DOI: 10.20495/seas.25007
Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture: Alternative
Worship of Text(iles) in Support of Monkhood
Saowakon Sukrak* and Silpsupa Jaengsawang**
Possessing inferior religious status to males, who could be ordained as monks,
females played a comparatively minor role in Theravāda Buddhism. Females
were generally allowed to be involved in creating items to be donated to the
Sangha, except for writing religious manuscripts, which required literacy in the
Dhamma script; that skill lay with monks and novices, since the script was
taught at monasteries. To compensate for their inability to obtain monkhood
status, women wove textiles for wrapping religious books or donated their hair
for binding palm-leaf manuscripts. Cloth-weaving skills compensated for their
lack of literacy in the Dhamma script, while the donation of hair compensated for
their lack of masculinity or monkhood. Women could also invest in tools,
sponsorship, and financial support for commissioning religious manuscripts.
Thus, although they were not allowed to be directly involved in the production of
religious manuscripts, they were able to engage in ancillary activities.
Keywords: women, Buddhism, manuscript culture, textiles, hair, Thai-Lao
1 Introduction: Women in Theravāda Buddhism1)
The earliest reference to the emergence of human beings and male-female gender in
Theravāda Buddhism is found in the Aggaññasutta, a sutta2) in the Dīghanikāya divi­
sion of the Suttanta Piṭaka3) in the Theravāda Buddhist canon (Tipiṭaka),4) which is
characterized as a myth of the universe.5) In the Aggaññasutta, asexual luminous
beings descended from the Ābhassarā level6) of the Form-Sphere (Rūpabhava)7) to the
human world and ate soil, which they found pleasant tasting. Having consumed the
* Faculty of Education, Rajabhat Maha Sarakham University, 80 Nakhon Sawan Road, Talat
Sub-district, Mueang District, Mahasarakham Province, 44000 Thailand
e-mail: saowakon@rmu.ac.th
https://orcid.org/0009-0000-8881-1411
**Dipartimento di Studi sull’Asia e sull’Africa Mediterranea, Università Ca’ Foscari Venezia,
Campazzo S. Sebastian, 1686, 30123 Venezia VE, Italy
Corresponding author’s e-mail: silpsupa.jaengsawang@unive.it
https://orcid.org/0009-0006-3284-3936
Accepted: August 16, 2024 Advanced published online on J-STAGE: November 10, 2025 437
Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 14, No. 3, December 2025, pp. 437–467
© Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University

438 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
soil, the Ābhassarabrahma beings lost their radiance and were unable to ascend back
to their Form-Sphere home. Their asexual bodies physically turned into male and
female genders, creating the very first generation of worldly human beings.
The myth of early human generations mentioned in the Aggaññasutta theoreti­
cally claims gender indiscrimination in Theravāda Buddhism. According to this, our
first ancestors descended from a higher level and were genderless until they con­
sumed the tasty soil; the implication is that sexual intercourse was irrelevant to the
origin of human beings, and that no human beings had disadvantageous sexual fea­
tures that prevented them from attaining enlightenment or nibbāna. During and after
the Buddha’s lifetime, as evidenced in canonical as well as non-canonical sources,
women played various roles in Buddhism and supported the religion in accordance
with their sociocultural status. In early Buddhism, females were not prohibited from
being ordained. The first Buddhist nun was Pajāpatī, the aunt of Gotama Buddha, who
with the help of Venerable Ānanda successfully requested permission for women to
be ordained.8) Below are some examples of female monks mentioned in canonical
texts and other religious sources.
After the Buddha’s passing (parinibbāna), there were conflicts between Venerable
Kassapa and Buddhist nuns. Venerable Kassapa disagreed with admitting women to
the order, and the nuns—due to Venerable Kassapa’s Brahman rather than Buddhist
background—doubted his ability to understand the Buddhist Dhamma. Venerable
Ānanda asked Venerable Kassapa for forgiveness on the nuns’ behalf (Kabilsingh
1998, 30–31). In Mahāvacchagotasutta (Paribbājakavagga, Majjhimapaṇṇāsaka, Majjhima
Nikāya, Suttanta Piṭaka), five hundred female monks attained enlightenment; and in
Therīgathā (Khuddaka Nikāya, Suttanta Piṭaka), thirty female monks gained enlighten­
ment (Anālayo 2009, 137). Through his lifetime Gotama Buddha encountered several
prominent Buddhist women, and he praised 13 female monks whom he recognized as
most outstanding.9) Among these, Kundalakesī Theri10) was praised for her sudden
attainment of Arahantship (freedom from obsessions), showing the ability of women
to attain enlightenment.
Originating in India, where society—like in other parts of Asia—is predominantly
patriarchal, the Buddhist religion is observed and practiced with rules that treat males
and females differently. In order to prevent sensual desire among monks and distrac­
tions caused by sexual intimacy, monastic prohibitions were instituted by the Buddha
to keep monks away from women. At some point, this brought about gender inequality
or gender discrimination. In the Theravāda Buddhist canon there are sutta that regard
women as a distraction preventing men from attaining nibbāna, as representing dan­
ger, and as being unable to occupy certain positions: Cātumasutta (in Bhikkhuvagga,

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 439
Majjhimapaṇṇāsaka, Majjhima Nikāya, Suttanta Piṭaka) and Bhayasutta (in Bālavagga,
Paṭhamapaṇṇāsaka, Tikanipāta, Aṅguttara Nikāya, Suttanta Piṭaka),11) Sappasutta (in
Dīghacārikavagga, Pañcamapaññāsaka, Pañcakanipāta, Aṅguttara Nikāya, Suttanta
Piṭaka),12) and Bahudhātukasutta (Pāli discourse) (in Anupadavagga, Uparipaṇṇāsaka,
Majjhima Nikāya, Suttanta Piṭaka).13)
Hinduism considers menstruation to be a sign of impurity and contamination.
With Thailand and Laos having been influenced by Hinduism, many Buddhist or
sacred places there are out of bounds for menstruating women; it is believed that this
period of impurity can weaken spiritual power. In addition, female visitors in general
are not allowed to enter certain spaces, such as stages for preaching monks, even
when there are no monks or laymen nearby. The exclusion of women from such
spaces is a strategy to shield monks from laywomen; laymen, on the other hand, can
freely visit and enter any place. Such regulations lead to gender discrimination and to
women being relegated to an inferior social status.
Due to the Buddhahood being limited to males, Bodhisattas in jātaka stories are
generally male. In the last ten great births of Gotama Buddha, women are supportive,
creatively resourceful, and active heroines in their own right. The few negative por­
trayals involve minor characters, and they do little to counteract the wealth of posi­
tive examples (Appleton and Shaw 2015, 21). A rare case of a female Bodhisatta’s
birth in Buddhist texts is found in Padīpadāna Jātaka in the Paññāsa Jātaka, a set of
fifty apocryphal jātakas14) attributed to monks from Chiang Mai (Northern Thailand)
during 1457–1657 CE. The story is set during the period of Dīpaṅkara Buddha,15)
whose sister was a princess. In one of her previous rebirths, she was born as a man
and committed Aparāpariyavedanīyakamma (a kind of sin whose effects recur in one’s
subsequent lives) with a daughter of his younger sister, causing his new rebirth as a
female in the period of Dīpaṅkara Buddha. The princess offered lamp oil to the Buddha—
her brother—making a wish to become a future Buddha named Siddhattha, whose
Buddhist era is in the present. This jātaka story shows the potential of females to reach
nibbāna and eventually become a Buddha with their sufficiently accumulated merit.
Theoretically, in the Theravāda canonical source (Tipiṭaka), women and men
emerged from shared celestial ancestors; but in reality females had an inferior social
status and played relatively minor roles in religious practices and norms. This gender
inequality had an influence on manuscript cultures.16) This paper aims to investigate
the roles of women in manuscript cultures in order to answer the questions of how
women, in an effort to compensate for their inferiority in religious practices, found
ways to participate in the production of religious manuscripts (all—if not most—of
whose scribes are male); the meaning of the alternative objects that women donated

440 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
to monasteries to compensate for their exclusion from monkhood opportunities; to
what extent the writing of religious manuscripts and the donation of objects to sup­
port religious manuscript production are different; and whether the alternative objects
offered by women can replace the writing of religious manuscripts. The paper will dis­
cuss general information on women in Thai-Lao Theravāda Buddhist society and in
manuscript cultures, followed by the donation of hair, wrapping cloth, and other
objects for manuscript production. The paper will end with a comparison between
texts and textiles.
2 Women in Thai-Lao Theravāda Buddhist Society: Social and Cultural
Context
There are four possible assemblies of Buddhists (buddhaparisā): monks (bhikkhu),
Buddhist nuns (bhikkhuṇī), laymen (upāsaka), and laywomen (upāsikā). Except for
Buddhist nuns, Thailand and Laos have the three remaining assemblies. Despite the
existence of Buddhist nuns in the Buddha’s lifetime, these days there are next to
none—probably because there are barely any left to organize ordination cere­
monies.17) Buddhist nuns observe a set of 311 precepts known as Gurudhamma, more
than the 227 precepts for monks. Women ordained in Thailand and Laos are not Bud­
dhist nuns but female novices (sikkhamānā or sāmaṇerī)18) who observe only six pre­
cepts and undergo a probationary course of two years before receiving higher
ordination (Payutto 2015, 354). The ordination ceremony for a nun requires at least
five nuns (Kabilsingh 1998, 14) to be present in addition to a number of monks. But
since there are no longer any legitimately ordained nuns within the Theravāda tradi­
tion, the ordination of a nun is simply not possible.
Unlike the current Sangha rules, before bhikkhuṇī came from India in the third
century BCE, male monks were allowed to ordain women (Li 2000, 183, cited in
Tomalin 2006, 387). Only three countries were home to bhikkhuṇī—Sri Lanka, India,
and Burma—though bhikkhuṇī had disappeared from Theravāda Buddhism by the
eleventh century CE. However, the bhikkhuṇī order of the Mahāyāna tradition still
exists to this day. An estimated eight hundred Sri Lankan nuns have received
bhikkhuṇī ordination, setting an important precedent for nuns in other Theravāda soci­
eties (Tomalin 2006, 386; Tsomo 2010, 90, 100). Sri Lankan and Chinese bhikkhuṇī
share the same lineage, because a group of bhikkhuṇī from Sri Lanka introduced
bhikkhuṇī ordination in China in 433 CE (Kabilsingh 1991, 31; Wijayasundara 2000, 82,
cited in Tomalin 2006, 387).

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 441
Compared to Lao white-robed laywomen (maekhao), Thai white-robed laywomen
(maechi) are better educated and are becoming more numerous, visible, and influen­
tial in society. However, white-robed laywomen in Laos seem to be slightly better off.
Maekhao have an identification card that establishes them as Buddhist nuns and gives
them certain privileges. Maechi, however, are not given such a card, which means
they pay full price for things like public transport but, like monks, are not allowed to
vote (Seeger 2006, 173; Tsomo 2010, 89, 103).
In Laos, maekhao and monks are interdependent and cooperate in a friendly man­
ner with each other. Monks share extra food and donated commodities with maekhao,
who in turn assist monks with goods and services. This is similar to the interactions
between monks and Buddhist women in Myanmar. The women cook for monks, and
monks express their gratitude to the laity by teaching them, which shows a female
presence in temples (Tsomo 2010, 88, 95; Saruya 2022, 11). Lao maekhao believe in
accumulating merit by means of serving and assisting monks, through which they
expect to reach nibbāna. Despite their shaved heads, they are considered pious
women rather than full members of the Sangha order and are relegated to a lower
position than monks. In spite of their lack of material goods and shelter, maekhao are
quite satisfied with their lot and do not aspire to elevate their status. Not all
Theravāda nuns in Laos are willing to formally receive the 311 bhikkhuṇī precepts,
especially those over a certain age for whom the additional precepts might pose a
hardship (Tsomo 2010, 102). Maekhao live in their comfort zone, and becoming a
maekhao is usually not a consequence of a miserable personal life or career failure.
By contrast, maechi in Thailand have made attempts to increase gender equality
in the Sangha order. There is no evidence to suggest that there were ever Theravāda
nuns in Thai society. The first attempt to establish a bhikkhuṇī order in Thailand was
undertaken in 1927 by the former government official and engaged lay-Buddhist
Narin Prasit. He had his two daughters ordained as sāmaṇerī, an act that was later
criticized heavily by both the government and the clergy. A monk suspected of having
ordained the two sisters was asked by his superior to leave the monkhood (Seeger
2006, 159). As a result of this incident, the 1928 Sangha Act prohibited monks from
ordaining women as bhikkhuṇī, sāmaṇerī, and sikkhamānā (novice trainees). This regu­
lation, however, contradicts the Thai constitution, which guarantees equality to men
and women and the freedom to practice any religion (Seeger 2006, 160; Litalien 2018,
573). Chatsumarn Kabilsingh was ordained as a bhikkhuṇī in Sri Lanka in 2003 and is
now known as Dhammananda. Since 2003 a further twenty or so women have been
ordained as sāmaṇerī or novices. Kabilsingh’s ordination was supported by Buddhists
in Sri Lanka and a global network of supporters of a certain bhikkhuṇī order in

442 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
Theravāda Buddhism (Tomalin 2006, 392; Litalien 2018, 595). In 2013 the very first
full Theravāda bhikkhuṇī ordination in the history of the Kingdom of Thailand
occurred in Phayao Province, followed by the second and third in 2014 and 2015
(Litalien 2018, 596). There are communities of Mahāyāna bhikkhuṇī in Thailand, but
maechi have a negative reputation—for instance, they are believed to have been
unsuccessful in love, homeless, or deprived of alternative opportunities (Seeger 2006,
173). In short, there is still gender inequality in Thailand, which spills over into the
Thai Sangha. The latter’s structure resembles that of the state bureaucracy, which is
dominated by males. On the other hand, maechi and bhikkhuṇī are able to provide ser­
vices to the community, as they are regarded as being outside of the Sangha (Litalien
2018, 589).
Southeast Asia is dominated by a patriarchal culture, with men generally leading
organizations and societies in a direction that benefits themselves more than women.
Even though Buddhist women continue with their devotions and alms-offering to
monks, in most Asian Buddhist societies religious and social institutions reflect a tacit
assumption of the moral superiority of males, discriminatory or patronizing attitudes,
and the exclusion of women (Tsomo 2010, 87–89). Women are barred from access to
institutional avenues of social mobility (Seeger 2006, 171). The Thai bhikkhuṇī move­
ment is a local strategy to address and bring attention to gender inequality by reli­
gious Buddhist feminists in Thailand. It is the result of attempts to establish social
discourses that consider religious and cultural factors in parallel with economic devel­
opment (Tomalin 2006, 386; Litalien 2018, 578).
In Myanmar, however, in the past Buddhist women were able to gain access to
meditation and study, and an increasing number even taught profound Dhamma topics
such as Abhidhamma. Laywomen could even participate in padaythabin processions,
which were part of the Pongyibyan festival.19) During the colonial period laywomen
created a demand for learning Buddhist doctrines, while monks created the supply,
resulting in an increased transmission of Buddhist texts. Textual transmission was
enhanced by the introduction of new printing technologies in Myanmar in the 1800s.
Studies of Myanmar history show that educated nuns during the reign of King
Mindong (1853–78) taught the ladies of the court. Some lay girls may have received a
basic education in monasteries up to a certain age. During the colonial era, female
education in general became more acceptable (Saruya 2022, 1–3).
Women in Thailand and Laos are expected to accept or comply with certain pro­
hibitions and even taboos. Those who fail to follow social norms are cautioned or
socially punished. Laywomen are expected to behave a certain way in terms of walk­
ing, speaking, prostrating, looking at a monk, etc. They also have to maintain a

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 443
respectful distance from monks and dress appropriately. Hence, women are limited by
rules and norms when interacting with monks and novices; they are subject to gender
and even social-hierarchical discrimination. This is the intrinsic inferiority of women
reinforced within the structure of everyday public Buddhist practices and customs
(Tomalin 2006, 389).
Certain areas or places are reserved for monks and out of bounds for laywomen.
In the ordination hall (sim) of monasteries, for instance, there is an elevated stage set
against an inner wall to seat chanting monks. Book cabinets, seating cushions, and
other ritual utensils are placed there. Laywomen are not allowed to enter the stage
even when there are no monks around:
In Theravāda monasteries, nuns, even those who have been ordained for decades, typically sit
on a mat on the floor, while monks, even those who have just been ordained, sit on a raised plat­
form above them. The seating arrangement of nuns below or behind the monks is symbolic of
the subordinate position nuns hold in the religious hierarchy, a position that has rarely been
questioned. (Tsomo 2010, 91)20)
This norm is not intended simply to maintain a distance between monks/novices and
laywomen but to discriminate against females. The rule prohibiting females from
entering monk’s abodes (kuṭi), however, makes sense and is not surprising—
comparable to dormitory regulations in schools and certain mansions—for preventing
monks and laywomen from getting close.
Aside from certain areas that females cannot enter under any circumstances,
there are some religious places—usually not in Northern Thailand—where laywomen
may be permitted depending upon their physical condition. For instance, only men­
struating women are prohibited from entering certain areas in Buddha relic pagodas
since it is believed that their impurity may contaminate the sacred power of the relics.
In Northern Thailand several temples do not allow women at all:
Many temples in Thailand, seen particularly often in the north, do not allow women to circum­
ambulate the stupas. The monks usually explain that the relics of the Buddha are placed in the
centre of the stupas at the time they built it. If women are allowed to circumambulate the stu­
pas, they would be walking at the level higher than the relics and hence might desacralize them.
(Kabilsingh 1998, 46–47)
Katherine Bowie (2011, cited in Chladek 2017, 130–131) notes that Northern Thai
people forbid women from entering areas of temples that hold sacred relics and

444 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
argues that this practice is uniquely part of northern Buddhism and cultural practice.
Kabilsingh (1998) explains that many Hindu practices are accepted under the name of
Buddhism. During the Ayutthaya period Buddhist monks and magic masters prohib­
ited women from touching or walking across consecrated items in order to maintain
the items’ magical power (women were considered impure because they menstruated).
In addition to the aforementioned prohibitions for women regarding certain areas
of a temple, the maintenance of an appropriate distance between monks/novices and
women is also a crucial concern in Buddhism. The distance must be such that neither
can reach out their arms to the other, let alone touch. Meetings between monks and
laywomen must be held within sight of other people. In the case of indoor visits, a
monk and a laywoman may not meet each other alone; there must be at least one
other male present. Laywomen meeting a monk have to wear outfits that cover their
upper bodies and reach at least below their knees. It is believed that such regulations
can prevent sexual affairs and thus protect the Sangha community from scandals.
In order to conform with the rules for associating with monks, laywomen in
Luang Prabang always wear a sheet of cloth known as pha biang (Lao: ) diago­
ຜາ້ ບຽ່ ງ
nally across their chests to keep the collar close to the neck and the upper part of
their bodies invisible when prostrating on the ground. The cloth also functions as a
small carpet when there is a group of ritual participants. In an ordination ceremony
that Silpsupa Jaengsawang joined in 2017 at the monastery of Vat Manorom, female
participants placed their pha biang together on the floor of the ordination hall, wel­
coming senior and newly ordained monks to walk by (see Fig. 1). Outfits with a pha
biang are standard dress for laywomen, but no pha biang is required for laymen. This
implies that sexual affairs are dependent upon females’ dressing habits—or are even
the responsibility of females—rather than the monks’ self-discipline.
Similarly, when a female donor offers gifts to a monk, a sheet of cloth is placed
between the donor and recipient. The laywoman sets the offerings on the cloth and
pulls back her hands; the monk takes the gifts from the cloth and gives his blessings.
Thus, offerings are not made hand to hand; monks and laywomen cannot hand things
directly to each other, so as to avoid the unintentional touching of hands. Laymen,
however, can simply hand objects directly to monks and novices.
The Dhamma script, used for writing manuscripts, was taught only to monks and
novices in monasteries; females were implicitly excluded from gaining this knowl­
edge. In order to compensate for this lack, laywomen found ways to participate in the
production and donation of religious manuscripts with the expectation of gaining simi­
lar merit to those who were literate in the Dhamma script. This matter is discussed
further below.

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 445
Fig. 1 Laywomen’s Pha Biang Placed on the Floor to
Welcome Monks at an Ordination Ceremony
(photo by Silpsupa Jaengsawang, March 18, 2017)
3 Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Cultures
Like other ways of making merit, copying and donating religious manuscripts were
believed to bring great merit to donors and scribes. The writing of manuscripts
required a huge effort, since palm leaves—the earliest and most durable form of writ­
ing support—needed a great deal of preparation. In addition, inscribing texts in a
palm-leaf manuscript took knowledge, time, and energy. Although mulberry paper and
industrial paper replaced palm leaves in some areas, the task of writing or copying
texts in a manuscript was still a major undertaking. In order to gain merit, which was
incalculable yet beneficial to ensure a better rebirth, people were willing to invest
their time and energy on this task. Hence, manuscripts mostly contain religious texts
because the investment of time, energy, and money is made with the expectation of
magnificent merit and a better rebirth. However, as mentioned above, the Dhamma
script was the only tool for textual transmission.
Silpsupa made two research trips to Laos, in February–March 2017 and August–

446 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
September 2022. She visited both Luang Prabang, the ancient capital, and Vientiane,
the current capital. In Luang Prabang, since most monasteries are walking distance
from—or even adjacent to—one another within the villages, local people are pro­
foundly engaged in Buddhism and participate enthusiastically in annual religious cere­
monies as well as regular Holy Days. Women in Luang Prabang are interested in
Buddhist studies. Some of them are self-taught in Buddhist knowledge and prayers;
they copy religious texts for Buddhist ceremonies—in the Lao rather than Dhamma
script—and pray on their own. Silpsupa even interviewed a laywoman who was a rit­
ual expert leading lay participants to pray in Pāli at a Buddhist event (Bunyong; men­
tioned below). Women’s basic education is provided by the government. Most of the
laywomen engaged in Buddhist religious ceremonies are of retirement age. They
have enough free time, without the responsibility of taking care of children and grand­
children who are adults or working in different districts. Laywomen have networks
that allow them to actively participate and collaborate in Buddhist ceremonies. Silpsupa
found a few nuns or maekhao who simply attended religious ceremonies as partici­
pants, while laywomen connected with both local laypeople and monks. It seemed
that certain laywomen communicated with local laypeople to announce upcoming
Buddhist events, gather lay participants, and lead preparations, while monks commu­
nicated with other monks and novices to organize the events. In Luang Prabang, lead­
ers who take care of secular practices are women, while those who take care of
monastic practices are monks, except for some tasks that traditionally belong to lay­
men, such as preparation for monkhood ordination.
Unlike Luang Prabang, in Vientiane monasteries are located far from one another.
During Silpsupa’s visit to Vientiane, participants in Buddhist ceremonies came from
different provinces or communities, and not all of them knew one another. Laywomen
did not appear to play an important role in religious events, unlike the case of Luang
Prabang. Monks seemed to play a crucial role. For instance, Silpsupa had the opportu­
nity to join a Buddha image consecration ceremony and Mahachat festival in 2017.
Monks and novices led different tasks and were followed by laypeople. Laymen and
laywomen were general participants, and none of them seemed to be assisting the monks.
To compare the situations in Vientiane and Luang Prabang, it is important to
compare their lay and monastic populations. In Luang Prabang, several sons are
ordained as monks/novices or work in other districts or even different countries.
Unemployed or retirement-aged laywomen are left behind in large numbers. They
therefore have more time to spend on Buddhist activities. In contrast, in Vientiane
there is a monastic school called Vat Ong Tü with a large number of monks and
novices who can help in Buddhist ceremonies; thus, laywomen are not required for

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 447
ceremonies.
Dhamma is literally defined as the “teachings of the Buddha”; the Dhamma
script is thus the script used for the Buddha’s teachings. Buddhist texts were trans­
mitted in the Dhamma script, literacy in which was limited to monks and novices. As
Buddhism and religious texts were studied at monasteries by monks, laywomen were
not encouraged to participate in the classes so as to avoid any scandals. Women con­
sequently lacked the opportunity to gain Dhamma script literacy and were unable to
inscribe manuscripts. Emma Tomalin’s (2006, 389) interviewees in Thailand sug­
gested the creation of a respected and recognized community of female ordinands that
could enable the institutionalization of girls’ education in the temples. To gain knowl­
edge of Buddhism or the Dhamma script, women needed to seek opportunities on
their own21) or do self-study. For instance, Maekhao Mi, a nun whom Tsomo met in
the village of Sebangfai in Laos, was interested in learning languages and even kept
palm-leaf manuscripts in her kuṭi for learning the Dhamma script.22)
Since manuscripts consist not only of texts but also of objects, in order to com­
pensate for their lack of opportunities and skills women could offer material and/or
financial support to sponsor manuscript production. Colophons record a number of
women as sponsors of Thai-Lao manuscripts, mentioning their responsibilities for
certain objects (see Tipitaka [DTP] 2017, 43; Silpsupa 2022, 222, 300). Fig. 2 shows
the colophon of a palm-leaf manuscript from Luang Prabang, written in 1963 CE and
mentioning the tasks of a female sponsor. The colophon mentions Ms. Khamin and
her family from Mün Na village, who donated this manuscript to a monastery in 1963.
Ms. Khamin dedicated the merit to her deceased parents, all beings, those with whom
she had been negatively involved in her previous lives, and enlightenment.
Besides providing objects, laywomen supported manuscript production in other
ways. The two most frequent alternatives were donating hair and wrapping cloth. The
first represented or “replaced” monkhood ordination, while the second replaced
Dhamma script literacy. In other words, monks wrote texts in manuscripts while
women donated textiles for the production of manuscripts.
Fig. 2 Colophon of a Palm-Leaf Manuscript that Mentions a Female Sponsor. Panya Palami (Rewards
Derived from Following The Thirty Perfections)
Source: Buddhist Archive of Photography (BAP), code: BAD-13-1-0760, Vat Saen Sukharam, Luang
Prabang, 1963 CE

448 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
3.1 Donation of Hair: Compensation for Monkhood Ordination (Masculinity)
In the ashrama23)—the Hindu philosophy of four life stages—the last stage, sannyasa
(asceticism), is defined by the renunciation of all forms of material desire and settling
into an ascetic life. Sannyasa practitioners (known as sannyasin) shave their heads
(mundana) to symbolize their detachment from worldly beauty or physical appearance
and spend their time on prayer and meditation. In the Hindu tradition, the hair one is
born with is regarded as an undesirable remnant of past lives. In the mundan (Hindu
hair-removal ceremony), the child’s head is shaved to signify freedom from the past
and a move forward to the future. It is also believed that shaving a child’s head will
stimulate the growth of the brain and nerves, while a tuft at the crown of the head will
protect one’s memories (Trüeb 2017, 2). Shaving the head is sometimes associated
with asceticism and was practiced also by Prince Siddhattha.
In contrast, according to Manusmṛiti (Laws of Manu), the text containing Hindu
codes of conduct, uncut hair is considered to render so much prestige that those who
snatch and drag someone by the hair are punished by having both their hands cut off
(Trüeb 2017, 2). Hair thus signifies one’s social status. As the head sits at the top of
one’s body, the head and hair are in some cases regarded as taboo areas that can be
touched only with permission. In India hairdressers and clinical trichologists are con­
sidered to have a special prerogative (Trüeb 2017, 2). In Thailand and Laos people
believe in khwan or spirits that reside in one’s head.24) The house of khwan is charac­
terized by a swirling or whorl-shaped cluster of hair at the top of one’s head. Touching
someone’s head with disrespect is regarded as an improper act that can drive the
khwan out of that person. Another widespread belief regarding the head is about one’s
guardian pagoda, known as Chu That (ชุธาตุ). According to a traditional Northern Thai
belief, before a spirit gets a new rebirth it stays in a certain pagoda (Th: chu that
ชุธาตุ), led by the animal of the year (Th: tua poeng ตั๋วเป้ิง). Then it moves to the head
of the newborn’s father for seven days, after which it enters the mother’s pregnancy.
The 12 animal years are associated with the 12 holy guardian pagodas in the northern
and northeastern regions of Thailand as well as some other countries.
According to Ralph Trüeb (2017, 3), offering hair to the gods is a symbolic ges­
ture of surrendering one’s ego and expressing thanks for one’s blessings. A well-
known scene from the Buddha’s life story Paṭhamasambodhi (1844–45), in which
Gotama Buddha reunites with his family members in Kapila city, represents this idea.
Bimbā, the wife of Prince Siddhattha or Gotama Buddha, unties her hair before
respectfully cleaning his feet with it. Although Bimbā’s hair is not cut as an offering,
the cleaning of Gotama Buddha’s feet in this way illustrates the hair being used as a
means to clean. Offering the topmost physical organ of one’s body to the bottom part

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 449
Fig. 3 Sandstone Bas-Relief Showing the Scene of Bimbā
Wiping the Buddha’s Feet with Her Hair (photo by
Silpsupa Jaengsawang, August 23, 2024)
of someone else’s, or letting one’s highest organ touch someone else’s lowest organ,
represents the utmost respect and surrender. At the National Museum in Khon Kaen
Province, Thailand, there is a sandstone bas-relief (c. 857–957 CE) portraying
this famous scene (see Fig. 3). Following is a description of the scene from
Bimbābilāpaparivatta (Bimbā’s sorrow), the 18th episode in Paṭhamasambodhi,
describing the sad Bimbā who prostrates herself and lays her head on the Buddha’s
feet:
เมอื่ มพี ระเสาวนยี ต์ รสั ปรภิ าษอสั สชุ ลธาราดงั น ี้ กค็ อ่ ยดํารงพระสตอิ ดกลน้ั เสยี ซงึ่ ความโศก เสดจ็ คลานออกมา
โดยพลัน จากครรภ์ทวารสถานท่สี ิริไสยาสน์ พ ระกรกอดเอาข้อพระบาทซบพระเศียรลงถวายนมัสการ
ลงพลางพิลาปกราบทูลสารว่า [. . .] เมื่อพระพิมพาเทวีบรรยายปริเทวนกถา โดยนัยพรรณนาฉะน้ ี
แล้วก็กล้งิ เกลือกพระอุตตมางคโมลีเหนือหลังพระบาทพระศาสดาโศกาพิลาป
After she (Bimbā) sadly complained to the Buddha with tears, she collected herself, left her
sleeping chamber, walked on her knees, held his feet with her hands, laid her head on his feet to

450 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
pay respects, and said . . . when she expressed her sadness, she rolled her head on his feet. (His
Supreme Patriarch Prince Paramanujitjinorot 1970, 275–276).
Beliefs about the head and hair, the highest physical organs, being venerated and
properly treated are associated with the Buddhist religion in Northern Thailand and
Laos, where women have traditionally had long hair. This influenced the manuscript
culture in these areas—for instance, women removing their hair to make book-
binding thread for manuscripts.
3.1.1 Use of Women’s Hair in Other Areas: China
Historical evidence from other Buddhist-influenced areas shows laywomen dedicating
their hair to pay respects to the religion. In China, for instance, there was a tradition
of hair being used for hair embroidery (髪繡 faxiu)—the use of human hair as thread
for stitching images on textiles. Hair embroidery was associated with success and
prosperity, and during the Ming and Qing periods it was something that pious women
did as a Buddhist devotional practice. According to Sun Peilan (1994), hair embroidery
started in the Wu area during the Song period. There is a record of a young woman
named Zhou Zhenguan from the Song Dynasty pricking her tongue and copying sev­
enty thousand characters of the Lotus Sutra with her blood (Sun 1994, 31; Li 2012,
138). She then removed hairs from her head and used them to stitch every character.
She started at the age of 13 and finished after 23 years. After finally completing the
piece, she passed away while sitting cross-legged. Through the literature, at the very
least one can be assured that the head was regarded as the highest organ, a dome of
sacredness and intimacy.
Buddhist embroidery during the Tang (618–907) and Song (960–1276) valued
each stitch as a Buddha. Embroidery, a labor-intensive activity, is based on the accu­
mulation of one stitch after another, and it is the accumulated labor that is cherished
in the embroidering of Buddhist imagery. Hair offering was thus regarded as a bodily
organ being externalized as a gift or spiritual exchange in the name of Buddhism.
When hair was used as thread and transformed into images of divine figures, it
became a gift or bushi (布施) (Li 2012, 133, 141, 153). From the fifteenth century
onward, more and more women combined their skills and talents with resources they
found in their bodies. They used their hair as thread to stitch images of Buddhist
deities as a way of emulating practices such as writing scriptures in blood. Such physi­
cal sacrifice can be compared to the sacrifices of Vairocana Buddha, who used various
parts of his body as mediums to convey the Dhamma (he peeled off his skin and used
it as paper, broke off his bones and used them as pens, used his blood as ink, etc.). He

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 451
used parts of his body as substitutes for secular tools, such as a pen, paper, and ink (Li
2012, 142). The Buddhist doctrines of detaching from worldly desires to reach
nibbāna, laywomen having long hair, and having pure intention to join in the produc­
tion of religious manuscripts drew women to eventually find ways to compensate for
their inferior status by donating parts of their physical bodies instead.
3.1.2 Use of Hair for Manuscripts
Laywomen’s contributions to manuscripts came in the form of objects such as writing
support, writing tools, writing substances, wooden covers, bookbinding thread, and
wrapping cloth. Women could make bookbinding thread out of their hair and wrapping
cloth with their skill of weaving. With respect to hair donation, long-haired women
braided their hair into sai sanòng (สายสนอง), a book-binding thread for palm-leaf
manuscripts that runs through the holes of the folios of a fascicle (see Fig. 4 below).
There is no reliable documentation regarding the period in which this tradition
became widespread. Traditionally, sai sanòng were made of materials such as cotton,
silk, and jute. To pay homage to the Buddha’s teachings in religious manuscripts,
women could offer their hair by making a wish with every hair they removed, group­
ing the hair, and braiding it into a thread. By offering the highest and most precious
part of their body and their effort of weaving the hair into durable bookbinding thread,
the women were able to demonstrate their ardent Buddhist faith. The authors were
not able to meet any women who had donated their hair for manuscript production.
Donating one’s hair at the altar of religion also represents the renouncement of
worldly desires. At his ordination ceremony a monk candidate has his head and eye­
brows shaved. In addition to following Gotama Buddha’s cutting of hair to show his
renunciation of kingship, hair removal signifies detachment and a reduction of worldly
Fig. 4 Bookbinding Thread Made of Hair (year unknown) (photo by
Porpon Suksai, January 15, 2020)
Petavatthu (Ghost stories), Faculty of Archaeology, Silpakorn
University

452 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
pleasure over physical appearance, which is also defined as defilement (kilesa) that
likely distracts monks from self-practice and meditation. This practice would obvi­
ously resonate with the community performing ordination rituals in nineteenth-
century Myanmar, reminding them that shaving their heads and taking vows was
following in the footsteps of the Buddha. The cutting of hair is the most symbolic
monastic renunciation of worldly life (Kaloyanides 2023, 240fn121). Buddhist disciples
therefore have regularly scheduled Shaving Days four times a month, corresponding
with the eve of a Buddhist Holy Day.25) In this sense, hair donation by women for the
making of religious manuscripts symbolized a faithful resolution to detach from all
kinds of worldly desires and escape the cycle of rebirth (saṃsāra) to attain enlighten­
ment (nibbāna).
In early Buddhist texts, the ways prescribed for women to dedicate their bodies
to their faith were probably limited to the natural resources of their bodies—for
instance, long hair could be offered in exchange for merit. There is also evidence of
the nails of the dead being offered for the production of religious manuscripts, in the
form of a knot attached to a bookbinding thread. Although there is hardly any reliable
evidence on the gender of nail donors, the donation of nails for use as knots for book-
binding thread is another example of organ sacrifice in veneration of the teachings of
the Buddha. This organ sacrifice is similar to the self-sacrifice of the Bodhisatta
(someone on the path to Buddhahood) for the sake of religion in his several previous
births. His sacrifice was part of the Perfection of Generosity (Dānapāramī) and even­
tually led to his very last birth as Gotama Buddha.
The gift of body or self-sacrifice is the ultimate level of the perfection of generosity in the sys­
tem of the 30 perfections. It seems that the Buddhavaṃsa is the first text in the Pāli canon in
which the 30 perfections are mentioned. (Arthid 2008, 780)
The practices of weaving one’s hair into bookbinding thread and weaving textile into
wrapping cloth are similar: strands of hair were braided into bookbinding thread, while
strands of fabric (silk, cotton, jute) were woven into wrapping cloth. Textiles compen­
sated for religious texts being conventionally inscribed or “woven” by monks. The
donation of wrapping cloth was thus another representation of the Buddhist religious
faith.
3.2 Donation of Wrapping Cloth: Compensation for Dhamma Script Literacy (Skills)
In ancient times, although women shared some household tasks with men, such as
harvesting, taking care of livestock, product exchange, and trading to earn a living,

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 453
certain tasks were reserved for women: these included textile weaving and embroi­
dery. Clothes and other household linens—pillows, curtains, bedsheets, etc.—were
woven by female members of the family. From older female family members, women
learned to make textiles with weaving looms and embellish them with embroidery;
weaving and embroidery were thus passed down the generations within households.
Knowledge of textile production was wholly “owned” by women, as opposed to
knowledge of rice farming, which was shared by men and women. Women became the
original givers of domestically produced textiles (Lefferts 2003, 90–91). Weaving was
a sign that a young woman was reaching adulthood by gaining the ability to provide for
the textile requirements of a household (Lefferts, n.d., 44). Since knowledge of weav­
ing and embroidery was transmitted orally within families, no manuscripts on this
have been discovered in the region.
In addition to general textile products used in everyday life, those for special
occasions, especially religious events, were also the responsibility of females. Women
took pride in their individual decorative styles. Certain materials, such as yarn and
cotton (Wattana 2012, 49), and colors were related to traditional practices: for
instance, white cloth was used for triple-tailed banners at funerals (Surapol 1999,
227–228). Vertical banners made of small pieces of cloth sewn together were hung on
the wall of an ordination hall during the Mahachat festival26) (see Fig. 5). In Myanmar
women traditionally weave monk robes in a special robe-weaving contest at the
Fig. 5 Decorative Banners at the Mahachat Festival in
Luang Prabang, March 17–19, 2017 (photo by
Silpsupa Jaengsawang)

454 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
Shwedagon Pagoda on the occasion of Kathin.27) Hand towels and handkerchiefs for
monks, with or without decorations, are made by women. Tablecloths for monks’
breakfast are another example. Weaving textiles for religious reasons was regarded as
a channel for women to participate in meritorious activities. The most pride-filled
weaving task is for women to make monk robes for their sons. Although monk robes
are available in the market, they are still traditionally given by mothers to their sons
(Lefferts, n.d., 45). With a deep-rooted belief in shared merit derived from monkhood
ordination, mothers and/or other female family members weave cloth and dye it yel­
low for monk robes, expecting glorious merit that will lead them to the heavens and
eventual nibbāna. The religious belief of depending on the merit derived from the
ordination of one’s own sons is reflected also in the well-known Thai phrase “holding
the edge of a yellow robe [to reach up to heaven] (เกาะชายผ้าเหลือง kò chai pha
lüang).” In Laos young monks explained that they had chosen this path for the sake of
their parents, especially their mothers, to whom they could transfer the merit they
made (Lefferts, n.d., 44). Thus, although women may not be ordained as monks, they
can gain merit through their sons by means of making monk robes for them.
For ordination and other Buddhist ceremonies, the wrapping cloth for religious
manuscripts was made by women. Buddhist teachings were orally transmitted by
Gotama Buddha during his lifetime, and over the centuries they were revised (classi­
fied and systematized) by successive teachers in order to facilitate memorization (U
Ko Lay 1984, 18). The Buddhist canon or Tipiṭaka was divided into three sections, or
baskets (piṭaka), during the third revision in 235 BE in India. During the reign of King
Vaṭṭhagāmaṇīabhaya of Sri Lanka, around 450 years after Gotama Buddha’s
parinibbāna, the Buddhist canon was first put down in writing, in palm-leaf
manuscripts. As the Pāli language did not have its own script, transmission was done
using local scripts that were aurally similar to Pāli pronunciation: the Dhamma, Lao
Buhan, Lik Tai Nüa, Khom, Central Thai, and Tai Dam scripts. These scripts can be
traced to South Indian writing systems, which were adapted for writing Pali and ver­
nacular languages in Southeast Asia (CrossAsia, n.d.). Hence, the tradition of donating
wrapping cloth for religious manuscripts began long after the Buddha’s lifetime.
Manuscripts mentioning the practice of donating wrapping cloth were written a cou­
ple of centuries ago: Sòng Pha Phan Nangsü (Rewards derived from the donation of
manuscript wrapping cloth) (1850) (Digital Library of Lao Manuscripts, code:
06011406012-16) and Salòng Hò Pha (Rewards derived from the donation of
manuscript wrapping cloth) (1967) (Buddhist Archive of Photography, code:
BAD-22-1-0934); both are found in Luang Prabang.
Women were responsible for all decisions on the material, weaving styles, sizes,

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 455
colors, patterns, and decorations of manuscript wrapping cloth. In Northeastern Thai­
land the cloth was usually a vertical sheet, sometimes drawn or painted with the story
of Vessantara Jātaka. The cloth could be decoratively displayed when not in use for
wrapping manuscripts (Wattana 2012, 49). Before the development of wall paint, tex­
tiles were often used to beautify venues. Colorfully patterned door curtains shielded
certain rooms from inquiring glances (Lefferts, n.d., 44).
Wrapping cloths could be offered to a monastery together with a particular
manuscript or separately. The names of the weavers were not necessarily written on
the cloth unless it was donated separately; otherwise, the names of all commissioning
agents were often mentioned in the colophon. Wrapping cloths that were separately
donated were collected and kept for future manuscripts that were donated without an
accompanying cloth.
Since wrapping cloths were created by hand, they contained clues about the
maker’s weaving skills, social status, wealth, and attitude. The better the quality of
the threads, the higher was the social status of the weavers, because not everybody
could source good-quality materials. Imported materials, in particular, could be
accessed mostly by high-ranking people.28) Weaving patterns and embroidery styles
displayed the weaver’s skills as well as aesthetic taste. Thus, wrapping cloths were a
medium that represented the personal identity, taste, skills, endeavor, social status,
and roles of weavers in their cultural contexts (Ciraphòn 2009, 56–57).
Weaving and donating wrapping cloth was regarded as a form of participation in
the textual transmission of the Buddha’s teachings—the study of the Dhamma—
which lay on the path to enlightenment. Through monkhood, men had the opportunity
to gain a Buddhist monastic education so as to eventually reach nibbāna, which was
the ultimate goal, as reflected in (Pāli) phrases at the end of colophons. Women, how­
ever, were unable to become monks, which was regarded as an essential step for
reaching nibbāna. To compensate for this lack of opportunity, women created wrap­
ping cloth—although the tradition of weaving and donating cloth developed originally
to protect manuscripts from insects and humidity, to keep them in well-organized bun­
dles, and to venerate the Buddha’s teachings (see Fig. 6).
Monks and novices studied canonical and other religious texts from palm-leaf
manuscripts that were—whether in Pāli or in the vernacular—written entirely in the
Dhamma script. Thus, they came to learn the Dhamma script and the Pāli language by
reading, writing, memorizing, and transmitting religious texts. For women, on the
other hand, the only path to nibbāna appeared to be through participating in the pro­
duction of religious manuscripts. Accordingly, manuscripts written by males and wrap­
ping cloth made by females represented reciprocal merit-making by Buddhists of both

456 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
Fig. 6 Bundle of Palm-Leaf Manuscripts with Wrapping Cloth (photo by Silpsupa
Jaengsawang)
genders with the common goal of sustaining and protecting the teachings of the
Buddha. According to the Buddha’s prophecy of the Five Disappearances (Pañca-
antaradhāna),29) the teachings of the Buddha will fade out (Pariyatti-antaradhāna)
over the course of time until the Buddhist Era’s five-thousandth year, followed by the
other four disappearances.30) The collaboration between men and women for trans­
mitting and protecting religious texts was done in an effort to prevent the Buddha’s
teachings from dying out.
3.3 Other Alternatives
Other choices that women made to gain merit from manuscript production and
preservation varied depending on their individual skills and available materials. For
instance, there is a cloth manuscript embroidered by Lady Bualai Thepphawong, the
wife of the last ruler of Phrae, Lord Phiriya Thepphawong (1836–1912), whose exper­
tise in embroidery was well known. Written in Pāli with the Dhamma script and
embroidered with gold-colored thread, the manuscript is titled Kammavācā31) and was
displayed in a vertical showcase at the museum of Wat Phra Bat Ming Müang, Phrae
Province, Northern Thailand (see Fig. 7). It has since been moved to another building.
The following paper manuscripts, surveyed by Silpsupa Jaengsawang in August
2022, were written by a senior laywoman named Bunyong, a ritual expert in Ban Saen
village in Luang Prabang. With her remarkable ability to memorize Pāli prayers and
ritual processes, as in some ethnic groups of Tai Dam where a woman functions as the
leader of the su khwan (consolation) ceremony (Tsomo 2010, 90), Bunyong led vil­
lagers in reciting Pāli prayers and interacted with monks at religious ceremonies. She
made two copies—one for herself and the other for a friend—of a ceremony manual
composed of various Pāli prayers derived from printed books and suggestions for acts.
The manuscripts were written in blank notebooks in the modern Lao script with ink
pen (see Fig. 8).
Another female scribe was Mae Thao (grandmother) Saengcòi, who wrote texts

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 457
Fig. 7 Embroidered Cloth Manuscript by Lady Bualai Thepphawong in
the Main Monastic Hall of Wat Phra Bat Ming Müang (photo by
Silpsupa Jaengsawang, 2018)
Fig. 8 Two Paper Manuscripts Made from Blank Notebooks by Ms.
Bunyong from Luang Prabang (photo by Silpsupa Jaengsawang)

458 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
Fig. 9 Colophon of a Palm-Leaf Manuscript Mentioning a Female Sponsor
Sòng Sapphathung (Rewards Derived from the Donation of All Kinds of Religious Banners)
Source: Buddhist Archive of Photography (BAP), code: BAD-11-1-0060, Vat Suvanna Khili, Luang Prabang,
1926 CE
in the Lik script. She learned the script from her family and copied several mulberry
paper manuscripts in the Thai Nüa manuscript culture, located in northwestern Laos,
southwestern China (Yunnan), and northern and eastern Myanmar (Kachin State and
Shan State, bordering northwestern Laos). She died in 1998 at the age of 81 (Wharton
2017, 43) and seems to have been among the last female scribes from the region.
In addition to providing materials and tools for manuscript production, females
are recorded in some manuscript colophons as offering financial support and facilities.
Some females were even engaged in commissioning manuscripts. In the case of
anisong manuscripts,32) for instance, there are similar numbers of lay sponsors and
Sangha sponsors mentioned. Most of the lay sponsors were female. Harald Hundius
(1990) calls the sponsors initial, or leading, lay monastic supporters of manuscript
production. A large number of laypersons certainly sponsored manuscripts kept in Vat
Si Bun Hüang, Luang Prabang. Khamvone Boulyaphonh and Volker Grabowsky (2017,
32) explain that in the catalogue of manuscripts discovered at the temple, laypeople
formed the large majority of manuscript sponsors and donors: four-fifths were layper­
sons and only one-fifth members of the Sangha. Fig. 9 shows an excerpt from a palm-
leaf manuscript from Luang Prabang written in 1926. The colophon mentions that the
manuscript was donated in 1926 CE by Ms. Kòngsi from Kang village for a merit dedi­
cation to Ms. Sin.
Today, with people becoming increasingly interested in the preservation of local
heritage, senior laywomen spend their free time volunteering and assisting in monas­
tic libraries where ancient manuscripts are maintained and exhibited. As their library
responsibilities are unrelated to discursive tasks, most of the volunteers are not able
to read the manuscripts. They take care of them as cultural heritage objects and to
prevent them from being stolen and damaged. Occasionally, they clean and rewrap
manuscripts, rearrange manuscripts on a shelf, repair the wrapping cloth, or even
make new wrapping cloth and donate it to the library.

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 459
4 Texts and Textiles in Compensation
As mentioned earlier, the production of religious manuscripts required monkhood sta­
tus and Dhamma script literacy. To compensate for their lack of both these opportuni­
ties, women donated their hair and wove textiles to bind and wrap religious
manuscripts. Donated hair compensated for the women’s lack of masculinity and thus
monkhood, while textile-weaving skills compensated for their lack of literacy in the
Dhamma script. Thus, although women were excluded from the creation of
manuscript texts, they compensated by donating textile products and other objects.
Why did women choose to make up for their physical disadvantage by donating
hair? It could be because heads were revered as the place where holy spirits resided.
Cleaning someone’s feet with one’s hair thus symbolized the greatest respect, and
donating one’s hair for making bookbinding thread implied a deep religious faith. In a
sense, women’s long hair could be viewed as compensating for monks’ shaved heads.
Hence, hair donation could represent both great respect for Buddhism and a solution
to the female physical condition.
Why did women weave textiles to compensate for their lack of Dhamma script
literacy? This can be regarded as a cultural phenomenon. The writing of manuscripts
and weaving of textiles share a common feature: proficiency in a skill. Men had the
opportunity to learn the Dhamma script, while women had the opportunity to learn
textile weaving. The transmission of such forms of knowledge was specifically tied to
gender: the Dhamma script was taught to monks in order to sustain and propagate the
Buddha’s teachings, while textile weaving was taught to women so they could con­
tribute to the household economy. While men used their Dhamma script literacy to
produce religious manuscripts, women used their textile weaving ability to participate
in the production of these manuscripts. Although men could only write the
manuscripts while women could only participate in their production, both derived
shared merit from the commissioning of a manuscript.
Manuscript writing and textile weaving had another feature in common: the cre­
ation of a new composition using diverse elements. When writing a manuscript,
scribes or copyists inscribed alphabets (consonants, vowels, numerals, symbols, etc.)
with writing tools and writing substances. The letters were interwoven to compose a
certain text. When weaving textiles, weavers or craftsmen connected strands of
thread (cotton, silk,33) jute, etc.) to create a new sheet of cloth. According to
Ñāṇodaya, “every single letter of the Buddha’s teaching has the same value as a sin­
gle Buddha image” (Seeger 2006, 157). In this sense, combining alphabets into text
and combining strands of thread into a sheet of cloth can both be described as a weav­

460 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
ing craft that requires special skills, and one alphabet can have the same value as one
strand of thread. Manuscripts woven with alphabets and wrapping cloths woven with
strands of thread are both the result of special abilities that are used to demonstrate a
faith in Buddhism. Texts and textiles thus share the common character of being com­
positions of interwoven elements. Hence, writing and textile weaving are both activi­
ties that combine elements according to certain guidelines into a structured outcome:
Literary works must be composed somehow. It is part of their nature to be woven, constructed,
fabricated, collected together out of disparate elements. Most of these meanings are implied by
the Latin textere, from which the English word “text” is derived. (Griffiths 1999, 22)
5 Conclusion
The donations of hair and manuscript wrapping cloth were a result of laywomen’s
struggles to partake in merit derived from producing and dedicating religious
manuscripts. They did not believe that this merit should be limited to males, and they
finally found ways to participate in gaining something that they considered precious.
Their long hair being braided into bookbinding thread and their expertise in weaving
and embroidering wrapping cloth were acknowledged as valuable in replacing monk­
hood status and Dhamma script literacy. Hair donation was a physical sacrifice to com­
pensate for the lack of monkhood status, and the donation of wrapping cloth was an
object sacrifice to compensate for the lack of ordination opportunities that led to
Dhamma script literacy.
The eventual manuscript thus benefited from collaboration between both gen­
ders: men wrote texts for manuscript production, while women wove textiles for
manuscript protection. The phenomenon reflects the gaining of shared merit by peo­
ple of both genders in Thai-Lao Theravāda Buddhist society, where women are
socially inferior. The collaborative merit-making implies that gender discrimination
was not too strong: it was acceptable for women to participate in meritorious prac­
tices. Their hair was acceptable, and their textile weaving ability was also appreciated
and included in the process of manuscript donation and thus merit making.
Acknowledgments
Research for this article was funded by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy–EXC 2176 “Understanding Written

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 461
Artefacts: Material, Interaction and Transmission in Manuscript Cultures,” project no. 390893796.
Research was conducted within the scope of the Centre for the Study of Manuscript Cultures at
Universität Hamburg. We owe the greatest debt of gratitude to the two anonymous reviewers who
spent their precious time on reading and providing critical comments on our paper. We learned a lot
from their contributions and their recommendations on other books and articles. This paper is
greatly improved thanks to their support.
Notes
1) Notes on Romanization of Thai and Lao
The Romanization in this paper follows the regional pronunciation of the Thai and Lao languages
by means of the Romanization system devised for conveying Thai syllables at the Asia-Africa
Institute of Universität Hamburg. This system largely follows the system of Romanization stipu­
lated by the Royal Thai Academy (Royal Institute 1941), with slight modifications. For example,
there are two additional symbols (ü, ò) (for representing อือ and ออ). This simplified Romaniza­
tion of Thai (and Lao) terms does not indicate vowel lengths or tones. With respect to the
names of specific temples in Laos, the consonant /ວ/ is usually transcribed as “v” by scholars of
Lao studies; thus, the term “temple-monastery” in proper names is spelled as “vat” in Lao in­
stead of “wat.” Yet, when referring to a Thai temple-monastery in general, “wat” is used.
2) Sutta or Suttanta Piṭaka is a compilation of the word of the Buddha in discourses—i.e., his ser­
mons, lectures, and explanations of Dhamma that were delivered to suit particular individuals
and occasions—along with compositions, narratives, and stories that originated in early Bud­
dhism (Payutto 2002, 36).
3) There are five divisions in Suttanta Piṭaka: Dīgha Nikāya, Majjhima Nikāya, Saṁyutta Nikāya,
Aṅguttara Nikāya, and Khuddaka Nikāya.
4) Tipiṭaka literally means “three baskets,” representing the three collections of the Buddhist
canon: Vinaya Piṭaka (Collection of rules for monks and nuns), Suttanta Piṭaka (Collection of ser­
mons, histories, stories, and accounts), and Abhidhamma Piṭaka (Collection of teachings and ex­
planations in purely academic terms).
5) Myths are a form of folktales. According to Stith Thompson (1977), there are 11 categories of
folktales: fairy tales, novellas, hero tales, sagas, explanatory tales, myths, animal tales, jests, for­
mula tales, religious tales, and ghost tales.
6) The Ābhassarā realm is the realm of Brahmas with radiant lustre. Gunapala Piyasena
Malalasekera (2009, 512) gives details on the Ābhassarā realm in terms of realm beings being
reborn on Earth: “The idea of a return to an original purity could be found in relation to the
development of deeper states of concentration. According to Buddhist cosmology, when the
world-system goes through a period of contraction beings are reborn in the Ābhassarā realm (D.
I, 17; D. III, 84), from which they eventually depart to be reborn on earth once the world-system
has re-expanded. The Ābhassarā realm is the cosmological counterpart to the attainment of the
second jhāna. Hence one who in the human realm succeeds in attaining this level of concentration
could indeed be reckoned to be returning to an original purity of the mind, a degree of purity
experienced a long time ago when living in the Ābhassarā realm during a time when this world-
system had contracted.”
7) There are 16 Form-Spheres (Rūpabhava, Fine-Material Sphere): Brahmapārisajjā (Realm of
great Brahmas’ attendants), Brahmapurohitā (Realm of great Brahmas’ ministers), Mahābrahmā
(Realm of great Brahma), Parittābhā (Realm of Brahmas with limited luster), Appamāṇābhā
(Realm of Brahmas with infinite luster), Ābhassarā (Realm of Brahmas with radiant luster),
Parittasubhā (Realm of Brahmas with limited aura), Appamāṇasubhā (Realm of Brahmas with in­

462 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
finite aura), Subhakiṇhā (Realm of Brahmas with steady aura), Vehapphalā (Realm of Brahmas
with abundant rewards), Asaññīsattā (Realm of non-percipient beings), Avihā (Realm of Brahmas
who do not fall from prosperity), Atappā (Realm of Brahmas who are serene), Sudassā (Realm of
Brahmas who are beautiful), Sudassī (Realm of Brahmas who are clear-sighted), Akaniṭṭhā
(Realm of the highest or supreme Brahmas). There are four Formless Spheres (Arūpabhava,
immaterial states): Ākāsānañcāyatana (Sphere of infinity of space), Viññāṇañcāyatana
(Sphere of infinity of consciousness), Ākiñcaññāyatana (Sphere of nothingness), and
Nevasaññānāsaññāyatana (Sphere of neither perception nor non-perception) (Payutto 2015, 271–
272).
8) “Motivated by the wish to live a celibate life dedicated to progress to awakening, the Buddha’s
fostermother Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī/Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī requests permission for women to
go forth. The Buddha refuses. Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī and her followers nevertheless shave off
their hair, put on robes, and follow the Buddha on his travels. The Buddha’s attendant Ānanda
intervenes on their behalf, raising the argument that women are in principle able to reach awak­
ening. The Buddha gives permission for women to join the order” (Anālayo 2019, 40).
9) These 13 are Pajāpatī (praised for her long standing as the first nun), Khemā (praised for her
great intellect), Upalavaṇṇā (praised for her divine miracles), Paṭācārā (praised for her good
memory of the Vinaya), Dhammadinnā (praised for her homiletic expertise), Nandā (praised for
her meditation), Soṇā (praised for her endeavor), Sakulā (praised for her divine sights), Bhaddā-
Kuṇḍalakesī (praised for her sudden enlightenment), Bhaddāpilānī (praised for her ability to re­
member past lives), Bhaddākaccānā (praised for her success in attaining great apiññā),
Kīsāgotamī (praised for her habit of wearing coarse robes), and Sigālamātā (praised for her re­
nunciation of defilements with her faith) (Samer 1981, 37–38).
10) Her name was Bhaddā, but she was known as Kuṇḍalakesā for her curly hair (Bhaddā-
Kuṇḍalakesā). She became an ascetic after being almost killed by her husband in a trick. She lost
a debate to Venerable Sariputta and became a Buddhist nun. Her brilliant attainment of Ara­
hantship was praised as being the fastest among all the nuns: “Just as the wanderer Bahiya was
foremost amongst monks who attained arahantship faster than anyone else, she was foremost
amongst nuns with the same quality” (Hecker 1994, 25).
11) The texts define the menace of lust caused by seeing women wearing their clothes improperly
or carelessly, unintentionally letting parts of their bodies show. Regardless of women’s intention
of physical—or even sexual—exposure, the sight of private parts of female bodies is considered
a menace.
12) Women are metaphorically compared to the five kinds of danger of a cobra: anger, revenge, venom
(lust), forked tongue (instigation), and ingratitude (unfaithfulness).
13) Five statuses are never attainable for females: a Buddha, a wheel-turning king (cakkavatti), a
heavenly king (God Sakka), Lord Māra, and a being in the Form-Sphere (rūpabhava) and Form­
less Sphere (arūpabhava). Although one can achieve the five statuses by accumulating merit no
matter what one’s gender, in the end one will be reborn in the five statuses only as a male. Gen­
der does not matter in the process of accumulating merit to gain status, but actually being in the
status is another matter. This gender discrimination can be found also in the case of the Tusitā
heaven, which is inhabited only by male beings. Women who have accumulated sufficient merit
and can eventually attain rebirth in the Tusitā level are born male in order to reside there.
14) In general there are two types of jātaka: canonical jātaka and non-canonical jātaka. Canonical
jātaka (547 stories) are found in the Buddhist Pāli canon (Tipiṭaka). The well-known set of non-
canonical jātaka in Thailand is Paññāsa Jātaka or Bāhira Jātaka. The term defines jātaka that are
absent in the canonical 547 jātaka in Khuddaka Nikāya, the Buddhist canon, as bāhira (Pāli)
means “external,” “foreign,” “outside” (U Ko Lay 1984). The Northern Thai Piṭakamālā calls
the Paññāsa Jātaka “the fifty births outside the saṅgāyanā” (Skilling 2006, 130). It has been

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 463
found in Siam, Laos, Cambodia, Lan Na, and Myanmar. For the Pali National Library collection,
Prince Damrong proposed the date 1457–1657 CE. The Paññāsa Jātaka of the Lan Na collection
is supposed to have been composed by monks from Chiang Mai. Invented or apocryphal Paññāsa
Jātaka stories are derived from Pāli/Sanskrit Buddhist texts, local folktales, India, and Paññāsa
Jātaka themselves and have been transmitted in different languages and scripts, from local Pāli
to nissaya. Individual stories included in Paññāsa Jātaka, not the set as a whole, had an enor­
mous influence on Siamese literature. Classical Siamese literature does not treat the stories as
extracts from the set of fifty; each story exists in its own right (Lamun 1995, 79; Skilling 2006,
134, 146, 148). In Thailand manuscripts were compiled by different persons and monasteries:
King Anantawòrarit who had ten manuscript bundles copied in 1861/62 and 1863/64; a complete
manuscript version (1834–36) kept at Wat Sung Men, Phrae Province; and other vernacular col­
lections including that of Verenable Thip Chutithammo, the abbot of Wat Min, Chiang Tung
(Skilling 2006, 148–149, 151).
15) Dīpaṅkara Buddha was the fourth Buddha and is mentioned in several jātaka. He prophesied
that Sumedhatāpasa (later Prince Siddhattha), who devoted his body to be a bridge for Dīpaṅkara
Buddha to walk on, would become a Buddha. Dīpaṅkara Buddha was from Amaravati city and the
son of King Sudeva and Queen Sumedhā. There were three more Buddhas who lived in the
same kappa (eon; world-eon; world-age) as Dīpaṅkara Buddha: Taṇhaṅkara Buddha, Medhaṅkara
Buddha, and Saraṇaṅkara Buddha (Chollada 2013, 83).
16) The Dhamma script cultural domain includes Shan areas in Myanmar, southwestern China
(Sipsòng Panna), Northern Thailand, Northeastern Thailand, Laos, and northern Vietnam.
17) Samer Boonma (1981, 41–50) gives five reasons for the decrease in the number of Buddhist
nuns: (1) complicated ordination procedures, (2) disciplinary strictness, (3) female physical con­
dition, (4) decline of Buddhism, and (5) lack of support.
18) Sikkhamānā or sāmaṇerī have to observe six precepts for two years and have to be re-ordained if
a precept is broken (Samer 1981, 41–42).
19) Ralph Isaacs (2009, 121) clearly describes the Pongyibyan festival in Myanmar and mentions the
roles of laywomen: generous donors earned more merit by contributing gifts for surviving
monks of the monastery. The gifts were carried in a procession of padaythabin, tree-like stands
of bamboo, each mounted on a bamboo platform and carried by two or four men or women.
20) During a research trip to Luang Prabang 2022, Silpsupa visited a monastery. She entered the
elevated stage, set against a wall of the main monastic hall, and started looking at the books and
other items there. A local layman entered the hall and spotted the author on the stage. He
warned her to climb down and never go up there again. As the author was not local, the man let
her off with a warning.
21) “Maekhaos (nuns) learn Buddhism informally from individual monks and by attending periodic
meditation courses. Several nuns told us that they eavesdropped when a monk explained Bud­
dhism to lay people; some stayed in the background and memorized every word the monk said.
Occasionally, a nun will cross into neighbouring Thailand and enroll at a Buddhist institute there
in order to learn more” (Tsomo 2010, 87).
22) “Her little kuti showed evidence of her studies, with an array of beginning English books as well
as palm leaf Buddhist manuscripts. Maekhao My was teaching herself both English and Lao
Tham, an ancient sacred script” (Tsomo 2010, 99).
23) The four ashramas are Brahmacharya (bachelor student), Grihastha (householder), Vanaprastha
(forest dweller, retired), and Sannyasa (ascetic).
24) The term khwan is a word of pre-Buddhist Tai origin that was used in Tai, Indian (Assam), and
Burmese (Shan State) regions before the Buddhist religion was propagated. In the Three Seals
Law (กฎหมายตราสามดวง) the term khwan in spelled ขวัน, not ขวัญ. Together with one’s physi­
cal elements, khwan is a spiritual element that remains in the human body and belongs to living

464 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
humans, whereas winyan (viññāṇa) is the spirit of the dead. Therefore, recitations and prayers
for any khwan-related rituals are in the vernacular—so that living hosts and attendants can un­
derstand the meanings—while recitations and prayers for rituals related to the dead (e.g., funer­
als, commemorative rituals) are in Pāli due to its sacredness and ritual significance. Although it
is believed that there are 32 individual khwan residing in all 32 of the body’s organs, there are no
rituals related to individual khwan. It is believed that every khwan of a human resides in and
protects every organ. Khwan is believed to escape the body when a person is sick and remain in
the body when the person is happy. When a human dies, it is believed that their khwan tries to
return to the home and family within seven days. The meaning of khwan is generally understood
as “courage” (Suwanna and Nuangnoi 1994, 76–86).
25) There are four Buddhist Holy days per month: the eighth waxing-moon day of the lunar month,
the 15th waxing-moon day of the lunar month, the eighth waning-moon day of the lunar month,
and the 15th (or 14th) waning-moon day of the lunar month.
26) The Mahachat, or Bun Phawet, or Tang Tham Luang festival is held for three days during Febru­
ary to March in Laos and Northeastern Thailand and in October to November in Central and
Northern Thailand. In the festival all 13 episodes of Vessantara Jātaka are rhythmically recited
by monks. According to the story of Venerable Malaya, those who listen to all 13 episodes within
one day will be reborn in the period of Metteyya Buddha, the next forthcoming Buddha.
27) “These kathina robes are distributed to monks who have observed the Lenten retreat. At the
Shwedagon a special robe-weaving contest is held at this time; looms are set up to weave fresh
sets of robes called matho thingan (Myanmar) for the four central Buddha images housed in the
pagodas’s main sanctuaries. Teams of women representing various lay associations work the
looms in shifts, cheered on by spectators, to complete the robes on time with the winning teams
receiving a prize” (Pranke 2015, 31).
28) “Additionally, we know that foreign cloth was a significant factor used by élite groups to adorn
and set themselves apart from the other members of the local populations. Sumptuary rules
were never simply a matter of better dress; foreign cloth denotes power, prestige and access to
non-native resources, and other-worldly attainment that ordinary folk could not command and
that reinforced the rights and privileges of élites” (Lefferts 2003, 91).
29) The Five Disappearances (Pañca-antaradhāna) of the Buddhist order are the Buddha’s teachings
(Pariyatti-antaradhāna); Buddhist practices (Paṭipati-antaradhāna); enlightenment (Paṭivedha-
antaradhāna); disciplined monks (Liṅga-antaradhāna); and relics, pagodas, and temples (Dhātu-
antaradhāna).
30) “In the commentary on the Aṅguttara Nikāya, it states that Buddhism will decline over time;
therefore, the knowledge of the scriptures will eventually disappear. The first text to disappear
would be the Paṭṭhāna, the last volume in the Abhidhamma, a text considered the most difficult
to understand” (Saruya 2022, 3).
31) The formal words of an act. The text is used in ordination ceremonies.
32) Liturgical manuscripts that contain sermonic texts and explain meritorious rewards gained from
several kinds of merit-making activities.
33) Donating wrapping cloth made of silk was also regarded as a form of compensation for the killing
of thousands of silkworms. The sinful deed of killing was thus believed—or expected—to be for­
given, and the killed silkworms could also gain merit (Ubon Ratchathani University 2019).
References
Manuscripts
Buddhist Archive of Photography (BAP). BAD-13-1-0760. ປນັ ຍາບາຮະມ. ີ Palm-leaf manuscript;

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 465
languages: Lao and Pāli; scripts: Lao Dhamma and Lao; 6 folios; CS 1325 (1963 CE).
Buddhist Archive of Photography (BAP). BAD-11-1-0060. ສອງສພັ ພະທງຸ . Palm-leaf manuscript;
languages: Lao and Pāli; scripts: Lao Dhamma and Lao; 9 folios; CS 1288 (1926 CE).
Buddhist Archive of Photography (BAP). BAD-22-1-0934. ສະຫຼອງຫ່ໍຜາ້ . Palm-leaf manuscript;
languages: Lao and Pāli; scripts: Lao Dhamma and Lao; 11 folios; CS 1329 (1967 CE).
Digital Library of Lao Manuscripts. 06011406012-16. ສອງຜາ້ ພນັ ໜງັ ສ. ື Palm-leaf manuscript;
languages: Lao and Pāli; scripts: Lao Dhamma and Lao; 7 folios; CS 1212 (1850 CE).
Publications
English
Anālayo. 2019. Women in Early Buddhism. Journal of Buddhist Studies 16: 31–76.
Anālayo. 2009. The Bahudhātuka-sutta and Its Parallels on Women’s Inabilities. Journal of Buddhist
Ethics 16: 135–190.
Appleton, Naomi and Shaw, Sarah, trans. 2015. The Ten Great Birth Stories of the Buddha: The
Mahānipāta of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Arthid Sheravanichkul. 2008. Self-Sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the Paññāsa Jātaka. Religion Compass
2(5): 769–787. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-8171.2008.00095.x.
Chladek, Michael Ross. 2017. Making Monks, Making Men: The Role of Buddhist Monasticism in
Shaping Northern Thai Identities. PhD dissertation, University of Chicago.
CrossAsia. n.d. Language & Scripts. CrossAsia Digital Collections. https://digital.crossasia.org/
digital-library-of-lao-manuscripts-resources-script/?lang=en, accessed February 13, 2025.
Griffiths, Paul J. 1999. Religious Reading: The Place of Reading in the Practice of Religion. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Hecker, Hellmuth. 1994. Buddhist Women at the Time of the Buddha, translated by Sister Khemā.
Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Hundius, Harald. 1990. The Colophons of Thirty Pali Manuscripts from Northern Thailand. Journal of
the Pali Text Society 14: 1–174.
Isaacs, Ralph. 2009. Rockets and Ashes: Pongyibyan as Depicted in Nineteenth- and Twentieth-
Century European Sources. Journal of Burma Studies 13: 107–136. https://doi.org/10.1353/
jbs.2009.0003.
Kabilsingh, Chatsumarn. 1998. Women in Buddhism (Questions and Answers). Bangkok: Dhamma
Education Association.
Kabilsingh, Chatsumarn. 1991. Thai Women in Buddhism. Berkeley: Parallex Press.
Kaloyanides, Alexandra. 2023. Baptizing Burma: Religious Change in the Last Buddhist Kingdom.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Khamvone Boulyaphonh and Grabowsky, Volker. 2017. A Catalogue of Lao Manuscripts Kept in the
Abbot’s Abode (Kuti) of Vat Si Bun Hüang: Luang Prabang. Hamburg: Hamburger
Südostasienstudien.
Lefferts, Leedom. 2003. Textiles for the Preservation of the Lao Intangible Cultural Heritage. In
Laos and Ethnic Minority Cultures: Promoting Heritage, edited by Yves Goudineau, pp. 89–110.
Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
Lefferts, Leedom. n.d. Women’s Textiles & Men’s Crafts in Thai Culture. Smithsonian Institution, pp.
43–46. https://folklife-media.si.edu/docs/festival/program-book-articles/FESTBK1994_24.pdf,
accessed June 6, 2024.
Li Yuhang. 2012. Embroidering Guanyin: Constructions of the Divine through Hair. East Asian
Science, Technology, and Medicine 36(1): 131–166.

466 Saowakon Sukrak and Silpsupa Jaengsawang
Litalien, Manuel. 2018. Social Inequalities and the Promotion of Women in Buddhism in Thailand.
Journal of Buddhist Ethics 25: 569–606.
Malalasekera, Gunapala Piyasena, ed. 2009. Encyclopaedia of Buddhism. Colombo: Government of
Ceylon.
Pranke, Patrick. 2015. Buddhism and Its Practice in Myanmar. In Buddhist Art of Myanmar, edited by
Sylvia Fraser-Lu and Donald M. Stadtner, pp. 27–34. New York: Asia Society.
Royal Institute. 1941. Notification of the Royal Institute Concerning the Transcription of Thai
Characters into Roman. Journal of the Siam Society 33(1): 49–65.
Saruya, Rachelle. 2022. Creating Demand and Creating Knowledge Communities: Myanmar/
Burmese Buddhist Women, Monk Teachers, and the Shaping of Transitional Teachings. Religions
13: 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3390/rel13020098.
Seeger, Martin. 2006. The Bhikkhunī-Ordination Controversy in Thailand. Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies (JIABS) 29(1): 155–183. https://journals.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/
index.php/jiabs/article/view/8976, accessed January 18, 2024.
Silpsupa Jaengsawang. 2022. Relationship between Anisong Manuscripts and Rituals: A Comparative
Study of the Lan Na and Lao Traditions. Segnitz: Zenos-Verlag.
Skilling, Peter. 2006. Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka in Southeast Asia. Journal of the Pali Text Society 28:
113–174.
Thompson, Stith. (1946) 1977. The Folktale. (New York: Dryden Press) London: University of
California Press.
Tomalin, Emma. 2006. The Thai Bhikkhuni Movement and Women’s Empowerment. Gender &
Development 14: 385–397. https://doi.org/10.1080/13552070600980492.
Trüeb, Ralph M. 2017. From Hair in India to Hair India. International Journal of Trichology 9(1): 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.4103/ijt.ijt_10_17.
Tsomo, Karma Lekshe. 2010. Lao Buddhist Women: Quietly Negotiating Religious Authority.
Theology and Religious Studies: Faculty Scholarship 27(1): 85–106. https://digital.sandiego.edu/
thrs-faculty/14, accessed June 3, 2024.
U Ko Lay. 1984. Guide to Tipitaka. Buddha Dhamma Education Association. http://www.
buddhanet.net/pdf_file/tipitaka.pdf, accessed June 4, 2024.
Wharton, David. 2017. Language, Orthography and Buddhist Manuscript Culture of the Tai Nuea.
PhD dissertation, University of Passau.
Thai
Chollada Kopatta ชลดา โกพัฒตา. 2013. คติความเชื่ออดีตพระพุทธเจ้าในสังคมไทยพุทธศตวรรษที่ 20–24.
วารสารศิลปศาสตร์ 13(1): 77–103. https://so03.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/liberalarts/article/view/
17172, accessed January 18, 2024.
Ciraphòn Nawasit จิราภรณ์ นะวะสิทธ์.ิ 2009. วัฒนธรรมการทอผ้า บทบาทผู้หญิงกับการเปลี่ย นแปลงชุมชน
กรณีศึกษา บ้านไผ่งาม ตําบลส้าน อําเภอเวียงสา จังหวัดน่าน. Individual study, Silpakorn University.
http://www.thapra.lib.su.ac.th/objects/thesis/fulltext/bachelor/a32552014/fulltext.pdf, accessed
January 18, 2024.
His Supreme Patriarch Prince Paramanujitjinorot สมเด็จกรมพระปรมานุชิตชิโนรส. 1970. พ ระปฐม
สมโพธิกถา. Bangkok: Thambannakhan.
Lamun Canhòm ลมูล จันทน์หอม. 1995. วรรณกรรมท้องถ่นิ ล้านนา. Chiang Mai: Suriwong Book Center.
Payutto ประยุทธ์ ปยุตฺโต. 2015. พจนานุกรมพุทธศาสน์ ฉบับประมวลธรรม. Bangkok: Museum for
Sustainable Buddhism.
Payutto ประยุทธ์ ปยุตฺโต. 2002. พระไตรปิฎก: สิ่งท่ชี าวพุทธต้องรู้. Bangkok: S.R. Printing Mass Products.

Women in Thai-Lao Manuscript Culture 467
Samer Boonma เสมอ บุญมา. 1981. ภิกษุณีในพระพุทธศาสนา. ว ารสารสํานักงานคณะกรรมการวิจัยแห่งชาติ
13(1): 1–65.
Surapol Damrikul สุรพล ดําริห์กุล. 1999. ล้านนา: สิ่งแวดล้อม สังคม และวัฒนธรรม. Bangkok: Rungarun.
Suwanna Satha-Anand สุวรรณา สถาอานันท ์ and Nuangnoi Bunyanet เนื่องน้อย บุณยเนตร, eds. 1994.
คํา: ร่องรอยความคิด ความเชื่อไทย. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University Press.
Tipitaka (DTP). 2017. ผ้าห่อถักทอเชื่อมสายบุญ. In อยู่ในบุญ, edited by Sombat Rakkhitacitto, Phra
พระสมบัติ รักขิตจิตโต, pp. 40–44. Pathumthani: Samnak Sü Thamma.
Ubon Ratchathani University. 2019. ลวดลายผ้าขิดห่อใบลาน ผ้าสะสมบุญ อุทิศส่วนกุศล แ ละสะเดาะเคราะห์
บ้านทุ่งใหญ.่ Esan Information@Ubon Ratchathani. December 27. http://www.esanpedia.oar.ubu.
ac.th/esaninfo/?p=5034, accessed February 4, 2025.
Wattana Chudhavipata วัฒนะ จูฑะวิภาต. 2012. ผ้าทอกับชีวิตคนไทย. Research project, Dhurakij Pandit
University. https://libdoc.dpu.ac.th/research/149797.pdf, accessed January 18, 2024.
Chinese
Sun Peilan 孫佩蘭. 1994. 蘇繡與佛教文化(下). 上海工藝 1: 30–31.