TITLE: Bagan Terracotta Plaques and Jātaka Iconography in Medieval Myanmar
AUTHOR: U Ko Ko, U Lwin Thaw
YEAR: 2019
LANGUAGE: EN/Burmese
ORIGINAL_FILE: 5. U Ko Ko Toe Lwin Thaw (53-70).pdf
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 46983
STATUS: OK
============================================================

J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
JĀTAKA STORIES: THE ANTERIOR LIVES OF BUDDHA (JᾹ.1- JᾹ.547) 
INTERPRETED DURING THE BAGAN PERIOD* 
Ko Ko Toe Lwin Thaw1 
 
Abstract 
Among the themes of Buddhist visual art , Jātaka stories have mostly reflected on social lives 
of Bagan people especially on performers and the characters intermingle as main icons and 
supporting icons in a single scene of jataka stories. The stories gave moral and ethical 
education to the common people and they were reflected with Bagan life -style. Jātaka stories 
are depicted at the most temples as interior wall mural painting decoration and adorned at 
many prominent solid -pagodas as the exterior glaze plaque decoration. Jātakas are mostly 
illustrated on the side walls of vestibule or entrance hall in the temples. In fact, these real 
narrative stories are transformed into the static scenes of narrative performance. Most Jātaka 
plaques and mural panels have serial numbers, captions of title and mentioned notes under 
them. They can be identified easily by mean of iconic and narrative patterns if they have 
without captions. The kind of Jātaka with Burman caption is different from those with Mon 
caption on figural attitude and scenic composition and even interpretation on each story is 
distinguished each other because of their religious concepts and different times of early and 
later periods. Most Bagan narrative stories murals and plaques are arranged in the pattern of 
square or rectangular panels. Few are in the pattern of circular tondos. The study will 
comparatively focus and examine the Jātaka stories between plaques and murals.  
Keywords   Jātaka, interpret, icon, mural, glaze, decoration, caption, panels, tondos 
    Research Method   qualitative, quantitative, descriptive, comparative and field research     
methods 
Introduction 
The Jātaka stories especially the last ten stories of previous lives of Buddha are the 
favourite themes of Bagan people. In fact, Jātakas were used as popular media of instruction in 
ethical and moral ideas and illustrative education. But Ananda Jātaka plaques are situated in the 
inaccessible and invisible places for the common folks so they were probably used for canonical 
references only that will be sometime used to compromise as evidential criterions. 2 Among the 
themes of Buddhist visual art, Jātaka stories have mostly reflected on social lives of Bagan 
people. The characters intermingle as main icons and supporting icons in the single scene to 
illustrate 537 short Jātaka stories. Few last ten Jātaka stories found in Bagan are illustrated in 
many scenes. The Jātaka stories gave moral and ethical education to the common people and 
they were reflected with Bagan life -style, so the themes and events of these stories will be 
explicitly examined in prior.  
  
 
*  Best Paper Award Winning Paper in History (2022) 
1  Department of History, East Yangon University, Attached at University of Yangon  
2  See Figure 1 Source, Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication  
54 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Glaze Plaques of Jātaka Stories, as Exterior Decoration, the Upper Part of Ananda1  
Jātakas constitute 547 stories of former births of Buddha that can be divided as the 537 
shorter stories of former 21 books and the last ten longer stories of 22 nd book. Jātaka stories are 
depicted at the most temples as interior wall painting decoration and adorned at many prominent 
solid-pagodas as the exterior glaze plaque decoration. Jātakas are mostly illustrated on the side 
walls of vestibule or entrance hall in the temples. In fact, these narrative stories are transformed 
and illustrated as the static scenes of narrative performance. The interpretation of earlier short 
537 stories and the last ten long stories are distinctively verified and examined.     
The Comparative Study between Jātaka Plaques and Jātaka Mural Panels of Bagan 
Most Jātaka plaques and mural panels have serial numbers, captions of title and 
mentioned notes under them. They can be identified easily by mean of iconic and narrative 
patterns if they have without captions. For instance, in some narrative scenes of later Bagan 
period, images of Bodhisattva called purhā lo ṅ meaning the Buddha -to-be are frequently 
illustrated under parasols as Burman style which are traditionally used as a piece of regalia for 
royalty. In the small panel scenes of Jātaka depicted with smal l figures on nearly full of wall, 
they are difficult to be identified who Bodhisattva is there, so it can be pointed out with an 
umbrella that distinguished with others. Some images can be identified according to head dresses 
for example, royalty has adorned with crown and others have various hair-knots.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  Most figures used in this paper is supported by Than Zaw (Bagan) who is a Bagan Mural specialist.  
2  See Figure 2 and Figure 3, Source- Photo Taken by Researcher, each scene is composed of three different  
 kinds of social life-styles _the king, minister/ chaplain and an average person of attendant with each has own   
 hair dress 
J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption / ဂါမဏိဇာတ် ပုရ ာလ ာင် အမ တ် ၈  Caption /သိ ဝိမသ် ဇာတ် လ  ာဟိတ်။ ၈၆။  
//gāmani jat purhāloṅ amat 8                               // silavimaṅsa jat brohit //86// 
Figure 2 (left) JᾹ. 8, Gāmani Jātaka: Minister Who Is Bodhisattva with Parasol, Wetkyi-in Kubyauk-gyi  
Figure 3 (right) JᾹ. 86 Sῑlavimaṁsana Jātaka: Chaplain with Parasol, Wetkyi-in Kubyauk-gyi  
Jātaka with Burman caption is different from those with Mon caption as well as figural 
attitude and scene composition and even interpretation on each story is distinguished between 
each other because of their religious concepts and different times. Most Bagan plaques and 
murals of narrative stories or Jātakas are arranged in the pattern of square or rectangular panels, 
but few figures are in tondos that can be seen in illustrating tondo Jātakas in M.1826 temple.1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4  Tondo Art, the Rows of Tangent Circular Floral, Jātakas and Floral Friezes from 
Vaulted Ceiling down to Upper Wall, M. 1826, Source- Photo Taken by Researcher 
As the said scenes of Jātakas are one of the favourite themes of Bagan muralists and 
sculptors as well as of Bagan audiences. In Bagan period, “among the Jātakas, the last ten longer 
stories, especially Sama JᾹ-538, Janaka JᾹ-539, Mahosada  JᾹ-542 and Vessantara JᾹ-547, 
were most prized and read; they have been translated in prose and verse, and turned into 
 
1  See Figure 4, M is referred to Monument. Source- Photo Taken by Researcher 
56 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
theatrical plays or dramas”. 1 The plaques and panel scenes of murals illustrated with Jātaka 
stories can be defined as static performance which reflects real live performances and real life -
styles of Bagan people.  
“A number of inscriptions at Bagan refer to the paintings, mentioning that 'on the walls 
were beautifully painted the scenes from the 500 Jātakas', and that 'on the walls of the hollow -
pagoda were painted 14,619 Buddhas and scenes from the 550 Jātakas".2  To compare with 
stupa, temple seemed to be more popular as they provide many interior walls and ceilings on 
which the scenes from the Jātaka could be painted as decoration and education. “Moreover, the 
paintings of canonical narrative scenes were the most effective  means of convincing the common 
folk how to get the merit of giving alms and of meditation”.3  
In the inscription dated A.D. 1239, a donor, Siri Mahādhammarajapaṇḍit recorded Pali 
Pitaka texts following as // Visuddhimagga 1 klam //Sut Sīlakkhandhā 1 klam Majjipannāsa, 
Suttanipat // Dhātuvaṅ// Mahāvaṅ / Catu-nipat Jat Athakathā / Nibbāna sut //.4 Among these 
texts, some Buddhist narrative stories would be cited and represented for narrative scenes and 
real performance. So many Pitaka texts were used to be dedicated to the monks, they became 
references of monks who would instruct the artists to illustrate the stories. 
  Stories of the anterior births of Gautama Buddha known to the old Burmans sometimes 
as jat ṅā ryā _ 500 birth stories, and sometimes as jat 550_ 550 birth stories, are also popular 
themes for painting on interior walls of temples and for plaques decorated on the outer parts of 
hollow-pagodas and solid -pagodas. Actually, there are only 547 stories. Strangely the Jātaka 
plaques at West Phetleik pagoda, found in earliest time of Bagan period so far, mentioned 
complete 550 stories. To reach number 550, the 547  Jātakas are added three stories such as 
Velāma Jātaka, Mahagovinda Jātaka (Dhīgha Nikāya, Mahagovindasutta)  and Sumeda- paṇdita 
Jātaka. There are six other pagodas belong to Bagan period which have only number 547 each. 
The six pagodas for plaques in exterior walls are: the East Phetleik solid-pagoda (by Aniruddha), 
the Shwe Sandaw solid -pagoda (by Aniruddha), the Shwezigon solid -pagoda (by Thiluiṅmaṅ), 
the Ananda hollow-pagoda (by Thiluiṅmaṅ), the Dhammayazika mix type of temples and stupa, 
(by Cañsū II) and the Mingalazedi solid-pagoda (by Tarukpliy).5    
Most temples are mainly decorated with Jātakas in the entrance vestibule or entrance hall. 
Good examples of displaying mural Jātakas can be seen in the temples of Myinkaga Kubyauk -
gyi(M-1323), Pahtothamya (M-1605), Lokahteikpan (M-1580), Wetkyi-in Kubyauk-gyi(M-298), 
Maungyon (M-600), Vinido (M-659) and Thingayaza (M-1051) which have captions of titles and 
brief mentioned notes engraved under narrative images of each plot of Jātaka. The ink gloss 
captions of Jātakas of the first three temples are in old Mon. In the scene of Lokahteikpan, 
caption is labeled using bilingual of Mon and Myanmar for Jātaka stories_ the twenty shorter 
stories from the first twenty  books are captioned in Mon and a story from 21 st book and the last 
ten stories from 22 nd book in Burman. Jātakas of the rest temples above are mentioned only in 
 
1  Chas. Duroiselle, “The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda, Text” , Epigraphia Birmanica, Vol. II, Part I,  Yangon, 
Government Printing,1921 p. V (Hereafter cited as Chas. Duroiselle, “The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda, Text”)    
2  (a)Pl.105, (b)Claudine Bautze -Picron, The Buddhist Murals of Pagan: Timeless Vistas of the Cosmos , Bangkok, 
Orchid Press, 2003, p.2, (Hereafter cited as Bautze -Picron, The Buddhist Murals of  Pagan ) (c)Dr. Than Tun, 
“History of Buddhism in Burma” , A.D. 1000 -1300, Ph.D. Thesis Submitted to SOAS, Revised and Enlarged 
Edition, Journal of Burma Research Society, Vol. LXI, i & ii, Yangon, Burma Research Society, 1978, 
pp.64,141(Hereafter cited as Dr. Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma”)  
3  Dr. Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma”, p.141 
4  U Nyein Maung, လရ ှေးလဟာင်ှေး မန်မာလက ာက်စာမ ာှေး (Old Burma Inscriptions), Vol.1, (Hand Writing), Yangon, Archaeological 
 Department, 1972, p. 289 (Hereafter cited as OBI-I)  
5  Dr. Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma”, p.65 
J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  57 
old Burman. The above captions also define the three  cultural periods of Bagan called early 
(Mon), transitional (Mon and Burman) and later (Burman) periods.  
The last longer ten stories of previous lives of Buddha are illustrated in many episodes 
but the rest former 537  Jātakas are always depicted in the pattern of one plaque for one scene. 
The media materials are always used of plaque or mural on wall_ the former is depicted on the 
exterior wall or in the roof decoration and the latter for an interior decoration. The Ananda 
pagoda has nearly 1500 Jātaka plaques in which the arrangement of displaying stories is made in 
two divisions; “the first representations o f the Jātakas, one story to one plate from Ekanipat to 
Arsītinipat (Nos. 1 to 537 Jātakas) totally up to 537 plaques as well as the second representations 
for the last ten stories (Mahanipat) from Mūgapakkha (Temi) Jātaka to Vessantarā Jātaka (From 
JᾹ-538 to JᾹ-547) amounted to 389 are illustrated each in a series of plaques on the roof and the 
receding terraces. It is not peculiar to Ananda because they are found on several other pagodas 
and temples at Bagan.  It could be sure that the feature is unique, for no other monument in the 
Buddhist world has so large a number of separate scenes of plaques like Ananda”. 1 In Jātaka 
plaques, the caption is used for only serial number and the name of each Jātaka but in mural, 
each Jātaka is always labeled with number, title of Jātaka (always in Pali) and short mentioned 
note always for life or career of Bodhisattva.  
The Myinkaba Gubyaul-gyi has painting of the 547 Jātaka stories on its walls with Mon 
glosses of Pali titles and short mentioned notes, but they are unnumbered. 2   The mentioned notes 
are little different from Mon and Burman for their own interpretations on the story. The common 
name of Buddha’s previous existence is indicated as Bodhisat (Bodhisattva) in Mon and purhā 
loṅ (Buddha- to- be) in Myanmar. In the comparative study between the Mon captions of 
Kubyauk-gyi (Myingaba) M -1323 in A.D. 1113 and the Burman captions of Kubyauk -gyi 
(Wetkyi-in) M-298 in early 13 th century A.D., we found the different usages between Mon and 
Burman i.e. ပဏ္ဍိတ်  paṇḍit is applied in Mon and ပညာဟိသသူ prañā hi sa sū3 and သုခမိန် sukhamin4 in 
Burman for wise man or sage,  အ္စာရ် acār in Mon သမာ samā in Burman for doctor, Deva  ဒေဝ in 
Mon, nat sā နတ်သာ in Burman for celestial gods and Indra in Mon, Sakrā in Burman for the king 
of 33 gods. In this case, it is obviously found that Burmans of Bagan have used their own 
terminological roots or they have coined the new terms  based on Pali by their own ways while 
Mon in Bagan have applied Pali-Sanskrit adaptation words as classical term.  
In the representation of Jātaka stories, Wetkyi -in Kubyauk -gyi used the division of 
volumes of Jātaka stories which is arranged from eka nipāta, dukka nipāta etc. to mahā nipāta. 
The caption of Sañjiva Jātaka no. 150 shows Disābrāmuik eka chuṁ (a world-famous teacher, 
end of Nipāta I). The next Jātaka resumed with the number one of second volume, third, fourth 
and so on. 5 Jātaka stories were arranged by mean of each Nipāta or book. But there are some 
mistakes _ the number one ahead the Sinhalese order from J Ᾱ-171 until 265 because a jātaka 
named Supāta jat  is wrongly illustrated. The stories from J Ᾱ-497 till J Ᾱ -503 are omitted and 
some stories are actually in blank. No.272 Jātaka is illustrated twice. Moreover, the places from 
JᾹ-257 till JᾹ-264 are inserted with scenes and captions from Buddhawaṁ.6 
 
1 Chas. Duroiselle, The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda, text, p. v 
2 Ibid, p.83 
3 JᾹ-6, JᾹ-49, JᾹ-89 in the Jātaka Panels, Wetkyi-in Kubyauk-gyi, 
4 Jātaka JᾹs 110,112,170, 364,401, 402, 403, 413, 441, 452 in the Jātaka Panels, Wetkyi-in Kubyauk-gyi 
5  See Figure 5, Source- Photo Taken by Researcher 
6  (a) Ba Shin, K. J. Whitbread and G. H. Luce, “Pagán, Wetkyi -in Kubyauk -gyi, an Early  Burmese Temple with 
Ink-Glosses”, Artibus Asiae , Vol. 33, No. 3, 1971, pp.200 -217, (Hereafter cited as Ba Shin, “Pagán, Wetkyi -in 
Kubyauk-gyi)   
(b) Based on Jātaka Stories’ ink glosses in Hall-Shrine.  
58 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption   / စူလကာလင်္ဂဇတ် ပ ုနာရသိ။ စတုတ် အ္စ။ //culakālaṅgajat buṁnā rasi  catuk ac// 
Figure 5 Brahman Hermit Beginning of Nipāta IV, Source- Photo Taken by Researcher 
Divisions of books can be found in the mural panel scenes of the temple, Lokahteikpan. 
They are particularly arranged, differed to other serial order of Jātakas, one panel scene for one 
Jātakas, but one panel scene for one book. “The first twenty -one nipātas or books of Jātakas are 
summarized with a limited number of panels in which twenty Jātakas cover the upper two rows 
(Mon captions) of the western wall in the shrine and a Jātaka, Sutasoma Jātaka , JĀ -537, the 
extreme left part of the third row of that western wall (Burman). They are followed by a detailed 
rendering of the first eight Jātakas included in the twenty-second book entitled the 'Great nipāta' 
called Mahānipāta, which cover the remai ning right part of the third row and the following 
fourth to fourteenth rows. As for the last two Jātakas, the Mahosadha and the Vessantara, they 
are on the two walls of entrance hall”. 1  So can be defined that the two stories mentioned above 
became the favourite themes of Bagan people like those of today Myanmar but they differ to the 
order of Jātakas between them.   
It is Lokahteikpan that is distinguished to the any other temples for all the scenes of 
Jātakas and Buddavaṁ, displayed on nearly almost all the walls are mentioned in the said two 
languages except 28 Buddhas on the north wall of Shrine which are captioned in only Mon 
language. According to the spatial art, the top two rows in Mon are reserved for Mon script 
writers and artists and the rest rows from the third to the lowest bottom for Burman respectively. 
The last ten Jātaka stories, dasajati, ten births we re particularly favoured by Bagan artists and 
artisans. We found about the dedication of Mahānipāta called Dasajat in the inscription dated 
A.D. 1273 situated at Min Khaung Pagoda at Pyay, the old city. 2 In this inscription, the donor 
and architect of pagoda recorded as “ Pisukā Ṅa Pisa ṅ nhaṅ atū pluso  Dasajat 1kla ṁ  
Abhidhammā 17klaṁ26-27  ိသုကာ ငပိသင်န င ်အတူ ပလုလသာဒသဇတ် ၁ကလမ် အဘိဓမမာ ၁၇ ကလမ်” means the architect, 
Pisukā Ṅa Pisaṅ and the donor made canonical texts such as a set of Dasajat (Last Ten Stories)  
 
1  Bautze-Picron, The Buddhist Murals of Pagan, p.75 (Bautze-Picron mentions the shorter stories as 20 books  
 and Mahānipāta as 21st books) 
2  U Nyein Maung, ဒရ ှေးဒဟာင်ှေးမမန်မာ ဒက ာက်စာမ ာှေး (Old Burma Inscriptions), Vol.3, (Hand Writing),  
Yangon, Archaeological Department, 1983, pp.87-89 (Hereafter cited as OBI, III) 
J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  59 
and 17 sets of Abhidhammā for pagoda and monastery. 1 It is noted that architect, mason and 
painter are essential for creation of art works and religious edifices as well as they were 
assumedly skillful in canonical texts. So, they have received the most price and prize for their art 
works from donors. Whereas, Tipitakas, canonical texts had ever been well known by monks and 
educated lay people, they were distributed in public using media of visual arts and performing 
arts.    
The performance is closely related to canonical texts especially in Jātakas nos. 59, 60, 
116, 179, 212, 243 and 309. Bodhisattva of each Jātaka was reborn as a performer of specific 
different career as well as fairy musician, kinnara in  Jātaka JᾹ-485. The Bodhisattvas (Buddhas-
to-be) were reborn as instrumentalists _a drummer ( cañ sañ) in J Ᾱ-59 Bherivāda jātaka,2, a 
conch blower ( Khrusaṅ sañ) in JᾹ-60 Saṁkhadhama Jātaka,3  a harpist ( coṅ tat) in J Ᾱ-243 
Guttila Jātaka.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption /ab&d0g'Zmwf aAm'dowf'of aumefn;rwdufzf/      ocF"rZmwf aAm'dowf'of aumefn;r r¾Koif 
Figure 6 (right) Bherivāda Jātaka JᾹ-59 with the Mon Caption Means that Bodhisattva Is a Drummer, 
   Kubyauk-gyi (Myinkaba) Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private 
Communication  
Figure 7 (left) Saṁkhadhama Jātaka JᾹ-60 with the Mon Caption Means that Bodhisattva Is a Conch Blower,    
   Kubyauk-gyi (Myinkaba) Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private 
Communication 
In the terms of old Myanmar, there is a little different word for music player between 
inscription and ink gloss caption for instance the former mentions coṅ sañ4  for harpist instead of 
using coṅ tat in the caption of ink gloss found in a Jātaka called Guttila JᾹ-243 of Kubyauk-gyi 
(Wetkyi-in). In Mon ink gloss of Kubyauk -gyi (Myinkaba), the caption of same Jātaka describes 
as acār tana (အ္စာရ် တန) that means a teacher for music of harp. 5 Coṅ sañ of inscriptions defines 
ordinary harpist but coṅ tat in old Burman and acār tana in old Mon captioned for Guttila Jātaka 
means a professional musician for string instrument of harp.  
  
 
1  G.H. Luce and Pe Maung Tin.  Inscriptions of Burma, 5 Portfolios, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1933-   57, 
Plate. 242 Lines 26-27 (Hereafter cited as Pl. for example Pl.24226-27)  
2  See Figure 6 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication 
3  See Figure 7 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication  
4  Pl.26535 
5  See Figure 8 and Figure 9 Source- Photos Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication 

60 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption / င်္ုတတိလလဇာတ်။ ဒ ာေီသတ်ေသ် အ္စာရ် တန။            င်္ုတတိလလဇာတ် ၂၄၃ 
Figure 8 Guttila Jātaka with Mon Caption, Mural, Two Harpists, Dancer and King, Myinkaba Kubyauk -gyi 
Figure 9 Guttila Jātaka/, Plaque, the Same Icons to Figure 8, Ananda, Source- Photos Taken by 
Than Zaw  
  (Bagan), Private Communication   
This story mentions about the contest of plucking skill on string instrument of Harp 
between the teacher named Guttila and his pupil who finally became a loser. To depict the story, 
two harpists before the king are always illustrated in the scene whereas sometimes the female 
celestial dancer on the side of teacher is inserted in the scene to help him. In this story, 
Bodhisattva is Guttila who is a teacher of lutenists.  
In JᾹ-116, Dubbaca Jātaka, Bodhisattva became an acrobatic dancer, called in Myanmar 
word khun ka so sū  (ခုန်ကဒသာသူ). Unfortunately, the image was damaged, but the style of the 
dancer can be traced in Ananda plaque of the same story. 1 In JᾹ-212, Ucchiṭṭhabhatta Jātaka, 
Bodhisattva became a poor acrobatic dancer,  suchuiw ṅray kakhriy  (သူဆိုဝ်မငယ် ကခခိယ်)2 in which 
case Myanmar language refers to “a dancer” for each career but canonical texts indicates an 
acrobat. The term could be corrected as an acrobat with spear (လ  ခ ုစဒသာသူ) in the Jātaka caption of 
Vinido temple M-659.3   
  
 
1  (a)Ba Shin, “Pagán, Wetkyi-in Kubyauk-gyi”, p.204 
 (b) See Figure 10 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication  
2  Ba Shin, “Pagán, Wetkyi-in Kubyauk-gyi”, p.207  
3  See Figure 11 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication 
J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption / ေု ဗစစဇာတ် ၁၁၆          /ေု ဗဇာတ် လ  ခုန်စဒသာ (သူ)  
Figure 10 (right) Dubbaca jātaka JᾹ-116, an Acrobatic Dancer, Plaque, Ananda  
Figure 11 (left) Dubbaca jātaka JᾹ-116, Vinido M-659, Source- Photos Taken by Than Zaw  
  (Bagan), Private Communication   
 
In the last ten stories, the supporting characters of dancers and instrumentalists revealed 
in narrative visual scenes and scriptures are the provable evidences that performances are 
essential in Buddhism. They are beautifully, widely arranged and illustrated as mural panels on 
the interior walls of Lokahteikpan temple and as the  plaques at Ananda. The paintings of 
Lokahteikpan can be compared with those of any other temples such as Nagayon, Pahtotharmya 
and even Abeyadana which is said, the best model of t he finest murals.  Nonetheless, the finest 
murals of Mahā Nipāta can only be seen in Lokahteikpan. The numbers of mural stories of Maha 
Nipāta in Burman style of Lokahteikpan and of glaze plaques of the longer ten stories in Mon 
style of Ananda, were more used to depict some scenes of Jātakas than others according to the 
profound sense of the canonical instructor, the monk.  
It is noted that both Burman and Mon preferred Vessantara and Mahosadha to other eight 
stories of Maha Nipāta , but the Mons have changed the serial order of arrangement for Maha 
Nipāta, Last Ten Jātakas. In Lokahteikpan, two recent former life stories of Buddha are fully 
decorated with many narrative scenes on the two walls of entrance hall. In this case, Burman 
script-writer of Lokahteikpan has followed the order of Sri Lanka.  
 
The Order of Last Ten Jātaka Stories 
Order Sri Lanka Lokahteikpan Ananda Myinkaba 
Kubyauk-gyi 
Modern 
Myanmar 
1 Mūga-pakkha  
538 
Temiya 
538 
Temī  
 
Temī  
 
Temiya (aw) 
 
2 Mahā Janaka  
539 
Janaka 
539 
Janak  
 
Janak Janaka (Z) 
 
62 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
Order Sri Lanka Lokahteikpan Ananda Myinkaba 
Kubyauk-gyi 
Modern 
Myanmar 
3 Suvaṇṇa Sāma                                       
540 
Sāma 
540 
Syām  
 
Syām  
 
Suvaṇṇa 
Sāma (ok) 
4 Nimi  
541 
Nemi 
541 
Nemi 
 
Nemi 
 
Nemi (ae) 
 
5 Kandahāla 
(CandaKumāra)  
542  
CandaKumāra 
542 
Mahos Maho Mahosadha 
(r) 
 
6 Buridatta   
543  
Buridatta 
543 
Candakumār Candakumār Buridatta (bk) 
7 Mahānāradakassap
a 544 
Nārada 
544  
Bhūridat Bhūridat Canda (pef) 
 
8 Vidhurapandita 
545 
Vidhura 
545 
Nār Nārada Nārada (em) 
 
9 Mahā-Ummagga  
546 
Mahosadha 
546 
Widhir Widhir Vidhura (0d) 
 
10 Vesantara  
547 
Vesantara 
547 
Wisantar Wesantara Vesantara 
(a0) 
 
According to the canonical masters of Aananda, 124 plaques for Wisantar (Vesantara) 
and 95 plaques for Mahos (Mahā-Ummagga), 45 for Janak (Mahājanaka), 37 for Temī 
(Mūgapakkha), 24 for Widhir (Vidhurapandita), 21 for Bhūridat (Bhūridatta), 19 for Syām 
(Sāma), 13 for Nemi (Nimi), 9 for Candakumār (Khandahala) and 3 for Nār (Mahānārada 
kassapa)1 are arranged on the second roof and three receding terraces above it of Ananda 2. The 
differentiate numbers among Jātakas at Ananda are much more than those of Lowkahteikpan. 
The number of plaques gradually reduced from most favourite to the least favourable story. “The 
different numbers of plaques of Jātakas indicate the popular interesting of Bagan on the last ten 
stories. The great popularity of Vessantara Jātaka in Myanmar has been noticed for his practice 
of Dāna (charity), one of the ten perfections ( pāramī) that was striking sympathetic chord in 
Bagan society”.3   
To point out the study of the visual art, the composition and attitude of imagery in the 
illustration of the Jātaka stories are important for the viewers. “There are two types of 
composition_ one asymmetric and imbued with movement and energy, and one based on a strict 
symmetry developed about a central figure. For instance, Bodhisattva alone occupied a half of 
the scene, usually the left one and a group of worshippers face him which implies that he is also 
 
1  Tun Aung Chain, Glimpses of Myanmar History , Texts and Images,  Yangon, SEAMEO, 2011,  p.83(Hereafter 
cited as Tun Aung Chain, Glimpses of Myanmar History) 
2  Chas. Duroiselle The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda, Text, p. V 
3 Tun Aung Chain, Glimpses of Myanmar History, Texts and Images, p.85 
J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  63 
taller than his companions. The other composition is imbued with a strict symmetry showing the 
Bodhisattva in the foreground and in the centre of the square panel”.1  
Among the last ten stories, the Jātakas closely related with performance will be examined 
between   Ananda and lokahteikpan pagodas. In the scene of Temi (Mūgapakka Jātaka), Jātaka 
plaques of Anada reveal more performing figures with the Prince Temi than those of 
Lokahteikpan mural panels. In the test scenes with devices that are related to performance of 
Ananda plaques, Bodhisattva is mostly in a reclining posture on his couch whereas he is always 
in a sitting attitude in those of Lokahteinpan murals. In Ananda, 37 plaques of separate episodes 
were used to illustrate Temi Jātaka in which the first scene starts with the episode of Indra’s 
inviting to Future Temi in the Tāvati ṁsa to be reborn as a son of Candādevī, the chief queen of 
the king of Benares. In this story, Temi, actuated by the fear of hell resulted from the cause of 
kingship and on the advice of a goddess, pretends to be dumb.  
According to the modern Myanmar texts, the king and his services test seventeen ways 
with many resorted devices to ascertain whether he is really so dumb, but all fail. The story 
discusses the nekkhama pāramī  (perfection of renunciation) and khantī pāramī  (perfection of 
forbearance). In this case, the artist and script writer used 16 plaques in Ananda for 16 scenes of 
testing tricks i.e. 1.Khīra vimaṅsa_ the trial with milk 2.Pūwakhajjana wimaṅsana_ the trial with 
cakes 3. Biḅat ku sacchu _ try with fruits 4. Kīlābhaṇḍaka wima ṅsana_ the trial with toys 
5.Bhojana wimaṅsana_ the trial with food 6.Biḅat ku cīṅ_ try with elephants 7.Biḅat ku jruṁ_ try 
with snakes 8. Samajja wima ṅsana_ the test of the mime 9. Biḅat ku snāk _ try with a sword 
10.Biḅat ku saṅ_ try with conches11. Biḅat ku phaṁ_ try with drums 12. Biḅat ku pnāṅ_ try with 
lamps 13. Biḅat ku ta ṅglāy_ try with molasses 14. Biḅat ku ha ḍak_ try with filth 15. Kapalla 
wimaṅsana_  the test with fire pan 16. Nāṭaka wima ṅsana_ trial with nautches or personal 
dancer.2  
The Mon artists for Ananda, assumedly, omitted or missed the scene of the test with 
burning the house in which Temi was staying that are mentioned in old and modern Burman 
versions. They had chosen the test scenes as the climaxes of the story by using 16 plaques for 16 
episodes that amount up to nearly the half of all scenes. Among the testing plots, the four tests 
are used with dancers and instrumentalists to elicit some words from Temiya. The Mon script 
writer used some Pali adopted words to mention the narrative episodes. The narratives are more  
vividly précised and more specific to cover the story than those of any other pagoda.  
In the mural scenes of Lokahteikpan pagoda c.1120 A.D. that is fifteen year later than 
Ananda c.1105 A.D., 3 the last ten stories are reserved for Burman script writers and artists. All 
last ten painted Jātakas have been mentioned with archaic Burman scripts as painted inscriptions. 
The story is illustrated in the 3 rd row and 4th row on the west wall of the shrine. The scenes have 
continuously run from left to right, episode by episode, without partition of panels within the 
row. But we can easily identify the kind of scene according to the captions below each scene. In 
Temiya Jātaka of this temple, the performing images with the prince are also seen at the testing 
episodes.  
The first scene of Temi starts with the episode of the monk’s asking Buddha to preach the 
law, Dhamma for the past story of Temiya. The concept of interpretation and representation on 
 
1  Bautze-Picron, The Buddhist Murals of Pagan, p.71 
2  (a)Chas. Duroiselle, The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Text, pp.1-8  
(b) Chas. Duroiselle, The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Index , Epigraphia Birmanic a, Vol. II, Part II Yangon, 
Government Printing, 1961, pp.2-12, plates, I-IV (Hereafter cited as “The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Index”)  
3  G.H. Luce and Bohmu Ba Shin, “Pagan Myinkaba, Kubyauk-gyi Temple of Rājakumār (1113 A.D.) and the  
 Old Mon Writings on its Walls” BBHC, II, Myanmar Historical Commission, 1961, pp.288-329 (Hereafter  
 Cited as G.H. Luce and Bohmu Ba Shin, “Pagan Myinkaba, Kubyauk -gyi Temple”) 
64 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
Jātaka defers even between Mon and Myanmar as well as early and later pagodas. In fact, what 
the most important is, is the local art works and their talents on cannon. The caption of the first 
test scene is illegible.2. Purhāloṅ sacsī phla ṅ caṁ e_ they test Buddha -to-be with fruits, 
3.Purhāloṅ chaṅ mraṅ yoṅ caṁ e_ they test Buddha -to-be with toys of elephant and horse 
4.Purhāloṅ thamaṅ caṁ e_ they test Buddha-to-be with food 5.Purhāloṅ im phut so caṁ e_ they 
test Buddha-to-be by setting house fire  6. Purhāloṅ chaṅ huyciy aṁ caṁ e_ they test Buddha-to-
be by seemingly causing an elephant to charge him 7. Purhāloṅ mruy rac so phla ṅ caṁ e _ they 
test Buddha-to-be by coiling him with a snake 9. Purhāloṅ coṅ ṅheṅ phlaṅ e caṁ e _ they test 
Buddha-to-be with harp and trumpet 9. Purhāloṅ snek1 phlaṅ e caṁ e_ they test Buddha -to-be 
with the sword 10. Purhāloṅ khuru mhut so  caṁ e_ they test Buddha -to-be by blowing conch -
shells 11. Purhāloṅ miy’ uiw  caṁ e_ they test Buddha -to-be with clay pot -lamp 12. Purhāloṅ 
keṅkrī caṁ e_ they test Buddha -to-be with excrement 13. Purhāloṅ mī caṁ e_ they test Buddha -
to-be with fire 14. Purhāloṅ myā caṁ e_ they test Buddha -to-be with wives  15.Purhāloṅ samī 
caṁ e_ they test Buddha-to-be with daughters.2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption / ပုရ ှာလ ှာင် ဆင်ဟုယ်စိယ်အံလ ှာဖ္လင်ဧစံဧအ်။ ပုရ ှာလ ှာင် မ ြုယ်ရစ်လ ှာဖ္လင်ဧစံဧအ်။ ပုရ ှာလ ှာင်လစှာင်လင င် ဖ္လင ်ဧစံဧအ်။ 
ပုရ ှာလ ှာင် လ ေက်၏စံ၏။ ပုရ ှာလ ှာင် ခု… 
Figure 12 Row of Long Panels and Captions are the Narrative Scenes for Temiya Jātaka, Second 
Row Is for Janaka, Lokahteikpan, Source - Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private 
Communication 
In this case, Burman used more own glossaries than Mon, but the order of test is not 
précised and some tests are excluded such as tests with cakes, drums and molasses. They install 
the test with burning house that the Mon has omitted and the last two tests are overlapped. A very 
interesting case is that the test with entertainment is mentioned by playing harp and blowing 
trumpet. They are represented to the form of theatrical drama but they do not use the word pantyā 
that probably means narrative performanc e and performers. In the illustration of Temiya Jātaka, 
Buddha-to-be (Bodhisattva) is in sitting posture before the pair performers of whom a man is 
plucking five strings of coṅ _ Myanmar arch harp and a woman is blowing trumpet called  ṅheṅ. 
 
1  Old Mon word, compare with Ananda caption of test with sword, later, Burman of Bagan used Sanlyak for sword 
2  (a) Ba Shin. Lokahteikpan: Early Burmese Culture in a Pagan Temple, Rangoon, The Burma Historical  
 Commission, 1962   Myanmar text, pp.53-54, English Transliteration, pp.91-92, English Translation, pp.122- 
 123 (Hereafter cited as Ba Shin. Lokahteikpan) (b) See Figure 12 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan),  
 Private Communication 
J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  65 
In two musical instruments they held, the harp is clearly prominent and the trumpet is fade out 
because of white wash, but it can be seen if carefully.1 
In the scene of coronation ceremony of Janaka Jātaka , the elder prince namely 
Aritthajanaka, the crown prince who is sitting under a wh ite umbrella and a Brahman who is 
blowing the conch for Abhiseka is illustrated in the mural of the fifth row on the west wall of 
shrine in Lokahteikpan. 2 Some figuring styles are good example of asymmetric art in which the 
artists magnify supporting images that can be seen at the scene of the goddess’ rescuing the 
Bodhisattva from the sea. The scene represents that Maṇimekhalā carries Janaka in her arms by 
flying through air in which the movement acting posture can be well portrayed in Lokahteikpan. 3 
The figure of main icon, Janaka is minimized and the support icon, goddess is magnified. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption ။ r[mZeuf rnfaomrif oDc&um tavmrf rifvkwpfum rifaumifBud,fbd{tf/ rifomN*Dum £rf&S,f rifrl   
 aom t&dw¬ Zeufaw; vlwpfum rifN*DarSmufwHk{tf/ nDum£rftf&Sd,ftf rifrl{tf?? £rftf&Sd,ftf rifpd,faom.  
Figure 13 Crown Prince, Aritthajanaka under white Umbrella who is Father of Bodhisattva is 
Raised as the King, the Brahman Blows the Conch-shell for Abhiseka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption/ oifazmaumvd,f{tf/oifazm0fuG,f&um/ redarcvmESifpum;qdk0fav{tf? redarcvm yk&Smavmifudk0fqm,f&K,f   
ysHav{tf? 
Figure 14  Four Episodes of Janaka, the Ship Splits, Janaka Climbs the Ship’s Mast, he 
Converses with Maṇimekhalā, the Goddess and she Carries Bodhisattva in her Arms 
through Air, Lokahteikpan 
 
1  See Also Figure 12 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication 
2  See figure 13 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication   
3  See figure 14 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication  
66 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
At first, the goddess places Bodhisattva on a rock in a garden. And then the artist 
illustrated the plot mentioned that the princess Sīvali is squeezed by a minister called amatyā for 
intentionally please to her. The main climax of story continues that a ‘Living State Carriage’ 
arrives near Bodhisattva, a Brahman of royal chaplain, examines the marks on soles of the feet of 
Bodhisattva who is in lying attitude on the stone. The troupe scene is composed of two 
drummers, four singers who entertain him. The la st scene in the figure is that the Bodhisattva 
under umbrellas who dressed the crown is raised as the king by a Brahman holding a conch to 
blow it as a musical instrument.1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption 
  
  qkyf{tf/ &xm&SifavSwf&k,f yk&Smavmif [d&mvma,stf yHkemwpfa,muf Ncd,fvu©em&SK&um yk&Smavmifaw; .  
Figure 15 Bodhisattva Lying on the Rock who Entertained by Royal Troupe, Lokahteikpan   
In Buridatta Jātaka , dragons of Ananda are depicted as if they are human beings who 
have human faces wearing dragon head -dress look like snake. The suitable costumes and head -
dresses were arranged to depict the manners of characters in the stories. In fact, Nagas, the 
dragons have often assumed the human forms. The scenes or episodes extracted from Jātakas of 
these two pagodas are different from each other because of their script writers’ interpretation on 
the story as they appreciated.  
In Ananda the artists used 21 plaques to illustrate that story in which the first scene starts 
with episode of conception of Bhūridatta that shows the choice of important scene for first 
impression to attract viewers and the great skillful editing for summary of the whole story. The 
Jātaka can vividly convey to an end with the last scene, the conversations with his grandfather 
who is a hermit living in ascetic life. The gorgeous dance and music performance of young nāgīs 
(female dragons) are illustrated at the beginning part of the story as the supporting characters for 
the fifth scene of Bhūridatta’s observing sīla at uposatha day in the garden, Udyā of Nāga 
realm.2 The scene is a very important cause to become apparent for the whole story because the 
nāgīs’ performance displeases the Bodhisattva that incites his mind to go to human world. In that 
scene one nāgī is playing a kind of string musical instrument in a sitting position and another 
young nāgī is dancing in a pattern of celestial choreograph like a celestial dancer, apsara of 
Angkor temples in Cambodia (8th-13th centuries A.D). 
 
  
 
1  Figure 15 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication  
2  See Figure 16 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication  
J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption  bl&d'wfrif oDv[ef O'sm 
Figure 16 Bhūridatta Observe Sīlas in the Garden (Two Performers_ One is an Instrumentalist 
and Another, a Dancer before Bhūridatta), Ananda, Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw 
(Bagan), Private communication 
In the mural scenes of Lokahteikpan, there are omitted that an important climax episode 
of observing sila by Bhūridatta. In comparing with Ananda, the script -writers of Lokahteikpan 
are less skillful in Jātaka stories because some main scenes are absent, minor supporting and 
linking plots are mainly illustrated and the story does not convey to an end and stops with the 
scene of searching Bhūdiatta by his brothers who come from Nāga world ( nagā rwā ). The 
supporting images of performance are displayed as alambāy1, a snake -charmer, beholding nagā 
daughters’ dancing on the north wall of the arch-window2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption uvkefe*gtpm cda,stf/ &od,fh owifoHkaomtm uvkefrda,s/ tvrÁm,f e*gord,f upaomzl{?..  
Figure 17 Alambāy, Snake-charmer Beholding Nagā Daughters’ Dancing, Lokahteikpan 
 
1 Old mon of Ananda applies the term, alaṁbāy, an abbreviation of Ālambayana for snake -charmer, now alambāy is 
written for the same meaning word in Mon and Burman, Chas. Duroiselle “ The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda 
Text”, p.85 
2  (a)Ba Shin. Lokahteikpan, Myanmar text, p.62, English Transliteration, p.100, English Translation, pp.122 - 
 123 (b)See Figure 17 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication  
 
68 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
In Vidura Jātaka, the episode concerned with dance is mentioned at 13 th row on the wall 
to the north of the arch -window with the dancing illustration of Nāgī Arandatī  who has the 
dragon head -dress. Her dance pattern looks like a celestial one that is often seen in Bagan 
Murals. She intentionally dances and sing s on the top of the mountain to attract Puṇṇaka.1 
Vessantara Jātaka is the most favourite theme out of ten Jātaka stories for artists and audiences 
during Bagan period. In the Vessantara Jātaka, the scene related performance is absent in Bagan, 
but we found that scene in Sale temple no.94 in which a drummer and a trumpeter as the ushers 
noticing the crowded audience with their instruments are inserted in the narrative scene of 
departure.2 Bagan artists inevitably used performance and narrative stories prohibited by Buddha 
for propagation and education of Buddhist teaching.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caption ..rd,mESpfvHkpH{tf/ t&dEé0wDawmifxdyf u{tf/ ykEé,ufzk{tf/ ykEé,ufESmife*grifpumqdk0f{tf/ 
Figure18 Arannatī’s (Nāgī Arandatī) Dance at the Top of Mountain, Being Beheld by Puṇṇaka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19 Departure of Vessansara, Performers as Ushers Going Ahead of Procession, Sale-94,  
Source- Photo Taken by Researcher 
 
 
 
1  See Figure 18 Source- Photo Taken by Than Zaw (Bagan), Private Communication 
2  See Figure 19 Source- Photo Taken by Researcher 

J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5  69 
Conclusion 
The Jātaka stories from Ekanipāta to Mahānipāta are illustrated in plaques and mural 
panels. They were used as popular media of instruction in ethical and moral ideas and illustrative 
education, but those stories in the inaccessible places for the common folks were probably used 
for canonical references only. Jātakas constitute 547 stories of former births of Buddha that can 
be divided as the 537 shorter stories of former 21 books and the last ten longer stories of 22 nd 
book. Jātaka stories are depicted at temples and  solid-pagodas as an interior wall painting 
decoration and as an exterior glaze plaque decoration respectively. These narrative stories are 
transformed and illustrated as the static scenes of narrative performance. Among the themes of 
Buddhist visual art, Jātaka stories have mostly reflected on social lives of Bagan people. The last 
longer ten stories of previous lives of Buddha are illustrated in many episodes, but the rest former 
537 Jātakas are always depicted in the pattern of one plaque or one panel fo r one scene. The 
plaques and panel scenes of murals illustrated with Jātaka stories can be defined as static 
performance which reflects real live performances and Bagan life-styles.  
In the last ten stories, the supporting characters of dancers and instrumentalists revealed 
in narrative visual scenes and scriptures are so provable evident that performances are essential in 
Buddhism. They are beautifully, broadly arranged and illustrated as mural panels on the interior 
walls of Lokahteikpan temple and as the plaques at Ananda.  In the pattern of serial order, the 
Mons have changed the serial order of arrangement for Maha Nippāta, Last Ten Jātakas. In this 
case, Burman script-writer of Lokahteikpan has followed the order of Sri Lanka. The component 
figures, both dancers and instrumentalists are related to such scenes of Jātakas as Temiya, 
Janaka, Caṅda-kumāra, Buridat, Vidura and Vessantara. The narrative scenes of Jātakas are 
unavoidably used as a media for education and propagation of religion although Buddha 
prohibited performing practice in the observing of Sīla.  
 
References 
Inscriptional Sources 
Blagden, C.O. Epigraphia Birmanica, I, III & IV, Rangoon, Government Printing, 1919-34  
Chit Thein, U.  လရ ှေးလဟာင်ှေးမွန်လက ာက်စာလပါင်ှေးခ ုုပ် (The Compilation of old Mon Inscriptions , I, II in Mon and Myanmar), 
Rangoon, Department of Archaeology, 1965  
Duroiselle, Chas.  Epigraphia Birmanica, II, i and ii, Rangoon, Government Printing, 1921   
Luce, G.H. and Pe Maung Tin.  Inscriptions of Burma, 5 Portfolios, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1933-57 
Nyein Maung, U. The Old Burma Inscriptions, (Hand Writing), 6 Volumes, 1972-2012  
Than Tun, Dr. (Deciphered and Transliterated),  လန ှောင်ှေးလတွွေ့လက ာက်စာမ ာှေး (A Miscellany of Inscriptions ), Yangon, 
Myanmar Historical Commission, 2005   
Than Tun, Dr. A Miscellany of Inscriptions , (Text Transcription and Translation in English), Yangon, Myanmar 
Historical Commission, 2016 
Walshe, Maurice. The Long Discourses of the Buddha, A Translation of the Digha Nikaya , Massachusetts, Wisdom 
Publications, 1995 
Literature Sources    
Aye Cho, U. ငါှေးရာငါှေးဆယ်သိမ တ်ဖွယ် (The Knowledge of 550 Jātakas), Yangon, Sar-pay Beikman, 1988 
Ba Shin. Lokahteikpan: Early Burmese Culture in a Pagan Temple, Rangoon, The Burma Historical Commission, 
1962  
Ba Shin, K. J. Whitbread and G. H. Luce. “Pagán, Wetkyi -in Kubyauk -gyi, an Early Burmese Temple with Ink -
Glosses”, Artibus Asiae, Vol. 33, No. 3, 1971, pp. 167-218 
70 J. Myanmar Acad. Arts Sci. 2023 Vol. XXI. No.5 
 
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. The Buddhist Murals of Pagan: Timeless Vistas of the Cosmos,Bangkok, Orchid Press, 
2003 
Cowell, E.B. The Jataka, or Stories of Buddha’s Former Births, Vols. I to VI, London, Pali Text Society,1957  
Galloway,  Charlotte Kendrick. “ Burmese Buddhist Imagery of Early Bagan Period (1044 -1113)”, 2 Volumes, (A 
Doctoral Thesis submitted to ANU), Canberra, ANU, 2006 
Halliday, R. A Mon-English Dictionary, Rangoon, Mon cultural Section, 1955  
Khin Maung Nyunt, Dr. and Members, Dictionary of Myanma Performing and Plastic Arts, Yangon , Ministry of 
Culture, 2001 
Kyaw Nyein,  ပုဂံမမိုွေ့လဟာင်ှေး  မင်ကပါဂူလ ပာက်ကက ှေးဘုရာှေး (Myin-ka-pa Ku -byauk-gyi Temple of Ancient Bagan ), Yangon, 
Department of Archaeology, 1992 
Luce, Gordon. H. The Old Burma-Early Pagan, Vol. I, II, III, New York, New York University Press, 1969-1970 
Luce, G.H. and Bohmu Ba Shin, “Pagan Myinkaba, Kubyauk-gyi Temple of Rājakumār (1113  
A.D.) and the Old Mon Writings on its Walls.” BBHC, II, Myanmar Historical Commission, (1961), 271 -416 the 
Powin Taung Caves), Bangkok, White Lotus, 2007  
Pichard, Pierre. Inventory of Monuments at Pagan, Volumes 1-8 (vol.1 1992, vol. 2 1993, vol.3 1994,  
vol.4 1994, vol.5 1995, vol. 6 1996, vol. 7 1999, vol.8 2002) KISCADALE EFEO UNESCO. 1992-2002 
Than Tun, Dr. “ History of Buddhism in Burma , A.D. 1000 -1300”, Ph.D. Thesis Submitted to SOAS, Revised and 
Enlarged Edition, JBRS, Yangon, Burma Research Society, 1978 
Tun Aung Chain. Glimpses of Myanmar History, Texts and Images, Yangon, SEAMEO, 2011  
 