P-ISSN 2664-0422 Pakistan Social Sciences Review Jan-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
O-ISSN 2664-0430 https://doi.org/10.35484/pssr.2024(8-I)13 [148-155]
RESEARCH PAPER
Translation and Dissemination of Buddhist Texts in China: Centered
On Jatakas
1Xue Chennan and 2Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood
1. PhD Scholar, Department of History and Pakistan Studies, University of Punjab, Lahore
54896, Punjab, Pakistan and Youth College of Political Science of Inner Mongolia Normal
University, Hohhot 010050, Inner Mongolia, China
2. Professor, Department of History and Pakistan Studies, University of Punjab, Lahore 54896,
Punjab, Pakistan
*Corresponding Author 461250635@qq.com
ABSTRACT
Two routes of diffusion emerged during the height of the translation and dissemination
of Chinese Buddhist sutras, from the Wei, Jin, Southern, and Northern Dynasties to the
Tang Dynasty: the translation of elite Buddhism and the popularization of folk
Buddhism. The Collection of the Six Perfections, a model for the translation works,
introduced Buddhism into China by interpreting traditional Buddhist texts through the
lens of Confucian philosophy. The Jataka stories were also associated with the spread of
folk Buddhism, which preached to the public in a way that was seen as acceptable. These
two paths enhanced one another and paved the way for the growth of Buddhism and
the Jatakas in China. The appropriate method for this research study are the qualitative
research techniques and the field work method. The results of article show the Buddhists
texts in China were translated which were made localized to disseminate it according to
the Chinese society.
KEYWORDS Bhuddists Texts, Jatakas, Localization, Translating the Literature
Introduction
Two distinct cultural regions arose in ancient Asia, which is when the Indian and
Chinese cultural circles came to be. Though both cultural rings are situated physically
inside Asia, there is a distinct separation between them due to the Himalayas and the
Tibetan Plateau. In addition, there are notable distinctions in terms of racial
backgrounds, languages, cultures, social systems, and natural environments like climate
and terroir. As a result, the cultural spheres of China and India are entirely different and
have developed separately over time (Zhu, 2022). Buddhism originated and flourished
in the Indian subcontinent. However, as it spread across varied geographical locations
and reached China, it had to face several challenges due to the differences in
environmental conditions. This resulted in various symptoms of incompatibility that
were observed in the process (Deeg, 2014).
Tang Yong tong, a renowned Chinese scholar worldwide, posits that the
integration and development of heterogeneous ideas can be classified into three stages.
The first stage involves the appearance of similarities and harmonization of different
ideas. The second stage is the conflict stage, where differences in ideas are recognized.
The third stage involves reconciling the differences by rediscovering the true harmony
between the ideas. In this final stage, both the original and foreign cultures are
transformed, and the outsiders have assimilated. This implies that the process of
assimilation is more profound than merely adopting a new culture, as both the host and
assimilated cultures undergo a transformation (Mu, 2019).

Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR) January-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
The evolution of the Jataka stories in China is like a mirror of Buddhism in China,
which is a kind of exotic culture in China. Its spread and development is an excellent
portrayal of the exchange and dialogue between Buddhism and Chinese traditional
civilization.
The fundamental concepts and philosophical tenets of early Indian Buddhism
are distinctly dissimilar from the traditional Chinese philosophical doctrines.
Consequently, comprehending them was challenging for the Chinese populace in the
early days. Some of the core principles of Indian Buddhism, such as karma, anatmya,
and rebirth, were frequently misunderstood or misinterpreted by the Chinese Buddhists
for an extended period. This misinterpretation eventually prompted several Chinese
monks to travel to India to uncover the truth. Each narrative within Jatakas offers an in-
depth understanding of a particular facet of existence through the lens of a specific
organism. Together, these narratives surpass their selves and give rise to a more
profound and integrated significance (Husain, Zaidi, & Bhalla, 2015). The incorporation
of Buddhism and Jataka into Chinese culture by means of the Jataka narrative is a
logically sound and reasonable method.
Buddhism, as a religious philosophy, consists of two distinct forms: an advanced
and profound philosophical form (termed elite or high monk Buddhism) and a popular
and simplistic belief form (termed popular Buddhism). This duality allows Buddhism to
cater to the varying needs of individuals at different levels of intellectual and spiritual
understanding (Li-an, 2019). In the case of the Jatakas, its dissemination and
development in Chian also rely on these two ways: translation of sutra and
dissemination of folk literature.
Literature Review
After the spread of the Buddhism in different parts of the world a wide range of
literature has been developed and research on Buddhist philosophy has been done. In
China different centers were developed to translate the Buddhist knowledge into local
paradigm and understanding. Some of the peer-reviewed articles are reviewed to
understand the basic development of the Buddhism in China as a whole. By following
the procedures used by anthologists to produce canon extracts, the research shows how
anthologies make canon viable; in the process and propose a distinction between formal
and practical canons. To do this, the researcher first demonstrate how, in order to confirm
the canon's complexity and applicability, a selection of passages from A Grove of Pearls
known as "Bathing Monks" effectively utilize a range of canonical source materials. Next
the researcher explains how the extracts from "Bathing Monks" were further optimized
using a single-page document that was stored in the Dunhuang cache (dating from the
ninth century or before). Based on researcher findings, religious scholars should consider
religious anthologies to be both textual repositories and resources that encourage
religious individuals to peruse extensive. Same is the case with the Buddhists literature
translation (Hsu, 2022).
Shakya Muni Buddha formed his sangha and developed his concepts while
journeying across the "Great Magadha." Although it cannot be positive of the exact
language the Buddha spoke, the earliest known teachings of the Buddha were recorded
in Pali. Buddhist literature that uses Pali terminology and grammar often correspond
with the inscriptions on Buddhist stupas constructed both during and after Ashoka's
reign, including the Sanchi and Bharhut stupas in the Magadha region. To reach out to
downtrodden people who could not comprehend Pali, didactic tale figures were carved
on the railings and gates surrounding the stupas. Buddhism as an organization and a
149

Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR) January-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
religion started to spread outside of the Great Magadha after the Buddha's passing.
Linguistic barriers have to be overcome by the Buddha's disciples (Liu, 2023). The Śyāma
jātaka is widely known for its depiction of a loyal son who takes care of his blind parents.
It has been translated into multiple textual versions, illustrated in reliefs and murals, and
widely circulated throughout the Buddhist world. Prior research on the story's
transmission in China has mainly concentrated on its portrayal of filial piety and its
resonance with the Chinese context; however, a careful examination of surviving visual
depictions of jātaka stories brings to light historical and regional disparities that have
often been overlooked in relation to the reception of Śyāma jātaka's didactic teachings in
early medieval China. Although the story has flourished in North China (including the
Central Plain and the Hexi Corridor). By placing the story's textual and visual traditions
within the greater historical environment of displaying Buddhist stories and filial
paragons in the sixth century, examine the uneven adaptation of the Śyāma jātaka within
Chinese visual culture. According to my research, during the textual translation process
of the story in third- and fourth-century China, the multiple-faceted topic of the story
was reduced to filial devotion. It also demonstrates that the story's visual legacy had to
be negotiated and overcome in order to be incorporated into the local filial piety
curriculum. Two historical aspects can be linked to these difficulties: the rise in
popularity of other jātakas that included teachings on charity in ear, and the revival of
pre-existing artistic traditions showing Chinese filial sons (Zhao, 2023).
Role of translators in introducing Jatakas
During the Wei, Jin, Southern, and Northern Dynasties, a number of Buddhist
classics were recorded that primarily documented the Jatakas. Among these classics, Pu
sa ben yuan jing (菩萨本缘经) by Zhiqian in The Three Kingdoms, Collection of Six
Perfection by Kang shenghui in The Three Kingdoms, (Nattier, 2008) Sheng jing (生经) by
Zhu Fahu in the Western Jin, and Sutra of Bodhisattva Jataka Practices, which is lost and
just collected in Chinese Buddhism Cannon. Additionally, there were several single Jataka
stories such as Yue Ming Bodhisattva Jataka, Nine Color Deer Jataka, Deer Mother Jataka,
Prince Mupo Jataka, and Shanzi Jataka, Prince Xu Dana Jataka and so on. Additionally, many
Jataka stories can be found in the "Zengyi Ahan" in the Four Ahan and in the Law
Collection (Qingqing, 2008).
The Collection of Six Perfection is a collection of 87 Buddha Jataka stories, which
are considered to be the earliest and most significant Jataka stories for the spread of
Buddhism in China. The translation of Buddhist texts in China often incorporated Laozi
and Zhuangzi's allusions to cater to the public and gain followers. Confucian and
Buddhist Monks also used a translation strategy that proved to be an important attempt
to spread Buddhism further. Although it is uncertain if this was the beginning of using
Confucian and Buddhist Buddhism, it was undoubtedly the most successful attempt at
that time. The convents that were deeply immersed in Buddhist culture also had an
impact on traditional Chinese culture. The translator, Kang Senghui, an expert in
Buddhist culture, was also influenced by traditional Chinese culture. He possessed
profound knowledge of Sinology and was known for his literary talent. His translation
of the Collection of the Six Perfection was particularly noteworthy as he skillfully combined
the Buddhist Mahayana doctrine of compassion and Confucian ideas, using Confucian
terminology to achieve a vivid and acceptable effect. He successfully merged the
principles of equality of sentient beings and filial piety with the school entrance thought,
highlighting the advantages of the translation strategy of Confucianism and Buddhism.
The translation of Buddhist classics into the Confucian language and the elaboration of
Buddhist thoughts in a language that was acceptable to the Chinese people played a
150

Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR) January-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
pivotal role in the widespread adoption of the Jatakas in China. This approach not only
accelerated the popularity of the text but also significantly enhanced the acceptance of
Buddhism as a whole in China.
After the collection of Six Perfections, no translated works of Buddhist texts in
China contain more Jataka stories, which have a particular relationship with the folk
literature sources of the Jataka sutra. However, the Jataka stories also appears frequently
in Chinese Buddhist texts. Wang Huihui, a Chinese scholar, has identified over 50
Chinese Scriptures that contain more than 500 Jataka stories. Although some parts of
these stories are repetitive, there are still approximately 300 unique tales. However, only
20 to 30 of these Jataka stories are widely known among the people (Huihui, 2016). Xuan
Zang translated Sacrifice Sutra that included five Jataka stories in Bharhut: Prince Sacui
feeding tiger, King Moonlight giving his head, Prince Xu Dana giving wife and children,
King Chili giving yaksha with blood, and Brahman giving his body to get Dharma. There
are four Jataka stories in the Biography of Buddhism, which is a travel book written by
the eminent monk Faxian in the Eastern Jin Dynasty. According to Faxian, in the
Gandhara region at the time, four Jataka stories, Prince Sachui feeding tiger, King
Moonlight giving his head, King Kuaimu giving his eyes, and King Shibi cutting meat to
save a pigeon, were carved on the tower for worshippers. Eliminating the repetition,
there are four Bhakta in total. Additionally, there are seven Jataka stories that frequently
appear in Buddhist texts and images (Huihui, 2016). There are some Jataka stories that
are considered the most important based on their embodiment of the images in different
places. These tales include: Prince Xu Dana Jataka, Six-tooth Elephant Jataka, One-
horned immortal Jataka, King Shibi Jataka, King Deer Jataka, King Elephant Jataka, King
Monkey Jataka, Nine-color Deer Jataka, Prince Mupo Jataka, Prince Shacui Jataka, Ru
Tong Jataka, Shanzi Jataka and so on (Shufei, 2013). The Jātakas are widely represented
in ancient sculpture and inscriptions, which further supports their significance as a text
genre. Additionally, reciters of the Jātakas are considered a distinct class of bhāṇakas.
The evolution of the Jataka stories in folklore Literature
During the Sui and Tang Dynasties, China's stability increased, and its national
power continued to grow. By the time of the "Zhenguan" reign, China had achieved
remarkable internal and external accomplishments. Communication between China and
the West was highly developed at this time. Several foreign religions, including
Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, Islam, and Nestorianism, emerged and thrived in China.
Buddhism, which originated from the Southern and Northern dynasties, was highly
respected and prosperous among most emperors and nobles in the Sui and Tang
Dynasties. Xuanzang and Yijing brought new Buddhism from India, and the esoteric
teachings such as "no empty three Tibetanisms, kindness and fearlessness" infused new
vitality into the original Buddhism. Meanwhile, the foundation of Chinese Buddhism
had been established during the Northern and Southern Dynasties, and by the Tang
Dynasty, various sects had formed with the emergence of eminent monks in China.
Moreover, Buddhist beliefs and culture had deeply penetrated into the masses, and
popular folklore and variations were widely prevalent. This foreign religion, Buddhism,
had eventually become an integral part of the spiritual life of the Chinese people.
Elite Buddhism is a type of Buddhism believed by Buddhist intellectuals,
including both monastic and non-monastic intellectuals. It's quite different from the "folk
Buddhism" applied in daily life, but it's not a parallel trade. Elite Buddhism played a
significant role in Buddhism's development in this period, where intellectuals or even
senior intellectuals promoted its development. A good example is the Sutra translation
team led by the venerable monk Xuan Zang. This team gathered almost the most top
151

Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR) January-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
translation and Buddhist academic talents in the Chinese Buddhist circle at that time,
and accelerated the theoretical development process of Chinese Buddhism. However,
one of the downsides of such groups and their work is that it's uncertain how many
followers of their translation or preaching activities actually understand what's going on.
The majority of ordinary believers follow them, especially the venerable monk
Xuanzang, more for his personal charm, tenacity of character, and legendary journey
west. It's unclear how many people appreciate the translation work or the preaching
activities for their academic value. Even though there's no definitive data to support this
view, after the Tang Dynasty, there were almost no monks comparable to the Great
virtuous monks at that time, which can illustrate this point. Even the decline and
disappearance of the only school of Knowledge (Faxiang School) founded by Master
Xuanzang that can best embody the characteristics of Indian Buddhism after the Tang
Dynasty all reflect the defects of elite Buddhism.
During the Sui and Tang dynasties, the spread of Buddhism led to the necessity
of dharma transmission. To propagate the Dharma, Buddhist activities centered in the
temple became the primary means of dissemination. As a result, the development of the
Jataka Sutra was inevitable and had a profound impact. It even gave rise to a new form
of Chinese popular literature - the literature of lecture-singing. The method of
storytelling while singing the main idea in verse undoubtedly originated from the Indian
Buddhist tradition. The Jataka stories, originating from the temple, eventually made their
way to the ancient Chinese playground "Wazi"(瓦子), becoming an integral part of the
lives of the Chinese people.That is a major development of folk Buddhism in China.
Dunhuang, located along the Silk Road, is a significant hub of culture and art that
played a vital role in the spread and development of Buddhist culture in China. During
the Tang Dynasty, Buddhism flourished and the monks, in order to promote folk
Buddhism, produced two forms of rap art - “Bian Wen”(变文) and “Su Jiang”(俗讲）.
These forms of rap art were specifically aimed at the common people and helped to
spread Buddhist teachings to a wider audience. Bian Wen, a form of Chinese narrative
literature, and Su Jiang, a spoken language used to teach Buddhism, share similarities
with the Jataka Stories. These similarities include their primary aim of spreading
Buddhist teachings and their accessible content that the public can easily understand.
Bian Wen's literature, in particular, utilizes stories (including Nidana,
Abhiniṣkramaṇasūtra and Jatakas) to teaching Buddhist sutras, while Su Jiang
incorporates folklore and legends to promote virtuous behaviour and encourage people
to perform good deeds. Although Su Jiang later included more secular content, its
underlying theme of promoting filial piety and good deeds remained unchanged, with
the religious concepts of karma and the retribution of good and evil being used to
encourage such behaviour. These stories, which fall under the category of Buddhist
literature, have deep roots in the are reflected in Bian Wen and Su Jiang (Zhenduo, 2009).
During the spread of Buddhism, the individuals responsible for teaching the
sutras to people were known as sutra teachers. They were proficient in Brāhma and
rereading. Lecturers were responsible for sharing the classics with the people. The
speaker played a significant role by engaging in conversation with the lecturer during
the lecture and assisting in delivering the lecture. During the Northern and Southern
Dynasties, these activities were mainly monopolized by intellectual elites such as monks
and nobles. However, in the Tang Dynasty, a “Fu jiang shi”(复讲师) emerged who
delivered the lecture after the lecturer, and thus, this person was called a repeat lecturer
(Shiren, 2015). 69-80 During the Tang Dynasty, there were Buddhist monks who actively
preached to the public, travelling around to spread their teachings. In later years,
152

Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR) January-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
wandering and marching monks continued this tradition of preaching to the people. As
the Middle Tang Dynasty approached, Su Jiang also began to give lectures known as
"laity." The format of these lectures was similar to those given to the monks, but the
audience was now laypeople. The content of these lectures mainly consisted of relatable
stories that were approachable to the general public, such as Nidana and Jataka stories.
During the Wei and Jin Dynasties in China, there was a notable effort to translate
and disseminate Buddhist sutras. This movement was particularly focused on the Jataka
tales, which are stories about the previous lives of the Buddha. These translations played
a significant role in the development and spread of Buddhism in China, and the Jataka
tales became an important part of Chinese Buddhist literature.
Effects of the Jakatas Translation on Chinese Buddhism
Avadāna-masters were Buddhist teachers who were experts at narrating
Avadāna stories, according to the Sarvāstivāda School of Sectarian Buddhism.
Furthermore, the process of Ashoka's secularization of Buddhism was significantly aided
by subsequent storytelling. Avadāna attracted attention as a literary form in the Six
Dynasties, when these tales were translated into Chinese and given the title piyu 譬喻.
Naturally, these sutras are mostly found in the Tripitaka category of Jātaka (benyuan 本
緣, bensheng 本生 (life stories of Buddha or Bodhisattvas), and yuanqi 淣起 (fables or
Avadāna), although Avadāna stories can also be found in other portions of the Tripitaka.
This is a reference to several kinds of rebirth and karma tales about the Buddha,
Maitreya, Bodhisattvas, or Buddha's followers in previous and current lifetimes. Sutras
of the Buddha's initial existence (bensheng 本生), the Buddha's biography (fozhuan 潛傳
), the stories of the Buddha and his disciples (fo ji dizi yinyuan 潛及弟子因篣), the
Dhammapada (fajujing 法句經), and the Avadāna sutras (piyu 譬喻) are the five portions
of these tales. Sharmistha Sharma contends that the Avadana sutras came from the Jataka
sutras, and that the two.
Among these Avadāna sutras translated in the Six Dynasties, six of them are the
most important ones, which are Za piyu jing 雜譬喻經 (The Sutra of Miscellaneous
Avadāna Stories, one juan, T. 204, translated by Lokakṣema (Zhilou jiachen 支婁迦讖,
d.u.) of Yuezhi 月氏 in between the 1st year of Jianhe 建和 and the 3rd year of Zhongping
中平 (CE 147–186.), Later(East) Han dynasty 後漢 in Luoyang 洛陽); Za piyu jing 雜譬喻
經 Jiu za piyu jing 舊雜譬喻經 (The Sutra of Ancient Miscellaneous Avadāna Stories, one
juan, T. 206, translated by Indian (tianzhu 天竺) Monk Kang Senghui 康僧會of Wu (229–
280) from Three Kingdom Period (220–280)); Za piyu jing 雜譬喻經 (The Sutra of
Miscellaneous Avadāna Stories, one juan, T. 207, collected by Bhikkhu Daolüe 道略
(d.u.)); Zhongjing zhuanza piyu 眾經撰雜譬喻 and Baiyu jing 百喻經.
Nevertheless, it would be irresponsible to infer any inferences from this scenario
based only on similarities as there may not be a clear correlation with the ones that
already exist in China. The second type consists of Buddhist Avadāna stories that were
incorporated into Chinese culture and became Chinese folktales. This essay's primary
goal is to demonstrate how Buddhist Avadāna tales were incorporated into literary
fiction during the Six Dynasties. In addition to serving a "missionary" purpose by
imparting Buddhist principles, these stories also established a historical framework that
allowed them to be recognized as Chinese folktales, proving their legitimacy. As a result,
153

Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR) January-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
the Avadāna stories were able to transition from being "imaginational" to "real," and they
began to have actual significance for the common people living through that turbulent
period. After the Tang and Song dynasties, when the fables written by Liu Zongyuan 柳
宗元 (773–819), Su Dongpo 蘇東帡 (1037–1101), Liu Ji 劉基 (1311–1375), and Yuan Mei 袁
枚 (1716–1798) were closely linked to the fables collected in the Baiyu jing, the long
decline of Chinese literature began. This was influenced by the themes, narratives, and
meaning of Avadana tales.
Conclusion
In general, Buddhist Avadāna stories have been merged into Chinese literature;
nonetheless, the connection between the two entails complex flux, intermingling, and the
formation of an unidentifiable cultural river, rather than just simple parallelism or
influence. The fundamental structure, central themes, and narrative arcs of Buddhist
metaphorical stories served as a specific source of inspiration for the literati as they wrote
their books. Above all, by transforming the fanciful Buddhist stories into allegorical
stories with grounded concerns based on the traits and historical developments of
Chinese literature, they intentionally strove to deflect cultural significance. The
significance of history and the attention to historical detail, in addition to the text's finer
intricacies, are particularly noteworthy. These aspects elevate the metaphorical tales
from works of fiction to ones with realistic meaning and social issues. The literature of
the Buddhist Avadāna serves as a comparable cultural resource for understanding and
utilizing stories with related themes that are found in many civilizations. More
importantly, they provide a first-hand source of information that can be used to create
literary fiction, which is why they are a major motivation for Chinese fiction writers. By
adding more writing techniques and literary and artistic interests, the novels of the Wei,
Jin, and Northern Dynasties, on the other hand, expanded on the religious significance
of metaphorical tales and enhanced their historical and cultural significance,
transforming them from Buddhist fable-like texts into fiction with historical details. The
story is now a realistic text with a feeling of historical authenticity rather than a Buddhist
"story." To put it briefly, the process of integrating Buddhist Avadāna stories into
Chinese cultural contexts is intricate. Monks and authors must do more than only
recognize the commonalities among the tales and integrate them into a cohesive
framework, as demonstrated by xuanliang cigu, which unites Buddhist tales with
traditional Chinese narratives around a common topic. As Wu Jun and others have
shown, it was even more imperative that they take the effort to modify Buddhist
Avadāna stories to suit their own purposes. In an effort to capture the interest of the
Chinese audience, Xunshi focuses on magic feats in addition to a fresh take on filial
devotion. Not only do direct quotes from Buddhist scriptures, like those found in Liu
Yiqing's works, show how quickly Buddhism spread, but they also reveal how much the
literati loved Buddhist Avadāna stories, which gave them food. On the other hand, the
modern implications and cultural significance of Buddhist Avadāna can be better
understood if a story like yingwu jiuhuo is examined in the larger context of the chaotic
time. This leaves more room for interpretation in our understanding of how Buddhist
Avadāna stories were used by Chinese literati.
154

Pakistan Social Sciences Review (PSSR) January-March 2024, Vol. 8, No. 1
References
Deeg, M. (2014). Chinese Buddhists in search of authenticity in the Dharma. The Eastern
Buddhist, 45(1&2), 11-22.
Hsu, A. O. (2022). Making Canon Practicable: Scaling the Tripiṭaka with a Medieval
Chinese Buddhist Anthology. History of Religions, 61(4), 313-361.
Huihui, W (2016), Jataka stories in Chinese translations of Buddhist texts, Lanzhou: Gansu
Education Press
Husain, I., Zaidi, N., & Bhalla, A. (2015). Reason and Purpose of the Jataka
Stories. Manoa, 27(1), 230-232.
Li-an, L. I. (2019). Academic Interpretation of Folk Buddhism and a New Understanding
of the History of Chinese Buddhism. Journal of East China Normal University
(Philosophy and Social Sciences), 51(6), 91.
Liu, X. (2023). Buddhist Art Broke Language Barriers to Spread to Central Asia and
China. In India-China Dialogues Beyond Borders: Cultural, Social Economic and Political
Perspectives (pp Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore.
Nattier, J. (2008). A Guide to the Earliest Chinese Buddhist Translations Texts from the
Eastern Han 東漢 and Three Kingdoms 三國 Periods, Soka University.
Qingqing He (2008). The Study about Jataka and Nidana on the Narrative of Chinese-
translated Buddhist Scriptures in Wei, Jin, Northern and Southern Dynasties, Mill
Dissertation, South West University
Shiren Li, (2015). The Translation and the Interpretation of BUDDHIST Scriptures: Su
Jiang and Early Chinese Vernacular Novels, Fudan Journal (Social Sciences), 1
(February), 69-80
Shufei X, (2013). A Study on the Jataka stories Images of India and Gandhara Relics, Mill Taipei
National University of the Arts,
Zhao, J. (2023). Filial Piety in Fluidity: The Tension between the Textual and Visual
Traditions of Śyāma Jātaka in Early Medieval China. Religions, 14(7), 860.
Zhenduo Z, (2009). History of Chinese vulgar literature, Beijing: China Social Sciences
Press
Zhu, G. (2022). The Sinicization of Buddhist Scriptural Language. In The Palgrave
Handbook of Chinese Language Studies (pp. 213-252). Singapore: Springer Nature
Singapore.
155