TITLE: The Oldest Paper Manuscript of the Mahāvastu: Codicological Study
AUTHOR: Seishi Karashima
YEAR: 2015
LANGUAGE: EN/Sanskrit
ORIGINAL_FILE: The_oldest_paper_manuscript_of_the_Mahav.pdf
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 29069
STATUS: OK
============================================================

ISSN 1343-8980
ֶ
ॴ
೥ɹใ
ฏ੒೥౓
ʣ
Annual Report
of
The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology
at Soka University
for the Academic Year 2016
Volume XX
ॴ
ࢠ
The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology
Soka University
Tokyoɾ2017
ARIRIAB XX (2017)
ʗCONTENTS
#: paper partly written in Japanese.
●  ࠂ RESEARCH ARTICLES:
Oskar VON HINÜBER:
The Kotappakonda Donation of Siddhārtha [one figure] 3–9
ANĀLAYO:
Some Renditions of the Term Tathāgata in the Chinese Āgamas 11–21
Petra KIEFFER-PÜLZ:
Saṅgharakkhita Mahāsāmi’s Oeuvre Based on Intertextual Links in his Texts 23–55
Haiyan HU-VON HINÜBER and Yukio YAMANAKA:
Did Buddha Vipaśyin teach the Prātimokṣasūtra? 57–66
Katarzyna MARCINIAK: 
Padumāvatī-jātaka attested in the Manuscript Sa of the Mahāvastu 67–102
Katarzyna MARCINIAK: 
The oldest paper manuscript of the Mahāvastu 103–121
Katarzyna MARCINIAK: 
A manuscript of Gopadatta’s Jātakamālā copied by Jayamuni Vajrācārya 123–128
Oskar VON HINÜBER:
Names and Titles in the Colophon of the ‘Larger Prajñāpāramitā’ from Gilgit [5 figures] 129–138
Seishi KARASHIMA: 
On Avalokitasvara and Avalokiteśvara 139–165
Peter SKILLING and SAERJI:
How the Buddhas of the Fortunate Aeon First Aspired to Awakening: The pūrva-praṇidhānas 167–204
     of Buddhas 501–750
James B. APPLE:
The Old Tibetan Version of the Kāśyapaparivarta preserved in Fragments from Dunhuang (1) 205–230
LI Xuezhu:
Diplomatic Transcription of the Sanskrit Manuscript of the Abhidharmasamuccayavyākhyā 231–240
     –– Folios 18r1–23v4 ––
Seishi KARASHIMA: 
On cha Ⴂ, tjer 뎔 (절) and tera ͯΒ 241–249
Tatsushi TAMAI:
The Tocharian Mūgapakkha-Jātaka 251–275
Miwako MATSUDAIRA:
Introduction of Photographic Material: Photos of the Lost Decorative Ivory Plaques of 277–286
     the Begram Archeological Site [65 figures]
#౻ॱ೭:
ຊ(2): ຊB, C 287–312
#[Noriyuki KUDO: Gilgit Manuscripts of the Sumāgadhā-avadāna (2): Manuscripts B and C with a special
Reference to the Fragmetns in the Srinagar Collection]
●  PLATES:
1 O. VON HINÜBER: The Kotappakonda Donation of Siddhārtha PLATE 1
2 O. VON HINÜBER: Names and Titles in the Colophon of the ‘Larger Prajñāpāramitā’ from Gilgit PLATE 2
3 M. M ATSUDAIRA: Introduction of Photographic Material ... Begram Archeological Site PLATES 3–34
●  NEW PUBLICATIONS:
Gilgit Manuscripts in the National Archives of India, vol. II.4. Further Mahāyānasūtras.
Ratnaketuparivarta, Kāraṇḍavyūha, Ajitasenavyākaraṇa and Avikalpapraveśasūtra.
Ed. by Adelheid METTE, Noriyuki KUDO, Ruriko SAKUMA, Chanwit TUDKEAO and Jiro HIRABAYASHI
    xliv pages + 151 plates, 2017, ISBN 978-4-904234-15-0
Gilgit Manuscripts in the National Archives of India, vol. III. Avadānas and Miscellaneous Texts.
Ed. by Noriyuki KUDO
    lxvi pages + 146 plates, 2017, ISBN 978-4-904234-14-3
The oldest paper manuscript of the Mahāvastu∗
Katarzyna MARCINIAK
The oldest preserved paper manuscript of the Mahāvastu1 (hereafter: Ms. Na), currently kept
at the National Archives of Nepal, was photographed by the Nepal-German Manuscript
Preservation Project. The microfilms are available both at the National Archives of Nepal
and at the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin. 
The catalogue card of the Nepalese German Manuscript Cataloguing Project (hereafter:
NGMCP) provides us with the following information:
Microfilm: B 98/14
Dimensions: 43×11 
256 folios (sic!)
material: not specified 
script: unknown
language: Sanskrit
subject: Avadāna, Bauddha
NAK accession no.: 4/127.
The manuscript consists of 238 folios. The number of folios given in the catalogue card is
256. The information, however, is incorrect due to the fact that under number B 98/14 we
find three different manuscripts: Ms. Na (complete, 238 folios) and parts of two other texts.
The first five folios belong to one manuscript, whereas the last sixteen folios are a part of yet
another Buddhist text2. 
Each recto and verso contains from 12 to 15 lines of writing. The text commences on fol.
1v. The manuscript is complete, although the numbering in the right margin indicates that
fols. 118, 119, 132-137, 138-140 and 237 are missing. However, on further examination it
turns out that these are merely scribal errors in numbering, not lacunas in the text. The
manuscript is well preserved, there are few folios with blurred or illegible parts. Folio
numbers are indicated by numerals written in the centre right margins of versos. Corrections
*      I am grateful to Susan Roach for checking my English. 
1. First references to Ms. Na are included in ROTH (1970: I.8): “There exists a manuscript of the Mahāvastu-
avadānaṃ, dated Nepāla saṃvat 777, in Nepal”; and de JONG (1985: 139): “An older manuscript (dated Nepāla
saṃvat 777) is preserved in Nepal”. It was as early as in 1882 when Senart himself in the first volume of his
edition of the Mv reported the existence of a more ancient Ms. preserved in Nepal (1882: ix): ‟Il existe au
Népal, d’après une obligeante communication de M. Cowell, un manuscrit ancien de notre livre”. We do not
know which manuscript Senart referred to, it might have been either Ms. Sa or Ms. Na. 
2. The colophon indicates that this is a part of the Divyāvadāna XXI, Sahasodgata: ity evaṃ bhikṣavaḥ
śikṣitavyaṃ ǀǀ iyaṃ tāvad utpattir na t āvad buddho bhagav ān śrāvakāṇāṃ vinayesikṣipadaṃ ǀǀ sahasogatasya
prakaraṇāvadānaṃ ekaviṃśatitamaṃ ǀǀ
ARIRIAB Vol. XX (March 2017): 103–121
© 2017 IRIAB, Soka University, JAPAN
to the text are written both in the upper and lower margins as well as in the right and left
margins, together with the indication of the lines to which they pertain, while in the text they
are marked with kākapadas. 
The names of the chapters are marked with two double daṇḍas, a siddhaṃ symbol as well
as with red dye. In comparison to the oldest palm-leaf Ms. Sa, we find that the following
chapter names were altered in Ms. Na: Naraka-parivartaṃ (Ms. Sa Naraka-parivartaṃ nāma
sūtraṃ); Rāhulabhadrasya p ūrvayogaṃ (Ms. Sa Rāhula-jātakaṃ); Asthisenasya j ātakaṃ
(Ms. Sa Asthisenasya purohitaputrasya jātakaṃ); Arindamarāja-jātakaṃ (Ms. Sa Arindama-
jātakaṃ). 
The preamble, fol. 1v1, 9:
oṃ namaḥ śrīmahābuddhāyâtītānāgatapratyutpannebhyaḥ sarvabuddhebhyaḥ ǁ mahāvastune ādi
(...) ǀǀ (1v9) āryamahāsāṃghikānāṃ lokottaravādināṃ madhyuddeśikānāṃ pāṭhena
vinayapiṭakasya mahāvastuye ādi ǀ
From the preamble above we learn that the text belongs to the Vinaya of the
Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins who “recite [the Prātimokṣa] through the medium of an
intermediate type of language” ( madhyuddeśika) (ROTH 1970); “die edlen Mah āsāṃghika-
Lokottaravādins, die (das Prātimokṣa) in der ‘Mittleren Sprache’ (zwischen Prakrit und
Sanskrit) rezitieren”3 (KARASHIMA 2012). 
At the beginning of the preamble Jayamuni introduced an additional word Mahābuddha:
oṃ namaḥ śrīMahābuddhāya°, whereby expressing his devotion to the Mahābuddha and his
connection with the Mahābuddhadevālaya (Mahābuddhavihāra), his family temple 4. We do
not find this part of the preamble in the oldest Ms. Sa 5, but it has been preserved in all the
other paper manuscripts of the text. This indicates that all the later extant manuscripts of the
Mv derive from the oldest paper Ms. Na or its copy. 
The colophon of Ms. Na (fol. 238v12) reads:
arindamarāja-jātakaṃ samāptaṃ ǁ samāpto ca mahāvastu ǁ ā ryamahāsāṃghikānāṃ lokottara-
vādināṃ pāṭhena ǁ ye dharmā hetuprabhavā hetun te ṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat te ṣāṃ ca yo
nirodha eva ṃvādī mahāśramaṇaḥ ǁ ś ubham astu lekhaka- śrījayamuneḥ ǁ saṃvat 777
phālguṇamāse śuklapakṣe p ūrṇṇamāsyāṃ tithau p ūrvaphālguṇīnakṣatre dhṛtiyoge budhav āsane
śrījayamuninā svārthaṃ parārthena likhito ya ṃ mahāvastv-avadānā samāpto bhavat ǁ etat
puṇyaprabhāvena sarvajagat āṃ bodhilābho stu sarvathā ǁ granthapramāṇaṃ ś loka 215986 ǁ
3. KARASHIMA 2012: Ābhisamācārikāḥ samāptāḥ ǀǀ āryaMahāsāṃghikānāṃ Lokottaravādināṃ
madhyuddeśapāṭhakānāṃ pāṭhenêti; ROTH 1970: ārya-Mahāsāṃghikānāṃ Lokottaravādināṃ madhyʼ-
uddeśikānāṃ pāṭhena bhik ṣuṇī-vinayasyādiḥ; TATIA 1976: samāptaṃ prātimokṣasūtraṃ ā ryamahā-
sāṃghikānāṃ lokottaravādināṃ madhyoddeśikānāṃ pāṭhêti ǀǀ; Mahāvastu Ms. Sa: āryamahāsāṁghikānāṁ
lokottaravādināṁ madhyuddeśikānāṁ pāṭhena vinayapiṭakasya mahāvastuye ādi ǀǀ
4. See LOCKE 1985: 100. 
5. The preamble of Ms. Sa runs as follows: nāmo at ῑtānāgatapratyutpannebhyaḥ sarvabuddhebhyaḥ ǀǀ
mahāvastune ādi ǀǀ 
6. The number of granthas given in the colophon of Ms. Na is 21,598. It is worth mentioning that in the oldest
palm-leaf Ms. Sa the grantha-saṃkhyā is estimated to be 21,594. There is a difference of only four granthas
between the calculated length of the two oldest copies of the text. However, since Ms. Sa contains one more
chapter, as well as many more repetitions than Ms. Na, the number of granthas calculated for Ms. Sa should be
much higher than that estimated for Ms. Na. However, it should be noted that the grantha-saṃkhyā that we find
after the final colophon at the end of Ms. Sa represents different handwriting than that in which the entire
manuscript was written. It was most probably added at a later stage by another scribe who found it necessary to
introduce such information into the text. We can be fairly certain that originally there was no indication of the
104
śubhaṃ yat prasādāt tat me mahābuddhāya namo namaḥ sadā ǁ
The underlined part of the colophon above is found also in the oldest Ms. Sa, as well as in
all the extant complete manuscripts of the Mahāvastu. The remaining part points to the
circumstances in which Ms. Na itself was produced. The manuscript was written in the year
saṃvat 777 (= 1657 C.E.), on a Wednesday in the nakṣatra called Pūrvaphalgunī, in the
month of Phālguṇa (February-March), by a scribe whose name was Jayamuni (Jayamuninā
… likhito).  
It is worth mentioning that Ms. Na is the oldest extant manuscript of the Mahāvastu in
which the text is referred to as an avadāna. In the oldest palm-leaf Ms. Sa we find this term
only in the post-colophon that was added a long time after the completion of the manuscript
and it originally did not belong to it (see MARCINIAK 2014: 25-27). Thus, the title of the
work in the form Mahāvastu-avadāna occurs for the first time in the final colophon of Ms.
Na and has thereafter found its place in all the later copies of the text, in their final colophons
as well as at the end of chapter colophons.
The manuscript produced by Jayamuni is of great importance. This is the oldest paper
manuscript of the Mahāvastu preserved to the present day 7. All the later copies of the text
follow the readings introduced in Ms. Na, therefore we can assume that they all are based
directly or indirectly on Ms. Na. In many cases the readings attested in them agree with those
in Ms. Na, while differing from those in the oldest palm-leaf Ms. Sa. Moreover, since we
have no other copy of the text from the period between the 12 th c. (Ms. Sa, see MARCINIAK
2015) and the middle of the 17th c. (Ms. Na), and we possess numerous manuscripts produced
in the 18th, 19th and even 20th centuries, we can presume that it was Jayamuni’s manuscript of
the Mahāvastu that triggered the process of producing numerous copies of this important
Buddhist text.
The following examples, selected from many of that kind attested in Ms. Na, illustrate the
nature of emendations, corrections and additions introduced by Jayamuni as well as
confirming that all the later manuscripts of the text are copies of Ms. Na: 
• Ms. Sa Rāhula-jātakaṃ > Ms. Na Rāhulabhadrasya p ūrvayogaṃ > all the other
extant Mss. read Rāhulabhadrasya pūrvayogaṃ. Moreover, the form of the colophon
is different in Sa and Na, i.e., Ms. Sa 329r4-5 reads bhagavān āha syāt khalu punar
bhikṣava yu ṣmākam evam asy ād anya ḥ sa tena k ālena tena samayena candro n āma
mithilāyāṃ vaideharājā abhūṣi na khalv etad eva ṃ draṣṭavyaṃ tat kasya heto ḥ eṣa
bhikṣavo r āhulo kum āro tena k ālena tena samayena mithil āyāṃ candro n āma
vaideharājā abhūṣi yaṃ se so sūryo riṣi aśokavanikāyāṃ ṣadrātraṃ uparuddho tasya
taṃ karmasya vipākena ṣadvarṣāṇi garbhāvāso abhūṣi ǀǀ rāhulajātakaṃ samāptaṃ; 
number of granthas in Ms. Sa. It is worth noticing that the same grantha-saṃkhyā is attested in the final
colophon of Ms. C of the Mv, currently kept at the Cambridge University Library. Interestingly, the two Mss.
are not in a close relationship, i.e., they are not one another’s copies (cf. MARCINIAK 2014: 107-147). 
7. Surprisingly, Yuyama (2001) did not include Ms. Na in his list of the extant manuscripts of the Mahāvastu.
In his work the oldest paper manuscript is Ms. Sb, whose date is given as saṃvat 815 (= 1695 C.E.; Yuyama
erroneously gives “1615”). The catalogue card of the NGMCP gives the date saṃvat 915 (= 1795 C.E.), the
same date we find in MENKENS (1983: 15), while Roth (1985:129) adopts saṃvat 815 (= 1695 C.E.). V on
Hinüber (1989: 344) reads the date as saṃvat 675 (= 1555 C.E.). The date found after the final colophon in Ms.
Sb was added in different handwriting. The manuscript itself is undoubtedly modern, as it is written in
Devanāgarī. Therefore, the date found in the final colophon cannot refer to the date when Ms. Sb was produced,
it was probably copied from an older manuscript, from which Ms. Sb derives. 
105
Ms. Na 187v6 reads syāt khalu bhiksava ḥ yuṣmākam evam asy ād anya ḥ sa tena
kālena tena samayena candro rājā ǀ eṣa tadā rāhulabhadrakumāro abhūṣi ǀǀ yaḥ sūryo
ṛṣis tadā aham ev ābhūvaṃ ǀǀ yat s ūryo ṛṣi aśokavanikāyāṃ ṣ aḍrātraṃ uparuddhaḥ
tasya karmasya vip ākena r āhulo kum āro ṣaḍvarṣāṇi garbh āvāsasthito abh ūṣi ǀǀ
rāhulabhadrasya pūrvayogaṃ ǀǀ.
• In Ms. Na and in all the later copies of the text some of the chapter colophons are
either much shorter or formed in a different way from those in the oldest palm-leaf
Ms. Sa8.
• As stated above, at the beginning of the preamble Jayamuni introduced an additional
word Mahābuddha. We do not find this part of the preamble in the oldest Ms. Sa,
though it has been attested in all the later copies of the text. 
• One entire chapter in Ms. Sa, namely Padumāvatī-jātaka is found neither in Ms. Na
nor in the other paper manuscripts. 
• As stated above, the title of the text, namely Mahāvastu in Ms. Sa was altered into
Mahāvastu-avadāna in the final colophon of Ms. Na, and it was consequently copied
in all the other extant manuscripts. 
• Ms. Sa kin te dārakāḥ ye dārakā ye Padumāvatīye jātāḥ (a dittography) > Ms. Na kiṃ
te dārakā ye Padumāvatīye jātāḥ (Jayamuni removes the dittography) > all the other
extant Mss. follow Na. 
• Ms. Sa 294r4 reads mā āryaputra paravacanen āsmākaṃ parityajatha mā ca imāni
dārakadārikāni parityajyatha mā ca imaṃ ramaṇīyaṃ ratanadvīpaṃ, Ms. Na and all
the later copies read mā āryaputrā paravacanenāsmākaṃ parityajatha mā ca imaṃ
ramaṇīyaṃ ratnadvīpaṃ. 
• Sa 365r1 reads vitatavitānaṃ muktapuṣpāvakīrṇṇaṃ tad aho saptame divase g ṛha-
dvāre pi mahargh ā dhūpadhūpani ubhayato pi anuttar ā samyaksambodhim abhi-
saṃbuddho ākāśagamanakāni ca pūrāṇi id āni vaya ṃ kumāro abhini ṣkramato
paśyiṣyāma ǀǀ gāthā ca malā vimalā vaḍavikāpitato v āriśiktasanmṛṣṭaṃ dhūpa-
gehadvāranagare kiṃ anadya nakṣatragṛhāṇi navakāni trikaukokīllā jānasya bharitā
dāhāni manujātīyenānīyenāraṇyagatā matho jīvo pañca kiṃ kāraṇā; Ms. Na and all
the later Mss. lack the underlined part of the text; in Se a lacuna is printed in this
8. Cf. the colophon of the chapter Nalinī-jātaka which is in Ms. Sa three times as long as in the other extant
Mss. of the text: Ms. Sa bhagavān āha syāt khalu puna bhikṣavaḥ yuṣmākam evam asyād anya tena kālena tena
samayena kāśyapo riṣi abhūṣi na khalv etad eva ṃ draṣṭavyaṃ tat kasya heto eṣa sa bhikṣava rājā śuddhodano
tena k ālena tena samayena s āhaṃjanīyāṃ āś ramapade k āśyapo riṣi abhūṣi ǀ syāt khalu puna bhik ṣavo
yuṣmākam evam asyad any ā sā tena kālena tena samayena sā mṛgī abhūṣi na khalv etad eva ṃ draṣṭavyaṃ tat
kasya heto eṣā sā bhikṣavo mah āprajāpatī gautamī tena k ālena tena samayena abh ūṣi ǀ anuhimavante
sāhaṃjanīyaṃ āś ramapade m ṛgī abhūṣi ǀ syāt khalu puna bhik ṣavo yu ṣmākam evam asy ād anya ḥ sa tena
kālena tena samayena k āśirājā abhūṣi na khalv etad eva ṃ draṣṭavyaṃ tat kasya heto ḥ eṣa sa bhikṣava
mahānāmo śākyabhūtena tena k ālena tena samayena k āśirājā abhūṣi ǀǀ syāt khalu puna bhik ṣavo yu ṣmākam
evam asyad anya ḥ sa tena k ālena tena samayena eka śṛṅgako n āma ri ṣikumāro abh ūṣi na khalv etad eva ṃ
draṣṭavyaṃ tat kasya heto ahaṃ sa bhikṣavaḥ tena kālena tena samayena ekaśṛṅgako nāma riṣikumāro abhūṣi ǀ
syāt khalu puna bhik ṣavo yu ṣmākam evam asy ād anya ḥ sa tena k ālena tena samayena nalin ī nāma k āśirājño
dhītā abhūṣi na khalv etad eva ṃ draṣṭavyaṃ tat kasya heto eṣā sā bhikṣavo yaśodharā rāhulasya mātā ǀ tena
kālena tena samayena nalin ῑ nāma k āśirājño dh ῑtā abhūṣῑ ǀ tadāpi eṣā ātmānam ala ṃkṛtvā mama pralobheti
etarahiṃ pi eṣātmānaṃ alaṃkṛtvā mama pralobheti ǀǀ nalinῑye rājakumārῑye jātakaṃ ǀǀ Ms. Na bhagavān āha ǀǀ
yas tena kālena kāśyapo ṛṣir eṣu sa śuddhodano abhūṣi ǀ yā sā mṛgī eṣā sā bhikṣavo mahāprajāpatī abhūṣi ǀ yaś
ca kāśirājo (’)bhūd eṣaiva mahānāmo śākyo (’)bhūt ǀ yaś caikaśṛṃgako ṛṣikumāras tadāhaṃ eva babhūva ǀ yā
ca nalinī nāma r ājakanyā eṣaiva ya śodharā abhūṣi ǀǀ tadāpi eṣā ātmānaṃ alaṃkṛtvā mama pralobheti ǀ
etarahiṃ pi eṣātmānaṃ alaṃkṛtvā mama pralobheti ǀǀ nalinīye rājakumārīye jātakaṃ samāptaṃ ǀǀ 
106
place.
• Sa 381r1 reads evam eva bhagavāṃ anuttareṇa buddhacak ṣuṣā sarvāvantaṃ lokaṃ
abhilokayanto adr ākṣīt satv ā uccāvaccāṃ hīnapraṇītaṃ adrākṣīt satv āṃ du-ākārāṃ
durvineyāṃ durviśodheyāṃ adrākṣīt satv āṃ su-ākārāṃ suvineyāṃ suviśodheyāṃ
adrākṣīt satvāṃ ughṛṭṭitajñāṃ vipañcitajñāṃ neyāṃ padaparamāṃ ǀǀ adrākṣīt satvāṃ
sutīkṣṇendriyāṃ mṛddhendriyāṃ madhyendriyāṃ adrākṣīt satv ānāṃ trayo r āśayo
mithyatvaniyataṃ rāśiṃ samyaktvaniyataṃ rāśi aniyata ṃ rāśiṃ ǀǀ atha khalu
bhagavato; Na and all the later Mss. lack the underlined part of the text. 
• Ms. Sa reads atha br āhmaṇaveṣeṇa k āśirājño g ṛhaṃ praviśitvā ahaṃ pi mah ārāja
akṣehi kuśalo ti (the sentence is incomplete) > Ms. Na reads atha brahmadatto r ājā
(added by Jayamuni in the lower margin of the folio) brāhmaṇaveṣeṇa k āśirājño
gṛhaṃ praviśitvā ahaṃ pi mah ārāja ak ṣehi ku śalo ti; all the later Mss. follow the
reading introduced in Ms. Na. 
• Ms. Sa 255v1 reads antaḥpureṇa r ājārahehi abhiruhitv ā; Jayamuni adds the word
rathehi above the first line of writing in fol. 145r; all the later Mss. follow Na and
read antaḥpureṇa rājārahehi rathehi abhiruhitvā.
• Ms. Sa 391r4 teṣāñ ca radhātuṣu (lipography), Ms. Na 219r1 aparaloka- (added in
the upper margin); the other Mss. follow: teṣāṃ aparalokadhātuṣu. 
• Ms. Sa 55v1 reads dṛḍhaniṣkramaṇaṃ ca balaniṣkramaṇaṃ ca śreṣṭhaniṣkramaṇa ca
ǀ cetiyapūjakaṃ ca ǀ riṣipūjakaṃ ca ǀ devapūjakaṃ ca ǀ; Ms. Na 32v5 reads
dṛḍhavikramaṇaṃ ca ǀ cetiyapūjakaṃ ca ǀ devapūjakaṃ ca ǀ; all the later Mss. follow
the reading of Na. 
• Sa 95r5 reads ghaṭikāro kumbhakāro jyotipālaṃ māṇavam etad uv āca ǀ ś rutam idaṃ
samyakjyotipāla bhagav āṃ kila kośaleṣu janapade ṣu c ārikāṃ caramāṇo yena
kośalānāṃ bhaḍiṃgaṃ brāhmaṇagrāmo tad avas āri tad anupr āpto tatraiva viharati
anyatarasmi vana ṣaṇḍe ǀ kiṃ punar vaya ṃ ǀǀ samyagjyotipāla yena bhagav āṃ
kāśyapo tenupasa ṃkramema bhagavanta ṃ kāśyapaṃ darśanāye paryup āsanāye ǀ
tṛtῑyam pi ānanda jyotipālo māṇavo ghaṭikāraṃ kumbhakāram etad avocat ǀ kiṃ me
bhaṇe ghaṭikāra tehi mu ṇḍehi śramaṇehi darśanāye upasaṃkrāntehi paryupāsanāye
ǀ; the underlined part is lacking in Na as well as in all the later Mss.; in Se a lacuna in
printed in this place. 
• Ms. Sa 57v4 atha p ūrṇṇāyāṃ pūrṇṇamāsyāṃ puṣpanakṣatrayogayuktāyāṃ
bodhisatvā mātu kukṣim avakrāmenti ǀ upoṣadhikāyāṃ pramadottamāyāṃ bodhisatvā
mātu kuk ṣim avakr āmanti ǀ aninditāyāṃ prāsādikāyāṃ kulῑnāyāṃ ś ucigātrāyāṃ
mandarāgapāmabhilakṣitāyāṃ akṣudrāvavarāyāṃ jātisampannāyāṃ kula-
sampannāyāṃ rūpasaṃpannāyāṃ varṇṇasaṃpannāyāṃ nāmasaṃpannāyāṃ āroha-
saṃpannāyāṃ, Ms. Na 33v10-22 atha p ūrṇāyāṃ pūrnamāsyāṃ puṣyanakṣatra-
yogayuktāyāṃ bodhisatvā mātuḥ kukṣim avakr āmanti ǀǀ upoṣadhikāyāṃ ā roha-
sampannāyāṃ; the underlined part is lacking in Na and in all the other extant Mss. 
• In the oldest palm-leaf Ms. Sa, the final part of the chapter Vṛṣabha-jātaka, i.e., the
samodhāna, is wanting. We find it added in the upper margin of folio 158v in Ms. Na:
bhagavān āha ǀ syāt khalu punar bhik ṣavo yu ṣmākam evânya ḥ sa tena k ālena tena
samayena v ṛṣabho (’)bh ūt ǀ so (’)haṃ vṛṣabho (’)bh ūṣi ǀ yaḥ giriko n āma śṛgalo
(’)yam eva māro (’)bhūṣi ǀ tadâpy avatārārthī avatāram alabhanto nirvidyâpakrāṃtaḥ
ǀǀ; all the later Mss. follow Na.
107
• The final part of the chapter Vānara-jātaka (II) is missing in Ms. Sa. It was added by
Jayamuni in the lower margin of folio 158v: bhagavān āha ǀ syāt khalu bhik ṣavo
yuṣmākam evam anya ḥ sa tena k ālena tena samayena yo vānarādhipatir aham eva
tadâbhūt ǀ yo dakarākṣaso (’)bh ūd ayam eva māro (’)bh ūt ǀ tadâpi na śaknoti
smāvatāram adhigantuṃ ǀǀ; all the later Mss. follow the reading introduced in Ms. Na.
• Many of the repetitions and fixed phrases found so abundantly in Ms. Sa are lacking
in Ms. Na, consequently we do not find them in any other extant Mss. and Se. E.g.,
the following parts of the chapter Ājñātakauṇḍinya-jātaka: Ms. Sa 382v3-383r4 ye te
satvā samādhisampannā bhavanti ǀ evarūpā āryaṃ dharmacakraṃ pravarttenti ǀ ye te
satvā vimuktisampannā bhavanti evarūpā satvā āryadharma-cakraṃ pravarttenti ǀ ye
te satvā vimuktijñānadarśanasaṃpannā bhavanti evar ūpā satvā ā ryaṃ dharma-
cakraṃ pravarttenti ǀ ye te satvā naiṣkramyasaṃpannā bhavanti evarūpā satvā āryaṃ
dharmacakraṃ pravarttenti ǀ ye te satvā mahākaruṇāpratilābhasaṃpannā bhavanti
evarūpā satvā ā ryaṃ dharmacakraṃ pravarttenti ye te rūpā satvā bodhisaṃpannā
bhavanti ǀ evaṃrūpā satvā āryadharmacakraṃ pravarttenti ǀ …
The underlined parts of the text are lacking in Na and in the other Mss. 
It cannot be ruled out that Jayamuni consulted more than one manuscript of the
Mahāvastu available to him at the time when he was preparing his copy of the text. The two
(or more?) manuscripts, one of which was Ms. Sa known to us from the photographs taken by
the NGMPP, would have differed considerably from one another. Otherwise, if the scribe
used only one manuscript, namely the oldest extant Ms. Sa, then he himself would have been
responsible for all deletions, additions and emendations introduced in his copy of the text. In
his recent article, Dr. Camillo Formigatti writes (p. 124): “As we have seen, Jayamuni was
not a simple scribe with a shaky knowledge of the Sanskrit language, but a careful editor and
reviser of many collections of jātakas and avadānas (and of philosophical texts as well)”9. In
the light of those discoveries, it is not too far-fetched to assume that it could have been
Jayamuni himself who introduced all emendations, including the above-mentioned ones, into
the text of the Mv. It is not clear, however, why he would have removed one entire chapter
from the text, since it certainly was not common practice for scribes to do so. As I have
shown in another article included in the present volume, Padumāvatī-jātaka constitutes an
element of a scheme consisting of three parts, i.e., parikalpa, jātaka and pūrvayoga, therefore
its presence in the Mv after the chapter Padumāvatī-parikalpa and before the Padumāvatī-
pūrvayoga is fully justified. Whether it was Jayamuni who took out the Jātaka or it had been
removed from the text before the scribe produced his manuscript, cannot be stated with
certainty. However, it is certain that it was Jayamuni’s manuscript of the Mv from which all
the later manuscripts directly or indirectly derived, therefore, it is of special significance for
the study of the Mahāvastu. 
9. (p. 113): “Jayamuni wrote many other manuscripts of important Buddhist works and texts. He is mentioned
in the colophon of a manuscript of the Mahāvastu written in 1657 CE. He is credited to have written also a
manuscript of the Bodhicaryāvatāra in 1643 CE (NGMCP H 380/8; Nep āla Saṃvat 764), as well as an undated
manuscript of the Sugatāvadāna (NGMCP H380/7). Several other manuscripts can be attributed to him with a
good degree of certainty. The most interesting are the oldest known manuscript of a metrical adaptation of the
Avadānaśataka, the Kalpadrumāvadānamālā (NGMCP A 117-13 to A 118-1), as well as the old est known
manuscript of the Mahajjātakamālā (NGMCP B 98-15)”; and then (p. 124): “his role in the transmission of the
vast corpus of Buddhist narrative literature in Nepal is astonishing”. 
108
Akṣara List of the Manuscript Na of the Mahāvastu
Daṇḍa ; 
Virāma: 
  (t) ; 
  (k); 
  (ṭ)
Avagraha: ; 
 (Kāśyapo ’bravīt)
Visarga: : 
  (kāḥ); 
  (tāḥ)
Anusvāra: 
  (ntaṃ); 
  (kiṃ)
The end of chapters: ; ; 
 (Bahubuddhakaṃ sūtraṃ)
Deleted akṣaras: 
   ; 
 ; 
Corrections in the upper and lower margins: 
Fol. 186r:
(Brahmadatto r ājā; 9th line) →
 (atha
brāhmaṇaveṣeṇa) → atha Brahmadatto rājā brāhmaṇaveṣeṇa
Fol. 18v: 
  (rṇṇa) → 
  (valla) → varṇṇa
Akṣaras to be inserted or replaced:
 (saṃjātaṃ)
 (adhigataśabdena → adhigatasvādena) 
 (mūrcchitās te bhujanti → mūrcchitās te na bhujanti)
Ms. Na, basic letters: 
a ā i ī u ū ṛ ṝ e ai o au
k-
kh-
g-
gh-
109
c-
ch-
j-
jh-
ṭ-
ṭh-
ḍ-
ḍh-
ṇ-
t-
th-
d-
dh-
n-
p-
ph-
b-/v-
bh-
m-
y-
r-
110
l-
ś-
ṣ-
s-
h-
Ms. Na, ligatures:
- a ā i ī u ū ṛ e ai o au
kk
kt
ktr
ktv
kn
kp
kpr
ky
kr
kl
kv
kṣ
kṣṇ
kṣm
kṣy
kṣv
111
ks
khy
gg
gdh
gn
gbh
gy
gr
gry
gl
gv
ghn
ghr
ṅk
ṅg
ṅm
cc
ccy
cch
cchr
cchv
cy
jj
112
jjh
jñ
jy
jr
jv
ñc
ñj
ṭṭ
ṭy
ṭv
ṭs
ṭhy
ḍḍ
ḍg
ḍbh
ḍy
ḍv
ḍhy
ṇṭh
ṇḍ
ṇṇ
ṇy
ṇv
113
tk
tkr
tkṣ
tkh
tt
ttr
tth
tn
tp
tpr
tph
tm
tmy
ty
tr
try
tv
ts
tsk
tsn
tsy
tsv
thy
114
dg
dd
ddh
ddhn
ddhy
ddhr
db
dbh
dbhy
dm
dy
dr
dv
dvy
dhn
dhy
dhr
dhv
nk
nkr
nt
nty
115
ntr
nth
nd
ndy
ndr
ndv
ndh
ndhy
ndhr
nn
np
npr
nbh
nm
ny
nv
ns
pt
pn
pp
pph
py
pr
116
pl
ps
psy
bj
bd
bdh
by
br
bhy
bhr
mn
mp
mpr
mb
mbh
mm
my
mr
ml
mh
yy
yv
rjjh
117
rtt
rtty
rdd
rddh
rṇṇ
lk
lg
lp
lph
lbh
lm
ly
ll
lv
vy
vr
śc
śn
śm
śy
śr
śl
118
śv
ṣk
ṣkr
ṣṭ
ṣṭy
ṣṭr
ṣṭh
ṣṭhy
ṣṭv
ṣṇ
ṣp
ṣpr
ṣm
ṣy
ṣv
sk
skh
st
sty
str
119
stry
sth
sn
sp
sph
sm
sy
sr
sv
ss
hn
hm
hy
hr
hl
hv
Ms. Na, numerals:
1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6
7 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
13
 14
 15 16 17
 18
19 20
 100
 200
120
Bibliography
FORMIGATTI 2016. Formigatti, Camillo, “Walking the Deckle Edge: Scribe or Author? Jayamuni and the
Creation of the Nepalese Avadānamālā Literature”. Buddhist Studies Review 2016, pp. 101-140. 
de JONG 1985. de Jong, Jan W., “Madhyadeśika, Madhyodde śika and Madhy’udde śika”, in: Bechert, Heinz:
Zur Schulzugehörigkeit von Werken der H īnayāna-Literatur (Symposien zur Buddhismusforschung,
III.1). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1985.
KARASHIMA 2012. Karashima, Seishi, von Hinüber, Oskar, Die Abhisamācārikā Dharmāḥ. Verhaltensregeln
für buddhistische Mönche der Mah āsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins, herausgegeben, mit der chinesischen
Parallelversion verglichen, übersetzt und kommentiert von Seishi Karashima unter Mitwirkung von
Oskar von Hinüber, 3. V ols., The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology, Soka
University, Tokyo 2012.
LOCKE 1985. Locke, John, Buddhist Monasteries of Nepal. A Survey of B āhās and B āhīs of the Kathmandu
Valley. Sahayogi Press Pvt. Ltd., Kathmandu 1985. 
MARCINIAK 2014. Marciniak, Katarzyna, Studia nad Mah āvastu, sanskryckim tekstem buddyjskiej szko ły
mahasanghików-lokottarawadinów. Studia Buddhica 3. Research Centre of Buddhist Studies, Warsaw
2014.
MARCINIAK 2015. Marciniak, Katarzyna, “The oldest palm-leaf Manuscript of the Mahāvastu (MS Sa): A
paleographic Description”. Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced
Buddhology at Soka University, V ol. XIX, pp. 125-148. 
MENKENS 1983. Menkens, Ralph, Zwei neue Mah āvastu-Handschriften aus Nepal , Magisterarbeit zur
Erlangung der Würde der Magister Artium der Philosophischen Fakultäten der Albert-Ludwigs-
Universität zu Freiburg 1983.
ROTH 1970. Roth, Gustav, Bhikṣuṇī-Vinaya. Manual of Discipline for Buddhist Nuns . Patna: K. P. Jayaswal
Research Institute 1970.
ROTH 1985. Roth, Gustav, “The Readings Madhy’-uddeśika, Madhyoddeśika, and Madhyadeśika in the
Scriptures of the Ārya-Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins ‒ Including Notes on daśa-baddhena and
pañcabaddhena ga ṇena”, in: Bechert, Heinz: Zur Schulzugehörigkeit von Werken der H īnayāna-
Literatur (Symposien zur Buddhismusforschung, III.1). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1985.
SENART 1882-1897. Senart, Émile, Le Mahâvastu, texte sanscrit publié pour la première fois et accompagné
d’introductions et d’un commentaire, 3. V ols., Paris: Imprimerie Nationale 1882-1897. 
TATIA 1976. Tatia, Nathmal, Prātimokṣasūtraṃ of the Lokottarav ādi-Mahāsāṅghika School, Tibetan Sanskrit
Works Series, V ol. XVI, Patna 1976.
TOURNIER 2012. Tournier, Vincent, “The Mahāvastu and the Vinayapiṭaka of the Mah āsāṃghika-
Lokottaravādin”, Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at
Soka University, V ol. XV , 2012, pp. 87-104.
YUYAMA 2001. Yuyama, Akira, The Mahāvastu-Avadāna in Old Palm-Leaf and Paper Manuscripts. 2 vols.,
Tokyo: The Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies for Unesco 2001.
121