Journal of Buddhist Ethics
ISSN 1076-9005
http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/
Volume 26, 2019
Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics:
A New Approach
Ven. Pandita (Burma)
University of Kelaniya
Copyright Notice: Digital copies of this work may be made and distrib-
uted provided no change is made and no alteration is made to the con-
tent. Reproduction in any other format, with the exception of a single
copy for private study, requires the written permission of the author. All
enquiries to vforte@albright.edu.

Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist
Ethics: A New Approach
Ven. Pandita (Burma)1
Abstract
In this paper, I argue that (1) rape is not covered by the
concept of sexual misconduct prohibited by the Third Pre-
cept of the universal Five Precepts morality in Buddhism;
and (2) many problematic issues surrounding this precept
go away when we interpret it in this way.
The Definition of Sexual Misconduct
Sexual misconduct (kāmesu micchāra), sometimes also translated as “mis-
conduct in sensual pleasures,” is an immoral act prohibited by the Third
Precept of the universal Five Precepts morality in Buddhism. In a nutshell,
it means a sexual relationship with certain women deemed as sexually ta-
boo objects. What follows is from some of the earliest canonical sources:
1 Postgraduate Institute of Pali and Buddhist Studies, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka.
Email: ashinpan@gmail.com.

152 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
kāmesumicchācārī [MN adds kho pana here.] hoti. yā tā mātu-
rakkhitā piturakkhitā mātāpiturakkhitā bhāturakkhitā bhagini-
rakkhitā ñātirakkhitā gottarakkhitā dhammarakkhitā sasāmikā
saparidaṇḍā antamaso mālāguḷaparikkhittāpi, tathārūpāsu
cārittaṃ āpajjitā hoti. (AN V 264, 283, 292; MN I 286, III 54)
He engages in sexual misconduct. He has sexual relations
with women who are protected by their mother, father,
mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are
protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose
violation entails a penalty; or even with one already en-
gaged. (Bodhi, Numerical 1519)
The last four refer respectively to: (1) a woman protected
by her co-religionists, (2) one already married or even
promised to a husband at birth or in childhood, (3) one with
whom sexual relations entail punishment, and (4) a girl
who has been garlanded by a man as a sign of engagement.
(1855)
If one reads the sutta cited above closely, one can notice that the
Buddha appears to be addressing men alone. Based on such texts, Cabezón
observes that the canonical sources “are silent on the question of what
constitutes sexual misconduct for women” (468). Does this mean that
women do not need to abstain from sexual misconduct, and that only men
should be blamed for illicit relationships?
It seems not. If women were not obliged to abstain from sexual
misconduct, they would have only four precepts out of five, and yet we
have never heard in Buddhism of a Four Precepts morality for women.
Furthermore, there is evidence showing that women are also morally re-
sponsible to abstain from sexual misconduct:

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 153
It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahāpajāpati Gotamī ab-
stains from killing living beings . . . from misconduct in sen-
sual pleasures . . . from wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which
are the basis of negligence. (MN III 253; Ñāṇamoḷi and Bodhi
1102; emphasis added)
Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a female lay follower is
deposited in heaven as if brought there. What five? She ab-
stains from the destruction of life . . . abstains from sexual
misconduct . . . abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants,
the basis for heedlessness. (AN III 276; Bodhi, Numerical 848;
emphasis added)
Therefore, I do not agree with Cabezón’s claim that “the doctrine of sexual
misconduct is almost entirely directed at men” (469). On the contrary, I
think what we need to find out is why the Buddha was silent on what sex-
ual misconduct means for women, which I will attempt to do in the fol-
lowing section.
Buddhaghosa’s input
Buddhaghosa, as seen in his commentaries (Sv III 1048; Ps I 199; Spk II 145;
As 98), explains the different roles of men and women in sexual miscon-
duct, which Collins sums up as follows:
Many texts give two standard lists of ten kinds of women
with whom intercourse is forbidden, which include young
women “under protection” as well as “wives of other men”.
They are agamanīyavatthu, literally “objects not to be gone
to”: Forbidden Zones. The first gives Ten Women (dasa

154 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
itthiyo), all of whom are under some form of protection, and
the second gives Ten Kinds of Wife (bhariyā) . . . .
For men all Ten Women and all Ten Wives are Forbidden
Zones. In the case of women, however, there is precise lim-
itation: all Ten Wives are guilty of wrongdoing if they have
sex with a man, but only the last two of the list of Ten
Women are. This is because they [i.e., the last two of the list
of Ten Women] have been promised to a man, and are
counted as “having a husband” (or “owner”, sassāmikā) . . . .
(263-264; 265–266)
From Collins’s description above we can derive the following
scheme:
1. If a woman is married, or is not yet married but has her sexuality
already reserved for one particular man, the following principles
apply:
(a) She is a forbidden object to all men except her partner; and all
other men are forbidden objects to her;
(b) Therefore, if she has sex with a man other than her partner,
both she and the man are guilty of sexual misconduct.
2. If she is single but her sexuality is protected by parents, etc., then
the following principles apply:
(a) She is a forbidden object to all men unless her protectors per-
mit; but no man is a forbidden object to her;
(b) Therefore, if she has sex with any man without the permission
of her protectors, her partner would be guilty of sexual mis-
conduct, but she remains innocent.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 155
Does this interpretation really represent the Buddha’s view? We
cannot know for sure; but, if it does, it can lead to a plausible explanation
of why the Buddha declined to specify women’s role in sexual misconduct.
How so? If Buddhaghosa is correct, what the Buddha had to say on wom-
en's role in sexual misconduct would be as follows: “Married women need
to be faithful to their husbands, but single women can do whatever they
like without any moral guilt.” This kind of statement would have sent a
mixed signal—discouraging one party (men) but emboldening the other
(single women) at the expense of their respective protectors. The Buddha
was too smart a teacher to convey such a message; this is probably why he
highlighted only men when he talked about sexual misconduct. Again, be-
cause Buddhaghosa’s input can explain this issue, there is a real possibility
that his interpretation represents the Buddha’s true intent somehow pre-
served in the commentarial tradition.
The third-party issue
As seen above, the sutta definition of sexual misconduct entirely ignores
the women’s right to choose, and uses the existence of a specific third
party—a husband, fiancé, or protector—to determine whether a woman is
sexually taboo to a particular man, and thereby she happens to be an ob-
ject of sexual misconduct for him. This early Buddhist position has led to
two knotty issues:
1. With any illicit sexual relationship, it is the erring couples (espe-
cially the women) who must bear the brunt of all its undesirable
consequences—unwanted pregnancies, social backlash, etc. The
third parties (husbands, parents, etc.) would also suffer, but cer-

156 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
tainly not more than the women themselves (the wives, the daugh-
ters, etc.). Then, why should the third parties alone be described
as the victims in the suttas?
2. The second issue is concerned with the moral status of rape. Rape
happens when someone (usually a woman) is forced into having
sex “by violence or the threat of violence” (“Rape”). When the def-
inition of sexual misconduct ignores a woman’s right to say no, and
focuses only on whether or not she is a sexually taboo object to
certain men, we cannot avoid the conclusion that it is not sexual
misconduct to rape a woman if she is not sexually taboo to the rap-
ist, as in the case of a husband raping his wife, or of a father raping
his unmarried daughter who has no other guardian beside her fa-
ther. If those specific rape cases are not covered by sexual miscon-
duct, should we conclude that Buddhism somehow provides a “li-
cense” for certain men to rape certain women? If we did, we would
go against everything we know about the spirit of Buddhist moral-
ity.
One way to deal with those issues would be to “extend” the sutta definition
by treating sexual misconduct as a blanket term covering all kinds of sexual
misdeeds, and devising original elaborate systems of sexual ethics to deal
with all diverse scenarios and settings of sex. This seems the path chosen
by major Mahāyānist treatises like Aśvaghoṣa’s Daśakuśalakarmapathanird-
eśa, Nāgārjuna’s Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra, Asaṅga’s Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī
and Yogācārabhūmi, and Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakośa and Bhāṣyaṃ (see
Cabezón 488–504, for details). The purpose of those great philosophers
might be to “fill in many of the gaps left open in the earlier formulations”
(487); but, in my opinion, they have unintentionally opened a can of doc-
trinal worms, and consequently made the Buddhist sexual ethics less rel-
evant across diverse cultures and regions.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 157
In contrast, some modern scholars have chosen to explain away
the sutta definition as representing a sort of socio-cultural bias, which
Cabezón calls the “gender ideology of Buddhist India,” and which he de-
scribes as follows:
When an unmarried girl is raped, it is recognized that she
is injured in some way, but the truly injured party is not the
girl but the girl’s father or guardian. Likewise, when a man
commits adultery, it is the woman’s husband who is ulti-
mately wronged. (64)
Cabezón in this case seems to be following Collins, who writes earlier:
“Thus, as is often the case worldwide, sexual transgressions are commit-
ted by men not directly against a woman but against those who either
‘own’ her or are in some other way legally responsible for her” (268). Col-
lett has also come to support this theory after studying certain types of
non-consensual marriages recognized by various Hindu dharmaśāstras
(155–156), but given that I do not agree with her interpretation of the
aforesaid data (see the details in the appendix), I do not think her argu-
ment can be valid support for Collins’s theory in the Indian context.
On the other hand, I argue that there is a simpler and more robust
way to solve those two issues mentioned above. And in doing so, there
would be no need to override the sutta authority.
First of all, we should not forget that couples involved in illicit,
mutually consenting relationships have chosen that path of their own ac-
cord; therefore, they are at least partly responsible for whatever suffering
they have to bear afterwards. This is true even in the cases of underage
sex, for the Buddhist law of karma does not recuse anyone for their con-
scious choices even if they happen to be young children. In contrast, when
the third parties concerned (the husbands, the parents, etc.) have to suffer
on account of those illicit relationships, their pain, their trouble, comes

158 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
from something not of their own doing, not from their choice. This is why,
I argue, only third parties are designated as victims of sexual misconduct.
Secondly, about rape, I argue that the original Pāli term kāmesu
micchācāra (lit. “misconduct in sensual pleasures”) is not a blanket term
covering all kinds of sexual misdeeds, but a euphemism referring to a spe-
cific kind of sexual misconduct, i.e., one that victimizes a particular third
party even though carried out with mutual consent. This is why the suttas
define all sexually taboo women in terms of relevant third parties. In con-
trast, rape victimizes an unwilling second party (usually a woman). There-
fore, rape should be considered apart from the type of sexual misconduct
prohibited by the Third Precept. (Henceforth, I would use the term sexual
misconduct to refer to the specific kind of misdeed prohibited by the Third
Precept.)
However, there can be scenarios where rape and sexual miscon-
duct overlap, and we can describe the relationship between the two cate-
gories as follows:
1. When a man has mutually consenting sex with a woman who is
sexually taboo to him, this is sexual misconduct, not rape.
2. When a man rapes a woman who is sexually taboo to him, this is
rape as well as sexual misconduct.
3. When a man rapes a woman who is not sexually taboo to him (e.g.,
a husband raping his wife), this is only rape, not sexual misconduct.
Conversely, we should also consider male rape. If we remember that men,
married or not, are not sexually taboo objects, we arrive at the following
scheme:
1. When a man has mutually consenting sex with another man, this
act is neither rape nor sexual misconduct.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 159
2. When a man is raped by a woman who is married to another man,
she commits rape as well as sexual misconduct (by virtue of being
unfaithful to her husband).2
3. When a man is raped by another man, by his own wife, or by a sin-
gle woman who has protectors like the parents etc., this act is only
rape, not sexual misconduct.
If rape is not covered by the Third Precept, how should we place the for-
mer in the Five Precepts scheme? I answer: rape should be in the category
of theft prohibited by the Second Precept, for the term referring to theft
in Pāli is adinnādāna, literally meaning “taking something not given,” a
sense that correctly reflects the nature of rape.
Again, if rape is deemed as a sort of theft, sexual misconduct also
appears of the same kind, for the latter involves, for instance, stealing an-
other man’s wife or stealing another couple’s daughter, etc. Then, why
should the latter be treated separately in the Five Precepts scheme,
whereas rape is not?
I agree that sexual misconduct is somewhat similar to theft, but
there is an important difference. It seems that Early Buddhist ethics does
not view a given transaction as theft if it is carried out with mutual con-
sent (i.e., dinnādāna “taking what is given”); if the giver does not have the
right to carry out the aforesaid transaction and yet still goes ahead, it is
his or her problem, not the recipient’s:
In an account recorded at (Vin III 65; Horner 1: 108–109),
several monks were offered mangoes by the guards of a
2 We may be reluctant to recognize that women can rape men, but this is only because of
the stereotypical assumptions that “Women’s ‘weaker’ physical stature, and thus pre-
sumed inability to overpower men, means compelled penetration cannot or does not
take place” and “Men value and enjoy sex and so view all sexual opportunities with
women as positive.” (Weare et al. 13; see also Weare).

160 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
mango garden. The monks thought that those guards had
the right only to protect the garden, not to give mangoes
away, so they scrupulously refused to accept. When they
told the Buddha about it afterward, the Buddha did not
bother to check if the guards really had the legal right to
donate in secular law but simply stated, “It is no offense as
far as the guardian’s offering is concerned.” (Pandita, “In-
tellectual” 619)
Therefore, if sexual misconduct were counted as a sort of theft, it would
follow that whereas a married woman willingly involved in adultery
would be guilty of sexual misconduct, her lover would not be; this impli-
cation would outright contradict the sutta definition. This is why, I argue,
sexual misconduct cannot be counted, unlike rape, as a kind of theft, but
has to be given a separate category in the Five Precepts scheme.
To sum up, the Third Precept prohibiting sexual misconduct pos-
sesses a unique characteristic. When compared with other precepts pro-
hibiting certain acts that hurt immediate second parties (i.e., killing, steal-
ing, and lying hurt the killed, the proprietor, and the gullible listener, re-
spectively), or with the precept prohibiting the kind of act that hurts one-
self (e.g., doing drugs), the Third Precept prohibits a kind of act that hurts
a third party even when it is carried out with the second party’s consent.
This is the spirit of this precept, which we should keep in mind when we
deal with the relevant doctrinal issues.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 161
Adultery
As we have seen, a wife is supposed to be faithful to her husband. If she is
not, i.e., has an extramarital affair with another man,3 she commits adul-
tery. But, how exactly is her husband hurt by her adulterous behavior?
See Doniger for the views manifested in Vedas and other Hindu texts, but
the Buddha had his own approach:
Again, householders, a noble disciple reflects thus: “If
someone were to commit illicit sex with my womenfolk,4
3 A wife’s extramarital affair with another woman is traditionally not considered as tan-
tamount to a real transgression of the Third Precept. Why? Because the Vinaya seemingly
indicates that lesbian sex is not sex per se. What follows is the Vinaya definition of sex:
paṭisevati nāma yo nimittena nimittaṃ aṅgajātena aṅgajātaṃ antamaso
tilaphalamattampi paveseti, eso paṭisevati nāma. (Vin III 28)
Indulges means: any (monk) who makes a privy part enter a(nother)
privy part, who makes a sexual organ enter a(nother) sexual organ,
even for the length of sesame fruit, is said to indulge in sex.
But what are the “sexual organs” meant here? If we look at the elaboration (Vin III 28–
29; Horner vol. 1, 48–49) that follows the definition above, we can see that:
1. The “entrant” organ is the male penis;
2. The “recipient” organ is one of three cavities—vagina, anus, or mouth—belong-
ing to a female or hermaphrodite (human or otherwise), or either of two cavi-
ties—anus or mouth—belonging to a male or eunuch (human or otherwise).
Therefore, purely lesbian sex, not involving a real male penis, is traditionally treated not
as real sex but only as mere kāyasaṃsagga (“bodily intimacy”). This view is also the reason
why the Burmese traditional culture views a woman as still a virgin if she has had only
lesbian experience.
4 Bhikkhu Bodhi translates the phrase mama dāresu cārittaṃ as “adultery with my wives.”
Indeed, the term dāra (or dārā in feminine gender) is most commonly rendered as “wife.”
However, PED notes that this term can originally mean “women members of the house-
hold” (PED “dāra”). The latter sense has a better fit in this context, for the sutta definition
of sexual misconduct covers not only wives, but also daughters, sisters, etc., of other peo-
ple. Furthermore, we should remember that polygyny was socially acceptable (Collins
263 fn. 2), but not universal, at the time, so there might be many monogamous couples

162 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
that would not be pleasing and agreeable to me. Now if I
were to commit illicit sex with the womenfolk of another,5
that would not be pleasing and agreeable to the other ei-
ther. What is displeasing and disagreeable to me is displeas-
ing and disagreeable to the other too. How can I inflict
upon another what is displeasing and disagreeable to me.”
Having reflected thus, he himself abstains from sexual mis-
conduct, exhorts others to abstain from sexual misconduct,
and speaks in praise of abstinence from sexual misconduct.
Thus this bodily conduct of his is purified in three respects.
(SN V 354; Bodhi, Connected 1798)
The reasoning seen in the sutta, based on empathy, generally works, but
empathy alone cannot answer for every scenario. One issue, for example,
would be thus: if I do not mind my wife sleeping around, can I sleep with
any woman regardless of the latter’s marital status? Perhaps because of
such issues, a sub-commentator tries to clarify exactly how a husband is
hurt by the adulterous behavior of his wife:
in the Buddha’s audience. In this case, if he had used the plural form dāresu in the sense
of “wives,” it would have been tantamount to calling all his listeners polygynous; doing
so would have sounded ill-mannered. This is another reason why the sense “womenfolk”
feels more natural here. Finally, when we look into Sanskrit (Apte; Monier-Williams), we
can find that when dāra means “wife,” it is usually used, like in Pāli, in plural number,
pointing to the possibility of its original sense being “womenfolk.”
If my interpretation is correct, then well-known terms like paradārika,
paradāragamana, etc., should also be rendered as “one who has sex with the women of
other households,” “having sex with the women of other households,” etc. But, how
about compounds like sadārasantuṭṭho (AN III 348 “One who is content with his own
dāra”), in which dāra unambiguously means a wife? Here also, we can render sadāra lit-
erally as “one’s own womenfolk,” which, in turn, can contextually mean “one’s wife,”
given that one’s mothers, sisters, etc., are sexually off-limits even though they are living
in the same house.
5 Cf. Bhikkhu Bodhi’s version: “adultery with the wives of another.”

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 163
yā hi sāmikassa santakaṃ phassaṃ thenetvā paresaṃ abhiratiṃ
uppādenti, tāsaṃ micchācāro. (“Sp-ṭ” II 328)
Indeed, there is misconduct on the part of the women who
steal the touch (i.e., sexuality) belonging to the husband
and let others have fun (from it).6
As seen above, the sub-commentator describes a wife’s sexuality as “be-
longing to the husband” (sāmikassa santakaṃ). According to him, when a
married woman sleeps with a man other than her husband, both she and
her lover are guilty of stealing the husband’s property—an idea seemingly
derived from the more general concept of a wife being a possession of her
husband.7
However, the traditional interpretation based on the concept of
proprietary rights alone has led to many problems:
1. If the institution of marriage were to rest solely upon a husband’s
proprietary possession of his wife’s sexuality:
6 Cf. “When women cause sexual desire to arise for [or in] other men, [thereby] stealing
the contact which belongs to their husbands, there is Misconduct on their part” (Collins
267).
7 The most well-known evidence for this concept is the Vessantarajātaka, in which the
would-be Buddha is found to donate his wife (Ja VI 569–570; Cowell and Rouse 293) and
children (Ja VI 547; Cowell and Rouse 283) to a brahmin. This would have been impossible
if a man’s wife and children were not his legitimate property in those times. Moreover,
the early nikāyas (DN I 89; Walshe 112; MN II 134; Ñāṇamoḷi and Bodhi 744; AN IV 89; Bodhi,
Numerical 1062) give a list of “seven gems,” i.e., the extraordinary properties that a uni-
versal monarch comes to possess. Of these, the “woman-gem” (i.e., a wife with extraor-
dinary qualities) is enumerated together with both inanimate properties (e.g., the wheel-
gem, the ruby-gem, etc.) and animate properties (e.g., elephant-gem, horse-gem etc.).
This list also seemingly indicates that a wife is a legitimate property of her husband dur-
ing the Buddha’s times.

164 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
(a) Sexual misconduct would be no more than a sort of theft,
which contradicts the sutta authority as I have shown above.
(b) Even a wife withholding sex from her husband for one night
after a nasty fight would be as sinful as her sleeping with an-
other man for one night; for, in both cases, she is practically
keeping her husband’s rightful property away from him. But,
in real life, these two cases are not treated equally.
(c) Divorcing a husband against his will would be even worse than
adultery, for whereas he could still hope to regain his “prop-
erty” from his adulterous wife, it would be lost for good with a
divorce; this also contradicts the real world.
2. Moreover, even though the Buddha persuaded wives to be faithful
to their husbands, he never said that wives could not withhold sex
from their husbands, nor did he ever condemn divorce as immoral.
To resolve these issues, I argue that in a society where wives are
exclusive to their husbands (even though vice versa may not be the case),
a husband occupies a unique position, i.e., no one except him has access
to his wife’s sexuality and romance as long as their marriage lasts. And
that position itself is a positional good8 of highest value, justifying for him
8 The phrase positional good is an economic term, explained by The Economist as follows:
“Things that the Joneses buy. Some things are bought for their intrinsic usefulness, for
instance, a hammer or a washing machine. Positional goods are bought because of what
they say about the person who buys them. They are a way for a person to establish or
signal their status relative to people who do not own them: fast cars, holidays in the most
fashionable resorts, clothes from trendy designers. By necessity, the quantity of these
goods is somewhat fixed, because to increase SUPPLY too much would mean that they
were no longer positional. What would owning a Rolls-Royce say about you if everybody
owned one?” (“Positional Good”)

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 165
all the burdens of husbandly duties towards his wife, or fatherly duties
towards the children that his wife bears for him.
If this solution is correct, we can understand why a husband does
not mind occasional nights spent on the couch (his position is not really
damaged by his wife withholding sex), and yet why he can also be deeply
hurt by a single adulterous night of his wife, which seriously damages his
position. In the case of divorce, he loses the position, but also foregoes his
husbandly duties towards his former wife. Fair enough. This understand-
ing would also explain why men are often bitter in having to pay alimony,
for they are paying for some position that they have already lost.
Another issue is: why are married men not prescribed as sexually
taboo to women other than their own respective wives? If a married man
is off-limits to other women, polygyny is impossible, for in a polygynous
relationship, a woman is exclusive to her man, but, by definition, not vice
versa. However, polygyny seemingly was, even though not universal, a so-
cially acceptable practice in those times: “The existence of polygyny is
widely attested in Pāli” (Collins 263, fn. 2). It was probably to make room
for polygyny, which the Buddha could not reject, given its established sta-
tus in the society, that he declined to include married men as sexually ta-
boo to women other than the respective wives.9 But this relaxation does
not mean that he morally supported polygynous marriages (as we will see
later).
9 However, I do not exactly agree with Collett (175) and Doniger (161), who think that
ancient India “easily overlooked” male infidelity. At least in the Buddhist context, there
is a concept termed “being content with one’s own women” (sadārasantosa): “One not
content with his own wives / is seen among prostitutes,/ seen among the wives of others:
/ that is a cause of a downfall” (Sn 20; Bodhi, Suttanipāta 173). This is the kind of virtue
that works against male infidelity. However, it seems admittedly not a strict moral re-
quirement for laymen, for going to prostitutes and marrying a new wife are not actually
forbidden.

166 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
Prostitution
In the sutta definition cited above, one type of sexually taboo object is a
woman having a husband, i.e., the wife of someone else, whom the Vinaya
further elaborates into a list of ten kinds of wives (Vin III 139; Collins 264–
265). In that list, standing at one end of the spectrum is “muhuttikā,” ren-
dered by Collins as “a temporary wife,” and interpreted as “i.e. a prosti-
tute, used for a shorter or longer period” (265), but understood by Cabe-
zón thus:
The “wife for the moment” obviously included prostitutes
or courtesans, but we cannot assume that all women who
entered into such arrangements with men were profes-
sional sex workers. It is noteworthy that the texts refrain
from using the word “prostitute” or “courtesan” in de-
scribing this category. (483)
(I agree with Cabezón, for a woman appointing a surrogate husband in the
Hindu custom of nigoya,10 and the female partners of modern swinging
couples, can be viewed under this category.)
What is the moral status of prostitution in Buddhism? If we re-
member that no man is off-limits to a single woman, we can say that a
prostitute does not commit sexual misconduct by doing business even
with clients married to other women. Moreover, the list of wrong trades
10 “Niyoga . . . was an ancient Hindu tradition, in which a woman (whose husband is either
incapable of fatherhood or has died without having a child) would request and appoint a
person for helping her bear a child” (“Niyoga”). Doniger thinks this form of “nonmar-
riage serves to define, as well as to challenge, the boundaries of ‘normal’ marriage” (161),
but a Buddhist would not see any moral issue here. Why? Firstly, because, niyoga is a
polyandrous provision for a Hindu wife as part and parcel of her marriage, and compa-
rable to the prenuptial agreements of modern marriages, and secondly because, for the
surrogate husband, she is a “temporary wife” of his.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 167
(AN III 208; Bodhi, Numerical 790) does not mention prostitution. There-
fore, the profession itself is not viewed in Buddhism as immoral.11 How-
ever, being a “temporary wife” by definition, a prostitute must be faithful
to her “husband,” i.e., a client who has paid her, until she completes her
services in return. If she accepts and serves a new client while being still
the “wife” of another client, both she and the new client practically com-
mit adultery (Ja II 380; Collins 280). On the other hand, how about a mar-
ried man’s visit to a prostitute? This option is also tacitly permitted if po-
lygyny is permissible, for a prostitute can be viewed as just another “tem-
porary” polygynous wife of a married man.
Again, from this characterization of a prostitute as a kind of wife,
we can infer that the term “wife” (bhariyā) is used in this context in a sense
much broader than usual; that is, any woman in an exclusive sexual rela-
tionship, temporary or long-term, is designated as the “wife” of her part-
ner. Cabezón is of the same opinion:
There is probably no single English word general enough to
capture the full range of examples subsumed under the
scholastic category bhariyā. As we are about to see, the
word can refer to primary wives, official mistresses, certain
female slaves or servants, and lovers (including prostitutes
under contract for a fixed period of time). (476)
This usage of a word literally meaning “wife” in such a wide scope tells us
that marriage is not sacred in Buddhism. If sex is bought and sold purely
11 Cf. “In the Therīgāthā, there are verses attributed to three former gaṇikās [i.e., courte-
sans] . . . None of the three sets of verses . . . say anything about the nuns being disgusted
by their former profession. Each set of verses mentions that they were formerly obsessed
with their appearance . . . but while the past enrapture with beauty is reviled, the fact of
a life lived in prostitution is not. In fact, here and elsewhere, that they could gain a high
price for their services appears to be an accolade and something that they remain proud
of ” (Collett 139–140).

168 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
on a commercial basis, this practice is prostitution. If mutual attraction
happening in a bar leads to a night spent together, this practice is a one-
night stand. If a couple leads separate lives but occasionally spends time
together, this practice is dating. If a relationship is based on a long-term
plan along the lines of “until death us do part,” this practice is marriage.
All those practices are sexually exclusive relationships (although the ex-
clusivity resides only with women when the society finds polygyny ac-
ceptable). But this attitude is not meant to denigrate the institution of
marriage, but rather to show that any exclusive sexual relationship, even
between a prostitute and her paying client, should be treated with care no
less than that for a proper marriage.
Protected Women
I cannot find any sutta reasoning for why men should abstain from sex
with single, protected women without the permission of their protectors,
unless the sutta argument against adultery that we have seen above covers
protected women as well. Nevertheless, the same empathy-based argu-
ment might be at work here; for instance: “If I am responsible for getting
my daughter properly married and if virginity is a prerequisite for mar-
riage in my culture, I cannot accept my little girl losing her virginity to
some random man. Likewise, I should not also have sex with the virgin
daughters of other people, for those people would also disagree with such
an act.”
From the argument above, we can infer that just being a family
member does not make one qualified as a protector. Take, for instance, a
girl protected by her mother (māturakkhitā). In this case, the girl’s mother
can be properly deemed as a “protector” only if the latter takes the re-
sponsibility to oversee the former’s sex life, or to ensure that there is none
of it, until the time of the former’s proper marriage. If the mother or other

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 169
family members do not take on such a burden, the girl remains “unpro-
tected,” and would be free to choose her own sexual partner, just like a
modern teenage girl whose parents have permitted her to date whomever
she wants. On the other hand, even though the protectors try to do their
job properly, they still can clash with their own girl because they find her
choice unacceptable; in such cases, the girls sometimes prevail—like the
case of Kuṇdalakesā, who forced her parents to save a thief from execution
so that she could marry him (Thī-a 97; Dhp-a II 217–218; Collett 61), or like
the case of Paṭācārā, who chose to elope supposedly with a servant in her
household (Dhp-a II 260–261; Collett 61).
However, there are still questions that remain unanswered by such
reasoning. I would attempt to raise and answer these one by one.
First of all, why should women be “protected,” whereas men or
boys do not need such protection? Here, Cabezón notes:
What the Buddhist texts here call women’s “protection,”
feminists might rightly consider “control”. . . . Buddhism
places much less emphasis on caste than does Brahmanism,
but it nonetheless shows the same degree of obsession with
‘protecting’ women. In the Buddhist case, it is these two
broader Indian social norms—that brides be virgins and
that paternity be indubitable—that seem to motivate the
restrictions placed on girls and women. (468–469)
However, the Indian social norms mentioned by Cabezón explain only
why women of those times should refrain from extramarital sex, not why
they could not be left alone to deal with this issue on their own. So, this is still an
open question that I would attempt to answer as follows.
I argue that the Buddhist standpoint regarding protected women
is similar to that of modern laws regarding underage children:

170 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
The age of consent is the age at which a person is consid-
ered to be legally competent to consent to sexual acts and
is thus the minimum age of a person with whom another
person is legally permitted to engage in sexual activity. The
distinguishing aspect of the age of consent laws is that the person
below the minimum age is regarded as the victim and his or her
sex partner is regarded as the offender. The purpose of setting an
age of consent is to protect an underage person from sexual ad-
vances . . . . (“Age of Consent,” emphasis added)
In the same way, I argue, Buddhist India put single women into the pro-
tected category to deter the sexual advances of potential male perpetra-
tors not approved by the women’s protectors.
(In retrospect, I think nothing has fundamentally changed from
ancient Buddhist parents who restrict their daughters’ movements so as
to sustain the latter’s virginity until the time of marriage, to modern par-
ents who put their sexually active teenage daughters on contraceptive
pills. For me, both parties are striving to make decent futures for their
little girls. If their methodologies are different, this is only because they
live and struggle in different social and cultural contexts.)
However, if a society feels it is only the woman that has to handle
the sharp end of an illicit relationship, it would not feel any need to “pro-
tect” boys or men. Until recently, Burmese society had such an attitude,
manifest in a saying of theirs: “Whether a thorn falls on a leaf or a leaf falls
on a thorn, it is the leaf that gets a hole.” Buddhist India might have a
similar perspective.
Furthermore, if married women must be faithful to their hus-
bands, why can single women be without guilt in having sex with men sans
the approval of their relevant protectors? A sub-commentator answers
thus:

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 171
māturakkhitādīnaṃ aṭṭhannaṃ purisantaragamane natthi mic-
chācāro tāsaṃ asāmikabhāvato . . . na ca mātādayo tāsaṃ phasse
issarā. Mātādayo hi na attanā phassānubha-vanatthaṃ tā
rakkhanti, kevalaṃ anācāraṃ nisedhentā purisantaragamanaṃ
tāsaṃ vārenti. Purisassa pana etāsu aṭṭhasupi hotiyeva mic-
chācāro mātādīhi yathā purisena saddhiṃ saṃvāsaṃ na kappeti,
tathā rakkhitattā paresaṃ rakkhitagopitaṃ phassaṃ thenetvā
phuṭṭhabhāvato. (“Sp-ṭ” II 328)
There is no misconduct on the part of eight (kinds of)
women—those protected by the mothers, etc.—because
they (i.e., the former) have no proprietors (i.e., no hus-
bands) . . . . On the other hand, the mothers, etc., are not
authorities over their touch (i.e., sexuality). Indeed, the
mothers, etc., protect them not for the sake of enjoying
their sexuality themselves. Rather, they (i.e., the mothers
etc.) prohibit their intercourse with other men purely to
prevent bad conduct. But there is misconduct on the part
of men in (having intercourse with) those eight types. For,
they happen to steal and touch the sexuality protected by
others, given that the mothers, etc., protect those (women)
so that (the latter) do not have intercourse with a man.12
As seen above, no one, not even the protectors, can lay an exclusive claim
to a single woman’s sexuality. Therefore, she does not commit more than
mere disobedience when she sleeps with a man not approved by her protec-
tors. And disobedience in itself is neither good nor bad, for we should re-
12 Cf. “Because mothers, etc., do not arrange for [their wards to have] intercourse with
men, therefore [there is Misconduct for a man] through the fact of Protection, through
the state of having stolen [sexual] contact which is protected and guarded by others”
(Collins 266).

172 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
member that our own bodhisatta (“would-be Buddha”) disobeyed his par-
ents to renounce and achieve Buddhahood.13 This is why single women are
not guilty of sexual misconduct, despite their sexual adventures. On the
other hand, men in illicit relationships with single, protected women are
like trespassers on protected grounds. The “grounds” may be innocent,
but the trespassers are not.
Finally, we should notice that there is no age limit for single
women in the protected category. It means that even if a single woman is
already an adult, her protectors would still have a say in the matter of with
whom she can sleep. This situation is in sharp contrast to the modern
world, where children gain the right to decide their own destiny, dating
and marriage included, when they come of age. But we cannot say that
this ancient restriction is sexist, for, we can find in another context that
both genders, even though being adults, are forced to acquire the permis-
sion of their parents to join the Order (Vin I 82–83; Horner vol. 4, 104; Vin
IV 335; Horner vol. 3, 394). Therefore, it would be more natural to con-
clude that the adults of those times enjoyed less freedom than those of
our times.
Eloping couples
This question has been raised in Burmese monastic circles: Suppose a
young couple elopes because the girl’s parents (i.e., protectors) cannot
agree to their union. Obviously, the boy commits sexual misconduct when
13 “Later, while still young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of
youth, in the prime of life, though my mother and father wished otherwise and wept with tearful
faces, I shaved off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and went forth from the
home life into homelessness.” (MN I 163; Ñāṇamoḷi and Bodhi 256; emphasis added)

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 173
he has sex with his new wife. But suppose the girl’s parents never recog-
nize their marriage. Does this mean that the boy would be guilty for life,
whenever he has sex with his wife?
There is no explicit solution to this problem; but, given that sexual
misconduct is somewhat similar to theft, we can take a leaf from the lat-
ter’s book to solve it. To do so, we should look into the Vinaya, which deals
with the various aspects of theft in detail. Given that the Vinaya is the law
for monks and nuns, I will firstly attempt to use a legal approach to this
issue.
According to the Vinaya, theft can entail the pārājika (“Defeat”) of-
fense, the most serious one for monks and nuns, whereas all the preceding
actions leading to the act of stealing entail lesser offenses. But how do we
determine, out of a series of actions, which the act of theft exactly is? If a
desired object is stolen by removing it from its place, theft is accomplished
exactly when the thief makes its location changed.14 However, when one
steals an unmovable object like a real estate by means of an unjustified
lawsuit, the act of theft is accomplished when the real owner gives up
hope to retain his property, even though the legal course of action is not
complete yet:
ārāmaṃ abhiyuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. sāmikassa vimatiṃ
uppādeti, āpatti thullaccayassa. sāmiko na mayhaṃ bhavissatīti
dhuraṃ nikkhipati, āpatti pārājikassa. (Vin III 50)
14 E.g., bhaṇḍaṃ thale nikkhittaṃ hoti. thalaṭṭhaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharissāmīti theyyacitto dutiyaṃ
vā pariyesati gacchati vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa. āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. phandāpeti, āpatti
thullaccayassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti pārājikassa .(Vin III 48 “(Suppose) the goods are kept on
the raised ground. Having a mind to steal, (i.e.) thinking ‘I will steal the goods on the
raised ground,’ (one) either seeks a companion or goes himself; there is an offense of
Wrong-doing. (One) touches (the goods); there is an offense of Wrong-doing. (One) makes
(the goods) quiver; there is a Grave offense. (One) lets (the goods) removed (from their
place); there is an offense of Defeat.”)

174 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
(If a monk) lays (legal) claim to a residential estate, (it is) an
offense of Wrong-Doing for him. If he raises doubt of the
(real) owner, (it is) a Grave offense for him. If the owner lets
go the responsibility, (thinking) “This estate will no longer
be mine (i.e., I would certainly lose it),” (it is) an offense of
Defeat for him.
In the scenario cited above, the time when the theft is accom-
plished (i.e., when the real owner gives up all hope for retaining
his property) should be also when the estate actually changes
hands, i.e., becomes the suing monk’s (even if wrongful) property.
We can reason in the same way regarding the girl. That is, we can
say that the girl loses her parents’ protection when the latter abandon all
hope to get her back and come to the conclusion that their daughter’s sex
life has gone beyond their protection. From that time on, the boy is inno-
cent of sexual misconduct when he has sex with his wife, even though
their marriage is never recognized by her parents.
But this solution is only a legal one, so how should we treat this
issue from a purely ethical perspective? When the parents give up all ef-
forts to win their daughter back, and consequently when the boy no
longer needs to fight for keeping his wife, he would become confident that
his wife has become truly his. Henceforth, he is innocent of sexual mis-
conduct when he has sex with his wife, for according to the Vinaya, it is
not theft when one takes another person’s property if one believes the
property is his own (sakasaññī, Vin III 60; Horner vol. 1, 100–101).

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 175
Sexual Deviance
As we have seen, sexual misconduct essentially means a kind of act that
hurts a third party even when it is carried out with the second party’s con-
sent. This definition leads to the conclusion that deviant sexual relation-
ships—like incest, swinging, LGBT relationships, etc.—are not deemed sex-
ual misconduct if such a relationship hurts no third party.
It may not be so easy to fulfill the aforesaid condition in the real
world. Let us consider sibling incest, for instance. If one’s sister is under
the protection of the parents who are against incest among their children,
incestuous sex with her entails sexual misconduct. Again, suppose the
parents have no objections. Even then, if there is a law against incest, the
sister would belong under the protected category of sapridaṇḍā (“one with
whom sexual relations entail punishment” [see the cited sutta under the
definition of sexual misconduct]); this fact would incur the label of sexual
misconduct to her brother’s incestuous sex with her.
Nevertheless, it is still not wrong to claim that Early Buddhism
views several sexual taboos prevalent in ancient India, like incest taboo,
only as social and cultural constraints, not as immoral sins in themselves.
In fact, there is an early canonical account that seemingly supports my
argument here. That account can be found in the Ambaṭṭha-sutta of the
Dīgha-nikāya. Therein, we see the Buddha having an argument with the
brahmin youth Ambaṭṭha over the relative superiority of brahmin and
khattiya castes, to the latter of which the sakyas, the Buddha’s own clan,
belong. To show the purity of his own clan, the Buddha describes its
origin:
At one time King Okkāka, to whom his queen was dear and
beloved, wishing to transfer the kingdom to her son, ban-
ished his elder brothers from the kingdom—Okkāmukha,

176 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
Karakaṇḍu, Hatthinīya and Sīnipura. And these, being ban-
ished, made their home on the flank of the Himālayas . . . .
And for fear of contaminating the stock they cohabited with
their own sisters . . . . At this King Okkāka exclaimed: “They
are strong as teak (sāka),15 these princes, they are real Sa-
kyans!” And that is how the Sakyans got their well-known
name. And the King was the ancestor of the Sakyans. (DN I
92–93; Walshe 114–115; emphasis added)
Here, we can know that marrying one’s own sisters was not the norm dur-
ing those times, from the excuse given, i.e., “for fear of contaminating the
stock.” Yet, King Okkāka’s praise for his sons, as well as the fact of the
Buddha’s revelation failing to lead Ambaṭṭha to denigrate the Buddha
about his ancestors committing incest—these show that it was still per-
missible, even commendable, at the time to break the incest taboo for the
sake of higher ideals, i.e., in this case, for preserving the family purity.
On the other hand, Silk points out that “the full-siblings” of the
Pāli version16 “have . . . become half-siblings” in the same sutta preserved
15 Cf., Buddhaghosa explains the word sakyā as sāmatthā, paṭibalā (“able, adequate, com-
petent”) (Sv I 262), so he probably derives it from the Skt. form śakya, which is glossed in
Sanskrit dictionaries as “able, possible, capable of being . . . ” (“śakya”). Therefore, if Bud-
dhaghosa is right, we can interpret sakyā as “capable of being forced to take extreme
actions to preserve racial purity.”
16 Theravādin records show that all those brothers and sisters were born from the same
mother:
tatiyaokkākassa pañca mahesiyo ahesuṃ . . . sabbajeṭṭhāya cattāro puttā . . .
pañca dhītaro . . . iti sā nava putte vijāyitvā kālamakāsi. atha rājā aññaṃ da-
hariṃ abhirūpaṃ rājadhītaraṃ ānetvā aggamahesiṭṭhāne ṭhapesi. sā jantuṃ
nāma puttaṃ vijāyi . . . sā ñātakehi saddhiṃ mantetvā puttassa rajjaṃ yāci.
(Sv I 258)
The king Okkāka the Third had five queens . . . . There are four sons and
five daughters of the eldest of all (queens) . . . . Thus, after giving birth
to nine children, she passed away. Then, the king brought another

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 177
in the Chinese Dīrghāgama of the Dharmaguptaka school (258), and ob-
serves: “This seems to represent a slight modification and softening of the
more original portrayal preserved in the Pali tradition, probably due to a
desire to mitigate the ethical difficulties that would otherwise arise. . . . ”
(258).
I agree with Silk, but need to raise the question: why should ethical
difficulties arise if those earliest Sakyan couples are full siblings? Their
case can pose an ethical problem, not in Early Buddhism, but in morality
systems that treat incest as morally wrong. Interestingly enough, the Ab-
hidharmakośabhāṣyaṃ of Vasubandhu said that “one’s mother, one’s
daughter, and one’s paternal or maternal relations” belong to the cate-
gory of “prohibited (agamya) females,” sex with whom incurs sexual mis-
conduct (Cabezón 501), and the Daśākuśaladharmapathanirdeśa of Dhārmi-
kasubhūtighoṣa also counts “sex . . . with a blood relative” as sexual mis-
conduct (505). In my view, these statements appear to be an instance of
how Mahāyāna philosophy has influenced the evolution of Āgama texts.
royal daughter, young and beautiful, and established her at the rank of
chief queen. She gave birth to a son named Jantu . . . . She discussed
with the relatives and requested the throne for the son.
But why did the king not choose one of the incumbent queens as the new chief queen?
Obviously because they had failed to bear children for him. Then why did the incumbent
queens not support the elder sons in the dispute? Because they had no reason to defy the
new chief queen for the sake of the princes who were not their children. So this com-
mentarial version, whether factual or not, makes a lot of sense.
On the other hand, it would be more difficult to answer the questions above for
the Dharmaguptaka version: “the mothers of the four princes, consorts of the king who
is the father of the princes, also each have at least one daughter, whose father is likewise
the same king, of course. These mothers, then, offer among themselves to have their sons
marry their agnatic half-sisters, one mother’s son to another mother’s daughter” (Silk
257).

178 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
On the other hand, I should note, the early monastic code (Vinaya)
has placed several restrictions on sexual deviants. This topic has been ex-
tensively discussed by Cabezón in his work (373–451), but I have to ignore
it, given that it is beyond the scope of this paper.
Modern Relevance
Many modern feminists may find the Buddha’s seeming moral support of
polygyny and prostitution as sore points. And they might also be irked by
the concept of “protection” for women. Indeed, we do not need to doubt
the fact that the Buddha adapted his sexual ethic to the prevalent social
norms of his times. But did the Buddha invent those norms? I do not think
so. Rather, it is much more probable that the Buddha himself and his fol-
lowers were born and brought up in a society guided by such imperatives.
All he did was to teach men and women how to lead moral, virtuous lives
in the society that they were born into. (This may sound somewhat sim-
plistic, but see the elaborated argument at [Pandita, “Intention” 1-17]).
Does it mean that the Buddha condoned such patriarchal, andro-
centric social systems? No, for I have already argued elsewhere that the
Buddha was an agnostic where social or political institutions are con-
cerned:
Having ideals out of the reach of people in general, the Bud-
dha is like a mature adult, and people are like children who
the former has to teach. He cannot expect children to act
like adults, but as an adult, he also cannot see any real sig-
nificance in, nor entertain real preferences over, the toys
that children hold in great value. What he will do is: to
adapt his teaching methodology to children and teach

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 179
them how to play with their toys, but with a different pur-
pose. While children aim to get maximum fun when they
play with their toys, the adult’s purpose in teaching them
how to play is to develop their physical and mental facul-
ties.
It is the same with the Buddha. He was ready to teach any-
one of any social status and of any particular walk of life,
but only with a clearly-defined objective, i.e., the full liber-
ation from the circle of birth . . . . (Pandita, “Intention” 13-
14)
Therefore, if it is possible for a prostitute to lead a moral life without leav-
ing her sole means of livelihood, the Buddha would not refrain from
teaching her how to be a “virtuous” prostitute. This does not necessarily
mean that he supported the oldest profession in the world. Likewise, if it
is possible to be a “good” husband, or to be “good” wives, in a polygynous
marriage, he would not hesitate to teach to that effect. This does not nec-
essarily mean that he supported polygyny. In the same way, teaching men
how to deal “properly” with protected women does not imply that he sup-
ported the patriarchal control of women. (Here the terms good, moral, vir-
tuous, and proper mean “good for,” and conducive towards, the liberation
of those men and women; it does not have to be good for their worldly
happiness, nor for the society.)
Now, with those issues out of the way, it is time to think if the Third Pre-
cept as prescribed in ancient Buddhist India is applicable to modern laity.
I think it is. Given that the prevalent social and cultural circumstances
largely determine whether a specific third party is hurt by a specific sex-
ual relationship, the spirit of the precept can be very flexible, enabling it
to work in diverse cultures and societies. For instance, I argued above that
the sutta definition of sexual misconduct does not treat married men as
off-limits to other women, so as to make room for polygyny existing at the

180 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
time as a socially acceptable custom. Then, we can infer that in a strictly
monogamous society, married men should also be off-limits to women
other than their respective wives. This sort of inference, even if different
from the suttas in letter, would still carry the same spirit.
Appendix
Remarks on non-consensual marriages
Various Hindu dharmaśāstras have recognized, among others, two types of
non-consensual, after-the-fact marriages: “rākṣasa (abduction marriage),
and paiśāca (rape of an insensible girl . . . ) ” (Muldoon-Hules 212). After
looking through such texts, Collett notes:
Surveying the evidence of the texts overall, it would appear
that the idea of taking a woman by force . . . is not in itself
considered inappropriate. The only occasion on which it is
considered either inappropriate or ‘unlawful’ is when the
woman clearly belongs to another man or other men. Thus, in
Kautilīya, it is unlawful to rape the courtesans who belong
to the king, while single women can be subjected to rape
and through that act considered to be the new wife of the
rapist. (155–156)
Collett’s view is only one way to look at this issue, and a problem-
atic one at that. How could other powers that be (i.e., generals, ministers,
rich men, etc.) put up with a king who would be lenient to the rapists of
their single daughters, and yet who would seriously punish the violators
of royal courtesans? Would the king’s act not mean that their daughters
were valued even less than courtesans? So, there must be a catch here,
which we should try to find out.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 181
From my perspective, I read Kautilīya in a different light. A king
could have chosen to give a jail sentence, or even a capital punishment, to
the rapist of a single girl, but in doing so, he would be punishing the victim
as well, for he could not have recuperated, in this way, the girl’s ruined
reputation or marital prospects. On the contrary, the best solution in such
circumstances would seemingly be to let the rapist carry the burden of his
mistake, i.e., to force him to become the husband of the victim, whom no
one else would be inclined to marry. Having to serve, for life, the very
woman that he has wronged in a moment of weakness—this marriage it-
self is his punishment, and a deterrent to other potential rapists. This may
be how, rightly or wrongly, ancient Indians thought.
Now, the inevitable question would be: How could such an ar-
rangement be fair to the victim? Moreover, how could a girl accept as her
husband someone who has abducted and/or raped her? One good way to
deal with this issue would be to consider, for the sake of comparison, a
similar social phenomenon. Therefore, I would discuss here a form of “ab-
duction marriage” that had occasionally happened in Burmese society un-
til recently. The typical pattern of events in such cases is as follows.
A boy would fall in love with a girl, who refuses to reciprocate his
love. Then, the desperate boy would collaborate with his friends to abduct
the girl and take her to a distant village. He might or might not force him-
self sexually upon her, but he would forcibly keep her with him alone for
a few days while asking her again and again to marry him. These actions
would usually be enough to make the girl accept her fate. But, how?
When she has spent even one night alone with a boy not related
by blood, no one else would any longer believe that she is still a virgin,
even if she still is. In a conservative society where men prize the virginity
of their brides, her chances to marry someone other than the abductor
are all but doomed, even though she has done nothing wrong. But what if
she already has a boyfriend who loves and trusts her enough to believe

182 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
her explanation and take her back? Even in this case, this unfortunate
event would remain a deep non-healing wound on her boyfriend’s honor
and ego;17 there is a high probability that he might choose to take personal
revenge on the culprit and consequently to end up in jail as a murderer.
Alternatively, even if she could manage to marry her boyfriend without
any other mishap, her abduction is a ghost that would forever haunt her
marriage.
On the other hand, can the culprit be a good husband for her? If
she is not entirely out of his league, the answer would largely depend
upon her own ability. The wife is usually at an advantage in a Burmese
marriage, given that she is in most cases also the financial authority in the
family. The husband is supposed to turn over all his income to his wife and
get his pocket money back from her just like their children do. She is ex-
pected to leverage her positions as the wife and the financial authority to
make her spouse a good husband and man (This is why a wife is often
blamed when her husband goes bad). Moreover, in her own case, if she
marries her abductor, this abduction would forever be a trump card that
she could play against her husband in any marital dispute.
17 There is a cruel phrase in Burmese, “a bullock having to pull a broken cart,” to describe
a young man marrying a girl who has already experienced sex with another man, espe-
cially if he discovers only after the marriage that his bride is not a virgin. One modern
example would be the story of a young and talented politician of NLD, the ruling party of
Burma. According to the rumors, his marriage has been arranged by his parents. His
bride failed to tell him, before the marriage, that she was no longer a virgin, but he dis-
covered the fact afterwards. Accordingly, he declared, to his wife’s face, that he would
never be faithful to her. And, true to his word, his married life has been fraught with many
extramarital flings, which have also hindered his rise in political ranks. (I do not claim
that this account is true, but it is plausible, given the typical mindset of the Burmese peo-
ple in those times.)
However, it is an altogether different matter when a widower marries a widow
or a divorcee. This kind of marriage is viewed as fair and acceptable.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 183
After considering all these pros and cons, the girl could come to
see that the culprit himself is her best bet on a secure future. Therefore,
she would accept, albeit in apparent reluctance, his offer to marry her
(This would have been his objective from the very beginning. But if he
chooses to change his mind at this stage, she would certainly report him
to the police, at the first chance, on the charges of rape and/or abduction.)
Then, the couple would inform their respective parents that they have
willingly eloped together so as to prevent the law coming after the boy.
Their parents might be initially opposed to their union but later would
give in and let them marry, given that, from the elders’ perspective, the
girl cannot recover her virginity anyway, and the boy should take the re-
sponsibility for his actions.
Ancient India might be a similar case. If young Indian women of
those times were to reason like typical Burmese girls described above, the
former would be able to accept those after-the-fact types of marriage as
the only way to recover their ruined prospects.
Therefore, I do not find Collett’s interpretation of ancient Indian
non-consensual marriages convincing enough. Subsequently, at least in
the Indian context, I do not think her argument can be a valid support for
Collins’s theory cited in this paper.
Works Cited
Primary Sources
(The Pali text titles are abbreviated per the Critical Pali Dictionary sys-
tem.)
AN Aṅguttara-Nikāya. 1885–1910. Edited by Richard Morris and A. K.
Warder, 6 volumes, The Pali Text Society, 1958–1976.

184 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
As Aṭṭhasālinī: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dhammasaṅghanī. 1897.
Edited by Edward Müller, Text Series 12, The Pali Text Society,
1979.
Dhp-a The Commentary on Dhammapada. 1906. Edited by H. C. Norman, 4
volumes, The Pali Text Society, 1970.
DN The Dīgha Nikāya. 1890-1911. Edited by T. W. Rhys Davids and J.
Estlin Carpenter, 3 volumes, The Pali Text Society, 1966-1976.
Ja The Jātaka together with Its Commentary. 1877-1897. Edited by V.
Faübøll, 7 volumes, The Pali Text Society, 1962-64.
MN Majjhima-Nikāya. 1888-1899. Edited by V. Trenckner and Robert
Chalmers, 3 volumes, The Pali Text Society, 1977-1979.
Ps Papañcasūdanī: Majjhima-Nikāyaṭṭhakathā of Buddhaghosācariya.
1922-1938. Edited by J. H Woods, et al., 4 volumes, The Pali Text
Society, 1976-1979.
SN The Saṃyutta Nikāya of the Sutta-Piṭaka. 1884-1898. Edited by M.
Léon Feer, 5 volumes, The Pali Text Society, 1975-1991.
Sn Sutta-Nipāta. 1913. Edited by Dines Andersen and Helmer Smith,
Routledge/Kegan Paul, 1984.
Sp-ṭ “Sāratthadīpanīṭīkā.” Chaṭṭha Saṅgāyanā Tipiṭaka 4.0, 3 volumes,
Vipassanā Research Institute, 2008.
Spk Sārattha-ppakāsinī: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Saṃyutta-
Nikāya. 1929-1937. Edited by F. L. Woodward, 3 volumes, The Pali
Text Society, 1977.
Sv Sumaṅgalavilāsinī: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dīgha Nikāya.
1929–1932. Edited by T. W. Rhys Davids, et al., 3 volumes, The Pali
Text Society, 1968–1971.
Thī-a Therīgāthā-Aṭṭhakathā (Paramatthadīpanī IV) by Achariya Dhamma-
pāla. Edited byWilliams Pruitt, The Pali Text Society, 1998.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 185
Vin Vinaya Piṭaka. 1879–1883. Edited by Hermann Oldenberg, 5 vol-
umes, The Pali Text Society, 1982–1997.
Secondary Sources
“Age of Consent.” Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia, Wikimedia Foundation,
29 Dec. 2017, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Age_of_consent. Accessed 31
Dec. 2017.
Apte, Vaman Shivram, compiler. A Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
1912. 2nd edition, Sri Satguru, 1989.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, translator. The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A New
Translation of the Saṃyutta Nikāya. Wisdom, 2000.
, translator. The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the
Aṅguttara Nikāya. Wisdom Publications, 2012.
Cabezón, José Ignacio. Sexuality in Classical South Asian Buddhism. Wisdom
Publications, 2017.
Collett, Alice. Lives of Early Buddhist Nuns: Biographies as History. Oxford UP,
2016.
Collins, Steven. “Remarks on the Third Precept: Adultery and Prostitution
in Pāli Texts.” Journal of the Pali Text Society, vol. 29, 2007, pp. 263–
284.
Cowell, E. B. and W. H. D. Rouse, translators. The Jātaka: Or Stories of the Bud-
dha’s Former Births. Edited by E. B. Cowell, volume 6, Cambridge UP,
1907, 7 volumes.
Doniger, Wendy. “Begetting on Margin: Adultery and Surrogate Pseudo-
marriage in Hinduism.” From the Margins of Hindu Marriage: Essays
on Gender, Religion, and Culture, edited by Lindsey Harlan and Paul B.
Courtright, Oxford UP, 1995.
Horner, I. B., translator. The Book of the Discipline (Vinaya Piṭaka). 6 volumes,
The Pali Text Society, 1938-1966.

186 Pandita, Sexual Misconduct in Early Buddhist Ethics
Monier-Williams, Monier, compiler. A Sanskrit English Dictionary. Corrected
Edition, Motilal Banarasidass, 2002.
Muldoon-Hules, Karen. “Avadānaśataka: The Role of Brahmanical Marriage
in a Buddhist Text.” Women in Early Indian Buddhism: Comparative
Textual Studies, edited by Alice Collett, South Asia Research, The U
of Texas South Asia Institute/Oxford UP, 2014, pp. 192–220.
Ñāṇamoḷi, Bhikkhu and Bhikkhu Bodhi, translators. The Middle Length Dis-
courses of the Buddha: A New Translation of the Majjhima Nikāya. 4th ed.,
Wisdom, 2009.
“Niyoga.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 28 Sept. 2017, en.wikipe-
dia.org/wiki/Niyoga. Accessed 28 Dec. 2018.
The Pali Text Society’s Pali-English Dictionary. 1921-1925. Compiled by T. W.
Rhys Davids and William Stede, The Pali Text Society, 1995.
Pandita (Burma), Ven. “If Intention is Karma: A New Approach to the Bud-
dha’s Socio-Political Teachings.” Journal of Buddhist Ethics, Vol. 19,
2012.
. “Intellectual Property in Early Buddhism: A Legal and Cultural Per-
spective.” Journal of Buddhist Ethics, Vol. 19, 2012.
“Positional Good.” Economics A-Z terms, The Economist, 2017,
https://www.economist.com/economics-a-to-z/p#node-
21529537. Accessed 26 Nov. 2017.
“Rape.” Merriam-Webster Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, 27 Sept. 2015,
play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.merriamweb-
ster&hl=en. Accessed 28 Oct. 2015.
“śakya.” A Sanskrit English Dictionary, compiled by Monier Monier-Wil-
liams, Corrected Edition, Motilal Banarasidass, 2002.
Silk, Jonathan A. “Incestuous Ancestries: The Family Origins of Gautama
Siddhārtha, Abraham and Sarah in Genesis 20:12, and The Status of

Journal of Buddhist Ethics 187
Scripture in Buddhism.” History of Religions, Vol. 47, 4 May 2008, pp.
253–281.
Walshe, Maurice, translator. The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation
of the Dīghanikaya. 2nd ed., Wisdom, 1995.
Weare, Siobhan. ““Oh you’re a guy, how could you be raped by a woman,
that makes no sense”: Towards a case for Legally Recognising and
Labelling ‘Forced-to-Penetrate’ Cases as Rape.” International Journal
of Law in Context, 2017, pp. 1–22.
Weare, Siobhan, et al. “Forced-to-Penetrate Cases: Lived Experiences of
Men.” Lancaster Eprints, Lancaster U, June 2017, eprints.lancs.ac.
uk/87216/.