TITLE: The Vessantara-Jātaka and Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya Narrative
AUTHOR: Bhikkhu Anālayo
YEAR: 2016
LANGUAGE: EN
SOURCE: Journal of the Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies 11 (2016): 11–37
TYPE: Journal Article (PDF)
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 66849
STATUS: OK============================================================

The Vessantara-Jātaka and Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya Narrative
Anālayo
Abstract
In this paper I study a tale whose probably best-known version is the
Vessantara-jātaka preserved in Pāli. My exploration is informed by an
interest in the genesis of the basic trope and its function as a Vinaya
narrative.
I begin by summarizing a version of the tale found in the
Saṅghabhedavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya (1) and then turn to
the topic of giving to brahmins (2) as well as to giving as one of the
perfections (3). Next I take up aspects of the story from the viewpoint of
normative Buddhist ethics (4) and from a historical-critical perspective
(5), after which I explore its function as a Vinaya narrative (6).
1) The Saṅghabhedavastu Version
In keeping with a general tendency of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya to abound
in stories, the Saṅghabhedavastu contains several tales that report past lives of
Devadatta. These serve to provide a background to his activities at the Buddha’s
time. Besides attempts at assassinating the Buddha and creating a schism, according
to this Vinaya he also killed an arhat nun.1 From the viewpoint of Mūlasarvāstivada
* I am indebted to Naomi Appleton, bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā, Richard Gombrich, Jonathan
Silk, and Fumi Yao for commenting on a draft version of this article.
1 Gnoli 1978: 255,1 or Dutt 1984: 227,9, D 1 nga 286b6 or Q 1030 ce 264a1, and T 1450 at T
XXIV 148a12.
. 6(11): 11–37. ©6 Bhikkhu Anālayo

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Vinaya reciters,2 he thus committed three of the five severe crimes which bring
immediate retribution (ānantarya).3 The Saṅghabhedavastu reports that, on being
informed that Devadatta had beaten an arhat nun to death, the Buddha delivered a
story of a former life of Devadatta as an animal in which he acted similarly. This
tale serves to show that Devadatta had a deep-seated tendency towards performing
wicked deeds from his past lives and also explains why a relative of the Buddha,
who even goes forth as a monk, could still go so far as to perform such evils.
The same pattern of portraying Devadatta as an evil character throughout
many of his former lives leads the Saṅghabhedavastu to present its version of
the tale of the prince Viśvantara, a former life of the Buddha. At the conclusion
of the tale, the Buddha informs the listening monks that a merciless brahmin,
who had brazenly asked for the children of Viśvantara, was a former life of
Devadatta. The main story proceeds as follows:
Brahmins from a rival country ask the prince for the royal elephant, and he
gives it to them. For this action he is exiled from his country; his wife Mādrī
and his two children follow him. On his way into exile, a brahmin asks for his
chariot, and this too he gives away.
When the family has settled down in a hermitage and Mādrī is absent
gathering fruit, a brahmin asks for the two children to become his servants; the
prince gives them to him. Indra/Śakra transforms himself into a brahmin and
asks the prince for his wife Mādrī; her too he gives away. Indra/Śakra discloses
his identity and returns Mādrī, admonishing the prince not to give her away
again. The brahmin in the meantime tries to sell the children at the market in
town. They are ransomed by the king, who then recalls the prince and Mādrī
from exile.
This sketch of the main elements in the Saṅghabhedavastu equally well
summarizes a tale found in the eleventh-century Kathāsaritsāgara by the Śaivite
Somadeva. The resemblance is so close that, even though the name of the prince
differs (which it also does in various Buddhist tellings of the story),4 the name
of his faithful spouse Mādrī remains the same.5
2 Devadatta’s killing of a different nun is reported in Eā 49.9 at T II 803c29, already noted by
Mukherjee 1966: 125f.
3 For a list of the five ānantarya cf., e.g. Mahāvyutpatti 2323–2328 (§122), Sakaki 1916/1962:
172, and for a discussion Silk 2007.
4 For a survey of different names of the prince in Buddhist sources cf. Lamotte 1949/1981:
713f note 1.
5 Cf. also the Bṛhatkathāmañjarī 18.211, Śivadatta and Parab 1901: 616,21.
12

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
The Kathāsaritsāgara shows that the tale summarized above can function
meaningfully outside a Buddhist context. It follows that the identifications
of the prince with the Buddha and the brahmin with Devadatta, found in
several Buddhist versions of the story,6 are not indispensable elements in the
narrative. By implication the same holds for the idea that the various gifts
made to brahmins are part of the pre-awakening path of cultivation required
for reaching Buddhahood. Although this is a prominent element in Buddhist
tellings, so much so that in one jātaka extant in Chinese translation the
prince even proclaims that he aspires to the path of the Mahāyāna,7 in the
Kathāsaritsāgara the prince just explains that his giving is motivated by his
desire to give to brahmins.8
2) Giving to Brahmins
The important role of brahmins as recipients of gifts emerges not only from the
Kathāsaritsāgara, but can also be seen in the Saṅghabhedavastu version. Here
the brahmin, on being congratulated by others on the wealth he has acquired by
selling the children of the prince, affirms that this is his due, since being from
the highest caste he is worthy of offerings.9 This places the dramatic story of
the gift of the children within the framework of the role of brahmins in ancient
Indian society as worthy recipients of gifts, whose requests have to be met in
order to avoid causing any offense. The need to avoid offending brahmins also
finds explicit mention in the Saṅghabhedavastu version, where, in the episode
that involves giving away the chariot, the prince tells his wife that one should
never disparage a brahmin.10
6 The identification of the two is reported in the Saṅghabhedavastu, Gnoli 1978: 133,27, D 1
nga 200b5 or Q 1030 ce 189a2, and T 1450 at T XXIV 184b21, as well as in Jā 547 at Jā VI 593,25,
the Avadānakalpalatā 23.53, Chandra Das and Vidyabhushaṇa 1888: 658,16 (Tibetan) and 659,15
(Sanskrit), the Gilgit manuscript Viśvantarāvadāna, Das Gupta 1978: 63,9 or Matsumura 1980:
158,2, T 152 at T III 11a18, and T 171 at T III 424a13.
7 T 171 at T III 421b3: 欲求摩訶衍道; already noted by Durt 2000: 151.
8 Durgāprasād and Parab 1930: 536,39 (§77): na me sādhyaṃ kim apy asti vācchā tve tāvatī
mama, prāṇān api sadā dadyāṁ brāhmaṇebhya iti dvija.
9 Gnoli 1978: 133,25: uttamavarṇaprasūto ’haṃ, dakṣiṇīyo lokasya, D 1 nga 200b4 or Q 1030
ce 189a1: rigs mchog gi nang du skyes pas kho bo ’jig rten gyi yon gnas su gyur te (Q: to), and T
1450 at T XXIV 184b18: 云我是最上, 是人之福田, 合得受供養 (translated in Durt 1999: 176).
10 Gnoli 1978: 123,23: na khalu bhavatyā brāhmaṇaḥ paribhāṣaṇīyaḥ, D 1 nga 195a5 or Q 1030
ce 183b6: khyod kyis bram ze ma spyo shig, and T 1450 at T XXIV 182a26: 汝於婆羅門勿出惡言.
13

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Jamison (1996: 164) reports that “the figure of the Exploited Host, who
patiently and unquestioningly accedes to increasingly onerous and often
humiliating demands, is almost a stock character in the Mahābhārata”, “there
are several similar stories in the Mahābhārata about … imperious and capricious
visiting Brahmans who take over their host’s households and even their lives.”
According to Jamison (1996: 168f), “the host’s duty of unfailing generosity
to a visitor is not limited to the usual food and other accoutrements, but extends
to the ceding of control over the persons of the hosting family.” Such stories
demonstrate “the value attached to yielding without complaint to any demand
… no matter how bizarre or painful”, providing “an incentive to practice
unquestioning hospitality … as no doubt the Visiting Brahman lobby was well
aware.”
The notion that the requests of begging brahmins have to be met at all costs
comes up also in the prologue to the Pārāyana-vagga. Having just completed a
great sacrifice, Bāvari is unable to give to a visiting brahmin the sum of money
the latter requests. The visiting brahmin threatens that after seven days Bāvari’s
head will split into seven pieces for having failed to satisfy his request.11
In the Pārāyana-vagga the claim by the begging brahmin is dismissed as
deluded, exemplifying the early Buddhist attitude to the trope of the supposed
duties of a host towards a visiting brahmin’s unreasonable requests and the
alleged dangers incurred by upsetting a brahmin.
The commentary to the Pārāyana-vagga reports that the begging brahmin
had been sent on his mission by his young wife, who wanted him to get money
from Bāvari and then buy a household servant who would relieve her of the
housework.12 Similarly, in the Vessantara-jātaka the brahmin who begs the
children has been sent by his young wife, who wants to have the children as
household servants to relieve her of the housework, in particular of having to
fetch water.13 This similarity in the narrative background of these two instances
reflects the same basic tendency to ironical exaggeration by depicting a brahmin
whose unreasonable demands are motivated by the wish to please his young
wife. The portrayal of this brahmin in the Vessantara-jātaka in fact brims with
a tendency to caricature.
11 Sn 983 and T 202 at T IV 432c22; on the trope of splitting the head cf., e.g., Hopkins 1932:
316, Insler 1989/1990, Witzel 1987, Black 2007: 80–88 and 2011: 154–158.
12 Pj II 582,2.
13 Jā 547 at Jā VI 523,23.
14

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
In contrast to this basic similarity in narrative mode and detail, the prologue to the
Pārāyana-vagga and the Vessantara-jātaka exhibit a substantially different attitude
towards the trope of having to oblige the demands of a begging brahmin. Here outright
dismissal in the Pārāyana-vagga stands out against wholehearted compliance in the
Vessantara-jātaka. This conveys the impression that the basic trope in the Vessantara-
jātaka is perhaps more at home in the Mahābhārata than in Buddhist discourse.
The spotlight on having to oblige begging brahmins is a general feature of the
tale in various other versions, where those who ask the prince for his possessions and
family members are invariably actual brahmins (or Śakra disguised as a brahmin).
Brahmins are even explicitly mentioned in rather brief references to the story. This
holds for a pūrvayoga extant in a Gāndhārī fragment, which notes that the gift of
the elephant was made to a brahmin.14 Similarly brief references in the Jātakastava
and the *Mahāprajñāpāramitopadeśa report that the prince gave his children to a
brahmin.15 That the elephant and the children were given away to brahmins also
finds explicit expression in the description by the pilgrim Xuánzàng (玄奘) of his
visit to the location where these events were believed to have taken place.16
The same can also be seen from a representation of the gift of the elephant from Goli
in Andhra Pradesh (see next page image 1), which shows the prince ceremoniously
pouring out water when giving the elephant to brahmins, recognizable as such by
the pots they carry (the two behind the one who receives the elephant on their behalf
also carry sticks, another signifier of brahmin identity in pictorial representation).17
In a jātaka collection extant in Chinese translation the children tell their father
that, in spite of their youth, they have already heard that according to the Dharma
of brahmins one should protect one’s wife and children in order to be reborn in the
Brahmā world.18 This implies that for the prince to give away his children (and later
his wife) to a brahmin is not in keeping with the very Dharma of brahmins. In fact
the children qualify the one to whom they are being given as an “evil brahmin”.19
14 Lenz 2003: 144 (§24): hastinago bramanasa dite.
15 Dresden 1955: 444 (§161). T 1509 at T XXV 146b5: 以其二子布施婆羅門. In a footnote
to his translation of this passage, Lamotte 1949/1981: 713f offers a detailed survey of various
versions and representations of the tale; for another detailed survey cf. Schlingloff 2000: 198–201.
16 T 2087 at T LI 881b9 and 881b19.
17 Chennai Government Museum; courtesy of Monika Zin.
18 T 153 at T III 60a13: 我雖幼稚亦曾聞說婆羅門法, 若有擁護妻子, 因緣得生梵天 (translated
in Durt 1999: 160f).
19 T 153 at T III 60a5: 此惡婆羅門. In the Gilgit manuscript Viśvantarāvadāna, Das Gupta
1978: 56,20 or Matsumura 1980: 149,15, the mother refers to him as a cruel brahmin.
15

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Image 1: The Gift of the Elephant
16

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
The Vessantara-jātaka, āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, and jātaka collections extant
in Chinese translation go a step further. They report that one of the children tried
to prevent their being given away by telling their father that the one who has
asked for them is not a real brahmin, but an evil spirit.20 Clearly the motif of
having to give to begging brahmins whatever they demand is a central aspect of
the various tellings of the story and explains the denouement of the main plot.21
Needless to say, brahmins are of course a recurrent feature in the wider jātaka
and apadāna genre, so that their occurrence as such in the present tale is not in
itself surprising. What is unusual, however, is the type of gifts they request and
receive in the Vessantara-jātaka.
3) The Perfection of Giving
Whereas from the viewpoint of the need to fulfil one’s obligation towards
begging brahmins the basic story is well in line with other such tales in the
Mahābhārata, as a jātaka the same narrative is extraordinary. As Shaw (2015:
513) points out, “in no other jātaka does the Bodhisatta make such gifts,
encourage others to do so, or speak to his children in this way.” Here it needs
to be kept in mind that the trope of giving away part of one’s body or the whole
body differs, since making such offerings only requires directly inflicting harm
on oneself, not on others. The challenge to understand and appreciate the gifts
made by the bodhisattva in the Vessantara-jātaka is in fact a continuous theme
in the Buddhist traditions, which can best be explored by taking up the Pāli
version and its reception.
Already the Vessantara-jātaka itself voices criticism of the prince’s
generosity. After the gift of the elephant, the citizens point out that it would
20 Jā 547 at Jā VI 554,14: na cāyaṃ brāhmaṇo tāta, dhammikā honti brāhmaṇā, yakkho brāhma-
ṇavaṇṇena, Kern 1891: 62,25 (9.65f): na cāyaṃ brāhmaṇo … yakṣo ’yaṃ brāhmaṇacchannā, T
152 at T III 9c12: 彼是鬼也, 非梵志矣, T 171 at T III 422a19: 此非婆羅門, 為是鬼耳 (translated
in Chavannes 1911: 382); cf. also T 2121 at T LIII 165c21: 此是鬼耳, 非梵志也. Although the
corresponding part has not been preserved in the Sogdian version, the ensuing passages refer
to the one to whom the prince had given his children as a brahmin who resembles a yakṣa or
a brahmin yakṣa; cf. Benveniste 1946: 64 (§1044) and 66 (§1091). For a comparative study of the
offering of the children and of Mādrī, with particular attention given to sources extant in Chinese, cf. Durt 1999
and 2000.
21 The significance of the depiction of brahmins in the Vessantara-jātaka has already been
noted by Gombrich 1985: 436 and the pervasiveness of this motif in the various versions by Durt
2000: 137.
17

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
have been proper for Vessantara to give food, drink, clothes and dwelling places
to brahmins,22 but not the royal elephant. When giving away his children, the
son asks his father if his heart is made of stone.23 When hearing of the gift of
the children, the courtiers express their criticism (garaha), in that it is wrong for
Vessantara to act like this; he can give away slaves, animals, or a chariot, but
not his own children.24
A critical attitude finds expression again in the Milindapañha. Putting the
dilemma in succinct terms, the question is: “if one gives a gift that inflicts
suffering on others, does that gift result in happiness and lead to heaven?”25
The allusion to rebirth in heaven reflects the position taken in the Pāli tradition
that Vessantara was reborn in the Tusita realm, from where he then took birth as
Gotama and became a Buddha.
The dilemma spotted by Milinda concerns basic ethical norms of early
Buddhist thought. The point he makes is that, granted that Vessantara wishes
to gain merit, he could have given himself as a gift, instead of inflicting harm
on others by giving them away.26 The problem is that, whereas Vessantara has
the right to do with his own body whatever he wishes, the authority he has
as a father over his children and as a husband over his wife comes together
with the responsibility to take care of them.27 At least from the viewpoint of
early Buddhist ethics, he is not free to give them away in a manner that clearly
involves harming them.
Given this conflict with basic ethical principles, it is no surprise that
misgivings continue to be voiced by modern-day Theravādins.28 Gombrich
(1971/2008: 312) comments on Vessantara’s giving away of his wife and
children that this not only “strikes us as excessive. It strikes the Sinhalese
22 Jā 547 at Jā VI 490,24: annapānañ ca yo dajjā, vatthasenāsanāni ca … etaṃ kho brāhma-
ṇārahaṃ; for a discussion of the placing of this criticism cf. Alsdorf 1957: 25f.
23 Jā 547 at Jā VI 549,4: asmā nūna te hadayaṃ āyasaṃ daḷhabandhanaṃ?
24 Jā 547 at Jā VI 575,14: dukkaṭaṃ vata bho raññā … kathan nu puttake dajjā? … dāsaṃ dāsiñ
ca so dajjā, assañ c’ assatarī rathaṃ, hatthiñ ca kuñjaraṃ dajjā, kathaṃ so dajjā dārake ti?
25 Mil 276,14: paraṃ dukkhāpetvā dānaṃ deti, api nu taṃ dānaṃ sukhavipākaṃ hoti sagga-
saṃvattanikan ti?
26 Mil 275,27: puññakāmena manujena kiṃ paradukkhāpanena, nanu nāma sakadānaṃ
dātabbaṃ hotī ti?
27 The responsibility of a husband to ensure the wellbeing of his wife is reflected in DN 31 at
DN III 190,4 and its parallels Dā 16 at T I 71c26, T 16 at T I 251b18, T 17 at T I 254a25, and Mā
135 at T I 641a22; cf. also SHT IV 412.27 R4–6, Sander and Waldschmidt 1980: 58.
28 On my reasons for having no qualms in employing the term Theravāda cf. Anālayo 2013.
18

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
in the same way. The two monks with whom I brought up the subject both
said that Vessantara was wrong.”29
Gabaude (2016: 38) notes that “the story has confused and disoriented the
East … in Thailand, it has generated hot debates among elite as well as common
voices.” One critique mentioned in Gabaude (2016: 40) turns in particular on
Vessantara’s failure to fulfil his moral duties, in that he is “‘a king who fails to
keep the morality of kings’; in other words, he fails to obey the national interest”
by giving away the royal elephant. “Vessantara is ‘a husband who fails to keep
the morality of husbands’: far from protecting his wife … he lets her slip into
poverty and even gives her away to another man ‘as if she were not a human
being’. Vessantara is a ‘father who fails to keep the morality of fathers’: he does
not protect his children … he accepts seeing them beaten in front of him.”
Ladwig (2016: 63) reports from Laos the comment on Vessantara that, “the
more he gives away, the more problematic and egoistic his generosity becomes.
His drive for giving becomes a burden for other people and it produces
considerable suffering. His excessive generosity is almost comparable to a kind
of illness.”
The contrast between the doctrinal framework of the perfections to be
cultivated by a bodhisattva and the story line of the Vessantara tale becomes
further accentuated by the circumstance that the Theravāda tradition reckons
this particular life to be the last in the series of human existences of the Buddha-
to-be. This positioning implies that, by the time of this life, the bodhisattva must
have already reached a high level in his cultivation of the perfections.
The Theravāda list of the perfections includes mettā as well as truth-
fulness, alongside giving. Yet it is not easy to conceive of Vessantara’s acts
as springing from the mind of one who has already perfected mettā and
truthfulness. The problem is not merely the giving away of his innocent
and crying children to a cruel brahmin who mistreats them in front of his
eyes. According to the Pāli report, when confronted with his distraught
wife, who worries what has happened to the children, Vessantara at first
just remains silent for quite some time, and when he finally speaks to her
he is portrayed as intentionally using “harsh speech” to make her give
29 Cf. also the argument raised by a Sinhalese catechist in the 19th century, reported in Young
and Somaratna 1996: 148, that Vessantara’s giving away his children and wife “was not a civilized
act. Because of giving his children away, they were subjected to much suffering. What merit could
one attain by making another suffer? Will any one of you in this audience give away your own
wife to another just so that you could gain merit for yourself?”
19

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
up her sorrow.30 Not only does he employ harsh speech on this occasion,
but earlier Vessantara is on record as intentionally “deceiving” her.31 Such
depiction of his behaviour would be surprising if the story had originally
been conceived as an illustration of a past life of the Buddha-to-be so close
to his final lifetime that he had already accomplished the perfections of
mettā and truthfulness to a high degree.
The commentary on the Cariyāpiṭaka (the root text of which also has
a version of Vessantara’s deeds) proclaims that all perfections without
exception have as their characteristic the benefitting of others, and as their
proximate cause compassion and skilful means.32 Vessantara’s generosity,
however, seems to be carried out to benefit himself first of all, and any benefit
to others would only result from his eventual attainment of Buddhahood in
a future life. Compassion and the exercise of skilful means are certainly not
conspicuous aspects of his conduct. In sum, the perfections to be cultivated by
a bodhisattva do not seem to be the natural home for the arising of the story of
Vessantara. If the original idea had been to portray the perfection of giving at
its utmost extremes, this could still have been done without doing violence to
the cultivation of the other perfections.
According to the Lakkhaṇa-sutta, the bodhisattva’s exercise of truth-fulness
in previous lives formed the condition for his gain of two of the thirty-two bodily
marks with which as a Buddha he was endowed.33 Another deed leading to his
endowment with another of the thirty-two marks was that in previous lives he
kept reuniting families, uniting mother with child and child with mother, etc.34
Such descriptions do not sit too well with the Vessantara tale as a depiction of
the Buddha’s penultimate life as a human being.
Now the Vessantara-jātaka is at the same time “the last, longest, and most famous
of the Pāli collection of Jātaka stories”, as noted by Norman (1981/1991: 172). Two
30 Jā 547 at Jā VI 561,31: kakkhaḷakathāya naṃ puttasokaṃ jahāpessāmī ti cintetvā imaṃ
gātham āha.
31 Jā 547 at Jā VI 541,9 reports that, when Maddī tells Vessantara about a nightmare she just
had, even though he clearly understands its implications, he intentionally deceives her to console
and dismiss her, mohetvā assāsetvā uyyojesi. Collins 1998: 528 argues that actions of Vessantara
seem to stand in contrast, at least to some extent, to each of the five precepts.
32 Cp-a 280,16: avisesena tāva sabbā pi pāramiyo parānuggahalakkhaṇā … karuṇūpāya-
kosallapadaṭṭhānā vā; the Vessantara tale itself is found at Cp 7,1 (§9).
33 DN 30 at DN III 170,15: saccavādī saccasandho theto paccayiko avisaṃvādako lokassa.
34 DN 30 at DN III 160,18: mātaram pi puttena samānetā ahosi, puttam pi mātarā samānetā ahosi.
20

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
of the three aspects mentioned are closely interrelated, since the Pāli Jātaka
collection proceeds from short to long jātakas, wherefore the Vessantara-jātaka
as the longest is inevitable also its last and therefore the final member of its
ultimate group of tales, the Mahānipāta.
According to Appleton (2010: 73f), whereas “the position of the Vessantara-
jātaka … is related merely to the number of the verses contained within it”,
“ideas of chronology and biography were introduced to the collection later, after
the order of the stories was fixed. If, therefore, the popularity of the Vessantara-
jātaka is due to its status as the antepenultimate birth of the Buddha, and this
in turn is due to a purely mnemonic ordering, then an inability to explain in
what way the story embodies the highest achievements of the Bodhisatta is
unsurprising.”
Appleton and Shaw (2015: 3f) explain that “the idea that jātaka stories
illustrate the long path to Buddhahood is not found in the earliest layers of the
text”, thus “the association between jātaka stories and the perfections came
relatively late in the compositional history of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā.” Appleton
(2010: 147 and 149) points out that, although “jātakas were not originally
conceived of as demonstrating the gradual perfection of the Bodhisatta”, “the
framing as Bodhisatta-biography and Buddha-dhamma make the story more
able to communicate Buddhist ideals such as the perfections, even where the
central message of the story itself seems to be of little importance.”
Thus it seems fair to conclude that the Vessantara tale quite probably shares
with many other members of the jātaka collection that it is a final product of
an integration of various fables, anecdotes and parables, taken from the ancient
Indian repertoire and incorporated into Buddhist narrative lore.35 Its popularity
may at least to some degree be the outcome of the fruitful tension that arises
between the denouement of the story and Buddhist ideals.
35 Cf., e.g., von Hinüber 1998: 190–192 and Anālayo 2010a: 55–71. Appleton and Shaw
2015: 28 explain that “the jātakas are the product of a broader Indian narrative scene, and
the Mahānipāta stories [of which Vessantara is the last] in particular appear to have a strong
relationship with Indian epic sources”; on this topic cf. also Lüders 1897/1940 and 1904/1940
as well as Gombrich 1985. That the same pattern applies to the present case has already been
suggested by Fick 1926: 147, who comments that “wir haben es bei der …Vessantara-legende
zweifellos mit einem gemeinindischen, im Volke weitverbreiteten und beliebten Stoff zu turn,
der von Brahmanen wie von Buddhisten und Jainisten für ihre religiösen Zwecke verwertet,
dichterisch weiterverarbeitet und mit Zügen ausgestattet wurde, die der Bearbeiter zum Teil aus
anderen Sagenkreisen entlehnte.”
21

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Another argument supporting the impression that the Vessantara tale did not
originate in a Buddhist frame of thought has been presented by Alsdorf (1957:
61), who points out the prominent role of indulging in intoxicating drink in
several episodes of the tale. The royal palace is described as a place where one
is woken up with meat and liquor.36 When Vessantara departs for his exile, he
has strong drink distributed on his behalf.37 When he returns home, each village
along the way is to prepare a hundred jars with liquor for distribution.38 Such
recurrent celebration of the consumption of alcohol confirms that several aspects
of the tale did not originate in a setting imbued with Buddhist ethical values.
4) The ‘Buddhist’ Nature of the Vessantara-jātaka
Based on his detailed study, Alsdorf (1957: 70) then comes to the conclusion that
the Vessantara-jātaka “is just as completely un-Buddhist or rather pre-Buddhist
as the vast majority of the other Jātakas.” This has been criticized by Collins
(2016: 4), who sees this conclusion “as a kind of cartoon sketch of an outmoded
Orientalism: the natives, in their blindness, have all-unknowingly preserved as
their favorite Buddhist text something that in fact, as revealed by the dogged
philological labors of the rationalist Herr Professor in his European library, has
in itself nothing to do with them.”
Although the formulation employed by Alsdorf is indeed too strong,39
when considered in context it becomes clear that his statement is in reply to
the suggestion by Winternitz that the Vessantara-jātaka’s “purely Buddhistic
origin is unmistakeable”, a quote with which Alsdorf introduces his assessment.
Leaving aside the exaggerated expression “completely un-Buddhist”, however,
and without in any way wanting to advocate a return to Orientalism, the
qualification of the basic story line as not originally Buddhist seems to me
to offer a meaningful perspective for understanding the evolution of the tale.
If we want to give a fair hearing to tradition, alongside the popularity of the
Vessantara-jātaka the various instances of criticism, surveyed above, need to be
36 Jā 547 at Jā VI 483,5: surāmaṃsappabodhane.
37 Jā 547 at Jā VI 502,11: soṇḍānam detha.
38 Jā 547 at Jā VI 580,19: sataṃ kumbhā merayassa surāya ca, stressed again at Jā VI 580,23:
bahū surā.
39 Already Cone and Gombrich 1977: xxviii objected against Alsdorf’s classification of the
Vessantara-jātaka as “completely un-Buddhist”; Schlingloff 2000: 201 opts for the preferable
expression “originally non-Buddhist”. Alsdorf 1977: 25 again employs the expression “un-
Buddhist”, but without the qualification “completely”, in a discussion of Jā 543.
22

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
taken serious as reflecting a continuous sense of unease with central elements
of the tale.
Collins (2016: 4f) mentions the example of the “Buddhist virtue of mettā”
to argue that “obviously the values of friendliness, kindness, beneficence, etc.,
can be found in any and every cultural context, both before and outside of
Buddhist texts. So when a Buddhist acts in a kind, friendly manner toward a
fellow human being, is he or she then being ‘completely un-Buddhist or rather
pre-Buddhist’?”
Now the Pāli discourses and their parallels do present mettā as something
that had been practised long before the advent of the Buddha. A case in point is
the tale of Sunetta, a seer of ancient times who cultivated mettā with sufficient
success to be reborn in the Brahmā world.
The same tale is also of interest to the topic of the evolution of jātakas
in general, in as much as the relevant discourse in the Aṅguttara-nikāya
does not identify Sunetta as a past life of the Buddha, an identification
found in a Madhyama-āgama parallel.40 This is one of several examples
illustrating the same basic pattern, also evident in the Vessantara tale,
of stories being not necessarily conceived of from the outset as former
existences of the Buddha.
Whether or not Sunetta is explicitly identified as a past life of the Buddha,
this tale does imply that tradition itself considered mettā to be “pre-Buddhist”
in the sense that its practice was already known and practised before Gotama
Buddha started to teach. Such recognition even takes the form of pointing out
in what way the practice of mettā taught by Gotama Buddha differs from the
cultivation of mettā by his contemporaries.41 The decisive difference is found in
yoking mettā to the arousing of the awakening factors. In this way the example
of mettā illustrates that to conceptualize certain ideas or practices as “pre-
Buddhist” or “not originally Buddhist” is very much in keeping with a position
at times adopted by the tradition itself.
40 Mā 8 at T I 429b29, reported after referring to his level of rebirth, which has a counterpart
in AN 7.62 at AN IV 104,22; cf. also Anālayo 2010a: 70. A version in the Tibetan Bhaiṣayavastu
can be found in D 1 kha 261b6 or Q 1030 ge 243a2; for a reference to a Sunetra-jātaka in the
Vyākhyāyukti-ṭīkā cf. Skilling 2000: 343.
41 A query in this respect by non-Buddhists is reported in SN 46.54 at SN V 116,29 and its
parallels SHT IX 2051Vd, Bechert and Wille 2004: 69, and Sā 743 at T II 197b27; cf. also the
discussion in Gethin 1992: 177–182.
23

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
5) The Vessantara-jātaka in Historical-critical Perspective
Collins (2016: 5) continues his criticism of Alsdorf by stating that “much more
important than the issue of unnecessary identity language is the fact that the
search for an original ur-text, founded in Western classical scholarship on the
written texts of Greek and Latin, misunderstands the narrative traditions of
South and Southeast Asia, where a complex mixture and overlap of orality and
literacy makes the search for origins quixotic at best.”
I am not sure if we need to dismiss Alsdorf’s study as being informed
by a quest for the ur-text, or whether it could not rather be read as offering
a historical-critical perspective that prevents mistaking the Vessantara-
jātaka for an ur-text. An example is his suggestion that a misplacing in
sequence of a verse seems to have led to the impression that, after the
horses had been given away to begging brahmins, the chariot was still
being drawn by draught animals. This then would have led to the arising
of a prose narration according to which devas intervened, taking the form
of deer to draw the chariot.42 The suggestion by Alsdorf seems to offer
a reasonable hypothesis and has been accepted as such, for example, by
Cone and Gombrich (1977: xxxii), who comment that “this explanation
appears to us convincing. The supernatural incident generated by a chance
misunderstanding appealed to contemporary sentiment, and became
embedded in the tradition.” The prose description resulting from this
apparent error could then in turn have influenced āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā,
which has a similar episode.43
With all due awareness granted to the complexity of the interrelations
and cross-fertilizations between different tellings of this story in the oral
and eventually in the written medium, it is still possible to discern in a
broad manner stages of development, such as to propose that a mix-up in
the sequence of the canonical verses could have led to a particular prose
description in the Jātaka commentary.44 The type of historical perspective
42 Alsdorf 1957: 36–38. The suggestion is that verse 215 has its proper place before 214; the
prose description of the intervention by devas is found in Jā 547 at Jā VI 512,14.
43 Kern 1891: 59,6 (no. 9 §45); the parallelism in this respect between the Jātakamālā and the
Vessantara-jātaka has already been noticed by Fick 1926: 153.
44 Collins 2016: 11f also comments that it seems to him that “jātaka stories were originally
in prose and verse combined (in Sanskrit called the campū style), which the later tradition has
bifurcated into canonical verses and prose commentary.” A close study of the Udāna collection as
another text in the same Khuddaka-nikāya shows the existence of a versified nucleus accompanied
24

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
that emerges in this way shows that the Vessantara-jātaka is the product of
a gradual evolution. In its present form the Pāli prose, and by implication
also āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, show the incorporation of a later element.
Versions that do not have the intervention by devas to pull the chariot stand
a good chance of having preserved an earlier version of the account of the
prince’s journey into exile. This is helpful in so far as it counters a tendency,
sometimes found even in contemporary scholarship, to conceive the Pāli
version of a particular text as invariably the most original version at our
disposition.45
This is in fact what Collins (2016: 6) does to some degree, when he
refers to the Vessantara-jātaka as “the earliest and most prestigious telling
we now have. But that does not make it an ur-text of which other tellings are
versions or variants. Better than the chronological language of original and
later versions is a distinction … between ‘authoritative’ and ‘oppositional’
tellings.”46
It is hard for me to see how the Vessantara-jātaka could be considered
the earliest telling we have.47 There seems to be no a priori reason why
the tale summarized above from the Saṅghabhedavastu, for example, or
one of the other jātaka versions preserved in at times fairly early Chinese
translations, might not have preserved more archaic elements. In fact
none of these versions has the intervention of devas to pull the horse-less
chariot, making it reasonable to assume that, at least in this respect, they
by a more fluctuating prose, which due to its later date of completion only became part of the
canonical collection in some reciter traditions; cf. Anālayo 2009. Such a pattern, where a more
fixed base text is accompanied by a commentary more open to variation and change, can also
be seen at work in the relationship between the code of rules and the accompanying stories
in Vinaya literature; cf. Schlingloff 1963. The same emerges from a comparative study of the
early discourses; cf. Anālayo 2010b. In fact the same can even be discerned in the early stage of
evolution of the Abhidharma; cf. Anālayo 2014a: 79–89. This pattern is so pervasive in Buddhist
literature as to make it safe to conclude that the case of the Jātaka collection follows the same
model, in that only the verses are canonical simply because they served as a more fixed base text
whose more variable prose commentary only became fixed at a subsequent time, too late for it to
become part of the canonical text.
45 For a more detailed criticism of the assumption that the Pāli version must invariably be the
earliest textual witness at our disposition cf. Anālayo 2016.
46 Collins 2016: 19–23 offers a detailed survey of translations of different versions of the tale,
showing that his assessment of the Pāli version as the earliest and most authoritative was made in
awareness of the extant parallels.
47 Already Lienhard 1978: 139 suggested that the Vessantara-jātaka is the oldest version we have.
25

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
offer an earlier account of the episode of the gift of the horses and/or the
chariot than the Pāli version.48
Nor is the distinction between ‘authoritative’ and ‘oppositional’ tellings
necessarily more relevant, since Mūlasarvāstivāda reciters in India need not
even have been aware of the Theravāda Vessantara-jātaka. Even if they had
been aware of it, which is not particularly probable, they would not have
considered it as authoritative and quite likely also not as oppositional.
In short, it seems to me that adopting a historical-critical perspective is a
useful approach to the study of a particular tale, enabling us to explore the
probable framework of conditions that would have influenced the coming
into being of the text in its present form.49 The wish to avoid the quest for
an ur-text need not lead us to the opposite stance of disregarding that there
have been pre-versions to the text we have in hand. Such an opposite stance
can easily led to ignoring historical layers in the development of a particular
text, thereby potentially also ignoring the multiplicity of conditions, cross-
fertilizations and other dynamics that have influenced the oral transmission of
what we now access in the form of a written testimony of a particular instance
of this complex process. Once the indeed unwarranted valorisation of anything
early as intrinsically superior to later ‘degenerations’ has been left behind, the
historical dimension as such offers an important tool for contextualization that
should not be too easily dismissed.50
On this basis and without thereby in any way intending to turn a blind eye
to the complexity of the range of conditions that would have influenced the
genesis of the tale in its various manifestations, I propose the conclusion that
the tale summarized at the beginning of this article quite probably originated
in dialogue with the importance of unfaltering hospitality to brahmins. Its
present form in the Buddhist traditions does appear to be comparable to the
48 The Saṅghabhedavastu reports only a single gift of chariot and horses together; cf. Gnoli
1978: 123,29, D 1 nga 195a6 or Q 1030 ce 183b8, and T 1450 at T XXIV 182b6 (on versions of this
tale in the Bhaiṣajyvastu cf. the survey in Yao 2012: 1191 §11). In T 152 at T III 9a8 and T 171 at
T III 420c15 the prince first gives away the horses and then pulls the chariot himself, before giving
away the chariot as well. T 153 at T III 59b15 does not report that the prince departed into exile on
a chariot drawn by horses, so that here the whole episode of giving these away is not found.
49 With this I do not intend to take the position that there cannot be meaningful explorations
of the Vessantara-jātaka apart from historical considerations, such as, e.g., the one recently
offered by Shì 2015.
50 On the unfortunate tendency to disregard the historical dimension in the academic study of
Buddhism cf., e.g., Gombrich 2003: 4ff.
26

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
case of mettā, in that a practice or story has been adopted and imbued with
Buddhist values by relating it to qualities concerned with awakening, be these
the awakening factors in the case of mettā or the perfections in the case of the
jātaka tale.
6) The Function of the Viśvantara Tale as a Vinaya Narrative
The suggestion that the tale of Viśvantara takes its basic plot from concern with
hospitality to brahmins leads me to the question of its function in the Buddhist
traditions. Whereas in the Saṅghabhedavastu the story serves to illustrate to the
monks the evil nature of Devadatta, this is not the only context for this story to
manifest in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya. Another telling can be found in the
Bhaiṣajyavastu of the same Vinaya.51 In the Bhaiṣajyavastu the tale is addressed
to a king and serves the function of illustrating the bodhisattva’s practice of
generosity undertaken for the sake of his full awakening.52 As a result of this
different setting, the Bhaiṣajyavastu concludes with the Buddha only identifying
the generous prince as a past life of his, without any mention of Devadatta.53
The two settings conveniently illustrate how narratives can be put to different
uses within a Vinaya framework. One such usage is to provide to the monks a
narrative background to legal matters, here in particular schism, saṅghabheda.
Another usage is for narratives to be employed when teaching laity the importance
of generosity. Needless to say, for a mendicant community like the Buddhist
monastic order both concerns are of considerable importance. Whereas stories
51 Durt 2000: 138 notes a difference between the two Chinese version, as in T 1448 at T
XXIV 66a19 not only the brahmin asking for the prince’s wife, but also the one who asks for
the children is an apparition caused by Śakra. This creates an internal inconsistency, as later this
brahmin brings the children to the town where they are going to be ransomed by their grandfather,
something he does on being influenced by Śakra, so that in this episode the two are clearly
different protagonists; cf. T 1448 at T XXIV 68a15. The idea that Śakra was the one to ask for the
children can also be found in a Newar telling of the story, Emmrich 2016: 191, and according to
Tucci 1949: 469 in a Tibetan painting. A conflation of these two episodes could naturally occur
in art, given that in pictorial depiction there is a tendency to portray successive episodes in a
single image (cf., e.g., Schlingloff 1981), which could easily have led to the Śakra motif being
mistakenly related to the previous gift of the children as well.
52 D 1 kha 219a6 or Q 1030 ge 206b2 and T 1448 at T XXIV 64c26. The Tibetan Bhaiṣajyavastu
has a second telling of the tale, summarized in Yao 2012: 1190–1192; for corresponding Sankrit
fragments cf. the survey in Yao 2015: 297.
53 D 1 kha 227b2 or Q 1030 ge 214a2 and T 1448 at T XXIV 68b13.
27

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
of monastic misconduct would not have been apt for public consumption,54
tales of the heroic exploits of the Buddha-to-be, like the Viśvantara narrative,
would have furnished Mūlasarvāstivāda monastics with convenient material for
preaching purposes.
Such uses explain why Vinaya literature can incorporate so many tales, a
tendency particularly evident in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, but also apparent
in the Vinaya texts of other schools. Vinaya texts as the source for rules to
train monastics in behaviour and etiquette naturally lend themselves to the
incorporation of other material considered relevant for training monastics, such
as training their teaching skills. This almost inevitably leads to the integration of
various stories, which not only serve to attract (and entertain) potential monastic
reciters by providing narrative background to legal actions, but also equip them
with material that can be employed in teaching activities.
Understood in this way, a legalistic discussion of a rule and a jātaka found
side by side in a Vinaya text are not as surprising as this may seem at first sight,
since they express closely related concerns. Thus a collection of tales like the
Mahāvastu, as argued convincingly by Tournier (2012), is indeed a Vinaya text.
According to Haribhaṭṭa’s Jātakamālā, the delivery of jātakas falls into place,
once a sermon has been given, by way of illustrating the teaching in additional
detail, comparable to the light provided by a torch, thereby becoming a source
of happiness for the audience.55 This points to a function of jātakas in order to
flesh out abstract teachings and, needless to say, at the same time also entertain
the audience. The edifying and entertaining aspects of jātaka literature are also
noted by the Chinese pilgrim Yìjìng (義淨),56 who is credited with translating
the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya into Chinese.
In modern days, as pointed out by Ladwig (2016: 57), “‘giving’ moral
precepts and explaining virtuous models of behavior … is considered one of
the main tasks of a Buddhist monk. An important part of sermon making is its
performance and aesthetics.”
Combined with the setting in the Bhaiṣajyavastu, this helps to explain another
dimension of the success of the Viśvantara tale in different Buddhist cultures.
54 The Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya explicitly states that Vinaya material is to be taught to
monastics, not to laity; cf. T 1442 at T XXIII 672c4: 毘奈耶教是出家軌式, 俗不合聞.
55 Hahn 2011: 4,27 (§8): dhārmakathiko hy ārṣasūtram anuvarṇya paścād bodhisattvajātakānu-
varṇanayā citrabhavanam iva pradīpaprabhayā sutarāṃ uddyotyati śrotṛjanasya ca manasy
adhikāṃ prītim utpādayatīti.
56 T 2125 at T LIV 227c29.
28

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Such success does not appear to be in spite of its unusual encouragement of
relentless giving, which has a more natural home in the Mahābhārata, but
quite probably precisely because of this feature. Alongside the fruitful tension
this depiction creates with Buddhist ethical values, the basic portrayal of the
Buddha-to-be engaging in such giving can serve to encourage doing the same,
albeit on a lesser scale.57
Cone and Gombrich (1977: xxv) note that “Buddhist monks replaced
brahmins as an economically parasitic class”. Thus a tale that portrays
uncompromising willingness to give to brahmins can easily be employed to
encourage generosity to Buddhist monastics as those who have replaced the
brahmins in Buddhist societies. Regarding the need for monastics to encourage
giving, Findly (2003: 337) explains that “several strategies are devised in
order to capture donors’ attention within the marketplace of current young
religious movements, and to bind their attention to this particular movement
for the long term. The most important of these strategies is the development
of a doctrinal soteriology for householders that deals with proper acquisition
and use of wealth and that provides a clear status-producing system of merit
for those who give to the Saṅgha.”
The suggested function of the tale that emerges from the type of setting
depicted in the Bhaiṣajyavastu accords with the results of research done on
teachings of the Vessantara-jātaka in Theravāda societies. Spiro (1970/1982:
108) explains that “taught to every schoolboy, alluded to frequently in
conversation, recounted repeatedly in sermons … the story of Prince Vessantara
is probably the best known and most loved of all Buddhist stories. Its sacrificial
idiom provides the charter for and reinforces the Burmese belief in the religious
efficacy of giving.” ladwig (2016: 60) reports from laos that “monks like to
employ it in order to point out the meritorious character of giving, refer to the
great rewards Vessantara received through his generosity, and motivate the
laypeople to follow his example on a more moderate level and make regular
donations to the temple.”
Alongside an encouragement to generosity, the dramatic setting of the tale,
as a result of a fertile friction between a Brahminical trope and Buddhist values,
57 Das Gupta 1978: 32 reasons that “even in its original pre-Buddhist form this legend must
have been an excellent example of charity, and this was the fact which encouraged the Buddhist
monks to adopt this legend for preaching charity. They not only adopted the existing tale, but also
magnified the idea of charity prevailing already in this pre-Buddhist legend and developed it into
a Buddhist legend by amalgamating it with the Buddha, bodhi and bodhisattva” notions.
29

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
also speaks to the audience at several levels. Emmrich (2016: 191) explains one
of the functions of the story to be “to encourage the female listeners to picture
themselves as Madrī and to put them into a position where they are forced to
negotiate among the pressures of their own household duties, their own affective
marital expectations, and the anxieties produced by the aspirations of their more
or less bodhisattvalike husbands … the telling of this story is as much an appeal
to domestic piety as an occasion when domestic unhappiness, its relentless and
seemingly unchangeable nature, finds a public place of articulation.” Heim
(2003: 538) notes that “the text gives direct cues — and permission — to its
hearer to feel apprehension and ambivalence”.
These features taken together provide a meaningful background to the
success of the tale in the Buddhist traditions. Besides being apt for popular
teaching, however, the occurrence of the same tale in the Saṅghabhedavastu
points to the fact that entertaining stories were not lost on the monastic reciters
and their brethren.58
Here it also needs to be kept in mind that Mūlasarvāstivāda monastics would
quite probably have perceived the story of Viśvantara as a factual account of
something that actually happened, comparable to a background story in the
Vinaya that purports to explain why the Buddha promulgated a particular
pārājika rule. Both would have been experienced as equally “real”.
In relation to the tale that depicts the promulgation of the first pārājika rule
concerning celibacy, I have argued that the differences that emerge from
a comparative study of this story in various Vinayas show that this type of
narration has to be understood in terms of their teaching function in the context
of legal education, in the sense that such stories reflect the needs and concerns of
those responsible for the teaching, transmission, and codification of the different
Vinayas, but not necessarily what actually happened on the ground.59
The present study, together with another study of the background narration
to the pārājika on killing and assisting in suicide,60 further confirms the need to
consider Vinaya narrative on its own terms. Viśvantara’s exploits form part of
the narrative embedding of what for the early Buddhist monastic community
58 The attraction of entertainment evident in Vinaya narrative can fruitfully be related to art,
where Zin 2015: 136 observes that “one of the main characteristics of early Buddhist art is the
placement of … representations relevant for enlightenment … next to depictions of a merely
auspicious nature, which are propitious for material prosperity but not for enlightenment.”
59 Anālayo 2012: 416 and 424.
60 Anālayo 2014b.
30

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
appears to have been a major crisis: the schism attempt by Devadatta. It thus
stands on a par with the narrations related to the pārājika rules on celibacy
and killing. Nevertheless, the story of Viśvantara hardly gives us a historically
accurate picture of events that took place in ancient India. What it does offer,
instead, is a window on the concerns, needs, and attitudes of those responsible
for the transmission and final shape of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, and by
extension of Vinaya literature in general. It therefore seems to me vital that
a mode of reading Vinaya narrative is found that proceeds beyond the naïve
literalism with which at times this type of literature is approached and which
is able to accommodate similarly the depiction of events leading to a monastic
misdeed as well as a jātaka like the one studied in this paper.
Conclusion
Basic elements of the tale known in the Pāli tradition as the Vessantara-jātaka
appear to reflect the influence of a setting imbued with brahminical values and
stand in conversation with that, in particular with the trope, recurrent in the
Mahābhārata, of the host’s duty to provide all and everything a begging brahmin
might ask for. The adoption of this story in the Buddhist tradition naturally finds
its home within the scheme of perfections a bodhisattva is expected to achieve
during the path to Buddhahood. As a result of this adoption, some aspects of the
story contrast to the early Buddhist normative ethical perspective.
The popularity of the tale among monastic teachers would quite probably
have been inspired by the potential of employing the tale’s depiction of relentless
generosity to encourage giving among lay supporters. The attraction held by
the same tale among Buddhist audiences would to some extent be the result of
the fertile field of friction caused by the transposition of the basic plot into the
setting of the perfections, allowing room for the articulation of ambivalence and
the cathartic experiencing of related emotions.
The employment of the tale in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya points to twin
concerns of monastic story telling: fleshing out legal concerns through narrative
embellishment and providing a convenient stock of tales for preaching purposes,
especially for ensuring the continuity of a mendicant tradition by encouraging
generosity. Together with the background narration to various rules, the occur-
rence of jātaka tales in Vinaya literature reflects related aspects in the training of
monastics and alerts to the potential as well as the limitations of such tales for
reconstructing the actual situation on the ground.
31

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Abbreviations
AN Aṅguttara-nikāya
Cp Cariyāpiṭaka
Cp-a Cariyāpiṭaka-aṭṭhakathā
D Derge edition
Dā Dīrgha-āgama
DN Dīgha-nikāya
Eā Ekottarika-āgama
Jā Jātaka
Mā Madhyama-āgama
Mil Milindapañha
Pj Paramatthajotikā
Q Peking edition
Sā Saṃyukta-āgama
SHT Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden
SN Saṃyutta-nikāya
Sn Sutta-nipāta
T Taishō edition (CBETA)
References
Alsdorf, ludwig 1957: “Bemerkungen zum Vessantara-Jātaka”, Wiener Zeitschrift
für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens, 1: 1–70.
Alsdorf, ludwig 1977: “Das Bhūridatta-Jātaka. Ein anti-brahmanischer Nāga-
Roman”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, 21: 25–55.
Anālayo 2009: “The Development of the Pāli Udāna Collection”, Bukkyō Kenkyū,
37: 39–72.
Anālayo 2010a: The Genesis of the Bodhisattva Ideal, Hamburg: Hamburg
University Press.
Anālayo 2010b: “The Influence of Commentarial Exegesis on the Transmission of
āgama literature”, in Translating Buddhist Chinese, Problems and Prospects,
K. Meisig (ed.), 1–20, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
32

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Anālayo 2012: “The Case of Sudinna: On the Function of Vinaya Narrative, Based
on a Comparative Study of the Background Narration to the First Pārājika Rule”,
Journal of Buddhist Ethics, 19: 396–438.
Anālayo 2013: “A Note on the Term Theravāda”, Buddhist Studies Review, 30.2:
216–235.
Anālayo 2014a: The Dawn of Abhidharma, Hamburg: Hamburg University Press.
Anālayo 2014b: “The Mass Suicide of Monks in Discourse and Vinaya Literature”,
(with an addendum by Richard Gombrich), Journal of the Oxford Centre for
Buddhist Studies, 7: 11–55.
Anālayo 2016: “Selected Madhyama-āgama Passages and their Pāli Parallels”,
Dharma Drum Journal of Buddhist Studies (forthcoming).
Appleton, Naomi 2010: Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism, Narrating the
Bodhisatta Path, Surrey: Ashgate.
Appleton, Naomi and S. Shaw 2015: “Introduction”, in The Ten Great Birth Stories
of the Buddha, The Mahānipāta of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, N. Appleton and S.
Shaw, 1–49, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Bechert, Heinz and Wille, K. 2004: Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden,
Teil 9, Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner.
Benveniste, Émile 1946: Vessantara Jātaka, texte sogdien, édité, tradui e commenté,
Paris: Paul Geuthner.
Black, Brian 2007: The Character of the Self in Ancient India: Priests, Kings, and
Women in the Early Upaniṣads, Albany: State University of New York Press.
Black, Brian 2011: “Ambaṭṭha and Śvetaketu: literary Connections Between the
Upaniṣads and Early Buddhist Narratives”, Journal of the American Academy
of Religion, 79.1: 136–161.
Chandra Das, Sarat and P.H.M. Vidyabhushaṇa 1888: Avadāna Kalpalatā, A
Collection of Legendary Stories about the Bodhisattvas by Kshemendra,
Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press.
Chavannes, Édouard 1911 (vol. 3): Cinq Cents Contes et Apologues, Extraits du
Tripiṭaka Chinois et Traduits en Français, Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Collins, Steven 1998: Nirvana and other Buddhist Felicities, Utopias of the Pali
Imaginaire, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
33

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Collins, Steven 2016: “Introduction, Dramatis Personae, and Chapters in the
Vessantara Jātaka”, in Readings of the Vessantara Jātaka, S. Collins (ed.), 1–35,
New York: Columbia University Press.
Cone, Margaret and R. Gombrich 1977: The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara,
A Buddhist Epic, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Das Gupta, Kabita 1978: Viśvantarâvadāna, Eine buddhistische Legende, Edition
eines Textes auf Sanskrit und auf Tibetisch, Eingeleitet und übersetzt, Ph.D.
thesis, Berlin: Freie Universität.
Dresden, Mark J. 1955: “The Jātakastava or ‘Praise of the Buddha’s Former Births’, Indo-
Scythian (Khotanese) Text, English Translation, Grammatical Notes, and Glossaries”,
Transactions of the American Oriental Society, New Series, 45.5: 397–508.
Durgāprasād, Pandit and k.P. Parab 1930: The Kathāsaritsāgara of Somadevabhatta,
(revised by W.l.S. Paṇsīkar), Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press.
Durt, Hubert 1999: “The Offering of the Children of Prince Viśvantara/Sudāna in the
Chinese Tradition”, Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist
Studies, 2: 266–231.
Durt, Hubert 2000: “The Casting-off of Mādrī in the Northern Buddhist literary
Tradition", Journal of the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist
Studies, 3: 133–158.
Dutt, Nalinaksha 1984: Gilgit Manuscripts, Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinayavastu, vol. III
part 4, Delhi: Sri Satguru.
Emmrich, Christoph 2016: “Vessantara Opts Out, Newar Versions of the Tale of
the Generous Prince”, in Readings of the Vessantara Jātaka, S. Collins (ed.),
183–209, New York: Columbia University Press.
Fick, Richard 1926: “Zur Entstehungsgeschichte des Vessantara-Jātaka”, in Beiträge
zur Literaturwissenschaft und Geistesgeschichte Indiens, Festgabe Hermann
Jacobi zum 75. Geburtstag (11. Februar 1925) dargebracht von Freunden,
Kollegen und Schülern, W. Kirfel (ed.), 145–159, Bonn: F. Klopp.
Findly, Ellison Banks 2003: Dāna, Giving and Getting in Pali Buddhism, Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Gabaude, Louis 2016: “Readers in the Maze, Modern Debates about the Vessantara
Story in Thailand”, in Readings of the Vessantara Jātaka, S. Collins (ed.), 37–
52, New York: Columbia University Press.
34

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Gethin, Rupert 1992: The Buddhist Path to Awakening: A Study of the Bodhi-
Pakkhiyā Dhammā, Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Gnoli, Raniero 1978 (vol. 2): The Gilgit Manuscript of the Saṅghabhedavastu, Being
the 17th and Last Section of the Vinaya of the Mūlasarvāstivādin, Rome: Istituto
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Gombrich, Richard F. 1971/2008: Buddhist Precept and Practice, Traditional
Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of Ceylon, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Gombrich, Richard 1985: “The Vessantara Jātaka, the Rāmāyaṇa and the Dasaratha
Jātaka”, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 105.3: 427–437.
Gombrich, Richard F. 2003: “Obsession with Origins”, in Approaching the Dhamma,
Buddhist Texts and Practice in South and Southeast Asia, A.M Blackburn and J.
Samuels (ed.), 3–15, Seattle: Pariyatti Editions.
Hahn, Michael 2011: Poetical Vision of the Buddha’s Former Lives, Seventeen
Legends from Haribhaṭṭa’s Jātakamālā, New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Heim, Maria 2003: “The Aesthetics of Excess”, Journal of the American Academy
of Religion, 71.3: 531–554.
Hopkins, E. Washburn 1932: “The Oath in Hindu Epic Literature”, Journal of the
American Oriental Society, 54.4: 316–337.
Insler, Stanley 1989/1990: “The Shattered Head Split and the Epic Tale of Śakuntalā”,
Bulletin d’Études Indiennes, 7/8: 97–139.
Jamison, Stephanie W. 1996: Sacrificed Wife/Sacrificer’s Wife, Women, Ritual, and
Hospitality in Ancient India, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kern, Hendrik 1891: The Jātaka-mālā or Bodhisattvāvadāna-mālā by Ārya-çūra,
Boston, Mass: Ginn & Company.
Ladwig, Patrice 2016: “Emotions and Narrative, Excessive Giving and Ethical
Ambivalence in the lao Vessantara Jātaka”, in Readings of the Vessantara
Jātaka, S. Collins (ed.), 53–80, New York: Columbia University Press.
Lamotte, Étienne 1949/1981 (vol. 2): Le Traité de la Grande Vertu de Sagesse de
Nāgārjuna (Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra), Louvain-la-Neuve: Institut Orientaliste.
Lenz, Timothy 2003: A New Version of the Gāndhārī Dharmapada and a Collection
of Previous-Birth Stories, British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 16 + 25, Seattle:
University of Washington Press.
35

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Lienhard, Siegfried 1978: “La légende du prince Visvantara dans la tradition
népalaise”, Arts Asiatiques, 34: 139–149 and 151–156.
lüders, Heinrich 1897/1940: “Die Sage von Ṛṣyaśṛṅga”, in Philologica Indica,
Ausgewählte kleine Schriften von Heinrich Lüders, Festgabe zum siebzigsten
Geburtstag am 25. Juni 1939 dargebracht von Kollegen, Freunden und Schülern,
1–43, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
lüders, Heinrich 1904/1940: “Die Jātakas und die Epik. Die kṛṣṇa-Sage”, in
Philologica Indica, Ausgewählte kleine Schriften von Heinrich Lüders, Festgabe
zum siebzigsten Geburtstag am 25. Juni 1939 dargebracht von Kollegen,
Freunden und Schülern, 80–106, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Matsumura Hisashi 1980: Four Avadānas from the Gilgit Manuscript, Ph.D. thesis,
Australian National University.
Mukherjee, Biswadeb 1966: Die Überlieferung von Devadatta dem Widersacher des
Buddha in den Kanonischen Schriften, München: Kitzinger.
Norman, k.R. 1981/1991: “Notes on the Vessantara-jātaka”, in Collected Papers,
Volume II, K.R. Norman (ed.) 172–186, Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Sakaki Ryōzaburō 1916/1962: 飜譯名義大集, Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation.
Sander, Lore and E. Waldschmidt 1980: Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden,
Teil IV, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.
Schlingloff, Dieter 1963: “Zur Interpretation des Prātimokṣasūtra”, Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, 113: 536–551.
Schlingloff, Dieter 1981: “Erzählung und Bild: Die Darstellungsformen von
Handlungsabläufen in der europäischen und indischen Kunst”, Beiträge zur
Allgemeinen und Vergleichenden Archäologie, 3: 87–213.
Schlingloff, Dieter 2000: Ajanta Handbook of Paintings, Narrative Wall-paintings,
Vol. I Interpretation, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Shaw, Sarah 2015: “The Birth Story of Vessantara (Vessantara-jātaka), Introduction”,
in The Ten Great Birth Stories of the Buddha, The Mahānipāta of the
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, Volume Two, N. Appleton and S. Shaw, 507–534, Chiang
Mai: Silkworm Books.
Shì Huìfēng 2015: “Chiastic Structure of the Vessantara jātaka, Textual Criticism
and Interpretation through Inverted Parallelism”, Buddhist Studies Review, 32.1:
143–159.
36

THE VESSANTARA-JāTAkA AND MūlASARVāSTIVāDA VINAYA NARRATIVE
Silk, Jonathan A. 2007: “Good and Evil in Indian Buddhism: The Five Sins of
Immediate Retribution”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 35: 253–286.
Śivadatta, M.P. and k.P. Parab 1901: The Bṛihatkathâmañjarî of Kshemendra,
Bombay: Nirṇaya-sâgara Press.
Skilling, Peter 2000: “Vasubandhu and the Vyākhyāyukti literature”, Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies, 23.2: 297–350.
Spiro, Melford E. 1970/1982: Buddhism and Society, A Great Tradition and Its
Burmese Vicissitudes, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Tournier, Vincent 2012: “The Mahāvastu and the Vinayapiṭaka of the Mahāsāṃghika-
lokottaravādins”, Annual Report of the International Research Institute for
Advanced Buddhology at Soka University, 15: 87–104.
Tucci, Giuseppe 1949 (vol. 2): Tibetan Painted Scrolls, Roma: Libreria dello Stato.
von Hinüber, Oskar 1998: Entstehung und Aufbau der Jātaka-Sammlung, Studien
zur Literatur des Theravāda-Buddhismus I, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.
Witzel, Michael 1987: “The Case of the Shattered Head”, Studien zur Indologie und
Iranistik, 13/14: 363–415.
Yao Fumi 2012: “Problems in the sTog Palace Manuscript of the Bhaiṣajyavastu of
the Mūlasarvāstivāda-vinaya”, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies, 60.3:
1189–1193.
Yao Fumi 2015: “A Preliminary Report on the Newly Found Sanskrit Manuscript
Fragments of the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya”, Indian
Logic, 8: 289–303.
Young, R.F. and G.P.V. Somaratna 1996: Vain Debates, The Buddhist-Christian
Controversies of Nineteenth-Century Ceylon, Vienna: Institut für Indologie der
Universität Wien.
Zin, Monika 2015: “Pictures of Paradise for Good Luck and Prosperity: Depictions
of Themes Irrelevant for Enlightenment in the Older Buddhist Tradition (with
Special Reference to the Paintings of Ajanta)”, in Mani-Sushma Archaeology
and Heritage, Dr. B.R: Mani Festschrift, Vol. 1, V. Kumar and B. Rawat (ed.),
125–147, Delhi: B.R. Publishing Corporation.
37