TITLE: Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism
AUTHOR: Naomi Appleton
YEAR: 2018
LANGUAGE: EN
SOURCE: Buddhist Studies Review 35.1–2 (2018): 279–292 | DOI: 10.1558/bsrv.36764
TYPE: Journal Article (PDF)
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 46022
STATUS: OK============================================================

BSRV 35.1–2 (2018) 279–292 Buddhist Studies Review ISSN (print) 0256-2897
http://www.doi.10.1558/bsrv.36764 Buddhist Studies Review ISSN (online) 1747-9681
Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism
Naomi appletoN
University of Edinburgh
naomi.appleton@ed.ac.uk
Keywords
Apadāna, Bodhisatta, Buddha, jātaka, paccekabuddha, Sutta-nipāta
This article explores the role of paccekabuddhas in stories of the Buddha’s past
lives (jātaka tales) in early Buddhist narrative collections in Pāli and Sanskrit.
In early Buddhism paccekabuddhas are liminal figures in two senses: they ap-
pear between Buddhist dispensations, and they are included as a category
of awakening between sammāsambuddha and arahat. Because of their appear-
ance in times of no Buddhism, paccekabuddhas feature regularly in jātaka lit-
erature, as exemplary renouncers, teachers, or recipients of gifts. This article
asks what the liminal status of paccekabuddhas means for their interactions
with the Buddha and his past lives as Bodhisatta.
Introduction
The last time I saw Lance Cousins was at the 2014 Spalding Symposium on Indian
Religions in Manchester. At the time I was knee-deep in the complex story-net-
work concerning kings called Janaka and Nimi and their renunciatory prowess.1
I had headed off on a tangent exploring paccekabuddhas, since these apparently soli-
tary renouncers feature large in such stories. I remember chatting with Lance over
tea and a biscuit about the role of paccekabuddhas as a category and as a narrative
device. I then had to set this area aside to complete work on my recent book, but I
always wanted to come back to paccekabuddhas. Since this formed my last proper
conversation with Lance, and since — like paccekabuddhas — he was both an accom-
plished meditator and a stimulating teacher,2 it seemed an appropriate topic to
address in this memorial collection.
The term paccekabuddha (or, in Sanskrit pratyekabuddha) is usually translated as
‘solitary Buddha’ or ‘lone Buddha’.3 Such figures are said to arise in times between
1. Eventually published as chapter 6 of Appleton 2017.
2. I was lucky enough to benefit from Lance’s Pāli teaching, both formally during my DPhil at the
University of Oxford, and informally at his home, where Sarah Shaw and I spent many a happy
afternoon reading jātakas with him. On paccekabuddhas as teachers see Appleton 2019.
3. Since I am primarily exploring Pāli sources I will tend to use Pāli terms except when explicitly
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2018, Office 415, The Workstation, 15 Paternoster Row, Sheffield, S1 2BX

280 Naomi Appleton
Buddhist dispensations, achieve awakening without access to teachings, and pursue
a life of solitary renunciation: they ‘wander lonely as a rhinoceros’, as the famous
Sutta-nipāta verses put it.4 They are liminal figures in more than one sense: Not only
do they appear between full buddhas (sammāsambuddhas), but they are positioned
between these and arahats in the enumeration of types of awakening, realising the
truth themselves (like full buddhas) but not going on to found a Buddhist dispen-
sation or monastic lineage. Because of their association with past times before the
Dhamma was made available by the most recent Buddha, paccekabuddhas feature
most prominently in jātaka and apadāna literature. In jātaka stories in particular
their liminality comes to the fore, as they interact with the Bodhisatta in stories
told by the Buddha. In such stories we find much more than silence and solitude:
paccekabuddhas often gather in groups, sometimes bound by past-life friendship;
they teach others, including the Bodhisatta, often through enigmatic verses,
metaphors or images; and they offer a model of renunciation fit for the distant past,
before the monasticism instituted by the Buddha.
In this paper I will explore the role of paccekabuddhas in jātaka literature, with
a particular focus on the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, but also making reference to jātakas
in the Apadāna, Avadānaśataka, and Mahāvastu. I will also make some comparative
comments about the non-jātaka occurrences of paccekabuddhas in the Sutta-nipāta
commentary. The article will address the following question: What does the posi-
tioning of paccekabuddhas as interim figures, appearing as they do between the
dispensations of full buddhas, mean for their relationship with the most recent
Buddha or his past lives as Bodhisatta? I will start by considering stories in which
paccekabuddhas appear as generic best renouncers or best recipients of gifts in the
times between Buddhisms, as well as the karmic rewards of serving such figures.
Next I will explore stories in which paccekabuddhas assist or teach the Bodhisatta,
asking what this tells us about the various spiritual and social hierarchies exposed
in jātaka literature. This will lead on to some concluding thoughts about how the
paccekabuddha serves to both undermine and reinforce the status of Bodhisatta and
Buddha in jātaka stories.
The paccekabuddha as interim figure
In a recent article in Artibus Asiae, Samerchai Poolsuwan (2016) explores the iconog-
raphy of paccekabuddhas in a range of Pagan sites from around the twelfth to thir-
teenth centuries, and demonstrates that paccekabuddha images often represent the
intermediate time between past and present — or present and future — buddhas. As
such they are depicted in careful relation to, for example, the twenty-eight buddhas
referring to a Sanskrit text. I prefer to use paccekabuddha rather than the standard translation
‘solitary Buddha’, as in narrative occurrences paccekabuddhas are often not solitary. Leaving the
term untranslated has the potential to mislead, however, since Norman (1983) has convincingly
argued that the term may originally have been related to pratyaya-buddha and meant something
like ‘awakened by signs’. If pressed, I would translate as ‘independent Buddha’.
4. Sn 35–75. On why the reference should be to a rhinoceros and not his horn see Jones 2014. For
a translation and study of the verses and commentarial stories associated with paccekabuddhas
see Kloppenborg 1974.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism 281
of the Buddhavaṃsa, or events in the life of the next buddha, Metteyya. Poolsuwan
further argues that they may be iconographically intermediate too, being depicted
with some of the iconography of full buddhas but not all, marking them out as some-
where between a buddha and an arahat.5
As Poolsuwan rightly notes, one of the main associations with paccekabuddhas is
their position between buddhas, and between the buddha and his awakened disci-
ples. As such, paccekabuddhas occupy a liminal space. This liminal role is particularly
apparent in the narrative universe of jātaka stories, in which neither a full buddha
nor any arahats can exist. As such, paccekabuddhas often feature as a substitute for
these other forms of awakened being, either as a generic ‘best field of merit’ or as
‘best renouncer’. We will therefore begin our examination of paccekabuddhas in the
jātakas with these two functions of these independent renouncers.
In a famous story found in the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā (40) and the Jātakamālā (4),
the Bodhisatta sees a paccekabuddha and decides to offer him a gift, but Māra cre-
ates a vision of a hell pit that he must traverse if he is to succeed in his intentions,
and declares that gift-giving leads to hell. The virtuous donor, of course, sets out
in any case to make his offering, and miraculous lotus-flowers appear beneath his
feet as stepping-stones.6 This is the only real occurrence of a paccekabuddha in the
Jātakamālā, and his role is simply to demonstrate the Buddha-to-be’s commitment
to almsgiving. The importance of giving alms is also the focus of the Dhajaviheṭha-
jātaka (Ja 391), though it is addressed through slightly different means: A false
ascetic causes a king to stop supporting ascetics, and the god Sakka (the Bodhisatta)
is forced to intervene to teach the king about the importance of venerating ascetics,
using an old paccekabuddha as an example of a good recipient. In the Āditta-jātaka
(Ja 424), paccekabuddhas themselves highlight the importance of gift giving, in a
teaching given after they accept alms from King Bharata (the Bodhisatta) and his
queen.
The idea that paccekabuddhas are the best available recipients is further high-
lighted in the Dasabrāhmaṇa-jātaka (Ja 495) in which King Yudhiṭṭhira consults his
wise counsellor Vidhura (the Bodhisatta) about the qualities of brahmins. After a
number of verses about those who are brahmins in name only, the king wishes
to invite only ‘true’ brahmins to an almsgiving, and so they invite five hundred
paccekabuddhas. Thus the story shows characters famous from the Brahmanical
epic Mahābhārata acknowledging the Buddhist perspective on who makes the best
recipient. In the very next story, the Bhikkhāparampara-jātaka (Ja 496), a king trav-
els through his land with his brahmin chaplain in disguise, trying to find out if he
is deficient in virtue. Upon receiving a gift of some food, he gives it to his brah-
min chaplain, who gives it to an ascetic, who gives it to character identified in the
verses as a bhikkhu. This term, which literally means ‘one who lives by alms’, usually
refers to a monk, but is explained in the prose as here referring to a paccekabuddha.
5. It is noted that his arguments on this point are disputed by other scholars, and it is possible that
the images he sees as paccekabuddhas are actually arahats.
6. A similar tale is found twice in the Mahāvastu (III, 41–7 and III, 250–254) though there the poten-
tial recipient is not named, and the tester is the god Śakra rather than Māra.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

282 Naomi Appleton
The discrepancy between verse and commentarial prose (which is itself reasonably
common in the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā) serves to highlight the use of paccekabuddhas in
this story as a simple substitute for a monk in a time when no Buddhist monasti-
cism is in existence. Indeed, the appearance of a paccekabuddha is often described as
similar to a monk, for example they wear orange robes, further blurring the lines.
That a person with such an appearance is widely trusted is an important narrative
device in two further jātakas, in which someone takes on a disguise as a paccekabud-
dha in order to catch and kill an elephant (Ja 221 and 514).
The worthiness of paccekabuddhas as recipients is reinforced by the karmic
rewards of serving them, and this is another common theme in jātaka literature, as
also in apadāna/avadāna literature. For example, in the Kummāsapiṇḍa-jātaka (Ja 415),
a poor man (the Bodhisatta) gives four handfuls of food to four paccekabuddhas, and
as a result is reborn as a king. In the Mahāpanāda-jātaka and Suruci-jātaka (Ja 264 and
489), a father and son build a shelter for a paccekabuddha and reap impressive karmic
rewards including rebirth as a king. Karmic rewards can even fruit within a single
lifetime: In the Saṃkha-jātaka (Ja 442) the brahmin Saṅkha (the Bodhisatta) is very
generous and decides to go to sea to get more wealth to give away. A paccekabuddha
sees that he will run into trouble and so appears before him to give him a merit-
making opportunity. Saṅkha duly gives him his own sandals and a sunshade, as a
result of which, when his ship is destroyed, he and his attendant survive and swim
for seven days until the goddess Maṇimekhalā rescues them; she declares them
worthy of rescue because of the gift Saṅkha made to the paccekabuddha.
Bad karmic interactions are also possible, as are mixed ones. In the Mayhaka-
jātaka (Ja 390) we discover that the reason a rich merchant cannot enjoy his wealth
is because in a past life he gave a gift to a paccekabuddha but was too miserly to
rejoice in it. An episode of the Kuṇāla-jātaka (Ja 536) records that a woman’s ugly
face but soft skin is due to having given a gift to a paccekabuddha but in anger.
In a little interlude of the Kusa-jātaka (Ja 531, with a parallel in Mahāvastu III, 27) we
find the karmic cause of the ugliness of King Kusa (the Bodhisatta) and the reason
he is despised by his wife: in a past life she had given away his portion of food to a
paccekabuddha and he had become angry and taken it back (see Shaw article, p. 265).
As we can see, the Bodhisatta is far from exempt from these karmicly potent
encounters with paccekabuddhas, and this is particularly true of Pāli literature.7
Perhaps the most interesting examples appear in the Pubbakammapiloti chapter of
the Apadāna, which, despite being about the Buddha, is tucked in with the verses
of the theras (Ap 299–301). In this intriguing text we hear of past-life misdeeds that
the Bodhisatta committed, and how these explain various minor sufferings in the
7. Sanskrit narrative literature also records plenty of stories of karmicly potent encounters with
pratyekabuddhas, though the Buddha-to-be rarely features. In the Mahāvastu, for example, past-
life service of pratyekabuddhas explains why Ājñāta Kauṇḍinya was first to understand the
Dharma, and why Yaśoda mastered the powers so quickly. The only encounter between the
Buddha-to-be and a pratyekabuddha, however, is in a past-life episode within the Kuśa-jātaka,
discussed above. In the Avadānaśataka there are plenty of encounters with pratyekabuddhas, but
none of them feature the Buddha-to-be.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism 283
Buddha’s final life.8 Several of these misdeeds involve paccekabuddhas: the Bodhisatta
slanders a paccekabuddha (verse 4), throws a clod of earth at a paccekabuddha (verse
17), and attacks a paccekabuddha with an elephant (verse 19). All of these actions of
course have bad karmic results, both in hell realms and in his final life, in which the
Buddha was slandered and subject to attacks from Devadatta, including an attack
with an elephant. Poetic justice abounds in the Apadāna.
Paccekabuddhas supporting or teaching the Bodhisatta
In addition to providing a powerful field of merit (or demerit) and serving as
ideal recipient of gifts, paccekabbuddhas in the jātakas often function as teachers
or exemplary renouncers, frequently encouraging the Bodhisatta to give up his
worldly attachments.9 Perhaps the most famous of such stories, and the one that
initially prompted my interest in the whole category of paccekabuddhas, is the story
of the four paccekabuddha-kings and the potter, found in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka
(Ja 408). In this tale, the Bodhisatta is a potter, and he and his wife are visited by four
paccekabbuddhas who used to be famous kings. The potter asks them how they
came to be paccekabuddhas and they explain in a verse each. These verses speak of
signs or experiences that led to renunciation, such as seeing a mango tree stripped
bare, or hawks fighting over a piece of meat. The theme, of course, is the perils of
worldly life and the benefits of renunciation. After hearing them, the potter decides
to become a renouncer himself, but his wife — also inspired — beats him to it and
leaves him to care for their children. Only once the children are old enough to fend
for themselves is the Bodhisatta-potter able to fulfill his ambition.
This story is important for several reasons. First, it draws our attention to a key
theme with which paccekabuddhas are often associated, namely seeing signs that
lead to renunciation. Secondly, it shows how their means of learning — through
direct experience or reflection on a powerful image — becomes their means of
inspiring or teaching others, either through recounting their own encounters as
here, or concocting new ones for their audiences, as in other narratives. Thirdly,
it shows that this lesson about the benefits of renunciation is suitable for all audi-
ences, not just royalty, and not just men. And one of the most common audiences
for their teachings about renunciation in the jātakas is the Bodhisatta, in whatever
form he happens to have taken birth.
Often the paccekabuddhas that teach the Bodhisatta turn out to be old friends.
In the Darīmukha-jātaka (Ja 378), for example, while relaxing in a park the young
brahmin Darīmukha realises that his friend — the Bodhisatta — is about to become
king and that he himself is likely to be appointed as the commander of the army.
Deciding that he prefers renunciation he hides himself at the key moment, when the
people come to invite the Bodhisatta to be king. After the Bodhisatta has accepted
their invitation and been taken off to the palace, Darīmukha emerges from the shad-
ows, sits on the empty royal bench, and sees a withered leaf fall to the ground. At
8. For a helpful study of this text see Walters 1990.
9. For a more extensive study of the content and methods of paccekabuddha teachers in Pāli litera-
ture see Appleton 2019.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

284 Naomi Appleton
once he realises paccekabodhi, magically assumes the appearance of a renouncer,
and flies off to the Himalayas. After forty years of being infatuated with the glories
of kingship, the king recalls his former friend and conceives a desire to see him.
Eventually the paccekabuddha Darīmukha decides it is time to visit, to encourage
the king to renounce now that he is older and has many descendants to continue
the line. The king, though pleased to see his former friend, takes some persuading
before he is willing to detach himself from his worldly life, but he does eventually
renounce. Of course, as he is the Bodhisatta he cannot achieve paccekabodhi like his
friend, but he does achieve a heavenly rebirth as a result of his efforts.
A closely related story is the Sonaka-jātaka (Ja 529), in which the Bodhisatta,
called Arindama, becomes king and his friend Sonaka becomes a renouncer.10 As
in the Darīmukha-jātaka, Sonaka achieves paccekabodhi as a result of seeing a with-
ered leaf, that classic sign of impermanence, and immediately disappears off to the
Himalayas. When the king much later wants to see him, Sonaka visits and offers
some potent teachings, including outlining the eight blessings of being a renouncer
(samaṇa), which are all benefits of non-attachment, such as remaining dispassionate
even if one’s city were to burn down. When the king remains unconvinced, Sonaka
tells him the famous parable of a crow who is so greedy that he gets stuck inside an
elephant carcass, busily eating away as the hide shrinks in the sun.
In these two stories the aim of the paccekabuddha’s teaching is to persuade the
Bodhisatta-king of the need to renounce, but sometimes the teachings are about
other related ideals, particularly the need for control of the senses and avoidance
of various kinds of attachment. Thus, in the Telpatta-jātaka (Ja 96, see also Ja 132)
the Bodhisatta-prince seeks a kingship across the other side of a wilderness, and
some paccekabuddhas counsel him to be careful, as the wilderness is populated by
demonesses who ensnare men’s senses then eat them. The Bodhisatta sets off with
five companions, each of whom falls foul of the demonesses’ efforts, whether soft
couches, beautiful music, sweet foods, enticing perfumes or seductive forms. Only
the Bodhisatta has full control of all his senses, and his reward is to reach the other
side in safety and gain a kingship. Having paccekabuddhas as your advisors turns
out to be very beneficial.
It is fitting that kings should so often be the beneficiaries of the teachings of
paccekabuddhas, since they are their polar opposites, being so dominated by worldly
pleasures and attachments. Perhaps for the same reason, it is also very often kings
that become such accomplished renouncers, though this is by no means always the
case. In the Pānīya-jātaka (Ja 459), five householders each commit and then reflect
upon a misdeed, and this leads to their renunciation and paccekabodhi. Later they
recount their experiences to the Bodhisatta, who is a king. Their misdeeds are not
severe: the first stole water from a friend, the second felt lust towards another man’s
wife, the third told a lie in order to save his own life, the fourth permitted slaughter
of animals for sacrifice, and the fifth allowed the consumption of strong drink at a
festival, which led to fights and injuries. Once again the Bodhisatta-as-king is able
10. See also Mahāvastu III, 449–61 for a parallel story, though in this version the renouncer is not
said to be a pratyekabuddha.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism 285
to benefit from the teachings of these paccekabuddhas, realising that unwholesome
desires lead to bad behaviour and deciding to renounce as well. Although the verses
are recounted in a manner reminiscent of the four paccekabuddha-kings, the themes
are rather different: these paccekabuddhas demonstrate that renunciation is a way to
avoid bad deeds by cultivating non-attachment, whereas the paccekabuddha-kings
reflect on the inevitable destruction of worldly wealth or the benefits of solitude.
However, the end result is the same, with the Bodhisatta in both cases becoming a
renouncer.
Even when he is already a renouncer, the Bodhisatta can benefit from the teach-
ings of paccekabuddhas. In the Pañcuposatha-jātaka (Ja 490) the Bodhisatta is a brah-
min sage who is afflicted with an excess of pride, which is, of course, a form of
attachment. Four animals that live near him each wrestle with a different form of
attachment: a pigeon vows to overcome his passion for his mate after she is eaten
by a hawk, a snake vows to overcome the anger that led him to kill a bull, a jackal
vows to overcome his greed after escaping an elephant carcass in which he has been
trapped for a long time, and a bear vows to overcome greed that has led to him being
attacked by villagers. All four decide to observe the holy day (uposatha). Meanwhile
a paccekabuddha sees the Bodhisatta-sage’s pride and deliberately comes to sit on
his seat, making him angry. The paccekabuddha rebukes the sage for his pride, and
— in a rather unusual passage for the jātakas — tells him that he will become a full
buddha, and that such proud behaviour is unworthy of him. Despite this prediction
and admonition, the sage remains silent, refusing even to pay respects to his visitor.
Finally, the paccekabuddha shocks the sage by flying into the air, and all of a sudden
the Bodhisatta realises what an opportunity he has missed as a result of his pride. He
reflects on this and finally achieves the meditative attainments. He and the animals
then exchange verses about their experiences, and we learn that pride, along with
other forms of attachment such as greed, passion and anger, should be overcome.
In addition to showing how the Bodhisatta benefits from the teachings of a pacc-
ekabuddha, this story reminds us of the question of hierarchy. In relation to the proud
brahmin sage, the paccekabuddha is superior, yet the proud brahmin sage is himself
set to become a full buddha, clearly superior to a paccekabuddha. As a Bodhisatta,
however, he cannot attain paccekabodhi, and so even after he has overcome his pride,
all he achieves is a range of meditative attainments and a rebirth in the Brahmā
realm. We might reasonably ask which of the two characters — the Bodhisatta-sage
or the paccekabuddha — is the superior ‘hero’ of the story. This same question arises,
though it is less directly addressed, in all the other stories in which the Bodhisatta is
taught or encouraged to renounce by a paccekabuddha, for although he may follow
their recommendations, he can never equal their attainments.
A Bodhisatta cannot be a paccekabuddha
The questions of spiritual hierarchy that arise in these stories are avoided in the many
commentarial tales that accompany the rhinoceros horn verses of the Sutta-nipāta
(Pj II 52–130). In this collection we find numerous stories in which kings are inspired
by paccekabuddhas into renouncing and attaining paccekabodhi themselves, thereby
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

286 Naomi Appleton
equaling the attainment of their teachers, who are often said to have been their
friends in past lives. The tricky thing for the jātaka genre, in contrast to the Sutta-
nipāta commentary, is that a character has to be identified as the Bodhisatta, and the
Bodhisatta cannot — by definition — achieve any form of awakening until his final
life as a buddha. Evidence that the decision over which character ought to be identi-
fied as the Bodhisatta is not always straightforward is found in one of the most inter-
esting stories that is associated with paccekabuddhas, the Mahājanaka-jātaka (Ja 539).
In the Mahājanaka-jātaka, the hero and namesake of the story is a prince and then
king called Mahājanaka, or simply Janaka. As a boy, he grows up in a neighbour-
ing city after his father, the king of Mithilā, is killed and ousted by his uncle. After
an adventurous sea-voyage, the young Janaka ends up in the royal park of Mithilā
just as the magical state chariot is set free to seek a new ruler, Janaka’s uncle hav-
ing died without a son. Unsurprisingly the magical chariot approaches Janaka and
stops beside him. Having inspected the young man, the brahmins invite him to be
ruler, and he is taken to the palace, where he further proves his worth by winning
over the princess (his cousin Sīvalī) and solving riddles left by his uncle. It is in
these riddles that we get our first indication that paccekabuddhas are important in
this story. One part of the riddle says that treasure can be found at the sunrise and
at the sunset. Janaka works out that this must mean the places where the previous
king received and took leave of paccekabuddhas, since these glorious figures are like
the sun, and indeed treasure is found buried in these places.
These worthy renouncers are referred to again later in the story, both explicitly
and implicitly. After a happy time as ruler, supporting paccekabuddhas, married to
Sīvalī and with a son and heir, Janaka one day decides to visit his pleasure park. On
his way into the park he sees a mango tree bursting with ripe fruits, and he picks
and eats a mango. Seeing this, all the members of his retinue follow suit, stripping
the tree bare and breaking its branches. On his way home, the king sees this sorry
looking tree, and next to it a fruitless tree that has remained lush and unharmed.
Just as paccekabuddhas seem commonly to do, Janaka reflects that the kingship is like
the fruiting tree, and wishes to become like the barren tree. When he returns to his
palace, he hands over his state duties and lives on the roof terrace as a renouncer.
This is not enough for him, however, and he reflects on those paccekabuddhas he
has supported and wonders where he might find their good example and teach-
ings now. Having got hold of a robe and bowl he shaves his head and descends the
stairs in pursuit of proper renunciation. On the way down the stairs he meets his
wife, and she mistakes him for a paccekabuddha.
There are no more explicit references to paccekabuddhas after this in the text,
but what happens next continues to remind us of those characters. Not only does
Janaka seek a particularly solitary form of renunciation, he declares that he has no
teachers other than the mango trees, and speaks a famous verse about his detach-
ment from his city, stating that even if Mithilā was on fire, nothing of his would
be burning. Janaka also uses a variety of other images to try to persuade his wife
to stop following him, images that are reminiscent of those often encountered by
paccekabuddhas: a girl with two bracelets on one arm jangling annoyingly and a single
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism 287
bracelet on the other arm silent as a sage; a fletcher who shuts one eye in order to
make his arrow straight; a plucked blade of grass unable to be rejoined to its plant.
What these various elements of the story suggest is that Janaka was once con-
sidered a paccekabuddha, yet in this story he is identified as the Bodhisatta. As such,
all he achieves, after finally embarking on the solitary renunciation he so strongly
insists upon, is a heavenly rebirth; his wife achieves the same, after a more mod-
est form of renunciation in the royal gardens. That the identification of Janaka
as the Bodhisatta and the concomitant restriction on his ‘happy ending’ was a
change made to an existing story is supported by the wider story-cycle of kings of
Mithilā famous for their renunciatory prowess. Such kings, who include those called
Janaka, Nimi and Nami, are associated with awakening through signs, pursuing soli-
tary renunciation, and expressing their detachment through a verse about their
burning city. This verse is found associated with a King Janaka in the Mahābhārata
(12.17.18, 12.171.56, and 12.268.4), and with a King Nami in the Jain Uttarajjhāyā
(9.14). Elsewhere in the Uttarajjhāyā (18.45–47) King Nami is one of a group of four
kings who renounce and achieve liberation after seeing a sign, in a parallel story
to that of the four paccekabuddha-kings in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka examined above.
In the Nimi-jātaka (Ja 541, see also Ja 9) the king of Mithilā may not be associated
with paccekabuddhas, but he does renounce after seeing a sign — his first grey hair.11
What do we learn from this network of stories, and from the various references
to and associations with paccekabuddhas in the Mahājanaka-jātaka? We learn that
sometimes the generic conventions of the jātaka genre likely over-ruled previous
associations with narrative characters, even when such characters were famous
for their attainments. Indeed, it is precisely because Janaka was already a well-
known royal renouncer that he had to be claimed as the Bodhisatta. The result,
however, is that this famous renouncer can only renounce, and not achieve the lib-
eration that his counterparts in Jain narrative and Hindu epic are said to achieve.
We return once again to the question of the relative hierarchy of paccekabuddha
and Bodhisatta.
A question of hierarchy: paccekabuddha, Bodhisatta and Buddha
Despite his heroic efforts and impressive achievements, as in all the other stories in
which the Bodhisatta is inspired by paccekabuddhas, Janaka is inferior to these awak-
ened beings. This sense of relative hierarchy is sometimes emphasized, for example
in the Gaṅgamāla-jātaka (Ja 421), in which the Bodhisatta is King Udaya and his bar-
ber, Gaṅgamāla, renounces and becomes a paccekabuddha. When he returns to visit
the king he uses a familiar form of address to greet him, and the king’s mother and
others are cross that he is not properly subservient. The Bodhisatta has to intervene
and explain the merits of a paccekabuddha to his ignorant relations. Here, then, it
is clear that a paccekabuddha-barber is superior to a Bodhisatta-king. However, the
message is perhaps more to do with another important hierarchy: spiritual attain-
ments trump social or caste rank.
11. For a full discussion of this network of stories see Appleton 2017, chapter 6.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

288 Naomi Appleton
A rather different answer to the question of hierarchy is found in the Mahāmora-
jātaka (Ja 491), in which the Bodhisatta is a golden peacock who lives a holy life
in the Himalayas. Nobody can catch him because of his holiness and protective
chants. Eventually a hunter trains a peahen, and ensnares the peacock through
lust. However, they then talk, and the peacock teaches the hunter such that he
becomes a paccekabuddha. Despite this attainment he does not know how he can
free all the birds he has left in bondage back at his home, and it takes the Bodhisatta
— who is explicitly said in the commentary to be more knowledgeable than a
paccekabuddha — to advise an Act of Truth. Thus the paccekabuddha declares the
truth of his attainment, and through that all the creatures are freed. And while
he too is freed, from the bondage of saṃsāra, he remains in at least one respect
inferior to the Bodhisatta-peacock.
While there may be more than one perspective on whether paccekabuddha or
Bodhisatta is superior, it is clear that the Buddha is definitely superior to pacc-
ekabuddhas, and in this certainty is found another solution to the question of hier-
archy. In a series of verses in the Apadāna (I 7–14) the Buddha tells his disciple
Ānanda how paccekabuddhas came to achieve awakening. He explains that they
served former buddhas but did not achieve awakening in that time. This expla-
nation neatly places the agency back in the hands of the Buddha again, making
paccekabuddhas dependent on buddhas in a similar manner to arahats. Rather than
being entirely independent and accomplished renouncers, paccekabuddhas are then
said to achieve awakening without a teacher because they already had a teacher in
a past life, and that teacher was a full buddha. However, this explanation appears
only to have developed after the proliferation of stories about paccekabuddhas.
I have not found any jātaka stories that tell of the past-lives of paccekabuddhas, who
are instead associated with immediate and present awakening, in a manner that
bypasses the teachings of a full buddha.
The Apadāna’s explanation of how paccekabuddhas sow the seeds of their achieve-
ments in past lives is, of course, broadly in line with apadāna/avadāna conceptions
of awakening in general. In the same text, elder monks and nuns are said to have
sowed the seeds of arahatship by serving past buddhas or, indeed, past paccekabud-
dhas. The Buddha himself is also said to have served past buddhas but not achieved
awakening during that time. In the Avadānaśataka a chapter of ten stories (21–30)
recounts how people become pratyekabuddhas after an act of service to — and pre-
diction by — a buddha, though in most of these stories the buddha is the one of the
present age, and the achievement will happen in a future time. We also find a simi-
lar theme in the Sutta-nipāta commentary, where the stories associated with eight
of the verses tell of past lives of paccekabuddhas in the time of Buddha Kassapa, but
here the focus is less on their prior achievements and more on their karmic bonds:
their fellowship as a part of Kassapa’s community leads to them coming together
again once they have become paccekabuddhas, and helping any remaining member
of their group to achieve that same end.12
12. Such multi-life group bonds appear in the stories associated with verses 38, 42, 47 and 58, while
those associated with verses 36 and 39 simply imply that the paccekabuddha sowed the seeds in
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism 289
These intricate networks of vows, predictions, service, achievements, and lat-
eral karmic bonds are characteristic of the apadāna/avadāna genre, and, as we have
seen, paccekabuddhas feature as recipients of karmicly significant acts of service as
well as having past-life stories of their own. However, jātaka stories — in contrast to
apadānas/avadānas, tend to emphasize the former of these two positions, portray-
ing paccekabuddhas as figures that are solitary in the sense of being independent,
awakened by and for themselves, in a time when the teachings of buddhas are not
known. Theirs is a very direct form of awakening, based on personal experience,
and not dependent on learning or formal monastic training. It is no wonder, then,
that the question of their value relative to the Buddha became rather important.
These varying perspectives within Buddhist narrative sources are echoed by
scholarly debates around the status of paccekabuddhas. Many scholars have argued
that the character of the paccekabuddha allows for the inclusion of non-Buddhist
(or pre-Buddhist) ascetics into the Buddhist fold.13 Certainly in jātaka literature, as
we have seen, paccekabuddhas often feature as generic renouncers in a time when
no monks or buddhas can appear, and they offer a form of awakening that appears
independent of learning or institutions. Indeed, Janaka and Nimi/Nami appear to
be renouncer kings of particularly legendary status, and the fact that they — and
the overall concept of a paccekabuddha — are shared with Jainism suggests a likely
pre-Buddhist background. However, whatever its origins it is clear that the cat-
egory entered Buddhism early, and took root in various different ways. For this
reason, amongst others, it is important to consider the different understandings of
paccekabuddhas across different genres and different schools, for the notion changed
as Buddhist traditions developed and spread.
The distinction between the portrayal of paccekabuddhas in jātaka literature and
their position in apadāna/avadāna literature, as discussed here, demonstrates the
fruitfulness of such an approach. The differences between these genres’ portrayal
of paccekabuddhas suggest that efforts were made to subordinate these remarkably
independent renouncers, by codifying their attainments in relation to past life
encounters with buddhas. This careful positioning of paccekabuddhas as dependent
on the Buddha should not, however, stop us from appreciating their unique posi-
tion within stories of the Buddha’s past lives, where they maintain much of their
independence, and yet behave according to — and teach — an entirely Buddhist
understanding of the world.
Conclusion
I began this paper with the following question: What does the positioning of pacc-
ekabuddhas as interim figures, appearing as they do between the dispensations of full
buddhas, mean for their relationship with the most recent Buddha or his past lives as
his past life, and the story that accompanies verses 45 and 46 explores how past-life affection
can make it hard to achieve awakening.
13. For example this view is broadly shared, with some variation, by Gombrich 1979, Katz 1982,
Kloppenborg 1974, Fujita 1985, Norman 1983, while Ray (1994) has suggested that they represent
a form of early Buddhist ‘saint’, and Wiltshire (1990) argued that they are proto-śramaṇas.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

290 Naomi Appleton
Bodhisatta? As we have seen, this interim positioning allows paccekabuddhas to fill a
narrative gap in jātaka literature, which is almost always situated in a time between
Buddhisms, by serving as ‘best renouncers’ or ‘most powerful fields of (de-)merit’.
In these roles paccekabuddhas are not particularly distinctive, and indeed they are
often described as looking rather like Buddhist monks. More distinctive is their role
in teaching the Bodhisatta about the benefits of renunciation or non-attachment.
By recounting their own powerful experiences of confronting impermanence or the
defiling power of desire, or by offering a parable or other illustration, paccekabud-
dhas provide a teaching and example for the Buddha-to-be to follow.
In these Bodhisatta-paccekabuddha encounters, the Bodhisatta often appears
inferior, requesting and receiving teachings, struggling to overcome his worldly
ties or social pride. The Bodhisatta often aspires to be like a paccekabuddha, follow-
ing his example through renouncing the world. However, because of the restric-
tions of the jātaka genre, the Bodhisatta can never equal the attainments of his
teacher, managing only to achieve successful renunciation, meditative attainments,
and a heavenly rebirth. Alternatively, if the compilers felt the need to identify a
truly heroic legendary king-become-paccekabuddha as the Bodhisatta, the associa-
tion with paccekabodhi was necessarily pushed to the sidelines.
The superiority of these independent renouncers over the heroic Buddha-to-be
is challenged by the development of the apadāna/avadāna notion of intricate karmic
networks. We discover that paccekabuddhas, like arahats and full buddhas, all planted
the seeds of this attainment through an act of service towards a buddha in the past.
These vast networks of karmicly potent encounters between awakened beings of
all types and stages allows the Buddha — and other full buddhas — to regain centre-
stage, yet paccekabuddhas feature as fields of merit as well as as characters with a
past-life encounter of their own. This closes the circle, bringing us back to those
jātaka stories in which paccekabuddhas provide an opportunity for the Bodhisatta
to make merit or demerit on his long path to buddhahood.
To conclude, paccekabuddhas seem always to be in the space in between two more
established categories. Just as they are positioned between full buddhas and arahats,
they also appear between Buddhist dispensations. They are powerful fields of merit,
but their attainment ultimately came to be considered as dependent on encounters
with even more powerful fields of merit. They teach but they cannot be seen to be
teaching lest they threaten the authority of the Buddha and his dispensation. They
help the Bodhisatta, and remain superior to him in most instances, yet their infe-
riority to the Buddha is clear to see. Contrary to their reputation, paccekabuddhas
are neither solitary nor silent, but rather it is their possible independence from the
Buddhist dispensation that makes them so interesting.
Abbreviations
Ap Apadāna
Ja Jātakatthavaṇṇanā
Sn Sutta-nipāta
Pj Paramattha-jotikā containing Sutta-nipāta commentary
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

Jātaka Stories and Paccekabuddhas in Early Buddhism 291
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Apadāna: references to volume and page of Lilley:
Lilley, Mary E. ed. 1925–1927. The Apadāna of the Khuddaka Nikāya. 2 vols. London: The Pali
Text Society.
Avadānaśataka: references to story number:
Speyer, J. S. ed. 1958. Avadānaçataka: A century of edifying tales belonging to the Hīnayāna. The
Hague: Mouton.
Jātakamālā of Āryaśūra: references to story number:
Khoroche, Peter, trans. 1989. When the Buddha Was a Monkey: Ārya Śūra’s Jātakamālā. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Speyer, J. S. ed. 1895. The Jātakamālā: Garland of Birth-Stories of Ārya-śūra. Sacred Books of the
Buddhists vol. 1. London: Henry Frowde.
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā: references to story number:
Appleton, Naomi and Sarah Shaw, trans. 2015. The Ten Great Birth Stories of the Buddha: The
Mahānipāta of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā. 2 vols. Chiang Mai: Silkworm.
Cowell, E. B. ed. (several translators). 1895–1907. The Jātaka, or Stories of the Buddha’s Former
Births. 6 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fausbøll, V. ed. 1877–1896. The Jātaka Together with its Commentary being Tales of the Anterior
Births of Gotama Buddha. 6 vols. London: Trübner.
Mahābhārata: references to book, chapter and verse of Critical Edition:
Sukthankar, Vishnu Sitaram, Sripad Krishna Belvalkar, Parashuram Laksman Vaidya et al.,
eds. 1933–1966. The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute.
Mahāvastu: references to volume and page of Senart:
Jones, J. J. trans. 1949–1956. The Mahāvastu. 3 vols. London: Luzac.
Senart, Émile, ed. 1882–1897. Mahāvastu. 3 vols. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.
Paramattha-jotikā: references to volume and page of Smith:
Smith, Helmer. ed. 1916–1918. Paramattha-jotikā. 2 vols. London: The Pali Text Society.
Sutta-nipāta: references to page of Andersen and Smith:
Andersen, Dines and Helmer Smith. eds. 1913. Sutta-Nipāta. London: The Pali Text Society.
Uttarajjhāyā: references to chapter and verse as in Charpentier:
Charpentier, Jarl. ed. 1922. Uttarādhyayanasūtra. Uppsala: Appelbergs Boktryckeri Aktiebolag.
Jacobi, Hermann. trans. 1895. Jaina Sūtras Part II. The Sacred Books of the East volume 45.
Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Secondary Sources
Appleton, Naomi. 2017. Shared Characters in Jain, Buddhist and Hindu Narrative: Gods, Heroes and
Kings. Abingdon: Routledge.
———. 2019. ‘Dialogues with Solitary Buddhas’. In In Dialogue with Classical Indian Traditions:
Encounter, Transformation, and Interpretation, edited by Brian Black and Chakravarthi
Ram-Prasad, 37–50. Abingdon: Routledge.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018

292 Naomi Appleton
Fujita, Kotatsu trans. Leon Hurvitz. 1985. ‘One Vehicle or Three?’ Journal of Indian Philosophy
3(1–2): 79–166.
Gombrich, Richard F. 1979. Review of Kloppenborg 1974, in Orientalistische Literaturzeitung,
74(1): 78–80
Jones, Dhivan Thomas. 2014. ‘Like the Rhinoceros, or Like its Horn? The Problem of
the Khaggavisāṇa Revisited’. Buddhist Studies Review 31(2): 165–178. https://doi.
org/10.1558/bsrv.v31i2.165
Katz, Nathan. 1982. Buddhist Images of Human Perfection: The Arahant of the Sutta Piṭaka Compared
with the Bodhisattva and Mahāsiddha. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Kloppenborg, Ria. 1974. The Paccekabuddha: A Buddhist Ascetic. Leiden: Brill.
Norman, K. R. 1983. ‘The Pratyeka-Buddha in Buddhism and Jainism’. In Buddhist Studies:
Ancient and Modern, edited by Philip Denwood and Alexander Piatigorsky, 92–106.
London: Curzon.
Poolsuwan, Samerchai. 2016. ‘Iconography and Symbolism of the Pacceka Buddhas in the Art
of Pagan’. Artibus Asiae 76(1): 37–80.
Ray, Reginald A. 1994. Buddhist Saints in India: A Study in Buddhist Values and Orientations.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Walters, Jonathan. 1990. ‘The Buddha’s Bad Karma: A Problem in the History of Theravāda
Buddhism’. Numen 37(1): 70–95.
Wiltshire, Martin G. 1990. Ascetic Figures Before and in Early Buddhism: The Emergence of Gautama
as the Buddha. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110858563
Naomi Appleton is Senior Lecturer in Asian Religions at the University of
Edinburgh. Trained in Buddhist Studies, her interests now span Buddhist, Jain and
early Hindu narrative traditions. She has published extensively on Buddhist and
early Indian narrative, including: Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism (Ashgate 2010),
Narrating Karma and Rebirth (CUP 2014) and Shared Characters in Jain, Buddhist and
Hindu Narrative (Routledge 2017). She was lucky enough to have Pāli reading classes
with Lance Cousins during her time as a doctoral student in Oxford, and continued
visiting him for reading groups after moving on in her career.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2018