Sophia (2025) 64:413–429
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11841-024-01011-3
Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular
Buddhism’, Religious Practices and Ontologies in Thailand
Jim Taylor1,2
Accepted: 1 March 2024 / Published online: 8 April 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
This paper reconsiders explanations of ‘popular’ Buddhism in Thailand initiated in mid-
twentieth century anthropological definitions of vernacular articulations of religiosity in
village settings. Buddhist localism, in its various manifestations, is seen to contrast with
a doctrinal or literate ‘great’ monastic tradition. In this persisting ethnographic argument,
an actor may draw randomly on various syncretic elements of their religiosity according
to circumstances (an historical complexity which is sourced in a mix of Sinhalese-sourced
Buddhism, animism including magic, and folk Brahmanism). It is therefore not wholly or
consistently one, but substantively divided into several strands. This long-standing posi-
tion is problematic as the paper shows. There are multiple coextensive Buddhism/s (plu-
ral) within the Greater Theravada tradition, which emerge from an identification of the
actors themselves with the one, not the many, as one-unitary-Buddhists. I theorise using
a general framework of Meillassoux’s discussion on contingency and, by way of contrast,
taking Deleuzian ideas on multiplicity. It is grounded on an understanding of popular or
organic lived religion sourced in the early counter-enlightenment or radical enlightenment
thinking of Giambattista Vico. Here, it is argued that in Thailand villagers would identify
cosmologically as the one, not as the many (in a sense as in the assemblages or varieties
of religious practices detached from the totality of the cosmological unitary one). Under-
standing the creative processes behind cosmological multiplicities is a starting point, with
the notion that within specific cultural forms we are faced with a multiplicity of defini-
tions and things to observe, as in an understanding of the varieties of lived Buddhism. The
essay is based on an ethnographic assessment from over three decades of field research
among ethnic Thai Buddhists at various modalities and settings, and in framing these ver-
nacular religious practices and their ontologies. My gratitude to two anonymous review-
ers for their constructive comments. The essay does not deal directly with specific eth-
nographic case studies; instead, it is intended as retheorising representations of ‘Popular
Buddhism’ in Thailand as based on early scholarship since the 1960s (where Buddhism is
constituted as three or more distinctive but intertwined religious strands).
Keywords Popular Buddhism · Contingency · Multiplicity · Vico · Vernacular
tradition
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Vol.:(012134 536789)

414 J. Taylor
Defining Popular Religiosity
The meaning of what is referred to as ‘popular religion’ is inherent in the early phil-
osophical ruminations of Giambattista Vico (1668–1744),1 in an emergent context
of humanism which contrasts with the rationalism and totalising civilising notions
of the European Enlightenment. His religion was based on a poetics of the ancients
or folk traditions, the privileging of bodily practices (bodily sensed experience), the
use of imaginative terms, creating universals, and a making sense of the lived natu-
ral world (Vico, 2000, pp. 71–93). This perspective on lived religiosity stands in
contrast to a literate sanctioned theology, or a theology of the canon, and in a gene-
alogy of the religious virtuosi.
Normative or doctrinal religion is civic religion which is transmitted by the
mechanisms of socialisation within and regulated by state-sanctioned religious insti-
tutions. Popular religiosity may be seen as mass cultural articulations as received in
the process of socialisation; it is syncretic, unpredictable, and protean according to
defined cultural needs and sensuous embodied socio-cultural life-worlds (see Clas-
sen, 1997). It is a way of seeing and constructing the (lived) world.
In using the term ‘popular’ or folk Buddhism (phuttha’chaobaan), I refer approx-
imately to a conceptualisation of a Thai religion associated with the majority people,
peasant, or village societies. That is, as a religion of laity and of local village–based
monasticism (wat baan); a foundation on orality and vernacular literate forms, and
as an ‘ideological creation of elites, promoted through folklore societies, muse-
ums, historical and ethnographic research, and so on’ (Palmer, 2019, p. 157). In the
essay, the term majority ‘Thai religion’ is taken in its broad and inclusive sense as
an assemblage of religious rituals and practices that are associated with the category
ethnic Thai Buddhism/s (plural). This includes civic religion which generates that
(Durkheimian) sense of ‘collective effervescence’, or the socially reinforcing of col-
lective ethnic values. This captures the variations in religiosity as defined by the
local actors themselves as ‘Buddhist’.
In a study of popular Buddhism, the concept of reason or rationalism (with-
out contingency) has no legitimate basis of analysis and instead I use the term
contingency as taken in part from Meillassoux’s (2008)2 ‘principle of unrea-
son’ or ‘factiality’3 (everything, including all laws, is contingent),4 though
1 For a discussion on Spinoza’s influence on Vico, see Preus (1979).
2 Meillassoux’s thought is based on a quasi-radicalization of Alain Badiou’s conception of the event
where chance is the pure thought of the event (‘la pensée pure de l’événement’), a radical occurrence that
breaks with the pre-existing parameters and rules of every system. Meillassoux argues that radical con-
tingency is itself the ultimate ‘ground’ of being, the only possibility we have of rationally establishing the
absolute nature of reality (Kennedy, 2017, p. 73). See also Meillassoux (2012).
3 The meaning here is that everything is a fact, and that it is necessary that everything is a fact. The
(unreason–) principle that things could be other than they are (one can imagine reality as being funda-
mentally different even if we never know such a reality). This forms part of part of Meillassoux’ critique
of correlationism (facticity, as in the ‘ultimate absence of reason’, referred to as ‘unreason’, see Meillas-
soux, 2008, p. 22).
4 The principle is suggested in order to account for contingency in the world and that, as Meillassoux
(2008, p. 60) argues, in order that there be genuine contingency, there must be no reason for anything to
be or to remain the way that it is: ‘everything must be able, without reason, to be other than it is; every-
thing must, without reason, be able not to be and/or be able to be other than it is’.
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 415
moving this argument beyond an abstract set of inherently unrelated possibili-
ties, or in terms of nothingness, but in terms of an enigmatic something: a
continuum within which actual entities are specifiable in terms of relations
(Ramey, 2014).
In general perceptions of popular Buddhism, we may concur with reasoning
that all causal relations are contingent, that it is hardly certain what various
effects could follow from the same causes. Mysticism, magic, and divination,
elements of popular Buddhism/s, as forms of human consciousness and modes
of analogical thought (Greenwood, 2020, 2; Tambiah, 2017 [1973]) and unrea-
son or arbitrary reasoning, are discussed below to show a particular religiosity
of the one that is supported in the view of contingency. Here I imply the notion
that textual or canonical religion and its ‘detraditionalization’ reveals that all
causal relations are contingent, that it opens the possibility that completely
different effects could follow from the same causes. In other words, popular
religious practices are openings to various consequences and (connected but
autonomous) effects which are grounded in vernacular experiences of individu-
als and the varieties of lived worlds.
There is much more that we do not know than what we do know about the
natural world that cannot fit into neat and ordered causal configurations.
The relationship between humans and the cosmos can only be established
through representational structures, such as among those rituals which are
found in popular religion. Essentially, I am arguing that everything is other
than what it already is via the lack of scientific reason. It is sufficient to be
based on chance, on contingency. Rural ‘popular’ Buddhists may, in a ritual
or metaphorical sense, as aleatory reasoning (Meillassoux, 2012), simply
throw the dice, and whatever eventuates from the configuration of numbers
must have some inherent sense, and is therefore sufficient (reason) in itself.
As Meillassoux (2012, p. 330) notes:
For, just as a coincidence in a game of chance, as surprising as it might appear,
becomes conceivable as the result of a purely aleatory combination if one
gives oneself a sufficiently high number of ‘turns’, so the order of the world
might be considered the result of a purely hazardous combination of events
with no necessary relation between them, a combination supposed however
to be capable of producing, on the basis of an immense number of chaotic
attempts, the stability we observe in the universe.
Indeed, contingency has relevance in popular religious studies as it stands at the
end of reflections on the limits of reason, while at the same time maintaining an
‘ontic reservation within view’ (Wuchterl, 2019, p. 185). In a Buddhist correlational
(post-Kantian) ‘causal’ argument,5 more attuned to Deleuze minus his correlational
5 That is, as in ‘correlationism’, referring to the idea according to which we only ever have access to the
correlation between thinking and being, and never to either term considered apart from the other (see
Meillassoux, 2008, p. 11).
1 3

416 J. Taylor
absolutism, we may indicate that (kammic) cause {equals} (a thought that is contin-
gent on) an effect of an action, but we cannot define a correlation or what it is in the
first place.
In the realm of speculation and uncertainty, Buddhist adherents of the eclectic
popular religion may move from seeking a clear absolute to one of causal contin-
gency as expressed through the multiplicity of rituals and the fluid possibilities that
may be available to them.6
Early Ethnographic Delimitation and the Multiple
The early ethnographic search for the organic and in social and cultural forms
(as in structural-functionalism) was based on differentiating archaic, peasant-folk
societies and cultures. These small-scale societies, although not bounded nor dis-
creet, are intimately connected to each other in overlapping kinship relations and
through mutual interpretations of the moral and social order. The communica-
tive modalities noted in small-scale societies imply an intuitive and empathetic
comprehension of the lived world and the meanings which are embedded in the
connections between community (Gemeinschaft) and nature. In other words, the
organic nature of the community and the moral order was associated with a broad
religiosity which we see expressed in customary or traditional (if changing)
organic peasant-folk societies, compared to more complex (urban) and imper-
sonal, allegedly rational modern societies (Gesellschaft). Popular religion was
then associated with an all-embracing set of beliefs, rituals, and shared moral val-
ues of a society based on defining the causes of certain consequences (as in the
prescribed choice among actors to turn to various cultural remedies for spiritual
ailments). These ensure that the lived world, its material, natural, and its spiritual
dimensions are in concurrence or in a correlation.
Popular religion is assumed to be a religion of the (majority) ordinary folk,
rather than that of the urban literate monastic clergy, though these distinctions
in rural Thailand have little bearing other than as modalities of ethnic tradi-
tions, historic monastic practices, and lineages, which are found in various set-
tings. The literate (educated) monks carry out the authority of the great tradi-
tion using religious texts. These texts may in turn (over time) be reworked at
a local level to conform to vernacular traditions (as in the elaborate annual
recitation of the Vessantara Jataka, the Bun Phra-Wet festivities among Thai-
Lao speakers).7
6 Rather than privileging epistemology — ‘or the study of other people’s representations of what we
may know to be the real (lived religious) world’ — such an approach ‘acknowledges the existence of
multiple worlds’ (Carrithers et al., 2010, p. 153).
7 See for instance Jory (2002a, 2002b), Bowie (2018), and Gabaude (2016).
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 417
This spatial division led observers to posit a clear distinction in their anal-
ysis between urban and rural religious forms.8 The work of early anthropolo-
gist Robert Redfield (1897–1958 see (1956, 1960))9 on ‘little tradition’, the
folk-peasant societies and their cultural transitions, is notable here. Since
then, numerous studies have defined little and great religious traditions
(Obeyesekere, 1963).10
The religious and the moral orders are one and the same and interconnected and
constitute a continuum, as in the sense of peoples’ lives connected to a rhythmic rep-
etition in the nomos based around the agricultural and ritual calendar, genealogies,
and, among local religious devotees, its (predictable) cyclical processes.11 Earlier,
for example, Opler (1959)12 commented on the central role typically attributed to
religion in Indian village life, saying that a detailed record made of daily activities in
the Gangetic village of Senapur showed that over a 366-day period, religious activi-
ties occurred in 302 days of the year in the village, and on many of these days more
than one such activity occurred.
In transitional folk-peasant societies as a consequence of modernity, religion con-
stitutes the ultimate ground and substance of culture, a pervasive element articulated
not only in its religious institutions but in every aspect of cultural life. The popular
in religion was in the original forms of culture, as in the roots of self- and collective
identity, in holistic frames of understanding, and in providing meaning in the lived
world. It is observed in folk tales and its vernacular mythology along with its trans-
missions which allowed for varieties of popular religion to be extended and enriched
over time, as it confronts the project of modernity, orthodoxy, and in reformed urban
religion.
Kidpromma (2022) has recently cautioned about simplistic categories of
Buddhism/s in modernity, as defined by rational, normative practice, but instead
suggests an ongoing integration of traditional cosmologies and mythologies
already present in lived religion. It should be remembered too that the normative
Buddhist texts are replete with tales of the Buddha’s supranormal/supernatural
powers (abhiññā/iddhi) because of meditation achievements. As Reynolds (2015)
noted, in Buddhism, this is a reason why the boundary with magic is especially
blurred given that the Buddha himself was accredited with the possession of such
powers.
8 However, as discussed later, in late modernity, there is a complexity confounded in these spatial polari-
ties as an intermingling between two or more religious’ orientations (cultural hybridities).
9 See also Singer (1959) and Marriott (1955).
10 Stanford and Whitehouse (2021) more recently suggested an evolutionary and dialogic or coopera-
tive relation between the ‘wild’ little and the doctrinal/great traditions based on their studies of Burmese
Buddhism (though one involving more as an unconvincing cognitive, psychological assessment, rather
than an ethnographic mode of analysis).
11 A further differentiation can be made between complex urban societies where there is a somewhat
clearer distinction between sacred and profane in the social world and the simpler, peasant societies
where the distinctions are deemed less relevant.
12 Opler is better known for his work on the North American Apache Indians.
1 3

418 J. Taylor
Buddhist Modernism is itself, in part, a product of the engagement between Bud-
dhism and the European Enlightenment, mediated by the experiences of colonial
encounters. In Thailand, this is embedded in the nineteenth century royalist reforms
as Thailand transitions from what Mongkut referred to as superstitious to a rational
(‘Protestant’ (Gombrich & Obeyeskere, 1988)) Pali Buddhism. Indeed, as a critique
of the royalist foundational text Trai Phum Phra Ruang (‘Three Worlds of King
Ruang’),13 it is the culmination of a long history of visionary and cosmological lit-
erature within the Theravada tradition, representing in a vivid and concise form, the
religious universe within which Thai Buddhists have traditionally lived. But, in the
case of the Phra Ruang, it is an elite-based cosmology which is interpreted from the
perspective of its literate royalist author. The world is, as the world is represented
(Vorstellung) or conceptualised.
A further point to be made here is that since and even preceding the crisis of
modernity and its radical immanence, emergent middle-class in Theravada countries
have sought secular and vernacular traditions to complement the literate religious
traditions. These include, for instance mediums, magical monks, traditional healers,
use of protective tattoos, and associated rituals and incantations, a liturgy of media-
fused ghost stories and the idiosyncrasies of well-known magical Buddhist monks,
practices of divination, astrology/fortune-telling, and a thriving protective amu-
let market-place (Jackson, 2023; Baker & Phongphaichit, 2013; McDaniel, 2011;
Nilsen, 2011; Taylor, 2015). The transmissions have not necessarily occurred from
the little to the great tradition, but also in reverse and meeting mid-way. In Scott’s
(1979, p. 130) words, though referring to revolutionary contexts, an intermingling
situation whereby the ‘“little tradition” percolates up… [and the] “great tradition”
percolates down’.
A key focus of analysis into popular religion is divination or astrology and how
divination substantiates the irreducibility of the actual for possibility (contingency).
In popular religiosity, archaic or folk arts of divination are intended to address the
problem of a world that is replete with contingency. But, as Ramey (2014) notes,
this contingency is nevertheless linked to actuality in ways that recur in patterns that
are uncannily significant, at least for devotees to feel satisfied that they are complete
through ritual practices.14 Evans-Pritchard would have argued that magic and divi-
nation practices do not deny the power of efficient and material causes or involve a
theory of causation that is anything but primitive. Deleuze (1990, p. 163), who was
always concerned with contingency, makes the point that divination (and associated
magic) involves a grounding in ethics and that ‘divinatory interpretation consists of
the relation between the pure event (not yet actualized) and the depth of bodies, the
corporeal action and passions whence it results’. Vico (2000, p. 7) (as noted earlier)
also postulated that divination is in fact the oldest, the most archaic form of (Chris-
tian) religion which binds (religio) the heavens to earth. Let us also not forget that
the various forms of magic are as much part of the modern world as the primitive
(see also Styers, 2004; van Schaik, 2020).
13 (Translated) Frank and Mani Reynolds (1982).
14 See for example Evans-Pritchard’s (1935) classic study of witchcraft among the Azande.
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 419
Early Scholarship and Cultural Divisions Within Practicing Buddhism
Several early Buddhist scholars in observing Buddhist actors could not see the
unity of one, but only the many separate or segmented cultural emanations from
the one. They tended to argue for a differentiated approach. That is, that the sub-
ject cannot be true to one unless they discarded or compartmentalised the other
distinct cultural accretions. It was noted in earlier scholarship that Thai (popu-
lar) Buddhism has been seen as constituted by at least three distinct syncretic
and historical layers (‘subsystems’) bound loosely together: (animism [localism],
folk Brahmanism [Indic culture], and Sinhalese/Pali Buddhism [the Mahavihara
tradition]).
For instance, Barend J (Bas) Terwiel (1976), in his ethnographic research in
the late 1960s at the central Thai village of Wat Sanchao, was fundamental to this
debate. He had earlier categorised rural Buddhism in two tiers as ‘syncretist’ or
‘compartmentalised’. Terwiel’s central argument was that Buddhism is fundamen-
tally syncretic and magico-animistic (the monkhood seeking worldly pursuits or
goals, or perhaps enabling the laity to seek worldly pursuits), syncretism in the sense
that villagers do not make a sharp distinction between Buddhism on the one hand
and various kinds of ‘magical’ practices on the other. He stated that some scholars
cannot differentiate between Buddhist and non-Buddhist practices and beliefs; some
consider a fusion of religious typologies while others that the distinction between
Buddhism and non-Buddhism can be clearly drawn (where Buddhism and non-Bud-
dhism viewed as complementary subtypes of religion, with each subtype fulfilling a
distinct function in society) (1976, p. 392). These three functional subsystems mutu-
ally reinforce each other, seemingly without any cultural conflict.
Indeed, as Terwiel (1976) further showed, many scholars agree that Theravada
Buddhists adhere to more than one religious tradition or cultural ontology, but still
regard themselves as ‘one’ (e.g. an interpretative problem which echoes Weber’s
early explanatory modalities). These Southeast Asian peoples adhere to other strands
of religion, generally classed under rubrics such as ‘non-Buddhist beliefs’, ‘folk reli-
gion’, ‘animism’, or ‘supernaturalism’. Yet, though virtually all authors recognise
this situation, there is no consensus in their views on how the different ‘subsystems’
are interrelated or are correlational, or indeed even ontologically (rather as univo-
cal ontology, as individuated differences), that is how villagers themselves (self-)
identify. For instance, Patchanee Malikhao (2017) remarked: ‘in my opinion, the
Thai’s common beliefs are more of an animistic than a Buddhist nature, the Thai is
more oriented toward the exterior, institutionalized norms of Buddhism that the core
moral principles, while supernatural elements are ever present…’ (etc.) Confirming
Niels Mulder’s (1985) argument, she concludes that ‘the Thai Weltanschauung com-
bines the sophisticated elegance of a universal principle with the primordial direct-
ness of animistic thinking’. Further, in unifying the many, that somehow ontologi-
cally Theravada Buddhism and the ‘Buddhist animistic heritage have corroborated
and concluded a perfect marriage…’ (Malikhao, 2017, p. 55).
As noted, Terwiel’s fieldwork was focused on the interface between Buddhism
and the magico-animistic aspects of Thai religion, showing the lack of distinction
1 3

420 J. Taylor
between these categories for the villagers he studied. However, in a subsequent
revision (2012) to his earlier work, he recognised these limitations which differ-
entiated folk-peasant religion of the village from urban (doctrinal) Buddhism and
where he stated that magico-animism was relevant only in the village context.
As Reynolds (2019, p. 8) said, in fact, the beliefs and practices concerned with
magico-animism are found throughout the religious systems of the Tai people and
among regional (Theravada) Buddhist cultures.
More than thirty years on since Terwiel’s ethnography in a village community,
under the impact of modernity and globalisation, the town or city and village every-
where have colluded. Indeed, forms of urban religion now integrate mysticism and
magic into its normative social field (Kidpromma, 2022, p. 14). McDaniel (2011)
more recently was also concerned with the ‘magic’ question and correctly seeks
to prioritise emic understandings over analytical models that impose distinctions
between ‘Buddhism’ and ‘magic’, or between ‘elite’ and ‘popular’ religious orien-
tations, as arbitrary multiplicities. What I am arguing here is that from the root of
one is a multiplicity itself, and that the concept of layering in order to form the one
is redundant. As Laruelle (1998, p. 35) notes, ontologically, we may say that the
one ultimately determines the multiple as such, or in its identity. Thai Buddhism,
as we may observe (and even experience it), is constituted by multiple discursive
layers which may include (multiple) historical forms, (multiple) local pre-Buddhist
animism/s, and (multiple) folk Brahmanism/s. In the context of such variables, the
issue for the post-modern ethnographer is, how do syncretic rural-dwellers in Thai-
land then self-identify as constituted in these unstable relations of difference.
In Sri Lanka, Michael Ames (1964) was one of the earliest exponents of a struc-
tural analysis of the religious system of the Sinhala Buddhists. This study included
magico-animism in a reductive, functionalist Maussian/Durkheimian analysis, not
unlike the criticisms in the later work of Stanley Tambiah’s totalising sociological
approach (Taylor, 2013, pp. 51–67), critiqued by Charles Keyes (1978, 1987).
Thomas Kirsch (1977; supported by Hans-Dieter Evers, 1977) argued for a ‘syn-
cretic approach’ to understanding Thai religion. This explains how religious systems
have influenced, evolved, and interacted with other value systems. In so doing, it
recognises that the coexistence and interplay of indigenous and non-indigenous ele-
ments in Thai religion have long persisted throughout Thai history (indigenous-ani-
mist, Brahmanic, and [scriptural] Buddhist).
In this intertwined complexity, or correlation, one religious element is contingent
on the other/s, and essentially between an ’abstract Buddhism’ and the other non-
Buddhist elements mediated by the ‘vicissitudes of everyday life’ (p. 266). Kirsch
further emphasised the principal religious rationalisation called ‘Buddha-ization’, in
which Buddhism, as a major state-sponsored religion, worked to upgrade the overall
religious system by absorbing and converting non-Buddhist elements of the popula-
tion into Buddhist ones. That being the case, as villagers may resort to various tra-
ditional cosmologies of healing, divination, and thaumaturgy, are they consciously
acting as (being-) Buddhist, or as something else?
In Meillassoux’s sense, there is only a correlation between thinking and being,
rather than the misleading consideration of one to be set apart from the other. Here,
being is always meditated (through language, culture, consciousness etc.) and that
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 421
it is therefore not possible to think anything outside the correlation, it can only ever
describe the fact of this correlation. It may be that villagers take recourse to empiri-
cal contingency as chance, at times when things go wrong in the life cycle and fail-
ing any certainty about what will happen. At least one can be certain that it will
occur within currently existing magical parameters, derived from the experience of
others. It must also be remembered that for villagers, as Mauss (2010, p. 114) states
in a general sense of the improbable and seeking certainty through magic, ‘nobody
seeks out a magician unless he [sic] believes in him’.
Popular Buddhism in Thailand and Notion of Multiplicities
The nineteenth century Protestant missionary and Sinologist Ernest Eitel remarked
that.
Certainly, if I had asserted that Buddhism remained anywhere or for any length
of time a mere system of doctrine and consistently developed itself in practice
life, as it was developed by thinking minds in the solitude of the cloister or in
the study of the philosopher, I would have to demur at these charges. But the
fact is, I have constantly kept in mind that Buddhism is one thing as a dog-
matic theoretical system and another thing as a living practical religion, that
Buddhism developed itself in one form when cast into the crucible of logical
thought and was moulded into another shape under the sober practical influ-
ences of daily life, in the struggle for existence (1873, p. 75)
This statement referring to a religious binarism and transformation reverber-
ates with the early modern analysis of Buddhism in South East Asia which delin-
eated a literate clerical (universal) tradition from folk or local village variants of
the Theravada religion. In this logic, the great tradition ‘moulded’ or shaped the lit-
tle tradition. Late nineteenth century Anglican missionary Reginald Copleston (in
Ling, 2013 [1973], p. 249) also talked about the ‘two Buddhisms’ in Sri Lanka,
with a marked divide between the little and great traditions; one was pure, the other
impure. Since this time, the frame of reference for viewing living Buddhism has
sought to divide and categorise religion pertaining to its soteriology, pragmaticism,
and accessibility to devotees, whether as ‘kammatic’ (or apotropaic) or ‘nibbanic’
(virtuosi religion) (King, 1964; Spiro, 1971; also, for Thailand see Keyes in Keyes
& Daniel (eds.) 1983) or in its normative (scriptural) and non-normative (lived) ele-
ment of a belief system.
Trevor Ling (2013 [1973], p. 22) may have been incorrect to postulate that Bud-
dhism is not a ‘religion’ per se, that is, not a belief system. Instead, he argued that
it was originally a non-religious philosophy,15 one that is devoid of the devotional
15 In textual matters alone, an understanding of the Four Noble Truths (cattāri ariyasaccāni) — the
essence of Buddhism — would dispel any doubts about both its logico-epistemology and soteriology as
a religion.
1 3

422 J. Taylor
element of the common folk. However, he concedes a later development of multi-
ple articulations of the religion and the many Buddhism/s.16 It may be many ‘Bud-
dhisms’ to an observer; but from an actor point of view, it is the one. It is in contra-
distinction to a dialectical position where the multiple/many is opposed to the one.
A study of contemporary Buddhism in Thailand would indicate that an either/or
position in defining the religion is redundant. Instead, it is more useful to perceive
a creative third-way space in an emergent hybridised17 religion (Kitiarsa, 2012, pp.
14–16). That is, neither are there any actor associations solely with the little, nor
with the great traditions. But it is argued, historically, cultural hybridisation and
change from within has always been an element of the syncretic tendencies of local-
ism and its transformations over the centuries. The religion was never static, except
in the momentary prism and the distorted lens of the observer’s gaze.
Indeed, as stated, from the sociology of actor perspectives, religion is seen as
unitary one, not of the many. In late-modern urban Thailand, Taylor (2008) and
Kitiarsa (2012, n.28) for example described a melange of new and imaginative
hybrid religious practices. These were a consequence of modernity and globalisation
indicating cultural creativity and the persistence of vernacular religiosity.
As in much of Buddhist Southeast Asia, there are then multiple conterminous
Buddhism/s within the Greater (regional) Theravada tradition. As mentioned above,
the Thai religious context is observed to constitute a variety of apotropaic magic
practices, each with their own spaces. Given Thai Buddhism’s cultural multiplici-
ties, it is not hard to see that the various tendencies and practices that constitute
popular religion include magic-animism and its moral contingencies. Nonetheless,
in a Deleuzian sense, we may ask: are these epistemological orientations and prac-
tices sourced from the one, or from the many?
Deleuze and Multiplicities
I take the concept of multiplicities from Deleuze (1994 [1968]), and later elabora-
tions in Deleuze and Guattari (1987) as varieties of articulations, a concept which
does not imply a combination of the many and the one (singular), but instead an
organisation (of difference) which belongs to the many as such, and which has no
need for unity of order to form a system. The multiplicities referred to here per-
tain more to a correlationism,18 to self-identity as unifiable (molar) wholes (as in
civil religion), expressing self-similarity across its variations, organisable and
which desires to make an either/or from the both/and complex. In response to the
syncretic variants of popular magical and religious rituals and practices available
16 See for instance recent work show variations among Buddhism/s outside but not within national tradi-
tions, e.g. Nicholas Brasovan and Micheline Soong (eds.) (2019) and John Strong (2015).
17 As discussed originally by Homi Bhabha (2004 [1994]), here used in relation to a creative space that
lies between the discourses embedded in ‘little’ (cf. subaltern) and ‘great’ (dominant) traditions (the lat-
ter statist and hegemonic), and their respective subjectivities (e.g. peasants and elites).
18 Deleuze in fact does not entertain the possibility of existence without correlation in his sense of abso-
lutism, but concurs with Meillassoux on contingency.
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 423
to them, popular Buddhist practitioners would argue that they are one-unitary-Bud-
dhist. However, we need to keep in mind that there are also unconscious, intensive
(molecular) multiplicities, as a multitude of (heterogeneous) assemblages that tend
to compose (virtual) identity and being (as in ‘becoming’-Buddhist) (see also Tan-
abe (2016) for northern Thailand).
Identification as a Buddhist person ([…nabthuer-saasanaaphut] however defined
by normative categories) is adequate. Rather than postulate binary oppositions
between the one and the many, we could instead see only ‘multiplicities of multi-
plicities’ which form a single assemblage (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987, 38; Tanabe,
2016, 3–9), in this case as extending to the subjects’ identification as ethnic Bud-
dhists. Multiplicities are of course rhizomatic, lacking a basis of unity and subjec-
tive division; by their nature, they expose the unitary arborescent (great tradition)
structures (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987, p. 8). It seems that local or vernacular religion
is based on decentred pluralism, non-unitary practices, multiplicities, which move
away from the canon. Although we cannot dispense with the canon as a traditional,
historical-philological paradigmatic reference (Freiberger, 2004), we must empha-
sise the obvious multifaceted character of Buddhism and deal with its diversity, its
historical breaks, its differences. Each religious element that constitutes the whole (a
self-identifying ethnic Buddhist) may be marked by a persisting identity produced
by a prior relation, an intensity, between variant religious expressions. These ema-
nate from a particular historicity.
In fact, although Deleuze seems to work with juxtapositions of unity and dif-
ference, as earlier considering the problematic of difference, in his later work with
Felix Guattari, he shifted more to a theory and practice of free multiplicities.19 The
multiplicity variable Deleuze argues (influenced by Bergson’s continuous/discrete
multiplicities) is in the ‘how many, the how and each of the cases’, and that eve-
rything is a multiplicity insofar as it engenders an idea (and in having an arbitrary
number). The one is also a multiplicity, which dispels the philosophical notion of
many to one and one to many typologies. The variety of multiplicity was, it seems,
simply stated in his early work as difference (Deleuze, 1994, p. 182). Religious sys-
tems, and the identification that individuals attach to their beliefs, are sites for the
actualisation of Ideas (neither one, nor multiple) but a (continuous) ‘multiplicity
constituted of differential elements, differential relations between those elements,
and singularities corresponding to those relations…’ And that these three dimen-
sions, e.g. elements, relations, and singularities, constitute three aspects of multiple
reason (Deleuze, 1994, p. 278). The individual (or system), far from being indivis-
ible, never ceases to divide and change its nature (constantly in flux), not constitut-
ing a fixed entity, but articulates itself in the form of internal multiplicities.
It is clear in the individual who says that they are an (ethnic) ‘Buddhist’ in a
‘populist’ (mostly rural) setting exposed to multiple layers of historical cross-cur-
rents and influences is not ‘one’, but multiples of one. To divide the individual into
many in his case is erroneous. The one being their (Self) identity (Deleuze, 1994,
p. 257). In vernacular Buddhism, individuals are representations of the one and
19 See Francois Laruelle’s critique of Deleuze in Terence Blake (n.d.)
1 3

424 J. Taylor
the many, the normative marker drops away and becomes meaningless. Textualists
or canonists may ponder on this metaphysical dilemma as they need to mark cer-
tain practices under observation in accordance with a measurement of doctrinal or
scriptural traditions, hence as certain elements pure (normative) and others impure
(non-normative).
In seeking difference, White (2017) noted how certain spirit practices within
Theravada Buddhism were a persistent topic of study for early anthropologists of
Buddhism in South East Asia in the early decades of the post-war years. Thus,
instead of seeing Buddhism as ‘containing plurality, contradiction, and even incom-
mensurability within itself’, these scholars used structural–functional descriptions of
‘local configurations of various religious systems at play within any particular Ther-
avada Buddhist cultural order’ (p. 191). The problem is these tended to see modali-
ties of spirit possession for instance as an aberration of Buddhism (p. 193). What is
needed are new socio-cultural lens of analyses to challenge the classical models of
spirit possession, Theravada Buddhism, and their relationship with each other. This
would then open new possibilities for understanding spirit possession within Thai
Theravada Buddhism and the relation between them ‘highlighting the plural, fluid,
and contested understandings of possession at play within contemporary Thai Bud-
dhist landscapes’ (p. 194).20
In accord with this methodological approach and for new anthropological under-
standings of lived Buddhism, it is useful to see this as a religious unitary one (a
multiplicity of one, not the many; as an assemblage or as an interactive, contingent
correlation). In this understanding, we can explore actor-orientations on the lived
world, the practicalities, limitations, and conceptions of an interactive, intense moral
universe.
Popular Religion and National Politics
Popular forms of religiosity were always a problem for the modern western-influ-
enced Thai nation-state, attempting to bring everything into a structured administra-
tive order. It was also a response to western religious (Christian) influences in the
country (Winichakul, 2015). The national monastic reforms at the turn of the twen-
tieth century in Thailand may have been exaggerated in terms of the extent of the
state’s rationalisation and standardisation of Buddhism. Regional or multiplicitous
variants of Theravada Buddhism in Thailand have long existed and coexisted with
state reform (orthodox) Buddhism. For instance, even the active destruction of vil-
lage spirit shrines initiated by some wandering reform-Nikaya monks in Northeast
Thailand as promoted in the turn of the twentieth century to eradicate ‘superstitious’
ritual practices, these failed to annihilate vernacular difference. These practices were
not seen by royal Bangkok monks to be in accord with new (western) science and an
emerging ethos of the modernising Thai state.
20 See also on Thai Buddhism and spirit mediumship Muecke’s early work (1992), Morris (2000), and
the edited collection by de la Perrière and Jackson (2022).
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 425
As noted in Taylor (1993, p. 118), the intensity of the national campaign was such
that one forest monk noted local shrines were burned and ‘there would be nothing but
smoke all day long’. The villagers were left to a vulnerability to unseen spirits after
this centre-nation purification of the national religion and so in place of the destroyed
animistic shrines, they were handed out instead doctrinally normative inscribed Pali
chants. The canon was supreme and for a while displaced vernacular or cult (latthi)
traditions, though these regional varieties of Buddhism were never destroyed. As found
today in regional Thailand, variants of Buddhism at times subsumed under normative
state Buddhism are practiced and maintained through the enactment of rituals and line-
age traditions. For instance, some Northern Thai kammaṭṭhāna chanting texts, trans-
lated from the early Tai Tham script, were passed down to regional monks in the nine-
teenth century and have maintained a uniqueness in northern Thailand monasteries.
How effective was this normative appropriation of diverse religious practices in
the periphery which occurred under centre-nation royal auspices? Since late moder-
nity, we have seen an increased diversity of Buddhist practices largely sourced at
the periphery as part of localised attempt at a revitalised vernacular religiosity. This
diversity (sourced from the one) of Buddhist doctrinal hermeneutics in rural Thai-
land, Parnwell and Seeger (2008) call ‘relocalization’, led by a few activist monks
and middle-class Buddhist laity. It was impactful at some level, but also limited in
scale as the centre-nation-state has to some extent shown itself capable since mod-
ernisation of capturing and appropriating cultural symbols or religious diversity in
the social and political margins, and converting this to civic religion as an absolute
religio-political space (Lefebvre, 1991).
Conclusion
In this paper, it has been argued that villagers identify cosmologically as the one, not as
the many (in a sense here as in the assemblage or varieties of religious practices detached
from the totality of the cosmological unitary one). Understanding creative processes
behind cosmological multiplicities21 is a starting point, with the notion that within spe-
cific cultural forms we are faced with a multiplicity of definitions and things to observe,
as in understanding the varieties of lived Buddhism. In the context of small-scale socie-
ties that were subjected to peripheral, heterogeneous, and uneven modernisation, popular
expressions of religion survived and have not been muted by the imposition of outside
canonical religion, far less from the influences of modern secularism (Parker, 1998).
Popular religion is also not static, but contingent, and like all cultural forms liable
for transformations which enable it to persist and remain meaningful. The essay has
looked at the dialectical relations between doctrinal religion, the bourgeois and intel-
lectual forms of religion, and the contingent multi-complex religion of the majority
devotees. The early debates which still resound in studies of contemporary Bud-
dhism need to be re-theorised in the context of contingency and multiplicity. Indeed,
an understanding of the meaning of popular or vernacular Buddhism among vari-
ous actors can only be had through the notion of contingency. The simplistic notion
21 E.g. as in Fredrik Barth’s classic work among the Ok people in New Guinea (1990 [1987]).
1 3

426 J. Taylor
that an embodied/unitary person may be constituted in multiple ways is misleading;
instead, correlatively, an organization (of difference) which belongs to the many and
which has no need for unity of order to form a systemic (molar) whole is perhaps a
better conceptualization.
The Deleuzian multiplicities that I have been concerned with here pertain more to reli-
gious self-identity as ontological univocity among actors as unifiable wholes, as self-sim-
ilarity across variations, and which in normative religion in turn creates an either/or, from
the both/and the complex. The logic of binarism, which pervades studies of doctrinal Bud-
dhism, renders totalisation problematic. It is not possible as an observer to define Buddhist
orthopraxy while discounting the multi-complex variants of popular Buddhist practice.
Here I have argued for a more nuanced and pluralistic understanding of varieties of popular
religious practice and ontology within self-perceptions among actors of being religious.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions
Declarations
Competing Interests The author declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen
ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Ames, M. (1964). Buddha and the dancing goblins: A theory of magic and religion. American Anthro-
pologist, LXVI, 75–82.
Baker, C., & Phongpaichit, P. (2013). Protection and power in Siam: From Khun Chang Khun Phaen to
the Buddha amulet. Southeast Asian Studies, 2(2), 215–242.
Barth, F. (1990). (1987). Cosmologies in the making: A generative approach to cultural variation in inner
New Guinea. Cambridge studies in social and cultural anthropology, 64. Cambridge University
Press.
Bhabha, H. (2004 [1994]). The location of culture. Routledge.
Blake, T. (n.d.). Laruelle and Deleuze: From difference to multiplicity. https:// onsce nes. weebly. com/ philo
sophy/ deleu ze- philo sopher- of- diffe rence- or- philo sopher- of- multi plici ty. Accessed 02 March 2023.
Bowie, K. (2018). The historical vicissitudes of the Vessantara Jataka in mainland Southeast Asia. Jour-
nal of Southeast Asian Studies, 49(1), 34–62.
Brasovan, N., & Soong, M. (Eds.). (2019). Buddhisms in Asia: Traditions, transmissions, and transforma-
tions. SUNY Press.
Carrithers, M., et al. (2010). Ontology is just another word for culture: Motion tabled at the 2008 Meet-
ing of the Group for Debates in Anthropological Theory, University of Manchester. Participants:
Michael Carrithers, Matei Candea, Karen Sykes, Martin Holbraad and Soumhya Venkatesan. Cri-
tique of Anthropology, 30(2), 152–200.
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 427
Classen, C. (1997). Foundations for an anthropology of the senses. International Social Science Journal,
49(153), 401–412.
de la Perrière, B. B., & Peter, J. (2022). Spirit possession in Buddhist Southeast Asia: Worlds ever more
enchanted. NIAS Press.
Deleuze, G. (1994). Difference and repetition. Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. (1990). The logic of sense (J. Lester & C. Stivale, Trans.). Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus (B. Massumi, Trans.). Continuum Books.
Eitel, E. J. (1873). Buddhism: Historical, theoretical, and popular aspects (three lectures on Buddhism)
(3rd ed.). Trubner & Co.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1935). Witchcraft. Africa: Journal of the International African Institute, 8(4),
417–422.
Evers, H.-D. (1977). The social complexity of Southeast Asian religion: The current debate on Buddhism.
Journal of Asian Studies, 37(1), 183–185.
Freiberger, O. (2004). The Buddhist canon and the canon of Buddhist studies. Journal of the Interna-
tional Association of Buddhist Studies, 27(2), 261–283.
Gabaude, L. (2016). Readers in the maze: Modern debates about the Vessantara story in Thailand. In S.
Colins (Ed.), Readings of the Vessantara Jātaka (pp. 37–52). Columbia University Press.
Gombrich, R., & Obeyesekere, G. (1988). Buddhism transformed: Religious change in Sri Lanka. Princ-
ton University Press.
Greenwood, S. (2020). The anthropology of magic. Routledge.
Jackson, P. (2023). Capitalism magic Thailand: Global modernity and the making of enchantment. ISEAS -
Yusof Ishak Institute.
Jory, P. (2002a). A history of the thet maha chat and its contribution to a Thai political culture [PhD the-
sis]. ANU, Canberra.
Jory, P. (2002b). The Vessantara Jataka, Barami, and the Bodhisatta-kings: The origin and spread of a
Thai concept of power. Crossroads: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 16(2),
36–78.
Kennedy, K. (2017). System and/as contingency: Quentin Meillassoux and the ethics of chance. Irish
Journal of French Studies, 17, 71–93.
Keyes, C. (1978). Structure and history in the study of the relationship between Theravada Buddhism and
political order. Numen, 25, 156–170.
Keyes, C. (1987). Theravada Buddhism and its worldly transformations in Thailand: Reflections on the
work of S.J. Tambiah. Contributions to Indian Sociology, 21, 123–145.
Keyes, C. (1983). Karma: An anthropological inquiry. In C. Keyes & E. Valentine Daniel (Eds.), Karma:
An anthropological inquiry (pp. 261–286). University of California Press.
Kidpromma, A. (2022). Buddhist modernism and the piety of female sex workers in northern Thailand.
Religions, 13(4), 350. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ rel13 040350
King, W. (1964). In the hope of Nibbana: An essay on Theravada Buddhist ethics. Carus Publishing
Company.
Kirsch, A. T. (1977). Complexity in the Thai religious system: An interpretation. The Journal of Asian
Studies, 36(2), 241–266.
Kitiarsa, P. (2012). Mediums, monks, and amulets: Thai popular Buddhism today. Silkworm Books.
Laruelle, F. (1998). Dictionary of non-philosophy (T. Adkins, Trans.). Editions Kime. Monoskop.org.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The production of space (D. Nicholson-Smith, Trans.). Blackwell Publishing.
Ling, T. (2013). [1973] The Buddha: The social-revolutionary potential of Buddhism. Pariyatti Press
(Fortieth Anniversary Edition).
Malikhao, P. (2017). Culture and communication in Thailand. Springer Nature.
Marriott, M. (Ed.). (1955). Village India: Studies in the Little Community. University of Chicago Press.
Mauss, M. (2010 [1972]). A general theory of magic (R. Brain, Trans.), reprint. Routledge.
McDaniel, J. (2011). Thai Buddhism: Magic, money and murder. The Huffington Post. http:// www. huffi ngton
post. com/ justin- mcdan iel/ thai- buddh ism- magic- money- murder_ b_ 10161 15. html. Accessed 20 Jan 2024.
Meillassoux, Q. (2008). After finitude: An essay on the necessity of contingency. Continuum.
Meillassoux, Q. (2012). The contingency of the laws of nature. Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space, 30(2), 322–334.
Morris, R. (2000). In the place of origins: Modernity and its mediums in northern Thailand. Duke Uni-
versity Press.
Muecke, M. (1992). Monks and mediums: Religious syncretism in northern Thailand. Journal of the
Siam Society, 80(pt.2), 97–104.
1 3

428 J. Taylor
Mulder, N. (1985). Everyday life in Thailand. An interpretation. DK Books.
Nilsen, M. (2011). The spirit of a heroine: Ya Mo – Spirit reverence, patriotism and Thai Buddhism.
Modern Asian Studies, 45(6), 1599–1625.
Obeyesekere, G. (1963). The great tradition and the little in the perspective of Sinhalese Buddhism. The
Journal of Asian Studies, 22, 139–153.
Opler, M. E. (1959). The place of religion in a North Indian village. Southwestern Journal of Anthropol-
ogy, 15, 219–226.
Palmer, David A. (2019). Folk, popular, or Minjian religion? (editorial). Review of Religion and Chinese
Society, 6, 155–159.
Parker, C. (1998). Modern popular religion: A complex object of study for sociology. International Soci-
ology , 13(2), 195–212.
Parnwell, M., & Seeger, M. (2008). The relocalization of Buddhism in Thailand. Journal of Buddhist
Ethics, 15, 79–176.
Preus, J. S. (1979). Spinoza, Vico, and the imagination of religion. Journal of the History of Ideas, 50(1),
71–93.
Ramey, Joshua. (2014). Contingency without unreason: Speculation after Meillassoux. Angelaki: Journal
of the Theoretical Humanities, 19(1), 31–46.
Redfield, R. (1956). Peasant society and culture: An anthropological approach to civilization. University
of Chicago Press.
Redfield, R. (1960). The little community and peasant society and culture. University of Chicago Press.
Reynolds, C. (2015). Magic and Buddhism. In J. Powers (Ed.), The Buddhist world. Taylor & Francis Inc.
Reynolds, C. (2019). Power, protection and magic in Thailand: The cosmos of a southern policeman.
ANU Press (Asian Studies Series Monograph 12).
Reynolds, F. & Reynolds, M. (1982). Three worlds according to King Ruang: A Thai Buddhist cosmol-
ogy. Asian Humanities Press.
Scott, J. (1979). Revolution in the revolution: Peasants and commissars. Theory and Society, 7(1/2), 97–134.
Singer, M. (1959). Traditional India: Structure and change. American Folklore Society.
Spiro, M. (1971). Buddhism and society: A great tradition and its Burmese vicissitudes. Harper & Row
Publishers.
Stanford, M., & Whitehouse, H. (2021). Why do great and little traditions coexist in the world’s doctrinal
religions? Religion, Brain & Behavior, 11(3), 312–334.
Strong, J. (2015). Buddhisms: An introduction. One World Publications.
Styers, R. (2004). Making magic: Religion, magic, and science in the modern world. (The American
Academy of Religion) Oxford University Press.
Tambiah, S. J. (2017 [1973]). Forms and meaning of magical acts. Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 7(3),
451–473.
Tanabe, S. (2016). Communities of potential: Social assemblages in Thailand and beyond. Silkworm
Books.
Taylor, J. (1993). Forest monks and the nation-state: An anthropological and historical study in northeast
Thailand. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Taylor, J. (2008). Buddhism and post-modern imaginings in Thailand: The religiosity of urban space.
Ashgate Publishing.
Taylor, J. (2013). Understanding social totalities: Stanley Tambiah’s early contribution to sociology of
Thai religion. In F. Aulino, M. Goheen, & S. Tambiah (Eds.), with Afterword by Michael M.J.
Fischer, Radical egalitarianism: Local realities, global relations (pp. 51–67). Fordham University
Press.
Taylor, J. (2015). Popular Buddhism: Magic, monks and amulets. In B. Turner & S. Oscar (Eds.), Hand-
book of Religions in Asia (pp. 219–230). Routledge.
Terwiel, B. (1976). A model for the study of Thai Buddhism. The Journal of Asian Studies, 35(3),
391–403.
Terwiel, B. (2012). Monks and magic: Revisiting a classic study of religious ceremonies in Thailand (4th
Revised Edition). NIAS Press.
van Schaik, S. (2020). Buddhist magic: Divination, healing, and enchantment through the ages. Shamb-
hala Publications Inc.
Vico, G. (2000). New Science (D. Marsh, Trans.). Penguin Books Ltd.
White, E. (2017). Rethinking anthropological models of spirit possession and Theravada Buddhism. Reli-
gion and Society: Advances in Research, 8, 189–202.
1 3

Multiplicities and Contingency: Rethinking ‘Popular… 429
Winichakul, T. (2015). Buddhist apologetics and a genealogy of comparative religion in Siam. Numen,
62, 76–99.
Wuchterl, K. (2019). Religious-philosophical contingency and empirical theology. Journal of Empirical
Theology, 32, 169–187.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Jim Taylor1,2
*
Jim Taylor
jim10taylor@gmail.com
1 Faculty of Social Sciences, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand
2 School of Social Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
1 3