TITLE: Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body in Indian Buddhist Literature
AUTHOR: Reiko Ohnuma
YEAR: 2007
PUBLISHER: Columbia University Press
LANGUAGE: EN
TYPE: Monograph / Treatise
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 939614
STATUS: OK
============================================================

Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood

HEAD, EYES,
FLESH, AND BLOOD
Giving Away the Body
in Indian Buddhist Literature
Reiko Ohnuma
columbia university press new york

Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York, Chichester, West Sussex
Copyright © 2007 Columbia University Press
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Ohnuma, Reiko.
Head, eyes, fl esh, and blood : giving away the body in Indian Buddhist
literature / Reiko Ohnuma.
p. cm.
Originally presented as the author’s thesis (Ph.D.—University of
Michigan).
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-231-13708-7 (cloth : alk. paper) — ISBN 0-231-51028-4 (e-book)
1. Buddhist literature—India—Th emes, motives. 2. Sacrifi ce in
literature. 3. Gautama Buddha—Pre-existence. I. Title.
BQ1029.I42056 2006
294.3'42—dc22
2006019767
o
Columbia University Press books are printed on
permanent and durable acid-free paper.
Printed in the United States of America
c 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Toshi and Shoroku Ohnuma
All good things began with you

CONTENTS
Illustrations ix
Tables xi
Conventions Used in Th is Book xiii
Acknowledgments xv
Introduction 1
i Th e Gift- of- the- Body Genre 26
ii Conventions of Plot 52
iii Conventions of Rhetoric 90
iv Dāna: Th e Buddhist Discourse on Giving 140
v A Flexible Gift 167
vi Bodies Ordinary and Ideal 199

contents
vii Kingship, Sacrifi ce, Off ering, and Death:
Some Other Interpretive Contexts 242
Conclusions 266
Appendix: A Corpus of
Gift- of- the- Body Jātakas 273
Notes 285
Bibliography of Works Cited 337
Index 359
viii

ILLUSTRATIONS
figure 1
Th e elephant Saddanta gives his tusks to a hunter (Ajantā, Cave 17)
˙ ˙ ˙˙
figure 2
King Śibi gives his fl esh to ransom a dove (Ajantā, Cave 1)
˙˙
figure 3
An ascetic gives his body to a hungry tigress (Tibetan thangka)
figure 4
King Śibi gives his fl esh to ransom a dove (Gandhāra)
figure 5
Th e hare gives his body to a brahmin (Osamu Tezuka’s Buddha)
figure 6
King Śibi gives his fl esh to ransom a dove
(Amar Chitra Katha comic book)

TABLES
table 1
Diff erences Between the Two Major Plotlines
of the Gift- of- the- Body Genre
table 2
Th e Structure of Mahajjātakamālā 44 and
Its Relationship to Jātakamālā 2
table 3
Two Conceptual Schema for Organizing the Varieties of Buddhist Dāna

CONVENTIONS USED IN THIS BOOK
1. Th roughout this book, I refer repeatedly to many diff erent gift- of- the-
body jātakas (which collectively make up the corpus from which I draw my
conclusions). Since it is cumbersome to cite all of the available editions,
translations, and discussions of each jātaka every time it is mentioned,
and since it is confusing (for the reader) to cite such information only the
fi rst time each jātaka is mentioned, I have collected all of this information
together in the Appendix (where I hope it will be easier to locate) and
left it out of the endnotes completely. Th e endnotes are thus reserved for
direct citations and relevant discussions only. However, when citing a text
or story that is not a part of my corpus (and therefore not covered in the
Appendix), I try to give somewhat fuller information in the endnotes.
2. Passages translated by me from the original sources are cited ac-
cording to the edition used (ed.); passages borrowed from other people’s
translations are cited according to the translation used (trans.). For passages
translated by me, I have provided the original text in the endnotes in the
case of shorter passages, but not in the case of longer passages.
3. Many of the stories I discuss exist in both Pāli and Sanskrit versions.
In order to avoid the confusion caused by variant names, I consistently
xiii

conventions used in this book
use the Sanskrit form throughout (e.g., King Śibi rather than King Sivi),
regardless of whether I am talking about a Pāli or a Sanskrit source. Th e
same goes for technical terms (e.g., anātman rather than anatta). Th e
only exceptions are a few instances in which it made more sense to me
(for various reasons) to use the Pāli form rather than the Sanskrit (e.g.,
Vessantara Jātaka rather than Viśvamtara Jātaka). In such cases, I clearly
˙
indicate that the language is Pāli.
xiv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
M
any people and institutions have helped me in the completion
of this book (as well as the Ph.D. dissertation on which it is
based), and it is a pleasure to be able to acknowledge them.
First and foremost, I would like to thank the members of my dissertation
committee at the University of Michigan: my advisor Luis Gómez, for his
unfl agging help and support (along with many mysterious and enigmatic
kernels of wisdom); Don Lopez, for his enduring friendship and expert
guidance over the last fi fteen years; Bob Sharf, whose scholarship I deeply
admire; and Madhav Deshpande, for much help with the Sanskrit.
For funding that made the completion of the dissertation possible, I would
like to thank the Rackham Graduate School of the University of Michigan
(for a Rackham Pre- Doctoral Fellowship and a Rackham Th esis / Disser-
tation Grant) and the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation
(for a Charlotte Newcombe Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship).
During the many years that have elapsed since completion of the origi-
nal dissertation, I have had three institutional homes, all of whom I thank
for providing me and my family with equally warm and hospitable envi-
ronments: the Department of Asian Studies at the University of Texas, the
xv

acknowledgments
Department of Religious Studies at the University of Alabama, and the
Department of Religion at Dartmouth College—with a special thanks to
Susan Ackerman, Amy Hollywood (now of Harvard), and Ehud Benor,
for help with various aspects of this book. I would also like to thank
Dartmouth College for a Junior Faculty Fellowship during 2002–2003
that made the signifi cant revision of the dissertation possible.
Other scholars to whom I am grateful for helping me over the years
and showing an interest in my work include Tom Trautmann, Griff Foulk,
Charles Hallisey, Phyllis Granoff , Jonathan Silk, Liz Wilson, Richard
Cohen, Jake Dalton, Dan Boucher, and Gregory Schopen. I also thank
four anonymous reviewers (for both Columbia and another press) who
made many valuable comments about my original manuscript—some
incorporated and others ignored—and one very unanonymous reviewer,
John Strong, whose extensive comments were particularly helpful. Wendy
Lochner at Columbia University Press has made my fi rst experience in
publishing a very pleasant one. Finally, I thank two scholars who stand at
the very beginning and very end of the process: At the end was Michael
Hahn, who found many unforgivable errors of translation in a piece I
had published and then most graciously agreed to review the bulk of the
translations that appear in this book, thus saving me from many embar-
rassing mistakes. And at the beginning of the process was Padmanabh
Jaini, my inspiring undergraduate teacher at U.C. Berkeley. Th ough I sat
at the back of his classroom and never said a word, I now take this op-
portunity to thank him publicly for his wonderful courses on Buddhism
and Hinduism that fi rst set the direction for my future. I only hope I
have begun to live up to the startling comment he made at the end of my
fi nal paper: “Graduate work in Buddhist Studies appears to be a natural
direction for your future!”
On the nonacademic side of my life, I thank my older sister, Keiko,
for leading an interesting, tropical life, and my wonderful in-l aws, the
Pults, for unbelievably good food over many years’ time. Closer to home
are my husband, Richard, and my beautiful kids, Attie and Astro—none
of whom were any help at all in the completion of this book—as well as
Ike and Dusty (who weren’t much help either, since they spend most of
their time bumping into each other). Still, I feel lucky and blessed every
single day to have surrounded myself with such a gorgeous and motley
array of creatures. Nothing would mean anything without them. Finally,
words cannot express the debt of gratitude I owe to my parents, Toshi and
xvi

acknowledgments
Shoroku Ohnuma, who have helped me, supported me, and loved me
for my entire life. I have often been a diffi cult, petulant, and ungrateful
daughter. I hope that I can begin to repay them in some small way for
everything they have done for me by dedicating this work wholly—and
whole- heartedly—to them.
xvii

Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood

INTRODUCTION
I
n 399 c.e. a Chinese Buddhist monk by the name of Faxian set out
from his home in Chang’an to undertake a f ourteen-y ear pilgrimage
to the Buddhist holy land of India. After following a path westward
across the length of China, he eventually worked his way south via the
Karakorum trail and entered the northwestern portion of the Indian sub-
continent, in the regions of Uddiyāna and Gandhāra (in what is currently
˙˙
northern Pakistan).
At the time of Faxian’s visit, Buddhism in this region (under the Later
Kusānas and Śakas) was fl ourishing, and in addition to the many large
˙ ˙
monasteries and thriving monastic communities Faxian encountered, there
were a number of impressive Buddhist holy sites associated with the bi-
ography of the Buddha. But since the original homeland of the historical
Buddha lay far away in the central Gangetic plain, this region of northwest
India could not lay claim to the more standard and well known episodes
of the Buddha’s life. Instead, the holy sites of northwest India were of two
major types: Some commemorated the events that took place during a
purely apocryphal and supernatural nighttime journey the Buddha is said
1

introduction
to have taken to the region in the company of the yaksa Vajrapāni, during
˙ ˙
which he tamed and converted many nonhuman beings by means of his
magical powers.1 (Th us Faxian visited the famous cave in which the Bud-
dha, after taming the nāga-k ing Gopāla, had left an imprint of his shadow
as a continuing reminder of his presence.) Most of the northwestern sites,
however, were associated with the Buddha’s previous lifetimes (before his
birth as Siddhārtha Gautama) and commemorated the various heroic
deeds he had performed while still a bodhisattva. Since northwest India
could not be clearly associated with the Buddha’s last life, it made sense
to localize and acclimatize Buddhism within the region by identifying
various northwestern sites as the locales of some of his previous lives, as
recorded in the Buddhist jātakas.2
If we follow Faxian along his journey (by means of the detailed ac-
count he left behind),3 it is striking to observe that virtually all of these
sites connected to the Buddha’s previous lives commemorate deeds of
bodily self-s acrifi ce. Th ough the bodhisattva of the jātakas performs dif-
ferent virtuous deeds, it is the act of bodily sacrifi ce, above all, that seems
to have excited the imagination of those who erected the holy sites of the
northwest. In a place called Suvastu, for example, Faxian came across a
large stūpa “adorned . . . with gold and silver ornaments” and marking the
spot where the Buddha, in his previous life as King Śibi, had “cut off a
piece of his own fl esh” and used it to ransom a dove from the clutches of
a hungry hawk.4 Five days later, in Gandhāra, Faxian encountered another
large stūpa, similarly adorned with gold and silver, where the same King
Śibi “gave away his eyes as alms to others.”5 Seven days later, while visit-
ing a stūpa in Taksaśilā, Faxian informs us that the name Taksaśilā means
˙ ˙
“decapitation” and refers to the Buddha’s birth as King Candraprabha, who
“gave away his head as alms at this place; hence the name.”6 And from
there, several days’ journey to the east, Faxian and his companions visited
yet another stūpa, which marked the place where the bodhisattva, born as
Prince Mahāsattva, “gave his body to feed a starving tigress.”7 Th ese acts
of bodily sacrifi ce seem to have inspired abundant worship and devotion,
for Faxian further informs us that the people of the region referred to
these sites as the “Four Great Stupas,” where “kings, ministers, and people
of diff erent countries vied with one another in making off erings” and
“the practices of scattering fl owers and lighting lamps at the stupa never
ceased.”8 A virtual cult of the bodhisattva’s bodily sacrifi ce appears to have
been active throughout the region.
2

introduction
Approximately two hundred years later, in the seventh century c.e.,
another Chinese Buddhist monk by the name of Xuanzang also made the
holy pilgrimage to India, visiting many of the same sites as his predecessor
Faxian and writing an even more detailed account of his travels.9 By this
time the situation in northwest India had changed considerably, however.
Buddhism had suff ered greatly under the ravages of the Ephthalites, or
White Huns, and in many of the places where Faxian had described beau-
tiful monasteries and thriving monastic communities, Xuanzang found
only neglected and crumbling buildings inhabited by dwindling numbers
of monks.
Nevertheless, while traveling through the northwest, Xuanzang once
again paid his respects at the same four stūpas, his account of them off er-
ing us several additional details. Th e stūpa commemorating King Śibi’s
sacrifi ce of his eyes, for example, is described by Xuanzang as having
“wood carvings and stone sculptures [that] are quite diff erent from work
done by human artisans.”10 Xuanzang dates this stūpa to the era of King
Aśoka, and further informs us that the bodhisattva gave his eyes away at
this spot not just once, but in a thousand consecutive lifetimes. Th e same
repetitive quality also characterizes King Candraprabha’s gift of his head,
for Xuanzang tells us that this king, too, made such a gift “a thousand
times in past lives.”11 Th e potency of this repetitive self-d ecapitation was
such that its eff ects were still apparent in the time of Xuanzang. “On
fast days,” he tells us, “[the stūpa] sometimes emits a light amid divine
fl owers and heavenly music,” and its powers had recently cured a devout
woman suff ering from leprosy.12 Supernatural occurrences also charac-
terized the fourth stūpa, commemorating Prince Mahāsattva’s gift of his
body to the hungry tigress. Xuanzang tells us that because the prince had
“pricked himself with a dry bamboo splinter so as to feed the tigress with
his blood . . . the soil and plants of this place are dark reddish in color,
as if they have been stained by the blood,” and “when people come to
this spot, they feel nervous and uneasy, as if they had prickles hurting
their backs.”13
Unlike Faxian, Xuanzang does not single out these sites as the “Four
Great Stupas.” In fact, his account of his travels through the northwest
suggests that many additional sites associated with the bodhisattva’s bodily
sacrifi ce also existed in this region.14 Th us, the Mahāvana (“Great Forest”)
monastery marked the spot where the bodhisattva, as King Sarvadatta,
had off ered his own head to a wandering supplicant.15 In the Sanirāja
3

introduction
valley stood a monastery called Sarpausadhi (“Serpent Medicine”) with an
˙
eighty- foot high stūpa whose story Xuanzang relates as follows:
Th is was the place where a famine occurred with a pestilence when the Tathāgata
was [the deity] Indra in a former life. Medical treatment failed to cure the people,
who died one after another on the road. With a mind of pity, Indra wished to
save them, and so he transformed himself into a huge python lying dead in the
valley, and an announcement echoed in the air. Th ose who heard about it were
glad to rush to the spot to cut off pieces of fl esh, which were at once replaced, to
satisfy their hunger and cure their disease.16
Strangely enough, nearby was yet another stūpa where a very similar deed
had occurred: during a great famine, the bodhisattva (born once again as
the deity Indra) “changed himself into a large sūma (water) serpent, and
all those who ate its fl esh were cured.”17 And fi nally, the appropriately-
n amed Rohitaka (Red) Stūpa marked the spot where the bodhisattva, as
King Maitrībala, “drew blood from his body to feed fi ve yaksas.”18
˙
Head, eyes, fl esh, and blood—the land of northwest India itself was
a virtual map of the bodhisattva’s gruesome gifts. Over and over again,
throughout his long career—whether as king, prince, ascetic, elephant,
hare, serpent, or god—the bodhisattva quite literally gave of himself, re-
peatedly jumping off cliff s or into fi res, drowning himself in the ocean,
slashing his throat, cutting the fl esh from his thighs, ripping out his tusks,
gouging out his eyes, or letting mosquitoes drink from his blood. He of-
fered his body as food, as drink, as medicine to cure all ills, as a raft to hang
onto in pursuit of the other shore, as ransom for the life of another—or for
no good reason at all, but merely because someone had asked. And always
with the same motivation—to benefi t other beings out of selfl essness and
compassion, to fulfi ll the “perfection of generosity” (dāna- pāramitā), and
ultimately, to win the highest estate of Buddhahood.
Visual depictions of such gifts are scattered throughout the archaeo-
logical remains of ancient India and beyond. In a sculptural frieze from
Gandhāra, the bodhisattva, born as a noble elephant, kneels down and
allows a cruel hunter to saw off his magnifi cent tusks for the sake of an
evil queen who desires them.19 Th e same legend is depicted at Ajantā Cave
˙˙
17 (see fi gure 1), except that in this case the elephant himself performs the
diffi cult task, wrapping his enormous trunk around one of his tusks and
enduring excruciating pain as he wrenches it out, while the hunter kneels
beside him in awe.20 In another Gandhāran frieze now kept at the British
4

introduction
figure 1 Th e elephant Saddanta removes his own tusk on behalf of a hunter. Wall paint-
˙ ˙
ing, Cave 17 at Ajantā, ca. late 5th century c.e. Courtesy of Benoy K. Behl.
˙˙
Museum (see fi gure 4 in chapter 3), we see King Śibi having a chunk of
fl esh removed from his thigh and placed on a scale in order to match the
exact weight of the dove whose life is being ransomed, while in a painting
from Ajantā Cave 1 we see him heaving his entire body up onto the scale
˙˙
itself, since—through a bit of divine magic—the weight of the dove cannot
be matched no matter how much fl esh is cut (see fi gure 2).21
For textual references to the bodhisattva’s bodily gifts, we need not
rely solely on the accounts of Chinese travelers, but can turn to the vast
literature of Indian Buddhism itself. In some texts these gifts are merely
alluded to in a general way. Th e Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra, for example,
says of the Buddha: “When he was still only a bodhisattva, he off ered to
his enemies who came to kill him his body, his fl esh, his head, his eyes,
his marrow, and his brain.”22 In other texts, they are enumerated more
specifi cally. Th e Lalitavistara, Rāstrapālapariprcchā Sūtra, and Jātakastava
˙˙ ˙
of Jñānayaśas, for example, contain long lists of the Buddha’s previous
births in which multiple instances of bodily sacrifi ce are briefl y summa-
rized and praised.23 (Th e bodhisattva of the Jātakastava is especially busy;
in just twenty verses, he throws himself off two cliff s, drowns himself in
the ocean, jumps into a raging fi re, and gives away his head, tusks, eyes,
5

introduction
figure 2 King Śibi, unable to cut enough of his fl esh to equal the weight of the dove,
steps onto the scale itself. Wall painting, Cave 1 at Ajantā, ca. late 5th century c.e. Courtesy
˙˙
of Benoy K. Behl.
and fl esh on three diff erent occasions.) Such descriptions, though brief,
do make us privy to certain new and lush details. From the Jātakastava,
for example, we learn that King Maitrībala’s fl esh was “cut out in slices
with a sword,” and after being cut, was “still warm . . . with blood fl owing
from the apertures of the cloven veins.”24
In many Mahāyāna sūtras, on the other hand, the bodhisattva’s gifts are
treated as examples to be imitated, and all bodhisattvas are encouraged to
give their bodies away, either literally or fi guratively. “I have renounced
and abandoned my body to all living beings,” the Nārāyanapariprcchā
˙ ˙
Sūtra advises the bodhisattva to think, “not to mention external things.
If any being needs anything for any reason whatsoever, I will give it,
as long as it seems right. I will give my hands to whoever asks for my
hands, my feet to whoever asks for my feet, my eyes to whoever asks for
my eyes. I will abandon fl esh, blood, bone marrow, major and minor
limbs—not to mention external things . . .”25 Th e Vajradhvaja Sūtra like-
wise advises the bodhisattva to renounce his own body, reasoning with
himself: “If I should give to this supplicant the intestines, the liver,
the heart, or the lungs from my body, or if I should not give them—
either way, my body is not permanent; at the end of my life, it is des-
6

introduction
tined for the cremation ground.”26 Such passages remove the act of
bodily self-s acrifi ce from the specifi c context of Śākyamuni Buddha’s
biography and begin to place it within the more generic context of the
bodhisattva path and vocation.
Th e bodhisattva’s gift of his body appears in many diff erent guises,
then, throughout the traditions of Indian Buddhism. Nevertheless, it is
fi rst and foremost in the Buddhist literary genres known in Sanskrit as
jātaka and avadāna that such gifts and deeds truly come alive. In these
two prominent Indian Buddhist narrative forms, the human stories behind
such gifts are told, the heroes are brought to life, and the consequences of
their gifts on themselves and those around them are narrated in painstak-
ing detail. It is only through the reading of such fully elaborated stories
that we stop thinking of bodily sacrifi ce as merely “something bodhisattvas
do”—routinely, repetitively, as a matter of course—and are instead mo-
mentarily drawn into a world in which a real creature infl icts horrible pain
and mutilation upon his own self. It is only within the context of the story,
in other words, that we lose sight of the generic “bodhisattva path”—a
cosmological pattern that replays itself in much the same way over and over
again throughout time—and instead become embroiled within a smaller
and more detailed world concerned with this- or- that king, this-o r- that
rabbit, and the integrity of this- or- that physical body. Th rough the skill
of the storyteller and the fl ow of the narrative, the bodhisattva’s deeds
become visceral experiences for the reader. No matter how many stories
one reads in which the bodhisattva agrees to give his body away, one still
holds one’s breath every time the momentous decision is made. One still
feels a shudder run up the spine whenever the bodhisattva cuts open his
fl esh, and the text dwells almost lovingly on the pain and agony endured.
It is only the story that engages us to such an extent that we become as
children again, listening to the same tale over and over but experiencing
delight upon every retelling.
Th us, in the various Pāli and Sanskrit versions of the jātaka involving
King Śibi’s gift of his eyes, we hear not merely of the gift itself, but of the
dramatic events leading to it. King Śibi is described as a generous and
compassionate king—one who has six alms-h alls established throughout
his capital city and distributes six hundred thousand pieces of gold to beg-
gars and supplicants every day, “showering forth a great rain of gifts, like
a cloud in the Golden Age.”27 Surely, he is the very model of the generous
king! But still—it is not enough; he is unhappy and discontented; some-
thing is not right, “so addicted was he to giving.”28 We see him sitting on
7

introduction
his throne, chin in hand, mulling over his gifts, wondering why they no
longer satisfy him. What is it that he truly wishes to give?
“I’ve got it!,” he exclaims, suddenly seating himself bolt upright.
Today, when I go to the alms- hall, if any supplicant asks not for an external
object, but names something internal, I will give it. If anyone names the fl esh of
my heart, I will strike my chest with a spear, and as if I were uprooting a lotus
with its stalk from a clear pool of water, I will tear out my heart, oozing with
drops of blood, and give it to him. If anyone names the fl esh of my body, I will
strip the fl esh off my body as if I were engraving with an engraving tool and give
it to him. If anyone names my blood, I will give him my blood, placing it in his
mouth or fi lling up the bowl he holds forth. . . . If anyone names my eyes, I will
tear out my eyes, as if I were removing the pith from a palm tree, and give them
to him. . . . Th ere is not a single human gift that has not been given by me. Even
if someone should ask for my eye, without trembling I will give it.29
Sure enough, later that day, a blind old brahmin comes and asks the king
for an eye, and King Śibi agrees to give him not one, but both of his eyes.
Th is terrible decision throws his kingdom into chaos; offi cials and min-
isters protest, people are torn with grief, and ladies cry and lament. But
King Śibi cannot be swayed. He calls his court physician and orders him
to remove an eye. Th e physician reluctantly applies a powdered medica-
tion, and the eye rolls around in its socket. He applies another powder,
and the eye begins to come out. He applies a third powder, and the eye
comes out of the socket and dangles at the end of a tendon. Th e pain is
extreme, blood fl ows, the ladies cry and lament. “My friend, be quick,”
says the king. So the physician picks up a knife, severs the tendon, and
hands the king his eye, whereupon the king gives his eye to the brahmin,
who places it in his own eye-s ocket. Th e same procedure is repeated for
the second eye, as well. King Śibi is now blind, but the brahmin can see,
and King Śibi is at last satisfi ed. “Th e eye of omniscient knowledge,” he
says, “is dearer to me than this eye by a hundred-f old, by a t housand- fold!
Th is is the reason for [my action].”30
Th e story does not end there. Later on we will fi nd out that the blind
man was really the god Śakra in disguise, who was merely testing the
bodhisattva’s virtue. We will also see King Śibi’s eyes magically restored to
health and hear him preach a sermon on generosity to his subjects. But
already we have begun to enter the king’s world. What a strange man he
8

introduction
is—but we feel that we know him somewhat; we have entered into his
world and listened to him think, all by means of the story. He is no longer
just the generic bodhisattva; now he is the proud and magnanimous king
and the fallible human being—depressed when his unnatural addiction
to generosity cannot be satisfi ed, stubbornly determined when his subjects
oppose him, nearly suicidal (though never regretful) upon becoming blind.
Th e story has given him fl esh, and bone, and life.
One way in which we might begin to appreciate the possibilities brought
about by the s tory- form is to compare two diff erent versions of the same
story, in this case both composed by the same author, the great Buddhist
poet Ksemendra, who included many such stories in his e leventh- century
˙
c.e. Sanskrit collection of versifi ed jātakas, the Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā
(hereafter Avadānakalpalatā). Th is is the well-k nown story of the hungry
tigress, which diff ers in its details from one version to the next, but always
involves the bodhisattva’s sacrifi ce of his life in order to feed a hungry tigress
who is about to devour her own cubs (see fi gure 3). In Avadānakalpalatā
95, Ksemendra relates this story in the briefest of terms. One day, two
˙
criminals who have been sentenced to death are pardoned through the
intervention of the Buddha, who then explains to his disciples:
Th ese two were saved by me in a previous birth, as well, when their mother was
a hideous tigress. At that time, I was a king’s son named Karunarekha. I was a
˙
bodhisattva and a compassionate friend of all beings. A tigress was once emaciated
by hunger and ready to eat her two young cubs. I gave her my own body and
thus prevented her from doing so. And now, these same two [cubs] have become
thieves through their remaining karma, and have [again] been rescued by me.
Th eir mother was none other than that tigress.31
Th is version of the story is brief and uninteresting, providing all of the es-
sential “facts” but otherwise failing to exploit any of the possibilities of the
storytelling form. In Avadānakalpalatā 51, on the other hand, Ksemendra is
˙
much more loquacious, telling what is basically the same story again (aside
from minor details), but this time in a manner that brings out all of the
richness made possible by the characteristics of narrative literature.
One day, so the story goes, the Buddha suddenly smiles. When the
deity Śakra asks him why, the Buddha replies that his smile is a result of
him remembering some of the deeds from his previous lives that occurred
on precisely this spot of ground. He then goes on to relate (speaking
9

figure 3 Story of the starving tigress, as depicted on an eighteenth- century Tibetan
thangka now kept in the St. Louis Art Museum (detail). On the lower left, the Buddha
relates the story of his previous life as a brahmin ascetic. On the lower right, the brahmin
ascetic and his disciple cross a bridge. In the center, they discover and preach to the starv-
ing tigress. On the upper left, the bodhisattva is devoured by the tigress while his disciple
searches for him. Courtesy of the Saint Louis Art Museum, William K. Bixby Trust for
Asian Art.

introduction
in the t hird-p erson rather than the fi rst-p erson) a series of four of his
previous lives, the fourth of which involves the hungry tigress. In order
to give one a suffi cient taste of this literature, I now quote the episode
in full:
[Once upon a time, there was a brahmin’s son] named Satyavrata who was
highly esteemed by the people. He was learned in all the sciences, his heart was
devoted to compassion, he was fond of tranquility, and his mind was opposed to
marriage.
A noble birth, the acquisition of virtues,
a mind adorned with discrimination,
and love and compassion for all beings—
Th ese are the marks of those whose karma is good!
Taking delight in his indiff erence to worldly desires, he went to a hermitage when
he was still just a young man. He undertook a vow to serve two great sages and
lived comfortably at the hermitage.
Th en, in time, when he had attained the pure eye of wisdom, he saw a tigress
who was about to give birth. He refl ected: “She is affl icted by hunger and will
give birth in seven days. Th en an intense longing will arise [in her] to eat her own
young.” Th inking thus about her suff ering, he informed the two sages and made
a wish, out of compassion, to prevent it.
Th en, after seven days had passed, the tigress—exhausted by the weight of
the fetuses, and tormented by her long abstinence from food—brought forth her
young in pain. Satyavrata saw that the smell of her own blood had produced an
intense longing within her, and full of compassion, he thought: “Because of the
pain of hunger, this miserable [creature] is prepared to eat her own cub! Alas! Out
of regard for one’s own welfare, one forgets even the love of off spring! Everyone
is tormented by their own suff ering, but cool to the torments of others. Rarely is
a person born who is especially pained by the pain of others. I will give away my
body to rescue this tigress and her young! I cannot endure their copious suff ering
when their lives are at stake. [And besides:]
Th ose who abandon their bodies in order to save the lives of others,
treating [their bodies] as if they were [mere] blades of grass—
they have an enduring body of fame,
brought about by the arising of abundant merit!
[For] this [mortal body] is intent upon death.
11

introduction
It is a speck of life, like a drop of water,
trembling on the surface of a lotus leaf
shaken by the advancing wind.
Having thus refl ected, that treasure- store of compassion fell down in front of
the tigress, and with a bamboo stick, made a wound on his neck that oozed with
blood.
For the minds of those who are magnanimous—
which are sweet with compassion
and intent upon protecting the unfortunate—
cannot at all endure the torments of others!
Th en the tigress, stimulated by a desire for his blood, fell down upon his broad
chest as he lay immobile, tearing into it with the glistening tips of her claws, which
seemed to smile with joy, as if they were engraving into his chest the wonder of
his noble conduct in this world.
Without moving at all, his body, full of courage, endured with compassion
the burden of the terrible and cruel injuries brought about by the attack of the
tigress—just as love endures faults, forbearance endures wickedness, wisdom
endures a multitude of anxieties, fi rm resolution endures miserable and unbear-
able calamity, and ascetic radiance endures affl iction. His body was covered with
bristling hairs, and as his unblemished chest was torn apart by the sport of the
tigress’ rows of claws, it looked for a moment as if it were full of shooting rays of
light whose purity was as bright as the moon. As he joyfully gazed at the tigress,
intoxicated by eating his fl esh and drinking his blood, his innate life- force—be-
wildered at the prospect of a long journey abroad—held its ground for a moment,
clinging on in his throat.
[At last, the tigress] was satiated by moving back and forth as if she were cir-
cumambulating him, holding her face down continuously as if from bashfulness,
and intent upon taking his hand [like a bride]. Th us did she cause excitement to
his heart—even though he was hostile to marriage!
Th ose who are good- hearted have hearts
that are purifi ed by benevolence,
imperturbable, noble by nature,
rivers of kindness and merit,
[enjoying] fame among [all] worlds.
Th eir very nature is to benefi t others,
12

introduction
and although they are completely in control of themselves,
they are also ornamented by compassion for the miserable.
Th en, as he was being torn apart by the tips of the tigress’ claws, the e arth-
l ady, who is girdled by the playful tides of her four oceans, noticed his unequalled
courage and suddenly trembled for a long time, as if with dread at the moment
when his life would be destroyed.
[Th e Buddha concluded]: “I myself was that man Satyavrata, who delighted
in compassion. Remembering here and now my own [former] deeds, I gave rise
to a smile.”
Having heard the Conqueror speak of his past conduct, Śakra’s mind was
amazed and his face stood motionless.32
Here, we have the same basic theme as before—the bodhisattva’s gift
of his body to a hungry tigress—yet the characters and their actions have
now been vividly brought to life. We see the tigress, her belly heavy with
the weight of her cubs, bringing them forth in great pain, giving rise
to an insatiable hunger brought about by the smell of her own uterine
blood, and fi nally ripping into the bodhisattva’s fl esh with utter abandon,
satiating her hunger until she is drunk with blood and joy. And we see
the bodhisattva himself—a calm, dispassionate, and wise renunciant,
but at the very same time, a true bodhisattva, so full of compassion for
the miserable beast and so excited by the opportunity to help her that
she actually appears to him like a bashful bride, circumambulating the
wedding- fi re and “causing excitement to his heart, even though he was
hostile to marriage.” Th e use of such erotic imagery within the con-
text of a body being ripped to shreds underscores for us just how odd
this bodhisattva’s values really are. Other paradoxes are also evident: Th e
bodhisattva’s neck is violently torn open and oozes with blood, yet at just
the same time he is described as being “sweet with compassion”—as if
the oozing blood itself were transformed, through his great compassion,
into sweet, delicious nectar. Th e act of self-s acrifi ce is gory and bloody,
with repeated images of claws ripping fl esh—but it is also a fantastic
spectacle, full of “shooting rays of light” and making the earth herself
tremble like a fainthearted woman. Standard Buddhist doctrinal themes
are also brought to life: the impermanent and unsatisfying human body
becomes a drop of water clinging hopelessly onto a shaking leaf, while the
attachment- to- self affl icting all unenlightened beings becomes a desperate
mother ready to devour her own young.
13

introduction
On the other hand, even though they are duly mentioned, virtually
no attention at all is paid in this version to the two sages with whom the
bodhisattva lives—but they will similarly be brought to life in yet further
versions of the same tale. In one version,33 in which the bodhisattva is a
prince rather than an ascetic, these two sages are replaced by the two older
brothers of the bodhisattva, who, in spite of being royal princes themselves,
are also men full of fear: even before entering the forest where they will
encounter the hungry tigress, one brother says that he is afraid of being
destroyed by a wild animal, while the other brother says that he is afraid
of being separated from their parents—exactly the fate that their younger
brother will later willingly and gladly undergo (whereupon we watch these
two brothers utterly fall apart as a result of their enormous grief). In
another version,34 they are not only fearful but foolishly boastful—two
sages who assure the bodhisattva that they will provide the hungry tigress
with food, only to use their magical powers to fl y away in fright once they
realize how vicious the tigress really is. We also discover that one of these
sages was a previous birth of the future Buddha Maitreya, and it was his
failure to act in the same exalted manner as Śākyamuni that made him
lose the cosmic race toward perfect Buddhahood. Th e highest and most
exalted beings within the Buddhist universe are thus intimately connected
to a single, long- ago human episode involving three ascetics wandering
around in a lonely forest.
Same story, diff erent versions—and a myriad of ways in which the awe-
some, cosmic pattern of the bodhisattva’s repetitive bodily self-s acrifi ce is
individualized, brought to life, and placed within a universe that matters to
us. It is an awesome deed, to be sure, but perhaps it becomes something we
can actually imagine when it is related to us in a simple, fi rst- person voice
and involves one’s life as a lowly rabbit—such as we fi nd in Cariyāpitaka
˙
1.10 from the Khuddaka Nikāya of the Pāli Canon. Here the Buddha
explains:
When I was a hare living in the woods, feeding on grass, leaves, vegetables, and
fruit, and abstaining from injuring others, a monkey, a jackal, an otter cub, and I
lived in the same neighborhood and were seen [together] morning and evening.
I instructed them as to virtuous and sinful deeds, saying, “Shun the sinful and
stick to the virtuous!”
Seeing the full moon on an Observance Day, I told them: “Today is an Ob-
servance Day. Prepare gifts to give to one who is worthy of gifts. After giving gifts
to one who is worthy of gifts, observe the Observance Day.”
14

introduction
“Very well,” they said to me, and after preparing gifts in accordance with their
ability and their means, they searched for one worthy of gifts.
Seated [there], I thought about a worthy, suitable gift: “If I should fi nd some-
one worthy of gifts, what will be my gift? I have no sesame seeds, beans, rice, or
clarifi ed butter [to off er]. I live on grass, and it is impossible to give [someone]
grass. If someone worthy of gifts comes to me for food, I will give him my own
self! He will not leave [with an] empty [stomach]!”
Understanding my intention, [the god] Śakra came to my dwelling disguised
as a Brahmin in order to test my generosity. When I saw him, I was delighted,
and I spoke these words:
“It is indeed wonderful that you have come to me for the sake of food. Today
I will give you an excellent gift that has never been given before! [But] you are
endowed with moral virtue, and it is not suitable for you to injure others. [So]
come, gather various types of wood, and light a fi re. I will cook my own self, and
you will eat [my] cooked [body]!”
“Very well,” he replied, and with a delighted mind, he gathered various types
of wood and fashioned a great pyre out of a womb of burning embers. He lit the
fi re there in such a way that it would quickly grow great.
Shaking my dusty limbs, I approached to one side. When the great pile of wood
was blazing and roaring, I jumped up and fell into the middle of the fl ames.
Just as cool water relieves the anxiety and fever of whoever enters into it, and
gives them satisfaction and joy, so did the blazing fi re, when I entered it, relieve
all of my anxiety, as if it were cool water.
My outer skin, my inner skin, my fl esh, my muscles, my bones, and the sinews
of my heart—I gave my whole entire body to the Brahmin.35
What a delightfully silly image—four little animals gathered together
in the woods, listening intently to a sermon preached by a bunny rabbit,
followed by the bunny rabbit himself, full of shame due to his poor food-
g athering abilities, diving headlong into a blazing fi re in order to feed a
solitary Brahmin wanderer. And yet the Brahmin wanderer is really the
great deity Śakra in disguise, the bunny rabbit is the bodhisattva himself,
the blazing fi re that ought to consume him magically becomes like cool,
fresh water, and, as the Cariyāpitaka itself later informs us, this single deed
˙
constituted the bodhisattva’s “fulfi llment of the perfection [of giving]” and
thus directly contributed to Śākyamuni’s Buddhahood.36
In Avadānakalpalatā 104, by contrast, Ksemendra turns the rabbit into a
˙
signifi cantly more austere fi gure, and a much more sophisticated preacher.
In this version, the rabbit lives in the forest with an ascetic, but when the
15

introduction
forest is suddenly affl icted by drought, the ascetic becomes determined
to leave it and go to a village where there will be more food. Th e rabbit
dissuades him, however, by speaking eloquently and poetically about the
dangers of ordinary, worldly life within a village. “O Holy Man, rich in
austerities,” he says,
Is it really proper for a wise man like you
to abandon an ascetic grove?
Th e grounds of a village are teeming with people
who are immersed in all kinds of distress
as a result of being separated [from whatever they are attached to].
Th ey are breeding grounds for the trouble caused
by the demon known as “delusions of the household life.”
Th e household is crowded with servants;
it is rattled by the chain called “wife”;
it is made intolerable by the fetter called “son”;
it fi rmly strangles one with the snare called “relatives.”
It is made terrible by its crowds of wicked people;
it is a great darkness that envelops one in stupidity.
What wise man, having abandoned the household,
would ever touch it again?
Th e sorrow that results from being separated from what one loves
is a constant source of bewilderment.
Food that is salty with material wealth
only makes one’s thirst grow greater.
People whose minds are made stupid
by their habitual, wicked desire for sensual pleasures
dwell in the house called “fi eld of mental affl ictions”
and see their welfare come to ruin.
[But] in a deserted forest,
those who are satisfi ed by sublime tranquility
do not have minds shaking with intoxication
by the passionate liquor of sensual enjoyments;
or eyes full of tears welling up
from the smoke of separation from loved ones;
or burning pain brought about
by the heat of anger and fi ghting.
When men have an aversion to tranquility,
16

introduction
they continually long for the village
because of the distress caused by the forest,
or they fondly remember the forest
because of the distress caused by the village.
Please don’t look longingly upon the village,
for the village is unfavorable to discipline!
And how much more does contact with the village
bind those who are attached to sensual pleasures!
You’ll be able to get fruit right here, sooner or later.
And for now, you can survive on my own clean fl esh!37
Same basic scenario, but no longer is he an insignifi cant bunny rabbit
worrying about how to gather food; now he is a most talented Buddhist
preacher (superior even to the human ascetic) whose sermon skillfully
gives voice to the enduring Buddhist themes of the pitfalls of worldly
life and the benefi ts of renunciation. Bold images such as the “rattling
chain called ‘wife’” and the “intolerable fetter called ‘son’” also remind us
that this particular preacher is the future Buddha himself, and the simple
plotline involving a rabbit jumping into a fi re here recedes somewhat into
the background.
In yet other cases, however, such sermons might be kept to a mini-
mum, while the plotline itself becomes signifi cantly more complicated
and capable of conveying complex ideas by means of its very intricacy.
Consider, for example, the t wenty- sixth story in the (Tibetan) Sūtra of the
Wise and the Fool, a story with a complicated pedigree38 but clearly related
to several Sanskrit parallels. While this story resembles the other stories I
have discussed, its depiction of the act of bodily sacrifi ce is clearly more
complicated than we fi nd in the cases of King Śibi, the tigress, or the hare.
Once again, in order to provide a suffi cient taste of this literature, I will
translate this delightful story in full:
Th us did I hear at one time. Th e Blessed One was [once] dwelling at Venuvana,
˙
at Kalandakanivāpa, in Rājagaha. At that time, the Venerable Ānanda got up from
his seat, arranged his robes, put his knees on the ground with his palms joined,
and requested the Blessed One thus:
“I ask you to explain this. Why is it that as soon as the Blessed One [fi rst] turned
the wheel of the dharma in the world, the fi ve monks headed by Kaundinya were
˙˙
the very fi rst to taste the nectar of the dharma?”
17

introduction
Th e Blessed One said to Ānanda: “Previously, these fi ve monks were the fi rst
to eat my fl esh and be satiated. Th erefore, in this life as well, they were the fi rst
to taste the fl avor of the dharma and be liberated.”
Ānanda requested of the Blessed One: “Please tell us what these fi ve monks
previously did.” Th e Blessed One spoke to Ānanda, [and he told him a story of
the past].
• • •
Formerly, in the past, a long time ago, immeasurable, innumerable, inconceiv-
able eons ago, here in Jambudvīpa, there was a king named Śudolagarne who
ruled over the 84,000 or so minor kings of Jambudvīpa. At one time, a soothsayer
predicted that no rain would come to the country for a period of twelve years.
Hearing this news, the king was greatly affl icted by suff ering, thinking about how
much food there was and for how many years it would feed so many people if
such a great famine arose. He gathered all the minor kings and ministers together
and consulted with them, calculating how much grain was in the storehouse and
how many people were present. But when they calculated [how much grain] must
be given directly to each person [in order to last] for twelve years, [they saw that
the grain they had] would not last for twelve years, and they announced this in
a bell- ringing proclamation.
Th en, later on, a great famine arose and many people died. Th e king thought
about what he could do to save many people’s lives. [One day, the king], the
queen, and the royal retinue went walking in the park and stopped somewhere
to rest. After the queen and all of the numerous people [in the retinue] had fallen
asleep, [the king] got up from his couch, bowed down in the four directions, and
made a solemn vow, as follows:
“In this country, a famine has arisen, and all the food is gone. May I abandon
my body through hunger, and after I have died, may I be reborn as a giant fi sh!
May everyone feed on my fl esh and be satiated!”
Having made this solemn vow, he climbed up into a tree. He threw his body
from the tree into an abyss. After dying there, he was miraculously transformed
into a giant fi sh, fi ve hundred yojanas [long], [swimming] in a great river.
At that time, there were fi ve woodcutters in the country who came to the
riverbank to gather wood. Th e giant fi sh saw them and said to them in a human
voice:
“If you are hungry, then cut off my fl esh and eat as much as you want! Even
after you are full, take home with you as much as you can carry! You will be the
fi rst to eat my fl esh and be satiated; therefore, later on, as well, when I have attained
complete enlightenment, you will be the fi rst to taste the food of the dharma!
18

introduction
[Go and] tell the people of the country that anyone who is hungry should take
as much of my fl esh as they wish.”
So the fi ve men cut up his fl esh and ate it, and told the people of the country [to
do likewise]. Th e word spread from one to another until everyone in Jambudvīpa
gathered to cut up his fl esh and eat it. When one side of his ribs was completely
exhausted, [the fi sh], on his own accord, turned over [and off ered] the other side.
Similarly, when the top half of him was not yet completely exhausted, he off ered
the bottom half. With the fi sh turning over and over in this way, from his belly
to his back, everyone cut his fl esh and ate it for a period of twelve years. [During
this time], everyone gave rise to thoughts of compassion, and thus, everyone who
ate his fl esh, even after dying, was reborn as a god in heaven.
• • •
“Ānanda,” [the Buddha concluded,] “the king who became a fi sh at that time
and on that occasion is now me. Th e fi ve woodcutters who were the fi rst to cut
and eat my fl esh are [now] the fi ve monks headed by Kaundinya. Th e many beings
˙˙
who later ate my fl esh are [now] 80,000 devas and my liberated disciples. At that
time, I gave [my body] to those fi ve men fi rst and saved their lives, and therefore,
in the present time, as well, I taught the dharma fi rst to them, and by means of
the limbs of my dharma- Body, I extinguished the fi re of the three poisons.”
Ānanda and the great assembly were delighted and rejoiced at the Blessed
One’s words.39
In this case, we have two separate instances of bodily self- sacrifi ce, along
with a miraculous transformation. Th e king fi rst sacrifi ces his life in order
to transform himself into a gigantic fi sh, and the fi sh then sacrifi ces its life
by allowing all beings to feed on his fl esh. Th is seems to change the nature
of the self- sacrifi ce itself. In fact, if we consider all of the stories I have dis-
cussed thus far, it is possible to place this instance of self- sacrifi ce on the far
end of a continuum of bodily destruction and / or transformation: in the
story of the tigress, an ascetic’s body is wholly ripped to shreds and lost for
good; in the story of the hare, the outside world itself (in the form of the
fi re) refuses to destroy the hare’s body at all; in the story of King Śibi, the
eyes are pulled out but later magically restored in a better and more power-
ful form than before; and now fi nally, in the story of King Śudolagarne,
the act of self-s acrifi ce actually transforms the ineff ectual human body
into a gigantic creature whose fl esh heals thousands of other beings. Th e
image of the dispassionate bodhisattva who is willing to throw away his
worthless body on behalf of other beings gradually gives way to another,
19

introduction
quite diff erent image: that of a boastful bodhisattva who is determined to
physically force the transformation of his body into something monstrous
and almost grotesquely eff ective. Clearly, the act of bodily self-s acrifi ce is
more complicated than it fi rst seems.
Th ere is a further complexity in this story, as well, in the intriguing
identifi cations made between past and present characters: the fi ve wood-
cutters who were the very fi rst to feed on the fi sh’s fl esh were subsequently
reborn as the Buddha’s fi rst fi ve disciples (headed by Kaundinya), who
˙˙
were “the very fi rst to taste the nectar of the dharma.” Th ere are no
lengthy sermons or extended doctrinal refl ections, yet from these identi-
fi cations (and similar identifi cations made in other stories), it is possible
to discern, as I have done elsewhere,40 an underlying message about the
nature of Buddhahood and the path that leads to it: the bodhisattva gives
away his physical body and enacts a physical salvation of beings, the story
suggests, whereas the Buddha gives away a spiritual body—the body of
dharma—and enacts a spiritual salvation of beings. An intriguing paral-
lel—but also hierarchy—is thus drawn between the bodhisattva’s gift of
his physical body in the past and the Buddha’s gift of his dharma- body
in the present, between life-s aving food and soul-s aving nectar, between
physical satiety and spiritual satisfaction.
Complex plotlines, intriguing identifi cations, beautiful imagery, and so
many diff erent elaborations of the same basic theme. Perhaps we can now
understand why the theme of the bodhisattva’s gift of his body proved to
be such a compelling one in the literary traditions of Indian Buddhism.41
In the Pāli Canon preserved by the Th eravāda school (whose roots extend
back to perhaps the third century b.c.e. but whose fi nal codifi cation and
commentarial appendages were not completed until the fi fth century c.e.),
there are several such stories (for example, those of King Śibi, the hare,
and the elephant) contained in the Jātaka collection of verses (the tenth
book of the Khuddaka Nikāya), together with its prose commentary, the
Jātakatthakathā (hereafter “Pāli Jātaka collection”). Two of these stories
˙˙
(those of King Śibi and the hare) are also related more briefl y in the
Cariyāpitaka (the fi fteenth book of the Khuddaka Nikāya), where they are
˙
celebrated as paradigmatic instances of the bodhisattva’s dāna- pāramitā,
or “perfection of generosity.”
Nevertheless, although the theme of the bodhisattva’s bodily sacrifi ce
would become quite popular in the later Th eravāda tradition of Southeast
Asia (there are many such stories, for example, in the 15th–16th century
Paññāsa Jātaka),42 in the earlier tradition represented by the Pāli Canon,
20

introduction
it does not seem to have attained much prominence—overshadowed,
perhaps, by the complete dominance within this tradition of the Vessantara
Jātaka, which is another story involving extreme generosity (in this case,
the gift of one’s wife and children).43 In the Sanskrit tradition, on the other
hand, stories involving the bodhisattva’s bodily self-s acrifi ce seem to have
become something of a minor obsession, the same stories appearing over
and over again in story- collections of diverse provenance. Th is would in-
clude, for example, relatively earlier collections such as the Avadānaśataka,
the Mahāvastu, the Divyāvadāna,44 Kumāralāta’s Kalpanāmanditikā (now
˙˙
extant only in Chinese),45 and the Jātakamālā of Āryaśūra, as well as
later collections such as the Jātakamālās of Haribhatta and Gopadatta,46
˙˙
Ksemendra’s Avadānakalpalatā, and the (much later) Mahajjātakamālā47—
˙
texts which range in date from perhaps the fi rst century c.e. to relatively
recent times, come from both Mainstream and Mahāyāna origins,48 and
vary in style all the way from simple Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit prose at-
tributed to no individual author to elegant, literary Sanskrit composed at
the courts of kings by named and celebrated poets.
In some cases, gift- of-t he-b ody stories appear in unexpected places—
such as the version of the tigress-s tory contained in the eighteenth chap-
ter of the Mahāyāna Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra (which is otherwise a
˙
typical Mahāyāna sūtra)—while in other cases, the theme is developed
at great length and merits its own, independent text, such as we fi nd in
the Manicūdāvadāna, a long rendition of the story of King Manicūda,
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
and in the Lokānandanātaka of Candragomin, a dramatic play in fi ve acts
˙
(again dealing with King Manicūda) that is now extant only in Tibetan.
˙ ˙
Finally, some story collections preserved in languages such as Chinese
and Tibetan and having a very uncertain relationship to any presumed
Indic originals might also be included within this general grouping,
since the stories themselves clearly draw on Indic tradition and often
run parallel to stories existing in Sanskrit or Pāli. Two such collections I
will refer to throughout this book are the Chinese Liudu ji jing (Sūtra on
the Collection of Six Perfections, T. 152), which is supposed to have been
translated by Kang Senghui between 222 and 280 c.e. but which has
no extant Indic original,49 and the Tibetan mDzangs bLun (commonly
known as the Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool), which is a collection of
stories that were supposedly heard orally in some Indic language by
eight Chinese monks living in Khotan, transcribed by them in Chinese
in 445 c.e., and subsequently translated into Tibetan, Mongolian, and
Oirat versions.50
21

introduction
How can texts of such diverse provenance, existing in diff erent social,
historical, cultural, and literary contexts, be brought together merely by
sharing the single theme of the bodhisattva’s bodily self-s acrifi ce? Does it,
indeed, make any sense to view them as a single grouping? In this book, I
will be advancing precisely this argument. Despite each story’s individual
fl avor (some of which I have tried to convey through the excerpts given
above), the premise of the book as a whole is that the gift- of- the- body
theme itself has its own internal logic and signifi cance, and was conveyed
through a set of conventions that seem to have remained remarkably
consistent over wide areas of space and time, and in spite of signifi cant
linguistic and stylistic diversity. In fact, as I will argue, gift- of- the- body
stories might best be seen as constituting a discrete subgenre of Indian
Buddhist narrative literature—a subgenre that is worthy of a close and
careful reading that gives due weight to the literary forms of the stories
and takes them seriously as crafted pieces of literature.
One of the earliest scholars to address the gift- of- the- body theme in any
detail was Har Dayal, who collected, summarized, and discussed a series
of gift- of- the- body stories in his classic work Th e Bodhisattva Doctrine in
Buddhist Sanskrit Literature.51 But despite the usefulness of his discussion,
I cannot share his opinion of the value of such stories or the manner in
which they should be read. “Th e idea of giving away one’s limbs has given
rise to some curious stories,” he states, “which are intended to be highly
instructive and inspiring, but which are simply silly and puerile.”52 A few
pages later, he continues:
Th e heroes and heroines of these stories give away wealth, limbs, life, wives and
children in a spirit of exaggerated and fantastic philanthropy. Th e lack of a sense of
proportion and harmony is the fatal fl aw of the Indian temperament as exhibited
in literature and religion. Th e Indian thinkers and writers often push a good idea
to such extremes that it becomes grotesque and ridiculous. But we can read these
quaint parables with pleasure and interest, if we appreciate their spirit without
thinking too critically of the details.53
“Th inking critically of the details” is precisely what I aim to do herein.
Instead of abstracting the “spirit” of the gift-o f- the- body theme from the
context of the stories in which it is developed, I aim here to treat the theme
as it is developed within the jātakas and avadānas themselves. I am interested
not merely in the meaning and signifi cance of the gift-o f-t he-b ody theme,
but also in how this theme reveals and unfolds itself within the world of
22

introduction
Indian Buddhist storytelling. We know that bodhisattvas tend to give away
their bodies, but how does this actually occur? What kind of beings are
they, why do they do such things, how do the people around them react
to their deeds, does it hurt—and what happens next? It is the stories and
not the theme alone that captivate my attention, and this book is a fi rst
attempt to problematize and analyze the reactions that I—and perhaps
other audiences—have experienced as a reader of these tales.
Th e book is based on a highly idiosyncratic (and by no means complete)
corpus of Indian Buddhist gift- of- the- body stories preserved in Pāli and
Sanskrit (with a few Tibetan and Chinese translations for support) and clas-
sifi ed as either jātakas or avadānas. Th e stories in question date anywhere
from perhaps the third century b.c.e. to the late second millennium c.e.
and are drawn from the narrative literature of both the Mainstream and
Mahāyāna traditions. Th ey include several of the most famous and well-
k nown gift-o f-t he-b ody tales—such as those of King Śibi, the elephant,
and the tigress—and many less prominent tales as well. A full description
of the corpus is given in the Appendix.
My discussion can be divided naturally into two halves. In chapter 1,
which is methodological and introductory in nature, I lay out my argu-
ment in favor of approaching gift- of- the- body stories from a genre-b ased
perspective and through a largely ahistorical approach. I then situate my
corpus of gift-o f- the- body stories within the larger context provided by
the jātaka and avadāna genres, arguing that gift-o f- the- body stories should
be treated as a distinct subgenre within this larger context, proposing a
defi nition of the gift- of- the- body subgenre, and distinguishing it from
several other, closely related subgenres. Th is chapter thus sets the literary
and conceptual background for chapters 2 and 3.
In chapter 2 I begin my analysis of the tales by looking closely at the
genre’s conventions of plot: What are some of the major plotlines employed
within gift- of- the- body stories? How does each plotline “work,” how do
diff erent plotlines relate to each other, and how do variations in the plotline
serve to bring diff erent emphases to the fore? Th is analysis is continued
in chapter 3, where I turn from conventions of plot to conventions of
rhetoric: What kind of rhetorical and ideological logic underlies the gift-
of- the- body genre? What do these stories wish to argue, and how do they
go about doing so? How do they use the narrative form to acknowledge,
confront, and grapple with various alternative ideologies that are directly
opposed to their own, most cherished ideals? Th ese two chapters together
provide the reader with a close analysis of the genre and make a conscious
23

introduction
attempt to complicate our perception of these seemingly “simple” sto-
ries and instead demonstrate to the reader their complexity, nuance, and
ideological power.
After examining my corpus in terms of genre, in the second half of the
book, I move away from a strictly genre- based approach (though without
losing sight of the literary forms of the stories) to examine more closely
some of the major religious issues that come to the fore within gift-o f-
t he-b ody tales. Chapters 4 and 5 focus on the “gift” portion of the gift-o f-
the- body theme. Th e bodhisattva’s bodily self-s acrifi ce is usually explicitly
conceived of as a type of “gift” (dāna)—indeed, as a most extraordinary
type of gift and a fulfi llment of the bodhisattva’s “perfection of generosity”
(dāna- pāramitā). Th ese two chapters thus attempt to situate the gift-o f-
t he-b ody theme within the larger context of Buddhist ethical discourse
on gifts, gift- giving, and the virtue of generosity: What kind of gift is the
bodhisattva’s gift of his body, and how does it bring together several dif-
ferent Buddhist ideals of generosity? Since dāna constitutes a profoundly
important concept in Indian Buddhist thought whose many contours are
just beginning to be untangled, in chapter 4 I fi rst set the context for this
discussion by proposing two diff erent conceptual schema by means of
which the many notions of dāna put forth in Indian Buddhist literature
might be classifi ed. In chapter 5 I then turn to the gift-o f- the- body theme
itself and attempt to situate it within this larger discourse, arguing that the
theme is multivocal and fl exible in nature and relates to the larger discourse
in a variety of diff erent ways (and again paying ample attention to the types
of narrative strategies that allow for this degree of fl exibility).
Chapter 6, in contrast, focuses on the “body” portion of the gift- of-
the- body theme. Th e bodhisattva’s gift is not just any gift, but specifi cally
a gift of his body. Th us this chapter discusses several prominent Buddhist
lines of thinking about the body—both the ordinary human body and
the very special body of the bodhisattva—and demonstrates how they are
invoked within gift-o f- the- body stories, once again arguing for the genre’s
multivocality and fl exibility as brought about through the narrative form.
Chapters 5 and 6 together thus begin to move away from an intensive focus
upon the stories themselves to demonstrate how the stories relate to wider
spheres of Buddhist intellectual discourse.
Finally, chapter 7 briefl y points toward several further contexts of inter-
pretation that might be brought to bear on the gift-o f- the- body theme—
including kingship and its legitimation, the category of sacrifi ce, the cat-
egory of the ritual off ering, and the Buddhist discourse on death—while
24

introduction
the Conclusions off er a summarizing discussion of the major points made
throughout the book.
In speaking of the hundreds of versions of the Rāmāyana epic that have
˙
crisscrossed their way across ancient and modern India, A. K. Ramanujan
once observed that the Rāmāyana is not just a series of “texts” or “stories”
˙
or “versions,” but instead a set of cultural resources—or what he termed
a “pool of signifi ers” that each individual version dips into to bring out a
“unique crystallization.”54 Each “version” has its own unique internal logic
and necessity, but relies for its ability to convey meaning on the overall
“pool” from which it draws. I fi nd this to be a most felicitous image for
thinking about Buddhist gift-o f-t he-b ody stories. It is my hope that within
these pages I have thrown some light on both the art and artistry of indi-
vidual “crystallizations” and the basic “pool of signifi ers” from which all
such stories draw.
25

i
THE GIFT OF THE BODY GENRE
I
n the t wenty-s econd chapter of the Divyāvadāna we fi nd a long and
elaborate rendition of the story of King Candraprabha, who gave
away his head to an evil and greedy brahmin. Th e story opens with
a description of King Candraprabha’s magnanimous generosity and the
benefi cial eff ects it has on his kingdom. King Candraprabha is described
as “a giver of everything, a renouncer of everything, one who gave without
attachment and engaged in great generosity.”1 He gives away so many mate-
rial gifts that everyone in Jambudvīpa’s 68,000 cities becomes exceedingly
wealthy. No one goes around on foot anymore; instead, they ride around
on the backs of richly caparisoned elephants or in golden chariots drawn
by horses. So weighed down are they by the jewelry, parasols, crowns, and
ornaments given to them by the king that everyone in Jambudvīpa begins
to look exactly like the royal king himself. Th ey live in pleasure and luxury,
and instead of working for a living, they listen to musical performances,
surround themselves with beautiful women, and “amuse themselves with
the amusements of kings.”2
Th e turning point in the story comes with the introduction of an evil
brahmin named Raudrāksa, who lives on Gandhamādana Mountain. For
˙
26

the gift-o f- the- body genre
as soon as he hears of King Candraprabha’s great reputation as an “all-
giving” (sarvamdada) king, he muses to himself:
˙
What if I were to go and ask for his head? If he were really “all-g iving,” then he
would give me his head! But it is diffi cult, impossible, and out of the question that
he would renounce the most excellent, beloved, cherished, dear, and charming
part of his body—his head, that is! Th is is impossible!3
When I fi rst translated this story many years ago, I did not fi nd any-
thing particularly humorous in Raudrāksa’s musings. Instead, I won-
˙
dered right along with him whether King Candraprabha could really
be convinced to off er up his own head. It was only after reading many
more gift-o f-t he-b ody stories that I began to fi nd Raudrāksa’s words in-
˙
credulous, ridiculous, and maybe even funny. For by the conventions of
the gift- of- the- body genre, of course, there is no question as to whether
the bodhisattva will agree to give away his head. Every dull- witted reader
knows that he will—that it is impossible that he should not—and thus, for
Raudrāksa to state repeatedly that such a thing is “diffi cult, impossible,
˙
and out of the question” turns him into a caricature of the foolish, evil
brahmin, and makes his statement appear humorous. Th e humor is not
intrinsic to the statement itself, but derives from one’s understanding of
the conventions of the gift-o f-t he-b ody genre. Once I understood this,
my education as a reader had begun.
Here is another example of the play of generic conventions. In the
sixth chapter of Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, we fi nd an interesting version of
the famous story of the Buddha’s previous birth as a hare, roughly the
same story as the one I previously quoted from the Cariyāpitaka. Once
˙
again, this hare lives in the forest with an otter, a jackal, and a monkey,
and once again, he delivers a sermon to them on the necessity of off er-
ing food and hospitality to wandering travelers, but then immediately
begins to fret about his own ability to do so. Just when the hare is about
to despair, however, he hits upon a momentous idea: he will off er to any
wandering travelers who happen by the fl esh from his own body. Th is
sincere intention to sacrifi ce his own body in order to feed a guest causes
the earth and mountains to shake with delight, which alerts the celestial
beings above. Th e god Śakra, eager to test the hare’s virtue, disguises him-
self as a brahmin wanderer who is hungry and lost in the woods. When
he calls out for help, the otter comes and off ers him seven fi sh, the jackal
off ers him a dead lizard and a bowl of sour milk, and the monkey off ers
27

the gift- of- the- body genre
him some mangoes. Th e hare then bravely steps forward and off ers to the
brahmin his own body. A heap of fl aming coals suddenly materializes,
and the hare throws himself into the fi re—thus sacrifi cing his very life to
provide the brahmin wanderer with a nice meal of rabbit. Impressed and
fi lled with astonishment, Śakra abandons his b rahmin- disguise, praises the
hare’s deed at length, and then places the image of the hare in the moon
as a permanent reminder of this magnifi cent gift.
For the uninitiated reader, there is nothing especially odd here—noth-
ing that would immediately stand out and garner one’s attention. It is only
for one who has read many of these tales and is familiar with the conven-
tions of the genre that the plot of this particular tale marks it as an especially
extreme example. For, as we will see in chapter 2, gift-o f- the- body stories
fall into two main types. In some stories, the request for the gift might
be described as “real.” Th at is, an ordinary living being who fi nds himself
in dire straits of some kind makes a sincere request for the bodhisattva’s
body, or is obviously in need of the bodhisattva’s body. Th e bodhisattva
gives away his body, and generally dies in the process. Th is death is entirely
appropriate—for the theme of extreme and uncompromising generosity
on behalf of suff ering living beings fi nds its greatest fulfi llment only when
the bodhisattva actually loses his life and is therefore seen to have sacrifi ced
everything for the sake of generosity and compassion. (Having the bod-
hisattva survive the gift or somehow get his body back would obviously
dilute the ethical message.)
In other stories, however, the request for the gift is not “real,” but might
rather be described as a “ruse”—for the recipient who demands the gift is
not truly a suff ering being in need, but rather the god Śakra in disguise,
who is merely testing the bodhisattva’s generosity. Th e request for the gift is
not real—it is a ruse—and thus the bodhisattva in these stories does not die.
Instead, the normal outcome of such stories is that once the bodhisattva
passes Śakra’s test by demonstrating his willingness to give, Śakra reveals
his true identity, praises the bodhisattva, and then encourages him to
perform an “Act of Truth” that restores his injured body to perfect health.
Th e story has a “happy ending”—and this, again, is entirely appropriate.
For it is never Śakra’s intention to make the bodhisattva die; it is only his
intention to test him, and once he passes this test, it is perfectly appropri-
ate that he should get his body back. Th is correspondence between the
identity of the recipient and the ultimate fate of the bodhisattva appears
to be a solid generic convention. Th at is, although such conventions never
constitute ironclad rules, we can state with some assurance that most gift-
28

the gift-o f- the- body genre
o f-t he-b ody episodes in which the recipient is Śakra-i n-d isguise end with
the bodhisattva restoring his body by performing an Act of Truth, while
most gift- of- the- body episodes in which the recipient is someone other
than Śakra end with the bodhisattva losing his life.
Once we are schooled in these generic conventions, Āryaśūra’s rendition
of the hare- story suddenly jumps out at us and strikes us as signifi cant. For
the story begins with the typical setup involving Śakra’s desire to test the
bodhisattva’s generosity—yet it ends with a fi ery death for the hare. Some-
thing has gone wrong here. He wasn’t supposed to die, it was only a test. Ge-
neric conventions have been violated, generic expectations thwarted—and
it is here that interpretation takes place. We might speculate, for example,
that Āryaśūra is particularly concerned to emphasize the theme of extreme
self- sacrifi ce, and thus violates certain generic conventions in his retelling
of the hare-s tory in order to achieve this end. Even when the gift was only
a ruse, he seems to be saying, the bodhisattva still gave up his life. Th e com-
petent reader will, on some level, recognize the divergence of Āryaśūra’s
version not only from the Pāli versions on which it is likely based4—in
which the hare survives the gift rather than dying—but more important,
its divergence from all gift-o f-t he-b ody stories in which the recipient is
Śakra-i n-d isguise. It is the violation of the larger generic convention that
signals to the reader the possible signifi cance of this particular tale. Ideally,
such a reader has heard or read many diff erent stories in which Śakra tests
the bodhisattva—and has seen the bodhisattva pass and survive this test
in good health over and over again. Th us, when the hare unexpectedly
dies, this death calls attention to itself; it brings home to one the reality of
extreme self-s acrifi ce with new and unanticipated force. Th is forcefulness
derives from the story’s relationship to the larger generic tradition rather
than from the story itself.
In support of this interpretation, I might point out that Peter Khoroche
has claimed that the Jātakamālā does indeed show a much greater concern
with emphasizing the bodhisattva ideal of self-s acrifi ce than does the Pāli
Jātaka collection. He notes, for example, that three of the four tales in
the Jātakamālā that are not shared in common with the Pāli Jātaka col-
lection involve the gift- of- the- body theme.5 Th us one could argue that
Āryaśūra, when deciding which tales from the earlier tradition to include
within his collection, showed disproportionate favor toward the theme
of extreme self- sacrifi ce. Th e collection as a whole thus confi rms what
we can already gather from just a single story—once we approach it in
terms of its genre.
29

the gift- of- the- body genre
Th e Concept of Genre
“Genre,” in my usage, does not refer to a prescriptive body of rules, theo-
retical model, or universal archetype. Instead, I adhere to a broadly his-
torical conception of genre, as advanced by many literary critics.6 In the
understanding of such critics, the term “genre” should be restricted to
those historically situated sets of institutionalized conventions that have
presumably governed the writing and reading of literature at a particular
place and time. Th us any genre, by this defi nition, should be character-
ized by both historical / cultural specifi city, in terms of being restricted in
time and space, and discursive specifi city, or its own distinctive complex
of generic conventions. A genre becomes recognizable to its readers as an
entire complex of generic conventions—formal, substantive, structural,
functional, etc.—that appear to characterize a body of related texts. Each
genre can be described as an abstract body of such conventions, which
constitutes its “generic repertoire.” Genres can be named and defi ned by
the culture in question (jātaka, avadāna, etc.), but it is also possible for
scholars to make historically and critically persuasive arguments for genres
that are not explicitly named by the culture in which they operate—which
is the project I will undertake here.
Despite modern declarations of the increasing irrelevance or even
“death” of genre, genre is, in fact, intrinsic to the everyday processes of
writing, reading, and interpreting.7 Writing cannot take place in a vacuum;
a writer always writes within the context of the repertoire of genres charac-
teristic of his or her culture. Even those works that seem to violate generic
codes beyond recognition derive at least some of their meaning against
the framework provided by the very codes violated and contribute (if they
become infl uential) to the future make-u p of the codes. Readers, too,
can interpret a text only by placing it within the context of a particular
genre or genres. Th us literary critics (especially r eader- response critics)
often speak of the way in which the opening section of a text establishes a
“generic contract” between the text and the competent reader, providing
the reader with a set of “generic expectations” against which to interpret
the text. Th ese expectations are often violated or broken, but they provide
the framework within which interpretation takes place, and they make the
violations meaningful. Far from limiting the creativity of either author or
reader, generic conventions (and other elements of literary competence
brought to bear on the text) provide the very means by which literature
can be made to bear meaning. Th us, if we think of genre not in terms of
30

the gift-o f- the- body genre
ironclad rules and prescriptions that stifl e creativity, or rigid, taxonomic
classes into which every work of literature must fi t, but rather in the looser
terms of an “invitation to form”8 for the writer and a “horizon of expecta-
tions”9 for the reader, then it seems that genre is very much alive.
Th e phrase “horizon of expectations” is also useful for indicating the
status of the generic conventions one describes within one’s analysis.
Rather than seeing these conventions as collectively constituting some
kind of “underlying structure” or “essence” that is intrinsic to the genre in
question—as Vladimir Propp does, for example, in Morphology of the Folk-
tale10—I favor an approach which theoretically shifts such “structures”
from the text to the expectations of the competent reader.11 Th at is,
whatever conventions one uncovers through the reading of multiple texts
should not be seen as properties intrinsic to those texts, but rather, as
the norms, expectations, and interpretive operations on the part of the
reader that are required to account for the eff ects of signifi cation the texts
are seen to have. Th us, in my own discussion of the gift- of- the- body
genre, whatever conventions I discern and describe should be seen merely
as abstractions that attempt to render explicit the body of literary and
generic expectations any qualifi ed and competent Indian Buddhist reader
might have brought to bear on a story of this type, based on his or her
previous experiences with literary tradition. From this perspective, devia-
tions from the expected conventions found in any particular story do not
“disqualify” the story as a gift- of- the- body story, but rather, highlight pos-
sible points at which the reader might derive meaning from the violation
of his or her “generic expectations” (as we saw with Āryaśūra’s version of
the story of the hare). Alternatively, if we wish to imagine genre from the
perspective of the writer rather than the reader, then these same conven-
tions might be seen as a hypothetical reconstruction of the basic set of
discursive possibilities such a writer had available to him in composing
or reworking a story of this type—whether or not he ultimately chose
to fulfi ll them.
Th e concept of genre, as I have defi ned it, always includes a histori-
cal dimension.12 Because literature is historically situated and constantly
subject to transformation and change, genres that are given “once-a nd-f or-
all” defi nitions and conceived as ideal, immutable, Platonic forms tend to
lack any explanatory power when applied to actual texts. Th erefore, one’s
analysis of a genre should always specify a historical frame of reference.
Moreover, depending on the width of this frame, there will generally
be a trade- off between the range of texts accounted for and the level of
31

the gift- of- the- body genre
explanatory detail: a very wide historical frame will include a greater range
of texts at the expense of explanatory detail, while a very narrow historical
frame will be rich in explanatory detail but have the power to explain a
smaller number of texts. I do not necessarily agree with Alastair Fowler,
however, when he states categorically that “correspondingly little can be
said” within a frame of wider limits, or that such discussion always “tends
toward the vacuous.”13 True, one can probably say considerably less of
general import about “the novel” than one could about “the nineteenth-
century British novel”—but what one does say might be equally interesting
and persuasive and serve just as well to bring out the value and literariness
of those texts understood to be “novels.” Ultimately, the success or failure
of this t rade-o ff depends on the critic’s overall purpose and should be
evaluated in those terms.
Methodologically, then, I conceive of genre in a manner that steers a
middle way between two theoretical extremes. On the one hand, I am
broadly committed to historicity and would reject any generic interpre-
tation—however rhetorically convincing—that would be impossible for
historical authors and readers to recognize. On the other hand, however,
I also recognize that history itself is a matter of interpretation—not the
objective ground for such interpretation—and in that sense, all generic
“description” is ultimately interpretive and pragmatic in nature. Genres are
always grounded in the critic’s explanatory purpose, defi ned by the critic
herself in order to achieve certain ends, and constitutively powerful of the
texts being examined. As Adena Rosmarin states in Th e Power of Genre,
genre is “the critic’s heuristic tool”—a “pragmatic t hought- experiment”
that is “justifi ed wholly insofar as it helps us make better or more convinc-
ing critical arguments.”14
Th ese theoretical issues are especially pertinent to the project I under-
take here because the historical frame of reference I invoke throughout
this book is a very wide one indeed. In fact, the category of “Indian
Buddhism” is perhaps the only historical frame that brings my corpus of
stories together (and in some cases even this frame is stretched to its very
limit). Th us, although I am ostensibly aiming to reconstruct the generic
expectations of a “qualifi ed and competent Indian Buddhist reader,” it is
worthwhile asking who, exactly, this phantom fi gure might be. After all,
a Pāli story from the Pāli Jātaka collection written in a simple style and
perhaps deriving from early oral tradition (though not redacted in its fi nal
form until fi fth- century c.e. Sri Lanka) is something very diff erent from
a Sanskrit story from Āryaśūra’s f ourth-c entury c.e. Jātakamālā, which is
32

the gift-o f- the- body genre
written in an elegant, courtly style and directed at connoisseurs of fi ne
poetry—and both of those are quite diff erent, again, from a much later
Tibetan story translated from a Chinese collection originally based upon
oral tales heard in some Indic language by Chinese monks in Khotan.15
What kind of “qualifi ed and competent Indian Buddhist reader” could we
possibly posit as the audience for all three of these tales? Where would such
a person come from, what gender or social class would he (or she) belong
to, when would he (or she) have lived, and under what local circumstances
would he (or she) have encountered such a genre?
Perhaps the best way to answer such questions is to admit that while
this kind of local specifi city—even in the case of premodern Indian Bud-
dhism—is sometimes possible,16 and while it has garnered increasing at-
tention in the fi eld of Buddhist Studies, it is simply not the project I
am interested in pursuing here. Since I am interested in a set of stories
that spans the entire length and breadth of the Indian Buddhist tradition
(and involving many texts whose provenance and reception are full of
uncertainty), and since I nevertheless wish to hold onto the conception of
genre in terms of the generic competence and expectations of the reader,
I suppose that my “qualifi ed and competent Indian Buddhist reader” is
something of a phantom fi gure. Not only is he (or she) fully literate—for
in my conception of a “reader,” I have completely ignored the oral / aural
dimension of these texts and their possible adaptation to performative,
storytelling contexts—but he or she also stands at the very end of the tradi-
tion, looking back, and is familiar with texts in several diff erent languages
and styles of writing.
In a sense this reader is not any single historical person who might have
potentially existed, but instead a personifi cation of Indian Buddhist liter-
ary tradition—and even perhaps a personifi cation of the not-n ecessarily-
c hronological intertextuality so characteristic of this material. For the texts
within my corpus are not just isolated texts—they are texts that are often
aware of one another, refer to one another, quote from one another, draw
from the same shared context of reference and allusion, and borrow and
adapt the same stories and conventions over and over again—in some
cases, seeming to “speak” to each other in a way that would be historically
impossible. It is this—admittedly diff use and historically vague—Indian
Buddhist discursive space that I am after when I conceive of my “competent
reader.” It is the overall “pool of signifi ers” that most persuasively (I hope)
accounts for the “unique crystallization” embodied by each individual tale.
Th is competent reader, moreover, is—unavoidably—a projection of my
33

the gift- of- the- body genre
own reading practices, but one that is available for the scrutiny of other
qualifi ed readers.
Ultimately, then, in spite of its reliance upon a broadly historical con-
ception of genre, the project that I undertake here is clearly not well-
r ooted in a particular historical context, and although I recognize that
this methodology leaves me open to the risk of considerable criticism, I
am convinced that this is a risk worth taking. Otherwise, one would have
to hold the position that nothing at all can ever be said about a general
“Indian Buddhist discursive world” that shows defi nite continuity over
time and space (not only in terms of plotlines, characters, and religious
conceptions, but even in terms of individual clichés and phraseology,
and between Pāli, Sanskrit, and Tibetan / Chinese translations), simply
because “Indian Buddhism” is too long and too broad for one’s statement
to be historically responsible—and I am unconvinced that this is the
case. I would loosely compare the scope of my methodology, perhaps, to
John Strong’s description of his work as “the exegetical exploration of a
world of meaning,”17 in which “particular texts or particular issues [from
widely varying historical contexts] are taken as focal points for presenting
and discussing the problematics of a given tradition,”18 or to Steven Col-
lins’ exploration of a wide- ranging “Pali imaginaire,” which he specifi es
as consisting of “any and every Pali text from the premodern period, but
only those of which there is a western edition.”19 And fi nally, I would also
defend the basic claim that careful reading and a sympathetic imagination
can make up, to some extent, for a lack of historical precision. As Hallisey
and Hansen have stated:
As yet we know very little about what individual Buddhists did in particular
historical circumstances, and it is unlikely that we will ever recover all that we
would like to know. Th ere will be very few instances where we will have an in-
dependent historical witness to the impact that the retelling of a story may have
had on a particular individual. [But] [a]ttention to the worklike aspects of the
texts may help us to educate our imaginations, such that we do feel that we have
a reasonable idea about what subsequent Buddhists . . . might have learned from
a story—if only because our own horizon of values and expectations is altered
by our attempt to think through the possibilities of a text.20
I follow them here in believing in the value of such imaginative
enterprises.
34

the gift-o f- the- body genre
Jātakas, Avadānas, and Gift-o f- the- Body Tales
Th e vast majority of gift-o f- the- body stories that constitute my corpus do
not refer to themselves explicitly as “gift- of- the- body stories.” Th ough the
bodhisattva’s gift of his body is referred to in Sanskrit with several diff erent
terms—such as ātma- parityāga (“self- sacrifi ce”), śarīra- parityāga (“renun-
ciation of the body”), adhyātma- dāna (“internal gift”), and kāya- dāna or
deha- dāna (“gift of the body”)—none of these terms is regularly used, either
alone or in combination with other terms, to indicate a specifi c literary
genre.21 Th e gift- of- the- body genre I am proposing constitutes my own
hypothetical construction and is not a genre that was specifi cally named
by the culture in question. I have underscored this point throughout by
consistently making use of the hyphenated English adjective “gift-o f-t he-
body” (as in “gift- of- the- body theme,” “gift- of- the- body story,” and “gift-
of- the- body genre”) rather than any Sanskrit equivalent.
Instead of referring to themselves as “gift- of- the- body stories,” most of
the stories within my corpus identify themselves more generally as jātakas
or avadānas. Th ree diff erent versions of the hare story,22 for example,
call themselves the Sasa Jātaka (Pāli), the Śaśa Jātaka (Sanskrit), and the
Śaśāvadāna (Sanskrit)—meaning either “the jātaka of the hare” or “the
avadāna of the hare.” Th e Buddhist narrative genres of jātaka and avadāna
thus constitute the larger generic context within which gift-o f- the- body
tales might be seen as a distinct subgenre—a “subgenre” being defi ned by
Fowler as a class with the same basic generic repertoire as its correspond-
ing genre, but additional specifi cation of content.23 Th is raises the obvious
question, however, of how gift-o f- the- body stories can constitute a sub-
genre of two diff erent genres at once. Are gift- of- the- body stories jātakas?
Are they avadānas? Or does it depend on the particular story?
A brief discussion of the jātaka and avadāna genres will help to clarify
these issues. Both in terms of etymology24 and consistent usage, the mean-
ing of the term jātaka in Indian Buddhism is quite clear: a jātaka, in brief,
is a story in which one of the characters—usually the hero—is identifi ed
as a previous birth of the historical Buddha, generally appearing in the
form of a man, a deity, or one of the higher animals (but only rarely as
a female of any kind).25 Such stories exist within all kinds of Buddhist
texts, both canonical and noncanonical—including sūtra, vinaya, abhid-
harma, śāstras, and commentaries, as well as individual jātaka texts and
jātaka collections. Th e jātaka as a genre appears to be very old, for in the
35

the gift- of- the- body genre
ancient system enumerating nine “limbs” (an˙ga) of the Buddha’s teaching
mentioned throughout the Pāli Nikāyas, jātaka constituted the seventh
“limb.”26 Since this is an ancient classifi cation that predates the texts in
which it now appears, jātaka as an an˙ga refers not to specifi c extant texts,
but rather to a particular genre of composition and category of buddhava-
cana. Th e great age of the jātaka genre is also suggested by the fact that
depictions of jātaka stories appear in Indian Buddhist art at Bhārhut and
Sāñcī as early as the second century b.c.e.
Th e existence of the jātaka genre is based on the notion that the Bud-
dha, during the “fi rst watch” of the night of his enlightenment, attained
the recollection of his previous lives.27 Th roughout his career he often
had occasion to relate one of these former lives to his audience in order
to illustrate a point, drive home a moral lesson, or shed light on some
situation. It is these stories that constitute the jātakas. Because samsara is
beginningless, of course, the Buddha—like all beings—has a potentially
infi nite number of these previous lives. Th e jātakas, however, do not stretch
back into the infi nite past. In Indian Buddhist tradition, the lives related
in the jātakas are understood to be restricted to those that took place
during the Buddha’s bodhisattva career. In several important texts, such
as the Jātakanidāna and the Buddhavamsa (both in Pāli), the story is told
˙
that four “innumerable eons” and one hundred thousand (regular) eons
ago, when the Buddha was a young brahmin ascetic named Sumedha, he
encountered the former Buddha Dīpamkara, became full of faith, made
˙
a religious vow in Dīpamkara’s presence to become a Buddha himself in
˙
the far distant future, and received from Dīpamkara a fi rm and detailed
˙
prediction of his future success.28 Th is was the moment that inaugurated
the Buddha’s bodhisattva career, and it is only the lives that occurred after
this crucial point that are worthy of being related in the jātakas. Jātakas
are about the Buddha’s previous lives as a bodhisattva on the bodhisattva
path rather than as an ordinary being.29
Th e general function of the jātakas, then, is to illustrate how the bo-
dhisattva, in life after life, cultivated various virtues on the bodhisattva path
that ultimately contributed to his attainment of Buddhahood. Accordingly,
most jātakas portray the bodhisattva as an exemplary fi gure, highlight-
ing such features as his wisdom, compassion, and ascetic detachment.
Many jātakas, in fact, are explicitly intended to illustrate the bodhisattva’s
cultivation of one of the six or ten “perfections” (pāramitā) needed for
the attainment of Buddhahood. In the Avisahya Jātaka, for example, the
˙
bodhisattva is a wealthy merchant who continues to give alms to sup-
36

the gift-o f- the- body genre
plicants even after he is reduced to absolute poverty, thus cultivating the
“perfection of generosity” (dāna- pāramitā); in the Brāhmana Jātaka he is
˙
a boy who refuses to steal even when his brahmin teacher urges him to do
so, thus cultivating the “perfection of morality” (śīla- pāramitā); and in the
Ksāntivādin Jātaka he is an ascetic who calmly tolerates the mutilation
˙
infl icted on him by an angry king, thus cultivating the “perfection of
forbearance” (ksānti- pāramitā).30
˙
Some jātaka collections are even arranged on this basis: the Jātakamālā
of Āryaśūra arranges the bulk of its t hirty-f our jātakas (including the three
mentioned above) in accordance with the fi rst three of the Sarvāstivādin
list of six perfections, while the Cariyāpitaka of the Pāli Canon arranges
˙
its thirty- fi ve versifi ed jātakas in accordance with the Th eravādin list of ten
perfections. In spite of the didactic nature of these and many other jātakas,
however, it is also the case that any preexisting tale could be transformed
into a jātaka simply by turning one of its characters into a previous birth
of the Buddha. Th e jātaka genre was thus used to assimilate an enormous
variety of traditional Indian folklore into the Buddhist fold—including
some tales whose moral lessons were not specifi cally Buddhist, or that had
no discernible moral lesson at all. Th is is especially true of the massive Pāli
Jātaka collection, much of whose contents are likely non-B uddhist in ori-
gin, including many traditional animal fables, folktales, and fairy tales.
In terms of narrative structure, many jātakas possess or imply a threefold
structure consisting of a “story of the present” (in Pāli, paccuppannavat-
thu), explaining on what occasion the Buddha told this tale; a “story of
the past” (atītavatthu), which is the past-l ife story itself; and the fi nal
“identifi cations” (samodhāna), in which the perspective shifts back to the
present, and the Buddha identifi es characters in the “story of the past” as
the previous births of those in the “story of the present” and other well-
k nown Buddhist fi gures of his time (always including himself). Th ese
identifi cations are often predictable, for the relationships the Buddha has
with other people during his last life often mirror the relationships he had
with them during his numerous previous lives. (Th us, the bodhisattva’s
mother is usually identifi ed as a previous birth of the Buddha’s mother
Queen Māya, the bodhisattva’s father is usually a previous birth of King
Śuddhodhana, and any “villain” in the story is usually a previous birth of
the Buddha’s cousin and nemesis Devadatta.)
Th e “story of the present” and the “identifi cations” both pertain to the
“present” time, and together serve as an outer framework that encompasses
and contextualizes the “story of the past,” or jātaka proper. In many cases,
37

the gift- of- the- body genre
however, this outer framework is largely ignored, and only the “story of the
past” appears—although at least some indication that one of the characters
is a previous birth of the Buddha is required in order to indicate that the
story is a jātaka. Often this is accomplished simply by referring to one of
the characters as “the bodhisattva.”
In contrast to the relatively easy task of describing what constitutes a
jātaka, far greater problems are presented by our second relevant genre,
the avadāna. Etymologically, the term avadāna has been given at least
two diff erent derivations,31 and there is no consensus on what the term
originally meant. It seems fairly clear, in fact, that both the etymology
and the original meaning of the term avadāna must have been lost at an
early date, and the Buddhist tradition itself did not clearly understand
the precise meaning of the term. Given these uncertainties, many scholars
have eschewed the quest for etymology or original meaning and have been
content to conclude that the term avadāna within Buddhist literature
has the broad meaning of “legend,” “narrative,” or “tale.”32 In some cases,
however, scholars have also come up with more descriptive defi nitions,
based on the characteristics of those works labeled as avadānas. A perusal
of descriptive defi nitions put forth by scholars and ranging in date from
1844 to 200033 leads one to the conclusion that although they diff er in
emphasis, they are generally in accord with one another, and seem to
revolve around three major aspects: (1) Avadānas are stories that illustrate
the workings of karma and rebirth, demonstrating how past actions have
resulted in present circumstances, and how present actions will result in
future circumstances. (2) Often the types of actions depicted take place
in a Buddhist devotional context; thus positive actions are generally good
deeds done toward Buddha, Dharma, Samgha, or some other religious
˙
object, while negative actions are the opposite. (3) Th e heroes of avadānas
are generally Buddhist disciples or layfollowers.
Taken together, these three elements do provide an adequate descrip-
tive defi nition of the avadāna genre—one that is in general concord with
important avadāna collections, such as the Avadānaśataka, Divyāvadāna,
Karmaśataka, (Pāli) Apadāna, and a later collection of texts known as the
Avadānamālās. It is also possible in many cases to distinguish (as some
scholars have done) between several distinct types of avadānas: avadānas of
the past (relating the previous lives of the heroes), avadānas of the present
(relating deeds and their consequences within a single lifetime), avadānas
of the future, or vyākaranas (“prophecies,” relating present deeds and the
˙
Buddha’s prediction of their future consequences), and mixed avadānas,
38

the gift-o f- the- body genre
which combine several diff erent types.34 Further complicating the matter,
however, is that many “avadānas of the past” deal with previous lives of
the Buddha; these are referred to as bodhisattvāvadānas and are technically
equivalent to jātakas. Th us, jātakas can be seen as a subset of avadānas,
and any jātaka, in theory, could be called an avadāna (while only some
avadānas could be called jātakas).
Just as the existence of the jātaka genre is based on what happened
during the “fi rst watch” of the night of the Buddha’s enlightenment, so
the existence of the avadāna genre is based on what happened during
the “second watch.”35 During this watch the Buddha gained the “divine
eye,” which allowed him to see, with perfect clarity, the intricate work-
ings of karma and rebirth and the “passing away and reappearance” of all
beings. Th us, in addition to perceiving his own previous lives, he could
also perceive the previous (and future) lives of other beings. Th roughout
the remainder of his career, he often had occasion to relate the previous
or future lives of his disciples and layfollowers—focusing especially on
karmic deeds and their consequences—and it is these stories that consti-
tute the avadānas.
Like the jātaka, the avadāna appears to be a very old genre, for in ad-
dition to the ancient system of nine an˙gas, or “limbs,” of the Buddha’s
teaching mentioned earlier, there is also a list of twelve an˙gas that retains
the original nine but adds three additional categories, including avadāna as
the eleventh.36 Once again, since this twelvefold system predates the texts
in which it now appears, avadāna as an an˙ga refers not to specifi c extant
texts, but rather to a genre of composition or category of buddhavacana.
It is even possible, moreover, that there existed a class of monks who
specialized in composing and passing down the texts belonging to this
genre, since two verses in the Kalpadrumāvadānamālā refer specifi cally to
“avadānists” and to “experts in the avadānas.”37
From the preceding discussion, the answers to the questions I posed
above become obvious: although the gift-o f- the- body stories within our
corpus are variously labeled either jātaka or avadāna, we are justifi ed in
seeing them strictly as jātakas because all of them involve previous births
of the Buddha, which is the technical defi nition of the jātaka. Th us the
title jātaka versus the title avadāna has little signifi cance within this corpus,
since avadāna, in this case, really stands for bodhisattvāvadāna, a term
synonymous with jātaka. Gift- of- the- body stories are clearly jātakas.
In the following section, however, I would like to approach and an-
swer this question from a slightly diff erent perspective by considering not
39

the gift- of- the- body genre
merely the technical defi nitions of the terms jātaka and avadāna, but also
the religious meaning or signifi cance of each genre and the relationship
obtaining between them. For jātakas and avadānas do not exist in isolation;
instead, they are both part of an Indian Buddhist generic system marked
by particular relations between diff erent genres. I will argue that gift-o f-
the- body stories are jātakas not merely because they involve previous births
of the Buddha, but also because they embody what might be called the
“ethos of the jātaka” rather than the “ethos of the avadāna.” I will argue,
in fact, that gift-o f-t he-b ody stories are a kind of “super-j ātaka”—and
that part of the signifi cance of the “super-j ātaka” derives from its stark
contrast to the avadāna.
Perfections, Devotions, and Super- Jātakas
Several scholars have pointed to a fundamental diff erence between the
religious perspectives of the jātaka and the avadāna. Weeraratne states that
jātakas involve the long moral career of the bodhisattva and his gradual
acquisition of virtues and perfections over an extremely long period of
time. Th ey never suggest that one can achieve complete Buddhahood
merely through worshiping other Buddhas. “But in the avadānas,” he
states, “we detect a subtle change of emphasis. . . . Th ough these avadānas
are termed stories about karma . . . the karma referred to . . . is not the
karma . . . described in the jātaka stories, but action with a certain amount
of devotion . . . towards the Buddha.”38 Speyer makes a similar observa-
tion that is worth quoting at length (despite his use of the word “trivial”
to characterize the avadānas):
Th e avadāna class comprises a great many of invented stories of a trivial kind,
which are never or seldom met with among the jātakas proper. To perform an
avadāna, that is to say: a glorious deed, common people may suffi ce with some-
thing less than the w orld-f amed heroic performances of the Bodhisattvas of old,
who off ered their body as food to a famished tigress, their eyes, their fl esh and
blood, their head . . . who gave away wife and children to a begging brahman,
etc. Gifts to the San˙gha; glorifi cation of the Master or his disciples by presenting
them with incense, fl owers, silver, gold, jewels; the adorning, repairing, honour-
ing of stūpas and caityas . . . in short any deed or performance benefi cial to the
Church and its Clergy may constitute actions entitled to that name and worth
celebrating in avadāna- tales.39
40

the gift-o f- the- body genre
And fi nally, John Strong, in a somewhat similar manner, contrasts “jātaka-
acts” with “avadāna-a cts”—noting that j ātaka-a cts are “acts of compassion”
while avadāna-a cts are “acts of devotion.”40 Taking all three observations
together, we might say that jātakas illustrate the bodhisattva’s arduous
cultivation of certain moral perfections, whereas avadānas take place in a
Buddhist devotional context and involve the performance of devotional
acts by disciples and layfollowers. In short, we might say that jātakas are
about “perfections” whereas avadānas are about “devotions.”
Taking jātakas and avadānas as a whole, of course, this is not strictly true.
It is more of a general tendency—yet general enough so that it constitutes a
generic expectation whose violation causes confusion about whether some-
thing is “really” a jātaka or an avadāna. Take, for example, the stories that
appear in the second varga (division) of the Avadānaśataka or the various
narratives contained in the Buddhavamsa.41 Th ese relate the previous lives
˙
of the Buddha and therefore meet the technical defi nition of the jātaka. But
rather than dealing with the bodhisattva’s cultivation of the perfections, they
instead deal with the bodhisattva’s devotions toward previous Buddhas. For
this is the second major activity a bodhisattva engages in: when there is no
Buddha in the world, the bodhisattva cultivates the six or ten moral perfec-
tions needed for Buddhahood (as described in the jātakas), but when there is
a Buddha in the world, the bodhisattva encounters this Buddha and engages
in acts of worship and devotion. Th us the Buddha himself, as a bodhi-
sattva, encountered every one of the t wenty-f our Buddhas that arose in the
world beginning with the time of his original bodhisattva- vow (as the ascetic
Sumedha) and ending with his own fi nal attainment of Buddhahood—and
it is these devotional encounters that fi ll the pages of the Buddhavamsa and
˙
the Avadānaśataka’s second varga. Because these narratives focus on this
second type of action—“devotions” rather than “perfections”—they are more
akin in spirit to avadānas than to jātakas. Consequently, there is confusion
among scholars about whether they are really jātakas, and most surveys of
jātaka literature and descriptions of the Buddhavamsa and Avadānaśataka
˙
do not refer to them as jātakas. In the case of the Avadānaśataka, in fact,
the term jātaka is usually reserved for the stories that appear in the fourth
(rather than second) varga of the text, which do deal with the bodhisattva’s
cultivation of the moral perfections. Th us, even though the second and
fourth vargas of the text both focus on the Buddha’s previous lives, only the
latter is consistently seen as containing jātakas.
This distinction between the second and fourth vargas of the
Avadānaśataka is not merely a product of scholarly confusion, moreover,
41

the gift- of- the- body genre
for the Buddhist tradition itself appears to make the very same distinc-
tion. From approximately 400 to 1000 c.e., most of the stories of the
Avadānaśataka were systematically reworked, elaborated, and rekeyed in
the tone of the Mahāyāna in a later series of four texts known as the
Avadānamālās (or “Garlands of Avadānas”). It is striking to observe, as
Strong has pointed out in his discussion of this issue, that the author-
c ompilers who produced these later texts on the basis of the Avadānaśataka
consistently included the stories of the second varga but ignored those from
the fourth.42 Th is suggests that the author-c ompilers themselves drew a
distinction between avadānas as stories about “devotions” and jātakas as
stories about “perfections.” Th e stories in the second varga fi t the implicit
defi nition of the avadāna and were thus included in the Avadānamālās,
even though they involved previous births of the Buddha and were there-
fore technically jātakas, while the stories in the fourth varga, though called
avadānas, were recognized by them to be jātakas and thus left out of the
Avadānamālās.
In terms of their ethos or religious signifi cance, then, we might say that
jātakas are about “perfections,” while avadānas are about “devotions.” Th e
former deal with moral acts, while the latter deal with ritual acts. Th e split
between morality and ritual, of course, is by no means a defi nitive one.
Buddhist texts make it clear that moral acts (such as saving somebody else’s
life) very often involve ritualistic elements (such as vows), while ritual acts
(such as off ering fl owers to a stūpa) are both driven by and help to cultivate
moral attitudes (such as faith). In fact, the frequently voiced notion that
Buddhism replaces ritual with ethics or ethicizes ritualistic notions has
been shown to be vastly oversimplifi ed; the moral and the ritual always
implicate each other and can never be wholly separated.43 Nevertheless,
there is a diff erence of emphasis between the predominantly- moral and
the predominantly-r itual, and it is this contrast, I contend, that constitutes
one of the major diff erences between the jātaka and avadāna genres.
Th is contrast can be further clarifi ed, perhaps, if we consider the two
genres in terms of the absence or presence of Buddhism in the world to
function as a “fi eld of merit” (punya- ksetra). In the avadānas Buddhism
˙ ˙
is present in the world as a powerful “fi eld of merit.” Th e heroes of the
avadānas thus engage in devotional acts that ritually draw upon the power
of this fi eld to produce religious merit—or they fail to take advantage of
this fi eld, which produces religious demerit. In the jātakas, by contrast,
the world is devoid of Buddhism as a fi eld of merit whose power can be
ritually tapped. Th e heroes of the jātakas thus engage in moral (rather than
42

the gift-o f- the- body genre
devotional) acts to produce religious merit. Moreover, because they do not
have access to such a powerful fi eld of merit, the moral acts they perform
must often be more extreme in nature than the ritual acts performed by
the heroes of the avadānas, who do have access to such a fi eld. Th us, gen-
erosity in the avadānas might involve the off ering of alms to a Buddhist
monk, whereas generosity in the jātakas might involve chopping off one’s
own head. Ascetic detachment in the avadānas might involve depriving
oneself of material goods by off ering them to the Samgha, whereas ascetic
˙
detachment in the jātakas might involve renouncing one’s family and
glorious kingship to endure a diffi cult life in the wilderness.
In part, no doubt, this diff erence between the jātaka and the avadāna
derives from the fact that the hero of the former is the bodhisattva himself,
whereas the hero of the latter is generally an ordinary person. (Naturally,
we would expect the bodhisattva to engage in more heroic feats than an
ordinary disciple or layfollower.) Quite apart from this, however, I con-
tend that part of the logic of the distinction between jātakas and avadānas
is to highlight the diff erence between the pre- Buddha and post- Buddha
ages. Without a Buddha in the world, King Śibi had to gouge out his eyes
and give them to a stranger in order to adhere to the imperative of dāna,
whereas a layperson living in the age of Śākyamuni can off er alms to a
monk and perhaps gain just as much. Why? Because the latter gift consti-
tutes an act of dāna to the Samgha—a potent fi eld of merit that was un-
˙
available to King Śibi. Th us, moral deeds in a Buddha- less age (“perfec-
tions”) are both compared to and contrasted with ritual transactions in
an age of Buddhadharma (“devotions”). By means of the jātakas, the bodhi-
sattva is lauded and exalted for the magnifi cent lengths he went to during
his previous lives—but by means of the avadānas, ordinary Buddhists
receive the message that such magnifi cent lengths are now unnecessary,
thanks to the presence of Buddhism in the world as a powerful fi eld of
merit. Th e life of the Buddha can be replaced by the ritual of the Buddhist.
For “perfections” and “devotions” are, on some level, equivalent: the sort
of ritual logic at work here means that every off ering made, every act of
devotion performed, no matter how small, is multiplied by the great fi eld
of merit in which it is bestowed—the resulting product calling to mind
the magnifi cent past deeds of the Buddha himself (such as King Śibi’s gift
of his eyes). Th us it is neither the jātakas alone nor the avadānas alone but
only the two genres taken together that illuminate for the reader the ritual
magic worked by Buddhism—a magic that allows pre-B uddha “perfec-
tions” to be replaced by post- Buddha “devotions.”44
43

the gift- of- the- body genre
Jātakas and avadānas, then, are not distinguished from each other solely
by the technical matter of whether they focus upon the Buddha or someone
other than the Buddha. Instead, each of the two genres conveys certain
characteristic religious values and assumptions, and the two genres work
together to encompass an entire set of contrastive relations (as well as par-
allels and connections) between the past and the present, the Buddha- less
age and the age of Buddhadharma, moral deeds and ritual transactions,
Buddhas and ordinary beings. Within the discursive space occupied by
these two genres, some tales embody the ethos of the jātaka, some tales
embody the ethos of the avadāna, some tales consciously attempt to forge
connections between the two,45 and some tales have little relevance to
either side of this distinction—but in that case, I contend, the generic
label of jātaka or avadāna strikes us almost as adventitious or irrelevant
to the story’s interpretation.
Gift- of- the- body stories are jātakas in this second and more signifi -
cant sense as well. Th at is, not only do they involve previous births of
the Buddha, but they do so in a manner consistent with the ethos of the
jātaka—by focusing on “perfections” within a Buddha- less age rather
than “devotions” within an age of Buddhadharma. In fact, if we imagine
a kind of continuum in which stories can be judged as either more or less
“jātaka- like,” then gift- of- the- body stories, I maintain, are “super-j ātakas,”
or some of the most “jātaka- like” jātakas of all. Within the jātaka genre as
a whole, there is an implicit hierarchy of tales, and gift- of-t he- body stories
inhabit the highest rungs of this hierarchy. In order to demonstrate this,
let me draw a few distinctions between diff erent varieties of jātakas and
their corresponding degrees of “jātaka- ness” or adherence to the ethos of
the jātaka:
1. Th e fi rst major distinction I would draw is between those jātakas that
illustrate one of the six or ten perfections (pāramitā) and those jātakas that
do not, with the former having more “jātaka- ness.” Th is is not a question
of relative numbers, since a very large number of the latter type of jātaka
also exist. Many of the stories in the Pāli Jātaka collection, for example, are
simple animal fables teaching cleverness, shrewdness, or worldly wisdom
(nīti), rather than illustrating one of the perfections. And yet one cannot
help but notice a persistent tendency in the scholarship to exclude such
tales from the j ātaka- category. Th us Speyer, in the above quote, speaks of
“jātakas proper,” and there are similar references throughout the scholarly
literature to “real jātakas,” “unequivocal jātakas,” “true jātakas,” “classical
jātakas,” “distinctly Buddhist jātakas,” and so forth.46 Presumably, such
44

the gift-o f- the- body genre
real, true, unequivocal jātakas are those that illustrate, in some way, the
bodhisattva’s cultivation of the perfections.
Th e same underlying assumption about what constitutes a “true” jātaka
is also evident within the Buddhist tradition itself. Despite the heteroge-
neous contents of the Pāli Jātaka collection, for example, the Th eravādin
tradition has always given a special status to the last ten jātakas in the
collection because they are understood to be the preeminent examples of
each of the ten perfections. Likewise, if we look at the history of the jātaka
genre as a whole, there is a clear tendency over time for later authors to
selectively choose and rework earlier traditions. Within these patterns of
choice, many such authors (for example, Āryaśūra and Haribhatta) clearly
˙˙
favor those tales that illustrate the bodhisattva’s cultivation of the perfec-
tions and generally ignore the simple animal fables, fairy tales, and folktales
found so frequently in the Pāli Jātaka collection. Th e fact that some later
collections (such as the Jātakamālā) are even arranged on the basis of the
perfections further underscores this obvious hierarchy.
2. Among those jātakas that illustrate one of the six or ten perfections,
dāna- pāramitā, or the “perfection of generosity,” seems to be a highly
favored choice. Th is is clear not only from a subjective reading of many
jātakas but also in the layout of those jātaka- collections that are arranged
on the basis of the perfections. Th e fi nal ten jātakas of the Pāli Jātaka col-
lection mentioned above (which deal with the ten perfections) save the
last and longest story of all (that of Prince Vessantara) for the “perfection
of generosity”—clearly giving it the most exalted status among the ten
perfections.
In other cases, this favoritism toward dāna is a matter of relative num-
bers. Th e Cariyāpitaka of the Pāli Canon consists of t hirty- fi ve versifi ed
˙
jātakas (told in the fi rst-p erson by the Buddha himself) arranged according
to the Th eravādin list of ten perfections. Among these, there are ten stories
each for “generosity” (dāna) and “moral virtue” (sīla), followed by fi ve for
“renunciation” (nekkhamma), one for “resolution” (adhitthāna), six for
˙˙
“truth” (sacca), two for “benevolence” (mettā), and one for “equanimity”
(upekkhā)—with one of the concluding verses of the work implying that
the remaining three perfections have been achieved as well. Āryaśūra’s
Jātakamālā is arranged in a similar way, with the fi rst ten stories illustrating
“generosity,” the second ten “moral virtue,” and the third ten “forbearance”;
the pattern breaks down with the last four stories of the collection, how-
ever, which do not illustrate “energy” (the fourth Sarvāstivādin perfection),
and the fi fth and sixth perfections (“meditation” and “wisdom”) are not
45

the gift- of- the- body genre
represented at all. In both texts, then, dāna is clearly one of the favored per-
fections. Many early scholars could not understand this: Barua and Morris
felt that the Cariyāpitaka must be incomplete because it was “missing”
˙
three perfections; Horner felt that even if the “lost” sections were found,
one still could not account for the overrepresentation of “generosity” and
“moral virtue”; and Rhys Davids surmised that the text must originally have
consisted of a hundred tales—ten for each perfection—basing himself on a
similar claim concerning the Jātakamālā recorded by the Tibetan historian
Tāranātha.47 However, recent scholarship has insisted that both works are
complete as they stand,48 and indeed it is not so diffi cult to imagine that
dāna and śīla were simply held in higher esteem and thought to warrant
greater attention, as the most “jātaka- like” virtues of all.
3. Finally, within the favored category of jātakas illustrating dāna-
pāramitā, the gift- of- the- body theme was one of the favored means of so
doing. Out of the great wealth of jātakas involving generosity that must
have been available to their authors, the Cariyāpitaka uses two gift-o f-t he-
˙
b ody stories (out of ten) to illustrate dāna- pāramitā, while the Jātakamālā
uses four; similarly, in a list found in the Jātakanidāna, two out of eleven
jātakas illustrating dāna- pāramitā are also gift- of- the- body stories.49 Sim-
ilarly, gift-o f-t he-b ody stories are frequently invoked within exegetical
discussions of dāna- pāramitā. In fact, the gift of the body is consistently
described not as an ordinary act of dāna but as the paradigmatic example
or fullest embodiment of dāna- pāramitā.
Th us, gift- of- the- body stories are not only jātakas in a strictly technical
sense. In addition, they are jātakas in the further senses of illustrating the
cultivation of moral perfections in a Buddha-l ess world, focusing in par-
ticular upon the highly favored “perfection of generosity,” and illustrating
this perfection in an extreme and especially paradigmatic way. Gift-o f-
t he-b ody tales are very special jātakas—“super- jātakas” that occupy the
highest rungs in an implicit j ātaka-h ierarchy. Moreover, if the ethos of the
jātaka contrasts with the ethos of the avadāna, then it is the “super-j ātaka”
that provides the greatest contrast of all. Part of the signifi cance of the
“super- jātaka,” I contend, comes from its extreme “non- avadāna- ness.”
In the bodhisattva’s gift of his body, we have perhaps the paradigmatic
example of the heroic and inimitable moral exploit performed by a worthy
and superior being in a diffi cult, B uddha-l ess age of the past—and standing
in stark opposition to the commonplace ritual and devotional transactions
performed by ordinary Buddhists in the narrative present.
46

the gift-o f- the- body genre
Th is contrast, in fact, sometimes seems to be invoked within the Bud-
dhist tradition itself. One of the most interesting examples comes from
Faxian’s experience of the festival of the Buddha’s tooth relic, as it was
celebrated in Sri Lanka during the fi fth century c.e. For ten days prior to
the festival, Faxian reports, the king took care to whip up the devotional
fervor of the public by having a man dressed in royal robes parade around
the city on a huge elephant, reminding people (in the following words) of
everything the Buddha had done on their behalf:
Th e Bodhisattva practiced for the incalculably long time of three asamkhyeya (im-
˙
measurable) kalpas, never sparing his own life. He gave up his kingdom, his wife,
and his child. He even tore out his eyes to give them to others. He cut his own
fl esh to ransom a dove, gave his head as alms, off ered his body to feed a famished
tigress, and did not begrudge his marrow and brain. Having suff ered these pains,
he achieved Buddhahood at last for the sake of all living beings.50
It was explicitly in remembrance of these particular deeds that people were
then encouraged to “level the streets, decorate the roads, and prepare all
kinds of fl owers, incense, and other off erings”—or in other words, engage
in typical, avadāna- like deeds. Th e fervor of their devotion, in other words,
was to be fueled by the obvious and enormous chasm existing between what
the bodhisattva did for them—expressed most eff ectively in the gifts of
his body—and what they were able to do in return, out of gratitude and
devotion. Implicit in this man’s message is the very contrast I have been
discussing—the contrast between the “ethos of the jātaka” and the “ethos
of the avadāna”—as well as the status of the gift of the body as perhaps
the most preeminent expression of the former.51
Understanding the position inhabited by gift- of-t he-b ody tales within
the larger generic context provided by jātakas and avadānas, I believe, is
helpful in interpreting the rhetorical strategies employed by individual gift-
o f-t he-b ody stories. One of the recurring themes throughout the remainder
of this book will be my contention that gift- of- the- body stories are “super-
jātakas” that embody the ethos of the jātaka in a particularly paradigmatic
way and derive part of their meaning from the contrast they pose with
the ethos of the avadāna. Th is contrast, however, is neither simple nor
straightforward; indeed, I will demonstrate that gift-o f-t he-b ody stories
often make playful and creative use of this contrast by highlighting it,
exaggerating it, undermining it, denying it, or manipulating it in some
47

the gift- of- the- body genre
other manner. On the one hand, the bodhisattva’s gift of his body is a
paradigmatic example of the jātaka-t ype moral deed; on the other hand,
the avadāna- type ritual deed is never far away. In diff erent circumstances,
and through a variety of rhetorical strategies, the line between the two may
be hardened, blurred, moved around, or dissolved altogether. It is only by
means of an approach that considers this larger generic context that such
strategies can be brought to the fore.
Th e Gift- of-t he- Body Subgenre: A Defi nition
Now that I have demonstrated that gift-o f- the- body stories are jātakas and
made the further argument that they belong to an elite group of “super-
jātakas,” it is time for me to provide a stipulative defi nition of the gift-o f-
the- body subgenre by considering more specifi cally the subject matter of
the stories I assign to this category. For if we follow Fowler52 in thinking
of genre in terms of “family resemblance”—that is, as a group of texts that
have certain similarities or family resemblances to each other—then we
still have to determine the size of the family we wish to treat. Genres, as
families, can be small, medium, or large, and the size of the family one
treats will determine the limits and parameters of the discussion, as well
as the status of particular stories as either “belonging” to the genre in
question or having more or less “relatedness” to it.
In this case, stories involving the basic theme of bodily sacrifi ce can be
classifi ed into several diff erent categories. Many Indian Buddhist stories
involve animal or human characters who in some way sacrifi ce either the
entire body or a part of the body, but I am focusing in this book only
on a specifi c type of these stories. Th e defi nition of this type can proceed
through a process of elimination by identifying several closely related
subgenres that fall outside the scope of my analysis:
1. Some stories feature the theme of altruistic self-s acrifi ce of one’s life for
someone else, but do not explicitly conceive of this act as a gift of the body.
For example, in the Nigrodhamiga Jātaka of the Pāli Jātaka collection,53
there are two herds of deer who alternately take turns sending one of their
members (drawn by lot) to the palace kitchen of the king of Benaras to be
cooked for the king’s royal meals. On one occasion, when the lot falls to
a pregnant doe, the leader of one of the herds decides to sacrifi ce himself
for the king’s meal in order to spare her and her unborn fawn. In this case,
48

the gift-o f- the- body genre
the deer- king (who is a previous birth of the Buddha) is said to “give his
life” (jīvitam datvā)54 to the doe, but the gift is not explicitly a gift of the
˙
body; instead, it is a generalized act of self-s acrifi ce. Th ough these stories
share much in common with the stories I am focusing on, they lack our
stories’ characteristic emphasis on and conceptions of the body, which are
dealt with in chapter 6.
2. On the other hand, some stories involve the loss of a body part and
its religious ramifi cations, but do not explicitly conceive of this loss as
a gift. Two examples involving the eyes are the Kunālāvadāna (from the
Divyāvadāna), in which King Aśoka’s son Kunāla has his eyes gouged out
at the command of his evil stepmother, and the Subhā Jīvakambavanikā
(from the Pāli Th erīgāthā), in which the nun Subhā pulls out her own
eye in order to stop a man who is sexually threatening her.55 Th ough very
similar in some respects to the story of King Śibi’s gift of his eyes, these
stories—and others of their kind—lack the primacy given to dāna char-
acteristic of the stories I am focusing on, which is the subject of chapters
4 and 5.56 Likewise, in jātakas featuring the bodhisattva, the act of bodily
self- sacrifi ce is sometimes treated as an illustration of ksānti- pāramitā (the
˙
perfection of forbearance) rather than dāna- pāramitā (the perfection of
generosity). Th e most prominent example, of course, is the famous story
of Ksāntivādin (mentioned earlier), in which an ascetic calmly tolerates
˙
the mutilation infl icted upon him by an angry king, thereby fulfi lling
the perfection of forbearance.57 Again, since the bodily mutilation here
constitutes a passive act of “forbearance” rather than an active deed of
“generosity,” such stories lie outside the scope of my discussion.
3. A third type of story I am not dealing with here includes those sto-
ries in which a character gives away his body in exchange for a religious
teaching (often referred to as subhāsita, “well- spoken words,” or subhāsita-
˙ ˙
gāthā, “a well- spoken verse”).58 In the Surūpa Jātaka of the Mahāvastu,
for example, a deer- king named Surūpa off ers his body to a hunter in
exchange for a single verse of teaching.59 Many such stories exist, and in
some cases are strikingly similar in character and plot structure to the gift-
o f-t he-b ody stories within my corpus: in Avadānakalpalatā 91, for example,
King Śibi purchases a verse of religious teaching by feeding his own fl esh
and blood to a demon—who is really the god Śakra in disguise—and
later restores his body by performing an Act of Truth. Despite the obvious
similarities, however, there is a crucial diff erence: whereas gift- of- the- body
stories emphasize one- sided generosity, these stories deal explicitly with the
49

the gift- of- the- body genre
notion of exchange. Because the act of bodily sacrifi ce in such stories is
always performed in exchange for receiving a religious teaching, it is very
far removed from the bodhisattva’s dāna- pāramitā.
4. A fourth type I exclude from my discussion involves those stories in
which a character uses his body to make a religious off ering. Examples are
chapter 23 of the Lotus Sūtra, in which a bodhisattva burns his arm as an
off ering to a Buddha,60 and the many stories in which a bodhisattva copies
the dharma using his skin as parchment, his bones as a pen, and his
blood or marrow as ink.61 Such stories deal with ritual “off erings” rather
than “gifts,” and generally take place within a Buddhist devotional con-
text rather than in the B uddha- less past. Th ey thereby construe the act of
bodily sacrifi ce more in accordance with the ethos of the avadāna than
the ethos of the jātaka, which distinguishes them signifi cantly from the
stories I focus on here.
5. A fi nal category of stories excluded from my discussion is those in
which the gift of the body is given by someone other than the Buddha in
a previous birth. In several diff erent Buddhist texts recently analyzed by
Hubert Durt, there are stories about women who give away the fl esh from
their thighs in order to feed Buddhist monks who need meat because they
are ill.62 Although these stories involve both the gift- aspect and the body-
a spect of the gift- of-t he-b ody theme, they do not feature the bodhisattva as
the hero. Such stories lack the basic features of the jātaka so characteristic
of gift-o f-t he-b ody stories (such as taking place in a Buddha- less age) and
clearly follow a diff erent narrative pattern.63
• • •
From the above exclusions, it is clear that stories belonging to the gift-
of- the- body subgenre (as I defi ne it) are characterized by three necessary
elements—gift, body, and bodhisattva. Th ey must feature the bodhisattva
as the hero; they must conceive of the act of bodily sacrifi ce as a gift; and
they must emphasize the physical body as the item being given away. In
order to highlight these three elements simultaneously, I will consistently
refer to these stories henceforth as “gift-o f-t he-b ody jātakas.” Although,
as mentioned before, this genre is my own hypothetical construction and
is not a genre that was named by the culture in question, I believe there is
evidence that such a category was recognized to some extent by the tradi-
tion itself. Exegetical discussions of dāna or dāna- pāramitā and narrative
collections illustrating the six pāramitās, for example, often invoke this
same group of gift- of- the- body jātakas over and over again, while stories
50

the gift-o f- the- body genre
of the other types (nos. 1–5 above) are not generally invoked within the
same contexts.
Nevertheless, I clearly recognize that the distinctions I have drawn
above are somewhat artifi cial and sometimes hard to defend. It is often
diffi cult, for example, to determine whether the bodhisattva is really giving
up his “body” or his “life,” and whether or not his action is primarily an
expression of “generosity.” I have used the concept of the “gift- of-t he-b ody
jātaka” pragmatically to limit my material, but I believe that ultimately
all such story- types as I have described above must be seen as one large
and interwoven thematic group, with the various types playing off each
other in interesting ways. Many such interconnections can be adduced,
and I therefore attempt in my discussion to refer briefl y to other types
wherever applicable.
Since even the narrow defi nition of the gift-o f- the- body genre I draw
above includes a very large amount of material, I have selected a limited
number of stories that constitute the corpus from which I draw my con-
clusions. Th e corpus is drawn mostly from Sanskrit and Pāli sources easily
available in published editions (including, for example, the Pāli Jātaka
collection, Cariyāpitaka, Jātakamālā, Avadānakalpalatā, Divyāvadāna,
˙
Avadānaśataka, Mahāvastu, Avadānasārasamuccaya, Mahajjātakamālā,
and Manicūdāvadāna). Since my access to the Tibetan Buddhist canon is
˙ ˙
limited—and my facility with classical Tibetan mediocre at best—I have
made use of only two Tibetan texts: the mDzangs bLun zhes bya ba’i mdo
(commonly called the Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool), which contains
several interesting gift- of- the- body jātakas, and the Lokānandanātaka (a
˙
dramatized version of the story of King Manicūda), a Sanskrit drama by
˙ ˙
Candragomin that now exists only in Tibetan. Finally, I have also taken
into consideration several Chinese texts presumably based upon Indic
originals and read in French translation. Th ough I have tried to include
within the corpus some of the most prominent gift-o f-t he-b ody stories
(such as those of King Śibi, the tigress, and the hare), my selection is
otherwise idiosyncratic, covering a very broad period and including both
Mainstream and Mahāyāna examples. A full description of the corpus can
be found in the Appendix.
51

ii
CONVENTIONS OF PLOT
I
n chapter 1 I argued that gift- of-t he-b ody jātakas can be usefully treated
as a discrete subgenre of “super- jātakas” within the larger generic con-
text provided by jātakas and avadānas as a whole—even though the
stories I place in this category are widely divergent in terms of language,
style, dating, and historical context. Th e purpose of this and the following
chapter, therefore, will be to demonstrate in a more concrete manner that
gift- of- the- body jātakas constitute a separate and identifi able grouping of
texts marked by consistent features and conventions that make it mean-
ingful to speak of them as a subgenre. Gift- of- the- body jātakas, in other
words, share more than merely the central theme of a gift of the body. In
plotline, characters, structure, imagery, and even the use of stereotypical
phraseology, all gift-o f- the- body jātakas share a certain “family resem-
blance” that immediately recalls the category to mind.
Th e fi rst and largest aspect of this “family resemblance” is that of plot.
Th e bodhisattva’s gift of his body is always a climactic moment, but it is not
a moment that exists in isolation; instead it is integrated into a narrative
plotline that allows the gift to develop gradually and then traces its various
consequences. Th is is perhaps the most profound distinction between the
52

conventions of plot
gift- of- the- body theme when taken in isolation and the same theme when
treated in the jātakas. Instead of the mere fact of the bodhisattva’s self-
sacrifi ce—experienced as something isolated and already complete—the
jātakas integrate this self-s acrifi ce into a particular narrative sequence and
allow it to unfold in a processual and emergent manner. Th e readers of
these stories watch the gift come into being and occur over time, and they
also experience the outcome of the gift and how it aff ects the surround-
ing world. Th is unfolding of the gift, however, is never arbitrary or id-
iosyncratic in nature, but instead follows certain conventional patterns.
Th ese patterns, which are limited in number, constitute the conventional
plotlines of the gift- of- the- body genre.
Although there are several possible ways one might classify individual
gift- of- the- body jātakas into diff erent categories based on plotline, I have
found that the most useful criterion of classifi cation—the one which has
the greatest eff ect on plotline as a whole—is the identity of the recipient.
As already alluded to in the previous chapter, stories in which the recipient
is an ordinary being (who makes a “real” request for the bodhisattva’s body)
are quite diff erent in character and development from stories in which the
recipient is the deity Śakra in disguise (whose request for the bodhisattva’s
body is nothing more than an elaborate “ruse”). Based primarily on this dis-
tinction, I will enumerate two “major” conventional plotlines characteristic
of the gift- of- the- body genre (as well as one plotline I designate as “minor”).
I will also advance the argument that, quite apart from the question of
how each plotline may have developed historically, the resulting eff ect is
signifi cant: variations in plot are much more than simply superfi cial dif-
ferences in narrative sequence, for each conventional plotline consistently
conveys particular messages and emphasizes particular themes.
When the Recipient Is an Ordinary Being
Our fi rst major category consists of those gift- of- the- body jātakas in which
the recipient of the gift is an ordinary being, rather than the deity Śakra
in disguise. Th ough such stories are obviously quite diverse in nature
and content, it is my contention that when taken as a group, they func-
tion in a similar manner and consistently emphasize the same themes.
Th ese themes include the extraordinary heroism of the bodhisattva, the
extreme purity of his generosity and compassion, his exaltation above all
other living beings, and the sense of amazement and awe surrounding his
53

conventions of plot
act of self-s acrifi ce. Th ese stories, in other words, make use of ordinary,
lowly beings as the recipients of the bodhisattva’s self- sacrifi ce in order
to emphasize the chasm that exists between him and everyone else and
turn him into an object worthy of the highest devotion and adoration.
Returning once again to the idea of the “super-j ātaka” and its portrayal
of truly heroic and utterly inimitable deeds, these stories are perhaps the
“super- est” jātakas of them all.
We can recognize this more clearly when we consider the fact that the
ordinary beings who serve as the recipients of the bodhisattva’s gift are never
just generic “ordinary beings”; instead, they are thoroughly conventional
in nature. Th ey can be roughly divided into two groups—those who are
pitiful and those who are evil. Th e pitiful recipients (for example, hungry
animals, thirsty insects, or destitute wanderers) are usually in dire straits
and do not make any direct demand for the bodhisattva’s body. Th e bod-
hisattva simply encounters their pitiful situation—very often a situation
of hunger, thirst, illness, or the threat of imminent death—and decides,
on his own initiative, to give up his body in order to save their lives. I call
these recipients “pitiful” not only because of the dire situation in which
they fi nd themselves, but also because the lack of any explicit request for
the bodhisattva’s body distinguishes them from those recipients who are
“evil.” Pitiful recipients, in other words, are innocent of any conscious
desire for the bodhisattva’s self- sacrifi ce; though they might ask the bo-
dhisattva for help, they would never dream of asking him to cut off his
head, gouge out his eyes, or sacrifi ce his life on their behalf. Instead, they
are wholly pitiful creatures—starving to death, dying of thirst, lost in the
wilderness and about to collapse, stricken by horrible illnesses, drowning
in the ocean, or consigned to a low animal birth driven solely by the un-
conscious instinct for survival. Th ey present themselves, in all their misery,
before the bodhisattva’s eyes, and he—on his own initiative—decides to
give his body away.
One classic example involving a “pitiful” recipient is the story of the
starving tigress, which exists in several diff erent Sanskrit versions. Here
the bodhisattva is either a prince or a brahmin ascetic who encounters a
tigress in the wilderness. Th e tigress has just given birth to several cubs and
is so overcome by hunger and fatigue that she is on the verge of devouring
her own off spring. In order to save the lives of both the tigress and her
cubs, the bodhisattva throws himself off a cliff or slits his own throat and
allows the tigress to devour him. In other stories, as well, the bodhisattva
is devoured by insects and mosquitoes, dogs and jackals, or birds of prey
54

conventions of plot
such as vultures. Such animals are presented as objects of pity rather than
blame, for in being consigned to an animal rebirth, they are incapable of
making a conscious moral decision to kill or hurt the bodhisattva.1 Instead,
they are merely wild animals, affl icted by suff ering and driven wholly by
the animal instincts of hunger and self- preservation. Th is is underscored
by the fact that it is always the purely physical needs of hunger and thirst
that drive such animals to take advantage of the bodhisattva’s body, and
their inner thoughts and conscious intentions are never depicted.
In other cases, however, it is morally conscious human beings rather
than i nstinct-d riven animals who serve as such “pitiful” recipients, with
several diff erent strategies being utilized to preserve their “pitiful” status.
In some cases the human recipients who fi nd themselves in such dire situ-
ations throw themselves at the bodhisattva’s feet and beg for his help, but
only in the most generalized manner and without any explicit reference to
his giving up his body. In Avadānaśataka 31, for example, when the subjects
of King Padmaka’s kingdom are dying from a terrible epidemic, they cry
out to the king in despair, “Save us, Great King, from this disease! Give
us life!”2—yet they never imagine that he will throw himself off the roof
of his palace in order to transform himself into a particular type of fi sh
whose fl esh will cure their disease. As soon as this happens, of course, they
do take full advantage of the situation—“carrying baskets and gripping
weapons in their hands” and ruthlessly “cutting up the fl esh of the fi sh
while he was still alive”3—yet their innocence is preserved by the fact that
they never intended for him to help them in this way.
It is also pertinent to note that when they do devour the fi sh so raven-
ously, they do so in the midst of an epidemic—while in a similar story
from the Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool, the situation is one of great famine.4
Epidemic and famine are both conditions that strip one of moral agency;
one of the common themes we fi nd in these stories (and elsewhere in Bud-
dhist literature) is the idea that extreme hunger, thirst, and illness reduce
morally conscious human beings to an a nimal-l ike status in which they
lose their moral agency and act purely through the instinct for survival.5
Desperate physical circumstances, we might say, temporarily consign these
human beings to an animal rebirth, thus ensuring their status as objects
of pity.
In other stories, however, human moral agency is preserved, even in the
most calamitous of circumstances, and the author must go to yet further
lengths to protect his characters’ innocence. One strategy is to have the
same human recipients who initially beg the bodhisattva for help become
55

conventions of plot
shocked, repulsed, and horrifi ed when they discover what he intends to
do. Th us, in Jātakamālā 30, the bodhisattva is a magnifi cent elephant who
encounters a group of seven hundred men who are wandering through the
desert, suff ering from hunger and thirst. Th ese men beg the elephant for
help, calling him “relief incarnate,” a “refuge,” and a “friend for we who
are friendless,” and explicitly asking him to “please save us in whatever
way you know how!”6 Realizing that they will never make it across the
desert without food and water, the elephant tells them where they can fi nd
an elephant carcass, whose fl esh will serve as food and whose entrails will
serve as water bags. Racing ahead to the predetermined spot, the elephant
throws himself off a mountain in order to provide the carcass that will save
the men’s lives. In this case, even though the men beg for the elephant’s
help, they certainly have no intention that he should kill himself, and once
they come across the elephant carcass and realize it is the same elephant
as before, they are shocked and horrifi ed:
Who could possibly eat the fl esh of one whose love for us was greater than that
of the most aff ectionate friends and relatives, who was kind enough to help us
in such a way, who was eager to undertake our welfare even at the cost of his
own life, and who has acted in such an exceedingly noble manner? Instead, it
would be more appropriate for us to repay our debt to him by worshipping and
cremating his body!7
It is only through some argument amongst the men and a consideration of
what the elephant would have wanted them to do that they are ultimately
persuaded to make use of his physical body, as he intended. Th us their
innocence of any explicit demand for the bodhisattva’s body is preserved,
and they remain wholly “pitiful” characters.
A comparison of several diff erent versions of a single story can further
demonstrate how the blamelessness of human recipients is preserved, even
as they are given greater and greater moral agency. In one story, the bodhi-
sattva is the leader of a band of merchants who are drowning in the ocean
after their ship has been demolished. Remembering that the ocean cannot
stand to have a dead body in it for even a single night, the bodhisattva
instructs his companions to hang on to his body and then slits his own
throat, whereupon the ocean casts his corpse onto shore, thus saving the
others’ lives.
In the version of this story that appears in the Mahāvastu,8 we hear
nothing from the bodhisattva’s companions. Th ey do not beg him for help,
56

conventions of plot
they don’t seem to have any knowledge of his intention to kill himself
beforehand, and once he does kill himself, we hear nothing of their reac-
tion to his deed. Instead they are mute characters who serve only as the
objects of the bodhisattva’s compassion and might just as well be depicted
as animals. In contrast, Avadānasārasamuccaya 2,9 which is a later version
of the same story, dramatically expands the role of these companions and
turns them into morally conscious beings. Now, as they are drowning,
they throw themselves at the bodhisattva’s feet and beg him for help at
great length:
We have abandoned all eff ort, fi xing all our aims and hopes upon you. Whatever
needs to be done here, do it quickly! Our lives are in danger! As you look on,
these hopeless men are drowning in the ocean right before your very eyes. Any
delay would be improper, so use your strength and act now! . . . Rescue these
people who are wandering aimlessly in the face of adversity. . . . Deliver us from
danger, like a father showing compassion for his sons, for we are in the very belly
of death. . . . Display your manly strength, O Kinsman of the World! . . . Please
rescue us!10
Yet despite the urgency and intensity of this request, once these compan-
ions hear that the bodhisattva intends to kill himself, they are shocked and
horrifi ed. Th eir minds are “utterly blown away,” their hearts “tremble with
fear,” they are “overcome with sadness and despair,” and they consider his
intention to be “inconceivable, unendurable, and exceedingly awesome.”11
Th ey start crying uncontrollably and beg him to reconsider:
All of us will willingly go to our deaths right here in this great ocean, but we can-
not do this ignoble deed! An excellent friend like you is diffi cult to fi nd; if we
saw you destroyed, what use would we have for worldly life or riches? So refrain
from this reckless deed, O Resolute- Minded One!12
In a third version of this story, found in Sambhadrāvadānamālā 4, even
this protest is not enough, for the helmsman of the ship then steps forward
and argues against the bodhisattva’s self- sacrifi ce for an additional fourteen
verses, employing a number of fairly complicated moral arguments.13 It is
only after all of this shock, horror, and moral protest have been registered
that the bodhisattva (through another lengthy speech) fi nally convinces
his reluctant companions to accept his intention to kill himself and make
use of his physical body.
57

conventions of plot
“Pitiful” recipients, then, can be mute and i nstinct-d riven animals,
desperate human beings temporarily reduced to an a nimal-l ike condition,
innocent people who make only the most generalized request for help, or
wholly conscious—even morally sophisticated—human beings who are
fully aware of what the bodhisattva intends to do. But in all cases, their
moral innocence in bringing about the bodhisattva’s death is always pre-
served. Th ey do not ask the bodhisattva to give up his body, and they have
no intention that he should do so. In this sense, they constitute objects of
pity rather than blame or censure.
In contrast, I classify evil recipients (for example, evil brahmins, evil
kings, or evil women) as those who make a direct, explicit, and conscious
demand for the bodhisattva to give up his body. “Evil,” of course, is a
relative term, with some recipients being far more “evil” than others, but
with all of them being presented in a highly negative manner. Th e most
evil recipients of all are those who have no discernible reason for demand-
ing the bodhisattva’s body, other than outright cruelty. Th e story of King
Candraprabha alluded to earlier14 never gives us any explicit reason why
the brahmin Raudrāksa must have King Candraprabha’s head, other than
˙
intimating that the brahmin is a cruel and malicious person. Slightly less
evil, perhaps, are those who demand the bodhisattva’s body for purely
selfi sh purposes—such as the queen who demands an elephant’s tusks to
get revenge upon him for some perceived slight, or the brahmin who asks
for King Sarvamdada’s head because another king has off ered a reward.
˙
Finally, the least evil of the “evil” recipients are those who demand the
bodhisattva’s body for a seemingly legitimate reason. Th ese recipients have
a legitimate need for the gift that makes them overlap somewhat with
those who are “pitiful,” yet I classify them as “evil” because of the explicit
demand they make for the bodhisattva’s body—a demand perceived by
those around them (and presented by the story itself) as being excessive,
cruel, and repugnant.
In the story of King Manicūda (as found in the Manicūdāvadāna), for
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
example, the bodhisattva is a generous king named Manicūda who has a
˙ ˙
magical c rest-j ewel embedded in his head, while the recipient of the gift is
a neighboring king named Dusprasaha who demands the c rest-j ewel so he
˙
can use its curative powers to end an epidemic within his own kingdom.
Despite this seemingly legitimate need for the c rest- jewel, the story goes
out of its way to depict Dusprasaha in as negative a manner as possible.
˙
Th e name Dusprasaha itself means “diffi cult to endure,” and the character
˙
lives up to this name from the moment he is introduced. Long before
58

conventions of plot
the epidemic affl icts his kingdom, Dusprasaha is said to be greedy for an
˙
excellent elephant belonging to Manicūda. He repeatedly hankers after the
˙ ˙
elephant and then becomes angry and jealous when the elephant is given
to someone else. He gathers his army together and proceeds to wage war
against Manicūda’s kingdom—an act Manicūda himself attributes to the
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
“wickedness of the affl ictions.”15
It is only after this thoroughly unpleasant character has been established
that we see Dusprasaha demand Manicūda’s c rest-j ewel in order to cure the
˙ ˙ ˙
epidemic affl icting his kingdom. In the Lokānandanātaka (a dramatized
˙
version of the Manicūda story preserved only in Tibetan), even this request
˙ ˙
is suspect, for Manicūda’s prime minister calls it a “trick” and a “means of
˙ ˙
deception” intended to kill Manicūda, rather than a benevolent attempt
˙ ˙
by Dusprasaha to save his own subjects’ lives.16 Th is negative portrayal is
˙
further reinforced at the end of the Manicūdāvadāna, when Dusprasaha
˙ ˙ ˙
is identifi ed as a previous birth of Devadatta. Whether or not there is a
legitimate use for the bodhisattva’s body, then, any recipient who would
even think of asking the bodhisattva to intentionally injure or kill himself
tends to be presented by the story in a negative and highly unfl attering
manner. In this sense, such recipients are “evil” rather than “pitiful.”
Th e ordinary beings who receive the bodhisattva’s gift of his body are
thus thoroughly conventional in nature. In some cases they are “pitiful”
and in other cases they are “evil”—but they are never just generic “ordinary
beings.” Why should this be the case? Perhaps the most important reason is
that those who are “pitiful” and those who are “evil” both clearly fall into
the category of those who are “unworthy” of receiving gifts. As I will explain
at greater length in chapters 4 and 5, gift-o f- the- body jātakas must be seen
within the context of a larger Buddhist discourse on giving (dāna) and, in
particular, in relation to the doctrine of the “worthy recipient” (supātra).
Th e doctrine of the worthy recipient was pan-I ndic in nature. Buddhism,
Hinduism, and Jainism all hold that religious gifts should generally be
directed upward toward religiously worthy and superior recipients (such as
monks, brahmins, Buddhas, and Jinas) because these gifts are productive
of the greatest amount of merit (punya). Indeed, the merit accruing from
˙
a gift is dependent on the spiritual worth of the recipient: the more worthy
the recipient is—or the better “fi eld of merit” he or she constitutes—the
more merit the donor will accrue. Any ordinary giver will thus aim to direct
his or her gifts toward the worthiest recipients of all, in order to acquire
the greatest merit. Correspondingly, it follows that gifts which fl ow in the
opposite direction—that is, downward toward unworthy recipients—are
59

conventions of plot
productive of very little merit, since they are planted within a poor- quality
“fi eld.” In the Buddhist discourse on giving, the gift given to an unworthy
recipient is thus an unproductive gift—and as such it becomes the site of
pure, unmitigated generosity. Although ordinary people are sometimes
exhorted to make such gifts, it is characteristic of Buddhist literature in
general that the gift given to an unworthy recipient is usually attributed
only to highly exceptional beings (such as bodhisattvas and Buddhas) and
is often used as a marker for pure generosity and altruism.
As those who are “unworthy” of receiving gifts, then, “pitiful” and “evil”
recipients fulfi ll a very specifi c function within gift- of- the- body stories:
they mark the bodhisattva as an extraordinary giver, not an ordinary giver,
and serve to highlight the extreme and uncompromising nature of his
generosity. So extreme is his generosity that he gives away his body even
to lowly and pathetic creatures such as insects, and so uncompromising
is his generosity that he gives away his body even to evil people who
have no legitimate use for it—and in both cases he does so not for the
sake of merit, but purely out of generosity and compassion. Pitiful and
evil recipients thereby represent extreme test-c ases of dāna- pāramitā (the
“perfection of generosity”), a theme I explore in more detail in chapter 5.
By the use of such lowly recipients, the bodhisattva’s status is elevated and
he becomes a highly exalted giver, capable of giving in a manner that no
ordinary giver could ever hope to emulate. Stories featuring ordinary be-
ings as the recipients of the gift thus promote a highly idealized portrait
of the bodhisattva’s generosity.
Th e same point can be made again if we consider “pitiful” and “evil” re-
cipients from the point of view of the audience’s response. For the audience,
the two types of recipients represent quite diff erent situations and merit
quite diff erent reactions. When the recipients are pitiful in nature—with
their miserable situations often being described in excruciating detail—it
is clear that the audience should be moved by their plight and respond
with a feeling of pity (“pity,” or krpā, being one of the standard rasas, or
˙
appropriate aesthetic responses, outlined in the classical Sanskrit theory of
aesthetics). In contrast, when the recipients are evil in nature, the audience’s
reaction is likely very diff erent and probably involves feelings of anger
or indignation rather than sympathy or pity. In case an audience doesn’t
know how to respond, there are certain subsidiary characters—especially
lower deities and other supernatural beings—who seem to serve as the
audience’s guide by demonstrating for them the “correct” response to the
gift. Th ese “correct” responses are fairly consistent in nature: sympathetic
60

conventions of plot
and compassionate if the recipients are pitiful, angry and indignant if the
recipients are evil.17 Th us, for the gods and other subsidiary characters in
the narrative—and by extension, for the audience, as well—pitiful and
evil recipients merit very diff erent responses.
From the perspective of the bodhisattva, however, such is not the
case—and once again, the extraordinary nature of the bodhisattva and
his essential diff erence from all other beings is thus highlighted. For the
bodhisattva in these stories makes no distinction whatsoever between
“pitiful” and “evil” recipients. “Evil” recipients, for him, are as equally
the objects of pity as those who are more conventionally “pitiful.” Th is is
because the bodhisattva understands that just as “pitiful” recipients suff er
from hunger, thirst, illness, and other life-t hreatening conditions, so “evil”
recipients are equally tormented by the mental affl ictions of anger, hatred,
and delusion—affl ictions, moreover, that will surely condemn them to
hell, where they will suff er physical torments even worse than those now
suff ered by the “pitiful.”
Th is compassion the bodhisattva feels for even the most evil of recipients
is made explicit in story after story. Th e bodhisattva is often described as
intentionally “generating thoughts of benevolence and compassion” toward
evil recipients,18 and sometimes patiently explains to those around him why
such recipients merit pity rather than blame. In the Manicūdāvadāna, for
˙ ˙
example, when the evil King Dusprasaha demands the crest-j ewel embed-
˙
ded in King Manicūda’s head, Manicūda tells his ministers they ought to
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
feel sympathy for him, for it is only because the poor king is “intoxicated
with the pride of royal power” and “deluded by lust for this life” that he
“intends to do something unprofi table both in this world and the world
to come, thus assuring his own ruin!”19 His ministers are amazed at this
reaction and wonder how Manicūda can be so compassionate “even to a
˙ ˙
killer whose weapon is poised to strike.”20 Similarly, in Kalpanāmanditikā
˙˙
69, the bodhisattva, as an elephant, explains to his female companion why
it is foolish for her to react with anger toward the cruel hunter who has
come to remove his tusks:
If a man whose heart had been invaded by demons
in his madness insulted his doctor,
the doctor would only think of subduing the demons,
he would not blame the poor patient!
Affl ictions and bonds are like these demons.
Only when one is enveloped by the bonds of ignorance
61

conventions of plot
does one give rise to anger and hatred.
. . . So why become vexed against this man?21
By comparing the hunter’s cruelty to a physical disease suff ered by a wholly
innocent patient, the bodhisattva equalizes those who are “pitiful” and
those who are “evil” in a way that ordinary people would fi nd diffi cult.
Th e bodhisattva’s ability to look beyond worldly ideas about who deserves
“pity” and who deserves “blame” and to see all beings as equally pitiful
and in need of compassion within the larger context of a world governed
by suff ering and rebirth distinguishes him sharply from other people and
once again highlights his extraordinary nature.22
Th e same eff ect is heightened even further in those cases in which the
bodhisattva actually exalts the evil recipient above the pitiful recipient,
speaking of him not merely as an object of pity and compassion, but, in
fact, as one who deserves great praise, gratitude, and esteem. Th e idea that
it is precisely one’s worst enemy that gives one the greatest opportunity
to cultivate the wholesome attitudes of benevolence, forbearance, and
compassion—and that this enemy therefore deserves gratitude and esteem
rather than blame or censure—is common to many Buddhist texts dealing
with meditative techniques.23 In gift- of- the- body jātakas involving evil
recipients, we sometimes see the same idea put into play within a narrative
situation. Th us, when an enemy king viciously attacks King Sarvamdada’s
˙
kingdom, his reaction is one of gratitude rather than anger. He exalts the
enemy king as an “auspicious friend” who is “truly teaching” him in the
ways of patient forbearance, and wishes only the best for this cruel invader:
“From now on, let even evil conduct be of benefi t to him, his friends,
and his relations for hundreds of years!”24 Once again, it is the contrast
between the bodhisattva’s reaction and that of the other characters that is
often highlighted: in the Manicūdāvadāna, even a wise sage refers to the
˙ ˙
fi ve brahmins who have come to remove the c rest-j ewel from Manicūda’s
˙ ˙
head as “killers with violent minds and cruel hearts, sinners who pay no
heed to the other world and are ungrateful and merciless”—only to hear
Manicūda himself refer to the very same brahmins as “wish- fulfi lling jewels,
˙ ˙
vessels of good fortune, d esire-g ranting cows, like gurus, like gods.”25 In
a Tibetan version of the same story, in fact, these cruel brahmins are even
better than wish- fulfi lling jewels, “for a wish- fulfi lling jewel grants material
wealth alone, while a supplicant brings about all virtues.”26 In fact, from the
bodhisattva’s exalted point of view, the situation is the very reverse of what
62

conventions of plot
the ignorant presume it to be. Th us King Manicūda says of the evil king
˙ ˙
Dusprasaha who has sent the brahmins to remove his c rest- jewel: “Th is
˙
man here is the donor, and it is I who am the supplicant! O Friend, why
have you turned it all around?”27 Since the audience likely identifi es with
the sentiments of the other characters rather than those of Manicūda, the
˙ ˙
extraordinary nature of the bodhisattva and the chasm between his values
and ours are once again highlighted and brought to the fore.
“Pitiful” and “evil” recipients thus fulfi ll a variety of diff erent functions,
yet in every case the same themes are reinforced—the extraordinary hero-
ism of the bodhisattva, the extreme purity of his generosity and compas-
sion, his exaltation above all other beings, and the sense of amazement and
awe surrounding his act of self- sacrifi ce. Perhaps we can now understand
why the most common and appropriate outcome for such stories is to
have the bodhisattva die as a result of making his gift. Th e extreme and
uncompromising generosity that constitutes the main emphasis of such
stories can fi nd its greatest consummation only in the bodhisattva’s tragic
death. Our sense of the extraordinary character of the bodhisattva and our
amazement at his self- sacrifi ce on behalf of the lowliest of creatures can
be sustained only if the bodhisattva actually dies; for him to survive the
gift or experience giving’s rewards would run counter to all of the eff ects
initiated by featuring pitiful and evil recipients in the fi rst place. Although
the bodhisattva is sometimes reborn in heaven or receives some other
comparable “reward” for his gift, more emphasis is laid in these stories on
his tragic loss of life and the grief and sadness of those he leaves behind.
Extreme generosity is the predominant theme, and amazement mixed with
grief, the predominant emotional tone.
If “sainthood,” as one volume has put it, is always a complicated mix-
ture of otherness and imitability,28 then stories in which the recipient is an
ordinary being come down clearly on the side of the bodhisattva’s “other-
ness.” He sacrifi ces his body on behalf of the lowliest of beings, he does so
purely out of disinterested generosity and without any ulterior motives,
and in the vast majority of cases he suff ers death as a result—a tragic
death that is usually lamented at great length by other beings. He is other
to us, and his deed invites a response of worship and devotion rather than
direct imitation—for the ordinary reader cannot hope to imitate such an
extraordinary deed. Moreover, though I previously argued that all gift-
of- the- body jātakas constitute “super-j ātakas” whose signifi cance, in part,
derives from their contrast with the ethos of the avadāna, I now contend
63

conventions of plot
that this is especially and particularly true of those stories featuring ordi-
nary beings as their recipients. Th e inimitable heroic exploit performed by
an extraordinary being in a diffi cult, Buddha-l ess age of the past that defi nes
the ethos of the jātaka fi nds perhaps its most perfect manifestation in the
spectacle of the bodhisattva’s tragic loss of life on behalf of those who are
pitiful and evil.
When the Recipient Is Śakra- in- Disguise
Quite diff erent in nature from the above are stories falling into our second
major category, in which the recipient of the gift is really the deity Śakra
in disguise rather than an ordinary being. Once again, these stories follow
a thoroughly conventional plotline—but one that brings quite diff erent
emphases to the fore from those characteristic of the fi rst category. Let
me fi rst summarize the conventional plotline adhered to by such stories,
and then turn to a discussion of how its concerns and messages diff er
fundamentally from those of the stories addressed previously.
Th e pattern of Śakra’s involvement in these stories is fairly consistent
and includes the following elements. First, Śakra is introduced into the
story by being aroused or alerted in some way as to the existence of the
bodhisattva and the extremity of his generosity. Usually this occurs because
the bodhisattva forms a generalized aspiration to give away his body (before
any specifi c opportunity to do so has arisen). Śakra is alerted because the
power of this aspiration causes his marble throne to become hot (a common
Indic convention in speaking of virtuous human beings),29 or because it
causes the trembling of earth and mountains, whereupon Śakra discerns
the reason for such omens,30 or because Śakra simply “understands” or
“realizes” the bodhisattva’s intention31—as one text puts it, because he has
“knowledge and vision of what goes on in the lower regions.”32
In any case, once Śakra is alerted to the bodhisattva’s intentions, he
then decides to test the bodhisattva’s generosity by asking him for his
body. In order to carry out this test, Śakra dons some sort of disguise; he
never approaches the bodhisattva in his own form. Śakra’s disguises again
fall into the general categories of the pitiful recipient or the evil recipi-
ent—but whether the recipient is pitiful or evil matters little, since the
audience always knows that he is Śakra- in- disguise. Using this disguise,
Śakra goes to the bodhisattva and requests a part of his body (or makes a
generalized plea for help that he knows will result in a gift of the body),
64

conventions of plot
and the bodhisattva, with no hesitation, agrees to give his body away and
generally begins the process of doing so.
Rather than allowing the bodhisattva to die, however, these stories
generally interrupt the gift at some point and make it clear to the audi-
ence that the bodhisattva has successfully passed Śakra’s “test” and does
not need to lose his life. Although it is diffi cult to determine the exact
moment when the test has been “passed,” it seems to be marked by sev-
eral narrative elements in combination. In many cases, for example, the
gift- giving is interrupted when Śakra suddenly reveals his true identity to
the bodhisattva, sometimes explaining that he was merely testing him. At
some point also, Śakra usually expresses a wish (generally to himself) to
help the bodhisattva restore his injured body to perfect health.33 He then
does so in almost all cases by encouraging the bodhisattva to perform an
Act of Truth.
Th e “Act of Truth” (satya- kriyā), a common motif in Indic narrative
literature, is a ritualistic act in which a person enunciates some truthful
statement and then ritually draws upon the power of this truth to make
some desired consequence occur.34 It generally takes the form of: “If X is
true, then by the power of this truth, let Y occur.” Th e natures of both truth
and consequence vary widely from one story to another and can range from
the trivial to the very profound. In gift- of- the- body jātakas, however, they
are again quite conventional in nature: the truth invoked by the bodhi-
sattva always concerns the purity and sincerity of his frame of mind when
he gave his body away, while the desired consequence is always a request to
see this same body restored. Th e truth may be stated either negatively (for
example, his mind experienced no regret, displeasure, hostility, or other
negative emotions while giving his body away) or positively (for example,
his mind experienced only unconditional love for all supplicants, joy and
pleasure in giving the gift, etc.). As a “negative” example, we might take
Manicūda’s fi rst Act of Truth in the Manicūdāvadāna:
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
When I gave away my own fl esh today, through the force of compassion and in-
tent upon enlightenment, my mind did not give rise to any regret, and was free
of both stinginess and distress. O Th ousand- Eyed One, by this truth, and by
the power of my merit, let this body of mine become just as it was before, fully
handsome!35
As a “positive” example, we might take King Śibi’s two Acts of Truth after
giving away his eyes, as stated in the Jātakamālā:
65

conventions of plot
Since the voices of supplicants freely asking for favors, both then and now, are
as dear to me as if they were blessings, let one of my eyes arise! . . . Moreover,
since I gladly gave both of my eyes to he who asked for only one, and did so with
single- minded joy and pleasure, let my second eye also arise!36
While the fi rst Act of Truth deals with the absence of certain mental quali-
ties and the second one deals with the presence of certain (other) mental
qualities, both statements attest to the bodhisattva’s absolute sincerity
in giving the gift. It is the power of this sincerity that then allows the
bodhisattva’s injured body to be restored to perfect health. Naturally, the
Act of Truth is always eff ective, and once the bodhisattva’s body has been
restored, we know for certain—in fact, we have physical evidence—that
the bodhisattva has passed the test successfully and convinced Śakra that
he constitutes a true bodhisattva.
One fi nal indication that the test has been successfully passed occurs
when Śakra makes some kind of eff usive, positive response to the bod-
hisattva—for example, he praises the gift, he confi rms the bodhisattva’s
generosity and pure intentions, or he predicts the bodhisattva’s imminent
Buddhahood:
His resolution is fi rm and sincere; he will not be long in becoming a Buddha!37
Wonderful, wonderful, O Lord of the Earth! Your mind is fi rmly resolved, your
vow is unshakable, and your great compassion seeks out beings because you are
fearless in the midst of those conditions which cause terror. Because of your
determination, it won’t be long before you awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, full
enlightenment!38
Look, honorable gods who live in heaven! Rejoice at this Great Being’s truly ex-
traordinary and remarkable deed! Look how he has fearlessly given up his body
today out of love for his guest!39
Th us, a number of narrative elements in combination—Śakra’s revela-
tion of his true identity, his wish to restore the bodhisattva’s body, his role
in encouraging the Act of Truth, the bodhisattva’s survival and restoration
of his body, and Śakra’s positive reaction to the gift—all conspire to signal
to the audience that the test is over, and the bodhisattva has passed. Rather
than culminating in a tragic loss of life, such stories conclude with a “happy
ending”—with Śakra fully satisfi ed and the bodhisattva in robust health.
66

conventions of plot
Clearly such stories are quite diff erent in nature from the stories I dis-
cussed previously. I would characterize this diff erence in two major ways:
On the one hand, the theme of generosity itself is deemphasized, to some
extent, so that other concerns can come to the fore—fi rst and foremost, a
concern with clarifying the relationship between the Buddha and the gods.
On the other hand, while generosity does remain a predominant theme,
such stories present us with quite a diff erent model of generosity than
the extreme and uncompromising generosity characteristic of the stories
discussed earlier. I will deal with each of these topics in turn.
buddha, gods, and cosmos
Whereas eff ective illustration of the “perfection of generosity” appears to
be the very raison d’être of the stories discussed earlier, stories involving
Śakra as the recipient of the gift seem to deemphasize generosity, to some
extent, so that other concerns can come to the fore. Th is deemphasizing
of generosity will become apparent if we pause to consider some of the
implications of the basic test- by- Śakra motif. When Śakra decides to “test”
the bodhisattva, the terms used consistently for the notion of “testing”
all derive from the desiderative of the verbal root man (or occasionally
jñā), meaning “to want to know,” “to investigate,” or “to test.”40 Th e very
consistent use of these forms is important, for they clearly mark Śakra’s
request for the bodhisattva’s body as a test or a trial that the bodhisattva
must successfully “pass,” rather than a sincere appeal for his body. Th is
already indicates to the audience that quite apart from the specifi c virtue
of “generosity,” Śakra’s testing of the bodhisattva (and the bodhisattva’s
successful passing of this test) itself becomes a predominant theme. Th e
question of the narrative is not merely “Is he generous?” or “Will he give
the gift?” but also “Will he pass the test?” Th ough generosity is the specifi c
quality being tested here, generosity is deemphasized to the extent that
other qualities appropriate to bodhisattvas might just as well be tested in
its place—and in other stories this is indeed the case.
In fact, the theme of Śakra’s testing of the bodhisattva appears in many
diff erent stories and does not need to be tied to the virtue of generosity
at all. In Jātakamālā 19, for example, the bodhisattva is an ascetic who
lives in the forest with his seven siblings.41 Alerted to his great virtue,
Śakra takes his meals away every day and waits to see if he will accuse
his siblings of having done so. Th is seems to constitute a general test of
morality or virtue and is clearly not a test of generosity. Similar tests by
67

conventions of plot
Śakra concerning other virtues occur throughout the bodhisattva’s career.
From this perspective, we might see Śakra’s testing of the bodhisattva as
a theme in itself, with “generosity” as the incidental quality being tested
in these particular stories.
Th e deemphasizing of generosity per se and the highlighting of Śakra’s
testing of the bodhisattva also have important implications for the outcome
of the plot. Th e initial setup of the story already indicates to the audience
that the story ought to end with the bodhisattva surviving the gift rather
than dying—for if the bodhisattva dies when the gift was nothing more
than a test, the story will seem like a cruel joke rather than a noble illustra-
tion of generosity (unless, of course, the author is intentionally subverting
these generic expectations, as I argued earlier in the case of Āryaśūra’s
version of the story of the hare). Th us the emphasis on the bodhisattva’s
“tragic loss of life on behalf of suff ering beings” so characteristic of the
earlier set of stories here recedes into the background: we do not wish to
see the bodhisattva lose his life out of compassion for others; instead, we
wish to see him best the god and pass the test. Th e bodhisattva must succeed,
the deity Śakra must be suffi ciently humbled, and the story must have a
positive outcome. Compassion, self-s acrifi ce, and generosity are all present,
but the manner in which they manifest themselves is now governed by
the larger theme of a contest between god and bodhisattva. Th e gift alone is
insuffi cient, precisely because it is the exigencies of the test that control the
narrative, rather than the theme of generosity alone. Th us, whereas stories
in which the recipient is an ordinary being often place the bodhisattva’s
gift of his body toward the end of the narrative—as climax and culmina-
tion of the entire plot—stories involving Śakra as the recipient generally
locate the gift at a much earlier point in the narrative, subordinating it to
the larger concerns of the test-b y- Śakra motif.
One of these concerns, as I have already suggested, is the theme of an
agonistic contest between god and bodhisattva. Indeed, quite apart from the
promotion of generosity, I believe that these stories can be placed within
a larger Buddhist discourse concerned with illuminating the careful bal-
ance of power between the Buddha and traditional deities such as Śakra.
In order to explore this theme, let us begin by considering Śakra’s posi-
tion relative to the bodhisattva and the complex motives that drive him
to initiate the test.
In some cases, it seems that Śakra tests the bodhisattva purely out of a
sense of personal curiosity. In Jātakamālā 6, for example, Śakra is “fi lled
with astonishment and curiosity” when he learns of the bodhisattva’s desire
68

conventions of plot
to give away his body and “wishes to fi nd out more about the nature of
this Great Being.”42 Likewise, in Mahajjātakamālā 44, he thinks to him-
self: “Th is king is obsessed with giving! What is he thinking? I must go
and see whether or not this intention of his is sincere!”43 Although these
sentiments of personal curiosity do provide a suffi cient rationale for the
undertaking of the test, they do little to illuminate Śakra’s status as king
of the devas and his relationship to the aspiring bodhisattva.
More interesting to consider are those statements that begin to place
Śakra’s motives within a wider cosmological perspective. In some cases
Śakra seems to be working for the welfare of the cosmos as a whole when
he tests the bodhisattva, allowing the bodhisattva to fulfi ll the perfection
of generosity by giving away his body and thereby move one step closer to
perfect Buddhahood on behalf of the entire world. In Kalpanāmanditikā
˙˙
64,44 for example, Śakra is overcome with sorrow when an heretical teacher
denies the existence of anyone in the universe who is capable of achiev-
ing perfect, full enlightenment. He searches the universe for such a being
and, with the help of Viśvakarman, locates the generous King Śibi and
decides to put him to the test. Once King Śibi has passed the test by giv-
ing away his fl esh, both Śakra and Viśvakarman are full of joy. Th ey off er
their respect and homage to the bodhisattva and express a wish for the
future that all beings might take refuge in the Buddha and attain the goal
of perfect enlightenment.
From a cosmological perspective, the specifi c quality of “generosity” is
almost irrelevant here. Instead, the primary concern of the test- by- Śakra
motif in this case seems to be to demonstrate the proper place of the
devas within a Buddhist universe and their relationship to the bodhisat-
tva: Th e devas, such a story suggests, are committed Buddhists. Th ey are
benevolent in nature and work for the welfare of the world by aiding the
bodhisattva in his progress toward Buddhahood—and despite the fact
that they are devas (while the bodhisattva is just a human being or even
an animal), they submit to his greater spiritual authority. Historically, we
might interpret such a story as part of the larger attempt Buddhist authors
undertook to integrate Buddhism into the wider Indic religious context
and make an argument for the Buddha’s superiority over traditional dei-
ties such as Śakra.
Śakra’s benevolent role in aiding the bodhisattva’s progress is by no
means devoid of some ambivalence, however. Perhaps most interesting of
all are those occasions on which Śakra is depicted as becoming anxious,
worried, or fearful when he learns of the existence of the bodhisattva and
69

conventions of plot
the perfection of his virtue and generosity. Th e reason for Śakra’s worry
has to do with the status of Śakrahood itself and how it is achieved. In
the Buddhist understanding, Śakra is not a unique and immortal being;
instead, the position of “Śakrahood” is a particularly high station of rebirth
achieved through virtuous, m erit-m aking deeds and inhabitable by any hu-
man being who exhibits suffi cient virtue. (Th is is why Śakra’s marble throne
begins to heat up every time a human being is excessively virtuous.)
Moreover, among the virtuous deeds that result in rebirth as Śakra,
generosity seems to occupy a prominent place. In the Sakkasamyutta of
˙
the Samyutta Nikāya, for example, we are told that Śakra was previously
˙
a human being who undertook seven vows “by the undertaking of which
he attained the position of Śakrahood,” and the fi fth of these vows was
to be “freely generous, open- handed, devoted to liberality, ready to give,
delighted in giving and sharing.”45 In the section of this text devoted
to Śakra’s epithets, moreover, we are told that Śakra is called Purindada
because in the past “he gave gifts in one city after another (pure pure),”
he is called Śakra (Pāli Sakka) because “he gave gifts respectfully (sakkac-
cham),” and he is called Vāsava because he once “gave a dwelling- place
(āvasatham)”;46 while in the commentary to the Dīgha Nikāya, Buddha-
ghosa tells us explicitly that “one attains the state of Śakrahood in this
world by giving gifts.”47
Śakra’s anxiety and worry over the generous bodhisattva are thus well
justifi ed, for if the bodhisattva continues to engage in abundant generosity,
he will be well on his way to usurping Śakra’s position. (In fact, according
to a passage in the An˙guttara Nikāya, the bodhisattva did indeed occupy the
position of Śakrahood a total of t hirty- six times throughout his career.)48
In some of our stories, Śakra’s fear of being displaced by the bodhisattva
becomes quite explicit. When the bodhisattva is born as a very generous
woman named Rūpāvatī, for example, one version of her story has Śakra
think to himself, “I fear that the woman Rūpāvatī might thus cause Śakra
to fall from his palace!”—while in another version he wonders: “Does
Rūpāvatī wish to expel me from the City of the Immortals and herself
assume sovereignty over the gods?”49 Similarly, a Chinese version of the
story of King Śibi’s gift of his fl esh (to ransom a dove) begins with a group
of devas and other supernatural beings discussing the fact that Śakra is
replaceable, whereupon Śakra becomes “fearful” that the virtuous King
Śibi might replace him.50 Later on in the story, Śakra sheepishly apologizes
to King Śibi, saying: “In my stupidity, I thought, O Great King, that you
wanted to take my place from me, and that’s why I harassed you.”51
70

conventions of plot
In many Hindu stories making use of this motif—that is, a deity’s posi-
tion being threatened by a virtuous human being—an ascetic’s extreme
power and virtue cause Śakra’s (or in Hinduism, Indra’s) marble throne to
heat up, and Śakra becomes worried lest the ascetic should displace him.
His response at this point often involves sending down a celestial nymph
to seduce the ascetic and diminish his ascetic power, thus circumventing
the threat to himself. In Indian Buddhist literature too we have at least
one example of a similar nature in the Alambusā Jātaka of the Pāli Jātaka
collection, in which Śakra, fearful of losing his position, sends the heavenly
nymph Alambusā down to earth to seduce the powerful ascetic Isisin˙ga,
who then loses his powers for three long years as he immerses himself in
sexual distraction.52 In the perpetual struggle between god and man, a god
must encourage an overly virtuous man’s downfall, lest the man become
so virtuous that he displace the god himself. But why, then, in our stories,
would Śakra decide to test the bodhisattva’s virtue by asking him for his
body? If his position is already threatened by the generous bodhisattva,
why would he give him the opportunity to engage in an even more mag-
nifi cent display of generosity?
One of the consistent features of the role played by the higher devas
within gift- of- the- body jātakas is that they seem to have a longer and wider
perspective on the bodhisattva’s gift of his body than do those of more
lowly status. While animals, human beings, and lower deities often lament
the terrible consequences of the gift, the higher devas generally express
celebration and joy because they understand the larger signifi cance of the
gift within the context of the bodhisattva’s career (perhaps by virtue of their
incredibly long lives and their witnessing of numerous bodhisattva- careers).
Śakra, too, falls into this pattern. Śakra clearly understands that the gift
of the body is not merely another gift that will move the bodhisattva ever
closer to usurping Śakra’s throne, but is instead the kind of deed that will
propel the bodhisattva on toward full Buddhahood and thus out of the
karmic race for Śakrahood altogether. In functional terms, encouraging
the bodhisattva to give away his body is no diff erent from sending down
a celestial nymph: while the latter protects Śakra’s position by kicking the
virtuous human back down the karmic ladder, the former protects Śakra’s
position by propelling the virtuous human on toward full Buddhahood
and thus out of the karmic hierarchy altogether. Th us Śakra tests the
bodhisattva not merely out of personal curiosity or for the welfare of the
world—though both elements are no doubt present—but also as a way
of defending his own position in the universe.
71

conventions of plot
Th is defensiveness and self- interest on the part of Śakra are never quite
made explicit within our stories, but are implicit in several elements of the
plot, taken together—his stated fear that the bodhisattva might displace
him, his decision to test the bodhisattva by asking him for his body, his
pleasure and satisfaction when the bodhisattva demonstrates a willingness
to give his body away, and his frequent predictions of the bodhisattva’s
future Buddhahood. Moreover, as I discuss in more detail in the next
chapter, Śakra often goads the bodhisattva into making a specifi c state-
ment of the motives underlying his gift—and in many cases this statement
includes an explicit denial of any desire for the status of Śakrahood. Th e gift
of the body in these stories is thus not merely an opportunity to illustrate
the bodhisattva’s perfection of generosity; it is also an agonistic contest be-
tween god and bodhisattva in which the god protects his own position in
the universe, while the man propels himself toward the ultimate position
of Buddhahood.
Th e relationship between Śakra and the bodhisattva in these stories is
complicated and constantly shifting. While Śakra is king of the gods and
the bodhisattva is just an ordinary human being (or even animal), Śakra
clearly understands that the bodhisattva is on a course that will ultimately
make him far superior not only to other human beings but to any god as
well. In testing the bodhisattva and asking him for his body, Śakra protects
his own position at the top of the karmic hierarchy and removes the bod-
hisattva as a threat, yet at the same time he acknowledges the bodhisattva’s
ultimate superiority and provides him with the opportunity to propel him-
self toward Buddhahood. Likewise, the bodhisattva is superior to Śakra and
rejects the kind of goal represented by Śakra’s position, yet he also depends
upon Śakra’s godly powers and intervention to make his leap out of the
karmic hierarchy. Śakra and the bodhisattva dance a complicated dance
of interdependence that ultimately illuminates the relationship between
the Buddha and the devas. Gift- of- the- body jātakas involving Śakra as
the recipient thus place the gift of the body within a larger cosmological
perspective balancing humans, gods, and Buddhas.53
Th e role that Śakra, as a higher deva, plays within these previous lives of
the Buddha continues on, of course, into his fi nal life as Prince Siddhārtha.
Th ough Prince Siddhārtha is the one who renounces the world, engages
in many years of religious striving, defeats Māra underneath the bodhi
tree, attains enlightenment, becomes a Buddha, and initiates the spread
of the dharma, he is aided at every step of the way by the intervention of
the devas. In Buddha-b iographies such as the Jātakanidāna, for example,
72

conventions of plot
when Prince Siddhārtha is living a hedonistic life of luxury within his
palace compound and has no exposure to suff ering, it is the gods who
engineer the Four Sights that will cause him to renounce the world. When
he decides to leave the world even though his father has locked him up
within the palace compound, it is the gods who cause the palace guards
to fall asleep, open the palace gates, and even hold up the hooves of his
horse so that his departure will go unnoticed. And when he fi nally attains
enlightenment but then hesitates to teach to others, it is the gods who
intervene and beg him to teach, thus assuring the spread of the dharma.
Th roughout the entire biography, we see the same complicated interde-
pendence and shifting hierarchies that we see in gift- of- the- body jātakas
involving Śakra: the Buddha is superior to the gods, yet he depends upon
the gods in order to become a Buddha; the gods are more powerful than
Prince Siddhārtha, yet they use their divine powers to help the lowly
human reach a status superior to any godhood. Gift- of- the- body jātakas
in which Śakra is the recipient thus fall into a larger category of stories
concerned with illuminating this complex relationship—quite apart from
their illustration of generosity.
imitable giving
Th e particular virtue of generosity, of course, does remain a predominant
theme. Yet even if we bracket the test- by- Śakra motif and consider these
stories purely from the perspective of the theme of generosity, it is clear
that they diff er signifi cantly in their illustration of generosity from stories
of the earlier type. We can see this diff erence most clearly, perhaps, when
we consider the physical restoration of the bodhisattva’s body and the
contradictory nature of the Act of Truth that brings it about. Th e Act of
Truth within these stories strikes us as inherently contradictory, for on the
one hand the bodhisattva asserts his perfect willingness to give his body
away, his joy in doing so, and his absolute lack of any regret, while on
the other the obvious purpose of the Act of Truth is to get his body back.
In chapter 5, I will address this contradiction in more detail; for now,
I simply observe that the extreme and uncompromising generosity so
characteristic of the stories discussed earlier is here signifi cantly defl ated
by the fact that, in these stories, the bodhisattva gets his body back. We
know from the Act of Truth that the bodhisattva’s generosity is perfect
and sincere, yet the illustration of this generosity cannot help but be af-
fected by the spectacle of the bodhisattva’s body being restored to perfect
73

conventions of plot
health. Instead of watching the bodhisattva suff er a tragic loss of life as a
result of giving the gift, here we watch him give the gift—only to see this
gift restored back to him in the end, often in a better and more powerful
form than before. Th e emphasis on perfect and one- sided generosity is
thus signifi cantly weakened.
Th is weakness in the illustration of generosity, however, is balanced by a
corresponding strength: the survival of the bodhisattva and the restoration
of his body allow these stories to emphasize the rewards of the gift much
more so than those stories in which the bodhisattva dies. Consequently,
although the bodhisattva’s gift itself remains extreme and inimitable in
nature, it often serves implicitly as a model for more ordinary types of
giving (such as the off ering of alms to monks) and the karmic rewards
they bestow. Th e ordinary Buddhist giver could not hope to imitate the
bodhisattva’s bodily sacrifi ce—and in that sense the bodhisattva is ex-
alted—but perhaps he or she can identify with the bodhisattva’s enjoyment
of giving’s rewards and thus be encouraged to engage in generosity of his
or her own. Th is identifi cation with the bodhisattva is reinforced on an
emotional level as well: the survival of the bodhisattva and the restoration
of his body give to these tales a much more joyful and celebratory tone
than those in which the bodhisattva dies—one that off ers the reader a
vicarious satisfaction and further motivates his or her own generosity. Th us,
in contrast to the highly idealized and extreme generosity characteristic
of the stories discussed earlier, stories involving Śakra as the recipient of
the gift present the virtue of generosity in a more palatable and accessible
form, one that appeals to the ordinary giver.
We might say, in other words, that in the balance between the saint’s
“imitability” and “otherness,” these gifts remain wholly “other” to the
ordinary giver—yet they begin to make a nod toward “imitability.” In
these stories the bodhisattva’s generosity is not merely the object of awe-
inspired worship and devotion, but also an appropriate object of imitation:
the ordinary reader, too, can give gifts generously and experience giving’s
many rewards. On the level of genre, moreover, it also follows that although
these stories remain “super- jātakas” that perfectly embody the ethos of the
jātaka, they do so in a manner that at least begins to form a bridge to the
ethos of the avadāna. In contrast to the stories discussed earlier, stories
featuring Śakra as the recipient begin to draw connections between the
bodhisattva’s “perfections” and the ordinary Buddhist’s “devotions”—be-
tween heroic bodily gifts and ordinary ritual off erings. Th ese ideas will be
treated at greater length in chapters 4 and 5, when I turn to a discussion
74

conventions of plot
table 1
Diff erences Between the Two Major Plotlines of the Gift- of- the- Body Genre
recipient of Ordinary being (pitiful or evil) Śakra- in- disguise
the gift
most common Bodhisattva dies Bodhisattva survives and restores
outcome of his body through an Act of Truth
the plot
type of giving Extraordinary giving Ordinary giving
quality Bodhisattva’s “otherness” Bodhisattva’s “imitability”
emphasized
appropriate Worship and devotion Direct imitation
response
JTAKA vs. “Super- jātaka” “Avadāna- like” jātaka
AVADNA ethos
of the Buddhist discourse on dāna. For now, I refer the reader to table
1, which summarizes the major distinctions I have enumerated between
these two major plotlines.
When the Gift Is Interrupted
So far I have enumerated the two major plotlines that are most charac-
teristic of the gift- of- the- body genre. In the fi rst plotline, the recipient of
the gift is an ordinary being, and the bodhisattva dies as a result of giving
the gift; in the second plotline, the recipient of the gift is the god Śakra
in disguise, and the bodhisattva survives the gift and restores his body
through an Act of Truth. In addition, I would also defi ne a third and
less common plotline. Th is plotline, which might make use of either an
ordinary being or the god Śakra as the recipient of the gift, is defi ned by
the single fact that the gift is not initiated once the bodhisattva’s willingness
to give has been established. Here the bodhisattva’s mere willingness to give
75

conventions of plot
performs the same function as the actual gift itself, and the bodhisattva
therefore neither needs to lose his life nor restore his body through an Act
of Truth. Th ese stories have a somewhat diff erent fl avor than the others,
since there is none of the usual emphasis on the mutilation of the body
or the pain undergone by the bodhisattva so characteristic of the types
described above. Nevertheless, some of the themes we have already seen
are also present here.
In some cases, the gift is not initiated because whoever was demand-
ing the gift or in need of the gift is so moved by the bodhisattva’s mere
willingness to give that he puts a stop to the gift before it is even begun.
Th e bodhisattva’s ability to cause this profound change of heart in the
recipient through the sheer magnitude of his virtue once again highlights
the extreme and uncompromising nature of the bodhisattva’s generosity, as
well as the awe- inspiring power and charisma he exerts over others. Th us
in Avadānaśataka 34 Śakra disguises himself as a brahmin and makes a
request for King Śibi’s eyes in order to test his generosity. In contrast to
other versions of the story, however, as soon as King Śibi demonstrates his
complete willingness to give—saying, “Take whatever you want, Great
Brahmin! Th ere is no obstacle here on my part!”54—Śakra puts a stop to
the test before the gift is even begun. In this case, it appears that the bodhi-
sattva’s mere verbalization of his willingness to give is so powerful that
Śakra becomes convinced of his generosity, and the physical gift itself then
becomes unnecessary. Th e bodhisattva’s resolve, in and of itself, has the
power to circumvent the test.
Th is power to bring about such a profound change of heart in the
recipient is especially strong, of course, in the case of those recipients I
have classifi ed as “evil.” In the traditional story of King Sarvamdada, for ex-
˙
ample, the bodhisattva is a virtuous and generous king named Sarvamdada
˙
(“All- Giving”) who fi rst loses his kingdom to an immoral, enemy king and
then off ers his own head to a wandering supplicant to bring to the enemy
king for a reward. Th is gift of Sarvamdada’s head is never completed,
˙
however, because the enemy king is so moved and profoundly shaken by
Sarvamdada’s generous intentions that he immediately gives up his im-
˙
moral ways and is converted wholly to the side of virtue. Various versions
of the Sarvamdada story take pains to convey the profound nature of the
˙
enemy king’s conversion. In Avadānasārasamuccaya 3, for example, when
the enemy king fi rst learns of Sarvamdada’s intention to off er up his own
˙
head, he “trembles with fear,” his mind is “overwhelmed by terror,” and he
wonders who this magnifi cent being might be.55 By the time he has come
76

conventions of plot
face to face with Sarvamdada himself, his moral conversion is complete.
˙
“O King,” he says to Sarvamdada,
˙
if one who is capable of gratifying his subjects deserves to be called a ‘king,’ then
you alone are a king, O T reasure-H ouse of Excellent Virtues! . . . Go rule over your
own city, just as you did before. We are intent on submitting to the authority of
someone like you. And please forgive us our deviation from proper conduct—for
one who has no eyes stumbles even when the ground is even.56
He “renounces the poison known as anger,”57 bows his head down at
Sarvamdada’s feet, and retreats to his own kingdom, where he becomes a
˙
virtuous ruler thereafter. In Kalpanāmanditikā 71, the situation is similar,
˙˙
with the enemy king confessing his “remorse” and chastising himself as
“an idiot and a fool, a conceited man deprived of intelligence.”58 In all
such cases, the bodhisattva’s mere intention to give aff ects the world around
him in powerful ways and has a lmost-m agical consequences upon others.
Th us, even though the gift itself never occurs, the spectacle of the gift is
replaced, in a sense, by the spectacle of the powerful moral eff ects the
bodhisattva’s generosity wields upon others.
In other cases, it is not the recipient of the gift who experiences such a
profound conversion, but the very universe itself. Th e gift is not completed,
in other words, because of some kind of magical or miraculous response
on the part of the cosmos. Th us in several diff erent versions of the hare
story the hare off ers his body to a brahmin supplicant (sometimes Śakra,
sometimes not) by throwing himself into a fi re, but the fi re refuses to
burn him. In Pāli Jātaka 316, the fi re is “unable to heat even as much as
the pores of the bodhisattva’s skin”;59 in Cariyāpitaka 1.10 the fi re becomes
˙
like “cool water relieving a fever”;60 and in a Chinese version of the story
the fi re itself is extinguished as soon as it touches the bodhisattva’s body.61
Likewise, in a Chinese story involving a mother swan who intends to feed
her own fl esh to her young during a drought, the cosmos itself responds
to this magnanimous intention by immediately showering down rain and
food, thus obviating the need for such a gift.62 In these cases, the physi-
cal universe itself seems to respond in powerful ways to the bodhisattva’s
intention. Th e spectacle of the gift is here replaced by the spectacle of the
universe’s response; the universe confi rms the bodhisattva’s generosity,
and the gift does not need to be completed. Th ese physical responses on
the part of the universe are ultimately equivalent to the moral changes of
heart discussed earlier: the universe, in a sense, becomes a moral character
77

conventions of plot
who is so moved by the bodhisattva’s intention that it puts a stop to the
gift before it is made.
Such dramatic interruptions of the gift, whether moral or cosmologi-
cal in nature, once again serve to underscore the enormous power of the
bodhisattva’s resolve, his essential diff erence from other beings, and his
status as an object of awe and devotion. In this sense, we might compare
such stories to those of the fi rst plotline I dealt with above, since both
plotlines engage in an extreme idealization of the bodhisattva. At the same
time, however, these stories also share something in common with the
second plotline I dealt with above, in terms of presenting a more palat-
able, accessible, and imitable model of generosity than one that results in
the giver’s death. For just as stories following the second plotline suggest
that you can give away a gift and later get it back (as long as your inten-
tions are pure), so stories following this third plotline seem to suggest that
perhaps you don’t really have to give away the gift at all (as long as your
intentions are pure). Stories in which the gift is interrupted thus seem to
combine the extreme idealization of the bodhisattva characteristic of the
fi rst plotline with the palatable and appealing model of generosity char-
acteristic of the second.
What, then, is the basic purpose of the noncompletion of the gift? If
we observe the simple fact that in all such stories the bodhisattva’s mere
willingness to give functions like the gift itself, and the need for an actual
gift is thus obviated, then perhaps the underlying purpose of such a
plotline is to draw a strict equivalence between the intention or volition to
give and the actual act of giving itself. Not only would this help to ensure
that aspiring bodhisattvas all over India were not throwing themselves
off mountains or jumping into fi res, but it also accords doctrinally with
many Buddhist defi nitions of dāna. Th e Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra, for
example, defi nes dāna as a “wholesome volition associated with the mind,”
and then adds that “certain people say that from this wholesome voli-
tion comes a bodily or vocal act which is also called dāna.”63 In a similar
manner, the Bodhicaryāvatāra says that the bodhisattva’s dāna- pāramitā
“is called such because of the intention to give everything one has to all
people, along with the fruit of the gift,” and then adds, “Th erefore, the
perfection is nothing other than this intention.”64 Such defi nitions give
primary emphasis to the intention behind the gift, and seem to include
the actual act of giving as a secondary element. Th is is in consonance,
of course, with Buddhism’s much- vaunted “ethic of intention” and the
78

conventions of plot
Buddha’s famous defi nition of action in the An˙guttara Nikāya: “O Monks,
I say that action is volition. Having made a volition, one acts by means
of body, speech, or mind.”65
Variations
In the above discussion I have enumerated the two “major” plotlines and
one “minor” plotline most characteristic of the gift-o f- the- body genre, as
well as elucidating the basic themes each plotline highlights. Th us I hope
to have shown that stories featuring ordinary beings as the recipients of
the gift promote a highly idealized and extreme generosity that invites a
response of worship and devotion; stories featuring Śakra as the recipient
of the gift temper this ideal and make it more accessible and “imitable”
by leaving space for the rewards of giving (as well as addressing other
concerns); and stories in which the gift is not completed draw a strict
equivalence between the intention or volition to give and the actual gift
itself.
Despite the usefulness of these categories, however, gift-o f- the- body
jātakas demonstrate an endless variety in creative detail, character, imag-
ery, and plot. Th e schema I have presented above cannot be treated too
mechanistically because there will always be individual stories that fail to
conform; indeed, there are probably almost as many exceptions as there
are stories that adhere to the expected patterns. My purpose in laying out
such a typology is not to designate certain plotlines as the only “accept-
able” alternatives, but rather to construct a basic interpretive framework
for the genre—one that is solidly based on the stories themselves, but also
one that helps us make sense of even those stories that fail to conform. I
would describe these plotlines as being interpretive in function rather than
classifi catory: in other words, rather than using them as boxes in which
to classify individual stories, I perceive them only as a well-g rounded
conceptual framework against which to interpret stories that may or may
not necessarily conform. In order to demonstrate this largely heuristic
function, I will conclude this chapter by looking at three such instances
of “failure to conform.” Th is enumeration is by no means exhaustive,
but is only intended to provide a range of representative examples and to
demonstrate the types of questions and answers that become possible by
constructing such a framework in the fi rst place.
79

conventions of plot
an unstable convention: the bodhisattva’s
restoration of his own body
I will begin with the case of an unstable convention—that is, a conven-
tion that is characteristic of one of the plotlines I enumerated above, but
that seems to be inherently unstable and is therefore frequently violated.
As we have seen, in those gift-o f- the- body jātakas involving the test-b y-
Śakra motif, it is generally the case that Śakra puts a stop to the test at
some point and encourages the bodhisattva to perform an Act of Truth,
which alone is responsible for restoring his body back to health. Narra-
tively speaking, this makes sense: if the purpose of the story is to test the
bodhisattva’s generosity, then the Act of Truth constitutes the “proof” we
need that this test has been successfully passed. For by means of the Act
of Truth, we know for certain that the bodhisattva’s generosity is genuine;
after all, if his claim to be perfectly generous were not true, then the Act of
Truth would fail and his body would not be restored—but since his body
is restored, we know for sure that this claim must be true. Restoring the
bodhisattva’s body in some other manner would clearly not have the same
proof- giving eff ect. Th is is emphasized for us, in fact, in a discussion from
the Milindapañha, for when King Milinda (the interlocutor in this text)
wonders how King Śibi’s eyes could be restored after being so completely
destroyed, the wise monk Nāgasena answers him by emphasizing the power
of the Act of Truth alone: “Th rough the power of the truth and without
any other cause, Great King, did that divine eye arise. Truth itself was the
cause, in this case, for the arising of the divine eye.”66
In spite of this narrative logic, however, the exclusive role of the Act
of Truth in restoring the bodhisattva’s body appears to be an inherently
unstable convention. In many stories, in fact, Śakra’s crucial role in encour-
aging the Act of Truth seems to result in some ambiguity about whether
Śakra might be partially responsible as well. Th us, in company with the Act
of Truth, Śakra sometimes tells the bodhisattva to “choose a boon” (which
suggests that he himself is granting the restoration); or the restored body
part is said to have been “given by Śakra”; or the Act of Truth is paired
with Śakra’s administration of supernatural medicines (which obscures
the true cause of the restoration).67 Finally, there are some stories in which
the Act of Truth is dispensed with completely, and it is Śakra himself (or
sometimes another divine being) who restores the bodhisattva’s body di-
rectly.68 In other words, although the genre as a whole ostensibly wishes
to show that the bodhisattva’s sincerity alone has the power to heal and
80

conventions of plot
restore his own body, individual stories consistently falter in this assertion
and imply that Śakra is partially or wholly responsible as well.
Why is this particular convention so unstable, resulting in frequent
deviations from the plotline one would normally expect? I noted before
that all stories involving the basic motif of bodily self- sacrifi ce should
ultimately be seen as one large and interweaving thematic group, and
that gift- of- the- body jātakas most likely have close connections to stories
of other types. In this case, in trying to explain why there is a consistent
tendency to give Śakra part or all of the responsibility for restoring the
bodhisattva’s body, I would perhaps point to Phyllis Granoff ’s discussion
of a large body of Indic stories (Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain) sharing a
common complex of ideas.69 Th e stories that conform to this pattern have
nothing to do with the virtue of generosity. Instead, all of them depict a
hero embarking on some kind of quest and having an agonistic encounter
with a god- in- disguise, in which the hero must show himself to be willing
to risk his life. He is ritually humbled, or wounded, or “killed” (some-
times symbolically, sometimes literally), and then restored to health and
given a new and purifi ed body by the deity himself. In an episode from the
Mahābhārata, for example, Arjuna goes on a quest to obtain some magical
weapons and the mantras that control them. His journey takes him into
the forest, where he encounters the god Śiva, disguised as a hunter. Śiva
and Arjuna fi ght; Arjuna loses the fi ght and is severely wounded. Śiva
then reveals his true identity and touches Arjuna’s body, whereupon “all
that was impure in Arjuna’s body was at once destroyed.”70 It is only then
that Arjuna is able to obtain the weapons and mantras he needs. Granoff
interprets such stories as being similar in structure to “rites of passage” (as
described by Arnold van Gennep and Victor Turner),71 in which the hero
is stripped of his personal identity through an agonistic encounter with
a deity- in- disguise, and then purifi ed, renewed, and transformed at the
hands of the deity himself.
Keeping this larger group of stories in mind, then, perhaps we could
speculate that gift- of-t he-b ody stories in which Śakra is the recipient either
play upon or derive from this traditional complex of ideas, but recast it in
terms of Śakra’s testing of the bodhisattva’s generosity. Many of the themes
seem quite similar—the hero on a quest (this time, for Buddhahood), the
god in disguise, the agonistic quality of the encounter, the hero’s willing-
ness to risk his life, and his ultimate renewal and restoration to health.
One could speculate, however, that because our stories adapt this com-
plex of ideas to illustrate the Buddhist virtue of dāna, they must shift
81

conventions of plot
responsibility for the restoration of the body from the god to the bo-
dhisattva’s own sincerity in giving the gift; however, as we have seen, they
sometimes fail to do so completely. On a grander scale, one might even try
to make the argument that a traditional Indic narrative or ritual pattern
has here been “Buddhicized” and / or “ethicized”—but the transformation,
in some cases, remains incomplete.
Determining whether this particular argument is valid, of course, would
require much more substantial evidence. Th e methodological point I am
making, however, is hopefully clear: Once we have an “expected” generic
framework against which to interpret our stories, minor deviations from
the expected plotline are fl agged, the inherent instability of certain generic
conventions becomes visible, and it then becomes possible to speculate
about the instability itself. Th e questions we ask and the answers we give
take shape only against the initial framework with which we begin.
Distorting the Plotline: Multiple Episodes of Bodily Giving
Another example of the failure to conform to an expected plotline oc-
curs in those stories that depict multiple episodes of bodily giving. Some
authors were not content to depict the bodhisattva making a single gift
of his body, but instead composed stories in which multiple gifts of the
body occur, and the bodhisattva seems to engage in an orgy of extreme
generosity. Rather than watching a single gift come into being and unfold
in the expected manner, such stories present us with a quick succession
of gifts that stretch and distort the characteristic plotlines—though not
beyond recognition.
Th us in Avadānaśataka 34 the familiar character of King Śibi performs
three such gifts in quick succession. First, he cuts open his body and allows
mosquitoes to feast on his blood. Before this episode can reach any kind
of resolution, however, the story proceeds onward to a second gruesome
episode, in which the deity Śakra, disguised as a vulture, receives permis-
sion to pluck out King Śibi’s eyes. Rather than revealing his true identity
and encouraging King Śibi to perform an Act of Truth, however, Śakra then
quickly dons yet another disguise, appearing as a brahmin supplicant who
requests these same eyes, whereupon King Śibi freely agrees to give them. It
is only when we get to this third and fi nal episode that one of our “expected”
outcomes occurs—in this case, what I have designated as the “minor plot-
line,” in which the gift is interrupted once the bodhisattva’s willingness to
82

conventions of plot
give has been established. Th ree episodes of bodily giving are thus related
within four short pages of text, with two of these episodes lacking any char-
acteristic outcome and the resolution of the story being delayed until the
last and fi nal gift. In stark contrast to a story such as Mahajjātakamālā 44,
which takes eighteen (much longer) pages to relate a single gift of King Śibi,
the reader here is clobbered with a quick succession of bodily gifts—nar-
ratively immersed in the relentless fl ow of the bodhisattva’s bodily sacrifi ces,
which only comes to a conclusion (and an expected resolution) with the
third and fi nal gift. Th e conventions of the gift-o f-t he-b ody genre are here
being stretched and manipulated in order to achieve a certain eff ect, and
the resulting experience for the reader is quite diff erent.
If we were to imagine this process being taken to its logical conclusion,
we might envision something like a gift- of- the- body “story” that has lost
all narrative structure and become nothing more than a relentless listing
of bodily gifts. It is interesting to note that as the Mahāyāna discourse
on the bodhisattva’s generosity becomes more and more hyperbolic and
extravagant in nature, we do indeed fi nd gift- of- the- body stories in the
Mahāyāna sūtras that tend in this direction. With their multiple episodes
of bodily sacrifi ce and their lack of characteristic plot outcomes, these
stories contain many of the traditional elements we might expect to fi nd
in a gift- of-t he-b ody story—such as generous donors, evil or pitiful re-
cipients, gifts of the body, and Acts of Truth—but their discourse seems
fundamentally diff erent. Th ey are less “narrative” in nature, less intelligible
as self-c ontained “stories” with defi nite plotlines, and more embedded
within the surrounding sūtra text.
In the fi fth chapter of the (Mahāyāna) Karunāpundarīka Sūtra, for ex-
˙ ˙˙
ample, there is a story involving the Buddha’s previous birth as a cakravartin
king named Ambara. But rather than focusing on a single gift of Ambara’s
body, this text inundates the reader with a veritable deluge of bodily gifts:
in quick succession, Ambara gives away to various recipients his feet, eyes,
ears, genitals, fl esh, blood, and hands. His ministers dump his mutilated
body into a charnel ground, where the remainder is devoured by fl ies,
mosquitoes, dogs, jackals, and vultures. He (or whatever is left of him)
then performs an Act of Truth that begins in a thoroughly conventional
manner but ends in such a way that the orgy of giving can continue:
If, when I gave up my whole body, with its major and minor limbs, and thereby
gave up all of my royal sovereignty, I did not feel regret for even a moment, nor
did I give rise to anger, then may my wish be fulfi lled: May this body of mine
83

conventions of plot
become a mountain of fl esh! May whatever beings have fl esh for food and blood
for drink come eat my fl esh and drink my blood. And, by the power of my vow,
may my body grow enough to accommodate as many beings as may eat my fl esh
and drink my blood, until it is a hundred thousand yojanas in height and fi ve
thousand yojanas in width!72
Once this occurs and he becomes a fl esh-m ountain, he continues to feed
beings his fl esh for a full one thousand years. He is then reborn as a
nāga-k ing who discovers and gives away “hundreds of thousands of mil-
lions of billions of t reasure- stores full of treasures,” during “seven hundred
thousand millions of billions of seven- year intervals,” and in universes
“equal in number to grains of sand in the Ganges River.”73 Th us the story
doesn’t so much come to a defi nitive conclusion as get lost in a cloud of
Mahāyāna hyperbole and seamlessly merge back into the surrounding
sūtra discourse.
Th e experience and eff ects of such a narrative are quite diff erent, of
course, from those of the traditional gift-o f- the- body jātaka. Instead of
allowing the reader to focus on a single gift and experience its unfolding
in a processual and emergent manner (as well as contemplate its possible
consequences on the surrounding world), this text hits the reader over the
head with an incessant wave of multiple bodily sacrifi ces described briefl y
and in quick succession, so that the language of the narrative as a whole
becomes almost numinous in nature. Nevertheless, individual elements
of the traditional plotlines are still recognizable, along with the manner
in which they have been reinterpreted.
Understanding the conventions of the gift- of- the- body genre might thus
help us to understand the nature of Mahāyāna discourse and the types
of adaptations Mahāyāna authors made to traditional Buddhist genres in
order to fulfi ll new ends. In fact, the manipulation of the gift-o f- the- body
genre in this instance might even be aligned with other such manipula-
tions characteristic of Mahāyāna discourse. Th e audience who listens to a
Mahāyāna sūtra, for example, is often described in a much more elaborate
and fantastical manner than the audience who listens to a Mainstream
sūtra—sometimes consisting of billions of bodhisattvas and celestial beings
spread out in multiple universes, rather than the standard 1,250 monks
gathered at Jetavana. Th e growth of the audience to such unimaginable
and inconceivable proportions is somewhat similar to the extension of the
gift- of- the- body theme from a single gift to an incessant wave of bodily
sacrifi ces that become diffi cult to keep track of or visualize. Taking both
84

conventions of plot
manipulations together, it then becomes possible to say something about
Mahāyāna discourse more generally—about its tendency toward excess and
hyperbole, perhaps, or its numinous use of language and imagery. Such
discussions become convincing, however, only when they are built upon
a solid understanding of the conventions of earlier genres.
Th e Individual Story: An Analysis of Jātakamālā 8
While the previous two discussions have focused on “anomalies” that are
common to more than one gift-o f- the-b ody story, I turn now to the case of
an individual story that fails to conform to the expected plotlines—most
likely for purely individual reasons. Every story is unique, of course, and
has its own internal logic and necessity—but once again I hope to dem-
onstrate that the conceptual framework I have constructed can serve as a
background against which this logic becomes illuminated.
Jātakamālā 8 relates the story of the virtuous King Maitrībala, who
slices up his own body on behalf of fi ve cruel and murderous yaksas who
˙
have begged him for food but are unsatisfi ed with anything less than hu-
man fl esh and blood. Because these yaksas constitute “evil recipients,” we
˙
might expect King Maitrībala to die as a result of making this gift. Th ese
expectations are subverted, however, when the god Śakra suddenly ap-
pears on the scene and praises his great generosity. However, rather than
encouraging him to perform an Act of Truth to restore his body—as we
might then expect—Śakra restores his body directly by applying natural
and supernatural medicines. Looked at purely in terms of plotline, then,
this story appears to be make use of elements common to several diff erent
types: the yaksas, as “evil” recipients, are characteristic of the fi rst plotline I
˙
discussed; Śakra’s sudden appearance on the scene, his formal praise of the
bodhisattva, and the bodhisattva’s survival and restoration of his body are
common to the second plotline I discussed; while the fact that it is Śakra
who restores the bodhisattva’s body (rather than the bodhisattva’s own Act
of Truth) is characteristic of the “unstable convention” I have described.
Rather than merely classifying each element of the story, however, it is also
possible to use our conventional plotlines as a framework against which
the logic of this individual story might be elucidated.
Th e fi rst thing to note is that a reading of the story as a whole makes
it clear that one of the major themes of this particular story is the illus-
tration of “good kingship” and the fundamental connection Buddhism
85

conventions of plot
posits between the virtue of the king and the prosperity and fl ourishing
of his kingdom. Th is theme is highlighted throughout the entire story.
At the beginning of the story, when the yaksas are fi rst introduced, we see
˙
them going around King Maitrībala’s kingdom, trying to sap the people of
their vital forces so they can devour their bodies for food. When they are
unsuccessful at weakening even a single person, however, they ask a simple
cowherd in the forest why the people of this kingdom are so invulnerable
to horrible, man- eating demons, whereupon the cowherd tells them that
the kingdom is protected by a “powerful good- luck charm”—the virtuous
King Maitrībala himself.74 As the cowherd explains, the virtue of the king
is like a physical force- shield that ensures the prosperity of the kingdom
and the robust health of its citizens:
Th e power of our great king derives from his own noble character. . . . His power
is nothing other than his benevolence—and his army, with its colorful fl ags, is
merely a matter of traditional custom. He has never experienced anger, and he
is incapable of speaking harshly. He rules the earth in a proper manner, and the
dharma he follows is one of good governance, not deceitful statecraft. . . . Our
Lord is endowed with hundreds of virtues such as these, and this is why no mis-
fortune could ever affl ict the people who live in his realm.75
It is this information that makes the yaksas decide that they should simply
˙
ask King Maitrībala for his own fl esh and blood—hoping, in one fell
swoop, to both satiate their immediate hunger and destroy the protective
“good- luck charm” that prevents them from getting more food.
With this initial opening, it becomes clear that one of the purposes
of this particular story will be to illustrate what “good kingship” is (from
the Buddhist perspective) and to demonstrate its benefi cial consequences.
Th e gift-o f-t he-b ody theme is clearly subordinated to this end, for once the
yaksas have requested the king’s fl esh and blood, the lengthy arguments that
˙
occur between Maitrībala and his ministers are really arguments about
the nature of “good kingship.” While Maitrībala’s ministers repeatedly ad-
vance the basic dharmaśāstric argument that the king has a duty to serve
the entire kingdom and should therefore not sacrifi ce his life merely for the
sake of a few hungry demons, the story has Maitrībala put forth a more
typically Buddhist view: the king is a moral exemplar, and the virtue of
the entire kingdom is dependent, fi rst and foremost, upon the virtue of
the king himself. “Being your leader in matters of dharma and the law,” he
tells his ministers, “if I myself were to take the wrong course [of action],
86

conventions of plot
what would be the condition of my subjects, who would follow my path
of conduct? Th erefore, it is in consideration of my subjects themselves
[that I am giving away my body].”76 Th us, in sharp contrast to the Hindu
political discourse on nīti and arthaśāstra, with its paramount concern
with political expediency, this story wishes to argue that a king who gives
his body to a few cannibalistic demons out of perfect generosity is indeed
the best king of all—and not merely for himself and his own progress as a
bodhisattva, but for the worldly prosperity of his kingdom as well.77 In this
Buddhist view of ideal kingship, the moral virtue of the king is paramount
and serves as the very fountainhead of the kingdom’s prosperity.
In this situation, it is, of course, impossible to have King Maitrībala die
as a result of making his gift, for if he were to die his kingdom would be left
leaderless and all the worst fears of his ministers proven correct. In order to
demonstrate that the bodhisattva’s compassion and self-s acrifi ce on behalf
of the lowliest of creatures is also the best possible policy for the worldly
welfare of his kingdom, King Maitrībala must survive and prosper, and the
story must have a positive resolution. Th us it is no surprise that the story
ends with the deity Śakra quite suddenly appearing on the scene, praising
the king’s excellent conduct, and using various supernatural medicines that
instantly heal his wounds and restore his body to its former condition. It
is only in this way that Maitrībala’s virtuous deeds can be justifi ed as an
appropriate manifestation of good kingship. Th us, in spite of the presence
of the yaksas as “evil recipients,” it is essential for the bodhisattva to survive
˙
this gift and prosper, rather than suff er a tragic death.
On the other hand, if one asks why the story didn’t simply make Śakra
the recipient of the gift—which might more easily have ensured the king’s
survival—this, too, it seems to me, can be explained by the emphasis on
good kingship. It is the good king’s ability to show compassion for everyone
(including the unworthiest of beings) and still be an eff ective leader that
is at stake here, not merely his ability to pass some deity’s test. In order
to demonstrate that generosity toward the lowly really can be reconciled
with eff ective political leadership, the request for the king’s body must be
real and not just a deity’s ruse. Th e recipients of the gift must therefore
be ordinary, lowly beings—the more evil, the better—and not simply a
curious deity undertaking an elaborate deception. For if the entire gift were
nothing more than Śakra’s trick, the viability of compassionate Buddhist
kingship would not truly be tested.
Depicting the yaksas as “evil” recipients is useful to the story in another
˙
way as well. Th roughout the Buddhist discourse on good kingship, a
87

conventions of plot
consistent emphasis is placed on the manner in which the king’s virtue
leads inexorably to the virtue of those around him. In the present case this
theme is reinforced by having the yaksas be “evil” recipients, for the story
˙
is then able to depict the dramatic moral conversion they undergo upon
receiving the king’s fl esh. In fact, when faced with the king’s willingness to
give up his very life, these formerly murderous yaksas become “completely
˙
serene and full of wonder”; they beg for the king’s forgiveness and ask him
to give them a command, whereupon he orders them to “avoid, as if they
were poison, injury to others, greed for their wives or possessions, vile
speech, and the sin of drunkenness.”78 Th e story thus demonstrates that
not only did the king’s extreme generosity not result in his death and loss
to the kingdom, but in fact it even protected the kingdom forever after
from the further incursions of these murderous yaksas. Th e power of the
˙
king’s virtue to spread to those around him and thus ensure the prosperity
of his kingdom is dependent upon the yaksas being “evil recipients.”
˙
Finally, if one asks why the story depicts Śakra magically restoring the
king’s body rather than having the king himself perform an Act of Truth,
I would argue that this again makes sense within the context of the “good
kingship” theme. Since this particular story is really more concerned with
justifying the ideal of compassionate Buddhist kingship than it is with
underscoring the bodhisattva’s “perfect generosity,” there is less of a need,
perhaps, to focus so explicitly (as the Act of Truth does) on the purity of
the king’s generosity. Th e Act of Truth can thus be sacrifi ced in favor of
an element that here makes better narrative sense: Śakra, the king of the
devas, suddenly appears on the scene, praises King Maitrībala’s conduct,
and magically restores his body. Th e ideal of compassionate Buddhist
kingship embodied by the human king Maitrībala is thus dramatically
confi rmed and validated by the king of the gods himself.
Every element of the story, then, makes a positive contribution to the
story’s paramount concern with illustrating the viability of compassionate
Buddhist kingship. In analyzing this story against the background of our
“conventional plotlines,” however, I do not wish to convey the impression
of an author who consciously lays these plotlines out before him and then
selectively chooses elements in order to achieve a certain eff ect. Instead,
my argument throughout this chapter is simply this: looking closely at a
body of related texts that strike one as belonging to a single genre and then
uncovering that which a reader experiences as the standard conventions
of this genre allows us to construct a coherent world of meaning against
which the details of an individual story suddenly become signifi cant—and
88

conventions of plot
gives us a language in which to ask meaningful questions about a narra-
tive and off er persuasive arguments as to why it has been constructed in a
particular way. It is a way of diving—from a distant time and place—into
the “pool of signifi ers” historical writers and readers perhaps swam in with
little conscious eff ort.
89

iii
CONVENTIONS OF RHETORIC
A
s we saw in the previous chapter, gift-o f-t he-b ody jātakas show
signifi cant variations in plotline, with each conventional plotline
emphasizing diff erent themes and allowing diff erent concerns to
be brought to the fore. Nevertheless, the unity of the genre is ensured by
the fact that all such tales share in common the central theme of the bo-
dhisattva’s gift of his body and the rhetoric surrounding this gift. Whether
or not the gift is completed, whether or not the bodhisattva dies in the
process, and regardless of who the recipient is, certain aspects of the rhetoric
or argumentation remain the same: the bodhisattva wishes to give away
his body, other characters oppose this wish, arguments for and against the
gift are provided, a resolution is reached, and in every case, the point is
ultimately made that the bodhisattva’s intention was good, true, and right
all along, while those who opposed his intention were wrong. Th roughout
the story, there is a dialectical push-a nd-p ull between the bodhisattva and
those who oppose him—between the drive to complete the gift and the
drive to stop it—that always resolves itself by demonstrating the rightness
of the bodhisattva’s intention (even in those cases in which the gift is not
ultimately made). A distinction might be drawn here between plot and
90

conventions of rhetoric
rhetoric: stories showing signifi cant variations in plot nevertheless share
in common the same basic rhetoric.
Th is chapter seeks to elucidate the conventions of rhetoric characteristic
of the gift-o f-t he-b ody genre. It proceeds in the following manner. I fi rst
off er a brief, holistic interpretation of the genre’s basic rhetoric—that is, an
argument about what the genre wishes to persuade us of and how it goes
about doing so. Using this discussion as a framework, I then go back and
look in more detail at how this “power to persuade” proceeds throughout
the course of the story, focusing especially on particular types of characters
and the roles they play within this rhetoric.
Confl ict and Resolution
Th e rhetoric of the gift-o f- the- body genre is organized, I contend, around
confl ict and resolution—that is, the positing of a fundamental confl ict and
some attempt at its eventual resolution. In order to understand both the na-
ture of this confl ict and the possibilities of its resolution, it is fi rst necessary
to consider what the character of the bodhisattva stands for—and what
happens when this character is immersed within a narrative setting.
As I will demonstrate in more detail in chapter 5, the bodhisattva’s gift
of his body is frequently described in Indian Buddhist literature as the
most extreme manifestation possible of the virtue of dāna (generosity)
and the paradigmatic example or fullest embodiment of dāna- pāramitā
(the “perfection of generosity”). Th e bodhisattva who engages in a gift of
the body thus constitutes a human (or anthropomorphic) embodiment of
the abstract Buddhist ideal of dāna or dāna- pāramitā. Accordingly, he does
not strike one as a fully- rounded or “realistic” character; instead, he is a
highly idealized stereotype of virtue with whom the reader has diffi culty
identifying, and his major purpose is to embody the ideal of dāna in a
wholly uncompromising way. Indeed, the statements made about the bod-
hisattva by the narrative voice of the text, the way in which the bodhisattva
speaks and acts throughout the story, and other conventions surrounding
the bodhisattva are generally in close agreement with the abstract ideal of
dāna discussed within exegetical and philosophical literature.
Th e diff erence between the bodhisattva and the abstract ideal, however,
is that while the abstract ideal may exist in isolation, the bodhisattva must
embody this ideal as a human or animal character acting within a semi-
realistic narrative setting, where he is surrounded by other characters who
91

conventions of rhetoric
react to his thoughts and deeds, as well as a physical universe potentially
aff ected by the various consequences of his actions. Th is, it seems to me, is
precisely the point: the basic rhetorical purpose of gift- of- the- body stories,
I contend, is to provide a concrete manifestation of an abstract Buddhist
ideal, locating this ideal within a dramatic character and allowing it to un-
fold within a recognizable human context replete with personal and social
consequences. In contrast to many philosophical and technical discussions
of dāna, then, these depictions often lay particular emphasis upon both
the bodhisattva’s diffi culties in executing the ideal and the community’s
ambivalence toward it. Th e opposition and confl ict surrounding the ideal
must be depicted and worked out.
Th e primary confl ict depicted within gift- of-t he-b ody stories consists of
the obvious and inevitable clash that occurs between the abstract impera-
tive of dāna and the value systems of everyday life—between the univer-
salistic demands of “perfect generosity” and the particularistic claims of
family, community, and kingdom. Th e dāna of the bodhisattva, one must
remember, is not just ordinary, everday dāna, but rather dāna- pāramitā, the
“perfection” of generosity, or (using the traditional etymology of pāramitā)
dāna that has “gone to the other shore,” been taken to its utmost limit,
followed through to its logical conclusion—in other words, dāna as an
absolute and transcendent value that brooks no concession or compro-
mise. While this absolute imperative of dāna dictates that the bodhisattva
should give to any recipient whatever gift that recipient requests, this gift
is consistently portrayed as confl icting with the bodhisattva’s social and
familial obligations. Gift-o f-t he-b ody stories do not shy away from this
confl ict; instead, they confront it directly.
Certain types of characters (whom I refer to as opposers) tradition-
ally play the role of exposing such confl ict and vigorously opposing the
bodhisattva’s intention to give, employing a variety of non- Buddhist (often
Hindu dharmaśāstric) and general Indic cultural viewpoints that openly
confl ict with the Buddhist ideal of dāna in its more extreme forms. While
the logic of such stories always assumes from the very beginning that such
characters will never succeed in persuading the bodhisattva to refrain, they
are often given ample opportunity to voice their concerns and make their
arguments. Th e concerns and doubts they express about the gift constitute
a multitude of competing voices and show that the ideal of dāna promoted
by gift- of- the- body stories was by no means presumed to be self-e vident.
In fact, it is a basic feature of the genre that because the bodhisattva is
such a static embodiment of virtue, it is his opposers with whom the reader
92

conventions of rhetoric
is most likely to identify, and the utter reasonableness of their arguments
that are perhaps most likely to persuade.
Ultimately, however, this confl ict between the transcendent Buddhist
values embodied by the bodhisattva and the everyday, pragmatic concerns
embodied by those who oppose him must reach some sort of resolution
in favor of the bodhisattva’s point of view. Th us no matter how much
resistance and opposition to the gift might be depicted, the bodhisattva
is always allowed to answer his opposers, in many cases putting forth
detailed counterarguments in favor of the gift and persuading them of
the correctness of his conduct. Ethical argument alone is not enough,
however—particularly when it pertains to transcendent values whose cor-
rectness and justifi ability are far less obvious than the more immediate
objections raised by the opposers1—and it is here that we see one of the
strengths of the narrative form, for in some cases the story itself must at-
tempt to persuade where ethical arguments fail to do so.
Th us no matter how much pain and tragedy is involved in making
the gift, the bodhisattva’s conduct is always ultimately vindicated by the
outcome of the story: Sometimes, the bodhisattva’s mere willingness to
give melts the heart of the recipient, so that the gift does not have to be
made, and the recipient is no longer a danger. Sometimes, the gift is made
and the bodhisattva dies, but he is often reborn in heaven and leaves
behind something of signifi cant worth (such as relics or caityas)—and
his opposers too usually gain an understanding of the larger signifi cance
of the gift in terms of its contribution to perfect Buddhahood. In those
stories involving Śakra, Śakra either reveals his identity and puts a stop to
the test before the gift is made, or he reveals his identity after the gift is
made and then helps the bodhisattva restore his body by performing an
Act of Truth. And in all cases, the bodhisattva’s sincere show of generos-
ity sets a moral example and induces others to do good. Th e outcome
of the story, no matter how tragic, is never one of chaos, misfortune, or
misery. By employing such stock “happy endings,” gift- of-t he-b ody stories
suggest that the seeming confl ict between dāna and other obligations is
only illusory and results from a limited perspective. Appeal is made to a
kind of overarching Buddhist cosmic and moral order that encompasses
and overrides all narrower and more limited realms of interest, such that
adherence to even the most extreme Buddhist ideals ultimately results in
the greatest benefi t for everyone.2
Th e degree and tidiness of this resolution vary, however, from one story
to another, and once again we can point to some general diff erences
93

conventions of rhetoric
between our three most typical plotlines. Stories featuring ordinary be-
ings as the recipients of the gift and resulting in the bodhisattva’s tragic
loss of life on behalf of those who are pitiful or evil tend to off er the least
satisfactory resolution. Because of the bodhisattva’s tragic death and the
grief and sadness of those he leaves behind, the absolute confl ict between
transcendent and pragmatic values initially posed by the gift is often al-
lowed to hang numinously in the air, despite perfunctory and pro forma
statements of its resolution. Th is, I contend, is fully intentional. It is in
keeping, once again, with the status of these stories as the paradigmatic
example of the “super- jātaka,” and the way in which the super- jātaka
highlights the extraordinary nature of the bodhisattva, invites a response
of awe, worship, and devotion, and makes little attempt to relate the heroic
deeds of the bodhisattva to the everyday actions of ordinary Buddhists.
In contrast, stories in which Śakra is the recipient of the gift and the
bodhisattva restores his body by performing an Act of Truth off er a greater
degree of resolution—not merely because the bodhisattva survives the gift,
but also because the very notion of giving the gift and then getting it back
provides the reader with a concrete image of the confl ict’s resolution: the
bodhisattva wants to give his body away, his opposers want him to keep
his body, and the point is ultimately made that if he gives it away with
utter sincerity, he will get to keep it as well. Th e universalistic demands of
perfect generosity and the particularistic demands of family, community,
and kingdom are thereby brought together through the give-a nd-g et-b ack
movement of the gift. Th e character of Śakra also plays a crucial role in
the development of this resolution. Śakra, I believe, constitutes a kind of
mediator between the Buddhist values of the bodhisattva and the everyday,
worldly values of his opposers. As king of the gods, Śakra stands at the
apex of the everyday world. Śakra’s test of the bodhisattva thus constitutes
a direct contest between worldly values and the Buddhist ideal. When the
bodhisattva passes this test and Śakra must acknowledge his superiority,
the Buddhist ideal is fully justifi ed even from the worldly perspective most
fully embodied by Śakra. Moreover, as I will demonstrate further below, the
character of Śakra fulfi lls a number of “discursive functions” throughout
the narrative that help to develop this resolution in a gradual manner and
allow the reader to experience it dialectically. Again, all of this is in keeping
with the status of these stories as “super-j ātakas” that nevertheless begin
to form a bridge to the ethos of the avadāna—compromising the “perfec-
tion” of generosity just enough to make the bodhisattva’s heroic deeds of
94

conventions of rhetoric
self- sacrifi ce in the past relatable to the ordinary Buddhist’s actions and
motivations in the present.
Finally, stories in which the gift is interrupted by either dramatic moral
conversions on the part of the recipients or cosmic reactions on the part of
the universe seem to go so far in resolving the confl ict that they perhaps
abort it rather than truly resolving it. On the one hand, the confl ict be-
tween the bodhisattva and his opposers does reach some sort of resolution;
on the other hand, because the gift itself is not depicted and the need to
make the gift simply evaporates, this “resolution” seems to occur all too
easily, and the mental “work” of resolution on the part of the reader is
somehow absent. As a result, stories that follow this pattern strike the
modern reader at least as the most didactic and unrealistic in nature.
However, because these stories are presumably arguing that the intention
to give is equivalent to the gift itself, perhaps it makes sense that the gift’s
supposed confl ict with more pragmatic and worldly concerns would not
require such elaborate resolution. Developing this resolution through the
narrative can thus be sacrifi ced in favor of other ends.
Th e gift-o f-t he-b ody genre as a whole thus posits a fundamental con-
fl ict between the transcendent Buddhist ideal of dāna- pāramitā and the
more pragmatic value systems of everyday life, with each of the three
conventional plotlines resolving this confl ict in diff erent ways. In placing
the three plotlines along a continuum running from “least” to “great-
est” resolution of the confl ict, however, I want to emphasize that the
terms “least” and “greatest” suggest nothing whatsoever about the relative
“success” or “failure” of a particular story. A story off ering the “greatest”
resolution is not necessarily the most “successful” story—nor does one
off ering the “least” resolution represent any kind of “failure.” Instead, the
intentional manipulation of confl ict and resolution on the level of each
individual story allows for the achievement of diff erent eff ects, messages,
and reading experiences across the genre as a whole—a way of gradually
working out and thinking through the diffi culties of the confl ict and
the possibilities (or impossibilities) of its resolution. Th us all gift-o f- the-
body stories are concerned with positing the confl ict and then resolving
it, but they make very diff erent choices about how starkly to depict the
initial confl ict and how tidily to portray its resolution. Some stories are
highly idealistic and propagandistic in nature, going out of their way to
convince their readers of the ease and tidiness of Buddhist ideology’s ac-
commodation with the everyday world—while other stories are far more
95

conventions of rhetoric
ambivalent. Moral ambiguity, multivalence, irony, and subversion are all
present, and rather than reducing all texts of the genre to a simple (and
simplistic) judgment—i.e., “Th ese are nice, happy, didactic stories that
promote the virtue of dāna”—any serious attention to Buddhist narra-
tive must recognize this complexity and diversity. I follow Steven Collins
here in invoking the “off ensiveness” of Buddhist ideology—indeed, of all
transcendentalist ideologies—or the manner in which such ideologies af-
front and off end against the ordinary concerns of everyday human life and
community.3 Buddhist authors were fully aware of this “off ensiveness,”
and they grappled with it in sophisticated and creative ways.
Despite the complex and open- ended nature of this process, however,
I also follow Collins in pointing to the importance of the concept of nir-
vana—or in our case, the concept of full and perfect Buddhahood—in
acting as a syntactical marker of closure within the world of Buddhist narra-
tive, particularly within the world imagined by the jātakas.4 In other words,
the jātaka genre, by its very defi nition (and whether or not this is made
explicit), presupposes as its fi nal teleological end point the bodhisattva’s
achievement of perfect Buddhahood. Th is end point, or “marker of clo-
sure,” is always in the background and serves in some sense as an ultimate
justifi cation for whatever happens within the jātaka itself (should more
mundane forms of justifi cation fail to satisfy). In fact, I believe that it is
precisely because of the implicit presence of this end point—Buddhahood
as a presupposed Ultimate Good—that the gift- of-t he-b ody genre becomes
free to acknowledge (in some cases, to emphasize) the intractable diffi cul-
ties posed by “perfect generosity”: Is perfect generosity really everything it’s
cracked up to be? Th e image of a highly beloved fi gure taking a knife to his
own fl esh amidst the cries and protestations of those around him poses
this question in the starkest possible manner, and the understood teleo-
logical end point of perfect Buddhahood allows for enormous creativity
and freedom in suggesting a possible answer.
By the same token, however, if the ambivalence toward perfect dāna
such stories sometimes display is ultimately made possible by the under-
stood end point and summum bonum of perfect Buddhahood, then the
reverse is perhaps equally true: the value of perfect Buddhahood itself
depends upon the messiness in which it is sometimes immersed. Ultimate
goals and universal ethical ideals are nothing more than cold and life-
less abstractions unless they are imaginatively placed within a world that
matters to us; they are meaningless unless they are forced to grapple with
96

conventions of rhetoric
the particular—and it is narrative that does this most eff ectively. Th is
dependence of the universal upon the particular has been nicely stated by
Alasdair MacIntyre in the following terms:
Th e fact that the self has to fi nd its moral identity in and through its member-
ship in communities such as those of the family, the neighborhood, the city, and
the tribe does not entail that the self has to accept the moral limitations of the
particularity of those forms of community. Without those moral particularities to
begin from there would never be anywhere to begin; but it is in moving forward
from such particularity that the search for the good, for the universal, consists.5
Th is point was recognized by the Buddhist authors of gift- of- the- body
tales, and its implications were explored within the world most amenable
to such exploration—the imaginative world of the story.
In what follows, I hope to fl esh out the interpretation I have off ered
above through a closer consideration of the conventional characters of
gift- of- the- body stories and the roles they play within this rhetoric.
Th e Bodhisattva and His Motive
One way to bolster the claim that the bodhisattva within gift-o f- the- body
stories represents a perfect anthropomorphic embodiment of the abstract
Buddhist ideal of dāna is by looking at the conventions used to depict him
and the manner in which these conventions tend to be in close agreement
with systematic and philosophical discussions of dāna found, for example,
in exegetical (rather than narrative) texts. Although there are several diff er-
ent conventions that might be used for this purpose, I will here focus on
only one—the statements made by the bodhisattva concerning his motive
in giving the gift: what is the motive behind the gift, and what does the
bodhisattva hope to accomplish by means of the gift?
Statements made by the bodhisattva in answer to these questions vary
widely from story to story; in some stories, he barely mentions his motives
at all, whereas in other stories (particularly from later texts), he may go on
for several pages. Such statements form a large and heterogenous group and
diff er widely from one story to the next. However, there is also a smaller
group of statements that are formalistic (and often ritualistic) in nature,
conventional across a range of stories, and immediately recognizable as a
97

conventions of rhetoric
group, employing the same phrases and ideas over and over again. Th ese
statements constitute one of the conventions associated with the bodhisat-
tva and indicating his ideal nature as a perfect embodiment of dāna. Th ey
may be loosely divided into four diff erent patterns of increasing complexity,
which can be represented formulaically as follows:
1. Simple Vows (often explicitly referred to as pranidhāna or pranidhi): “By means
˙ ˙
of this gift, let A- B- C occur.”
2. Statements of Motive (stated positively, negatively, or both): “I give this gift only
for the sake of A-B -C ” (positive); “I do not give this gift for the sake of X-Y -Z”
(negative); “I do not give this gift for the sake of X-Y -Z , but only for the sake
of A- B- C” (positive and negative).
3. Vows including Statements of Motive: “I do not give this gift for the sake of X-Y -Z ,
but only for the sake of A- B- C, and by means of this gift, let A- B- C occur.”
4. Vows including Statements of Motive and formulated as Acts of Truth (sometimes
explicitly referred to as satyakriyā, satyādhisthāna, or some equivalent expression):
˙˙
“I do not give this gift for the sake of X-Y -Z , but only for the sake of A-B -C ,
and if this is true, then by means of this gift, let A- B- C occur.”6
While these patterns, as I have stated them, are somewhat artifi cial, and
not all such statements will match up perfectly with one of these catego-
ries, nevertheless there is a signifi cant group of immediately recognizable,
formalistic statements that conform in a general way to these four basic
patterns. Individual statements may be more or less elaborate, more or less
complete, yet they all share a certain “family resemblance” that recalls them
mutually to mind. Let us look at a few examples of diff erent types:
(Simple Vow) By the gift of my head, may I quickly attain enlightenment!7
(Simple Vow) [By means of this gift,] may I become a Buddha in this blind
world, without leader and without guide. May I ferry across those who have not
crossed, may I liberate those who are not liberated, may I console those who are
despondent, and may I bring to complete nirvana those who have not attained
complete nirvana!8
(Statement of Motive [negative]) I do not give this [gift] for the sake of glory, nor
do I desire sons or wealth or kingdoms.9
98

conventions of rhetoric
(Statement of Motive [negative and positive]) [By means of this gift,] there is noth-
ing I wish to obtain in this world. Rather, having benefi ted all beings, I strive to
obtain unsurpassed, perfect, full enlightenment.10
(Statement of Motive [negative and positive]) If I sacrifi ce my body, it is not in order
to win riches, nor for sensual pleasure, nor for the love of my wife, children, or
relations. What I covet is enlightenment, so that I can procure the welfare of all
beings.11
(Statement of Motive [negative and positive]) Th e merit that I obtain from giving
my head to you is not for the sake of [acquiring rebirth as] a Māra, a Brahmā, a
Śakra, or a Cakravartin, nor because I desire the pleasures and enjoyments of the
three worlds. Rather, I do this [only] because I wish to attain unsurpassed, perfect,
full enlightenment, and to rescue all beings and establish them in nirvana.12
(Vow including a Statement of Motive [negative and positive]) O Kauśika, by means
of this gift of my own body, I do not wish to become a Śakra, a Māra, a Brahmā,
or a World-P rotector, nor for rebirth in heaven, nor for the kingship of a Cakra-
vartin, nor for any other human kingship. Rather, by means of this [gift], may
I attain unsurpassed, perfect, full enlightenment! May I ferry across those who
have not crossed, may I liberate those who are not liberated, may I console those
who are despondent, and may I bring to complete nirvana those who have not
attained complete nirvana! Th is is what I want.13
(Vow including a Statement of Motive [negative and positive]) Th is is not an at-
tempt to win for myself a happy destiny, or the royal majesty of a universal king,
or heaven with its singularly excellent joys, or even the bliss of liberation. But
by whatever merit I may gain from wanting to rescue these people immersed in
the wilderness, may I become the savior of the world, which is immersed in the
wilderness of samsara!14
(Vow including a Statement of Motive [negative and positive] and formulated as an
Act of Truth) I am making a gift—an extraordinary gift, a gift exceeding all other
gifts, a sacrifi ce of my own throat! But I make this sacrifi ce not for the sake of
kingship, not for the sake of wealth, not to become Śakra, not to acquire the ter-
ritories of kings and Cakravartins, and how much less for anything else! Rather,
when I have awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, full enlightenment, may I tame
those who are untamed, ferry across those who have not crossed, liberate those
99

conventions of rhetoric
who are not liberated, comfort those who are despondent, and bring to complete
nirvana those who have not attained complete nirvana. By these true words of
truth, may my sacrifi ce bear fruit!15
(Vow including a Statement of Motive [negative and positive] and formulated as an
Act of Truth) I go to this trouble not out of ambition, nor out of a desire for fame,
heaven, or kingship, nor even [to attain] perfect bliss for myself. On the contrary,
I do this only in order to benefi t others. As this is true, may I forever have the
power to remove the world’s suff ering and simultaneously give it happiness and
prosperity, just as the sun has the power to remove darkness and give off light.16
Examining these four patterns, it is clear that all such statements are
concerned with the denial of unacceptable motives for the gift (X- Y- Z) and
the affi rmation of acceptable motives for the gift (A- B- C). Th e constant
and repetitive invocation of the same items for A- B- C and X- Y- Z is what
gives to these statements their conventional quality. What, then, are these
“acceptable” and “unacceptable” motives, and what do they tell us about
the bodhisattva?
Th e unacceptable motives denied by the bodhisattva are stereotypical
in nature and include three basic types of inappropriate desire: the desire
for a high karmic station (such as kingship, Cakravartinhood, devahood,
Śakrahood, Mārahood, or Brahmāhood), the desire for the rewards of such
high stations (such as kingdoms, wealth, glory, sensual pleasures, sons, or
family), and the desire for individual tranquility, fi nal emancipation, or
fi nal bliss. “Unacceptable motives” for the gift thus include all worldly
and heavenly goals, all karmic goals, and even individual nirvanic goals
that do not include a consideration of the welfare of others. Th e acceptable
motives affi rmed by the bodhisattva are overwhelmingly limited to two: the
desire for omniscience or enlightenment or Buddhahood, and the desire
to help beings, rescue beings, work for the welfare of the world, and so
forth. Particularly clever in this regard is the bodhisattva’s statement in
Jātakamālā 1 that he gives the gift only parārthasiddheh—a phrase which,
˙
as Speyer has pointed out, can be interpreted as either “in order to benefi t
others” or “to attain the highest goal [of Buddhahood],” thus suggesting
both “acceptable motives” within the same phrase.17
Th ese “acceptable” and “unacceptable” motives invoked by the bodhi-
sattva have not been chosen at random; in fact, they accord very closely
with those hierarchical classifi cations of diff erent types of dāna based on
the motive behind the gift found throughout Mainstream and Mahāyāna
100

conventions of rhetoric
sūtra and śāstra literature. A passage found in both the Dīgha and An˙guttara
Nikāyas,18 for example, speaks of eight types of givers who give gifts with
the hope of being reborn within specifi c high karmic stations—as a rich
ksatriya, brahmin, or householder, or as one of seven diff erent types of
˙
deities. Although the passage promises such rewards to the virtuous giver
(but not the nonvirtuous giver), it also assumes that any such desire to
attain a high karmic station constitutes the motives of an “ordinary” giver,
and for each case, it states (somewhat dismissively): “Th is intention of
his, being directed at an inferior level and not cultivated to a higher level,
will [only] result in rebirth within that realm.”19 In our stories, as we have
seen, it is precisely the desire for such self-i nterested and limited karmic
rewards that is invoked by the bodhisattva, but that must be denied, since
the bodhisattva is an embodiment of ideal dāna, not an ordinary giver.
In general, classifi cations of dāna based on the motive behind the gift
tend to subordinate all worldly and rebirth- oriented goals to the higher
soteriological goal of attaining nirvana, or at least cultivating the mental
states that lead to it. Very common throughout the Pāli Canon and other
Buddhist texts are passages listing eight diff erent types of gift, in which the
eighth gift is contrasted to and made superior to the previous seven. In a
passage from the Abhidharmakośabhāsya, for example, the eight gifts are
˙
listed as: (1) the gift one gives because the recipient is nearby; (2) the gift
one gives out of fear that the object will be destroyed anyway; (3) the
gift one gives because the recipient had previously given to them; (4) the
gift one gives with the hope that the recipient will return something greater;
(5) the gift one gives because one’s fathers and grandfathers gave; (6) the
gift one gives with the hope of reaching heaven; (7) the gift one gives for
the sake of one’s reputation; and (8) the gift one gives “to ornament one’s
mind, to prepare one’s mind, to [acquire] the equipment of yoga, and
to obtain the highest goal [of nirvana].”20 Of these, the fi rst seven gifts
are motivated by worldly and heavenly rewards, while the eighth gift is
motivated by the aspiration for nirvana; correspondingly, the eighth gift
is described as being “foremost” (agra).
Slight variations on this list also appear in two diff erent passages from
the An˙guttara Nikāya, where (in both cases), the eighth gift is again given
“to ornament and prepare one’s mind [for nirvana].”21 Also common is a
distinction between those gifts that are “impure” (aviśuddha) and those
that are “pure” (viśuddha), in which the latter is sometimes defi ned in
terms of the goal of nirvana. Th us the Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra in one
passage defi nes the “pure” gift as “a gift made in view of the Path [to
101

conventions of rhetoric
nirvana] . . . [and] not searching for happiness either in this world or the
world beyond.”22 Th us the goals of mental and religious cultivation and
individual liberation are consistently placed above all lesser worldly and
heavenly goals.
But for the bodhisattva who aspires to Buddhahood, of course, even this
does not suffi ce, and our stories thus consider even the goal of individual
liberation to be an “unacceptable” motive that is often explicitly denied.
In fact, the only “acceptable” motives for the bodhisattva’s gift of his body
are those motives that should incite all the actions of the bodhisattva (not
merely giving)—that is, the desire to obtain Buddhahood and the desire
to liberate and succor all beings. In some doctrinal texts this gift is placed
alongside the gift aiming at nirvana as another variety of “foremost” gift
appropriate specifi cally to the bodhisattva. In the Abhidharmakośabhāsya’s
˙
discussion, for example, it is said that in addition to the gift given with
the goal of attaining nirvana, “the gift that a bodhisattva gives for the
welfare of all beings is [also] the foremost gift”23—as the sub- commentary
by Yaśomitra further explains, “because it is given for the sake of perfect
Buddhahood and for the sake of all beings.”24 In many Mahāyāna texts,
on the other hand, this gift is exalted far above the gift aiming at nirvana.
Th us, the Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra, in spite of its praise of the “pure”
gift aiming at nirvana, later distinguishes the gift of a śrāvaka from that
of a Buddha or bodhisattva in the following terms:
When one gives out of fear of old age, sickness, and death, this is the gift of a
Śrāvaka. When one gives in order to acquire the state of a Buddha, in order to
convert beings, and without fear of old age, sickness, and death, this is the gift
of a Buddha or bodhisattva.25
Similarly, the Bodhisattvabhūmi defi nes the “pure gift” of the bodhisattva
as a gift that is “indiff erent to reward” in the form of either “material or
bodily good fortune,” but is made by the bodhisattva “seeing supreme
Buddhahood [alone] as a blessing.”26
Th e statements made by the bodhisattva concerning the motive un-
derlying his gift are thus not random in nature, but intentionally chosen
to be in close accord with the highest ideal of dāna expressed within
exegetical and philosophical texts. Th ese formalistic statements of motive
are only one of the many conventions associated with the bodhisattva.
Here I have merely used this convention as an example of the way in
which the bodhisattva in these stories can be seen as constituting a perfect
102

conventions of rhetoric
manifestation of dāna—or, as one story puts it, “the very embodiment of
dāna- pāramitā.”27 As I argued above, however, this ideal cannot exist in
isolation, but must be immersed within a real- world setting of opposition
and confl ict. Let me turn now to explore the conventional forms such
opposition normally takes.
Opposition to the Gift
Just as certainly as the bodhisattva is willing and eager to give his body
away, so also there are always one or more characters who oppose the
bodhisattva’s gift of his body and give active voice to this opposition
throughout the course of the story. Th ese characters, whom I will call
opposers, are again conventional in nature and type, falling into four
recognizable and consistent categories across a wide range of diff erent
tales: (1) offi cials and ministers, when the bodhisattva is a king (such as
the army commander, the brahmin purohita, the king’s vassals, or other
types of offi cials and ministers); (2) women close to the bodhisattva (such
as mothers, wives, and lovers); (3) commoners beholden to the bodhisattva
(such as the king’s subjects or a man’s friends and companions); and (4)
minor deities, usually those who preside over the location where the gift
is taking place (such as the deity of a hermitage, a city-g ate, a tree, or a
pleasure-p ark).
I will argue below that each group of “opposers” represents some kind
of limited social, familial, political, or religious realm of interest against
which the absolute and transcendent value of dāna must be shown to take
priority.28 To foreshadow my argument a bit: Th e category of offi cials and
ministers represents the realm of worldly political interests (the interests
embodied in the concept of nīti or realpolitik), as well as traditional Hindu
dharmaśāstric arguments concerning the conduct appropriate to each
class of individuals in each stage of life (varn˙āśramadharma), including
the conduct proper to a king (rājadharma)—or, in broader terms, the in-
terests of social and political order more generally. Th e category of women
represents the realm of familial and aff ective interests, or the interests of
specifi c and particularistic love and duty (especially those pertaining to wife
and children). Th e category of commoners seems to represent the interests
of traditional Indian extensions of the male head-o f-h ousehold, such as
servants, employees, and beggars, and the householder’s paternalistic re-
sponsibility to such groups. Finally, the category of minor deities represents
103

conventions of rhetoric
the limited religious interests of popular, local religious tradition over and
against the universalistic religious interests of Buddhism.
Each of these realms of interest, embodied in the appropriate characters,
puts forth its own variety of opposition to the gift. When the bodhisat-
tva succeeds in overcoming each type of opposition and winning over
all those who had opposed him, the Buddhist ideal of dāna in its most
extreme form is seen to take precedence over all more limited realms of
interest—indeed to include all more limited realms of interest—and the
triumph of the Buddhist values embodied in the bodhisattva is thus assured
(though again the degree and nature of this “triumph” are quite variable).
It is through this opposition and its eventual resolution that the rhetoric
of the genre manifests itself.
To support my association of each group of “opposers” with a particu-
lar limited realm of interest, in the following sections I examine more
closely the specifi c arguments made against the gift by each of these four
groups.
officials and ministers:
competing notions of kingship
In those stories in which the bodhisattva is a king, it is generally the
king’s offi cials and ministers who argue against the gift most vociferously.
Moreover, out of all the characters I have labeled as “opposers,” offi cials
and ministers off er the most sustained and developed opposition, using a
wide range of arguments and often opposing the gift from several points
of view at once. Because they constitute the opposers par excellence, I
will deal with these characters at some length and treat the other three
categories more briefl y.
Th e most immediate opposition to the gift off ered by offi cials and
ministers is the attempt to substitute material gifts for the gift of the body.
“A supplicant should be given material goods,” King Śibi’s ministers urge
him in Mahajjātakamālā 44,
such as precious metals, jewels, and money; various types of ornaments, clothing,
and so forth; furnishings, houses, etc.; elephants, horses, chariots, and vehicles . . .
delectables such as food and drink . . . rice, corn, and other edibles; wonder- drugs
and elixirs; kingdoms and so forth—all those things that are fi t to be given, you
should give. . . . Why should one give what is not to be given? One should give
only that which is supposed to be given!29
104

conventions of rhetoric
“What use does a poor man have for an eye?”—they further reason in
Jātakamālā 2—“It will [only] see the prosperity of others! Th erefore, Lord,
give him money instead. Don’t do anything rash!”30
Such substitutions are also urged on the recipient. In Divyāvadāna 22,
for example, King Candraprabha’s chief minister tries to prevent an evil
brahmin from asking for the king’s head by enticing him with a large pile
of jeweled heads instead: “Great Brahmin, you take these many jeweled
heads, and I will give you such abundant gold and silver that it will be
the livelihood of your sons and grandsons. What do you want with the
Lord’s head, full of marrow, mucus, and fat?”31 Th e stark contrast drawn
in such passages between the attractive material riches that could be given
to the recipient and the dismembered body parts the king proposes to
give underscores the utter reasonableness of the ministers’ urgings and
the inconceivability of the king’s intentions—particularly in a premodern
South Asian context in which the description of material riches would
no doubt be quite appealing to the majority of ordinary listeners, and in
which strong cultural notions of bodily impurity would make the gift of the
body (full of “marrow, mucus, and fat”) rather unappealing. Th e confl ict
between the bodhisattva and his opposers is thus posed in a particularly
stark manner, with the reader’s own sentiments likely to be fi rmly on the
side of the opposers.
What might simply appear, on the surface, to be a simple argument over
what kind of object it is more reasonable to give, however, also contains an
underlying discourse contrasting two competing notions of kingship and
the dharma proper to a king (rājadharma). By urging the king to substitute
material gifts for the gift of the body, offi cials and ministers uphold the
king’s proclivity for generosity, yet also try to force him to express this gen-
erosity through the means proper and appropriate to an Indian king—the
traditional means of material gifting. In the dharmaśāstric literature dealing
with kingship, generosity is one of the foremost virtues incumbent upon
the Indian king, but this generosity is traditionally understood in the lim-
ited sense of material support of the people through the giving of material
gifts.32 By desiring to give away his body the bodhisattva- king clearly takes
this ideal of royal generosity to an extreme that openly confl icts with his
duties as a king—for how can a king who is blind, mutilated, or dead
possibly continue to be a good king? Th e ministers’ attempt to substitute
material gifts for the gift of the body thus constitutes an attempt to keep
the king bound within the limits of traditional Indic kingship, as well as to
avoid whatever political chaos and instability might ensue from the death
105

conventions of rhetoric
of the king. By rejecting such attempts at substitution, the b odhisattva-
king rejects both the dharmaśāstric notion that moral conduct is relative
to and dependent upon one’s particular social position, and the arthaśāstric
notion that a king’s moral conduct must be limited to whatever is politi-
cally expedient—and in their place he embodies an idealistic Buddhist
notion of kingship in which the best king is also one who adheres rigor-
ously and without concession to the highest of Buddhist virtues (as we
saw previously in the story of King Maitrībala). Or, to put it another way:
the ministers promote a sva- dharma—literally, “one’s own dharma,” or the
dharma that pertains to a particular social position (in this case, that of
“king”)—whereas the bodhisattva promotes a s āmānya- dharma, that is,
a “universal” dharma that transcends any particular social position. Th e
story itself, by means of the “happy endings” discussed earlier, resolves
this confl ict by arguing that the two are, in fact, wholly compatible: the
sāmānya- dharma adhered to by the good bodhisattva is also the best
sva- dharma for any good king.
Th e argument I have advanced here might be usefully compared to
Steven Collins’ discussion of kingly violence in Nirvana and Other Buddhist
Felicities.33 Collins maintains that one of the fundamental confl icts facing
the authors of Pāli Buddhist texts in dealing with the theme of kingship
was the issue of violence: How can the violence inherent in the institu-
tions of kingship and political power be reconciled with the transcendent
ideal of perfect nonviolence espoused by Buddhist monastic ideology?
Collins maintains that Pāli texts, rather than positing any single answer
to this question, off er a range of possible answers by means of a plethora
of stories about kings.
In order to impose some order upon this range, he puts forth two con-
trasting notions of dharma (or “what is right”) in relation to the kingly use
of violence (particularly in the form of punishment). “Mode 1 dharma” is
“an ethics of reciprocity, in which the assessment of violence is c ontext-
dependent and negotiable. Buddhist advice to kings in Mode 1 tells them
not to pass judgment in haste or anger, but appropriately, such that the
punishment fi ts the crime”34—in other words, some violence is necessary,
and as long as it is administered fairly, it falls within the confi nes of dharma.
“Mode 2 dharma,” on the other hand, is “an ethic of absolute values,
in which the assessment of violence is c ontext- independent and non-
negotiable, and punishment, as a species of violence, is itself a crime. Th e
only advice possible for kings in Mode 2 might seem to be ‘Don’t be one!’,
‘Renounce the world!’, ‘Leave everything to the law of karma!’”35—in other
106

conventions of rhetoric
words, violence is never acceptable, not even for a king. Using these two
concepts to analyze and discuss an array of Pāli stories about kings, Collins
demonstrates that some stories promote the negotiable Mode 1 dharma
and suggest that a king who engages in appropriate and just punishment
is a perfectly good king; some stories promote the non-n egotiable Mode
2 dharma in such a way that kingship becomes impossible (the only good
king being one who renounces the kingship altogether); and some stories
imagine a world in which kingship is compatible with Mode 2 dharma by
putting forth the “utopian paradox of the nonviolent king” ruling over a
“Perfect Moral Commonwealth.”36 In other words, perfect nonviolence
and the maintenance of social order become compatible because—in
the utopian scenario envisioned by such texts—the king’s virtue spreads
to those around him, everyone behaves morally, and the law courts and
prisons stand empty.
Th ough Collins’ discussion deals with the theme of violence rather
than the theme of generosity, on a larger level the confl ict is much the
same. In gift- of- the- body stories, we might say, the offi cials and min-
isters, promoting Mode 1 dharma, advocate a “context-d ependent and
negotiable” generosity, such that a king should give certain types of gifts
to certain types of recipients in certain types of appropriate situations;
while the bodhisattva, promoting Mode 2 dharma, advocates a “context-
i ndependent and non-n egotiable” generosity, such that one should give
whatever object is asked for to anyone who requests it.37 Th e stories as a
whole, rather than off ering a full range of possible relationships between
these two modes, generally come down in favor of Mode 2 and its compat-
ibility with kingship within the context of a utopian vision of the “Perfect
Moral Commonwealth.” Th us, the king can give away his body and still
be a good king with a prosperous and fl ourishing kingdom because of the
very power of his virtue—which spreads to those around him, converts
evil recipients so that they are no longer any danger, infl uences his own
subjects to behave as perfect moral citizens, results (in many cases) in
the restoration of his own injured body, and often causes nature itself to
be bounteous and shower the kingdom with ever- replenishing wealth.38
Th us, contrary to the ministers’ expectations, the king’s duty to uphold
the transcendent ideal of dāna does not confl ict in any way with his duty
to be a good king.
Much the same fundamental confl ict is found in a second major type
of opposition to the gift off ered by offi cials and ministers, which is to cite
the disastrous consequences of the king’s gift for various groups of people.
107

conventions of rhetoric
In this case, it is not a question of what type of gift a king should give, but
rather, to whom he owes his allegiance: Do some people deserve his loyalty
and protection over others? In the Manicūdāvadāna, for example, King
˙ ˙
Manicūda’s brahmin purohita points out that if the king gives away his
˙ ˙
body, the wretched, blind, and miserable will be deprived of all protec-
tion, beggars and mendicants will be deprived of all support, the king’s
subjects will be sorrowful and despondent, and the queen and women of
the harem will all die of grief.39 Of course these are precisely the parties to
whom the king owes a particular allegiance, and any reasonable reader will
feel that they deserve more consideration than, say, a cannibalistic demon
or an evil brahmin from a faraway land. Th e confl ict once again can be
reduced to competing notions of kingship; as King Maitrībala’s ministers
remark in Jātakamālā 8,
O Lord . . . you bear the burden of kingship solely for the benefi t of your people,
[but] your determination to give away your fl esh runs contrary to your own inten-
tions! So let it go! . . . What kind of dharma is this by which the Lord would make
the whole world fall into misfortune for the sake of these fi ve [yaksas] alone?40
˙
As we saw already in chapter 2, however, King Maitrībala answers his
ministers by citing his role as a moral exemplar as the very foundation
of his kingly dharma—and the ending of the story ultimately bears him
out. Eff ective political leadership and particularistic duty toward one’s
own subjects are thus shown to be reconcilable with universal compas-
sion for all.
In some cases, in fact, a particular emphasis is placed once again on the
inexorable and relentless spread of the king’s virtue to others—which even-
tually makes meaningless any distinction between “one’s own” subjects and
everybody else. In Mahajjātakamālā 45, for example, King Sarvamdada’s
˙
willingness to make a gift of his own head has a positive moral infl uence
not only on the subjects of his own kingdom, but on all other kings as well:
“Th en, all of those kings, desirous of the happiness which comes from being
renown for righteousness, gave gifts and worked for the world’s welfare as
much as they were able. . . . Th us, by the power of the bodhisattva’s merit,
everywhere on earth, a faultless and virtuous eff ort was set in motion on
all sides.”41 Again in Mahajātakamālā 44 it is not merely the people of
King Śibi’s own kingdom who are aff ected by his version of kingly dharma,
but rather, “through the truth, power, and strength of that dharma, there
was happiness everywhere, in all kingdoms.”42 In the face of such radiant
108

conventions of rhetoric
power, particularistic duties toward one’s own subjects are easily subsumed
within the bodhisattva’s universal compassion for all.
In addition to attempting to substitute material gifts for the gift of the
body and citing the king’s responsibility toward particular groups of people,
offi cials and ministers employ a wide variety of further arguments—for
example, they invoke the glory of kingship and express amazement at the
idea that anyone would do something to jeopardize such a high station;
they cite commonsense, logical arguments against the gift (such as the
impossibility of attaching one person’s eye to another); and they warn
the king that the recipient is a fraud whose only intention is to bring the
king to ruin. But the general gist of such argumentation should by now be
clear. In all of these cases, offi cials and ministers represent the worldly and
pragmatic realm of politics, the interests of maintaining social order and
political dominance, and traditional dharmaśāstric interests in enforcing
varnāśramadharma—all of which, by the end of the story, must somehow
˙
be reconciled with the absolute imperative of dāna.
Th is is similar to the role such characters play in many other types
of Buddhist stories as well—a prominent example being stories of royal
fi gures who wish to renounce the world and retire to the life of the forest,
including the story of Siddhārtha Gautama himself. In a famous passage
from the Buddhacarita, for example, King Śuddhodana’s chief minister
and brahmin purohita are sent to the forest to persuade the young Prince
Siddhārtha to return to the kingdom after he has renounced the world.43
Th eir arguments against Siddhārtha’s renunciation are very similar to those
we encounter in gift-o f- the- body stories: fi rst, they off er the dharmaśāstric
argument that one should renounce the world only at the proper stage of
one’s life; second, they appeal to Siddhārtha’s compassion for his family;
third, they argue that renunciation is for the weak and timid (thus invoking
the martial ethic of the ksatriya); and fourth, they employ the argument
˙
of the Bhagavad Gītā that salvation is attainable through the disinterested
fulfi llment of one’s traditional duties. Siddhārtha, of course, successfully
counters each of these arguments and refuses to return back home.
Th is dialogue between radical b odhisattva-k ings and their more tradi-
tional ministers continues throughout the Buddhist story tradition. Bud-
dhist stories about b odhisattva- kings are not merely stories promoting the
Buddhist ideals of dāna, nonviolence, and renunciation, but also stories
that actively engage a much wider Indic and Hindu discourse on such mat-
ters as kingship, caste, good governance, and the ideal social and politi-
cal order. Within this plethora of stories, we fi nd a wide range of possible
109

conventions of rhetoric
solutions off ered to the confl ict between Buddhist ideology and the realities
of social and political life. In any particular story the two might be depicted
as being completely compatible, completely incompatible, coexisting in
a state of tension, or placed in a hierarchical relationship in which one
is subordinate to the other. It is through the sheer diversity of narrative
possibilities that the relationship between the two is negotiated.
officials and ministers: a case study
To further illuminate the opposition to the gift put forth by offi cials and
ministers, I turn now to a specifi c case study. In this case study, a later
text tells the same basic story as an earlier text but signifi cantly expands
the argumentation that occurs between the king and his ministers. Op-
position to the gift is considerably heightened in the later text, with the
ministers becoming more confrontational and adversarial characters and
arguing against the gift more intensively than they do in the earlier ver-
sion. Th us, even though the two texts tell the same basic story, the later
text shows a greater willingness to use these conventional characters to
confront and challenge the bodhisattva and suggest the possible problems
inherent in his “perfect generosity.” I include this case study not only to
further illuminate the opposition to the gift off ered by offi cials and min-
isters, but also to provide the reader with a specifi c example of generic
variation—or how a later version of a story can extend and manipulate
the rhetorical discourse of an earlier version while still remaining within
the basic constraints of the genre.
Jātakamālā 2 (hereafter JM 2) and Mahajjātakamālā 44 (hereafter MJM
44) both tell the story of King Śibi’s gift of his eyes to a brahmin supplicant
(the god Śakra in disguise) and their eventual restoration by means of an
Act of Truth. Moreover, the two texts are closely related, with the later text,
MJM 44, being signifi cantly based upon the earlier, JM 2. Out of the 220
verses that comprise MJM 44, thirty verses are borrowed directly from JM
2, 105 more verses are directly parallel to the corresponding material in JM
2 (in many cases being simple versifi cations or elaborations of the prose
portions of JM 2), and only eighty- fi ve verses (approximately t hirty- eight
percent of the total) represent content that is substantially new. Neverthe-
less, by identifying these e ighty- fi ve “new” verses and considering the kinds
of adaptations they make, we can see that the author of MJM 44 had some
very specifi c concerns in mind in his reworking of JM 2—in particular, a
concern with heightening the opposition to the gift put forth by offi cials
110

conventions of rhetoric
table 2
Th e Structure of Mahajjātakamālā 44 and Its Relationship to Jātakamālā 2
verses content
and ministers (as well as the countering of this opposition on the part of
the bodhisattva), and a concern with resolving the confl ict between them
in a more explicit manner. (Th e relationship between the two stories is
outlined in Table 2 as an aid to the following discussion.)
In the earlier version of the story found in JM 2, when King Śibi agrees
to give both of his eyes to the brahmin supplicant, his offi cials and minis-
ters put forth many standard varieties of opposition to the gift: Th ey urge
him to off er material gifts instead, they remind him of his duty to his
own subjects, they wonder why anybody would be willing to give up the
hard-w on status of kingship, and they wonder how one person’s eyes can
possibly be attached to another. Th e bodhisattva, in refuting them, essen-
tially ignores all of these pragmatic arguments and seems to speak purely
from his transcendent status as a perfect bodhisattva who is concerned
solely with fulfi lling the imperative of dāna, regardless of whatever eff ect
this might have on his kingdom. Two opposing sets of values are thus set
in confl ict with one another, and it is only the outcome of the story that
resolves this confl ict for us—for once King Śibi has survived the gift and
111
stnemugra
wen
dedda
dedda
emarf
lanretni
dedda
emarf
lanretxe
1– 4: Dialogue between Aśoka and Upagupta
Bodhisattva intentionally takes birth in
5– 10: the world as King Śibi to rescue all be-
ings and make them “devoted to dharma”
11– 94: Parallels with Jātakamālā 2
(except for 8 verses, 6 of which involve dharma)
95– 122: Th e ministers oppose the gift as “bad dharma”
123– 46: King Śibi argues for the gift as “good dharma”
147– 209: Parallels with Jātakamālā 2 (except for 4 verses)
King Śibi’s dharma spreads throughout
210– 213
the earth and he is reborn in heaven
214–220 Dialogue between Aśoka and Upagupta

conventions of rhetoric
prospered, we understand implicitly that his transcendent dharma as a
bodhisattva overrides and encompasses the more worldly dharma espoused
by his offi cials and ministers. Th is resolution remains implicit, however,
being conveyed through the narrative action itself rather than being given
any direct expression.
In MJM 44, on the other hand, it is clear that the author wishes to re-
cast this entire exchange so that the underlying question becomes explicit:
What is it that constitutes “dharma,” and which variety of “dharma” is most
benefi cial, not only for the bodhisattva’s own progress, but for the worldly
welfare of his kingdom as well? In fact, it is striking to observe that a very
long passage of the text running from verses 11 to 94 essentially repeats the
entire argument between King Śibi and his ministers, as found in JM 2,
with only eight new verses containing substantially diff erent content—yet
out of these eight new verses, six of them deal explicitly with the concept
of dharma. Th us, in verses 54–56, the brahmin supplicant now frames his
request for King Śibi’s eyes specifi cally in terms of dharma:
O Great King, I have come to you with the hope that you will give me an eye. By
fulfi lling this hope of mine, you will increase your fame for dharma. By respectfully
giving to all supplicants whatever material goods they want . . . you have only be-
gun to shine. Now fulfi ll my desire by giving me one of your eyes, and in this way,
you will conquer all other givers and attain fame for your excellent dharma!44
Likewise, in verse 83 King Śibi warns his ministers that they should not
interfere with the gift of his eyes, “for when it comes to dharma, servants
share in the eff orts of their master”—only to have his ministers reply in
verse 86: “O Lord . . . we servants are only conducting ourselves in devo-
tion to dharma.”45 Finally, in verse 90 the chief minister tries to prevent
the gift of King Śibi’s eyes by urging the king: “If one wants happiness
and success in the excellent dharma, one should thoroughly and quickly
investigate the eff ectiveness of his actions, and only then should one act.”46
Clearly the king and his ministers both believe that they are pursuing
“dharma,” even though they are proposing completely diff erent courses
of action. Th rough the strategic addition of these six new verses to what
is otherwise a straightforward replay of the material found in JM 2, the
author of MJM 44 succeeds in reframing the entire discussion as an argu-
ment over competing notions of dharma.
Th is subtle reframing of the argument then serves as an underpin-
ning for MJM 44’s single largest innovation on the earlier version. In a
112

conventions of rhetoric
long passage spanning fi fty- two “new” verses, the king and his ministers
continue to debate the gift, off ering wholly new arguments not found in
the earlier text. From verses 95 to 122 the ministers argue against the gift,
and from verses 123 to 146 the king counters by arguing in favor of the
gift. Th e author of MJM 44 uses these extra passages to heighten both
the ministers’ opposition and the bodhisattva’s resolve, as well as to frame
the entire confl ict in terms of competing notions of dharma. In verses
96–99, for example, one of the ministers, speaking for the others, states
their position in the starkest possible terms—and makes clear what the
ministers stand for and what the bodhisattva is so opposed to—by draw-
ing an explicit equation between nīti and dharma, between the “art of
politics” and “what is right”:
O Master and Great King, for the sake of your own welfare, you should listen
to what I have to say. You are practicing a brand of politics (nīti- dharma) that is
not benefi cial to the world! Neglecting your people through this foolish brand
of politics (anīti), how will you attain dharma? And without dharma, there is
suff ering, and the one who suff ers is tormented. . . . [Th erefore,] respecting that
which is honored as the art of politics (nīti), if one wishes to rescue people, one
should place the practice of the art of politics (nīti- dharma) above everything else,
and then give the gifts that are desired.47
By twice using the compound nīti- dharma, the ministers suggest that nīti
itself is a kind of dharma—but by also stating explicitly that without nīti,
there is no dharma, they make the further suggestion that, at least when it
comes to King Śibi, nīti is dharma. King Śibi, however, states his rebuttal
just as clearly: the universal dharma he adheres to as a bodhisattva overrides
but also encompasses any royal dharma incumbent upon him as a king:
Dharma is the only thing that death can never conquer. Th erefore, dharma is
a great hero and should be perfected for the welfare of the world. Dharma can
conquer everything, everywhere, at all times, while not even a multitude of sins
can conquer dharma. . . . Th erefore, those good people who seek virtue should
abandon everything else and always zealously perfect dharma alone, for the welfare
of the world.
And among all dharmas, the dharma of the Buddhas (saugatam dharmam) is
˙
the best, for it renders all sin throughout the triple world completely harmless.
It is through the power of the dharma that all Sugatas of the past benefi ted the
world, attained enlightenment, and were liberated. It is through the power of the
113

conventions of rhetoric
dharma that all of those who are Conquerors right now, having attained complete
enlightenment, stand ready to bring about the welfare of the triple world. And it
is through the power of the dharma, again, that all those who will be [Buddhas in
the future] will conquer all of Māra’s troops and eff ect the welfare of the world.
And I, too, wish in every way to follow the dharma, attain complete enlighten-
ment, conquer Māra and his troops, and do good on behalf of the world. Th is is
why I wish to give to this old brahmin even the eye attached to my own body. . . .
Because I yearn for the welfare brought about by the good dharma right here
within samsara, I am indiff erent even to my own life and quite capable of giving
up my eye. Th erefore, you should not hinder my gift. For when it comes to the
practice of the dharma, servants should only be of assistance. Realizing this, you
should sympathetically rejoice in my gift, for by the power of this dharma, you,
too, will attain enlightenment.48
On the one hand, King Śibi’s invocation of the innumerable Buddhas of
the past, present, and future, their attainment of perfect enlightenment,
and their conquering of Māra calls forth all of the authority and grandeur
of the transcendent Buddhist dharma manifested by his gift—a cosmic
dharma which is the “best among all dharmas” that might exist. But on
the other hand, he further makes it clear that this dharma also leads to
happiness and welfare “right here within samsara” and is thereby equivalent
to his dharma as a worldly king.
Th e priority of King Śibi’s universal dharma over the nīti- dharma
advocated by his ministers must be reinforced, of course, by the story as
a whole, and it is interesting to note the manner in which the remain-
ing “new” verses added by the author of MJM 44 function to do exactly
that. In his narration of the story, the author of MJM 44 adds two new
frames that are absent from the earlier version. Th e fi rst new “framing”
of the basic story occurs in verses 5–10 at the beginning of the tale and
verses 210–213 at the end. In verses 5–10, we learn that the bodhisattva’s
birth as King Śibi was neither random nor accidental, but took place for
a very specifi c reason: the bodhisattva was “a wise king of the gods in
heaven” who looked down upon the earth one day, saw that “all beings
everywhere on earth were behaving wickedly,” became “determined to
rescue them” and “to make mortal humans devoted to dharma,” and thus
“took birth in the royal family of the Śibis.”49 Th e bodhisattva’s birth as
King Śibi is now made fully intentional—and his intent is not merely
to be a good king to the Śibi people, but to rescue all beings and make
them “devoted to dharma.” Th e universalizing eff ect these verses have
114

conventions of rhetoric
on the basic story is subsequently reinforced at the end of the story, in
verses 210–213, where we learn that the moral example the king sets by
giving away his eyes spreads inexorably to all kingdoms throughout the
world, and the king himself is subsequently reborn up in heaven, where
he “continued to work for the welfare and benefi t of the world with a
mind directed toward full enlightenment.”50 Th e addition of this frame
demonstrates for the reader the larger signifi cance of the dharma adhered
to by King Śibi and its complete compatibility with his ministers’ more
immediate (and local) concerns.
Th e second new “framing” of the basic story added by the author of
MJM 44 occurs in verses 1–4 at the beginning of the story and verses
214–220 at the end. Th is is an external frame story in which the tale of
King Śibi is set within the context of a dialogue between the great Buddhist
king Aśoka and the famous arhat Upagupta. In verses 1–4, King Aśoka asks
Upagupta to tell him the story of a “well- done deed” performed by the
Buddha in a previous birth, and Upagupta agrees to do so.51 After relating
the entire story of King Śibi, the text returns to this external f rame- story
in verses 214–220, where Upagupta concludes by telling King Aśoka that
it was by means of giving away his eyes that the bodhisattva “engaged in
the practice of dharma,” and that King Aśoka himself must “tell the people
about the Teacher’s practice of excellent dharma, place them on the paths
leading to enlightenment, and rule over them,” whereupon Aśoka and
his retinue rejoice.52
By means of this external frame, the story of King Śibi is now located
within a very specifi c context: it is a story told to a king, and it is nar-
rated by a Buddhist monk. We could say that the monk, as representative
of Buddhist transcendentalist ideology, is thus placed in a position of
authority and instruction over the king, as representative of the realm of
worldly, political power—yet the message of the monk’s story is that the
two realms are wholly compatible. In fact, in the end Upagupta addresses
King Aśoka himself as a bona fi de bodhisattva, for his fi nal words to the
king are: “Th rough the power of this meritorious work, may you always
have good fortune! And having gradually fulfi lled the requisites for enlight-
enment, may you fi nally attain it!”53 Th e compatibility of kingship and bo-
dhisattvahood suggested by the story of King Śibi is thus reinforced by
the addition of this external frame.54 Th rough this and other strategically
placed additions, the author of MJM 44 succeeds in both heightening and
sharpening the ministers’ opposition to King Śibi’s gift and demonstrating
the correctness of the bodhisattva’s reply.
115

conventions of rhetoric
other opposers: women, commoners,
and minor deities
Th e three remaining groups of opposers and the limited realms of interest
they embody can be treated more briefl y, since many themes similar to
those we have seen above also come into play here.
Women close to the bodhisattva (such as mothers, wives, and lovers)
tend to respond to the gift with abundant emotion—frequently crying,
wailing, fainting, and lamenting—which is suitable, I contend, to their
role as representatives of aff ective, familial, and sexual interests, or the
interests of specifi c and particularistic love. Again we see a close corre-
spondence between stories involving renunciation and stories involving
self- sacrifi ce: just as angry wives constitute the major obstacle to their
husbands’ renunciation of the world and ordination as Buddhist monks
in so many Buddhist tales,55 here also women oppose the bodhisattva’s
self- sacrifi ce because of the way in which it breaks up the family, leaves
the woman abandoned and grieving, and otherwise confl icts with the
male bodhisattva’s traditional obligations toward wife and children. Th e
opposition expressed by women thus pits the particularistic claims of
familial love and aff ection against the universal compassion for all beings
characteristic of the bodhisattva.
A good example of such arguments is the long, passionate speech deliv-
ered by Queen Padmāvatī in the Manicūdāvadāna, when King Manicūda is
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
on the verge of death, having cut up his body to feed a hungry rāksasa:
˙
Alas, alas, Lord, alas, you who are supremely virtuous and greatly compassionate,
Hero in Generosity, Protector of the World! Where have you gone, abandoning me
without a protector, extremely depressed and wandering in the wilderness? Alas,
Lord, please turn back! . . . Oh Lord, I am blameless, yet you have abandoned
me. Alas, Illustrious One, I am ruined, miserable, and depressed. . . . O Sinless
One, you even promised Bhavabhuti, my father, that you would never abandon
his daughter. Did you make such a promise in vain? . . . So please turn back! . . .
Or, if you have decided that you absolutely must go, O Brave One, then take me
along as well—your queen and slave, who is devoted to your feet. Having entered
the fi re out of love for you, I will die together with you.56
Female characters are frequently used in this way in traditional In-
dian literature: we might cite, for example, the pitiful lamentations of
Siddhārtha’s wife and the women of his harem after he renounces the
116

conventions of rhetoric
world in the Buddhacarita,57 Queen Maddi’s long and sorrowful lament for
˙˙
her missing children in the Vessantara Jātaka,58 and, as a Hindu example,
Draupadī’s somewhat angry rebuke of her husbands for failing to protect
her in the Mahābhārata.59 By virtue of their lower social and political sta-
tus, I would argue, women come to be representative of the personal and
familial bonds of love. Th ey thus constitute eff ective agents for presenting
emotionally compelling arguments with which the reader can easily iden-
tify, and which seem to make a mockery of the coldly abstract ideal em-
bodied by the male hero. In Victor Turner’s terms, they possess the “powers
of the weak” that allow them to stand in temporary moral judgment of
the superior bodhisattva.60 Th us, while the male hero is valiantly pursuing
some abstract and universalistic ideal, it is the women in his life who tend
to remind us who gets hurt in the process. It is interesting to note, as well,
that while the bodhisattva generally expends enormous energy in refuting
the objections of his offi cials and ministers, his most common response to
the women in his life is one of utter silence. Queen Padmāvatī, for example,
gets no reply to her impassioned speech because the story—perhaps all too
conveniently—has Manicūda faint from his injuries just before it begins
˙ ˙
and wake up only once it has concluded.61 (Perhaps he’s a typical husband
after all!) Nevertheless, the conclusion of the story, in one way or another
and to varying degrees, always vindicates the bodhisattva’s conduct: the
best bodhisattva also makes the best husband.
Our third category of “opposers,” that of commoners beholden to the
bodhisattva (such as the king’s subjects or a man’s friends and compan-
ions), is much less frequently encountered than the fi rst two. In fact,
commoners do not frequently speak for themselves, but as we have seen,
their interests are often taken up by offi cials and ministers. In any case,
in arguments against the gift from the point of view of commoners be-
holden to the bodhisattva, their aff ection for the bodhisattva, the grief
they will feel if he abandons them, their dependence on him, and his
paternalistic responsibility toward them are emphasized. Within such
arguments commoners are frequently depicted as children losing a par-
ent, or inferiors losing a paternalistic superior. Th erefore, I believe that
the category of commoners represents the interests of traditional Indian
extensions of the male head-o f-h ousehold, such as servants, employees,
and beggars, as well as the subjects of the king (a sort of “super” head- of-
household, as it were). Inasmuch as such groups constitute extensions of
the householder’s self, for the householder to give himself away (by giving
away his body) constitutes an abrogation of his responsibilities toward
117

conventions of rhetoric
them. Once again, however, the outcome of such stories fully justifi es the
bodhisattva, for whether or not he survives the gift, his conduct is always
depicted as having a positive moral eff ect on the commoners beholden
to him. As King Śibi puts it: “When it comes to dharma, servants share
in the eff orts of their master.”
Finally, minor deities, the fourth category of “opposers,” generally react
to the gift in childish, emotional, and sometimes violent ways. Th ey do
not off er specifi c, logical arguments against the gift, but simply lash out
at the recipient. In the Manicūdāvadāna the deity of the hermitage where
˙ ˙
King Manicūda is about to give away the jewel embedded in his head yells
˙ ˙
at the brahmin recipients: “Alas, alas, you sinful brahmins! How can you
cause the death of this royal sage, who is most compassionate, devoted
to all beings, blameless and harmless?”62 Likewise, in Divyāvadāna 22 the
deity of a city- gate tries to prevent a brahmin recipient from entering the
city to ask for King Candraprabha’s head, saying: “Do not enter, you evil
and vicious brahmin!”63—while in the Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22, it
is a tree-d eity who becomes incensed, going so far as to strike the brahmin
recipient across the face, causing him to fall to the ground.
As far as I can tell, such reactions on the part of minor deities occur
primarily in those stories in which the bodhisattva is a king. When seen
from this perspective, such reactions are, in a sense, entirely appropriate to
the protective functions of such deities, for as the guardians and benefac-
tors of the territory, they have a duty to protect the king who rules over
it. In all such cases, however, there seems to be an attempt to make such
deities seem not merely protective, but also irrational and short-s ighted,
especially in contrast to the bodhisattva himself. I believe that such dei-
ties represent the realm of local, popular religious interests, and that the
translocal and cosmological authority of Buddhism over such interests is
demonstrated by the fact that the bodhisattva always sternly rebukes the
deity and is successful in making him64 “fall silent.”
By means of this rebuke, the bodhisattva- king thus proclaims his ter-
ritory to be a realm in which the Buddhist dharma holds priority over
popular folk religion (even in the absence of “Buddhism” itself!). Th e way
in which the bodhisattva rebukes such deities is also signifi cant. Rather
than employing ethical argument (as in the case of offi cials and ministers)
or simply remaining silent (as in the case of females), the bodhisattva tends
to rebuke minor deities through a very specifi c type of appeal: usually, the
local deity’s opposition to the gift is shown to be s hort-s ighted through an
appeal to Buddhist cosmology and sacred geography. Th at is, by placing
118

conventions of rhetoric
events in an ages- long, cosmic and mythological perspective, the bodhi-
sattva succeeds in demonstrating the deity’s purely local concerns to be
trivial, and the deity falls silent and allows the gift to be made.
In the Manicūdāvadāna episode mentioned above, for example, whereas
˙ ˙
the deity of the hermitage is concerned with this particular king giving away
this particular crest- jewel, King Manicūda rebukes him by placing the gift
˙ ˙
within a much larger context—the bodhisattva’s long journey to perfect
enlightenment and the similar deeds performed by him at the very same
spot during thousands of previous lives:
Enough, enough, deity! Do not obstruct my supplicant! Do not hinder my enlight-
enment! And why is that? In the past, deity, a supplicant approached me, asking
for my body. He was hindered by some deities. By hindering him, they hindered
my enlightenment and produced a lot of demerit for themselves. If they had not
hindered my supplicant, I would have very soon attained unsurpassed, perfect,
full enlightenment. Moreover, deity, at this very spot of earth, I have sacrifi ced
my body a thousand times, and no one has ever hindered me before. Th erefore,
I say to you: Do not hinder my supplicant! Do not cast my unsurpassed, perfect,
full enlightenment into the far distance!65
By means of this rebuke, the deity’s objections to the gift are now dramati-
cally reconfi gured within a wholly new frame: his misguided attempt to
protect the local territory might, in fact, be delaying the appearance of a
Buddha in the world—and not a single one of his one thousand predeces-
sors has ever made such a fatal mistake before.
In Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22, a similar statement is made, but the
aura of cosmic inevitability surrounding the gift becomes even stronger,
for King Candraprabha explains to the tree- deity:
In the past, I have given my head away at this tree nine- hundred- and- ninety-
n ine times. Now, with this head, I will complete one thousand gifts and fulfi ll
the perfection of giving! So please do not hinder my aspiration for the highest
enlightenment!66
And fi nally, in Divyāvadāna 22, King Candraprabha’s rebuke of the deity
expands to include a well- known Buddhist mythological fi gure as well:
Do not hinder the supplicant who wants my head! For it was here in this very [plea-
sure- park], deity, that I once sacrifi ced myself to a tigress and thus outdistanced
119

conventions of rhetoric
Maitreya, who had set out [for Buddhahood] forty eons before. Maitreya Bodhi-
sattva was outdistanced by a single gift of my head!67
Now the local deity learns that not only is he delaying the appearance of a
fully enlightened Buddha in the world, but he may in fact be interfering in
two bodhisattvas’ cosmic race toward Buddhahood—ruining Śākyamuni’s
“lead,” as it were.
Within the bodhisattva’s rebuke, then, the imperative to make the gift
is not merely a moral imperative but becomes a matter of cosmological
inevitability. Th e full authority and grandeur of the Buddhist universe
is solemnly invoked, and the deity’s purely local religious concerns are
revealed to be trivial and insignifi cant. In terms of history, we might see
such passages as refl ecting, on the narrative level, the complicated process
by which Buddhism, as an elite and translocal ideology expressed through
formal languages such as Sanskrit and Pāli, coexisted with popular, local
religious traditions.68 In terms of literature, on the other hand, such pas-
sages once again take us back to a consideration of genre—for the shift in
perspective between a “local” frame and a “cosmological” frame employed
so eff ectively by such passages is possible precisely because of the double
time- perspective inherent to the jātaka: within the bodhisattva’s rebuke,
we are suddenly reminded of what we have known all along—that this
particular human king will one day become the exalted Buddha himself.
can the bodhisattva be all things to all beings?
As we have seen, the four standard groups of opposers I have identi-
fi ed above are used to represent various limited realms of interest against
which the Buddhist ideal of dāna must be shown to take priority—such
as worldly political interests (nīti), Hindu dharmaśāstric interests in main-
taining varnāśramadharma, familial and aff ective interests, the interests of
˙
traditional Indian extensions of the male head-o f-h ousehold, and the in-
terests of popular, local religious tradition. Each of these realms of interest
is defi ned in terms of social structure; in other words, the representatives
of each realm of interest have legitimate claims upon the bodhisattva (as
king, husband, etc.) because of the social-s tructural position they them-
selves inhabit (as offi cial, minister, wife, etc.)—position- bound claims that
have been specifi ed and authorized in a long tradition of Indian śāstric
literature.
120

conventions of rhetoric
figure 4 King Śibi, with the help of his attendants, has his fl esh cut and weighed on a
scale in order to ransom the life of a dove (lower left); the deity Śakra is the crowned fi gure
second from right. Sculptural frieze from Gandhāra, ca. 2nd century c.e. © Copyright
Th e Trustees of the British Museum.
In some passages, however, we encounter a form of opposition that is
far more general and philosophical in nature and perhaps more diffi cult
to answer: How can universal compassion be shown toward beings with
very particularistic desires? What if one generic being’s demands upon the
bodhisattva confl ict with those of another generic being? In this case, it
is not a question of specifi c groups of people who have legitimate claims
upon the bodhisattva’s allegiance that have been vouchsafed by Indic tra-
dition, but rather, the more basic question: Can the bodhisattva really be
all things to all beings?
In Avadānakalpalatā 55, a frightened dove takes refuge with King Śibi
(here called King Sarvamdada), who resolves to safeguard the dove’s life.
˙
A hunter, however, soon appears on the scene and argues that the dove
ought to be released to him. After all, he observes, hunting for such prey
is his “birth- given occupation,” the dove constitutes food that is “natural”
to him, and if he cannot hunt for such doves, his whole family will soon
121

conventions of rhetoric
die.69 Th is seems reasonable enough, but since King Śibi is determined to
safeguard the dove’s life, what can he possibly do? Since both the hunter
and the dove must be assumed to be subjects of Śibi’s kingdom, this is
not a situation pitting insider against outsider, but a more fundamental
confl ict between one creature and another. Th e hunter himself poses this
confl ict in the starkest possible terms: “You should not show hatred to
me out of aff ection for the dove. . . . As he is, so am I. What diff erence is
there between us to you? Good people who are impartial toward all beings
should not show compassion to one alone.”70
Th is confl ict is further heightened by the phrases used to describe the
king throughout the story: he is favorably compared to a “wish-f ulfi lling
jewel that grants whatever one can think of” and a “tree of plenty that
produces exactly what one wants,” and described as one who “listens to
the needs of all the world, as if with innumerable bodies”—yet here he
is, a single mortal body stuck between the competing claims of a hunter
and a dove.71 In Kalpanāmanditikā 64—in which the dove is being sought
˙˙
by a hawk rather than a hunter—King Śibi states that the dove must be
protected because “when I made the vow to attain enlightenment, I ac-
corded my protection to all beings”—only to have the hawk turn his own
words against him: “If your words are true,” he points out, “then quickly
give me the dove. For if you cause me to die of hunger, you will no longer
be showing compassion.” Even King Śibi is momentarily undone by this
reasoning, for he says to himself: “I fi nd myself in an extremely diffi cult
situation.”72
In keeping with the “utopian” nature of the gift-o f- the- body genre, of
course, even this intractable situation is easily resolved (in both versions
of the story) by means of the gift of the body: the king gives his own fl esh
away, and the needs of both the dove and the hunter / hawk are satisfi ed (see
fi gure 4). Nevertheless, the question has been raised, and it hangs in the
air: What if more doves, hunters, and hawks continued to make the very
same requests? What would the bodhisattva do then? Can the bodhisattva
really be all things to all beings?
In the fi rst three acts of the Lokānandanātaka, a dramatized version of
˙
the Manicūda story authored by Candragomin in the fi fth century c.e.
˙ ˙
but now extant only in a Tibetan translation, this question is posed in a
particularly bold and daring manner. Th is fi rst half of the play—which
takes place during King Manicūda’s youth—deals not with the two gifts
˙ ˙
of the body for which Manicūda is famous (the gift of his fl esh to a rāksasa
˙ ˙ ˙
122

conventions of rhetoric
and the gift of his c rest- jewel to an enemy king), but rather with the issue of
marriage. Th e maiden Padmāvatī is deeply in love with Prince Manicūda,
˙ ˙
and everyone wishes to see them married, including both of their parents.
Manicūda, however, has no interest in marriage; he sees marriage as an “in-
˙ ˙
curable sickness”73 and wishes only to renounce the world so that he can
work on becoming a Buddha.
After several diff erent characters have tried and failed to persuade him
to go along with his family’s wishes, the heavenly fairy Ratnāvalī, under-
standing that Manicūda is a bodhisattva intent upon universal compas-
˙ ˙
sion, hits upon the perfect plan. Toward the end of act 2 she approaches
Manicūda and throws herself at his feet, begging him for help. When he
˙ ˙
asks her what she wants, she replies: “O Great and Powerful One, your
body!”74 Of course, this is precisely what Manicūda, the compassionate
˙ ˙
bodhisattva, has been waiting for all along—a chance to give away his
body in an act of perfect generosity. “O Sister who asks for my body,” he
thinks to himself with excitement, “now at last I see a supplicant who is
daring!”75—whereupon Ratnāvalī goes in for the kill:
O Great and Powerful One . . . If the mere sight of your body can relieve all of
the torment suff ered by a person, then that person should remain with you! My
aff ectionate friend [Padmāvatī] is suff ering from a headache that will [only] go
away if she sees you, O Great and Powerful One. Th ere is no other relief!76
Ratnāvalī, of course, has mischievously tricked Manicūda, using his own
˙ ˙
professions of universal compassion to get him to fulfi ll the particularistic
duty of marriage: If he really wants to be compassionate, she suggests, why
not start at home? Manicūda recognizes the trick and continues to resist
˙ ˙
until the end of act 3, when he is fi nally forced—both by Ratnāvalī’s cruel
logic and by his own growing desires—to accept the equivalence between
Padmāvatī and other recipients of his compassion. “Since I am greatly
compassionate,” he says, “I will sacrifi ce myself for her sake.”77
Th e Lokānandanātaka here is boldly reversing the usual line of argu-
˙
mentation, subordinating the universal to the particular rather than the
other way around—and defl ating its hero’s pretences in the process. In
fact, Ratnāvalī’s trick has the eff ect of suggesting that the bodhisattva’s
“universal compassion” is perhaps not so “universal” after all—since it is
far more interested in hungry demons and evil brahmins than it is in the
members of his own family. Manicūda’s good friend Gautama, fulfi lling
˙ ˙
123

conventions of rhetoric
the typical hero-d efl ating function of the vidūsaka in a Sanskrit drama,78
˙
makes this suggestion explicit when he questions Manicūda—“If you wish
˙ ˙
to benefi t the world of relatives and kinsmen, then why do you stay so far
away from it?”79—and when he describes Manicūda, the bodhisattva, as
˙ ˙
being “without compassion,” “lacking even aff ection,” and “devoid of any
sympathy” in relation to his own family.80
As Gautama’s biting remarks make clear, generosity here is not so much a
concern with the other as it is a concern with oneself, for the bodhisattva, in
order to display his perfect generosity both to himself and to other beings,
relies upon recipients who are pitiful and evil—not beautiful, high- born
maidens. Of course one must make note of the fact that this is only act 3;
by the end of the play, Manicūda will succeed twice over in demonstrating
˙ ˙
that he can give his body to lowly creatures and still be the best possible
king and husband—and outside of the play stands the fi nal end point of
perfect Buddhahood, the ultimate justifi cation for everything. Neverthe-
less, in regard to the initial question I raised—Can the bodhisattva be all
things to all beings?—the Lokānandanātaka goes a very long way toward
˙
saying: “No—at least not until he is a Buddha.”
A similar boldness is displayed in a passage from the Mahāprajñāpāramitā
Śāstra, in its discussion of the six perfections.81 When the narrator of the
text states that each of the bodhisattva’s perfections should be practiced
in conjunction with the others, his interlocutor points to the possibility
of confl ict: If someone were to ask the bodhisattva- monk for his monas-
tic robes or alms-b owl, for example, the “perfection of morality” would
require him to refuse (since this is forbidden by the Vinaya), but the
“perfection of generosity” would require him to assent—so what is he sup-
posed to do? Th e narrator answers plainly that a “beginner bodhisattva”
cannot practice all the perfections at the same time, and he illustrates this
point by means of a rather startling reference to the tigress story: When
the bodhisattva practiced the “perfection of generosity” by giving his
body to the hungry tigress, his mother and father were blinded by grief,
and the tigress was karmically punished for killing the bodhisattva.
“However,” he concludes, “the bodhisattva considers neither the sorrow
of his parents nor the punishment reserved for the tigress: He wishes
only to accomplish the gift and gain merit.”82 So much for “universal”
compassion!
In chapter 5, I return to this theme of the ambiguity surrounding the
bodhisattva’s “perfect generosity” and the underlying aggression that is
perhaps inherent in his gift. For now I raise the issue simply to emphasize
124

conventions of rhetoric
once again the willingness of the genre to confront and challenge its own
most cherished ideals, and the importance of those conventional characters
I have called “opposers” in fulfi lling this rhetorical function.
Opposition to the gift is not always so rhetorically explicit, however. In
the following section I turn to the treatment of several minor conventional
characters who present further obstacles to the gift, thus adding to the
dramatic tension of these stories.
Other Conventional Characters
I have already had occasion thus far in my discussion to mention all
of the major conventional characters that populate the gift- of- the- body
genre—the bodhisattva, who gives away his body or is willing to give away
his body; the recipient, who is the intended target of the bodhisattva’s gift
(and who is either an ordinary being or the god Śakra in disguise); and
those heterogenous characters I have called opposers (most often, offi cials
and ministers, women, commoners, and minor deities), who oppose the
bodhisattva’s intention to give and actively argue against it. I turn now to
a brief discussion of three further types of characters that also demonstrate
conventional qualities, whom I refer to as the false donor, the envoy, and
the reluctant helper. Each of these characters further adds to the dramatic
tension of the plot by in some way causing obstacles to the completion of
the gift. Each type of character thus plays a particular role in the rhetoric
of the genre as a whole.
the false donor
In some stories, the bodhisattva is contrasted with one or more false do-
nors, characters who are in the same situation as the bodhisattva himself
but behave in a very diff erent manner. Th us in Pāli Jātaka 316, as we have
already seen, the bodhisattva, who is a hare, has three companions—a
monkey, a jackal, and an otter. All four animals are obligated to give food
to a wandering brahmin. Th e monkey, jackal, and otter all give ordinary
food to the brahmin, which contrasts sharply with the hare’s gift of his
own body. Moreover, the text explicitly tells us that the monkey, jackal,
and otter all take pride in their own virtue, which again contrasts sharply
with the hare’s complete selfl essness and single-m inded concern for the
welfare of the recipient. We might call the monkey, jackal, and otter false
125

conventions of rhetoric
donors who are faced with the same situation as the bodhisattva himself,
but who fail to act in the same exalted manner.
Likewise, in the eighteenth chapter of the Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra
˙
the bodhisattva is a prince named Mahāsattva, while the false donors are
his two brothers, Mahāpranāda and Mahādeva. When all three broth-
˙
ers encounter a starving tigress, Mahāpranāda and Mahādeva go off and
˙
search for ordinary food, while Mahāsattva gives the tigress his own body.
Th is contrast between Mahāsattva and his brothers is foreshadowed at
the beginning of the story, for before entering the great forest where they
will encounter the starving tigress, Mahāpranāda says that he is afraid of
˙
being destroyed by a wild animal, Mahādeva says that he is afraid of be-
ing separated from their parents, and Mahāsattva says that he is afraid of
nothing at all. Not only does the bodhisattva’s fearlessness contrast with
the false donors’ fears, but the false donors’ fears (destruction by a wild
animal and separation from parents) are the very fate that the bodhisattva
will willingly and gladly undergo.
In Divyāvadāna 32, where there are three brahmin ascetics rather than
three princely brothers, the situation is much the same: When faced with
the starving tigress, two of the ascetics remark, “Who could sacrifi ce his life
for the sake of a mere animal?”—whereupon the third ascetic (the bodhi-
sattva) answers: “I can sacrifi ce my life for the sake of a mere animal!”83 In
yet other versions of the tigress story, as we have seen, a single false donor
is identifi ed as a previous birth of the bodhisattva Maitreya, who fails to
consider giving the tigress his own body and thus falls behind Śākyamuni
in the race for Buddhahood by nine incalculable eons.
Th e rhetorical function of such false donors seems fairly obvious: the
contrast between their behavior and that of the bodhisattva serves to high-
light the uniqueness of the bodhisattva’s virtue and the extraordinary nature
of his gift. Th e bodhisattva’s excellence is doubly emphasized when set
against the background of the other characters’ utter failure to meet the
same exalted standard; as the false donor in Jātakamālā 1 states, “Oh, how
his heroic accomplishment sheds harsh light on my own unruliness!”84 Th e
presence of the false donor thus reinforces the exaltation and idealization
of the bodhisattva characteristic of the genre’s rhetoric as a whole.
At the same time, however, it is also possible in some cases to see the
false donor’s role as one of casting doubt upon the bodhisattva’s “perfect”
conduct by presenting a more reasonable reaction to the situation than that
pursued by the bodhisattva himself. In the hare story, for example, there
is no reason why the brahmin should not be perfectly satisfi ed with the
126

conventions of rhetoric
ordinary food presented to him by the monkey, jackal, and otter—which
perhaps suggests to the reader that the hare’s urgent desire to immolate
himself in a fi re is both unreasonable and unnecessary. (As the brahmin
wanderer puts it in one version of the hare story, “What is this reckless,
excessive, and repugnant deed that you’re doing?!”)85
Th us, whether they are intended to exalt the bodhisattva’s conduct or
to diminish it, false donors illustrate for the reader the normal, pragmatic
response that one might expect in such a situation—which then becomes
a background against which to interpret the bodhisattva’s extraordinary
deed.
the envoy
Earlier I defi ned the “evil” recipient as one who makes a direct and con-
scious demand for the bodhisattva’s body. In some stories, however, the evil
recipient does not himself go to the bodhisattva and ask for his body, but
instead sends an envoy to do his bidding. In Pāli Jātaka 514, for example,
it is the evil Queen Subhaddā who constitutes the recipient, since she
is the one who demands and ultimately receives the bodhisattva’s body
(here, an elephant’s tusks). However, rather than going to the bodhi-
sattva herself, she sends an envoy—the hunter Sonuttara. Likewise, in the
Manicūdāvadāna, when the evil King Dusprasaha wants the c rest- jewel
˙ ˙ ˙
attached to King Manicūda’s head, he remains in his own kingdom and
˙ ˙
sends out fi ve brahmins as envoys to do the dirty deed.
Th e functions of such envoys are not entirely clear to me, but several
themes seem to be highlighted. Th e evil recipient often has considerable
trouble recruiting an envoy: in the Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22, for
example, an evil king asks all the beggars in his kingdom to go and get
King Candraprabha’s head, but all of them refuse to do so, citing King
Candraprabha’s great kindness and compassion; only later does he fi nd a
“brahmin from the mountains” who agrees to do the deed in exchange for
half of his kingdom and the hand of his daughter. Likewise, in Pāli Jātaka
514 Queen Subhaddā at fi rst has diffi culty persuading any hunter to go
after the tusks of the elephant Chaddanta; as the narrator explains, the
hunter Sonuttara eventually agrees to do so only because he had formerly
been an enemy of Chaddanta in a previous life. Th us I would say that the
problems involved in recruiting an envoy are used to present obstacles
to the recipient’s intentions—just as “opposers” present obstacles to the
bodhisattva’s intentions—and thus add to the drama and confl ict of the
127

conventions of rhetoric
story. Moreover, the reluctance of potential envoys to take on the job serves
again to highlight the great virtue of the bodhisattva and his widespread
power and infl uence over others—while the very need to use such an envoy
at all also suggests the cowardly nature of the evil recipient. Th e contrast
between the bodhisattva and the recipient—and thus the enormity of the
bodhisattva’s self-s acrifi ce on the recipient’s behalf—is thus intensifi ed by
the use of such envoys.
the reluctant helper
Reluctant helpers are those occasional characters who are charged with the
actual task of physically mutilating the bodhisattva’s body, but who strongly
resist doing so, horrifi ed at the very idea or afraid of the consequences of
injuring such a virtuous being. In Pāli Jātaka 499, for example, King Śibi
asks his court surgeon to remove his eyes, but the surgeon is extremely
reluctant to do so (although he eventually does). In Kalpanāmanditikā 64
˙˙
it is a servant who is charged with cutting up King Śibi’s fl esh, but who
begs to be absolved from such a horrifi c duty. “Have compassion on me,”
he says,
I can’t do it. I have always received the king’s kindnesses; how could I cut with a
knife a morsel of fl esh from the king’s thigh? . . . Th e king is the savior and pro-
tector of all. If I cut the king’s fl esh with a knife, surely I will be quickly thrown
down and fall to the ground.86
We might also speak of the “reluctant helper” in a slightly diff erent
sense when the bodhisattva has diffi culty recruiting such a helper (just as
the recipient has diffi culty recruiting an envoy). In Avadānakalpalatā 55
King Śibi off ers abundant gold to anyone who will cut up his fl esh, but the
vast majority of people simply “cover their ears [in horror] and run away”;
only a “cruel-m inded fellow” with the suggestive name of Kapilapin˙gala
(“Reddish-B rown”) fi nally agrees to do the deed.87 In yet other cases,
we might say that it is the recipient himself (or his envoy) who acts as the
reluctant helper. Th at is, though eager to receive the bodhisattva’s body,
many recipients and envoys display either weakness or cowardliness when
it comes to the actual task of physically mutilating the bodhisattva. Th us,
in Pāli Jātaka 514 the hunter Sonuttara struggles to cut off the elephant
Chaddanta’s tusks, but is physically unable to do so, just as the tigress in
various versions of the tigress story is too weak to devour the bodhi-
128

conventions of rhetoric
sattva. Other recipients and envoys simply refuse to perform the mutila-
tion out of fear and cowardice. Th e brahmin recipient in Divyāvadāna 22
fi rst forces King Candraprabha into a secluded p leasure- park so that the
crowds cannot see what is about to occur, and then admits to the king, “I
cannot cut off the Lord’s head!”88—just as the hunter in Kalpanāmanditikā
˙˙
69 admits to the b odhisattva- elephant, “I fear the fi re of your compassion;
if I tear out your tusks, certainly my hand will fall dead.”89
Whether the reluctant helper is a recipient, an envoy, or a separate
character, in all cases, his reluctance or fear of performing the mutila-
tion serves to draw out the narrative and make it more dramatic by
again delaying the gift and causing further obstacles to the bodhisattva’s
intention. Moreover, in many cases, this reluctance also serves as a plot-
device by means of which the bodhisattva himself is eventually forced to
injure his own body. Th ese scenes are often milked for as much pathos
as they can muster: in Pāli Jātaka 514, for example, the elephant, hav-
ing been shot by the cruel hunter, is so weak from loss of blood that he
cannot even lift up his own trunk; nevertheless, he tells the hunter that
if the hunter will lift up his trunk for him, he will somehow manage to
grasp the hunter’s saw and then saw off his own tusks. Th ese pathetic
scenes in which the heroic bodhisattva himself mutilates his own body
on behalf of those too cowardly, fearful, or incompetent to do so again
highlight the great diff erence between the bodhisattva and other people,
for a contrast is drawn between the strength, courage, and heroism of
the bodhisattva and the weakness, fearfulness, and cowardliness of those
around him. Once again, then, a minor conventional character plays a
role that is seemingly insignifi cant, but that contributes to the rhetoric
of the genre as a whole.
Supernatural Occurrences
Another conventional “character” we might speak about is the universe at
large—in particular, those responses on the part of the universe that fall
into the category of “supernatural occurrences.” By “supernatural occur-
rences” I mean unnatural or abnormal events, events whose occurrence
cannot be explained in natural, everyday terms, such as the shaking of the
earth or the sudden fall of a shower of heavenly fl owers. Such supernatural
occurrences appear in many gift- of- the- body stories and are stereotypical
in both content and location.
129

conventions of rhetoric
Supernatural occurrences are found almost solely at two locations within
the narrative. First, they occur at crucial junctures in the process of giv-
ing the gift, such as the moment when the recipient decides to ask for
the bodhisattva’s body, the moment when the bodhisattva decides to give
away his body, the moment when the bodhisattva’s body is fi rst harmed,
or—most commonly—the moment when the gift is completed. Second,
in those stories in which the bodhisattva’s body is restored through an Act
of Truth, supernatural occurrences very frequently mark the moment of the
restoration. In both cases, supernatural occurrences serve to underscore the
power of the bodhisattva’s virtue by showing how the universe itself reacts
to it in spontaneous and unusual ways. Th eir stereotypical location also
makes them important narrative markers that grab the reader’s attention
at crucial junctures in the story and indicate to him or her that something
momentous is going on.
Supernatural occurrences are stereotypical in content as well as loca-
tion, the same phrases being repeated over and over again. Th is content
seems to suggest to us the most appropriate ways of evaluating the gift
and the restoration of the body, contextualizing these events for the reader
by demonstrating how the universe itself responds to their occurrence. By
far the most common supernatural occurrence is for the earth to shake or
tremble violently; very often, a stereotypical cliché is employed in which
the earth is said to shake “in six ways” (sadvikāram).90 Th e shaking of the
˙ ˙ ˙
earth (and secondarily, of Mount Meru, the oceans, etc.) seems to herald
fi rst and foremost the awe- inspiring power of the bodhisattva’s deed, since
the earth and mountains are usually noted for their fi rmness and immov-
ability.91 Other supernatural occurrences seem more distinctly negative in
tone, perhaps heralding the terrible nature of the deed. For example, the
earth, oceans, and mountains resound with horrible noises, the sun and
moon stop shining, the whole world becomes dark, meteors fall, thunder
and lightning occur, streams and lakes dry up, trees lose their fl owers and
fruit, rough winds blow, animals are terrifi ed, and so forth. Such signs are
sometimes explicitly referred to as “inauspicious omens,” “most dreadful
omens,” “evil omens,” and the like.92 A third group of supernatural occur-
rences are undoubtedly more positive in tone, and seem to celebrate the
wonderful or miraculous nature of the deed. Th e most frequently mentioned
of these are showers of heavenly fl owers, perfumes, and powders, and the
sounding of celestial drums. Other “positive” signs are the exact opposites
of the “negative” signs mentioned above: instead of not shining, the sun
and moon may shine especially brightly; instead of rough winds blowing,
130

conventions of rhetoric
a soft and perfumed breeze may blow; instead of losing all their fl owers
and fruit, trees may spontaneously blossom out of season.
Th e distribution of “awe- inspiring,” “positive,” and “negative” super-
natural occurrences is also conventional in nature, for all three types seem
to occur freely at the moment when the gift is made, but only the “awe-
i nspiring” and “positive” (never the “negative”) occur when the bodhi-
sattva’s body is restored. Th is would suggest that the giving of the gift itself
may be both terrible and wonderful in nature, whereas the restoration of
the bodhisattva’s body is wholly wonderful; both, of course, inspire amaze-
ment and awe. In some cases, however, only “negative” signs occur at the
moment when the gift is made, and their corresponding “positive” signs
occur when the bodhisattva’s body is restored; for example, rough winds
blow when the gift is made, and a cool, perfumed breeze blows when the
bodhisattva’s body is restored.93 Th is latter scenario perhaps suggests that
the bodhisattva’s deed, while awe- inspiring in its power, is also a terrible
injustice that throws the universe out of whack until the body is restored
and the bodhisattva returned to health. In any case, all three types of signs
forcefully demonstrate that the bodhisattva’s deed has powerful reverbera-
tions throughout the cosmos, as well as beginning to suggest to the reader
how he or she might evaluate the gift.
Th e same general categories of awe- inspiring, negative, and positive
are equally well refl ected in another large group of supernatural occur-
rences—the reactions of supernatural beings such as devas, nāgas, yaksas,
˙
gandharvas, asuras, kinnaras, and mahoragas. Rather than playing a direct
part in the narrative, these beings generally constitute a kind of Greek
chorus, reacting to and commenting on the action from a distance. Th e
reactions of these beings parallel other types of supernatural occurrences.
In some cases, they are simply “amazed” and full of wonder; in some cases,
they cry and wail and lament; and in some cases, they sing with joy, play
heavenly musical instruments, and otherwise worship the bodhisattva and
celebrate his deed. Th eir occasional proclamations about the gift can again
be divided up in a similar way: they either express amazement alone (“It is
improbable that such a thing has ever been done before!”);94 or they grieve
and lament the bodhisattva’s injury or death (“Alas, alas, what a calamity!
Th is noble and great sage has been killed!”);95 or they praise and celebrate
the bodhisattva and his deed (“Oh, what nobility! Oh, what compassion!
See how great is the purity of his heart!”).96
In general, however, one feature that seems to distinguish such be-
ings—particularly the higher devas—from either ordinary human charac-
131

conventions of rhetoric
ters or the natural world is their somewhat greater tendency to recognize
and celebrate the “wonderful” nature of the deed. Often, in the midst of
terrible earthly omens, wailing people, and frightened animals, the gods
alone are busy celebrating, raining down heavenly fl owers, and praising
the bodhisattva eff usively. Moreover, from their lofty position in the skies,
they frequently make pronouncements concerning the larger signifi cance
of the gift (“By giving away his head, King Candraprabha has completely
fulfi lled the perfection of generosity!”),97 or make predictions about the
bodhisattva’s future (“Soon he will obtain Buddhahood!”).98 Th eir per-
spective on the gift is longer and wider than that of the other characters,
and their pronouncements have the air of normative statements about
how the gift should be interpreted, an eff ect which is heightened by the
distance they maintain from the immediate actions and emotions of the
story.
In short, the voice of the higher devas sometimes seems to fulfi ll a
largely discursive function within the narrative, temporarily removing the
reader from the immediate emotional context of the story and providing
him or her with clues as to the true signifi cance of the gift. In terms of
rhetoric, it seems to me that the presence of the devas and the normative
statements they make about the rightness of the gift provide a higher- level
frame within which opposition to the gift can be fully elaborated and
developed without the reader losing sight of the genre’s normative con-
cerns. Th e profound ambivalence toward the gift so often expressed by the
bodhisattva’s “opposers,” in other words, is perhaps made possible in part
by being contextualized within the frame of the higher devas’ statements
in praise of the gift. We will see a similar type of discursive functioning
recurring in my fi nal discussion of the conventions of rhetoric—the dis-
cursive functions fulfi lled by Śakra, lord of devas.
Śakra’s Discursive Functions
Earlier in this chapter I briefl y argued that stories featuring Śakra as the
recipient of the gift off er the greatest degree of resolution between the
transcendent values embodied in the bodhisattva and the everyday, prag-
matic values embodied in the bodhisattva’s opposers—not only because the
give-a nd-g et-b ack movement of the gift provides the reader with a concrete
image of the confl ict’s resolution, but also because the character of Śakra
fulfi lls a number of “discursive functions” throughout the narrative that
132

conventions of rhetoric
help to develop this resolution in a gradual manner.99 Once again, it is
the distance Śakra maintains from the immediate action of the story that
perhaps allows for this kind of discursive functioning. Unlike other devas,
of course, Śakra does play an active role within the story and is not merely
a passive bystander. However, for much of the time he appears in disguise;
only the reader knows who he really is, which has the eff ect of distancing
Śakra from the story and putting him on a level with the reader.
We might speak of three discursive functions fulfi lled by the character
of Śakra. First, he constitutes what we might call the curious reader. Śakra
seems to represent the reader’s perspective: From the moment when he is
fi rst alerted to the existence of the bodhisattva, Śakra constantly expresses
doubt, curiosity, and some skepticism about the bodhisattva’s generosity.
He is usually the only one who expresses such doubt explicitly; in contrast,
the narrative voice of the text always takes the bodhisattva’s virtue com-
pletely for granted, as well as assuming implicitly that the gift of one’s own
body is an appropriate course of action. Śakra expresses the doubts and
asks the questions that are otherwise forbidden. In this he often seems to
echo the reader’s own questions about the bodhisattva as he or she reads
the story: Will the bodhisattva really give the gift? Why is the bodhisattva
giving the gift? Is he crazy?
It is remarkable, in fact, to notice just how often Śakra speaks in the
form of questions that might just as easily come from the mouth of a
curious reader. Let us look at a few random examples drawn from stories
involving King Śibi, all of which are spoken by Śakra, either to himself
or to another deity:
Will he be able to give [his eyes] or not?100
Why does this King Śibi act thus for the sake of beings? Does he [do so] out of
compassion?101
How on earth has this king thought up such a thing, his mind carried away by his
excessive passion for giving? Is he taking his determination to give to the utmost
limit by fi rmly resolving to give away his own limbs?102
Is it certain that the king will not be shaken from his purpose?103
Will the great king maintain his resolve in the midst of the greatest of suff erings?
. . . Will he maintain his resolve if I make him redouble his suff erings?104
133

conventions of rhetoric
By means of such musings, Śakra makes explicit the main questions to
be answered by the story, and gives the reader a character with whom to
identify.
A second discursive function fulfi lled by Śakra again largely takes the
form of questions, but this time addressed to the bodhisattva himself. We
might refer to this as Śakra’s role as a questioner. Both during the gift itself
and when he encourages the bodhisattva to perform an Act of Truth, Śakra
frequently questions the bodhisattva about why he is giving the gift, what
he hopes to accomplish, whether he has any regret, and so forth. In other
words, Śakra is unsatisfi ed with merely the gift itself; his questions force
the bodhisattva to make the logic and motives behind the gift explicit,
thus assuring the reader of the true nature of the gift (while exonerating
the bodhisattva of any unprompted boasting). In the Manicūdāvadāna,
˙ ˙
for example, when Śakra, disguised as a rāksasa, is drinking Manicūda’s
˙ ˙ ˙
blood, Manicūda becomes sad for a moment because—as the narrator
˙ ˙
explains—he sees the stream of blood drying up and is concerned that the
rāksasa will be left unsatisfi ed. However, lest we (or anyone else in the story)
˙
fi nd this sadness suspect or do not trust the narrator’s explanation, the text
uses Śakra—the reader’s ally—to make Manicūda’s feelings explicit. Śakra
˙ ˙
asks Manicūda, “Do you regret, Great King?”105—whereupon Manicūda
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
makes an explicit denial of any feeling of regret. In many cases, Śakra
remains unsatisfi ed even by statements such as this, and, through further
questions, forces the bodhisattva to make a more formalistic statement
(such as a vow or an Act of Truth).
Th is pattern is consistent in story after story, Śakra continually goading
the bodhisattva into making the nature of the gift explicit:
Are you beginning to have regrets?106
What do you wish to gain by such deeds and by such a strenuous endeavor?107
O Great King, what goal do you wish to attain by enduring such torments?108
When beggars have reduced you to such a condition, how on earth can you still
be concerned with them?109
Great King, when you were thinking that you would give up your body, or that
you had given up your body, or that you should give up your body, I hope you
felt no hesitation or regret. . . . How are we to know this?110
134

conventions of rhetoric
Did you not feel grief in sacrifi cing yourself for a dove? . . . Such words are dif-
fi cult to believe, and such an act has never been seen before. Who will be able
to give it credit?111
After giving away your breasts, did you [later] change your mind?112
Is it true, Rūpāvatī, that you sacrifi ced both of your breasts for the sake of a young
boy? . . . Rūpāvatī, did your mind feel any regret when you decided to sacrifi ce,
when you were sacrifi cing, or when you had sacrifi ced both of your breasts? . . .
But who will believe such a thing?113
By means of this austerity, do you desire to conquer the station belonging to
Indra? Good Woman, I ask you this only out of curiosity.114
Not only does Śakra share the reader’s initial doubts about the bodhisattva,
he also maintains this doubt throughout the giving of the gift and makes
sure—on behalf of the reader—that the bodhisattva makes his motives
and intentions verbally explicit.
Of course, the same alliance between Śakra and the reader is implicit
in the whole motif of the test itself: Śakra tests the bodhisattva for the sake
of the reader as much as for his own sake, since the narrative voice of the
text (as well as most of the other characters) already takes the bodhisattva’s
virtue for granted. Th is leads us to Śakra’s third discursive function: he
constitutes a reliable witness. Because Śakra shares all the doubts of the
reader, he is a reliable witness to the bodhisattva’s generosity; when his
doubts are fi nally dispelled, so must ours be. Th e dispelling of Śakra’s
doubts is signifi ed not only by his eff usive positive praise of the bodhisat-
tva (several examples of which I gave earlier), but also by the fact that he
dispenses with his disguise and reveals his true identity. Once he becomes
a “believer,” we might say, he leaves the once-r emoved, discursive level of
the narrative (by shedding his disguise) and seems to meld back into the
story itself—hopefully bringing the reader along.
Th is is why I perceive the character of Śakra to be a mediator between
the Buddhist values embodied in the bodhisattva and the everyday, prag-
matic concerns embodied in the bodhisattva’s opposers. He begins on the
side of the opposers (at least in terms of his doubt), and by means of the
test, gradually moves over to the side of the bodhisattva, coming fi nally to
fully champion the transcendent ideal represented by the bodhisattva’s gift
of his body. Moreover, by virtue of his discursive functioning as a curious
135

conventions of rhetoric
reader, questioner, and reliable witness, Śakra guides the reader along the
same arc as he himself travels: if only we can identify with Śakra, we too
will move from doubt and skepticism to conviction and belief.
Ambivalence Toward the Traditional Rhetoric in Two Chinese Tales
Th e consistency of the rhetoric characteristic of the gift- of- the- body genre
that I have tried to elucidate throughout this chapter can perhaps be
brought into greater relief by looking at two Chinese stories that seem
distinctly ambivalent toward this rhetoric. Th ough both stories come from
texts that present themselves as Chinese translations of Indic originals (now
lost), the rhetoric of each story suggests strongly that a Chinese author was
uncomfortable with the traditional version of the story and adapted it to
be in greater conformity to his own sensibilities. It is the striking manner
in which these adaptations jump to one’s attention that convince me of
the otherwise consistent nature of the Indian genre’s rhetoric.
Th e Mohe senzi lu (T. 1425) contains a story of the bodhisattva’s previ-
ous birth as an elephant that is familiar to us from Indic tradition as the
Saddanta Jātaka (represented within my corpus, for example, by Pāli Jātaka
˙ ˙
514 and Kalpanāmanditikā 69).115 As in the Indian versions, the main
˙˙
character is a magnifi cent, six-t usked elephant who is shot by the arrow of
a cruel hunter and then willingly gives his own tusks to the hunter, refus-
ing to get angry at him out of respect for the religious robes the hunter
has deceivingly put on. Th e Mohe senzi lu version, however, distinguishes
itself sharply from the other versions in its depiction of the b odhisattva-
elephant. Here the bodhisattva- elephant does everything possible to avoid
having to give away his tusks. Long before he has even encountered the
hunter, in fact, the elephant thinks to himself, “Why do men want to
kill us? Th ey want to kills us because of our tusks.”116 Th inking this, he
prudently stashes away both his grandfather’s tusks and his father’s tusks
when each of them dies, and later uses these tusks to try to avoid giving
away his own. When the hunter approaches him and asks for his tusks, the
elephant fi rst gives him his grandfather’s tusks on the condition that the
hunter will never return. Th e hunter is soon cheated out of the tusks by
a wine merchant, however, and returns to the elephant again and asks for
another pair of tusks. At this point, the elephant gives him his father’s tusks
on the condition that he will never again succumb to such debauchery.
Once again, the hunter loses the tusks, returns, and shoots the elephant
136

conventions of rhetoric
from a hiding place. It is only at this point in the story that the elephant
reverts to his more familiar character, refusing to get angry at the hunter
out of respect for the religious robes he has put on and freely inviting the
hunter to take his own tusks.
Th e stance of the bodhisattva- elephant here is strikingly diff erent from
what we have seen to be so characteristic of the Indian genre. Instead of
a bodhisattva who is eager to encounter a supplicant who will ask for his
body, off ers no hesitation whatsoever in giving his body away, and never
dreams of attempting to substitute something else in its place, here we
have a bodhisattva who consciously stashes away possible substitute- gifts
beforehand, does not off er his own body until these s ubstitute- gifts have
been exhausted, and tries in vain to make sure that the supplicant will
never return! So inconsistent is this story with the rhetoric I have eluci-
dated above that I cannot help but imagine a Chinese author who was
unhappy with the traditional version and thus rewrote it to make it “more
reasonable.”117 Th e rhetoric here is one that promotes a prudent course in
which one tries to protect one’s own life—but does display virtue if the
situation demands it. Frankly, I cannot imagine an original Indic version
of such a tale.
Even more striking are the innovations found in another Chinese gift-
o f-t he-b ody story, this time taken from the Liudu ji jing (T. 152).118 Th is
is clearly a version of the well-k nown story of King Candraprabha, who
gives his own head to an evil brahmin and suff ers death as a result. Never-
theless, it again departs radically from other versions of this story (such as
Divyāvadāna 22 and Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22) in its depiction of
the bodhisattva. In the traditional versions, of course, King Candraprabha
is eager to give his body away and overjoyed to encounter a brahmin who
asks for his head. In the Liudu ji jing version, on the other hand, his reac-
tion is completely diff erent, for as soon as the brahmin asks for his head,
he replies: “What advantage could my head be to you that would make
you want to have it? I possess all sorts of jewels that I could off er to you in
large quantitites.”119 As we have seen, this attempt to substitute material
gifts for the gift of the body is usually characteristic of the bodhisattva’s
ministers, not the bodhisattva himself; in fact, it is precisely the rejection of
this substitution that normally characterizes the bodhisattva himself.
Th is striking departure from the traditional rhetoric is further under-
scored later on in the Liudu ji jing version when it is King Candraprabha
himself who off ers to the brahmin a head made out of jewels in place of
his own head—just as his ministers do in the other versions. It is only
137

conventions of rhetoric
when the brahmin keeps refusing these material substitutes that King
Candraprabha fi nally agrees to give away his own head. Just as we saw in
the e lephant-s tory above, King Candraprabha follows a prudent course
in which the gift of his body is a last resort.
Th e outcome of this story, moreover, is also strikingly diff erent from
what we fi nd in the other versions, where, as we have seen, a minor deity
becomes angry at the brahmin and tries to obstruct the gift, but is sternly
rebuked by the bodhisattva and made to “fall silent” so that the gift can take
place, resulting in the bodhisattva’s tragic death. In this version, however,
the minor deity slaps the brahmin across the face, causing him to fall on the
ground and lose his sword, thus sparing King Candraprabha’s life! Th e gift
is successfully interrupted by the anger and indignation of a minor, local
deity, and the bodhisattva- king off ers no protest against this obstruction at
all. Instead of the message that Buddhism, as a cosmological and translocal
tradition, has authority over the realm of popular, local religious interests,
here we seem to get the very diff erent message that the power of a local
deity can protect the bodhisattva who chooses to adhere to transcendent
Buddhist values. In a sense, the local takes precedence over the translocal
rather than the other way around. In several diff erent ways, then, we can
detect the Chinese author’s discomfort with the traditional rhetoric char-
acteristic of the genre and his signifi cant alteration of this rhetoric—even
while maintaining the basic elements of the story in place.
It is against the background provided by these two “alternative” Chinese
versions that the project I have engaged in throughout this chapter becomes
clear: I have attempted to elucidate some of the conventions of rhetoric
that govern the gift-o f-t he-b ody genre and make possible its “power to
persuade.” Th ese conventions are organized around a limited number of
c haracter-t ypes who interact with one another throughout the course of
the plot, their interactions gradually unfolding the basic argument of the
genre in a processual and emergent manner in which the reader is able
to participate. It is the narrative form that allows for this process by em-
bodying Buddhist ideals and their antitheses within particular characters
who engage in action over time, come into confl ict with other characters,
resolve their confl icts (to whatever degree and in whatever manner), and
experience the various consequences of both confl ict and resolution. I
follow many scholars here in believing that the type of ethical work per-
formed by narrative literature is not subsidiary to more systematic texts,
but absolutely essential.120 As Hallisey and Hansen have noted in their
study of ethics and narrative in Th eravāda Buddhism,
138

conventions of rhetoric
Th rough narrative we are able to imagine ourselves in the place of another. . . .
[W]hen, in reading, we leave aside our own social location . . . and enter imagi-
natively into the experience of a character in a narrative, we cultivate capabilities
that are necessary to all moral agency. . . . In short, narrative prefi gures moral
life because it cultivates a capacity of imagination that is essential for ethical
action.121
In addition to such “prefi guring,” Hallisey and Hansen also argue that it
is narrative, fi rst and foremost, that allows us to think about moral conduct
in a manner that fully acknowledges “its conditioning by other values”
and the “limitations which ‘reality’ may impose on our visions of human
fl ourishing”122 and it is this dimension that I have sought to emphasize
here. By subjecting this material to a close and careful reading that takes
seriously its complexity and artistry, I have tried to avoid the kind of pat
and simplistic judgment of these stories that all too quickly dismisses
them as “trivial, didactic fables promoting the virtue of dāna,” in favor of
an analysis that highlights the confl ict and opposition surrounding the
gift, the enormous ambivalence such an ideal of generosity engenders in
its audience, and the fragile and tenuous nature of the resolution that all
such stories ultimately aim to provide.
139

iv
DĀNA
Th e Buddhist Discourse on Giving
N
ow that I have subjected the gift-o f- the- body genre to a careful
analysis in terms of its “conventions of plot” and “conventions of
rhetoric,” in this and the following chapters I turn away from a
strictly genre- focused approach in order to look more broadly at some of
the major conceptual issues that come to the fore within gift-o f- the- body
tales. Taking a cue from the phrase “gift of the body” itself, chapters 4 and
5 are devoted to the “gift” aspect of these tales, while chapter 6 is devoted
to the “body” aspect. I turn now to the subject of the gift.
Over the course of the previous century, the notion of the gift—so im-
mediately familiar to us in everyday life—has also become a prominent
category of analysis in academic scholarship and critical theory. Th e geneal-
ogy of the gift within modern critical theory begins with the appearance
in 1925 of Marcel Mauss’ groundbreaking Essai sur le don and subsequently
meanders through a pantheon of prominent twentieth-c entury thinkers
working from a variety of disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives.
Th e wealth and breadth of scholarship now available on the gift has merely
confi rmed Mauss’ original insight that the gift constitutes a “total social
140

DNA
phenomenon” in which all kinds of institutions—religious, political, so-
cial, economic, and cultural—fi nd simultaneous expression.2
Th is salience of “the gift” within modern academic thought fi nds a
distant parallel in the world of premodern South Asian Buddhism. In-
dian Buddhist textual discourse pays an enormous amount of attention
to the category of the gift. Th e terms “gift,” “giving,” and “generosity” are
all indicated by the Pāli and Sanskrit term dāna (derived from the verbal
root dā), which is ubiquitous in Indian Buddhist texts. Dāna appears on
many diff erent standardized lists of highly valued acts and qualities, such
as the six or ten “perfections” (pāramitā), the three “bases of meritorious
action” (punya- kriyā- vastu), the four “means of conversion” (samgraha-
˙ ˙
vastu), and the four “accomplishments” (sampad).3 In the commentarial
explanations that so often accompany such lists, Buddhist texts contain
extensive discussions of the gift in which the qualities of the giver, the gift,
the recipient, and the procedure of giving itself are all exhaustively analyzed
and typologies of diff erent gifts are worked out. Th ese discussions are used
by the Buddhist tradition to engage in serious and sustained refl ection
on a variety of diff erent issues: Why is generosity a valued moral quality?
Who should give what to whom, and when and how should such gifts be
made? What motivates the gift, and how do diff erent motivations relate to
each other? Th e abstract answers to such questions are further illuminated
by a voluminous body of stories about gifts; gift-g iving of various sorts,
in fact, may well be the single most popular subject of Indian Buddhist
narrative literature, taken as a whole. Th e gift thus becomes a prominent
site for ethical, religious, and ritual refl ection. Buddhism here is heir to
its South Asian background, as refl ection on dāna and stories illustrating
dāna constituted an extensive pan- Indic discourse shared equally by the
Hindu and Jain traditions as well.4
Discussion of the Buddhist gift, moreover, is not restricted to any
single, narrowly defi ned area, but spreads its tentacles out in virtually
every direction. Th e Buddhist gift manifests itself in a wide variety of
diff erent forms—including, for example, the layperson’s gift of alms and
other material objects to the Samgha, the giving of ritual off erings to the
˙
Buddha (or to other objects of worship), the status of monks and nuns as
“gifts” made to the Samgha by their parents (as well as their own “giving
˙
up” of the world in an act of renunciation), the bodhisattva’s “perfection
of generosity” on behalf of others, and the Buddha’s and Samgha’s “gift of
˙
the dharma.” Th e gift in Buddhist discourse thus encompasses laypeople,
141

DNA
monastics, and religious virtuosos; acts of ritual off ering, renunciation,
preaching, and self- sacrifi ce; material gifts, the gift of the dharma, and
the ultimate gift of oneself.5
Stories featuring the bodhisattva’s gift of his body and highlighting the
virtue of generosity cannot be taken in isolation, therefore, but must be
placed within the larger context of the Buddhist discourse on dāna—which
is the project I undertake in this and the following chapter. What type of
gift is the bodhisattva’s gift of his body, and what role does the gift- of- the-
body theme play within the larger context of Buddhist ethical discourse on
the gift? In the present chapter I fi rst set the background for this discussion
by presenting two diff erent conceptual schema for organizing some of the
many varieties of dāna discussed within Buddhist exegetical texts. Th e fi rst
schema consists of a threefold hierarchy of reciprocated gifts, unreciprocated
gifts, and pure gifts, while the second schema consists of a threefold ty-
pology of giving up, giving down, and giving up in another sense (which
I will indicate as giving up2). Th ese two schema overlap with each other
considerably, but approach the material from quite diff erent perspectives.
Together, I hope they will provide the reader with a solid framework for
thinking, in some complex ways, about the many Buddhist notions and
varieties of dāna. Only after this conceptual background has been estab-
lished will I then turn, in chapter 5, to the gift-o f- the- body theme itself
and its relationship to this larger discourse.
Reciprocated and Unreciprocated Gifts
At the beginning of his seminal Essai sur la don,6 Marcel Mauss focuses
on the practice of gift- giving in “primitive” and “archaic” societies. His
primary argument concerning the gift in archaic societies is that although
the gift operates under the illusion that it is free, voluntary, and disinter-
ested—qualities inherent in the very defi nition of a “gift”—it is, in fact,
obligatory, constrained by social rules, and necessarily reciprocal. Th rough-
out the essay, Mauss emphasizes the reciprocal nature of the archaic gift,
not only because he wishes to demonstrate a historical connection be-
tween archaic gift-g iving and modern economic exchange—which is the
fundamental thesis of the Essai as a whole—but also because he wants
to argue for the gift’s social function. It is the gift, according to Mauss,
that enables society, for through the constant movement and exchange of
goods, honors, and services via the medium of the gift, social networks
142

DNA
are established and social ties maintained. Th us Mauss off ers a plethora
of examples in order to demonstrate that gift-g iving in archaic societies
is really exchange; that gift- giving is always reciprocal; that in addition to
the “obligation to give” and the “obligation to receive,” there is also an
“obligation to reciprocate”; and that underneath the disinterested idiom
of the “gift” lie the brute social facts of reciprocity and exchange.
In the middle of the book, however, when Mauss turns to the classical
Sanskrit literature of India in order to fi nd “survivals” of the archaic gift,
it is only through some subterfuge and obscurity that he is able to use
the Indic material in a way that is benefi cial to his argument, while he
ignores those aspects of the material that fail to cooperate.7 For while the
Brahmanical material Mauss draws on is very useful to him in regard to
certain other points he wants to make about the gift, it is not at all useful
to him in terms of the “obligation to reciprocate.” As several Indologists
have subsequently noted,8 the classical Indian theory of dāna—whether
Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain—departs radically from Mauss on precisely this
point, since dāna, as a rule, must never be reciprocated. Although there are
other forms of gift in South Asian discourse that do involve exchange and
reciprocity, the category of dāna constitutes a special (and highly valued)
case that is defi ned by its lack of such reciprocity. Having begun his career
as an Indologist, Mauss was fully aware of this point, but because it didn’t
support his general argument, he was forced to relegate it to a footnote.9
Why did the Indic notion of dāna fail to cooperate with Mauss? As
Trautmann has most clearly demonstrated,10 in Buddhism, Hinduism, and
Jainism the theory of dāna works together with the theory of karma and
makes use of a basic Mīmāmsaka distinction between “seen” and “unseen”
˙
“fruits” (drsta- phala, adrsta- phala). Any gift that is reciprocated within this
˙˙˙ ˙˙˙
world—for example, by a r eturn-g ift from the recipient—has a “seen” and
visible “fruit” and thereby loses its ability to result in a transcendent karmic
reward. Such a gift belongs wholly to the ordinary social realm and is really
no diff erent from barter, sale, or purchase. Only the unreciprocated gift
that has no visible fruit within this world can be presumed to result in an
“unseen” and transcendent reward in the form of karmic merit (punya).
˙
Th e unreciprocated gift thus constitutes an “instrument of salvation”:11 the
recipient must not reciprocate the gift because to do so would exhaust the
gift’s soteriological capacity of resulting in karmic merit for the world to
come. Th e Indic theory thus agrees with Mauss that all ordinary gifts are
reciprocal in nature—only to reject such gifts in favor of an asymmetrical,
unreciprocated gift that bears fruit in the transcendent future, beyond the
143

DNA
present realm of give-a nd-t ake. As Trautmann succinctly puts it, the theory
of dāna includes no “obligation to reciprocate” because it is “a soteriology,
not a sociology of reciprocity.”12
Th is leads us to a basic truism about the gift that has been stated by
several scholars, both in relation to South Asia and in more general terms.
Speaking of several diff erent types of giving among Th eravāda Buddhists
in Sri Lanka, Parry states: “Th e reciprocated gift belongs to the profane
world; the unreciprocated gift to a quest for salvation from it.”13 Likewise,
Michaels notes in relation to Hindu dāna that since it is “not normal” for
gifts to go unreciprocated, the gift given with no expectation of worldly
return must be based on “the giver’s search for the abnormal, uncommon,
supernatural.”14 And, more broadly, Parry notes of the “world religions”
in general that wherever there is a notion of salvation that devalues this
profane world in favor of a better world (or better life) yet to come, “the
unreciprocated gift becomes a liberation from bondage to [this world],
a denial of the profane self, an atonement for sin, and hence a means to
salvation.”15 Here then we see one of the fundamental connections between
the gift and religion: while the reciprocated gift stands as a marker of the
purely social, the unreciprocated gift often serves to signify the sacred, the
salvational, or the soteriological.
Th is hierarchical distinction between “reciprocated” and “unrecipro-
cated” gifts can be found in many Buddhist passages relating to dāna.
Indian Buddhist discussions of dāna do take notice of the ordinary, “re-
ciprocated” gifts described by Mauss, but tend to accord them a very
low status. Th us, in a passage from the An˙guttara Nikāya, the gift given “be-
cause he gave to me” and the gift given “because he will give to me” are
both found within a list of seven “faulty” gifts and are contrasted with
those gifts that do not involve such social reciprocity.16 Similarly, in the
Bodhisattvabhūmi, the “pure gift” (viśuddha- dāna) of the bodhisattva is
defi ned in part as being “indiff erent to payback” in the sense of “not ex-
pecting any requital from others.”17 Th us, the kind of reciprocal social ex-
changes (masquerading as “gifts”) described by Mauss are recognized in the
Buddhist discourse on dāna, but are not highly valued.
“Unreciprocated” gifts of various types, on the other hand, are praised
and exalted ad nauseam in Buddhist literature. One classic example of an
“unreciprocated” gift in Buddhism is the layperson’s gift of alms to the
Samgha. When a layperson gives alms to a monk, the monk constitutes a
˙
nontransactional partner who receives and enjoys the alms but is in no way
expected to reciprocate. Th ough it often seems to the outside observer that
144

DNA
the monk “repays” the layperson’s gift by preaching a sermon or perform-
ing a ritual—the gift of alms and the gift of dharma thus constituting
a direct and balanced exchange—the Buddhist tradition itself generally
holds that the two gifts are independent of each other, and one is in no
way a “repayment” for the other.18 Indeed, in order to preserve the capacity
of the layperson’s gift to result in transcendent karmic rewards, the monk
should not reciprocate in any explicit manner, not even by an expression
of gratitude.19 In fact, just the reverse obtains: it is the layperson who
should be grateful to the monk for providing him or her with the oppor-
tunity to give an “unreciprocated” gift. Contrary to ordinary expectations,
then, both gift and gratitude fl ow in a single direction—from the giver
to the recipient—and even the appearance of reciprocity is avoided. Th e
monk in this one- way transaction serves only as a worthy “fi eld of merit”
(punya- ksetra)—a rich soil in which to “plant” one’s good deed—and the
˙ ˙
layperson’s gift is repaid solely by the impersonal karmic mechanism. It is
precisely this lack of reciprocity on the everyday social level that defi nes
the gift of alms as a highly valued act of dāna—an act set off from the
ordinary world of give-a nd-t ake by its soteriological power. Th us, the gift
of alms is not merely a material or economic transaction that allows the
monastic community to survive; it is also a symbolic move by means of
which the donor temporarily sets herself apart from ordinary society and
expresses her orientation toward the future. Much the same is true of other
types of material off erings made to the Samgha (such as images, paintings,
˙
monasteries, etc.), as well as the “gift” of a son or daughter that parents
bestow when they allow their children to join the monastic order. All
such gifts are “unreciprocated” in nature—“paid back” only in the form
of merit—and are highly praised within Buddhist literature.
Another example of an “unreciprocated” gift in Buddhism is the ritual
off ering made to the Buddha. If the monk constitutes a nontransactional
recipient in the sense that he receives gifts without reciprocating, the
Buddha perhaps brings this nontransactional quality to its highest point
of perfection. For the Buddha is generally understood to be absent in
nirvana and unavailable to his worshipers—incapable even of receiving
gifts, let alone of reciprocating. Contemporary Buddhists in Th eravādin
Southeast Asia are fairly insistent on this point, even though other aspects
of Buddhist ritual (such as relic worship) seem to suggest that the Bud-
dha is alive and present.20 In Indian Buddhist discourse, we fi nd some-
thing of the same ambiguity. On the one hand, much of the inscriptional
evidence suggests that the Buddha was believed to be physically present
145

DNA
through his relics and was even conceptualized as a legal owner of prop-
erty, such that donations made to the Buddha “belonged” to him and
were restricted to certain well- defi ned purposes.21 But on the other hand,
many Indian Buddhist texts are again quite insistent on the technical point
that gifts made to the Buddha are not actually “received” by anyone. In
the Abhidharmakośabhāsya (hereafter Kośa), for example, this lack of a
˙
recipient is emphasized. After telling us that ritual off erings made to the
Buddha do indeed result in merit, the text has a hypothetical interlocu-
tor raise the objection: “But if no one receives [the gift], then how can
there be merit?”22 Th e text answers this objection by stating that merit is
not solely dependent upon the “favor shown to others”; otherwise, there
would be no merit in individual practices such as cultivating meditation
or wisdom.23 Th erefore, an actual recipient is not really necessary, and a
gift made to the Buddha, “even though he has passed away,” still produces
merit “through the power of one’s intention.”24 One still derives the merit
that comes from the “renunciation” (tyāga) of the gift—although one does
not derive the further merit that comes from the “enjoyment” (paribhoga)
of the recipient.25
Despite signifi cant ambiguity regarding his exact ontological status,
then, it is fairly clear that a ritual off ering made to the Buddha—or, for
that matter, to a caitya, stūpa, image, or any other object representing
the absent Buddha—is absolutely assured of avoiding any semblance of
worldly quid pro quo, since no one actually receives the gift. Having
impugned the social ethic of reciprocity through its notion of the unrecip-
rocated gift, the Buddhist tradition now perfects this notion by positing a
gift that is given but never received. Th e orientation of the gift toward the
transcendent future could not be more clear: the gift becomes an arrow
shot out into space that never quite hits its target, symbolically freeing
the giver from this world.
We can further recognize the signifi cance of the Buddha’s nontransac-
tional status if we contrast it with the fully transactional status of various
other, lesser beings. In the Th eravāda Buddhism of Southeast Asia, for
example, there is a basic contrast drawn between the reciprocal transactions
one makes with the gods and the nonreciprocal transactions one makes
with the Buddha.26 Th e gods in Th eravāda Buddhism are understood to be
in charge of worldly goods and benefi ts. One gives off erings to the gods in
exchange for their assistance and protection; one haggles and bargains with
the gods, just as one haggles and bargains in the marketplace. Th e Buddha,
on the other hand, does not deal in worldly benefi ts. Th erefore, off erings
146

DNA
to the Buddha point beyond the present world and should properly be
renunciatory in fl avor. In the language of Th eravāda Buddhism, the gods
are laukika, or “worldly” in nature, whereas the Buddha is lokottara—“be-
yond the world” or transcendent.
Th is hierarchical distinction between what is laukika and what is lo-
kottara is one of the most basic ideological oppositions characteristic of
Buddhism as a whole, and is perhaps most concretely materialized through
“reciprocated” and “unreciprocated” gifts: “Reciprocated” gifts in Bud-
dhism are classed with barter, sale, or purchase, as well as with the ordi-
nary social world of give- and- take; they bind one to the world and are
thoroughly mundane in nature. “Unreciprocated” gifts, on the other hand,
bear fruit in the transcendent future; they lead one away from this world
and toward one’s karmic destiny. Th e impulse suggested by the “unrecip-
rocated” gift is an impulse to set oneself apart, to extricate oneself from
the ordinary circuits of exchange, to be temporarily or permanently free
from the mundane tyranny of gift and countergift. And this renunciatory
impulse—along with the gifts that properly embody it—is highly valued
in the Buddhist discourse on dāna.27
Beyond Reciprocated and Unreciprocated: Th e Pure Gift
It is also true, however, that what I have been referring to thus far as an
“unreciprocated” gift is not wholly “unreciprocated.” Mundane, social reci-
procity might be rejected in favor of what Trautmann calls “transcendental
reciprocity,” but reciprocity is involved nonetheless.28 Th e layperson who
gives alms to a monk or the Buddhist who makes a ritual off ering to the
Buddha desires and expects a return in the form of karmic merit. Th ough
such a gift should ideally be made without focusing on such desires and
expectations, everyone knows that giving has its rewards, and Buddhist
texts do not shy away from describing these rewards in enormous detail
and using them to motivate the giver. To the giver of such “unreciprocated”
gifts every form of future worldly felicity is promised: a pleasurable rebirth
among humans or gods, along with life, beauty, happiness, strength, intel-
ligence, abundant wealth and riches, the fulfi llment of all sensual pleasures,
sweet perfumes emanating from the body, and so forth.29 “He who gives
what is dear to him obtains what is dear to him” many times over, for
even a small off ering “is worth a thousand times as much” in its eventual
reward.30 Indeed, generosity is a prudent investment for the future: giving
147

DNA
gifts away is like removing one’s riches from a burning house in order to
save them for later enjoyment,31 while that poverty which the miser fears
if he gives is exactly what awaits him in the next world if he does not.32
Th us even the “unreciprocated” gift is usually motivated by self- interest
and calculated to result in the greatest possible return—as the precise
“merit account books” kept by Burmese villagers so clearly demonstrate.33
Buddhist texts recognize this inevitable fact and frequently walk a sort of
tightrope between, on the one hand, dangling delicious karmic rewards in
front of the giver in order to motivate his giving and, on the other hand,
assigning a lower status to any gift that is motivated purely or primarily
by the desire for such karmic rewards.
I mentioned before the prevalence of lists containing eight diff erent
types of gift, in which seven faulty gifts are contrasted with an eighth
gift, which is superior. In one such list from the An˙guttara Nikāya, the
gift given “to be reborn in a happy destiny within a heavenly world” is
one of the seven “faulty” gifts,34 while in another such list, the Buddha
similarly criticizes the “desirous man who gives a gift while attracted [to
its rewards], wishing to store up [its rewards], and thinking, ‘I’ll enjoy this
after death!’”35—even though both of these gifts are “unreciprocated” in
nature and do indeed result in rebirth as a deity. A passage I previously
quoted from the Dīgha Nikāya similarly dismisses gifts motivated by the
desire for various types of good rebirth as having an “inferior intention.”36
Th us although it is theoretically possible to give an “unreciprocated” gift
without hankering after the merit such a gift is known to bestow, it cer-
tainly isn’t easy. Th e diffi culty of giving such a gift with the proper frame
of mind and the automatic nature of such a gift’s rewards seem ultimately
to taint the “unreciprocated” gift—and suggest that there is something
yet higher.
Th is naturally raises the question of the possibility of what anthro-
pologists (following Malinowski)37 have often referred to as the “pure”
gift—that is to say, the completely disinterested gift, the gift given purely
out of generosity and altruism, or the gift given with no expectation of
return of any kind. Much of the recent theoretical literature on gift- giving
has been concerned with the question of the “pure” gift, for this question
implicates such fundamental human issues as self-i nterest versus altruism
and the possibility of a truly disinterested human act. Are there any gifts
in Buddhism that would qualify as such “pure” gifts? Is “pure generosity”
even possible? Beyond the distinction between “mundane reciprocity”
148

DNA
and “transcendental reciprocity,” is it possible to imagine a gift involving
no reciprocity?
In the Dakkhināvibhan˙ga Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya, the Buddha
˙
enumerates four types of gifts, those involving: a virtuous giver, a virtu-
ous recipient, neither a virtuous giver nor a virtuous recipient, and both
a virtuous giver and a virtuous recipient. Of these four, the last gift is
clearly the most superior, its highest example being the gift given by one
arhat to another: “When a passionless person gives to another passion-
less person . . . that gift is the best of all material gifts.”38 Th is statement
is repeated in other Buddhist texts; in the Kośa, for example, we are told
that “among all gifts, the best is the gift given by one liberated person to
another liberated person.”39 An earlier passage in the same text seems to
suggest that the reason such a gift is ideal is because the donor is one who
can enjoy neither worldly nor karmic rewards—in other words, one who
cannot benefi t in any manner from the giving of the gift. Not only would
such a gift lack any worldly rewards—since the recipient is not to recipro-
cate—but perhaps more importantly, it also lacks any karmic rewards, for
the donor (as a liberated person) has “defi nitively passed beyond the stage
where the gift’s retribution [would have taken place].”40 Existing outside of
both mundane and transcendental reciprocity, this gift can only be a pure
and disinterested gift. Moreover, by specifying that the recipient, too, is a
detached and liberated person, this gift has the added benefi t of ensuring
that even the recipient does not truly “enjoy” the gift (at least in the sense
of experiencing attachment or grasping). Th e ideal gift is not enjoyed or
reciprocated by anyone, and nobody enjoys any return, either worldly or
transcendent. Th e ideal gift here stands completely apart, beyond the realm
of samsara, passing wordlessly from one liberated person to another.
Jacques Derrida has written eloquently of the aporia of the gift: Th e
gift, according to Derrida, is an impossible ideal. As soon as the gift is
recognized as a gift, it is implicated in exchange and reciprocal obligation
and thereby ceases to be a gift. Th e gift can be a gift only when there is
no gift at all—when it is not recognized as a gift, when there is a radical
“forgetting” of it, and no remembrance of the gift or obligation to repay it,
for either donor or recipient—and this, Derrida maintains, is impossible.41
But in the Buddhist tradition perhaps we fi nd precisely this impossible
ideal expressed in the notion of the gift given by one liberated person to
another. Here, the wholly detached and liberated mind of one who has
attained nirvana might, in some sense, be seen as equivalent to Derrida’s
149

DNA
radical “forgetting.” Having eradicated all desires, interests, and expecta-
tions, the liberated mind can give or receive a gift without recognizing it
as such, and without setting into motion the entire cycle of desires and
interests that normally accompany all gifts. Th e gift passed from one arhat
to another thus constitutes one example of the perfectly “pure” gift.
A similar sense of absolute desirelessness and radical “forgetting” can
also be found in connection with the advanced bodhisattva’s “perfection of
generosity,” or dāna- pāramitā. All bodhisattvas should cultivate generosity,
of course, but it is only the bodhisattva of a relatively advanced stage that
achieves its absolute “perfection.” Th ough the nature of this “perfection” is
described in numerous diff erent ways (depending on the context), in many
Mahāyāna Buddhist texts it is defi ned quite specifi cally as a gift that is
“triply pure” because it is given with no conception whatsoever of “donor,”
“gift,” or “recipient.”42 Th e “perfection of giving,” in other words, is any
giving that is informed by the “perfection of wisdom” (prajñā- pāramitā), or
the advanced bodhisattva’s thorough realization of the truth of emptiness
(śūnyatā). Th e bodhisattva understands that “donor,” “gift,” and “recipi-
ent” are nothing more than conventional notions and are empty of any
abiding essence or self—and yet he still gives the gift. Again this might be
interpreted in line with Derrida’s “forgetting”: the ideal gift can exist only
when the person who gives it is so thoroughly imbued with an understand-
ing of the emptiness, selfl essness, and essencelessness of all things that the
very notions of “donor,” “gift,” and “recipient” are all “forgotten”—he gives
without giving, and without expecting anything in return.
Th us the impossible ideal of the “pure” gift exists, but seems to be
possible only among Buddhism’s most highly exceptional beings. While
arhats, Buddhas, and advanced bodhisattvas exist in a strangely desireless
world in which they are capable of giving with no conception of giving as
such (and thus no expectation of return), the rest of us are mired within
Mauss’ social world—wholly driven by desires and interests and governed
by unwritten rules of obligation, exchange, and reciprocity. Th e “pure”
gift, as Michaels states, is always “a sign of the extraordinary”43—or, as
Starobinski puts it, only “God, nature and the sun give freely, without
asking to be repaid in return.”44 In this sense perhaps we can agree with
Derrida about the paradox and impossibility of the “pure” gift.
One manner in which Buddhist texts seem to extend the “pure” gift
beyond the realm of such purely desireless beings, however, is by positing
a hierarchy of desires in which higher and more subtle desires approach
the status of being “desireless.” We can see this already—if only to some
150

DNA
extent—in the fi rst distinction I made above, between “reciprocated”
and “unreciprocated” gifts. Both of them are (at least in part) presum-
ably motivated by some kind of desire—the desire for a return- gift from
the recipient in the former case, and the desire for karmic merit in the
latter—but because the latter desire is higher and more subtle in form,
its corresponding gift more closely approximates the truly “desireless.” In
other words (and as Silber has argued with respect to religious donations
in medieval Christianity),45 whatever “return” one receives in the form of
karmic “merit” is so abstract, intangible, uncertain—and thus inherently
unattractive—that it approaches no return at all and thus partakes in the
character of the disinterested gift. (After all, it is the lack of any “seen”
reward that one can enjoy here and now that qualifi es such gifts as lokottara
rather than laukika.) To a certain extent, then, the gift given in exchange
for merit thereby “solves” the problematic of the gift: pure, disinterested
generosity and the self- interested expectation of reward are brought to-
gether through the inherent uncertainty and intangibility of the nebulous
reward called “merit.” Ordinary Buddhists giving alms and making ritual
off erings are thus assimilated to arhats, bodhisattvas, and Buddhas.
But while the gift motivated by a desire for merit partakes in the ethic of
the “pure” gift only partially, there are other, still higher desires that appear
to be accepted by the Buddhist tradition as truly “desireless,” in the sense
that they do not compromise the status of the perfectly disinterested gift.
One such example is the desire to attain nirvana. In the lists of eight gifts
I mentioned previously (found twice in the An˙guttara Nikāya, as well as
in the Kośa), the eighth and most superior gift is the gift given “to prepare
one’s mind [for nirvana]” or “to obtain the highest goal [of nirvana].”46 Th is
gift is considered to be a “pure” gift and is contrasted with seven “impure”
or faulty gifts that are motivated by various lesser desires (such as the desire
for reciprocity or the desire for merit). It is only the desire for “desireless-
ness” itself, one might say, that constitutes a “desireless” desire. Th e “pure”
gift is thus extended from the liberated arhat alone to all those who strive
for the goal of arhatship (and give gifts with this motivation).
Much the same is true of gifts given for the sake of attaining Buddha-
hood. Th e bodhisattva gives gifts not only out of pure generosity toward
others, but also with the desire to attain Buddhahood for himself. Yet
“attaining Buddhahood” appears to be the one “self- interested” motiva-
tion that does not compromise the purity of the bodhisattva’s gift, since
Buddhahood—though pertaining to oneself—is desired on behalf of all
beings. Th is is why the Bodhisattvabhūmi is able to describe the “pure gift,”
151

DNA
without contradiction, as one given “with no expectation of reward” but
made “seeing Buddhahood [alone] as a benefi t.”47 Once again we encounter
a paradox: the gift made “with no expectation of reward” is made possible
only by aiming for the ultimate reward—the attainment of perfect Bud-
dhahood. It is only at the level of this purest motivation of all that self-
interest (svārtha) and other- interest (parārtha) fi nally merge together, for
the bodhisattva (as the Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra puts it) “cannot be happy
˙
unless others are happy,” and “his own happiness is inseparable [from the
happiness of others].”48 Once again, the “pure” gift is extended from the
advanced bodhisattva who has attained the “perfection of wisdom” to all
bodhisattvas (even those who are beginners) who give gifts with a sincere
desire for Buddhahood.
In addition to the Buddha (whose ability to give a “pure” gift pretty
much goes without saying), then, it seems that arhats, those striving to be-
come arhats, advanced bodhisattvas, and those striving to become advanced
bodhisattvas are all capable of giving “pure” gifts—either because they are
free of all desire, or because they are motivated by one of the “approved”
desires that approach the status of being “desireless.”49 Th eir gifts thus
constitute “pure” gifts standing at the top of the threefold hierarchy I have
enumerated here: reciprocated gifts, unreciprocated gifts, and pure gifts.
Giving Up and Giving Down
Th e second conceptual schema I will present for organizing the many vari-
eties of dāna discussed in Buddhist texts overlaps considerably with the fi rst
schema, but approaches the material from a diff erent perspective. Th is is a
threefold typology (rather than hierarchy) among giving up, giving down,
and giving up in another sense (which I will indicate as giving up2).
In chapter 2 I briefl y mentioned the pan-I ndic doctrine of the “worthy
recipient” (supātra) found equally in the Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain dis-
courses on dāna. As I noted, all three religious traditions generally hold
that religious gifts should normally be directed upward, toward worthy
and superior recipients (such as monks, brahmins, Buddhas, and Jinas),
and indeed that the merit accruing from a gift is dependent upon the
spiritual worth of the recipient: the more worthy the recipient is—or the
better “fi eld of merit” he or she constitutes—the more merit the donor
will accrue. Th us in many Buddhist passages we are given a hierarchy of re-
cipients and a corresponding hierarchy of merit: In the Dakkhināvibhan˙ga
˙
152

DNA
Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya, the Buddha tells Ānanda that giving to an
animal produces ten times less merit than giving to an evil human being,
which itself produces a hundred times less merit than giving to a virtuous
human being, and so on—all the way up to arhats, pratyekabuddhas,
and Buddhas as the most “productive” recipients of all.50 We get another,
similar hierarchy in the An˙guttara Nikāya, where off ering alms to a hundred
people of “right view” produces less merit than off ering alms to just a single
Once-R eturner; feeding a hundred Once- Returners is less meritorious than
feeding a single Non- Returner; and so on, through arhats, pratyekabud-
dhas, and Buddhas.51 Even better than such gifts made to individuals are
gifts made to the Samgha, since the Samgha includes all virtuous monks
˙ ˙
from the past, present, and future. In a stereotyped passage that appears
throughout the Pāli Canon, the Samgha is described as being “worthy of
˙
gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of off erings, worthy of reverence, the
best fi eld of merit in the world.”52 Religious gifts in Buddhism therefore
generally fl ow upward toward worthy and superior recipients, and the
Buddha himself advocates choosing one’s recipients “with discrimination”
in order to maximize one’s eventual reward.53 Th is is the model of giving
I refer to by means of the phrase giving up—that is, giving upward to a
worthy recipient in exchange for karmic merit.
Giving down, on the other hand, is exactly the opposite. For the natural
corollary of the worthy- recipient doctrine, as we saw before, is that gifts
which fl ow in the opposite direction—that is, downward toward unwor-
thy recipients—are productive of very little merit, since they are planted
within a poor-q uality “fi eld.” In a passage from the An˙guttara Nikāya, the
Buddha says that a gift given to a wicked person bears very little fruit,54
while the Kośa states more explicitly that “because of the faultiness of
the fi eld, the result of such a gift will be insignifi cant or nothing at all.”55
Furthermore, since unworthy recipients (such as animals and beggars) are
equally incapable of reciprocating in any worldly manner, gifts directed at
them produce neither worldly nor transcendent rewards. Unproductive
in any manner, such charitable gifts become the site of pure, unmitigated
generosity.56 Th is is the model of giving I refer to by means of the phrase
giving down—that is, giving downward to an unworthy recipient out of pure
generosity and compassion.
Th ese two models of giving are naturally opposed to one other: gifts
given upward out of respect and for the sake of merit are contrasted with
gifts given downward out of compassion and with no expectation of reward.
Th is basic distinction can be found within both Buddhist textual dis-
153

DNA
course and the ethnographic evidence from contemporary Th eravāda. It
is in this sense, for example, that I interpret the Kośa’s statement that the
technical term dāna should properly be restricted to those gifts given “with
the desire to render worship or assistance”57—where rendering “worship”
(pūjā) presumably refers to the upward gift, and rendering “assistance”
(anugraha) refers to the downward gift. It is these two modes of giving
in particular, the Kośa suggests, that are the proper subject matter of the
discourse on dāna. Exactly the same distinction is found among contem-
porary Th eravāda monks in Sri Lanka, who (according to Richard Gom-
brich) draw a distinction between two kinds of giving: “that with thought
of worship (pūjābuddhiya), which is motivated by respect (gaurava), and
that with thought of favor (anugrahabuddhiya), which is motivated by
pity (anukampāva),” with the former being “exemplifi ed by a gift to the
Sangha, the latter by a gift to a beggar”58—in other words, giving up versus
giving down.
Th is diff erence between giving upward to a worthy recipient and giving
downward to an unworthy recipient depends, of course, on the doctrine of
the “worthy recipient” itself, and becomes meaningless in the absence of
this doctrine. It is important to point out, therefore, that the doctrine of the
worthy recipient is not an iron- clad rule; in fact, Indian Buddhist texts are
not at all consistent in their upholding of this doctrine. Giving to the sick,
for example, is frequently recommended as being especially meritorious,
regardless of the spiritual worthiness of the sick person. Th e Kośa itself, in
fact, immediately after invoking the worthy- recipient doctrine, includes
“those who are sick” among a list of fi ve special recipients who bring about
“immeasurable” merit “even though they are ordinary people.”59 A debate
recorded in the Kathāvatthu even suggests that some schools (such as the
Uttarāpathakas) were actively opposed to the w orthy-r ecipient doctrine
because of its implication that one person’s merit is dependent upon the
moral qualities of another (the recipient), thus violating a strict under-
standing of karma.60
In fact, many Buddhist discussions of dāna display an ambivalence
toward the worthy- recipient doctrine, at one moment upholding the doc-
trine by asserting that gifts given to unworthy recipients produce little to
no reward, and at another moment discounting the doctrine by claiming
that all gifts result in good rewards, regardless of the status of the recipi-
ent. Th e two passages I quoted above in support of the w orthy-r ecipient
doctrine display precisely this ambivalence when we consider their larger
contexts. In the An˙guttara Nikāya passage, the statement that a gift given
154

DNA
to a wicked person bears very little fruit is immediately preceded by the
Buddha’s categorical statement of what would seem to be exactly the op-
posite: “Even if someone were to throw away the dirty rinse- water from
washing pots or dishes into a cesspit or other fi lthy pool with the intention
that the living beings dwelling therein might survive on it, I declare, O
Vaccha, he would get merit from that act!”61 Similarly, the Kośa’s statement
that a “faulty fi eld” results in a reward that is “insignifi cant or nothing at
all” is immediately preceded by the author’s reassurance that “even when
planted into a bad fi eld, [the gift] bears an agreeable fruit, for there can
never be opposition between the seed and its fruit.”62 Such passages seem to
want it both ways: on the one hand, the gift given to an unworthy recipient
produces little or no merit because the fi eld is bad; on the other hand, the
nature of the fi eld is irrelevant, and all gifts produce merit because giving
is always good. But how can both claims be true simultaneously?
A historical explanation for these confl icting attitudes toward the wor-
thy recipient has been provided in a recent study by James Egge.63 Th rough
a careful analysis of the discourse of dāna found in Pāli canonical and post-
canonical texts, Egge convincingly demonstrates that dāna is described and
explained in these texts by means of two diff erent discourses, which he
refers to as the sacrifi cial discourse and the karmic discourse. Th e sacrifi cial
discourse, which Egge sees as the more ancient understanding of dāna (and
the predominant understanding of dāna in the v erse-, or gāthā- , portions
of the earliest Pāli canonical texts), conceives of dāna—in particular, the
off ering of alms to Buddhist mendicants—using the language and imag-
ery of Vedic sacrifi ce, where Buddhist mendicants replace the sacrifi cial
fi re, and alms-o ff erings replace the Vedic sacrifi cial oblations. Th us, dāna
is analogous to a Vedic sacrifi ce: it is a sacrifi cial off ering made to a wor-
thy recipient, and it results automatically in merit (punya), which is here
˙
nothing more than the good eff ects of ritual action properly performed.
Within this “sacrifi cial discourse,” both the object given and the recipient
of the gift are of the utmost importance, for it is only by sacrifi cing the
proper object to the proper recipient that the sacrifi cial ritual automatically
produces its proper reward in the form of merit. Dāna is thus a type of
giving—sacrifi cial giving—that is distinct from all other types of giving.
It is primarily ritual in nature—rather than moral—and depends for
its eff ects upon having the proper object, procedure, and recipient. It is
from this ancient “sacrifi cial discourse” (inherited from the world of Vedic
sacrifi ce) that the Buddhist emphasis upon the worthy recipient derives.
Clearly, from the perspective of this discourse, a gift given to an unworthy
155

DNA
recipient would not produce any merit, because without an appropriate
recipient, the sacrifi ce has not been properly performed.
Egge then demonstrates how Pāli literature—beginning with the prose
portions of the earliest canonical texts and getting stronger and stronger
through later portions of the canon, the commentaries, and medieval story
literature—gradually displaces the sacrifi cal discourse of dāna with a karmic
discourse of dāna. Th is karmic discourse conceives of dāna in primarily moral
rather than ritual terms, interpreting it as an act of renunciation, generosity,
and mental purifi cation, rather than an act of ritual sacrifi ce. Within this
“karmic discourse,” the primary emphasis is on the mental state and ethical
intentions of the donor (rather than the appropriateness of the gift or the
worth of the recipient)—since karma, in Buddhist discourse, is primarily
defi ned in terms of intention or volition. Emphasis thus shifts from the
external factors of gift and recipient to the internal factor of the donor’s own
mind. Th e act of giving, when properly performed, still results in merit
(punya), but merit is now conceived as being analogous to “good karma”
˙
(the positive results of skillful ethical actions), and not in terms of the
automatic eff ects of properly performed rituals. Almsgiving to Buddhist
mendicants is thus no diff erent in nature from any other manifestation
of dāna—or indeed, from any ethically skillful action that results in the
production of merit. It is from the perspective of this “karmic discourse”
that the nature of the recipient (whether worthy or unworthy) becomes
irrelevant, since giving, as an ethical action, is always ethically good—and
its goodness is a function of the donor’s own mind.
Egge maintains that as one traces the discourse of dāna through dif-
ferent strata of Pāli literature, one sees that the “karmic discourse” be-
comes stronger and stronger over time, largely displacing the “sacrifi cial
discourse”—but without ever eradicating it completely. Th e sacrifi cial
understanding of dāna remains important, even in later Pāli texts, and
nowhere more so than in the continued emphasis such texts place upon the
importance of a worthy recipient. Strictly speaking, from the perspective
of the “karmic discourse,” the worth of the recipient should perhaps be
irrelevant, since it is the mental state and ethical intentions of the donor
that really matter. Nevertheless, we continue to see an emphasis upon
giving to worthy recipients, such as Buddhist monks or the Samgha. We
˙
can see the two discourses uneasily coexisting in those passages (previously
mentioned) that give us a hierarchy of recipients and a corresponding
hierarchy of merit. On the one hand, such passages adhere to the “karmic
discourse,” since they maintain that all giving produces merit (even giving
156

DNA
to the lowliest animals); on the other hand, such passages also adhere to
the “sacrifi cial discourse” by retaining the notion of the worthy recipient,
since the amount of merit acquired in each case is relative to the worth
of the recipient. In a similar manner, the ambivalence of the passages I
alluded to above can also be seen as resulting from a confl ict or tension
between sacrifi cial and karmic understandings of dāna.
Why did the “karmic discourse” of dāna, though becoming more and
more dominant over time, never succeed in eradicating completely the
“sacrifi cial discourse” of dāna and its emphasis on worthy recipients? Why
did the status of the recipient continue to matter? Why was dāna never fully
“ethicized”? Egge is surely correct in pointing to economic considerations:
in practical terms, the Samgha was dependent for its survival upon the
˙
material support of the laity and obviously could not aff ord to discount
any doctrine that emphasizes giving to the religiously worthy.64
At the same time, however, Maria Hibbets’ study of the discourse of
dāna found in Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain medieval digests suggests equally
strongly that the persistence of the worthy- recipient doctrine within all
three traditions should not be reduced to economic considerations alone—
since this kind of crude and reductive explanation cannot account for
the careful theorizing these texts off er on the ethical eff ects of giving to a
worthy recipient.65 Hibbets maintains that medieval discussions of dāna
from all three traditions promote an “ethics of esteem” which highly values
the respect, esteem, and admiration that should arise in the donor when
confronted by a religiously worthy person, such as a monk. Th e unequal
and hierarchical relationship between the donor and the worthy recipient
is thus crucial, in Hibbets’ view, for it encourages the donor to look up to
the recipient, admire his moral qualities, use his gift of alms to express a
commitment to the religious values the recipient represents, and perhaps
gain a greater awareness of his own moral failings. Th us: “Th e moral excel-
lence of the recipient is vital not only for how much merit or good karma
the giver earns by the gift [but also because it] conditions the appropriate
intentions and responses expected of the giver. . . . Th e exalted status of
the recipient is the very condition for esteem and respect to rise up in the
giver.”66 In contrast, as Hibbets points out, an unworthy recipient inspires
only a feeling of pity, and “pity may not be far from contempt . . . having
pity for others may be akin to despising them at worst and patronizing
them at best”—attitudes that are “not particularly ethically valuable.”67
Hibbets hereby demonstrates that the doctrine of the worthy recipient is
not incompatible with purely karmic explanations of giving.
157

DNA
It is also important to note that whereas our own culture might consider
moral “worthiness” or “unworthiness” to be purely a matter of internal,
mental qualities—and thus impossible for the donor to discern—in a
South Asian context pervaded by the notions of karma and rebirth, moral
worth is at least partially suggested by the particular social position one
inhabits, which is clear for all to see. Th us animals, beggars, and lepers are
“unworthy” by defi nition, while monks and ascetics must be presumed to
merit one’s respect and devotion. In other words (and despite arguments to
the contrary by the Uttarāpathakas), the doctrine of the worthy recipient
need not strip the donor herself of any ethical agency, since she is free to
choose the recipients of her gifts “with discrimination,” and fully capable
of identifying those who are “worthy.” Ultimately, of course, monks and
ascetics need not necessarily be good, and the possibility of a corrupt and
immoral monk is always there, but Buddhist discussions of dāna provide
for this as well: whether the individual monk who receives one’s alms is
moral or immoral, intelligent or stupid—indeed, even if one knows he is
immoral and stupid—he still constitutes a “worthy recipient” who should
be met with respect and esteem, since (as many Buddhist texts make clear)
it is the values represented by his religious clothing that one is honoring
with a gift, not his qualities as an individual.
Th is is also the reason a gift made to the Samgha is always more meri-
˙
torious than a gift made to an individual, since the Samgha represents an
˙
abstraction of all the virtuous qualities that might or might not be real-
ized within any individual monk. Th e Samgha is always a worthy “fi eld
˙
of merit,” free of the stain of individual faults. In the Dakkhināvibhan˙ga
˙
Sutta, in fact, the Buddha states categorically: “O Ānanda, I say that in
no way whatsoever does a gift given to an individual ever have greater
fruit than an off ering made to the Samgha”—even in future times, when
˙
the Samgha will be full of those who are “immoral and wicked.”68 Th is is
˙
because such a gift is given “on account of the Samgha”69—in other words,
˙
out of esteem for what the Samgha represents rather than its individual
˙
embodiments.
Th e doctrine of the worthy recipient, in other words, seems to be over-
determined. While economic considerations are of crucial importance,
there are also legitimate ethical reasons why a gift given to a worthy recipi-
ent might be more salutary (and thus more productive of merit) than a
gift given to an unworthy recipient—and why Buddhist monks and the
Samgha must always be presumed to be worthy recipients. Th e w orthy-
˙
recipient doctrine should therefore be seen as an element of the “sacrifi cial
158

DNA
discourse” of dāna that continues to persist under the gradual dominance
of the “karmic discourse” of dāna not only through economic consider-
ations that call up the image of a greedy monkhood, but also because it
was compatible with that karmic discourse and capable of being rational-
ized in karmic terms. Th e extent of this rationalization varies considerably
from one context to another, however, so that the doctrine of the worthy
recipient might be upheld, ignored, or opposed altogether, depending on
the particular passage: sometimes the merit of the gift derives solely from
the worth of the recipient, and an unworthy recipient therefore results in
no merit at all; sometimess the merit of the gift derives solely from the
intentions of the donor, and the character of the recipient is thus irrelevant;
and sometimes we fi nd a curious mixture of the two or another criterion
altogether governing the amount of merit produced (such as the excellence
of the object given). Hence, the inconsistency and ambivalence.70
Having undertaken this lengthy digression in order to explain the am-
bivalence Buddhist texts sometimes display toward the worthy- recipient
doctrine, I now return to the basic contrast I drew above (which seems
to coexist unproblematically with this ambivalence): gifts given upward
to worthy recipients out of respect and for the sake of merit are contrasted
with gifts given downward to unworthy recipients out of compassion and
with no expectation of reward. I refer to these two modes of giving as giv-
ing up and giving down, which together comprise and organize a number
of diff erent Buddhist gifts. Th e rubric of giving up covers all those gifts
associated with ordinary Buddhists and moving upward with respect and
esteem from inferiors to superiors, such as the layperson’s gift of alms and
other forms of material support to the Samgha, the family’s gift of their
˙
children to be ordained as monks and nuns, or the making of ritual off er-
ings to an image, caitya, or stūpa. Th e rubric of giving down, on the other
hand, covers all those gifts associated with ideal and exalted Buddhist
beings and moving downward from superiors to inferiors in spontaneous
displays of generosity and compassion, such as the bodhisattva’s gift of his
body, possessions, or merit, or the Buddha’s gift of the dharma.
Historical Origins
What are the historical origins or antecedents of these two prominent
modes of giving? If we look beyond the strictly Buddhist discourse on
dāna to consider its larger Vedic and Hindu background, an argument can
159

DNA
be made (based on Vedic, epic, and dharmaśāstric literature) that each
mode of giving was associated with one of the two dominant ideologi-
cal communities of classical Indian society—that is, the brahman and
ksatriya varnas, respectively. Th omas Trautmann long ago pointed out
˙ ˙
that many Vedic and Hindu textual discussions covering a variety of dif-
ferent topics (such as marriage, caste, and commerce) presume and share
in common an underlying “typology of exchange” in which each one of
the four varnas is associated with a particular mode of exchange.71 If we
˙
look at Trautmann’s typology and compare it to the Buddhist material, it
is clear that the Buddhist modes of giving up and giving down correspond
very closely to the modes of exchange associated with the brahman and
ksatriya varnas, respectively.
˙ ˙
Th e gift given upward for the sake of merit is closely associated with the
brahman varna because, according to Brahmanical ideology, it is the special
˙
privilege of this varna to be the preordained recipients of all such u pward-
˙
m oving, m erit-p roducing gifts. According to the Dharma Śāstras, while the
giving of religious gifts (dāna) is a strict obligation of all t wice- born varnas,
˙
only brahmins have the special privilege of earning a livelihood by receiving
religious gifts (pratigraha), since it is the religious position of the brahmins
and the spiritual quality of brāhmanya that make them the exclusive human
˙
recipients of such gifts.72 Religious gifts in the dharmaśāstric conception
therefore always fl ow upward toward superior beings—either the gods or
the pure and learned brahmins who are the “gods on earth.”
Dharmaśāstric literature seems to restrict the meaning of dāna almost
exclusively, in fact, to religious gifts given upward to worthy recipients in
exchange for merit. Dharmaśāstric defi nitions of dāna (well summarized
in P. V. Kane’s comprehensive treatment)73 specify that dāna must involve
both a material object that is given and a worthy recipient who receives
the gift, and that this “receiving” (pratigraha) must be done “with the idea
that he [the donor] will derive from that act some unseen spiritual result
[adrsta or punya].”74 Other possible conceptions of dāna seem specifi cally
˙˙˙ ˙
to be excluded. In direct contrast to various Buddhist notions of dāna,
the dharmaśāstric commentator Medātithi says that the teacher’s gift of
knowledge to a pupil (in which there is no material object) and the ritual
off ering made to an image (in which there is no recipient) are called dāna
only in a secondary sense, and do not constitute the technical meaning of
dāna as viewed by the Dharmaśāstra.75 Further demonstrating the absolute
necessity of a worthy recipient is the fact that a gift which is lost en route
and never reaches its recipient reaps no reward for the donor (regardless
160

DNA
of his good intentions),76 while a gift given to an evil recipient might
result in misery for the donor or lead him to hell (in spite of his good
intentions).77 What I have been referring to, in Buddhist discourse, as
the mode of giving up might therefore be seen as a kind of “brahmanical
model” of giving related historically to the brahmanical ideology in which
dāna refers specifi cally to religious gifts given upward to worthy recipients
in exchange for merit.
Th e Buddhist mode of giving down, on the other hand, seems to derive
from diff erent historical sources. When Buddhist authors speak not of
themselves as members of the Samgha accepting the gifts of laypeople,
˙
but rather of bodhisattvas and Buddhas compassionately showering ex-
travagant gifts downward upon pitiful and unworthy recipients, they are
clearly not drawing upon the dharmaśāstric understanding of dāna. (In
fact, gifts of compassion are specifi cally excluded from the dharmaśāstric
conception; Kane, for example, observes of the Dharma Śāstras that “when
a person makes a gift through compassion it is not the dāna and pratigraha
spoken of by the śāstra . . . [for] a gift made through compassion is made
irrespective of caste.”78) Instead, these magnanimous displays of generos-
ity characteristic of bodhisattvas and Buddhas seem to be drawing on the
ksatra- dharma found primarily in the epics, where the ksatriya is repeatedly
˙ ˙
admonished to acquire goods through noble conquest and the heroic use
of arms, and then distribute them indiscriminately to others with complete
generosity, thereby rendering him independent of any semblance of direct
exchange with other varnas.79 Ksatriyas are thus the preordained “givers” of
˙ ˙
the varna system—particularly in their role as kings, who are repeatedly
˙
reminded of their paramount duty to give, give, give—while they avoid
being “receivers” by acquiring their gifts through noble conquest alone.80
In sharp contrast to the brahmin, the ksatriya must never accept a gift or
˙
make an entreaty, which would be akin to admitting submission and defeat
on the battlefi eld, seriously wounding the ksatriya’s pride.81
˙
Th e Buddhist mode of giving down runs parallel to this “ksatriya model”
˙
of giving, a parallel that becomes especially clear when we consider the
many “ksatriya- like” aspects of that exemplar of magnanimous, downward
˙
giving—the bodhisattva. Whether or not one prescribes to the theory that
Buddhism represented a radical revolt against brahmanical ideology, there
is no doubt that Buddhist thought in India is replete with royal imagery,
often seems to regard the ksatriya as being higher in status than the brah-
˙
min, and draws a number of distinct parallels—mythical, iconographi-
cal, and ideological—between the bodhisattva and the ksatriya. In fact, I
˙
161

DNA
would argue that the bodhisattva ideal may, in many respects, be seen as
a kind of Buddhist application of a ksatriya- ethic of life. Th is comes out
˙
especially strongly in Mahāyāna texts that deal with the bodhisattva career,
such as Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra. Just as courageous battle against one’s
enemies is perhaps the single most characteristic activity encouraged by
the ksatra- dharma of the epics, so Śāntideva’s manual on the bodhisattva
˙
practice draws quite heavily on the imagery of war and depicts the ideal
bodhisattva as a kind of “ksatriya of the human mind” waging a violent
˙
battle against the mental affl ictions (kleśa).82 Just as the ksatra- dharma
˙
attaches special importance to the ksatriya’s quality of vīrya (strength, en-
˙
ergy, or vigor), and posits it as the underlying root of the ksatriya’s noble
˙
qualities,83 so vīrya constitutes the fourth of the bodhisattva’s six perfec-
tions (pāramitā), and is often described as that virtue which informs and
activates the other fi ve.
Th ese parallels between the bodhisattva and the ksatriya (which could
˙
easily be multiplied in number) extend as well to their ideal modes of ex-
change. Just as the ksatriya is encouraged to give magnanimously to others
˙
but never to receive anything from them in return, so the bodhisattva is
exhorted ad nauseam to give himself, his possessions, and his merit away
to all living beings without distinction, but never to accept any such gifts
on his own behalf.84 In fact, like the ksatriya of the epics, Śāntideva’s ideal
˙
bodhisattva is loathe to accept gifts or favors of any kind: “Let him be able
and energetic, always doing things for himself; he should not let anyone
else help him in any task.”85 Th e Bodhicaryāvatāra presents a striking
diff erence, in fact, between the bodhisattva’s own means of progressing
along the path (through noble endeavor, hard work, and diffi cult striv-
ing) and other people’s means of progressing along the path (by receiv-
ing everything as a gift from the generous bodhisattva himself). “Th is
world is completely subject to the affl ictions and incapable of bringing
about its own welfare”—the bodhisattva thinks to himself—“Th erefore,
I must do it for them, for I am not incapable, as these people are.”86 Like
the ksatriya, the bodhisattva should even cultivate an exaggerated sense
˙
of pride (māna), constantly thinking to himself, “It is I alone who must
do it!”87—or in other words (as Prajñākaramati’s commentary explains),
“Whatever good things happen to living beings, I alone should bring all
of them about; nobody else should be given any opportunity!”88 Within
such passages, the bodhisattva begins to look very much like the swagger-
ing and self- suffi cient ksatriya warrior. In Jan Nattier’s felicitious phras-
˙
162

DNA
ing, the bodhisattva path is here depicted as an especially ambitious and
“macho” vocation, appropriate only for “a few good men” or “such people
as Olympic athletes (‘going for the gold’) or Marine Corps recruits (‘the
few, the proud, the brave’)”—in other words, those who are similar in
nature to the ksatriya warrior.89
˙
What I have been referring to as the mode of giving down in Buddhist
discourse might therefore be seen as a kind of “ksatriya model” of giv-
˙
ing related historically to the ksatra- dharma of the epics, in which dāna
˙
refers specifi cally to royal gifts fl owing down a hierarchy of dependence in
magnanimous displays of largesse. Buddhism thus appears to have adapted
both the “brahmanical” model of giving up and the “ksatriya” model of
˙
giving down. However, in consonance with Buddhism’s general strategy of
divorcing religious ideas from the varna theory (or redefi ning the varnas
˙ ˙
in spiritual terms), these two modes of giving are no longer attached to
particular varnas determined by birth. Instead they are attached more
˙
loosely to religious categories defi ned by Buddhism: the mode of “giving
up” is associated most closely with the Buddhist monastic order (as the
preordained recipients of upward- moving gifts), whereas the mode of
“giving down” is associated with ideal and exalted beings such as arhats,
bodhisattvas, and Buddhas. Th us, when Buddhists act as members of the
Samgha accepting the gifts of laypeople, they act more like brahmins,
˙
but when they imagine their most exalted beings’ magnanimous works
of compassion, they call up the image of ksatriyas.
˙
It is also pertinent to consider the position of the Buddha himself. Th e
Buddha appears to be equally associated with both models of giving: on
the one hand, he is the ultimate monk and a worthy “fi eld of merit” who
is the foremost recipient of u pward-m oving gifts; on the other hand, he
is also the exalted, magnanimous being who freely showers his dharma
down on his dependents. He is both ultimate (ksatriya) giver and ultimate
˙
(brahmin) recipient, the paradigmatic embodiment of both “giving up”
and “giving down.” By single- handedly attaining perfect Buddhahood
and lavishing his dharma upon the world, he partakes in the heroic giving
characteristic of the ksatriya, but by establishing a monastic order that can
˙
enter into regular relations of patronage with the surrounding lay com-
munity, he partakes in the more regularized and institutionalized giving
characteristic of the brahmin. His ability to both give and receive with
no considerations of relative position is symbolic of his absolute freedom
and power.
163

DNA
Giving Up (Again)
But the Buddha constitutes the paradigmatic embodiment of a third mode
of giving as well—one that completes my threefold schema of giving up,
giving down, and giving up2. Th is is “giving up” in quite another sense—the
“giving up” of the world in an act of ascetic renunciation. Th e linguistic
slide between “giving” and “giving up” is not limited to the English lan-
guage alone; in Pāli and Sanskrit, for example, the term cāga / tyāga means
both “gift” and “renunciation.” Buddhist thought acknowledges and often
emphasizes this connection: every gift is a renunciation. To give a gift to
someone else is always to deprive oneself of the same—thus, every “gift”
is also a “giving up.” Every gift is defi ned as a moment of cultivating
nonattachment, the culmination of which is the monk’s renunciation of
the world. And just as every gift constitutes a miniature version of world-
r enunciation, so also w orld-r enunciation itself can be seen as an ultimate
variety of “the gift.”
Th is third mode of giving can be conceptualized as the logical culmina-
tion of either of the other two—a relationship that is sometimes clarifi ed
by the use of narrative. In relation to the “ksatriya model” of giving, for
˙
example, there are many Buddhist stories in which the magnanimous
generosity of the king easily shades into the ascetic’s giving up of the
world. Th e connection between the two is made especially explicit in the
famous jātaka of Prince Vessantara, whose kingly generosity is so extreme
that he eventually gives away his possessions, his royal status, his wife, and
his children. Reduced to poverty and exile in the forest, Prince Vessantara
begins to look very much like the world-r enouncing monk. But rather
than becoming a monk in the ordinary way, he renounces the world and
becomes a monk as the logical outcome of having given everything away.
Th e royal largesse characteristic of the king, when taken to an extreme,
leads Prince Vessantara directly into the renunciation of the world char-
acteristic of the monk.90 Th e royal’s giving down blends into the ascetic’s
giving up.
Much the same is true in regard to the “brahmanical model” of giving
as well: the layperson’s upward- moving off erings to the Samgha, when
˙
taken to an extreme, once again blend into the monk’s renunciation of
the world. Th is connection is made explicit in the story of another famous
king—King Aśoka and the “Great Quinquennial Festival” (pañcavarsika)
˙
he holds on behalf of the Samgha. During this festival (as described in the
˙
Divyāvadāna), King Aśoka, acting as a faithful Buddhist layman, engages in
164

table 3
Two Conceptual Schema for Organizing the Varieties of Buddhist Dāna
reciprocated / unreciprocated / pure giving up / giving down / giving up
() RECIPROCATED GIFTS ∅
(gifts involving mundane reciproc-
ity, i.e. ordinary Maussian social
exchanges)
() UNRECIPROCATED GIFTS () GIVING UP
(gifts involving transcendental reci- (giving upward to a worthy recipi-
procity, i.e. given for the sake of merit ent out of respect and for the sake of
alone) merit) (“brahmanical” model)
() PURE GIFTS
(gifts involving no reciprocity, i.e.
either completely desireless or
motivated by one of the “approved”
desires):
(a) the gift given by an advanced () GIVING DOWN
bodhisattva who has attained the (giving downward to an unworthy
perfection of wisdom, or the gift recipient out of compassion and with
given by any bodhisattva with the no expectation of reward) (“ksatriya”
desire to attain Buddhahood model)
(b) the gift given by an arhat or () GIVING UP2
with the desire to attain arhatship (giving up the world in an act of
renunciation)
(c) the gift given by a Buddha brings together giving up, giving
down, and giving up (as the para-
digmatic object of the fi rst and the
paradigmatic agent of the latter two)

DNA
a frenzy of ritual off erings to the Samgha, fi nally giving away not only his
˙
entire kingdom but also his family, his kingship, and his very self—thereby
symbolically becoming a monk and joining the Samgha. Th e almsgiving
˙
characteristic of the Buddhist layperson, when taken to an extreme, thus
leads King Aśoka (if only temporarily) directly into the renunciation of the
world characteristic of the monk.91 Th e layperson’s giving upward blends
into the ascetic’s giving up.
World- renunciation, or giving up,2 can thus be related to either the
“brahmanical model” of giving up or the “ksatriya model” of giving down.
˙
Perhaps we can relate this to the fact that, historically, scholars have been
unable to pinpoint any single, defi nitive origin for the practices of asceti-
cism and world- renunciation within Indian religions—some scholars see-
ing them as a natural development from the logic of Brahmanical sacrifi ce,
and other scholars positing a non-B rahmanical and non-V edic origin. In
any case, within the Buddhist discourse on giving this renunciatory aspect
ultimately serves to tie together all competing notions of the gift at the
level of their logical culmination: whether the gift is given up or given
down, out of respect or out of compassion, resulting in abundant merit
or none at all, a matter of sacrifi ce or a matter of charity—all gifts have a
renunciatory aspect, and all giving ultimately partakes of giving up.
• • •
Th e two conceptual schema I have presented in this chapter for organizing
some of the many varieties of dāna discussed within Buddhist exegetical
texts are summarized in table 3, along with some indication of how the
two schema might overlap with one another.
It should be noted, however, that the connections I have drawn in this
table between diff erent categories of giving are not intended to be strict
or exclusive equivalences but only suggestive parallels. My hope is simply
that, taken together, these two schema will off er the reader several diff er-
ent ways of conceptualizing each variety of the gift. Th e heavy black line
that runs across the entire table indicates a more basic distinction between
lower (reciprocal) and higher (nonreciprocal) ideals of giving. Using this
discussion as a framework, I now turn to a closer consideration of the
gift- of- the- body theme.
166

v
A FLEXIBLE GIFT
H
ow does the bodhisattva’s gift of his body relate to the larger
discourse on dāna I enumerated in chapter 4? In the following
discussion I shall be pursuing a double argument: On the one
hand, the bodhisattva’s gift of his body represents one of the highest ideals
of giving to be found in the Buddhist tradition and is commonly depicted
and classifi ed as an ideal and nonreciprocal gift—in other words, a gift
that falls somewhere below the heavy black line in table 3 of the previous
chapter. On the other hand, however, gift- of-t he-b ody jātakas, through
a variety of diff erent narrative strategies, skillfully encompass and invoke
various lesser, more ordinary, and more reciprocal models of giving as
well—or those that fall above the heavy black line in table 3. Th e gift of the
body is thus both ideal and ordinary, simultaneously nonreciprocal and
reciprocal. In chapter 2 I invoked the tension between the bodhisattva’s
“imitability” and his “otherness.” Th e same tension appears here, in the
twofold aspect of the gift of the body: as an ideal and nonreciprocal gift,
the gift of the body suggests the bodhisattva’s “otherness,” but as an or-
dinary and reciprocal gift, it suggests his “imitability.” Th e fi rst demands
our admiration and cultic devotion toward the glorious feat of the
167

a flexible gift
bodhisattva, while the second demands that we imitate the bodhisattva and
engage in dāna ourselves. Either one of these aspects may be emphasized
at the expense of the other, or a precarious resolution between the two
may be attempted.
In what follows, I will examine each of these two perspectives on the
gift, as well as demonstrating some of the ways in which they are balanced.
I will then turn to another variety of “doubleness” inherent in the gift-
o f-t he-b ody theme: the double discourse of “self” and “selfl essness” that
surrounds the notion of “self- sacrifi ce.” In both these discussions, the gift
of the body will reveal itself to be highly fl exible and multivalent in nature,
capable of conveying, at one and the same time, a number of diametrically
opposed conceptions of generosity, selfl essness, and reward. Th e artfulness
and skill with which the concept’s multiple connotations are handled are
what make the gift-o f-t he-b ody theme such a useful signifi er within the
Buddhist discourse on dāna.
Th e Ideal Gift
Indian Buddhist textual discourse generally conceives and depicts the gift
of the body not as an ordinary act of giving, but rather as the fullest pos-
sible manifestation of dāna and the ideal form of dāna. Th is high valuation
of the gift of the body is conveyed in several diff erent ways. One simple
way of indicating its ideal nature is to associate this gift closely, consis-
tently, and almost exclusively with the fi gure of the bodhisattva. Th ough
gifts of the body are not restricted to bodhisattvas alone,1 it is no doubt
true that within Buddhist literature those who give away their bodies are
overwhelmingly described as bodhisattvas. In fact, the gift of the body is
even a defi ning feature of bodhisattvahood, for it is said that all bodhi-
sattvas must make fi ve gifts throughout the course of their careers—those
of wealth, children, wife, body parts, and life.2 Since, as we saw earlier, any
gift given by a bodhisattva is by defi nition a perfectly “pure” gift, closely
associating the gift of the body with the fi gure of the bodhisattva strongly
suggests its ideal nature.
Th is idealization is further reinforced, moreover, by the fact that the
gift of the body is often associated more specifi cally with the bodhisattva’s
“perfection of generosity,” or dāna- pāramitā. As I mentioned previously,
gift- of- the- body stories are frequently chosen to illustrate dāna- pāramitā
within narrative collections intended to illustrate the six or ten perfections.
168

a flexible gift
Similarly, gift- of- the- body stories are frequently invoked within exegetical
discussions of dāna- pāramitā. In the Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra, for ex-
ample, a long section devoted to an explanation of each of the six perfections
answers the question “How does the bodhisattva fulfi ll dāna- pāramitā?” by
stating: “He gives everything away without restriction, and when he gives
even his own body, his heart experiences no regret: for example, King Śibi,
who gave his body to a dove.”3 Th is is followed by a retelling of the story
of King Śibi’s gift of fl esh to ransom a dove, this story itself serving as the
complete explanation of dāna- pāramitā. Likewise, in the Pāramitāsamāsa
attributed to Ārya Śūra, the author begins his discussion of dāna- pāramitā
with eight verses on the gift of the body (mentioning fl esh, blood, and
limbs), clearly treating this gift as emblematic of dāna- pāramitā as a whole.4
Again, the Cariyāpitaka’s brief discussion of dāna- pāramitā explains that
˙
gifts of material goods constitute only the “preliminary requirements for
giving,” whereas the gift of one’s limbs constitutes the “perfection of giv-
ing,” and the gift of one’s entire body or life constitutes the “fulfi llment of
the perfection [of giving].”5 Th ese and many other, similar contexts indi-
cate that the gift of the body was conceived not as ordinary giving, but
rather as giving’s “perfection.”
One of the major ways in which this “perfection” is described in Bud-
dhist texts is in terms of the absolute purity of intention that accompanies
the gift—in other words, the fact that the bodhisattva gives a gift out of
pure generosity and compassion and with no ulterior motives whatsoever.
In this regard, it is striking to note just how closely and consistently the
gift of the body is associated with such purity of intention. Consider again
the Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra’s defi nition of dāna- pāramitā: “He gives
everything away without restriction, and when he gives even his own body,
his heart experiences no regret.” Th e defi nition of dāna- pāramitā given here
is not merely the act of giving away one’s body, but more specifi cally giving
away one’s body and feeling no regret. It is the purity of intention that is
presumed to accompany the gift of the body that is thus highlighted. Th is
is true even when the category of dāna- pāramitā itself is not mentioned. In
another passage from the same text,6 gifts are classifi ed as being “inferior,”
“medium,” or “superior,” with the gifts of head, eyes, fl esh, and blood (as
well as kingdom, riches, wife, and children) constituting the “superior”
category. But in addition to defi ning each type of gift in terms of the ob-
jects given, the text also defi nes them as follows: “inferior” gifts are simply
given, “medium” gifts come about with one’s “progress in the cultivation
of giving,” and “superior” gifts come about with one’s “progress in the
169

a flexible gift
intention behind the gift.” Gifts of the body are again explicitly linked to
the donor’s purity of intention.
Much the same is illustrated in yet another section of the same text,
this time by means of a humorous story about Śāriputra. Śāriputra, the
text tells us, had practiced the bodhisattva path for sixty kalpas and was
eager to fulfi ll the perfection of giving. One day a mendicant approached
him and asked for his eye. Śāriputra at fi rst hesitated, but then, desiring
to fulfi ll dāna- pāramitā, he pulled out an eye and gave it to him. Th e
mendicant took the eye, smelled it, spit up in disgust, threw the eye on
the ground, and crushed it with his feet. Angered and resentful, Śāriputra
thought to himself:
People who are so vicious are diffi cult to save! My eye was truly of no use to him,
but he cruelly asked for it, and when he obtained it, he threw it down and crushed
it with his feet. What could be more vicious? Such people cannot be saved. Better
to tame oneself; one will be liberated from samsara earlier!7
It was at that very moment, the text explains, that Śāriputra left the bodhi-
sattva path and returned to the Lesser Vehicle.
Notice that Śāriputra makes an immediate connection between the gift
of the body and dāna- pāramitā, assuming implicitly that the gift of one’s
own body is the type of gift that will automatically allow one to fulfi ll the
perfection of generosity. Th is underscores the close association drawn by
the tradition between gifts of the body and dāna- pāramitā. Notice also,
however, what Śāriputra fails to recognize: that gifts of the body consti-
tute a fulfi llment of dāna- pāramitā precisely because of the great purity
of intention that is assumed to accompany such gifts. Śāriputra’s failure,
after all, is not a failure to give (since he does give the man his eye), but
rather a failure to maintain the frame of mind and purity of intention that
normally characterize such gifts.
Th e close association drawn between the gift of the body and the ab-
solute purity of the giver’s intention is perhaps explainable by the fact
that the former would seem to constitute a stark and obvious signifi er
of the latter. In other words, whereas the purity of the donor’s intention
is a purely mental quality—invisible and unverifi able to the outside ob-
server—its existence seems to be vouchsafed by the dramatic spectacle
of bodily self-s acrifi ce, which is clear for all to see. Indeed, one of the
underlying assumptions at work here is that nobody would give such a
diffi cult and painful gift—such an extreme gift—if his intentions were not
170

a flexible gift
completely pure. Th e gift of the body thus seems to serve in the Buddhist
imagination as a potent external sign or visible marker for the presence
of pure generosity.
Th is presence is further confi rmed for us, moreover, by another external
sign characteristic of the gift of the body: the spectacle of the unworthy
recipient. As we have seen, because the recipient of the bodhisattva’s body
is either pitiful or evil (or the deity Śakra pretending to be someone pitiful
or evil), we know for certain that the bodhisattva cannot be acting in the
interest of gaining merit, but must be acting solely out of pure generosity
and compassion. Finally, as if all these external signs still constituted insuf-
fi cient evidence, the bodhisattva himself, as we have seen, is continually
forced to make the purity of his motivations verbally explicit. Th rough
vows, ritualized statements, and Acts of Truth, the bodhisattva repeatedly
gives voice to his status as an ideal and perfect giver. When formulated as
Acts of Truth, moreover, these verbalized statements often result in yet one
more visible marker of the bodhisattva’s utter sincerity: the restoration of
his injured body to perfect health. Th us, the giver, the gift, the recipient,
and the procedure of giving itself—all of these features of the gift-o f- the-
body genre conspire to prove to us, beyond any suspicion, the status of
the gift of the body as a pure and perfect gift, one that adheres to the very
highest standards of dāna.
Finally, another variety of ultimate and ideal gift, as we have seen, is the
giving up of the world in an act of renunciation. And once again we fi nd
that gift- of-t he-b ody stories sometimes suggest that the gift of one’s own
body is somehow equivalent to this ultimate gift. Th is association between
the gift of the body and the act of renunciation is never stated explicitly
but is suggested in several diff erent ways. For example, if we think of
w orld-r enunciation as being equivalent to the giving up of everything—one’s
wealth, possessions, family, and indeed, one’s very life (as it was formerly
lived)—then it is interesting to note that gift- of-t he-b ody stories often
seem to treat the body as a signifi er for “everything.” In other words, the
bodhisattva within such stories often implicitly assumes (whether rightly
or wrongly) that by giving away his body, he is giving away everything.
Th is equivalence is made explicit, in fact, by the consistent association
drawn between gifts of the body and the name Sarvamdada (“All Giver” or
˙
“Giver of Everything”). Sarvamdada is a ubiquitous name within gift-o f-
˙
the- body stories. Although it is most commonly associated with the story
of a particular king named Sarvamdada who off ers his head to a brahmin
˙
supplicant,8 it has a tendency to be invoked within other gift-o f- the- body
171

a flexible gift
stories as well. Th us King Ambara in the Karunāpundarīka Sūtra,9 King
˙ ˙˙
Candraprabha in Divyāvadāna 22,10 and King Śibi in Avadānakalpalatā
5511—to cite just a few examples—are all referred to using the name
Sarvamdada or the adjective sarvamdada. Moreover, in those contexts in
˙ ˙
which the name is explained, the idea that the gift of one’s body consti-
tutes the gift of everything is always suggested. In Avadānasārasamuccaya
3, for example, King Sarvamdada asks himself: “How and when could he,
˙
whose mind is attached even to his own body, be called ‘Sarvamdada’?”
˙
By giving away his body, he determines, he will “now become one whose
name is apt in meaning.”12 Th us it is not until the gift of his body that
Sarvamdada, the “Giver of Everything,” truly “earns” his name. Likewise,
˙
in the Karunāpundarīka Sūtra, when the gods praise King Ambara for his
˙ ˙˙
great generosity and give him the name “Sarvamdada,” the people of his
˙
kingdom are still not convinced and decide to ask him for all of his limbs,
noting: “If he gives them, he will be ‘Sarvamdada,’ but if he doesn’t give
˙
them, he will not be ‘Sarvamdada.’”13 Similarly, in Divyāvadāna 22, when
˙
the evil brahmin Raudrāksa hears of King Candraprabha’s great reputa-
˙
tion as an “all-g iving” (sarvamdada) king, he immediately speculates: “If
˙
he’s really ‘all-g iving,’ then he’ll give me his head!”14 Th e gift of the body
thus stands for the gift of everything—which is equivalent to renouncing
the world.
Perhaps another way of saying much the same thing is to note that the
practice of world- renunciation involves not merely the rejection of family
or material possessions but also the loss of one’s former identity and the
giving up of one’s self—which is aptly symbolized by the gift of one’s body.
As Mauss pointed out long ago, every gift contains something of the giver
and represents an abnegation and renunciation of his own self.15 But this
symbolic identity between giver and gift, which is sometimes stronger and
sometimes weaker, becomes literal and complete in the gift of one’s own
body: when the giver himself becomes the gift, the gift loses its fl avor as
an external object or mere “gift,” and becomes a true renunciation, conver-
sion, or giving up of the self. Perhaps this is why gift- of- the- body stories
so often take on the structure of “rites of passage” (as described by Van
Gennep and Turner), since all such rites involve the loss and stripping of
one’s former identity in order to take on a new identity, such as that of a
monk or renunciant.16 Th e gift of the body thus becomes a concrete and
visceral image of the kind of eradication of self that is perhaps most fully
realized when one renounces the world.
172

a flexible gift
Within Buddhist texts the idea that the gift of the body is really the gift
of oneself fi nds perhaps its greatest expression in the distinction sometimes
drawn between those gifts that are “external” (bāhira) and those that are
“internal” (adhyātmika). Whereas bāhira gifts are “external” to the self,
consisting of adventitious property or possessions, adhyātmika gifts are
“internal” to the self, or that which constitutes an integral or inherent part
of one’s person. In Pāli Jātaka 499 King Śibi thinks to himself: “Th ere is
not a single external object that I have not given, [yet] external gifts do not
satisfy me; I want to give an internal gift.”17 Th e context clearly suggests
that “internal” gifts are of a qualitatively diff erent order than “external”
gifts, and cites, as examples of “internal” gifts, the fl esh of the heart, the
fl esh of the body, the blood, and the eyes.
Th is distinction between material objects as “external” gifts and gifts of
the body as “internal” gifts appears in many later Buddhist texts, as well;
in the Bodhisattvabhūmi, for example, the two types of gifts are defi ned
somewhat technically as follows:
What is the [bodhisattva’s] “gift of everything”? In brief, “everything” refers to the
two types of objects that can be given: internal and external. When a bodhisattva
gives away his own body—even including the very marrow of his bones—that
is referred to as the gift of a wholly internal object. When the bodhisattva ingests
food and drink and then regurgitates it for the sake of those beings who eat [only]
regurgitated food, that is referred to as the bodhisattva’s gift of a partly internal
and partly external object. Th e gift of any object aside from those just mentioned
is referred to as the gift of a wholly external object.18
While the precise delineation of regurgitated food as “partly internal and
partly external” would seem to make the internal / external distinction
overly physical or biological in nature, it seems clear from other contexts
that what is really at stake here is the person, the identity, or the self. Th us,
the Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra claims that “the internal gift consists of
giving one’s life without regret for beings, as is recounted in the jātakas
and avadānas”19—thus moving away from an overly physical conception
of the body and toward a more generalized conception of self- sacrifi ce. Even
more tellingly, King Śibi, in the passage from Pāli Jātaka 499 alluded to
above, includes “doing the work of a slave” (along with more concrete
bodily sacrifi ces) under the category of “internal” gifts.20 Th e adhyātmika
category thus includes any gift that might be interpreted as a giving up
173

a flexible gift
of the self that is akin to the ascetic’s renunciation of the world and that
supercedes all ordinary gifts. Giving up the world in an act of renuncia-
tion is thus yet another category of ideal and nonreciprocal gift closely
associated with the gift of the body.
Th e Ordinary Gift
Th e gift of the body thus stands as one of the highest ideals of giving to
be found in the Buddhist tradition—the very paradigm of the pure and
nonreciprocal gift. At the same time, however, it is my contention that
part of the appeal of the gift- of- the- body genre is the manner in which
gift-o f-t he-b ody stories skillfully encompass and invoke various lesser, more
reciprocal, and more attainable models of giving as well—such that the
gift of the body becomes an ordinary gift, as well as one that is ideal. Th is
occurs in a number of diff erent ways.
One could argue, for example, that it is precisely the extremity of the
ideal gift that allows it to function as a model of the ordinary—by illus-
trating, in an exaggerated way, those features that should characterize all
acts of giving, no matter how trivial. In other words, the most extreme
expression of a phenomenon can serve to clarify those features of the
phenomenon that are always present, but might normally be hidden or
obscured within its more ordinary manifestations. Th us, if the gift of the
body is made akin to renunciation, it is to underscore the point that every
gift, even the most trivial off ering of alms, is ideally an expression of nonat-
tachment to the world and a miniature version of w orld- renunciation. If
the gift of the body is frequently described as being “very diffi cult, most
diffi cult, for a man to give up”21 and thus incontrovertible proof of the
donor’s heroism, bravery, and strength of resolution, it is to underscore
the point that every gift, even the most mundane, should be given with
a fi rm mind and unwavering resolve, as if one were willingly throwing
away one’s own life.
In some jātakas this ultimate equivalence between extreme and ordinary
manifestations of dāna is made explicit. In the jātaka of King Manicūda,
˙ ˙
for example, King Manicūda is in the process of performing a traditional
˙ ˙
Vedic sacrifi cial off ering when a demon (who is really the god Śakra in
disguise) suddenly rises up from the sacrifi cial fi re and demands his fl esh
and blood, which Manicūda then proceeds to give him. Manicūda’s gift of
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
his fl esh and blood thus takes place during a Vedic sacrifi ce and in the form
174

a flexible gift
of an ordinary sacrifi cial off ering—thus suggesting the idea that every such
ritual off ering ought to be made with the same seriousness of purpose as
if one were willingly taking a knife to one’s own fl esh. In much the same
manner, in Jātakamālā 4 a pratyekabuddha looking for alms comes to the
door of a generous householder, whereupon Māra conjures up a bottomless
hell in between the doorway and the pratyekabuddha. Undeterred, the
generous householder steps directly into the hell in his eagerness to give
alms, whereupon a lotus magically springs up out of the hell and prevents
him from falling in.22 Th e point here, of course, is that every mundane
gift of alms should be made with the same strength of resolution as if one
were willingly stepping into hell itself—an equivalence made clear in the
accompanying moral: “Good men will give even at the risk of their own
lives—so how can anyone residing in comfort refuse to do so?”23
To some extent, then, lower and higher forms of giving are not nec-
essarily incompatible with each other. Higher forms represent the ideal
toward which all lower forms should strive and illustrate in an especially
clear manner those features of dāna that ought to be ever-p resent. In this
sense it is precisely the highly idealized nature of the gift of the body that
allows it to serve as a model for more ordinary forms of giving. Never-
theless, I am more interested here in exploring exactly the opposite—in
other words, several ways in which the idealism normally associated with
gifts of the body is sometimes signifi cantly compromised, so that the gift
of the body loses some of its exalted character and moves closer to more
ordinary forms of giving and the expectation of giving’s rewards. Th is kind
of compromise allows the story to successfully encompass several diff er-
ent notions of dāna at once, yet also results in a certain degree of tension
and contradiction. Two ways in which this compromise is achieved are by
means of plotline and framing.
compromising the ideal gift through plotline
In terms of plotline, I am referring, of course, to those stories in which
the deity Śakra is the recipient of the gift. As I noted already in chapter 2,
stories featuring ordinary beings as the recipients of the gift tend to em-
phasize the extreme and uncompromising generosity of the bodhisattva,
who willingly loses his life on behalf of those who are pitiful or evil. In
stories featuring Śakra as the recipient, on the other hand, this extreme and
uncompromising generosity cannot help but be weakened to some extent
by the fact that the bodhisattva not only survives the gift but also gets his
175

a flexible gift
body back. Th ough the bodhisattva himself, at the time when he makes
the gift, is obviously unaware that his body will ultimately be restored, the
reader who is familiar with the conventions of the genre cannot help but
recognize the fact that, over and over again, the bodhisattva within such
stories is returned to perfect health and suff ers no permanent negative
consequences as a result of making the gift.
Th e survival of the bodhisattva and the restoration of his body (often
in a better condition than before) signifi cantly weaken the emphasis upon
“perfect generosity.” At the same time, however, this outcome also allows
the reader to vicariously experience the rewards of the gift much more so
than those stories in which the bodhisattva dies. Consequently, while the
bodhisattva’s gift of his body remains an extreme gift in nature, it also serves
implicitly as a model for more ordinary, reward- based giving, such as the
off ering of alms to monks and other gifts given for the sake of merit. Th e
balancing act maintained here between reciprocal and nonreciprocal modes
of giving is exemplifi ed by the double status of Śakra as the recipient: On
the one hand, Śakra is disguised as someone pitiful or evil—an “unworthy
recipient” whose presence testifi es to the great purity of the bodhisattva’s
generosity. On the other hand, we, the audience, understand that Śakra
is actually a deity—a classic “worthy recipient” who calls up the image of
gifts given for the sake of reward. Th e confused identity of Śakra as a re-
cipient is a marker of the careful balancing act between competing no-
tions of generosity engaged in by stories of this type.
Th is strategy raises a number of interesting questions. Can the extrem-
ity of the gift be compromised, while still trying to maintain the ideal
nature of the gift, which, as we have seen, is in part suggested precisely by
its extremity? Does the gift of the body lose its ethical punch when the
bodhisattva’s body is wholly restored, and the entire episode is revealed
to be an elaborate ruse undertaken by Śakra? And why do these stories
sometimes strike us as trying to have their cake and eat it too? Within
gift- of- the- body stories involving Śakra, I contend, there is indeed some
tension between the desire to depict an ideal gift given with no expectation
of any reward and the desire to depict this same gift as a model of dāna
that can speak to the ordinary giver and that includes the expectation and
enjoyment of rewards. Th is tension comes out most clearly, perhaps, in
the bodhisattva’s Act of Truth.
As we have seen, all Acts of Truth restoring the body invoke the purity
of the bodhisattva’s intentions when he gave his body away. But such Acts
of Truth are inherently contradictory, for while presumably attesting to
176

a flexible gift
the bodhisattva’s complete lack of regret in making the gift, the obvious
purpose of the Act of Truth is to get his body back; in fact, such statements
display an inordinate concern with payback, return, and reciprocity (“I
gave freely, so give it back”; “I gave two eyes when only one was asked
for, so give me one back”). Th e bodhisattva’s obvious concern with “pay-
back” stands in stark contradiction to the lack of such concern that is
enunciated within the Act of Truth itself—and, in fact, that is required
for the payback to occur—and the reader of such stories thus stumbles
when she gets to the Act of Truth and feels a twinge of embarrassment
on behalf of the bodhisattva. How do such stories deal with the apparent
contradiction?
On the one hand it seems to me that the blatant self- interest inherent in
these kinds of statements is permissible precisely because they are framed
within the context of an Act of Truth. For the Act of Truth is treated by
the tradition not as a declarative statement of one’s desires, wishes, and
motives, but rather as a performative utterance that ritually draws upon
both the power of the truth and the intrinsic connection between moral
action and its karmic rewards. In a sense, its performative and ritual status
seems to negate whatever declarative value it may have, thus providing a
“safe” context in which the bodhisattva is free to make bald statements of
his true motives and desires.
On the other hand, however, this ritual s leight- of- hand is perhaps not
completely convincing, and the lingering discomfort felt by some bod-
hisattvas is thus apparent. In Pāli Jātaka 499, for example, when Śakra
encourages King Śibi to perform an Act of Truth in order to restore his
eyes, the king is depicted as being hesitant and uncomfortable, whereas
Śakra freely acknowledges the self-i nterest involved in such gifts: “Great
King,” he tells King Śibi, “the gift is not only given for the sake of the next
world alone; there is also a motive for the sake of this world!”24 Similarly, in
Jātakamālā 2, after Śakra off ers King Śibi a boon in celebration of his bodily
gift, the narrator notes the king’s obvious discomfort: “Now, the king was
accustomed to giving and was therefore unpracticed in the way of begging
and poverty.”25 When King Śibi fi nally manages to ask for death alone as
a boon, Śakra seems to become angry at his overweening humility:
Enough! Enough of this intention of yours! . . . When beggars have reduced you
to such a condition, how on earth can you still be concerned with them? Enough
deception! Just tell me, so that you can overcome your condition and at once get
on with your life!26
177

a flexible gift
Th us it is Śakra alone who is willing to face the contradictory character
of the Act of Truth, whereas King Śibi, still embarrassed by its blatant na-
ture, complains to Śakra: “Why do you insist on making me boast, Sir?”27
Only after such hemming and hawing does he fi nally perform the two Acts
of Truth that restore his eyes. Th ese Acts of Truth themselves, however—
now rendered “safe” by their ritualized and performative context—freely
acknowledge the king’s desire to have his eyes restored. Moreover, once
the purity of his intentions has been dramatically verifi ed by means of this
restoration, the king delivers a sermon in which he now feels free to dwell
at length on the enormous rewards of giving:
Who in the world would be lax in favoring supplicants with their wealth, after
seeing these supernatural eyes of mine produced from the merit of giving? I can
see all visible objects everywhere as clearly as if they were close by, even if they
are a hundred yojanas away or hidden behind many mountains! What means of
prosperity could be better than generosity, born of modesty and compassion for
others? For just now, I gave away a human eye and received one that is supernatu-
ral and divine! Understanding this, Śibis, make your wealth bear fruit by giving
it away and spending it. Th is is the way to the arising of fame and happiness in
this world and the next!28
In just a few pages, then, King Śibi has moved from hesitation and dis-
comfort at the thought of any reward to enthusiastic promotion of g iving-
and- getting- back. Th e tension between these two positions is characteristic
of stories that adhere to this plotline.
Stories involving Śakra as the recipient thus walk a sort of tightrope
between ideal and ordinary gifts. Th ey use an ideal gift in order to justify
and encourage giving in general, yet they must also compromise some of
the elements of this ideal in order to bring it closer to the ordinary. Cor-
respondingly, the giver of the gift is something of an enigma: he is both
the extraordinary bodhisattva who gives away his body with no expecta-
tion of reward, and the ordinary giver who expects and enjoys the rewards
of his meritorious deeds. His confusion over which role he is playing is
sometimes manifested as hesitation, embarrassment, or doubt, and the
reader of such stories is often struck by the contradictory nature of his
words and deeds.
Nevertheless, the movement between these two perspectives on the gift
is not completely haphazard, for it is also the case that a consistent pattern
can be discerned: the switch from the gift of the body as an ideal gift to
178

a flexible gift
the gift of the body as an ordinary gift seems to be facilitated somewhat by
the switch to a ritualized frame. In other words, when one is performing
a ritualized Act of Truth, or when one is engaging in formal preaching
to the public, one approaches the gift of the body a fter- the- fact, from a
once- removed distance, and from within a ritualized frame—and it then
becomes possible to acknowledge the rewards of the gift and to use the gift
of the body as a model for more ordinary and reciprocal forms of giving.
At the precise narrative moment when the gift is being made, in contrast,
such an acknowledgment would be impossible. It is through the switch-
ing between these two frames that competing conceptions of the gift are
carefully balanced.
compromising the ideal gift through framing
Th ere is a second manner, too, in which the compromise between ideal
and ordinary forms of dāna is eff ected by gift- of- the- body stories—one
that again relies on a shift to a diff erent frame. Th is is a compromise that
occurs not by means of the story’s plotline, but rather by means of its
external framing—more specifi cally, the framing of the “story of the past”
within a particular “story of the present.”
In chapter 1 I suggested that one possible way of describing the diff er-
ence between jātakas and avadānas is to say that jātakas, on the whole,
illustrate the bodhisattva’s cultivation of the moral perfections in an age
devoid of Buddhism, whereas avadānas, on the whole, take place in a
Buddhist devotional context and involve the performance of devotional
acts by disciples and layfollowers who take advantage of the presence
of Buddhism in the world as a powerful “fi eld of merit.” Th us, jātakas
are about “perfections,” whereas avadānas are about “devotions,” and by
means of the two genres’ coexistence, moral deeds in a Buddha- less age
are both compared to and contrasted with ritual transactions in an age of
Buddhadharma.
Now let us observe that the same distinction I have drawn between the
jātaka and avadāna genres is also present within many jātakas themselves
as a distinction between the “story of the past” and the “story of the pres-
ent.” For it is a characteristic feature of the jātaka genre that the “story
of the past” always involves the bodhisattva within some long-a go life,
whereas the “story of the present” always takes place within a Buddhist
devotional context centered upon Śākyamuni and explaining the occasion
upon which he narrated this particular tale. When the two stories are paired
179

a flexible gift
together, it sometimes occurs that an actual life- event undergone by the
bodhisattva within the “story of the past” is somehow shown to be parallel
to some ritual or devotional situation occurring within the surrounding
“story of the present.” Th is framing presents yet another opportunity for
contextualizing the bodhisattva’s gift of his body within a ritualized frame
that makes it akin to more ordinary types of giving.
Let us consider, for example, Pāli Jātaka 316. Th e “story of the present”
opens with a landowner inviting the Buddha and his monks to take a
sumptuous meal at his house. He invites them back every day for seven
days, and on the seventh day he presents the Samgha with many material
˙
gifts. Th e Buddha says to him:
Layman, it is right for you to give joy and satisfaction [to others]. Th is is called
generosity, and it is a tradition of the wise beings of old. For the wise beings of
old, upon encountering supplicants, sacrifi ced their lives for them and gave them
even their own fl esh.29
He then launches into the “story of the past,” which is the gift-o f-t he-
body jātaka involving a hare who throws himself into a fi re in order to
feed a hungry brahmin ascetic (whereupon the fi re refuses to burn him).
Following this, there is a switch back to the “story of the present,” where
we learn that the landowner, upon hearing the tale of the hare, attained
the fruit of stream- entry.
Treating this jātaka as a whole and taking seriously its association of
these two particular stories, it is clear that the landowner engaging in or-
dinary dāna within the “story of the present” is, in some sense, parallel to
the hare engaging in extreme dāna (the gift of the body) within the “story
of the past”—for the Buddha tells the story of the hare’s gift immediately
after, and in reference to, the gift off ered by the landowner. Moreover, both
the landowner and the hare follow a similar arc: the opportunity to make
a gift, the giving of the gift itself, and the enjoyment of the gift’s rewards.
Th us, the bodhisattva’s gift of his body remains extreme in nature, yet is
subtly made parallel to more ordinary ritual acts of off ering, such as the
layperson’s off ering of material gifts to the Samgha.
˙
Th e exalted ideal of generosity represented by the hare’s act of bodily sac-
rifi ce is weakened and compromised by being associated with a much more
mundane form of giving—the upward- moving, merit- producing gift to a
worthy recipient. Th is weakening, however, is also a great strength—for
180

a flexible gift
now the ordinary reader can feel good about his gifts and confi dently relate
his own ritual actions to the heroic deeds performed by the bodhisattvas
of old. In fact, he might even be justifi ed in believing that the two gifts
are functionally equivalent—for whereas the hare is born in an age devoid
of Buddhism and must therefore go to rather extreme lengths, off ering
his entire body to a passing brahmin, the landowner, fortunate enough to
be born in an age of Buddhadharma, can simply off er material gifts to
the Samgha. Th us, by carefully framing the “story of the past” within a
˙
particular “story of the present,” the hare’s gift of his body is placed within
a ritualized context in which it approaches more reciprocal forms of the
gift.
Much the same process occurs in Pāli Jātaka 499. Here the “story of
the present” opens with the king of Kosala entertaining the Buddha and
his Samgha for seven days straight and then presenting the Buddha with
˙
a very expensive robe. When the monks express their amazement at such
a wonderful gift, the Buddha states:
Monks, external possessions are indeed good gifts. [But] the wise men of old made
all of Jambudvīpa into a festival every day by giving away gifts of six hundred
thousand [gold pieces, yet] they were [still] unsatisfi ed by these external gifts.
Th inking to themselves—“He who gives what is dear [to him] obtains what is
dear [to him]”—they [even] tore out their [own] eyes and gave them to the sup-
plicants they encountered.30
Th e Buddha then launches into a “story of the past”—the story of King
Śibi’s gift of his eyes to a blind old brahmin.
Again it is clear that the king of Kosala engaging in ordinary gifts within
the “story of the present” is being in some sense made parallel to King
Śibi engaging in extreme gifts within the “story of the past.” While the
Buddha’s comments make it clear that King Śibi’s gifts are vastly superior
to those of the king of Kosala—for King Śibi is said to be “unsatisfi ed”
by the kind of mere “external gifts” given by the king of Kosala—there is
also a sense that the king of Kosala does not need to make such superior
gifts, for he has access to the potent fi eld of merit represented by the Bud-
dha and his Samgha. King Śibi must make the diffi cult “internal” gift of
˙
his eyes, whereas the king of Kosala relies on an ordinary “external” of-
fering of robes. (Perhaps one could go so far as to suggest that “internal”
gifts in a B uddha- less age may be replaced by “external” gifts in an age
181

a flexible gift
of Buddhadharma.) Th e bodhisattva’s gift of his body is thus associated
with—and made functionally equivalent to—the ordinary layman’s of-
fering of a robe.
It is also quite striking to note what the Buddha says here about the
“wise men of old” who gave their bodies away. Just as the king of Kosala
most likely makes his off erings of food and clothing to the Samgha with
˙
the hope and expectation of receiving merit as a reward, so the Buddha
has the “wise men of old” think to themselves (as they give their bodies
away), “He who gives what is dear [to him] obtains what is dear [to him].”
Since most bodhisattvas in gift-o f-t he- body stories, as we have seen, are
depicted as having no expectation of any reward, the extreme purity of
intention normally associated with gifts of the body has here been consid-
erably compromised. By compromising this purity of intention, however,
the Buddha’s statement allows the king of Kosala to identify himself with
King Śibi before the story even begins, since both kings give their gifts
based on the expectation of rewards. At the end of the story, moreover,
when King Śibi’s eyes are not only restored but acquire supernatural powers
as well, the king of Kosala gets a foretaste of the kind of worldly rewards
he might also expect to enjoy for his more ordinary acts of dāna. Th us
the extreme ideal of the gift of the body—when compromised to some
extent by being motivated by a desire for mundane rewards—is capable
of serving as a model for more ordinary forms of giving.
Once again, however, it is interesting to note that this compromise
is made possible only by a shift in the story’s perspective to a ritualized
and “once- removed” frame. In other words, the statement “He who gives
what is dear [to him] obtains what is dear [to him]” is attributed to the
gift- of- the- body donor only indirectly (by the Buddha), after the fact, and
within the confi nes of the “story of the present.” Within the “story of the
past,” or jātaka proper, on the other hand, at the moment when the gift
is being made, the bodhisattva himself would never deign to think such
a thought. Again, we fi nd the same consistent pattern as before, which
hinges on the gift’s “framability.”: Whenever the gift can be “framed” as
something external to oneself and able to be considered from a distance,
its interpretation becomes somewhat fl exible. But when one is immersed
within the precise narrative moment of its occurrence, such fl exibility becomes
untenable, and the perfect purity of the gift must be upheld. It is the careful
balancing act between these two perspectives on the gift (through plotline,
framing, and other means) that makes the gift of the body such a versatile
narrative theme within the Buddhist discourse on dāna.
182

a flexible gift
Th e Slippery Magic of the Gift
Th e kind of balancing act between higher and lower forms of the gift that
I have tried to demonstrate above might perhaps be further elucidated by
reference to some of the current scholarly discourse on the gift—for the
problematic relationship between the “pure gift” and “reciprocity” has
been a major theme of recent gift- related discourse.
If we envision the diff erent types of “reciprocity” that ordinary gift-
g iving might involve, it is possible to distinguish among several major
varieties. Marshall Sahlins, attempting to put forth a purely formal ty-
pology of exchange, has identifi ed three diff erent types of reciprocity:
negative, balanced, and generalized.31 In negative reciprocity each person
acts purely in his own self- interest and tries to maximize his own per-
sonal gain at the expense of the other—for example, through barter or
chicanery. Balanced reciprocity, on the other hand, works on the principle
of a direct and equivalent exchange between two parties: Person A gives
to Person B, and Person B reciprocates in an equivalent manner within
a fi nite period of time. Finally, generalized reciprocity is indirect and
diff use in nature; here, Person A gives to Person B, who gives to Person
C, who gives to Person D . . . until Person A is ultimately “repaid” by
someone other than the person to whom he originally gave. Payback is
indirect and uncertain in nature and may take a considerable amount
of time. Clearly, Sahlins’ categories could be placed along a “continuum
of reciprocity” that begins with utilitarian self-i nterest and ultimately
culminates in the “pure” gift.
In a similar manner, Lévi-S trauss’ work on kinship draws a basic dis-
tinction between restricted exchange and generalized exchange, which are
equivalent to the “balanced” and “generalized” reciprocities outlined by
Sahlins.32 While restricted exchange involves only two parties who are fully
aware of the obligatory nature of their gifts and countergifts, generalized
exchange is theoretically open to an indefi nite number of parties; the more
diff use and complicated such a network of reciprocity becomes, the closer
we move to the pole of pure sacrifi ce, or the gift given with no expectation
of any return.33 In the formulations of both Sahlins and Lévi- Strauss, then,
the “pure” gift represents the idealized end of a continuum of reciproc-
ity—the vanishing point that can never be attained. Th e “pure” gift seems
to fulfi ll a purely syntactic function and cannot be realized in any particular
instance. It is in this sense that we can agree with Derrida that the “pure”
gift is an impossible ideal.
183

a flexible gift
And yet . . . many of these reciprocal exchanges are perceived and expe-
rienced as “pure” gifts. Th is is the genius, the paradox, the s leight-o f-h and
enacted by the gift—impossible to realize, yet somehow underlying and
informing an entire range of reciprocal exchanges. Th is paradox of the gift
has been commented upon by many. Lévi- Strauss himself, for example,
hints at the paradoxical nature of a system of “generalized exchange.” In
reality, there is reciprocity and “payback” within such a system, yet through
the indirectness of the returns—which weave their way through a chain
of intermediaries not easily observable by the original donor—general-
ized exchange has the appearance of pure sacrifi ce and is experienced as
such by those who partake in it. Once the network of reciprocity is of
suffi cient complexity, the mechanism of “payback” becomes obscure and
impossible to trace, and at least the illusion of Derrida’s “forgetting” then
becomes possible.
Going one step further, much the same can be said even in the case
of “restricted exchange” between two parties, where the route of return is
completely obvious (A ↔ B). To understand how a direct and obligatory
exchange between two parties can nevertheless be experienced through
the idiom of the “pure,” disinterested gift, it is helpful to consider Lévi-
S trauss’ critique of Mauss and Pierre Bourdieu’s subsequent critique of
Lévi-S trauss. In his essay on the gift, Mauss split the act of gift-e xchange
into three sequential practices—giving, receiving, and reciprocating—and
then wondered what it was that held them together, eventually invoking
the indigenous Maori notion of hau as a kind of “spirit” of the original do-
nor that animates his gift and later compels the recipient to make a return.34
In his critique of Mauss’ argument, Lévi- Strauss accuses Mauss of failing
to perceive that “the primary, fundamental phenomenon is exchange itself,
which gets split up into discrete operations in social life.”35 In other words,
Mauss misses the forest for the trees; instead of examining exchange as a
whole, he splits this whole up into three sequential parts (giving, receiving,
and reciprocating) and must then use hau as a glue to put the parts back
together again and reconstruct the phenomenon of exchange. Mauss fails
to become a true structuralist; his mistake is to see only an empirically
given sequence of discrete events, rather than uncovering the simpler,
underlying structure “to which the given owes its whole reality.”36
Pierre Bourdieu, on the other hand, has more recently argued that this
underlying structure uncovered by Lévi-S trauss does not, in fact, constitute
the “whole reality” of gift- exchange. What this structural approach to the
gift lacks is any appreciation for the properties of gift-e xchange that result
184

a flexible gift
from the fact that “it is constructed in time, that time gives it its form
. . . and therefore its direction and meaning.”37 In other words, time and
sequence are everything, and the fact that giving, receiving, and reciprocating
unfold in succession cannot be excluded from an account of gift-e xchange.
In particular, Bourdieu emphasizes the crucial importance of the time- lag
between gift and countergift. A gift can be reciprocated only after an ap-
propriate amount of time; it is the time-l ag that most sharply distinguishes
gift-g iving from ordinary barter, and it is the time-l ag that allows the sub-
jective experience of pure generosity to coexist with the objective truth of
exchange: “Th e lapse of time that separates the gift from the counter- gift
is what allows the deliberate oversight, the collectively maintained and
approved self- deception, without which the exchange could not function.
Gift exchange is one of the social games that cannot be played unless the
players refuse to acknowledge the objective truth of the game.”38 Th ough
Bourdieu speaks in this and other passages of the “denial,” “self- deception,”
and “illusion” of pure generosity allowed for by this polite lapse of time,
he also recognizes that even these labels can be applied only retroactively,
after the entire sequence has been completed. For at the time when a gift is
given, it is no illusion to suppose that there may not be any return—the
gift, after all, may fall fl at. Time, in other words, introduces uncertainty
and unpredictability into the mechanical model put forth by Lévi- Strauss,
and thus allows for the subjective experience of generosity.
Pure, disinterested generosity therefore coexists with reciprocity and
exchange—not only within a complicated network of “generalized ex-
change,” but even within the most direct and seemingly transparent rela-
tionship of “restricted exchange.” Th e continuum of reciprocity I proposed
above thus collapses, and leads to a paradox in which the “pure” gift is an
unattainable ideal—yet all gifts somehow partake of the character of the
“pure” gift. Derrida’s “forgetting” may be impossible, yet it is also that
which enables all gifts.
If we now return to the case of Buddhism, we can see that much the
same paradox obtains. While perfect generosity and the “pure” gift may
well be restricted to arhats, bodhisattvas, and Buddhas alone, there is also
a sense in which the many gifts and off erings made by ordinary Buddhists
in exchange for karmic merit equally partake in the ethic of the “pure” gift.
For at the time when such a gift is given, merit, as its reward, is nebulous,
intangible, and uncertain in nature, and clearly involves a time-l ag be-
tween the gift and its recompense. In fact, not only does this recompense
frequently extend beyond death and into a future lifetime, but it can even
185

a flexible gift
be described as repaying a “diff erent” person altogether—thus sharing in
the indirectness characteristic of “generalized exchange.”
To take the argument one step further, even those wholly laukika ex-
changes that would fall into the category of “restricted exchange”—such
as off erings made to the gods in direct exchange for worldly benefi ts—also
share some of the features that would allow them to be experienced as
“pure” gifts. For example, the outcome of such a gift is exceedingly un-
certain—nor is the physical presence of the recipient wholly clear—and
once again involves a time- lag between the gift and its recompense. Th us,
such gifts can be given—in the moment—with a spirit of pure generosity,
even though—after the fact—what we see is exchange. As Jan Gonda has
remarked in regard to the exchanges between men and deities characteristic
of the Rg Veda, “it would . . . be incorrect to regard this reciprocity as a
˙
mere matter of barter.”39 Instead, we might rather say that the worshiper’s
initial gift opens up a stream of benefi cence and generosity within its divine
recipient, and his or her r eturn-g ift does the same within the giver, so that
“both god and worshipper give and receive.”40 Th us:
Th e old formula do- ut- des—[or in the Sanskrit texts,] dehi me dadāmi te, ‘give me,
I give thee’—often quoted to indicate that man sacrifi ces to the gods in order to
persuade them into reciprocating should therefore be replaced by do- ut- possis- dare,
‘I give in order that thou mayest be able to give’: man adds to the god’s power,
that he may have power to reciprocate and that life may not stagnate because of
any lack of potency.41
Th is more charitable view of reciprocal gift-e xchange as an ever-fl owing
stream of good will and generosity that spontaneously unfolds over time
and ultimately benefi ts everyone is perhaps truer to the gift- giving ex-
perience than the cold, market rationalism implied by the notion of
“exchange.”
Th rough the slippery magic of the gift, then, pure generosity informs
even the most self-i nterested, laukika exchange. By the same token, how-
ever, the reverse is perhaps equally true: the logic of self- interest informs
even the purest, most lokottara gift. Once again it is the category of time
that seems to mediate between these two perspectives. When the bodhi-
sattva is immersed within the precise narrative moment of the gift’s unfolding,
he can and must adhere to the perfect ideal of pure, one-s ided generosity.
But once the gift is framed from a distance and after- the- fact, it moves closer
to more ordinary forms of giving that freely acknowledge reciprocity and
186

a flexible gift
exchange. It is this slippery magic of the gift that is taken full advantage
of by the gift- of- the- body genre.
Self and Selfl essness in the Buddhist Discourse on Giving
I would like to turn now to another fundamental paradox or “slippery
magic” that lies at the heart of the gift—one I have hinted at several times
already but not yet treated at any length. Th is is the tension between “self”
and “selfl essness” that is inherent in the concept of generosity. Although
generosity is presumably an expression of selfl essness, it often seems to
involve a very strong assertion of self. On the surface a gift is given wholly
for the sake of the other, but underneath this surface lies a deeper concern
with oneself—not, this time, in the sense of a self- interested expectation
of reward, but rather in the subtler sense of using the gift as an expression
of oneself, or to convey a certain message about oneself, in the guise of
aiding another. In fact, this tension seems to become increasingly worse
as the gift itself becomes increasingly altruistic: the more the giver insists
on the “selfl essness” of his or her generosity, the more suspect this “selfl ess-
ness” seems to become. We are all familiar with the modern stereotype
of the zealous do- gooder who altruistically devotes his or her entire life
to a variety of enlightened and charitable causes, but whose personality
is that of a self- aggrandizing egomaniac making everyone around them
miserable. What role does this paradox play within the Buddhist discourse
on giving—especially considering Buddhism’s overriding emphasis on the
importance of cultivating nonself?
Many of the Buddhist ideals of giving I described in the previous chap-
ter do indeed contain suggestions of an underlying a ssertion- of- self. In the
initial distinction I drew between “reciprocated” and “unreciprocated”
gifts, for example, we saw that the “unreciprocated” gift (which is given
only for the sake of karmic merit) rejects and repudiates the kind of social
give-a nd-t ake represented by the “reciprocated” gift described by Mauss,
instead allowing the donor to set herself apart from ordinary society and
express her own soteriological aspirations and orientation toward the tran-
scendent future. Th ere is a paradoxical sense, then, in which the ordinary,
reciprocated gift—which might appear to be wholly calculating and “self-
i nterested” on the surface—actually expresses one’s involvement in society
and commitment to maintaining social bonds; whereas the unreciprocated
gift—which appears to be a “purer” expression of generosity precisely
187

a flexible gift
because it is not reciprocated—really expresses one’s independence from
other people and rejection of social bonds. Th us, the more “selfl ess” the
gift is, the more it involves an assertion of one’s “self” and a separation
from the “other.” Th is paradox only becomes stronger when we consider
what is perhaps the most “selfl ess” and “other- directed” gift of all—the
bodhisattva’s gift of his body.
We saw in chapter 2, for example, that those who oppose the bodhi-
sattva’s intention to give away his body represent a variety of diff erent realms
of interest, such as worldly political interests, familial and aff ective interests,
and the interests of popular, local religious tradition. It might be said that
all such interests represent a man’s entanglements in the social world—the
constitution of his personality through his mutual obligations with others
and his involvement within ever-w idening networks of interdependence.
Th us, when the bodhisattva resists his opposers, he rejects this defi nition
of himself and instead asserts his right to act as an autonomous and free
individual—even to the point of giving his body away. Here we encounter
a paradox: whereas giving up one’s body and life for the sake of another
would seem on the surface to be the ultimate denial of self, it is, at the
same time, an ultimate act of self-w ill—an aggressive assertion of the self’s
right to dispose of himself as he pleases (others be damned). Th is is why
the bodhisattva’s “selfl ess” act encounters so much opposition. It is in the
arguments of his opposers, perhaps, that we see which “self” the bodhi-
sattva really wishes to deny—the self entangled within and defi ned by its
obligations and duties to others, the self that must engage in reciprocity.
Whereas the bodhisattva’s gift is presumably given wholly for the sake of
the other, it also declares his independence from others in a way that is
perhaps inherently self- aggrandizing.
Indeed, gift- of- the- body stories, which are touted as paradigmatic ex-
amples of selfl essness—and which even seem to materialize this selfl essness
through visceral images of self-m utilation—are consistently character-
ized by an underlying a ssertion- of- self through which the bodhisattva is
depicted (and perceives himself) as a completely unique and autonomous
being capable of doing what no one else can do, and giving a unique and
unprecedented gift, a gift that surpasses all other gifts. Th is is a common
conceit within these stories: the bodhisattva frequently prides himself on
giving the “excellent gift never given before”42 and often contrasts himself
favorably with other, more lackluster givers. “Ah, how good is this, my gift
of an eye!”43—King Śibi thinks to himself, while Prince Mahāsattva notes
that he is giving up his body, “which is so diffi cult for others to sacrifi ce.”44
188

a flexible gift
Th e elephant Saddanta calls himself a “prince of generosity,”45 while King
˙ ˙
Punyabala proudly notes that only eight other bodhisattvas in the whole of
˙
time made such a gift as he.46
In addition to asserting a strong sense of himself, moreover, the “selfl ess”
bodhisattva also evinces a certain repugnance at the idea of reciprocity with
others. Far be it from him to ask anyone else to share in his compassionate
works or to help him in any manner whatsoever. Totally self-s uffi cient and
self- dependent, the bodhisattva must do it alone. “You alone . . . are called to
be the savior of all,” King Śibi reprimands himself,47 while King Manicūda
˙ ˙
resolves: “For the sake of all beings, I will endure all suff ering by myself
alone!”48 Once again we are reminded of the ksatra- dharma of the epics,
˙
and the way in which the ksatriya’s magnanimous liberality only masks his
˙
extreme fear of becoming dependent upon others. Much like the ksatriya,
˙
the bodhisattva aggressively asserts his autonomy and independence from
others—even in the very act of self- sacrifi ce on their behalf.
Th is “terror of reciprocity” that is characteristic of the bodhisattva’s
practice of dāna is equally discernible in another of his paradigmatic gifts
as well—the “gift of merit” (punyadāna). Th e bodhisattva gives away not
˙
only his material possessions, his family, and himself, but also the merit
that results from each of these acts of giving. He engages in gifts of all
types that result in transcendent karmic rewards, but out of pure generosity
and compassion he refuses these rewards for himself by making them into
further gifts and passing them on to other beings. Th is is surely the very
height of other- directed generosity—and yet, once again, one often senses
an underlying concern with the self and a defensive fear of the self being
“tainted” by any suggestion of reciprocity or reward. Th us, in an especially
intriguing passage from the Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra, the bodhisattva cel-
˙
ebrates the karmic fruitfulness of his gift and its power to produce karmic
rewards on behalf of its benefi ciaries49—while at the same time he seems
to exhibit a peculiar distaste for the karmic reciprocity represented by the
gift, for at one point in the passage he takes pains to compare his own
penchant for one- sided giving with the gift’s penchant for “repayment”
(pratikāra), actually taunting the gift with the following words: “You do not
bear fruit for one who doesn’t deal with you. Since you expect repayment,
you are not like me! I do not expect repayment; I freely give to others the
fruit which comes from you!”50 Th e bodhisattva here wants to out- gift the
gift itself, and he scornfully suggests that even that which we call a “gift”
is actually devoid of the pure, one-s ided generosity of which only he,
the bodhisattva, is capable. Th e boasting and prideful tone in this passage
189

a flexible gift
suggests, once again, that the gift given with no expectation of reward is
not only a manifestation of “pure generosity,” but also an expressive strategy
the giver uses to set himself apart from others—to turn his back on the
world and categorically state: “I expect nothing in return!” It is perhaps
less about the other than it is about oneself.
Indeed, in many passages on the bodhisattva’s dāna one can sense a
kind of fear of accumulation or retention of any kind—every gift (or
reward from a gift) is like a “hot potato” that must relentlessly be
“passed on” before it scalds one’s “perfect generosity.” Th us, in the Bodhi-
sattvabhūmi the “pure gift” of the bodhisattva is described as being “un-
accumulated,” meaning that the bodhisattva never accumulates or stores
up gifts before giving them away, but rather gives them the moment
they arise. He cannot see any reason to hang on to any potential gift,
and he “cannot bear” to refuse any supplicant.51 Th e bodhisattva of the
Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra likewise states that any gift whose fruit is not
˙
immediately rejected is unsatisfactory because “to remain without giving
for even an instant is to be unsatisfi ed with the gift.”52 He realizes that
every gift only brings back to him “more numerous and more wonderful
pleasures” in reward, but assures himself: “I don’t have to worry about
such pleasures, since I [also] give them away unceasingly!”53 Th e fear
and insecurity suggested by such passages serve as the fl ip side of the
exaggerated pride and self-c onfi dence exemplifi ed by some of the pas-
sages cited earlier. Perhaps most disturbingly, this same fear or insecurity
is sometimes vulnerable to being projected outward and manifesting
itself in the form of submerged hostility toward the recipient. In fact, as
Hibbets has reminded us, this is one of the dangers inherent in the use
of the “unworthy recipient”: compassion for those who are “pitiful” or
“unworthy” sometimes borders on hateful contempt, as the bodhisattva
lords it over those who are clearly inferior.54 (As David Shulman has
remarked in another context, “here, as elsewhere in Indian myth, the
coinage of aggression is compassion.”55)
Th is paradoxical self-a ggrandizement and aggressiveness toward others
that is perhaps an inherent element of “pure generosity” is not simply my
own (rather uncharitable) view of the bodhisattva’s dāna, but is a danger
well recognized within Buddhist literature itself. In fact, we often fi nd
warnings against precisely this danger in manuals and treatises on the
bodhisattva path. Th e Bodhisattvabhūmi, for example, pointedly reminds
its readers that the “pure gift” of the bodhisattva should be an “unarrogant
gift” (anunnata- dāna), meaning that the bodhisattva “has a humble mind
190

a flexible gift
when he gives,” “does not give out of rivalry with others,” and “does not
think that because of that gift, he alone is a giver and a master of generos-
ity, while others are not”56—a statement that seems almost as if it might
be addressed to the heroes of many gift-o f- the- body jātakas. Similarly, in
the Bodhicaryāvatāra, Śāntideva takes pains to remind the bodhisattva that
he is utterly dependent upon sentient beings in order to attain Buddha-
hood; therefore, those pitiful sentient beings he is intent upon saving are
equal to the Buddha himself—and equally deserving of his respect and
worship.57 Arrogance, pride, self- aggrandizement, and contempt for others
were thus well- recognized dangers that might arise in the very midst of
the bodhisattva’s selfl ess generosity and compassion.58
Th ere is even some evidence for the view that out of all gifts, the
gift of the body in particular was especially prone to this kind of self-
aggrandizement and therefore could not possibly constitute an “ideal gift.”
Th is is because the gift of the body appears to be susceptible to a particu-
larly vexing form of the paradox I have been discussing. Self- sacrifi ce,
one could argue, depends for its very existence upon a reifi ed self to be
sacrifi ced—thus paradoxically rendering self- sacrifi ce a clear indication
of one’s clinging to the concept of a “self” and one’s lack of the perfect
wisdom that realizes “nonself.”
Several textual discussions seem to suggest such a notion. In the ninth
chapter of Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga, for example, there is a long
discussion of the four brahmavihāras—four benefi cial states of mind the
Buddhist practitioner is supposed to cultivate in meditation and direct
outward toward all living beings, including benevolence (mettā), compas-
sion (karunā), sympathetic joy (muditā), and equanimity (upekkhā).59
˙
Beginning with the cultivation of “benevolence,” Buddhaghosa advises
the meditator to develop a feeling of “benevolence” fi rst toward himself,
then toward a friend, then toward a neutral person, and fi nally toward
an enemy—thus moving from the easiest state of mind to achieve to the
most diffi cult. Once all four states of mind are well established, however,
the meditator should then strive to “break down the barriers”60 between
them—that is, to develop a feeling of “benevolence” toward all four cat-
egories so equally that no distinctions among them are possible. As an
illustration of the “breaking down of barriers,” Buddhaghosa says that if
oneself, a friend, a neutral person, and an enemy were all being attacked
by a robber who wished to kill one of them, the one who has “broken
down the barriers” would be completely unable to choose which of the
four people should be killed.
191

a flexible gift
What is crucial here is that Buddhaghosa explicitly rules out the option
of the meditator sacrifi cing himself to the killer in order to save the other
three—since that would indicate a preference for the others over himself,
and thus a clinging to the notion of separate and discrete selves and a lack
of the even-m indedness that treats all beings the same. In other words,
one should cultivate benevolence until it is truly universal in nature and
directed equally toward all beings—including oneself—and self-s acrifi ce
is incommensurable with this goal. Th is necessity of “breaking down the
barriers” is then repeated in connection with each of the remaining three
brahmavihāras: compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity. Naturally,
“equanimity” comes last in the list of brahmavihāras because it represents
the highest of the four and the level to which all of the others should be
cultivated. Equanimity suggests that one’s benevolence, compassion, etc.,
are so thoroughly informed by the truth of nonself that they are applied
equally to all beings, including oneself—again excluding the possibility
of self- sacrifi ce. Th ough Buddhaghosa’s discussion deals only with the
meditative cultivation of the brahmavihāras and does not directly address
the jātakas dealing with the bodhisattva’s self-s acrifi ce, his discussion is
at least capable of suggesting that the bodhisattva was at a relatively low
stage of progress when he performed such deeds and had not yet developed
equanimity or a realization of the truth of nonself.
For a stronger version of this suggestion, and one that explicitly invokes
the bodhisattva’s gift of his body, we can turn to yet another intriguing
discussion found in the Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra. Whereas previously
we saw that two other passages within this text cited King Śibi’s gift of his
fl esh to ransom a dove as a paradigmatic example of dāna- pāramitā,61 and
classifi ed all gifts of the body as “superior” gifts,62 in the present discussion
the text contradicts these sentiments and puts forth a quite diff erent clas-
sifi cation, according to which King Śibi’s gift of his fl esh (and other gifts
of the body) are merely “medium” gifts, whereas any gift given with utter
“detachment” (nihsan˙ga) is a “superior” gift.63 As for why King Śibi’s gift
˙
of his body could not have been a “superior” gift (or one given with “de-
tachment”), the text records three diff erent opinions. Th e fi rst is that King
Śibi perceived both himself and the dove as real selves; thus, his gift lacked
perfect wisdom and was merely a “medium” gift. Th e second opinion
recorded states more boldly that gifts of the body can never constitute the
fulfi llment of dāna- pāramitā because they are always motivated by intense
compassion for the recipient and thus lack the “detachment” essential to
“superior” gifts. Th e third opinion is that King Śibi’s gift was necessarily
192

a flexible gift
“impure” because he was still attached to the three notions of “donor,”
“gift,” and “recipient”—in other words, a notion of self.
Th ough stated in slightly diff erent ways, all three of these opinions
seem to agree with the Visuddhimagga’s suggestion that self-s acrifi ce is
incommensurable with the wisdom that realizes absolute selfl essness and
the resulting equanimity that treats all beings the same. In fact, one can
perhaps go even further and say that self- sacrifi ce is actually suggestive of an
underlying clinging to the notion of a self—of which the kinds of arrogance
and self- pride sometimes displayed by the bodhisattva are only the most
overt manifestations. Th us Buddhist discourse itself seems to recognize
the same “assertion-o f-s elf” underlying the rhetoric of “selfl essness” that
I have posited above.
Worthy Self, Unworthy Other
One fi nal paradox involved in the strong sense of “selfhood” that underlies
the bodhisattva’s “selfl ess” gift of his body is the fact that this selfhood is
completely dependent upon the presence of a particular other. I would like
to demonstrate this reliance of the Buddhist hero upon a particular type
of transactional other by comparing our gift- of- the- body stories featuring
the bodhisattva as the donor with another set of gift-g iving stories featuring
an idealized Buddhist fi gure—this time, as the recipient of the gift rather
than as the donor.
In an interesting article,64 Liz Wilson has examined a set of related nar-
ratives involving the “selective begging practices” of the Buddha’s disciple
Mahākāśyapa. In stories taken from several Pāli and Sanskrit texts (such
as the Udāna, the Vimānavatthu Commentary, and the Mūlasarvāstivāda
Vinaya), Mahākāśyapa—a venerable monk and master of asceticism, and
thus a very good “fi eld of merit”—goes out of his way to receive alms-
f ood from highly disadvantaged donors (such as poor people, lepers, and
low- caste weavers), while avoiding or outright refusing the alms off ered
by highly advantaged donors (such as a group of fi ve hundred apsarases
or, most commonly, the deity Śakra). Th e reasoning behind these selective
begging practices is clear: Mahākāśyapa is full of compassion and therefore
favors those unfortunate donors who are most in need of the abundant
merit they will receive from “sowing” their gifts within such a produc-
tive “fi eld.” Th us in a narrative from the Vimānavatthu Commentary, he
goes out of his way to receive a gift of leftover rice-w ater from an old and
193

a flexible gift
p overty-s tricken woman, thereby allowing the woman to escape from
her impending fate of being reborn in hell and instead attain rebirth in
heaven—an act that he himself describes as “the exercise of the highest
compassion.”65
In contrast, he avoids or directly refuses the alms- food off ered to him
by highly advantaged donors such as Śakra or the apsarases because (as he
says to the latter in a narrative from the Udānatthakathā): “You’ve earned
˙˙
merit, you have great enjoyment because of it. I’m going to act in sympathy
with those who are badly off !”66 Th ough refusing to accept an off ering of
alms may not seem appropriate to such a paragon of compassion, we must
remember that Mahākāśyapa, as an ardent practitioner of fasting, does not
eat very much alms-f ood to begin with; therefore, any merit obtained by a
highly advantaged donor such as Śakra has, in a sense, been “stolen” from
one who is more unfortunate. Indeed in several of these narratives Śakra
attempts to deceive Mahākāśyapa by disguising himself as a disadvantaged
donor and thus obtaining for himself the merit intended for somebody
else—a ruse Mahākāśyapa generally sees through.
Th ough Wilson is interested in examining Mahākāśyapa’s transac-
tions in terms of a particular interpretation of dāna,67 I am interested
in them from quite another perspective: these narratives involving the
monk Mahākāśyapa as a “choosy recipient” off er a fascinating parallel to
gift- of- the- body stories involving the bodhisattva as a “choosy donor,” for
in both cases we have a Buddhist hero who relies on a particular type of
transactional “other” in order to convey a certain message about himself.
In gift- of- the- body stories, as we have seen, the bodhisattva is a donor who
specifi cally chooses to give his gifts to “unworthy” recipients rather than
“worthy” ones. He avoids “worthy” recipients because giving gifts to such
recipients would result in the acquisition of merit for himself, thereby sug-
gesting that his gift was not given out of pure generosity and compassion.
Th us, although the bodhisattva should ostensibly be a universal giver—giv-
ing gifts to everyone—the fact is that he relies on the unworthy recipient
in order to display, to both himself and others, his own exalted status as a
paragon of perfect generosity. In the narratives examined by Wilson, on
the other hand, we have a perfect reversal of this scenario: Mahākāśyapa
is here a recipient (not a donor) who specifi cally chooses to receive his gifts
from “unworthy” donors rather than “worthy” ones. He avoids “worthy”
donors (such as Śakra) because accepting gifts from such donors would
mean that he was favoring them and their welfare over those who were
194

a flexible gift
more unfortunate, thereby suggesting that he was not accepting gifts out
of pure compassion. Th us, although Mahākāśyapa should ostensibly be a
universal recipient—graciously accepting alms from everyone—the fact is
that he relies on the unworthy donor in order to display, to both himself and
others, his own exalted status as a paragon of perfect compassion.
Th e two situations are exact reversals of each other, yet they are also
structurally parallel—for whether the Buddhist hero is the donor or the re-
cipient, in both cases he relies on a particular type of transactional “other.”
More specifi cally, this “other” must be unworthy rather than worthy in or-
der to display something about the Buddhist hero himself—perhaps even
to exalt the “worthy Buddhist hero” against the background of his “un-
worthy other.” Both cases militate against the universal giving and receiving
that should presumably characterize true generosity and compassion: after
all, why shouldn’t the perfect bodhisattva give equally to everybody, and
why shouldn’t the perfect monk be a “fi eld of merit” for all? Th e fact that
both scenarios rely on particular transactional relationships that are vis-
ibly hierarchical and unequal in nature suggests to me that both types of
stories are fundamentally concerned with the matters of social display and
prestige, and not purely with generosity and compassion. In other words,
the concern of each hero is not merely to be generous or to be compas-
sionate, but to have this generosity or compassion visibly displayed to the
world through the particular nature of the recipient.
Perhaps this is one reason why anonymous or hidden gifts do not seem
to be highly valued in the Buddhist discourse on dāna—because they lack
this crucial element of display. Rather than exalting the humble generosity
of one who gives a gift anonymously, the Buddhist discourse on giving
seems to celebrate openhanded liberality as a way of visibly displaying to
the world one’s power, rank, and prestige and forcing them to be acknowl-
edged by others, who are perceived as being weaker than oneself. Here
we are reminded once again not only of the ksatra- dharma of the epics,
˙
but also of Mauss’ discussion of the institution of the potlatch and, more
generally, the entire p restige-a spect of the gift:68 the more one gives away
in the form of material goods, the more one receives in return in the social
currencies of rank and prestige—yet this exchange is always agonistic in
nature and relies upon rivalry with others. Despite the bodhisattva’s pro-
testations of absolute autonomy and independence, then, the worthy self
he constructs through generosity is fi nally dependent upon the presence
of the unworthy other.
195

a flexible gift
Contradictory Discourses and the Rise of Buddhism
Th e gift- of- the- body theme thus seems to hang precariously between self-
lessness and assertion-o f- self. On the one hand, the bodhisattva is completely
selfl ess and altruistic, acting wholly for the welfare and benefi t of the
other; on the other, the bodhisattva asserts a particularly aggressive type of
self—one that ignores all social obligations and acts exactly as it pleases,
and one whose rank and prestige are won out of rivalry with “unworthy
others.” How can we place this contradictory discourse of “self” and “self-
lessness” within a larger historical context?
One way to move forward is by considering the fact that “selfhood”
itself is not a unitary concept but can have several diff erent connotations.
In an analysis of Marcel Mauss’ seminal essay on notions of the “person”
(personne) and notions of “self” (moi), Michael Carrithers has attempted to
systematize Mauss’ loose and poetic language by making a clear conceptual
distinction between personne and moi.69 In brief, personne for Carrith-
ers is a conception of the self defi ned as the member of a specifi c social
collectivity and characterized by specifi c rights and obligations, whereas
moi is a conception of the individual and autonomous self who relates
to others as an individual moral agent and not as the embodiment of a
particular social role.
Th ough Carrithers, for various reasons, denies that ancient India had
any conception of personne, Patrick Olivelle has subsequently expanded
Carrithers’ understanding of personne and argued convincingly that the
male head-o f-h ousehold in ancient Vedic society was very much a p ersonne-
t ype of self—a relational personality largely defi ned by his position within
various social orders defi ned by caste, class, and gender.70 Furthermore, he
contrasts this personne- type of self characteristic of the Vedic worldview
with the moi- type of self represented by the ideologies of Buddhism, Jain-
ism, and the Upanisads. In Olivelle’s view, the dramatic socioeconomic,
˙
political, and cultural changes occurring throughout North India during
the sixth century b.c.e.—such as the rapid development of trade, increas-
ing urbanization, political consolidation into large kingdoms, and greater
individual freedom and mobility—signifi cantly weakened the traditional
communal structures characteristic of older, Vedic society and gave rise to
various new ideologies that promoted the concept of individual selfhood,
or the self divorced from social relationships.71
Th is general thesis—that “individualism” was born in ancient India
only in the mid- fi rst millennium b.c.e. and concomitant with the rise of
196

a flexible gift
śramana movements such as Buddhism—has been stated by many schol-
˙
ars before. Louis Dumont asserted long ago, for example, that whereas
there was no such thing as an autonomous individual within the Vedic
worldview, the w orld-r enouncer within Buddhism and Jainism, in con-
trast, was “invested with an individuality” that was “the distinctive trait
. . . oppos[ing] him to the [Vedic] man- in- the-w orld.”72 We have already
witnessed something of the historical clash between these two concep-
tions of the self in the confl ict between the bodhisattva and his oppos-
ers—with the opposers promoting the interdependent, personne- type of
self characteristic of the Vedic worldview, and the bodhisattva promoting
the independent, moi- type of self characteristic of new ideologies such
as Buddhism.
We can also contrast their attitudes toward salvation. In the Vedic
worldview, salvation is brought about through the joint sacrifi ces off ered
to the gods by the male head-o f-h ousehold, whom Orlan Lee has described
as a kind of pater familias or “pharaonic personality” that stands for the
household as a whole and performs sacrifi ces on their collective behalf.73
In the Buddhist and śramanic worldview, on the other hand, salvation is
˙
brought about through an individual act of w orld- renunciation that cleaves
one from family and society and asserts one’s individual instrumentality
in one’s own salvation.
Historically, then, the social and cultural context in which Buddhism
arose was characterized by a weakening of traditional social networks and
a new conception of the self as an individual and autonomous agent fully
capable of acting on its own behalf—a new and confi dent “selfhood,” as
it were. Yet at the same time perhaps the primary emphasis in Buddhist
teaching is on renunciation of one’s individuality and detachment from
the notions of “I” and “mine.” Here we encounter a larger version of the
paradox I have been dealing with: the rise of Buddhism is witness to a new
and powerful self, yet the primary goal of its teachings is to eradicate the
self.74 As the Dhammapada puts it: “For the self is the refuge of the self;
the self is the destiny of the self; therefore, restrain the self.”75 Th is paradox
makes a certain amount of logical sense, for in order to deny the self, one must
have a self to begin with. But though explainable, this paradox inevitably
results in a continuing tension in Buddhist thought between the assertion
of one’s individuality and its denial. It is these larger historical forces sur-
rounding the rise of Buddhism, I contend, that perhaps contributed to
the contradictory discourse of “self” and “selfl essness” characteristic of the
gift- of- the- body theme.
197

a flexible gift
Th ese same tumultuous forces, moreover, might also be invoked to ex-
plain the other major balancing act I have dealt with above—that between
the “pure” gift and more reciprocal forms of giving. If we wish to consider
this contradictory discourse again in terms of the historical context of the
rise of Buddhism, then perhaps we should take note of the argument put
forth by Jonathan Parry that the ideology of the “pure” gift is made possible
only by the development of a capitalistic marketplace.76 In other words,
the “pure” gift is everything the market is not—disinterested, altruistic,
etc.—and therefore depends on the market for its very existence. Histori-
cally, it is only when a highly developed marketplace based wholly on the
notion of utilitarian self- interest becomes progressively disembedded from
the rest of society that a space is left open for the utterly free and disinterested
gift. (In Mauss’ “archaic” or “primitive” societies, on the other hand, the two
realms are inextricably woven together.) Parry thus speculates that perhaps
“it is not . . . coincidental that the ideology of the ‘pure gift’ is accorded
such prominence among groups—such as the Jews and Jains—which have
a particularly close historical association with market trade.”77
Th e Buddhists, too, should be added to this list, since the social and
historical context in which Buddhism arose was characterized (among other
things) by rapid industrialization and increasing trade, the growth of mer-
cantile classes, and the development of money and a market economy—all
trends with which Buddhism is closely associated.78 Th ese historical condi-
tions perhaps fostered the development not only of an ideology of pure,
economic self- interest, but also of an ideology of “pure generosity”—both
of which then coexisted in some tension with the traditional norms of
reciprocity more characteristic of older, Vedic society. Again, it is this
historical tension that perhaps contributed to the contradictory discourse
of reciprocal and nonreciprocal forms of giving characteristic of the gift-
of- the- body theme.
Of course, the two contradictory discourses I have dealt with above
(self- vs.- selfl essness and pure- gift- vs.- reciprocity) are historically related
to each other. Th e “pure gift,” the market economy, and the autonomous,
moi-t ype of self that is presumed by them both all arise together—and
all stand in opposition to the relational personality and mingled realms
of interest and disinterest characteristic of Mauss’ “archaic” gift-e xchange.
What we fi nd in the gift-o f- the- body genre is thus not merely a skillful
use of narrative strategies to convey and balance multiple, contradictory
notions of dāna, but also a refl ection of some of the wider historical forces
and confl icts surrounding the rise of Buddhism itself.
198

vi
BODIES ORDINARY AND IDEAL
Th e Buddhist attitude towards the body has been
summed up as follows: (1) the body, whether of men
or of higher beings, can never be the abode of
anything but evil; (2) fi nal deliverance from all
bodily life, present and to come, is the greatest
of all blessings, the highest of all boons,
and the loftiest of all aims.
—J. H. Bateson, “Body (Buddhist)” (1908)
I
turn, in this fi nal chapter on the gift-o f- the- body genre, from the “gift”
aspect of these tales to their “body” aspect. For despite the bodhisattva’s
apparent willingness to throw his “worthless” body away, and despite
the opinion expressed by J. H. Bateson (in the quote given above1) that
there is little more to say about the matter, gift-o f-t he-b ody stories do, in
fact, have much to say about the body—about the ordinary body, about
the ideal body, and about the ways in which one is transformed into the
other. Such stories give voice, in fact, to a rich and complex discourse on
the body—a discourse that does not depict all bodies as “abodes of evil,”
nor preach “fi nal deliverance from all bodily life” as the ultimate goal.
Th e denigration of the body so strongly emphasized by Bateson does, of
course, constitute one prevalent trend of thought within Buddhism itself
and is not merely an invention of Western perceptions. Nevertheless, to
focus so singularly upon this denigration in one’s depiction of Buddhist
attitudes as a whole is to ignore the extraordinary attention also paid in
Buddhist literature to the care and maintenance of the human body, its
use within religious practice, and the various pleasures it can aff ord. It is
also to ignore the fact that Buddhist literature of all kinds depicts various
199

bodies ordinary and ideal
types of “ideal bodies” that stand in direct opposition to the “ordinary
body” and that are exalted rather than degraded—such as the perfectly
controlled and decorous body of a monk, the unusual and supernatural
bodies that often result from the performance of meritorious deeds within
the jātakas and avadānas, the g olden-c olored and irresistibly attractive body
of the Buddha, or the “bodies” involved in the worship of relics, images,
or stūpas. How do such “ideal bodies” relate to the “bag of excrement” so
often scorned in Buddhist texts?
Not only have such positive views of the body been relatively ignored
in the history of Buddhist studies, they have also been artifi cially separated
from the negative view espoused by Bateson above. Th is is in line with
the historical tendency of Buddhist studies as a discipline to depict “Bud-
dhism” itself as an ethereal, disembodied, and wholly rational philosophy,
preserved and conveyed primarily through doctrinal and philosophical
texts, and only gradually debased and corrupted by grosser, more material
concerns (such as ritual, devotion, and cult)—concerns which themselves
are often depicted as mere concessions to “lay,” “Tantric,” “Hindu,” or “sub-
stratum” pressures.2 “Negative” body topics such as meditations on the
foulness of the body or statements concerning the body’s impurity and im-
permanence have been artifi cially emphasized because they are in perfect
accord with the historical tendency of the discipline to conceive “true”
Buddhism as an austere path for the w orld- renouncing, nirvana- seeking
monk, whereas “positive” body topics such as relic- worship or the beauty
of the Buddha’s body have been relegated to the realm of “lay” or “popular”
religion and thus discussed within a diff erent context, if at all.
Th e fact that “negative” and “positive” views of the body are mutually
related and constructed is not recognized; instead these views have been
falsely located within completely diff erent interpretive contexts. At the
same time, “positive” views of the body are further obscured by the modern
Western dualism between mind and body. Th e split between “mind” and
“body” automatically demands a hierarchical relationship in which one
is elevated and the other is degraded; as soon as “mind” is elevated and
“body” degraded, positive views of the body and “ideal bodies” tend to
drop out of sight. Dualistic Western assumptions thus bring to the Bud-
dhist material a question of mind versus body, and therefore fail to see that
the material’s own concern may sometimes be a question of one type of
mind / body complex versus another or even one type of body versus another.3
Th ese biases characteristic of the discipline as a whole are what result in
such sweeping generalizations.
200

bodies ordinary and ideal
During the last t wenty-fi ve years, however, the discipline of Buddhist
studies—like the discipline of religious studies as a whole—has undergone
some profound and signifi cant shifts in the direction of “rematerialization.”4
Th e scholarship of Gregory Schopen has been particularly infl uential, over-
turning our understanding of Indian Buddhism by making unprecedented
use of material sources (such as inscriptions), demonstrating conclusively
that “materialistic” concerns (such as the image cult, the stūpa cult, and
rituals surrounding death) were all high, monastic preoccupations, and
“rematerializing” Buddhist texts themselves by pointing to their status as
cultic objects of devotion.5 Following Schopen’s lead, recent scholarship
in Buddhist studies has shown a growing tendency to focus on the local,
the vernacular, the ritual, and the material, in favor of the universal, the
disembodied, and the ideal. Th us the titles of several recently published
anthologies of Buddhism consciously invoke Buddhism’s “practice,” “life,”
and “experience”—in contrast to an older cohort of anthologies and their
focus upon “texts,” “translations,” “scriptures,” and “teachings.”6
Th is same trend toward “rematerialization” has also resulted in increasing
attention paid to Buddhist conceptions of the body and a gradual dispelling
of the image of Buddhism as a dualistic system that denigrates the body and
holds complete bodily emancipation—“nirvana-w ithout-r emainder”—as
its ultimate goal. Scholars are now paying more attention to the topics of
relic worship, the glorious bodies of Buddhas and bodhisattvas, the bodies
created through Buddhist monastic practice, the gendered body, and the
various types of bodily transformation so often encountered in Buddhist lit-
erature. Moreover, they are beginning to overcome the persistent framing of
these issues in terms of mind versus body (with all its attendant hierarchies),7
as well as the tendency to artifi cially separate “ordinary” bodies from those
that are “ideal.”8 We will encounter some of their conclusions throughout
the rest of this chapter. In exploring Buddhist conceptions of the body as
they are manifested within gift-o f- the- body jātakas, I hope to demonstrate
the complexity of this body discourse, the importance of perspective and
point of view, and the sophisticated ways in which a Buddhist “ideology
of the body” is conveyed through the narrative form.
Th e Worthlessness and Worth of the Ordinary Body
Gift- of- the- body jātakas exhibit at least two traditional lines of Buddhist
thinking about the ordinary human body. We might refer to one line of
201

bodies ordinary and ideal
thinking as the worthlessness of the body: the body is impure, foul, and
disgusting (commonly described as a “wound,” a “boil with nine openings,”
and a “bag of excrement”); the body is affl icted by old age, disease, suff er-
ing, and death; the body is transient and impermanent (like a “bubble” or
“foam”)—yet the body’s deceptive wholeness leads to delusions of selfhood,
sexual passion for others, and other undesirable consequences that entrap
one in the round of rebirth. Such negative attitudes toward the human
body appear in a wide variety of Buddhist texts; since they have been well
documented before,9 I will here restrict myself to citing a few verses from
the Dhammapada that encapsulate them succinctly:
Behold [the human body]—a dressed- up image, a collection of wounds, an ac-
cumulation [of bones], diseased, full of intentions but lacking any permanence
or duration! Th is decaying form, [the body], is a frail nest of diseases. Th is putrid
body [fi nally] disintegrates, for life ends in death. [Th is body is] a city of bones,
plastered over with fl esh and blood, wherein lie hidden decay, death, pride, and
hypocrisy.10
Negative views of the body thus center around its impurity, its imper-
manence, its fragility, and its signifi cant role in reinforcing one’s passions
and delusions. Given these negative qualities, attachment to the body is
worthless and futile, and the Buddhist monk is encouraged to overcome
such attachment through a variety of body- focused meditations, such as
meditation on the t hirty- two loathsome parts of the body, meditation on
the nine stages of decomposition undergone by a corpse, or meditation on
the ten varieties of dead bodies found in the cremation ground.11 Negative
statements about the nature of the body and admonitions to practice vari-
ous types of meditation focusing on the body’s many unsatisfying qualities
both suggest the body’s inherent worthlessness.
In contrast to this worthlessness, however, we might refer to the second
line of thinking as the worth of the body. First and foremost, the body is
a necessary locus of enlightenment; as Bernard Faure has said: “Despite
its transcendental claims, awakening is always localized: it needs a locus
to ‘take place,’ and this locus is the body.”12 More than just a passive locus
where enlightenment “takes place,” however, the body is also a necessary
instrument for the attainment of enlightenment. Without the physical
body one could not engage in religious practice of any sort; meditation,
worship, ritual, and acts of devotion and m erit-m aking would all be im-
202

bodies ordinary and ideal
possible to perform. Th us the human body, as both the vehicle for one’s
spiritual progress and the locus of its ultimate goal, should be adequately
cared for and maintained.
Th is second line of thinking fi nds expression in many diff erent con-
texts. In the Buddha’s own life story, for example, true spiritual progress
was made only when he renounced severe mortifi cation of the body and
came to understand that the body needed adequate food and mainte-
nance in order to serve as a locus of enlightenment. Proper care for the
body was thus an essential element of the Middle Way propounded by
the Buddha and distinguished the Buddha’s teaching from some other
śramana groups who engaged overzealously in asceticism. Similarly, the
˙
human body is often celebrated for the rare opportunity it provides to
engage in religious practice, while suicide is frowned upon as a wasteful
squandering of this opportunity; 13 food is recommended in moderation;
health and physical vitality are extolled; the bodily pleasures of medita-
tion are praised; and so on. In a variety of such ways, the essential worth
of the human body and the necessity of caring for it properly are clearly
recognized and extolled.
Th ese two lines of thinking—both well attested throughout Buddhist
literature—tend to be invoked in diff erent contexts, the worthlessness of
the body being emphasized when the motivation is to overcome one’s at-
tachment to self, and the worth of the body being emphasized when the
motivation is to inculcate proper care for the body in the pursuit of higher
religious goals. Nevertheless, there is a sense in which the two notions
taken together might appear to be contradictory. In the Visuddhimagga,
for example, Buddhaghosa, invoking the foulness and impurity of the
body, scorns the manner in which people continually attend to it, “scour-
ing the fi lth from their teeth by using toothpicks and rinsing the mouth
and so on, concealing their genitals with all types of clothing, smearing
[themselves] with s weet-s melling ointments of various colors, adorning
[themselves] with fl owers and ornaments and so on”—all in a vain attempt
to “make it fi t to be grasped as ‘I’ or as ‘mine.’”14 Such care for the body is
depicted as nothing but the futile eff orts of fools who do not understand
the body’s intrinsic nature. Th is might lead one to surmise that those who
are wise and do understand the body’s intrinsic nature would not bother
to expend such care on the body, knowing it to be futile. Yet, as several
scholars have pointed out,15 Buddhist monastic discipline itself is greatly
preoccupied with minutely detailed matters of dress, etiquette, and bodily
203

bodies ordinary and ideal
deportment, and places a high value on such qualities as cleanliness, health,
and decorum. Th e scorn heaped on ordinary people’s care for their bodies
and the monastic preoccupation with carefully controlling the bodies of
monks and nuns are on some level contradictory.
At the same time, of course, the worthlessness and worth of the body
can also be explained in such a way that they become complementary
rather than contradictory. One could argue, for example, that ordinary
people care for their bodies because they misperceive them as truly existing
and satisfying selves that are worthy of such elaborate attention, whereas
monastics (ideally) are under no such delusions and only care for their
bodies because they recognize the body’s practical worth as a vehicle for
attaining enlightenment. Much of the care that ordinary people lavish on
their bodies, moreover, is intended to make these bodies more sexually
attractive, whereas monastic care of the body minimizes sexuality and seeks
to detract attention rather than attract it. Finally, one might add, monastic
attention to the body is detached and analytical in nature and contrasts
with the ordinary person’s slavish devotion. Within such an explanation,
the worthlessness and worth of the body are logically related to each other
rather than standing in contradiction.
An explanation of this type does in fact occur in a discussion in the
Milindapañha, in which King Milinda asks the monk Nāgasena why Bud-
dhist monks “cherish and take pride in” the body if it is not “dear” to
them.16 Nāgasena answers by comparing the body to a wound received
in battle: although it is not “dear” to the one who receives it, it is never-
theless “rubbed with ointment, smeared with oil, and wrapped in a fi ne
cloth bandage.”17 In just the same way, the body is not “dear” to monks,
but they care for it “for the benefi t of the religious life.”18 In Nāgasena’s
answer, too, the worthlessness of the body as a “wound” and the necessity
of caring for it because of its worth in practicing the dharma are not nec-
essarily in confl ict.19 Similarly, in his own variation on the Milindapañha
dialogue, Steven Collins has argued that the monk’s positive nurturing
of his body—though superfi cially in opposition to the negative views of
the body he is supposed to cultivate in meditation—“creates the actual
behavioural space in which the ‘subjectivized’ interiority inculcated by
meditative practices can take place.”20 In other words, the monk’s decorous
and controlled behavior—which would seem to imply a faulty overvaluing
of the body—actually serves to mark him off from other people (physically,
behaviorally, and psychically) and thus gives him the “room” in which
204

bodies ordinary and ideal
to attain a truly internalized realization of the body’s worthlessness. In
various such ways, then, the worthlessness and worth of the body may be
interpreted as complementary.
Nevertheless, it is perhaps inevitable that an element of contradiction
and paradox always remains: How could the impure, foul, and disgusting
body also serve as a necessary locus for the summum bonum of enlight-
enment? How could such a worthless entity turn out to be an object of
such incalculable worth? Th e degree to which this paradox is highlighted
may vary from one context to another: in some instances, the body’s
“worthlessness” or “worth” alone might be emphasized; in other instances,
the logical relationship between them might be demonstrated; while in
yet other instances, the paradox between them might be heightened and
celebrated without providing any explanation of their relationship. An
entire range of possibilities exists—and all of them make an appearance
in the gift- of- the- body genre.
Worthlessness and Worth in Gift- of- the- Body Tales
In some passages—often from stories involving the feeding of hungry
beings—the bodhisattva depicts the “worthlessness” of his body in stark
and uncompromising terms, using standard Buddhist images of the body’s
foulness and impermanence, while the only “worth” invoked is the minimal
worth others might draw from the abandoned carcass left behind. Because
the body is totally worthless and doomed to destruction anyway—the
bodhisattva reasons—it might as well be abandoned and put to use in
feeding others:
Th is body is devoid of individual existence. It is insubstantial and breaks apart.
It is miserable, ungrateful, and always impure. He who would not rejoice upon
its being useful to another is a fool.21
Since my body is perishable and a source of unhappiness [anyway], even deliberat-
ing [this gift] would be base.22
Th e body is a corruptible instrument; how can it be protected? Everything living
must die; who is there who could preserve himself for all eternity? If you don’t
take [my body], it will return to dust [anyway].23
205

bodies ordinary and ideal
All living beings must perish; the body is a corruptible instrument. Since it has
to be abandoned anyway, it is better to give it away as food.24
Eat fearlessly! I will not stop you. Th e body is worthless and repulsive, attended
by misfortune and wasting away in an instant. [Only] when it gives the slightest
benefi t to others does it attain [any] worth in samsara. How could anyone so in-
appropriately love the fi lthy human body—a despicable abode of evil that oozes
with discharges and emits little snorts with every step? Th e only thing desirable
about it is that having seen someone, somewhere, sometime, in a time of trouble,
it is prepared through meritorious deeds to help them just a little bit.25
It is not merely the worthlessness of one’s present body that is invoked,
in fact, but also its perpetual worthlessness—in one life after another,
throughout the entire round of samsara, whether in a good station or a
bad. Th e worthlessness of the body here takes on almost cosmic propor-
tions—an unbearable burden the bodhisattva is only too happy to abandon
and throw away:
Even when one’s intentions are innocent, many miseries are experienced in samsara
over and over again—in the hells, among the animals, in the world of Yama, and
in the world of men. Th e cutting off of the hands, of the feet, of the ears, of the
nose, of both the ears and the nose, and many other similar types of misery are
experienced. What good am I to gain from that, when I might [instead] generate
power, strength, and energy within myself, satisfy this woman with my own fl esh
and blood, and [thus] set free her son?26
Th is putrid body has been maintained for an exceedingly long time with very
expensive beds, clothing, food, drink, and vehicles. Characterized by decay and
death, fi nally breaking apart and ending in misery, this [certainly] isn’t the fi rst
time this ungrateful [body] will relinquish its own nature.27
For all eternity, this body has been circling around in samsara. For a long time,
when it was a being in hell, transmigrating many times even in a single day, this
body was consumed by lye, iron dogs, boiling hot water, vomit, chariots of fi re,
pits of fi re, and so on, and as a hell-b eing, it underwent suff ering for a very long
time. But even though this body was consumed countless times by being boiled,
burned, and so on, it did not produce even the slightest merit. When born in
the womb of animals, who bite and devour one another, [this body] was killed
by others and eaten by all, and having died, it decomposed and rotted away over
206

bodies ordinary and ideal
and over again. But even though it was consumed in this way, it did not produce
any merit. When born in the realm of hungry ghosts, fi re burned in this body;
its head was split open by a wheel, only to recover again immediately, and this
happened over and over again. But even though this body was consumed in
this way, it did not produce any merit. Even when born as a human being, [this
body’s] eyes gaped wide open with anger and greed due to wealth and women.
Th is body was consumed by [people] hurting and killing each other, meeting in
battle and murdering each other. But even though this body was thrown away
countless times through desire, hatred, and delusion, it still did not make any
merit. I completely reject this body!28
Despite the occasional reference to making merit, it seems fairly clear
that such passages are concerned, fi rst and foremost, with the body’s
“worthlessness.” Because the body is completely and utterly worthless, it
might as well be abandoned, and the only “worth” of the body invoked is
the “leftover” or “remaining” worth of the carcass, which is usually nothing
more than its status as potential food. Th e emphasis here is on abandoning
the foul and worthless body, rather than on using the body to achieve some
kind of goal; the body is not an instrument, but merely a burden to be
unloaded. Th e sentiments expressed here might perhaps be compared to
some of the most negative statements about the body’s loathsome nature
found elsewhere in Buddhist literature—passages concerned solely with
eradicating one’s attachment to the body and convincing one of its foul and
disgusting nature rather than considering the body’s practical worth.
Such passages as the above are relatively few in number, however, and
do not constitute the perspective on the body characteristic of the genre
as a whole. For outside of such isolated passages, these stories generally
make it clear that this “unloading of the burden of the body” is not merely
a passive occurrence; it is also instrumental in nature—a positive moral
deed that generates enormous merit and furthers one’s spiritual progress.
To abandon the worthless body is also to use the worthless body in a
particular way—and if done in the proper manner and in pursuit of the
proper ends, such abandonment carries its own, signifi cant rewards. We
thus begin to move from the “worthlessness” of the body to a realization
of its “worth,” and to see that these two qualities are complementary and
logically related rather than standing in contradiction. Th is movement
can be traced in many gift- of- the- body tales.
My fi rst example is an interesting passage from Jātakamālā 6, in which
the bodhisattva is a hare who off ers his body to a wandering brahmin (see
207

figure 5 Gift- of- the- body jātakas from India continue to be retold in popular formats
in many Buddhist cultures today. Osamu Tezuka (grandfather of manga in Japan and
creator of Astro Boy and many other series) opens his magnifi cent, eight- volume Buddha
(originally serialized in Japanese in the 1970s) with the story of the hare. In this series of
panels, the hare has thrown himself into a fi re in order to feed a brahmin wanderer, and
the brahmin wanderer lifts his corpse up toward the sky, whereupon his image comes to
adorn the moon. Image reprinted with permission from Vertical, Inc.

bodies ordinary and ideal
fi gure 5). Th is passage, I believe, attempts to demonstrate the causal and
logical relationship between the body’s worthlessness and its worth by hav-
ing the ruminations of the hare move sequentially from the former to the
latter. Pondering what food he might off er to supplicants he encounters
on the fast- day, the hare begins by berating the absolute worthlessness of
his body in procuring adequate food for a guest, and then—in a kind of
“a- ha!” experience—has a sudden realization of its worth:
Th ere is no possible way I can give to a guest the very bitter blades of grass I
nibble off with the tips of my teeth. What a curse is my helplessness! What use
do I have for such a weak and miserable life, when a guest who should bring me
joy thus becomes a matter of sorrow? When will this wretched body—worthless
in its ability to attend on a guest—be of use to someone by being abandoned?
. . . I’ve got it! Indeed, I myself possess something that is suitable for honoring
a guest, blameless, easy to obtain, and at my own disposal—the treasure of my
body! So why should I despair? I have found something that is proper for a guest.
Th erefore, heart, let go of your despair and misery! I will honor the requests of
guests as they arise with this wretched body!29
Th e sequential ordering of the ideas of worthlessness and worth within
the context of a sudden realization on the part of the hare serves to clarify
the fact that the body’s worth derives from one’s realization of its utter
worthlessness. Th at is, it is only because the hare realizes how worthless his
body is that, in a moment of frustration, he suddenly hits upon the idea
of abandoning it completely—which then leads him to see that it might,
in fact, derive some worth in the very act of being abandoned, enough
worth, in fact, so that the “worthless” and “miserable” body is paradoxically
transformed into a “treasure.” In that moment of sudden realization, the
negative worth involved in merely abandoning the body is transformed into
the positive worth involved in using the worthless body in a religious act,
one which paradoxically transforms the body into a precious “treasure.”
In the hare’s monologue, of course, the worthlessness and worth of the
body are invoked in terms of a specifi c narrative situation: the body is
worthless because it cannot procure adequate food for a guest, and it is
worthy because it itself constitutes adequate food for a guest. Clearly,
however, the worthlessness and worth of this particular body in this par-
ticular situation can be taken to stand for the worthlessness and worth of
the body in general—that is, the body’s worthlessness as characterized by
impermanence, impurity, and suff ering, and its worth as a locus and vehicle
209

bodies ordinary and ideal
for attaining enlightenment. Th erefore, I believe that what Jātakamālā 6
is trying to demonstrate by means of the structure of this monologue is
the double- edged role of the body in relation to bondage and freedom.
Miserable and wretched, the body is a major cause of bondage for deluded
beings, yet one need only recognize this awful truth about the body (and
about old age, disease, suff ering, and death) in order to be free—with the
body itself serving as the ground for this realization—and in that sense
the body is also the cause of freedom. Th e body encompasses bondage in
samsara, the freedom of nirvana, and the path leading from one to the
other. As the Buddha puts it in the Samyutta Nikāya: “Moreover, monk, it
˙
is precisely within this fathom-l ong cadaver that I make known the world,
the arising of the world, the cessation of the world, and the path leading
to the cessation of the world.”30 Th us, worthlessness and worth here are
not merely compatible, but mutually entail one another, with the latter
deriving from the former.
In other passages, we can see the same movement compressed into a single,
brief statement. In the story of the tigress found in the Suvarnabhāsottama
˙
Sūtra, for example, the bodhisattva, upon seeing the hungry tigress ready
to devour her own young, thinks to himself:
Th ere is no use to this [body] because it is nothing but piss, [so] I will now em-
ploy it in a virtuous act. Th us, it will be like a boat carrying me across the ocean
of birth and death.31
Once again we move from the worthlessness of the body (which is “noth-
ing but piss”), to the use of the worthless body in the performance of “a
virtuous act,” which then paradoxically transforms the worthless body into
a “boat carrying me across the ocean of birth and death”—all within the
confi nes of a single, brief passage. In Avadānasārasamuccaya 2, we have
exactly the same movement (although, in this case, the grammar of the
sentence presents the ideas in a slightly diff erent order):
If I do not use this body in such a way to acquire merit, which will result in incom-
parable happiness, of what use will it be when it is a corpse, shunned [by everyone]
and as feeble as a bubble being whirled about in the ocean by the wind?32
Implicit in this statement is the same basic movement—from the worthless-
ness of the “feeble corpse,” to the “use” of this corpse “to acquire merit,” which
then paradoxically brings about a state of “incomparable happiness.”
210

bodies ordinary and ideal
In all of these passages, then, we move through a logical sequence of
ideas linking the body’s “worthlessness” to its “worth.” If we wanted to
enumerate these ideas as explicitly as possible, they might look something
like the following:
1. Th e body is worthless.
2. I realize that the body is worthless.
3. Because I realize that the body is worthless, I am willing to abandon it for
others.
4. Yet my abandoning of the body (because it is worthless) is also a particular use
of the body.
5. Th is use of the body (when done in the proper manner and with the proper
motivation) is positive in nature and results in desirable rewards.
6. Th ese rewards thus paradoxically turn my worthless body into something of
incalculable worth.
7. However, my body never would have attained this “worth” without the original
realization of its “worthlessness.”
Th rough their implicit suggestion of this sequence of ideas, these passages
demonstrate for their readers the d ouble-e dged nature of the body in
relation to bondage and freedom and the causal and logical relationship
between its “worthlessness” and its “worth.”
At the same time, however, the fact that such passages are either more
or less explicit in their enumeration of this sequence of ideas also points
to the possibility of one fi nal option available to the authors of gift- of-
the- body tales—that of painting the “worthlessness” and “worth” of the
body in starkly contradictory terms and celebrating the paradox between
them without clarifying how they might be related. Th is is perhaps a
more poetic strategy, one of reveling in the paradox instead of resolv-
ing it. In Jātakamālā 8, for example, King Maitrībala, in a single verse,
refers to his body as “a noxious sore” and a “corpse” that is “perpetually
ill and the cause of disease,” but also notes that he will use this corpse in
“an extraordinary deed” and thus exact upon it an “exceedingly sweet re-
venge.”33 In the Manicūdāvadāna Manicūda exclaims that his “putrid body”
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
is, at one and the same time, a “requirement for [attaining] unsurpassed,
perfect enlightenment.”34 And in Jātakamālā 30 the bodhisattva (as an
elephant) refers to his body as an “asylum for many hundreds of diseases”
but also “a raft for crossing [the ocean of] misfortune for these men af-
fl icted by suff ering.”35 Finally, a particularly striking example can be found
211

bodies ordinary and ideal
in Avadānasārasamuccaya 3, where the simultaneous invocation of worth-
lessness and worth occurs in each of three consecutive verses spoken by
King Sarvamdada:
˙
Today, at last, with your help, this evil called the body, which despairs at the sudden
attacks of countless miseries, will now be of use to me in fulfi lling the side of virtue!
O Best of Brahmins! Th e wish that I have longed for for such a long time—may it
be fulfi lled today, through your power, and in dependence on this body, a parade
of decay, disease, and death. Th e king will have joy, you will attain great wealth,
and I will have superior perfection. See what extraordinary joy has befallen each of
us through the abandonment of a single body fi lled with misfortune!36
Th e continual oscillation here between worthlessness and worth elicits a
reaction of amazement at the paradox of the body without attempting
to draw attention to the ways in which this paradox might be resolved.
Within such passages we leave the realm of coherent doctrine behind and
enter a more aesthetic and emotional realm, one in which the foul and
loathsome body is suddenly—almost alchemically—transformed into a
precious and highly valued object.
Although for the purposes of description I have distinguished and
treated separately several diff erent ways of invoking the “worthlessness”
and “worth” of the ordinary human body, many gift- of- the- body stories
pursue all of these strategies simultaneously. In fact, the richness of the gift-
of- the- body genre’s discourse on the body lies precisely in the fact that its
perspective is constantly shifting. One story that is particularly rich in this
regard is Avadānasārasamuccaya 2, in which the bodhisattva is a merchant
who tries to convince his one hundred drowning companions to accept
the gift of his body. Th roughout the course of a long monologue, all of
the strategies enumerated above are represented in a constantly shifting
pattern. Th us at one moment he emphasizes the body’s utter worthless-
ness, telling his companions that if he does not abandon this “weak and
putrid body,” then “powerful Death, which is intent upon destroying the
world, will make me abandon it [anyway].”37 Since “the body’s end is
already near,” he reasons, “what is so diffi cult about [giving it away]?”38
At another moment, however, this same worthless body that can only be
thrown away in disgust is also, paradoxically, “an occasion of great joy”
that “should be celebrated for the excellence of its merit”;39 indeed, it is
like “moonlight out of season” and “an eternal remedy for misfortune.”40
And at other moments the reasoning behind such contradictory evalua-
212

bodies ordinary and ideal
tions is made explicit: “[By using it] to achieve the welfare of my friends,”
he explains, “I will make this body an abode of joy”41—thus transforming
“this strife called the body from an enemy into a friend.”42 Several diff er-
ent perspectives on the body are presented simultaneously, in a constantly
shifting pattern, leaving the reader with a rich and complex discourse on
the body’s “worthlessness” and its “worth.”
Extracting the Essence from Th is Essenceless Body
My description of the bodily discourse found in gift- of- the- body jātakas in
terms of the two perspectives of “worthlessness” and “worth” fi nds a very
close parallel within the stories themselves, through the use of a particular
cliché repeated over and over again. In many gift-o f- the- body stories, it
is said that the bodhisattva, by giving away his body, will “extract the es-
sence from this essenceless body.” Th is statement is usually spoken by the
bodhisattva, and often addressed to the recipient:
I will [now] extract the essence from my body.43
Today, having met you, I wish to draw the essence from this essenceless body.44
Today, having gained you as my friend, I am ready to extract the essence from
this putrid corpse, destined to decay.45
I must extract the essence from this crumbling, essenceless body, as if I were
plucking a piece of fruit from a tree hanging on to a river bank, just as its roots
are being torn by the current and giving way.46
Th e idea of “extracting the essence from the essenceless body” seems to
be closely associated with the bodhisattva’s self-s acrifi ce outside the gift-
of- the- body genre as well. Th e phrase is used several times, for example, in
the fi rst chapter of Śāntideva’s Śiksāsamuccaya, which deals at length with
˙
the bodhisattva’s gift of his body.47 Later in the same text the w ilderness-
dwelling bodhisattva who is attacked and devoured by snakes and ferocious
beasts is also told to remind himself that because of this self-s acrifi ce, “I
have met with great profi t, for I will [now] grasp the essence from my es-
senceless body.”48 Th ough this cliché is invoked in regard to other types of
meritorious deeds as well, and is by no means limited to contexts involving
213

bodies ordinary and ideal
the bodhisattva’s gift of his body, it does seem to have a particularly close
association with this context.
In all of these passages, the words used for “essence” and “essenceless” are
sāra and its negative, asāra. Th e term sāra has a wide range of related mean-
ings; it refers to the “core,” “pith,” “sap,” “heart,” or “essence” of something
and, by extension, its “essential part,” “best part,” “value,” or “worth.”49
Th us the terms sāra and asāra could legitimately be translated as “worth”
and “worthless,” and the bodhisattva described as one who “extracts the
worth from this worthless body.” Th is expression gives voice to the inher-
ent paradox involved in getting “worth” out of a body that is “worthless,”
yet also hints at the way in which the two qualities might be related—the
body’s “worth” being derived (or “extracted”) from one’s realization of its
utter “worthlessness.” Th e cliché thus encapsulates the two major lines of
Buddhist thinking about the body I have discussed above within the con-
fi nes of a single phrase: to “extract the essence from the essenceless body” is
to realize the body’s worthlessness and thus make use of the body in pursuit
of higher religious goals, thus creating the body’s worth.
Th e fact that sāra and asāra are almost always translated as “essence”
and “essenceless” (or “substance” and “insubstantial”) rather than the more
abstract “worth” and “worthless” is due, I believe, to the fact that the
term sāra seems to have chiefl y physical connotations, referring primarily
to the “core,” “pith,” or “sap” of something, and only by extension to its
“value” or “worth.”50 It is perhaps because of these substantialist connota-
tions that John Strong, in his discussion of this cliché (as it appears in
the Aśokāvadāna), states that Aśoka’s talk about extracting the body’s “es-
sence” is “somewhat reminiscient” of the Brahmanical concept of ātman,
the Jain concept of jīva, and the Sāmkhya concept of purusa, as well as
˙ ˙
aligning it closely with the later Mahāyāna concepts of tathāgatagarbha
and dharmadhātu.51 Like the tathāgatagarbha or dharmadhātu, according
to Strong, the “essence” one must rescue from the essenceless body is the
“ultimate reality to be understood in enlightenment” and is one of several
concepts used to emphasize “the immanence of the Unconditioned.”52
Th ough Strong himself observes that the Aśokāvadāna here “is not con-
cerned with doctrine per se but with stressing the immediate possibilities of
soteriological action,”53 he nevertheless interprets the term sāra in a manner
that I believe veers too far in the direction of turning it into some kind
of substantial, metaphysical entity extracted from the body.54 Th ough the
extraction of sāra is often described in terms of vivid, concrete images (such
214

bodies ordinary and ideal
as rescuing a treasure chest from a sinking ship or removing the pith from a
palm tree), this language is strictly poetic and metaphorical in nature. Th e
“essence” of the body itself, I believe, is indeed nothing more and nothing
less than “the immediate possibilities of soteriological action”—in other
words, the body’s basic ability and potential to engage in religious action
of every sort. In fact, it seems to me that this strictly functional (rather
than ontological or metaphysical) status of sāra is made exceedingly clear
within the Aśokāvadāna itself. Explaining the idea of the body’s “essence”
to his minister Yaśas, Aśoka states (from Strong’s own translation):
When my body lies in the ground,
discarded like the pulp of sugarcane,
it will be of no use for merit making;
it won’t be able to perform strenuous activities:
getting up, bowing down, and making añjalis.
Th erefore, right now, I should endeavor to save
my meritorious essence from perishing in the grave.
Th ose who do not extract the essence
from this body that must inevitably perish
are like those who fail to save a chest of jewels
from a burning house or a ship sinking at sea.
Unable to distinguish essence from non- essence,
they never see the essence at all
and are totally distraught
when they enter the jaws of Death.
Once one has enjoyed curds,
ghee, fresh butter, and buttermilk,
the best part of the milk—its essence—is gone.
If the jar is then accidentally broken,
it is hardly something to get upset about.
So too there should be no sorrow at death
if one has already extracted from one’s body,
its essence—good conduct.
. . . Th e wise in this world make merit
by getting up, bowing down, and performing
other acts of obeisance,
relying on this most vile body,
hoping for the essence.55
215

bodies ordinary and ideal
Within this passage, it seems to me, the “essence” of the essenceless body is
not a substantial or metaphysical entity akin to dharmadhātu; instead, it is
simply one’s ability to make use of the body within religious acts—“getting
up, bowing down, and performing other acts of obeisance.”
My interpretation here is in accord with that of Jonathan Silk, who
has also discussed the meaning of this cliché.56 Noting that “the idea of
a body which has a transcendent essence seems to be rather common in
the Tathāgatagarbha literature”—but that he remains unconvinced that
this has anything to do with the meaning of sāra within this cliché—Silk
then cites a passage from the Ugrapariprcchā Sūtra which he believes makes
˙
the meaning of the expression explicit. Th e passage in question runs as
follows:
[Th e bodhisattva] thinks in terms of extracting the essence from his essenceless
body. . . . What is “thinking in terms of extracting the essence from one’s essence-
less body”? It is taking pleasure in doing all that is to be done for others; speaking
respectfully to one’s teachers, doing homage to them, rising up, pressing one’s
palms together, and bowing to them—this is “thinking in terms of extracting the
essence from one’s essenceless body.”57
Once again, the “essence” of the body here is nothing more and nothing
less than its ability to be used to engage in acts of a religious nature. It is
functional in nature rather than metaphysical.
And yet—it is no doubt true that the concreteness of the imagery
still remains. Because sāra retains its physical connotations, the idea of
“extracting the essence from this essenceless body” seems almost alchemi-
cal and magical in nature and is associated with vivid, physical images of
jewels rescued from a burning house, delicious ghee extracted from thin
and watery milk, or ripe and luscious fruit plucked from a barren, wind-
s wept tree. By means of extracting this “essence,” moreover, the foul and
loathsome body—the “noxious sore” and the “putrid corpse destined to
decay”—is quite suddenly and inexplicably transformed into “moonlight
out of season,” “an eternal remedy for misfortune,” and “a raft for crossing
the ocean of birth and death.” Clearly, such images begin to point beyond
the mere potential of the ordinary body toward a diff erent kind of body
altogether—one that is already perfect and ideal, and one that paradoxically
overcomes all of the “worthlessness” whose realization is precisely what
brings it about. It is perhaps this poetic and paradoxical use of imagery,
216

bodies ordinary and ideal
then, that ultimately makes possible the Buddhist tradition’s leap from
the ordinary body to the ideal.
Th e Ideal Body Achieved
Susanne Mrozik (again in connection with the “essence” cliché) has spoken
of this as a “productive paradox” lying at the heart of Buddhist conceptions
of the body. She describes this paradox in the following terms:
Th e person who cultivates detachment from his body, even to the point of sac-
rifi cing his body and life for the sake of others, is the very person who gets the
best body of all—the irresistibly beautiful body of a Buddha. Paradoxically, the
realization that one’s body is inherently disgusting, impermanent, and without
abiding essence creates an altogether diff erent kind of body. Likewise, the ability
to regard all bodies as alike in their foulness, impermanence, and lack of abiding
essence produces a body that is quite diff erent from all others.58
Th is paradox is fully evident in the gift-o f- the- body genre, for in spite of
their frequent condemnation of the ordinary body’s worthlessness, gift-o f-
the- body jātakas share with other genres of Buddhist literature a tendency
to celebrate various types of “ideal bodies” that stand in stark contrast
to the ordinary body and overcome all its defi ciencies and limitations.
Th ese statements move beyond the mere “worth” of the ordinary body to
celebrate—often in literal and concretely physical terms—a body that is
already perfect and beautiful to behold. Let me enumerate four diff erent
contexts in which the conception of such an “ideal body” occurs.
1. Th e fi rst and most prevalent context consists of statements made
about the bodhisattva’s body by others—for despite the bodhisattva’s own
tendency to dwell on his body’s impurity and repulsiveness, this same body
is almost always described by others (and by the authorial voice itself) as
one that is already ideal. In Avadānasārasamuccaya 3 King Sarvamdada
˙
describes his own body as “a parade of decay, disease, and death” that is “af-
fl icted by many misfortunes,” yet this same body is hyperbolically extolled
by the narrative voice of the text as “having the gait of an elephant in rut,
shiny as gold, tall as Mount Sumeru, with brilliant jewel-l ike features.”59 In
Kalpanāmanditikā 64 the body that King Śibi himself describes as being “a
˙˙
seat of old age and disease, numerous dangers and repugnant substances” is
217

bodies ordinary and ideal
nevertheless praised by the narrator for being “as blue as a lotus- leaf” and
“shining with a pure brilliance.”60 And in Jātakamālā 8 King Maitrībala’s
body—which, according to him, is a “noxious sore” and a “corpse”—is
described by one of his subjects in the following terms:
His chest is as broad as a rock on Mount Meru; he is handsome, with a face as
lovely as the clear moon in autumn; his arms are long and thick like bars of gold;
he has the look and stride of a bull.61
In fact, not even the gory act of mutilation can make this body unat-
tractive. For even when his body is cut open and “his blood [is] being
lapped up by the demons,” King Maitrībala is still described as having “a
body shining like gold, as if Mount Meru were being embraced by clouds
heavy with the weight of rain and reddened by twilight”62—just as the
woman Rūpyāvatī, after severing her own breasts and arriving home with
her clothing drenched in blood, still manages to look like “a golden image
worshipped with saff ron powder.”63
In addition to physical beauty, moreover, these bodies are often char-
acterized by supernatural powers that belie the weak and fragile image
often painted by the bodhisattva himself. In Pāli Jātaka 514 the elephant’s
tusks emit six- colored rays of light and have magical powers.64 In the
Manicūdāvadāna King Manicūda’s c rest-j ewel lights up the entire city of
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Sāketa every night, appeases all misery (such as disease, fi re, and fl oods),
and turns everything it touches into pure gold;65 whereas King Candra-
prabha of Divyāvadāna 22 derives his name (meaning “Moonlight”) from
the fact that “neither jewels nor lamps nor torches were led in front [of
him], but light went forth from his own body, like rays from the disk of
the moon.”66 In numerous such ways, then, these stories indicate that—at
least according to those around him—the bodhisattva’s body, far from
sharing the foul nature that is supposed to be characteristic of all bodies,
is already perfect and ideal.
2. Secondly, in those stories in which the bodhisattva dies, much the
same can be said of the corpse he leaves behind. Because these stories often
involve descriptions of the body’s impermanence and impurity and its
mutilation and dumping in the charnel ground, they strongly evoke the
image of the meditative practice of a śubha- bhāvanā, in which one medi-
tates on dead, rotting, and mutilated corpses in the charnel ground in order
to realize the body’s foul and loathsome nature. In fact, the bodhisattva’s
body, after being mutilated or devoured, is often described in such a way
218

bodies ordinary and ideal
so as to match up perfectly with one of the nine or ten varieties of corpses
focused on in the cemetery meditations, such as the “corpse pecked at by
crows, vultures, dogs, and worms,” the corpse that is reduced to “bones
scattered in all directions,” or the “hacked and scattered” corpse.67 We
might therefore expect the bodhisattva’s mutilated corpse to be evaluated
in equally negative terms, and perhaps used as a meditative object illustrat-
ing the foul and transient nature of the body for those he leaves behind.
Yet this is just the opposite of the reaction to the corpse that occurs in
story after story.
In the fi rst place, the bodhisattva’s lifeless corpse—even when headless,
bloody, or otherwise mutilated—is still described as an object of great
beauty. In Jātakamālā 30, even after the elephant has thrown himself off a
mountain, the weary travelers who fi nd his corpse extol its great beauty in
three long verses, comparing its various parts to l otus- stalks, moonbeams,
the graceful curve of a bow, and other poetic images.68 In Jātakamālā 6
the rabbit’s corpse, even after being burnt in a fi re, is still “as beautiful
as lotus petals and adorned with radiant jewels.”69 In Suvarnabhāsottama
˙
Sūtra, chapter 18, Prince Mahāsattva, having been devoured by the ti-
gress, is reduced to nothing more than “bones devoid of blood, fl esh,
and sinews, with hair scattered in all directions”—but for the onlookers
this has the appearance of delicately scattered lotus petals.70 And fi nally,
in Avadānasārasamuccaya 2 the m erchant- leader’s dead body is described
as being “pleasing although devoid of life” and “having a beautiful com-
plexion like polished gold, as if it had been willingly stroked by Laksmī.”71
˙
Even as a dead corpse it is contrasted with the living bodies of ordinary
beings, who are “immersed in the fi lth and excrement of birth, full of
large, quivering worms of affl iction.”72
Rather than being meditated on or allowed to rot further, moreover, the
bodhisattva’s corpse is almost always made the object of elaborate ritual
treatment. In Pāli Jātaka 514 the elephant’s corpse is ceremonially cremated
in a sacred enclosure by the other elephants, while fi ve hundred pratyeka-
buddhas recite texts all night long.73 In Divyāvadāna 22 the king’s headless
and bloody corpse is cremated on a pile of fragrant wood, interred in a
stūpa at a great crossroads, adorned with fl ags and banners, and worshiped
with various types of off erings.74 In Jātakamālā 1, after the bodhisattva is
devoured by the tigress, his disciple says of his remains: “Oh! How his body,
which was not lacking in goodness, has now suddenly become worthy of
the greatest adoration!”75 Joined by gandharvas, yaksas, nāgas, devas, and
˙
other men, he worships the remains with garlands, jewels, and unguents.
219

bodies ordinary and ideal
And in Jātakamālā 30 the gods themselves honor the elephant’s corpse by
showering down fl owers, singing hymns of praise, making cloud canopies
for him in the sky, and causing trees to bloom out of season.76
Finally, the holy sites resulting from such ritual treatment are some-
times depicted as having a lasting—almost permanent—duration. In
Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra, chapter 18, Prince Mahāsattva’s parents, the
˙
king and queen, remove all of their ornaments, pay homage to the relics of
their son, and then erect a beautiful stūpa made of jewels, gold, and silver.
Th is stūpa lasts throughout the eons and is later made to reemerge from
the earth by the Buddha himself, who explains to Ānanda: “By means of
these bones, Ānanda, I quickly awoke to unsurpassed, perfect enlighten-
ment.”77 Perhaps the most enduring treatment is accorded to the hare’s
body in Jātakamālā 6: though the hare himself dies, his body lives on in
an image of cosmic proportions, for Śakra inscribes his image on the disk
of the moon, and thus “even today, when the moon is full, the image of
the hare shines in the sky, like a refl ection in a silver mirror”78—elsewhere
described as one of the “four marvels” of the present eon.79
In short, we see that over and over again the same body that the bo-
dhisattva denigrates as foul and impure even when alive is treated by
others—even as a mutilated corpse—as a sacred and physically beautiful
object worthy of the highest adoration and most elaborate ritual treatment.
Moreover, in many stories the corpse itself, instead of rotting away and thus
illustrating impermanence, seems to be physically transmuted through the
bodhisattva’s deed into relics, stūpas, or holy sites that sometimes take on
cosmic dimensions and have an almost permanent duration.
3. A similar process occurs on a smaller scale in those stories in which
the bodhisattva survives. As we have seen, despite the bodhisattva’s sincere
willingness to give away his impure body, it is inevitable in these stories
that he later performs an Act of Truth intended to get his body back.
In the Manicūdāvadāna, for example, King Manicūda, who speaks so
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
eloquently of the “putrid body” before giving away his fl esh and blood,
later performs an Act of Truth asking for his “perfectly beautiful” body
to be restored.80 Moreover, many such stories manifest a bizarre brand
of bodily alchemy wherein the limb off ered as gift is not only restored,
but becomes greater and more powerful than before. For instance, the
light emitted by King Manicūda’s c rest-j ewel doubles in size when later
˙ ˙
restored.81 Likewise, in Pāli Jātaka 499 King Śibi’s restored eyes can see
through walls, rocks, and mountains, and for a hundred yojanas on every
220

bodies ordinary and ideal
side (as he himself states, “I gave away a human eye and obtained one
that is supernatural!”).82 Although neither Manicūda nor Śibi asks for
˙ ˙
such increases in power, such passages at least imply that the bodhisattva
gives away his impure and “worthless” body in order to acquire one that
is better and more powerful.
4. Whereas the above three contexts all involve the statements made
about, and the treatment accorded to, the bodhisattva’s body by others (or
by the voice of the text), a fourth context—relatively rare by comparison—
consists of the bodhisattva’s own statements about what type of “ideal
body” he hopes to attain in the future (often in exchange for the ordinary
one he is giving away). Th is desire for a better body can take a number of
diff erent forms. In the story of the woman Rūpāvatī, for example, it is
specifi cally cast in terms of gender, for Rūpāvatī vows that by means of the
gift of her breasts, “may the bodily faculties of a woman disappear from me,
and may I appear with the bodily faculties of a man!”83—since manhood
is “the basis of virtue in this world.”84 Th is physical transformation does
indeed come to pass, with the resultant male body (in Haribhatta’s version
˙˙
of the story) being celebrated for its “moon-l ike face,” “manly chest,” and
“beard as dark as collyrium.”85 In this case it is the male body—perhaps
a trope for Buddhahood itself?—that constitutes the desired ideal, while
the female body is cast as ordinary and imperfect.
In Divyāvadāna 22, on the other hand, King Candraprabha’s desire
for a better body seems to be focused on the corpse’s post mortem trans-
formation into powerful relics and holy sites, for as he is giving away his
head, he vows:
And when I have attained nirvana, may there be relics the size of mustard seeds.
And in the middle of this Maniratnagarbha p leasure-p ark, may there be a great
˙
stūpa, more excellent than any other stūpa. And may those beings who go with
pure bodies to the great caitya, wishing to worship it, having seen that [stūpa],
full of relics and more excellent than any other stūpa, feel at ease. And when I
have attained nirvana, may crowds of people come to my caityas, perform acts of
worship, and be destined for heaven or liberation.86
Although King Candraprabha’s vow in regard to his stūpa does involve
the soteriological eff ects it will have upon others, it also includes an un-
abashed desire for physical beauty and “oohs” and “aahs” from the adoring
crowds.
221

bodies ordinary and ideal
Th e same type of desire takes on a particularly grotesque form in those
stories involving the theme of the “fl esh- mountain.” In the story of King
Ambara found in the Karunāpundarīka Sūtra, King Ambara vows:
˙ ˙˙
May this body of mine become a mountain of fl esh! May whatever beings have
fl esh for food and blood for drink come eat my fl esh and drink my blood! And,
by the power of my vow, may my body grow enough [to accommodate] as many
beings as may eat my fl esh and drink my blood, until it is a hundred thousand
yojanas in height and fi ve thousand yojanas in width!87
Following this vow, he further explains that he satiated the beings there with
his fl esh and blood for one thousand years and also gave away numerous
tongues to be devoured by the birds and beasts, “yet by the power of my
vow, one after another of them appeared [until] there was a heap of them
as big as Vulture Peak Mountain.”88 King Durdhana in the same text also
becomes a “fl esh- mountain” by means of a vow—a mountain that sub-
sequently grows to a thousand times its original size, with “human heads
appearing everywhere, with hair, ears, eyes, noses, lips, teeth, tongues, and
many hundreds of thousands of mouths.”89 Here the ideal body seems
almost to translate into sheer quantity and multiplicity of body parts.
In yet other cases, the ideal body the bodhisattva wishes to attain by
giving away the body he presently has is the body of a Buddha. Th e exact
nature of the Buddha- body he hopes to attain, however, is somewhat open
to question. In some cases, such as the following two passages, this body
is referred to rather abstractly as a “dharma- body” (dharma- kāya):
By abandoning my body, a boil, impelled through hundreds of existences, full of
excrement and urine, as insubstantial as foam, full of hundreds of worms, driven
forward by its acts, I will obtain a dharma- body, free of grief, free of change, free
of [all] attachments, pure and stainless, full of hundreds of virtues, fully endowed
with virtues such as meditation and so forth.90
[By giving away my body,] I will obtain a dharma- body that cannot be split apart,
cut up, or carried away, that is imperishable, unscarred, and unsurpassed.91
It is diffi cult to interpret the exact sense of dharma- kāya within these
passages; as research on the various bodies of the Buddha has shown,92 the
meaning of dharma- kāya varies from text to text, and the word itself has
fl uid connotations. Here the adjectives used to describe it (“free of grief,”
222

bodies ordinary and ideal
“free of change,” “imperishable,” “unscarred,” “cannot be cut up,” etc.)
obviously imply something that escapes all of the limitations of ordinary
physical existence without making it clear whether this something itself
is also a physical body in nature. Th erefore, the bodhisattva’s wish to ex-
change his ordinary body for a “dharma-b ody” could be interpreted as a
wish for transcendence beyond the physical condition into a completely
immaterial existence. Nevertheless, there are other passages that make it
clear that it is the physical body of a Buddha that the bodhisattva desires.
In the Karunāpundarīka Sūtra King Ambara gives away his genitals in the
˙ ˙˙
hope of acquiring the “mark of hidden genitals” and his fl esh and blood
in the hope of acquiring the “mark of a golden complexion”93—which
are two of the thirty-t wo marks characteristic of the physical body of a
Buddha (the so- called mahāpurusalaksana).
˙ ˙ ˙
Finally, as the last two examples make clear, it is also common for the
bodhisattva to give away an individual part of the body (rather than the
body as a whole) in exchange for its idealized counterpart. Th us King Śibi
gives away his physical eye in hope of acquiring the “eye of omniscience,”94
just as the elephant Saddanta gives away his physical tusks in hope of
˙ ˙
acquiring the “tusks of omniscience.”95 Likewise, King Punyabala gives
˙
away the “ordinary eye of fl esh” in hope of acquiring the “unsurpassed eye
of dharma,”96 King Manicūda gives away the jewel attached to his head
˙ ˙
in hope of acquiring the “jewel of enlightenment,”97 and King Ambara
gives away his hands and feet in hope of acquiring the “excellent hands of
faith” and the “excellent feet of morality.”98 Th e process is the same as we
have seen in regard to the whole body, but is here limited to individual
parts of the body. In fact, both elements—the individual body parts and
the d harma-b ody as a whole—are brought together in a passage on the
bodhisattva’s self- sacrifi ce from the Vajradhvaja Sūtra (as preserved in the
fi rst chapter of the Śiksāsamuccaya). Th is passage states that the bodhisattva
˙
sacrifi ces his head, “longing for the most excellent knowledge, which is
the foremost head of all the world”; he sacrifi ces his hand, “using the hand
of faith to act for the welfare [of all beings]”; and he sacrifi ces his foot,
thus “stepping with the soles [of his feet] upon the great foundation [of
Buddhahood].” Th e passage then concludes that as he sacrifi ces all of these
individual body parts, he bears in mind “the idea of a body that is uncut,
unbroken, and undiminished—the dharma-b ody consisting of knowledge
without any obstacles.”99 Th e specifi c qualities attained in exchange for
individual body parts (such as hand, foot, and head) thus come together
to form the “dharma- body” as a whole.
223

bodies ordinary and ideal
Morality and Physicality Intertwined
Th e citations given above should suffi ce to demonstrate that gift-o f- the-
body jātakas, in spite of their frequent rhetoric concerning the body’s
utter worthlessness, also hold out the hope of attaining a diff erent kind
of body altogether—an ideal body, one that escapes the negative qualities
attributed to all physical bodies while still remaining resolutely physical
in nature. Moreover, this ideal physical body is not merely the body of
a Buddha that will be attained by the bodhisattva in the future, it is also
the body he already possesses. Despite the frequent Buddhist claim that all
human and animal bodies are foul and disgusting by nature—and despite
his own enthusiastic assent to this claim—the bodhisattva’s body, whether
human or animal, is seen and treated by others as being already perfect
and ideal. Clearly, as I have noted before, there is something of a paradox
involved in the very existence of such an ideal body. If all bodies are sup-
posed to be equally unsatisfactory, how can some bodies escape from this
condition and be perfect and ideal? Moreover, how can it be the case that
one attains such an ideal body precisely through one’s realization of the
body’s worthless nature? And how can others see a perfect body where the
bodhisattva himself sees only a decrepit and impure form?
One way of resolving the apparent paradox is by overcoming our in-
herited tendency toward mind / body dualism and instead keeping in mind
the absolute interpenetration of the moral and the physical characteristic
of the Buddhist worldview. As recent scholarship has increasingly come
to show, the world depicted in traditional Buddhist texts is one in which
the moral and physical orders are completely intertwined.100 Moral virtues
such as compassion or wisdom are not exclusively “mental” or “spiritual”
in nature, but also have concrete physical embodiments such as a golden
complexion or a mellifl uous voice. Characters in Buddhist literature (as
Susanne Mrozik has noted) “literally reek with sin or are made fragrant
with virtue . . . are disfi gured by vice and adorned with morality.”101 Posi-
tive moral status manifests itself in an idealized body—just as negative
moral status is refl ected in a foul and impure form.
Perhaps the most obvious example of this intertwining is the fi gure of
the Buddha himself, for each of the t hirty-t wo “marks of a great man”
(mahāpurusalaksana) that adorn his physical body is described as the kar-
˙ ˙ ˙
mic result of particular moral virtues cultivated during his former lives.
Th e correlation between moral deed and physical mark is made explicit
in sources such as the Lakkhana Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya. He has soft
˙
224

bodies ordinary and ideal
and delicate skin because he approached ascetics and Brahmins for moral
advice; he has a bright and golden complexion because he lived without
anger and never showed hostility; he has a perfect sense of taste because he
avoided harming beings by hand, stones, stick, or sword; and so forth.102
Th e same is true of less exalted beings as well, such as the ordinary monks
and laymen who populate the Avadānaśataka and are described as acquiring
specifi c physical features (such as a golden body) as a result of performing
specifi c moral deeds (such as worshiping a stūpa).103 Moral deeds thus result
in physical marks, and these physical marks themselves then go on to have
profoundly moral eff ects, for both oneself and others—such as one’s ability
to practice religion at all (which, after all, requires a certain minimum type
of body) or the ability of one’s body to morally inspire others (as we see
with the moral conversions undergone by so many characters in Buddhist
literature merely as a result of catching a glimpse of the Buddha’s physical
body, being touched by him, or hearing his beautiful voice).
In other words, this is a world in which physical features are always
indicative of moral status, and moral attainments must be refl ected by their
corresponding physical eff ects. Of course, this correspondence between the
moral and physical orders is an absolute necessity in a worldview domi-
nated by the theory of karma, which holds that all morally signifi cant deeds
must inevitably bear fruit—including fruit of an obviously physical nature,
such as the type of body one inhabits or one’s realm of rebirth. Perhaps this
correspondence is so obvious, however, that it is easily lost from view—and
not only among ourselves but even among those who inhabit the world
depicted in Buddhist texts, who must often be reminded of this fact. In
Avadānaśataka 31, for example, the monks of Jetavana are “stricken by ill-
ness, yellow and pale, their bodies emaciated and their limbs weak,” while
the Buddha is “free from disease, free from illness, strong and healthy.”104
In explanation for this bodily diff erence, the Buddha relates his previous
birth as a king who sacrifi ced his own body in order to cure an epidemic
among his subjects, and then notes that it was precisely because of this
compassionate moral deed that he is now “endowed with a stomach whose
digestion is regular, by means of which everything I eat, drink, chew, and
enjoy is digested with perfect ease, and I am free of disease and have left
illness behind.”105 Th us, the gift of the body does not merely lead one to
spiritual enlightenment, it also improves one’s digestion! Th e reason for
this is simple and clear; as the Buddha himself patiently explains to his
monks: “Th e acts that [a person] performs and accumulates, monks, do
not bear fruit outside [of that person]. . . . Rather, the acts that [a person]
225

bodies ordinary and ideal
performs—whether pure or impure—bear fruit in the skandhas, dhātus,
and āyatanas that [he] receives.”106
Here then is a logical way of resolving the paradox of the ideal body:
realization of the body’s worthlessness constitutes a positive moral deed that
must have its corresponding physical eff ect—in this case, the attainment
of a body of great worth. Th e body is indeed worthless by nature, yet a
true realization of this worthlessness is not purely a mental achievement;
it is also one which manifests itself in the physical realm through a body
that overcomes the very worthlessness whose realization helped bring it
about. We must remind ourselves again that there is no question here of
the “spiritual” mind transcending the “vulgar” body, but rather of mind-
and- body transforming together. King Śibi trades in his physical eyes for
“eyes of the perfection of truth”107—yet these same eyes are also superior
physical eyes that can see through walls and for a hundred yojanas on all
sides. Likewise, Prince Mahāsattva’s inferior body is physically transmuted
into a beautiful and long-e nduring stūpa full of relics—yet these same rel-
ics are also “fragrant with [the bodhisattva’s] morality and virtue.”108 Th e
moral and physical orders mutually implicate one another and are always
transformed in tandem. Perhaps nowhere is this absolute interpenetration
of the moral and the physical made clearer than in an interesting motif
sometimes found in the gift-o f- the- body genre—a motif I will refer to
as “tasty fl esh.”
Tasty Flesh
Let me begin my discussion of the “tasty fl esh” motif with a remarkable
quote from the Śiksāsamuccaya, a Mahāyāna compendium compiled by
˙
Śāntideva in perhaps the late seventh or early eighth centuries c.e. As
Richard Mahoney has demonstrated through a close and careful analysis,109
the Śiksāsamuccaya presents the bodhisattva- path wholly in terms of the
˙
virtue of generosity. Th e entire text, in fact, is structured around the fol-
lowing line of argument:
1. One attains perfect enlightenment by “giving away everything.”
2. One “gives away everything” by giving away one’s “body,” “enjoyments,” and
“merit.”
3. However, in order to make the gift of one’s body, enjoyments, and merit into a
truly worthy gift that will most eff ectively benefi t others, one must constantly
226

bodies ordinary and ideal
work to “preserve,” “purify,” and “increase” each of these things by means of
moral conduct.110
For Śāntideva, in other words, it is the activities of preserving, purifying,
and increasing one’s body, enjoyments, and merit that logically come fi rst,
and giving them that comes later. Within this schema, the bodhisattva’s
gift of his body to benefi t all beings thus stands at the very end of the
bodhisattva- path, whereas most of the path is more properly concerned
with “preserving,” “purifying,” and “increasing” this body through moral
conduct in order to make it into a worthy gift. Th roughout the text,
Śāntideva therefore makes several comments arguing against premature
and ill- considered self- sacrifi ce.111
It is in this context that we fi nd the following passage at the beginning
of chapter 8, where Śāntideva explains why it is so important for the bo-
dhisattva to “purify” his person before giving it away:
Now I will speak about purifi cation. And why is that? Because once the body is
purifi ed, it will be like clean and well- prepared rice, and its consumption will be
salutary for embodied beings. As it says in the noble Tathāgataguhya Sūtra: “In
the great cities, there are large c remation-g rounds fi lled with many hundreds of
thousands of living beings. Even there, when his time has come and he has died,
the b odhisattva-m ahāsattva displays his great body. And the beings there who have
been reborn as animals eat as much of his fl esh as they desire. And at the end of
their lifespans, when their time has come and they have died, they are reborn in
a happy destiny, among the gods in heaven. And he alone is the cause of their
[rebirth there, or any other good destiny they attain], even up to [their attain-
ment of] parinirvāna—that is, [it occurs] through the purity of that bodhisattva’s
˙
former vow. [Th e bodhisattva] who has vowed for a long time—‘When my time
has come and I have died, may [beings] enjoy my fl esh!’—he alone would be the
cause of their [happy destiny]. Th e aspiration of that virtuous [bodhisattva] is
accomplished, his wish is accomplished, his vow is fulfi lled.”
. . . Moreover, I will also tell you what is wrong with not purifying [the body]:
Just as a crop overcome by weeds fails to prosper and wastes away with disease,
so also a Buddha- sprout, when overcome by the affl ictions, never grows.112
In other words, the bodhisattva’s gift of his body is not merely an act
of generosity and compassion, it is also the serving of a physical meal that
morally transforms those diners who consume it. Th e bodhisattva’s high
moral attainments actually infuse his physical body (like “well- prepared
227

bodies ordinary and ideal
rice”), and it is directly by means of consuming the bodhisattva’s fl esh
that lowly beings in the cemeteries attain rebirth in heaven or even achieve
nirvana. If the bodhisattva sacrifi ces his body prematurely, on the other
hand, his fl esh is likened to “a crop overcome by weeds,” and no matter
how generous his intentions might be, the meal will not have the desired
eff ect. Th ough we tend to think of the bodhisattva’s positive moral eff ects
upon other beings purely in terms of the example he sets in regard to vir-
tues such as generosity and compassion, this text states emphatically that
it is equally a matter of his physical fl esh. Th rough constant moral practice
and cultivation of virtue, the bodhisattva gradually “seasons” his fl esh and
transforms it into a magical elixir capable of saving all beings—if only they
will eat. Perhaps nowhere is the total interpenetration of moral and physical
qualities so pronounced as in this ability to depict the moral conversion of
beings through the purely physical idiom of eating the right food.
It is equally important to take note of the fact that, in addition to
its salvifi c qualities, this fl esh also tastes good, its delicious taste being a
direct result, of course, of the bodhisattva’s moral virtue. Emphasis is of-
ten placed on its wonderful taste, which seems to rival in importance its
positive soteriological eff ects. Th e moral power of the bodhisattva is thus
inseparable from the wonderful taste of his fl esh, and spiritual salvation
is indistinguishable from the physical satiety one experiences after eating
a good meal. Th e bodhisattva’s self-s acrifi ce is both a heroic deed of gen-
erosity and the serving of a fi ne gourmet meal that satiates the recipient
(and gives the Buddha good digestion).
Th is motif of the bodhisattva’s “tasty fl esh” occurs in several gift- of- the-
b ody stories involving the feeding of hungry beings, though it is more
explicit in some cases than in others. In Jātakamālā 8, for example, it
constitutes an undercurrent that never quite comes to the surface but is
at least implicitly present. In this story, fi ve cannibalistic yaksas disguise
˙
themselves as brahmins and ask the virtuous King Maitrībala for food.
He gladly off ers to them a “pleasing meal fi t for even a king,” whereupon
they explain that “we don’t eat this kind of food.”113 When he asks what
kind of food they do eat, they resume their terrifying yaksa- forms and
˙
reply: “Warm and fresh fl esh and blood from human beings—this is what
yaksas eat and drink.”114 Full of joy at the arising of this opportunity, King
˙
Maitrībala then decides to give them, from his own body, some “thick,
solid lumps of fl esh, dripping with blood.”115 When his ministers object
to this gift, King Maitrībala argues that this meal of fl esh must come from
a living being, “for the fl esh of those who have died a natural death is
228

bodies ordinary and ideal
bloodless and cold, and will not please these [yaksas],”116 and that it is he
˙
alone who should give it because his body is “big, solid, and distinguished
by its masses of fl esh.”117
Implicit in this exchange is the notion of “tasty fl esh”: by having the
yaksas refuse a “pleasing meal” in favor of King Maitrībala’s fl esh, the text
˙
suggests that the king’s body constitutes a better- than- pleasing meal (at
least for those who are yaksas). Moreover, King Maitrībala clearly takes
˙
pride in providing the yaksas with fl esh they will fi nd delicious—not fl esh
˙
that is “bloodless and cold,” but fl esh that tastes good to them and fi lls
their stomachs to satiety. Only he can give them this meal, not his minis-
ters—and not merely because he is more virtuous than they are, but also
because he has a better body, one that is “big, solid, and distinguished by
its masses of fl esh.” Th us, while much of the story is preoccupied with
ethical arguments both for and against the gift, this sprinkling of passages
constitutes an undercurrent of concern focused instead on the merits of
delicious fl esh, yummy bodies, and physically satisfying meals.
Th e same scenario is also characteristic of the story of King Manicūda,
˙ ˙
who makes a gift of his fl esh and blood to feed a hungry rāksasa (who is
˙
really the god Śakra in disguise). In the Manicūdāvadāna, once again, this
˙ ˙
rāksasa fi rst refuses the “large heap of delectable foods” off ered to him and
˙
informs the king that he eats only “the fl esh and blood of the recently
killed,” whereupon King Manicūda, full of joy, decides to give him “fresh”
˙ ˙
fl esh and blood from his own body.118 Once again, he takes peculiar pride
in the taste of his fl esh, for as he slices it from his body, he indicates to
the rāksasa the particular gastronomic qualities of each piece (almost as
˙
if he were a waiter describing the daily specials): “Th is fl esh is rich in
blood, this is rich in fat, and this is very tender.”119 Th e obvious pride the
bodhisattva takes in the deliciousness of his fl esh stands in stark contrast
to the statements he makes elsewhere in the text describing his body as a
“putrid corpse, destined to decay,” and so on.120 It is almost as if the idiom
of food- and- feeding provides the bodhisattva with a roundabout way of
acknowledging and taking pride in his own generosity, compassion, and
moral virtue—qualities he cannot recognize explicitly, but can attest to
in terms of their consequences for the taste of his fl esh.
It is in the version of the Manicūda story found in the Lokānandanātaka,
˙ ˙ ˙
however, that this motif of the bodhisattva’s “tasty fl esh” reaches its highest
culmination, becoming the object of an extended dialogue among several
characters. Here, the rāksasa fi rst explains that the only food acceptable to
˙
rāksasas is “glistening fl esh, freshly cut by the blade of a sword, abundant
˙
229

bodies ordinary and ideal
in quantity, warm and red in color,”121 whereupon Manicūda tells him that
˙ ˙
“this body is the kind of food you desire!”122 When Manicūda’s brahmin
˙ ˙
priest argues that the rāksasa should instead be given an animal slaughtered
˙
in sacrifi ce, Manicūda answers angrily: “O Brahmin, why are animals
˙ ˙
[alone] suitable for a rāksasa in a sacrifi ce? After all, once you’ve refused
˙
ambrosia, what are you going to do with something tasteless?”123 Manicūda
˙ ˙
here compares his own body to “ambrosia” and contrasts it with the “taste-
less” fl esh obtainable from the bodies of others—once again, perhaps a
roundabout way of trumpeting his own moral virtue and contrasting it
with the moral inferiority of others. Manicūda’s wife Padmāvatī then jumps
˙ ˙
into the fray, off ering her own body to the rāksasa, since “this body, too, is
˙
divine, is it not?”124 Th e rāksasa refuses this equivalence, however, through
˙
an extended excursus on the gastronomic qualities of the fl esh characteristic
of diff erent types of people, depending on their moral qualities:
Th e fl esh of a sorrowful person tastes bitter, astringent, and salty. Th at of a pas-
sionate person is like liquid and goes down easily. Th at of a very fearful person is
dry. Th at of an angry person is sour, very salty, pungent, bad-t asting, and gives
you heartburn. [But] the body of one who is greatly benevolent in nature tastes
sweet, and completely satisfi es all the senses.125
Manicūda is clearly pleased at the implication of the rāksasa’s remarks,
˙ ˙ ˙
for he states, “After all this time, only now do I see a supplicant who is
endowed with higher knowledge!”126—and immediately begins slicing up
his own fl esh. Clearly, the bodhisattva’s virtue throughout this extended
exchange is more than just an abstract “spiritual” quality; it also manifests
itself in the concrete, physical world through the very taste of his fl esh.
Th is taste provides the rāksasa with a delicious, pleasing meal, yet it also
˙
does much more—providing concrete, physical proof of the pure gener-
osity that motivates the bodhisattva’s gift. In the fi nal analysis, the act of
self- sacrifi ce alone is not enough, for this act might be motivated by grief,
fear, greed, or other negative emotions. What proves the sincerity of the
bodhisattva’s deed is the resultant taste of his fl esh.
Th e motif of the bodhisattva’s “tasty fl esh” is thus a potent indicator of
the absolute interpenetration of the moral and physical orders character-
istic of the world depicted in Buddhist narrative. Moral status is always
inscribed upon the physical body one inhabits, and it is this which accounts
for the bodhisattva’s a lready-i deal body. Th e compassion and generosity
that drive the bodhisattva’s deed are not merely “spiritual” qualities; they
230

bodies ordinary and ideal
are also materially embodied through his beautiful appearance, his pure
corpse, and his delicious, tasty fl esh. Th e gift of the body is not merely a
moral act; it is also the serving of a gourmet meal that has a salutary eff ect
upon its diners. From this perspective, we can also begin to understand
how this ideal, beautiful body coexists with denunciations of the body’s
worthlessness, and why the bodhisattva sometimes characterizes his body
in such profoundly contradictory ways: when the bodhisattva denounces
his “putrid” and “impure” body, the concern is with demonstrating his
wisdom and his level of realization into the true nature of things; when,
on the other hand, he praises his “fresh” and “ambrosia- like” fl esh, the
concern is with demonstrating how this wisdom necessarily manifests itself
within the physical world. In other words, statements about the nature
of the body cannot be taken in isolation but must always be interpreted
within context.
Opposing Ideologies of the Body and the Importance
of Perspective and Point of View
In his work on the Chan Buddhist tradition, Bernard Faure has discerned
two opposing ideologies of the body, the fi rst of which he refers to as an
“ideology of absence / transcendence” and the second of which he refers to
as an “ideology of presence / immanence.”127 Th e fi rst ideology denigrates
the body and the physical universe, assigns an ontological primacy to
mind, emphasizes the direct and unmediated nature of enlightenment
(“sudden awakening”), and is characterized by a radical antinomianism and
an iconoclastic denial of the cultic mediations of traditional Buddhism.
All such views are aspects of the “rhetoric of immediacy” that Faure fi nds
to be characteristic of the orthodox discourse of “classical” Chan. Within
such a discourse we should expect to fi nd a denigration of the physical
body in favor of some kind of immaterial goal, as well as a rejection of
cultic mediations (such as relics and icons) that embody and instantiate
this immateriality for others.
As Faure demonstrates, however, behind this orthodox ideology lies
another, unspoken ideology—an ideology of body, of presence, and of im-
manence. Th is second ideology is manifested, for example, in the Chan
preoccupation with funerary ritual, r elic-w orship, mummifi cation, and the
production of various other types of “substitute bodies” for the deceased
(such as icons, portraits, patriarchal robes, and mortuary tablets)—all
231

bodies ordinary and ideal
perceived as a means of transforming the mortal body of the deceased
Chan master into an immortal and permanently incorruptible body that
can be harnessed for its power by the world of the living. As Faure notes,
all of these concerns “imply a mediation with the invisible realm, that
seems at fi rst glance to contradict the Chan emphasis on immediacy, i.e.,
the sudden and unmediated character of awakening.”128 Th e “ideology
of absence” enunciated in Chan’s rhetorical discourse, in other words, is
everywhere belied and contradicted by the “ideology of presence” that
clearly motivates so much of Chan practice. “Here again,” he states, “we
are confronted with the limits of ideology, the inverted relation between
the doctrine and the values underlying practice.”129
It is precisely because classical Chan discourse puts forth such an un-
compromising “rhetoric of immediacy”—a rhetoric that is just as obvi-
ously subverted in actual practice—that Faure is able to draw this sharp
distinction and to speak of the two ideologies as being inherently contra-
dictory (with the ideology of presence “lurking behind” the ideology of
absence). As we have already seen, however, within the context of Indian
Buddhism (with its notions of a more “gradual” enlightenment) such was
never the case. With regard to our gift- of- the- body stories, for example,
the physical transmutations and glorifi cations of our bodhisattvas do not
“lurk behind” a more orthodox wish for transcendence; instead, they dis-
play themselves unabashedly and repeatedly throughout each tale. Th us,
to whatever extent it might be possible to distinguish between Faure’s two
“ideologies” in the Indian case, for the most part these stories (and the
Indian Buddhist tradition as a whole) seem to view them as completely
complementary: denunciations of the body’s worthlessness and the wish for
“nirvana- without- remainder” coexist unproblematically with the idealiza-
tion and glorifi cation of the wonderful bodies of Buddhas and bodhisat-
tvas. Yet how can this be so?
In the eff ort to overcome the tendency toward mind / body dualism and
“rematerialize” our understanding of Indian Buddhism, I believe there
is a danger of going too far in the other direction—in other words, em-
phasizing the interpenetration of the moral and physical orders to such
a great degree that any notion of an “ideology of absence” within Indian
Buddhism becomes impossible. In fact, I believe that Faure’s categories
are analytically useful, even in the case of Indian Buddhism, and that a
limited distinction between the two ideologies can be drawn in the Indian
case. With regard to our gift-o f- the- body stories, for example, I would
232

bodies ordinary and ideal
point to the importance of considering perspective and point of view when
evaluating statements concerning the body.
Th ere is a basic distinction to be drawn, I believe, between the point
of view taken by the bodhisattva and the point of view taken by those
around him. Th is distinction results, once again, from the diff ering time
perspectives involved in the logic of the jātaka—that is, the pre- Buddha
past in the “story of the past” and the post- Buddha present in the “story
of the present.” From his own perspective in the pre-B uddha past, the
bodhisattva himself—as a king, prince, hare, etc.—is an ordinary being
(with an ordinary body) struggling on the long path to enlightenment.
Th is perspective would naturally involve a denigration of the body and
the desire for an “upward” movement—for transcendence over ordinary
physical existence (without any explicit conceptualization of what form
such transcendence might take). But from the perspective of the reader in
the post- Buddha present—and by extension, the characters in the story
who react to the bodhisattva’s deed—the bodhisattva is a future Buddha,
one whose ultimate perfection is already assured. Th is perspective would
naturally involve the desire for a “downward” movement—for presence
and immanence in the form of relics, stūpas, or an ideal being with su-
pernatural powers, and correspondingly, a glorifi cation of the resultant
body.130
Although this distinction is never absolute (as we saw in the discus-
sion of “tasty fl esh”), it seems to me that the bodhisattva is more likely to
denigrate his body and to speak from the perspective of the “ordinary
body” alone, whereas other characters are more likely to focus on the
“ideal body” they know becomes a reality in the future. In Faure’s terms,
the bodhisattva generally gives voice to an “ideology of absence,” whereas
those around him give voice to an “ideology of presence.” Or, to rephrase
the same idea in terms I have made use of throughout this book, the bo-
dhisattva speaks from the perspective of the “ethos of the jātaka,” or the
long moral career leading to Buddhahood in the far distant future, while
those around him speak from the perspective of the “ethos of the avadana,”
or the great fi eld of merit (including sacred relics and salutary bodies) that
becomes available once Buddhahood has been achieved. Contradictory
statements concerning the nature of the body thus fi t into a larger set of
contrastive relations between the past and the present, the ordinary being
and the ideal Buddha, moral deeds and ritual transactions, the ethos of the
jātaka and the ethos of the avadāna. In this way, competing ideologies of
233

bodies ordinary and ideal
the body are balanced and harmonized through the help of the narrative
form and its shifting use of perspective and point of view. Either perspec-
tive taken alone is partial and limited in nature, and it is only through
both perspectives in combination that the true “ideal body” comes into
view—one that encompasses an understanding of the “ordinary body” and
how the two are connected.
Another way of stating the same thing is in terms of the various bodies
of a Buddha discussed throughout Buddhist doctrinal literature. From the
bodhisattva’s own perspective, we might say, there is a wish to exchange
the debased rūpa- kāya of an ordinary being for the eternal d harma- kāya
of the Buddha. From the perspective of the reader and those who react to
the bodhisattva’s deed, there is a wish to celebrate the way in which the
dharma- kāya of the Buddha manifests itself in the world in the form of
a glorifi ed rūpa- kāya, which we might perhaps speak of as nirmāna- kāya.
˙
And fi nally, if we combine both perspectives together, the overall concep-
tion of the “ideal body” depicted within these stories as a whole is perhaps
suggestive of sambhoga- kāya. As Nagao has pointed out, sambhoga- kāya has
˙ ˙
a “double character,” paradoxically partaking of both the transcendence
of d harma- kāya and the immanence of nirmāna- kāya. It thus “occupies
˙
the central position in the triple- body doctrine” and may be called “the
Buddha par excellence.”131
Technically, of course, sambhoga- kāya is defi ned as a specifi c body of a
˙
specifi c Buddha, such as Amitābha or Śākyamuni when he preaches the
Mahāyāna sūtras. But the essence of the sambhoga- kāya idea, it seems to
˙
me, can be extended to relics, stūpas, holy sites, and the bodies of special
beings such as bodhisattvas—all those glorifi ed yet physical “substitute
bodies” that paradoxically embody, instantiate, and concretize the im-
material without losing their quality of transcendence. In fact, the same
themes we have encountered in regard to the bodhisattva within gift-
of- the- body stories have also been encountered by scholars in relation
to other such “substitute bodies.” In speaking of the Chan tradition’s
production of relics and mummies, for example, Faure states that relics
and mummies “result in a somewhat paradoxical bifurcation: an upward
movement of spiritualization, leading to nirvāna, the achievement of im-
˙
mutability; and a downward movement of materialization, a return to
the realm of change, to the world of cults.”132 Likewise, several scholars,
speaking of the signifi cance of the stūpa, have interpreted it as a symbol
that paradoxically mediates between the absence of the Buddha in tran-
234

bodies ordinary and ideal
scendent nirvana and his presence in the world through the power of his
relics.133 And fi nally, Steven Collins has sought to demonstrate much the
same thing about the decorous and highly controlled bodies of monks,
arguing that the monk’s negative attitudes toward his body and positive
nurturing of his body work together in such a way that the practitioner
becomes able to “embody in imagination the immateriality posited in the
doctrines of Buddhism.”134 Th us, relics, mummies, stūpas, and the bodies
of well-d isciplined monks all serve to mediate the immaterialist conception
of nirvana for believers—and might all be loosely described as versions
of the Buddha’s sambhoga- kāya. To this list of “substitute bodies” we can
˙
now add the bodhisattva’s body in stories of self- sacrifi ce.
Th e Body Th at Tends Toward Non- Body
Th e special character of these “substitute bodies,” of course, is that although
they are physical, they are very peculiar bodies, bodies that escape all of
the shortcomings of ordinary embodiment. In conceiving of such a body,
I have found Jean-P ierre Vernant’s description of the bodies of the gods
in pre- Socratic Greece to be especially suggestive.135 In pre- Socratic Greek
thought, Vernant argues, there was no sharp distinction between divinity
and corporeality. Th e gods were not “pure spirit”; rather, they were endowed
with divine “super-b odies” that perfected and brought to fulfi llment all
that was imperfect and diminished in the bodies of men:
Roughly, the problem consists of deciphering all the signs that mark the human
body with the seal of limitation, defi ciency, incompleteness, and that make it a
sub- body. Th is sub- body cannot be understood except in reference to what it
presupposes: corporeal plenitude, a super- body, the body of the gods. . . . By
pushing to an extreme all the qualities and bodily values that are present in an
always diminished, derivative, faltering and precarious form in man, one is led
to endow the divinities with a set of traits which, even in their epiphanic mani-
festations here below . . . locates them in an inaccessible beyond and causes them
to transgress the corporeal code by means of which they are represented in their
relation to humans.136
Th us, the divine s uper- bodies of the gods were conceived by “subtract[ing]
from the human body all those traits that bind it to its mortal nature and
235

bodies ordinary and ideal
betray its transitory, precarious and unfulfi lled character,” and by mag-
nifying and multiplying “all values which appear by comparison on the
human body as diminished, paltry and laughable.”137
It seems to me that this is a cogent way of interpreting at least some
of the odder descriptions of the divine “super- body” of the bodhisattva
engaged in self-s acrifi ce. In regard to the story of King Ambara mentioned
earlier, for example, we might pose the problem as follows. If one’s tongue
is unsatisfactory because it is single, impermanent, and unable to feed more
than one hungry being, one can overcome these physical limitations in
either one of two ways: either get rid of physicality altogether in favor of
some kind of “transcendence,” or (as King Ambara chooses to do) replace
the single, faulty tongue with an ever-r eplenishing mountain of tongues
that will never run out or diminish. Th e mountain of tongues is repre-
sented in a “corporeal code” (the everyday code of faulty, impermanent
tongues), yet through its ever- replenishing and permanent nature, it also
transgresses this code and locates itself “in an inaccessible beyond”—the
same “beyond” that one would achieve by ridding oneself of physicality
altogether, which means that the two options are really the same (just as
the tradition holds the various bodies of the Buddha to share an essential
unity).138 Exchanging one’s rūpa- kāya for the eternal dharma- kāya of the
Buddha and exchanging it for an ever- replenishing mountain of fl esh thus
become fully compatible. Th ough the motif of the “fl esh- mountain” is
a particularly striking example, the same argument can be advanced in
more prosaic cases as well. Th e impermanent and unsatisfactory nature
of King Śibi’s eyes is resolved both by throwing these worthless eyes away
in favor of the “eye of omniscience,” and by magically replenishing them
with supernatural eyes that can see through walls and for a hundred yojanas
on every side.
Ultimately, of course, this notion of a “super-b ody” is inherently con-
tradictory and must lead to paradoxical statements. Th e sambhoga- kāya of
˙
the Buddha, for example, is said to be corporeal and physical in nature,
yet also to fi ll up the entire universe and suff er no limitations in space.
As Vernant notes, such a “super-b ody” is “a body that is not a body,” a
body that “evokes and touches upon the non- body” yet “never merges
with it,”139 or what I prefer to call “a body that tends toward non-b ody.”
It represents the dilemma of human beings, stuck “somewhere between
angel and animal,”140 and only able to conceptualize something greater than
themselves by drawing on their own, imperfect forms. In the gift-o f- the-
b ody genre, however, this process is facilitated by the conventions of the
236

bodies ordinary and ideal
jātaka genre and the manipulation of perspective and point of view. Unlike
such “sudden,” paradoxical symbols as the stūpa or the sambhoga- kāya, the
˙
“ideal body” in gift- of- the- body stories emerges in a more “gradual” man-
ner through the unfolding of a narrative plot and the constantly shifting
perspectives of diff erent characters.
Th e Importance of Pain
Th roughout this chapter I have attempted to demonstrate how gift- of-
t he-b ody stories use the narrative form to give expression to a complex
ideology of the body—one that recognizes both the “worthlessness” and
the “worth” of the ordinary body, as well as the simultaneous coexistence
of the ordinary body with one that is already perfect and ideal. I now
conclude my discussion with some remarks on the importance of the
bodhisattva’s pain in mediating between these various conceptions. Pain
within these stories is far more than just a narrative embellishment; in fact,
it is crucial, I believe, for eff ecting the transition between one conception
of the body and another.
Th e presence of pain within our stories can fi rst be highlighted by con-
trasting it with the absence of pain in stories of a closely related type. In
1963 Jean Filliozat published an article on “autocremation” in the Indian
Buddhist tradition in which he subjected to close analysis a number of
passages from the Mahāyāna sūtras in which bodhisattvas set themselves
on fi re to pay homage to the Buddha—such as the story of Ksemadatta
˙
from the t hirty-t hird chapter of the Samādhirāja Sūtra and the story of
Sarvasattvapriyadarśana from the twenty- second chapter of the Lotus
Sūtra.141 Th roughout his analysis of these episodes Filliozat repeatedly
emphasizes the absence of any pain. In his view, the hero who performs
such a deed is always an advanced bodhisattva whose mind is fi rmly set on
the dharma, or “true nature of things,” alone. He has an absolute convic-
tion in the emptiness of all things, including the body; he understands
that the mutilation of the body is, in truth, nothing more than a playful,
sham appearance (since the body does not truly exist anyway); he carries
out the mutilation in a yogic state of samādhi; and because of his yogic
training, complete detachment, and understanding of the body’s empti-
ness, he does not feel any pain. Th ough Filliozat’s analysis is restricted to
episodes of autocremation in the Mahāyāna sūtras, he also aligns these
episodes with other forms of “voluntary death” in the Hindu, Buddhist,
237

bodies ordinary and ideal
and Jain traditions, suggesting that all such forms of “voluntary death”
can be interpreted in a similar manner—including the bodhisattva’s self-
sacrifi ce in gift- of- the- body jātakas.
But while Filliozat’s interpretation does seem to hold for the Mahāyāna
episodes he focuses on, I do not think it applies in the least to most gift-
of- the- body jātakas. Th e heroes of our tales are usually detached from
their bodies, but they generally do not make any explicit philosophical
statements about the emptiness of the body or its status as an illusory
appearance; though they may describe the body as being worthless, they
do not characterize it as being unreal. Moreover, although they always
demonstrate great courage and unwavering resolution in submitting to
the mutilation of their bodies, in many cases it is made abundantly clear
that they are indeed experiencing suff ering and pain. Th e violence infl icted
upon their bodies and the resulting physical pain are frequently emphasized
in great detail. Th ere is no yogic state of samādhi that anesthetizes the pain;
in fact, in many cases the pain is so excruciating that the bodhisattva loses
consciousness altogether—perhaps the very opposite of a focused, yogic
trance. In short, Filliozat interprets the b odily-m utilation theme wholly
in terms of the type of philosophical playfulness and manipulation of
appearance- versus- reality that is typical of bodhisattvas in the Mahāyāna
sūtras, but which I believe is inapplicable to most heroes in gift-o f- the- body
jātakas. Th e jātakas wish to draw us into a world of reality, a world where
the hero is a real being cutting open a real body in excruciating pain—a
world of high stakes rather than playful, sham performances.142
But why is there so much emphasis on the bodhisattva’s pain? While
such stories seem to delight in long and graphic descriptions of the painful
act of self-m utilation, I believe that pain within this context is far more
than just a concession to the vulgar appetite for blood and gore. Instead, the
bodhisattva’s pain is fundamental to the transformation of his body achieved
through self-s acrifi ce and thus allows these stories to mediate between the
ordinary, worthless body and the glorifi ed, ideal form. Th e problem with
an advanced bodhisattva who carries out the act of self-m utilation in a
yogic state of samādhi, sees the entire act as an illusory performance, and
feels no pain is that, within such a case, no transformation is involved, and
thus no link between the ordinary body and the ideal. It is only pain that
can bridge these two conceptions and thus allow these stories to balance
several diff erent lines of thinking about the body.
Th e role pain plays in religious rituals around the world has been re-
cently analyzed by Ariel Glucklich in Sacred Pain: Hurting the Body for
238

bodies ordinary and ideal
the Sake of the Soul,143 and his analysis is quite suggestive for understand-
ing the link between pain and transformation, even in the case of purely
literary representations of pain such as we fi nd in gift- of- the- body jātakas.
Glucklich’s aim is to off er an explicitly reductionistic account of “sacred
pain”—in other words, to elucidate the neurodynamic and psychological
eff ects of ritualized pain on human consciousness and identity, regardless
of the specifi c religious or cultural context in which the pain occurs. In
briefest terms—and no succinct summary can possibly do justice to the
complex and meticulously detailed analysis he off ers—Glucklich demon-
strates that pain has the eff ect of “progressively weaken[ing] the body-s elf
template, resulting in the diff usion of the self or its complete disappear-
ance.” “In other words,” he states,
if you scourge your body repeatedly, the sensory over- stimulation would not eradi-
cate your thoughts, sense perceptions, and so forth. But your experience of being
a self, an agent who undergoes these perceptions and thoughts, would gradually
disappear, until it seemed that these belonged to someone or something else.144
Th is is what he refers to as “disintegrative” or “telic-d ecentralizing” pain—
pain experienced as an overwhelming threat to the self, a strong signal “to
the conscious steering mechanism (ego) of the whole organism that the
functional purpose of a subsystem is jeopardized . . . [or] that the overall
function of the entire system is threatened, perhaps by death.”145
Now, if one’s ego is the highest system or “center of telos” with which
the individual identifi es, this weakening or destruction of the ego will be
experienced as a devastating loss—such as might be the case, for example,
for an ordinary person who suff ers a devastating accident and then struggles
with agonizing, chronic pain. Glucklich also points out, however, that there
can be many diff erent “centers of telos” involved in the human organism,
ranging from organic subsystems, to the ego as a whole, to systems higher
than the ego. Th us, if the person in pain identifi es with a “center of telos”
that is higher than the ego, then the weakening or destruction of the ego
(through ritualized and modulated pain) can actually strengthen and make
more real his identifi cation with that higher center of telos. In this way,
“disintegrative” or “telic-d ecentralizing” pain is transformed into “integra-
tive” or “telic-c entralizing” pain: “bad” pain becomes “good” pain—a pain
that transforms and empowers the self at a higher level of being, rather
than diminishing and destroying it. It is religion that most often provides
the higher “center of telos” that allows pain to become transformative for
239

bodies ordinary and ideal
the self. Th e exact nature of this higher “center of telos” will, of course,
diff er from one religious context to another—“union with God” for the
Christian mystic, for example, or “becoming a Buddha” for the Bud-
dhist—but the process itself, Glucklich maintains, is based on neurological
and psychological principles common to all human beings. Th is is pain
that has been transformed into sacrifi ce: “A pain- induced subservience to
a greater telos turns the torture into a ritual of self- sacrifi ce.”146
Glucklich’s comments are quite suggestive for the gift- of- the- body
theme and seem to run parallel to some of the language of the stories
themselves. When King Punyabala gives away the “ordinary eye of fl esh”
˙
in hope of acquiring the “unsurpassed eye of dharma,” when the elephant
Saddanta gives away his physical tusks in hope of acquiring the “tusks
˙ ˙
of omniscience,” or when Prince Mahāsattva abandons his body “full of
excrement and urine [and] as insubstantial as foam” in hope of acquiring
a “dharma-b ody, free of grief, free of change, pure and stainless”—they all
appear to be partaking in the type of sacrifi cial logic that Glucklich has
found to be characteristic of the religious use of pain, using pain both to
weaken and diminish the ordinary self and to redefi ne this self in relation
to the higher “center of telos” constituted by full Buddhahood. Likewise,
when our various bodhisattvas speak of “extracting the essence from this
essenceless body,” perhaps they are referring (in religious language) to the
process of transforming “bad” pain into “good” pain, using the destruction
and disintegration of the “essenceless” self to ritually incorporate within
themselves the highest and most precious “essence.”
Similarly, in chapter 5 I addressed the contradictory discourse of “self”
and “selfl essness” that underlies the gift of the body, or the manner in
which self- sacrifi ce seems to constitute both the ultimate denial of self
and the ultimate act of self-w ill. Glucklich’s analysis helps us to see that
this paradox is resolvable by reference to two diff erent selves: a lower self
is willfully denied and destroyed through a violent act of pain, in favor of
empowering a higher self that is constituted by the aspiration to perfect
Buddhahood.
But it is the presence of pain, I contend, that is crucial to signifying this
process of self-t ransformation. Th e very image of “extracting” the essence
from the essenceless body seems to recognize the importance of pain, sug-
gesting that this essence cannot simply be “realized” or “created,” but must
rather be “extracted” through the violent and painful act of self- sacrifi ce.
In Kalpanāmanditīka 64, in which King Śibi mutilates and sacrifi ces his
˙˙
body on behalf of a hungry hawk (who is really Śakra in disguise), Śakra
240

bodies ordinary and ideal
justifi es this cruel test of the bodhisattva by stating: “When one chooses an
excellent jewel, one examines it several times in order to make sure that it
is not fake. Th e means of examining a jewel are to cut it, shatter it, expose
it to fi re, and strike it; then alone can one know that it is not fake.”147 Th e
painful torture undergone by the bodhisattva’s body during self-s acrifi ce
is thus compared to the cutting, burning, and rubbing of a jewel in order
to ensure that it is genuine—or, perhaps, to make it genuine through the
very act of the torture itself. Pain and transformation go together, and the
presence of the latter is vouchsafed by reference to the former. Th is trans-
formative pain still hurts, of course, but its hurt has become meaningful
and thus delicious. Th us, in Avadānakalpalatā 51, such bodhisattvas “are
joyful as their lives are being extinguished,” the “wounds made on their
bodies by extremely sharp weapons feel like blows from the lotuses that
wanton women wear behind their ears,” and they are “happily amused to
be ornamented by hairs that stand on end [from the pain].”148 By giving
voice to the delicious pain of self- transformation, gift-o f- the- body stories
provide the fulcrum between the ordinary body and the ideal, thus further
ensuring their ability to balance several contradictory lines of thinking
about the body.149
241

vii
KINGSHIP, SACRIFICE,
OFFERING, AND DEATH
Some Other Interpretive Contexts
I
n this fi nal chapter I move beyond both the “gift” aspect and the “body”
aspect of the gift-o f- the- body theme to consider a number of other
interpretive contexts that might be brought to bear on this discus-
sion—contexts I have not been able to deal with in the remainder of the
book, but wish to discuss at least briefl y before I conclude. Th ese discussions
revolve around the topics of kingship, sacrifi ce, off ering, and death: Why
is the bodhisattva within gift-o f- the- body jātakas so frequently a king, and
what do these stories have to tell us about kingship and its legitimation?
How is the bodhisattva’s gift of his body related to the category of sacrifi ce?
How is it related to the category of the ritual off ering? How is it related
to the Buddhist discourse on death? And how might one characterize the
bodhisattva’s stance toward death, as manifested by his self- sacrifi ce?
Gift and Kingship
It is striking to observe that a preponderance of gift- of-t he-b ody stories
revolve around the fi gure of the generous king, and that many of these
242

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
stories share a similar pattern: Th e king begins with material gifting, which
reaches a climax of some kind and results inevitably in the gift of his own
body. Th e king survives this gift, and the story ends with the king under-
taking what is clearly a kingship that has been renewed and legitimated
through the gift of the body.
Th e basic logic of this pattern is not so diffi cult to understand: it is the
foremost duty of the Indian king to be generous, and the kings in gift- of-
t he-b ody stories are always generous from the very beginning. But to give
away wealth and material goods is easy for a wealthy and powerful king
and thus gives no real proof of his virtue. By giving away his body, however,
the king demonstrates the sincerity of his generosity and his willingness to
give away his very person. Th e gift of the body thus legitimates all future
royal gifts, and more generally, the kingship itself. Th e gift of the body,
though not explicitly enacted as a ritual, functions within these stories
almost as if it constituted a ritual of consecration, renewal, or legitimation
in regard to the kingship of the hero. In fact, as I briefl y noted before, such
stories often bear a loose resemblance to the structure of “rites of passage,”
as described by Van Gennep and Turner.1 Just as Van Gennep and Turner
describe the rite of passage as a process involving the loss and stripping of
one’s former identity, a liminal period of ambiguity and transition, and
the reincorporation into a new identity, so gift-o f-t he-b ody stories often
involve a preliminary period leading up to the gift; the gift itself, which is
symbolic of a total giving up of oneself or one’s identity; and the aftermath
of the gift, which often places the bodhisattva in a new and rejuvenated
status—in this case, that of kingship.
In much more concrete ways, as well, however, many gift- of-t he-b ody
stories involving kings play themselves out like magnifi cent rituals of royal
consecration. Th e confl uence between the gift of the body and royal conse-
cration will require some background discussion concerning the structure
of such stories and their ties with classical Indic conceptions of the king’s
royal authority. In particular, we must focus on the movements of the king
and the physical spaces in which he acts.
It is a striking feature of gift- of- the- body stories involving kings that
they often exhibit a basic structural pattern characteristic of Indian thought
and widely found throughout Buddhist and Hindu literature. Th is pattern
involves the movement of the king from the kingdom to the forest and
back to the kingdom. Th e forest provides the setting for an ultimate test
of some kind, and the king’s successful passing of this test results in a tri-
umphant return to the kingdom and a renewed and legitimated kingship.
243

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
Th e salience of this pattern in Indian literature is remarkable. Within the
Buddhist tradition we might cite what are perhaps the two most famous
“life stories” in the Indian Buddhist world—that of Prince Vessantara and
that of Śākyamuni Buddha himself. Prince Vessantara, of course, takes
refuge in the forest with his wife and children after being exiled from the
kingdom for his excessive generosity. Th e forest provides the setting for
an ultimate test of generosity—the gift of his wife and children—whose
successful completion results in a restoration of royal status and a trium-
phant return to the kingdom. Likewise, the life story of the Buddha can
also be interpreted along the same lines. Prince Siddhārtha renounces his
royal status, goes forth into the forest, is severely tested by Māra, succeeds
in passing this test (in part by invoking his own previous birth as Prince
Vessantara), and then regains a renewed form of “kingship”—in his case,
the spiritual sovereignty of Buddhahood. Th e story is given a radical twist
with the concepts of enlightenment and Buddhahood, yet the same pat-
tern still holds.
Moving from the Buddhist to the larger Indian context, we fi nd this pat-
tern repeated in many Hindu myths, as well as forming the basic structure
of the two great epics of India, the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyana. Both
˙
the Pāndava brothers and Rāma are royal fi gures who are exiled and endure
˙˙
many trials in the forest before returning triumphantly to the kingdom;
in fact, it is precisely this basic pattern that holds these voluminous works
together and gives them some semblance of unity. Th e king’s movement
from the kingdom to the forest, his passing of a test in the forest, and
his resultant return to the kingdom and legitimation of his kingship thus
constitutes a dominant theme in Indian myth and literature.2
Th e same pattern is strikingly characteristic of many gift- of- the- body
stories involving generous kings. Th e pattern appears most clearly in the
story of King Sarvamdada,3 who renounces the kingship and leaves the
˙
kingdom when an enemy king comes to attack him, taking exile in the
forest as an ascetic. Th e forest provides the setting for an ultimate test of
his generosity: a brahmin’s demand for his head. King Sarvamdada freely
˙
off ers his head, and although this gift is never actually completed, the off er
itself results directly in his return to the kingdom and the restoration of
his kingship. Moreover, his kingship is clearly empowered by this gift; in
Mahajjātakamālā 45, for example, the fame resulting from his magnifi cent
gift spreads throughout the whole world and has a benefi cial eff ect on all
other kings as well.4 Th e same pattern appears again in the story of King
Manicūda:5 after his excessive generosity gets him into trouble with an-
˙ ˙
244

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
other king, King Manicūda renounces his kingship, leaves the kingdom,
˙ ˙
and enters the forest as an ascetic. Th e forest provides the setting for the
gift of his c rest-j ewel, and after completing the gift and restoring his body,
King Manicūda is brought back to the kingdom in great pomp and glory
˙ ˙
and reconsecrated into the kingship.
In the story of King Śibi’s gift of his eyes,6 the pattern is slightly diff erent.
Here it is the two Acts of Truth restoring his body rather than the initial
gift of his eyes that seem to constitute King Śibi’s ultimate “test.” For the
gift of the eyes takes place in one of King Śibi’s alms- halls, but shortly
after completing the gift of the eyes, King Śibi moves from the palace to
the royal pleasure-p ark. Th e p leasure-p ark provides the setting for the two
Acts of Truth restoring the body, which is followed by a triumphant and
glorious return to the palace. If we interpret the Acts of Truth as being
the ultimate “test” of King Śibi rather than the gift of his eyes, we have a
pattern moving the king from the palace to the p leasure- park and back to
the palace. Th is is merely another version of the movement from kingdom
to forest to kingdom—a point that becomes clear when we consider the
signifi cance in Buddhist literature of the pleasure- park.
Th e p leasure- park (ārāma) in Buddhist literature is closely associated
with the caitya, or woodland shrine, and both spaces appear to constitute a
kind of “reserve” or “residue” of the forest contained within the kingdom.7
Both the caitya and the ārāma consisted minimally of a tree (or grove
of trees) and a stone seat or bench. According to Jeannine Auboyer, the
tree(s) represented the forest, the seat or bench represented the mountains,
and the caitya and ārāma as a whole were both doubles of the forest out
of which the settled kingdom had been carved. Th us King Śibi, by mov-
ing from palace to pleasure-p ark to palace, in a sense also moves from
“kingdom” to “forest” to “kingdom,” with the “forest” providing the set-
ting for the test that legitimates and renews his kingship. Moreover, we
can now begin to see how this pattern is related to royal consecration.
Auboyer has shown that the stone seat or bench located within the caitya
or ārāma was a prototype of the Indian throne, and appears to have been
considered a powerful—almost magical—source of the king’s royal au-
thority.8 In several Buddhist jātakas,9 for example, a man wanders into a
royal p leasure-p ark and sits down on its stone seat; meanwhile, the king
dies with no male heirs. Th e funeral procession goes by the park, and the
people immediately consecrate the man sitting on the stone seat as the new
and rightful king, merely by virtue of his being seated on the “throne.”
Th e king’s royal authority was thus vested in the stone seat or “throne”
245

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
within his pleasure- park, and the pleasure- park itself was a double of the
forest—which further suggests that the king’s royal authority was somehow
derived from or located in the forest. In line with this, Nancy Falk has
demonstrated that there existed a complex relationship between kingship
and the forest in ancient India, with the forest acting in numerous ways
as the source and support of the king’s royal authority.10 It now makes
sense that gift- of- the- body donors who are kings must perform the gifts
that legitimate their kingship within the forest or a “residue” of the forest,
such as a pleasure- park.
Without going into excessive detail, let me briefl y note that many other
gift-o f-t he-b ody stories involving kings also show this pattern, though in
more altered and truncated forms. In Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra 18 a prince
˙
moves from the kingdom to the forest before making his gift; however,
because the gift kills him, there is no question of returning to the kingdom.
In a story found in the Karunāpundarīka Sūtra a king renounces his king-
˙ ˙˙
ship and enters the forest as an ascetic; while in the forest, he makes a gift
of his body, but instead of returning to the kingdom, he becomes a “fl esh
mountain” that feeds hungry beings for thousands of years. In Divyāvadāna
22 a king goes into his pleasure- park to give away his head, but again the
gift kills him; in Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22, the same gift takes place
in the forest. Th ough these tales do not fi t the kingdom / forest / kingdom
pattern so evident in the stories of Sarvamdada, Manicūda, and Śibi, and
˙ ˙ ˙
do not involve the legitimation of kingship, nevertheless fragments of the
same pattern are still evident.
More than just a narrative pattern, however, the kingdom / forest / king-
dom structure of gift- of- the- body stories involving kings also mimics the
structure of the Indian royal consecration ritual itself. Heesterman has
discussed the fundamental opposition drawn in Indian thought between
the settled, agricultural community (grāma) and the alien, outside sphere
of the forest (āranya), as well as the use of this opposition within rites of
˙
royal consecration.11 In his view the Vedic ritual texts dealing with royal
consecration utilize the opposition between grāma and āranya to symbol-
˙
ize a basic and insoluble confl ict between the king’s embeddedness within
society and his need to fi nd a source of authority outside of it:
Th e dilemma of kingship can then be expressed in terms of this basic paradigm:
the king must belong to the grāma, but his authority must be based in the alien
sphere of āranya. . . . Th e necessary complementarity of the two spheres can then
˙
be ritually expressed as alternating phases in a cycle connecting the two opposites.
246

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
Since the opposition as well as the complementarity is there all the time and can-
not be overcome, the cycle has to go on forever.12
Analyzing closely the Vedic ritual texts dealing with royal consecra-
tion, Heesterman illustrates this use of the grāma / āranya opposition. For
˙
example, in the rājasūya rite the king’s unction is followed by a “chariot
drive,” which is then followed by his enthronement. Th ough the “chariot
drive” is ritualized, the symbolism involved clearly shows that it is repre-
sentative of a true war expedition or cattle raid. We thus have a pattern
in which the king is consecrated within the grāma, goes out on a heroic
journey into the āranya, and is enthroned only upon his triumphant return
˙
to the grāma. Th e rājasūya also contains many larger cycles that follow
exactly the same pattern of grāma / āranya alternation.
˙
Like Heesterman, Ronald Inden, working with later texts, has recog-
nized a potential confl ict between the king’s need to transcend society
and his need to be immanent within it, maintaining that this confl ict is
“stated in royal rituals and resolved in them by the device of alternation
or oscillation between [grāma and āranya] on a cyclic, periodic basis.”13
˙
Analyzing the rājyābhiseka rite as found in the Visnudharmottara Purāna
˙ ˙˙ ˙
(eighth century c.e.), Inden notes that the ritual is binary in structure, the
fi rst half taking the king out of the kingdom and infusing him with royal
authority, and the second half returning him to the kingdom, where his
authority once again becomes immanent within the world. Th is alterna-
tion between grāma and āranya is repeated yearly, and is conceptually tied
˙
to other cyclic oscillations, such as that between day and night. Ritual as
well as myth, then, suggests that the forest is the source of the king’s royal
authority, and the king needs to venture into the forest (or a f orest- like
setting) to acquire and renew that authority before returning triumphantly
to the kingdom.
None of this is made explicit within our stories, of course. In our
stories, I would argue, the gift of the body legitimizes the king’s king-
ship by demonstrating the sincerity of his generosity and his willingness
to give away everything—especially that which cannot be reacquired
through the power and wealth of his offi ce. His successful passing of this
ultimate test of generosity proves the king to be a worthy embodiment
of virtuous Buddhist kingship, and justifi es the obedience and devotion
of his subjects. Th is is the moral message of the stories, and it is this
message that is highlighted. In the background, however, worked into
the very structure of the tale, this message is reinforced and strengthened
247

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
by several other ideas: the forest as a source of royal authority, the power
of the pleasure- park’s stone throne, the oscillating structure of rites of
royal consecration, and the king’s need to renew his authority at regular
intervals. Th ese themes are not explicitly presented, but they contribute to
the overall eff ect of the tale and reinforce the intended message. Because
of the associations and connotations they convey, the king’s gift of his
body leaves the realm of mere “gift” and plays itself out as a magnifi cent
ritual of royal consecration.
At the same time it is also well to recall that the king is not only a
king trying to legitimate his kingship, but also a bodhisattva on his way
to the attainment of Buddhahood. And, in fact, these same ideas sur-
rounding the legitimation of kingship are also invoked more broadly by
the Buddhist tradition as a whole in its discourse on the Buddha’s Bud-
dhahood—which is itself, of course, a type of “kingship.” Th e Buddha
himself, as noted before, follows the same basic pattern: he begins in the
kingdom, renounces kingship and goes forth into the forest, is tested by
Māra in the forest, and returns triumphantly to the kingdom to deliver his
fi rst sermon as the Buddha. Th e Bodhi Tree and the Seat of Enlightenment
are doubles of the tree and stone seat that minimally constitute a caitya,
and the Buddha’s confrontation with Māra over the Seat of Enlightenment
may thus be interpreted as a king’s heroic battle for possession of a caitya’s
stone throne and the world- sovereignty such possession would confer.14
Th e forest is thus the source of the Buddha’s authority, and throughout
his life he regularly renews this authority by oscillating between wander-
ing and settled life on a seasonal and cyclical basis—a practice that was
continued by the early Samgha and appears to have contributed to the
˙
regular renewal of their spiritual authority as well. We might also note
that all major events in the Buddha’s life—such as his birth, enlighten-
ment, fi rst sermon, and death—take place in the forest or in f orest- like
settings. Th e Buddhist monastery (ārāma) is assimilated to the forest and
the royal pleasure- park, while the Buddhist monastic concern with rules
about seats and sitting mirrors the social code of propriety surrounding
the seats and thrones of royalty.15
Finally, we might also note that the same pattern holds not only in
regard to the Buddha’s fi nal life, but in regard to his extended biography
as well. Over and over again, throughout the jātakas, Śākyamuni is reborn
as a king who renounces the kingdom to live as an ascetic, or otherwise
spends time in the forest. In one sense, each of these tales demonstrates how
Śākyamuni “practiced” the Great Renunciation in numerous former lives.
248

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
But in another sense, when taken as a whole such tales imply a continu-
ous pattern of life- in- the- kingdom and life- in- the- forest—an oscillating
pattern that legitimates not only each of Śākyamuni’s previous lives as a
king, but his present “kingship” as well.
Gift and Sacrifi ce
Although thus far I have not paid much attention to the category of sacri-
fi ce, the themes of bodily mutilation, blood, and death obviously suggest
that the bodhisattva’s gift of his body might be interpreted as a sacrifi cial
ritual in which the bodhisattva plays the double role of both sacrifi cer and
sacrifi cial victim. Th is interpretation has indeed been advanced several
times before, particularly in relation to the many connections that can be
drawn between some gift-o f-t he-b ody stories and the practice and theory
of Vedic sacrifi ce.
In her analysis of the story of King Manicūda,16 for example, Phyllis
˙ ˙
Granoff points out that Manicūda’s gift of his fl esh and blood to a hungry
˙ ˙
rāksasa takes place in the middle of an actual sacrifi ce: Manicūda is per-
˙ ˙ ˙
forming a traditional sacrifi ce on behalf of his father- in- law Bhavabhūti
when Śakra takes on the guise of a rāksasa and emerges from the sacrifi cial
˙
fi re to demand the king’s fl esh and blood; moreover, in another, similar
story about a king who gives his fl esh and blood to hungry demons (the
story of King Maitrībala), this gift is explicitly compared to the blood
sacrifi ces made to the gods.17 Th us we might see Manicūda’s gift of his
˙ ˙
fl esh and blood not so much as a compassionate gift made to a rāksasa,
˙
but rather as a traditional sacrifi cial off ering made to a Vedic deity (albeit
one in disguise). Later on in the story Manicūda makes another gift of his
˙ ˙
body, this time giving away the healing c rest- jewel embedded in his head
to another king whose kingdom is suff ering from an epidemic. Although
this gift does not take place during an actual sacrifi ce, it again seems to
contain distant echoes of ritual sacrifi ce, for as Granoff points out, in the
very similar Hindu story of Aśvatthāman from the Mahābhārata, the c rest-
j ewel given away is referred to as ucchista, or the “fructifying, life-g iving
˙˙
remainder of the sacrifi ce”—while in another version of the same tale
Aśvatthāman is said to be bound just as one binds the sacrifi cial beast.18
Th e Buddhist episodes involving Manicūda and Maitrībala, as well as
˙ ˙
the Hindu episode involving Aśvatthāman, might therefore all be seen as
involving sacrifi ce rather than gift.
249

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
In answer to the question of what kind of sacrifi ce is being invoked,
Granoff interprets these gift- giving episodes primarily as sacrifi ces of ex-
piation. She points out that not only do several of the episodes seem to
involve a situation of sin that needs to be eradicated—the epidemic for
which Manicūda’s c rest-j ewel is needed, for example, has been brought
˙ ˙
about by the sins of a particular king—but the Buddhist tradition itself
off ers this explanation for all gifts of the body performed by the bodhisat-
tva. According to a story found in the Samādhirāja Sūtra,19 the Buddha,
in one of his previous births, was a wicked king who viciously ordered an
innocent monk’s execution, and it was in order to expiate this heinous
sin of killing a monk that the Buddha, through countless subsequent
lives, had to suff er the great pain of giving away his head, eyes, fl esh, and
blood. Th e bodhisattva’s gift of his body can thus be seen as a sacrifi ce of
expiation—one that accords well, in fact, with the rituals of expiation out-
lined, for example, in Hindu dharma texts such as the Apastambadharma
Sūtra, which states that “the proper expiation for the sin of murder was
for the sinner to cut off his hair, skin, and fl esh and off er them into the
sacrifi cial fi re.”20
In Hubert’s and Mauss’ still- classic account of the mechanism and
varieties of sacrifi ce, this is a so- called sacrifi ce of desacralization, in other
words, a sacrifi ce whose aim is to make the sacrifi cer less sacred by transfer-
ring his sacredness (here, in the form of sin or impurity) to a victim and
then destroying the victim.21 In our case, of course, the bodhisattva alone
is both sacrifi cer and victim—but this only makes explicit a condition
that is characteristic of all Vedic sacrifi ce, in which the sacrifi cer is always
identifi ed with the victim. In fact, Hubert and Mauss themselves, general-
izing from the Vedic case, make this identifi cation one of the fundamental
features of all sacrifi ce: “Indeed, it is not enough to say that [the victim]
represents [the sacrifi cer]: it is merged in him. Th e two personalities are
fused together.”22 Even without a separate victim the same logic can apply
to our stories as well: the bodhisattva who gives away his body performs a
classic sacrifi ce of expiation, purifying himself in the long run by sacrifi cing
his impure and worthless body in the present.
Hubert and Mauss, however, also emphasize the “fundamental com-
plexity of sacrifi ce” that makes each individual sacrifi ce combine elements
of several diff erent types and accomplish a number of diff erent, often
contradictory ends at the same time23—and much the same is true of
the bodhisattva’s gift of his body. In their typology of the various types of
sacrifi ce, the sacrifi ce of desacralization can be contrasted with the sacrifi ce
250

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
of sacralization—in other words, a sacrifi ce whose aim is to make the sac-
rifi cer more sacred by identifying him with a consecrated victim and then
destroying the victim to release its sacred power, which then redounds
upon the sacrifi cer himself.24 Th is again is a useful category in interpreting
the gift- of- the- body theme.
To put this in an Indic context, we can refer to Edith Parlier’s very
thorough analysis of the story of King Śibi’s gift of his fl esh to ransom a
dove (from either a hawk or a hunter) and its numerous connections with
the life-g iving, order- restoring variety of Vedic sacrifi ce.25 Th ough I can-
not do justice here to the wealth of details contained in her article, Parlier
demonstrates how virtually every element of the story—including the
dove, the hawk, the hunter, and even the fact that the dove lands upon the
right thigh of King Śibi—has rich and detailed resonances with the theory
and practice of Vedic sacrifi ce, particularly with the soma sacrifi ce and the
altar- building ritual known as the agnicayana. Ultimately, she demonstrates
that the story of King Śibi uses these parallels and resonances to suggest
that just as the Vedic sacrifi ce renews and sanctifi es both the sacrifi cer and
his cosmos through the consecration and destruction of a victim (which
is identifi ed with the sacrifi cer himself), so also does the bodhisattva’s gift
of his body. As we have already seen, the bodhisattva sacrifi ces his present
state in order to gain the more sacred state of Buddhahood, he sacrifi ces
his ordinary body in order to gain the body of a Buddha, or he sacrifi ces
an individual body part (such as the “eye of fl esh”) in order to gain its
more sacred counterpart (such as the “eye of the dharma”)—and in all
such cases the larger cosmic order he inhabits is likewise sanctifi ed and
renewed. As Hubert and Mauss observe to be characteristic of the sacrifi ce
of sacralization, “the changes eff ected [by such sacrifi ces] are more or less
of long duration”; in fact, “they are sometimes constitutional and imply
a real metamorphosis.”26
Th e bodhisattva’s gift of his body might therefore be seen as either a
sacrifi ce of desacralization, in the sense of eradicating his sin or impurity,
or a sacrifi ce of sacralization, in the sense of sanctifying the bodhisattva
and moving him one step closer to perfect Buddhahood. In the fi rst case
the victim accepts sin and impurity from the sacrifi cer, while in the second
case the victim imparts sacred power to the sacrifi cer—and since in our case
the bodhisattva himself is the victim, this accords nicely with the double
character of the bodhisattva’s body as both a worthless and impure carcass
and an a lready- ideal form. Ultimately, of course, the bodhisattva’s gifts of
his body are not literal sacrifi ces, but they do share with literal sacrifi ce
251

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
the destruction of a victim and the profound surge of sacred energy that
seems to be released by such destruction. Th ey might therefore be seen as
metaphorical sacrifi ces or, perhaps, as “spiritualizations” or “ethicizations”
of sacrifi ce.
Th e general kinship between Vedic sacrifi ce and Buddhist renunciatory
ideals has been noted many times before. Carol Meadows has interpreted
the bodhisattva’s perfection of giving as a “metaphorical or spiritual sacri-
fi ce,”27 and Granoff , citing Meadows, observes that “a metaphorical inter-
pretation of the actual ritual sacrifi ce to extend the concept to a spiritual
sacrifi ce is central to classical India.”28 Hubert and Mauss themselves, in
their pioneering work on sacrifi ce, noted the essential connection between
Vedic ritual sacrifi ce and the type of spiritual “sacrifi ce” embodied in
Buddhist renunciation and detachment. One of the consistent features of
sacrifi ce they enumerated, for example, was the preliminary sacralization
of the sacrifi cer through ascetic and purifi catory rituals such as the Vedic
consecration ritual known as dīksā. Connecting such rituals directly to the
˙
rise of Buddhism and Jainism, they state: “Th ese preparatory actions often
become the type for the sacrifi ce of oneself. Th e asceticism preliminary to
the sacrifi ce became, in many cases, the whole sacrifi ce.”29 Th e idea that
renunciatory and ascetic traditions in India represent an “internalization”
of the Vedic sacrifi ce is common, of course:30 the renunciant is one who
internalizes the sacrifi cial fi re within his own body as tapas, or the “heat”
of his ascetic austerities, and who performs the sacrifi ce within himself by
means of his renunciation and detachment.31 Perhaps we might argue that
this hereditary connection between Vedic sacrifi ce and Buddhist renuncia-
tion is enacted in a reverse direction in gift- of- the- body stories, in which
Buddhist renunciation is embodied by a deed that once again bears some
resemblance to Vedic sacrifi ce.
While the bodhisattva’s gift of his body might well be interpreted as
a metaphorical Vedic sacrifi ce, however, it is also crucial to note that the
manner in which it adapts the sacrifi cial motif contains within itself an
implicit critique of Vedic sacrifi ce—a point made most eff ectively in the
discussion of Parlier. In her analysis it is strictly the theory of Vedic sac-
rifi ce that posits a complete identifi cation between the sacrifi cer and the
victim—an identifi cation made most explicit in the famous Purusa Sūkta
˙
hymn of the Rg Veda (10.90), in which the cosmic man Purusa sacrifi ces
˙ ˙
himself in order to create the universe. When it comes to the practice of
Vedic sacrifi ce, on the other hand, we fi nd that the sacrifi cer always relies
on a substitute; he substitutes a victim in place of himself, thus leaving
252

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
himself free to enjoy the many benefi ts of the sacrifi ce while the innocent
victim is destroyed in his place.
Th ere is a rupture, in other words, between the theory and the practice
of Vedic sacrifi ce—a rupture that results directly in violence unleashed
upon the victim. According to Parlier, this violence inherent in the practice
of Vedic sacrifi ce was intolerable for both Buddhism and epic Hindu-
ism because of their adherence to the new, renunciatory ideal of perfect
nonviolence (ahimsā). Th e story of King Śibi—in both its Buddhist and
˙
Mahābhārata versions—off ers us at least one solution to this problem: by
having King Śibi sacrifi ce himself rather than the dove, the mechanism of
substitution is rejected, violence is avoided, the rupture between theory
and practice is healed, and the new values of selfl essness, detachment, and
nonviolence are dramatically affi rmed (see fi gure 6). In repudiating the
mechanism of substitution upon which the practice of Vedic sacrifi ce is
based, there is a return to the original mythological ideal represented by
Purusa: true sacrifi ce is revealed to be nothing other than renunciation.
˙
Moving beyond the strictly Indian context, much the same point is
made by Hubert and Mauss in their discussion of the phenomenon of
the “self- sacrifi cing god.” Contrasting the self- interest inherent in ordinary
sacrifi ce with the total selfl essness of the self- sacrifi cing god, they state:
In any sacrifi ce there is an act of abnegation since the sacrifi er deprives himself
and gives. . . . But this abnegation and submission are not without their selfi sh
aspect. Th e sacrifi er gives up something of himself but he does not give himself.
Prudently, he sets himself aside. Th is is because if he gives, it is partly in order to
receive. Th us sacrifi ce shows itself in a dual light. . . . Disinterestedness is mingled
with self- interest.
Th ere is, however, one case from which all selfi sh calculation is absent. Th is is
the case of the sacrifi ce of the god, for the god who sacrifi ces himself gives himself
irrevocably. . . . [But this] is possible only for mythical, that is, ideal beings. Th is
is how the concept of a god sacrifi cing himself for the world could be realized,
and has become, even for the most civilized peoples, the highest expression and,
as it were, the ideal limit of abnegation, in which no apportionment occurs.32
Th e self- interest involved in making use of a substitute victim is thus
contrasted with the absolute disinterest involved in sacrifi cing oneself.
As we have seen from our stories, however, the contrast between these
two poles is not always so c lear-c ut—and once again, we can draw some
general diff erences between our two basic plotlines: when the recipient
253

figure 6 Th e story of King Śibi’s gift of his fl esh to ransom the life of a dove contin-
ues to be popular in contemporary India today. Th is is a page from a popular children’s
comic book in India (“Indra and Shibi,” Amar Chitra Katha, vol. 254) originally published
in 1978 and reprinted in 2001. It depicts a Hindu version of the story, taken from the
Mahābhārata epic.

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
of the gift is an ordinary being and the bodhisattva dies as a result of
making his gift, this is perhaps the most perfect exemplifi cation of the
self- sacrifi cing god—for not only does the bodhisattva lose his life, but
the emphasis within these stories is on what the recipients gain through
the sacrifi ce, rather than on what the bodhisattva gains. It is they who are
sacralized, often through direct ingestion of the bodhisattva’s fl esh—direct
consumption of the victim being identifi ed by Hubert and Mauss as the
most common means of sanctifi cation used within sacrifi ces of sacraliza-
tion. Th us, if we do choose to see the bodhisattva’s gift of his body as a
“sacrifi ce of sacralization,” then these stories perhaps advocate being the
victim of such a sacrifi ce rather than the one who sacrifi ces. On the other
hand, when the recipient of the gift is the deity Śakra in disguise and the
bodhisattva restores his body by performing an Act of Truth, the situ-
ation is more complicated: the bodhisattva himself still constitutes the
self- sacrifi cing god who acts with complete disinterest and refuses to use
a substitute. Nevertheless, the fact that he survives the gift and then gets
his body back (often in a better form than before) makes a nod, at least,
toward the idea of substitution; it is as if there were a substitute victim.
Th ese stories thus temper the ideal notion of the self- sacrifi cing god with
intimations of ordinary, acquisitive sacrifi ce.
One fi nal point remains to be made. While gift-o f- the- body stories ef-
fectively manipulate the tension between using and not using a substitute,
it is also worth asking whether even the rejection of substitution really
goes far enough in adhering to the principle of perfect nonviolence. After
all, even in the absence of a substitute victim, the basic mechanism of
sacrifi ce—in which a violent act of destruction leads to sanctifi cation and
the reestablishment of order—still remains in place. Charles Orzech, in
an article that attempts to relate several varieties of Buddhist self-s acrifi ce
to René Girard’s theory of violence and the sacred,33 off ers just such an
analysis of Pāli Jātaka 316, the story of the hare who immolates himself in
a fi re in order to feed a brahmin supplicant. In Orzech’s interpretation, the
hare’s eager willingness to make a sacrifi ce of himself may seem exemplary
on the surface, but in fact it is nothing more than the “oppressive internal-
ization of the process of victimage” elucidated by Girard. It glorifi es the
mechanism of sacrifi cial violence and has the unfortunate eff ect of mimeti-
cally motivating others to engage in similarly violent deeds.34 In this sense,
he contrasts the hare- story with the equally famous Ksāntivādin Jātaka,
˙
in which an ascetic calmly and passively endures the horrifi c mutilation
infl icted upon him by an angry king, refusing to give rise to any anger
255

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
himself.35 In Orzech’s analysis, the ascetic here is a victim, but he doesn’t
go out and make himself a victim—and this distinction is important. In
this way, the ascetic puts a stop to the cycle of reciprocal violence and dem-
onstrates the “perfection of forbearance” (ksānti- pāramitā) in a way that
˙
is enlightening and transformative for others. Orzech thus contrasts the
“violent course of the sacred victim” with the “nonviolent transformative
course of the exemplary victim,”36 and maintains that these two types of
victimage should be distinguished from each other, for the former “fuels
the process of reciprocal violence” while the latter “stops it.”37
In Orzech’s Girardian analysis, the Buddhist tradition contains both
nonviolent and violent (sacrifi cial) strands—with gift- of- the- body jātakas
being perhaps the primary exemplifi cation of the latter. It is perhaps this
lingering sense of sacrifi cial violence surrounding the bodhisattva’s gift of
his body that ultimately results in some of the ambivalence we have seen
in previous chapters.
Gift and Off ering
Th e dialectical tension between using and not using a substitute examined
above in connection with the category of “sacrifi ce” can also be discussed,
of course, in terms of the related category of “ritual off ering.” As we saw
in chapter 1, it is precisely the issue of substitution that constitutes the
fundamental diff erence between the bodhisattva’s gift of his body within
the past and the ordinary Buddhist’s ritual off erings within the present.
Th e bodhisattva within gift- of- the- body stories exists in a Buddha- less past
in which there is no “Buddhism” in the world to function as a powerful
“fi eld of merit.” He therefore has no choice but to manifest his generosity
in an extreme and unmediated manner—giving himself away rather than
relying on any substitute. His deeds make it possible for others, however,
to off er substitutes in place of themselves. By becoming a Buddha and
establishing “Buddhism” as a powerful “fi eld of merit,” he creates a situa-
tion in which it is no longer necessary to give oneself away. Instead one can
give away various substitutes (such as alms)—for once these substitutes are
multiplied by the great “fi eld of merit” in which they are bestowed, they
become equivalent, in some sense, to the original gift of oneself. We thus
move from the bodhisattva’s gift of his body to the ordinary Buddhist’s
devotional off ering, from the “ethos of the jātaka” to the “ethos of the
256

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
avadāna,” from the life of the Buddha to the ritual of the Buddhist—in
other words, from not using to using a substitute.
What are we to make, then, of forms of self-i mmolation that seem to
collapse these two categories together? In the famous “Medicine King”
chapter of the Lotus Sūtra, for example, the bodhisattva “Seen With Joy
By All Living Beings” sets his own body on fi re as a devotional off ering to
the Buddha “Pure and Bright Excellence of Sun and Moon,” and—in his
subsequent rebirth—burns both of his forearms for s eventy- two thousand
years as a devotional off ering to this same Buddha’s relics.38 Similarly, in
other Mahāyāna sūtras, bodhisattvas, in a frenzy of Buddhist devotion, write
out the sūtras using their skin as parchment, their bones as pens, and their
blood or marrow as ink.39 Episodes such as these proved to be of great in-
spiration to ordinary Buddhists in China, where, beginning from the fourth
century c.e. and extending into relatively recent times, both individual,
private instances and mass, public spectacles of bodily self- mutilation very
often occurred in conjunction with the worship of relics or stūpas.40 In 873
c.e., for example, when the emperor Yizong of the Tang had a segment of
one of the Buddha’s bones brought into the capital in a magnifi cent proces-
sion, there were spectators who cut off their arms, sprinkled the relic with
their blood, walked on their elbows and knees, bit off their fi ngers, pulled
out their hair, and set their heads on fi re.41 (It was precisely such spectacles
of mass chaos, in fact, that inspired the scholar- offi cial Han Yu’s famous
invective against Buddhist r elic- worship in 819 c.e.)42 Self- immolation
of many diff erent varieties was also popular among individual Chinese
monks—so much so that “self- immolation” constitutes one of the basic
organizing categories of most of the “Biographies of Eminent Monks” col-
lections43—and although motivated by many diff erent concerns, was quite
often associated with the worship of relics, images, or stūpas.
All of these acts take place within a Buddhist devotional complex, and
the devotees who perform them have full access to Buddhism as a power-
ful fi eld of merit. Nevertheless, they refuse to make use of any substitute,
choosing instead to turn themselves into the off ering. We might say that
although the Buddha—through his j ātaka- like deeds—has brought about
for them an avadāna-l ike setting, they choose to respond to this setting in
the most devotional manner possible by once again acting in a j ātaka- like
manner, thereby collapsing the the former and the latter ethos together.
Th e message suggested by such episodes, perhaps, is that once one rec-
ognizes the profound debt of gratitude owed to the Buddha for making
257

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
the mechanism of substitution possible, one realizes that the best way to pay
honor to this debt is by forgoing the mechanism itself. In China, moreover,
many self-i mmolators who chose this route themselves left behind further
relics and stūpas—which then made the same choice available to yet others:
either make use of substitution or reject it.
A polemic that favors the route of dispensing with any substitute rather
than using one is discernible in many Buddhist texts. In the “Medicine
King” chapter of the Lotus Sūtra, for example, when the bodhisattva “Seen
With Joy” uses his own body as a devotional off ering, the Buddhas of in-
numerable w orld- spheres congratulate him by favorably comparing the
off ering of one’s own body to any other material off ering:
Excellent! Excellent! Good man, this is true perseverance in vigor! Th is is called
a true Dharma- off ering to the Th us Come One. If with fl oral scent, necklaces,
burnt incense, powdered scent, p aint-s cent . . . and a variety of such things one
were to make off erings, still they could not equal this former [act of yours]. Even
if one were to give realm and walled cities, wife and children, they would still be
no match for it. Good man, this is called the prime gift. Among the various gifts,
it is the most honorable, the supreme. For it constitutes an off ering of Dharma
to the Th us Come Ones.44
Th e highest form of worship, then, is one that rejects the mechanism of
substitution upon which all worship presumably depends. It is called a
“dharma- off ering” in the sense that it constitutes the very dharma itself,
rather than an act of worship in honor of the dharma.
In the Th eravāda tradition a similar polemic is perhaps discernible in
the tradition of the bodhisattva’s “thirty perfections” (found, for example,
in the Buddhavamsa, Jātaka, and Dhammapada commentaries), where each
˙
of the ten Th eravādin “perfections” is said to be fulfi lled by the bodhisattva
in three diff erent degrees, resulting in thirty perfections altogether. As the
commentary to the Buddhavamsa explains, when one sacrifi ces external
˙
possessions, this is merely a “lower perfection” (upapāramī); when one
sacrifi ces one’s limbs, this is a “perfection” (pāramī); and when one sacrifi ces
one’s life, this is an “ultimate perfection” (paramatthapāramī).45 While it
is diffi cult to understand how the distinctions among sacrifi cing external
possessions, limbs, and life could be applied to any perfection other than
dāna (and perhaps ksānti), the signifi cance of the distinction itself is fairly
˙
clear: using a substitute makes the act in question a “lower” perfection,
258

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
using oneself (rather than a substitute) makes it an “ultimate” perfection,
and using one’s limbs—which might be said to occupy an intermediate
position between using and not using a substitute—occupies the middle
ground between the other two. Implicit within these distinctions is a value
judgment about the logic of substitution itself—a judgment in which
immediacy is ranked more highly than mediation.
We thus move in a dialectical manner from the immediacy characteristic
of the Buddha to the mediation made available to the ordinary Buddhist
follower, and back once again to the immediacy freely chosen by the fervent
Buddhist devotee. Nevertheless, it is perhaps inevitable that pure imme-
diacy is impossible to sustain and must inevitably give way to mediation.
Th is is apparent even in the “Medicine King” chapter itself, if we pay care-
ful attention to its sequence of events. For it is signifi cant, I believe, that in
his fi rst life, the bodhisattva “Seen With Joy” burns his entire body as an
off ering and suff ers death as a result, whereas in his second life, he burns
only his forearms and then restores them through an Act of Truth. We
thus move from the entire body to the major limbs, from death to survival,
and from permanent loss to restoration. Th e pure immediacy of the off ering
is thus gradually domesticated—and by the time we get to the end of the
chapter and its recommendations for the ordinary Buddhist follower, we
are down to a single fi nger or toe:
If there is one who, opening up his thought, wishes to attain anuttarasamyaksambodhi,
˙
if he can burn a fi nger or even a toe as an off ering to a Buddhastūpa, he shall exceed
one who uses realm or walled city, wife or children, or even all the lands, moun-
tains, forests, rivers, ponds, and sundry precious objects in the whole thousand-
millionfold world as off erings.46
Th e immediacy characteristic of exalted Buddhas and bodhisattvas is
thus domesticated just enough that it becomes a viable possibility for the
ordinary Buddhist devotee. Perhaps we might locate the ultimate end
point of this process of “domestication” in the common East Asian Bud-
dhist practice of burning incense, or moxa, on the crown of the head (or
the forearm) at the time of Buddhist monastic ordination.47 Here, the
practice of self- sacrifi ce has been thoroughly ritualized, routinized, and
institutionalized. It stands at the beginning of the Buddhist path rather
than its end, and constitutes a standard procedure applying to everyone
rather than an option freely chosen by the heroic few.
259

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
Gift and Death
In a recent essay on “death” as a “critical term” for the study of Buddhism,48
Jacqueline Stone identifi es two interrelated issues that should stand in the
foreground of any attempt to study d eath-r elated discourses and practices
across Buddhism as a whole. Th ese two issues are mastery over death and
the legitimation such mastery confers. As Stone puts it, “Th is promise [held
out by Buddhism] of control over that most mysterious and terrifying
realm—death—has been a chief source of Buddhism’s attraction as a lived
religion, and the perceived possession of such control has been one of its
major sources of legitimation.”49 Both issues—the mastery itself and the
legitimation it confers—can be related to the gift-o f- the- body theme.
While the high value that Buddhism places on mastery over death is
fairly obvious—being manifested by such things as the Buddha’s defeat of
Māra, the God of Death, on the night of his enlightenment, the defi nition
of nirvana itself as a conquest of death, and the many exemplary stories told
about Buddhist heroes who displayed such mastery—it is worth asking the
question of how one knows that such mastery has been achieved. If “mas-
tery over death” can be displayed in several diff erent ways, then it might
be possible to construct a continuum ranging from the “least visible” to
the “most visible” displays of such mastery. Standing on the “least visible”
end of the continuum might be the common Buddhist phenomenon of
“voluntarily giving up the life-f orce”—such as the Buddha himself is said
to have done three months before he actually died. While this is certainly
an impressive achievement, it is also a phenomenon that is invisible to the
outside observer (ignoring, for the moment, the earthquake that is said
to occur every time a Buddha does this), it can be widely separated from
the moment of death itself (as it was in the case of the Buddha), and it
can result in a wholly o rdinary-l ooking death (as the Buddha is said to
have died from a stomach illness). Th is mastery, in other words, is wholly
internal in nature, impossible for the outside observer to see, and leaves
few traces upon the actual death itself—which is perhaps the very reason
the tradition felt it necessary to supplement it with external signs such as
earthquakes. In the absence of such external signs, this mastery is perhaps
somewhat suspect.
Further down on the continuum of visibility, we might place something
like the Ksāntivādin Jātaka, in which the ascetic Ksāntivādin willingly
˙ ˙
submits to being murdered by a king, without giving rise to any anger,
thus fulfi lling the “perfection of forbearance.” Here the mastery over death
260

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
consists of submitting to one’s death with perfect calm and utter detach-
ment—states of mind which are present at the moment of death itself
and leave visible traces on the face, body, and demeanor of the one who
possesses them. In comparison to “voluntarily giving up the life- force,” this
mastery over death is perhaps easier for an external observer to discern.
Nevertheless, since somebody else does the actual killing and the ascetic’s
“mastery” consists only of the proper response, even this mastery is perhaps
not completely clear.
It is from this perspective that we can see some of the appeal of the
gift- of- the- body theme. For the bodhisattva who actively brings about his
own death takes control of the reins, as it were; he exerts his mastery over
death in an active and heroic manner, he leaves no question about this
mastery—it is clear for all to see. Th e gift of the body thus constitutes
the most visible marker of one’s mastery over death (just as we earlier saw
that it constitutes the most visible marker of the presence of pure gener-
osity). Perhaps this is why the bodhisattva who gives his body away is so
often depicted as a king, for as Graeme MacQueen has noted, Buddhist
texts give voice to two diff erent types of mastery: internal mastery, which
is symbolized most potently by the ascetic, and external mastery, which is
symbolized most potently by the king.50 If the king is one who exercises his
mastery in an outward and visible manner, then the king who heroically
takes his own life is perhaps the most potent and external symbol of the
mastery over death so highly valued by the Buddhist tradition.
At the same time, of course, such mastery can never be completely as-
sured by external signs alone. Even the person who brings about his own
death and seems to submit to it with utter calm and detachment could well
be affl icted by passion and delusion and thus committing an ordinary act
of suicide, which is generally looked down upon by the Buddhist tradi-
tion. Ultimately, true mastery over death is determined solely by internal
mental factors which can never be wholly visible; as Charles Hallisey has
noted, “[the] good death [in Buddhism] is distinguished by one’s state of
mind, by volitional and aff ective factors, at the moment of death, and not
by outward circumstances.”51 In fact, it might even be the case that the
more “actively” and externally such a death is pursued, the more suspect
the presence of the correct mental factors becomes. Perhaps this is why
there is also so much emphasis within Buddhism upon post- mortem vis-
ibility: What signs are left over from the death that indicate the mastery
of the one who has died? In the case of the Buddha and other venerated
disciples, such signs take many diff erent forms: spontaneous combustion
261

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
of the cremation fi re, the body’s refusal to rot and decay, various post-
m ortem actions of the body, or the post-m ortem production of relics. And
in our stories as well we see a consistent concern with such signs: after the
death itself has occurred, heavenly fl owers fall from the sky, the gods shout
with glee, relics are produced, stūpas are erected, fl esh- mountains spring
into existence, the bodhisattva comes back to life, other people undergo
moral conversions, and so forth. Even in the face of the bodhisattva’s active
enactment of his own death, such further signs are needed to legitimate
the presence of the mastery that brought it about.
In the Chinese Buddhist tradition, in fact, it was precisely the visibility
of such pre- and post-m ortem signs that reassured authors such as Huijiao,
Daoxuan, and Zanning that all of the cases of self-i mmolation they were
reporting on within their “Biographies of Eminent Monks” collections
were, indeed, legitimate expressions of the self- immolator’s mastery over
death.52 As James Benn has demonstrated,53 all three compilers were con-
cerned to draw a distinction between the advanced bodhisattva, whose
mastery over death legitimizes his act of self- immolation, and the ordinary
person, who has no such mastery and would only be breaking the Vinaya’s
prescription against suicide if he were foolishly to decide to kill himself.
And for all three compilers, we see a consistent need to rely on external
signs in order to make this distinction. Th us, Huijiao states confi dently
that if the act of self- immolation is legitimate, this will be indicated by
“auspicious omens” and “a myriad of good signs”; Daoxuan notes that
illegitimate self- immolators often betray themselves by a “groan of pain”
at the moment of death; and Zanning points to a number of legitimating
signs common in Chinese practice, such as the unburned tongue, the body
that drowns but doesn’t sink, and the cremation fi re that spontaneously
combusts.54
Th e concerns expressed by Huijiao, Daoxuan, and Zanning are quite
reminiscent of the discourse surrounding the Hindu practice of sati, in
which a virtuous wife immolates herself on the cremation pyre of her
husband. Th is discourse, too, is often characterized by an anxious need to
distinguish “legitimate” from “illegitimate” cases through the use of various
external signs. As Lindsey Harlan has noted, for example, because Rajput
women consider the wifely virtue that leads to sati to be a trait character-
istic of themselves alone, all non-R ajput cases of sati require “additional
evidence” in order to be considered legitimate. Th e woman must vow to
commit sati with no hesitation whatsoever, for example, and the fl ames
that consume her body—which should properly arise directly from the
262

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
heat of her own wifely virtue—must be “visibly distinct” from the fi re
used to light the cremation pyre itself.55 Th e anxious need for such signs
that characterizes both Chinese Buddhist self- immolation and the Hindu
practice of sati is perhaps inevitable in the face of such gruesome forms of
death. Death is disturbing enough when it happens in a natural manner,
but the self-i nfl icted death is disturbing in the extreme. Th e anxious de-
sire for visible signs that might vindicate such disturbing deeds is perhaps
indicative of the human anxiety surrounding death.
All of this reveals that the relationship between mastery over death and
the process of legitimation is something of a vicious circle. Perceived mas-
tery over death does, indeed, legitimate the one who displays it—yet this
mastery itself stands in need of constant legitimation.
Giving to Gain or Giving to Save?
In further considering the active and heroic—perhaps almost too bla-
tant—manner in which the bodhisattva within gift-o f-t he-b ody stories
confronts and tackles death, it seems to me that we can characterize his
basic stance toward death in one of two contradictory ways. On the one
hand, he is a braggart and a rogue who taunts the very gods themselves
and purposefully gambles everything away in the hope of winning back
an even greater return. He recklessly courts death and disaster itself in the
hope of winning back a renewed and eternal life. Underneath their surface
structure, gift- of- the- body stories suggest to me the vague ideas of risk and
gambling, courting disaster and wagering with destiny.
One of the earliest occurrences of the Act of Truth in Indian literature
occurs in the Rg Veda and involves the trials and tribulations of a gambler.56
˙
A gambler has lost everything through his compulsion to gamble—his pos-
sessions, his home, his wife, and himself. All he has left are his ten empty
fi ngers. He extends his ten fi ngers to Savitr, the god of dice, performs an
˙
Act of Truth, and asks to be released from his compulsion. Th ough the
Act of Truth is not explicitly stated, Brown surmises that it consists of
the simple statement that, as the complete and ultimate gambler, he has
gambled away all his possessions and has only his ten empty fi ngers left.57
Savitr restores all his possessions and commands him to stop gambling.
˙
Th e story has a strange resemblance to many gift- of-t he-b ody jātakas.
In both cases the initial dispensing of material goods escalates to a critical
point; the hero refuses to retreat or back down; he confronts destiny itself
263

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
by staking his own body; and because he can truthfully attest to the sheer
audacity of his move, the gods are forced to make an even greater return.
Th e giver and the gambler are really not so diff erent. Th e gift- of- the- body
bodhisattva is the ultimate gambler: by staking his own body, he poses the
ultimate challenge and takes the ultimate risk, yet he does so in the hope
of winning back the ultimate prize.
In agricultural harvest rituals from around the premodern world, grain
is exorbitantly displayed and recklessly destroyed in order to ensure the
fertility of the next year’s crop. Since life comes from death, the life of
the new crop can be assured and guaranteed by recklessly killing the old.
Instead of waiting for fate to intervene, a proactive stance is taken and
fate is brazenly challenged:
Fertility is born of excess. . . . In a sort of wager with destiny, ruinous consequences
are courted in the attempt to be the one who will give away the most, so that
destiny is obliged to return with compound interest what it has received. . . .
Economy, accumulation, and moderation defi ne the rhythm of profane life, while
prodigality and excess defi ne the rhythm of the festival.58
We are reminded here, too, of the institution of the potlatch, in which
the conspicuous and extravagant gifting of accumulated wealth is engaged
in with the hope and expectation of eventual return, and wealth may be
recklessly destroyed in the attempt to outdo a rival chief. Th e gift- of- the-
body bodhisattva, too, as we have seen, has some of the same reckless and
agonistic quality about him.
A similar type of logic, however, also governs religious actions that
are less brazen and more defensive in nature. Instead of boldly gambling
everything in order to gain a greater return, in some cases one suff ers a
“tolerable loss” in order to save the whole. Trapped in a rocking boat during
a storm, one throws dollar bills into the ocean in order to spare oneself. In
many fairy tales, the hero escapes from a pursuing monster by throwing his
possessions (and sometimes body parts) behind him to stall the monster’s
pursuit. In the second century c.e., when a man named Aristeides was
destined to die in three days, Asclepius, the god of healing, told him to “cut
a piece of his body for the sake of saving the whole.” Finger- sacrifi ce often
has the same logic: “Pursuing demons are pacifi ed by the act of severing a
fi nger from the body; the partial loss is to save the whole man.”59 On the
level of groups, as well, one person may constitute the partial loss suff ered,
such that his self-s acrifi ce ensures the survival of all. Even celibacy may be
264

kingship, sacrifice, offering, and death
interpreted along the same lines: by renouncing one’s role in creating life,
one hopes to escape from the jaws of death. Life is ransomed away from
death through the suff ering of a manageable loss.
In Burkert’s illuminating discussion, from which all these examples
are drawn,60 all such actions embody a kind of pars pro toto, or “part for
whole,” logic that is a common feature of religion and cult, and that is
frequently enacted in situations of panic or despair. In such a way, religion
functions to reduce and manage the anxiety brought about by illness, pain,
and fear. I bring up this context of ideas not in order to suggest that it
bears directly on the gift-o f-t he-b ody theme, but only to emphasize the
double character of the bodhisattva who gives his body away. On the one
hand, he is a braggart who challenges destiny, tempts fate, and gambles
everything away in the hope for a greater return; on the other hand, he is
a being reacting in panic and despair, escaping from the jaws of death by
suff ering a manageable loss. He gives to gain, and he gives to save—yet
another variety of “doubleness” built into the theme itself.
265

CONCLUSIONS
T
hroughout this book I have focused upon the plotlines, charac-
ters, rhetorical strategies, and religious conceptions characteristic
of a particular genre of stories involving the bodhisattva’s gift of
his body. Th ough many diff erent points have been treated and discussed,
several of them converge around a single, consistent, underlying dialectic.
By way of summarizing my discussion and highlighting this dialectic, let
me return to an idea that I presented in chapter 1 and that has served as a
leitmotif throughout the remainder of this book.
In chapter 1 I made a wide-r anging distinction between the “ethos of
the jātaka” and the “ethos of the avadāna”—the former involving “perfec-
tions” and the latter involving “devotions.” Jātakas feature the heroic and
inimitable moral exploits performed by a worthy and superior being in a dif-
fi cult, Buddha- less age of the past, while avadānas feature the commonplace
ritual and devotional transactions performed by ordinary Buddhists in an
age of Buddhadharma. By reading the two genres together, we can see how
pre- Buddha “perfections” are contrasted with post-B uddha “devotions,”
or how the life of the Buddha is contrasted with the ritual of the Buddhist.
Within the context of this contrast, I argued, gift-o f- the- body stories might
266

conclusions
be seen as “super- jātakas,” or those jātakas that exemplify the ethos of the
jātaka most strongly and provide the greatest contrast of all with the ethos
of the avadāna. Nevertheless, I also argued that despite the particularly
paradigmatic way in which the gift- of- the- body theme exemplifi es the
ethos of the jātaka, the ethos of the avadāna is never far away. Th rough a
variety of narrative strategies, gift-o f- the- body jātakas repeatedly invoke the
avadāna-t ype ritual deed and strive to suggest that the two ethoses can, in
fact, be made equivalent through the existence of Buddhism itself.
In chapter 2’s examination of conventional plotlines I began to elucidate
some of these narrative strategies. Th e contrast between the ethos of the
jātaka and the ethos of the avadāna is refl ected somewhat in the gift- of-
the- body genre’s use of two major conventional plotlines. Stories featuring
ordinary beings as the recipients of the gift exemplify the ethos of the jātaka
in a particularly stark manner by depicting pitiful, evil, and unworthy re-
cipients who cannot, in any sense, “repay” the bodhisattva’s gift, as well as
having the bodhisattva die as a result of giving this gift, thus highlighting
the theme of extreme, disinterested generosity. Stories featuring Śakra as
the recipient of the gift, on the other hand, while still exemplifying the
ethos of the jātaka, implicitly invoke the ethos of the avadāna as well by
depicting a deity—the classic “worthy” recipient—as the recipient of the
gift. In addition, by allowing the bodhisattva to survive the gift and restore
his body to perfect health, such stories also depict the rewards of the gift
and implicitly align it with more ordinary ritual off erings. Diff erent aspects
of the bodhisattva’s character are highlighted by each plotline. If otherness
and imitability are the two contrasting elements of “sainthood,” then stories
of the fi rst type clearly err on the side of “otherness,” while stories of the
second type make a nod toward “imitability.” Th e reader’s response also
varies in accordance, the fi rst plotline inviting a response of ritual, wor-
ship, and devotion, and the second plotline demanding that we imitate
the bodhisattva and engage in giving ourselves. Finally, the third (and
more minor) plotline I enumerated, in which the gift is interrupted once
the bodhisattva’s willingness to give has been established, perhaps represents
one strategy for bringing together the ethos of the jātaka and the ethos of
the avadāna: by suggesting that the intention to give is really equivalent to
the gift itself, such stories collapse the enormous distance between heroic
bodily self- sacrifi ce and ordinary ritual off erings, suggesting that the two
are, in fact, equivalent—as long as the underlying motivation is pure.
In chapter 3’s examination of rhetoric I suggested that the basic rhe-
torical purpose of the gift-o f- the- body genre is to pose and then resolve
267

conclusions
the fundamental confl ict between the universalistic demands of “perfect
generosity” (as embodied by the bodhisattva) and the particularistic claims
of family, community, and kingdom (as embodied by the bodhisattva’s
opposers). As we might expect from the discussion in chapter 2, stories
featuring ordinary beings as the recipients of the gift generally off er the
least resolution to this confl ict, since the tragic death of the bodhisattva and
the grief of those he leaves behind suggest that the two sides are, in fact,
irreconcilable. Stories featuring Śakra as the recipient of the gift, on the
other hand, generally off er the greatest resolution to the confl ict—bring-
ing the two sides together through the give- and- get- back movement of the
gift, and using Śakra as a mediator between the transcendent Buddhist
values adhered to by the bodhisattva and the everyday, pragmatic concerns
adhered to by those who oppose him. Once again, this is in keeping with
my basic distinction between the jātaka and the avadāna: the ethos of
the jātaka (characteristic of the former stories) is an ethos of absolute
and transcendent values that can brook no concession or compromise and
might clash tragically with the ordinary, mundane world, whereas the
ethos of the avadāna (characteristic of the latter stories) is an ethos of eff ec-
tive ritual action that refl ects universal Buddhist values but can be fully
incorporated into everyday life.
In addition to these general tendencies characteristic of our two major
plotlines, however, I hope that chapter 3 has also demonstrated the enor-
mous variety of diff erent strategies for relating the universal and the par-
ticular displayed across the genre as a whole. In some cases, for example, the
particular is fully subordinated and made subservient to the universal—such
as when the bodhisattva sternly rebukes a minor deity by drawing on the
full authority and grandeur of the Buddhist cosmos and demonstrating
the deity’s purely local concerns to be trivial. In some cases, the universal
and the particular are placed in a proper, hierarchical relationship—such
as when the higher devas above applaud the gift and understand its true
signifi cance, whereas human beings below consider only the gift’s imme-
diate consequences and are therefore deeply opposed. In some cases, the
universal wholly encompasses the particular—such as when a king’s strict
adherence to perfect generosity spreads inexorably to everyone around
him, eventually obviating any need to distinguish between his own sub-
jects and all other beings. And in some cases, the particular becomes a valid
expression of the universal—such as when Manicūda becomes convinced
˙ ˙
that to marry Padmāvatī is a legitimate expression of the bodhisattva’s
compassion for all beings. Th e confl ict between universal and particular
268

conclusions
values is fundamental to the Buddhist tradition, and rather than providing
any single, straightforward resolution, the gift- of- the- body genre off ers to
its readers the full range of creative resources needed to grapple with the
confl ict themselves.
Th e basic distinctions of plotline enumerated in chapter 2 (and made
use of in chapter 3) appear again in chapters 4 and 5, but this time in con-
nection with the Buddhist discourse on dāna. In line with their exempli-
fi cation of the ethos of the jātaka, stories featuring ordinary beings as the
recipients of the gift depict the bodhisattva’s gift of his body as an ideal
and nonreciprocal form of dāna—a gift given downward to an unworthy
recipient out of pure generosity and compassion, and a gift that perhaps
ultimately derives from a “ksatriya model” of exchange. In contrast, in
˙
line with their movement toward the ethos of the avadāna, stories featur-
ing Śakra as the recipient of the gift suggest that the bodhisattva’s gift of
his body can also be interpreted as an ordinary and reciprocal form of
dāna—a gift given upward to a worthy recipient with a desire for karmic
rewards, and a gift that perhaps ultimately derives from a “brahmanical
model” of exchange.
In enumerating this basic distinction, however, I have been particularly
interested in the category of time and the role time plays in balancing
between these two conceptions. As we have seen, at the precise narrative
moment when the gift is being given, it must be depicted as a pure and non-
reciprocal gift. It is only later on and after-t he- fact—once the bodhisattva’s
body has been restored and his generosity proven sincere, for example,
or even many eons later, when the Buddha himself recounts the tale of a
previous life—that this same gift can then be celebrated as a reciprocal
exchange that brings the giver enormous rewards. In stories featuring
Śakra, these two categories of time are signifi ed, in part, by the donning
and dispensing of Śakra’s disguise: when Śakra is disguised as an “unworthy”
recipient, the bodhisattva’s gift is wholly pure, but once Śakra is revealed to
be the classic “worthy” recipient—a deity—the gift becomes relatable to
more ordinary ritual off erings. It is the passage of time—and with it, the
gift’s increasing “framability”—that serves to balance these two depictions,
and it is only within the Act of Truth (such an appropriate name!) that
this careful balancing act falls apart. For within the Act of Truth, time is
collapsed: the ideal and the ordinary forms of dāna are brought together
within a single ritual moment, leading inevitably to contradictory and
disconcerting statements in which the bodhisattva’s utter lack of regret at
giving away his body is combined with his driving desire to get this body
269

conclusions
back. A more satisfactory strategy for collapsing time, on the other hand,
can perhaps be found in the standard jātaka practice of pairing a particu-
lar “story of the present” with a particular “story of the past.” As we have
seen, in some cases, ordinary ritual off erings in the “story of the present”
are implicitly equated with heroic bodily self-s acrifi ces in the “story of the
past.” On the one hand, “past” and “present” are kept apart from each
other; on the other hand, by pairing the two stories together and framing
one inside the other, time is collapsed—and the ethos of the jātaka and the
ethos of the avadāna become equivalent through the ritual magic worked
by Buddhism as a powerful “fi eld of merit.”
In chapter 6’s examination of the discourse on the body characteristic
of the gift- of- the- body genre, the same distinction between jātaka and
avadāna once again came into play, but this time in terms of character and
point of view rather than in terms of plotline. Th e bodhisattva himself usu-
ally speaks from the perspective of the ethos of the jātaka—seeing himself
as an ordinary body struggling on the long moral path that ultimately leads
to Buddhahood in the far-d istant future and often emphasizing this body’s
worthlessness. Th ose around the bodhisattva, on the other hand, usually
speak from the perspective of the ethos of the avadāna—celebrating the
bodhisattva as an already- ideal body that manifests itself in the world in
a glorifi ed form and makes itself ritually available to others as a powerful
fi eld of merit. Th e fi rst is an “ideology of absence,” while the second is an
“ideology of presence.” Once again, we see a distinction in terms of time,
for the fi rst is placed squarely in the pre-B uddha past, while the second
seems to assume the post- Buddha present. In this way, two entire sides of
the Buddhist tradition are brought together—the ascent away from this
world and the descent that brings one back out of compassion. It is, at
least in part, the pain of the bodhisattva’s body that serves as a fulcrum for
these diff erent conceptions by signifying the possibility of transformation,
or movement from one side to the other. Diff erent perspectives on the
body are thus brought together and balanced, so that the true “ideal body”
depicted across the genre as a whole constitutes a middle way between
transcendence and immanence—a s ambhoga- kāya or “substitute body”
that paradoxically materializes the immaterial.
Finally, in several of the discussions contained in chapter 7, the same
contrast between the ethos of the jātaka and the ethos of the avadāna is
implicit in my treatment of the logic of substitution: when seen in relation
to the category of sacrifi ce, the bodhisattva’s gift of his body represents a
sacrifi ce in which one forgoes the mechanism of substitution and sacri-
270

conclusions
fi ces oneself in place of a victim. Similarly, when seen in relation to the
category of the ritual off ering, the bodhisattva’s gift of his body represents
the off ering of oneself rather than any material substitute. Yet in both cases
the gift- of- the- body genre eff ectively manipulates the tension between not
using and using a substitute—the fi rst being refl ective of the ethos of the
jātaka and the second being refl ective of the new ritual situation brought
about by the ethos of the avadāna.
Th e “ethos of the jātaka” and the “ethos of the avadāna” have thus
served throughout this book as imprecise yet suggestive labels for two entire
sides of the Buddhist tradition and complexes of thought and practice that
seem to be brought together, over and over again, by the gift-o f-t he-b ody
genre. How are we to explain the multiplicity of the gift-o f-t he-b ody theme
and its ability to suggest a number of opposing conceptions simultane-
ously? I would like to suggest that this ability depends, at least in part,
upon the very structure of the theme itself—more specifi cally, on the
complete identifi cation it achieves between the giver and his gift. Merely
by virtue of the fact that the gift and the person who gives it are not normally
one and the same thing—but in this case they are, the gift- of- the- body
theme is inherently suggestive of the two- that- are- really- one- but- that- can-
be- strategically- separated- back- into- two. Symbolically, in other words, the
very theme itself embodies a dialectic between immediacy and mediation,
between the two- that- are- fused- together and the two- that- are- separated-
through- some- form- of- mediation. And what is this dialectic other than the
tension that exists between the “ethos of the jātaka” and the “ethos of the
avadāna”? Between the pre- Buddha past and the post- Buddha present?
Between becoming a Buddha oneself and worshiping the Buddha through
off erings? Between the life of the Buddha and the ritual of the Buddhist?
Th is “double character” is built into the very structure of the theme itself,
and it enables the theme to bear multiple connotations and conceptions
at the same time.
By itself and in isolation, however, the gift-o f- the- body theme cannot
automatically function in this multifaceted way. Th ough the gift-o f- the-
b ody theme has the potential for symbolizing numerous opposing con-
ceptions, the p laying- out of those conceptions always takes place within
the context and structure of a story. It is the story that is able to develop
multiple lines of thought simultaneously and balance their interests against
each other. Th e multivalency and successful functioning of the theme thus
depend not only on the nature of the theme itself, but also on the narrative
context through which it is conveyed. Th is is why I have insisted through-
271

conclusions
out this book on treating the gift- of- the- body theme within the context
of the stories themselves. Stories involving the gift- of- the- body theme
are not randomly constructed; they are structured in particular ways that
enable them to bear particular meanings, and an understanding of their
structures illuminates the manner in which those meanings are conveyed.
Th eme and story thus work seamlessly together and are dependent upon
each other for their functioning. Th e connotations and suggestions of the
gift- of- the- body genre are born only through this perpetual interaction.
272

appendix
A CORPUS OF
GIFT OF THE BODY JĀTAKAS
Th is appendix contains basic information about each of the gift-o f-t he-b ody
jātakas that collectively constitute the corpus of material on which this book is
based. I make no claims whatsoever to comprehensiveness—either in terms of
which gift-o f-t he-b ody stories are included within the corpus, or in terms of what
kind of information is provided below for those stories that are. Th e corpus itself
is highly idiosyncratic in nature, its contents determined by all kinds of diff erent
factors (such as whether I was aware of the story beforehand, its easy accessibility
in a published edition, its inherent interest, its inclusion of a particularly striking
passage, whether my library was able to obtain a particular volume, or just pure
chance), and I am aware of many gift- of- the- body stories (and individual versions
of such stories) that are not included here.
Each of the entries below includes such basic information as the title of the
story, its language, its location within a larger collection, the published editions
and translations I have made use of (not necessarily all that exist), a brief sum-
mary of the plot, citations of any relevant discussions, and ancillary comments
that I thought might be helpful to the reader. Again, none of this information
is necessarily complete. For many of the stories, more thorough bibliographical
273

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
citations are already available in Leslie Grey’s A Concordance of Buddhist Birth
Stories (2nd ed., 1994); I have included citations to Grey wherever applicable. I
have organized the corpus in terms of basic plotlines (arranged in no particular
order), with the exception of the fi nal two categories.
A. King Śibi Gives His Eyes to a Brahmin
1. Pāli Jātaka 499: Sivijātaka
Pāli. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 401–412. Trans. Cowell 1895–1913:4, 250–256. King
Śibi gives both of his eyes to an old, blind brahmin (the deity Śakra in disguise)
and later restores them through two Acts of Truth.
2. Cariyāpitaka 1.8: Sivirājacariyam
˙ ˙
Pāli. Ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 7–8. Trans. Horner 1975: pt. 2, 7–8. King Śibi
gives both of his eyes to an old, blind brahmin (the deity Śakra in disguise); their
later restoration is not related. Th e account is told in the fi rst- person voice by
the Buddha himself.
3. Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) 2: Śibijātaka
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:7–15 and Kern 1891:6–14 (emendations in Khoroche
1987:15–17). Trans. Khoroche 1989:10–17 and Speyer 1895:8–19. King Śibi gives
both of his eyes to an old, blind brahmin (the deity Śakra in disguise) and later
restores them through two Acts of Truth.
4. Mahajjātakamālā 44: Śibirājacaksuhpradānāvadāna
˙ ˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Hahn 1985:514–531. King Śibi gives both of his eyes to an old, blind
brahmin (the deity Śakra in disguise) and later restores them through two Acts
of Truth. Borrows substantially from no. 3 above.
5. Avadānaśataka 34: Śibyavadāna
Sanskrit. Ed. Speyer 1958:1, 182–186 and Vaidya 1958:83–85. Fr. trans. Feer 1891:124–
127. Th ree episodes: King Śibi gives his blood to insects, has his eyes plucked out
274

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
by a bird (the deity Śakra in disguise), and off ers his eyes to a brahmin (the deity
Śakra in disguise), but the fi nal gift is not completed.
See also: Grey 1994:361–365 (s.v. Sivi); Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 255, n. 1; Cum-
mings 1982:75–83.
B. King Śibi Gives His Flesh to Ransom a Dove
1. Kalpanāmanditikā (of Kumāralāta) 64
˙˙
Chinese translation from Sanskrit (T. 201). Fr. trans. Huber 1908:330–341. King
Śibi gives his fl esh to ransom a dove (the deity Viśvakarman in disguise) from a
hawk (the deity Śakra in disguise) and later restores his body through an Act of
Truth.
2. Avadānakalpalatā (of Ksemendra) 55: Sarvamdadāvadāna
˙ ˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 334–337 (emendations in De Jong 1979:93–94).
King Sarvamdada (rather than Śibi) gives his fl esh to ransom a dove from a
˙
hunter (the deity Śakra in disguise) and later restores his body through an Act
of Truth.
See also: Grey 1994:361–365 (s.v. Sivi); Grey 1994:337–338 (s.v. Sarvamdada);
˙
Schlingloff 1988:86–92; Cummings 1982:75–83; Parlier 1991.
C. King Candraprabha Gives His Head to a Brahmin
1. Divyāvadāna 22: Candraprabhāvadāna
Sanskrit. Ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:314–328 and Vaidya 1959c:195–203. Trans.
Ohnuma 2004b. King Candraprabha gives his head to a brahmin and dies.
2. mDzangs bLun zhes bya ba’i mdo (Skt. Damamukha Sūtra, or Sūtra of the Wise
and the Fool) 22
Tibetan translation from Chinese. Ed. Schmidt 1845:132–146. Trans. (from Mon-
golian version of same) Frye 1981:105–114. King Candraprabha gives his head to
a brahmin (sent by another king) and dies.
See also: Grey 1994:49 (s.v. Candraprabha); Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 144, n.;
Hartmann 1977; Matsumura 1980.
275

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
D. King Maitrībala Gives His Flesh and Blood to Five Yaksas
˙
1. Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) 8: Maitrībalajātaka
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:43–54 and Kern 1891:41–51 (emendations in Khoroche
1987:23–26). Trans. Khoroche 1989:47–57 and Speyer 1895:55–71. King Maitrībala
gives his fl esh and blood to fi ve yaksas and later has his body restored directly
˙
by the deity Śakra.
2. mDzangs bLun zhes bya ba’i mdo (Skt. Damamukha Sūtra, or Sūtra of the Wise
and the Fool) 12
Tibetan translation from Chinese. Ed. Schmidt 1845:53–54. Trans. (from Mongo-
lian version of same) Frye 1981:46–47. King Maitrībala gives his fl esh and blood
to fi ve yaksas; the later restoration of his body is not related.
˙
See also: Grey 1994:231 (s.v. Maitrībala); Schlingloff 1988:139–142.
E. King Manicūda Gives His Flesh and Blood to a Rāksasa
˙ ˙ ˙
and His Crest- Jewel to a Group of Brahmins
1. Manicūdāvadāna
˙ ˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Handurukande 1967:1–105. Trans. Handurukande 1967:106–146.
A long biography of King Manicūda containing two gift-o f- the- body episodes:
˙ ˙
King Manicūda gives his fl esh and blood to a rāksasa (the deity Śakra in disguise)
˙ ˙ ˙
and later restores his body through an Act of Truth. Th en he gives the crest- jewel
embedded in his head to a group of brahmins (sent by another king) and later
restores it through an Act of Truth.
2. Lokānandanātaka (Tib. ‘Jig rten kun tu dga’ ba’i zlos gar) of Candragomin
˙
Tibetan translation from Sanskrit. Ed. Hahn 1974. Transliterated in Handuru-
kande 1967:209–291. Trans. Hahn 1987. Ger. trans. Hahn 1974. Detailed synopsis
in Handurukande 1967:292–298. See also: Hahn 1979. A fi ve-a ct Sanskrit drama
containing two gift-o f-t he-b ody episodes: King Manicūda gives his fl esh and blood
˙ ˙
to a rāksasa (the deity Śakra in disguise) and is later restored to health directly by
˙
the earth- goddess. Th en he gives the crest- jewel embedded in his head to a group of
brahmins (sent by another king) and later restores it through an Act of Truth.
See also: Grey 1994:239–240 (s.v. Manicūda, Ratnacūda); Granoff 1990; Han-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
durukande 1975.
276

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
F. King Sarvamdada Off ers His Head to a Brahmin
˙
1. Avadānasārasamuccaya 3: Sarvamdadajātaka
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Handurukande 1984:54–87. Trans. Handurukande 1984:54–87. King
Sarvamdada off ers his head to a brahmin to bring to another king for a reward,
˙
but the gift is not completed. Th is story has been attributed by Michael Hahn
(1992) to Gopadatta’s Jātakamālā.
2. Mahajjātakamālā 45: Sarvamdadābhidhānamahārājāvadāna
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Hahn 1985:532–550 and Handurukande 1984:196–206. King
Sarvamdada off ers his head to a brahmin to bring to another king for a reward,
˙
but the gift is not completed. Borrows substantially from no. 1 above.
3. Kalpanāmanditikā (of Kumāralāta) 71
˙˙
Chinese translation from Sanskrit (T. 201). Fr. trans. Huber 1908:416–421. An
unnamed king off ers himself (not specifi cally his head) to a brahmin to bring to
another king for a reward, but the gift is not completed.
See also: Handurukande 1984:20–23; Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 714, n. 2; Mat-
sumura 1980.
G. King Padmaka Becomes a Fish and Gives
His Flesh and Blood to His Subjects
1. Avadānaśataka 31: Padmakāvadāna
Sanskrit. Ed. Speyer 1958:1, 168–172, and Vaidya 1958:78–80. Trans. Ohnuma
2004a. Fr. trans. Feer 1891:114–117. King Padmaka sacrifi ces his life to transform
himself into a fi sh, gives his healing fl esh and blood to his subjects to cure an
epidemic, and dies.
2. Avadānakalpalatā (of Ksemendra) 99: Padmakāvadāna
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 544 (emendations in De Jong 1979:250–251). King
Padmaka sacrifi ces his life to transform himself into a fi sh, gives his healing fl esh
and blood to his subjects to cure an epidemic, and dies.
277

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
3. mDzangs bLun zhes bya ba’i mdo (Skt. Damamukha Sūtra, or Sūtra of the Wise
and the Fool) 26
Tibetan translation from Chinese. Ed. Schmidt 1845:171–173. Trans. (from Mongo-
lian version of same) Frye 1981:133–134. King Śudolagarne (not Padmaka) sacrifi ces
his life to transform himself into a fi sh, gives his fl esh and blood to his subjects
during a drought (not an epidemic), and dies.
See also: Grey 1994:277 (s.v. Padmaka > Rohita).
H. A Merchant Gives His Body to Save His Drowning Companions
1. Mahāvastu: Pañcakānām Bhadravargikānām Jātakam
˙ ˙ ˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Senart 1977:3, 353–356 and Basak 1963–1968:3, 470–475. Trans. Jones
1949–1956:3, 350–354. A merchant kills himself in the ocean so that his drowning
companions can use his body to get to shore.
2. Avadānasārasamuccaya 2: Sārthavāhajātaka
Sanskrit. Ed. Handurukande 1984:34–57. Trans. Handurukande 1984:34–57. A
merchant kills himself in the ocean so that his drowning companions can use his
body to get to shore. Th is story has been attributed by Michael Hahn (1992) to
Gopadatta’s Jātakamālā.
3. Sambhadrāvadānamālā 4: Sārthavāhajanmāvadāna
Sanskrit. Ed. Handurukande 1984:187–195. A merchant kills himself in the ocean
so that his drowning companions can use his body to get to shore. Borrows sub-
stantially from no. 2 above.
See also: Handurukande 1984:16–20.
I. Th ree Gift- of- the- Body Episodes Together: (1) A Woman Gives Her Breasts
to Another Woman Who Is Starving; (2) A Merchant’s Son Gives His Eye
and Flesh to Some Birds; (3) A Brahmin Gives His Body to a Starving Tigress
1. Divyāvadāna 32: Rūpāvatyavadāna
Sanskrit. Ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:469–481 and Vaidya 1959c:307–313. Th ree epi-
sodes: (1) Th e woman Rūpāvatī gives her breasts to another woman who is starving,
278

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
and later has them restored through her husband’s Act of Truth. Th en she performs
her own Act of Truth by which she becomes a man named Rūpāvata. (2) Rūpāvata,
after dying, is reborn as the merchant’s son Candraprabha, who gives his eye and
his fl esh to a fl ock of hungry birds and then dies. (3) Candraprabha is reborn as the
brahmin Brahmaprabha, who gives his body to a starving tigress and dies.
2. Avadānakalpalatā (of Ksemendra) 51: Rukmavatyavadāna
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 316–319 (emendations in De Jong 1979:80–82). Trans.
Das 1893. Th ree episodes: (1) Th e woman Rukmavatī gives her breasts to another
woman who is starving and then performs an Act of Truth and becomes a man named
Rukmavān. (2) Rukmavān is reborn as the merchant’s son Sattvavara, who gives his
eye and his fl esh to a fl ock of hungry birds and then dies. (3) Sattvavara is reborn as
the brahmin Satyavrata, who gives his body to a starving tigress and dies.
3. Jātakamālā (of Haribhatta) 6: Rūpyāvatījātaka
˙˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Hahn 1992:51–57. Trans. Ohnuma 2004c. One episode: Th e woman
Rūpyāvatī gives her breasts to another woman who is starving, and later has them
restored through her husband’s Act of Truth. Th en she performs her own Act of
Truth, by which she becomes a man named Rūpyāvata.
See also: Grey 1994:305–306 (s.v. Rukmavatī, Rūpāvatī); Ohnuma 2000.
J. A Prince or an Ascetic Gives His Body to a Starving Tigress
1. Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) 1: Vyāghrījātaka
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:1–6 and Kern 1891:1–6 (emendations in Khoroche
1987:15). Trans. Khoroche 1989:5–9 and Speyer 1895:2–8. A brahmin ascetic gives
his body to a starving tigress and dies.
2. Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra 18: Vyāghrīparivarta
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Nobel 1937:201–240. Trans. Emmerick 1970:85–97. Prince Mahāsattva
gives his body to a starving tigress and dies.
3. Avadānakalpalatā (of Ksemendra) 95: Vyāghryavadāna
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 538–539 (emendations in De Jong 1979:240–242).
Prince Karunarekha gives his body to a starving tigress and dies.
˙
279

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
See also: citations for episode 3 in item I above; Grey 1994:222–224 (s.v.
Mahāsattva, Vyāghrī); Schlingloff 1988:145–146; Cummings 1982:85–93; Feer
1899.
K. A Hare Gives His Body to a Wandering Supplicant or Ascetic
1. Pāli Jātaka 316: Sasajātaka
Pāli. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:3, 51–56. Trans. Cowell 1895–1913:3, 34–37. A hare
throws himself into a fi re to feed a wandering supplicant (the deity Śakra in
disguise), but the fi re refuses to burn him.
2. Cariyāpitaka 1.10: Sasapanditacariyah
˙ ˙˙ ˙
Pāli. Ed. Jayawickrama 1974:2, 12–13. Trans. Horner 1975:2, 14–16. A hare throws
himself into a fi re to feed a wandering supplicant (the deity Śakra in disguise),
but the fi re refuses to burn him. Th e account is told in the fi rst- person voice by
the Buddha himself.
3. Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) 6: Śaśajātaka
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:30–35 and Kern 1891:27–33 (emendations in Khoroche
1987:19–21 and Hahn 1986–1992). Trans. Khoroche 1989:32–38 and Speyer 1895:37–
45. A hare throws himself into a fi re to feed a wandering supplicant (the deity
Śakra in disguise) and dies.
4. Avadānaśataka 37: Śaśāvadāna
Sanskrit. Ed. Speyer 1958:1, 206–212 and Vaidya 1958:93–95. Trans. Feer 1891:138–
142. A hare throws himself into a fi re to feed an ascetic who lives with him in the
forest, but the ascetic immediately pulls him out.
5. Avadānakalpalatā (of Ksemendra) 104: Śaśakāvadāna
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 556–557 (emendations in De Jong 1979:262–264). A
hare throws himself into a fi re to feed an ascetic who lives with him in the forest,
but the ascetic immediately pulls him out.
280

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
See also: Grey 1994:338–341 (s.v. Sasa); Grey 1994:341 (s.v. Śaśaka); Schlingloff
1988:123–129.
L. Th e Elephant Saddanta Gives His Tusks to a Hunter
˙ ˙
1. Pāli Jātaka 514: Chaddantajātaka
Pāli. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:5, 36–57. Trans. Cowell 1895–1913:5, 20–31. Th e el-
ephant Saddanta gives his tusks to a hunter (sent by an evil queen) and dies.
˙ ˙
2. Kalpanāmanditikā (of Kumāralāta) 69
˙˙
Chinese translation from Sanskrit (T. 201). Fr. trans. Huber 1908:403–411.
Th e elephant Saddanta gives his tusks to a hunter (sent by an evil queen) and
˙ ˙
dies.
See also: Grey 1994:50–52 (s.v. Chaddanta, Saddanta); Grey 1994:109 (s.v.
˙ ˙
Hastaka, Saddanta); Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 716–717, n. 1; Foucher 1917; Feer
˙ ˙
1895.
M. An Elephant Gives His Body to Lost Travelers
1. Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) 30: Hastijātaka
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:209–216 and Kern 1891:200–207 (emendations in
Khoroche 1987:66–68). Trans. Khoroche 1989:213–220 and Speyer 1895:281–291.
An elephant gives his body to a group of hungry and lost travelers and dies.
2. Avadānakalpalatā (of Ksemendra) 96: Hastyavadāna
˙
Sanskrit. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 539–540 (emendations in De Jong 1979:243–244).
An elephant gives his body to a group of hungry and lost travelers and dies.
See also: Grey 1994:109–110 (s.v. Hastin); Schlingloff 1988:149–150; Cummings
1982:69–73.
N. Th ree Stories from the (Mahāyāna) Karunāpundarīka Sūtra
˙ ˙˙
1. King Ambara gives away many body parts and eventually becomes a fl esh-
mountain.
281

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
Ed. Yamada 1968:2, 376–384. Summarized in Yamada 1968:1, 112–117. See also:
Grey 1994:11 (s.v. Ambara).
2. King Durdhana sacrifi ces his life to become a fl esh- mountain.
Ed. Yamada 1968:2, 360–368. Summarized in Yamada 1968:1, 108.
3. King Punyabala gives his eyes and skin to an Ajīvaka and dies.
˙
Ed. Yamada 1968:2, 348–355. Summarized in Yamada 1968:1, 105–107. See also:
Grey 1994:290–291 (s.v. Punyabala).
˙
O. Supporting Stories from the Chinese Buddhist Canon
In addition to the stories that constitute my corpus (given above), I have some-
times drawn additional details from the following thirteen stories translated from
Chinese into French in Édouard Chavannes’ two- volume Cinq cents contes et
apologues extraits du Tripitaka chinois (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1910–1934). All of
˙
them come from Chinese Buddhist canonical texts presumably translated from
lost Indic originals, and most of them run parallel to one or more stories within
my corpus (though individual names and details are often diff erent). I have used
Chavannes’ numbers to designate each story.
1. Story no. 2 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 7–11), translated from Liudu ji jing, or Sūtra
on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): A king gives away his fl esh to ransom
a dove from a hawk (the deity Śakra in disguise), and later has his body restored
by a celestial doctor (equivalent to plotline B above).
2. Story no. 4 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 15–17), translated from Liudu ji jing, or
Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): An ascetic gives his body to a
starving tigress and dies (equivalent to plotline J above).
3. Story No. 5 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 17–19), translated from Liudu ji jing, or
Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): A king off ers his head to a brahmin
but the gift is not completed (equivalent to plotline F above).
4. Story no. 10 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 38–45), translated from Liudu ji jing, or
Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): A king off ers his head to a brahmin
to bring to another king for a reward and dies (similar to plotline F above).
282

a corpus of gift- of- the- body JA¯TAKAS
5. Story no. 11 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 46–49), translated from Liudu ji jing,
or Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): A king off ers his head to a
brahmin to bring to another king for a reward; he cuts his own head off and dies
(similar to plotlines F and C above).
6. Story no. 19 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 71–72), translated from Liudu ji jing,
or Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): A female swan tries to feed
her own fl esh to her young during a drought, but they refuse to eat it. Th e gods
respond by granting all of their wishes.
7. Story no. 21 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 75–77), translated from Liudu ji jing, or
Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): A hare throws himself into a fi re
to feed an ascetic who lives with him in the forest, but the fi re refuses to burn
him (equivalent to plotline K above).
8. Story no. 28 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 101–104), translated from Liudu ji jing,
or Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): An elephant gives his tusks to
a hunter (sent by an evil queen) and dies (equivalent to plotline L above).
9. Story no. 67 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 245–247), translated from Liudu ji jing,
or Sūtra on the Collection of Six Perfections (T. 152): A merchant kills himself in the
ocean so that his drowning companions can use his body to get to shore; Śakra
later restores his life (similar to plotline H above).
10. Story no. 139 (Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 411–12), translated from Jiu za piyu jing
(T. 206): A hare throws himself into a fi re to feed an ascetic who lives with him in
the forest, but the fi re refuses to burn him (equivalent to plotline K above).
11. Story no. 191 (Chavannes 1910–1934:2, 59–61), translated from Za piyu jing
(T. 207): A king off ers his head to a brahmin to bring to another king for a reward,
but the gift is not completed (equivalent to plotline F above).
12. Story no. 197 (Chavannes 1910–1934:2, 70–72), translated from Zhong jing
xuan za piyu jing (T. 208): A king gives his fl esh to ransom a dove (the deity
Viśvakarman in disguise) from a hawk (the deity Śakra in disguise); his body is
later restored by Śakra (equivalent to plotline B above).
13. Story no. 344 (Chavannes 1910–1934:2, 289–293), translated from Mohe senzi
lu (Mahāsamghika Vinaya [T. 1425]): An elephant gives his tusks to a hunter and
˙
dies (equivalent to plotline L above).
283

NOTES
Introduction
1. Th e Buddha’s journey to northwest India is not found in any of the stan-
dard B uddha-b iographies, but does appear, for example, in the Mūlasarvāstivāda
Vinaya. On this legend, see Strong 1992:23–37, Lamotte 1966, and Przyluski
1914.
2. On this point, see Strong 2004:52–55, Snellgrove 1987:311, and Lamotte
1988:332–337.
3. For translations of this account (T. 2085), see Li 2002, Legge 1965, Giles
1956, and Beal 1884: xxiii–lxxxiii.
4. Trans. Li 2002:169–170.
5. Trans. Li 2002:170.
6. Trans. Li 2002:170.
7. Trans. Li 2002:170.
8. Trans. Li 2002:170.
9. For translations of this account (T. 2087), see Li 1996, Watters 1904–1905,
and Beal 1884. See also Wriggins 1996 and Grousset 1932.
10. Trans. Li 1996:78.
285

notes to pages 3–8
11. Trans. Li 1996:95.
12. Trans. Li 1996:94–95.
13. Trans. Li 1996:99.
14. See Foucher 1974 for a detailed account of Xuanzang’s travels through
the northwest and an attempt to identify the sites he describes with current- day
archaeological remains.
15. Trans. Li 1996:86.
16. Trans. Li 1996:86–87.
17. Trans. Li 1996:87.
18. Trans. Li 1996:88.
19. See Foucher 1917: pl. XXX(1).
20. Th is story is also depicted at Bhārhut, Amarāvatī, Sāñcī, and Ajantā Cave
˙˙
10. For a comparison of textual and visual versions of this story, see Cummings
1982:68–73 and Foucher 1917.
21. Th e same story is also depicted at Amarāvatī, Nāgārjunikonda, and
˙˙
Mathurā. For a comparison of textual and visual versions of the various stories
involving King Śibi, see Parlier 1991, Schlingloff 1988:86–92, and Cummings
1982:74–83.
22. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 143. Th e Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra (or
Da zhi du lun, T. 1509) is attributed to Nāgārjuna, but exists only in a Chinese
translation done by Kumārajīva in 404–405 c.e.; moreover, there is scholarly
consensus on the fact that the attribution to Nāgārjuna is incorrect, and the text
most likely constitutes a Chinese or Central Asian compilation. Nevertheless,
since this massive text clearly borrows much from the Indian Buddhist tradition
and contains an abundance of interesting material relating to the bodhisattva’s
bodily self- sacrifi ce, I will be treating it loosely throughout this book as if it were
indeed an Indian Buddhist text.
23. Trans. Bays 1983:1, 249–256; Ensink 1952:22–27; and Shackleton Bailey
1954.
24. Trans. Shackleton Bailey 1954:26.
25. As quoted in Śāntideva’s Śiksāsamuccaya (ed. Bendall 1957:21; trans. Bendall
˙
and Rouse 1990:23).
26. As quoted in Śāntideva’s Śiksāsamuccaya (ed. Bendall 1957:25–26; trans.
˙
Bendall and Rouse 1990:28).
27. dānavarsam krtayugamegha iva vavarsa (from Jātakamālā 2, ed. Vaidya
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1959a:7).
28. dānaśaundah (from Jātakamālā 2, ed. Vaidya 1959a:8).
˙˙ ˙
29. From Jātakatthakathā 499 (ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 402).
˙˙
286

notes to pages 8–21
30. mama ito akkhito satagunena sahassagunena sabbaññūtañānakkhim eva
˙ ˙ ˙
piyam tassa me idam paccayo hoti ‘ti (from Jātakatthakathā 499, ed. Fausboll 1875–
˙ ˙ ˙˙
1897:4, 407).
31. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 538, vv. 15–18.
32. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 317–319, vv. 28b–50. I have retained the v erse-f orm of
some of the verses.
33. Contained in the eighteenth chapter of the (Mahāyāna) Suvarnabhāsottama
˙
Sūtra.
34. Contained in the thirty- second chapter of the Divyāvadāna.
35. Ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 12–13, vv. 125–143.
36. pārami pūrayim (ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 13, v. 147).
˙
37. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 556–57, vv. 10–17 (in v. 12, reading - pāśam rather than
˙
- pāśa- and bhrtyākulam rather than - bhrtyākulā [see De Jong 1979:262–263]).
˙ ˙ ˙
38. See the discussion further below and note 50.
39. Ed. Schmidt 1845:171–173.
40. Ohnuma 1998.
41. Given the problems involved in dating early Buddhist texts, it is diffi cult
to say precisely how early in the Buddhist tradition such stories can be placed,
but the elephant story (Saddanta Jātaka), for example, is depicted in art as early
˙ ˙
as Bhārhut and Sāñcī (second to fi rst centuries b.c.e.).
42. Trans. Horner and Jaini 1985.
43. Th e Vessantara Jātaka is Pāli Jātaka 547 (trans. Cowell 1895–1913:6, 246–305
and Cone and Gombrich 1977). For the speculation that the Vessantara Jātaka’s
enormous popularity may have come at the cost of the gift- of- the- body theme, I
am indebted to John Strong (personal communication, September 28, 2004).
44. It is doubtful whether the Divyāvadāna can really be classifi ed as a “rela-
tively early” collection. Although it is common to place it in around the fourth
or fi fth century c.e. (see, for example, Winternitz 1933:284–290 and Weeraratne
1989), Michael Hahn believes that the collection as a whole cannot predate 1000
c.e. (personal communication, March 29, 2005). Nevertheless, substantial por-
tions of the collection are undoubtedly signifi cantly earlier. (On the sources of the
Divyāvadāna, see Huber 1904, Huber 1906, and Lévi 1907.) It is also important
to note that the Divyāvadāna exists in several widely varying manuscripts, and
the edition published by Cowell and Neil (1970) represents only one version of
what seems to have been a somewhat fl uid textual tradition.
45. Sanskrit fragments of the Kalpanāmanditikā have been edited in Lüders
˙˙
1926, and Kumārajīva’s Chinese translation of the complete Kalpanāmanditikā
˙˙
has been translated into French by Huber (1908), who mistakenly identifi es it
287

notes to pages 21–26
as the Sūtrālamkāra of Aśvaghosa. On the identifi cation of Kumārajīva’s text as
˙ ˙
Kumāralāta’s Kalpanāmanditikā, see Hahn 1982. Th roughout this book, I rely on
˙˙
Huber’s translation.
46. Th ese two texts, whose original Sanskrit contents appear to have come
down to us as scattered portions of various anonymous avadāna collections, have
been painstakingly reconstructed by Michael Hahn (in the case of Haribhatta,
˙˙
with the help of an existing Tibetan translation). Among his many publications,
see especially (in English) Hahn 1992 and 1993. Hahn tentatively dates Haribhatta
˙˙
to the early decades of the fi fth century, and places Gopadatta some time after
Haribhatta but before 800 c.e.
˙˙
47. Th e Mahajjātakamālā was composed in late medieval Nepal (fourteenth
to seventeenth centuries c.e.); half of its contents paraphrase an earlier Mahāyāna
sūtra, the Karunāpundarīka Sūtra (see Tatelman 2000:10). It has been edited by
˙ ˙˙
Michael Hahn (1985).
48. Th roughout this book, I make use of Paul Harrison’s term “Mainstream
Buddhism” to refer to traditional, non- Mahāyāna Buddhism. See Harrison
1992:77–78, n. 2.
49. I am drawing on this text (relying on the French translations available in
Chavannes 1910–1934) because of the many interesting gift-o f-t he-b ody stories
it contains, most of which seem closely related to stories existing in Sanskrit or
Pāli.
50. Th roughout this book, I refer to this text as the Sūtra of the Wise and the
Fool and rely only on the Tibetan translation, as edited in Schmidt 1845 (I am
aware of Takahashi 1969 but was unable to obtain a copy). Th e Mongolian version
has been translated into English in Frye 1981. For the many historical uncertain-
ties surrounding this text, see Mair 1993, Lévi 1925, and Takakusu 1901. Despite
the diffi culties in making use of it, I have freely drawn on this text because of the
several interesting gift-o f-t he-b ody stories it contains, most of which seem closely
related to stories existing in Sanskrit or Pāli.
51. Dayal 1970:181–187.
52. Dayal 1970:175.
53. Dayal 1970:181–182.
54. Ramanujan 1991:46.
1. “Th e ‘Gift- of- the- Body’ Genre”
1. sarvamdadah sarvaparityāgī nihsan˙gaparityāgī ca mahati tyāge vartate (ed.
˙ ˙ ˙
Cowell and Neil 1970:316).
288

notes to pages 26–34
2. rājakrīdayā krīditum ārabdhāh (ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:317).
˙ ˙ ˙
3. Ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:320.
4. Pāli Jātaka 316 and Cariyāpitaka 1.10.
˙
5. Khoroche 1989:xvii–xviii.
6. My discussion of genre has been infl uenced by many works, including the
following: Duff 2000, Fowler 1991, Rosmarin 1985, Kent 1986, Fowler 1982, Du-
brow 1982, Culler 1981, Fowler 1979, Todorov 1976, Jameson 1975, Culler 1975,
Guillén 1971, and Fowler 1970.
7. Th e death of genre has been heralded by everyone from (most famously)
the early- twentieth- century Italian philosopher Benedetto Croce (2000) to (more
recently) Jacques Derrida (2000).
8. Guillén 1971:109.
9. Jauss 1974. Jauss borrows this phrase from Karl Popper but adapts it to the
reading of literature.
10. Propp 1958; see also Propp 1983. Th e English title Morphology of the Folktale
is somewhat misleading, since the object of analysis in Propp’s work is the fairy
tale (types 300–749 in the Aarne- Th ompson Tale-T ype Index).
11. See Culler 1975 and 1981.
12. See Fowler 1970.
13. Fowler 1982:47.
14. See Rosmarin 1985:3–51 (quoted phrases taken from 25, 46, and 43).
15. I am referring here to the Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool; see Introduction
(and note 50 therein).
16. I would cite Ajantā as one such possibility. Th e caves of Ajantā contain
˙˙ ˙˙
paintings that depict scenes from Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, with captions that seem
to come directly from the text (see Schlingloff 1988). Th us, we can say with some
confi dence that this text (and its version of these stories) was known by the com-
munity of this particular place and time. Moreover, since the dating of Ajantā’s
˙˙
caves is relatively certain, and since inscriptions and other types of evidence give
us some indication of the social, historical, and political context of the Ajantā
˙˙
community, we could perhaps say something about the reception and interpre-
tation of the Jātakamālā within this particular context, and also reconstruct its
potential readers.
17. Strong 1992:xii.
18. Strong 2004:xv.
19. Collins 1998:78. He also, of course, gives a lengthy theoretical and meth-
odological explanation of this concept and its relationship to historical change
(72–89).
20. Hallisey and Hansen 1996:311.
289

notes to pages 35–36
21. Occasionally, however, this does occur. Mahajjātakamālā 45, for example,
refers to itself as a dehadānāvadāna, or “gift- of- the- body avadāna” (ed. Hahn
1985:550, v. 173).
22. Pāli Jātaka 316, Jātakamālā 6, and Avadānaśataka 37.
23. Fowler 1982:158.
24. Etymologically, all scholars are in agreement that the term jātaka is formed
from jāta + ka, with jāta being derived from the Sanskrit verbal root jan (“to be
born,” “to happen,” “to occur”) and ka being an affi x—jātaka thus indicating
“of or relating to birth.”
25. Th e term can also be applied to other Buddhas or advanced bodhisattvas,
but is much more commonly associated with the historical Buddha Śākyamuni.
Th us Winternitz (1908:491) defi nes the jātaka as “a story in which the Bodhi-
sattva, i.e. the Buddha in one of his former births, plays some part, either that
of the hero or of some other character, or sometimes only that of a looker- on.”
Similarly, various Pāli and Sanskrit dictionaries defi ne the word as “the story of
any previous birth of the Buddha” (Rhys Davids and Stede 1989), “a story of a
previous birth of the Buddha” (Edgerton 1985), and “the story of a former birth
of Gautama Buddha” (Monier- Williams 1979).
26. On the systems of nine and twelve an˙gas, see Lamotte 1988:143–147, Ka-
lupahana 1965, and Lamotte 1944–1980:5, 2281–2286.
27. For canonical accounts concerning the “three knowledges” (trividyā) ob-
tained by the Buddha during the three watches of the night of his enlightenment,
see Bareau 1963:75–91.
28. For the Jātakanidāna’s version of this episode, see Jayawickrama 2000:3–35;
for the Buddhavamsa’s version, see Horner 1975: pt. 1, 9–25.
˙
29. In the later Th eravādin tradition of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, however,
the situation is slightly diff erent. Medieval-p eriod Th eravādin narrative texts such
as the Mahāsampindanidāna, Sotatthakīmahānidāna, and Jinakālamālī stretch the
˙˙ ˙˙
jātaka backward in time by up to sixteen more “innumerable eons” to include
six lives that occurred before the Buddha’s birth as Sumedha. But here too the
movement into the past is not infi nite; instead these lives begin with the very
fi rst life in which the Buddha made a fi rm vow to attain Buddhahood—but did
not yet receive a prediction of his future success. Th us, although these additional
lives do not technically deal with the Buddha as a bodhisattva, they do deal with
a being who has formally aspired to become a bodhisattva in the future. Beyond
this point, the jātakas do not extend. On this “extended biography,” see Strong
2001:23–27, Derris 2000:1–11, and Gombrich 1972; and for a sensitive analysis of
the additional lives recounted in one such text (the Sotatthakīmahānidāna), see
˙˙
Derris 2000:26–123.
290

notes to pages 37–38
30. Jātakamālā 5, 12, and 28 (trans. Khoroche 1989:26–33, 84–87, 193–204).
31. Speyer (1958:2, ii–iv) derives avadāna from the verb ava + dā, in the
sense of “to cut off , to select,” with avadāna suggesting “something cut off ,
something selected,” and thus, “notorious facts, fascinora,” and eventually, “il-
lustrious, glorious achievements.” He notes that non- Buddhist writers regularly
use the word avadāna in the sense of “glorious achievement,” and even the
Jātakamālā itself, in two instances, uses the word in the same way. Th omas
(1933:35) and Vaidya (1958:ix) largely concur, with the former defi ning avadāna
as “glorious achievement” or “heroic story,” and the latter as “good, illustrious,
heroic or noble act.” While these defi nitions seem to ignore those avadānas that
involve wicked deeds (such as those in the fi fth section of the Avadānaśataka),
Winternitz’ defi nition (1933:277–278) does take these into account: “Th e word
avadāna means a ‘noteworthy deed,’ sometimes in a bad sense, but generally
in the good sense of ‘a heroic deed,’ ‘a feat,’ with the Buddhists a ‘religious or
moral feat’ and then also the ‘story of a noteworthy deed, or feat.’” However,
an alternative etymology adhered to by Müller (1881:50, n.), Monier- Williams
(1979: s.v. avadāna), and Takahata (1954:xxi–xxiv) derives avadāna from the verb
ava + dai, in the sense of “to cleanse, to purify.” Th us, Müller defi nes avadāna as
“a legend, originally a pure and virtuous act . . . afterwards a sacred story, and
possibly a story the hearing of which purifi es the mind,” while Takahata claims
that it is “beyond doubt that the central idea underlying avadāna literature is . . .
the purifi cation of mind.” In Chinese, however, avadāna was rendered as pi yu,
a word meaning something akin to “parable,” “simile,” “metaphor,” or “illustra-
tion”—and in various Buddhist śāstras, avadāna is explained in similar terms,
described as being synonymous with drstānta (“example”), upamā (“simile”),
˙˙˙
and aupamyodāharana (“illustration by way of a simile”) (see Matsumura 1980:
˙
xiv–xvii for the relevant references). Many Japanese scholars have followed these
interpretations, sometimes also proposing an etymological derivation from ava +
dā, in the sense of “to unfasten, to unravel,” and thus, “to show clearly or explain
by way of illustration.”
32. Oldenburg (1893:301), for example, says that avadāna is applied to “legends”
in general; Burnouf (1844:64) says that the true sense of avadāna is “légende, récit
légendaire”; and the Pāli Text Society’s Pāli- English Dictionary defi nes apadāna as
“legend, life- history” (Rhys Davids and Stede 1989: s.v. apadāna).
33. For example: “[Avadānas] usually revolve around two subjects, the expla-
nation of present actions through past actions, and the prediction of rewards or
suff erings reserved for the future through present actions” (Burnouf 1844:64);
“An avadāna is a tale which establishes a relationship between current events and
conditions, on the one hand, and past or future events and conditions, on the
291

notes to pages 39–42
other, by reason of the merit or demerit of the acts of a specifi c individual—the
current state being a reward or punishment for past actions, the future state being
a reward or punishment for present actions” (Feer 1879:147); “[Th e main tendency
of the avadāna is,] on the one hand, to show the irresistible and all-p ervading
power of Karma towards determining for each creature the course and the fortune
of his existences within . . . Samsāra, and on the other, to convince the minds
˙
of the audience of the individual power of every creature to gather, by means of
the performance of good actions, stores of śuklam karma [positive karma] which
˙
shall have precious results . . . in time to come” (Speyer 1958:2, iv); “Th e word
apadāna . . . means ‘heroic deed, glorious deed’ . . . [Th e Apadānas ] are ‘tales of
the heroic deeds,’ i.e., the pious works of the saints (which often consist of very
commonplace actions performed in adoration of a Buddha). . . . Th ese stories are,
therefore, legends of saints” (Winternitz 1933:157); “Th e general characteristic of
all avadānas is that an avadāna primarily discusses the consequence of some act
good or bad . . . directed towards the Buddha, the Dharma or the San˙gha, or
some other object of religious signifi cance, such as stūpas” (Weeraratne 1967:396);
“An avadāna is a narrative of the religious deeds of an individual and is primarily
intended to illustrate the workings of karma and the values of faith and devotion
. . . the main protagonist of the avadāna is usually . . . [an] ordinary individual,
often a layman” (Strong 1983a:22); “[An avadāna is] a biography which depicts
the workings of karma in the life of an individual or individuals” (Tatelman
2000:5).
34. See, for example, Weeraratne 1967:396–398 and Feer 1891:xii–xiv.
35. See note 27 above.
36. See note 26 above.
37. Th at is, avadānika and avadānārthakovida (ed. Vaidya 1958:272 and 275;
see the discussion in Strong 1985).
38. Weeraratne 1967:397.
39. Speyer 1958:2, vii–viii.
40. Strong 1977:62.
41. Fr. trans. Feer 1891; trans. Horner 1975: pt. 1.
42. Strong 1977:53–64; see also Strong 1985. The four texts in ques-
tion are the Kalpadrumāvadānamālā, Ratnāvadānamālā, Aśokāvadānamālā,
and Ratnamālāvadāna. Excluding a few exceptions and irregularities, the
Kalpadrumāvadānamālā retells stories 1 and 2 from each varga of the Avadānaśataka
(except the fourth); the Ratnāvadānamālā retells stories 3 and 4 from each varga
(except the fourth); the Aśokāvadānamālā retells story 10 from each varga (except
the fourth); and the Ratnamālāvadāna retells twenty- one remaining stories that
have not already been treated (and excluding any from the fourth varga).
292

notes to pages 42–46
43. See, for example, Hibbets 1999a:216–239, and its criticism of Gombrich
1984 and 1996; see also the discussion in Egge 2002:124–125, n. 39.
44. Some of the points I have made in this discussion are echoed in an un-
published paper by John Strong that I received only belatedly. Strong observes,
for example: “Avadānas are about acts done in the presence of the Buddha or
some other meritorious fi eld; jātakas are about acts done in the absence of such.
Another way of putting this, perhaps, is to say that avadānas provide the devotee
with models for religious action in a Buddhist milieu, while jātakas provide the
devotee with models for religious action in a non-B uddhist milieu. Th is does not
mean that in the jātakas there is no fi eld of merit. Rather, in them, the fi eld of
merit and the m erit-m aker are merged; they are, in fact, one and the same. In
the jātakas, the bodhisattva’s actions refl ect his own glory, while in the avadānas
the same actions refl ect another’s” (Strong 1983b:17).
45. Consider, for example, the aforementioned narratives of the Buddhavamsa
˙
and the Avadānaśataka’s second varga. If the heroic moral deeds performed by
the bodhisattva in the jātakas stand in sharp contrast to the ordinary ritual deeds
performed by commonplace Buddhists in the avadānas, then narratives such as
these in which the bodhisattva worships former Buddhas serve to bring these two
realms together. For it is in these narratives that we suddenly discover that the
austere bodhisattva of the jātakas—performing moral feats we can only worship
but never hope to imitate ourselves—is also the ordinary Buddhist who himself
made simple off erings of fl owers or almsfood to a former Buddha, who himself
took advantage of a powerful fi eld of merit. Th us, in this group of stories, the
ethos of the jātaka is conjoined with the ethos of the avadāna: he is us, and we
are him. Th e same point is made in a slightly diff erent way in stories such as those
appearing in the fi rst varga of the Avadānaśataka, in which an ordinary Buddhist
makes a ritual off ering to the Buddha and receives a prediction of his own future
Buddhahood. Th ese stories communicate the message that even when we engage
in commonplace, ritual, avadāna- type off erings, we become like Sumedha himself
and initiate a path that will eventually encompass those j ātaka- type moral deeds
we can only stand in awe of at the present time. Both types of stories mix, in
some manner, the ethos of the jātaka and the ethos of the avadāna—thus ensur-
ing that the life of the Buddha and the ritual of the Buddhist do not become too
estranged from each other.
46. “Real jātakas” (Speyer 1958:2, v); “unequivocal jātakas” (Speyer 1958:2, v);
“true jātakas” (Speyer 1958:2, xvi); “jātakas proper” (Weeraratne 1967:396); “classi-
cal jātakas” (Feer 1891:xv); “distinctly Buddhist jātakas” (Norman 1983:81); etc.
47. Barua 1939:vi; Morris 1882:xv; Horner 1975: pt. 2, vi; Rhys Davids 1880:liv.
48. For example, Khoroche 1989:xi.
293

notes to pages 46–55
49. Trans. Jayawickrama 2000:58.
50. Trans. Li 2002:206.
51. Notice that much the same is true in the quote by Speyer I gave above
(cited in note 39), where a contrast is drawn not between avadānas and jātakas
in general, but between avadānas and jātakas involving gifts of the body. It is these
jātakas in particular—what Speyer calls the “world- famed heroic performances”
of the bodhisattva—that are called upon to emphasize the stark contrast between
jātakas and avadānas.
52. Fowler 1982:37–44.
53. Pāli Jātaka 12 (trans. Cowell 1895–1913:1, 36–42).
54. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:1, 151.
55. Divyāvadāna 27 (trans. Strong 1983a:268–286); Th erīgāthā 71 (trans. Nor-
man 1971:38–40).
56. However, for an analysis that brings together the story of Subhā and the
story of King Śibi’s gift of his eyes, see Trainor 1993.
57. Versions of this story include Pāli Jātaka 313 (trans. Cowell 1895–1913:26–
29) and Jātakamālā 28 (trans. Khoroche 1989:193–204).
58. For an interesting discussion of this genre, see Granoff 1991–1992.
59. Trans. Jones 1949–1956:2, 240–242.
60. Trans. Hurvitz 1976:293–302. For a discussion of this theme and its ritual
elaborations in China, see Benn 2001, Jan 1965, Filliozat 1963, Gernet 1960, and
Kieschnick 1997:35–50.
61. See citations in Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 143–145, n. 1, and 2, 975, n. 1.
62. Durt 1998.
63. In a more recent article, however, Durt (2000) has discussed a somewhat
similar story that does feature the bodhisattva as its hero. Th is is the story (pre-
served in four Chinese texts) of a seven- year- old boy named Sujāti (a previous
birth of the Buddha) who feeds his fl esh to his parents when they have no other
food, thus demonstrating the virtue of fi lial piety.
2. “Conventions of Plot”
1. Although the jātakas themselves are full of wise and noble animals who
are capable of making complex moral choices (especially when such animals are
previous births of the Buddha himself), the more common view of the animal
rebirth in Buddhist literature is that such an existence is full of suff ering and
wholly governed by the concerns of physical survival. Th is is the view that ap-
294

notes to pages 55–61
pears to predominate in the depiction of animal recipients within gift-o f-t he-
body jātakas.
2. paritrāyasva mahārāja asmā[n asmā]d vyādheh prayaccha jīvitam iti (ed.
˙
Speyer 1958:1, 170).
3. śastravyagrakarah pitakān ādāya . . . jīvata eva māmsāny utkartitum ārabdhah
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
(ed. Speyer 1958:1, 171).
4. Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 26.
5. In some cases, in fact, epidemic and famine seem to reduce human beings to
something well below the animal state. In a story from Haribhatta’s Jātakamālā,
˙˙
for example, when a woman, dying of starvation during a horrible famine, decides
to eat her own newly born son, the bodhisattva compares her unfavorably with
a lowly animal, the crow: “Even when affl icted with hunger, a mother crow cares
for and nourishes her young, who follow her around with their faces lifted up and
their beaks wide open, longing for food and uttering a harsh cry. So how much
more should a human woman do so!” (vyākosatundakam udānanavīksamānam
˙ ˙˙ ˙ ˙
āhārakān˙ksinam udīritarūksaśabdam / pusnāti śāvam anugāminam ādarena kākī
˙˙ ˙ ˙˙ ˙
ksudhā parigatāpi satī kim u strī //; ed. Hahn 1992:53, v. 16).
˙
6. mūrtas . . . āśvāsa; śaranam; no bandhur abandhūnām; yathā vetsi . . . tathā
˙ ˙ ˙
nas trātum arhasi (ed. Vaidya 1959a:210–211).
7. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:215.
8. Referred to as the Pañcakānām Bhadravargikānām Jātakam.
˙ ˙ ˙
9. Michael Hahn (1992) believes that this story derives from Gopadatta’s
Jātakamālā.
10. Ed. Handurukande 1984:36–38, vv. 11–14, 16–17.
11. abhiprasāritamānasāh; śan˙kāvyathitahrdayā; visādadainyavidheyāś;
˙ ˙ ˙
cintāvisayātītagocaram avisahyam ativismayanīyam (ed. Handurukande 1984:44).
˙ ˙ ˙
12. Ed. Handurukande 1984:44, vv. 32–33.
13. Ed. Handurukande 1984:191–192, vv. 98–111.
14. Divyāvadāna 22.
15. kleśānām daurātmyam (ed. Handurukande 1967:54).
˙
16. gyo sgyu; gyo thabs (ed. Hahn 1974: 188).
17. Two typical examples: In Avadānaśataka 31, when King Padmaka becomes
a healing fi sh on behalf of his subjects who are suff ering from a terrible illness
(i.e., pitiful recipients), the gods cry out with glee: “Th is great fi sh has appeared
like ambrosia in the sandy river for beings long tormented by great illness!” (esa
˙
dīrghakālamahāvyādhyutpīditānām amrtakalpo nadyām vālukāyām mahān rohita-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
matsyah prādurbhūta iti; ed. Speyer 1958:1, 171). In contrast, in Divyāvadāna 22,
˙
when the cruel brahmin Raudrāksa asks for King Candraprabha’s head (i.e., an
˙
295

notes to pages 61–62
evil recipient), the gods have a very diff erent response: “O Sinful Brahmin,” they
yell at him, “how can you now cut off the head of King Candraprabha, who is ir-
reproachable, non-i njurious, aff ectionate toward many people, and endowed with
many virtues?” (katham idānīm tvam pāpabrāhmana rājñaś Candraprabhasyādūsino
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙
‘napakārino mahājanavatsalasyānekagunasampannasya śiraś chetsyasīti; ed. Cowell
˙ ˙
and Neil 1970:325).
18. For example: karunāsahagatam maitracittam utpādya (from Divyāvadāna
˙ ˙
22, ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:327); bhūyasī karunā tesu samabhūt (from Jātakamālā
˙ ˙
8, ed. Vaidya 1959a:46); tīvrakārunyaś cintayām āsa (from Manicūdāvadāna, ed.
˙ ˙ ˙
Handurukande 1967:75); maitracittam upasthāpya (from Manicūdāvadāna, ed.
˙ ˙
Handurukande 1967:82); ksāntim maitrīm karunām ca vardhayām āsa (from
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:84).
˙ ˙
19. rājaiśvaryamadamatto; jīvita . . . trsnayā vyāmohito; drstadhārmikam
˙˙˙ ˙˙˙ ˙
sāmparāyikam cānartham manasi krtvaivam ātmano nāśāya pratipannas (ed. Han-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
durukande 1967:55–56).
20. udyataśastre ‘pi vadhake (ed. Handurukande 1967:55).
21. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:405.
22. It should be noted, however, that this is not always so easy for the bo-
dhisattva to do. Th e bodhisattva- elephant in Kalpanāmanditikā 69, for example,
˙˙
actually pauses for a brief moment before giving the hunter his tusks. When the
hunter asks him why he is pausing, he replies: “I waited a moment in order to
calm down my heart and make my suff erings cease, so that I could recover toward
you a heart full of veneration and faith. . . . I do everything with a pure inten-
tion. So wait for my heart to be free of all hesitation, so that my reward may be
vast and grand” (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:410). Th is suggestion of inner struggle is
a rather remarkable admission on the part of the bodhisattva.
23. See, for example, two verses from Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra: “Like a
treasure found in my own house and acquired without any eff ort, my enemy is
one who helps me in the practice that leads to enlightenment; therefore, I should
long for him” (aśramopārjitas tasmād grhe nidhir ivotthitah / bodhicaryāsahāyatvāt
˙ ˙
sprhanīyo ripur mama // [v. 6.107]; ed. Vaidya 1960:109); “It is precisely as a result
˙ ˙
of his evil intentions that I give rise to forbearance. Th erefore, he alone is the
cause of my forbearance; I should worship him as if he were the true dharma”
(taddustāśayam evātah pratītyotpadyate ksamā / sa evātah ksamāhetuh pūjyah
˙˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
saddharmavan mayā // [v. 6.111]; ed. Vaidya 1960:110).
24. kalyānamitram; arthatah śiksayate; kalyānam evāstv anayo ‘py ato ‘sya saband-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
humitrasya śaracchatāni (ed. Handurukande 1984:64). Th is passage comes from
Avadānasārasamuccaya 3, which has been attributed by Michael Hahn (1992) to
Gopadatta’s Jātakamālā.
296

notes to pages 62–65
25. esām vadhakānām satvānām raudracittānām nirghrnahrdayānām pāpakārinām
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
tyaktaparalokānām akrtajñānām niskārunikānām (ed. Handurukande 1967:91);
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
cintāmanayo bhadraghatā dhenavaś ca kāmaduhā guruvac ca devavac ca (ibid., 92).
˙ ˙
26. yid bzhin nor ni nor tsam ster byed kyi // slong ba’i skye bo yon tan kun ‘byung
ngo // (ed. Hahn 1974:174).
27. ‘di ni sbyin bdag ‘dir bdag slong mo pa // grogs po phyin ci log tu ci phyir byed
// (ed. Hahn 1974:174).
28. See the introduction to Kieckhefer and Bond 1988.
29. To cite just one example: “Due to the radiant power of [the bodhi-
sattva’s] virtue, Śakra’s marble stone throne became hot” (tassa sīlatejena sakkassa
pandukambalasilāsanam unhākāram dassesi; from Pāli Jātaka 316, ed. Fausboll
˙˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1875–1897:3, 53).
30. Th is happens, for example, in Jātakamālā 2 (ed. Vaidya 1959a:8), Jātakamālā
6 (ibid., 32–33), and Mahajjātakamālā 44 (ed. Hahn 1985:517, vv. 43–45).
31. For example: “Śakra, understanding his intention . . .” (sakko tassa ajjhāsayam
˙
viditvā; from Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 403); “Śakra, understand-
ing my intention . . .” (mama san˙kappam aññāya sakko; from Cariyāpitaka 1.8, ed.
˙
Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 6, v. 3); “Śakra, understanding my intention . . .” (mama
san˙kappam aññāya; from Cariyāpitaka 1.10, ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 12, v. 10).
˙
32. śakrasya devendrasyādhastāj jñānadarśanam pravartate (from Avadānaśataka
˙
34, ed. Speyer 1958:1, 185); devatānām cādhastāj jñānadarśanam pravartate (from
˙ ˙
Avadānaśataka 37, ed. Speyer 1958:1, 210).
33. For example: “I will give a boon to the great king and restore his eye”
(mahārājassa varam datvā cakkhu patipākatikam karissāmīti; from Pāli Jātaka 499,
˙ ˙ ˙
ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 408); “Since such a wonderful being should not be made
to experience such hardship for long, I will endeavor to restore his eye by showing
him how to do it” (tan nāyam āścaryasattvaś ciram imam parikleśam anubhavitum
˙
arhati / yatah prayatisye caksur asyopāyapradarśanād utpādayitum; from Jātakamālā
˙ ˙ ˙
2, ed. Vaidya 1959a:12); “I should act now in such a manner that this Great Being
might obtain excellent, divine vision and [again] be able to see” (tadyathāyam
˙
mahāsattvo labdhvā divyam sudarśanam / paśyet tathā prayatnāni kartum arhāmi
˙
sāmpratam //; from Mahajjātakamālā 44, ed. Hahn 1985:526, v. 164); “Th e great
˙
king has shown his compassion for all beings; it would be right for his body to
be rendered as it was previously” (from Kalpanāmanditikā 64, here spoken by
˙˙
Viśvakarman to Śakra, Fr. trans. Huber 1908:339); “Th is wonderful being should
not have to endure such hardship for very long. Is there any way that his body
can be restored to its former condition?” (nārhaty ayam mahātmā ciram imam
˙ ˙
parikleśam anubhavitum / tat ko ‘sāv upāyah syād yenāsya yathāpaurānam śarīram
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
syād iti; from Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:44).
˙ ˙
297

notes to pages 65–70
34. On the Act of Truth, see Brown 1968, 1963, 1940, and Burlingame 1917.
35. Ed. Handurukande 1967:45.
36. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:13.
37. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:338).
˙˙
38. From Avadānaśataka 34 (ed. Speyer 1958:1, 185–186).
39. From Jātakamālā 6 (ed. Vaidya 1959a:35).
40. For example: “I will test the royal hare” (sasarājam vimamsissāmiti; from
˙ ˙
Pāli Jātaka 316, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:3, 53); “[Śakra came] in order to test my
generosity” (dānam vimamsanāya; from Cariyāpitaka 1.10, ed. Jayawickrama 1974:
˙ ˙ ˙
pt. 2, 12, v. 10); “[Śakra came] in order to test him” (tassa vimamsanatthāya; from
˙
Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 403); “I will test him” (vimamsayāmi
˙
tam; from Cariyāpitaka 1.8, ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 6, v. 5); “[Śakra,]
˙ ˙
wishing to test the bodhisattva . . .” (bodhisattvasya mimāmsanārtham; from
˙ ˙
Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:28); “Suppose I were to test her?”
˙ ˙
(yan nv aham enām mimāmseyam; from Divyāvadāna 32, ed. Cowell and Neil
˙ ˙
1970:473); “I will just test him” (tam mimāmsisye tāvad enam iti; from Jātakamālā
˙ ˙
2, ed. Vaidya 1959a:8); “[Śakra,] wishing to test [the bodhisattva’s] character . . .”
(sattvam jijñāsuh; from Avadānakalpalatā 55, ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 334, v. 13).
˙ ˙
41. Trans. Khoroche 1989:119–125.
42. samāpūryamānavismayakautūhalena manasā tasya mahāsattvasya
˙
bhāvajijñāsayā (ed. Vaidya 1959a:33).
43. rājñā dānātirāgena kim svid idam vitarkitam / etat satyam asatyam vā drastum
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙ ˙
gaccheya tanmanah (ed. Hahn 1985:517, v. 47).
˙
44. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:330–341.
45. yesam samādinnattā sakko sakkattam ajjhagā; muttacāgo payatapāni vossag-
˙ ˙ ˙
garato yācayogo dānasamvibhāgarato (ed. Feer 1960:1, 228).
˙
46. pure pure dānam adāsi; sakkaccham dānam adāsi; āvasatham adāsi (ed.
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Feer 1960:1, 229).
47. dānam hi loke sakkasampattim deti (ed. Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1968–
˙ ˙
1971:2, 472).
48. chattimsakkhattum kho panāham bhikkhave sakko ahosim devānam indo
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
(ed. Morris 1955–1961:4, 89).
49. mā haiva sā rūpāvatī strī atah śakram bhavanāc cyāvayet (from Divyāvadāna
˙ ˙
32, ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:473); rūpyāvatī mām amarapurāt pracyāvya svayam
˙
eva devādhipatyam kartukāmā syād iti (from Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta] 6, ed.
˙ ˙˙
Hahn 1992:55).
50. Th is story comes from the Liudu ji jing (T. 152) (Fr. trans. Chavannes
1910–1934:1, 7–11 [story no. 2]).
51. Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 10 (story no. 2).
298

notes to pages 71–80
52. Pāli Jātaka 523 (trans. Cowell 1895–1913:5, 79–84). Isisin˙ga is more com-
monly known in Indic tradition by his Sanskrit name Rsyaśrn˙ga; for a discussion
˙˙ ˙
of several diff erent Hindu and Buddhist versions of his story, see O’Flaherty
1981:42–50.
53. Th e depiction of Śakra within gift-o f-t he-b ody stories that I have elucidated
here is consistent with his depiction throughout Indian Buddhist literature as a
whole. As Charles Godage has noted (1945), Śakra appears in Indian Buddhist texts as
a humanized, moral, and benefi cient character who respects the Buddha, recognizes
his inferiority to him, and is interested in hearing his teachings, but who is also “not
in any way free from general human weaknesses” such as ignorance and fear (60).
54. mahābrāhmana grhytām yad abhirucitam na me ‘tra vighnah kaścit astīti
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
(ed. Speyer 1958:1, 185).
55. adhīratayā cakampe; sādhvasākulitamatiś (ed. Handurukande 1984:78).
56. Ed. Handurukande 1984:80, vv. 68–69.
57. tyaktvā . . . krodhābhidhānam visam (ed. Handurukande 1984:84, v. 82).
˙ ˙
58. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:421.
59. so pana aggi bodhisattassa sarīre lomakūpamattam pi unham kātum nāsakkhi
˙ ˙ ˙
(ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:3, 55).
60. sītodakam . . . sameti . . . parilāham (ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 13, v.
˙ ˙ ˙
17). Th e commentary glosses sameti as vūpasameti.
61. From the Jiu za piyu jing (T. 206) (Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 411–
412 [story no. 139]).
62. From the Liudu ji jing (T. 152) (Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 71–72
[story no. 19]). I have not encountered an Indic version of this story.
63. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 662.
64. phalena saha sarvasvatyāgacittāj jane ‘khile / dānapāramitā proktā tasmāt sā
cittam eva tu // (v. 5.10, ed. Vaidya 1960:53).
65. cetanāham bhikkhave kammam vadāmi; cetayitvā kammam karoti kāyena
˙ ˙ ˙
vācāya manasā (ed. Morris 1955–1961:3, 415). In relation to dāna, however, this
was apparently not an uncontested point. In the Kathāvatthu (7.4), for example,
in relation to the proposition that “dāna is a mental state rather than the object
given,” the text has the Rājagirikas and Siddhatthikas agreeing with this point,
while the Th eravādins disagree (trans. Aung and Rhys Davids 1915:198–200).
66. saccabalena mahārāja avatthumhi dibbacakkhu uppajjati saccam yeva tat-
˙
tha vatthu bhavati dibbacakkhussa uppādāya (ed. Trenckner 1880:120; emphasis
added).
67. For example: in Pāli Jātaka 499, in company with the Act of Truth, Śakra
tells King Śibi to “choose a boon,” and the resulting eyes are later said to have
been “given by Śakra” (varam varassu; sakkabrāhmanassa . . . dinnacakkhum; ed.
˙ ˙ ˙
299

notes to pages 89–93
Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 409 and 410); in Jātakamālā 2, Śakra again tells King Śibi
to “choose a boon,” and later tells him, “these eyes of yours were given by me”
(varam vrnīsva; pratidatte te mayeme nayane; ed. Vaidya 1959a:12 and 14); and in
˙ ˙˙˙
the Manicūdāvadāna, King Manicūda’s restoration of his body by means of an Act
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
of Truth is immediately preceded by Śakra’s administration of “quickly strength-
ening and stimulating medicines” (sadyobalābhis samjīvanībhir ausadhībhir; ed.
˙ ˙
Handurukande 1967:44).
68. Th is is the case, for example, in two Chinese versions of the story of King
Śibi’s gift of fl esh to ransom a dove (one from the Liudu ji jing [T. 152], Fr. trans.
Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 7–11 [story no. 2], and one from the Zhong jing xuan za
piyu jing [T. 208], Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:2, 70–72 [story no. 197]), as
well as in the Tibetan Lokānandanātaka, where King Manicūda’s fl esh is restored
˙ ˙ ˙
directly by the earth goddess.
69. Granoff 1991–1992.
70. Granoff 1991–1992:168.
71. See, for example, Van Gennep 1960 and Turner 1995, 1987, 1977, and
1974.
72. Ed. Yamada 1968:2, 381–382.
73. nidhikotīnayutaśatasahasrāni nidhānānām (ed. Yamada 1968:2, 382); sapta-
˙ ˙ ˙
saptavarsakotīnayutaśatasahasresv (ibid., 383); gan˙gānadīvālikāsamesu (ibid., 383).
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
74. svastyayanena . . . mahatā (ed. Vaidya 1959a:44).
75. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:45.
76. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:48–49.
77. As Khoroche (1989: xviii) has pointed out, the superiority of Buddhist
morality to the realpolitik or nīti of the Arthaśāstra is a consistent theme through-
out the Jātakamālā. See also Meadows (1986:9–10), who summarizes numerous
passages in the Jātakamālā in which the dharma proper to a good Buddhist king
is explicitly contrasted with nīti.
78. param prasādam vismayam copajagmuh (ed. Vaidya 1959a:51); himsā bha-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
vadbhir visavad vivarjyā / lobhah paradravyaparigrahesu vāg garhitā madyamayaś
˙ ˙ ˙
ca pāpmā (ibid., 53).
3. “Conventions of Rhetoric”
1. Collins (1998) usefully emphasizes what is sometimes easy to forget: the non-
obviousness of transcendent religious values. “A transcendental vision is not one
of the immediate givens of everyday life; rather, it sets the everyday in a larger, and
consciously critical (because not obvious) frame” (1998:39). Elsewhere, he reminds
300

notes to pages 93–99
us: “the overall intolerable condition responded to by a spiritual conception of
salvation, a soteriology, is not necessarily, indeed is not usually an ailment or form
of distress . . . in any immediate physical or psychological sense” (107).
2. My interpretation here is slightly diff erent from that of Edith Parlier (1991).
In her comparison between Hindu and Buddhist versions of the story of King
Śibi’s gift of his fl esh to ransom the life of a dove, Parlier observes that the Hindu
versions of this story (specifi cally, those found in the Mahābhārata) demonstrate
“the total equation between general interests and particular interests which char-
acterizes Hindu dharma” (143), whereas the Buddhist versions, in stark contrast,
“emphasize the radical opposition between mundane preoccupations and the
search for bodhi, between universal welfare and particular interests” (145). I agree
with Parlier that the Buddhist versions of this story do set up and emphasize this
opposition—at least initially. Nevertheless, the outcome of the story as a whole, in
my opinion, performs much the same sort of reconciliation between worldly and
spiritual goals as we fi nd in a more obvious form in the Hindu versions. Parlier
herself, in fact, later observes that even within the Buddhist versions, King Śibi
appears to be able to resume his royal functions once he has given the gift (153).
3. Collins 1998:38–40.
4. Collins (1998) argues that the “syntactic” (rather than semantic) function of
nirvana has previously been ignored—the fact that the concept of nirvana acts as
“a narrative closure- marker, both in narrated time and in the time of narration”
(234) and “provides the sense of an ending in the Buddhist master text” (117). See
Collins 1998, esp. 121–133 and 234–281.
5. MacIntyre 1981:221.
6. It should further be noted that A- B- C in all of the above formulas is very
often (though not always) a version of the standard bodhisattva vow for Buddha-
hood, whose consistent usage within these formulas further lends to their con-
ventional quality.
7. śīghram śirahpradānād dhi labheya bodhim (from Divyāvadāna 22, ed. Cow-
˙ ˙
ell and Neil 1970:324).
8. andhe loke anāyake aprināyake buddho bhūyāsam atīrnānām sattvānām tārayitā
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
amuktānām mocayitvā anāśvastānām āśvāsayitā aparinirvrtānām parinirvāpayiteti
˙ ˙ ˙
(from Avadānaśataka 37, ed. Speyer 1958:1, 210–211).
9. na vāham etam yasasā dadāmi na puttam icche na dhanam na rattham (from
˙ ˙ ˙˙ ˙
Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 406).
10. na prāpyam asti me kimcil loke ‘smin kim tv annutarām / hitāya sarvajagatām
˙ ˙ ˙
samyaksambodhim arthaye // (from Avadānakalpalatā 55, ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 337,
˙
v. 52).
11. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:337–338).
˙˙
301

notes to pages 99–103
12. From Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22 (ed. Schmidt 1845:144–145).
13. From Manicūdāvadāna (ed. Handurukande 1967:43–44).
˙ ˙
14. From Jātakamālā 30 (ed. Vaidya 1959a:212).
15. From Divyāvadāna 32 (ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:478).
16. From Jātakamālā 1 (ed. Vaidya 1959a:5).
17. Speyer 1895:6, n. 1.
18. Ed. Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1975–1982:3, 258–260; ed. Morris 1955–
1961:4, 239–241.
19. tassa tam cittam hīne ‘dhimuttam uttarim abhāvitam tatr’ upapattiyā
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
samvattati (Dīgha Nikāya, ed. Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1975–1982:3, 258–
˙
260, passim). Th e An˙guttara Nikāya passage is identical except that it substitutes
vimuttam for adhimuttam (ed. Morris 1955–1961:4, 239–241, passim).
˙ ˙
20. dānam cittālamkārārtham dānam cittapariskārārtham yogasambhārārtham
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
uttamārthasya prāptaye dānam (Abhidharmakośabhāsya 4.117, ed. Pradhan
˙ ˙
1975:270).
21. cittālan˙kāracittaparikkhārattham, found fi rst in a list enumerating eight
˙
“types of gift” (dānāni) (ed. Morris 1955–1961:4, 235–236), and then in a list enu-
merating eight “occasions for giving” (dānavatthūni) (ibid., 236–237).
22. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 664.
23. bodhisattvasya ca . . . dānam . . . sarvasattvahitahetos tad . . . ’bhyādānam
˙
agram (Abhidharmakośabhāsya 4.117, ed. Pradhan 1975:270).
˙
24. tad dhi samyaksambodhyartham sarvasattvārthañ ca (ed. Śāstrī 1998:
˙
744–745).
25. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 677.
26. More specifi cally, the gift that is “indiff erent to reward” (vipākānapeksa)
˙
is fi rst listed as one of the ten diff erent forms of the bodhisattva’s “pure gift”
(viśuddham dānam) and subsequently defi ned as follows: “Th e bodhisattva, hav-
˙ ˙
ing given a gift, does not expect in the wake of that gift either material or bodily
good fortune as a reward. He sees all conditioned states as being worthless, and
supreme Buddhahood [alone] as a blessing” (ed. Dutt 1978a:94).
27. dānapāramitā . . . mūrtimatī (from Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta] 6, ed. Hahn
˙˙
1992:53, v. 27).
28. It is interesting to note that Edith Parlier’s analysis of visual depictions of
the story of King Śibi (as they appear at Amarāvatī and Nāgārjunakonda) also
˙˙
emphasizes two of these groups, those of royal ministers and women. She fi rst notes
that these depictions emphasize “the profound opposition between the supreme
gift and the temporal order, between the universal welfare that the Bodhisattva
has in view and the interests of the kingdom.” As evidence for this opposition,
she notes that within these depictions: “Th e king is generally surrounded by sev-
302

notes to pages 104–108
eral assistants. Among them, one can sometimes recognize one of the ministers
who, according to the texts, tried to restrain the king . . . but it is especially the
fear manifested by the assistants or the women of the palace . . . which demon-
strates to what degree the gesture of the king impacts upon his entourage. Even
more so than in the sculpture of Gandhāra, the women incarnate, better than
any other fi gure, the temporal order that is compromised by the sacrifi ce of the
king” (1991:153).
29. Ed. Hahn 1985:522, vv. 105–107, 109a.
30. caksusā kim daridrasya parābhyudayasāksinā / dhanam eva yato dehi deva
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙
mā sāhasam krthāh // (ed. Vaidya 1959a:10).
˙ ˙ ˙
31. Ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:323.
32. Th e dāna appropriate to an Indian king, as well as many other aspects of
the dharmaśāstric notion of dāna, are summarized in Kane 1941:837–888.
33. Collins 1998:414–496.
34. Collins 1998:420.
35. Collins 1998:420.
36. Collins 1998:422.
37. Th e importance of giving whatever object is asked for is frequently em-
phasized in our stories. As King Śibi puts it (in Jātakamālā 2), “One should
give exactly what has been asked for, for unwanted gifts are not pleasing. What
use is water to one being carried off by a fl ood? Th erefore, I will give him what
he wants!” (yad eva yācyeta tad eva dadyān nānīpsitam prīnayatīha dattam / kim
˙ ˙
uhyamānasya jalena toyair dāsyāmy atah prārthitam artham asmai //; ed. Vaidya
˙
1959a:11).
38. Th e benefi cial eff ects of good kingship on the natural world are a com-
mon theme within our stories. Th ey are evocatively portrayed, for example, in
Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta] 6: “Th en the rain clouds gave them water, seasonably
˙˙
and to their hearts’ content, and no natural disasters ever gave them trouble. With
that Lord of the Earth ruling the earth through good government, people no
longer heard even the word ‘suff ering.’ Th e rice grew abundantly without being
cultivated, and the trees were always laden with fl owers and fruit. With that good
king ruling the kingdom, as if he were [the fi rst ruler] Prthu, the w ater-b uff alo
˙
gushed forth such abundant milk, they virtually milked themselves” (ed. Hahn
1992:56, vv. 39–40).
39. Ed. Handurukande 1967:35.
40. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:48.
41. Ed. Hahn 1985:549, vv. 155, 160.
42. taddharmasatyaprabalānubhāvāt sarvatra rājyesv api man˙galāni (ed. Hahn
˙
1985:530, v. 211).
303

notes to pages 109–117
43. Trans. Johnston 1984: pt. 2, 123–140.
44. Ed. Hahn 1985:518, vv. 54–56 (emphasis added).
45. sevakā hi prabhor dharma utsāham vardhayanty api (ed. Hahn 1985:520, v.
˙
83 [emphasis added]); deva . . . dharme ‘nusamraktāś carāmahe ‘nujīvinah (ibid.,
˙ ˙
v. 86 [emphasis added]).
46. . . . sahasā kāryasādhanam / samīksya sādhayet kāryam saddharmasukhasid-
˙ ˙
dhaye // (ed. Hahn 1985:520, v. 90 [emphasis added]).
47. Ed. Hahn 1985:521, vv. 96–97, 99.
48. Ed. Hahn 1985:523–524, vv. 128–137, 141–143.
49. divi devādhipah sudhīh (ed. Hahn 1985:514, v. 6); sarvatrāpi mahītale sarve
˙ ˙
sattvā durācārāh (ibid., v. 5); tān samuddhartum samutsāham samādadhau (ibid.,
˙ ˙ ˙
v. 8); martyān dharmaratān kartum (ibid., v. 9); śibirājakule janma labdhvā (ibid.,
˙
v. 10).
50. sa jagaddhitārtham sambodhicittah pracaramś (ed. Hahn 1985:530, v. 213).
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
51. sukrtam karma (ed. Hahn 1985:514, v. 2).
˙ ˙
52. prākarod dharmasādhanam (ed. Hahn 1985:530, v. 215); prajāmś . . . śāstuh
˙ ˙
saddharmasādhanam / śrāvayan bodhimārgesu niyujya pātum arhati // (ibid., v.
˙
217).
53. etatpunyānubhāvena sarvadā te śubham bhavet / kramena bodhisambhāram
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
pūrya bodhim avāpnuyāh // (ed. Hahn 1985:531, v. 218).
˙
54. It should be noted here that the external framework involving a dia-
logue between Upagupta and King Aśoka is not unique to this story alone; it
is characteristic, in fact, of many later avadāna collections (including all of the
Avadānamālās); on this point, see Strong 1985. Nevertheless, this does not negate
the specifi c form in which the framework appears and the signifi cance it plays
within this particular story.
55. See, for example, Wilson 1994.
56. Ed. Handurukande 1967:40–41. Despite the pathos of Padmāvatī’s lament,
one wonders whether the epithets “Hero in Generosity,” “Protector of the World,”
and “Sinless One” don’t carry a hint of sarcasm here. In fact, later on, when
Manicūda has agreed to give both Padmāvatī and their son Padmottara away (in
˙ ˙
an act reminiscent of Vessantara), Padmāvatī’s remarks in the Lokānandanātaka’s
˙
version of the story almost seem to drip with sarcasm, for she tells her son matter-
of- factly: “Take a good look at your father, for His Majesty has completely aban-
doned us” (‘phags pa’i bus bdag cag yongs su btang zin gyis yab la legs su ltos shig;
ed. Hahn 1974:146).
57. Trans. Johnston 1984: pt. 2, 104–122. Th e hurt, suff ering, and indigna-
tion experienced by the Buddha’s wife Yaśodharā (also called Bimbā) after he re-
304

notes to pages 117–120
nounces the world are emphasized in a particularly eff ective manner in a popular
northern Th ai text known as “Bimbā’s Lament”; see Swearer 1995.
58. Trans. Cone and Gombrich 1977:65–74.
59. Mahābhārata 2.27.62 (trans. van Buitenen 1975:148–149).
60. Turner 1995:94–130.
61. One could again compare this to Vessantara’s behavior in the Vessantara
Jātaka after giving away his children. Th ough Vessantara’s wife Maddi spends
˙˙
the entire night lamenting, searching for her children, and repeatedly pleading
with Vessantara to tell her of their fate, Vessantara says nothing to her for many
hours (other than a brief and particularly cruel exchange in which he accuses her
of sexual infi delity). In the Cone and Gombrich translation (1977), she begins
lamenting to him on page 69, and he doesn’t inform her of the children’s fate
until the bottom of page 73.
62. hā kastam katham idānīm yūyam pāpabrāhmana imam rājarsim
˙˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
paramakārunikam sarvasatvavatsalam adūsinam anapakārinam praghātayateti (ed.
˙ ˙ ˙˙ ˙ ˙
Handurukande 1967:81).
63. raudracitta pāpabrāhmana mā praviśeti (ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:322).
˙
64. Th roughout this discussion of minor deities, I use the masculine pronouns
“he,” “him,” and “his” as a matter of convenience, but within the texts themselves,
the gender is not clear, since the feminine noun devatā (the term most commonly
used) can refer to masculine deities as well as feminine ones.
65. Ed. Handurukande 1967:81–82.
66. Ed. Schmidt 1845:145.
67. mamottamān˙gayācanakasyāntarāyam mā kuru / esa eva devate saprsthībhūto
˙ ˙ ˙˙˙
maitrīyo yo vyāghryā ātmānam parityajya catvārimśatkalpasamprasthito Maitreyo
˙ ˙ ˙
bodhisattva ekena śirahparityāgenāvaprsthīkrtah / (ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:326).
˙ ˙˙˙ ˙ ˙
Th e correct interpretation of the second sentence is somewhat problematic. Jaini
(1988:58) takes both prsthībhūto and avaprsthīkrtah as “turned his back on [im-
˙˙˙ ˙˙˙ ˙ ˙
minent Buddhahood]” and translates the passage as follows: “Th is is [the spot],
O guardian deity, where Maitreya had turned away. [How?] Maitreya the bodhi-
sattva, who had [once] abandoned himself to a tigress and had proceeded [on the
bodhisattva course] for forty kalpas, had been compelled to turn his back upon
[his career because of a similar obstruction] in once giving away his head.” Th e
same interpretation is suggested by Edgerton (see Edgerton 1985: s.v. prsthībhūta,
˙˙˙
avaprsthīkrta, and Maitrīyo). When translated in this way, the idea seems to be
˙˙˙ ˙
that Maitreya had practiced the bodhisattva path for a long time, and had even
sacrifi ced himself to a tigress, yet because he was once hindered in giving away his
head, his attainment of Buddhahood was signifi cantly delayed. (On the general
305

notes to pages 120–123
idea that Maitreya should have become a Buddha before Śākyamuni, but at some
point was placed on a “slow track” to Buddhahood, see La Vallée Poussin 1928 and
Strong 1992:54–55.) However, I am not convinced that this is the correct transla-
tion. It seems to me that the passage may be somewhat garbled, and that its real
intent may be to say that Śākyamuni himself (not Maitreya), as a bodhisattva,
sacrifi ced himself to a tigress at that very spot and thus outdistanced Maitreya by
a single gift of his head. In fact, Śākyamuni’s surpassing of Maitreya does play a
role in various versions of the tigress story, for Maitreya is sometimes identifi ed as
the companion who went in search of food while Śākyamuni, the bodhisattva, was
giving his body to the tigress. In Divyāvadāna 32, for example, the Buddha says of
his gift to the tigress: “And thus, Monks, Maitreya Bodhisattva, who had set out
on a journey [for Buddhahood] forty eons before, was outdistanced by a single
gift of my throat” (tadā me bhiksavaś catvārimśatkalpasamprasthito Maitreya Bo-
˙ ˙ ˙
dhisattva ekena galaparityāgena paścānmukhīkrtah; ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:481).
˙ ˙
Th us I would interpret prsthībhūto and avaprsthīkrtah in the prior passage in the
˙˙˙ ˙˙˙ ˙ ˙
same passive sense as paścānmukhīkrtah in this passage, and translate: “Maitreya
˙ ˙
was outdistanced [by me] . . .”
68. On this general process, see Decaroli 2004.
69. sahajā vrttir (ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 334, v. 14); nisargasiddham (ibid., 335,
˙
v. 15).
70. mayi pārāvataprītyā na dvesam kartum arhasi / . . . yathaivāyam tathaivāham
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
ko viśesas tavāvayoh / sarvabhūtasamāh santah krpām naikatra kurvate // (ed. Vaidya
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1959b:2, 335, vv. 18–19). In another version of the story (involving a hawk rather
than a hunter), the hawk similarly says to King Śibi: “O King, how can you be
benevolent toward others while denying me my nourishment?” (from Liudu ji
jing [T. 152], Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 9 [story no. 2]). Likewise, in a
third version, he says: “O King, if you want to save all living beings, I am among
these beings. How can I be the only one not to have pity taken upon him . . . ?”
(from Zhong jing xuan za piyu jing [T. 208], Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:2,
70 [story no. 197]).
71. cintāmanih kila vicintitavastudātā kalpadrumaś ca parikalpitam eva sūte (ed.
˙ ˙
Vaidya 1959b:2, 334, v. 1); śuśrāva prthivīkāryam asamkhyair iva vigrahaih (ibid.,
˙ ˙ ˙
334, v. 8).
72. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:333.
73. sman med pa’i nad (ed. Hahn 1974:68).
74. mthu chen po khyod kyi lus so (ed. Hahn 1974:78).
75. lus rab tu slong ba sring mo de srid nas spobs pa can gyi skye bo slongs mo pa
bdag gis mthong ngo (ed. Hahn 1974:80).
76. Ed. Hahn 1974:80.
306

notes to pages 123–129
77. ci’i phyir shin tu snying rje bas // de’i phyir bdag ni yongs su spong // (ed.
Hahn 1974:112).
78. It is interesting to note that in the Manicūdāvadāna Gautama is a minor
˙ ˙
character (a sage Manicūda encounters in the forest) who off ers only weak op-
˙ ˙
position to Manicūda’s actions and is soon won over by his arguments. In the
˙ ˙
Lokānandanātaka, on the other hand, Candragomin has rather brilliantly turned
˙
Gautama into a vidūsaka (the comical friend of the male hero in a Sanskrit
˙
drama), who opposes Manicūda’s actions, defl ates Manicūda’s pretences, and
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
becomes the strongest voice of opposition and moral conscience throughout the
entire play. Th is is in keeping with the role of the vidūsaka; see, for example, the
˙
following statements from G. K. Bhat’s (1959) thorough study of the vidūsaka:
˙
“Th e Vidūsaka enjoys another privilege: His tongue is free. He can make fun
˙
of everybody, including the king and the queen” (65); “Th e jokes which the
Vidūsakas cut in the presence of the king, particularly those that are directed
˙
against the hero himself, have often the quality of wisdom inspired by the knowl-
edge of the world” (99); “the Vidūsaka assumes the role of a critic, symbolising,
˙
as it were, the ‘conscience of the play’” (139); “[the Vidūsaka’s wit] manifests itself
˙
very often as innocent nonsense; but occasionally it is crammed with practical
wisdom. In fact, the Vidūsaka often becomes the mouthpiece of sound common-
˙
sense” (167).
79. gnyen ‘dun ‘jig rten rnams kyi don mdzad pa la de las ci’i phyir ring du sdod
par byed (ed. Hahn 1974:76). Later on in the play Manicūda himself is forced to
˙ ˙
admit, “I am making my relatives suff er!” (nye du’i skye bo sdug bsngal bar bya’o;
ibid., 164).
80. snying rje med pa (ed. Hahn 1974:70); mnyes gshin pa ‘ang . . . mi ‘dug
(ibid.); snying rje ba yang med (ibid., 74).
81. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 979–981.
82. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 980.
83. ka utsahate tiryagyonigatasyārthāya jīvitam parityaktum . . . aham utsahe
˙
tiryagyonigatasyārthāya jīvitam parityaktum (ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:478).
˙
84. aho madīyā gamitā prakāśatām khatun˙katā vikramasampadānayā (ed.
˙ ˙ ˙
Vaidya 1959a:6).
85. kim etat sāhasam tīvram viruddham bhavatā krtam (from Avadānakalpalatā
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
104, ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 557, v. 19).
86. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:335.
87. pidhāya śravanau yayuh (ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 336, v. 39); dārunamatir nāmnā
˙ ˙ ˙
kapilapin˙galah (ibid., v. 40).
˙
88. nāham śaksyāmi devasya śiraś chettum iti (ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:325).
˙ ˙
89. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:408.
307

notes to pages 130–133
90. See, for example, Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra 18 (ed. Nobel 1937:214);
˙
Manicūdāvadāna (ed. Handurukande 1967:46, 78, and 94); Sūtra of the Wise and
˙ ˙
the Fool 22 (rnam pa drug tu gyos; ed. Schmidt 1845:145); Sūtra of the Wise and the
Fool 14 (rnam pa drug tu gyos te; ed. Schmidt 1845:85); Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr.
˙˙
trans. Huber 1908:338); etc.
91. One of the Sanskrit words for “mountain” is acala, and one of the Sanskrit
words for “earth” is acalā—both terms literally meaning “immovable.”
92. aśivāni nimittāni (from Divyāvadāna 22, ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:321);
paramadārunāni nimittāni (from Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:90);
˙ ˙ ˙
apraśastāni nimittāni (ibid.).
93. Compare, for example, two passages from the Manicūdāvadāna: the mo-
˙ ˙
ment when Manicūda gives away his crest- jewel (ed. Handurukande 1967:88–89)
˙ ˙
and the moment when the crest- jewel is restored (ibid., 94–95).
94. Spoken by devas, nāgas, yaksas, gandharvas, asuras, kinnaras, and mahoragas
˙
when King Śibi fi rst begins cutting off his fl esh in Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans.
˙˙
Huber 1908:336).
95. hā hā kastam praghātito ‘yam mahātmā maharsir (from the Manicūdāvadāna;
˙˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
spoken by devas when King Manicūda gives away his crest-j ewel; ed. Handuru-
˙ ˙
kande 1967:89).
96. aho bataudāryam aho krpālutā viśuddhatā paśya yathāsya cetasah (from
˙ ˙
Jātakamālā 2; spoken by “fl ocks of great supernatural beings” [maharddhibhir
bhūtaganaih] when King Śibi’s eyes are restored; ed. Vaidya 1959a:14).
˙ ˙
97. rgyal po zla ‘od kyis mgo sbyin pa byas pas / sbyin pa’i pha rol tu phyin pa yang
yongs su rdzogs par gyur to (from Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22, ed. Schmidt
1845:145).
98. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:341).
˙˙
99. Th ough I am concerned in this discussion only with the discursive func-
tions fulfi lled by Śakra within the gift- of- the- body genre, I should note that Śakra
fulfi lls many such discursive functions throughout Buddhist narrative literature
in general. In the Avadānakalpalatā, for example, it is Śakra’s questioning of the
Buddha that is used to set many of the stories into motion.
100. sakkhissasi nu kho dātum udāhu no ti (from Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll
˙
1875–1897:4, 403). Although Śakra is here speaking to himself, the question actu-
ally translates as “Will you be able to give them or not?”—as if he were imagining
himself speaking to King Śibi.
101. kim ayam śibi rājā sattvānām artham evam karoti uta karunayā (from
˙ ˙ ˙
Avadānaśataka 34, ed. Speyer 1958:1, 185). Th e uta is problematic (see Speyer’s
note 2 on the same page).
308

notes to pages 133–137
102. dānātiharsoddhatamānasena vitarkitam kimsvid idam nrpena / ābadhya
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
dānavyavasāyakaksyām svagātradānasthiraniścayena // (from Jātakamālā 2, ed.
˙ ˙
Vaidya 1959a:8).
103. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:331).
˙˙
104. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:336–337).
˙˙
105. mahārāja mā haiva te vipratisāro bhūd iti (ed. Handurukande 1967:37).
106. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908: 337).
˙˙
107 karmabhis tvam īdrśair aho suduskarena vyavasāyena ca kim prārthayasa iti
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
(from Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:43).
˙ ˙
108. From Liudu ji jing (T. 152) (Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 10 [story
no. 2]).
109. imām avasthām gamitasya yācakaih katham nu te samprati tesu mānasam
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
(from Jātakamālā 2, ed. Vaidya 1959a:12).
110. mahārāja mā haiva te śarīram tyaksāmiti vā parityajito vā parityājyo
˙ ˙
vā bhūt cetaso ‘nyathātvam vipratisāro veti . . . katham etad jñāyate iti (from
˙
Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:44–45).
˙ ˙
111. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:339–340).
˙˙
112. api te stanadānena mano vikrtim āyayau (from Avadānakalpalatā 51, ed.
˙
Vaidya 1959b:2, 316, v. 14).
113. satyam te rūpāvati dārakasyārthāyobhau stanau parityaktau / . . . evam te
˙ ˙
rūpāvati ubhau stanau parityajāmīti parityajantyāh parityajya vābhūc cittasya
˙
vipratisārah / . . . atra kah śraddhāsyati / (from Divyāvadāna 32, ed. Cowell and
˙ ˙
Neil 1970:473).
114. kim aindram amunā sthānam tapasā vijigīsase / kutūhalavaśād bhadre
˙ ˙
prcchāmi bhavatīm aham // (from Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta] 6, ed. Hahn 1992:55,
˙ ˙˙
v. 33).
115. Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934: 2, 289–293 (story no. 344).
116. Fr trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:2, 290.
117. Th e only link between the Mohe senzi lu version’s innovations and the
extant Indic originals is a brief statement made by the elephant in Pāli Jātaka 514.
In this version, the hunter has been sent for the tusks by an evil queen, and the
elephant muses at one point that perhaps the queen has done this because she
knows that “I have many excellent pairs of tusks, which I got from my fathers
and ancestors” (bahū hi me dantayugā ulārā / ye me pitunnam pi pitāmahānam; ed.
˙ ˙
Fausboll 1875–1897:5, 51). Nevertheless, he never makes any attempt to substitute
these tusks in place of his own.
118. Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 17–19 (story no. 5).
119. Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 18.
309

notes to pages 138–143
120. Th ere is a large body of scholarly literature on narrative, ethics, and theol-
ogy. For one useful anthology, see Hauerwas and Jones 1997.
121. Hallisey and Hansen 1996:314–316.
122. Hallisey and Hansen 1996:316–317.
4. “Dāna: Th e Buddhist Discourse on Giving”
1. Th e theoretical scholarship on gift-g iving is voluminous, but see, for ex-
ample, the following: Diprose 2002, Godelier 1999, Godbout and Caillé 1998,
Coles 1997, Starobinski 1997, Derrida 1995 and 1992, Mauss 1990, Cheal 1988,
Strathern 1988, Hyde 1979, and two edited collections that bring together a num-
ber of programmatic pieces, Schrift 1997 and Komter 1996.
2. Mauss 1990.
3. See Dayal 1970:172 for an enumeration of lists including dāna.
4. Th e scholarship on gift-g iving in South Asia is again voluminous, but see,
for example, the following. For South Asian Buddhism: Egge 2002, Falk 1990,
Strong 1990, Endo 1987, Weeraratne 1984, Strenski 1983, Strong 1979, Dayal
1970:172–193, Ames 1966, and Findly 2003 (in regard to the last source men-
tioned, I regret that I became aware of this book too late to incorporate many of its
insights). For Vedism and Hinduism: Michaels 1997, Parry 1994:119–148, Acharya
1993, Raheja 1988, Nath 1987, Parry 1986, Trautmann 1986 and 1981:77–93, Gonda
1975, Hara 1974, Gonda 1965, and Kane 1941:837–888. For discussions incorporat-
ing Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism: Hibbets 2000, 1999a, and 1999b; Brekke
1998; and Babb 1996:174–195.
5. Th ough this is an aspect of the gift that falls outside the scope of this study,
it is also obvious that the gift in Buddhism has had profoundly material and eco-
nomic consequences. Indeed, the category of the gift has a concrete material pres-
ence that many other valued categories within Buddhist discourse utterly lack, for
most of the physical objects that embody Buddhism in time and space—such as
stūpas, images, paintings, texts, monasteries, monks and nuns—can be identifi ed
and conceptualized as gifts. Th is material and economic aspect of the gift cannot
be overemphasized: the very existence of “Buddhism” as such has been dependent
upon the gift (a point made most forcefully, perhaps, in Strenski 1983).
6. Eng. trans. Mauss 1990.
7. Mauss 1990:54–60.
8. Including, for example, Trautmann 1981 and 1986, Parry 1986, Raheja 1988,
and Michaels 1997.
310

notes to pages 143–147
9. Mauss 1990:146–147, n. 61.
10. Trautmann 1981:278–282.
11. Trautmann 1981:287.
12. Trautmann 1981:279.
13. Parry 1986:462.
14. Michaels 1997:259.
15. Parry 1986:468.
16. adāsi meti dānam deti; dassati meti dānam deti (ed. Morris 1955–1961:4,
˙ ˙
236).
17. pratīkārānapeksam; na paratah pratyupakāram pratyāśamsate (ed. Dutt
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1978a:94).
18. See, for example, Hibbets 1999a, Strenski 1983, and Ames 1966. However,
Egge (2002:140, n. 149) does cite a passage from the Itivuttaka that “praises the
reciprocity of the lay-m onastic relationship,” in which “laypeople supply monas-
tics with their material needs, and monks teach the Dharma to laypeople; thus
homeless and householders live the religious life in mutual dependence.” He also
speculates that “similar notions of reciprocity have no doubt played a much larger
role in the attitudes of Buddhists than they do in textual ideologies.”
19. See Spiro 1982:410 and Bunnag 1973:60. Th e same is true of Hindu dāna;
as Trautmann (1981:287–288) notes, “Because the donee is the benefactor, it is a
feature of this etiquette that he makes no expression of thanks, a characteristic of
Indian life much puzzling to Westerners.”
20. See, for example, Spiro 1982:200, Gombrich 1971:117–118, and King
1964:153.
21. See Schopen 1997:114–147, 148–164, 258–289.
22. katham tatrāpratigrhnati kasmimścit punyam (v. 4.121, ed. Pradhan
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1975:272).
23. yadi hi punyam parānugrahād eva syāt maitryādyapramānasamyagdrstibhāv
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙˙
anāyām na syāt (v. 4.121, ed. Pradhan 1975:272).
˙
24. abhyatīte ‘pi; svacittaprabhavam (v. 4.121, ed. Pradhan 1975:272).
˙
25. caitye tyāgānvayam punyam paribhogānvayam punyam nāsti (v. 4.121, ed.
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Pradhan 1975:272).
26. See, for example, Gombrich 1971:150–152 and Ames 1966.
27. Compare the similar distinction drawn in the Bhagavad Gītā, where gifts
“given in due time and place to a fi t recipient who can give no advantage” are
classifi ed as sāttvika, and gifts “given reluctantly, to secure some service in return
or to gain a future reward” are classifi ed as rājasa (vv. 17.20–21, trans. Miller
1986:140).
311

notes to pages 147–152
28. Trautmann 1981:281.
29. Such passages are too numerous to cite individually, but see, for ex-
ample, Dīgha Nikāya (ed. Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1975–1982: 3, 258–260)
and An˙guttara Nikāya (ed. Morris 1955–1961: 2, 62–64; 2, 202–205; 3, 32–34; 3,
172–173).
30. piyassa dātā piyam labhatīti (from the Pāli Jātaka collection, ed. Fausboll
˙
1875–1997: 4, 401); sahassena samam mitā (from Samyutta Nikāya, ed. Feer
˙ ˙
1960:1, 18).
31. See the Pāli Jātaka collection (ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:3, 471).
32. See Samyutta Nikāya (ed. Feer 1960:1, 18).
˙
33. Spiro 1982:111–112.
34. sugatim saggam lokam uppajjissāmīti dānam deti (ed. Morris 1955–1961:4,
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
236).
35. ekacco sāpekho dānam deti patibaddhacitto dānam deti sannidhipekho dānam
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
deti imam pecca paribhuñjissāmiti dānam deti (ed. Morris 1955–1961:4, 60).
˙ ˙
36. cittam hīne ‘dhimuttam (ed. Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1975–1982:3,
˙ ˙
258–260, passim).
37. Malinowski 1932: chapter 6.
38. yo vītarāgo vītarāgesu dadāti dānam . . . tam ve dānam āmisadānānam
˙ ˙ ˙
agganti (ed. Trenckner 1888–1925:3, 257).
39. sarvesām tu dānānām agram muktasya muktāya (v. 4.117, ed. Pradhan
˙ ˙ ˙
1975:270).
40. tadvipākabhūmer atyantasamatikrāntatvāt (v. 4.114, ed. Pradhan
1975:269).
41. Derrida 1992.
42. See the many references in Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 297, n. 2.
43. Michaels 1997:259.
44. Starobinski 1997:64.
45. Silber 1995.
46. cittaparikkhārattham (from An˙guttara Nikāya, ed. Morris 1955–1961:4,
˙
235–236 and 236–237); uttamārthasya prāptaye (from Abhidharmakośabhāsya, v.
˙
4.117, ed. Pradhan 1975:270).
47. vipākānapeksam; paramabodhāv anuśamsadarśī (ed. Dutt 1978a:94).
˙ ˙ ˙
48. na . . . vinā parasukhenāsti sukham; tasyāyutasaukhyatvād (ed. Lévi 1907–
1911: chapter 17, v. 53).
49. Th is is nicely summed up, in fact, by a single half-v erse from the Kośa’s
discussion of giving (v. 4.117, ed. Pradhan 1975:270). Th is half-v erse fi rst observes
that among all gifts, “the best is the gift given by one liberated person to another
liberated person” (agram muktasya muktāya)—in other words, the gift of an arhat.
˙
312

notes to pages 153–157
It then adds, “or a gift from the bodhisattva” (bodhisattvasya ca), and fi nally con-
cludes, “or the eighth” (astamam)—that is, the gift given for the sake of attaining
˙˙
arhatship (the “eighth” in the Buddha’s list of eight gifts). Th e “best gift” is thus
restricted to arhats, those aspiring to arhatship, and all bodhisattvas.
50. Ed. Trenckner 1888–1925:3, 255.
51. Ed. Morris 1955–1961:4, 394–395.
52. āhuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhineyyo añjalikaranīyo anuttaram puññakkhettam
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
lokassāti (found throughout the Pāli Canon; see, for example, the partial list of
citations and brief discussion found at Egge 2002:140, n. 1).
53. viceyyadānam (a concept found, for example, in the Samyutta Nikāya [ed.
˙ ˙
Feer 1960:1, 21] and the Pāli Jātaka collection [ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:3, 472]).
54. sīlavato dinnam mahapphalam vadāmi, no tathā dussīle (ed. Feer 1960:1,
˙ ˙
161).
55. ksetradosāt tu tad bījam alpaphalam vā bhavaty aphalam vā (v. 4.121, ed.
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Pradhan 1975:272–273).
56. Egge 2002:34–39, Hibbets 2000:36–37.
57. pūjānugrahakāmyayā (v. 4.113, ed. Pradhan 1975:268).
58. Gombrich 1971:248. Th e same distinction is common among Burmese
monks, according to Melford Spiro (1982:109): “To contribute to the support of
a monk, to erect a pagoda, to off er fl owers to a Buddha image—these are dāna.
To contribute to the support of a widow, to build a school, to bring fl owers to
the sick—these are not, or at best are inferior dāna; little if any merit is to be
gained from them.”
59. ebhyah pañcabhyah prthagjanabhūtebhyo ‘py aprameyā phalato daksinā
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
bhavati (v. 4.118, ed. Pradhan 1975:271).
60. Kathāvatthu 17.11 (trans. Aung and Rhys Davids 1915:321–322).
61. Ed. Morris 1955–1961:1, 161.
62. kuksetre ‘pīstaphalatā phalabījāviparyayāt (v. 4.121, ed. Pradhan 1975:272).
˙ ˙˙
63. Egge 2002. Some of the same ground is also covered in Brekke 1998, but
Egge’s treatment is much more comprehensive.
64. Egge 2002:62. Much the same explanation is off ered by Brekke (1998:311),
who states: “[Th e worthy- recipient doctrine] is an ideology serving the interests
of the religious specialists. Th e aspirations to domination of this class rests on this
ideology. If people do not believe in the special merit of giving to the renouncers,
the renouncer will not receive alms. Th is has, of course, been clear to monks and
Brahmins and they have worked to keep the ideology alive and gloss over its clash
with the ethics of intention.”
65. Hibbets 2000.
66. Hibbets 2000:34, 38.
313

notes to pages 157–161
67. Hibbets 2000:37. Brekke (1998:293) similarly notes that Jain discussions
of dāna suggest that the donor should be characterized by aparibhāvitvā, or an
“absence of condescension towards the recipient,” and that the “condescension
which naturally arises in the charitable donor towards the beggar” would therefore
tend to undermine the donor’s proper frame of mind.
68. natvevāham ānanda kenacī pariyāyena san˙ghagatāya dakkhināya
˙ ˙
pātipuggalikam dānam mahapphalataram vadāmi; dussīlā pāpadhammā (ed.
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Trenckner 1888–1925:3, 256).
69. san˙gham uddissa (ed. Trenckner 1888–1925:3, 256).
˙
70. As Brekke (1998:290) has pointed out, however, this is not merely a case of
muddled thinking, but rather a useful and productive inconsistency that has been
“used creatively to invest all gifts with merit. When the gift is seen as a sacrifi ce
the excellent qualities of the recipients are in the foreground. When the gift is
seen as charity it is the good intentions of the giver which are highlighted. Th e
good qualities of the recipient ensure the merit in an act of sacrifi ce whereas the
bad qualities of the recipient do not aff ect the merit in an act of charity. Gifts are
never in vain if the giver can switch between the two alternative m erit-m aking
mechanisms as he pleases.” Th is fl exibility of interpretation is particularly useful
when it comes to justifying the practice of almsgiving to religious renunciants,
since the renunciant could be viewed as either a worthy and godlike recipient
who deserves one’s worship and off erings or a poor and helpless beggar who is
dependent upon one’s charity.
71. Trautmann 1981:278–288.
72. On the duties and privileges of each of the four varnas, as outlined in the
˙
Dharma Śāstras, see Kane 1941:2, pt. 1, 105–164. On brahmins as the exclusive
human recipients of religious gifts, the Manusmrti, for example, says: “Whatever
˙
wealth exists on this earth—all that belongs to the brāhmana; the brāhmana de-
˙ ˙
serves everything on account of his superiority due to his descent [from the mouth
of the Creator]” (Manusmrti 1.100, as quoted in Kane 1941:2, pt. 1, 135).
˙
73. See Kane 1941:2, pt. 2, 837–888.
74. So says the commentator Medātithi, commenting on Manusmrti 4.5, as
˙
quoted in Kane 1941:2, pt. 2, 842.
75. Kane 1941:2, pt. 2, 842.
76. Kane 1941:2, pt. 2, 843.
77. Kane 1941:2, pt. 1, 114; see also 2, pt. 2, 846.
78. Kane 1941:2, pt. 1, 116. He adds (in note 249): “Th e idea is that pratigraha
is a privilege, while charity to the poor and the diseased is due to dayā
(compassion).”
79. On this ksatra- dharma, see Hara 1974.
˙
314

notes to pages 161–162
80. Th is ksatriya-e thic of conquest and liberality can perhaps be related to the
˙
general tendency within Indian thought to assimilate kings to gods—for Gonda
(1975) has observed a very similar ethic in relation to the gods as far back as the
Rg Veda. According to him, the hymns of the Rg Veda consistently suggest that
˙ ˙
generosity is “an essential part of the god’s function” and “characteristic of his very
nature as a powerful divine being” (129), that the god gives such gifts by “fall[ing]
back upon [his own] abundance of possessions” (130), and that these possessions
have generally been “won, gained or acquired . . . by force” (131).
81. Th us, in the Mahābhārata, a ksatriya says: “I am a Ksatriya and never know
˙ ˙
the expression ‘give me.’ We are those who say [only] ‘give me a battle.’” Similarly,
Yudhisthira says to Duryodhana, “it is not a right thing (dharma) for a warrior
˙˙
to accept [what is given],” and King Iksvāku says to Kauśika, “Ksatriyas are said
˙ ˙
to be the givers [so] how can I take [this] from you?” (Mahābhārata 12.192.41,
9.30.53b, and 12.192.73b, as quoted in Hara 1974:302–303).
82. One might compare, for example, the following passages. In the
Mahābhārata, ksatriyas are constantly being urged to fi ght: “Fight with no self-
˙
i nterest, having simply recourse to strength and valour. For there is nothing more
auspicious for Ksatriyas than fi ghting” (Mahābhārata 6.117.32, as quoted in Hara
˙
1974:299). In a similar fashion, Śāntideva encourages the bodhisattva to fi ght
against his enemies, the affl ictions: “In the vanguard of the battle, powerful men
violently attack those dark enemies of theirs who are destined by nature to die.
Ignoring the painful blows of arrows and spears, they do not turn back until they
have succeeded. So even if I should experience a hundred misfortunes today, what
reason could I possibly have to feel the misery of despair when I have set out to
conquer my natural enemies—[the affl ictions]—who are the constant cause of
every sort of pain? . . . Let my entrails ooze out if they wish to! Let my head fall
off —who cares? But never in any way will I bow down before my enemies, the
affl ictions!” (vv. 4.37–38 and 4.44, ed. Vaidya 1960:46).
83. Hara 1974:297–299. Th e Mahābhārata, for example, says of the ksatriya:
˙
“A man of strength [vīrya] can overcome enemies, even when he lacks all other
virtues. But what will he accomplish, a man without strength, even when he pos-
sesses all other virtues?” (Mahābhārata 2.15.10, as quoted in Hara 1974:299).
84. Of course, if the bodhisattva is also a monk, then he is obligated to accept
the gift of alms—but in some contexts, this receiving- rather- than- giving seems to
have caused him some degree of consternation. Th us, in the Ugrapariprcchā Sūtra,
˙
it is said that the bodhisattva should beg for alms “for as long as he lives”—yet
even as he accepts these alms, he thinks to himself, “I should live by my own
power, not in dependence upon another” and “I will not rely on any man, woman,
boy, or girl” (trans. Nattier 2003:287–288).
315

notes to pages 162–172
85. daksa utthānasampannah svayamkārī sadā bhavet / nāvakāśah pradātavyah
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
kasyacit sarvakarmasu // (v. 5.82, ed. Vaidya 1960:69).
86. kleśasvatantro loko ‘yam na ksamah svārthasādhane / tasmānmayaisām kar-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
tavyam nāśakto ‘ham yathā janah // (v. 7.50, ed. Vaidya 1960:128).
˙ ˙ ˙
87. mayaivaikena kartavyam (v. 7.49, ed. Vaidya 1960:128).
88. yat kimcid anavadyam karma āpatitam bhavati sattvānām tat sarvam
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
mayaivaikena kartavyam / nānyasyāvakāśo dātavya ity arthah // (commentary on
˙
Bodhicaryāvatāra 7.49, ed. Vaidya 1960:128).
89. Nattier 2003:147.
90. See Strong 1990.
91. For an English translation of this episode, see Strong 1983a:264–268; see
also Strong 1990.
5. “A Flexible Gift”
1. Consider, for example, the ordinary laywomen discussed in Durt 1998 who
make gifts of their own fl esh.
2. Th is statement is made, for example, in the commentary to the Cariyāpitaka
˙
(see Horner 1975:2, 14, n. 1).
3. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 255.
4. See verses 1.6–13 (ed. Meadows 1986:158–161). Th e Ārya Śūra who authored
the Pāramitāsamāsa is most likely distinct from, and several centuries later than,
the Ārya Śūra who authored the Jātakamālā (for this argument, see Meadows
1986:1–21).
5. dāna- parikkhārā; dānassa pāramī; pārami pūrayim (ed. Jayawickrama 1974:
˙
pt. 2, 13, v. 146). A similar threefold distinction (but applied to all ten Th eravādin
perfections, not just dāna) is discussed in the Conclusions.
6. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 750–751.
7. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 701.
8. As related, for example, in Kalpanāmanditikā 71, Avadānasārasamuccaya 3,
˙˙
and Mahajjātakamālā 45.
9. Ed. Yamada 1968: vol. 2, 376, 378, 379.
10. Ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:320.
11. Ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 334–337. Th is story is called the Sarvamdadāvadāna and
˙
refers to its main character as Sarvamdada throughout, yet tells the traditional
˙
story of King Śibi’s gift of fl esh to ransom a dove.
12. sarvamdado nāma katham kadā vā yasya svadehe ‘pi manahprasan˙gah /
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
yathārthanāmā tv adhunā bhavisyāmy (ed. Handurukande 1984:74, v. 47).
˙
316

notes to pages 172–177
13. yadi dāsyati Sarvamdado bhavisyati, atha na dāsyati na Sarvamdado bhavisyati
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
(ed. Yamada 1968:2, 378–379).
14. yadi tāvat sarvamdado bhavisyati mama śiro dāsyaty (ed. Cowell and Neil
˙ ˙
1970:320).
15. “To make a gift of something to someone is to make a present of some part
of oneself . . . to accept something from somebody is to accept some part of his
spiritual essence, of his soul” (Mauss 1990:12). Th is identity between giver and
gift is so strong within Indic discourse that Trautmann (1986) and Parry (1986),
for example, both speculate that Mauss perhaps derived this idea from the Indic
material itself. For even as far back as the Rg Veda, in fact, Gonda has remarked
˙
upon the “close connection between a god’s character and the benefi ts he bestows
on his worshippers” (1975:127), and concluded therefrom that the gods are really
being “implored to give part of their own nature . . . essence or substance” (126).
Th us, “giver and gift are not only connected by a tight bond, the latter is also part
of the very being and essence of the former” (128).
16. See, for example, Van Gennep 1960 and Turner 1995, 1987, 1977, and
1974.
17. mayā bāhiravatthum adinnam nāma natthi, na mam bāhiradānam toseti,
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
aham ajjhattikadānam dātukāmo (ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 402).
˙
18. Ed. Dutt 1978a:80. In other cases, the distinction between “internal” and
“external” gifts is clearly assumed, even though this terminology is not made ex-
plicit. Th e Pāramitāsamāsa, for example, advises the bodhisattva to think: “May
those who desire my fl esh take my fl esh; may he who desires even my bone mar-
row take my bone marrow by drawing it out. For I bear this wretched body for the
sake of the world—how much more an external object!” (māmsārthino māmsam
˙ ˙
idam harantu majjānam apy uddharanāt tadarthī / aham hi lokārtham idam
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
bibharmi śarīrakam kim bata vastu bāhyam //; v. 1.7, ed. Meadows 1986:158).
˙ ˙
19. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 688.
20. dāsakammam karissāmi (ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 402).
˙
21. suduccajam . . . purisena duccajan (spoken by King Śibi to describe the gift
˙
of his eyes in Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 403). Th e idea that the
gift of the body is an exceedingly diffi cult gift to give is a common conceit within
gift- of- the- body stories.
22. Trans. Khoroche 1989:22–25.
23. evam atyayam apy aviganayya ditsanti satpurusāh / kena nāma svasthena na
˙ ˙ ˙
dātavyam syāt / (ed. Vaidya 1959a:23).
˙
24. mahārāja dānam nāma na kevalam samparāyattham eva dīyati,
˙ ˙
ditthadhammatthāya pi paccayo hoti (ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 409). Rouse
˙˙
interprets this sentence as three separate phrases (the fi rst phrase ending after
317

notes to pages 177–189
kevalam), and translates: “Th e gift is not everything in itself, Your Majesty, it is
˙
given with an eye to the future. Yet there is a motive relating to this visible world”
(see Cowell 1895–1913:4, 255). I interpret the sentence as two phrases only, with
na kevalam and eva basically performing the same function. I believe this makes
˙
better sense.
25. atha sa rājā pradānasamucitatvād anabhyastayācñākārpanyamārgo (ed.
˙
Vaidya 1959a:12).
26. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:12–13.
27. ko ‘yam asmān vikatthayitum atrabhavato nirbandhah (ed. Vaidya
˙
1959a:13).
28. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:14–15.
29. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:3, 51.
30. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 401.
31. Sahlins 1996.
32. Lévi- Strauss 1969.
33. Strenski 1983.
34. Mauss 1990:10–13.
35. Lévi- Strauss 1997:55.
36. Lévi- Strauss 1997:53.
37. Bourdieu 1996:135.
38. Bourdieu 1996:142.
39. Gonda 1975:132.
40. Gonda 1975:133.
41. Gonda 1975:133.
42. For example: “Today I will give a gift that has never been given by me
before” (ajjāham mayā nadinnapubbam dānam dassāmi; from Pāli Jātaka 316,
˙ ˙ ˙
ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:3, 54); “Today I will give you an excellent gift that has
never been given before” (adinnapubbam dānavaram ajja dassāmi te aham; from
˙ ˙ ˙
Cariyāpitaka 1.10, ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 12, v. 12); “I will give a gift that
˙
has never been given before” (adinnapubbadānam dassāmīti; from Pāli Jātaka 499,
˙
ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 403); “Today I will give to a supplicant an excellent
gift never given before” (adinnapubbam dānavaram ajja dassāmi yācake; from
˙ ˙
Cariyāpitaka 1.8, ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 6, v. 12).
˙
43. aho sudinnam mayā akkhidānan ti (from Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll
˙
1875–1897:4, 407).
44. deham parair dustyajam (from Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra, chapter 18, ed.
˙ ˙
Nobel 1937:212).
45. From Kalpanāmanditikā 69 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:410).
˙˙
318

notes to pages 189–191
46. “Good Son, I will tell you in brief of the perfection of generosity. [I will tell
you] how, as I was practicing the bodhisattva conduct, I sacrifi ced the sacrifi ce of
a gift, [and how] no other bodhisattva previously sacrifi ced the sacrifi ce of such
a gift, [and how] there will be no bodhisattva [in the future] who, as he practices
the conduct leading to enlightenment, will sacrifi ce the sacrifi ce of such a gift, as
I sacrifi ced [such a gift], when I was practicing the bodhisattva conduct—except
for [the following] eight good men . . .” (from Karunāpundarīka Sūtra, chapter
˙ ˙˙
5, ed. Yamada 1968:2, 355).
47. From Kalpanāmanditikā 64 (Fr. trans. Huber 1908:336).
˙˙
48. utsahe ‘ham sarvasatvānām arthe eka eva sarvaduhkhāny udvodhum (from
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:84).
˙ ˙
49. “I have given this gift, along with its fruit, to living beings because their
happiness is my happiness. Be as fruitful for them as you can be, if you feel any
obligation toward me!” (saphalam dānam dattam tan me satvesu tatsukhasukhena
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
/ phala tesv eva nikāmam yadi me kartavyatā te ‘sti //; ed. Lévi 1907–1911: chapter
˙ ˙
17, v. 54).
50. akrtam na phalasi yasmāt pratikārāpeksayā na me tulyam / pratikāranirvyapeksah
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
paratra phalado ‘sya kāmam te // (ed. Lévi 1907–1911: chapter 17, v. 58).
˙
51. viśuddha- dāna; asambhrta; na utsahate (ed. Dutt 1978a:93).
˙ ˙
52. ksanam api dānena vinā dānābhirato bhavati naiva // (ed. Lévi 1907–1911:
˙ ˙
chapter 17, v. 57).
53. bhogā bahuśubhatar[ā]; na hi tatsukham matam me dāne pāramparo ‘smi
˙ ˙ ˙
yatah (ed. Lévi 1907–1911: chapter 17, v. 55).
˙
54. Hibbets 2000:37.
55. Shulman 1993:121.
56. a nunnata- dāna; nīcacitto bodhisattvo dānam dadāti / na ca paraspardhayā
˙
dadāti / na ca . . . tena dānena manyate aham asmi dātā dānapatir anye ca na tatheti
/ (ed. Dutt 1978a:94).
57. Verses 6.112–116 (ed. Vaidya 1960:110–111).
58. As Jan Nattier (2003:135) has noted: “Th e potential for arrogance on the
part of the practitioner who is striving for such a glorious goal [as Buddhahood]
is a theme that pervades the earliest bodhisattva literature, and various coping
tactics are recommended in order to aid the bodhisattva in dealing with this
threat.” One especially interesting “coping tactic” cited by Nattier is the “rheto-
ric of negation” characteristic of many Mahāyāna sūtras, or “the use of negative
language to undermine reifi cation, and thus the very conceptual basis for pride,
in what the bodhisattva is undertaking.” She notes that many such negations are
applied not to dharmas in general but to the bodhisattva himself and the practices
319

notes to pages 191–197
he engages in, and then adds (135–136, n. 62): “It is my strong suspicion that this
‘rhetoric of negation’ fi rst emerged as a tactical attempt to undercut the potential
for bodhisattvas’ arrogance, and was only later generalized to what came to be
considered a new (anti- abhidharma) ontology.”
59. Trans. Tin 1975:340–375.
60. sīmāsambhedo kātabbo (ed. Rhys Davids 1975:307).
61. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 255.
62. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:2, 750–751.
63. Fr. trans. Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 297–298.
64. Wilson 2002.
65. Cited in Wilson 2002:62.
66. Cited in Wilson 2002:61.
67. Th at is, dāna as a means of purifying the donor through the physical
transfer of his “sin” or “inauspiciousness” to the recipient via the medium of the
gift. Th is interpretation of dāna has been explored, for example, in Heesterman
1985 and 1993, Parry 1994, and Raheja 1988. Although there seems to be ample
ethnographic evidence for this view of dāna, its relevance to the textual sources
is far less certain. Hibbets (1999a:137–146), for example, denies that there is any
evidence for this view in Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain medieval digests on dāna.
Similarly, I do not see any solid evidence for this view in regard to the bodhi-
sattva’s gift of his body; however, I have treated this issue speculatively, at least,
in Ohnuma 1997:284–292.
68. See esp. Mauss 1990:33–43.
69. Carrithers 1985 (in reference to Mauss 1985).
70. As Olivelle (1997:445, n. 6) points out: “Carrithers appears to restrict
personne to those societies that have legally defi ned citizenship carrying rights
and responsibilities” and “denies that such a category is applicable to the Indian
varna system.” Olivelle, on the other hand, thinks that “selfhood within the
˙
varna system is very much a personne, because it is defi ned by one’s belonging to
˙
a particular social group, a belonging that carries rights and responsibilities, even
though that group is not the nation- state” (see also his discussion on 429–431).
71. See also Olivelle 1992: chapter 2.
72. Dumont 1980:274–275.
73. Lee 1967.
74. Dumont (1980:274–275) says of the w orld-r enouncer: “In leaving the
world he fi nds himself invested with an individuality which he apparently fi nds
uncomfortable since all his eff orts tend to its extinction or its transcendence.”
75. attā hi attano nātho attā hi attano gati / tasmā saññāmay’ attānam . . . (v.
˙
380, ed. Von Hinüber and Norman 1994:107).
320

notes to pages 198–200
76. Parry 1986, esp. 458–459 and 466–469.
77. Parry 1986:469.
78. On this point, see especially Chakravarti 1987 and Findly 2003.
6. “Bodies Ordinary and Ideal”
1. Bateson 1908:758. Th is quote appears to be a summary of the views expressed
in Sir Monier Monier- Williams’ Buddhism, published in 1889.
2. Gregory Schopen (1997:1–22), for example, has discussed the “Protestant”
bias by which the disembodied ideas found in Pāli and Sanskrit textual sources
have been regarded as the location of “real” religion and overwhelmingly pre-
ferred over archaeological, epigraphical, and art historical sources, which are
perceived as the abode of “popular” religion precisely because they relate more
closely to material things. (His argument is well taken; however, he does tend
to construct his own r everse-h ierarchy between texts and inscriptions, arguing
that inscriptions are a direct refl ection of “what Indian Buddhists actually did”
[1997:8–9] and what they “actually practiced and believed” [1997:1] instead of
perceiving them as another kind of text.) Philip Almond (1988:13) dates this
“textual reifi cation of Buddhism” to the fi rst half of the nineteenth century.
He states: “Originally existing ‘out there’ in the Oriental present, Buddhism
came to be determined as an object the primary location of which was the
West, through the progressive collection, translation, and publication of its
textual past. Buddhism, by 1860, had come to exist, not in the Orient, but in
the Oriental libraries and institutes of the West, in its texts and manuscripts,
at the desks of the Western savants who interpreted it. It had become a textual
object, defi ned, classifi ed, and interpreted through its own textuality. By the
middle of the century, the Buddhism that existed ‘out there’ was beginning to
be judged by a West that alone knew what Buddhism was, is, and ought to be.
Th e essence of Buddhism came to be seen as expressed not ‘out there’ in the
Orient, but in the West through the West’s control of Buddhism’s own textual
past.” Many of the same issues are discussed in relation to Th eravādin Buddhist
studies in Hallisey 1995, and in relation to Tibetan Buddhist studies in Lopez
1995a and 1998:156–180.
3. Th is is not merely a problem of Western assumptions confronting Eastern
materials; the same problem is encountered in the interpretation of the West’s own
past. In regard to Christianity, for example, much of Caroline Walker Bynum’s
work on medieval religion has aimed to get beyond the dualistic view assumed in
modern thought and to show that medieval Christian thinkers perceived of the
321

notes to pages 201–202
person as a psychosomatic unity and highly valued the body as a means of access
to the divine (see, for example, Bynum 1987, 1989, 1991, and 1995).
4. Th e “rematerialization” of religious studies as a discipline can be easily
traced, for example, in the recent volume Critical Terms for Religious Studies (Tay-
lor 1998) and its highlighting of terms such as “body,” “gender,” “image,” “relic,”
“performance,” “territory,” and “writing”—as well as its deconstruction of terms
such as “belief” and “rationality.” See the review by David Chidester (2000),
which notes that “the best essays in this collection suggest an emergent horizon
for the study of religion that might be called a new materialism. Attentive to the
body, the senses, gender, sexuality, location, exchange, power relations, and other
material conditions, most of the authors implicitly recast religion as a category
for analyzing materiality” (374). See also the discussion in Terry Godlove’s “Sav-
ing Belief: On the New Materialism in Religious Studies,” which is an argument
for “saving belief” (Godlove 2002). Th e “rematerialization” of religious studies
might itself be seen within the context of the “rematerialization” of the humani-
ties and social sciences as a whole, which has resulted in an explosion of “body-
focused” scholarship over the last several decades. Th is body-f ocused literature
is far too vast to cite. However, for some good, representative examples, see the
three- volume Fragments for a History of the Human Body (Feher et al. 1989); and
see the references and discussions found in various bibliographical, “state- of- the-
fi eld” articles on body studies from a variety of disciplinary perspectives, such as
the following: McGuire 1990, Sullivan 1990, Culianu 1991, Turner 1991, Frank
1991, Porter 1992, Dissanayake 1993, Turner 1997, Asad 1997, LaFleur 1998, and
Porter 2001.
5. See the articles collected in Schopen 1997 and 2004.
6. Th e complete titles of these anthologies are as follows: Buddhism in Practice
(Lopez 1995b), Th e Life of Buddhism (Reynolds and Carbine 2000), Th e Experience
of Buddhism (Strong 1995), Buddhist Texts Th rough the Ages (Conze 1954), Bud-
dhism in Translations (Warren 1896), Buddhist Scriptures (Conze 1959), and Th e
Teachings of the Compassionate Buddha (Burtt 1955).
7. See, for example, Mrozik 2002, which argues for a study of Buddhist ethics
that is driven by the concept of “embodied virtue” rather than just virtue.
8. It is instructive, in fact, to compare Bateson’s article with a more recent
encyclopedia entry: Yuichi Kajiyama’s article on “Th e Body” in the Encyclopaedia
of Buddhism (Kajiyama 1972), which does include a section on “Th e Ideal Body”
(restricted, however, to a discussion of the Buddha’s body).
9. See, for example, Bateson 1908, Kajiyama 1972, Hamilton 1995, Wilson
1996:41–76, Collins 1997, and Williams 1997 (I cannot, however, agree with
Hamilton’s argument that distinctly negative statements about the body within
322

notes to pages 202–205
the Pāli Canon should be solely attributed to “Brahmanical,” “non- Buddhist,” or
“nondoctrinal” infl uence). On the tendency within Buddhist literature to gender
the “worthless” body as a specifi cally female body, see Lang 1986, Wilson 1995 and
1996, and Blackstone 1998:59–81. Th eir argument has been refuted—though not
convincingly, in my opinion—by other scholars, such as Gross (1993:47), Collins
(1997:191, n. 10), Trainor (1993), and Walters (1994:362, n. 11). For a fuller discus-
sion of this dispute, see Ohnuma 1997:203–213.
10. Verses 147–148, 150 (ed. Von Hinüber and Norman 1994:42–43).
11. For a succinct description of body-f ocused meditations (and citations to
the Pāli canonical and commentarial texts in which they are described), see Col-
lins 1997:192–194.
12. Faure 1995:212.
13. By “suicide,” I mean self- interested suicide, not voluntary deeds of self-
sacrifi ce for the benefi t of others, such as we see in gift- of- the- body jātakas. Self-
i nterested suicide was largely condemned, though there were situations (such as
degenerative illness) in which it seems to have been condoned or exonerated, as
long as the person committing it were truly detached from his body. Th e problems
of textual interpretation surrounding the issue of suicide are complex, however;
on this question see, for example, Lamotte 1987, Wiltshire 1983, Keown 1996,
and Harvey 2000:286–292.
14. Ed. Rhys Davids 1975:195.
15. See, for example, Keown 1983, Gombrich 1984, and Collins 1997.
16. kelāyatha mamāyatha; piyo (ed. Trenckner 1880:73).
17. ālepena ca ālimpīyati telena ca makkhīyati sukhumena ca colapattena
˙˙
palivethīyati (ed. Trenckner 1880:74).
˙
18. brahmacariyānuggahāya (ed. Trenckner 1880:74).
19. It is interesting to note, however, that a wound received in battle, though
not “dear” to the one who receives it, is described as being cared for “so that the
fl esh will heal” (mamsassa rūhanatthāya) (ed. Trenckner 1880:74). If Nāgasena’s
˙ ˙
analogy between the body and a wound is supposed to be a strict one, this perhaps
suggests (albeit subtly) that monastic care for the body somehow “heals” it so that
it is no longer a “wound”—perhaps becoming an “ideal body” that overcomes
the defi ciencies of the ordinary human form.
20. Collins 1997:202.
21. nirātmake bhedini sārahīne duhkhe krtaghne satatāśucau ca / dehe parasmāy
˙ ˙
upayujyamāne na prītimān yo na vicaksanah sah // (from Jātakamālā 1, ed. Vaidya
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1959a:4).
22. dehe vināśiny asukhāspade ca / vimarśamārgo ‘py anudāttatā syān . . . (from
Jātakamālā 8, ed. Vaidya 1959a:50).
323

notes to pages 205–213
23. From Liu du ji jing (T. 152) (Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 41 [story
no. 10]).
24. From Liudu ji jing (T. 152) (Fr. trans. Chavannes 1910–1934:1, 77 [story
no. 21]).
25. From Avadānakalpalatā 51 (ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 317, vv. 24–26).
26. From Divyāvadāna 32 (ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:472).
27. suciram api dhrto ‘yam pūtikāyo mahārhaih śayanavasanapānair bhojanair
˙ ˙ ˙
vāhanaiś ca / śatanapatanadharmo bhedanānto duranto na vijahati apūrvam svam
˙ ˙
svabhāvam krtaghnah // (from Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra, chapter 18, ed. Nobel
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1937:210).
28. From Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool 22 (ed. Schmidt 1845:143–144).
29. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:32.
30. api cāham āvuso imasmiññ eva byāmamatte kalebare sasaññimhi samanake
˙
lokañ ca paññāpemi / lokasamudayañ ca lokanirodhañ ca lokanirodhagāminiñ ca
patipadan ti / (ed. Feer 1960:1, 62).
˙
31. nāsti tasyopajīvyam sarvato mīdhabhūtatvāt / tam aham idānīm satkarmani
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
samniyoksye / tan me janmamaranasamudrottaranapotabhūto bhavisyati // (ed. No-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
bel 1937:211).
32. evamvidhe yadi na kāyam imam prayoksye punyāgame nirupamānasukhānubandhe
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
/ ko ‘rtho ‘munā parihrtena kadevarena vātāhatāmbunidhibudbudadurbalena // (ed.
˙ ˙ ˙
Handurukande 1984:42, v. 27).
33. Th e whole verse reads: dustavranasyeva sadāturasya kade(le)varasyāsya
˙˙ ˙ ˙
rujākarasya / karomi kāryātiśayopayogād atyartharamyam pratikārakhedam // (ed.
˙
Vaidya 1959a:47).
34. pūtikāyo; anuttarāyāh samyaksambodheh sambhārabhāvam (ed. Handuru-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
kande 1967:32).
35. bahurogaśatālayam; esām duhkhaparītānām āpaduttaranaplavam (ed. Vaidya
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
1959a:211).
36. Ed. Handurukande 1984:74, vv. 49–51.
37. pūtikāyam . . . abalam; samtyājayisyaty . . . balātmā jagadvināśāvahitah
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
krtāntah (ed. Handurukande 1984:42, v. 28).
˙ ˙
38. kāyam āsannanāśam; duskaram kim nu tatra (ed. Handurukande 1984:42,
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
v. 31).
39. mahotsavah punyaviśesaramyah (ed. Handurukande 1984:42, v. 30).
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
40. akāle kaumudī; pratīkāro . . . vipadām . . . śāśvatah (ed. Handurukande
˙
1984:44, v. 39).
41. pramodāyatanī karisyate mayā śarīram suhrdām hitāgame (ed. Handuru-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
kande 1984:46, v. 46).
324

notes to pages 213–214
42. Th e whole verse reads: “If I do not turn this strife called the body from an
enemy into a friend, my mind will burn for a long time with the fi re of regret,
whose fl ames are sighs” (amitrabhūtam yadi mitrasād imam kalim karisyāmi na
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
kāyasamjñakam / vidhaksyate vipratisāravahninā mano viniśvāsaśikhena me ciram
˙ ˙
//; ed. Handurukande 1984:48, v. 48).
43. sāram śarīrād aham uddharisye (from Jātakamālā 8, ed. Vaidya 1959a:49).
˙ ˙
44. kāyād asārād aham adya sāram bhavantam āsādya samujjihīrsuh (from
˙ ˙ ˙
Avadānasārasamuccaya 3, ed. Handurukande 1984:76, v. 53).
45. adyāham pūtikād asmād vināśāntāt kadevarāt bhavantam mitram āsādya
˙ ˙ ˙
sāram uddhartum udyatah (from Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:32).
˙ ˙ ˙
46. asārāt sāram ādeyam śarīrāt pātukād itah / srotobhinnavalanmūlāt phalam
˙ ˙ ˙
tatataror iva // (from Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta] 6, ed. Hahn 1992:54, v. 19).
˙ ˙˙
47. Ed. Bendall 1957:23, 25, 26 (all quotations from the Vajradhvaja Sūtra).
48. lābhā me sulabdhā yasya me ‘sārāt kāyāt sāram ādattam bhavisyati (quoted
˙ ˙
from the Ratnarāśi Sūtra, ed. Bendall 1957:200).
49. See Monier- Williams 1979: s.v. sāra.
50. Th is might in part explain why the cliché is associated so closely with
the bodhisattva’s gift of his body (rather than other meritorious deeds), for the
physical image of the “core,” “pith,” or “sap” of something being “extracted” runs
parallel to the image of the bodhisattva’s body being mutilated and a body part
removed. In fact, it is interesting to note that King Śibi—in both the Pāli Jātaka
collection and the Cariyāpitaka—bypasses the cliché itself and compares the re-
˙
moval of his eyes directly to the removal of the pith from a palm tree (tālamiñja).
In Pāli Jātaka 499 he states: “If anyone names my eyes, I will tear out my eyes,
as if I were removing the pith of a palm tree, and give them to him” (sace me
koci akkhīnam nāmam ganheyya tālamiñjam nīharanto viya akkhīni uppātetvā
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
dassāmīti; ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4, 402). In Cariyāpitaka 1.8 the Buddha relates:
˙
“Th en [the physician] Sīvaka . . . tore out [my eyes] like the pith from a palm
tree, and gave [them] to the supplicant” (tato so . . . sīvako . . . uddharitvāna pādāsi
tālamiñjam va yācake; ed. Jayawickrama 1974: pt. 2, 6, v. 14). Th e gouging out of
˙
the king’s eye, the removal of the pith from a palm tree, and the abstract idea of
extracting worth from a worthless body all run parallel to each other.
51. Strong 1983a:148–161.
52. Strong 1983a:154, quoting Warder’s (1970:405) and Conze’s (1962:229) defi -
nitions of dharmadhātu.
53. Strong 1983a:155.
54. Perez- Remon (1979) goes even further. After analyzing the use of the term
sāra in many passages throughout the Pāli Nikāyas, he concludes that the designa-
325

notes to pages 215–218
tion of the skandhas and so many other things as “essenceless” (asāra) implicitly
suggests that what the Buddhist follower should be looking for is an “essence”
that does truly exist—in other words, the self (ātman). He believes that the Bud-
dha himself and the earliest generation of Buddhist masters taught a doctrine of
the self (ātman), but this was corrupted in later times into a doctrine of no-s elf
(anātman). I do not fi nd his argument very convincing.
55. Trans. Strong 1983a:149–150.
56. Silk 1994:1, 353, n. 1.
57. I have taken this translation from Nattier (2003:227–228) but (for the sake
of consistency) replaced her “substance” and “insubstantial” with “essence” and
“essenceless.” In addition to extracting the essence from one’s essenceless body, the
full passage also deals with extracting this essence from one’s life and from one’s
wealth. Th e latter two are also defi ned in purely functional (nonsubstantialist)
terms—the fi rst as “not damaging the r oots- of- goodness that one has previously
planted, but causing them to increase,” and the second as “restraining the spirit of
stinginess, causing the spirit of great liberality to increase, and distributing gifts.”
Nattier (2003:227, n. 120) notes that “the idea of ‘extracting the [essence]’ from
these three items—viz., body (kāya), life (jīva), and wealth (bhoga)—while at the
same time maintaining a view of them as [essenceless] is a well-e stablished trope
in Mahāyāna sūtras,” appearing both alone and together (see her references). Th e
bodhisattva’s gift of his body, of course, might qualify as either of two of these
items: “extracting the essence from one’s essenceless body” or “extracting the es-
sence from one’s essenceless life.”
58. Mrozik 1998:78–79.
59. jarārujāmrtyukhalūrikām (ed. Handurukande 1984:74, v. 50); naikopasar-
˙
gavihite (ibid., 74, v. 52); mattavāranagatim kanakāvadātam prāmśum sumerum
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
iva laksanaratnacitram (ibid., 78, v. 63).
˙ ˙
60. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:334, 332.
61. kanakagiriśilāviśālavaksāh śaradamalendumanojñavaktraśobhah / kanakapa-
˙ ˙ ˙
righapīnalambabāhur vrsabhanibheksanavikramo . . . (ed. Vaidya 1959a:45).
˙˙ ˙ ˙
62. sa pīyamānaksatajah ksitīśah ksapācarair hemavapuś cakāśe / samdhyānuraktair
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
jalabhāranamraih payodharair merur ivopagūdhah // (ed. Vaidya 1959a:50).
˙ ˙ ˙
63. lohitacandanārcitā . . . hemapratimeva (from Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta]
˙˙
6, ed. Hahn 1992:54, v. 22).
64. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:5, 37 and 53.
65. Ed. Handurukande 1967:7–9.
66. na ca manir vā pradīpo vā ulkā vā purastān nīyate api tu svakāt kāyād
rājñaś candraprabhasya prabhā niścaranti tad yathā candramandalād raśmayah /
˙˙ ˙
(ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:316).
326

notes to pages 219–221
67. Th ese corpses are enumerated in various places—for example, the
Mahāsatipatthāna Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya, the Satipatthāna and Kāyagatāsati
˙˙ ˙˙
Suttas of the Majjhima Nikāya, Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga, Sanskrit Abhi-
darma texts such as the Abhidharmakośa, and various Mahāyāna texts as well. For
a succinct summary of these lists, see Lamotte 1944–1980:3, 1311–1313.
68. Verses 34–36 (ed. Vaidya 1959a:214).
69. kamalapalāśalaksmīsamrddhābhyām bhāsurān˙gulībhūsanālamkrtābhyām
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
(ed. Vaidya 1959a:35).
70. asthīni vyapagatarudhiramāmsasnāyūni diśo vidiśaś ca keśān vikīrnān (ed.
˙ ˙
Nobel 1937:221).
71. samudgataprānam api prasannam; laksmyā samālabdham iva prakāmam
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
pramrstacāmīkaracāruvarnam (ed. Handurukande 1984:54, v. 58).
˙˙˙ ˙
72. magnam . . . janmāvaskarakardame sphuradurukleśakrimivyākule (ed. Han-
˙
durukande 1984:54, v. 56).
73. Ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:5, 54.
74. Ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:327.
75. aho namaskāraviśesapātratām prasahya nītāsya gunātanus tanuh // (ed.
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
Vaidya 1959a:6).
76. Ed. Vaidya 1959a:213.
77. ebhir Ānandāsthibhir mayaivam ksipram anuttarā samyaksambodhir
˙ ˙ ˙
abhisambuddheti / (ed. Nobel 1937:206).
˙
78. sampūrne ‘dyāpi tad idam śaśabimbam niśākare / chāyāmayam ivādarśe rājate
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
divi rājate // (ed. Vaidya 1959a:35).
79. Th is occurs in the Nalapāna Jātaka of the Pāli Jātaka collection (ed. Faus-
˙
boll 1875–1897:1, 172).
80. pūtikāyo; samparipūrnaśobham (ed. Handurukande 1967:32 and 45).
˙ ˙
81. Ed. Handurukande 1967:94.
82. datvāna mānusam cakkhum laddham [me] cakkhum amānusam (ed. Faus-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
boll 1875–1897:4, 412).
83. mama strīndriyam antardhāya purusendriyam prādurbhavet (from
˙ ˙
Divyāvadāna 32, ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:473).
84. jagati gunāśrayas (from Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta] 6, ed. Hahn 1992:55, v. 34).
˙ ˙˙
85. Th e whole verse (from Jātakamālā [of Haribhatta] 6) reads: “And when her
˙˙
two breasts, swollen like the frontal globes of an elephant in rut, saw just a few
b eard-h airs as dark as collyrium powder appearing on that moon-l ike face, they
immediately disappeared into a manly chest, as if out of shame” (śmaśrūdgamam
˙
praviralāñjanacūrnanīlam āvirbhavantam avalokya tad ānanendau / sadyah
˙ ˙
payodharayugam gajakumbhapīnam antardadhe prthuni vaksasi lajjayeva //; ed.
˙ ˙ ˙
Hahn 1992:56, v. 36).
327

notes to pages 221–225
86. Ed. Cowell and Neil 1970:326.
87. Ed. Yamada 1968:2, 381–382.
88. pranidhānavaśena cānyonyāh prādurbhūtāh tesām ayam Grdhrakūtaparvata-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
pramāno rāśih syān (ed. Yamada 1968:2, 382).
˙
89. sarvatra mānusaśirāh prādurbhūtāh sakeśakarnanayanānāsausthadāntāh
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙ ˙
sajihvā anekamukhaśatasahasrāh prādurbhūtāh / (ed. Yamada 1968:2, 364).
˙ ˙
90. From Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra, chapter 18 (ed. Nobel 1937:211).
˙
91. . . . mayāpsyate / abhedyam acchedyam ahāryam avyayam niruttaram
˙ ˙
dharmaśarīram avranam // (from Avadānasārasamuccaya 2, ed. Handurukande
˙
1984:46, v. 47).
92. Th ere is a large body of scholarship devoted to the bodies of the Bud-
dha. See, for example, the following: Akanuma 1922; Anesaki 1908; Demiéville
1929–1967:3, 174–185 (s.v. Busshin); Dutt 1978b:136–170; Eckel 1994; Griffi ths
1994; Harrison 1992; La Valleé Poussin 1906 and 1913–1914; Makransky 1989;
Nagao 1973; Reynolds 1977; Stein 1937; Suzuki 1963: 217–276; and Williams
1989:167–184.
93. vastiguhyatālaksana; suvarnavarnatālaksana (ed. Yamada 1968:2, 380).
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
94. sabbaññūtañānakkhim (from Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4,
˙
407).
95. sabbaññutañānadantā (from Pāli Jātaka 514, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:5, 53).
˙
96. prākrtamāmsacaksus; anuttaram dharmacaksuh (from Karunāpundarīka
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙
Sūtra, ed. Yamada 1968:2, 351).
97. bodhiratna (from the Manicūdāvadāna, ed. Handurukande 1967:76).
˙ ˙
98. anuttaraśraddhāhasta; anuttarām śīlapādām (from the Karunāpundarīka
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙˙
Sūtra, ed. Yamada 1968:2, 380 and 379).
99. sarvadharmāgraśirah paramajñānam avataran; śraddhāhastaprayuktenānu-
˙
grahacāritrena; mahāpratisthānakramatalavyatihārena; nisparyavasthānajñānadhar-
˙ ˙˙ ˙ ˙
maśarīrāchinnābhinnāluptakāyasamjñah (ed. Nobel 1937:24).
˙ ˙
100. See, for example, Mrozik 1998 and 2002, and Boucher [forthcoming]:
chapters 1–2.
101. Mrozik 1998:31.
102. See the translation of the Lakkhana Sutta in Walshe 1995:441–460. For a
˙
thorough discussion of the thirty- two marks and their relation to specifi c moral
deeds performed in previous lives, see Boucher [forthcoming]: chapters 1–2.
103. Th is example comes from Avadānaśataka 61. On the moral and physical
aspects of acts of off ering in the Avadānaśataka, see Strong 1979.
104. rogena bādhyante pītapāndukāh krśośarīrā durbalān˙gā; alpābādho ‘lpā tan˙ko
˙ ˙˙ ˙ ˙
‘rogo balavān (ed. Speyer 1958:1, 168).
328

notes to pages 225–227
105. samapākayā ca grahanyā samanvāgato yena me aśitapītakhāditāsvāditam
˙ ˙
samyaksukhena parinamati alpābādho rogatātītaś cāsmi (ed. Speyer 1958:1, 172).
˙
106. na bhiksavah karmāni krtāny upacitāny bāhye . . . vipacyante . . . api
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
tūpāttesv eva skandhadhātvāyatanesu karmāni krtāni vipacyante śubhāny aśubhāni
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
ca (ed. Speyer 1958:1, 169).
107. saccapāramitācakkhūnīti (from Pāli Jātaka 499, ed. Fausboll 1875–1897:4,
411).
108. śīlagunaparivāsitāni (from Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra, chapter 18, ed. Nobel
˙ ˙
1937:206).
109. Mahoney 2002.
110. Adapted from Mahoney 2002:16–17. Th e corresponding Sanskrit termi-
nology used for each item in quotation marks is as follows: “giving away every-
thing” (sarva- dāna or sarva-u tsarjana); “body” (ātmabhāva); “enjoyments” (bhoga);
“merit” (punya); “preserve” (√raks); “purify” (√śudh); “increase” (√vrdh).
˙ ˙ ˙
111. Th ese statements are interesting for providing a diff erent, much more
cautionary perspective on the bodhisattva’s gift of his body than we fi nd within
gift- of- the- body jātakas themselves. At the beginning of chapter 2 Śāntideva ex-
plains the relationship between “giving” and “preserving” as follows: “Th us, even
though one’s body, etc., are given away, they must [also] be preserved. Why is
that? Because it is for the enjoyment of living beings that one gives away one’s
body, etc. If they aren’t preserved, then how can they be enjoyed? And if they aren’t
enjoyed, then where is the gift? Th erefore, one should protect one’s body, etc., for
the sake of living beings’ enjoyment” (ed. Bendall 1957:34). In other words, one
should focus on preserving one’s body (through moral conduct) rather than too
hastily giving it away; otherwise it will not be a worthy gift. Similarly, in chapter
3, Śāntideva, again in connection with the topic of “preserving” one’s body, tells
the bodhisattva to expend “eff ort” (vīrya) in all his activities—but not to such
an extent that he produces “exhaustion” (kheda). Such “exhaustion” might occur,
for example, “if [a bodhisattva] of little strength were to undertake a heavy task,
or do so at the wrong time, or if [a bodhisattva] of immature confi dence were to
undertake a diffi cult deed such as giving away his fl esh. [Of course, the bodhi-
sattva] does give away his body, but he must [also] guard against its premature
consumption. For otherwise, the bodhisattva’s exhaustion would result in the
destruction of his bodhicitta, which is the seed [of Buddhahood], and because
of this, the great quantity of merit those beings [might have acquired] would be
destroyed. Th is is why the Gaganagañja Sūtra tells us that the premature desire
[for self- sacrifi ce] is the work of Māra. . . . Even though one should give away
the seed from a beautiful medicinal tree whose many parts are fi t for consump-
329

notes to pages 227–236
tion, this seed must also be protected against premature consumption. And the
same holds true for the medicinal tree that is the perfectly enlightened Buddha”
(ibid., 51).
112. Ed. Bendall 1957:158–159.
113. abhirucitam bhojanam . . . rājārham api; naivamvidham bhojanam vayam
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
aśnīma iti (ed. Vaidya 1959a:46).
114. pratyagrosmāni māmsāni narānām rudhirāni ca / ity annapānam . . .
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
yaksānām . . . (ed. Vaidya 1959a:46).
˙ ˙
115. sthirapīvarāni . . . māmsāni saśonitāni (ed. Vaidya 1959a:47).
˙ ˙ ˙
116. svayammrtānām hi nirusmakāni bhavanti māmsāni viśonitāni / priyāni
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
caisām na hi tāni . . . (ed. Vaidya 1959a:47).
˙ ˙
117. vivardhitesv, brhatsu, māmsopacayonnatesu (ed. Vaidya 1959a:49).
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
118. khādanīyabhojanīyasya mahān rāśir (ed. Handurukande 1967:30);
sadyohatamāmsarudhira (ibid.); pratyagrāni (ibid., 31).
˙ ˙
119. idam sarudhiramāmsam idam samedam idam sukumāram (ed. Handuru-
˙ ˙ ˙ ˙ ˙
kande 1967:38).
120. pūtikād asmād vināśāntāt kadevarāt (ed. Handurukande 1967:32).
˙
121. sha ni mdangs ldan slar yang ral gri’i lo mas sngon nyid du / rnam bcad rab
tu mang po dron mo mdog ni dmar po rnams (ed. Hahn 1974:132).
122. bza’ ba ji ltar ‘dod bzhin lus ‘di ni (ed. Hahn 1974:132).
123. kye yi bram ze mchod sbyin la / srin po phyugs rnams ci phyir rung / yang na
bdud rtsi spangs nas ni / snying po med pas ci zhig bya / (ed. Hahn 1974:134).
124. lus ‘di yang lha’i yin mod / (ed. Hahn 1974:134).
125. Ed. Hahn 1974:134.
126. ring mo nas slong ba’i skye bo mngon shes can re zhig bdag gis mthong ngo /
(ed. Hahn 1974:136).
127. Faure 1991, esp. chapters 7–9; Faure 1995.
128. Faure 1995:212.
129. Faure 1991:135.
130. For a discussion of “ascent” versus “descent” as a persistent theme in Bud-
dhist thought, see Nagao 1984.
131. Nagao 1973:37.
132. Faure 1991:136.
133. E.g., Trainor 1997 and several of the articles in Schopen 1997.
134. Collins 1997:201.
135. Vernant 1989. We could also compare such bodies to Judeo-C hristian
notions of the resurrected body or the bodies of angels.
136. Vernant 1989:23.
137. Vernant 1989:27, 34.
330

notes to pages 236–241
138. Th e same strategy of conveying absolute transcendence through physical
multiplication or magnifi cation is also employed in the Bhagavad Gīta, of course,
for when Krishna reveals to Arjuna a physical vision of his supernal form as God,
Arjuna is startled by its innumerable body parts: “Seeing the many mouths and
eyes of your great form, its many arms, thighs, feet, bellies, and fangs, the worlds
tremble and so do I” (v. 11.23; trans. Miller 1986:101).
139. Vernant 1989:39, 43.
140. Dunning 1992:1.
141. Filliozat 1963. Th e phenomena of autocremation and spontaneous com-
bustion in Indian Buddhism have also been usefully explored in Wilson 2003.
142. Some further idea of the contrast between these two genres can be gained
by considering the Act of Truth in the story of Ksemadatta (from the Samādhirāja
˙
Sūtra). Like the heroes of so many gift- of- the- body jātakas, Ksemadatta also uses
˙
an Act of Truth to restore his injured body to health—but the emphasis of his
Act of Truth is completely diff erent from what we have seen in the jātakas: “By
virtue of the truth by which truth this thing called an arm does not exist, may my
arm become as it was previously! . . . Th is thing that is Ksemadatta does not exist;
˙
because of emptiness, those who investigate the ten directions cannot perceive it
. . . [and] the same is true of all things” (trans. Filliozat 1963:25). Th is explicit em-
phasis upon the emptiness or nonexistence of the body given away is completely
uncharacteristic of the Acts of Truth found within gift- of- the- body jātakas.
143. Glucklich 2001.
144. Glucklich 2001:59.
145. Glucklich 2001:96–97.
146. Glucklich 2001:149.
147. Fr. trans. Huber 1908:332.
148. Th is is the story of the woman Rukmavatī, who sacrifi ces her breasts to
feed another woman who is starving. Th e entire (introductory) verse reads: “What
words can possibly be used to describe the noble conduct of those who think only
of protecting the affl icted, who are devoted to compassion? Th ey are joyful as
their lives are being extinguished, the wounds made on their bodies by extremely
sharp weapons feel like blows from the lotuses that wanton women wear behind
their ears, and they are happily amused to be ornamented by hairs that stand
on end [from the pain]” (ed. Vaidya 1959b:2, 316, v. 1; reading prānapravāsotsave
˙
rather than prānapravāhotsave and vācyocitair rather than bālyocitair [see De Jong
˙
1979:80]).
149. If we remind ourselves, moreover, that “pain” is also an acceptable trans-
lation for duhkha, then the d ouble-s ided nature of the bodhisattva’s pain that I
˙
have tried to elucidate here accords nicely with the idea that duhkha, in Buddhist
˙
331

notes to pages 243–249
thought, is both the overwhelming problem and the necessary context for its
solution.
7. “Kingship, Sacrifi ce, Off ering, and Death:
Some Other Interpretive Contexts”
1. See, for example, Van Gennep 1960 and Turner 1995, 1987, 1974, and
1977.
2. On the theme of the exiled king and the opposition between kingdom and
forest in the Rāmāyana, see Th apar 1978. On the king’s relationship to the wilder-
˙
ness in Indian thought, see Falk 1973.
3. As found, for example, in Avadānasārasamuccaya 3, Mahajjātakamālā 45,
and Kalpanāmanditikā 71.
˙˙
4. Ed. Handurukande 1984:204, vv. 146–156.
5. As found, for example, in the Manicūdāvadāna, the Lokānandanātaka,
˙ ˙ ˙
Avadānakalpalatā 3, and Mahajjātakamālā 49 and 50.
6. As found, for example, in Pāli Jātaka 499, Jātakamālā 2, and Mahajjātakamālā
44.
7. See Falk 1973:3–6 and Auboyer 1949:49–61.
8. Auboyer 1949:177–185.
9. Such as the Nigrodha, Sonaka, and Mahājanaka Jātakas of the Pāli Jātaka
collection.
10. Falk 1973.
11. Heesterman 1985:108–127.
12. Heesterman 1985:118.
13. Inden 1978:29.
14. See Falk 1973 and Bloss 1978.
15. Auboyer 1949:177ff .
16. Granoff 1990. Granoff bases her discussion on two versions of the Manicūda
˙ ˙
story that are not a part of my corpus (Avadānakalpalatā 3 and Mahajjātakamālā
49 and 50), but the basic plots of these versions (as well as many of the details)
are very close to those of the Manicūdāvadāna and the Lokānandanātaka, which
˙ ˙ ˙
are the two versions of the story in my corpus.
17. When the demons refuse the fi ne food and drink initially off ered to them
by King Maitrībala and demand fl esh and blood instead, his ministers say to him:
“Th e Gods are pleased with fat and marrow and such things that are off ered into
the fi re at sacrifi ces. It is no wonder that these demons do not take any pleasure
in the fi ne food you have brought before them” (Jātakamālā 8, v. 30 [ed. Vaidya
332

notes to pages 249–256
1959a:48]; I have borrowed Granoff ’s translation [1990:229]; the same verse also
appears in Mahajjātakamālā 46, v. 135 [ed. Hahn 1985:562]).
18. Granoff 1990:230–233. Th e episode of Aśvatthāman is found at Mahābhārata
10.15–16 and Bhāgavata Purāna 1.7.
˙
19. Th is story is contained in the t hirty-fi fth chapter. I am not aware of any
English translation.
20. Apastambadharma Sūtra 1.9.25.12, as paraphrased by Granoff (1990:229).
Much the same interpretation has also been off ered by Jacques Gernet (1960).
In his analysis of numerous cases of self-i mmolation and mutilation by fi re com-
mitted by Chinese Buddhist monks between the fi fth and tenth centuries c.e.
(many of which were directly motivated by the Indian gift-o f-t he-b ody theme),
Gernet speculates that such immolations functioned as sacrifi cial rituals, and
more particularly as rituals of expiation, in which the martyr takes upon himself
the sins of those around him. (However, for a refutation of Gernet’s analysis, see
Filliozat 1963.)
21. Hubert and Mauss 1964:53–58.
22. Hubert and Mauss 1964:32.
23. Hubert and Mauss 1964:67.
24. Hubert and Mauss 1964:51–52.
25. Parlier 1991.
26. Hubert and Mauss 1964:51.
27. Meadows 1986:72.
28. Granoff 1990:239, n. 40.
29. Hubert and Mauss 1964:114, n. 66.
30. See, for one example, Heesterman 1985, esp. 26–44.
31. For an exploration of how the sacrifi cial imagery of heat and fi re is adapted
in the many Buddhist stories involving the themes of autocremation and spon-
taneous combustion, see Wilson 2003.
32. Hubert and Mauss 1964:100–101.
33. Orzech 1994. For a succinct introduction to René Girard’s theory, see
Hamerton- Kelly 1994.
34. Orzech 1994:147.
35. Versions of this story include Pāli Jātaka 313 (trans. Cowell 1895–1913:26–29)
and Jātakamālā 28 (trans. Khoroche 1989:193–204).
36. Orzech 1994:152.
37. Orzech 1994:149. It is interesting to note that the story related in the
Ksāntivādin Jātaka is very similar to the story (mentioned above) from the
˙
Samādhirāja Sūtra that presents itself as an explanation for all gifts of the body
performed by the bodhisattva, for both stories deal with a king who kills an ascetic
333

notes to pages 257–262
in anger after his harem has wandered away from him and gone to sit at the feet
of the ascetic. Perhaps this suggests, in some way, that it was the killing of the
nonviolent “exemplary victim” that gave rise to the violent “sacred victim.”
38. Trans. Hurvitz 1976:293–302.
39. See citations in Lamotte 1944–1980:1, 143–145, n. 1, and 2, 975, n. 1.
40. For discussions of self- mutilation and self- sacrifi ce in the Chinese Bud-
dhist tradition, see Gernet 1960, Jan 1965, Kieschnick 1997:35–50, Benn 1998,
and Benn 2001.
41. Kieschnick 1997:35–37.
42. Th is is the famous Memorial on the Buddha Relic (Lun Fogu biao), in which
Han Yu warns the emperor Xianzong (r. 805–820) that if he honors the Buddha’s
relics, people “in their tens or hundreds [will] burn the tops of their heads and
burn off their fi ngers in sacrifi ce . . . [and] cut off their limbs or slice up their
bodies in making off erings which will pervert our customs and destroy normal
usages, making us a laughing stock to the world” (trans. Benn 2001:193).
43. Including, for example, the Mingseng zhuan (compiled around 519 c.e.),
Gaoseng zhuan (compiled in 531 c.e.), Xu gaoseng zhuan (compiled in 667 c.e.), and
Song gaoseng zhuan (compiled in 988 c.e.). Th e biographies of “self- immolators”
that appear in these and several other collections are exhaustively described and
analyzed in Benn 2001.
44. Trans. Hurvitz 1976:295.
45. Trans. Horner 1978:89. (For other references to the same threefold distinc-
tion, see note 2 on the same page.)
46. Trans. Hurvitz 1976:298.
47. Th e development of this practice on the basis of two Chinese apocryphal
sūtras and its relationship to more dramatic deeds of autocremation are discussed
in Benn 1998.
48. Stone 2005. For other general discussions of Buddhism and death, see
Reynolds 1992 and Hallisey 2000.
49. Stone 2005:57.
50. MacQueen 1981.
51. Hallisey 2000:17.
52. Huijiao was the compiler of the Gaoseng zhuan (531 c.e.), Daoxuan was
the compiler of the Xu gaoseng zhuan (667 c.e.), and Zanning was the compiler
of the Song gaoseng zhuan (988 c.e.).
53. Benn (2001) discusses and translates the “critical evaluation” (lun) that each
of these compilers appends to the “self-i mmolation” category of his “Biographies
of Eminent Monks” collection (see 64–73 for Huijiao, 116–130 for Daoxuan, and
189–205 for Zanning).
334

notes to pages 262–265
54. Benn 2001:70, 125, 200.
55. Harlan 1994:83. For a good introduction to sati, see the collected volume
Hawley 1994.
56. Rg Veda 10.34. Th e hymn’s nature as an Act of Truth is discussed in Brown
˙
1963 and 1968:173.
57. Brown 1968:173.
58. Caillois 1959:120–121, cited in Drekmeier 1962:47.
59. Burkert 1996:37.
60. See Burkert 1996:34–55.
335

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WORKS CITED
Acharya, Kala. 1993. Purānic Concept of Dāna. Delhi: Naga Publishers.
˙
Akanuma, Chizen. 1922. “Th e Triple Body of the Buddha.” Eastern Buddhist
2:1–29.
Almond, Philip C. 1988. Th e British Discovery of Buddhism. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Ames, Michael. 1966. “Ritual Prestations and the Structure of the Sinhalese Pan-
theon.” In Anthropological Studies in Th eravāda Buddhism, ed. M. Nash et al.,
27–50. Cultural Report Series 13. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asian
Studies.
Anesaki, M. 1908. “Docetism (Buddhist).” In Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,
ed. James Hastings, vol. 4, 835–840. New York: Scribner’s.
Asad, Talal. 1997. “Remarks on the Anthropology of the Body.” In Religion and the
Body, ed. Sarah Coakley, 42–52. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Auboyer, Jeannine. 1949. Le trône et son symbolisme dans l’Inde ancienne. Annales
du Musée Guimet 55. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Aung, Shwe Zan, and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, trans. 1915. Points of Controversy;
or, Subjects of Discourse, being a translation of the Kathā-v atthu from the
337

bibliography of works cited
Abhidhamma- Pitaka. Pāli Text Society Translation Series 5. London: Pāli Text
˙
Society.
Babb, Lawrence A. 1996. Absent Lord: Ascetics and Kings in a Jain Ritual Culture.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bareau, André. 1963. Recherches sur la biographie du Buddha dans les sūtrapitaka
˙
et les vinayapitaka anciens: De la quête de l’éveil à la conversion de Śāriputra et
˙
de Maudgalyāyana. Paris: Ecole Française d’Extrême- Orient.
Barua, D. L., ed. 1939. Cariyāpitakatthakathā. London: Pāli Text Society.
˙ ˙˙
Basak, Radhagovinda, ed. 1963–1968. Mahāvastu Avadāna. 3 vols. Calcutta Sanskrit
College Research Series 20, 31, 63. Calcutta: Sanskrit College.
Bateson, J. H. 1908. “Body (Buddhist).” In Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,
ed. James Hastings, vol. 2, 758–760. New York: Scribner’s.
Bays, Gwendolyn, trans. 1983. Th e Voice of the Buddha: Th e Beauty of Compassion.
2 vols. Berkeley: Dharma Publishing.
Beal, Samuel, trans. 1884. Si-Y u-K i: Buddhist Records of the Western World. Trans-
lated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (A.D. 629). 2 vols. in one. London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co. Orig. pub. 1869.
Bendall, Cecil, ed. 1957. Çikshāsamuccaya: A Compendium of Buddhistic Teach-
ing compiled by Çāntideva chiefl y from earlier M ahāyāna-S ūtras. Th e Hague:
Mouton & Co. Orig. pub. 1902.
Bendall, Cecil, and W. H. D. Rouse, trans. 1990. Śiksā Samuccaya: A Compendium
˙
of Buddhist Doctrine. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Orig. pub. 1922.
Benn, James. 1998. “Where Text Meets Flesh: Burning the Body as an Apocryphal
Practice in Chinese Buddhism.” History of Religions 37.4:295–322.
——. 2001. “Burning for the Buddha: A History of Self-I mmolation in Chinese
Buddhism.” Ph. D. diss., University of California at Los Angeles.
Bhat, G. K. 1959. Th e Vidūsaka. Ahmedabad: New Order Book Co.
˙
Blackstone, Kathryn R. 1998. Women in the Footsteps of the Buddha: Struggle for
Liberation in the Th erīgāthā. Surrey, Great Britain: Curzon Press.
Bloss, Lowell. 1978. “Th e Taming of Māra: Witnessing to the Buddha’s Virtues.”
History of Religions 18.2:156–176.
Boucher, Daniel. [Forthcoming]. Bodhisattvas of the Forest and the Formation of the
Mahāyāna: A Study and Translation of the Rāstrapālapariprcchā- sūtra. Honolulu:
˙˙ ˙
University of Hawai’i Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1996. “Th e Work of Time.” In Th e Gift: An Interdisciplinary
Perspective, ed. Aafke E. Komter, 135–147. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press. Excerpted and reprinted from Th e Logic of Practice. Trans. Richard Nice.
Cambridge: Polity Press, 1990. Orig. pub. 1980.
338

bibliography of works cited
Brekke, Torkel. 1998. “Contradiction and the Merit of Giving in Indian Religions.”
Numen 45:287–320.
Brown, W. Norman. 1940. “Th e Basis for the Hindu Act of Truth.” Review of
Religion 5.1:36–45.
——. 1963. “Rg Veda 10.34 as an Act of Truth.” In Munshi Indological Felicitation Vol-
˙
ume, ed. Jayantkrishna H. Dave et al., 8–10. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
——. 1968. “Th e Metaphysics of the Truth Act (*Satyakriyā).” In Mélanges
d’Indianisme à la mémoire de Louis Renou, 171–177. Publications de l’Institut
de Civilisation Indienne 28. Paris: Éditions de Boccard.
Bunnag, Jane. 1973. Buddhist Monk, Buddhist Layman: A Study of Urban Monastic
Organization in Central Th ailand. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burkert, Walter. 1996. Creation of the Sacred: Tracks of Biology in Early Religions.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Burlingame, Eugene Watson. 1917. “Th e Act of Truth (Saccakiriya): A Hindu
Spell and Its Employment as a Psychic Motif in Hindu Fiction.” Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society, 429–467.
Burnouf, E. 1844. Introduction à l’histoire du Buddhisme Indien. Paris: Imprimerie
Royale.
Burtt, E. A., ed. 1955. Th e Teachings of the Compassionate Buddha: Early Discourses,
the Dhammapada, and Later Basic Writings. New York: Penguin.
Bynum, Caroline Walker. 1987. Holy Feast and Holy Fast: Th e Religious Signifi cance
of Food to Medieval Women. Berkeley: University of California Press.
——. 1989. “Th e Female Body and Religious Practice in the Later Middle Ages.”
In Fragments for a History of the Human Body, ed. Michel Feher et al., vol. 1,
160–219. New York: Urzone.
——. 1991. Fragmentation and Redemption: Essays on Gender and the Human Body
in Medieval Religion. New York: Zone Books.
——. 1995. Th e Resurrection of the Body in Western Christianity, 200–1336. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Caillois, Roger. 1959. Man and the Sacred. Glencoe, Illinois: Free Press of
Glencoe.
Carrithers, Michael. 1985. “An Alternative Social History of the Self.” In Th e
Category of the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History, ed. Michael Carrithers
et al., 234–256. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chakravarti, Uma. 1987. Th e Social Dimensions of Early Buddhism. Delhi: Oxford
University Press.
Chavannes, Édouard, trans. 1910–1934. Cinq cents contes et apologues extraits du
Tripitaka chinois. 4 vols. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
˙
339

bibliography of works cited
Cheal, David J. 1988. Th e Gift Economy. New York: Routledge.
Chidester, David. 2000. “Material Terms for the Study of Religion.” Review of
Critical Terms for Religious Studies, ed. Mark C. Taylor (University of Chicago
Press, 1998). Journal of the American Academy of Religion 68.2:367–380.
Coles, Romand. 1997. Rethinking Generosity: Critical Th eory and the Politics of
Caritas. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Collins, Steven. 1997. “Th e Body in Th eravāda Buddhist Monasticism.” In Religion
and the Body, ed. Sarah Coakley, 185–204. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
——. 1998. Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire.
Cambridge Studies in Religious Traditions 12. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Cone, Margaret, and Richard F. Gombrich, trans. 1977. Th e Perfect Generosity of
Prince Vessantara: A Buddhist Epic. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Conze, Edward, ed. 1954. Buddhist Texts Th rough the Ages. New York: Philosophi-
cal Library.
——, ed. 1959. Buddhist Scriptures. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin.
——. 1962. Buddhist Th ought in India. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Cowell, Edward B., gen. ed. 1895–1913. Th e Jātaka; or, Stories of the Buddha’s Former
Births. 6 vols. and Index. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cowell, Edward B., and Robert A. Neil, eds. 1970. Th e Divyāvadāna: A Collection
of Early Buddhist Legends. Amsterdam: Oriental Press. Orig. pub. 1886.
Croce, Benedetto. 2000. “Criticism of the Th eory of Artistic and Literary Kinds.”
In Modern Genre Th eory, ed. David Duff , 25–28. Harlow, England: Longman.
Excerpted and reprinted from Aesthetic as Science of Expression and General
Linguistic, 2d ed. Trans. Douglas Ainslie. London: Peter Owen, 1953. Orig.
pub. 1902.
Culianu, I. P. 1991. “A Corpus for the Body: A Review Article.” Journal of Modern
History 63:61–80.
Culler, Jonathan. 1975. Structuralist Poetics: Structuralism, Linguistics, and the Study
of Literature. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
——. 1981. Th e Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction. Ithaca: Cor-
nell University Press.
Cummings, Mary. 1982. Th e Lives of the Buddha in the Art and Literature of Asia.
Michigan Papers on South and Southeast Asia 20. Ann Arbor: Center for
South and Southeast Asian Studies, University of Michigan.
Das, Nobin Chandra, trans. 1893. “Rukmāvatī.” Journal of the Buddhist Text Society
of India 1.4:1–12.
340

bibliography of works cited
Dayal, Har. 1970. Th e Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass. Orig. pub. 1932.
Decaroli, Robert. 2004. Haunting the Buddha: Indian Popular Religions and the
Formation of Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Jong, J. W. 1979. Textcritical Remarks on the Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā
(Pallavas 42–108). Studia Philologica Buddhica Monograph Series 2. Tokyo:
Reiyukai Library.
Demiéville, Paul, ed. 1929–1967. Hōbōgirin: Dictionnaire encyclopédique du Boud-
dhisme d’apres les sources chinoises et japonaises. 4 vols. Paris: Librairie d’Amérique
et d’Orient, Adrien Maissonneuve.
Derrida, Jacques. 1992. Given Time. 1. Counterfeit Money. Trans. Peggy Kamuf.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Orig. pub. 1991.
——. 1995. Th e Gift of Death. Trans. David Wills. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. Orig. pub. 1992.
——. 2000. “Th e Law of Genre.” In Modern Genre Th eory, ed. David Duff ,
219–231. Harlow, England: Longman. Reprinted from Glyph 7 (1980): 202–
213.
Derris, Karen. 2000. “Virtue and Relationships in a Th eravādin Biography of
the Bodhisatta: A Study of the Sotatthakīmahānidāna.” Ph. D. diss., Harvard
˙˙
University.
Diprose, Rosalyn. 2002. Corporeal Generosity: On Giving with Nietzsche, M erleau-
Ponty, and Levinas. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dissanayake, Wimal. 1993. “Body in Social Th eory.” In Self as Body in Asian Th eory
and Practice, ed. Th omas P. Kasulis et al., 21–36. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Drekmeier, Charles. 1962. Kingship and Community in Early India. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Dubrow, Heather. 1982. Genre. London: Methuen.
Duff , David, ed. 2000. Modern Genre Th eory. Harlow, England: Longman.
Dumont, Louis. 1980. “World Renunciation in Indian Religions.” Trans. D. F.
Pocock and R. G. Lienhardt. Appendix B in Homo Hierarchicus: Th e Caste
System and Its Implications, rev. ed., 267–286. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. Orig. pub. 1959.
Dunning, A. J. 1992. Extremes: Refl ections on Human Behavior. Trans. Johan
Th eron. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Orig. pub. 1990.
Durt, Hubert. 1998. “Two Interpretations of Human-F lesh Off ering: Misdeed or
Supreme Sacrifi ce.” Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist
Studies 1:57–83 or 236–210.
341

bibliography of works cited
Durt, Hubert. 2000. “Du lambeau de chair au démembrement: Le renoncement
au corps dans le bouddhisme ancien.” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-
Orient 87:7–22.
Dutt, Nalinaksha, ed. 1978a. Bodhisattvabhūmi. Patna: K. P. Jayaswal Research
Institute.
——. 1978b. Mahāyāna Buddhism. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Eckel, Malcolm David. 1994. To See the Buddha: A Philosopher’s Quest for the
Meaning of Emptiness. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Edgerton, Franklin. 1985. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. 2
vols. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Orig. pub. 1953.
Egge, James. 2002. Religious Giving and the Invention of Karma in Th eravāda Bud-
dhism. Curzon Studies in Asian Religion 5. London: Curzon Press.
Emmerick, R. E., trans. 1970. Th e Sūtra of Golden Light: Being a Translation of the
Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra. London: Luzac.
˙
Endo, Toshiichi. 1987. Dāna: Th e Development of Its Concept and Practice. Co-
lombo: Gunasena.
Ensink, Jacob, trans. 1952. Th e Question of Rāstrapāla. Zwolle: N. V. Drukkerij en
˙˙
Uitgeverij Van de Erven J. J. Tijl.
Falk, Nancy. 1973. “Wilderness and Kingship in Ancient South Asia.” History of
Religions 13.1: 1–15.
——. 1990. “Exemplary Donors of the Pāli Tradition.” In Ethics, Wealth, and
Salvation: A Study of Buddhist Social Ethics, ed. Russell F. Sizemore and Donald
K. Swearer, 124–143. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Faure, Bernard. 1991. Th e Rhetoric of Immediacy: A Cultural Critique of Chan / Zen
Buddhism. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——. 1995. “Substitute Bodies in Chan / Zen Buddhism.” In Religious Refl ec-
tions on the Human Body, ed. Jane Marie Law, 211–229. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Fausboll, V., ed. 1875–1897. Th e Jātaka Together With Its Commentary, Being Tales of
the Anterior Births of Gotama Buddha. 6 vols. and Index. London: Trübner.
Feer, Léon. 1879. “Le livre des cent légendes (Avadāna- çataka).” Journal Asiatique
7.14:141–189 and 273–307.
——, trans. 1891. Avadāna-ç ataka: Cent légendes (Bouddhiques). Annales du Musée
Guimet 18. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
——. 1895. “Le C haddanta-J âtaka.” Journal Asiatique, ser. 9, vol. 5: 31–85 and
189–223.
——. 1899. “Le Bodhisattva et la famille de Tigres.” Journal Asiatique, ser. 9, vol.
14: 272–303.
342

bibliography of works cited
——, ed. 1960. Th e Samyutta- nikāya of the Sutta- pitaka. 5 vols. and Index. London:
˙ ˙
Pāli Text Society. Orig. pub. 1884–1904.
Feher, Michel, et al., eds. 1989. Fragments for a History of the Human Body. 3 vols.
Zone 3, 4, and 5. New York: Urzone.
Filliozat, Jean. 1963. “La mort volontaire par le feu et la tradition bouddhique
indienne.” Journal Asiatique 251:21–51.
Findly, Ellison Banks. 2003. Dāna: Giving and Getting in Pāli Buddhism. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Foucher, Alfred. 1917. “Th e Six- Tusked Elephant: An Attempt at a Chronological
Classifi cation of the Various Versions of the Saddanta- Jātaka.” In Th e Begin-
˙ ˙
nings of Buddhist Art and Other Essays in Indian and C entral- Asian Archaeology,
185–204. Rev. by the author and trans. by L. A. Th omas and F. W. Th omas.
Paris: Paul Geuthner. London: Humphrey Milford. Orig. pub. 1911.
——. 1974. Notes on the Ancient Geography of Gandhara: A Commentary on a
Chapter of Hiuan Tsang. Trans. H. Hargreaves. Varanasi: Bhartiya Publishing
House. Orig. pub. 1901.
Fowler, Alastair. 1970. “Th e Life and Death of Literary Forms.” New Literary His-
tory 2:199–216.
——. 1979. “Genre and the Literary Canon.” New Literary History 11:97–119.
——. 1982. Kinds of Literature: An Introduction to the Th eory of Genres and Modes.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
——. 1991. “Genre.” In Encyclopedia of Literature and Criticism, ed. Martin Coyle,
151–163. London: Routledge. Orig. pub. 1990.
Frank, Arthur W. 1991. “For a Sociology of the Body: An Analytical Review.” In
Th e Body: Social Process and Cultural Th eory, ed. Mike Featherstone et al., 36–
102. London and Newbury Park, California: Sage.
Frye, Stanley, trans. 1981. Th e Sūtra of the Wise and the Foolish (mdo bdzans blun);
or, Th e Ocean of Narratives (üliger-ü n dalai). Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan
Works and Archives.
Gernet, Jacques. 1960. “Les suicides par le feu chez le bouddhistes chinois du Ve
au Xe siècle.” Mélanges publiés par l’Institut des Hautes Études chinoises 2, 527–558.
Paris: Institut des Hautes Études.
Giles, H. A., trans. 1956. Th e Travels of Fa- hsien (399–414 A.D.); or, Record of the
Buddhistic Kingdoms. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Orig. pub. 1923.
Glucklich, Ariel. 2001. Sacred Pain: Hurting the Body for the Sake of the Soul. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Godage, Charles. 1945. “Th e Place of Indra in Early Buddhism.” University of
Ceylon Review 3:41–72.
343

bibliography of works cited
Godbout, Jacques T., and Alain Caillé. 1998. Th e World of the Gift. Trans. Donald
Winkler. Montreal: McGill- Queen’s University Press. Orig. pub. 1992.
Godelier, Maurice. 1999. Th e Enigma of the Gift. Trans. Nora Scott. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. Orig. pub. 1996.
Godlove, Terry. 2002. “Saving Belief: On the New Materialism in Religious Stud-
ies.” In Radical Interpretation in Religion, ed. Nancy K. Frankenberry, 10–24.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gombrich, Richard F. 1971. Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural
Highlands of Ceylon. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——. 1972. “Feminine Elements in Sinhalese Buddhism.” In Wiener Zeitschrift
für die Kunde Südasiens 16:67–93.
——. 1984. “Notes on the Brahmanical Background to Buddhist Ethics.” In Bud-
dhist Studies in Honour of Hammalava Saddhātissa, ed. Gatave Dhammapala et
al., 91–102. Nugegoda, Sri Lanka: Buddhist Research Library Trust.
——. 1996. How Buddhism Began: Th e Conditioned Genesis of the Early Teachings.
London: Athlone.
Gonda, Jan. 1965. “Gifts.” In Change and Continuity in Indian Religion, 198–228.
Th e Hague: Mouton.
——. 1975. “‘Gifts’ and ‘Giving’ in the Rgveda.” In Selected Studies 4: History of
˙
Ancient Indian Religion, 122–143. Leiden: Brill.
Granoff , Phyllis. 1990. “Th e Sacrifi ce of Manicūda: Th e Context of Narrative
˙ ˙
Action as a Guide to Interpretation.” In Kalyānamitra (Festschrift for H. Naka-
˙
mura), ed. V. N. Jha, 225–239. Poona: Poona University.
——. 1991–1992. “Seeking the Perfect Words: Teachers and Transmission in Bud-
dhist Story Literature.” Indologica Taurinensia 17–18, 145–181.
Grey, Leslie. 1994. A Concordance of Buddhist Birth Stories. 2d ed. Oxford: Pāli
Text Society. 1st ed. pub. 1990.
Griffi ths, Paul J. 1994. On Being Buddha: Th e Classical Doctrine of Buddhahood.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Gross, Rita M. 1993. Buddhism After Patriarchy: A Feminist History, Analysis, and
Reconstruction of Buddhism. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Grousset, Réné. 1932. In the Footsteps of the Buddha. Trans. Mariette Leon. London:
George Routledge and Sons, Ltd. Orig. pub. 1929.
Guillén, Claudio. 1971. Literature as System: Essays Toward the Th eory of Literary
History. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hahn, Michael, ed. and trans. 1974. Candragomins Lokānandanātaka. Nach
˙
dem tibetischen Tanjur herausgegeben und übersetzt. Ein Beitrag zur klassischen
indischen Schauspieldichtung. Asiatische Forschungen 39. Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz.
344

bibliography of works cited
——. 1979. “Th e Play Lokānandanātaka by Candragomin.” Kailash 7:51–67.
˙
——. 1982. “Kumāralāta’s Kalpanāmanditikā Drstāntapan˙kti Nr. 1. Die Vorzüglich-
˙˙ ˙˙˙
keit des Buddha.” Zentralasiatische Studien 16:306–336.
——, ed. 1985. Der grosse Legendenkranz (Mahajjātakamālā): Eine mittelalteriliche
buddhistische Legendensammlung aus Nepal. Wiesbaden: O. Harrassowitz.
——. 1986–1992. “Variant Readings of Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā as Found in
Jātakamālātīkā.” Journal of Oriental Research 56–62 [Dr. S. S. Janaki Felicita-
˙
tion Volume]: 233–253.
——, trans. 1987. Joy for the World: A Buddhist Play by Candragomin. Berkeley:
Dharma Publishing.
——. 1992. Haribhatta and Gopadatta, Two Authors in the Succession of Āryaśūra:
˙˙
On the Rediscovery of Parts of Th eir Jātakamālās. 2d ed. Studia Philologica Bud-
dhica Occasional Paper 1. Tokyo: International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
1st ed. orig. pub. 1977.
——. 1993. “Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature: Chronology and Related
Topics.” Genshi Bukkyō to Daijō Bukkyō: Watanabe Fumimaro hakushi tsuitō
ronshū (Studies in Original Buddhism and Mahāyāna Buddhism in Commemo-
ration of the Late Prof. Dr. Fumimaro Watanabe), ed. Egaku Mayeda, 31–58.
Kyoto: Nagata Bunshodo.
Hallisey, Charles. 1995. “Roads Taken and Not Taken in the Study of Th eravāda
Buddhism.” In Curators of the Buddha: Th e Study of Buddhism Under Colonial-
ism, ed. Donald S. Lopez Jr., 31–61. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 2000. “Buddhism.” In Death and the Afterlife, ed. Jacob Neusner, 1–29.
Cleveland: Pilgrim Press.
Hallisey, Charles, and Anne Hansen. 1996. “Narrative, Sub-E thics, and the Moral
Life: Some Evidence from Th eravāda Buddhism.” Journal of Religious Ethics
24.2:305–327.
Hamerton-K elly, Robert G. 1994. “Religion and the Th ought of René Girard: An
Introduction.” In Curing Violence: Essays on René Girard, ed. Mark I. Wallace
and Th eophus H. Smith, 3–24. Sonoma, California: Polebridge Press.
Hamilton, Sue. 1995. “From the Buddha to Buddhaghosa: Changing Attitudes
Toward the Human Body in Th eravāda Buddhism.” In Religious Refl ections
on the Human Body, ed. Jane Marie Law, 46–63. Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press.
Handurukande, Ratna, ed. and trans. 1967. Manicūdāvadāna, Being a Translation
˙ ˙
and Edition, and Lokānanda, a Transliteration and Synopsis. Sacred Books of
the Buddhists 24. London: Pāli Text Society.
——. 1975. “The Manicūda Study.” In Bukkyō Kenkyū (Buddhist Studies)
˙ ˙
5:309–168.
345

bibliography of works cited
Handurukande, Ratna, ed. and trans. 1984. Five Buddhist Legends in the Campū
Style From a Collection Named Avadānasārasamuccaya. Indica et Tibetica 4.
Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag.
Hara, Minoru. 1974. “A Note on the Rāksasa Form of Marriage.” Journal of the
˙
American Oriental Society 94.3:296–306.
Harlan, Lindsey. 1994. “Perfection and Devotion: Sati Tradition in Rajasthan.”
In Sati, the Blessing and the Curse: Th e Burning of Wives in India, ed. John
Stratton Hawley, 79–91.
Harrison, Paul. 1992. “Is the Dharma- kāya the Real ‘Phantom Body’ of the Bud-
dha?” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 15.1:44–94.
Hartmann, Jens- Uwe. 1977. “Das Candraprabha- jātaka: Nach dem Gilgit-
Manuskript ubersetzt und Kommentiert.” M.A. thesis, Munich.
Harvey, Peter. 2000. An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics: Foundations, Values, and
Issues. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hauerwas, Stanley, and L. Gregory Jones, eds. 1997. Why Narrative? Readings in
Narrative Th eology. Grand Rapids, Michigan: W. B. Eerdmans. Orig. pub.
1989.
Hawley, John Stratton, ed. 1994. Sati, the Blessing and the Curse: Th e Burning of
Wives in India. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heesterman, J. C. 1985. Th e Inner Confl ict of Tradition: Essays in Indian Ritual,
Kingship, and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 1993. Th e Broken World of Sacrifi ce: An Essay in Ancient Indian Ritual.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hibbets [now Heim], Maria. 1999a. “Th e Ethics of the Gift: A Study of Medieval
South Asian Discourses on Dāna.” Ph.D. diss., Harvard University.
——, Maria. 1999b. “Saving Th em from Yourself: An Inquiry Into the South
Asian Gift of Fearlessness.” Journal of Religious Ethics 27.3:437–462.
——. 2000. “Th e Ethics of Esteem.” Journal of Buddhist Ethics 7:26–42.
Horner, I. B., trans. 1975. Th e Minor Anthologies of the Pāli Canon, Part 3:
Buddhavamsa and Cariyāpitaka. Sacred Books of the Buddhists 31. London:
˙ ˙
Pāli Text Society.
——, trans. 1978. Th e Clarifi er of the Sweet Meaning (Madhuratthavilāsinī), Com-
mentary on the Chronicle of Buddhas (Buddhavamsa) by Buddhadatta Th era.
˙
London: Pāli Text Society.
Horner, I. B., and Padmanabh S. Jaini, trans. 1985. Apocryphal Birth-S tories
(Paññāsa- Jātaka). 2 vols. London: Pāli Text Society.
Huber, E. 1904. “Trois contes du Sūtrālamkāra d’Açvaghosa conservés dans le
˙ ˙
Divyāvadāna.” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême- Orient 4:709–726.
346

bibliography of works cited
——. “Études de littérature Bouddhique: V. Les Sources du Divyāvadāna.” Bul-
letin de l’École Française d’Extrême- Orient 6:1–37.
——, trans. 1908. Aśvaghosa Sūtrālamkāra. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
˙ ˙
Hubert, Henri, and Marcel Mauss. 1964. Sacrifi ce: Its Nature and Function. Trans.
W. D. Halls. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Orig. pub. 1898.
Hurvitz, Leon, trans. 1976. Scripture of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine Dharma (Th e
Lotus Sūtra). New York: Columbia University Press.
Hyde, Lewis. 1979. Th e Gift: Imagination and the Erotic Life of Property. New
York: Vintage Books.
Inden, Ronald. 1978. “Ritual, Authority, and Cyclic Time in Hindu Kingship.”
In Kingship and Authority in South Asia, ed. J. F. Richards, 28–73. University
of Wisconsin South Asian Studies Publication Series 3. Madison: University
of Wisconsin.
Jaini, Padmanabh S. 1988. “Stages in the Bodhisattva Career of the Tathāgata Mai-
treya.” In Maitreya the Future Buddha, ed. Alan Sponberg and Helen Hardacre,
54–90. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jameson, Fredric. 1975. “Magical Narratives: Romance as Genre.” New Literary
History 7:135–163.
Jan, Yün- hua. 1965. “Buddhist Self- Immolation in Medieval China.” History of
Religions 4:243–268.
Jauss, Hans Robert. 1974. “Literary History as a Challenge to Literary Th eory.” In
New Directions in Literary History, ed. Ralph Cohen, 11–41. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Jayawickrama, N. A., ed. 1974. Buddhavamsa and Cariyāpitaka. Pāli Text Society
˙ ˙
Text Series 166. London: Pāli Text Society.
——, trans. 2000. Th e Story of Gotama Buddha (Jātaka–nidāna). Rptd. with
corrections. Oxford: Pāli Text Society. Orig. pub. 1990.
Johnston, E. H., ed. and trans. 1984. Th e Buddhacarita or Acts of the Buddha, by
Aśvaghosa. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Orig. pub. 1936.
˙
Jones, J. J., trans. 1949–1956. Th e Mahāvastu. 3 vols. Sacred Books of the Buddhists
16, 18, and 19. London: Pāli Text Society.
Kajiyama, Yuichi. 1972. “Th e Body.” In Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed. G. P.
Malalasekera, vol. 3, fasc. 2, 255–262. Ceylon: Government Press.
Kalupahana, David J. 1965. “An˙ga.” In Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed. G. P. Malala-
sekara, vol. 1, fasc. 4, 616–619. Colombo: Government of Sri Lanka Press.
Kane, P. V. 1941. History of Dharmaśāstra (Ancient and Mediaeval Religious and
Civil Law), vol. 2, pts. 1 and 2. Government Oriental Series, class B, no. 6.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
347

bibliography of works cited
Kent, Th omas. 1986. Interpretation and Genre: Th e Role of Generic Perception in
the Study of Narrative Texts. Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press.
Keown, Damien. 1983. “Morality in the Visuddhimagga.” Journal of the Interna-
tional Association of Buddhist Studies 6.1:61–75.
——. 1996. “Buddhism and Suicide: Th e Case of Channa.” Journal of Buddhist
Ethics 3:8–31.
Kern, Hendrik, ed. 1891. Th e Jātaka- mālā or Bodhisattvāvadāna- mālā by Ārya- çūra.
Harvard Oriental Series 1. Boston: Harvard University.
Khoroche, Peter. 1987. Towards a New Edition of Ārya-Ś ūra’s Jātakamālā. Indica
et Tibetica 12. Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag.
——, trans. 1989. Once the Buddha Was a Monkey: Ārya Śūra’s Jātakamālā. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kieckhefer, Richard, and George D. Bond, eds. 1988. Sainthood: Its Manifestations
in World Religions. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kieschnick, John. 1997. Th e Eminent Monk: Buddhist Ideals in Medieval Chinese
Hagiography. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
King, Winston L. 1964. A Th ousand Lives Away: Buddhism in Contemporary Burma.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Komter, Aafke, ed. 1996. Th e Gift: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. Amsterdam:
University of Amsterdam.
LaFleur, William R. 1998. “Body.” In Critical Terms for Religious Studies, ed.
Mark C. Taylor et al., 36–54. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lamotte, Étienne. 1944–1980. Le traité de la grande vertu de Sagesse de Nāgārjuna.
5 vols. Bibliothèque du Muséon 18. Louvain: Bureaux du Muséon.
——. 1966. “Vajrapāni en Inde.” In Mélanges de sinologie off erts à Monsieur Paul
˙
Demiéville, vol. 1, 113–159. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
——. 1987. “Religious Suicide in Early Buddhism.” Buddhist Studies Review
4.2:105–118.
——. 1988. History of Indian Buddhism, From the Origins to the Saka Era. Trans.
Sara Webb- Boin. Publications de l’Institut Orientaliste de Louvain 36. Louvain-
l a-N euve: Institut Orientaliste de l’Université Catholique de Louvain. Orig.
pub. as Histoire du Bouddhisme indien: Des origines à l’ère Saka in 1958.
Lang, Karen Christina. 1986. “Lord Death’s Snare: G ender-R elated Imagery in
the Th eragāthā and the Th erīgāthā.” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion
11.2:63–79.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis. 1906. “Studies in Buddhist Dogma: Th e Th ree Bodies
of a Buddha (Trikāya).” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 943–977.
——. 1913–1914. “Note sur les Corps du Bouddha.” Le Muséon: Revue d’Études
Orientales 32:258–290.
348

bibliography of works cited
——. 1928. “Les neuf kalpas qu’a franchis Śākyamuni pour devancer Maitreya.”
T’oung pao 26:17–24.
Lee, Orlan. 1967. “From Acts—To Non-A ction—To Acts: Th e Dialectical Basis
for Social Withdrawal or Commitment to Th is World in the Buddhist Refor-
mation.” History of Religions 65.4:273–302.
Legge, James, trans. 1965. A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms: Being an Account by
the Chinese Monk Fâ-H ien of His Travels in India and Ceylon (A.D 399–414)
in Search of the Buddhist Books of Discipline. New York: Dover Publications.
Orig. pub. 1886.
Lévi, Sylvain. 1907. “Les éléments de formation du Divyāvadāna.” T’oung pao,
ser. 2, vol. 8, 105–122.
——, ed. and trans. 1907–1911. M ahāyāna- Sūtrālamkāra, exposé de la doctrine du
˙
Grand Véhicule selon le système Yogācāra. 2 vols. Paris: H. Champion.
——. 1925. “Le sūtra du sage et du fou dans la littérature de l’Asie Centrale.”
Journal Asiatique, ser. 12, 6, 207: 305–332.
Lévi-S trauss, Claude. 1969. Th e Elementary Structures of Kinship. Rev. ed. Trans.
James Harle Belle and John Richard von Sturmer. Ed. Rodney Needham. Bos-
ton: Beacon Press. Orig. pub. as Structures élémentaires de la parenté in 1949.
——. 1997. “Selections from Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss.” In Th e
Logic of the Gift, ed. Alan D. Schrift, 45–69. New York: Routledge. Excerpted
and reprinted from Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss. Trans. Felicity
Baker. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1987. Orig. pub. as Introduction
à l’oeuvre de Marcel Mauss in 1950.
Li Rongxi, trans. 1996. Th e Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions,
Translated by the T ripitaka-M aster Xuanzang Under Imperial Order; composed
by Śramana Bianji. Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and
˙
Research.
——, trans. 2002. “Th e Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian.” In Lives of Great
Monks and Nuns, trans. Li Rongxi and Albert A. Dalia, 155–214. Berkeley:
Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Lopez, Donald S., Jr. 1995a. “Foreigner at the Lama’s Feet.” In Curators of the
Buddha: Th e Study of Buddhism Under Colonialism, ed. Donald S. Lopez, Jr.,
251–295. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——, ed. 1995b. Buddhism in Practice. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——. 1998. Prisoners of Shangri- La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lüders, Heinrich, ed. 1926. Bruchstücke der Kalpanāmanditikā des Kumāralātā.
˙˙
Kleinere Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden 2. Leipzig: Deutsche Morgen-
landische Gesellschaft.
349

bibliography of works cited
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 1981. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Th eory. Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press.
MacQueen, Graeme. 1981. “Th e Confl ict Between External and Internal Mastery:
An Analysis of the Khantivādi Jātaka.” History of Religions 20.3:242–252.
Mahoney, Richard. 2002. “Of the Progresse of the Bodhisattva: Th e Bodhi-
sattvamārga in the Śiksāsamuccaya.” M.A. thesis, University of Canterbury.
˙
Mair, Victor. 1993. Th e Linguistic and Textual Antecedents of the Sūtra of the Wise and
the Foolish. Sino-P latonic Papers 38. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania,
Department of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies.
Makransky, John J. 1989. “Controversy Over Dharmakāya in India and Tibet: A
Reappraisal of its Basis, Abhisamayālamkāra Chapter 8.” Journal of the Inter-
˙
national Association of Buddhist Studies 12.2:45–78.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1932. Argonauts of the Western Pacifi c: An Account of Native
Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. Studies
in Economics and Political Science 65. London: G. Routledge and Sons, Ltd.
New York: E.P. Dutton and Co. Orig. pub. 1922.
Matsumura, Hisashi, ed. 1980. “Four Avadānas from the Gilgit Manuscripts.”
Ph.D. diss., Australian National University.
Mauss, Marcel. 1985. “A category of the human mind: the notion of person; the
notion of self.” Trans. W. D. Halls. In Th e Category of the Person: Anthropology,
Philosophy, History, ed. Michael Carrithers et al., 1–45. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Orig. pub. as “Une catégorie de l’esprit humain: La notion
de personne, celle de ‘moi’” in 1938.
——. 1990. Th e Gift: Th e Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies. Trans.
W. D. Halls. New York: Norton. Orig. pub. as Essai sur la don in 1925.
McGuire, Meredith B. 1990. “Religion and the Body: Rematerializing the Hu-
man Body in the Social Sciences of Religion.” Journal for the Scientifi c Study
of Religion 29.3:283–296.
Meadows, Carol, ed. and trans. 1986. Ārya Śūra’s Compendium of the Perfections:
Text, Translation, and Analysis of the Pāramitāsamāsa. Bonn: Indica et Tibetica
Verlag.
Michaels, Axel. 1997. “Gift and Return Gift, Greeting and Return Greeting in
India: On a Consequential Footnote by Marcel Mauss.” Numen 44:242–
269.
Miller, Barbara Stoler, trans. 1986. Th e Bhagavad- Gita: Krishna’s Counsel in Time
of War. New York: Bantam.
Monier-W illiams, Sir Monier. 1979. A Sanskrit- English Dictionary. New ed. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press. Orig. pub. 1899.
350

bibliography of works cited
Morris, Richard, ed. 1882. Th e Buddhavamsa and the Cariyāpitaka. London: Pāli
˙ ˙
Text Society.
——, ed. 1955–1961. Th e An˙guttara- Nikāya. 5 vols. and Index. London: Pāli Text
Society. Orig. pub. 1885–1910.
Mrozik, Susanne. 1998. “Th e Relationship Between Morality and the Body in
Monastic Training According to the Śiksāsamuccaya.” Ph.D. diss., Harvard
˙
University.
——. 2002. “Th e Value of Human Diff erences: South Asian Buddhist Contribu-
tions Toward an Embodied Virtue Th eory.” Journal of Buddhist Ethics 9:1–33.
Müller, Max, trans. 1881. Dhammapada. Sacred Books of the East, vol. 10, part 1.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nagao, Gadjin. 1973. “On the Theory of B uddha-B ody.” Eastern Buddhist
6.1:25–53.
——. 1984. “Ascent and Descent: Two- Directional Activity in Buddhist Th ought.”
Presidential Address for the Sixth Conference of the International Association
of Buddhist Studies, Tokyo, Japan, September 1983. Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies 7.1:176–183.
Nath, Vijay. 1987. Dāna: Gift System in Ancient India (c. 600 B.C.–c. A.D. 300): A
Socio- Economic Perspective. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers.
Nattier, Jan. 2003. A Few Good Men: Th e Bodhisattva Path According to Th e Inquiry
of Ugra (Ugrapariprcchā). Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
˙
Nobel, Johannes, ed. 1937. Suvarnabhāsottamasūtra: Das Goldglanz- sūtra, Ein
˙
Sanskrittext des Mahāyāna- Buddhismus. Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz.
Norman, K. R., trans. 1971. Th e Elders’ Verses, Part 2: Th erīgāthā. Pāli Text Society
Translation Series 40. London: Pāli Text Society.
——. 1983. Pāli Literature, Including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and San-
skrit of All the Hīnayāna Schools of Buddhism. A History of Indian Literature,
ed. Jan Gonda, vol. 7, fasc. 2. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger. 1981. Śiva: Th e Erotic Ascetic. London: Oxford University
Press. Orig. pub. as Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Śiva in 1973.
Ohnuma, Reiko. 1997. “Dehadāna: Th e ‘Gift of the Body’ in Indian Buddhist
Narrative Literature.” Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan.
——. 1998. “Th e Gift of the Body and the Gift of Dharma.” History of Religions
37.4:323–359.
——. 2000. “Th e Story of Rūpāvatī: A Female Past Birth of the Buddha.” Journal
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 23.1:103–145.
——, trans. 2004a. “Why the Buddha Had Good Digestion.” In Buddhist Scrip-
tures, ed. Donald S. Lopez Jr., 136–141. London: Penguin.
351

bibliography of works cited
Ohnuma, Reiko, trans. 2004b. “A King Gives Away His Head.” In Buddhist
Scriptures, ed. Donald S. Lopez Jr., 142–158. London: Penguin.
——, trans. 2004c. “Rūpyāvatī Gives Away Her Breasts.” In Buddhist Scriptures,
ed. Donald S. Lopez Jr., 159–171. London: Penguin.
Oldenburg, Serge. 1893. “On the Buddhist Jātakas.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society 25, n.s., 301–350.
Olivelle, Patrick, trans. 1992. Samnyāsa Upanisads: Hindu Scriptures on Asceticism
˙ ˙
and Renunciation. New York: Oxford University Press.
——. 1997. “Amrtā: Women and Indian Technologies of Immortality.” Journal
˙
of Indian Philosophy 25.5:427–449.
Orzech, Charles D. 1994. “‘Provoked Suicide’ and the Victim’s Behavior.” In
Curing Violence: Essays on René Girard, ed. Mark I. Wallace and Th eophus H.
Smith, 137–160. Sonoma, California: Polebridge Press.
Parlier, Edith. 1991. “La légende du roi des Śibi: Du sacrifi ce brahmanique au don
du corps bouddhique.” Bulletin d’Études Indiennes 9:133–160.
Parry, Jonathan. 1986. “Th e Gift, the Indian Gift, and the ‘Indian Gift.’” Man
21.3:453–473.
——. 1994. Death in Banaras. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Perez- Remon, Joaquin. 1979. “Th e Simile of the Pith (Sāra) in the Nikāyas and Its
Bearing on the Anattavāda.” Boletín de la Asociación Española de Orientalistas
15:71–93.
Porter, Roy. 1992. “History of the Body.” In New Perspectives on Historical Writ-
ing, ed. Peter Burke, 206–232. University Park: Pennsylvania State University
Press.
——. 2001. “History of the Body Reconsidered.” In New Perspectives on Histori-
cal Writing, ed. Peter Burke, 2d ed., 233–260. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Pradhan, Prahlad, ed. 1975. Abhidharmakośa- bhāsyam of Vasubandhu. 2d ed. Ti-
˙
betan Sanskrit Works 8. Patna: K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute. 1st ed. orig.
pub. 1967.
Propp, Vladimir. 1958. Morphology of the Folktale. Trans. Laurence Scott. Indiana
University Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore, and Linguistics 10.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Orig. pub. as Morfologiia skazki in
1928.
——. 1983. Th eory and History of Folklore. Ed. A. Lieberman. Trans. A. Y. Martin
et al. Th eory and History of Literature 5. Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press.
Przyluski, Jean. 1914. “Le Nord-o uest de l’Inde dans le Vinaya des Mūlasarvāstivādin
et les textes apparentés.” Journal Asiatique 4:493–568.
352

bibliography of works cited
Raheja, Gloria Goodwin. 1988. Th e Poison in the Gift: Ritual, Prestation, and the Dom-
inant Caste in a North Indian Village. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ramanujan, A. K. 1991. “Th ree Hundred Rāmāyanas: Five Examples and Th ree
˙
Th oughts on Translation.” In Many Rāmāyanas: Th e Diversity of a Narrative
˙
Tradition in South Asia, ed. Paula Richman, 22–49. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Reynolds, Frank E. 1977. “Th e Several Bodies of Buddha: Refl ections on a Ne-
glected Aspect of Th eravada Tradition.” History of Religions 16.4:374–389.
——. 1992. “Death as Th reat, Death as Achievement: Buddhist Perspectives
with Particular Reference to the Th eravada Tradition.” In Death and Afterlife:
Perspectives of World Religions, ed. Hiroshi Obayashi, 157–167. Contributions
to the Study of Religion 33. New York: Greenwood Press.
Reynolds, Frank E., and Jason A. Carbine, eds. 2000. Th e Life of Buddhism.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rhys Davids, C. A. F., ed. 1975. Th e Visuddhi- magga of Buddhaghosa. London:
Pāli Text Society, 1975. Orig. pub. as 2 vols. in 1920–1921.
Rhys Davids, T. W., trans. 1880. Buddhist Birth Stories. London: Trubner’s Ori-
ental Series.
Rhys Davids, T. W., and J. E. Carpenter, eds. 1968–1971. Th e Suman˙gala- vilāsinī,
Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dīgha Nikāya. 3 vols. London: Pāli Text
Society. Orig. pub. 1929–1932.
——, eds. 1975–1982. Th e Dīgha Nikāya. 3 vols. London: Pāli Text Society. Orig.
pub. 1890–1911.
Rhys Davids, T. W., and William Stede. 1989. Pāli Text Society Pāli- English Diction-
ary. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers. Orig. pub. 1921–1923.
Rosmarin, Adena. 1985. Th e Power of Genre. Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press.
Sahlins, Marshall D. 1996. “On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange.” In Th e
Gift: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, ed. Aafke E. Komter, 26–38. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press. Reprinted and abridged from Stone Age Econom-
ics. London: Routledge, 1978.
Śāstrī, Swāmī Dwārikādās, ed. 1998. Th e Abhidharmakośa & Bhāsya of Ācārya Va-
˙
subandhu with Sphutārthā Commentary of Ācārya Yaśomittrā. 2 vols. Bauddha
Bharati Series 7–8. Varanasi: Bauddha Bharati.
Schlingloff , Dieter. 1988. Studies in the Ajanta Paintings: Identifi cations and Inter-
pretations. Delhi: Ajanta Publications.
Schmidt, I. J., ed. and trans. 1845. Der weise und der thor: Aus dem tibetischen
uebersetzt und mit dem originaltexte herausgegeben. St. Petersburg: W. Gräff ’s
Erben. Leipzig: Leopold Voss.
353

bibliography of works cited
Schopen, Gregory. 1997. Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks: Collected Papers on
the Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India. Honolulu:
University of Hawai’i Press.
——. 2004. Buddhist Monks and Business Matters: Still More Papers on Monastic
Buddhism in India. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Schrift, Alan D., ed. 1997. Th e Logic of the Gift: Toward an Ethic of Generosity.
New York: Routledge.
Senart, Émile, ed. 1977. Mahāvastu avadānam. Le Mahāvastu: texte sanscrit publié
˙
pour la première fois et accompagné d’introductions et d’un commentaire. 3 vols.
Tokyo: Meicho- Fukyū- Kai. Orig. pub. 1882–1897.
Shackleton Bailey, D. R., ed. and trans. 1954. “Th e Jātakastava of Jñānayaśas.”
In Asiatica: Festschrift Friedrich Weller, ed. Johannes Schubert, 22–29. Leipzig:
Otto Harrassowitz.
Shulman, David. 1993. Th e Hungry God: Hindu Tales of Filicide and Devotion.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Silber, Ilana F. 1995. “Gift- Giving in the Great Traditions: Th e Case of Dona-
tions to Monasteries in the Medieval West.” Archives europeennes de sociologie
36.2:209–243.
Silk, Jonathan Alan. 1994. “Th e Origins and Early History of the Mahāratnakūta
˙
Tradition of Mahāyāna Buddhism with a Study of the Ratnarāśisūtra and
Related Materials.” 2 vols. Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan.
Snellgrove, David. 1987. Indo- Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and Th eir Ti-
betan Successors. 2 vols. Boston: Shambhala Publications.
Speyer, J. S., trans. 1895. Th e Gātakamālā; or, Garland of Birth-S tories by Ārya Sūra.
Sacred Books of the Buddhists 1. London: Oxford University Press.
——, ed. 1958. Avadānaçataka: A Century of Edifying Tales Belonging to the Hīnayāna.
2 vols. in one. Th e Hague: Mouton and Co. Orig. pub. 1902–1909.
Spiro, Melford. 1982. Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and Its Burmese Vicis-
situdes. 2d ed. Berkeley: University of California Press. 1st ed. orig. pub. 1970.
Starobinski, Jean. 1997. Largesse. Trans. Jane Marie Todd. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. Orig. pub. as Largesse (in French) in 1994.
Stein, Otto. 1937. “Notes on the Trikāya- Doctrine.” In Jha Commemoration Vol-
ume, 389–398. Poona Oriental Series 39. Poona: Oriental Book Agency.
Stone, Jacqueline I. 2005. “Death.” In Critical Terms for the Study of Buddhism, ed.
Donald S. Lopez Jr., 56–76. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Strathern, Marilyn. 1988. Th e Gender of the Gift: Problems with Women and Problems
with Society in Melanesia. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Strenski, Ivan. 1983. “On Generalized Exchange and the Domestication of the
Samgha.” Man, n.s., 18:463–477.
˙
354

bibliography of works cited
Strong, John. 1977. “Making Merit in the Aśokāvadāna: A Study of Buddhist
Acts of Off ering in the Post-P arinirvāna Age.” Ph.D. diss., University of
˙
Chicago.
——. 1979. “Th e Transforming Gift: An Analysis of Devotional Acts of Off ering
in Buddhist Avadāna Literature.” History of Religions 18.3:221–237.
——. 1983a. Th e Legend of King Aśoka: A Translation and Study of the Aśokāvadāna.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——. 1983b. “Buddhist Avadānas and Jātakas: Th e Question of Genre.” Unpub-
lished paper delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Academy of
Religion, Dallas, Texas.
——. 1985. “Th e Buddhist Avadānists and the Elder Upagupta.” In Tantric and
Taoist Studies in Honour of R. A. Stein, ed. Michel Strickman, vol. 3, 862–881.
Mélanges Chinois et Bouddhiques 22.
——. 1990. “Rich Man, Poor Man, Bhikkhu, King: Aśoka’s Great Quinquennial
Festival and the Nature of Dāna.” In Ethics, Wealth, and Salvation: A Study in
Buddhist Social Ethics, ed. Russell F. Sizemore and Donald K. Swearer, 107–123.
Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
——. 1992. Th e Legend and Cult of Upagupta: Sanskrit Buddhism in North India
and Southeast Asia. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——, ed. 1995. Th e Experience of Buddhism: Sources and Interpretations. Belmont,
California: Wadsworth Publishing Company.
——. 2001. Th e Buddha: A Short Biography. Oxford: Oneworld.
——. 2004. Relics of the Buddha. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sullivan, Lawrence E. 1990. “Body Works: Knowledge of the Body in the Study
of Religion.” History of Religions 29:86–99.
Suzuki, D. T. 1963. Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism. New York: Schocken. Orig.
pub. 1907.
Swearer, Donald K., trans. 1995. “Bimbā’s Lament.” In Buddhism in Practice, ed.
Donald S. Lopez Jr., 541–552. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Takahashi, Moritaka, ed. and trans. 1969. Hdsan˙s Blun; or, the Sūtra of the Wise
and the Foolish, Translated from Tibetan Versions and Annotated. Osaka, Japan:
Institute of Oriental and Occidental Studies, Kansai University.
Takahata, Kanga, ed. 1954. Ratnamālāvadāna, A Garland of Precious Gems or a
Collection of Edifying Tales, Belonging to the Mahāyāna. Oriental Library, series
D, vol. 3. Tokyo: Toyo Bunko.
Takakusu, J. 1901. “Tales of the Wise Man and the Fool, in Tibetan and Chinese.”
Journal of the Royal Asiatique Society, 447–460.
Tatelman, Joel. 2000. Th e Glorious Deeds of Pūrna: A Translation and Study of the
˙
Pūrnāvadāna. Surrey, England: Curzon.
˙
355

bibliography of works cited
Taylor, Mark C., ed. 1998. Critical Terms for Religious Studies. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Th apar, Romila. 1978. Exile and the Kingdom: Some Th oughts on the Rāmāyana.
˙
Rao Bahadur N. Narasimhachar Endowment Lecture for 1977–1978. Banga-
lore: Mythic Society.
Thomas, E. J. 1933. “Avadāna and Apadāna.” Indian Historical Quarterly
9:32–36.
Tin, Pe Maung, trans. 1975. Th e Path of Purity, Being a Translation of Buddhaghosa’s
Visuddhimagga. Pāli Text Society Translation Series 11, 17, and 21. 3 vols. in
one. London: Pāli Text Society. Orig. pub. 1923–1931.
Todorov, Tzvetan. 1976. “The Origin of Genres.” New Literary History
8:159–170.
Trainor, Kevin. 1993. “In the Eye of the Beholder: Nonattachment and the Body
in Subhā’s Verse (Th erīgāthā 71).” Journal of the American Academy of Religion
61.1:57–79.
——. 1997. Relics, Ritual, and Representation in Buddhism: Rematerializing the Sri
Lankan Th eravada Tradition. Cambridge Studies in Religious Traditions 10.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trautmann, Th omas R. 1981. Dravidian Kinship. Cambridge Studies in Social
Anthropology 36. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——. 1986. “Th e Gift in India: Marcel Mauss as Indianist.” Paper delivered be-
fore the Th irty-E ighth Annual Meeting of the Association for Asian Studies,
Chicago, Illinois. Unpublished manuscript.
Trenckner, Vilhelm, ed. 1880. Th e Milindapañho: Being Dialogues Between King
Milinda and the Buddhist Sage Nāgasena. London: Williams and Norgate.
——, ed. 1888–1925. Th e Majjhima Nikāya. 3 vols. and Index. London: Pāli Text
Society.
Turner, Bryan S. 1991. “Recent Developments in the Th eory of the Body.” In Th e
Body: Social Process and Cultural Th eory, ed. Mike Featherstone et al., 1–35.
London and Newbury Park, California: Sage.
——. 1997. “Th e Body in Western Society: Social Th eory and Its Perspectives.”
In Religion and the Body, ed. Sarah Coakley, 15–41. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Turner, Victor. 1974. Dramas, Fields, and Metaphors: Symbolic Action in Human
Society. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
——. 1977. “Variations on a Th eme of Liminality.” In Secular Ritual, ed. Sally F.
Moore and Barbara G. Myerhoff , 36–52. Amsterdam: Van Gorcum.
——. 1987. “Betwixt and Between: Th e Liminal Period in Rites of Passage.” In
Betwixt and Between: Patterns of Masculine and Feminine Initiation, ed. Louise
356

bibliography of works cited
Carus Mahdi, Steven Foster, and Meredith Little, 3–19. La Salle: Open Court.
Reprinted from Th e Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1967.
——. 1995. Th e Ritual Process: Structure and Anti- Structure. Lewis Henry Morgan
Lectures, 1966. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Orig. pub. 1966.
Vaidya, P. L., ed. 1958. A vadāna- Śataka. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 19. Darbhanga:
Mithila Institute.
——, ed. 1959a. Jātakamālā. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 21. Darbhanga: Mithila
Institute.
——, ed. 1959b. Avadāna- kalpalatā of Ksemendra. 2 vols. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts
˙
22–23. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute.
——, ed. 1959c. Divyāvadāna. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 20. Darbhanga: Mithila
Institute.
——, ed. 1960. Bodhicaryāvatāra of Śāntideva, with the Commentary Pañjika of
Prajñākaramati. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 12. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute.
Van Buitenen, J. A. B., trans. 1975. Th e Mahābhārata, Book 2: Th e Book of the
Assembly Hall, and Book 3: Th e Book of the Forest. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Van Gennep, Arnold. 1960. Th e Rites of Passage. Trans. Monika B. Vizedom and
Gabrielle L. Caff ee. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Orig. pub. as Les
rites de passage in 1909.
Vernant, Jean- Pierre. 1989. “Dim Body, Dazzling Body.” In Fragments for a History
of the Human Body, ed. Michel Feher et al., vol. 1, 19–47. New York: Urzone.
Von Hinüber, O., and K. R. Norman, eds. 1994. Dhammapada. Oxford: Pāli
Text Society.
Walshe, Maurice, trans. 1995. Th e Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation
of the Dīgha Nikāya. Boston: Wisdom Publications. Orig. pub. 1987 as Th us
Have I Heard: Th e Long Discourses of the Buddha.
Walters, Jonathan S. 1994. “A Voice From the Silence: Th e Buddha’s Mother’s
Story.” History of Religions 33.4:358–379.
Warder, A. K. 1970. Indian Buddhism. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Warren, Henry Clarke, ed. 1896. Buddhism in Translations. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Watters, Th omas, trans. 1904–1905. On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India (A.D.
629–45). 2 vols. London: Royal Asiatic Society.
Weeraratne, W. G. 1967. “Avadāna.” In Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed. G. P. Malalase-
kera, vol. 2, fasc. 3, 395–398. Colombo: Government of Sri Lanka Press.
——. 1984. “Dāna.” In Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed. Jotiya Dhirasekera, vol. 4,
fasc. 2, 307–310. Colombo: Government of Sri Lanka Press.
357

bibliography of works cited
Weeraratne, W. G. 1989. “Divyāvadāna.” In Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed. G. P.
Malalasekera, vol. 4, fasc. 4, 284–290. Colombo: Government of Sri Lanka
Press.
Williams, Paul. 1989. Mahāyāna Buddhism: Th e Doctrinal Foundations. London:
Routledge.
——. 1997. “Some Mahāyāna Buddhist Perspectives on the Body.” In Religion
and the Body, ed. Sarah Coakley, 205–230. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wilson, Liz. 1994. “Henpecked Husbands and Renouncers Home on the Range:
Celibacy as Social Disengagement in South Asian Buddhism.” Union Seminary
Quarterly Review 48.3–4:7–28.
——. 1995. “Th e Female Body as a Source of Horror and Insight in Post-A shokan
Indian Buddhism.” In Religious Refl ections on the Human Body, ed. Jane Marie
Law, 76–99. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
——. 1996. Charming Cadavers: Horrifi c Figurations of the Feminine in Indian
Buddhist Hagiographic Literature. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 2002. “Beggars Can Be Choosers: Mahākassapa as a Selective Eater of Of-
ferings.” In Constituting Communities: Th eravāda Buddhism and the Religious
Cultures of South and Southeast Asia, ed. John Cliff ord Holt, Jacob N. Kinnard,
and Jonathan S. Walters, 57–70.
——. 2003. “Human Torches of Enlightenment: Autocremation and Spontaneous
Combustion as Marks of Sanctity in South Asian Buddhism.” In Th e Living and
the Dead: Social Dimensions of Death in South Asian Religions, ed. Liz Wilson,
29–50. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Wiltshire, Martin G. 1983. “Th e ‘Suicide’ Problem in the Pāli Canon.” Journal of
the International Association of Buddhist Studies 6.2:124–140.
Winternitz, Maurice. 1908. “Jātaka.” In Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, ed.
James Hastings, vol. 7, 491–494. New York: Scribner’s.
——. 1933. A History of Indian Literature, Vol. 2: Buddhist Literature and Jaina
Literature. Trans. S. Ketkar and H. Cohn. Calcutta: University of Calcutta.
Orig. pub. as part of Geschichte der indischen Literatur in 1908–1920.
Wriggins, Sally Hovey. 1996. Xuanzang: A Buddhist Pilgrim on the Silk Road.
Boulder: Westview Press.
Yamada, Isshi, ed. 1968. Karunāpundarīka: Th e White Lotus of Compassion. 2 vols.
˙ ˙˙
London: School of Oriental and African Studies.
358

INDEX
Nonspecifi c citations to gift-o f-t he-b ody stories (for example, “tigress, story of”)
are indexed separately from specifi c citations to gift- of- the- body stories (for ex-
ample, “Jātakamālā No. 1”), with cross-r eferences from the former to the latter
(but not vice-v ersa). Figures and tables are indexed separately from other page
references.
Abhidharmakośabhāsya, 101, 102, 146, Amar Chitra Katha, 254 fi g. 6
˙
149, 151, 153–155, 312n49 Ambara, King, story of (in
Act of Truth, 263. See also under Karunāpundarīka Sūtra), 83–84,
˙ ˙˙
plotline with Śakra- in- disguise as 172, 222, 223, 236
recipient Amitābha, 234
agonistic encounter between hero and An˙guttara Nikāya, 70, 79, 101, 144,
god- in- disguise, stories of, 81 148, 151, 153, 154–155
Ajantā, 4, 5, 5 fi g. 1, 6 fi g. 2, 289n16 animals, Buddhist view of, 294n1
˙˙
Alambusā Jātaka, 71 Apadāna, 38
Almond, Philip, 321n2 Apastambadharma Sūtra, 250
Amarāvatī, 302n28 ārāma, 245–246, 248
359

index
Arjuna, 81 Avadānaśataka, 21, 38, 41–42, 51, 225,
Artha Śāstra and arthaśāstric argu- 292n42, 293n45. See also individual
ments, 87, 106, 300n77 stories listed below
Aśoka, King: in Aśokāvadāna, 214– Avadānaśataka No. 31, 55, 225–226,
215; and “Great Quinquennial 295n17
Festival” (pañcavarsika), 164–166; Avadānaśataka No. 34, 76, 82–83
˙
stūpas associated with, 3; and Avisahya Jātaka, 36
˙
Upagupta, dialogue between, 111
table 2, 115, 304n54 Barua, D. L., 46
Aśokāvadāna, 214–216 Bateson, J. H., 199
Aśokāvadānamālā, 292n42 Benn, James, 262
Aśvatthāman, Hindu story of, 249 Bhagavad Gītā, 109, 311n27, 331n138
ātma- parityāga (self- sacrifi ce), 35 Bhārhut, 36
Auboyer, Jeannine, 245 Bhat, G. K., 307n78
autocremation, 237, 331n142 Bodhicaryāvatāra, 78, 162, 191,
Avadānakalpalatā, 9, 21, 51, 308n99. 296n23, 315n82
See also individual stories listed bodhisattva: as embodiment of dāna,
below 91, 97–103, 111; and fear of
Avadānakalpalatā No. 51, 9–13, 241, reciprocity, 189–193; and parallels
331n148 with ksatriya, 161–163, 189, 315n82;
˙
Avadānakalpalatā No. 55, 121–122, 128, thirty perfections of, 258–259; and
172 war imagery, 162, 315n82. See also
Avadānakalpalatā No. 91, 49–50 bodhisattva path; bodhisattva’s gift
Avadānakalpalatā No. 95, 9 of his body
Avadānakalpalatā No. 104, 15–17 Bodhisattvabhūmi, 102, 144, 151–152,
Avadānamālās, 38, 42, 292n42, 304n54 173, 190–191
avadāna(s), 7, 35; of the bodhisattva, bodhisattva path, 7, 36; danger of
39; ethos of, 40–44, 46–48, 50, 233, arrogance on, 319–320n58
256–257, 266–271, 293n45; bodhisattva’s gift of his body, 266–
etymology of, 291n31; experts in, 272: aggression involved in, 124,
39; as a genre, 38–39, 291n32, 188–195; as assertion of self,
291n33; as illustrating “devotions,” 124, 188–195, 240; and Buddhist
41–44, 179, 266 discourse on dāna, 167–198, 269–
Avadānasārasamuccaya, 51. See also 270; and death, 260–265; as
individual stories listed below defi ning feature of bodhisattva-
Avadānasārasamuccaya No. 2, 57, 210, hood, 168; as end of bodhisattva
212–213, 219 path, 227–228; and fear of
Avadānasārasamuccaya No. 3, 76–77, reciprocity, 189, 191–193; as
172, 212, 217 fulfi llment of dāna- pāramitā, 46,
360

index
91–96, 168–170; as gift of every- 203–205, 323n19; critical discourse
thing, 171–172; as gift of self, 172– on, 322n4; destruction of, versus
174; as giving up of world, 171–174; transformation of, 19–20; extract-
as ideal gift, 167–174; incompat- ing essence from essenceless, 213–
ibility with equanimity, 192–193; 217, 240, 325n50, 325n54, 326n57;
incompatibility with nonself, in gift- of- the- body jātakas, 205–
191–193; in jātakas and avadānas 223, 228–231, 232–241, 270; of
(see gift- of- the- body jātakas); in Greek gods, 235–236; ideal, 200,
Mahāyāna sūtras, 6–7, 83–85; 217–231, 233–241; meditations on,
motivation behind, 97–103, 134– 202, 204, 218–219; ordinary, 200,
135, 171; multiple episodes of, 82– 201–217, 233–241; as refl ection of
85; as ordinary gift, 167–168, 174– moral status, 224–231; self-
182; pain involved in, 237–241, mutilation of, in China, 257–258,
331n149; performed prematurely, 262, 333n20, 334n42; “substitute,”
329n111; and purity of intention, 231, 234–235; thirty- two marks of
169–171, 182; and reliance on Buddha’s, 223, 224–225; trans-
unworthy recipients, 124, 171, 193– formed by pain, 237–241, 331n149;
195; and ritual off erings, 256–259, Western dualism between mind
271; as sacrifi ce, 249–256, 270–271; and, 200, 224, 321n3; worthlessness
as sacrifi ce of desacralization, 250, vs. worth of, 202–217, 322n9
251; as sacrifi ce of expiation, 250, Bourdieu, Pierre, 184–185
333n20; as sacrifi ce of sacralization, Brāhmana Jātaka, 37
˙
250–251, 255; as self- sacrifi ce of brahmavihāras, 191–192
god, 253–255; as unique gift, 188– Brekke, Torkel, 313n64, 314n67, 314n70
189, 318n42; and Vedic sacrifi ce, Brown, W. Norman, 263
249–253; visual depictions of (see Buddha: biography of, 244; biography
gift- of- the- body jātakas: visual of, in northwest India, 1–4;
depictions of); vs. Buddha’s gift of bodhisattva career of, 36–37; body
his dharma- body, 20 of (see body: of a Buddha); death
Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā. See of, 260, 261–262; “divine eye” of,
Avadānakalpalatā 39; as exemplar of “brahmanical”
body: bodhisattva’s desire for better, and “ksatriya” models of dāna, 163;
˙
221–223; bodhisattva’s vs. others’ as exemplar of giving up the
perspectives on, 233–235; of a world, 164; and gift of his dharma-
Buddha, 222–223, 234, 236 (see body, 20; lives prior to the life as
also dharma- kāya; nirmāna- kāya; Sumedha of, 290n29; nontransac-
˙
sambhoga- kāya; rūpa- kāya); tional status of, 145–147; outdis-
˙
Buddhist conceptions of, 199–241; tancing of Maitreya of, 120, 126,
in Buddhist monastic discipline, 305n67; previous life as Sumedha
361

index
Buddha (continued) confl ict between dāna and other
of, 36, 41; previous lives as Śakra values. See under gift- of- the- body
of, 70; previous lives of, 35–38, jātakas
248–249; recollection of previous conventional plotlines, 52–79, 75 table
lives of, 36; thirty- two marks of 1, 94–97, 267. See also deviations
body of, 223, 224–225; world- from expected plotlines; plotline
renunciation of, 109 with ordinary beings as recipients;
Buddhacarita, 109, 117 plotline with Śakra- in- disguise as
Buddhavamsa, 36, 41, 293n45; recipient; plotline in which gift is
˙
commentary on, 258 interrupted
Buddhism: absence vs. presence of, in
world, 42–44, 179, 181–182, 256, Dakkhināvibhan˙ga Sutta (from
˙
266, 293n44; anthologies of, 201; Majjhima Nikāya), 149, 152–153,
rise of, 196–198; vs. Vedic world- 158
view, 196–198 dāna (gift, giving, generosity): of
Buddhist studies: neglect of body in, bodhisattva, 189–195; “brahmani-
199–201; “rematerialization” of, cal model” of, 161, 164–166, 165
201; textual bias of, 321n2 table 3; Buddhist discourse on, 59–
Burkert, Walter, 265 60, 140–166, 165 table 3, 187–198,
269–270; defi ned in terms of
caitya(s), 93, 146, 159, 221; and intention, 78–79, 299n65; and
legitimation of kingship, 245–246, doctrine of “worthy recipient,” 59–
248 60, 152–163, 313n58, 313n64,
Candraprabha, King, story of, 2, 3, 314n70; economic considerations
58, 137–138. See also Divyāvadāna of, 157, 158–159, 310n5, 313n64;
No. 22; Sūtra of the Wise and the Hindu discourse on, 141, 143–144,
Fool No. 22; and under Liudu ji 152, 157, 159–163, 311n19, 311n27,
jing (T. 152) 314n72, 315n80, 315n81, 317n15; and
Cariyāpitaka, 15, 20, 37, 45–46, 51, intentions of donor, 156, 159; Jain
˙
169. See also individual stories listed discourse on, 141, 143–144, 152, 157,
below 198, 314n67; karmic discourse on,
Cariyāpitaka No. 1.8, 325n50 155–159, 314n70; “ksatriya model”
˙ ˙
Cariyāpitaka No. 1.10, 14–15, 77 of, 161–166, 165 table 3, 315n80,
˙
Carrithers, Michael, 196, 320n70 315n81; lists containing, 141; as
Chan Buddhism, 231–232, 234 means of purifying sin, 320n67;
Chidester, David, 322n4 motives underlying, 72, 100–102;
Collins, Steven, 34, 96, 106–107, 204, sacrifi cial discourse on, 155–159,
235, 300n1, 301n4 314n70; and self vs. selfl essness,
competent reader, 31–34 187–198, 240. See also dāna-
362

index
pāramitā (perfection of generos- dīksā, 252
˙
ity); gift(s) Dīpamkara, 36
˙
dāna- pāramitā (perfection of generos- Dīgha Nikāya, 101, 148; commentary
ity), 4, 20, 37, 49, 50, 60, 78, 124, on, 70
150, 168–170, 192–193, 252, 258; Divyāvadāna, 21, 38, 51, 164–166,
emphasis on, in the jātakas, 45–46. 287n44. See also individual stories
See also bodhisattva’s gift of his listed below
body: as fulfi llment of Divyāvadāna No. 22, 26–27, 58, 105,
dāna- pāramitā 118, 119–120, 129, 137, 172, 218, 219,
Dayal, Har, 22 221, 246, 295–296n17
Da zhi du lun (T. 1509). See Divyāvadāna No. 32, 126, 305n67
Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra drought, 16. See also famine
death, 260–265 duhkha, 331n149
˙
deha- dāna (gift of the body), 35 Dumont, Louis, 197, 320n74
Derrida, Jacques, 149–150, 183, Durdhana, King, story of (in
184–185 Karunāpundarīka Sūtra), 222
˙ ˙˙
Devadatta, 37, 59 Durt, Hubert, 50
deva(s): assimilated to kings, 315n80;
exchanges between men and, 186; Egge, James, 155–157, 311n18
role of, in biography of Buddha, elephant, story of. See Jātakamālā
72–73; role of, in gift- of- the- body (of Āryaśūra) No. 30; Saddanta
˙ ˙
jātakas, 69, 71, 131–132, 268, 295n17; (elephant), story of
transactional status of, 146–147. emptiness (śūnyatā), 150
See also supernatural beings enemies, exaltation of, 296n23
deviations from expected plotlines, envoy. See under gift- of- the- body
79–89 jātakas
Dhammapada, 197, 202; commentary epidemic, 55, 58–59, 295n5
on, 258 essence. See body: extracting essence
dharma, competing notions of, 111 from essenceless
table 2, 112–115. See also “Mode 1 “ethics of esteem,” 157
dharma” vs. “Mode 2 dharma” evil recipients. See under plotline with
dharmadhātu, 214, 216 ordinary beings as recipients
dharma- kāya (dharma- body), 222– exchange: experienced as gift, 184–
223, 234, 236, 240 187; varieties of, 183
Dharma Śāstras and dharmaśāstric
arguments, 86, 92, 103, 105–106, Falk, Nancy, 246
109, 120, 160–161, 250, 303n32, false donor. See under gift- of- the- body
314n72. See also jātakas
varnāśramadharma famine, 4, 55, 295n5. See also drought
˙
363

index
Faure, Bernard, 202, 231–232 recipients of, 153, 158; critical
Faxian: at festival in Sri Lanka, 47; discourse on, 140–141, 148, 183–185;
pilgrimage through northwest and display, 195; of dharma, 145,
India of, 1–2 159, 160, 311n18; downward, 59–60,
fi eld of merit (punya- ksetra), 42–44, 152–166, 165 table 3; eight types of,
˙ ˙
59–60, 145, 152–163, 179, 181, 193, 101, 148, 151, 312n49; equivalence
233, 256 between ideal and ordinary, 174–
Filliozat, Jean, 237–238 175; and equivalence with giver,
fl esh- mountain, 84, 222, 236, 246 172, 271, 317n15; exchanges
“Four Great Stupas” (of northwest perceived as, 184–187; external,
India), 2, 3 173–174, 181–182, 317n18; “forget-
Fowler, Alastair, 32, 35, 48 ting” of, 149–150, 184–185; given by
framing (as a narrative strategy), 114– bodhisattva, 102, 151–152, 165 table
115, 119–120, 132, 179–182, 269, 3, 168, 302n26, 312n49; given by
304n54 Buddha, 165 table 3; given by one
arhat to another, 149–150, 165 table
Gaganagañja Sūtra, 329n111 3, 312n49; given to attain nirvana,
Gandhāra, 1, 2, 4–5, 121 fi g. 4, 302n28. 101–102, 151, 165 table 3, 312n49;
See also northwest India given to Samgha, 145, 153, 156, 158,
˙
generic contract, 30 164–166, 180–182; given to sick,
generic conventions, 26–34, 88; 154; of gods, 317n15; hierarchy of
instability of, 80–82 desires motivating, 150–152;
generic expectations, 29–31, 41, 82 internal, 35, 173–174, 181–182,
generic repertoire, 30 317n18; of merit, 189–190; “pure,”
genre: in terms of competent reader 60, 101–102, 144, 147–152, 165 table
(see competent reader); concept of, 3, 168, 183–187, 190–191, 198,
30–34; “death” of, 30, 289n7; in 302n26; reciprocated, 142–147, 151,
terms of “family resemblance,” 48; 165 table 3, 187–188, 311n18, 311n27;
historical dimension of, 31–34; as of son or daughter to Samgha, 145,
˙
pragmatic and heuristic, 32; size of, 159; and time, 179, 182, 185–187,
48. See also generic contract, 269–270; unreciprocated, 142–148,
generic conventions, generic 151, 165 table 3, 187–188, 311n18,
expectations, generic repertoire 311n27; upward, 59–60, 152–166,
Gernet, Jacques, 333n20 165 table 3, 180. See also dāna (gift,
gift(s): of alms, 144–145, 155–156, 157, giving, generosity); dāna- pāramitā
159, 164–166, 175, 311n18, 314n70, (perfection of generosity);
315n84; anonymous, 195; in archaic off erings, ritual
societies, 142–143, 198; choosing gift of the body. See bodhisattva’s gift
donors of, 193–194; choosing of his body
364

index
gift- of- the- body jātakas, 7–25, 266– unexpected places, 21; visual
272; ambivalence toward rhetoric depictions of, 4–5, 5 fi g. 1, 6 fi g. 2,
of, 136–139; association with 10 fi g. 3, 121 fi g. 4, 208 fi g. 5, 254
northwest India of, 1–4; concep- fi g. 6, 286n20, 286n21, 302n28. For
tions of body in, 205–223, 228–231, related stories, see also self- sacrifi ce
232–241; confl ict between dāna Girard, René, 255–256
and other values in, 91–97, 103– “giving down.” See gift(s): downward
120, 268–269 (see also universal vs. “giving up.” See gift(s): upward
particular values); confl ict between giving up the world (“giving up2”),
one being’s desires and another’s 164–166, 165 table 3, 171–174
in, 120–125; conventional charac- Glucklich, Ariel, 238–240
ters of, 125–129; conventional Godage, Charles, 299n53
plotlines of (see plotline in which god(s). See deva(s)
gift is interrupted; plotline with Gombrich, Richard, 154
ordinary beings as recipients; Gonda, Jan, 186, 315n80, 317n15
plotline with Śakra- in- disguise as grāma / āranya opposition, 246–247
˙
recipient); defi nition of, 48–51; Granoff , Phyllis, 81, 249–250, 252
deviations from expected plotlines gratitude, 145
of (see deviations from expected
plotlines); earliest date of, 287n41; Hallisey, Charles, 34, 138–139, 261
envoy in, 127–128; false donor in, Hamilton, Sue, 322n9
125–127; as genre of Indian Hansen, Anne, 34, 138–139
Buddhist narrative literature, 22, Han Yu, 257, 334n42
26–51, 52; as jātakas rather than hare, story of. See Śaśa (hare), story of
avadānas, 35–40; legitimation of Harlan, Lindsey, 262–263
kingship in, 242–249; lists of, 5; Hasti (elephant), story of. See
opposition to gift in (see opposi- Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 30
tion to gift); in Pāli Canon, 20–21; hau, Maori notion of, 184
reluctant helper in, 128–129; Heesterman, Jan, 246–247
resolution of fundamental confl ict Hibbets, Maria, 157, 190, 320n67
in, 93–97; rhetoric of, 90–139, Horner, I. B., 46
267–269; in Sanskrit tradition, Hubert, Henri, 250–255
21; role of supernatural beings in
(see under supernatural beings); “ideology of absence / transcendence,”
as “super- jātakas,” 44–48, 267; 231–235
supernatural occurrences in (see “ideology of presence / immanence,”
under supernatural occurrences); 231–235
textual references to, 5–7; in “imitability” vs. “otherness.” See
Th eravāda tradition, 20–21; in “otherness” vs. “imitability”
365

index
immediacy vs. mediation, 231–232, 46; associated with northwest
259, 271 India, 1–4; Buddhahood as
incense, burning of, at time of teleological end point of, 96, 124;
ordination, 259 double time- perspective of, 120,
Inden, Ronald, 247 179–180, 233, 270; ethos of, 40–48,
Indian Buddhism: as category, 32–34 50, 233, 256, 257, 266–271, 293n45;
Indra: as previous birth of Buddha, 4; etymology of, 290n24; as a genre,
and temptation of ascetics, 71. See 35–38, 290n25; hierarchy of, 44–48;
also Śakra “identifi cations” in, 37; as illustrat-
Itivuttaka, 311n18 ing “perfections,” 36–37, 41–48,
179, 266; prior to the Buddha’s
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra), 21, 37, 45– birth as Sumedha, 290n29; “story
46, 51, 289n16, 300n77, 316n4; and of the past” in, 37, 179–180, 233,
emphasis on theme of self- 270; “story of the present” in, 37,
sacrifi ce, 29. See also individual 179–180, 233, 270; as subset of
stories listed below avadānas, 39; threefold structure of,
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 1, 100, 37. See also gift- of- the- body jātakas
126, 219 Jātakastava, 5–6
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 2, 65– Jātakatthakathā. See Pāli Jātaka
˙˙
66, 105, 110–115, 111 table 2, 177– collection
178, 303n37 Jinakālamālī, 290n29
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 4, 175
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 6, 27– Kalpadrumāvadānamālā, 39, 292n42
29, 68–69, 207–210, 219, 220 Kalpanāmanditikā, 21, 287n45. See
˙˙
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 8, 85– also individual stories listed below
89, 108, 211, 218, 228–229, 332n17 Kalpanāmanditikā No. 64, 69, 122,
˙˙
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 19, 67 128, 217–218, 240–241
Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra) No. 30, 56, Kalpanāmanditikā No. 69, 61–62, 129,
˙˙
211, 219, 220 136, 296n22
Jātakamālā (of Gopadatta), 21, Kalpanāmanditikā No. 71, 77
˙˙
288n46, 295n9, 296n24 Kane, P. V., 160, 161
Jātakamālā (of Haribhatta), 21, Karmaśataka, 38
˙˙
288n46. See also individual story Karunāpundarīka Sūtra, 83–84, 246,
˙ ˙˙
listed below 288n47. See also Ambara, King,
Jātakamālā (of Haribhatta) No. 6, story of; Durdhana, King, story of;
˙˙
295n5, 303n38, 327n85 Punyabala, King, story of
˙
Jātakanidāna, 36, 46, 72–73 Kathāvatthu, 154
jātaka(s): arranged in terms of kāya- dāna (gift of the body), 35
bodhisattva’s perfections, 37, 45– Khoroche, Peter, 29
366

index
Khuddaka Nikāya, 14, 20 Mahābhārata, 81, 117, 244, 249, 253,
kingdom / forest / kingdom pattern, 254 fi g. 6, 301n2, 315n81, 315n82,
243–249 315n83
kingship: Buddhahood as, 248–249; Mahajjātakamālā, 21, 51, 288n47. See
conceptions of, 85–89, 105–110, also individual stories listed below
112–115, 303n38; legitimation of, Mahajjātakamālā No. 44, 69, 83, 104,
242–249; ritual consecration into, 108, 110–115, 111 table 2
246–247 Mahajjātakamālā No. 45, 108, 244
ksānti-p āramitā (perfection of Mahākāśyapa, 193–194
˙
forbearance), 37, 49, 256, 258, 260 Mahāprajñāpāramitā Śāstra, 5, 78,
Ksāntivādin Jātaka, 37, 49, 255–256, 101–102, 124, 169–170, 173, 192–
˙
260, 333n37 193, 286n22
ksatriya, ethic of, 109, 161–163, 189, Mahāsampindanidāna, 290n29
˙ ˙˙
195, 315n80, 315n81, 315n83 Mahāvastu, 21, 51; story of merchant
Kunālāvadāna, 49 who saves drowning companions
in, 56–57
Lakkhana Sutta (from Dīgha Nikāya), Mahāyāna discourse, 84–85
˙
224–225 Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra, 152, 189–190
˙
Lalitavistara, 5 Mahoney, Richard, 226
laukika (worldly), 147, 151, 186–187 Maitreya, 14; outdistanced by
Lee, Orlan, 197 Śākyamuni, 120, 126, 305n67
Lévi- Strauss, Claude, 183–185 Maitrībala, King, story of, 4, 6, 249.
life of Buddha vs. ritual of Buddhist, See also Jātakamālā (of Āryaśūra)
43–44, 257, 266, 271, 293n45 No. 8
limbs (an˙ga) of the Buddha’s teaching: Malinowski, Bronislaw, 148
system of nine, 36; system of Manicūda, King, story of, 58–59, 62–
˙ ˙
twelve, 39 63, 174–175, 189, 223, 229–230,
Liudu ji jing (T. 152), 21: story of King 244–245, 249–250, 268, 332n16.
Candraprabha in, 137–138; story of See also Lokānandanātaka;
˙
King Śibi’s gift of fl esh in, 70, Manicūdāvadāna
˙ ˙
306n70; story of swan in, 77 Manicūdāvadāna, 21, 51, 58–59, 61, 62,
˙ ˙
Lokānandanātaka, 21, 51, 59, 62–63, 65, 108, 116, 118, 119, 127, 134, 211,
˙
122–124, 229–230, 304n56, 307n78 218, 220, 229, 307n78
lokottara (beyond the world), 147, 151, Manusmrti, 314n72
˙
186–187 Mauss, Marcel, 140, 142–144, 172, 184,
Lotus Sūtra, 50, 237, 257, 258–259 187, 195, 196, 198, 250–255, 317n15
Māyā, Queen, 37
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 97 mDzangs bLun. See Sūtra of the Wise
MacQueen, Graeme, 261 and the Fool
367

index
Meadows, Carol, 252 1–4. See also Gandhāra; Taksaśilā;
˙
merchant who saves drowning Uddiyāna
˙˙
companions, story of, 56–57. See
also Avadānasārasamuccaya No. 2; “off ensiveness” of Buddhist ideology,
Sambhadrāvadānamālā No. 4; and 96
under Mahāvastu off erings, ritual, 145–147, 159, 160,
merit (punya), 143, 145–148, 151, 152– 271. See also under bodhisattva’s
˙
163, 176, 185–186, 189–190, 215, gift of his body
314n70 Olivelle, Patrick, 196, 320n70
Michaels, Axel, 144, 150 opposition to gift, 92–93, 103–125, 188,
Middle Way, 203 197: by commoners, 103, 117–118;
Milindapañha, 80, 204 by minor deities, 103–104, 118–120,
Mīmāmsaka, 143 138, 268; by offi cials and ministers,
˙
“Mode 1 dharma” vs. “Mode 2 103, 104–115, 137, 302n28; by
dharma,” 106–107 women, 103, 116–117, 302n28
Mohe senzi lu (T. 1425): story of ordinary beings as recipients.
elephant in, 136–137, 309n117 See plotline with ordinary beings
moral vs. ritual acts, 42, 48, 155–156, as recipients
179 Orzech, Charles, 255–256
Morris, Richard, 46 “otherness” vs. “imitability,” 63, 74,
Mrozik, Susanne, 217, 224 167–168, 267
Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, 193
Padmaka, King, story of. See
Nārāyanapariprcchā Sūtra, 6 Avadānaśataka No. 31
˙ ˙
Nattier, Jan, 162–163, 319n58, 326n57 pain: “disintegrative,” 239; “integra-
Nigrodhamiga Jātaka, 48–49 tive,” 239; religious use of, 238–240
Nagao, Gadjin, 234 Pāli Canon, 14, 37, 45, 101, 153, 155–156;
Nāgārjunakonda, 302n28 gift- of- the- body jātakas in, 20–21
˙˙
nāga(s), 84; Gopāla, 2. See also super- Pāli Jātaka collection, 29, 37, 44, 45,
natural beings 51, 258. See also individual stories
nirmāna- kāya, 234 listed below
˙
nīti (worldly wisdom, statecraft, or Pāli Jātaka No. 316, 77, 125–126, 180–
realpolitik), 44, 87, 103, 113–115, 181, 255
120, 300n77 Pāli Jātaka No. 499, 128, 173, 177, 181–
nonself, 187, 191–193, 197 182, 220–221, 325n50
nonviolence (ahimsā), 253, 255–256 Pāli Jātaka No. 514, 127, 128, 129, 136,
˙
northwest India: Buddha’s apocryphal 218, 219, 309n117
journey to, 1–2; and sites associ- Pāli Jātaka No. 547. See Vessantara
ated with gift- of- the- body jātakas, Jātaka
368

index
Paññāsa Jātaka, 20 evil recipients in, 61–63; death of
Pāramitāsamāsa, 169, 316n4, 317n18 bodhisattva in, 63; evil recipients
Parlier, Edith, 251–253, 301n2, 302n28 in, 58–64, 171; evil recipients exalted
Parry, Jonathan, 144, 198, 317n15 in, 62–63; as paradigmatic “super-
Perez- Ramon, Joaquin, 325n54 jātakas,” 63–64, 94; pitiful and evil
perfection of forbearance. See ksānti- recipients as “unworthy” recipients
˙
pāramitā (perfection of in, 59–60; pitiful recipients in, 54–
forbearance) 58, 59–64, 171; worship and
perfection of generosity. See dāna- devotion as proper response to, 63
pāramitā (perfection of generosity) plotline with Śakra- in- disguise as
perfection of morality. See śīla- recipient, 28–29, 64–75, 75 table 1,
pāramitā (perfection of morality) 94–95, 175–179, 255, 267–269: Act
perfection of vigor. See vīrya- pāramitā of Truth in, 65–66, 73–74, 80, 88,
(perfection of vigor) 130–131, 171, 176–179, 220–221,
perfection of wisdom. See p rajñā- 269–270, 331n142; bodhisattva as
pāramitā (perfection of wisdom) ordinary giver in, 73–75, 176–179;
“Perfect Moral Commonwealth,” 107 bodhisattva’s “imitability” in, 74; as
personne vs. moi, 196–198, 320n70 contest between Śakra and
pilgrimage: of Faxian, 1–2, 47; of bodhisattva, 68–73; deemphasizing
Xuanzang, 3–4 of generosity in, 67–68; and ethos
pitiful recipients. See under plotline of avadāna, 74, 94–95; imitation as
with ordinary beings as recipients proper response to, 74; Śakra as
pleasure- park. See ārāma curious reader in, 133–134; Śakra
plotline in which gift is interrupted, 75– as mediator in, 94–95, 135; Śakra as
79, 95, 267: because of cosmic questioner in, 134–135; Śakra as
response, 77–78; because of reliable witness in, 135; Śakra’s
recipient’s change of heart, 76–77; discursive functions in, 94, 132–136;
equivalence between intention to Śakra’s fear of being displaced in,
give and gift itself in, 78–79, 95; 69–72; Śakra’s praise of bodhisattva
idealization of the bodhisattva in, 78; in, 66, 135; Śakra’s revelation of his
imitation as proper response to, 78 identity in, 65, 135; Śakra’s testing
plotline with ordinary beings as of bodhisattva in, 64–73, 80, 94,
recipients, 28, 53–64, 75 table 1, 94, 135, 241; survival of bodhisattva in,
253–255, 267–269: audience’s 65–66, 68, 74, 175–176; unstable
reaction to pitiful and evil recipi- convention in, 80–82
ents in, 60–61; bodhisattva as popular or folk religion, 104, 118–120,
extraordinary giver in, 60–64; 138
bodhisattva’s “otherness” in, 63; prajñā- pāramitā (perfection of
bodhisattva’s reaction to pitiful and wisdom), 150
369

index
pre- Buddha vs. post- Buddha ages, sacrifi ce, 249–256, 270–271
43–44, 233, 256, 266, 271 Saddanta (elephant), story of, 4, 5 fi g. 1,
˙ ˙
Propp, Vladimir, 31 58, 136–137, 189, 223, 240, 309n117.
Punyabala, King, story of (in See also Kalpanāmanditikā No. 69;
˙ ˙˙
Karunāpundarīka Sūtra), 189, 223, Mohe senzi lu (T. 1425): story of
˙ ˙˙
240, 319n46 elephant in; Pāli Jātaka No. 514
Purusa Sūkta (Rg Veda 10.90), 252 Sahlins, Marshall, 183
˙ ˙
Sakkasamyutta (from Samyutta
˙ ˙
rājadharma (dharma of a king), 103, Nikāya), 70
105. See also kingship: conceptions Śakra: position of, 70; role of, in biog-
of raphy of Buddha, 72–73; role of, in
rāksasa(s), 116, 122, 134, 229–230, 249. gift- of- the- body jātakas (see plotline
˙
See also supernatural beings with Śakra- in- disguise as recipient);
Ramanujan, A. K., 25 role of, in Indian Buddhist litera-
Rāmāyana, 25, 244 ture, 299n53, 308n99; and tempta-
˙
Rāstrapālapariprcchā Sūtra, 5 tion of ascetics, 71. See also Indra
˙˙ ˙
Ratnamālāvadāna, 292n42 Śākyamuni Buddha. See Buddha
Ratnāvadānamālā, 292n42 Samādhirāja Sūtra, 237, 250, 331n142,
reciprocity, varieties of, 183 333n37
relics, 93, 145–146, 220, 221, 234–235, sāmānya- dharma (“universal
257–258, 262 dharma”), 106, 113, 114
religious studies, “rematerialization” Sambhadrāvadānamālā No. 4, 57
of, 322n4 sambhoga- kāya, 234–235, 236
˙
reluctant helper. See under gift- of- the- Samgha, as worthy recipient of gifts,
˙
body jātakas 153, 158
renunciation. See giving up the world Samyutta Nikāya, 210
˙
Rg Veda, 186, 252, 263, 315n80, 317n15 Sāñcī, 36
˙
rhetoric of gift- of- the- body jātakas. Śāriputra’s gift of eye, 170
See under gift- of- the- body jātakas śarīra- parityāga (renunciation of the
Rhys Davids, T. W. S., 46 body), 35
rites of passage, 81, 172, 247 Sarvadatta, King, story of, 3
ritual vs. moral acts, 42, 48, 155–156 Sarvamdada, King, story of, 58, 62,
˙
Rosmarin, Adena, 32 76–77, 171, 244. See also
rūpa- kāya, 234, 236 Avadānasārasamuccaya No. 3;
Rūpāvatī, story of, 70, 135, 218, 221. Kalpanāmanditikā No. 71;
˙˙
See also Jātakamālā (of Mahajjātakamālā No. 45; Sar-
Haribhatta) No. 6 vadatta, King, story of
˙˙
Rūpyāvatī, story of. See Rūpāvatī, Sarvamdada (“All- Giving”), as proper
˙
story of name or adjective, 27, 171–172
370

index
Śaśa (hare), story of, 14–17, 19, 35, 77, Speyer, J. S., 40, 44, 100
126–127, 208 fi g. 5; as fulfi llment of Sri Lanka, 47, 144, 154, 290n29
the perfection of giving, 15. See also Starobinski, Jean, 150
Avadānakalpalatā No. 104; Stone, Jacqueline, 260
Cariyāpitaka No. 1.10; Jātakamālā (of Strong, John, 34, 41, 42, 214–216,
˙
Āryaśūra) No. 6; Pāli Jātaka No. 316 293n44
sati, 262–263 stūpa(s), 146, 159, 220, 221, 234–235,
Schopen, Gregory, 201, 321n2 257–258; associated with King
“seen” vs. “unseen” fruits, 143, 151, 160 Aśoka, 3; in northwest India, 2–4
selfhood, notions of, 196–198, 320n70 subgenre, 35
self- sacrifi ce: altruistic, 48–49; in Subhā Jīvakambavanikā (from
exchange for religious teachings, Th erīgāthā), 49
49–50; as religious off ering, 50 substitution, mechanism of: in ritual
Shulman, David, 190 off erings, 256–259, 271; in sacrifi ce,
Śibi, King, stories of: gift of eyes, 2, 3, 252–255, 270–271
7–9, 19, 43, 49, 80, 104–105, 110– Śuddhodhana, King, 37, 109
115, 111 table 2, 133, 177–178, 188, Śudolagarne, King, story of. See Sūtra
189, 223, 226, 236, 245, 325n50 of the Wise and the Fool No. 26
(see also Avadānaśataka No. 34; suicide, 203, 261, 262, 323n13
Cariyāpitaka No. 1.8; Jātakamālā Sumedha: Buddha’s previous birth as,
˙
[of Āryaśūra] No. 2; 36, 41
Mahajjātakamālā No. 44; Pāli “super- jātakas.” See under gift- of- the-
Jātaka No. 499); gift of fl esh to body jātakas
ransom a dove, 2, 5, 6 fi g. 2, 70, supernatural beings: and response to
121 fi g. 4, 121–122, 133, 135, 169, the gift, 60–61, 131–132. See also
192–193, 251, 253, 254 fi g. 6, 301n2, deva(s); nāga(s); rāksasa(s); yaksa(s)
˙ ˙
302n28 (see also Avadānakalpalatā supernatural occurrences: in gift- of-
No. 55; Kalpanāmanditikā No. 64; the- body jātakas, 129–132; and
˙˙
under Liu du ji jing [T. 152]; under stūpas of northwest India, 3–4
Zhong jing xuan za piyu jing Surūpa Jātaka, 49
[T. 208]); Hindu, 301n2 Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool, 51,
Śiksāsamuccaya, 213, 223, 226–228, 288n50. See also individual stories
˙
329n111 listed below
śīla- pāramitā (perfection of morality), Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool No. 22,
37, 124 118, 119, 127, 137, 246
Silber, Ilana, 151 Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool No. 26,
Silk, Jonathan, 216 17–20, 55
Śiva, 81 Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra, Chapter 18,
˙
Sotatthakīmahānidāna, 290n29 21, 126, 210, 219, 220, 246
˙˙
371

index
sva- dharma (“one’s own dharma”), 106 varnāśramadharma, 103, 109, 120. See
˙
swan, story of. See under Liudu ji jing also Dharma Śāstras and
(T. 152) dharmaśāstric arguments
Vedic sacrifi ce, 155, 166, 174–175, 197,
Taksaśilā, 2. See also northwest India 249–253; and relation to Buddhist
˙
tapas, 252 renunciation, 252
Tāranātha, 46 Vedic worldview, 196–198
tasty fl esh, motif of, 226–231 Vernant, Jean- Pierre, 235, 236
tathāgatagarbha, 214, 216 Vessantara Jātaka, 21, 45, 117, 164, 244,
Tathāgataguhya Sūtra, 227 304n56, 305n61
Th eravāda, 37, 45, 138, 144, 145, 146– vidūsaka, 124, 307n78
˙
147, 154, 258–259; gift- of- the- body Vimānavatthu Commentary, 193–194
jātakas in, 20–21 Vinaya, 124, 262
tigress, story of, 2, 3, 9–14, 10 fi g. 3, violence, kingly, 106–107
19, 54, 124, 126, 128–129, 188, 226, vīrya- pāramitā (perfection of vigor),
240, 305n67. See also 162
Avadānakalpalatā No. 51; Visnudharmottara Purāna, 247
˙˙ ˙
Avadānakalpalatā No. 95; Visuddhimagga, 191–192, 203
Divyāvadāna No. 32; Jātakamālā vows: of bodhisattva, 301n6; simple,
No. 1; Suvarnabhāsottama Sūtra, 98; including statements of
˙
Chapter 18. motive, 98–99; including state-
Trautmann, Th omas, 143–144, 147, ments of motive and formulated as
160, 311n19, 317n15 Acts of Truth, 98–100
Turner, Victor, 81, 117, 172, 247
Weeraratne, W. G., 40
Udāna, 193; commentary on, 194 Wilson, Liz, 193–194
Uddiyāna, 1. See also northwest India
˙˙
Ugrapariprcchā Sūtra, 216, 315n84, Xuanzang: pilgrimage through
˙
326n57 northwest India of, 3–4
universal vs. particular values, 92–97,
116, 121, 123, 268–269, 301n2, yaksa(s), 85–88, 108, 228–229;
˙
302n28. See also gift- of- the- body Vajrapāni, 2. See also supernatural
˙
jātakas: confl ict between dāna and beings
other values in Yaśodharā, 304n57
Uttarāpathakas, 154, 158
Zhong jing xuan za piyu jing (T. 208):
Vajradhvaja Sūtra, 6–7, 223 story of King Śibi’s gift of fl esh in,
van Gennep, Arnold, 81, 172, 247 306n70
372