Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
The Second Decade of the Avadānaśataka
Translated with an Introduction
by
Naomi Appleton
Despite its richness as a source for one of the lost schools of Indian Buddhism (the
Sarvāstivāda), and its potential contributions to our understanding of the
development of narrative and ideology in early Buddhism more generally, the
Avadānaśataka has never been fully translated into English. It was edited by J. S.
Speyer in 1906-1909, and this edition, reprinted with some corrections and some
new errors by P. L. Vaidya in 1958, is widely available, including online.1 Less easy
to obtain, though still widely present in academic libraries, is Léon Feer’s 1891
French translation of the text, complete with a thorough introduction and
commentary. This translation pre-dates Speyer’s edition and was made from a
single manuscript, but with the help of the Tibetan version Feer makes a fairly
complete and reliable work, albeit one that could now be improved upon given
the progress of Buddhological scholarship in the intervening years. With these
copies of the text available, an English rendering appears far easier than it would
be for many other texts of early India. The question remains, therefore, why such
a rendering has not yet been published. In answer one might mention the history
of Buddhist studies and its well-documented bias against narrative and
mythological texts.2 One might also point out that the edition is in need of some
improvement in the light of available manuscripts and the Tibetan and Chinese
versions. The text as a whole is also enormously repetitive in a way that often
belies elegant translation. In addition the composite nature of the text, with its
ten chapters on different themes each containing ten stories, has encouraged
more partial studies. For example Chapter 5 is of interest for its stories of pretas,
while Chapter 8 has a rare and intriguing focus on female arhatship.3 Even when a
scholar has taken an interest in the text as a whole, the result has been a study
rather than a translation.4
This article contains a translation of Chapter 2, the second decade of the
Avadānaśataka. The reason for not starting at Chapter 1 is simple: I have a
particular interest in jātaka stories and in the notion of genre in Buddhist
narrative, and Chapter 2 consists of what might be termed “Jātaka-avadānas”.
1 This edition is available on GRETIL – the Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian
Languages - http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil.htm
2 In tackling this bias Steven Collins has argued that ‘narrative’ and ‘systematic’ thought are of
equal interest when studying Buddhist texts (Collins 1998). Perhaps partly under his influence, as
well as thanks to the pioneering work of John Strong (1983, 1992), interest in Buddhist narrative
texts has grown in recent years, and several monographs have appeared on the subject in the past
decade (for example Ohnuma 2007, Rotman 2009 and Appleton 2010).
3 On the latter see for example Collett 2009 and Muldoon-Hules 2009, and forthcoming.
4 For an interesting article on the text’s rationale as a whole, see Strong 1979.
1

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
Thus my translation began as a working translation to allow reflection on the
characteristics of these particular stories and how they contribute to our
understanding of both the jātaka and avadāna genres. My study of this theme will,
I hope, shortly appear elsewhere. Meanwhile, I have polished the translation in
order to present it as an offering to the scholarly community. It is my hope that
other scholars whose interest in the Avadānaśataka has led to them creating a
working translation of one or more chapters may be encouraged to do the same.
By this method, within a few years we could have a full translation of the
Avadānaśataka freely available online, and in time a publisher might be interested
in printing a revised version of this in full. In the modern academic environment,
in which it is difficult to justify working on an extensive piece of translation, such
a method may help to make more texts widely available.5
The Text
As my base text I use Vaidya’s edition, which is in essence a reprint of Speyer’s
earlier work, with the correction of some typographical and other minor errors
and the addition of several more. Since Vaidya does not include Speyer’s
apparatus I have also made reference to Speyer in order to check his alternate
readings, notes, and index of rare forms. The text is fairly coherent, and with the
aid of Edgerton’s Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary it is not difficult to make a
simple working translation. Editing this working translation into something
readable and with some degree of elegance is somewhat harder, with the vast
repetition of stock terms and passages posing a particular difficulty, as discussed
below.
The dating of the Avadānaśataka, as with so many Indian texts, is difficult
to pin down. The mention in story 83 of a dīnāra, a coin not used in India until the
first century, along with the presence of a third-century Chinese translation of
the text, suggested to Speyer (1958: xv) a date of around 100 CE. However, Demoto
Hahn has recently questioned the dating (and authorship) of the Chinese
translation, suggesting it may be as late as the 6th century. Based on this revised
dating, but taking into account the archaic style of the Sanskrit text, she suggests
a terminus ante quem of the 4th century. She also notes that the text continued to be
revised for several centuries, undergoing serious revision at the hands of
Mūlasarvāstivādins perhaps as late as the 7th century.6 To complicate matters, we
5 My own point of reference, and that of most British academics, is the research assessment cycle
in which scholars are rated – and institutional funding allocated – according to a periodic
assessment of research outputs. This has had the effect of discouraging long-term projects, in
addition to which there has been a reluctance to acknowledge the status of scholarly translations
as research outputs. A model of collaborative translation work is one response to such pressures.
6 Demoto Hahn 2006: 209-12. Demoto provides a thorough overview of the various manuscript
sources for the text before discussing fragments from the Schøyen collection. None of the
fragments contain material from the second decade.
2

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
cannot use the presence of a single mention of a coin to date the origin of all the
stories in the collection, which has features that suggest an oral transmission.7
Repetition, Reiteration, Restatement and Redundancy
One of the most difficult features of the Avadānaśataka when it comes to
translation is the constant repetition of both individual concepts and whole
passages. One word is often followed by several (usually three) synonyms or near-
synonyms, and finding a subtly different meaning for each is a challenge, to say
the least. For example the Buddha was never simply ‘honoured’ (satkṛto) but
‘honoured, praised, respected and worshipped’ (satkṛto gurukṛto mānitaḥ pūjito),
and in turn he never simply taught, but ‘taught, inspired, incited and pleased’
(saṃdarśayati samādāpayati samuttejayati saṃpraharṣayati). In addition, stock
phrases, including these lists of synonyms, are repeated in multiple stories, often
making up the bulk of the text. Descriptions of the Buddha, including his status as
object of honour and his magical smile, and of the setting for a past-life story in
the time of a past buddha, are particularly prone to such stock phrases.
Feer’s approach to the extensive repetition in his text was to abbreviate
within the story and provide these stock passages at the start of the book,
numbered for easy reference. This has obvious advantages but also compromises
the text. If the reader is simply trying to ascertain what the unique elements are
of a particular story – that it is about a sailor rather than a king, for example, or
was told in Śrāvastī rather than Rājagṛha – then Feer’s method will facilitate this.
However, if the reader wishes to read a story in full, she must refer back and forth
in the book to fill in all the stock passages and recreate the story’s detail. One
consequence of this inconvenience is that the stories become unable to affect the
reader (or hearer) in the same way as they would in full. The repetition arguably
serves the purpose of creating a familiar atmosphere and setting the scene. It is
also most likely a feature of the text’s oral past, and thus a window into the text’s
history and origins.8 It thus feels necessary to preserve the repetition in my
translation.
However, choosing to translate each repeated passage in full in every story
brings its own challenges, for when a passage reappears several times within a
single text it becomes particularly important that the translation is smooth and
readable. A slightly clumsy translation of a phrase that only appears once may be
easily glossed over and forgotten by the reader, but if it appears three, four, or
even ten times then the reader might well become frustrated. This puts extra
pressure on a translator of a text such as the Avadānaśataka. I have tried to pay
special attention to the stock passages that appear in the text, but I would
welcome the attempts of others to improve upon what I have begun. I hope that
7 For evidence of possible oral origins for the stories see Collett 2006.
8 See discussion in Collett 2006.
3

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
what I have provided here, though not a literary translation, is at least readable
and interesting to other scholars and students of Buddhism.
* * * * *
11. The Sailors
The Buddha, the Exalted One,9 honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas10 – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents,11 the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing12 and of great merit, dwelled in Śrāvastī with his community of disciples,
provided with the requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for the
sick, below a village of sailors on the river Ajiravatī. Those sailors approached the
Exalted One, and having approached they honoured the Exalted One’s feet with
their heads and sat to one side. The Exalted One taught, inspired, incited and
delighted those sailors seated to one side with discourses on the dharma. Having
taught, inspired, incited and delighted them with many kinds of dharma discourse
he was silent. Then those sailors rose from their seats, placed their outer
garments on one shoulder, saluted13 the Exalted One and said to him, “Let the
Exalted One, along with his community of monks, consent to take tomorrow’s
meal with us on the banks of the river Ajiravatī. We will transport you across by
boat.” The Exalted One consented to the sailors through his silence.
Then the sailors prepared the bank of the river Ajiravatī by removing all
the stones, pebbles and gravel. They raised up parasols, flags and banners, and
scattered various flowers there, and perfumed it with incense sticks.14 They had
excellent food prepared, and made lots of bouquets of flowers, and decorated the
9 I have chosen to translate bhagavat as ‘Exalted One’, or simply ‘exalted’ when used in combination
with other epithets.
10 These are various categories of what DeCaroli (2004 passim) has usefully dubbed ‘spirit-deities’.
Although the categories are not well-defined and often overlap, there are some general
characteristics associated with each: nāgas are serpent deities associated with underwater palaces,
yakṣas are often local demons or deities, asura is the term given to anti-gods or demons, garuḍas
are bird-deities in conflict with the nāgas, kinnaras are often said to be half-man half-horse, and
mahoragas are a type of serpent-demon. The term that preceeds these – which I have translated as
gods – is deva, which is usually used to refer to gods of the heavens, though it can also refer to
earth-dwelling gods such as those that inhabit trees.
11 A rājamātra is anyone who claims equivalent rank to king. Compare Pāli rāja-mahāmatta.
12 Although MMW only records the meaning ‘known’ or ‘known as’ for jñāta, DP records a possible
alternative reading ‘knowing’ for the Pāli equivalent ñāta. This seems more natural here, in this
praise of the Buddha. However, an alternative is that he was ‘well-known’ i.e. famous.
13 Literally ‘made an añjali’, which is a traditional gesture of respect that involves placing the
hands palms together and fingers pointing upwards, and raising this towards the object of respect.
14 The term ghaṭikā could mean either small sticks or water-pitchers (see DP), but the former
meaning seems most likely in the context.
4

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
boat that was going15 with flower-pavilions. A messenger announced to the
Exalted One that it was time: “It is the moment, sir. The food is prepared, so the
Exalted One should know that it is time.” The Exalted One, surrounded by a group
of monks and attended by the monastic community, approached the village of the
sailors. Having approached, he sat on a seat that had been prepared, in front of
the community of monks. When the sailors saw that the community of monks
with the Buddha at their head were happily seated nearby, they served them with
their own hands, entertaining them with pure and excellent hard and soft foods.
Having served them with their own hands and entertained them in various ways
with pure and excellent hard and soft foods, when they saw that the Exalted One
had eaten, his hands were washed and the bowl removed, they took lower seats
and sat in front of the Exalted One in order to hear the dharma. And the Exalted
One, understanding the dispositions, propensities, character and nature of those
sailors, furnished them with a dharma teaching of such a kind that penetrated the
four noble truths. Having heard this some sailors attained the fruit of stream-
entry, others the fruit of once-returning, others the fruit of non-returning, some
renounced and by abandoning all defilements realised arhatship, others produced
a resolve to attain śrāvaka-bodhi,16 others a resolve to pratyeka-bodhi17 and yet
others a resolve to full and perfect buddhahood. And the whole assembly was
established in commitment to the Buddha, inclination towards the dharma, and
devotion to the saṅgha. And then with great reverence the sailors transported the
Exalted One across by boat, along with his community of monks.
The monks, their minds overcome by seeing the honour paid to the
Buddha, asked the Exalted Buddha, “Where were these skillful roots planted by
the Exalted One?”18 The Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata
performed and accumulated in other previous births have come together and
their conditions have matured. Being inevitable19 they have approached like a
river. That is why the Tathāgata is honoured in this way. Would you like to hear
about it, monks?” “Indeed, sir.” “Then listen, monks, concentrate the mind on the
good and the right, and I will speak.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
called Bhāgīratha arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
15 According to Speyer’s index, the term nausaṃkrama, which only appears in this story, means
‘bridge made up of ships joined together’. However, this seems without basis. See Edgerton’s note
(BHSD p.313) for further discussion.
16 The ‘awakening of the hearers’, in other words that attained by disciples, also known as
arhatship. The distinction with the preceeding group would appear to be that the former attain
arhatship in their present life whereas the latter resolve to do so in the future.
17 This is ‘awakening for/by oneself’ in other words the attainment of awakening without the aid of
a teacher (in contrast to arhatship) and without proclaiming the teaching to others (in contrast to
samyaksaṃbodhi).
18 Here ‘planted’ is rather a liberal translation, for the verb is simply kṛ - to do. However, it seems
to be the meaning that best fits the metaphor of planting actions and reaping their fruits.
19 For the translation of avaśyam as ‘inevitable’ see Pāli avassam.
5

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer (sugata), unsurpassed
knower of the world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and
men, awakened and exalted. Surrounded by 62 thousand arhats he wandered on a
journey through the countryside, and reached the shore of the Ganges. At that
time a caravan leader with a retinue of several hundred was transporting his
goods across the river Ganges, and in that place there was a great danger from
thieves. The caravan leader saw the perfect Buddha Bhāgīratha with his assembly
of 62 thousand arhats, and having seen him his mind became full of faith.20 With
mind full of faith he addressed the Exalted One: ‘I will carry the Exalted One
across first of all.’ The perfect Buddha Bhāgīratha consented to the caravan leader
through his silence, and then the caravan leader conveyed the perfect Buddha
Bhāgīratha and his assembly of 62 thousand arhats across by boat, with great
might. And having refreshed them with excellent food, he made an aspiration to
attain unsurpassed and perfect full buddhahood.”
The Exalted One said, “What do you think, monks? The person who was the
caravan leader at that time, on that occasion, that was me. I transported the
perfect Buddha Bhāgīratha across by boat, in addition to his retinue of 62
thousand arhats, refreshed them with excellent food, and made the vow. Because
of the ripening of that action of mine I have experienced great happiness in
boundless saṃsāra, and now I have attained unsurpassed perfect and full
awakening and receive great honour of this kind. In this way, monks, one should
train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and worship the teacher. And
having revered, paid respects to, honoured and worshipped the teacher, we will
live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
12. The Post
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, with his community of disciples, provided with the
requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for the sick, wandered on a
journey through the countryside amongst the Kauravyas and arrived at the city of
Kauravya. But the multitude of Kauravya people needed converting by the Buddha
to being generous minded and delighted by giving.21 Thus it occurred to the
20 cittaṃ prasādayāmāsa. The term prasāda has a variety of implications, ranging from mental calm
to faith. In some instances it is glossed as śraddhā. For discussions of the role of prasāda in the
Avadānaśataka and Divyāvadāna respectively see Fifield 2008 and Rotman 2009.
21 Here I depart dramatically from Feer’s rendering, for he understands the passage to say that the
people were already generous, and ‘avait des tendances d’esprit généreuses à l’égard de la
6

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
Exalted One: “If I were to summon Śakra, king of the gods, surrounded by his
retinue of maruts,22 as a result of seeing him they would increase their skillful
roots.” So the Exalted One had a worldly thought:23 “Well now! If only Śakra the
king of the gods, together with his retinue of maruts, would come bringing a post
of gośīrṣa24 sandalwood!” With the arising of this thought Śakra the king of gods,
surrounded by his retinue of maruts, came there, as did Viśvakarman and the
great kings of the four directions, surrounded by many gods, nāgas, yakṣas and
kumbhāṇdas,25 bringing a post of gośīrṣa sandalwood. They cried out loudly – “Ha!
Ha! Kila! Kila!” – and according to the Exalted One’s intention they constructed a
palace made of gośīrṣa sandalwood. Then in that palace Śakra the king of the gods
honoured, praised, respected and worshipped the Exalted One, along with his
community of disciples, with divine food, divine beds and seats, and celestial
perfumes, garlands and flowers.26
The multitude of Kauravya people saw that divine magnificence27 and then
they were amazed and had this thought: “Surely the Exalted Buddha is supreme in
the world, for he is honoured by gods with their kings!” Their minds were
overcome and they turned to the Exalted One. Having honoured the Exalted One’s
feet they sat to one side. Seated to one side in that palace, the group of Kauravya
people became extremely faithful.
Then the Exalted One made that palace disappear and taught a dharma
teaching about such things as attachment to transient objects, hearing which
many people who were Kauravya inhabitants attained the fruit of stream entry.
Others attained the fruit of once-returning, some the fruit of non-returning, and
some renounced and by abandoning all defilements realised arhatship . Others
produced a resolve to attain śrāvaka-bodhi, others a resolve to pratyeka-bodhi and
yet others a resolve to full and perfect buddhahood. And the whole assembly was
established in commitment to the Buddha, inclination towards the dharma, and
devotion to the saṅgha.
The monks, their minds overcome by seeing the divine honour paid to the
Exalted One, asked the Exalted Buddha, “Where were these skillful roots planted
by the Exalted One?” The Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata
performed and accumulated in other previous births have come together and
their conditions have matured. Being inevitable they have approached like a
discipline du Boudha’ (p.57), the Sanskrit phrase being: buddhavaineya udāracittaḥ pradānaruciśca.
Edgerton notes vaineya as meaning one to be trained or converted, and thus buddhavaineya as one
to be converted by the Buddha.
22 A type of god, attendant of Śakra.
23 A laukika citta, thus readable by the gods.
24 gośīrṣa is said to be the most precious variety of sandalwood.
25 Another type of spirit-deity.
26 gandhamālyapuṣpaiḥ could also mean ‘with perfumed garlands of flowers’.
27 Following Speyer’s MS reading vibhūṣitān rather than his emendation vibhūṣikāṃ or Vaidya’s
suggested alternative vibhūtikāṃ, which he attributes, apparently without basis, to Speyer. See
discussion in BHSD.
7

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
river. That is why the Tathāgata is honoured in this way. Would you like to hear
about it, monks?” “Indeed, sir.” “Then listen, monks, concentrate the mind on
the good and the right, and I will speak.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
called Brahmā arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the
world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened
and exalted. Surrounded by 62 thousand arhats the perfect Buddha Brahmā
wandered on a journey through the countryside, and reached a certain royal city.
The consecrated warrior king heard, ‘The perfect Buddha Brahmā along with his
retinue of 62 thousand arhats, wandering on a journey through the countryside,
has arrived in our realm.’ Hearing this, with great royal power and great regal
pomp, he went to the place where the exalted and perfect Buddha Brahmā was.
Having arrived he honoured the perfect Buddha Brahmā’s feet with his head and
sat to one side. The Exalted One inspired that consecrated warrior king who was
seated to one side with the dharmas that bring about awakening. That king
became faithful, and getting up from his seat he put his upper robe over one
shoulder, saluted the Exalted One and said to the Exalted One, ‘May the Exalted
One consent to live in this royal residence for the three-month rainy season. I will
attend upon the Exalted One and his community of disciples with the requisite
robes, almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for the sick.’ The perfect Buddha
Brahmā consented to the king through his silence. Then that consecrated king,
according to the Exalted One’s intention, had a palace constructed out of gośīrṣa
sandalwood. He presented this, decorated with a myriad of cloths and ornaments,
covered with various flowers and perfumed with incense sticks, to the Exalted
One along with his community of disciples. For three months he entertained them
with excellent food and clothed them with diverse kinds of cloths, and then made
an aspiration to full and perfect buddhahood.”
The Exalted One said, “What do you think, monks? The person who was the
consecrated warrior king at that time, on that occasion, that was me. I honoured
the perfect Buddha Brahmā,28 and because of the ripening of that action of mine I
have experienced great happiness in boundless saṃsāra, and now I have attained
unsurpassed perfect and full awakening and receive great honour of this kind. In
this way, monks, one should train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and
worship the teacher. And having revered, paid respects to, honoured and
worshipped the teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you
should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
28 Speyer and Vaidya read brahmaṇaḥ here but given the context this looks like an error.
8

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
13. The Bath
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, dwelled in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park, the Jeta Grove in
Śrāvastī, with his community of disciples, provided with the requisite robes,
almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines for the sick. At that time in Śrāvastī, five
hundred merchants went along a forest road. Losing the way, they reached a
desert.29 Tormented by heat and fatigue, their provisions used up, scorched by the
hot rays of the sun at midday, they rolled around on the earth like fish taken out
of water, suffering severe and harsh pain and sharp and unpleasant feelings. They
entreated thousands of deities, namely Śiva, Varuṇa, Kubera, Vāsava and so on,
but none of them was able to rescue them.
But one of them was a layman who recognised the Buddha’s teachings, and
that merchant said to them, “Good sirs, go to the Buddha for refuge!” And they
all, in a single cry, went to the Buddha for refuge.
Now there is nothing that is not known, seen, understood and discerned by
the Exalted Buddhas. Indeed, it is a rule that Exalted Buddhas – who are greatly
compassionate, devoted to benefitting the world, the one protector, delighting in
calm and insight,30 skilled in the threefold self control,31 who have overcome the
four floods,32 established in the bases of conduct that are the four bases of
supernormal power, having practised for a long time the four articles of
attraction,33 lacking the five [bad] qualities,34 gone beyond the five realms,35
furnished with the six qualities [of equanimity],36 who have accomplished the six
perfections,37 abounding in the flowers that are the seven factors of awakening,38
guides on the eightfold path, skilled in the nine successive attainments [of
29 Literally a ‘sandy place’ – vālukāsthala.
30 śamatha and vipaśyanā, the two types of meditation practice/goal.
31 Presumably this is control over body, speech and mind.
32 The four floods of evil or passions, often equated with the four āśravas (‘defilements’), namely
kāma- (passion, sense pleasures), bhava- (existence), avidyā- (ignorance) and dṛṣṭi- ([wrong] views).
33 The saṃgraha-vastu are the means by which Buddhas draw beings towards the teaching, and they
are said to be dāna (giving), priya-vacana (sweet speech), artha-caryā (conduct for the benefit [of
others]) and samānārthatā (equality or emphathy).
34 pañcāṅgaviprahīṇānaṃ. The Visuddhimagga says these are the five hindrances. See BHSD aṅga.
35 The realms of rebirth, namely heavenly, preta, hellish, human, and animal.
36 Equanimity regarding each of the six senses. See BHSD aṅga.
37 These are dāna (giving), śīla (good conduct, morality), kṣānti (forbearance, patience), vīrya
(energy, determination), dhyāna (meditation), prajñā (wisdom).
38 These are smṛti (mindfulness), dharmapravicaya (discriminating comprehension of the dharma),
vīrya (energy, determination), prīti (joy), praśrabdhi (serenity), samādhi (meditative absorption) and
upekṣā (equanimity).
9

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
meditation], mighty with the ten powers, whose splendour pervades equally the
ten directions, and who are more distinguished than ten hundred rulers – survey
the world with their Buddha-vision for three days and three nights, knowing and
seeing the motion: “Who is abandoned? Who is cut off? Who has met with pain?
Who is in danger? Who is afflicted? Who has met with pain, danger and affliction?
Who is headed for a state of woe? Who is inclined towards an evil state? Who is
bent on a bad destiny? I would raise them39 up from evil states and establish them
in heaven and liberation! I would raise up with my hands the one who has sunk
into the mire of sense pleasures. The one who is deprived of the honourable
treasures40 I would establish in mastery over and excellence in the honourable
treasures. For the one who has not planted skillful roots I would plant them, and
for the one who has planted them I would bring them to maturity, and for the one
who has them matured I would bring to liberation.” And it is said:
Though the ocean, abode of monsters, may pass over the shore,
a Buddha cannot pass over the opportunity41 of children in need of training.42
In such a way the Exalted One saw the many merchants who had met with
misfortune, danger and affliction. At the very looking of his eye he disappeared
from the Jeta Grove with his retinue of monks and reached that place. The
merchants saw the Exalted One with his community of monks, and seeing him
they let forth a loud cry. Then this worldly thought occurred to the Exalted One:
“Well now! Śakra, king of the gods, let loose the rain of great Indra, and send forth
cold winds!” And with the arising of this thought in the Exalted One, Śakra let
loose the rain of great Indra and set in motion cold wind. Thus the thirst of those
merchants was quenched, and their heat was calmed. Those merchants obtained
clear knowledge, and with the Exalted One showing them the road they reached
Śrāvastī.
Their fatigue from the journey dispelled, they turned to to the Exalted One,
and the Exalted One gave a dharma teaching of such a kind that penetrated the
four noble truths. Hearing this, some achieved the fruit of stream entry, some the
fruit of once return, some the fruit of non-return, and some renounced and by
abandoning all defilements realised arhatship. Others produced a resolve to attain
śrāvaka-bodhi, others a resolve to pratyeka-bodhi and yet others a resolve to full
and perfect buddhahood. And the assembly was established in a high degree of
commitment to the Buddha, inclination towards the dharma, and devotion to the
saṅgha.
39 Here I am interpreting kam as an indefinite pronoun, a rare but attested use of kaḥ alone, though
it is more usually found in this meaning with a particle such as cit. It is also possible to interpret
the long string of interrogatives that preceed this phrase as indefinite pronouns.
40 āryadhana. In the Pāli tradition these are seven in number: faith, good conduct, shame, fear of
evil, learning, liberality and wisdom.
41 There is a pun here that is slightly lost in translation: velām atikramet can mean ‘exceed the
shore’ or ‘neglect the opportunity,’ amongst many other possible meanings.
42 For a slightly different translation of this stock passage and a discussion of its features see
Collett 2006.
10

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
The monks became doubtful and asked the Exalted Buddha, remover of all
doubts, “It is a marvel, Exalted One, that these merchants were rescued from the
path in the wilderness by the Exalted One, and that with the arising of a thought
the rains of great Indra rained down and cooling winds blew.” The Exalted One
said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata performed and accumulated in other
previous births have come together and their conditions have matured. Being
inevitable they have approached like a river. These actions have been done and
accumulated by me. Who else will experience their results? O monks, deeds done
do not mature in the earth element, nor in the water element, nor in the fire
element, nor in the wind element. Rather, deeds done, whether pure or impure,
ripen in what is enumerated as the aggregates, the physical elements and the
elements of sense-experience (skandhadhātvāyataneṣu).”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
named Candana arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the
world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened
and exalted. The perfect Buddha Candana wandered on a journey through the
countryside and reached a certain royal city. The consecrated warrior king
approached the place where the perfect Buddha Candana was. Having approached
he honoured the perfect Buddha Candana’s feet with his head and sat to one side.
And the perfect Buddha Candana inspired that consecrated warrior king who was
seated to one side with the dharmas that bring about awakening. Getting up from
his seat, the consecrated warrior king put his upper robe over one shoulder,
placed his right knee on the ground, saluted the perfect Buddha Candana, and
said to the perfect Buddha Candana, ‘May the Exalted One consent to live in this
royal residence for the three month rainy season, along with his community of
monks.’ The perfect Buddha Candana consented to the king through his silence.”
“Now at that time a great drought appeared, as a result of which it
happened that the rivers and wells contained little water and the trees lost their
flowers and fruits. The king made a request of the perfect Buddha Candana:
‘Exalted One, I will have a lotus pool filled with perfumed water built in the
middle of our city, in which the Exalted One together with his community of
disciples will bathe. Surely as a result of the Exalted One’s bath the god will rain in
our country.’ The Exalted One, the perfect Buddha Candana, consented to the king
through his silence.”
“Then the consecrated warrior king gave an order to his courtiers: ‘Sirs,
make ready perfumed water and water pitchers made of jewels, with which we
will bathe the Exalted One together with his community of disciples.’ Then the
king, surrounded by his retinue of courtiers, arranged that the city be cleared of
stones, pebbles and gravel, raised up flags and banners, scattered various flowers,
sprinkled fragrant water, and perfumed with a variety of incense. And the lotus
11

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
pool was prepared. Then the Exalted One, the perfect Buddha Candana, whose
purpose is to benefit all, in a single robe stood in the lotus pool. The king,
surrounded by his retinue of courtiers, bathed the perfect Buddha Candana
together with his community of disciples with water that was infused with various
perfumes. And with that bathing of Candana the perfect Buddha, Śakra the king of
the gods sent forth rains of the Great Indra kind, which revived all the crops. And
because of this a great body of the people gained faith43 in the Exalted Buddha,
and some of them established a perfumed stūpa. All those who went to the perfect
Buddha Candana for refuge entered nirvāṇa, and I am one of the remainder.”
“Therefore in this way, monks, one should train: ‘We will revere, pay
respects to, honour and worship the teacher. And having revered, paid respects
to, honoured and worshipped the teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this
way, monks, you should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
14. The Plague
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas,44
asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised,
respected and worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers,
bankers, caravan leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and
mahoragas – and who was knowing and of great merit, approached Rājagṛha and
took residence in Kalandakanivāpa45 in the Veṇu Grove, with his community of
disciples, provided with the requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines
for the sick. And at that time there was an epidemic amongst the inhabitants of
Nāḍakanthā, and a mass of people were afflicted with diseases. They entreated
several thousand different deities, including Śiva, Varuṇa, Kubera, Vāsava and so
on, but none calmed the plague. Now a certain layman lived in Nāḍakanthā, and
he said to the brahmins and householders46 who lived in Nāḍakanthā, “Come, you
should go to the Buddha for refuge, and entreat the Exalted One to come here.
Then the Exalted One would put an end to the epidemic and lessen our pain.”
Then the brahmins and householders of Nāḍakanthā began to entreat the Exalted
One: “May the Exalted One come and free us from our dangerous plight!”
Now there is nothing that is not known, seen, understood and discerned by
the Exalted Buddhas. Indeed, it is a rule that Exalted Buddhas – who are greatly
compassionate, devoted to benefitting the world, the one protector, delighting in
calm and insight, skilled in the threefold self control, who have overcome the four
43 Here the term is śraddhā, though prasāda is often used in this context too.
44 Despite this being a stock passage, in this chapter gandharvas (celestial musicians) are added to
the list of spirit deities.
45 As Edgerton translates, ‘squirrel food offering’, the name of a place near Rājagṛha.
46 Alternatively this could mean those brahmins who were also householders.
12

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
floods, established in the bases of conduct that are the four bases of supernormal
power, having practised for a long time the four articles of attraction, lacking the
five [bad] qualities, gone beyond the five realms, furnished with the six qualities
[of equanimity], who have accomplished the six perfections, abounding in the
flowers that are the seven factors of awakening, guides on the eightfold path,
skilled in the nine successive attainments [of meditation], mighty with the ten
powers, whose splendour pervades equally the ten directions, and who are more
distinguished than ten hundred rulers – survey the world with their Buddha-
vision for three days and three nights, knowing and seeing the motion: “Who is
abandoned? Who is cut off? Who has met with pain? Who is in danger? Who is
afflicted? Who has met with pain, danger and affliction? Who is headed for a state
of woe? Who is inclined towards an evil state? Who is bent on a bad destiny? I
would raise them up from evil states and establish them in heaven and liberation!
I would raise up with my hands the one who has sunk into the mire of sense
pleasures. The one who is deprived of the honourable treasures I would establish
in mastery over and excellence in the honourable treasures. For the one who has
not planted skillful roots I would plant them, and for the one who has planted
them I would bring them to maturity, and for the one who has them matured I
would bring to liberation.” And it is said:
Though the ocean, abode of monsters, may pass over the shore,
a Buddha cannot pass over the opportunity of children in need of training.
In the morning the Exalted One dressed and, taking his robe and bowl and
accompanied by a group of monks and preceeded by the monastic community,
reached Nāḍakanthā. Then the Exalted One suffused the whole city with heartfelt
loving kindness, and as a result the epidemic was gone, and the plague calmed.
Then from seeing the Buddha great faith arose in those brahmins and
householders, and those in whom faith had arisen served the Exalted One and his
community of disciples with the requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats and
medicines for the sick. Then the Exalted One gave a dharma teaching of such a
kind that penetrated the four noble truths. Hearing this, some of the brahmins
and householders achieved the fruit of stream entry, others attained the fruit of
once return, others the fruit of non-return, and others renounced and by
abandoning all defilements realised arhatship. And the whole city was established
in commitment to the Buddha, inclination towards the dharma, and devotion to
the saṅgha.
The monks became doubtful and asked the Exalted Buddha, remover of all
doubts, “It is a marvel, sir, that these beings who had experienced calamity,
through faith in the Exalted One were completely freed from their woe.” The
Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata performed and
accumulated in other previous births have come together and their conditions
have matured. Being inevitable they have approached like a river. These actions
have been done and accumulated by me. Who else will experience their results? O
monks, deeds done do not mature in the earth element, nor in the water element,
13

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
nor in the fire element, nor in the wind element. Rather, deeds done, whether
pure or impure, ripen in what is enumerated as the aggregates, the physical
elements and the elements of sense experience.”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
called Candra arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly awakened,
perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the world,
trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened and
exalted. The perfect Buddha Candra wandered on a journey through the
countryside and reached a certain royal city. The consecrated warrior king heard:
‘A fully and perfectly awakened one has arrived in our realm.’ Having heard this,
with great royal power and great regal pomp he went to the place where the
perfect Buddha Candra was. Having arrived he honoured the perfect Buddha
Candra’s feet with his head and sat to one side. The perfect Buddha Candra
inspired that consecrated warrior king who was seated to one side with the
dharmas that bring about awakening. Then that consecrated warrior king gained
faith, and getting up from his seat he placed his robe on his shoulder, put his right
knee on the ground, and saluting the perfect and full Buddha Candra he said this
to the perfect Buddha Candra: ‘May the Exalted One consent to live here with his
community of monks for the three month rainy season. I will attend upon the
Exalted One with the requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for
the sick.’ The perfect Buddha Candra consented to the king through his silence.”
“At that time in the king’s city there was a great epidemic amongst the
populace, and a plague that seriously afflicted a great body of people. The king,
for the sake of appeasing the sickness, requested of Candra the perfect Buddha, ‘It
would be good, Exalted One, if you were able by some means to calm the
epidemic.’ Then the exalted and perfect Buddha Candra said to the king, ‘Go, great
king! Having fastened this robe on the top of a banner, have it paraded about in
your realm with great reverence and make a great festival for it. And instruct all
the great populace to keep their minds on the Buddha. It will be for your benefit.’
So the king did everything as he had been instructed, and by that means and for
that reason all the diseases were calmed. Then a body of people became faithful
and the citizens and royal courtiers went to the Buddha for refuge, also taking
refuge in the dharma and the saṅgha.”
The Exalted One said, “What do you think, monks? The person who was the
king at that time, on that occasion, that was me. I greatly honoured the perfect
Buddha Candra, and because of the ripening of that action of mine I have
experienced great happiness in saṃsāra. It caused me to attain divine and human
birth, and because of it I am now powerful. All this was attained because of that
thought and according to that wish. In this way, monks, one should train: ‘We will
revere, pay respects to, honour and worship the teacher. And having revered,
14

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
paid respects to, honoured and worshipped the teacher, we will live in reliance on
him.’ In this way, monks, you should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
15. The Miracle
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, approached Rājagṛha and took residence in
Kalandakanivāpa in the Veṇu Grove, with his community of disciples, provided
with the requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines for the sick. When
King Ajātaśatru, under the influence of Devadatta, put an end to the life of his
father, a righteous and just monarch, and established himself as king,
faithlessness became strong and faithfullness became weak. A certain senior
courtier had no faith and was hostile to the teaching of the Exalted One, and he
began to commission sacrifices from brahmins. Several hundred thousand
brahmins assembled and made a resolution that nobody should approach the
śramaṇa Gautama. Then those skilled brahmins, all in agreement, began to
supplicate Śakra in the middle of the bazaar with rites and utterances from the
Vedas – “Come, come, lover of Ahalyā!”47
Now there is nothing that is not known, seen, understood and discerned by
the Exalted Buddhas. Indeed, it is a rule that Exalted Buddhas – who are greatly
compassionate, devoted to benefitting the world, the one protector, delighting in
calm and insight, skilled in the threefold self control, who have overcome the four
floods, established in the bases of conduct that are the four bases of supernormal
power, having practised for a long time the four articles of attraction, lacking the
five [bad] qualities, gone beyond the five realms, furnished with the six qualities
[of equanimity], who have accomplished the six perfections, abounding in the
flowers that are the seven factors of awakening, guides on the eightfold path,
skilled in the nine successive attainments [of meditation], mighty with the ten
powers, whose splendour pervades equally the ten directions, and who are more
distinguished than ten hundred rulers – survey the world with their Buddha-
vision for three days and three nights, knowing and seeing the motion: “Who is
abandoned? Who is cut off? Who has met with pain? Who is in danger? Who is
afflicted? Who has met with pain, danger and affliction? Who is headed for a state
of woe? Who is inclined towards an evil state? Who is bent on a bad destiny? I
would raise them up from evil states and establish them in heaven and liberation!
I would raise up with my hands the one who has sunk into the mire of sense
47 Ahalyā is the sage Gautama’s wife, and she was seduced by Indra, hence “lover of Ahalyā” is an
epithet of Indra/Śakra.
15

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
pleasures. The one who is deprived of the honourable treasures I would establish
in mastery over and excellence in the honourable treasures. For the one who has
not planted skillful roots I would plant them, and for the one who has planted
them I would bring them to maturity, and for the one who has them matured I
would bring to liberation.” And it is said:
Though the ocean, abode of monsters, may pass over the shore,
a Buddha cannot pass over the opportunity of children in need of training.
The Exalted One saw: “These brahmins formerly planted skillful roots and
seized the path to liberation, desiring their own welfare and well-disposed
towards nirvāṇa, indifferent towards saṃsāra. But now, because of lacking a
spiritual guide they are hostile towards my teaching. I should approach eagerly
for the purpose of training them.” Then the Exalted One made himself look like
Śakra, and shining forth with divine appearance he began to descend into the
sacrificial arena. As a result those brahmins were thrilled, pleased and delighted,
becoming intensely joyful and happy, and all as one said: “Come, come, Exalted
One! You are welcome Exalted One!” Then the Exalted One, bearing the
appearance of Śakra, sat on the seat that was prepared. Word spread throughout
the city of Rājagṛha: “During a sacrifice Śakra the king of the gods has
descended!” Hearing this many hundreds of thousands of beings assembled. Then
after the humbled brahmins had honoured him in this way, the Exalted One
removed his disguise as Śakra and resumed once again the appearance of the
Buddha. He gave a dharma teaching of the kind that penetrates the four noble
truths, hearing which sixty thousand brahmins, having broken with the
thunderbolt of knowledge the mountain of wrong views about individuality
(satkāya-dṛṣṭi) that rises up with twenty peaks, realised the fruit of stream entry,
and many hundreds of thousands of beings gained faith in the Exalted One.
Then the monks became doubtful and questioned the Buddha, the Exalted
One, destroyer of all doubt, “It is marvelous, sir, that having come to the Exalted
One these brahmins were made to see the truth, and that many hundreds of
thousands of beings became greatly faithful.” The Exalted One said, “O monks,
actions that the Tathāgata performed and accumulated in other previous births
have come together and their conditions have matured. Being inevitable they
have approached like a river. These actions have been done and accumulated by
me. Who else will experience their results? O monks, deeds done do not mature in
the earth element, nor in the water element, nor in the fire element, nor in the
wind element. Rather, deeds done, whether pure or impure, ripen in what is
enumerated as the aggregates, the physical elements and the elements of sense
experience.”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
called Indradamana arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the
16

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened
and exalted. He wandered on a journey through the countryside and reached a
certain royal city. That royal city was stubbornly heretical. A certain consecrated
warrior king heard, ‘The perfect Buddha Indradamana has arrived in our realm.’
Having heard this, with great royal power and great regal pomp he went to the
place where the perfect Buddha Indradamana was. Having arrived he honoured
the exalted perfect Buddha Indradamana’s feet with his head and sat to one side.
The perfect Buddha Indradamana inspired that consecrated warrior king who was
seated to one side with the dharmas that bring about awakening. Then that king
gained faith, and getting up from his seat he placed his robe on his shoulder, put
his right knee on the ground, and saluting the perfect Buddha Indradamana he
said this to the perfect Buddha Indradamana: ‘May the Exalted One consent to live
here for the three month rainy season. I will attend upon the Exalted One with the
requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for the sick.’ The Exalted
One said, ‘Great King, is there any monastery in this realm in which monks who
are coming or going can make their abode?’ The King said, ‘There is not, Exalted
One. But may the Exalted One stay! I will have a monastery built, in which monks
who are coming and going may make their abode.’ Then the king had a monastery
built according to the wishes of the Tathāgata, with solid walls and an arched
doorway, adorned with round windows, turrets, half-moon shaped lattice
windows and balconies, furnished with rugs, with abundant streams and filled
with groves of trees that contained various flowers and fruits. And when it was
made it was presented to the Exalted One and his community of disciples. At their
request the Exalted One performed a great miracle in return. Entreated by the
king the Exalted One, the perfect Buddha Indradamana, displayed a great miracle
involving playing with a multitude of buddhas. As a result of seeing this the king,
together with his courtiers and the town and country folk and the whole city
became very faithful and exceedingly enamoured with the teaching.”
“What do you think, monks? The one who was the king at that time, on
that occasion, that was me. I honoured the perfect Buddha Indradamana in this
way, and because of the ripening of that action I experienced boundless happiness
in saṃsāra, and now being a Tathāgata I have this brilliant teaching. In this way,
monks, one should train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and worship the
teacher. And having revered, paid respects to, honoured and worshipped the
teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
17

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
16. Five Year Festival48
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras,
garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, with his community of disciples, provided with the
requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for the sick, approached
Rājagṛha and took residence in Kalandakanivāpa in the Veṇu Grove. When that
deluded person Devadatta had done a thousand evils with regard to the Exalted
One’s teaching, but was unable even to move a hair of the Exalted One, he
addressed King Ajātaśatru: “One should make a resolution that nobody in
Rājagṛha is to approach the śramaṇa Gautama, or give him alms. Then, getting no
goods and no honour, surely he will move on to another country.” The king did
this. Then those laypeople who had seen the truth began to lament: “Oh it is
dreadful that the city of Rājagṛha has no protector! For it is not possible to
approach the Exalted One, the Buddha whose appearance is as rare as the flower
of the udumbara tree,49 and make provision for him.” Word of this passed on from
person to person and was heard by the monks. Venerable Ānanda heard it and
announced it to the Exalted One. The Exalted One said, “Be little anxious Ānanda.
In this matter the Tathāgatas know the seasons. But as long as there is my
teaching, as before and now, there will be no insufficiency in the service of the
disciples.”
Now it happened that Śakra, the king of the gods, came to know about this
matter, and saw the alteration with regard to the Exalted One’s religion.50 For the
sake of strengthening the generous givers, highlighting the greatness of the
arising of a Buddha, breaking the pride and arrogance of Ajātaśatru and
Devadatta, and increasing his own faith, he manifested with splendour and
nobility and made a loud announcement to the whole of Rājagṛha: “Today I will
serve the Exalted One together with his community of disciples with divine
requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for the sick.” Having
announced this he approached the Exalted One. Having approached he honoured
the Exalted One’s feet with his head and stood to one side. Then Śakra the king of
the gods said this to the Exalted One: “May the Exalted One consent that in this
city of Rājagṛha I will serve the Exalted One with divine requisite robes,
48 The title of this story, Pañcavārśikam, means ‘something related to five years’ or ‘five yearly’.
Since it would appear that some sort of festival is meant I have translated the term as ‘five year
festival’ here and at its other occurrences throughout the story.
49 Ficus Glomerata or Ficus Racemosa. The flowers cannot be seen as they are within the fruit. A
legend therefore emerged that the tree only flowers extremely rarely.
50 The term is śāsana, which is usually translated as ‘teaching’ or ‘dispensation’, since it also shades
over into meaning the Buddhist religion. Here it is clear that it is not the teaching that is suffering
so much as the teachers, and thus the religion as a whole.
18

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
almsbowls, beds, seats, and medicines for the sick.” The Exalted One said,
“Enough, Kauśika. It is sufficient to make your mind fully faithful, for there are
many in the world who desire merit.” Śakra said, “May the Exalted One consent to
stay for five years. I will make the five year festival for the sake of the Tathāgata.”
The Exalted One said, “Enough, Kauśika. It is sufficient to make your mind fully
faithful, for there are many in the world who desire merit.” Śakra said, “May the
Exalted One consent to five days.” Then the Exalted One, for the sake of displaying
the strength of his own virtue, and in order to benefit Śakra the king of the gods,
and to ensure the continuity of the future five year festival,51 consented through
his silence.
Then Śakra the king of the gods, understanding that the Exalted One had
consented through his silence, made that Veṇu Grove look like Vaijayanta Palace52
with divine seats, heavenly lotus pools and divine food. The Exalted One sat on the
seat that had been prepared. Śakra the king of the gods, seeing that the Buddha
first of all and also the community of monks were happily seated, served and
waited on them with his own hands, surrounded by several thousand deities.
Having served and waited on him in several ways with his own hands,
understanding that the Exalted One had eaten, his hands washed and the bowl
removed, he took a lower seat and sat before the Exalted One in order to hear the
dharma. Then the Exalted One taught, inspired, incited and delighted Śakra the
king of the gods and his retinue with a dharma discourse. And King Ajātaśatru,
who had gone on the palace roof-terrace, saw this type of worship of the Exalted
One in the Veṇu Grove, and having seen it he was remorseful and experienced
great faith. The citizens who lived in Rājagṛha became agitated for the dharma and
having approached the king they spoke thus: “Great king, your majesty, the
citizens who live in Rājagṛha have been robbed, for the gods, despite being
heedless and delighting in intoxication, have abandoned their divine realm and
worship the Exalted One. It would be good, your majesty, to undo the resolution.”
Then King Ajātaśatru undid the resolution and proclaimed with a gong:
“Honour should be paid to the Exalted One as desired.” The citizens who lived in
Rājagṛha and their followers were thrilled, pleased and delighted, became
intensely joyful and happy, and approached in order to see the Exalted One,
bringing perfumes, garlands and flowers. Then the gods and humans paid great
honour to the Exalted One, and the Exalted One gave a dharma talk of the kind
that penetrates the four noble truths for the gods and humans standing there.
Hearing this, many of the gods and men saw the truth.
Seeing the honour paid to the Exalted One, the monks became doubtful
and asked the Exalted One, “It is a marvel, sir, that there be a festival of this kind
in the Exalted One’s dispensation.” The Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that
the Tathāgata performed and accumulated in other previous births have come
51 anāgatapañcavārṣikaprabandhahetor. I follow the Tibetan interpretation, translated by Feer (p.73)
as ‘pour ne pas interrompre la durée de la fête de cinq ans’.
52 Indra’s own palace in the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.
19

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
together and their conditions have matured. Being inevitable they have
approached like a river. These actions have been done and accumulated by me.
Who else will experience their results? O monks, deeds done do not mature in the
earth element, nor in the water element, nor in the fire element, nor in the wind
element. Rather, deeds done, whether pure or impure, ripen in what is
enumerated as the aggregates, the physical elements and the elements of sense
experience.”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
named Ratnaśaila arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the
world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened
and exalted. He wandered on a journey through the countryside and reached a
certain royal city. In that royal city a king called Dharmaśuddhi ruled the
kingdom. And in that royal city there was a great epidemic, so that king offered
the Exalted One and his community of disciples food for three months, in order to
cure the epidemic. With the passing of three months the epidemic was pacified,
and so the king and the citizens, their minds converted, made the five year
festival for the Tathāgata and his community of disciples.”
And he said:
“Ānanda, Ratnaśaila of great splendour, entreated by the king
who desired peace, carried out the five year festival.”
“What do you think, monks? He who at that time, on that occasion, was the
king, that was me. I carried out the five year festival for the Tathāgata Ratnaśaila,
and because of that I experienced great happiness in saṃsāra, and for that reason
now I am honoured in this manner as a Tathāgata. And when I am fully liberated
there will be many hundreds of five year festivals in my dispensation. In this way,
monks, one should train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and worship the
teacher. And having revered, paid respects to, honoured and worshipped the
teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
17. Eulogy
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, dwelled in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park, the Jeta Grove in
Śrāvastī, with his community of disciples, provided with the requisite robes,
almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines for the sick. On that occasion five hundred
20

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
musicians were living in Śrāvastī as a company. At that time the king of
musicians, named Supriya, arrived, and his power was of such a kind that he
produced seven notes and twenty-one modes53 on a single string. Proclaiming
loudly that there were no skilled musicians54 in the six great cities, he arrived in
Śrāvastī. The residents of Śrāvastī and the musicians reported this to the king.
The king said, “Do not worry, gentlemen. We will know what to do.”
Then Supriya the king of musicians thought this: “It is often heard that
King Prasenajit is very skilled in music. I should propose a contest with him.”
Then Supriya the king of musicians approached King Prasenajit the Kośalan, and
having approached he said this to King Prasenajit the Kośalan: “I have heard,
king, that you are skilled in music. If you are without a teacher you should be
examined.” King Prasenajit put him off, saying, “I have an accomplished teacher,
an unsurpassed king of musicians, stationed in the Jeta Grove. Come, we should go
to his presence.” Then King Prasenajit the Kośalan went to the Jeta Grove
surrounded by the five hundred musicians, along with Supriya the king of
musicians and many hundreds of thousands of beings.
Now there is nothing that is not known, seen, understood and discerned by
the Exalted Buddhas. Indeed, it is a rule that Exalted Buddhas – who are greatly
compassionate, devoted to benefitting the world, the one protector, delighting in
calm and insight, skilled in the threefold self control, who have overcome the four
floods, established in the bases of conduct that are the four bases of supernormal
power, having practised for a long time the four articles of attraction, lacking the
five [bad] qualities, gone beyond the five realms, furnished with the six qualities
[of equanimity], who have accomplished the six perfections, abounding in the
flowers that are the seven factors of awakening, guides on the eightfold path,
skilled in the nine successive attainments [of meditation], mighty with the ten
powers, whose splendour pervades equally the ten directions, and who are more
distinguished than ten hundred rulers – survey the world with their Buddha-
vision for three days and three nights, knowing and seeing the motion: “Who is
abandoned? Who is cut off? Who has met with pain? Who is in danger? Who is
afflicted? Who has met with pain, danger and affliction? Who is headed for a state
of woe? Who is inclined towards an evil state? Who is bent on a bad destiny? I
would raise them up from evil states and establish them in heaven and liberation!
I would raise up with my hands the one who has sunk into the mire of sense
pleasures. The one who is deprived of the honourable treasures I would establish
in mastery over and excellence in the honourable treasures. For the one who has
not planted skillful roots I would plant them, and for the one who has planted
53 sapta svarānādarśayati ekaviṃśati mūrcchanāḥ. In Indian music there are seven notes (svara) in the
scale, which are combined in various patterns to form the basis of melodies, and these
combinations are known as mūrcchanas.
54 Following Speyer’s suggested emendation of apaṭunāni to apaṭukāni, as supported by the Tibetan
version.
21

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
them I would bring them to maturity, and for the one who has them matured I
would bring to liberation.” And it is said:
Though the ocean, abode of monsters, may pass over the shore,
a Buddha cannot pass over the opportunity of children in need of training.
Then the Exalted One had a worldly thought to benefit those beings in
need of training: “Oh, that Pañcaśikha, the son of a gandharva,55 would enter my
presence, with his retinue of seven thousand gandharvas and bringing his lute
with the stick of cat’s-eye gems.” With the arising of that thought, Pañcaśikha the
son of a gandharva with his retinue of seven thousand gandharvas was there, duly
praising the Exalted One and bringing his lute with the stick of cat’s-eye gems for
the Exalted One. Then Supriya the king of musicians began to play the lute before
the Exalted One, and he began to produce seven notes and twenty-one modes on a
single string. On hearing this King Prasenajit and a large body of the people were
filled with intense wonder. Then the Exalted One also played the lute with the
stick of cat’s-eye gems, such that he displayed several different notes and many
kinds of modes on each string, yet making them appear empty.56 And he showed
that the body is like a lute, the notes like the sense-organs and the modes like the
heart element. On hearing this Supriya the king of musicians was humbled, and
leaving his lute in the perfumed chamber he went forth in the presence of the
Exalted One. And by applying himself, striving and exerting, he understood that
this fivefold wheel of rebirth is in constant motion. Having rejected all
conditioned things as being characterised by decay, decline, destruction and ruin,
through destroying all the defilements he achieved the state of arhatship. Having
become an arhat he was free from passions in the threefold universe.57 He
considered mud and gold to be the same, thought the sky to be the same as the
palm of his hand, and was indifferent alike to an axe or sandalwood.58 Having
attained knowledge (vidyā), supernormal knowledges (abhijñā) and special
knowledges (pratisamvid), he turned away from the benefits of longing to attain
worldly existence. He became worthy of honour, devotion and salutation for the
gods including Indra and his younger brother.59
Then the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas were
converted and began to be protectors of the Exalted One’s teaching, and the five
hundred musicians became happy and glad, and it occurred to them: “We are
living in a low occupation and in a condition of suffering. What if, after asking the
king, we were to invite the Exalted One together with his community of disciples
into the city?” And accordingly those musicians gained permission and invited
55 A gandharva is a celestial musician, and Pañcaśikha is famed for his musical ability. The term for
musician that has been used throughout this story – gāndharvika – is derived from gandharva.
56 Following Speyer’s conjecture (p.96 n. 2) and his emendation of śūnyākāraṇaca to śūnyākāreṇaiva.
Feer is clearly puzzled since he reads ‘et cela à plusieurs reprises (?)’ (p. 77).
57 In other words the kāma, rūpa, and arūpa realms that make up the whole of saṃsāric existence.
58 vāsī-candana-kalpa - see Edgerton’s extensive note.
59 sendropendrāṇāṃ. Upendra is often used to refer to Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. The presence of a plural
rather than dual form is not unusual in Buddhist Sanskrit.
22

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
the Exalted One together with his community of disciples into the city, and the
Exalted One accepted the invitation of those musicians through his silence. Then
those musicians, along with the king, his courtiers, the citizens and coutryfolk,
removed the stones, pebbles and gravel from the whole city of Śrāvastī, sprinkled
it with perfumed water, scattered various flowers, perfumed it with various
scents, and decorated it with heaps of flowers. And then those musicians, each
carrying his own lute, and with various drums, flutes and cymbals, approached
and served the Exalted One and his community of disciples with excellent food.
Then the Exalted One smiled. Now according to the natural order of things,
when Buddhas display a smile then blue, yellow, red and white rays issue from the
mouth and some go to the lower region and some to the upper region. Those that
go to the lower region, they go to the hells – Saṃjīva (Vivifying), Kālasūtra (Black
Rope), Saṃghāta (Crushing), Raurava (Roaring), Mahāraurava (Great Roaring),
Tapana (Hot), Pratāpana (Very Hot), Avīci (Unwavering), Arbuda (Swelling),
Nirarbuda (Thoroughly Swelling), Aṭaṭa (Roaming), Hahava, Huhuva,60 Utpala
(Fleshless/Water Lily), Padma (Lotus), and Mahāpadma (Great Lotus).61 Those that
descend into the hot hells become cool, and those that descend into the cold hells
become warm, and they allay the various sufferings of the beings there such that
it occurs to them, “Sirs, is it the case that we are leaving here and arising
elsewhere?” Then in order to make them develop faith, the Exalted One emits an
image of himself, and seeing this image they realise, “No, sirs, we are not leaving
here nor arising elsewhere. There is this being, not seen before, by whose power
our various sufferings are being allayed.” Their minds becoming faithful towards
this image, they cast off the karma that caused their experience of hell, and take
rebirth amongst gods and men, where they become vessels for the truths.
Those that go to the upper region, they go to the gods – the Four Great
Kings, and the gods of Trāyastriṃśa (Thirty-Three), Yāma (End), Tuṣita (Delight),
Nirmāṇarati (Delighting in Creation), Paranirmitavaśavartin (Delighting in the
Creations of Others), Brahmakāyika (Brahmā’s Retinue), Brahmapurohita
(Brahmā’s Ministers), Mahābrahma (Great Brahmā), Parittābhā (Little Radiance),
Apramāṇābhā (Immeasurable Radiance), Abhāsvara (Radiant), Parittaśubha (Little
Purity), Apramāṇaśubha (Immeasurable Purity), Śubhakṛtsna (Entirely Pure),
Anabhraka (Cloudless), Puṇyaprasava (Begetting Good), Bṛhatphala (Great Fruit),
Abṛha (Not Vast), Atapa (Not Hot), Sudṛśa (Handsome), Sudarśana (Beautiful) and
Akaniṣṭha (Highest).62 They shout out “Impermanent! Suffering! Empty! Not-Self!”
and speak two verses:
60 hahava and huhuva are both cold hells that take their names from expressions of distress, so
their names might be translated as “Aargh” or similar.
61 Since the names of the hells have, in many cases, only approximate or speculative translations, I
have decided to leave them in Sanskrit and provide English renderings alongside. For a more
readable and descriptive, but considerably less literal, rendering see Collett 2006: 161.
62 Once again since the etymologies for several of the heaven names are uncertain, I have left the
names in Sanskrit and added tentative translations alongside. For a more descriptive rendering
see Collett 2006: 161.
23

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
“Go forth, take hold of and attach yourselves to the Buddha’s teaching!
This shakes the army of death like an elephant shakes a reed-hut.
He who will live mindfully according to this dharma and vinaya,
abandoning the life of saṃsāra, he will make an end to suffering.”
Then those rays of light, having roamed through the great thousand of the
three-thousand world realms, enter the Exalted One one after another. If the
Exalted One is desirous of explaining63 past actions they disappear into the Exalted
One’s back, if he wishes to explain future actions they vanish into his front. If he
wishes to predict arising in a hell they disappear into the soles of his feet, while if
he wants to predict arising as an animal they enter his heel, and if he wants to
predict arising as a ghost they vanish into his big toe, and if he desires to predict
arising as a human they disappear into his knee. If he wishes to predict rule as a
powerful wheel-turning king64 they enter the palm of his left hand, while if he
wishes to predict rule as a wheel-turning king they disappear into the palm of his
right hand. If he wishes to predict arising as a god they vanish into his navel. If he
wishes to predict śrāvaka-bodhi they enter his mouth, while if he wants to predict
pratyekabuddhahood they vanish into the circle of hair between his eyebrows,
and if he wants to predict unsurpassed and perfect full buddhahood they
disappear into his uṣṇīṣa.65
On this occasion those rays of light circumambulated the Exalted One
three times and disappeared into the circle of hair between the Exalted One’s
eyebrows. Then Venerable Ānanda joined his hands in respect and asked the
Exalted One:
“A collection of a thousand bright coloured rays of various kinds
is expelled from the inside the mouth,
completely illuminating the directions
as if from the rising of the sun.”
And he spoke these verses:
“Buddhas have cut off rebirth, abandoned affliction and enjoyment,
become the cause of what is best in the world;
Victors, their enemies conquered, do not exhibit a smile
– white as a conch-shell or lotus-fibre - without reason.
63 There is a question here over how to translate vyākaroti, which in its most common meaning
refers to explaining or elucidating, but in a specifically Buddhist meaning can refer to the
predicting of future attainments such as buddhahood. Since this first example refers to past
actions, it seems that the more general meaning is implied here. However, it is possible that in the
later examples the Exalted One wishes to predict rather than explain arising in the various realms
and so on, and I have translated accordingly. Given the broader context of the Avadānaśataka, in
which stories of past actions and present results are told alongside those of present actions and
future results, translating vyākartum as ‘to predict’ introduces a time-restriction that is perhaps
unwarranted.
64 See Edgerton’s discussion of bala-cakravartin in BHSD, in which he explains that it is an inferior
form of cakravartin.
65 This is a turban-shaped protuberance on the top of the head.
24

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
Victor, realising yourself through your intelligence that it is time,
Śramaṇa, Lord of Conquerors, for the hearers who wish it,
Bull of Sages, remove the doubt that has arisen,
with splendid, wise and superior speech.
It is not without reason that the courageous kings, rocks of the ocean,
perfect Buddhas, protectors, exhibit a smile.
A multitude of people yearn to hear
the reason why wise ones exhibit a smile.”
The Exalted One said, “This is so, Ānanda, this is so. It is not without cause or
without reason, Ānanda, that arhats who are perfect and fully awakened display a
smile. You see, Ānanda, that these musicians have paid me honour in this way.
Thus, Venerable Ānanda, these musicians, because of the arising in their minds of
this skilful root, and through renunciation and charity, when the time comes they
will acquire pratyekabodhi, and become pratyekabuddhas called Varṇasvarā in a
future time, feeling compassion for the wretched and miserable, taking food, bed
and seat in a lonely place, the only ones worthy of veneration in the world. This is
the gift for those whose minds become faithful in my presence.”
The monks became doubtful and asked the Exalted Buddha, remover of all
doubts, “Sir, what were the skilfull roots planted by the Exalted One that
produced this?” The Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata
performed and accumulated in other previous births have come together and
their conditions have matured. Being inevitable they have approached like a
river. These actions have been done and accumulated by me. Who else will
experience their results? O monks, deeds done do not mature in the earth
element, nor in the water element, nor in the fire element, nor in the wind
element. Rather, deeds done, whether pure or impure, ripen in what is
enumerated as the aggregates, the physical elements and the elements of sense
experience.”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
named Prabodhana arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the
world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened
and exalted. He wandered on a journey through the countryside and reached a
certain royal city. The king’s park was endowed with all that was suitable, so the
Exalted One entered that park and in order to benefit the king he sat down near a
certain tree. Having arranged his seat, he attained the fire-element meditation.
Then the consecrated warrior king entered the park with women playing music
on instruments, and walking through that park the king saw the Exalted One
Prabodhana, the perfect Buddha who engenders faith66 in those who would be
faithful, calm of mind, endowed with the highest degree of calmness and control
66 He is a prāsādika, or ‘agent of prasāda’ - see Rotman 2009 for a discussion of this term.
25

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
of the mind, like a pillar of gold, radiant and blazing. And having seen him faith
then arose and the king with his harem woke67 the Exalted One from his
meditative state by playing various musical instruments, and served him with
excellent food, and made an aspiration to complete and perfect buddhahood.”
“What do you think, monks? The person who at that time, on that
occasion, was the king, that was me. I honoured the perfect Buddha Prabodhana,
and as a result of that I have been praised in this way by the musicians. In this
way, monks, one should train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and
worship the teacher. And having revered, paid respects to, honoured and
worshipped the teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you
should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
18. The Boon
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, dwelled in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park, the Jeta Grove in
Śrāvastī, with his community of disciples, provided with the requisite robes,
almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines for the sick. In Śrāvastī a certain
philanderer68 lived in impure actions. Having been seized by the king’s men, he
was brought before the king. The king declared him a criminal, and gave him the
death sentence. He, with his neck ornamented by a garland of Oleander flowers,69
was proclaimed a criminal on the roads and at crossroads and junctions by the
king’s men, who were dressed in blue garments and holding their swords aloft,
and then led through the southern gate of the city.
Now there is nothing that is not known, seen, understood and discerned by
the Exalted Buddhas. Indeed, it is a rule that Exalted Buddhas – who are greatly
compassionate, devoted to benefitting the world, the one protector, delighting in
calm and insight, skilled in the threefold self control, who have overcome the four
floods, established in the bases of conduct that are the four bases of supernormal
power, having practised for a long time the four articles of attraction, lacking the
five [bad] qualities, gone beyond the five realms, furnished with the six qualities
[of equanimity], who have accomplished the six perfections, abounding in the
flowers that are the seven factors of awakening, guides on the eightfold path,
skilled in the nine successive attainments [of meditation], mighty with the ten
powers, whose splendour pervades equally the ten directions, and who are more
67 In what is presumably a pun on Buddha Prabodhana’s name, the verb is prabodhayati.
68 A pāradārika, in other words somebody connected with the wives of others.
69 This is said to be the sign of a condemned criminal.
26

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
distinguished than ten hundred rulers – survey the world with their Buddha-
vision for three days and three nights, knowing and seeing the motion: “Who is
abandoned? Who is cut off? Who has met with pain? Who is in danger? Who is
afflicted? Who has met with pain, danger and affliction? Who is headed for a state
of woe? Who is inclined towards an evil state? Who is bent on a bad destiny? I
would raise them up from evil states and establish them in heaven or liberation! I
would raise up with my hands the one who has sunk into the mire of sense
pleasures. The one who is deprived of the honourable treasures I would establish
in mastery over and excellence in the honourable treasures. For the one who has
not planted skillful roots I would plant them, and for the one who has planted
them I would bring them to maturity, and for the one who has them matured I
would bring to liberation.” And it is said:
Though the ocean, abode of monsters, may pass over the shore,
a Buddha cannot pass over the opportunity of children in need of training.
In the morning the Exalted One dressed, and taking his bowl and robe he
entered Śrāvastī for alms. That man saw the Exalted Buddha decorated with the
thirty-two marks of a great man and the eighty minor marks, with excellent limbs
and adorned with light that extended a fathom, radiance in excess of a thousand
suns, handsome in his entirety like a living mountain of jewels. And having seen
him he threw himself at the Exalted One’s feet and said this to the Exalted One: “I
am worthy of a boon, Exalted One. Grant me my life, as I wish.” The Exalted One
addressed Venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, go to King Prasenajit and say, ‘Offer me
this man, I will make him a monk.’” Venerable Ānanda approached King
Prasenajit the Kośalan. Having approached he spoke the Exalted One’s words to
King Prasenajit the Kośalan: “Grant that the Exalted One ordain this man.” Saying,
“It appears suitable,” King Prasenajit the Kośalan consented, and he was received
and ordained by the Exalted One. And by applying himself, striving and exerting,
he understood that this fivefold wheel of rebirth is in constant motion. Having
rejected all conditioned things as being characterised by decay, decline,
destruction and ruin, through destroying all the defilements he achieved the
state of arhatship. Having become an arhat he was free from passions in the
threefold universe. He considered mud and gold to be the same, and thought the
sky to be the same as the palm of his hand. He was indifferent alike to an axe or
sandalwood. Having attained knowledge, supernormal knowledges and special
knowledges, he turned away from the benefits of longing to attain worldly
existence. He became worthy of honour, devotion and salutation for the gods
including Indra and his younger brother.
The monks became doubtful and questioned the Exalted One, remover of
all doubts, “It is a marvel, sir, that all intentions prosper through the Exalted
One.” The Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata performed and
accumulated in other previous births have come together and their conditions
have matured. Being inevitable they have approached like a river. These actions
have been done and accumulated by me. Who else will experience their results? O
27

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
monks, deeds done do not mature in the earth element, nor in the water element,
nor in the fire element, nor in the wind element. Rather, deeds done, whether
pure or impure, ripen in what is enumerated as the aggregates, the physical
elements and the elements of sense experience.”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.”
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
named Indradhvaja arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the
world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened
and exalted. He wandered on a journey through the countryside and reached a
certain royal city. In that royal city a brahmin who had mastered the Vedas and
the Vedic expositions70 had a seat of honour with the king. In the morning,
Indradhvaja the perfect Buddha dressed himself and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered that royal city for alms. That brahmin saw Indradhvaja the perfect
Buddha, decorated with the thirty-two marks of a great man and the eighty minor
marks, with excellent limbs and adorned with light that extended a fathom,
radiance in excess of a thousand suns, handsome in his entirety like a living
mountain of jewels. And having seen him he was like a tree cut off at the roots,
and throwing himself at the Exalted One’s feet he said, ‘I am worthy of a boon,
Well-Farer. May the Exalted One sit on the seat of honour.’ Then the exalted and
perfect Buddha Indradhvaja, wishing to benefit him, sat on the seat of honour.
And the brahmin praised Indradhvaja the perfect Buddha, seated in that seat of
honour, in a hundred verses,71 and served him with excellent food, and made an
aspiration to perfect and full buddhahood. And because of this the king, courtiers
and citizens were converted.”
“What do you think, monks? The one who was that brahmin on that
occasion at that time, that was me. It was me that honoured the Tathāgata
Indradhvaja, and because of this I have experienced boundless happiness in
saṃsāra, and that wish, that aspiration, all came to fruition. In this way, monks,
one should train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and worship the
teacher. And having revered, paid respects to, honoured and worshipped the
teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
19. The Cloth of Kāśi
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
70 The vedāṅgas, usually said to be six in number, are classes of works that aid exposition of the
Vedas, such as metrics and linguistics.
71 Strictly speaking one hundred padas, which are usually quarter-verses.
28

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, dwelled in Rājagṛha, in Kalandakanivāpa in the Veṇu
Grove, with his community of disciples, provided with the requisite robes,
almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines for the sick. When King Bimbisāra, along
with many hundreds of thousands of beings, had comprehended the truths, then
in order to display his gratitude, for the sake of promoting worship of the
Buddha(s), in order to display the extent of his house, and in order to make
known the value of the arising of a Buddha, he invited the Exalted One together
with his community of monks to take a meal in the royal palace. And he
commanded the citizens of Magadha, “At the entrance to the city the Exalted One
is to be honoured with garlands, flowers, perfumes and ointments, and the whole
city of Rājagṛha should be prepared by removing the stones, pebbles and gravel.
Various flowers should be scattered and flags and banners raised up all the way
from the Veṇu Grove to Rājagṛha, and the whole of the road in between should be
covered with cloths.” And all this was arranged by the courtiers. Then King
Bimbisāra himself held the hundred-ribbed parasol over the Exalted One’s head,
and the remaining citizens did the same for the community of monks.
Now the Exalted One - restrained and surrounded by restrained people,
peaceful and surrounded by the peaceful, freed and surrounded by the freed,
calmed and surrounded by the calm, tamed and surrounded by the tamed, worthy
(arhan) and surrounded by the worthy, dispassionate and surrounded by the
dispassionate, an agent of faith (prasādika) and surrounded by agents of faith, like
a bull amongst a herd of cattle, like an elephant amongst a group of young
elephants, like a lion amongst a group of carnivores,72 like a goose amongst a flock
of geese, like a suparṇa (divine bird) amongst a flock of birds, like a sage
surrounded by a group of students, like a good horse amongst a herd of horses,
like a hero amongst a group of warriors, like a guide amongst a band of travellers,
like a caravan leader amongst a caravan of merchants, like a banker amongst a
group of city-dwellers, like the ruler of a castle amongst a group of courtiers, like
a wheel-turning monarch surrounded by his thousand sons, like the moon
amongst the collection of stars, like the sun surrounded by its thousand rays, like
Dhṛtarāṣṭra amongst a troop of gandharvas, like Virūḍa amongst a group of
kumbhaṇḍas, like Virūpākṣa surrounded by a troop of nāgas, like Dhanada amongst
a group of yakṣas, like Vemacitri surrounded by a group of asuras, like Śakra
amongst the group of thirty gods, like Brahmā surrounded by Brahmā’s retinue,
like the tranquil ocean, like a watery thundercloud, like the leader of the
elephants free from intoxication – the Exalted One entered that city walking with
proper steady deportment, with senses completely restrained, filled with the
many special qualities of a Buddha.
And when the Exalted One’s foot was placed on the threshold, the great
earth trembled in six ways, and when the Exalted One entered the city many
72 I follow Feer’s interpretation of daṃṣṭri ‘biter’ as denoting carnivorous animals.
29

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
other wonders of such a kind occurred. That is to say: small things became
extensive, elephants called out, horses neighed, bulls bellowed, various musical
instruments that were in the houses played by themselves, the blind recovered
their sight, the deaf their hearing, mutes became able to speak, those who were
deficient in the other sense organs had their senses completely restored, those
who were despicable in their intoxication with drink became sober, those who
had drunk poison were freed from it, those who were enemies with one another
became friendly, pregnant women gave birth successfully, those bound in fetters
were freed, the poor received riches, and the atmospheric (āntarikṣa) gods, devas,
asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas let loose divine flowers.
Then the Exalted One began to enter the royal palace with supernormal
power of this kind, and King Bimbisāra himself stood in the courtyard outside the
door, took the foot-washing water fragranced with gośīrṣa sandalwood and
washed the feet of the Exalted One and his community of monks. Having seen that
the community of monks with the Buddha at their head were happily seated
nearby, he presented them with food of a hundred flavours, and after they had
eaten he clothed them in Kāśi cloths. And because of this the citizens of Magadha
were converted.
Then the monks became doubtful and asked the Exalted Buddha, destroyer
of all doubts, “Where was this skillful root of the Exalted One planted, on account
of which the Exalted One and the community of monks has been honoured in such
a fashion?” The Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata performed
and accumulated in other previous births have come together and their
conditions have matured. Being inevitable they have approached like a river.
These actions have been done and accumulated by me. Who else will experience
their results? O monks, deeds done do not mature in the earth element, nor in the
water element, nor in the fire element, nor in the wind element. Rather, deeds
done, whether pure or impure, ripen in what is enumerated as the aggregates, the
physical elements and the elements of sense experience.”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
named Kṣemaṃkara arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly
awakened, perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the
world, trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened
and exalted. He wandered on a journey through the countryside and reached a
certain royal city. The consecrated warrior king heard, ‘Kṣemaṃkara the perfect
Buddha, wandering on a journey through the countryside, has reached our royal
city.’ And hearing this, with great royal power and great regal splendour he
approached the place where Kṣemaṃkara the exalted and perfect Buddha was.
Having arrived he honoured the perfect Buddha Kṣemaṃkara’s feet with his head
and sat to one side. The perfect Buddha Kṣemaṃkara inspired that consecrated
warrior king who was seated to one side with the dharmas that bring about
30

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
awakening. Then that king gained faith, and having invited the perfect Buddha
Kṣemaṃkara to the royal palace he presented him with food of a hundred flavours
and clothed him with a cloth worth a hundred thousand. And when he had
attained complete awakening he had a stūpa constructed that was a krośa high and
a yojana in every direction.”73
“What do you think, monks? He who was at that time and on that occasion
the king, that was me. It was me that paid the perfect Buddha Kṣemaṃkara
honour in that way, and thus I have experienced boundless happiness in saṃsāra.
And because of that now I receive honour of such a kind from King Bimbisāra. In
this way, monks, one should train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and
worship the teacher. And having revered, paid respects to, honoured and
worshipped the teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you
should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
20. Divine Food
The Buddha, the Exalted One, honoured by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas,
kinnaras and mahoragas – that is to say honoured, praised, respected and
worshipped by kings, regents, the wealthy, the city-dwellers, bankers, caravan
leaders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas – and who was
knowing and of great merit, dwelled in Rājagṛha, in Kalandakanivāpa in the Veṇu
Grove, with his community of disciples, provided with the requisite robes,
almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines for the sick. There, a certain banker who
was rich, of great wealth and property, whose possessions were broad and
extensive, as lofty as Vaiśravaṇa’s wealth, rivalling Vaiśravaṇa’s wealth, was a
follower of the heretics. He was converted to the [Buddhist] teaching by
Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana and entered into a great faith in the Exalted One.
And that householder, having a stong inclination towards generosity, said to
Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana, “Be a friend to me. I wish to pay honour to the
Exalted One.” Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana consented to that householder
through his silence. Then Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana took the householder
and went to where the Exalted One was. Having arrived he honoured the Exalted
One’s feet with his head and sat to one side. Seated to one side, Venerable
Mahāmaudgalyāyana said this to the Exalted One: “Sir, this householder wishes to
feed the Exalted One together with his community of monks. So let the Exalted
One, feeling compassion, consent to this.” The Exalted One consented to the
householder through his silence. Then that householder, understanding that the
Exalted One had consented through his silence, brought together food of a
hundred flavours as well as ointments, garlands, perfumes and flowers. And
73 A yojana is defined as the distance one can travel on a single yoke of an ox, while a krośa is the
distance a cry can be heard, usually said to be one quarter of a yojana.
31

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana requested of the king of gods Śakra, “This
householder should be assisted.” So Śakra the king of gods magically made the
Veṇu Grove into the Nandana Grove, and a thousand elephants resembling
Airāvaṇa and Supratiṣṭhita … fanned with a yak-tail fan.74 Several thousand
gandharvas, beginning with Supriya, Pañcaśikha and Tumburu, were brought near,
played music on musical instruments of various kinds and prepared divine food
and elixir. Then that householder, with the assistance of the demi-gods,75
approached the Exalted One, threw his whole body at the Exalted One’s feet and
made an aspiration: “By this skillful root, the arising of this thought and the
practise of gift-giving and renunciation, may I become a Buddha in this dark
world that is leaderless and without a guide. May I be a saviour for those beings
who have not crossed over, a liberator for the unliberated, a consolation for the
unconsoled, a fully extinguished one for those who have not attained full
extinction.”
Then the Exalted One, understanding the succession of causes and the
succession of actions of that householder,76 displayed a smile. Now according to
the natural order of things, when Buddhas display a smile then blue, yellow, red
and white rays issue from the mouth and some go to the lower region and some to
the upper region. Those that go to the lower region, they go to the hells – Saṃjīva
(Vivifying), Kālasūtra (Black Rope), Saṃghāta (Crushing), Raurava (Roaring),
Mahāraurava (Great Roaring), Tapana (Hot), Pratāpana (Very Hot), Avīci
(Unwavering), Arbuda (Swelling), Nirarbuda (Thoroughly Swelling), Aṭaṭa
(Roaming), Hahava, Huhuva, Utpala (Fleshless), Padma (Lotus), and Mahāpadma
(Great Lotus). Those that descend into the hot hells become cool, and those that
descend into the cold hells become warm, and they allay the various sufferings of
the beings there such that it occurs to them, “Sirs, is it the case that we are
leaving here and arising elsewhere?” Then in order to make them develop faith,
the Exalted One emits an image of himself, and seeing this image they realise,
“No, sirs, we are not leaving here nor arising elsewhere. There is this being, not
seen before, by whose power our various sufferings are being allayed.” Their
minds becoming faithful towards this image, they cast off the karma that caused
their experience of hell, and take rebirth amongst gods and men, where they
become vessels for the truths.
74 There is a gap in the MS here, as recorded in Speyer and therefore Vaidya. Feer (p.87) fills the
gaps from the Tibetan, and his French rendering of this may be translated as follows: ‘Several
thousand elephants resembling Airāvaṇa and Supratiṣṭhita were brought and led in; they
supported a canopy worth a hundred, which was raised above the Buddha and the community of
monks; several thousand daughters of gods were also brought and led in, and they fanned (the
Buddha and the community of monks) with a fan with a jewelled handle.’
75 divyamānuṣair means ‘by the divine-men’, and presumably refers to the gandharvas, as opposed to
Śakra and his fellow full divinities.
76 hetuparaṃparāṃ karmaparaṃparāṃ. In other words the Buddha understands the man’s karmic
state and thus his future capabilities.
32

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
Those that go to the upper region, they go to the gods – the Four Great
Kings, and the gods of Trāyastriṃśa (Thirty-Three), Yāma (End), Tuṣita (Delight),
Nirmāṇarati (Delighting in Creation), Paranirmitavaśavartin (Delighting in the
Creations of Others), Brahmakāyika (Brahmā’s Retinue), Brahmapurohita
(Brahmā’s Ministers), Mahābrahma (Great Brahmā), Parittābhā (Little Radiance),
Apramāṇābhā (Immeasurable Radiance), Abhāsvara (Radiant), Parittaśubha (Little
Purity), Apramāṇaśubha (Immeasurable Purity), Śubhakṛtsna (Entirely Pure),
Anabhraka (Cloudless), Puṇyaprasava (Begetting Good), Bṛhatphala (Great Fruit),
Abṛha (Not Vast), Atapa (Not Hot), Sudṛśa (Handsome), Sudarśana (Beautiful) and
Akaniṣṭha (Highest). They shout out “Impermanent! Suffering! Empty! Not-Self!”
and speak two verses:
“Go forth, take hold of and attach yourselves to the Buddha’s teaching!
This shakes the army of death like an elephant shakes a reed-hut.
He who will live mindfully according to this dharma and vinaya,
abandoning the life of saṃsāra, he will make an end to suffering.”
Then those rays of light, having roamed through the great thousand of the
three-thousand world realms, enter the Exalted One one after another. If the
Exalted One is desirous of explaining past actions they disappear into the Exalted
One’s back, if he wishes to explain future actions they vanish into his front. If he
wishes to predict arising in a hell they disappear into the soles of his feet, while if
he wants to predict arising as an animal they enter his heel, and if he wants to
predict arising as a ghost they vanish into his big toe, and if he desires to predict
arising as a human they disappear into his knee. If he wishes to predict rule as a
powerful wheel-turning king they enter the palm of his left hand, while if he
wishes to predict rule as a wheel-turning king they disappear into the palm of his
right hand. If he wishes to predict arising as a god they vanish into his navel. If he
wishes to predict arhatship they enter his mouth, while if he wants to predict
pratyekabuddhahood they vanish into the circle of hair between his eyebrows,
and if he wants to predict unsurpassed and perfect full buddhahood they
disappear into his uṣṇīṣa.
On this occasion those rays of light circumambulated the Exalted One
three times and disappeared into the Exalted One’s uṣṇīṣa. Then Venerable
Ānanda joined his hands in respect and asked the Exalted One:
“A collection of a thousand bright coloured rays of various kinds
is expelled from the inside the mouth,
completely illuminating the directions
as if from the rising of the sun.”
And he spoke these verses:
“Buddhas have cut off rebirth, abandoned affliction and enjoyment,
become the cause of what is best in the world;
Victors, their enemies conquered, do not exhibit a smile
– white as a conch-shell or lotus-fibre - without reason.
Victor, realising yourself through your intelligence that it is time,
33

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
Śramaṇa, Lord of Conquerors, for the hearers who wish it,
Bull of Sages, remove the doubt that has arisen,
with splendid, wise and superior speech.
It is not without reason that the courageous kings, rocks of the ocean,
perfect Buddhas, protectors, exhibit a smile.
A multitude of people yearn to hear
the reason why wise ones exhibit a smile.”
The Exalted One said, “This is so, Ānanda, this is so. It is not without cause or
without reason, Ānanda, that arhats who are perfect and fully awakened display a
smile. You see, Ānanda, that this householder has paid me honour in this way.
Thus, Venerable Ānanda, this householder, because of this skillful root and the
arising of this thought, and through renunciation and charity, after three
incalculable aeons he will attain awakening, and having fulfilled the six
perfections that are pervaded with great compassion he will become a full and
perfect Buddha named Divyānnāda, with the ten powers, four confidences, three
special applications of mentality77 and great compassion. This is the gift for those
whose minds become faithful in my presence.” And having heard this
explanation, King Bimbisāra and his attendants the Magadhans were greatly
astonished.
The monks became doubtful and asked the Exalted Buddha, destroyer of all
doubt, “See, Exalted One, how this householder worshiped the Exalted One and his
community of monks with the supernormal powers of the demi-gods.” The
Exalted One said, “O monks, actions that the Tathāgata performed and
accumulated in other previous births have come together and their conditions
have matured. Being inevitable they have approached like a river. These actions
have been done and accumulated by me. Who else will experience their results? O
monks, deeds done do not mature in the earth element, nor in the water element,
nor in the fire element, nor in the wind element. Rather, deeds done, whether
pure or impure, ripen in what is enumerated as the aggregates, the physical
elements and the elements of sense experience.”
“Actions do not disappear even after a hundred aeons.
When they have reached completion and it is time, they fruit for living beings.”
“Formerly, monks, in a past time, a fully and perfectly awakened one
named Pūrṇa arose in the world – a tathāgata, arhat, fully and perfectly awakened,
perfect in wisdom and conduct, well-farer, unsurpassed knower of the world,
trainer of those ready to be trained, teacher of gods and men, awakened and
exalted. Pūrṇa the full and perfect buddha wandered on a journey through the
countryside and reached a certain royal city. The consecrated warrior king heard,
‘Pūrṇa the perfect Buddha, wandering on a journey through the countryside, has
reached our royal city.’ And hearing this, with great royal power and great regal
splendour he approached the place where Pūrṇa the perfect Buddha was. Having
arrived he honoured the perfect Buddha Pūrṇa’s feet with his head and sat to one
77 See Edgerton’s discussion in BHSD under smṛty-upasthāna.
34

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
side. The perfect Buddha Pūrṇa inspired that consecrated warrior king who was
seated to one side with the dharmas that bring about awakening. Then that
consecrated warrior king offered to provide the perfect Buddha Pūrṇa together
with his community of monks with the requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats and
medicines for the sick for three months. The perfect Buddha Pūrṇa consented to
the king through his silence. Then the consecrated warrior king understood that
the perfect Buddha Pūrṇa had consented through his silence and attended them
with the requisite robes, almsbowls, beds, seats and medicines for the sick for
three months. He had an image of the Exalted One made of jewels and carried out
the Buddha-Joy [festival],78 such that several hundred thousand beings attained
great faith, and for that reason and cause they attained complete awakening.”
“What do you think, monks? The one who was the king at that time and on
that occasion, that was me. It was me that honoured the perfect Buddha Pūrṇa in
such a fashion, and thus I experienced boundless happiness in saṃsāṛa, and for
that reason I was honoured as a Tathāgata in this way by the banker and by Śakra.
In this way, monks, one should train: ‘We will revere, pay respects to, honour and
worship the teacher. And having revered, paid respects to, honoured and
worshipped the teacher, we will live in reliance on him.’ In this way, monks, you
should train.”
Thus spoke the Exalted One, and the monks were delighted and praised the
Exalted One’s speech.
Abbreviations
BHSD Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary, see Edgerton 1970.
DP Dictionary of Pāli, see Cone 2001-2010.
MMW Monier Monier-Williams’ A Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
PED Pali-English Dictionary, see Rhys-Davids and Stede 1921-1925.
Bibliography
Appleton, Naomi. 2010. Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism: Narrating the Bodhisatta
Path. Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate.
Collett, Alice. 2004. Buddhist Narrative Literature in Context: A study of stories from the
Avadānaśataka and Vicitrakarṇikāvadāna including editions and translations. PhD
thesis, Cardiff University.
78 bhagavato ratnamayapratimāṃ kārayitvā buddhaharṣaṃ kāritavān. I follow Speyer’s suggestion, in
his index of rare forms, that buddhaharṣa is the name of a festival. The term does not appear in
either BHSD or PED. Feer translates ‘il fit faire une image de Bhagavat en pierres précieuses, ce qui
mit le Buddha dans le ravissement’ but this seems unlikely given the repetition of the verb.
35

Asian Literature and Translation Vol. 1, No. 7 (2013) 1-36
Collett, Alice. 2006. ‘List-based Formulae in the Avadānaśataka.’ Buddhist Studies
Review 23/2: 155-85.
Collett, Alice. 2009. ‘Somā the Learned Brahmin.’ Religions of South Asia 3/1: 93-109.
Collins, Steven. 1998. Nirvana and other Buddhist Felicities. Cambridge University
Press.
Cone, Margaret. 2001-2010. A Dictionary of Pāli. The Pali Text Society.
DeCaroli, Robert. 2004. Haunting the Buddha: Indian Popular Religions and the
Formation of Buddhism. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.
Demoto Hahn, Mitsuyo. 2006. ‘Fragments of the Avadānaśataka.’ In Jens Braarvig
(ed.) Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. III: 207-44. Oslo: Hermes Publishing.
Edgerton, Franklin. 1970. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. 2 vols.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Originally Yale University Press 1953.
Feer, Léon (trans.) 1979. Avadâna-Çataka: Cent legends bouddhiques. Amsterdam:
APA-Oriental Press. Originally Annales du Musée Guimet 18. Paris: E. Leroux,
1879.
Fifield, Justin. 2008. Faith, Miracles and Conversion in the Avadānaśataka: A
Translation and Analysis of the First Decade of Stories. M.A. Thesis, University of
Texas at Austin.
Muldoon-Hules, Karen. 2009. ‘Of Milk and Motherhood: The Kacaṅgalā Avadāna
Read in a Brahmanical Light.’ Religions of South Asia 3/1: 111-24.
Muldoon-Hules, Karen. forthcoming 2013. ‘The Avadānaśataka: The Role of
Brahmanical Marriage in a Buddhist Text.’ In Alice Collett (ed.) Women in Early
Indian Buddhism: Comparative Textual Studies. Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press.
Ohnuma, Reiko. 2007. Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body in Indian
Buddhist Literature. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rhys-Davids, T. W. & William Stede. 1921-1925. Pali-English Dictionary. The Pali
Text Society.
Rotman, Andy, trans. 2008. Divine Stories: Divyāvadāna Part 1. Boston: Wisdom
Publications.
Rotman, Andy. 2009. Thus Have I Seen: Visualizing Faith in Early Indian Buddhism.
Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.
Speyer, J. S. ed. 1958. Avadānaçataka: A century of edifying tales belonging to the
Hīnayāna. The Hague: Mouton & Co.
Strong, John S. 1979. ‘The Transforming Gift: An Analysis of Devotional Acts of
Offering in Buddhist Avadāna Literature.’ History of Religions 18/3: 221-37.
Strong, John S. 1983. The Legend of King Aśoka: A Study and Translation of the
Aśokāvadāna. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Strong, John S. 1992. The Legend and Cult of Upagupta: Sanskrit Buddhism in North
India and Southeast Asia. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Vaidya, P. L. (ed.) 1958. Avadāna-śataka. Darbhanga: The Mithila Institute.
36