Suicide and Euthanasia in Buddhism:
Ethicization of the Narratives in the Pāli Tipiṭaka
A dissertation presented to the
Graduate School of Letters, Department of Buddhist
Studies Ryukoku University
In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
By
Kanae Kawamoto
L14D005

Acknowledgements
This dissertation, in which I have investigated the issues of suicide and euthanasia
as my continual theme to be solved, is also bound up with the help and support of many
people.I would like to thank the members of my dissertation committee at Ryukoku
University, my advisors Prof. Yusho Wakahara and Dr. Eisho Nasu, for their expert
guidance. I would also thank to Dr. Lisa Grumbach and Dr. Angela Dietrich for editing
my (terrible) English.
Moreover, I received abundant useful suggestions from Dr. Jens Schlieter from
the Institute of Religious Science, the University of Bern, through productive
discussions while I was staying as a Visiting Fellow of the Japanese-Swiss Young
Researchers’ Exchange Programme.
I greatly appreciate all of their help which has made the field of my study so
rich. Without their help, this thesis would never have seen the light of day.
Kanae Kawamoto
Kyoto, 2017

Suicide and Euthanasia in Buddhism:
Ethicization of the Narratives in the Pāli Tipiṭaka
Table of Contents
Table of Contents i
List of Tables iii
Conventions Used in this Thesis. iii
List of Abbreviations. iv
Introduction
a. Outline of the study 1
b. Background 2
c. Objectives 7
d, Literature Review 9
e. Methodology 19
f. Outline of Each Chapter 19
Chapter I: Killing and Buddhist Morality
1.1. Major Theories of Ethics in the West 22
1.2. Morally Wholesome or Unwholesome Acts in Buddhism 25
1.3. Killing as an Unwholesome Act 29
1.4. Nibbāna and Morality. 33
Chapter II: Monastic Suicides in the Suttas
2.1. Killing and Arahants 38
2.2. Similarities of the Three Stories 40
2.3. The Plot of the Godhika-Sutta 42
2.4. Ethical and Soteriological Interpretations of Godhika’s Death 48
2.5. The Plot of Vakkali-sutta 52
2.6. Post-canonical Interpretations of the Vakkali-sutta
59
i

2.7. The Plot of the Channa-sutta as Depicted in the Pāli Canon 60
2.8. Controversies over the Channa-sutta in Buddhist Ethics
68
Chapter III: Self-sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the Jataka Narratives
3.1. Dāna Pāramī 72
3.2. Motives of the Bodhisatta’s Self-sacrifice 75
3.3. The Motives in the Paññāsa-jātaka 86
Chapter IV: Suicide and Euthanasia in the Vinaya
4.1. The Plot of the First Sub-story 100
4.2. Analytical Reading of the First Sub-story 108
4.3. Karmic Rationale
117
4.4. The Understanding of Destructive Karma in Theravāda 121
Buddhism
4.5. Other Cases Relevant to Suicide or Euthanasia in the 127
Vinaya
Conclusion 133
Bibliography 138
ii

List of Tables
Table 1. Table 1 Stories in which the Bodhisatta practices self- 76
sacrifice In the Cariyāpiṭaka and Khuddaka Nikāya
Table 2. Table 2 Stories of self-sacrifice and the Bodhisatta’s motives 88
in the Paññāsa-jātaka
Table 3. Table 3 Three Major Scenes of the First Sub- 101
story for the Third Pārājika Rule
Table 4. Table 4 The Other Cases in the Vinaya which are Comparable 132
with Euthanasia
Conventions Used in this Thesis
In order to avoid the readers’ confusion, I mainly use Pāli forms
throughout (e.g. Bodhisatta rather than Bodhisattva). However, when I am
talking about Sanskrit titles of Mahāyāna sources as well as specific
concepts found only in Mahāyāna Buddhism (e.g. Amida Buddha), the
Sanskrit form is applied in preference to the Pāli. Moreover, I use the
anglicised form ‘karma’ rather than ‘kamma’ in Pāli when it is independent
and not part of a compound or when it is not a citation from the Pāli texts.
iii

List of Abbreviations
In quoting the Pāli sources, references are given according to the volume and page
number of the Pali Text Society (PTS) edition.
A : Aṅguttaranikāya
Abhidh-s : Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha
D : Dīghanikāya
Dhp : Dhammapada
Dhp-a : Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā Ja :
Jātaka (-aṭṭhakathā)
K :
Khuddakanikāya
M :
Majjhimanikāya
Mil :
Milindapañha S :
Saṃyuttanikāya
SA : Saṃyuttanikāya-
aṭṭhakathā Th : Theragāthā
Th-a : Theragāthā-
aṭṭhakathā Vibh :
Vibhaṅga
Vin : Vinayapiṭaka
Vin-a : Vinayapiṭaka-
aṭṭhakathā Vism :
Visuddhimagga
Yam : Yamakapāli
Yam-a : Yamakapāli-aṭṭhakathā
iv

Example: 1) Vin iii 82.
Vin =
Vinayapiṭaka iii
= Volume 3
82 = Page 82
Example: 2) J-a 12.
J-a = Jātaka- aṭṭhakathā
12 = Verse 12
Other abbreviations:
ed.: Edited by
et al. : Et alia/ and others
ibid. : Ibiden/in the same book
trans. : Translated by
v

Introduction
a. Outline of the Study
This dissertation is the product of researches into how stories (jatakas?)
onfound in the Pāli Buddhist texts depicts the aacts of self-killing such as suicide
and euthanasia. The purpose of this research is to understand how their ethical
interpretation in secondary works, ranging from Buddhaghosa's commentaries
to modern publications of Theravāda Buddhism, have developed by referencing
important Buddhist concepts, especially karma (kamma in Pāli).— I call the this
process ethicization.
Some of the stories in the Pāli Tipiṭaka, for example, those on monastic
suicide in the suttas and the background stories concerning the prohibitions
against murder in the Vinaya, have been important references to understand
Buddhist morality and ethics. However, this dissertation doesis not concerned
with research into suicide and euthanasia as ethical issues from a Buddhist
perspectives. Instead, forin order to understanding their ethicization, I pay
careful attention to the storylines, characters, and their dialogues in these texts.
The stories that I examine are theconcern suicide cases of occurring in the
background stories of the tatiya-pārājika in the Vinaya texts, the suttas about
Godhika, Vakkali, and Channa, and also the cases of self-sacrifice by the
Bodhisatta in the jātaka narratives. In particular, I analyzes what parts of these
stories have been emphatically interpreted in favorlight of ethicization by later
authors so that these texts progressed negative views of suicide and euthanasia,
1

which consequently came to be used as a warnings against these acts from a
Buddhist perspectives.
My procedureresearch began begin withby reading the texts in the Pāli
Tipiṭaka just as narrratives without considering the later commentarial
interpretations. The reason for doing it isconducting my study in this way is that
I needed to understand their storylines, themes and messages, which are
indiependent of the interpretations of the later compilators of the canon and its
commentaries. Then I compared the original texts with the later interpretations
including modern studies on Buddhist ethics.
b. Background
Suicide and euthanasia are viewed as belonging in the same moral
category as murder on most occasions, as they are all involved in the act of
taking a human life. However, in this thesis, I also explore the differences
which exist among these three.
The French sociologist Émile Durkheim, who authored On Suicide,
formulated the following definition of suicide: “‘Suicide’ is the term applied
to any case of death resulting directly or indirectly from a positive or negative
act, carried out by the victim himself which he was aware would produce
this result.” 1
In the eyes of the law in every country, murder is absolutely a punishable
act in recognition of the intrinsic value of everyone’s life after birth. However,
1 Durkheim, On Suicide, (2006:19).
2

it would appear that the same sense of injustice can be applied to the act of
intentionally ending one’s own life or assisting someone’s voluntary death.
The moral legitimacy of suicide by its very nature exists in a no man’s land
somewhat aside from murder because of its ambiguity whereby the victim also
plays a double role as the victimizer. For this reason, suicide is not legally
equated to murder in most countries.
In regard to suicide, the principles of each religious tradition differ as to
whether it can be affirmed or proscribed from an ethical and moral
perspective. The Roman Catholic Church, for instance, disapproves of the act
of suicide as a form of killing in violation of the Fifth Commandment. 2
Furthermore, both Catholicism and Protestantism prohibit suicide because
it is a sacrilegious act based on the concept that human life is not owned by
a human being but rather is considered divine under the authority of the creator
God. Not only is suicide forbidden within the strict moral sanctions of the
religious compact, but both the Catholic and Protestant tradition also declare
that such misdeeds will bring punishment in the afterlife.
Unlike these Christian views, Buddhism recognises no sole creator God
besides harbouring a different worldview altogether. Yet, the general
evaluation of suicidal acts in Theravāda Buddhist countries in Southeast Asia
are as negative as the attitudes of Christianity. Many Buddhists in Myanmar
and Thailand, for instance, are often afraid that one suicidal deed will result
in five hundred repetitions of suicide in one’s future rebirths. This fear does
2 See §§ 2258–80 of Catechism of the Catholic Church,
< http://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/_INDEX.HTM >.
3

not derive from mere folk beliefs, but rather from one of the narratives in the
Pāli Sutta, the Matakabhatta-jātaka. 3 This story warns of the potential
karmic fruition of evil deeds [rather than the virtuous altruism of the
Bodhisatta – unnecessary, best to delete this part].
The Matakabhatta-jātaka relates that a Brahmin in his past life had once
killed a goat in a sacrificial ritual. Due to the retribution governing even this
single act, he was repeatedly subject to rebirth as a goat and had his head cut
off five hundred times. In the Burmese Buddhist context, the karmic result of
killing another (regarded as an unwholesome act) is linked with the anticipated
karmic consequence of suicide. At the same time, it is to be noted that such
negative interpretations do impart moral attitudes acting to prevent suicide in
the Theravāda Buddhist tradition.
As regards the act of euthanasia, on the one hand, it requires another
person to assist in someone’s death, just as the case of a doctor helping a patient
considered physician-assisted suicide. Under these conditions, euthanasia
might be identified as being closer to the act of murder than of suicide per se.
According to general ethical classifications, euthanasia is differentiated into
two modes, active and passive. The active mode of euthanasia hastens
another’s death deliberately as, for example, by lethal injection. In the passive
mode, one person leads another to death by omitting a necessary action such
as offering food or medical treatment. As such, the actual means of euthanasia
3 Ja 18. (K-a i 166-8). I am grateful for the assistance of Ven. Vūpasanta, lecturer at the International
Theravāda Buddhist University, Yangon, 2013. She showed me her |Master’s dissertation in which she
examines the connection between this jātaka narrative and Burmese understanding of suicide.
4

can be classified into the three types: 4 (1) voluntary, (2) involuntary, and (3)
non-voluntary. In the medical context, for example, voluntary euthanasia
means that a doctor agrees to the patient’s wish to die and provides the patient
with the means of terminating his or her life. Involuntary euthanasia occurs
when the doctor intentionally facilitates the means to end the patient’s life
against the patient’s wishes. In the case of non-voluntary euthanasia, the
patient is incapable of either requesting or rejecting the doctor’s lethal
actions, as the patient is either in a state of coma or may, for example, be
suffering from dementia.
In contrast to the issues and concerns regarding suicide and euthanasia in
modern society, some cases of self-killing in Buddhism have been viewed as
being inseparable from spiritually high motives or outcomes. These deaths
should not be equated with the desperate suicide cases often witnessed in
modern society. Since Buddhism never supports the idea of harmfulness to
living beings, taking one’s own life is generally regarded as an unwholesome
act resulting in karma bringing a negative result in the future. Moreover,
assisting the death of someone who is severely ill, as is propagated by
proponents of euthanasia today, is considered to be absolutely identical to the
act of killing in most Buddhist teachings.
However, some stories of monastic suicide and the self-sacrifices enacted
by the Bodhisatta have raised controversy. Buddhist commentaries on the Pāli
Tipiṭaka as well as modern studies were undoubtedly designed to strengthen
moral attitudes in order to prevent Buddhists from copying these acts of self-
4 Keown, Buddhism and Bioethics (2001:168-f).
5

killing as depicted in their original texts. Buddhaghosa, the renowned
commentator of the Pāli Tipiṭaka, seems to have rationalized the negative
interpretations of these acts by using the concepts of karma and mind
processes, both of which are generally emphasized in later works such as the
Abhidhamma and the Visuddhimagga in order to deem both suicide and
euthanasia as unwholesome acts. Therefore, Buddhaghosa’s effort in this
regard can be viewed as constituting an attempt to see how the ethicization
of these acts has occurred.
In the West, ethics requires universal theories that can be applied to wider cases
as I have discussed some major ethical theories in Chapter 1. Western studies in
Buddhist ethics have also examined the Buddhist canon in an attempt to derive
universal Buddhist attitudes towards suicide and euthanasia.
It begs the question, whether their attempts have been successful. While
Buddhism does consistently place moral value in regard to life, there are
various inconsistent descriptions on these topics scattered throughout the
canon. For example, the Buddha explains the same topic, such as happiness or
human relationships, in completely different ways depending on who is being
addressed, their situations, and their capacities for understanding the
Dhamma. Just as a doctor gives the most suitable treatment and medication to
each patient according to their needs, so the Buddha gives the best answer to
a questioner according to that person’s current state and potential for growth.
This multiplicity of perspectives represents Buddhism’s strength, but it may
have also created confusion for those seeking a unified code of Buddhist
ethics.
6

This characteristic feature of variations in the Buddha's instructions
should not be disregarded when reading texts relevant to suicide and
euthanasia. Rather, there is no doubt that one must pay attention to situational
differences. The Buddha’s reaction to each story may be positive or negative
due to the situational differences surrounding the persons in the story. The
commentaries have fielded interpretations in combination with other Buddhist
concepts in order to harmonize events or to unify the results in the context of
each of these events and the results appear to be in conflict with other positions
articulated in the Pāli Tipiṭaka. Indeed, the commentators' efforts seem to have
contributed to perspectives seeking to prevent suicide and euthanasia
particulary as driven by one’s emotional motives.
However, a more careful reading of each of the self-killing stories as a self-
contained narrative or drama reveals a somewhat different understanding of these
texts, which have otherwise been read only as sources for Buddhist ethical studies.
Since each story has its own plotline with a soteriological motivation, one case of
suicide in a certain story should not be applied universally to modern cases of
suicide or euthanasia. Rather, a careful reading of these original stories
without any biased filter of the commentarial interpretation shows that the
essential messages of these stories differ dramatically from the moral ones.
c. Objectives
In the present context, I do not attempt to examine Buddhist ethics in regard
to the issues of suicide and euthanasia. Instead, my aim is to analyze how
7

these acts concerning self-killing have contributed towards the discourse
surrounding ethicization by commentators and researchers continuing up to
the modern day. My objectives for this research can thus be subdivided into
the following three tasks.
First, I focus on the acts of killing which are categorized as morally
unwholesome in the Pāli Tipiṭaka in order to examine how “Buddhist ethics”
have been constructed in modern scholarship. In my discussion, I criticize the
tendency to apply the Western hermeneutics of ethics to the Indian Buddhist
situation because Buddhist moral views in the Pāli Tipiṭaka should rather be
constructed based on Indian hermeneutical ideas of situations and
relationalities. Furthermore, in regard to how Buddhism establishes an act as
morally good or bad, I examine the episodes in which the Buddha teaches how
to differentiate wholesome (kusulla) from unwholesome (akusulla) actions. I
also examine the texts concerning killing in the Pāli Tipiṭaka in order to
establish a general understanding of killing in Buddhist morality.
Second, I pay careful attention to the stories that have relevance to the
issues of suicide and euthanasia in the Sutta and the Vinaya. Specifically, I
read these texts as narratives in order to focus on the roles that the stories,
especially in regard to their characters, their dialogues, and their situations
play in both the development and the outcome of the plots. The texts in which
monks commit suicide or are involved in assisting someone’s death are
controversial sources for understanding moral values on suicide and
euthanasia in Buddhism. However, I argue that the themes of these stories lie
not in the acts of suicide or killing but in other factors, and therefore that it
8

may be a mistake only to regard the stories or to seek to deduce Buddhist moral
attitudes to suicide and euthanasia from these sources alone.
Third, I analyze differences among the commentaries of these and later
texts including extra-canonical ones, and examine how they developed
Buddhist moral interpretations in combination with other philosophical
concepts relating to karma and mental factors often seen in the Abhidhamma
and the Visuddhimagga. These interpretations should have been aware of the
controversial elements seen in the stories and attempted to explain or
harmonize these differences in order to create ethical standards in Buddhism.
I also examine how the ethicization of these stories has resulted in bifurcations
and sometimes confusions in modern Buddhist studies on suicide and
euthanasia.
d. Literature Review
Scholarly studies on suicide in the context of the Pāli Tipiṭaka have been
largely conducted in the West. I have studied Theravāda Buddhist ethics as
regards suicide in my paper “Buddhism and Suicide: Right Attitude towards
Death” and my master’s thesis “Ambiguity of Karmic Fate and Voluntary
Death: Suicide Cases in Theravāda Buddhism and Japanese Society.” In Buddhism,
killing is on any occasion absolutely considered to be an unwholesome action.
However, the question as regards Buddhist ethics is whether killing
should also include that of oneself and, overall, whether or not suicide is even
ethically wrong in Buddhism. In the context of the Vinaya rules, it appears that
9

the Buddha proclaimed prohibitions on murder, assisting someone’s suicide,
and praising the benefits of death, but not clearly on suicide itself.
Scholarship on Buddhist ethics has generally concluded that Buddhism
holds negative views toward suicide and euthanasia. However, some
controversy ensued when Étienne Lamotte commented that suicide is not
considered an offence under the Vinaya rules on the grounds that the Vinaya
regulates only monks’ behavior when it comes to maintaining harmony in the
saṅgha.5
Two specialists in Buddhist ethics are, however, critical of the act of
suicide, in opposition to Lamotte’s conclusion. One is Damien Keown, who is
well known for his paper on the case of Channa, a monk who committed
suicide as described in the Channa-sutta. After Keown examined the original
sutta and the commentary, he elucidated the whole picture surrounding
Channa’s death and then explored a possible normative position on arahants’
commiting suicide. [I will discuss Channa’s suicide in Chapter II – put in a
footnote]. In his discussion, Keown applied two terms, ‘exoneration’ (one’s act
being exempt from punishment) and ‘condonation’ (one’s act being allowed)
in considering the Buddha’s declaration that Channa was liberated after his
suicide. In his response, Keown states: “the Buddha’s concluding remark
becomes not an exoneration of suicide but a clarification of the meaning of an
ambiguous word in a context which has nothing to do with ethics.” 6 In his
conclusion, Channa’s death could be considered as suicide by an ordinary
5 Lamotte,” Religious Studies in Early Buddhism” in Buddhist Studies Review (1987: 214).
6 Keown, ‘Buddhism and Suicide: The Case of Channa,’ in Journal of Buddhist Ethics (1996:24).
10

person, though not by an enlightened person, and should not be ‘condoned’
from a Buddhist moral viewpoint.
Keown also mentions the ten factors suicide is contrary to: 1) the
principle of ahimsā, as it is an act of violence; 2) the First Precept; 3) the third
pārājika (prohibition of murder); 4) the statement that “arahants do not cut
short their lives” described in the Milindapañhā; 5) the great value of human
life, [and it also prevents a missionary contribution to others as a Dhamma
expert – doesn’t make sense]; 6) the fulfilment of one’s allotted life span; also
suicide is; 7) a form of the three cravings, namely, self-annihilation (vibhava
taṇhā); 8) associated with the methods rejected by Buddhism for the eradication
of craving; 9) beyond dispute an act of self-torture that one should abstain from;
10) immediately denounced by Sāriputta when Channa first confided his
intention of suicide.
The second scholar is Peter Harvey, the author of one of the most
significant overviews of Buddhist ethics, Introduction to Buddhist Ethics
especially as most modern studies on suicide and euthanasia have relied on
his study. Harvey considers the combined concept of rebirth and karma as
forming basic Buddhist morality culminating in the ultimate goal of
nibbāna. 7 In the chapter 'Suicide and Euthanasia', he illustrates many
different types of suicide cases in the Pāli Canon. Similarly to Keown, he was
critical of suicide in Buddhism, demonstrating that, in the context of the major
Buddhist moral principles, it should not be allowed as follows: (1) Suicide due
7 Harvey, Introcution to Buddhist Ethics (2000:13-f).
11

to escapism is an ineffective act triggered by craving for annihilation; (2)
dying with an agitated mind diminishes the accumulation of good karma and
the opportunity for a ‘precious human rebirth’; (3) the monastic rules (the
vinaya) refer to the serious prohibition of suicide, murder, and even assisting
suicide; (4) even the few cases of monks who killed themselves to attain
arahantship (the highest enlightenment in Theravada Buddhism) are unwise
acts driven by remorse. In addition, Harvey also regards two exceptions as
not relevant to normal suicide cases. One is the self-sacrifice of the
Bodhisatta (Buddha-to-be) to assist others in the attainment of ideal
Buddhahood, as often seen in Mahāyana Buddhist ideas. The other is the
case of self-immolation by Mahāyana Buddhist monks just prior to the
Vietnam War. 8
Harvey’s viewpoint has yet to be further refined. First in regard to his
statement (3) as to whether the third pārājika rule (the prohibition of murder)
includes the act of self-killing, is still ambiguous. [In Chapter 4, I examine the
original text in comparison with the commentary – footnote]. In this context,
the commentary provides several reasons to justify both the Buddha’s self-
seclusion that resulted in his not being able to stop the monks’ suicides, and
their deaths as an unavoidable outcome when applying the function of
destructive karma (upaghātaka kamma or upacchedaka kamma). In this
context, those monks' acts of killing others and even themselves did not result
in the accumulation of unwholesome karma, but acutally were constituted by
8 Harvey, (2000: 286-292).
12

the resultant karma due to their past unwholesome karma, which ultimately
caused their (karmically viewed) unadvoidable death.
My second question concerns the two exceptional cases that Harvey
proposed. The first, that of self-sacrifice by the Bodhisatta in the jātaka
narratives (the Buddha’s previous lives), is not criticized as an unrecommended
death, but is even generally glorified among Buddhists. While the perfection of
offering (dāna-pārami) in Buddhist discourses places giving one’s life on the
most supreme level, copying such altruistic suicide is not similarly
recommended by modern Buddhists. I examine this issue in Chapter 3 in order
to further clarify the true motives and meaning of his self-sacrifice.
These previous studies can be viewed as having resulted from evolving
Buddhist ethical views on suicide and euthanasia, and the attempt of
corolating the issues of suicide and euthanasia with other non-violent
Buddhist sentiments [However, each of their analyses resulted in searching
for ethical views of suicide and euthanasia at any cost. – I would delete this,
it isn’t clear] When these cases of suicide and euthanasia are described in the
Sutta and the Vinaya, the characters in each of the stories act, talk, suffer,
practice the training, attempt suicide, or commit it. Indeed, the stories progress
in a consistent flow just like a drama on the stage.
In respect to the study of the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice, Sheravanichkul, who
specializes in Thai Buddhist literature, has examined the collection of the Paññāsa-
jātaka consisting of 61 stories which are popularly preserved in Southeast Asia.
This non-canonical collection contains a higher content ratio of self-
sacrificial stories than are contained in the orthodox jātaka stories in the Pāli
13

Tipiṭaka. Sheravanichkul compares the Paññāsa-jātaka with the orthodox
collection, and also examines the reason for the increase in self-sacrifice
stories in the Paññāsa-jātaka. 9Although the acts of hasting one's death are
basically discouraged in the Pāli Tipiṭaka and also in modern Theravada
Buddhism, the self-sacrifice of the Bodhisatta to save others’ lives is
emphasized in the Paññāsa-jātaka in a postive context. According to
Sheravanichkul, this emphasis on the act of giving demonstrates the
meritorious significance of the perfection of generosity (dāna pāramī). He
also examines the self-immolation case of two Thai monks in early nineteenth
century Thailand, in which they burned themselves to death as an offering to
the Buddha, thereby expressing their aspiration for the attainment of
Buddhahood. He relates this case of the two monks to the importance of the
gift of the body being viewed as a compassionate practice. His conclusion
points out that the Bodhisatta’s internal gift is the symbolisation of one’s
strong faith and devotion to the Triple Gem (Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha),
although such voluntary death can merely be a metaphorical idealization and
symbolization of dāna-pāramī.
Chronologically, Sheravanichkul's analysis is based on Reiko Ohnuma's
compherensive studies of the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice. Ohnuma has applied the
concepts in the field of Indian Buddhist literature to the symbolic meanings
of the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice. The two terms in Sanskrit of the ‘gift of the
body’ (deha-dāna) and ‘self-sacrifice’ (ātma-parityāga) correspond to
9 Sheravanichkul, “Self-Sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the Paññāsa Jātaka” in Religion Compass.
(2008:769–787).
14

inward or personal offerings (ajjhattika-dāna) in Pāli. She establishes a
parallel contrast of the Buddha’s gift of Dhamma and the Bodhisatta’s gift of
his body. 10According to her interpretation, the former is used as an abstract
‘tenor’ and the latter a concrete ‘vehicle’ on a metaphorical level. Because
the Buddha was considered a supremely perfect being out of reach of
Buddhists in ancient times, after the Buddha’s demise, these Buddhists may
have imputed a realistic and emotional sense to the act of giving as exemplified
by the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice. She also argues that the Buddha’s Dhamma
gift does not only take precedence over, but also embodies, the Bodhisatta’s
spiritual gift, and that from a shifting perspective on the jātaka tales those
stories of self-sacrifice function as extended metaphors in which the vehicle
(the Bodhisatta’s gift) dominates over the tenor (of the Buddha’s Dhamma
gift). Conversely, from a religious perspective, the stories are not simple
metaphors but literal acts. In the former case, the Bodhisatta’s gift of the body
symbolizes the Buddha’s gift of Dhamma, while this gift of the body
transforms itself into the gift of Dhamma through the attainment of
Buddhahood.
These two previous studies, Sheravanichkul and Ohnuma, are worth considering
because they both emphasize the meaning of symbolization of the Bodhisatta’s self-
sacrifice. This symbolization seems to have developed for the purpose of preventing
Buddhists from copying similar suicidal acts. Nevertheless, they also show a
paradoxical fact: the more symbolization is emphasized, the more it appeals to
10 Ohnuma, “The Gift of Body and the Gift of Dharma” in History of Religions. (1998: 323–59).
15

Buddhists as the symbol is also an ideal. As in Sheravanichkul’s reference to
the cases of the two Thai monks, it appears that altruistic suicide or self-
sacrifice as the perfection of dāna-pāramī will forever fascinate Buddhists. I
examine this point further in Chapter 3.
Martin Delhey further articulates this dilemma 11 in his paper where he
begins with two problems: does the deliberate choice of death have a value
as intrinsic as life; and can suicide be judged in the same way as the killing
of others, or is it different? 12 His analysis shows that there is an incoherent
contrast between the Vinaya and Sutta in the different recensions. On the one
hand, the Buddha strictly declares his disapproval of murder in the Vinaya,
which does not precisely proscribe committing suicide. On the other hand,
supported by Damien Keown’s argument as I will examine in Chapter 2,
taking one’s own life before enlightenment is morally wrong although it may
in fact lead to arahantship at the moment of death. Suicidal motivations in the
stories of monks such as Godhika, Channa, and Vakkali repeatedly appear in
the suttas. Delhey points out that suicide is not exactly prohibited in the
Vinaya while suicide before enlightenment as seen in the suttas is morally
wrong. His investigation further develops the interpretations of those monks’
motivations in the post-canonical texts such as in Buddhaghosa’s commentary
and in the Sarvāstivāda ones from the viewpoint of harmful acts to others and
karmic relevance. However, Delhy follows Harivarman’s position in the
Tattvasiddhi which justifies the third motivation of Godhika’s suicide as an
11 Delhey, “Views on Suicide in Buddhism: Some Remarks” in LIRI Seminar Proceedings Series.
(2006:25-64).
12 Ibid (26).
16

act for the sake of salvation.
Delhey also examines a wide range of Mahāyana Buddhist texts. His
analysis of the jātaka narratives is supported by Ohnuma’s argument on the
Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice that suggests that figurative glorification is
praised more than the actual altruistic acts. Delhey also refers to the cases of
self-immolation by monks and nuns in medieval China, which are recorded in
the Chinese text as the act of worship. In the case of Pure Land Buddhism,
Delhey refers to the case of a particular adherent who committed suicide in
hope of an earlier rebirth in the Pure Land embraced by Amida. Finally,
Delhey discusses the views of Buddhist leaders in the modern world such as
Thich Nhat Hanh, the Dalai Lama, Daisaku Ikeda, and so forth.
Delhey’s conclusion can be summed up into the following seven ideas.
First, suicide is not seen to be equated with the act of killing of other living
beings because the act is not harmful to others, and also the cases of monastic
suicide are quite ambiguous to be morally judged. Second, Delhey interprets
the concept of ahiṃsā in a way dissimilar to most Western experts on Buddhist
ethics. While most of the Western experts see more value of life in
consideration of the wrongness of killing, in which the victim will revenge
the culprit in the afterlife. From the ethical viewpoint, suicide should be
discouraged along with the concern for the welfare of other living beings.
However, Delhey speculates that the concept of karmic retribution plays a
more important role in the negative understanding of suicide than ahiṃsā.
Third, suicide should be valued as to whether the aim derives from the
attainment of liberation as the ultimate soteriological goal. Fourth, the mental
17

state at the very moment of committing suicide is the crucial factor. Fifth,
the Vinaya rules certainly perform a preventive power against suicide for
monks and nuns living in the saṅgha. Sixth, suicide due to escapism is not
permissible and Buddhism must have reasons for it. Seventh, one of the
contemporary Mahāyāna Buddhist attitudes regarding suicide is that all living
beings, as they have Buddha-nature, should not do harm to each other.
Delhey’s study goes into deeper analysis for careful differentiation of the
cases of suicide in order to avoid shallow generalizations of them as each of
the caseof suicide and euthanasia must be differently considered. The Buddha
flexibly teaches others according to situation, the person’s capacity of
understanding, social state (monk or laity), and so on. If the Buddha does not
criticize a case of suicide, it does not mean it can be applied to all other cases.
Therefore, I agree with his way of careful examination.
My aim in this dissertation is, however, not to understand each of the
actsof suicide and euthanasia as described in the the Pāli Tipiṭaka as a mere
source for ethical judgement. Rather, my interest turns towards observing how
and why the ethical way of reading them has developed. Moreover, I expect
to find a new possible understanding of these acts by paying attention to
reading them as narratives, not merging with the later commentarial
interpretations with esoteric and philosophical concepts as the commentaries
adopted for ethicization of the acts of suicide and euthanasia in the Pāli
Tipiṭaka.
18

e. Methodology
I undertake a review of all relevant material of the Pāli Tipiṭaka and the
commentaries supplemented by the available English translations. With
regard to research of the ethical principles, I will examine the part of
prohibition of murder (tatiya-pārājika) and its commentary (the
Samantapāsādika). The study of monastic suicide and self-sacrifice by the
Bodhisatta includes the revision of narratives in the Sutta and commentaries.
For the analysis of destructive karma, I will use the Abhidhamma in the Pāli
Tipiṭaka, which systematizes the working of karma and its manifestation in
one’s future rebirth. In addition, I will introduce a small amount of field
research and available publications on demonstrating practical attitudes of
Theravāda Buddhist monks towards suicide and euthanasia in Myanmar and
Thailand.
f. Outline of Each Chapter
My examination can be divided into three portions in accordance with the
sequential chapters. In Chapter 1, I begin with ethical concepts common in the
West and also general Buddhist ethics. This chapter also examine what is
wholesome or unwholesome in the light of Buddhist morality. My
examination shows that the act of killing is absolutely an unwholesome act,
and further discusses how Buddhist morality understands suicide and
euthanasia as acts of killing.
In Chapter 2, I begin my examination of three monastic suicides, such as
19

the cases of Godhika, Vakkali, and Channa in the Pāli Sutta. This chapter
shows the essential themes surrounding these three monks. Due to the
combination of suicide and arahantship, which seems to contradict other
moral ideas in Buddhism, these three stories have often been discussed as
important references to look for ethical standards on suicide in Buddhism.
Instead, I interpret these discourses as narratives, focusing on the ‘process’
of their life story. Furthermore, this examination underscores the importance
of the progressive dialogues in the stories between each of the three monks,
the Buddha, and the other important characters including Māra, deities, and
two of the Buddha’s great disciples Sāriputta and Mahācunda. Their dynamic
depictions have been neglected by previous researches because of their
interests in ethicization of Buddhist views on suicide.
As another important source of studies on suicide, the jātaka narratives
about the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice have inspired ethical understanding for
Buddhist researchers. Chapter 3 focuses on these jātaka stories in the Pāli
Sutta compared with the famous extra-canonical texts of the Paññāsa-jātaka.
The purpose of this examination is to see the emphasis of the motives of the
Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice, which should be changed for ethicization of his
altruistic acts.
Finally, Chapter 5 examines the background stories of the third pārājika
rules in the Vinaya. In studies on Buddhist ethics, the Vinaya is often
referenced first as it offers regulations on Buddhists’ behaviors. However, I
deliberately set this examination in the last chapter in order to emphasize my
intention to see the development of ethicization by karmic rational by reading
20

all the relevant texts as narratives.
In my conclusion, I summarize my discussion and the major results drawn
in each chapter. I also give some suggestion for future research to be
crystallized.
I hope my findings in this dissertation shed a light on the ambiguity or confusion
over ethical standards in Buddhism. I also hope my way of reading the texts inspire
Buddhist researches that focus on ethical issues.
21

Chapter I
Killing and Buddhist Morality
Chapter 1 investigates the basic ideas of ethics in the West, especially
Buddhist ethics that they consider. I first discuss major previous studies on
Buddhist ethics. Second, I show the classification of wholesome and
unwholesome acts in order to understand basic moral values in Buddhism.
Consequently, this leads to the understanding of killing as an unwholesome act
yet leaves us with the question of whether the act of killing includes self- killing.
1.1. Major Theories of Ethics in the West
The three major ethical theories in the West are consequentialism,
deontology, and virtue ethics. In his book on Buddhist ethics, Charles
Goodman especially applies consequentialism to the fundamental ethics of
Buddhism. 13 He provides many different examples applied to modern life.
In consequentialism, one should choose an action that produces the best
consequence. Consequentialist views consider the right based on the good. However,
the evaluation of the good can often be misjudged. He refers to the example of “George
13 Goodman, Consequences of Compassion: An Interpretation and Defense of Buddhist Ethics (2009:45).
22

the Chemist,” used by Bernard Williams. 14 George, who has a family and is looking
for a job, receives a job offer at a high salary. This job is, however, to develop
chemical and biological weapons. Even if he refuses this offer, another talented
chemist can willingly accept it in order to develop more harmful weapons.
Goodman claims that consequentialist views should encourage George to
accept it because in the larger framework of the future, George can raise his
family with his salary, and the nations of his country’s enemy can escape an
attack by more devastating weapons developed by another chemist. In this
context, Goodman divides the concept of consequentialism into two types of
act consequentialism and rule consequentialism. The former places precedence
on the outcome brought by the act. Thus, George must accept the job in order
not to let it be given to a vicious chemist who might kill more lives. In making
a decision according to rule consequentialism, however, George should follow
the universal rule that would bring the best outcome, and if the production of
harmful weapons is prohibited as a universal rule, George should refuse the job
according to the rule. 15
The theory of deontology was proposed by Emmanuel Kant. Deontological
ethics must absolutely observe some moral rules in great consideration of
human rights in virtue of humanity even if violating those rules can produce
better consequences. In this sense, deontology is opposed to consequentialism.
14 Goodman, (20009:27).
15 Ibid, (28-f).
23

For making a contrast between these two theories, Goodman gives an example:
aliens fly down to the earth by spaceships. They request the American president
to hand over a man named Joe in exchange for not incinerating some cities
including Washington, D.C. Their purpose in taking Joe is to perform fatal
experiments on him. Consequentialists may hand Joe over to the aliens.
However, deontologists would reject the proposition if there is a universal
rule for one person’s right to life even if it results in more people’s deaths. 16
While these two theories require society to establish a ‘system of moral
principles,’ 17 virtue ethics, addressed by Aristotle, emphasizes ‘practical
wisdom’ to make different decisions according to different considerations.
Virtue in this context is happiness for human beings and living well. Virtue
ethics values the virtue that a person conceives within her/himself as a form
of activity that can be kept throughout one’s entire life including the skills
habits, and attitudes. 18
Considering these characteristics of the three ethical theories, Goodman
suggests ‘that Buddhist ethics accepts some form of consequentialism or that
they advocate a version of virtue ethics.’ 19 His argument is reasonable in a
sense. First, Buddhist morality is supported by the idea of cause and effect
linked to the basic Buddhist notion of karma. In terms of virtue ethics, virtuous
acts in Buddhism are linked with wholesomeness achieved by observing
16 Goodman, (2009:36).
17 Ibid, (37).
18 Ibid, (37-9).
19 Ibid, (45).
24

morality (sīla) and virtuous qualities (guṇa). However, the idea of consequence
in Buddhist morality is often the outcome not of short-sighted goals but
considering a far distant future brought by karmic fruition. In addition, in the
Buddhist view virtuous or wholesome acts necessarily bring agreeable results.
Therefore, applying these two different Western ethical theories to Buddhism
still does not cover the understanding of the entirety of Buddhist morality.
Buddhist morality is not concerned with universal theories as in Western ethics,
but rather takes into account various options and outcomes according to
specific situations.
1.2. Morally Wholesome or Unwholesome Acts in Buddhism
What are morally good acts in Buddhism? Wholesome karma can include
even mental states, not only one’s physical acts. Moreover, in the concept of
morality, a major consideration in decision-making is how the act affects
others, or what kinds of relationships are held with others.
The attitude is based on one’s role in interpersonal relationship with their
community, not on individualistic one. This idea is called role ethics and often
discussed as the ethics of Confucianism. 20 This ethical theory is based on a
person’s role in family and society. This orientation of one’s behaviors is also
discussed as generally seen in Eastern Buddhism. However, it can be similarly
20 Fraser, et al, Ethics in Early China: An Anthology (2011:17-35).
25

applied to Buddhist traditions in early India and also Theravāda Buddhism in
Southeast Asia.
A well-known example of Buddhist attitudes toward moral decision-
making is the Buddha’s admonishment to his son Rāhula in the Amba-laṭṭhika-
rāhulovāda-sutta in respect to how to reflect on wholesome or unwholesome
acts of speech. 21 Whatever verbal, bodily, or mental action is done, the Buddha
teaches Rāhula, one should reflect upon whether it is harmful to oneself, to
others or to both. For example, the Buddha states the definition of unwholesome
acts by body:
Yad - eva tvaṃ Rāhula kāyena kammaṃ kattukāmo hosi tad - eva te
kāyakammaṃ paccavekkhitabbaṃ: Yaṃ nu kho ahaṃ idaṃ kāyena
kammaṃ kattukāmo idam - me kāyakammaṃ attabyābādhāya pi
saṃvatteyya, parabyābādhāya pi saṃvatteyya ubhayabyābādhāya pi
saṃvatteyya, akusalaṃ idaṃ kāyakammaṃ dukkhudrayaṃ
dukkhavipākan - ti. 22
Rāhula, whenever you want to do a bodily action, you should
contemplate the bodily action: I want to do this bodily action, but
would the bodily action function as harmful to myself, harmful to others,
or harmful to both? Would this bodily action be unwholesome, to cause
21 M i 414-7.
22 M i 415.
26

pain, to result in pain?
If one' act from any of bodily, verval or mental actions can hurt any of the above
three kinds of persons it should be anunwholesome action, which both causes
and results in suffering. If cannot, it is a wholesome action, which both causes
and results in happiness.
Self-killing such as suicide and euthanasia is harmful to oneself, but not to others
if one dies alone. It is yet unclear that this understanding is applied to the disapproval
of suicide and euthanasia.
Another example is similar in respect to its emphasis on relationships with
others. In the Bāhitika sutta, King Pasenadi asks Ānanda about unwholesome
behavior to be avoided. 23Their dialogue is worth considering as it
demonstrates Buddhist moral attitudes towards others according to each type
of act, bodily, verbal, or mental:
Katamo pana bhante Ānanda, kāyasamācāro opārambho samaṇehi
brāhmaṇehi viññūhīti?.
Yo kho, mahārāja, kāyasamācāro akusalo.
Katamo pana, bhante, kāyasamācāro akusalo?
Yo kho mahārāja, kāyasamācāro sāvajjo.
23 M ii 112.
27

Katamo pana, bhante, kāyasamācāro sāvajjo?
Yo kho, mahārāja, kāyasamācāro savyāpajjho.
Katamo pana bhante, kāyasamācāro savyāpajjho?
Yo kho, mahārāja, (kāyasamācāro) dukkhavipāko.
Katamo pana, bhante, kāyasamācāro dukkhavipāko?
Yo kho mahārāja, kāyasamācāro attabyābādhāya pi saṃvattati,
parabyābādhāya pi saṃvattati, ubhayabyābādhāya pi saṃvattati; tassa
akusalā dhammā abhivaḍḍhanti, kusalā dhammā parihāyanti;
—evarūpo kho, mahārāja, kāyasamācāro opārambho samaṇehi
brāhmaṇehi viññūhīti. 24
“Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily conduct that wise recluses and
brahmins censure?”
“Great king, any bodily conduct that is unwholesome.”
“Now, venerable, what kind of bodily conduct is unwholesome?” “Great
king, any bodily conduct that is blameworthy.”
“Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily conduct is
blameworthy?”
“Great king, any bodily conduct that is harmful.”
“Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily conduct is harmful?” “Great
24 M ii 114.
28

king, any bodily conduct that brings painful results.”
“Now, venerable, what kind of bodily conduct brings painful results?”
“Great king, any bodily conduct that brings affliction to oneself, or
affliction of others, or affliction to both. From this (conduct),
unwholesome dhammas increase and wholesome dhammas decrease.
Great king, such bodily conduct is censured by wise recluses and
brahmins.”
This dialogue similarly defines wholesome and unwholesome acts of speech and mind
in relation with their effects to others. These two discourses teach the importance of
interpersonal relationships concerning morality. However, suicide and euthanasia at
least do not harm others, though these acts may cause others to feel mental anguish.
1.3. Killing as an Unwholesome Act
In contrast, killing is always considered to be harmful and is explicitly
defined as an unwholesome act. Killing (pāṇāti-pātā) is one of the Five
Precepts (pañca-sīla) that form the moral foundations of general Buddhists
including the laity. All Buddhists should abstain from killing. 25 The Buddha in
the Sammādiṭṭhi-sutta of the Majjhima-nikāya gives instruction for achieving
25 D iii 235. Pañca sikkhāpadāni. Pāṇātipātā veramaṇī, adinnādānā veramaṇī, kāmesu micchācārā
veramaṇī, musā-vādā veramaṇī, surā-meraya-majja-pamādaṭṭhānā veramaṇī.
29

Right View, one of the elements of the Eightfold Noble Path, which eventually
leads a monk to the achievement of the true Dhamma. In this context, Right
View includes the discernment of the wholesome and the unwholesome, and
their roots. Killing is enumerated as one of the unwholesome acts. 26
In regard to the definition of killing, the commentary on the Sammādiṭṭhi-sutta
provides some further explanation:
“...pāṇassa atipāto pāṇātipāto, pāṇavadho pāṇaghātoti vuttaṃ hoti.
Pāṇoti cettha vohārato satto, paramatthato jīvitindriyaṃ. Tasmiṃ pana
pāṇe pāṇa-saññino jīvitindriyupacchedakaupakkamasamuṭṭhāpikā
kāyavacī-dvārānaṃ aññataradvārappavattā vadhakacetanā pāṇātipāto.
So guṇavirahitesu tiracchānagatādīsu pāṇesu khuddake pāṇe
appasāvajjo, mahāsarīre mahā-sāvajjo. Kasmā? Payogamahantatāya.
Payogasamattepi vatthu-mahantatāya. Guṇavantesu manussādīsu
appaguṇe pāṇe appasāvajjo, mahāguṇe mahāsāvajjo. Sarīraguṇānaṃ
pana samabhāve sati kilesānaṃ upakkamānañca mudutāya appasāvajjo,
tibbatāya mahāsāvajjoti veditabbo. Tassa pañca sambhārā honti pāṇo,
pāṇasaññitā, vadhakacittaṃ, upakkamo, tena maraṇanti. Cha payogā
26 M i 46-f. Yato kho, āvuso, ariyasāvako akusalañ - ca pajānāti akusalamūlañ - ca pajānāti, kusalañ - ca
pajānāti, kusalamūlañ - ca pajānāti, ettāvatā pi kho āvuso ariyasāvako sammādiṭṭhi hoti, ujugatā 'ssa
diṭṭhi, dhamme aveccappasādena samannāgato, āgato imaṃ saddhammaṃ. Katamaṃ pan' āvuso,
akusalaṃ, katamaṃ akusalamūlaṃ, katamaṃ kusalaṃ, katamaṃ kusalamūlaṃ: Pāṇātipāto kho āvuso,
akusalaṃ, adinnādānaṃ akusalaṃ, kāmesu micchācāro akusalaṃ, musāvādo akusalaṃ, pisuṇāvācā
akusalaṃ, pharusā vācā akusalaṃ, samphappalāpo akusalaṃ, abhijjhā akusalaṃ, byāpādo akusalaṃ,
micchādiṭṭhi akusalaṃ.
30

sāhatthiko, āṇattiko, nissaggiyo, thāvaro, vijjā-mayo, iddhimayoti.
Imasmiṃ panettha vitthārīyamāne atipapañco hoti, tasmā naṃ na
vitthārayāma, aññañca evarūpaṃ. Atthikehi pana samantapāsādikaṃ
vinayaṭṭhakathaṃ oloketvā gahetabbo.” 27
Killing breathing beings is regarded as pāṇātipātā, the destruction of
breathing beings. Here, a breathing being is the ‘generally-said being’
and also has a life-faculty in an ultimate sense. Thus, killing is that one
perceives it (the object) as a breathing one and has the will to kill it, as
expressed through body or speech, occasioning an attack that cuts off
its life-faculty. That action, in regard to those without good qualities
(guṇa) [such as] animals, etc., is of lesser fault when they are small,
greater fault when they have a large physical frame. Why? It is because
of the greater effort involved. When the effort is the same, (it is greater)
because the object (vatthu) (of the act) is greater. In regard to those
with good qualities [such as] humans, etc., the action is of lesser fault
when they are of few good qualities, greater fault when they are of
many good qualities. But when the size or good qualities are equal, the
fault of the action is lesser due to the (relative) mildness of the mental
defilements and of the attack, and greater due to their intensity. Five
27 M-a i 198-f.
31

factors are involved: a living being, the actual perceiving of a living
being, a thought of killing, the attack, and death as a result of it. There
are six methods: with one’s own hand, by instigation, by missiles, by
contrivances (traps or poison), by sorcery, and by psychic power.
In this statement, several issues are presented for deciding the degree of
unwholesomeness of an act of killing. First, killing a human being—i.e.,
murder—is worse than killing an animal. Killing a virtuous person is worse
than killing a less virtuous person. Killing with a lot of mental defilements
or in a cruel way is more blameful. The five factors (pañca aṅgāni) are also
defined for the completion of killing: (1) The being object (which is killed) must
breathe (pāṇa), (2) the actor who kills perceives the object as living (pāṇa-
saññitā), (3) the actor has the intention to kill the object (vadhaka-citta),
and then (4) the actor strives (upakammati or vāyamati) to kill until (5) the
object ends up dying (marati). 28
Pānātipāta is also one of the ten unwholesome acts (akusalakammapatha). Some
acts of akusalakammapatha overlap with those of the Five Precepts including
killing. 29 Commiting any of the ten akusalakammapatha are conducive to
unwholesome karmic results.
28 The commentary of Majjhima-nikāya enumerates the fourth quality as upakkama. The other two
commentaries (See Kh-a i 221, Kh-a 51) do similarly. However, in the version in Kh-a 31, the fourth
quality is described as vāyamati: “Aṅgatoti ettha ca pāṇātipātassa pañca aṅgāni bhavanti – pāṇo ca hoti,
pāṇasaññī ca, vadhakacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti, vāyamati, tena ca maratīti.”
29 Dasa akusalakammapathā. Pāṇātipāto, adinnādānaṃ, kāmesu micchācāro, musā-vādo, pisuṇā vācā,
pharusā vācā, samphappalāpo, abhijjhā, byāpādo, micchā-diṭṭh. (Diii 269). Akusalakammapathā are
found in several different texts such as D iii 291, and A v 263, Vibh 392.
32

In the Abhidhamma, each action of akusalakammapatha corresponds to its
respective unwholesome root (mūla) and consciousnes.
In this context, the volitional killing (cutting-off of the life faculty) is
intrinsically rooted in hatred (dosa). 30 In this sense, any act of killing is
necessarily accompanied by a spiteful feeling. Therefore, even killing oneself
must be conducted with a feeling of hatred, and therefore, suicide, of
necessity, constitutes an unwholesome act.
1.4. Nibbāna and Morality
Wholesome karma is not necessarily connected with the effect of one’s
actions on others. Monks’ seclusion in meditation is regarded as spiritually
higher than their social life. In respect to the relationship with others, Sompran
Promta examines selfishness and altruism in his book on Buddhist ethics. 31
He states that if an act that seems to be selfish is performed not for self-interest
but for nibbāna, it is not deemed selfish. It can also be applied to the case of Prince
Siddhattha who leaves his family and palace for the ascetic life, whereby his motive
was to attain enlightenment.
Promta cites the story of Poṭṭhila, a monk who is well-learned and skilled in
teaching others. Despite Potthila’s learning and help for others, the Buddha calls
him “Tuccha Poṭṭhila” (blank palm-leaf) as he is merely a blank notebook to record
30 Vibh 392.
31 Promta, (2008:53-62).
33

the Buddha's teaching, which suggests that he should go to the forest for meditation
practice. The point of the episode is that Poṭṭhila should not follow merely scholarly
pursuits and act as ‘a recorder to help others with learning the teachings, like a
manuscript,’ but should devote himself to higher spiritual aims. Motivated by the
Buddha’s suggestion, Poṭṭhila meditates in the forest and consequently attains
arahantship.
Promta’s argument also has relevance for the cases of monastic suicide that I will
examine in Chapter 2. Each of the three monks who commit suicide leaves the
community of monks for secluded meditation practice and finally attains liberation.
Although the consequent result is that each of the three monks kills himself with a
knife, I will argue that their cases should not be considered in the same way as suicides
committed by ordinary people who live in modern society.
Promta also refers to stories in which the Bodhisatta performs an act of self-
sacrifice. According to Promta, these acts are not to be considered as selfish but
as altruistic ones. The Bodhisatta decides on an act of self- sacrifice in order
to save or lead others to greater understanding. Because the aim of buddhahood
is to lead other beings to enlightenment, it should not be confused with general
cases of suicide in modern society. This means that a monk's training in
seclusion or suicide for a spiritual purpose that is related with enlightenment
should be considered as higher than worldly activities even though these are
beneficial to others in society. In other words, monastic training is considered
to be beyond ordinary moral values. I will show in Chapter 3 how this
34

differentiation has ethicized or developed the understanding of suicide and
euthanasia in Buddhism, which could therefore be intended to detract
Buddhists from making a careless decision to undergo self-killing.
It should be noted that general Western ethical theories have sought for a
system that functions universally, and has even attempted to apply them to
Buddhist morality. However, spiritual wholesomeness in Buddhism may
transcend ethical rules and values that work in general society. Instead of
applying the major ethical theories, I suggest that taking situational factors into
consideration could be compatible with Buddhist moral ideas. In situation
ethics, though fundamentally based on Christian theology - as Paul Tillich states
that God’s unconditional love is the ultimate law, 32 - there is seen to be
flexibility in Buddhism in regard to the relationship between an act and
morality. Joseph Fletcher, the author of Situation Ethics, states: “The
situational factors are so primary that, according to Gertrude Stein’s dying
words, “circumstances alter rules and principles” . 33 Therefore, decision-
making derives from God’s undefined love which is said not to have a universal
system, but serves simply as a “method of situational or contextual decision-
making.”” 34
However, my main purpose in this dissertation is not to examine the acts
of suicide and euthanasia described in the Pāli Tipiṭaka as the study of Buddhist
32 Tillich, Systematic Theology (1953:152).
33 Fletcher, Situation Ethics (1966:29).
34 Fletcher, Introduction by James F. Childress in Situation Ethics (1996:2).
35

ethics as I declare in my Introduction. Instead, my purpose is in seeing the
process of ethicization regarding suicide and euthanasia in the Pāli scriptures.
For this purpose, I analyse the narrative characteristics of each of the relevant
stories accordingly.
36

Chapter II
Monastic Suicides in the Suttas
Monastic suicides are mentioned repeatedly in the suttas. There have been
reliable references when modern Buddhist studies mostly in the West discuss
the moral values connected with self-killing or suicide. My aim in this chapter
is to examine these essential themes in the discourses of three monks in the Pāli
Sutta: Godhika, 35 Vakkali, 36 and Channa. 37 I also briefly compare
Buddhaghosa’s commentaries with some relevant Chinese discourses . In this
chapter, I reexamine the main themes of these discourses in order to evaluate
the suicides of these three monks in a more comprehensive and systematic
framework with reference to the other Pāli texts such as the Vinaya and
Abhidhamma.
By considering the main themes of these discourses, I demonstrate that
there is no consequentialism regarding the act in terms of pros or cons, or right
or wrong. Instead, I attempt to discuss something transcending a dualistic
ethical judgment, to be understood intrinsically in different ways in regard to
religion or art. Therefore, I interpret these discourses similarly to the way a
drama or theater performance would portray them, by paying attention to the
35 S i 120-122.
36 S ii 119-124.
37 S iv 55-60 as the Channa-sutta; M iii 263-266 as the Channovāda-sutta.
37

‘process’ of the story, i.e., how each monk lives as a human being just as we
do, how he yearns for suicide when being confronted by intense pain or
suffering, and how he finally strives for nibbāna at the end. Furthermore, the
focus of dramatic factors in each story embosses the importance of the
progressive dialogue in the stories between each of the three monks, the
Buddha, and other important characters including Māra, some deities, and two
of the Buddha’s great disciples,i.e.,Sāriputta and Mahācunda.
2.1. Killing and Arahants
Although each of them killed themselves with a knife, the Buddha declared
their liberation after their deaths. Since killing is understood as an absolutely
unwholesome act that the enlightened should never commit, suicide seems
never to be permissible as a means of one’s own salvation. Due to this
incongruent combination of suicide and liberation, therefore, these three
stories have often been studied as imporant texts for seeking ethical precepts
on suicide in Buddhism.
The Abhidhamma mentions, for example, that an arahant eradicates all
defilements and an act of self-killing by an arahant does not include any
evidence of an unwholesome-rooted consciousness. This notion is also related
to the case of Cakkhupāla, a blind monk who unintentionally steps upon insects
38

during walking meditation at night. 38 The other monks find the insects dead
the next day and report it to the Buddha. Contrary to those monks' critical
reports, the Buddha said: just as they did not see him killing, so also
Cakkhupāla did not see those living insects as he is blind, and thus it proves
that he had no intention of killing t h e m and is consequently quite innocent
because he had already achieved arahantship. In this context, an arahant’s act of
killing is differentiated from an ordinary person's act of killing, while killing generally
constitutes absolutely unwholesome karma.
However, killing oneself in the three suttas is not be identical with the
case of Cakkhupāla. As proof of this, Buddhaghosa, the author of the
commentary of the Pāli Tipiṭaka, had to reconcile the doctrinal inconsistency
between these three stories with negative views on suicide in the other texts.
By applying different philosophical concepts often seen in the Abhidhamma and
the Visuddhimagga, he explained that these three monks were not truly arahants
until they slashed their necks with a knife. Following Buddhaghosa’s
interpretation, modern Buddhist studies have paid attention to the ‘timing’—
the very moment when the monks actually became arahants—to better evaluate
the question of suicide in Buddhist ethics. These studies have focused almost
exclusively on the act of suicide itself to the detriment of other possible
readings or interpretations of these stories.
38 Yam-a 1.
39

2.2. Similarities of the Three Stories
The three stories of Godhika, Vakkali, and Channa have some common
characteristics. First, though similar to all other discourses, each account of
these discourses progresses through dialogues or reflective subvocalization
(silent self-talk) uttered by the different characters. Such a form of progression,
which studies on Buddhist ethics have hitherto been unware of, enhances the
dramatic elements of the narratives. The key difference between the discourse
and a play, however, is that we can only understand these narratives by reading
or listening to them and not as an audience would watch a play with actors
on stage in chronological order. Rather, in these discourses the chronological
relationship between the dialogues and the actions is not clear, and this
confusion seems to have lead to the added interpretations through the
commentaries. However, the three discourses devote more space to what the
characters say than to what they do. Thus I focus on how each of the stories
reflects the emotions of the characters through their dialogues.
Second, the general plot of the three stories is the same. The main character
is a monk who has a suicidal intention due to a certain problem, but the other
important character (two characters in the case of Channa) plays a role in
dissuading him from committing suicide or testing the steadfastness and his
motives. Nevertheless, in each case the monk eventually dies, and each of the
stories ends with the Buddha’s declaration that the monk who has died is
40

liberated. Yet none of the three discourses depicts how the monk dies and what
happened at the very moment of his death.
Third, in his commentary on the three discourses, Buddhaghosa attempted
to add similar interpretations to reconcile the discrepancy with the Buddhist
negative view of killing as seen in most parts of the Tipitaka. He first
emphasizes that the three monks were not arahants at the point when they
decided to die, but that they were under the illusion of being arahants at that
time because of their own conceit. Buddhaghosa also intentionally elaborates
on the very moment when each attempts suicide (according to Buddhaghosa’s
commentary, all three are described as having killed themselves with a knife
thereby cuting their own throats). Buddhaghosa says that this act was linked to
a negative emotion such as pain and fear, which an arahant never suffers from
and which proves that they all still had some mental defilements. The monk in
question is said to have instantaneously turned his attention to the observation
of his physical senses, and it consequently leads him to liberation. 39 The
process of moving from the conceit of imagined arahantship, to the realization
of this misconception, to the observation of negative emotions, and finally to
their liberation is common to all three stories.
In my examination of each of the three discourses, I first explain the
general plot described in the text of the Pāli Sutta. Second, I analyze the
interpretation in the commentary and the relevant issues arising therefrom in
39 SA i 182-5 in the case of Godhika; SA ii 313-5 of Vakkali; S-a ii 371-3 of Channa.
41

modern Buddhist ethics. Third, without any reference to ethical concerns seen
in the commentaries and in previous studies on Buddhist ethics, I demonstrate
that it is the major theme found in each of the stories itself, which values the
process of how each of the three monks actually lived.
2.3. The Plot of the Godhika-Sutta
The Godhika-sutta demonstrates the theme that a Buddhist, including a highly-
trained monk like Godhika, is always in danger of being trapped by unwholesome
feelings or by the tempter Māra, and for this reason one should never neglect Buddhist
practice until the very end of one’s life.
The story of Godhika progresses between two places in Rājagaha: place (A) the
Black Rock on the Isigili Slope where Godhika stays, and place (B) the
Squirrel Sanctuary where the Buddha stays. Mount Isigili is a place noted for
ascetic practices often associated with lethal pain, originally where the Jains
practiced self-annihilation. 40 Therefore, it is possible that Buddhists also
connected this place with the suicide of not only Godhika but also Vakkali, as
well as possibly with the murder of Moggallāna by brigands. 41
The Godhika-sutta begins with the scene of Godhika’s meditation practice
on the Isigili Slope (Place A). To be precise, the first dialogue is Godhika’s
40 M i 91ff. For an extensive discussion about how the characteristics of Jain asceticism differ from
Buddhist practice, see Bronkhorst (2006:15-22).
41 Ja v 125f; DhA iii 65.
42

silent speech to himself just like a soliloquy in a drama. His ardent effort enables
him to attain temporary cetovimutti (liberation of mind) six times, but he is
unable to sustain it. He fails to succeed at temporary cetovimutti the first time,
second time, third time... The repetition of the same failure depicts how
gradually his feelings of disappointment deepen like the waves in the ocean.
Depressed from repeated failures, the following concept occurs to him:
...yāva chaṭṭhaṃ khvāhaṃ sāmayikāya cetovimuttiyā
parihīno.Yannūnāhaṃ satthaṃ āhareyyanti. 42
[Godhika]
"Six times already, I have fallen away from temporary liberation of mind. Let
me use the knife." 43
After Godhika's depressing subvocation, Māra notes his suicidal intention as
the scene moves from place (A) to (B). In this scene, the dialogue between the
Buddha and Māra is featured. Māra plays an important role 44 in encouraging
the Buddha to go to Godhika, and in the ending of the story. Māra
surreptitiously approaches the Buddha in order to discourage Godhika from
42 S i 121.
43 Bodhi (2000:213).
44 Māra’s nature in the canon is that of a dramatic character like a villain. Guruge says the role of Māra is
the poetical imagery or allegorization of temptation: “That is precisely why almost all the accounts
of Māra’s temptations in the Pāli Canon are in verse, fully or partially, and the conversations with
Māra invariably are recorded in verse.” (Guruge 1997:4).
43

committing suicide. It may be difficult to understand why Māra intends to
prevent Godhika’s death, as Buddhism generally does not encourage killing
and Māra symbolizes death and destruction. The discourse does not mention
the reason at all which will be discussed in due course.
Māra often appears in order to vocally coax out the Buddha or his
disciples to the abandonment of the secluded trainings in different scenes in
the canon. However, in this dialogue Māra uniquely repeats outward
compliments for the Buddha, concealing his true agenda. The following
rhetorical appellatives for the Buddha enhance both a mysterious and a
comical tension, evoking the scene in which Mephistopheles tempts Faust
to make a bargain.
Mahāvīra mahāpañña iddhiyā yasasā jalaṃ,
Sabbaverabhayātīta pāde vandāmi cakkhuma.
Sāvako te mahāvīra maraṇaṃ
maraṇābhibhu,
Ākaṅkhati cetayati taṃ nisedha jutindhara.
Kathaṃ hi bhagavā tuyhaṃ sāvako sāsane rato, Appattamānaso sekho kālaṃ
kayirā janesutāti. 45
45 S i 121.
44

[Māra]
"O great hero, great in wisdom, Blazing forth with power and glory!
I worship your feet, One with Vision,
Who has overcome all enmity and fear."
"O great hero who has vanquished death,
Your disciple is longing for death.
He intends [to take his own life]:
Restrain him from this, O luminous one!"
"How, O Blessed One, can your disciple—
One delighting in the Teaching,
A trainee seeking his mind's ideal—
Take his own life, O widely famed?" 46
When these verses are uttered at place (B), the discourse relates, “At that time,
Godhika took up a knife” 47 at place (A). The Buddha immediately recognizes
Māra’s intent and dismisses him with the following verse in reply:
Evaṃ hi dhīrā kubbanti nāvakaṅkhanti jīvitaṃ samūlaṃ
46 Bodhi (2000:213).
47 Ibid, (213).
45

taṇhaṃ abbuyha Godhiko parinibbutoti. 48
[The Buddha]
“Such indeed is how the steadfast
act: They are not attached to life.
Having drawn out craving with its
root, Godhika has attained final
Nibbāna.” 49
In this context, when Māra is talking to the Buddha at place (B), the Buddha is
simultaneously aware of both Godhika’s suicide and liberation, which have
occurred at place (A). However, it is uncertain whether the Buddha predicted
these two acts beforehand.
In the last scene, the Buddha moves from place (B) with the other monks
to place (A) where Godhika has died. They see something like black smoke
going in different directions. It is Māra searching for Godhika’s
consciousness (viññāṇa) because Māra assumes it has already left his body. The
Buddha tells the other monks that Godhika’s viññāṇa cannot be found as he has
already entered nibbāna. Māra drops the lute held beneath his arm, and
disappears from the scene as he has lost all hope of capturing Godhika’s mind-
stream prior to his having achieved nibbāna.
48 S i 122.
49 Bodhi (2000: 214).
46

uddhaṃ adho ca tiriyañca disā-anudisāsvahaṃ
anvesaṃ nādhigacchāmi Godhiko so kuhiṃ gato ti.
jetvāna maccuno senaṃ anāgantvā punabbhavaṃ, s
samūlaṃ taṇham abbuyha Godhiko parinibbuto ti. 50
[Māra]
“Above, below, and across,
In the four quarters and in between, I have been searching but do not find
Where Godhika has gone.”
[The Buddha]
“Having conquered the army of Death, Not returning to renewed existence,
Having drawn out craving with its root,
Godhika has attained final Nibbāna.” 51
Although the term Death (maccu) in the first line of this verse is often
used as a synonym for Māra and Yama, 52 here it does not indicate Māra who
asks about Godhika’s rebirth. Rather, the phrase “having conquered the Army
of Death” (maccuno senā) implies the self-discipline of monks who train in
50 S i 122.
51 B.Bodhi (2000:214-f).
52 S i 156; Sn 357.
47

seclusion. 53 Paradoxically, in this context Godhika’s [loss by – what do you
mean by this?] maccuno senā should suit Māra’s true aim, the prevention of
Godhika from achieving liberation.
However, the discourse gives no reference to the connection between
death and viññāṇa. What is depicted throughout the story is Godhika’s diligent
practice, his disappointment, Māra’s temptation, the Buddha’s immovable
attitude, and finally the Buddha’s declaration that Godhika has indeed attained
nibbāna.
2.4. Ethical and Soteriological Interpretations of Godhika’s Death
Godhika’s suicide, at first glance, does indeed seem to be driven by a
negative motive such as disappointment due to his failures, which should be
counted as unwholesome karma from a Buddhist ethical viewpoint, and
therefore it should not have culminated in his achievement of nibbāna. In his
comprehensive study on suicide in Buddhism, Martin Delhey addresses these
difficulties to “determine whether Godhika had attained release when he came
to his decision and committed suicide or whether he became an arhat only afterwards
in the moment of death.” 54
However, the commentary explicitly gives a moral rationale (though
somewhat incoherent) that Buddhaghosa arrived at in order to reconcile the
53 Th 255-7 by Abhibhūta; Th 1151-54 by Moggallāna.
54 Delhey (2006:34).
48

contradiction between suicide and liberation. First, according to the
commentary, Godhika is unable to maintain a strong concentration because of
chronic disease and thus he failed at temporary cetovimutti. 55 Thus the actual
motive for suicide is not due to his disappointment but rather to his anxiety
about his subsequent rebirth because one who has not established firm jhāna
absorption has an uncertain destination after death, while one who has done so
can be reborn in the brahma world. 56 The commentary also concedes the
possibility of Godhika’s enlightenment with the reasoning that the tendency
towards self-killing by using a knife is often found in those who have no
attachment to the body and life and that such persons are able to attain
arahanthood simply by practicing mūlakammaṭṭhāna (root meditation
subject). 57 By this reasoning, Godhika is understood to have been in a special
state, which may have triggered suicide but also arahantship through a certain
meditation practice. However, death here is not absolutely predestined but remains
simply a possibility.
Second, because of this reasoning, the commentary has to further explain
the critical point of Godhika’s arahantship. Thus it uses the idea of samasīsī
55 SA i 183. Parihāyīti kasmā yāva chaṭṭhaṃ parihāyi? Sābādhattā. Therassa kira vātapittasemhavasena
anusāyiko ābādho atthi, tena samādhissa sappāye upakārakadhamme pūretuṃ na sakkoti, appitappitāya
samāpattiyā parihāyati.
56 SA i 183. yasmā parihīnajjhānassa kālaṅkaroto anibaddhā gati hoti, aparihīnajjhānassa nibaddhā gati
hoti, brahmaloke nibbattati, tasmā satthaṃ āharitukāmo ahosi.
57 The definition of mūlakammaṭṭhāna is not practically mentioned in the canon and this term can be
found in post-canonical texts including the commentaries and the Visuddhimagga. Some of the modern
Burmese Theravāda traditions say that this means to be mindful of the four basic postures of
meditation such as walking, standing, sitting, and lying down. On the other hand, Bhikkhu Bodhi
explains that ānāpāna sati (breathe in-out) meditation can function as mūlakammaṭṭhāna because
ānāpāna sati can be practiced by everyone ranging from neophytes to the enlightened. (Bodhi,
1994:74-f)
49

(the concurrence of arahantship with another act). Samasīsī is classified into
three cases, and the case of Godhika (and of Channa as well) was defined as
jīvita-samasīsī, the concurrence of arahanthood with the end of life.
58
The
commentary tries to rationalize how Godhika’s jīvita-samasīsī occurred by
explaining many terms and concepts often found in the Abhidhamma and
Visuddhimagga. 59
The interpretation of Godhika’s death as samasīsī is also controversial.
Jouhan Chou examines the concept of samasīsī in different Chinese texts as
follows: the Godhika-sutta in the Saṃyukta Āgama indicates that Godhika
succeeds in his seventh temporary cetovimutti, but fearing that he will fall from
it again, he rather wishes to die before his next failure. 60 Similarly, in the
Abhidharma-mahāvibhāṣā-śāstra, Godhika is described as a taihō-arakan (退
法阿羅漢, an arahant who is still in danger of backsliding from arahanthood
due to his past karma), so he commits suicide for fear of yet another failure. 61
58 SA i 184. The commentary classifies samasīsī into three types: iriyāpatha-samasīsī, roga-samasīsī, and
jīvita-samasīsī. Iriyāpatha-samasīsī means arahantship that is simultaneously associated with the
change of a monk’s posture, which applies to Ānanda's enlightenment. Roga-samasīsī is the
concurrence of arahanthood and recovery from a disease.
59 SA i 184. Ayaṃ iriyāpathasamasīsī nāma. Yo pana cakkhurogādīsu aññatarasmiṃ sati– ito
anuṭṭhitova arahattaṃ pāpuṇissāmīti vipassanaṃ paṭṭhapeti, athassa arahattappatti ca rogato vuṭṭhānañca
ekappahāreneva hoti. Ayaṃ rogasamasīsī nāma. Keci pana tasmiṃyeva iriyāpathe tasmiñca roge
parinibbānavasenettha samasīsitaṃ paññāpenti. Yassa pana āsavakkhayo ca jīvitakkhayo ca
ekappahāreneva hoti. Ayaṃ jīvitasamasīsī nāma. Vuttampi cetaṃ – yassa puggalassa apubbaṃ
acarimaṃ āsavapariyādānañca hoti jīvitapariyādānañca, ayaṃ vuccati puggalo samasīsīti.
60 The Saṃyukta Āgama 雑 阿 含 経 vol. 39. T2, 286a. 乃至六反猶復退轉。我今當以刀自殺。莫令第
七退轉。For this discussion, see Chou (2008:370-f).
61 The Abhidharma-mahāvibhāṣā-śāstra 大毘婆沙論 vol. 62. T27, 320b9-16. 有阿羅漢名喬底迦。是時
愛心解脱彼六反退失阿羅漢果已。第七反還得阿羅漢果時。恐復退失以刀自害。問彼爲是退法
爲是思法耶。設爾何失。二倶有過。所以者何。若是退法何縁自害若是思法何故退耶。答應作
是説。彼是退法。問若爾何故以刀自害。答彼厭退故以刀自害。若先不退而自害者乃是思法。
See also (Chou 2008:370).
50

Third, the commentary employs an abhidhammic idea about the term
viññāṇa. Godhika’s enlightenment is highly unlikely before he dies; Māra
thinks the Buddha can prevent Godhika’s death and he approaches the Buddha
so that he can prevent Godhika’s viññāṇa. 62 Viññāṇa is often synonymous with
other terms to mean a mind characterised by mano and citta. 63 The term viññāṇa
has a particular meaning when it is used as one of the five aggregates subject to
rebirth 64 or when it is linked to the rebirth process for energizing a future
entity/individual as described in the paṭicca-samuppāda. 65 In fact, the
commentary interprets the term viññāṇa in this context to mean paṭisandhi-
citta (rebirth-linking consciousness) 66 which is attributed to the abhidhammic
concept. 67 The scene in which Māra is searching for Godhika’s viññāṇa leads
us to imagine that Godhika’s liberation is still an open question to all the other
monks present at the time.
Fourth, the commentary also emphasizes the superiority of vipassanā
practice over jhāna absorption. While the original discourse focuses on
62 SA i 183. ayaṃ samaṇo satthaṃ āharitukāmo, satthāharaṇañca nāmetaṃ kāye ca jīvite
ca anapekkhassa hoti. Yo evaṃ kāye ca jīvite ca anapekkho hoti, so mūlakammaṭṭhānaṃ sammasitvā
arahattampi gahetuṃ samattho hoti, mayā pana paṭibāhitopi esa na oramissati, satthārā paṭibāhito
oramissatī ’’ ti therassa atthakāmo viya hutvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami.
63 S i 94-f. In the context of the Assutavā-sutta, viññāṇaṃ is described in parallel to mano and citta in
opposition to kāya (body).
64 D ii 63; S ii 91. The phrase viññāṇassa avakkanti is used regarding the rebirth process.
65 S ii 4; S iii 61. In the Saṃyukta Āgama, Godhika’s viññāṇa is translated as shishen (識神 ), literally
“consciousness-spirit.” Michael Radich gives various examples where shishen is used as the Sanskrit
term vijñāṇa. It particularly originates from the early Indian idea of an eternal soul or ‘spiritual core.’
For more references, see Radich 2016. 111-116.
66 SA i 185.Viññāṇaṃ samanvesatīti paṭisandhicittaṃ pariyesati. Appatiṭṭhitenāti paṭisandhiviññāṇena
appatiṭṭhitena, appatiṭṭhitakāraṇāti attho. Beluvapaṇḍuvīṇanti.
67 Abhidh-s v 37. In the chapter Paṭicca-samuppāda (Vibh.171), a rebirth-linking consciousness is
described prior to the occurrence of nāma-rūpa.
51

Godhika’s six-fold failure of cetovimutti, there is no mention of how he actually
achieved enlightenment. The commentary, however, states that Godhika's means
for attaining arahantship was vipassanā in its explanation of samsīsī. As
mentioned above, even if one's jhāna absorption is well-established, possibly
the highest rebirth is described to occur in the brahma realm. The controversy
over samatha and vipassanā, which is often witnessed even today, is found in
the same context. 68
However, the discourse in the Pāli version simply but vividly depicts how
Godhika practiced ardently to attain liberation in the face of repeated failures,
and the victory of the Buddha in having been unshakable in resisting Māra’s
seduction.
2.5. The Plot of the Vakkali-sutta
The story of Vakkali features the theme that any attachment, even when
it may derive from adoration of the Buddha, is an obstacle to enlightenment,
though this type of attachment may be different from worldly attachments. Such
attachments which are by their very nature contrary to ordinary ones can create
an overestimation regarding one's true level of understanding or practice of the
Buddhist teachings, just as one believes their attachment to be so special that
they are allowed to embody it.
68 For further extensive examination of the dominance of vipassanā over samatha, or
paññāvimutti over cetovimutti, see Gombrich (1997:96-134).
52

In this discourse, the characters move between four places in Rājagaha;
place (A), a potter’s house, where Vakkali is seriously ill; place (B), the
Squirrel Sanctuary, where the Buddha is staying, and also where he was
domiciled in the Godhika-sutta; place (C), the Isigili Slope where Vakkali commits
suicide just as Godhika did; and place (D), the Vulture Peak where the Buddha meets
two deities. Vakkali apparently is unable to rise from his sickbed at place (A) and
requests the monks who nurse him that they should go to place (B) to ask the Buddha
to visit him. The dialogue between the Buddha and Vakkali plays an important role in
depicting the contrast between the Buddha’s calm admonishment and Vakkali’s human
emotions. When Vakkali sees the Buddha coming in the distance, his body stirs on the
bed. This action depicts Vakkali’s distraught attitude regarding veneration and delight
when the Buddha comes into sight. At first, the Buddha encourages Vakkali to bearup
and live on. In response, Vakkali says that his only remorse and regret is that he will
no longer be physically strong enough to see the Buddha up close. In this section of the
Vakkali story, I will use my own translation instead of that by Bhikkhu Bodhi.
No ce kira vakkali, attā sīlato upavadatīti, atha kiñca te kukkuccaṃ ko ca
vippaṭisāroti?
Cirapaṭikāhaṃ bhante, bhagavantaṃ dassanāya upasaṃkamitukāmo.
Natthi ca me kāyasmīṃ tāvatikā balamattā, yāvatāhaṃ bhagavantaṃ
53

dassanāya upasaṃkameyyanti. 69
[The Buddha]
Vakkali, if you do not reproach yourself in regard to virtue, then what
regret and remorse are there for you?”
[Vakkali]
For a long time, Venerable Sir, I have wanted to approach the Blessed
One. I do not have much strength in my body, whereby I could see the
Blessed One close.
The grief of separation from someone you deeply love is universal even in
the modern world, especially when you are bound to expire before that person
does so. However, the difference in Vakkali’s case is that it is not a matter of
one’s ordinary separation from someone very close, but a devoted Buddhist
monk’s separation from the Buddha. While taking refuge in the Buddha is
generally required of Buddhists, the depiction of Vakkali’s emotional remorse
warns of the danger of excessive adoration as potential attachment.
In stark contrast, the Buddha coolly continues to preach the concept of
dhammakāya (the body of Dhamma) with an attitude of observation.
Alaṃ vakkali. Kiṃ te iminā pūtikāyena diṭṭhena, yo kho vakkali,
69 S iii 120.
54

Dhammaṃ passati so maṃ passati, yo maṃ passati so Dhammaṃ passati,
Dhammaṃ hi vakkali, passanto maṃ passati. Maṃ passanto Dhammaṃ
passati. 70
[The Buddha]
Stop, Vakkali! What can you see through this foul body? Whoever,
Vakkali, sees the Dhamma sees me. Whoever sees me sees the Dhamma.
One who sees the Dhamma, Vakkali, sees me. One who sees me, sees the
Dhamma.
In addition, Vakkali responds perfectly to the question concerning
Buddhism’s three characteristics of anicca, dukkha, anatta (impermanence,
suffering, non-self) describing the nature of the five aggregates. The Buddha’s
admonishment in this dialogue might be interpreted as being of the highest
importance. However, this contrasts with Vakkali’s admission of remorse for
separation (from the Buddha) that everyone has to face.
Immediately after this dialogue, Vakkali asks the other monks to carry
him upto the Isigili Slope.
etha maṃ āvuso mañcakaṃ āropetvā yena isigilipassaṃ kāḷasīlā
tenupasaṃkamatha. Kathaṃ hi nāma mādiso antaraghare kālaṃ
70 S iii 120.
55

kattabbaṃ maññeyyā. 71
[Vakkali]
“Come friends, lift me up onto the bed and let us go up to the Black Rock
at the Isigili Slope. How on earth should one like me imagine dying
indoors?”
Vakkali’s motive for moving to place (C) is described neither in the
discourse nor in the commentary. The Isigili Slope is the place where Godhika
committed suicide, too, and is a symbolic place for the training of self-
mortification as discussed in the case of Godhika. In this scene found in the
Vakkali-sutta, some new thought seem to have occurred in his mind. Vakkali may
have been ashamed of his emotional attitude toward the Buddha, which well-
trained monks should not have, which may have driven him to practice harder
even though his health condition was still unwell.
The Buddha spends the rest of the day at place (D) the Vulture Peak. That
night, two beautiful deities appear in front of the Buddha illuminating the
mountain. In this second important dialogue (though the Buddha does not reply
to them), the two deities foretell both Vakkali’s suicidal thoughts and his
liberation.
71 S iii 121.
56

Vakkali bhante, bhikkhu vimokkhāya ceteti.
...so hi nūna, bhante, suvimutto vimuccissati. 72
[One deity]
“Venerable Sir, the monk Vakkali is harboring deliverance.”
[The other deity]
“Surely, Venerable, just as the well-liberated one has been, he will be
emancipated.”
Through these two important messengers who illuminate themselves and the whole
mountain, this scene is depicted with dazzling brilliance and happiness as they celebrate
Vakkali’s impending liberation. Accordingly, the Buddha also gives an affirmative
statement that Vakkali’s death is not to be considered evil.
The next day, the Buddha calls on some monks to deliver his message to
Vakkali at place (C), in which he adds his own declaration to the deities’
announcement in regard to Vakkali’s death.
Mā bhāyi Vakkali, mā bhāyi vakkali, apāpakaṃ te maraṇaṃ bhavissati apāpikā
kālakiriyā. 73
[The Buddha]
72 S iii 121.
73 S iii 122.
57

“Do not be afraid, Vakkali. Do not be afraid, Vakkali! Your death will
not be wrong for you. Ending your life will not be wrong.”
After the monks tell him the Buddha’s message, Vakkali gives them his reply
for the Buddha in return.
Rūpaṃ aniccaṃ tāhaṃ bhante na kaṃkhāmi, yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhanti
na vicikicchāmi, yad aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ natthi
me tattha chando vā rāgo vā pemaṃ vāti na vicikicchāmi. Vedanā aniccā
tāhaṃ bhante na kaṃkhāmi... 74
[Vakkali]
“Matter is impermanent. Venerable Sir, I am certain about this. I do not doubt
that whatever is impermanent is suffering. I do not doubt that whatever is
impermanent and suffering is subject to change. I do not doubt that I have no
desire nor lust nor affection for them. Venerable Sir, I am certain that any
emotion is impermanent...”
This dialogue between the Buddha and Vakkali is conveyed through the other
monks. Vakkali repeats his full understanding of the three characteristics of the
five aggregates, which the Buddha has questioned him about on the previous
74 S iii 122-f.
58

day. This dialogue is particularly noteworthy compared to the two other stories
because the Buddha proclaims Vakkali’s death especially as not being an evil
one before he dies. Moreover, Vakkali’s answers to the Buddha’s questions
indicate that he fully realizes the Dhamma and is determined to end his life—
this is his testament or farewell to the world.
After the monks leave Vakkali, he seizes a knife at place (C), the Isigili
Slope. The monks come back to the Buddha at place (D), the Vulture Peak.
When they finish conveying Vakkali’s reply, the Buddha asks them to go to
place (C) again because he knows that Vakkali has just died there. They see
black smoke, just as in the Godhika-sutta, and again it is Māra’s doing. The
Buddha and Māra repeat the same question and answer; the question is to ask
where Vakkali’s viññāṇa may be found and the answer amounts to a declaration
of his parinibbāna.
2.6. Post-canonical Interpretations of the Vakkali-sutta
Given the above plot, Vakkali’s reply to the Buddha proves his liberation,
and his death seems to be embraced by the Buddha. Nevertheless, the
commentary emphasizes that he was not enlightened before his death, but
instead attained liberation through the practice of vipassanā. According to the
commentary, the message of the two deities means that Vakkali would attain
arahantship through the practice of vipassanā. Vakkali was so conceited
59

(probably due to of his level of understanding of the Buddhist teachings) that
he thought his suicide should be permissible. However, Vakkali realized his
nature was that of a worldly person when he felt a sharp pain at the moment of
slitting his throat with the knife. He immediately turned to the observation of
physical sensations, attained arahantship, and died on the spot. 75
Delhey suggests that the orientation to time at the moment of Vakkali’s realization
generated a different interpretation of his death in the Chinese version. The Ekottara
Āgama contains the statement that just after his knife touched his throat Godhika
regretted that his suicide would result in nothing wholesome but merely in the
unwholesome, and thus he forthrightly turned to the observation of the five
aggregates until he attained parinibbāna by cetovimutti. 76
However, when reading the Pāli discourse without reference to any post-
canonical interpretation, the story of Vakkali depicts how he lived and died,
simply but eloquently. The theme surrounds the process of his life, in which
even a well-trained monk has difficulties renouncing his attachment to the
Buddha, but he reflects upon this weakness and returns to practice ardently
until he finally achieves liberation celebrated by the Buddha and the deities.
2.7. The Plot of the Channa-sutta as Depicted in the Pāli Canon
75 SA ii 315.
76 The Ekottara Āgama 増一阿含経. T2 642c11-20. 是時婆迦梨以刀自刺而作是念。釋迦文佛弟子之
中。所作非法。得惡利不得善利。於如來法中。不得受證而取命終中。不得受證而取命終。是
時尊者婆迦梨便思惟是五盛陰是謂此色。是謂色習。是謂色滅盡。是謂痛想行識。是謂痛想行
識集是謂痛想行識滅盡。彼於此五盛陰熟思惟之。諸有生法皆是死法。知此已便於有漏心得解
脱。爾時尊者婆迦梨於無餘涅槃界而般涅槃。
60

The Channa-sutta is the discourse most studied as pertaining to suicide.
The reason is that this discourse has abundant inconsistencies in each dialogue.
In fact, these inconsistencies concern Channa’s entire life—and, ultimately,
our lives. In addition, the Buddha’s attitude at the end of the account shows
something transcendent beyond the dualistic views that always focus on the
result of ‘suicide.’
Before examining these issues, I will describe the general plot of this
discourse as I have done in the above two discourses. The Buddha stays at place
(A), the Squirrel Sanctuary, just as in the two other discourses. Channa is
dwelling at place (B), the Vulture Peak. Just as Vakkali suffers from terminal
disease, Channa is also confined to bed. In the first dialogue, when Sāriputta
and Mahācunda visit him in bed to inquire about his health at place (B), Channa
reveals his disease is becoming increasingly worse by using various analogies
that suggest the seriousness of his condition. When Channa declares his suicidal
intentions, Sāriputta and Mahācunda propose that they will look after him as
much as they can. 77
Na me, āvuso, khamanīyaṃ, na yāpanīyaṃ, bāḷhā me dukkhā vedanā
abhikkamanti no paṭikkamanti, abhikkamosānaṃ paññāyati no paṭikkamo.
Satthaṃ, āvuso sāriputta, āharissāmi, nāvakaṅkhāmi jīvitanti.
77 Bodhi, (2000:1165).
61

Mā āyasmā Canno satthaṃ āharesi āpetāyasmā Channo yāpentaṃ
mayaṃ āyasmantaṃ Channaṃ icchāma. Sace āyasmato channassa natthi
sappāyāni bhojanāni ahaṃ āyasmato Channassa sappāyāni bhojanāni
pariyesissāmi... yāpetāyasmā Channo yāpentaṃ mayam āyasmantaṃ
Channaṃ icchāmā. 78
[Channa]
"I am not bearing up, I am not getting better. Strong painful feelings are
increasing in me, not subsiding, and their increase, not their subsiding,
is to be discerned. I will use a knife, friend Sariputta, I have no desire
to live."
[Sāriputta]
"Let the Venerable Channa not take up the knife. Let the Venerable Channa live
on. We want the Venerable Channa to live on. If the Venerable Channa has no
suitable food, I will go to search for suitable food for him... Let the Venerable
Channa live on. We want the Venerable Channa to live on."
Since involvement in murder is absolutely prohibited by the Vinaya rules, their attempt
to nurse the sick monk is appropriate as members of the saṅgha order. 79
78 S iv 57.
79 As Keown notes, monks’ visiting the sick is recounted in the canon. In addition to the suttas of the
three monks, there are some more examples in S v 344 (Dīghāvu); S iii 124 (Assajji); M iii 258, S.v 380
(Anāthapiṅḍika). For further variations, see Keown (1996:14). Moreover, killing the sick out of
compassion is included in the third pārājika offence (V iii 79).
62

However, Channa refuses their offer. He claims that he is qualified to end his
life as his death will be considered anupavajja (blameless).
Api ca me, āvuso, satthā pariciṇṇo dīgharattaṃ manāpeneva, no
amanāpena. etaṃhi, āvuso sāvakassa patirūpaṃ. Yaṃ satthāraṃ
paricareyya manāpeneva no amanāpena tam anupavajjaṃ Channo
bhikkhu satthaṃ āharissatīti evam etaṃ āvuso Sāriputta dhārehī ti. 80
[Channa]
“Moreover, friend, for a long time I have practiced only what the Teacher
would approve, but not disapprove. It is exactly proper for a disciple to
practice what the Teacher would approve, but not disapprove. You
should think, friend Sāriputta: because it is blameless, the bhikkhu
Channa, will take up a knife.”
In the second dialogue, Sāriputta together with Mahācunda begins to test
Channa by asking if he understands the three characteristics associated with
the six consciousnesses and their respective objects. These two elderly monks
must suspect that Channa believes himself to be an arahant who has nothing to
do anymore with life because he has performed all the necessary practices for
the Buddha. Channa answers their questions precisely, which implies that he
80 S iv 57.
63

correctly understands those Buddhist concepts. This is why Mahācunda gives
an important exhortation like a ‘certificate of passing the test’ at the end of
their conversation.
Tasmāti ha āvuso Channa idam pi tassa Bhagavato sāsanam niccakappaṃ
sādhukam manasi kātabbaṃ. Nissitassa calitam anissitassa calitaṃ natthi. calite
asati passaddhi hoti. passaddhiyā sati nati na hoti. natiyā asati āgatigati na hoti.
āgatigatiyā asati cutūpapāto na hoti. cutūpapāte asati nevidha na huraṃ na
ubhayam antarena esevanto dukkhassāti. 81
[Mahācunda]
Therefore, friend Channa, this is the teaching of the Blessed One, which
is perpetually to be well-considered. One who has attachments is
agitated. One who has no attachments is not agitated. When one is not
agitated, there is tranquility. When there is tranquility, there is no
inclination. When there is no inclination, there is no coming and going.
When there is no coming and going, there is no death and birth. When
there is no death and birth, there is neither this world nor beyond nor in
between the two. This in itself is the end of suffering.
If we take this exhortation literally, Channa’s liberation from the cycle of
81 S iv 59.
64

rebirth appears to have been ascertained by these two major Buddhist disciples
and therefore, Channa’s death ensues.
The last and most important dialogue centers on the explanation of the
word anupavajja that Channa has mentioned before his death, making an
interesting contrast between Sāriputta’s confusion and the Buddha’s dignified
correction. Sāriputta approaches the Buddha at place (A) in order to ask where
Channa has been reborn. Instead of answering Sāriputta’s question, the Buddha
declares Channa’s liberation by reminding Sāriputta of the word anupavajja
(blameless) that Channa mentioned before his death.
Nanu te, Sāriputta Channena bhikkhunā sammukhā yeva anupavajjatā
byākatāti.
Atthi, bhante, Pubbavijjanaṃ nāma Vajjigāmo. tatthāyasmato
Channassa mittakulāni suhajjakulāni upavajjakulānīti.82
[The Buddha]
Sāriputta, didn't the bhikkhu Channa declare his blamelessness
(anupavajja) right in front of you?
[Sāriputta]
82 S iv 59.
65

Venerable Sir, there is a Vajjan village named Pubbavijjan. There the
Venerable Channa had families that he was friendly with, was close
with, and frequently visited (upavajja-kulāni).
In the dialogue the jeu de mots leads the commentary to the interpretation
that Sāriputta had confused the word anupavajja with upavajja(-kulāni). I
will discuss these terms below. Interestingly, the term upavajja is mostly used
as ‘blameworthy’ in the Pāli canon. As Keown suggests, the pronunciation
of this term as Sāriputta misheard, is similar to that of uppajjana
(rebirth). 83 Immediately Sāriputta associates the misheard word with the
memory that Channa associated with lay families in his lifetime, even though
well-trained monks should abstain from such a habit. For this reason, Sāriputta
thinks Channa should not be liberated but instead should be reborn.
Nevertheless, the Buddha corrects Sāriputta’s mistake in relation to the
original meaning of upavajja, saying he is not saupavajja, which is the
compound of sa-upavajja, ‘being blameworthy.’ 84
na kho panāhaṃ Sāriputta, ettāvatā Sa-upavajjo ti vadāmi. Yo kho
Sāriputta, tañca kāyaṃ nikkhipati aññañca kāyaṃ upādiyati, tam ahaṃ
83 Keown (1996:22-f).
84 In PTS Pāli-English Dictionary, the prefix sa has the senses of “with,” “possessed of, having” and
“same as.” (1952:114).
66

Sa-upavajjo ti vadāmi, taṃ Channassa bhikkhuno natthi. Anupavajjaṃ
Channena bhikkhunā satthaṃ āharitanti evam etaṃ Sāriputta
dhārehīti. 85
[The Buddha]
No, Sāriputta, I am not saying to that extent that he is saupavajja.
Sariputta, when one discards this body and takes up another body, I say
one is blameworthy. This is not the case of the bhikkhu Channa. Because
it is blamess, the knife was taken by the bhikkhu Channa. Sariputta, you
should remember in this way.
The story of this discourse has some incoherent parts, which have raised
controversies regarding the authenticity of the discourse. For instance,
Woodward doubts the later reconstruction of the discourse in regard to the
suicide of Channa. 86 The critical point of Channa’s liberation is not certain.
Mahācunda’s statement seems to praise Channa’s answers, emphasizing ‘this
is the teaching of the Buddha’ (bhagavato sāsana). His statement also ends with
the same passage that depicts the state of nibbāna in Udāna. 87 Thus the
Buddha’s affirmation regarding anupavajja seems to have certified Channa’s
arahanthood. Otherwise, those two statements might be merely predictions.
86 He suggests that the redactors of the canon make the Buddha “sanction the unworthy act of the poor
little sufferer” (1956:xi).
87 Ud 81.
67

Channa might have become an arahant before or while he was stabbing his neck,
or even after he died.
2.8. The Controversies over the Channa-sutta in Buddhist Ethics
The commentary employs the concept of samasīsī in order to interpret
Channa’s death similarly to that of Godhika’s; that is, Buddhaghosa posits that
Channa was not an arahant before his death, but that rather his arahanthood
occurred at the moment of death. 88
However, this reasoning is not fully convincing, and other interpretations have
been put forth by modern scholars. In his comparative study on Channa’s suicide,
Ryuken Nawa claims that the Saṃyukta Āgama recognizes Channa’s arahanthood
before his death. In this context, the Buddha tells Sāriputta that even a monk
who is fully enlightened with the right wisdom may have been close to lay
families as supporters, and he (Channa) should not be blameworthy if he had
such families supporting him. 89
Probably the most well known study on Channa’s suicide is by Damien
Keown. His argument centers on the two concepts of 'exoneration' and
'condonation' established in Western ethics and law: “Exoneration and
88 SA.ii.372-f. So attano puthujjanabhāvaṃ ñatvā, saṃviggacitto vipassanaṃ paṭṭhapetvā, saṅkhāre
pariggaṇhanto arahattaṃ patvā, samasīsī hutvā parinibbuto. Sammukhāyeva anupavajjatā byākatāti
kiñcāpi idaṃ therassa puthujjanakāle byākaraṇaṃ hoti; etena pana byākaraṇena anantarāyamassa
parinibbānaṃ ahosi. Tasmā bhagavā tadeva byākaraṇaṃ gahetvā kathesi.
89 See Nawa, (2011:75-f). His reference is found in the Saṃyukta Āgama 雑阿含経 T vol.2 p.348a23-25.
佛告舍利弗。如是舍利弗。正智正善解脱善男子。有供養家親厚家善言語家。舍利弗。我不説
彼有大過。若有捨此身餘身相續者。
68

condonation are two different things. Exoneration is the removal of a burden
(onus) of guilt, while condonation is the approval of what is done.” 90 In other
words, exoneration is legally free from punishment, while condonation
depends on extenuating conditions and sympathy by others. Keown applies the
concept of exoneration to the case of Channa. According to Keown's argument,
the commentary unusually interpreted the meaning of anupavajja, which
contains the compound word an-upavajja and generally means ‘blameless’, to
the compound an-uppajja (not reborn), which is an antonym of sa-upavajja (to
be reborn). 91 The commentary also attempts to “avoid the dilemmas of an Arhat
breaking the precepts.” 92 If Channa’s suicide is ‘blameless’ or if he decided
not to be reborn, he could be liberated from the offence, which means he
could be ‘exonerated.’ Nevertheless, Keown concludes his action should not
be ‘condoned’ as the Pāli sources consistently condemn the intentional killing
of life. 93
However, apart from these ethical views and commentarial interpretations,
the discourse itself simply narrates Channa’s life story describing the process
of how even a monk can suffer from disease, tries to understand the teachings,
accepts the onset of his terminal illness in agony, and receives the declaration
90 Keown, (1996:18). In addition, I received this personal explanation about these two terms when I
met Keown in Bangkok, 2013. He also gave this example: there is a banker whose child has been
kidnapped, and the kidnappers demand a ransom; thus the banker embezzles the money from the bank
where he works. In this case, Keown suggested that the banker would be exonerated due to the
extenuating threat, but his wrong act of embezzlement should not be condoned.
91 SA ii 371. Anupavajjanti appavattikaṃ appaṭisandhikaṃ.
92 Keown (1996:28-f).
93 Ibid, (28-31).
69

of enlightenment from the Buddha after his death. Channa’s story eloquently
expresses the essential themes of life, which should be of concern to us
regardless of time and nationality.
Kiyoyuki Koike has closely examined all of the cases of these three monks.
He argues that “the grounds for parinibbāna are absolutely attributed to the
perfection of practice, not to the means of committing suicide.” 94 He suggests
that their suicidal intentions are psychologically natural for any human being
who is terminally ill and in pain. More importantly, Koike notes that it is
because of compassion that the Buddha declared their parinibbāna after their
deaths, which is a declaration for the dead to become arahants retrospectively:
they diligently continued to practice even in agony, thereupon reaching
liberation, and subsequently died. 95 Koike also points out that the gap in the
dialogue between Sāriputta and the Buddha in the Channa-sutta, is that
between morality (vinaya and sīla as represented by the saṅgha) and
religion (transcendence of right and wrong by liberation). 96
When an audience reads or watches the story of Romeo and Juliette, do
they focus on only the young couple’s suicides? Do they think that the theme
of the story relies only on the act of suicide? The ending of the story, resulting
in their suicides, is rather the medium for expressing how strong their love
is, which is the theme. Thus, Romeo and Juliette is not merely a suicide story.
94 Koike (2007：38).
95 Ibid, (38-f).
96 Ibid, (24; 38-f).
70

Similarly, in the stories of these three monks analyzed in regard to the
ethical views of suicide in Buddhism, the themes do not only revolve around
the resultant suicides of the monks. Commentaries both ancient and modern
have tried to resolve the discrepancy between the stories’ ideas of an arahant’s
suicide and other parts of the Tipiṭaka that condemn all killing, including self-
killing. This struggle to ‘time’ the moment of liberation has been the focus
even in present-day Buddhist ethics. Thus these narratives have attracted the
interest of the commentaries and modern research in terms of the ethicization
of the relationship between suicide and arahantship. The notion of the
impossibility of suicide by arahants resulted in the rationalization of the act
by emphasizing the idea of karma in later texts such as the Milindapañha,
which states that arahants long for neither life nor death and just await their
time of death because they never ‘destroy what is unripe.’ 97
Each of the three discourses depicts a drama demonstrating the importance
of one’s progression in life—the process whereby a person, even a monk,
suffers and wishes to die. But in these examples a person finds his salvation
through the strenuous effort of training as a Buddhist monastic who reaches
final liberation. Therefore, these stories are filled with multiple important
messages and meanings of life, and do not just embody a limited focus on
suicide.
97 Mil 44-f. Horner. trans. p.61. For further discussion of the ethicization of karma in Milindapañhā, see
Main, (2008) and Mcdermott, (1977)
71

Chapter III
Self-sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the Jataka Narratives
In this chapter, I investigate the voluntary death by the Bodhisatta, the
‘Buddha-to-be,’ who trains himself to aim for Buddhahood. The Buddha’s
previous lives are narrated in the 547 jātaka narratives, in which we see the
Bodhisatta incarnated in various existences including a monastic, a king, and an
animal. The jātaka narratives are widely popular in Theravāda Buddhist
countries because of the messages that the Bodhisatta’s actions impart, forming
the foundation of moral values for Buddhists such as extraordinary generosity,
compassion, and patience.
3.1. Dāna Pāramī
The jātaka narratives are said to illustrate how the Bodhisatta developed
the qualities of the ten perfections (dasa pāramiyo) in his past existences until
he was born as Gotama who became the Buddha. The classification of ten
perfections is usually mentioned more in later literature than in the Pāli
Tipiṭaka. According to the Visuddhimagga, all of the ten perfections can be
obtained through the development of the four divine abidings (brahma vihāra)
such as loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic-joy and equanimity.
72

The Visuddhimagga also states: The Great Beings (mahā-sattā;
synonymous with a Bodhisatta) produce a mind-set by which they attend to
beings’ welfare and beings’ suffering, harbout the wish that beings may
achieve various successes and that these successes will be of long duration,
and establish an impartial attitude toward them.98Following this description,
the Visuddhimagga enumerates the ten perfections as: (1) making offerings
(dāna) with pleasure and indiscrimination, (2) virtue (sīla) to avoid being
harmful, (3) renunciation (nekkhamma) for perfecting the virtue, (4) wisdom
(paññā) to discern what is good or bad without confusion, (5) energy (vīriya)
that perpetually occurs by considering beings’ welfare and happiness, (6)
patience (khanti) with beings’ many kinds of faults, (7) truth (sacca in
general, but na visaṃvādeti in the Visuddhimagga) whereby one should not
break one’s word, (8) decision (adhiṭṭhāna) that is unshakable for the purpose
of beings’ welfare and happiness, (9) loving-kindness (mettā) that is
unshakable, (10) equanimity (upekkhā) that they expect nothing in return. 99
In consideration of the dasa pāramī, it is notable that in the jātaka
narratives the dāna performed by the Bodhisatta ranges from giving food or
98 Vism 124.Evaṃ subhaparamādivasena etāsaṃ ānubhāvaṃ viditvā puna sabbāpetā dānādīnaṃ
sabbakalyāṇadhammānaṃ paripūrikāti veditabbā. Sattesu hi hitajjhāsayatāya sattānaṃ
dukkhāsahanatāya, pattasampattivisesānaṃ ciraṭṭhitikāmatāya, sabbasattesu ca pakkhapātābhāvena
samappavattacittā mahāsattā.
99 Vism 124. ...vibhāgaṃ akatvā sabbasattānaṃ sukhanidānaṃ dānaṃ denti. Tesaṃ upaghātaṃ
parivajjayantā sīlaṃ samādiyanti. Sīlaparipūraṇatthaṃ nekkhammaṃ bhajanti. Sattānaṃ hitāhitesu
asammohatthāya paññaṃ pariyodapenti. Sattānaṃ hitasukhatthāya niccaṃ vīriyamārabhanti.
Uttamavīriyavasena vīrabhāvaṃ pattāpi ca sattānaṃ nānappakārakaṃ aparādhaṃ khamanti. ‘‘Idaṃ vo
dassāma karissāmā’’ ti kataṃ paṭiññaṃ na visaṃvādenti. Tesaṃ hitasukhāya avicalādhiṭṭhānā honti.
Tesu avicalāya mettāya pubbakārino honti. Upekkhāya paccupakāraṃ nāsīsanti’.
73

money to offering his bodily parts and his life itself. According to the
commentary, the perfection of offering (dāna pāramī) is divided into three
stages: (1) offering of external goods (bāhira-bhaṇḍa-pariccāga), (2)
offering of one’s own bodily parts (aṅga-pariccāgo), and (3) offering of one’s
own life (jīvita-pariccāgo). Offerings of the first type are the most general and
the easiest; thus offerings of such things as money and food are not considered
to be difficult to do. The second type of offerings of one’s bodily parts, may be
considered, for example, as the transplantation of one person’s organs to others
in modern terms. The third type of offering is named as the highest kind
(paramattha-pārami), which the Bodhisatta seems to have fulfilled. 100 This
ranking represents an affirmation of the orientation of Buddhist morality as
the Bodhisattva’s offerings were considered acts of virtuous sacrifice.
In regard to dāna pārami, it is important to consider the meaning of the
acts as wholesome karma, which is subject to its own result in future as
described in the Cūḷakammavibhaṅga-sutta as I cited in Chapter I. Materialist
views that do not admit any relation between cause and effect in regard to one’s
act are depicted as dangerous, which Buddhism should never agree with. 101
The problem is, however, to what extent should Buddhists in general
follow the ideals of the dāna pāramī? Since the Bodhisatta is believed to have
100 Bv-a 59. Tattha dānapāramiyaṃ tāva bāhirabhaṇḍapariccāgo pāramī nāma, aṅgapariccāgo upapāramī
nāma, jīvitapariccāgo paramatthapāramī nāmāti. Evaṃ dasa pāramiyo dasa upapāramiyo dasa
paramatthapāramiyoti samattiṃsa pāramiyo honti. Tattha Bodhisattassa dānapāramitāya
pūritattabhāvānaṃ parimāṇaṃ nāma natthi. Ekantena panassa sasapaṇḍitajātake.
101 Ja-544. Ja-a. Similarly, the materialist views that ignore the karmic fruit of one’s acts are compared
by Appleton. See Appleton (2014:4-7).
74

completed the ten pāramī, these are at a minimum the prerequisites limited
to those who aspire for buddhahood. When one reads or listens to the acts of
self-sacrifice by the Bodhisatta, what should one learn or what role do the
acts play for Buddhists?
3.2. Motives of the Bodhisatta’s Self-sacrifice
The acts of dāna of the first level are generally followed by Buddhist
monks and laity. The question remains, is the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice to be
regarded as a special act that all Buddhists should not follow if they have no
determination to achieve Buddhahood?
First, we should consider whether all of the Bodhisatta’s acts of self-
sacrifice were performed as acts of dāna-pārami. The stories of the
Bodhisatta’s self-immolation are found in the Khuddaka-nikāya and the
Cariyāpiṭaka. I have chiefly relied on the useful study by Sheravanichkul for
this analysis. 102 Table 1 displays the various story elements of the seven
jātakas that Sheravanichkul references, as well as one additional jātaka
(number 8) that I introduce as an example of the act of giving an internal gift.
102 Sheravanichkul, (2008:769–787).
75

Table 1. Stories in which the Bodhisatta practices self-sacrifice
in the Cariyāpiṭaka and Khuddaka Nikāya
Who in
Group Stories Story No. Bodhisatta as Purpose Offering Recipient disguise
Nigrodhamiga- sacrifice for
1 J-a.12 a deer king ̶
jātaka pregnant doe Life king
[1st group] 2 Cūḷanandiya-jātaka J-a.222 a former sacrifice for his ̶
monkey king mother life hunter
General
dāna- pāramī sacrifice for an
3 Sasapaṇḍita-jātaka J-a.316 a hare Sakka
ascetic life ascetic
sacrifice for his
4 Jayaddisa-jātaka J-a.513 a prince ̶
father life ogre
5 Sivi-jātaka J-a 499 a king omniscience eyes beggar Sakka
[2nd group ]
6 Chaddanta-jātaka J-a.514 an elephant omniscience tusks hunter ̶
Sabbaññutā-
ñāṇa 7
S
ja
ī
j
l
ā
a
t
v
a
a
k
n
a
ā garā-
J-a.72 an elephant omniscience tusks hunter ̶
wife,
8 Vessantara-jātaka J-a.547 a king omniscience beggar ̶
children
Source: Based on the classification of self-sacrifice stories in Jataka by Arthid Sheravanichkul
(2008).
The simple plot of each story is as below: 103
(1) Nigrodhamiga-jātaka: the deer king volunteers to substitute his life for
a pregnant doe of his herd.
(2) Cūḷanandiya-jātaka: a monkey asks a pitiless hunter to shoot him to
spare his mother’s life.
(3) Sasapaṇḍita-jātaka: a hare throws himself into a fire to support an
ascetic's training in the holy life.
(4) Jayaddisa-jātaka: a prince fearlessly goes into a forest to sacrifice
himself, having made a promise to a cruel ogre to offer his own life in
place of his parents.
103 The list from my master’s thesis “Ambiguity of Karmic Fate and Voluntary Death: Suicide Cases in
Theravāda Buddhism and Japanese Society.” Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University, (2014:27-f).
76

(5) Sivi-jātaka: King Sivi gouges out both his eyes to give to a blind beggar,
proclaiming that the act will bring the attainment of omniscience
(sabbaññuta-ñāṇa). 104
(6) Chaddanta-jātaka: the elephant Chaddanta agrees to a demand made
by an evil queen and then offers his tusks to a hunter sent by her. 105
(7) Sīlavanāgarāja-jātaka: an elephant gives a hunter his tusks with the
declaration of the attainment of sabbaññuta-ñāṇa. 106
(8) Vessantara-jātaka: the king offers his wife, children, and wealth to a
brahmin, articulating how possessing sabbaññuta-ñāṇa is supreme. 107
As shown in Table 1, the Bodhisatta’s motives in the above eight jātaka
stories can be grouped into two types: dāna-pāramī and sabbaññutāñāṇa. In
the first four stories, (1) the Nigrodhamiga-jātaka, (2) the Cūḷanandiya- jātaka,
(3) the Sasapaṇḍita-jātaka, and (4) the Jayaddisa-jātaka, no spiritually higher
motive is mentioned as the reason for the Bodhisatta’s self- sacrifice; the reason
104 K-a iv 408; J-a iv 407. mama ito akkhito sataguṇena sahassaguṇena satasahassaguṇena
sabbaññutaññāṇakkhim eva piyaṃ, tassa me idaṃ paccayo hotū." 'ti vatvā brāhmaṇassa adāsi. So taṃ
ukkhipitvā attano akkhimhi ṭhapesi.
105 J-a v 52-f; K-a v 53. Mahāsatto soṇḍāya kakacaṃ gahetvā aparāparaṃ cāresi, dantā kaḷīrā viya
chijjiṃsu. Atha naṃ te āharāpetvā gaṇhitvā ,,samma luddaputta ahaṃ ime dante tuyhaṃ dadamāno n'
eva ,,mayhaṃ appiyā" ti dammi, na Sakkatta-Māratta-Brahmādiṃ patthento, imehi pana me dantehi
satasahassaguṇena sabbaññutaññāṇadantā va piyatarā, sabbaññutaññāṇappaṭivedhāya me idaṃ puññaṃ
paccayo hotū.
106 J-a i 321; K-a i 322. “So tassa dvepi aggadante chindi. Bodhisatto te dante soṇḍāya ,,bho purisa,
nāhaṃ ‘ete dantā mayhaṃ appiyā amanāpā’ ti dammi, ime hi pana me dantehi sahassaguṇena
satasahassaguṇena sabbadhammapaṭivedhanasamatthā sabbaññutaññāṇadantā va piyatarā, tassa me
idaṃ dantadānaṃ sabbaññutaññāṇaṃ paṭivijjhanatthāya hotū" 'ti sabbaññutaññāṇassa āvapanaṃ katvā
dantayugalaṃ adāsi.
107 J-a vi 547. In offering his child, for example, J-a ver 2146; ...evaṃ kumāre agghāpetvā samassāsetvā
assamapadaṃ netvā kamaṇḍalunā udakaṃ gahetvā ,,ehi vata bho brāhmaṇā" 'ti sabbaññutaññāṇassa
patthanaṃ katvā udakaṃ pātetvā ,,puttena me sataguṇena sahassaguṇena satasahassaguṇena
sabbaññutaññāṇam eva piyataran" ti pathaviṃ unnādento brāhmaṇassa piyaputtadānaṃ adāsi.
77

is simply to save others.
As examples of this first group in which the motivation for the offering
is simply to save someone’s life, let us examine two stories. In the first story,
(1) Nigrodhamiga-jātaka, the Bodhisatta is a deer king. Because of his
beautiful golden color, the king of Benares gives him an exemption from
being hunted. At the same time, the deer in the group agree to choose their
turns by lot to go to the forest as victims so they can avoid being hunted at
random. One day, the lot falls on a pregnant doe. When requested by the doe,
the deer king (the Bodhisatta) decides to take her turn in order to save her and
her fawn’s lives. When the king’s cook goes to the forest to catch the day’s
victim, he finds the deer king lying down at the place of execution. The king of
Benares hears of this and approaches the Bodhisatta thus:
"...samma migarāja, nanu mayā tuyhaṃ abhayaṃ dinnaṃ, kasmā tvaṃ
idha nipanno "ti. Mahārāja, gabbhinī migī āgantvā 'mama vāraṃ aññassa
pāpehīti āha, na sakkā kho pana mayā ekassa maraṇadukkhaṃ aññassa
upari nikkhipituṃ, sv-āhaṃ attano jīvitaṃ tassā datvā tassā santakaṃ
maraṇaṃ gahetvā idha nipanno, mā aññaṃ kiñci āsaṅkittha, mahārājāt" 'ti.108
[The king of Benares]
“My dear, the king of deer, didn’t I guarantee your safety? Why are
you lying here?” he said.
108 J-a i 151.
78

[The Bodhisatta]
“Sire, a pregnant doe came (to me) saying, “please give my turn to
another.” However, I cannot pass one’s agony of death to another. So
I gave my life to her and took her death on myself, and I am lying here.
Do not suspect there is anything else (as a reason), your majesty.”
In this context, the Bodhisatta explains the reason for his sacrifice simply as
an attempt to save the pregnant doe. While he does not refer to anything about
pāramī, it is understandable to that his sacrifice implies dānā-pāramī.
In (2) the Cūḷanandiya-jātaka, the Bodhisatta is a monkey. He is killed
together with his brother (Ānanda) by a Brahmin hunter (Devadatta) in order
to save their mother (Gotamī) in the forest. Considering that the Buddha begins
this story explaining that Devadatta has been harsh (kakkhaḷo), violent
(pharuso), and merciless (nikkāruṇiko) before, the theme of this story is to
emphasise the qualities of the Buddha as opposed to the adjectives used for
Devadatta. When the Bodhisatta saw the hunter aiming at his mother, he said to
his brother :
Taṃ disvā Bodhisatto ,,tāta Cūḷanandiya, esa me puriso mātaraṃ
vijjhitukāmo, aham assā jīvitadānaṃ dassāmi, tvaṃ mam' accayena
mātaraṃ paṭijaggeyyāsī "ti vatvā sākhantarā nikkhamitvā ,,bho purisa, mā
79

me mātaraṃ vijjhi, esā andhā jarādubbalā, aham assā jīvitadānaṃ demi,
tvaṃ etaṃ amāretvā maṃ mārehīti" tassa paṭiññaṃ gahetvā sarassa
āsannaṭṭhāne nisīdi. So nikkaruṇo Bodhisattaṃ vijjhitvā pātetvā māta-
ram pi'ssa vijjhituṃ puna dhanuṃ sannahi. 109
Having seen this, the Bodhisatta said, “my dear, little Nandiya, this man wants
to shoot my mother. I will give the offering of my life for her sake. After I die,
you please take care of our mother.” Having said this, he came out, grabbing
a crossed branch, saying, ‘O man, don’t shoot my mother! This (/she)
is blind, and infirm with old age. I will give the offering of my life for
her sake of. Don’t kill this (/her), but kill me!” Having gained his (the hunter’s)
agreement, (the Bodhisatta) sat down within range of bowshot. He (the hunter),
who is merciless, shot and killed (the Bodhisatta), and also bent a bow to shoot
the mother.
As in the Nigrodhamiga-jātaka, the Bodhisatta in the Cūḷanandiya-jātaka also
offers his life just to save his mother. He does not utter his particular purpose
prior to his sacrifice. Yet this case enables us to identify his act as one of
dāna-pāramī.
In regard to these stories about the Bodhisatta’s unuttered motive for self-
sacrifice, Sheravanichkul states that not every jātaka story necessarily gives
109 J-a ii 201.
80

allegorical evidence to show the practice of pārami: “This shows the fact that
it is not necessary that every jātaka is to exemplify the perfections. Still, if
we follow the “conventional” theory regarding jātaka as the stories of the
Buddha’s previous lives in which he fulfils the ten perfections, then it can be assumed
that the self-sacrifice in these four stories is also a part of the fulfilment of the
perfection of generosity.” 110
The second group contains the other four stories of (5) the Sivi-jātaka, (6)
Chaddanta-jātaka, (7) the Sīlavanāgarāja-jātaka, and (8) the Vessantara-
jātaka. In these stories, there is a marked contrast with the first group in terms
of the clear statements made by the Bodhisatta as he proclaims his wish for the
attainment of omniscience as a reward for the act of offering.
For example, in (5) the Sivi-jātaka in which the Bodhisatta is King Sivi, the
Buddha tells of the ‘incomparable gift’ (asadisa-dāna) of one of his eyes that
King Sivi offers a beggar. This gift is not taken from material goods which are
external to oneself; rather it is something that is internal to oneself as
emphasized by the saying ‘whoever offers a thing dear to oneself will receive a
dear thing” (piyassa dātā piyaṃ labhati) in return. King Sivi, the Bodhisatta,
though offering all kinds of external gifyts (bahira-dāna), is still not satisfied
with his offerings and thus he ponders:
‘‘mayā bāhiravatthuṃ adinnaṃ nāma n' atthi, na maṃ bāhiradānaṃ toseti,
110 Sheravanichkul, (2008: 776).
81

ahaṃ ajjhattikadānaṃ dātukāmo... 111
“There is nothing I have not given outside (of myself); but the external
offerings do not satisfy me. I want to offer an internal thing that is part
of myself.”
Since the Bodhisatta in the guise of the king wishes to make an internal gift
(ajjhattika- dāna), he decides to offer a part of his body to whomever he meets
on his way to the meditation hall that day. The Bodhisatta meets a blind brahmin
who is actually a metamorphosis of Sakka. When the blind brahmin requests an
eye, the king offers his two eyes:
“Na v' āhaṃ etaṃ yasasā dadāmi,
na puttam icche na dhanaṃ na raṭṭhaṃ,
Satañ ca dhammo carito purāṇo,
icc-eva dāne ramate mano maman ti. 112
[The Bodhisatta]
“I will offer (my eyes) in hope of neither fame, son, wealth, nor
a kingdom; This has been practiced by holy people since ancient times. Thus,
111 J-a iv 402.
112 J-a iv 406.
82

my mind delights in this offering.”
The commentary elaborates his motive of offering the eyes as not being caused by
material desire:
... na hi pāramiyo pūretvā bodhipale sabbaññutaṃ pāpuṇituṃ
samattho nāma n' atthi, ahañ ca pāramiyo pūretvā Buddho bhavitukāmo...
dīpetuṃ.
Na me dessā ubho cakkhū, attānaṃ me na dessiyaṃ, sabbaññutaṃ piyaṃ
mayhaṃ, tasmā cakkhuṃ adās' ahant ti āha. 113
Without completing pāramī, it is impossible to attain omniscience at the throne
of enlightenment. Having completed the pāramis, I wish to become a buddha...
Thus (the Bodhisatta) states in order to clarify, “both of the eyes are not
disagreeable to me, and myself is not detestable to me: Omniscience is dear to
me, and for this reason, I gave the eyes.
In this context, it is clear that the offering of the eyes is a prerequisite for
obtaining this other dear thing, omniscience. On the basis of what has been cited
above, ‘whoever offers a thing dear to oneself will receive a dear thing (in
113 j-a iv 406.
83

return)’, the Bodhisatta offers his own eyes that are dear to him because he
wants omniscience, the sought after goal.
The second example I refer to is part of (7) the Sīlavanāgarāja-jātaka, in which
the Bodhisatta as an elephant agrees to offer his tusks to a forester:
... bho purisa, nāhaṃ ‘ete dantā mayhaṃ appiyā amanāpā’ ti dammi, ime hi pana
me dantehi sahassaguṇena satasahassaguṇena sabbadhammapaṭivedhana-
samatthā sabbaññutaññāṇadantā va piyatarā, tassa me idaṃ dantadānaṃ
sabbaññutaññāṇaṃ paṭivijjhanatthāya hotū" ti sabbaññutaññāṇassa ārādhanaṃ
katvā dantayugalaṃ adāsi. 114
... (The Bodhisatta) gave (his tusks) saying, “My friend, these tusks are not
disagreeable nor unpleasant. But the tusks of omniscience which can
comprehend all of the dhammas are dearer to me with a hundredfold, a
thousand-fold, or a hundred thousand-fold virtue. And therefore, may my
offerings of these tusks (to you) bring the comprehension of
omniscience.’ With this utterance, (the Bodhisatta) gave the pair of
tusks for the accomplishment of omniscience.
While the acts of self-sacrifice in the first group can be classified as acts
114 j-a i 321.
84

performed as general dāna-pāramī without any specific aims, those in the second
group have the more specific motive of attaining omniscience as the purpose of
dāna-pāramī.
A comparison of these two groups also reveals further points of similarity
and difference. First, it should be noted that most of the recipients in the eight
jātaka stories are not deemed worthy enough to receive the spiritual offerings
in light of common morality as they are hunters, beggars, and so forth. This is
especially the case in the four stories in the first group which are about self-
sacrifice just to save someone’s life. Thus it can be understood that the Bodhisatta
offers his life just for the personal purpose of overcoming attachment to his body or
bodily parts.
In contrast, the four stories in the second group postulate an ulterior
motive for the act of self-sacrifice as dāna-pāramī. Furthermore, the motive is
to reach omniscience for the sake of all of the dhammas, which is an essential
quality of buddhahood. Therefore, this motive expresses a less personal
purpose, since the Bodhisatta in this case practices self-sacrifice as a step
towards the preparatory training to become the Buddha, the teacher of living
beings.
The other difference is that in each story in the first group the Bodhisatta
offers his own life for the sake of saving someone else’s life, while in each story
in the second group having the motive of omniscience the Bodhisatta offers
85

either only a part of his body such as tusks and eyes, or external offerings such
as a wife and children. In the former, the self-sacrifice consists in his life itself,
and in return, the Bodhisatta reaps the karma resulting from his dāna-pāramī.
On the other hand, in the latter, his self-sacrifice is less lethal and harmful to
his life, and so the reward for the act is the attainment of omniscience.
In regard to the first group of 'General dāna- pāramī' there is a danger that
the emotional aspect of the stories may inspire Buddhists to follow the same
self-sacrifice for the personal reason of saving someone close to them. In
contrast, the motive for offering in the second group - 'Sabbaññutā- ñāṇa'- is not
[please check to see if this is correct] to save a certain living being, but rather to
attain omniscience, the wisdom that can universally lead all living beings to
liberation. In this respect, the motive of the second group is spiritually higher
than that of the first group. Therefore, regardless of the chronological order of
the jātaka stories, the second group represents a more advanced one.
3.3. Motives in the Paññāsa-jātaka
The change in the Bodhisatta's motives for self-sacrifice can also be seen
in the Paññāsa-jātaka, a non-canonical compilation of jātaka narratives,
which is popular throughout Theravāda Buddhist countries in Southeast Asia
such as Thailand and Cambodia. The Paññāsa-jātaka is said to have been
86

compiled in the fifteen to sixteen century. 115
In his article on the Paññāsa- jātaka, Arthid Sheravanichkul has noted
that the Paññāsa- jātaka contains more stories about self-sacrifice than the
Pāli version. According to his statistics, the Paññāsa-jātaka collection held in
the Thai National Library contains 14 self-sacrifice accounts among a total of
61 stories (22.95%), whereas the jātaka narratives of the Pāli Canon contain
merely 7 self-sacrifice accounts in all of the 547 stories (1.28%). 116 The
greater prevalence of self-sacrifice in the Paññāsa-jātaka implies that the
Bodhisatta's self-sacrifice was emphasized more in the Theravāda Buddhist
tradition.
With reference to Sheravanichkul's study, Toshiya Unebe states that in many of
the Paññāsa-jātaka stories, the motive of the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice is precisely
proclaimed, with the Bodhisatta stating his reason for making an internal offering
(ajjhattika-dāna) to a person. Table 2 from his paper shows the classification of the
detailed conditions as depicted in nine jātaka stories. 117
Two characteristics can be discovered in the motives for self-sacrifice in
the Paññāsa-jātaka stories. It was demonstrated that in the Pāli jātaka stories
115 Toshiya Unebe. "パンニャーサ・ジャータカに説かれる捨身の目的—「声門、独覚の栄達
（sampatti）を求めず」をめぐって——(Motive behind the Bodhisatta’s Self-sacrifice in the Paññāsa-
Jātaka: Not for the Achievement of a Sāvaka or Paccekabuddha)" (2013: 16).
116 Sheravanichkul, "Self-Sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the Paññāsa Jātaka" (2008: 776).
117 Unebe. “Not for the Achievement of a Sāvaka or Paccekabuddha: The Motive behind the Bodhisatta’s
Self-sacrifice in the Paññāsa-Jātaka” (2012: 52). Because the Bodhisatta’s declaration in each jātaka
varies from version to version, I have mostly adopted the Thai National Library edition that Unebe has
referred to in his paper.
87

(Table 1), - in the second group of stories - the Bodhisatta uniformly proclaims
his motive as the ‘attainment of omniscience.’ However, the nine stories in the
Paññāsa-jātaka offer additional motives for the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice
as shown in Table 2, which is based on Unebe's table .
Table 2. Stories of self-sacrifice and the Bodhisatta’s motives
in the Paññāsa-jātaka
Not for…
Jātaka stories Story No.
Paccek Purpose of Offering
Recipient
Sāvaka a- self- sacrifice s
buddha
a19 √ √ listening to
1 Dhammasoṇḍaka life Ogre
Sa1:p.7 ̶ ̶ Dhamma
a27, √ √ wife,
listening to
2 Surūpa Zp 14: √ √ Dhamma sons, Ogre
p.782 self
a6 √ √
perfection of wife,
3 Vipullarāja Zp 26: √ √ Brahmin
generosity son
p.312
a13 ̶ √ perfection of
4 Āditta wife Brahmin
Zp 1: p.7 ̶ ̶ generosity
b8 (46) √ √ perfection of wife,
5 Aridama Brahmin
Zp 4: p.36 ̶ ̶ generosity self
a7 √ √
perfection of
6 Siricuddhāmaṇi Zp 17: √ head Brahmin
̶ generosity
b.203
a15 ̶ √
perfection of half of
7 Mahāsurasena Zp 28: √ Brahmin
̶ generosity body
p.342
a4 ̶ √
saving his
8 Ratanapajota Zp 23: √ heart ogre
√ mother's life
p.285
a28 ̶ ̶
saving his dead
9 Mahāpaduma Zp 27: √ √ heart
mother's life mother
p.37
Note: a/b = Thai version, Zp = Burmese version, and Sah = Sri Lankan version. ( See following sections
on Abbreviations and Manuscripts for details.)
Source: Unebe, Toshiya.Appendix: Not for the Achievement of a Sāvaka or Paccekabuddha: The Motive behind
the Bodhisatta' s Self-sacrifice in the Paññāsa-jātaka
In Unebe’s translation of the Dhammasoṇḍaka-jātaka, a jātaka story from
88

the palm-leaf manuscripts of the Paññāsa-jātaka, Unebe explains that this
narrative is not included in the Pāli tipiṭaka,, but is parallel to the jātaka of
Sessen-doji ( 雪 山 童 子 , the boy on the snowy mountain) in the Mahā-
parinirvāṇa Sūtra, typically associated with Mahāyāna Buddhism. 118 In
this jataka, the Bodhisatta as King Dhammasoṇḍaka hears an ogre reciting a
verse about impermanence. When the Bodhisatta wishes to listen to the rest of
the verse, the ogre demands the Bodhisatta’s flesh in return. When the Bodhisatta is about to
throw himself from a tree to the ground below where the ogre stands, the ogre is revealed to
be Sakka, who then recites the following verse for the Bodhisatta:
“...bhonto bhonto devasaṃghā suṇātha me vaanam, ahañ ca attānaṃ
yakkhassa datvā Dhammasavanatthāya ahañ ca manussesammpattiṃ na
patthemi, saggasampattiṃ na patthemi, na brahmasampattiṃ, na sāvaka-
sampattiṃ, na paccekabuddhasampattiṃ. na catulokapāla sampattiṃ, na
cakkavattisampatttiṃ, na chakāmāyacarasampattiṃ, na soḷasabrahma-
sampattiṃ patthemi, api cakho pana attanāṃ cajitvā
Dhammasavanatthāya sabbaññutañāṇaṃ eva buddhattabhāvaṃ
patthayissāmi, attānaṃ saṃsārato mocanatthaṃ jīvitvaṃ pajjahitvā
Dhammasavanatthāyā’ti.
118 Unebe, “ パーリ語およびタイ語写本による東南アジア撰述仏典の研究 (Study on the Buddhist
texts recorded in Pāli and Thai manuscripts in Southeast Asia)”. (2008:43).
89

Lords, Lords, assemblage of gods! Please listen to my words! Giving
my body to the dmon (yakkha) in order to listen to Dhamma, I wish
for neither the achievement (sampatti) of a human being (manussa),
the achievement of heaven (sagga), the achievement of a Brahma, the
the achievement of a sāvaka, the achievement of paccekabuddha, the
achievement of the four gurdian gods, the achievement of a Cakkavatti
king, the achievement of beings in the lower six heavenly abodes, nor
the achievement of the sixteen brahmā abodes, but, abandoing myself
in order to listen to Dhamma, I will wish for ominiscience
(sabbaññutāñāṇa), namely, Buddhahood (buddhattabhāva) only,
abandoning my life for the purpose of setting myself free from
saṃsāra, by listening to Dhamma.119
In this context, the Bodhisatta denies any purpose lower than perfect liberation
such as the achievement of disciplehood (sāvaka), a Silent Buddha
(paccekabuddha) who is only capable of teaching the Dhamma not to lead
others to liberation, or any rebirth, or even to higher abodes than the human
one. The Bodhisatta’s exact purpose is thus to liberate himself, and listening
to the Dhamma is the way to do so.
Unebe examines the purposes declared by the Bodhisatta in the other
119 Unebe. (2012:36).
90

accounts. He notes that (2) the Surūparāja-jātaka, for example, depicts the
Bodhisatta as saying that he aspires not for the achievement of
paccekabuddhahood, nor for that of a sāvaka, but rather to become a Buddha
in the future. However, according to Unebe’s examination, all three jatakas,
that of (4) the Āditta-jātaka, (7) the Mahāsurasena-jātaka, and (8) the
Ratanapajota-jātaka reject only the achievement of paccekabuddhahood, but
do not include the statement about sāvakas. The Bodhisatta also declares that
he will make beings attain peaceful nibbāna. 120
There is no doubt that a Bodhisatta’s acts of self-sacrifice will have a
profound effect on his karma as reflected in the Paññāsa-jātaka, which
provides two indications of this. This collection particularly emphasizes that
the attainment of the sāvaka and paccekabuddha are insufficient. and, in
fact,, the varied concepts of the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice are described more
elaborately in this work. This can be seen as a further elaboration of the
motive of ‘the attainment of omniscience’ as described in the four stories in
the Pāli jātaka. When the motive is described more precisely as the attainment
of buddhahood and not only as that of omniscience, the authors of the
Paññāsa-jātaka, writing at a later time than the Pāli jātaka, intend to
emphasize that these acts of self-sacrifice are limited to those who aim to be a
buddha. In other words, ,these acts of self-destruction are considered to be the
privilege of those with a strongly defined spiritual motive, and ordinary
120 Unebe, (2008:38).
91

Buddhists are not ordinarily entitled to follow these acts carelessly.
Unebe presumes that the Bodhisatta’s declarations as found in the
Paññāsa- jātaka originate from an old source that exists at present only in
Chinese. If this proves correct, then the motive for attaining buddhahood to
lead others to nibbāna seems to be none other than the compassionate act as
emphasized in the Mahāyāna concept of the bodhisattva path.
It is presumed that the compilers of the Paññāsa-jātaka in Southeast Asia have
adopted the other concepts of the Bodhisatta's compassionate self-sacrifice as often
found in the Mahāyāna Buddhist teachings. The transition of the Bodhisatta's self-
sacrifice may have functioned as a warning to Buddhists not to commit suicide as a
form of offering (dāna).
However, the instances of self-sacrifice in the Paññāsa-jātaka may have had
the opposite effect. Sheravanichkul argues that the more compassionate
depictions in the Paññāsa-jātaka also emphasized the sublime virtue of dāna-
pāramī as practiced by the Bodhisatta, which devotional Buddhists were apt to
follow. He examines a case of self-immolation by two Thai monks in the early
nineteenth century in which they burned themselves as an offering to the
Buddha, thereby aspiring for the attainment of Buddhahood. 121
The self-sacrifice by the Bodhisatta could be said to play a role in making
Buddhists feel that he is more close to them because of his (com-)passionate
121 Sheravanichkul (2008:469-f).
92

and humane acts. Reiko Ohnuma also suggests a comparison between the ethos
expressed through the Pāli jātaka and the Mahāyāna ethos as articulated in
avadāna literature. Ohnuma concludes that the former features the ‘heroic and
inimitable moral exploits’ s122 performed by the superior and aspiring
Bodhisatta in the Buddha-less time of the past, while the latter renders
devotional practice by ordinary Buddhists in the age of Buddhadhamma.
On the other hand, her analysis shows that these two contrasting ethos of
pre-Buddha ‘perfections’ and post-Buddha ‘devotions’ are equally inherent in
Buddhism. 123According to her discussion, the gift-of-the-body genre contains
plotlines to emphasize the extraordinary generosity of the Bodhisatta, in
offering his life: 1) to apparently unworthy recipients such as an evil person
or a pitiful animal on demand; 2) the donor (offerer) is a superior person such
as a king or prince; 3) in no hope of reciprocation, as perfectly gratuitous act;
4) with no regret. According to Ohnuma, the gift of the body in the jātakas
is a completely selfless and pure gift which leads the Bodhisatta to achieve the
ultimate goal of Buddhahood in the far-distant future. This concept was
undoubtedly developed to serve as a model for more ordinary forms of dāna,
considered to be an ideal gift for present in ritual, commonly believed to be
the most difficult to practice. 124
122 Ohnuma. "Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body". (2006:266).
123 Ibid, (2006: 266).
124 Ibid, (2006:175).
93

Ohnuma, in another paper, proposes interesting parallels between the
ethos of the Bodhisatta’s gift of body and the Buddha's gift of Dhamma, meaning
the legacy of teachings left by the Buddha. She speculates that the metaphoric
function of the Buddha’s gift of Dhamma may be seen as the ‘tenor’ while the
Bodhisatta’s gift of body may be seen as the ‘vehicle’. As tenor is abstract in its
own right, the vehicle tends towards embodying the tenor. Ohnuma detects the
dramatic and physical gift by a Bodhisatta lends itself to a concrete
embodiment of the abstract and rather emotionless gift of the Buddha’s Dhamma
because the personality of the Buddha is stated to be far more divinely perfected
and detached from ordinary people. 125 Ohnuma does, however, postulate the
superiority of the Buddha’s gift of Dhamma to the Bodhisatta’s gift of his body.
The reason is that the former may be considered as a perfect manifestation that
the Buddha realizes in the present Buddha era, whereas the latter is what the
Bodhisatta, the not-yet-Buddha, failed to realize in the past prior to achieving
buddhahood. The significance of these self-sacrifice accounts is described as
follows as regards the relationship between the tenor and its vehicle:
Perhaps the shifting perspective one can take on these stories is, in part,
indicative of the difference between a literary perspective and a religious
perspective. From a literary perspective, we might see these stories functioning
as extended metaphors in which the inherent power of the vehicle causes it to
125 Ohnuma, (1998:323-359).
94

dominate over the tenor. But from a religious perspective, of course, these are
not metaphors but literal deeds... From a literary perspective, the gift of the
body symbolizes the gift of dharma, but from a religious perspective, the gift of
the body transforms itself into the gift of dharma, and the revolutionary
transformation entailed by the attainment of Buddhahood is thereby celebrated
and affirmed. 126
Moreover, Sheravanichkul supports this argument in the Cariyāpiṭaka that
the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice is rather used to extol the great virtue of the
Buddha than to be similarly encouraged as an ideal practice. Despite the
Bodhisatta’s internal gifts frequently found in the jātakas, the author Ācariya
Dhammapāla warns:
The Great Man does not knowingly give his own body, limbs, and
organs to Māra or to the malevolent deities in Māra's company,
thinking: “Let this not lead to their harm.” And likewise, he does not
give to those possessed by Māra or his deities, or to madmen. But when
asked for these things by others, he gives immediately, because of the
rarity of such a request and the difficulty of making such a gift... For this
reason he does not waver, does not quake, does not undergo the least
vacillation, but remains absolutely unshaken in his determination to
126 Ohnuma, (1988:323-359).
95

undertake the good. 127
Therefore, the Bodhisatta’s practice of self-sacrifice, though it may be
rationalized under the right conditions as constituting an internal gift, is in fact
morally controversial. These acts should rather be considered as
symbolizations or metaphors of the great virtue of the Buddha.
However, while the karmic rationalization rendered self-sacrifice a special act
for special people in order to discourage the majority of Buddhists from performing
careless acts of suicide as an offering, the karmic rationalization did serve to create
a certain distance. The distance pradoxically continues to attract Buddhists,
evoking the emotional feature of self-sacrifice that is mixed with the spiritual
inaccessibility and the amiration for the Buddha, just as pop stars shine far above
their fans.
In addition, the emphasis of the motive for self-killing is also
predominantly related to the three cases of monastic suicide I examined in
chapter 3 and 4, because the motive is also inseparable from the situations
surrounding the doer. The three monks, Godhika, Vakkali, and Channa, who all
commit suicide and attain liberation are ‘secluded’ monks (or may be described
as hermits), not living with other monks in the saṅgha. In the case of Channa,
Sāriputta plays a role as representative of monks who should live in a
127 Acariya Dhammapala, Trans., Bhikkhu Bodhi, “A Treatise on the Paramis: From the Commentary to
the Cariyapitaka”, Access to Insight, 2005, <http://www.accesstoinsight.org/
lib/authors/bodhi/wheel409.html>.
96

harmonious community. Thus their converstation shows a gap from the
understanding of Channa’s death by the Buddha. In chapter 4, the monks who
killed themselves due to their aversion to their bodies are strongly criticized.
However, the Buddha gives no comment about the monks killed by
Migalaṇḍika, who attempted to help others cross over to nibbāna. Therefore,
it is difficult to determine a universal norm for self-killing including self-
sacrifice which can be applied to all the Buddhists, especially as it is clear that
the surrounding circumstances may vary.
97

Chapter IV
Suicide and Euthanasia in the Vinaya
In this chapter, I intend to show how suicide and euthanasia as depicted
in the Vinaya text have been ethicized in relation to the concept of karma.
Homicide is established as the third pārājika offence amongst the four
heaviest ones and the commitment of this offence by monks leads to their
permanent expulsion from the community of monks (saṅgha). 128 Modern
Buddhist ethics generally views suicide and euthanasia as constituting part of
killing. Indeed, the background stories illustrative of the prohibition of murder
in the third pārājika rule have comprised a rationale to relate suicide with
homicide in a wider sense.
Due to their disciplinary nature, the descriptions found in the Vinaya text
have been an indispensable source for providing Buddhist ethical views of
suicide and euthanasia in respect to their being regarded as part of killing.
However, it should not be forgotten that even the background stories for the
pārājika can be considered to play a role of narratives. [If you look at the stories
in the third pārājika rules out of context to extract only Buddhist views of
suicide and euthanasia, it would fail to understand abundant features that are
inherent in the stories. – either delete or rework] Instead, judging these stories
in terms of their place within the larger literary context allows us to gain an
128 Vin iii 68-86.
98

appreciation for the true function of the story as a whole.
Moreover, reading the background stories as narratives constitutes a new
form of investigation. These narratives in the Vinaya unexceptionally have the
nature of both religious and also popular narratives which are both part of a more
salient literary tradition in South(-east) Asia. Indeed, any narrative may seen as
an intentional creation on the author’s part. In case of a religious narrative,
the author tends to emphasize the elements of reality, not of fiction, in the
stories in order to strengthen people’s faiths in religion. In such stories,
which may be described as hagiographic in nature, even miraculously great
acts must not be understood as mere fantasy. On the other hand, popular
narratives may be surreal dramas or intriguing works of fiction. My
examination in this chapter enables one to read the Vinaya text in both
ways.
The Vinaya text is not a mere manual for Buddhist disciplinary rules. It
contains a great number of ‘stories’ in which different persons act and talk
with or without the Buddha. These are the life stories, or more precisely,
personal stories in which, like in a human drama, the different characters
exhibit varying capacities of understanding the Dhamma in the different
situations they find themselves in. I suggest that dilemmas in modern Buddhist
ethics in part may have stemmed from these mis- applications of modern
ethical issues to the cases described in the background of the Vinaya, thereby
disregarding the limitations of these personal stories.
Ethics in the West seek universal regulations, while Buddhism considers
each personal situation even in regard to the issues discussed in the field of
99

ethics such as suicide and euthanasia. Therefore, extracting the elements
favorable to ethical views of suicide and euthanasia from the stories of the
pārājika can potentially trigger a serious confusion of the themes or even lead
to misreading of the stories.
In support of my enquiry into this problem, I first read the background
stories that lead to the laying down of the third pārājika in the Pāli Vinaya,
concerned with suicide and euthanasia. In my reading, I payed close attention
to the story lines without considering the interpretations of the commentaries
or other previous studies. Thus, in this examination I focused on the functions
that these stories serve as both religious and fictional texts as depicted by the
narrator and performed by different characters.
Second, I intend to demonstrate what the commentary sees as being
problematic in the stories. Finally, I intend to demonstrate that while the
commentary creates interpretations that vary from the original text, it does this
in order to bring coherence as regards the teaching of general Buddhist morality
scattered throughout the other sections of the Tipiṭaka.
4.1. The Plot of the First Sub-story
The prohibition of murder as the third pārājika rule is established on the
basis of two major origin stories. The first incident is the mass-killing by a large
number of monks, which also includes the monk’s self-killing. The second is a
layman’s self-induced death encouraged by a group of six monks.
100

Table 3 Three Major Scenes of the First Sub-story for the Third Pārājika Rule
Events Place Scene Acts Motives/ cause
(1) 1st mass- monks disgust their bodies misunderstanding
killing Vesālī 1-a of asubha-bhāvanā
monks:
1) kill themselves 1) monks:
2) kill one another, same as 1-a (self-
3) request Migalaṇḍika aversion)
to kill themselves
1-b 4) Migalaṇḍika kills 2) Migalaṇḍika:
them receiving a set of bowl
and robe
(2) Reflection The An evil deity praises
misguide by the evil
and Vaggamudā 2 Migalaṇḍika’ s killing as
deity
inducement River meritorious deeds.
Migalaṇḍika kills
(3) 2nd mass- other monasteries monks who do not misperception of his
3
killing around Vesālī request him to kill killing
themselves
The first sub-story has been often cited as being more related to suicide.
The second has been rather discussed in the context of euthanasia. Beginning
with the first incident, as I show in Table 3, this sub-story can be divided into
three major scenes in regard to the chain of mass- killings, namely, the first
mass-killing by the monks, the dialogue between the deer-hunter Migalaṇḍika
and an evil deity at the Vaggamudā river, and the second mass-killing which
is carried out only by Migalaṇḍika. One night the Buddha is staying in Vesālī
teaching about the ‘contemplation of the foulness of the body’ (asubha-
bhāvanā) to the saṅgha which is assembled there. After the Buddha finishes
his instructions, he announces that he wishes to seclude himself for half a
month:
“...icchām' ahaṃ bhikkhave addhamāsaṃ paṭisallīyituṃ, n' amhi
101

kenaci upasaṅkamitabbo, aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakenā 'ti. 129
[The Buddha]
“I wish, monks, to stay in solitary meditation practice for half a month.
No one should approach me except the one who brings me alms-food.”
The first important scene starts after the Buddha leaves. The monks
continue to develop the practice of the unattractiveness of their own bodies
according to the Buddha’s instructions. In Scene 1-a, the following simile
elaborates how they increasingly felt aversion to their own bodies:
Scene 1-a:
te sakena kāyena aṭṭīyanti harāyanti jigucchanti. seyyathāpi nāma itthī
vā puriso vā daharo yuvā maṇḍanakajātiko sīsaṃ nhāto ahikuṇapena vā
kukkurakuṇapena vā manussakuṇapena vā kaṇṭhe āsattena aṭṭīyeyya
harāyeyya jiguccheyya... 130
Those (monks) were troubled by their own bodies, ashamed of them, disgusted
by them. It is just as a man or woman, young, fond of ornaments, and with their
head bathed, would be troubled by, ashamed of, and disgusted by the carcass of
a snake, a dog or a man that was hung around the neck. 131
129 Vin iii 68.
130 Vin iii 68.
131 Vin iii 69. Monks at the Buddha’s time did not have their hair completely shaved becase they did not
have well-sharpened knives. Moreover, in South and Southeast Asia, they wash their hair at each bath
time. Therefore sīsaṃnhāto (with their head bathed or washing their hair) means to make their whole
bodies clean and flesh.
102

Due to their repugnance to their bodies, those monks start killing themselves and each
other. 132
They also ask the deer-hunter Migalaṇḍika who dresses like a monk, to kill
them. 133 Migalaṇḍika accepts their requests of killing them in Scene 1-b.
Scene 1-b:
...evam eva te bhikkhū sakena kāyena aṭṭiyantā harāyantā jigucchantā
attanāpi attānaṃ jīvitā voropenti aññamaññaṃ pi jīvitā voropenti
Migalaṇḍikaṃ pi samaṇakuttakaṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadanti: sādhu
no āvuso, jīvitā voropehi. idan te pattacīvaraṃ havissatīti. 134
...thus, those monks who were troubled by their own bodies, ashamed
by them, disgusted by them, took their own lives, took one another’s
lives, and approached Migalandika, the fake recluse and said, "Friend,
please take our lives. This bowl and robe will be yours."
The text states that some of them do kill themselves and also ask someone
to kill them, which is synonymous to assisting suicide or euthanasia in modern
terms. In this first scene, Migalaṇḍika simply makes a contract to kill them in
return for the bowl and robe. He agrees with those monks’ requests by killing
them with a knife.
132 Vin iii 68.
133 The commentary only states that Migalaṇḍika wears a yellow robe with his head shaved just like a
Buddhist monk does, but nothing about the reason for it. V-a ii 400.
134 Vin iii 68.
103

The second scene is concerned with the change of Migalaṇḍika’s mind
through the dialogue with an evil deity. Migalaṇḍika goes to the Vaggamudā
river in order to wash the bloody knife where feelings of remorse or confusion
arise to his mind. He becomes concerned that his acts might be considered
unmeritorious and unwholesome. Then, a deity belonging to Māra’s group
coaxes and praises him thus:
Scene 2:
“...sādhu sādhu sappurisa, lābhā te sappurisa, suladdhaṃ te sappurisa,
bahuṃ tayā sappurisa puññaṃ pasutaṃ yaṃ puññaṃ tvaṃ atiṇṇe
tāresīti. 135
[The evil deity]
"Well done, well done, good man. You, good man, have gained rightly,
good man, you have produced much merit, (namely that) you sent across
those who have not crossed yet."
Thus Migalaṇḍika recovers a great deal of confidence as his acts of killing were
said by the evil deity to have also contributed to the monks’ merit. In the third scene,
it is this confidence making him go ahead and do more killing. Therefore, he goes to
look for more monks whom he should kill in Scene 3.
Scene 3:
...tikkaṃ asiṃ ādāya vihārena vihāraṃ pariveṇena pariveṇaṃ
135 Vin iii 69.
104

upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadeti: ko atiṇṇo kaṃ tāremīti. tattha ye te bhikkhū
avītarāgā tesaṃ tasmiṃ samaye hoti yeva bhayaṃ hoti chambhitattaṃ
hoti lomahaṃso, ye pana te bhikkhū vītarāgā tesaṃ tasmiṃ samaye na
hoti bhayaṃ na hoti chambhitattaṃ na hoti lomahaṃso. atha kho
Migalaṇḍiko samaṇakuttako ekam pi bhikkhuṃ ekāhena jīvitā
voropesi dve pi bhikkhū ekāhena jīvitā voropesi tayo pi... cattāro pi...
pañca pi... dasapi... vīsam pi... tiṃsam pi... cattālīsam pi... paññāsam
pi... saṭṭhim pi bhikkhū ekāhena jīvitā voropesi. 136
With a sharp knife, (he) approached from monastery to monastery,
from monk’s dormitory to dormitory, and said, “Who has not crossed
over yet? Who shall I send across?” Then those monks who were not
yet free from lust were frightened and paralyzed with their hair standing
on end at that time. But those monks who were free from lust were not
frightened and paralyzed with their hair standing on end at that time.
Then Migalaṇḍika, the fake recluse, killed one monk in a single day,
killed two monks in a single day... three... four... ten... twenty... thirty...
forty... fifty... he killed sixty monks in a single day.
At the end of that half month of seclusion, the Buddha finds the company
of monks greatly diminished and asks Ānanda what has happened, who responds
by referring to the two mass-killings in scenes 1 and 3. The monks around the
Buddha also tell him that asubha-bhāvanā was not suitable for the monks who
136 Vin iii 69.
105

have died and asked the Buddha for the instructions of a different meditation
subject. The Buddha then teaches the breath in-out meditation (ānāpānassati)
which can bring the foundation of tranquility and bliss, and also can vanquish
one’s evil and unwholesome nature. In this context, the monk’s aversion to
their bodies was brought about by an agitated mind. This means their mind
afflicted with such an aversion was not able to vanquish unwholesomeness.
Such a misguided impetus must be what the Buddha intended to correct through
these instructions.
After the Buddha finishes imparting the instructions of ānāpānassati, the third
pārājika is set down. The important point is that he condemns only the killing in Scene
1, while ignoring the killing by Migalaṇḍika in Scene 3, and also, what he laid down
is slightly different from what he condemned.
... vigarahi buddho bhagavā: ananucchavikaṃ bhikkhave tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ
ananulomikaṃ appaṭirūpaṃ assāmaṇakaṃ akappiyaṃ akaraṇīyaṃ. kathaṃ hi
nāma te, bhikkhave bhikkhū attanāpi... (attānaṃ jīvitā) voropessanti...
(aññamaññampi jīvitā) voropessanti (migalaṇḍikampi samaṇakuttakaṃ
upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ) vakkhanti – 137
[The Buddha’s criticism]
The Buddha, the Blessed One rebuked them, “Monks, it is not suitable
for these monks, it is not appropriate, it is not proper, it is not for a true
137 Vin iii 71.
106

recluse, it is not allowable, it should not be done. Monks, how could
those monks take their own lives, take one another’s lives, and how
could they approach Migalaṇḍika, the fake recluse, and said, “Friend,
take our lives, this bowl and robe will be yours.”
This is what the Buddha condemned prior to the injunction of murder. He continues
with the preliminary ruling of the third pārājika as follows:
yo pana bhikkhu sañcicca manussaviggahaṃ jīvitā voropeyya satthahārakaṃ
vāssa pariyeseyya, ayampi pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso 'ti. evañ c' idaṃ bhagavatā
bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ hoti. 138
[Preliminary Ruling]
Whatever monk should intentionally take a human body's life or should
search for a knife-bringer, he, too, is one who is defeated and not in
communion. Thus. the Blessed One prescribed this training rule for monks.
However, the Buddha’s promulgation names only these two acts of
intentionally killing a person and asking someone to kill oneself. Whether a
‘Human life’ should be defined as ranging from oneself to others was not
precisely described.
Furthermore, although the Buddha includes 'searching for a knife-bringer'
in the ruling, he does not specifically state anything about at Migalaṇḍika's
action. The Buddha's condemnation originating from the discouragement of the
138 Vin iii 71.
107

impetus for killing constitutes three kinds of acts: killing of self, killing one
another, and requesting someone to kill oneself. Now here it is unclear whether
the Buddha includes taking one's own life as an act of 'intentionally tak[ing] a
human life.'
4.2. Analytical Reading of the First Sub-story
In the above section, I explained the general plot and the three major scenes
which took place in the course of the mass-killings. In the following, I will compare
this story with the Pāli Tipiṭaka and Samantapāsādikā, the commentary of the vinaya.
At the first killing in Scene 1-a, the monks apparently misunderstood the
purpose for the Buddha's teaching of the asubha-bhāvanā. According to the
commentary, the purpose of the practice of asubha-bhāvanā is to eradicate
attachment to each part of one’s physical body by contemplating it to be an
unworthy and unpleasant object. 139 Accordingly, this practice can produce
virtue by, for example, discouraging the practitioners from sexual acts. 140
However, the meditation subject of asubha-bhāvanā is not suitable for some
practitioners. For example, in the case of the monk Suvaṇṇakāra, he is not able
to improve his practice of asubha-bhāvanā even though Sāriputta chose it for
him. The Buddha recognizes one of his past lives using his divine eyes, in which
he was a goldsmith and liked beautiful goldwork. Thus, generating feelings of
139 "so ca nesaṃ asubhāsucipaṭikkūlabhāvo vaṇṇatopi saṇṭhānato pi gandhato pi āsayato pi okāsato pīti
pañcahi kāraṇehi veditabbo." Vin-a ii 394.
140 Vin-a ii 396. "asubhasaññā paricitena, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cetasā bahulaṃ viharato
methunadhammasamāpattiyā cittaṃ paṭilīyati paṭikuṭati paṭivaṭṭati." Vin-a ii 396.
108

the impurity of the body merely prevented him from improving concentration
for certain people like Suvaṇṇakāra due to his pronounced sense of beauty.
After the Buddha encouraged Suvaṇṇakāra to change his meditation practice
to the contemplation of red color, he could finally succeed in attaining
arahanthood 141 Similarly, the consequences of mass-killing among monks
shows that those monks did not practice in the way that the Buddha had
intended to teach them. Instead, their wrong interpretation triggered a strong
aversion to their bodies culminating in their (misconceived) motivation to kill
themselves and one another.
This aversion also leads them to ask Migalaṇḍika to kill them, which means
to ask him to assist their suicide. At Scene 1-b, Migalaṇḍika makes a deal
expressing his agreement to their request in return for a reward: the bowl and
robe. In the Pāli text, the number of bowls and robes is stated to be in the singlular
(pattacīvaraṃ), yet perhaps the readers can surmise that Migalaṇḍika would
receive many sets of bowls and robes because he was certain to have killed a
great number of monks. The paradox, however, is that, in fact, he would not
have needed so many sets of bowls and robes for himself anyway. 142 The
commentary states that Migalaṇḍika was living near the monastery and ate the
leftovers of the almsfood that the monks had received. 143 In my reading of the
story, Migalaṇḍika practically does not need the excessive sets of bowls and
141 Dh-a iii 425-8.
142 I would like to thank Jens Schlieter, who remarked about the question as to why a bowl and a robe
(pattacīvaraṃ) is used as a single compound, which is highly likely to be symbolic.
143 The commentary explains that Migalaṇḍika shaved his head, wore the monk’s yellow robes and lived
close to the monastery eating the leftover alms food Vin-a.II. 399 “Migalaṇḍikam pi samaṇakuttakan ti
Migalaṇḍiko ti tassa nāmaṃ. samaṇakuttako ti samaṇavesadhārako, so kira sikhāmattaṃ ṭhapetvā sīsaṃ
muṇḍetvā ekaṃ kāsāvaṃ nivāsetvā ekaṃ aṃse katvā vihāraṃ yeva upanissāya vighāsādabhāvena
jīvati.”
109

robes, and actually the set of bowls and robes may not have inspired him to
commit the act of killing in the first place. There must have been another motive.
In thinking about this episode in the larger context of the narrative, why after
all is the hunter Migalaṇḍika dressed (or more precsisely, disgused) as a monk?
It is reasonable to think that Migalaṇḍika, dressed as a monk living near the
monastery, probably actually longed to become a monk, a member of the
saṅgha, but may have been rejected for ordination for some reason. Thus a
single set of bowls and robes can be considered to be a symbol of genuine
monkhood, which he aspires towards.
Given this situation in Scene 1-b, Migalaṇḍika enters into a simple contract
with those monks. While the monks' motivation was to abandon their bodies,
Migalaṇḍika would receive the bowls and robes—the metaphor of true
monkhood—in return for accepting their requests. Thus, the first mass-killing
consisted of three kinds of killing by the monks; self-killing by the monk, one
another’s killing by the monks, and the killing by Migalaṇḍika.
In Scene 2, Migalaṇḍika has the opportunity for penitence when he washes
the blood off of his knife at the riverbank and reflects upon his morality.
However, an evil deity comes to praise his acts. This deva symbolized the same
evil quality as Māra as depicted repeatedly in the other sections of the suttas. It
cajoles Migalaṇḍika into sending across those who had not crossed yet (tvaṃ
atiṇṇe tāresī). The verb tarati (to get to the other side) is often used as a
metaphoric word in combination with the word flood (ogha). 144 Reinforced
144 Crossing over the flood is often used to mean to overcome the four floods of mental defilements that
consist of sensuality (kāma), becoming (bhava), wrong view (diṭṭha), and ignorance (avijjā), which is
synonymous with enlightenment. For example, see the Oghataraṇa-sutta (SN 1.1; S i 1).
110

by the deity’s encouragement, Migalaṇḍika believed himself to be contributing
to wholesome acts. Māra often appears to delude the Buddha and his disciples
in different parts of the text. It is used as a symbol of one's own weakness in the
process of one's solitary training. In most cases, monks and nuns reject Māra
and attain liberation. However, since Migalaṇḍika is a lay person and less
spiritual, he may not have reflected upon his acts fully and may still have been
deluded.
Migalaṇḍika continued to commit the second mass-killings. Depiction 3
shows that his cause for the killing was different from the first one. There are
no more deals between him and the other monks. Migalaṇḍika was simply
motivated to kill them in order to help the monks with achieving liberation even
though they did not request such help. Moreover, some of the monks seemed
to have been unwillingly killed out of fear. The text differentiates between the
reactions of those monks who had not been enlightened and those who had.
The commentary states the former monks were killed full of terror because they
feared death. On the other hand, the latter were those arahants who died with a
calm mind and no fear because they comprehended the emptiness of all living
beings. 145
The question arises as to why the other monks did not stop Migalaṇḍika
from such mass-killing? Many monks stayed around Vesālī whereas
Migalaṇḍika was only one person, so it seems that those monks could easily
145 Vin-a ii 401-f. "hoti yeva bhayanti maraṇaṃ paṭicca cittutrāso hoti. hoti chambhitattanti hadayamaṃsaṃ
ādiṃ katvā tasmā sarīracalanaṃ hoti; atibhayena thaddhasarīrattan ti pi eko, thambhitattaṃ hi
chambhitattan ti vuccatīti. lomahaṃso ti uddhaṃ ṭhitalomatā, khīṇāsavā pana sattasuññatāya sudiṭṭhattā
maraṇakasattam eva na passanti, tasmā tesaṃ sabbamp' etaṃ nāhosīti veditabbaṃ.
111

have stopped him. My presumption is that although the monks may regard
Migalaṇḍika’s acts of killing as unwholesome, perhaps they did not regard it as
severely unwholesome because the pārājika had not been laid down yet. Those
monks may also have been uncertain about how to deal with acts commited by
this non-saṅgha member Migalaṇḍika.
When the Buddha reappeared after his half-month retreat, all of the killing
was over. Ānanda related all of the three scenes including the two cases of
killings to the Buddha, suggesting that the instruction of asubha-bhāvana may
not have been suited to those monks who died and also requested a different
kind of instruction which was more suitable for the living monks. The
instruction that the Buddha chose was ānāpānasati meditation. In the course
of his instructions, the Buddha emphasized concentration (samādhi) by
mindfulness of breathing, which counteracts unwholesome qualities. 146 If
those monks committing unwholesome actions like murder attain such a state
of mind through the practice of asubha-bhāvana, then surely the new
instructions should not trigger such as misunderstanding which would drive
them to kill out of simple aversion to their bodies. The Buddha’s instructions
of ānāpānasati finally culminated in the pre-promulgation of the third
pārājika.
Subsequently it may be worth examining the difference between what he
ruled afterwards and what the Buddha rebuked in regard to the mass-killings.
The Buddha disagreed with the three acts of killing, the first of oneself, the
146 Vin iii 70. "…evam eva kho bhikkhave ānāpānassatisamādhi bhāvito bahulīkato santo c' eva paṇīto ca
asecanako ca sukho ca vihāro uppannuppanne ca pāpake akusale dhamme ṭhānaso antaradhāpeti
vūpasameti."
112

second of killing each other, and the third of asking Migalaṇḍika to kill them. 147
In modern bioethical terms, the Buddha rejects the act of suicide, murder, and
assisted-suicide. Thus the promulgation in this context simply prohibits the two
acts of killing a human and requesting assisted suicide. 148 If the Buddha’s
criticism of the three kinds of killings has a coherent context within the
promulgation of the preliminary ruling, the human body (manussaviggaha)
definitely should include one’s own body. Accordingly, suicide should
logically be prohibited as it has been designated as being part of the third
pārājika offence.
However, the commentary limits the third pārājika only to murder in the
course of events. According to the explanation, the opportunity for the
establishment of the third pārājika rule was precipitated neither by killing by
oneself nor being killed by Migalaṇḍika.
pārājikaṃ paññapento yo pana bhikkhu sañcicca manussa-viggah...
evaṃ bhagavā ānāpānassatisamādhikathāya bhikkhū samassāsetvā
atha yan taṃ tatiyapārājikapaññattiyā nidānañ c' eva pakaraṇañ ca
uppannaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ aññamaññaṃ jīvitā voropanaṃ, etasmiṃ nidāne
etasmiṃ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṃ sannipātetvā paṭipucchitvā
vigarahitvā ca yasmā tattha attanā attānaṃ jīvitā voropanaṃ
migalaṇḍikena ca voropāpanaṃ pārājikavatthuṃ na hoti, tasmā taṃ
ṭhapetvā pārājikassa vatthubhūtaṃ aññamaññaṃ jīvitā voropanaṃ eva
147 See [The Buddha’s criticism] in this chapter.
148 See [Preliminary Ruling] in this chapter.
113

gahetvā an ti ādim āha. 149
Thus the Buddha reassured the monks by talking about the
concentration achieved through ānāpānassati meditation, and also by
explaining that the cause and occasion for the third pārājika being
prescribed was only the taking of one another’s lives by the monks. In
regard to this cause on this occasion, (the Buddha) called upon the
community of monks, questioned them, and blamed them saying that
the grounds for the pārājika were not the taking of their lives by
themselves or by Migalaṇḍika. Therefore, excluding it (those two cases
of killing above), having taken as the grounds for the pārājika as the
taking of one another’s lives, he (the Buddha), prescribing the pārājika,
said, “Whatever a monk should intentionally take a human life, etc.”
The above suggests that the Buddha declared the third pārājika because he
intended to explain its purpose and also to account for the act of depriving each
other of life. The commentary intends to exclude suicide from the pārājika
offence even though it is obvious that the Buddha rebukes the act. With regard
to the possible reason for this exclusion, Lamotte’s argument is worth quoting:
For them morality only rules our behaviour in relation to others, but does
not impose on us any duty with regard to ourselves. When Buddhist
morality prohibits murder, theft, sensual misconduct, ill-will, and false
149 Vin-a ii 435.
114

views, this is because these bodily, vocal and mental misdeeds are
harmful to others. 150
Lamotte’s argument is in agreements with the commentary that suicide is
not included in the offences. The raison d’être of the vinaya rules is to maintain
a harmonious community among the ordained monks and to prohibit any
harmful or inappropriate acts on their part towards the laity living in society.
Any contravention of the pārājika should entail an appropriate punishment.
However, it is impossible for the community (sangha?) to punish a monk who
has already died. The community in later times probably believed that they
could only exercise their regulation of the vinaya rules for those living monks
who were still part of the community.- when you mean ‘sangha’, it’s best to
use that word, otherwise we don’t know what you’re talking about as
‘community’ can also mean the laity.
Thus my examination corroborates that the prohibition of killing does not
necessarily mean that of both murder and suicide. Two more questions are also
unclear, firstly, what role the second mass-killing plays in this story? Secondly,
why did the Buddha neither refer to the second mass-killing by Migalaṇḍika in
his criticism nor in the preliminary ruling of the third pārājika? The plausible
answer could be that Migalaṇḍika was not a monk and commiting murder by a
layman could be excluded from the Vinaya rules. There is a possibility that
the number of murders which Migalaṇḍika actually committed steadily
increased. Such an exaggeration may have been done to warn others against
150 Lamotte, (1987:214).
115

committing such unwholesome acts as the first mass-killing by the monks and
also the second mass-killing by Migalaṇḍika, though the second one is not
directly connected with pārājika offences. [For example, the mother tells her
children to go to bed by 10 o’clock or they may be late to leave their house for
school. Nevertheless, the children do not listen to her and consequently leave
late. When the children have to run to school carelessly and have a car accident,
it is a result caused by their disregarding of the mother’s order – I would leave
this out as it seems frivolous]. In the context of the above story of the third
pārājika, the first killing serves as a breaking of the pārājika rules and thus
entails the offence of a monk killing someone or himself or asking someone to
kill him. However, the second mass-killing by Migalaṇḍika is intended to
serve as a warning against the possible aftereffect that can be triggered by the
first mass-killing, but it is not as serious a punishment as the third pārājika.
The second problem concerns the possible motive for the second mass-
killing. The monks’ motive for dying in the first mass-killing was the aversion
against their own bodies. Since this event is part of the third pārājika, this
motive for choosing death is undoubtedly an unwholesome reason. However,
the second mass-killing, which is not prohibited in the third pārājika, was
caused by Migalaṇḍika’s positive but misguided motivation for hastening the
monks’ enlightenment. Such a motivation for liberation is connected with the
stories of suicide by Godhika, Vakkali, and Channa because their deaths were
regarded as allowable as they were construed as leading to nibbāna. 151
151 See Chapter 2.
116

Deciding on one’s death for the purpose of liberation has yet to be discerned
from a Buddhist ethical viewpoint.
4.3. Karmic Rationale
In addition, the commentary attempts a karmic rationalization in this
context, too, though it also reveals a degree of incoherence. The commentary
seems to justify the Buddha having isolated himself from those monks for
half a month against the criticism that the Buddha as an omniscient person must
have predicted and thus could prevent any mass-killings beforehand. The
commentary rationalizes that although the Buddha did predict the killings, he
nevertheless intentionally refrained from preventing them. It further explains
that those monks involved in the first mass-killing made their living as hunters
and they killed animals and birds in past lives. While these karmic factors
caused their rebirths in hell, their wholesome karma which resulted from the
past was also a factor causing them to be ordained as monks by the Buddha. Yet
their (residual) unwholesome karma created by hunting also ripened and
directed them to self-killing and to killing one another. 152
... tesaṃ tato mūlākusalakammato avipakkavipākā aparāparacetanā
tasmiṃ addhamāsabbhantare attūpakkamena ca parūpakkamena ca
jīvatupacchedāya okāsam akāsi, naṃ bhagavā addasa. kammavipāko
152 Vin-a ii 397. ... kasmā pana evam āhā 'ti, atīte kira pañcasatā migaluddakā mahatīhi daṇḍavāgurāhi
araññaṃ parikkhipitvā haṭṭhatuṭṭhā ekato yeva yāvajīvaṃ migapakkhighātakammena jīvikaṃ kappetvā
niraye upapannā te tattha paccitvā pubbe katena kenacid eva kusalakammena manussesu upapannā
kalyāṇūpanissayavasena sabbe pi bhagavato santike pabbajjañ ca upasampadañ ca labhiṃsu.
117

nāma na sakkā kenaci paṭibāhituṃ. 153
... there, due to this original unwholesome karma of theirs, the volition
that possessed the fruition not ripened yet at that time had a chance to
destroy (their) lives by attacking self and others again and again for half
a month. The Blessed One saw this. Indeed, no one can avoid the
production of karmic fruition.
According to the commentary, there are four types of enlightened and one
type of the non-enlightened monks among those monks in the story. 154 Once
they die, arahants are designated to be reborn nowhere, and the other three
enlightened categories are destined for positive destinations. The rebirths of
non-enlightened monks are not fixed yet. This leads the Buddha to impart the
asubha-bhāvanā.
... ime attabhāve chandarāgena maraṇabhayabhītā na sakkhissanti gatiṃ
visodhetuṃ, handa nesaṃ chandarāgappahānāya asubhakathaṃ
kathemi, taṃ sutvā attabhāve vigatacchandarāgatāya gativisodhanaṃ
katvā sagge paṭisandhiṃ gaṇhissanti, evaṃ tesaṃ mama santike pabbajjā
sātthikā bhavissatīti. 155
Those who fear death will not be able to purify their destination because
153 Vin-a ii 397.
154 Vin-a ii 397.
155 Vin-a ii 397-f.
118

of the desire and lust for their continued existence. Now, in order to
destroy their desire and lust, I will give the instruction of asubha-
bhāvanā to them. Having listen to it, and having purified their
destination by ceasing desire and lust for their continued existence, they
will take rebirth in heaven. Therefore, their living as monks near me
will be profitable for them.
This codicil appears to be unreasonable. If the Buddha intended to help them
to renounce desire, how could the exact outcome be their misunderstanding of
the object of the asubha-bhāvanā meditation that the Buddha taught?
The commentary further stated: Thus the Buddha gives the instruction of
asubha-bhāvanā by explaining the point of meditation, but not by intending to
praise the quality of death. The Buddha had predicted what would happen among
the monks after his instructions, but he preferred secluding himself to receiving
the other monks' report about how many monks died each day. However, even
the Buddha could not have prevented their unwholesome resultant karmas from
ripening.
Seemingly, the commentary attempts to justify that the Buddha's seclusion
was reasonable and inevitable by reiterating that he did not stop them even
though he was aware of what was happening during his seclusion. 156 Perhaps he
thought that their karmic fruit would be unstoppable by anyone, even by
156 Vin-a ii 398. ... tato tesaṃ anuggahāya asubhakathaṃ kathesi, kammaṭṭhānasīsena, no maraṇavaṇṇa-
saṃvaṇṇanādhippāyena. kathetvā ca pan' assa etad ahosi: sace maṃ imaṃ addhamāsaṃ bhikkhū
passissanti ajja eko bhikkhu mato ajja dve… pe… ajja dasā ’ti āgantvā ārocessanti.
119

himself. Even though hearing the reports of their deaths, the Buddha was
helpless to prevent the inevitable outcome, as it was the fruit of karma, he thus
concluded that he would henceforth not witness their killings. 157
To avoid criticism from others (probably those in other religious groups), the
commentary stated:
... tattha paṇḍitā vakkhanti: bhagavā paṭisallānam anuyutto imaṃ
pavattiṃ jānāti koci 'ssa ārocayitāpi n' atthi, sace jāneyya addhā
nivāreyyā 'ti. 158
In regard to this, the wise say, “The Blessed One did not know about this
incident as he was involved in seclusion, and no one informed him. If he
had known about it, he certainly would have prevented it.”.
The above sentences obviously serve as a refutation of the criticism as to why
the Buddha, though he was omniscient, could not stop his disciples from mass-
killing. The commentary connotes that if the Buddha witnessed these killing,
such criticism should be reasonable and therefore in order to avoid it, the
Buddha intentionally hid himself from those monks, so as not to need to witness
what was going to happen. The commentary stated that ‘the Buddha did not
know it as he could not see it.’
157 Vin-a II 398. ... ayañ ca kammavipāko na sakkā mayā vā aññena vā paṭibāhituṃ svāhaṃ taṃ sutvāpi
kiṃ karissāmi kiṃ me anatthakena anayabyasanena sutena handāhaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ adassanaṃ
upagacchāmīti. tasmā evam āha: icchām' ahaṃ bhikkhave, addhamāsaṃ patisallīyituṃ n' amhi kenaci
upasaṅkamitabbo aññatra ekena piṇḍapātanīhārakenā 'ti.
158 Vin-a ii 398.
120

However, it would appear this is also an unsatisfactory explanation. The
commentary also explains that the Buddha was ignorant of the impending result
of those monks’ unwholesome karma in the past. The Buddha secluded himself
not because he could not bear to see it, but because even he could not help those
monks to evade the result of their powerful karmas. Although the commentary’s
explanation sought to uphold the authority and rightness of the Buddha’s
actions, this argument consequently proves the validity of a certain type of
karma that powerfully destines one to commit suicide. The process of karmic
rationalization which works to justify the ethicization of suicide in Buddhism
is evident in this context.
4.4. The Understanding of Destructive Karma in Theravāda Buddhism
In Theravāda Buddhist countries, a certain kind of karma which is believied
to drive monks to kill themselves or one another as depicted in the
aforementioned story is often understood as destructive karma (upaghātaka-
kamma or upacchedaka-kamma). The two words of upaghātaka-kamma and
upacchedaka-kamma, are generally understood as having the same meaning
in Theravāda Buddhism. Leḍī Sayadaw (1846- 1923), one of the most
preeminent monks in Burmese Buddhism, defines them synonymously in his
book Paramatthadīpanī (Manual of Ultimate Truth). 159 These words can be
found only in the extra-canonical Pāli texts, such as the commentaries on the
159 Pv-a 40. “Upaghātakanti pana upacchedakantica atthato ekaṃ.” Pv-a 40.
121

Tipiṭaka, Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, and Visuddhimagga. It is notable that these
classifications of karma including upaghātaka kamma are the creations of later
interpretations after the Buddha’s time.
The former upaghātaka-kamma is described as one of the four karmas in
the third category in regard to their effect. The enumeration of the four karmas
is generally described as 1) productive karma (janaka-kamma); 2) supportive
karma (upatthamabhaka-kamma); 3) obstructive karma (upapīḷaka-kamma);
and 4) destructive karma (upaghātaka-kamma). 160 According to the
Visuddhimagga, productive karma acts to produce any of the five aggregates at
the moment of rebirth-linking actions even throughout one’s entire next life
after death. Supportive karma is not capable of producing any result but is
designed to strengthen the results created by other karmas, while obstructive
karma has an opposite effect by producing negative results. Destructive
karma acts to prevent other weaker karmas from ripening in an either
wholesome or unwholesome way. 161
The exercise of upaghātakakamma has the power to take one’s life
suddenly. In his manual of the Abhidhammasaṅgaha, Bhikkhu Bodhi explains
that: “...somebody born as a human being may, through his productive kamma,
160 ... idāni kammacatukkaṃ catūhākārehi dassetuṃ “janaka” ntyādi āraddhaṃ, janayatīti janakaṃ.
upatthambhetīti upatthambhakaṃ. upagantvā pīḷetīti upapīḷakaṃ. upagantvā ghātetīti upaghātakaṃ.
Abhidh-s 50.
161 Aparampi catubbidhaṃ kammaṃ: janakaṃ, upatthambhakaṃ, upapīḷakaṃ, upaghātakan ti. Tattha
janakaṃ nāma kusalam pi hoti akusalam pi, taṃ paṭisandhiyam pi pavatte pi rūpārūpavipākakkhandhe
janeti. Upatthambhakaṃ pana vipākaṃ janetuṃ na sakkoti, Aññena kammena dinnāya paṭisandhiyā
janite vipāke uppajjamānakasukhadukkhaṃ upatthambheti, addhānaṃ pavatteti. Upapīḷakaṃ aññena
kammena dinnāya paṭisandhiyā janite vipāke uppajjamānakasukhadukkhaṃ pīḷeti bādhati, addhānaṃ
pavattituṃ na deti. Upaghātakaṃ pana sayaṃ kusalam pi akusalam pi samānaṃ aññaṃ
dubbalakammaṃ ghātetvā, tassa vipākaṃ paṭibāhitvā, attano vipākassa okāsaṃ karoti. Evaṃ pana
kammena kate okāse taṃ vipākaṃ uppannaṃ nāma vuccati. Vism 601-f.
122

have been originally destined for a long life-span, but destructive kamma may
arise and bring about a premature death.” 162
The Abhidhammic analysis also shows the development of causation
between karma and the process of death, in which the advent of death is
fourfold: 1) through the expiration of one’s life-span (āyukkhaya-maraṇa);
2) through the expiration of the productive karmic force (kammakkhaya-
maraṇa); 3) through the expiration of both the life-span and productive karma
(ubhayakkhaya-maraṇa); and 4) through the intervention of destructive karma
(upacchedaka-maraṇa). 163 In this context, the destructive karma is described
as upacchedakakamma. In the Theravāda Buddhist tradition, these four deaths
are often illustrated by the following four causes: an oil lamp may be blotted
out due to the exhaustion of the wick, the exhaustion of the oil, the exhaustion
of both at the same time, or a sudden gust of wind even though the wick and
oil still remain. 164
Moreover, according to the Visuddhimagga, death due to destructive
karma (upacchedaka kamma) is called untimely death (akālamaraṇa), while
each of the first three deaths is timely death (kālamaraṇa). 165 Untimely death
is described as follows.
162 Bhikkhu Bodhi, ed., A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma (1993:202).
163 “Āyukkhayena kammakkhayena ubhayakkhayena upacchedakakammunā ceti catudhā maraṇuppatti
nāma” Abhidh -s 89.
164 Bodhi, (1993:220) This metaphor is often used in Theravāda Buddhism. It seems that the later
compilers or Theravāda Buddhist monks in history may have invented the simile about the fire, fuel
and the wind in the Mil 304.
165 Yam pi c' etaṃ adhippetaṃ, taṃ kālamaraṇaṃ akālamaraṇan ti duvidhaṃ hoti. Tattha kālamaraṇaṃ
puññakkhayena vā āyukkhayena vā ubhayakkhayena vā hoti. Akālamaraṇaṃ kammupacchedaka-
kammavasena. Vism 229.
123

Yaṃ pana Dūsīmāra-Kalāburājādīnaṃ viya taṃ khaṇaṃ yeva ṭhānā cāvana-
samatthena kammunā upacchinnasantānānaṃ purimakammavasena vā
satthaharaṇādīhi upakkamehi upacchijjamānasantānānaṃ maraṇaṃ hoti: idaṃ
akālamaraṇaṃ nāma. Taṃ sabbampi vuttappakārena jīvitindriyupacchedena
saṅgahitaṃ. 166
But it (untimely death) is the death of those, as Dūsi Māra and Kalāburā
and so forth were, whose continuity (of life) is destroyed by karma that
enables them to cast (one) from the place at the very moment, or whose
continuity (of life) is increasingly destroyed by the onfalls with knives,
etc., due to previous karmas. This is called untimely death. All these
are included in the cutting-off of the life faculty as stated above.
The above description of ‘attacked by taking knives and so forth’
(satthaharaṇādīhi upakkamehi) can be exemplified in the case of mass-killing
in the sub-story of the third pārājika. Thus one’s sudden death by killing
(especially stabbing) constitutes untimely death due to one’s destructive
karma.
Death by knifing is also included in the category of untimely death as
Nāgasena illustrated in his responses given in the Milinda-pañhā. Nāgasena first
166 Vism 229-f. Dūsimāra is a Māra who harassed one of the chief Buddhist disciples Kakusandha and the
other monks in the Māratajjaniya-sutta (MN 51; M i 337), and consequently Māra falls into hell. King
Kalāburā cuts off a Bodhisatta’s ear, nose, and limbs. Subsequently the ground opened the king into
hell. J-a iii 39.
124

considered death to be just like a fruit that falls from the tree when it is ripe
enough, but it could also fall in an untimely fashon when it is eaten by insects,
poked by clubs, or blown by the wind. Likewise, he enumerates the four causes
of death as follows: destruction through the force of old age (jarā), 2) forced by
one’s karma (kamma), 3) forced by a course to go to one’s next destination (gati),
and 4) forced by their own actions (kiriya), in which the first is timely death
and the other four are untimely death. Accordingly, Milinda placed the following
categories, i.e., death in the mother’s womb (mātukucchi), in the birthing room
(vijātaghara), at a month old (māsika), and at a hundred years old (vassasatika)
into that of timely death. 167 In response to his doubts, Nāgasena enumerated the
seven kind of persons who die untimely death due to karma in spite of one’s
normal life-span: 1) dying from hunger (jighacchita) having failed to obtain
food, 2) dying from thirst (pipāsita) having failed to obtain water, 3) dying due
to snake venom (ahinā daṭṭha)and failing to obtain any cure, 4) dying due to
poison having failed to obtain any antidote (visamāsita), 5) dying by fire
(aggigata) failing to obtain any means of escape, 6) dying by drowning
(udakagato) failing to obtain a foothold, and 7) dying by being knifed (sattihata) or
through serious disease (ābādhika) having failed to obtain a physician. 168
In this context, Nāgasena explained death as the combination of ‘untimely’
(akāla) and due season (samaya). He further enumerated eight ways of
167 Mil 301-f.
168 Mil 302. ..mahārāja, ḍayhantesu aṅgapaccaṅgesu agadaṃ alabhamāno vijjamānepi uttariṃ āyusmiṃ
akāle marati, aggigato, mahārāja, jhāyamāno nibbāpanaṃ alabhamāno vijjamānepi uttariṃ āyusmiṃ
akāle marati, udakagato, mahārāja, patiṭṭhaṃ alabhamāno vijjamānepi uttariṃ āyusmiṃ akāle marati,
sattihato, mahārāja, ābādhiko bhisakkaṃ alabhamāno vijjamānepi uttariṃ āyusmiṃ akāle marati, ime
kho, mahārāja, satta vijjamānepi uttariṃ āyusmiṃ akāle maranti. Tatrāpāhaṃ, mahārāja, ekaṃsena
vadāmi.
125

accelerating one’s death as follows: 1) produced by the winds
(vātasamuṭṭhānena), 2) produced by bile (pittasamuṭṭhānena), 3) produced by
phlegm (semhasamuṭṭhānena), 4) resulting from a union of the humors of the
body (sannipātikena), 5) by the change of season, 6) attacked by adversities
(visamaparihārena), 7) by thrust (opakkamikena), 8) by the maturation of karma
(kammavipākena). According to Nāgasena only the seventh way is due to the
combination of untimely death with due season, while the other seven are
untimely death not in due season. 169In the case of death by knifing, untimely
death in due season occurs when one who has killed someone by using a knife
receives one’s karmic fruit to be knifed likewise at any age, 170 and untimely
death not in due season means that a powerful karma which was created in the
past can change the direction of one’s life by being forcefully killed by a
knife. 171
Theravāda Buddhism seems to attribute the case of the sub-story in the
third pārājika to untimely death by the maturing of powerfully destructive
karma, referring to the explanation in the Visuddhimagga and to the discussion
by Nāgasena. The Milindapañhā also explains that arahants never destroy what
is unripe and wait for full maturation, one of the qualities that arahants
possess, 172by citing the following verses by Sāriputta.
169 Aṭṭhavidhena, mahārāja, sattānaṃ kālaṅkiriyā hoti, vātasamuṭṭhānena pittasamuṭṭhānena
semhasamuṭṭhānena sannipātikena utuvipariṇāmena visamaparihārena opakkamikena kammavipākena,
mahārāja, sattānaṃ kālaṅkiriyā hoti. Tatra, mahārāja, yadidaṃ kammavipākena kālaṅkiriyā, sā yeva
tattha sāmayikā kālaṅkiriyā, avasesā asāmayikā kālaṅkiriyāti. Mil 302.
170 Mil 303.
171 Evameva kho, mahārāja, yo koci akāle marati, so... sattivegappaṭipīḷito vā akāle marati. Idamettha,
mahārāja, kāraṇaṃ, yena kāraṇena akāle maraṇaṃ atthi. Mil 304.
172 Natthi, mahārāja, arahato anunayo vā paṭigho vā, na ca arahanto apakkaṃ pātenti paripākaṃ āgamenti
paṇḍitā. Mil 44.
126

Nābhinandāmi maraṇaṃ, nābhinandāmi jīvitaṃ; Kālañca paṭikaṅkhāmi,
nibbisaṃ bhatako yathā. Nābhinandāmi maraṇaṃ, nābhinandāmi jīvitaṃ;
Kālañca paṭikaṅkhāmi, sampajāno patissato. 173
I do not rejoice in death, I do not rejoice in life.
I wait for the time, as a hired servant waits for his wages. I do
not rejoice in death, I do not rejoice in life.
I wait for the time, fully conscious and mindful.
Considering the examination as stated above, the moral understanding of
untimely death including suicide by arahants has developed and been
intertwined with the concept of karma which is an especially powerful driving
force. Buddhaghosa and the later compilators of the Milindapañhā have
attempted to avoid mentioning the impetuous suicide by arahants. If they do
commit suicide (which appears to have happened suddenly and in an untimely
way), each of their suicides must occur at the appointed time and be necessarily
caused by karma.
4.5. Other Cases Relevant to Suicide or Euthanasia in the Vinaya
The second sub-story and some of the other cases of the third pārājika
need to be examined. The second sub-story is about a case of the [self-
deconditioning-what’s ?] by a layman who was abetted by a group of six
173 Mil 45.
127

monks. This case is not directly concerned with the punishment of self-
killing by monks, but rather with that of suggestions by monks in favour of
someone’s suicide.
The group of six monks were attracted by the lay-follower’s beautiful
wife. Since the lay-follower is a [cumberer-?] to those six monks, they
decide to praise the beauty of death (maraṇavaṇṇaṃ saṃvaṇṇeti) in hope
of his intentional self-killing. They acclaim all the conduct that he has done. As
Buddhist monks, they admire that he has perfectly accomplished virtuous and
wholesome acts with nothing left to be done, saying: 174
... kataṃ tayā kalyāṇaṃ akataṃ tayā pāpaṃ. kiṃ tuyh' iminā pāpakena
dujjīvitena, matan te jīvitā seyyo. ito tvaṃ kālaṅkato kāyassa bhedā paraṃ
maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjissasi, tattha dibbehi pañcahi
kāmaguṇehi samappito samaṅgībhūto paricāressasīti. 175
“You have done what is good, you have not done what is evil. What do
you need throughout this evil and wrong life? It should be better for
you to die than to live. Hence, when you reach the mortal moment at
the destruction of the body after death, you will be born in a happy abode,
in a heavenly world. There, being endowed and possessed with five
divine qualities of sensual pleasure, you will amuse yourself.”
174 Vin iii 71-f.
175 Vin iii 72.
128

The lay-follower, who believes in them, thus becomes motivated to hasten his
death. He ingests poisonous foods and drinks, which hastens his death. 176 His wife is
so enraged that she criticizes those six monks as shameless (alajjin), morally bad
(dussīla), and liars (musāvādina). This also fueled the reproach of other lay-followers
and monks. Thus the Buddha, having received this report, added the following
prohibition.
yo pana bhikkhu sañcicca manussaviggahaṃ jīvitā voropeyya satthahārakaṃ
vāssa pariyeseyya maraṇavaṇṇaṃ vā saṃvaṇṇeyya maraṇāya vā
samādapeyya ambho purisa kiṃ tuyh' iminā pāpakena dujjīvitena matan
te jīvitā seyyo ’ti, iticittamano cittasaṃkappo anekapariyāyena
maraṇavaṇṇaṃ vā saṃvaṇṇeyya, maraṇāya vā samādapeyya, ayam pi
pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso 'ti. 177
Whatever monk... should praise the beauty of death, or instigate
(anyone) to die, saying, ‘Look, my man, what do you need throughout
this evil and wrong life? It should be better for you to die than to live.’
or whoever harbors the decision or intention, or should praise the beauty
of death or instigate (anyone) to die in various ways, he too is one
defeated and not in communion.
This is the plot of the second sub-story. Those monks are not directly involved
176 ... tassa asappāyāni c' eva bhojanāni bhuñjato asappāyāni ca khādanīyāni khādato asappāyāni
sāyanīyāni sāyato asappāyāni pānāni pivato kharo ābādho uppajji, so ten' eva ābādhena kālaṃ akāsi.
Vin iii 72.
177 Vin iii 73.
129

in the killing of the lay-follower, but indirectly achieved their purpose to take
his life.
The point of this prohibition in this context is that monks should not allure
anyone to die by teaching what Buddhism does not value. The six monks first
lead the lay-follower to believe that he has completed all the wholesome deeds
and has been freed from fear of death, which is synonymous to their attestation
that he has been liberated. The lay-follower’s subsequent belief (even though
it is wrong) evokes the dialogue between Vakkali and the Buddha and that
between Channa and Sāriputta. The exact difference between Vakkali and
Channa, however, is that Buddhists should never harbour a suicidal motives for
gaining more sensuality. The five qualities of sensual pleasure that those six
monks had is the temptation that Buddhists should avoid and contemplate
described repeatedly in the suttas. 178 Since those monks encouraged the lay-
follower to hasten his own death due to such desire, his wife accused them as
‘morally bad’ and ‘liars.’ This implies that Buddhist morality and truth is
absolutely opposed to the idea of abandoning life and praising death in hope of
rebirth in the abode where one can enjoy sensual pleasures. Moreover, praising
the beauty of death also means to make someone feel such immoral and untrue
advantages. Importantly, this ruling also questions whether the motivation for
gaining liberation, not sensual pleasure, is allowable in Buddhism. Neither
Godhika, Vakkali, or Channa wished joyful rebirth, and thus their deaths cannot
178 For example, the qualities of the five sensual pleasures to allure is described in the
Mahādukkhakkhandha-sutta (MN 13) in which these mean any pleasing and joyful feeling arisen
through the five senses such as eye, ear, nose, tongue, and tangibility. M i 85.
130

be discussed in the case of this prohibition, either.
The contrast with the case of modern euthanasia should be referred to.
In the case of euthanasia,neither a doctor or a family or a patient himself wishes
the patient’s death in hope of the latter having a better ending. Considering that
the death of the lay-follower was motivated by his wishing for a better rebirth
but not a better ending, this sub-story should not be precisely compared with
the modern issues of euthanasia. However, the following interpretation may be
plausible: Buddhists should not intentionally end their life earlier even in the
event of palliative care because it gives the patients something relaxing and
agreeable to think about. The Vinaya repeatedly encourages monks to look after
the sick monks just as Sāriputta proposed Channa to offer care and
medicine. 179
The other Buddhist attitude that is relevant to euthanasia is also found in the
Vinaya. Table 4 shows four cases, in each of which a monk intentionally
involved himself to haste someone’s death. Just as in the first case that I
discussed above, the rest of the three cases similarly entail the pārājika
offence. Case 2 is that of a monk who praises the beauty of death to another
monk who is ill out of compassion (kāruññena). 180 In the second case, a monk
asks the executor not to torture a robber to death but to kill him instantly with a
single blow (ekena pahārena jīvitā voropehī) at the execution. The third case
refers to both a monk and a nun, asked by their relatives who seemed to be
pressured into caring for a limbless man, suggesting that they should make him
179 There are several cases of monks’ reactions to sick monks in Vin iii 82-f.
180 Vin iii 79.
131

drink buttermilk to kill him (te taṃ takkaṃ pāyesuṃ). 181
Table 4 The Other Cases in the Vinaya which are Comparable with Euthanasia
(A) person (B) What a monk
Case PTS B)'s motive How A died
who died (/monks) did
by intaking
Vin iii praised the beauty taking his
1 71-3. a sick layman of death beautiful wife poisonous
food/drink
praised the beauty compassion with
Vin iii a sick monk not mentioned
2 of death his sickness
79.
by the executor
asked the executer compassion with
3 Vin iii a robber who accepted B’s
to kill him instantly his torture
86. request
agreeing to his
suggest making him by drinking butter
4 Vin iii a limbless man relatives' wish
drink butter milk milk
86. for his death
As I examined above, even though the act of killing may stem from a
compassionate motivation for someone or the others such as a person's family, it is
still undoubtedly regarded as a pārājika offence. In contrast, the fact that suicide or
killing of self without anyone's help seems not to be clearly prohibited only appears
evident from reading of the original story. Therefore, the commentary or its later
compilators sought a solution, a karmic rationale which can function as a moral
warning for prevention.
181 The latter two cases are described in Vin iii 86.
132

Conclusion
Throughout this dissertation, I have examined Buddhist texts relevant to
suicide and euthanasia: the understanding of general Buddhist ethics on these
acts as forms of killing, the themes regarding monastic suicide as narrative, the
symbolization of the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice, and the background stories of
the Vinaya.
Without a doubt, Buddhism values life. Moreover, the stories regarding the
three monks do not constitute discourses on death. The same is true of the
narratives of the Bodhistta’s self-sacrifice. Instead, these are life histories,
affirming the value of life and advising on how to live one’s life. These are
not mere apologie geared towards preaching Buddhist moral values. Seeing
these stories being referred to as the source to warn and ethicize the acts of
suicide and euthanasia, I attempted to discover other ways of reading these
texts.
I expected in this dissertation to search for alternative readings of
Buddhist narratives that might correspond to the three objectives of my study
as provided in the introduction. By way of summary, let me now review and
consolidate the answers to each of these objectives that I have proposed
throughout the body of this dissertation.
In Chapter 1, I introduced concepts from general Buddhist morality and
briefly compared these with Western ethical theories such as consequentialism,
deontology, and virtue ethics. With detailed reference to Goodman’s study, I
133

discussed major ideas regarding Buddhist ethics by applying the relevant
sources as seen in the Pāli Tipiṭaka. Central to Buddhist morality is the
encouragement of wholesome karmas and to discourage unwholesome ones,
including those that incorporate killing. I demonstrated that the definition of
these would derive from interpersonal relationships in most cases when one acts
in society. This also led to a question of whether self-killing— without harming
others— should be regarded as embodying unwholesome karma.
Moving to the reading of the Sutta Piṭaka for the second objective, I
examined the three discourses regarding the monastic suicide of: Godhika,
Vakkali, and Channa. I attempted a new reading of these discourses to evaluate
their deaths by suicide as narratives. This was intended to show the essential
themes as literature could present them, beyond a n y dualistic ethical
judgments. Thus I focused on their dramatic characteristics such as story line,
characters, and dialogues. My further analysis of the third objective was
conducted by comparing the commentary and modern previous studies in order
to show the development of ethicization concerning their resultant suicides.
Consequently, the result of my examination also clarified the dramatic effects
of the three discourses demonstrating the process of one’s life and the meaning
of life, and not only limiting my focus on suicide alone.
The examination of the jātaka narratives in Chapter 3 also aimed to
achieve the second and third objectives. First, I explained the meaning of dāna-
pāramī that describes the motives behind the Bodhisatta’s self-sacrifice based
on the studies of the Pāli Tipiṭaka. I then analyzed his motives by classifying
all eight jātaka stories into two groups according to the Bodhisatta’s
134

declaration before his self-sacrifice. The second group has more specific
utterances such as the attainment of omniscience, while the stories of the first
group more simply voice the motive of saving the life of another human being.
I also speculated about the probability of the development of these motives in
the later extra-canonical collection of jātaka narratives such as the Paññāsa-
jātaka. Since the Bodhisatta declares his motives in detail in the Paññāsa-
jātaka, I analyzed the development of symbolization of the Bodhiatta’s self-
sacrifice so that general Buddhists will not copy such suicidal acts. I also
presented my idea that this intended symbolization also had the paradoxical
effect of attracting others to copy his actions.
The examination in chapter 4 was to show how the acts of suicide and
euthanasia as described in the Vinaya were interpreted in negative ways in order
to discourage these as being associated with unwholesome karmas. For the
second objective of my study, I focused on the reading of the first sub- story
that caused the promulgation of the third pārājika rule. My first task was to
read the original text as narrative by focusing on the story and the characters in
each scene just as I would watch a drama or theatrical performance. I first
classified the major incidents in three scenes and secondly, for the third
objective, I analyzed the explanation in the commentaries in order to clarify
what the commentaries saw as problematic and compared it with the other moral
concepts reiterated in the Pāli Tipiṭaka. One notable point is the incoherent
reasoning governing the Buddha’s seclusion. The commentary attempted to
justify the Buddha’s actions with reference to Abhidhammic concepts such as
destructive karma. The other is the difference between the Buddha’s statement
135

calling for prohibition and that calling for condemnation. My examination
showed this difference introduced confusion or ambiguity regarding the
question of whether or not suicide should be included in the third pārājika. I
also presented some more examinations of the other stories concerning suicide
and euthanasia.
Throughout my study, my aim was not to investigate these cases of suicide
and euthanasia in the Pāli Tipiṭaka within a framework based on Buddhist
ethics. This is not a study on Buddhist ethics. Instead, I attempted to trace the
transition of the later attempts made to ethicize suicide and euthanasia in the
context of negative views and also to read the relevant texts as narratives.
Especially as Buddhism pays the greatest respect to living one’s life with
wisdom and compassion, violent acts are never encouraged.
It must be said that these stories involving suicide and euthanasia never
actually encourage these acts, but simply relate how people in the stories acted
and lived. Their ethicization may have contributed to the prevention of or
warning against suicide and euthanasia to Buddhists. Conversely, this has also
limited in another way the understanding of these “life” stories. More
importantly, each case depends on the situations into which people in the
story were placed. Therefore, none of the cases presented in these stories can
be universally applied to others.
For future studies of suicide and euthanasia from a Buddhist perspective,
I would suggest that one should avoid framing Buddhist ideas exclusively in
concepts derived from Western ethics. Although this attempt could be
successful to some extent, it may well be inadequate to cover the entire
136

spectrum of Buddhist moral values. Buddhist ethics will never offer universal
theories while also remaining flexible enough to be applied to each case in the
same manner that the Buddha helped beings to be liberated..
Instead, I would suggest that the studies of these texts can attempt new
possible ways of textual readings from different perspectives. Although
searching for their underlying ethics is one approach to reading these stories, I
hope researchers including myself can find different ways to arrive at new
interpretations of them. I also hope such new perspectives can shed more light
on as well as offer a more cogent response to the issues of suicide and
euthanasia from Buddhist perspectives.
137

Bibliography
1. Primary Sources
AbhiDhammatthasaṅgaha and AbhiDhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā. H.
Saddhatissa, ed. London: Pali Text Society, 1989.
Aṅguttara-nikāya. 5 Vols. Vols I-II, R. Morris. (ed.) Vols. III-V, E. Hardy,
ed. First published 1885-1900. Reprint. London: Pali Text Society,
1979-1995.
Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka. N.A. Jayawickrama. (ed.) First published 1974.
Reprint. London: Pali Text Society, 1995.
Dhammapada. O. von Hinüber and K.R. Norman. (eds.) London: Pali Text Society,
1994, 1995.
Dīgha-nikāya. 3 Vols. Vols. I-II, T.W. Rhys Davids and J.E. Carpenter.
(eds.) Vol. III, J.E. Carpenter, ed. First published 1889-1910.
Reprint. London: Pali Text Society, 1995-2007.
Jātaka with Commentary. 7 Vols. V. Fausbøll. (ed.) First published 1877- 1896.
Reprint. London: Pali Text Society, 1990-1.
Khuddakapāṭha. Helmer Smith. (ed.) First published 1915. Reprint. London: Pali Text
Society, 1978.
Majjhima-nikāya. 3 Vols. Vol. I, V. Trenckner. (ed.) Vols. II-III, Robert
Chalmers, ed. First published 1888-99. Reprint. London: Pali Text
Society, 1993-94.
Milindapañha. V. Trenchner. (ed.) First published 1880. Reprint. London: Pali Text
138

Society, 1961.
Samantapāsādikā. 8 Vols. J. Takakusu and M. Nagai (ed.)London: Pali Text Society,
1977.
Saṃyutta-nikāya. 5 Vols. Léon Feer. (ed.) First published 1884-98. Reprint.
London: Pali Text Society, 1975-2006.
Theragāthā & Therīgāthā. R. Pischel, (ed.) with Appendixes by K.R. Norman
and L. Alsdorf. London: Pali Text Society, 1990
Theragāthā Commentary (Paramatthadīpanī V). 3 Vols. F.L. Woodward. (ed.)
London: Pali Text Society, 1995.
Vibhaṅga. Mrs C.A.F and Rhys Davids. (ed.) First published, 1904. Reprint.
London: Pali Text Society, 1978.
Vibhaṅga Commentary (Sammoha-vinodanī). Ven. A.P. Buddhadatta. (ed.) First
published, 1923. Reprint. London: Pali Text Society, 1980.
Vinaya-piṭaka. 5 Vols. H. Oldenberg. (ed.) First published 1879-1883.
Reprint. London: Pali Text Society, 1969-1995.
Visuddhimagga. 2 Vols. C.A.F. Rhys Davids. (ed.) First published 1920.
Reprinted as one vol. London: Pali Text Society, 1975.
Yamaka Commentary. Mrs C.A.F. Rhys Davids. (ed.) London: Pali Text Society,
1912.
2. Electronic Pāli Sources
Chaṭṭha Saṅgāyana Tipitaka. Vipassana Research Institute. <http://tipitaka.org>.
139

3. Translations and dictionaries
Bodhi, Bhikkhu. (trans.) 2000. The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A
Translation of the Saṃyutta Nikāya. 2 vols. Boston: Wisdom
Publications.
Horner, I. B. (trans.) 1993. The Book of the Kindred Saying. Vol. 4. London: The Pali
Text Society.
Davids, Rhys, & William Stede (ed.). The Pali Text Society Pali-English Dictionary.
1952. London: The Pali Text Society.
Woodward, F. L. Milinda’s Questions. Vol. 1. 1956. London: The Pali Text Society.
4. Secondary Sources
Bhikkhu Bodhi, ed., 1993. A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma.
Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu. 1994. “The Noble Eightfold Path: The Way to the End of Suffering”.
The Wheel Publication No. 308/311. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Bronkhost, Johannes. 2006. Greater Magadha: Studies in the Culture of Early India.
Leiden: Brill.
Chou, Jouhan 周柔含. 2008. “齊頂(首)補特伽羅についての一考察 (Samasisi-
puggala)”. Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies. vol. 57 n.1: Tokyo: The
Japanese Association of Indian and Buddhist Studies. 367-373.
Delhey, Martin. 2006. “Views on Suicide in Buddhism: Some Remarks”. LIRI
Seminar Proceedings Series. Vol. 2. Michael Zimmermann (ed.),
Lumbini: Lumbini International Research Institute. 25-63.
140

Durkheim, Émile. 2006. On Suicide, Robin Russ, (trans.) London: Penguin
Classics.
Fletcher, Joseph. 1996. Situation Ethics: The New Morality. Introduction by James F.
Childress. Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press.
Fraser, Chris, Dan Robins, et imothy O'Leary. 2011. Ethics in Early China: An
Anthology. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Gombrich, Richard F. 1997. How Buddhism Began: The Conditioned Genesis of the
Early Teachings. London: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Goodman, Charles. 2009. Consequences of Compassion: An Interpretation
and Defense of Buddhist Ethics. New York: Oxford.
Guruge, Ananda W.P. 2005. “The Buddha’s Encounters with Māra the Tempter:
Their Representation in Literature and Art”. The Wheel Publication No.
419. Access to Insight Edition. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Harvey, Peter. 2000. An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics. Cambridge;
Cambridge University Press.
Keown, Damien. 1996. “Buddhism and Suicide: The Case of Channa”.
Journal of Buddhist Ethics, Vol. 3:8-31.
———2001. Buddhism and Bioethics. New York: Palgrave.
Koike, Kiyoyuki. 2007. “仏教思想と生命倫理 (Bioethics from a Buddhist
Viewpoint)”. Doctoral diss., Ryukoku University.
Lamotte, Étienne. 1987. “Religious Suicide in Early Buddhism”. Buddhist Studies
Review.
McDermott, James. P. 1977. “Kamma in the Milindapañhā”. Journal of the
141

American Oriental Society, vol. 97 no. 4: 460-468.
Main, Jessica. 2008. “The Karma of Others: Stories from the Milindapañhā and
the Petavatthu-aṭṭhakathā”. In Revisioning Karma: The eBook, Charles
S. Prebish, Damien Keown, and Dale S. Wright (ed.), 297–351.
Nawa, Ryuken. 2011. “ チ ャ ン ナ の 自 殺 (Channa’s
Suicide)”.
Machikaneyama Ronso. Philosophy. Vol. 45: 67- 82.
Ohnuma, Reiko. 2006. Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body
in the Indian Buddhist Literature. New York: Columbia University
Press
——— 1998. “The Gift of Body and the Gift of Dharma”. History of Religions.
Vol. 37, no. 4. 323–59.
Promta, Somparn. 2008. An Essay Concerning Buddhist Ethics. Bangkok:
Chulalongkorn University Press.
Radich, Michael. 2016. “A “Prehistory” to Chinese Debates on the Survival
of Death by the Spirit, with a Focus on the Term Shishen 識 神 / Shishen
神識”. Journal of Chinese Religions, 44:2. 105-126.
Sheravanichkul, Arthid. 2008. “Self-Sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the
Paññāsa Jātaka”. Religion Compass. Vol. 2/5. Blackwell Publishing
Ltd. 769–787.
Tillich, Paul. 1973. Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Unebe, Toshiya (ed.) 2008. “パーリ語およびタイ語写本による東南アジア
142

撰述仏典の研究 (A Study of Southeast Asian Buddhist Literature,
Based on Pāli and Thai Manuscripts)”. Study Report of the research
project, Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C), Project Number
17520046 (2005–2007). Nagoya: Nagoya University, Graduate Schools
of Letters.
———2012. “Not for the Achievement of a Sāvaka or Paccekabuddha: The
Motive behind the Bodhisatta’s Self-sacrifice in the Paññāsa-Jātaka”.
Buddhist Studies Review. Vol. 29.1. 35-56. Journal of UK Association
for Buddhist Studies.
———2013. "パンニャーサ・ジャータカに説かれる捨身の目的—「声門、
独覚の栄達（sampatti）を求めず」をめぐって——(Motive behind
the Bodhisatta’s Self-sacrifice in the Paññāsa-Jātaka: Not for the
Achievement of a Sāvaka or Paccekabuddha)". 『名古屋大学文学部研
究論集．哲学』(The Journal of the Faculty of Letters, Nagoya
University. Philosophy). Vol. 59. 35-57.
5. Internet Sources
Acariya Dhammapala, “A Treatise on the Paramis: From the Commentary to the
Cariyapitaka”, Trans., Bhikkhu Bodhi, Access to Insight, 2005,
“Catechism of the Catholic Church.” Retrieved on Jan 25, 2017.
< http://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/_INDEX.HTM >.
143