TITLE: Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism: Narrating the Bodhisatta Path
AUTHOR: Naomi Appleton
YEAR: 2010
LANGUAGE: EN
ORIGINAL_FILE: Jataka Stories in Theravada Buddhism Narrating the Bodhisatta Path (2010) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
TYPE: PDF
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 520712
STATUS: OK
============================================================

Jātaka Stories in Theravāda
Buddhism
Narrating the Bodhisatta Path
Naomi Appleton

JĀtaka StorieS in theravĀda BuddhiSm
Jātaka stories (stories about the previous births of the Buddha) are very popular
in Theravāda Buddhist countries, where they are found in both canonical texts
and later compositions and collections, and are commonly used in sermons,
children’s books, plays, poetry, temple illustrations, rituals and festivals. Whilst
at first glance many of the stories look like common fables or folktales, Buddhist
tradition tells us that the stories illustrate the gradual path to perfection
exemplified by the Buddha in his previous births, when he was a bodhisatta
(buddha-to-be).
Jātaka stories have had a long and colourful history, closely intertwined with
the development of doctrines about the Buddha, the path to buddhahood, and
how Buddhists should behave now the Buddha is no more. This book explores
the shifting role of the stories in Buddhist doctrine, practice, and creative
expression, finally placing this integral Buddhist genre back in the centre of
scholarly understandings of the religion.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Jātaka Stories in Theravāda
Buddhism
Narrating the Bodhisatta Path
Naomi aPPleToN
Cardiff University, Wales

© Naomi appleton 2010
all rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
Naomi appleton has asserted her right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents act,
1988, to be identified as the author of this work.
Published by
ashgate Publishing limited ashgate Publishing Company
Wey Court east Suite 420
Union Road 101 Cherry Street
Farnham Burlington
Surrey, GU9 7PT VT 05401-4405
england USa
www.ashgate.com
British library Cataloguing in Publication Data
appleton, Naomi, 1982–
Jātaka stories in Theravāda Buddhism : narrating the bodhisatta path.
1. Jātaka stories—History and criticism. 2. Theravāda Buddhism—Doctrines.
i. Title
294.3’82325—dc22
library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
appleton, Naomi, 1982–
Jātaka stories in Theravāda Buddhism : narrating the Bodhisatta path / Naomi appleton.
p. cm.
includes bibliographical references and index.
iSBN 978-1-4094-1092-8 (hardcover : alk. paper) — iSBN 978-1-4094-1093-5 (ebook)
1. Tipitaka. Suttapitaka. Khuddakanikaya. Jātaka—Criticism, interpretation, etc.
2. Theravāda Buddhism. i. Title.
BQ1467.a67 2010
294.3’82325—dc22
2010032129
iSBN 9781409410928 (hbk)
iSBN 9781409410935 (ebk)

Contents
Preface vii
List of Abbreviations ix
1 What is a Jātaka? 1
2 The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 21
3 The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 41
4 Generic Conventions embraced and ignored 65
5 Jātakas and Buddhology 85
6 Jātakas and Biography 109
7 Jātaka ideology in Practice 123
8 The Perfection of Storytelling 147
Bibliography 159
Index 171

This page has been left blank intentionally

Preface
This is a book about Theravāda Buddhism, but also about a fundamental question
shared by all Buddhist traditions: how should Buddhists relate to the Buddha’s
teaching, example and person? This question has been answered quite differently
by mahāyāna traditions and the school that became known as Theravāda. The
bodhisattva path has been the subject of much scholarship, yet the Pāli equivalent
– the bodhisatta path – may be a new concept to many. in Theravāda Buddhism
this path is inextricably entangled with jātaka stories – stories about episodes in
the past births of Gotama Buddha – and related texts.
The idea that jātaka stories illustrate the path to buddhahood is not new to
the scholarly community. Caroline Rhys-Davids remarked in the introduction to
her 1929 translation of some of the stories:
Taking then the Jatakas with their introduction, it is scarcely an overstatement
to say that, for all the much foolishness we find in them, the oddities, the
inconsistencies, the many distortions in ideals and in the quest of them, they
are collectively the greatest epic, in literature, of the ascent of man
and asks:
Will the next writer on the subject see beneath the ‘motley’ of the Jataka … the
theme which constitutes its real significance – its real significance not for one
elect man alone, but for every human being?1
eighty-one years later i hope that i have done justice to the expectations of this
pioneer of Pāli scholarship.
Because i am focusing upon the Theravāda tradition i primarily use Pāli
terms, unless the subject under discussion requires terminology in a different
language. i refer to the Buddha-to-be as the Bodhisatta and the path he
demonstrates as the bodhisatta path; likewise the Buddha (Gotama) and buddhas
(multiple). References to jātakas from the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā (also known as the
Jātakaṭṭhakathā) are made according to the numbers and titles used in Fausbøll’s
edition and the translation by Cowell et al. References to other texts use standard
titles and divisions to enable reference to both Pali Text Society (PTS) and other
editions and translations; references to PTS editions are provided in footnotes
where appropriate. all translations are my own unless stated.
1 C.A.F. Rhys-Davids (trans.), Stories of the Buddha (London, 1929), pp. xviii–xix,
xxvii.

viii Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
The research upon which this book is based was mostly carried out during
my time as a doctoral student at oxford University under the expert supervision
of Professors Christopher minkowski and David Gellner. i am very grateful to
the arts and Humanities Research Council for funding my D.Phil. studies, and
the British academy for allowing me to continue my research and prepare
it for publication. i also owe a huge debt to Sarah Shaw, and latterly arthid
Sheravanichkul, for the wonderful jātaka-lunches that stimulated so many of my
more intelligent thoughts. in addition, many thought-provoking conversations
with lance Cousins and Peter Skilling have greatly enhanced my work, and the
librarians at the Bodleian and elsewhere have provided invaluable assistance.
i was very lucky to have been inspired by Kate Crosby and andrew Skilton
to study Sanskrit and Pāli as an undergraduate. i am grateful to lance Cousins
for helping me take my Pāli skills to the next level during my time in oxford,
and both amal Gunasena at SoaS and Prof. meegaskumbura at the University of
Peradeniya for providing Sinhala tuition.
i am very grateful to everyone who made my time in Kandy so enjoyable and
profitable, especially maya Shobrook and the Department of Pāli and Buddhist
Studies at the University of Peradeniya, who provided tea, cake and excellent
conversation. i am indebted to Ven. Wimalagnana for showing me temple
illustrations in and around Kandy and for many interesting conversations on
the subject, as well as to Ven. Dhammarakkhita who helped me gain access to
manuscripts. The aHRC and the max müller fund subsidised my trips.
Various scholars from around the world have generously shared their
thoughts, skills and resources, including anne Blackburn, lance Cousins, Kate
Crosby, max Deeg, ian Harris, Peter Harvey, Will Johnson, Justin mcDaniel,
Jeffrey Samuels, Sarah Shaw, Peter Skilling, andrew Skilton, John Strong and
Jan Westerhoff. Support less scholarly but no less valuable has been provided
by my wonderful friends and family. in particular i must thank my mother for
her endless encouragement, Sarah easterby-Smith for sharing her valuable
friendship and botanical expertise, alice eardley for her companionship in the
House of eternity, anas Jarjour for everything he does for me without even
knowing it, and my nephew Charlie for constantly reminding me not to take it
all too seriously.
it is my fascination with Religious Studies that has propelled me through the
highs and lows of this work. The wonderful people in the School of Religious and
Theological Studies at Cardiff University have long nurtured my interest, and
Peggy morgan kept it alive during my detour into oriental Studies. However, its
origins go further back, to my superb school RS teacher Penny Clay, who likely
has no idea of the effect she has had upon my life’s trajectory. i would like to
dedicate this book to her, and to all the other teachers who have inspired and
challenged me over the years.
Naomi appleton
oxford, June 2010

list of abbreviations
AN Aṅguttara Nikāya
DN Dīgha Nikāya
JA Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, or Jātakaṭṭhakathā
MN Majjhima Nikāya
P Pāli
PTS Pali Text Society
SHB Simon Hewavitarne Bequest
Sin Sinhala
Skt Sanskrit
SN Saṃyutta Nikāya
Tib Tibetan
VRi Vipassana Research institute

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 1
What is a Jātaka?
once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was ruling in Varanasi, a festival was
proclaimed in the city. The king’s gardener wanted to go and join the festivities,
so he asked a troop of monkeys who lived in the garden to look after the plants
while he was away. aware of the benefits they had from living in the palace
garden, the monkey-king happily agreed that they would do so. The monkeys set
about watering the young trees. ‘But be careful not to waste the water!’ warned
the monkey-king. So they first pulled up the plants and measured the roots, in
order to ascertain how much water each plant needed. a wise man was passing
and commented (in verse):
assistance from a fool does not lead to happiness:
a fool fails, just like the monkey gardener.1
Taken as a simple story, we might learn from this that we shouldn’t associate
with fools, and that we certainly shouldn’t allow monkeys to do our gardening.
However, this story is not just a story, it is the forty-sixth jātaka of the
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā (henceforth JA), the semi-canonical jātaka collection of the
Theravāda school of Buddhism. So, we might ask, what difference does it make
to the story to identify it as a jātaka? What exactly is a jātaka?
The story of the monkey gardeners is illustrated at one of the earliest Buddhist
sites, the stūpa of Bhārhut in Central india. The stone relief from around the first
century bce shows a wise man observing two monkeys, one of whom is inspecting
the roots of a tree whilst the other carries water pots. Similar illustrations are
found in South and Southeast asian temples, cartoons and children’s books.2 in
some of these depictions a halo or golden skin indicates the special status of the
wise observer, for he is identified as the Buddha in a previous life. The presence
of the Buddha – or, as he is called before his awakening, the Bodhisatta – is the
1 my translation of the verse from JA 46. all references to the JA are to the standard
numbering in V. Fausbøll (ed.), The Jātaka together with its commentary being tales of the
anterior births of Gotama Buddha (6 vols, london, 1877–1896) which is also used in e.B.
Cowell (ed. – several translators), The Jātaka, or Stories of the Buddha’s Former Births (6 vols,
Cambridge, 1895–1907). all translations are my own unless otherwise stated.
2 illustrations of this story from Bhārhut, a selection of Thai temples and some
modern media are found in Peter Skilling (ed.), Past Lives of the Buddha: Wat Si Chum – Art,
Architecture and Inscriptions (Bangkok, 2008), pp. 202–3.

2 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
key criterion for identifying a story as a jātaka. Simply defined, a jātaka is a story
relating an episode in a past birth of the Buddha.
Jātakas defined in this manner are found scattered throughout the texts of
the early Buddhist schools as well as in commentaries and later compositions
and compilations. The term is often used to refer specifically to the JA as this is
the largest and most prominent collection, yet several other jātaka collections
exist both within and outside the Pāli scriptures, as do more general collections
of narrative, which often contain some jātakas. Jātaka texts and stories remain
especially popular in Theravāda Buddhist countries, as demonstrated by their
frequent illustration in temples, as well as their presence in sermons, children’s
story books, plays, television programmes, theatre, dance and poetry. The stories
are also used in rituals at key moments in life, and form a lively part of many
Buddhist festivals. Huge roadside illustrations during the Sri lankan celebration
of Vesak, as well as long public recitations and dramatisations in Southeast asia,
are testament to the enduring popularity of the stories.
The presence of jātakas in all aspects of Theravāda life might seem somewhat
curious, given the widely-held view that Theravāda Buddhists glorify buddhas
and the bodhisattva path less than their mahāyāna neighbours. Several questions
present themselves about the place of jātakas in Theravāda society: if jātakas
illustrate the actions of the Bodhisatta, should we view them as exemplary
narratives or devotional ones? How do we explain the stories in which the
Bodhisatta plays a minor or morally ambiguous part? is it important whether or
not the stories are narrated by the Buddha? What is the significance of the stories
in the long biography of the Buddha? Does their illustration of the ideal path of
a bodhisatta conflict with the mainstream Theravāda goal of arahatship? What
role do the stories play when they are used in sermons, illustrated in temples or
recited at festivals? This book is an attempt to answer such questions.
once we consider these issues it becomes clear that formulating a definition
of jātaka stories may be more complicated than it seemed at first sight, for
many of the questions above can be reformulated as questions about definition:
does a jātaka story have to be narrated by the Buddha? Does the Bodhisatta’s
behaviour in the story affect its identification as a jātaka? Do jātaka stories
illustrate the actions of the Bodhisatta or the bodhisatta path as an ideal to be
pursued? Do jātaka stories have a different role in society to other forms of
Buddhist narrative? Such questioning becomes circular, for in order to form a
clear definition of jātaka stories one must first look at their role in Buddhist texts
and societies, and yet the latter requires at least a working definition of jātakas
before it can be commenced. i shall therefore begin this book with an attempt
to clarify and qualify the simple definition of jātakas as stories of past births of
the Buddha, by looking at the possibility of defining the form, subject matter,
audience and purpose of jātakas. However, whilst we may end this chapter with a
better understanding of the complexity of jātakas, the question ‘what is a jātaka?’
will pursue us throughout the chapters that follow.

What is a Jātaka? 3
JĀTaKa aND aVaDĀNa
one problem with any definition of jātakas is the difficulty of disentangling
jātakas from avadānas.3 The distinction perhaps most often made is that jātakas
are about the past births of the Buddha whereas avadānas are about the past
births of other people. However, a study of Buddhist narrative soon reveals that
the situation is not so simple as this: jātakas often contain the Bodhisatta in a
minor role (thus actually seeming to be about another character altogether),
whilst texts that call themselves avadānas (or apadānas in Pāli) are sometimes
about past lives of the Buddha. other terms are also found: in the early portions
of the Theravāda scriptures stories of rebirth appear un-named, as simple
bhūtapubbam (‘formerly’) stories, and the recent Gandhāran finds include
what we might call jātakas and avadānas under the title of pūrvayoga (‘former-
connection’), a term also used in the Mahāvastu. To further complicate matters,
the Gandhāran manuscripts also contain stories that self-identify as avadānas,
but which contain no rebirth of any of the characters.4
another common definition of avadāna, this time compatible with the
Gandhāran materials, is ‘glorious deed’, or simply ‘legend’ or ‘tale’, taking the
Sanskrit root as ava√dai, meaning to cleanse or purify. Under this definition the
term is assumed to denote a story of the valiant efforts of a person (often one of
the Buddha’s disciples), usually demonstrating its results in a present or future
birth. This is not the only etymology to have been proposed for avadāna, however,
and the lack of agreement between scholars reveals the complexity of the term’s
origins and uses.5 another possibility is that the term could be a back-formation
from the Pāli apadāna. Whilst this Pāli term is used as the title of a collection
of birth stories (of arahats, paccekabuddhas and buddhas) in the Theravāda
tradition, it also has the simple meaning ‘reaping’ (related to the Sanskrit root
ava√do, to cut) and is found in descriptions of rice-harvesting in the Agañña
Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya. Thus mellick has suggested that an apadāna is part of
the agricultural metaphor of reaping the rewards of one’s actions.6 Since such
actions could be by the Bodhisatta or another person, there is no reason why
an avadāna could not also be a jātaka; indeed some stories in the Theravāda
3 in this discussion i will use primarily the Sanskrit term since the scholarly debate
about avadānas has centred on Sanskrit texts and definitions.
4 Timothy lenz, A New Version of the Gāndhārī Dharmapada and a Collection of Previous-
Birth Stories: British Library Fragments 16 + 25 (Seattle, 2003) and Gandhāran Avadānas: British
Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 1-3 and 21 and Supplementary Fragments A-C (Seattle and london,
2010).
5 a succinct outline of the different etymologies proposed over the years is
presented by Reiko ohnuma, Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body in Indian
Buddhist Literature (New York, 2007), p. 291 fn. 31.
6 Sally mellick, A Critical Edition, with Translation, of Selected Portions of the Pāli Apadāna
(oxford University D.Phil. Thesis, 1993), p. 9ff.

4 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Apadāna relate the karmicly significant deeds of the Buddha in previous births,
and the terms bodhisattvāvadāna (Skt) and buddhāpadāna (P) are found describing
jātakas in the Northern and Southern traditions respectively.7
if we accept this definition of avadāna, is it possible to suggest – as some
scholars have done – that jātakas are merely a sub-set of the avadāna genre,
illustrating karmicly significant actions performed by the Bodhisatta? a quick
reading of the JA reveals this to be untrue, for many of the Bodhisatta’s actions
in this text are karmicly insignificant, as we will see in the next chapter. The idea
that jātakas illustrate karmicly significant acts would therefore demand that we
exclude much of the semi-canonical jātaka book, the very text that is considered
definitional for the genre, at least within the Theravāda tradition. To go even
further and suggest that jātaka and avadāna are merely interchangeable terms is
also not a tenable position, since historical evidence tells us that the two genres
had separate specialist reciters, and are classified separately in early lists of
Buddhist textual types.8
if etymologies cannot help us, we might look for a distinction between jātaka
and avadāna based upon their apparent ideologies. in ohnuma’s study of gift-of-
the-body jātakas, she distinguishes between jātaka and avadāna on the basis of
the absence or presence of Buddhism, contrasting what she calls the ‘ethos of
the jātaka’ (perfection) and ‘ethos of the avadāna’ (devotion):
By means of the jātakas, the bodhisattva is lauded and exalted for the
magnificent lengths he went to during his previous lives – but by means of
the avadānas, ordinary Buddhists receive the message that such magnificent
lengths are now unnecessary thanks to the presence of Buddhism in the world
as a powerful field of merit.9
She then goes on to situate gift-of-the-body stories within these genres, as
‘some of the most “jātaka-like” jātakas of all’.10 Since gift-of-the-body stories
7 For example the Cariyāpiṭaka is also entitled Buddhāpadāna, and Āryaśūra’s
Jātakamālā has the alternative title Bodhisattvāvadānamālā.
8 Strong provides three pieces of evidence that demonstrate that the Buddhist
tradition has treated jātaka and avadāna as different genres: ‘(1) the distinction between
avadāna and jātaka in Buddhist classifications of canonical literature; (2) the existence
of “avadānists” – a class of Buddhist story tellers who made avadāna literature their
specialty; and (3) the curious discrimination between avadānas and jātakas that was
consistently made over a period of centuries by the compilers of a group of texts known
as the avadānamālās’. John S. Strong, ‘Buddhist avadānas and Jātakas: The Question of
Genre’ (paper presented at the american academy of Religion meeting, Dallas, 1983),
p. 3. Strong also notes, however, that avadānas appear to be a relatively late development
in the literature, thus they may not always have formed a distinctive genre.
9 ohnuma, Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood, p. 43.
10 ohnuma, Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood, p. 44.

What is a Jātaka? 5
are considerably less popular in Theravāda jātaka collections than in the indian
sources that form the focus of ohnuma’s work, her ideological division between
jātaka and avadāna cannot be transplanted into our context. However, her
discussion highlights the possible insights to be gained from an investigation of
the ‘religious’ or ‘ideological’11 aspects of Buddhist narrative genres.
Where does this leave my attempt to define jātaka? Whilst the situation is
clearly more complicated than at first sight, nothing examined thus far need
prevent me from standing by my original definition of this genre. Defining jātakas
simply as birth stories of the Buddha allows for large ideological variations
within the category of jātaka, which could reveal changes in conceptions of the
genre across different times and communities. Defining jātakas in this way does
not require that avadānas are defined in similar terms, as birth stories about
people other than the Buddha; indeed avadānas can be defined in a totally
different manner, for example as stories about karmicly significant acts. i do not
wish to suggest that this is the only defining feature of avadānas, and indeed it
is important to acknowledge that the exact definitions of both genres changed
amongst different communities at different times. However, the important point
to note here is that the definitions of jātaka and avadāna can be on completely
different bases – thus the genres overlap, rather than being in opposition. it is
possible for a story to be both a jātaka and an avadāna, but also for a story to fit
only in one of the two genres.
another argument in defence of the simple definition of jātakas as birth stories
of the Buddha is that it is in accord with Theravāda narrative texts, which will
form the focus of this study. These texts all contain a character who is identified
as the Bodhisatta, or the Buddha in a previous birth. This is true even of the
JA: although it contains some stories about karmicly significant acts and some
stories that focus upon characters other than the Bodhisatta, one character is
always identified as the Bodhisatta, suggesting that this is the unifying feature
of jātaka stories. Whether hero, saviour, villain, fool or passer-by, the Bodhisatta
is always there.
another feature that unifies the jātakas of the JA in particular is that all of
the stories of past births are narrated by the Buddha himself. This might be seen
as inextricably linked to the presence of the Bodhisatta, for it is the Buddha’s
extraordinary memory that allows him to reveal jātaka stories to his audience.
if the Bodhisatta did not participate in – or at least witness – the story then how
could the Buddha remember it? However, in Buddhism the ability to recall past
lives of oneself and others is achieved through meditative prowess; it is not a
skill limited to buddhas, and indeed even non-Buddhists are capable of telling
stories of their past lives or the lives of other people. Thus the Buddha can see
the births of others as well as his own, and selected others can see their own
(and, presumably, his). Such a situation makes it all the more curious that the
11 i use the term here in a very general sense, relating to the ideas or doctrines
contained within and negotiated by the stories and the collections which contain them.

6 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
jātaka genre became defined by the time of the JA as a story of a past life of the
Buddha related by himself.
Given all the past-life narrative possibilities open to the early Buddhists, why
did jātakas become defined in this way, and how did they become such a prominent
genre in Theravāda Buddhism? i will argue in this book that the answer is found
in the person of the Buddha and the importance of his biography. This book,
briefly put, is an investigation into the ideological relationship between the
person of the Buddha and his jātaka stories in the tradition that is now known
as Theravāda.12
‘ClaSSiCal JĀTaKaS’ aND THe JāTAKATTHAVAṇṇANā
Why, in over 100 years of scholarship on jātakas, has the relationship between the
Buddha and his birth stories not yet been established, or even fully investigated?
one reason for this is the prioritisation of the study of formal aspects of jātakas,
over and above their ideological features. as a consequence, jātakas have been
defined by their form: either because of their inclusion in the JA, or because they
mimic the structure established in this great collection. This structure is well-
known: each story in the JA begins with a quotation from the first line of the
first verse, followed by the story of the present ( paccuppanna-vatthu), which sets
out the Buddha’s reasons for telling the story. The story of the past (atīta-vatthu)
follows, and this is the part considered to be the jātaka proper, since it is in this
section that a previous birth of the Buddha is related. at some point either within
or shortly after the story of the past we find the verse or verses (gāthā), which
are both canonical and in an old form of Pāli, and thus are followed by a word
commentary (veyyākaraṇa). at the end of the jātaka, the consequences of the
Buddha telling it, such as the hearer becoming a stream-enterer, are related. The
jātaka is rounded off with the ‘connection’ (samodhāna), or identification of the
births, where the Buddha links present and past with an explanation of who was
who. This distinctive structure of the jātakas of the JA, which is mimicked also
in many later stories and collections, inspires Skilling to use the term ‘classical
jātakas’ to describe them.13 This term is clearly preferable to the alternative of
‘canonical jātakas’, since the text as a whole has only semi- or quasi-canonical
12 i use this term in full awareness that ‘Theravāda’ can be an unhelpful designation,
since despite referring specifically to both to a vinaya lineage and a textual tradition it has
recently become a ‘catch-all’ term amongst scholars for countries, kings, and so on. The
use of the term here is merely pragmatic, in order to distinguish the objects of my study
from those texts preserved in other schools.
13 Peter Skilling, ‘Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka in South-east asia’, The Journal of the Pali
Text Society, 28 (2006): 113–73.

What is a Jātaka? 7
status, and there are in any case great problems inherent in any attempt to
classify the Theravāda scriptures.14
The study of jātaka texts has long been focused on the JA, both because of
its apparent centrality within Theravāda, and because of its early availability
in the West.15 in trying to ascertain the authenticity of the text, much attention
has been focused upon the division between the verses and the prose, which
was described by Winternitz as ‘[i]n many cases … nothing but the miserable
performance of a very late period’.16 oldenberg applied his ākhyāna theory
to the text, thereby identifying it as a poetic-prosaic tale in which only the
verses were fixed and the prose sections were improvised by each narrator.17
evidence for his position is fourfold: first, the verses alone are canonical (the
prose commentarial); second, the prose cannot have been fixed at the time of
the verses for it frequently contradicts the message of the verses, and is in a
more modern style of Pāli; third, the text is structured according to the number
of verses contained within each story, and each story is identified by the first
pāda of its first verse; fourth, the verses circulated (and continue to circulate)
without the prose.
Thanks to this research on the structure of the JA, recently crowned by von
Hinüber’s meticulous analysis,18 it is now possible to outline the development of
the text in broad terms: the JA is a commentary on the verses of the Jātakapāli,
which now forms the tenth section of the Khuddaka Nikāya of the Theravāda
scriptures. Since these verses are clearly incomplete without the stories that
accompany them, we can assume that they have always circulated with the
stories of the past in some (possibly quite flexible) form. Though there are a
few exceptions, many of the stories of the present seem to have been artificially
created to match their stories of the past, suggesting they may be from a
14 Distinguishing between ‘canonical’ and ‘commentarial’ with regard to Buddhism
imposes Western conceptions of textual hierarchy and ‘sacred’ texts onto the tradition.
although it is clear that Theravāda scholastics viewed the JA as a commentary upon
canonical verses, it is not a natural consequence to thus view the JA as less important than
‘purely canonical’ texts. it is also not clear to what extent such distinctions matter(ed)
to the majority of Buddhists. There is in any case little historical evidence for the early
formation of a fixed ‘canon’ in the Theravāda tradition.
15 The JA was edited in its entirety by V. Fausbøll (1877–1896), who had already
translated several of the stories. T.W. Rhys-Davids began a translation even before
Fausbøll’s endeavour was completed, but after completing the Nidānakathā and the first
40 jātakas, he handed the work over to a team of translators: R. Chalmers, W.H.D. Rouse,
H.T. Francis, R.a. Neil and e.B. Cowell, under the editorship of the latter (1895–1907).
16 m. Winternitz, A History of Indian Literature, Vol. II: ‘Buddhist Literature and Jaina
Literature’, trans. Ketkar and Kohn (Calcutta, 1933), p. 119.
17 a useful survey of the arguments on each side of this identification is found in l.
alsdorf, ‘The Ākhyāna Theory Reconsidered’, Journal of the Oriental Institute, 13 (1963/1964):
195–207.
18 oskar von Hinüber, Entstehung und Aufbau der Jātaka-Sammlung (Stuttgart, 1998).

8 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
somewhat later period of redaction. The overall text of the JA as we have it
now can be dated to the fifth or sixth centuries ce. There are therefore several
discernable layers in the history of the text.
To demonstrate the insight that can be gained from examining these different
layers we may return to the jātaka outlined earlier. in the story of the monkey
gardeners, on the level of the Jātaka-pāli all we have is the verse:
assistance from a fool does not lead to happiness:
a fool fails, just like the monkey gardener.
Thus there is an aphorism, with reference to an event or story that supports it.
There is no discernable Buddhist content. in the story of the past we have the
story to which the verse relates. We see that a wise man spoke the verse as a
comment on the situation, though the comment is addressed to the monkeys,
despite being about them. The wise man plays no part in the action himself. in
the story of the present we are told that this particular jātaka – the ārāmadūsaka-
jātaka – was told by the Buddha after he was informed of a similar set of events
involving a village lad and the garden of a wealthy landowner. at the end of the
jātaka, in the identification of the births, we hear that the village lad was the king
of the monkeys in those days, and the Buddha was the wise man. The Buddha
told the story of the past to show that this is not the first time the village lad has
spoiled a park. There is therefore no discernable Buddhist content in the story
itself, and the Buddha and Bodhisatta are regulated to the sidelines, yet their
presence is enough to identify the story as a jātaka.
as this brief example shows, studies of the formal aspects of the JA provide
an invaluable springboard for work on the ideological impact of the jātaka genre
more broadly. However, such studies should not be seen as the end of the road,
for an understanding of the history or structure of a text is very different to an
understanding of the history or pattern of a text’s influence on a community or
religious tradition. Whilst studies of the formal aspects of the JA have laid the
foundation for further work, it is clear that a definition of jātakas according to
their inclusion in certain texts, or their peculiar structure, will give us at best
only a partial understanding of the significance of the genre.
aRe JĀTaKaS BUDDHiST?
This may seem like a silly question. of course jātakas are Buddhist: they are
ubiquitous in Buddhist texts and Buddhist contexts. However, there has been
a tendency to treat jātakas as somehow non-Buddhist or pre-Buddhist. The
main interest in the JA when it became available to Western scholars in the
late nineteenth century was in its worth as a historical document. The first
scholar to thoroughly examine the text, T.W. Rhys-Davids, described it as ‘full of
information on the daily habits and customs and beliefs of the people of india,

What is a Jātaka? 9
and on every variety of the numerous questions that arise as to their economic
and social conditions’,19 and throughout the past century many scholars have
seen the collection primarily as ‘a storehouse of information about life and
society in ancient india’,20 despite the impossibility of dating the text accurately.
The treatment of the JA as a historical document discouraged any study of the
text’s literary qualities. The literary value of the jātakas was in any case seen
as minimal, thanks to the large amount of repetition and omission, as well as
the sometimes crude content.21 in any case they are stories, and therefore ‘low
culture’, thus the only other interest in them was as folklore, albeit as ‘the most
reliable, the most complete, and the most ancient collection of folklore now
extant in any literature in the world’.22 indeed, for Rhys-Davids, the fact that
jātakas are ancient folklore is what gives them real historical value, since they
provide insight into more ‘primitive’ cultures, and form ‘a priceless record of the
childhood of our race’.23
Such views are so obviously outdated that it is easy to forget that they are
still influential today, albeit in a more subtle form. The definition of jātakas
as common folktales remains particularly prevalent. The trouble is that a
comparativist approach to jātakas that examines their parallels in, for example,
aesopic fables or indian epic, encourages the idea that the JA is made up of
common story stock. Concomitant with this can be a lack of attention to the
effects of placing a story within a specific collection or text. The argument
might be that whilst Buddhists claim that a jātaka illustrates the biography of the
Bodhisatta, we should not expect to find any Buddhist content, since the story
is in fact – for example – Greek. Such an argument leaves jātakas with no unique
19 T.W. Rhys-Davids, Buddhist India (london, 1903), p. 189.
20 Benoychandra Sen, Studies in the Buddhist Jātakas: Tradition and Polity (Calcutta,
1974), p. i. Perhaps the greatest work done on this basis is Ratilal N. mehta, Pre-Buddhist
India: A Political, Administrative, Economic, Social and Geographical Survey of Ancient India Based
Mainly on the Jātaka Stories (Bombay, 1939), though there are also smaller studies on this
theme. However, as Rhys-Davids himself pointed out (Buddhist India, p. 189ff.), if we are
going to use jātaka stories as historical documents we must first determine what period
they refer to. The many layers and levels of redaction of the JA make it impossible to date
the incidental details with any degree of accuracy. Thus even if we were able to defend
such studies from recent scholarly attacks against treating Buddhist texts as documentary
evidence, their contributions are speculative at best.
21 The stories of the JA are often repeated more than once, or associated
simultaneously with different verses or stories of the present. one example is the story of
the greedy crow and pigeon, recounted in JA 42, 274, 375 and 395 with different verses. in
JA 275 only verses are given, with a reference back to the preceding jātaka for the story.
22 Rhys-Davids, Buddhist India, p. 208.
23 T.W. Rhys-Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories (london, 1880), p. lxxix.

10 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
qualities to distinguish them from other indian or indeed world narratives, and
suggests that they contain no distinctively Buddhist morals or doctrines.24
That this is a misleading position can be demonstrated by a comparison with
other settings. For example, in morgan’s study of proverbs, fables, gnomai and
exempla in the early Roman empire, she points out that such genres require
some sort of moral authority, hence, for example, the gradual compilation of
legends surrounding the person of aesop. She argues that popular genres are in
many ways definitive of a society:
it is in the nature of ethics across societies to have much in common … at
the same time, no feature more sharply distinguishes societies than the moral
authorities they invoke … Roman ethics can be felt by Romans to be profoundly
Roman, not because they are unique, but because they appeal to Roman gods,
heroes and stories.25
With this in mind we might say that the same story told by the Buddha and
by aesop is not, in fact, the same story. Thus, even if jātakas have parallels in
other collections, their setting as jātakas must be examined, and their influence
as a genre remains significant. Rather than dismiss the stories as common tales,
we can ask how and why they were transformed into jātakas and established as
Buddhist stories.
it is impossible to treat jātakas as non-Buddhist or even pre-Buddhist for the
simple reason that these stories are now – and have been for over 2,000 years – a
popular part of Buddhism. The confusion here is between the often non-Buddhist
origins of the stories and their present Buddhist textual and societal context. Real
danger lies in assuming that no change has occurred during the appropriation
24 The general expectation seems to be that folklore is moralistic, but not in any
sense that is specific to the community that preserves the tale. For example in Jones’
study of the values of the JA in comparison with the Pāli canon, he provides a very
thorough survey of the JA and makes a number of interesting observations about themes
such as kamma and rebirth, non-harm, friendship and women. However, he states that:
‘We should not expect the Jātaka stories to attempt any systematic or comprehensive
ethical teaching, though we should expect them to be, like folk tales in general, moralistic
in tone.’ John G. Jones, Tales and Teachings of the Buddha: The Jataka Stories in Relation to
the Pāli Canon (london, 1979) p. 57. He then goes on to highlight jātakas in which the
Bodhisatta harms, or even kills, other beings, and behaves less than chivalrously with
regard to women, leaving us wondering what morals he expects the jātakas, as folktales,
to contain. in any case Jones is doubtful about the Buddhist nature of jātakas, and in
particular views jātakas as fundamentally at odds with Buddhism because they talk
of a person progressing through many lives (contradicting the doctrine that there is
nothing that is an attā – a self). He is also keen to point out the historical impossibilities
of the stories, such as the fact that the Bodhisatta is said to be born 395 times while
Brahmadatta was ruling in Benares.
25 Teresa morgan, Popular Morality in the Early Roman Empire (Cambridge, 2007), p. 231.

What is a Jātaka? 11
of a story, whereas in fact even if the story itself remains untouched, making a
story into a jātaka instantly provides a Buddhist framework. That some stories
(and indeed verses) may predate Buddhism does not mean that early Buddhists
used jātakas in anything other than a wholeheartedly Buddhist context, or that
the JA as we have it now is in any way non-Buddhist. Thus jātakas deserve to be
studied seriously for their Buddhist elements, not merely as folktales or sources
of information about ancient india.
aRe JĀTaKaS SERIOUSLy BUDDHiST?
even if we accept that the presence of a story in the JA and the presence of the
Buddha and Bodhisatta in the story make a jātaka Buddhist, does that necessarily
mean that jātakas contain anything seriously Buddhist? in other words, are jātakas
simply moral stories purely for the instruction of the laity? Do they contain
anything of interest in relation to the development of Buddhist philosophy or
practice?
it is easy to discredit the idea that jātakas as stories purely for the laity. as
Gombrich notes, village culture in Theravāda countries is often dominated by
the monastery temple, which provides depictions of jātakas on the walls, and
sermons that can border on storytelling or even drama. The subjects for both the
art and the sermons are chosen by the monks, so one assumes that the appeal
of jātaka stories must be just as strong in monastic education as amongst the
laity.26 There is evidence to suggest this was also the case in the past: Schopen,
for example, notes that a large proportion of the donors at stūpa sites (where
jātaka illustrations are popular) were monks and nuns.27 in any case, monastic
education, as many anthropologists have observed, is not always very different
to the education of a layman. it is thus clearly a mistake to assume that jātaka
stories will have no use in a monastic context, and although it is surely less
objectionable to refer to ‘popular’ rather than ‘lay’ Buddhism in relation to this
issue, as meiland argues,28 this might still misleadingly imply a lack of doctrinal
or philosophical content.
There is further evidence within the texts and stories themselves that jātakas
have relevance to the monastic community. For a start, each story in the JA is said
to be told by the Buddha, who is head of the monastic order, and the audience
inside the frame story is monastic in more than 80 per cent of cases. in addition,
26 margaret Cone and Richard F. Gombrich, The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara
(oxford, 1977), p. xxvi.
27 Gregory Schopen, Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks: Collected Papers on the
Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India (Honolulu, 1997), chapters 3,
5, 9 and 11.
28 Justin meiland, Buddhist Values in the Pāli Jātakas, with Particular Reference to the
Theme of Renunciation (oxford University D.Phil. Thesis, 2004), p. 15.

12 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
the issues covered are frequently of monastic relevance, including discussions
of renunciation, how to resist the temptation of returning to one’s wife, and
how to ensure peace and harmony in the saṅgha. There is plenty of evidence to
suggest that jātakas appeal(ed) to the laity too, not least the crowds that gather
around for a dramatic performance in present-day Southeast asia. it is often
noted that many of the stories focus upon giving, which is an ideal required
of the laity if the monastic community is to survive, and therefore an obvious
theme for sermons. However, as ohnuma has recently shown in her study of gift-
of-the-body jātakas in the indian Buddhist tradition, the rationale behind the
representation of giving in such stories is clearly more complex than the simple
ethical teaching that generosity is good.29
it is clear that jātakas in fact contain teachings aimed at many audiences that
work on many different levels, and that defining jātakas as simple moral stories
for the edification of the laity is misrepresentative. Stories do, of course, provide
us with material quite different to explicitly philosophical and doctrinal texts,
but the evidence they provide is no less important for a full understanding of
Buddhism. as Steven Collins notes:
it is, surely, no more than common sense to recognise that people react to
problems, ideas and events by telling stories about them, or by understanding
them in terms of already-known stories, as well as – and sometimes at the
same time as – by thinking logically or scientifically about them; and that what
counts as a good story is not the same as what counts as a good argument, and
vice versa.30
Collins’ division between ‘narrative’ and ‘systematic’ thought, set out in his
study of felicitous states in Buddhism,31 provides a neat framework for studying
jātaka stories as narratives, but without dismissing them as ‘just stories’. i will be
returning to his arguments in Chapter 6.
That jātaka stories do indeed contain something very seriously Buddhist
is declared by many of the texts themselves. in the biographical preface to
the JA as well as in later jātaka collections we are told that jātakas illustrate the
Bodhisatta’s long path to buddhahood, in which he acquired the 10 perfections
or pāramitās. one cannot get more seriously Buddhist than an illustration of the
path to buddhahood. However, this rationale is not reflected in the core of the JA:
in the majority of the stories it is difficult to tell which perfection might be being
acquired, and indeed the Bodhisatta’s behaviour is often far from perfect. many of
the stories contain no explicitly Buddhist teaching. in addition, the stories are not
ordered chronologically, as one might expect them to be if they illustrate a path.
29 ohnuma, Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood.
30 Steven Collins, Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire
(Cambridge, 1998), p. 121.
31 He defines these terms in Collins, Nirvana, p. 121ff.

What is a Jātaka? 13
This definition of jātakas – that they illustrate the gradual perfection of the
Bodhisatta – will form the focus of my study. as is clear already, this is only one
aspect of jātakas, and only one possible way of defining them. Such a definition
has wide implications for Buddhist history, literature and doctrine, since if the
jātakas illustrate the Bodhisatta’s acquisition of the perfections required for
buddhahood, it stands to reason that they are biographical, and time-specific.
History and chronology become important, and the Bodhisatta is linked to other
buddhas and bodhisattas, including – potentially – an aspiring bodhisatta in the
audience. Such preoccupations, however, at times sit uneasily with the stories’
origins, allowing us to see the development of these ideas over time.
a DiVeRSe aND CHaNGiNG GeNRe
among all the definitions of what a jātaka is, there is little discussion of the
possible changes in the genre, or the possible variety within it. The dangers of
this situation can be demonstrated by a jātaka story. in the Kiṃsukopama-jātaka
( JA 248), four princes ask their charioteer to show them the Kiṃsuka (‘What’s-
it’) tree. He takes each of them to the tree in turn:
He seated the eldest son in the chariot and took him to the forest. Saying ‘This
is the Kiṃsuka’ he showed him the tree at the time there was just a trunk. The
next he showed at the time it was showing young foliage, the next at the time
of flowering, and the next at the time of fruiting. later the four brothers were
sitting together and raised the question, ‘What sort of tree is the Kiṃsuka?’
one said ‘it is like a burnt pillar,’ the second ‘it is like a Banyan tree,’ the third
‘it is like a piece of flesh’ and the fourth ‘it is like an acacia tree.’32
Perplexed at each other’s answers they go to their father, the King of Varanasi
(who is the Bodhisatta), to settle the matter. He speaks the first stanza of the
jātaka:
all have seen the Kiṃsuka; why now do you doubt?
Nobody asked the charioteer about all the conditions!33
We see in the story of the present ( paccuppannavatthu) that this jātaka is told by
the Buddha to illustrate that different meditation methods suit different people,
but that they all lead to the same nibbāna. it reads:
‘all have seen the Kiṃsuka…’ This story was told by the Teacher while he
was dwelling in Jetavana, about the simile of the Kiṃsuka tree. Four monks
32 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, p. 265.
33 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, p. 266.

14 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
approached the Tathāgata and requested meditation subjects. The Teacher
gave them each a meditation subject and having taken them they each went to
their day-time and night-time abodes. one of them attained arahatship after
contemplating the six sense-bases, another the five aggregates, another the
four great elements, and the other the eighteen bases. They told the Teacher
about the characteristics of each of their attainments. Then a thought occurred
to one monk and he asked the Teacher, ‘Nibbāna is of one kind for all these
meditation subjects. How can arahatship be attained by all these methods?’
The Teacher replied, ‘monks, isn’t this variation like that of the brothers
who saw the Kiṃsuka tree?’ ‘Bhante, explain the meaning to us,’ the monks
entreated, and so he told a story of the past.34
Keeping to the JA’s tradition of having a story for every purpose, and sometimes
several paccuppannavatthus for one jātaka (and vice versa), it is possible to re-
write the paccuppannavatthu for this story, in order that it instead illustrates the
state of scholarship on the jātakas:35
‘all have seen the Kiṃsuka…’ This story was told by the Teacher while he was
dwelling in Jetavana, about the simile of the Kiṃsuka tree. Four scholars were
discussing the nature of the jātaka stories. one had seen jātakas with parallels in
other story collections outside Buddhism, and saw them as folktales. another
noticed the many incidental details and said they were indian narratives of
predominantly historical value. a third had been listening to sermons and
marvelled at the way the stories were used to inculcate Buddhist ethics in
the laity. The fourth had been reading the Jātaka-nidānakathā and Cariyāpiṭaka
and had learnt from these that jātakas are biographical and illustrate the
acquisition of the perfections by the Bodhisatta. They each explained their
positions to the Teacher. The Teacher said, ‘Scholars, isn’t this variation like
that of the brothers who saw the Kiṃsuka tree?’
Though perhaps a little facetious, this exercise clearly demonstrates that
there are several possible definitions of jātakas precisely because of the variety
inherent in the genre.
The Kiṃsuka tree – Butea Monosperma or Butea Frondosa – is appreciated for
the magnificent changes in its appearance during the year. after appearing
totally barren for up to two months its gnarled branches burst forth into flesh-
coloured flowers, which vanish to be replaced with large leaves. The leaves have
a ritual function for Hindus, but also serve as plates, tobacco wrappers and
packing materials. The gum and seeds both have medicinal uses, the shoots and
roots are used to make rope, the flowers provide orange dye, and the wood is
34 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, p. 265.
35 my thanks go to Sarah Shaw for pointing out this very helpful parallel.

What is a Jātaka? 15
used to make sacrificial utensils as well as for building.36 Thus the diversity of
the Kiṃsuka tree, in both appearance and function, is celebrated and admired;
not so with the jātakas. The different interpretations of jātakas are often seen as
at best irrelevant to one another, and at worst contradictory or incompatible:
how can jātakas be both non-Buddhist folktales and Buddhist moral stories, for
the common man and the aspiring bodhisatta, simple moral tales about kamma
that nonetheless demonstrate the gradual path to buddhahood? The key to
understanding and appreciating this diversity is that jātakas – like the Kiṃsuka
tree – are not unchanging. individual stories developed and changed over time,
as did the very idea of what a jātaka is and is for, and although both the stories
and their rationale were eventually cemented together in textual form, they
remain diverse in the practices and contexts of living Buddhism.
The diversity of the JA can be celebrated as it allows interaction with a range
of ideas and people. even the apparently haphazard nature of the collection can
be seen as an advantage. That the stories are often repeated elsewhere in the
text, sometimes with alternative endings, gives the text a sense of being flexible
and open ended. There is a similar case in relation to the verses, for the same
verses are sometimes used in several stories, or the same story is told in relation
to different verses. Several verses also have parallels in other texts both within
and outside Buddhism, and so the recitation of a verse or story immediately
brings to mind a variety of contexts and applications.37 The variety – and even
the untidiness – within the jātaka collections can therefore be celebrated in the
same way as the variety of the Kiṃsuka tree.
The Kiṃsukopama-jātaka reminds one of the story related in chapter six of
the Udāna, where some blind men are each shown part of an elephant and then
asked by the king to describe what an elephant is like:
Those blind people who had been shown the head of the elephant replied, ‘an
elephant, your majesty, is just like a water jar.’ Those blind people who had
been shown the ear of the elephant replied, ‘an elephant, your majesty, is just
like a winnowing basket.’ Those blind people who had been shown the tusk of
the elephant replied, ‘an elephant, your majesty, is just like a ploughshare.’
Those blind people who had been shown the trunk replied, ‘an elephant, your
majesty, is just like a plough pole.’ Those blind people who had been shown the
body replied, ‘an elephant, your majesty, is just like a storeroom.’ Those blind
people who had been shown the foot replied, ‘an elephant, your majesty, is just
like a post.’ Those blind people who had been shown the hindquarters replied,
‘an elephant, your majesty, is just like a mortar.’ Those blind people who had
36 S.P. ambasta (ed.), The Useful Plants of India (New Delhi, 1986), pp. 91–2; Dietrich
Brandis, Indian Trees (london, 1906), p. 230; Shakti m. Gupta, Plant Myths and Traditions in
India (2nd edn, New Delhi, 1991), pp. 23–5.
37 For an interesting discussion of this see Kum Kum Roy, ‘Justice in the Jatakas’,
Social Scientist, 24/4/6 (1996): 23–40.

16 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
been shown the tail replied, ‘an elephant, your majesty, is just like a pestle.’
Those blind people who had been shown the tuft at the end of the tail replied,
‘an elephant, your majesty, is just like a broom.’38
in subtle contrast to the jātaka, this story relies upon the diversity in parts of
a whole, rather than changes over time. This too can be applied to the jātakas,
where not only is there great change over time, but also great variety in form
and function within a given time (or text). This is particularly true of the JA,
which is often assumed to be a united whole (on account of its united frame)
when in fact there is great variety within it.
These two stories complement one another and remind us that when we look
at the jātaka genre, we must be aware of the diversity both within individual
texts and across time. in a sense, the story of blind men and the elephant forms
the basis for Chapter 2, where i investigate the diversity found within the JA. The
Kiṃsuka-jātaka informs Chapters 3 and 4, which trace developments in the JA and
the jātaka genre more broadly. These chapters then feed in to a discussion of wider
developments in Theravāda doctrine and practice. Rather than see the mutative
and diverse nature of the jātakas as a problem, i prefer to use observations of the
changes and variety to better understand the development of early Buddhism.
The image of the tree provides us with another useful parallel, namely the
different ways in which it might be viewed. Not only can we see it at different
times, or see only parts of it, we might also have different ways of looking.
Some people (descriptive botanists) might be particularly interested in the
structural make-up of the tree, or want to study the roots or ascertain its age;
others (aesthetes) appreciate its beauty and complexity for artistic reasons; and
yet others (applied botanists) look at the uses made of it. To appreciate a tree
in its entirety requires several approaches; similarly, when studying jātakas it
is necessary to use a variety of methodologies in order to build up a complete
picture.
in the study of jātakas, it is textualists who have dominated, looking at the
roots in non-Buddhist folklore, counting the rings to ascertain the age, and
examining the ways in which the different parts fit together. They have shown
limited interest in the purposes or uses of jātakas. Now that the basic forms and
sources of jātaka texts have been established, it is necessary to build on this
work by moving towards more thematic, historical and doctrinal studies that
appreciate the diversity of the genre. Such studies rely upon moving away from
purely textual studies, into such arenas as art history and anthropology.
i am of course not alone in my insistence that we move away from exclusively
textual studies. as Schopen has famously pointed out, in the study of indian
Buddhism texts have been unduly prioritised over the inscriptional and artistic
evidence preserved in asia, despite the latter being in some cases older and
38 John D. ireland (trans.), The Udāna: Inspired Utterances of the Buddha (Kandy, 1990),
pp. 93–4 (section 6.4).

What is a Jātaka? 17
more reliable than the texts. There has also been a prioritisation of doctrinal and
philosophical texts over and above those with a higher ritual or mythological
content, and ‘canonical’ texts over and above popular works. Such texts have
been taken as key to understanding the history of Buddhism, and have been
viewed as descriptive documents, even though they are often clearly normative.
Such attitudes are now often termed ‘Protestant Buddhism’, since, as Schopen
argues, the idea that ‘true’ or ‘correct’ religion lies in doctrinal texts can be
traced to the influence of sixteenth-century Protestant polemics on Western
intellectual history, and consequently on the attitudes of Western scholars of
Buddhism.39
as well as prompting studies of Buddhism through its art, archaeology and
epigraphy (the latter forming the focus for his own work), Schopen’s critique has
encouraged new approaches to texts that attempt to counter the bias of earlier
scholarship. These include Blackburn’s notion of the ‘practical canon’, which she
contrasts to the ‘formal canon’ so often the focus of scholars.40 She advocates an
examination of what texts were used by whom in specific circumstances, and
argues that such an approach can help scholars to better understand Buddhist
communities within historical contexts.41 Blackburn also insists that Buddhist
texts should not be viewed as a passive witness to what the Buddha taught,
but rather as part of an active process of the self-representation of a particular
community in a particular historical context. as Hegarty puts it in relation to
the Mahābhārata, a text can be ‘“work” in the sense of both noun and verb, that is
to say it is both “a literary work” and “work” in the sense of the way in which the
text demands creative response to its discourse from its audience’.42 Hegarty’s
description certainly applies to the JA, which has had a dynamic relationship
with other texts and ideas about buddhahood within certain communities,
making it possible (or even necessary) to talk of the text as if it were a subject as
39 See in particular his 1991 article on ‘archaeology and Protestant Presuppositions
in the Study of indian Buddhism’, reprinted as chapter 1 in Schopen, Bones, Stones, and
Buddhist Monks.
40 Blackburn defines the practical canon as ‘the units of text actually employed in
the practices of collecting manuscripts, copying them, reading them, commenting on
them, listening to them, and preaching sermons based upon them that are understood
by their users as part of a tipiṭaka-based tradition’. anne m. Blackburn, ‘looking for
the Vinaya: monastic Discipline in the Practical Canons of the Theravāda’, Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies, 22/2 (1999): 281–309, p. 284. This she contrasts
with the more general definition by Collins (Nirvana, p. 78) as ‘works in actual use at any
given places and times’.
41 Blackburn, ‘looking for the Vinaya’, especially pp. 284–5.
42 James m. Hegarty, A Fire of Tongues: Narrative Patterning in the Sanskrit Mahābhārata
(manchester University Ph.D. Thesis, 2004), p. 20.

18 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
well as an object.43 alternatively we might return to the comparison with a tree
and say that, in a sense, the JA – and indeed the jātaka genre more generally – is
a living thing.
if the jātaka genre is a living creative process, what ‘work’ might jātaka
illustrations be doing? it is easiest to view them simply as illustrations of a
narrative, retelling a story through images. However, recent studies of the uses
of jātaka images, as well as of the uses of jātaka stories in the consecration of
Buddha images, suggest that image and story are linked in a more complex
way than merely as source and illustration.44 Understanding the relationship
between jātaka texts and developing ideas about the Buddha and buddhahood
sheds further light on the role of jātaka images. art-historical analyses of jātakas
in turn may hold the key to an understanding of the purposes and uses of jātakas
in general.
if we are looking for uses of jātakas, we might reasonably turn to ethnographic
work for elucidation, and piecing together brief mentions of the genre in various
works it becomes clear that jātakas have many uses, not all of which depend
upon their narrative content. as well as being used in sermons and schoolbooks,
they are also recited in legal disputes, ritual contexts and during significant
life events. The diversity of jātakas can be seen by their relevance to each of
Spiro’s (contested) divisions: ‘nibbānic’ (which he understands to be a normative
soteriological system, and that most frequently understood by Westerners
to be Buddhism), ‘kammatic’ (which he understands to be a non-normative
soteriological system, which relies upon either postponing the quest for nibbāna
whilst focusing on attaining a better rebirth, or reclassifying nibbāna as a
heavenly state and aiming for it through meritorious actions), and ‘apotropaic’
(which he understands to be a non-soteriological framework concerned with
matters in this life, such as health and the weather).45 The portrayal in jātakas of
personal soteriological quests, karmic consequences and apotropaic methods,
demonstrates that trying to link jātakas to a single Buddhist attitude or situation
is impossible.
43 We might, as Hegarty does, quote lévi-Strauss in support of proceeding ‘as if the
thinking process were taking place in the myths, in their reflection upon themselves
and their interrelation’ (from The Raw and the Cooked, quoted in Hegarty, A Fire of Tongues,
p. 23). Viewing a text in this way is perhaps particularly useful when it has no single
author or single date of composition, making talk of authorial intent next to impossible.
44 i am thinking especially of the work of two authors, which i will discuss at length
in Chapter 7: Robert l. Brown, ‘Narrative as icon: The Jātaka Stories in ancient indian
and Southeast asian architecture’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the Buddhist
Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu, 1997), pp. 64–109; Donald K. Swearer,
Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand (Princeton, 2004).
45 melford e. Spiro, Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and its Burmese Vicissitudes
(2nd edn, Berkeley, 1980).

What is a Jātaka? 19
The aspect of jātakas that becomes most clear in ethnographic and art-
historical studies is their extreme popularity in Sri lanka and Southeast asia
through to the present day. as Carrithers notes in relation to Sri lanka: ‘The
Jātakas are at once older than the Pali canon, and the basic substance of sermons
in modern Ceylon; they are preserved in Pali, but form the basic matter of most of
Sinhalese literature; and they have been woven into the daily life of the Sinhalese,
through sermons, poetry, art and music, for more than two thousand years.’46
Bode speaks of ‘the immortal Jātaka book’ and states that ‘[t]o understand the
literature, “serious” or popular, of Burma we cannot know the Pali Jātaka too
well’.47 Clearly the popularity of jātakas in these countries is strongly linked to
jātaka texts. Therefore, although i will be returning to ethnographic sources in
Chapter 7, i must begin my exploration of the ideological relationship between
the Buddha and his jātaka stories by becoming better acquainted with the
Pāli jātaka book, the JA. once i have established the contribution of that text
to emerging understandings of the generic conventions of jātaka stories i will
move on to an examination of the genre’s impact on Theravāda doctrine and
practice.
46 michael Carrithers, The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka (Delhi, 1983), p. 90.
47 mabel Haynes Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma (london, 1909), p. 3 and p. 82.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 2
The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories
in the dedicatory verses at the very beginning of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā ( JA) we
hear that the jātakas ‘illuminate the unimaginable magnificence of the deeds of
a Great man’ who ‘brought to fruition over a long time the endless conditions
for bodhi’.1 The view that jātakas are about the acquisition of the many qualities
required for buddhahood over a long series of lives is shared by many scholars
and Buddhists alike. Under the influence of such a definition we might expect
to see the Bodhisatta performing exclusively positive deeds in his jātaka stories.
However, even a cursory glance at the contents of the JA reveals that the
Bodhisatta is a more complex character than this. When we consider that the
presence of the Bodhisatta is an essential feature of jātakas, it is surprising how
little attention has been paid to his character. The most obvious place to start in
my examination of the biographical dimensions of the jātaka genre is therefore
the characterisation of the Bodhisatta within his jātaka stories.
Great variety lies in the roles the Bodhisatta plays in jātaka stories. in many
cases he behaves as a good Buddhist should, demonstrating virtues and acquiring
the perfections ( pāramitās). However, his character is not restricted by Buddhist
concerns, and sometimes his ‘good’ behaviour is more a demonstration of worldly
wisdom, even at the expense of other (Buddhist or ‘moral’) qualities. in several
stories he plays little or no part in the action, but merely observes or pronounces
the moral. He may also assault people, kill, steal, commit sexual impropriety,
gamble and get drunk. it is said in the prose of the Hārita-jātaka ( JA 431, discussed
below) that the Bodhisatta can break all the other precepts but never lie, yet we
even find examples of the Bodhisatta deceiving people. Thus the Bodhisatta’s
behaviour is not always in accordance with the ‘endless conditions for bodhi’
that the compiler leads us to expect. The purpose of this chapter is to examine
these various roles, and present some possible explanations for the great variety
and apparent widespread lack of biographical concern. most examples will be
drawn from the JA, since it is this text that presents itself as a biography, and
where possible quotations will be given from the verses of this text, since these
are considered to be the canonical core. Supplementary examples from other
texts will be given where they better illustrate the variety of characters played
by the Bodhisatta in his jātaka stories.
1 Verses 10 and 5, respectively. For a full translation see the opening to Chapter 3.

22 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
GooD
i shall begin my investigation with those stories in which the Bodhisatta behaves
in a ‘good’ way. in such stories the Bodhisatta is variously a morally upright or
particularly sagacious hero, a compassionate saviour of others, a teacher, or a
wise observer. in some, the text points out the particular pāramitās (perfections)
he is acquiring, and draws our attention thus to the way in which jātakas form a
prelude to the final life as Gotama Bodhisatta and Gotama Buddha.
Hero or Saviour?
Scholars and practitioners have long debated the appropriate attitude that
Buddhists should have towards the Buddha, and indeed other buddhas and
bodhisatt(v)as. is the Buddha an ideal that should be emulated or rather
a compassionate figure to be propitiated? is the Buddhist path the sole
responsibility of each individual, or might we reasonably expect a little
assistance? Such debates are most pertinent in mahāyāna Buddhism, but the
division is alive also in Theravāda societies. in relation to the Buddha, whether
he is a focus for emulation or propitiation is a central issue in discussions of
image and relic worship. To investigate attitudes towards the Bodhisatta, we
might turn to jātakas, where he is portrayed sometimes as hero and sometimes
as saviour.
in several jātakas the Bodhisatta is identified with a great hero of old, and
perhaps the most striking of these is the Dasaratha-jātaka ( JA 461) where he is
identified as Rāma and enacts his own version of an episode from the Rāmāyaṇa.
Several other jātakas portray the Bodhisatta as the head of a group, either of
merchants, animals or birds, leading them to safety. in his saviour role, the
most obvious examples are those jātakas where he is the god Sakka, who very
often in Buddhist tales provides support for Buddhism and righteous people.
Sakka is a frequent character in the JA, where on more than 20 occasions he is
identified with the Bodhisatta.2 in many of these stories Sakka teaches a moral
lesson through his special divine powers, but in others he offers assistance: in
the Bhadraghaṭa-jātaka ( JA 291) he gives a wishing-cup to a poor man who was his
son in a previous birth; in the Kaccāni-jātaka ( JA 417) he saves a mother who has
been cast out by her son.
2 Sakka’s other main role is to test the Bodhisatta’s resolve, for example he often
takes on a disguise and asks the Bodhisatta for some extremely difficult gift, either in
order to aid the Bodhisatta’s practice of the perfections, or as a way of preserving his
own position which might be challenged by a being as great as the Bodhisatta. For a good
discussion of these ambiguities see Justin meiland, Buddhist Values in the Pāli Jātakas, with
Particular Reference to the Theme of Renunciation (oxford University D.Phil. Thesis, 2004),
chapter 2, and Reiko ohnuma, Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body in Indian
Buddhist Literature (New York, 2007), p. 64ff.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 23
The characters of hero and saviour are perhaps best illustrated by the
Valāhassa-jataka ( JA 196) and the Telapatta-jātaka ( JA 96), which are combined in
some Sanskrit texts to form one story. The Valāhassa-jātaka tells of how a merchant
and his caravan are shipwrecked on an island and seduced by the yakkhinīs (man-
eating demonesses) who live there. The caravan leader becomes suspicious and
makes for the shore with half of his merchants. on the shore, as luck would
have it, there happens to be a magical horse, who carries the merchants home.
Those who foolishly stay behind are eaten.3 The Telapatta-jātaka tells of a prince
who makes his way to Takkasilā across a wilderness populated by yakkhinīs. His
five companions each fall by the wayside, tempted by each of the five senses,
and the prince is tracked by a yakkhinī who pretends to be his wife. When she
has no luck with him, she seduces the king, and summons her friends to feast
on the royal family. The prince expels the yakkhinīs and is made king. in the
Mūlasarvāstivāda-vinaya and the Divyāvadāna these two jātakas are combined to
form a single narrative. in the Valāhassa-jātaka the Bodhisatta is the saviour horse;
in the Telapatta-jātaka he is the prince who resists the charms of the yakkhinīs.
Consequently the combined story has two options for the identification of the
Bodhisatta: heroic merchant or saviour horse. He is, as it happens, identified
as the former.4 Thus the same cycle of stories, which all illustrate the danger
of lust, has a flexible attitude towards its identifications of the Bodhisatta. is
the Buddha-to-be a sagacious heroic leader (to be emulated) or a compassionate
saviour (to be propitiated)? The answer we find in the jātakas is both.
Teaching and Example
in many jātaka stories the Bodhisatta has no opportunity to demonstrate his
heroism or compassion, but rather shows his good judgement. often these jātakas
show the Bodhisatta teaching through wise observation or by his own actions.
an example of the latter is the Dummedha-jātaka ( JA 50), in which the Bodhisatta
is a prince who makes a big show of worshipping a particular tree. When he
becomes king he says he must make an offering to the tree-deity (rukkhadevatā)
3 The Valāhassa-jātaka is a poorly abbreviated form of another telling, and thus
is barely coherent in its narrative. an example of how the story may have been told
when the verses were first composed can be found in the story of 500 merchants in the
Mahāvastu, where the verses are also paralleled. a full discussion of the different versions
can be found in Naomi appleton, Seduced by Saṃsāra, Saved by a Flying Horse: A Study of the
Aśvarāja and Siṃhala Stories (Cardiff University m.Phil. Thesis, 2004) and a shorter analysis
in Naomi appleton, ‘The Story of the Horse-King and the merchant Siṃhala in Buddhist
Texts’, Buddhist Studies Review, 23/2 (2006): 187–201.
4 in mahāyāna versions of the story the horse becomes identified with
avalokiteśvara and the heroism of the Bodhisatta is played down, demonstrating another
level of flexibility. For a full discussion see appleton, Seduced by Samsāra or ‘The Story of
the Horse-King’.

24 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
who brought him such good fortune, and that this offering must be 1,000 people
who indulge in animal sacrifice. Suddenly nobody in his kingdom will perform
animal sacrifice. Such jātakas are not always so Buddhist in emphasis, but
rather show the Bodhisatta being ‘good’ in a mundane sense, by being worldly
wise or quick-witted. in the Gagga-jātaka ( JA 155) a brahmin called Gagga and
his son, the Bodhisatta, have to stay in a hut haunted by a yakkha who is able
to devour anyone who doesn’t say ‘long life to you’ when someone sneezes.
Hoping to make a meal of the two travellers he makes the brahmin sneeze, but
the Bodhisatta realises the situation and dutifully says ‘long life’, prompting
his father to reply, thereby guaranteeing their immunity. He then reforms the
yakkha, to everyone’s amazement. This story is in no way inherently Buddhist,
but nor does it contradict Buddhist ideals.
an example that shows the Bodhisatta as a teacher or wise commentator
may be seen in the Matakabhatta-jātaka ( JA 18), which tells of a goat that laughs
then weeps as he is being prepared as a sacrifice. Being asked why, he explains
that he is happy that this is finally his last of 500 births where his head must be
chopped off as punishment for sacrificing animals. However, he is upset at the
thought that the brahmin who is about to slaughter him will have to suffer the
same fate. The brahmin sets the goat free and does his best to protect him, but
his head is cut off by a falling rock which has been struck by a thunderbolt. The
Bodhisatta is a tree-deity who explains:
if beings knew this was the suffering of the origin of birth,
no living being would kill a living being, for the murderer laments.5
in these stories, as well as the many others where the Bodhisatta’s role is to give
advice, pass judgement or pronounce the moral, it is the Bodhisatta’s wisdom and
insight, rather than his actions, that matter, and the audience can be instructed
by the actions of other protagonists.
often the Bodhisatta’s role is merely to give good advice, for example in the
Cullakaseṭṭhi-jātaka ( JA 4), which tells of how the Bodhisatta finds a dead mouse,
and interprets the omens, saying a sensible man should pick up the mouse and
start a business and keep a wife. a young man overhears, and through a long and
convoluted series of actions he gains a fortune. He goes to thank the Bodhisatta
and marries his daughter, completing his rise to fortune and happiness. The
verse summarises that:
With the smallest capital, a wise and discerning man,
advances himself – just like blowing on a small fire.6
5 Trans. from V. Fausbøll (ed.), The Jātaka together with its commentary being tales of the
anterior births of Gotama Buddha (6 vols, london, 1877–1896), vol. 1, p. 168.
6 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 1, p. 122.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 25
Perhaps a little surprisingly, the wise man in this case is not the Bodhisatta, who
has only kick-started the narrative with some good advice. Sometimes even
his advice is ignored, for example in the Ruhaka-jātaka ( JA 191) the Bodhisatta
is Brahmadatta (King of Varanasi) and has a chaplain called Ruhaka, who is
estranged from his wife. The king calls him to the palace to try to reconcile
them, saying:
Ruhaka! a broken bowstring can be connected again.
let this old wife be reconciled. Don’t let anger overcome you.
Ruhaka replies:
as long as there is hemp and craftsmen,
i will make a new bowstring. enough of the old wife!7
and he finds himself a new wife.
The Perfections
at the other end of the spectrum to those stories in which the Bodhisatta gives
advice to his inattentive companions in saṃsāra, are those in which he takes
centre stage as an aspiring buddha. Such stories show how the Bodhisatta acquired
the skills and virtues required for buddhahood, in particular the 10 perfections
( pāramīs or pāramitās): giving (dāna), morality (sīla), renunciation (nekkhamma),
wisdom ( paññā), energy (viriya), forbearance (khanti), truth (sacca), determination
(adhiṭṭhāna), loving kindness (mettā) and equanimity (upekkhā). The most famous
of these stories, both within and outside asia, is the Vessantara-jātaka ( JA 547),
which according to Theravāda tradition relates Gotama’s last-but-one birth.
in it, the Bodhisatta gives away his wife and children in the perfection of his
generosity. other jātakas can be found that take the other perfections to similar
extremes, such as the Khantivādi-jātaka ( JA 313), which tells of the teacher of
forbearance who allows his hands and feet and ears and nose to be lopped off by
an angry king without lifting a finger in his own defence. Nekkhamma is perhaps
the quality most frequently addressed, with many tales extolling the benefits of
renunciation, although it – like the other perfections – is rarely mentioned by
name in the jātakas themselves. according to later traditions, the final 10 jātakas
of the JA illustrate the 10 perfections being acquired in their highest form by the
Bodhisatta in his final 10 births.
7 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, pp. 114–15. There is a pun here on the word
jiyā which can mean bowstring or wife. Where Fausbøll has marūdvāsu, l.S. Cousins has
suggested to me the alternative of maruvāsu; maruvā (Skt mūrvā) is a plant in the hemp
family, which may have been used to make bowstrings.

26 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
although stories about the pāramitās are influential, the jātakas in the JA tend
not to address them explicitly. The perfections are, in fact, a late-canonical and
commentarial preoccupation, as can be seen by the strong emphasis on them
in the JA’s dedicatory verses, the Jātaka-nidānakathā, and the Cariyāpiṭaka, all of
which will be discussed in the next chapter. To acknowledge that the perfections
are a late addition to the jātakas of the JA is not to deny the important role
that they play in the history of the genre. However, since i will be discussing
the pāramitās in greater detail in later chapters, we need not consider them at
length here.
Bad
Despite the pervasive idea that jātakas demonstrate the perfections, the Bodhisatta
sometimes acts badly, both within a Buddhist framework and according to what
we might consider universal standards of morality. We may now move on to an
examination of the different types of such jātakas: first where the behaviour is
accepted as bad and resolved within the jātaka, either in the story of the past
itself, or in the frame story through a karmic consequence; and second where
the immoral behaviour is apparently condoned within the narrative.
Villainy and Kamma
let me begin with a mild example: in the Litta-jātaka ( JA 91) the Bodhisatta
poisons a gambling dice in order to catch a cheat. This is a neat illustration of the
importance of two aspects of morality, namely intention and result; according to
Buddhist expositions, it is the former (cetanā) that ultimately defines an action
as good or bad, skilful or unskilful. in this case we can assume that the Bodhisatta
had good intentions in the long term (to prevent the cheat from accruing further
bad kamma), but in the short term the intention was to cause physical suffering,
and the result of the poison was that the cheat ‘fainted, his eyes rolled around,
and doubling over [in pain] he fell’.8 after proving his point the Bodhisatta did
cure the man, as well as tell him not to cheat again, but there is no mention of
whether the cheat reformed or not. if only we knew that he had been cured of
his bad behaviour and therefore prevented from a bad rebirth we could be happy
that at least the longer-term results, as well as the intention, were good.
a slightly more problematic example is the Lomahaṃsa-jātaka ( JA 94), in
which the Bodhisatta lives a life as a naked ascetic, which in Buddhist terms is
a false path stemming from ‘wrong view’, and one of the 10 paths of unskilful
action enumerated in many Buddhist commentarial texts. He is not allowed to
take this path to its natural karmic consequences, however, for at the end of his
life (and of the story) he sees a vision of hell as he lies dying, and he realises the
8 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 1, p. 380.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 27
futility of austerities just in time to make it to heaven. a similar example is the
Mudulakkhaṇa-jātaka ( JA 66) in which the Bodhisatta is an ascetic who loses his
ability to levitate after seeing the queen in a state of undress.9 The king gives the
queen to the tormented ascetic, and she cures him of any lust by acting the part
of a demanding, nagging wife. Realising his folly, the ascetic returns the queen to
her husband and retreats to the Himalayas to continue his practices out of harm’s
way. as in the previous example, the message here is that it is acceptable for the
Bodhisatta to behave foolishly, but not for an entire life, for then his karmic
fruits would be inevitable. once again, therefore, the Bodhisatta’s problematic
behaviour is resolved within the course of the jātaka’s story of the past.
in other cases the Bodhisatta’s problematic behaviour is resolved by the story
of the present, which shows the karmic consequences of his actions and thereby
warns the audience not to emulate them. many jātakas are said to have been
related by the Buddha to illustrate the workings of kamma. often this involves
the past actions and present tendencies or situations of his monks or patrons,
for example the Keḷisīla-jātaka ( JA 202), which is told to explain how someone so
learned and accomplished as the elder monk lakuṇṭaka can have the physically
insignificant form of a dwarf. The explanation of course involves a combination
of good and bad deeds in a previous life, leading to mixed fruits in the present.
according to the definition proposed in the previous chapter, this is an apadāna
– a story of karmicly significant deeds – and several of these are included in
the JA and other jātaka texts. However, stories about the Buddha’s bad or mixed
kamma are not considered in the JA, as he is considered to have passed beyond
the realm of kamma (by becoming awakened) by the time he tells the jātakas.
However, if we leave the JA for a moment and enter another Theravāda text,
the Apadāna, we find a set of 12 jātakas in the Pubbakammapiloti that illustrate
past bad actions of the Buddha. The text seeks to explain the suffering that the
Buddha experiences after his awakening, for even he is not free from bodily
illness, slander and attacks from adversaries. The slander is from two women
who, working for heretics, claim that they have been sleeping with the Buddha.
The assaults are caused by the Buddha’s cousin Devadatta, who hires assassins,
and urges a mad elephant to attack. The events in these two categories cause little
actual suffering, as the Buddha shows great forbearance at the slander, and is not
injured by the assassin or the elephant (which he calms with his great mettā –
loving kindness). only a splinter from a rock aimed at crushing him causes injury
to his foot, after two mountains intervene to prevent this from being any more
serious. The Buddha experiences no sorrow or anxiety, and so, as Walters points
out, these events merely highlight his greatness.10 even the attack of dysentery
and the backache and headaches recounted in the suttas seem not to bother the
9 This also happens in JA 251 and 431.
10 Jonathan S. Walters, ‘The Buddha’s Bad Karma: a Problem in the History of
Theravāda Buddhism’, Numen, 37/1 (1990): 70–95, p. 74.

28 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Buddha. However, this does not remove the problem of the reasons behind these
events, which according to the Buddhist paradigm are likely to be karmic.
in the Apadāna, we discover that 12 bad actions resulted in these 12 sufferings
experienced in the Buddha’s final birth (in addition to much suffering in the
intervening births). For example, the Bodhisatta’s slander of a buddha many eons
in the past resulted in him being slandered when he became Buddha. likewise
the Bodhisatta once crushed his half-brother with a rock, which resulted in
him being attacked in the same manner by his cousin. This is a controversial
explanation, as is demonstrated by the outright denial of any karmic cause for
the Buddha’s suffering found in the Milindapañha, the Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā and
the JA.11 The unease which is demonstrated by Theravāda responses to these
stories suggests the possibility that they originated in an alternative school
of Buddhism, and this is supported by the presence of similar stories in the
Mūlasarvāstivāda vinaya and elsewhere.12
Putting up a robust defence of the tradition, the commentary on the
Pubbakammapiloti elaborates the stories and provides further explanation,
pointing out that previous buddhas suffered too, and that the stories provide an
example to ordinary Buddhists who find the perfection of the Buddha daunting,
and wish for reassurance that even they can get on the right path.13 The fact
that these actions occur in the distant past allows the tradition to examine the
Buddha’s flaws without impinging too greatly on his final perfection.
This is really a doctrinal issue to do with the nature of awakening and
residual kamma. These jātakas are told in clear awareness that the Bodhisatta’s
actions are bad, and there is no attempt to justify his behaviour or encourage
others to emulate it; thus the morality of the jātakas is not in question, even if
the doctrinal implications are. Similarly, those jātakas in which the Bodhisatta
behaves in a morally dubious way, but realises his error and reforms within the
story of the past, do not attempt to hold up the Bodhisatta’s behaviour as a good
example. Rather, all these stories show that being on the path to awakening does
not require perfection at all times.
11 Walters, ‘The Buddha’s Bad Karma’, p. 79ff.
12 Similar explanations in the form of jātaka stories – with some variations – are
found in the Anavataptagāthā of the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivāda vinaya, and the
Daśakarmaplutyavadāna of Kṣemendra’s eleventh-century Bodhisattvāvadāna Kalpalatā,
as well as in the Upāyakauśalya Sūtra, which nonetheless insists that the suffering of
the Buddha was not real, but only skill-in-means. For a discussion of the parallels see
Sally mellick Cutler, ‘Still Suffering after all These aeons: The Continuing effects of the
Buddha’s Bad Karma’ in Peter Connolly and Sue Hamilton (eds), Indian Insights: Buddhism,
Brahminism and Bhakti (london, 1997), pp. 63–82.
13 Walters, ‘The Buddha’s Bad Karma’, p. 88.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 29
Ethics and Wisdom
What about those stories in which the Bodhisatta behaves in a morally dubious
manner, yet this is nonetheless internally presented as acceptable? often this
immoral behaviour is a direct contravention of one of the five precepts ( pañca-
sīlāni), which are accepted by the laity as well as forming the basis for more
elaborate monastic regulations. These are against harming living beings, taking
what is not given, committing sexual misconduct, speaking falsely, and taking
intoxicating substances. These precepts are occasionally transgressed by the
Bodhisatta in his jātaka stories, which therefore portray him going against both
explicitly Buddhist values and what might be considered universal moral values.14
Breaking the precepts is also viewed as the opposite of certain positive qualities
that the Bodhisatta (if he is an example of a good Buddhist) should be cultivating:
kindness and compassion, generosity and renunciation, contentment, preserving
and understanding the truth, and mindfulness respectively.15 Furthermore, sīla is
one of the 10 perfections that the Bodhisatta is said to be developing in his jātaka
stories. Thus those jātakas where the Bodhisatta breaks the precepts require
some justification.
in the Hārita-jātaka ( JA 431) the Bodhisatta considers lying to the king after
having an affair with his wife:
He thought, ‘This king would believe me if i were to say that i haven’t enjoyed
her, but there is no support in this world equal to the truth. Those who have
forsaken the truth may sit at the foot of the bodhi-tree but they are unable to
attain bodhi, so i ought to just speak the truth.’ For in some situations a Bodhisatta
destroys life, takes what is not given, commits sexual misconduct, and drinks
liquor, but he does not lie, attended by deception that breaks with reality.16
14 Jones lists 11 jātakas where the Bodhisatta is involved in harming or killing ( JA 93,
128, 129, 152, 178, 233, 238, 246, 315, 319, 384; p. 61), though three of these actually concern
the issue of vegetarianism (246, 315, 319) rather than killing per se, two contain no actual
action on the Bodhisatta’s part (129, 238), and one of the others is accidental (178). He
also records stories ‘in which the bodhisatta proves vulnerable to sexual temptation and
is admitted to have violated the precept regarding sexuality’ ( JA 66, 251, 263, 431, 507;
p. 87) as well as those in which he steals ( JA 168, 279, 318; p. 136). Jones also provides a
useful discussion of the lists of precepts and virtues discussed in the jātakas, including JA
459 which explicitly addresses the deleterious effects of breaking each of the five precepts
(p. 57ff.). John G. Jones, Tales and Teachings of the Buddha: The Jātaka Stories in Relation to the
Pāli Canon (london, 1979).
15 Peter Harvey, An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics: Foundations, Values and Issues
(Cambridge, 2000), p. 68.
16 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 3, p. 499.

30 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
However, this declaration that a Bodhisatta cannot lie is not supported by all
the jātakas of the JA: for example in the Vānara-jātaka ( JA 342) the Bodhisatta is a
monkey who is befriended by a crocodile. The crocodile’s wife wants to eat the
monkey’s heart, and so the crocodile tricks the monkey into riding on his back.
on the point of being drowned, the monkey tells the crocodile that his heart is
hanging in a tree, and offers to go and fetch it, thereby ensuring his escape back
to dry land.
one explanation for such jātakas is that ‘bad’ behaviour is inevitable within a
long biography of the Buddha, as it is within the long biography of any human.
This explanation is in accord with the Apadāna stories just examined, but without
clear evidence of the karmic consequences. in search of this evidence, we might
argue that the fact that the Bodhisatta is regularly born in the animal realm in
his jātaka stories demonstrates that he cannot have been flawless in his actions.
However, stories in which the Bodhisatta transgresses precepts are included
in Theravāda Buddhist sources without any such justification or apology, and
furthermore they are present in texts that are traditionally used as sources for
ethical guidance. There are, it seems to me, two possible reasons for this: first,
that the morals we might expect to see are subjugated to higher ideals such as
the power of truth and worldly wisdom; and second, that jātakas are outside the
Buddhist moral framework and should not be looked to for ethical guidance. i
will address these in turn.
one example of a jātaka in which the Bodhisatta’s seemingly immoral actions
are presented without apology is the Aṇḍabhūta-jātaka ( JA 62). in this story the
Bodhisatta is a king with a passion for gambling. He always wins, because with
every roll of his dice he repeats a verse:
all rivers wind, all forests are made of wood;
all women, given opportunity, do no good.17
Because this verse is true, the dice land in his favour time after time until his
opponent is driven to a rather extreme response. He has a baby girl brought up
in the confines of a tower, with only female servants and companions. When
she is grown, he adds the line ‘except my girl’ to the end of the Bodhisatta’s
verse, turning the luck his way. To switch the luck back again, the Bodhisatta
pays someone to break into the lodgings of this young woman and seduce her.
The moral of the story, summed up in the verses, is of course that one should fear
woman, since even if you were to carry her about with you at all times you could
never be sure of her.
in this jātaka, two problematic actions of the Bodhisatta go without comment
and are thus implicitly condoned. First, he gambles, which though not explicitly
forbidden, is seen by many Buddhist traditions as a transgression of the second
17 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 1, p. 289. This verse is part of the commentary
– it is not one of the canonical verses.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 31
precept – against taking what is not given.18 We saw in an earlier jātaka that the
Bodhisatta has had occasion to punish cheats, yet in this story he himself gambles
in the knowledge that he is sure to win, which could be seen as akin to cheating.
Second, his treatment of women is problematic. i am not here talking about the
verse he uses, for the position of women in the jātakas is deeply ambiguous.19
a mixture of popular folk-wisdom and a Buddhist desire to reduce attachment
to sense pleasures could easily produce such a sentiment, which in any case is
primarily for comic effect. What i refer to is his payment of a young man to
seduce the captive girl, which must surely qualify as a transgression of the third
precept – against sexual misconduct. even though the Bodhisatta himself does
not perform the deed, he encourages it; indeed he both intends and causes it.
Despite all the dubious actions, it is possible that moral instruction has not
been abandoned or ignored in this jātaka, but that it has instead been directed at
particular ideals at the expense of others. The Bodhisatta wins because he makes
a statement of truth – what is elsewhere called a saccakiriya (‘act of truth’). These,
in jātakas as elsewhere, lead to great benefit to the truth-teller. For example, in a
more famous jātaka of the JA (Vaṭṭaka-jātaka, JA 35) the Bodhisatta is a young quail
who is left defenceless, facing a forest fire. He utters a verse about his situation
and the power of the truth holds back the fire. Similarly, in our jātaka, the truth
of the verse ensures the success of the Bodhisatta in a situation where the laws
of nature should prevail.
as we saw in the Hārita-jātaka, lying is seen as worse than breaking the other
precepts, thus although the Bodhisatta can break any of the other precepts, he
(reputedly) cannot lie, ‘attended by deception that breaks with reality’. This latter
phrase indicates that lying is seen here as being fundamentally at odds with the
truth underlying reality, in other words the dhamma. The Cetiya-jātaka ( JA 422)
contains similar sentiments in a set of verses that the Bodhisatta recounts to a
king whose persistent lying is causing him to gradually sink into the earth:
injured Truth (dhamma) truly harms; not injured it harms nobody;
Therefore one shouldn’t harm the Truth, lest harmed Truth harms you.
The gods leave one who speaks falsely,
His mouth is rotten, and he falls from the heavenly realms,
He who answers falsely when asked an intelligible question.
18 Harvey, An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics, pp. 70–71.
19 For example a cluster of five jātakas in the Itthi-vagga that could be labelled
‘misogynous’ ( JA 61–5) is followed by a jātaka in which a woman saves a hermit from
giving in to lust (66) and a story of a woman whose affection for her husband, son and
brother, and her wisdom in being able to choose between them, is praised (67). For a full
treatment of the place of women in Theravāda jātakas see Naomi appleton, ‘Temptress on
the Path: Women as objects and Subjects in Buddhist Jātaka Stories’ in Pamela anderson
(ed.), New Topics in Feminist Philosophy of Religion: Contestations and Transcendence Incarnate
(Dordrecht, 2010), pp. 103–15.

32 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
o King, if you speak the truth you will be as you were before;
if you speak a lie, you will sink further into the earth of Ceti.
it rains at the wrong time and fails to rain when it should,
For one who answers falsely when asked an intelligible question.20
Similar notions about the priority of truthfulness are found elsewhere, for
example in Dhammapada verse 176:
The person who speaks falsely, transgressing the one Truth (dhamma),
abandoning the other world, there is no evil he cannot do.21
as all of these verses suggest, speaking a lie is going against the dhamma, which
is both the Truth underlying the universe, and the Buddhist teachings that can
save beings from the sufferings of rebirth and redeath. Transgressing the dhamma
by lying demonstrates that one is ignorant of the truth, and is destined for much
future suffering. Telling the truth, even for a morally ambiguous purpose, could
therefore be seen as proof of the Bodhisatta’s awareness of the wider truths that
will later characterise his attainments.
if speaking the truth can be seen as a higher ideal than other ethical principles,
this vindicates the Aṇḍabhūta-jātaka to some extent, for the focus is placed upon
the power of the truth. However, the focus is much more clearly on the danger
of women, and here we find another justification. it is said that this jātaka was
told by the Buddha to a monk who was in danger of breaking his vows of celibacy.
in other words it is designed to preserve an ethical and religious ideal in the
present, even if this happens at the expense of ethics in the past. This is at least
partial justification for the presence of such a story in this jātaka collection.
my second set of examples are those in which the Bodhisatta is born as a
robber, which happens twice in the JA. in the Satapatta-jātaka ( JA 279) the
Bodhisatta is a robber who correctly interprets omens for a passing youth before
letting him pass with his money intact. The intention here is clearly to show him
being a good robber, and indeed we are even told in the commentary that his
robber-nature is not his fault:
Bodhisattas, even though they are great beings, sometimes take the belongings
of others, because of taking birth as a miscreant; they say this is because of a
fault in the constellations.22
20 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 3, pp. 456–8, omitting intervening prose. The
verses go on to state that a liar will only have female children, and that his children will
flee from him.
21 Trans. from o. von Hinüber and K.R. Norman (eds), Dhammapada (oxford, 2003),
p. 50.
22 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, p. 389.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 33
in contrast, in the Kaṇavera-jātaka ( JA 318) the Bodhisatta is a very successful
robber who is saved from execution by a courtesan who has taken a fancy to him.
Too quick-witted for her (and, one might think, a little ungrateful), he knocks
her unconscious and steals her jewels. He refuses to be tempted back by her, as
he suspects she would eventually betray him as she has betrayed others. This
story thus serves as a lesson about the unreliability of women and once again
encourages a wayward monk to stop thinking of returning to his wife. Clearly
this jātaka shows the Bodhisatta assaulting and stealing, yet he is still portrayed
as in the right. This, it seems, has a lot to do with his worldly wisdom and quick-
wittedness, as well as his detachment from the charms of the most sought-after
courtesan in the city.
an even more shocking jātaka about a Bodhisatta-robber is found in the
Mūlasarvāstivāda-vinaya.23 in it, the Bodhisatta steals from the king and rapes the
princess, leaving her pregnant with his child. Years later, when the son correctly
identifies his father in a crowd, the Bodhisatta is presented with the princess’
hand in marriage as a reward from the king for being so clever. The jātaka is told
by the Buddha to illustrate the idea that a son has an innate ability to recognise
his father, as Rāhula did with his father the Buddha, despite the latter creating
several illusory bodies. in this example, the Bodhisatta clearly transgresses two
of the precepts – those against stealing and sexual misconduct. However, once
again the focus is elsewhere: the robber is praised and rewarded for his cleverness,
and so the story is really about worldly wit and wisdom. This may appear to
contradict Buddhist wisdom, since it allows the transgression of Buddhist
precepts. However, on closer inspection, worldly wisdom could be seen as a part
of the Buddhist ideal of wisdom, which is in many cases seen as the highest of all
ideals in Buddhism. it is contained in the lists of perfections aspired to in both
indian (including mahāyāna) and Theravāda texts, and is one of the acquisitions
required for buddhahood and therefore pursued by the Bodhisatta during many
of his births. if we see worldly wisdom as part of the Buddhist concept of wisdom
then once again our only problem is that certain other morals are being ignored
or transgressed in order to demonstrate its power.
The hierarchy in which certain qualities lie is a doctrinal issue as well as a
moral one. Some analyses of the Buddhist path see ethical conduct (sīla) and
wisdom ( paññā) as consecutive parts of the path, thus suggesting that ethics are
irrelevant to the ultimate soteriological goal. in other words good actions are the
preoccupation of the laity and are all about attaining a better rebirth, whereas
nibbāna itself transcends moral values. By this type of analysis, it is perhaps
possible to justify tales showing the power of wisdom over and above the calls of
morality. However, such a view of the Buddhist path has been widely criticised
by both scholars and practitioners, who insist that ethical conduct and wisdom
23 Discussed in John S. Strong, ‘a Family Quest: The Buddha, Yaśodharā, and Rāhula
in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the Buddhist
Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu, 1997), pp. 113–28, pp. 120–21.

34 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
go hand-in-hand throughout the Buddhist path, and that awakened beings are
not beyond good conduct, but only beyond attachment to it and also beyond
its karmic results (since they are free from rebirth). although i agree with this
latter analysis, whichever thesis we accept, two rather awkward facts remain:
first, jātakas are stories of a Bodhisatta who is at times far from awakening, thus
he is arguably not yet at the stage of the path in which ethical conduct could
be abandoned, even if this were his ultimate goal; second, jātakas are used in
Buddhist countries as a source of ethical guidance, and thus we cannot be blamed
for expecting to find morals within them.
Yet of course even this latter statement is problematic, for we can already
see that jātakas are very variable, and that many were probably not composed as
jātakas but rather adapted from existing stories; this early history of jātakas will
be examined in the next chapter. Jātakas could in any case be viewed as falling
outside the Buddhist moral framework, since most of the stories take place
in a time when no Buddha sāsana (teaching) exists, and many revolve around
the actions of animals. as a duggati, the realm of animals is one in which the
attainment of enlightenment is thought impossible, thus it is rare – though
not unfeasible – to consider animals capable of actions conducive to progress
on the Buddhist path.24 Perhaps most importantly, jātakas in many cases are
primarily good stories, and, as Caroline Rhys-Davids puts it in relation to the
JA, ‘the compiler was keener in storymongering than in piety’.25 We should not,
therefore, always look to jātakas for moral instruction. This does not mean that
we should not consider the stories to be Buddhist, but only that they cannot be
viewed as straightforwardly exemplifying Buddhist morals.
one further example that clearly illustrates these concerns is the Biḷāra-
jātaka ( JA 128), in which the Bodhisatta is a big, wise rat living in the forest with
hundreds of ratty followers. a wily jackal pretending to be an ascetic is visited
by them daily, and every day the jackal eats the last to leave. eventually the
Bodhisatta notices and makes sure he is last to leave. When the jackal pounces
he utters a verse about the evil of pretending to be religious then leaps at the
jackal’s throat and kills him, after which:
The company of rats returned and ate the jackal with a crunch crunch crunch.
or rather, i have heard, the first that came got meat, but those that were
behind got none.26
24 This position is borne out by the fact that jātaka stories do not describe animals
meditating or attaining any stage of the Buddhist path, though they do describe animals
making positive moral choices.
25 C.a.F. Rhys-Davids (trans.), Stories of the Buddha (london, 1929), p. xix.
26 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 1, p. 461. This story has a parallel in the
Mahābhārata, where the villain is a cat. as an example of the frequent inconsistency
between the prose and verse portions of the JA, the jātaka verse in fact refers to a cat, as
does the title of the jātaka, but the prose story is about a jackal.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 35
although the Bodhisatta is clearly the hero of this tale, he is not averse to killing
and eating another creature (described in a pretty gruesome manner), albeit
in self-defence. as a rat unaware of Buddhist teachings, his defeat of the jackal
merely serves to demonstrate both his heroism and his concern for the welfare
of his companions. in addition, the story is also found in many other sources in
asia, showing that as a good story it transcends the jātaka genre.
Foolish Bodhisatta
one way in which non-Buddhist or other ‘immoral’ actions are condoned within
the jātakas is through showing the protagonist succeeding because of or despite
his actions. Sometimes, as above, this ‘immoral’ protagonist is the Bodhisatta, and
in other examples it is another protagonist who gets the better of the Bodhisatta
through behaving badly; such stories can make the Bodhisatta appear to be a
fool. one example is the Dūbhiyamakkaṭa-jātaka ( JA 174), in which the Bodhisatta
is a brahmin who draws some water from a well and gives some to a thirsty
monkey. When the monkey has drunk the water, he starts pulling faces at the
Bodhisatta, who chastises him for his ingratitude. The monkey replies:
Who has ever seen or heard of a well-behaved monkey?
Now i will shit on you, for such is our nature!27
He defecates on the Bodhisatta’s head and leaves.
a similar set of events occurs in the Mahisa-jātaka (278), where the Bodhisatta
is a buffalo tormented by a monkey who repeatedly defecates on his back.
He refuses to kill the monkey, taking comfort in the fact that sooner or later
somebody else will, and then he will be free from both the pestering and the
guilt of taking a life:
Proud of his treatment of me, he will do the same to others;
They will kill him, and i will be free.28
Therefore in both these cases we can at least be certain that the monkey will get
the fruit of his action, even if the punishment is not meted out by the Bodhisatta
himself. We might, however, be forgiven for wondering about the karmic
consequences of the Bodhisatta wishing for another creature to kill the monkey.
admittedly, reflecting on the fact that everyone is heir to their own kamma is
said by both Buddhaghosa and Dhammapāla to be the basis or ‘proximate cause’
for the cultivation of upekkhā.29 in a sense this story is an illustration of that idea,
27 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, p. 71.
28 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, p. 386.
29 Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli (trans.), The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) by Bhadantācariya
Buddhaghosa (5th edn, Kandy, 1991), p. 311; D.l. Barua (ed.), Achariya Dhammapāla’s

36 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
though these great commentators do not of course recommend taking comfort
from the fact that others will not be so equanimous.
Whatever their moral implications, these two stories leave us (perhaps a
little reluctantly) laughing at the Bodhisatta. He is too kind for his own good,
not smart enough to know what monkeys are like, and covered in excrement on
more than one occasion.
iNSiGNiFiCaNT
i have so far examined jātakas where the Bodhisatta is identified as either a good
or bad character, and sought some explanations for the latter. However, perhaps
even more surprising than identifying the Bodhisatta as a villain, is identifying
him – in his own jātaka stories – as an indifferent or unnecessary character. We
have already encountered a few examples where he merely comments on the
actions of others, or gives advice which may or may not be heeded. in addition
there are some jātakas in which he plays no part at all, and in fact enters the
jātaka only in the samodhāna, where he is identified most often as a tree-deity
who was watching the whole scene, or maybe some passer-by. of all the jātakas
of the JA, it is those in which the Bodhisatta doesn’t feature at all that are most
difficult to reconcile with the JA commentator’s idea of what jātakas are. in this
final section of the chapter i will examine these examples and ask whether the
presence of such jātakas in the JA can be explained by the origins of the stories.
in contrast to the rest of the this chapter i will therefore be starting to examine
the stories in their historical context, in addition to completing my survey of
the Bodhisatta’s characters. This historical focus will prepare us for the next
chapter.
one example of where the Bodhisatta merely observes in silence is the
Gūthapāna-jātaka ( JA 227), which illustrates the dangers of intoxication, whether
by alcohol or lust. it tells of a dung beetle who gets drunk and challenges a
rutting elephant to a duel:
a hero comes together in battle with a strong, fierce hero.
Come, elephant! Turn back! Why do you fearfully run away?
let the people of aṅga and magadha witness our heroism!
The elephant replies:
i will not strike you with my foot, nor with my tusks nor with my trunk.
i will strike you with shit: let the putrid be killed by the putrid.30
Paramatthadīpanī, Being the Commentary on the Cariyā-Piṭaka (london, 1939), p. 281.
30 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 2, p. 211. The latter verse was deemed rude
enough to be translated into latin by W.H.D. Rouse for Cowell’s 1895 translation.

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 37
and he kills the dung beetle. Thus intoxication can lead to death, or killing
another living being. in this story the Bodhisatta is a tree-deity who watches
the whole event, but does not even have the opportunity to comment, since
both verses are used up by the main characters. in fact, his presence is not even
mentioned in the atīta-vatthu; only the final identification of the birth mentions
that he was watching. The Bodhisatta is a silent devatā in nine other jātakas,31
and in eight more he merely makes a small comment which has no impact on
the events of the story.32
The Gūthapāna-jātaka is one of many in which merlin Peris sees Greek
influence, drawing our attention in this case to two aesopic fable motifs which
he believes may have inspired the story we find in our jātaka.33 Peris is by no
means the first to have noticed the many parallels between jātakas and Greek
fables, but he is in my view the first to argue persuasively that the influence was
from Greece to india, rather than (or in addition to) vice versa.34 Peris points out
that before the JA, the jātakas in the Nikāyas always portrayed the Bodhisatta
as a human, and none of the stories had any Greek parallels; yet by the time of
the Bhārhut illustrations there were vastly more stories, many identifying the
Bodhisatta with an animal, and many with motifs that emulate Greek sources.
This development is seen in full in the JA, and the period of time during which
the development took place coincides with the arrival of alexander’s huge army
into Northwest india. Peris goes on to present a thorough argument for Greek
influence based upon both a study of internal evidence in parallel stories, and
an investigation of the chronology and history of opportunity in the interactions
between india and Greece. The parallels with Greek myth provide some of the
most convincing evidence for the priority of Greek sources, since not only are
some of the myths centuries older than Buddhism, but parallels are also found
in Herodotus’ historical writings, into which it would arguably be difficult to
incorporate fables from afar. Peris concludes that the influence of Greek motifs
upon many jātakas cannot be denied, though he is quick to emphasise that
such stories ‘constitute but a small fraction of the considerable wealth of story
material that these birth stories of the Buddha contain’.35
it is difficult to resist being pulled into a form of civilisational essentialism in
such arguments, and it is of course problematic to speak of ‘Greek’ and ‘indian’
31 JA 102, 147, 205, 209, 297, 298, 361, 400, 437.
32 JA 13, 18, 38, 139, 283, 294, 295, 492.
33 merlin Peris, Greek Story Motifs in the Jatakas (Colombo, 2004), pp. 198–200.
34 Scholars who have argued the priority of indian stories include T.W. Rhys-Davids,
a. Wagener, otto Keller and J. Hertel; those prefering Greek influence include Benfey,
albrecht Weber, W. Gunion Rutherford and several other reputed classicists; scholars
who have merrily sat upon the fence or argued for coincidence include max müller, e.B.
Cowell, a.B. Keith and Joseph Jacobs. See chapter one of Peris, Greek Story Motifs, for a
thorough discussion of the arguments on all sides.
35 Peris, Greek Story Motifs, p. 354.

38 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
in these contexts without lengthy qualification. However, we need not become
entangled in the arguments here, since it is at least clear that some of the jātakas
of the JA were not composed as jātakas, but were reworked from existing sources.
The origins of such jātakas are of interest to us only in that they highlight the fact
that there must have been a process of absorption, during which a character is
identified with the Bodhisatta and the story is put in the mouth of the Buddha. it
is reasonable to suggest that if a story has been composed without the character
of the Bodhisatta in mind, it might at times be difficult to see which role to assign
him, and he might end up identified merely as a silent or insignificant witness.
Thus identifications of the Bodhisatta with characters of no importance, as well
as with morally dubious or at the very least non-Buddhist characters, might be
explained by the importing of a story into the jātaka genre. However, though
this might explain the origins of the stories, it does not excuse the fact that such
stories are later claimed to be part of the Buddha’s biography. i will return to
this issue later.
Greek fables are not the only types of story to have been transformed into
jātakas; many other stories appear to have been appropriated by the JA to further
its own ends. These include those stories which are really apadānas, stories about
karmicly significant deeds and their fruit. Such stories may indeed be about the
Buddha’s karmic fruit, both positive (as in several jātakas, especially those about
his acquisition of perfections) and negative (as in the Pubbakammapiloti discussed
above). However, often apadānas are about the karmic deeds of the Buddha’s
followers, such as in the Keḷisīla-jātaka ( JA 202) mentioned earlier, which explains
the mixed karmic fruits of lakuṇṭaka Thera; in this story the Bodhisatta is Sakka,
and teaches the king (lakuṇṭaka) to be better behaved. in some stories the
difference of the past is used to inspire a change in the present, for example the
Vaṇṇupatha-jātaka ( JA 2) tells of the past perseverance of a man who is currently
a faint-hearted monk. in addition, a very common format is a parallel story in
the past; in other words the actions of a person in the paccuppannavatthu are
repeated in the atītavatthu, with the introduction ‘this is not the first time that
so and so has done such and such’. examples of this include stories about the
idiocy of the elder Udāyi (see JA 5, Taṇḍulanāli-jātaka), also called lāḷudāyi (see
JA 123, Naṅgalīsa-jātaka), as well as the numerous stories that relate Devadatta’s
attempts to kill the Bodhisatta and split the saṅgha. in all such stories the focus
is naturally upon a character other than the Bodhisatta.
The stories that illustrate parallel actions in the past do not really fit our
definition of apadāna. For Peris, such stories are more accurately described as
fables:
The practice of the Buddha, when any event of importance has taken place, to
refer to a similar event involving the same people in a past life is, from a karmic
point of view, neither here nor there. What the jataka achieves, however, is
that, by the detachment of the participants of the past life up to the point of
the samodhana, to make his hearers view their behaviour objectively, critically

The Bodhisatta in Jātaka Stories 39
– and sometimes even humorously, and thus self-evaluate their actions of the
present … the function is thus truly that of fable, holding up the former to the
latter as a mirror in which the moral assessment that the speaker wishes to
make can be the more clearly brought home.36
The fable thus contrasts with the apadāna, where it is a karmic consequence that
is illustrated. Both fable and apadāna are present in the JA, and neither requires
the Bodhisatta to play a significant role. once again, we have an explanation
for the minor character of the Bodhisatta in some of his jātakas, yet once again,
this cannot explain the fact that such stories are said to be part of the Buddha’s
biography, during which he traverses the long path to buddhahood.
CoNClUSioN
as is now clear, it is rather an oversimplification to say that the jātakas of the
JA illustrate the magnificence of the Bodhisatta as he strives for the conditions
of buddhahood. in fact, there are many different types of story contained in
the JA and related texts, as several scholars have noted, prompting them to
formulate typologies of various kinds. Since my focus is upon the Bodhisatta, i
have distinguished between those stories with positive, negative and indifferent
characterisations. Within this discussion i have examined the nature of apadānas
(illustrating the karmicly significant deeds of either the Buddha or one of his
followers) and fables (illustrating a moral point as a reflection of the present
situation). The importance of both these types of story in the teaching methods
of the Buddha can help to explain their presence in the jātaka collection, where
they nevertheless challenge the overall rationale for the collection. in addition, i
have hinted at the history of the collection, which might explain the presence of
stories that challenge or merely ignore Buddhist moral and religious values. This
whistle-stop tour through some of the jātakas has therefore helped to illustrate
the variety that makes it so surprising that the JA presents itself as an exemplary
biography.
if we cannot find evidence within individual stories that jātakas demonstrate
the Bodhisatta’s long path to perfection, we might ask where this idea comes
from, and how it is reconciled with the varied characterisation of the Bodhisatta.
To see this we must examine the history of how and why the stories were told,
collected and presented. This will be the subject of the next chapter.
36 Peris, Greek Story Motifs, p. 45.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 3
The Creation of a Jātaka Genre
in the dedicatory verses at the beginning of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā ( JA) the fifth-
century commentator1 gives us his idea of what a jātaka is:
Having bowed at the feet of the great sage, the world-protector, by whom
measureless benefit was made during thousands of millions of births, and
having made homage to the Dhamma, and honoured the Saṅgha that is the
vessel of all honour, destroying all adversity through the power of the merit
that results from the veneration of the three jewels, [1–3]
The jātakas, beginning with the Appaṇṇaka, taught formerly by the splendid
great sage, relating to various tasks, in which the teacher, the leader, desirous
of carrying the world across, brought to fruition over a long time the endless
conditions for bodhi, all those which were chanted together under the name
‘Jātaka’ when the collections of Dhamma were being made, [4–6]
Having been approached and entreated by the elder atthadassin, who wishes
for the perpetuation of this chronicle of the Buddha,2 who shuns society and
always lives with his co-monks, and indeed by the learned Buddhamitta of
calm mind, who is well-versed in methods, and from the mahiṃsāsaka lineage,
and also by the monk Buddhadeva of pure intellect, [7–9]
i will speak the commentary on the Jātaka that illuminates the unimaginable
magnificence of the deeds of a Great man, depending upon the approaches of the
mahāvihāra inhabitants.3 may the virtuous grasp the virtue while i speak. [10–11]4
1 Theravāda tradition ascribes the commentary to Buddhaghosa, but it is more
likely to have been a Sri lankan monk working shortly after the time of Buddhaghosa,
following the tradition established by that great commentator. a thorough discussion is
found in G.P. malalasekera, The Pāli Literature of Ceylon (Kandy, 1994), p. 123ff.
2 The term here is buddhavaṃsa, which could equally refer to the lineage of buddhas
such as that found in the text of the same name, but context demands we interpret it as
the lineage of the Buddha, in other words his previous births.
3 This is a reference to the mahāvihāra of anurādhapura, the leading monastery
of Sri lanka and the lineage to have survived in the form of Theravāda Buddhism. The
great commentator Buddhaghosa worked at the mahāvihāra, and the vaṃsa chronicles
of the island were composed according to the mahāvihāra tradition. The other two early
lineages of Sri lanka were the Jetavana and abhayagiri vihāras, the latter of which was
known for being more open to mahāyāna ideas.
4 Trans. from V. Fausbøll (ed.), The Jātaka together with its commentary being tales of
the anterior births of Gotama Buddha (6 vols, london, 1877–1896), vol. 1, p. 1. The numbers

42 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
according to this commentator, therefore, jātakas are those which were chanted
as such during the early compilation of the Buddha’s discourses. They were
related by the Buddha, and show how he encountered many tasks and spent
many lives perfecting the conditions required for awakening.
How do the stories i have just examined fit into this overall rationale? Having
taken a swift tour through the great diversity found in individual jātaka stories,
and the variety in the characters which the Bodhisatta plays in stories that became
associated with his long biography, i must now turn my attention to jātaka texts,
which try in their own way to unify the stories through some sort of biographical
association. in contrast to the predominantly synchronic view of the stories
found in the previous chapter, i will here be examining the developments of the
jātaka genre through history. Here i will address the changing role of jātakas and
the emergence of a developed jātaka genre that accompanied the formation of
the Theravāda scriptures. This is not a mere textual history, but rather a history
of the relationship between the Buddha/Bodhisatta and his jātaka stories.
as i discussed in Chapter 1, scholars have tended to view jātakas as a static
genre, rather than one that changes in appearance and use over time. as a
consequence, few scholars have seriously examined the history of Theravāda
jātakas, and fewer still with any attention to their ideological content. T.W. Rhys-
Davids, in a quest to ascertain the period to which the cultural and political
evidence contained in the JA referred, considered the comparative age of the
different parts of the JA. He argued that the original and canonical jātaka work
consisted only of verses, and that the JA consists of a commentary to those
verses; this view is now widely accepted. Rhys-Davids also traced stories in sutta
and vinaya that have parallels in the JA, pointing out that such stories ‘usually
give us neither framework nor verses. in them the Buddha, in his previous birth,
is never identified with an animal, or even with an ordinary man. He is identified
only with some famous sage of bygone times’.5 These comments, though deeply
interesting in regard to the developing rationale of the jātaka genre, are passed
over without further notice by him, on the way to conclusions about the value
of jātakas as folklore.
Rhys-Davids’ observations form part of the evidence for De’s Significance and
Importance of Jātakas. Briefly put, De contends that jātakas must be studied away
from their association with the Bodhisatta, since this was a late association and
not part of their initial rationale. in fact, jātakas were originally only the verses
now found in the Jātakapāli, and these contain nothing distinctively Buddhist.
in pursuit of his conclusion that jātakas demonstrate ‘the fundamental unity of
the two great religions – Hinduism and Buddhism’6 De is guilty of the occasional
in square brackets are the verse numbers; the nature of the passage makes it difficult to
render verse-by-verse.
5 T.W. Rhys-Davids, Buddhist India (london, 1903), p. 207.
6 Gokuldas De, Significance and Importance of Jātakas (Calcutta, 1951), p. xx.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 43
(possibly wilful) misunderstanding of Buddhist doctrine,7 and his strongly
polemical tone is matched by a confused and ill-formed argument. For all De’s
faults, however, he must be praised for raising several issues that have been
otherwise largely ignored in the study of jātakas. Not only does he highlight the
worth of tracing the development of jātakas from pre-Buddhist times through
to the relatively late JA collection, he also demonstrates that the Bodhisatta
ideal (and the pāramitā doctrine that goes hand-in-hand with it) is only a late
association with the genre. He insists that the state of jātakas before the great
jātaka collection must be examined if we are to appreciate the true value of these
stories. although i cannot agree with De’s polemic, and frequently find fault in
his arguments, his contribution to the study of jātakas is significant because of
this insistence.
in contrast to De’s work, von Hinüber’s Entstehung und Aufbau der Jātaka-
Sammlung is a meticulous analysis of the structure and history of the JA. Von
Hinüber argues that the earliest form of jātaka in the Theravāda canon is a story
told by the Buddha entirely in prose; such jātakas are found in the Sutta Piṭaka. in
the Vinaya Piṭaka, stories appear with moral verses, though these contain nothing
specifically Buddhist and are rarely incorporated into the stories themselves.
once we reach the JA, the prose has lost its canonical status, since a text without
fixed form (as in ākhyāna8) cannot be included in the canon. The verses therefore
become the backbone of the collection, and are seen as the canonical core,
despite their late arrival in the genre.9
Von Hinüber restricts himself to a philological textual approach, and is
uninterested in the ideological developments that form the focus of my own
study. Thus, although i will draw upon von Hinüber’s work in support of my own
arguments, my purpose is rather different from his. and although my purpose in
some ways overlaps with De, insofar as he wants to ascertain how and when the
Bodhisatta ideal became associated with jātakas, his influence on my arguments
is minimal. i wish to take a new approach that focuses upon the religious
ideological content of the different forms of jātaka, tracing any developments
through the texts. my approach is founded upon certain strands of modern genre
7 For example in his analysis of the role of the god Sakka in jātakas he states: ‘it pains
one to find how heedlessly in the Jātaka aṭṭhakathā the idea of Bodhisatta has been thrust
upon the previous existence of Sakka, the permanent (ajarāmara) ruler of gods who did
exist in the time of Bhagavā himself and can by no stretch of imagination be identified with
his Bodhisatta so wisely shunned in the more scholarly work Dhammapada aṭṭhakathā’.
De, Significance and Importance, p. 74. it need hardly be pointed out that Sakka’s ultimate
impermanence forms a strong theme within jātakas, where his worth is compared with,
and found inferior to, the final aim of buddhahood.
8 See Chapter 1 for a discussion of to what extent jātakas fit the ākhyāna form (fixed
verse and flexible prose).
9 This argument is set out primarily in oskar von Hinüber, Entstehung und Aufbau der
Jātaka-Sammlung (Stuttgart, 1998), section iii.2.

44 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
theory, inasmuch as i hold that the jātaka genre constantly evolved and became
slightly redefined by every text composed within it. Thus jātaka texts have much
to reveal about the development of the jātaka genre towards an association with
Buddha- and Bodhisatta-biography.
JĀTaKaS BeFoRe JĀTaKa TexTS
Before jātakas were brought together into dedicated texts such as the Jātaka-
pāli, JA and Cariyāpiṭaka, we find several embedded in sutta and vinaya material.
Such stories show signs of a stronger association with the Buddha than with the
Bodhisatta. These ‘embedded jātakas’ must therefore be viewed in the light of
Theravāda traditions about both the memory of past births, and the categorisation
of the scriptures. only after such an investigation can we productively begin our
examination of the Theravāda jātaka collections.
Recollecting Lives: The Doctrinal Foundation of Jātaka Stories
arguably, the very concept of a jātaka is inextricably tied up in the Buddha’s
biography, and can be traced back to the moment of the Buddha’s awakening.
according to several well-known passages in the Sutta Piṭaka, the Bodhisatta
had three different realisations during each of the three watches of the night in
which he became awakened. in the first watch of the night he saw his previous
births:
i recollected my manifold past lives, that is to say, one birth, two, three, four,
five births, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand
births, many ages of world contraction, many ages of world expansion, many
ages of world contraction and expansion: ‘i was there so-named, of such a race,
with such an appearance, such food, such experience of pleasure and pain,
such a life term … and passing away thence i reappeared here’ – thus with
details and particulars i recollected my manifold past life. This was the first
true knowledge attained by me in the first watch of the night.10
This part of his awakening experience might be seen as the beginning of the
idea of a jātaka story. Yet at this stage there is no mention of the reasons behind
his progression from life to life; instead we are just left with a sense of the
tiring infinitude of the process. However, in the second watch of the night the
Bodhisatta saw the effects of actions:
10 Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli (trans.), The Life of the Buddha According to the Pali Canon (3rd
edn, Kandy, 1992), pp. 23–4, from Majjhima Nikāya 36.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 45
i saw beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly,
happy and unhappy in their destinations. i understood how beings pass on
according to their actions: ‘These worthy beings who were ill-conducted in
body, speech and mind, revilers of noble-ones, wrong in their views, giving
effect to wrong view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, have reappeared in states of privation, in an unhappy destination, in
perdition, even in hell; but these worthy beings who were well-conducted in
body, speech and mind, not revilers of noble-ones, right in their views, giving
effect to right view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death,
have reappeared in a happy destination, even in a heavenly world.’ … This was
the second true knowledge attained by me in the second watch of the night.11
This might be seen as the beginning of the concept of an apadāna story. Having
realised, in the third watch of the night, the knowledge of the destruction of the
defilements, the Bodhisatta became Buddha, and proceeded to use stories about
previous births as part of his teachings.
The ability of the Buddha to recollect his own lives is certainly necessary for
his ability to tell jātakas. a recurrent formula in the JA describes the Buddha’s
telling of the stories of the past as ‘making clear that which was concealed [from
his audience] by rebirth’,12 implying that the Buddha’s vision gave him this
special ability to narrate jātakas. However, the ability to see one’s past births,
though mentioned in most relations of the night of awakening, is not limited to
awakened beings. Recollection of past lives, or past abodes (P pubbenivāsānussati;
Skt pūrvanivāsānusmṛti) is one of the six higher knowledges (P abhiññā; Skt abhijñā),
only the last of which – the knowledge of the destruction of the defilements
– is limited to enlightened beings. The other five, including the memory of past
abodes, are attainable through intense meditation, and thus are not even limited
to Buddhist practitioners, though Buddhaghosa remarks that non-Buddhists
can only remember as far back as 40 eons, since their understanding is so
weak.13 indeed the Pāli canon contains past birth stories related by the Buddha’s
followers.14 in addition, according to the Jātaka-nidānakathā the Bodhisatta
attains the five higher knowledges before he even makes his first aspiration to
11 Ñāṇamoli, The Life of the Buddha, p. 24.
12 bhavantarena paṭicchannakāraṇaṃ pākaṭam akāsi – JA stories 1–13 are introduced
in this way, after which the formula is dropped, though the commentator states that it
should nonetheless be assumed to be part of the experience of each story.
13 Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli (trans.), The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) by Bhadantācariya
Buddhaghosa (5th edn, Kandy, 1991), p. 407; Visuddhimagga xiii 16. The Buddha can see
millions of eons, and the varying types of followers varying degrees in between.
14 See, for example, moggallāna’s story of a past birth in the Māratajjaniya Sutta (sutta
50) of the Majjhima Nikāya.

46 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
buddhahood as Sumedha at the feet of Dīpaṃkara Buddha.15 His recollection
of past births during the night of his awakening cannot therefore be seen as a
defining feature of his enlightenment.
an obvious question might be why the memory of past abodes was included
in accounts of the Buddha’s awakening, if it is in fact a relatively unimpressive
attainment. Possible answers to this have been examined by lopez, who suggests
that it is memory’s close link to personal identity that makes its inclusion in
the account of awakening necessary, as a contrast to (and in tension with) the
realisation of anattā, for ‘the bodhisatta sees the past and present order of the
world in the first two watches of the night. But when he sees that the ordered
world has no essence, he is awakened’.16 as such, it is necessary to demonstrate
the continuity and identity in past births – a realisation common with the
Brahmanical tradition – in order to transcend this in the exclusively Buddhist
realisation of conditionality that forms awakening.
if the memory of former lives is not a uniquely Buddhist phenomenon, why is
Buddhism unique in having such a vibrant tradition of narrative recollections of
the past births of its founder?17 it is possible that this account of the awakening
boosted the importance of recollecting births, thus inspiring the rising numbers
of jātaka stories.18 it may also have influenced the association between stories
of past births and the Buddha’s ability to see deep into the past. Yet if the
Buddha can see the births of others, and selected others can see their own as
well as his, we have to ask how the jātaka genre became defined as a story of
the past life of the Buddha related by himself (albeit sometimes later repeated
by others). it is not self-evident that this is what a jātaka necessarily is; rather it
is a definition developed and propagated by the texts. We have here a doctrinal
(and mythological or hagiographical) justification for the Buddha’s ability to tell
jātakas, but the strong association of jātakas with Buddha and Bodhisatta is a
development that requires further explanation.
15 N.a. Jayawickrama (trans.), The Story of Gotama Buddha: The Nidāna-kathā of the
Jātakaṭṭhakathā (oxford, 1990), p. 8. This aspiration, confirmed by a prediction by the
buddha of the time, traditionally marks the beginning of the Bodhisatta’s journey towards
buddhahood. See Chapter 5 for a full discussion.
16 Donald S. lopez Jr., ‘memories of the Buddha’ in Janet Gyatso (ed.), In the Mirror of
Memory: Reflections on Mindfulness and Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism (albany,
1992), pp. 21–45, p. 36.
17 There are isolated cases in the Jain tradition, but no equivalent genre. Jain texts
preserve more stories of the past births of unawakened beings, and these are used in quite
a different way to equivalent stories in Buddhist traditions. Clearly each tradition has
different understandings of the characteristics and uses of birth stories.
18 This link, however, is not made in the JA: the account of the awakening in the
Nidānakathā is very brief and does not associate the recollection of previous abodes with
the jātaka stories that follow.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 47
Embedded Jātakas
it will of course aid my historical analysis to look closely at the earliest examples
of jātaka stories, as preserved in sutta and vinaya material. Three stories
found in the JA (1, 168 and 371) are found in sutta and vinaya texts without an
identification of the Buddha with any of the characters, and without the jātaka
verses.19 Seven further stories ( JA 28, 31, 37, 91, 136, 253 and 309) are found with
no identification but containing the same verses as are preserved in the JA.20 it is
clear from these examples that stories later identified as jātakas were not always
associated in their earlier form with the person of the Bodhisatta. Nor indeed
were they necessarily associated with the Buddha’s teaching career: two stories
in the Pāyāsi Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya which are later identified as jātakas ( JA 1
and 91) are narrated by the disciple Kassapa, after the Buddha’s parinibbāna.
Two further stories from the JA are found in sutta texts, and this time they
are identified as stories about a previous birth of the Buddha. in the Majjhima
Nikāya we find the story of King makhādeva, who renounced his throne after
the discovery of a grey hair. This story parallels those preserved in JA 9 and
541, the Makhādeva-jātaka and Nimi-jātaka, though none of the jātaka verses are
19 JA 1, Apaṇṇaka-jātaka is found in DN 23 Pāyāsi (T.W. Rhys-Davids and J. estlin
Carpenter (eds), Dīgha-nikāya (3 vols, london, 1889–1911), vol. 2, p. 316ff.). JA 168,
Sakuṇagghi-jātaka is found in SN Mahāvagga iii (Satipaṭṭhāna-saṃyutta) 1.6 Sakuṇagghi
(l. Feer (ed.), Saṃyutta-nikāya (6 vols, london, 1884–1904), vol. 5, pp. 146–8). JA 371,
Dīghitikosala-jātaka is found in the Vinaya: Mahāvagga x (Hermann oldenberg (ed.), Vinaya
Piṭakaགྷ (5 vols, edinburgh, 1879–1883), vol. 1, p. 337ff.).
20 JA 28, Nandivisāla-jātaka is found in the Vinaya: Suttavibhaṅga, Pācittiya ii (oldenberg,
Vinaya-piṭakaགྷ, vol. 4, p. 4ff.). JA 31, Kulāvaka-jātaka is found in SN Sagāthāvagga xi (Sakka-
saṃyutta), 1.6 Kulāvaka (Feer, Saṃyutta-nikāya, vol. 1, pp. 224–5). JA 37, Tittira-jātaka is
found in the Vinaya: Cullavagga vi, 6, 3 (oldenberg, Vinaya-piṭakaṃ, vol. 2, pp. 161–2). JA
91, Litta-jātaka is found in DN 23 Pāyāsi (Rhys-Davids and Carpenter, Dīgha-nikāya, vol. 2,
p. 316ff.). JA 136, Suvaṇṇahaṃsa-jātaka is found in the Vinaya: Bhikkhunīvibhaṅga, Pācittiya
i (oldenberg, Vinaya-piṭakaṃ, vol. 4, pp. 258–9). JA 253, Maṇikaṇṭha-jātaka is found in the
Vinaya: Suttavibhaṅga, Saṅghādisesa Vi, 1 (oldenberg, Vinaya-piṭakaṃ, vol. 3, p. 145ff.). JA
309, Chavaka-jātaka is found in the Vinaya, Suttavibhaṅga, Sekhiya 69 (oldenberg, Vinaya-
piṭakaṃ, vol. 4, pp. 203–4). The latter story could be seen as identifying a character as
the Buddha in a past birth, but in contrast to the very explicit identification in the other
stories, the identification of the Bodhisatta (as a low class man) is merely implied by the
conclusion to the story, where we find the line: ‘tadāpi me bhikkhave amanāpā nīce āsane
nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa mantaṃ vācetuṃ. kim aṅga pana etarahi na amanāpā bhavissati
nīce āsane nisīditvā ucce āsane nisinnassa dhammaṃ desetuṃ’ (oldenberg, Vinaya-piṭakaགྷ, vol.
4, p. 204). ‘at that time, monks, it was not pleasing to me to give advice to one seated on
a higher seat, whilst sitting on a lower seat; how much more now will it be unpleasing to
teach the Dhamma to one seated on a higher seat, whilst sitting on a lower seat.’ There is
therefore a distinct possibility either of scribal error or a later interpolation in awareness
of the jātaka story, which refers directly to this passage for its context.

48 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
found in the sutta version.21 in the Dīgha Nikāya is the story of mahāsudassana,
a wealthy king from the glorious past of Kusinārā. This story forms JA 95, the
Mahāsudassana-jātaka, where the same verse is also found.22 like the other
parallel stories to the JA found in sutta and vinaya material, these two stories
are introduced with bhūtapubbaṃ ‘formerly’, in contrast to the JA, where stories
are introduced with the term atīte ‘in the past’. None of the stories use the word
‘jātaka’ or ‘bodhisatta’, so it is perhaps unfair to consider even these two stories
as examples of the jātaka genre at this stage. However, these stories must have
influenced what later became standard for the genre, and so they are worthy of
a little investigation.
in both of these stories the Bodhisatta is identified as a king, but despite
the limited characterisations the material reveals much about attitudes towards
Buddha and Bodhisatta. The story of King mahāsudassana is told after Ānanda
laments that the Tathāgata should die in a great city, not a little insignificant
town like Kusinārā. The story’s elaborate description of the great wealth
belonging to the past king of Kusinārā (the Bodhisatta) not only lends status
to the place where the Buddha is about to die, but also serves as a final lesson
to Ānanda on the nature of impermanence. Thus Ānanda is at once comforted
by the knowledge that his teacher is not about to end his life in a place of no
significance, whilst also being reminded that the sort of significance that comes
from riches is ultimately unsatisfactory. in yet another layer of meaning, we see
that the Bodhisatta once had all the riches a person could ever conceive of, yet
remains insignificant in comparison with the Buddha.
Such a comparison between Buddha and Bodhisatta is clearer still in the
story of King makhādeva, who renounces the world at the sight of his first grey
hair, and entreats his son to continue this practice. He, and each of a long line
of descendents, thus attain the Brahma realm. The last in the line is King Nimi,
who in the JA is also identified with the Bodhisatta. in the sutta, however, only
makhādeva is the Bodhisatta, and he thus institutes a good practice which is
followed by many others. But, the Buddha concludes, that practice only led
to rebirth in the Brahma realm, not to nibbāna. in contrast, he says, the good
practice instituted by the Buddha – the eightfold path – leads to much greater
things.
This situation is echoed in some of the stories which identify themselves
as being about the Buddha’s past births but are nevertheless not found in the
JA. one such story is in the Kūṭadanta Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya,23 which tells of
how an advisor to King Vijita arranged a great (bloodless) sacrifice for him. The
audience for this story includes the brahmin Kūṭadanta, who at its conclusion
asks whether the Buddha himself witnessed the events. The Buddha replies
21 MN 83 Makhādeva (V. Trenckner and Robert Chalmers (eds), Majjhima-nikāya (3
vols, london, 1888–1902), vol. 2, p. 74ff.).
22 DN 17 Mahāsudassana (Rhys-Davids and Carpenter, Dīgha-nikāya, vol. 2, p. 169ff.).
23 DN 5 Kūṭadanta (Rhys-Davids and Carpenter, Dīgha-nikāya, vol. 1, p. 127ff.).

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 49
that he was at that time the king’s advisor, and then gives various instructions
about how to perform even better sacrifices than that performed by King Vijita;
such ‘sacrifices’ (yañña) range from giving gifts specifically to renunciants, to
undertaking Buddhist meditative practices. Thus, we learn, the Bodhisatta does
well, but the Buddha does better.
in the Pacetana Sutta of the Aṅguttara Nikāya24 the Bodhisatta is wheelwright
to King Pacetana, and makes two new wheels ready for a battle. one wheel he
makes in six months less six days; this wheel is magnificent. The other he makes
in the remaining six days, and because it is crooked and flawed it is inferior. The
Buddha sums up the birth and says:
at that time, monks, i was skilled in regard to crooked wood, wood with flaws
and faults. Now, monks, i – arhat and Fully enlightened one – am skilled with
regard to the crookedness, faults and flaws of the body, the crookedness, faults
and flaws of speech, the crookedness, faults and flaws of the mind.25
again, we have a direct contrast being made between the mundane skills of the
Bodhisatta and the religious skills of the Buddha. Similarly, in the Mahāgovinda
Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya,26 the Bodhisatta is identified as a brahmin named
Jotipāla who is minister to a king, and is followed into renunciation by the king
and several hundred others, all of whom progress as a result to birth as gods
or gandhabbas (spirits). again, however, the Bodhisatta’s fault is highlighted,
for, as the Buddha points out, progress towards the heavens is not as good as
progress towards nibbāna; thus the teachings of Jotipāla Bodhisatta are nothing
in comparison with those of Gotama Buddha.
Rather than glorifying the progress of the Bodhisatta, these early jātakas
put such Bodhisattas in direct contrast to the Buddha – their achievements are
great, but the Buddha’s are on a different scale altogether. The difference is not
highlighted in order to demonstrate the failings of the Bodhisatta, however;
on the contrary one gets the impression the Bodhisatta did all that he could,
bearing in mind the limitations of being in a world without Buddhism. Such a
limitation is highlighted most explicitly by the story of Brahmin Velāma in the
Aṅguttara Nikāya,27 in which the Bodhisatta gives great gifts which are elaborately
described. The Buddha, however, points out that ‘though the householder
Brahmin Velāma gave very great gifts, had he fed a single person of right view
there would have been much greater fruit’.28 The Buddha goes on to explain that
the gift would have been much greater had there been worthy recipients (in
24 AN 3, 15 Pacetana (Richard morris and edmund Hardy (eds), Aṅguttara-nikāya (5
vols, london, 1885–1900), vol. 1, p. 110ff.).
25 Trans. from morris and Hardy, Aṅguttara-nikāya, vol. 1, p. 112.
26 DN 19 Mahāgovinda (Rhys-Davids and Carpenter, Dīgha-nikāya, vol. 2, p. 220ff.).
27 AN 9, 20 Velāma (morris and Hardy, Aṅguttara-nikāya, vol. 4, p. 393ff.).
28 Trans. from morris and Hardy, Aṅguttara-nikāya, vol. 4, p. 394.

50 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
ascending order of worth: people of right view, once-returners, non-returners,
arahats, paccekabuddhas and tathāgatas) or had the donor resolved to keep the
precepts or conceived a thought of impermanence. Such things, we are implicitly
told, were not possible for the Bodhisatta when he was the Brahmin Velāma. We
are thus made to appreciate how much better the situation is with Buddhism in
the world.
The contrast between a past without Buddhism and a present with Buddhism,
as drawn in such stories, is instructive in that it allows the audience to see how
much benefit the Buddha has brought to the world. it is interesting to compare
this focus with ohnuma’s distinction between the ‘ethos of the jātaka’ (perfection,
necessary in a buddha-less world) and ‘ethos of the avadāna’ (devotion, enough
in a world with Buddhism), mentioned earlier.29 The situation in our context is
slightly different from that examined by ohnuma, since the Bodhisatta’s reaction
to being stuck in a buddha-less world is not to perform extreme acts of self-
sacrifice or other demonstrations of the pāramitās (as in ohnuma’s examples),
but rather to just do the best he can within the non-Buddhist framework. His
actions, positive though they may be, are shown to be insignificant in relation to
the magnificent acts of the Buddha. it is almost as if we are being told that the
Bodhisatta is not Buddhist. Such stories must therefore date to before any fully
formed doctrine of the bodhisatta path.
in contrast to such stories, in the Ghaṭīkāra Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya30
we find a story of the Bodhisatta’s actions in the time of another buddha. Here
Gotama Buddha identifies himself with another brahmin named Jotipāla, who
dismisses several times his friend Ghaṭīkāra the potter’s suggestion that they
visit Kassapa Buddha, saying there is no point in visiting a ‘little bald ascetic’
(muṇḍaka samaṇaka). He finally relents, hears a teaching, and goes forth into
Kassapa Buddha’s order. The story then focuses upon the benefits felt by his
companion the potter as a result of supporting Kassapa Buddha and his monks.
There is no mention of Jotipāla’s subsequent achievements in the Buddhist
order, and so attention is focused upon his initial reviling of Kassapa Buddha,
though the consequences of this are not commented on in the story. in the
Pubbakammapiloti of the Apadāna this episode is given as the karmic cause of
Gotama Buddha’s six years of suffering during severe austerities.31 in this latter
text, therefore, Jotipāla’s less-than-exemplary behaviour is highlighted in order
to demonstrate that the sufferings of the Buddha’s final life can be explained by
his misbehaviour in the past.
looking at jātakas as they might have been before the compilation of jātaka
texts has several benefits. First, they remind us that the JA is not an exhaustive
29 Reiko ohnuma, Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body in Indian Buddhist
Literature (New York, 2007), as discussed in Chapter 1.
30 mN 81 Ghatīkāra (Trenckner and Chalmers, Majjhima-nikāya, vol. 2, 1, p. 45ff.).
31 See Chapter 2 for a discussion of the significance of this text in relation to jātakas
and the Bodhisatta’s ability to misbehave.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 51
collection. Second, they demonstrate that some stories only became identified
as jātakas with their inclusion in jātaka texts. Third, they show that where the
Buddha is identified as one of the characters in these early stories, this is almost
always done in order to point out the contrast in value between Bodhisatta and
Buddha. The idea that jātakas demonstrate the Bodhisatta’s gradual path to
perfection is not found in such texts; rather the stories show how special the
Buddha is, and what impact he has had on the world through his presence and
teachings. The jātaka genre thus has roots in some of the earlier texts, yet in quite
a different form, both structurally and stylistically (as von Hinüber has shown),
and ideologically. Now that we are clear about the foundations upon which the
later texts rest, we may move on to an examination of the developments in the
genre.
Recollecting Texts: The Emergence of a Genre
The Theravāda canon was formed at a time when the preservation of scripture
was done by learned monastics who would memorise portions of it. Thus the
early ‘councils’ of Buddhism, where the scriptures were assembled, are referred
to as the saṃgīti, or ‘singing together’. one can only speculate about the nature
of the earliest scriptures, since there is little evidence about which texts formed
a part at this time. The earliest reliably datable evidence we have for Buddhist
literature is an asokan inscription from the third century bce, which contains
a list of Buddhist scriptures, although the exact identification of the texts
mentioned is still under debate.32 Textual evidence is unreliable by comparison,
but one classification of scripture that is considered to be very old is that into nine
limbs (navaṅga): sutta (discourses), geyya (recitation), veyyākaraṇa (expositions),
gāthā (verses), udāna (utterances of joy), itivuttaka (‘thus said’s), jātaka (birth
stories), abbhutadhamma (marvellous phenomena) and vedalla (analyses).33 it is
quite clear that this list does not refer to individual texts, but rather to ‘types’ of
text (we might even, in the present context, say ‘genres’). ‘Jātaka’ forms one of
these types, while ‘apadāna’ is not mentioned at this stage, suggesting that this
had not yet emerged as a genre in its own right, and is perhaps counted under
‘jātaka’; as we have seen, many apadānas are included in the JA.
32 Calcutta-Bairat minor rock edict: e. Hultzsch, Inscriptions of Aśoka (New Delhi,
1991), pp. 172–4. There is no mention of jātakas.
33 See K.R. Norman, Pāli Literature (Wiesbaden, 1983), pp. 15–16 for instances of this
list. These lists occur in some of the early portions of the canon, although the earliest
lists only contain only three or four limbs, and no jātakas. in most Sanskrit materials we
find lists of 12, which include avadāna. For an overview of the lists and their adoption by
different schools see etienne lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka
Era, trans. from French by Sara Boin-Webb (louvain la Neuve, 1988), p. 143ff.

52 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
The preservers and reciters of the Theravāda scriptures – the bhāṇakas
(and bhāṇikās)34 – specialised in different sections of sutta material, and thus
we find mention in Pāli commentaries of bhāṇaka traditions for the Dīgha,
Majjhima, Saṃyutta and Aṅguttara Nikāyas, including some references to disputes
between the members of different traditions. in the Milindapañha we find
‘Jātakabhāṇakā Dīghabhāṇakā Majjhimabhāṇakā Saṃyuttabhāṇakā Anguttarabhāṇakā
Khuddakabhāṇakā’35 as part of a list of inhabitants of the Blessed one’s ‘city of
dhamma’, in an elaborate metaphor that compares the Buddha to an architect of
a city. This brings the list to six, and it is noteworthy that this text refers to Jātaka-
bhāṇakas as separate from the Khuddaka-bhāṇakas, a reasonable practicality
bearing in mind the size of the JA. mori points out that in fact many lists omit
the Khuddaka-bhāṇakas even when they mention Jātaka-bhāṇakas, suggesting
that some form of jātaka collection may predate the compilation of the Khuddaka
Nikāya.36
in the Samantapāsādikā (Buddhaghosa’s commentary on the vinaya), the
requirements for bhāṇakas are laid out. Here we learn that bhāṇakas need not
know the entire nikāya, thus Majjhima-bhāṇakas should know at least the first
50 discourses, and Dīgha-bhāṇakas should know the Mahāvagga. Jātaka-bhāṇakas
should know ‘the jātaka with its commentary’ (sāṭṭhakathaṃ jātakaṃ), as well as,
according to the mahāpaccarī commentary, the Dhammapada with its stories
(dhammapadam pi saha vatthunā).37 That some expected Jātaka-bhāṇakas to learn
stories from the Dhammapada commentary as well as the jātaka stories of the JA,
suggests that these particular bhāṇakas might double up as storytellers; indeed
their specialism could hardly be anything else. The important factor here must
therefore be the illuminating quality of stories, rather than any association with
the Bodhisatta.
Such references can only confirm that jātakas were subject to their own
bhāṇaka tradition from before the commentarial period (and, therefore, before
the JA as we have it now). in relation to the earlier history of jātakas, adikaram
records references to a Jātaka-bhāṇaka existing at the time of the Buddha, another
preaching stories to a king in the first century ce, and another referred to as
a Mahā-jātaka-bhāṇaka who specialised in reciting the Vessantara-jātaka. These
references are also rather late (around the fifth century ce), but they do suggest
34 i am heavily reliant here on the thorough survey of materials relating to the
bhāṇakas of various types found in e.W. adikaram, Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon
(Dehiwala, Sri lanka, 1946), chapter 3, as well as S. mori, ‘The origin and History of
the Bhānaka Tradition’ in Y. Karunadasa (ed.), ānanda: Papers on Buddhism and Indology
(Colombo, 1990), pp. 123–9.
35 V. Trenckner (ed.), The Milindapañho (london, 1962), pp. 341–2.
36 mori, ‘origin and History’.
37 J. Takakusu and makoto Nagai (eds), Samantapāsādikā: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary
on the Vinaya Piṭaka, vol. 4 (london, 1934), p. 789.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 53
the possibility of a sustained tradition from early times.38 This is supported by
a first-century ce epigraphic reference to a Sri lankan donor monk who was
a Jātaka-bhāṇaka.39 That jātakas were a recognised genre from as early as the
second century bce is in any case attested by the presence of the word ‘jātaka’
in the labels for the jātaka reliefs at Bhārhut, though the precise meaning of the
term at this time cannot be known.
in summary, the early history of the jātaka genre is difficult to trace, though
we can see from the division of scriptures, the bhāṇaka traditions, and the
inscriptions at Bhārhut, that ‘jātaka’ is considered to be a distinct genre from
at least a few centuries after the time of the Buddha. in addition, the idea of
telling stories of past births is conceptually linked to the story of the Buddha’s
awakening, and stories that demonstrate his abilities to recall past lives are
found in both sutta and vinaya materials. However, there is no evidence at this
stage that the genre had any relation to the path of the Bodhisatta, indeed a
tendency to demonstrate the great abilities of the Buddha, or perhaps just
a desire to tell good stories, is more prominent. The emergence of a defined
jātaka collection seems to have been a gradual process, perhaps linked to the oral
preservation of stories and the continued use of such stories in sermons. at some
point this random assortment of jātakas, or rather the verses relating to them,
was collected together into one text – the Jātakapāli.
the JāTAKAPāLI and the KHUDDAKA NIKāyA
The first jātaka text to emerge in the Theravāda tradition was the Jātakapāli,40 a
collection of verses which now forms the tenth section of the Khuddaka Nikāya of
the Theravāda canon. it is not clear at what stage the text was compiled, though
some of the verses are found in other parts of the canon as well as in texts from
other schools, and the first pāda of the Jātakapāli verse of the Aṇḍabhūta-jātaka
( JA 62) is found inscribed as its title at Bhārhut. Gombrich has suggested that the
verses of the Vessantara-jātaka are no later than the third century bce.41 Warder
has used evidence from the metre of all of the Jātakapāli verses to argue that they
were composed at different times during the long period of the compilation of
the canon. He concludes that some are as early as the Suttanipāta, or even earlier,
38 Respectively Papañcasūdanī, Mahāvaṃsa, Manorathapūranī – adikaram, Early History,
pp. 30–31.
39 S. Paranavitana, Inscriptions of Ceylon, vol. 2/2 (Colombo, 2001), no. 171a
(pp. 270–271): Jātaka-baṇa[ka] Naka-teraha patagaḍi – ‘The step of the elder Nāga, the reciter
of Jātakas’. i am grateful to Peter Skilling for bringing this reference to my attention.
40 i use this term rather than simply Jātaka in order to make it clear that i am not
referring to the JA, which is often called Jātaka by scholars.
41 Richard F. Gombrich, ‘The Vessantara Jātaka, The Rāmāyaṇa and the Dasaratha
Jātaka’, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 105/3 (1985): 427–37, p. 428.

54 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
whereas many others probably belong to a particularly creative period in the
third century bce.42 Though Warder’s methods have been disputed, his findings
are consistent with the other (scanty) evidence we have for the compilatory
history of the Jātakapāli.
The Jātakapāli clearly belongs to the early period of Buddhism when texts
were part of an oral tradition. like parts of the Veda as well as several other
texts in the Pāli canon, the Jātakapāli was organised on a nipāta system, thus the
ekanipāta contains verses which individually relate to a jātaka, the dukanipāta
contains pairs of verses that relate to a jātaka, and so on. The final nipāta
contains long, verse-filled narratives. Within the first eight nipātas the stories
are organised into chapters, and these are either themed or named after the first
story contained within them. even where no theme is stated there appears to be
some sort of organisational principle, as simple as clustering all the stories about
birds together, or all the stories with verses on a similar structural pattern. in
this way it has a certain order, but this order is primarily for mnemonic reasons,
rather than being the conscious ordering of a literary composition.
it is difficult to establish a unifying principle for the verses in the Jātakapāli
that resulted in their ending up in the same text. arguably we should examine
them alongside their stories, in which case we could merely accept the traditional
explanation that the verses were placed in the text because of their presence in
a jātaka. i see no great reason to dispute this explanation, although it might be
worth adding the alternative that in some cases at least verses may have been
composed to accompany an existing story in order to facilitate its inclusion in
the collection. in either case one might then ask why the whole story was not
included in the Jātakapāli, but here we need only refer to the ākhyāna theory
discussed in Chapter 1, and suggest that although the stories came first, the
verses were fixed earlier than the stories, and thus it was only the verses that
acquired canonical status. The verses thus became the way of remembering a
story, itself too cumbersome and flexible to be remembered verbatim.
evidence that the jātaka was considered to be more than just the verse is
provided by the uddāna (‘summary’) verses. Such verses are found throughout
the Pāli canon, every 10 chapters or so, and contain a list of the contents that
have just preceded. The uddāna verses of the Jātakapāli occur every 10 jātakas, and
mention each jātaka separately, even where such a jātaka is only a single verse.
This is in contrast to the uddāna verses of other canonical texts, where chapters
are referred to, not their individual contents. evidence from the uddāna verses
cannot be relied upon too heavily, since their dating is always in question,43 but
they do add to a picture that associates the verses of the Jātakapāli inextricably
42 a.K. Warder, Pali Metre: A Contribution to the History of Indian Literature (london,
1967), p. 97 and the table on p. 225.
43 Such verses are found in some early manuscripts and also in the Sanskrit tradition,
but dating is nonetheless problematic. in any case, even if we can date the practice there
is no reason to suggest that the individual verses remained the same. The verses may

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 55
with the stories found later in the JA. However, the fact that the stories were
not fixed, and not included in the canon, implies that the verses deserve to be
examined separately, much as the Dhammapada is studied both in its own right
as well as with its commentary.
in the case of the Dhammapada and its commentary the two texts are each
well known but are used in different ways. in contrast, the Jātakapāli and JA are
considered inextricable, and this is usually explained as the result of the verses
being incomprehensible without the stories. in actual fact, it is not so much that
the verses are incomprehensible, as incomplete, since they often refer directly
to a specific example found in the prose story. This situation is well illustrated
by a cluster of jātakas about foolishness. The relevant verses of the Jātakapāli
(vv. 41–50) are as follows:
He who doesn’t listen to the counsel
of those friends who care about his welfare
laments, like mittaka hanging on to the goat’s foot. [41]
He who doesn’t listen to the counsel
of those friends who care about his welfare
dwells as if, having not heeded the pigeon’s words,
he is in the hand of the enemy. [42]
He who doesn’t listen to the counsel
of those friends who care about his welfare
is destroyed like Veḷuka’s father. [43]
an intelligent enemy is better,
not indeed a stupid friend.
Deaf-and-dumb, thinking ‘i would strike the mosquito’
the son cleaved his father’s head. [44]
Better a wise foe than a foolish friend.
See worthless Rohiṇi; having killed her mother she laments. [45]
assistance from a fool is not conducive to happiness:
a fool fails, just like the monkey gardener. [46]
assistance from a fool is not conducive to happiness:
a fool fails, as in the case of Koṇḍañña and his liquor. [47]
He who is misguided in his efforts to help, suffers:
the Cetans killed Vedabbha, and they all met with ruin. [48]
The luck of honoured stars misses the fool
luck is luck’s star; what can stars do? [49]
With a thousand fools, the sacrifice entreated by me
now indeed i will perform, for unrighteous people are plentiful. [50]44
also vary between the Burmese tradition (represented by the VRi edition, used here) and
other Southeast asian manuscript traditions.
44 Trans. of the Atthakāma vagga of the Jātakapāli, extracted from Fausbøll, The Jātaka,
vol. 1, p. 234ff. This agrees with both the SHB edition of the Jātakapāli (Ven. W. Piyatissa

56 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
in most of these verses the story is referred to as a support for what is being said,
but the moral itself is spelled out fully in the verse – often half the verse is the
moral, and the other half a reference to a specific set of events that demonstrate
this. one could compare what the Dhammapada has to say on the same subject, in
some verses from chapter five, Bālavagga (‘chapter on the fool’):
long is the night to one who is alert; long a mile to one who is tired;
long is saṃsāra for fools who do not comprehend the true doctrine. [60]
if a wanderer fails to meet his equal or better,
he should surely journey alone; there is no companionship with fools. [61]
Thinking ‘i have sons, i have wealth’ the fool suffers.
He has not even his own self, how then sons or wealth? [62]
The fool who is aware of his foolishness is therefore like a wise man.
But a fool who thinks he is wise is called a fool indeed. [63]
a fool who, as long as he lives, attends to a wise man,
he doesn’t know the doctrine, as the spoon doesn’t know the soup’s flavour. [64]
if a discerning person attends to a wise man even for a second,
he swiftly knows the doctrine, like the tongue knows the soup’s flavour. [65]45
in this case the verses make no reference to anything outside themselves, and
where examples are required they are included in the verses, and take the form
of images rather than stories. Thus the Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā has an easier job
than the JA, since it only needs to supply the context for the utterance of the
verse by the Buddha, or a story which further backs up the content of the verses.
This comparison is not limited to the Dhammapada: von Hinüber contrasts the
Jātakapāli with all other canonical verse collections, since it is the only text which
is dependent upon its commentary.46
in addition to the tendency of the Jātakapāli to be reliant upon its
accompanying stories, the verses have rather a more worldly focus than texts
such as the Dhammapada. Though all the verses just quoted are about folly, the
idea of who is a fool is rather different in each text: in the Jātakapāli, a fool is
someone who doesn’t listen to his friends, or a gardener who pulls up plants to
check from their roots how much water they might require; in the Dhammapada
a fool is someone who doesn’t heed or understand Buddhist teachings. only in
(ed.), The Jātaka Pāli (Colombo, 1954), vol. 1, pp. 6–7) and the VRi edition of the Jātakapāli
(also known as the Chaṭṭha Saṅgāyana edition, found at www.tipitaka.org). The verses
here are numbered as in the editions of the Jātakapāli – in Fausbøll’s edition they are
numbered 40–49.
45 Trans. from ‘Bāla vagga’ of the Dhammapada (o. von Hinüber and K.R. Norman
(eds), Dhammapada (oxford, 2003), p. 17ff.).
46 Von Hinüber, Entstehung und Aufbau, p. 192. Despite this undeniable situation, it is
notable that in many cases the stories as we have them now have only a tenuous relation
to the Jātakapāli verses.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 57
Jātakapāli verses 49 and 50 do we see a difference in style (these verses are pretty
incomprehensible without the stories), accompanied by some Buddhist notions.
The story that accompanies verse 49 in the JA tells of a family who consult
the stars before allowing a marriage to take place, and by holding back on an
inauspicious day miss out on the bride.47 The next story tells of a prince who
makes a show of worshipping a tree-deity until he becomes king, then orders a
sacrifice to be made to the tree of 1,000 unrighteous people – such a declaration
unsurprisingly leads to better behaviour amongst his subjects.48 Both stories
(and indeed verses) contain a mocking portrayal of popular practices and to
that extent are Buddhist. The commentary of the latter story as we have it now
explicitly expounds some Buddhist principles, though there is no reason to
believe this was an original part of the story.
The style of the Jātakapāli changes further as the text proceeds, and a
particularly strong contrast is found in the later (longer) stories, where the
verses can form ballads or epics, and rely much less upon the accompanying
prose for their elucidation. There is even an isolated case of canonical prose (in
the Kuṇāla-jātaka49). Such variation makes the style of the Jātakapāli difficult to
pin down, and the ideology is similarly mixed, though generally – as we have
seen – concerned with secular affairs. The word ‘bodhisatta’ is present in the
verse samodhānas of three jātakas of the JA, but it is not clear whether or not
these verses were considered to be part of the Jātakapāli.50 The term ‘bodhisatta’
is not found in any other Jātakapāli verse, and the term ‘pāramī’ is found only in
two verses of the Vessantara-jātaka.51 in any case, since the Jātakapāli is ordered for
mnemonic reasons, there can be no preoccupation at this time with the jātakas
as chronological parts of the Buddha’s biography. The creation of the Jātakapāli
may have altered the jātaka genre to give it a set structure (canonical verse and
flexible prose accompaniment) and its own dedicated text and bhāṇaka tradition,
but the ideology found in the JA is not yet formalised.
Before moving on to look at the changes brought by the JA, it is worth pausing
to consider the relevance of the location of the Jātakapāli in the Khuddaka Nikāya.
This nikāya is later than the other four, and is considered to be a collection of
‘miscellaneous’ texts. Several of the Khuddaka texts are strongly associated with
the Buddha’s early disciples, rather than with the Buddha himself, for example
47 JA 49 Nakkhatta-jātaka.
48 JA 50 Dummedha-jātaka.
49 JA 536. an edition, translation and study of this unique jātaka is found in W.B.
Bollée (ed. and trans.), Kuṇāla Jātaka (london, 1970).
50 The verse samodhānas to JA 276, 522 and 544. The VRi edition of the Jātakapāli
includes the verse samodhāna only in the case of JA 522, but here the word bodhisatta is not
found (instead the term lokanātha is used to identify the Buddha’s character).
51 ‘pāramiṃ’ is in JA 547 verses 460 and 462 (m. Yamazaki and Y. ousaka, Index to the
Jātaka (oxford, 2003)). The equivalent verses in the VRi Jātakapāli edition are verses 2113
and 2115.

58 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
the Thera-therī-gāthā and Apadāna explicitly identify themselves as authored by
followers of the Buddha.52 it is thus possible that at the time of the Jātakapāli
the jātakas were not all considered to be buddhavacana; as we saw earlier,
such a notion is not conceptually necessary, though it becomes an important
characteristic of the jātaka genre by the time of the JA and Cariyāpiṭaka. The
Apadāna, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka also demonstrate a preoccupation with
buddhology (the doctrine of past and future buddhas and the development of
the bodhisatta ideal), whilst the Vimānavatthu and Petavatthu join the Apadāna
in focusing on kamma theory. Such preoccupations feature prominently in our
jātakas by the time of the JA, and will be further explored in later chapters.
observations about how well the Jātakapāli fits with the character of the
Khuddaka Nikāya as a whole are made more interesting by the history of confusion
– or explicit association – between the Khuddaka Nikāya and jātakas. abeynayake
notes the mistake made by Buddhaghosa and later scholars of identifying
the navaṅga with actual texts, rather than styles or genres, and suggests the
possibility that ‘some of the Khuddaka texts came into existence as a result of
an attempt to compile texts as examples for certain “limbs”’.53 as we noted
above, an early form of jātaka collection may well predate the Khuddaka Nikāya,
and so it may have formed a model for the composition of other texts for each
of the aṅgas. as a genre that was early noted, and thus legitimated, the jātaka
text was clearly an important part of the nikāya, and in some senses may even
have been considered synonymous with it. There is, for example, a passage in
the Samantapāsādikā where the decline of the dhamma is outlined, and the texts
disappear one by one. Here, the first four nikāyas are mentioned, along with the
fifth: ‘Jātakanikāya’.54
the JāTAKATTHAVAṇṇANā
The Jātakapāli forms the backbone to the better-known JA, which takes the form
of a commentary upon the canonical verses. We saw in the previous chapter
that the stories of the past are very variable in their form and content, but the
JA gives them a set structure – in the simplest form merely story of the present,
story of the past, and identification of the births – which lends the collection a
greater unity. The stories of the present also serve to authenticate the stories
of the past and place them in a biography of the Buddha, and this is enhanced
further by the addition of the biographical preface known as the Nidānakathā.
52 This is not unique to the Khuddaka Nikāya: some of the suttas of the four earlier
nikāyas are also spoken by close disciples of the Buddha.
53 oliver abeynayake, A Textual and Historical Analysis of the Khuddaka Nikāya (Colombo,
1984), p. 22.
54 abeynayake, Textual and Historical Analysis, p. 55.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 59
This text, above all others, is the one which moulded the jātaka genre towards
biography.
although the JA as we have it now is a composition from around the fifth
century ce, and all parts of it except the verses are considered to be by the same
author, it is based upon much older material. There has been much debate about
what type of commentary to the Jātakapāli was present before that which now
forms part of the JA. Since most of the verses of the Jātakapāli are incomplete
without the stories that accompany them, we have to assume that there has
always been some sort of commentary, though it is not clear whether this was
preserved orally or in writing, in Sinhala or Pāli. Several jātakas are also paralleled
in other schools, indicating that they may be part of an old common tradition,
and yet others are found in other Theravāda canonical texts, whether in the
old sutta and vinaya texts examined above, or the late-canonical Cariyāpiṭaka,
which preserves some narrative details found in the prose of the JA as well as
several verses from the Jātakapāli. in addition, several jātakas appear in artistic
portrayals, such as the reliefs at Bhārhut, which date to the second century bce
and depict some jātakas that are only found in the JA, and some events that are
only found in the prose of this text.
Regarding the order in which the different parts were composed and compiled,
the most likely chronology is that the stories existed first (though they may not
always have been jātakas), then verses were composed to accompany them, then
the verses were preserved as part of the canon while the story itself continued to
develop, evolve, and in some cases become lost. Thus although the stories of the
past may be considered to be an old layer, we have to be wary of possible changes
and interpolations. even more problematic is the age of the stories of the present,
though again some are found also in other parts of the canon, and the practice of
framing all the Buddha’s discourses in a situation during his teaching career is
completely standard. The Nidānakathā causes yet more problems of dating, as we
will see below. However, for reasons which will become clear, and with my focus
firmly on the changing ideology of the jātaka genre, i am going to assume for the
time being that a text approximating the form of the JA was in existence before
the closing of the Theravāda scriptures. i am therefore going to treat the JA, at
least tentatively, as the second stage in the development of jātaka texts.
Towards a Unified Structure
one of the most striking features of the jātakas in the JA is their structure, and
this is clearly an attempt to unify a collection that contains a large variety of
stories. We might see this process as a way of establishing a well-defined jātaka
genre, and indeed the structure is imitated by the Cariyāpiṭaka, Apadāna, and
later Paññāsa-jātaka collections. i have already suggested that the atīta-vatthu in
some form was in existence before the verses, and that the verses were probably
composed to give some solidity to the ever-growing body of stories, as well as
to provide a means of remembering them. The samodhāna allows the crucial

60 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
link between present and past to be made, and the relevance of each jātaka to
be explained. The frequently repeated formulaic ending, telling of the sermon
on the noble truths and the attainments of the hearers, adds yet more unity to
the collection and by its repetitive nature suggests an oral tradition. The link
to a story of the present is the most complex factor in all this, and has various
ideological implications that demand our attention.
Though it is clear that the stories of the past must always have been integral
to the jātakas, the same is not necessarily true of the stories of the present. in
some cases a jātaka has clearly been associated with a specific story of the present
since early times, and these may therefore have a frame that contains echoes
of vinaya, biography or sutta. one example is the Gagga-jātaka ( JA 155) related
in the previous chapter. a colourful tale with no Buddhist moral (and indeed
every suggestion of being a non-Buddhist folktale), this jātaka is nonetheless
‘Buddhicised’ by the story of the present which is situated in a discussion about
vinaya rules also found in the Cullavagga. in it, a sermon is interrupted when
someone sneezes and everyone shouts ‘long life to you!’. The Buddha forbids this
as a superstition, but the people get upset when the monks do not respond when
they say ‘long life’, so he permits them to reply. The monks ask when this practice
began, and the Buddha relates the jātaka. in other examples the commentary
explicitly refers to another text for the story of the present, or states that the
story is taken from a particular sutta or vinaya passage.55
Whilst in the case of the earliest jātakas (such as those found in sutta and
vinaya), one might assume that the stories of the present at least might relate the
actual events surrounding the telling of the stories, this cannot be said of those
cases where non-Buddhist stories have been absorbed and thus have no story of
the present accompanying them. in such cases the compiler has done the best he
can with limited resources, and consequently the present story often seems to
have been invented in order to keep to the set structure, in many cases repeating
exactly the events of the past (as in the case of the monkey gardeners, discussed
in Chapter 1). Nonetheless, whatever means have been used to acquire a frame
story for each jātaka, the result is that all the stories are given a specific location
in the time and place of the Buddha. Furthermore, if a jātaka is only considered
such if narrated by the Buddha, then any story incorporated in this way must be
by definition buddhavacana.
in the JA, the location in which the Buddha tells a jātaka is more often than
not the Jeta grove – in fact Feer counted 410 stories where this is the case.56 most
55 For example JA 309 Chavaka-jātaka, which gives only a brief summary of the
situation in the present and refers the reader to the vinaya for the full story. in the vinaya
version, as we saw in the discussion above, the story is not explicitly identified as a
jātaka.
56 C.a.F. Rhys-Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories (london, 1880), p. 245. as Peris notes,
openings such as ‘this story was told by the master at Jetavana’ are just as formulaic as
‘when Brahmadatta was ruling in Benares’ (merlin Peris, Greek Story Motifs in the Jatakas

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 61
often the audience for the telling of the jātakas consists of either members of
the saṅgha or prominent laypeople. The setting is thus explicitly one of Buddhist
instruction, and this compensates somewhat for the lack of explicit Buddhist
content in many of the jātaka stories. The setting is also both historically and
geographically specific, and can be verified by visiting the places in which the
Buddha taught; the location of the storytelling is thus accessible, at least in
theory. The setting of all of the stories is in one region and one time period,
in contrast to the cosmic cycles traversed in the jātakas, and made explicit in
related texts that outline the patterns of the births of the previous buddhas. The
very specific nature of the setting of the stories thus allows the flexibility to
remain within the individual jātakas, whilst authenticating them and drawing
them into a verified and accessible Buddhist milieu.
The set structure established in the JA allowed the absorption of many
stories into this specifically Buddhist genre. almost any story could become a
jātaka with the simple association of one character (or even a totally silent and
uninvolved witness) with the Bodhisatta, and the placing of the story within the
teaching career of the Buddha. The result is that this rather motley collection of
predominantly secular stories is firmly established as Buddhist: they are stories
told by the Buddha, as part of his dhamma, about his time as Bodhisatta.
The Nidānakathā: Chronology and Biography
The addition of a long biographical preface known as the Nidānakathā to the JA
emphasises the idea that jātakas are part of the Buddha’s life story. The dating
of this portion of the JA is uncertain, though it cannot belong to the time of the
Jātakapāli, since it in part forms a commentary on the Buddhavaṃsa, which is one
of the latest additions to the canon. To make matters more complicated, it is
not merely a case of ascertaining a date for the composition of the Nidānakathā,
but also whether it has always been associated with the jātaka collection. For
(Colombo, 2004), pp. 185–6). Such lines are found with equal frequency in the stories of
present and past respectively, and remind us to treat the present episodes as part of the
jātaka narrative. We might also note that the Mūlasarvāstivāda vinaya text examined by
Schopen displays a natural bias towards setting all discourses in Sāvatthi, where the Jeta
Grove is located, just as it encourages the setting of all stories of the past in the reign of
Brahmadatta: ‘those who forget the name of the place, etc., must declare it was one or
another of the six great cities, or somewhere where the Tathāgata stayed many times.
if he forgets the name of the king, he must declare it was Prasenajit; if the name of the
householder, that it was anāthapiṇḍada … of the place of a story of the past, that it was
Vāraṇāsī, of the king, that it was Brahmadatta’ (Gregory Schopen, ‘if You Can’t Remember,
How to make it Up: Some monastic Rules for Redacting Canonical Texts’, in Petre Kieffer-
Pülz and Jens-Uwe Hartmann (eds), Bauddhavidyāsudhākara˙: Studies in Honour of Heinz
Bechert on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday (Swisttal-odendorf, 1997), pp. 571–82, p. 575).
Schopen suggests that the JA must have been guided by a similar injunction (p. 578), and
the statistics certainly support this view.

62 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
example, the text is found in a fourteenth-century Tibetan translation as a
separate work ascribed explicitly to the Buddha, yet still called ‘Jātaka-nidāna’
(Tib sKyes pa rabs kyi gleṅ gzi).57 it is not immediately clear why this biography
became associated with the jātaka collection, though Gaffney suggests: ‘That it
is set out in the form of an introduction to the Jātaka collection has perhaps
aided its acceptance by the Pāli tradition as an ancient and reliable source of
biographical material on the Buddha’s life.’58 although i find Gaffney’s argument
that the jātaka collection legitimated the Nidānakathā in some way quite plausible,
i believe that the legitimation may have worked in the opposite direction too:
attaching a biography of the Buddha to the collection legitimated the jātakas
by providing a frame for their telling in the career of the Buddha and their
occurrence in the long biography of the Bodhisatta.
The Nidānakathā is divided into three parts: the dūre-nidāna (distant epoch),
avidūre-nidāna (intermediate epoch) and santike-nidāna (the proximate epoch),
relating respectively: the life of the Bodhisatta in the time of previous buddhas;
the life of the Bodhisatta in the Tusita heaven and in his final life before
awakening; and the life of the Buddha up to the donation of the Jeta grove. Thus
this biographical narrative begins with the vow of the Bodhisatta (as Sumedha)
to become a buddha, which is made in the presence of the Buddha Dīpaṅkara.
The narration continues through the lives of the 24 previous buddhas in a text
based heavily on the Buddhavaṃsa. Then follows the life of the historical Buddha
from his time in the Tusita heaven and in his final birth, up to the time when
anāthapiṇḍika donates the Jeta grove to the saṅgha. Since many of his years of
teaching take place in the Jeta grove, and it is during these years that the jātaka
stories are said to be related, the Nidānakathā acts as an extension to the ‘stories
of the present’. However, the ordering of the jātakas is not chronological in terms
of present or past lives, since the nipāta system of increasing number of verses
is the organisational principle.59 There is, therefore, a disjunction between the
style of the Nidānakathā and the rest of the text.
The structure of the Nidānakathā has parallels in other biographical texts, such
as the Mahāvastu and Lalitavistara. Such texts are sometimes called ‘incomplete
biographies’60 as unlike some biographies they do not continue to the end of
57 Peter Skilling, ‘Theravādin literature in Tibetan Translation’, Journal of the Pali
Text Society, 19 (1993): 69–201, p. 106ff.
58 Sean Gaffney, ‘The Pāli Nidānakathā and its Tibetan Translation: its Textual
Precursors and associated literature’ in Tadeusz Skorupski (ed.), The Buddhist Forum, Vol.
IV (london, 1996), pp. 75–91, p. 89.
59 as proof that the ordering is in no way chronological we might mention that JA
95 is said to have been told by the Buddha as he lay on his death-bed, whereas JA 547 is
told during the Buddha’s visit to his home country; the past events of JA 539 took place
when the human life-span was 10,000 years, but most are said to have taken place during
Brahmadatta’s reign, when the life-span was much the same as now.
60 See for example J.S. Strong, The Buddha: A Short Biography (oxford, 2006), p. 5.

The Creation of a Jātaka Genre 63
the Buddha’s life, or to the dissolution of the relics and disappearance of the
dhamma, which later becomes identified as the very final end of the Buddha’s
biography. Frauwallner sees the origin of such biographies in the old Skandhaka
text of the original vinaya, which was related not in the form of a list of rules,
but as a historical account framed by the Buddha’s early life at the beginning
and his death and the subsequent councils at the end. The biographical preface,
he argues, was eventually detached and became a separate text, and in some
schools (including Theravāda) it was later appended to the jātaka collection.61
The texts vary slightly in where they end their narrative: the Nidānakathā
stops at the donation of the Jeta grove, the Mahāvastu ends at the formation of
the saṅgha, and the Lalitavistara ends at the first sermon. as an alternative to
Frauwallner’s argument i would like to suggest that these variations might be
a sign that the texts exemplify an early phase of biography writing, when the
aim was to give context and legitimation to the Buddha’s teachings (whether
vinaya or sutta). The Mahāvastu calls itself a vinaya text, and so may preserve the
form it had when appended to a set of vinaya rules, as Frauwallner argues. Thus
the biographical preface need only continue until the formation of the saṅgha,
when the monastic regulations began to be formed. The Lalitavistara is said to be
sūtra, and thus the biography stops at the beginning of the composition of the
Buddha’s discourses. in the JA many of the jātakas (including the first one) are
said to be told by the Buddha in the Jeta grove at the request of anāthapiṇḍika,
so the biography of the Nidānakathā stops there, leaving us in the presence of the
Buddha, awaiting the tales of his previous births.
as well as providing a context for the telling of the jātakas, the Nidānakathā
helps to reconcile the historical biographical aspect of the individual jātakas
relating to the one historical Buddha, with the repetitive nature of time and
experience, by putting the Buddha into a broader cycle. as Dimock comments
in relation to religious biography in india, ‘if the life of an individual has cosmic
significance, its particularities are unimportant, and if the particularities are
important, the life is not worth writing’.62 By prefacing the jātaka collection with
a biography of the 24 previous buddhas, the Nidānakathā changes the time-frame
of the narrative, setting the historical Buddha in a larger context. in addition
to providing a broader context than a single person (in his many lives), the
61 e. Frauwallner, The Earliest Vinaya and the Beginnings of Buddhist Literature (Rome,
1956), p. 50ff. Frauwallner’s argument has obvious implications for the dating of the
Nidānakathā, and places it somewhat earlier than we otherwise have evidence for, since he
argues that its precursor – the Skandhaka – dates to around the third century bce. However,
even if we could verify this theory, tracing the changes in the text, and in particular
ascertaining at what stage it was appended to the jātaka collection, is still an impossible
task.
62 edward C. Dimock, ‘Religious Biography in india: The “Nectar of the acts” of
Caitanya’ in Frank e. Reynolds and Donald Capps (eds), The Biographical Process: Studies in
the History and Psychology of Religion (The Hague, 1976), pp. 109–17, p. 109.

64 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Nidānakathā thus reinforces the idea that the JA should be seen as a biography
that is not unique. a consequence of this is that people are able to see themselves
as having the possibility of a similar biography, and of thereby being part of this
context. i will be returning to this idea later.
CoNClUSioN
i have now traced the history of jātaka texts from the early suttas through to the
JA. as i have noted, the earliest past-birth stories of the Buddha, preserved in
sutta texts, did not demonstrate the perfections acquired by the Bodhisatta, but
rather held him up in unfavourable comparison with the Buddha. even when the
stories were organised into a collection, biography was not a preoccupation, and
the ordering principle was purely mnemonic. only later, as the JA imposed a set
structure and the Nidānakathā was prefaced to it, did jātakas begin to demonstrate
the long life of the Buddha. even as this became the accepted rationale for the
text, the individual jātakas of the JA retained their various styles and uses, so
that biography remains only one of many preoccupations, albeit the one most
vigorously promoted in the canonical and early commentarial literature. To
what extent this idea of jātakas affected later texts and communities is the focus
of the next chapter.

Chapter 4
Generic Conventions embraced
and ignored
in the previous chapter we witnessed the birth of a genre. By the time the
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā ( JA) acquired its many layers a jātaka was clearly defined as a
story told by the Buddha that in some way illustrated the actions he undertook
whilst on the long path to buddhahood. Jātakas were thus associated with
biography and the gradual acquisition of the perfections by the Bodhisatta, and
were given a standardised structure that confirmed their status as buddhavacana.
That this definition emerged before the last texts were incorporated into the
scriptures is clear from its adoption in the late-canonical Cariyāpiṭaka, discussed
below. However, the later jātaka texts retain the biographical preoccupation
to varying degrees, and suggest that the real power of jātakas remains their
flexibility and variety. These qualities are still visible in present-day jātaka texts,
which at times seem totally unaware of the association between jātakas and the
Bodhisatta.
The purpose of this chapter is to examine to what extent the biographical
preoccupation of jātaka stories is preserved in texts created after the time of the
JA. To survey all the uses of jātakas in Theravāda texts through to the present
day would of course be an impossible task, so instead i will focus upon four
key areas: First i will examine the Cariyāpiṭaka, which adopts the biographical
definition of the JA along with several of its stories, and tightens the focus upon
the perfections, but has limited success as a narrative text. Second, i will discuss
two early post-canonical texts (Milindapañha and Visuddhimagga) in which jātaka
stories are explored according to the understanding that they are part of the
Buddha’s biography. Third, i will demonstrate how later jātaka texts (Mahājātaka
and Paññāsajātaka) develop and stretch the JA’s definition of jātakas in new ways.
Finally, i will bring the study up to date by exploring the present-day place of
jātaka texts in a single Theravāda country, namely Sri lanka. This survey of
attitudes towards the jātaka genre since the time of the JA suggests that there
is some tension between the presentation of jātakas in monastically preserved
texts such as scripture and treatises, and the way the popular stories were and
are interacted with in everyday life. This chapter will therefore highlight both
the pervasive influence, and the ultimate limitations, of the JA’s defintion of the
jātaka genre.

66 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
JĀTaKaS aND PeRFeCTioNS: CARIyāPIṭAKA
also known as the Buddhāpadāniyaṃ, the Cariyāpiṭaka forms the fifteenth section
of the Khuddaka Nikāya, and is considered to be one of the latest additions to the
Theravāda scriptures. it contains 35 jātakas relating explicitly to the acquisition
of the pāramitās or perfections, which are usually enumerated as a list of 10:
giving (dāna), morality (sīla), renunciation (nekkhamma), wisdom ( paññā), energy
(viriya), forbearance (khanti), truthfulness (sacca), determination (adhiṭṭhāna),
loving kindness (mettā) and equanimity (upekkhā). The first 10 stories of the
Cariyāpiṭaka relate to dāna, the second 10 to sīla, and the final 15 to nekkhamma
(5), adhiṭṭhāna (1), sacca (6), mettā (2) and upekkhā (1). There are no stories
referring explicitly to paññā, viriya or khanti, although some stories contain
implicit references. Some scholars have argued that there are missing stories,
and this is supported by confusion between references in the Nidānakathā to
Cariyāpiṭaka stories and those contained in the text as we now have it, though
i will later argue for an alternative explanation for these apparent anomalies.
Thirty-two of the jātakas in the Cariyāpiṭaka have parallels in the JA, one other is
in the Dīgha Nikāya, and one in the Majjhima Nikāya. The Cariyāpiṭaka extracted
the stories from these sources and retold them for its own purposes. The main
stylistic change is that they are told relatively concisely, entirely in verse, and in
the first person.
The purpose of the Cariyāpiṭaka is very clear: to glorify the Bodhisatta’s
perfection. Some of the stories chosen are unsurprising: Vessantara for generosity,
the story of the young quail’s act of truth for truthfulness, and so on. Some are
a little more surprising, particularly the Kapirājacariyaṃ (iii.7), the story of the
monkey and the crocodile, which is told in the section demonstrating sacca. in
the parallel stories of the JA (57. Vānarinda-jātaka; 208. Suṃsumāra-jātaka; 342.
Vānara-jātaka) the monkey (the Bodhisatta) tells a lie to the crocodile in order
to outwit him. in the Cariyāpiṭaka we are told: ‘No lie was spoken to him, i acted
according to my word.’1 This is clearly a deliberate attempt to rewrite the stories
already popular in the JA in order to give them a cleaner ethic. it is possible
that by this time the idea that the Bodhisatta cannot lie (declared in the JA and
examined in Chapter 2) had become current, yet to put this problematic tale into
a chapter about truthfulness seems courageous to say the least. The message is
clear: jātakas show the Bodhisatta being good, whatever the Jātakapāli and JA
might suggest to the contrary.2
1 Na tassa alikaṃ bhaṇitaṃ yathā vācaṃ akās’haṃ. N.a. Jayawickrama (ed.),
Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka (london, 1974), p. 30, verse 310.
2 of course the idea of what constitutes good behaviour is specific to the (con)text,
and some of the Bodhisatta’s actions in the Cariyāpiṭaka might not be condoned by
contemporary Buddhists. See for example ii.4 Cūḷabodhicariyaṃ where the Bodhisatta
allows his wife to be taken away against her will, and claims he wouldn’t break his sīla
even if they were to attack her with a knife. in ii.5 Mahisarājacariyaṃ the Bodhisatta is a

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 67
Further comparison between the Cariyāpiṭaka and Jātakapāli may be made
from the uddāna verses. For example, the verse that concludes the ‘atthakāma
vagga’ of the Jātakapāli (examined in Chapter 3 in comparison to verses in the
Dhammapada) runs:
Here the ten are mittaka, the mother’s excellent pigeon,
then Bamboo, Deaf-and-Dumb, Rohiṇī,
and also the monkey, the liquor, and the Cetans,
then the stars and the excellent sacrifice.3
The titles here mentioned are not those given as titles in the text itself. This
might suggest that in fact the titles now found in editions of the Jātakapāli are
imposed from the JA. However, the uddāna verses are in any case not so much
lists of titles, as lists of contents, and so no agreement should necessarily be
expected.4 There is also no mention of the Bodhisatta, and the characters in the
story are not exclusively those identified with him. in the JA, the same chapter
has the following uddāna:
The ten are losakatissa, the pigeon, Bamboo and also the mosquito
Rohiṇī, the disgrace of the garden, the liquor, innocent Vedabba
astrology, and the fool.5
Here it is the titles of the jātakas that are given, but still there is no mention
of the Bodhisatta (though some Jātakapāli and JA uddānas do mention that the
stories are jātakas6). in contrast, the first chapter of the Cariyāpiṭaka ends:
The brahmin akitti, Saṅkha, the Kuru king Dhanañcaya;
King mahāsudassana, the brahmin mahāgovinda;
Nimi, and Prince Canda, Sivi, Vessantara, the hare;
i was the one then who gave those most excellent gifts.
These were the requisites of dāna, these the perfections of dāna;
Having given my life to a supplicant, i fulfilled this perfection.
buffalo tormented by a monkey: he refuses to retaliate, saying that some other, less moral
creature is sure to kill the monkey eventually, thereby freeing him from both present and
future troubles. i examined such stories as found in the JA in Chapter 2.
3 Trans. of uddāna verse for the Jātakapāli ‘atthakāma vagga’ from the VRi edition.
4 in any case, great variation in the titles of jātakas in different texts (and, for
example, on the reliefs at Bhārhut) implies that they were loose at best.
5 Trans. of uddāna verse for the JA ‘atthakāma vagga’ from the VRi edition.
6 The uddāna verses for the Jātakapāli and JA do have some overlap, but are rarely
identical, which perhaps suggests an early tradition as otherwise we might expect them
to have been standardised, as the titles appear to have been.

68 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Seeing one approaching for alms, i abandoned my own self;
There is no equal to me in dāna; these were my perfections of dāna.7
Here, though the structure (at least initially) is similar to both the Jātakapāli and
JA, the stories are referred to through the character of the Bodhisatta; indeed, it
is not so much the stories being referred to as the lives of the Buddha. if the first
two verses don’t convince one of the reason these stories have just been related,
the latter two spell it out in full. in addition, as i recently noted, the jātakas of
the JA are related in the third person whereas those in the Cariyāpiṭaka are in the
first person; this is true also for the concluding verses. as far as i am aware, this
is the only incidence of first-person uddāna verses in the Pāli canon.
The Cariyāpiṭaka is a very neat text, in terms of both structure and didactic
method, with a great unity and few problems with interpretation. it may even
have been composed explicitly for teaching purposes, and it demonstrates clearly
what aspects of the Bodhisatta’s behaviour should be admired and emulated, and
inspires faith in the Buddha’s teaching. in contrast to the JA, it is concise, clear
and relatively morally unambiguous, and is accepted as part of the Khuddaka
Nikāya. However, although the JA is unwieldy, inconsistent, and at times morally
problematic, as well as being accepted as only part-canonical, it seems to have
always been more popular than the Cariyāpiṭaka. i suggest there are several
reasons why the Cariyāpiṭaka was unable to supersede the JA in popularity. To
begin with, the JA was already well established as a text before the composition
of the Cariyāpiṭaka, and indeed the latter text mostly extracted stories from
the former, adding very little. although the JA is officially commentarial, such
distinctions seem to primarily concern scholars rather than Buddhists, and in
any case much of it appears to be older than the Cariyāpiṭaka, and was clearly
accorded a quasi-canonical status.
Perhaps the most serious reason for the Cariyāpiṭaka’s comparative failure,
however, is its neatness, since this allowed no flexibility in use. The JA’s motley
collection of stories provided (and continues to provide) an almost endless
source of material for preaching, illustration, education and entertainment. The
biographical focus is found only in the framing of the JA, thus anchoring and
unifying the text without interfering with the uses and types of its constituent
parts. Nor does the framing interfere with the plain fun of the stories, which
when retold in the Cariyāpiṭaka seem stilted and unappealing. The Cariyāpiṭaka’s
exclusive focus upon the praiseworthy parts of the narrative results in the loss
of narrative detail or whole portions of story. We are left only with verses of
praise, full of allusions to stories that we know are much more vibrantly told
in the JA. Thus although the early JA reshaped the jātaka genre with a strong
biographical focus, a text composed entirely according to this rationale has very
limited appeal.
7 Trans. of the uddāna verses for the Cariyāpiṭaka ‘Dānapāramitā’ chapter from the
VRi edition.

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 69
JĀTaKaS aND BoDHiSaTTa: MILINDAPAñHA and VISUDDHIMAGGA
The Cariyāpiṭaka demonstrates that the definition of jātakas established by the
JA was influential before the end of the period in which the scriptures were
compiled. The continued association of jātaka stories with the person of the
Bodhisatta after this time can be seen in two further texts that, though not
canonical, are very highly regarded within Theravāda Buddhism. each text is
compilatory in some way, and thus they together provide good evidence for
the ways in which jātakas may have been viewed and used during the centuries
leading up to the commentarial period.
The Milindapañha (‘The Questions of King milinda’) is a text composed in north
india but later translated into Pāli and given very high status within Theravāda
countries. it consists of a conversation between the Bactrian King milinda and
the monk Nāgasena, who settles each of the king’s questions in turn.8 on six
occasions individual jātaka stories form the basis of queries put by the king to
Nāgasena, and these can be summarised as follows (with the titles as found in
Trenckner’s edition):9
i, 4, Hetu bhūmicalassa, The Cause of the earthquake: There are said to be only
eight causes of earthquakes, so why did the earth also quake when Vessantara
gave his gift? answer: The Bodhisatta’s great generosity was exceptional and
therefore doesn’t count amongst the eight standard causes.
i, 5, Sivirāja, King Sivi: How did King Sivi get divine eyes after giving away his
own, if nothing arises without a cause? answer: The power of his statement of
truth was the cause.
iV, 6, Mettāya ānisaṃsā, The Good Result of loving Kindness: The Buddha said
that a person who cultivates loving kindness cannot be harmed, so how can
it be that Sāma was killed despite his cultivation of loving kindness? answer:
Sāma lapsed in his loving kindness at the moment he was shot.
V, 5, Lomakassapajāti, The Birth as lomakassapa: The Buddha is said not to have
harmed even in past births, so how is it possible that as lomasa Kassapa he
made a huge animal sacrifice? answer: The Bodhisatta was maddened with
lust, and madmen are not responsible for their actions.
8 although the king is identified with King menandros, who dates from the second
century bce, the text is not historical in nature but reads as a carefully constructed religious
dialogue. The dating of the Milindapañha is thus very problematic, and to complicate
matters the text appears to have several sections of different ages. For a full discussion
of the possibilities see oskar von Hinüber, A Handbook of Pāli Literature (Berlin, 1996),
pp. 82–6.
9 V. Trenckner (ed.), The Milindapañho (london, 1962).

70 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
V, 6, Jotipālajāti, The Birth as Jotipāla: How is it possible that when born as
the elephant Chaddanta the Bodhisatta respected the robe of a recluse yet as
Jotipāla he mocked and reviled Kassapa Buddha? answer: it was the fault of
his birth in a family of unbelievers, for he was tainted by this as cold water is
warmed by contact with fire.
Viii, 1, Sabbe Bodhisattā puttadāran denti, Do all Bodhisattas Give away
Their Wives and Children?: How can giving that causes harm to others, as
Vessantara’s gift harmed his children, still reap positive fruits? Shouldn’t he
have given himself instead? answer: Vessantara’s giving led to great renown. if
asked for his wife and children he had to give them – he could not give himself
instead. He knew the king would redeem the children and that they would
therefore not remain slaves.
These dilemmas show that the actions of the Bodhisatta in his jātaka stories were
taken seriously, and on occasion needed to be defended or explained in the same
way as the Buddha’s actions. The continuity between Bodhisatta and Buddha,
and the nature of jātakas as demonstrating the Bodhisatta’s path to buddhahood,
are assumed without question.
The other main occurrence of jātakas in the Milindapañha is in Meṇḍakapañha
iV, 7: Devadattassajātiyo – ‘The Births of Devadatta’. Here it is Devadatta, the
Buddha’s troublemaking cousin, who is the focus, in a long question about
whether or not good and bad actions result in the same fruit. The king points out
that in many previous births (he gives 16 examples) Devadatta, though behaving
badly, occupies a higher status than the Bodhisatta, and in some other cases (he
cites six) the two are on a par. Thus, he argues, good and evil actions must lead
to equal results. The majority of the examples cited by the king are found in the
JA. as Nāgasena points out, however, Devadatta did a variety of bad and good
things, and his karmic fruit was a lot more complicated and long lived than this
small number of births. once again the truth of the jātakas is not in question,
nor is the presence of the Bodhisatta. However, the fact that they appear not to
glorify the Bodhisatta over his obviously inferior cousin is deemed a problem
with wide reaching implications for ethical practice, since they form a challenge
to the doctrine of kamma.
an unquestioning acceptance that jātakas illustrate the Buddha’s long path to
buddhahood is also found in Buddhaghosa’s fifth-century treatise Visuddhimagga
(‘The Path of Purification’), which draws on a wide range of sources including
canonical texts, the old aṭṭhakathā material and the different bhāṇaka traditions
to present a demonstration of the Buddhist path. These varied sources include
jātaka stories, in the chapter on the Brahmavihāra (ix 25–35). Here Buddhaghosa
recommends certain jātakas that demonstrate the Bodhisatta’s forbearance
as meditation subjects for those wishing to eliminate resentment in order to
develop mettā:

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 71
Here is the way of reviewing it: ‘Now you who have gone forth, is it not
a fact that when your master was a Bodhisatta before discovering full
enlightenment, while he was still engaged in fulfilling the perfections during
the four incalculable ages and a hundred thousand aeons, he did not allow hate
to corrupt his mind even when his enemies tried to murder him on various
occasions? For example, in the Sīlavant Birth Story …’10
Buddhaghosa then proceeds to cite various examples, quoting from the Jātakapāli
and Cariyāpiṭaka where appropriate, and summarising the stories in prose.
Both of these texts show that the association of the jātakas with the positive
example of the Bodhisatta was prominent before the commentarial period. it was
an association that came with problems, but these were dealt with by the great
minds such as Nāgasena or his creator/author, leaving the Bodhisatta free to be
an example to all Buddhists. The definition created by the JA and embraced by
the Cariyāpiṭaka thus exerted a significant influence over Theravāda scholastics
during their discussion of jātaka stories.
STReTCHiNG THe BioGRaPHY: MAHāJāTAKA and PAññāSAJāTAKA
Certain jātakas of the JA have always been more popular than others, as is
evidenced in both textual and art-historical sources. in particular, the final 10
jātaka stories have long been considered as having greater importance than the
rest of the text, and may even have had their own specialist reciters.11 These 10
jātakas together are known in Southeast asia as Mahānipātajātaka or Dasajātaka
and contain the Mūgapakkha, Mahājanaka, Sāma, Nimi, Bhūridatta, Khaṇḍahāla,
Nārada, Vidhura, Ummagga and Vessantara jātakas.12 These stories also circulate
individually, often with their own commentary and/or translation into a
vernacular. in Sri lanka the 10 stories minus the last two circulated together in a
text known as Aṭajātaka, although Nevill, in his catalogue entry for the Aṭajātaka
10 Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli (trans.), The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) by Bhadantācariya
Buddhaghosa (5th edn, Kandy, 1991), pp. 294–5 followed by examples and quotations
from the Jātakapāli and Cariyāpiṭaka on p. 295ff. Buddhaghosa’s use of jātakas before the
composition of the JA we have now, demonstrates that some form of commentary was in
circulation, but was not fixed or established enough to quote directly from (he quotes
only from verses).
11 e.W. adikaram, Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon (Dehiwala, Sri lanka, 1946),
pp. 30–31 refers to a story about a Mahā-jātaka-bhāṇaka in the Manorathapūranī, and
discusses the possibility that this refers to a separate bhāṇaka tradition for the Mahājātaka
(either just the Vessantara-jātaka, or the jātakas of the Mahānipāta).
12 The Southeast asian list of titles differs slightly from that in Fausbøll’s edition. For
a complete comparison see below.

72 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Sannaya, suggests that the absence of the last two is merely because they were
treated separately.13
The rise in importance of these jātakas appears to be related to the popular
idea that the last jātakas of the JA are chronologically last. in other words it is
commonly believed that the last 10 stories of the JA relate the Bodhisatta’s last
births before he attained buddhahood, and thus his final attainment of the 10
perfections, each of which is associated with a story. in the Mūgapakkha-jātaka
( JA 538), Prince Temiya (the Bodhisatta) pretends to be a dumb cripple in order
to avoid accruing the bad kamma that inevitably accompanies kingship. about
to be killed, he reveals himself and renounces, followed by his father, and this
story is therefore associated with the perfection of renunciation (nekkhamma). in
the Mahājanaka-jātaka ( JA 539), Janaka (the Bodhisatta) is shipwrecked and has
various adventures, demonstrating his acquisition of the perfection of energy
(viriya). The Sāma-jātaka ( JA 540) tells of how a blind ascetic couple are looked
after by their son Sāma (the Bodhisatta), who is acquiring the perfection of
loving kindness (mettā). in the Nimi-jātaka ( JA 541) King Nimi (the Bodhisatta)
finds his first grey hair and wishes to renounce. after a tour of the heavens
and hells he returns to his home and carries out his resolve (adhiṭṭhāna). in
the Khaṇḍahāla-jātaka ( JA 542) Prince Canda (the Bodhisatta) has perfected his
forbearance (khanti) to such an extent that he looks after his father despite the
latter’s attempts to kill him. in the Bhūridatta-jātaka ( JA 543) a nāga prince called
Bhūridatta (the Bodhisatta) is captured by a snake charmer, and demonstrates
the perfection of his virtue (sīla) by refusing to harm his captor. in the
Mahānāradakassapa-jātaka ( JA 544) Nārada (the Bodhisatta) descends from the
brahmā realm to persuade a king of his folly, demonstrating along the way his
perfection of equanimity (upekkhā). in the Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka ( JA 545) a sage
called Vidhura (the Bodhisatta) is devoted to telling the truth (sacca), and has
various adventures as a result. in the Mahā-Ummagga-jātaka ( JA 546) the wise
mahosadha (the Bodhisatta) solves various riddles and outwits his competitors,
demonstrating his perfection of wisdom ( paññā). in the Vessantara-jātaka ( JA 547)
Prince Vessantara (the Bodhisatta) gives great gifts, including the royal elephant,
his children and his wife, thereby perfecting his generosity (dāna).
The belief that the Bodhisatta’s birth as Vessantara in the very final jātaka
of the JA represents his antepenultimate birth,14 and thus the height of his
perfection, has been particularly important in Theravāda culture. it has led to
the Vessantara-jātaka becoming undeniably the most popular jātaka throughout
Southeast asia, to the extent that Gombrich has suggested that Buddhists in such
countries are as likely to be able to recount this story as the Buddha’s own life
13 K.D. Somadasa, Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection of Sinhalese Manuscripts in the
British Library, vol. 1 (london, 1987), p. 112.
14 His penultimate birth is in the Tusita heaven.

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 73
story.15 it is the focus of annual chanting rituals in Thailand, Cambodia, laos and
the Shan States, and is the most popularly depicted jātaka in temple illustrations,
as well as being used in rituals related to marriage, death, renunciation and the
consecration of a new Buddha image.
The popularity and priority of the Vessantara-jātaka has puzzled scholars,
as the story is not about the perfection considered the highest, nor indeed the
highest form of the perfection. in addition, the story relates extreme giving, to
a socially unacceptable extent, since the gifts include Vessantara’s own children
and wife; as early as the Milindapañha Buddhists have had to justify this level of
generosity. in any case, in the account of the Buddha’s defeat of māra on the
night of his enlightenment, it is not Vessantara’s gift of his wife and children
that is cited as evidence for the Buddha’s perfection of generosity, but his seven-
hundredfold gift of alms made at the beginning of the story;16 it is also this
latter gift that causes an earthquake in the account of the jātaka. Thus, despite
its current popularity, many Buddhists and Buddhologists alike have expressed
discomfort about the story’s content and status.17
as Peter Skilling observed in his paper ‘The antepenultimate Birth of the
Śākyamuni’,18 there are at least two traditions about the last-but-one birth of the
Buddha. Whereas the Theravāda tradition insists that the Buddha’s last human
birth was as Vessantara, in the North indian schools this place is given to either
Jyotipāla or Uttara māṇava.19 Skilling raised the question of where the Theravāda
tradition originated; it seems likely, as was suggested at the conference, that it
was the result of the position of the story at the very end of the JA, a text not
shared with the other Buddhist schools. However, the position of the Vessantara-
jātaka in the JA – as in the Jātakapāli – is related merely to the number of verses
contained within it. as i showed in the previous chapter, ideas of chronology
and biography were introduced to the collection later, after the order of the
15 margaret Cone and Richard F. Gombrich, The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara
(oxford, 1977), p. xv.
16 For this account in the Nidānakathā see N.a. Jayawickrama (trans.), The Story of
Gotama Buddha: The Nidāna-kathā of the Jātakaṭṭhakathā (oxford, 1990), p. 98.
17 much more could be said on the subject of the Vessantara-jātaka, but it would be
cumbersome and irrelevant here to examine all the different explanations for the success
of this story, or the justifications for its message of generosity beyond the bounds of
humanity. For a thorough discussion see the introduction to Cone and Gombrich, Perfect
Generosity, and chapter 7 of Steven Collins, Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of
the Pali Imaginaire (Cambridge, 1998).
18 Peter Skilling, ‘The antepenultimate Birth of the Śākyamuni’, paper presented at
the World Sanskrit Conference, edinburgh, July 2006.
19 The story of Vessantara was clearly popular in North india and Central asia too,
as versions are found in Sanskrit, Chinese, Tibetan, Khotanese, Sogdian and Tocharian,
and a pilgrimage site associated with the story was popular at the time of the Chinese
pilgrims.

74 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
stories was fixed. if, therefore, the popularity of the Vessantara-jātaka is due to
its status as the antepenultimate birth of the Buddha, and this in turn is due
to a purely mnemonic ordering, then an inability to explain in what way the
story embodies the highest achievements of the Bodhisatta is unsurprising. The
JA’s biographical framing has truly succeeded if it has produced such a powerful
tradition surrounding this curious story.
The idea that the Vessantara-jātaka demonstrates the perfection of dāna and
comes at the end of the Bodhisatta’s long journey, and that the other jātakas of
the Mahānipāta illustrate the culmination of each of the other nine perfections,
has become particularly prevalent in Southeast asia. The titles of these stories
in Southeast asia differ from Fausbøll’s edition, which was created from Sri
lankan manuscripts. as well as slight changes in ordering,20 Southeast asian
manuscripts and inscriptions preserve four significant changes of title, which
reflect a growing focus upon the character of the Bodhisatta:21
Mūgapakkha-jātaka becomes Temiya-jātaka;
Khaṇḍahāla-jātaka becomes Candakumāra-jātaka;
Mahānāradakassapa-jātaka becomes Nārada-jātaka;
Mahā-ummagga-jātaka becomes Mahosadha-jātaka.
in the first case, the change is at first glance insignificant, since Temiya is
merely an alternative name for the character known as mūgapakkha, who is the
Bodhisatta. However, such an alternative title might indicate a certain reluctance
to refer to the Bodhisatta as ‘Dumb-cripple’, the meaning of mūgapakkha.
20 The Burmese tradition adheres to the Sri lankan order until stories five to nine,
which are ordered mahosadha, Candakumāra, Bhūridatta, Nārada, Vidhura at Pagan, and
the same but with Candakumāra after Bhūridatta in manuscript collections. See G.H. luce,
‘The 550 Jātakas in old Burma’, Artibus Asiae, 19 (1956): 291–307; V. Fausbøll, Catalogue of
the Mandalay Manuscripts in the India Office Library (london, 1896); Ginette martini, ‘les
titres de jātaka dans les manuscrits Pali de la Bibliothèque Nationale de Paris’, Bulletin
de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient, 51/1 (1963): 79–93, p. 88. The Thai order, preserved in
a mnemonic that will be examined in Chapter 7, agrees with the Burmese manuscripts.
The Sri lankan order is not entirely stable: in a sannaya on eight of the 10 jātakas
(omitting mahosadha and Vessantara, which were reputedly treated separately) held in
the British library, the eight are in the same order as in Fausbøll, with the exception
of the Mahānāradakassapa and Bhūridatta, whose order is reversed (Somadasa, Catalogue of
the Hugh Nevill Collection, vol. 1, pp. 112–13). in de Zoysa’s catalogue of Sri lankan temple
manuscripts another aṭajātaka Sanne is found, this time with the Khaṇḍahāla-jātaka last
(louis de Zoysa, A Catalogue of Pāli, Sinhalese, and Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Temple Libraries
of Ceylon (Colombo, 1885), pp. 5–6).
21 These changes are not true in every case, for example two Burmese manuscripts
in the Bibliothèque Nationale (martini, ‘les titres de jātaka’, manuscripts 146 and 135,
p. 88) preserve the title of Mahāummagga-jātaka as in the Sinhalese list. However, i believe
that the changes are significant enough to be seen as reflecting a general trend.

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 75
in the second case the change is more obvious: the story ceases to be named
after Devadatta’s character Khaṇḍahāla and instead becomes named after the
Bodhisatta’s character Prince Canda. in the third case we see merely clarification
of focus, by omitting the ‘kassapa’ which might refer to another character in
the action and leaving merely the name of the Bodhisatta, in the form used
throughout the story. in the final case, the subject of the story, a great tunnel
(mahā-ummagga), is replaced in the title by the Bodhisatta’s name mahosadha.
With these alterations, all the stories of the Mahānipāta become named after the
Bodhisatta.
although the Southeast asian Mahānipāta titles betray a consistent focus on
the Bodhisatta, the stories have no consistent identification with a perfection.
Table 4.1 shows how the traditional Thai ascription of the perfections compares
to the perfections named in association with the stories in the JA and its
Nidānakathā, and in the Cariyāpiṭaka.
Table 4.1 The perfections associated with the Mahānipāta jātakas
Jātaka Thai associated JA Nidānakathā Cariyāpiṭaka
perfection reason for story associated associated
perfection perfection
Temiya nekkhamma about the great nekkhamma adhiṭṭhāna adhiṭṭhāna
Janaka viriya about the great nekkhamma viriya
Suvaṇṇasāma mettā about supporting one’s mettā
parents
Nemi adhiṭṭhāna about a smile (but ref. also to dāna dāna
nekkhamma)
mahosadha paññā about paññā-pārami paññā
Bhūridatta sīla about keeping the uposatha sīla sīla
Candakumāra khanti about Devadatta dāna dāna
Nārada upekkhā about the conversion of
Uruvela-Kassapa
Vidhura sacca about paññā-pārami paññā
Vessantara dāna about a shower of rain dāna dāna
Clearly the association of these 10 stories with the 10 perfections post-dates both
the Cariyāpiṭaka and the Nidānakathā, even though the latter does preserve the
tradition that the Vessantara-jātaka is the antepenultimate birth and is associated
with the practice of dāna. The Mahājātaka thus strengthened the association
between the jātakas and the perfections, painting for the first time a coherent
picture of the final stages of the Bodhisatta’s career.

76 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Whilst the Mahājātaka developed the final stages of the Bodhisatta’s path,
other stories composed in mainland Southeast asia further extended the
Bodhisatta’s biography, both outwards (by incorporating stories not found in
the JA) and backwards (by telling stories said to predate those found in the JA).
These collections of ‘non-classical’ (or ‘apocryphal’) jātakas are known by the
general title Paññāsajātaka, or ‘50 jātakas’.22 This should be considered a genre
rather than a text, for there are many different collections under this title, in
both Pāli and vernaculars, most of which do not contain exactly 50 stories.23 The
Pāli version from Burma, known as the Zimmé Paṇṇāsa, is the only one to be found
neatly arranged in five sections of 10 stories each; this is the version published
by the Pāli Text Society.24 as Jaini notes, the jātakas in this text copy the structure
of the JA, and are heavily preoccupied with Buddhist ideals, and thus they ‘were
acceptable as complements to the canonical Jātakas’.25 The vernacular and
Siamese Pāli traditions preserve many more motley collections, and in any case
Skilling comments that the stories contained in the Paññāsajātaka collections
were treated as individual stories, and used and retold as such, not as extracts
from a collection of 50.26
Despite their variety, the Paññāsajātaka stories demonstrate the same
preoccupation with outlining the Bodhisatta’s biography and illustrating his
acquisition of the perfections, as established by the JA and reinforced by the
Mahājātaka. manuscript evidence from temples in Northern Thailand leads
Skilling to suggest that ‘there may once have been a collection that classed the
stories according to the perfections that they illustrated’.27 There appears to
be a strong emphasis in many of the stories on the Bodhisatta acquiring the
perfection of dāna, especially through sacrificing his own flesh and blood. The
22 in addition to the Paññāsajātaka collections, the Lokaneyyappakaraṇa (of
approximately the same date and provenance) also draws on the tradition of the JA to
create a new composition, in this case a long jātaka about worldly wisdom. By synthesising
and expanding upon two jātakas – the Mahā-ummagga-jātaka ( JA 546) and the Kurudhamma-
jātaka ( JA 267) – the text manages to address simultaneously the types of worldly wisdom
relevant to both ordinary men and kings. its samodhāna identifies no fewer than 34
characters! See Jaini’s edition, to which he provides an excellent introduction: Padmanabh
S. Jaini (ed.), Lokaneyyappakaraṇaṃ (london, 1986).
23 Peter Skilling, ‘Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka in South-east asia’, Journal of the Pali Text
Society, 28 (2006): 113–73, p. 130ff. Dating is problematic, and arguably unhelpful, since
there is no one collection and each collection relies upon older sources. The Zimmé Paṇṇāsa
perhaps dates to the fifteenth century and according to eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century Burmese tradition originated from Chiang mai in northern Thailand.
24 Padmanabh S. Jaini (ed.), Paññāsajātaka (2 vols, london, 1981–1983); i.B. Horner
and Padmanabh S. Jaini (trans.), Apocryphal Birth Stories (2 vols, oxford, 1985–1986).
25 Padmanabh S. Jaini, ‘The apocryphal Jātakas of Southeast asian Buddhism’, Indian
Journal of Buddhist Studies, 1/1 (1989): 22–39, p. 36.
26 Skilling, ‘Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka’, p. 147.
27 Skilling, ‘Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka’, p. 149.

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 77
Bodhisatta’s gift of parts of his body is found in a few stories of the JA, and is
reasonably common in Sanskrit sources. as arthid Sheravanichku has observed,
this motif has a distinctive flavour in the Paññāsajātaka stories, in which
the Bodhisatta is generally explicit about the purpose of the gift (the future
attainment of buddhahood) and often enacts a form of devotional sacrifice. For
example, one story in a Thai collection tells of the Bodhisatta requesting that his
flesh be turned into gold leaf in order that he might decorate a buddha-image.
another shows him cutting off his head and burning his body as an offering to
the three refuges.28 Such stories once again blur the boundaries between jātaka
and avadāna, and reflect the increasing influence of devotional understandings
of Buddhist spiritual progress, but they nonetheless persist in associating jātakas
with the perfect biography of the Buddha.
in addition to a continued emphasis on the role of the perfections in
the Bodhisatta’s biography, this biography is extended further back in time
by the inclusion in at least one collection of the Padīpadāna-jātaka, which relates
the Bodhisatta-to-be’s last birth as a woman. in this story, which will be examined
in more detail in the next chapter, the woman makes an offering of a lamp to a
Buddha but does not receive the prophecy she wishes for as she is still a woman.
The merit of her action allows her to be reborn in a heavenly realm before being
reborn as a man (Sumedha) in the time of Dīpaṅkara Buddha, where the first
bodhisatta vow is made and the long journey to buddhahood begins. The story
explains the absence of the Bodhisatta during the time of the first three buddhas
of the present eon, as related in the Nidānakathā, as he was in one of the heavenly
realms. as Jaini notes, ‘it is very much to the credit of the author of this story
that he was thus able to improve on the Nidānakathā without in any way violating
the spirit of the canonical account’.29
in the Padīpadāna-jātaka and some other stories contained in the Paññāsajātaka
collections we find a certain amount of overlap with Sanskrit jātakas (sometimes
only now extant in Chinese sources). This may explain their ‘apocryphal’
status, since they are not in conflict with the JA, but are also not within it. The
Paññāsajātaka collections therefore demonstrate the flexibility of the jātaka
genre. Though the jātakas in this tradition share the structure of those in the JA,
and have doubtless been influenced by the latter’s preoccupation with biography
and the perfections, they also have the freedom to address times and events
outside of the realm of the JA. They can in fact be more broadly biographical
since they are not restricted by the imposed time-frame of the JA which, for
example, prevents female births, as it is said to relate only stories since the
bodhisatta vow. in addition the texts can incorporate jātakas not previously known
28 arthid Sheravanichkul, ‘Self-Sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the Paññāsa Jātaka’,
Religion Compass, 2/5 (2008): 769–87, especially p. 778.
29 Jaini, ‘apocryphal Jātakas’, p. 28. For a more thorough discussion of this story see
Padmanabh S. Jaini, ‘Padīpadānajātaka: Gautama’s last Female incarnation’ in Collected
Papers in Buddhist Studies (Delhi, 2001), pp. 367–74.

78 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
to the Theravāda tradition, and address local concerns such as the mythology
surrounding local kings or landscapes. in this way the established jātaka genre
allows the incorporation of ever more stories, and an infinite expansion of the
Buddha’s biography.
GooD BUDDHiST SToRieS: JĀTaKa TexTS ToDaY
i have so far examined perceptions of the jātaka genre in some specific textual
sources from the time of the JA to the medieval period. These texts suggest that
the definition of jātakas established in the JA pervaded subsequent texts, both
later collections of jātakas and texts mentioning jātakas for diverse reasons.
Jātaka stories remain very popular in South and Southeast asia today, where the
jātaka book (whether in its Pāli form as the JA, or a vernacular translation such
as the Sinhala Jātaka-pota) are well known. Certain jātakas contained within the
collection have been subject to many retellings in a variety of different media.
However, it is here that our neat little picture begins to crumble, for modern
jātaka ‘texts’ (in which i am including modern media) seem largely unaware of
the idea that jātakas illustrate the long path to buddhahood.
i would like to end this chapter by bringing the history of jātaka texts up to
date, albeit only in a single Buddhist country, namely Sri lanka.30 even a cursory
glance at available jātakas in present-day Sri lanka reveals that in these popular
modern jātaka ‘texts’ we find an interesting contrast to the idea of the jātaka genre
given in the canonical and commentarial texts. i will examine a few examples
from modern Sri lanka to illustrate this: madhubhashini Ratnayake’s radio
plays broadcast in 1997; two series of children’s jātaka books; Ven. Dhammika
and Susan Harmer’s cartoon book Stories the Buddha Told; m.D.R. Perera’s english
poem The Sage of India; and Prasanna Jayakody’s film Sankara.31 in these sources
we discover the limitations of the JA’s definition of the jātaka genre.
30 i have only been able to study Sri lanka in any depth, though the scattered and
anecdotal evidence i have encountered in regard to Southeast asia suggests a similar
situation throughout Theravāda countries. in Thailand, for example, the children’s jātaka
books issued by the education ministry make no mention of the Bodhisatta but are merely
ethical animal stories. a more thorough study of the place of jātakas in contemporary
South and Southeast asian societies is clearly a desideratum.
31 madhubhashini Ratnayake, Voices From Afar: Radio Plays Based on Ten Jataka Stories
(Dehiwala, Sri lanka, 1999). Bosat Katā series (Colombo, 2000–2001); Jātaka Katā series
(Colombo, in association with Book matrix, india, 2005). S. Dhammika and Susan Harmer,
Stories the Buddha Told (Singapore, 2006). m.D.R. Perera, The Sage of India, or Maha-Ummagga
Jataka (Colombo 1992). (Perera also composed two other jātaka-based poems: Sasho the
Sage, and The Rime of Vessantara, but The Sage of India was the only one widely available
during my time in Sri lanka.) The film Sankara was released in 2006 and performed well
on the international film festival circuit: see www.sankaramovie.com.

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 79
We saw in Chapter 2 that some jātakas are a little problematic in their
presentation of the Bodhisatta, as he does not behave as we might expect a being
on the path to awakening should. one example given was the Aṇḍabhūta-jātaka
( JA 62), in which the Bodhisatta is a gambling king who pays someone to seduce
a young woman. Since only a selection of the jātakas of the JA are well known
in modern society, one might imagine that such a story would be intentionally
ignored or avoided. Rather, the Aṇḍabhūta-jātaka is one of just 10 jātaka stories
selected for rewriting and broadcasting as radio plays on Sri lankan national
radio in 1997. However, the problem of the Bodhisatta’s actions is sidestepped by
the absence of both the Buddha and the Bodhisatta; the Buddha is not explicitly
identified as the author, and the Bodhisatta is not identified with the king as in
the jātaka samodhāna.
although the author makes it clear that these radio plays were a Buddhist
endeavour, and consequently were broadcast on poya (P uposatha) days each
month, the Buddhist content is minimal. only two of the stories chosen (Illīsa-
jātaka and Apaṇṇaka-jātaka) include the paccuppannavatthu, and even in these
jātakas there is no identification of the births, nor do we ever hear the Buddha
speak. The Sutasoma-jātaka is the only story to contain the samodhāna, and the
reason for this is not clear, since there is no link to the ‘present’ time of the
Buddha in this case. in the case of the Aṇḍabhūta-jātaka there is a possible reason
for avoiding the identification of the births, yet in all the other stories there
is no reason not to identify the Bodhisatta, and many reasons why it might be
an enhancement. in the stories chosen the Bodhisatta is wise (Mātaṅga-jātaka;
Kosambī-jātaka; Apaṇṇaka-jātaka; Sambula-jātaka), generous (Illīsa-jātaka) and
forbearing (Khantivādi-jātaka), yet the audience may never appreciate these
qualities as belonging to him.
a similar situation is found in the Bosat Katā (‘stories of the Bodhisatta’)
series of Sinhala children’s jātaka stories, where only the story of the past is told,
and with little attention to the structure of the original text, even though the
stories are extracted from the Jātaka-pota, where all the different sections of the
‘classical’ jātaka are found. The stories are not even called jātakas in the title,
rather the books have such names as ‘The Story of the Heart’ (Hædaya Vastuva)
for the jātaka in which the Bodhisatta is a monkey who deceives a crocodile
into believing his heart is hanging in a tree. However, the identification of the
Bodhisatta’s character is included in small print in parentheses at the end of
each book, thus the Hædaya Vastuva ends:
(This story has been written from the Vānara-jātakaya of the Pansiya Panas
Jātaka Pota. in this the Bodhisatta is the monkey.)32
32 ( pansiya panas jātaka potē vānara jātakaya æsuren mē katāva liyæviṇa. mehi bōsat
vandurā ya.) The Pansiya Panas Jātaka Pota is ‘the book of 550 jātakas’ – the full title of the
fourteenth-century Sinhalese reworking of the JA, usually referred to simply as Jātaka
Pota – ‘Jātaka book’.

80 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
No characters other than the Bodhisatta are identified, even where the
corresponding stories in the JA give the characters for his companions.
Consequently, in this case the reader cannot know that the crocodile is Devadatta,
and that this is one of many occasions when he tried to kill the Bodhisatta.
in another set of books for younger children, this time with large pictures and
simple Sinhala, we find 10 stories in a series called Jātaka Katā (‘Jātaka stories’).
in these, however, there is no identification of the births, nor any indication of
the sources for the stories.33 in another sub-set of the series, aesop’s fables are
recounted. The emphasis, therefore, is on the entertainment of the story, and
the lessons it might contain about how to get on in the world. Thus although
it is true that children in Sri lanka are all familiar with jātaka stories, it seems
unlikely that they appreciate the significance of the stories in relation to their
portrayal of the Bodhisatta. Rather, they are just good stories, with passing
reference to their nature as jātakas, or stories of the Bodhisatta.
in some children’s jātakas even the fact that the stories specifically belong to
the jātaka genre is ignored. in the Great Buddhist Stories series of cartoon books,
we find a volume entitled Stories the Buddha Told, and in it are found several
jātakas. in all the cases only the story of the past is found, and in the case of
the Ummagga-jātaka only two small episodes from the career of the great sage
mahosadha are included, as separate, though consecutive, stories. in none of the
stories is there any identification of the births, or any indication at all that the
stories are anything other than stories the Buddha told. Nor does the book as a
whole give any indication that it contains jātaka stories. The jātakas are included
in the series (which also contains books entitled Buddha and his Disciples, and
Stories of Buddhist Lands) because of their merit as stories told by the Buddha, in
other words because of their didactic qualities. The sales pitch on the back of the
book highlights this preoccupation:
Throughout his life and when it was appropriate, the Buddha told amusing and
clever stories to illustrate his teachings. He did not sum up each story with a
‘moral’; the stories themselves did that. But the Buddha used these stories to
reveal to the world the values he held most dear – honesty, kindness, courage,
generosity and worldly wisdom. Stories the Buddha Told, the third volume in
Great Buddhist Stories, will charm and challenge the reader of today with the wit
and wisdom of the man who told them.34
33 The books are actually from an indian publisher, reprinted in Sinhala by m.D.
Gunasena. one book in the series – Nuvaṇakkāra Vandurā ‘The Clever monkey’ – contains an
amalgamation of JA 57, 208 and 342 in a word-for-word translation of the english version
by ellen Babbitt, which was first published in 1912. Just as the pre-JA history of the stories
is hard to pin down, jātakas have continued to be elusive in their textual history.
34 Dhammika and Harmer, Stories the Buddha Told, back cover.

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 81
The presence in jātaka stories of the ‘summing up’ in the form of the samodhāna
and often a little expansion of the moral by the Buddha in the story of the present,
is purposefully ignored in favour of presenting the stories as they stand alone. as
such, the stories demonstrate the wisdom and didactic skill of the Buddha, but
say nothing about the Bodhisatta.
The situation in adults’ books is no more straightforward, though adults do
have access to the full Sinhala translation of the JA, a Pāli edition of the JA in
Sinhalese characters, or the english translation by Cowell et al. in indian reprint.
a more likely way of accessing the genre is through modern literature, which is
often inspired by jātaka stories. a good example is Perera’s poem based upon the
english translation of the Mahā Ummagga-jātaka, which tells the many stories of
the skill and wisdom of the great sage mahosadha. Perera’s preface mentions
that the story is a jātaka, but gives little information about what this means,
and he provides no paccuppannavatthu or samodhāna in the poem itself. The
introduction, by l.G. Hewage, explains more fully that it is a jātaka about the
perfection of wisdom by the Bodhisatta. He continues:
The educational value of the Jataka Stories in building up in [sic] what is
called the Buddhist Cultural Heritage is well-known now and needs no special
emphasis here. Nevertheless, in contemporary society too Jataka Stories re-
interpreted in this manner may have a relevance in building up a peaceful
global society, where human wisdom will have a predominant role to play.35
once again, the story’s value is seen as being in its moral content and literary
worth, and the fact that one character is the Bodhisatta is not a matter of
importance. Rather than showing wisdom to be necessary for buddhahood, as
the JA would have us believe, the story shows wisdom to be necessary in the rule
of a peaceful kingdom. The poem ends:
To make Warring Nations lay down their arms,
To co-exist in Peace and sane remain,
To be free from fears of wars and alarms,
may wise Mahosadha be born again.36
Such an ending makes subtle reference to the idea that mahosadha will benefit
the world in future births, but implies this happens only in the same way as he
has done in this particular birth. This could be construed as an implicit reference
to the Bodhisatta, but it is well concealed, and there is no other reference to
either Bodhisatta or Buddha, or to the Buddhist religious system.
my final example from modern Sri lanka is a film that won the Silver Pyramid
award at the 2006 Cairo film festival. made in Sri lanka and written and directed
35 Perera, The Sage of India, p. vii.
36 Perera, The Sage of India, p. 91.

82 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
by Prasanna Jayakody, Sankara explores the emotions experienced by a young
Buddhist monk who is restoring paintings in a temple. The paintings in question
portray the Telapatta-jātaka ( JA 196), in which the Bodhisatta successfully
crosses a wilderness populated by demonesses as his five companions one by
one give in to each of the five sense pleasures and are devoured. The struggle of
the Bodhisatta in the jātaka story is echoed by the young monk’s own struggle
against his attraction to a local girl.
in this example, the fact that the story is a jātaka is important in the sense that
the Bodhisatta provides a good example of how to behave, and this ties in neatly
with sermons the Buddha gave about the importance of not giving in to lust. The
two characters – Bodhisatta and Buddha – are thus closely identified with one
another. in addition, the young monk is able to identify himself with characters
in the story, and finally with the Bodhisatta himself. Thus the story works as
both instruction and example, and this is neatly aided by the jātaka genre with
its past and present elements. However, this is only ever implicit in the film,
which does not even tell the story in full.37 Though this might be excused by a
general awareness of the story amongst Sri lankans, when asked why it had not
been deemed necessary to translate this story for the international audience,
the director answered that such explicit use of the story is unnecessary, since it
is the story of everybody’s life.38 The interpretation just given, therefore, is likely
to be made only by a scholar, not an ordinary audience member.
The presence of a jātaka illustration as the focus for this film is more significant,
as it provides a visual meditation (for the monk as well as the audience who
appreciate its allegorical significance) and also allows the film to include an
examination of the cultural context in which Buddhism is situated. Just as the
mural is repeatedly painted over by each successive generation (this is typical
of Sri lankan temple murals, and necessary twice in Sankara after a deliberate
sabotage of the newly restored paintings), so also each generation must undergo
the same mental struggle as the young monk to balance the spiritual and the
worldly. The international success of the film is not because of its reference to
the Bodhisatta, but is rather because the theme is one that can be appreciated
by everyone. The fact that the Bodhisatta demonstrated the correct choice
in the struggle is rather incidental to the film, and not communicated to the
international audience.
in modern Sri lanka, therefore, it seems that the JA’s idea of what a jātaka
is is widely ignored. although a jātaka is still accepted as a story of a previous
birth of the Buddha, his presence is at best incidental and at worst ignored
altogether. The awareness of which character in these popular stories is the
Bodhisatta is often absent, and this allows jātakas which seem not to fit into the
37 although the name and significance of the story is mentioned several times in
passing in the Sinhala soundtrack, the english subtitles omit this entirely.
38 Question and answer session after the screening of the film at the British Film
Festival, National Film Theatre, london, 26 october 2007.

Generic Conventions Embraced and Ignored 83
JA’s scheme of biographical and exemplary stories to remain in the common
cultural imagination. The individual lessons of the stories, which have survived
the process of appropriation and unification of the JA intact, are appreciated
once more outside the context of the genre. Their identification as jātakas gives
them both cultural and religious weight, without making the focus necessarily
on the character or qualities of the Bodhisatta. more important is the Buddha
and his ability to use stories that appeal to all kinds of people to illustrate his
teachings and his own wit and wisdom. The framing of the JA, though effective
in its own way, has had little impact on the stories themselves, which retain their
individual characters and uses, and their association with the Buddha’s vision
and wisdom, rather than that of the Bodhisatta.
CoNClUSioN
one of the issues that has recurred throughout the last three chapters is to what
extent jātakas are about the Bodhisatta. We saw in Chapter 2 that his character
is variable and sometimes very minor, and that this is explained by the many
different forms of story that became identified as jātakas. From a historical
analysis of the development of the jātaka genre it seems likely that initially the
association of the Buddha with jātakas was more important than the presence
of the Bodhisatta. it was only with the development of the JA that the focus
became the Bodhisatta and the path he follows, and although this preoccupation
remained in the texts, and the texts remained at least symbolically important, it
little affected the stories themselves in the imaginaire of Buddhist societies.
The rest of this book will be concerned with the emergence and purpose of
the preoccupation with the character and path of the Bodhisatta. Now that it
is clear that this has never been the essence of jātakas, but is rather a historical
development of limited (albeit significant) influence, this development requires
some explanation. in the next two chapters i will contextualise this development
in terms of the emergence of the bodhisatta ideal in the Theravāda tradition and
the rising importance of biography. Following that, in Chapter 7, i will look at
the ways in which this preoccupation with sacred biography affects the uses of
jātakas in a variety of Buddhist practices.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 5
Jātakas and Buddhology
my examination of the jātaka genre began by questioning the assertion – found
in many primary and secondary sources – that jātakas illustrate the Bodhisatta’s
gradual path to perfection. By tracing the history of the jātaka genre through
to the present day, i have shown that the association between jātaka stories and
the person of Gotama is twofold: just as important as the association with the
many lives lived as Bodhisatta, is the association with the teaching career of
the Buddha which provides a legitimate Buddhist setting and another level of
biographical emphasis. The insistence of the redactor of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā
( JA) that jātakas illustrate the gradual perfection of the Bodhisatta over many
lives is therefore a development in the genre of significant, though ultimately
limited, influence. So what caused this development? Why was it necessary to
associate the jātaka genre with the long path to buddhahood? in this chapter i
will examine the circumstances – textual, historical and doctrinal – surrounding
the development of such a strong association between the jātaka genre and the
bodhisatta path.
one of the problems encountered in earlier portions of this book was the
dating of developments in the jātaka genre. Since it is impossible to reconstruct
the exact history of the JA, one is necessarily on insecure ground when trying
to place the rising biographical emphasis of jātakas into a historical context.
However, the context is in some cases easier to date than the jātaka texts, and so it
will help build up a more complete picture. For example, the major developments
in the genre occurred before and during the composition of some of the latest
texts of the Khuddaka Nikāya – namely Apadāna, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka.
Such texts are reflective of the rising interest in what we might call ‘buddhology’,
which carefully defined and systematically codified the nature of, and the path
to, buddhahood. They also reflect a rising interest in biography (of Buddha(s),
Bodhisatta(s) and arahats) as well as the use of self-consciously biographical and
historical genres. The development of these texts and the ideology they contain
can shed light upon the developing rationale of the jātaka genre.
The notion of multiple buddhas (past and future) and the resultant focus
upon and codification of a path to buddhahood, are both closely intertwined
with the changing ideology of the JA. The bodhisatta path is well developed in
Theravāda Buddhism, despite mahāyāna polemics insisting otherwise, and
the main aspects of the path – aspiration, exclusions and perfections – can
be reconstructed from jātaka and related texts. a comparison between this
path and the path to arahatship reveals that jātaka texts became associated
with all Buddhist paths on a practical level, even as they continued to glorify

86 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
the perfection of the Buddha and other awakened beings. in this way jātaka
materials subtly altered the soteriology of early Buddhism, and challenge the
binary opposition of mahāyāna and ‘Hīnayāna’ forms of Buddhism. Situating
jātakas within the context of developments in buddhology will thus allow me to
demonstrate the wider impact of the associations with Buddha and Bodhisatta
imposed on the genre.
maNY BUDDHaS
i noted in an earlier chapter that the jātakas provide a form of lineage for the
Buddha that refers back to his previous lives. another lineage of which he is a
part is that of the buddhas. in Theravāda Buddhism there are early lists of three
or six past buddhas as well as a future buddha, and later this list is expanded to
24, as in the Nidānakathā, the long biographical preface to the JA. By identifying
the Buddha as one of many, such accounts reinforce the idea that he realised
rather than formulated the dhamma, and that the dhamma is rediscovered time
after time. as i suggested during my examination of the overall structure of
the JA, such a repetitive context alters the time-frame in which the Buddha and
Buddhism are viewed. although the future buddha metteyya does not feature
in the JA, past buddhas imply future buddhas, and future buddhas imply present
bodhisattas. This prompts the formulation of a detailed account of the path to
buddhahood, as an exercise in glorifying past buddhas, a legitimation of Gotama
Buddha and his teachings, and an example to aspiring future buddhas. The JA,
as a text professing to be illustrative of the path of the Bodhisatta as well as the
authoritative teaching abilities of the Buddha, is an active player in this whole
discourse.
in the Mahāpadāna Sutta, the Buddha presents himself as seventh in a line of
buddhas, after Vipassī, Sikhī, Vessabhū, Kakusandha, Koṇāgamana and Kassapa.1
For each of the seven buddhas the sutta supplies details of the kappa (eon), jāti
(birth, social position), gotta (clan, family), length of life at the time, type of tree
under which they became enlightened, names of their two chief disciples, size of
their assemblies, name of their chief attendant, names of their parents and place
of birth. Following this is a more detailed narrative of Vipassī’s conception and
birth, along with the dhammatā (‘rules’) to which it adheres. Such rules include,
1 DN 14: T.W. Rhys-Davids and J. estlin Carpenter (eds), Dīgha-nikāya (3 vols,
london, 1889–1911), vol. 2, p. 1ff. in the Vepullapabbata Sutta (SN xV, 20) we find mention
only of the last three (l. Feer (ed.), Saṃyutta-nikāya (6 vols, london, 1884–1904), vol. 2,
p. 190ff.). Kakusandha appears again in the Māratajjanīya Sutta (MN 50) in a story of a past
birth of moggallāna (V. Trenckner and Robert Chalmers (eds), Majjhima-nikāya (3 vols,
london, 1888–1902), vol. 1, p. 332ff.). in the Ghaṭīkāra Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya (MN
81), as related in Chapter 3, the Bodhisatta encounters Kassapa Buddha (Trenckner and
Chalmers, Majjhima-nikāya , vol. 2, p. 45ff.).

Jātakas and Buddhology 87
for example, that a bodhisatta’s mother is virtuous, that she bears him for a full
10 (lunar) months, and that he is unsullied by blood during birth. There is also
a narration of Vippasī’s youth as a prince with the 32 marks of a Great man, the
seeing of the four sights, his renunciation, realisation of the dhamma, reluctance
to teach, persuasion by Brahmā and the founding of the saṅgha. as several
scholars have noted, this narrative contains so many familiar details that it must
be either modelled on or provide the model for the biography of Gotama.
in the Buddhavaṃsa the list of past buddhas is expanded to 24, of whom the
last six are identical to those found in the Mahāpadāna Sutta. in this account,
the most detailed narrative is for the first buddha, Dīpaṅkara, and his encounter
with an ascetic called Sumedha, who is Gotama Buddha in a past birth. it is at the
feet of Dīpaṅkara Buddha (lying in the mud to make a clean path for him) that
Sumedha makes his first aspiration to buddhahood, and Dīpaṅkara comments:
See this ascetic, this mighty matted-haired ascetic,
immeasurable eons from now he will become a buddha in the world.2
This, according to traditional accounts, is the very beginning of the bodhisatta
career of the person who becomes Gotama Buddha. it involves two aspects:
a vow or aspiration (abhinīhāra) and a prediction (vyākaraṇa) by a buddha.3
The Bodhisatta encounters each of the 24 past buddhas that feature in the
Buddhavaṃsa, and each of them gives him a prediction to buddhahood.
The idea of previous buddhas was arguably borrowed from the Jains,4 who
claim 24 tīrthaṅkaras for each time cycle, though they include mahāvīra as one of
the 24, whereas Gotama Buddha is claimed as the twenty-fifth in Buddhist lists.
it is not only the number that is shared: the biographies of Gotama and mahāvīra
share certain features with one another as well as with each of their predecessors.
Gombrich has argued that the Buddha’s predecessors were recounted in imitation
of the Jains in order to provide authority for his message, which was thereby
shown to be independent from the individual teacher and rediscovered by a series
of great men. This was an alternative authentication to that used by the Buddha’s
2 Trans. from N.a. Jayawickrama (ed.), Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka (london, 1974),
p. 13, verse 60.
3 The term vyākaraṇa is better known in mahāyāna contexts, and this usage of the
term appears to be a relatively late one in Pāli literature. However, it is the term used in
the Nidānakathā and the commentaries to Buddhavaṃsa, Apadāna and Cariyāpiṭaka.
4 The evidence for this direction of movement is that the idea of past tīrthaṅkaras
is present from the beginning of Jainism, since mahāvīra makes reference to the idea
that he is following in the tradition of Pārśva, who is widely accepted as a historical
figure. Gombrich, amongst others, argues that the idea of there being 24 tīrthaṅkaras
also predates (and influences) the idea of 24 previous buddhas (Richard F. Gombrich, ‘The
Significance of Former Buddhas in the Theravādin Tradition’, in Balasooriya et al. (eds),
Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula (london, 1980), pp. 62–72).

88 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
contemporaries in early india, who would cite a lineage of their teachers. Since it
is a defining feature of a sammāsambuddha that he realises the dhamma unaided,
the Buddha could not authenticate his message by reference to teachers. The
past buddhas therefore performed this function of authenticating the Buddha’s
message, and later ‘acquired the function of ensuring the availability of that
message by launching Bodhisattvas on their careers’.5
it is notable, in support of Gombrich’s argument, that the Mahāpadāna
Sutta speaks only of the past buddhas, whereas the focus of the later account
in the Buddhavaṃsa includes both information about the previous buddhas and
an account of their interaction with the person who was to become Gotama
Buddha. The 24 past buddhas named in the Buddhavaṃsa are, after all, of special
importance because it is at their feet that the Bodhisatta receives his prediction
to buddhahood. in fact, the Buddhavaṃsa mentions three further buddhas before
Dīpaṅkara, but these never encountered the Bodhisatta, and so are less important.
They are therefore omitted, for example, from the popular illustrations in Sri
lankan temples, which show the Bodhisatta at the feet of each of the 24 buddhas,
receiving his prediction to eventual buddhahood.
although the prediction made by Dīpaṅkara Buddha is said to formally mark
the beginning of Gotama’s path to buddhahood, his biography can be extended
further back: the Saddharmālaṃkāraya, a Sinhalese work from around 1400,
contains stories about lives of the future Gotama before his birth as Sumedha,
and his encounters with many hundreds of thousands of buddhas.6 Thus the
web of buddhas grows ever bigger and more complex: as well as our Bodhisatta
encountering many past buddhas, the ways in which buddhas progress on the
path demand that past buddhas encountered each other as bodhisattas, to give and
receive predictions. in addition, bodhisattas who have not yet become buddhas
encountered some of the same buddhas encountered by our Bodhisatta.
an implication of the idea that Gotama Buddha was one of many, and indeed
encountered other buddhas during his long career as a bodhisatta, is that there
must also be future buddhas. Thus it is natural to find the doctrine of metteyya (Skt
maitreya), who is said to be currently in the Tusita heaven, waiting for the right
time to take birth as a human and become the next buddha. The only mention of
metteyya in the four main nikāyas of the Sutta Piṭaka is in the Cakkavatti (Sīhanāda)
Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya. after outlining the decline of people’s morality,
happiness and life-span, and its subsequent recovery, the sutta states:
When the life-span of the people is eighty thousand years, monks, there will
arise in the world a blessed one called metteyya – an arahat, a perfectly and
fully awakened being, endowed with wisdom and conduct, auspicious, knower
of the worlds, incomparable trainer of men to be tamed, teacher of gods and
men, a buddha, a blessed one, just as i at present am arisen in the world an
5 Gombrich, ‘Significance of Former Buddhas’, p. 71.
6 Gombrich, ‘Significance of Former Buddhas’, p. 70.

Jātakas and Buddhology 89
arahat, a perfectly and fully awakened being, endowed with wisdom and
conduct, auspicious, knower of the worlds, incomparable trainer of men to be
tamed, teacher of gods and men, a buddha, a blessed one. Having experienced
and realised the knowledge himself he will declare it to this world with its
devas, māras and brahmas, to mankind with its recluses and brahmins, to gods
and men, just as i in the present time experienced and realised the knowledge
myself and declare it to this world with its devas, māras and brahmas, to mankind
with its recluses and brahmins, to gods and men. He will teach the Dhamma
that is beautiful in its beginning, beautiful in its middle, and beautiful in its
conclusion, in its meaning and its letter, and explain the holy life that is pure
and fulfilled in its entirety, just as i in the present time teach the Dhamma
that is beautiful in its beginning, beautiful in its middle, and beautiful in its
conclusion, in its meaning and its letter, and explain the holy life that is pure
and fulfilled in its entirety. He will have a community of thousands of monks,
just as i have a community of hundreds of monks.7
Thus metteyya is portrayed as identical to Gotama, with the exception of the size
of his retinue: this, along with the life-span of the time, is a common differential
for the different buddhas, past, present and future. There is quite clearly no
difference in his epithets or his task. This sense of continuity is reinforced in the
Buddhavaṃsa, where he is mentioned briefly at the very end, after a recap of all
the buddhas of previous eons mentioned in the text:
in this Bhadda-eon there have been three Teachers:
The guides Kākusandha, Koṇāgamana and Kassapa.
at present i am the fully awakened one; and there will also be metteyya.
These are the five buddhas, wise ones, compassionate towards the world.8
metteyya, we learn here, is no different to the other buddhas.
in later sources and those from outside the Theravāda tradition, however,
metteyya develops into a unique character with a variety of roles to play in
different Buddhist societies.9 The lack of definitive identification of metteyya-
to-be with any contemporary of Gotama Buddha (implying he is a relatively late
addition to buddhology), and the later development of an extensive mythology
and a multitude of practices involving metteyya, mean that the issue of his
7 Trans. from Rhys-Davids and Carpenter, Dīgha-nikāya, vol. 3, pp. 75–6.
8 Trans from Jayawickrama, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka, p. 101: chapter 27, verses
18–19.
9 in the Theravāda tradition we find metteyya in the Anāgatavaṃsa, Dasabodhisatt
uppattikathā and Pañcabuddhabyākaraṇa as well as later Sinhalese and Thai works. For a
full discussion see Padmanabh S. Jaini, ‘Stages in the Bodhisattva Career of the Tathāgata
maitreya’, in alan Sponberg and Helen Hardacre (eds), Maitreya, the Future Buddha
(Cambridge, 1988), pp. 54–90.

90 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
origins and influences is hotly debated.10 However, whilst the mythology may be
varied and of external influence, the outline of metteyya and the possibility of
more future buddhas after him are natural Buddhist developments.11 as a future
buddha he is a symbol of hope, and is also accessible here and now, in contrast to
Gotama and the other buddhas we hear about in the Buddhavaṃsa.
metteyya is included in the pantheon of mahāyāna bodhisattvas. indeed, upon
first glance it might be tempting to see him as a proto-mahāyāna development.
However, that metteyya is a strictly pre-mahāyāna development is clear from
his role in mahāyāna texts, where he is often ridiculed in the same way as
chief disciples of Gotama Buddha such as Sāriputta. Whatever the origins of
his extended mythology, the idea of metteyya requires no further explanation
than that Gotama Buddha was not unique. Despite all the mythology, metteyya
remains a simple idea: a future parallel to Gotama and the other buddhas in
whose lineage he is situated, guaranteed to discover and preach the dhamma and
begin a new Buddhist dispensation, when the time is right.
as well as containing a story about metteyya, the Anāgatavaṃsa contains a
list of 10 future buddhas, whose stories are later told in the fourteenth-century
Dasabodhisattuppattikathā. These biographies include jātaka stories as well as
details of the final lives of the 10 future buddhas.12 Saddhatissa notes that several
eighteenth-century Sri lankan temple paintings include depictions of these 10
future buddhas,13 demonstrating their significance alongside the 24 past buddhas
and Gotama himself. Thus the lineage of buddhas is opened up and extended
yet further into the future. Gotama Buddha, we learn, was one of many buddhas
of past and future, and his story is thus both an individual biography and a
typological narration, intertwined with the stories of countless other figures.
10 Scholars such as Basham, Przyluski and lévi have put forward the view that his
mythology came from mithraic religion or Zoroastrianism. For a discussion see Joseph m.
Kitagawa, ‘The many Faces of maitreya: a Historian of Religions’ Reflections’, in Sponberg
and Hardacre, Maitreya, pp. 7–22. Nattier notes that the differences between maitreya and
the buddhas before him are limited to such things as arising at the time of a cakkavattin
king, and being welcomed by Gotama Buddha’s disciple Kassapa (who according to some
accounts will be waiting in a state of suspended animation), and that such aspects of the
myth have strong parallels in iranian apocalyptic literature ( Jan Nattier, ‘The meanings
of the maitreya myth: a Typological analysis’, in Sponberg and Hardacre, Maitreya,
pp. 23–47 – see especially pp. 46–7, fn. 60).
11 Though as Kitagawa (‘many Faces’, p. 7) notes, metteyya will be the last buddha of
the current time cycle and so in some ways is viewed as bringing ‘a final dispensation’.
12 H. Saddhatissa (ed. and trans.), The Birth Stories of the Ten Bodhisattvas and the
Dasabodhisattupattikathā (london, 1975).
13 Saddhatissa, Birth Stories, pp. 20–21.

Jātakas and Buddhology 91
the BodhiSatta PaTH
if there are future buddhas then there are present bodhisattas, and present
bodhisattas-to-be. This prompts the development of instruction as to how
to identify bodhisattas, and how to enter and follow the bodhisatta path. Such
developments are tied up in the biographies of Gotama Buddha as found in the
Nidānakathā and related texts, but have wider relevance to any aspiring bodhisatta.
The next task is therefore to examine the bodhisatta path – including the aspiration,
exclusions from the path, and the perfections necessary for its fulfilment – as
outlined in Theravāda jātaka and related texts, and assess the evidence that the
bodhisatta path was taken seriously in Theravāda communities.
according to mahāyāna polemics, ‘Hīnayāna’ Buddhism (the ‘lesser vehicle’
of which Theravāda is the only surviving form) is the vehicle of the ‘hearers’
(śrāvakas) since its followers rely on the Buddha’s teachings to help them attain
the limited achievement of arahatship. Such śrāvakas know nothing of the vow,
the path or the perfections that are required for attaining buddhahood, which is
described in mahāyāna traditions as the only complete form of awakening.14 as
a consequence of this polemic many scholars have characterised the difference
between Theravāda and mahāyāna Buddhism according to the different aims: in
Theravāda, it is said, one aims for arahatship, whereas in mahāyāna one aims for
bodhisattvahood, and ultimately full and complete buddhahood.
Samuels has been prominent in arguing against the identification of the
bodhisattva-yāna with mahāyāna Buddhism and the śrāvaka-yāna with Theravāda.
He urges scholars to pay more attention to the role of the bodhisatta path in
Theravāda, and examines evidence that this path was taken seriously in
Theravāda countries, by kings, scholar-monks and manuscript copyists.15 He does
not, however, give an extensive outline of the path as it is presented in Theravāda
texts. The main discussions of the path are found in the long introduction to
the JA known as the Nidānakathā, and in the commentaries to the Buddhavaṃsa,
Cariyāpiṭaka and Apadāna. Since this is a largely neglected area, it is necessary to
construct an outline of the path from primary sources alongside an examination
of its relation to the jātaka materials.
The Bodhisatta Aspiration
When Sumedha makes his aspiration to buddhahood at the feet of Dīpaṅkara
Buddha he utters an oft-quoted verse about the criteria he has fulfilled, which in
the Buddhavaṃsa reads:
14 See, for example, the views of Nāgārjuna, Candrakīrti and asaṅga as examined
in Jeffrey Samuels, ‘The Bodhisattva ideal in Theravāda Buddhist Theory and Practice:
a Reevaluation of the Bodhisattva-Śrāvaka opposition’, Philosophy East and West, 47/3
(1997): 399–415, pp. 400–401.
15 Samuels, ‘The Bodhisattva ideal’.

92 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
The human state, male-ness, cause, seeing a teacher,16
Renunciation, attainment of the qualities, an act of service, strong will;
Through the combination of these eight things the aspiration
succeeds.17
although these eight qualities are required for the making of a bodhisatta
aspiration, there is no implication here that such qualities remain throughout
the bodhisatta career: in the Buddhavaṃsa the Bodhisatta is once a lion, a
yakkha and a deva, and twice a nāga, and he is only a renunciant in five of his 24
encounters with buddhas, and yet he still receives his predictions to buddhahood
and resolves to further practice the perfections required to fulfil this aim.
as i noted briefly in the previous chapter, the Southeast asian non-classical
Paññāsajātaka includes a story about the Bodhisatta-to-be’s last birth as a woman.18
The story has familiar dramatis personae: the buddha at the time is called Porāṇa
(old) Dīpaṅkara, to differentiate him from the bodhisatta at the time, who is called
Rāma and will become the (Pacchima – ‘later’) Dīpaṅkara Buddha who predicts
Sumedha to buddhahood at the beginning of the Buddhavaṃsa. The Bodhisatta-
to-be is a princess who makes an offering of lamp oil to Rāma who worships
Porāṇa Dīpaṅkara with lamps whilst making his bodhisatta vow. Her interactions
with the Buddha are thus indirect, even though he is her cousin. Hearing that
she wishes to become a buddha, Porāṇa Dīpaṅkara tells Rāma Bodhisatta that
he cannot predict her to buddhahood because she has not fulfilled the eight
factors. When Rāma asks what these are the Buddha replies with the same list
as Sumedha mentions in the Buddhavaṃsa.19 He then explains further: ‘Brother,
it is not possible for me to make a prediction for the princess because she is
a woman.’20 Unable to predict her to buddhahood, Porāṇa Dīpaṅkara instead
reveals that she will be reborn as a devaputta in the Tusita heaven as a result
of the merit of her gift. Then, when Rāma Bodhisatta has become (Pacchima)
Dīpaṅkara Buddha, (s)he will receive the desired prediction from him. This jātaka,
16 The commentaries on both Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka are clear that this
‘teacher’ must be a living sammāsambuddha; an image or reliquary will not suffice, nor
will an arahat or a paccekabuddha. according to this tradition, therefore, the opportunities
for making the aspiration to full and perfect buddhahood are extremely rare.
17 Trans. from Jayawickrama, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka, p. 12: chapter 2, verse 58.
18 Number 35 in the PTS edition: Padmanabh S. Jaini (ed.), Paññāsajātaka (2 vols,
london, 1981–1983). See also Padmanabh S. Jaini, ‘Padīpadānajātaka: Gautama’s last
Female incarnation’, in Collected Papers in Buddhist Studies (Delhi, 2001). according to Jaini
there is a similar story in the Chinese Anguttarāgama, and Gombrich (‘Significance of
Former Buddhas’, p. 70) notes another version in the second chapter of Dharmakīrti’s
fifteenth-century Sinhalese prose classic Saddharmālaṃkāraya.
19 Jaini, Paññāsajātaka, vol. 2, p. 399, verse 8.
20 Trans. from Jaini, Paññāsajātaka, vol. 2, p. 399.

Jātakas and Buddhology 93
along with three others examined recently by Skilling,21 explicitly predates the
aspiration to buddhahood, and therefore extends the path of the Bodhisatta
further into the past.
Exclusions from the Path
The implication in the Padīpadāna-jātaka is that the bodhisatta vow marks the
end of certain rebirth possibilities. Such a notion is taken up in a set of verses
found in the Nidānakathā, the commentaries on the Apadāna, Buddhavaṃsa and
Cariyāpiṭaka, and the ṭīkā to the Brahmajala Sutta:
Thus the men, perfect in all parts, fixed on awakening,
transmigrate for a long time through hundreds of millions of eons.
They are not born in the avīci hell, nor in the space between the worlds,
nor do they become asuras or beings tormented by hunger and thirst,22
nor do they become small animals,23 even when arising in the bad realm(s).
When born among men they are not blind at birth,
nor are they deficient in hearing or dumb.
The accomplished men, fixed on awakening,
do not take female form, nor do they become hermaphrodites or neuters.
Freed from the deadly misdeeds, everywhere associating with the pure,
with no use for wrong views, they understand the workings of kamma.
living in the heavens they do not arise as non-conscious (asañña) gods,24
and there is no cause [for rebirth] amongst the gods of the pure abodes.25
Good men, bent on renunciation, detached from the world in birth after birth, they
conduct themselves for the benefit of the world, fulfilling all the perfections.26
21 See Peter Skilling, ‘Quatre vies de Sakyamuni: a l’aube de sa carriere de Bodhisatta’,
in Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat and Jean leclant (eds), Bouddhismes d’Asie: monuments et
littératures (Paris: aiBl – Diffusion De Boccard, 2009), pp. 125–39. These stories are found in
the Thai tradition surrounding the beginning of the Bodhisatta career. in such sources the
Padīpadāna-jātaka occurs as the last of four stories where the Bodhisatta-to-be cultivates
intentions towards buddhahood. in none of these stories does he make an aspiration or
receive a prediction in the presence of a buddha.
22 This is a reference to the peta realm.
23 Since in the jātakas of the JA he appears as a rat, an iguana, a frog and a fish
(respectively JA 128 and 129; 141; 239; 75, 114 and 236) the interpretation of what exactly
counts as a ‘small animal’ is questionable.
24 literally ‘unconscious’, this class of devas have reached a realm of heaven
appropriate to their high meditative attainments. There is said to be a strong risk of
mistaking this realm for nibbāna.
25 This is the heavenly realm where ‘non-returners’ are reborn and attain
arahatship.
26 Trans. from V. Fausbøll (ed.), The Jātaka together with its commentary being tales of the
anterior births of Gotama Buddha (6 vols, london, 1877–1896), vol. 1, pp. 44–5.

94 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
From this set of verses we can see that some exclusions apply to the path after the
vow. There are clear reasons for denying certain rebirth possibilities: the worst
of the bad realms are not possible because of the great merit of a bodhisatta, and
the asañña realm is a place where a bodhisatta would be able neither to advance
on the path nor to assist others. When born as humans bodhisattas are able-
bodied men, explicitly not women, or those of both sexes, or of neither. one
assumes that this is because of the karmic laws preventing such deprived states
of rebirth, as well as the parallels between the requirements for buddhahood and
the path to it. indeed the Buddhavaṃsa commentary on the verse about the eight
conditions explains the need for the male state by a reference to the Buddha’s
declaration that a woman cannot be a buddha.27
in the commentaries to the Suttanipāta and Apadāna we find an alternative list
of ‘impossible states’ (abhabbaṭṭhāna) into which a bodhisatta cannot be born.28
This is a slightly expanded list, and is also more specific, for example it specifies
that when born as an animal a bodhisatta cannot be smaller than a quail or larger
than an elephant. The more sophisticated nature of this list implies that it may
be later than the one in the Nidānakathā, though the presence of both lists in the
Apadāna commentary might suggest that they merely represent two different
traditions. one of the most striking differences between these two traditions
is that women are not mentioned in the more detailed list. endo suggests that
this is because of the close relationship between the more general list and the
jātaka materials.29 The exclusion of women from the state of being a bodhisatta
is certainly supported by jātaka materials since the Bodhisatta is always male
in the jātaka stories of the JA, and indeed the Padīpadāna-jātaka explicitly seeks
to predate these stories with its tale of the last female birth.30 Since this is an
excellent example of the dynamic interplay between jātakas and ideas about the
bodhisatta path, it is worth examining the exclusion of women from this path in
some detail.31
27 i.B. Horner (trans.), The Clarifier of the Sweet Meaning (Madhuratthavilāsinī),
Commentary on the Chronicle of Buddhas (Buddhavaṃsa) by Buddhadatta Thera (london, 1978),
p. 133.
28 an outline and discussion of the two lists, as well as full references for their
occurrences in the texts, may be found in Toshiichi endo, Buddha in Theravāda Buddhism:
A Study of the Concept of Buddha in the Pāli Commentaries (Dehiwela, Sri lanka, 1997),
pp. 260–262.
29 endo, Buddha, p. 263.
30 We might also note that the more general exclusion from birth as a ‘small animal’
also better suits a text containing jātakas in which the Bodhisatta takes birth as animals
smaller than a quail.
31 For a fuller discussion of this issue see Naomi appleton, ‘in the Footsteps of the
Buddha? Women and the bodhisatta path in Theravāda Buddhism’, Journal of Feminist
Studies in Religion (forthcoming). For a general discussion of the place of women in the
jātakas see Naomi appleton, ‘Temptress on the Path: Women as objects and Subjects

Jātakas and Buddhology 95
as well as being excluded from the vow and the path, women are of course
not able to become buddhas: in the Bahudhātuka Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya,
the Buddha is recorded as saying that it is impossible for a woman to be a
fully awakened one – a sammāsambuddha.32 in mahāyāna Buddhism, where the
bodhisatt(v)a ideal is prominent, there has been much discussion about when
(and whether) a woman must become a man before attaining buddhahood,
with many texts sidestepping the issue by trying to demonstrate the ultimately
illusory nature of gender through tales of magical sex-change. However, the
exclusion of women from buddhahood and the formal path to it in Theravāda
Buddhism has not attracted much attention from scholars, who generally view
the restriction as unimportant given the priority of the arahat ideal (which
is open to women) and the ability in any case of women to be reborn as men.
as is becoming increasingly clear, however, the bodhisatta path has been taken
seriously in Theravāda Buddhism, and the exclusion of women from it may have
had a wider influence on attitudes towards women. Therefore it is necessary to
examine the origins of the exclusion of women from this path, and the role of
jātaka materials in the discourse.
The jātaka stories are rarely told in isolation, but form part of a large body of
story literature. The other most popular collection is the Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā,
a long, story-filled commentary on the Dhammapada. many such stories portray
women in prominent (and positive) roles. Here, for example, we find the story
of Visākhā, a generous, compassionate and intelligent lay woman. We also find
the tragic story of Kisāgotamī, who was unable to accept that her baby son was
dead and carried him from house to house asking for medicine. The Buddha told
her that her son would be cured by a mustard seed from a house untouched by
death. Realising eventually that such a house did not exist, Kisāgotamī became
a nun and achieved arahatship.33 The lives of nuns and their experiences of
awakening are also found in the Therīgāthā, and stories of their previous births
are found in the Apadāna, alongside their male counterparts. in the Vimānavatthu
in Buddhist Jātaka Stories’, in Pamela Sue anderson (ed.), New Topics in Feminist Studies
of Religion (Dordrecht, 2010), pp. 103–15. it is worth noting at the outset that Foucher’s
assertion that the Bodhisatta is depicted in female form at Bhārhut is simply incorrect
(alfred Foucher, Les Vies Antérieures du Bouddha, D’Après les Textes et les Monuments de l’Inde
(Paris, 1955), p. 175, repeated in etienne lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism from the
origins to the Śaka Era, trans. from French by Sara Boin-Webb (louvain la Neuve, 1988),
p. 404). He argues that since the reliefs are sacred, and they wouldn’t be sacred unless
they depicted the Bodhisatta, the female protagonists portrayed on two examples must
be the Bodhisatta. in fact these female protagonists (as he himself notes) are identified
in the extant versions of the stories as characters other than the Bodhisatta. No close
relationship between the jātakas at Bhārhut and the person of the Bodhisatta has been
demonstrated.
32 MN 115: Trenckner and Chalmers, Majjhima-nikāya, vol. 3, p. 65.
33 e.W. Burlingame (trans.), Buddhist Legends (3 vols, Cambridge, ma, 1921).

96 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
and Petavatthu, we find stories of the actions of both men and women that led to
their rebirth in heavenly mansions, or in the realm of the hungry ghosts.
These other collections of stories demonstrate that women were not excluded
from good actions, any more than men were excluded from bad. There is rarely
any change of gender between births, suggesting that this was not relevant to
spiritual progress. many women made offerings to past buddhas and resolved to
become prominent nuns or laywomen (not monks or laymen) in the retinue of
Gotama Buddha. it is clearly demonstrated that both men and women are able
to attain arahatship, and so there is no need to aspire to a change in gender.
Similarly, the Bodhisatta keeps his male-ness throughout his jātaka stories,
whether he is identified as human, god, or even animal. Rita Gross describes
this as seeing ‘more affinity between male humans and male animals than
between female and male human beings’ and thus considers it to demonstrate
‘an extreme of androcentric consciousness in which, more than is usually the
case even for androcentrism, women are seen as outside the norm, as a foreign
object but not a human subject’.34 Seeing the JA in relation to other collections
of rebirth narratives suggests an alternative position, however: it is possible that
the jātakas of the JA originally reflected the soteriological equality that assumes
a fixed gender.
as i demonstrated in previous chapters, jātakas acquired their associations
with the bodhisatta path after the compilation of the early JA. Thus it was after this
text had been composed that the stories became viewed as demonstrating the
bodhisatta path from an initial vow that made rebirth as a female impossible to a
buddhahood that excludes women. in other words, the fact that the Bodhisatta
always happens to be male in his jātaka stories is simply because he is male in
his final birth. after the association of the stories with the bodhisatta path, his
consistently male character influenced the idea that a bodhisatta must be male.
a few stories in the JA and elsewhere demonstrate the idea that being
a woman is the result of bad actions in previous births. For example, in the
Mahānāradakassapa-jātaka ( JA 544) a woman who teaches the king about kamma
reveals her own previous births. as a consequence of one life where she was a
man who went after other men’s wives, she was fated to suffer in a hell realm,
followed by birth as a castrated goat, a monkey whose father bit off his testicles,
a castrated ox, and a hermaphrodite. This action also explains why she is stuck
in female form for the next six births, though we discover at the end of the
jātaka that she eventually becomes Ānanda, the Buddha’s (male) cousin and chief
attendant.35 The ability of humans to be reborn as either (or neither) sex is here
found hand-in-hand with the idea that rebirth as a woman is bad.
34 Rita m. Gross, Buddhism After Patriarchy: A Feminist History, Analysis, and Reconstruction
of Buddhism (albany, 1993), p. 43.
35 in the Therīgāthā the elder nun isidāsī relates a similar set of events and rebirths,
culminating in her final life, where she was rejected by several husbands before

Jātakas and Buddhology 97
in the early sources rebirth as a woman is seen as bad because of the suffering
inherent in a woman’s life, rather than because of the idea that women are less
capable of spiritual development. Such ideas are clearly linked, however, for
according to a simplistic view of kamma the reason for the suffering of a woman
is her spiritual and ethical immaturity in a previous birth. This idea is present
in Buddhist countries today: surveys conducted amongst Sri lankan women by
Huston, as well as Seneviratne and Currie, showed that many Buddhist women
believed their sex was decided by previous actions and that this explains the
extra suffering endured by women, for example during childbirth.36 Kabilsingh
records similar sentiments amongst Thai women, noting that this naturally
benefits the monks, who receive many gifts from women hoping to make merit
and attain a male rebirth.37 it is easy to see how the clearly evident fact of the
suffering endured by women in society can lead to the view that women are
spiritually less able than men. as well as being obstacles on the path of men, they
are then denied a path of their own until they become men.
like Buddhist texts in general, the JA contains a multitude of opinions on
women. Whilst some stories demonstrate ascetic misogyny (often at the expense
of Buddhist values), more positive characterisations of women tend to only show
them supporting the men. Such attitudes can be explained to a certain extent
by the context in which the text emerged: some stories are clearly aimed at
preserving celibacy amongst monks, and they were all no doubt compiled and
preserved in a monastic context. However, the association of the genre with the
bodhisatta-path has legitimated these arguably incidental attitudes, as well as
excluding women from certain attainments. What probably began as the result
of the perceived irrelevance of gender eventually supported the idea that a
bodhisatta must be male. This in turn contributed to the notion that a female
birth is not only unfortunate, but also restrictive, and that a woman’s role is
therefore to support the spiritual quest of her male family members and the
monks whilst aspiring to a male rebirth. That the popular literature, especially
the JA, participated in this debate about women’s nature and abilities is clear.
This is one example of the way in which the gradual association of jātaka stories
with the bodhisatta path has both affected and been affected by attitudes towards
the nature of this path.
renouncing and attaining arahatship (C.a.F. Rhys-Davids and K.R. Norman (trans.), Poems
of Early Buddhist Nuns (oxford, 1989), verses 400–447).
36 Perdita Huston, Third World Women Speak Out: Interviews in Six Countries on Change,
Development, and Basic Needs (New York, 1979), pp. 48f.; Thalatha Seneviratne and Jan
Currie, ‘Religion and Feminism: a Consideration of Cultural Constraints on Sri lankan
Women’, in Darlene m. Juschka (ed.), Feminism in the Study of Religion: A Reader (london,
2001), pp. 198–220, p. 210ff.
37 Chatsumarn Kabilsingh, Thai Women in Buddhism (Berkeley, 1991), p. 31.

98 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
The Perfections
it is clear that jātaka materials, especially the Nidānakathā, have played a significant
role in establishing restrictions on who is able to make a successful aspiration
to buddhahood, and how they will progress. Jātakas have also contributed to
discussions about a central feature of the bodhisatta path – the pursuit of the
perfections, which are seen as an integral part of the practice of a bodhisatta.
in fact, the history of jātaka materials is closely related to the development of
doctrines surrounding the perfections. Therefore i will next examine what the
Nidānakathā has to say about the perfections, how the lists of perfections given
in this text relate to the Cariyāpiṭaka, and what Dhammapāla’s commentary on
the Cariyāpiṭaka adds in terms of ideas about the perfections’ chronology and
hierarchy in relation to jātaka stories.
immediately following the set of verses from the Nidānakathā that outline
the exclusions on the bodhisatta path, several examples of the cultivation of the
perfections are given. These examples are given in the form of references to
jātaka stories, mostly with supporting quotations from the Cariyāpiṭaka.38 For
example, in the discussion of dāna, the text mentions 10 jātaka stories in which
the Bodhisatta is said to have cultivated this perfection, and then provides a
quotation from the story of the hare. The set of examples ends with the following
statement: ‘This here is an abridgement; the meaning should be understood
from the detail of the Cariyāpiṭaka.’39 This implies a direct borrowing of all of the
stories from the Cariyāpiṭaka, yet the stories listed are not all found in that text.
This might imply that the version of the Cariyāpiṭaka familiar to the author of the
Nidānakathā was different from the text that has survived as such. Von Hinüber
suggests that the Nidānakathā may be referring to a Sri lankan Cariyāpiṭaka,
whereas the Cariyāpiṭaka which survives (and around which Dhammapāla wrote
his commentary) may be a South indian version.40
if there were – as von Hinüber suggests – two versions of the Cariyāpiṭaka,
perhaps the most interesting difference between them is that the stories quoted
in the Nidānakathā illustrate each of the 10 perfections, whereas in the Cariyāpiṭaka
that has survived only seven of the perfections are explicitly addressed. This has
led to suggestions that the Cariyāpiṭaka we have is incomplete. another possibility,
however, is that it represents an alternative list of perfections, one that predates
the standard list of 10. This would explain why a text that is internally coherent
so spectacularly fails to match up to the 10 perfections it is said to illustrate,
38 it is worth noting that the same list of perfections with quotations from the same
jātakas (but without the extra examples) is also found in the Buddhavaṃsa commentary,
where the references are also declared to be from the Cariyāpiṭaka (Madhuratthavilāsinī
commentary to the Buddhavaṃsa verses 76 and 77). like the Nidānakathā account, the text
refers readers to the Cariyāpiṭaka for the detail.
39 my trans. from Fausbøll, The Jātaka, vol. 1, p. 47.
40 oskar von Hinüber, A Handbook of Pāli Literature (Berlin, 1996), p. 64.

Jātakas and Buddhology 99
not only by lacking certain perfections but also by ordering those it has in a
different manner. as l.S. Cousins has suggested,41 the list exemplified by the
Cariyāpiṭaka may have been combined with the North indian list in order to form
the list of 10. We can see how this may have worked from Table 5.1, which shows
how both the mahāyāna list of six perfections and the Cariyāpiṭaka list of seven
relate to one another and to the list of 10 that later became the standard for the
Theravāda tradition.
Table 5.1 lists of perfections
Perfections associated Cariyāpiṭaka perfections Standard list
with mahāyāna (e.g. Nidānakathā)
dāna dāna dāna – generosity
śīla sīla sīla – morality
kṣanti (nekkhamma) nekkhamma – renunciation
vīrya paññā – wisdom
samādhi/dhyāna viriya – energy
prajñā khanti – forbearance
adhiṭṭhāna sacca – truth
sacca adhiṭṭhāna – determination
mettā mettā – loving kindness
upekkhā upekkhā – equanimity
as can be seen, the combination of the two lists is a neat explanation for the list
of 10 perfections. The latter incorporates all the perfections mentioned in the
Cariyāpiṭaka, as well as all those in the list of six.
The combining of the two shorter lists works particularly well if one accepts
two further proposals made by Cousins. First, Cousins argued that the Cariyāpiṭaka
may not actually contain stories that exemplify nekkhamma, and that those stories
41 i am grateful to l.S. Cousins for many fruitful discussions of this issue, and for
sharing with me the contents of his paper ‘Supreme Qualities: the Development of the
lists of Four, Six and Ten Pārami(tā)s’, which he presented at the 12th Conference of the
international association of Buddhist Studies, lausanne, 1999.

100 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
currently under such a heading actually fit better in the chapter on adhiṭṭhāna.
Second, he argued in favour of equating jhāna (Skt dhyāna) with nekkhamma. This
latter argument relies upon there being at least two conflicting etymologies
possible for nekkhamma: resignation/renunciation (related to Skt naiṣkramya) or
suppression of worldly desire (related to Skt naiṣkāmya). Cousins is convinced
that the latter meaning is in use in many Pāli texts, and that this brings the term
closer to jhāna as the practice of meditation which requires separation from
kāma, rather than the physical renunciation of the worldly life. This meaning
appears to be adopted by Dhammapāla in his commentary to the Cariyāpiṭaka, for
example he gives as the reasons why nekkhamma is stated after sīla in the list of
perfections: ‘because the accomplishment of sīla is achieved through nekkhamma;
in order to speak of good conduct of the mind after speaking of bodily and verbal
good conduct; because jhāna succeeds very easily for one who has purified his
sīla’.42 in many of the jātakas that address the issue of nekkhamma, it most often
involves both aspects – physically removing oneself to a secluded place and then
practising jhāna.
Cousins’ arguments suggest that the Cariyāpiṭaka very likely represents an
early list of perfections, before the list of 10 became prominent. if this is the case,
then the Cariyāpiṭaka represents an earlier tradition than the Nidānakathā, since
it demonstrates a list that was completely supplanted by the list of 10 found in
the latter text. The first reference to 10 perfections is in the Buddhavaṃsa, where
each of the 10 is presented in turn and the list of 30 is mentioned; this implies
that the Cariyāpiṭaka also predates the Buddhavaṃsa. The chronology of these
texts is supported by other evidence, which will be examined in Chapter 6.
in addition to highlighting some interesting questions regarding the
development of lists of perfections, the account in the Nidānakathā uses
the jātakas that illustrate perfections for an explicitly chronological focus. The
passage just examined is found towards the end of the Durenidāna (the first of the
three sections of the Nidānakathā) and followed only by the words:
Having fulfilled the perfections in this way, and having performed great
virtuous deeds that cause the great earth to shake, as is said in the Vessantara-
birth:
‘The earth, without intention and not knowing joy or sorrow,
even she shook seven times at the power of my generosity.’
when his life was concluded he passed away and was reborn in the Tusita
heaven. This – called the Dūrenidāna – should be understood as from the
[resolve at the] feet of Dīpaṅkara up to this rebirth in Tusita.43
42 Trans. from D.l. Barua (ed.), Achariya Dammapāla’s Paramatthadīpanī, being the
Commentary on the Cariyā-Piṭaka (london, 1939), p. 278.
43 my trans from Fausbøll, The Jataka, vol. 1, p. 47. The verse is quoted from
Cariyāpiṭaka 1.9.

Jātakas and Buddhology 101
This chronology explicitly places the cultivation of the perfections (as illustrated
in jātaka stories) between the bodhisatta vow and the penultimate birth in
Tusita heaven. in addition, it explicitly states that the birth as Vessantara was
when the perfections were completed, and formed the antepenultimate birth.
The 10 perfections are also situated explicitly between the first aspiration and
buddhahood by the Buddhavaṃsa: after Sumedha has received his prediction
from Dīpaṅkara Buddha, he examines the qualities required for buddhahood
(buddhadhammā, bodhipācanā) and talks in turn about each of the 10 perfections.44
This sense of there being a chronology (and even hierarchy) to the
perfections is expanded upon in a lengthy appendix (called the Pakiṇṇakakathā)
to the commentary on the Cariyāpiṭaka by Dhammapāla, which takes the form of
a treatise on the perfections.45 after answering what a pāramī is, why it is called
such, and how many there are, Dhammapāla proceeds to outline two alternative
explanations for their sequence. in the first, he states that their sequence of
teaching reflects the order in which they are undertaken:
Herein giving, being easy to practice and of great help to virtue, is said at
the beginning. Giving accompanied by virtue is greatly fruitful and of great
merit, so virtue is said to immediately follow giving. Virtue accompanied by
renunciation …46
The second is an explanation for the list having a certain order, rather than the
practice following a particular sequence:
another method – Giving is said first because: it is common to all beings, and
there is giving even amongst the common people; it has the smallest fruit; and
it is the easiest. Virtue is said immediately after giving: because donor and
recipient are purified by virtue; in order to speak of eliminating the suffering
of others [through virtue] after speaking of the benefit to others [of giving];
in order to speak of a quality of abstinence after speaking of an active quality;
in order to speak of the cause of the attainment of [positive] rebirth after
speaking of the cause of the attainment of wealth. Renunciation is said directly
after virtue because …47
44 Chapter 2, verses 116–66: Jayawickrama, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka, pp. 16–20.
45 The treatise draws on the Buddhavaṃsa and JA, amongst other Theravāda texts,
and also upon the mahāyāna Bodhisattvabhūmi (the sixteenth section of the yogācārabhūmi
Śāstra, an encyclopedic work of the Yogācāra school from around the fifth century
attributed to asaṅga or maitreyanātha) and although the work remains consistently
Theravāda in tone and content, it takes the doctrine of the perfections to a new level
within the Theravāda scholastic tradition. This treatise is also found in an abridged form
in the ṭīkā to the Brahmajala Sutta.
46 Trans. from Barua, Paramatthadīpanī, p. 278.
47 Trans. from Barua, Paramatthadīpanī, p. 278.

102 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
each perfection is thus carefully linked to the next in the sequence. Whilst the
first sequence is explicitly chronological, the latter is not, and indeed there is a
sense that all the perfections feed into one another in complex ways. Thus their
chronology may not be quite as simple as the Buddhavaṃsa suggests.
Somewhat later in Dhammapāla’s treatise we find the list expanded into
30 perfections: 10 (ordinary) perfections ( pāramī), 10 intermediate perfections
(upapāramī), and 10 supreme perfections ( paramatthapāramī).48 after setting out
the various views about how these three sets of perfections fit into the bodhisatta’s
career, Dhammapāla gives us a definition for each:
The perfection of giving is said to be the relinquishing of wealth, wife, children,
and so on; the intermediate perfection of giving is the relinquishing of limbs;
and the supreme perfection of giving is the relinquishing of one’s own life.
Therefore the three perfections of virtue are not transgressing on account
of the threefold children, wife etc; the three perfections of renunciation are
the renunciation of those three fields having cut off attachment to them; the
three perfections of wisdom are acting with discrimination between what is
beneficial and harmful for beings, having abolished the craving for belongings,
limbs and life. The three perfections of energy are endeavouring to relinquish
and so on the aforementioned things; the three perfections of forbearance are
tolerance of those who obstruct belongings, limbs and life; the three perfections
of truth are the non-relinquishing of truth on account of belongings, limbs
and life; the three perfections of determination are steadfast determination
even at the loss of belongings etc, for the perfections of giving and so on
succeed through unshakeable determination; the three perfections of loving
kindness are not relinquishing loving kindness towards beings even when they
injure belongings, limbs and life; the three perfections of equanimity are the
acquisition of impartiality towards beings and formations whether of benefit
or injury in regard to the three aforementioned fields.49
Thus all the perfections are based around what are elsewhere called the five
great sacrifices ( pañca-mahāpariccāga) – of wealth, wife, children, limbs and life.
Such a division – here further defined as three types – fits well with a description
of dāna, but seems slightly awkward in regard to the other perfections. Here
giving is seen as both the root of, and in this sense the most important of, all the
perfections.
Demonstrating that dāna is the most important perfection in this way might
be seen as fitting the tradition that identifies Vessantara as the antepenultimate
birth of the Buddha, and his acts of generosity as the complete fulfilment of
48 The division into three lots of 10 must predate the Buddhavaṃsa as it is mentioned
– but not explained – when Sāriputta requests the teaching from the Buddha.
49 Trans. from Barua, Paramatthadīpanī, p. 321, with some readings preferred from
VRi edition.

Jātakas and Buddhology 103
the perfections. However, as Vessantara the Bodhisatta only gives according to
the ordinary pāramī, in contrast to several jātakas where he offers his life and
limbs. The Cariyāpiṭaka’s chapter on dāna begins with seven stories of offerings
of wealth, followed by the stories of King Sivi’s gift of eyes, Vessantara’s gift
of children then wife, and (finally) the hare’s self-sacrifice. in other words, the
order supported by the Cariyāpiṭaka (if indeed it is a deliberate order) is wealth,
limbs, children, wife, then life. This suggests that the order in which these five
gifts were placed was somewhat flexible. it is possible that Dhammapāla’s treatise
was influenced by jātaka stories preserved in other indian schools, where stories
of the Bodhisatta’s bodily self-sacrifice seem to be more popular as illustrations
of the Bodhisatta’s ultimate perfection of dāna.
as discussed in the previous chapter, the association between the final jātakas
of the JA and the perfections was initiated by the Nidānakathā but developed
further as the text spread through Southeast asia. it is therefore possible to see the
layers of development: first, through the influence of the early JA, jātakas become
seen as demonstrating the Bodhisatta on his path, and he is therefore seen as
illustrating certain key qualities required for buddhahood. Consequently stories
are explicitly retold in the Cariyāpiṭaka to illustrate a list of such key qualities.
after the lists of qualities are standardised (by the time of the Buddhavaṃsa), the
10 are associated with the final 10 jātakas of the JA (the Mahānipāta), which then
circulate separately as a way of both glorifying the Buddha and exemplifying the
qualities which Buddhists should follow. The development in understandings of
the perfections is intertwined with developments in the jātaka and related texts.
The jātakas are thus key to understanding developments in the notion of the
pāramīs, and vice versa.
Real Theravādin Bodhisattas
That the bodhisatta path – complete with aspiration, exclusions and perfections
– was well defined in Theravāda scriptures and commentaries is now clear. This
path is presented as an account specific to the future Gotama Buddha and other
named buddhas, but it opens up the possibility of there being bodhisattas in the
present who are destined to be buddhas of the future. Thus the textual discussions
of the bodhisatta path allow that any Buddhist can aspire to follow this path.
The evidence examined here demonstrates the presence in the scriptures of the
concept of the bodhisatta path, albeit not in such a well-developed form as in
mahāyāna texts; evidence from chronicles, inscriptions and scribal colophons
demonstrates that such a path has been genuinely aspired to by Theravāda
Buddhists.
Jeffrey Samuels has done much to draw attention to the presence of a
bodhisatta ideal in Theravāda.50 He notes a strong association between the notions
of kingship and bodhisattahood, and ascribes this in part to the Vessantara-jātaka
50 Samuels, ‘The Bodhisattva ideal’.

104 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
and its portrayal of perfect kingship and perfect bodhisattahood. The Bodhisatta
is commonly identified as a king in his jātaka stories, often a cakkavattin. Whilst
some stories (such as the Temiya-jātaka) advocate renunciation and speak of
the dangers of kingship, more show the Bodhisatta attaining kingship, which
forms a suitable happy ending. Commonly the Bodhisatta makes a good king,
providing for his subjects, giving alms, and protecting his kingdom from harm.
it is hardly surprising, therefore, that in Theravāda kingdoms several kings
were identified as bodhisattas, or identified themselves as such. Such references
range from the implicit and probably retroactive references in the Mahāvaṃsa
to Duṭṭhagāmaṇī’s compassionate resolve to become king of Sri lanka and unite
it in peace, to explicit self-identifications as bodhisattas in inscriptions from Sri
lanka, Burma and Thailand from the eighth century onwards.51
The bodhisatta ideal was also associated with highly achieving monks. For
example, the Cūḷavaṃsa records that the eminent monk Buddhaghosa, who
composed numerous commentaries on Pāli canonical works in the fifth century,
was compared by monks at the anurādhapura monastery to the future buddha
metteyya.52 Samuels also records the story of a twentieth-century Sri lankan
monk who claimed to have taken the bodhisatta vow.53
Further evidence to suggest that real Theravādins aspired to become buddhas
is found in the scribal colophons printed at the end of Fausbøll’s edition of the JA.
The first scribal colophon states, for example:
By this meritorious action, from here in my next birth,
having been reborn in the beautiful city of Tusita, abode of the gods;
Hearing the dhamma-teaching of world-protector metteyya,
and enjoying the great splendour with him for a long time;
When the Great Being – the Buddha – is born in the beautiful city of Ketumati,
conceived with the three [skilful] roots and born into a brahmin family;
Having given a robe and alms food – priceless, abundant and splendid –
and a dwelling and remedies to that great sage;
Having gone forth into the teaching, perfectly knowing and explaining the
unsurpassed three Piṭakas, being mindful and having supernormal powers;
in the future it will be predicted by him: ‘This person will become a buddha.’
Having given alms to buddhas each as they arise, they will also [predict] this.54
moving through saṃsāra like a wish-fulfilling tree,
with mind set on giving food and so on to beings as wished for;
Having fulfilled all the perfections – good conduct, renunciation, wisdom and so on,
having attained the peak of the perfection, having become unsurpassed buddha;
51 Samuels, ‘The Bodhisattva ideal’, pp. 404–6.
52 Samuels, ‘The Bodhisattva ideal’, p. 406.
53 Samuels, ‘The Bodhisattva ideal’, p. 406.
54 in other words, metteyya will be the first to predict him to buddhahood, but each
subsequent buddha will confirm this, as in the case of Gotama Buddha.

Jātakas and Buddhology 105
Having taught the sweet dhamma that brings happiness to the people,
having released the whole vast world, including the gods, from the bondage of
saṃsāra, may i attain the happy, splendid, serene place.55
it is clear that this copyist has a desire to emulate the biography he has just been
involved in preserving. even more explicit is the sixth scribe:
By this meritorious action, until i become a buddha,
by giving like Vessantara, owning like Jotiseṭṭhi,
knowing like mahosadha, may i be (thus) in birth after birth.
my wish and desire must surely take effect quickly;
the intentions and thoughts must come to fullness,
just like the moon on the fifteenth day.56
These aspirations may seem to be directly related to the JA, yet in fact such
aspirations are common on other Pāli texts copied in Sri lanka; even the
aspiration to be like Vessantara, Jotiseṭṭhi and mahosadha is found elsewhere.57
Such scribes, kings and eminent monks are hardly the norm, but rather are
exceptional human beings. it is important not to suggest that all or even most
Theravāda Buddhists resolved to become buddhas: the bodhisatta path is said
to be for exceptional people only. However, the principle that the Bodhisatta’s
example should be followed is presented in the jātaka stories, when they are
presented as illustrative of the bodhisatta path. Having established that the
bodhisatta path is part of the ideology of Theravāda jātaka and related texts, and
that Theravāda Buddhists seem to have taken the path seriously, it is now worth
examining to what extent this path differs from the main path in Theravāda
– the path to arahatship.
55 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jataka, vol. 6, p. 594.
56 Trans. from Fausbøll, The Jataka, vol. 6, p. 596. The references are to the Bodhisatta’s
role in the Vessantara-jātaka ( JA 547) and the Mahā-ummagga-jātaka ( JA 546), and to the
story of Jotika found in the Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā. The latter reference is somewhat
anomalous since Jotika is not identified as a bodhisatta, indeed he becomes a monk and
attains arahatship in the time of Gotama Buddha, causing his legendary inexaustible
wealth to spontaneously vanish. See G.P. malalasekera, Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names (3
vols, oxford, 1997), vol. 2, p. 968ff.
57 an almost identical verse is recorded at the end of a Sri lankan manuscript of
the Dhammapada held in the John Rylands library in manchester (N.a. Jayawickrama, Pali
Manuscripts in the John Rylands University Library of Manchester (manchester, 1972), no. 19).
Declarations that the merit attained from copying the manuscript might help the scribe
meet metteyya are common.

106 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
THe PaTH aND THe Goal
in mahāyāna polemics against ‘Hīnayāna’ Buddhism, the latter is accused of
knowing nothing about the stages on the path to buddhahood, the vow, or the
perfections. as is now clear, this accusation is unfounded. However, there is still
a significant development in mahāyāna Buddhism, for the goal of becoming a
bodhisatt(v)a becomes the focus of mahāyāna, whilst being reserved for only a
select few in the Theravāda tradition. This difference in application of course
later prompted developments in doctrine and practice in mahāyāna schools,
whilst the mainstream ideal of Theravāda Buddhism remained arahatship, the
very goal that is the object of mahāyāna accusations of selfishness and simple-
mindedness. However, during the period in which the bodhisatta ideal emerged
in Theravāda, the arahat ideal also underwent some changes that make the two
ideals converge a little. Though the bodhisatta ideal never gained a prominent
position in the Theravāda tradition, its influence on wider discussions about the
various paths and practices available to Theravāda Buddhists is significant.
The mainstream ideal of Theravāda Buddhism has always been arahatship,
yet this idea has undergone various changes. Bond argues that during the early
development of what became Theravāda Buddhism, the arahat ideal ‘developed
from an ideal readily attainable in this life … into an ideal considered remote
and impossible to achieve in one or even many lifetimes’.58 Bond’s evidence
lies in a close examination of the texts, the earliest of which narrate stories of
ordinary people becoming arahats easily and instantly, particularly after hearing
the Buddha speak the dhamma. later, arahatship became a more distant goal,
requiring specified actions on an increasingly well-defined path. Such a path
is laid out in a number of the early suttas, which focus upon renunciation of
the household life and the cultivation of certain qualities. although the gulf
between the putthujjana (‘ordinary person’) and the arahat is highlighted here,
at this stage it was still seen as at least theoretically possible to reach arahatship
in the same life, even if in practice this was not portrayed as likely. The third
stage identified by Bond makes it clear that arahats are few and the path is long,
requiring many births. as the goal became more distant, the path needed to
be more thoroughly set out, thus at this point the doctrines of the four paths/
fruitions and four noble persons (stream-enterer, once-returner, non-returner
and arahat) became codified. Commentarial literature expanded these and other
divisions of the path, and also provided stories of how the arahats of the Buddha’s
time had begun their practices in previous lives: ‘For the commentators, the path
had become central and arahantship a remote but controlling ideal.’59
58 George D. Bond, ‘The Development and elaboration of the arahant ideal in the
Theravada Buddhist Tradition’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 52/2 (1984):
227–42, p. 228.
59 Bond, ‘Development and elaboration’, p. 234.

Jātakas and Buddhology 107
The lengthening and codification of the path to arahatship took place over
the same period as the codification and opening up of the bodhisatta path:
changes in both can be seen by comparing the early canonical, late canonical
and commentarial expositions. as two alternative paths to nibbāna, it is notable
that neither is an instant fix; rather, both involve a long and very similar set
of practices and improvements. it is possible that the focus upon the paths
(rather than the distant goals) influenced the increased association between the
jātaka genre and the Buddhist path(s), and contributed to the view that such
stories provided examples of how to be a good Buddhist. as parallel paths, the
distinction between them is blurred, and thus the jātakas can be relevant to
both aspiring bodhisattas and those wishing to attain arahatship, since both can
practise the perfections (albeit to different levels60) and follow both the teaching
and example of the buddhas and bodhisattas.
although the distinction between a buddha and arahat was early considered
to be that a buddha required no teachers, it is not the case that a bodhisatta
therefore has no teachers, and this further blurs the boundaries between the
two paths. in a distinction first found applied to bodhisattas in the Cariyāpiṭaka
commentary, three types of bodhisatta are identified: (1) ‘one who understands
a brief instruction’ (ugghaṭitaññū) who is strong in wisdom and takes 100,000
eons and four incalculables to attain buddhahood; (2) ‘one who understands an
expanded instruction’ (vipañcitaññū) who is strong in faith and takes 100,000
eons and eight incalculables to attain buddhahood; (3) ‘one who is to be guided’
(neyya) who is strong in energy and takes 100,000 eons and 16 incalculables to
attain buddhahood.61 all three categories of bodhisatta presuppose that they are
at some point receiving teachings, and indeed the categories were originally
applied more generally to all persons. Whether bodhisatta or aspiring-arahat, the
path takes many lifetimes, depending upon both capabilities and effort.
as endo observes, there is a tension in early Theravāda Buddhism between
wanting to portray the Buddha as the same as his disciples (and buddhahood
and arahatship as essentially the same awakening), and the desire to glorify
60 although the perfections are strongly associated with the practice of bodhisattas,
the division into basic, intermediate and ultimate perfections, as well as the thorough
explication of their practice by Dhammapāla, make implicit the idea that other Buddhists
can practice them too. in some canonical sources the term ‘pāramippatta’ is used in relation
to the senior sāvakas, implying that the path to sāvaka-bodhi also involves perfections
(see for example MN 77 Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta. i am grateful to l.S. Cousins for providing
references for the occurences of this term).
61 Peter Skilling, ‘Three Types of Bodhisatta in Theravādin Tradition: a
Bibliographical excursion’, in Buddhist and Indian Studies in Honour of Professor Sodo Mori
(Hamamatsu, Japan, 2003), pp. 91–102. The detail comes from later (fourteenth- and
fifteenth-century) texts, though the distinction as applied to persons generally is found
in canonical and early commentarial sources, and is first applied to bodhisattas in the
Cariyāpiṭaka commentary.

108 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
the Buddha.62 extending the Bodhisatta’s path, setting out the requirements
of aspiration, prediction and perfections, and interweaving his path with that
of other buddhas, might be seen as a result of the latter tendency. endo argues
that this led to more emphasis being placed on the path to arahatship, as the
‘alternative and easier way to emancipation’.63 This might seem to argue for the
divergence of the two paths, rather than their convergence, for the lengthening
the bodhisatta path makes the Buddha and buddhahood seem greater and
therefore more distant. However, every path has two ends. at one end of the
bodhisatta path we have the glory of buddhahood, but there is still the nearer
end of the path, which is more accessible the further away it is from its glorious
destination. Rather than diverging, it would seem that both paths – to buddhahood
and arahatship – underwent similar extensions and clarifications over the same
period of time. The lengthening and codification of the paths has two effects: it
makes the glory of the Buddha and arahats greater whilst simultaneously making
the path more accessible. With the two paths looking ever more similar and ever
more long, everybody can have a place somewhere upon them.
CoNClUSioN
These developments – in past and future buddhas, the bodhisatta path and
associated perfections, and the lengthening of the path to arahatship – happened
alongside the developments in the jātaka genre examined in the previous
chapters. it seems likely, therefore, that the need for jātakas to be illustrative
of the Buddhist path(s) increased as the arahat ideal changed and the bodhisatta
ideal rose in prominence and accessibility. Jātakas became a way of showing just
how difficult and lengthy the path to awakening is, but also a source of practical
advice to those on all stages of all paths. Jātakas thus became a form of exemplary
and didactic biography; the example being set by the Bodhisatta but in the form
of teachings by the Buddha to those aspiring to any form of Buddhist progress.
The development of this twofold biographical association is closely linked to
other biographical texts such as the Buddhavaṃsa. The position of jātakas in
relation to other biographical texts, the rising popularity of biography within
the first few centuries of Buddhism, and the benefits of being a biographical
form of narrative, will be the focus of the next chapter.
62 endo, Buddha, pp. 223–4.
63 endo, Buddha, p. 241.

Chapter 6
Jātakas and Biography
more than any other form of religious narrative, perhaps, biography is a genre
that addresses both ‘doctrinal’ and ‘popular’ needs, as well as providing a
historical legitimation for a tradition or set of traditions. in the case of Theravāda
Buddhism, Woodward goes so far as to talk of a ‘biographical imperative’.1 as
Woodward points out, all of the Theravāda scriptures are framed by biographical
narrative: suttas hark back to Ānanda (and through him to the Buddha) through
the formula evaṃ me sutaṃ, ‘thus have i heard’, and vinaya passages contain
more explicit biography, both as background and as narrative explanations
for particular rules. Buddhaghosa and other commentators used extensive
biographical narrative in their works, and the former justified the buddhavacana
status of the Abhidhamma texts with reference to biographical materials.2 Thus
every aspect of Theravāda Buddhism – history, doctrine, philosophy, cosmology
– is interwoven with biography. Therefore biographical texts – which include
some jātaka texts – may be studied as rich sources for aiding our understanding
of the religious tradition.
as has already become clear, jātakas acquired an important role in the
biographical frame of Buddhism, and the biographical frame acquired an
important role in the jātaka genre, although the degree to which jātakas have
been viewed as ‘biographical’ has changed over time. i have spoken already
about the Bodhisatta’s perfections and imperfections, and the role of jātakas in
setting out the bodhisatta path. in this chapter i will examine how jātakas bind
together the notions of biography and autobiography, of Buddha, Bodhisatta
and Buddhists. i will begin by discussing the place of jātaka materials in relation
to the late canonical texts that preserve a biographical inclination, namely
the Buddhavaṃsa, Cariyāpiṭaka and Apadāna. Next will be an examination of the
historical setting for the apparent rise in biographical emphasis, in particular
the role of pilgrimage as popularised by asoka. The chapter will conclude with
a look at the special qualities biography has that make it both legitimating
and transformative, and how these characteristics of biography map onto the
jātaka genre.
1 mark R. Woodward, ‘The Biographical imperative in Theravāda Buddhism’ in
Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia
(Honolulu, 1997), pp. 40–63.
2 Woodward, ‘The Biographical imperative’, pp. 43–9.

110 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
THe BioGRaPHiCal WeB
in Chapter 1 i began to examine the distinction between different genres of
Buddhist narrative, in particular jātaka and apadāna. although a definitive
distinction is elusive, the comparison is instructive, since only by saying what
jātakas are not, can we say what they are. Since apadānas were seen as a separate
genre at least by the close of the Khuddaka Nikāya, it is likely that jātakas were
by that time defined in relation to (and as distinct from) apadānas. it is therefore
impossible to examine the jātaka genre without also examining apadāna materials
and related texts. Since my focus is biography, it will also be instructive to look at
the wider field of biographical genres in early Buddhism.
When talking about genre, i do not wish to invoke or create a final or
exclusive definition. it should be clear by now that the jātaka genre developed
over time and in relation to other genres, and should not be viewed as static or
isolated. We might bear in mind the words of genre theorist alastair Fowler: ‘it
is neither possible nor even desirable to arrive at a very high degree of precision
in using generic terms. The overlapping and mutability of genres means that an
“imprecise” terminology is more efficient.’3 Fowler notes that genres are by nature
mutable, since every new work composed within a genre alters its character.
as a consequence ‘[g]enres are better understood … through a study of their
mutual relations … These relations are partly diachronic or dynamic (formation,
combination, mixture), partly static (similarities, contrasts)’.4 This view of genre
mutability is very relevant to the jātaka genre, which has been altered by every
text composed within it. However, whilst Fowler’s words are instructive, we
must be aware of the dangers inherent in applying Western generic terms to
a Buddhist context. life-writing might be seen as a particularly difficult area,
since Buddhist conceptions of ‘self’ are very different from the one essential soul
embodied from birth to death that tends to pervade Western understandings
and biographies. With these cautions in mind, however, it will still be instructive
to talk of genre in relation to jātaka, apadāna and biography, as there is a need to
examine how the texts situated themselves in the literary context. after all, the
lists of textual types found in early canonical texts demonstrate that the early
Buddhist community had ideas about genres that developed alongside the texts.
Three late-canonical texts – the Cariyāpiṭaka, Buddhavaṃsa and Apadāna
– form a useful group for reflecting on the nature of Buddhist biography during
the last phases of the Theravāda scriptures, after the Jātakapāli and its early
commentary had made its mark. i examined the Cariyāpiṭaka in some detail in
earlier chapters in relation to the JA, since both are collections of jātaka stories.
However, there is also good reason to group this text with the Buddhavaṃsa and
Apadāna. First, these three texts are considered to be some of the latest additions
3 alastair Fowler, Kinds of Literature: An Introduction to the Theory of Genres and Modes
(oxford, 1982), p. 130.
4 Fowler, Kinds of Literature, p. 255.

Jātakas and Biography 111
to the Theravāda scriptures. Furthermore, all three texts participate in the rising
interest in the biographies of enlightened beings and discourses on the nature
of enlightenment and the path to it. as a collection of jātakas exemplifying the
perfections acquired by the Bodhisatta, the stories of the Cariyāpiṭaka are in a
sense also apadānas, according to the definition suggested in Chapter 1; indeed
the colophon to the text calls it the Buddhāpadāniyaṃ. Such a term might also be
applied to the actions of the Bodhisatta in the Buddhavaṃsa, where he makes his
resolve to become a buddha at the feet of 24 past buddhas. all three texts narrate
some of the karmicly significant actions that lead a being towards the final goal
of nibbāna. The acts described are in some way typological and exemplary: they
are about buddhahood, not the Buddha, and arahatship, not arahats. Yet they are
also part of a personal biographical corpus.
The introductory passages of the Buddhavaṃsa also imply that it should be
treated in a pair with the Cariyāpiṭaka, for when Sāriputta requests that the
Buddha relate the text he asks:
‘Great hero, best of men, of what kind was your resolve?
at what time did you – wise one – wish for supreme awakening?
of what kind was your giving, moral conduct, renunciation, wisdom and energy?
of what kind was your forbearance, truth, resolve, loving kindness and equanimity?
leader of the world, wise one, of what kind were your ten perfections?
How were the higher perfections fulfilled? How the ultimate perfections?’
asked by him, he with voice as sweet as a karāvika bird gave an answer,
cleansing the heart and gladdening the world with its gods.5
The teaching that is the play of the victors who were buddhas in the past,
that is connected with the lineage of the buddhas,
through the understanding of his former abodes,
he explained for the benefit of the world with its gods.6
Thus Sāriputta’s request is for the life story of the Buddha, from his resolve
through the long path of acquiring perfections. only part of this is found in the
Buddhavaṃsa; the elucidation of the perfections might be seen as contained in
the Cariyāpiṭaka, and this association is confirmed in the commentary. indeed
the Buddhavaṃsa commentary here inserts quotations from the Cariyāpiṭaka in
illustration of the perfections.7
5 The text contains only sadevakaṃ but the commentary states that this means ‘the
world with the devas’.
6 Trans. from N.a. Jayawickrama (ed.), Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka (london, 1974),
pp. 6–7, verses 75–9.
7 a note of caution: as discussed above, the Cariyāpiṭaka does not in fact address the
10 perfections, but only seven of them, and probably predates the classification into three
sets of 10 perfections mentioned in the Buddhavaṃsa (for the first time in the scriptures).

112 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
in contrast to the other two texts here under examination, the Apadāna
focuses primarily persons other than the Buddha.8 The text demonstrates
the karmic results of actions from the perspective of those who have most
benefited, in other words awakened beings of the three types (sammā-sambuddha,
paccekabuddha, arahat). it is devided into four parts: (1) Buddhāpadāna relates the
Bodhisatta’s visualisation of a great offering to all the buddhas and disciples of
different eras; (2) Paccekabuddhāpadāna contains verses attributed to the Buddha
describing the merits of paccekabuddhas; (3) Therāpadāna relates around 550
stories by elder monks (who are implicitly arahats), about their previous deeds
and present results of these deeds; (4) Therī-apadāna relates 40 similar stories
by elder nuns. although most of the apadānas are indeed glorious deeds with
positive results, the presence of some tales of bad kamma influenced mellick’s
etymology of the term apadāna, as discussed in Chapter 1. mellick notes that the
sections about the Buddha and paccekabuddhas are likely to have been added in a
deliberate attempt to match the threefold ideal, since they have a very different
style and sit rather uneasily in the collection.9
as was noted in Chapter 2, the Therāpadāna contains a section, the
Pubbakammapiloti-apadāna, which relates the bad deeds committed by the
Bodhisatta that led to much suffering in hell, and eventually to the slight
discomforts experienced by Gotama in his final life. These stories are therefore
jātakas as well as apadānas. The real bulk of the text, however, consists of
biographies of the monks and nuns that made up the first Buddhist community.
The Apadāna thus demonstrates a rise in biography of the Buddha’s close
followers as a legitimate genre in itself, rather than as incorporated in the
Buddha’s own jātaka stories, which also contain many stories about members of
his early community. The arahats whose tales are told in the Apadāna provide a
model for Buddhists, in terms of both their final lives and their previous deeds.
Such a presentation of the previous deeds of the great followers of the Buddha
demonstrates the merit of devotion, and thus sets out a path for people lucky
enough to live in the time of a buddha or his teaching.
in many cases the stories contained in the Apadāna involve an encounter
with a past buddha, and in most the main character performs a pious act such as
the giving of a gift, makes an aspiration, and receives a prediction. after many
intervening births this prediction comes true when the character in question
becomes an arahat, and maybe also achieves a particular position within the
early Buddhist community. in the commentary to the Apadāna we find that the
paths to the different types of bodhi require aspirations like the one made by the
The link i am making here is conceptual and relates to genre; i am not trying to suggest
that the two texts were authored at the same time or by the same people.
8 For a partial edition and translation, including the Buddhāpadāna and the
Pubbakammapiloti-apadāna see Sally mellick, A Critical Edition, with Translation, of Selected
Portions of the Pāli Apadāna (oxford University D.Phil. Thesis, 1993).
9 mellick, Critical Edition, p. 22ff.

Jātakas and Biography 113
Bodhisatta at the feet of Dīpaṅkara Buddha. endo notes that ‘paccekabuddhas
are required to satisfy only five conditions for abhinīhāra as against eight for
a Bodhisatta aspirant: viz., (1) a human; (2) a male; (3) being able to see an
enlightened one (Buddha, paccekabuddha, or arahant); (4) ready to sacrifice
one’s life for a Buddha; and (5) having a firm resolve. Disciples, on the other
hand, are required to satisfy only the last two conditions’.10 These requirements
deliberately strengthen the comparison between the three paths to bodhi, and
make explicit the relationship between the Apadāna and the stories of the
Bodhisatta’s long path told in the Buddhavaṃsa, Cariyāpiṭaka and JA.
Further intertwining of these texts is demonstrated by the fact that the
long path to the attainment of arahatship narrated in the Apadāna is only partly
directed by the actions of the disciples themselves. after making their aspirations
they must wait, through countless births (not all of them pleasant), for the time
when the Bodhisatta is ready to become Buddha, supporting him where they
can. This aspect of the stories is perhaps best exemplified in the yasodharā-
therī-apadāna, where Gotama’s former wife declares that she has supported his
quest for buddhahood right from the beginning, when she gave Sumedha (the
Bodhisatta) some flowers with which to make offerings to Dīpaṅkara Buddha.
She has renounced with him or been willingly given away in birth after birth to
help his pursuit of the perfections.11 The Bodhisatta’s path would not have been
possible, the Apadāna stories argue, without the support of a larger community
who eventually became the first Buddhist monks and nuns.
John Strong has noted that scholars tend to have what he calls an
‘individualistic bias’ in the study of sacred biography. Whilst this ‘may be
mitigated somewhat by the realisation that Buddhist (as indeed most indian)
sacred biographies do not properly begin and end with a single person’s lifetime
but incorporate a whole karmic history, including previous lives and future
existences as “other” beings’ he insists that ‘such longitudinal extensions of
individual biographies over many lifetimes run the risk of merely reinforcing
a sense of self, if they are not complemented by lateral expansions’.12 With the
addition of the Apadāna to the biographical corpus, the chief followers of Gotama
Buddha are shown to have biographies intimately connected to those of other
awakened beings. many – like the Bodhisatta – have interacted with past buddhas
and made aspirations that bind them to Gotama’s own destiny. We might say
that such apadānas demonstrate the formalisation of the lateral expansion of
the Buddha’s biography, which was begun in the jātakas of the JA. Such lateral
10 Toshiichi endo, Buddha in Theravada Buddhism: A Study in the Concept of Buddha in the
Pāli Commentaries (Dehiwela, 1997), p. 255.
11 For a full translation see mellick, A Critical Edition.
12 John S. Strong, ‘a Family Quest: The Buddha, Yaśodharā, and Rāhula in the
Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions
of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu, 1997), pp. 113–28, p. 114.

114 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
expansion complements the expansion back in time through the Buddhavaṃsa
and Cariyāpiṭaka, creating a complex web of biographical materials.
THe RiSe iN BioGRaPHY
The three texts i have just examined are evidently designed to fulfil the same
purpose: the provision of extensive biographical materials that form an example
for all Buddhists, glorify the particularly advanced beings who founded the
religion and formed its early community, and demonstrate in detail the actions
required for the achievement of the Buddhist goal(s). These texts are clearly
later than the Jātakapāli and whatever commentary was circulating with it in the
early period, and they show signs of having been influenced by the biographical
ideology of the JA (or its predecessor) examined in Chapter 3. They are also
influenced by the developments in buddhology and the codification of the
Buddhist path(s) examined in Chapter 5. it is now time to address the historicity
of this web of ideas and texts, and to ask how and why these developments
occurred when they did. answers to such questions are necessarily tentative,
since we cannot be certain of much in the early period, and must be cautious
when using traditional accounts of the early developments. However, this
study would be incomplete without an attempt to fix the developments i have
identified into a historical context.
We noted above that the Apadāna, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka are considered
to be amongst the latest additions to the Theravāda scriptures, and they were
indeed late enough to raise queries about their status as buddhavacana, leading
reputedly to their rejection by the Dīgha-bhāṇakas.13 Their dubious nature as
buddhavacana might well have been the reason why their compilers place the
accounts in a first-person narrative, in contrast to the more standard third-
person narratives of the JA. although such an account of these texts does help
to date them, we are still on unstable ground when trying to ascertain even the
date of the closing of the canon, if indeed there was such a concept of canon,
and if it was ever properly closed. if we accept traditional accounts that date the
writing (and therefore to some extent fixing) of the Theravāda scriptural corpus
to the first century bce, then we have a span of four centuries during which our
texts developed.
We have thus far treated the Apadāna, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka as
contemporaneous, but we can in fact place them in a relative chronology. Walters
argues that progress is from Cariyāpiṭaka to the Buddhavaṃsa to the Apadāna,
because progress is from Bodhisatta-biography, to the biography of many
buddhas, to the biography of other enlightened beings. He also notes that each
13 oskar von Hinüber, A Handbook of Pāli Literature (Berlin, 1996), pp. 42–3 provides a
good discussion of the contested contents of the Khuddaka Nikāya.

Jātakas and Biography 115
text in the sequence quotes verses from its predecessors.14 Von Hinüber notes
that the Apadāna ‘seems to be younger than the Buddhavaṃsa, but much older
than the commentaries’.15 The fact that the Buddhavaṃsa explicitly mentions the
10 perfections and implies that such a topic was covered by another discourse
by the Buddha, suggests that it is later than the Cariyāpiṭaka, which most likely
preserves an older list of perfections. We thus have several reasons for placing
these texts in such an order, and of course for placing the Jātakapāli and its early
commentary before the Cariyāpiṭaka. as a consequence, the textual history over
the four centuries following the death of the Buddha probably included the
development in turn of four separate texts, each of which developed the idea of
biography further.
This textual evidence is supported by archaeological and artistic evidence
for the developments in buddhology represented by the texts. in one of asoka’s
edicts (Niglīva, or Nigālisāgara, Pillar inscription) we hear of his repair and
enlargement of a stūpa for Koṇāgamana (here called Konakamana) Buddha,
demonstrating that past buddhas were known and deemed worthy of veneration
by the middle of the third century bce. The ancient monuments at Bhārhut and
Sāñcī have sets of seven trees, one for each of the group of seven buddhas, with
labels at the former making this link explicit.16 Thus, one assumes, the rise in
numbers of buddhas to 24 probably post-dates these earliest sites, but the concept
of past buddhas was current at the time of asoka. in addition to representations
of past buddhas, countless sites – including Bhārhut and Sāñcī – are illustrated
with jātaka stories.
it is clear that a crucial link in the history of jātakas and biography is the
reign of asoka, who united much of the indian subcontinent, sent out Buddhist
missions, and left behind a wealth of inscriptions. Several scholars have linked
developments in buddhology to the influence of asoka. Bareau, for example,
has argued that asoka’s reign ‘coincides with the zenith of the deified Buddha
Gautama’ and expansions of the buddha and bodhisatta ideals to include other
figures.17 Walters argues that the development of the extended biographies
in the Apadāna, Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka necessarily took place after the
unification of asoka’s empire, which prompted a universalisation of Buddhist
14 Jonathan S. Walters, ‘Stūpa, Story, and empire: Constructions of the Buddha
Biography in early Post-aśokan india’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the
Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu, 1997), pp. 160–192, p. 165.
15 Von Hinüber, Handbook, p. 61.
16 Richard F. Gombrich, ‘The Significance of Former Buddhas in the Theravādin
Tradition’ in Balasooriya et al. (eds), Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula (london,
1980), pp. 62–72, p. 67.
17 andré Bareau, ‘The Place of the Buddha Gautama in the Buddhist Religion during
the Reign of aśoka’ in Balasooriya et al. (eds), Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula
(london, 1980), pp. 1–9, p. 8.

116 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
doctrine and practice.18 asoka is credited with popularising pilgrimage to
key sites associated with the Buddha’s biography, and is legendarily said to
have established 84,000 stūpas containing relics of the Buddha. By so doing he
contributed greatly to the rising interest in Buddhist sacred biography.
Walters examines the link between pilgrimage sites and sacred biography
in the context of how the Cariyāpiṭaka, Buddhavaṃsa and Apadāna are linked to
the practices of building, decorating and using stūpa sites. i will have reason
to examine his arguments further in the next chapter in relation to the role
of jātakas at such sites, but his comments are more generally relevant here.
For Walters, stūpa cults are made meaningful not only by the inscriptions but
also by the three texts that map out an immensely complex biographical web
linked together by acts of devotion such as took place at the sites. Such acts of
devotion are recorded in the texts (particularly the Apadāna) and inscriptions,
and link the devotee/donor into the biographical web, the explication of which
culminated in the Apadāna and its portrayal of lateral karmic bonds. For Walters,
the Buddha’s biography ‘is indistinguishable from the biographies of all those
who were involved in the complex agencies that provided the context for his
(and their) actions throughout time’.19 Thus, he argues, ‘Apadāna is part of the
biography of a cosmic society still moving on together toward nirvāṇa: a universal
society whose members are the participants, past and present, in the stūpa
cult’.20 Walters tentatively dates the texts to shortly after the asokan period, and
argues that the rise in such literature is linked to the rise in devotional practices
associated with stūpa sites.
all the evidence points to the probable composition of the Cariyāpiṭaka,
Buddhavaṃa and Apadāna – in that order – during perhaps the second and first
centuries bce. The Jātakapāli and its early commentary must have been composed
somewhat earlier. The importance of biography in this period is linked to the
spread of Buddhism and the creation of a sacred landscape, as well as to the
developments in buddhology examined in the previous chapter. Biographical
narrative also brought with it certain possibilities unique to its generic
characteristics, which i will examine next.
WHY BioGRaPHY?
Having examined the historical and doctrinal circumstances that prompted and
accompanied the rise in biographical materials within early Buddhism, i wish now
to look at some of the reasons why biographical texts – and jātakas in particular
– may have been so popular and successful. To a certain extent my focus is now
moving away from historical matters towards the more timeless qualities that
18 Walters, ‘Stūpa, Story, and empire’.
19 Walters, ‘Stūpa, Story, and empire’, p. 176.
20 Walters, ‘Stūpa, Story, and empire’, p. 176.

Jātakas and Biography 117
jātakas embody, such as an ability to legitimate a wide variety of local and folk
stories, the transformative potential of being both teaching and example, and
the creative resolution of certain paradoxes about the nature of the Buddha. This
examination of the qualities of the jātaka genre will highlight further the reasons
for its popularity and development during the first four centuries of Buddhism.
Furthermore, it will form the basis for my examination of the role of the special
qualities of jātakas in Buddhist practice in the next chapter.
i noted above that the structure of the jātaka stories gives them a legitimate
place in the Buddhist scriptures, as both buddhavacana and Bodhisatta-biography.
Stories from diverse backgrounds and with diverse themes were raised up by the
generic setting as a jātaka, and even those stories with the most tenuous links
to Buddha and Bodhisatta were happily incorporated into a quasi-canonical
text. The identification of the Buddha as narrator and Bodhisatta as protagonist
is more powerful than mere naming of characters for legitimating purposes,
however. The interplay between Buddha and Bodhisatta allows the text to
address the wider Buddhist question of how one escapes from saṃsāra. it does
this by narrating both the painful and seemingly endless repetition of saṃsāra
and the end of time altogether for the narrator who has attained nibbāna.
as Steven Collins has suggested, a person’s life is like a story, and within
saṃsāra each life becomes a short story connected to other short stories.21 For
Buddhists the endless repetition is an unsatisfactory situation that can only
be ended by the attainment of nibbāna. The Buddha’s life, as related in the JA,
narrates both the short stories endlessly connected to one another (in each
jātaka), and the story that ends all these (in the frame narrative). The text
therefore incorporates both repetitive (or seemingly cyclical) time and non-
repetitive (or linear and progressive) time, in much the same way as Collins
demonstrates for the Buddhavaṃsa.22 The presence of the Buddha thus gives
more meaning to the actions of the Bodhisatta, for he represents the end-point
of the narrative – nibbāna. Collins argues that nibbāna is unnarratable because it
is timeless, and narrative can only deal with finite time. The way in which the
Pāli imaginaire deals with this is by using nibbāna as the full stop, the closure
marker in both systematic and narrative thought.23 This is clear in the case of
the JA, where nibbāna becomes an expression of the end of finite time for one
person, within which the individual jātakas relate small pockets of seemingly
inescapable repetition.
21 See, for example, Steven Collins, Nirvana: Concept, Imagery, Narrative (Cambridge,
2010), pp. 22, 27.
22 Steven Collins, Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire
(Cambridge, 1998), and Nirvana: Concept, Imagery, Narrative, chapter 5.
23 He notes (Collins, Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities, p. 282): ‘inexpressible,
timeless nirvana is a moment in the Buddhist textualization of time, the explicit or
implicit closure-marker in its discourse of felicity. it is the motionless and ungraspable
horizon, the limit-condition which makes of the Pali imaginaire a coherent whole.’

118 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
By being placed in the shadow of nibbāna, the individual jātaka stories are free
to address worldly issues, to comment on kamma and narrate the transmigration
of a person through many lives, with all their ups and downs and encounters
with the lives of others. The Bodhisatta may act in ways that challenge our
perception of him, and he may also take a back seat in stories that focus more
upon other characters. He may fall in love, or obtain a kingdom, without
challenging Buddhist doctrines. Furthermore, the stories can address seemingly
insignificant matters of daily life or local concerns, whilst still being anchored to
the biographies of both Buddha and Bodhisatta. The diversity and repetition of
the jātakas is legitimated by the assumed ending, which every audience member
already knows – that the hero attains awakening. The individual jātakas may
thus comment on kamma, rebirth, heaven and hell, yet as a whole the JA also
teaches about arahatship, buddhahood and nibbāna, and speaks to its audience
about the possibility of having a finite biography as impressive as the Buddha’s.
Thus the broad biographical framing of the text allows for continuing diversity
within a united – and very influential – master narrative.
outside the great textual collection the same legitimative association
with both Buddha and Bodhisatta applies, and is perhaps best seen in the
role of jātakas in local sites.24 The travelogues of the Chinese pilgrims Faxian
(fifth century ce), Songyun (sixth century ce) and xuanzang (seventh century
ce) describe sites in North india that are associated with the events of jātaka
stories.25 Several scholars have drawn attention to the fact that such associations
with jātakas were most popular in (greater) Gandhāra, a place where no sites
could reasonably be associated with the final birth of the Buddha, and which
therefore benefited greatly from associations with past births of the Buddha or
potent Buddha-relics.26 The Gandhāran preoccupation with making Buddhism
relevant locally is also evident in the recent manuscript finds, which contain
local traditions and stories.27 The localisation of jātaka stories in this region was
thus part of a wider strategy for associating this newly Buddhist land with the
activities of the Buddha, and – vice versa – incorporating local features into the
newly arrived religion.
24 For an extended discussion of the role of jātakas in the construction of local forms
of Buddhism see Naomi appleton, ‘a Place for the Bodhisatta: the local and the Universal
in Jātaka Stories’, Acta Orientalia Vilnensia, 8/1 (2007): 109–22.
25 For detail of the sites visited and the associated stories see appleton, ‘a Place for
the Bodhisatta’.
26 For example see Shoshin Kuwayama, ‘The Buddha’s Bowl in Gandhāra and
Relevant Problems’ in maurizio Taddei (ed.), South Asian Archaeology 1987 (Rome, 1990),
pp. 945–78, p. 962, and etienne lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the
Śaka Era, trans. from French by Sara Boin-Webb (louvain la Neuve, 1988), p. 335.
27 Richard Salomon, Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra, The British Library Kharoṣṭhī
Fragments (london, 1999), p. 10.

Jātakas and Biography 119
Such localisation is not limited to Gandhāra: for example Namobuddha, near
Panauti in present-day Nepal, remains a popular pilgrimage site with Newar
Buddhists, who hold that it is where the Bodhisatta sacrificed himself to a starving
tigress, as narrated in the popular Mahāsattva-jātaka or Vyāghrī-jātaka.28 in a part
of eastern Thailand inhabited by laopuan people, there is a town associated with
the characters and events of the Mahā-Ummagga-jātaka, and in several cases other
jātakas have been ‘expanded with explanations attached to the story or with
episodes invented by the villages to explain puzzling incidents or geographic
features in the community’.29 Some jātakas have even become associated with
several locations simultaneously, for example the Aśvarāja story, which has a
strong association with Sri lanka (and is even recounted by xuanzang as a story
of the origin of the Sinhalese people) but is transported in the Newar version to
the Himalayas to transform the story into a warning for traders planning a trip
to Tibet.30 The Vessantara-jātaka, though strongly associated with a pilgrimage
centre in Gandhāra, is also believed by some to have taken place in Northeast
Thailand.31
in addition to the many free associations between jātakas and local areas, the
flexibility of the setting of a jātaka is evident in the pictorial representations of
jātakas found in temples and on manuscripts. These tend to reflect the land and
culture contemporary with the painting, with no concern for the historicity or
place of the stories. Thus we see the Bodhisatta in eighteenth-century Burmese
court dress, or travelling in a clipper ship, and, as Griswold points out, ‘the
happy anachronism serves as a reminder that the lessons the tales teach are
timeless’.32 This flexibility of jātaka stories relies upon the fact that most stories
do not contain a concrete association with any specific place.33 it also relies upon
28 David N. Gellner, Monk, Householder and Tantric Priest: Newar Buddhism and its
Hierarchy of Ritual (Cambridge, 1992), p. 120.
29 Pranee Wongthet, ‘The Jataka Stories and the laopuan Worldview’, Asian Folklore
Studies, 48/1 (1989): 21–30. much of the local area is associated with the wise Bodhisatta
mahosadha’s wooing of his equally clever wife amarā(devī), a part of the narrative that
has been much expanded in the local version.
30 See Naomi appleton, ‘The Story of the Horse-King and the merchant Siṃhala in
Buddhist Texts’, Buddhist Studies Review, 23/2 (2006): 187–201.
31 Patrick Jory, ‘Thai and Western Buddhist Scholarship in the age of Colonialism:
King Chulalongkorn Redefines the Jatakas’, Journal of Asian Studies, 61/3 (2002): 891–918,
p. 897, referring to observations by S.J. Tambiah.
32 a.B. Griswold’s foreword to elizabeth Wray et al., Ten Lives of the Buddha: Siamese
Temple Painting and Jataka Tales (revised edn, New York and Tokyo, 1996), p. 11. an
example of the latter may be found on an illustration of the Mahājanaka-jātaka at Wat No,
Suphanburi (plate 6, p. 34). Freely portraying the Bodhisatta/Buddha in contemporary
settings is also a feature of Burmese paintings – see Patrician m. Herbert, The Life of the
Buddha (london, 1993), p. 13.
33 This is not to say that specific places (and names and times) are not mentioned
within stories. The frequent formulaic setting in Varanasi (whilst time and time again

120 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
the fact that jātakas are a legitimate genre, closely linked to both the person of
the Buddha (who is anchored in time and place to fifth century bce North india)
and Bodhisatta (who is free to roam in any time and any place). only through
these two biographical associations can jātakas maintain both the flexibility and
authority needed for the successful incorporation of local tales into Buddhism,
and Buddhism into local tales.
Biography is not only a legitimating form of narrative, however; it can
also have a transformative nature, eliciting some change in the audience or
reader. in the context of religious biography or hagiography, appreciating the
exemplary behaviour of a senior religious figure – even if the example cannot
really be followed – can inspire a believer to better themselves. The inimitable
nature of the Bodhisatta’s perfection may inspire a lower level of imitation:
after appreciating the Bodhisatta’s gift of wealth, wife, children, limbs, and even
life, the gift of food to the monastery seems easy and minor. once again we can
see that the gradual path is open to anyone at any stage, and the greatness of
the other end (buddhahood or another form of awakening) is matched by the
modesty of the near end. in this way the jātaka stories are a way of resolving
the paradox of the Buddha’s inimitable example, since they contain advice for
early stages of the path in the form of teachings from the Buddha about his
past lives, whilst contributing to the glorification of the Buddha, Bodhisatta
and bodhi.
The ability of the Buddha’s biography to be an example is reliant upon its ability
to be both an account of a single person’s life and a general account of a path.
in other words, the Buddha/Bodhisatta must be both an individual and a ‘type’
and jātakas are also able to negotiate this balance. Sarah Shaw has examined the
complex layers of narrative voice in the JA, noting the typical structure of a third-
person account by an external narrator of the present situation, a third-person
account by the Buddha of one of his previous births, and then the only first-person
statement: ‘i was such-and-such a character at that time.’ She sums up:
The threads of the Buddha, described in the third person, the ‘he’ of the
Bodhisatta and the ‘i’ at the end of each tale are woven in and out of each
other like a plait, evoking a succession of lives. These three elements suggest
neither the ‘eternalist’ view, an abiding self, nor the ‘annihilationist’ view
that the self ceases at death … a moving point, like a kind of ‘middle way’,
arises from the process itself, in the constant movement between the first
ascetics retreat to the Himalayas, and young brahmins are sent to Takkasilā for their
education) locates most jātakas of the JA in North india, yet this rather spurious precision
betrays a lack of interest in the ‘true’ location of the events of the story. Where places
are specified, they are not given in detail, and many are not given a location at all. in the
early textual sources, the association between jātakas and specific places appears rather
irrelevant, making later associations all the more straightforward.

Jātakas and Biography 121
person acknowledgement of the Buddha and his third-person character, the
bodhisatta.34
in contrast to the complex layers of the jātakas in the JA, the jātakas related in the
Cariyāpiṭaka are straightforwardly in the first person. This is also the case for the
sections of the Apadāna that deal with the Buddha, as well as the Buddhavaṃsa
and its counterpart in the Nidānakathā. Shaw suggests that the move to a first-
person voice is because such events are exemplary and typological. in contrast,
the distance provided by the primarily third-person narration in the JA allows
the Bodhisatta to have a wider variety of roles and act out much more human
situations. Thus in jātakas the Bodhisatta can be both type and person.
another example of the layering of Buddhist biographical narrative has been
examined by Jonathan Silk. He notes the major paradox contained in traditional
life-stories of the Buddha, that ‘at birth he is virtually omniscient, but by
adolescence when he encounters the famous “four sights” – an old man, an ill
man, a corpse, and a mendicant – he does not know how to understand them’.35
Silk does not try to ‘solve’ this paradox through historical or philological enquiry,
but rather investigates the story’s ‘potential logic and the ways in which it may
be seen to resolve its own tensions creatively’.36 He concludes that there are two
levels on which the Buddha’s life story is operating:
First, there is a story of the result of an almost infinitely long career. in this
present and final lifetime the miraculous results of a long course of spiritual
development spanning multiple lifetimes finally come to full fruition. Second,
and almost entirely disjunct from the first, is a story of discovery, of encounter
with unpleasant facts of the reality of life in the world, the discovery of a means
to cope with those facts, and the efforts at asceticism and mental cultivation
that ultimately lead to liberation. Both of these levels to the story – and we
must keep in mind that there is, nevertheless, one and only one story – provide
elements of a model for the seeker, elements of a path that can be followed by
every Buddhist, models to emulate.37
The two models Silk outlines are, he argues, both essential for a person on
the Buddhist path, for this person may on one level feel inspired to emulate
the Bodhisatta’s renunciation, whilst on another level he or she is forced to
acknowledge that emulation is not entirely possible given the many lives in
34 Sarah Shaw, ‘and that was i: How the Buddha Himself Creates a Path between
Biography and autobiography’ in linda Covill et al. (eds), Lives Lived, Lives Imagined:
Biography in the Buddhist Traditions (Boston, 2010), pp. 15–47, pp. 36–7.
35 Jonathan a. Silk, ‘The Fruits of Paradox: on the Religious architecture of the
Buddha’s life Story’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 71/4 (2003): 863–81, p. 863.
36 Silk, ‘The Fruits of Paradox’, p. 866.
37 Silk, ‘The Fruits of Paradox’, p. 870.

122 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
which the Bodhisatta has been preparing for this moment.38 Thus, for Silk, the
‘blatant narrative inconsistencies in the story’ are evidence of the ‘profound
psychological insight of those ancient masters who composed or compiled it’.39
Silk’s investigation is not only instructive for its approach to narrative
layers, or its view that Buddha-biography is by nature exemplary. The two
models he identifies resonate with my earlier discussion of developments in the
nature of the paths to arahatship and buddhahood. Whereas jātaka stories may
have originally been associated only with the path to buddhahood as a way of
glorifying the Buddha, as the arahat path began to be extended and codified and
be seen as also stretching over many lives, such stories were able to provide a
model for all Buddhists, whatever ideal they aspired to. according to the early
ideal of arahatship, a simple realisation of the true nature of things can lead to
liberation, in the same way as it did for Gotama. on the other hand, Gotama, we
are told, had spent many lives preparing for this moment; so, it seems, must we.
Silk explicitly avoids a historical analysis of his materials, yet we can perhaps
see in his two models a reflection of this development in the proposed path
for the Buddha’s followers. Similarly, we might see the emergence of the two
biographical associations of the jātaka genre as a reflection of developments in
buddhology and the outlines of the Buddhist paths discussed in the previous
chapter. it is clear that biographical narrative has a creative role in making the
path accessible yet the person inimitable.
Jātaka texts, as a form of Bodhisatta- and Buddha-biography, are thus closely
linked to other biographical texts that rose in prominence during and shortly
after the time of asoka. These biographical texts together construct a complex
Buddhist past, in which the Bodhisatta’s actions are intertwined with those
of other buddhas and the past lives of arahats. The association between jātakas
and both Buddha and Bodhisatta, as established by the JA, allows the stories to
contain – and creatively resolve – several paradoxes about the Buddha: (1) he is
an inimitable exemplar; (2) he is a worshipped teacher; (3) his teachings and lives
were both local to particular times/places and are universal; (4) he is both a person
and a ‘type’. Jātaka stories provide examples for followers of the Buddha, whilst
simultaneously demonstrating the superiority of the Bodhisatta’s perfections;
they demonstrate both his superior teaching ability and the perfection acquired
over countless lives that makes him worthy of reverence; they link the universal
pattern of buddhahood and the universal application of the dhamma with local
places, peoples and concerns, as well as with a single individual’s long biography.
The ability of jātaka stories – through their biographical associations with
Buddha and Bodhisatta – to successfully negotiate these paradoxes, makes them
ideal sources for sermons, art and various Buddhist practices. it is these uses of
jātakas to which i will turn in the next chapter of our story.
38 Silk, ‘The Fruits of Paradox’, p. 871.
39 Silk, ‘The Fruits of Paradox’, p. 872.

Chapter 7
Jātaka ideology in Practice
it has become clear that there are two ways in which jātakas interact with the
Buddha’s biography, namely with him as Bodhisatta and with him as Buddha.
in one way the stories are necessarily buddhavacana, since they are episodes
remembered by the Buddha, and therefore they are both dhamma and Buddha-
biography; in another way they are stories about his previous births and
therefore Bodhisatta-biography. i have observed these two aspects in operation
in jātaka and related texts and examined the historical and doctrinal contexts
that provoked an increased interest in the biography of both Buddha and
Bodhisatta. in this chapter i will be examining how these two biographical
aspects of jātaka stories affect the ways in which the stories are interacted with
by believers and practitioners, and to what extent the association with Buddha-
dhamma and Bodhisatta-biography is necessary for practices involving jātakas to
be meaningful.
although i will be examining practices from all periods and regions, this
chapter is not intended to be an all-inclusive survey of Buddhist practices that
involve jātakas. Rather it presents a selection of case studies that demonstrate
the power and flexibility provided by the biographical associations that have
been woven into jātaka materials. my sources include Pāli scriptures and the
writings of Chinese pilgrims, ethnographic accounts of contemporary or near-
contemporary Southeast asia, and first-hand observation of contemporary Sri
lanka. Such examples of the uses of jātakas are not entirely confined to the
Theravāda tradition, although this does remain the focus. Where examples from
other schools of Buddhism are used, they are to provide useful context, and
support the more philosophical arguments presented in this chapter. The varied
geographical and historical contexts help to build up a general framework for
viewing the jātaka genre and its interaction with Buddhist practice. This chapter
therefore moves away from the strong historical and textual focus that has so far
dominated my discussion.
i will begin with perhaps the most widespread ‘use’ of jātaka stories: their
illustration in temples and at stūpa sites. Such use is by no means limited to
narrating the stories; the illustrations are also on occasions more iconographic
than narrative, and sometimes appear to have symbolic cosmological significance.
my examination of jātaka images will include some comments on the notion of
worshipping the dhamma(-kāya) of the Buddha, which i will then return to in an
investigation of the power and significance contained within the physical frame
of a jātaka book. This will be followed by a look at several practices that involve
using words from the jātaka book for apotropaic purposes. This discussion of the

124 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
jātaka as story, image, dhamma book and source of powerful words, will set the
scene for the examination of how jātaka text (as book and source of powerful
words) and image come together in a powerful ritual context. all these examples
persuasively suggest that jātakas have many and varied roles in Buddhist societies
that have little to do with the stories themselves, and much more to do with the
symbolism inherent in the very idea of what a jātaka is.
Because my interest here is primarily the biographical significance of the
jātaka genre as a whole, i will not be examining their merit as individual stories.
i do not mean to suggest that their use as didactic narratives in Theravāda
countries is unimportant; indeed the subject deserves a whole book of its
own. Such uses are many and varied; for example, as well as being popularly
depicted in children’s books and used in sermons, the stories have been used
in psychotherapy by a Sri lankan psychiatrist, Dr D.V.J. Harischandra, who has
also published a book surveying the psychiatric conditions and treatments
mentioned in the Jātaka-Pota and providing a host of examples of how he uses
jātaka stories in therapy (a practice he claims goes back to the Buddha himself).1
Several structural factors unique to jātaka stories might contribute to such uses,
and indeed in the previous chapter i noted the effects of the two biographical
associations (with Buddha and Bodhisatta) on the stories’ legitimative and
transformative effects. other aspects of the genre not related to biography also
play a part in making the stories meaningful, for example the use of humour,
allegorical symbolism, or typological characters and places. Such qualities of
the jātakas, though interesting, are outside the scope of this chapter. We must
instead turn our attention to the symbolic qualities of the genre, in other words
those qualities not related to narrative content but rather to the biographical
associations of the genre as a whole.
THe PoWeR oF THe imaGe
as well as the textual (and oral) traditions of telling jātakas, the stories have
been used as a source for the art of temple and stūpa sites since at least the time
of Bhārhut (second century bce). The practice of depicting jātaka stories has
continued to the present day, where they remain a popular theme for temple
illustrations in South and Southeast asia. Jātaka images have generally been
viewed as simple illustrations with the same didactic function as the stories
themselves. However, a few scholars, notably Robert Brown and Jonathan Walters,
have seen more significance than this in the portrayal of biographical narratives
in general, and jātakas in particular. in addition, analyses of the purpose and
function of images of the Buddha can help to illuminate the possible place of
jātaka images, especially when combined with an investigation of the place of
1 D.V.J. Harischandra, Psychiatric Aspects of Jataka Stories (Galle, Sri lanka, 1998).

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 125
buddha-biography and buddhahood at such sites, and the notion of the dhamma-
kāya in Theravāda Buddhism.
Illustrating the Narrative and Narrating the Illustration
most art historical analyses of jātaka portrayals tend to focus upon the
identification of the story and the source text, how the story is ‘narrated’
visually, and how the jātakas are arranged. Such studies treat the images as
narratives, and as Vidya Dehejia, for example, states: ‘Stories revolve around
actions, human or otherwise, that occur in space and unfold in time; for the
artist, the protagonists of a story, together with the elements of space and time,
are the three major components of narrative.’2 Dehejia proceeds to examine the
modes of visual narration of jātaka stories with these three elements in mind,
and categorises them thus: (1) monoscenic narrative, which identifies the story
with a single scene and leaves the viewer to narrate the story to themselves; (2)
synoptic narrative, where multiple episodes are shown within a single frame
with no temporal sequence communicated; (3) conflated narrative, where there
are again several scenes within one frame, but the figure of the protagonist is
shown only once, acting several parts in sequence; (4) continuous narrative,
which shows the protagonist in each scene, with temporal succession and spatial
movement clearly indicated; (5) linear narrative, which is essentially continuous
narrative but with frames separating the scenes from one another; (6) narrative
networks, where multiple scenes are shown in an apparently random order,
which may be dictated by concepts of geographical groupings or thematic
clusters. She suggests that different modes can suit different settings, for example
a continuous narration of the Buddha’s life might suit the wall encircling a stūpa,
where it could be viewed in sequence by a pilgrim circumambulating the shrine.
Some types of narration presuppose prior knowledge of the story, and serve
merely as hints or memory-joggers.3
Robert Brown’s ‘Narrative as icon’ contains a critique of Dehejia’s analysis,
but he does not criticise her categorisation. instead he criticises the assumption
(which also underlies most other analyses) that the images are designed to be
narrations or narrative prompts. Brown uses some of Dehejia’s own observations
to refute this assumption. First, he points out, many visual representations
are not organised as narratives (one might suggest that this applies to all of
Dehejia’s types except four and five) but instead are practically unreadable
or unrecognisable. Scenes are often grouped geographically or according to
causal links, and crucial scenes are often omitted, making the identification
of any narrative content very difficult. in addition, the reliefs are frequently
not accessible to the visitor, being situated high overhead or at foot level,
2 Vidya Dehejia, ‘on modes of Visual Narration in early Buddhist art’, The Art
Bulletin, 72/3 (1990): 374–92, p. 374.
3 Dehejia, ‘on modes of Visual Narration’.

126 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
narrated in the opposite direction to circumambulation, or even covered up.
The practicalities of ‘reading’ such illustrations as narratives, or using them
didactically, are problematic. For example, the ananda Temple at Pagan has 912
small plaques depicting all of the jātakas from the Pāli collection. Scholars have
suggested a didactic or proselytising purpose for these illustrations, despite the
fact that they are situated on the roof, unidentifiable from the ground.4
Brown insists that the meaning of jātaka reliefs is not to be found in their
textual context, but in the context of the monument. one example he cites is
Wat Si Chum, a fourteenth-century temple in Sukhothai, Thailand.5 This temple
contains illustrations of the first 100 jātakas of the JA carved in stone panels in
the ceiling of a dark, narrow passageway. Several scholars have suggested that
the jātaka illustrations must have been moved there from a more accessible
location, but it has recently been demonstrated that the carvings were custom-
made for this ceiling.6 The intention must therefore have been something other
than didactic narration of the stories. as Brown and others have suggested,
the presence of the illustrations in the passageway implies that they provide a
sense of progression, through following the footsteps of the Bodhisatta. Such an
association is supported by the illustration of a Buddha-footprint in the ceiling
above a turn in the stairs, before the jātakas continue from JA 34.7
Perhaps the most effective example used by Brown, which has also been
comprehensively studied by, amongst others, Paul mus, is Borobudur, a complex
eighth-/ninth-century mahāyāna monument in Java which contains reliefs of
jātakas, avadānas and biographical material from Śākyamuni’s final life, as well
as buddha images and stūpas. These images are arranged on concentric stepped
terraces surrounding a central stūpa. at the lowest level are reliefs illustrating
karmic consequences (from a text called the Karmavibhaṅga), but these are
hidden from view by an additional terrace. This illustrates neatly the idea that
these images do not need to be seen to justify their existence. instead, their
4 Robert l. Brown, ‘Narrative as icon: The Jātaka Stories in ancient indian and
Southeast asian architecture’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the Buddhist
Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu, 1997), pp. 64–109. in relation to Pagan he
refers specifically to the work of Gordon luce. There is of course an argument that the
plaques are intended to be viewed by devas and other non-human beings, who are also
in need of Buddhist teaching. This argument cannot, however, be applied to all Brown’s
examples, nor – for example – to images painted on the inside walls of stūpas such as
those found at mihintale and mahiyangana in Sri lanka (see Peter Skilling (ed.), Past Lives
of the Buddha: Wat Si Chum - Art, Architecture and Inscriptions (Bangkok, 2008), p. 80). it is
clear that concealed images must have another layer of meaning that is independent of
an audience.
5 Brown, ‘Narrative as icon’, p. 92ff.
6 See Skilling, Past Lives of the Buddha, especially the introductory discussion
by Pattaratorn Chirapravati (pp. 13–40). The authors of this volume suggest that the
intention was to build higher and eventually illustrate all the jātakas of the JA.
7 See Brown, ‘Narrative as icon’, p. 97.

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 127
presence is necessary in relation to what follows higher up the stūpa, but this
has no relation to any perceived audience. The next level up shows jātakas and
avadānas,8 followed by biographical scenes from the Lalitavistara which narrate
as far as the Buddha’s first sermon. Further up, the story of Sudhana from the
Gaṇḍavyūha Sūtra is illustrated, showing Sudhana’s quest to find spiritual answers
and his eventual bodhisattva-vow made in the presence of the Bodhisattva
Samantabhadra. This is interspersed with and followed by buddha images, some
in perforated stūpas.
Brown analyses the arrangement of images at Borobudur both from the
outside in, and from the inside out. The pilgrim begins at the base, in the world
of desires, which are, however, covered and left behind. Next he must follow
in the steps of Śākyamuni Buddha through his past lives and final life. Next he
participates in Sudhana’s quest, maybe even in his vow to bodhisattvahood,
as he climbs ever higher towards the perfection (reflected in the ever more
perfect geometry of the terraces) of the Buddha/buddhahood. From the centre,
buddhahood is manifest first as ‘Ādibuddha’ hidden in the central stūpa, then
partially obscured in perforated stūpas, then fully visible as the (mahāyāna)
buddhas on the balustrades, and accessible in the reliefs portraying Śākyamuni’s
many lives. it is interesting that the images at Borobudur were clearly inspired
by some easily identifiable texts, yet, Brown insists, ‘even when the visual images
are organised to reflect the narrative nature of a verbal text (events related
through time), the visual images are there to express the Buddhistic nature of
the monument, to locate the Buddha and his teaching, not to tell a story’.9 at
Borobudur and in other examples presented, Brown sees images of jātakas as
parallel to images of the Buddha or buddhas, as a way of making his presence felt
and in order to inspire a similar spiritual quest. They form an intermediate stage
of purity between the glorious Buddha/buddhahood and the Buddhist pilgrim,
and do not have to be read to fulfil this.
8 Brown notes ‘Avadānas are stories of previous births that include individuals other
than the Buddha, but they function like jātakas and need not be differentiated for our
purposes’ (‘Narrative as icon’, p. 105, n. 52). However, avadānas are not explicitly part of
the Buddha’s biography in the same way that jātakas are, and thus cannot function in the
same way in Brown’s scheme. i have two suggestions for side-stepping this issue: (1) the
avadānas form a bridge between the biographical stories and those of the Karmavibhaṅga,
i.e. a bridge between the person of the Buddha and the practice of his path by others; (2)
as Strong argues in the same volume, there can be a ‘lateral expansion’ of biography in
the Buddhist tradition to include ‘not only the “histories” of identifiable karmic continua
over a series of lives, but also of ongoing karmic nexuses’. John S. Strong, ‘a Family Quest:
The Buddha, Yaśodharā, and Rāhula in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya’ in Juliane Schober
(ed.), Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu, 1997),
pp. 113–28, p. 114. Thus since the Buddha is karmicly linked with his followers, their
biographies are in some way a part of his. This resonates with Walters’ argument about
participation in the Buddha’s biography presented later.
9 Brown, ‘Narrative as icon’, p. 80.

128 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Jonathan Walters, in ‘Stūpa, Story and empire’, has a similar suggestion to
Brown’s regarding the significance of early indian stūpa illustration. He takes
three types of evidence together in his examination of stūpa cults: images on stūpa
carvings, three interrelated texts he believes accompany the early post-asokan
stūpas (Cariyāpiṭaka, Buddhavaṃsa and Apadāna), and the donative inscriptions.
Walters begins with a purely textual analysis, looking at the development from
Cariyāpiṭaka (the first Buddha-biography to include his previous lives, or rather
the first explicitly biographical collection of jātaka stories) to Buddhavaṃsa
(which expands the scenario to include the lives of past and future buddhas) to
Apadāna (which contains the lives of eminent monks and nuns, in a catalogue of
acts and their results). He claims that this illustrates a growing universalisation
of Buddhist ideals. Next he examines the inscriptions on the stūpas, which
make it clear that the donors were from a variety of backgrounds, reflecting
the universalism of the texts. in addition, the stūpa itself is illustrated with the
cosmic Buddha biography: not just jātakas and scenes from Gautama’s life, but
also the scenes of stūpa worship. These last scenes are part of the biography
because we are told in the texts that such actions in this life will result in being
present at the time of a future buddha; similarly, previous actions such as this
have resulted in the opportunity to worship the stūpa of this buddha. Returning
to the inscriptions, Walters notes that the early inscriptions state only the
name of the donor(s), omitting the later trend for extolling the merit of giving
and specifying who will receive the merit accrued. The process of funding and
creating the stūpas was doubtless very complex, so there must have been an
understanding of the merits, and Walters argues that this was provided by the
texts, particularly the Apadāna and its catalogue of merit-making. later, when
the popularity of these texts waned, more explicit donative inscriptions were
required. in conclusion, Walters suggests that stūpas should in fact be viewed
as a cosmic buddha-biography, containing the rūpakāya (in the relic) and the
dharmakāya (in the illustrations). This can parallel Brown’s analysis of the Buddha
‘manifest’ in the images and ‘unmanifest’ in the relic/stūpa.10 Both scholars see
the inclusion of such images as a result of the struggle to maintain the presence
of the Buddha in a post-parinibbāna world.
Both Brown and Walters see jātaka images as fulfilling a symbolic role, rather
than, or as well as, a narrative one, and this is related to the place of jātakas in
the extended biography of the Buddha. Their fulfilment of this role would not
be possible were they not stories about the Bodhisatta who later becomes the
Buddha. Thus for Brown and Walters the whole of stūpa (and, for Brown, temple)
10 Here Brown draws a direct comparison with representations of Hindu deities,
which have long been accepted as being a ‘manifest’ form of a normally ‘unmanifest’ deity.
He notes, in passing, that ‘in part the Buddha manifests himself in terms of a history, a
biography (and this includes jātaka tales) much more strongly than do the Hindu deities,
who manifest themselves in mythic terms, often of a cosmic nature’ (‘Narrative as icon’,
pp. 74–5).

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 129
symbolism is focused upon the person of the Buddha. This is also true for mus,
who argues that the long career of Śākyamuni is the focus even at monuments
that appear to have cosmological symbolism, for ‘the cosmic planes will always
be characterised by the personal adventures of the Buddha’.11 For mus, the
jātakas are a stage closer to the devotee, and thus contrast with the figure of
the Buddha, especially in the earlier so-called ‘aniconic’ phase of Buddhist art.
in this phase, he argues, a devotee circumambulating the stūpa would see the
Buddha as a Bodhisatta time and time again, but the primary figure vanishes
as he reaches his final life.12 as mus points out, the absence of any figure of the
Buddha only highlights the extent to which his person is the focus of the image.
Regardless of the slightly differing detail of their analyses, for all three of these
scholars the person of the Buddha, also as Bodhisatta, is of central importance in
understanding the symbolism of sacred sites.
A Little Assistance from Buddha Images
Since the person of the Buddha is clearly important in interpreting temple and
stūpa sites, i might here stray productively into scholarship on Buddha images,
in particular the work of Jacob Kinnard, whose book Imaging Wisdom will lead
us neatly back to jātakas. When it comes to interpreting the significance of
sacred images and the worship of such images, there are two basic views: either
the image is or becomes the sacred, or it is a symbol or representation. Kinnard
argues that, rather than seeing these two views in opposition, it is possible to see
images as bringing together the two positions in some way:
Practicing Buddhists are able to maintain at once that the Buddha is present in
such things as relics, sculptures and paintings, and at the same time able to hold
the conflicting (and seemingly contradictory) view that it is only the emblem,
or reminder, of the no-longer present Buddha that they worship. in other
words they are able simultaneously to maintain an ontological and a semantic/
symbolic position on the presence of the Buddha. and, what is more … they use
sculptural images as a means of reflecting on the tensions between these two
simultaneously held positions.13
11 Paul mus, Barabuḍur: Sketch of a History of Buddhism Based on Archaeological Criticism
of the Texts, trans. alexander W. macdonald (New Delhi, 1998), p. 94.
12 mus, Barabuḍur, p. 70ff.
13 Jacob N. Kinnard, Imaging Wisdom: Seeing and Knowing in the Art of Indian Buddhism
(Richmond, 1999), p. 11. We might compare Gombrich’s idea that to Theravāda Buddhists
the Buddha is ‘cognitively’ absent, but ‘affectively’ present (Richard F. Gombrich, Precept
and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of Ceylon (oxford, 1971) with
particular regard to relics see p. 105). However, Kinnard’s contribution is to replace this
dichotomy with a dialectic. Strong sees a similar dialectic in Buddhist relics, which ‘toy

130 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Kinnard uses Thomas Kasulis’ notion of metapraxis – reflection on how what is
doctrinally true relates to actual practice14 – as a way of analysing the many
ways in which images function. He argues that images are actually a form of
metapractical reflection, bridging the gap between the absence and presence of
the Buddha.
as an example of metapractical discourse in relation to Buddha images,
Kinnard cites the legendary saint Upagupta’s request that newly converted māra
take the form of the Buddha to ease what Strong calls Upagupta’s ‘rūpalogical
deficiency’ (he has seen the Buddha’s dharma-kāya but wishes also to see his rūpa-
kāya).15 although Upagupta knows that the image of the Buddha he sees before
him is not actually the Buddha, he still bows down before māra. as Kinnard
analyses this:
We can now see Upagupta’s response to māra as reflective of the dynamic
interplay between metaphysics, praxis, and metapraxis: ‘of course, i know
that the Best of Speakers has gone altogether to extinction [metaphysics] … i
bow down before that Sage [praxis]. But i do not revere you! [metapraxis]’.16
Thus, far from being stuck in a simple dichotomy between belief and practice,
images are part of an active discourse between them. images have power precisely
because of this tension, because of the possibility of mistaking the image for the
real Buddha. For Kinnard, the reality of the Buddha’s absence and the desire
to be in his presence are mutually contributive: ‘it is only with the positing of
absence that presence becomes important, and thus the significance of the
Buddha’s presence is always caught up in the ultimate reality of his absence.’17
or, as Kevin Trainor puts it, ‘it is precisely because the Buddha is not present that
he is worthy of offerings’.18
with the opposition between “gone” and “not gone”’ (John S. Strong, Relics of the Buddha
(Princeton and oxford, 2004), p. 239).
14 Kasulis defines his terms thus: ‘By “metaphysics,” we will mean simply the
development of a philosophical theory about the nature of reality. Basing our sense of
the term on its philological components instead of historical etymology, we can say
metaphysics theorizes about what lies “behind” or “beyond” (meta) “natural things and
powers” ( physis). By analogy, “metapraxis” is the development of a philosophical theory
about the nature of a particular praxis, in this case, religious praxis. it theorizes about
what lies behind or beyond the practices of a religious tradition. Thomas P. Kasulis,
‘Philosophy as metapraxis’ in Frank Reynolds and David Tracy (eds), Discourse and Practice
(albany, 1992), pp. 169–95, p. 174.
15 John S. Strong, The Legend and Cult of Upagupta (Princeton, 1992) discussed in
Kinnard, Imaging Wisdom, p. 31.
16 Kinnard, Imaging Wisdom, p. 41.
17 Kinnard, Imaging Wisdom, p. 78.
18 Kevin Trainor, Relics, Ritual, and Representation in Buddhism: Rematerialising the Sri
Lankan Theravāda Tradition (Cambridge, 1997), p. 189.

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 131
already we can hear an echo of mus’ theory about how both aniconic
representations of the Buddha, and representations of his previous lives,
function. Both, mus argues, help to bridge the gap between the glorious, absent
Buddha, and the possibility of following in his footsteps. The relevance of such
arguments to my own study might be stated as follows: just as Buddha images
mediate between the Buddha’s absence and presence, jātakas mediate between a
historical person that it is possible for Buddhists to emulate, and the marvellous
and incomparable glory of the Buddha/buddhahood. Thus they each form a part
of the link between Buddhist practitioner and buddhahood. Jātakas also mediate
between universal paradigmatic truths (of buddhahood or nibbāna, demonstrated
through the association with the 24 previous buddhas, or, in mahāyāna, the
bodhisattvas) and the particular instance of the Buddha who founded the present
buddha-sāsana after many years of preparation.
Kinnard’s theory about the metapractical importance of sacred images
actually forms a preface to the main thrust of his argument, that in Pāla-period
Buddhism, the priority of prajñā influenced sculptural art, and can help to
explain it. He traces the rise in the idea that Śākyamuni is an embodiment of
prajñā, and thus that prajñāpāramitā is the source of the Tathāgatas, the equation
of prajñāpāramitā with the dharma-kāya, and the consequent rise in worship of
both book and deity. in conclusion he says:
the visual and textual data i have assembled and analyzed here not only
demonstrates that prajñā was a central part of Buddhist discourse and practice
during the Pāla period, but also that the visual representation and presentation
of wisdom – as opposed to only the textual/intellectual discourse that is so
frequently the object of our inquiries – was of great importance to Pāla-period
Buddhists. That is, Pāla-period Buddhists did not only want to think about
the Buddha; they also wanted to see him, and to be in his presence (and, as
i have argued, to think about the nature of this presence). indeed, it is the
amalgamation of these two faculties, seeing and knowing, that is at the root of
Pāla-period visual practice.19
as an analysis of medieval North indian mahāyāna Buddhist practice, Kinnard’s
argument might seem far removed from the context of Theravāda jātakas.
However, he highlights an important distinction: between worshipping (or
perhaps ‘appreciating’) the dhamma as something to be learned (internalised)
and worshipping the dhamma as an image of wisdom, with the idea that ‘seeing’
such an image is in some way equivalent to ‘seeing’ (internalising) the dhamma.
19 Kinnard, Imaging Wisdom, p. 177. Kinnard provides a good discussion of the
importance assigned to seeing the Buddha as an aid to seeing the dhamma (pp. 57–64). See
also Trainor (Relics, Ritual and Representation, especially p. 173ff.) for an analysis of much
of the same material in relation to the functional equivalence of seeing a relic and seeing
the Buddha in Sri lankan Theravāda.

132 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Such a distinction is applicable to my examination of jātaka images too, for they
are both transmitters of, and symbols of, the dhamma. i will be returning to this
idea shortly.
For Kinnard, the ability of the prajñāpāramitā literature and deity to embody
the dhamma is based upon the conviction that the Buddha (and indeed – in the
mahāyāna context – all buddhas) is the embodiment of prajñāpāramitā. This prompts
me to make another connection with jātakas, for, as i showed in earlier chapters,
jātaka stories become strongly associated with the 10 pāramitās, to the extent that
these become the main rationale for the jātaka genre before even the time of the
closing of the Theravāda canon. in Southeast asia the perfections, as exemplified
in the final 10 jātakas of the JA, also form the basis for practices involving jātakas,
as discussed below. if the JA, selections of it, or the jātaka genre more broadly,
can be conceived of as representing or somehow embodying the perfections
that not only make the Buddha a buddha but also allow Buddhists to follow in his
path, then jātaka literature is not so different from the prajñāpāramitā literature
of Pāla-period Buddhism that Kinnard examines. This level of interpretation
might provide the key to understanding why it is jātakas that are the subject of
illustrations on temple and stūpa sites throughout the Buddhist world.
Dhamma and Dhamma-kāya: Narrative and Symbol
Jātakas, i have argued, can have symbolic meaning as representations of the
Buddhist path because they both portray the Bodhisatta’s biography and transmit
the Buddha’s dhamma. We have so far given very little attention to the idea that
jātaka images have a didactic function, but in fact in many sites this is clearly a
preoccupation. Brown is perhaps a little too keen to highlight the non-narrative
functions of jātaka illustrations almost to the exclusion of any narrative value,
though he is quite right to draw our attention to the other reasons for their
presence. Walters’ investigation relies rather more on the narrative aspect of
the stories interacting with the donors, images and stūpa. For Walters it is the
fact that the donor and the visitor play a part in the narration of the Buddha’s
biography that is crucial to an understanding of the sites. as well as providing a
narrative frame for a devotee’s interaction with a sacred site, however, i would
argue that the simple didactic narrative value of jātaka illustrations is an essential
counterpart to the more symbolic interpretations. in order to see this, we must
turn our attention to the idea of the dhamma-kāya.
The Buddha’s admonition of the monk Vakkali, when the latter expresses his
sadness at not having been able to see the Buddha, is well known:
enough Vakkali! What is the point of you seeing this vile body? Vakkali, he
who sees the dhamma sees me; he who sees me sees the dhamma.20
20 Trans. from the version in the Vakkali Sutta of the Samyutta Nikāya (l. Feer (ed.),
Saṃyutta-nikāya (london, 1884–1898), vol. 3, p. 120).

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 133
Some scholars have taken this passage as evidence that the Buddha did not
wish to be worshipped, but merely wanted his followers to follow his teachings.
Whatever the reality of this interpretation, in fact this equation of Buddha and
dhamma seems to be the root of the idea that the Buddha can be worshipped
through his dhamma, and indeed vice versa. We might here see the origins of
the idea of the dhamma-kāya, a term rarely found in Pāli but well-known in the
context of later mahāyāna theories of the Buddha’s three bodies.21
Whatever its later meanings, the dhamma-kāya is initially a reference purely
to the body of teachings of the Buddha. Paul Harrison urges us to remember this
even when examining early and middle mahāyāna texts and practices, where
the term becomes caught up in the trikāya theory. He tracks down all the early
occurrences of the term (it is rarely found in the Pāli canon,22 though there are
some references in the Chinese āgamas and later texts) and insists that in all
these it refers to the teachings/truth of the Buddha, not to a spiritual body. He
concludes:
as far as the Buddhists who wrote the texts were concerned, what was
important was the identification of the Buddha with the dharma or dharmas, of
the Teacher with the truth which he taught or the principles which he realised,
considered either in the abstract, or concretely embodied in scripture. a
simple equation perhaps, but with far-reaching consequences, especially for
Buddhist cult-practice, in which the cult of relics eventually coalesced with
the cult of the book.23
Harrison’s reference to the cult of relics and the cult of the book is of particular
interest here, since he sees the origin of their amalgamation in the idea that the
dhamma-kāya (in the form of a book) is equivalent in status and function to the
rūpa-kāya (in the form of a relic).
That a book containing the teachings of the Buddha can have symbolic and
ritual functions in a similar manner to a physical relic of the Buddha is attested
in contemporary Theravāda practice, as discussed below. it is also found in
medieval indian practice, such as that described by Kinnard, and also by Daniel
Boucher, who charts the influence of the pratītyasamutpādagāthā during the same
period. This is the verse used to convert Sāriputta and moggallāna, who were
21 For an analysis of the importance of the Buddha’s many bodies in the Theravāda
tradition see Frank e. Reynolds, ‘The Several Bodies of Buddha: Reflections on a Neglected
aspect of Theravada Tradition’, History of Religions, 16/4 (1977): 374–89.
22 Harrison suggests only once in the whole canon, but Peter Harvey has drawn my
attention to three further references in the Apadāna (1.13, 1.532 and 1.168) identified by
C. Jantrasrisalai in Early Buddhist Dhammakāya: Its Philosophical and Soteriological Significance
(University of Sydney Ph.D. Thesis, 2007).
23 Paul Harrison, ‘is the Dharma-kāya the Real “Phantom Body” of the Buddha?’,
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 15/1 (1992): 44–94, p. 76.

134 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
to become the Buddha’s chief disciples. it is recorded in the Mahāvagga that the
monk assaji repeated the verse to Sāriputta, who then repeated it to moggallāna.
The pratītyasamutpādagāthā is said to embody the dhamma in a single verse, and
it therefore formed the focus for medieval practices of inscribing tablets to be
enshrined in stūpas. There is even textual evidence of the practice, including
the declaration that he who sees pratītyasamutpāda (conditioned arising) sees the
dharma, and he who sees the dharma sees the Tathāgata.24 like Kinnard, Boucher
sees this practice as a way of negotiating the absence and presence of the Buddha,
without committing to one or other camp. He argues that ‘by transforming
the notion of Buddha-as-dharma into relic, medieval Buddhists were able to
harmonise the impulse to fix the Buddha in real time and space with the long-
established scholastic definitions that, apparently, could not be ignored’.25 Robert
Campany writes that during the same period in China, Buddhist hagiographies
and miracle tales provide ample evidence for the idea that ‘sūtra texts embody
the beings whom they describe and whose words they contain; to harm the
texts is to harm the beings and to incur the karmic retribution appropriate to
such a heinous act … The Buddha, his teaching, Buddha images, and sūtra texts:
all seem to have been regarded – or at least were represented – as functionally
interchangeable’.26 He notes that the equation of text with Buddha or bodhisattva
means that devotional uses of texts are far more prominent than the injunction
to read or understand them. Yet, as with the pratītyasamutpādagāthā, it is the
contents of the texts that allow, and even encourage, identification as an object
of veneration.
What i have been trying to illustrate through these examples is that the notion
of dhamma-kāya as an object of veneration is inextricably linked to the content
of the dhamma. in other words, although the practices involve identifying the
dhamma with the Buddha, and thus are not concerned with reading/hearing
the contents of the dhamma, this is possible (and efficacious) only because the
Buddha is venerated because of the teachings he left behind. in theory any portion of
teachings could be considered dhamma-kāya, yet those most popular as objects of
devotion have a special reason to be thus singled out. For Campany’s examples,
the texts are associated with (and therefore embody) a particular bodhisattva;
in the case of the pratītyasamutpādagāthā, it is the fact that the realisation of
conditioned arising is seen as the very essence of awakening that promotes its
veneration; for the prajñāpāramitā literature, prajñā is the essence of bodhi.
24 Daniel Boucher, ‘The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā and its Role in the medieval Cult of
the Relics’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 14/1 (1991): 1–27, p. 11.
He mentions an explicit reference in the āryapratītyasamutpādanāmamahāyānasūtra as
well as more implicit references elsewhere.
25 Boucher, ‘The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā’, p. 16.
26 Robert F. Campany, ‘Notes on the Devotional Uses and Symbolic Functions of Sūtra
Texts as Depicted in early Chinese Buddhist miracle Tales and Hagiographies’, Journal of
the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 14/1 (1991): 28–72, p. 43.

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 135
i’d like to suggest that to a lesser extent the jātaka genre also encourages
its own veneration, thanks to its dual associations with Buddha and dhamma.
The Buddha’s biography is of central importance because of his role as exemplar
and teacher, and this importance is reflected in strong biographical emphasis in
temple and stūpa art. Jātakas clearly have a symbolic role in these sites, but their
ability to do so is reliant upon the fact that they are also part of the dhamma that
simultaneously demonstrates the great teaching ability of the Buddha and the
greatness of the Bodhisatta. as part of both the exemplary biography and the
teachings, i would therefore argue that, like the other examples i have presented,
jātakas have a special status within the dhamma-kāya.
Returning to Images and Some Conclusions
To return to temple images, an example might help to demonstrate what i
mean by the assertion that jātaka images can be both part of a cosmic Buddha
biography, and a simple exposition of the dhamma. in the tradition of the Kandyan
School of temple art,27 found mostly in the Central Province of Sri lanka from
the eighteenth to early nineteenth centuries, jātakas form a popular subject for
illustrations. Such temples are often lavishly illustrated with jātaka stories at a
perfectly convenient height and in a coherent progressive narrative, traditionally
in horizontal bands across the wall, and often with captions in Sinhala. even
today such illustrations form the subject of sermons; they are also a handy way
of imparting a little understanding of Buddhism to any visitors who should
chance their way. other popular subjects for depiction in such temples are: the
life of the Buddha (in narrative bands like the jātakas); the defeat of māra (in a
large single scene); the request of the gods to the Bodhisatta to take birth and
become Buddha (in a large single scene); the Bodhisatta receiving his prediction
to buddhahood at the feet of each of the 24 previous buddhas (24 panels in grid
form); the events of the seven weeks after enlightenment (in consecutive panels);
and the 16 sacred places in Sri lanka (also in panels). all of these subjects, but
especially the latter two, are portrayed in a highly stylised and symbol-heavy
form, in contrast to the jātakas, where, although the distinctive style of the
Kandyan School is still apparent, Dehejia’s three elements – protagonist, time
and place – are all clearly defined.
it would be difficult to deny the narrative purpose of the jātaka images in
such temples, yet when taken in the context of the other paintings and images,
it is clear that there are other factors influencing their position. Such a temple
arrangement demonstrates that the choice of location for each subject was
determined by both practical and ideological considerations. Certainly jātakas
27 i am deeply indebted to Ven. Wimalagnana, a student and visiting lecturer in
the Department of Pāli and Buddhist Studies at the University of Peradeniya, for many
conversations on the Kandyan School – the subject of his own research – and for helping
me to gain access to many of the paintings during my visits to Sri lanka.

136 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
are always portrayed in narrative bands on easily-viewable portions of the
walls, but they are also ideologically linked to the other subjects through being
biographical in nature. in Kandyan temple art, subjects for illustration are all
in some way biographical – in the broader definition, in other words to do with
the life of the Bodhisatta and Buddha and his relics – and each has its traditional
place. For example, a painting of the Buddha’s defeat of māra’s army or the gods’
entreaty to the Bodhisatta in Tusita heaven will be on the ceiling, with the defeat
of māra having pride of place directly above the main Buddha image. Jātakas,
by contrast, are most often on the outer walls, or the walls that divide the main
shrine from the porch area, so that in many temples there is a definite feeling of
progression inwards towards buddhahood. Jātaka images in this context therefore
function both as didactic narrative demonstrations of dhamma, and (collectively)
a representation of the Buddha. Thus, i argue, it is possible for jātaka images that
are used as teaching aids to also take their place in the wider symbolic structure
of temple art. Just as the symbol-heavy style of Kandyan period painting does not
damage the narrative value of the jātaka illustrations, so the symbolic role these
illustrations play in the wider temple complex need not exclude the possibility
of the illustrations also being read as stories.
it is of course important to remember that jātaka images – as in the case of
jātaka stories and texts – need not have performed the same function in all cases
at all times; indeed, a careful study of the various ways in which jātaka images are
presented and ordered can reveal a variety of emphases at a variety of sites. in
some cases, changes in emphasis over time can be seen, providing evidence for
changes in the make-up or preferences of the local community of the temple or
site. For example, Hsio-Yen Shih notes a development in the Dunhuang murals
and concludes:
The three early caves 275, 254 and 257 have been interpreted as gradually
evolving from the use of narrative paintings as reminders to the monastic
community of the fundamental ideal of bodhisattvahood so exemplified in
Siddhārtha, and the steps necessary to spiritual advancement. By the sixth
century appeal to laity became an additional factor in the increasing popularity
of avadāna for narrative depiction and its advocacy of bhakti worship.28
Shih argues that this demonstrates a change in the nature of the Dunhuang
community and the role of its cave temples. as another example we might
compare the preoccupations at Bhārhut and Pagan, through their inscriptions.
at Bhārhut, titles are given for the jātakas illustrated, frequently using the term
jātakaṃ, but without any obvious emphasis upon the character or nature of
the Bodhisatta. in contrast, at several of the temples in Pagan (the eleventh-
28 Hsio-Yen Shih, ‘Readings and Re-Readings of Narrative in Dunhuang murals’,
Artibus Asiae, 53 (1993): 59–88, p. 88.

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 137
to thirteenth-century capital of Burma) which illustrate all 547/550 jātakas,29
the captions give not only the title but also the character which is identified as
the Bodhisatta.30 There is even evidence for the creation of images only of the
Bodhisatta as found in each story, in some fifteenth-century bronze statues from
ayutthaya.31 These Southeast asian sites demonstrate a developed focus upon
the role of the stories as part of the Bodhisatta’s biography.
i have here examined two complementary ideas about the significance of
jātaka images. First, the jātakas are part of the sacred and cosmic biography of
the Buddha, and they symbolically provide cosmological completeness and an
intermediate stage of purity which parallels the long path to arahatship. Second,
they are the dhamma-kāya of the Buddha, shown on stūpas as a partner to the relics,
and in temples as a partner to the image of the Buddha. Neither of these layers of
meaning requires that they have some didactic function, though in many cases
they do, and this only serves to increase their ideological significance, since it
is the content of the jātakas that gives them their power as symbols of Buddha,
dhamma and buddhahood. The very representation of the dhamma (which is the
Buddha) has a place in the network of sacred symbols present at a temple or
stūpa site. The image does not necessarily need to be ‘read’ or even viewed in
order for it to perform its role: its very creation (for the donor) and existence
(for the pilgrims and monks) are enough.
THe PoWeR oF THe TexT
The non-narrative function of jātaka images can help to illuminate the many
functions which the jātaka narratives and texts themselves appear to have. on
an individual level the jātakas are of course undeniably narratives, but that
does not exclude the possibility that they do something other than tell a story.
For example, as a genre, they might fulfil the same need for some manifest
form of post-parinibbāna Buddha as the images. They also represent, rather
than merely describe, the path to bodhi. one might even go so far as to suggest
that they perform this function even without an audience, as in the case of the
29 Some of the temples follow the numbering familiar in Fausbøll and other editions,
but the West Petleik inserts three more after 496 (the last of the Pakiṇṇaka Nipāta): Velāma
497, Mahāgovinda 498, Sumedhapaṇḍita 499, making a full 550 in total (G.H. luce, ‘The 550
Jātakas in old Burma’, Artibus Asiae, 19 (1956): 291–307, p. 294f.).
30 See luce, ‘The 550 Jātakas’, pp. 292–4. out of the seven sets of illustrations he
examines, four give the identification of the Bodhisatta in addition to the number and
title.
31 Forrest mcGill, ‘Jatakas, Universal monarchs, and the Year 2000’, Artibus Asiae,
53/3/4 (1993): 412–48 links the creation of these statues to a king’s attempt to prevent
the disappearance of the jātakas in the year 2000 of the Buddhist era, as is predicted to
happen in various texts and inscriptions.

138 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
images: their creation and presence are more important that the fact that they
are read; and the fact that they are jātakas is more important than that they
are read as such.
in Reverend Clough’s Sinhala–english dictionary the entry for ‘Jātaka-
pota’ records: ‘work of great celebrity among the buddhists … this book is so
sacred amongst the buddhists that they will offer to it and worship it’.32 Such
book-worship is not unheard of in Theravāda countries, though it is more
commonly associated with the development of mahāyāna Buddhism. although
the Theravāda scriptural corpus may not contain texts which so explicitly
enumerate the benefits of copying, reciting and honouring themselves as in, for
example, prajñāpāramitā literature, historical records, contemporary practices
and manuscript colophons all indicate that such ideas were not alien. an
anecdote may help to illustrate this.
on a visit to the Temple of the Tooth in Kandy in 2007 my tour guide
enthusiastically showed me a copy of the Jātaka-pota that was displayed in
a glass cabinet in the temple library. it was proudly labelled: ‘This Pansiya
Panasjathakaya, 550 life Stories of the Buddha’s Former Births, Composed &
Written on 1600 ola leaves 960 years ago.’ Whilst pilgrims paid their respects and
tourists took photographs, i was naturally suspicious. The title was in Sinhala,
and so presumably referred to the Sinhala reworking of the JA, which is dated
to the fourteenth century, substantially less than 960 years ago. The label was
ambiguous as to whether the manuscript itself was claimed to be so old; the tour
guides, however, boldly declared it to be the oldest manuscript on the island, a
claim that even a cursory look indicated was false. a few weeks later i was lucky
enough to be allowed to look closely at the manuscript, which was removed from
the cabinet and opened especially, much to the joy of passing devotees who were
able to touch it. Upon inspection, however, the manuscript turned out to be a
copy, in Pāli, of the Khuddaka Nikāya, dated (in the cover) to 1886. Chuckling,
the senior monk who had very kindly arranged for me to view the manuscript
suggested that the monks had probably just assumed it was the Jātaka-pota
because of its size; in any case, he said, the public like it to be the Jātaka-pota. on
a subsequent visit three months later, the label remained unchanged.
like the worship of images and relics discussed above, devotion towards
manuscripts might be interpreted in many different ways. Some might suggest
that there is no ‘magical’ benefit from reverentially touching a manuscript
of the jātakas, as many lay Buddhists joyfully did on the occasion of my visit
to the Temple of the Tooth, but that the act merely reinforces in the mind of
the devotee a determination to follow the teachings of the Buddha embodied
in the text. others talk of acquiring merit from such acts, as they are equated
with worship of the Buddha. Both of these options are found in the examples
of scribal colophons to the JA that i examined in Chapter 5: in some cases the
32 Rev. B. Clough, Dictionary of English and Singhalese, and Singhalese and English
Languages, vol. 2 (Colombo, 1830).

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 139
scribe wished to follow the path exemplified by the Bodhisatta, or taught in the
stories; in many cases, however, the merit accrued from the act of copying the
text was mentioned. of course, in the case of colophons, the scribes have read
the text, inasmuch as they have copied the words, yet it is not the reading that
brings the benefits. These two aspects are not incompatible: just as the image of
a book (whether as an associated deity or as illustrations, as discussed above)
can be held up as both a symbol of the Buddha (and bodhi) and as an example
of the dhamma, so too can the physical manuscript or book.33 in Kandy, the
other manuscripts contained in this temple library were rammed in cupboards
all around the room, and none attracted the attention of the (assumed) Jātaka-
Pota, implying that it contains something other texts do not. i suggested some
possible reasons for this during our investigation of the dhamma-kāya in relation
to image and relic worship, and i would argue here that once again it is the
two biographical associations of the jātaka book that promote and explain such
devotion. an additional factor might of course be a widespread familiarity with
the contents of the text, which doubtless contributes to its popularity, though it
is difficult to see how it might contribute to its sanctity.
THe PoWeR oF THe WoRDS
even in the case of oral/aural interactions with jātakas, it is not necessarily
important to understand the words of the story, or to learn from them. For
example, Hayashi writes that the monks’ recitation of jātakas at the Bun Phrawet
festival in Northeast Thailand is ‘more like music than a sermon’ and that the
audience, though familiar with the story, respond more to the narrative style
of the monk, with its special intonation and rhythm.34 This ritual recitation of
the Vessantara-jātaka, which takes place across Thailand, Burma and the Shan
States, has also been studied by Tambiah in the village of Phraan muan. Tambiah
notes that ‘villagers count Bun Phraawes as merit from listening to a sermon’35
and that the recitation of the jātaka confers good fortune on the villagers, and
ensures plentiful rain. He notes that ‘a problem is posed as to the mechanics of
the Buddhist ritual – how the use of sacred words which deal with the virtues of
renunciation transfers to the participants the seemingly opposite benefits of life
33 i am not trying to suggest that the jātaka book, or indeed any other text, is the
subject of systematic cults of veneration, as has been suggested in the case of certain
mahāyāna texts. What i am suggesting is that in some way the jātaka book has greater
sanctity for Sinhalese Buddhists than other Buddhist texts.
34 Yukio Hayashi, Practical Buddhism among the Thai-Lao (Kyoto and melbourne, 2003),
p. 134.
35 S.J. Tambiah, ‘Bun Phraawes’ in Frank e. Reynolds and Jason a. Carbine (eds), The
Life of Buddhism (Berkeley and los angeles, 2000), pp. 62–9, p. 62.

140 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
affirmation’.36 Though he offers no solution, it is clear from both accounts of the
ritual that the recitation of the Vessantara-jātaka contains some form of power
that can be directed at worldly ends. Such ends can also be more in line with
Buddhist soteriology; for example the Thai text Phra Malai states that listening
to a recitation of the Vessantara-jātaka can lead to rebirth at the time of metteyya
Buddha.37 as in the case of the scribal colophons, both merit and soteriological
progress are implicit benefits of hearing (not understanding) or copying (not
reading) a jātaka.
in Thailand the first syllable of the titles of the final 10 jātakas of the JA form
a mnemonic: te ja su ne ma bhu cha na vi ve.38 Textual mnemonics (called hua chai
– ‘heart’ in Thai) exist for the Tipiṭaka as a whole, as well as various sections of
it, and teachings contained within it. Thus, for example, the four ariyasaccāni are
condensed to ‘du sa ni ma’ (for dukkha – unsatisfactoriness, samudāya – arising,
nirodha – cessation, and magga – path). Skilling notes that such mnemonics have
many different functions, including protective ones.39 Since the final 10 jātakas
are said to exemplify in the highest form the Bodhisatta’s acquisition of the 10
perfections, they might be seen as having significance because of an association
with bodhi. it is also possible that this particular mnemonic is able to provide
protection because of the association with the (very powerful) perfections. after
all, in many jātakas we hear of how the power of the Bodhisatta’s good practice
made Sakka’s throne heat up, or caused an earthquake. it might also serve to aid
the internalisation of the perfections it symbolises.
The Thai mnemonic, if it is a safeguard, would not be the only jātaka-sourced
protective, for jātakas are also included in paritta ceremonies. The Pāli term paritta
( pirit in Sinhala) means ‘protection’ and is used to refer to a body of texts that are
chanted for their protective powers at all important life events such as birthdays,
new jobs, weddings, and at times of sickness. Paritta texts and rituals date to
before the compilation of the Milindapañhā, which contains a discussion of their
efficacy. in addition, there are references to paritta in the Pāli commentaries,
for example the prose of the Telapatta-jātaka ( JA 96) contains a description of a
paritta ceremony, leading Gombrich to conclude that ‘no important feature of a
modern pirit ceremony post-dates commentarial times’.40 as with many Buddhist
practices, however, both texts and Buddhists claim that the origins go back to
36 Tambiah, ‘Bun Phraawes’, p. 68.
37 Collins, Nirvana, pp. 375–8.
38 i am very grateful to Dr. arthid Sheravanichkul of Chulalongkorn University, who
– during his stay in oxford in 2007/2008 – shared information about this mnemonic, as
well as many other aspects of Thai jātakas.
39 Personal communication with Peter Skilling, June 2007. For a brief discussion of
such formulae see B.J. Terwiel, Monks and Magic: An Analysis of Religious Ceremonies in Central
Thailand (3rd revised edn, Bangkok, 1994), p. 103.
40 Richard F. Gombrich, Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands
of Ceylon (oxford, 1971), p. 204.

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 141
the Buddha himself. Two particular paritta texts that have their source in the
Sutta-piṭaka are often cited in defence of this position: in the Khanda Sutta of the
Aṅguttara Nikāya41 the Buddha recommends a verse expressing loving kindness
towards snakes as a remedy against snakebites, and in the Aṅgulimāla Sutta of
the Majjhima Nikāya42 aṅgulimāla makes a saccakiriya (‘act of truth’) in order to
ease the suffering of a woman who has been in labour for seven days. The verse
uttered by aṅgulimāla is still chanted to women in labour today.
The texts chanted for protective purposes are collected together in
the Catubhāṇavarapāli (‘text of the four recitals’, also known in Sinhala as
Piruvānapotvahanse, ‘the venerable recitation book’), which contains 29 suttas,
of which three are of central importance. These are, as lily de Silva describes
them: ‘the Ratana Sutta dealing with the invocation of blessings by the power of
the truth (sacca) of the infallible virtues of the Buddha, Dhamma, and the Saṅgha,
the Metta Sutta, advocating the cultivation of loving kindness (metta) towards all
sentient beings, and the Mahāmaṅgala Sutta describing social ethics’.43 She links
these main paritta suttas with the overall rationale for the efficacy of recitations
of such texts by identifying truth and loving kindness as the core themes of
paritta suttas. as she notes, truth-telling can have the power to override natural
laws, and loving kindness has great protective power.44 The importance of the
person of the Buddha – as one who demonstrates and teaches sacca and mettā
– in the efficaciousness of the paritta ceremony is demonstrated by the ritual
apparatus. During a paritta ceremony, the presence of the Buddha is represented
by his relics, of the dhamma by (a physical copy of) the paritta text and the saṅgha
by the monks present.45 all three aspects are physically linked to the thread
which is later tied around the wrists of devotees to provide protection.
The power of the truth in protecting Buddhists, that is so central to the
efficacy of paritta, is also demonstrated by a popular yantra in Thailand, now
frequently sold to tourists. on it is depicted the Bodhisatta’s birth as a quail,
during the Vaṭṭaka-jātaka ( JA 35). in this story the young quail uses a saccakiriya
to hold back a forest fire, and it is said in the JA that no fire can be kindled there
for the remainder of the eon. in present-day Thailand, quail yantras are placed
41 Richard morris and edmund Hardy (eds), Aṅguttara-nikāya (5 vols, london,
1885–1900), vol. 2, pp. 72–3.
42 V. Trenckner and Robert Chalmers (eds), Majjhima-nikāya (3 vols, london,
1888–1902), vol. 2, p. 97ff.
43 lily de Silva, ‘The Paritta Ceremony of Sri lanka: its antiquity and Symbolism’, in
David J. Kalupahana (ed.), Buddhist Thought and Ritual (Delhi, 2001), pp. 139–50, p. 139.
44 de Silva, ‘The Paritta Ceremony’, pp. 139–40.
45 in addition, there are occasions when householders can perform a paritta
ceremony, though Samuels records that such ceremonies are not seen as being quite
as powerful as those performed by monks (Jeffrey Samuels, ‘Texts memorized, Texts
Performed: a Reconsideration of the Role of Paritta in Sri lankan monastic education’,
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 28/2 (2005): 339–67, p. 344 n. 10).

142 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
inside the house – often inscribed on beams – to protect against fire. The power
of the truth uttered by the Bodhisatta is thus used to protect against a very
worldly danger.46
as well as gaining efficacy through the power of truth and loving kindness,
the paritta suttas gain authority through being considered to be the words of the
Buddha or one of his enlightened disciples. as a buddha or arahat, such people are
well able to set an example in terms of both sacca and mettā, which are two of the
10 perfections. most of the paritta suttas are discourses given by the Buddha and
have parallels of varying levels of similarity throughout the Sutta Piṭaka. Three of
the paritta suttas – Khandaparitta (no. 10, verses found in JA 203), Mittānisaṃsa (no.
12, see JA 538) and Moraparitta (no. 13, see JA 159) – find parallels in jātaka stories.
in the Khandavatta-jātaka, the death of a monk from snakebite prompts the
telling of a story from the past, when the Bodhisatta advised his fellow ascetics
to speak verses of kindness towards snakes in order to avoid harm. These verses
are those of the Khandaparitta. in the Temiya-jātaka, the Bodhisatta is a prince
who pretends to be dumb in order to escape kingship and all the worldliness it
entails. about to be killed by his charioteer (on the order of the king) he declares
10 verses in praise of good friendship, which are those found in the Mittānisaṃsa.
in the Mora-jātaka, the Bodhisatta is a peacock who gains protection from certain
verses he has composed in praise of the sun and of the wise. The authority for
the latter two parittas thus comes from the fact that they were composed by
the Bodhisatta and used by him to good effect. The introductory verses to the
paritta suttas themselves mention the occasions in the Buddha’s previous lives
that prompted their use. in the case of the Khandaparitta, however, the paritta
sutta makes no mention of the use of the verses in the time of the Bodhisatta, but
places the authority and composition directly with the Buddha.
of course, the paritta texts are chanted in Pāli, and so the contents will not be
understood by the majority of those present, though Tambiah notes that:
for the Buddhist layman the fact that he does not understand does not mean
for him that the chants are mumbo-jumbo. He believes quite rightly that for
those who know Pali the words contain great wisdom and sense; his ignorance
is a reflection of his unworthiness and involvement in an inferior mode of life
compared with that of the monk.47
However, the contents might be seen as of secondary importance to the
monks too: Samuels emphasises the importance of the monks’ deportment,
appearance and sweetness of voice during the paritta ceremony, over and above
the contents of the texts, which are in many cases not even understood by the
46 my thanks to Peter Skilling for information about this practice, provided during a
conversation in December 2007.
47 S.J. Tambiah, Culture, Thought and Social Action: An Anthropological Perspective
(Cambridge, ma, 1985), pp. 26–7.

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 143
monks themselves.48 like the other examples examined thus far, the contents
are – once again – not the immediate source of meaning or power. However, as in
the other examples, the inherent association of the contents with both Buddha
and dhamma are essential.
THe PoWeR oF THe GeNRe
The practices we have examined thus far have helped to illuminate the different
levels on which jātaka materials – images, texts and words – function. Drawing
these different levels together is the ritual practice of consecrating a new
Buddha-image, as examined in its Northern Thai form by Donald Swearer.49 i
discussed in detail the symbolisms and functions of images of the Buddha
above. What i neglected to examine there, is that an image of the Buddha
only acquires significance after a ritual consecration. This ritual, as enacted in
Northern Thailand, is essentially biographical in focus, and attempts to recreate
symbolically the night during which the Bodhisatta became Buddha, thus
imbuing the image with ‘buddha-ness’.
During the image consecration ritual, the recitation of biographical texts,
including material about his previous lives, ‘reminds’ the statue who he is. Thus
the image becomes the Buddha through a narrative based ceremony: ‘as a gifted
actor becomes the person he or she plays by identifying with the character
portrayed in the drama, so the Buddha image becomes the Buddha’s double after
being instructed in the tathāgata’s life history.’50 as the image relives the Buddha’s
life so does the audience. Thus, Swearer hints, it is the buddha-biography’s ability
to function as an instructive narrative, as well as the particulars it contains about
the person of the Buddha, that ensure the efficacy of the ritual. Jātakas, as part of
that biography, help the image to become the Buddha, and help the devotees to
aspire to his biography. in addition, the Buddha’s life story becomes more than the
life of an individual: the recitation conjures up buddhahood itself, ‘instantiating
in the buddhābhiseka a paradigmatic truth’.51 Thus the image doesn’t just become
a person; rather it becomes a ‘type’, or a paradigm of buddhahood.
Swearer outlines two stages in the ritual of consecration: ‘instructing the
image’ and ‘empowering the image’.52 The first is achieved through the recitation
of biographical texts, which instruct the image in its life history, including
48 Samuels, ‘Texts memorized, Texts Performed’.
49 Donald K. Swearer, Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand
(Princeton, 2004). See also Donald K. Swearer, ‘Consecrating the Buddha’ in Donald S.
lopez Jr. (ed.), Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, 1995), pp. 50–58.
50 Swearer, Becoming the Buddha, p. 122.
51 Swearer, Becoming the Buddha, p. 122.
52 These are the chapter headings for chapters five and six of Swearer, Becoming the
Buddha.

144 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
past lives and vows to buddhahood. The second stage is achieved through the
recitation of texts that transfer the qualities of the Buddha – or of buddhahood
– to the image, thus broadening the focus beyond the person of the Buddha
to the universal paradigm of buddhahood. During the first stage of the ritual,
jātakas are important as part of the biography, which is instructive both to image
and devotees. although jātakas are not explicitly a focus for the second stage of
the ritual, they are ideologically present. For example, the main text used – the
Buddha Abhiseka – contains the following passages:
The lord Buddha, filled with boundless compassion, practiced the thirty
perfections for many eons (four asaṅkheyya and 100,000 kappa), finally attaining
enlightenment. To that Buddha i pay homage. may all the Buddha’s qualities
(guṇa) be invested in this image. may the Buddha’s boundless omniscience be
invested in this image until the Buddhist religion ceases to exist … mahākassapa
Thera approached the Buddha and inquired about the tradition of the Buddhas
(Buddhacarita). The Buddha then preached the Cariyapiṭaka to him. may the
truth of this teaching become a part of this Buddha image for the remainder of
the life of the religion … The Buddha, referring to the miracle of the Pokkhara
rainfall during the time of Prince Vessantara, preached the Mahāvessantara
Jātaka. may the supernatural power of the jātaka also be instilled in this Buddha
image for 5,000 rains retreats.53
Thus the idea that the Buddha’s enlightenment was only possible because of the
long path he traversed through many eons is used to justify the supernormal
greatness finally achieved by the Buddha, and transferred into the image. in
addition, the jātaka stories he taught (in the Cariyāpiṭaka and the Vessantara-
jātaka, texts which are explicitly related to the perfections) are also seen as
having special power which can be transferred to the image.
another link between the image of the Buddha and his long path of gradual
perfection is made in the Lakkhaṇa Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya where his positive
actions in past births are said to be the reasons behind each physical feature
of the Buddha’s perfect body.54 Thus, as Skilling puts it, ‘the jātakas have, in a
sense, culminated in the image’.55 The link made between the powerful image
and a system of ethical or religiously meaningful acts means that devotion
to the image can be ethically justified and linked to his teachings as well as
example.56 although this link is not explicitly made during the ritual, it is clear
53 Swearer, Becoming the Buddha, pp. 162–3.
54 T.W. Rhys-Davids and J. estlin Carpenter (eds), Dīgha-nikāya (3 vols, london, 1889–
1911), vol. 3, p. 142ff.
55 Skilling, Past Lives of the Buddha, p. 68.
56 Devotion might even be viewed as necessary, in gratitude for the wonderful acts
of the past, as is argued by Berkwitz in relation to the Sinhala Thūpavaṃsa. in this text’s
description of the night of awakening, each of the perfections is brought to life as a warrior

Jātaka Ideology in Practice 145
that the many levels on which jātakas operate – as extension of the Buddha’s
biography, as requirement for his enlightenment and thus somehow closely
linked to enlightenment itself, and as powerful teachings – are all connected to
the consecration of images, as well as to the power they are subsequently said
to contain.
The different biographical layers of jātakas are paralleled by Swearer’s
assessment of the three buddhological themes he sees underlying the ritual:57
first, the Buddha as omnipresent through time and yet particularised in history,
which requires two lineages: that of previous buddhas and of Gotama’s previous
lives. Second, the equivalence between Buddha and dhamma: the conclusion
(and climax) of the ceremony is a re-enactment of the Buddha’s first sermon,
during which the image becomes the dhamma-kāya. a text identifying each part
of the Buddha’s physical body with an aspect of the dhamma makes this link
explicit. The third theme is that the image is the mediator of power. all of these
themes resonate with our discussion of jātaka stories, as personal narration and
typological exemplar, conducting power through an association with dhamma
and buddhahood. Thus jātakas, through being able to operate on each of these
levels, fit into each of the different aspects of the ritual.
CoNClUSioN
all the practices examined in this chapter demonstrate that it is the two
biographical aspects of jātaka stories (the associations with Buddha and
Bodhisatta) that allow them to give meaning to a variety of different activities.
in artistic portrayals jātakas can simultaneously narrate the Bodhisatta’s
biography and the Buddha’s dhamma; they can also represent these two aspects,
and thus take an important place in the complex web of symbolism at stūpa sites
and in temples. Their association with the powerful teachings of the Buddha
allows them to form part of paritta collections, where it is both the fact that such
parittas were used by the Bodhisatta, and taught by the Buddha, that allows them
to be considered efficacious. Jātaka manuscripts are also seen as having special
status, which i argued is once again because of this association with Buddha and
dhamma, making their identification as dhamma-kāya more meaningful. even in
those practices which are explicitly concerned with the final life of the Buddha,
his previous existences are seen as an essential counterpart because of being
both biography and teaching. So, for the ceremony that inaugurates a new
protecting the Buddha from māra’s army. The perfections each speak of their gratitude
for the great acts of the past, for example ‘Renunciation’ says ‘Will i not perform an act
of service for the Dear lord who protected me while giving up royal prosperity in crores
of births like this?’ (Stephen C. Berkwitz, Buddhist History in the Vernacular: The Power of the
Past in Late Medieval Sri Lanka (leiden, 2004), pp. 282–3).
57 Swearer, Becoming the Buddha, chapter 7, especially pp. 175–6.

146 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Buddha image, his biography is related to him to bring him to life. Yet whilst this
happens, the devotees are simultaneously able to hear a dhamma teaching and
can resolve to participate in the Buddha’s biography.
The jātaka genre thus contributes to the dynamic interplay between Buddha,
dhamma and Buddhist, in a way that has little to do with the stories themselves
and much more to do with the established idea of what a jātaka is. Particularly
important are the associations between the genre and the perfections that
empower the Buddha, underscore his teaching of dhamma, and are aspired to
by all Buddhists to different degrees. The perfections provide a bridge between
the person of the Buddha (who is a buddha because he has acquired all the
perfections) and Buddhists who strive to follow both his example and teachings.
Therefore in the next and final chapter i will look more closely at the role of the
perfections in weaving together the many different levels on which the jātakas
operate.

Chapter 8
The Perfection of Storytelling
i began this study with a discussion of the varying ways in which jātakas can be
and have been defined. This helped to highlight the fact that defining jātakas as
part of the biography of the Bodhisatta, though the focus of the JA and of this
study, was only one of several possible definitions. as a consequence i concluded
that the origins of this definition within Theravāda Buddhism required serious
investigation. Such investigation has revealed that jātakas were not originally
conceived of as demonstrating the gradual perfection of the Bodhisatta, but
were in fact more strongly associated with the person of the Buddha, whose
accomplishments in the ‘present’ allowed him to remember and tell the stories,
each one appropriate for its audience. The absorption of many stories into
the early form of the JA naturally resulted in a diverse collection that then
benefited greatly from an overall framework and rationale that provided links
to both Buddha and Bodhisatta, and through them to the Buddhist path(s). Such
developments in the jātaka genre were influenced by developments in the history
of the Buddhist community and its doctrines about the paths to bodhi. The two
resulting biographical associations – with Buddha and Bodhisatta – allow the
stories to creatively resolve several tensions that surround the person of the
Buddha, such as his unique yet typological behaviour, his inimitable example,
and his teaching that is worthy of worship. They also allow the stories to work
on several different levels as artistic representations and in Buddhist practice.
Throughout this book i have argued that the structure of the jātaka genre
established and promoted by the JA means that the stories are as much examples
of the Buddha’s great teaching ability, as of the Bodhisatta’s long path to
perfection. The genre thus works on two different levels that are tied together
by the person of the Buddha. These two ideological layers are particularly visible
in the ways in which Buddhists interact with jātakas: as part of the sacred and
cosmic biography of the Buddha, jātakas demonstrate the magnificence of the
Buddha and of his path, but also provide Buddhists with the possibility of sharing
in such a biography; in this way they can function as examples or as objects
of worship that equate with the person of the Buddha. as dhamma teachings
jātakas demonstrate the Buddha’s great skill as teacher, as well as his wit and
wisdom, and allow all forms of narrative to be appropriated and legitimated; as
such they are didactic, but simultaneously worthy of worship as the Buddha’s
dhamma-kāya.
The link in this web that has recurred time and time again is the doctrine
of the 10 perfections. The perfections link the Bodhisatta to the Buddha, since
the opportunities for practising perfections in the jātakas allow him to progress

148 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
from one to the other. They also link the Bodhisatta and ordinary Buddhists,
since by practising the perfections one can emulate the path of the Bodhisatta,
even if one is right at the other end of the path. Finally, the perfections link
the Buddhist renunciant community (with the Buddha at their head) with lay
Buddhists, since through the practise of dāna (often portrayed in jātakas as the
highest perfection) the monks are supported materially, and the laity spiritually.
Thus by linking jātakas to the perfections, Theravāda scholastics allowed them
to be meaningful to both lay and renunciant Buddhists, on all stages of all
paths. Furthermore, the Lakkhaṇa Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya links the superior
parts of the physical body of a buddha to their cause in the perfection of certain
qualities in previous births. Therefore the Buddha not only demonstrates his
gradual acquisition of the perfections and teaches their benefits, he is the literal
embodiment of them.
There are in fact three main players in this web: the Buddha, the Bodhisatta
and Buddhists. The stories are not just about the person and path of the
Buddha and Bodhisatta, for they allow Buddhists to explore the nature of their
relation to past and future buddhas as well as their own past and future selves.
The interactions between Buddha, Bodhisatta and Buddhist, facilitated by the
doctrine of the perfections, can be seen on both the level of individual stories
and texts, and in the ways in which the genre as a whole is used. To draw this
study to a conclusion, therefore, i would like to look at some examples of how
this interaction works.
a PeRFeCT SToRY: THe moNKeY GaRDeNeRS ReViSiTeD
let me return once more to the story with which i began: after visiting a garden
ruined by a foolish gardener, the Buddha tells of how a wise man (the Bodhisatta)
once commented upon the folly of monkeys who pulled up plants in order to see
how much water they might require. in this story there is an interaction between
Buddha, Bodhisatta and the Buddhist audience, mediated by the perfections.
The Buddha, because of his cultivation of the perfections, is able to see into the
distant past, and to relate events unknown to his audience. He also knows the
appropriate story to tell in a given situation, and can use it to entertain and
thereby – to paraphrase W.S. Gilbert – to trick into learning with a laugh. The
Bodhisatta, in the process of cultivating the perfections, demonstrates his wisdom
in observing the monkeys and commenting on their situation. By appreciating
that the Bodhisatta has now become the Buddha we can also see his wisdom in
following the Buddhist path, which prevents him from being drawn into karmic
repetition, as demonstrated by the gardener both in his birth as a monkey and in
his later human birth. Hearing this story a Buddhist may be inspired to develop
faith in the Buddha and his words, and to strive for greater wisdom. moreover
a Buddhist might aspire to eventual escape from the repetitive karmic cycles
that make repeating the same mistakes in birth after birth – as the gardener

The Perfection of Storytelling 149
did – almost inevitable. This escape requires the cultivation of the perfections
demonstrated by Buddha and Bodhisatta.
The Buddha, Bodhisatta and Buddhists are thus in a constant interaction,
and this is because of the qualities taught and demonstrated by the Buddha
and Bodhisatta, and appreciated and aspired to by the Buddhist audience. The
quality under discussion in this particular story is wisdom, in both a worldly
and Buddhist sense. To appreciate the importance of the framing of this story as
a jātaka, we might consider how the story would operate were the Buddha and
Bodhisatta absent. We would still learn that these monkeys are foolish, and that
the wise man is wise, and that the storyteller is witty. But without the presence
of a man on a path and another man demonstrating the end of this path, the
story has little impact. The framing as Bodhisatta-biography and Buddha-
dhamma make the story more able to communicate Buddhist ideals such as the
perfections, even where the central message of the story itself seems to be of
little importance.
as i have noted, it is the inclusion of the story in the JA with its united frame
that add these layers of value. The real success of the JA is its ability, through
its framing structure, to comment on kamma (with some continuity between
lives) and arahatship and buddhahood (with the realisation of anattā), heaven
and nibbāna, the repetitive nature of existence and the possibility of a finite
biography. individual stories can have little inherent Buddhist value, and yet the
perfection of the narrator and the understanding that the stories demonstrate
the pursuit of perfection, result in a perfect Buddhist story.
The interaction between Buddha, Bodhisatta and Buddhists is not only a
feature of the JA, nor is it limited to Theravāda jātakas composed in the shadow
of this great collection. in mahāyāna Buddhism these three groups remain
central, though here the characters are multiplied in number, time and place.
By highlighting the common importance of interactions between these three
groups in both mahāyāna ideology and Theravāda jātaka texts i do not intend to
suggest that jātakas are ‘proto-mahāyāna’, nor that they in any way compromise
Theravāda ideology. Rather, the importance of the Bodhisatta and his path in
early Buddhism and the continued development of this theme in Theravāda texts
demonstrates that the gulf between mahāyāna and other Buddhist traditions is
not, perhaps, as great as it is often perceived to be. after all, these traditions co-
existed in South asia for many years; even Sri lanka was influenced by mahāyāna
ideals, most strongly in the abhayagiri Vihāra, but also in the mahāvihāra
commentarial tradition. as a step towards understanding the relationship
between jātakas and the bodhisatta path, i hope that my study also contributes
towards a wider understanding of the relationship between mahāyāna and non-
mahāyāna (i hesitate to use the term Śrāvakayāna for obvious reasons) ideas
about buddhahood and bodhisatt(v)ahood.
When talking about non-mahāyāna Buddhism i am of course referring to
more than just the school which eventually identified itself as Theravāda. most
likely because the process of compiling jātakas ran over into the period after

150 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
the geographical dispersal of Buddhism, each school of early indian Buddhism
has a different number of jātakas as well as a different way of organising them.1
No school has a collection comparable to the JA, and so the generic associations
of jātakas propagated in that text must be seen as specific to the Theravāda
school. The different early indian texts adhere to these generic characteristics
to different levels. For example, the many jātakas in the Mūlasarvāstivāda vinaya
and the Mahāvastu share the biographical framing in the teaching career of the
Buddha, which is also central to the JA. Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, on the other hand,
is a literary Sanskrit composition, with no pretence of being buddhavacana. it
does, however, claim to illustrate the exemplary behaviour of the Bodhisatta.
The Liu Du Ji Jing – a Chinese jātaka collection translated from Sanskrit in the
third century ce – goes a step further by structuring its stories around the six
perfections.2 The analysis i have made of the JA and the Theravāda tradition
of jātakas more generally may not be applicable to all Buddhist jātakas, but the
widespread portrayals of the perfections of the Buddha and Bodhisatta suggest
there may be considerable overlap.
a PeRFeCT GeNRe: VeSaK CeleBRaTioNS iN SRi laNKa
one final example will help to demonstrate that the association with the
perfections, as well as with the Buddha and Bodhisatta, allow the jātaka genre
to play a vibrant role in Buddhist societies. This will involve taking a step away
from the level of individual stories and texts, in an examination of the role of the
genre as a whole in an important Buddhist festival: the celebration of Vesak in
Sri lanka.3 This festival marks the day upon which three major events in the life
of the Buddha – his birth, awakening and death (or complete awakening) – are
1 We have, after all, little understanding of how the fifth nikāya or āgama of the
early Buddhist schools was put together. as collections of stories it is possible that jātaka
texts may have been only preserved orally, or in local languages. This might explain a text
such as Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, which clearly had a prior collection as its source, perhaps a
collection similar to the JA. The survival of the Jātakamālā in the absence of its source text
could be explained by its superior (and not exclusively Buddhist) literary form. However,
if jātaka collections like the JA existed and shared its biographical associations, it seems
unlikely that a literary authored text would survive and not a buddhavacana collection.
The varying types of texts containing jātakas, as well as the survival of some smaller
collections exclusively of jātakas, suggest to me that it is more likely that each school
developed different ways of organising their own jātakas. However, much more work is
required before the history of such collections can be understood.
2 See edouard Chavannes, Cinq Cent Contes et Apologues: Extraits du Tripiṭaka Chinois
(4 vols, Paris: adrien-maisonneuve, 1962, first published 1910–1935 1962), vol. 1, stories
1–88.
3 During this section, which is based on fieldwork carried out in Sri lanka during
Vesak week 2007, i will make use of Sinhala terms. i have transliterated these according to

The Perfection of Storytelling 151
believed to have occurred. it is thus necessarily focused upon the biography
of the Buddha. The activities which make up the festival are imbued with
significance because of their association with the Buddha’s life story. although
the festival is focused upon events in the final life of the Buddha, Jātaka stories
form a prominent part of the celebrations, and are tied to the final-life biography
through their associations with the perfections required for buddhahood as well
as their place in the dhamma-teachings given by the Buddha.
of central importance to the Vesak celebrations is the moment of awakening,
which forms the backdrop to many of the more prominent activities during
Sri lankan Vesak. many Buddhists make or buy lanterns and hang coloured
lights around their homes and gardens, as a symbol of the rays of light that
emanated from the Buddha’s body as he achieved buddhahood. The shadvarna
(six-coloured) flag which is now flown in every Buddhist residence during Vesak
week also represents these rays of light, said to be blue, yellow, red, white and
orange, followed by a combination of the five (Sin pabasara; P pabhāsa – literally
‘brightness’ or ‘illumination’). other aspects of the festivities, such as the singing
of Bhakti gī (devotional songs, originally inspired by the use of carols at Christmas)
and the sending of cards are relatively recent ‘cultural borrowings’, and though
the content is specifically Buddhist, it is not clear how relevant to Vesak in
particular these activities are. The cards contain Sinhalese verses praising the
Buddha and invoking the blessings of the triple gem on the recipient, and the
songs contain similar praises, and sometimes include biographical descriptions
that highlight the Buddha’s greatness. in addition, one popular justification for
the songs, apparently used by mrs Pushpa Hewavitarana when she argued for a
revival of the practice in 1956, is that the devas burst into song when they saw
that Gotama had become Buddha. Thus an attempt is made to link this practice
too with the moment of awakening.
The moment of awakening is the result of a long preparation and a sustained
cultivation of the perfections. according to many Buddhists, a celebration of the
Buddha’s life is really a celebration of the Buddhist path that he demonstrated,
and therefore it comes as no suprise that the perfections are also closely tied
up in Sri lankan Vesak celebrations. as is the case throughout the year, the
two most prominent perfections are sīla and dāna. The former is observed with
greater than normal strictness during Vesak, when Buddhists traditionally
strive extra hard to keep the pansil (P pañcasīlāni – five precepts), and some take
on a further three or five precepts temporarily. The observation of the first and
fifth precepts – against killing and consuming intoxicants – is even enforced to a
certain extent by the state: the sale of alcohol is strictly prohibited during Vesak
week, and the slaughter of animals is also avoided for the day itself, while some
animals due for slaughter are set free. There is also a great flurry of dāna: the
usual temple gifts are swelled in numbers and supplemented by the traditional
the same criteria as Pāli transliterations to allow consistency and easy comparison with
Pāli cognates.

152 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
giving of robes to monks and books to piriveṇas (monastic schools). Devotees
dressed in white carrying bags of money process with their extended family
towards the temple. Temple visitors are bombarded with pleas to donate to one
or another good cause, and roadside stalls appear with free food and drink for
all passers-by. a gift of the body is said to be still more meritorious, and the gift
of blood is a widespread practice: newspaper advertisements invite all (18 to
55 years of age, over 50 kilograms in weight) to practice the perfection of dāna.
Containing even clearer resonances with jātaka literature is the registration at a
Colombo temple’s 2007 Vesak celebrations of corneas to be donated to the blind.4
This practice is a deliberate emulation of the very popular Sibi-jātaka, where the
Bodhisatta gives away his eyes in a demonstration of his great dāna.5
Jātakas, especially thanks to their strong association with the perfections, are
thus subtly invoked in some Vesak activities. However, there is also explicit use
of jātaka stories, the most obvious being on toraṇas (also called pandal). These are
large wooden structures covered with illustrated boards or canvases and wired
up to hundreds of coloured bulbs that are set to flash in a variety of complex
patterns. The former illustrate jātaka stories, historical events or scenes from
the life of the Buddha ( jātakas are easily the most popular), with an image of the
Buddha himself forming a centrepiece. The latter imitate the light emitting from
the Buddha as he attained enlightenment. During Vesak week evenings, crowds
gather around the base of the toraṇa. in case the audience are only there for the
magnificent lights, they may be reminded of the true significance by a ceremony
involving such activities as raising the Buddhist flag, burning incense, chanting
the three refuges, and listening to a sermon based on the story in question. only
then is the image of the Buddha uncovered and the lights lit, with spectacular
effect. in some places the painted scenes are brought to life by singers or actors,
broadcast over the huge sound system that is incoporated into the toraṇa.
most of the practices of Sri lankan Vesak are relatively recent: the lanterns
and flags are said to date from the late nineteenth century; the singing also dates
from the colonial period and the cards from even more recent times. However,
the use of jātaka illustrations during Sri lankan festivals may be attested to in
much older sources, although admittedly in this case the festival is not Vesak
but the parade of the Sacred Tooth Relic. The fourth-century Chinese pilgrim
4 ‘“Buddha Poornima” at Sai mandir’ in the Sunday Observer, 29 april 2007, p. 38.
5 B. Simpson (‘impossible Gifts: Bodies, Buddhism and Bioethics in Contemporary
Sri lanka’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 10/4 (2004): 839–59) notes that Sri
lankan donated corneas are so plentiful they are exported all over the world. He also
notes that appeals for blood and organ donation are often framed in Buddhist idiom,
and that both doctors and patients refer to jātaka stories in support of the importance of
body-part donation to Sinhalese Buddhists. He states (p. 843): ‘For Sinhala Buddhists, the
idea of giving the body and its parts is captured in the much repeated formula: “aes, his,
mas, lē”, meaning literally “eyes, head, flesh, blood”, which refers to the four main objects
that appear as donations in Buddhist folk literature.’

The Perfection of Storytelling 153
Faxian witnessed one such parade and records that 10 days beforehand the king
appointed someone to remind the people of the Bodhisatta’s great acts with a
declaration beginning:
The Bodhisattva practiced for the incalculably long time of three asaṅkhyeya
(immeasurable) kalpas, never sparing his own life. He gave up his kingdom, his
wife, and his child. He even tore out his eyes to give them to others. He cut his
own flesh to ransom a dove, gave his head as alms, offered his body to feed a
famished tigress, and did not begrudge his marrow and brain.6
Following this proclamation:
the king set up on both sides of the road [images of] the various transmigratory
forms of the Bodhisattva in his past five hundred incarnations, such as Sudāna,
Śyāmaka, the elephant king, a deer, and a horse. all these forms, true to life,
were painted in colors and richly adorned.7
The implication is that for each story the Bodhisatta’s character was represented
by painted statues. Contemporary Vesak banners may not attempt to illustrate
all the jātakas, nor do they focus so explicitly on the person of the Bodhisatta,
but there is still a striking continuity between the two festivals. in both cases the
intention is undoubtedly to demonstrate the greatness of the person who forms
the subject of the festival, for, like Vesak, the Tooth Relic Perahera is focused
upon the person of the Buddha.8
one advantage of the modern tendency to illustrate just a few jātaka
stories, rather than all as happened in Faxian’s day, is that they can be carefully
6 li Rongxi (trans.), ‘The Journey of the eminent monk Faxian’ in li Rongxi
and albert a. Dalia (trans.), Lives of Great Monks and Nuns (Berkeley, 2002), pp. 155–214,
p. 206. The example jātakas mentioned at first glance seem peculiar, since they are not
all contained in the Theravāda collection. However, they are in fact jātakas which Faxian
related earlier in his travelogue in relation to pilgrimage sites in North india. it is possible,
therefore, that Faxian is here re-creating an only partially-remembered proclamation.
another possibility is that the procession was orchestrated by the abhayagiri vihāra,
which was mahāyāna in its leanings and hosted Faxian during his visit to Sri lanka.
7 li, ‘The Journey of the eminent monk Faxian’, p. 206. i am very grateful to max
Deeg for discussing this passage with me.
8 The esala Poya day (when the famous Kandy perahera takes place, including the
parade of the tooth relic, although in modern times an imitation is used) marks several
biographical events: mayādevī’s dream about the white elephant entering her side (said
to be the moment Gotama Bodhisatta descended into her womb); Gotama Bodhisatta’s
renunciation; Gotama Buddha’s first sermon. The practice of illustrating jātaka stories on
banners is also found in the bun phawet festival of Northeast Thailand, and here the focus
is apparently ‘praising the meritorious acts in previous lives of Buddha’ (Hayashi Yukio,
Practical Buddhism among the Thai-Lao (Kyoto and melbourne, 2003), p. 132).

154 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
chosen. For example the primary toraṇa in central Kandy in 2007 illustrated
the Mātupōsaka-jātakaya (Mātiposaka-jātaka, JA 455) in which the Bodhisatta
is an elephant devoted to looking after his mother. one day he helps a lost
traveller find the way home, but the latter hears a proclamation that the king
requires a new royal elephant, and subsequently betrays the Bodhisatta into the
service of the king. The Bodhisatta tells the king of his duty to his mother and
is allowed to return home. after his mother dies and he performs the funeral
rites, he lives with some hermits who subsequently build an image of the
Bodhisatta to worship. The other, smaller, Kandy toraṇa (a few hundred yards
away) illustrated the Mahāsupina-jātakaya (Mahāsupina-jātaka, JA 77), which tells
how the Bodhisatta correctly interpreted the king’s 16 dreams, each of which is
portrayed in a separate scene. The toraṇa outside Kelaniya temple illustrated the
Apannaka-jātakaya (Apaṇṇaka-jātaka, JA 1) where the Bodhisatta is a wise caravan
leader. other toraṇa in Colombo portrayed Sama-jātakaya (Sāma-jātaka, JA 540; the
Bodhisatta cares for his blind parents), Kelisīla-jātakaya (Keḷisīla-jātaka, JA 202;
the Bodhisatta as Sakka teaches a king to respect old age), and Samibulā-jātakaya
(Sambula-jātaka, JA 519; the Bodhisatta admonishes his son for mistreating his
wife despite her loyalty in the face of danger). in addition to the toraṇa, Vesak is a
time for plays and dances in the villages of Sri lanka. The plays more often than
not take jātaka stories as their base,9 and once again the most popular jātakas for
enacting are strongly biographical in focus: according to Disanayaka, the four
most popular are Kusa ( JA 531), Vidhurapaṇḍita ( JA 545), Ummagga ( JA 546) and
Vessantara ( JA 547).10 The latter three are the last stories of the jātaka collection,
and are thus associated strongly with the perfections. in contrast to modern
jātaka books, therefore, jātaka stories at Vesak seem to be chosen with the specific
aim of holding up the Bodhisatta as a good example of both specifically Buddhist
qualities and responsible social practices.
The jātakas used in Vesak are thus deliberately used as snippets from an
exemplary biography, and one way they fit into the rest of the festival is by
extending the Buddha’s biography back to the time when he was a Bodhisatta.
The biography is pushed back still further by a form of Vesak dance called Sūvisi
vivarana naeṭum, ‘Dance of the 24 predictions’, which is performed in villages in
the Kandy district. accompanied by song, the dance narrates the 24 predictions
to buddhahood given to Gotama by the 24 previous buddhas, as related in the
Nidānakathā.11 Just as in the texts and the temple illustrations, the biography of
Gotama Buddha includes this narration, as well as narrations of jātaka stories
9 according to J.B. Disanayaka (The Vesak Fullmoon Festival (Nugegoda, Sri lanka,
1993), p. 26), apart from the general popularity of the stories, one possible reason for this
is that it is not considered possible to act the part of the Buddha; acting the Bodhisatta,
in contrast, is not a problem. This allows biographical plays to be enacted during a
biographical festival.
10 Disanayaka, The Vesak Fullmoon Festival, pp. 26–7.
11 Disanayaka, The Vesak Fullmoon Festival, pp. 28–9.

The Perfection of Storytelling 155
such as the ones painted on toraṇa and enacted in village plays. Thus although
the festival is only explicitly concerned with the Buddha’s birth, enlightenment
and death, the rest of his biography is also celebrated as what allowed and led to
the final moment of awakening.
it is not only the long biography of the great being who eventually became
the Buddha that is celebrated. Since Vesak is a celebration of the Buddha, and
the reason Buddhists celebrate the Buddha is because of his dhamma, the latter
is of central importance during the festival. i have already noted the strong
emphasis on the perfections during Vesak week, especially sīla and dāna, which
are of course part of the dhamma teachings. The perfections, as a rationale for
the Buddhist path, form a link between jātakas and the final life of the Buddha.
They also provide a link between a Buddhist’s own aspirations and the personal
biography of the Buddha/Bodhisatta. This link is sometimes made explicit, for
example in a special Vesak feature article in The Sunday Times that lays out each of
the perfections we should be striving towards with examples from the Buddha’s
own previous lives.12 Such aspirations are not wholly towards the perfections
or buddhahood, though; an article two pages later lays out some instructions
on how to achieve rebirth as the king of the gods,13 and this attitude is amply
reflected in the preoccupation with the acquisition of merit through worship
of the Buddha during the festival. as always, these two types of aspiration and
preoccupation happily co-exist, and both – as we have seen in earlier chapters
– find legitimation and inspiration in jātaka stories.
Whether helping the devotee towards nibbāna or rebirth in the heavenly
realms, many other aspects of the dhamma also form part of the rationale for
Vesak activities. The newspapers try to educate readers about Buddhist ideals, as
well as the history and significance of the festival. in addition they contain sundry
small articles about Vesak activities around the island, as well as reviews of the
major Vesak annuals. There are several of the latter in circulation, containing
a great variety of articles, including scholarly examinations of Buddhist
philosophy by some of the island’s top professors, devotional poetry by leading
authors, and news articles about Buddhism worldwide. in addition there are
special programmes on Sri lankan television channels, including debates about
Buddhist issues, devotional songs, and live broadcasts of Vesak celebrations.
everywhere Buddhist ideals are being promoted to the general public. Jātakas,
of course, are a traditional method of imparting Buddhist teachings in Sri lanka.
Their link to Vesak is therefore not just through their association with the
biography of the person whose life is being celebrated; jātakas have a practical
role to play in communicating the dhamma, and as such demonstrate the great
teaching ability of the Buddha.
12 Upali Salgado, ‘a Stepping Stone to end Suffering’ in The Sunday Times Plus, 29
april 2007, p. 4.
13 Chandrani Fernando, ‘How to be Reborn as Sakka, King of Gods’ in The Sunday
Times Plus, 29 april 2007, p. 6.

156 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
We can now see that there are several layers of interaction between jātakas
and Vesak. The Bodhisatta set an example through, amongst other things, his
great dāna. This is emulated by devotees during Vesak (both explicitly and
implicitly associated with jātaka stories), as well as taught as a virtue through
toraṇa, plays, newspaper and annual articles and so on. as is commonly said by
Buddhists, the greatest gift of all is the gift of the dhamma, and this great gift
given by the Buddha forms the focus for much of Vesak. once again, these two
biographical elements of jātaka stories – their association with the Buddha as
teacher and Bodhisatta as celebrated example – allow them to operate on these
different levels during the festival, linked by the 10 perfections.
as with many festivals, the religious significance of Vesak is caught up in
a carnival-like atmosphere. it is difficult to say what religious significance is
intended by the grand parade of fire-spinners, Kandyan drummers and dancers,
and finely attired elephants, put on by the Temple of the Tooth in Kandy. There is
also an underlying spirit of rivalry, most clearly seen in the lantern competitions
held in every major town. as noted above, the symbolism of the lantern is
clear, and in addition many of the more elaborate lanterns take a biographical
theme, yet the intense secrecy during preparation and the displays of large,
commercially-sponsored creations in roadside booths with proud-looking
creators standing nearby betray a more competitive, rather than devotional,
spirit. in addition, the large toraṇa on display in Kandy market in 2007 declared
itself to be the work of a local electrical company, whose business address and
telephone number were provided in large letters on the base of the display; one
assumes this was not to make delivery of the merit easier, but rather to turn
admirers into customers. The variety of levels on which the festival operates, of
course, are not mutually exclusive. Vesak is a time of celebration, of community
spirit and being with the family. The bright lights, competitions and elephants
do not prevent engagement with the religious meaning of the festival; rather
they make it more accessible and enduring. There is therefore one final link to
be made between Vesak and jātaka stories: both serve as a vehicle for Buddhist
teachings, yet through containing many layers of meaning and engagement,
they remain accessible and appealing to all.
a PeRFeCT BioGRaPHY: HaPPY eNDiNGS
Throughout my examination of the texts and practices involving jātaka stories
the recurring themes are clear: as Bodhisatta biography jātakas demonstrate the
magnificence of the Buddha and of his path, and in this way jātaka images and
texts can function as icons or objects of worship that equate with the person of
the Buddha and embody his perfection (with its associated power). However,
jātakas also provide Buddhists with the possibility of sharing in such a biography,
and so the interaction between jātaka image/text/words and Buddhist is a
dynamic one. as dhamma teachings jātakas demonstrate the Buddha’s great skill

The Perfection of Storytelling 157
as teacher, which allows an appreciation of both the contents of the teachings
and the person of the teacher. The twofold association with Buddha’s dhamma and
Bodhisatta’s biography thus plays a central part in practices involving jātakas,
and helps to explain the enduring popularity of the stories. all these aspects
are linked by the perfections that give the Buddha his power, the Bodhisatta his
purpose, the dhamma its rationale, and Buddhists their ideals.
These ideals are varied, reflecting the various levels on which Buddhist
doctrine and practice operate. on one level the stories encourage worldly
wisdom, simple good conduct, or the sort of generous acts that lead to a
happier rebirth. Doubtless the interaction between many Buddhists and jātaka
stories is limited to this level, but there are also other possibilities. Ultimately,
of course, the Buddha’s narration of the tiresome repetition in his and other
people’s past lives, and his own escape from this painful cycle, should inspire the
audience to pursue the path to liberation themselves. Thus the goal is not to live
happily ever after, since this possibility is denied by the three characteristics of
existence – impermanence, suffering and not-self. Rather, the happy ending for
the Buddhist jātaka audience is escape from their own biography, through the
help of the Buddha’s.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Bibliography
abeynayake, oliver, A Textual and Historical Analysis of the Khuddaka Nikāya
(Colombo: Karunaratne, 1984).
adikaram, e.W., Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon (Dehiwala, Sri lanka: The
Buddhist Cultural Centre, 1946).
alsdorf, l., ‘The Ākhyāna Theory Reconsidered’, Journal of the Oriental Institute, 13
(1963/1964): 195–207.
ambasta, S.P. (ed.), The Useful Plants of India (New Delhi: Publications & information
Directorate, Council of Scientific & industrial Research, 1986).
Ānandajoti, Bhikkhu (ed. and trans.), Safeguard Recitals (Kandy, Sri lanka:
Buddhist Publication Society, 2004).
appleton, Naomi, Seduced by Saṃsāra, Saved by a Flying Horse: A Study of the Aśvarāja
and Siṃhala Stories (m.Phil. Thesis, Cardiff University, 2004).
appleton, Naomi, ‘The Story of the Horse-King and the merchant Siṃhala in
Buddhist Texts’, Buddhist Studies Review, 23/2 (2006): 187–201.
appleton, Naomi, ‘a Place for the Bodhisatta: The local and the Universal in
Jātaka Stories’, Acta Orientalia Vilnensia, 8/1 (2007): 109–22.
appleton, Naomi, Biography and Buddhahood: Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
(D.Phil. Thesis, oxford University, 2008).
appleton, Naomi, ‘Temptress on the Path: Women as objects and Subjects in
Buddhist Jātaka Stories’, in Pamela anderson (ed.), New Topics in Feminist
Philosophy of Religion: Contestations and Transcendence Incarnate (Dordrecht:
Springer, 2010), pp. 103–15.
appleton, Naomi, ‘in the Footsteps of the Buddha? Women and the bodhisatta Path
in Theravāda Buddhism’, Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion (forthcoming).
Bareau, andré, ‘The Place of the Buddha Gautama in the Buddhist Religion during
the Reign of aśoka’ in Somaratna Balasooriya et al. (eds), Buddhist Studies in
Honour of Walpola Rahula (london: Gordon Fraser, 1980), pp. 1–9.
Barua, D.l. (ed.), Achariya Dhammapāla’s Paramatthadīpanī, Being the Commentary
on the Cariyā-Piṭaka (london: Pali Text Society, 1939).
Behm, allan J., ‘The eschatology of the Jatakas’, Numen, 18/1 (1971): 30–44.
Bell, alexander Peter, Didactic Narration: Jataka Iconography in Dunhuang with a
Catalogue of Jataka Representations in China (münster: litt Verlag, 2000).
Berkwitz, Stephen C., Buddhist History in the Vernacular: The Power of the Past in Late
Medieval Sri Lanka (leiden: Brill, 2004).
Blackburn, anne m., ‘looking for the Vinaya: monastic Discipline in the Practical
Canons of the Theravāda’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist
Studies, 22/2 (1999): 281–309.

160 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Blackburn, anne m., Buddhist Learning and Textual Practice in Eighteenth Century
Lankan Monastic Culture (Princeton and oxford: Princeton University Press,
2001).
Bode, mabel Haynes, The Pali Literature of Burma (london: Royal asiatic Society,
1909).
Bollée, W.B. (ed. and trans.), Kuṇāla Jātaka (london: luzac & Co., 1970).
Bond, George D., ‘The Development and elaboration of the arahant ideal in the
Theravada Buddhist Tradition’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion,
52/2 (1984): 227–42.
Boucher, Daniel, ‘The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā and its Role in the medieval Cult
of the Relics’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 14/1
(1991): 1–27.
Brandis, Dietrich, Indian Trees (london: Constable, 1906).
Braun, Heinz, ‘The Colophons of Burmese manuscripts’, Journal of the Pali Text
Society, 27 (2002): 147–53.
Brown, Robert l., ‘Narrative as icon: The Jātaka Stories in ancient indian and
Southeast asian architecture’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the
Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i
Press, 1997), pp. 64–109.
Burlingame, e.W., ‘Sources of the Pāli Commentaries’, Journal of the American
Oriental Society, 38 (1918): 267–8.
Burlingame, e.W. (trans.), Buddhist Legends (3 vols, Cambridge, ma: Harvard
University Press, 1921).
Campany, Robert F., ‘Notes on the Devotional Uses and Symbolic Functions
of Sūtra Texts as Depicted in early Chinese Buddhist miracle Tales and
Hagiographies’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 14/1
(1991): 28–72.
Carrithers, michael, The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka (Delhi: oxford University Press,
1983).
Carrithers, michael, Why Humans Have Cultures: Explaining Anthropology and Social
Diversity (oxford: oxford University Press, 1992).
Chavannes, edouard, Cinq Cent Contes et Apologues: Extraits du Tripiṭaka Chinois (4
vols, Paris: adrien-maisonneuve, 1962, first published 1910–1935).
Clough, Rev. B., Dictionary of English and Singhalese, and Singhalese and English
Languages, vol. 2 (Colombo: Wesleyan mission Press, 1830).
Collins, Steven, Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
Collins, Steven, Nirvana: Concept, Imagery, Narrative (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2010).
Cone, margaret and Gombrich, Richard F., The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara
(oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977).
Cousins, l.S., ‘Supreme Qualities: the Development of the lists of Four, Six and
Ten Pārami(tā)s’, paper presented at the 12th Conference of the international
association of Buddhist Studies, lausanne, 1999.

Bibliography 161
Cowell, e.B. (ed. – several translators), The Jātaka, or Stories of the Buddha’s Former
Births (6 vols, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895–1907).
Cummings, mary, The Lives of the Buddha in the Art and Literature of Asia (ann
arbor: Center for South and Southeast asian Studies, University of michigan,
1982).
Dayal, Har, The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature (Delhi: motilal
Banarsidass, 1999).
De, Gokuldas, Significance and Importance of Jātakas, with Special Reference to Bhārhut
(Calcutta: Calcutta University Press, 1951).
Dehejia, Vidya, ‘on modes of Visual Narration in early Buddhist art’, The Art
Bulletin, 72/3 (1990): 374–92.
de Jong, J.W., ‘Review of oskar von Hinüber’s Entstehung und Aufbau der Jātaka-
Sammlung’, Indo-Iranian Journal, 42 (1999): 375–8.
de Silva, lily, ‘The Paritta Ceremony of Sri lanka: its antiquity and Symbolism’
in David J. Kalupahana (ed.), Buddhist Thought and Ritual (Delhi: motilal
Banarsidass, 2001), pp. 139–50.
de Zoysa, louis, A Catalogue of Pāli, Sinhalese, and Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Temple
Libraries of Ceylon (Colombo: George J.a. Skeen, 1885).
Dhammika, S. and Harmer, Susan, Stories the Buddha Told (Singapore: marshall
Cavendish, 2006).
Dimock, edward C., ‘Religious Biography in india: The “Nectar of the acts”
of Caitanya’ in Frank e. Reynolds and Donald Capps (eds), The Biographical
Process: Studies in the History and Psychology of Religion (The Hague: mouton &
Co., 1976), pp. 109–17.
Disanayaka, J.B., The Vesak Fullmoon Festival (Nugegoda, Sri lanka: Sarasavi
Publishers, 1993).
endo, Toshiichi, Buddha in Theravada Buddhism: A Study of the Concept of Buddha in
the Pali Commentaries (Dehiwela, Sri lanka: Buddhist Cultural Centre, 1997).
Fausbøll, V. (ed.), The Jātaka together with its commentary being tales of the anterior
births of Gotama Buddha (6 vols, london: Trübner and Co., 1877–1896).
Fausbøll, V., Catalogue of the Mandalay Mss in the India Office Library (london: Pali
Text Society, 1896).
Feer, m. léon, A Study of the Jātakas, Analytical and Critical, trans. G.m. Foulkes
(Calcutta: Susil Gupta, 1963, first published in Journal Asiatique, 1875).
Feer, m. léon (ed.), The Saṃyutta-nikāya of the Sutta-Piṭaka (6 vols, london: Pali
Text Society, 1884–1904).
Fontein, Jan, ‘Notes on the Jātakas and avadānas of Barabuḍur’ in luis o. Gomez
and Hiram W. Woodward Jr. (eds), Barabuḍur: History and Significance of a
Buddhist Monument (Berkeley: asian Humanities Press, 1981), pp. 85–108.
Foucher, alfred, Les Vies Antérieures du Bouddha, D’Après les Textes et les Monuments
de l’Inde (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1955).
Fowler, alastair, Kinds of Literature: An Introduction to the Theory of Genres and Modes
(oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982).

162 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Frauwallner, e., The Earliest Vinaya and the Beginnings of Buddhist Literature (Rome:
istituto italiano per il medio ed estremo-oriente, 1956).
Gaffney, Sean, ‘The Pāli Nidānakathā and its Tibetan Translation: its Textual
Precursors and associated literature’ in Tadeusz Skorupski (ed.), The Buddhist
Forum, Volume IV (london: School of oriental and african Studies, 1996), pp.
75–91.
Gellner, David N., Monk, Householder and Tantric Priest: Newar Buddhism and its
Hierarchy of Ritual (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
Ginsburg, Henry, Thai Art and Culture: Historic Manuscripts from Western Collections
(london: British library, 2000).
Gombrich, Richard F., Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural
Highlands of Ceylon (oxford: Clarendon, 1971).
Gombrich, Richard, ‘The Significance of Former Buddhas in the Theravādin
Tradition’ in Somaratna Balasooriya et al. (eds), Buddhist Studies in Honour of
Walpola Rahula (london: Gordon Fraser, 1980), pp. 62–72.
Gombrich, Richard, ‘The Vessantara Jātaka, The Rāmāyaṇa and the Dasaratha
Jātaka’, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 105/3 (1985): 427–37.
Gombrich, Richard F., Theravāda Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to
Modern Colombo (london and New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1988).
Granoff, Phyllis and Shinohara, Koichi (eds), Other Selves: Autobiography and
Biography in Cross-Cultural Perspective (oakville, ontario: mosaic Press, 1994).
Grey, leslie, A Concordance of Buddhist Birth Stories (2nd edn, oxford: Pali Text
Society, 1994).
Gross, Rita m., Buddhism After Patriarchy: A Feminist History, Analysis, and
Reconstruction of Buddhism (albany: State University of New York Press,
1993).
Gupta, Shakti m., Plant Myths and Traditions in India (2nd edn, New Delhi:
munshiram manoharlal, 1991).
Hallisey, Charles and Hansen, anne, ‘Narrative, Sub-ethics, and the moral life:
Some evidence from Theravāda Buddhism’, Journal of Religious Ethics, 24/2
(1996): 305–27.
Harischandra, D.V.J., Psychiatric Aspects of Jataka Stories (Galle, Sri lanka: Upuli,
1998).
Harrison, Paul, ‘is the Dharma-kāya the Real “Phantom Body” of the Buddha?’,
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 15/1 (1992): 44–94.
Harvey, Peter, An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics: Foundations, Values and Issues
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Hayashi, Yukio, Practical Buddhism among the Thai-Lao: Religion in the Making of a
Region (Kyoto: Kyoto University Press and melbourne: Trans Pacific Press,
2003).
Hegarty, James m., A Fire of Tongues: Narrative Patterning in the Sanskrit Mahābhārata
(Ph.D. Thesis, manchester University, 2004).
Herbert, Patricia m., The Life of the Buddha (london: British library, 1993).

Bibliography 163
von Hinüber, oskar, A Handbook of Pāli Literature (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co.,
1996).
von Hinüber, oskar, Entstehung und Aufbau der Jātaka-Sammlung (Stuttgart: Franz
Steiner Verlag, 1998).
von Hinüber, o. and Norman, K.R. (eds), Dhammapada (oxford: Pali Text Society,
2003).
Horner, i.B., The Early Buddhist Theory of Man Perfected (london: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1936).
Horner, i.B. (trans.), The Minor Anthologies of the Pali Canon, Part III: Chronicle of
Buddhas (Buddhavaṃsa) and Basket of Conduct (Cariyāpiṭaka) (oxford: Pali Text
Society, 1975).
Horner, i.B. (trans.), The Clarifier of the Sweet Meaning (Madhuratthavilāsinī),
Commentary on the Chronicle of Buddhas (Buddhavaṃsa) by Buddhadatta Thera
(london: Pali Text Society, 1978).
Horner, i.B. and Jaini, Padmanabh S. (trans.), Apocryphal Birth Stories (Paññāsa-
Jātaka) (2 vols, oxford: Pali Text Society, 1985–1986).
Hultzsch, e., Inscriptions of Aśoka (New Delhi: archaeological Survey of india,
1991).
Huston, Perdita, Third World Women Speak Out: Interviews in Six Countries on Change,
Development, and Basic Needs (New York: Praeger, 1979).
Huxley, andrew, ‘The Traditions of mahosadha: legal Reasoning from Northern
Thailand’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of
London, 60/2 (1997): 315–26.
ireland, John D. (trans.), The Udāna: Inspired Utterances of the Buddha (Kandy, Sri
lanka: Buddhist Publication Society, 1990).
Jaini, Padmanabh S., ‘The Story of Sudhana and manoharā: an analysis of the
Texts and Borobudur Reliefs’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies,
29/3 (1966): 533–58.
Jaini, Padmanabh S. (ed.), Paññāsajātaka (2 vols, london: Pali Text Society, 1981–
1983).
Jaini, Padmanabh S. (ed.), Lokaneyyappakaraṇaṃ (london: Pali Text Society,
1986).
Jaini, Padmanabh S., ‘Stages in the Bodhisattva Career of the Tathāgata maitreya’
in alan Sponberg and Helen Hardacre (eds), Maitreya, the Future Buddha
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 54–90.
Jaini, Padmanabh S., ‘The apocryphal Jātakas of Southeast asian Buddhism’,
Indian Journal of Buddhist Studies, 1/1 (1989): 22–39.
Jaini, Padmanabh S., ‘Padīpadānajātaka: Gautama’s last Female incarnation’,
in Collected Papers in Buddhist Studies (Delhi: motilal Banarsidass, 2001),
pp. 367–74.
Jantrasrisalai, C., Early Buddhist Dhammakāya: Its Philosophical and Soteriological
Significance (Ph.D. Thesis, University of Sydney, 2007).
Jayasinghe, Gamini, Sri Lankan Buddhist Art: Post-Classical Revival (Ratmalana, Sri
lanka: Sarvodaya Vishva lekha, 2006).

164 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Jayawickrama, N.a., Pali Manuscripts in the John Rylands University Library of
Manchester (manchester, 1972).
Jayawickrama, N.a. (ed.), Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka (london: Pali Text Society,
1974).
Jayawickrama, N.a. (trans.), The Story of Gotama Buddha: The Nidāna-kathā of the
Jātakaṭṭhakathā (oxford: Pali Text Society, 1990).
Jones, John G., Tales and Teachings of the Buddha: The Jātaka Stories in Relation to the
Pāli Canon (london: George allen and Unwin, 1979).
Jones, J.J. (trans.), The Mahāvastu (3 vols, london: luzac & co., 1949–1956).
Jory, Patrick, ‘Thai and Western Buddhist Scholarship in the age of Colonialism:
King Chulalongkorn Redefines the Jatakas’, Journal of Asian Studies, 61/3
(2002): 891–918.
Kabilsingh, Chatsumarn, Thai Women in Buddhism (Berkeley: Parallax Press,
1991).
Kasulis, Thomas P., ‘Philosophy as metapraxis’ in Frank Reynolds and David
Tracy (eds), Discourse and Practice (albany: State University of New York Press,
1992), pp. 169–95.
Katz, Nathan, Buddhist Images of Human Perfection: The Arahant of the Sutta Piṭaka
Compared with the Bodhisattva and the Mahāsiddha (Delhi: motilal Banarsidass,
1982).
Kawamura, leslie S. (ed.), The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhism (Waterloo, ontario:
Wilfrid laurier University Press, 1981).
Khoroche, Peter (trans.), Once the Buddha was a Monkey: ārya Śūra’s Jātakamālā
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989).
Kinnard, Jacob N., Imaging Wisdom: Seeing and Knowing in the Art of Indian Buddhism
(Richmond: Curzon, 1999).
Kitagawa, Joseph m., ‘The many Faces of maitreya: a Historian of Religions’
Reflections’ in alan Sponberg and Helen Hardacre (eds), Maitreya, the Future
Buddha (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 7–22.
Kulasuriya, ananda S. ‘The Jātakas and their ethical Foundations’, in Kuala
lumpur Dhammajoti, asanga Tilakaratne and Kapila abhayawansa (eds),
Recent Researches in Buddhist Studies: Essays in Honour of Professor y. Karunadasa
(Colombo: Y. Karunadasa Felicitation Committee, 1997), pp. 403–26.
Kuwayama, Shoshin, ‘The Buddha’s Bowl in Gandhāra and Relevant Problems’, in
maurizio Taddei (ed.), South Asian Archaeology 1987 (Rome: istituto italiano Per
il medio ed estremo oriente, 1990), pp. 945–78.
lamotte, etienne, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era, trans.
from French by Sara Boin-Webb (louvain la Neuve: institut orientaliste,
1988).
law, B.C., ‘Some observations on the Jātakas’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
(1939): 241–51.
lenz, Timothy, A New Version of the Gāndhārī Dharmapada and a Collection of Previous-
Birth Stories: British Library Fragments 16 + 25 (Seattle and london: University of
Washington Press, 2003).

Bibliography 165
lenz, Timothy, Gandhāran Avadānas: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 1-3 and 21
and Supplementary Fragments A-C (Seattle: University of Washington Press,
2010).
li Rongxi (trans.), The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (Berkeley:
Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 1996).
li Rongxi (trans.), ‘The Journey of the eminent monk Faxian’ in li Rongxi and
albert a. Dalia (trans.), Lives of Great Monks and Nuns (Berkeley: Numata Center
for Buddhist Translation and Research, 2002), pp. 155–214.
lilley, m.e. (ed.), Apadāna (2 vols, london: Pali Text Society, 1925–1927).
lopez Jr., Donald S., ‘memories of the Buddha’ in Janet Gyatso (ed.), In the Mirror
of Memory: Reflections on Mindfulness and Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan
Buddhism (albany: State University of New York Press, 1992), pp. 21–45.
luce, G.H., ‘The 550 Jātakas in old Burma’, Artibus Asiae, 19/3/4 (1956): 291–307.
mcDaniel, Justin Thomas, ‘The art of Reading and Teaching Dhammapadas:
Reform, Texts, Contexts in Thai Buddhist History’, Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies, 28/2 (2005): 299–337.
mcDermott, James P., ‘Sādhīna Jātaka: a Case against the Transfer of merit’,
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 94/3 (1974): 385–7.
mcGill, Forrest, ‘Jatakas, Universal monarchs, and the Year 2000’, Artibus Asiae,
53/3/4 (1993): 412–48.
malalasekera, G.P., The Pāli Literature of Ceylon (Kandy, Sri lanka: Buddhist
Publication Society, 1994, first published london 1928).
malalasekera, G.P., Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names (3 vols, oxford: Pali Text Society,
1997).
martini, Ginette, ‘les titres de jātaka dans les manuscrits Pāli de la Bibliothèque
Nationale de Paris’, Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise d’Extrême-Orient, 51/1 (1963):
79–93.
mehta, Ratilal N., Pre-Buddhist India: A Political, Administrative, Economic, Social and
Geographical Survey of Ancient India Based Mainly on the Jātaka Stories (Bombay:
examiner Press, 1939).
meiland, Justin, Buddhist Values in the Pāli Jātakas, with Particular Reference to the
Theme of Renunciation (D.Phil. Thesis, oxford University, 2004).
mellick, Sally, A Critical Edition, with Translation, of Selected Portions of the Pāli
Apadāna (D.Phil. Thesis, oxford University, 1993).
mellick Cutler, Sally, ‘The Pāli apadāna Collection’, Journal of the Pali Text Society,
20 (1994): 1–42.
mellick Cutler, Sally, ‘Still Suffering after all These aeons: The Continuing effects
of the Buddha’s Bad Karma’ in Peter Connolly and Sue Hamilton (eds), Indian
Insights: Buddhism, Brahminism and Bhakti (london: luzac oriental, 1997), pp.
63–82.
morgan, Teresa, Popular Morality in the Early Roman Empire (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2007).

166 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
mori, S., ‘The origin and History of the Bhānaka Tradition’ in Y. Karunadasa
(ed.), ānanda: Papers on Buddhism and Indology (Colombo: Felicitation Volume
editorial Committee, 1990), pp. 123–9.
morris, Richard and Hardy, edmund (eds), Aṅguttara-Nikāya (5 vols, london: Pali
Text Society, 1885–1900).
mus, Paul, Barabuḍur: Sketch of a History of Buddhism Based on Archaeological Criticism
of the Texts (trans. alexander W. macdonald, New Delhi: indira Gandhi National
Centre for the arts, 1998).
Ñāṇamoli, Bhikkhu (trans.), The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) by
Bhadantācariya Buddhaghosa (5th edn, Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society,
1991).
Ñāṇamoli, Bhikkhu (trans.), The Life of the Buddha According to the Pali Canon (3rd
edn, Kandy, Sri lanka: Buddhist Publication Society, 1992).
Nattier, Jan, ‘The meanings of the maitreya myth: a Typological analysis’ in alan
Sponberg and Helen Hardacre (eds), Maitreya, the Future Buddha (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 23–47.
Norman, K.R., Pāli Literature (Wiesbaden: otto Harrassowitz, 1983).
Norman, K.R., ‘Review of oskar von Hinüber’s Entstehung und Aufbau der Jātaka-
Sammlung’, acta Orientalia, 60 (1999): 257–62.
ohnuma, Reiko, ‘The Story of Rūpāvatī: a Female Past Birth of the Buddha’,
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 23/1 (2000): 103–45.
ohnuma, Reiko, Head, Eyes, Flesh, and Blood: Giving Away the Body in Indian Buddhist
Literature (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007).
oldenberg, Hermann (ed.), Vinaya Piṭakaṃ (5 vols, edinburgh: Williams & Norgate,
1879–1883).
oldenberg, Hermann, ‘The Prose-and-Verse Type of Narrative and the Jātakas’,
Journal of the Pali Text Society, 6 (1912): 19–50.
Panglung, Jampa losang, Die Erzählstoffe des Mūlasarvāstivāda-Vinaya (Tokyo: The
Reiyukai library, 1981).
Paranavitana, S., Inscriptions of Ceylon, vol. 2, part 2 (Colombo: archaeological
Survey Department, 2001).
Perera, m.D.R., The Sage of India, or Maha-Ummagga Jataka (Colombo: State Printing
Corporation, 1992, first published 1976).
Peris, merlin, ‘The Jataka Bodhisatta’, Sri Lankan Journal of the Humanities, 22
(1996): 51–62.
Peris, merlin, Greek Story Motifs in the Jatakas (Colombo: Godage international
Publishers, 2004).
Pierce, David C., ‘The middle Way of the Jātaka Tales’, The Journal of American
Folklore, 82/325 (1969): 245–54.
Piyatissa, Ven. Widurupola (ed.), The Jātaka Pāli (3 vols, Colombo: Tripitaka
Publication Press (Simon Hewavitarne Bequest), 1954).
Rahula, Walpola, ‘l’idéal du Bodhisattva dans le Theravāda et le mahāyāna’,
Journal Asiatique (1971): 63–70.

Bibliography 167
Ratnayake, madhubhashini, Voices From Afar: Radio Plays Based on Ten Jataka Stories
(Dehiwala, Sri lanka: Buddhist Cultural Centre, 1999).
Reynolds, Frank e., ‘The many lives of Buddha: a Study of Sacred Biography
and Theravāda Tradition’ in Frank e. Reynolds and Donald Capps (eds), The
Biographical Process: Studies in the History and Psychology of Religion (The Hague:
mouton & Co., 1976), pp. 37–61.
Reynolds, Frank e., ‘The Several Bodies of Buddha: Reflections on a Neglected
aspect of Theravada Tradition’, History of Religions, 16/4 (1977): 374–89.
Reynolds, Frank e., ‘Rebirth Traditions and the lineages of Gotama: a Study
in Theravāda Buddhology’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the
Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i
Press, 1997), pp. 19–39.
Rhys-Davids, C.a.F. (trans.), Stories of the Buddha, being selections from the Jātaka
(london: Chapman & Hall, 1929).
Rhys-Davids, C.a.F. and Norman, K.R. (trans.), Poems of Early Buddhist Nuns
(Therīgāthā) (oxford: Pali Text Society, 1989).
Rhys-Davids, T.W. (trans), Buddhist Birth-Stories (Jātaka Tales) (revised edn by C.a.F.
Rhys-Davids, london: George Routledge & Sons, 1880).
Rhys-Davids, T.W., Buddhist India (london: T. Fisher Unwin, 1903).
Rhys-Davids, T.W. and Carpenter, J. estlin (eds), Dīgha-nikāya (3 vols, london: Pali
Text Society, 1889-1911).
Roy, Kum Kum, ‘Justice in the Jatakas’, Social Scientist, 24/4/6 (1996): 23–40.
Saddhatissa, H. (ed. and trans.), The Birth Stories of the Ten Bodhisattas and the
Dasabodhisattupattikathā (london: Pali Text Society, 1975).
Saddhatissa, H., ‘The Significance of Paritta and its application in the Theravāda
Tradition’ in David J. Kalupahana (ed.), Buddhist Thought and Ritual (Delhi:
motilal Banarsidass, 2001), pp. 125–37.
Salomon, Richard, Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra, The British Library
Kharoṣṭhī Fragments (london: British library, 1999).
Samuels, Jeffrey, ‘The Bodhisattva ideal in Theravāda Buddhist Theory and
Practice: a Reevaluation of the Bodhisattva-Śrāvaka opposition’, Philosophy
East and West, 47/3 (1997): 399–415.
Samuels, Jeffrey, ‘Texts memorized, Texts Performed: a Reconsideration of the
Role of Paritta in Sri lankan monastic education’, Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies, 28/2 (2005): 339–67.
Schopen, Gregory, Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks: Collected Papers on the
Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India (Honolulu:
University of Hawai’i Press, 1997).
Schopen, Gregory, ‘if You Can’t Remember, How to make it Up: Some monastic
Rules for Redacting Canonical Texts’ in Petra Kieffer-Pülz and Jens-Uwe
Hartmann (eds), Bauddhavidyāsudhākaraḥ: Studies in Honour of Heinz Bechert on
the Occasion of His 65th Birthday (Swisttal-odendorf: indica et Tibetica Verlag,
1997), pp. 571–82.

168 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Sen, Benoychandra, Studies in the Buddhist Jātakas: Tradition and Polity (Calcutta:
Saraswat Press, 1974).
Seneviratne, Thalatha and Currie, Jan, ‘Religion and Feminism: a Consideration
of Cultural Constraints on Sri lankan Women’ in Darlene m. Juschka (ed.),
Feminism in the Study of Religion: A Reader (london: Continuum, 2001), pp. 198–
220.
Shaw, Sarah (trans.), The Jātakas: Birth Stories of the Bodhisatta (New Delhi: Penguin,
2006).
Shaw, Sarah, ‘and that was i: How the Buddha Himself Creates a Path between
Biography and autobiography’ in linda Covill et al. (eds), Lives Lived, Lives
Imagined: Biography in the Buddhist Traditions (Boston: Wisdom Publications,
2010), pp. 15–47.
Sheravanichkul, arthid, ‘Self-Sacrifice of the Bodhisatta in the Paññāsa Jātaka’,
Religion Compass, 2/5 (2008): 769–87.
Shih, Hsio-Yen, ‘Readings and Re-Readings of Narrative in Dunhuang murals’,
Artibus Asiae, 53 (1993): 59–88.
Silk, Jonathan a., ‘The Fruits of Paradox: on the Religious architecture of the
Buddha’s life Story’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 71/4 (2003):
863–81.
Simpson, B., ‘impossible Gifts: Bodies, Buddhism and Bioethics in Contemporary
Sri lanka’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 10/4 (2004): 839–59.
Skilling, Peter, ‘Theravādin literature in Tibetan Translation’, Journal of the Pali
Text Society, 19 (1993): 69–201.
Skilling, Peter, ‘Three Types of Bodhisatta in Theravādin Tradition: a
Bibliographical excursion’ in Buddhist and Indian Studies in Honour of Professor
Sodo Mori (Hamamatsu, Japan: Kokusai Bukkyoto Kyokai, 2003), pp. 91–102.
Skilling, Peter, ‘Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka in South-east asia’, Journal of the Pali
Text Society, 28 (2006): 113–73.
Skilling, Peter, ‘The antepenultimate Birth of the Śākyamuni’, paper presented
at the World Sanskrit Conference, edinburgh, July 2006.
Skilling, Peter (ed.), Past Lives of the Buddha: Wat Si Chum – Art, Architecture and
Inscriptions (Bangkok: River Books, 2008).
Skilling, Peter, ‘Quatre vies de Sakyamuni: a l’aube de sa carrière de Bodhisatta’ in
Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat and Jean leclant (eds), Bouddhismes d’Asie: monuments
et littératures (Paris: aiBl – Diffusion De Boccard, 2009), pp. 125–39.
Somadasa, K.D., Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection of Sinhalese Manuscripts in
the British Library (7 vols, london: Pali Text Society & British library, 1987–
1995).
Spencer, Robert F., ‘ethical expression in a Burmese Jātaka’, The Journal of American
Folklore, 79/311 (1966): 278–301.
Spiro, melford e., Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and its Burmese Vicissitudes
(2nd edn, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980).

Bibliography 169
Strong, John S., ‘Buddhist avadānas and Jātakas: The Question of Genre’, paper
presented at the american academy of Religion meeting, Dallas, December
1983.
Strong, John S., The Legend and Cult of Upagupta: Sanskrit Buddhism in North India
and Southeast Asia (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992).
Strong, John S., ‘a Family Quest: The Buddha, Yaśodharā, and Rāhula in the
Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the
Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i
Press, 1997), pp. 113–28.
Strong, John S., Relics of the Buddha (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2004).
Strong, John S., The Buddha: A Short Biography (oxford: oneworld, 2006).
Subrahmanyam, B., Jātakas in South Indian Art (Delhi: Bharatiya Kala Prakashan,
2005).
Swearer, Donald K., ‘Consecrating the Buddha’ in Donald S. lopez Jr. (ed.),
Buddhism in Practice (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), pp. 50–58.
Swearer, Donald K., Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004).
Takakusu, J. and Nagai, makoto (eds), Samantapāsādikā: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary
on the Vinaya Piṭaka, vol. 4 (london: Pali Text Society, 1934).
Tambiah, S.J., Culture, Thought and Social Action: An Anthropological Perspective
(Cambridge, ma: Harvard University Press, 1985).
Tambiah, S.J., ‘Bun Phraawes’ in Frank e. Reynolds and Jason a. Carbine (eds),
The Life of Buddhism (Berkeley and los angeles: University of California Press,
2000), pp. 62–9.
Tanabe, Kazuko, ‘Some Remarks on the Stories Beginning with the Word
Bhūtapubbaṃ’ in Buddhist and Indian Studies in Honour of Professor Sodo Mori
(Hamamatsu, Japan: Kokusai Bukkyoto Kyokai, 2003), pp. 43–53.
Terwiel, B.J., Monks and Magic: An Analysis of Religious Ceremonies in Central Thailand
(3rd revised edn, Bangkok: White lotus, 1994).
Trainor, Kevin, Relics, Ritual, and Representation in Buddhism: Rematerialising the Sri
Lankan Theravāda Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Trenckner, V. (ed.), The Milindapañho (london: Pali Text Society, 1962).
Trenckner, V. and Chalmers, Robert (eds), Majjhima-nikāya (3 vols, london: Pali
Text Society, 1888–1902).
Walters, Jonathan S., ‘The Buddha’s Bad Karma: a Problem in the History of
Theravāda Buddhism’, Numen, 37/1 (1990): 70–95.
Walters, Jonathan S., ‘a Voice From the Silence: The Buddha’s mother’s Story’,
History of Religions, 33/4 (1994): 358–79.
Walters, Jonathan S., ‘Stūpa, Story, and empire: Constructions of the Buddha
Biography in early Post-aśokan india’ in Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography
in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia (Honolulu: University of
Hawai’i Press, 1997), pp. 160–192.

170 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Warder, a.K., Pali Metre: A Contribution to the History of Indian Literature (london:
Pali Text Society, 1967).
Winternitz, m., ‘Jātaka Gāthās and Jātaka Commentary’, Indian Historical Quarterly,
4/1 (1928): 1–14.
Winternitz, m., A History of Indian Literature, Vol. II: ‘Buddhist Literature and Jaina
Literature’, trans. Ketkar and Kohn (Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press,
1933).
Wongthet, Pranee, ‘The Jataka Stories and laopuan Worldview’, Asian Folklore
Studies, 48/1 (1989): 21–30.
Woodward, mark R., ‘The Biographical imperative in Theravāda Buddhism’ in
Juliane Schober (ed.), Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and
Southeast Asia (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1997), pp. 40–63.
Wray, elizabeth et al., Ten Lives of the Buddha: Siamese Temple Painting and Jataka
Tales (revised edn, New York and Tokyo: Weatherhill, 1996).
Yamazaki, m. and ousaka, Y., Index to the Jātaka (oxford: Pali Text Society, 2003).

index
act of truth, see saccakiriya dubious behaviour of 10n, 12, 26–36,
adhiṭṭhāna 25, 66, 72, 75, 99, 100, 102, 111; 66, 69–70, 79, 118
see also pāramitā as inferior to Buddha 48–51
aesopic fables 9, 10, 37, 80 presence of as defining feature and
ākhyāna 7, 43, 54 increasing focus of jātaka stories
Anāgatavaṃsa 89n, 90 1–2, 3–5, 8, 38–9, 42–3, 52, 61,
ananda temple at Pagan 126 66–78, 117, 136–7
Ānanda, Buddha’s attendant 48, 96, 109 pursuing perfections, see pāramitā
anāthapiṇḍika 62, 63 bodhisatta path, see also Bodhisatta,
anattā (not-self) 10n, 46, 110, 113, 120–21, buddhahood
149, 157 aspiration to embark upon 13, 91–3,
aṅga, limbs of the teaching 51, 51n, 58 103–5, 112–13
Aṅguttara Nikāya 49, 52, 141 compared with path to arahatship
anicca (impermanence) 43n, 48, 50, 157 106–8
animals exclusions from 93–7
abstaining from the killing of 24, 69, perfections cultivated during 98–103;
151 see also pāramitā
bodhisattas born as 30, 37, 42, 93, 93n, in Theravāda as in mahāyāna 85, 91
94, 94n, 96 bodhisattva in mahāyāna 2, 90–91, 127, 131,
spiritual capabilities of 34, 34n 134, 149
apadāna (genre) 3, 27, 38–9, 45, 51, 110–12; body
see also Apadāna; avadāna of the Buddha, see Buddha, body of
Apadāna (text) 4, 58, 59, 85, 95, 109, 110–16, of the Dhamma, see dhamma-kāya
121, 128 Borobudur 126–7
commentary 87n, 91, 93–4 Brahmadatta, past king of Varanasi 1, 10n,
pubbakammapiloti 27–8, 30, 50 25, 60n, 62n
yaśodharā-therī-apadāna 113 Brown, Robert l. 18n, 124–9, 132
arahatship 2, 85, 91, 95–6, 105, 106–8, 111, Buddha
113, 118, 122, 137, 149 bodhisatta career of, see Bodhisatta;
asoka 51, 109, 115–16, 122, 128 bodhisatta path
avadāna (genre) 3–5, 50, 51n, 77, 126–7, body of 132, 144, 145, 148, 151; see also
127n, 136; see also apadāna dhamma-kāya; gift-of-the-body
jātakas; relics
bhāṇaka 52–3, 57, 70, 71n, 114 final-life biography of 6, 44–6, 58, 60,
Bhārhut 1, 1n, 37, 53, 59, 95n, 115, 124, 136 61–4, 85, 87, 90, 109, 113, 115–16,
bhūtapubbam stories 3, 48 120–22, 128, 135, 143, 151
blind men and the elephant, parable of images of 18, 73, 77, 92n, 126–32, 136,
15–16 143–5, 152
Bodhisatta; see also bodhisatta path; karmic consequences experienced by
metteyya; Sumedha 27–8, 38

172 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
as storyteller 2, 5, 11, 38, 44–6, 60, 80, dāna 12, 25, 29, 49, 66, 67–8, 69, 72–7, 98,
83 99, 100, 102–3, 148, 151–2, 155, 156;
as superior to Bodhisatta 48–51 see also gift-of-the-body jātakas;
buddhas Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, jātaka stories,
of the future 58, 86, 88–90, 104, 128, Vessantara-jātaka; pāramitā
148; see also Anāgatavaṃsa; Dasabod Dasabodhisattuppattikathā 89n, 90; see also
hisattuppattikathā; metteyya buddhas, of the future
of the past 58, 86–90, 96, 111, 112, 113, determination, see adhiṭṭhāna
115, 148; see also Dīpaṅkara Buddha deva, devatā 37, 92, 126n, 151; see also trees,
Buddhaghosa 35, 41n, 45, 52, 58, 70–71, tree-deities (rukkhadevatā)
104, 109; see also Samantapāsādikā; Devadatta 27, 38, 70, 75, 80
Visuddhimagga dhamma, dharma
buddhahood, see also Bodhisatta; bodhisatta decline/disappearance of 58, 63
path; buddhas; buddhology equivalent to buddha 132–5, 145; see
compared with arahatship 85, 106–8, also dhamma-kāya
122 equivalent to truth (sacca) 31–2
compared with divine status 43n, 49 gift of 156
inability of women to attain 95–6 jātakas as part of 61, 123, 132, 136, 137,
jātakas as illustrative of the path to 139, 145, 147, 149, 151, 156–7
12–13, 15, 18, 21, 25, 39, 65, 70, 78, dhamma-kāya, dharma-kāya 123, 128, 130,
85, 118, 122 131, 132–5, 137, 145, 147
perfections required for, see pāramitā Dhammapada 32, 52, 55–6, 67
present in images and at stūpa sites Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā 28, 43n, 52, 55–6,
125, 127, 131, 136, 137, 143–5 95, 105n
Buddhavaṃsa Dhammapāla, see Cariyāpiṭaka,
biographical preoccupations of 58, commentary
101, 108, 109–11, 113–14, 115–17, Dīgha-bhāṇaka 52, 114; see also bhāṇaka
121, 128 Dīgha Nikāya
bodhisatta career in 87, 91–2, 101 Agañña Sutta 3
commentary 91, 92n, 93–4, 98n, 111 Cakkavatti (Sīhanāda) Sutta 88–9
dating of 100, 114–15 Kūṭadanta Sutta 48
Nidānakathā as commentary on 61–2 Lakkhaṇa Sutta 144, 148
past buddhas mentioned within, see Mahāgovinda Sutta 49
buddhas, of the past Mahāpadāna Sutta 86
story of Sumedha and Dīpaṅkara, see Mahāsudassana Sutta 48
Dīpaṅkara Buddha Pāyāsi Sutta 47
buddhology 58, 85–108, 115, 116, 122 Dīpaṅkara Buddha 62, 77, 87, 88, 91–3, 100,
101, 113; see also buddhas, of the
canonicity 6–7, 7n, 17, 42–3, 68, 114 past
Cariyāpiṭaka 4n, 58, 59, 71, 110–11, 113,
114–16, 121, 128 endo, Toshiichi 94, 107–8, 113
and the perfections 14, 26, 66–8, 75, energy, see viriya
98–100, 103, 111, 144 equanimity, see upekkhā
commentary 91, 92n, 93, 98, 101–2, 107
Collins, Steven 12, 17n, 73n, 117 fable (genre) 10, 38–9; see also aesopic fables
Cousins, l.S. 99–100 Faxian 118, 153
forbearance, see khanti

Index 173
Gandhāra Jātakatthavaṇṇanā
localisation of Buddhism in 118–19 authorship 41n
manuscripts and narratives 3 biographical preface, see Nidānakathā
generosity, see dāna dedicatory verses 21, 26, 41–2
gift-of-the-body jātakas 4–5, 12, 76–7, 152, framing with story of present 6–8, 11,
152n, 153 27, 32, 38–9, 58–61, 68, 74, 79, 83,
Gombrich, R.F. 11, 53, 72–3, 87–8, 87n, 117–18, 120–21, 147, 149, 150
129n, 140 samodhāna 6, 36, 57, 59–60, 76n, 79, 81
Gotama Buddha, see Buddha scribal colophons 104–5, 138–9, 140
Greek parallels 9, 37–8, see also aesopic structural development of 6–8, 58–64;
fables see also Jātakapāli
jātaka stories (story number in brackets)
heavenly realms 18, 27, 31, 45, 49, 72, 77, Aṇḍabhūta-jātaka (62): 30, 32, 53, 79
92, 93, 93n, 96, 118, 149, 155 Apaṇṇaka-jātaka (1): 47n, 79, 154
bodhisatta in Tusita heaven 62, 88, ārāmadūsaka-jātaka (46): 1, 8, 55,
100–101, 136 148–9
hell realms 26, 45, 72, 93, 96, 112, 118 Bhadraghaṭa-jātaka (291): 22
von Hinüber, oskar 7, 43, 51, 56, 69n, 98, Bhūridatta-jātaka (543): 71–5; see
115 also Mahājātaka
Biḷāra-jātaka (128): 34
images Cetiya-jātaka (422): 31–2
of the Buddha, see Buddha, images of Chaddanta-jātaka (514): 70
of jātakas, see jātaka, images Chavaka-jātaka (309): 47n, 60n
impermanence, see anicca Cullakaseṭṭhi-jātaka (4): 24
Dasaratha-jātaka (461)22
jātaka Dīghitikosala-jātaka (371): 47n
children’s books 78–81 Dūbhiyamakkaṭa-jātaka (174): 35
compared with avadāna 3–6 Dummedha-jātaka (50): 23, 57
embedded in sutta 44, 47–51 Gagga-jātaka (155): 24, 60
images 1, 2, 11, 18, 37, 73, 82, 119n, Gūthapāna-jātaka (227): 36–7
123, 124–9, 132, 135–7, 152–4; Hārita-jātaka (431): 21, 29, 31
see also ananda temple at Pagan; Hastinika-jātaka, see Mātiposaka-
Bhārhut; Borobudur; Wat Si Chum jātaka
memorisation and transmission, see Illīsa-jātaka (78): 79
bhāṇaka Kaccāni-jātaka (417): 22
object of worship 138–9 Kaṇavera-jātaka (318): 33
source of powerful words 139–43; see Keḷisīla-jātaka (202): 27, 38, 154
also paritta Khaṇḍahāla-jātaka (542): 71–5; see
texts, see Jātakatthavaṇṇanā; also Mahājātaka
Jātakamāla; Jātakapāli; Jātaka-pota; Khandavatta-jātaka (203): 142
Mahājātaka; Paññāsajātaka Khantivādi-jātaka (313): 25, 79
Jātaka commentary, see Jātakatthavaṇṇanā Kiṃsukopama-jātaka (248): 13–15
Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā, see Jātakatthavaṇṇanā Kosambī-jātaka (428): 79
Jātaka-nidānakathā, see Nidānakathā Kulāvaka-jātaka (31): 47n
Jātaka-pota 78, 79–80, 124, 138, 139 Kuṇāla-jātaka (536): 57
Jātakamālā 4n, 150, 150n Kurudhamma-jātaka (267): 76n
Jātakapāli 7, 42, 53–8, 59, 67–8, 71, 73, Kusa-jātaka (531): 154
114–16 Litta-jātaka (91): 26, 47n

174 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
Lomahaṃsa-jātaka (94): 26 Vaṭṭaka-jātaka (35): 31, 66 141
Lomasakassapa-jātaka (433): 69 Vessantara-jātaka (547): 25, 52, 53,
Mahājanaka-jātaka (539): 71–5, 57, 66, 69, 70, 71–5, 78n,
119n; see also Mahājātaka 100–101, 102–4, 105, 119,
Mahānāradakassapa-jātaka (544): 139–40, 144, 154; see also
71–5, 96; see also Mahājātaka Mahājātaka
Mahāsudassana-jātaka (95): 48 Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka (545): 71–5,
Mahāsupina-jātaka (77): 154 154; see also Mahājātaka
Mahā-Ummagga-jātaka (546): 71–5, Jeta grove 60, 60–61n, 62, 63
76n, 80, 81, 105, 119, 154; see
also Mahājātaka kamma, karma
Mahisa-jātaka (278): 35 Buddha’s experience of karmic fruits
Maṇikaṇṭha-jātaka (243): 47n 27–8, 38, 50, 112
Matakabhatta-jātaka (18): 24 jātakas as demonstrations of kamma
Mātaṅga-jātaka (497): 79 15, 18, 26–8, 30, 35, 38, 70, 72, 96,
Mātiposaka-jātaka or Hastinika- 118, 149
jātaka (455): 154 karmic repetition 38–9, 148
Mora-jātaka (159): 142 lateral karmic bonds 113, 116, 127n
Mudulakkhaṇa-jātaka (66): 27 preoccupation of apadāna/avadāna
Mūgapakkha-jātaka or Temiya-jātaka genre 3–5, 38, 58, 111, 112
(538): 71–5, 104, 142; see also Kassapa Buddha 50, 70, 86, 89; see also
Mahājātaka buddhas, of the past
Nakkhatta-jātaka (49): 57 khanti 25, 66, 70–71, 72, 75, 79, 99, 102, 111;
Nandivisāla-jātaka (28): 47n see also pāramitā
Naṅgalīsa-jātaka (123): 38 Khuddaka Nikāya, see also Apadāna;
Nimi-jātaka (541): 47–8, 71–5; see Buddhavaṃsa; Cariyāpiṭaka;
also Mahājātaka Dhammapada; Jātakapāli
Ruhaka-jātaka (191): 25 relationship with jātaka texts 7, 52, 53,
Sakuṇagghi-jātaka (168): 47n 57–8
Sāma-jātaka (540): 69, 71–5, 154; see Kinnard, Jacob N. 129–32
also Mahājātaka
Sambula-jātaka (519): 79, 154 Lalitavistara 62, 63, 127
Sasa-jātaka (316): 98, 103 limbs of the teaching, see aṅga
Satapatta-jātaka (279): 32 loving kindness, see mettā
Sivi-jātaka, or Sibi-jātaka (499): 69, lying, see sacca
103, 152
Suṃsumāra-jātaka (208): 66 Mahājātaka or Mahānipāta 25, 65, 71–5, 103,
Sutasoma-jātaka (537): 79 132, 140
Suvaṇṇahaṃsa-jātaka (136): 47n Mahāsattva-jātaka or Vyāghrī-jātaka 119,
Taṇḍulanāli-jātaka (5): 38 153
Telapatta-jātaka (96): 23, 82, 140 Mahāvastu 3, 23n, 62–3, 150
Temiya-jātaka, see Mūgapakkha- mahāyāna 2, 22, 33, 41n, 85–6, 87n, 90, 91,
jātaka 95, 99, 101n, 106, 126, 131–4, 138,
Tittira-jātaka (37)47n 139n, 149, 153n
Valāhassa-jātaka (196): 23, 119 maitreya, see metteyya
Vānara-jātaka (342): 30, 66, 79 majjhima Nikāya
Vānarinda-jātaka (57): 66 Aṅgulimāla Sutta 141
Vaṇṇupatha-jātaka (2): 38 Bahudhātuka Sutta 95

Index 175
Ghaṭīkāra Sutta 50, 86n paññā
Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta 107n contrast with sīla 33–4
Makhādeva Sutta 47 perfection of 25, 66, 72, 75, 81, 99, 102,
Māratajjaniya Sutta 45n, 86n 104, 111, 148; see also pāramitā
Majjhima-bhāṇaka 52; see also bhāṇaka prajñā-pāramitā 131–2, 134
meditation 5, 13–14, 45, 49, 70–71, 82, 93n, worldly wisdom 21, 30, 33, 76n, 80, 81,
100 149, 157
mellick, Sally 3, 28n, 112 Paññāsajātaka 59, 65, 76–8, 92
memory of past lives (pubbenivāsānussati) Padīpadāna-jātaka 77, 92
5, 44–6 pāramitā, pāramī (perfections), see also
merit 18, 41, 77, 92, 94, 97, 104–5, 105n, adhiṭṭhāna; dāna; khanti; mettā;
128, 138–9, 140, 152, 155, 156 nekkhamma; paññā; sacca; sīla;
mettā upekkhā; viriya
perfection of 25, 66, 70–71, 72, 75, 99, focus of jātakas 12–13, 21, 25–6, 43, 50,
102, 111; see also pāramitā 57, 64, 132, 149, 150
protective power of 27, 69, 141, 142 illustrated in Cariyāpiṭaka 65, 66–8,
metteyya 86, 88–90, 104, 105n, 140 111, 144
Milindapañha 28, 52, 65, 69–70, 73, 140 illustrated in Mahājātaka 71–5, 132, 140
monkey illustrated in Paññāsajātaka 76–7
and the crocodile, stories of 30, 66, multiple lists and sequences 98–103,
79, 80n 115
gardeners, story of 1, 8, 55, 148–9 practised by non-bodhisattas 107, 107n,
tormenting the Bodhisatta, stories of 120, 148, 151–2
35, 67n required for buddhahood 85, 91, 92,
Mūlasarvāstivāda-vinaya 23, 28, 33, 61n, 150 93, 122, 147, 151
mus, Paul 126, 129, 131 sources of power 132, 140, 142, 144,
144n
navaṅga, see aṅga paritta 140–43
nekkhamma 12, 25, 29, 49, 66, 72, 75, perfections, see pāramitā
99–100, 101, 102, 104, 111, 145n; Peris, merlin 37–9, 60n
see also pāramitā Petavatthu 58, 96
nibbāna 13–14, 18, 33, 48, 49, 93n, 107, 111, pilgrimage 109, 116, 118–19
117–18, 131, 149, 155 pubbakammapiloti, see Apadāna
Nidānakathā 45, 58–9, 61–4, 66, 75, 77, 86, pubbenivāsānussati, see memory of past
91, 93–4, 98–101, 121, 154; see also lives
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā
nipāta ordering system 54 relics
not-self, see anattā as part of Buddha’s biography 63, 116,
118, 136
ohnuma, Reiko 3n, 4–5, 12, 22n, 50; see also as rūpa-kāya 128, 133, 137; see also
gift-of-the-body jātakas dhamma-kāya
Buddha present in 129, 129n, 131n, 141
paccekabuddha 3, 50, 92n, 112, 113 parade of the sacred tooth relic 152–3,
paccuppannavatthu, see Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, 153n
framing with story of present renunciation, see nekkhamma
Padīpadāna-jātaka, see Paññāsajātaka resolve, see adhiṭṭhāna
Pakiṇṇakakathā, see Cariyāpiṭaka, Rhys Davids, C.a.F. vii, 34
commentary Rhys Davids, T.W. 7n, 8–9, 9n, 42

176 Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism
rukkhadevatā, see trees, tree-deities tree-deities (rukkhadevatā) 23, 24, 36–7,
rūpa-kāya, see relics 57
under which buddhahood attained 29,
sacca 86, 115
inability of Bodhisatta to transgress wish-fulfilling tree 104
29, 31, 66 truth, truthfulness, see sacca; saccakiriya
four noble truths (ariyasaccāni) 60, 140
perfection of 25, 66, 72, 75, 99, 102, uddāna verses 54, 67–8
111, 142; see also pāramitā upekkhā 25, 35, 66, 72, 75, 99, 102, 111; see
power of 30, 141–2; see also saccakiriya also pāramitā
saccakiriya 31, 66, 69, 141
Sakka 22, 22n, 38, 43n, 140, 154, 155 Vesak 2, 150–56
Śākyamuni Buddha, see Buddha Vessantara-jātaka, see Jātakatthavaṇṇanā,
Samantapāsādikā 52, 58; see also jātaka stories
Buddhaghosa Vimānavatthu 58, 95–6
Samuels, Jeffrey 91, 103–4, 141n, 142 vinaya, see also Mūlasarvāstivāda-vinaya;
Saṃyutta Nikāya 47n, 52, 86n, 132n Samantapāsādikā
Schopen, Gregory 11, 16–17, 61n biographical context of 63, 109
scribal colophons, see Jātakatthavaṇṇanā jātaka stories found within 42, 43, 44,
selfhood, see anattā 47–8, 53, 59, 60
sīla viriya 25, 66, 72, 75, 99, 102, 111; see also
contrast with paññā 33–4 pāramitā
five precepts (pañcasīlāni) 29, 151 Visuddhimagga 35, 45, 65, 70–71
perfection of 25, 29, 66, 66n, 72, 75, Vyāghrī-jātaka, see Mahāsattva-jātaka
99, 100, 104, 111, 151, 155; see also
pāramitā Walters, Jonathan S. 27–8, 114–16, 128, 132
Skilling, Peter 6, 73, 76, 93, 107, 126n, 140, Wat Si Chum 126
142n, 144 wisdom, see paññā
story of the present, see Jātakatthavaṇṇanā women
Strong, John S. 4n, 33, 113, 127n, 129n, 130 dangerous 23, 27, 30, 32, 33
stūpa 115, 116, 134 in jātaka stories 10n, 30–31, 31n, 33
illustrations of jātakas on 1, 11, 124–9, inability to be bodhisattas 93–7
137; see also jātaka, images inability to be buddhas 95
Sumedha 46, 62, 77, 87, 88, 91–3, 101, 113, karmic cause for birth as 96–7
137n; see also Dīpaṅkara Buddha
Swearer, Donald K. 143–5 xuanzang 118, 119
Theravāda, definition of 6n, 91; see also yakkha, yakkhinī 23, 24, 92
mahāyāna Yasodharā 113
time, repetitive and linear 63, 86, 117–18,
148–9
trees
Kiṃsuka tree as metaphor for jātaka
study 13–15, 16, 18