SIGNIFICANCE OF TREES: ECOCRITICISM IN SELECT SANSKRIT AND
PALI TEXT
a Shanmugapriya Kumaravelu, b Christopher Gnanadurai
ABSTRACT
Objective: The following study, which is grounded on ecocriticism, uses text analysis to identify
the significance of trees in ancient religious texts (Pali's Jataka Tale) and nonreligious texts
(Sanskrit's Panchatantra Tales).
Method: According to the ecocritical theory, it provides new insights into how people think
about non-humans like Plants, fairly and legitimizes their subject positions within the lens of
eco-critical concerns for improving the environment and requirements for evolution from “eco-
awareness to eco-consciousness.”
Result: The tree nourishes and protects us and it also keeps the environment green which gives
us many aesthetic values. Therefore, we must do everything to protect trees and save them
before they disappear completely, additionally, scholars Tisnawijaya & Kurniati claimed that
“Trees are Mother Earth.” However, the reality is that Mother Earth is currently facing various
ecological problems.
Conclusions: Literature from the past teaches us how to have happy lives in harmony with the
natural world. These eco-literary masterpieces speak eloquently to the interplay and
interdependence between humans and the environment, which is a central subject in eco-
literature. The more ecocritical literature is read and discussed, the more man will come to
understand how-to live-in harmony with nature and address the current global environmental
crisis.
Keywords: deforestation, environment, eco-consciousness, nature, reincarnation, trees,
comparative study.
Received: 19/06/2023
Accepted: 18/09/2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.55908/sdgs.v11i8.1019
a PhD in English literature, SSL, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India,
E-mail: shanmugapriya.k2020@vitstudent.ac.in, Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9133-8530
b PhD in English Literature, Assistant Professor Senior, SSL, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India,
E-mail: christopher.g@vit.ac.in, Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8536-2574
1
Mia mi| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
SIGNIFICADO DAS ÁRVORES: ECOCRITICISMO NO TEXTO
SELECIONADO EM SÂNSCRITO E PALI
RESUMO
Objetivo: O estudo a seguir, que se baseia na ecocrítica, usa análise de texto para identificar
o significado das árvores em textos religiosos antigos (Conto de Jataka de Pali) e textos não
religiosos (Contos Panchatantra de Sânscrito).
Método: De acordo com a teoria ecocrítica, ela fornece novas percepções sobre como as
pessoas pensam sobre não-humanos como as plantas, de forma justa e legitima suas posições
dentro da lente de preocupações eco-críticas para melhorar o ambiente e os requisitos para a
evolução de "consciência ecológica para consciência ecológica."
Resultado: A árvore nutre e protege-nos e também mantém o ambiente verde, o que nos dá
muitos valores estéticos. Portanto, devemos fazer tudo para proteger as árvores e salvá-las
antes que elas desapareçam completamente, além disso, os estudiosos Tisnawijaya & Kurniati
afirmaram que "as árvores são a Mãe Terra". Mas a realidade é que a Mãe Terra enfrenta
atualmente vários problemas ecológicos.
Conclusões: A literatura do passado nos ensina como ter vidas felizes em harmonia com o
mundo natural. Essas obras-primas eco-literárias falam eloquentemente da interação e
interdependência entre os seres humanos e o meio ambiente, que é um assunto central na eco-
literatura. Quanto mais literatura ecocrítica for lida e discutida, mais o homem passará a
entender como viver em harmonia com a natureza e lidar com a atual crise ambiental global.
Palavras-chave: desmatamento, meio ambiente, consciência ecológica, natureza,
reencarnação, árvores, estudo comparativo.
1 INTRODUCTION
Indian literature is unquestionably a number of the oldest and maximum numerous
inside the whole globe. Additionally, oral transmission of data seems inside the oldest
portions of Indian literature. The state boasts literature in every of its more than 22
recognized languages. Nevertheless, Sanskrit texts make up maximum of the early
literature. Classical literature refers to greater than simply books. Additionally, it may
consist of pastoral, lyric, tragic, comedy, and epic literary genres. For a long time,
studying this literature changed into required of all humanities students. It’s not unusual
to refer to older novels which have continued for a long period as ‘classic’. Because it
addresses topics like love, hate, death, lifestyles, faith, social concerns, mental portrayal,
and surroundings, classical literature is said to have a worldwide appeal and to
emotionally engage readers. We have get entry to timeless ideas and characters in
classical literature due to the fact they hold to shape contemporary way of life and have a
lasting effect on how humans sense, suppose, and conduct themselves. Their principles
2
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
and goals are important to current culture, and those works have sparked many
adaptations and new interpretations.
‘Indian literature’ is defined by Epistle Britannica as “literature produced within
the Indian Republic after 1947, as well as literature created throughout the Indian
subcontinent before the founding of the Republic of India in 1947.” The majority of early
literature is composed of Sanskrit texts. When it comes to ancient Indian writing, there is
a lot more to comprehend and absorb than there is with the Vedas and epics. The
Dharmashastras, which describe a person's duties and how they should develop their
character, are also discussed in ancient literature. Shastras contained concepts from
science and mathematics. Political and economic issues are covered in Kautilya's Sanskrit
treatise Arthashastra. Buddhist texts written in the Pali language have become more and
more well-known. It comprises Buddhist literature's grammar as well as poetry and
philosophy. It would have been lovely and difficult to read and comprehend ancient
Indian literature. Singh (2002) asserts that classical literature "shapes our language and
way of thinking". It has profoundly changed the way we communicate and think. Many
idioms and phrases that are used often now in English have their origins in great works
of literature. For many reasons, classic literature is still significant today.
The early Indian civilization had an extensive focus on and connection to flora
and trees because they make it easier to clean up soil and water, which is ultimately
benefits the environment. 'Trees' possessed a major role in Indian classical literature. Both
in spoken and written form, their importance and intimate connection to individuals are
conveyed. “Trees are among the most prestigious and ancient species.” (Lal et al., 2014,
p. 16). Both mankind and the planet's ecosystems gain from it. Thiruvalluvar addresses
tree and its importance in Thirukkural
“A tree that fruits in the hamlet's central mart,
Is wealth that falls to men of liberal heart.” (Kural - 216 - Thirukkural, n.d.).
This means the benevolent people’s wealth is like a town’s fruitful tree ripening.
2 LITERATURE REVIEW
In the year 1925 the new york etmonlogical society critically examined
Vishnusharma's Panchatantra Tales to analysis the insect (New York Entomological
Society, 1925), and then in the study conducted by kulkarni focussed on Indian classical
fables in education (Kulkarni, n.d.), researcher Shamsuddin point out that "the Place of
3
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
Panchatantra in world literature" (Shamsuddin, 2013), in the year 2016 the representation
and de-emphasize of animals in Sanskrit text were analysised, and in the perspective of
green reading (Bhattacharya, 2019), then in the feministic point of view (Shinde, 2015),
critical text investigation (M. Taylor, 2019), a comparative study of the early and recent
translations of Pancahatantra tales are examined (Rafieisakhaei Soudabeh, 2021), and eco
philosophical perspective (Kumaravelu & Christopher, 2023). And the religious text
Jataka Tales from the Point of Views on Gender Study (Kumar & Hee, n.d.), Women and
the Bodhisatta Path (Appleton, 2011), Character Analysis on Devadatta (Appleton, 2019),
Moral Guidance (Kyi & Kyi, 2020), Eco Sophy (Bhattacherjee & Sinha, 2021). Finally,
both the tales are discussed in comparative aspects of what are the “similarities between
Panchatantra tales, Jataka tales, and Kodi fables (Needham, 1960), and “Jatakas and
Panchatantra impacted on the Odia writer of Manoj Das’s works” (Rani A, 2017) are
previously discovered.
2.1 RESEARCH GAP
Many people have researched topics like translation, women’s rights, moral value
aspects, character examination, and ecological parts in the select classical text. However,
no academic research has compared the stories from an ecocritical point of view
particularly ‘trees’ in the select classical text Panchatantra tales and Jataka tales.
Therefore, the identified gap in this research paper is to explore how classical fables
promote environmental awareness (trees), because people believe trees are the ultimate
source of life. These select tales help to understand one’s relationship to trees and increase
ecological consciousness due to the emotive and social connection to Earth. This can be
accomplished through tree-based narratives. This research is an attempt to create
awareness of protecting nature (trees) which will help to avoid deforestation.
3 MATERIALS AND METHODOLOGY
The study involves qualitative research, a comparative study of selected Indian
classical fables such as Panchatantra tales and Jataka tales in the lens of ecocriticism
specifically on trees by using ‘textual analysis,’ because it is a kind of tactic which
involving the interpretation of textual language (Hammarberg et al., 2016), like a
comparative investigation of Indonesia and Sweden (Jimmi Agustinus et al., 2023).
4
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
Additionally, the great academician Kothari makes clear that: In the behavioural
sciences, where the goal is to uncover the fundamental causes of human behaviour,
qualitative research is particularly significant. Through such a study, we may examine the
many aspects that influence people's behaviour or their likes and dislikes of various
things.
Firstly, the researchers read the selected literary works and related philosophies to
understand the study problem, the stories are read numerous times. Reading relevant
theories prevents misinterpretation. Secondly, using ecocriticism ideas, characters, and
views, are analyzed. The effective use of narrative techniques in the context of
environmental literacy may be observed as a crucial and innovative mechanism for
instructing readers on environmental concerns, and at the same time advancing
sustainable behaviors for future generations. This discourse on ecocriticism can be a
valuable and constructive approach to environmental education. In this context ‘Nature’
refers to the beauty of its inhabitants, such as plants and animals. Having a healthy
ecosystem exists for the benefit of both humans and the environment to maintain a
balance between living things and as well as inanimate objects.
4 ECO-CRITICISM THEORY
The two terms ‘eco’ and ‘critic’ come from the Greek words “oikos” and “kritis”
(Ecocriticism 2023), which means ‘house judge’. Researcher William Rueckert invented
the term ‘ecocriticism’ in his essay “Literature and Ecology: An Experiment in
Ecocriticism” (Howarth, W. 1996). A long-winded explanation of ecocritics might be: “a
person who evaluates the strengths and weaknesses of writings that show how culture
affects nature, praises nature, and criticizes those who harm nature, then takes political
action to fix the damage they have done.” (Howarth, W. 1996).
Researcher Tisnawijaya states “Ecocriticism places importance on environmental
issues” (Tisnawijaya & Kurniati, 2021, p. 234), and it is more than just the analysis of
how nature is depicted in literature. Ecocriticism emphasizes ecological justice since
man’s insatiable desire to overcome nature is deceptive. P.W. Taylor stated that “Ecology
is concerned with enhancing the human-nature relationship. People will respect and love
the natural world if they recognize the clear scientific evidence of their interrelationship
with it.” (P. W. Taylor, 2011). Ecocriticism advocates sustainable development for a
better future for mankind in general. All organisms have their right to survive in their
5
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
way. However, now we realize that nature is not a subordinate but a co-inhabitant of this
earth’s ecosystem. We should change our self-destructive motives.
4.1 PANCHATANTRA: A PIECE OF NON-RELIGIOUS WRITING
Around 2200 years ago, Pandit Vishnu Sharma composed the great Indian short
story collection called Panchatantra Tales in the Sanskrit language ( the language of
Sans), and the stories are still widely retold and read by children and adults all over the
world. Panchatantra is also known as Nitishastra, which is Sanskrit meaning "book of
wise conduct in life." It is broken up into five volumes, each of which has a unique
narrative inside a story (Shinde, 2015, p. 13682). Most of the Panchatantra storylines
involve a natural environment. “The recognition of the environment as a fundamental
right is enshrined in Brazilian law and in several countries that participated in
international events to protect the environment” (Fiorin, 2019). According to Kulkarni
(n.d., p. 203), these are "Mitra-bheda, Mitra-lbha or Mitra-samprpti, Kkolkyam,
Labdhapraam, and Aparkitakraka." The Panchatantra is "India's most famous collection
of tales, and it was one of the first Indian books to be copied into Western languages,"
according to author and translator Patrick Olivella. No other Indian work has, without a
doubt, had a greater influence on writing in the world, and no other collection of short
stories has achieved the same fame in India. (1997, Olivelle).
4.2 PALI RELIGIOUS TEXT - JATAKA TALES
Ancient Buddhist writings Jataka Tales are a collection of 550 stories that are "part
of a semi-canonical Theravada Buddhist work and focuses on the life story of Buddha”
(Appleton, 2009, p. 104). Many of the stories in the “Panchatantra are the same as the
Buddhist Jataka stories,” (Nadwi, 2013, p. 34). The Buddha was a “nature lover, he spent
long periods in forests, caves, and under trees, and as well as urged his monks to do the
same. Monastic disciplinary guidelines address environmental protection initiatives. He
adored nature, which included animals.” (Nguyen Thi & Kieu Diem, 2012, p. 6). And as
well “the tree is a symbol of knowledge, it is said that Buddha found spiritual awakening
while meditating under an Ashoka tree” (Lal et al., 2014, p. 19). Every religion recognizes
the significance of trees. “The forests are soft, reads the Dhammapada, a place where the
world does not enter; the saint finds his rest there.” (Muller, 2010). According to
researcher Jean-Georges, "Plants are significantly superior" (Jean-Georges, 2016, p. 11),
6
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
as they set the scene and help frame the storyteller's imagination and narrative discourse.
Researcher Alexander et al. distinguished that "trees have a profound and crucial
significance for humans. The symbolic importance of old trees is archetypal; in our
visions, they frequently represent personality in their entirety. People’s affection for trees
creates special locations, both to inhabit and to traverse. Trees can generate a variety of
social spaces” (Alexander, 1977, p. 798).
5 DISCUSSION
Environmental issues rarely come up in academic discussions so this discussion
highlights the fact that it is a persistent problem that needs to be considered. Despite
being such ancient literary works, the selected fables mentioned in this article all
emphasize trees as a significant aspect of environmental issues from various storylines
and epochs. Since they exhibit an understanding of sustainable living, they may offer
detailed insights into how young readers initially comprehend the stories. The ancient
Sanskrit texts are like a gold mine of information about trees from that period. They
demonstrate how in tune with nature the ancients were.
5.1 THE SIGNIFICANT NATURE OF THE TREE IN SANSKRIT LITERATURE
The tree was given importance by author Vishnu Sharma because it forms a
complex circle that serves as a source of life as well as shelter. The verse describing the
banyan tree's importance opened Book 2's “Winning of Friends.” There was a tremendous
banyan tree nearby that provides shelter for various animals.
“Birds in multitudes gather to roots,
Darkening its dark-green canopy of leaves;
Troops of monkeys’ cling to the trunk;
While hollows hum with insect-throngs;
Flowers are boldly kissed by honey-bees:
Oh! What happiness its every limb showers
On assembles of various creatures.
Such a tree deserves all praise,
Others can only burden the Earth” (Rajan, 1993, p. 193).
So, these verses detailly explain the use of trees. Here narrator also highlights the
worth of trees to humans by highlighting their importance. Researcher Lithoxoidou and
his co-researcher stated that “Forest is the home of animals that is where they sleep and
eat” (Lithoxoidou & Georgopoulos, n.d., p. 71), Nonetheless, it provides shelter for
humans as well, as depicted in the following tale “The dove who sacrificed himself”
7
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
When a hunter requires shelter due to heavy rain in the forest, he took refuge under a large
tree for a time.
“Searching wildly for some shelter,
To one of the great lords of the forest.
He covered for a while under that great tree;
The stars shone bright as the skies cleared suddenly.
A ray of wisdom glimmering, he spoke softly:
O divinities! You are my sanctuary” (Rajan, 1993, p. 309).
The next tale “The Crow and the Serpent” is then explored. Here in this narrative
readers can understand and learn the lifestyle of plants and animals like crows, cowards,
and deer. “Crows, cowards, deer, these three, Will ne’er abandon their home;” (Rajan,
1993, p. 62). Book 4 tale “Loss of Gains” started with “A great rose-apple tree, which
was perennially laden with fruit. An ape named red-faced lived in it” (Rajan, 1993, p.
353). Readers will learn that birds may survive in trees even during the rainy season and
seek refuge by sheltering inside a tree hole or nest. So, the above narrations explain trees
as shelter provides for all living being in the world. But we humans intentionally or
unintentionally cause damage to them. Like deforestation, this was explained in the tale
“The cat judgment”
“By cutting trees and slaying animals,
By fighting wars that create bloody slime,
If this is the way men go to heaven,
Who in that case goes to hell?” (Rajan, 1993, p. 295).
From this verse, the author conveys the message that those who cut the tree will
go to hell. Due to human anthropocentric behavior, Mother Earth is destroyed. Researcher
Kavitha and the coresearcher defined that “the process of deforestation has destroyed elm
trees. Subsequently, when attempts were made to plant these trees in Jamaica after a
significant period, they were unable to acclimatize to the local climate.” (Kavitha & A.,
2019, p. 105).
5.2 DEFORESTATION CONCEPT IN RELIGIOUS TEXT
In addition to discussing the significance of trees, the Jataka tale explains the
present-day environmental crisis of ‘deforestation.’ This was described in the following
tale “The Stupid Monkeys” Once a King’s gardener planned to attend a festivity in a
nearby village, therefore he requested a few monkeys to water the plant. Following
8
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
acceptance, the idiotic primates dragged down tree after tree to inspect the water. A wise
man “witness the ape that killed the garden trees” (Francis & Thomas, 2012, p. 27).
Therefore, the reader can comprehend watering plants without endangering them from
the narration. However, humans are the primary cause of deforestation, due to this the
“significant portion of the carbon stored by trees is returned to the atmosphere as carbon
dioxide, which contributes to climate change.”(What Is the Role of Deforestation in
Climate Change and How Can “Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Degradation” (REDD+) Help? n.d.). This will cause natural imbalances and living beings’
life in danger. Tropical deforestation poses a dual threat to both the climate and as well
as indigenous communities residing in affected regions. From “the Amazon to South East
Asia and Africa, traditional societies (tribals) are facing endangerment due to this
phenomenon” (Boekhout van Solinge, 2010, p. 264). This demonstrates how well fables
teach people about the world. From an ecocritical point of view, trees are sometimes not
questioned as much as in other parts of the world. But the researchers hope this study
progress create eco-consciousness to some readers, particularly teenagers in society.
5.3 THE REINCARNATION OF BUDDHA AS A ‘TREE’
Reincarnation, also called rebirth, transmigration, or metempsychosis, is the
philosophical or religious idea that the invisible soul of a living thing starts a new life in
a different body after it dies. This is a common belief in many religions “the existence of
numerous souls is widespread across the world’s faiths. Many people believe that the soul
may leave the body using the mouth or the nostrils and then be reincarnated as a
nonhuman being such as a bird, a butterfly, or an insect.” (Reincarnation | Definition &
Facts | Britannica, n.d.). Buddha also stated that there is karma, which impacts future
suffering via the “cycle of reincarnation” (Harvey, n.d., pp. 32–33), but he also stated that
nirvana is a method to halt the cycle of karmic rebirths. In the stores of Jataka tales
Buddha reincarnated as humans, birds, creatures, and trees, among others.
“Trees are such an ancient living being” and it is turn out to be home for most
animals and birds, this perception is discussed in the following tale “A foolish monkey,
living in the trees” (Francis & Thomas, 2012, p. 106), and birds “There grew on the river’s
bank a silk cotton tree, in which lived a young parrot” (Francis & Thomas, 2012, p. 49).
From these readers can understand that trees become shelters for not only animals but for
birds also.
9
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
The next Buddhist tale “The Crane and the Crab” Bodhisatta ascended in the
woodland as the divinity of a tree, near the lotus pond. There, lived a clever crane intended
to consume fish from the pond so he made a plane to catch fish and crab. Therefore, the
cunning crane approached them like we need to move to another pond because of water
scarcity. But the intelligent crab discovered the master plan and punished him. so, here
the tree witnessed the event and caused the entire forest to erupt in acclaim. By reading
this kind of tale readers can be motivated, and entertain an eco-critical investigation and
it may lead to new environmental studies.
In the next tale, “The Jackal and the Crow” Bodhisatta transformed into a tree-
spirit in a rose-apple grove. Both the crow and the fox are flattering one another by
labeling each other Sweet Singer and young tiger. Therefore, out of annoyance, “the tree-
spirit, assuming a fear-full shape, scared them both away” (Francis & Thomas, 2012, p.
170). Even in the story “The Otters and the Jackal” Buddha again becomes a tree spirit in
the river bank (Francis & Thomas, 2012, p. 209).
6 CONCLUSION
In conclusion, it can be asserted that trees hold significant importance and offer
numerous benefits to all living organisms on the planet. In the absence of these entities,
the sustenance of life on the planet would be challenging, ultimately leading to the death
of all species due to insufficient oxygen levels. To ensure our survival, we must acquire
an understanding of the significance of trees and impart this knowledge to future
generations. Literature from the past teaches us how to have happy lives in harmony with
the natural world. These eco-literary masterpieces speak eloquently to the interplay and
interdependence between humans and the environment, which is a central subject in eco-
literature.
Indian literature has been filled with environmental concerns from the prehistoric
to the modern times. Along with ancient Indian writing in English, traditional translations
of regional literature also feature representations of nature. They teach us how to live a
joyful life in an intimate connection with the natural world. The important element of
eco-literature, the interdependence, and connectivity of human nature, is skillfully
handled in these literary works about the environment. The general theme is to preserve
nature in all her pristine beauty and to avoid destroying anything that cannot be rebuilt.
The more ecocritical literature is read and discussed, the more man will come to
10
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
understand how-to live-in harmony with nature and address the current global
environmental crisis. Finally, we hope “a forest heals and again grows” (Rajan, 1993, p.
296).
FURTHER RESEARCH
The authors are offering the significance of trees in Indian classical text such as Sanskrit-
Panchatantra tales and Pali- Jataka tales with an ecocritical perspective. As an upcoming
extension of the present work, it is necessary to investigate the significance of plants in
other languages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The researchers would like to express their thankfulness to the Editor and reviewers of
the manuscript who provided extensive feedback on earlier versions of this article.
11
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
REFERENCES
Alexander, C. (1977). A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. Oxford
University Press.
Amirthalingam, M. (n.d.). Plant diversity in the Valmiki ramayana.pdf.
Appleton, N. (2009). Temptress on the Path: Women as Objects and Subjects in Buddhist
Jataka Stories. In P. S. Anderson (Ed.), New Topics in Feminist Philosophy of Religion
(pp. 103–115). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6833-1_7
Appleton, N. (2011). In the Footsteps of the Buddha? Women and the Bodhisatta Path in
Theravā?da Buddhism. Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion, 27(1), 33–51.
https://doi.org/10.2979/jfemistudreli.27.1.33
Appleton, N. (2019). What Does It Mean to Be a Badly Behaved Animal? An Answer
from the Devadatta Stories of the Pāli Jātakas. Religions, 10(4), Article 4.
https://doi.org/10.3390/rel10040288
Bhattacharya, n. (2019). Environmental consciousness in Indian fables: how and what the
Panchatantra can teach our children (pp. 47–51).
Bhattacharya, Nivedita. Environmental Consciousness in Indian Fables: How and What
the Pañcatantra Can Teach Our Children. 2019, pp. 47–51.
Bhattacherjee, Monalisa, and Sweta Sinha. Ecosophy through Jātaka Tales. 2021, p. 13.
“Ecocriticism.” Wikipedia, 6 Mar. 2023. Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecocriticism&oldid=1143204652#cite_note-
4.
Epistle | Literature | Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/art/Indian-literature .
Accessed 20 Mar. 2023.
Fiorin, P. S. (2019). Society of fundamental rights: Sustainable development protected by
extra-fiscal instruments. Journal of Law and Sustainable Development, 7(2), 168–185.
Scopus. https://doi.org/10.37497/REVCAMPOJUR.V7I2.269
Francis, and Thomas. , (2012). The Jataka Tales. 1st edition, Jaico Publishing House.
Frey, Lawrence R., et al. AN INTRODUCTION TO RESEARCH METHODS.
Hammarberg, Karin, Maggie Kirkman, and Sheryl de Lacey. (2016). "Qualitative
research methods: when to use them and how to judge them." Human reproduction 31.3
498-501.
Harvey, Peter. (2012). An introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, history and practices.
Cambridge University Press.
Howarth, William. (1996). "Some principles of ecocriticism." The ecocriticism reader:
Landmarks in literary ecology 69-91.
12
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
Jean-Georges, Chali. (2016). "Relations between Man and the Environment through the
Analysis of the Symbolism of the Herbs and Trees in Caribbean Literature." Open Access
Library Journal 3.7 1-17. https://doi.org/10.4236/oalib.1102765
Jimmi Agustinus, Leo, et al. “Towards a Fairer Future: Examining Environmental Permits
in Indonesia and Sweden Through the Lens of Sustainable Development and Equity.”
Journal of Law and Sustainable Development, vol. 11, no. 2, 2023, p. 3.
Kavitha, Ms S., and A. Hariharasudan. (2019). "Historiographic metafiction in Jhumpa
Lahiri's The Lowland: A Postmodernist's Perspective." Literary Endeavour 86.
Kothari, C. R. (2004). Research methodology: Methods & techniques. (2nd ed). New Age
International Publishers
Kulkarni, Shirin. (2013). "Panchatantra: An example of using narratives in teaching in
ancient Indian education." Puheenvuoroja narratiivisuudesta opetuksessa ja oppimisessa.
Kumar, L. Udaya, and Lee Kyoung Hee. (2021). "Buddhist Women and Their Gender
Identity: A Contemporary Feminist Approach."
Shanmugapriya, Kumaravelu, and G. Christopher. "Eco-philosophy of Indian classical
fables." Ecocycles 9.1 (2023): 100-106.
Kural—216—Thirukkural. (n.d.). Kural.PRO. Retrieved April 30, 2023, from
https://kural.page/english/holy-kural-216-duty-to-society
San Kyi, Myint, and Khin Min Kyi. "Moral Guidances in Jātaka."
Lal, Hari Shankar, Sanjay Singh, and P. K. Mishra. "Trees in Indian Mythology."
Discovery 12.29 (2014): 16-23.
Lithoxoidou, L. S., & Georgopoulos, A. D. (n.d.). “Trees have a soul too!” Developing
Empathy and Environmental Values in Early Childhood.
Melinamani, A. (2016). Theorizing Animals: Representation of Animals in Panchatantra.
Contemporary Discourse, 7(2), 220–225.
Muller, F. M. (Ed.). (2010). The Dhammapada: The Sacred Books of the East V10.
Kessinger Publishing.
Nadwi, A. Qadir. (2013). Panchatantra: Its impact on Perso-Arabic Literature. IOSR
Journal of Humanities and Social Science, 12(3), 33–35. https://doi.org/10.9790/0837-
1233335
Needham, R. (1960). Jataka, Pañcatantra, and Kodi fables. Bijdragen Tot de Taal-, Land-
En Volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia,
116(2), 232–262. https://doi.org/10.1163/22134379-90002214
New York Entomological Society., & Society, N. Y. E. (1925). Journal of the New York
Entomological Society (Vol. 33, pp. 1–314). Allen Press [etc.].
https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/206119
13
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Kumaravelu, S., Gnanadurai, C. (2023). Significance of Trees: Ecocriticism in Select Sanskrit
and Pali Text
Nguyen Thi & Kieu Diem. (2012). The role of Animals in Indian Buddhism with special
reference to the Jatakas [University of Delhi]. http://hdl.handle.net/10603/6464
Olivelle, P. (1997). The Pancatantra: The Book of India’s Folk Wisdom. Oxford
University Press. https://dspace2.creighton.edu/xmlui/handle/10504/79544
Rafieisakhaei, Soudabeh. A Comparative Study of the Earliest and the Latest English
Translations of the Panchatantra. Diss. University of Georgia, 2021.
Rajan, C. (1993). Vishnu Sarma: The Panchatantra.
Rani A. (2017). Impact of jataka and Panchatantra in Short Stories of Manoj das. The
Vedic Path, 92(1 & 2), 23.
Rathore, R. (2015, January 16). Ancient Indian Literature—History Study Material &
Notes. Exam Pariksha. https://exampariksha.com/ancient-indian-literature-history-study-
material-notes/
Reincarnation | Definition & Facts | Britannica. (n.d.). Retrieved April 30, 2023, from
https://www.britannica.com/topic/reincarnation
Shamsuddin, S. M. (2013). Place of &quot; Panchatantra&quot; in the World of
Literature. British Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences.
https://www.academia.edu/6977957/Place_of_Panchatantra_in_the_World_of_Literatur
es
Shinde, S. (2015). Panchatantra: Critical Analysis from Feminist Perspective. 10, 7.
Singh, S. (2023, January 9). Influence of Classic Literature on Modern Society.
Taylor, M. (2019). The Panchatantra: World Literature Before “World Literature”. A
Companion to world literature. In K. Seigneurie (Ed.), A Companion to World Literature
(1st ed., pp. 1–13). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118635193.ctwl0045
Taylor, P. W. (2011). Respect for Nature: A Theory of Environmental Ethics
Tisnawijaya, C., & Kurniati, G. (2021). Sustaining life with trees: ecocriticism
perspective in selected picture books. Lire Journal (Journal of Linguistics and Literature),
5(2), 233.
What is the role of deforestation in climate change and how can “Reducing Emissions
from Deforestation and Degradation” (REDD+) help? (n.d.). Grantham research institute
on climate change and the Environment. Retrieved April 30, 2023, from
https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/explainers/whats-redd-and-will-it-help-tackle-
climate-change/
14
Miami| v.11, n. 8| pages: 01-14| e01019 |2023. JOURNAL OF LAW AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT