Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
DOI10.1007/s12671-014-0373-4
COMMENTARY
Clearing the Muddled Path of Traditional and Contemporary
Mindfulness: a Response to Monteiro, Musten, and Compson
RonaldE.Purser
Publishedonline:25December2014
#SpringerScience+BusinessMediaNewYork2014
Introduction (2014)“TheDarkNightoftheSoul.”Inaddition,numerous
Buddhistteachersandreligiousstudiesscholarshaveweighed
In their article, Monteiro, Musten and Compson (2015) ex- inonthemedicalizationandpsychologizationofmindfulness,
ploredthecriticismsregardingtheproliferationofcontempo- considering how such reinterpretations alter the meaning,
rary mindfulness programs by attempting to represent the function and ends of such secular practices (Bazzano 2013;
positions and concerns of the traditional Buddhist Brazier2013;BuswellandLopez2014;Cohen2010;Lopez
community. They noted that traditional Buddhists have 2012;Samuel2014;Stanley2013;Thanissaro2012;Wallace
raisedalarmsovertheproliferationofmindfulnessprograms 2007). In addition to analyzing and describing the trend to-
primarily because such contemporary applications have wards the decontextualization of mindfulness and the role it
significantly diverged from canonical definitions of playswithinanintegratedBuddhistpathofliberation,anum-
mindfulness as derived from the vast corpus of traditional berofscholarshavealsodescribed,perhapsmoreimportantly,
Buddhist texts and practices. In addition, they characterized howcontemporarymindfulnessapplicationshaveundergone
suchobjectionsbytraditionalBuddhistsasagroundswellof a refashioning and make over in order to accommodate the
protest,particularlywhenconcernsareraisedovertheabsence needs of Western society deeply rooted in individualism,
of ethics, or sila, in clinical and nonclinical mindfulness consumer capitalism, along with its pragmatic demands for
programs. Theyalsotouchonissuespertainingtoaclash of tangible and worldly benefits (McMahan 2008; Schedneck
worldviews between religion and science, as well as the 2013;Stanley2013;Wilson2014).
teaching of secular mindfulness programs in corporations Monteiro et al. have emphasized two extreme views by
andthemilitary. narrowly framing the debate simply in terms of definitional
Monteiroetal.(2015)framedthedebate,firstintermsof squabbles of what constitutes right mindfulness and the ab-
two streams, the traditional Buddhist community (which is senceofanexplicitethicalframeworkformindfulness-based
depicted as fiercely critical of the other stream)—namely, interventions(MBIs).BhikkhuBodhi(2014a)haschronicled
contemporary mindfulness, as propagated and practiced by thispolaroppositioninwhathecallsa“fusionofhorizons.”
secular and clinical mindfulness practitioners. This framing On one side of the polarity are the conservative Buddhists,
hassomemerit,astheconcernsraisedhavebeenthesubjectof whobelievetheDharmamustbekeptpure,thatitshouldbe
much debate and attention in both the popular press and preservedandprotected,andthatintroducinganychangesis
Buddhistblogosphere,suchasPurserandLoy’s(2013)“Be- simplyaslipperyslopetoaneventualdegradationandwhole-
yond McMindfulness,” North’s (2014) op-ed piece “The saledilutionoftheBuddhistteachings.Ontheotherendofthe
Mindfulness Backlash” in the New York Times, Thompson spectrum are the contemporary mindfulness advocates, who
(2014),“TheMindfulnessWars,”Whitaker’s(2013)“2013as believe that Buddhism has always evolved as it migrates to
the year of mindfulness: Critics and defenders,” and Roca’s newcultures,andthattheWestisnotanydifferent.Therefore,
theDharmaismutableandshouldbeadaptiveandrelevantto
modern times by shedding its religious overtones, supersti-
R.E.Purser(*)
tions, and cultural baggage. Contemporary mindfulness is
CollegeofBusiness,Bus349,SanFranciscoStateUniversity,1600
pragmatic and therapeutic—its aim is to reduce suffering in
HollowayAvenue,SanFrancisco,CA94132,USA
e-mail:rpurser@sfsu.edu
thehereandnow.Theslogan,“meetingpeoplewheretheyare

24 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
at,” is the mantra for contemporary mindfulness advocates. practice” (Monteiro et al. 2015, p. 1), the most established,
While there issomedegree ofvalidityto these characteriza- popular, and researchedclinicalprogram,mindfulness-based
tions,thisextremistcomparison,whichMonteiroetal.focus stress reduction (MBSR), now advertises its training and
onas being representativeof the “tangleofconcerns,” often curriculum“asavehicleforembodyingandtransmittingthe
depicts Buddhist traditionalists as inflexible, dogmatic, and dharma in a wholly secular and universal idiom. It is a
deficientlyadaptive,ineffect,settinguptraditionalBuddhism recontextualizing of dharma, not a decontextualizing of it”
asastrawman.Thisiscurious,giventhattheBhikkhuBodhi Center for Mindfulness (2014). Williams and Kabat-Zinn
(2011, pp. 35–36), an American monk and one of the key (2011, p. 15) have even gone so far to say that MBSR and
voicesfor“traditionalBuddhism”intheWest,hasremarked MBIsarearecontextualizationoftheBuddhistteachingsinall
that: oftheir“essentialfullness.”.Infact,theprefacestatementto
the standards and principles expected of a MBSR teacher
“…Idonotthinkweneedbealarmedabouttheadapta- explicitlymakesmentionofthefactthatMBSRderivesmuch
tionofBuddhistpracticesforsecularends.Icalltomind of its approach from Buddhist practices, underscoring that
a statement the Buddha made in the weeks before his mindfulnessis“theheartofBuddhistmeditation.”Prospective
death:‘TheTathagatahasnoclosedfistofateacherwith MBSRteachersareexpected“tobeacommittedstudentofthe
respecttoteachings.’Bythishemeantthathehadtaught dharma,asitisexpressedbothwithintheBuddhistmeditation
everythingimportantwithoutholdingbackanyesoteric traditions and in more mainstream and universal contexts
doctrines,butIliketointerprethiswordstomeanthat exemplifiedbyMBSR”(CenterforMindfulness2014).This
wecanletanyonetakefromtheDhammawhateverthey strongrequirement—tobecommittedtothedharma,withan
findusefulevenifitisforsecularpurposes.” explicitemphasisonBuddhistmeditation—isqualified,how-
ever,byacuriousexemptionclause:“Thishasnothingtodo
In their characterization of “a growing and sometimes-
withbeingornotbeingaBuddhist”(CenterforMindfulness
fraught debate” between traditional and contemporary
2014).
mindfulness, Monteiro et al. (2015) apparently have chosen
How should one make sense of these mystifying state-
toomittheequallynumerouscriticismsanddefensiveretorts
ments? It appears that MBSR teacher training is indeed ex-
comingfromcontemporarymindfulnessadvocates(Goldstein
plicitly based in Buddhist meditative practice and in a Bud-
2013; Halliwell 2011; Hunter 2013; Nicklebine 2013; Segal
dhistcontext;itsteachersareexpectedtobecommittedtothe
2013),whichhavenotbeenexactlycongenialtothetradition-
“dharma” and undertake long, 7–10-day silentretreats, pref-
alBuddhistcommunity.Moreimportantly,thisnarrowfram-
erably in the Western Buddhist vipassana tradition. At a
ing of the issues serves to deflect attention away from the
meeting of MBSR teachers in Northern California, Saki
“mystification” of mindfulness, a term Wilson (2014) has
Santorelli,theExecutiveDirectorfortheCenterforMindful-
recentlyusedtodescribetheintentionalrhetoricaltacticsand
ness,emphasizedtheneedformorein-depthteachertraining
processes involved in extracting and uprooting mindfulness
anddeclaredthattheCenterforMindfulness(CFM)isinthe
fromitsgroundinginareligioustradition,informednotonly
business of training dharma teachers. And a senior MBSR
onafoundationofmoralityandethics,butwhichismotivated
teacher-trainerattheCFMhasadamantlystated,“Ireallyfeel
bysoteriologicalaimsforthecessationofdukkha,liberation
MBSRisnotsecular…”andthat“MBSRisveryspiritualand
fromsamsara,andacompassionatecommitmenttoactforthe
holy. If you look inside the curriculum you will find it is
welfareofallsentientbeings.Itisthisprocessofmystification
inspiredfromtheessenceandheartoftheDhamma.”Cullen
that also accounts for the widespread misconception in the
(2011),aseasonedMBSRteacher,identifiedMBIsasanew
WestthatBuddhistpracticeissynonymouswithmindfulness
lineageandanemergentstreamofa“newAmericandharma,”
meditation. Such cultural appropriation was of course the
one that is widely accessible, non-dogmatic, and pragmatic.
outgrowthofthemainstreamingmindfulnessforclinicaland
Giventheexplicituseofsuchtermsas“dharma,”“spiritual,”
non-Buddhistpopulations,amovementthathasnowcometo
“holy,” and “lineage” by these senior MBSR teachers, these
permeate the mass media with its appeal as a convenient
declarationsdonotexactlyhaveasecularringbutborderon
remedyfortheeverydaystressesandanxietiesoftheWestern
the evangelical.Indeed,the juxtapositionofthe “traditional”
consumer.
versusthe“contemporary”mindfulnessstreamsappearstobe
blurredandquestionable,ifnot,misguided.
Itisunderstandable,however, why Monteiroetal. would
MixedMessagesofContemporaryMindfulness subscribe tosucha polarizationbetweenthe twostreams,as
wellastheambiguousstancetheCenterforMindfulnesshas
Another problem in this categorization scheme is that while towardsBuddhismasatraditionandreligiouspractice.First,
contemporary mindfulness is defined as “all forms of mind- distinguishing contemporary from traditional (Buddhist)
fulness programs that are not explicitly based in Buddhist mindfulnessisdependentuponaselectivereadingofclinical

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 25
mindfulnessprograms,particularlyMBSR.Thisisduetothe resourcefortheircurriculaandongoingtraining.Buddhismas
factthatMBSRisusuallypresentedaswhollysecular,med- a faith tradition and religion is downplayed, replaced by
ical, scientific, evidenced-based clinical program, devoid of Buddhist modernism’s image of the Buddha as a scientist
anyreligiousaffiliations.Andthisemphasisonthesecularand and radical empiricist, and the teachings, the practices, and
scientific is certainly the case when mindfulness-based pro- mindfulness meditation as the expression of a “universal
gramsaretargetedforimplementationinpublicschools,orin dharma.”Wilson(2014,p.161)makesaveryastuteobserva-
seekinggrantfundingfromfederalagenciessuchasNational tionregardingthisstrategy:
Institute of Health (NIH) and the Department of Defense
(DoD). In these cases, advocates engage in self-censorship, “…mindfulness continues to operate in a religious or
taking care not to emphasize the Buddhist connections. In quasi-religious fashion, despite its advocates’ frequent
otherwords,dependingontherecipient,MBSRisbilled,on insistencethatitisnotthecase(or,atleast,neednotbe)
the one hand, as an either wholly secular and contemporary connected to religion. As we’ve seen, religion and
program,orontheotherhand,asasacred,spiritual,andholy valuesaredownplayedbymindfulnessauthorstogarner
practice—a faithful recontextualization of the dharma. In large audiences—but in many cases, the reason they
attempting to have it both ways, MBSR has succeeded in want an audience in the first place is because they are
extending its scope and reach, but at the expense of an convincedthatmindfulnessandotherelementsderived
impendingidentitycrisis. fromBuddhismhavearealabilitytoalleviatesuffering
Thechameleonandshape-shiftingnatureofMBSR’spub- (thegoalofreligiousBuddhism)….Mindfulnessiscon-
licfaceisagrowingsourceofconfusion.TrainingforMBSR nected to a whole set of self-disciplinary and lifestyle
teachers explicitly draws from Buddhist sources (albeit in a practicesthataregivenmoralweightbytheirpromoters.
highlymodifiedandtruncatedfashion),anditsseniorteachers Evenifweacceptthe protestations ofmanyadvocates
have even declared MBIs are a new transmission of the thatmindfulnessisnotareligionperse,itisnonetheless
dharma. Many Western Buddhist centers (mostly Western doingtheworkofreligions.”
Insight Meditation and some progressive Zen centers) even
Thisblurringofboundariesbetweentheso-calledcontem-
offer MBSR courses alongside traditional Buddhist classes.
porary-traditional mindfulness communities, along with the
Kabat-Zinn (2011, p. 12) has even referred to MBSR and
incongruence in messaging (MBIs as sacred, new transmis-
other related MBIs as “Dharma based portals.” Despite this
sionofthedharma,groundedinBuddhistteachingsvs.whol-
intermingling, there is still an intentional distancing from
lysecular,evidenced-based,scientific,clinicalinterventions),
Buddhism as a faith tradition, which should come as no
isnotonlycreatingagreatdealofconfusionbutalsoethical
surprise, since in a secular society, many consider religious
and credibility issues (Shonin, Van Gordon and Griffiths
traditionstobesuspect—thelegacyofoutdated,corrupt,and
2013).AsShoninetal.(2013,p.2)pointedout:
authoritarianpremoderninstitutions.
CFM’s qualifying statement that MBSR teacher training,
“…suchspiritually-ladenlanguageappearstobeincon-
“…has nothing to do with being or not being a Buddhist”
gruentwiththegeneralpresentationandconceptualiza-
(Center for Mindfulness2014) can also be seen even within
tionofMBIsinrelationtotheiroperationalizationwith-
WesternBuddhism.BecauseMonteiroetal.havefocusedon
inclinicalsettings.Thus,theidentityofMBIsaswellas
the extreme end of a spectrum that they label as traditional
their primary underlying “intention” (i.e., a means of
Buddhism,theyfailedtoconsiderthemiddlegroundofcon-
improvingpsychosomaticwell-beingoratoolforspir-
temporary WesternBuddhism—which has already distanced
itualdevelopment)appearstobeslightlyconfused,and
itselffromreligiousBuddhism.Infact,inmanyWesternneo-
thisispotentiallyconfusingforservice-users.”
vipassanacenters,onecanbeaBuddhistpractitionerwithout
havingtobecomeaBuddhist.ThetakingofBuddhistvowsin Contemporarymindfulnessteachersarefondofsayingthat
theBuddha,Dharma,andSangha(thetraditionalceremonyof traditional Buddhists “don’t own mindfulness” (Goldstein
Buddhistconversion)isgenerallynotofferedinsuchcenters 2013) or as Monteiro et al. (2015, p. 7) noted, “whether
noronmeditationretreats,andthetakingofBuddhistethical Buddhismhassoleproprietyrightstotheconceptofmindful-
preceptsisusuallylimitedtowhileoneisonaretreat,rather ness and its dissemination.” However, the dispute here, as
thanasacommitmenttothewholeofone’slife. Shoninetal.(2013)showed,isnotoneofintellectualproperty
Therefore, it is quite obvious that by promoting mindful- butoftruthinadvertising.TraditionalBuddhists,asBhikkhu
ness as non-religious, intentionally decoupling it from Bud- Bodhi’s earlier statement revealed, have no issue with the
dhism, the contemporary mindfulness community has been adaptation of mindfulness for secular and clinical purposes,
abletooffermindfulnesspracticetoamuchwiderpopulation. whichaimsatsymptomreductionandimprovementsinpsy-
However,withintheMBSR/MBIteachercommunities,Bud- chosomatic well-being. However, if service users, especially
dhist teachings and practices are explicitly recognized as a thoseinhealthcaresettings,arereallybeingtaughtaformof

26 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
“stealth Buddhism,” that’s anethical issue.Trying to haveit 201) reiterated his main premise that “patients cannot inten-
both ways is both problematic and disingenuous. At McGill tionallyparticipateinCAMwithoutunderstandingtheconse-
University’s Advanced Study Institute, Mindfulness in Cul- quencesoftheiractionsforbothhealthandreligion.”
tural Context conference, Thupten Jinpa Langri (2013), the Brown (2013) went on to describe how spiritual teachers
DalaiLama’slong-timetranslatorandinterpreteragreed: and trainers first seek to gain the trust of their clients by
utilizing more neutral language, gradually introducing more
“Although,Iamawarethatsometimes,thepresentersof spirituallyladenconceptsandpractices:
mindfulness practices on the one hand, want to argue
this[mindfulness]hasnothingtodowithBuddhism,it “JonKabat-Zinnminimizesspiritualvocabularyduring
issecular…butatthesametime,theywanttoarguethis hiseight-weekmindfulness-basedstressreductionclas-
istheessenceoftheBuddhistteachings.I’veoftentold ses.Butasstudentsgraduate,herecommendsthatthey
them, you know, you cannot have it both ways. It is find an ongoing meditation group such as an Insight
either secular, or you want to say its the essence of Meditation Society, an organization that Kabat-Zinn
Buddhism,thereforeit'saBuddhistpractice.Youcannot describes as having “a slightly Buddhist orientation”
haveitbothways.” (p.209).
OnereasonwhyKabat-ZinnandhisMBSRteachersareso
Thisphenomenonof“dualidentities”mayhavelegalim-
adamant that ethics remain “implicit” in their curriculum is
plicationsintermsofanevasionofprofessionalaccountability
thatitispartofthiscamouflagestrategy.Inordertocastthe
andapotentialviolationofinformedconsentlaws.AsBrown
widestpossiblenetand“mainstream”mindfulness,anexplicit
(2013)pointedout,thereisagrowingcontroversythatCom-
commitment to ethics and or any appearance of religious
plementary Alternative Medicine (CAM) providers may not
affiliations with Buddhism would compromise that strategy.
bemeetingthereasonable-personstandardprovidingservice
ThecamouflagestrategyisparticularlysalientasMBSRand
users (clients) the information necessary to make informed
otherMBIsarefrequentlyofferedtoavulnerablepopulation,
decisions.BecausebothMBSRandMBIscanbeconsidered
especially when such cases also involve experimental
formsofCAM,providingonlyinformationlimitedtomedical
research.Brown(2013)arguedthatinsuchinstances“thera-
risksisinsufficient.Religiousaffiliations,tiesorcontentmust
peuticmisconception”maybeoccurring,whereasthepatients
also be fully disclosed since these factors have bearing on
who are consenting to such mindfulness treatments believe
patients “long-range goals and values,” which can include
theyarereceivingmedicallyandscientificallybasedtherapies,
religiouscommitments(Brown2013,p.201).Whencontem-
when inreality they are gradually be introduced toreligious
porary mindfulness providers communicate that their treat-
practices,withoutfulldisclosureorinformedconsent.Evenif
mentshavenothingtodowithBuddhism,theyareengaging
such disclosure was forthcoming, Shonin et al. (2013 p. 3)
inself-censorshipandatacticofwhatsociologistsrefertoas
alsopointed out the claims thatMBIsare “grounded” inthe
“camouflage” (Brown 2013, p. 209). Brown (2013, p. 209)
Buddhist teachings, or other such language as being “in-
described this communicative strategy as “elaborative tech-
spired” or “informed” by Buddhism, need to be honest and
niquesofconcealingandgradualexposure.”Agoodexample
forthrightinthatsuchadaptationsare“bynomeanscongruent
ofsucha flagrantbait-and-switch camouflage technique can
with the traditional Buddhist perspective.” Up until now,
beseenintacticsusedtorecruitnewScientologycultmem-
MBSRandMBIshavemaintainedthattheethicaldimension
berswiththepseudo-scientific“E-meterstresstest.”
oftheirtreatmentiscoveredalreadybyprofessionalstandards
The camouflage tactic of promoting contemporary mind-
(such as the Hippocratic Oath), especially if such service
fulness as exclusively and purely secular and scientifically
providersarelicensedpsychotherapistsorhealthservicepro-
basedisusedtoappealtoasegmentofthepopulationwould
viders. However, many ethicists have criticized the profes-
considerBuddhismincompatibleorevenathreattotheirown
sionalpracticestandardasbeinginadequateinprovidingfull
religiousbeliefs.Thisfailureoffulldisclosuremayfallshort
disclosureofnon-medicalrisks.
of meeting the standards ofinformed consent, whichlegally
andethicallyrequireswhethersuchatreatmentmay,accord-
ingtoattorneyRichardSteinecke,“offendareligious,ethical
or personal belief of the patient” (Brown 2013, p. 208). QuestioningtheBuddhistRootsofContemporary
According to the reasonable-person standard of informed Mindfulness
consent,protectingpatientrightsrequiresrespectingtheper-
sonalautonomyofpatientstomaketheirowndecisionsand, Monteiro et al. devoted a considerable amount of time
in order to do so, they must have access to the necessary expoundingonthefunctionandpurposeoftheEightfoldPath
informationthatismaterialtotheirdecisionmaking.Drawing asameansforunderstandingbehaviorsandattitudesthatare
fromtheworkofethicistBeauchamp(2010),Brown(2013,p. skillful and wholesome, as well as for contextualizing and

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 27
defining right mindfulness (sammā sati). They went on to affiliation and connections to Buddhism. The reason such
maketheclaimthatEightfoldPathcouldbestbeunderstood analogies are faulty is because science and its natural laws
notonlyasasetofguidelinesforthedevelopmentofskillful arenotaculturalenterprise(Coseru2014).Culturalartifacts,
conduct,meditativeconcentration,andwisdombutalsoasan inthiscase,theformulationoftheNobleEightfoldPathbythe
universalcosmiclawofnature.TheyclaimedthattheEight- Buddha,isnotamenableto,norcanbereducedto,scientific
foldPathisactuallyacausallawofnature,“notaninvention explanation.Gravity,algebra,andsubtractionarenot“cultur-
oftheBuddhaoranyotherteacher,anymorethangravity,for al” artifacts nor are they culturally determined. As Coseru
example, was the invention of Newton” (Monteiro et al. (2014, p. 1) pointed out, “the principles of mathematics [or
2015). While their source for this claim is derived from lawsofgravity]applyregardlessofreligiousbeliefsorcultural
(Gethin2001,p.220),theircherrypickingandfurtherextrap- norms” and that there is a world of difference between the
olationsderivedfromthispassagearequiteproblematicfora domainsofscientificinquiryandculturallydeterminedhuman
numberofreasons. valuesandendeavors.Whereasscientificlawsaredescriptive
First, Gethin (2001, p. 225) later clarified (in the same of the fundamental principles operative in the physical uni-
chapterthatMonteiroetal.referenced)thattheNobleEight- verse, human values are concerned “with what humans do,
fold Path (ariyo atthangiko maggo) “was always primarily thatis,withculturalpracticeswritlarge.”
conceivedofasawayofpracticingorofgoingalong…”and TheEightfoldPathisbothareligiousandculturalpractice
thattheeightfactorsofthepathhavealwaysbeen“thoughtof that exists in a completely different domain than gravity,
aseightitemsthataretobecollectivelybroughttorightness.” physics and mathematics.AsCoseru(2014, p.1)explained,
Gethinwentontopointoutthatintheearlystagesofthepath, inculturaldomainswecannotmakeclaimsthat:
the aspirantlearnstoabandon wrongviews,which isstill at
the levelof “ordinary right view.” At thisstage,the aspirant “Beethoven’s9thsymphonyisnottruerthanMozart’s,
still has many doubts as to whether the path will ultimately Jazz is not truer than classical music, and mindfulness
lead to the cessation of suffering. It is not until the aspirant meditation is not truer than contemplative prayer be-
develops supermundane right view, which is considered no- cause truth is not their currency, at least not scientific
ble, that the aspirant dispels all doubt, knowing with full truth.Assymbolicspecies,wehaveatendencytoimbue
confidence that the path truly does deliver on its promise. everythingwedowithmeaning,andtoseekmeaningin
SuchaconversionexperienceisalsoknowninthePaliliter- everything we do. That is why we have social and
ature as becoming a “stream-enterer” (sotāpanna), which is culturalinstitutions.Idon'tmeantosuggestthatscien-
actuallycharacterized,accordingtoGethin(2001,p.225)“as tificinquiriesandthekindofinquirieswepursueinthe
onewhohascompletetrust(avecca-ppasada)intheBuddha, humanitiesandthesocialsciencesshouldbekeptapart,
Dharma, and Sangha, as one who has overcome doubt.” justthatphenomenathatfallunder onedescriptionare
Clearly,developingcompletetrustinthethreejewelsimplies notamenabletodescriptionsinotherdomains.”
adirectknowledgeof,anddeepcommitmentto,theBuddhist
teachings.Monteiroetal.’s(2015,p.3)assertion“…butthere Moreover, where lawfulness does operate in accordance
isnoreasoninprinciplewhyfamiliaritywithexplicitly‘Bud- withtheBuddhadharma,itisthatwhichpertainstotheoper-
dhist’teachingsareanecessaryconditionforsuchliberation” ationofkarmaanditsresults(extendingacrosslives)andin
is in direct contradiction to Gethin’s account of the stream- the relation of the practices to the results of practice. But
enterer on the path to liberation is one who develops “has properly, these are matters that are described as paccatta
completetrustintheBuddha,Dharma,andSangha.” veditabbo viññūhi—“to be realized personally by the wise”
Second,thecomparisonoftheEightfoldPathasauniversal (Bodhi 2014c). They are not matters publicly demonstrable
andcausallawofnature,notunlikethatofgravity,isafaulty suchasthephysicallawsofgravity(Bodhi2014c).Bymak-
analogy. Surely, the natural laws of gravity existed prior to inganappealtouniversality,Monteiroetal.appeartomaking
Newton’s formulations, but the premise that the specifics of acasefora“trans-historicalBuddhism,”onewhichisimmune
theeight-pathfactorsareeternal,universal,andcosmiclaws to social, cultural, and historical contexts, thereby making it
operating on human beings in a similar fashion as gravity portable and adaptable for any secular purpose (Ivy 2005).
causesapplestofallfromatreeistocommitacategoryerror. Their claim that the “outcome of the training transcends
Therearesimilartropesoftentrottedoutbythecontemporary Buddhistteachings” is not new (Monteiro et al. 2015, p. 3);
mindfulness community, such as we need not become be- in fact, it can be traced directly to Kabat-Zinn (2011) asser-
lievers in Islam in order to use algebra, or become converts tionsthatthe“dharma”isanalogoustothefundamentalphys-
toHinduisminordertousesubtraction,orthatthereisnosuch icallawsoftheuniverse,coupledwiththeclaimthatMBSRis
thingasaChristianphysics.Theseanalogiesareoftenusedas theessenceofa“universaldharma.”
attemptstodefendculturalappropriationofmindfulnessfrom For example, Kabat-Zinn (2011b, p.57) exclaimed, “The
Buddhist sources while simultaneously disavowing any wordDharmareferstoboththeteachingsoftheBuddhaand

28 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
also the way things are, the fundamental lawfulness of the discourses, which emphasized the application of the
universe.SoalthoughtheBuddhaarticulatedtheDharma,the Dhamma-Vinaya—which “refer specifically to the restraint
Dharma itself cannot be Buddhist any more than the law of ofa person’s unskillfulmentaland physicalactivity, and the
gravity is English because of Newton or Italian because of cultivation of skillful mental and activity, for the purpose of
Galileo.Itisauniversallawfulness.”Thisstatementresonates developing insight and thus gaining total liberation from
with other similar talking points that Kabat-Zinn has made suffering”(Davis2004,p.22).Thereareanumberofpassages
both in writings and inpubliclectures, such as“the Buddha inthePaliTipitakawheretheBuddhamakesitveryclearthat
wasnotaBuddhist.” he taught the “Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the
AmoretellingremarkistheoneKabat-Zinn(2013)made Tathagata”(Bodhi2014a).
at the New York Academy of Sciences, in response to a InaspecialissueofContemporaryBuddhism,(Kabat-Zinn
question asked by the moderator as to whether mindfulness 2011,p.290)statedthatMBSRisthe“universaldharmathat
wasreallyanoffshootofBuddhism: is co-extensive, if not identical, with the teachings of the
Buddha, the Buddhadharma.” At first glance, Kabat-Zinn’s
“TheBuddhawasn’taBuddhist….weturntheBuddha bold assertion may seem contradictory to Wilson’s observa-
intosomebigthing.Buthisfundamentalteaching,you tionthatthepurgingandeliminationofBuddhismisastrate-
canthinkofhimasmoreasascientist,likeaGalileoor gicsteptowardsthepropagationofasecularandcontempo-
anEinstein—withvery,verydeepinsightintothenature raryformofmindfulness.Kabat-Zinn,however,hasbeenvery
of his own experience. But from the point of view of clear and open in previous writings that chronicle his long
mindfulness,andalthoughitisspokenofastheheartof history of Buddhist training at Western Insight Meditation
Buddhist meditation, it’s about paying attention. How centers and in Korean Zen. Nevertheless, it is curious as to
Buddhististhat?It’saboutawareness,howBuddhistis whyKabat-ZinngesturestotheteachingsoftheBuddhaand
that? It’s about loving-kindness, how Buddhististhat? the Buddhadharma when in many of his other writings and
Orcompassion? So, ifwedropintoitsessence [mind- public talks he goes out of his way to distance MBSR from
fulness],whichhasalwaysbeenitsessence,thenthose Buddhism.Whilesomemayviewhisclaimasoverstatingthe
kindsofquestionsaresecond-order.It’snotlikeweare case,orevengrandiose,suchastatementlendsacertaincache
secretlytryingtoturneveryoneintoBuddhists,asifthat in the branding of MBSR for the spiritual but not religious
wasourhiddenagenda.” population. However, claiming MBSR is co-extensive with
theBuddhadharmadoescallintoquestiontheentirepremise
In the above public statements, it is apparent that Kabat- ofMonteiroetal.’s(2015)“contemporary-traditional”mind-
Zinn distances mindfulness from its Buddhist roots, arguing fulnessdichotomy.IfMBSR“isco-extensive,ifnotidentical
thatthementalstatesandqualitiesresultingfromthepractice toteachingsoftheBuddha,”itcertainlyappearstosoundasif
ofmindfulnessmeditation—suchaspayingattention,aware- itisexplicitlybasedinBuddhistpractice,which,accordingto
ness,loving-kindness,andcompassion—arenotexclusiveto Monteiroetal.’s(2015)definition,wouldplaceitbackintothe
the Buddhist domain. This rhetorical strategy tracks with traditionalcategory.Moreimportantly,thisstatementrevealsa
Wilson’s (2014) analysis of how the cultural appropriation majorassumptionthatBuddhismitselfhasauniversalessence
ofmindfulnessisaprogressive,multi-stageprocess.AsWil- that can be extracted and repackaged for mass secular con-
sonpointedout,firstBuddhismwasmademorepalatableby sumption.Inthiscase,theessenceis,ofcourse,mindfulness
singling out mindfulness as the heart of Buddhism, making asitsconceivedandrefashionedbyKabat-Zinnandtherefore
BuddhismitselfmoremarketabletotheWest.Thenextstage it is not really Buddhism that we are interested in, but the
involves purging Buddhism and any overt associations to dharma.AnalyzingKabat-Zinn’svariousrhetoricalstrategies,
Buddhisminordertopromoteandsellmindfulness. Wilson(2014,p.89)summeduphisobservations:
This purging of Buddhism in order to promote secular
mindfulness has rested squarelyonthe way the term “Dhar- “MindfulnessisanEnglishword,notaforeignSanskrit,
ma”hasbeenappropriatedbyKabat-Zinn.Dharmahasawide Pali, or other Asian term. It can be used comfortably
rangeofmeaningsincluding“law,”“truth,”“righteousness,” without any indication of being specifically Buddhist,
and“doctrine”(Davis2004,p.21).However,asDavis(2004, andthereforewasofuseforKabat-Zinn’sagenda.Atthe
p. 22) pointed out, the decision toappropriate this term as a same time, he intended mindfulness to mean not only
stand alone essence of the Buddhist teachings, as well as awareness and meditation but also a shorthand for the
strategicmeansforpurgingitsassociationwiththeBuddhist Buddhisttradition,sothatBuddhismcouldbebrought
path, reduces its meaning to mainly its philosophical and intonon-Buddhistsettingsbysimplysubstitutingadif-
psychologicalaspects.Infact,Davisarguedthatthisrhetorical ferentwordthatwouldnotsetoffalarmbells.Arguably,
move negates and discounts a crucial aspect of how the then, when Kabat-Zinn speaks of mindfulness-based
dhammawasconceivedandtaughtinmanyoftheBuddha’s stressreductionheinfactmeansBuddhist-Based(orat

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 29
least Dharma-Based) Stress Reduction, given this Buddhism with local cultural traditions and outside
intended double definition of mindfulness” (italics in religions, such as Confucianism or animistic cults.
original). ….Yet, thisnewly pared-down Buddhism that suppos-
edlyreturnstoIndianrootsiseminentlypreparedtobe
At the Buddhism in America conference, Kabat-Zinn ex- applied tothe worldly culturalconcernsofAmericans,
plained his view: “The Dharma, to me, is pointing to some- especiallythoseinthemiddle-class,mainlywhitecom-
thing that really is universal … The cultural and ideological munities that have dominated the public conversation
overlays,andthehistoricalelementsof[Buddhism],beautiful overwhatAmericanBuddhismshouldbe.….Thusthe
andhonorableandwonderfulastheyare,arenotnecessarily immensepopularityofmindfulnessdoesnotrepresent,
the heart of the Dharma, which transcendsthem.” However, asitsproponentssometimesallege,auniversal,noncul-
the premise that the “Dharma” can be extracted from the turalBuddhism.Instead,theapplicationofmindfulness
Buddhadharma, and essentialized, is equivalent to closed tosomanyaspectsofAmericancultureisinfactclearly
system thinking (Wilden 1980). No system, especially the yetanother“practicalbenefits”approachtoBuddhism,
teachingsoftheDharma,isevertotallyclosed,orevertotally pursued in this case by American Buddhists and sym-
independent. Moreover, the notion of a universal “essence” pathizers. Though some believe they have done away
actuallycontradictsoneofthecoreBuddhistteachingsofno- with “attachment-based” utilizations of Buddhism, in
selfnature,orannattā,foranessenceassumesthecharacter- fact their stripped-down approach makes aspects of
isticofa“thing”independentofinteractions,relationshipsand Buddhism available for attachment to new culture-
a social-historical context. In many respects, Kabat-Zinn specificconcernssuchasovereating,wastefulconsump-
(2011) and Monteiro et al. (2015) fall prey to the belief that tion, parenting difficulties, and workplace stress—so
contemporarymindfulnessisauniversal,“noncultural”form available, in fact, that many of the people developing
of Buddhism, reflective of a collective blind spot among suchapplicationsarenotBuddhiststhemselves.”
North Americans to downplay the importance of culture.
SociologistshavepointedoutthatformostNorthAmericans, In tracing the development of the contemporary under-
cultureanditseffectsonthem,arelargelyinvisibleandhidden standingofmindfulness,Monteiroetal.(2015)turntoSharf’s
from view (Bellah 1985; Stewart and Bennett 1991). This (2013) critique of “Buddhist modernism,” linking the thera-
tendency to downplay or minimize the cultural dimension peuticturninmindfulnesstotheTheravadarevivalmovement
showsupinthecontemporarymindfulnessmovement’scele- oftheearlytwentiethcentury.Sharf’scritique,however,went
brationofpersonalfreedom,authenticity,andtheemphasison beyondestablishingsuchalink,ashealsoprovidedhistorical
the primacy of the individual as the sole moral agent and examples that show the secularization of mindfulness/
sourceofauthority. meditation reaches much farther back in Buddhist history.
The cross-cultural research compiled by Stewart and For example, Sharf traced the notions of “bare attention”
Bennett (1991) sheds light on the cultural influences on the and“present-centeredawareness”tootherhistoricalinstances
mindfulnessmovementinNorthAmerica.Theirbroadgener- besides the Theravada reform movements, particularly the
alizationsshowthatNorthAmericans’self-conceptisoneofa popularization of Chan meditation in eighth-century China.
highlyindividualisticandatomizedunitinsociety,withlittle In this latter case, Sharf noted that some Zen (Chan) sects
commitmenttocommunityortradition.NorthAmericansare promotedamethodofmeditationtothelaity—amethodthat
also a highly pragmatic culture and tend to reject historical, emphasizeddwellingwithinpresentmomentexperiencewith
sociological,andphilosophicalprinciples,preferringpsycho- promisesofa fast-tracktoliberation. However, a number of
logicaltheories.Inthisrespect,NorthAmericanshaveanaïve Zenreformers,suchasDahui,werevehementlycriticalofthis
view that they have an immunity to cultural influences and methodof“present-centeredawareness,”andconsidereditto
demonstrate a pronounced ethnocentricism and fear of that be a form of “meditation sickness,” whereby the meditator
whichisforeignandalien.Wilson’s(2014,p.131)concluding becomespassivelycontentwithquiescence,losinginterestin
remarksregardingthispeculiarNorthAmericanizationofthe and responsiveness to the suffering of the world. Sharf’s
mindfulnessmovementisworthconsideringatlength: critiquerevealedthatevenintheBuddhistworld,mindfulness
meditationhasbeendecontextualizedandstrippedofitsmoral
“One possible irony of the mindfulness movement is andphilosophicaltheories,andthatsuchcritiqueshavebeen
thatitemergedinpartfrommovementsthatdesiredto commonplace among Buddhists reformers for at least a
reformBuddhismandgetbacktoitsoriginal,authentic millennia.
teachingsofthehistoricalBuddha.ManyearlyWestern Therearealsoanumberofhistoricalinaccuraciesregard-
authorsespousearadicallymodifiedformofBuddhism ing the Theravada reform movement that are in need of
pruned of what they call “Asian trappings” that were correction. While Mahasi Sayadaw is often attributed to be
accumulatedbysupposedly“impuremixtures”ofbasic theforerunneroftheTheravadavispassanareformmovement,

30 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
hisrolewaspavedbymanyprominentBurmesemonksbefore recent adaptation of MBSR for delivering pre-deployment
him,suchasthenotableLediSayadaw(Braun2013).Mahasi mindfulnessprogramstomilitarypersonnel.
Sayadawwasalsoanaccomplishedtextualscholarwhohada The first component is described as “contemplative prac-
fullmasteryofBuddhistdoctrine(Bodhi2014b).Hecertainly tices that are spiritual and/or religious” and as serving to
would not have downplayed ritual for ordinary Buddhist “centerus,bringusawayfrommentaldispersal,andconnect
practice, but during his meditation retreat rituals were not uswithourimmediateexperience.”Typically,thesepractices
conducted. Thus, he was quite different from the secular consist of a combination of sitting and walking meditations.
proponentsofmodernmindfulness.EvenS.N.Goenka,who Theyare clear thatsuch contemplative practices are adapted
might also be considered a “Buddhist modernist,” actually for participants in MBIs courses. These adaptations are sig-
incorporatedritualintohismeditationcourses,withchanting nificant,bothinfunctionandpurpose,asevidentbytheaimas
and his invocation of the blessings of the “Bodhi Dhatu, described: to connect individuals with their immediate,
NirvanaDhatu”uponthemeditatorsatthebeginningofeach present-moment experience. Describing the meditative prac-
day’s practice. Moreover, neither Buddhist modernism nor ticeofMBIsasameansof“centering”andreducing“mental
MahasiSayadawwereresponsibleforthe“dryinsight”meth- dispersal,”appearstobeequivalenttoreducingmentalrumi-
odwhichbypasseddevelopmentofthejhanas.Thepathofthe nations about the past and future in order to enhance the
bare insight practitioner is already found in the connectionwithimmediateexperience.Viewedasatherapeu-
Visuddhimagga and the Pali commentaries. For intensive ticmodalityforsensoryenhancement,contemplativepractice
meditationpracticeinanytradition,intricatedoctrinalinstruc- isconstrued asfocusingoneverydayactivitiestocultivate a
tion may not be not given, but an accomplished Buddhist modeofattentivenessfordealingwiththestressesandanxi-
teacherwillguidethestudentsonthebasisofhisownknowl- etiesofordinarylife(Purser2014).
edge of doctrine through the stages of development. In the Perhaps the signature example of this mode of
caseoftheMahasimethod,baremindfulnessofthepresentis mindfulness-as-sensory enhancement is the mindful eating
thestartingpointofthepractice,butwiththeprogressofthe ofa raisin, thefirst MBSR exerciseintroduced inthe begin-
practicethestudentisguidedintothestagesofinsightaccord- ning of an eight-week program. The mindful of eating the
ing to the classical model laid out in texts like the raisin brings the immediacy of experience back to life; the
PaţisambhidāmaggaandtheVisuddhimagga(Bodhi2014b). participant comes to know and appreciate the raisin in a
ContrarytoMonteiroetal.’s(2015)claimthattheTheravada differentwaybyfocusingattentiononthesensationsofeating
reformmovementrequirednofamiliaritywithBuddhistphi- it. This mode of contemplative practice focuses on the
losophy or traditional commentarial texts such as the epistemologicalaspectofmeditation.Theself-as-knoweren-
Abhidhamma, one the foremost pioneers and leaders of this gages in a meditative practice that results in a sensory en-
movement,LediSayadaw,wasastrongadvocateforsystem- hancementoftheimmediacyofexperienceandwhich,inno
aticstudy,textuallearning,particularlytheAbhidhamma,on doubt,hastherapeuticbenefits.
the part of the laity (Braun 2013). While it is true that both Buddhistcontemplativepracticesalsofocusontheepiste-
MahasiSayadawandLediSayadawdownplayedthecultiva- mologicaldimensionsofexperience,particularlythosewhose
tionofconcentration(samādhi),theystressedmeditationasa purposeandfunctionistoenhanceconcentrationandmental
practice depended on textual learning. The de-emphasis on stability (e.g., śamatha, calm abiding). However, such con-
learningandguidancefromtraditionalBuddhistcommentar- centrationpracticesareoftenconsideredasfoundationalsup-
iesoccurredafteritwasimportedbyAmericaninsightmed- ports or preliminaries to the development of insight and
itationteachers. wisdom.Thepracticeofinsightmeditation,alongwithother
related practices whose purpose are the development of
wisdom, or prajñā, are aimed to effect a fundamental
ontological shift in being and radical transformation of the
CultivationofTherapeuticWell-Beingvs. self, or the one who knows. The outcome is not merely
aTransformativeVisionofMoralEngagement therapeutic in nature(sensory enhancement inthe service of
individual well-being or stress reduction) but the emergence
The description and function which Monteiro et al. (2015) ofa radical transformation inone’s visionofreality coupled
providedofcontemporarymindfulness-basedinterventionsis withaspontaneousmoralengagementwiththeworld.
essentiallytherapeutic,withanoverallfocusonthecultivation However, there isanother epistemological aspectofBud-
ofindividualwell-being.Theypresentedacomponentsmodel dhist philosophy (and by implication Buddhist meditative
ofmindfulness-basedinterventionstargetedtoMBIsthathave practices), which has to do with a fundamental error of per-
theiroriginsinMBSRandwhichareclaimedtohaveconnec- ception.Thisperceptualerrorisoftenreferredtoas“basicor
tions to “Buddhistprinciples” of practice. They also include fundamental ignorance,” but such a translation falls short in
mindfulness-basedmindfitnesstraining(MMFT),whichisa explicatingtheinnateandreflexiveperceptualprocessthatis

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 31
also considered the root cause of dukkha (and for now, this accordingtoMonteiroetal.(2015),thereductionofsuffering,
termwill notberenderedortranslatedas“suffering,” which allegedly through Buddhist-based concepts, amounts to the
will become more apparent later). Basic ignorance, or delu- cultivation of “experiential awareness” (isn’t all awareness
sion,isderivedfromtheSanskrittermavidyā(inTibetanma- experiential?),butsuchconcepts,theywentontoadd,arenot
rig-pa). The antonym is vidyā, which is often translated as at all unique to Buddhism—they are also operative in such
“seeing.”However,inthiscontext,itreferstotheperceptual psychotherapeutic approaches as Gendlin’s focusing therapy,
capacityforclearlyseeingthetruenatureofrealityandthings which also trains clients to be attentive to their bodily felt
as they are (this includes subjects and objects), that is, as sensations.
impermanent,interdependentandlackinganyintrinsicreality It should be apparent by now why it is so important to
(Garfield2015,p.26). clarify exactly what is meant by “Buddhist philosophy” in
According to Buddhist philosophy, it is this fundamental order to understand both the commonalities as well as the
misperceptionthatisatthe rootofdukkha,whichisquiteat major points of departure between contemporary and tradi-
odds with the explanation given by Monteiro et al. (2015). tionalmindfulness.Moreover,becausetheterm“Buddhism”
TheirsecondcomponentclaimstodrawonBuddhistphilos- isamoderninventionofEuropeanorientalists,andisfarfrom
ophybyexplainingthattherootofsufferingisduetomental beingmonolithic,makingsweepingclaimsto“Buddhistphi-
dispersal and dysfunctional stances to the experiences of losophy”withoutcontextualizingsuchclaimsisfraughtwith
anger, clinging and confusion. It is also unclear what they perils.Thetendencytodatehasbeentowardsacross-cultural
really mean when they state that suffering is the result of a conflation and an uncritical transposition of Buddhist terms,
failuretoutilizeperceptualskillseffectivelyandconstructive- principlesandconceptsfromthereligiousdomainintoclinical
ly. Further clarification is needed to parse this notion of and therapeutic contexts. This is problematic as many Bud-
dukkhaasbeingderivativeofafundamentalerrorofpercep- dhist terms have a wide semantic range and their intended
tion, and as being caused by a perceptual process. First, the meaning, role and function can only be understood within
perceptualprocesswithinthebroadcontextofBuddhistphi- theirrespectivereligiousandhistoricalcontexts,whichmeans
losophyisnottobethoughtofassimplyasetofperceptualor taking into account their embeddedness within a soteriology
cognitive skills that can be applied more or less effectively. and systematic path oriented towards liberation and
Rather,theperceptualprocessbeingspokenofhereisdeeply awakening.
primal,innate,andembeddedinourcognitivereflexes(Gar- There are a number of examples of where such linguistic
field 2015).Garfield(2015,p.28)providesfurtherclarifica- andconceptualconflationisresultinginwhatRosch(2007,p.
tion,ashestated: 259) referred to as a “confusion of levels.” For example,
Dorjee (2010) made an important distinction regarding the
“Dukkha,however,iscausedbyaperceptualprocess.It roleofmindfulnessasaprecursorto,andasaseparatemental
is not that we engage with the world, or contemplate faculty from, the development of wisdom and insight. She
ourselves, and infer or decide that we or the things distinguishedthetherapeuticmechanismsofMBSR,suchas
aroundusarepermanent,independentandhaveidenti- “decentering” and deautomatization of mental events, from
fiable intrinsic natures. Rather, we take the world and the higher stages of the meta-awareness of mind that are
ourselves to be like that in our immediate perceptual developed during the fourth foundation of mindfulness as
engagement. Perceptionitselfistherefore shotthrough practiced within Theravada Buddhist tradition. In this latter
withreification.” stage of advanced mindfulness training, well after the atten-
tionhasbeenstabilizedandrefined(samādhi),thereisoftena
As Garfield made clear, the perceptual process is tainted pronounced dissolution of the subtle sense of “I, me or
anddistortedbythesuperimpositionofreification;aprocess mine” and a deep insight into nature of the codependent
thatisnotintheconsciousdomainofacognitiveskilloreven origination (Dorjee 2010; Olendzki 2010. Similarly,
philosophical analysis. In fact, Garfield preferred the term such advanced levels of mind-training can be found in
“primalconfusion,”tobetterdescribeavidya,delusionorbasic the Tibetan Buddhist tradition, which culminates in the
ignorance.TheBuddhistpathculminatinginthedevelopment arising of wisdom and pristine awareness (rigpa) (Wallace
ofwisdomisaimedtodispelprimalconfusionbydeveloping 2012). This dimension of the mind is radiant, luminous and
and cultivating the power of insight to uproot the innate and clear,andtranscendsthesixmodesofconsciousness(thefive
latenttendenciesthatinfiltratestheperceptualprocessesleading physicalsensesandtheordinarymentalconsciousness).Itis
tothereificationofbothselfandobjects.Thus,thecessationof known in Theravadin commentaries as the pure “ground of
dukkha requires a thoroughgoing reorientation, facilitated by becoming”(bhavanga),andalsomanifestsduringdreamless
theorchestratedsynergiesoftheentireNobleEightfoldPath— sleep and at the moment of death (Wallace 2012). In the
aimed at the deepest strata of ontology in order to effect a Tibetan tradition, this experience of non-dual awareness is
fundamental transformation in epistemology. In contrast, nolongerevenviewedas“mindfulness.”

32 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
When words and phrases such as “insight,” “wisdom,” ambiguous notion of what it really means to be “informed
“witnessing,” “dukkha” “seeingthingsastheyare,” and “di- by” and “grounded” in Buddhist meditative practices. For
rectperception”areliftedoutofaBuddhistcontextandreused example, the body scan practice as it is taught in MBSR, is
inWesterntherapeuticmindfulnessdiscourse,theirmeanings often conducted in a supine position with eyes closed. The
change significantly. Perhaps the most conflated term and basic instructions given are to begin noticing sensations,
overusedphraseinusageinatherapeuticmindfulnesscontext starting with the feet, and moving progressively through the
is “insight” and “seeing things as they really are.” Dorjee limbs, torso, and ending at the top of the head. In her
(2010) pointed out that within the therapeutic mindfulness ethnographic study of MBSR classes, Rosch (2014) found
context, “insight” is more descriptive of the decentered per- thatparticipantsdescribedthissessionasaformofrelaxation,
spective on our thoughts and feelings, or what Wallace and with many reporting that the practice was used as an aid to
Shapiro (2006) referred to as “reperceiving.” This signifies facilitatetheonsetofsleep.Manyoftheparticipantsalsosaid
takingamoredetachedstanceinrelationtoone’sthoughtsand thatithelpedthemtosleeporactuallyputthemtosleep,some
feelings.Thisisaverydifferentlevelofinsightascompared reporting happily that they had never stayed awake for the
with how the term is used within the Theravada tradition, entireCD.Rosch(2014,p.13)alsoobserved,thatduringthe
which,asalludedtoearlier,ismoredescriptiveofapenetrat- group MBSR sessions, “a chorusofsnorestypically accom-
ing insight into the three characteristics of impermanence paniedthebodyscan.”
(annica), not-self (anattā), and all conditioned phenomena Comparethisaccountofthebodyscanwiththetraditional
as suffering (dukkha), accompanied by “a complete dissolu- 32-part body scan practice in the Satipațțhāna Sutta which
tion of an independent self” (Dorjee 2010). Both Dorjee systematicallyreviewsandcontemplatestheanatomicalcon-
(2010) and Rosch (2007) also called attention to how the stitutionofthebodyasameanstoreduceone’sattachmentto
decentered perspective that isdeveloped inMBSR (an eight thebody.Contemplationofthebodyinstructionsareoriented
weekprogram)isoftenconflatedandconfusedwithsomeof to seeing its impurities, even directing attention to contem-
themostadvancedmeditativestatesintheBuddhisttraditions, platingbodilyorifices,feces,guts,pusandsoon—andother
includingDzogchen.Thiscanbeseeninthediscourseamong morerepulsivefeatures,allwiththeaimtoinducearealization
numerousWesternmindfulnessauthorssuchasBishopetal. thatthereisnothinginherentlybeautifulorattractiveaboutthe
(2004),Brownetal.(2007),Kabat-Zinn(2011),andTeasdale nature ofthe body, inorder tocounter the tendencytowards
etal.(2002)whoarefondofthephrase“seeingthingsasthey conceit (Anālayo 2010, p. 148). Even the monk Mahayasi
reallyare.”However,inaBuddhistcontext,thisreferstothe Sayadaw,atwentiethcenturyTheravadareformer,instructed
penetrating insight into the three characteristics and a com- hisstudentstodwellupontheimpuritiesofthebodyinorder
plete dissolution ofthe “observer-observed” dichotomy. Ina todevelopanaversiontoit.
clinicalandcontemporarymindfulnesscontextitisspokenof Additional practices in the contemplation of the body in-
inamoregeneralizedandtherapeuticsense,describingabasic cludemindfulnessvisualizationsofadecayingcorpsethrown
recognitionandabilitytodetachfromthecontentsofmental aside in a charnel ground, being eaten and devoured by
events.Rosch(2007,p.263)characterizedthesedistinctions various creatures, such as crows, hawks, vultures, worms—
in terminology as being descriptive of relative sanity in a progressively decaying until even the skeletonbones turn to
therapeutic context versus the Buddhist wisdom-insight de- dust.Thecontemplativepracticeofadecayingbodyismeant
veloped through prolonged periods of advanced meditative tomakevividtheinevitablyofdeathandimpermanenceofall
practices. beings.
This trend towards linguistic conflation extends to the It appears that the body scan as practiced in MBSR is a
meditative practice domain, in which case, traditional Bud- recontextualization of the modernist adaptation of Burmese
dhist practices are refashioned, modified or completely BuddhistmeditationteacherLediSayadawandIndianteacher
changed to such an extent that they bear little similarity to S.N. Goenka’s variation on scanning body sensations. The
theiroriginalfunctionandpurpose.Whatremainsisareduc- practiceofscanningbodysensationswasappliedasawayof
tionistic form of Crypto-Buddhism. For example, MBSR developing equanimity to the pain that comes from sitting
utilizesthe “bodyscan” which isproclaimed to bebased on immobilefor manyhours onintensive vipassana retreats. In
the first foundation of mindfulness practice, as found in the this context, participants were taught to view sensations as
Satipațțhāna sutta (Discourse on the Foundation of being transient vibrations, thereby hopefully eliminating all
Mindfulness). Cullen (2011) made the claims “Perhaps it is desireandaversionfromtheirminds(Rosch2014).
important to reiterate here that MBSR is informed by and The body scan in MBSR does not instruct participants to
groundedintheapplicationofthefourfoundationsofmind- view sensations as “transient vibrations” in order to endure
fulness and the view that mindfulness, as taught in this pro- painfulsensations whileremaining vigilant,alert and immo-
gram, has elements of all of the brahma vihāras seamlessly bile in a sitting posture, nor to develop a detachment to the
integrated into it.” The qualifier here is, of course, the body,nordoesitencourageparticipantstoseetheinevitability

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 33
ofthebody’sdeathanditsinherentunattractiveness.Instead, recently convened a working group of neuroscientists and
the body scan in MBSR is guided by therapeutic aims: the clinical researchers to address strategies for countering the
practical benefitsderived fromrelaxationcan resultin“self- hypeandevaluatingthevalidityofmediareportsonscientific
acceptance”and“healing.” studies of mindfulness (Kerr 2014). According to Britton,
Monteiroetal.(2015)accusedthetraditionalmindfulness “public enthusiasm is outpacing scientific evidence,” noting
communities as not greeting nor positively welcoming the that most MBI studies which lack active control groups are
exponential number of clinical and scientific studies investi- beingpassedalongasscientificevidence,oftenbythosewho
gatingtheefficaciesandmechanismsofMBIs.Theywenton standtobenefitfrommindfulnessprograms(Heuman2014a,
to state, “Many [in the traditional mindfulness community] p.1).Brittongoesontowarnthatexperimenterallegianceis
have found deconstructing mindfulness into its mechanisms often overlooked when such studies are reported. When the
and active components disconcerting.” Alan Wallace is spe- researcheralsohappenstobeacreatorofaclinicalmindful-
cificallytargetedasbeingrepresentativeofthese“disconcert- nessprogramitcan,accordingtoBritton,“countforalarger
ing” sentiments, given his critical questioning of the meta- effectthanthetreatmentitself”(Heuman2014a).
physicsofscientificmaterialisminthefieldofcontemplative
neuroscience, “which, in his view, is inconsistent with the
teachingsoftheBuddha.”Whatreallyappearsdisconcerting TwoStreams,TwoIntentions
here—andessentiallyanon-sequitur—isconflatinginvestiga-
tivestudiesintotheunderlyingmechanismsandactiveneural Monteiroetal.maintainedthatcontemporaryandtraditional
components of mindfulness with a metaphysical critique of mindfulnessshareasingularandcommonintention“toalle-
scientific materialism. It also seems quite odd to single out viatesufferingintheworldasitisnow,”implyingthatthese
AlanWallaceasholding ananti-scientific positiongiven his twostreamssharethesameroots.Suchisnotthecase.Thereis
instrumentalroleinforgingthe early dialogues between sci- commonground,butonlyonthesurface.Thegoalsandaims
entistsandtheDalaiLamaattheMindandLifeInstitute,as ofcontemporaryandtraditionalmindfulnessdiverge;thefor-
well as his pioneering scientific research on the Shamatha merisconcernedwiththealleviationofworldlysufferingand
project in collaboration with numerous neuroscientists. thepracticalbenefitsderivedfrommindfulnesspractice.Tra-
Monteiro et al. went on attempting to persuade that there is ditional mindfulness (embedded within the Buddhist Eight-
ample and conclusive evidence for the clinical efficacy of fold Path) is concerned with the cessation of dukkha and,
MBIsbasedonasinglemeta-analyticstudytheycite(Eberth depending on the specific tradition and context, culminates
and Sedlmeier 2012). What is not mentioned here are the in the fruition of awakening and the attainment of nirvana.
numerous methodological issues with MBI studies, such as The telos of contemporary mindfulness is therapeutic in na-
thewidevariancewithhowmindfulnessacrossvariousstud- ture.Contemporarymindfulnessisconceivedasatherapeutic
ies is conceptualized, variations in program design, small form of self-help and self-care, which, as Monteiro et al.
sample sizes, inadequate controls of confounding factors, a (2015, p. 4) pointed out, operates within a pragmatic and
lackofrandomizedcontroltrialsandactivecontrolgroups,a commercial context that “expects quick relief from distress
lack of long-term follow-up data and longitudinal studies of andisfocusedoncapitalgain.”Buddhist,ortraditionalmind-
MBIparticipants,anoverrelianceonquestionableself-report fulness, operates within a soteriological context or path
measures, wide variations in teacher experience and compe- (marga)thatcreatesacommonalityofconcernwhichinforms
tence,and poormonitoringofparticipant adherence to prac- allthevariousstrandsofitsreligiousendeavor—moralvalues,
ticeprotocols(Shoninetal.2013). ritual observances, doctrinal teachings, and contemplative
Monteiro et al. also omitted an important meta-analytic exercises—into a unified network of practices focused on
study on the efficacy of mindfulness meditation that was liberation (Buswell and Gimello 1994). Rather than being
recentlypublished(Goyaletal.2014).Goyaletal.reviewed motivated by “quick relief from distress and capital gain,”
18,753 citations of meditation studies and found only 47 of some Buddhist traditions consider the path of liberation as
themtohaveactivecontrolgroups.Forprogramswithactive evolving over many lifetimes, involving deeper levels of
controls, there was no effect or insufficient evidence that renunciationfromworldlylife.
mindfulnessmeditationwasanymoreeffectivethanexercise, A common misconception—that contemporary and tradi-
progressiverelaxation,orgrouptherapy. tionalmindfulnesssharethesameintention—isbasedonthe
Perhaps the “disconcerting” sentiment in the traditional “suffering”trope;thiscanbeattributedtoamistranslationof
mindfulness communities has more todo with the hype and theBuddha’sstatement,“Iteachonethingandonethingonly:
overblown conclusions regarding the scientific evidence as- suffering and the end of suffering.” However, as Bhikkhu
sociatedwithMBIs. However, suchconcernsare nowbeing Bodhi (2013) has pointed out, the correct translation is, “In
expressedfromwithinthecontemplativesciencecommunity the past, monks, and also now, I teach suffering and the
itself (Logothetis 2008). In fact, the Mind & Life Institute cessation of suffering.” Moreover, Bhikkhu Bodhi has also

34 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
clarifiedthatanyutteranceoftheBuddhawasalwaysguided to see that we suffer, or that many of us are unhappy.
bytheintentiontoenhancethewelfareandhappinessofthose That has been noted many times by philosophers in
receivinghismessage.TheBuddha’sstatementregardingthe many traditions. His genius was instead to see that
cessation of suffering was madein a particular context,spe- dukkha is the fundamental structure of our lives, what
cifically in response to a question someone had asked the Heidegger would have called our existentiale. To be
Buddha in the hopes that he would engage in metaphysical humanistoliveindukkha.”
speculation.Takenoutofcontext,manycontemporarymind-
fulness teachers have misconstrued this statement as being In describing the current practice of traditional mindful-
representative of the whole of what the Buddha taught. As ness,Monteiroetal.(2015)seemtoprivilegetheĀnāpānasati
BhikkhuBodhi(2013)haspointedout,theBuddhataughton andSatipațțhānasuttas,theprimaryinstructionsformindful-
a wide range of topics besides suffering and its cessation, nesstrainingintheTheravadatradition.Thesesuttashavealso
includingimportanttopicsliketheworkingsofkarma,moral beenthemainstayforWesternneo-vipassanainsightmedita-
andethicalbehaviorsanddependentco-origination,aswellas tioncentersanditisnocoincidencethatthesecentersarethe
manypracticaltopicsforhouseholders,suchasmarriage,the most closely aligned with MBSR. However, associating tra-
distributionofwealth, and household budgets.Summarizing ditional mindfulness to only these two suttas from the Pali
thismisconception,BhikkhuBodhi(2013)stated:“…Buthis Nikayasdoesnotdojusticetothewiderangeofconceptions
words are not always tied to the theme of ‘suffering and its and practices of mindfulness within the Buddhist tradition.
cessation.’ To insist on confining them to this topic is to For example, even within the Theravada tradition, there are
drasticallynarrowtherangeofthedharma.” manyotherseminaltextsandcommentarialtreatises(suchas
Contemporary mindfulness teachers also tend to equate the Milindapañha, Abhidamma, Visuddhimagga), with each
dukkhawithsuffering,asitisacommontranslation,butthis offeringnuancedunderstandingsofthemoralphenomenolo-
equivalence masks the deeper strata of suffering, for which gy of mindfulness. Beyond this, the Mahayana traditions
traditionalmindfulnessseekstoeradicate(Purser2014).Con- (such as Chan, Zen, Pure Land) and the Tibetan Vajrayana
temporary mindfulness is orientedtowards the alleviation of (Mahamudra, the Tantras, and Dzogchen) each have unique
mundaneandsuperficiallevelofdukkha—ourordinaryphys- conceptionsofmindfulnessanditsfunctionondifferentstages
ical and mental pain—anxieties, worries, fears, frustrations, ofthe path. Classicteachings bythese later traditions, along
headaches,andotherchronicphysicalailments.Thereisalso with the teachings of such Buddhist adepts as Asanga,
thedukkhaofchange,thefundamentalrealitythatnothingis Kamalaśīla, and Shantideva have rarely entered the contem-
permanentandthatallconditionedphenomenaaresubjectto porarymindfulnessdiscourse.
change. All material objects, all sources of sensual and psy- Mindfulness-based interventions have been heralded as a
chological pleasure, our sense of emotional and physical veritableparadigmshift,or“third-force,”inthefieldofpsy-
security, are inherently impermanent and subject to change. chotherapyandbehavioralmedicine.Monteiroetal.attribute
Finally, the deepest and most pervasive level of dukkha, the thistotheuniquestancethatmindfulness-basedinterventions
deepeststrataofsuffering,isinextricablylinkedwithinterde- develop, allowingclients todis-identifywiththe contentsof
pendence—thecausalchainsthatarewellbeyondarecontrol their experience and to relate differently to their thoughts,
andagency(Garfield2015).Thisisamuchmoresubtlelevel feelings, and mental ruminations. One of their examples is
of suffering, based on the premise that any phenomena that that of MBCT and how this intervention fosters such a
takes form or birth is subject to the laws of karma and detachedstance.Gilpin(2008)madeaveryastuteobservation
dependentorigination.Pervasivesufferingisrootedinafun- that while mindfulness-based interventions may encourage
damentaldelusion,orfixedview,thattheexistenceofaperson the self-as-observer to “be with” experience differently, this
inaworldisacontinuousbeingfromthetimeofbirth(until may actually reinforce a stronger sense of the agency of the
death)(Purser2014).Dukkhaisa muchmorepervasiveand self. Gilpin (2008, p. 243) elaborated on this point, as he
comprehensiveinnaturethansufferingasusuallyunderstood, stated:
orwhatwecommonlythinkofas“distress.”Rather,dukkhais
a fundamental structuring of the nature of conditioned exis- “Rather than encouraging the meditator tosee through
tence.Garfield(2015,p.23)madeausefulclarification: theillusionoftheSelfwhichis‘observing’phenomena,
itslanguageimpliessuchapositioncanbeadopted,and
“We can now see why dukkha is so pervasive, and so bydoingsoonecanenhanceone’scontrolof(particu-
whythetermdukkhadoesnotadmitofeasytranslation larlynegative)mentalandemotionalexperiences.Ata
intoalanguagethatdoesnotencodethisviewofreality. subtle level, such habitual positioning may actually
Suffering, dissatisfaction, unease, stress, anxiety and reinforce one’s sense of self such that, if one were to
painareallkindsoraspectsofdukkha,butnoneofthem continuepracticingbeyondacourse(asMBCTencour-
exhaustit.SiddharthaGautama’sgeniuswasnotsimply ages), the very progress such practices are designed to

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 35
facilitateontheBuddhistpathwouldbeblockedbyan andchangingorganizationalcultures.”However,thereisnota
unrealistic view or assessment of the meditative pro- singleempiricalstudytodateinanyofthetop-tierorganiza-
cess.”(italicsinoriginal). tionalstudiesjournalsthatprovidesconvincingevidencethat
mindfulness-basedinterventionsinorganizationshaveledto
Thereareanumberofunexaminedassumptionsthatsucha substantive and fundamental changes in organizational cul-
therapeuticstanceentails.Firstisthenotionthattheindividual ture.Eventhemostvisibleandpublicizedcorporatemindful-
client has full control and agency for their own emotional nessprogramatGoogle,“SearchInsideYourself,”forwhich
reactivity,aswellastheirabilitytodecenterfromthecontents over2000Googleemployeeshavetaken,hasnotyieldedany
of their experience. Lomas et al. (2014), however, have re- publishable or empirical results with regards to corporate
centlychallengedthisassumption,notingthatclientscurrently culture change. The issue of whether mindfulness-based in-
suffering from depression may lack the mental strength to terventionscouldhaveunintendedconsequencesinsuppress-
engageinthechallengingworkofdecenteringfromnegative ingormarginalizingcriticalthoughtthatinvestigatesthevery
cognitions,andthatMBCTcouldpotentiallyexacerbatemen- context, structures, and systems of causes that give rise to
tal ruminations (see also Teasdale et al. 2003). Second, the socialsufferingwillbeaddressedlaterinthisarticle.
assumptionthataclienthasfullagencyovertheircognitions Both streams—contemporary and traditional mindful-
also assumes that they are fully responsible for their own ness—are devoted to means of responding to human suffer-
“healing,” a popular narrative in the complementary and al- ing.Forcontemporarymindfulness,itisviatherapeuticinter-
ternativemedicinedomain.Thisphilosophyiscloselyaligned ventions that enhance skills in self-regulation, reducing the
with much of the self-help and pop psychology literature proliferation of negative cognitions and mental ruminations.
whichproselytizesmindfulnesscantapinto“innerresources” Fortraditionalmindfulness,itisviaacomprehensivemental
thatwillfacilitaterecoveryfrom,oratleastacceptanceof,an andethicaltrainingsystemwhosesoteriologicalaimisthefull
illness—andinsomecases,serveaspreventivemedicinefrom path of liberation from the cycle of samsara. While these
theonsetofstress-relateddiseasesandchronicillnesses(Bark- streams share a mutual interest in acknowledging the plight
er2008).Itisalsocloselyrelatedtothetherapeuticpracticeof of human suffering, the commonality is nominal and at the
increasing a client’s sense of conscious control over their surface-level only. Once beneath the surface, their aims and
thoughts and emotions (often referred to as “client motiva- intentions substantively diverge as contemporary and tradi-
tion”), and more recently, has been promoted as developing tionalmindfulnessaddresssufferingandthenatureofmindat
more“willpower”(McGonigal2013;Moloney2013). qualitativelydifferentlevelsofdepthandontology.Conflating
Thepolicyimplicationsoftheseclaimsarealsosuggestive both the means and ends regarding these two streams only
thataclient’smisery(alongwiththefullagencyandcapacity contributes to conceptual confusion. The claim that contem-
to heal) and mental suffering is simply located inside their porary mindfulness retains the “essence of a tradition” was
head, and therefore mindfulness-based interventions provide shown earlier to be a strategy of appropriation and radical
the means for enhancing self-regulation, self-management, decontextualization(Wilson2014,p.44).
self-acceptance, and self-control. In contrast, Foucault has
notedhowthesetypesof“psydiscourses”presentabenevo-
lentfacewith their professed claimsatofself-emancipation, EthicsinMindfulness:TheirAbsenceorPresenceIsNot
whiletheiractualusagemaymakeindividualsmoremanage- the(Only)Question
able and disciplined within current institutional structures
(Illouz2008).Payne(2014)hassuggestedthatthecontempo- Monteiro et al. (2015) attempted to represent the Buddhist
rary mindfulness community has failed to recognize their critiqueofcontemporarymindfulnessasstemmingfrom:(1)
highly privatized, atomistic, and neoliberal conceptions of debates and fundamental differences between religion and
the autonomous self/individual. This cultural bias places a science;(2)incompatibleconceptualframeworks,andmainly;
heavy burdenonthe individual, asthe sourceofsufferingis (3) a decontextualized and secularized form of mindfulness
viewed as a lack of self-regulation and entirely self-made. that is void of an ethical foundation. Recent advocates of
Mindfulness-based interventions are in close resonance with contemporary mindfulness have launched fierce criticisms
the ideological basis for “blaming the victim,” as it is the and rhetorical attacks on the Buddhist tradition. For
individual (not the social context, history, or factors such as example, Sam Harris (2014) exemplified this when he char-
socio-economicstatus,inequities)thatisheldfullyresponsi- acterized the Buddhist religious tradition as an “accidental
ble for their own emotional reactivity, mental suffering and strand”ofhistoryandtellsthoseinthemindfulnessmovement
misery,aswellastheirownillnesses. thatthey“nolongerneedtobeinthe religionbusiness.” Or
In addition to the fields of psychology and medicine, takethebook,SearchInsideYourself:TheUnexpectedPathto
Monteiro et al. (2015) also claim mindfulness approaches AchievingSuccess,Happiness(andWorldPeace),writtenby
have “given new perspectives to organizational psychology Google’stopin-housemindfulnessadvocate,Tan(2012).The

36 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
insidefrontcoverflapimmediatelysignalsthattheauthority Withregardstothesecondclaim,theissueofincompatible
for mindfulness certainly “cannot be the domain of bald conceptualframeworks,theproblemismorethanmerelyone
people in funny robes.” Rather it lies with the scientists in oftransportingterminologiesfromasoteriologicaltoaclinical
whitelab-coats,asTancitedstudyafterstudytobackuphis context. Rather, what is often missed among contemporary
claimsthatmindfulnessdeliversgreaterhappiness,prosperity, mindfulnessadvocatesisamodernisticbiasthatpresupposes
health,andcareersuccess.Andwhenitcomestomindfulness, that the modern world-view is universal, immune to it own
Tan insisted, “everything can be completely secular.” Dan cultural assumptions. Mindfulness, no matter whether tradi-
Harris(2014),co-anchorofABC’sNightlineandGoodMorn- tional(religious)orcontemporary(secular),isalwayssituated
ing America, and the author of the best-selling book 10% byacontext,andsuchcontextsframemeanings.Astripped-
Happier,said,“Ialwaysthoughtmindfulnesspracticewasfor downanddecontextualizedmodelofcontemporarymindful-
peoplewholiveinyurts,orcollectcrystals…asitturnsout, nessisproblematiconlybecauseitassumesthatmindfulness
there is all this science that says it can boost your immune hasanessencefreeofcontext,andbyextractingthatessenceit
system, reduce your blood pressure, and rewire key parts of canbebetterunderstood,studiedandpracticed.Themindful-
your brain,” as he decried “meditation’s massive PR prob- nessmovementsuffersfroma massive blind spotbecause it
lem”, code for shedding any associations with anything that obviouslygrowsoutofadistinctlyAmericancontextthathas
smacks of tradition. Sam Harris gave an obligatory nod to prideditselfonthenarrativeofscientificprogress,thebeliefin
tradition, “That’s not to say that people who have brought theindividualasthesolenexusofmeaning,anentrepreneurial
meditation to the West haven’t done great and truly heroic ethos, and other underlying and generally unexamined as-
things …but now we are at a new stage. The science has sumptions that are anything but universal, much less Bud-
shownthatthiscantrulyhavearevolutionaryimpactonthe dhist, but are simply absorbed from our social environment.
brain, at least its strongly suggestive of that.” These are Thisnarrativealsocreatesaradicalbreakwiththepast,which
familiar tropes of the contemporary mindfulness movement: conspires to reinforce the view that mindfulness operates
thatscience,invalidatingmindfulnesspractice,hasliberatedit outsideof,ratherthanwithin,theexistingsocialandhistorical
fromtheflaky,foreign,irrational,outdatedandspookymeta- context. In this respect, the mindfulness revolution is a big
physicsofreligioustradition. bang innovation myth, a uniquely American cultural
This rhetoric is troublesome in that it casts the Buddhist phenomenon.
traditionasamountingtonothingmorethananoutdatedsetof Monteiro et al. framed the Buddhist critique as mainly
cultural accretions. Such messages betray not only a terrible beingamatteroftheomissionofethicsincontemporaryand
lackofunderstandingoftheverynatureofreligioningeneral clinicalapplicationsofmindfulness,butthisformulationmis-
and Buddhism in particular, or what it means to engage ses the heart of the matter. The issue is not whether ethical
meaningfullywithatradition,buttheyalsoperpetuateanaïve dimensions of mindfulness are present or absent, implicit or
belief in the unassailable authority science and the form of explicitincontemporarymindfulnessapplications,butasetof
logicderivedfromit.Theseviewsarerepresentativeofscien- assumptionsthatviewethicalframeworksforcontextualizing
tism,afundamentalbeliefthat“scientistsaloneholdthekeyto mindfulness practice as an inconvenient “add-on,” a set of
understanding reality, and that key is the range of scientific prescriptions, rules or moral imperatives for behavior and
methods accepted by the orthodox scientific community” action.Monteiroetal.addedtothisconfusionbypresenting
(Wallace2014).ContrarytoMonteiroetal.’scharacterization, the Buddhist ethical concerns as simply being a matter of
thedebatesarenotbetweenreligionandscience,butreligion developing“right”(sammāsati)versus“wrong”mindfulness
and scientism. When contemporary mindfulness advocates (micchasati).
marginalize the Buddhist religious tradition, they are essen- Contemporarymindfulnessteachersgotogreatlengthsto
tially defending the beliefs of scientific materialism, explaintheirpositionthatethicsmustremainimplicitinorder
dismissinganymethodsorevidencethatisincompatiblewith to avoid potential value conflicts in secular settings where
this belief system. Why engage in a dialogue with tradition mindfulness practices are offered. There are a variety of
whenitisconsidered,atbest,asbasicallyirrelevant,oreven arguments offered that support this position: the practice of
asadetrimentandanachronistictotheprogressofthemind- clinical and contemporary mindfulness practices naturally
fulness movement? The messaging is that it is of strategic lead to ethical behavior; that ethical dimensions are “built-
necessitythatBuddhismbepurged,thatallresiduesoftradi- into”thepracticeitself;ethicaloutcomesdependonthemind-
tionjettisoned,ifmindfulnessistobewidelypropagatedasa fulness teacher “embodying” and modelingethical behavior,
scientificallyapprovedmethodimmunetoculturalandhistor- andsoon.Thereappearstobeanavoidanceofmoralinquiry
icalinfluences.Inotherwords,wecannottrustwhattradition incontemporarymindfulnessdiscourse,alongwithageneral
has transmitted for the last 2600 years—it is prima facie reluctance to consider how the practice of mindfulness and
suspect.Onlybyplacingourfaithinsciencecanwevalidate questionsofthegoodareunavoidablyintertwined.Thisisdue
thevalueofmindfulness. partially to the fact that the contemporary mindfulness

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 37
movement is operating within a market society, where the Horse) was reserved for Buddhas and Bodhisattavas. As
dominantethosismarketlogicandthevalueneutraldiscourse (Wilson 2014, p. 91) pointed out, when people like Kabat-
of economics. Thus, there is a powerful appeal to avoid ZinnandothermindfulnessteacherssuchasMonteiroetal.,
engagement with moral and ethical questions when “drawontheconceptofskillfulmeans,theyauthorizethem-
economisticconceptionsofvirtuehaveenteredspheresoflife selvesviatheexampleoftheBuddhatochangeaspectsofthe
that were traditionally buffered from market logic (Sandel tradition to better suit the different environmental circum-
2013). Letting the market decide questions of the good, as- stancesofBuddhismoutsideofitspremodernAsianhistorical
sumingthatethicalbehaviorwill“naturally”ariseoutofeither context.”Mindfulnessincorporationsisalsoconsideredasan
thepracticesthemselvesorviatheprofessionalismand“em- exampleofthismodernizingof“skillfulmeans.”Theskillful
bodiment”ofteachers,orthroughthehappenstanceofinduc- Trojan Horse metaphor is often used to defend claims that
tive self-discovery, might be referred to as the “laissez-fare introducingmindfulnessprogramsintocorporationswillnat-
mindfulness”school(Wilson2014,p.194). urallyandeventuallyleadtoamajortransformationofcorpo-
rate behaviors and practices—away from self-interest and
narrowconcernsformaximizingshareholderprofits—tomore
DisentanglingBuddhistEthics:MoralEngagement humanistic, compassionate, and socially responsible organi-
andtheProblemsofSocialSuffering zations that are concerned for the public good. Corporate
mindfulness advocates have often compare their initiatives
Like many other contemporary mindfulness teachers, with the work of the Buddha, noting that he often taught
Monteiro etal. are fond of viewing MBIs—whether applied kings,merchants,andfeudalvillageleaders.Thisistrue,but
in clinical, corporate, or public sector contexts—as another misleading. While the Buddha taught the dharma to leaders
Buddhistutilizationofskillfulmeansorupāya.Monteiroetal. andthemerchantclass,whathetaughtwasnotamindfulness-
and others, suchasKabat-Zinn, haveappropriatedthisBud- based intervention so they could simply feel better about
dhistconceptasawayofretrospectivelyexplaininghowtheir themselves, nor did he simply provide them a meditative
adaptationsofmindfulnesstomoderncontextsis“developed techniqueforimprovingtheirconcentrationsothattheycould
inamannerconsistent”withBuddhistteachings.Theirinter- obtainevenmorewealthandriches,rather,theBuddhaadvo-
pretation of skillful means is that it is equivalent to a peda- catedawiserformofethicalleadershipthatcounteractedthe
gogicaltoolforadaptingmindfulnesspracticestotheneedsof mentalpoisonsofgreed,illwillanddelusion.
asecularandculturalcontext,however,omitsafewimportant Monteiroetal.havepositionedtheirassessmentofMBIsin
details. termsofthedegreetowhichthesemethodsareinalignment
The concept ofskillfulmeans can betracedtothe Maha- with basic Buddhist principles, which they have
yana schools, and figures prominently in the Lotus Sutra, a circumscribed in terms of right mindfulness, insight into the
classic text in that tradition. In the Lotus Sutra, numerous root causes of suffering, and the inclusion of the ethical
parables show the Buddha taking on different forms and componentsofmindfulness.Thisisadmirable,butalsolimit-
deceiving his audiences—purely out of compassion in order ing,fortheirassessmentfailstocriticallyexaminehowMBIs
toleadthemtothefinaldestinationofliberationandawaken- arelimited—notbecausetheyfallshortofemulatingBuddhist
ing. Even the Theravada tradition (which Monteiro et al. is principles—but because of their adherence to a therapeutic
suggestivethatbecauseofitscloseadherencetothemonastic cultureanddiscourseofself-helpthatispremisedonahighly
codeofethics,thevinaya,isaversionofBuddhistfundamen- privatizedsenseofselfandneoliberalconceptionsofsubjec-
talism),alsohasteachingstoriesfromthesutrasthatexempli- tivitythatisclinicallywithdrawnfromthepublicsphere.
fy the Buddha’s skillful means. A classic teaching story is TherehavebeennumerousclaimsthatMBIsarebasedon
KisaGotami,whotragicallylosesherinfantsonandpleadsto thefourfoundationsofmindfulness(Cullen2011;Kabat-Zinn
theBuddhaforhimtobringhersonbacktolife.TheBuddha 2011; Stahl 2014). What is actually meant by the claim that
agrees, but only if Gotami can first bring to him a mustard MBIsare“basedon”oneofthemosthighlyrevereddiscourse
seed froma home that has never encountered the death of a of the Buddha, the Satipaţţthāna Sutta, remains ambiguous.
loved one. Gotami, of course, despite the many homes she The four foundations of mindfulness provide exact instruc-
visits,cannotfindanyhomeorfamilythathasnotwitnessed tions on the practice of mindfulness meditation (Anālayo
death. She returns herself healed and becomes a nun and 2010).Theoriginal,overarchingpurposeandcontextofthese
discipleoftheBuddha. mindfulness practices were based on the renunciation of
Inalloftheexamplesandallegories,whetherinMahayana greed, desires and discontent with the world, and these in-
orTheravadatexts,itisthefullyawakenedBuddhaandhighly structionsinthefourfoundationswereconsideredasavehicle
advanced Bodhisattavas who employ expedient, skillful for a direct path to liberation (nibanna). The discourse is
means to lead their followers to the path of liberation. This divided into four sections, pertaining to mindfulness of the
skillful use of deception (Buddhist variants of the Trojan body(kāyā),feelings(vedanā),mind(citta),andmind-objects

38 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
(also called dhammas, or phenomena). Mindfulness of the coursesarethereforreliefofchronicpainandstress,notfor
body (kāyānupassanā) comprises fourteen subjects of medi- ultimatereligiousliberationfromthewheelofbirthanddeath,
tation,withmindfulnessofthebreath(ānāpānasati)beingthe detachment from the body and worldly concerns, and the
mostpopular.Mindfulnessoffeeling(vedanānupāssanā)isof abandonmentofcraving.
three types, pleasant, painful, and neutral, referring to both PerhapsthemostdubiousclaimamongMBIadvocatesis
material and spiritual feelings. Mindfulness of mind that ethics are implicit, and need to remain so, in both the
(cittānupassanā) is differentiated into contrasting states of practiceandintheteachingofmindfulnessinsecularsettings.
mind,namely,withandwithoutlust,hatred,delusion,amind Monteiro et al. turned to a single study by Shapiro, Jazaieri
contractedordistracted, exalted orunexalted,surpassable or andGoldin(2012)tojustifytheirclaimthatimplicitethics,as
unsurpassable,concentratedorunconcentrated.Finally,mind- exemplifiedinMBSR,leadstoanincreaseinethicaldecision
fulnessofmentalobjectsorphenomena(dhammānupassanā) makingand moralreasoning.Whattheyfailtoreportisthat
consistsoffivecategories:thefivehindrances,thesixinternal thisstudy isbasedonanextremelysmallsamplesizeof25,
and external senses, the seven factors of enlightenment, and mostly Caucasian women, lacking both randomized and ac-
thefournobletruths.Inaddition,theinstructionsalsoinclude tivecontrolgroups.Furthermore,thestudyreliedcompletely
contemplations directed towards observing the arising and onself-reportdatausingtheMindfulnessAttentionAwareness
passingawayofthesephenomenainthestreamofexperience. Scale(MAAS)andtheFive-FacetMindfulnessQuestionnaire
While MBIsmay claim and appeartodraw, albeithighly (FFMQ), both of which have been the subject of severe
selectively, from the four foundations of mindfulness, their criticisms in the clinical literature (Grossman and Van Dam
extraction from the context of Buddhist liberation radically 2011).
altersthenatureandmeaningofthesepractices.Mindfulness The debate on whether ethics are implicit in mindfulness
meditationbecomespsychologizedandreorientedtoimprov- practiceitself,orwhetherethicsshouldremainimplicitinthe
ing and enhancing ordinaryworldly life—a methodfor alle- teachingofsecular mindfulness,ispartlydrivenbya funda-
viating the stresses, anxieties and worries of middle-class mental misconception that the ethical aspects of Buddhist
lifestyles.Thereis,ofcourse,nothingproblematicinutilizing mindfulness practiceand its pathofspiritual-moral develop-
Buddhisttechniquesfortherapeuticandclinicalpurposes,but mentarederivedfromadherencetoprescriptivebehaviorsand
to claim thatMBIs are equivalent secular expressions of the ethical imperatives, or the intentions of a self-as-agent. In
four foundations of mindfulness goes too far. How is it, for other words, Monteiro et al., Kabat-Zinn, and others in the
example,thatMBIswhichemphasize“nonjudgmentalaware- MBIcommunityviewethicsandmoralitythroughaWestern
ness” engage in the third foundation of mindfulness which Judeo-Christian lens, equatingthemtoasetofabstractprin-
entailsdiscriminatingunwholesomestatesofmindtocontem- ciples to which one can be compelled to ascend. The usual
plating the presence (or absence) of higher states of mind? reservationraisedbyMBIteachersisthatthereisnoroomfor
HowdoMBIsprovideinstructionsinthefourthfoundationof allowing ethics or moral discourse into secular mindfulness
mindfulness,whichincludescontemplatingthesevenfactors programs as it could potentially be seen as an imposition of
of awakening and the four noble truths (including the eight religiousdogmaorposevalueconflicts—ispremisedonthis
fold path)? There is also a strong emphasis in the Satipa- Westernviewofethics. Attemptingtohermeneutically force
țțhana on both internal and external phenomena, especially Buddhist ethics into an MBI curriculum unaware of such
intermsofnotingtheirimpermanentnature.MBIs,however, ethnocentric biases is bound to result in misconceptions and
tendtobemuchmoreinternalinfocus.Thereisalsoverylittle facile understandings. Monteiro et al. proposed a confusing
emphasis or training in contemplating the conditioned and admixtureofvirtueethics,adistortedconceptionofMahaya-
impermanent nature of the five aggregates (material form, na Buddhist ethics as utilitarianism, deontological claims to
feelings, cognition, volitions and consciousness). This per- universalityviaamisreadingofGethin,andastrainedattempt
hapsexplainswhyseveralpracticesareomittedinMBIs,such toconverttraditionalBuddhistteachingsintosecularcounter-
ascontemplatingthebodyasadecayingcorpse,contemplat- parts (the Four Noble Truths now become the cultivation of
ing the inevitability of the death of one’s own body, and “moralcourage”).Keown(2001),whomMonteiroetal.cite
viewingthebodyintermsofthefourelements(components throughout this section, warned against the subtle danger of
ofthefirstfoundationofmindfulness).AsIpreviouslypoint- “cultural misappropriation” in attempts to selectively import
ed out, the body scan in MBIs only has a distant family BuddhistmoralityintoWesternizedviews.Atthispoint,one
resemblancetothe32-bodypartpracticeintheSatipațțhāna. begins to wonder what the aim is here given that Monteiro
In the latter text, the body parts are visualized and contem- etal.stakeoutcontemporarymindfulnessintheverybegin-
platedwithaviewofseeingthemascomposite,impermanent ningas“mindfulnessprogramsthatarenotexplicitlybasedin
and unattractive. The wholeaim ofthispractice istoreduce Buddhistpractice.”Even(McCown2013,p.65),whoiscited
attachmenttothebodyaswellasconceit,notmerelytorelease asanadvocateforMBIs,seemswaryofimportingBuddhist
tensionandstress.Granted,thosewhoenrollin8-weekMBI ethics into contemporary mindfulness practice as he states,

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 39
“ToarticulateanethicbasedondistinctlyBuddhistconcepts defenseoraninstrumentofkilling,andtheswordsman
orusesspecificallyBuddhistlanguage,then,wouldruncoun- turnsintoanartistofthefirstgrade,engagedinproduc-
tertotheconceptsandpracticesthathave,insmallerorlarger ing a work of genuine originality” (quoted in Victoria
part,fueledthegrowthofMBIs.” 2006,p.110).
Perhapsthemostproblematicanddisconcertingexposition
inthispaperistheinterpretationofMahayanaBuddhistethics, Monteiroetal.arebasicallydredgingdoctrinalsupportfor
which Monteiro et al. use as an example to justify and war and violence through an overly simplistic use of the
rationalize killing, as well as a supposed means to go skillful means (upāya) teaching. As described earlier, this
beyond the seemingly narrow edicts of the Theravada doctrinal teaching has been vulnerable to much abuse and
school.Monteiroetal.turnedtoHarvey(2000)forjustifica- misuse.Theclassicteachingstoryillustrativeofskillfulmeans
tion, “some scholars have stated that killing may not be in the Mahayana is to be found in the Upāyakauśalyasūtra,
something to condemn if it arises from virtuous intentions.” which describes an incident when the Buddha Shakyamuni
The question here is who arbitrates whether such intentions was still a bodhisattva in one of his past lives. In this story,
arevirtuous?Ifamilitarycombatantkillsinthenameof“My Shakyamuniwasonashipandbecameawareofarobberon
God,MyCountry”andinthespiritofunitywiththeirunit,isit boardwhohadtheintentionofkillingallthepassengersonthe
virtuous? IssuchkillingvirtuousinunjustwarsorinAmer- ship.Topreventthisactfromhappening,Shakyamunidecides
icanimperialistinterventionssuchasinthewarinIraq?Are to kill the robber out of compassion—saving not only the
droneoperatorstrainedinmindfulnessexemptfromallmoral passengers, but also the robber from accruing even greater
accountability because their intentions are simply to defend negative karma. Because the Buddha Shakyamuni acted out
our “national interests”? This is evidently no problem for of great compassion, because his intention was wholesome,
Monteiro et al. as one “could mitigate that form of his act was morally justified. This story, along with other
unwholesomeness [killing]” by simply “acting from the sutras, have been historically misinterpreted and distorted to
Bodhisattava’sideal.” sanction warfare and violence. What is omitted and glossed
Monterio et al. have resorted to what I call the perverse overbythosewhodistorttheseteachingsisthatitisahighly
“Mahayanaexceptionalism”argument,aconvenientspiritual advanced Bodhisattva or even a Buddha that is engaging in
loopholethatcaneasilybemisusedtorationalizeanddefend theseacts, not JapanesekamikazepilotsemboldenedbyIm-
militarismandpolicebrutality.Thissortofmentalgymnastics perial Zen propaganda or by 18-year-old privates in the US
inappropriatingtheMahayanafordubiousendsisnotwithout Marinesengaginginmindfulnesspracticefortwelveminutes
historical precedent. Victoria’s (2006) classic work, Zen at a day as they do in mindfulness-based mind fitness training
War, documents how Mahayana Buddhist teachings were (MMFT). Moreover, in Buddhistsoteriologicaltheory, since
distortedandmisinterpretedtojustifytheJapaneseImperial- awakenedBuddhashaveputanendtotheirownkarma,they
ism, modern Japanese militarism and the many atrocities act without intention, that is, their acts of compassion arise
inflicted on millions of Russian, Chinese and Korean civil- spontaneously (withoutdeliberateconceptuality)out ofnon-
ians.ConsiderhowD.T.Suzukialsoutilizedthejustification dualtranscendentalwisdom.
ofvirtuousintentionstorationalizekillingasanactofspon- Attemptingtofindmoraljustificationviaanappealtothe
taneouscompassion: Mahayanaforkilling,evenifsuchactsaredrivenbypositive
intentions within morally ambiguous situations, is fraught
“The sword is generally associated with killing, and withperil.Thisisespeciallyproblematicwhentheattemptis
most of us wonder how it can come into connection tofindBuddhistdoctrinalsupportforcontemporarymindful-
withZen, which is a school ofBuddhism teaching the nessapplicationsinvolvingpoliceandmilitaryforcesthatare
gospel of love and mercy. The fact is the art of receivingmindfulnesstraining.Itisquitedangeroustosimply
swordmanship distinguishes between the sword that assume that police and military forces are engaged in right
killsandtheswordthatgiveslife.Theonethatisused mindfulness, or are uniquely and heroically acting as awak-
byatechniciancannotgoanyfurtherthankilling,forhe ened Bodhisattavas, carefully discerning and “weighing the
neverappealstotheswordunlessheintendstokill.The ultimatecostofshootingornotshooting”priortomakingthe
case if altogether different with the one who is com- decision to kill the targeted person. The risks of self-decep-
pelled to lift the sword. For it is really not he but the tion,grouployaltyatanycost,andnationalisticjingoismcan
sworditselfthatdoesthekilling.Hehadnodesiretodo easilyberationalizedasharboringpositiveintentions.Thereis
harm to anybody, but the enemy appears and makes reallynoneedtoforcefitormisappropriateBuddhistMaha-
himself a victim. It is as though the sword performs yanateachingsforsuchpurposes.Ofcourse,thereareindeed
automaticallyitsfunctionofjustice,whichisthefunc- exceptional and extreme cases, such that not taking a life or
tionofmercy….Whentheswordisexpectedtoplaythis notretaliatingwouldleadtoevengreatertragiclosses,suchas
sortofroleinhumanlife,itisnomoreaweaponofself- intheinstanceofHitler’sexpansionismofNaziGermany,or

40 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
inacasewhereapoliceofficermustshoottopreventalunatic Theissueofwhetherethicsshouldbeimplicitorexplicitis
gunman from killing innocent children at a school site. But a moot point. There is no way of avoiding a moral point of
even for these extreme cases, one could turn to our own view, as ethical engagement is predicated on our perceptual
Western ethical tradition, utilitarianism, or Kohlberg’s process. Debating whether ethical imperatives should be in-
(1981)stagesofmoraldevelopment,forguidance. troduced into mindfulness programs is the wrong question.
PerhapsthemainconfusionintheMonteiroetal.paperas Whenethicalengagementisviewedintermsofareordering
it pertains to Buddhist ethics, and its possible import to ofourperceptualprocess,ratherthanon“embodyingvirtuous
contemporarymindfulness,isthatitisultimatelynotaclean intentions,” deciphering actions, rights, duties and prescrip-
moraltheoryofaction.Rather,asGarfield(2015)suggested, tions, or virtues – we can begin to think of mindfulness in
Buddhist ethics should be thought of more as a moral phe- termsofwhetheritcultivates,whatGarfieldhastermed“mor-
nomenologyofexperience.Thissuggestionmightcomeasa allyawakenedperception”(Garfield2015,p.325).However,
surprise to many, as Buddhist ethics has often been seen this is only half of the equation. What is often missed in
throughthelensofeitherutilitarianismorAristotelianvirtue contemporary mindfulness is that elevating ethical concerns
ethics. What is frequently, if not perhaps always overlooked inmindfulnesscurricula,practices,andcommunitydiscourse
among contemporary mindfulness teachers, is that Buddhist raises the stakes to act and care for the suffering of others.
ethics is situated within a complex nexus of thoroughgoing Such a project means moving beyond the therapeutic to ac-
interdependence, dependent origination (pratiyasamutpada). tivism.Repositioningethicaldimensionswithinaframework
ItisperhapsnocoincidencethenthatMBSRandMBIshave ofcausalinterdependencealsoreframesthenatureandlocus
omittedwhattheBuddhaactuallydeclaredastobeoneofhis ofsufferingandwelfare,transcendingbothaself-orientedand
core teachings (“to understand the dharma is to understand other-orienteddualism.Thisistheinnovativecontributionof
dependent origination”). Garfield (2015) was adamant that the Mahayana, and the bodhisattva ideal, that genuine well-
Buddhist moral phenomenology is concerned with locating being is always grounded in an ethic of care and action on
humanactionwithinavastcausalnexusofinterdependence, behalfofallsentientbeings,nearorfar.
andofkarma,that“Moralreflectiononactionmusttakeallof Perhapsagoodexampleofhowcontemporarymindfulness
thesedimensionsofdependenceintoaccount.Tofocusmere- isethicallychallengedisinitsrecentapplicationincorporate
lyonmotivation,oroncharacter,orontheactionitself,oron settings. However, it is not that recent if we look again to
itsconsequencesforothers,would betoignoremuchthatis Japan and how the militarization of Zen took on a different
important”(Garfield2015,p.313). formafterWorldWarII.Afterthewar,therewasgreatinterest
Contemporarymindfulnessproponentsareoperatingfrom amongJapanesecorporationstoreinstillandreturnto“theold
afaultypremise,atleastfromaBuddhistmoraltheorypointof virtuesofobedienceandconformity”and“selflessdevotionto
view, that ethics are somehow separable from the nature of one’s assigned duties” (Victoria 2006, p. 182). This was the
experienceandfrommeditativepracticesthemselves—inoth- beginning of what was known as the Corporate Zen boom,
erwords,becauseethicsarestillviewedasasetofimperatives and it continues to be a popular training program whereby
or consequentialist calculus for deciphering “virtuous inten- selectmanagersandemployeesspendtimeinZenmonaster-
tions” and their relation to action—they miss the essential ies, indoctrinated into the values and behaviors of selfless
point. Buddhist practice, as Garfield (2015) emphasized, is devotion to one’s superiors. Sakai Tokugen, a leading Zen
about solving a problem and that problem is dukkha and its master who has been involved in Corporate Zen training
triune roots, aversion, attraction and confusion (Olendski programs, describes the value of such training industrial
2014).TheBuddhisteightfoldnoblepathisasolutiontothe warriors:
problem of dukkha, and simply focusing on motivation and
intentionasthearbiterofethicalactionistotakeanextremely “Sincerity [in carrying out orders] means having feel-
narrow view. Again, Garfield (2015, p. 315) cautioned us ingsandactionsofabsoluteservice,givingone’sall[to
against superimposing Western ethical biases on Bud- thetaskathand].Indoingthistherecanbenothoughtof
dhist moral theory: “The eightfold path identifies not a personal loss orgain….By carrying out our [assigned]
set of rights or duties, nor a set of virtues, but a set of tasks,webecomepartofthelifeoftheentireuniverse;
areas of concern or dimensions of conduct. The path we realize our original True Self…..This is the most
indicates the complexity of human moral life and the noblethingahumancando”(quotedinVictoria2006,
complexity of the sources of suffering.” This also points p.185).
to the fact that any ethical orientation to mindfulness
mustbesituatedwithinalargersocialcontext;ethicalaction This is a bold claim, that submitting oneself to the larger
only has meaning and sense whenitpertainstohowactions corporate interest, one can realize the True Self—which, in
affect and impact the lives of others in the vast causal Zen,isequivalenttoenlightenment.Itistemptingtodiscount
nexus of interdependence. this example as merely a byproduct of Japanese collectivist

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 41
culture.Yet,thisexampleillustrateshowasecularadaptation programs will remain limited to a palliative for helping em-
of traditional Zen Buddhism, along with its use of samādhi ployeescopeandtoleratetheconditionsofcorporatecapital-
power (focused concentration and attention enhancement), ism,reinforcingratherthanchallengingthestatusquo.
has been coopted for bolstering obedience, conformity and Manypromotersofcorporatemindfulnessclaimthatoffer-
loyaltytocorporateauthority. ing mindfulness programs to individuals, even if limited to
Whatparallelsmightweseeinthecurrenttrendofcorpo- personalstressreduction,worksinsidiouslyfromwithin,and
rate mindfulness in the West? Wall Street traders and hedge willeventuallyleadtowiser,morecompassionateandsocially
fundmanagersspeakofthebenefitsofmindfulnesstrainingin responsible corporations (Boyce 2014; Halliwell 2014;
termsofhowitishelping to“fine-tune theirbrains,”orasa Hunter2013; Maturano 2014;Tan 2012). Organizational and
means for “upping their game,” and “giving them an edge” social change is, as Stanley (2013) pointed out, envisaged as
(Burton and Effinger 2014). At Goldman-Sachs, where cor- beginning with the individual. Corporate transformation of
porate mindfulness programs have now become immensely institutionalized suffering will be “changed one mindful indi-
popular,tradersoftenlikenthemselvestothe“newSamurai” vidual at a time” (Stanley 2013, p. 8). This is, again, the
oras“Ninjawarriers”(BurtonandEffinger2014).Monteiro mindfulness is a “Trojan Horse” argument. The notion that
etal. listednumerousbenefitsofcorporate mindfulnesspro- corporate transformation is effected through the power of
grams—betterlistening,seekingcommonground,andlearn- empowering individuals with mindfulness training resembles
ingtonavigatethedialectoftheorganization(citingBushand in some respects the “experiments” and dubious claims by
Goleman2013).Inotherwords,mindfulnessintheworkplace Transcendental Meditation (TM) aspirants that groups of TM
is promoted as a way to reduce friction, increase efficiency, practitioners meditating together could lower crime rates in a
and relieve the pressures of late-capitalism. They go on to largemetropolitancity.Boyce(2014,p.8),editoroftheglossy
claim,“Inworkplaceprograms,conceptssuchasbeingcom- newsstand magazine, Mindful, made the claim: “Mindfulness
fortablewithuncertainty,takinganonjudgmentalstancetoa maybeginatstressreliefbutitdoesnotendthere.It naturally
situation,orcultivatingcompassionateactionareintendedto leads to inquisitiveness about our own minds and exam-
transformemotionalreactivitysothatthesituationcanbemet ination of how we are connected to other people, of the
withskillfulmeans”(p.11).Inalloftheseexamples,thescope causes and effects of our actions….Who knows what a
of the mindfulness training is focused on the individual leader…might do for the greater good with the aid of a
employee. little mindfulness?”
The conditions of uncertainty, stressful conditions and Thatisagoodquestion,whoknows?Monteiroetal.them-
toxic situations, are attributed to the emotional reactivity of selves acknowledged that it is probably naïve to expect that
the individual. The onus of responsibility is placed squarely corporate mindfulness training programs that focus on indi-
on the individual—the sources of stress, anger, conflict and vidualswillleadtoanysortofsignificantchangeincorporate
confusion—are a personal, privatized problem which corpo- culture.Theyalludethatthetrainingofindividualemployees
rate mindfulness is designed to fix. It isn’t a misperception inmindfulnesswillleadtothecreationofmicro-climatesthat
“thatmindfulness programs intendto develop anindiscrimi- offer some limited benefits. At best, corporate mindfulness
nate tolerance for stress,”, as they put it, but the fact that programs have succeeded in creating what Healy (2013) re-
corporate mindfulness programs have excluded inquiry into ferredtoas“integritybubbles,”myopicislandsandprivatized
the systemic sources of stress in the organization. Stress in glimpses of stress reduction and enhanced focused attention
organizations cannot merely be attributed to an individual’s while mindlesslyexternalizing macro-tensions and structural
emotional reactivity and lack of self-regulation; it is also inequalities.Forexample,Google,whichhasnowbecomethe
systemic, cultural and institutional in scope. Restricting the poster-childforcorporatemindfulnessprograms,hascreated
scopeofmindfulnessinterventiontotheleveloftheindividual integrity bubbles for some 2000 engineers while it profits
incorporatesettingsamountstoblamingthevictim. enormously in manipulating the attention of consumers, as
Huffington(2014),anavidpromoterofmindfulnessinthe itsmainexportistomakeanindustryoutofculturaldistrac-
workplaceproposeda“thirdmetric”ofsuccess—well-being, tion. There appears to be no attention given in the Search
wisdom, and wonder (the first two metrics, of course, are InsideYourselfmindfulnesscurriculumforbeingmindfulof,
money and power). The message here is that “wisdom” and orcultivatingwiseattentiontocallintoquestionthelonglist
mindfulnessarefullycompatiblewithlate-capitalismandthe of Google’s nefarious corporate practices such as privacy
primary metrics of money and power. Social critics, such as violations,off-shoretaxevasion,theirgrueling80-hourwork
(Zizek2001,p.1),contendedthattheWesternBuddhist(and weeks, or their negative impact on housing evictions in San
byextension,thecorporatemindfulness)“meditativestanceis Francisco(Ream2014).OrtakeMonsanto,onceidolizedfor
arguably the most efficient way for us to fully participate in its early adoption of corporate mindfulness programs, but
capitalistdynamicswhileretainingtheappearanceofmental notorious for its egregious ethics violations, negligence of
sanity.”Thejuryisstilloutonwhethercorporatemindfulness public health, abuse of patent laws, and production of

42 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
potentially risky genetically modified organisms (GMOs), theessenceofthedharmaisencapsulatedinasinglepractice
along with their lobbying efforts to defeat consumer protec- divorced from a wider cultural and historical context. This
tions.GeneralMills,anothercompanythathasreceivedmedia includesthedevelopmentofmoreother-orientedandrelation-
attention for its large-scale corporate mindfulness program alformsofmeditativepracticethataimtocultivateprosocial
(Gelles 2012), has collaborated with Monsanto in lobbying behaviors.Tomeetthischallenge,contemporarymindfulness
againsttheconsumerrightsgroupswhicharedemandingthe programs will also need to expand their foci to include the
fulldisclosureofthecontentofCheerios,oneoftheirsigna- socialcontextofsufferinginallitmanifestations.Thisomis-
turecerealsthatismarketedtochildren. sion has been due to the rapid psychologization of mindful-
Whatalloftheseexamplescallforthiswhethercorporate nessanditmergerwiththeself-helpindustryundertheaegis
mindfulnessprogramsarethe“TrojanHorse”and“disruptive of therapeutic discourse. A major fall-out of this psycholo-
technology”(Hunter2013)thattheyclaimto be,orwhether gizedconceptionofmindfulnessisthatitcomestobeunder-
suchmediapublicityamountstoaformof“saffronwashing” stoodatbest—asapathforpersonalsalvation,andatworst,as
(Fiet2014)?Whenonthecrestofawave,itisalsodifficultto justanotherself-helptechnique—bothofwhichareblindand
saywhetherthecorporatemindfulnessmovementisaninsti- insensitivetothesocial,politicalandeconomicdimensionsof
tutional fad or a sustainable innovation. Only time will tell. suffering. Such discourse has deemphasized social relations
Mindfulness,however,isnotmerelyafrivolousandpassing and has covertly depoliticized socio-economic problems, lo-
fadsuchashula-hoops.Theenthusiasmformindfulnesspro- calizingthecausesofdistressandunhappinessasbeingstrict-
grams is having a contagion effect, now endorsed and pro- lyinternalandwithintheindividual(Moloney2013).Rather
moted by physicians, psychotherapists, educators, corporate thanservingasasociallubricantforthesmoothfunctioningof
CEOs, politicians, and top military brass—requiring signifi- society, contemporary mindfulness programs can begin to
cantinstitutionalinvestments—anderroneouslyassuming,as encourage critical thought and investigation into the wider
Cathy Kerr worries, that its “suitable for all people in all socialandpoliticalcausesofsocialsuffering.Inotherwords,
circumstances” (Heuman 2014b). These are serious profes- ratherthanconcealingsociallyinducedformsofsufferingas
sionalswhobelievetheyarenoteasilyfooledordupedbythe exclusivelyproblemsof“emotionalself-regulation,”“reactiv-
latestnovelty,fadorfashion.Theillusionofdiffusionoccurs ity,” “self-acceptance,” and “self-management,” mindfulness
when enthusiasm is mistaken for empirical evidence (Best programs can assist people in diagnosing the mentally toxic
2006).However,asBest(2006,p.18)pointedout,theillusion aspectsoftheirsocialcontexts.
of diffusion plays a key role in institutional fads, as serious AsWallace(2005)pointedout,humanflourishingentailsa
peoplehaveastrongconviction“thatfarfrombeingafad,this mindfulnesspracticethatiscongruentwithawayoflifethat
innovationrepresentsprogress—it isanimprovement thatis supports one’s own and others’ genuine happiness. A mid-
worthwhileandwillendure.” coursecorrectionisneededwhichwouldentailprioritizinga
focusoninterdependenceandarelationalviewofmindthatis
inseparable from the wide sociocultural context. An other-
Conclusions centered “civic mindfulness,” (Healy 2013) can expand the
realmofpracticetowardsa relationalperspective thatisdis-
The contemporary mindfulness movement could become a cerning of social dukkha, developing corporate mindfulness
formidableforceforaradicaltransformationofWesterncap- programcurriculathatexaminethecausesofinstitutionalized
italist society if it can manage to overcome what (Fromm greed,illwill,anddelusion(Loy2003).
2010, p. 15) called the “pathology of normalcy.” Fromm’s Contemporary mindfulness has yet to develop an effica-
socialcritiqueofpsychotherapyandpsychiatryofhisdaywas ciousethicalframeworkinanexplicitlynormativewaythatis
aimedathowthenotionthatmentalhealthinsocietycompla- integratedwithpractice.However,ratherthaneschewingeth-
cently had become a matter of individual adjustment to the ical principles, or misconstruing Buddhist ethics through a
statusquoofasocietythatwasitselfoffkilter.ForFromm,the Westernlens,asecularizedethicswouldfocusontherelation
“normal” functioning of society could itself be a disturbing between behavior and its effect on one’s own and others’
pattern of collective pathology. Krishnamurti (1966) once genuinewell-being.Butthisrequiresthatonedrawadistinc-
remarked, “It is no measure of health to be well-adjusted to tionbetweenhedonicandgenuine,oreudaimonic,well-being.
aprofoundlysicksociety.”Thesameinjunctionmayholdtrue A true mindfulness revolution would call into question a
forcontemporarymindfulnessifitsprimaryfunctionislimit- Western sense of entitlement to happiness irrespective of
edtoindividualadjustmenttoandanuncriticalacceptanceof ethicalconduct.
thestatusquo. Finally,thecontemporarymindfulnessmovementisindire
In order to do this, the contemporary mindfulness move- need of becoming more communal, fostering ways individ-
ment will have to come to terms with its current limitations uals can forge mutually supportive bonds with a sense of
anddeficiencies.First,itshoulddispensewiththerhetoricthat shared purpose and continuity over time. Communal well-

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 43
beingisaprerequisiteforauthentichappiness,andasustain-
Cohen,E.(2010).FromtheBodhitree,totheanalyst’scouch,theninto
the MRI scanner: The psychologisation of Buddhism. Annual
ablepathtowardseventhissecularendisunlikelytotakeroot
ReviewofCriticalPsychology,8,97–119.
if mindfulness is reduced to a form of “mental fitness” con- Coseru,C.(2014).Mindfulness,mindscience,clinicalscience,Buddhism…
ducted in isolation. The heart of mindfulness is a collective Where are we now? Facebook group. June 5 2014 Retrieved from
practice, that which unites people towards acting for the https://www.facebook.com/groups/429677260502964/.
Cullen,M.(2011).Mindfulness-basedinterventions:Anemergingphe-
common good, which in turn provides the basis for human
nomenon.Mindfulness,2,186–193.
flourishingandsocialtransformation.
Davis, J. (2004). Strong roots. Barre, MA: Dhamma Dana Pubishing
BarreCenter.
Dorjee,D.(2010).Kindsanddimensionsofmindfulness:Whyitimpor-
References
tanttodistinguishingthem.Mindfulness,1(3),152–160.
Eberth& Sedlmeier.(2012).Theeffectsofmindfulnessmeditation:A
meta-analysis.Mindfulness,3,174–189.
Anālayo. (2010). Satipathāna: The direct path to realization. Fiet, S. (2014). Mindfulness the Google way: Well-intention saffrom-
Birmingham:WindhorsePublications. washing?Retrievedfromhttp://www.nadalila.org/mindfulness-the-
Barker,M.(2008).Self-healinginlate-modernity:Thecaseofmindful- google-way-well-intentioned-saffron-washing/.
ness.(unpublishedpaper). Fromm, E. (2010). The pathology of normalcy. New York: American
Bazzano,M.(2013).Inpraiseofstressinduction:Mindfulnessrevisited. MentalHealthFoundationBooks.
EuropeanJournalofPsychotherapyandCounselling,15(2),174– Garfield,J.(2015).EngagingBuddhism:Whyitmatterstophilosophy.
185. NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress.
Beauchamp, T. (2010). Autonomy and consent. In F. Miller & A. Gelles,D.(2012).Themindbusiness,fromhttp://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/
Weetheimer (Eds.), The ethics of consent: Theory and practice. d9cb7940-ebea-11e1-985a-00144feab49a.html#axzz2MuOcUpfA.
NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress. Gethin,R.(2001).TheBuddhistpathtoawakening:AstudyoftheBodhi-
Bellah, R. (1985). Habits of the heart. Berkeley, CA: University of Pakkhiya Dhamma (previously published in 1992). Oxford:
CaliforniaPress. OneworldPublications.
Best, J. (2006). Flavorof the month: Why smart people fall for fads. Gilpin,R.(2008).TheravadaBuddhismandmindfulness-basedcognitive
Berkeley,CA:UniversityofCaliforniaPress. therapy.ContemporaryBuddhism,9(2),227–251.
Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D., Goldstein, E. (2013). Beyond McMindfulness: A thoughtful reply.
Carmody, J., et al. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational Huffington Post, 7/12/2013. http://blogs.psychcentral.com/
definition.ClinicalPsychology:ScienceandPractice,11(3),230– mindfulness/2013/07/beyond-mcmindfulness-throwing-the-baby-
241. out-with-the-bathwater/.
Bodhi, B. (2011). What does mindfulness really mean? A canonical Goyal,M.,Singh,S.,Sibinga,E.M.S.,Gould,N.F.,Rowland-Seymore,
perspective.ContemporaryBuddhism,12(1),19–39. A.,Sharma,R.,etal.(2014).Meditationprogramsforpsychological
Bodhi,B.(2013).WhattheBuddhaneversaid:Iteachonlysufferingand stress and well-being: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
theendofsuffering.Tricycle,Winter.Retrievedhttp://www.tricycle. JAMAInternalMedicine,174(3),357–368.
com/what-buddha-never-said/i-teach-only-suffering-and-end- Grossman, P., & Van Dam, N. T. (2011). Mindfulness, by any other
suffering. name…: trials andtribulations of sati in western psychologyand
Bodhi,B.(2014a).Fusionofhorizons.(unpublishedpaper). science.ContemporaryBuddhism,12(1),219–239.
Bodhi,B.(2014b).Personalcommunication. Halliwell,E.(2014).Mindfulness:Hasitbeenhijeackedbybusinessor
Bodhi,B.(2014c).Personalcommunication. canitchange lives?Retrieved from TheGuardian,25July2014
Boyce,B.(2014).It’snotMcMindfulness.MindfulDecember,p.8 http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/mindfulness-
Braun,E.(2013).Thebirthofinsight.Chicago,IL:UniversityofChicago hijacked-business-parliamentary-inquiry.
Press. Halliwell, E. (2011). You don’t need the ‘right’ kind of zafu to be a
Brazier, D. (2013). Mindfulness reconsidered. European Journal of Buddhist. Retrieved from The Guardian,6 January 2011,http://
PsychotherapyandCounselling,15(2),116–126. www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2011/jan/06/western-
Brown,C.G.(2013).Thehealinggods:Complementaryandalternative buddhists-zafu-meditative-method.
medicineinChristianAmerica.NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress. Harris,D.(2014a).10%happier.NewYork:ItBooks.
Brown, K. W., Ryan, R. M., & Creswell, J. D. (2007). Mindfulness: Harris,S.(2014).Mindfulnessispowerful,butkeepreligionoutofit.
Theoretical foundations and evidence for its salutary effects. Retrievedfromhttp://www.samharris.org/.
PsychologicalInquiry,18(4),211–237. Harvey, P. (2000). An introduction to Buddhist ethics. Cambridge:
Burton,K.,&Effinger,A.(2014).TomakeakillingonWallStreet,start CambridgeUniversityPress.
meditating.RetrievedfromBloomberg,27May2014,http://www. Healy,K.(2013).Searchingforintegrity:Thepoliticsofmindfulnessin
bloomberg.com/news/2014-05-28/to-make-killing-on-wall-street- the digital age. Nomos Journal, August 5, 2013. http://
start-meditating.html. nomosjournal.org/2013/08/searching-for-integrity/.
Bush,M.,&Goleman,D.(2013).Workingwithmindfulness:Research Heuman, L. (2014a). Meditation nation. Tricycle, April 25, 2015.
andpracticeofmindfulnesstechniqueswithorganizations.Kindle- Retrievedfromhttp://www.tricycle.com/blog/meditation-nation.
ebookAmazon.com. Heuman,L.(2014b).Don’tbelievethehype.Tricycle,October01,2014.
Buswell,R.E.,&Gimello,R.M.(1994).Thepathtoliberation:The Retrieved from http://www.tricycle.com/blog/don%E2%80%99t-
marga and its transformations in Buddhist thought. New Delhi: believe-hype.
MotilalBararsidass. Huffington,A.(2014).Thrive:Thethirdmetrictoredefiningsuccessand
Buswell,R.,&Lopez,D.(2014).10MisconceptionsaboutBuddhism. creating a life of well-being, wisdom, and wonder. New York:
Tricycle. Retrieved from http://www.tricycle.com/blog/10- HarmonyBooks.
misconceptions-about-buddhism. Hunter,J.(2013).Ismindfulnessgoodforbuisness.Mindful,April,52–59.
Center for Mindfulness (2014). Retrieved from http://www.umassmed. Illouz,E.(2008).Savingthemodernsoul:Therapy,emotions,andthe
edu/cfm/stress-reduction/history-of-mbsr/. cultureofself-help.Berekely,CA:UniversityofCaliforniaPress.

44 Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45
Ivy,M.(2005).Modernity.InD.S.Lopez(Ed.),Criticaltermsforthe Roca,T.(2014).Thedarknightofthesoul.RetrievedfromTheAtlantic,
studyofBuddhism.Chicago,IL:TheUniversityofChicagoPress. June 25, 2014 http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/06/
Kabat-Zinn,J.(2011).SomereflectionsontheoriginsofMBSR,skillful the-dark-knight-of-the-souls/372766/.
means, and the trouble with maps. Contemporary Buddhism, Rosch,E.(2007).Morethanmindfulness:Whenyouhaveatigerbythe
12(01),281–306. tail,letiteatyou.PsychologicalInquiry,18,258–263.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2013). Retrieved from the New York Academy of Rosch, E. (2014). The emperor’s clothes: A look behind the Western
Scienceshttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c0dup-0Dh0g. mindfulness mystique. In B. Ostafin, M. Robinson, & B. Meier
Keown,D.(2001).ThenatureofBuddhistethics.NewYork:Palgrave. (Eds.),Handbookofmindfulnessandself-regulation.Amsterdam,
Kerr,C.(2014).Whydostudiesofmeditationandofthebrainmatter? NL:Springer.
RetrievedfromTheHuffingtonPost,20October2014,http://www. Samuel,G.(2014).BetweenBuddhismandscience,betweenmindand
huffingtonpost.com/catherine-kerr/why-do-studies-of-meditat_b_ body.Religion,5,560–579.
6075664.html. Sandel,M.(2013).Whatmoneycan’tbuy.NewYork:Farrar,Strausand
Kohlberg,L.(1981).Essaysonmoraldevelopment,Vol.1:Thephiloso- Giroux.
phyofmoraldevelopment.SanFrancisco,CA:Harper&Row. Schedneck,C.(2013).ThedecontextualizationofAsianreligiousprac-
Krishnamurti,J.(1966).ThecollectedworksofJ.Krishnamurti:1966- ticesinthecontextofglobalization(unpublishedpaper).Chianmai
1967:Volume17:Perennialquestions.Seattle,WA:KindleEdition, University,Thailand
AmazonDigitalServices. Segal, S. (2013). In defense of mindfulness. Retrieved from The
Langri, T.J. (2013). Mindfulness in cultural context. Retrieved from Existential Buddhist blog http://www.existentialbuddhist.com/
Advanced Studies Institute lectures on https://www.youtube.com/ 2013/12/in-defense-of-mindfulness/.
watch?v=6PR83yMoGZs. Shapiro,S.L.,Jazaieri,H.,&Goldin,P.R.(2012).Mindfulness-based
Logothetis,N.K.(2008).Whatwecandoandwhatwecannotdowith stress reduction effects on moral reasoning and decision making.
fMRI.Nature,453,869–878. JournalofPositivePsychology,7(6),504–515.
Lomas,T.,Cartwright,T.,Edington,T.,Ridge,D.(2014).Aqualitative Sharf,R.(2013).MindfulnessorMindlessness:TraditionalandModern
analysis of experiential challenges associated with meditation. Buddhist Critiques of “Bare Awareness. Video lecture Advanced
Mindfulness. Retrieved from Springer Link http:// Studies Institute lectures on Mindfulness in a Cultural Context,
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12671-014-0329-8. McGill University. Retrieved fromhttps://blogs.mcgill.ca/tcpsych/
Lopez, D. (2012). The scientific Buddha. New Haven, CT: Yale tag/robert-h-sharf/.
UniversityPress. Shonin,E., Van Gordon,W., & Griffiths,M. D. (2013). Mindfulness-
Loy, D. (2003). The great awakening: A Buddhist social theory. basedinterventions:Towardsmindfulclinicalintegration.Frontiers
Somerville,MA:WisdomPublications. inPsychology,4,1–4.
Maturano, J. (2014). Finding the space to lead: A practical guide to Stahl,B.(2014).Buddhism’salignmentwithmindfulness.TheSecular
mindfulleadership.NewYork:BloomsburyPress. Buddhist,Episode204,July19,2014.
McCown, D. (2013). The ethical space of mindfulness in clinical Stanley, S. (2013). ‘Things said or done long ago are recalled and
practice.London:JessicaKingsleyPublishers. remembered’:TheethicsofmindfulnessinearlyBuddhism,psy-
McGonigal,K.(2013).Thewillpowerinstinct.NewYork:AveryTrade. chotherapy and clinical psychology. European Journal of
McMahan,D.(2008).ThemakingofBuddhistmodernism.NewYork: PsychotherapyandCounselling,15(2),151–162.
OxfordUniversityPress. Stewart,E.C.,&Bennett,M.J.(1991).Americanculturalpatterns:A
Moloney, P. (2013). The therapy industry: The irresistible rise of the cross-culturalperspective.Boston,MA:InterculturalPress.
talkingcure,andwhyitdoesn’twork.London:PlutoPress. Tan, C.-M. (2012). Search inside yourself: The unexpected path to
Monteiro,L.M.,Musten,R.F.,&Compton,J.(2015).Traditionaland achieving success,happiness (andworld peace).NewYork,NY:
contemporarymindfulness:Findingthemiddlepathinthetangleof HarperOne.
concerns.Mindfulness,6,1–13. Teasdale,J.D.,Moore,R.G.,Hayhurst,H.,Pope,M.,Williams,S.,&
Nicklebine, M. (2013). From both sides: Secular Buddhism and the Segal, Z. V. (2002). Metacognitive awareness and prevention of
“McMindfulness” question. The Secular Buddhist Association. relapse in depression: empirical evidence. Journal of Consulting
August 2, 2013. Retrieved from http://secularbuddhism.org/2013/ andClinicalPsychology,70(2),275–282.
08/12/from-both-sides-secular-buddhism-and-the-mcmindfulness- Teasdale,J.D.,Segal,Z. V., & Williams,J.M.G. (2003). Howdoes
question/. cognitivetherapypreventdepressiverelapseandwhyshouldatten-
North,A.(2014).Themindfulnessbacklash.RetrievedfromTheNew tionalcontrol(mindfulness)traininghelp?BehavioralResearchand
YorkTimes,June30,2014http://op-talk.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/ Therapy,33,25–39.
06/30/the-mindfulness-backlash/?_r=0. Ţhānissaro, B. (2012). Right mindfulness: Memory & ardency on the
Olendski, A. (2014). The mindfulness wedge. Tricycle, Fall, Retrieved Buddhist path. Retrieved from http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/
fromhttp://www.tricycle.com/thus-have-i-heard/mindfulness-wedge. authors/thanissaro/rightmindfulness.pdf.
Olendzki, A. (2010). Unlimiting mind: The radically experiential psy- Thompson, N. (2014). The mindfulness wars. Dangerous Harvests,
chologyofBuddhism.Somerville,MA:WisdomPublications. February 21, 2014 Retrieved from http://dangerousharvests.
Payne,R.(2014).Corporatistspirituality.Retrievedfromhttps://rkpayne. blogspot.com/2014/02/the-mindfulness-wars.html.
wordpress.com/2014/02/18/corporatist-spirituality/. Victoria,B.D.(2006).Zenatwar(2nded.).Oxford:Rowman&Littlefield.
Purser, R. (2014). The myth of the present moment. Mindfulness, Wallace, A. B. (2005). Genuine happiness: Meditation as a path to
Retreived from http://download.springer.com/static/pdf/548/art% fulfillment.NewYork:JohnWiley.
253A10.1007%252Fs12671-014-0333-z.pdf?auth66= Wallace,B.A.(2007).Amindfulbalance:WhatdidtheBuddhareally
1416427673_5de7e2d80e58dc6ce81fabdcb4c0d3cf&ext=.pdf. meanby‘mindfulness’?http://buddhanet.net/budas/ebud/ebdha344.
Purser,R.,&Loy,D.(2013).BeyondMcMindfulness.HuffingtonPost. htm.
Retrieved from http://www.huffigtonpost.com/ron-purser/beyond- Wallace,B.A.(2012).MeditationsofaBuddhistskeptic:Amanifestofor
mcmindfulness_b_35919289.html. themindsciencesandconteplativepractice.NewYork:Columbia
Ream,A.(2014).WhyIdisruptedtheWisdom2.0conference.Tricycle UniversityPress.
blog, Retrieved from http://www.tricycle.com/blog/why-i- Wallace, B.A. (2014). Creationism and scientism: One mindset, two
disrupted-wisdom-20-conference. beliefsystems.(unpublishedpaper).

Mindfulness(2015)6:23–45 45
Wallace, A., & Shapiro, S. (2006). Mental balance and well being: Williams,J.M.G.,&Kabat-Zinn,J.(2011).Mindfulness:Diverseperspec-
Building bridges between Buddhism and Western Psychology. tivesonitsmeaning,origins,andmultipleapplicationsattheintersec-
AmericanPsychologist,61(7),690–701. tionofscienceanddharma.ContemporaryBuddhism,12(1),1–18.
Whitaker, J. (2013). 2013 as the year of mindfulness: Critics and de- Wilson, J. (2014). Mindful America: The mutual transformation of
fenders. December 21, 2013. Retrieved from http:// Buddhist meditation and American culture. New York: Oxford
secularbuddhism.org/2013/08/12/from-both-sides-secular- UniversityPress.
buddhism-and-the-mcmindfulness-question/. Zizek,S.(2001).FromWesternMarxismtoWesternBuddhism.Cabinet
Wilden.(1980).Systemsandstructure:Essaysincommunicationsand Magazine Retrieved from http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/
exchange.London:TavistockPublications. 2/western.php.