Chapter
Psychological Stages of
Enlightenment
Patrick Jones
Abstract
The journey to actualise our full potential is a complex one but there is research
to suggest it is marked with signs along the way. Following an investigation of the
literature, a theoretical framework made up of five major stages and their markers
is proposed. It is suggested that in Stage 1, the conventional sense of self, well-being
pivots on the experiences of pleasure and pain. In Stage 2 (Mindfulness) a new level
of nonjudgmental objectivity develops where thoughts can be seen as passing mental
events. With practice, Stage 3 awakening events may occur, leading to an interruption
of the sense of a continuous self. Over time, these intermittent states may stabilise,
leaving a default of the ongoing awakened state of Stage 4, an altruistic, peaceful
resting state with no discernible sense of self, and increased functionality. Finally,
after a seemingly infinite amount of practice, the rare uninterrupted blissful state
of perfected enlightenment, along with unlimited capacities, occurs (Stage 5). With
the increase now in evidence-based mindfulness research, we are able to evaluate the
psychology of enlightenment and its associated stages. If we can translate methods
and outcomes into psychological language and find common ground with western
concepts of happiness and human potential, we may find antidotes to our mental
health inquiry, that can raise the bar from coping to contentment.
Keywords: mindfulness, enlightenment, self-actualisation, awakening, self-realisation,
union with God, nondual, nondual well-being, inner well-being, spiritual awakening,
Buddhist psychology, bodhisattva
1. Introduction
In the conventional model of well-being, we find that affect and satisfaction with
one’s life conditions necessarily fluctuate based on changing mental and physical
phenomena [1]. Biologically and psychologically driven by minimising pain and
maximising pleasure, well-being varies because individuals achieve desired goals, rest
momentarily, and then seek to close more perceived aspiration-achievement gaps [2]
in an ongoing loop of goal achievement derived from changing life conditions.
In his critique of such well-being constructs, Vitterso [3] contends that such
approaches rely too heavily on extrinsic satisfaction (having or not having) and these
types of goal achievement models miss inner dimensions like self-actualisation or
meaning. Vittersø and Søholt [4] argue for alternative models such as eudaimonic or
psychological well-being which focus more on being than having. They argue that
1

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
relying on intrinsic factors delivers true well-being and that people will in fact actively
suppress their hedonic tendencies to get it.
Whilst prioritising being, over having or doing, is not typical of the subjective
well-being, quality of life, or life satisfaction constructs, it is crucial to happiness
models that include constructs such as self-actualisation [5], spiritual awakening [6],
enlightenment [7], self-realisation [8] or union with God [9]. Here the conventional
sense of self, that seeks to “have” by maximising pleasure, and “not have” by mini-
mising pain, is viewed as the problem and the cause of fluctuations in well-being. It
is argued that only by deconstructing the sense of a separate, abiding self can stable
well-being be achieved, one that does not fluctuate in response to life conditions [10].
Such unchanging “nondual” well-being, within these paradigms, is seen to be the
most psychologically healthy approach for a human being. One who has developed
both resilience in response to fluctuating life conditions and a robust well-being that
can be happy for no reason. In Buddhist psychology, the nondual or enlightened state,
is seen as both the endpoint of training and the fulfilment of human potential [1].
Though not typically seen as part of the developmental stages, there is some litera-
ture in the field of mindfulness, that sees that these advanced states of well-being are
the extension that is missing [11]. Such experiences are seen as higher levels of human
development [12, 13] or the completion of the developmental domains. In support of
this we are beginning to see increasing evidence of the significant differences between
beginners and long term meditators in a range of indicators, including the transition
from effort-based to effortless concentration when the sense of a self that is control-
ling the meditation dissolves [14].
The standout characteristic however is not just differences in levels of concentra-
tion but the report of nondual awareness states [15], self-transcendent events [16],
or anomalous experiences [17]. It is these experiences involving a dissolution of the
sense of an abiding and separate self or “anatta” [18], that lead to an expanded and
unitary state of consciousness [19], and a perception of oneness or connectedness to
people and surroundings.
Sogyal Rinpoche from the Tibetan Buddhist tradition describes the unfolding of
this new sense of self: “Then there is the very nature of mind, its innermost essence,
which is absolutely and always untouched by change. At present it is hidden within
our own mind, enveloped, and obscured by the mental scurry of our thoughts and
emotions. Just as clouds can be shifted by a strong gust of wind to reveal the shining
sun and wide-open sky, so, under certain special circumstances, some inspiration
may uncover for us glimpses of this nature of mind” [20].
He continues: “Mystics, poets and psychologists throughout history have described
it with different names, but what they are all fundamentally experiencing is the same
essential nature we find in the depth of our being”. That is while groups in psychol-
ogy, art, and religion have tried to describe this sense of self, if it is the nature of a
human being, it can never be copyrighted by one school of thought or tradition. And
now this type of experience and the approaches to achieve it are being increasingly
researched in the fields of psychology and neuroscience [21, 22]. Methods to build
attention are being explored for their impact upon well-being, along with the so called
“deconstructive” methods [23], that aim to dissolve the sense of self and its separate-
ness from things and others.
The psychological process to achieve this outcome has been well described in
Joseph Campbell’s hero’s journey. In his comprehensive treatise, “The Hero with
a Thousand Faces” he describes how people undergo the process of moral, men-
tal, emotional and spiritual transformation: “The individual, through prolonged
2

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
psychological disciplines, gives up completely all attachment to his personal limita-
tions, idiosyncrasies, hopes and fears, no longer resists the self-annihilation that is
prerequisite to rebirth in the realization of truth, and so becomes ripe, at last, for the
great at-one-ment” [24].
In early psychological investigations Maslow [25] saw these experiences as the
final stage in his hierarchy of needs model, with them delivering a sense of ego-
transcendence, becoming in touch with ultimate reality, and a transcendence of all
dichotomies. In recent years, self-report instruments have been developed to obtain
data on such peak experiences. Early efforts included the Washington University
Sentence Completion Test, [26] Cook-Greuter’s revised version [27], and Hood’s
Mysticism Scale [28], followed later by the Brief Index of Self-Actualization [29].
Such nondual experiences seem to be fleetingly accessible to diverse develop-
mental levels rather than only at the “higher” levels [30, 31]. For example, Martin’s
research “Ego Development Stage Does Not Predict Persistent Non-Symbolic
Experience” found a broad variation in psychological maturity [32, 33]. That is, if an
individual is capable of nondual or ego-less states, their unprocessed psychological
material (developmental delay or arrest), triggered by life events, can interrupt their
nondual experience. Hence whilst the highest nondual states appear to occur with
people at different levels of maturity, completion of the steps in each developmental
line still seems relevant, to both maintain these experiences and fill in gaps in psycho-
logical health.
There is also clinical evidence, that such nondual experiences can occur for people
with unstable psychological foundations. For example, individuals who practise
meditation methods and have not developed a cohesive sense of self (Borderline
Personality Disorder), may be more disposed to experiencing states that deconstruct
that sense of self [34, 35]. However these experiences can also act as a catalyst for
people to implement methods to complete the developmental gaps that keep them
from returning to those heightened states.
A key distinction here is whether an individual is having a bona fide spiritual
experience or is experiencing some level of psychosis [36]. In clinical presentations it
may be necessary to make a differential diagnosis, as whilst both may initially present
as experiencing similar phenomena, the associated experience that comes with them
is very different [37]. Provision is now made in the latest Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) under the category “Religious or spiritual
problem” for crises associated with possible changes in consciousness [38].
Whilst both presentations could involve a form of euphoria and a dissocia-
tion from their conventional sense of self, a psychosis is typically characterised by
accompanying paranoid or grandiose delusions, thought disorder or hallucinations
[39]. Other differentiating indicators of psychosis could include heightened negative
affect, a disconnect from reality, disruptions in normal speech or thought processing,
including cognitive slippage [40].
By contrast, a spiritual experience, whilst it may also incite an elevation of positive
affect, it tends to include feelings of unity (derived from a dissolution of the sense of
self), a sense of calm, clarity, transcendence, heightened present moment awareness
and sense of purpose [41]. However what makes diagnosis more complex is that char-
acteristics like sleep disturbance, fluctuating affect, impulsive behaviours, seemingly
poor judgement, or impaired social functioning, whilst often predictable indicators
of mental disturbance, may also occur in someone who has experienced a profound
spiritual experience and is struggling to integrate this with their previous functioning
baselines [42].
3

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
This is well described by Meher Baba in his work with the more advanced versions
of this state: “But the case of masts (God-intoxicated) is altogether different in origin,
as well as in potentiality. There is no doubt that masts often exhibit an incapacity to
deal with the ordinary situations of life; and they are, in this respect, comparable to
those who are deranged in mind. But the departure of masts from normal behaviour
and responses is not due to lack of sufficient mental development, nor is it due to
any chaotic forces of disruption; it is due to a suspension of interest in the ordinary
pursuits of life, and to an absorption in the spiritual realities encountered on the path
towards Truth-realization” [43].
As spiritual or awakening experiences can trigger a dramatic shift in conscious-
ness, for many it can dismantle default mental styles, such as the tendency to habitu-
ally suppress or avoid unpleasant emotions, which in turn can issue in a disruption
to the previous status quo. Whilst for most, these events are short-lived and can be
somewhat integrated or understood, for those who engage in regular self-opening
practices, these events can become habitual and will need more attention and guid-
ance [44].
In view of these possible outcomes it could be seen as reasonable to have some
concern about meditation-like practices and their possible contraindications and
potential for harm (meditation-related adverse effects or MRAEs). However it is
important to dispel the notion that all such reactions are necessarily adverse events,
as in some cases they are transient expected outcomes from egoic deconstruction
processes, or simply increased awareness of one’s current situation [34]. Best practice
in value-based healthcare [45] would be to screen such complex presentations before
intervention, so as to responsibly differentiate mental health indicators from spiri-
tual health indicators. If bona fide, this rare experience then has the opportunity to
not be shut down with medication or invalidation but be nurtured towards spiritual
emergence rather than mistreated and either dwindle or become a spiritual emer-
gency [46, 47].
Traumatic events that lead people to dissociate, chemical alteration through drugs
and psychedelics [48] or exposure to single pointed concentration activities like
some sporting events or fishing that led to flow or in the zone experiences [49], can
also trigger these states. These random states, whilst they may result in “beyond the
self” experiences, are not stable foundations from which to build the experience in a
predictable or ongoing way. They are, however, doorways inviting individuals to then
apply robust methodology to build the experience of a “self-lessness”.
To progress to the deeper levels of proficiency in the necessary tools is essential.
With practice individuals should be able to maintain attention longer in the present
moment, be better able to neutrally watch and allow thoughts and emotions that
arise, respond freshly to new challenging events or treat apparent enemies with
equanimity and kindness [50]. Progressing to a level of mastery that can issue in the
nondual states typically takes a solid command of these fundamentals, which is why
major religions focus on building the introductory skills, often in tandem with ethics
training.
In the religious traditions methods to progress safely and predictably to these
states have been developed and refined over thousands of years [51]. Their methods
aim to transition the practitioner’s experience from a temporary state to an ongo-
ing trait, whilst avoiding developmental gaps that cause personal and interpersonal
difficulties if stages are missed. Their preparatory or foundational practices are
typically comprehensive and lengthy before the initiate can begin the hazardous work
on the deconstruction of the sense of self [52]. In some traditions, to progress to this
4

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
advanced end of the teaching curriculum, a student might have to ask the teacher
three times for teachings before they were accepted. Or they might have to wait doing
menial work for weeks, months or years before the teacher felt they were ready.
Having the right motivation, foundation and psychological maturity to even begin
the work was paramount, as they would need it to face the dragons from within or
without.
There appear however many psychological advantages to being able to access these
nondual states, especially when challenging circumstances present. Once stabilised,
someone with this level of mastery can act more skilfully in their life areas, whilst
maintaining inner calm. However the path and process from novice to master, like all
hero’s journeys, is scattered with insights and mistakes.
2. Theoretical context
Each spiritual or religious tradition has proposed their own model to explain the
progression of maturation on the path to spiritual actualisation. To supply some
context to the theoretical framework of the proposed five stages of psychological
enlightenment in this chapter, it would be of use to cover some variations offered
in various traditions. For example in Hinduism, Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras [53] offer a
comprehensive set of techniques and instructions culminating in Samadhi, or absorp-
tion in the Absolute [54]. His “Eight Limbs of Yoga” include the yamas (non-violence,
truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity, non-greed), and niyamas (cleanliness/purity,
contentment, discipline/austerities, self-study, contemplation), and become indica-
tors or traits of adepts [55]. The remaining limbs, asana (yoga postures), pranayama
(breath control), pratyahara (withdrawal of the senses), dharana (concentration),
dhyana (meditation) if practised lead to samadhi (absorption). This in itself has
several levels of refinement [56]:
Level 1, Savikalpa Samadhi (4 stages), has progressive levels of concentration and
absorption in meditation, moving to bliss and then stillness, latent tendencies remain
undissolved. In Level 2, Nirvikalpa Samadhi, psychological imprints have been dis-
solved and only consciousness remains. It is experienced by withdrawing into medita-
tion and one returns to function in the world with supernormal capacities. Level 3,
Dharmamegha Samadhi or complete liberation occurs while still in a physical body.
Here the yogi has cleared all residual karmas, and it is characterised by a desireless
concentration, the realisation of the self, and limitless knowledge and insight [57, 58].
In Buddhism we have in the earliest Theravada tradition, the presentation of the
four noble truths: (1) life is “dukkha” or incapable of satisfying us; (2) the origin of
this suffering or “samudaya” is craving and attachment to transient objects; (3) the
cessation or “nirodha” of suffering is the releasing of these attachments; (4) and the
way “marga” to achieve this is through the eightfold path [59]. This eightfold path,
which can serve as both method and indicator of the level of maturity of a practitio-
ner included [60]: right view; right intention; right speech; right action; right liveli-
hood; right effort; right mindfulness; and right concentration. An ordinary person,
who has not understood or practised, is known in Sanskrit as a “pṛthagjana” (without
jnana or knowledge), and is considered to be trapped in the endless cycle of samsara
or the pursuit of external pleasure and avoidance of pain. If the path is practised this
can lead into the four progressive stages of awakening: Stream-enterer (some under-
standing), Once-returner (reduced desires and ill-will), Non-returner (has overcome
sensuality, partially awakened) and the Arahant (fully awakened) [61, 62].
5

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
In the later Satipatthana Sutta (The Discourse on the Establishing of
Mindfulness), four levels of practices and attainments are laid out as fundamental
to progress [63]. These include: (1) The Contemplation of the Body (Mindfulness
of Breathing, The Postures of the Body, Mindfulness with Clear Comprehension,
The Reflection on the Repulsiveness of the Body, The Reflection on the Material
Elements, and The Nine Cemetery Contemplations; (2) The Contemplation
of Feeling (contemplation of pleasant and unpleasant feelings/tones; (3) The
Contemplation of Consciousness (contemplation on the impermanence, origination
and dissolution of all factors found in consciousness; (4) The Contemplation of
Mental Objects [The Five Hindrances (sense-desire, anger, sloth and torpor, agitation
and remorse, and doubt), [The Five Aggregates of Clinging (the impermanence of
material form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness), The Six Internal
and External Sense Bases, The Seven Factors of Enlightenment (the presence of
mindfulness, the investigation of mental objects, energy, joy, tranquillity, concen-
tration, and equanimity), and an understanding of the previously mentioned Four
Noble Truths [59].
In the even later Mahayana Buddhist tradition the Tibetans lay out six “paramitas”
or means that a practitioner cultivates on the path to enlightenment [64]. These
include generosity (dana), ethical conduct (sila), patience (ksanti), diligence (virya),
meditation (dhyana), and wisdom (prajna). Using these practices as a gradual process
of effort and refinement, a progressive formula of five paths leading to enlighten-
ment is taught: (a) the path of accumulation—possessing a strong desire to overcome
suffering (self and others) and a renunciation of worldly life; (b) the path of prepara-
tion—practising meditation, and having a conceptual knowledge of emptiness; (c)
the path of seeing—the practice of meditation on the nature of reality, and the realisa-
tion of emptiness; (d) the path of meditation—purification and the accumulation of
wisdom; (e) the path of no more learning—complete purification [65].
Within these five paths, categorised in seven groupings, there are thirty-seven
factors of enlightenment that are practised at specific stages of the first four of the
five paths [66]. Once mastered these collection of practices and mental states includ-
ing such things as ethical conduct, concentration, and equanimity, are then seen as
qualities that demonstrate the presence of enlightenment. Following this there are
ten stages of development known as “bhumis”, or grounds that describe the progres-
sion of a practitioner on the path to enlightenment and represent different levels of
spiritual development [67]. Whilst described quite differently in multiple sutras [68,
69], in brief these are:
(1) Joyous: first direct perception of emptiness, entry into the third of the five
paths, phenomena viewed as empty so loses all attachment, works at the perfecting
generosity; (2) stainless: perfect ethics and the overcoming of tendencies for negative
actions; (3) light-Maker: radiant, cultivates the perfection of patience and equanim-
ity; (4) radiant: perfection of effort and elimination of afflictions, progressively
deeper absorption in meditation, increasingly skilful in wisdom and teaching; (5)
difficult to overcome: perfects arduous practices, now difficult to conquer, strong
powers of meditation; (6) manifest: experiences phenomena as empty and can abide
in undisturbed contemplation of emptiness; (7) gone afar: can be in meditative
absorption for long periods of time, know the thoughts of others and can adapt teach-
ings accordingly; (8) unshakeable has overcome all afflictions, completely absorbed
in dharma, the bodhisattva has attained nirvana; (9) good wisdom: faultless, mastery
of all aspects of dharma—concepts, meaning, grammar, and teaching, magical power
to change form if needed to best serve; (10) cloud of dharma: overcome all traces of
6

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
affliction, transcend the ordinary laws of time and space, limitless powers like a cloud
spontaneously spreads teaching in all directions [70, 71].
In Zen, another later branch of Buddhism, the 10 phases of Zen Ox Herding [72,
73] clearly outline pivotal turning points on the journey: (1) seeking the Ox—search-
ing for fulfilment and happiness in worldly pursuits; (2) finding the tracks—insight
that all forms come and go, leaving fleeting satisfaction; (3) first glimpse of the
Ox—first spiritual experience or satori; (4) catching the Ox—building a spiritual
method and lifestyle; (5) taming the Ox—becoming aware of a “watcher” indepen-
dent of thoughts, perceptions and emotions; (6) riding the Ox home—now mindful
and not ruled by the mind; (7) Ox forgotten, Self Alone—nondual awareness with
intermittent returning to identification with the mind, the practitioner exerts no
effort, and spontaneously practices without with goal or purpose; (8) both Ox and
self-forgotten—duality of practice and practitioner dissolve into oneness; (9) return
to the source—the adept completes the process from mountain, to no mountains, to
mountain again, everything is the same but without attachment; (10) entering the
World—leaving the isolation of the mountain to return to mundane life, spontane-
ously providing help to those in need—“Barefoot and bare-chested, I mingle with the
world; Though covered with dirt, I beam with joy.” (p. 2) [74–76].
In Judaism, included in its three core practices of “torah” (study), acts of “hesed”
(kindness/love) and “tzedek” (righteousness/justice), is “avodah” (prayer) [77].
Amongst other methods, three stages of self-seclusion meditation “hisbodedus”
[78, 79] are recommended including withdrawal from physical stimuli, applying
concentrated attention and directing awareness to the Divine, and dissolving into the
Creator in a state of oneness “echad” [80]. Historically a Baal Shem (later replaced by
the Hasidic tzadik leader) was a Jewish practitioner of Practical Kabbala who was seen
to be able to heal, perform miracles and exorcisms, and protect people from disasters.
Such individuals were seen to have dutifully performed the two categories of “mitz-
voth” (person to person duties and person to God duties) or the “peeling” of the shell
towards the five levels of consciousness or communion with God [81, 82].
These levels are: (1) Nefesh—awareness of the body, physical world and surrender
of one’s will to God and the fulfilment of the commandments); (2) Ruach—love and
motivation to serve God, the “the toil of the heart”; (3) Neshama—loving God with
all one’s soul, “the rapture of the heart”, receiving of Divine insight); (4) Chaya—the
end of self-seeking, dissolving of the ego, knowledge of absolute truth, the life that
Adam had in the Garden); (5) Yechida—“echad” or the state of oneness, one sees the
light of the Infinite in everything, all is one with no divisions, one with all-encom-
passing reality [83].
There is much written over the centuries within the Christian mystical tradition,
however like many methods, the focus is less on a detailed delineation of each of the
steps on the ladder, and more on the devotional path of faith laid out in the scrip-
tures, rituals and the dogmas. One approach however is a division of the spiritual life
into three stages: Purgative, Illuminative, and Unitive [84]. Outlined by Garrigou-
Lagrange [85] in his “The Three Ages of the Interior Life”, he drew from the writings
of Pseudo-Dionysius, Thomas Aquinas and St John of the Cross [86]. These stages
(Nathe [87] adds a “pre-way” stage for those who aren’t on the journey) can include:
[Pre-Way—frequent engagement in minor sins, little resistance to major
wrongdoing, optional or sporadic prayer and rituals] (1) Purgative Way: (a)
Underdeveloped—infrequent engagement in minor sins, weak resistance to major
wrongdoing, intermittent prayer and regular rituals; (b) developing—occasional
minor sins, strong resistance to major wrongdoing, regular prayer and rituals;
7

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
developed—vigilant resistance to minor sins, rare major wrongdoing, some justifi-
cation of imperfections, very regular prayer and rituals; (2) illuminative way: (a)
Underdeveloped—accidental minor sins, no major wrongdoing, imperfections are
regretted and renounced, regular prayer and rituals; (b) developing—imperfections
guarded against, thirst for self-renunciation and divine love, frequent graces infused
prayer and rituals; (3) unitive way: (a) developing—imperfections are impulses
only, contemplation infused with supernatural graces and occasional extraordinary
phenomena, non-resistant surrender to purification, disinterest in the self; (b)
developed—imperfections are rare and not easily apparent; frequent experience of
divine union in prayer [88].
Within Islam, Sufism is a more esoteric path [89] that outlines a variety of spiritual
practices and stages of spiritual awakening. It is usually divided into a progression
from observing religious laws “Sharia”, to self-purification and practising the spiritual
path “Tariqa”, leading to direct realisations of the divine or the experience of mysti-
cal truth “Haqiqa”, culminating in complete union with the divine “Marifa” [90].
The twelfth century poem, the Conference of the Birds, by Farid Ud-Din Attar [91]
famously outlined these stages in terms of valleys, though typically they are referred
to as evolving stages of the self or ego “nafs”, and are usually ranked from the lowest
to highest self [92]:
(1) Egoic Self—characterised by desires like lust, anger or greed, it chases
its cravings and material possessions; (2) Reflective Self—the development of
self-awareness, one’s negative traits and actions are seen inviting repentance; (3)
Inspired Self—inspired by a spiritual calling, it seeks to do good, please God and
serve others, abandons worldly knowledge as useless in the path; (4) Peaceful Self
or Detachment—has a level of self-control, more detached from material desires,
building trust in God; (5) Pleased Self or Unity—finds inner peace, satisfaction, and
surrenders to the divine will, the realisation that all is connected and God is beyond
all forms; (6) Surrendering Self—deep contentment surrenders to the divine, free
from self-centred desires with an unbroken sense of union with the Divine, awed by
the absolute and what lies beyond the relative; (7) Pure Self or Annihilation—com-
plete purification, the ego is free from attachments, the self disappears into God
consciousness. Some writings distinguish in this last stage the ecstatic experience of
God intoxication followed by the option of a “second sobriety”, which includes the
transformed mystic returning to the world as a living witness [93–95].
The above examples, in coming from a broad range of religious traditions, typi-
cally bring with them the cultural characteristics or beliefs of those frameworks. A
more psycho-spiritual model, proposed by James Fowler, identifies six stages of how
people progress from a simple to more complex belief systems [96, 97]. The “Stages of
Faith” according to Fowler are:
(1) Intuitive-Projective Faith: in early childhood, faith arises from experiences
and relationships with caregivers; (2) Mythic-Literal Faith: during middle child-
hood, faith builds through stories and symbols or religious texts; (3) Synthetic-
Conventional Faith: by adolescence, faith is shaped by the social norms and the
community; (4) Individuative-Reflective Faith: in young adulthood, an individual
critically examines and take responsibility for beliefs; (5) Conjunctive Faith: by
mid-adulthood, a more complex and integrative understanding or experience of faith
occurs; (6) Universalizing Faith: in this final rare stage, individuals may develop a
profound sense of oneness and dedicate themselves to causes and universal values
greater than themselves.
8

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
It is of note that this last stage is the foundational point for some of the models
given previously. This level is also similar to Kohlberg’s post-conventional fifth and
sixth stages where someone may disobey rules that are not consistent with their
beliefs in human rights or justice [98]. In Stage six (universal ethical principles
driven), abstract moral reasoning is derived from perceived universal ethical prin-
ciples, rather than rules per se. Kohlberg thought there may be even a seventh stage of
Transcendental Morality, or Morality of Cosmic Orientation, which linked spiritual
experience of religion with moral reasoning, however, he struggled to obtain empiri-
cal evidence for this [99].
Along with the growth of humanistic psychology [25, 100, 101], transpersonal
psychology [102] developed to address the self-transcendent experiences (STEs),
often triggered by extreme conditions, psychedelics and meditation practices [103].
It’s focus was on both practices that contributed to the expansion of self, and the
impact of these experiences upon mental and physical health. Since this field spread
into the so-named popular psychology arena in recent years [104], there have been
many secular or mainstream attempts to delineate the process, and the investigation
has burgeoned [105, 106].
Some of the features of such awakenings identified in secular or non-religious
frameworks include decreased interest in material possessions or financial wealth;
decreased sense of separateness from others; decreased mental noise or emotional
reactivity; increased sense of union or interconnectedness; increased compassion
and altruism; increased calm, gratitude and well-being, and ultimately a sense
of oneness or no sense of self [41, 107, 108]. Scales have also been developed to
capture some of these characteristics including: The Enlightenment Scale [109],
Hawkins’ Consciousness Scale [110], Daily Spiritual Experience Scale [111], Spiritual
Enlightenment Experience Scale [112], A Scale to Measure Nonattachment [113], and
The Nondual Awareness Dimensional Assessment (NADA) [114].
2.1 Proposed model
In view of the diversity and cultural specificity of some of the above models, we
would do well to have our own more mainstream, psychologically informed catego-
ries with similar state or stage identifiers. To this end, given the relative paucity of
investigation within the field of psychology, a theoretical framework of five primary
stages of psychological enlightenment and how the stages are derived was proposed. It
is argued that if these stages are fundamental to the actualisation of human potential
[5], there should be easily identifiable markers that might be expected along the way.
In the following sections, we will explore what can occur in each stage, and the
implications for the practitioner. Starting with “Stage 1: Pre-state—Conventional
sense of self”, we look at the normal or conventional way of relating to oneself
and events. In “Stage 2: Mindfulness” we explore what might be expected when an
individual starts to step back and objectively observe mental processes. In “Stage 3:
Awakenings (State)” we examine the stage where intermittent gaps in the normal
sense of self or awakenings to the nondual experience start to occur. In “Stage 4:
Awakened (Trait)” the transition of the nondual experiences of “no self” from
temporary states to a persisting trait, is outlined. Finally in “Stage 5: Enlightenment”,
the rarest of states, we investigate what it might be like when an individual experi-
ences an unchanging nondual state where all psychological fluctuations cease, and the
practitioner is seen to be perfected with control over phenomena.
9

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
3. Stage 1: Pre-state—Conventional sense of self
3.1 Literature
Early psychological research into happiness focused primarily on quality of life
areas like relationships, work, money, health, and leisure. These elements were
initially seen to play a significant role [115–117]. However, over time, it became
evident that these life circumstances had a surprisingly small impact (8–15%) due to
the influence of cognitive processes [118, 119].
The research emphasis shifted to the subjective factors of cognition and affect
[120–122] leading to the development of constructs like subjective well-being [116],
life satisfaction [123], and psychological well-being [124]. These constructs have
become widely used in research, policy, and practice, despite their varying or overlap-
ping components [125].
As the research into happiness progressed, the consensus was that it was com-
prised of objective conditions and subjective processes. The latter included affect
[126], and cognitive processes that assessed the level of satisfaction with one’s life
[127–129]. Within this model, positive and negative events were seen to temporar-
ily affect well-being, but according to constructs like the Dynamic Equilibrium
Model [130], most people can adapt back to pre-existing well-being levels [131].
Well-being is believed to be under homeostatic control (Homeostatically Protected
Mood) within a set-point that enables people to return to a similar level of life
satisfaction [132, 133]. This almost autonomous self-regulating system comprises of
buffers like optimism, reframing, problem solving or seeking social support to get
back on track [134].
When asked, “How satisfied are you with your life as a whole?” populations
reported themselves to be only three-quarters (75%) satisfied with their lives [135].
From an evolutionary psychology framework [136], up to now such partial satisfac-
tion has been argued to serve some function such as being a protective neurophysio-
logical state [137], with increased positive affect being linked to increased risk-taking
[138]. That is, it is acknowledged that it is beneficial to be happy, but not excessively
so, lest we get too reckless.
3.2 Indicators
This pre-state stage reflects the normal or conventional way of relating to oneself
and events. Here people experience pleasure if things go well, pain if things go badly.
It is not absent of goodness or insights but typically an individual is unable to experi-
ence a state of well-being that feels good no matter what is going on (happy for no
reason). Here well-being comes from the quality of one’s thoughts, life events, and
interpersonal connections.
This approach is based on the premise that there are basic human needs, and if
people fulfil their needs, they are more likely to be happy. The focus is on achieving
satisfaction across critical life areas like relationships, work or money. The perception
of quality of life is determined by the width of the gap between expectations and
outcomes [139], with each individual setting these markers differently.
Expectations can be based upon judgements of previous performance, future
predictions, ideals, or others’ performance. The bigger the gap, the lower the reported
quality of life. With this approach a major predictor of self-esteem is social com-
parison [140]. If there is a significant gap between how one views one’s performance
10

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
versus others, in domains important to that individual, then self-esteem will conse-
quently be low (or high).
Driven by the survival drive and its dual forces of minimising pain and maximis-
ing of pleasure, individuals who experience such a gap or a negative event, will seek
strategies to reduce the gap [141, 142]. They may target the event to better match
expectations (problem-solving) or alter expectations (reframing). They might choose
to fight to change the event, flee from it, or freeze and ignore it.
If the problem solving response is successful and the negative event is resolved,
they recalibrate back to their premorbid well-being baseline [143]. However, if the
event cannot be changed, they can still alter their expectations, by reframing it and
changing their response to it, allowing individuals to adapt to unchanging outcomes.
In this approach, the well-being set point is relatively stable, unless disrupted by
events. When problems arise that affect this, the adaptation response is triggered,
recalibrating it back to baseline or previous well-being levels [144].
This self-regulating process, similar to maintaining body temperature, blood glu-
cose, or water levels, is maintained through a complex blend of positive, neutral, and
negative beliefs that have evolved to ensure psychological survival. Although events
may temporarily affect mood or affective state, they usually do not change deeply
entrenched belief systems, resulting in a typical return to baseline once emotions
subside [145].
With this model however, people remain vulnerable to events that exceed their
mental resources or adaptation abilities. If a traumatic event occurs, an individual
may not be able to recalibrate easily back to baseline. If an acute crisis becomes
chronic, their mental state may remain compromised, establishing a new baseline.
This is typically when individuals seek counselling or additional resources. If suc-
cessful and they upgrade their skillset, they may return to or surpass their previous
well-being point, however to protect well-being, they must be adept at negotiating
life events that challenge its stability. And if they cannot, even if temporarily, then
well-being will suffer [146].
4. Stage 2: Mindfulness
4.1 Literature
The arrival of modern mindfulness and its diverse group of techniques [147]
has sparked extensive research into the advantages of building self-awareness. Its
methods have been found to diminish personal biases related to self-processing and
support the maintenance of subjective well-being [148]. Practitioners aim to cultivate
meta-awareness (self-awareness), the ability to modulate their behaviour (self-regu-
lation), and build qualities such as interpersonal skills, and empathic accuracy [149].
Typically, someone who has entered stage two aims to use methods like mindful-
ness to both develop non-judgmental attention to the present moment [150] and
better regulate their behaviour in a more prosocial way. Practices such as focused
attention, open monitoring, and loving-kindness are employed with the aim to build
awareness, concentration, and compassion [151]. Such techniques assist in maintain-
ing well-being levels or restoring mood homeostasis [145].
One drawback however of trying various practices outside of a cohesive model or
process [152] is that progression to higher well-being levels may be hindered, as steps
built into these models may be missed. In the more recent applications of mindfulness
11

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
techniques there are a range of methods that whilst effective in themselves [153, 154],
are designed to produce very different effects [155]. For example some interven-
tions to improve well-being or reduce anxiety, have been isolated from a larger set of
practices originally designed to deconstruct subject-object duality [1].
Despite this, what is still possible with any of the techniques, is the beginning of a
type of mental objectivity and greater control over the mind. Old beliefs and feelings
that normally dictated the sense of self and actions, have the chance to be observed
more neutrally, reducing their power. As a practitioner develops the ability to step
back and observe their mind, they start to be able to switch from “I believe that...” to
“I am having the thought that...” [156].
With input from neuroscience, we have now found that developing such objectiv-
ity and present moment awareness, decreases unnecessary rumination, increases
activation of “task-positive” brain regions related to life skills such as conflict moni-
toring and cognitive control [157, 158], and enhances well-being [159, 160]. By being
able to neutrally observe their mental processes, individuals gain greater choice in
whether to engage with or disengage from their thoughts and emotions in order to
protect, maintain, or optimise well-being [22, 161, 162].
Such freed-up attentional resources [163] lead practitioners to exhibit reduced
activity in the default mode network associated with rumination [164], increased
activity in brain regions linked to cognitive control [165], and a richer cognitive,
sensory, and perceptual response to stimuli. Regarding relationships to others, such
training increases altruistic behaviours [166] and fires up increased activity in parts
of the brain, like the insular cortex, that are associated with empathy [167].
4.2 Indicators
This capacity to neutrally watch mental phenomena as passing mental events, also
includes a reduced resistance to emotional or physical movements, and an increase
in a stance of openness. In this stage people can begin to be less reactive to passing
pains or pleasures, whilst still learning to balance quality of life and live their life
as functionally as possible. There are a range of attributes or qualities that can be
developed [168]. Under a grouping of what could be called Clear Mind some of these
could include:
(1) Present moment awareness: a present time, moment by moment awareness
of thoughts, feelings and sensations; (2) neutrality: the ability to neutrally observe
thoughts, feelings and sensations as passing events; (3) clarity: the ability to clearly
identify one’s beliefs and emotions; (4) regulation of attention: the capacity to
disengage from thought and direct attention as required; (5) thought suspension:
the ability to suspend engagement in thought and just be. Attributes focusing more
on affect and an open approach to people and life events could be characterised
under Open Heart, and could include: (1) openness: openness to life events (people,
opinions, and experiences); (2) acceptance: the ability to accept and allow rather
than avoid either good or bad feelings; (3) response freshness: to respond uniquely
or freshly to each new event; (4) relaxation: a natural relaxation response to life
events; (5) interpersonal equanimity: the capacity to treat others non-judgmentally
or compassionately [169, 170].
When individuals become more skilful at stepping back and observing their
mental process, they also tend to deal with current problems more effectively as there
is less mental static or interference [171]. This increasing objectivity and freedom to
choose what thoughts to listen to, make it easier to identify maladaptive schemas and
12

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
behavioural repertoires, thus reducing the psychological load they accumulate over
their life.
With sufficient practice or opportunity, past residual trauma can also be pro-
cessed, or as Freud argued, the latent becomes manifest [172]. Life events that trigger
unprocessed psychological material provide opportunities to deconstruct past
cognitive distortions that need review. As practitioners develop the ability to watch
thoughts pass, and experience feelings as transient, mental movements can begin
to lose their agency. This can lead to the experience of relating to thoughts as just
thoughts, rather than thoughts as “me”. At this point the “watcher” or witnessing self
that can objectively watch thoughts may also come under question—what is watching
the thoughts?
5. Stage 3: Awakenings (State)
5.1 Literature
The self as described in Stages 1 and 2, is a stable, independent, and cohesive
entity that that works to be robust in the face of psychological challenges [173]. In
Stage 3, for the first time, the sense of “me” begins to present as less tangible, rather
than as a familiar solid defined point or location. The transition from the conven-
tional sense of self, that generates its well-being from an ability to manage its environ-
ment, involves a fundamental shift—the replacement of the dualistic subject-object
perception of me and the world, to no apparent sense of a “me”.
Jung [174] referred to the first two stages as individuation, the process of integrat-
ing the conscious and unconscious aspects of the psyche, and saw that to become
one’s true integrated self, was the primary goal of human development. He also then
argued that this process was in preparation for the next step: “The first half of life is
devoted to forming a healthy ego, the second half is going inward and letting go of
it.” (p. 399). Interestingly, Bill Wilson, co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous, was
influenced by Jung and asserted that the “recovery” or purification stage got people
started, however it was having a “vital spiritual experience” that was the foundational
healing of addiction [175].
When an individual begins to experience such a discontinuance or interruption of
a continuous sense of a self [176], it is a departure from the default and can manifest
in many ways. For example, in advanced mindfulness practices, it can spontaneously
occur when practitioners master the ability to observe the mind’s fluctuating nature
without judgement [177–179].
In Wilber’s [180] integral theory and subsequent four-quadrant grid, he delineated
ten principal stages in the spectrum of consciousness. These cross referenced cogni-
tive, moral, and object relations lines of development against stages of consciousness
identified in the contemplative traditions. Wilber identified that individuals who had
such nondual or non-symbolic experience spanned a range of developmental levels
[50]. However, to achieve consistently higher levels and transform these experiences
from temporary states to permanent traits, repetition and practice were still required.
This aligns with the structured approach of the religious traditions, which prepare
their students through sequenced practices. Whether it is seen as a dissolution of
the self, absorption, surrender to the divine, awakening to the nondual nature, or
enlightenment [1, 181, 182], a systematic method is always presented as fundamental
to sustaining these outcomes.
13

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
In recent years, neuroscience researchers have been looking into how the brain’s
neural networks help create and sustain the sense of self. Andrews-Hannah and col-
leagues [183] found eleven brain centres that play a role in different types of “selfing.”
For instance, the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex is linked to “self-and-other,” the
medial temporal lobe handles the “self-in-time,” and the insula deals with emotional
states that shape our self-perception. Brewer, Garrison, and Whitfield-Gabrieli [184]
also found that if the prefrontal cortex subsystem is turned off, we lose our sense of
time and feel timeless. If the temporal lobe is turned off, we may feel a sense of unity
or no separation.
Moments of ecstasy, deep meditation, or even epileptic seizures can interrupt
or make this “selfing” disappear. For meditation practitioners, who are adept, as
the Dalai Lama noted, in experiencing “the mind observing itself” [185], a reduced
identification with this mind-body signal can allow them to respond to events in
literally a “self-less” way. To support these experiences occurring, just as in Stage Two,
advanced concentration methods can be used to both improve attentional regulation
skills and reduce discursive thinking.
Once these skillsets develop, the tendency to relate to all thoughts (including the
“I” thought) as objective realities (cognitive reification), can be addressed through
deconstructive practices that dismantle the “self-schema” or self-beliefs [21, 22]. By
examining the thinking, feeling, and perceiving processes that create the sense of self
or “minimal phenomenal self” [186], these methods aim to uncover what it might be
like to experience the “self” as “substance-less”.
This approach moves beyond the introductory levels of mindfulness, and argues
that the notion of a self is an unnecessary construct that is mistakenly perceived as
an independently existing, stable agent (subject) separate from thought (object)
[187]. In the contemplative traditions, such constructs are seen as false and limiting,
obstructing the otherwise naturally arising state of enlightenment or self-less percep-
tion [19, 188]. This new construct is in stark contrast with the conventional notions of
the self as found in Stages 1 and 2, where the experience of a sense of self is founded
on a sense of place, purpose and boundary.
5.2 Indicators
After typically a substantial amount of practice, intermittent gaps in the normal
sense of identity, or awakenings, can start to happen. Words may be experienced as
empty thought forms, and an expanded sense of space or absence of an obvious sense
of self can occur [189]. Practitioners move from initially being able to watch thoughts
neutrally, to experiencing the emptiness of the words that make up these thoughts.
Similarly when the facility of allowing emotions builds, it leads to an increasing emo-
tional openness. These changes are the beginnings of a movement towards Maslow’s
self-actualisation [5].
If they have progressed to sustaining a silent mind, there might also be a sense of
a “me” that can watch silently the gap between thoughts (the silent witness). When
a practitioner sustains this mindful watching, they perceive the sense of “me” more
lightly, and like the words, it can begin to feel optional. There is still the experience
of thinking, feeling, sensing, and acting, but it feels lighter. When they progress
from neutrally watching their thoughts to watching the sense of self, it begins to
appear less solid.
Over time the perceived transparency or emptiness of the thoughts can move to
the “I thought” or the “me” [190]. At this point of progress a practitioner is able to
14

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
objectively investigate the point from where the “I” is looking. Here the experience of
being not just the nonjudgmental watcher, but more a type of neutral awareness that is
doing the watching, can emerge. A type of intangible self that is not merely a composite
of thoughts, feelings, and sensations. In these moments, the practitioner can experi-
ence themselves beyond the limitations of what their thoughts say they are, as articu-
lated by Wittgenstein “The limits of my language are the limits of my world.” [191].
Such experiences can also randomly occur in events like intense suffering, psyche-
delics, lovemaking, or an ecstatic sunset [192]. Typically, they close quickly as they
are unfamiliar, and the person is not able to hold this state (state not trait). The first
experience of this type of consciousness is usually unexpected, as it occurs as a break
from the normal flow or “sense of a self” existence. These glimpses however typically
occur in response to consistent mindfulness-like methods that involve stepping back
and watching the mind stream of thoughts and feelings.
If there is regular practice, there can be an increase in the frequency, duration and
intensity [193] of the experiences of the “no-self”. With such practice intermittent
openings or awakenings can consolidate and move towards becoming the default
experience of operating in the world. However, often there is much psychological
clearing (tapas) to be done before the state of stabilisation occurs. The appearance of
latent tendencies, old ways of being, or attachments continue to occur and need to be
met with non-judgmental awareness, that can watch rather than react to the passing
mental events.
Life areas like work, money, and relationships [168] are quite common places that
need to be renegotiated. Practitioners may have an occasional experiences of them-
selves beyond their fluctuating thoughts, feelings, and sensations, however, for this to
stabilise, there is much to purify. If however there is an growing shift from an external
to an internal source of well-being [194, 195], individuals can feel less dependent on
life events needing to go to plan to maintain well-being.
Opening experiences can trigger an internal reshuffle, as the individual is now
different in some way and the rest of their moveable parts, psychologically speaking,
need to readjust [196]. When regular openings, satoris or awakenings are combined
with practices of seeing through default identifications with long-held beliefs, old
mental styles can fall away or not be believed so rigorously. Worries may still remain
and get activated or triggered, but there may not be enough charge to maintain the
full reaction repertoires.
The changes in this clearing out stage can be challenging to face and include a lot
of energy movement, as past trauma and unintegrated psychological material can
surface for years. It is seen that such fears are essentially empty, a mental projection
or illusion, and that what is happening mentally about an event is the cause of distress
rather than a past event that no longer is occurring. In watching and allowing the
thoughts, feelings, and sensations until they pass, proof of change is signified by
either no reaction, or a relaxed accepting of any residual mental movement.
As practitioners progress in this stage, there can also be a drawing to inner still-
ness, to conducive peaceful life conditions and a growing disinterest in needing
events to fuel well-being. This integration stage invites jobs, relationships and other
responsibilities to be re-negotiated, as any previous arrangements set up for security
or happiness become less required. One of the consequences of these changes can
be an increased interest in the well-being of others [155, 197], though this might be
preceded by an initial inward focus.
Experience and interest progressively shifts from event-based well-being to inner
well-being. This stabilisation stage is typically long, and most advanced practitioners
15

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
who progress this far, end up staying here for the duration. Whilst they might be
able to intermittently access this free, no-self place, most are not able to stay there or
access it on demand. However with consistent good method, this may progress and
issue in the next stage of a more predictable experience [13, 198].
6. Stage 4: Awakened (Trait)
6.1 Literature
The inquiry into nondual experiences usually, but not always, distinguishes
between temporary and persisting states [199, 200]. Terms such as ‘awakenings’,
“satoris” or mystical experiences refer to brief or singular events where the sense of
self dissolves, resulting in an experience of oneness with everything.
By contrast the terms “awake” or “awakened” (distinct from “woke”), generally
describe long-term or enduring nondual states [201]. This is when the experience has
settled, and it is the default state, although unprocessed elements of the psyche may
still arise and require clearing. Maslow [5] approached this distinction in his concept
of self-actualisation, by using “peak experience” for temporary states and “plateau
experience” for sustained ones.
Nondual or awakening experiences, in some literature, are regarded as the culmi-
nation or apex of psychological development [12, 29] and are seen to typically only
happen after dedicated practice. While this sequence is generally the case, there is
substantial evidence that they are also accessible along the way rather than only at the
later stages [30, 31].
These experiences engender feelings of ego-transcendence, a sense of connection
with an ultimate reality, and a transcending of dichotomies. Nondual experiences
often begin as temporary insights or experiences [32], with advanced practitioners
aiming to develop the capability to transform these temporary states into a continuous
experience [202].
In Tibetan Buddhist psychology (which varies across the four Nyingma, Kagyu,
Sakya and Gelug schools of thought), three training outcomes can be outlined as
markers of this progression: “Mindfulness”, “Calm abiding”, and “Insight” [1]. These
are: (1) Mindfulness—when practitioners attain an awareness of consciousness, or
meta-awareness, that allows them to observe mental phenomena without clinging or
aversion, yet they still perceive from a subject-object duality; (2) Calm Abiding—the
mind is now able to remain in a state of one-pointed concentration for a prolonged
period of time, and they can perceive phenomena in an interconnected way as occur-
ring spontaneously; (3) Insight—involves directly experiencing nondual awareness,
with the capacity to engage each moment with sustained non-referential awareness
(no sense of self) [6, 198, 203].
In this last stage, such an accomplished practitioner is seen as walking the path
of a “bodhisattva” (byang chub sems dpa), or “hero of the enlightened mind” [204].
With the aspiration to go beyond the conventional goals of well-being, they have
trained the mind to attain a nondual cognitive state “for the benefit of all sentient
beings” (ultimate bodihicitta) [205]. Here the practitioner recognises, whilst
continuing to serve others, that there are no independent entities such as “I”
(subject), “mind,” or “things” (object). Instead, mental (subjective) and physi-
cal (objective) phenomena are viewed as interdependent and empty of inherent
existence.
16

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
Recent research data on these stages of progression suggest that advanced medi-
tators that transition from focused attention (FA) to open monitoring (OM) and
achieve these effortless “no thought” states, exhibit a decrease in overall brain activ-
ity, indicating cessation of intentional control [206]. This forms an inverted U-shaped
curve [207], with beginner meditators showing more activation in attentional areas
than untrained controls, but advanced meditators showing less activation, indicating
they needed to make no effort to remain undistracted [208].
Other research on the nondual experience finds it is correlated with decreased
activity in areas responsible for body sense (medial parietal areas). For example,
adepts who report a sense of expanded space, no sense of self, and timelessness
showed reduced neurological activity in perceptual processing areas [209]. Such physi-
ological correlates of consciousness [210] support traditional mindfulness theory that
the sense of self is not a physical or locatable entity, and any perceived sense of self can
be interrupted or potentially deconstructed voluntarily [211] and remain dismantled.
These experiences are outlined in the Buddhist typology of concentration states
(jhana). For example the fourth Jhana state (infinity of space), is described as the
experience of formless absorption. Here the self is not limited to its normal sense of
spatio-temporal continuity but rather is perceived as connected to the expanse of
empty space [7].
One characteristic of this experience is the report of so called “uncaused happiness”
or bliss, states not associated with external stimuli. Vaitl et al. [212] found that when
such meditators reported blissful states, they were associated with greatly elevated
positive affect and increased theta synchronisation [213]. Hagerty et al.’s [208] research
also supports this by mapping the brain wave patterns of an adept meditator who could
generate on demand progressively more blissful states for sustained periods.
6.2 Indicators
At this point of Stage 4, remaining layers that may have held together a conven-
tional sense of self have worn away “the apple falls from the tree”, and the default
is a “no-self” state [33]. Meditation transitions to being able to turn awareness onto
itself and absorb into the experience of oneness or union, rather than being directed
towards a chosen meditation object. It is characterised by a restful sense of space,
varying levels of peace or bliss, and the comprehension that nothing outside of itself
can add to the experience.
Also described as the natural resting state [214], there is decreasing mental move-
ment, and attachments (too much desire/too much aversion) that have not been inte-
grated can be triggered or spontaneously arise. However the relationship to them is very
different as, if seen, they are able to be experienced as non-substantial mental move-
ments, rather than solid entities with an inherently meaningful existence or validity.
However, as these can still influence thoughts and behaviours, previous practices
are still required. With sustained awareness, the beliefs, emotions and behaviours
connected to them can gradually disappear. Interestingly the Buddhist notion of
attachment (too much desire or too much aversion) is reflected in the previously
referenced DSM-5, under the diagnostic categories of Disinhibited Social Engagement
Disorder (anxious and clinging) and Reactive Attachment Disorder (mistrustful and
avoidant). Whilst criteria must be met to achieve diagnosis, it highlights the bidirec-
tional tendencies that all individuals must integrate to achieve balance.
With time and practice individuals experience an increased mental clarity with
their energy often being described as lighter or stronger [215]. There is mostly a
17

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
growing inclination towards some form of altruism [205, 216], as the default of
self-preoccupation has dissolved. Some of the risks, however, include a mistaken but
unseen identification with some senses of a superior “self” due to an increasingly
untouchable mental state, a habit of leadership without supervision, and a lack of
acknowledgement when residual attachments intermittently arise.
After what is usually a rigorous self-watching stage, there is often a returning of
attention back to the world to contribute, whilst operating from a more expanded or
self-less experience. One of the many challenges can be to functionally integrate back
into normal society and relate to others still operating within a conventional event-
based well-being model of optimising their life conditions [19]. As time passes the
integration becomes easier or more mature.
As explained in Zen: “First mountain, then no mountain, then mountain again”
[217]. During this stage, which typically lasts until death, some choose to live a
more silent anonymous mystical life of ongoing purification,, as articulated by
Wittgenstein “Of what one cannot speak about, one must be silent” [191], while oth-
ers choose to teach and translate their experience within a tradition or from their own
formulations. Others may remain living their lives as before, however all versions are
transformed, lit up by an invisible inner well-being.
During this penultimate stage there is also a perceptible increase in functioning
[15]. Whilst varied it can include both increased mental and physical reaction times,
increases in intuition, insight, and a general elevation in skills across a range of areas.
Whilst the full scope of these enhanced capabilities will be covered in Stage Five, the
gradual development of special abilities, is seen as the natural unfolding of human
potential [218].
7. Stage 5: Enlightenment
7.1 Literature
In some literature and schools of thought, the terms “awakening” and “enlighten-
ment” are used interchangeably for the stabilised nondual experience [219]. However,
like the terms “quality of life” and “subjective well-being”, they are actually different
constructs [220]. The term awakening refers to the nondual experience where there
is either a transient or permanent dissolution of a tangible sense of self, leaving in
its place a relaxed or peaceful emptiness or no sense of self. However in this stage,
unprocessed psychological phenomena can still move, seen and unseen in the psyche,
leading to errors in judgement and variations in the depth of the experience.
Enlightenment, on the other hand, traditionally refers to the stage beyond this. In
this extremely rare stage, what remains is an unchanging state where all psychological
purification has now ceased, and there is no mistaken view or unseen self-referential
biases [221, 222]. The individual is seen to be perfected and has complete control
over all phenomena. This rarest of states is when there is nothing left to purify as all
self-serving tendencies have naturally dissolved or been seen through. The essential
nature is expressed without any hindrance and is associated with full control over
whatever is in in attention. In many traditions this is typically associated with what is
seen as miraculous, or beyond our understanding of known laws. This is the final or
perfected example of human potential.
An early example of this is Siddhartha Gautama or the Buddha [223], who is
seen to have achieved the state of perfect enlightenment as an outcome of long term
18

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
ascetical practices and meditation. He is described as also having access to supernor-
mal abilities, which in the sutras he is reported as discouraging students to display
or seek for their own sake [224]. To assist others achieve his experience themselves,
he taught the previously outlined Four Noble Truths and Eight-fold path (including
mindfulness), leading ultimately to the deconstruction of the false sense of a solid
self [225].
In line with the range of theoretical frameworks presented in the Introduction, the
three main branches of Buddhism (Theravada, Mahayana and Vajrayana), all assert
the possibility of perfection for a practitioner, known respectively as arahant, bod-
hisattva and mahasiddha [226]. In these advanced or final stages of practice practitio-
ners are seen to develop special abilities in comparison to normal functioning [227].
These aptitudes are seen as a natural outcome of seeing through the illusion that the
subjective self and objective phenomena are separate and inherently existent entities.
7.2 Indicators
In the Tibetan Buddhist school of Dzogchen [228], which includes a “pointing-out
instruction” (“ngo sprod”), or direct introduction to the nature of mind, the first step
of training (“Treckcho”) targets stabilising such non-dual awareness or awakening.
If this is achieved only then can it be followed by the advanced practices of “Togal”
or training in special abilities in service of others [20]. This order is set to prevent a
practitioner from developing special abilities derived from concentration that are not
pure, ego-less and in service of humanity—aka the antihero [13, 229].
In early Theravadin texts, six abilities known as the “abhinnas” (siddhis) or higher
knowledge, are reported to spontaneously unfold for practitioners who have attained
progressive levels of concentration or “jhana” states. In most accounts, the practitio-
ner must have progressed past the first four “material” jhanas before supernormal
mental abilities start to manifest [230], however there is some divergence as to when
they are seen to manifest. The levels of jhana illustrate a step-by-step progression in
mental control, and in various sutras, the Buddha encourages disciples to develop the
jhana states, which are integral to the practice of right concentration in the eightfold
path [231]. As the average mindfulness practitioner rarely achieves the first level
depicted by these states [232], empirical studies seldom evaluate practitioners who
have progressed through the jhana states, however they are foundational for the
development of the full range of human capabilities in Buddhist theory [233]. In
summary they are:
(1) First jhana (joy)—uninterrupted concentration with pleasant sensation or
background bliss; (2) Second jhana (contentment)—the dissolution of bliss and
progression to motionless, quiet contentment; (3) Third jhana (utter peacefulness)—
equanimity without positive or negative feelings, continuous one-pointedness; (4)
Fourth jhana (infinity of space)—absorption without forms, attention moves beyond
the body with the self being experienced as expansive empty space [145]; (5) Fifth
jhana (infinity of consciousness)—awareness perceives a sense of infinite space
(oneness with all existence) that includes one’s own consciousness; (6) Sixth jhana
(no-thingness)—infinite consciousness itself is seen as empty of abiding existence,
but in a constant state of change (increasing, maintaining or decreasing); (7) Seventh
jhana (neither perception nor non-perception)—going beyond the duality of percep-
tion and yet awareness remains; (8) Eighth jhana (cessation)—the cessation of overt
consciousness, leaving a perception of oneness with everything (can appear uncon-
scious) [7, 230].
19

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
In Hinduism the list of these abilities can number as many as twenty-four [234].
Some of the extraordinary faculties outlined in this tradition include: (1) Performing
Miracles (psychokinesis)—attaining extraordinary physical powers such as disap-
pearing, walking on water, passing through solid objects, or flying; (2) Celestial
Hearing (clairaudience)—being able to hear sounds from far away or other realms;
(3) Knowledge of Thoughts (telepathy)—communicating without words and
understanding unspoken languages, including those of animals; (4) Knowledge of
the Past and Future (knowledge beyond time)—knowing past and future events of
both themselves and others, including other life cycles; (5) Celestial Vision (clairvoy-
ance)—having vision that is free and unobstructed, with the ability to see things in
minuscule detail, from far away, through solid objects, in the dark, or understanding
the nature of someone’s mind; (6) Eradication of All Defilements (end of suffering)—
realisation of enlightenment or nirvana (seen as the attainment of greatest value),
where the practitioner transcends the cycle of birth and death [218, 222, 235].
As mentioned earlier, Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras outline a graded progression of gross
to subtle practices through the eight limbs of yoga, leading the aspirant to union or
absorption (samadhi) [58, 236, 237]. From this state, abilities beyond normal func-
tioning (siddhis) are believed to develop [224, 238, 239]. If a practitioner perfects
these practices, eight abilities (siddhis) are thought to develop, including the capacity
to: (1) decrease the body to any size; (2) expand one’s body indefinitely; (3) become
as heavy as needed; (4) become weightless; (5) be anywhere at will; (6) manifest
immediately whatever is thought; (7) exert control over nature and natural forces,
and (8) experience undiluted happiness.
In another Hindu text, the Bhagavata Purana, Krishna lists 10 signs that indicate
a person has achieved perfect mastery [240], including the capacity to: (1) be unaf-
fected by hunger, thirst, and physical desires; (2) have the ability to hear distant
sounds; (3) see things far away; (4) move one’s body in line with one’s thoughts
(teleportation or astral projection); (5) assume any form at will; (6) entering form
(alive or inert); (7) choose the moment of death; (8) interact with beings in different
realms; (9) perfectly manifest intentions; and (10) execute commands or instructions
unhindered.
Although these abilities may seem remarkable or desirable, they are always seen as
secondary to achieving self-realisation or perfection (kaivalya) [58]. In all traditions,
it is believed that the complete set of abilities cannot be fully realised until the prac-
titioner has reached a state of perfection. Only when they are unwavering, pure, and
untouchable can their full human potential be unlocked without limitations, however
both such a state and its effects are understood to progressively unfold. There is some
evidence that some of the lesser faculties can occasionally occur naturally in some
individuals with little to moderate training (the scope of western parapsychological
research) [241]. However, the full set of attributes is seen to be reached only after the
highest states of concentration are under the complete control of the practitioner [10].
Given the magnitude of the proposed states and abilities found in the final stage
of enlightenment, it is reasonable to seek verification of the literature that proposes
they are simply the full spectrum of human potential. In response to this there is now
a growing body of literature documenting empirical findings about advanced medita-
tors [208, 242, 243]. However, as mentioned earlier, a demographic constraint indi-
cated in some research, is that the attainment of such levels is both taboo to self-reveal
(considered an obstruction on the path to enlightenment) and exceedingly rare, with
traditions citing that only one in a thousand of a thousand of a thousand practitioners
could reach such levels of attainment [235].
20

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
8. Conclusion
The journey of progression on the path to actualising our potential is a complex
one, but it seems both possible and able to be marked with signs along the way [178].
For example, in the beginning, as a result of an insight, event, or meditative practice,
an individual can begin to question the path of the conventional sense of self (Stage
1), where well-being pivots on being elevated if one experiences pleasure if things go
well, or decreases if one experiences pain or some form of distress if things go badly.
They may then start the journey of Stage 2 (Mindfulness) where they learn to
observe thoughts and feelings. With this new level of nonjudgmental objectivity, they
may develop a silent witnessing mind that can see thoughts as passing mental events
rather than objective realities. With sustained practice, Stage 3 awakening events may
occur, where a gap in the normal stream of thoughts occurs, leading to an interruption
to the normal sense of a continuous self.
These nondual events may increase in frequency, duration and intensity, and lead
to a more ongoing sense of interior space, and a deeper perception of the emptiness of
subtle (mental) and gross (objects) phenomena. Over time with the right practices,
these intermittent states may stabilise, and the process come to an end, leaving a
default of the ongoingly awakened state of Stage 4, an altruistic, peaceful resting
state with no discernible sense of self and increased functionality [244]. Finally after
seemingly an infinite amount of practice, Stage 5 of enlightenment is seen as possible.
Seen as an extraordinary uninterrupted blissful state of happiness, along with its set
of unlimited capacities, it has been persistently argued in all religious traditions, that
such attainments are achievable [221, 227].
With the burgeoning increase now in evidence-based mindfulness research
(including neuroscience), we are at a juncture unlike any time in history, to evaluate
the psychology of enlightenment and its associated stages. We have an opportunity
to plumb the findings of millennia old traditions and put them to the test. However
we need to continue to both translate methods and outcomes into comprehensible
psychological language and find common ground with our western concepts of
happiness and human potential [236]. The contemplative traditions of both East and
West, appear to contain comprehensive systems and antidotes to our mental health
inquiry, and as such provide an opportunity for us to explore if we can raise the bar
from coping to contentment.
Author details
Patrick Jones
Independent Researcher, Australia
*Address all correspondence to: drpatrickjonesaustralia@gmail.com
© 2025 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0),
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original work is properly cited.
21

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
References
[1] Kudesia RS, Nyima T. Mindfulness Theologica. 2021;22(4):37-69. DOI:
contextualized: An integration of 10.5507/sth.2020.027
Buddhist and neuropsychological
approaches to cognition. Mindfulness. [10] Thrangu K. Transcending Ego:
2014;6:910-925. DOI: 10.1007/ Distinguishing Consciousness from
s12671-014-0337-8 Wisdom. A treatise of the Third
Karmapa. Boulder, USA: Namo Buddha
[2] Brown KW, Kasser T, Ryan RM, Alex Publishers; 2001
Linley P, Orzech K. When what one has
is enough: Mindfulness, financial desire [11] Davidson RJ, Dahl C. Outstanding
discrepancy, and subjective well-being. challenges in scientific research
Journal of Research in Personality. on mindfulness and meditation.
2009;43(5):727-736. DOI: 10.1016/j. Perspectives on Psychological
jrp.2009.07.002 Science. 2018;13:62-65. DOI:
10.1177%2F1745691617718358
[3] Vitterso J. Subjective well-being
versus self-actualization: Using the [12] Alexander C, Langer E. Higher Stages
flow-simplex to promote a conceptual, of Human Development: Perspectives
clarification of subjective quality on Adult Growth. New York: Oxford
of life. Social Indicators Research. University Press; 1990
2004;65(3):299-331
[13] Wilber K. Integral Spirituality: A
[4] Vittersø J, Søholt Y. Life satisfaction Startling New Role for Religion in the
goes with pleasure and personal growth Modern and Postmodern World. Boston:
goes with interest: Further arguments Shambhala; 2006
for separating hedonic and eudaimonic
well-being. The Journal of Positive [14] Lutz A, Greischar LL, Rawlings NB,
Psychology. 2011;6(4):326-335. DOI: Ricard M, Davidson RJ. Long-term
10.1080/17439760.2011.584548 meditators self-induce high-amplitude
gamma synchrony during mental
[5] Maslow A. The Farther Reaches practice. Proceedings of the
of Human Nature. Harmondsworth, National Academy of Sciences.
England: Penguin; 1973 2004;101(46):16369-16373
[6] Tolle E. The Power of Now: A Guide [15] Josipovic Z. Neural correlates of
to Spiritual Enlightenment. Vancouver: nondual awareness in meditation. Annals
Namaste Publishing; 1997 of the New York Academy of Sciences.
2014;1307:9-18. DOI: 10.1111/nyas.12261
[7] Narada M. A Manual of Abhidhamma.
Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society; 1980 [16] Yaden DB, Haidt J,
Hood RW, Vago DR. The varieties of
[8] Suddhananda S. Path to Pathless: Self- self-transcendent experience. Review of
Knowledge Series. India: Notion Press; General Psychology. 2017;21(2):143-160.
2023 DOI: 10.1037/gpr0000102
[9] Filip ŠM. Isidoro Isolani OP and his [17] Cardena EE, Lynn SJE, Krippner SE.
summa de donis sancti Ioseph. Studia Varieties of Anomalous Experience:
22

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
Examining the Scientific Evidence. [27] Cook-Greuter SR. Rare forms of
Washington, DC: American self-understanding in mature adults. In:
Psychological Association; 2000. DOI: Miller ME, Cook-Greuter SR, editors.
10.1037/10371-000 Transcendence and Mature Thought in
Adulthood: The Further Reaches of Adult
[18] Perez-Ramon J. Self & Non-Self in Development. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Early Buddhism. The Hague: de Gruyter; Littlefield; 1994. pp. 119-146
1980
[28] Hood RW Jr. The construction and
[19] De Castro JM. A Model of preliminary validation of a measure of
Enlightened/Mystical/Awakened reported mystical experience. Journal
Experience. Psychology of Religion for the Scientific Study of Religion.
and Spirituality. 2015. Advance Online 1975;14:29-41. DOI: 10.1037/gpr0000102
Publication. DOI: 10.1037/rel0000037
[29] Sumerlin JR, Bundrick CM. Brief
[20] Sogyal R. The Tibetan Book of index of self-actualization: A measure
Living and Dying. San Francisco: Harper of Maslow’s model. Journal of Social
Collins; 1992 Behavior and Personality. 1996;11:253-271
[21] Dahl CJ, Lutz A, Davidson RJ. [30] Combs A. The Radiance of Being:
Reconstructing and deconstructing the Understanding the Grand Integral Vision:
self: Cognitive mechanisms in meditation Living the Integral Life. St. Paul, MN:
practice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. Paragon House; 2002
2015;19(9):515-523. DOI: 10.1016/j.
tics.2015.07.001 [31] Wilber K. Up from Eden: A
Transpersonal View of Human Evolution.
[22] Lindahl JR, Britton WB. I have Garden City, NY: Anchor Press; 1981
this feeling of not really being here.
Journal of Consciousness Studies. [32] Martin JA. Ego Development Stage
2019;26(7-8):157-183 Does Not Predict Persistent Non-
Symbolic Experience, A Dissertation
[23] García-Campayo J, Submitted to the Faculty of the
Puebla-Guedea M, Labarga A, California Institute of Integral Studies in
Urdánoz A, Roldán M, Pulido L, et al. Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
Epigenetic response to mindfulness in for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
peripheral blood leukocytes involves Transformative Studies. San Francisco,
genes linked to common human diseases. CA: California Institute of Integral
Mindfulness. 2018;9:1146. DOI: 10.1007/ Studies; 2010
s12671-017-0851-6
[33] Martin JA. Clusters of Individuals
[24] Campbell J. The Hero with a Experiences form a Continuum of
Thousand Faces. New York: New World Persistent Non-Symbolic Experiences
Library; 1949 in Adults, CONSCIOUSNESS: Ideas and
Research for the Twenty-First Century:
[25] Maslow A. Religions, Values and 8(8), Art 1. 2020. Available from: https://
Peak-Experiences. New York: Viking; 1970 digitalcommons.ciis.edu/conscjournal/
vol8/iss8/1
[26] Loevinger J. Ego Development:
Conceptions and Theories. San [34] Binda DD, Greco CM, Morone NE.
Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 1976 What are adverse events in mindfulness
23

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
meditation? Global Advances in [42] Greyson B. Differentiating spiritual
Integrative Medicine and Health. and psychotic experiences: Sometimes a
2022;11:2164957X221096640. DOI: cigar is just a cigar. Journal of Near-Death
10.1177/2164957X221096640 Studies. 2014;32(3). DOI: 10.17514/
jnds-2014-32-3-p123-136
[35] Cebolla A, Demarzo M, Martins P,
Soler J, Garcia-Campayo J. Unwanted [43] Donkin W. The Wayfarers An
effects: Is there a negative side of Account of the Work of Meher Baba
meditation? A multicentre survey. PLoS with the God-intoxicated, and also with
One. 2017;12(9):e0183137. DOI: 10.1371/ Advanced Souls, Sadhus, and the Poor.
journal.pone.0183137 Ahmednagar, India: Avatar Meher Baba
Perpetual Public Charitable Trust; 1988.
[36] Randal P, Argyle N. ‘Spiritual p. 4
Emergency’ – A useful explanatory
model? A Literature Review and [44] Chukwurah K. Assessing the
Discussion Paper. 2005. Available relationship between spiritual
from: http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pdf/ intelligence and psychological distress
DrPRandalDrArgyleEmergency.pdf among seminarians of the Catholic
Diocese of Aba, Nigeria. International
[37] Prusak J. Differential diagnosis Journal of Research and Scientific
of “Religious or Spiritual Problem” – Innovations. 2023;X(V):109-117. DOI:
Possibilities and limitations implied by 10.51244/ijrsi.2023.10511
the V-code 62.89 in DSM-5. Psychiatria
Polska. 2016;50(1):175-186. DOI: [45] Bowen R. Including social
10.12740/pp/59115 determinants of health in value-based
care payment. American Speech
[38] American Psychiatric Association, Language Hearing Association. May/June
editor. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 2023. DOI: 10.1044/leader.bml
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text
Revision (DSM-5-TR). Washington, DC, [46] Garbe M. Spiritual emergence and
USA: American Psychiatric Publishing; spiritual emergency. Spirituality in
2022. ISBN 978-0-89042-575-6 Mental Health Practice. 2020:47-62. DOI:
10.4324/9781003008781-5
[39] Brucato G. Attenuated psychosis,
psychosis-proneness, and risk factors [47] Spiritual GS, Emergency. When
for psychotic illness. Assessing Personal Transformation Becomes a Crisis.
Psychosis. 2024:166-189. DOI: Los Angeles: Jeremy P. Tarcher; 1989
10.4324/9781003415206-16
[48] Letheby C. Spirituality. Philosophy
[40] Gooding DC. Cognitive slippage, of Psychedelics. 2021:196-204. DOI:
psychosis-proneness, and Schizotypy: 10.1093/med/9780198843122.003.0009
A comment on Loas, et al. (2013).
Psychological Reports. 2014;115(2):537- [49] Csíkszentmihályi M. The Systems
540. DOI: 10.2466/02.19.PR0.115c21z3 Model of Creativity: The Collected Works
of Mihály Csíkszentmihályi. Dordrecht:
[41] Mahaffey PJ. Integrating spiritual Springer; 2014
awakening and psychological
development. Integrative [50] Travis F, Brown S. My brain made
Spirituality. 2018:177-202. DOI: me do it: Brain maturation and levels of
10.4324/9781138610408-9 self-development. In: Pfaffenberger AH,
24

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
Marko PW, Combs A, editors. The Post [60] Carter JR, Palihawadana M; tr.
Conventional Personality: Perspectives Buddhism: The Dhammapada. New York:
on Higher Development. New York: History Book Club; 1992
SUNY Press; 2011
[61] Nanda A. The four stages as a
[51] DeConick A. Mysticism Before collective set in the Pāli Nikāyas. In:
Mysticism. In: Teaching Mysticism. The Theory of the Four Stages of
2011. pp. 26-45. DOI: 10.1093/acprof: Liberation in Pāli Literature. Cham:
oso/9780199751198.003.0003 Palgrave Macmillan; 2024. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-031-55873-3_5
[52] Kingsland W. An Anthology of
Mysticism and Mystical Philosophy. [62] Vetter T. The Noble eightfold
London: Routledge; 2024. pp. 1-4. DOI: path. In: The Ideas and Meditative
10.4324/9781003581352-1 Practices of Early Buddhism. Leiden,
Netherlands: Brill; 1988. pp. 11-13. DOI:
[53] Vivekananda S. Patanjali Yoga Sutras. 10.1163/9789004644380_00
Delhi: Vijay Goel; 2014
[63] Anālayo B. Understanding and
practicing the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta. In:
[54] Gokhale PP. The Yogasūtra of
Shonin E, Van Gordon W, Singh NN,
Patañjali: A New Introduction to the
editors. Buddhist Foundations of
Buddhist Roots of the Yoga System. India:
Mindfulness. Cham: Springer; 2015. pp.
Routledge; 2020
71-88. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18591-0_5
[55] Paudel D. Integrating the eight limbs
[64] Dhammapala A. A Treatise on the
of yoga into psychotherapeutic practice:
Paramis: From the Commentary to the
A typology conceptual framework. 2023.
Cariyapitaka (PDF). Bodhi, Bhikkhu.
DOI: 10.31219/osf.io/9feu7
Kandy, Sri Lanka: Buddhist Publication
Society; 1996
[56] Crangle E. “A comparison of Hindu
and Buddhist techniques of attaining
[65] Williams P. Buddhism: The Origins
Samādhi” (PDF). In: Hutch RA,
and Nature of Mahāyāna Buddhism;
Fenner PG, editors. Under the Shade of
some Mahāyāna Religious Topics. Vol. 3.
the Coolibah Tree: Australian Studies
Oxford, England: Williams Routledge;
in Consciousness. Maryland, U.S.A.:
2004. pp. 32-33
University Press of America; 1984
[66] Snyder DN. The Complete Book
[57] Das BH. The Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali: of Buddha’s Lists Explained. Las Vegas,
A Study Guide for Book I Samādhi Pāda.
Nevada: Vipassana Foundation; 2006
Santa Cruz, California: Sri Ramana
Publishing; 1999 [67] Dorje JY. The Nyingma School of
Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals
[58] Sarbacker SR. Power and Meaning and History. Boston, USA: Wisdom
in the Yogasūtra of Patañjali. In: Yoga Publications; 1991
Powers. 2012. pp. 195-222. DOI: 10.1163/
ej.9789004212145.i-520.57 [68] Dayal H. The Bodhisattva Doctrine
in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. Delhi:
[59] Nyanasatta T. Satipatthana Sutta: Motilal Banarsidass; 1999
The Foundations of Mindfulness
(MN 10), Access to Insight (BCBS [69] Panda NC. Concept of Bhūmi
Edition). 2013 in Buddhist literature (with special
25

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
reference to the Daśabhūmika Sūtra). meditative practice and its transmission
Journal of the Oriental Institute. from the Egyptian Pietists to the Hasidic
1996;46(1-2):31-45 masters. Religions. 2024;15(10):1232.
DOI: 10.3390/rel15101232
[70] Chodron KM. Maha Prajnaparamita
Sastra (trans. Étienne Lamotte). [79] Alexander H. Spiritual awakening.
2001. Available from: https://www. In: Reclaiming Goodness. Indiana:
wisdomlib.org/buddhism/book/ University of Notre Dame Press; 2001.
maha-prajnaparamita-sastra pp. 1-24. DOI: 10.2307/j.ctvpj7dkp.5
[71] Ramanan KV. Nāgārjuna’s [80] Fenton P. Solitary meditation in
Philosophy as Presented in the Mahā- Jewish and Islamic mysticism in the
Praj̄n̄āpāramitā-Śāstra. India: Motilal light of a recent archeological discovery.
Banarsidass Publications; 1987 Medieval Encounters. 1995;1:271-296
[72] Cooper PC. Riding the Elusive Ox [81] Persico T. Hitbodedut for a new
of Zen: Problems of Definition. The age: Adaptation of practices among the
Zen Impulse and the Psychoanalytic followers of rabbi Nachman of Bratslav.
Encounter. Routledge; 2009 Israel Study Review. 2014;29(2):99-117
[73] Piyasilo PT. The Buddha’s Teachings: [82] Idel M. Studies in Ecstatic Kabbalah.
A Study of Comparative Buddhism in Albany: State University of New York
Truth, Tradition and Transformation. Press; 1988
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia: Dharmafarer
Enterprises; 1991 [83] Waxman PD, Bob. Correspondences
in Jewish Mysticism/Kabbalah and Hindu
[74] Shi-en K. The Ten Ox Herding Mysticism/Vedanta-Advaita. Thesis for
Pictures. Taiwan: Trans. Chung Master’s Degree Skidmore College; 2009.
Tai Translation Committee; 2007. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.27837.10729
Available from: www.buddhajewel.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020/02/the-ten- [84] Burke D, Bartunek J. The three ways
oxherding-pictures-v7-201005272.pdf of the spiritual life. In: Navigating the
Interior Life: Spiritual Direction and the
[75] Donohue JM. Herding the Ox, Journey to God. Steubenville: Emmaus
Wielding the Sword: Paradigms for Road; 2012
Enlightenment in Zen and the Martial
Arts1990. DOI: 10.1037/e719432011-026 [85] Garrigou-Lagrange R. The Three Ages
of the Interior Life: Prelude to Eternal Life.
[76] Rahula W. Zen and the Taming of the Vol. 1, translated by Doyle, M. Timothea,
Bull: Towards the Definition of Buddhist St. Louis: B. Herder Book Co.; 1947
Thought. London: Gordon Fraser Book
Publishers; 1978 [86] Burke D, Bartunek J. Navigating the
Interior Life: Spiritual Direction and the
[77] Dosick W. Living Judaism: The Journey to God. Steubenville: Emmaus
Complete Guide to Jewish Belief, Road; 2012
Tradition and Practice. New York:
HarperCollins; 2007 [87] Nathe T. Stages of the Spiritual
Life. 2023. Available from:. https://
[78] Weil M. “Jewish meditation holyredeemervan.org/pastor-columns/
reconsidered”: Hitbodedut as a stages-of-the-spiritual-life
26

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
[88] Burke D. Navigating the Interior Life. [99] Krebs D, Denton K. Toward a
Steubenville: Emmaus Road Publishing; more pragmatic approach to morality:
2012 A critical evaluation of Kohlberg’s
model. Psychological Review.
[89] Ramaji. 1000 Levels of 2005;112(3):629-649
Consciousness, Kindle, Amazon.com.
2014 [100] D’Souza J, Gurin M. The universal
significance of Maslow’s concept of
[90] Aslan A. Religious Pluralism in self-actualization. Human Psychology.
Christian and Islamic Philosophy: 2016;44:210-214. DOI: 10.1037/
The Thought of John Hick and Seyyed hum0000027
Hossein Nasr. London: Routledge; 2004
[101] Sutich AJ. Transpersonal
[91] Attar. Conference of the Birds, psychology: An emerging force.
Translated by Sholeh Wolpé. New York, Journal of Humanistic
United States: W. W. Norton & Co; 2017 Psychology. 1968;8(1):77-78. DOI:
10.1177/002216786800800108
[92] Nguyen M. Sufi theological thought.
In: Schmidtke S, editor. The Oxford [102] Grof S. Varieties of transpersonal
Handbook of Islamic Theology111. experiences: Observations from LSD
Oxford University Press: Oxford psychotherapy. Journal of Transpersonal
Handbooks in Religion and Theology Psychology. 1972;4:45
Series; 2016
[103] Daniels M. On transcendence in
[93] Schimmel A. Mystical Dimensions transpersonal psychology. Transpersonal
of Islam. North Carolina, USA: The Psychology Review. 2001;5:3-11
University of North Carolina Press; 1975
[104] Timothy DJ, Conover PJ. Nature
[94] Shah-Kazemi R. The notion and religion, self-spirituality and New Age
significance of Ma’rifa in Sufism. Journal tourism. In: Tourism, Religion and
of Islamic Studies. 2002;13(2):155-181 Spiritual Journeys. Oxford, England:
Routledge; 2006. pp. 155-171. DOI:
[95] Sevim E. Path to the universal self 10.4324/9780203001073-21
in Haji Baktash Walî: Four doors - Forty
stations. Spiritual Psychology and [105] Sutcliffe S. The nameless ones:
Counseling. 2016;1(2):145-161 Small groups in the nuclear age. In:
Children of the New Age. London:
[96] Hoehn RA, Fowler JW. Stages Routledge; 2002. pp. 65-86. DOI:
of faith: The psychology of human 10.4324/9780203471227-6
development and the quest for
meaning. Review of Religious Research. [106] Versluis A. American (Literary)
1983;25(1):77. DOI: 10.2307/3511314 Spiritual Teachers. In: American Gurus.
2014. pp. 81-91. DOI: 10.1093/acprof:
[97] Armstrong T. The Human Odyssey: oso/9780199368136.003.0007
Navigating the Twelve Stages of Life.
Dover, England: Ixia Press; 2019 [107] Galanter M, Dermatis H,
Sampson C. Spiritual awakening scale.
[98] Kohlberg L, Hersh RH. Moral In: APA’s PsycTESTS Dataset [Online].
development: A review of the theory. American Psychological Association
Theory into Practice. 1977;16(2):53-59 (APA); 2014. DOI: 10.1037/t62117-000
27

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
[108] Ivtzan I. Awareness Is Freedom: Life. New York: Russell Sage Foundation;
The Adventure of Psychology and 1976
Spirituality. Winchester: Changemakers
Books; 2015 [116] Diener E. Subjective well-being.
Psychological Bulletin. 1984;95(3):542-
[109] Boyd Wilson B, Walkey F. The 575. DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.95.3.542
enlightenment scale: Further evidence
for validity. Journal for the Study of [117] Veenhoven R. Is happiness relative?
Spirituality. 2015;5(2):128-142. DOI: Social Indicators Research. 1991;24:1-34
10.1179/2044024315Z.00000000046A
[118] Argyle M. The Psychology of
[110] Hawkins DR. Transcending the Happiness. London: Methuen; 1987
Levels of Consciousness: The Stairway
to Enlightenment. Sedona: Veritas [119] Kammann R. Objective
Publishing; 2006 circumstances, life satisfactions, and
sense of well-being: Consistencies across
[111] Underwood LG. Ordinary Spiritual time and place. New Zealand Journal of
experience: Qualitative research, Psychology. 1983;12:14-22
interpretive guidelines, and population
distribution for the daily Spiritual [120] Diener E, Suh EM, Lucas RE,
experience scale. Archive for the Smith HL. Subjective well-being: Three
Psychology of Religion. 2006;28(1):181- decades of progress. Psychological
218. DOI: 10.1163/008467206777832562 Bulletin. 1999;125(2):276-302
[112] Wang Q. Spiritual Enlightenment [121] Sirgy JM, Michalos AC, Ferriss AL,
Experiences: Mechanisms of Suffering Easterlin RA, Patrick D, Pavot W.
Transformation. Pokfulam, Hong Kong: The quality-of-life (QOL) research
The University of Hong Kong; 2019. DOI: movement: Past, present, and
10.5353/th_991044158741603414 future. Social Indicators Research.
2006;76:343-466
[113] Sahdra BK, Shaver PR, Brown KW.
A scale to measure nonattachment: [122] Steptoe A, Deaton A, Stone AA.
A Buddhist complement to Western Subjective wellbeing, health, and ageing.
research on attachment and adaptive The Lancet. 2015;385(9968):640-648.
functioning. Journal of Personality DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(13)61489-0
Assessment. 2010;92(2):116-127. DOI:
10.1080/00223890903425960 [123] Diener E, Emmons RA, Larsen RJ,
Griffin S. The satisfaction with life scale.
[114] Hanley AW, Nakamura Y, Journal of Personality Assessment.
Garland EL. The Nondual Awareness 1985;49(1):71-75. DOI: 10.1207/
Dimensional Assessment (NADA): s15327752jpa4901_13
New tools to assess nondual traits
and states of consciousness occurring [124] Ryff CD. Happiness is everything,
within and beyond the context of or is it? Explorations on the meaning
meditation. Psychological Assessment. of psychological wellbeing. Journal
2018;30(12):1625-1639. DOI: 10.1037/ of Personality and Social Psychology.
pas0000615 1989;57(6):1069
[115] Campbell A, Converse PE, [125] Busseri MA, Sadava SW. A
Rodgers WL. The Quality of American review of the tripartite structure of
28

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
subjective wellbeing: Implications for American Psychologist. 2006;61(4):305-
conceptualisation, operationalization, 314. DOI: 10.1037/0003-066X.61.4.305
analysis and synthesis. Personality
and Social Psychology Review. [132] Lucas RE. Adaptation and the
2011;15(3):290-314. DOI: set-point model of subjective well-
10.1177%2F1088868310391271 being: Does happiness change after
major life events? Current Directions in
[126] Carter SD. Reexamining the Psychological Science. 2007;16:75-79.
temporal aspects of affect: Relationships DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00479.x
between repeatedly measured affective
[133] Sheldon KM, Boehm J,
state, subjective well-being, and affective
Lyubomirsky S. Variety is the spice
disposition. Personality and Individual
of happiness: The hedonic adaptation
Differences. 2004;36(2):381-391. DOI:
prevention model. In: David SA,
10.1016/s0191-8869(03)00103-x
Boniwell I, Conley Ayers A, editors. The
Oxford Handbook of Happiness. New
[127] Diener E, Heintzelman SJ,
York, NY, US: Oxford University Press;
Kushlev K, Tay L, Wirtz D, Lutes LD,
2013. pp. 901-914
et al. Findings all psychologists should
know from the new science on subjective [134] Cummins RA. The Theory of
well-being. Canadian Psychology/ Subjective Wellbeing Homeostasis:
Psychologie Canadienne. 2017;58(2):87- A Contribution to Understanding
104. DOI: 10.1037/cap0000063 Life Quality, Social Indicators
Research Series2016. pp. 61-79. DOI:
[128] Layous K, Lyubomirsky S. The 10.1007/978-3-319-20568-7_4
how, why, what, when, and who of
happiness: Mechanisms underlying the [135] Cummins RA. The second
success of positive interventions. In: approximation to an international
Gruber J, Moscowitz J, editors. Positive standard of life satisfaction. Social
Emotion: Integrating the Light Sides and Indicators Research. 1998;43:307-334
Dark Sides. Oxford University Press;
2014. pp. 472-495. DOI: 10.1093/acprof: [136] Allen NB, Badcock PBT. The
oso/9780199926725.003.0025 social risk hypothesis of depressed
mood: Evolutionary, psychosocial,
[129] Lench HC, Levine LJ, and neurobiological perspectives.
Perez KA, Carpenter ZK, Carlson SJ, Psychological Bulletin. 2003;129(6):887-
Tibbett T. Changes in subjective well- 913. DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.129.6.887
being following the U.S. presidential
[137] Davern MT, Cummins RA,
election of 2016. Emotion. 2019;19(1):1-
Stokes MA. Subjective wellbeing as an
9. DOI: 10.1037/emo0000411
affective-cognitive construct. Journal of
Happiness Studies. 2007;8(4):429-449.
[130] Headey B, Wearing AJ. Personality,
DOI: 10.1007/s10902-007-9066-1
life events and subjective well-being:
Toward a dynamic equilibrium model. [138] Loewenstein GF, Weber EU,
Journal of Personality and Social Hsee CK, Welch N. Risk as feelings.
Psychology. 1989;57:731-739. DOI: Psychological Bulletin. 2001;127(2):267-
10.1037/0022-3514.57.4.731 286. DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.127.2.267
[131] Diener E, Lucas RE, Scollon CN. [139] Michalos AC. Satisfaction and
Beyond the hedonic treadmill: Revising happiness. Social Indicators Research.
the adaptation theory of well-being. 1980;8:385-422
29

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
[140] Wang JL, Wang HZ, Gaskin J, second-generation of mindfulness-
Hawk S. The mediating roles of upward based interventions. Australia and
social comparison and self-esteem New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry.
and the moderating role of social 2015;49:591-593
comparison orientation in the association
between social networking site usage [148] Teasdale JD, Segal ZV,
and subjective well-being. Frontiers in Williams JMG, Ridgeway VA,
Psychology. 11 May 2017;8:771. DOI: Soulsby JM, Lau MA. Prevention of
10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00771 relapse/recurrence in major depression
by mindfulness-based cognitive therapy.
[141] Brunstein JC. Personal goals and Journal of Consulting and Clinical
subjective well-being: A longitudinal Psychology. 2000;68:615-625
study. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. 1993;65:1061-1070 [149] Shonin E, Van Gordon W,
Compare A, Zangeneh M, Griffiths MD.
[142] Locke EA, Latham GP. New Buddhist derived loving-kindness and
Developments in Goal Setting and Task
compassion meditation for the treatment
Performance. New York, NY: Routledge;
of psychopathology: A systematic review.
2013
Mindfulness. 2015;6(5):1161-1180. DOI:
10.1007/s12671-014-0368-1
[143] Cummins RA. Normative life
satisfaction: Measurement issues and
[150] Kabat-Zinn J. Some reflections on
a homeostatic model. Social Indicators
the origins of MBSR, skillful means, and
Research. 2003;64:159-190
the trouble with maps. Contemporary
Buddhism. 2011;12:281-306
[144] Lucas RE, Clark AE, Georgellis Y,
Diener E. Reexamining adaptation and
[151] Kirby JN, Tellegen CL, Steindl SR.
the set point model of happiness:
A meta-analysis of compassion-based
Reactions to changes in marital status.
interventions: Current state of
Journal of Personality and Social
knowledge and future directions.
Psychology. 2003;84(3):527-539. DOI:
Behavior Therapy. 2017;48(6):778-792.
10.1037/0022-3514.84.3.527
DOI: 10.1016/j.beth.2017.06.003
[145] Lyall K, Mikocka-Walus A, Evans S,
Cummins RA. Linking homeostatically [152] Shear J, editor. The Experience of
protected mood, mindfulness, and Meditation: Experts Introduce the Major
depression: A conceptual synthesis Traditions. St. Paul, MN: Paragon House;
and model of moodfulness. Review of 2006
General Psychology. 2021;25(3):304-320.
DOI: 10.1177/10892680211017523 [153] Fox KC, Dixon ML, Nijeboer S,
Girn M, Floman JL, Lifshitz M, et al.
[146] Luhmann M, Hofmann W, Eid M, Functional neuroanatomy of meditation:
Lucas RE. Subjective well-being and A review and meta-analysis of 78
adaptation to life events: A meta-analysis functional neuroimaging investigations.
on differences between cognitive Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews.
and affective well-being. Journal of 2016;65:208-228
Personality and Social Psychology.
2012;102:592-615. DOI: 10.1037/a0025948 [154] Grossman P, Van Dam NT.
Mindfulness, by any other name: Trials
[147] Van Gordon W, and tribulations of sati in western
Shonin E, Griffiths MD. Towards a psychology and science. Contemporary
30

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
Buddhism. 2011;12:219-239. DOI: progressive muscle relaxation, and
10.1080/14639947.2011.564841 loving-kindness meditation on
decentering and negative reactions to
[155] Hirshberg MJ, Goldberg SB, repetitive thoughts. Behaviour Research
Schaefer SM, Flook L, Findley D, and Therapy. 2010;48:1002-1011
Davidson RJ. Divergent effects of brief
contemplative practices in response [162] Segal Z, Williams JMG, Teasdale J.
to an acute stressor: A randomized Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy
controlled trial of brief breath awareness, for Depression: A New Approach to
loving-kindness, gratitude or an Preventing Relapse. New York: Guilford
attention control practice. PLoS One. Press; 2002
2018;13(12):e0207765. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0207765 [163] Cahn BR, Delorme A,
Polich J. Occipital gamma activation
[156] Twohig MP, Levin ME, during Vipassana meditation. Cognitive
Ong CW. What is acceptance and
Process. 2010;11:39-56
commitment therapy (ACT)? ACT
in Steps. 2020:1-18. DOI: 10.1093/
[164] Grimm S, Ernst J, Boesiger P,
med-psych/9780190629922.003.0001
Schuepbach D, Hell D, Boeker H, et al.
Increased self-focus in major depressive
[157] Anderson ND, Lau MA, Segal ZV,
disorder is related to neural
Bishop SR. Mindfulness-based stress
abnormalities in subcortical-cortical
reduction and attentional control.
midline structures. Human Brain
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy.
Mapping. 2009;30:2617-2627. DOI:
2007;14(6):449-463. DOI: 10.1002/
10.1002/hbm.20693
cpp.544
[165] Brewer JA, Worhunsky PD,
[158] Vago DR, Nakamura Y. Selective
Gray JR, Tang Y, Weber J, Kober H.
attentional bias towards pain-related
Meditation experience is associated with
threat in fibromyalgia: Preliminary
differences in default mode network
evidence for effects of mindfulness
activity and connectivity. Proceedings
meditation training. Cognitive Therapy
of the National Academy of Sciences.
Research. 2011;35:581-594
2011;108(50):20254-20259. DOI: 10.1073/
[159] Curry OS, Rowland L, Van Lissa CJ, pnas.1112029108
Zlotowitz S, McAlaney J, Whitehouse H.
Happy to help? A systematic review [166] Hölzel BK, Carmody J, Vangel M,
and meta-analysis of the effects of Congleton C, Yerramsetti SM,
performing acts of kindness on the Gard T, et al. Mindfulness practice
well-being of the actor. Journal of leads to increases in regional brain gray
Experimental Social Psychology. Feb matter density. Psychiatry Research:
2018;76. DOI: 10.31219/osf.io/ytj5s Neuroimaging. 2011;191:36-43. DOI:
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2010.08.006
[160] Malinowski P. Neural mechanisms
of attentional control in mindfulness [167] Ricard M. The Art of Happiness:
meditation. Frontiers in Neuroscience. A Guide to Developing life’s most
2013;7:1-11. DOI: 10.3389/ Important Skill. London, England:
fnins.2013.00008 Atlantic Books; 2011
[161] Feldman G, Greeson J, Senville J. [168] Jones P, Drummond PD. A
Differential effects of mindful breathing, summary of current findings on
31

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
quality of life domains and a proposal Health. New York: Springer; 2015. DOI:
for their inclusion in clinical 10.1007/978-3-319-18591-0
interventions. Frontiers in Psychology.
29 Oct 2021;12:747435. DOI: 10.3389/ [177] Chiesa A, Serretti A,
fpsyg.2021.747435 Jakobsen JC. Mindfulness: Top–down
or bottom–up emotion regulation
[169] Jones P, Drummond P. strategy? Clinical Psychology Review.
Construction and evaluation of a 2013;33(1):82-96. DOI: 10.1016/j.
mindfulness-based quality of life cpr.2012.10.006
and well-being program (MQW) in a
randomized trial. Current Psychology. [178] Shiah YJ. From self to nonself:
2022;42(17):14782-14803. DOI: 10.1007/ The nonself theory. Frontiers in
s12144-021-02672-w Psychology. 4 Feb 2016;7. DOI: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.00124
[170] Jones P. Clear Mind Open Heart.
Diamond Creek, Victoria, Australia: [179] Trungpa C, Goleman D. The
Ultimate World Publishing; 2024 Sanity we Are Born with: A Buddhist
Approach to Psychology. Boston:
[171] Smallwood J, Brown K, Baird B, Shambhala; 2005
Schooler JW. Cooperation between the
default mode network and the frontal- [180] Wilber K. Eye to Eye: The Quest for
parietal network in the production of an the New Paradigm. Boston: Shambhala;
internal train of thought. Brain Research. 1990
2012;1428:60-70. DOI: 10.1016/j.
brainres.2011.03.072 [181] Purser RE, Milillo J. Mindfulness
revisited: A Buddhist-based
[172] Sayers J. Sigmund Freud. In: Divine conceptualization. Journal of
Therapy. 2003. pp. 30-60. DOI: 10.1093/ Management Inquiry. 2014;24(1):3-24.
med:psych/9780198509813.003.0003 DOI: 10.1177/1056492614532315
[173] Ritchie TD, Sedikides C, [182] Shonin E, Van Gordon W,
Wildschut T, Arndt J, Gidron Y. Griffiths MD. The emerging role of
Self-concept clarity mediates the Buddhism in clinical psychology: Toward
relation between stress and effective integration. Psychology of
subjective well-being. Self and Religion and Spirituality. 2014;6(2):123-
Identity. 2011;10(4):493-508. DOI: 137. DOI: 10.1037/a0035859
10.1080/15298868.2010.493066
[183] Andrews-Hanna JR,
[174] Jung CG. The Structure and Reidler JS, Sepulcre J, Poulin R, Buckner RL.
Dynamics of the Psyche. London: Functional-anatomic fractionation of
Routledge and Kegan Paul; 1960 the Brain’s default network. Neuron.
2010;65(4):550-562. DOI: 10.1016/j.
[175] Wilson B. My First 40 Years. An neuron.2010.02.005
Autobiography by the Cofounder of
Alcoholics Anonymous. Center City, [184] Brewer JA, Garrison KA,
Minnesota: Hazelden; 2000 Whitfield-Gabrieli S. What about the
“self” is processed in the posterior
[176] Shonin E, Van Gordon W, Singh NN, cingulate cortex? Frontiers in Human
editors. Buddhist Foundations of Neuroscience. 2013;7:647. DOI: 10.3389/
Mindfulness. Mindfulness in Behavioral fnhum.2013.00647
32

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
[185] Dalai Lama HH, Thurman RAF, Press; 2009. pp. 213-231. DOI:
Gardner HE, Goleman D. MindScience: 10.1007/978-90-481-2354-4_10
An East–West Dialogue. Somerville,
Massachusetts: Wisdom Publications; [194] Ryan RM, Deci E. Self-
1991 determination theory. In: Michalos AC,
editor. Encyclopedia of Quality of Life
[186] Blanke O, Metzinger T. Full-body and Well-Being Research. Dordrecht:
illusions and minimal phenomenal Springer; 2014. DOI: 10.1007/
selfhood. Trends in Cognitive 978-94-007-0753-5_2630
Sciences. 2009;13:7-13. DOI: 10.1016/j.
tics.2008.10.003 [195] Locke EA, Schattke K. Intrinsic and
extrinsic motivation: Time for expansion
[187] Natarajan AR. Ramana Maharshi and clarification. Motivation Science.
Answers 100 Questions. Bangalore, India: 2019;5(4):277-290. DOI: 10.1037/
Ramana Maharshi Centre for Learning; mot0000116
2000
[196] Dunne J. Toward an understanding
[188] Nirbhay N, Shonin E, Van of non-dual mindfulness. Contemporary
Gordon W, editors. Buddhist Foundations Buddhism. 2011;12:71-88. DOI:
of Mindfulness. Switzerland: Springer; 10.1080/14639947.2011.564820
2015
[197] Lutz A, Brefczynski-Lewis JF,
[189] Dambrun M. When the dissolution Johnstone T, Davidson RJ. Regulation
of perceived body boundaries elicits of the neural circuitry of emotion by
happiness: The effect of selflessness compassion meditation: Effects of
induced by a body scan meditation. meditative expertise. PloS ONE. 26 Mar
Consciousness and Cognition. 2008a;3(3):e1897. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
2016;46:89-98 pone.0001897
[190] Gyamtso KT. Progressive Sates [198] Wilber K. The spectrum of
of Meditation on Emptiness. Oxford: development. In: Wilber K, Engler J,
Longchen Foundation; 1994 Brown D, editors. Transformations of
Consciousness. Boston: Shambhala; 1986.
[191] Wittgenstein L. Tractatus. pp. 65-105
Logico-Philosophicus. London: Kegan
Paul; 1922 [199] Levin J, Steele L. The transcendent
experience: Conceptual, theoretical, and
[192] Griffiths RR, Richards WA, epidemiologic perspectives. Explore.
McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin can 2005;1(1):89-101
occasion mystical-type experiences
having substantial and sustained [200] Stace W. Mysticism and Philosophy.
personal meaning and spiritual Philadelphia: Lippincott; 1960
significance. Psychopharmacology.
2006;187:268-283 [201] Butlein DA. The impact of
spiritual awakening on psychotherapy:
[193] Diener E, Sandvik E, Pavot W. A comparison study of personality
Happiness is the frequency, not the traits, therapeutic worldview, and
intensity, of positive versus negative client experience in transpersonal,
affect. In: Assessing Well-Being. non-transpersonal, and purportedly
Oxford, England: Pergamon awakened psychotherapists. Dissertation
33

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
Abstracts International. 2005;67(1):533B guided MEG study. Frontiers in
(UMI No. 3202046) Psychology. 2013;4:912. DOI: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00912
[202] Travis F, Arenander A,
DuBois D. Psychological and [210] Travis F, Pearson C. Pure
physiological characteristics of a consciousness: Distinct
proposed object-referral/self-referral phenomenological and physiological
continuum of self-awareness. correlates of ‘consciousness itself.
Consciousness and Cognition. International Journal of Neuroscience.
2004;13:401-420 2000;100(1-4):77-89. DOI:
10.3109/00207450008999678
[203] O’Keeffe J. Prior to phenomenal
perception. Paradoxica: Journal of
[211] Davis JH, Vago DR. Can
Nondual Psychology. 2014;6
enlightenment be traced to specific
neural correlates, cognition, or behavior?
[204] Khyentse D. Enlightened Courage. No, and (a qualified) yes. Frontiers in
An Explanation of Atisha’s Seven
Psychology. 2013;4:870. DOI: 10.3389/
Point Mind Training. Nepal: Shechen
fpsyg.2013.00870
Publications; 1997
[212] Vaitl D, Bierbaumer N, Gruzelier J,
[205] Khyentse D. The Heart of
Jamieson GA, Kotchoubey B, Kubler A,
Compassion: The Thirty-Seven Verses
et al. Psychobiology of altered states
on the Practice of a Bodhisattva. Boston,
of consciousness. Psychological
MA: Shambhala Publications; 2007
Bulletin. 2005;131:98-127. DOI:
10.1037/00332909.131.1.98
[206] Hinterberger T,
Schmidt S, Kamei T, Walach H.
[213] Aftanas LI, Golocheikine SA.
Decreased electrophysiological activity
Human anterior and frontal midline
represents the conscious state of
theta and lower alpha reflect emotionally
emptiness in meditation. Frontiers in
positive state and internalized attention:
Psychology. 2014;5:99. DOI: 10.3389/
High-resolution EEG investigation
fpsyg.2014.00099
of meditation. Neuroscience Letters.
2001;310(1):57-60
[207] Lutz A, Slagter HA, Dunne JD,
Davidson RJ. Attention regulation and
monitoring in meditation. Trends in [214] Ghosh A. Innate intuition: An
intellectual history of Sahaja-jñāna
Cognitive Sciences. 2008;12(4):163-169
and Sahaja Samādhi in Brahmoism
[208] Hagerty MR, Isaacs J, Brasington L,
and modern Vaiṣṇavism. Religions.
2019;10(6):384. DOI: 10.3390/
Shupe L, Fetz EE, Cramer SC. Case study
rel10060384
of ecstatic meditation: fMRI and EEG
evidence of self-stimulating a reward
system. Neural Plasticity. 2013:1-12. DOI: [215] Bechert H. Buddha-field and
10.1155/2013/653572 transfer of merit in a Theravada source.
Indo-Iranian Journal. 1992;35(2/3):95-
[209] Berkovich-Ohana A, 108. Available from: http://www.jstor.
Dor-Ziderman Y, Glicksohn J, Goldstein A. org/stable/24659519
Alterations in the sense of time, space,
and body in the mindfulness-trained [216] Mohamed A. The Effects of Loving
brain: A neurophenomenologically- Kindness Meditation on Subjective
34

Psychological Stages of Enlightenment
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1010343
Wellbeing in Healthy Young Adults. Buddhist Canon. Surrey: Curzon Press;
University of Washington Poster 1999
Presentation. Poster. Figshare; 2015. DOI:
10.6084/m9.figshare.1456105 [226] Katz N. Buddhist Images of Human
Perfection: The Arahant of the Sutta
[217] Dogen, editor. The Heart of Dogen’s Piṭaka Compared with the Bodhisattva
Shobogenzo. Albany, NY: SUNY Press; and the Mahāsiddha. Delhi: Motilal
2002 Banarsidass; 1990
[218] Maheshwarananda P. The Hidden [227] Roney SM, Solfvin J. Yogic
Power in Humans. Vienna: Ibera Verlag; attainment in relation to awareness
1998 of precognitive targets. Journal of
Parapsychology. 2006;70(1):91-120
[219] Jones P. Nondual well-being - the
evolution of happiness. In: Happiness [228] Higgins D. An introduction to the
and Wellness - Biopsychosocial Tibetan Dzogchen (great perfection)
and Anthropological Perspectives. philosophy of mind. Religion Compass.
IntechOpen; 2023. DOI: 10.5772/ 2012;6(10):441-450
intechopen.106770
[229] Jones P. Mindfulness-based
[220] Skevington SM, Böhnke JR. How is heroism: Creating enlightened
subjective well-being related to quality of heroes. Journal of Humanistic
life? Do we need two concepts and both Psychology. 2018;58(5):501-524. DOI:
measures? Social Science & Medicine. 10.1177/0022167817711303
2018;206:22-30. DOI: 10.1016/j.
socscimed.2018.04.005 [230] Tsong Khapa J. The Great
Treatise on the Stages of the Path to
[221] Paramatmananda S. On the Road to Enlightenment: Lam Rim Chen Mo.
Freedom. Vol. 1. Kerala: Amrita Offset Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion; 2002
Printers; 1987
[231] Gunaratana H. The Jhanas in
[222] Maheshwarananda P. Lila-Amrit: Theravada Buddhist Meditation. Sri
The Divine Life of Sri Mahaprabhuji. Lanka: Buddhist Publication Society;
New Delhi: BRPC (India) Ltd.; 1990 1988
[223] Morgan D. The life of Siddhartha [232] Clough BS. The higher knowledges
Gautama, the awakened one. In: Essential in the Pāli Nikāyas and Vinaya. Journal of
Buddhism: A Comprehensive Guide the International Association of Buddhist
to Belief and Practice. Santa Barbara: Studies. 2011;33(1-2):409-433
Praeger; 2010. pp. 5-64. DOI: doi.
org/10.5040/9798400647291.ch-002 [233] Lodro G. Calm Abiding and Special
Insight. USA: Snow Lion Publishers; 1998
[224] Olson C. The problematic
nature of the third chapter of the yoga [234] De Silva P. An Introduction to
Sūtras and its discussion of powers. Buddhist Psychology. Houndmills,
Journal of Yoga and Physiotherapy. England: Palgrave/Macmillan; 2005.
2017;3(1):1-8 DOI: 10.1057/9780230509450
[225] Anderson CS. Pain and its Ending: [235] Jacobsen KA, editor. Yoga Powers:
The Four Noble Truths in the Theravada Extraordinary Capacities Attained
35

Happiness and the Psychology of Enlightenment – An Investigation into Methods and Results
through Meditation and Concentration.
Leiden: Brill; 2012
[236] Radin D. Supernormal. New York:
Random House; 2013
[237] Vivekananda S. Patanjali Yoga
Sutras. Delhi: Vijay Goel Delete Used
Earlier; 2014
[238] Braud WG. Patañjali yoga
and siddhis: Their relevance to
parapsychological theory and research.
In: Rao KR, Cornelissen M, Dalal J,
editors. Handbook of Indian Psychology.
New Delhi: Cambridge University Press;
2008. pp. 217-243
[239] Rama S. Living with the Himalayan
Masters. Honesdale: Himalayan Institute;
1999
[240] Menon R. Bhagavata Purana. New
Delhi: Rupa Publications; 2007
[241] Roney-Dougal SM. Taboo and belief
in Tibetan psychic tradition. Journal
of the Society for Psychical Research.
2006;70(4):193-210
[242] Jones P. Mindfulness training:
Can it create superheroes? Frontiers in
Psychology. 2019;10:613. DOI: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2019.00613
[243] Jones P. Mindfulness and nondual
well-being – What is the evidence that
we can stay happy? Review of General
Psychology. 2023;27(2):103-120. DOI:
10.1177/10892680221093013
[244] Hanley AW, Baker AK, Garland EL.
Self-interest may not be entirely in the
interest of the self: Association between
selflessness, dispositional mindfulness
and psychological well-being.
Personality and Individual Differences.
2017;117:166-171
36