Framing the Path to Awakening:
Tibetan Adaptations of the Jātaka
Genre
ULRIKE ROESLER
University of Oxford
Abstract: Jātaka and avadāna stories belong to the staples of Bud-
dhist narrative literature. While most jātakas follow a relatively stable
narrative template, they also allow for some variation depending on
their time and place of composition and the audiences they are meant
to address. Jātaka stories have been told and preserved in a variety of
languages and literary forms, from simple prose narratives to complex
poems or visual representations. This article focuses on Tibetan ad-
aptations of the jātaka genre. It begins with a brief survey of jātaka
stories translated from Sanskrit or Chinese and contained in the Ti-
betan Buddhist canon, and then moves on to investigate one specific
jātaka cycle composed in Tibet within the Bka’ gdams pa school of
Tibetan Buddhism. The frame story is of particular interest, as this is
where the Tibetan narrators are perhaps at their most innovative. In
these Bka’ gdams pa jātakas, the narrative frame is shifted from India
to Tibet, and the main characters of the frame story are newly con-
verted Tibetan Buddhists and their Indian teacher. This highly orig-
inal appropriation of the jātaka genre demonstrates the important
role of narrative literature in the Tibetan adoption and adaptation of
Buddhism.
Keywords: Jātaka, Avadāna, Tibetan Buddhism, Atiśa
Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.15239/hijbs.06.01.04
Hualin International Journal of Buddhist Studies 6.1 (2023): 145–170 145

146 ULRIKE ROESLER
1. Introduction: Jātaka and Avadāna Stories
The importance of narratives in the dissemination of Buddhism
across Asia can hardly be overestimated. Whether in the Bud-
dhist canons, in commentarial literature, in oral sermons, in visual
art, in poetry, or as stage performances—narratives and legends
have played a major role in transmitting the message of Buddhism,
and they still do so today. Among the Buddhist narrative forms,
jātakas and avadānas1—the stories about previous lives of Buddha
Śākyamuni and other individuals—can claim pride of place as one
of the most popular genres of Buddhist narrative. The enormous
popularity of jātakas is not just due to their usefulness as didactic
tools, but also to their sheer variety and entertaining nature. The
Pāli jātaka corpus, for example, has incorporated a wide range
of popular narratives and folk stories and even includes parables
without an obvious Buddhist message, such as animal tales known
from the Indian narrative cycle of the Pañcatantra [Five Books,
or Five Chapters], where they illustrate political skill rather than
religious values.2 The flexibility of the genre also made it possible
to adapt the jātaka and avadāna format to different cultural envi-
ronments in other regions of Asia, which further contributed to its
popularity.
Tibet is no exception in this respect. In the Tibetan tradition,
Buddhist narratives and jātaka tales contain materials received
from South Asia as well as stories circulating along the Silk Roads.
Tibetan Buddhist teachers refer back to the jātakas taught by the
Buddha to explain and legitimise the use of stories in their own
1 The meaning of Sanskrit avadāna and Pāli apadāna, and the similarities
and differences between jātaka and avadāna, have been discussed by sever-
al scholars. A survey can be found in Appleton, Jātaka Stories, 3–5. To this, we
may add Fukita’s recent proposal that the original meaning of avadāna may have
been ‘illustration’ or ‘precedent’ (Fukita, ‘The Original Meaning and Role of
Avadāna’).
2 Parallels between the Pāli jātakas and Pañcatantra are listed in Grey, A
Concordance of Buddhist Birth Stories.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 147
sermons and religious treatises.3 However, in addition to legends of
Indian or Indic origin, Tibetan Buddhist storytelling also allowed
for the integration of indigenous themes, folk tales, and poetry.
The influence between Buddhist narratives and local non-Buddhist
narratives went both ways; the epic of King Gesar of Ling may
serve as an example of a Tibetan heroic narrative that increasingly
integrated Buddhist ideas.
Narratives, including jātakas, were cast in a variety of media
and literary forms, and Tibetan jātakas include translations from
foreign languages as well as indigenous Tibetan compositions,
phrased in prose, in verse, or in a mixture of both. They were and
are transmitted in writing, but also orally by travelling bards, or
by Buddhist teachers who still make ample use of legends and
stories in their oral instructions today.4 This paper will begin with
a brief survey of Indian or Indic jātakas in the Tibetan Buddhist
canon, and then move on to a case study of jātakas that are original
Tibetan creations, produced during the formative period of Tibetan
Buddhism in the eleventh to thirteenth centuries.
3 One relatively early example may suffice here: the Bka’ gdams pa master
Po to ba Rin chen gsal (1027–1105) gave a comprehensive explanation of the
graded Buddhist path to awakening in form of parables, similes, and anecdotes.
His teaching technique became so popular that two of his disciples compiled
his parables into two works known as the Dpe chos [Dharma Exemplified] and
the Be’u bum sngon po [Blue Compendium]. Moreover, ’Gro mgon Dpal ldan
ye shes (fourteenth c.) added a volume containing further stories related to the
Dpe chos, the Gtam rgyud rin chen phreng mdzes. The introduction to the Dpe
chos rin chen spungs pa explains: ‘Why it was necessary that the Spiritual Mentor
Po to ba used many parables to illustrate [the dharma]: Through parables, one
will quickly grasp the meaning. The section of the avadānas too was delivered by
teaching through parables...’ (Dpe chos dang dpe chos rin chen spungs pa, 15.) The
avadāna stories ascribed to Buddha Śākyamuni are thus invoked as a model for
storytelling in Tibet.
4 See, for example, the frequent use of jātaka stories and other kinds of
parables in Pabongka Rinpoche’s Liberation in the Palm of your Hand.

148 ULRIKE ROESLER
2. Tibetan Translations and Adaptations
Indian Buddhist tales and legends were translated into Tibetan
from the eighth century onward and were integrated in the two
sections of the Tibetan canon, the Bka’ ’gyur (pronounced ‘Kanjur’,
and containing the word of the Buddha) and the Bstan ’gyur
(pronounced ‘Tenjur’, and containing treatises and compositions by
mostly Indian authors). In addition to purely Buddhist narratives,
such as the life story of Buddha Śākyamuni and his previous lives,
the Tibetan Buddhist canon even contains translations of a small
number of non-Buddhist materials (such as the famous Sanskrit
poem ‘Meghadūta’ [Cloud Messenger] by Kālidāsa),5 which
demonstrates the great esteem the Tibetan Buddhists developed for
Indian narratives and Sanskrit literary compositions.
Like their Pāli and Sanskrit counterparts, the jātaka and
avadāna stories in the Tibetan Buddhist canon are meant to
illustrate the effect of karma or, in some cases, the Buddhist
pāramitās (perfections). The Kanjur contains several important
cycles of pre-birth stories in its Sūtra section (Tib. mdo), namely,
the Avadānaśataka [A Hundred Avadānas, Tib. Rtogs pa brjod pa
brgya pa] (D 343/P 1012), the Karmaśataka [A Hundred Deeds,
or perhaps rather: A Hundred [Stories about] Karma, Tib. Las
brgya tham pa] (D 340/P 1007), and the Mdzangs blun zhes bya
ba’i mdo [Sūtra of the Wise and the Foolish] (D 341/P 1008). The
latter, translated from the Chinese by ’Gos Chos grub who was
active in Dunhuang in the early ninth century, became particularly
popular in Tibet and is often referred to by Buddhist authors.6
These three narrative cycles are followed in the canon by several
5 Tib. Sprin gyi pho nya, contained in the section on language/linguistics
(sgra rig pa) of the Bstan ’gyur, D 4302/P 5794.
6 For unknown reasons, the number and arrangement of the stories in the
Tibetan version differ from the Chinese version. See Takakusu, ‘Tales of the Wise
Man and the Fool’; Baruch, ‘Le cinquante-deuxième chapitre du mJaṅs-blun
(Sūtra du sage et du fou)’; Roesler, ‘Materialien zur Redaktionsgeschichte des
mDzaṅs blun’.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 149
individual avadānas, including the Sumāghadhāvadāna [Avadāna
of Sumāgadhā, Tib. Ma ga dha bzang mo’i rtogs pa brjod pa],
Puṇyabalāvadāna [Avadāna of Puṇyabala, Tib. Bsod nams stobs
kyi rtogs pa brjod pa], and Candraprabhāvadāna [Avadāna of
Candraprabha, Tib. Zla ’od kyi rtogs pa brjod pa].
The Tenjur, which contains works by Indian Buddhist authors,
contains a whole section devoted to jātakas (Tib. skyes rabs). These
include several poetical jātaka cycles composed in Indian kāvya style:
the Jātakamālās [Garland of Jātakas] of Āryaśūra7 and his successor
Haribhaṭṭa8 as well as Kṣemendra’s Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā
[Wish-Fulfilling Creeper of Bodhisattva-Avadānas].9 The legends
of the two Jātakamālās are arranged to illustrate the Buddhist
pāramitās.10 Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, translated into Tibetan in the
early translation period (eighth c.), became so emblematic of the
genre that the term skyes rabs is often used by Tibetan authors to
refer specifically to the thirty-four legends of his work. The third
Karma pa, Rang byung rdo rje (1248–1339) added sixty-six stories
to the collection, thus turning it into a cycle of one hundred jātakas
(Skyes rabs brgya pa).11 His jātakas were based on Indian Buddhist
legends and emulated Āryaśūra’s style, a poetical combination
of prose and verse (Skt. campū). This enlarged cycle became so
popular that it was also visually represented in paintings. The most
noteworthy example is a cycle of exquisite paintings and inscriptions
in the skor lam chen mo (the great circumambulatory) of Zha lu
Monastery, executed shortly after the composition of the Skyes rabs
brgya pa in the fourteenth century.12
7 D 4150/P 5650; for a critical edition of the first fifteen jātakas together
with a philological commentary see Hanisch, Āryaśūras Jātakamālā.
8 D 5152/P 5652; see Hahn, Poetical Vision of the Buddha’s Former Lives.
9 D 4155/P 5655. Its impact in Tibet is discussed in van der Kuijp, ‘Tibetan
Belles-Lettres’.
10 Hahn, Haribhaṭṭa in Nepal, 12–15.
11 BDRC W1KG16609; see Tropper, Die Jātaka-Inschriften, 68–70;
Hanisch, Āryaśūras Jātakamālā, lxxxi.
12 Tropper, Die Jātaka-Inschriften.

150 ULRIKE ROESLER
The Tibetan translation of Kṣemendra’s above-mentioned Bodhi-
sattvāvadānakalpalatā in the thirteenth century became a milestone in
the study of Sanskrit poetic conventions in Tibet. The translator Shong
ston (thirteenth c.) as well as Dpang Lo tsa ba (1276–1342), who revised
the translation, had a strong interest in Indian poetics, as demonstrated
by their translation of and commentary on Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa
[Mirror of Poetics].13 Several Tibetan commentaries were written on
the Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā. Its legends were retold by various au-
thors14 and were also represented visually in block prints and paintings.15
In addition to translating Buddhist narratives, Tibetan authors
also began to compose Buddhist stories of their own, both imitating
Indian models and developing their own forms of storytelling. This
includes the important genre of Tibetan Buddhist life-writing (Tib.
rnam thar). Some of these religious biographies were modelled on
the life story of Śākyamuni and subdivided into ‘twelve [great] deeds’
(Tib. mdzad pa bcu gnyis) of the individual in question, following
the model of the ‘twelve deeds’ of the Buddha that had become
popular in Tibetan Buddhist circles. Just as the jātakas from South
Asia extend the life of the Buddha into the past, Tibetan Buddhist
biographies from the twelfth century onward also integrated lists or
accounts of previous lives of Tibetan Buddhist masters, thus extend-
ing the idea of the jātaka genre to the Tibetan context.16 The basic
principle of these accounts is the same as in the case of jātaka stories
13 Dimitrov, Mārgavibhāga, 25–60.
14 van der Kuijp, ‘Tibetan Belles-Lettres’, 401f.
15 Tucci, Tibetan Painted Scrolls, vol. II, 442–533.
16 Early examples of Tibetan Buddhist masters who considered themselves,
or were considered, reincarnations of previous named figures are Nyang ral Nyi
ma ’od zer (1124–1192), who regarded himself as an incarnation of King Khri
Srong lde btsan (see Hirschberg, ‘A Post-Incarnate Usurper?’) and Karma Pakshi
(1204/6–1283), who was considered a reincarnation of Dus gsum mkhyen pa (see
Manson, The Second Karmapa Karma Pakshi, 131–32). Van der Kuijp has also
drawn attention to an even earlier instance within the Bka’ gdams tradition: Chos
kyi rgyal po of Kong po (1069–1144) is said to have regarded himself as a reincar-
nation of Nag tsho lo tsa ba (1011–1064), see van der Kuijp, ‘The Dalai Lamas’.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 151
about the Buddha: they show through which actions and experiences
in the past the Tibetan Buddhist masters became the accomplished
reincarnate lamas that they were in the present.
In his previous lives, the future Buddha is called the bodhisatta in
Pāli, and it has been argued that this term likely corresponds to the
Sanskrit form *bodhisakta, a being inclined towards awakening, or a
‘Buddha-to-be’. However, in later times, its common Sanskritisation
as ‘bodhisattva’ also allowed for the association with the bodhisattvas
of Mahāyāna Buddhism, which became particularly appealing when
applied to the previous lives of Tibetan Buddhist masters. Thus, it
became common practice to identify Tibetan Buddhist authorities
as emanations of the main bodhisattvas of the Mahāyāna, such as
Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, or Vajrapāṇi.
3. The Jātakas of the Bka’ gdams glegs bam
This consideration leads over to the main topic of this paper. It
concerns a cycle of Tibetan jātaka stories which are not about
the previous lives of the Buddha, but about the previous lives of a
Tibetan Buddhist teacher of the eleventh century. I shall introduce
this case in some detail, as it is well-suited to illustrate the way the
jātaka genre was adopted and modified to serve specific purposes
during the formative phase of Buddhism in Tibet. The stories
originated within circles of the Bka’ gdams pa tradition of Tibetan
Buddhism, one of the main lineages that emerged during the revival
period of Buddhism in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and they
recount the previous incarnations of the founding figure of the Bka’
gdams pa, ’Brom ston Rgyal ba’i ’byung gnas (1004–1064).
The notion of ’Brom ston as the founding figure of the Bka’
gdams pa needs to be prefaced with a note of caution. As Dan Martin
has very aptly pointed out, it is likely that those who are regarded
as the founders of a school or tradition of Tibetan Buddhism did
not have any notion of being a founder.17 The identification of a
17 ‘[...] we have to stop thinking of most of the reputed founders of Tibetan

152 ULRIKE ROESLER
founding figure or a foundational event, such as the establishment
of a monastic institution, are only understood in this way by later
generations who regard themselves as part of the respective tradition.
In the case of the Bka’ gdams pa, the tradition came to regard itself as
a school following the teachings of the Bengali master Atiśa/Adhīśa
Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna (982–1054),18 who spent the last twelve years
of his life in Tibet. They regard Atiśa’s Tibetan disciple ’Brom ston
Rgyal ba’i ’byung gnas, or ’Brom ston pa in short, as the ‘progenitor
of the Bka’ gdams tradition’, the bka’ gdams kyi mes po.
The foundation of the monastery of Reting in 1056/57 is in
later Bka’ gdams histories described as a landmark event that marks
the beginning of the school. However, it has been argued that the
beginning of a self-definition as Bka’ gdams pa is only traceable from
approximately half a century later, around the end of the eleventh
century after ’Brom ston pa’s main disciples had established their
own monasteries and began teaching larger groups.19 The terms used
sects as people who deliberately set about founding them. I think we have to go even
further and doubt, rather than assume, the very concept of foundership. It generally
takes some time for sectarian identities to become recognized in the culture at large
as being meaningful or useful categories. And sometimes it is difficult to zero in on
a particular time in history and identify it as the point at which a sect emerged into
general consciousness.’ Martin, ‘The Book Moving Incident’, 198.
18 His honorary title is rendered as ‘Atiśa’ by some scholars, and as ‘Adhīśa’
by others. The Tibetan tradition understands the Sanskrit title as an equivalent
of Tibetan Jowo (jo bo) and Jowoje (jo bo rje). The Bka’ gdams pa expert Helmut
Eimer has argued that the form atiśa represents a short form of Sanskrit atiśaya,
‘his eminence’ (Eimer, Berichte, 18–22). This form appears like a good match
for the Tibetan title jo bo, ‘the lord’. The other form, adhīśa means ‘the superior
lord’ and has been proposed more recently by Harunaga Isaacson and Francesco
Sferra (The Sekanirdeśa, 70–71, note 51). It corresponds well to the Tibetan title
jo bo rje, the ‘lord of lords’ or ‘overlord’. Both forms are possible, and I currently
do not see sufficient conclusive evidence to decide the case. In this paper I shall
use the form Atiśa, not because it is necessarily the correct form, but simply
because it seems to be more familiar to most academic readers.
19 See, for example, Martin, ‘The Book Moving Incident’, 199–200.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 153
for those who follow the teachings of Atiśa vary and we find terms
such as jo bo pa (followers of Jo bo [Atiśa]) and jo bo’i bka’ brgyud
(lineage of Jo bo [Atiśa]) alongside bka’ gdams and bka’ gdams pa.20
The term bka’ gdams is also sometimes used for the instructions
of the Bka’ gdams tradition rather than for the school itself, which
makes the term slightly ambiguous in its meaning.
Three of ’Brom ston pa’s disciples are regarded as the origin of
three main transmission lineages. According to later histories of the
Bka’ gdams pa school (Bka’ gdams chos ’byung), Po to ba initiated
the lineage of the scriptural tradition (gzhung pa), Spyan snga ba
the instructional tradition (gdams ngag pa), and Phu chung ba the
local transmissions that were later compiled into the Bka’ gdams
glegs bam [Book of Kadam], which contains the jātaka stories that
this paper will examine in more detail. Phu chung ba therefore plays
a crucial role for our topic, even though his legacy is frustratingly
elusive.
The early period of the Bka’ gdams pa school in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries is not well documented because orality played a
major role and Tibetan literary composition was only just emerging.
Most of the extant written literature dates from slightly later periods,
and the authors back-project their own state of affairs onto the past.
It is therefore hard to pin down when exactly the movement became
solidified and from when the identification of the three main trans-
20 The two works mentioned in note 3 presenting the instructions of Po to
ba Rin chen gsal (1027–1105), the Dpe chos rin chen spungs pa and the Be’u bum
sngon po, mostly use the designations jo bo pa and jo bo’i bka’ brgyud for Atiśa’s
tradition. Similar expressions, including jo bo pa, jo bo’i bka’ brgyud, jo bo’i bka’
srol, and a ti sha’i bka’ brgyud, are used in the works of the Bka’ gdams pa master
Sangs rgyas dbon ston (1138–1210) and in early works from the Dwags po bka’
brgyud tradition (I thank Dr. Volker Caumanns and Professor Marta Sernesi for
this information). Even though the term bka’ gdams pa is occasionally used, it
is not the standard designation for Atiśa’s or ’Brom ston pa’s tradition in these
relatively early sources. This variety of names suggests that while a certain group
coherence had already emerged, the group’s identity as a ‘school’ with the name
Bka’ gdams pa was not fully developed yet.

154 ULRIKE ROESLER
missions became the mainstream view. However, we can point at
specific works in which an attempt at constructing a school identity
is particularly visible. The most striking example in this respect is the
Book of Kadam, in Tibetan known as the Bka’ gdams glegs bam, or
simply the Glegs bam (hereafter, The Book).21
The Book as we know it consists of two main parts: the so-called
Pha chos [Father Teachings], which is considered to contain teachings
of Atiśa addressed to the ‘father’ of the tradition, ’Brom ston pa,
and the so-called Bu chos (teachings for the ‘sons’ Rngog Legs pa’i
shes rab and Khu ston Brtson grus g.yung drung). The Pha chos is
centred around Atiśa’s Bodhisattvamaṇyāvali [Jewel Garland of the
Bodhisattva, Tib. Byang chub sems dpa’i nor bu’i phreng ba], a short
work in verse that is based on his earlier Vimalaratnalekha [Epistle
of Immaculate Jewels, Tib. Dri ma med pa’i rin po che’i phrin yig], a
letter of Buddhist advice composed during his stay in Nepal. It also
contains long dialogue sections outlining the content of the Jewel
Garland of the Bodhisattva and instructions on the esoteric practice
of the Bka’ gdams pa known as the ‘Sixteen Spheres’ (Tib. thig le bcu
drug). At some stage in the redaction process, several biographies
of Atiśa were added at the beginning of the Pha chos.22 This stage is
illustrated in the following diagram:23
21 Major parts of this work have been translated into English. See Jinpa,
trans., The Book of Kadam: The Core Texts. In her 2004 Ph.D. thesis, Amy Sims
Miller analyses its significance in the construction of ’Brom ston pa’s legacy, see
Miller, ‘Jewelled Dialogues’.
22 The transmission and redaction history of The Book has been investigated
in Ehrhard, ‘The Transmission of the Thig-le bcu-drug’, and more recently by
Sernesi, ‘Bibliography and Cultural History’.
23 See Sernesi, ‘Bibliography and Cultural History’. The Book later underwent
further rearrangements.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 155
First xylograph edition of The Book (1538–1539)
1. Pha chos, ‘father teachings’ • Four-part biography of Atiśa
• ‘Seal’ of The Book
• Liberation Stories of the Lineage Masters
• Explanation of the ‘Sixteen Spheres’ Practice
• ’Brom’s Self-Exhortation
• The Jewel Garland of the Bodhisattva
• The Jewel Garland of Dialogues
2. Bu chos, ‘son teachings’ • Twenty jātakas
• ‘Seal’
• Two further jātakas
• Prophecies
• The Vajra Song
• Miscellanea
The second part, the Bu chos contains twenty-two jātaka stories
about ’Brom ston pa’s previous incarnations. They follow the
standard format of jātakas known from South Asia, with a narrative
setting in the present that provides the frame for the story about the
events in the past. However, instead of recounting previous lives of
the Buddha, they feature the founding figures of the Bka’ gdams
tradition. They are rendered by Atiśa to explain how ’Brom ston pa
developed the bodhisattva qualities outlined in the Jewel Garland
of the Bodhisattva, and the central figure of the bodhisattva in these
stories is therefore identified as the previous incarnation of ’Brom
ston pa. The two parts of The Book are thus closely related, and
even though The Book is a compilation of separate parts and was
redacted and rearranged over the years, it needs to be understood in
its current form as a literary masterpiece creating a coherent vision
of the Bka’ gdams tradition. Not much work has been done in this
respect, because much of the research to date has focused on the
historical aspects of the work’s origin and transmission. A doctoral
thesis submitted by Amy Sims Miller in 2004 makes a first attempt
to understand The Book as a literary unit and unpack its internal
logic. However, much remains to be done, and this paper hopes
to make a small contribution in this direction. We will see how,
through narrative means, the stories contained in the Bu chos invest

156 ULRIKE ROESLER
the tradition with authority by elevating its founding figures Atiśa
and ’Brom ston pa to the status of omniscient beings and linking
them with the story of the conversion of Tibet brought about by the
bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara.
In doing so, The Book taps into the myth of Avalokiteśvara’s
manifestations in Tibet. As is well known, this bodhisattva
of compassion plays a particular role in the Tibetan cultural
consciousness. He is believed to have manifested in various successive
forms, including a monkey forefather of the Tibetan people, as well
as Tibet’s first Buddhist king Srong btsan sgam po (seventh c.), on
a mission to generate, educate, and convert the people of Tibet.
This idea became popular in Tibet around the time when the Bka’
gdams tradition emerged, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. The
narratives in The Book must therefore be viewed alongside other
works from this period propagating the Avalokiteśvara myth, such
as the Bka’ chems ka khol ma [Pillar Testament] and the Maṇi bka’
’bum [Collected Teachings on Avalokiteśvara].24
Of particular interest in this respect are the stories about ’Brom
ston pa’s previous incarnations contained in the Bu chos. These are
called skyes rabs (incarnation accounts), the Tibetan equivalent of
the Sanskrit or Pāli term jātaka. To fully appreciate the narrative
24 The Bka’ chems ka khol ma, regarded as the ‘testament’ of King Srong
btsan sgam po, is said to have been extracted from a pillar in the Jo khang
temple in Lhasa by Atiśa in 1048, thus establishing a direct link between the
Avalokiteśvara mythology and the Bka’ gdams pa. The slightly later Maṇi bka’
’bum (twelfth–thirteenth c.) develops the Avalokiteśvara narrative further; see
Kapstein, ‘Remarks on the Maṇi Bka’-’bum’. Similar themes were integrated
into the fourteenth-century historical work Rgyal rabs gsal ba’i me long by
Sa skya bla ma dam pa Bsod nams rgyal mtshan, see Sørensen, The Mirror
Illuminating the Royal Genealogies. The concept of Avalokiteśvara’s repeated
interventions in Tibetan history was re-deployed later to identify the Dalai
Lamas as manifestations of Avalokiteśvara and reincarnations of ’Brom ston pa,
who in turn was regarded as a reincarnation of King Srong btsan sgam po. Thus,
the Dalai Lama lineage came to be viewed as part of the salvation story of Tibet
under the tutelage of Avalokiteśvara.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 157
structure of these stories, it will be useful to compare them against
the typical structure of the pre-birth stories of Buddha Śākyamuni
preserved in Pāli. Here, the jātaka narratives are contained in the
para-canonical story collection known as the Jātakāṭṭhavaṇṇanā,
and they follow the following recurring pattern:
1. Paccupannavatthu, the story of the present, in which Buddha
Śākyamuni is in conversation with his disciples. To explain
why specific events occurred in the present, he offers to tell a
story about the past which will clarify the karmic conditions
that led to these events.
2. Atītavatthu, the story of the past, renders episodes from
previous lives of Buddha Śākyamuni and his disciples. In
these stories, the Buddha’s previous incarnations are called
bodhisatta, a being that is due to become a Buddha in a later
existence.25 The story of the past also includes stanzas (Skt.
gāthā), spoken as part of the narrative, which are considered
to be earlier than the prose stories and are the only part of
the jātaka collection that is actually part of the Pāli canon
itself.26
3. Samodhāna, the identification of the characters in the story of
the past with the people of the present. The bodhisatta of the
past is now Buddha Śākyamuni, and other characters are now
his disciples, such as Sāriputta or Ānanda, or other individuals
who interact with the Buddha. The Buddha’s ability to know
the three times—past, present, and future—and to see the
karmic connections across time is related to his status as an
omniscient, awakened being.
As Naomi Appleton has pointed out in her excellent book Jātaka
Stories in Theravāda Buddhism:
25 The bodhisatta of the Pāli jātakas should not be confounded with the
Great Bodhisattvas of the Mahāyāna such as Avalokiteśvara or Mañjuśrī.
26 The stanzas are part of the Khuddakanikāya. For a survey see von
Hinüber, A Handbook of Pāli Literature, 41–64.

158 ULRIKE ROESLER
[T]he very concept of a jātaka is inextricably tied up in the Buddha’s
biography, and can be traced back to the moment of the Buddha’s
awakening. According to several well-known passages in the Sutta
Piṭaka, the Bodhisatta had three different realisations during each of
the three watches of the night in which he became awakened. In the
first watch of the night he saw his previous births:
I recollected manifold past lives [...]: ‘I was there so-named, of
such a race, with such an appearance, such food, such experi-
ence of pleasure and pain, such a life term ... and passing away
thence I appeared here’ – thus with details and particulars I
recollected my manifold past life. This was the first true knowl-
edge attained by me in the first watch of the night.
[... I]n the second watch of the night the Bodhisatta saw the effects of
actions:
I saw beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and supe-
rior, fair and ugly, happy and unhappy in their destinations. I
understood how beings pass on according to their actions...27
What the Buddha here realises is the functioning of karma
that determines where and how a being is reborn, and how their
circumstances and experiences are shaped by their past actions. This
understanding of karma across lives prepares him for the insight that
constitutes his awakening, namely, why beings suffer in the cycle of
rebirth, and how this can be remedied. He is now an awakened being,
a Buddha, with a full understanding of the causal chain between
past, present, and future. He has therefore gained the ability to teach
others how to end the cycle of rebirth by eliminating the conditions
driving the chain of rebirth after rebirth. The knowledge about
previous lives, such as those rendered in jātakas, was the first step
towards awakening, and jātakas will become a means to teach others
about the karmic chain of cause and effect across lives.
With this background in mind, we can now return to the jātakas
of the Bu chos within The Book. Their structure follows the structure
known from Indian jātaka stories. Here, however, the stories are
27 Appleton, Jātaka Stories, 44–45.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 159
not told by the Buddha, but by Atiśa, who is in conversation with
his closest Tibetan disciples, and the main character in the stories
of the past is not the bodhisatta of the Pāli jātakas, but previous
incarnations of Atiśa’s Tibetan student ’Brom ston pa. The stories
themselves are not borrowed from India but are original Tibetan
creations. Nevertheless, they follow established narrative patterns
and are in accordance with the general spirit of the jātakas as
they illustrate how past behaviour and past virtues have led to the
behaviours and virtues of the characters in the present.
The stories of the past are usually set in India. However, they
are not entirely consistent in maintaining the Indian setting. For
example, the first story28 begins in the Indian city of Varanasi but
then continues in Mdo khams in Eastern Tibet. The names of the
main characters are mostly Indian, sometimes rendered phonetically
and sometimes in a Tibetan translation of the Indian name.
On occasion, the jātakas incorporate Indian or Indic materials
alongside genuinely Tibetan elements. For example, the twenty-first
story of the Bu chos29 consists of a narrative cycle about a parrot
who prevents the lady of the house from committing adultery. The
parrot does this by telling her intriguing stories which keep her at
home in the evenings, eager to hear more, instead of going to meet
her lover. The idea is the same as in the Indian story collection
known as the Śukasaptati [Seventy Tales of the Parrot], but the
stories themselves are different from their Indian counterparts.
Most of the tales of the Tibetan version are set in India, but
sometimes this Indian setting is abandoned. For example, the third
tale presents a story about a certain Prince Gesar who is equipped
with magic objects that enable him to achieve his aims: magic
boots, a magic bag that can produce food, a magic cloak that makes
him invisible, and a magic flower that can transform humans into
monkeys and vice versa. Some of these magic items resemble those
28 ‘Dge ba’i bshes gnyen pa bram ze’i khye’u gsal bar ji ltar skye ba bzhes pa’i
le’u’, Bka’ gdams glegs bam, Bu chos, 1–24.
29 ‘Bshes gnyen pa sprul pa’i bya sro long kun tu rgyur ji ltar skye ba bzhes pa’i
le’u’, Bka’ gdams glegs bam, Bu chos, 657–701.

160 ULRIKE ROESLER
of the Tibetan epic hero King Gesar, which demonstrates that
some Tibetan narrative motifs have found their way into the jātaka
stories of the Bu chos.
Moreover, the stories of the Bu chos introduce elements that relate
to historical events within the Bka’ gdams tradition. They refer to
the bodhisattva’s incarnation as ’Brom ston pa, the foundation of
the monastery of Reting (Tib. Rwa sgreng), and the emergence of
the Bka’ gdams tradition itself. For example, the fifth story30 explains
how ’Brom ston pa in his previous incarnation as Prince Dkon
mchog ’bangs went on a quest to find the wisdom ḍākinī Gsang ba
ye shes and bring her home as his bride. In this context, she makes a
pledge to stay with him in the future, and we are told that later Dkon
mchog ’bangs incarnated in Tibet as King Srong btsan sgam po and
Gsang ba ye shes as the princess of the Tang dynasty who became his
wife in 641. Later, he incarnated as ’Brom ston pa, and Gsang ba ye
shes took up permanent residence in a large rock near ’Brom ston
pa’s monastery of Reting. This rock is still venerated as the seat of the
wisdom ḍākinī Gsang ba ye shes today.
In the sixth story31 we learn how, in his previous incarnation as
Dad pa brtan pa, ’Brom ston pa won the support of two serpent
spirits (Skt. nāga, Tib. klu) who would later reside at Reting
monastery. The story also introduces the figure of ’Phying dkar ba,
the main protector deity of the monastery of Reting. The nineteenth
jātaka of the Bu chos32 presents the story of ’Brom ston pa’s birth as
Lha’i rgyal po and introduces a certain sage Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna, a
manifestation of a bodhisattva, who will later come to Tibet. In the
course of events, extensive prophecies are made about the appearance
of Buddha Śākyamuni as well as the future Buddhist kings of Tibet,
the foundation of the monastery of Reting, and some of the main
30 ‘Dge ba’i bshes gnyen pa yul bde ldan du rgyal bu dkon mchog ’bangs su
sku skye ba bzhes pa’i le’u’, Bka’ gdams glegs bam, Bu chos, 97–205.
31 ‘Dge ba’i bshes gnyen pa yul bhaṃ ga lar rgyal bu dad pa brtan par sku skye
ba bzhes pa’i le’u’, Bka’ gdams glegs bam, Bu chos, 206–303.
32 ‘Chu bo ya mu na’i gling du / dge ba’i bshes gnyen pa lha’i rgyal por sku
skye ba bzhes pa’i le’u’, Bka’ gdams glegs bam, Bu chos, 479–536.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 161
teachers of the Bka’ gdams pa school. The logic of the narrative
suggests that the stories are set in the distant past, prior to the life
of Buddha Śākyamuni, but the exact time is not specified. The
prophecies make ample use of the well-known trope of snyigs ma’i
dus, the degenerate times in which the Buddhist dharma is in decline
and the intervention of bodhisattva kings and Buddhist masters is
needed to protect the people of Tibet. Thus, they integrate the main
figures of the Tibetan Bka’ gdams pa tradition into the wider picture
of Buddhist history and give them a significant role in the unfolding
of dharma on earth.
A particularly striking feature is the way in which the narrative
frame of these jātaka tales is constructed. While Indian jātakas
form part of the life story of Buddha Śākyamuni and his disciples,
the stories of the present in the Bu chos are set in Tibet. They take
place at the hermitage of Brag Yer pa in Central Tibet, and the main
dialogue partners are Atiśa Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna and his Tibetan
disciples ’Brom ston pa and Rngog Legs pa’i shes rab, sometimes
joined by other disciples or lay patrons.
The frame story of the first jātaka may serve as an example.
Atiśa’s disciple Rngog Legs pa’i shes rab asks ’Brom ston pa how he
developed the mental qualities of a bodhisattva, and more specifically
how he managed to give up all doubt. This is a reference to the first
stanza of Atiśa’s poem Bodhisattvamaṇyāvali, which is included in
the Pha chos of The Book and starts: ‘Give up all doubt and strive with
dedication in your practice’.33 In response, ’Brom at first declines
Rngog’s request to explain how he developed this quality in his past
lives. First of all, he says he is just an ordinary person and he is not
sure that he really has given up all doubts. Secondly, he does not
have any knowledge about his previous lives. Rngog appeals to Atiśa
saying that surely ’Brom had developed this specific bodhisattva
quality, and he asks Atiśa to reveal how this had happened so that he
and future generations could learn from it. Atiśa explains: ‘His good
qualities are so great that they are difficult for others to comprehend.
33 ‘The tshom thams cad spang bya zhing // bsgrub la nan tan gces su bya //’,
Bka’ gdams glegs bam, Pha chos, 607.

162 ULRIKE ROESLER
Therefore, you should not speak of them to others. However, I shall
explain some of this, so that you can grasp them’.34
The theme of secrecy comes up repeatedly in the jātakas, and
on various occasions Atiśa and ’Brom ston pa explain that the
knowledge of the past and the workings of karma across lives are
difficult to grasp and profound, and should therefore not be revealed
to others or put down in writing. While Indian jātaka stories are
widely and freely disseminated, the jātakas of the Bu chos are thus
given the aura of esoteric knowledge. At first sight, this may seem
odd, as the stories themselves do not contain anything that would
usually fall within the realm of esoteric transmissions. Is the call for
secrecy an attempt to create the notion of an inner circle of those
who are initiated into this knowledge, inclusive only of those who
were present when the stories were told, and including the reader of
the Bu chos stories who is thus integrated into this exclusive circle? Or
is it an attempt to pre-empt potential criticism of the way ’Brom ston
is elevated to bodhisattva rank in these narratives? By saying that the
workings of karma are difficult to understand and that individuals
without faith will not have the capacity to grasp this profound
knowledge, any doubt about the incarnation stories can be dismissed
as ignorance. Or is the call for secrecy and the injunction against
writing them down an attempt to explain why the stories were not
publicly known for several generations, until The Book was finally
compiled in writing at Narthang in 1302?
Any and all of the above motivations may have played a role. In
this context, we also need to consider how the jātakas are embedded
in the narrative programme of The Book as a whole. They are told to
illustrate specific verses of the Bodhisattvamaṇyāvali contained in
the first part of The Book, the Pha chos. The Pha chos itself contains a
long section of dialogues that are exclusively devoted to an elucidation
of the Bodhisattvamaṇyāvali by explaining how the bodhisattva
qualities described in the poem are embodied by ’Brom ston pa.
34 ‘Yon tan shin tu che ste gzhan gyi blor shor bar dka’ / khyod kyis gzhan la
bshad du mi rung / khyod rang gzung bar bya ba’i phyir cung zad bshad kyis...’,
Bka’ gdams glegs bam, Bu chos, 2.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 163
These dialogues are presented in a question-and-answer format. They
begin with fairly tangible and ordinary topics, but the conversation
gradually shifts to a more sublime level. While the beginning is set in
the hermitage of Brag Yer pa or at Atiśa’s residence in Snye thang, in
the course of the conversation, Atiśa uses his magic powers (Tib. rdzu
’phrul) to create a palace of light, where the remainder of the questions
and answers take place. Eventually, ’Brom ston reveals his heart, which
is seen to contain the four main meditation deities of the Bka’ gdams
pa tradition.35 The scene shifts into what is called dag snang (pure
vision) in Tibetan. The clan name ’Brom is changed into a ‘secret’
name consisting of the mantra syllable ’Bhrūṃ, and in the final
sections of the dialogues Atiśa addresses ’Brom ston pa as ’Bhrūṃ rje
(Master ’Bhrūṃ). Here, we have indeed entered an esoteric level that
is not accessible to beings with ordinary perception. Given that in the
arrangement of The Book the jātaka stories of the Bu chos follow the
dialogues of the Pha chos and illustrate their meaning by explaining
the conditions generated in the past, they must be considered part of
this esoteric knowledge too. This adds an additional layer of reasons
why they are presented as an esoteric knowledge, reserved for the
chosen few who are able to understand them.
One further crucial aspect needs to be addressed here. We saw that
in the life story of Buddha Śākyamuni, the knowledge of his previous
lives immediately preceded his awakening. In Indian Buddhism,
the knowledge of the past and the future is considered one of the
supernatural knowledges (P. abhiññā, Skt. abhijñā), alongside such
abilities as reading other people’s minds or the ability to hear human
and divine voices. These can be obtained through meditation and are
not reserved for the Buddha alone. Only the last of the six supernat-
ural knowledges, the knowledge of how to eliminate the defilements
that bind sentient beings to the cycle of existence, is specific to a fully
awakened Buddha.36 Knowledge of the three times, past present and
future, is, however, a necessary element of the omniscience ascribed
to a Buddha.
35 Namely, Buddha Śākyamuni, Avalokiteśvara, Acala, and Tārā.
36 Appleton, Jātaka Stories, 45.

164 ULRIKE ROESLER
Atiśa’s ability to recount the stories of previous lives and explain
their karmic connections with the present therefore characterises
him as an accomplished Buddhist practitioner with supernatural
knowledge. We may even go one step further. Within the narrative
structure of the jātakas, Atiśa takes the position in which we
would normally expect to find Buddha Śākyamuni. Like Buddha
Śākyamuni, Atiśa is asked for instruction, tells the story of the past,
and makes the connection with the present by identifying the main
characters of the story with the individuals in the present. Like the
Buddha of the Indian jātakas, he is the omniscient narrator. This
is a powerful narrative way of replacing the figure of the highest
authority in the Buddhist tradition—the Buddha himself—
with the Indian authority of the Bka’ gdams tradition, Atiśa
Dīpaṃkaraśriīñāna. The correspondences in the narrative structure
are shown in the table below.
Pāli Jātakas Jātakas of the Bu chos
1. Story of the present: Śākyamuni and his 1. Story of the present: Atiśa and his
disciples disciples
2. Story of the past told by the Buddha 2. Story of the past told by Atiśa and
and dealing with his past lives dealing with ’Brom ston pa’s past lives
3. Gāthā verses 3. Verses from the Bodhisattvamaṇyāvali
4. Identification: Characters from the 4. Identification: Characters from the
story of the past = the Buddha and his story of the past = Atiśa, ’Brom ston
audience pa, and other disciples of Atiśa
Atiśa occupies the role of the omniscient narrator, a role that
would normally be reserved for the Buddha, and the jātaka stories
place ’Brom ston pa in the role of the bodhisattva, the Buddha-to-be,
as the main character in the stories of the past.

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 165
4. Conclusion
The narrative elevation of teachers active in eleventh-century Tibet
to a rank similar to the Buddha, accomplished by literary means, is a
bold move, and this specific literary device is, as far as I am aware, un-
paralleled within the Tibetan literature of this period. The creators of
The Book must therefore be seen as innovators of the tradition. They
played an active part in the Tibetan assimilation of Buddhism by
creatively adapting narrative norms to their own context.
The jātaka stories use a well-known narrative pattern for their
own ends, shifting the focus from India to Tibet, and putting
the founding figures of the newly emerging Bka’ gdams tradition
centre stage. The narrative pattern employed in these stories imbues
the Buddhist teachers of Tibet with authority and superhuman
knowledge, parallel to that of the Buddha, and elevates figures
of Tibetan history to the status of major players in the history of
Buddhism itself.
The narrative format conveys its message discretely, without
having to give explicit explanations of this shift. The deliberate use of
the jātaka frame is all it takes to shift the emphasis of the story from
India to Tibet and to make Buddhism something truly Tibetan, with
its destiny playing out on the Tibetan plateau, and driven by figures
of authority within the Tibetan Buddhist tradition. Buddhism thus
becomes part of the story of Tibet, in step with the general process
of adoption and assimilation of Buddhism that took place in Tibet
during the Buddhist revival period of the eleventh and twelfth
centuries.
Buddhist narrative was a powerful tool in this process, and
attention to narrative patterns helps us to understand better why and
how Buddhism gained such great popularity on the Tibetan plateau
during this period. Similar processes of adoption and adaptation can
be observed concerning other forms of narrative and other Asian
countries.
Narrative was thus instrumental in spreading the message of
Buddhism in different societies and environments by integrating the
universal message of the Buddhist doctrine into the local and specific
cultural contexts of those who narrated the stories and their audiences.

166 ULRIKE ROESLER
Bibliography
Abbreviations
BDRC Buddhist Digital Resource Centre, https://library.bdrc.io/
D Derge blockprint edition of the Tibetan Buddhist canon.
See Secondary Sources, Barber, A. W., ed. Numbers
correspond to those in Ui, Suzuki, Kanakura, and Tada,
eds., A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons.
P Peking blockprint edition of the Tibetan Buddhist canon.
Numbers correspond to those in the Otani catalogue. See
Secondary Sources, Suzuki, ed., The Tibetan Tripitaka.
Primary Sources
Bka’ chems ka khol ma. Jo bo a ti shas gter nas bton pa [Pillar
Testament. Retrieved from the Treasure by Jo bo Atiśa].
Traditional date 1048. Edited by Smon lam rgya mtsho.
Lanzhou: Kan su’u mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1989.
Bka’ gdams glegs bam [Book of Kadam]. Vol. 1: Jo bo rje lha gcig
dpal ldan a ti sha’i rnam thar bla ma’i yon tan chos kyi ’byung
gnas sogs bka’ gdams rin po che’i glegs bam bzhugs so [The Book
of Kadam, [including] the Biography of the Sole Lord Glorious
Atiśa, the Good Qualities of the Lama, Source of the Dharma].
Vol. 2: ’Brom ston rgyal ba’i ’byung gnas kyi skyes rabs bka‘ gdams
bu chos le’u nyi shu ba bzhugs so [Son Teachings of the Kadam in
Twenty Chapters, Incarnation Stories of ’Brom ston Rgyal ba’i
’byung gnas]. Xining: Mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang,
1994.
Dpe chos dang dpe chos rin chen spungs pa [Dharma Exemplified and
Dharma Exemplified, a Heap of Jewels]. Composed in 1105
based on the teachings of Po to ba Rin chen gsal (1027–1105)
and edited in the twelfth or early thirteenth century by Lce sgom
Shes rab rdo rje. Edited by Mgon po dar rgyas. Gangs can rig
brgya’i sgo ’byed lde mig [A Key to Unlock Tibet’s Many Kinds
of Learning] 17. Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1991.
Maṇi bka’ ’bum [Collected Teachings on Avalokiteśvara]. Mdzad

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 167
pa po: Chos rgyal srong btsan sgam po. Gter ston: Grub thob dngos
grub sogs. [(Alleged) Author: Dharma King Srong btsan sgam
po. Treasure Revealers: Grub thob dngos grub and others.] 2
vols. Edited by Rdo bis Tshe ring rdo rje. Lha sa: Bod ljongs mi
dmangs dpe skrun khang, 2013.
Secondary Sources
Appleton, Naomi. Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism: Narrating
the Bodhisattva Path. London: Routledge, 2016.
Barber, A. W., ed. The Tibetan Tripitaka: Taipei Edition. 72 vols.
Taipei: SMC Publishing, 1991.
Baruch, Willy. ‘Le cinquante-deuxième chapitre du mJaṅs-blun
(Sūtra du sage et du fou)’ [The Fifty-Second Chapter of the
Mdzangs blun (Sūtra of the Wise and the Fool)]. Journal
Asiatique [Asiatic Journal] 243 (1955): 339–66.
Dimitrov, Dragomir. Mārgavibhāga: die Unterscheidung der
Stilarten: kritische Ausgabe des ersten Kapitels von Daṇḍins
Poetik Kāvyādarśa und der tibetischen Übertragung Sñan ṅag
me loṅ nebst einer deutschen Übersetzung des Sansksrittextes
[Mārgavibhāga: Differentiation of Styles. Critical Edition of
the First Chapter of Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa and its Tibetan
Rendition Sñan ṅag me loṅ, with a German Translation of the
Sanskrit Text]. Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 2002.
Ehrhard, Franz-Karl. ‘The Transmission of the Thig-le bcu-drug and
the Bka’ gdams glegs bam’. In Proceedings of the Ninth Seminar
of the IATS, 2000. Volume 10: The Many Canons of Tibetan
Buddhism, edited by Helmut Eimer and David Germano, 29–56.
Leiden: Brill, 2002.
Eimer, Helmut. Berichte über das Leben des Atiśa
(Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna): Eine Untersuchung der Quellen.
[Accounts of the Life of Atiśa (Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna): An
Investigation of the Sources.] Asiatische Forschungen 51.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1977.
Fukita, Takamichi. ‘The Original Meaning and Role of Avadāna’.
In Saddharmāmṛtam: Festschrift für Jens-Uwe Hartmann zum
65. Geburtstag [Saddharmāmṛtam: Festschrift for Jens-Uwe

168 ULRIKE ROESLER
Hartmann on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday], edited by
Oliver von Criegern, Gudrun Melzer, and Johannes Schneider,
139–48. Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische
Studien der Universität Wien, 2018.
Grey, Leslie. A Concordance of Buddhist Birth Stories. Oxford: The
Pali Text Society, 1994.
Hahn, Michael. Haribhaṭṭa in Nepal: Ten Legends from His
Jātakamālā and the Anonymous Śākyasiṃhajātaka. Tokyo:
International Institute for Buddhist Studies of the International
College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies, 2007.
⸻. Poetical Vision of the Buddha’s Former Lives: Seventeen
Legends from Haribhaṭṭa’s Jātakamālā. Delhi: Aditya Prakashan,
2011.
Hanisch, Albrecht. Āryaśūras Jātakamālā: Philologische
Untersuchungen zu den Legenden 1 bis 15 [Āryaśūras
Jātakamālā: A Philological Study of Legends 1–15]. 2 vols.
Indica et Tibetica 43. Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 2005.
Hinüber, Oskar von. A Handbook of Pāli Literature. Berlin; New
York: Walter de Gruyter, 1996.
Hirschberg, Daniel A. ‘A Post-Incarnate Usurper? Inheritance at
the Dawn of Catenate Reincarnation in Tibet’. Revue d’Études
Tibétaines [Journal of Tibetan Studies] 8 (February 2017):
65–83.
Isaacson, Harunaga, and Francesco Sferra. The Sekanirdeśa of
Maitreyanātha (Advayavajra) with the Sekanirdeśapañjikā of
Rāmapāla: Critical Edition of the Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts
with English Translation and Reproduction of the MSS. Naples:
Università degli Studi di Napoli ‘L’Orientale’, 2014.
Jinpa, Thubten, trans. The Book of Kadam: The Core Texts. Boston:
Wisdom Publications, 2008.
Kapstein, Matthew. ‘Remarks on the Maṇi Bka’-’bum and the
Cult of Āvalokiteśvara in Tibet’. In Tibetan Buddhism: Reason
and Revelation, edited by Steven D. Goodman and Ronald M.
Davidson, 79–93. Albany: SUNY, 1992.
Manson, Charles. The Second Karmapa Karma Pakshi: Tibetan
Mahāsiddha. Boulder: Shambhala Publications, 2022.
Martin, Dan. ‘The Book Moving Incident of 1209’. In Edition,

TIBETAN ADAPTATIONS OF THE JĀTAKA GENRE 169
éditions: l’écrit au Tibet, évolution et devenir [Editing and
Editions: Tibetan Writing, Its Evolution and Development],
edited by Anne Chayet, Cristina Scherrer-Schaub, Françoise
Robin, and Jean-Luc Achard, 197–217. Collectanea Himalayica
3. München: Indus Verlag, 2010.
Pabongka Rinpoche. Liberation in the Palm of your Hand: A Concise
Discourse on the Path to Enlightenment. Edited by Trijang
Rinpoche and translated by Michael Richards. Boston: Wisdom
Publications, 1991.
Roesler, Ulrike. ‘Materialien zur Redaktionsgeschichte des mDzaṅs
blun: Die Selbstaufopferung des Prinzen Sujāta’ [Materials for
a Redactional History of the mDzangs blun: Prince Sujāta’s
Self-Sacrifice]. In Indica et Tibetica: Festschrift für Michael
Hahn zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht
[Indica and Tibetica: Festschrift for Michael Hahn Presented
by Friends and Students on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday],
edited by Konrad Klaus and Jens-Uwe Hartmann, 405–22.
Vienna: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien
der Universität Wien, 2007.
Miller, Amy Sims. ‘Jewelled Dialogues: The Role of The Book in
the Formation of the Kadam Tradition within Tibet’. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Virginia, 2004.
Sernesi, Marta. ‘Bibliography and Cultural History: Remarks on the
Bka’ gdams glegs bam’. In The Illuminating Mirror: Tibetan
Studies in Honour of Per K. Sørensen on the Occasion of His 65th
Birthday, edited by Olaf Czaja and Guntram Hazod, 411–44.
Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag, 2015.
Sørensen, Per K. The Mirror Illuminating the Royal Genealogies:
Tibetan Buddhist Historiography: An Annotated Translation of
the XIVth Century Tibetan Chronicle rGyal-rabs gsal-ba’i me-
long. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 1994.
Suzuki, Daisetz T., ed. The Tibetan Tripitaka. Peking Edition. Kept
in the Library of the Otani University, Kyoto. Reprinted under
the supervision of the Otani University, Kyoto. 168 vols. Tokyo:
Tibetan Tripitaka Research Institute, 1955–1961.
Takakusu, J. ‘Tales of the Wise Man and the Fool; in Tibetan and
Chinese’. The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain

170 ULRIKE ROESLER
and Ireland 33.3 (1901): 447–60.
Tropper, Kurt. Die Jātaka-Inschriften im skor lam chen mo des
Klosters Zha lu. Einführung, textkritische Studie, Edition der
Paneele 1-8 mit Sanskritparallelen und deutscher Übersetzung
[The Jātaka Inscriptions in the skor lam chen mo at Zhalu
Monastery: Introduction, Textcritical Study, Edition of Panels
1–8 with Sanskrit Parallels and German Translation]. Vienna:
Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien der
Universität Wien, 2005.
Ui, Hakuju, Munetada Suzuki, Yenshō Kanakura, and Tōkan Tada,
eds. Vol. 1: A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons
(Bkaḥ-ḥgyur and Bstan-ḥgyur). Vol. 2: A Catalogue-Index of the
Tibetan Buddhist Canons (Bkaḥ-ḥgyur and Bstan-ḥgyur). Sendai:
Tōhoku Imperial University, 1934.
van der Kuijp, Leonard. ‘The Dalai Lamas and the Origin of
Reincarnate Lamas’. In The Dalai Lamas: A Visual History,
edited by Martin Brauen, 15–31. Chicago: Serindia Publications
2005.
⸻. ‘Tibetan Belles-Lettres: The Influence of Daṇḍin and
Kṣemendra’. In Tibetan Literature: Studies in Genre, edited by
José Ignacio Cabezón and Roger R. Jackson, 393–410. Ithaka:
Snow Lion, 1996.