CHAPTER ONE
Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency
in Medieval Japa nese Narratives
Body
Even in the modern West, the body, far from being a term whose meaning is self-
evident, is in fact a hotly contested concept that has become the subject of con-
siderable debate in the last few de cades.1 Nietz sche’s invective against Western
thinkers on the grounds that “they despised the body; they left it out of the ac-
count: more, they treated it as an enemy,”2 whether true or otherwise, seems to
capture succinctly how the body has come to be thematized, a century later, in
an entirely new field of research devoted exclusively to it. What we might call the
“body question” has spawned a bewilderingly diverse array of scholarly works in
the Western academy, much of it a reaction against its own philosophical tradi-
tion, which it accuses of neglecting the body, or worse, showering it with abuse.3
The argument runs that for all the differences between, say, Greek philosophy
and medieval Christian theology, Western thinking has been marked by a pro-
found dualism in which the body has come to be constituted in opposition to the
soul/spirit/mind, and that as the unprivileged term in the binary, it has for a long
time been subjected to systematic neglect or denigration. That Western thought
is dualistic; that the body has always been in a position of subordination to the
soul/mind; and that woman, who is identified with the body, has been positioned
as inferior to man— these, it would appear, are some of the constitutive features
of the Western tradition.
Many scholars have sought to complicate and pluralize this par tic u lar account
of the Western tradition.4 They have argued, for instance, that Descartes’s writ-
ings marked a seminal moment in Western thought when a radical break occurred
with medieval conceptions of the body— for the first time, both the body and
nature became passive and inert entities, disconnected from the cosmos and di-
vorced from the soul, and the mind became the sole repository of thought and of
mental pro cesses.5 It has also been suggested that new developments in the sci-
ences in the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in Eu rope brought about
new ways of imagining the body. The practice of dissection, for example, led to the
10

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 11
body being understood as a machine, which could be observed as an object, and
analyzed as a discreet anatomical entity, made up of muscle, flesh, bones, viscera,
and a skeletal structure.6 Regardless of the differences between those who believe
that the body has been reviled since the dawn of Western civilization and those
who argue that it is with Descartes that the body became loaded with negative
connotations, what is indisputable is that “body studies” is born of the need to
subvert and challenge the discourses on the body produced by that tradition.
Until recently these debates on the body have tended to veer between two poles.
On the one hand, there are those who insist that there is an ontological basis to
the body prior to social meaning or linguistic signification. In this view the body
is first and foremost constituted through biology, which forms the physical sub-
strate upon which different social and cultural meanings come to be inscribed.
As Chris Shilling puts it, “we ‘all know’ that the body consists of such features as
flesh, muscles, bones and blood, and contains species- specific capacities which
identify us as humans.”7 While granting that the specific features of the body may
change over time— bones grow brittle, hair thins, the flesh sags— the body, under-
stood as a biological entity, is in this view universal, regardless of time or place.
On the other hand, the social constructivist approach has sought to move
away from an emphasis on the physicality of the body and the attendant dangers
of biological reductionism, by focusing instead on the body’s symbolic forms, and
on the meanings with which it is inscribed in different cultural and historical con-
texts. This approach makes the idea of the body as a given, with fixed meanings,
unsustainable. For, like childhood, death, madness, sex, and so on the body too
now has a history, and far from being universal and stable, bodies are seen as par-
tic u lar, contingent, and changing formations that are historically and culturally
variable. We recognize, not least because of the work of Michel Foucault, that the
“body” is historically constructed and that it varies even in the history of the West.8
These contesting claims, for all their differences, have been framed within the
mind/body and nature/culture debates, which have haunted Western thought
since the eigh teenth century.9 Given that these debates belong to a history that
has little to do with the world of medieval Japan, is there a way in which we can
speak about the body in medieval Japa nese texts, without reproducing some of
the core presumptions that have gone into its making as a category? I would sug-
gest that the body/bodies we encounter in these texts begin to acquire some sem-
blance of intelligibility only when they are inserted within the context of the larger
epistemic framework of what one might loosely call the East Asian medical, reli-
gious, and philosophical traditions within which they are produced.10
The medieval Japa nese world shared with its Eu ro pean medieval counterparts
a conception of the cosmos in which the human and natural order w ere integrally

12 Chapter 1
linked. This was a world in which men, women, animals, and gods inhabited a
common cosmological order, often intermingling promiscuously with one an-
other; gods w ere active agents and nature was a living presence, yet to be reduced
to a passive object, to be given meaning by the Man of Reason. The relationship
between the body and mind was not the site of troubled debates in the East Asian
traditions, in the way that it was in Western thought. The question that pre-
occupied Daoists and Buddhists alike was not whether the body and mind were
connected (for it was assumed that they w ere); it was rather how the two could
work most effectively together as a mind- body complex. The body, in this frame-
work, was not reducible to muscle, flesh, and bone. Nor was it inert and passive
matter, divorced from the mind. Mental and affective pro cesses were understood
as integral parts of its materiality, and the body was envisaged as a psychosomatic
pro cess, “something done, rather than something one has.” 11 “Thought” did not
function as the other of “feeling” or emotion, nor was form the antithesis of
matter. In the medieval Japa nese tradition, the word kokoro referred to both heart
and mind; the verb omou encapsulated both feeling and thinking,12 and the
word for love, koi, made no distinction between the physical and spiritual as-
pects of love. Both material and mental/emotional pro cesses were central to the
constitution of a meaningful body/self.
In Daoist religious and medical discourses, for example, the body is under-
stood as linked to material and psychical pro cesses alike through psychophysical
matter or energy (Ch. qi; Jp. ki), and the energy arterial pulses (Jp. myaku). To-
gether, they constitute the life force of the self. It is as if the distinction between
the internal and the external does not apply, for the body presents itself as a per-
fectly transparent entity in which the viscera and organs are openly displayed. We
are far removed here from the Western practice of dissection in which “the vis-
cera are truths buried in and under dense flesh, and fat and bone . . . secrets that
have to be uncovered.” 13 This has implications for how the body is imagined and
visualized in literary and visual texts.
Mark Elvin’s observation that “Chinese pictures of the human body, clothed
or semi- clothed, are—to Western eyes— meagre, schematic and inadequate,” 14
highlights the limits of the intelligibility of the body when it fails to correspond
to the one that was produced in post- Renaissance Eu rope, and to which we are
heirs. As John Hay observes, the literary and pictorial traditions of the premodern
period in China have no “image of a body as a whole object, least of all as a solid
and well shaped entity whose shapeliness is supported by the structure of the
skeleton and defined in the exteriority of swelling muscle and enclosing flesh.” 15
It is the principle of linearity underlying the energy arterial pulses, he argues, that
“provided the most convincing way of embodying the kind of structures that gave

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 13
the body both its existence and its life.” 16 This insight is highly suggestive for, as I
argue in the following chapter, it is precisely through robes and hair, whose lin-
ear forms are analogous to the energy arterial pulses through which qi flows, that
the body is imagined in a text such as the Genji.
Invoking the historicity of the body is not to claim that different cultures or
periods produce one single, stable body at any given moment. We cannot speak
of a “medieval Japa nese body,” any more than we can of a “Re nais sance body” or
a “modern body.” For there is always a multiplicity of bodies in play in any given
historical period, and both how they appear and the significations with which they
are imbued are subject to the par tic u lar contexts and generic conventions within
which they are discursively produced. In a courtly text such as the Genji, for
example, the aristocratic body is imagined as a phenomenological entity whose
presence is felt, not through elaborate descriptions of its physical appearance but
rather through its stylized, performative modes. Setsuwa tales, by contrast, which
speak to a more heterogeneous audience, produce bodies that engage not only in
the refined arts of poetry and music but also in the more vulgar activities of every-
day life— sex, eating, defecating, and the like. And yet, the heterogeneity of these
bodies notwithstanding, it may be possible to identify something that makes them
recognizably akin one to the other, an affinity that rests on certain core presump-
tions that have gone into their making and which are grounded in the epistemic
framework within which they are produced.
Let me explain further what I mean. In medieval Japa nese pictorial scrolls
(emaki), the body is made palpable not through the depiction of the body as an
enfleshed entity but rather through robes and through what one might call bodily
comportment. The twelfth- century Genji monogatari emaki (Picture Scroll of
the Tale of Genji), for instance, seeks to capture the world of the Genji through the
immobile postures of noblemen and women, whose faces, indistinguishable one
from the other, are sketched minimally through the stylized technique of
hikime kagibana (dashes for eyes and hooks for noses), registering little by way of
emotions, thereby conveying the innate grace, self- possession, and nobility that
are meant to inhere naturally to those who belong to the upper classes (Figure 1).
It is for this reason that by representing Kumoinokari in an upright position,
as she approaches Yūgiri to snatch a letter from him, the scroll is able to suggest
that something dramatic and out of the ordinary has occurred— Kumoinokari is
in a state of agitation caused by her suspicion that Yūgiri is involved with another
woman. The bodies of ordinary men and women in picture scrolls of the twelfth
century such as the Saigyō monogatari emaki (Picture Scroll of Life of Monk
Saigyō) or Ban Dainagon emaki (Picture Scroll of the Courtier Ban Dainagon),
on the other hand, are marked by movement and action and exaggerated facial

14 Chapter 1
Figure 1. Genji monogatari emaki and Makura no sōshi emaki (Picture Scroll of the Tale of
Genji and Picture Scroll of the Pillow Book), 12th century, Tokugawa Art Museum, Nagoya.
expressions and gestures, signaling the vast distance that separates them from
aristocrats, whose self- contained bodies are manifestations of their supposed
mastery of themselves and the world (Figure 2).
The diverse bodies that appear in the Japa nese pictorial tradition are only
sketchily outlined and are often delineated in a stylized manner. However, regard-
less of the differences of gender and class, the bodies in emaki are repositories not
only of the physical but, equally importantly, of the par tic u lar mental/social at-
tributes that are believed to characterize different social groups.
The bodies in Buddhist sculpture, which draw on Indian figural traditions,
appear to conform to some recognizable principles of physiology and anatomy,
that is to say, with conventions with which we are familiar. The guardian figures
that flank the gates of temples, protecting the buddhas within, are depicted in a
lifelike manner with strong, muscular physiques and bulging veins. Likewise, the
statues of Zen masters, like Ikkyū, are cast in a realistic mode: hair, believed to
be his own, is implanted on Ikkyū’s head, eyebrows, and chin.
At first glance, what distinguishes the bodies in emaki as opposed to the fig-
ures in Buddhist sculpture is that the latter are depicted realistically. And yet, this

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 15
Figure 2. Ban Dainagon emaki
(Picture Scroll of the Courtier Ban
Dai nagon), 12th century, Sakai
Collection, Tokyo.
lifelike quality is not an attempt at a repre sen ta tion of the human body as an
object, whose entirety is captured through the precision and accuracy of its
anatomical detail. The statues of the patriarchs and guardians are not symbolic
repre sen ta tions of holy figures, for they are not envisaged in a mimetic mode.
Rather, they are seen as living embodiments of a life force made manifest in ma-
terial form (Figure 3). What appears to have interested Japa nese sculptors was the
best way to capture “the energy and power by which the dharma— invisible, in-
conceivable, unknowable— mystically projected itself into the everyday world.” 17
The bodies in these lifelike statues are seen as repositories not only of the
physical but also the psychic attributes that go into the constitution of person-
hood. Sculpted statues of illustrious monks often contained their ashes, thereby
suffusing them with the presence of these masters.18 Likewise, in using Ikkyū’s
own hair to produce his statue the aim was not to create the most perfect likeness
of Ikkyū; it was rather to inject the spirit of this holy figure into his statue. When
medieval Buddhist tales speak of people going to the temple to pray before the
Buddha, it is telling that they do not refer to the “Buddha image” (butsuzō), a word,
which is a more recent invention.19 That no distinction was drawn between the
image and what we would call the “actual” Buddha tells us something about the
way in which the image was seen as making palpably manifest the body- mind of

16 Chapter 1
Figure 3. The Indian Patriarch
Mujaku by Unkei, 13th century,
Kōfukuji, Nara.
the sacred figure. The eye- opening ceremony (kaigen) that accompanied the con-
secration of a statue or sacred object to formally declare it as being animated by
its spirit constituted an institutionalized ritual, which reflected the commonly
held understanding that statues, paintings, stupas, mandalas, and the like w ere all
living sacred presences.
What Buddhist statues exemplify is a conception of the body in which the body
does not exist separately from the mind; the two are integrated into a kind of
mind- body (shinshin) complex that functions as a single psychosomatic entity.20
Life or existence in Buddhist thought is made up of the five elements or aggregates
(Sk. pañca skandhā) of which the first, rūpa- skandhā, is form or matter, related to
the six organs of the senses (Jp. rokkon), while the other four are associated with
mental faculties. The distinctions of form and matter or body and mind have no
valence here given that the six sense organs in the Buddhist framework include
not only what we would categorize as physical attributes— the eye, the ear, the nose,
the tongue, and the body— but also the mind/consciousness.21 Both the figures
drawn in emaki and the holy figures that appear in Buddhist sculpture, for all
their differences, share in the assumption that the body is not mere matter and
that the heart/mind is integral to its very constitution.

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 17
Neither materialist arguments nor social constructivist claims are entirely
adequate to conceptualizing the body in medieval Japa nese texts. The social con-
structivist move to historicize the body is critical for recognizing that the mean-
ings with which the body is imbued are not universal or constant, and that they
are inseparably linked to the social and historical contexts within which they are
produced. However, historicization need not lead to a denial of the materiality
of the body, as in some extreme versions of culturalism, where the body seems to
disappear altogether in a fug of discourse. It is worth taking the corporeality
of the body seriously, while acknowledging that what constitutes the body’s
materiality is itself subject to variability. The body we encounter in the East Asian
tradition is not an anatomical entity made up of flesh, bones, and muscles. Fur-
thermore, its materiality already carries within it the psychological dispositions
and mental attributes that go into the formation of the body and personhood.
Even the physical substrate of the body, which we assume to be universal, is itself
historically variable. The choice between the natural versus the social/cultural
body that is on offer in these debates is part of a very par tic u lar history that
belongs to the West, and hence necessarily inadequate to thinking about other
traditions of embodiment, in which the body is imagined outside of the well-
worn binary of nature and culture. It is this, to us, unfamiliar body that I seek to
explore in this book.
Woman/Sex/Gender
It has become part of our common sense to assume that what distinguishes men
from women is sexual difference and that this difference is biologically de-
termined. As feminist scholars have long argued, sexual difference has been the
basis for justifying the idea that women are innately inferior to men. It is by as-
sociating them first and foremost with their reproductive functions and, by ex-
tension, with their bodies, that women are seen as being naturally different from
and, by implication, lesser than men. The profound somatophobia that charac-
terizes Western thought, feminists argue, has had serious implications for the ways
in which women have come to be positioned within this tradition. For if the body
has been seen as a danger to the operations of reason, or to the salvation of the
soul, then it follows that woman, who is synonymous with the body, and with un-
reason, is marked as inferior to man and to everything else that is valorized in
that moral and ethical system.22
Scholars who have challenged the idea that the body has uniformly been the
site of denigration or neglect have had to do so by questioning the assumption
that there has been a constant and unchanging alignment, in all of Western

18 Chapter 1
thought, between male and soul/mind, on the one hand, and woman and body,
on the other. Caroline Bynum, for example, has argued that gender imagery in
medieval Eu rope was marked by an extraordinary degree of fluidity and that
“medieval theologians and natural phi los o phers often mixed and fused the
genders, treating not just the body of Christ but all bodies as both male and
female.”23 Thomas Laqueur, likewise, has demonstrated how until the seven-
teenth century, what prevailed was the “one sex model,” in which men and women
were seen as having essentially the same sexual organs—no linguistic distinction
was made between ovaries and testicles, which shared the same name, and what
distinguished men from women was merely that men’s genitalia lay on the outside
while those of women w ere inverted.24
The one- sex model did not presume that men and women were equal: it was
taken for granted that the male constituted the normative model of which the
female was simply an inferior version. What is significant, however, was that nei-
ther the body nor its sexual organs were the privileged sites for the justification of
par tic u lar social arrangements. To be one’s gender, to occupy a par tic u lar place
within the social order as a man or woman, was itself seen as part of the natural
order. Both what we would call “nature” and “culture” were cut of the same cloth,
part of the same divine scheme, and there was no need to turn to the body for
affirming this preordained hierarchy. Sex did not function as a biological cate-
gory any more than gender did as a social one.25
The epistemological shift from the medieval world that transformed the body
into a machine, whose workings w ere seen as being governed by the laws of
nature, and whose constituent elements could be observed and analyzed through
the practice of dissection, also brought with it new ways of understanding woman,
sex, and gender. By the eigh teenth century, men and women came to be seen as
radically different, and the isomorphism of their anatomy gave way to new theo-
ries about the incommensurability of their sexual organs. Among the many causes
for this there is no doubt that po liti cal developments loomed large. When hierar-
chy was taken as given, and seen as part of the natural order of things, there was
no specific need to justify the differential and unequal treatment of women. But
in an age that began to speak of equality and liberty as being the “natural” state
of man, a rationale was needed for why this equality and liberty did not pertain
to women (or indeed to those of different “colors” or “races”).26
The radical difference that was seen to separate men from women now came
to be grounded in a biological truth, a fact of nature that could not be challenged
or changed.27 In place of the fluid gender boundaries and a belief in the inter-
changeable and permeable nature of the sexes that had characterized medieval
thinking, sex now became the defining characteristic that marked woman off from

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 19
man and served as the overarching explanation for differences between men and
women tout court. For those who sought to contest this view, the chief argument
became that sexual or biological difference did not determine intellectual and
other differences. The category “gender” emerged precisely as a way of arguing that
social roles w ere not necessarily bound to sex; gender, it was argued, was “a social
category imposed on a sexed body.”28
The feminist project of the sixties and seventies assumed the naturalness of
sex, while challenging the social roles that were seen as following from “natural”
biological differences. It was in this context that what we now call “women’s his-
tory” emerged; at the heart of the po liti cal project of feminism that informed
this history was a radical questioning of the androcentric biases of history writing
and an attempt to rediscover stories about women, which had been silenced and
written out of historical accounts. There emerged in these writings an autonomous
women’s sphere within which women w ere active agents, alive, and even rebellious;
the task of retrieval meant that women from the past could now be re- presented
as the foremothers of and role models for women today.
The project of writing women’s histories reverberated across many other
disciplines. Religious traditions came to be interrogated by feminist scholars
who sought to expose the patriarchal and misogynous assumptions that they
saw at the very heart of these traditions. Feminists who were also Christians
were the first to undertake a thoroughgoing critique of the scriptural texts and to
put forward a radical new exegesis of the Christian tradition from a feminist
perspective.
It is not surprising, then, that in many ways the work done on women and Bud-
dhism mirrors some of the same concerns and strategies that w ere first adopted
by feminists working within the Christian tradition.29 It is within the tradition
of sixties’ and seventies’ feminism that much of our current work on women in
medieval Japa nese studies is squarely located. Narratives about nuns, princesses,
courtesans, and women poets are now seen as central to the way in which we tell
the story of both Buddhism and literature in medieval Japan.30 Likewise, there
has been considerable scholarly activity to discover women and their activities
in historical rec ords.31 Rescuing women who until now w ere “hidden from his-
tory” has undoubtedly helped us rethink the nature of medieval Japa nese society,
of its religious practices, and of women’s place in them.
The project of retrieval, however, has been fraught with problems. Under-
pinning much of our work is the assumption that “Woman” is a self- evident, tran-
scendental category that subsumes within its fold the diverse multitude of women
who appear in medieval texts. We may grant that women in this period did not
all belong to the same social class and that there was a vast gap in their material

20 Chapter 1
and cultural circumstances. In place of “Woman” we may choose the more
encompassing “women” as our category of analysis. And yet, this lowercase,
pluralizing amendment still leaves us trapped in an ahistoricism whereby the
very pro cesses through which the category came into being is left unexamined.
What is at issue here is obviously not the existence of real women, for who would
deny that claim? It is rather the assumption that women constitute a self- evident
and distinct category, and that women recognize themselves everywhere and at
all times as so constituted. Many of the questions and doubts I have raised above
have been central to recent debates within feminism itself; it is a mea sure of
our inattentiveness to these ongoing conversations that we continue to speak of
women in medieval Japa nese texts as if they formed a natural, pregiven identity,
in little need of further examination.32
What is more, we assume unreflexively that men and women in medieval
Japan w ere merely versions of us moderns, and that for them, like us, the sexed body
was the single most important and overarching site of difference between men and
women. And yet, what are the grounds for claiming that men and women, regard-
less of time or place, have always been seen as being constituted through the dif-
ferences between their sexual organs? Neither the “one- sex” model that prevailed
in the West until the seventeenth century nor the sexual dimorphism that in-
formed subsequent understandings of the body are necessarily applicable for
interpreting how “male” and “female” came to be constructed in premodern China
and Japan. As Charlotte Furth argues, classical Chinese medical texts, which
formed the basis of Japa nese medical theories, conceived of the feminine ( yin) and
masculine ( yang) principles as complementary aspects of the body, which were
seen to interpenetrate both men and women. The ideal body was the androgynous
one, which held together both elements yin and yang in perfect balance. In Chi-
nese medicine “healthy males and females, when seen as a fertile couple, formed
the matching yin yang opposites of homologous gender.”33
In this schema, not unlike the one that obtained in medieval Eu rope, sex and
gender, which are premised upon a division between natural attributes and so-
cial roles, had little meaning given that “the categories of male and female w ere
understood as both natural and social, and their bodily powers were given spiri-
tual significance as fitting microcosmic participants in a universal order.”34 It is
for this reason that social relations w ere seen as mirroring the same principles
that applied to the body and to the cosmos. “Male” and “female” w ere understood
as complementary rather than mutually opposed, antagonistic forces. This did not
imply, of course, that the two were equal: the male principle was the normative one
and necessarily superior, but the perfect balance of the two was seen as central
to producing harmony in both natural and social relationships.

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 21
For all the differences between medico/philosophical texts and literary cre-
ations, what marked the textual tradition of the medieval period in Japan was that
“man” and “woman” made sense only when imagined in relation to others within
the society to which they belonged, rather than as autonomous and transcenden-
tal entities, whose meanings were fixed and immutable. It was often as mothers,
wives, and daughters, rather than as women qua women, that they w ere identified
in texts. Rather than as individuals, it was their status and position in society at
large that determined the manner in which they came to be known. In the Tale
of Genji, for example, Onna Ichi no Miya, Onna Ni no Miya, and Onna San no
Miya are introduced to us in terms of their social status and their relationship to
each other as the first, second, and third imperial princesses, respectively. That
they are women is not without relevance, but what their names signal is the fact
that they are siblings, born of an impeccable lineage.
If we consider the semantic range of the word onna (woman) and otoko (man),
it is clear that it was conceptually fluid, carry ing many significations, which w ere
always contingent upon context.35 It is only within the specific context of amo-
rous encounters that men and women in the Tale of Genji appear simply as otoko
and onna, without any reference to their kinship status or rank. Even h ere, how-
ever, what these terms signify is not generic man and woman. Through its use of
the terms otoko and onna the text evokes those suspended moments when intense
emotional and erotic possibilities unfold, bringing into play young men and women
who are still of an age when they can participate in the secular world of amorous
sport, before their inevitable withdrawal from a life of worldly pleasures and at-
tachment. For example, Murasaki is referred to as himegimi in the Aoi chapter. It
is when the text suddenly transforms her into onnagimi and Genji into otokogimi
that it becomes clear that their u nion has been consummated.36 Likewise, it is
when Yūgiri puts all his energies into trying to convince Ochiba no Miya to give
in to his advances that the text transforms him from Taishō (Commandant), the
social rank he holds, to simply otoko.37 In the Genji, it is in that moment when
amorous union takes place that otoko and onna erase the particularity of the two
lovers in question, recasting them as figural sites of love, longing, and amorous
desire.
In the world of the Genji and waka poetry, animals and plants are also
metonymically associated with otoko and onna— morning glory (asagao), for
example, is the face of a female lover in the morning; the child who is stroked
(nadeshiko) is at once a flower as well as a girl, who is much loved and raised into
womanhood by a man, while ominaeshi (maidenflower) functions both as flower
and “maiden.”38 Through a thick web of connections the deer is figured as male,
while the bush clover, for whom it/he pines, is associatively linked to the female.

22 Chapter 1
What is striking about the flora and fauna, however, is that they are not treated as
symbols or repre sen ta tions of real men and women. Everything that exists within
nature and the cosmos— animate and inanimate alike—is or ga nized around a set
of correspondences, and male and female is one among many ways of imagining
relationships that are complementary to one another.
Onna in the medieval lexicon is a world removed from the modern word for
woman/women, josei, which was coined in the Meiji period and which, as the
character sei demonstrates, was founded on new biological understandings of men
and women as constituted through their sexuality.39 There is little to suggest that
in medieval Japa nese texts sex was “natural” while gender was socially learned
and “constructed.” It is this sense of the term “gender,” understood not purely as
a social construction, as opposed to the biological truth of sex, that I seek to main-
tain when I use it as an analytical category in the book. Gender, in this context, I
see as a kind of script, and it is the specificity of the gendered per for mance, that
is to say, the particularity of the script that is enacted, that gives substance to the
categories “male” and “female” in medieval texts. This is what makes it possible
for a male poet to slip seamlessly into the persona of the waiting female, and
allows even a monk who has ostensibly renounced the world to enact the role of a
woman pining for her lover.40 While acknowledging that “textual cross- dressing”
was less available to women than it was for men in courtly texts, I maintain
that what it meant to be a woman in a text such as the Genji or the Pillow Book
(Makura no sōshi) was not predetermined by her sex, and that gender as a perfor-
mative act always left open the possibility of deviating from script, thereby creat-
ing polyphonous voices, which can only provisionally be recuperated under the
sign “woman.”
Women and Buddhism
I have suggested above that in texts such as the Tale of Genji, “woman,” far from
being framed as a transcendental category, is endowed with different meanings,
which are always contingent upon context, and that in these texts, being a woman
is not a function of her body’s sexual attributes but rather something that is tied
to the enactment and per for mance of the protocols that give gender some sem-
blance of stability. But what then of Buddhist canonical texts and pop u lar narra-
tives often used for proselytizing the faith, which identify certain characteristics
as intrinsic to women, and sometimes claim that these attributes constitute an
impediment to the attainment of enlightenment? For, as we know, women are often
seen as being burdened by the five obstructions;41 they are afflicted by particu-
larly jealous dispositions; and their bodies are marked by impurities connected

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 23
to menstruation and childbirth, which call for special injunctions prohibiting
them from entering sacred places.
Scholars have focused precisely on these negative repre sen ta tions of women
to argue that Buddhism is discriminatory toward women, and that the portrayal
of women as inferior to men is a structural feature of its beliefs and practices. In-
deed, part of the project of reinscribing women into patriarchal historical and
religious narratives has entailed not only an investigation of the hidden and un-
acknowledged role played by women in shaping Buddhist doctrines and practices
but also an exposure of the power structures that have been instrumental in their
discrimination and exclusion.
Many of the debates regarding Buddhist attitudes to women rest on contend-
ing claims that seek either to establish Buddhism’s misogyny or else to argue for
its inherent egalitarianism. The claim for egalitarianism can take different forms.
The fact that women often appear in Buddhist narratives as bodhisattvas and other
enlightened beings is offered in support of the argument that Buddhism funda-
mentally holds women in high regard. Another approach has been to acknowl-
edge Buddhism’s decline into misogyny by historicizing the different phases of
Buddhism, claiming that Buddhism’s origins were pure and unsullied and that
it became antiwoman only when it became corrupted by influences that w ere
extraneous and antithetical to the core beliefs of its religious system. These claims,
for all their differences, rest on certain shared assumptions that merit closer
examination.
Buddhism is often treated as if it w ere a single, unitary, purposeful, and highly
anthropomorphized category (rather than as a heterogeneous set of doctrines and
practices) that either consciously or unconsciously seeks to impose its will on
women. The fact that Buddhist texts speak of women’s impurity and sinfulness,
or of their power to arouse men and trap them in the web of deluded attach-
ment, is offered as incontrovertible proof of the fact that Buddhism holds an
essentialist view of women as constituted through their sexual organs. In a curious
circularity, the critique of Buddhism as a religion that reduces women to their
sex is made precisely by invoking the same master code, sexuality, that gives
substance and cohesion to the category “woman.” 42
And yet, is there sufficient evidence in the texts themselves to suggest that
women formed an identifiable group that cohered around the specificity of their
sexual attributes? The word in the Japa nese medieval lexicon that corresponds to
the term “body,” mi, like the word shintai, which is used today to signify the phys-
ical body, refers to the bodies of human beings and animals as well as to the life
force that animates these beings. Mi, however, makes no distinction between the
physical body and what we might call the psychic, social, or cultural body; indeed,

24 Chapter 1
mi extends beyond the body to signify a self, understood not as an individual sub-
ject, or autonomous agent separate from society, but rather as one that is mean-
ingful only as a social entity. It is for this reason that one of the most common
usages of the term mi is to signify a person’s status or standing in the world. We
are far removed here from modern conceptions of the individual, as a lone figure,
abstracted from society, and often in opposition to it. When medieval texts speak
of onna no mi they mean more than the physical and sexed body that makes for
womanhood; for both her mental and emotional attributes as well as her relation-
ship to others as a social being are involved in the constitution of what we might
call the female body/self.
The body in the medieval context was not something set in stone, where the
distinction between man and woman was predetermined by their respective sex-
ual characteristics; neither the body nor nature was seen as inert and passive
matter with immutable attributes. This was of profound significance with far-
reaching consequences, for it meant that medieval bodies were granted transfor-
mative powers that rendered the boundaries between gods, humans, and beasts
porous and fluid. Both within canonical texts as well as in pop u lar narratives,
women and their bodies became shape- shifting forms that defied any consolidation
of “woman” as a stable entity.
If the Lotus Sutra made rebirth as a man one of the conditions for attaining
enlightenment,43 the Vimalakirti Sutra argued that viewed from within the Bud-
dhist doctrine of nonduality, neither maleness nor femaleness could be seen as
innate or stable characteristics, thereby attesting to the provisional nature of gen-
dered identities.44 In many Buddhist texts, women who lure men into the trap of
attachment are revealed to be bodhisattvas, and beautiful women turn out to be
fox spirits or demons, seamlessly crossing the boundaries between the human and
nonhuman worlds.45
“Woman” in the Buddhist schema was at once singled out by a particularity
that marked her as different. She was hindered by the five obstructions; her beauty
was dangerous for men who had chosen the path of renunciation; her body was
marked by the impurities of childbirth and menstruation. At the same time,
woman could never be an unchanging and essentialist category, always fixed in
the same way. For all bodies, even those of women, far from being “the flat, hori-
zontal, immovable foundation of physical fact: sex,” 46 were conceptualized as
active agents that could defy common expectations and perform miraculous
transformations, thereby attesting to the power of the Buddhist faith.
That women were positioned as different from men, and that they were not
their equals, is beyond dispute. This does not, however, render Buddhism misog-
ynist, if by that term we mean a conscious and willful hatred of women by men.

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 25
In a world that was both naturally and socially (understood not as two separate
realms) hierarchically ordered, Buddhists assumed that women w ere lesser than
men, and there was little need to justify this “truth” by making women the ob-
jects of sustained attack through polemical treatises and learned disquisitions.
While it is true that women’s shortcomings and sinful dispositions were often used
in Buddhist discourse, what these writings sought to highlight was not women’s
inferiority to men but rather the nature of the profound hurdles that had to be
overcome in order to attain salvation. In other words, “woman” served as a kind
of placeholder, who made possible the playing out of questions and solutions that
were central to the Buddhist project.
Buddhist texts creatively used the topos of “woman” (marked by par tic u lar
shortcomings and failings, but only provisionally so), as a skillful means, a hōben,
if you will, to demonstrate the miraculous powers of the Buddhist teachings, which
made enlightenment possible for all beings. In the pro cess, what they revealed,
through the topos of woman, was the temporary and provisional nature of all that
seemed real in the mundane world of samsāra. This may be one way of reading
the drama that unfolds in the Devadatta chapter of the Lotus Sutra, in which one
of the Buddha’s disciples, Sāriputra, expresses doubts about the eight- year- old
daughter of the dragon king possessing the necessary requisites for attaining Bud-
dhahood on the grounds that the female body was a “filthy” thing, subject to the
five obstructions. It is by overturning this narrative and recounting how the dragon
girl swiftly transforms herself into a man and eventually achieves Buddhahood
that Manjusri demonstrates the shifting boundaries between men, women, drag-
ons, and buddhas. The rhetorical tour de force acquires its par tic u lar potency from
the use of “woman” as a particularly graphic instance of the ways in which con-
ventional and supposedly unchangeable realities can be overturned and reversed.47
It is in this sense that the figure of “woman” is structurally central to the soterio-
logical aims of the Lotus Sutra.
Discussions about women in setsuwa narratives, while ostensibly about women,
also suggest an order of inquiry in which the central point of interest is not women
qua women. What might be the best way to make one’s way in this world, and
ensure one’s salvation in the next; how to outsmart one’s partner; how to make
sense of events that befall one; what might be learned by being attentive to the
intricate workings of karma? It is these mundane predicaments, attendant on
living in the world of samsāra, that often find expression through narratives
about women. Their pedagogical value goes beyond proselytizing exclusively to
real women, for the textual figure of woman in these tales is a powerful re-
minder to men and women alike of the miraculous transformations that faith
can effect.

26 Chapter 1
Agency
I have argued that imputing egalitarianism or misogyny to Buddhism is based
on the assumption that women constitute a self- evident category and that they
recognize themselves as such, and hence work in their own interests as women.
Let me return again to the project of “retrieval,” which presumes the existence of
a female subjectivity, which is under constant threat by the workings of Buddhism.
Once “retrieved,” woman presents herself in many guises: she sometimes appears
to be able to mobilize her agency heroically and act in ways that challenge the
attempts by Buddhism and patriarchy to degrade her as a woman; at other times,
sadly, as a creature of false consciousness, she is complicit with Buddhism’s ideo-
logical agenda, or simply a passive victim of it. The project of unveiling women’s
agency, empowerment, and re sis tance is always haunted by the doppelganger of
women’s oppression, victimhood, and, worse, their own collusion with patriarchal
values.48
How we then judge medieval texts that are seen as offering these conflicting
perspectives becomes an exercise in arbitrariness. To sustain the idea of Buddhist
misogyny it is imperative to show that women are oppressed. At the same time
the emancipatory project, built into feminism, demands that women be seen as
agents, actively fighting oppression. If the texts themselves are resistant to either of
these interpretations, then extratextual evidence is often mobilized to secure the
argument— texts here are often treated as little more than ideological reflections
of a reality that lies outside of them. In each case what is left unexamined is the
concept of agency itself.
As I have argued earlier, the medieval world was populated by gods, buddhas,
men, women, and animals, all of whom consorted together as active agents within
a shared cosmological order. Humans had yet to be privileged as the sole bearers
of agency, with gods and buddhas explained away as “projections,” or manifesta-
tions of the human mind.49 In the medieval universe, gods and buddhas w ere of-
ten the central actors who instigated, inhibited, or mediated the actions taken by
human beings. Our privileging of human agency bears the marks of our par tic u-
lar history— modern liberal thought presumes the existence of a subject who has
complete po liti cal and moral autonomy, and who is naturally predisposed to seek
freedom. Liberal notions of freedom presuppose the existence of a free will, which
operates in de pen dent of social and religious customs and traditions, such that
both a challenge to these traditions or complicity with them are to be read as ema-
nating from a woman’s own desire or will to be liberated or dominated.50 Agency
is often treated as conceptually interchangeable with the idea of re sis tance against
relations of power and domination. Even when female agency is not expressly

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 27
articulated, or is hard to locate, the actions of women are read as signs of a “nascent
feminist consciousness”51 that may produce effects that challenge or disrupt the
dominant male order.
Underlying modern conceptions of agency is the assumption that behind
every act there is the presence of an autonomous individual, who has the innate
desire to strike out against the norms of her society. What if we were to let go of this
anachronistic assumption, and w ere to decouple agency from liberal thought?52
Would it not then open up a space for imagining alternate readings of agency that
do not presuppose the validity and universality of conceptions and norms based
on modern notions of autonomy and freedom? It is this, from our point of view,
limiting notion of agency that is worth reinstating in considering women’s actions
in medieval Japa nese texts.53
The tradition of taking the tonsure is a case in point. In medieval times, both
men and women, regardless of their status in society, or the circumstances that
led to them taking religious vows, shared in the aspiration to become lay nuns or
monks at some stage in life, in the hope of retiring from the world of social obli-
gations and preparing for a favorable death. Furthermore, there w ere many forms
that tonsure could take, requiring varying degrees of seclusion from the secular
world. The category “nun,” for example, incorporated a wide variety of religious
practices and living arrangements, ranging from women who continued to live
within the house hold without taking part in sexual activities and procreation to
those who lived in complete seclusion.
Scholars have singled out nunhood as one of the sites upon which both
Buddhism’s misogyny and women’s response to it came to be played out in the
medieval period. Some have seen the act of tonsure as an act of re sis tance to
patriarchal social arrangements, and in that sense as an illustration of female
agency. Fighting against the constraints that society imposes on them, women
who take the tonsure are seen as exercising their right to decide and to choose
how they want to live. Nunhood, in this reading, becomes the space of freedom.54
Others, working within the same conceptual framework of agency, have claimed
precisely the opposite, arguing that the practice of tonsure was proof of women’s
oppression and subservience in the face of patriarchal domination and Buddhist
misogyny.55 Or, in another manifestation of their subjection, nuns are seen as
traitors who betray their own sisters by subscribing to patriarchal norms. As
Bernard Faure puts it, “What if they [nuns] w ere only the ‘spokespersons’ of a
dominantly male tradition and so complicit in the silencing of female voices?”56
If we work within the framework of liberation or subjection, the par tic u lar
reading that we favor becomes little more than an arbitrary choice. No one would
deny that a woman taking the tonsure served a variety of ends, ranging from

28 Chapter 1
testing the affections of a lover whose attentions had flagged to withdrawing
altogether from a relationship that had gone wrong.57 Becoming a nun may well
have been a consequence of unfortunate social circumstances, but to see these
acts as manifestations of either empowerment or victimhood reduces medieval
players to little more than versions of our own selves. If personhood in medieval
Japan is located in the social, and if it is not imagined as an individual and secu-
lar identity, then agency in this context would have to be disentangled from
nineteenth- century liberalism, which speaks an altogether different language of
choice and self- determination.58
This would allow us to read women’s tonsure as providing a socially available
model for escaping from the trials of worldly life as well as engaging in the per-
for mance of pious and virtuous deeds that work not against but rather in confor-
mity with the traditions and practices of medieval society. It would also allow us
to recognize why tonsure, which bespoke a faith that enabled both men and women
to give up what they and the world to which they belonged held most dear, reso-
nated deeply within medieval texts. For tonsure in religious/literary texts, regard-
less of the circumstances that may have led to the act, elicited both admiration
and sadness in equal mea sure.
Taking the tonsure and leading the life of a nun suggests the expression of
a very different modality of action, which lies outside of the category of agency
understood as re sis tance. Often the proper enactment of a pious and ethical life
prescribed by that tradition meant “losing” rather than “finding” oneself. It was
for this reason that stories about men and women who had performed acts of great
self- sacrifice were retold in various forms over many centuries. The many versions
of the Karukaya legend, for example, which focus on the religious quest of a fa-
ther who abandons his family to become a monk at Mount Koya, and his wife and
son who set off in search of him, gain their poignancy from the suffering and ul-
timate death of the wife and the sorrow of her husband, who now turned monk,
cannot but be moved by the power of worldly ties.
That such stories, which w ere often narrated by Kumano bikuni, had such
extraordinary appeal was in no small mea sure because they spoke to men and
women alike; by dramatizing a tension that was central to becoming a good Bud-
dhist, they brought to life the pain and suffering that were the necessary condi-
tions for breaking the bonds of attachment. The forms that suffering and pain took
were undoubtedly gendered and it was the stylized enactment of these conven-
tional roles that had the power to produce affective intensities. However, religious
acts for both men and women involved abandoning the self— understood not as
an individualized entity but rather as something inextricably tied to clan and kin

Rethinking Body, Woman, Sex, and Agency 29
by bonds of affect and duty— and reconfiguring it through surrender to the as-
cetic discipline and/or devotion required by Buddhism.
When we seek to reveal the misogynist and patriarchal assumptions under-
girding medieval Japa nese texts, we are not surprised to find our claims vindi-
cated in works written or promoted by men, for it is assumed that men, for the
most part, speak for their sex, in the pro cess maligning or denigrating women,
their oppositional other. More puzzling and inexplicable for us are those texts
written by women that depict their own kind as passive beings, who lack the abil-
ity to shape their own destinies. For passivity implies subjection. Often an expla-
nation for this curious lack of female agency in a woman- authored text is found
by turning to the world outside of it: polygamy and other oppressive social ar-
rangements during the Heian period are made, for example, to account for women’s
helplessness in texts such as the Genji. In medieval times, this text came to be
associated with the sin of falsehood and had to be defended from the charge of
lasciviousness and immorality by arguing that its author was in fact a bodhisattva
who wished to alert readers to the dangers of amorous attachment.59 Today, we
no longer take seriously the medieval defense of this text. Modern interpretations
of the text are equally products of their times and are often situated in secular
assumptions, which revolve around questions of the in e qual ity of social and gender
relations. It is not surprising then to find that some of the more extreme denun-
ciations of the sexual politics that the text reveals have come from such secular
readings, which argue that Genji was a rapist, and that it was the cruelty of men
toward women that Murasaki, the author, sought to lay bare in her work.60
We may have distanced ourselves from the more extreme readings of our own
times that caricaturize Genji as a rapist,61 but the ascription of either re sis tance
or passivity to women continues to color our readings of the female characters
in the Genji. However, as I have argued, agency understood purely in terms of
human will and consciousness, acting upon the world, in de pen dent of gods and
buddhas, does not adequately explain why so many of the protagonists of the tale
view the circumstances that unfold in their lives less as consequences of their
deeds in their present lives, but rather as manifestations of karma from previous
existences.
There is also a problem with conflating gender relations in the real world with
their textual figurations;62 in medieval waka poetry, setsuwa, and monogatari,
otoko and onna often function not as literal repre sen ta tions of man and woman
as fixed and unified categories but rather as variable performative stances that
make possible a diversity of modes through which love and longing can be played
out. The man who visits and the woman who pines and waits, rather than serving

30 Chapter 1
as instances of men’s agency and women’s passivity, become more amenable to
being read as figures of speech, which make possible the per for mance of stylized
gendered positions, working in consonance with and, on occasion, overturning
the prescribed trajectory of romance.
Misogyny, subjection, passivity, complicity, agency, rebellion, and re sis tance:
these terms have now become integral to the repertoire that allows us to formu-
late the “woman question.” Likewise, it is “woman” that has become the axis
around which the terms body, sex, eroticism, and gender— the terms I have cho-
sen as the central analytical categories of this book— now revolve. These catego-
ries I have sought to argue are modern inventions and have a par tic u lar history
that is rooted in Western thought. However, to the degree that they have now
become part of our common sense, we cannot dispense with them altogether, for
the questions we wish to ask of texts that belong to another time and place are
inevitably driven by our own preoccupations. In charting how these terms came
to be within the history of Western thought, and in suggesting some of the con-
ceptual difficulties that they pose in our reading of medieval Japa nese texts, I hope
to have signalled what is at stake when we embark on acts of interpretation using
concepts that may not have made sense to those who inhabited the texts we seek
to illuminate.