Edinburgh Research Explorer
Shared Characters in Jain, Buddhist and Hindu Narrative
Gods, Kings and Other Heroes
Citation for published version:
Appleton, N 2016, Shared Characters in Jain, Buddhist and Hindu Narrative: Gods, Kings and Other
Heroes. Dialogues in South Asian Traditions: Religion, Philosophy, Literature and History, 1 edn, Routledge,
Abingdon. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315608860
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.4324/9781315608860
Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
Publisher Rights Statement:
This is an Accepted Manuscript of a book chapter published by Routledge in "Shared Characters in Jain,
Buddhist and Hindu Narrative" on 24/11/2016, available online: http://www.routledge.com/9781472484451
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 12. Sep. 2026

Chapter 6
The Renouncing Royals of Videha
In the ninth chapter of the Uttarajjhāyā (‘Later Chapters’), one of the scriptures of
the Śvetāmbara Jains, we find the story of a king called Nami. Having recalled a past
life,1 Nami decides to renounce and so places his son on the throne before
abandoning his kingdom for the solitary life. Indra (called Śakra or, in Prākrit,
Sakka), disguised as a brahmin, approaches Nami to test his resolve. In an exchange
of verses about the propriety of renunciation he tells Nami that his palace is on fire
and exhorts him to look after his household. Nami replies:
suhaṃ vasāmo jīvāmo jesi mo natthi kiṃcaṇa
mihilāe ḍajjhamāṇīe na me ḍajjhai kiṃcaṇa
We live happily, we who have nothing.
Though Mihilā may be on fire, nothing of mine is burning.2
In this way he indicates his dedication to the path of the renouncer. The same verse,
with minor variations, is also found in a Buddhist jātaka story as well as in the
Mahābhārata. In these cases, however, the renouncing royal is King Janaka, not King
Nami. A renouncing king of Videha named Nimi/Nemi, however, is also known from
Buddhist narratives, where he is prompted into leaving his kingdom by the sight of
a grey hair. As several lineages from within Indian texts show, Nami (or Nemi or
Nimi) and Janaka are part of the same family of kings of Videha, several of whom
are famous for renunciation.3
1 Recollection of past lives is a common prompt for renunciation in Jain narratives.
On the role of past-life memory in Buddhist and Jain narratives see Naomi Appleton,
Narrating Karma and Rebirth: Buddhist and Jain Multi-life Stories (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2014), chapter 6.
2 My translation of chapter 9 verse 14, taken from Jarl Charpentier, ed.,
Uttarādhyayanasūtra (Uppsala: Appelbergs Boktryckeri, 1922), 96. See also Hermann
Jacobi, trans., Jaina Sūtras Part II, Sacred Books of the East vol. XLV (Oxford: The
Clarendon Press, 1895), 35-41. Because this chapter involes comparisons of the
wording of verses and motifs I will generally cite the original text as well as the
translation.
3 For example the Nimi-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 541) records Nimi’s son’s name as
Kaḷāra-Janaka, and when King Janaka of the Rāmāyaṇa (Sītā’s father) recalls his
1

In chapter 18 of the Uttarajjhāyā we encounter King Nami again, though this time he
is only briefly mentioned in a list of great renouncer kings of the past:
Nami humbled himself,4 urged by Sakka in person.5
The Videhan abandoned his home and became a renouncer (sāmaṇṇa). (45)
Karakaṇḍu of Kaliṅga, Dummuha of Pañcāla,
King Nami of Videha, and Naggaī of Gandhāra: (46)
These bulls among kings renounced in the dispensation (sāsaṇe) of the Jinas.
Having placed their sons on the throne they became renouncers. (47)6
The King Nami mentioned here must be the same Nami as in chapter nine, given the
reference to his encounter with Sakka. When he is mentioned again in the
subsequent verse we hear even less of his story, only that he was one of four kings
who went forth in the community of the jinas. In Devendragaṇi’s commentary to the
Uttarajjhāyā, however, we find the full stories of these four kings.7 We also find their
story – told slightly differently – in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 408),
alongside a parallel verse to that listing the kings above. In these two stories we
ancestral lineage in the Bālakāṇḍa (sarga 70) he notes both Nimi and Janaka amongst
their names.
4 There is a pun in nami namei, for the name Nami is taken as related to the verb
√nam – ‘to bow, submit to’. In the commentarial story about Nami’s past, he is said
to be named Nami because even as a child all the kings bowed before him. With the
addition of appāṇam, the reflexive pronoun, Nami is bowing himself, or – as Jacobi
neatly translated – humbling himself.
5 sakkhaṃ sakkena coio – ‘urged by Sakka himself’. This alliterative refrain is found in
other verses too, and this whole verse is also found in the story of Nami in chapter
nine of the Uttarajjhāyā.
6 My translation from Charpentier, Uttarādhyayanasūtra, 141: namī namei appāṇaṃ
sakkhaṃ sakkeṇa coio | caiūṇa gehaṃ vaidehī sāmaṇṇe pajjuvaṭṭhio (45) karakaṇḍū
kaliṃgesu paṃcālesu ya dummuho | namī rāyā videhesu gandhāresu ya naggaī (46) ee
narindavasabhā nikkhantā jiṇasāsaṇe | putte rajje ṭhaveūṇaṃ sāmaṇṇe pajjuvaṭṭhiyā (47)
See also Jacobi, trans., Jaina Sūtras Part II, 87, where he has verses 45 and 46 in the
reverse order.
7 For an edition of this commentary see Hermann Jacobi, Ausgewählte Erzählungen in
Māhārāshṭrī (Leipzig: S. Hirzel, 1886). An English translation of this may be found in
John Jacob Meyer, trans., Hindu Tales: An English Translation of Jacobi’s Ausgewählte
Erzählungen in Māhārāshṭrī (London: Luzac & co, 1909).
2

discover the prompts that led the four kings into renunciation: a bull, a bracelet, a
mango tree and either a hawk or a banner of Indra. The signs of the mango tree and
the bracelet are also found in the Janaka-jātaka, where they reinforce the
determination of King Janaka to leave behind his kingdom, a determination already
expressed through the verse:
susukhaṃ vata jīvāma yesaṃ no n’atthi kiñcanaṃ
Mithilāya ḍayhamānāya na me kiñci aḍayhatha
Surely we live in great happiness, we who have nothing!
Though Mithilā may be on fire, nothing of mine is burning.8
We have come full circle (appropriately enough, the Buddhist interpretation of
Nimi’s name9) and returned to where we started.
Thus we can see that there is an interconnected series of motifs associated with the
renouncing kings of Videha that cuts across Buddhist and Jain texts; it is also
known, though to a lesser extent, in Brahmanical texts.10 This king may be called
8 My translation from V. Fausbøll, ed., The Jātaka Together with its Commentary being
Tales of the Anterior Births of Gotama Buddha (London: Trübner and co, 1877-96) vol. 6,
54. The Janaka-jātaka, also known as the Mahā-janaka-jātaka to distinguish it from a
shorter version earlier in the collection, is Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 539.
9 In the Nimi-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 541), known more usually in the Southeast
Asian tradition as the Nemi-jātaka, he is said to be named this because he brings the
lineage full circle like the rim (nemi) of a carriage-wheel. See Fausbøll, ed., Jātaka,
vol. 6, 96.
10 I am by no means the first to have treated these various stories as part of the same
network of motifs. Jarl Charpentier brought together many of the same sources in
his doctoral dissertation Paccekabuddhageschichten, published in 1908. However, he,
like K. R. Norman (“The Pratyeka-Buddha in Buddhism and Jainism,” in Buddhist
Studies: Ancient and Modern, ed. Philip Denwood and Alexander Piatigorsky [London
and Dublin: Curzon, 1983], 92-106; and Anālayo (“Paccekabuddhas in the Isigili-sutta
and its Ekottarika-āgama Parallel,” Canadian Journal of Buddhist Studies 6 (2010): 5-36),
was primarily interested in the concept of a pratyekabuddha and the story of the four
kings. Our focus here is more closely on the notion of a lineage that is associated
with royal renunciation, whether this results in pratyekabuddhahood or full
buddhahood / jinahood. As will become clear later in our discussion, the flexibility
3

Janaka or Nimi/Nemi/Nami, and he may be prompted into renunciation by a
particular experience, or express his detachment through a verse about Mithilā
burning, but we are dealing with the same lineage in each case. This is not just the
lineage of kings of Videha, but the lineage of Videhan kings that are famous for
their determined renunciation. In this chapter I would like to explore these
interconnected narratives in an effort to understand how each of the three
traditions – Brahmanical Hindu, Jain and Buddhist - used this lineage and the motifs
associated with it to serve their own agendas. In so doing I will shed light on the
connections between these traditions as well as their distinctive concerns. I will also
address why a lineage offers something rather unique to storytellers working in a
competitive narrative economy.
My exploration will take each of three related motifs in turn, starting with stories of
King Nimi’s grey hair, moving through a discussion of the four kings and the
prompts for their renunciation, and ending with the great detachment of the king
who views his city ablaze and yet feels nothing. Following this outline of the
narrative sources, I will reflect on what they contribute to our understanding in
relation to kingship, renunciation, and competing notions of lineage.
Part 1: The Motifs
King Nimi and the Grey Hair
Let us begin with an exploration of our lineage according to Buddhist stories of King
Nimi/Nemi.11 Three related stories are found in Pāli texts: the Makhādeva Sutta
(Majjhima Nikāya 83), Makhādeva-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 9), and Nimi/Nemi-jātaka
(Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 541). The two jātakas between them tell basically the same story:
King Makhādeva (who is the Bodhisatta or Buddha-to-be) has a long and just rule,
then renounces at the sight of his first grey hair. Once reborn in the Brahmā
heavens, Makhādeva sees that this practice is followed by all of his descendents,
in terms of the type of awakening attained by these kings is of crucial importance to
the development of this cluster of stories.
11 Both Nimi and Nemi are present in the manuscript sources for the jātakas, with
Southeast Asian tradition generally preferring Nemi. Nimi has tended to be adopted
in European publications, including in Fausbøll’s edition of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā
and the Pali Text Society edition and translation of the Majjhima Nikāya. The only
exception to this is a passing reference to a paccekabuddha called Nemi in a long list
of such in Majjhima Nikāya 116.
4

through a lineage of 84,000 minus two. Makhādeva realises that he should take
rebirth as the son of the current monarch, in order to complete the tradition. He is
born as Nimi, his father renounces, and he becomes king. When he in turn sees his
first grey hair he too renounces. While this same basic story is found in both jātakas,
the focus of the Nimi-jātaka shifts from renunciation at the sight of a grey hair, to
the explorations of the heavens and hells made by King Nimi as he is being taken up
to the Heaven of the Thirty-Three (Pāli: Tāvatiṃsa) to visit Sakka.
These two jātakas most likely have the Majjhima Nikāya story as their source. The
Makhādeva Sutta tells of the Buddha’s past birth as King Makhādeva and his
initiation of the practice of renouncing at the sight of the first grey hair, which is
then followed by 84,000 descendents. The last of these descendents is King Nimi,
who is so famous for his good work that he is invited to visit Sakka in heaven. Nimi’s
tour of the heavens and hells is mentioned in the Makhādeva Sutta but not fully
exploited as in the Nimi-jātaka. More importantly, while the jātakas both declare
Makhādeva and Nimi to be the Bodhisatta, the sutta only says this of the first king,
Makhādeva. Thus in the Makhādeva Sutta the emphasis is on the Bodhisatta
instituting a good practice that is then followed by his descendents, much as the
Buddha later on institutes even better practices that are then followed by his monks
and nuns.12 Whether or not Nimi is identified as the Buddha-to-be will become
important later in our discussion.
The stories of Makhādeva and Nimi are also found in Buddhist texts outside the Pāli
collection. A parallel to the Makhādeva Sutta is found in the Chinese Madhyama-
āgama (67) and Ekkotarika-āgama (50.4), and the story is also referred to in the
Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, preserved in the Tibetan translation. A
related story is also found in a Chinese collection of jātaka tales whose title Lie Du Ji
Jing (T152) is usually reconstructed into the Sanskrit Satpāramitā Sannipāta Sūtra, or
‘Discourse on the Assembly of the Six Perfections’. The story of Nimi also has a
separate existence within a Chinese Dharmapada Avadāna collection (T211, no. 38).13
12 For the idea that early jātakas embedded in the suttas tend to emphasise the
contrast between the worldly good works of the Bodhisatta and the soteriologically
transformative works of the Buddha, see Naomi Appleton, Jātaka Stories in Theravāda
Buddhism: Narrating the Bodhisatta Path (Farnham: Ashgate, 2010), 47-51.
13 My information on the Chinese and Tibetan sources is largely thanks to Anālayo, A
Comparative Study of the Majjhima-nikāya (Taipei: Dharma Drum Publishing
Corporation, 2011), vol. 1, 466-74. For the Chinese jātaka collection Lie Du Ji Jing see
also Édouard Chavannes, trans., Cinq Cents Contes et Apologues: Extraits du Tripiṭaka
5

The āgama parallels are close to the Majjhima Nikāya version, reinforcing the
evidence for its antiquity. As with the adjustment from sutta to jātaka in the Pāli
tradition, it is only in the Lie Du Ji Jing that Nimi is said to be the Bodhisatta as well as
Makhādeva; according to the Ekkotarika-āgama version Nimi is a past life of the
Buddha’s attendant Ānanda, and Nimi’s son – who discontinues the family practice
of renunciation – is a past life of the Buddha’s nemesis Devadatta.14
While I have not been able to find any parallel stories to that of King Nimi outisde
the Buddhist tradition, the idea of renouncing at the sight of grey hair fits with the
Brahmanical Hindu notion of the four āśramas as four stages of life.15 According to
texts such as the Mānava Dharmaśāstra, a person who has fulfilled the stages of a
celibate student and a householder knows that it is time to proceed to the third
stage of a forest dweller when his hair turns grey.16 This idea allows for two ideals to
be combined: the same person can be a good king (the ideal form of householder)
and a good renouncer. It is notable that many other Buddhist narratives are in
Chinois (Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1962), vol. 1, 1-88. Chavannes was of the opinion
that the text was not a simple translation of an Indian collection, but a compilation
of Indian tales restructured to fit the six perfections. The Makhādeva story appears
as number 84 in Chavannes (not 87 as Anālayo notes), and is roughly parallel to the
Makhādeva-jātaka.
14 See Anālayo Comparative Study, vol. 1, 473-4, n. 166. In the Pāli jātaka version
Ānanda is identified as both the barber who finds Makhādeva’s grey hair and the
divine charioteer Mātali who later fetches Nimi to heaven. The Pāli sources do not
provide any identification for Nimi’s descendents.
15 Olivelle has demonstrated that the idea of the āśramas as stages in a single life is
not the original form of the doctrine, which actually presents the different āśramas
as lifelong pursuits (Patrick Olivelle, The Āśrama System: The History and Hermeneutics
of a Religious Institution, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
However, the idea that renunciation was suitable only for later life (after Vedic
study, fulfillment of ritual obligations and the fathering of a son) developed as a key
means for neutralising the rise in renouncer movements.
16 See for example Mānava Dharmaśāstra 6.2 – gṛhasthas tu yadā paśyed valīpalitam
ātmanaḥ | apatyasyaiva cāpatyaṃ tadāraṇyaṃ samāśrayet || (Patrick Olivelle, ed. Manu’s
Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of the Mānava-Dharmaśāstra [Oxford and
New York: Oxford University Press, 2005] 594.) Olivelle translates this (p.148) as
‘When a householder sees his skin wrinkled, his hair turned gray, and his children’s
children, he should take to the wilderness.’ A similar sentiment is expressed in Viṣṇu
Smṛti 94.1. I am grateful to Patrick Olivelle for providing these references.
6

tension with this model, insisting instead that renunciation is necessary for the
young, though of course grey hair can also prompt the young to renounce: the first
of the ‘four sights’ that prompted the Buddha’s final life quest was an old man with
grey hair. The story of Nimi thus demonstrates the multiple perspectives on
renunciation found even within a tradition that rejects the life-affirming ritual and
social duties of Brahmanism.
The story of Makhādeva and Nimi sets the scene rather neatly for this study, for
three reasons: First, it speaks of a famous lineage of Videhan monarchs who each
renounced at the appropriate time; secondly, it speaks to a wider debate about the
tension between fulfilling one’s household duties and renouncing; and thirdly, it
mentions a specific prompt for renunciation, in this case the appearance of grey
hair, referred to as the ‘messengers of the gods’ (devadūtā).17 That the notions of
lineage and renuncation are important should already be clear. The use of
particular external prompts for renunciation is another key theme that binds this
lineage together. It is to this theme that we now must turn.
The Four Kings
While the Nimi-jātaka would appear to be unique to Buddhist texts, we have already
seen that the character of a renouncing king of Videha named Nami appears in the
Jain Uttarajjhāyā, both as an individual story (in chapter 9) and in a list of four
renouncing royals (in chapter 18). The verse listing these four kings is shared by
Buddhist and Jain traditions.18 A comparison of the verses from the Uttarajjhāyā and
the Kumbhakāra-jātaka demonstrates just how close the similarity is:
karakaṇḍū kaliṃgesu paṃcālesu ya dummuho
namī rāyā videhesu gandhāresu ya naggaī
(Uttarajjhāyā 18 v.46)
Karaṇḍu nāma Kaliṅgānaṃ Gandhārānañ ca Naggaji
17 For more on how birth, aging, sickness and death are the divine messengers that
function as a warning to humans see Devadūta Sutta (Majjhima Nikāya 130) and its
parallels.
18 Although our focus is on the kings of Videha, it is notable that this list of four
kings appears to be an attempt to be geographically inclusive (in North Indian
terms) and mentions other regions strongly associated with the śramaṇa
movements.
7

Nimirājā Videhānaṃ Pañcālānañ ca Dummukho
ete raṭṭhāni hitvāna pabbajiṃsu akiñcanā
(Jātaka 7 v. 94)
While the verse itself makes no reference to the cause of the kings’ renunciation,
their stories are found in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 408) and the
commentaries to the Uttarajjhāyā. In each case there are several layers perceivable
in the text. In the jātaka the verses are considered to be older than the prose, and
similarly the verses of the Prākrit Uttarajjhāyā-nijjutti (many of which are also found
in the Āvaśyaka-bhāṣya) are built upon by the much later prose commentary of
Devendragaṇi.19 It is therefore worth comparing the stories in the verse versions
first, before moving on to consider the prose.
In the Uttarajjhāyā-nijjutti the following verse sums up the prompts that led each
king to give up his throne:
A bull, a banner of Indra, a bracelet and a blossoming mango were the
awakening for Karakaṇḍu, Dummuha, Nami and the king of Gandhāra. (265)20
This is then followed by a series of verses specifically relating to King Nami, which
takes pains to clarify the relationship between Nami the pratyekabuddha and
another King Nami of Videha who became the twenty-first jina of our time cycle:
Two Videhan Namis left the kingdom and went forth:
19 While the jātaka prose was fixed by around the fifth century CE, Devendragaṇi was
working in the late twelfth century. However, the verses of the two texts are likely
to be closer in date to one another. For the jātaka see Fausbøll, ed., Jātaka, vol. 3, 375-
83. For the Uttarajjhāyā nijjutti (Sanskrit: Uttarādhyayana-niryukti) see Willem B.
Bollée, ed., The Nijjuttis on the Seniors of the Śvetāmbara Siddhānta: Āyāranga,
Dasaveyāliya, Uttarajjhāyā and Sūyagaḍa (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1995), and
for Devendragaṇi’s commentary see Jacobi, Ausgewählte Erzählungen and Meyer,
Hindu Tales. I am grateful to Jonathan Geen for helping me to untangle the
authorship and dating of the Uttarajjhāyā commentary.
20 My translation from Bollée, Nijjuttis, 95: Vasabhe ya Indakeū, valae ambe ya pupphie
bohī | Karakaṇḍu-Dummuhassā, Namissa Gandhāra-raṇṇo ya. See also Jacobi Ausgewählte
Erzählungen, 34, where it is quoted in Devendragaṇi’s commentary. Bollée (Nijjuttis,
95) notes that both this verse and that listing the kings are also found in the
Āvaśyaka literature, as Āvasyaka-Bhāṣya 205-6.
8

One was Nami the ford-maker, and one was a patteya-buddha. (267)
The venerable Nami who was the ford-maker had a retinue of a thousand,
and having placed his son on the throne he abandoned his ties and went
forth. (268)
And the second King Nami, having lived in the kingdom which was itself
complete in all qualities,
abandoned his ties and went forth. This should be taken with reference to
the the second [Nami]. (269)
Fallen from Puṣpottara [Heaven], having gone forth he bacame a solitary
renouncer.
He achieved omniscience as a patteya-buddha, attained perfection as a
solitary renouncer. (270)21
Finally we have some verses, also shared with the Āvaśyaka-bhāṣya and quoted in
Devendragaṇi’s commentary, which assign each of the four prompts to each of the
four kings:
Having seen in the middle of the enclosure a bull,
white, well-born and with well-formed horns,
regarding prosperity and ruin as the same,
the king of Kalinga perceived the dhamma. (271)
Seeing the decorated banner of Indra
fallen and destroyed,
regarding prosperity and ruin as the same,
the king of Pañcāla perceived the dhamma. (272)
…22
21 My trans. from Bollée, Nijjuttis, 96: dunni vi Namī Videhā, rajjâiṃ payahiūṇa pavvaiyā |
ego Nami-titthayaro, ego patteya-buddho ya ||267|| jo so Nami-titthayaro, so sāhassiya
parivvuḍo bhayavaṃ | gantham avahāya pavvai, puttaṃ rajje ṭhaveūṇaṃ ||268|| Bīo vi
Namī-rāyā, rajjaṃ caiūṇa guṇa-saya-samaggaṃ | gantham avahāya pavvai, ahigāro ettha
biieṇaṃ ||269|| pupph’uttarāu cavaṇaṃ, pavvajjā hoi ega-samaeṇaṃ | patteya-buddha-
kevali, siddhi gayā ega-samaeṇaṃ ||270||
22 I have ommitted v.273 from this translation, since it would appear to be an
interpolation. It adds another set of experiences for the King of Pañcāla, who is said
to have seen growth and depletion in the moon and then perceived impermanence
and understood the dhamma. This sign is not mentioned elsewhere in the story, and
is superfluous since we have already heard about the king’s response to the broken
9

Having heard the sound of many bracelets
and the silence of one,
King Nimi, ruler of Mithilā, renounced. (274)
The mango tree was delightful,
with its beautiful sprouts, shoots and flowers;
Regarding prosperity and ruin as the same,
the king of Gandhāra perceived the dhamma. (275)23
The verses of the jātaka version also marry up the signs to kings, with each king
declaring the reason for his decision to renounce:
I saw a mango inside a grove,
full-grown, dark and lustrous and fruiting,
and I saw it broken up for its fruit.
Seeing this I took up the life of a monk.
Two bracelets, polished and made ready by a skilled man,
a woman bore with little sound,
but bringing the two together made a noise.
Seeing this I took up the life of a monk.
Birds [attacked] a bird carrying carrion,
and many assembled like the one,
and attacked for the sake of meat.
Seeing this I took up the life of a monk.
I saw a bull in the middle of the herd,
with a quivering hump, splendid and strong,
and I saw him pierced because of lust.
Seeing this I took up the life of a monk.24
banner. Unlike the four verses that surround it, verse 273 does not appear in the
Āvasyaka-bhāṣya, adding further to the evidence that it is an interpolation.
23 My trans. from Bollée, Nijjuttis, 96: seyaṃ su-jayaṃ su-vibhatta-singaṃ, jo pāsiyā
vasahaṃ guṭṭha-majjhe | riddhiṃ a-riddhiṃ samupehiyāṇaṃ, Kalinga-rāyā vi samikkha
dhammaṃ ||271|| jo Inda-keuṃ samalankiyaṃ tu, daṭṭhuṃ paḍantaṃ paviluppamāṇaṃ |
riddhiṃ a-riddhiṃ samupehiyāṇaṃ, Pancāla-rāyā vi samikkha dhammaṃ ||272|| …
bahuāṇaṃ saddayaṃ succā, egassa ya a-saddayaṃ | valayāṇa Nimī-rāyā, nikkhanto
Mihilâhivo || 274|| jo cūa-rukkhaṃ tu maṇâbhirāmaṃ, sa-manjarī-pallava-puppha-cittaṃ |
riddhiṃ a-riddhiṃ samupehiyāṇaṃ, Gandhāra-rāyā vi samikkha dhammaṃ ||275|| Bollée
notes that these verses are also found as Āvasyaka-bhāṣya verses 207, 210, 211 and
212.
10

As can be seen, although the wording of these verses is different, the pattern of
listing a positive (such as a fruiting tree or a splendid bull) followed by a negative (a
broken tree and injured bull) is common to many of them. The way in which signs
prompted the kings’ renunciation is also shared, though one sign is different – the
banner of Indra in the Jain text, and the birds fighting over meat in the Buddhist. In
addition, the association of each sign with a king is different, though this is not in
any case made until the prose in the Buddhist version, which applies the kings to
signs in accordance with the order of verses.
The verses, of course, only supply the bare bones of the stories surrounding these
kings, and to find the full stories we must move onto later layers of commentary.
The prose of the jātaka, which was likely finalised around the fifth century CE,
supplies the stories fairly concisely, and places them in a larger narrative: the
Buddha-to-be, we are told, had been born as a potter and encountered these four
renouncers, who are said by this point to be paccekabuddhas (Sanskrit:
pratyekabuddhas). He asked them to explain their reasons for going forth, and so
they recounted the verses. Inspired by this, the Bodhisatta told his wife that he
wished to go forth, but she snuck off to renounce herself before he could do so, and
so he was left with the responsibility of bringing up their children. He finally
renounced once he was sure his children could look after themselves.
The frame story as found in the jātaka would appear to be a Buddhist innovation. In
the commentary to the Uttarajjhāyā, which dates from as late as the twelfth century
but draws on some earlier material, the focus remains clearly on the stories of the
four kings. However, the main aim seems to be to provide a back-story for each king
and an explanation for their names, rather than an elaborate tale of their shocking
experience of the sign that led to renunciation. As is common in Jain narratives,
what we find here is a lot of mistaken identity and karmic confusion, as well as an
emphasis on the importance of renunciation.
24 My translation from Fausbøll, ed., Jātaka, vol. 3, 380: Amb’āham addaṃ
vanamantarasmiṃ, nīlobhāsaṃ phalinaṃ saṃvirūḷhaṃ; tam addasaṃ phalahetū
vibhaggaṃ, taṃ disvā bhikkhācariyaṃ carāmi. || 90 || Selaṃ sumaṭṭaṃ naravīraniṭṭhitaṃ,
nārī yugaṃ dhārayi appasaddaṃ; dutiyañ ca āgamma ahosi saddo, taṃ disvā
bhikkhācariyaṃ carāmi. || 91 || Dijā dijaṃ kuṇapam āharantaṃ, ekaṃ samānaṃ bahukā
samecca; āhārahetū paripātayiṃsu, taṃ disvā bhikkhācariyaṃ carāmi. || 92 || Usabh’āham
addaṃ yūthassa majjhe, calakkakuṃ vaṇṇabalūpapannaṃ; tam addasaṃ kāmahetū
vitunnaṃ, taṃ disvā bhikkhācariyaṃ carāmi. || 93 ||
11

Since our focus is on the kings of Videha, let us take the story of Nami as an
example. In the Uttarajjhāyā commentary this begins with his mother’s loss of her
husband (who is reborn as a god) and escape to the forest where she gives birth to a
boy. She is then abducted by a vidyādhara (another common motif in Jain narratives)
and her son is found by the king of Mithilā and raised as his own. The affection the
king feels for the child is later explained as the result of them having had several
past lives as brothers. Later this son – named Nami (Humbler) because all the other
kings bow to him – wages war on the king of Sudaṃsaṇa, not realising that this is
actually his older brother who has now ascended the throne. His biological mother,
who has become a nun following her adventures, explains this and reconciles her
two sons. However, while in many Jain stories this type of identity confusion is
enough to prompt the main players to renounce, Nami continues to rule justly for
many years, and it is only when he gets ill and is massaged with sandal by women
wearing noisy bracelets that he decides it is time to give up his household life.
The bracelets that prompt King Nami to abandon the worldly life in the Uttarajjhāyā
commentary, are said in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka to be the reason behind King
Naggaji’s renunciation. Although the king is different, the message is very much the
same: Two bracelets make an annoying noise jangling against one another, but one
is quiet, and similarly the solitary life is superior to life with another. This focus on
the solitary life is a key feature of the pratyekabuddha, which is often translated is
‘solitary buddha’ on account of the idea that he is awakened by and for himself, and
does not found a religious community like a full buddha or jina.25 This idea of the
25 For a useful, if slightly basic, study of the concept of a paccekabuddha in Pāli
Buddhism see Ria Kloppenborg, The Paccekabuddha: A Buddhist Ascetic (Leiden: Brill,
1974). As Kloppenborg demonstrates, despite the understanding that
paccekabuddhas are solitary and do not teach, in fact they often congregate together
on Mount Gandhamādana and some do teach, though usually through signs rather
than words. Kloppenborg also provides a translation of stories surrounding the
Khaggavisāṇa Sutta of the Sutta Nipāta. These tales of paccekabuddhas vary in their
statement of the cause of bodhi, but in several we find the same sorts of experiences
mentioned in the story of the four kings. Martin G. Wiltshire, Ascetic Figures before
and in Early Buddhism: The Emergence of Gautama as the Buddha (Berlin and New York:
Mouton de Gruyter, 1990) is the only other book-length study of the concept of a
pratyekabuddha in the English language, and while he provides some useful material
his overall argument is flawed and his grasp of the sources inadequate (see the
reviews, for example, of Collins and Norman).
12

solitary path is expanded upon in a key early Buddhist text, the Khaggavisāṇa Sutta
of the Sutta-nipāta. Here we find, in 75 verses, an exploration of the ideal of
‘wandering lonely as a rhinoceros’ (or, according to some commentarial traditions,
as a rhinoceros horn).26 Verse 48 contains the bracelet analogy:
Having seen the shining [bracelets] of gold,
well crafted by the goldsmith,
knocking together when two on an arm,
one should wander lonely as a rhinoceros.27
The commentary, which provides a number of stories of paccekabuddhas, explains
that a king had become disgusted with the world after hearing bracelets jangling on
the arms of a woman who was grinding sandal for him. However, this king is neither
Nami nor Naggaji, but simply ‘a certain king of Vārāṇasī’ (aññataro bārāṇasirājā), as
indeed the majority of kings in that text are denoted.28 Yet another king of Vārāṇasī,
26 For a recent, and fairly comprehensive, discussion of this debate see Dhivan
Thomas Jones, “Like the Rhinoceros, or Like its Horn? The Problem of the
Khaggavisāṇa Revisited,” Buddhist Studies Review 31/2 (2014): 165-78. Jones also
summarises (p.165-6) the reasons for considering these verses to be early, including
the presence of a commentary on them in the Niddesa, a text that is itself accepted
as part of the scriptures, and the inclusion of parallel verses in the Mahāvastu and in
a Gāndhārī manuscript from the first century CE.
27 My translation from Dines Andersen and Helmer Smith (eds) The Sutta-Nipāta
(London: The Pali Text Society, 1913), 8: Disvā suvaṇṇassa pabhassarāni,
kammāraputtena suniṭṭhitāni; saṃghaṭṭamānāni duve bhujasmiṃ, eko care
khaggavisāṇakappo. See also Kloppenborg Paccekabuddha, 99-100.
28 These stories are recounted in Kloppenborg, Paccekabuddha. It is not clear how old
the association between the verses and the stories is, though the commentary in its
current form is probably from the fifth century CE and is ascribed – albeit
problematically – to Buddhaghosa. The Khaggavisāṇa Sutta itself has often been used
by scholars who wish to argue that the earliest image of Buddhist renunciation was
of the solitary ascetic, as helpfully discussed in Shayne Clarke, Family Matters in
Indian Buddhist Monasticisms (Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2014), 4-7. As
Clarke points out (p.7), however, the fifth-century commentator associated this
solitary renunciation not with ordinary Buddhist monks or even the Buddha
himself, but with paccekabuddhas/pratyekabuddhas. It is clear that whenever this
association between verses and stories was made, solitary wandering was
understood to be a key feature of the pratyekabuddha.
13

this one named Brahmadatta, views a tree stripped of its blossoms and leaves, and
decides to leave his kingdom and become a paccekabuddha, speaking another verse
of the sutta to explain.29 It is clear that these motifs had an ability to associate with a
variety of characters, and indeed we will meet another occurrence of the bracelets
later in this chapter.30
King Nami of Videha in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka is prompted to renounce by the sight
of a hawk being mobbed by other birds until he drops his food, and the subsequent
bird to catch the meat likewise being harrassed by the others. This is the one sign
that is not shared between the Buddhist and Jain stories; the Uttarajjhāyā has in its
place the story of a banner used in a festival for Indra lying broken in the filth and
mud, which King Dommuha finds shocking. The two other motifs shared by the
texts are a mango tree and a bull: One king (Karaṇḍu in the jātaka, Naggai in the
Uttarajjhāyā) sees a lush mango tree and picks some fruit. Afterwards the people
strip the tree bare, and seeing this the king decides to renounce. The other king
(Dummukha in the jātaka, Karakaṇḍu in the Uttarajjhāyā) sees a noble bull gored and
harrassed by another.31
29 In actual fact the link between story and verse (number 64) is rather tenuous. See
Kloppenborg Paccekabuddha, 114-5.
30 The signs in the story also feature in other lists of similes that are said to be
instructive. Thus the hawk dropping meat is also mentioned in a list of similes about
letting go of sense pleasures in Majjhima Nikāya 22 (Alagaddūpama Sutta, or ‘Discourse
on the snake simile’) and expanded upon in Majjhima Nikāya 54 (Potaliya Sutta). The
simile of a fruiting tree is also mentioned in Majjhima Nikāya 22, but Majjhima Nikāya
54 expands it into the story of a man who climbs a tree to reach the fruit and a
second who takes an axe and chops it down, injuring the first. The image of burning,
such a powerful part of the Janaka stories, is also used as a simile for the worldly life
in the famous Fire Sermon (Asittapariyaya Sutta, Saṃyutta Nikāya 35.28). Quite how
these lists of similes relate to the narratives is unclear and probably very flexible. It
is perhaps possible that the presence of the hawk simile in the Majjhima Nikāya
inspired its incorporation into the jātaka, for the Jain version has a festival banner
of Indra in its place in the list.
31 There is a different emphasis in each version: In the jātaka the bull is gored to
death by another bull in competition over a mate, and so the perils of lust form the
king’s reflection. In the Jain version it is the sight of an old harrassed bull that used
to be the prime bull that prompts reflection on the transitoriness of experience.
14

The differences in identification of kings and signs is complicated further by a
version of the Kumbhakāra-jātaka that is found in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya,
preserved in Tibetan. According to Panglung’s German summary, four
pratyekabuddhas pay a visit to a potter, displaying their supernormal powers, and
the latter expresses curiosity about the reasons for their going forth.32 The answers
are familiar but in a different order to the jātaka: The king of Kaliṅga saw birds
fighting over a piece of flesh, the prince of Mithilā saw a prime bull being injured,
the son of King Brahmadatta saw a mango tree in bloom that had been destroyed,
and another prince heard bracelets on a woman’s arm making a din. Here we find
the same four signs as in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka, and indeed the same basic story,
including the renunciation of the potter and his wife after their encounter with the
pratyekabuddhas. However, the signs are once again flexible in their associations
with specific kings, and some of the kings have been forgotten or adjusted.
While the exact signs and the identity of the kings differs, the process of being
prompted to renounce by some sort of external sign of the dissatisfaction that
comes from worldly life is found in all of the stories. Along with solitude, this
process of learning from signs is arguably linked to the very notion of a
pratyekabuddha (Sanskrit), patteyabuddha (Prākrit) or paccekabuddha (Pāli), a concept
which is found in both Buddhist and Jain sources but with a certain lack of clarity
over what distinguishes a pratyekabuddha from a full buddha/jina or any other
awakened being. In his 1983 article on the subject, Norman argued on philological
grounds that the term must predate Buddhist and Jain uses of it, rather than being
borrowed from one by the other.33 He further suggested that the term may have
been an incorrect back-formation from pratyaya-buddha, or someone awakened by a
cause (pratyaya).34 This argument partly stems from a discussion in a commentary to
the Jain Āyāraṃga Sutta (Sanskrit Ācārāṅga Sūtra) in which the word buddha is
explained as being of three types: svayam-buddha (awakened by oneself), pratyeka-
buddha (awakened by something), and buddha-bodhita (awakened by another
awakened being). As Norman noted, in Uttarajjhāyā chapter nine, during the story
of his renunciation, Nami is not called a pratyekabuddha, but rather a saha-
sambuddha, equivalent to svayam-sambuddha, a term also used to refer to the jinas.35
He argues that this reflects an earlier twofold distinction between those awakened
32 Jampa Losang Panglung, Die Erzählstoffe des Mūlasarvāstivāda-Vinaya : analysiert auf
Grund der tibetischen Übersetzung (Tokyo: Reiyukai Library, 1981), 163.
33 Norman, “Pratyeka-Buddha,” 95.
34 Norman, “Pratyeka-Buddha,” 96-7.
35 Norman, “Pratyeka-Buddha,” 94.
15

by themselves (svayam-sambuddha, both tīrthaṅkaras and others who did not found a
new dispensation) and those awakened by others (buddha-bodhita, also designated
śrāvakas – ‘hearers’ or disciples); the patteya-buddha, he suggests, may have been
slotted in between these two categories later on, when the idea was absorbed from
outside the tradition.
Through his careful exploration of the various terms in Prākrit and Pāli that are
used to describe this type of awakened being, Norman poses the possibility that
‘awakened by an external cause’ was the original referent for what became known
as a pratyekabuddha, though he is cautious in his conclusion, noting that the
argument of back-formation could work both ways: ‘Not only can prace’a (<Sanskrit
pratyeka) be wrongly backformed into pratyaya, but prace’a (<Sanskrit pratyaya) can
also be wrongly backformed into pratyeka.’36 He also admits that ‘the only criterion
available for the assessment of the correctness or otherwise of the suggestion that
the original form of the term was pratyaya-buddha is whether it makes better sense
than the traditional derivation from pratyeka-buddha’.37 While Norman clearly thinks
a derivation from pratyaya does make better sense, other scholars have disagreed.
Anālayo, for example, has put forward evidence that the idea of pacceka as ‘solitary’
makes good sense within the wider context of Pāli scriptures, and that ‘tales of kings
becoming Paccekabuddhas, common to the Buddhist and Jain traditions, may
perhaps best be understood as specific instances where external conditions played a
central role, rather than as the norm for attaining Paccekabodhi, at least from a
Buddhist viewpoint’.38 An alternative possibility, it would seem to me, is that there
may have been several conflicting understandings of the term in circulation and
that redactors chose the most appropriate to their context. This would account for
the occasional presence of the term pratyaya-buddha in Sanskrit Buddhist texts, and
for the dual association with causes and solitude.39
36 Norman, “Pratyeka-Buddha,” 99.
37 Norman, “Pratyeka-Buddha,” 99.
38 Anālayo, “Paccekabuddhas”, 13-14. See also p.33 n.62. While Anālayo may be
correct that pacceka has an established meaning of ‘solitary’ in Pāli contexts, this
does not seem to me to devalue Norman’s argument, which relies heavily in any
case on Jain understandings of the term. Anālayo’s disclaimer ‘at least from a
Buddhist viewpoint’ would appear to acknowledge this.
39 I am grateful to Giuliano Giustarini for a stimulating email exchange on this
subject. For the occurrence of pratyaya-buddha in Buddhist texts see Norman
“Pratyeka-Buddha,” 96, where he comments that this has usually – but perhaps
mistakenly – been assumed to be the result of an error of exegesis.
16

Since our interest in the story of the four kings is not the nature of pratyekabodhi but
the idea of an interconnected network of narratives associating kings of Videha
with renunciation, we need not engage further with this debate. One final
observation is worth noting, however: in the earliest verses referring to the four
kings and their reasons for renouncing, we do not find any reference to them
becoming pratyekabuddhas; this term only creeps in in the later commentarial
layers. Rather, the focus is on renunciation, or leaving behind the worldly life. Thus
in the Uttarajjhāyā the kings are mentioned in a long list of eminent royals who
renounced, and in the Kumbhakāra-jātaka the renunciation of the four kings prompts
the Buddha-to-be to follow their example, not to pratyekabuddhahood (an
achievement that would be impossible for a future Buddha) but simply to the path
of renunciation. Whether or not these four kings achieved awakening, and if so of
what variety, is of secondary interest to the story in its earliest form.40 The key
association with the four kings in its early strand would appear to be renunciation,
rather than any specific form of awakening. And whether this is prompted by a grey
hair, a mango tree, a bracelet, a hawk, a banner, a bull, or something else entirely,
these inspirations for renunciation tie together our Videhan lineage as well as link
the kings of Videha to other eminent renouncing royals.41
“Though Mithilā May Be On Fire…”
We may now move onto our third motif, that of a king named Janaka or Nami who is
unmoved by the sight of his burning city. This transition need not involve moving
between stories, only within them, for in the Janaka-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 539)
the king in question is prompted to renounce by various external signs and then
announces his detachment from the burning Mithilā, thus bridging the two motifs.
40 The declaration that the signs caused bodhi (Prākrit bohi) is found in the nijjutti
verse quoted above, but the type of bodhi is not specified, and the original context in
the Uttarajjhāyā is in a discussion of kings renouncing. Neither Nami nor Janaka is
included in the list of seers given in the Isibhāsiyāiṃ, all of whom are traditionally
understood to be pratyekabuddhas. See Nalini Balbir, “The Language of Ascetic
Poetry in the Isibhāsiyāiṃ and its Parallels,” in Buddhist and Jaina Studies: Proceedings
of the Conference in Lumbini, February 2013, ed. J. Soni, M. Pahlke and C. Cüppers
(Lumbini: Lumbini International Research Institute, 2014), 137-69.
41 In this sense the list of four kings sits within a broader genre of king-lists, for
example lists of kings who sacrifice, kings who conquer, kings who are generous.
Such lists are found in all three traditions.
17

Before we examine the burning city motif in particular, it is worth summarising
other aspects of the Janaka-jātaka in order to show how it stitches these various
motifs together.
Initially it is the sight of two mango trees that causes Janaka to rethink his position
as king: after he takes a fruit from a fruitful tree and enters a park for his
enjoyment, the people behind him strip the tree bare. On his return journey he sees
the sorry-looking tree, and next to it a barren tree that has been left to thrive. He
reflects that kingship is like the fruiting tree and renunciation like the barren tree,
and resolves to become like the latter. After living for a time as a renouncer
(samaṇa) but within the palace, he decides to leave the kingdom altogether and
walks away in the garb of a renouncer and carrying a begging bowl. His wife,
initially mistaking him for a paccekabuddha (once again reinforcing the links
between these Videhan monarchs and paccekabuddhas) realises he is her husband
and follows him entreating him to change his mind. During this period in which his
wife tracks him he also encounters the simile of the bangles, which a young girl
explains to him in three verses:
Renouncer, on this hand are fastened two bracelets.
and coming together they produce sound: this is the effect of the second.
On this hand, renouncer, a single bracelet is fastened,
and not having a second it makes no sound, but remains silent as a sage.
The second makes a dispute – for with whom would one quarrel?
Solitude is pleasing for those who wish for heaven.42
Janaka tries to use this to persuade his wife to leave him alone, but she will not.
Subsequently Janaka makes a similar point through an encounter with a fletcher
who closes one eye in order to better make his arrows straight, but even then she
refuses to leave him. He eventually has to sneak off into a forest while she is
unconscious on the road, having fainted as a response to his efforts to send her
away.
<Insert Figure 6.1 here>
42 My translation from Fausbøll, ed., Jātaka, vol. 6, 64: Imasmiṃ [me] samaṇa hatthe
paṭimukkā dunīdhurā, saṃghātā jāyate saddo, dutiyass’ eva sā gati. (277) Imasmiṃ [me]
samaṇa hatthe paṭimukko ekanīdhuro, so adutiyo na janati, munibhūto va tiṭṭhati. (278)
Vivādamanto dutiyo, ken’ eko vivadissati, tassa te saggakāmassa ekattam uparocatan ti.
(279)
18

Clearly this story is closely linked to that of the four kings, as well as to the story of
king Nimi who renounces after a grey hair. External prompts – some of them shared
with other stories – play an important role not only in helping Janaka himself
renounce, but also in helping his wife understand his decision. (She does eventually
become a renouncer herself, and achieves a heavenly rebirth as a result.) They are
therefore perhaps best viewed not always as prompts but also as similes, a role
several of them also play in two suttas of the Majjhima Nikāya.43 And what these
similes have in common is an ability to show the need for abandoning wealth and
embracing the life of a solitary renouncer.
Two other motifs are found in the Janaka-jātaka that resonate with Jain sources
about the renouncing royals of Videha. The first of these is the notion of a dialogue
with someone who tests the king’s resolve, for both King Janaka and King Nami have
such an encounter shortly after their renunciation. In the Uttarajjhāyā (chapter
nine) the focus is almost entirely on this conversation, in which Sakka-disguised-as-
brahmin uses a variety of arguments to try and dissuade Nami from his quest. Their
first exchange of words is somewhat cryptic, with Sakka asking:
Why is Mihilā full of uproar today?
Pitiless noises are heard from the palaces and houses.44
To this the king replies:
In Mihilā is a delightful sacred tree that gives a cool shade
and, with its various leaves, flowers and fruits, supports many.
When the delightful sacred [tree] is shaken by the wind,
the birds cry out, suffering and without refuge.45
43 See discussion in note 30.
44 My translation from Charpentier, Uttarādhyayanasūtra, 96: kiṇṇu bho ajja mihilā
kolāhalagasaṃkulā | suvvanti dāruṇā saddā pāsāesu gihesu ya (7)
45 My translation from Charpentier, Uttarādhyayanasūtra, 96: mihilāe ceie vacche
sīyacchāe maṇorame | pattapupphaphalovee bahūṇaṃ bahuguṇe sayā (9) vāeṇa
hīramāṇaṃmi ceiyaṃmi maṇorame | duhiyā asaraṇā attā ee kandanti bho khagā (10). See
also Jacobi, trans., Jaina Sūtras Part II, 36-7. Jacobi takes Maṇorama as the name of the
tree, which is a possibility, though the meaning ‘pleasing to the mind’ also works
adjectivally. The tree is a ceie ‘shrine’ (Pāli cetiya, Sanskrit caitya).
19

The king is presumably comparing himself to the tree, the loss of which makes the
people (the birds) cry out. However, it also suggests an association with similes for
renunciation, and perhaps hints at the prompt of the mango tree that appears so
fruitful but has the potential to be stripped bare. Following this exchange, Sakka
tells Nami that his palace is on fire, prompting the strong response that ‘even if
Mihilā is on fire nothing of mine is burning’; we will address this particular motif
below. Thereafter Sakka uses a number of arguments about the duties of the
kṣatriyas, suggesting that the king needs to build forts and palaces, punish
wrongdoers, conquer foes, sponsor sacrifices, give alms and make wealth. The king
rejects these duties of a householder, using a variety of similes to explain that he is
making a fortress out of austerities and conquering the self. Unable to dissuade him,
Sakka reveals himself and praises the king.
In the Janaka-jātaka the King of Videha’s dialogues are considerably less prominent,
but nonetheless form a significant part of the long renunciation attempt made by
Janaka during this story. He encounters two ascetics in turn, firstly Nārada and then
Migājina. In both cases he is prompted to explain his reasons for going forth and is
given advice and encouragement by the sage. In discussion with Migājina, Janaka
explicitly denies that he has any human teacher, stating rather that ‘the fruiting
mango and the fruitless are both teachers for me.’46 Once again we see the
association with the notion of a pratyekabuddha as one who has no human teacher
but is prompted into bodhi by an external cause. However, while Janaka is described
as looking like a pratyekabuddha he cannot be one, for he is the Buddha-to-be and
thus destined to achieve full buddhahood in a later life. We will return to this
important distinction later.
Janaka’s other dialogue partner in the Janaka-jātaka is his wife Sīvalī, a past life of
the Buddha’s wife and thus Janaka’s multi-life spouse. When Janaka goes forth
dressed as a renouncer Sīvalī refuses to leave him, even after he uses various means
to demonstrate his determination. It is in the early part of his encounter with Sīvalī
that we find Janaka’s declaration about Mithilā on fire. As a ruse to persuade him to
return, Sīvalī orders that people should make fires. She then tells him that his city is
on fire and all his wealth is being destroyed. He responds with the verse quoted
above. She then stages a raid:
46 My translation from Fausbøll, ed., Jātaka, vol. 6, 61: phalī ambo aphalo ca te satthāro
ubho maman ti.
20

At that very moment they showed the king men from here and there with
weapons in their hands chasing and plundering. They sprinkled red lac dye
on their bodies to make them look as if they had been wounded, and carried
them away on planks as if they were dead.47
But even this cannot change the king’s mind, for he declares:
Surely we live in great happiness, we who have no possessions.
While the kingdom is being destroyed nothing of mine is harmed.48
This is of course a parallel verse to that about Mithilā being on fire, and with a large
portion of the narrative demonstrating the desperate attempts of Sīvalī to convince
the king of his reponsibilities, the jātaka really hammers home the strength of
Janaka’s determination.
The verse about Mithilā being on fire is also found three times in the Śānti Parvan of
the Mahābhārata. This book of the epic is situated just after the end of the
catastrophic war that has all but annihilated the warriors of the earth. King
Yudhiṣṭhira, the victor of the war, is so traumatised by the experience that he wants
to give up his throne and become a renouncer. His brothers and other advisors urge
him not to. The Mithilā verse is quoted during this debate, when Yudhiṣṭhira says:
Now they say this verse was sung by King Janaka, who was beyond the pairs
of opposites, who had gained Absolute Freedom, and who had Absolute
Freedom in full view. “Yea! My possessions are endless though nothing at all
is mine. Were Mithilā ablaze in flames, nothing of mine would be burning.”49
While Yudhiṣṭhira holds this up as an example of strength of resolve by a fellow
royal, his younger brother Arjuna is having none of it. He responds at length with
47 My translation from Fausbøll, ed., Jātaka, vol. 6, 55: Taṃ khaṇaṃ yeva āvudhahatthe
purise tato tato ādhāvante vilumpante sarīre lākhārasaṃ siñcitvā laddhapahāre viya
phalake nipajjāpetvā vuyhante mate viya ca rañño dassesuṃ.
48 My translation from Fausbøll, ed., Jātaka, vol. 6, 55: Susukhaṃ vata jīvāma yesaṃ no
n’atthi kiñcanaṃ, raṭṭhe vilumpamānamhi na me kiñci ajīratha.
49 James L. Fitzgerald, trans., The Mahābhārata, vol. 7 (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2004), 203. The verse in the Pune Critical Edition (12.17.18; vol.13 p.66) reads:
anantaṃ bata me vittaṃ yasya me nāsti kiṃcana | mithilāyāṃ pradīptāyāṃ na me dahyati
kiṃcana ||
21

the story of what Janaka’s wife said to him, to dissuade him from renunciation. She,
Arjuna reports, roundly criticised the king’s decision, telling him he was neglecting
his duties of supporting the gods, brahmins and ancestors, and only swapping one
form of attachment for another – less appropriate – one. As the context of the
argument suggests, renunciation was the wrong choice for King Janaka, as it is the
wrong choice for Yudhiṣṭhira.50
The presence of Janaka and his verse of detachment in this Mahābhārata context was
presumably inspired by the Janaka-jātaka or a similar narrative. It suggests that the
association with Janaka the Videhan king and renunciation was well known and
thus a point of reference in debate, and that the particular verse uttered by the king
had become famous as a sign of his detachment. The Mahābhārata reference also
demonstrates awareness of Janaka’s wife’s attempts to dissuade him, as found in the
Janaka-jātaka. These links are clear, but another is more implicit, and helps to shed
light on the structure of the Janaka-jātaka more broadly. While our focus has been
on Janaka’s renunciation, the first half of the Janaka-jātaka tells of the extraordinary
efforts that Janaka went to to regain his rightful kingdom, which had been taken
from his father by his uncle. One particularly iconic image of the Janaka-jātaka is
that of Janaka shortly after being shipwrecked on a mission to earn sufficient wealth
to muster an army. While the other merchants are being eaten by sea monsters,
Janaka determinedly sets out for shore, even though he has no hope of reaching it.
The goddess of the ocean Maṇimekhalā spots him after seven days, and is so
impressed with his energetic determination that she rescues him and takes him to
Mithilā. There he passes a number of tests in order to gain the throne and marry
Sīvalī, his uncle’s only surviving child.
<Insert Figure 6.2 here>
The extraordinary effort that Janaka makes to regain his kingdom in the Janaka-
jātaka parallels in some ways the extraordinary effort that Yudhiṣṭhira has had to
make in the Mahābhārata. Both men had lost out to relatives, and both had to endure
a period of exile. While the epic’s long battle books frame Yudhiṣṭhira’s effort
largely in martial terms, Janaka’s effort is related more to his physical endurance
and intellectual sharpness, but both become king only after a huge undertaking. It is
50 For a discussion of the use of Janaka and his wife in the debate surrounding
Yudhiṣṭhira’s response to the war, see Simon Brodbeck, “Gendered Soteriology:
Marriage and the Karmayoga,” in Gender and Narrative in the Mahābhārata, ed. Simon
Brodbeck and Brian Black (London: Routledge, 2007), 159.
22

the question of whether or not it is appropriate to give up a kingdom after it took so
much effort to regain that sits in the shadows of both the Mahābhārata occurrence
and the Janaka-jātaka. For the Buddhist audience the effort made to gain the
kingdom serves to underline the greatness of the king’s renunciation, for had he
merely inherited it with no effort it would be less impressive to give it up. For the
audience of the Mahābhārata, however, the fact that Yudhiṣṭhira has had to wait so
long and work so hard is used as an argument for him not giving it all up.
The different points of emphasis in the Janaka-jātaka and Mahābhārata reflect a
broader South Asian concern about the hierarchy of duties. While the Mahābhārata
tends to present the duties of a king as above – or at least different to – those of a
renouncer, the Janaka-jātaka emphasises the importance of one’s personal quest
over and above the worldly temptations of wife and kingdom. As part of a lineage of
renouncing royals, stories of Janaka – and indeed of Nimi/Nami – have much to tell
us about the traditions’ views on royalty and renunciation. The verse of detachment
expressed by a king looking back at his burning city makes a clear statement about
the relative values of kingdom and forest. Dialogues with family members or
ascetics or the god Indra also help to explore the merits of renunciation and
demonstrate its superior value. The motif of the visual prompt for renunciation, as
associated strongly with the story of the four kings, also compares the householder
life – with kingship as its ultimate exemplar – with the higher path of a renouncer.
The prompt of grey hair, however, suggests that renunciation is particularly suited
to old age, thus serving to reconcile the two ideals of king and sage and make both
possible for a single character.
Stories about Janaka and Nimi/Nami thus offer a rich tapestry of ideas concerning
the crucial tension between worldly responsibilities and other-worldly pursuits. By
so doing they also explore several notions of lineage, whether of kings or
renouncers or religious leaders. Having explored the different motifs in turn, as
summarised here in the table that forms Fig. 6.4, we must now turn to the broader
notions of lineage that serve to connect them together.
<Insert Figure 6.3 here>
Part 2: The Lineage
What are we to make of this noble lineage of Videhan monarchs and all the
interconnected narrative motifs associated with them? Why might we be interested
in this lineage as scholars of early South Asian religion? Now that we have outlined
23

the stories and sources, I would like to explore the major themes associated with
the lineage, and the ways in which the cluster of motifs speaks to the needs of
Brahmanical Hindu, Jain and Buddhist communities. I will begin by looking at the
key tension between kingly duties and renunciation that is found in all the motifs.
While it might be assumed that in Jain and Buddhist sources this tension would be
clearly resolved in favour of renunciation, this cluster of narratives is actually more
open to the notion of household responsibility, as we will see. In the Brahmanical
context, which we will then explore, the association between Janaka and the
renunciation debate allows for a variety of different portrayals, all of which in some
way speak to the Buddhist and Jain stories outlined above. In order to bring our
discussion of worldly and renunciatory imperatives into a broader context, we will
then briefly address the female characters in our stories, and how their approach to
this tension compares to the kings who play the central role in the stories.
Following this we will take a quick look at another narrative that is connected to
this lineage, the story of King Arindama, and the flexibility in use of motifs that this
story demonstrates. Finally we will address the Buddhist tendency to identify all
heroes as the Buddha-to-be and the effect that this tendency has had on our
narrative nexus. As will become clear, the notion of lineage is key in several
different senses: concerns about the patriline and lineage of succession of kings
interplay with the notion of a lineage of renouncers and the importance of the
solitary life, and the lineage of the Buddha eventually trumps both of these in
Buddhist retellings of the stories and motifs.
Kingship and Renunciation
In our study of renouncing royals two ideal types are obviously present: the king
and the renouncer. Putting aside all discussion of pratyekabuddhas for the time
being, all the interweaved motifs concerning the Videhan lineage have a clear focus
on what it means to be a good king, and how that relates to the path of the
renouncer. As the use of the Janaka story in the Mahābhārata makes clear, not all the
religious traditions of early South Asia agree over the propriety of renunciation, nor
on what form renunciation should take. Whereas Arjuna and others argue forcefully
that Janaka was wrong to renounce, all the Buddhist and Jain sources just as strongly
assert that he was right. Yet the question is not simply ‘to renounce or not to
renounce’, but also when to renounce.
One of the curious features of the Buddhist story of King Nimi, who renounces at
the sight of his first grey hair, is that this model of renunciation is contradicted by
other stories telling of the urgency of renunciation even for the young. Thus, for
24

example, the Temiya-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 538) tells of the Buddha-to-be’s birth
as a prince, his memory of the hellish suffering caused by a past life as a king, and
his subsequent determination to avoid inheriting the kingship in his current life.
His desire to renounce – or, more immediately, to avoid becoming king – leads him
to pretend to be deaf, mute and crippled despite horrific torments. Eventually he
renounces and his family and most of the citizens follow him. The Buddha’s final
lifestory, in which he renounces as a young man despite the promise of a luxurious
adult life, would appear to support the perspective of the story of Temiya. The story
of Nimi stands in contrast to these and other stories, for in it we find renunciation
as an ideal activity for later in life, after one has fulfilled the duties of a
householder, in Buddhist terms giving gifts and encouraging morality. This same
notion is also found in the related story of Daḷhanemi in the Cakkavattisīhanāda Sutta
(Dīgha Nikāya 26), in which a wheel-turning monarch knows it is time to renounce
when his wheel-treasure disappears; at such a time he installs his son on the throne
and goes forth. It is surely no coincidence that he shares his name with our Videhan
royals, though Videha is not mentioned as his kingdom.
Of course it is only the grey hair motif – and, linked to it, the story of Daḷhanemi’s
renunciation when his wheel of kingship disappears – that associates renunciation
with old age. The other stories of Janaka and Nami do not explicitly state that the
kings renounced only in old age, though they do show the kings getting on with
royal duties first. As we have already commented, in the Janaka-jātaka the Buddha-
to-be is first shown going to great efforts to regain his kingdom, and only later –
after fathering a son to continue the preservation of the lineage – do his thoughts
turn to renouncing. Similarly the four kings of the famous verse were all observing
their duties before deciding to renounce; indeed the very fact of their being kings
suggests a certain maturity of age. It is a curious feature of the story in
Devendragaṇi’s commentary to the Uttarajjhāyā that while various shocking things
happen to King Nami during his lifetime – perhaps most significantly the revelation
that a rival king is actually his brother – it is only late on in his story that he finally
decides he has had enough of ruling and wishes to renounce. The story would
appear to suggest that it is okay to dispatch one’s kingly duties first and renounce
later. The usual Jain urgency to abandon one’s household duties – which inevitably
result in great acts of harm – is not present in this narrative motif.
The perceived appropriate moment for renunciation, at least in a Brahmanical
context, is closely related to the question of lineage. It is not considered appropriate
to leave a kingdom without a protector, and so a king should father a son before
renouncing. It is therefore significant that our renouncing royals even in Buddhist
25

and Jain texts are said to place their sons on the throne before going off into the
forest: King Nami and the other three kings do so in the Uttarajjhāyā, as do King
Makhādeva and King Nimi in the Nimi-jātaka, while King Janaka in the Janaka-jātaka
uses the suitability of his son to rule as one justification for his abdication of
responsibility.51 The preservation of the lineage is interpreted slightly differently in
the Nimi-jātaka, however, in which it is said that Nimi’s son Kaḷārajanaka did not go
forth and thus severed the lineage; clearly the Buddhist authors saw the lineage as
being specifically of renouncing kings, and not just of kings.
An emphasis on renouncing only after having first fulfilled one’s worldly duties
might seem to sit uncomfortably with broader Buddhist and Jain ideals, and may
indeed indicate that the stories originated outside these traditions. However, by
demonstrating that fulfilling the duties of kingship and pursuing a personal path to
liberation can both be achieved in a single lifetime, the stories of the Videhan royals
have several key advantages for the storyteller. Firstly, the stories are appropriate
for a world-embracing audience, including kings, since they do not belittle the
responsibilities of royalty. Thus powerful patrons can be instructed by stories of a
royal exemplar, while never denying the ultimate superiority of renunciation.
Secondly, the stories demonstrate that renunciation need not destroy a lineage,
since it can be achieved after fathering a son, even in old age. Indeed, the lineage of
Videhan monarchs who renounce would have been rather a short lineage were it
not for this accommodation of worldly duties! The danger of the renouncer
movements to families and lineages is thus played down, making the stories
palatable to a wide audience. Thirdly, the contrast that is set up between kingship
and renunciation serves to instruct the audience in the need to give up even the
greatest of enjoyments and responsibilities. This contrast plays out most strikingly
in the Janaka-jātaka, in which the great efforts Janaka made to regain his kingdom
were outstripped by the even greater efforts he made to give it all up again. This
creative tension is perhaps best summed up by a series of 90 verses that he utters
before his renunciation, in which he praises Mithilā at the same time as stating his
desire to leave it. The series begins:
O when will I give up prosperous Mithilā, broad and radiant all around,
and go forth into homelessness? When indeed will this be?
When will I give up prosperous Mithilā, evenly laid out and partitioned,
51 Uttarajjhāyā chapter 9 v. 2 and chapter 18 v. 47; Nimi-jātaka Fausbøll, Jātaka, vol. 6,
96 (Makhādeva) and 129 (Nimi); Janaka-jātaka Fausbøll, Jātaka, vol. 6, 62, especially v.
152.
26

and go forth into homelessness? When indeed will this be?52
While painting a picture of a magnificent kingdom filled with many riches and good
citizens, and a palace containing all the comforts one could expect, the repeated
refrain of these verses reminds the audience that the greatness of the city is only
serving to strengthen the king’s resolve. It is perhaps this ability of the stories to
praise kingdoms and renunciation simultaneously that best explains the presence of
the Videhan monarchs in Buddhist and Jain narrative traditions.
Janaka and Renunciation in Brahmanical Literature
Not all the King Janakas of early Indian religious literature are famous for
renunciation, of course. Indeed, since Janaka denotes a lineage as much as it does an
individual, the variety of King Janakas should be no surprise. The two most famous
Janakas who are not strongly associated with renunciation are King Janaka of the
early Upaniṣads and Sītā’s father in the Rāmāyaṇa. However, I would argue that even
for those kings in this lineage who do not renounce, the association of the lineage
with renouncing allows us to understand their position better. While the Upaniṣadic
king would appear to foreshadow some of the later motifs associated with Janaka,
the Rāmāyaṇa speaks to the tension between royalty and renunciation largely
through other characters, but both are illuminated by our cluster of motifs. And
these motifs are more directly relevant to understanding the kings of Videha that
appear in the Mahābhārata, one example of which we have already discussed. It is
clear that at least some of the Brahmanical narrative tradition was aware of the
widespread association between Videhan monarchs, and used this association for
their own various purposes.
King Janaka is a famous dialogue partner in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, such that
Black describes him as ‘the ideal Upanishadic king, as he is cast as both the generous
patron and the knowledgeable monarch’.53 He is not, however, famous for
renunciation, and he neither sees signs suggesting the necessity of renunciation or
benefits of the solitary life nor declares his detachment towards the burning city of
Mithilā. Instead he offers gifts to, and discusses key ideas with, the brahmin teacher
52 My translation from Fausbøll, Jātaka, vol. 6, 46: Kadāhaṃ Mithilaṃ phītaṃ visālaṃ
sbbatopabhaṃ | pahāya pabbajissāmi, taṃ kadāssu bhavissati. Kadāhaṃ Mithilaṃ phītaṃ
vibhattaṃ bhāgaso mitaṃ | pahāya pabbajissāmi, taṃ kadāssu bhavissati.
53 Brian Black, The Character of the Self in Ancient India: Priests, Kings, and Women in the
Early Upaniṣads (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2007), 106.
27

Yājñavalkya, though Janaka often ends up teaching the brahmin rather than vice
versa.54 Given that the early Upaniṣads are generally considered to predate the
Buddhist and Jain traditions, the portrayal of Janaka in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad
perhaps allows us to glimpse Janaka before he became associated with the narrative
motifs we have been exploring. Intriguingly, three parallels link Janaka of the
Upaniṣads to the later stories of Janaka and Nimi, and these are suggestive of the
influence of the Upaniṣadic king on his later narrative associations.
The first parallel between the Upaniṣadic Janaka and the other royals of Videha is
his generosity and patronage of teachers. In the Upaniṣads Janaka is associated with
lavish gifts of a thousand cows to his favoured teacher.55 This great generosity and
patronage of course parallels the great generosity of King Nimi in the Buddhist
sources, and indeed the general association of good kingship with gift-giving. While
Janaka of the Janaka-jātaka might prefer to support pratyekabuddhas, and Janaka of
the Upaniṣads supports brahmins, the patronage of learned and soteriologically-
advanced figures is the same mark of a good monarch. Secondly, King Janaka of the
Upaniṣads is associated with dialogic exchanges with learned partners, in which he
often has the upper hand. Similarly, as we have seen, the notion of dialogue
between the king and another being – whether this be his wife, the god Śakra, a sage
or a potter – is a key motif in our stories. While dialogue is one of the basic
structures of the Upaniṣads, it is somewhat less common in narrative genres such as
jātakas, so influence from the Upaniṣadic form on these later sources is a possibility.
Thirdly, more than any other figure it is King Janaka’s own priest Yājñavalkya who
is most associated with the teaching – and practice – of renunciation.56 Janaka
himself comes close to a form of renunciation when he offers to give the Videhans
to the brahmin after a long teaching in Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad IV, 4.
54 Janaka also appears in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, in which he defeats Yājñavalkya in
debate. The reversal of the teaching relationship to show kings teaching brahmins is
a key feature of the Upaniṣads.
55 This association even leads to King Ajātaśatru thinking that his own gift of a
thousand cows to the brahmin teacher Gārgya will lead people to cry out “a Janaka,
a Janaka!” Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad II, 1 and Kauṣītakī Upaniṣad IV, 1.
56 Significantly he is the only character in the principal Upaniṣads to deny the need
for a son. Yet, as we have seen, even the Janakas of Jain and Buddhist texts
acknowledge the need to continue the lineage, even as they promote the ideal of
renunciation. See discussion in Black, Character of the Self, 92-96 and Bṛhadāraṇyaka
Upaniṣad 4.4.22.
28

It would seem, therefore, that the dialogic form of the Upaniṣads, the generosity of
the ideal Upaniṣadic king Janaka, and the associations – albeit at this stage vague –
between the king and the ideal of renunciation, might have had an influence on the
formation of the narrative motifs found within Jain, Buddhist, and later
Brahmanical sources. While influence cannot be proven, ignorance of this
prominent king’s presence in the Upaniṣads by later storytellers seems unlikely.
However, since the motifs of the response to signs and detachment from a burning
city are completely absent, we must assume that these stories surrounding the
renouncing royals must have entered the tradition from elsewhere. Given the
preponderance of these motifs in Buddhist and Jain literature, the stories’ origins in
the northeast, amongst the various renouncer movements flourishing there, seems
likely. That said, in addition to the three specific ways in which the Upaniṣadic
Janaka appears to foreshadow the later motifs, one other contribution of the
Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad is clear: it establishes King Janaka of Videha as a prominent
monarch, whose intelligence and patronage of teachers make him worthy of
featuring in more stories.
Janaka is also a keen dialogue partner in the Mahābhārata, where he receives a
number of teachings on a variety of topics during the Śānti Parvan. In many cases his
appearance in the epic bears no resemblance to the renouncing royal we know so
well, though in some cases there are suggestive parallels and in others clear
evidence of intertextuality. 57 We have already noted the use of Janaka’s
renunciation by Yudhiṣṭhira in his attempt to justify his plans to give up his
kingdom in 12.17.18. The verse in which Janaka expresses his detachment is in fact
found three times more during the Śānti Parvan, suggesting widespread awareness
of the extent of Janaka’s detachment. In a use of the verse in 12.171.56 we also find
57 I will not attempt a complete study of the Janakas of the Mahābhārata here, though
there are several suggestive parallels with our Jain and Buddhist sources. For
example, in 12.28 Janaka is taught about the sufferings inherent in life, and urged to
stop grieving for his relations, a form of detachment also demontrated in some of
the motifs we have studied. Similarly suggestive but inconclusive is Mahābhārata
12.100, in which King Janaka of Mithilā is said to have conjured up images of
heavens and hells to encourage his warriors to excel themselves in battle; is this in
awareness of King Nimi’s tours of heavens and hells in the Buddhist sources? For a
useful overview of Janaka’s role in the dialogues immediately preceeding his debate
with Sulabhā, which suggest his association with renunciation, see James L.
Fitzgerald, “Nun Befuddles King, shows Karmayoga does not work: Sulabhā’s
Refutation of King Janaka at MBh 12.308.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 30 (2003): 647-8.
29

evidence of wider awareness of the motifs associated with Janaka: Here it is Bhīṣma
who mentions Janaka’s verse in his teaching to Yudhiṣṭhira about the importance of
detachment. Immediately following his quoting of the verse, Bhīṣma notes that the
story of the seer Bodhya is also pertinent, and proceeds to narrate a dialogue in
which Bodhya discusses his detachment with King Nahuṣa. In a clear resonance
with our narrative cluster, Bodhya declares that he has no teacher, but only learns
from images, which include that of an osprey who was killed by other birds for the
sake of stealing his meat, and a fletcher who was so engrossed in making arrows
that he failed to notice a king in his midst. There is no doubt that the compiler has
some awareness of the wider literature surrounding Janaka, though the idea of
being prompted into renunciation through signs is here offloaded onto a
neighbouring character.
Janaka’s verse of detachment is also mentioned at the end of a dialogue between the
teacher Pañcaśikha and King Janaka, which is present in the Vulgate but not in the
main text of the Critical Edition.58 Here it sits alongside a long narration of rival and
erroneous teachings, which are cleared away by Pañcaśikha. And finally the verse
appears at 12.268.4, when Bhīṣma relates how King Janaka declared his detachment
to Māṇḍavya, and taught him the perils of attachment; Māṇḍavya achieved
liberation as a result. In all these cases in which the verse about Mithilā burning is
mentioned, Janaka’s detachment makes him a significant positive example, but it
does not equate to renunciation. On the one occasion that it is linked with giving up
the kingdom – when Yudhiṣṭhira uses it in 12.17.18 – it is firmly rebuffed. Through
these and other episodes involving Janaka, the Mahābhārata paints him as a king
interested in and committed to detachment, if not actually renunciation.
This question of whether detachment necessitates renunciation is a moot one in the
Mahābhārata, and in relation to Janaka it comes to a head in yet another episode of
the Śānti Parvan. In 12.308, Janaka is presented as an advocate of the idea that one
can be a renouncer at heart without giving up outward ties, that one can act
without attachment and attain perfection that way. This idea, more widely known
as karmayoga, is promoted by such texts as the Bhagavad Gītā, which itself of course
58 In the Clay Sanskrit Library edition and translation (Alex Wynne, Mahābhārata
Book Twelve, Peace, Volume Three “The Book of Liberation”, New York: New York
University Press and JJC Foundation, 2009) it is at 219.50. It is included in the Pune
Critical Edition in Appendix 1, no. 19, verse 35 (vol.16, p.2036).
30

is an attempt to dissuade a royal warrior from shirking his duties.59 To show King
Janaka achieving mokṣa through the practice of inner renunciation would appear to
be the perfect way to challenge śramaṇic stories of Videhan kings renouncing their
thrones, while maintaining the idea that Janaka was impressively detached. It is
therefore curious that the text actually questions whether or not Janaka is right in
his assumption that he has achieved perfection, for he is challenged – and
apparently defeated – by the female ascetic Sulabhā, an adept in yoga.
Many scholars, perhaps most notably Fitzgerald in his 2003 translation of this
episode, have noted that Sulabhā appears to win the argument with King Janaka, for
the narrator (Bhīṣma) speaks approvingly of her, and Janaka is silenced by her
arguments.60 However, the lesson may be more complex. Black notes that Bhīṣma is
– in the larger narrative frame – discoursing on the importance of correct kingship,
which is more in line with Janaka’s view, even though he appears to endorse
Sulabhā’s view in recounting the debate. In addition, Janaka appears to be
acknowledged as having attained mokṣa as well as Sulabhā, since Bhīṣma introduces
the debate as being ‘between a man who had attained mokṣa and a woman who had
attained mokṣa’.61 Indeed, elsewhere in the Mahābhārata Janaka is said to have
attained liberation. Black concludes that ‘the text seems to endorse both arguments:
within the context of the dialogue itself, Sulabhā appears to be the clear winner of
the argument; yet within the context of Bhīṣma’s instruction to Yudhiṣṭhira,
Janaka’s view seems to be preferred.’62 The debate, therefore, may have a clear
rhetorical victor, but the notion of renunciation during kingship is not defeated.
59 It is not clear that Arjuna is planning to renounce and pursue a spiritual life,
however. Rather, he states he would rather beg for his food, which for a kṣatriya –
the givers and providers – would be the ultimate humiliation.
60 Fitzgerald even entitles his translation and study of this episode according to this
assumption: “Nun Befuddles King, shows Karmayoga does not work.”
61 Brian Black, “Dialogue and Difference: Encountering the Other in Indian Religious
and Philosophical Sources,” in Dialogue in Early South Asian Religions: Hindu, Buddhist,
and Jain Traditions, ed. Brian Black and Laurie Patton (Farnham: Ashgate, 2015), 255,
quoting Mahābhārata 12.308.19. See also Simon Brodbeck, “Ekalavya and
Mahābhārata 1.121-28,” International Journal of Hindu Studies 10/1 (2006), 17 n. 36,
where he notes that Sulabhā’s criticisms of the king are, in a sense, as damning of
herself as they are of him. I am grateful to both Simon Brodbeck and Brian Black for
fruitful discussions of this debate and for helping me to appreciate its nuance.
62 Black, “Dialogue and Difference,” 255.
31

This episode may, therefore, be a Brahmanical attempt to neutralise the famous
lineage of renouncing kings being promoted by Jain and Buddhist stories.
While Janaka seems to be strongly associated with renunciation (at least the inward
variety) in the Mahābhārata, as he is in the Buddhist and Jain sources, the Rāmāyaṇa
does not betray any awareness of the wider narrative nexus surrounding the kings
of Videha. A King Janaka is a central character in this smaller epic, as he is the
father of Sītā – who is herself also called Janakī – and oversees her marriage to
Rāma. However, he does not appear to be interested in renunciation, and during his
recounting of his eminent lineage he does not mention, for example, that his
ancestors Nimi and Janaka were famous for their renunciation. The associations
that play such a strong role in the Mahābhārata and other sources seem to be absent
here, perhaps suggesting the Rāmāyaṇa is, like the Upaniṣads, earlier than these
strong narrative threads.63
This appearance of Janaka in Brahmanical texts is therefore more complex than in
the Jain and Buddhist sources that have occupied us thus far. While the
Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad appears to set up King Janaka as a generous and intelligent
king dedicated to hearing about renunciation, the Mahābhārata builds on this image,
sometimes demonstrating awareness of the wider narrative motifs that have – by
this point – built up around him. The association between the lineage of Janaka and
the ideal of renouncer is clearly strong within Brahmanical as well as Buddhist and
Jain sources, but in the former context his renunciation tends more often to be of an
internal, rather than external, variety. Buddhist and Jain texts stick with a more
standard portrayal that emphasises the importance of physical renunciation of
worldly life, all the while preserving the complementary emphasis on correct royal
behaviour prior to renouncing.
What About the Women?
The lineage of renouncing kings of Videha is of course a lineage of men. Yet as we
have already seen, several important female characters feature in these narrative
sources, and suggest that the lineage’s leaning towards renunciation might also
63 Or perhaps, as Hiltebeitel suggests, the author was simply not that interested in
the Videhans, viewing them simply as ‘a collateral line to the Ikṣvākus who can
supply brides to Rāma and his brother’: Alf Hiltebeitel, Dharma: Its Early History in
Law, Religion, and Narrative (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2011),
488.
32

benefit the women in the family.64 Before we proceed to an examination of another
use of our narrative motifs, therefore, it is worth taking a small diversion into the
women’s stories.
If we want to explore women and renunciation in relation to Janaka then we might
immediately think of the Janaka-Sulabhā dialogue discussed above. There Janaka’s
ability to renounce inwardly while continuing to rule is challenged – apparently
successfully – by the female renouncer Sulabhā. As Black argues, the role of gender
in this debate is key, for it sits in a wider set of stories in the Mahābhārata in which
women challenge men and assert their own right to be heard.65 Perhaps, therefore,
the story is as much about Sulabhā proving her own mokṣa as it is about her
challenge of the king’s claim. Either way, the presence of a strong female character
who is acknowledged by the narrator as having achieved liberation through
renunciation suggests that the debate over the abandonment of worldly duties is as
relevant to women as it is to men.
Another female character who insists on making herself heard – and who is praised
for her careful arguments in the Mahābhārata – is Sīvalī, wife of Janaka in the Janaka-
jātaka. When she discovers that her husband has left the palace, she follows him and
uses a number of ruses and arguments to try to tempt him back. During this part of
the story she demonstrates her own difficulty in letting go of her husband, as well
as her wit in striving to retain him. After he eventually outwits her and succeeds in
disappearing into the forest alone, she also pursues the life of a renouncer, in a park
outside the city, and she herself attains rebirth in a Brahmā realm, the same
achievement as her husband.
In the Kumbhakāra-jātaka, by contrast, it is the woman who outwits the man, rather
than vice versa. After the four paccekabuddha kings have declared the reasons
behind their renunciation, both the potter (the Buddha-to-be) and his wife wish to
go forth, but it is she who manages it first through sneaking off and leaving the
potter to bring up their children. While this little narrative twist is not directly
related to the renouncing kings, it does demonstrate three things: firstly, sometimes
worldly duties, including the raising of children, must take priority over
renunciation, at least temporarily; secondly, renunciation is the ideal for potters as
64 I am grateful to the audience at the 2014 meeting of the Spalding Symposium on
Indian Religions in Manchester, including Simon Brodbeck, Sarah Shaw and
Jacqueline Suthren Hirst, for a fruitful discussion of this possibility.
65 Black, “Dialogue and Difference”, 254.
33

much as it is for kings; and thirdly, renunciation is the ideal for women as well as
men. Overall, then, the more mundane characters in this story of the four
paccekabuddha kings, help to bring the renunciatory ideal back down to earth for
every member of the audience.
Looking at the female characters involved in the stories of the Videhan royals thus
helps us to see that their portrayals of renunciation have a wider reach than at first
glance.66 It is the stories’ ability to speak to this key value of renunciation that gives
them so much currency within all three religious traditions. And the teachings are
not simply aimed at kings, but rather at every member of the audience – male or
female – who is grappling with the competing demands of worldly duties and a
personal religious quest.
Playing with Motifs and Lineages: The Story of King Arindama
As the Brahmanical sources highlight, the central concern of the motifs associated
with the Videhan lineage is the question of whether, how and when to renounce, a
question that dominates much religious discourse in early South Asia, not just the
stories of a single lineage. It is no surprise, therefore, that some of these motifs were
also used by narrative composers and compilers in a context not directly relating to
the Videhan kings. A complex picture of the flexibility of the various motifs
surrounding this lineage is painted by the Sonaka-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 529) and
its parallel in the Mahāvastu, in which it is known as the Arindama story and
features at the end of the text (III, 449-461). Both stories tell of a king called
Arindama whose childhood friend Sonaka/Śroṇa renouces and later teaches the
king about the benefits of renunciation. Within this basic framework are several
motifs familiar from other stories, though these vary across the two versions, and so
it is best to treat them separately in the first instance.
In the Sonaka-jātaka we find that Arindama is consecrated as king of Rājagaha
(notably not Mithilā) after being found lying on an auspicious stone slab in a park,
as happens also in the Janaka-jātaka. His friend Sonaka renounces after seeing the
withered leaf of a sāla tree and becomes paccekabuddha, in a clear resonance with
the stories associated with the four kings and with the Janaka-jātaka. When, much
66 Given this interest in the female characters, it is worth noting the possibility that
it is Sītā – also known as Janakī – who carries the renunciatory tendencies in the
Rāmāyaṇa. However, it seems more likely that this epic dates to before a time when
the renunciatory associations with the lineage were widespread.
34

later, the king seeks out Sonaka, the latter tells him of the benefits of renunciation,
and a familiar line is present in an explanation of the seven blessings of being a
monastic:
Pañcamam bhadram adhanassa anāgārassa bhikkhuno:
nagaramhi ḍayhamānamhi nāssa kiñci aḍayhatha.
The fifth blessing for a possessionless homeless monk:
When the city is on fire, nothing of his is burning.67
He also tells the king the story of a crow who became so absorbed in the pleasure of
eating his way through an elephant carcass that he failed to notice that it was being
swept out to sea. The king decides to crown his son (named Dīghāvu, the same as
Janaka’s son in the Janaka-jātaka), renounces and attains rebirth in a Brahmā realm.
He is identified as the Bodhisatta (Buddha-to-be).
In the Mahāvastu we find ourselves a few steps closer to the motifs surrounding the
renouncing royals of Videha. Importantly, in this version King Arindama rules in
Mithilā, and so the verse spoken by his friend is closer to other versions:
mithilāyāṃ dahyamānāyāṃ nāsya dahyati kiṃcana
caturthaṃ khu bhadram adhanasya anāgārasya bhikṣuṇo
When Mithilā is on fire, nothing of his burns:
This is the fourth blessing for a possessionless homeless monk.68
References to pratyekabuddhas are, however, absent: Śroṇaka renounces simply
because he sees the peril in sense pleasures, with no external prompt, and he is said
to become a seer (ṛṣi), not a pratyekabuddha. This suggests that perhaps the
connection with the pratyekabuddha ideal was made within the Pāli tradition, in
response to close connections between the different motifs in circulation. The
Mahāvastu version adds another layer to Śroṇa’s teaching, for the story of the crow
is followed by a series of verses describing the hells that are rather reminiscent of
the Nimi-jātaka. He also makes this teaching after the king has been ruling for 84,000
67 My translation from Fausbøll, Jātaka, vol. 5, 252.
68 My translation from Émile Senart (ed.) Mahāvastu (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale,
1882-1897), vol. 3: 453.
35

years (the same number of years Nimi is said to have ruled) in the mango grove
known as Mahādeva, which is presumably the same as Makhādeva grove, in which
the Buddha is said to have told the Makhādeva Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya.
As well as demonstrating the flexibility of the interconnected motifs surrounding
the renouncing royals of Videha, the story of Arindama suggests some differences in
interpretation of these motifs in different Buddhist traditions. The Pāli tradition
appears to have forgotten – or perhaps deliberately elided – the association with
Mithilā by placing Arindama on the throne of Rājagaha. It has combined the well-
known verse about a city in flames with the motif of the paccekabuddha. The
Mahāvastu, on the other hand, does not associate the story with pratyekabuddhas,
and keeps the focus firmly on the ideal of renunciation itself. That it is renunciation
and not immediate awakening that is the ideal propagated by the story is clear from
the identification of the characters: in the Mahāvastu the sage Śroṇa is the Buddha-
to-be, and cannot therefore be awakened within the story. In this sense it is Śroṇa’s
presence in the lineage of past lives of the Buddha that is significant to the
narrative, rather than King Arindama’s presence in the lineage of renouncing royals
of Videha.
Lineages of Buddhas
The difference between the character identifications of the Arindama story in its
Jātakatthavaṇṇanā and Mahāvastu versions is relevant to our other motifs as well, and
takes us back to the question of whether the focus of our stories is on the
achievement of awakening or simply renunciation. As we have seen, the four kings
are closely associated with the idea of pratyekabuddhahood in both Jain and
Buddhist sources, suggesting that this association is rather old. When King Nami is
singled out for individual treatment in the Uttarajjhāyā he remains a patteyabuddha,
and his renunciation is part of the story of his awakening. In the Kumbhakāra-jātaka
the four pratyekabuddha kings are joined in the story by the Bodhisatta, identified as
a potter who is inspired by his encounter with the four to renounce himself. He does
not, of course, become a pratyekabuddha, for if he did this would prevent him from
his eventual attainment of full buddhahood in a later life. The kings cease to be the
ideal in this context, for instead the real hero is the Bodhisatta, and this is made
clear by the story’s continuation through the narration of his determination to
renounce and his wife’s sneaky attempts to beat him to it.
It is this tendency of Buddhist stories to identify all heroes as the Bodhisatta that
probably accounts for the situation we find in both the Nimi-jātaka and Janaka-jātaka.
36

In the Janaka-jātaka the king is clearly identified with the Bodhisattva, and he is
understood to be demonstrating the energetic determination that is required of an
aspirant to buddhahood. It is thus impossible to identify Janaka as a pratyekabuddha
despite clear connections with that character and with the stories of the four kings.
That pratyekabuddhas are still central to the story is clear both from the presence of
several external prompts that are elsewhere said to lead to pratyekabuddhahood, as
well as from the presence of pratyekabuddhas at the court of King Janaka. Janaka
himself is mistaken for a pratyekabuddha when he leaves the palace, and his solitary
ideal of renunciation contrasts with the more sociable forest-dwelling that we find
in many other jātakas. It seems likely that the story was adapted from one in which
Janaka was understood to become a paccekabuddha, in order to create a jātaka story
that suitably augments the lineage of the Buddha by showing him supporting and
emulating pratyekabuddhas.69
A similar tension is visible in the various versions of the story of King Nimi and his
ancestor King Makhādeva. As noted above, in the Makhādeva Sutta only King
Makhādeva is identified as the Bodhisatta, and the identification of King Nimi with
the Bodhisatta is subsequently made in the jātakas. Thus the earlier version, in the
Majjhima Nikāya, allows for the idea that Nimi may have been another famous hero,
though admittedly not a paccekabuddha since he is said to achieve rebirth in a
Brahmā realm. We find a similar scenario in the Chinese sources: while the Āgama
versions only identify Makhādeva as the Bodhisattva, Nimi also gains this
identification in the Lie Du Ji Jing. However, the Ekottarika-āgama demonstrates the
flexibility of associations by identifying that king as a past life of the Buddha’s
attendant Ānanda, and declaring Nimi’s son, who brings to an end the eminent
lineage of renunciation, to be an earlier rebirth of Devadatta, the Buddha’s nemesis.
The idea that King Nimi – a clear hero and thus a prime candidate for jātaka
inclusion – is the Buddha-to-be seems to have evolved gradually. Nimi was initially
some other famous hero, disassociated from the Buddha’s biography, though the
idea of Nimi as pratyekabuddha that is so strong in Jain stories is not present even in
the earlier extant layer.
69 This is one area in which I am in agreement with Wiltshire, who also makes this
argument: Ascetic Figures, 159. However, he is surely overstepping his evidence when
he argues that the extensive shared mythology surrounding Nami/Janaka is
evidence of a shared origin for Buddhist and Jain traditions, and that
pratyekabuddhas were a ‘proto-śramaṇa’ ascetic group originating in Videha that
gradually resulted in the sectarian traditions of Buddhism and Jainism.
37

We can see, therefore, that the needs of the jātaka genre – namely the identification
of one character, ideally the hero, with the future Buddha – do not fit easily with
the narrative motif of a king who renounces and achieves awakening in his current
life. In a sense what we find in the Buddhist sources is a subordination of the lineage
of renouncing kings to the lineage of the Buddha. It is this key figure, whose jātaka
stories extoll his many virtues and achievements, who is lauded as the renouncer
par excellence. Sometimes, therefore, he must take over the identification of King
Janaka even though the latter is already understood to have been a pratyekabuddha,
and sometimes he must learn from his encounters with pratyekabuddhas who had
formerly been kings. The Jain sources, with no developed notion of a jātaka genre
and a tendency towards lauding a number of omniscient beings alongside one
another, make no such restrictions. However, it is notable that Nami the
pratyekabuddha shares his name with the twenty-first Jina of this time cycle, who is
also king of Mithilā. The Uttarajjhāyā-nijjutti takes pains to point out the parallel but
also the distinction: Nami the pratyekabuddha, we are assured, is a separate
character to the Jina, and considerably later in time.70
Conclusion
During this chapter we have established that there is a shared association between
the royals of Videha and the ideal of renunciation, sometimes expressed also
through the character of the pratyekabuddha. This association is present in both
Buddhist and Jain sources largely through two narrative clusters, the first
surrounding the four kings, and the second surrounding the king of Videha alone,
variously called Janaka or Nimi/Nemi/Nami, who renounces usually at the prompt
of an external sign, enters into dialogue about the propriety of his renunciation, and
declares that even if Mithilā is burning nothing of his is destroyed. These
intertwining motifs and associations are then played with in a variety of other
stories, such as those surrounding Nimi, Makhādeva and Arindama in Buddhist
texts, and the many references to King Janaka in Brahmanical sources.
On a very basic level, the presence of this association in all three traditions once
again speaks to the shared heritage of early South Asian narrative. Many different
storytellers and textual redactors and commentators were aware of the Videhan
lineage’s propensity for renunciation, and used characters from that lineage to
70 Uttarajjhāyā-nijjutti 267-9; Bollee, ed., Nijjuttis, 96. In Devendragaṇi’s commentary
we hear mention of the past Jina Nami when the mother of the pratyekabuddha Nami
visits Mithilā: see Meyer, Hindu Tales, 162.
38

explore how renouncing the throne could – and should – be undertaken. That the
lineage speaks to two key values of early South Asian religious discourse – worldly
duty and the need to renounce, whatever form this renunciation may take – enables
wide use of the narrative motifs to prove one or other perspective on this tension.
For Brahmanical sources this often means showing the possibility of internal
renunciation through detachment, though the use of the motifs in Brahmanical
contexts is by no means uniform. In Jain and Buddhist contexts we find a clear
emphasis on the need for renunciation and the benefits of the solitary life, but
alongside this an acknowledgement that fulfillment of worldly duties before
renunciation is acceptable, even admirable. The lineage, ensured by this careful
balance that allows for the fathering of sons before their abandonment, continues,
we are told, through many generations.
The Videhan royal family is not of course the only lineage with a particular
association; the other major example that also cuts across all three traditions is that
of the Śibis/Śivis, who are renowned as extraordinarily generous. Stories abound of
King Śibi, who variously gives away his eyes, allows insects to drink his blood, or
cuts off his flesh to ransom a dove; the latter motif is found across all three
traditions, and is – like the Videhan lineage – adjusted to suit each particular
context. It is surely no coincidence that the most popular Buddhist story of a
generous king, the Vessantara-jātaka (Jātakatthavaṇṇanā 547), is set in the kingdom of
the Sivis. Both the Sivis and the Videhans are lineages of very impressive kings, the
former famous for their extraordinary generosity, the latter for their determined
renunciation and detachment. As such they have great narrative appeal.
The ability of a lineage to carry a particular association is of great benefit to the
narratives, for it provides both weight and flexibility. The weight comes from the
long-standing association, one that is even accepted by rival traditions. The
flexibility comes from the fact that it is a lineage rather than an individual who
carries the association, and so a whole variety of stories can abound and interlink
without fear of contradiction. Janaka is at once the king who thinks he has achieved
mokṣa without renouncing, and a pratyekabuddha, and the future Buddha. Nimi
renounces having seen his first grey hair, or bracelets jangling and making a racket,
or birds fighting over a piece of meat. These characters are one and the same yet
also independent, and so a cluster of inter-related motifs emerges, each one
speaking back to the central concerns of the lineage: royalty and renunciation.
39