ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
RESEARCH Open Access
A bodhisattva-spirit-oriented counselling
ī
framework: inspired by Vimalak rti wisdom
Fung Kei Cheng1* and Samson Tse2
*Correspondence:
Abstract
oasischeng@yahoo.com
1DepartmentofSocialWorkand
AnumberofstudieshaveintegratedBuddhistprinciplesintotherapeuticinterventions,
SocialAdministration,TheUniversity
ofHongKong,Room534,5/F,The demonstratingeffectiveoutcomes;however,verylittleBuddhisttextualdatasupportthe
JockeyTowerClub,TheCentennial theoreticalfoundationofthosemodels.Thisexploratoryresearchconceptualisesa
Campus,PokfulamRoad,Hong counsellingframeworkbasedonacanonicalanalysisoftheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtra,
Kong,China
Fulllistofauthorinformationis togetherwithaqualitativeinquiry.Thirty-eightinformants,includinghelpingservice
availableattheendofthearticle practitioners,Buddhistmasters,Buddhistvolunteers,andbeneficiaries,wererecruited
throughcoldcalls,socialnetworks,referrals,andelectronicmail.Forty-sixsemi-structured
interviewsessions,involvingindividualsandfocusgroups,wereconductedintheform
offace-to-facediscussions,telecommunication, and correspondence. Data collection
was performed using multiple sources, consisting of interviews, expressive art, and
autobiographies. Both scriptural and fieldwork data were analysed with the aid
of ATLAS.ti 7, a software package; while interview data were processed under
phenomenological interpretative analysis. Different levels of triangulation were
employedtoenhancetheresearchrigour,includingmember-checkingoftranscriptions
and data interpretation, and peer analysis, with an inter-rated reliability of 92%. This
bodhisattva-spirit-oriented counselling framework was then finalised with two
super-ordinate themes (philosophical concepts and propositions for counselling),
14 emergent themes, and 40 themes. This counselling framework, from the prajñā
perspective,notonlyexhibitsMahāyānawisdom,butalsorevitalisesthepracticalityand
applicabilityofcatvāriapramānāni(thefourimmeasurables)intoday’scontemporary
context,approvingtheaspirationoftheBuddhatoservesentientbeings.
Keywords:Bodhisattva-mārga;Catvāriapramānāni;Cross-disciplinaryresearch;
Expressiveart;Mixedmethod;Qualitativefieldwork;Self-benefitingaltruism;Vimalakīrti
NirdeśaSūtra
Background
Western scholars have increasingly been interested in Buddhism since the 17th
century (Conze 1953), and particularly after the Second World War (Gethin 1998).
Through the influence of their studies, Buddhism has expanded to not only religion
circles, but also science (Kaklauskas and Olson 2008), art, social studies (Jones 2003),
and psychology (Storhoff and Whalen-Bridge 2010, Loy 2000, Hsing-Yun 2006).
Buddhism has been characterised as an “edifying philosophy” (Watson 1998, 14), and
a “dialectical pragmatism with a psychological turn” (Conze 1953, 15). For instance,
both catvāri-ārya-satyāni (the four noble truths 四聖諦), alluding to “the disease, the
cause, the cure, and the medicine” (Gethin 1998, 59), and Chan (Zen 禪) meditation
©2014ChengandTse;licenseeSpringer.ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommons
AttributionLicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,andreproductioninany
medium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycredited.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page2of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
have been considered as healing methods (Kief 2006) to dissolve mental challenges
(Sugamura and Warren 2006). Interfacing one of the world’s oldest religions (namely,
Buddhism) with a relatively new discipline (psychology) (Bankart, Dockett, and
Dudley-Grant 2003), intellectuals have continuously explored the similarities between
these two domains (Kaklauskas et al. 2008). Having experienced these valuable Buddhist
resources as “an ethical consciousness suitable for the globalcultureof the 21st century”
(Wright 2009, 15), professionals have integrated Buddhist ideas into helping or caring
professions (Walley 1986, Fielding and Llewelyn 1986, Welwood 1983, Heelas and
Kohn 1986, Claxton 1986), including social work (Brandon 1976/1990, Canda and
Furman2010),andpsychotherapy(Fromm1963);forexample,deSilva(1996),Epstein
(1989), Goleman (1975), Kabat-Zinn (2011), Rubin (2009), Suzuki, Fromm, and
DeMartino (1963), Wallace and Shapiro (2006), and Young-Eisendrath (2008).
Supported by voluminous research projects, this “New Buddhist Psychology” (Kwee,
Gergen, and Koshikawa 2006, 22; Kwee and Taams 2006, 435), as part of “Buddhist
modernism” (Deeg 2005, 376), has developed a “brand of psychotherapy” (Ponce
2006, 331) centred around remedial and preventive measures tackling psychological
disorders and life challenges, particularly by means of meditation and mindfulness
(de Silva 2006, Kabat-Zinn 2003, 2011, Crane and Kuyken 2012, Gehart 2012, Teasdale,
Segal, and Williams 1995, Thompson and Waltz 2010), attaining “the path of happi-
ness” (Inoue 1997, 89). Focusing on the idea of “spirit-in-pouch, pouch-in-spirit, or
body and mind as one” (Akizuki 1990, 115), this approach differs from Western
traditions.
Whiletheultimategoalof“human-centred”(Guruge2007,62)Buddhismistoenable
sentient beings to eradicate suffering (de Witt 2008, Long 2007) and achieve happiness
(Rahula 1988), Buddhist masters play a conventional role in helping laity cope with life
adversities and psychological difficulties (Dhammanaha 2000) through Buddhist prac-
tices, such as through using “mind training” (Thubten 2008, 32), and “thought trans-
formation” (Thubten 2008, 32) to calm down an unquiet mind (Bankart, Dockett, and
Dudley-Grant 2003). The mind collectively involves the “holistic feeling, judgements,
prejudices, and bigotries, as well as the ability (or inability) to accurately take the feel-
ing temperature of a social situation, physical space, or aesthetic presentation in one
experience” (Walker 2008, 184), or otherwise simply termed “emotional intelligence”
(Goleman2008, ix;1998, 7–10,375–376). Within mindtraining,Buddhist masters,act-
ing like counsellors, facilitate followers to possess a pure and crystal clear mind and to
gaininsightreflexively(Claxton1986).Subsequently,sentientbeingsareabletoconvert
suffering into motivation for personal growth (Hoffman 2008) and further self-
exploration (Epstein 1999), which echoes with the Vimalakīrti teachings that are ap-
plied to the philosophical theories in this cross-disciplinary study integrating Buddhist
resources into counselling. The Vimalakīrti Nirdeśa Sūtra (維摩詰所說經), an influen-
tial Mahāyāna canon, elaborates on the concepts of bodhisattva andbodhisattva-mārga
(thebodhisattvapath菩薩道),hintingat propositionsofcounselling.
By honing in on the Buddhist focus on praxis (Kasulis 2004), rather than comparing
it with Western psychotherapeutic approaches, the present research conceptualises a
bodhisattva-spirit-oriented counselling framework for applying to a generic therapeutic
context, wherein the practice of bodhisattva (菩薩) represents the core Mahāyāna
(Great Vehicle 大乘佛教) theory (Kanbayashi 1938/1984), in which the mission of a

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page3of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
bodhisattva is to free living beings from suffering. This is compatible with the goal of
helping professionals, such as counsellors, psychiatrists, and clinical psychologists. The
present study applies the teaching of catvāri apramānāni (the four immeasurables
四無量心)totherapeuticsettingsbecausethisnotionoffersaroadmapforhowtoprac-
tise bodhisattva-mārga (the bodhisattva path 菩薩道) in a way that inspires counselling
theories and practices. This research has adopted a mixed research method, employing
a canonical analysis of the Vimalakīrti Nirdeśa Sūtra (維摩詰所說經) and qualitative
interviews, so that it supplies primary data to strengthen the theoretical foundation for
the available Buddhist-influenced interventions, especially in humanistic approaches
(Watson 1998). Supported by the Buddhist traditional hierarchy of “theoretical consi-
derations, methodological considerations, goals and implications” (Watson 1998, 19),
this counselling framework consists of philosophical concepts and propositions for
counselling that are elaborated upon respectively. The former includes views of human
nature, worldviews, life views, and the bodhisattva spirit; whereas the latter covers
therapeutic mission and goals, roles and qualities of a counsellor, case conceptualisa-
tion, therapeuticrelationship,therapeutic strategiesandtactics,skills,andtechniques.
The conceptualisation of a counselling framework in this research, grounded on a
Buddhist canon (discussing its practicality from a secular perspective), and qualitative
fieldwork represents an exploratory inquiry, which not only offers doctrinal data and
extends the horizons of Buddhism as applied to mental well-being, but also attempts to
make this mixed method available for counselling research. Further discussion is in-
vited forthepurposeofenhancingthedevelopment oftheseapproaches.
Methods
Researchdesign
This cross-disciplinary research, while focusing on first-hand data, adopts a mixed
method, mingling canonical analysis with qualitative study, from which the former pro-
vides textual evidence giving direct voice to a Buddhist text while the latter represents
the lived experiences of interviewees, supporting the applicability and practicality of
Buddhistteachings inmodernsociety.
Acanonicalanalysis
The Vimalakīrti Nirdeśa Sūtra (維摩詰所說經) (hereafter called the Sūtra), written
from sometime in the late first century to the early second century A.D. (Lin 1997a), is
one of the prominent Mahāyāna canons (Zheng 1986) explicating prajñā (wisdom 般若)
(Kaziyama 1994). The details describes regarding the major Mahāyāna teachings, espe-
cially madhyamaka (the Middle School 中觀) (Lamotte 1976/1990), significantly affect
otherschoolsofBuddhism,includingChan(Zen禪宗)(Sheng-yen1988andSuzuki1938/
1981a),Tiantai (天臺宗) (You 1999), and Vajrayāna (Tantric Buddhism 密宗) (Tam 1995),
positively impact the culture of the upper and lower Chinese social classes (Mather 1968,
He 2009). Its influence also extends to other countries, such as Vietnam (Lieu 2004),
Japan(Zheng1986),andKorea(Miller1984).
Vimalakīrti, the protagonist of the Sūtra, is a “household bodhisattva” (Lopez and
Rockefeller 1987, 28), practising bodhisattva-mārga (the bodhisattva path 菩薩道) in
the loka (the secular world 世間). This Sūtra, designated thus by the Buddha, is named

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page4of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
after himi, which is rare in Buddhist traditions. This symbolises the importance of
Buddhist laymen who are devoted to practising Buddhist teachings in their daily life in
the development of Mahāyāna (Yin-Shun 1979). This is particularly true in the case of
self-benefiting altruism contributing to society, such as the helping or caring professions
(forexample,counselling,nursing,socialwork,occupationaltherapy,andeducation).
ThesecharacteristicsofferafoundationforselectingtheSūtrainthisstudy.Thetext-
ual analysis uses Kumārajīva’s (鳩摩羅什) Chinese rendition, along with English ver-
sions translated by McRae (2004) and Watson (1997) because of their readability. One
mentor who is well-versed in the Sūtra was invited to enhance the validity of canonical
interpretation, and ATLAS.ti 7, a software package, was employed for scriptural data
analysis (Figure 1).
Qualitativeinquiry
In this qualitative fieldwork, which was approved by the Human Research Ethics
Committee for Non-Clinical Faculties, The University of Hong Kong, 38 participants
in “purposeful sampling” (Patton 2002, 46) were recruited for this exploratory study.
Demographic information for the participants is broken down into the following
areas: gender (n=25 female, 65.8%; n=13 male, 34.2%), age (n=3 aged 18-30, 3.9%; n=12
aged 31–45, 31.6%; n=20 aged 46–60, 52.6%; n=3 aged over 60, 3%), and education (n=1
primaryschool,2.6%;n=6secondaryschool,15.8%;n=8undergraduate,21.1%;n=15post-
graduate,39.5%;n=8doctoraldegree,21.1%).
The eligibility criteria for the informants included the following: First, beneficiaries
were chosen who have experienced life challenges that have been resolved through
Buddhist wisdom; however, whether they were not required to be Buddhists. Second,
Buddhist masters were chosen who had experience preaching to followers, demonstrat-
ing that they actually connect with society. Third, Buddhist volunteers were chosen
who regularly serve the community. Lastly, the helping service practitioners are those
whotendtoapply Buddhistteachingstotheircareerorservices,butarenotnecessarily
Buddhists.Table1exhibitstheparticipantdetails.
Figure1CanonicaldataanalysisbyATLAS.ti7.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page5of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Table1Demographicsynopsisoftheparticipants
Classification Details
Categoriesofparticipants Beneficiaries(n=9;23.7%)
Buddhistmasters(n=11;28.9%)
Buddhistvolunteers(n=6;15.8%)
Helpingservicepractitioners(n=12;31.6%)
Recruitmentsources Socialnetworks(n=10;26.3%)
Coldcalls(n=15;39.5%)
Electronicmails(n=7;18.4%)
Facebookpage(n=0;0%)
Referralsandsnowballeffects(n=6;15.8%)
Helpingservicepractitioners Clinicalpsychologist(n=1;8.3%)
Counsellor(n=3;25%)
Psychiatrist(n=3;25%)
Socialworker(n=1;8.3%)
Teacher(n=4;33.4%)
Selectedin-textcitations Beneficiaries:
Amara,CheWai,ChiSim,Esther,DunLi,PemaKazhuo,PuretédeLotus
Buddhistmasters:
RinpocheK*,VenerableChiYiu,VenerableFooChai,VenerableSander,
VenerableThongHong,VenerableYuChun,VHU*,VHY*
Buddhistvolunteers:
Betty,YimNa
Helpingserviceproviders:
DrChan(ahelpingservicepractitioner),DrLi(apsychiatrist),HW*
(ahelpingservicepractitioner),Jackie(asocialworker),JC*(apsychiatrist),
Joe(acounsellor),KJ*(apsychiatrist),LP*(acounsellor),ML*
(acounsellor),Polly(aclinicalpsychologist)
Remarks:
Thosewith*arepseudonyms;andtheremainderarerealordharmanames,givenbyconsentoftheinterviewees.
Forty-six semi-structured interview sessions (44 sessions with individuals, and two
with focus groups), totalling 2,729 minutes, were conducted with the aid of guiding
questions from March 2011 to October 2012, by means of face-to-face interviews in
Hong Kong, telecommunication methods, or other correspondence. The two Buddhist
volunteer focus groups not only shared their personal ideas, but also served as a means
oftriangulatingtheexperiencesofotherindividualinformants.
Thirty-two informants (84.3%) were interviewed in Cantonese, a dialect spoken in
Hong Kong, while four others were interviewed in English (10.5%), one in Putonghua
(Mandarin) (2.6%), and another in Tibetan (2.6%), aided by an instantaneous inter-
preter. Furthermore, multiple sources were utilised to enrich the fieldwork data collec-
tion and analysis; for instance, a genogram (McGoldrick, Gerson, and Petry 2008), an
autobiographical timeline (Leung 2010), autobiographies, participatory observations,
and expressive art that contains rich messages of personal experiences and ideas
(Bertman 2000) (Figure 2). The interviews were tape-recorded and then transcribed
verbatim in Chinese. Phenomenological interpretative analysis was employed for this
qualitative data analysis by using ATLAS.ti 7, a computer-assisted programme, since
this analysis method mainly explores lived experiences and meaningful life events of

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page6of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Figure2Viewofdeath–attaining“theothershore”.
the informants (Eatough and Smith 2006, Smith, Flowers, and Larkin 2009), which
aligns with the objectives of this research. The analysis resulted in two “super-ordinate
themes” (Smith, Flowers, and Larkin 2009, 96) (philosophical concepts and propositions
for counselling), 14 “emergent themes” (Smith, Flowers, and Larkin 2009, p. 91), and 40
“themes” (Smith, Flowers, and Larkin 2009, 79) (Table 2). Various methods of triangula-
tion werealsousedtoenhancetheacademicrigourof thisstudy,encompassingmember
checks of transcription accuracy and data interpretation, and peer analysis at an inter-
raterreliabilityrateof92%.
Philosophicalconcepts
The philosophical basis of this counselling framework involves views of human na-
ture, worldviews, life views, and the bodhisattva spirit from the perspective of prajñā
(wisdom 般若) in Mahāyāna. It potentially offers a theoretical ground for propositions
for counselling that reflect the applicability and practicality of these teachings.
Viewsofhumannature
The school of prajñā (wisdom 般若) views human nature from the dimensions of na-
ture and nurture, associated with inward and outward factors, using the metaphor of a
dusty mirror.
Natureessentials
Regarding the nature aspect, the school of prajñā (wisdom 般若) treasures the im-
maculacy and innocence of human nature; however, it also acknowledges an imperfect
environmentthatcausesdefectsinsentientbeings.Andyet,sentientbeingsareanātman
(non-self 無我), and are in a changing state, implying the possibility of restoring their
bodhinature.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page7of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Table2Analysisthemesofthebodhisattva-spirit-orientedcounsellingframework
Super-ordinatethemes Emergentthemes Themes
Viewsofhumannature ●Natureessentials
●Nurtureproperties
Worldviews ●Pratītya-samutpāda
●Karma
●Hetu-phala
Philosophicalconcepts
Lifeviews ●Duḥkha
●Theothershore
Thebodhisattvaspirit ●Bodhisattva
●Bodhicitta
●Catvāriapramānāni
Therapeuticmission ●Freefromsuffering
Therapeuticgoals ●Rejuvenationofbodhinature
●Enlightenment
Rolesofacounsellor ●Ametaphoricaldoctor
●Afacilitator
Qualitiesofacounsellor ●Wisdom
●Congruence
●Self-cherishing
Caseconceptualisation ●Avidyā
●Ātma-grāha
●Viparyāsa
●Abhūta-parikalpa
Propositionsforcounselling Therapeuticrelationship ●Bodhisattvsa-bodhisattvainterplay
Therapeuticstrategies ●Rejuvenationofpurityandawareness
●Removalofkleśa,avidyā,andmoha
Therapeutictactics ●Advaita
●Transcendenceofkleśa
●Gratitudeforsuffering
Skills ●Upāya
●Intrigue
Techniques ●Metaphor
●Simile
●Humour
●Exaggerating
●Contrast
●Confrontation
●Silence
●Story-telling
●Psychoeducation
●RoleModel
Bodhinature
The prajñā (wisdom 般若) school values the inherent chastity of human natureii that
leads sentient beings to awaken (Yamaguchi 1999/2006), referred to as the bodhi

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page8of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
natureiii, tathatā (suchness 真如), a pure mind (Zheng 1986), or the “Buddha-nature”
(Abe 1997, 20); that inner force in which is able to dissipate delusion and attain one’s
authentic self (Reichenbach 1990). Since the human nature is identicaliv across individ-
uals, without divergencev, both ‘angels’ and ‘devils’vi can potentially be enlightenedvii.
Based on the belief that “every person innately possesses the buddha nature,” Dr Li
(a psychiatrist) concurred with Buddhism, that sentient beings have a high tendency
towards self-actualisation, which establishes an essential rapport for counselling
practitioners. This gives heart to the goals and strategies of counselling to energise
the purity of human nature and achieve “brilliant sanity” (Townsend and Kaklauskas
2008, 47).
Anātman(non-self無我)
Sentient beings are all identically living under pratītya-samutpāda (the law of
dependent origination 緣起法), forming stages of birth, growth, deterioration, and
death due to the combination of hetu (necessary causes 主因) and saha-kāri-pratyayaviii
(contributingcauses助緣),whichproduceschangesanduncertainties.Thus,sentientbe-
ings as such, as well as these two types of causes, are delusive representations without
fixed formsix, like clouds, foam, or bubblesx. In Buddhism, this concept of self is associ-
atedwithanātman(non-self無我),aninterdependent self(Wright2009andDow2008),
explainingthe transient physical,mental, and psychologicalstatesof human beings.Both
the growth and ageing of individuals represent the temporality of the physical domain,
while the mental and psychological states also change from time to time, being affected
byphysiologicalandemotionalfactors.Theseinescapableencounterscausetheselftobe
unreal(notinafixedformorstate)(Zheng1986).
Despitethesechallenges,sentientbeings,withtheirbodhinature,arecapableofconquer-
ing their vexations and transcend anitya (impermanence 無常) (Soothill 1913) through
“self-cultivation”(Wright2009,3),selfre-enlightenment,and“self-transformation”(Wright
2009,12),resultinginre-discoveryoftheir“originalself”(Akizuki1990,116).Thisoptimis-
ticpropositioninBuddhismrelatedtohumannatureencouragesindividualstoexperience
“emptinessofself”(Kornfield2001,76)andtomakethebestuseofself.
Inspired by prajñā (wisdom 般若) teachings, Jackie (a social worker) believes that
“people want to live happily. People hope they can be happy. … They (the decadent
persons) are eager to change. They want to be good. Only that kind of people can
change to be good [when conditions are adequate]”. Esther (a beneficiary) personally
experienced the power of change and recalled that, “because of the present environ-
ment,thepresentemotion,everythinghaschanged”,bythisbeliefsheovercameherlife
challengesandrecovered from depression.
Their support of short-term and long-term changes within the “self-system” (Markus
and Nurius 1986, 966) intrinsic to the bodhi nature (Trungpa 1983) approves the dis-
covery of their authentic self in the proper conditions, as well as the actualisation of
their constructive “possible selves” (Markus and Nurius 1986, 954); that is, the ideal
selves that individuals desire to become; “the successful self, the creative self, the rich
self, the thin self, or the loved and admired self” (Markus and Nurius 1986, 954). By re-
ferring to the concept of anātman (non-self 無我), a counsellor reinforces clients to re-
vivefrom transgressionsorlifeproblems.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page9of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
While self-actualisation remains the key principle in Mahāyāna, it also significantly
engages humanistic counselling approaches, including the hierarchy of human needs
(Maslow 1943), and person-centred therapy (Rogers 1947). These two cultural camps
highlight the positivenature of humanbeings, which builds effective communication in
counselling.
Nurtureproperties
Nurture properties consist of avidyā (ignorance 無明), along with individual attributes
madeupofthe externalfactorswhich influence thelifeofsentientbeings.
Avidyā(ignorance無明)
Regardless ofsituation,theimmaculate humannature (innercharacteristics)iscontam-
inated by vexations and desires (outer conditions), as expressed by the metaphor “this
body is impure, replete with defilements”xi (Watson 1997, 83). The toughest defilement
to address is avidyā, which consists of delusion and a false perception of one’s ever-
changing environment, which instigates negative emotions, and cognition and behav-
ioural problems. When sentient beings stubbornly holdxii on to avidyā, which is the
root of suffering, their mind is blemished, and distorts reality. Dr Chan (a helping ser-
vicepractitioner) analysed distress inthefollowingmanner:
“Peoplearepureinnature. Therearenodefilements;iftootherwise, they areself-
created.…Fromthe dimension ofthebuddhanature, everyoneisinbrightness;
everyonehasmeaningandvalue”.
Referring to the goals and strategies of counselling, a counsellor facilitates clients to
remove defilements and attain tranquillityxiii, metaphorically brushing away dirt (that
is, obstinate vexations) on a mirror (the pure human nature); for which Buddhist ele-
mentsprovide sourcesrelatedtotheories andpractices(Zheng 1986).
Individualattributes
Although the human nature is consistently pure, sentient beings have individual fea-
tures, varying according to experience, understandingxiv, and capacity regarding the
perception of this “evil world of the five impurities”xv (五濁惡世) (Watson 1997, 114);
namely,sahā-lokadhātu(worldofsaha娑婆世界).Insuchachaotic world,theyremain
obduratexvi in their delusion, unable to see the ultimate reality, and live with a jumping
mindxvii. In order to rectify their misperceptions, a counsellor is competent to apply
various techniques in order to deal with individual difficulties and features, which tech-
nique isknownasupāya(skilfulmeans方便)inBuddhism (Zheng 1986).
Worldviews
The fundamental Buddhist worldview comprises pratītya-samutpāda (the law of
dependent origination 緣起法), from which arises the doctrines of karma (action 業)
andhetu-phala (cause-and-effect 因果).

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page10of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Pratītya-samutpāda(thelawofdependentorigination緣起法)
Pratītya-samutpāda, the core Buddhist theory across all Buddhist denominations and
sects, explicates the formation of all beings in the empirical world. In Buddhism, what
is apparent is merely the phenomenal manifestation that results from the aggregate of
hetu (causes 因) and saha-kāri-pratyaya (contributing causes 助緣). For instance, a bi-
cycle consists of wheels, tyres, a saddle, brake levers, chains, pedals, and other parts.
All of these components appropriately come together and make the bicycle work. If
there is a missing part, the bicycle will become inoperative; or if the tyres are on the
saddle, instead ofonthewheels,thebicyclelikewise does notwork.Thisillustrates that
nothing is independent but all things are interconnected (Epstein 2005), which con-
strues the “impermanence, dependence, and insubstantiality of all things” (Wright
2009,23),andsurrendersabsolutism (Corless2010),whichiscompatible withthepost-
modernist view (Watson 1998). In short, “to exist means to be interdependent” (Abiko
1982,8).VenerableChiYiufurtherelaborated onitfrom thedimensionsofdailylife:
“Allthingsare created bycausesandconditions; thatis,the connection ofcauses
andconditions. …The connectionofcausesandconditionsrepresentsthe
occurrence ofeverything. Themeeting ofyou andmeimpliesthe connection of
causesandconditions.Ourmakingoffriends,manyotherthings,evenfamily,
familymembersarealsoincurredthroughtheconnectionofcausesandconditions”.
However, the hetu (causes 因) will change, and so will the saha-kāri-pratyaya
(contributing causes 助緣); therefore, the phenomenon continues to change with “no
lasting form” (Humphreys 1987, 20) only conjuring up a display of substancexviii, show-
ing reality to be fluid, uncertain, and dynamic (Gethin 1998). This illuminates the tran-
sient nature of existence as representing “impermanent phenomena as permanent”
(Zopa 2012,129).Thisissimilar toJackie’s(a socialworker)experience:
“Itiscause-and-condition,Iagreeverymuch.…Ifeelthateverysteprelatestocauses
andconditions.Wheretherearenocausesandconditions.…Therewillhavenochanges”.
Existence undergoes stages ofchange pertaining to “formation, existence, destruction,
and void” (Hsu 2012, 2), denoting that “arising, staying, changing, and vanishing” (Hsu
2012, 2) present the phenomenal development of all beings. As Che Wai (a beneficiary)
related the cycle of “causes arising when causes exist, causes gathering when causes
exist,causesdisappearingwhencauses arelost”that shepersonally experienced.
This teaching in the Vimalakīrti Nirdeśa Sūtra is defined as “non-abiding”xix – the
truth behind all existence in the empirical world. This “non-abiding” nature specifies
that “the various phenomena ultimately have no existence – this is the meaning of
emptiness”xx (McRae 2004, 43), and is termed “śūnyata” (voidness 空性) in Buddhism.
The word “śūnya” in Sanskrit literally means “the swollen” (Conze 1953, 130), referring
to hollowness, and representing an insubstantial nature (Zheng 1986); or with “preg-
nant”(Jones2003,13),referringtopotentialityandcreativity.Whenthenatureofexist-
ence is insubstantial, so is its manifestationxxi; hence, phenomena are delusive,
specious, and formlessxxii, and concepts are phantomxxiii. Conclusively, all beings are
unrealanddreamlike,from theBuddhist perspective;andsoistrespass.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page11of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
The nature of trespass and transgression is volatile and uncertainxxiv, and these are
both induced by a series of causes. In other words, if one of these causes is removed,
then the trespass or transgression will not occur. For example, a criminal commits a
crime not because of her/his sin nature, as depicted by the notion of bodhi nature, but
because of many other reasons, such as poverty, and family problems. This does not
imply that the crime committed should be accepted, but that one should accept the in-
fluencing power of external factors – as expounded upon earlier by the metaphorical
dust on a mirror. This also reveals that a counsellor must empathically investigates the
latent causes of a criminal, and facilitate her/him in eliminating unfavourable causes
while creating favourableagents.
Owing to “śūnyata” (voidness 空性), the quintessence of prajñā (wisdom 般若)
(Shi 2009), the ultimate truth (Gethin 1998), all beings are ephemeralxxv and amor-
phousxxvi; therefore Amara (a beneficiary) sighed, “nothing has never changed. Many
things are out of our control”. Agreeing with this, KJ* (a psychiatrist) intelligently
perceived the uncertainties of suffering (Shi 2009), expressing that:
“Infact,goodandbadarevoid.[When]weunderstandthatagoodenvironmentis
impermanent,[we]willlivecarefully.Butactually,predicamentsarealsoimpermanent”.
Change itself is open (Welwood 2003), unrestricted and unlimited (Rawlinson 1986),
andofferschancesfordevelopmentandgrowth(Bernhard2010),whichisafactworthy
of appreciation (Cason and Thompson 1983). Jackie (a social worker) proclaimed the
positive facet of evanescence, relating that “many things will change; and yet, changes
create opportunities and changes bring hopes”. This reminds a counsellor to help cli-
ents create favourable conditions for change. More importantly, chances pave the way
for a process ofrealising the meaning behind adistressful life, just asLP* (a counsellor)
encouraged herclients:
“[It]isaprocessofself-transformation.…[mis]-perceivethatpainisreal.Butpainis
notreal.…You[haveto]transcendappearanceandmaterialform,andevenoutward
form;thatistransformation,andfullfreedom”.
Vimalakīrti in the Sūtra was metaphorically sick, through which he explains tempor-
ariness by using his fleeting and deteriorating bodyxxvii that houses an assembly of ele-
ments to transitorily form the appearance of a bodyxxviii. He perceives his body “as a
conjurerlooksonthebeingshe conjuresup…themooninthewater,orafaceorform
seen in a mirror; as shimmers of heat in a torrid season, as the echo that follows a cry,
as clouds in the sky, as foam on the water, bubbles on the water, as a thing no firmer
that the trunk of the plantain, no longer lasting that a flash of lightning; …”xxix (McRae
2004, 83). This exhibits a transiently phantom bodyxxx, as with other beings, without a
fixed statexxxi,norarealexistenceoflifeordeathxxxii.
The vicissitude of the body is also realised through “the impermanence of the five
desires”xxxiii (Watson 1997, 37), referring to the physical sensations of hearing, seeing,
smelling, tasting, and touching. The desires for sensory satisfaction are infinite, chan-
ging, and contextual. One may like to listen to classical music today but to popular
songs tomorrow; or may relish sweet flavours today but sour tomorrow; or may covet a

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page12of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
car today but a house tomorrow; and so forth. This represents changes of mind, like a
monkey’smindjumping ideasfrom ideatoideaovertime.
The physical and mental representations of sentient beings endorse the principle of
anātman (non-self 無我), that is, the existence of selflessxxxiv and egolessxxxv beings. In
Buddhism, anātman spells out the changes within individuals related to their phy-
siological bodies and mental states (Watson 1998), rather than denying the existence
of individuals. As explained earlier, sentient beings are non-autonomous because of
pratītya-samutpāda (the law of dependent origination 緣起法), bound by conditions
and external factors. The absence of autonomy uncovers the limitations of sentient be-
ings, implying that there are no distinctions among individuals in nature. Therefore,
there is no difference between “I” and “others”xxxvi, which breaks the dualism within
interpersonalrelationshipsxxxviithroughan“open,unrestricted,immeasurable”(Rawlinson
1986, 141–142) mind. This realises the notion of anātman, which aims to dissolve
“self-absorptionandegoistic impulses” (Podvoll and Fortuna 2008, 88), surrender self-
centredness (Epstein 1999), banish attachment to self (Parry and Jones 1986), over-
comenarcissism(Abe1997),anddevelopan“immediate,non-self-centredresponseto
lifeasitis”(Magid2002,79).AsDrChan(ahelpingservicepractitioner)explained:
“Theso-callednon-selfisnottoliveinourownworld,nottoliveinaselfishspace,…
nottoworkwithothersthroughselfviews,selfangles,anarrowself,aselfishworld”.
Śūnyata (voidness 空性) incorporates the forsaking of self-centredness and suffering
that arise due to mis-perceptions of reality. Dr Chan (a helping service practitioner)
lookedat itthrough itspositive connotation,relatingthefollowing:
“Śūnyataistogetridofourdefilements,get ridofourattachment.…eliminate
incorrectperception, …terminateourdelusivethoughts,andthenreturntothe
ultimatereality,tothetruth. …disposeof biases,disposeofprejudices,dispose of
stubbornness,disposeofattachment,disposeofideology, disposeof hatred,dispose
ofextant negativepsychologicalattributes”.
Karmaandcause-and-effect
As different causes come together and form an event, according to pratītya-samutpāda
(the law of dependent origination 緣起法), some causes are created and incur a cause-
and-effect, to wit, karma (action 業) that is carried forward from previous actions
(Thubten 2008). An example of this is a body which has arisen from karmic effectxxxviii.
Although sentient beings are ever-changing without fixed forms, karma does not fade
out but affects lifexxxix, which is “resultant of the forces brought into action” (Soothill
1913,97).Jackie(a social worker),asaBuddhist,believedthis principle,relatingthat:
“Thingscontaincause-and-effect.Sometimes,[I]experience[cause-and- effect]in
[my]work.Regardlessofwhether[things]aregoingwellornot,therearecauses
andconsequences.Indailylife,thiscanbeexplained”.
In accordance with cause-and-effect, good karma (action 業) comes from good
actions that bring about happiness to oneself and others (Zopa 2012), and bad karma

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page13of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
likewisecomesfrombadactionsxl.Inotherwords,goodactionscreategoodkarmaandbad
actionscreatebadkarma(Craig,Chase,andLama2010).Thus,“thiscausemakesthisfruit.
Youmakewhatcausesandcreateswhatfruit”,asYimNa(aBuddhistvolunteer)assented.
Therefore, karma (action 業), like a “wake-up call” (Thubten 2008, 38), governs
Buddhists (Reichenbach 1990) to behave correctly and take responsibility for their
own behaviour (Conze 1967). When believing in karma, individuals can peacefully
accept reality (Kain 2013). This is the reason that Dun Li (a beneficiary) appreci-
ated Buddhist teachings, as following quoted here:
“InBuddhism, the concept ofcause-and-effect isacaneguidingmepeacefullyand
atease.…Yetexperiencingcause-and-effectin[my]dailylifemakesmeunderstand
thatluckiscreatedbymyselfandfateismadebymyexpectations.[I]firmlybelieve
fateisinmyhand”.
Betty (aBuddhistvolunteer)echoed:
“Ibelievetheviewofcause-and-effect.InBuddhism,regardingthisconcept,Imight
havehurtotherpeopleinmypreviouslives.[Therefore,I]calmlyfacekarma,confess,
andreflectonwhetherIhavehurtanyone.…[I]ammorevigilantwithmyself.Imake
goodrelationshipswithotherseveryminute”.
JC* (a psychiatrist) summarised karma in that “the theory of cause-and-effect asks
responsibilities of self [behaviour]”, which applies fairly to all beings alike, just as Pema
Kazhuo (a beneficiary) concurred, explaining that “the operation of cause-and-effect
[respondsto]anindividual’sbehaviour. Itisreallyfair”.
TheBuddhistworldviewsilluminatethelatentcausesofmentalillnesses,asdiagnosed
herebyKJ*(apsychiatrist):
“ThelawofdependentoriginationinBuddhismexplainsthatformationisproduced
byanaggregateofcausesandterminationisinducedbythelossofcauses.Our
problemsarealwaysrelatedtothedistortionofcause-and-effect.…Therefore,
wesuffer.Butmanypeoplearestillwarpingcause-and-effect,notacceptingthe
consequences.…[Ifyou]understandthiscause-and-effect,evaluateit,andchange
[your]behaviour,thoughts,speech–infact,theproblemwillhavebeensolved”.
Buddhist worldviews also heighten the hopes of positive change in unfavourable
environments, and simultaneously emphasise self-responsibility, which corresponds to
humanistic psychotherapy; for instance, existential psychotherapy (Yalom 1980), and
person-centredtherapy(Rogers1946).
Lifeviews
Duḥkha(suffering苦)
Duḥkhacentres onthelife views ofBuddhism connected to powerlessnessanddissatis-
faction with such a transient life (Ray 1986 and Harvey 1990). Life is so imperfect
(Huang 2011) and uncontainable (Schneider and Tong 2009), causing individuals to suffer
fromdistressxliwhereafflictionsareinevitableandinescapable(FlowersandStahl2011)due

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page14of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
to attachment (Boeree & George 1997) and accumulated “destructive karma” (Thubten
2008,38)in previous livesxlii. Rinpoche K* (a Buddhist monk) elaborated on this as
follows:
“Ourpresentlife,regardlessof bodily,physiological,orpsychologicalsuffering,
isinfact,rootedinbadkarmafrompreviouslives”.
Polly(a clinical psychologist) understoodthat sufferingisinduced byinfinite desire:
“ThemeaningofsufferinginBuddhism isverydeep. Greed coming from desire is
anaffliction.Becauseyouaregreedy,youwillexposeyourselftohopeforsomething.
Theresultsofsuchahopecontaintwoaspects:achieved,ornotachieved.
Therefore,yourmindeverworriesaboutgainsandlosses”.
Thus,sufferingisself-created,towhichAmara(abeneficiary)agreed:
“These afflictions aremade byourselves.Infact,they areourkarma.Ifeelour
sufferingisnon-stop”.
However, according to pratītya-samutpāda (the law of dependent origination 緣起法),
suffering is also unreal and speciousxliii, and will become void and fade out. So
is self, which is constantly changing, both physically and mentally (Townsend
andKaklauskas2008).Theunrealselfanddelusivesufferingarepresentandcontinuously
changing in response to surrounding conditions and karma (action 業). With a
non-permanent self entity (Bernhard 2010), individuals experience the fact that
“life is a process” (Bernhard 2010, 40), through which one learns to open one’s heart
to accept life’s difficulties (Bernhard 2010) and also oneself (Flowers and Stahl
2011).
There is a consensus across Eastern and Western philosophers regarding the nature
of suffering, in that no distinction is made as to whether it is good or bad. There are a
few exceptions to this rule: for example, Schopenhauer always viewed suffering pessim-
istically(App2010andWicks2007).However,Buddhismexpoundsonduḥkha(suffering苦)
through a realistic view of life and the phenomenal world, neither optimistic nor pessimistic
(Rahula2001),andofferswaysofexpungingduḥkha,fromwhichBuddhistssearchfor
meaning in life through suffering, which is concordant with person-centred therapy
(Rogers 1964). In particular, the mission of Mahāyāna Buddhists is to transcend
suffering (Mizuno 2003) through an “impermanent, uncertain, unpredictable, ever-
changing” (Bernhard 2010, 28) life by practising bodhicitta (Ponlop 2008), which will
beelaborateduponinthecomingsection.
Theothershore(彼岸)
DeathinBuddhismlieswithinthespectrumoflife,insteadofrepresentingtheendoflife.
Buddhistsaimatceasingtheirinvolvementinsaṃsāra(thecycleofbirthanddeath輪迴)
andattainingnirvāṇa(perfectstillness涅槃),or“theothershore”,whereisallispeaceful,
luminous,andhopeful,andwheresentientbeingsareextricatedfromrebirth(Abe1997).
Amara (a beneficiary) elucidated her fearlessness towards death, aided by her drawing

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page15of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
(Figure 2); while at the same time she admitted that “the other shore” will be accessible
onlybyenduringBuddhistpractices.
“That ‘shore’isfull of hopes. Death unnecessarily standsfor gloominess.Perhaps,
after youdie, youcanreach‘that shore’”.
Amara (a beneficiary) continued to explain her ideas, reiterating that the gap between
“this shore” and “the other shore” was extremely wide, leading her to row upstream very
hard.Nevertheless,shewasconfidentinreachingitifsheincessantlypractisedvipaśyanā
(insight meditation 內觀). The transcendent individuals in the upper part of her drawing
showherfirmconfidenceinthepossibilityoffinallyattaining“theothershore”.
Thebodhisattvaspirit
The bodhisattva spirit signals a landmark in Mahāyāna that designates a bodhisattva’s mis-
sionarycareer,bearingthewelfareofsentientbeingsthroughcatvāriapramānāni(thefour
immeasurables 四無量心) activated by the intrinsic bodhicitta. In Sanskrit, “bodhi”, which
stems from “budh” (Dayal 1932/1999, 18), refers to enlightenment (Leighton 1998); while
“sattva”,isderivedfrom“sant”,anddenotessentientbeings(Leighton1998).Abodhisattva,
a “buddha-to-be” (Harrison 1987, 67 and Nagao 1981, 73), has become enlightened and is
able to enter nirvāṇa (perfect stillness 涅槃), but is willing to live in the loka (the secular
world世間)inordertogivesuccourtosufferinglivingbeings(Krishan1984andWrayetal.
1979). As a “heroic benefactor” (Leighton 1998, 1), a bodhisattva remains attentive to “the
profoundaltruisticconcernthatalllivingbeingsbecomeenlightened”(Sasaki1982,11),and“is
dedicatedtosavingsentientbeingsfromaffliction,”asaffirmedbyJoe(acounsellor).Forthis,a
bodhisattva unreservedly “gives all [s/he] possesses as a gift to others”xliv (Watson 1997, 59),
emphasising both the “act of living” (Kawamura 2000, 106) and their contribution to society,
whichisimitatedadmirablybyChineseMahayanists(Suzuki1938/1981b,Lancaster1981).
In Mahāyāna, a bodhisattva, in a broad sense, could be anyone, and is not restricted
to celestial bodhisattvas (Harrison 1987), regarding which Betty (a Buddhist volunteer)
understood that “whoever can help other people is a bodhisattva; and everybody can do
it”.Inadditiontotheideathatabodhisattvaisalsoa“spiritualhelper”(Leighton1998,x)
facilitatingsentientbeingstoachievepersonal growthandameaningfullife,helpingpro-
fessionals(suchascounsellors,clinicalpsychologists,nurses,andsocialworkers)perform
bodhisattva tasks, providing human services to assist people in ameliorating their quality
of life (Morales, Sheafor, and Scot 2007). Dr Li (a psychiatrist) then utilised a metaphor
thatillustrateshowapsychiatristworksasabodhisattva,explaining:
“Adoctor (psychiatrist)istoenable patientstorelievesufferingandacquire
happiness.Inthebodhisattva path, rescuing others isnecessary.Therefore,adoctor
needstosavepeople, tomake patientsfreefrom afflictionandhavehappiness”.
A bodhisattva practises bodhisattva-mārga (the bodhisattva path菩薩道) through
her/his altruistic activities (Batchelor 2004), from which s/he also gains benefits (Zopa
2012), particularly personal development (Hsing-Yun 2006). In order to enlighten other
people, a bodhisattva enlightens her/himself first, demonstrating that this mutually
beneficial relationship forms self-benefiting altruism, with the core of the bodhisattva

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page16of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
spirit (Li 1989) shrinking away from self-centred altruism towards selflessly “perfect al-
truism” (Williams 1998, 29). Self-benefiting altruism (that is, the bodhisattva spirit) in-
spires the propositions for counselling from within this counselling framework,
especiallyinthepracticeofcatvāriapramānāni(thefourimmeasurables四無量心).
A bodhisattva cares about everybody and will not give up anyonexlv, and bearing the
suffering of sentient beingsxlvi, which presents mahāmaitrī-mahākarunā (great
loving-kindness and great compassion 大慈大悲) – the elements of catvāri apramānāni
(thefourimmeasurables四無量心)–activatedbybodhicitta(菩提心).
Bodhicitta(enlightenedmind菩提心)
Bodhicitta is made up of “bodhi” and “citta”, in which the former means “awakening”,
as explained earlier, and “citta”, which pertains directly to the mind (Dayal 1932/1999).
Also known by the full term “anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi”xlvii (Watson 1997, 31) (the
highest wisdom of awakening 無上正等正覺), this enlightened mind (Bloom 2000,
Gethin 1998) is concerned with “minds on the Great Vehicle”xlviii (Watson 1997, 44),
initiating the bodhisattva’s vow on behalf of all beings (Lan 2009). On one hand, “acti-
vating bodhicitta is to make a vow regarding the benefit of sentient beings”, Joe
asserted.Onanotherhand,HW*(ahelpingservicepractitioner)perceivedthat“activat-
ing bodhicitta is the process of practising Buddhist teachings”. In being a bodhisattva,
bodhicitta is the fundamental quality that activates catvāri apramānāni (the four im-
measurables 四無量心), especially karuṇā (compassion 悲), which was addressed by
Polly (a clinical psychiatrist) when she elucidated that “activating this vow is caused by
compassionateregretsforthe suffering ofallbeings”.
Catvāriapramānāni(thefourimmeasurables四無量心)
Based on śūnyata (voidness 空性) (Nakamura 1959/1997), catvāri apramānāni, which
comprises maitrī (loving-kindness 慈), karuṇā (compassion 悲), muditā (empathetic joy
喜), and upekṣa (equanimity 捨), negates the discrimination between “myself” and
“others”, which guides not only the mental capabilities of a bodhisattva, but also the be-
haviouralperformance,forthemissionofservingsentientbeings(Chen2005).
Maitrī (loving-kindness 慈), from a Sanskrit root meaning “friendliness” (Nakamura
1959/1997), yearns for sentient beings to experience cheerfulness (Wallace 1999), and
aims to deliver “contentment to all beings”xlix (Watson 1997, 84) and to cope with
cruelty (Salzberg 2010). Venerable Thong Hong put it simply, “loving-kindness is to
givehappinesstopeople”,orasVHU*(aBuddhistnun)similarlydenoted,“loving-kindness
istoenablelivingbeingstobehappy”.
While maitrī (loving-kindness 慈) leans towards happiness, karuṇā (compassion 悲)
implies afflictions, representing a bodhisattva’s defining passion (Gomez 1987) and a
critical motivation for altruistic contribution (Harvey 1990). Venerable Foo Chai
preached that, “compassion is to liberate one from his suffering”, and “[save] living
beings”l (Watson 1997, 60). Since the buddha nature represents the inborn human na-
ture, everyone carries an innate sense of compassion that can be applied to counselling
asML*(acounsellor)experienced:
“Iwillencouragethem(clients)toempathically observeothersaroundthem.
Compassionateobservationisalsoaprocessofself learning”.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page17of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Muditā (empathetic joy 喜) illustrates that one does not simply feel satisfied with
“one’s own pleasure yet celebrate[s] the pleasure of others”li (McRae 2004, 161), which
addresses the issue of jealousy (Harvey 1990, Wallace 1999) and causes the practitioner
to become humble. LP* (a counsellor) defined “empathetic joy as …to rejoice in other
people’s success, be happy because they are happy”. In “developing joy with others’suc-
cess and well-being”, one is “happy for others’achievements without [feeling] jealousy”,
VenerableSanderandVenerableYuChunsupplemented respectively.
Upekṣa (equanimity 捨) consists of three aspects: generosity, egalitarianism, and in-
discrimination. First, as Venerable Chi Yiu preached, from the domain of “forsakes
one’s various possessions”lii (McRae 2004, 162), “upekṣa is to share with sentient beings
what you have and what you should enjoy”. Second, the “principle of equanimity”liii
(Watson 1997, 40) “means egalitarianism” (Venerable Thong Hong), promoting the
principle that there are no differences among any sentient beings. A bodhisattva cares
for every individual, regardless of good or bad. Thus, upekṣa develops to the third
dimension, indiscriminationliv. Esther insightfully related her understanding that
“sentient beings are equal. This reminds us not to develop a discriminative mind. … In
fact, this can apply to life”. Applying upekṣa to counselling, LP (a counsellor) shared
that“equanimityimpliesthattherearenodifferences betweenclientsandmyself”.
The achievement of upekṣa (equanimity 捨) enables one to possess tranquillity, a bal-
anced mind (Harvey 1990), and an ordinary mind (Magid 2002) to observe reality as it
is (Pruett 1987), and to empathically look after other people’s distress with no senti-
mentalisedreactions(Manne-Lewis 1986).
The unity of the four interdependent and inseparable essentials of catvāri apramā-
nāni (the four immeasurables 四無量心), represents their individual functions and in-
teractions, working together just as do hands, feet, body trunk, and organs. Maitrī
(loving-kindness 慈) and karuṇā (compassion 悲) are two sides of a coin (Wallace
2010), as “intertwined forces” (Salzberg 2009, x), while muditā (empathetic joy 喜)
strengthens maitrī, and vice versa. Only when upekṣa (equanimity 捨) is activated, can
theotherthreecomponentsalsoactivatetoproduce“boundlessbenevolence”(Oi1982,9)
andlimitlesscompassion,leadingtogreatwisdom(Tada1982,Wray1986),whichperfects
catvāri apramānāni (Wallace 1999). A reminder from VHY* (a Buddhist nun) that “you
havetoindiscriminatelytreatotherswithloving-kindnessandcompassion”,illustratesthe
interactiverelationshipamongthem.Thefouressentialsrelatetodiverseaspectsandfeel-
ings,butaimtowardsthesamepath,thatis,nirvāṇa (perfect stillness涅槃),thespiritual
stateoftranquillity.Catvāriapramānānihasoftenbeenusedforpsychologicalandspirit-
ual growth (Kornfield, Dass, and Miyuki 1983), on which these theories applied to coun-
sellingsettingswillbeelaboratedinthenextpart.
Propositionsforcounselling
Buddhist teachings, as discussed previously, offer a far-reaching opportunity for healing
through insightful self-awareness (Thurman 2005), which supports the counselling the-
ories from within this counselling framework, covering four tiers: first, its therapeutic
mission and goals; second, the roles and qualities of a counsellor; third, case conceptu-
alisation, therapeutic relationships, and therapeutic strategies; and lastly, therapeutic
tactics,skills,andtechniques.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page18of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Therapeuticmission
A bodhisattva practises her/his sacred mission by implementing bodhicitta in order “to
benefit sentient beings”lv (McRae 2004, 82), relieve them from sufferinglvi (Keown
2000), and prune away avidyā (ignorance 無明) (Claxton 1986) and misconceptions.
Freedom from sufferinglvii indicates significant personal growth, marking the presence
of two aspects: self attainment,and altruismlviii. A bodhisattva aims to help sentientbeings
inorder toreleasethem from desireand causethem to acquireaninherently pure mindlix
sothattheycanbringthemselveshappinesslx.Also,s/hestrivestoleadsentientbeingstobe
bodhisattvasandhelpotherslxi.Inpractisingthe“helpertherapyprinciple”(Riessman1965,
28),abodhisattvaenablessuffererstohelpotherswhoaresufferingfromsimilardistress.In
conclusion, a bodhisattva is a bodhisattva to her/himself as well as to other people for the
purposeofattainingarichlynuancedlevelofwell-being,asdefinedbyFromm(1983,63):
“Well-being isthestateof havingarrived atthefull developmentofreasonnot in
the sense ofamerelyintellectual judgement,but inthatofgraspingtruthby‘letting
thingstobe’(touseHeidegger’sterm)astheyare. Well-being ispossible onlytothe
degreetowhich onehasovercome one’snarcissism; tothedegreetowhich one’s
open,responsive, sensitive,awake,empty (in theZensense). Well-beingmeanstobe
fully relatedtomanandnature affectively,toovercomeseparatenessandalienation,
toarrive attheexperienceofoneness withallthatexists–andyettoexperience
myselfatthesame timeastheseparateentityIam, asthein-dividual.Well-being
meanstobefullyborn,tobecomewhat onepotentially is;itmeanstohavethefull
capacityfor joyandfor sadness or,toputit still differently, toawake fromthe half-
slumbertheaveragemanlives in,andtobefullyawake.Ifitisallthat,itmeansalso
tobecreative;thatis,toreactandtorespondtomyself,toothers,toeverythingthat
exists-toreactandtorespondasthereal,totalmanIamtotherealityofeverybodyand
everythingasheoritis.Inthisactoftrueresponseliestheareaofcreativity,ofseeing
theworldasitisandexperiencingitasmyworld,theworldcreatedandtransformed
bymycreativegraspofit,sothattheworldceasestobeastrangeworld‘overthere’
andbecomesmyworld.Well-beingmeans,finally,todropone’sego,togiveupgreed,
toceasechasingafterthepreservationandtheaggrandisementoftheego,tobeandto
experienceoneselfintheactofbeing,notinhaving,preserving,coveting,using”.
Fromm’s(1983)delineation ofwell-beingaffirms thatthe inborn wisdom andenlight-
enment of sentient beings offer the qualities of self-actualisation that benefit not only
oneself, but also others and society. Similarly, a counsellor believes that anyone will
tend to change towards the direction of truth, good and beauty; and this can result
from any adversity, when the favourable conditions and environment are offered. The
mission of a counsellor in a “therapeutic venture” (Corey 2009, 6) is therefore to facili-
tate clients in alleviating their distress and solving problems by her/himself (acting as
her/his ownbodhisattva),andtoeventuallyacquiringinnerpeace dueto“thefullawak-
ening ofthetotal personalitytoreality”(Fromm1983,67).
Therapeuticgoals
In fulfilling this mission, the therapeutic goals are: first, to rejuvenate the true nature of
sentient beings, that is, to aid them in becoming their “absolute self” (Reichenbach

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page19of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
1990, 54) and achieving genuine “human-beingness” (Trungpa 1983, 126); second, to
liberate them from avidyā (ignorance 無明) and tri-doṣa (three poisons 三毒), or rāga
(greed 貪), dveṣa (hatred 嗔), and moha (delusion 癡). As a result, they attain “spiritual
freedom” (Reichenbach 1990, 54), with no fears, anxiety, or worries. In order to enable
clients to achieve enlightenment, a counsellor seeks to guide them away from self-
centredness (Krieglstein 2002). When clients let go of egotism, they can accurately
perceive reality, truly get in touch with their authentic self, and sincerely connect
with other people. Well-being comes from genuine acceptance of self and others, as
suggestedbyFromm(1983).
Rolesofacounsellor
A counsellor, acting like a bodhisattva, plays the roles of therapist and facilitator in
ordertofulfil thetherapeuticmission andgoals.
Atherapist
Abodhisattva is“thephysicianking,healingthehostofillnesses”lxii(McRae2004,110),
where “illnesses” refers to afflictions and psychological problems. Dr Chan (a helping
servicepractitioner)expounded onthis facet inthefollowingmanner:
“TheBuddhaisagreat doctor,…dealingwith ourignorance.Buddhism offersa
theoretical basewhich supportscounsellingtheories”.
Metaphorically, to be an “inexhaustible lamp”lxiii refers to the illumination of the
darkness, equivalent to the mission of acounsellor who helps clients leave their darkest
life period behind, regarding which Dr. Li (a psychiatrist) further explained, “in
Buddhism, this is the ‘lamp of heart’, that is, spiritual transmission: being willing to ex-
perience through the heart”. His emphasis on heartily caring for patients is reminiscent
of a helping service practitioner who practises maitrī (loving-kindness 慈) and karuṇā
(compassion 悲) towards clients. Thus, a compassionate therapist advocates the client-
centred principle. “[This] doesn’t focus on [the therapist], but on the patient. … [It]
isn’t for the self [of the therapist], but follows the patient’s needs”, VHY* (a Buddhist
nun) reiterated.
Afacilitator
A bodhisattva is also “the Great Guide of All”lxiv (McRae 2004, 74), who “[releases]
people from their delusions”lxv (McRae 2004, 139), acting as a life coachlxvi. “A good
bodhisattva and kalyāṇamitra (a good companion 善知識) must inspire [her/his]
patients to develop faith [in the law of karma], virtuous behaviour (śīla in Sanskrit),
generosity, and wisdom, so that [the patients] will be able to find happiness in their
present andfuture lives”,relatedVenerable Sander.
Summarising theroleofabodhisattva inacounselling setting,VenerableSandercon-
tinued, “a counsellor should aim to not only relieve the patient’s distress, but also to
teach him to take care of himself using dharma, and to develop an aim in life to find
happiness in the present life in a wise way, as well as in the future life, and even the
happinessofnirvāṇa”,thatis,blissful well-being (Conze 1953).

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page20of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Qualitiesofacounsellor
Consummating her/his mission, goals, and roles, a counsellor embodies three qualities,
which pertain to wisdom, congruence, and self-cherishing; not only for the sake of cli-
ents,but alsofor personal andcareer development when exposingclients’adversities.
Wisdom
Wisdom represents a cluster of attributes: in additional to sinceritylxvii, a profound
mindlxviii, and bodhicitta, it also covers non-dualism, maitrī (loving-kindness 慈),
karuṇā (compassion悲),muditā(empathetic joy 喜), andupekṣa (equanimity 捨).Hav-
ing attained compassionate wisdom (Slater 1981) to maintain a balanced mind and en-
gage a mindfully psychological state in respect to emotion, cognition, behaviour, and
spirituality (Kristeller and Jones 2006), a counsellor “must purify [her/] his mind”lxix
(Watson 1997,29)posits“inequality withoutdualism”lxx(Watson 1997,106).
A purified mind is a non-self-centred mind which is non-judgemental and impar-
tial, without bias, prejudice, preconception, and unfairness. Emerging out of non-
duality and indiscrimination, it enables a counsellor to see reality correctly without
distortionlxxi, build mutual trust with clients, and touch clients’ inner feelings more
easily. Non-duality refers to the absence of positive or negative criticism, which
opens a counsellor’s mind to the greatest level of acceptance without avoidance
(Magid 2002) and allows the counsellor to create possible solutions. Based on indis-
crimination and impartiality, or upekṣa (equanimity 捨) in Mahāyāna and unconditional
regard in person-centred therapy, a counsellor does pass judgement on clients whoever
theymaybe.Withapuremind,havingnonon-dualismordiscrimination,acounselloris
able to practise maitrī (loving-kindness 慈) and karuṇā (compassion 悲), “the true spirit
of Buddhism” (Dockett and North-Schulte 2003, 231), for this “compassionate service”
(Silverberg 2008, 239), especially in the “talking cure” (Glaser 2005, 5) related modes of
caringprofessions.KJ*(apsychiatrist)illuminatedtheprominenceofthisspirit:
“[Acounsellor]mustbe compassionate,andhaveloving-kindnessandcompassion.
[Whenacounsellor] hastheheart ofloving-kindnessandcompassion, [clients]will
trustyou(the counsellor)”.
As “a compassionate witness” (Kornfield 2001, 220) who heartily cares for clients, a
counsellor better understands clients (Whipps 2010) when s/he “experience[s] what pa-
tients experience. … Most importantly, [a counsellor] can experience [these things]
throughtheheart”,Dr.Li(apsychiatrist)continuedtosharehisempathicunderstanding:
“Idomybesttolookafterpatients,togetinvolveintheirdailylife,toentertheir
life.IconsiderwhetherIunderstand them,because, [I]must understand them in
ordertohelpthem.Otherwise, [I]cannothelpthem”.
Empathic understanding results from “nowness” (Brandon 1983, 143) and non-
judgement,and reflects“empathetic resonance” (Prendergast2003b,102) inresponding
to a client’s internal feelings and thoughts, as though the counsellor had experienced it
intimately and directly (Hunt 2003), showing thought empathy (Burns 2008) and feel-
ingempathy (Burns2008).

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page21of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
In order to empathically understand clients, karuṇā (compassion 悲) is a key attri-
bute, aselaborated herebyPolly(aclinicalpsychologist):
“When[we]candosuch basic work(compassion),[we]havehelped him(aclient) to
recognizehis emotion.Whenapersoncanrecognisehisown emotion,andcan
listentohis [inner]voice, hehasanatural ability …[When]apersoncanseeher/
himselfinotherpeople –infact,I(aclinicalpsychologist) function asamirror,and
canmore orlesshelp[him] toseehimself”.
Through empathy, a compassionate counsellor can also rejoice in a clients’ happiness
and achievements, which is known as muditā (empathetic joy 喜). The capability of
feeling the happiness and sadness of clients as they are differentiates a bodhisattva-
counsellorfromacounsellingtechnician.
Congruence
Congruence refers to the ability to “be myself” (Bondarenko 1999, 10) and be trans-
parent to oneself (Cornelius-White 2007), which leads a counsellor to develop open-
ness, unconditional regards and empathic understanding towards clients (Quinn 2008
and Rogers 1959). In order to be genuine, a counsellor must be able to listen to cli-
ents non-judgementally (Rogers and Nelson 1977) and to facilitate clients in unveiling
their genuineness, thereby allowing clients to enhance their self-awareness and ex-
press their true feelings (Rogers 1957, Quinn 2008 and Cornelius-White 2007).
A counsellor, also an ordinary person, has life challenges (Morales, Sheafor, and Scot
2007) that can become assets in her/his counselling career, because a “wounded healer”
(Stone 2008, 48) may provide greater healing effects to clients (Kornfield 2001) if the
counsellor is congruent to her/his true self, experience, and feelings. S/he is in this way
abletofeel thedistressempathically.AsDr.Li(apsychiatrist) reiterated:
“TheBuddhaperceiveshis ownsuffering first,andalso perceivessufferinginthe
secularworld, inwhich he’salsoamember.Therefore, heneedstofree [himself]
from his afflictions,andthen rescue suffering people”.
Self-cherishing
Compassion fatigue, similar to the “sentimental compassion”lxxii (McRae 2004, 112) de-
noted in the Sūtra, severely deteriorates the enthusiasm of counsellors, resulting in
physicalandemotionalexhaustion duetoprolongedexposuretocaring forothers’trib-
ulations through codependency (Walley 1986). Self-cherishing is a panacea for enabling
a counsellor to take care of her/himself for both personal growth and career develop-
ment(Bankart 2006), since,ML*(acounsellor)emphasisedasfollows:
“[You]have capability andendlessenergytowardsothers.Youmust firstknowto
take careofyourself.…Whenyou reasonablylookafter yourself,youthen havethe
ability [totakingcare ofyourself]”.
In order not to “be limited by any affectionate view” (McRae 2004, 112), a counsellor
implements prajñālxxiii (wisdom 般若) and upāyalxxiv (skilful means 方便) in order to

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page22of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
compassionately and skilfully help clients, while not overwhelming clients with their
distress and painlxxv. Initially, a counsellor properly understands the nature of beings,
that is, pratītya-samutpāda (the law of dependent origination 緣起法) and śūnyata
(voidness 空性), indicating the temporality of existence and that their existence varies
in light of karma (action 業) and hetu-phala (cause-and-effect 因果). The effectiveness
of a case depends on conditions and causes that are not in the counsellor’s control,
reflectingabilateralcounsellor-client relationship.
Also, a counsellor learns self-kindness and self-compassion (Germer 2009 and Ding
2009), through which s/he retains a positive attitude towards her/himself with the least
amount of self-criticism and self-blame (Neff 2003, Neff, Kirkpatrick, and Rude 2007).
This healthy and balanced psychological state enables the counsellor to maintain self-
awareness, self-esteem, self-worth, self-acceptance, and self-motivation (Neff 2004,
Williams, Stark, and Foster 2008, Neff, Kirkpatrick, and Rude 2007, Neff and Vonk
2009), which is especially important for counselling practitioners to prevent burnout or
compassion fatigue (Patsiopoulos and Buchanan 2011), and avoid over-involvement in
others’ miseries (Cheng 2013). In order words, a counsellor retains passion to help
clientslxxvi but neither attaches themselves to their situation nor over-invests compas-
sionlxxvii, because the bodhi nature is inherent in sentient beings, and is able to adjust
her/his mental contentmentaccordingly.
Self-cherishing, as a learning process, offers chances for a counsellor to have a better
self-understanding, and a better overview of life, and to improve her/his professional
techniques. During counselling, a counsellor helps clients, and gains insight from them,
which istheessenceofself-benefiting altruism,resulting from thisinteractiveprocess.
Therapeuticrelationships:bodhisattva-bodhisattvainterplay
Asthefoundationforthequalityofacounsellor,catvāriapramānāni(thefourimmeasur-
ables 四無量心) also nurtures the therapist-client relationship. HW* (a helping service
practitioner) advocated that “catvāri apramānāni is a channel through which to develop
the relationship between a counsellor and a client”, while KJ* (a psychiatrist) emphasised
the need to “treat other people with loving-kindness, compassion, empathetic joy, and
equanimity.Letthem(clients)feellovedandaccompanied.Don’tlet[them]feelalone”.
Through retaining upekṣa (equanimity 捨), and majoring in samatā (equality平等),
both counsellors and clients are equal in nature, in saṃsāra (the cycle of birth and
death 輪迴), in karma, and in hetu-phala (cause-and-effect 因果). Superior and inferior
are not necessarily distinguishable. This causes Polly (a clinical psychologist) to be
humble towards clients, in that “[it] is not really that there is an expert; or rather, that
an expert is not superior. An expert is only more experienced, or more willing to learn
from sickness. The real expert is that sickness [itself]”. Polly (a clinical psychologist)
had experienced this dynamic between counsellor and client, from which she gained
mutual benefit that aided her personal growth and career development; that is, self-
benefitingaltruism.
Counsellors and clients engender an interrelated, “fluid and permeable” (Prendergast
2003a, p. 8), and equal relationship (Raskin 1996). A counsellor, just like a bodhisattva,
helps a client to become a bodhisattva who can help her/himself. In this process, the

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page23of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
counsellor may review her/his own problems and better understand her/himself,
through which the client becomes a bodhisattva to the counsellor. This interaction
within the counselling process provides healing for the client, and self-learning for the
counsellor, through which the counsellor experiences “a journey of evolving self–other
understanding and growth” (Finlay 2011, 7). This forms a bodhisattva-bodhisattva rela-
tionship, through which both parties are counter-partner bodhisattvas, both gaining
personal development and potentially furthering self-actualisation. This non-linear
interplay,for the counsellor,realisesself-benefiting altruism.
Caseconceptualisation
Case conceptualisation contains a series of assessments utilised to investigate the prob-
lem(s) of a client, including family and education background, presenting problem(s),
and psycho-social development history (Corey 1996). Hereafter in this study, this term
refers totheprimordialcause(s)ofaclient’ssuffering.
Sickness in the Sūtra metaphorically refers to “bondage”lxxviii (McRae 2004, 112),
“defilement”lxxix (Watson 1997, 70), and “vexation”lxxx (McRae 2004, 83); in other
words, suffering. “Ignorance and feelings of attachment”lxxxi (Watson 1997, 65) are the
roots of defilement (Chang 2007). Sentient beings are ignorant of pratītya-samutpāda
(the law of dependent origination 緣起法), the ultimate truth of reality, not knowing
that existence is a phenomenon formed by causes and conditions. This ignorance leads
them to hold on to possessions; for instance, clinging to her/his own bodylxxxii (Watson
1997, 86). This possession of her/his own body directs her/him to eagerly seek after
an unchanging substantive body. For instance, individuals often endeavour to maintain
goodhealth,goodfigures,andbeautifulfaces,andfeeldissatisfiedwiththeinevitabilityof
gettingoldage.Inthissense,thebodyisanaggregateofdefilementsandsufferinglxxxiii.
The “attachment of self”lxxxiv (McRae 2004, 110), reflected by this clinging on to the
body,directsapersontotheir“centreofgravity”(Roshi1983,71),whichreinforcesamis-
understanding of “the integrative force, the function, that unifies you as yourself” (Roshi
1983, 71). This attachment to self makes one cultivate “desire and greed”lxxxv (Watson
1997, 86) so as to fulfil one’s endless wants. Rāga (greed 貪) leads an individual to seize
uponexternaldesires,towit“troublesomeentanglements”lxxxvi(ālambana攀緣)(Watson
1997, 69), in Buddhism, which causes one to tenaciously hold on to external factors. For
instance, an individual will often feel happy when praised, but sad when criticised. This
entanglement creates “a confused [view]”lxxxvii (viparyāsa 顛倒) (McRae 2004, 111) that
distractsapersonfrom beingabletoperceivethe phenomenal realityand one’s ownself.
These deluded thoughts magnify “false and empty distinctions”lxxxviii (abhūta-parikalpa
虛妄分別) (Watson 1997, 86) that discriminate between “you” and “I” and reinforce the
attachmentto“I”,“me”,and“mine”(FlowersandStahl2011,24),buildingawallofrejec-
tiontowardsotherpeopleandhangingontoself-centredness.
TheSūtrapointsoutthatthereisaclusterofcausesbehindsuffering,includingavidyā
(ignorance 無明), ātma-grāha (self-attachment 我執), deluded thoughts, viparyāsa
(confused view 顛倒), and abhūta-parikalpa (false dichotomy 虛妄分別), which agitate
thebodhinatureofsentientbeingsandformsasecondnature.Acounsellorhelpsclients
clarify the most crucial root factor for them from among these causes of suffering and
thushelpsthemimprovetheirsecondnature.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page24of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Therapeuticstrategies
Thetherapeuticstrategiesresonatewiththeviewsofhumannaturethathavebeendelved
intoandtargetedearlyon:first,thereisaneedforarejuvenationofpurityandawareness;
and second, the removal of kleśa (defilement 煩惱), avidyā (ignorance 無明), and moha
(delusion愚癡)isalsoessential.Theformerre-discoversthebuddhanature,whereasthe
latterbringsaboutacomfortablelifeintheempiricalworld.Indeed,thetwostrategiesare
interdependent,emphasisingthepositivefacetsoftheformerandunderminingthenega-
tive aspects of the latter. As a result, sentient beings can live with “the true self in the
here-and-now”(Akizuki1990,64),wherethepresentmomentnotonlyindicatestheexact
momentnow,butalsoextendstoeverymomentcontinuingintothefuture.
These therapeutic strategies accede to the views of human nature and develop thera-
peutic tactics that guide the operational purposes in order to fulfil the therapeutic mis-
sionandgoals,ascoveredpreviously.
Therapeutictactics
Therapeutic tactics, reflecting therapeutic strategies, embraces three domains: non-
dualism,transcendence ofkleśa(defilement煩惱),andgratitude for suffering.
Advaita(non-dualism不二)
Ineliminatingkleśa(defilement煩惱),avidyā(ignorance無明)andmoha(delusion愚癡),
and restoring the bodhi nature, precluding anta-dvaya (duality of extremes 二邊)
plays a critical role in awakeninglxxxix (Dalai 1999). De-polarising two extremes does
not deny the existence of the two poles; instead, it accepts the interdependence of
two truths: duality in lokasaṃvṛti-satya (secular truth 世俗諦), and non-duality in
paramārtha (superlative truth 真諦).
In the empirical world, phenomena of opposites do exist; for instance, bright/dark,
long/short, white/black; but this relativity does not exist in absolute truth, or para-
mārtha (superlative truth 真諦), implying that there is “no intrinsic reality” (Dalai
1999), as explained earlier. If there is no “one” reality and lokasaṃvṛti-satya (secular
truth 世俗諦) is relatively true, any judgement is therefore contextual and non-
absolute. For example, “entering” and “leaving” are relative, meaning that when one en-
tersaforest,thatsamepersonisalsoleavingtheforestafters/hehastraversedthroughhalf
ofit,evenwhilegoinginthesamedirection.Soisanyjudgementofgoodandbad,orright
and wrong. In fact, such pairs of extremes are symbiotic: they are opposite but paired,
inter-related,and interdependent(Dao-an1997). Where there isno rich, thereisno poor;
likewise for quick or slow. Judgement relies on comparison: When compared with 5 me-
ters,10metersawayisfar;butcomparedwith100meters,10metersawayisnear.Incon-
clusion, advaita (non-dualism 不二) challenges programmed thoughts and the second
nature, which enables sentient beings to cross over relativity and personal boundaries so
thattheycanopenlyacceptothersandevenoppositeopinions,andbecomeinclusive.
However, sentient beings mistakenly hold to relativity and suffer from the effects of
comparing themselves with others, causing Dr Chan (a helping service practitioner) to
illuminatewitha sigh:
“Weliveinrelativity.Relativityisopposition.Oppositioncreatesresistance.Resistance
yieldsfighting,andeventuallyleadstowar.People’svexationoriginatesfromrelativity.
…thatis,comparisonwillcausethelossofautonomy,andbecomepowerlessness”.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page25of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Unlike “non-duality therapy” (Fenner 2003, 26) that integrates the empty-mind con-
cept of Zen with the advaita (non-dualism 不二) of Hinduism, the chapter on “Enter-
ing the Gate of Non-dualism” in the Sūtra criticises the binary concept and asserts a
detachment from dichotomy. Examples include the antitheses between life and deathxc,
purityanddefilementxci,betweengoodandnotgoodxcii,andbetweensinandblessingxciii.
These appear to be mutually exclusive: Death cannot come together with life, nor purity
withcontamination;goodnesscannotjoinwithevil,nortrespasswithbenediction.When
getting rid of non-duality, one removes the desire for possession, abases narcissism, and
lessens the feeling of being afflictedxciv. However, beings are formed under pratītya-
samutpāda (the law of dependent origination 緣起法), and their nature is śūnyata
(voidness空性)withoutfixedformsorstates.Sinisincurredthroughsomecertaincauses
and conditionsxcv, by which a counsellor may understand, from an alternative view, how
tohelpclientslessentheirfeelingsofguiltandreducetheirpsychologicalburdenssothat
clientsaremorewillingtocorrecttheirmisbehaviour.
Transcendenceofdefilements
Having understood non-dualism, one can detach her/himself from phenomena that are
delusiveandcontextual. Phenomenaassuch areinsubstantial;therefore,“freedomfrom
attachments” (Inoue 1997, 125) (where attachment is a type of defilement) indicates
freedom from clinging to materialistic and psychological desiresxcvi. In Vimalakīrti wis-
dom, the method is presented where one is instructed to “just eliminate the illness; do
not eliminate dharmas”xcvii (McRae 2004, 111), where “illness” means defilements and
distress, and “dharma” herein refers to all natural phenomena (Dao-an 1997). This de-
notes that one may obviate the causes of suffering but not necessarily discard the
phenomenon of suffering itself. While the phenomenon is neutral, the reactions to the
phenomenon vary from individual to individual. Similarly, a love film can be romantic
to one individual but sorrowful to another, because of disparate life experiences and
feelings. More practically,suffering isinevitable inlife, but how to deal with suffering is
achoicefor eachindividual (Germer2009).
When the causes of suffering are eradicated, the phenomenon is only a presence and
it is unimportant whether or not it exists because these causes of suffering will no lon-
ger evoke negative emotion in the sufferer. In this sense, an individual who is capable
of “accepting the world as it is” (Kaklauskas and Olson 2008, 146), disregards whatever
afflictions may appear to existxcviii, and attains nirvāṇa (perfect stillness 涅槃) through
their sufferingxcix; in which nirvāṇa refers to the state where afflictions have been ex-
punged. In practice, emotion management itself is the critical issue, rather than nega-
tive emotional reactions towards those afflictions that are inseparable from life. In
addition to proper emotional management, the individual is able to help other people
avoid experiencing agony and help them transcend defilements, which is the achieve-
mentofMahāyānawisdom.
In one case in this study (Cheng and Tse 2014), Pureté de Lotus (a beneficiary),
who suffered the loss of her spouse, did not intentionally avoid feelings of guilt, al-
though she retained guilty feelings about not staying with her late husband when he
was seriously ill. She lived with feelings of guilt, which had no negative impact on her
daily life; and she practised good behaviour in order to achieve good karma. Further-
more, she was working as a social worker helping vulnerable people. Her experience

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page26of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
is inspiring, in that a counsellor may lead clients to face reality and live with pain, or
in other words, to transcend suffering.
Gratitudeforsuffering
TheSūtravaluessufferingbecausesentientbeingslearnfromafflictionc.Whentheyex-
perience suffering, they can understand the nature of existence, and afflictions offer
chances for them to discover their potentialityci, to wit personal growth. Treasuring the
experience of suffering helps them to realise the meaning of life, like obtaining a pearl
after entering an oceancii, implying that suffering is valuable. In this sense, all hin-
drances that afflict individuals are a learning process through which to overcome their
weaknessesandbecomestrongciii.
Beneficiaries in the study were often thankful for the distress that gave them a new
life after overcoming their suffering. By way of illustration, Esther re-built her self-
confidence and learned forgiveness after recovering from depression, and Che Wai and
Chi Sim improved their mother-child relationship, likewise expressing gratitude for
their suffering. A counsellor guides clients in managing suffering positively, and in
transformingmiseryinto motivation.
Principlesofskills
The Sūtra has inspired two major principles of therapeutic skills, covering upāya (skil-
fulmeans方便),andintrigue.
Upāya(skilfulmeans方便)
Upāya, in aiming to cultivate the well-being of sentient beings (Kaziyama 1994), is the
key principle which a bodhisattva practicesciv (Pye 2003) flexibly to help sentient
beingscv through various methods and techniques, complying with the characteristics
ofanindividual, andthatindividual’sneeds(Schroeder2001).
Even though the nature of sentient beings, that is, the buddha nature, is innately
identicalfor all, the karma of individuals is diverse, whichmanifestsdifferences in pres-
ence affected by causes and conditions. Therefore, the background, characters, attri-
butes, habits formed (second nature), and temperament are different from individual to
individual. A bodhisattva builds a pure land according to the capabilities and character-
istics of these sentient beings, where they are able to attain the pure landcvi, in order to
save themcvii, enable them to be peacefulcviii, and eradicate their afflictionscix. Similarly,
a counsellor is sensitive to clients’ personality traits when applying counselling models
and techniques to each independent therapeutic case, aiming to facilitate them in solv-
ing their own problems. HW* (a helping service practitioner) reacted by explicating,
“some people prefer self-benefit. … My tactic is to encourage [them] in how to achieve
self-benefit. If someone is suited to altruism, I will apply altruism in leading [them] to
leavetheircurrentpredicament”.
Also, a bodhisattva can intelligently make out the individual needs of sentient beings,
andfulfiltheirdemandscx.Clientshavedistinctneedsbecauseoftheirdisparatemilieuand
predicaments; and reacting to their actual needs is particularly vital for reaching “co-con-
structingsolutions”(Corey2009,6).Dr.Li(apsychiatrist)sharedhisexperienceasfollows:
“Upāyaistorecognisetheindividualityofeveryperson,andabodhisattva fits
[each of]them.Thatis,you needtoaccommodate patients,but not make patients

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page27of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
accommodateyou.…Ifapatientbelieves inKuan-Yin(abodhisattva), then [you]
may talkaboutKuan-Yin”.
The fictitious sickness (Schroeder 2001) of Vimalakīrti in the Sūtra highlights “an
upayic story” (Schroeder 2001, 75) by exemplifying his feigned body, from which
Vimalakīrti preaches the doctrines of anitya (impermanence 無常), non-autonomy,
interconnectedness, suffering, and causes of suffering and does not use a fixed method
for teaching. When preaching, any method is permissible as long as it achieves the
goals,such aswhenmetaphoricfragranceiseffectively adopted forfacilitationcxi.
Intrigue
With the help of upāya (skilful means 方便), intrigue will then be employed. After a
bodhisattva skilfully attracts sentient beings firstcxii by whatever means available, s/he
leads them to acquire a meaningful life. In this sense, a counsellor may adroitly draw
her/his clients’ attentions, particularly for “complainants” (Corey 2009, 383); that is,
involuntary clients who resist counselling services. Converting complainants to
“customers” (Corey 2009, 383), clients who are aware of their life difficulties and are
willing to seek professional help, is always one of the critical responsibilities of a
counsellor.
Counsellingtechniques
Counselling, as a “talking cure” (Watson 1998, 6), largely uses verbal activities for heal-
ing and facilitation; whereas the Sūtra artfully utilises both verbal and non-verbal ex-
pression techniques in order to enhance the readability and effective delivery of prajñā
(wisdom 般若) thoughts. Many of the techniques are compatible with those currently
used in therapeutic settings, pertaining to metaphor, simile, humour, exaggerating, con-
trast, confrontation, silence, story-telling, psychoeducation, and role model, illustrating
cross-referencebetweenthetwodisciplinesbutnotexcludingotherpossible techniques
forcounselling purposes.
Metaphor
A metaphor facilitates an understanding of a concept, the target domain (Kövecses
2002, 4), through another concept, the source conceptual domain (Kövecses 2002, 4).
As “humans are metaphorising animals” (Johnson 1995, 159), always performing a
metaphorical, imaginative, and “aesthetic function” (Schwabenland 2012, 80), they are
able to map a similar frame of reference from the source conceptual domain to the tar-
getconcept (Schwabenland2012).
Metaphorical representations are popularly used not only in Western literature, but
also in clinical interpretive practices. For instance, medical anthropologists employ a
variety of metaphors in implicitly describing a body, such as the illustration of poison
(Kirmayer 1992). Not only useful in facilitating understanding, metaphors are also uti-
lised in emotionalexpressionsand articulation (Averill 2009, Crawford 2009), especially
forevaluativefeelings (Emanatian1995,Helm2009).
Metaphoric preaching is a traditional and powerful approach among teachings in
Buddhist scriptures, and one which brings out insightful understandings of the more
complex tenets (Cheng 2011 and Sugioka 2009). In the Sūtra, metaphors are heavily

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page28of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
utilised to explain prajñā (wisdom 般若) philosophy. One of these is the illustration of
Vimalakīrti’ssicknessand his ever-changing body. His sicknessconnotes anitya (imper-
manence 無常), and the non-autonomy of all beingscxiii, in which it is presented that
the body will get sick, degenerate and diecxiv. Such a body is a phenomenal, delusive,
and temporal bodycxv which should be let go of it. Sickness itself functions as a
metaphor for a series of bondage – attachmentcxvi and entanglementcxvii that causes
suffering.
Similarly,alotus epitomisessuchunadulteratedandresilientfeaturescxviii.Growingin
grimy mud, an immaculate lotus shows its untainted character, shrinking away from
theinfluence ofitscontaminated environment,implyingitspersistence andnoble char-
acteristics. Conversely, a lotus will perish in clean earth where it does not get nourish-
ment from marshland, denoting that predicaments and failures are motivations that
drive success.
Metaphors serve as a communicative operation in psychotherapy (Witztum, van der
Hart, and Friedman 1988), covering psychoanalytic approaches to investigating cli-
ents’ unconsciousness (Punter 2007 and Rogers 1978), cognitive behavioural therapy
(Kopp 1995), family therapy (Kopp 1995), solution-focused therapy for problem solv-
ing and self reflection (Cheng 2011, Solberg, Nysether, and Steinsbekk 2012, Walsh
2010), and play therapy(Snowet al.2005),particularly using common life experiences
as examples (Larkin and Zahourek 1998, Clarke 2013), and forming a “metaphor
therapy” (Kopp 1995, xvi-xvii) to enhance metaphoric communication for emotional
ventilation (Laranjeira 2013).
Simile
A simile, a poetic similitude (Bronner 2007), is usually used in a looser form of associ-
ation but with a higher degree of common ground of understanding (Punter 2007); and
therefore it offers a more explicit connection between the target concept and the
source concept.
The Sūtra uses numerous similes in its preaching, for example, “the inexhaustible
lamp”, standing for the bodhisattva’s missionary careercxix; “a conjured person”, indicat-
ingthe śūnyata(voidness 空性)oflivingbeingscxx;andphantasmic presence,specifying
thenature ofexistencecxxi.
Similes, like metaphors, used in therapeutic settings (Cade 1994) effectively enable
clients to think more deeply as outsiders; in particular, when employed together with
confrontation, in order to prevent embarrassment. They are sometimes more effective
than metaphors indealing withchildren(Callow 2003).
Humour
The use of humour plays an important role in Western religious traditions (Geybels
and van Herck 2011), which is an art from relating funny stories and jokes from reli-
gious sources, showing comic and tragic connotations (Taels 2011) through magnifying
and exaggerating effects (Bergson 1911). The rich humour in Buddhist literature (Van
Herck2011)purposefullyenablesone toreview her/hislife (Taels2011).
Fables and parables in the Sūtra are full of “conversational humour” (Dynel 2011,
p. 217) that portray the “absurdity of contradiction” (Taels 2011, 26) but exhibit the
wisdom of Vimalakīrti (Lamotte 1976/1990). Śāriputra, one of the ten great disciples
of the Buddha, displays such irony (Lin 1997b) when failing to argue with a goddess.
When he despised the goddess and suggested that she became a god, he was

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page29of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
magically changed to the appearance of a goddesscxxii, and thereby understood that
there are no gender differences in nature. Humour has been widely adopted in psy-
chotherapy (Banman 1982, Davidson and Brown 1989, Klein 1976, Moran 2002) as a
coping strategy to turn negatives into positives, or pessimism into optimism, and to
increase happiness levels (Wilkins and Eisenbraun 2009).
Exaggerating
The technique of exaggeration intensifies the discussion theme in a therapeutic process
in order to draw out the creative and imaginative potential of the client (Dolliver 1991,
Ciuffardi,Scavelli, andLeonardi 2013).
In the Sūtra, the chapter “Inconceivable” uses this technique frequently. For example,
it elicits thirty-two thousand giant chairs in a one-square-foot cellcxxiii, Sumeru
Mountain in a mustard seedcxxiv, and an ocean of water in a tiny haircxxv. These break
the relativity of objects, leading one to outpace their habitual thinking mode and
open themselves up to limitless feasibility, resulting in not only “the total acceptance
of, and opening up to, the transience and fragility of our human condition” (Jones 2003,
p.9),butmorecrucially,to“theemptyingofthewantsanddesiresoftheclingingagitated
and opinionated ‘I’” (Jones 2003, 9); that is, to full emancipation from self-created afflic-
tions.
Contrast
Using contrast in Buddhist literature is the traditional method of preaching (Cheng
2011). In the Sūtra,Vimalakīrti, a layman, rectifies the ten great disciples’ understand-
ing of dharma, spelling out the imperfection of Theravāda (the doctrine of the elders
上座部佛教) and emphasising the Mahāyāna (Great Vehicle 大乘佛教) spirit for the
welfare of living beingscxxvi. Also, the reflections of the Fragrance bodhisattvas coming
from a peaceful world report the great will of the Buddha and bodhisattvas because
they relinquish nirvāṇa (perfect stillness 涅槃) and live in such a chaotic sahā-lokadhātu
(saha world 娑婆世界) for the sake of sentient beings’ happinesscxxvii. Furthermore, they
alsosharelimitlessmeritcxxviiiwithallbeings.Applyingthecontrasttechnique,acounsellor
makescomparisonsshowingtheadvantagesanddisadvantagesofaclient’sdecision.
Confrontation
As a therapeutic technique, confrontation bombards clients and pushes them to deeply
reflect on their thoughts and feelings (Bakes 2012) by challenging clients’ “incongru-
ence, discrepancy, inconsistency, or mixed message[s]” (Brems 2001, 256), particularly
when they avoid painful feelings (Brink and Farber 1996); whereas non-hostile “caring
confrontation” (Boukydis 1979, 32) or “compassionate confrontation” (Bratter and
Sinsheimer 2008, 108) enables clients to enhance their self awareness and clarity re-
gardingtheirinner world.
The Sūtra repeatedly employs confrontation for the clarification of dharma. Maitreya
(彌勒菩薩),thepredictedfuturebuddha,waschallengedbyVimalakīrtithathisabilityto
becomeabuddhawasnodifferentfromthatofotherscxxix,whichre-statestheegalitarian-
ism of beingsinnature. Similarly,thegoddess confrontsŚāriputra’s dogmatism abouthis
removalofflowersfromhisrobe.Shethenbringsuptheteachingofindiscriminationcxxx.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page30of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Silence
Maintaining and breaking silence is a prominent technique in various therapeutic
approaches (Lovelady 2006), especially in person-centred approaches (Brink and Farber
1996), even for coping with burnout of therapists themselves (Baranowsky 2002).
“Constructive silence” (Egbochuku 2013, 30) and “attentive silence” (International
Organization for Migration 2009, 49) allow clients to think deeply, reflect, and ex-
press feelings.
The “thunderous silence” (Leighton 1998, 8, McRae 2004, 59) of Vimalakīrti marks
his wisdom in that he is capable of surpassing language barriers and transcending the
ultimate truth of dharmacxxxi. His silence not only presents the teaching of non-duality
byacts,butalso offersinsighttohis audience.
Story-telling
Story-telling engages a long history in religious education (Manternach (2013), Arthur
1987) and counselling (McMahon and Watson 2013, Ciuffardi, Scavelli, and Leonardi
2013), which is able to build rapport, effectively communicate with different levels of
audiences (Myers, Tollerud, and Jeon 2012, Larkin and Zahourek 1998), capture their
attention easily, and facilitate self reflection (Ng 1994). Story-telling also offers clients
theopportunitytonarratetheirexperiencesandpersonalideas(McMahonandWatson
2013). As a “supernatural agency” (Phillips and Morley 2003, 4), a myth connects per-
sonal stories to help clients share ideas and ventilate emotion (Greene 2011) which can
yieldhealingeffectsonmentaldisorders(McClary2007).Practitionersusethese“creative
expressions” (Glazer and Marcum 2003, 131) for grief counselling, including therapy for
adolescents.
Stories in the Sūtra produce theatrical effects (Cui 2008), and are always adapted to
drama performance (Golden Lotus Theatre 1998). The stories of the “inexhaustible
lamp”cxxxii illuminate care for sentient beings, and those of “flowers scattered by a
goddess”cxxxiii further explain the notion of upekṣa (equanimity 捨). They provide an
easiermeansofunderstandingtheseprofounddoctrines.
Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation combinespsychotherapy andeducationinmentalhealth interventions
(Lukens and McFarlane 2004), especially in cognitive-behavioural approaches (Bauml
etal. 2006), andinfamilytherapy(McFarlane etal. 2003).
Buddhist canons are collections of preaching, equivalent to psychoeducation in coun-
selling (Cheng 2011). The Sūtra compiles Vimalakīrti’s preaching, initiated from his
sicknessthatconnectsthemajorMahāyānatheoriescxxxiv,asillustrated previously.
Rolemodel
The systematic “Socratic method” (Howard 2011, 15) has been imitated in therapeutic
questioning; thus, Socrates has been much admired as a role model for counsellors.
Role modelling is one of the primary techniques in behavioural and cognitive behav-
iouralapproaches(Safrenetal.2001,Thigpenetal. 2007).
The Buddha has demonstrated the “experiential verification” (Szkredka 2007, 193) of
the buddha path in the loka (the secular world 世間), role modelling for his followers
as depicted in Buddhist literature (Cheng 2011). A bodhisattva acts as a role model to

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page31of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
compassionately save sentient beings, which demonstrates the ideal of Mahayanists
(Abe 1997). In the Sūtra, Vimalakīrti has practised the bodhisattva path and upāya
(skilful means 方便), modelling how to implement the bodhisattva spirit and practise
upāyacxxxv. For instance, he visits gambling dens, brothels, and wine houses to save
them from transgressioncxxxvi, and gains respect from various social classes, including
from common peoplecxxxvii.
Discussion
Reviewing this bodhisattva-spirit-oriented counselling framework, four areas lead to
further discussion: interactions between philosophical concepts and propositions for
counselling,compatibility between Buddhism andpsychotherapy,limitations andfuture
researchdirections,andthefeaturesofthis framework.
Interactionsbetweenphilosophicalconceptsandpropositionsforcounselling
This bodhisattva-spirit-oriented counselling framework, by combining a canonical ana-
lysis with a fieldwork study; and achieving cross-validation from the data collected by
these two methods, features the application of prajñā (wisdom 般若) philosophy that
developed 2,000 years ago, together with the contemporary experiences of various
stakeholders, including helping service practitioners, Buddhist masters and volunteers,
and beneficiaries. Analysing the Vimalakīrti Nirdeśa Sūtra and integrating its doctrines
into the personal experiences of the participants, this counselling framework (Figure 3)
concludes the core of the bodhisattva spirit, that is, the Mahāyāna spirit, which is em-
bedded in philosophical concepts and propositions for counselling. While the philo-
sophical concepts (including views of human nature, worldviews, and life views) shed
light on, and incorporate catvāri apramānāni (the four immeasurables 四無量心) into
the propositions for counselling, the propositions for counselling put the philosophical
concepts into practice; in particular, catvāri apramānāni (loving-kindness, compassion,
empathetic joy, and equanimity) which permeates most sectors (including mission,
goals, qualities and roles of a counsellor, therapeutic relationship and strategies, thera-
peutic tactics,skills,andtechniques).
A bodhisattva, an awakening sentient being and Mahayanist ideal (Basham 1981),
deeply beholds the original human nature (Abe 1997) (the buddha nature or bodhi na-
ture), worldviews and life views, which activates bodhicitta (enlightened mind 菩提心)
and catvāri apramānāni (the four immeasurables 四無量心). The rise of mahā-maitrī-
mahā-karunā (great loving-kindness and great compassion 大慈大悲) reinforces a bo-
dhisattva’s aspiration of enlightening her/himselfand other people, which remains close
to a counsellor’s mission. This commonality represents the vein of this counselling
framework, pertaining to the four layers of propositions for counselling from thera-
peutic mission to counselling technique, by which a counsellor practises self-benefiting
altruism. Each tier functions as the guidance for the next tier: The first tier, covering
the therapeutic mission and goals, governs the second tier, which regards the roles and
qualities of a counsellor that formulate the therapeutic relationship and strategies, as
well as the case conceptualisation. The last tier contains therapeutic tactics, skills, and
techniques,which reflectsthepracticalityofthe previous tiers.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page32of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Figure3Thebodhisattva-spirit-orientedcounsellingframework.
CompatibilityofBuddhismandpsychotherapy
Despite the agreement among the participants that Buddhist teachings are helpful for
people affected by emotional disorders and dealing with life adversities, whether or not
Buddhist elements can fulfil the requirements of modern counselling or psychotherapy
is still refutable among the helping service practitioners in this research. KJ* and Dr. Li
(both are psychiatrists and participants of this study) converge on the inborn healing
function of Buddhism, in which both Buddhism and psychotherapy are communicative,
asKJ* (apsychiatrist) perceived, relating:
“LearningBuddhismisakindofpsychotherapy. …[It]ispsychotherapyforthe
whole life.…Buddhism mainlyraisessuffering.Sufferingispsychopathology. …
Largely,itisaboutpsychologicalaetiology.It(Buddhism)isaboutexpunging
distressandachievinghappiness.Thisisidenticaltotheobjectiveofpsychotherapy”.
Nevertheless,Dr.Li(a psychiatrist)identified apoint ofdivergence,arguing,

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page33of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
“Buddhism andpsychiatryareidenticalinmission,namely, freedomfrom suffering
andacquisition of happiness.This isthe core. However,therearedifferencesin
naturetosomeextent”.
Focusing on their similarities, KJ* (a psychiatrist) traced the interaction between
Buddhismandpsychoanalysis,aswell aslater humanisticapproaches,reiterating,
“Jungadvocatedindividuation sincethe1920sor1930s. Individuation raises[the
idea]thatpeople search foranauthenticself.Later,humanistic psychotherapy …
elicitsactualisation andtranscendence.…Thismaybe considered [tobesimilarto]
the concept ofpursuingtobeabuddha.…[Mahāyāna]referstohow todevelopa
humanbeing’sbuddhanature, self nature andpotentiality,andsoon. This and
client-centred therapy inthe West aredifferent inapproach but withsimilarresults,
talkingabout therealselfina similarway toBuddhism”.
In contrast, Dr. Li (a psychiatrist) emphasised the religious aspect of Buddhism that
isambivalent towards theobjectiveofpsychiatry,commenting:
“Buddhism focuses onthe supermundaneworld, whilepsychiatristsfocus onthe
secularworld. Thetwo aredifferent from eachother.One issuperlativetruth, and
one issecular truth.Eventhoughtheycooperate compulsorily,itisdifficult. …One
more coreproblemthatresistsus…needsself breakthrough,self transcendence,
andhaveachancetoreachthesupermudane world,andreachthebodhisattvapath.
Traditionalpsychiatry orcounselling,basicallyistostrengthentheself, but notto
transcendtheself.We don’thavethisplan.Therefore, onthis dimension,weattain a
betterself, but donotattain atranscendent self”.
However, Dr. Li’s (a psychiatrist) opinion overlooked the teaching that a Mahāyāna
bodhisattva serves sentient beings in the secular world, for which using catvāri
apramānāni (the four immeasurables 四無量心) to accomplish the bodhisattva’s vow
targets the implementation of bodhisattva-mārga (the bodhisattva path菩薩道) for
rooting out suffering. In this sense, the paramount mission of Buddhism, particularly
for Mahāyāna, is to extinguish the afflictions of sentient beings, which is congenial to
psychotherapy.
Limitationsandfutureresearchdirections
The limitations of this research and directions for future research involve three prem-
ises: first, this counselling framework does not present much of a therapeutic process
due to very few sources from the Sūtra. Grounded on this bodhisattva-spirit-oriented
counselling framework, future studies are advisable to develop a counselling process,
and a training manual, which can result in formulation of a counselling model. Second,
this research, as an exploratory study, disregarded psychotherapy process research to
evaluate the association, interaction, and bilateral influence of therapeutic process-
outcome effects (Marmar 1990, Beutler 1990 and Garfield 1990); and thus was unableto
fully validate the detailed implementation of this framework. Future projects, therefore,
are recommended for carrying out psychotherapy process research designs to tone up

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page34of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
thisembryonicinquisition.Lastly,theresearchoutcomesaresupportedbytextualand
qualitativedata,towhichfurtherfuturestudiesareproposed,tousesurveysandquan-
titativedatatovalidatetheseresults.
Characteristicsofthiscounsellingframework
This bodhisattva-spirit-oriented counselling framework focuses on the inner revolution
(Thurman 1998), a self-help approach as a sword of wisdom expunging hindrancescxxx-
viii, through “a journey of understanding one’s own experience” (Kaklauskas and Olson
2008,136)withtheaidof“edifying”(Watson1998,84)Buddhistwisdom.Thisselfhealing
characteristicnotonlyprovidespracticableteachingsforBuddhiststotackletheirlifediffi-
culties, as evidencedbythe beneficiariesin this research,butalsofor non-Buddhistswho
mayseektohelpthemselvesthroughcounsellingsettings.Inthisrespect,thiscounselling
frameworkchieflyaimsatthelong-termeffectivenessincurredbythoughttransformation
andself-actualisation,ratherthanatshort-termsolutions.
Asaproponentofthebodhisattvaspirit,thiscounsellingframeworknotonlyadvocatesan
“I-thourelation”(Buber1923/1937,ix)respectingapersonasasubject,butmostimportantly
establishes bodhisattva-bodhisattva interplay between counsellor and client, affirming egali-
tarianism and resulting in self-benefiting altruism through non-judgementalism, acceptance,
andempathicunderstanding(Brown,Elkonin,andNaicker2013),whichareconcordantwith
Mahāyānaphilosophyandhumanistictherapies.
Moreover, this research synchronises a doctrinal approach substantiated by qualita-
tive data, from which it voices Buddhist values directly from Buddhist textual evidence.
This mixed method differentiates itself from the available models of “Buddhist-inspired
psychotherapy” (Watson 1998, 249 and Dow 2008, 273), and accentuates the signifi-
cance of primary data sources in studying Buddhist-informed therapeutic interventions.
This may offer references for scholars who are interested in studying Buddhist-related
psychotherapy as supported by first-hand data, and in applying Buddhist teachings to
helpingorcaring professions differently.
Conclusion
This cross-disciplinary research, for a theory-building purpose, re-interprets the
Vimalakīrti Nirdeśa Sūtra (維摩詰所說經) as to its applicability on the secular level,
and applies its wisdom to propositions for counselling based on its philosophical con-
structs. It covers the overarching Mahāyāna (Great Vehicle 大乘佛教) doctrines,
focusing on prajñā (wisdom 般若), which shapes a counselling framework that may
offerfundamentalelementsforuseinspecifictherapeuticsettingsorpopulations,suchas
family therapy, bereavement, and mental health interventions. This bodhisattva-spirit-
oriented counselling framework emphasises mind training and thought transformation,
which enablesclientstotranscend self-createdsuffering produced byignorance, dualism,
and attachment to self. This self-help approach focuses on a sense of self responsibility,
the acquisition of innate resources, including the authentic self, and self-actualisation,
through an inclusiveness between counsellor and client. This dynamic strengthens the
connected and the one being connected during the counselling process, forming
bodhisattva-bodhisattvainterplay,wherebothpartiesactasthebodhisattvaforthemselves
(self-benefiting) as for their counter-partner (altruism). This interplay achieves self-

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page35of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
benefitingaltruismthroughthelettinggoofself-centrednessandthroughbearingtheaf-
flictions of other people. However, this counselling framework is still in development,
even though it does present the practicality of bodhisattva-mārga (the bodhisattva
path 菩薩道) in the contemporary milieu, substantiated by canonical evidence and
the lived experiences of participants in this research.
Endnotes
i“The Buddha said, ‘Ānanda, this sūtra is named the Discourse of Vimalakīrti”.
(McRae 2004, 179) 「佛言:阿難!是經名為“維摩詰所說”。」《囑累品第十四》
T14,no. 0475,p.0557b21.
ii“The characteristics of the minds of all sentient beings are likewise, in being without
defilement”. (McRae 2004, 93) 「一切眾生心相無垢。」《弟子品第三》T14, no. 0475,
p.0541b14-15.
iii“All sentient beings are the characteristic of bodhi”. (McRae 2004, 98) 「一切眾生
即菩提相。」《菩薩品第四》T14,no. 0475,p.0542a35.
iv“All living beings are a part of Suchness”. (Watson 1997, 53)「一切眾生皆如也。」
《菩薩品第四》T14,no.0475,p.0542a33.
v“identical with living beings, free of distinctions with regard to things” (Watson 1997,
131)「同眾生,於諸法無分別。」《見阿閦佛品第十二》T14,no.0475,p.0554c36-37.
vi“do not differentiate yourself from the host of Maras and the sensory troubles”
(McRae 2004,89)「汝與眾魔,及諸塵勞,等無有異。」《弟子品第三》T14, no. 0475,
p.0540b25-26.
vii“Ifyou,Maitreya, are able toattainanuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, thenall livingbeings
shouldlikewisebeabletoattainit.Why?Becausealllivingbeingsintruthbearthemarks
of bodhi”. (Watson 1997, 53) 「若彌勒得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提者,一切眾生皆亦應得。
所以者何?一切眾生即菩提相。」《菩薩品第四》T14,no.0475,p.0542a34-35.
viii“You are in this immediate present born, aged, and extinguished”. (McRae 2004, 97)
「汝今即時,亦生亦老亦滅。」《菩薩品第四》T14,no.0475,p.0542a31.
ix“All things are just the same – they have no fixed form”. (Watson 1997, 91) 「一切
諸法亦復如是,無有定相。」《觀眾生品第七》T14,no. 0475,p.0548b26.
x“As if he were a magician seeing a conjured person, so should a bodhisattva view
sentient beings, like a wise person seeing the moon in water, like seeing the image of a
face in a mirror, like a mirage when it is hot, like the echo of a shout, like clouds in the
sky,likewatercollectingintofoam,likebubblesuponwater,likethefirmnessoftheba-
nana tree, like the prolonged abiding of lightning, …”(McRae 2004, 123) 「譬如幻師,
見所幻人,菩薩觀眾生為若此。如智者見水中月,如鏡中見其面像,如熱時焰,如呼聲
響,如空中雲,如水聚沫,如水上泡,如芭蕉堅,如電久住,…」《觀眾生品第七》T14,
no. 0475,p.0547b01-02.
xi「是身不淨,穢惡充滿。」《方便品第二》T14,no. 0475,p.0539b16.
xii“stubborn and strong-willed beings who are difficult to convert” (Watson 1997, 118)
「剛強難化眾生。」《香積佛品第十》T14,no.0475,p.0552c33.
xiii“When the mind is pure, the Buddha land will be pure”. (Watson 1997, 29)
「隨其心淨,則佛土淨。」《佛國品第一》T14, no. 0475, p. 0538b29.
xiv“TheBuddhaexplainstheDharmawithonesound,andsentientbeingseachattainun-
derstanding according to their capacity”. (Watson 1997, 74) 「佛以一音演說法,眾生隨類

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page36of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
各得解。」《佛國品第一》T14, no. 0475, p. 0537b53; “The Buddha preaches the Law
withasinglevoice,buteachlivingbeingunderstandsitinhisownway”.(Watson1997,24)
「佛以一音演說法,眾生各各隨所解。」《佛國品第一》T14,no.0475,p.0537b55.
xv「五濁惡世。」《香積佛品第十》T14,no. 0475,p.0552b09.
xvi“The sentient beings of this land are obdurate and difficult to convert”. (McRae
2004,153) 「此土眾生剛強難化。」《香積佛品第十》T14,no.0475,p.0552c26.
xvii“These people who are difficult to convert have minds like monkeys”. (Watson
1997,118) 「以難化之人,心如猨猴。」《香積佛品第十》T14, no.0475,p.0552c32.
xviii“Allthingsinthephenomenalworldarejust suchphantoms andconjuredbeings”.
(Watson1997,43)「一切諸法,如幻化相。」《弟子品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0540b28.
xix“The non-abiding is its fundamental basis. … All dharmas are established on the
fundamental [basis] of non-abiding.” (McRae 2004, 127) 「無住則無本。… 從無住本,
立一切法。」《觀眾生品第七》T14, no.0475,p.0547c21.
xx「諸法究竟無所有,是空義。」《弟子品第三》T14, no.0475,p.0541a14.
xxi“Formisemptiness–itisnotthatformextinguishesemptinessbutthatthenature
of form is of itself empty”. (McRae 2004, 145) 「色即是空,非色滅空,色性自
空。」《入不二法門品第九》T14, no. 0475, 0551a19.
xxii“… understand that all phenomena are no more than phantom forms”. (Watson
1997,40)「知諸法如幻相;無自性,無他性。」《弟子品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0540a28.
xxiii“Allthe dharmasare generated andextinguished, without abiding. Like phantasms
or lightning bolts, the dharmas do not depend on each other. They do not abide even
for a single instant. The dharmas are all false views, like a dream, like a mirage,
like the moon [reflected] in water, like an image in a mirror – [all] generated from
false conceptualization”. (McRae 2004, 93) 「一切法生滅不住,如幻如電,諸法不相待,
乃至一念不住;諸法皆妄見,如夢、如炎、如水中月、如鏡中像,以妄想生。」《弟子
品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0541b16-17.
xxiv“Thenature ofthose transgressionsdoesnot residewithin,itdoesnotresidewith-
out, and it does not reside in the middle. … The mind likewise does not reside within,
does not reside without, and does not reside inthe middle. Just sois the mind, and just
so are transgression and defilement. The dharmas are also likewise, in not transcending
suchness”. (McRae 2004, 93) 「彼罪性不在內、不在外、不在中間,…心亦不在內、
不在外、不在中間,如其心然,罪垢亦然,諸法亦然,不出於如。」《弟子品第三》T14, no.
0475,p.0541b12-14.
xxv“All things are impermanent in nature”. (Watson 1997, 31) 「知有為法皆悉無
常。」《佛國品第一》T14,no.0475,p.0538c30.
xxvi“Emptiness is none other than formlessness”. (Watson 1997, 108) 「空即無
相。」《入不二法門品第九》T14,no. 0475,p.0551b07.
xxvii“The body is impermanent”. (McRae 2004, 110) 「說身無常。」《文殊師利問疾
品第五》T14,no. 0475,p.0544c18.
xxviii“This body is insubstantial, being housed in the four elements”. (McRae 2004, 83)
「是身不實,四大為家。」《方便品第二》T14,no.0475,p.0539b15.
xxix「譬如幻師,見所幻人,菩薩觀眾生為若此。如智者見水中月,如鏡中見其面像,
如熱時焰,如呼聲響,如空中雲,如水聚沫,如水上泡,如芭蕉堅,如電久住,…」《觀眾
生品第七》T14,no. 0475,p.0548b01-02.
xxx“This body is like an echo, dependent on causes and conditions”. (McRae 2004, 83)
「是身如響,屬諸因緣。」《方便品第二》T14,no.0475,p.0539b14.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page37of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
xxxi“Phantomshavenofixedform.…Allthingsarejustthesame–theyhavenofixed
form”. (Watson 1997, 90–91) 「幻無定相,… 一切諸法亦復如是,無有定相。」《觀
眾生品第七》T14,no. 0475,p.0548b25-26.
xxxii“Sentient beings are likewise without death and birth”. (McRae 2004, 131) 「眾生
猶然,無沒生也。」《觀眾生品第七》T14,no. 0475,p.0548c11.
xxxiii「五欲無常。」《菩薩品第四》T14,no. 0475,p.0543a12.
xxxiv“This body is without self, like fire”. (McRae 2004, 83) 「是身無我,為如火。」
《方便品第二》T14,no. 0475,p.0539b14-15.
xxxv“The body is without ego”. (Watson 1997, 67) 「說身無我。」《文殊師利問疾
品第五》T14,no. 0475,p.0544c18.
xxxvi“no‘I’,nodoer, norecipient”(Watson 1997,22) 「無我無造無受者。」《佛國品
第一》T14,no.0475,p.0537b38.
xxxvii“There is no self in the self, yet no duality: this is the meaning of non-self.” (McRae
2004,91)「於我、無我而不二,是無我義。」《弟子品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0541a15.
xxxviii“This body is like a shadow, manifested through karmic conditions”. (McRae
2004,83)「是身如影,從業緣現。」《方便品第二》T14, no.0475,p.0539b13-14.
xxxix“Yet good and bad karma never cease to function”. (Watson 1997, 22) 「善惡之
業亦不亡。」《佛國品第一》T14,no. 0475,p.0537b38.
xl“These are misdeeds of the body; these are the retribution for misdeeds of the body.
These are misdeeds of the mouth; these are the retribution for misdeeds of the mouth.
These are misdeeds of the mind; these are the retribution for misdeeds of the mind.
Thisis the killing of living beings; this is the retribution for killing living beings. This is
taking what has not been given to you; this is the retribution for taking what has not
been given to you. This is sexual misconduct; this is the retribution for sexual miscon-
duct. This is lying; this is the retribution for lying. This is being double-tongued; this is
the retribution for being double-tongued. This is harsh speech; this is the retribution
for harsh speech. This is specious talk; this is the retribution for specious talk. This is
greed; this is the retribution for greed. This is wrath; this is the retribution for wrath.
These are erroneous views; this is the retribution for erroneous views. This is stingi-
ness; this isthe retribution for stinginess.Thisisbreakingthe precepts;this isthe retri-
bution for breaking the precepts. This is anger; this is the retribution for anger. This is
sloth this is the retribution for sloth. This is distractedness; this is the retribution for dis-
tractedness. This is stupidity; this is the retribution for stupidity”. (Watson 1997, 117–118)
「是身邪行,是身邪行報;是口邪行,是口邪行報;是意邪行,是意邪行報;是殺生,是殺
生報;是不與取,是不與取報;是邪婬,是邪婬報;是妄語,是妄語報;是兩舌,是兩舌報;是
惡口,是惡口報;是無義語,是無義語報;是貪嫉,是貪嫉報;是瞋惱,是瞋惱報;是邪見,是
邪見報;是慳悋,是慳悋報;是毀戒,是毀戒報;是瞋恚,是瞋恚報;是懈怠,是懈怠報;是亂
意,是亂意報;是愚癡,是愚癡報。」《香積佛品第十》T14,no.0475,p.552c27-29.
xli“the sufferings of the body” (Watson 1997, 67)「說身有苦。」《文殊師利問疾品
第五》T14,no.0475,p.0544c18.
xlii“the innumerable kalpas of suffering of one’s past lives” (McRae 2004, 110) 「宿世
無數劫苦。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no. 0475,p.0544c19.
xliii“The five components are wide open, empty, nothing arising in them – this is the
meaning of suffering”. (Watson 1997, 45) 「五受陰,洞達空無所起,是苦義。」《弟子
品第三》T14,no. 0475,p.0541a13.
xliv「一切所有施於彼者,是為菩薩。」《菩薩品第四》T14,no. 0475,p.0543b13.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page38of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
xlv“and while thebodhisattva is inthe realm of birthand death hedoesnot scorn their
company” (Watson 1997, 66) 「菩薩於生死而不捨。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,
no.0475,p.0544c07.
xlvi“to bear the burden of all [sentient beings] using the dharmas of
birth” (McRae 2004, 163) 「以生法荷負一切。」《菩薩行品第十一》T14, no. 0475,
p.0554c05.
xlvii「阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心」《佛國品第一》T14,no. 0475,p.0538c29.
xlviii「大乘心」《弟子品第三》T14,no. 0475,p.0540c26.
xlix「行菩薩慈,安眾生故。」《觀眾生品第七》T14,no. 0475,p.0547b16-17.
l「以救眾生,起大悲心。」《菩薩品第四》T14, no.0475,p.0543c05-06.
li「不著己樂,慶於彼樂。」《菩薩行品第十一》T14,no.0475,p.0554b09.
lii「捨諸所有。」《菩薩行品第十一》T14, no.0475,p.0554b09-10.
liii“the Dharma of universal sameness” (McRae 2004, 87) 「平等法」《弟子品第三》
T14,no.0475,p.0540a26.
liv“identical with living beings, free of distinctions with regard to things” (Watson
1997, 131) 「同眾生,於諸法無分別。」《見阿閦佛品第十二》T14, no. 0475, p.
0554c36-37.
lv「饒益眾生。」《方便品第二》T14,no. 0475,p.0539a20.
lvi“do away with the ills that afflict all living beings” (Watson 1997, 36) 「斷一切眾生
病。」《方便品第二》T14,no.0475,p.0539b33.
lvii“cut off the source of illness” (Watson 1997, 69) 「斷病本。」《文殊師利問疾品
第五》T14,no.0475,p.0545a15.
lviiiTheterm “altruism”wascoined byComte(1854,18).
lix“to enable all living beings to acquire a clean and pure land” (Watson 1997, 135)
「願使一切眾生得清淨土。」《見阿閦佛品第十二》T14,no. 0475,p.0555c17.
lx“releasing the bonds of sentient beings” (McRae 2004, 105) 「解眾生縛。」《菩薩
品第四》T14,no. 0475,p.0543c11.
lxi“causing innumerable thousands of people to all generate the intention to achieve
anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi” (McRae 2004, 84) 「令無數千人皆發阿耨多羅三藐三菩
提心。」《方便品第二》T14,no. 0475,p.0539c11.
lxii「當作醫王,療治眾病。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14, no.0475,p.0544c20.
lxiii“The inexhaustible lamp is like a lamp that ignites a hundred thousand lamps, illu-
minatingalldarknesswithanilluminationthatisneverexhausted.…,ifasinglebodhisat-
tvaguidesahundredthousandsentientbeings,causingthemtogeneratetheintentionto
achieveanuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi,thatbodhisattva’sintentiontoachieveenlightenment
willalsoneverbeextinguished”.(McRae2004,103)「無盡燈者,譬如一燈,燃百千燈,冥
者皆明,明終不盡。如是,諸姊!夫一菩薩開導百千眾生,令發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心,
於其道意亦不滅盡。」《菩薩品第四》T14,no.0475,p.0543b16-17.
lxiv「大導師」《佛國品第一》T14,no. 0475,p.0537b59.
lxv「因以解人惑。」《佛道品第八》T14,no.0475,p.0549b73.
lxvi“guiding living beings” (Watson 1997, 127) 「引導眾生。」《菩薩行品第十一》
T14,no. 0475,p.0554b14.
lxvii「直心」《佛國品第一》T14,no. 0475,p.0538a29.
lxviii「深心」《佛國品第一》T14,no.0475,p.0538a29.
lxix「當淨其心。」《佛國品第一》T14, no.0475,p.0538b29.
lxx「平等無二。」《入不二法門品第九》T14,no. 0475,p.0551a16.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page39of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
lxxi“Tohavefalseconceptsisdefilement;tobewithoutfalseconceptsispurity.Confusion
is defilement, and the absence of confusion is purity. To grasp the self is defilement, and
not to grasp the self is purity”. (McRae 2004, 93) 「妄想是垢,無妄想是淨;顛倒是垢,無
顛倒是淨;取我是垢,不取我是淨。」《弟子品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0541b15-16.
lxxii「愛見悲」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0545a26.
lxxiii“Tocontemplate thebodyasimpermanent suffering,empty,andnon-selfiscalled
wisdom”. (McRae 2004, 113) 「又復觀身無常、苦、空、非我,是名為慧。」《文殊
師利問疾品第五》T14, no.0475,p.0545a33-34.
lxxiv“Althoughthebodyisill,italwaysexistsinsaṃsāra.Tobenefitallwithouttiring–
this is called skilful means”. (McRae 2004, 113) 「雖身有疾,常在生死,饒益一切,而不
厭倦,是名方便。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0545a34.
lxxv“It means that, with a mind free of affection and concern, a bodhisattva sets about
to adorn the Buddha lands, lead numerous living beings to them, and regulate himself
with the doctrines of emptiness, formlessness, and nonaction, never experiencing weari-
nessorrevulsion.Thisiscalledtheliberationofwisdomwithexpedientmeans”.(Watson
1997, 71) 「謂不以愛見心莊嚴佛土、成就眾生,於空、無相、無作法中,以自調伏,而
不疲厭,是名有方便慧解。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0545a30-31.
lxxvi“Though he moves in the realm of formlessness he yet saves many living beings”.
(Watson 1997, 73) 「雖行無相,而度眾生。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14, no. 0475,
p.0545b28.
lxxvii“Thoughheaddresseshimselftoalllivingbeingshedoessowithoutaffectionorat-
tachment”. (Watson 1997, 72) 「雖攝一切眾生,而不愛著。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》
T14,no.0475,p.0545b27.
lxxviii「縛」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0545a27.
lxxix「煩惱」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no. 0475,p.0545a26.
lxxx「惱」《方便品第二》T14,no.0475,p.0539b12.
lxxxi「從癡有愛。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0544b20.
lxxxii「身」《觀眾生品第七》T14, no.0475,p.0547c17.
lxxxiii“Alternately suffering and vexatious, it accumulates a host of illnesses”.
(McRae 2004, 83) 「為苦、為惱,眾病所集。」《方便品第二》T14, no. 0475, p.
0539b12.
lxxxiv「又此病起,皆由著我。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14, no.0475,p.0544c28.
lxxxv「欲貪」《觀眾生品第七》T14, no.0475,p.0547c17.
lxxxvi「從有攀緣,則為病本。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14, no.0475,p.0545a16.
lxxxvii「顛倒」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0544c30.
lxxxviii「虛妄分別」《觀眾生品第七》T14, no.0475,p.0547c18.
lxxxix“Non-duality is bodhi”. (McRae 2004, 98) 「不二是菩提。」《菩薩品第四》
T14,no. 0475,p.0542a39-40.
xc“Birth and extinction form a dualism. But since all dharmas are not born to begin
with, they must now be without extinction. By grasping and learning to accept this
truth of birthlessness one may enter the gate of no-dualism.” (Watson 1997, 104) 「生
滅為二。法本不生,今則無滅,得此無生法忍,是為入不二法門。」《入不二法門品第
九》T14, no.0475,p.0550c1-2.
xci“Defilement and purity constitute a duality. If one sees the real nature of defile-
ment, then there is no characteristic of purity, and one accords with the extinction of
characteristics. This is to enter the Dharma gate of non-duality”. (McRae 2004, 143)

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page40of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
「垢、淨為二。見垢實性,則無淨相,順於滅相,是為入不二法門。」《入不二法門品
第九》T14,no.0475,p.0550c11.
xcii“What is good and what is not good constitute a duality. If one does not generate
the good and what is not good, entering into and penetrating the limit of the non-
characteristics, this is to enter the Dharma gate of non-duality”. (McRae 2004, 144)
「善、不善為二。若不起善、不善,入無相際而通達者,是為入不二法門。」《入不二
法門品第九》T14,no.0475,p.0550c22.
xciii“Transgression and blessing constitute a duality. If one penetrates the nature of
transgression, then it is not different from blessings. Using the vajra wisdom to defini-
tively comprehend this characteristic, and to be neither in bondage nor emancipated, is
to enter the Dharma gate of non-duality”. (McRae 2004, 144) 「罪、福為二。若達罪
性,則與福無異,以金剛慧決了此相,無縛無解者,是為入不二法門。」《入不二法門
品第九》T14,no. 0475,p.0550c24-25.
xciv“It is without ties or attachments, without personal possessions, without thought
of possessions, without fluster or confusion. It means harbouring joy within”. (Watson
1997,49)「無繫著;無我所,無所受;無擾亂,內懷喜。」《弟子品第三》T14,no.0475,
p.0541c12.
xcv“Because their offense by its nature does not exist either inside them, or outside,
or in between. … When the mind is pure, the living being will be pure. As the mind is,
so will be the offense or defilement. The same is true of all things, for none escape the
realm of Suchness. … In the same way, when all living beings gain an understanding of
the nature of the mind, the no defilement exists. Where there is no topsy-turvy think-
ing, that is purity. Belief in the self is defilement. Where there is no such belief, that is
purity. … All phenomena are born and pass into extinction never enduring, like phan-
toms, like lightning. … One who understands this is called a keeper of the precepts,
onewhounderstandsthisiscalledwellliberated”.(Watson1997,47)「彼罪性不在內、
不在外、不在中間,如佛所說,心垢故眾生垢,心淨故眾生淨。心亦不在內、不在外、
不在中間,如其心然,罪垢亦然,諸法亦然,不出於如。…妄想是垢,無妄想是淨;顛倒是
垢,無顛倒是淨;取我是垢,不取我是淨。… 一切法生滅不住,如幻如電。…其知此者,
是名奉律;其知此者,是名善解。」《弟子品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0541b12-17.
xcvi“Non-grasping is bodhi”. (McRae 2004, 99) 「無取是菩提。」《菩薩品第四》
T14,no. 0475,p.0542a42.
xcvii「但除其病,而不除法。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0545a15.
xcviii“neither possesses earthly desires nor is separated from earthly desires” (Watson
1997,41)「非有煩惱,非離煩惱。」《弟子品第三》T14, no.0475,p.0540a29-30.
xcix“not to eradicate the afflictions yet enter into nirvāṇa” (McRae 2004, p. 85) 「不
斷煩惱而入涅槃。」《弟子品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0539b20.
c“All the afflictions constitute the seed of the Tathāgata”. (McRae 2004, 135) 「一切
煩惱,為如來種。」《佛道品第八》T14,no. 0475,p.0549b07.
ci“The field of the sensory troubles constitutes the seed of the Tathāgata”. (McRae
2004,135) 「塵勞之疇為如來種。」《佛道品第八》T14, no.0475,p.0549b16.
cii“If you do not descend into the vast ocean, you can never acquire a priceless pearl.
In the same way, if you do not enter the great sea of earthly desires, you can never ac-
quire the treasure of comprehensive wisdom”. (Watson 1997,95–96) 「譬如不下巨海,
不能得無價寶珠。如是不入煩惱大海,則不能得一切智寶。」《佛道品第八》T14, no.
0475,p.0549b7-8.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page41of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
ciii“Hindrances are bodhi”. (McRae 2004, 98) 「障是菩提。」《菩薩品第四》T14,
no. 0475,p.0542a38.
civ“Wanting to save people, [Vimalakīrti] used his excellent skilful means”. (McRae
2004,81)「欲度人故,以善方便。」《方便品第二》T14, no.0475,p.0539a11.
cv“Skilful means are the place of enlightenment, because of the salvation of sentient
beings”. (McRae 2004, 100) 「方便是道場,教化眾生故。」《菩薩品第四》T14, no.
0475,p.0542c15.
cvi“Bodhisattvas acquire the budhha lands according to the sentient beings they con-
vert. They acquire the buddha lands according to the sentient beings they discipline.
Theyacquirethebuddhalandsaccordingtowhatcountry sentientbeingsneedtoenter
into buddha wisdom. They acquire the buddha lands according to what country sen-
tient beings need to generate the roots [for becoming] bodhisattvas”. (McRae 2004, 75)
「菩薩隨所化眾生而取佛土,隨所調伏眾生而取佛土,隨諸眾生應以何國入佛智慧而
取佛土,隨諸眾生應以何國起菩薩根而取佛土。」《佛國品第一》T14, no. 0475, p.
0538a21-22.
cvii“Because the bodhisattva’s acquisition of a pure land is wholly due to his having
brought benefit to living beings”. (Watson 1997, 26) 「菩薩取於淨國,皆為饒益諸眾生
故。」《佛國品第一》T14,no.0475,p.0538a22-23.
cviii“to enable all living beings to acquire a clean and pure land” (Watson 1997, 135)
「願使一切眾生得清淨土。」《見阿閦佛品第十二》T14,no. 0475,p.0555c17.
cix“If one wishes to save sentient beings, the afflictions should be eradicated”. (McRae
2004,126) 「欲度眾生,除其煩惱。」《觀眾生品第七》T14, no.0475,p.0547c12.
cx“In accordance with the needs of others, he causes them to enter into the path of
buddhahood. Using the power of good skilful means, he provides sufficiency to all”.
(McRae 2004, 141)「隨彼之所須,得入於佛道,以善方便力,皆能給足之。」《佛道品
第八》T14,no.0475,p.0549b105-106.
cxi“TheThusComeOne inourlanddoesnotemploywords inhis exposition.Hejust
uses various fragrances to induce heavenly and human beings to undertake the obser-
vance of the precepts”. (Watson 1997, 117) 「我土如來無文字說,但以眾香令諸天、
人得入律行。」《香積佛品第十》T14, no.0475,p.0552c22.
cxii“first enticing them with desire, and later causing them to enter the wisdom of the
Buddha”. (McRae 2004, 140) 「先以欲鉤牽,後令入佛道。」《佛道品第八》T14, no.
0475,p.0549b97.
cxiii“Thisbody islike earth thathasnosubjective being”.(Watson 1997,35)「是身無
主,為如地。」《方便品第二》T14,no. 0475,p.0539b14.
cxiv“This body is impermanent, without durability, without strength, without firmness, a
thing that decays in a moment, not to be relied on”. (Watson 1997, 34) 「是身無常、無
強、無力、無堅、速朽之法,不可信也!」《方便品第二》T14,no.0475,p.0539b11-12.
cxv“This body is like a dream, an illusory view. … This body is without lifespan, like
the wind”. (McRae 2004, 83) 「是身如夢,為虛妄見;… 是身無壽,為如風。」《方便
品第二》T14,no. 0475,p.0539b13-15.
cxvi“Thisillnessofmineisbornofignoranceandfeelingsofattachment”.(Watson1997,
65)「從癡有愛,則我病生。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14,no.0475,p.0544b20.
cxvii“It is through objectified mentation that the basis of illness is constituted”.
(McRae 2004,111)「從有攀緣,則為病本。」《文殊師利問疾品第五》T14, no. 0475,
p.0545a16.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page42of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
cxviii“It is just as lotus flowers do not grow on dry land on the high plateau – these
flowers grow in the muddy filth of the lowly marshes. … It is like planting is seed in
space, where it would never grow – only in nightsoil-enriched earth can it flourish”.
(McRae 2004, 135) 「譬如高原陸地,不生蓮華,卑濕淤泥乃生此華;… 糞壤之地,乃能
滋茂。」《佛道品第八》T14,no. 0475,p.0549b04-06.
cxix“The inexhaustible lamp is like a lamp that ignites a hundred thousand lamps,
illuminating all darkness with an illumination that is never exhausted”. (McRae 2004,
103) 「無盡燈者,譬如一燈,燃百千燈,冥者皆明,明終不盡。」《菩薩品第四》T14,
no. 0475,p.0543b15.
cxx“As if he were a magician seeing a conjured person, so should a bodhisattva view
sentient beings. Like a wise person seeing the moon in water, lie a mirage when
it is hot, like …”(McRae 2004, 123) 「譬如幻師,見所幻人,菩薩觀眾生為若此。如智者
見水中月,如鏡中見其面像,如熱時焰,…」《觀眾生品第七》T14, no. 0475, p.
0547b01-05.
cxxi“There are [other buddha lands] where dreams, phantasms, shadows, echoes, im-
ages in mirrors, the moon [reflected in] water, mirages during times of heat, and other
metaphors perform the Buddha’s work”. (McRae 2004, 159) 「有以夢、幻、影、響、
鏡中像、水中月、熱時炎,如是等喻而作佛事。」《菩薩行品第十一》T14, no. 0475,
p.0554c18-19.
cxxii“At that time the goddess employed her supernatural powers to change Śāriputra
into a goddess like herself, while she took on Śāriputra’s form. Then she asked,‘Why
don’t you change out of this female body?’ Śāriputra, now in the form of a goddess,
replied ‘I don’t know why I have suddenly changed and taken on a female body’”.
(Watson 1997, 91) 「即時天女以神通力,變舍利弗令如天女,天自化身如舍利弗,而問
言:何以不轉女身?舍利弗以天女像而答言:「我今不知何轉而變為女身?」《觀眾生
品第七》T14,no. 0475,p.0548b47-49.
cxxiii“His (the Buddha) lion seat is eight-four thousand yojanas high … Buddha dis-
patched thirty-two thousand lion seats,tall, wide,andpureinornamentation, which ar-
rived in Vimalakīrti’s room. … The breath of the room entirely accommodated the
thirty-two thousand lion seats with no obstruction”. (McRae 2004, 118–119) 「其師子
座高八萬四千由旬,嚴飾第一。…即時彼佛遣三萬二千師子座,高廣嚴淨,來入維摩詰
室,…其室廣博,悉皆包容三萬二千師子座,無所妨礙。」《不思議品第六》T14, no.
0475,p.0546b02-06.
cxxiv“Vimalakīrti said,‘O Śāriputra, the buddhas and bodhisattvas have an emancipa-
tion called inconceivable. For a bodhisattva residing in this emancipation the vastness
of [Mount] Sumeru can be placed within a mustard seed without [either of them] in-
creasing or decreasing in size. Sumeru, king of mountains will remain in appearance as
before, …” (McRae 2004, 119) 「以須彌之高廣內芥子中無所增減,須彌山王本相如
故。」《不思議品第六》T14,no. 0475,p.0546b24-25.
cxxv“takethewatersofthefourgreatoceansandpourthemintotheopeningthatholds
a single hair” (Watson 1997, 78) 「又以四大海水入一毛孔。」《不思議品第六》T14,
no.0475,p.0546b26.
cxxvi“Itisas thelaymanhassaid.ButtheBuddhahasappearedinthisevil worldoffive
impurities and at present is practising the Law so as to save and liberate living beings”.
(Watson 1997, 50–51) 「如居士言。但為佛出五濁惡世,現行斯法,度脫眾生。」《弟
子品第三》T14,no.0475,p.0542a09.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page43of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
cxxvii“At that time the bodhisattvas who had come from the Host of Fragrances world
held their palms together and addressed the Buddha,‘World-honoured One, when we
first saw this land we generated the concept of its inferiority. Now we are ashamed of
ourselves and have abandoned this attitude. Why? The skilful means of the buddhas
are inconceivable. In order to save sentient beings, they manifest different buddha
countries in accordance with the responses of [sentient beings]”. (McRae 2004, 161)
「爾時眾香世界菩薩來者,合掌白佛言:「世尊!我等初見此土,生下劣想,今自悔責,
捨離是心。所以者何?諸佛方便,不可思議!為度眾生故,隨其所應,現佛國異。」《菩
薩行品第十一》T14,no. 0475,p.0554a28-29.
cxxviii“Even were the four seas to dry up, this food would not be exhausted”. (McRae
2004,152) 「四海有竭,此飯無盡。」《香積佛品第十》T14, no.0475,p.0552c10-11.
cxxix“All living beings are a part of Suchness and all other things as well are a part of
Suchness. The sages and worthy ones too are a part of Suchness; even you, Maitreya,
are a part of Suchness. So if you have been given a prophecy of enlightenment, then all
living beings should likewise be given such a prophecy. Why? Because Suchness knows
no dualism or differentiation. If you, Maitreya, are able to attain anuttarā-samyak-saṃ-
bodhi, then all living beings should likewise be able to attain it. Why? Because all living
beings should likewise be able to attain it. Why? Because all living beings in truth bear
the marks of bodhi”. (Watson 1997, 53) 「一切眾生皆如也,一切法亦如也,眾聖賢亦
如也,至於彌勒亦如也。若彌勒得受記者,一切眾生亦應受記。所以者何?夫如者不二
不異,若彌勒得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提者,一切眾生皆亦應得。所以者何?一切眾生即菩
提相。」《菩薩品第四》T14,no. 0475,p.0542a33-35.
cxxx“At that time, the goddess asked Śāriputra,‘Why would you remove the flowers?’
[Śāriputra] answered,‘Theses flowers are contrary to the Dharma, so I would remove
them.’ The goddess said,‘Do not say that these flowers are contrary to the Dharma!
Why? These flowers are without discrimination. Sir, it is you who are generating dis-
criminative thoughts’”. (McRae 2004, 127) 「爾時天女問舍利弗:何故去華?答曰:此華
不如法,是以去之。天曰:勿謂此華為不如法。所以者何?是華無所分別,仁者自生分
別想耳!」《觀眾生品第七》T14,no.0475,p.0547c24-28.
cxxxi“At this point Vimalakīrti was silent, saying nothing. Mañjuśrī exclaimed,‘Excellent,
excellent! Not to even have words or speech is the true entrance into the Dharma
gateofnonduality’”.(McRae2004,148)「時維摩詰默然無言。文殊師利歎曰:善哉!善哉!
乃至無有文字、語言,是真入不二法門。」《入不二法門品第九》T14, no. 0475, p.
0551c22-23.
cxxxii“The inexhaustible lamp is like a lamp that ignites a hundred thousand lamps, il-
luminating all darkness with an illumination that is never exhausted. Thus, sisters, if a
singlebodhisattva guidesahundredthousand sentientbeings,causing themtogenerate
the intention to achieve anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, that bodhisattva’s intention to
achieve enlightenment will also never be extinguished. With each teaching of the
Dharma all the good dharmas are naturally increased. This is what is called the ‘inex-
haustible lamp’. Although you reside in Māra’s palace, with this inexhaustible lamp you
can cause innumerable gods and goddesses to generate the intention to achieve anut-
tarā-samyak-saṃbodhi. Thereby you will repay the Buddha’s kindness and also greatly
benefitallsentientbeings”.(McRae2004,103)「無盡燈者,譬如一燈,燃百千燈,冥者皆
明,明終不盡。如是,諸姊!夫一菩薩開導百千眾生,令發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心,於其
道意亦不滅盡,隨所說法,而自增益一切善法,是名無盡燈也。汝等雖住魔宮,以是無盡

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page44of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
燈,令無數天子天女,發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心者,為報佛恩,亦大饒益一切眾生。」
《菩薩品第四》T14,no.0475,p.0543b15-17.
cxxxiii“At the time, there was a goddess in Vimalakīrti’s room who, upon seeing the
great men listening to the Dharma being explained, made herself visible and scattered
heavenly flowers over the bodhisattvas and great disciples. When the flowers reached
the bodhisattvas they all immediately fell off, but when they reached the great disciples
they adhered and did not fall off”. (McRae 2004, 127) 「時維摩詰室有一天女,見諸大
人聞所說法,便現其身,即以天華,散諸菩薩、大弟子上。華至諸菩薩,即皆墮落,至大
弟子,便著不墮。」《觀眾生品第七》T14,no. 0475,p.0547c23-24.
cxxxiv“Vimalakīrti used to occasion of his illness to make extensive explanations of the
Dharma”. (McRae 2004, 83) 「維摩詰因以身疾,廣為說法。」《方便品第二》T14,
no. 0475,p.0539b11.
cxxxv“Using skilful means he manifested becoming ill himself”. (McRae 2004, 83) 「其
以方便,現身有疾。」《方便品第二》T14,no. 0475,p.0539b10.
cxxxvi“If he went to gambling houses or theatres it was only to save people. … In en-
tering the brothels, he revealed the transgressions [that arise from] desire. In entering
the wine shops, he was able to maintain his [good] intention”. (McRae 2004, 82) 「若至
博弈戲處,輒以度人;…入諸婬舍,示欲之過;入諸酒肆,能立其志。」《方便品第二》
T14,no.0475,p.0539a14-15.
cxxxvii“When he was among the common people as the most honoured among the
common people he had them generate the power of blessings”. (McRae 2004, 82) 「若
在庶民,庶民中尊,令興福力。」《方便品第二》T14, no.0475,p.0539a18.
cxxxviii“Withtheswordofwisdomonewilldestroythe‘bandits’oftheafflictions”.(McRae
2004,162)「以智慧劍,破煩惱賊。」《菩薩行品第十一》T14,no.0475,p.0554b12.
Competinginterests
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.
Authors’contributions
FKCcollectedandanalysedthedata,wrotethefirstdraftofthismanuscript,respondedtothereviewers’comments,and
approvedtheproductionproofs. STsupervisedthedevelopmentofthisstudy,andevaluatedthedraftsofthismanuscript.
Allauthorsreadandapprovedthefinalisedmanuscript.
Authors’information
FungKeiCheng,PhD,focusesonapplyingChineseBuddhismtovariousdisciplines,includingcounselling,mental
health,complementaryandalternativemedicine,conflictresolution,businessmanagement,genderstudies,and
sustainabledevelopment.Correspondence:oasischeng@yahoo.com.
SamsonTse,PhD,isProfessorinDepartmentofSocialWorkandSocialAdministration,TheUniversityofHongKong.
Heisspecialisedinmentalhealth,includingaddiction.
Acknowledgements
Weconveyourdeepgratitudetothe38participants,whohaveopenlysharedtheirpersonalexperiencesandideas
withus. OurthankfulnessisalsodirectedtowardsDrSandraTsang(曾潔雯博士)forherassistanceinrecruiting
participants;DrWeiRuiXiong(熊偉銳博士),thepeeranalyst;MrLozangHau(侯松蔚先生),theTibetaninterpreter;
theanonymoustranslatorwhoproofreadsthetranslatedverbatimnarratives;andProfessorJianPingHe(何劍平教授),
andDrXinShiuWang(王新水博士)fortheirsuggestionsontheearlierdraftofthismanuscript.
Authordetails
1DepartmentofSocialWorkandSocialAdministration,TheUniversityofHongKong,Room534,5/F,TheJockeyTower
Club,TheCentennialCampus,PokfulamRoad,HongKong,China.2DepartmentofSocialWorkandSocial
Administration,TheUniversityofHongKong,Room520,5/F,TheJockeyTowerClub,TheCentennialCampus,
PokfulamRoad,HongKong,China.
Received:5June2014Accepted:18August2014

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page45of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
References
Abe,Masao.1997.Zenandcomparativestudies:Parttwoofatwo-volumesequeltoZenandwesternthought.Honolulu:
USA:UniversityofHawai'iPress.
Abiko,Hiroshi.1982.Theaspectofgreatjoy.ThePacificWorldJournal:JournalofInstituteofBuddhistStudiesno.1(1):8.
Akizuki,Ryomin.1990.NewMahāyāna:Buddhismforapost-modernworld.TranslatedbyJamesW.HeisgandPaulL.
Swanson.California:AsianHumanitiesPress.
App,Urs.2010.ArthurSchopenhauerandChina:ASino-Platonicloveaffair.USA:Sino-PlatonicPapers,Departmentof
EastAsianLanguagesandCivilizations,UniversityofPennsylvania.
Arthur,CJ.1987.Phenomenologyofrelgionandtheartofstory-telling:TherelevanceofWilliamGolding’s‘theinheritors’to
religiousstudies.ReligiousStudiesno.23:59–79.
Averill,JamesR.2009.Onart,science,metaphors,andghosts:Afewthoughtstoshare.EmotionReviewno.1(1):88–89.
doi:10.1177/1754073908099129.
Bakes,andSAlan.2012."Helpfulstrategiesforteachingeffectiveconfrontationskills".IdeasandResearchYouCanUse:
VISTAS2012no.1(Article36),http://counselingoutfitters.com/vistas/vistas12/Article_36.pdf.
Bankart,CPeter,KathleenHDockett,andGRitaDudley-Grant.2003.OnthepathoftheBuddha:Apsychologists’guide
tothehistoryofBuddhism.InPsychologyandBuddhism:Fromindividualtoglobalcommunity,ed.KathleenH
Dockett,GRitaDudley-Grant,andCPeterBankart,13–44.NewYork:KluwerAcademic/PlenumPublishers.
BankartPeter,C.2006."Mindfulness,compassion,andwisdom:Workingwithanger.".InHorizonsinBuddhistpsychology:
Practice,researchandtheory,ed.GMaurits,TKwee,KennethJGergen,andKoshikawaFusako,75–83.Ohio:ATaos
InstitutePublication.
Banman,John.1982.Theuseofhumourinpsychotherapy.InternationalJournalfortheAdvancementofCounselling
no.5(2):81–86.
Baranowsky,AnnaB.2002.Thesilencingresponseinclinicalpractice:Ontheroadtodialogue.InTreatingcompassion
fatigue,ed.CharlesRFigley,155–170.NewYork:Brunner-Routledge.
BashamArthur,L.1981."TheevolutionoftheconceptoftheBodhisattva.".InBodhisattvadoctrineinBuddhism,ed.
KawanuraLeslie,19–43.Waterloo,Ontario,Canada:PublishedfortheCanadianCorporationforStudiesinReligion/
CorporationbyWilfredLaurierUniversityPress.
Batchelor,Martine.2004.Introduction.InInThepathofcompassion:Thebodhisattvapercepts,1–44.UK:Rowman&
LittlefieldPublishers,Inc.
Bauml,Josef,TeresaFrobose,SibylleKraemer,MichaelRentrop,andGabrielePitschel-Walz.2006.Psychoeducation:A
basicpsychotherapeuticinterventionforpatientswithschizophreniaandtheirfamilies.SchizophreniaBulletin
no.32(S1):S1–S9.doi:10.1093/schbul/sbl017.
Bergson,Henri.1911.Laughter:Anessaryonthemeaningofthecomic.TranslatedbyCloudesleyBreretonandFred.
MacmillanandCompanyLimited:Rothwell.UK.
Bernhard,Toni.2010.Howtobesick:ABuddhist-inspiredguideforthechronicallyillandtheircaregivers.USA:Wisdom
Publications.
Bertman,SandraL.2000.Theartsandstory:Asourceofcomfortandinsightforchildrenwhoarelearningabout
death.InMeetingtheneedsofourclientscreatively:Theimpactofartandcultureoncaregiving,ed.JohnD
Morgan,177–191.NewYork:BaywoodPublishingCompany,Inc.
Beutler,LarryE.1990.Introductiontothespecialseriesonadvancesinpsychotherapyprocessresearch.Journalof
ConsultingandClinicalPsychologyno.58(3):263–264.
Bloom,Pamela.2000.Buddhistactsofcompassion.USA:ConariPress.
Boeree,C,andGeorge.1997.TowardsaBuddhistpsychotherapy1997[citedJuly252013].Availablefrom
http://webspace.ship.edu/cgboer/buddhapsych.html.
Bondarenko,AlexanderF.1999.MyencounterwithCarlRogers:AretrospectiveviewfromtheUkraine.Journalof
HumanisticPsychologyno.39(1):8–14.doi:10.1177/0022167899391002.
Boukydis,Kathleen.1979.Caringandconfronting.Voices:Theartandscienceofpsychotherapyno.15(1):31–34.
Brandon,David.1976/1990.Zenintheartofhelping.GreatBritain:ThePenguinGroup.
Brandon,David.1983.Nownessinthehelpingrelationship.InAwakeningtheheart:East/Westapproachesto
psychotherapyandthehealingrelationship,ed.JohnWelwood,140–147.USA:ShambhalaPublications,Inc.
Bratter,ThomasEdward,andLisaSinsheimer.2008.Confrontation:Apotentpsychotherapeuticapproachwithdifficult
adolescents.AdolescentPsychiatry:TheAnnalsoftheAmericanSocietyforAdolescentPsychiatryno.30:103–116.
Brems,Christiane.2001.Basicskillsinpsychotherapyandcounselling.USA:Thomson/Brooks/Cole.
Brink,DeboraC,andBarryAFarber.1996.AschemeofRogers’clinicalresponses.InThepsychotherapyofCarlRogers:
Casesandcommentary,ed.BarryAFarber,DeboraCBrink,andPatriciaMRaskin,15–24.USA:TheGuilfordPress.
Bronner,Yigal.2007.Thisisnolotus.Itisaface:PoeticsasgrammerinDandin’sinvestigationofthesimile.InThepoeticsof
grammarandthemetaphysicsofsoundandsign,ed.SLaPortaandDavidDeanShulman,91–108.Boston:Brill.
Brown,Ottilia,DianeElkonin,andSamanthaNaicker.2013.Theuseofreligionandspiritualityinpsychotherapy:
Enablersandbarriers.JournalofReligionandHealthno.52:1131–1146.doi:10.1007/s10943-011-9551-z.
Buber,Martin.1923/1937.IandThou.TranslatedbyRonaldGregorSmith.UK:MorrisonandGibbLimited.
Burns,DavidD.2008.Feelinggoodtogether:Thesecretofmakingtroubledrelationshipswork.NewYork:BroadwayBooks.
Cade,Brian.1994.Treatingthehouselikeahotel:Fromsimiletometaphor.CaseStudiesinBriefandFamilyTherapy
no.1(1):5–l4.
Callow,Geoff.2003.‘Magician’:Theuseofsustainedsimileinthealleviationofseriousbehaviouraldisturbanceand
acutedyslexiaina7-year-oldboy.ContemporaryHypnosisno.20(1):40–47.
Canda,EdwardR,andLeolaDyrudFurman.2010.Spiritualdiversityinsocialworkpractice:Theheartofhelping,2nd
ed.USA:OxfordUniversityPress.
Cason,Ann,andVictoriaThompson.1983.Workingwiththeoldanddying.InAwakeningtheheart:East/west
approachestopsychotherapyandthehealingrelationship,ed.JohnWelwood,192–201.Boston:Shambhala
Publications,Inc.
Chang,Otto.2007.Buddhismandscientificmethods.HsiLaiJournalofHumanisticBuddhismno.8:102–114.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page46of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Chen,YanZhu陳燕珠,2005.EssentialteachingsoftheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtraandthePañcavimśatisāhasrikā
PrajñāpāramitāSūtra維摩詰經要義、心經要義.Beijing:ChinaReligiousCulturePublisher宗教文化出版社.
Cheng,FungKei.2011.Anexploratorystudyofacounsellingframework:Fournobletruthsandtheirmulti-interactive
cause-and-effect.Chung-HwaInstituteofBuddhistStudiesno.12:151–196.
ChengFung,Kei鄭鳳姬.2013.Praxisofprajñābyovercomingsentimentalcompassion從克服愛見悲看般空慧的實
踐,pp.72–77.HongKong:PaperpresentedatPrajñāConference空慧學術會議.
ChengFungKei,andTse,Samson.2014.“Justeliminatetheillness;Donoteliminatedharmas”:Acasestudyonthelived
experienceofaBuddhistsurvivingspouse,41–58.Osaka,Japan:Paperpresentedatthe4thAsianConferenceon
PsychologyandtheBehaviouralSciences.
Ciuffardi,Gianluca,SoniaScavelli,andAndreaLeonardi.2013.Solution-focusedbrieftherapyincombinationwithfantasy
andcreativelanguageinworkingwithchildren:Abriefreport.InternationalJournalofSolution-FocusedPracticesno.
1(1):44–51.
Clarke,JacquelineK.2013.Utilizationofclients’metaphorstopunctuatesolution-focusedbrieftherapyinterventions:A
caseillustration.ContemporaryFamilyTherapy.doi:10.1007/s10591-013-9286-y.
Claxton,Guy.1986.Therapyandbeyond:Concludingthoughts.InBeyondtherapy:TheimpactofEasternreligionson
psychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed.GuyClaxton,313–325.England:WisdomPublications.
Comte,Auguste.1854.Systemofpositivepolity,ortreatiseofsociology,institutingthereligionofhumanity,4th
Volume:Theoryoffutureofman.Longman,GreenandCompany:TranslatedbyRichardCongreve.London.
Conze,Edward.1953.Buddhism:Itsessenceanddevelopment.Oxford:London.
Conze,Edward.1967.ThirtyyearsofBuddhistStudies:SelectedEssays.UK:BrunoCassirer(Publishers)Limited.
Corey,Gerald.1996.Caseapproachtocounsellingandpsychotherapy,4thed.USA:Brooks/Cole.
Corey,Gerald.2009.Theoryandpracticeofcounsellingandpsychotherapy,8thed.USA:Thomson/Brooks/Cole.
Corless,Roger.2010.Analogueconsciousnessisn’tjustforfaeries:Healingthedisjunctionbetweentheoryandpractice.
InAmericanBuddhismasawayoflife,ed.GaryStorhoffandJohnWhalen-Bridge,183–194.USA:StateUniversity
ofNewYorkPress.
Cornelius-White,JeffreyHD.2007.Congruence.InThehandbookofperson-centredpsychotherapyandcounselling,
ed.MickCooper,MaureenO'Hara,PeterFSchmid,andGillWyatt,168–181.NewYork:PalgraveMacmillan.
Craig,SiennaR,LianaChase,andTshewangNorbuLama.2010.TakingtheMINItoMustang,Nepal:Methodological
andepistemologicaltranslationsofanillnessnarrativeinterviewtool.AnthropologyandMedicineno.17(1):1–26.
Crane,RebeccaS,andWillemKuyken.2012.Theimplementationofmindfulness-basedcognitivetherapy:Learning
fromtheUKhealthserviceexperience.Mindfulness.doi:10.1007/s12671-012-0121-6.
Crawford,LElizabeth.2009.Conceptualmetaphorsofaffect.EmotionReviewno.1(2):129–139.doi:10.1177/1754073908100438.
CuiZhongTai崔鍾太.2008."ThedramaticgenreoftheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtra《維摩詰經》的戲劇體裁."Studies
ofCultureandArt文化藝術研究no.March:78–79&220.
Dalai,Lama.1999.TheheartoftheBuddha'spath.UK:Thorsons.
Dao-an,Venerable道安法師.1997.Philosophyofśūnyata空的哲理.Taipei:FoGuangShanCulturalEnterpriseLimited
佛光山文化事業有限公司.
Davidson,IFWK,andWIBrown.1989.Usinghumourincounsellingmentallyretardedclients:Aprelimiliarystudy.
InternationalJournalfortheAdvancementofCounsellingno.12(2):93–104.
Dayal,Har.1932/1999.ThebodhisattvadoctrineinBuddhistSanskritliterature.India:BanarsidassPublishersPrivateLimited.
DeSilva,Padmal.1996.Buddhistpsychologyandimplicationsfortreatment.InPsychiatryandreligion:Context,
consensusandcontroversies,ed.DineshBhugra,112–124.London:Routledge.
DeSilva,Padmal.2006.TheroleofBuddhisminmentalhealthinthemodernworld.InBuddhismandpeace:Theory
andpractice,ed.ChanjuMun,341–350.Hawaii:JungBupSaBuddhistTempleofHawaii.
HanDeWitt,F.2008.Workingwithexistentialandneuroticsuffering.InBrilliantsanity:Buddhistapproachesto
psychotherapy,ed.JFrancisKaklauskas,SusanNimanheminda,LouiseHoffman,andSMacAndrewJack,3–17.
Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Deeg,Max.2005.BuddhiststudiesanditsimpactonBuddhisminWesternsocieties:Ahistoricalsketchandprospects.
InTheroleofBuddhisminthe21stcentury.ProceedingsoftheFourthChung-HwaInternationalConferenceon
Buddhism,ed.HuiminBuikkhu,335–388.Taiwan:DharmaDrumCorporation.
SriDhammanaha,K.2000.Buddhismforthefuture.Taipei:TheBuddhaEducationalFoundation.
Ding,DaTong丁大同.2009.Buddhistjoyandsorrow佛家慈悲.China:TianjinRenminChubanshe天津人民出版社.
KathleenDockett,H,andDorisNorth-Schulte.2003.Transcendingselfandother:Mahāyānaprinciplesofintegration.In
PsychologyandBuddhism:Fromindividualtoglobalcommunity,ed.HKathleenDockett,GRitaDudley-Grant,and
CPeterBankart,215–238.NewYork:KluwerAcademic/PlenumPublishers.
Dolliver,andHRobert.1991."PerlswithGloriare-reviewed:GestalttechniquesandPerls’spractices.".JournalofCounselling
andDevelopment69:299–304.
Dow,Michael.2008.Buddhism,psychology,andneuroscience:Thepromisesandpitfallsofaneurobiologicallyinformed
contemplativepsychotherapy.InBrilliantsanity:Buddhistapproachestopsychotherapy,ed.JFrancisKaklauskas,Susan
Nimanheminda,LouiseHoffman,andMacAndrewSJack,99–132.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Dudley-Grant,G,CRita,BankarPeter,andKathleenHDockett.2003."Introduction.".InPsychologyandBuddhism:From
individualtoglobalcommunity,ed.HKathleen,GDockett,Dudley-GrantRita,andCPeterBankart,1–10.NewYork:
KluwerAcademic/PlenumPublishers.
Dynel,Marta.2011.Jockerinthepack:Towardsdeterminingthestatusofhumourousframinginconversations.InThe
pragmaticsofhumouracrossdiscoursedomains,ed.MartaDynel,217–242.USA:JohnBenjamins.
Eatough,Virginia,andJonathanASmith.2006.‘Iwaslikeawildwildperson’:Understandingfeelingsofangerusing
interpretativephenomenologicalanalysis.BritishJournalofPsychologyno.97:483–498.
EgbochukuElizabeth,Omotunde.2013.Counsellingcommunicationskills:Itsplaceinthetrainingprogrammeofa
counselingpsychologist(pp.17–32)2008[citedDecember162013]..Availablefromwww.ajol.info/index.php/ejc/
article/download/…/40997.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page47of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Emanatian,Michele.1995.Metaphorandtheexpressionofemotion:Thevalueofcross-culturalperspectives.Metaphor
andSymbolicActivityno.10(3):163–182.
Epstein,Mark.1989.Formsofemptiness:Psychodynamic,meditativeandclinicalperspectives.TheJournalof
TranspersonalPsychologyno.21(1):61–71.
Epstein,Mark.1999.Goingtopieceswithoutfallingapart:ABuddhistperspectiveonwholeness.London:Thorsons.
Epstein,Mark.2005.Opentodesire:Embracingalustforlife:InsightsfromBuddhismandpsychotherapy.Penguin
Group(USA)Inc:USA.
Fenner,Peter.2003.Nondualityandtherapy:Awakeningtheunconditionedmind.InThesacredmirror:Nondual
wisdomandpsychotherapy,ed.JohnJPrendergast,PeterFenner,andSheilaKrystal,23–56.USA:ParagonHouse.
Fielding,RGuy,andSueLlewelyn.1986.Thenewreligionsandpsychotherapy:Similaritiesanddifferences.InBeyond
therapy:TheimpactofEasternreligionsonpsychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed.GuyClaxton,271–289.England:
WisdomPublications.
Finlay,Linda.2011.Phenomenologyfortherapists:Researchingthelivedworld.USA:JohnWiley&Sons,Limited.
Flowers,Steve,andBobStahl.2011.Livingwithyourheartwideopen:Howmindfulnessandcompassioncanfreeyou
fromunworthiness,inadequacyandshame.USA:NewHarbingerPublications,Inc.
Fromm,Erich.1963.Foreword.InInZenBuddhismandpsychoanalysis,editedbyDaisetzTeitaroSuzuki,ErichFromm
andRichardDeMartino,vii-viii.NewYork:GrovePressInc.
Fromm,Erich.1983.Thenatureofwell-being.InAwakeningtheheart:East/westapproachestopsychotherapyandthe
healingrelationship,ed.JohnWelwood,59–69.USA:ShambhalaPublications,Inc.
Garfield,SolL.1990.Issuesandmethodsinpsychotherapyprocessresearch.JournalofConsultingandClinical
Psychologyno.58(3):273–280.
Gehart,DianeR.2012.Mindfulnessandacceptanceincoupleandfamilytherapy.NewYork:SpringerScience+
BusinessMedia.
Germer,ChristopherK.2009.Themindfulpathtoself-compassion:Freeingyourselffromdestructivethoughtsand
emotions.NewYork:TheGuilfordPress.
Gethin,Rupert.1998.ThefoundationsofBuddhism.UK:OxfordUniversityPress.
Geybels,Hans,andWalterVanHerck.2011.Introduction.InHumourandreligion:Challengesandambiguities,ed.Hans
GeybelsandWalterVanHerck,1–10.NewYork:ContinuumInternationalPublishingGroup.
Glaser,Aura.2005.Acalltocompassion:BringingBuddhistpracticesoftheheartintothesoulofpsychology.USA:
Nicolas-Hays,Inc.
Glazer,HildaR,andDonnaMarcum.2003.Expressinggriefthroughoutstorytelling.JournalofHumanisticCounselling,
EducationandDevelopmentno.42(Fall):131–138.
GoldenLotusTheatre,金色蓮花表演坊.1998.Vimalakīrti維摩居士.Taiwan:Digitalvideocompactdisc.
Goleman,Daniel.1975.MentalhealthinclassicalBuddhistpsychology.TheJournalofTranspersonalPsychologyno.
7(2):176–181.
Goleman,Daniel.1998.Workingwithemotionalintelligence.USA:BantamBooks.
Goleman,Daniel.2008.Foreword.InInEmotionalawareness:Overcomingtheobstaclestopsychologicalbalanceand
compassion:AconversationbetweentheDalaiLamaandPaulEkman,PhD,editedbyPaulEkman,ix-xi.NewYork:
TimesBooks.
Gomez,LuisO.1987.Fromtheextraordinarytotheordinary:ImagesofthebodhisattvainEastAsia.InTheChristand
thebodhisattva,ed.DonaldsLopezJrandStevenCRockefeller,141–191.USA:StateUniversityofNewYorkPress.
Greene,Mark.2011.Usingmyths,legendsandfairytalesincounselling:Archetypalmotifsunderlyingthemother
complex.AsiaPacificJournalofCounsellingandPsychotherapy2no2(1):41–50.doi:10.1080/21507686.2010.546418.
Guruge,AnandaWP.2007.Buddhismandscience–Acenturyofinvestigation.HsiLaiJournalofHumanisticBuddhism
no.8:13–65.
Harrison,Paul.1987.Whogetstorideinthegreatvehicle?Self-imageandidentityamongthefollowersoftheearly
Mahāyāna.TheJournaloftheInternationalAssoicationofBuddhistStudiesno.10(1):67–89.
Harvey,Peter.1990.AnintroductiontoBuddhism:Teachings,historyandpractices.UK:CambridgeUniversityPress.
He,JianPing何劍平.2009.StudyofVimalakīrtibeliefinmedievalChina中國中古維摩詰信仰研究.China:Sichuan
PublishingGroup四川出版集團.
Heelas,Paul,andRachaelKohn.1986.Psychotherapyandtechniquesoftransformation.In Beyondtherapy:The
impactofEasternreligionsonpsychologicaltheoryandpractice, ed.GuyClaxton,293–309.England:
WisdomPublications.
Helm,BennettW.2009.Emotionsasevaluativefeelings.EmotionReviewno.1(3):248–255.doi:10.1177/1754073909103593.
Hoffman,Louis.2008.AnexistentialframeworkforBuddhism,worldreligions,andpsychotherapy:Cultureanddiversity
considerations.InBrilliantsanity:Buddhistapproachestopsychotherapy,ed.FrancisJKaklauskas,Susan
Nimanheminda,LouiseHoffman,andMacAndrewSJack,19–38.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Howard,Alex.2011.Socratesasarolemodelforcounsellors.PracticalPhilosophyno.2(1):15–17.
Hsing-Yun,Master.2006.Thecoreteachings:Buddhistpracticeandprogress1.TranslatedbyReyRongLeeandMuTzen
Hsu.USA:Buddha'sLightPublishing.
Hsu,HengChi.2012.WhatisBuddhism?TianTangShanYuanYinGuSi:Theoryandpractice.TranslatedbyP.H.Wei.China.
Huang,Kuoching黃國清.2011.ThenatureandspiritoftheworldlybodhisattvaoftheMahāyānaBuddhism大乘佛教久
住世間的菩薩精神特質.InternationalJournalfortheStudyofHumanisticBuddhism人間佛教研究no.1:111–130.
Humphreys,Christmas.1987.ThewisdomofBuddhism.UK:CurzonPressLimited.
Hunt,Dorothy.2003.Beingintimatewithwhatis:Healingthepainofseparation.InThesacredmirror:Nondual
wisdomandpsychotherapy,ed.JohnJPrendergast,PeterFenner,andSheilaKrystal,164–184.USA:Paragon
House.
Inoue,Shinichi.1997.PuttingBuddhismtowork:Anewapproachtomanagementandbusiness.TranslatedbyDuncan
RyukenWilliams.KodanshaInternationalLimited:USA.
InternationalOrganizationforMigration.2009.Introductiontobasiccounsellingandcommunicationskills.IOMtraining
manualformigratecommunityleadersandcommunityworkers.Switzerland:InternationalOrganizationforMigration.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page48of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Johnson,Mark.1995.Introduction:Whymetaphormatterstophilosophy.MetaphorandSymbolicActivityno.10(3):157–162.
Jones,Ken.2003.ThenewsocialfaceofBuddhism:Acalltoaction.USA:WisdomPublications.
Kövecses,Zoltán.2002.Metaphor:Apracticalintroduction.NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress.
Kabat-Zinn,Jon.2003.Mindfulness-basedinterventionsincontext:Past,present,andfuture.ClinicalPsychology:Science
andPracticeno.10(2):144–156.
Kabat-Zinn,Jon.2011.SomereflectionsontheoriginsofMBSR,skilfulmeans,andthetroublewithmaps.
ContemporaryBuddhismno.12(1):281–306.
Kain,VictoriaJ.2013.Babiesborndying:Justbadkarma?Adiscussionpaper.JournalofReligionandHealth.
doi:10.1007/s10943-013-9779-x.
Kaklauskas,FrancisJ,SusanNimanheminda,LouiseHoffman,andMacAndrewSJack.2008."Introduction".InBrilliant
sanity:Buddhistapproachestopsychotherapy,ed.byFrancisJ.Kaklauskas,SusanNimanheminda,LouiseHoffman
andMacAndrewS.Jack,xix-xxii.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Kaklauskas,FrancisJ,andElizabethAOlson.2008.Largegroupprocess:GroundingBuddhistandpsychologicaltheory
inpersonalexperience.InBrilliantsanity:Buddhistapproachestopsychotherapy,ed.FrancisJKaklauskas,Susan
Nimanheminda,LouiseHoffman,andMacAndrewSJack,133–160.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Kanbayashi,Ryuujou神林隆淨,1938/1984.Studyonthebodhisattvathought,Volumes1&2菩薩思想的研究上下冊.
Taipei:HuaYuPublishing華宇出版社.Originaledition.TranslatedbyGuoZhongSheng郭忠生andXuYangZhu
許洋主.EditedbyLanJiFu藍吉富.CollectionoftranslationsoffamousworksonBuddhism,Volumes.65-66世界佛
學名著譯叢65、66冊.
Kasulis,ThomasP.2004."Foreword".InJohnW.Schroeder,Skilfulmeans:TheheartofBuddhistcompassion,ix-xvii.USA:
UniversityofHawaiiPress.
Kawamura,LeslieS.2000.Facinglifeanddeath:ABuddhistunderstandingofpalliativecareandbereavement.In
Meetingtheneedsofourclientscreatively:Theimpactofartsandcultureoncaregiving,ed.JohnDMorgan,
105–122.NewYork:BaywoodPublishingCompany.
Kaziyama,Yuuiti梶山雄一.1994.Wisdomofśūnyata:ModerninterpretationofPrajñāSūtra空的智慧:般若經的現代詮
釋.TranslatedbyQiShiJun戚世俊.Taipei:YuanMingPublisher圓明出版社.
Keown,Damien.2000.Buddhism:Averyshortintroduction.UK:OxfordUniversityPress.
Kief,Herman.2006."Zenmeditationasasourcefortherapeuticpractice.".InHorizonsinBuddhistpsychology:Practice,
researchandtheory,ed.GMaurits,TKwee,KennethJGergen,andKoshikawaFusako,119–139.Ohio:ATaos
InstitutePublication.
Kirmayer,LaurenceJ.1992.Thebody’sinsistenceonmeaning:Metaphoraspresentationandrepresentationinillness
experience.MedicalAnthropologyQuarterlyno.6(4):323–346.
Klein,JoelP.1976.Rationalityandhumourincounselling.CanadianJournalofCounsellingandPsychotherapy
no.11(1):28–32.
Kopp,RichardR.1995.Metaphortherapy:Usingclient-generatedmetaphorsinpsychotherapy.USA:Brunner/Mazel.
Kornfield,Jack.2001.Aftertheecstasy,thelaundry:Howtheheartgrowswiseonthespiritualpath.USA:BantamBooks.
Kornfield,Jack,RamDass,andMokusenMiyuki.1983.Psychologicaladjustmentisnotliberation:Asymposium.In
Awakeningtheheart:East/Westapproachestopsychotherapyandthehealingrelationship,ed.JohnWelwood,
33–42.USA:ShambhalaPublications,Inc.
KrieglsteinWerner,J.2002.Compassion:Anewphilosophyoftheother.Amsterdam:NewYork:Rodopi.
Krishan,Y.1984.TheoriginanddevelopmentoftheBodhisattvadoctrine.EastandWestno.34(1–3):199–232.
Kristeller,Jean,andJonesJames.2006."Amiddleway:Meditationinthetreatmentofcompulsiveeating.".InHorizons
inBuddhistpsychology:Practice,researchandtheory,ed.GMaurits,TKwee,KennethJGergen,andKoshikawa
Fusako,85–100.Ohio:ATaosInstitutePublication.
KweeMaurits,GT,KennethJGergen,andKoshikawaFusako.2006."Generalintroduction:TowardanewBuddhist
psychology.".InHorizonsinBuddhistpsychology:Practice,researchandtheory,ed.GMaurits,TKwee,KennethJ
Gergen,andKoshikawaFusako,20–26.Ohio:ATaosInstitutePublication.
KweeMaurits,GT,andTaamsMarja.2006."AnewBuddhistpsychology:MovingbeyondTheravādaandMahāyāna.".
InHorizonsinBuddhistpsychology:Practice,researchandtheory,ed.GMaurits,TKwee,KennethJGergen,and
KoshikawaFusako,435–478.Ohio:ATaosInstitutePublication.
PaulMarie,LamotteÉtienne.1976/1990.Vimalakīrtinirdeśa(TheteachingofVimalakīrti)維摩詰經序論.Translatedby
GuoZhongSheng郭忠生.Tainan:DiGuangZaZhiShe諦觀雜誌社.
Lan,Mei藍梅.2009.Illustrativeexplanationsonmindsoflovingkindnessandcompassion圖解慈悲心.China:Shaanxi
NormalUniversityPublishingHouse陝西師範大學出版社.
LancasterLewis,R.1981."Thebodhisattvaconcept:AstudyChineseBuddhistcanon.".InBodhisattvadoctrinein
Buddhism,ed.KawanuraLeslie,153–164.Waterloo,Ont.,Canada:PublishedfortheCanadianCorporationfor
StudiesinReligion/CorporationbyWilfredLaurierUniversityPress,c1981.
Laranjeira,Carlos.2013.Theroleofnarrativeandmetaphorinthecancerlifestory:Atheoreticalanalysis.Medicine,
HealthCareandPhilosophyno.16:469–481.doi:10.1007/s11019-012-9435-3.
Larkin,DorothyM,andRothlynPZahourek.1998.Therapeuticstorytellingandmetaphors.HolisticNursingPracticeno.
2(3):45–54.
Leighton,TaigenDaniel.1998.Bodhisattvaarchetypes:ClassicBuddhistguidetoawakeningandtheirmodern
expression.USA:Arkana.
Leung,PamelaPui,andYu.2010.Autobiographicaltimeline:Anarrativeandlifestoryapproachinunderstanding
meaning-makingincancerpatients.Illness,CrisisandLossno.18(2):111–127.
Li,MingFang李明芳.1989.StudyofethicalthoughtsofMahāyānaBuddhism大乘佛教倫理思想研究.Taiwan:
Buddha'sLightPublisher佛光出版社.
Lieu,ThihHua許嬋蕊.2004.TranslationandinterpretationoftheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtrainVietnambyVenerable
ZhiGuangandVenerableCiTong越南智廣、慈通對《維摩詰經》的翻譯與詮釋.Taiwan:ChineseCulture
University中國文化大學.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page49of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Lin,WenPing林文彬.1997.Anexploratorystudyoftheteachingsofnon-dualityintheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtra『維
摩詰經』不二法門義理初探.JournaloftheChineseDepartment,NationalChungHsingUniversity興大中文學報
no.10:145–158.
Lin,ZhaoYi林昭益.1997.Śāriputra'scharacterandroleintheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtra舍利弗在《維摩經》中的性
格與角色.Chung-HwaBuddhistStudies中華佛學研究no.1:1–21.
Long,Darui.2007.BuddhistmedicinesinChineseliterature.HsiLaiJournalofHumanisticBuddhismno.8:200–221.
Lopez,Donalds,andStevenCRockefeller.1987.Intoduction.InTheChristandthebodhisattva,ed.DonaldsLopezJr
andStevenCRockefeller,1–42.USA:StateUniversityofNewYorkPress.
Lovelady,HeatherV.2006.Theroleofsilenceinthecounsellingrelationship.Liverpool:CounsellingTrainingLimited.
LoyDavid,R.2000."Thelackofself:AWesternBuddhistpsychology.".InBuddhisttheology:Criticalreflectionsby
contemporaryBuddhistscholars,ed.JacksonRogerandMakranskyJohn,155–172.UK:Surrey:CurzonPress.
Lukens,EllenP,andWilliamRMcFarlane.2004.Psychoeducationasevidence-basedpractice:Considerationsforpractice,
research,andpolicy.BriefTreatmentandCrisisInterventionno.4(3):205–225.doi:10.1093/brief-treatment/mhh019.
Magid,Barry.2002.Ordinarymind:ExploringthecommongroundofZenandpsychotherapy.Somerville.MA:USA:
WisdomPublications.
Manne-Lewis,Joy.1986.Buddhistpsychology:Aparadigmforthepsychologyofenlightenment.InBeyondtherapy:
TheimpactofEasternreligionsonpsychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed.GuyClaxton,123–138.England:Wisdom
Publications.
ManternachDean,P.2013.Moraldynamicsofstorytelling:Invitingtransformationundated[citedDecember132013].
Availablefromhttp://old.religiouseducation.net/member/06_rea_papers/Manternach_Dean.pdf.
Markus,Hazel,andPaulaNurius.1986.Possibleselves.AmericanPsychologistno.41(9):954–969.
Marmar,CharlesR.1990.Psychotherapyprocessresearch:Progress,dilemmas,andfuturedirections.Journalof
ConsultingandClinicalPsychologyno.58(3):265–272.
Maslow,AbrahamHarold.1943.Atheoryofhumanmotivation.PsychologicalReviewno.50(4):370–396.
Mather,RichardB.1968.VimalakīrtiandgentryBuddhism.HistoryofReligionsno.8(1):60–73.
McClary,Rebecca.2007.Healingthepsychethroughmusic,myth,andritual.PsychologyofAesthetics,Creativity,and
theArtsno.1(3):155–159.doi:10.1037/1931-3896.1.3.155.
McFarlane,WilliamR,LisaDixon,EllenLukens,andAliciaLucksted.2003.Familypsychoeducationandschizophrenia:A
reviewoftheliterature.JournalofMaritalandFamilyTherapyno.29(2):223–245.
McGoldrick,Monica,RandyGerson,andSueliPetry.2008.Genograms:Assessmentandintervention,3rded.NewYork:
W.W.Norton&Company.
McMahon,Mary,andMarkWatson.2013.Storytelling:Craftingidentities.BritishJournalofGuidanceandCounselling
no.41(3):277–286.doi:10.1080/03069885.2013.789824.
McRaeJohn,R.2011.TheVimalakīrtiSūtra.NumataCentreforBuddhistTranslationandResearch2004[citedFebruary12011].
Availablefromhttp://www.numatacenter.com/digital/dBET_Srimala_Vimalakirti_2004.pdf.
Miller,RoyAndrew.1984.YamanoeOkura,aKoreanpoetineighth-centuryJapan.JournaloftheAmericanOriental
Societyno.104(4):703–726.
Mizuno,Kogen.2003.BasicBuddhistconcepts.TranslatedbyCharlesS.TerryandRichardL.Gage.Tokyo:Tokyo:Kosei
PublishingCompany.Originaledition,FirstpublishedinJapanesein1965,firstEnglisheditionin1987.
Morales,ArmandoT,BradfordWSheafor,andMalcolmEScot.2007.Socialwork:Aprofessionofmanyfaces,11thed.
USA:PrenticeHall.
MoranCarmen,C.2002."Humorasamoderatorofcompassionfatigue.".InTreatingcompassionfatigue,ed.CharlesR
Figley,139–154.NewYork:Brunner-Routledge.
MyersCharles,E,ToniRTollerud,andJeonMi-Hee.2012."Thepowerofpersonalstorytellingincounselloreducation.".
IdeasandResearchYouCanUse:VISTAS20121(Article19):1–6.
NagaoGadjin,Masato.1981."TheBodhisattvareturnstothisworld.".InBodhisattvadoctrineinBuddhism,ed.
KawanuraLeslie,61–74.Waterloo,Ont.,Canada:PublishedfortheCanadianCorporationforStudiesinReligion/
CorporationbyWilfredLaurierUniversityPress,c1981.
Nakamura,Hajime中村元.1959.1997.Lovingkindnessandcompassion慈悲.TranslatedbyJiangZhiDi江支地.Hong
Kong:HaiXiaoPublishingCompanyLimited海嘯出版事業有限公司.Originaledition,Originalpublishedin.
Neff,KristinD.2003.Self-compassion:Analternativeconceptualizationofahealthyattitudetowardoneself.Selfand
Identityno.2:85–101.
Neff,Kristin D.2004.Self-compassionandpsychologicalwell-being.ConstructivismintheHumanSciencesno.
9(2):27–37.
Neff,KristinD,KristinLKirkpatrick,andStephanieSRude.2007.Self-compassionandadaptivepsychologicalfunctioning.
JournalofResearchinPersonalityno.41:139–154.doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2006.03.004.
Neff,KristinD,andRoosVonk.2009.Self-compassionversusglobalself-esteem:Twodifferentwaysofrelatingto
oneself.JournalofPersonalityno.77(1):23–50.doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2008.00537.x.
Ng,ChiKwong吳智光.1994.SpiritofcounsellinginBuddhism佛教的輔導精神.AsianJournalofCounselling
亞洲輔導學報no.3(1&2):25–34.
Oi,Shojo.1982.Theaspectofgratitude.ThePacificWorldJournal:JournalofInstituteofBuddhistStudiesno.1(1):9–10.
Parry,StephenJ,GARichard,andJones.1986.Beyondillusioninthepsychotherapeuticenterprise.InBeyondtherapy:The
impactofEasternreligionsonpsychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed.GuyClaxton,175–192.England:WisdomPublications.
Patsiopoulos,AriadneT,andMarlaJBuchanan.2011.Thepracticeofself-compassionincounselling:AnarrativeInquiry.
ProfessionalPsychology:ResearchandPracticeno.42(4):301–307.doi:10.1037/a0024482.
Patton,MichaelQuinn.2002.Qualitativeresearchandevaluationmethods,3rded.California:SagePublications,Inc.
Phillips,James,andJamesMorley.2003.Introduction.InImaginationanditspathologies,ed.JamesPhillipsandJames
Morley,1–18.USA:MassachusettsIinstituteofTechnologyPress.
Podvoll,Ed,andJeffFortuna.2008.Psychotherapyasanexpressionofthespiritualjourneybasedontheexperienceof
shunyata.InBrilliantsanity:Buddhistapproachestopsychotherapy,ed.FrancisJKaklauskas,SusanNimanheminda,
LouiseHoffman,andMacAndrewSJack,87–98.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page50of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Ponce,DanielE.2006.IsBuddhismpsychotherapy?InBuddhismandpeace:Theoryandpractice,ed.ChanjuMun,
331–339.Hawaii:JungBupSaBuddhistTempleofHawaii.
Ponlop,Dzogchen.2008."Forward:Awakeningmind’spotential."InBrilliantsanity:Buddhistapproachesto
psychotherapy,editedbyFrancisJ.Kaklauskas,SusanNimanheminda,LouiseHoffmanandMacAndrewS.Jack,
xiii-xvii.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Prendergast,JohnJ.2003a.Introduction.InThesacredmirror:Non-dualwisdomandpsychotherapy,ed.JohnJ
Prendergast,PeterFenner,andSheilaKrystal,1–22.Minnesota:ParagonHouse.
Prendergast,JohnJ.2003b.Thesacredmirror:Beingtogether.InThesacredmirror:Non-dualwisdomandpsychotherapy,
ed.JohnJPrendergast,PeterFenner,andSheilaKrystal,89–115.Minnesota:ParagonHouse.
Pruett,GordonE.1987.ThemeaningandendofsufferingforFreudandtheBuddhisttradition.USA:UniversityPressof
America,Inc.
Punter,David.2007.Metaphor.NewYork:Routledge.
Pye,Michael.2003.Skilfulmeans:AconceptinMahāyānaBuddhism,2nded.London:Routledge.
Quinn,Adam.2008.Aperson-centeredapproachtothetreatmentofcombatveteranswithposttraumaticstress
disorder.JournalofHumanisticPsychologyno.48(4):458–476.doi:10.1177/0022167808316247.
Rahula,Walpola.1988.ThesocialteachingsoftheBuddha.EditedbyFredEppstenier,Thepathofcompassion:Writings
onsociallyengagedBuddhism.California:ParallaxPress.
Rahula,Walpola.2001.WhattheBuddhataught.Taipei:TorchofWisdom.Originaledition,Firstpublishedin1959.
London:TheGordonFraserGalleryLimited.
Raskin,PatriciaM.1996.Rogers’therapycases:Viewsfromwithinandwithout.InThepsychotherapyofCarlRogers:
Casesandcommentary,ed.BarryAFarber,DeboraCBrink,andPatriciaMRaskin,133–141.USA:TheGuilfordPress.
Rawlinson,Andrew.1986.ThethreefacetsofBuddha-mind.InBeyondtherapy:TheimpactofEasternreligionson
psychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed.GuyClaxton,138–152.England:WisdomPublications.
Ray,Colette.1986.WesternpsychologyandBuddhistteachings:Convergencesanddivergences.InBeyondtherapy:
TheimpactofEasternreligionsonpsychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed.GuyClaxton,17–29.England:Wisdom
Publications.
Reichenbach,BruceR.1990.Thelawofkarma:Aphilosophicalstudy.USA:UniversityofHawaiiPress.
Riessman,Frank.1965.The“helper”therapyprinciple.JournaloftheNationalAssociationofSocialWorkno.10(2):
27–32.
Rogers,CarlRansom.1946.Significantaspectsofclient-centredtherapy.AmericanPsychologistno.1:415–422.
Rogers,CarlRansom.1947.Someobservationsontheorganizationofpersonality.AmericanPsychologistno.2:358–368.
Rogers,CarlRansom.1957.Thenecessaryandsufficientconditionsoftherapeuticpersonalitychange.Journalof
ConsultingPsychologyno.21:95–103.
Rogers,CarlRansom.1959.Atheoryoftherapy,personality,andinterpersonalrelationships,asdevelopedintheclient-
centredframework.InPsychology:Astudyofascience,StudyI,Conceptualandsystematic,ed.SigmundKoch,
184–256.USA:McGraw-HillBookCompany,Inc.
Rogers,CarlRansom.1964."TowardaScienceoftheperson."InBehaviorismandphenomenology:Contrastingbasesfor
modernpsychology,editedbyT.W.Wann.Chicago:TheUnviersityofChicagoPress.
Rogers,CarlRansom,andAlanNelson.1977.Thepowerofthepowerless.InCarlRogersonpersonalpower,ed.Carl
Rogers,186–204.NewYork:DelacortePress.
Rogers,Robert.1978.Metaphor:Apsychoanalyticview.USA:UniversityofCaliforniaPress.
Roshi,JoshuSasaki.1983.Whereistheself?InAwakeningtheheart:East/Westapproachestopsychotherapyandthe
healingrelationship,ed.JohnWelwood,70–74.USA:ShambhalaPublications,Inc.
Rubin,JeffreyB.2009.Deepeningpsychoanalyticlistening:ThemarriageofBuddhaandFreud.TheAmericanJournal
ofPsychoanalysisno.69:93–105.
Safren,StevenA,GaryHollander,TrevorAHart,andRichardGHeimberg.2001.Cognitive-behaviouraltherapywith
lesbian,gay,andbisexualyouth.CognitiveandBehaviouralPracticeno.8:215–223.
Salzberg,Sharon.2009."Foreward."InThemindfulpathtoself-compassion:Freeingyourselffromdestructivethoughtsand
emotions,editedbyChristopherK.Germer,ix-x.NewYork:TheGuilfordPress.
Salzberg,Sharon.2010.Theforceofkindness:ChangeyourLifewithloveandcompassion.Canada:SoundsTrue,Inc.
Sasaki,LaVerne.1982.Theaspectoflifeofmeaningandgrowth.ThePacificWorldJournal:JournalofInstituteof
BuddhistStudiesno.1(1):11–12.
Schneider,KirkJ,andBenjaminTong.2009.Existentialism,Taoism,andBuddhism:Twoviews.InExistentialpsychology
East–west,ed.LouisHoffman,MarkYang,FrancisJKaklauskas,andAlbertChan,165–176.USA:Universityofthe
RockiesPress.
Schroeder,JohnWilliam.2001.Skillfulmeans:TheheartofBuddhistcompassion.USA:UniversityofHawai'iPress.
Schwabenland,Christina.2012.Metaphoranddialecticinmanagingdiversity.NewYork:PalgraveMacmillan.
Sheng-yen,Master聖嚴法師.1988.Practiceinthesecularworld:SixlecturesontheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtra修行在紅
塵:維摩經六講.Taiwan:DharmaDrumCorporation法鼓山文化事業有限公司.
Shi,XinTian釋心田.2009.IllustrativeexplanationsontheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtra圖解維摩詰經.China:Zijincheng
PublishingCompany紫禁城出版社.
Silverberg,Farrell.2008.Resonanceandexchangeincontemplativepsychotherapy.InBrilliantsanity:Buddhist
approachestopsychotherapy,ed.FrancisJKaklauskas,SusanNimanheminda,LouisHoffman,andMacAndrewS
Jack,239–257.USA:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Slater,Peter.1981."TherelevanceoftheBodhisattvaconceptfortoday.".InBodhisattvadoctrineinBuddhism,ed.
KawanuraLeslie,1–15.Waterloo,Ont.,Canada:PublishedfortheCanadianCorporationforStudiesinReligion/
CorporationbyWilfredLaurierUniversityPress,c1981.
Smith,JonathanA,PaulFlowers,andMichaelLarkin.2009.Interpretativephenomenologicalanalysis:Theory,method
andresearch.UK:SAGEPublicationsLimited.
Snow,MarilynS,RuthOuzts,ErinEMartin,andHeatherHelm.2005.Creativemetaphorsoflifeexperiencesseeninplay
therapy.VISTASOnlineno.Article12:63–65.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page51of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Solberg,Hege,GerdENysether,andAslakSteinsbekk.2012.Patients’experienceswithmetaphorsinasolution-focused
approachtoimproveself-managementskills:Aqualitativestudy.ScandinavianJournalofPublicHealthno.40:398–401.
doi:10.1177/1403494812449925.
Soothill,WilliamEdward.1913.ThethreereligionsofChina:LecturesdeliveredatOxford.London:Hodder
andStoughton.
Stone,Dan.2008.Woundedhealing:Exploringthecircleofcompassioninthehelpingrelationship.TheHumanistic
Psychologistno.36:45–51.doi:10.1080/08873260701415587.
Storhoff,Gary,andJohnWhalen-Bridge.2010.Introduction:AmericanBuddhismasawayoflife.InAmericanBuddhism
asawayoflife,ed.GaryStorhoffandJohnWhalen-Bridge,1–10.USA:StateUniversityofNewYorkPress.
Sugamura,Genji,andWarrenScott.2006."Conjoiningparadigms:Adissolution-orientedapproachtopsychotherapy.".
InHorizonsinBuddhistpsychology:Practice,researchandtheory,ed.GMaurits,TKwee,KennethJGergen,and
KoshikawaFusako,379–397.Ohio:ATaosInstitutePublication.
Sugioka,Takanori.2009.Themetaphorof“ocean”inShinran.PacificWorld:JournaloftheInstituteofBuddhistStudies
no.3(11):219–228.
SuzukiBeatrice,Lane.1938/1981a.MahāyānaBuddhism.London:GeorgeAllen&Unwin.Originaledition,Original
published1938.
SuzukiDaisetz,Teitaro.1938/1981b."Introduction.".InMahāyānaBuddhism,ed.SuzukiBeatriceLane,1–17.London:
GeorgeAllen&Unwin.
Suzuki,DaisetzTeitaro,ErichFromm,andRichardDeMartino.1963.ZenBuddhismandpsychoanalysis.NewYork:Grove
PressInc.
Szkredka,Slawomir.2007.ReasonasemployedbytheBuddha:Itsoriginalityandmysticalfoundations.HsiLaiJournal
ofHumanisticBuddhismno.8:181–200.
Tada,Kakuyei.1982.Theaspectofgreatcompassion.ThePacificWorldJournal:JournalofInstituteofBuddhistStudies
no.1(1):6–7.
Taels,Johan.2011.Humouraspracticalwisdom.InHumourandreligion:Challengesandambiguities,ed.HansGeybels
andWalterVanHerck,22–34.NewYork:Continuum.
Tam,ShekWing談錫永.1995.AstudyofVajrayānaemergedintheVimalakīrtiNirdeśaSūtra維摩經旨密義初探.Nei
Ming內明no.284(November):3–18.
Teasdale,JohnD,ZindelSegal,JMark,andGWilliams.1995.Howdoescognitivetherapypreventdepressiverelapse
andwhyshouldattentionalcontrol(mindfulness)traininghelp?BehaviourResearchTherapyno.33(1):25–39.
Thigpen,MorrisL,ThomasJBeauclair,GeorgeMKeiser,MichaelGuevara,andRachelMestad.2007.Cognitive
behaviouraltreatment:Areviewanddiscussionforcorrectionsprofessionals.USA:U.S.DepartmentofJustice,
NationalInstituteofCorrections.
Thompson,BrianL,andJenniferWaltz.2010.Mindfulnessandexperientialavoidanceaspredictorsofposttraumatic
stressdisorderavoidancesymptomseverity.JournalofAnxietyDisordersno.24:409–415.
Thubten,ChodronVenerable.2008.Dealingwithlife'sissues,workingwithanger:ABuddhistperspective.Taiwan:The
CorporateBodyoftheBuddhaEducationalFoundation.
Thurman,Robert.1998.Innerrevolution:Lifeliberty,andthepursuitofrealhappiness.NewYork:RiverheadBooks.
Thurman,RobertAF.2005.Foreward.InInAcalltocompassion:BringingBuddhistpracticesoftheheartintothesoulof
psychology,editedbyAuraGlaser,xi-xii.USA:Nicolas-Hays,Inc.
Townsend,Patricia,andFrancisJKaklauskas.2008.Therapistsubjectivityincontemplativepsychotherapy.InBrilliant
sanity:Buddhistapproachestopsychotherapy,ed.FrancisJKaklauskas,SusanNimanheminda,LouiseHoffman,and
MacAndrewSJack,39–64.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Trungpa,Chogyam.1983.Becomingafullhumanbeing.InAwakeningtheheart:East/westapproachesto
psychotherapyandthehealingrelationship,ed.JohnWelwood,126–131.USA:ShambhalaPublications,Inc.
Herck,Van,andWalter.2011.Humour,religionandvulnerability.InHumourandreligion:Challengesandambiguities,
ed.HansGeybelsandWalterVanHerck,191–203.NewYork:Continuum.
Walker,Robert.2008.Adisciplineofinquisitiveness:Thebody-speech-mindapproachtocontemplativesupervision.In
Brilliantsanity:Buddhistapproachestopsychotherapy,ed.FrancisJKaklauskas,SusanNimanheminda,LouiseHoffman,
andMacAndrewSJack,175–194.Colorado:UniversityoftheRockiesPress.
Wallace,BAlan.1999.Boundlessheart:Thefourimmeasurables.EditedbyZaraHoushmand.Ithaca,NewYork:Snow
LionPublications.
Wallace,BAlan.2010.Thefourimmeasurables:Practicestoopentheheart.NewYork:SnowLionPublications.
Wallace,BAlan,andShaunaLShapiro.2006.Mentalbalanceandwell-being:BuildingbridgesbetweenBuddhismand
Westernpsychology.AmericanPsychologistno.61(7):690–701.doi:10.1037/0003-066X.61.7.690.
Walley,MalcolmR.1986.ApplicationsofBuddhisminmentalhealthcare.InBeyondtherapy:Theimpactof
Easternreligionsonpsychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed. GuyClaxton,195–216.England:Wisdom
Publications.
Walsh,Trish.2010.Thesolution-focusedhelper:Ethicsandpracticeinhealthandsocialcare.UK:OpenUniversityPress.
Watson,Burton(Translated).1997.TheVimalakīrtiSūtra.NewYork:ColumbiaUniversityPress.
Watson,Gay.1998.Theresonanceofemptiness:ABuddhistinspirationforacontemporarypsychotherapy.UK:Curzon.
Welwood,Jennifer.2003.Dancingwithformandemptinessinintimaterelationship.InThesacredmirror:Nondualwisdom
andpsychotherapy,ed.JohnJPrendergast,PeterFenner,andSheilaKrystal,290–302.USA:ParagonHouse.
Welwood,John.1983.Onpsychologyandmeditation.InAwakeningtheheart:East/westapproachestopsychotherapy
andthehealingrelationship,ed.JohnWelwood,43–54.USA:ShambhalaPublications,Inc.
Whipps,JudyD.2010.Touchedbysuffering:AmericanpragmatismandengagedBuddhism.InAmericanBuddhismas
awayoflife,ed.GaryStorhoffandJohnWhalen-Bridge,101–123.USA:StateUnviersityofNewYorkPress.
Wicks,Robert.2007.ArthurSchopenhauer.StandardofEncyclopediaofPhilosophy2007[citedDecember252010].
Availablefromhttp://plato.stanford.edu/entries/schopenhauer.
Wilkins,Julia,andAmyJanelEisenbraun.2009.Humortheoriesandthephysiologicalbenefitsoflaughter.Holistic
NursingPracticeno.23(6):349–354.

ChengandTseInternationalJournalofDharmaStudies2014,2:6 Page52of52
http://www.internationaljournaldharmastudies.com/content/2/1/6
Williams,JeannettaG,ShannonKStark,andEricaEFoster.2008.Starttodayortheverylastday?Therelationships
amongself-compassion,motivation,andprocrastination.AmericanJournalofPsychologicalResearchno.
4(1):37–44.
Williams,Paul.1998.Altruismandreality:StudiesinthephilosophyoftheBodhicaryāvatāra.UK:CurzonPress.
Witztum,Eliezer,OnnovanderHart,andBarbaraFriedman.1988.Theuseofmetaphorsinpsychotherapy.Journalof
ContemporaryPsychotherapyno.18(4):270–290.
Wray,Elizabeth,ClareRosenfield,DorothyBailey,andJoeWray.1979.TenlivesoftheBuddha:Siamesetemple
paintingsandJatakatales.USA:Weatherhill,Inc.
Wray,Ian.1986.Buddhismandpsychotherapy:ABuddhistperspective.InBeyondtherapy:TheimpactofEastern
religionsonpsychologicaltheoryandpractice,ed.GuyClaxton,155–172.England:WisdomPublications.
Wright,DalesS.2009.Thesixperfections:Buddhismandthecultivationofcharacter.NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress.
Yalom,IrvinD.1980.Existentialpsychotherapy.USA:BasicBooks.
Yamaguchi,Susumu山口益.1999/2006.Historyofprajñāthought般若思想史.TranslatedbyXiaoPing肖平andYang
JinPing楊金萍.China:ShanghaiChineseClassicsPublishingHouse上海古籍出版社.
Yin-Shun,Master印順導師.1979.OriginofMahāyānaBuddhism大乘佛教導源.InDevelopmentofMahāyāna
Buddhism大乘佛教之發展,ed.ZhangManTaoand張曼濤,1–15.Taipei:MahāyānaCulturePublishing大乘文化
出版社.
You,HueiJean尤惠貞.1999.PhilosophyofTiantaiandpraxisofBuddhism天臺哲學與佛教實踐.Taiwan:Nanhua
University南華大學.
Young-Eisendrath,Polly.2008.Thetransformationofhumansuffering:Aperspectivefrompsychotherapyand
Buddhism.PsychoanalyticInquiryno.28:541–549.
Zheng,JinDe鄭金德.1986.PrinciplesofmodernBuddhism現代佛學原理.Taipei:DongDaBookCompany東大圖
書公司.
Zopa,LamaRinpoche.2012.Bodhisattvaattitude:Howtodedicateyourlifetoothers.Boston:LamaYesheWisdom
Archive.
doi:10.1186/s40613-014-0006-9
Citethisarticleas:ChengandTse:Abodhisattva-spirit-orientedcounsellingframework:inspiredbyVimalakīrti
wisdom.InternationalJournalofDharmaStudies20142:6.
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and benefi t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the fi eld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com