International Journal of Humanities & Social Science Studies (IJHSSS)
A Peer-Reviewed Bi-monthly Bi-lingual Research Journal
ISSN: 2349-6959 (Online), ISSN: 2349-6711 (Print)
Impact Factor: 6.8
Volume-XI, Issue-V, September 2025, Page No. 73-79
Published by Scholar Publications, Sribhumi, Assam, India, 788711
Website: http://www.ijhsss.com
DOI: 10.29032/ijhsss.vol.11.issue.05W.133
Ethical Ecology in the Jatakamala of Aryasura: A Bird’s Eye View
Dr. Swapan Mal
Asst. Professor, Dept. of Sanskrit, Raiganj University, Uttar Dinajpur, West Bengal, India
Received: 24.08.2025; Accepted: 16.09.2025; Available online: 30.09.2025
©2025 The Author(s). Published by Scholar Publication. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Abstract
The eternal history of India, which has been inherent in Indian culture, civilization and literature
since ancient times, is based on Sanskrit literature. In the Vedic and post-Vedic periods, the perfect
reflection of spiritual elements, philosophical elements and humanistic elements are observed. There
is a gap in the origin and development of theism over time. Similarly, the spirit of the ten
incarnations of Lord Vishnu is also seen in Indian literature, especially in the lyrical poem Gita
Govinda by the poet Jayadeva. There is a mention of Lord Buddha as the incarnation of Kesava or
Vishnu. It is said that: केशवधृतबुद्धशरीर जय जगदीश हरे।i. In the Jataka literature or the Avadana
literature based on Buddhist literature, 34 stories of the previous birth of that Buddha have been told
from the mouth of Lord Buddha. These stories emerged from the great compassion of the
Bodhisattva. Compassion is the most excellent thing in the morality of human hearts. There,
compassion is at the root of the stories told by the Bodhisattvas. These stories are also known as
Avadana because they are indicative of the generous character of the Bodhisattva. At the beginning
of all the stories it is stated about the purpose of the Jataka: as it is heard, that is, these stories are
heard. Various stories have been told simply and pleasantly for the salvation of all beings.
Keywords: Ethics, Ecology, Buddha, Buddhism, Jataka.
Introduction:
The basic doctrines of the Buddhist sect are the importance of wisdom and compassion, the
impermanence of the world, the theory of transience, and the theory of perception and
productivity. According to these doctrines, Buddhists accept that through the cycle of
birth, beings assume bodies in the form of human beings from human to human or from
non-human to human according to their repeated actions. But the basic theme of the Jataka
is that if beings do their work through wisdom, compassion, friendship, love, charity, etc.,
then they will attain Buddhism.
The collection of the Jataka story is in the Khuddaka Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka within
Tripitaka. The collection edited by Acharya Paumbol contains 544 Jataka stories. The
Chulla Niddesha, written in the second century BC, contains 500 stories. The Chinese
tourist Mr. Fa-Hiyen saw a Jataka story numbering 500 in Lanka in the fifth century AD. In
Gupta period, the Buddhist text mentions the number of the Jataka story is 34. The
Mahavastu mentions the story of the 80th Jataka. According to the Buddhist Theravada
tradition, the number of births is 550. However, according to the term Panchajatakashatani
Volume-XI, Issue-V September 2025 73

Ethical Ecology in the Jatakamala of Aryasura: A Bird’s Eye View Swapan Mal
in the Chulla Niddesha Grantha and according to Buddhism, the number of Jatakas has
Acharya-Aryashura edited a collection in Sanskrit called Jatakamala based on the account
of the previous birth of Lord Buddha. According to the original Pali text, thirty-four stories
are contained in this book by Aryashura. But he also made some changes to the original
Jataka literature for his purposes. The Jatakas which are contained in this book are-
व्याघ्रीजातकम्, शशशबजातकम्, कुल्माषशिण्डीजातकम्, श्रेशिजातकम्, अशवषह्य-श्रेशिजातकम्,
शशजातकम्, अगस्त्यजातकम्, मैत्रीबलजातकम्, शवश्वन्तरजातकम्, यज्ञजातकम्, शक्रजातकम्,
ब्राह्मणजातकम्, उन्मादयन्तीजातकम्, सुिारगजातकम्, म्स्तयजातकम्, वर्त्तकािोतकजातकम्,
कुम्भजातकम्, अिुत्रजातकम्, शबसजातकम्, श्रेशिजातकम्, चुडुबोशधजातकम्, हसं जातकम्,
महाबोशधजातकम्, महाकशिजातकम्, शरभजातकम्, रुरुजातकम्, महाकशिजातकम्, क्षाशन्तजातकम,्
ब्रह्मजातकम्, हशस्ततजातकम्, सुतसोमजातकम्, अयोगृहजातकम्, मशहषजातकम्, शतित्रजातकम्।
The Jatakamala in Sanskrit by Mr. Aryashura, based on Buddhism and philosophy, is
very famous. The basic theme of this book is also love, friendship, compassion, charity and
faith. The Jatakamala teaches that it is necessary to abandon pleasurable objects such as
lover and gold, which are suffering, and to fix the mind on objects such as knowledge and
compassion. This teaching is useless for the living beings of society because it reminds us
of Lord Buddha and enlightens us with love, friendship, compassion, faith, charity and so
on.
The Jatakamala composed by Aryashura contains a Jataka rich in composition
distinctive in prose and verse. This Jatakamala was written by the poet Aryasura according
to the Panchatantra of the famous poet Vishnu Sharma. Just as in the Panchatantra, there is
a system of composition, subject matter and moral values, so it is seen here in the
Jatakamala. The main characters in this Jatakamala are – a deity, yaksha, ghost, elephant,
deer, monkey, tiger, lion, buffalo, swan, fish etc. The advice given in this Jatakamala is that
violence should never be committed against all living beings and that one should show
equality towards all living beings by relying on feelings of compassion, mercy, friendship,
love and charity.
The word jataka is derived by the addition of the suffix kta in the sense of fidelity with
the verb Jan followed by the suffix kta in the sense of self. That is, the Jataka means the
story of past birth. When beings perform good deeds for many births, they attain
liberation. Lord Buddha was also born many times. In that birth, when he developed good
qualities in his conduct and practiced good deeds properly, he attained enlightenment, that
is, he became known as a Bodhisattva. This is not possible in one birth; this is the fruit of
the practice of good deeds in many births. The word Bodhisattva means Buddhahood and
the word Sattva means being. Yet, there is disagreement over the definition of the word
"sattva" in this regard. According to Mr. Moniar Williams, the word Sattva means
intelligence, character, knowledge, and nature. Another meaning is creature, a living thing.
The Bodhisattva is that which enlightens the beings, as staged by the author of the
Samadhiraja Sutra. Mr. P. Ghosh says that Bodhi is Sattva because of the dependence on
Sattva by the desire for great grace. Others say that the word Sattva means soul, mind,
senses and consciousness. Mr. Prajnakaramati has said that there is Sattva in
enlightenment, that is, the Bodhisattva is the intention. Another meaning is that the womb,
the unknown, the unmanifest.ii This stage of enlightenment is liberating for beings.
Another name for the Jatakamala is the Bodhisattvavadanamala. The word avadana means
Volume-XI, Issue-V September 2025 74

Ethical Ecology in the Jatakamala of Aryasura: A Bird’s Eye View Swapan Mal
good deeds. Therefore, the meaning of the Bodhisattva is the story of the gifts of the
previous birth of Lord Buddha and the series of stories of good deeds.
Lord Buddha was omniscient and remembered his caste. In the stage of Bodhisattva, he
had understood all the history of his previous birth. When the Bodhisattva was adorned as
a king of Kosala, he once remembered that he had been a worker in his previous life. In
that life, he provided food for the monks with a heart of faith. As a result of his pious deed
called the arrangement of food, the Bodhisattva in his next life attained the rank of the
ruler of Kosala. In the Kulmashapindijataka, the Bodhisattva said:
सुप्तप्रबुद्ध इव जाशतमनुस्तमराशम
यस्तयाशमहवै नगरे भृतकोऽहमासम्।
शीलाशन्वतोऽशि धनमात्रसमुशरितेभ्यः
कमातशभराधनसमर्जततदीनवृशर्त्ः।।
सोऽह ं भृतत ं िररभवश्रमदन्ै यशालां
त्राणाशया्स्तवयमवृशर्त्भयाशिशवक्षुः।
शभक्षार्थतनश्च चतुरः श्रमणानिश्यं
वश्येशन्ियाननुगताशनव शभक्षलु क्ष्मम्या।।
तेभ्यः प्रसादमृदनु ा मनसा प्रणम्य
कुल्माषमात्रकमदां प्रयतः स्तवगेह।े
तस्तयाङ्कुरोदय इवैष यदन्यराज-
चूडाप्रभाश्चरणरेणुषु मे शनषक्ाः।।iii
The wife of the king of Kosala in the form of a Bodhisattva also heard the story of his
previous birth. In her previous life she served a sage with food while working as a maid.
As a result of his pious deeds, she became the queen of the king of Kosala in her next life. It
is stated therein:
बाल्येऽनुभूतशमव त्समनुस्तमराशम
दासी सती यदहमुद्धृतभक्मेकम्।
क्षीणास्रवाय मुनये शवनयने दत्त्वा
सुप्तेव तत्र समवािशमह प्रबोधम्।।
एत्स्तमराशम कुशलं नरदवे ! येन
्वन्नाथतामुिगताशस्तम समं िृशथव्या।
क्षीणास्रवेषु न कृतं तनु नाम ककशि-
कद्यक्वानशस यथैव मुशनस्ततथैव।।iv
In this way, in this Kulmashapindijataka, the Bodhisattva taught that all charity assumes
the form of great deeds through pious actions, the lack of compassion, the absence of a
peaceful mind, the absence of trust, the absence of love, compassion, and friendship.
Charity is never lost by thieves, kings, fire, water, etc. Liberation from the enemies of lust,
anger and greed is obtained by proper charity. Charity is the chief reliance to save from the
world of suffering. Therefore, giving is enjoyable for everyone. Everything is possible by
giving for pious deeds. A being who never gives charity is not worthy of sight. A miserable
person is condemned in society. There are more painful things in this world. Therefore, if a
thing is given without lust for the benefit of others, instead of a painful thing, that action is
praise worthy in society. As stated in the Jatakamala
Volume-XI, Issue-V September 2025 75

Ethical Ecology in the Jatakamala of Aryasura: A Bird’s Eye View Swapan Mal
अल्िस्तयाशि शुभस्तय शवस्ततरशममं दष्टृ ्वा शविाकशश्रयः
स्तया्को नाम न दानशीलशवशधना िुण्यकक्रयात्िरः।
नैव िष्टुमशि क्षमः स िुरुषः ियातप्तशवर्त्ोऽशि सन्
यः काितण्यतशमस्रयावृतमशतनातप्नोशत दानैयतशः।।
्यक्व्यं शववशेन यन्न च तथा कस्तमैशचदथातय यत ्
तन्न्यायेन धनं ्यजन्यकद गुणं कशि्समुद्भावयेत्।
कोऽसौ तत्र भजते म्सरिथं जानन्गुणानां रस ं
प्री्याद्या शवशवधाश्च की्यतनसु ृता दानप्रशतिागुणाः।।
दानं नाम महाशनधानमनुगं चौराद्यसाधारण ं
दानं म्सरलोभदोषरजसः प्रक्षालनं चते सः।
संसाराध्विररश्रमािनयनं दानं सुख ं वाहन ं
दानं नैकसुखोिधानसुमुखं सशन्मत्रमा्यशन्तकम्।।v
Lord Buddha in his previous life was devoted to affection for all living beings. In the stage
of Bodhisattva, he was very dear to everyone for his holy conduct, restraint of the senses,
contentment, and compassion and so on. As stated in the Jatakamala:
आचारशुद्धया शनभतृ ेशन्िय्वा्सन्तोषयोगा्करुणागुणाच्च।
असंस्ततुतस्तयाशि जनस्तय लोके सोऽभूत् शप्रयस्ततस्तय यथैव लोकः।।vi
For this reason, even the violent animals of the forest do not show violence towards the
Bodhisattva. Those animals abandon their violent behavior and roam the forest like
ascetics. And it is said in the Jatakamala:
मैत्रीमयेन प्रशमेन तस्तय शवस्तयशन्दनेवानुिरीतशचर्त्ाः।
िरस्तिरिोहशनवृर्त्भावास्ततिशस्तववद ्व्यालमृगा शवचेरुः।।vii
As a result, the Bodhisattva Lord Buddha has demonstrated kindness, mercy, love,
generosity, faith, etc. for all beings. That is the most important thing in our lives. As stated
in the Jataka:
तदवे ं सवतसत्त्वेष्टवकारणिरमव्सलस्तवभावः सवतभूता्मभूतः िूवतजन्मस्तवशि स भगवाशनशत
बुद्ध े भगवशत िरः प्रसादः कायतः। जातप्रसादश्चै बुद्ध े भगवशत िरा
प्रीशतरु्िादशयतव्या।...एव ं दष्टु करशतसमुदानीत्वात् करुणावणेशि वारयमेव ं
स्तवभावाशतशयस्तय शनष्टिाकदका िरानुग्रहप्रवृशर्त्हते ुः करुणेशत।viii
Once in his previous life, Lord Buddha, in the stage of Bodhisattva, became king of the
country of Shivi. He was then a very generous king. He was eager to give everything to the
people. Because royal matters would not function properly without charity and humility
develops out of generosity. The king of Shivi was pleased to see the satisfaction in the
hearts of the beggars when the objects requested were given. There it is said in the
Shivijataka:
उदारभावा्करुणागुणाच्च शवर्त्ाशधि्याच्च स राजवयतः।
रेमेऽर्थतनामीशससतशसशद्धहषातदककशल्वष्टशोभाशन मुखाशन िश्यन्।।ix
Later, one day, Lord Indra, disguised as an old Brahmin, asked for the two eyes of
Shiviraja to consider his generosity. Then the ministers, soldiers, relatives and friends
Volume-XI, Issue-V September 2025 76

Ethical Ecology in the Jatakamala of Aryasura: A Bird’s Eye View Swapan Mal
gathered there repeatedly urged him to give them two eyes. But the charitable Shiviraja
ignored that opinion and said:
यदवे यारयते तदवे दद्यान्नानीशससतं प्रीणयतीह दर्त्म्।
ककमुह्यमानस्तय जलेन तोयैः दास्तयाम्यतः प्रार्थततमथतमस्तमै।।x
The king of Shivi gave two eyes to Indra in disguise later, having received this, Indra, the
king of the gods, thought:
अहो धृशतरहो सत्त्वमहो सत्त्वशहतैशषता।
प्र्यक्षमशि कमेद ं करोतीव शवचारणाम्।।xi
Then Indra went back to the king of Shivi with joy and returned him with two eyes
distinguished by many powers. Then there the king spoke about the importance of charity
and that there is no other way for living beings to prosper without charity. Charity is
produced by humility and mercy. So, make money successful by giving it right and
enjoying it right. This is the true means of attaining happiness and fame. Worldly wealth is
fleeting and meaningless. Therefore, that money should be given to the benefit of the
people. Giving money increases wealth and not giving money loses money:
िरानुकम्िाशवनयाशभजाताद्दाना्िरः कोऽभ्युदयाभ्युिायः।
यन्मानुषं चक्षुररहवै दत्त्वा प्राप्तं मयाऽमानुषकदव्यचक्षुः।।
एतशिकद्वा शशबयः प्रदानैभोगेन चाथातन ् सफलीकुरुध्वम्।
लोके िरशस्तमशन्नह चैष िन्थाः कीर्ततप्रधानस्तय सुखोदयस्तय।।
धनस्तय शनःसारलघोः स सारो यद्दीयते लोकशहतोन्मुखेन।
शनधानतां याशत शह दीयमानमदीयमानं शनधनैकशनिम्।।xii
There is a strong significance of the generosity of the Supreme Bodhisattva in the
unbearable Shresthijataka. There, at the beginning of the Shresthijataka, it is heard:
बोशधसत्त्वभूतः ककलायं
भगवान्भाग्याशतशयगुणाद्ु थानसम्िदा
चाशधगतशविुलधनसमृशद्धरशवषमव्यवहारशील्वाल्लोके
बहुमानशनकेतभूतउदाराशभजनवाननके शवद्याशवकल्िाशधगमशवमलतरमशतगुतणमाहा्म्यािा
जा
समुिहृतसम्मानः प्रदानशील्वाल्लोकसाधारणशवभवः श्रेिी वभूव।xiii
According to the Avishahyashreshthijataka, In a past life, Lord Bodhisattva was a wealthy
best man who possessed the virtues of renunciation, character, family, knowledge, and
humility. Being a man of great wealth, he was always engaged in hospitality and charity
and he became known as Insufferable because he was free from the vices of miserliness
and others. It is heard that:
बोशधसत्त्वभूतः ककलायं भगवांस्त्यागशीलकुलशवनयश्रुतज्ञानाशवस्तमयाकदगुणसमुकदतो
धनदायमानो शवभवसम्िदा सवातशतशथ्वादनुिरतदानसत्रो लोकशहताथतप्रवृर्त्ो दायकश्रेिः
श्रेिी बभूव। मा्सयातकददोषाशवषह्योऽशवषह्य इशत प्रकाशनामा।xiv
In the Sasajataka, Benevolence is seen as before. There, in his previous life, the Supreme
Buddha appeared in the form of a rabbit in a certain forest in the stage of Bodhisattva. The
Volume-XI, Issue-V September 2025 77

Ethical Ecology in the Jatakamala of Aryasura: A Bird’s Eye View Swapan Mal
character of that rabbit reflected the quality of Sattva, energy, contentment, and the quality
of non-violence of body, verbal and mental. The rabbit also shows the quality of
hospitality. In that birth, Indra, the king of the Gods, once went there in the guise of a poor
Brahmin to test the hospitality of the rabbit. Then the rabbit gave up his body and accepted
the hospitality. At that time the Brahmin was refused such hospitality by the rabbit
because of his friendship was from the past. Then the rabbit said:
दये ं च कद्साप्रवणं च शचर्त्ं भवशिधेनाशतशथना च योगः।
नावाप्तुमेतशद्ध सुखेन शक्यं त्स्तयादमोघं भवदाश्रयान्मे।।xv
Once, the Supreme Buddha manifested in the Tapovana forest as Agastya the sage while in
the Bodhisattva stage. Then even in him, the characteristics of hospitality and generosity
had appeared. For the welfare of the people, he became known as an equal of such
character. If such charity, hospitality, greed, hatred and other dharma are soaked in the life
of a sage, then it is necessary to awaken this dharma in the society of the world. It is also
elevated in the rejoicing of charity, in the reproach of greed, hatred, delusion, childhood, in
the virtue of contact with welfare friends, in the story of satisfaction, and the greatness of
the Tathagata.
Conclusion:
The Jatakas reflected in the Jatakamala contain many precepts for the welfare of the people,
for the benefit of others and the education of all people. Everything that the Lord Buddha
experienced in the stage of Bodhisattva in his previous births is heard in various Jatakas.
What is found in this Jatakamala is of supreme purpose for human beings like a great herb.
The nectar spoken by the Lord Buddha in the form of a thinker or transcending the last
place of experience and thought is certainly regarded as the supreme medicine. For this
reason, the Jatakamala is very important. What was the stage of mind, body, world,
suffering, self-reliance, the pursuit of manhood, greed, jealousy, hatred, morality, etc. in
the society of that time? What kind of legal system was there in society? What was the style
of narrative in society at that time? How was the use of logic in the debate? How was
addiction prevalent among men then? How was the crookedness of politics? What is the
nature of hospitality? The correct answers to all such questions as to what was the
importance of charity, humility, pious deeds, virtue and altruism in human society are
found in the Jatakamala. This Jatakamala is said to be from the lips of the great man.
Therefore, the words taught by the Jataka should be accepted and followed for the welfare
of all.xvi
References:
iJayadevakritatagovindam-1/9
ii Jatakamala by Aryashura, Jagdish Chandra Mishra (Editor), Preface, pp. 5-6
iiiKulmashapindijatakam-10-12
ivIbid-17-18
vIbid-19-21
viVyaghrijatakam-9
viiIbid-8
viii Right there, in the last part
Volume-XI, Issue-V September 2025 78

Ethical Ecology in the Jatakamala of Aryasura: A Bird’s Eye View Swapan Mal
ixShivijatakam-3
xIbid-25
xiIbid-31
xiiIbid.-48-50
xiii Shrestha-jataka, in the early part
xiv The Avisahyasresthijatakam, in the opening part
xvShashajatakam-32
xvi Agastyajataka, in the last part
Selected Bibliography
1. Chaturvedi, Parshuram. Cultural Glimpses of Buddhist Literature. 1958 edition,
Sahitya Bhavan, Allahabad
2. Choudhury, Suryanarayan. Jatakamala (by Aryashura). Edition 1971, Motilal Banarsi
Das, Patna
3. Das De, Gokul. Significance of Jatakas. Edition 1951, Calcutta University
4. Dev, Narendra. Philosophy of Buddhism. 1971 edition, Bihar Rashtrabhasha Parishad,
Patna
5. Dharmarakshita, Bhikshu. Precepts of Buddhism. 1951 edition, Ajanta Press Ltd.,
Patna
6. Feer, M.L. A Study of the Jatakas. Edition 1963, Sushil Gupta Pvt. Ltd., Calcutta
7. Ghosh, Waridavaran. Buddha o Bauddha. 1942 edition, Karuna Prakashan, Calcutta
8. Kern, Hendrik. The Jatakamala of Aryasura. Edition 1943, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
9. Mahasthavira Mahabodhisabha. Buddha-Vachanamrita. 1956 edition, Sarnath,
Varanasi
10. Mishra, Jagadish Chandra. Jatakamala (by Aryashura). Edition 2017, Chaukhamba
Surbharati Prakashan, Varanasi
11. Radhakrishnan, S. Indian Philosophy (Vol.-I). Edition 1966, George Allen & Unwin
Ltd., London
12. Sanskrit, Rahul. Buddhist Culture. 1952 edition, Modern Book Bhavan, Calcutta
13. Sharma, Mangesh. Gitagovindakavyam (by Jayadeva). Edition 1899, Nirnaya Sagar
Press, Bombay
14. Shastri, Chatursen. Buddha and Buddhism. 1947 edition, Hindi Sahitya Mandal, Bazar
Sitaram, Delhi
15. Sinha, J.N. History of Indian Philosophy (Vol.-I). Edition 1956, Sinha Publishing
House, Calcutta
16. Vaidya, Parashuram. Jatakamala (by Aryashura). Edition 1959, Mithila Vidyapeeth,
Darbhanga, Bihar
17. Viyogi, Mohanlal Mahato. Indian Culture during the Jataka period. 1958 edition, Bihar
Rashtrabhasha Parishad, Patna
Volume-XI, Issue-V September 2025 79