The
Sigiriya
Royal
Gardens
06
2012
The Sigiriya Royal Gardens
Analysis of the Landscape Architectonic Composition
Nilan Cooray
06
Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Architecture, 2012
Department of Urbanism

The Sigiriya Royal Gardens
Analysis of the Landscape Architectonic Composition
Nilan Cooray
Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Architecture, Department of Urbanism

The Sigiriya Royal Gardens
Analysis of the landscape architectonic composition
Proefschrift
ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor
aan de Technische Universiteit Delft,
op gezag van de Rector Magnificus prof. ir. K.C.A.M. Luyben,
voorzitter van het College voor Promoties,
in het openbaar te verdedigen op dinsdag 13 november 2012 om 12.30 uur
door Jude Nilan COORAY
Master of Science (Architecture), University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka
geboren te Colombo (Sri Lanka)

Dit proefschrift is goedgekeurd door de promotoren:
Prof. dr. ir. C. M. Steenbergen
Prof. dr. E. A. de Jong
Samenstelling promotiecommissie:
Rector Magnificus, Voorzitter
Prof. dr. ir. C. M. Steenbergen, Technische Universiteit Delft, promotor
Prof. dr. E. A. de Jong, Universiteit van Amsterdam, promotor
Prof. N. de Silva, University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka
Prof. ir. E.A.J. Luiten, Technische Universiteit Delft
Prof. dr. ir. P.H. Meurs, Technische Universiteit Delft
Prof. dr. ir. A. van den Brink, Wageningen Universiteit
Dr. ir. W. Reh, Technische Universiteit Delft
abe.tudelft.nl
Ontwerp: Sirene Ontwerpers, Rotterdam
ISBN 978-1480030978
ISSN 2212-3202
© 2012 Nilan Cooray

Contents (concise)
Abstract 9
Acknowledgements 11
1 Introduction 23
2 Context for the Study 41
3 Previous Research and Interventions 85
4 The Methodology 119
5 The Analysis 131
6 Conclusions 223
7 Perspectives 251
7 Contents (concise)

8 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens

Abstract
Besides the efforts that are of a descriptive and celebrative nature, studies related to Sri
Lanka’s historical built heritage largely view material remains in historical, sociological,
socio-historical and semiological perspectives. There is hardly any serious attempt to
view such material remains from a technical-analytical approach to understand the
compositional aspects of their design. The 5th century AC royal complex at Sigiriya
is no exception in this regard. The enormous wealth of information and the material
remains unearthed during more than 100 years of field-based research by several
generations of archaeologists provide an ideal opportunity for such analysis. The
present study aims, therefore, to fill the gap in research related to Sri Lanka’s historical
built heritage in general, and to Sigiriya in particular. Therefore, the present research
attempts to read Sigiriya as a landscape architectonic design to expose its architectonic
composition and design instruments. The study, which is approached from a technical-
analytical point of view, follows a methodological framework that was developed
at the Landscape Design Department of the Faculty of Architecture at the Delft
University of Technology. The study reveals that the architectonic design of Sigiriya
constitutes multiple design layers and multiple layers of significance with material-
spatial-metaphorical-functional coherence, and that it has both general and unique
landscape architectonic elements, aspects, characteristics and qualities. The richness
of its composition also enables the identification of the landscape architectural value
of Sigiriya, which will help reshape policies related to conservation and presentation
of Sigiriya as a heritage site, as well as to its protection and management as a green
monument. The positive results of the study also underline that the methodology
adopted in this research provides a framework for the study of other examples of
historical gardens and landscapes in Sri Lanka, which will eventually provide insight
into the typological aspects of a possible Sri Lankan tradition of landscape design.
9 Abstract

10 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens

Acknowledgements
The present research is the outcome of work carried out in the field, archives and the
drawing studio; the analysis of such material was carried out in 1995, 1996, 1999
and 2003 in Delft. It was the late Prof. dr. ir. Frits van Voorden, Chair, Architectural
and Urban Conservation of the Faculty of Architecture of the Delft University of
Technology, the Netherlands (TUD), who supervised and guided my research before
his untimely demise. In him I found a great mentor who made me look at historical
built heritage differently from the conventional art-historical perspective. Prof. dr. ir.
Clemens Steenbergen, Chair, Landscape Architecture of the same faculty, who was
the co-supervisor during the initial stages of my research, agreed to be my supervisor
after the demise of Prof. van Voorden. I am most privileged to be associated with
and guided by Prof. Steenbergen, who is one of Europe’s innovative researchers
on landscape design, and whose research work on West European gardens and
landscapes was a great source of inspiration for me. Prof. Steenbergen devoted
much of his valuable time to discussing my study, reading the text and drawings
meticulously and giving critical remarks to improve the quality of this research work.
When Prof. Steenbergen in 2011 retired as Chair, he requested Prof. dr. Erik de Jong,
with his great expertise in the history of landscape architecture, also to be a supervisor
of this project. He devoted much time to going through the text of my study and gave
his specific input to improve its quality. It has been an enviable pleasure to carry
out this research under their expert guidance, and I respectfully record my deepest
gratitude to these three teachers.
I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to Dr. Roland Silva, the former Director
General of the Central Cultural Fund (CCF) and under whom I had the privilege of
developing a carrier in heritage conservation, for persuading me and providing
institutional assistance to carry out this doctoral research in the Netherlands and
giving his expert comments at various stages of this study; to Prof. dr. Senake
Bandaranayake, under whom I had the opportunity to work at Sigiriya, and to be
inspired by his exceptional knowledge of, and scholarly research on, the site, and
for giving me all the facilities to carry out the study during his tenure as the Director
General of the CCF; to Dr. Nandana Chutiwongs, the former Curator of the Leiden
Museum of Ethnology, and Prof. dr. K. R. van Kooij, the former Chair, South Asian Art
and Archaeology, Kern Institute, Leiden University, for not only introducing me to
Prof. van Voorden of TUD, but making valuable comments during my research work; to
Dr. ir. Wouter Reh of the subdepartment of Landscape Architecture of TUD for giving
his expert advice, especially on the methodological aspects of the study; to Prof. dr.
P. L. Prematilleke, former head of the Department of Archaeology of the University
of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka, for giving his scholarly advice during the research work;
and to Prof. Nimal de Silva, former Dean of the Faculty of Architecture, University of
Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, who was one of my teachers during my architectural training
11 Acknowledgements

at the same university, for devoting his valuable time to read the text and giving his
constructive criticism to improve it. I feel fortunate to have obtained such assistance
from an array of distinguished experts.
I am also grateful to Dr. Gamini Wijesuriya for his valuable comments and the
encouragement given at different stages of the study; to Dr. Ron van Oers for
accompanying me to European gardens during field work, commenting on the text and
also helping me in diverse ways to make my stay in the Netherlands a pleasant one;
to architect Ismeth Raheem for his valuable advice during the archival research; and
to architect Jayatissa Herath, my colleague since our undergraduate days, for going
through the text and drawings and making valuable suggestions to improve them.
I wish to acknowledge all the assistance given by the non-academic staff of the
subdepartments of Architectural and Urban Conservation and Landscape Architecture
of TUD, especially Ms. Will Hoogendijk-Hagen and Ms. Margo van der Helm, for
providing logistical support during my study periods at TUD. My study in Delft on
several occasions was made possible through the scholarships offered to me by the
Netherlands National Commission for UNESCO, and the balance financial support
given by my employer, the CCF. I am grateful to both these institutions for the kind
contributions made to engage and complete this study.
Messrs. S. Sivanantharaja and S. M. J. S. Samarasinghe of the GIS Division,
Department of Survey, were cooperative in obtaining the Department’s GIS data
covering the Sigiriya region for the morphologic analysis related to the study. Mr.
Kusumsiri Kodituwakku of the CCF’s Sigiriya Project was helpful in discussing
some of the questions which I was confronted with during this research. Messrs.
Mohammed Sabet of TUD, Sarith Karunaratne of Jayatissa Herath Associates and
Chanaka Bogahawatte of the Department of Survey helped me in producing most of
the drawings, while Ms. Dilanthi Atapattu and Ms. Rovina de Soyza of the CCF assisted
me in the word processing. My brother-in-law, Mr. Linus Fernando, volunteered
in editing the language of the text and Ms. Judith Waters Pasqualge undertook the
copyediting of the final text. To all these institutions and individuals and many others
not mentioned, I wish to express my heartfelt thanks.
Finally, I wish to extend my deep sense of gratitude to my wife, Dilinie, my daughters,
Nayanamalie, Divyanie and Navyangie, who, no doubt, appreciate my work despite
much inconvenience caused to them throughout this study.
Nilan Cooray
Colombo, September 2012
12 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens

To the late Prof. dr. ir. Frits van Voorden
Former Chair, Architectural and Urban Conservation,
Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands
13 Acknowledgements

14 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens

Contents (extensive)
1 Introduction 23
1.1 Sri Lanka’s Historical Built Landscapes: General Overview 23
1.2 The Central Issue and Main Objective 34
1.3 The Secondary Objectives 36
1.3.1 Positioning Sigiriya in the Global Landscape Design Context 36
1.3.2 Conservation, Presentation and Management of the Heritage Site of Sigiriya 38
1.4 The Approach, Method, Scope and Limitations 38
1.5 The Structure of the Thesis 40
2 Context for the Study 41
2.1 General Context 41
2.1.1 Environment, Topography and Society 41
2.1.2 Attitude towards Nature 44
2.1.3 The Cosmology 45
2.1.4 Discourse of Kingship 49
2.1.5 City Planning and Architecture 51
2.1.6 Irrigation Engineering 56
2.1.7 Pleasure Activities of Royalty 58
2.1.8 External Contacts 59
2.2 Sigiriya: A Basic Introduction 61
2.2.1 Historical Context 61
2.2.2 Physical Characteristics 63
15 Contents (extensive)

3 Previous Research and Interventions 85
3.1 Previous Studies and Interpretations of Sigiriya 85
3.1.1 Function and Meaning 86
3.1.2 Design and Technical Aspects 94
3.1.3 Observations 102
3.2 Previous Conservation, Presentation and Development Activities 104
3.2.1 Sigiriya Proper 104
3.2.2 Visitor Infrastructure and Facilities 112
3.2.3 The Surrounding Hinterland 114
3.2.4 Observations 118
4 The Methodology 119
4.1 Survey of Existing Methodologies 119
4.2 Methodology of the Delft Tradition of Research 121
4.3 Adaptation of the Methodology for the Present Study 123
5 The Analysis 131
5.1 Characteristics of the Natural and Agricultural Landscape 131
5.1.1 Geomorphology and Topography 131
5.1.2 Natural, Topographic Configurations 142
5.2 Interaction of the Formal Layout with the Natural and Agricultural Landscape 149
5.2.1 Lines of the Formal Layout 149
5.2.2 Location and Orientation 151
5.2.3 Axial Arrangement 156
5.3 Geometry of the Scheme 160
16 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens

5.4 Symmetry and Asymmetry 165
5.4.1 Symmetry 165
5.4.2 Asymmetry 173
5.5 Incorporation and Organization of Spatial Entities 181
5.6 Treatment of Panorama/Horizon 184
5.7 Spatial Depth 190
5.8 Scenography of Movement 191
5.9 Visual Structure 203
5.9.1 Visual Layers 203
5.9.2 Hydraulic Elements 206
5.9.3 Natural and Built Elements 212
5.10 Activities and Functional Elements 215
5.10.1 Programmatic Domains 215
5.10.2 Pleasure Program 216
5.10.3 Functional Relationship of Spaces 218
6 Conclusions 223
6.1 Landscape Design Characteristics of Sigiriya 223
6.1.1 The Basic Form 223
6.1.2 The Spatial Form 229
6.1.3 The Metaphorical Form 232
6.1.4 The Programmatic Form 233
6.2 Sigiriya and Other Landscape Traditions: A Comparison of Landscape Designs 235
6.3 Sigiriya as a Landscape Architectonic Composition 246
17 Contents (extensive)

7 Perspectives 251
7.1 Conservation, Presentation and Management 251
7.2 Scientific and Methodological Aspects of the Research 259
7.3 Sigiriya in the Local and Global Design Context 262
7.3.1 A Sri Lankan Tradition of Landscape Design? 262
7.3.2 Landscape Design in the Global Context 262
List of Figures 265
Summary (Samenvatting) 271
Curriculum Vitae 277
Reference List 279
18 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens

19 Contents (extensive)

20 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens

Sri Lanka’s location
in relation to main-
land India
1. Trincomalee
2. Anuradhapura
3. Mihintale
4. Ritigala
5. Polonnaruva
6. Sigiriya
7. Dambulla
8. Yapahuwa
9. Arankele
10. Kurunegala
11. Dambadeniya
12. Kandy
13. Mahiyangana
14. Galabadda
15. Kotiyagala
16. Kottimbulvala
Figure 0.1
Map of Sri Lanka showing sites referred to in the text
21 i

22 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1 Introduction
§ 1.1 Sri Lanka’s Historical Built Landscapes: General Overview
Historical references in literary sources indicate that Sri Lanka’s earliest built
landscapes were the royal parks and woods that existed in the ancient royal center of
Anuradhapura during the pre-Buddhist period (before the 3rd century BC), which were
later offered to Buddhist monks by transforming them to monastic use. Therefore, the
pre-Buddhist Mahameghavana and Nandana (later Jotivana) gardens at Anuradhapura
could be regarded as such woods and parks of royalty.1 As per the commentaries of the
chronicle Mahavamsa (chapters XI:2-3, XV:1-3, 7-9) these woods and parks would
have consisted of thick foliaged fruit and flowering trees, aromatic plants and streams
providing shade and coolness. The chronicle Culavamsa (chapter LXXIX:2-3, 4-5)
mentions that the park called Nandana at Polonnaruva (12th century AC) was adorned
with hundreds of fruits and blossoms, and indicates that the park called Lakkhuyyana,
also at Polonnaruva, was planted with thousands of trees of every variety. The offering
of a royal lodge within Mahameghavana at Anuradhapura to Arahant Mahinda, who led
Buddhist missionary activities to Sri Lanka from India, for his night stay indicates that
built structures were also elements of the landscape design of such parks and woods
(Mahavamsa, chapter XV:11-13). An inscription of Nissankamalla (1187-1196) found
at the pavilion named Priti-dana-mandapa at Polonnaruva, where the king distributed
alms for the poor and forbade the picking of fruits from the surrounding orchards,
indicates that this pavilion was also a built structure of a park (Prematilleke and
Karunaratne, 1993:111). The references in the Mahavamsa (chapter XIV:1-10) to the
meeting of King Devanampiya Tissa and Arahant Mahinda at Mihintale, 13 kilometers
east of Anuradhapura, during a hunting expedition of the king also indirectly indicate
that hunting parks were not unusual, at least during Sri Lanka’s pre-Buddhist era.2
1 The chronicle Mahavamsa (chapter I:21-23) also mentions a garden called Mahanaga that existed during
the 5th century BC at Mahiyangana in central Sri Lanka as a customary meeting place of Yakkhas, one of the
early inhabitants of the island. For more information on gardens referred to in ancient literary sources, see
Dissanayake (2003:5-62).
2 Geiger (1960:62) mentions that hunting was a sport to which the king and noblemen were devoted. Adithya
(1981:9), referring to the Mahavamsa, points out that hunting was an accepted sport, despite Buddhism being
the state religion, and killing was resorted to by royalty.
23 Introduction i

1. Ranmasu Uyana
2. Isurumuniya
3. Vessagiriya
4. Tisavava Reservoir
Figure 1.1
Location of royal and monastic landscapes in relation to Tisavava reservoir at Anuradhapura (courtesy:
Bandaranayaka 1993a)
24 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

The most interesting built landscapes, however, were the pleasure gardens (magul
uyan) for the sensual enjoyment of royalty that continued over the centuries with
a possible pre-Buddhist origin.3 As seen at Ranmasu Uyana4 (7th or 8th century
AC5), located below the earthen bund of Tisavava, a gigantic man-made reservoir at
Anuradhapura (figures 1.1, 1.2), and at Dip Uyana (literally: Promontory Park, 12th
century AC), located between the citadel and Parakramasamudra (figure 1.3), the great
man-made reservoir at Polonnaruva, the pleasure gardens were elaborated with moated
island pavilions and summer palaces, ornamental baths and swimming pools, artificial
waterfalls and cascades.6 Ranmasu Uyana also showcases that natural boulders were
used as caves and to build garden structures upon them.7 However, the most famous
garden is at Sigiriya (5th century AC), which is the subject of this study. The provincial
royal complex at Galabadda (11th century AC) in southern Sri Lanka, which is still
largely uninvestigated, also falls into this category. The royal precinct of Kandy (19th
century AC), the last royal capital of Sri Lanka, with the vast sheet of water of the man-
made lake in the foreground and the green-forested mountain in the background, was
designed to give an impression of an abode, floating in the sky8 (figure 5.60).
3 Studies on Sinhala literature also indicate that water sports and water gardens were important aspects of Sri
Lankan courtly life (Gooneratne, 1983).
4 See ASCAR (1940-1945:18-22) and Paranavitana (1944:193-209) for detailed accounts of Ranmasu Uyana.
5 Van Lohuizen (1979:340) assigns the date of the rock-cut reliefs of elephants on either side of a royal bath
house at Ranmasu Uyana to the late 7th or early 8th century AC. However, Dissanayake (2003:55) argues that
the garden was established during the period from 3rd to 1st century BC.
6 The Culavamsa (chapter LXXIII:98-100) gives a vivid description of the different varieties of trees and structures
within the pleasure gardens at Polonnaruva. For a detail description of the variety of trees grown within the
historical built landscapes and their use, see Dissanayake (2003:224-230). Also see Ashton, et al. (1997:391-
399) for the use of trees in Sri Lanka’s history, and De Silva, N. (1998) for indigenous trees associated in the
traditional landscapes of Sri Lanka.
7 Upavana Vinodaya (1964:21) prescribes creating artificial caves and arches within the gardens by means of
vegetation, and this indicates that caves are important features of the built landscape.
8 According to tradition, King Sri Vickramarajasingha (1798-1815) commissioned the royal architect Devendra
Mulacariya to transform the city of Kandy into a celestial city. After seven days, the royal architect explained
the design concept to the king thus: “Your Majesty, I imagine that the thick green Udawattakele (the forested
mountain) behind the palace building is Neela Megha, the blue clouds of the sky; and that in front of the palace
building, it is possible to create cloud-walls in white. Then by transforming the paddy fields into a lake, one will
see the reflection of cloud-walls and the palace buildings in water, and no doubt, it will appear like a city floating
in the sky” (cited by De Silva, N. 1993:159).
25 Introduction i

Figure 1.2
Ranmasu Uyana at Anuradhapura
Figure 1.3
Dip Uyana at Polonnaruva (photo: Roelof Munneke)
26 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Such architectural elements as walakulu bemma (the cloud drift parapet wall, as
depicted in temple paintings) running at the level of the base of the palace buildings,
and diyareli bemma (the wave swell parapet wall) over the lake, also heighten the above
impression and reinforce the dynamic composition of the scheme.9 Although not yet
investigated from a landscape design point of view, the rock-associated royal capitals of
Yapahuwa (13th century AC), Dambadeniya (13th century AC) and possibly Kurunegala
(14th century AC) could also be significant built landscapes (figure 1.4).
1. Rock
2. Inner City
3. Outer City
4. Monastic Precinct
5. Moat
6. Rampart
Figure 1.4
Layout, rock associated royal capital at Yapahuwa
9 For further detail on walakulu bemma and diyareli bemma, see Seneviratne (1983:86) and Duncan (1990:101-
107).
27 Introduction i

The cave/rock-associated Buddhist monastic sites, which were meant to concentrate
on the religious ideals of the monks, were the earliest monastic landscapes10 of the
island, dating from the 3rd century BC. As seen at Mihintale, Dambulla and numerous
such sites (almost all dating from the 3rd or 2nd century BC), natural and/or partly
excavated cave shelters on rocky mountain peaks or slopes were utilized with minimum
disturbance to the natural setting. Sigiriya (3rd/2nd century BC) and modern
Vessagiriya (ancient Issaramana, 3rd century BC, figures 1.1, 1.5) at Anuradhapura
were also cave-associated monastic landscapes, before they were altered in the latter
half of the 5th century AC.11
Figure 1.5
Vessagiriya at Anuradhapura
10 For more description of Sri Lankan monastic landscapes, see De Silva, N. (2009).
11 Kasyapa (477-495) absorbed the monastic landscape of Sigiriya into his royal garden, while that of Vessagiriya
was relaid as a ‘pancavasa’ type of monastery and renamed after his two daughters and himself as ‘Bo-Upulvan-
Kasub-giri vehera’. For further detail, see Silva (1988:222, 228-229).
28 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

The modern Isurumuniya at Anuradhapura, between Ranmasu Uyana and Vessagiriya,
provides a different example, with moats and island structures arranged in an axial
layout with the backdrop of a towering rock mass12 (figures 1.1, 1.6, 1.7). As seen at
Puliyankulama at Anuradhapura (10th century AC) and numerous other sites in the
island, the Pancavasa Monasteries presents a highly formal layout with a series of
concentric squares of monks’ cells, so ordered as to circumscribe an elevated, central
ritual quadrangle. These monasteries are usually enclosed by a moat with axial avenues
oriented to the cardinal directions leading up to the central quadrangle13 (figure 1.8).
1. Tisavava Reservoir
2. Earthen Bund
3. Moat/Pond
4. Island Structure (?)
5. Rock
6. Earthen Embankment
Figure 1.6
Layout, Isurumuniya at Anuradhapura (courtesy: Bandaranayake 1993a)
12 Due to the secular sculpture found at the site and to its location in relation to Ranmasu Uyana, the very
existence of Isurumuniya as a monastic establishment is questionable. Bandaranayake (1993a:32) suggests
that together with Ranmasu Uyana, they were likely to have come under royal and monastic use collectively or
separately at various stages of history. However, van Lohuizen (1979:340) attributes the secular rock-reliefs at
Isurumuniya to the same period as those at Ranmasu Uyana (late 7th or early 8th century AC). Judging by the
decorations at the entrance to the rock-cut shrine, Paranavitana (1953:173), on the other hand, suggests that
the site was a Buddhist center from about the 10th century AC, or later.
13 See Silva (1995:215-273) for the planning system of the Pancavasa Monasteries.
29 Introduction i

The forest monasteries of Ritigala (9th century AC) and Arankele (9th-10th century
AC), with well-defined pathways that traverse the thick wooded natural topography,
and subtle positioning of the monastic structures with restricted views, present
different characteristics to those described above14 (figures 1.9, 1.10). However, the
monastic landscape associated with Kaludiya Pokuna (literally: Dark Water Pond, 8th-
10th century AC) at Mihintale is unique and a rare example which demonstrates the
integration of man-made geometrical forms with natural elements such as rocks and
water. The visual integration of the natural landscape beyond the monastery proper is
achieved through its large man-made pool (figures 1.11, 1.12).
Figure 1.7
General view, Isurumuniya at Anuradhapura
14 For a detailed description of the forest monasteries, see Wijesuriya (1998).
30 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1. Central Ritual Quadrangle
2. Concentric Squares of
Monks’ Cells
3. Moat
4. Service Buildings
Figure 1.8
Layout, Pancavasa Monastery, Puliyankulama, Anuradhapura
31 Introduction i

Figure 1.9
Pathway, Ritigala forest monastery (photo Lakshman Nadaraja; courtesy: Fernando, S. 2009)
Figure 1.10
Winding pathway, Arankele forest monastery (photo: Lakshman Nadaraja; courtesy: Fernando, S. 2009)
32 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1. Pool
2. Stupa
3. Monastic Buildings
4. Island Structure
5. Entrance Porch
6. Axial Avenue
Figure 1.11
Layout, Kaludiya Pokuna Monastery at Mihintale
33 Introduction i

Figure 1.12
General view, Kaludiya Pokuna Monastery at Mihintale
§ 1.2 The Central Issue and Main Objective
The site of Sigiriya celebrated 100 years of archaeological activity, research and
interpretation in 1994. Many scholarly studies have been carried out on various aspects
during this period. With exposure of the remains of garden structures at the western
precincts of the complex in the late 1940s, archaeologists began to interpret Sigiriya
also as an example of built landscape that can be dated to the 5th century AC (ASCAR
1952:18). Up to the commencement of the UNESCO-Sri Lanka Project of the Cultural
Triangle at Sigiriya in the early 1980s, scholarly consideration of the historical built
landscapes of Sri Lanka had mainly focused on several isolated examples, such as the
royal gardens at Sigiriya, Ranmasu Uyana at Anuradhapura and the monastic gardens
of Alahana Parivena at Polonnaruva (Paranavitana, 1944, 1955; Bandaranayake 1976).
With the commencement of the above project at Sigiriya, much interest was generated
not only to study various aspects of the built landscape itself, but also to understand
the process behind its creation. In this regard, Silva (1984) speculates that earlier
monastic concepts of the arama or the park must have set the pace to design norms at
Sigiriya, while Bandaranayake (1993a:8) declares,
34 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

‘The Sigiriya gardens are the survivals of a fairly recently identified Sri Lankan tradition
of garden-art, of which there are few other surviving examples, some historical and
literary documentation, and traces and fragments at nearly every site of the historical
period. The gardens at Sigiriya are a concrete and mature expression on a grand scale
of these various strands and traditions, which we see at other sites and in literary
descriptions, in a fragmentary form.’
Based on the physical elements and characteristics, Bandaranayake (1993a:8-25)
goes on to identify three distinct types of ‘landscape traditions’ at Sigiriya: symmetrical
water gardens, organic boulder gardens and stepped tiers or hanging gardens; he
remarks that ‘each of these [traditions] has clear antecedents and successors within
the Sri Lankan tradition itself.’
As such, Silva attempts to hypothesize that Sigiriya was not a sudden occurrence in
history, but that the already existing landscape design knowledge played a role in its
landscape design. Bandaranayake goes one step further and hypothesizes that Sri
Lanka had a tradition of landscape design and Sigiriya was the climax of this tradition.
Therefore, the above two statements focus on two important and interconnected
theoretical issues that are central to research on historic built landscape in Sri Lanka:
Did Sri Lanka possess a distinctive landscape tradition of its own?; Are historical
examples, including Sigiriya, an outcome of this tradition?
There is no doubt that a number of factors, such as ideological, political, socio-
cultural and technical contexts of the period, would have influenced this process.
Although Bandaranayake (1990a, 1993a) briefly touches upon these issues from a
historical point of view, there have been no serious and in-depth studies carried out
in this regard. Therefore, one of the tasks for researchers of all disciplines related to
historic built landscapes in Sri Lanka is to contribute to addressing these issues. From
a landscape design point of view, the above-mentioned theoretical issues lead to
several important and again interconnected research questions that are related to the
design of historical built landscapes in Sri Lanka: Do Sigiriya and other historical built
landscapes belong to one family of common characteristics (of landscape design)?;
Which work(s) provided design ingredients to the designers of Sigiriya?; Was Sigiriya
a prototype where new architectural inventions were experimented with?; or Was it a
synthesis of many elements of Sri Lankan landscape tradition?; or Was it both?; What
role in turn was played by Sigiriya in this tradition?
In order to answer such research questions, one has to first carry out separate studies
on the landscape design of Sigiriya and other significant historical built landscapes that
have survived in order to see by what (architectural) means the elements are arranged/
35 Introduction i

organized in their composition and so to understand their characteristics of landscape
design. The comparison of such characteristics of these various historical built
landscapes will then provide insight into answering the above research questions. Since
it is not feasible to undertake such a vast scope in a single study of limited duration, as
a point of departure the present study will focus on Sigiriya, which is the relatively best
preserved, much explored and well-documented historic built landscape in Sri Lanka.
Therefore, the main objective of the present study is to read Sigiriya as a landscape
architectonic design with special emphasis on the architectonic means (design tools,
principles/rules, techniques) employed by the designers to arrange/organize the
elements in the composition and thereby to understand its design characteristics.
§ 1.3 The Secondary Objectives
Apart from partially contributing to the answers of the research questions mentioned
in 1.2 above, the present study has the following secondary objectives that have either
scientific or practical significance.
§ 1.3.1 Positioning Sigiriya in the Global Landscape Design Context
In order to position Sigiriya among other international landscape traditions, several criteria
could be proposed. Antiquity coupled with the degree of preservation is one of them. As
far as antiquity is concerned, only age is involved as a factor, and as shown in Figure 1.13
there were numerous gardens belonging to Egyptian, Babylonian, Chinese, Assyrian,
Persian and Roman landscape traditions that predate Sigiriya. If the degree of preservation
of its physical fabric is brought into the equation, Sigiriya ranks only second to the gardens
of Rome, such as the private and public gardens of Pompeii and Herculaneum and the
imperial Villa Adriana at Tivoli (Bandaranayake, 1993a:25). Despite articles published at
international level (for example, Bandaranayake, 1993a, 1986b, 1997; Bopearachchi,
1993; Cooray, N., 1997), and despite attempts to find international parallelisms and
correspondence with the ‘three types of garden traditions’ at Sigiriya by Bandaranayake
(1993a:25-26), many international publications on built landscapes suggest that
36 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Sigiriya is still almost unknown in the global landscape architectural design context.15
There is hardly any serious study so far that compares Sigiriya with other international
gardens (and traditions) in terms of a landscape design point of view. Therefore, one
of the scientific objectives of the present study is to position Sigiriya in the global
landscape design context through a comparison of its landscape design with those
of other international landscape traditions. However, as will be pointed out later, the
present attempt is confined to a comparison of the landscape design of Sigiriya to those
of the West European landscape tradition.16
Figure 1.13
Schedule showing the antiquarian value of Sigiriya in relation to other international garden traditions
15 For instance, there is no mention of Sigiriya in The Landscape of Man (Jellicoe and Jellicoe, 1995), which is a
concise global view of built landscapes from the prehistoric to present eras, and is regarded as the standard
work on the subject, not only among landscape architects, but other academics interested in the subject. The
International Symposium on Gardens held in Leiden, the Netherlands, in 1990 (Fat and De Jong, 1991), as a
project of the World Decade of Cultural Development of the UN and UNESCO, is another instance where there
was no mention of Sigiriya in the discussions and deliberations on gardens of Europe, the Middle East and
Far East. One exception is Holmes (2001:12-13), in which Sigiriya is mentioned at a global level among other
historic gardens.
16 For the justification, see section 6.2.
37 Introduction i

§ 1.3.2 Conservation, Presentation and Management of the Heritage Site of Sigiriya
Sigiriya has been conserved, presented and managed as a heritage site since the
1890s.17 The degree of scientific understanding of the site since then has no doubt
influenced the shaping of the site’s conservation, presentation and management
policies. As will be pointed out in Chapter 3, the dominance of the archaeo-historical
studies on Sigiriya would have also contributed to giving prominence to antiquarian
values in deciding such policies. On the other hand, the increase in cultural tourism
to the site since the 1980s has necessitated facilities for a better interpretation
of the site, as well as the establishment of such facilities as toilets, parking and
visitor access within the site, and a proper road network, restaurants, guest houses
and hotels within its hinterland. Therefore, such demands also have an impact on
policies regarding the presentation and management of the site. Since the present
study is expected to provide scientific knowledge on the landscape design of Sigiriya,
and thereby to underline its landscape architectural value, one of the practical
objectives is to re-examine the validity of some of the interventions carried out so far
at Sigiriya, and to discuss policy issues and make suggestions for the consideration
of heritage professionals in reshaping the site’s future conservation, presentation
and management.
§ 1.4 The Approach, Method, Scope and Limitations
Since the main objective of the present study is to read Sigiriya as a landscape
architectonic design, the study will best be approached from a technical-analytical
point of view.18 In such a study the availability of architectural theories, philosophy
and the approach of the original designer, together with other works of the same
designer, are vital sources. Moreover, the client’s functional requirements and
his aspirations are major considerations in the design process. Access to such
information makes a study very much easier. However, in the study of Sigiriya, a
historical example of the distant past, the original designer is unknown. Unlike
designers of the recent past, any clues to the designer’s architectural theories,
philosophies and approach in the form of letters, diaries and sketches are also
17 See section 3.2 for details.
18 See Chapter 4 for the justification of a technical-analytical study.
38 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

absent. Further, there are no records of other works attributed to the same
designer.19 Although the client for Sigiriya and his aspirations, at least during the
major constructional phase, are briefly indicated in the chronicles, it is difficult to rely
on such information due to the biased nature of recording by the chroniclers. Such
information may be useful only to cross-examine the results of the present study.
Therefore, all these suggest that the only option available to carry out the present
study is to analyze and interpret the existing material remains at the site.
As will be pointed in Chapter 3, Sigiriya is a multiperiod site with monastic phases
preceding and following its royal phase. However, Sigiriya’s dominant identity is a
royal complex, and hence this study will be limited to analysis of the material remains
related to the royal phase. Therefore, analysis of the material remains related to other
phases is not within the scope of the present research.
Being a site that has been overrun by nature for several centuries, and due to
abandonment, the superstructure of almost all the built features has disappeared.
As far as the original planting scheme is considered, it has gone through faster cycles
without leaving any physical trace of its original character.20 In its present form,
therefore, the site does not provide all the data required for this study. Unlike in
the western tradition there are no engravings of Sigiriya. Thus, the present study is
limited to the material remains and the data that have been uncovered during the
last 100 years of archaeological activity. This means that the outcome of such a study
cannot be treated as final, and will no doubt be elaborated on in the future with the
exposure of more findings, employing advanced archaeological methods that will be
developed in the future.
With regard to the research questions raised in 1.2 above, finding answers to such
questions will only be possible after identifying the landscape design characteristics
of Sigiriya and other historical built landscapes in Sri Lanka. Since a detailed study of
all these built landscapes to identify such characteristics is an enormous academic
exercise, which is not feasible in a single study, the present study is limited to
indentifying the design characteristics of Sigiriya, and hence becomes the first
step of this long process. The next steps to be followed will be to study separately
19 As per the inscriptional evidence at Vessagiriya in Anuradhapura recording that Kasyapa has relaid the site
as a monastery. De Silva, N. (2012) however opines that due to the use of Lapis Lazuli, a semi-precious stone
imported from Afganistan, as a blue pigment in paintings found only at Sigiriya, Vessagiriya and Ranmasu
Uyana and the similarities in design concepts found at these three sites (‘landscape driven architecture’ instead
of ‘architecture driven landscape’) are factors that can be considered as evidence to attribute all three of these
works to the same architect or the same design school served during Kasyapa’s reign.
20 Although there have been a few attempts to investigate the archaeological and palaeo environment of Sigiriya
and plant micro-fossil remains, such as pollen and hydroliths, especially from pond sediments, with a view to
identify the plants of the original Sigiriya garden (Bandaranayake, 1994d), the results of such studies do not
provide insight to the present study.
39 Introduction i

other historical built landscapes to identify their individual design characteristics
– subjects of a series of studies of a similar nature. The comparison of such
characteristics of these various historical built landscapes will ultimately provide
answers to the research questions raised in 1.2 above. Hence, answering the research
questions is not within the scope of the present study.
§ 1.5 The Structure of the Thesis
Chapter 2 provides a general cultural-geographic, technical and historic context for
the present study. Chapter 3 inquires into two aspects that are relevant to the present
study: first, the approaches to and conclusions of previous studies and interpretations
on Sigiriya by various scholars, with a view to see if such approaches are capable of
providing a methodological framework for the present analysis of material remains
at Sigiriya; and second, the policies and approaches of conservation, presentation
and management activities carried out so far at the site. The intention of Chapter 4 is
to derive a methodological framework for the present study. It also involves a survey
of the existing methodologies, analytical tools and keys employed and developed
by various researchers to study landscape design around the world. Considering the
situation of Sigiriya, an appropriate methodology together with tools and keys will
then be adapted to read the landscape design of Sigiriya. Chapter 5 deals with an
analysis of the landscape design of Sigiriya by applying the methodological framework
adopted in Chapter 4, and hence becomes the core chapter of the study. Based on
the above analysis, Chapter 6 will derive specific statements with regard to the design
characteristics and also make a comparison with other world garden traditions in
order to position Sigiriya in the global design context to read Sigiriya as a landscape
architectonic composition. Chapter 7 deals with the perspectives that may arise
out of the present study, in order to discuss policy issues and make suggestions to
help reformulate overall policy and programs for the conservation, presentation and
management of Sigiriya, and also to discuss the scientific and methodological aspects
of the present research itself, based on the results of Chapter 5. This final chapter
is also expected to suggest other possible future studies that may arise out of the
present study.
40 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

2 Context for the Study
§ 2.1 General Context
§ 2.1.1 Environment, Topography and Society
Situated approximately 50 kilometers off the southern tip of mainland Asia, Sri Lanka
is an island in the Indian Ocean, measuring 430 kilometers north to south and 225
kilometers east to west (figure 0.1). The topography consists of a lowland coastal
belt, an intermediate upland towards the interior, and highland in the center. The
highland, which consists of a mountain mass, reaches a maximum elevation of about
2,500 meters above sea level (figure 2.1). Due to its location in the Indian Ocean,
the climate is influenced by the tropical monsoon system. This wind pattern together
with the central highland, which acts as a barrier more or less at right angles to the
direction in which the monsoon blows, divide the country into two distinct climatic
zones. The western, southwestern and central regions, which constitute the wet
zone, receive a heavy rainfall, especially through the southwest monsoon from May to
September. Hot humid weather prevails in the lowlands, while it is cooler and more
wholesome in the central highland. The dry zone, which constitutes about 70% of
the total land area, in contrast, receives rain only from the northeast monsoon from
mid-October to January, and suffers an annual severe drought for the rest of the year.
Dry and harsh weather prevails in the north central, eastern and south central dry
zone, while it is semi-arid in the northwest and southeast, and arid in the further
north. The topography of the dry zone predominately consists of intermediate upland
and lowland. The gently undulating terrain with several isolated erosion remnants
and rocky hills in the north central plain gives way to monotonous, featureless flat
landscape further north.
The natural vegetation is characterized by rain forests in the wet zone with drier
variants in the dry zone. Several rivers and streams that emerge from the central
highland (the island’s hydrographic hub) flow in a radial pattern across both zones
into the Indian Ocean. The rivers across the wet zone are perennial, while those
across the dry zone are mostly seasonal in their flow with a tendency to dry out
during droughts. One of the notable exceptions is the Mahaveli (the ‘Great Sandy
41 Context for the Study i

River’), which flows in a northeasterly direction across the dry zone and reaches the
sea at Trincomalee on the eastern seaboard. Apart from the wet dolines (villu) to
the northwest and northeast, natural lakes are lacking. However, the coastal belt is
characterized by several lagoons and beaches of scenic beauty.
A Wet Zone
B Intermediate Zone
C Dry Zone
D Arid Zone
Figure 2.1
Map of Sri Lanka showing climatic zones, topography, wind and the drainage pattern
42 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Contemporary research (Deraniyagala, S., 1992:686, 2001:54) reveals that by
about 125,000 BP there were prehistoric settlements in the island. During the
Prehistoric Iron Age (circa 900-600 BC), the inhabitants had already settled
down to communal living to farm the land (Deraniyagala, S., 1992:709).21 The
geographic position of Sri Lanka in relation to mainland Asia also made it one of
the terminal points of constant immigration from the subcontinent. In or around
500 BC, therefore, the culture of the indigenous inhabitants was overwhelmed
by immigrants from India, who predominantly spoke an Indo-Aryan dialect
(Paranavitana, 1967:1). The two cultures merged, and it was this amalgamation
that laid the foundation to form a distinctive island civilization in the succeeding
centuries. These settlements were basically concentrated in the harsh dry zone. As
at present rice was the staple food, and successful cultivation of rice in the dry zone
depended upon proper storage and management of rainwater. Initially existing
streams and rivers were dammed to construct reservoirs of modest scale to irrigate
the land during the dry season. These reservoirs thus became the first significant
man-made features in the dry zone landscape.
During the latter part of the first millennium BC, initial signs of urbanization emerged
at Anuradhapura, located in the north central plains. Buddhism was introduced to
the island from its birthplace in northern India during the reign of Asoka, emperor
of India in the 3rd century BC. Anuradhapura quickly became the center of both
political power and the Buddhist religion. The new religion provided a serene
philosophy of life, which served as an enduring source of inspiration for creativity in
art, architecture and literature. The social structure was based on the caste system,
with the king at the apex and Buddhist monks acting as the spiritual guardians of the
nation, and as advisers to the king. Such features of state formation as the use of a
script for writing, participation in external trade, emergence of Buddhist monastic
establishments, technological advances and the resultant social stratification
contributed to make Sri Lanka a distinct world civilization during the first millennium
AC, with Anuradhapura as its great urban center.
Sri Lanka’s close proximity to the South Asian mainland on the one hand and its
isolation due to the ocean on the other – as Japan is to China, and England to the
European mainland – has made it considerably influenced by the mainland and at
the same time has preserved its distinct individuality.
21 The latest research indicates that the farming of barley and oats was practiced at least from about 8,000 BC in
central Sri Lanka (Premathilake, 2000).
43 Context for the Study i

§ 2.1.2 Attitude towards Nature
Ancient Sri Lankans, like those of many South Asian countries, did not distinguish
themselves from nature, but believed that they were part of it. This attitude made them
pay immense respect towards nature. The religio-cultural belief system of society also
reflects this attitude. For instance, it is believed that deities (wruksha devata) live in
association with trees, particularly those with large canopies, and the practice of lighting
oil lamps under such trees as a mark of respect to the deity is continued by villagers even
today (de Silva, N., 1996:6). Buddhist teachings further promoted respect towards nature.
The three important events of the Buddha – birth, attainment of spiritual enlightenment
and passing away – were directly associated with trees. The Bodhi-tree under which
Buddha attained spiritual enlightenment and supreme wisdom is sacred to Buddhists. A
sapling (southern branch) of this sacred tree at Bodhgaya in India, brought to Sri Lanka in
the 3rd century BC and planted at the park of Mahameghavana at Anuradhapura, is still
venerated by Buddhists as a supreme relic of the Master, and it is considered to be the
world’s oldest, recorded, living historical tree. The cutting of trees was discouraged unless
for a genuine purpose. The rituals to be performed before cutting a tree (for example,
lighting an oil lamp under the selected tree for three nights to respectfully inform the
associated deity that the intention is for a good purpose, and to request the deity to leave
the tree) also illustrate this point (de Silva, N., 1996:6). The consideration of ancient
Sri Lankans towards trees is also very well reflected in identifying man-made reservoirs,
villages, and so on, in association with an individual tree or a grove of trees.
The concept of a mountain cult of socio-religious life of pre-Buddhist Sri Lanka has also
led to a respect for mountains, by assigning them some degree of numinous power
(Basnayake, 1983:1). The association of pre-Buddhist deity Sumana Saman with
the mountain peak Sri Pada is an example (Paranavitana, 1958). Special attention to
mountains is reflected in identifying rocky mountains with the shape of animals, such as
Atu-gala (in the shape of an elephant), Ibba-gala (tortoise), Anda-gala (eel), Vandura-gala
(monkey), Sigiriya (lion?), and so on.
Since the natural environment was not harsh, but conducive to outdoor living, nature was
not treated as an enemy of human existence or a rival to be conquered or subordinated, but
as a guardian. This attitude also gave rise to a specific living pattern centered on outdoor
living. Therefore, most family activities of ancient Sri Lankans, such as cooking, eating,
chatting and even entertaining outsiders, took place in outdoor spaces, while indoor spaces
were used, for example, for protection from rain and the privacy of female members. Hence
the indoor space of a house was very much smaller than the outdoor space.22
22 Also see De Silva, N. (1990:2) and Lewcock (1998:9-18).
44 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Apart from providing food, the trees gave shade for outdoor living under tropical
climatic conditions. This attitude towards nature also promoted the least human
intervention in the natural landscape and the incorporation of natural features into
the built environment without significant alteration. Moreover, popular beliefs in
the worship of nature were fully appreciated in the art of building construction,
both secular and religious, as reflected by the contents of various ancient Silpa texts
(Manjusri Vastuvidyasastra 1995:4).
§ 2.1.3 The Cosmology
The ancient Sri Lankan view of the physical nature of the universe is best reflected in
Buddhist cosmology and cosmography. Although adapted from Hinduism, the Buddhist
cosmology has no creation myth. However, some aspects of Hinduism were absorbed
into Buddhism, and such Hindu gods as Brahma and Indra (Sakra of the Buddhist
tradition) were incorporated into Buddhism, not as world creators, but as devout
followers of the Buddha (Adikaram, 1946:145) who were pious men during previous
lives. According to Buddhist cosmology, world systems are destroyed and recreated in
kalpas (cycles or great ages). The world system that exists during a kalpa has several
planes of existence in the vertical sequence divided into several worlds: underworlds
(including various hells, world of departed beings, demons, animal kingdom, and so
on), world of humans, and heavenly abodes of the gods (sagga-loka) on top of the Mount
Meru, the cosmic mountain. All these planes are subdivisions of the world of sensation
(laukika), and higher than these planes is the world of form (rupa-loka), the abodes of
the Brahmas who have a material body. Above these planes is the fourfold arupa-loka,
or the world of no-form, the abodes of the Brahmas who do not possess a material body
(Adikaram, 1946:153-154).
Mount Meru, the mythical cosmic mountain which lies at the center of the universe is
thought to be the axis of mundi joining the earth with abodes of the Brahmas at the
highest planes. The heavenly abode of god Sakra is on the summit of Mount Meru. This
cosmic mountain sits upon three peaks, the Trikuta, while a thick forest of silk cotton
trees covers the mountain slopes. The palaces of the four guardians of the world adorn
the slopes of the Meru. Below the Meru on Trikuta is the underworld. Mount Meru is
surrounded by seven annular seas, which are in turn separated from each other by
several mountain ranges. Beyond the last of these ranges lies an ocean containing four
continents, one each at the cardinal directions (Duncan, 1990:42-48). Therefore, this
cosmography gives rise to a bottom-up vertical sequence of cosmic landscape with
increasing divine habitation above the layers of the human world. The belief system of
the pre-Buddhist concept of mountain cult, in which mountain tops were the realms of
gods who reside above humans, would have also reinforced this cosmography.
45 Context for the Study i

This cosmic landscape was a great inspiration to artists, sculptors and architects
throughout the historical period.23 It is well reflected in the interior arrangement
of the relic chambers of Buddhist stupas. These relic chambers, embedded at the
center of the masonry work of the totally inaccessible hemispherical dome of the
stupa, functioned as repositories of the relics of the Buddha, which signifies the
presence of the Master within the stupa. A square pillar of stone, which forms the
central object of the relic chamber, represents the mythical Mount Meru. The small
chambers below the Meru stone contain the objects connected with the world of Nagas
(serpents) representing the underworld. The stone pillar sits upon three smaller stones
representing the Trikuta. Placed on top of the pillar is the casket containing the relics
of the Buddha, symbolizing the Buddha seated on the abode of god Sakra. The series
of seven horizontal bands carved on the faces of the stone pillar represents the seven
ranges of the mountains that surround Mount Meru (figure 2.2). In some cases, the
northern, southern, eastern and western sides of the pillar are painted yellow, blue,
white and red, respectively, which tallies with the accepted conventions about Mount
Meru, where the northern, southern, eastern and western sides of the cosmic mountain
are believed to be gold, blue sapphire, silver and coral, respectively (Paranavitana,
1946:20-24; Silva 2004:21-22; Seneviratne, 1991:366-376). The internal walls of the
chamber in some instances are painted with figures of gods of heavenly realms moving
among clouds. Seneviratne (1991:366) concludes that the relic chamber therefore
represents the middle world containing the earth and atmospheric region.
The spatial divisions within the interior of the painted Buddha image houses also
symbolically re-create the Buddhist cosmography representing the whole universe,
where the lowermost painted register is divided vertically into panels depicting the
various hells and underworlds, while ceiling paintings depict higher cosmic realms
(Bandaranayake, 1986a:22-23).
By citing several studies, Duncan (1990:48-49) remarks,
‘… the myth of Mount Meru became a paradigm for the spatial organization of state,
capital and temple in much of Southeast Asia. Terrestrial space was structured in the
image of celestial space. Many royal cities were exquisitely built to represent the cosmos
in miniaturized forms, with the central part of the city representing the celestial city
of the gods, high upon the cosmic mountain. These cities were built as a square or
rectangle and fixed at the cardinal directions. The square form of the city was actually
conceptualized as lying within a mandala, a circular cosmic diagram fixed at the four
cardinal directions and anchored by a fifth point in its center. By paralleling the sacred
23 Also see Aryawansa (1958:61-70) for a description of the mythical Himalayan region.
46 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

shape of the mandala, these cities were transformed into microcosms of the cosmos.
The king, by situating his palace at the center of this mandala, occupied the center of the
universe and the summit of the Mount Meru, and hence maintained the liminal status
of a god on earth. By occupying this position at the center of the cosmos, he became a
cakravarti who could control the world through the magical power of parallelism.’
Figure 2.2
Relic chamber of a stupa at Mihintale on display at the site museum showing the mythical cosmic mountain
(Mount Meru) sitting upon three smaller vertical stone pillars (partly covered) representing Trikuta. Also note the
series of seven horizontal bands carved on the faces of Mount Meru representing the seven ranges of mountains
that surround the mythical cosmic mountain and the paintings on the internal walls of the chamber.
47 Context for the Study i

Angkor Thom in Cambodia (12th-13th century AC) is identified as the clearest example
that set out to re-create the cosmic landscape (Kastof, 1991:172-173). Duncan
(1990:53-58) argues that such principal political centers in Sri Lanka as Anuradhapura
(4th century BC-10th century AC), Polonnaruva (11th-13th century AC) and Kandy
(17th-19th century AC) also have varying degrees of cosmic modeling and speculates
that Sigiriya is perhaps the clearest example of a cosmic city in early Sri Lanka.
Another aspect of cosmology is the cosmic ocean of milk, with water as the creative
agent. Accordingly, the high up in heaven Ahas Ganga, the starry river of milk (the
Milky Way), falls into Lake Anotatta on top of Mount Meru. At each cardinal direction,
this cosmic lake, the most sacred of lakes in Buddhist literature, has an outlet in the
shape of the mouth of an animal. The northern, southern, eastern and western outlets
are shaped like the mouths of a lion, bull, elephant and horse, respectively. The four
streams that emerge from these outlets then flow around the lake three times, and
at the eastern end of the lake become the Ahas Ganga, which drops into the ocean
to the south. It is amrita, the fluid of creation, which circulates through the universe.
The water containing amrita possesses the magical property of cleansing humans and
making them fit for divine association (Duncan 1990:45).
The 18th century, painted, Buddhist cave shrine at Kottimbulvala in Ratnapura
District offers one of the best representations where the overall theme of paintings
is inspired by Buddhist cosmological ideas. The major part of the rock ceiling of
the central cave depicts the mythical Himalayan landscape centralized around the
cosmic lake Anotatta. The variant inhabitants of the mythical region and its physical
features such as lakes, streams, rocks, trees and plants are represented in the liveliest
manner. The paintings on the wooden ceiling of the verandah are complete with hells,
the human world consisting of different continents and major rivers, heaven with
presiding divinities and many mythical Himalayan scenes (Chutiwongs, Prematilleke
and Silva 1990c:41).24 The elaborate landscape composition featuring the cosmic
lake is also well illustrated in the 18th century wall paintings of the Buddhist cave
shrine at Dambulla (figure 2.3). Here, the waters issuing from the mouths of the
directional animals are seen flowing out in four directions.25 The one to the east flows
over a mountain, enters Lake Anotatta and thereafter divides into five great rivers
before finally entering the ocean (Bandaranayake, 1986a:160, 178-179; Chutiwongs,
Prematilleke and Silva, 1990b:78-79).
24 Commenting on the Buddhist cosmology reflected in the paintings at Kottimbulvala, Chutiwongs, Prematilleke
and Silva (1990c) declare that “such a remarkable monochromic scheme is rarely found in the paintings of Sri
Lanka.”
25 The conventional directions of the bull and horse have been interchanged in the painting, perhaps due to a
misconception of the artist (Chutiwongs, Prematilleke and Silva, 1990b:78-79).
48 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.3
Cosmic lake of Anotatta, a painting from Dambulla cave shrine, 18th century AC (photo: M. W. E. Karunaratne)
Being an agro-based society using irrigated agriculture, this cosmic pattern represents
the hydrologic cycle: the ocean, lakes, rivers and rainfall that enable the earth’s fertility.
Therefore, it reflects the ecological characteristic that is so essential for agrarian
communities, where water is the essential commodity. Duncan (1990:53-54) argues
that there is a link between the cosmic waters and the practical irrigation projects of
the ancient Sri Lankan kings in modeling cosmic cities.
§ 2.1.4 Discourse of Kingship
Duncan (1990:38) identifies two major discourses within the larger discursive field
pertaining to kingship in ancient Sri Lanka, the Asokan and Sakra. The Asokan model,
which came with Buddhism during the Mauryan Buddhist missionary activities of India
during the 3rd century BC, was based on the Mauryan Emperor Asoka, who was looked
upon as an ideal Buddhist king. According to this model, the king should be pious,
righteous and devoted to the fostering of Buddhism and to the welfare of the people
(Duncan, 1990:5). This favored immensely the creation of a landscape dominated by
religious structures and public works. As seen at Anuradhapura, during the time of the
laying out of Sigiriya, the kings constructed monumental religious structures, such
49 Context for the Study i

as stupas,26 that dominate the landscape. These stupas not only express the growing
confidence and stability of the nation, but a determination to place a mark on the
natural landscape (figure 2.4). Mahathupa or Ruvanvalisaya (2nd century BC, original
height: approximately 90 meters), Abhayagiri (1st century BC/1st century AC, original
height: approximately 106 meters) and Jetavana (3rd-4th century AC, original height:
approximately 120 meters), the three mega stupas at Anuradhapura, are not only the
largest monuments of their kind in the entire Buddhist tradition, but are still the tallest
brick structures in the world, being surpassed in height only by the two stone-built great
pyramids of Gizeh, Egypt. In the same way, kings devoted themselves to constructing
massive man-made reservoirs at Anuradhapura, such as Abhayavapi (modern
Basavakkulam, 4th century BC, 100 hectares in extent), Tissavapi (modern Tissavava,
3rd century BC, 160 hectares) and Nuwaravava (or City Tank, circa 2nd century AC, 1,200
hectares), as public works to irrigate land to sustain agriculture. These towering stupas
with large sheets of water (man-made reservoirs) in the foreground, symbolize the
material and spiritual heights reached by ancient Sri Lankans. The landscape model of
Asokan discourse on kingship was, therefore, simultaneously religious and utilitarian.
The Sakran model, on the other hand, is based on Hinduism, where God Sakra (Indra of
the Hindu pantheon) is considered the king of gods. With regard to this model, Duncan
(1990:40) comments,
‘In the Sakran, as in the Asokan discourse on kingship, the king was also expected to be
just, pious, caring and attentive to the needs of the citizens. However, the former view
stressed the glorious and divine quality of kingship. The king was seen a cakravarti,
a universal monarch who rules over his people and other kings just as the king of the
gods, Sakra, rules over the thirty-two gods in the Tavatimsa heaven. The Sakran model of
kingship stressed the building of palaces, cities and lakes that glorify the god-king. These
landscapes were modeled upon textual descriptions of the cities of the gods in heaven
on the top of Mount Meru.’
26 The stupa is an important and essential ritual edifice of Sri Lankan Buddhist worship. Originally, it was meant
to enshrine the relics of the Buddha, but later became a representation of Him. The striking and dominant
element of the stupa is its hemispherical dome, which generally stands on an elevated square terrace. The dome
is surmounted by a cubical structure and a cone. Constructed out of solid masonry, these elements of the stupa
are arranged in a single vertical axis. The volume of each element gradually decreases as the eye travels upwards
along this axis. The relics are enshrined within small chambers of the solid masonry of the hemispherical
dome. The contrasting combination of square and circular plan forms and of hemispherical, cubical and conical
volumes gives a dramatic form to this edifice.
50 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Although Buddhism incorporated God Sakra as a devout follower of the Buddha, the
Sakran model, which promoted the glorification of the king through building heavenly
abodes, became oppositional to the Asokan one, and hence Buddhism during this
period did not sanction the devotion of great expense to sacral kingship. However,
Duncan (1990:53) points out that some aspects of the landscape model based on
Sakran discourse were used by kings during this period as reflected in the erection
of storied monastic mansions, such as Lohapasada (chapter house), in honor of the
religion rather than as palaces for the glorification of the king himself.
Figure 2.4
Mahathupa (Ruvanvalisaya), a colossal stupa at Anuradhapura, rising from the bank of an artificial reservoir
§ 2.1.5 City Planning and Architecture
Due to close cultural contacts with mainland India, the ancient Indian standard texts
and treatises on city planning and architecture, such as Kautiliya Arthasastra, Manasara,
Milindapanha and Mayamata, were known to the master builders of Sri Lanka from a very
early date (Silva, 2000:50-51). The introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka from India
during the 3rd century BC would have also provided an opportunity to associate with
counterpart professionals in India and to adapt prototypes of Buddhist ritual structures that
were developed in India.
51 Context for the Study i

According to Pali literature and other Buddhist texts, the cities in India during
Buddhist times (3rd century BC) were usually square and defended with walls on
all four sides. There were four gates, one in the middle of each wall facing the four
quarters, and four main streets led from these gates to the center of the city. With
regard to the fortifications, there were three successive moats: the ‘water moat,’ ‘mud
moat’ and ‘dry moat’ (Geiger, 1960:53, 58). These descriptions also agree with the
Kautiliya Arthasastra, according to which three moats, each narrower than the other,
must surround a royal residence with the gates located at the four cardinal directions
(Kangle, 1965:244). These treatises prescribe vastupurusa-mandala (figure 2.5), the
gridded centralized diagram, as the basis of site planning (Mayamata, 1985:15-22).
Manasara (1946:124-125) introduces 32 variants of vastupurusa-mandala that take
the square or rectangular plan.
As per this system, which prescribes the organization of the citadel, the royal palace
is to be located at the center, and several concentric precincts fortified by walls and
entered through gateways facing cardinal directions are to be assigned for various other
functions in a decreasing order of hierarchy (figure 2.6).27 Manjusri Vastuvidyasastra28
(1995) also prescribes the rules governing the selection of sites, location of buildings
according to a mandala concept, orientation, rules governing measurements,
method of selecting trees, and so on, for the laying out of Buddhist monasteries and
construction of buildings.29
By the time of the laying out of Sigiriya in the 5th century AC, the royal city of
Anuradhapura had an organically evolved and well-developed city plan with the
citadel as its nucleus, which is surrounded by a series of concentric rings of monastic
and suburban settlements (Silva, 2000:51-62). Although the citadel was not a true
square,30 the city wall and the moat beyond with gates facing cardinal directions, the
streets running in north-south and east-west directions, dividing the citadel into four
quarters and connecting the entrances and extending beyond, are in accordance with
the city planning principles prescribed in the Indian texts. The royal palace including
the household was located within the walled citadel.
27 Also see Mayamata (1985:38-44) for a description of the towns.
28 Manjusri Vastuvidyasastra, a unique manuscript of a Silpa text dealing with Buddhist architecture, is attributed
to the 14th-15th century period, but indicates the continuity of earlier compilation of technical texts (1995:16).
29 Also see De Silva, N. (1988, 1989).
30 De Silva, N. (1997:7) suggests that “the city of Anuradhapura is in the form of ‘Murudange’, the drum shape
which is considered as a non-Aryan city form.”
52 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.5
Vastupurusa-mandala, the gridded centralized diagram (courtesy: Mayamata 1985)
Figure 2.6
Bird’s-eye view of an ideal royal palace by P. K. Acharya as per the descriptions given in Manasara (1946)
53 Context for the Study i

Also located within the citadel was the temple of the scared Tooth Relic of the Buddha
and alms halls for the Buddhist monks. The five great Buddhist monasteries formed the
inner ring outside the city walls. Established and patronized by royalty, as part of their
program of fostering Buddhism, and developed from the 3rd century BC up to about
the 5th century AC, each monastery had an extensive layout. The largest monastery is
about 200 hectares in extent, which is larger than the citadel itself (about 160 hectares).
Located at the center of each monastery was a colossal stupa as a distinct architectural
focal point. The highest reaching 120 meters, these stupas dominated not only the
respective monastery, but the entire skyline of Anuradhapura. The artificial reservoirs,
including the agricultural settlements located beyond these monasteries, formed
the second ring of the city plan. The existing pre-Buddhist reservoirs of this ring were
further developed by constructing additional reservoirs or by enlarging the existing
ones by successive kings, again as part of their program to construct public works for
the welfare of the people. In addition to serving a utilitarian purpose, these reservoirs
were dominant elements in the cityscape, which also gave enchanting scenic beauty
to the city. Therefore, Anuradhapura’s city plan and its morphology clearly reflect the
Asokan discourse on kingship as well as the social hierarchy of the period. The location
of Buddhist monasteries immediately around the city also portrays the influential role
played by Buddhist monks as the advisors to the king in state affairs31 (figure 2.7).
Although the chronicles mention that numerous secular buildings existed from a
very early date in Sri Lanka, the state of preservation of such buildings at present
does not provide information to understand the character of secular architecture at
the time of the laying out of Sigiriya. On the other hand, the religious architecture of
ancient Sri Lanka shows that it is essentially a mixture of deeply rooted local building
tradition and the natural development of the forms introduced from mainland India
during the Mauryan Buddhist missionary activity of the 3rd century BC (Paranavitana,
1967; Bandaranayake, 1974; Silva, 1988). Within a few centuries of the Christian era,
architecture reached a very mature stage at Anuradhapura. The architectural designs of
such Buddhist ritual structures as stupas, vatadages and Bodhi-tree shrines show that
although distinctive individuality had been acquired during the process, no profound
modifications had taken place to obscure their origin. In India itself, the Buddhist
architecture in vogue in the period during which the Buddhist religion was introduced
31 The final phase of the city planning of Anuradhapura occurred when a certain section of Buddhist monks of the
Great Monasteries of the inner ring preferred to be away from the busy urban environment and to lead a life
based on meditation. The result was the establishment of several monasteries that were located beyond the
ring of reservoirs and agricultural settlements. Therefore, these monasteries formed the outer ring of the city
plan adjacent to the forests that were beyond. These monasteries seem to have relied on patronage from the
middle ring of the agricultural community rather than on royalty and the urban elite in the city center. This phase,
beginning in around the 5th century AC, culminated in around the 10th century (Silva, 2000:62, 2008:231-232).
54 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

had, by about the 5th century AC, been submerged by extraneous influences and
developments within. The elaboration of detail at the expense of architectural form
gradually became the rule in mainland India, both among Brahmanical sects as well as
Buddhists. Sri Lanka, on the other hand, preferred the ethical simplicity and monastic
puritanism of the Theravada, the orthodox Buddhist church, which ceased to be of any
influence in medieval India, to the mythological exuberance and metaphysical subtlety
of Mahayana Buddhism and later Brahmanism. The keynote of religious architecture
throughout the Anuradhapura period (which includes the laying out of Sigiriya in the
5th century AC) was, therefore, its simplicity, harmonious proportions and dependence
on the overall built form rather than on ornamentation and decoration to create an
effect (Paranavitana, 1955:77).
1 Citadel
2 Abhayagiri Stupa and Monastery
3 Mahathupa
(Ruwanvalisaya) and Monastery
4 Jetavana Stupa and Monastery
5 Mirisaveti Stupa and Monastery
6 Dakkhina Stupa and Monastery
7 Ranmasu Uyana
8 Isurumuniya
9 Vessagiriya
10 Toluvila (Pancavasa Monastery)
11 Pacinatissa (Pancavasa Monastery)
12 Puliyankulama (Pancavasa Monastery)
13 Pankuliya (Pancavasa Monastery)
14 Vijayarama (Pancavasa Monastery)
15 Kiribath Vehera (Pancavasa Monastery)
16 Halmillakulama (Reservoir)
17 Bulankulama (Reservoir)
18 Basavakkulama (Reservoir)
19 Tisavava (Reservoir)
20 Nuvara-vava (Reservoir)
21 Puliyankulama (Reservoir)
22 Malvatu Oya (Stream)
23 Western Monasteries (Tapovana)
Figure 2.7
City plan of Anuradhapura
55 Context for the Study i

§ 2.1.6 Irrigation Engineering
Being agriculturists in a system based on paddy cultivation, the early settlements
were concentrated on riverbanks of the dry zone. Although the Indo-Aryan colonizers
brought with them a basic knowledge of irrigation, the need to combat the prolonged
droughts of the dry zone demanded a much more organized artificial irrigation system
than before. In the pre-Christian era, village reservoirs of modest size to store water for
irrigation became the characteristic feature of the agricultural and cultural landscape.
From this basic understanding of water storage, a vast methodology of hydraulic
engineering was developed within a short period. This consisted of building up a
complex system of reservoirs, damming rivers, and constructing canals and anicuts.
The kings, influenced by the Asokan discourse on kingship, initiated massive irrigation
projects as public works for the sustenance of agriculture, not only within the principal
political center of Anuradhapura, but in the whole of Sri Lanka’s north central plain.
Water was diverted along artificial canals to irrigate paddy fields. King Vasabha of
the 1st century AC is regarded as the first significant builder of reservoirs and canals
of great dimension. King Mahasena (276-303 AC) was the greatest builder of tanks
of colossal proportions. The Kalavapi of King Dhatusena (459-477 AC), father of
the founder of Sigiriya, carried water to Tissavapi in Anuradhapura through the
86-kilometer-long artificial canal called Jaya Ganga.32 The country, which lacked inland
natural lakes, was gradually transformed into a landscape dotted with hundreds of
reservoirs of different sizes, which were interconnected by an intricate network of
canals of different gradients traversing the gently undulating terrain of the dry zone.
The philosophy of water conservation and management of this agro-based society was
that ‘every drop of water that falls on the island must not flow into the ocean without
serving its people’ (Culavamsa chapter LXVIII:8-10).33
Taking full advantage of the differences in the natural contours of the topography,
reservoirs were organized into a linear cascading sequence (figure 2.8) to allow
efficient water management (Madduma Bandara, 1985).34 The water management for
32 Also see Parker (1909), Brohier (1934-1935) and Fernando, D. N. (1980) for detailed descriptions of irrigation
works.
33 Ellepola (1990:173) comments that although this famous statement was made by King Parakramabahu in the
12th century, other Sri Lankan monarchs were probably less articulate; yet the philosophy of water conservation
was traditional from very early times.
34 Artificial reservoirs are linearly connected forming cascades, allowing surplus water from upstream reservoir(s)
and return flow from upstream command area(s) to reach the reservoir immediately downstream. This
facilitates the reuse of water in the command area of the downstream reservoir, and in effect increases the water
available for irrigation.
56 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

cultivation was developed with great skill using many expedients. Among these, the
well-known cistern (Biso-Kotuwa) played a singular role. A valve-pit locked the waters
of the tank, which were released through sluices in an ingenious method. Hydraulic
engineering was thus one of the greatest skills acquired by the people. Consequently,
there was a considerable agricultural surplus to provide a basis for a stable economy
and sustain a large non-agrarian community of monks, artisans, craftsmen, and so on,
in addition to the royal court and military personal. This surplus, on the other hand,
allowed kings to construct monumental religious structures such as stupas, which
dominate the landscape. Water was the most precious and treasured commodity
in this hydraulic civilization. This fact is vividly reflected in the famous Dhatusena-
Kasyapa story as recorded in the chronicle Culavamsa (chapter XXXVIII:103). The
response given by former King Dhatusena to his son Kasyapa, when the latter, in
captivity and facing death, demanded treasures of the state, was to show nothing but
the waters of Kalavapi, which he had constructed during his reign as the wealth of his
prosperous kingdom. Therefore, at the time of the laying out of Sigiriya by Kasyapa in
the 5th century AC, the country possessed a vast knowledge of hydraulic engineering
with centuries of practical experience of water management (Ellepola,1990:175).
Figure 2.8
Organization of reservoirs into a linear cascading sequence (courtesy: Abeywickrama, 1991)
57 Context for the Study i

§ 2.1.7 Pleasure Activities of Royalty
Despite making indirect reference to water festivals associated with royalty35 and
having the physical remains of pleasure gardens at Anuradhapura, such as Ranmasu
Uyana, chroniclers do not specifically record the nature of the activities associated
with pleasure gardens. Since such activities were connected with sensual pleasure,
Dissanayake (2003:50-51, 2009:28) suggests that the author of the Mahavamsa
deliberately omitted such activities as they were against the Buddhist philosophy.
The insignificant location of Ranmasu Uyana in relation to the overall city plan of
Anuradhapura (figure 2.7) also indicates that the Asokan discourse on kingship would
have also discouraged an emphasis on the pleasure activities of royalty as a major item
of the official royal program of kings.
Although there are no records available in the chronicles on the nature of the pleasure
activities of royalty, studies of the Jataka stories and other Sinhala literary works, mostly
dating from the 10th century onwards (Gooneratne, 1983; Dissanayake, 2003:231-
242), show that garden sports (uyan-keli) and water sports (diya-keli), which took the
form of royal ceremony, were part of Sri Lankan courtly life,36 and the royal pleasure
garden was the main theater for such activities. The pleasure gardens were not only
meant for the king and his immediate family, but for a multitude including the nobility
and harem as well. These studies further indicate that these pleasure activities were
held for a significant duration of the day, and the water sports were held after the
garden sports, suggesting that water sports were the climax of the pleasure program
of royalty. The rock-cut reliefs of elephants dallying among lotuses and squirting water
over themselves and each other, on either side of a royal bath house at Ranmasu
Uyana, and the liveliness of the movement of the elephants carrying lotuses in their
trunks and engaging in water sports, as depicted in a landscape composition painted
on a rock ceiling at Kotiyagala, very well express the mood of water sports of the
period.37 Moreover, water sports mainly involved women, and these literary works give
vivid descriptions of the specific garments, female make-up including the hair dress
35 The Mahavamsa mentions that King Devanampiyatissa (3rd century BC) arranged a water festival for dwellers in
the capital before he set forth to the Missaka Mountain (chapter XIV:1-2), and Prince Dutugemunu (2nd century
BC) made a tank near Kasa Mountain near Anuradhapura and held a water festival during his campaign against
King Elara of Anuradhapura (chapter XXV:50-51), and another with women in the harem for a whole day after
his consecration ceremony at Tisavava (chapter XXVI:6-10).
36 Also see Geiger (1960:62).
37 See Jayasinghe, G. and Rassapana (2003:26) for the reproduced paintings of elephants at Kotiyagala.
58 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

and decoration, and the sensual mood associated with water sports. A painted female
figure at Kotiyagala,38 in the attitude of decorating herself with flowers, also shows this.
Gooneratne (1983:6) observes that in most literary works the women participating
in water sports are described as wearing red dresses, while in some it is said that they
wore red and blue garments. Very often, the Sinhala poet saw women engaged in
water sports as lightning accompanied by dark rain clouds, symbols associated with
rainmaking (Gooneratne, 1983:7). Godakumbure (1970) suggests that water sports
themselves could be considered as part of a fertility cult. Since ancient Sri Lankan
society mainly depended on irrigated water, Godakumbure attempts to support his
argument by considering the connection of the king with rainmaking, the role of the
Rain-God and the relationship between water, fertility and various Sri Lankan Buddhist
festivals and ceremonies. The connection between the pleasure parks themselves and
rainmaking is further strengthened by an incident recorded in the Mahavamsa (chapter
XI:2-3), when a great cloud gathered over the site selected for the laying of a pleasure
park at Anuradhapura by King Mutasiva (307-247 BC) and poured forth non-seasonal
rain. Due to this incident the park was named Mahamegavana (the park of the great
cloud). Dissanayake (2003:238) also suggests that it was customary for kings as the
prosperity makers of the kingdom to engage in different activities associated with
pleasure gardens to bring forth rain, and hence the pleasure gardens were considered
as symbols of rainmaking and prosperity.
§ 2.1.8 External Contacts
The island of Sri Lanka occupies the southernmost position of mainland Asia in the
Indian Ocean, and latitudewise it is almost on the Equator, where the annual monsoon
effects and navigational winds blow for three months of the year in one direction and
change direction for another three months. It was also the halfway point between
the two great empires of Rome and China. Due to the uniqueness of Sri Lanka’s
geographical position, the island became a continuous navigational hub in relation
to ancient and medieval trade between the Mediterranean and the China seas along
the silk route of the sea39 (figure 2.9). Therefore, besides cultural contact with India
due to close proximity to mainland Asia, the island has a long history of international
exposure and transoceanic communication with other parts of the ancient world,
38 See Jayasinghe, G. and Rassapana (2003:25) for the reproduced female figure at Kotiyagala.
39 Also see Huzayyin (1942).
59 Context for the Study i

through international trade and commerce. The most valuable merchandise from
Sri Lanka were pearls and gemstones, hence the island name of Ratnadipa (Island
of Gems). Referring to the 6th century AC vivid account (Topographia Christiana XI)
by the Greek writer Cosmas Indicopleustes, in which he refers to the chief Sri Lankan
port at Mantai on the northwestern coast as the ‘great emporium’, Silva (1988:1-
4) suggests that Sri Lanka was the port-of-return in the region for maritime trade
vessels from Chinese ports in the Far East and from Roman and other Red Sea ports
in the West, and an ideal international center for barter and exchange. In the wake of
such trade activity, the envoys of King Bhatika Abhaya (19 BC-9 AC) were sent to the
Roman Empire (Weerakkody, 1990:158). Silva (2006:3-4) therefore argues that the
financial resources for such massive undertakings as the construction of great stupas
at Anuradhapura came equally from the income derived from exporting precious
items and custom duties and other levies on international trade and commerce, and
from agriculture.40
Figure 2.9
Ancient maritime trade routes between Rome and China (based on Huzayyin, 1942)
40 Also see Kiribamune (2000).
60 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

It is mentioned in 5th and 6th century foreign records41 that Arab merchants and a
Persian community were living in the city of Anuradhapura, which was, no doubt, due
to such international trade activity. Many items of trade from the Far East and the West,
such as stoneware and porcelain from China, and glazed ceramics and glass vessels
from West Asia and Rome, have been unearthed during excavations at the seaport
of Mantai as well as at Anuradhapura (Ratnayake, 1990; Prickett-Fernando, 1990).
The archaeological excavations conducted at Sigiriya have also unearthed Roman and
Indo-Roman coins as well as earthenware utensils belonging to the Sassanian dynasty
(222-651 AC) of ancient Persia (Codrington, 1924:32-33; Bandaranayake, 1984:17,
1993a:25-26; Bopearachchi, 1990, 1996:70-71). Graffiti numbers 219, 221 and 230
on the Mirror Wall of Sigiriya mention silk, while in verse number 399 “Chinese silk” is
clearly mentioned (Paranavitana, 1956:134, 135-136, 141, 248).
Therefore, in this context it could be assumed that international maritime trade and
commerce contributed considerably to raise funds to lay out the massive complex at
Sigiriya in the 5th century AC.
§ 2.2 Sigiriya: A Basic Introduction
§ 2.2.1 Historical Context
Located in the dry zone of Sri Lanka’s north central uplands, Sigiriya is approximately
160 kilometers northeast by road of the present capital city of Colombo. The expansion
of archaeological activity at Sigiriya in recent times reveals that the first occupant of
this site was Mesolithic man (circa 3rd-2nd millennium BC). Rock shelters, mainly to
the east of the central rock, were used with an occupational sequence starting nearly
5,000 years ago (Adikari, 1994; Karunaratne, P. and Adikari, 1994). However, the first
significant interventions to the natural landscape occurred during the early historic
period (3rd/2nd century BC up to the 1st century AC), with the establishment of a rock-
41 The accounts of a visiting Chinese scholar monk of the 5th century AC (A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms) and
Greek writer Cosmas Indicopleustes of the 6th century AC (Topographia Christiana XI), as cited by Silva (2000:59)
61 Context for the Study i

shelter associated with Buddhist monastic settlement on the western slopes adjacent
to the main rock. At least 30 rock shelters in this area were adapted as dwellings of the
monastery. These early monastic cave dwellings are marked by a drip-ledge cut along the
brow so as to prevent rainwater flowing into them. Some of the caves contain donor-
inscriptions carved just below the drip-ledge.
The site became nationally famous due to a significant event of the island’s history,
when Kasyapa (477-495), a son of King Dhatusena (459-477) by a wife of unequal
birth, and hence not the lawful heir to the throne, assumed the kingship by a palace
conspiracy, which ultimately led to the execution of his own father by having him walled
in alive. Moggalana, his half-brother, born of the anointed queen and heir apparent to
the throne, fled to India. According to the chronicle Culavamsa (chapter XXXIV:1-19),
Kasyapa, fleeing the inevitable return of Moggalana, sought refuge in the inaccessible
stronghold of Sigiriya (about 60 kilometers southeast of the then capital Anuradhapura).
The chronicle further mentions that Kasyapa built a palace on the summit of the gigantic
rock of Sigiriya by defending it with walls, and engineered a staircase in the form of a lion,
which gave the name of the site Sihagiri (Lion Rock). Most of the remains exposed at the
site are attributed to the major constructional phase of the 5th century AC (Kasyapan
period), considered as the brightest age of Sigiriya (Bandaranayake 1993b:114).
However, the capital was short-lived (only during the reign of Kasyapa), ending abruptly
with the return of Moggalana from India and the subsequent death of Kasyapa by
slashing his throat with his own dagger on the battlefront. Moggalana, not interested in
his rival brother’s royal center, handed over the site of Sigiriya to Buddhist monks.
During the post-Kasyapan period commencing from the late 5th century to the 13th
century AC, parts of the Sigiriya complex were converted for Buddhist monastic use by
altering or modifying earlier structures to accommodate the needs of the monks. These
latter interventions, however, did not affect the overall original physical layout of the
Kasyapan period (Bandaranayake 1993a:24). Historical sources continue to record that
there were two incidents of further assassination of royalty at Sigiriya, of Samghatissa II
and Moggalana III at the beginning and end of the 7th century AC, respectively, indicating
that the site did not entirely lose its political significance even after its partial conversion
for monastic use (Basnayake, 1983:5-6).
The graffiti inscribed at the site by numerous visitors to Sigiriya, which are dated to
a period from the 6th to the 13th or 14th centuries AC, also demonstrates that after
the abandonment of the site as one of the major political centers at the end of the
5th century, it was visited purely for its secular and aesthetic value (Bandaranayake
1993b:122). Sigiriya has, therefore, a long-standing record of being a destination of
cultural tourism commencing from the 6th century. After the 13th or 14th century AC,
the site was almost abandoned, and in the 16th and 17th centuries it was a distant
military outpost of the Kandyan kings. With the final abandonment of the site after the
17th century AC, Sigiriya was overrun by the ever-advancing nature.
The structures and numerous other creations, once viewed in elegance and splendor,
were completely in ruins or buried in debris when Sigiriya came into focus as a site of
antiquarian value in about the 1830s. Archaeological activity has been conducted from
62 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1894. Mentioned in the chronicles as a hideout of a patricidal king, who seized the
throne from his father, the primary attention of early archaeologists was to explore the
site as a stronghold (ASCAR, 1895:10). Although the evidence of a ‘pleasure garden’
was also noticed during this period (ASCAR, 1899:7), the unreachable rock summit,
fortified by a series of moats and ramparts, would have undoubtedly encouraged early
archaeologists to proceed on the above lines. However, it was only from the late 1940s
that archaeologists began to interpret the site as an example of built landscape, with the
exposure of a water-associated pleasure garden to the west of the rock (ASCAR, 1953:15-
19; Paranavitana, 1972a:40).
Sigiriya has been inscribed as the 202nd site on UNESCO’s World Heritage List in 1982
under Criteria II, III and IV,42 due to its outstanding universal values.43
§ 2.2.2 Physical Characteristics
Since the physical elements of Sigiriya have been described in great detail in
several publications (ASCAR, 1894-1900, 1902, 1905, 1949, 1951-1953, 1965;
Paranavitana, 1950, 1956, 1961, 1972a; De Silva R. H., 1976; Bandaranayake, 1984,
1990a, 1993a, 1993b, 2005; Dissanayake, 2003, 2011), what is attempted below is
not to reproduce or summarize such information, but to provide an overall picture of
the physical characteristics to form a background for the present study.
As it appears today, Sigiriya is centered on a monumental rock, a residual of
denudation, which rises abruptly to a height of about 180 meters above the
surrounding plain or 360 meters above the mean sea level (MSL), with sheer cliffs
on all sides. Like a giant pebble, the rock sits on a natural hill, whose escarpments
are dotted with natural boulders of varying size and picturesque appearance. The
outer limits of this hilly terrain, which roughly follow the 200-meter contour line, is
defined by a massive wall of roughly dressed stone, faced with brick in the west, and
42 The definitions of the criteria which were current and in use at the time of the nomination of Sigiriya for
inscription on the World Heritage List are as follows:
Criterion II : Have exerted great influence, over a span of time or within a cultural area of the world, on
developments in architecture, monumental arts, or town planning and landscaping.
Criterion III: Bear a unique or at least exceptional testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Criterion IV: Be an outstanding example of a type of structure which illustrates a significant stage in history.
43 The Outstanding Universal Value means cultural and/or natural significance which is so exceptional as to
transcend national boundaries and to be of common importance for present and future generations of all
humanity (UNESCO, 2008:14).
63 Context for the Study i

by high earthen ramparts in the northeast and southeast (figures 2.10, 2.11, 2.12).
This walled-in hilly terrain is roughly elliptical in plan and about 15 hectares in extent.
Extending to the east and west beyond it are two inner rectangular precincts, each
fortified by an earthen rampart and a moat in succession. The inner eastern rectangular
precinct measures about 500 meters north to south, and 700 meters east to west,
while corresponding measurements of the inner western rectangular precinct are 900
meters by 800 meters. The inner western rectangular precinct is further fortified by a
brick-built (middle) rampart beyond the inner moat. An outer earthen rampart, which
forms a large and elongated rectangle, encompasses the central rock, the walled-in
hilly terrain and two rectangular precincts to the east and west. This rectangle, which
measures about one kilometer north to south and three kilometers east to west, thus
creates two outer precincts to the east and west beyond the inner eastern and inner
western precincts. Just inside the outer rampart on the western limit of the outer
western precinct is another wide moat. All the rectangular enclosures are symmetrically
laid out on a single east-west axis, which cuts across Sigiriya rock at its center. The
principal gateways of the complex in the east-west direction are also set on this axis.
Extending further southwards from the outer limits of the hilly terrain is the partly
man-made and partly natural Sigiri Mahavava (great Sigiriya reservoir), which is formed
by an earthen bund nearly eight kilometers long. A rocky fortification, presently known
as Mapagala (Rock of the Viceroy), borders the Sigiri Mahavava to the west, as well as
the outer earthen rampart to the south. This fortification is linked to the hilly terrain at
the south through the earthen bund of Sigiri Mahavava (figure 2.13).
Figure 2.10
Satellite image of Sigiriya and its immediate environs (courtesy: Google Earth)
64 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.11
Semi-aerial view of Sigiriya from the northwest (photo: Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen)
1. Palace on Rock Summit
2. Walled-in Hilly Terrain
3. Inner Western Precinct
4. Outer Western Precinct
5. Inner Eastern Precinct
Figure 2.12 6. Outer Eastern Precinct
Plan, Sigiriya 7. Sigiri Mahavava
65 Context for the Study i

Figure 2.13
Greater Sigiriya showing Mapagala, Pidurangala, Ramakele and Mahavava
The inner western rectangular precinct (average elevation: 195 meters above MSL)
has gateways on the north, south and west across its inner moat and through the
rampart (figure 2.14). An axial pathway traverses the whole east-west length of this
precinct from the western gateway to its eastern limit, where the main gateway to the
walled-in hilly terrain is placed. The central zone of this precinct is dominated by water-
associated structures, such as reflecting pools and ponds, fountains and serpentine
streams, bathing pools and changing rooms, moated island structures and summer
palaces, arranged in a symmetrical order along its east-west axis (figures 2.15, 2.16,
2.17). These water bodies are fed by a network of surface and subsurface hydraulics,
which operates on the principle of gravity and pressure. A rectangular compound
associated with a ‘four-quartered’ landscape feature is located transversely across
the east-west axis within this precinct (figure 2.18). This landscape feature originally
had a central pavilion at the intersection of the main axis and the transverse axis. This
landscape feature is reminiscent of the well-known garden form found within the
‘paradise gardens’ of ancient Persia, of which the Sigiriya version is one of the oldest
surviving examples (Bandaranayake, 1993a:24-25, 1993b:123).
66 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1. Outer Rampart
2. Outer Moat
3. Middle Rampart
4. Inner Moat
5. Inner Rampart
6. ‘Four-quartered’ Feature
7. Miniature Water Garden
8. Summer Palace
9. Western Approach
10. Northern Gate
11. Southern Gate
Figure 2.14
Plan, western precincts
1. Four-quartered Feature
2. Outer Compartment
3. Miniature Water Garden
4. Summer Palace
5. Octagonal Pond
6. Axial Pathway
Figure 2.15
Plan, central zone of the western precincts
67 Context for the Study i

Figure 2.16
Central zone of the inner western precinct from the rock summit
68 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.17
Plan, Miniature Water Garden
69 Context for the Study i

1. Moated Central Pavilion
2. L-shaped Pond
3. Northern Outer Compartment
4. Southern Outer Compartment
5. Pavilion
Figure 2.18
Plan, four-quartered feature
Dotted with natural boulders of varying size and picturesque appearance, the hilly
terrain is formed into a series of ascending terraces towards the base of the rock
(figures 2.19, 2.20). These terraces are linked to each other by means of flights of
steps. The cut-marks on nearly all the boulders indicate that they had a structure
erected on top while the natural overhanging at their base served as rock-shelters
(figures 2.21, 2.22). These rock-shelters were originally utilized by Buddhist monks
of the pre-Kasyapan monastic phase. A few constructional works associated with
the interiors of the rock-shelters and some retaining walls are also attributed to this
period (Bandaranayake, 2005:10-15). The soffits of these rock-shelters below their
70 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

drip-ledges were plastered and painted during the Kasyapan phase and have close
similarities to those of the main rock face. The ceiling painting on the rock-shelter
popularly known as the Cobra-hood Cave is of a different type showing a geometric
pattern (figure 6.1). Winding pathways are laid out through the arches, courtyards
and alleys formed by these boulders (figures 2.23, 2.24). Two main access routes to
the rock summit in the form of ascending flights of steps traverse the western and
southwestern escarpments to converge at a brick-built gatehouse on the southwest
base of the main rock (about 250 meters above MSL).
1. Western Entrance
to Hilly Terrain
2. Western Route
3. Southwestern Route
4. Pathway associated
with Mirror Wall
5. Lion Plateau
6. Main Rock
Figure 2.19
Plan, western escarpment
71 Context for the Study i

Figure 2.20
Semi-aerial view of the western escarpment (photo: R. Swathe Inc.; courtesy: Bandaranayake, 1993b)
72 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.21
Boulder showing the cut-marks on the top to receive the brick masonry of a structure
Figure 2.22
A rock-shelter at the base of a boulder
73 Context for the Study i

Figure 2.23 Figure 2.24
Boulder arch No. 01 Boulder arch No. 02
An elevated pathway, punctuated by a short flight of steps and set along a collar-like
declivity of the western rock face, at an average height of 15 meters above the base of the
rock, runs northwards from this gatehouse. This pathway is protected by a high brick-built
parapet wall on its western edge, and by the natural overhang of the rock on top (figure
2.25). Popularly known as the Mirror Wall, due to its highly polished plaster on the internal
surface, this parapet wall contains poems and other graffiti inscribed by ancient visitors
to the site from the 6th to the 13th or 14th centuries AC, who recorded their emotional
expressions of the site (Paranavitana, 1956; Priyanka, 1990, 1994, 2010). The drip-ledge
cut at the brow along the entire length of the western and part of the northern rock faces
prevented rainwater flowing along the surface into this pathway. This protected pathway
winds around the northwest corner of the rock and continues along the northern face
as rather a steep stairway built on firm ground, to lead on to an elevated and elongated
plateau. This plateau (about 300 meters above MSL), which protrudes northwards from
the northern rock face, measures about 64 meters north to south and 32 meters east to
west (figures 2.26, 2.27). Built on this plateau against the northern vertical face of the
rock and facing north is a staircase-house in the form of the forepart of a colossal lion.
At present, only the massive forepaws of the so-called Lion-Staircase-House and an
internal passage with flights of steps leading up towards the rock summit have survived
(figure 2.28). The final ascent to the summit of the rock from this so-called Lion Plateau
is, therefore, firstly through this Lion-Staircase-House and then along a protected zigzag
stairway above it, built on the northern vertical face of the rock, of which only the crevices
cut on the rock surface to support the masonry work of the stairway have survived.
74 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.25
The Mirror Wall and the pathway
75 Context for the Study i

1. Lion-Staircase-
House
2. Pathway/Stairway
associated with
Mirror Wall
3. Main Rock
4. U-shaped Structure
Figure 2.26
Plan, Lion Plateau
Figure 2.27
Semi-aerial view of the Lion Plateau which protrudes from the northern rock face (photo: Dominic Sansoni/
ThreeBlindMen)
76 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.28
Remains of the Lion-Staircase-House (note the crevices cut on the upper part of the rock surface to support the
masonry work of the zigzag stairway above the Lion-Staircase-House to reach the rock summit) (photo: Dominic
Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen)
The area below the horizontal drip-ledge cut high up along the length of the western and
northern rock faces was originally plastered and painted with the famous Sigiriya Ladies
(Sigiri landun), only 19 of which have survived on adjacent depressions of the western
rock face above the protected pathway44 (figure 2.29). This painted band was originally
about 140 meters long and, at the widest, about 40 meters high (Bandaranayake,
1986a:26). According to some graffiti scrawled on the Mirror Wall, there had probably
been approximately 500 such figure paintings originally. This would have been, according
to John Still (1907:43), a British civil servant of the early 20th century, perhaps the largest
picture in the world. In this painting composition, only the upper part of the body of the
ladies, cut off about 20 centimeters below the waist by clouds, are shown floating among
the clouds.45 Similar paintings of the ladies are also found on one of the rock-shelters
44 Three more depressions, higher up on the western rock face, also contain plaster and pigments and fragments of
a painted figure.
45 The terracotta figurines unearthed in excavations at the western escarpment of the hilly terrain display close
similarities in general form and concept to the ladies painted on the rock face. Bandaranayake (1993c) dates
these exquisite figurines to the period between the 7th and 10th centuries, and believes that they may have
been replicas of the painted ladies, used as souvenirs to be carried away by visitors to Sigiriya.
77 Context for the Study i

situated on the hilly terrain, the only difference being that they are not cut off below the
waist by clouds, and hence are full figure representations with legs bent in a flying posture.
A painted lady and pigments discovered on the plastered outer surface of the Mirror Wall in
2004 (Wagaachchi, 2005) indicates that the whole of the outer surface of the Mirror Wall
was also painted in a similar manner to that of the rock face. However, the surviving painted
figure indicates that it is also a full figure representation very much similar to the painted
figures of the rock-shelters of the hilly terrain.
Figure 2.29
Remnants of the plaster band on the rock face showing the Sigiriya Ladies floating among clouds (photo: Gamini
Jayasinghe; courtesy: Bandaranayake 1986a)
Roughly elliptical in plan and about 1.5 hectares in extent, the summit of the rock
is occupied by palace buildings, service structures, rock-cut and brick-built pools
and water retaining structures as well as gardens and terraces (figures 2.30, 2.31,
78 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

2.32). Another interesting feature is an east-facing rock-cut seat which was originally
provided with a canopy (figure 2.33). Running at the middle and entire north-south
length of the rock summit is a limestone-paved pathway which links various spaces
on either side (figure 2.34). The entire rock summit was originally surrounded by a
parapet wall rising from the slopes below the edge, on almost the total periphery of the
rock (figure 2.35). Originally concealed within the parapet wall surrounding the rock
summit, a north-south running drain of considerable cross-section cut on the western
cliff was used to collect the rainwater run-off of the western sector of the rock summit.
A vertical drain cut on the southwest face of the rock carried the water down to a cistern
built at the base of the rock.
1. Main Palace
2. Other Palace Structures
3. Upper Palace Garden
4. Lower Palace Garden
5. Pool
6. Rock-cut Seat
7. Limestone-paved Central
Pathway
Figure 2.30
Plan, rock summit
79 Context for the Study i

Figure 2.31
Rock summit (view from southeast) (photo: Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen)
Figure 2.32
The large rock-cut pool at the rock summit
80 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 2.33
The rock-cut seat at the rock summit (note the post-holes at the floor level that supported a wooden structure for
the canopy) (photo: M. W. E. Karunaratne)
Figure 2.34
Limestone-paved central pathway at the rock summit
81 Context for the Study i

Figure 2.35
Rock summit showing the cut-marks to receive the brick masonry. Extending up to the very edge of the cap-rock,
these cut-marks indicate that the compound of the palace complex rose from the slopes below the edge of the
rock (courtesy: Prema 2001)
Figure 2.36
Ritual center of the post-Kasyapan monastic phase
82 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

The inner eastern precinct, which has its gateways at the north, east and south across
the moat and through the rampart, is still to a large extent uninvestigated, but there
was at least one large centrally located, pillared pavilion built on a rock outcrop along
the east-west axis, of which only the postholes have survived. The little-investigated
outer eastern precinct also contains a stone-pillared square structure across the moat,
just outside the northern gateway to the inner eastern precinct.
The post-Kasyapan interventions are also evident, and during this period some of the
earlier structures were partly altered or modified to accommodate the monastic needs
of monks. The ritual center, containing the stupa, Bodhi-tree shrine and cave shrine
sheltering a Buddha image of the post-Kasyapan monastic phase located just inside
the walled-in hilly terrain to the west, is a notable feature during this phase (figure
2.36). These latter interventions, however, did not affect the overall original physical
layout of the Kasyapan period (Bandaranayake, 1993a:24).
Beyond the fortifications are the natural forest and agricultural landscape with rice
fields, settlements, artificial reservoirs and agrarian infrastructure. The remains of
several Buddhist monastic establishments dating to the 5th century are also scattered
within the hinterland of Sigiriya, of which Pidurangala and Ramakele monastic remains
are located to the north and southwest of Sigiriya, respectively.
Since the site was abandoned as a royal center in the latter decades of the 5th century,
constant and continuous additions and rebuilding are relatively fewer as compared to
the long-lasting royal centers. Therefore, with such outstanding architectural remnants
that are mainly dated to the 5th century, Sigiriya provides valuable data and offers
an excellent opportunity to discover the state of landscape design during the 1st
millennium of the present era.
83 Context for the Study i

84 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

3 Previous Research and Interventions
§ 3.1 Previous Studies and Interpretations of Sigiriya
Sigiriya became a subject of modern antiquarianism from the 1830s due to the
pioneering efforts of British colonial officials and travelers. The primary intention of
these early visitors (Casie-Chitty, 1834; Frobes, 1840; Sirr, 1850; Anonymous, 1851;
Bailey, 185346; Tennent, 1859) were to record impressions of their visits to the site. The
account on the rock, visible remains and paintings by Rhys Davids (1875), the detailed
description of the site and the first layout plan of Sigiriya by Blakesley (1876), accounts
on the site by Burrows (1885, 1887, 1889) and the documentation of paintings by
Murray (1891) reflect a move away from the ‘impressionist’ attitude towards precise
and reality-based descriptive documentation during the latter part of the 19th century.
The Department of Archaeology (then Archaeological Survey of Ceylon) during its initial
phase of work at Sigiriya from 1894 (like any other site of antiquarian value elsewhere
in the country) initiated a program of documentation, site survey and exploration
of an investigative nature, thus laying a foundation in the succeeding decades to
formulate scholarly traditions of systematic documentation, study and interpretation
of Sigiriya. Therefore, from its commencement of activity at Sigiriya in 1894 and up to
1982, when the Cultural Triangle Project commenced its work at the site, systematic
documentation, study and interpretation of Sigiriya were almost exclusively carried
out by the Department of Archaeology. However, there were a few exceptions, such as
Coomaraswamy (1908) and Bandaranayake (1976), who as individuals contributed
towards this task. With the establishment and commencement of the Cultural Triangle
Project, the gates for these scholarly aspects were opened to various academics and
professionals in other government sector institutions such as the Central Cultural
Fund, the universities and even to those in private-sector institutions such as
architectural/conservation consultancy firms. Therefore, more than a century of study
and interpretation of Sigiriya indicates that scholarly interest in Sigiriya can be broadly
divided into several aspects:
46 John Bailey (1853), A. Y. Adams and Wijekoon, accompanied by local villagers in 1853, were the first recorded
explorers to climb the rock summit in modern times.
85 Previous Research and Interventions i

a. Understanding of the chronology of the site and related settlement research
b. Function and meaning of the overall scheme and of various features such as
paintings and sculptures
c. Linguistic studies on graffiti
d. Design and technical aspects of city planning, architecture, landscaping, hydraulics,
and so on
e. Studies of minor arts such as decorative features and figurines
Out of these, (b) and (d) are of special interest for the present study. What is intended
in the following subsections, therefore, is not to critically evaluate the validity of
the arguments, theories or hypothesizes, but rather to provide an overview of the
conclusions of previous studies and interpretations to form a background for the
present study.
§ 3.1.1 Function and Meaning
3.1.1(a) The Overall Scheme
Deraniyagala, P. E. P. (1951, 1958:2) holds the view that Sigiriya was a monastery
fortress and served in turn as a fortress and monastery. Bandaranayake (2010b:116-
117), by considering the site’s archaeological sequence based on stratigraphic
excavations, accepts that Sigiriya is a multiperiod site, but stresses that it has a major
period of construction at a time commensurate with that assigned to Kasyapa’s reign,
which is preceded and followed by monastic phases, and that the overall plan and
many features created during the major construction period were not fundamentally
altered by other construction periods.
Paranavitana (1950:129-134, 1961) was the first scholar to scientifically reject
the conception that defense was the primary motivation of its creators in selecting
this particular location and designing such an elaborate scheme. Interpreting the
clauses of the Culavamsa, that Kasyapa built a palace on the rock like unto a second
Alakamanda (mythical Himalayan domain) and lived there like Kuvera (Lord of
Wealth), Paranavitana (1950) brought forward a novel and alternative theory to explain
various features of Sigiriya, which cannot be explained purely on military grounds.
Paranavitana thereby attempts to relate Sigiriya as representing the cosmic Himalayan
landscape, and its features as modeled upon the textual descriptions of the abode
of Kuvera in the classical North Indian works of Kalidasa. This theory proposes that
Sigiriya is a replica of Kuvera’s Himalayan domain, with Sigiri Mahavava representing
the sacred lake of Anotatta; the rock itself, which is north of Sigiri Mahavava – the
86 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

mount Kailasa, one of the highest peaks of the Himalayas, rising from the northern
shores of Anotatta; the Aerial palace complex – the domain of Kuvera on top of Kailasa;
the rock boulders on the escarpment immediately below the base of the main rock
that were originally plastered – the snowy peaks of the lower Himalayas; the pathway
associated with the Mirror Wall – the narrow mountain passage, Krauncarandhara,
along the approach road to Kailasa; the Lion Plateau – Manosilatala (the platform of
Red Arsenic); the painted ladies of darker and yellow complexion on the plastered rock
face – the clouds and lightning princesses of Kuvera, respectively, suggesting that the
palace of Kasyapa is above the sphere of the clouds. Paranavitana thus attempted to
explain Sigiriya as an impression of the cult of divine royalty (the concept of God-king)
and supported his argument by drawing parallelisms with monuments that had been
influenced by such politico-religious conceptions from countries in Southeast Asia and
had a common cultural background.
Bandaranayake (1986a:29), while welcoming the approach of Paranavitana in the
study of historic works of art, also questions his conclusions,
‘While these identifications may seem to us today an over interpretation too specific to
accept on its totality – deriving from Paranavitana’s attempt to see the Sigiriya palace
and royal complex primarily as an impression of divine kingship – they do draw our
attention to important sociological dimensions in the understanding of ancient works
of art ... While such observation may be obvious at a certain level of generalization, to
interpret individual details as specifically as Paranavitana tries to do is more difficult
and require more rigorous analysis than he provides. Moreover to insist on the validity of
a single interpretation is always inadequate.’
Further commenting on Paranavitana’s concept, Bandaranayake (2010b:111) remarks,
‘In essence, the scholarly consensus is that Paranavitana used his profound and wide
ranging scholarship to ‘prove’ a concept that was based on a mistaken translation of
the term devaraja in Cambodian inscriptions not ‘the King who is a God’ but ‘the King
of the God’ ... Also that he used too elaborate an argument based on very thin evidence
... Nevertheless, it appeared that his main, underlying proposition was indeed very
significant: that the social meaning of the Sigiriya complex was to express ‘a politico-
religious concept’ by creating an elaborate mandala that would embody the elevated
ritual position of the king, in residence in a palace on the summit, surrounded by
complex architectural landscapes and astonishing works of art.’
87 Previous Research and Interventions i

While welcoming Paranavitana’s attempt at reading the overall scheme of Sigiriya
through the eyes of Kasyapa, its creator, and his method of going from ‘totality’ to
‘specific’ readings of individual but interconnected elements, Weerasinghe (2010:234)
also thinks that Paranavitana’s47 identification of individual elements at Sigiriya are
over interpretation.
Chutiwongs, Prematilleke and Silva (1990a:38) surmise that the Kalidasa’s classical
idealism of mythical Himalaya inspired Kasyapa in designing Sigiriya. Duncan
(1990:54), a cultural geographer and semiologist, is also of the opinion that Sigiriya
represents the clearest example of a cosmic city in early Sri Lanka. Seneviratne
(1991:337) also believes that Kasyapa structured his Sigiriya abode to suit the
descriptions of cosmology available to him at the time.
Liyanagamage (1984-1985) argues that Anuradhapura continued as the capital of King
Kasyapa’s kingdom, while Sigiriya was his pleasure resort. Bandaranayake (1990:24),
however, points out that Sigiriya was the political capital of Sri Lanka during the reign
of Kasyapa and argues that ‘the most tangible expression of this is the remains of the
great royal and urban complex at Sigiriya’. With more than a decade of field-based
archaeological research, Bandaranayaka’s (1994a:14-15, 2010a:28) interpretation
of the scheme is that the rock summit, the (principal) royal residence with palace
garden, the walled-in hilly terrain is the ‘citadel’ or the inner royal precinct; the inner
western precinct – the royal park or the pleasure garden; inner eastern precinct – the
‘ceremonial’ precinct; the outer eastern precinct – the outer city; and the area beyond
the outer rampart – the suburbs, villages and the Sigiri Mahavava (figure 3.1).
By studying descriptive accounts of the way a palace functioned in parallel Asian
cultures together with the archaeological remains at the rock summit, Bandaranayake
tentatively ascribes functions to the major structures and zones on the rock summit.
According to this, the royal residence on the rock summit consists of three distinct
zones: the inner or upper palace (central palace, west palace, east palace, palace
reception hall and pavilion, south palace complex, including ‘sun-set’ pavilion, and so
on) occupying the western half of the rock summit; the outer or lower palace (public
reception hall, audience hall with the stone-cut throne, and so on) located on the
47 By interpreting the readings of ancient lithic records that are datable to a period well before the composing of
the Culavamsa, Paranavitana (1972b) in his years of retirement formulated yet another alternative hypothesis
to the classical version of the Sigiriya story, as described in the Culavamsa, where he suggests that Sigiriya,
in fact, was not a creation of Kasyapa, but of Dhatusena, his father. Paranavitana thus revises his earlier
hypothesis of ‘God-King’ and retheorizes that Sigiriya was an attempt by Dhatusena, in his yearning to be
Parvataraja, the king of the mountains. The contents of this work, together with those of Paranavitana’s two
other research works (1966, 1971) are contested by several scholars (Indrapala, 1969; Gunawardena, 1972;
Weerakkody, 1986; Guruge, 1996), and they are of the view that there could be no logical or scientific reason
to accept his conclusions. With regard to this alternative hypothesis of Paranavitana, Bandaranayake (1994c)
remarks that ‘in his years of retirement, Paranavitana fell victim, as it were, to his immense scholarship and
brilliant imagination.’
88 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

northeast sector; and the palace garden including the central bathing pond laid out on
the southeast sector (Bandaranayake, 2010a:28-30). However, the low density of the
built structures on the northeast sector of the rock summit make it difficult to ascribe that
this sector is predominantly a palace, as Bandaranayake suggests. On the other hand,
the spatial relationship of the stone-cut throne with other close-by structural remains in
this sector makes it difficult to ascribe it as an audience hall. Therefore, considering these
facts, it is safe to assume that the northeast sector is more a garden than a built-up space.
Figure 3.1
Functional areas of the scheme as per the interpretation by Bandaranayake (1994a:15)
De Silva, R.H. in a number of publications and articles attempts, on the other hand, to
prove that Sigiriya is neither Kasyapa’s capital nor his pleasure domes, but a monastic
establishment of the Mahayanic Buddhist persuasion (De Silva, R.H., 1990, 1997,
2001, 2002, 2004, 2009). Karunaratne, S., (1997), however, opposes the above theory
by pointing out that it is difficult to assume the existence of Mahayanic monuments
in 5th century Sri Lanka. The arguments that are brought forward by De Silva, R.H. to
support his hypothesis are also questioned by Karunaratne, S. Taking into account a
number of factors, such as accounts in the chronicles, the material remains and the
archaeological sequence at the site, ‘eye witness’ accounts in the ‘graffiti’, literary
and epigraphic reference to Sigiriya, and ethno-historical sources, Bandaranayake
(2010b) states that ‘Sigiriya appears as an extremely complex multi-period site, whose
substantial and dominant identity is as a grand and brilliant conception of a royal
city from the middle of the first millennium’, and hence quite rightly dismisses the
arguments brought forward by De Silva, R. H.
89 Previous Research and Interventions i

Weerasinghe argues that Kasyapa, a son of a non-royal consort and the murderer
of his royal father, was not in a position to acquire conventional divine attributes of
the Buddhist tradition, and suggests that the whole scheme at Sigiriya is an attempt
by Kasyapa, through a retailored concept of kingship as status imbued with divine
attributes and associations, to convince the elite class of society of the divinity and
powers that Kasyapa amassed at Sigiriya, away from the city of Anuradhapura, the real
political power center. He further suggests that the water gardens, terrace gardens
and the royal palace on the rock summit, together with such features as waterways,48
fountains, baths, Mirror Wall and the painted ladies floating among clouds, all become
a part of Kasyapa’s ambitious political statement (Weerasinghe, 2010:236-238).
3.1.1(b) Painting and Sculpture
Like all ancient and modern day visitors to Sigiriya, the painted figures on the plastered
rock face have been the main focus of attention of many scholars who attempted to
interpret them from different points of view. Observing that all the female figures carry
flowers, as if they are in a ‘moving’ attitude in a northward direction, Bell, the first
commissioner of Archaeology made the first scholarly suggestion that they portray the
ladies of Kasyapa’s court in a devotional procession to the monastery at Pidurangala,
which is to the north of the Sigiriya complex (ASCAR, 1905:16-17). He also suggests
that the ladies with a yellow complexion represent queens or princesses, while their
darker companions are the ladies-in-waiting or maid servants. Since all the surviving
figures are cut off below the waist by cloud formation, and referring to the modern
artistic tradition, Coomaraswamy (1908:178, 1927:163) proposes to identify the
figures as divine beings (apsaras). As part of his elaborate hypothesis, that Sigiriya
expresses the cult of the divine royalty (the concept of ‘God-king’), Paranavitana
(1961:387), with literary and sociological evidence, suggests that the figures represent
the Lightning Princesses and Cloud Damsels and opines,
‘The drawing of naturalistic clouds on the rock face would not have impressed the
beholder; and if the clouds had been fully personified, their nature would not have
been evident to him at first sight. The master mind that was responsible for the
48 Referring to the hydraulic features at Sigiriya, Weerasinghe (2010:236-238) argues that water, which is present
in the pleasure garden, implies the idea that water comes from the rock summit, to present Kasyapa not
only as the controller of water, but also the person who lives in a palace where water originates. Therefore, he
suggests that Kasyapa is making a statement in relation to a new concept of kingship with divine attributes and
associations taking water as a metaphor, an icon and an index.
90 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

designing of Sigiriya therefore made a compromise between these two methods, and
showed the clouds half personified and half naturalistically. The dark damsels rising
from clouds thus would represent the Cloud Maidens, and their fair companions are
the representation of lightning, which issues forth from the cloud, and is golden in
color. Alakamanda (Alaka) being thus the place from which the clouds originate, one
who is symbolically its lord can claim to be able to control rain on which the life of an
agricultural community ultimately depends.’
Whatever the validity of his hypothesis, the most interesting aspect of his argument is
that Paranavitana for the first time attempts to relate the painted figures and the whole
painted band as component(s) of a larger scheme.
Bandaranayake (1986a:29) rejects Bell’s suggestion as being a purely imaginative
reconstruction that has no precedence in the artistic and social traditions of the region
or the period. Weerasinghe (2010:233) also remarks that ‘Bell’s interpretation carries
no social-historical or site specific or pan-regional meaning and Sigiriya apsaras
[ladies] become an idiosyncratic expression of Kasyapa.’ With regard to Paranavitana’s
suggestion, Bandaranayake (1986a:29) comments,
‘There is no doubt, however, that the spatial organization and spatial symbolism of the
Sigiri complex is profoundly determined by the cult of the king and ideology of kingship.
The great tapestry of paintings at Sigiriya, like the palace on the summit and the lion
staircase, are all part of a complex ‘sign-language’ expressing royal power and ritual
status.’
Although Bandaranayake does not favor Paranavitana’s hypothesis, he seems to accept
that the plastered rock face with its figures are part of the spatial organization of the
whole scheme.
However, Bandaranayake (1986a:29) agrees with Coomaraswamy’s identification
of the painted figures as divine beings by pointing out that it is in keeping with well-
established South Asian tradition and concludes,
‘We can see almost with certainty that the Sigiriya ladies are celestial nymphs, very
similar in essence to their successors, thirteen hundred years later in the ‘Daughters of
Mara’ panel from Dambulla, but it is also likely that they had more than one meaning
and function – as expressions of Royal grandeur and status and as artistic evocations of
courtly life, with aesthetic and erotic dimensions.’ 49
49 See also Somathilake (2008).
91 Previous Research and Interventions i

Commenting on Coomaraswamy’s identification of the painted figures, Weerasinghe
(2010:233) remarks that ‘the major drawback or the impotency of Coomaraswamy’s
explanation is that it is totally immune to Sigiriya as a complex social-historical/
social-political event and positions Sigiriya simply at the receiving end of an Asian
visual art tradition and it also fails to offer any indication to the function and meaning
of the mural.’ While recognizing the approach of Paranavitana in the identification of
individual elements at Sigiriya through a holistic approach, Weerasinghe (2010:232)
observes that the immense plaster band ‘would have provided a ‘heavenly ambiance’
to the pleasure garden.’ With regard to the identification of the painted figures
Weerasinghe (2010:238) states,
‘…whatever they would be, their meaning as celestial beings is to conjoin with other
art and architectural components of Kasyapa’s political scheme and new concepts of
kingship ... a re-tailored concept of the ancient idea of royalty as status imbued with
divine attributes and associations ...’
By closely studying the garments, ornaments, outlook, expression, configuration and
attitude, Chutiwongs, Prematilleke and Silva (1990a:41) suggest that the figures
represent the queens, daughters and maid-servants of the royal court, performing the
role of celestial ladies attending upon the God King. By studying the paintings in the
wider Asian context covering ancient Persia, central Asia and northwest India and in
the context of international maritime commercial contacts, Priyanka (2005) observes
that the art motifs of Sigiriya have parallelisms with those of the above-mentioned
Asian cultures. As such, he speculates that the models for the Sigiriya paintings were
the court ladies of Kasyapa, and the artists of Sigiriya would have used artistic themes
popular in many parts of Asia during the period to give the whole painting composition
a heavenly atmosphere to the royal abode.
De Silva, R. H. (2002:66-123, 2009:96-122) suggests that the painted figures on
the rock face represent the multiple representations of Goddess Tara, the consort of
Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, as part of his hypothesis that Sigiriya was an establishment
of Mahayanic Buddhist persuasion. By pointing out the differences in figural treatment,
iconography, age group, complexion and garments of the painted ladies, and the lack of
spiritual qualities in their expression, Dissanayake (2011:240-241) rejects the above
suggestion made by De Silva, R. H.
By referring to the descriptions of Sinhala literary works, Dissanayake (2011:242-
252) suggests that the ladies depicted in the paintings on the rock face represent
those of the harem; those with fair and dark complexions, the higher and lesser ladies
(utum and bala anganun); the feature which cuts off the bodies below the waist are
not clouds, but waves of the ponds in which they are engaged in water sports; and
the whole painting composition would have given a fitting backdrop to the water
sports that were meant to be held within the pleasure garden. Since some of the
ladies hold items that are not related to water sports (such as those similar to musical
instruments), and their postures do seem as if they are within ponds, surrounded with
92 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

water, Dissanayake’s suggestion that they are engaged in water sports is difficult to
accept. Moreover, the full figure representations of painted ladies discovered on the
outer surface of the Mirror Wall (Wagaachchi, 2005), which is below those on the rock
face, are clearly depicted in the conventional flying posture, also strengthening the idea
that the painted ladies are not associated with water sports.
The colossal sculpture of the forepart of a lion on the Lion Plateau is another feature
at Sigiriya which drew the attention of many scholars and other interested people. The
Culavamsa (chapter XXXIX:3-4) also indicates that it is a key feature of Kasyapa’s grand
scheme, which also gave it its name, the Lion Rock. Apart from being the stupendous
gateway to the final climb to the aerial palace, several scholars are of the view that it
has a definite symbolical meaning. According to Bell (ASCAR, 1904:9), this ‘monstrous
Simha’ is suggestive of the legendary founder of the Sinhala race. Paranavitana’s
explanation (1950) is that it represents the lion on the plateau of Red Arsenic, which
is in keeping with his hypothesis that Sigiriya is a replica of the Kuvera’s Himalayan
domain.50
Bandaranayake (1993a:130) comments that it made a major symbolic statement
operating on various levels of meaning, enhancing the power and majesty of royal
authority and invoking a ritual notion of dynastic origins, the lion being the mythical
ancestor and royal symbol of the Sri Lankan kings. Bandaranayake (2010a:25, 35)
also remarks that the lion figure was a massive architectural sculpture that served as
the grand entrance to the staircase-house, and the remaining brick basements on
the plateau in front of the lion figure are antechambers and courtyards forming the
final reception area before the ascent to the summit. Since the entrance to the palace
complex on the rock summit is from the north, De Silva, N. (2012) suggests that it was
in keeping with tradition, where the lion is the animal assigned for the north and for the
chariot of northern guardian deity Vaishravana.
50 Paranavitana (1950:151) goes on to mention that: “The mighty beast is represented as if he is lying down on his
paws, the hind part of the body inside the cave, the fore part emerging out covering the whole entrance to the
lair, ready to pounce upon an intruder. He is not only guarding his own lair, but anyone going further towards the
abode of the God-king on the summit must literally pass through his jaws ...”
93 Previous Research and Interventions i

§ 3.1.2 Design and Technical Aspects
3.1.2(a) City Planning
In addition to a detailed description of the site, Blakesley’s (1876) layout plan not only
records the fortifications associated with the rock, but indicates that Sigiriya was a well-
planned complex with the rock as its main element. The Sigiri Mahavava and Mapagala
are also seen in this layout plan as important elements of a unified scheme. The macro
picture of Sigiriya thus emerged for the first time (figure 3.2), which helped Bell, the
first commissioner of the Archaeological Survey, to elaborate upon it later. Apart from
precise documentation of individual monuments within Sigiriya, and some adjoining
sites such as Mapagala, Pidurangala and Ramakele, Bell carried out a detailed survey
of the then-known Sigiriya. The survey plans of Bell (ASCAR, 1907, for instance), which
were a result of progressive mapping of the site, not only show the relationship of the
moats, ramparts and other structures to Sigiriya rock, but indicate the zoning of various
precincts and spaces in relation to the overall layout of Sigiriya.
Although Bell and later Paranavitana observed the layout of the rectangular precincts in
relation to the central rock and to the east-west axis, with the principal gateway directly
aligned with this axis, it was Bandaranayake (1994a:14) who developed the hypothesis
that Sigiriya is one of the best-preserved urban forms of the first millennium AC, which
exemplifies the grand scale and vision of Sri Lankan city planning. Through a decade of
field-based archaeological research, Bandaranayake (1994b) suggests that the urban
plan of Sigiriya conforms to a hypothetical urban model (of the social and conceptual
organization of urban space), which he derives from his studies of Sri Lankan cities of
early and middle historical periods (3rd century BC-13th century AC). With regard to
the layout of Sigiriya, Bandaranayake (1990b:26) further comments,
‘One of the most remarkable aspects of the urban form at Sigiriya is its planning
mathematics and its total design concept. The plan of the city is based on a precise
square module. The layout extends outwards from the outer section of the central east-
west and north-south coordinates at the center of the palace complex, on top of the rock.
The eastern and western entrances are directly aligned with the central east-west axis,
while the intricate symmetry of the royal water gardens and the moats and ramparts
of the western precinct is based on ‘echo plan’ ... In its total conception, however,
Sigiriya represents a brilliant combination of concepts of symmetry and asymmetry, of a
deliberate interlocking of geometrical plan and natural form.’
94 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 3.2
Layout plan of Sigiriya by Blakesely (1876)
In one of his subsequent articles on the subject, Bandaranayake (1994a:15-16) adds,
‘The (Sigiriya) city can now be seen as having an elongated rectangular form, ... based on
a square module of circa 170 meters and a concentric-cum-axial design. This geometric
conception also accommodates organic and asymmetrical elements such as the Sigiriya
rock itself, the terraced hill around the base of the rock, the Mapagala fortress, the partly
man-made, partly natural topography of the lake, and the borrowed scenery of the
Kandalama Mountains and the Matale ranges.’
95 Previous Research and Interventions i

Based on archaeological field research at Sigiriya and carrying out studies on classical
literature on Indian town planning, Karunaratne, P. (1994) suggests that the areas
identified by Bandaranayake (1993b:114-116) as inner city, outer city and suburbs
are the ceremonial park with pavilions, the inner city comprising of markets and other
buildings for public use, and the outer city for the urban social strata, respectively. As
such, Karunaratne, P. argues that the layout of Sigiriya shows a deviation from the urban
model of the early and middle historical period, which is hypothised by Bandaranayake.
3.1.2(b) Architecture and Landscape Design
Apart from documentation of the remains that are visible above ground level and are
exposed due to archaeological excavation, and descriptive accounts of physical layouts,
the studies on architecture proper of Sigiriya are largely limited to reconstruction of the
superstructure of some monuments. Compared to the scholarly studies related to the
reconstruction of the superstructure of monuments at Anuradhapura and Polonnaruva
(such as Paranavitana, 1946; Bandaranayake, 1974, 1976, 1978; Silva, 1988,
2004; Nakagawa, 1990, 1991), most of such attempts at Sigiriya by both heritage
professionals, such as Karunaratne, L. K. (in 1960, see Bandaranayake, 2010a:figure
6), Ellepola (1990:204, 208), Amarasinghe (2003) and Gunawardhana (2008), and
others such as Amarasekare (in the 1930s, see Bandaranayake 2010a:figure 5), Kirinda
(in 1996, see Bandaranayake 2010a:figure 6) and Deepthikumara (1998, 2000),
could be regarded as pure conjectural reconstructions and/or artist impressions.
With regard to the reconstruction of buildings on the rock summit, Bandaranayake
(2010a:25-26) comments that ‘few of these offer acceptable, impressionistic images;
others are inelegant and bear scarcely any relation to the existing remains or to the
fine sensibilities that inform all aspects of art and design at Sigiriya. Moreover, none
of these reconstructions have argued the basis of their proposals.’ Bandaranayake
(2010a:35) also adds that ‘all conjectural reconstructions of the lion have been
based on ‘imaginary’ suggestions, derived (often at several removed) from the
generalized experience of varied representations of this royal icon in South Asian art
and architecture, both ancient and modern’.51 The lack of considerable remnants of
the superstructure and of archaeological data – the only indications being the square
cavities left for timber columns in the brick masonry, the post holes, beam sockets,
ledges and grooves cut into the rock, the stone pillar bases, roof tiles and iron nails –
have also made it a difficult exercise.
51 Although Bandaranayake also initially attempted to reconstruct the buildings on the rock summit, based on a
general consideration of the archaeological remains, rather than on careful study and interpretation, he admits
that his reconstruction in 1984 (Bandaranayake, 2010a:figure 3) was still largely impressionistic.
96 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Byrom (1986), by studying the remains of the southwestern compartment attached to
the central four-quartered feature and relating them to some of the palace structures
in the Indian state of Kerala, attempts to reconstruct the superstructure of the
buildings of the above compartment (figure 3.3). He also suggests that at least the
outer compartments attached to the central four-quartered feature must properly
be regarded not as garden (open) space, but as a subsidiary annex to the palace with
heavily built-up space. Although Byrom’s reconstructions are too inventive and creative
to accept his suggestions in totality, this study focuses attention on rethinking the
open, built-up spatial relationship of at least the two outer compounds attached to the
four-quartered feature, which is of much interest from an architectural point of view.
Figure 3.3
Byrom’s (1986) reconstruction of part of the southern outer compartment associated with the four-quartered feature
97 Previous Research and Interventions i

Sunnemark and Wik (1997) carried out a survey of the cut-marks in one of the boulder
clusters52 within the hilly terrain to map the structures on top of these boulders.
Although they went to the extent of conjecturing the structures, it was not based on the
material evidence at the site and general Sri Lankan architectural tradition. However,
the mapping of the structures on the boulders shows that the built elements at the
ground level are related to the structures on top (figure 3.4).
Figure 3.4
The cut-marks on one of the boulder clusters indicating the structures upon them and their relationship to the
remains at the base (courtesy: Sunnemark and Wik 1997)
Analyzing the remains on the rock summit, and placing them in the context of
Sri Lankan architectural tradition, Bandaranayake (2010a:29) assumes that ‘the
architecture on the rock summit was essentially the typical mixed brick-and-timber
architecture of the early and middle historical periods (3rd century BC-13th century
AC), most familiar to us from the monastic remains but also from royal contexts at
Anuradhapura and Polonnaruva.’ By such assumptions supported by comparison
52 The survey covered boulder numbers B1, B3, B4 and B7/8.
98 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

with other examples in Sri Lanka and elsewhere in monsoon Asia, Bandaranayake
(2010a:31-34) reconstructs the buildings on the rock summit, with hipped roofs
laid with clay tiles. The main palace building of the upper palace is reconstructed as
a structure with a three-storied central block, which is surrounded on the east, south
and west with single or double-story structures with central courtyards. The building
on the southwest quadrant, which Bandaranayake labels as the ‘sun-set pavilion’ is
conjectured as an open two-storied pavilion-type building to provide views of the outer
landscape (Bandaranayake, 2010a:28-34).53
Although Bell excavated some of the structures within the western precinct in the
1890s (ASCAR, 1899:7), the attention of archaeologists up to the 1940s was mainly
concentrated on such features as the aerial palace, Lion-Staircase-House, Mirror Wall
and the paintings that are associated with the central rock. Paranavitana from the
late 1940s, however, shifted the main focus beyond the central rock to the western
plain below. His excavations revealed an elaborate garden layout in an extensive area
of the inner western precinct. The central axial zone, which Paranavitana termed as
the ‘pleasure garden,’ was identified as composed of three distinct zones: the four-
quartered feature with its northern and southern compartments, the fountain garden,
and the upper garden with octagonal pond, each in a walled enclosure. Paranavitana
(ASCAR, 1952:18), therefore, for the first time could relate most of the features at the
inner western precinct as components of a unified scheme, and declares,
‘The plan of Sigiri ... show the relation that the newly exposed layout of the palace
garden has to the other features of the place – the palace on the summit of the rock,
the outer gateways, the moat and the island pavilions. It will be clear that every one of
these various units is related to the others and all contribute to form a balanced whole.
The skill exhibited by the architects in making the natural features harmonize with
their own creations is beyond all praise. The formality and symmetry of the layout on
the level ground is in contrast to the asymmetry, no doubt deliberately introduced, as
one approaches the rugged boulders at the base of the hill. The various sheets of water
in the moats, ponds and cisterns alternate with pavilions, which would have originally
appeared as rising from water. In fact, the whole garden must have been used for
water-sports, of which vivid descriptions are found in Sinhalese and Sanskrit poems.
The entire plan of the garden is unfolded when one stands on the summit of the rock
53 Although Bandaranayake (2010a:35-38) also attempts to reconstruct the lion figure associated with the
Lion-Staircase-House, by studying the rows of cuts in the rock face serving as footholds of brick masonry,
which provide the width and height of the lion figure, and superimposition of a bronze representation of a lion
from Anuradhapura, he admits that it is more of an approximation or conjectural reconstruction due to the
limited evidence.
99 Previous Research and Interventions i

and looks westwards. It is even now a striking spectacle, and one can imagine what the
sight would have been in Kasyapa’s days, with the ornamental roofs of the pavilions and
other buildings, the fountains, the flowering trees, the bowers and other features which
are now no more. Even the bare layout now exposed, when properly conserved, will not
be without aesthetic appeal to those who can appreciate balance and harmony and the
ordering of the various parts to give unity to an elaborate scheme.’ 54
The commencement of the UNESCO-Sri Lanka Cultural Triangle Project activities
at Sigiriya in the early 1980s witnessed the continuation of the study of ‘garden art’
initiated by Paranavitana. Based on the physical characteristics of Sigiriya and expanding
Paranavitana’s identification of ‘garden styles,’ Bandaranayake (1993a) further identifies
three ‘traditions of landscape gardening’: the symmetrical or geometrically planned
water gardens in the central and southwestern areas of the western precinct55; the
asymmetrical or organic cave and boulder gardens on the western escarpment; and the
stepped or terraced (hanging) gardens at the base of the central rock.56 With regard to
these three ‘traditions of landscape gardens,’ Bandaranayake (1993a:25) mentions,
‘Each of these has clear antecedents and successors within the Sri Lankan tradition itself.
Sites such as Vessagiriya, Isurumuniya (both of which are associated with Kasyapa), the
monastery complexes at Anuradhapura, and especially the south western sector of the
Abhayagiri Vihara, the Kaludiya Pokuna complex at Mihintale, the Alahana Parivena at
Polonnaruva, sites such as Situlpahuva in the south or Salgala and Maligatenna in the
west, are some of the many outstanding examples of site selection, site modeling and
landscape gardening produced by the Sri Lankan tradition. The royal pleasure gardens at
Anuradhapura, the lake side gardens and water palaces at Polonnaruva, and the royal palace
and lake complex at Kandy are some of the examples of secular landscaping and water
gardening that still remain in a skeletal or fragmentary form.’
54 Also see Paranavitana (1959:402, 1972a:40)
55 This includes garden number1 (the four-quartered garden or the Char-bagh with two outer compartments to its
north and south), number 2 (fountain garden), number 3 (the half char-bagh, halls, podiums and the octagonal
pond) that are previously identified by Paranavitana (1972a) in the central axial zone, and the Miniature Water
Garden exposed at the southwest corner of the western precinct by Bandaranayake. Apart from the symmetrical
or geometrical planning, Bandaranayake (1993b:126-127) remarks that the Miniature Water Garden has a
far more complex interplay of tile-roofed buildings, water retaining structures and water courses than is seen
elsewhere in Sigiriya, and suggests that it has been laid out as an extension and ‘miniaturized’ refinement of the
Kasyapan macro plan.
56 Bandaranayake (1993b:123) also suggests that the palace garden on the summit of the rock is a combination
(amalgamation) of the above three garden traditions.
100 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Bandaranayake (1993a:25-26) also draws attention to international parallelisms
and correspondence with each of the above garden traditions.57 Bopearachchi
(1993) argues that the Sigiriya gardens have parallelisms to those of the Persian
garden tradition.
De Silva, N. (1996), apart from describing the ancient monastic and secular landscapes
of Sri Lanka, attempts to highlight the boundary, entrance, paths, flight of steps,
retaining walls and water as the ‘design elements’ used in these landscapes.
3.1.2(c) The Hydraulic Engineering
Apart from documentation of the hydraulic features at the surface and subsurface
levels (see De Silva, R.H., 1976:7-8) and recent attempts to understand the irrigation
systems of the Sigiriya hinterland (Manatunge, 1990; Wickramasekera, 1990; Myrdal-
Runebjer, 1994), little attention has been given to study of the hydraulics of Sigiriya
proper. Bandaranayake (1990a:46-48, 1993a:12-17), however, suggests that the
hydraulics of the water garden is a result of a micro-scale application of the principles
of the macro-hydraulics, which formed the essential technological basis for the Sri
Lankan civilization during the early and middle historical periods (3rd century BC-13th
century AC). He also remarks that the essential characteristic of the hydraulic system
was the interconnection of macro- and micro-hydraulics. He goes on to identify two
57 Bandaranayake (1993a:24-26) states that: ‘The historical importance of the gardens at Sigiriya lies essentially
in two factors; one, their antiquity and degree of preservation; the other, their ingenious combination on a
grand scale, of at least three traditions of landscape gardening ... Past and recent archeological excavations
have confirmed that the gardens substantially dates from the 5th century ... The clearest parallels to the water
gardens at Sigiriya are to be found in the much more ancient geometrical gardens of Egypt or the ‘paradise
gardens’ of ancient Persia, while Sigiriya’s chronological successors are the well-preserved examples of the
gardening and the geometrical gardens of the Renaissance Europe. Of the ancient gardens of the world that
survived in an archaeological sense, the only significant examples that pre-date Sigiriya and are equally well
preserved are those of the Romans such as the private and public gardens of Pompeii and Herculaneum
and the imperial gardens of Hadrian at Tivoli ... The subsequent developments in the Asian water gardening
tradition, that is represented at such early dates at Sigiriya, are found on a majestic scale about four or five
centuries later at Angkor in Cambodia, and even much later in the exquisite gardens of the Mughals ... The
boulder gardens at Sigiriya on the other hand have eastern rather than western correspondence. The closest
parallel to the Sigiriya gardens are the gardens of China, Korea and Japan ... The third garden form at Sigiriya,
the terraced gardens, are so basic and archetypal in character that parallel forms exist in many diverse
cultures of the ancient world from the ziggurats of Mesopotamia and ‘Hanging Gardens’ of Babylon to the
pre-historic ritual terraces and stepped stupas of Southeast Asia. They are often encountered in early Indian
sites and are a conscious element in Chinese landscape gardening and architectural planning. Their most
obvious correspondence, however, are with the terraced rice fields and other terraced hillside agricultural
systems which are extensively found in Sri Lanka, as in most parts of tropical Asia. The diversity of parallels and
correspondences, that we see in the gardens at Sigiriya serve, in the end, only to underline the uniqueness of
this 5th century creation of Sri Lankan master builders.’
101 Previous Research and Interventions i

macro systems: Sigiri Mahavava, which is at a higher elevation than the water garden,
and a series of moats fed directly from Sigiri Mahavava and two micro systems; the
main water retaining structures of the water garden in the western precinct, and water
control and water retaining system from the rock summit up to the water garden.
Ellepola (1990), with available field evidence and archaeological records of Sigiriya
and placing them in the context of 5th century Sri Lankan knowledge of hydraulic
technology, attempts to conjecture the hydraulics of Sigiriya. Based on his study,
Ellepola (1990:183) remarks,
‘The hydraulics of Sigiriya may be considered as a composition of many specialized
systems that were engineered to serve the diverse needs of the citadel. Although these
individual systems functioned differently, their component parts were intricately inter-
related to form a single comprehensive network by means of numerous by-pass and loop
connections. This facility permitted parts of the system to continue working while other
sections remained closed, facilitating the processes of repair, maintenance or even water
conservation. The water flowing through these different hydraulic systems within the
citadel was passed out of the complex and collected into channels that finally emptied
the water into the Sigiriya Oya. Downstream irrigation of the Sigiriya region was
thus ensured with the water conserved from within the Sigiriya complex ... The water
distribution through the complex was caused by gravity action, which created a gently
flow into the successively lower areas where the supply was required.’
§ 3.1.3 Observations
The above inquiry shows that although much has been studied relating to the
landscape design of Sigiriya, there are no serious and in-depth studies with regard to
the central issue and the research questions mentioned under 1.2.
Based on the above inquiry on the research carried out so far on Sigiriya, the following
assumptions will also be derived with regard to the present study.
Although Sigiriya is a multiperiod site, its dominant identity is a royal complex during
the 5th century AC. The principal royal palace and the palace garden are located on the
upper west and the lower east levels of the rock summit, respectively. The walled-in
hilly terrain around the base of the rock is the inner royal precinct while the pleasure
garden occupies the inner western precinct. The outer city occupied by the urban elite
was located within the outer eastern precinct and/or just outside the outer ramparts,
with the suburbs, villages and monasteries further beyond.
The foregoing inquiry also shows that the studies relating to landscape architecture
and its related spheres – such as those of other historical architecture in Sri Lanka –
are efforts to view archaeological material in historical, sociological, socio-historical
and semiological perspectives. There is no doubt that such studies are important to,
102 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

and capable of, underlining the archaeo-historical value of Sigiriya, and contribute to
the subject of art history. The approach used by Paranavitana (1972a) and developed
by Bandaranayake (1990a, 1993a) – for instance, to attempt to formulate a typology
for gardens based on their physical characteristics, such as different hydraulic
features (pools, ponds, fountains), landscape features (water, boulders, terraces)
or the identification of planning principles such as planning mathematics based
on a square module, geometrical, axial, symmetrical, asymmetrical, organic, echo
planning, without addressing their specific selection by the designers – can only
highlight the historical importance of Sigiriya in the national as well as international
context. Such a basis, on the other hand, does not in any way help to underline the
importance of Sigiriya from a landscape design point of view. As far as landscape
design is concerned, the use (or even deliberate non-use) of various hydraulic and
landscape features is determined by the terrain and/or by overall architectural design
concept, and their composition is a result of the skillful application of design tools
and techniques by the designers. For instance, in French baroque gardens, the outer
landscape is intentionally banished from the line of sight using architectural design
techniques. In English landscape parks, the geometric system is deliberately dissolved
in the physical line of forces of the natural landscape, again using architectural design
principles (Steenbergen and Reh, 1996). Approaches from an art-historical point of
view, therefore, hardly provide insight into technical aspects of landscape design. As far
as the objectives of the present study are concerned, art-historical approaches are not
capable of delivering the expected results.
The studies of De Silva, N. (1996), by identifying the boundaries, entrances, paths,
flight of steps, retaining walls, water, and so on, as ‘design elements’ to understand the
principles of landscape design, together with the studies of Byrom (1986) and Ellepola
(1990), are seen as attempts to move away from the conventional art-historical
approach. Since the use of various design elements is again determined by the overall
design concept, and their composition is the result of the skilful application of design
tools and techniques of the designer, the methodologies of such studies do not help to
achieve the objectives of the present study.
All these suggest that in order to read the landscape design of Sigiriya to achieve
the objectives of the present study, a sound methodology is a prerequisite. As such
it is important to inquire into the methodologies followed by other researchers in
the international context. The next chapter, therefore, attempts to inquire into and
examine the methodologies available to study landscape architecture, in order to adopt
an appropriate research methodology to carry out the present study.
103 Previous Research and Interventions i

§ 3.2 Previous Conservation, Presentation and Development Activities
§ 3.2.1 Sigiriya Proper
The clearing of the jungle cover by the Department of Archaeology at Sigiriya commenced
in 1894, and with these attempts a clearer macro picture of Sigiriya came to light with
much clarity. Following this program, by 1899 most of the structures on the rock summit
and the remains of the Lion Plateau were exposed and conserved (ASCAR, 1894-1900).
The excavations at the rock summit mainly revealed the brick basements and foundations
of the palace and other related structures, retaining walls of the terraced gardens and
walkways, stairways and pavements linking different spaces and levels. With regard to the
conservation of such remains at the summit, the brickwork was mainly consolidated by
pointing and adding a few sacrificial brick layers where necessary to protect deteriorated,
existing inner brickwork (figure 3.5). Although several construction phases were identified
during excavations, no significant attempts were made to differentiate such phases.
Moreover, the presentation techniques employed during the period do not help to
differentiate the open and built-up areas on the rock summit. As such, there is some
confusion, even to an expert, in reading the total plan of the rock summit.
The excavations at the Lion Plateau made it possible to expose the deteriorated foreparts
of the brick-built and lime-plastered colossal lion figure and part of the superstructure
with internal flights of steps, as well as the basement of a U-shaped brick wall, which
formed an internal courtyard at the immediate foreground of the Lion-Staircase-House.
The two paws of the lion figure were restored to their original form, and the photographs
taken before and after conservation suggest that this intervention could be regarded as
one of the finest restoration works of the period (figure 3.6). The brickwork above the lion
paws with its flight of steps was also restored up to the level of the available evidence. A
steel ladder was introduced above this level to provide safe access to the rock summit.
Only the inner wall of the U-shaped building on the Lion Plateau was consolidated,
leaving the outer wall to the weathering elements (figure 3.7). This action also made it
difficult to read the plan of the plateau, specifically with regard to the open and built-up
spatial relationship.
Segments of the Mirror Wall that had partly collapsed were restored using brick masonry
and plastered to its original height and appearance. The pathway associated with the Mirror
Wall, which had collapsed in sections, was also reconstructed, as were the missing parts of
the parapet wall of such sections. The reconstruction of segments where the foundations
of this pathway had entirely collapsed were not attempted; instead, steel footbridges with
handrails cantilevered off the rock were introduced to span such gaps (figure 3.8). By 1912
considerable portions of the stairways traversing the southern and southwestern slopes of
104 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

the hilly terrain were also exposed and restored utilizing all available stone steps from the
site, and the missing stone steps were reproduced with new brickwork (figure 3.9).
Figure 3.5
The structures on the rock summit, after excavation and after conservation (courtesy: Archaeology Department [top])
105 Previous Research and Interventions i

Figure 3.6
A paw of the lion figure, before and after conservation (courtesy: Archaeology Department)
106 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 3.7
The Lion Plateau
Figure 3.8
The Mirror Wall (before and after conservation) (note the steel footbridge introduced to span the gaps created by
the segments of the wall that had collapsed) (courtesy: Archaeology Department [left])
107 Previous Research and Interventions i

Figure 3.9
Stairway traversing the western slope of the hilly terrain, before and after conservation (courtesy: Archaeology
Department [left])
During the period before 1900, excavations had been carried out on several structures
on the pleasure garden as well, especially at the central island pavilion of the four-
quartered feature and two island pavilions (‘summer palaces’) on either side of the
central axial pathway. Although the remains uncovered were published (ASCAR
1889:plates IX, X, XI), no significant attempt has been made to conserve them. The
retaining walls of the northern arm of the inner moat were partly excavated and
restored during 1947-1949. Some of the remains at the rock summit were also
consolidated during this period.
Excavations at the central and southwest sectors of the pleasure garden were
conducted intensively during the period 1950-1954. The foundations of numerous
enclosures, pavilions, terraces and other garden structures, and pools, ponds, fountains
and streams, together with an intricate hydraulic system, were unearthed within this
area. The pools, ponds, fountains and other hydraulic features were restored, while
the structures above ground level were consolidated by only adding a few sacrificial
layers where necessary. The underground conduits were also cleaned and rehabilitated.
Partial landscaping and layout work of this area were also undertaken. By about 1958,
retaining walls of the southwest L-shaped pond of the four-quartered feature were
exposed and its retaining walls restored up to the existing ground level. The pond was
then partly desilted and filled with water. The excavations and conservation of the
enclosure to the south of the four-quartered feature was also undertaken during this
108 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

period. Here again, the exposed brickwork above ground level was only consolidated
without proper interpretation. As in the case of the summit of the rock, there is again
confusion with regard to the identification of open and built-up spaces within this
enclosure.58
During the period 1961-1979, in addition to further investigation of the pleasure
garden, excavations were also conducted in the outer western precinct. As a result,
the western entrance to the pleasure garden with its limestone stairway was restored,
while the northern and southern gateways to the same precinct were consolidated by
adding a few sacrificial layers to protect the existing inner brick core of these structures.
The western outer moat and parts of the inner moat were also exposed and their stone
retaining walls restored. The middle rampart and its gate on the western side were
excavated and consolidated to an appreciable length. The stonework of several terraces
on the western escarpment were restored, and missing segments of a flight of steps
that traverse the escarpments were temporarily linked for the easy ascent of visitors.
In 1980 the Sri Lankan government with UNESCO launched the Cultural Triangle
Project to safeguard and present the outstanding sites and monuments within the
triangular zone demarcated by the island’s three ancient capitals: Anuradhapura
(4th century BC-10th century AC), Polonnaruva (11th-13th century AC) and Kandy
(16th-19th century AC), on a scale similar to such previous UNESCO campaigns at Abu
Simbel, Venice and Borobudur.59 Six major sites were identified under this project, and
the conservation of gardens at Sigiriya was one of them.60 The gardens of Sigiriya thus
became the major landscape conservation program ever implemented in Sri Lanka.
With the commencement of the UNESCO-Sri Lanka Project of the Cultural Triangle at
Sigiriya in 1982, the already ongoing conservation and presentation work program was
given a new outlook. The objectives stated in the original master plan (Selvaratnam
58 See Byrom (1986) for his suggested reconstruction of the spaces within the compartment to the south of the
four-quartered feature.
59 The principal difference between the Cultural Triangle Project and many other such UNESCO projects, however,
is that the former project was conceived of, initiated and implemented by Sri Lankan experts, providing a unique
model and experiment in heritage management in a developing country.
60 The other sites selected under the UNESCO-Sri Lanka Project of the Cultural Triangle were: (a) Jetavana
Monastery (4th century AC) at Anuradhapura, which consists of the tallest brick-built edifice in the world; (b)
Abhayagiri Monastery (1st century AC) at Anuradhapura, one of the largest pilgrim establishments ever built
by man and consisting of the second tallest brick-built edifice in the world; (c) Alahana Parivena (12th century
AC) at Polonnaruva, the largest Buddhist monastic university of medieval Sri Lanka; (d) rock and wall paintings
of the cave temple (3rd century BC to 19th century AC) at Dambulla, which consists of the largest collection of
classical mural paintings at one site; and (e) royal and monastic complexes of Kandy (16th to 19th century AC).
All these sites have been declared as World Heritage Sites. For details on this project see Silva (1993) and Silva
and Guruge (n.d.).
109 Previous Research and Interventions i

and Perera, 1992:6) of the project were ‘to excavate, record monuments and carryout
research on monuments uncovered, and on inscriptions, and paintings, discovered
within the project area; to conserve and, or to carryout restoration work on monuments
already uncovered; to provide facilities for the visitors to the area; and to provide
guidelines for the development of the neighboring areas so that the project area of
Sigiriya ... can be studied in its proper perspective.’
Therefore, from 1982 onwards the conservation, presentation and management
activities at the site were handled by the Central Cultural Fund, the implementing
agency of the UNESCO-Sri Lanka Project of the Cultural Triangle. Under the
conservation and layout program, all previously conserved areas and monuments
that showed signs of deterioration were consolidated. Since the features of the
pleasure garden are almost symmetrical along its east-west axis, and the previous
works were also mainly concentrated to the south of this axis, the intervention policy
of the project was to confine all possible interventions also to the area south of this
axis. The objectives of such an approach were to preserve a substantial part of the site
free of contemporary interventions to minimize disturbance to the site and to leave a
considerable area untouched for future investigation and interpretation, especially in
anticipation of advanced techniques of data retrieval that will be evolved in the future
(Bandaranayake, 1986b:104; Ellepola, 1999:20). Such a policy also had the added
advantage of displaying to the visitor the corresponding ‘untouched’ and ‘conserved’
areas on both sides of the central axis. Therefore, the un-conserved segments of the
inner moat, the southeast L-shaped pond, the retaining walls of the island pavilion
(‘summer palace’), and other ponds and pools, all to the south of the east-west axis,
were excavated and restored to their original levels (figure 3.10). The un-conserved
segments of the middle rampart, the miniature water garden (figure 3.11) between
the four-quartered feature and the inner rampart, the structures within the enclosure
to the south of the four-quartered feature, and the remains on top of the ‘summer
palace’ to the south of the east-west axis were consolidated by adding a few sacrificial
layers. The central east-west axial pathway was rehabilitated to its total length in the
inner western precinct. The missing links of the western and southwestern stairways
that traverse the hilly terrain, retaining walls of the terrace structure with their flight of
steps, among others, to the south of the axis were also restored (figure 3.12).
The original ground levels of the area south of the east-west axis from the middle
rampart up to the base of the main rock were almost established by removing soil
deposits of the latter periods and were landscaped and laid out. Since the original
planting scheme has completely disappeared without leaving any physical trace, no
attempt has been made to adopt any reconstructional scheme. Instead, the policy on
planting was to retain and protect the indigenous forest species that have survived
at the site up to now. All exotic trees and the flowering plants introduced between
1940 and 1980 were removed and replaced with indigenous species found at the site
(Bandaranayake, 1997:82). The existing trees showing signs of decay or disease have
also been botanically treated (Ellepola, 1999:27).
110 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 3.10
The central zone of the inner western precinct, before and after conservation (photo: M. W. E. Karunaratne [left])
Figure 3.11
The Miniature Water Garden, after conservation (photo: Upali Upananda; courtesy: Bandaranayake 1993b)
111 Previous Research and Interventions i

Figure 3.12
Western route through the hilly terrain leading up to the Boulder Arch No. 1, after excavations and after
conservation (courtesy: Central Cultural Fund)
§ 3.2.2 Visitor Infrastructure and Facilities
With regard to visitor access, the only means during the early period of activity at
Sigiriya to ascend to the level of the paintings, which have survived halfway up on the
western rock face, was the wire ladders suspended over the rock and dropping down
to the ground. Later in 1938, a steel spiral staircase was introduced from the pathway
associated with the Mirror Wall to view these paintings (figure 3.13).
With the declaration of Sigiriya as a World Heritage Site and the wide publicity it gained
after the commencement of the UNESCO-Sri Lanka Project of the Cultural Triangle,
Sigiriya undoubtedly became the most attractive destination for cultural tourism in the
island, among domestic as well as foreign visitors.
During the period of operation of the Cultural Triangle Project, therefore, a modest car
park, which was established before in the area between the base of the southwestern
slope of the hilly terrain and the southern gate to the pleasure garden, was developed
with toilet facilities and souvenir shops (figure 3.14). The car park was situated in such
a way as to be hidden under the thick and wide canopies of the existing trees of the area
112 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

from high elevations. In order to avoid crowd congestion and cross traffic movement
due to a large volume of visitors to the site, and to improve pedestrian circulation, the
existing steel gangway to the rock summit was duplicated. Similarly, an additional
spiral staircase to gain access from the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall to the
paintings was also provided.
Figure 3.13
Spiral staircases installed to view the surviving paintings
The east-west axial pathway was extended to about one kilometer beyond the western
outer rampart further west across the forest and paddy fields as the major approach
road to the site. The objective of such an intervention was to provide different and
changing views of Sigiriya rock to visitors approaching from a distance. With regard to
this intervention, Ellepola (1999:40-42) remarks,
‘The east-west axial line of the pedestrian pathway through the western water garden
was extended outside the precinct to project the construction baseline of the new
road trace. The western approach road was thus aligned with the existing geometry of
the western precinct ... Several images of the Sigiriya landscape setting are captured
along this road as the route approaches the western gate of the site ... The new
road thus became the stage to reveal the drama and unique effects of the Sigiriya
landscape setting.’
113 Previous Research and Interventions i

1. Vehicle Park, Shops &
Other Tourist Facilities
2. New Buddhist
Monastery
3. Housing for the Sigiriya
New Village
4. Extended East-West
Axial Approach
5. Herbal Garden
6. Sigiriya Museum
7. Vehicle Park
Figure 3.14
Layout of the Sigiriya complex showing the major interventions
As per the original master plan, a museum-cum-visitor center was constructed in the
area beyond the outer rampart by this approach road
§ 3.2.3 The Surrounding Hinterland
With regard to the conservation of the hinterland surrounding Sigiriya proper, the
master plan of the UNESCO-Sri Lanka Project of the Cultural Triangle at Sigiriya
(Selvaratnam and Perera 1992:8) outlines its approach thus:
114 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

‘... a complete excavated, restored and conserved citadel (Sigiriya proper) needs a proper
setting. The setting has to be created not only within the gardens, but also outside the
limits of the outer moat. The green fields, the landscape gardens, the presence of tanks,
canals and other water sources, nearby monasteries, were all part of this setting. Thus, to
take conservation as a whole, these must be looked into.’
As such, the principal lines of action suggested under this master plan are: preservation
of the natural forest cover; conservation of Pidurangala and Ramakele monasteries and
Mapagala fortification; rehabilitation of Sigiri Mahavava; prevention of township growth
in the vicinity of Sigiriya and shifting of such development to Kimbissa; and preparation
of guidelines for the development of townships.
Initially, an extent consisting of 5,100 hectares of land around Sigiriya was declared
in 1988 as the Sigiriya Sanctuary under the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance
(1937, amended 2009) to protect the forest and wildlife in the immediate vicinity of
Sigiriya proper (figure 3.15). The traditional settlements, paddy cultivation and tourist
accommodation facilities that are in conformity with the character of the sanctuary were
permitted to function within this area.61
Although the hinterland surrounding Sigiriya has been economically deprived for
several generations, the increase in cultural tourism and possible political and social
pressure may create a major impact on the World Heritage Site of Sigiriya in the
near future, and a decision has been taken to formulate a master plan for regional
development by incorporating all the above actions to satisfy conservation as well as
socio-economic development needs within the area. As such, the country’s Urban
Development Authority (UDA), which has regulatory powers to control development,
was invited by the Central Cultural Fund to prepare a comprehensive regional plan for
the conservation and development of the Sigiriya hinterland. As a result, a much larger
area covering 9,400 hectares of land, conforming to the boundaries of the Inamaluwa
Korale (local administrative area), was gazetted under UDA law. The principal objectives
of this regional plan prepared in 1989 were to: conserve and develop Sigiriya and other
significant archaeological sites; preserve the natural heritage; conserve traditional
hamlets, villages and settlements together with their lifestyle including agricultural
system; rehabilitate minor irrigation tanks; relocate settlements and townships; develop
new townships to ease development pressure in the immediate vicinity of Sigiriya proper;
and develop domestic and foreign tourism infrastructure with necessary guidelines
61 Later, the in-between land segment which is to the east of the Sigiriya Sanctuary and to the west of the Mahaveli
Environmental Program Reserve was also taken to merge the two conservation areas into a single entity under
the control of the Department of Wildlife Conservation. Therefore, the total sanctuary also played an important
role in the conservation of the existing elephant population in the area, as it buffers its migratory corridors
within the forest reserve (Ellepola, 1999:43).
115 Previous Research and Interventions i

(UDA, 1989). A Structure Plan was also prepared for this purpose (figure 3.16). Under
this master plan, the small township that was developing in the area between the outer
moat of the western precinct and Mapagala, and encroaching on the strict archaeological
reserve, was relocated by the Central Cultural Fund, with much improved living conditions
and facilities, to a location (new Sigiriya village) about one kilometer to the west of the
outer moat of Sigiriya (figure 3.14). A commercial square was established at the western
extreme of the newly laid out western axial approach road to Sigiriya. A car park and other
facilities such as cafeterias, toilets, souvenir shops, publication sales center and tourist
ticket sales for visitors were located within this commercial square, which is aligned with
the axial arrangement of the Sigiriya scheme. The east-west axis of the layout was further
extended westward to axially locate a new Buddhist monastery for the spiritual needs of the
new settlement. By constructing a new stupa on this axis, the extended axis of the layout
was terminated at this new ritual structure, which occupies the center of this monastery
(figure 3.14). The bund of the Sigiri Mahavava between the hilly terrain and Mapagala
was rehabilitated to facilitate the filling of the reservoir in the future, somewhat to its
original capacity. With regard to the development of tourism, the Central Cultural Fund
in collaboration with other related government and private-sector institutions prepared
guidelines to regulate the future growth of the tourist industry within this area. These
guidelines outline the development zones for tourist facilities as well as height, buildable
area, color and texture of the buildings, infrastructure and other services to preserve the view
from the rock summit. Apart from these activities, this master plan is not active at present.
Apart from the pressure due to cultural tourism, the area around Sigiriya is also being
threatened by other development pressures. One such instance was the proposal in
2001 to expand and modernize the existing airport, of modest scale, located about
three kilometers west of the World Heritage Site of Sigiriya into a major air base for
military purposes. Although the military need was a priority during that period, the
heritage managers in Sri Lanka together with UNESCO and ICOMOS convinced the
authorities concerned of the unacceptability of that proposed project. The basis for
the impact assessment, carried out by the Delft University of Technology on behalf of
the ICOMOS (Van Voorden, 2001) with regard to this proposed development, was a
scientific understanding of the significant value of the site,62 and it was declared that
the proposed project would cause serious and irreversible damage to the architectural,
urban and landscape values of the site.
A tree-planting scheme was also initiated to reforest both sides of the Inamaluva-
Sigiriya road, to provide a green belt and a dense canopy of foliage creating the effect of a
drive through a tunnel of vegetation. Ellepola (1999:42) explains that this was intended
to prepare visitors for the environmental experience of Sigiriya.
62 The report acknowledges the knowledge obtained from the present research (Van Voorden, 2001:1).
116 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 3.15
Different protected zones related to Sigiriya
Figure 3.16
Proposed Structure Plan of the UDA for Sigiriya (courtesy: UDA, 1989)
117 Previous Research and Interventions i

§ 3.2.4 Observations
With regard to Sigiriya proper, emphasis was given to restoring the retaining walls of
the terraces, ponds, pools and other hydraulic features that are either below ground
level or at surface level. Except the remains that are necessary for visitor circulation
within the site (such as flights of steps, stairways, pathways, and so on, that were either
restored or rehabilitated for visitor use), the remains above ground level were mainly
consolidated. This suggests that the conservation, presentation and development
program so far within Sigiriya proper is basically an attempt to restore the ground
morphology of the site and to partly revive the hydraulic system. The policy adopted
for the remains above ground level (except those related to visitor circulation) is a
minimal intervention to leave them as they are. The presentation technique used for
the remains in certain areas (such as the rock summit, in front of the Lion-Staircase-
House at the Lion Plateau, the four-quartered feature and its two outer compartments,
miniature water garden) does not aid visualization of the differentiation between the
open and built-up spaces. Therefore, due to such an approach, the three-dimensional
aspects of the site are not properly presented. With regard to the remains that can
be utilized for visitor circulation, they were either restored or rehabilitated. The new
additions and major interventions, such as the introduction of the spiral staircase
to view paintings and the extension of the east-west axis beyond Sigiriya proper in
a further westward direction as the approach road to the site, suggest that visitors
to the site have a major impact on the site. As far as conservation, presentation and
development activities of the hinterland are concerned, other than confining to the
administrative boundaries of Inamaluva Korale, there is no proper justification for
the determination of its boundaries from a heritage point of view. Therefore, this
suggests that these boundaries are arbitrarily decided. Although the conservation of
the cultural and natural landscape beyond the walls of Sigiriya proper was identified
as an essential aspect, the justification given for such an action is based on aesthetic
reasons, that is to provide an appropriate setting for the Sigiriya site proper. This points
out that the cultural and natural landscape beyond Sigiriya proper was identified only
as a feature to serve as a mere background to the walled-in complex. The axial location
of the commercial and visitor facilities at the western extreme of the newly laid out
western approach road, and further extension of the east-west axis to terminate at the
newly constructed Buddhist stupa, can also be considered as new additions and major
interventions to the overall original formal layout.
All this indicates that policies with regard to conservation, presentation and
development activities at Sigiriya have been largely influenced by the site’s antiquarian
values due to the dominance of archaeo-historical studies.
118 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

4 The Methodology
§ 4.1 Survey of Existing Methodologies
In order to derive an appropriate research methodology for the present study, a
literature survey was carried out to see what methodologies have been followed in
research on landscape design. Therefore, literature in the form of books, articles and
periodicals were surveyed.63 Literature dealing with such subjects as the horticulture
and floriculture of landscapes was excluded from this survey, as they belong to a special
subdiscipline of landscape design.
Since landscape design can be regarded as an art and a science at the same time,
the survey reveals that the methodological approaches to study/understand
landscape design can be roughly divided into two traditions: art-historical and
technical-analytical.
Many publications fall into the category of the art-historical tradition. Such studies
primarily focus on cultural-historical characteristics, picturesque aspects, art-historical
study, and interpretation of landscape as works of art and architectural appraisal.
This tradition is mainly developed by art/architectural historians and other culturally
oriented academics. The text is the predominant medium of communication, while
photographs, maps, plans and other drawings are used basically to illustrate their
arguments. Only a few publications fall into the technical-analytical tradition.
63 Books surveyed are: Aben and De Wit (1999), Adams, W. H. (1978), Bentmann and Muller (1970), Berral
(1978), Charageat (1955), Comito (1978), De Jong (1988, 1990), Dixon Hunt and Wills (1975), Berger (2002),
Corner (1996), Fairbrother (1974), Fat and De Jong (1991), Frank (1956), Fleming and Gore (1979), Gollwitzer
(1974), Gothein (1914), Hazlehurst (1980), Holmes (2001), Hussey (1967), Jashemski (1979), Jellicoe and
Jellicoe (1975), Kask (1971), Laird (1992), Laurie (1975), Mann (1993), Mariage (1986), Moore, Mitchell and
Turnbull (1993), Mosser (1991), Mostafavi (2003), Pechere (1987), Reh (1996), Reh, Steenbergen and Aten
(2007), Shepherd and Jellicoe (1986), Smienk and Neimeijer (2011), Steenbergen (1990, 2008), Steenbergen
and Bobbink (2009), Steenbergen and Reh (1996, 2003, 2011, 2012), Strong (1979), Thacker (1979), Tildon
(2006), Tobey (1973), Turner (2005), Van Asbeck (1976), Van der Ree, Smienk and Steenbergen (1992), Van
Voorden and Kwast (1997), Wittkower (1949), Woodbridge (1970,1982), and Yong and Yong (2005).
119 The Methodology i

Among them,64 Wittkower (1949) examines the architectural principles of Palladio villa
design; Frank (1956) studies the typological arrangements of the Frascati villa; Hussey
(1967) studies English gardens and landscapes; and Bentmann and Muller (1970)
make the Italian villa the subject of a socio-historical analysis.
Hazlehurst (1980), in his study of the illusionist devices of French baroque gardens,
designed by landscape architect Andre Le Notre, follows an approach that is a mixture
of these two traditions. The main themes which he discusses in the publication can be
summarized as follows:
• Relationship to the topography: how the design is imposed upon the terrain,
how the existing topographical features such as mounds, valleys, streams and
availability of water, and existing man-made features such as settlements and
structures, were considered in the realization of the scheme, and, on the other
hand, how these features have influenced the adjustment of the scheme, for
example.
• Definition of space: what the spatial limits of the scheme are, how they are defined,
treated, and so on.
• Axes and focal points: identification of the different types of axes in the scheme
(for example, main axis, transverse axes), and how they are formed, reinforced
and visually programmed using different elements (visual organization, direction,
slowing and termination); identification of the focal points of the composition and
how they are achieved, and so on.
• Optical effects: how the different forms of the scheme are visually interrelated
to each other, and how they change with dramatic rapidity when the spectator
advances down the scheme.
• Sudden surprises: how the elements of the design are highlighted and presented as
a surprise, and how they are unveiled to the spectator.
• Symbolic meaning: what are the symbolic meanings of the elements in the spatial
scheme and their expression.
For the analysis, Hazlehurst uses aerial photographs to show the relationship of the
garden proper to the surrounding landscape, technical maps and plans with sight
lines, a series of perspective sketches and special photographs to show how different
elements in the scheme relate to each other, as well as conventional illustrations such
as maps, plans and engravings.
Moore, Mitchell and Turnbull (1993), in their attempt to make suggestions about
how the landscape ‘patterns’ and ‘ideas’ of the past can be appropriated, interpreted
and transformed for modern times and in different locations by looking at the
64 Other studies that follow a technical-analytical approach are: Charageat (1955), Woodbridge (1970,
1982), Kask (1971), Mariage (1986), Shepherd and Jellicoe (1986), Corner (1996), Berger (2002) and
Mostafavi (2003).
120 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

great landscapes of the past around the globe, also use a methodology which is in
between these two traditions. Specially drawn plans, perspectives and axonometrics
highlighting the elements are used as tools. The axonometrics are used to differentiate
various spatial layers, such as the land form, buildings, walls, terraces, paths, water and
planting of the landscape.
§ 4.2 Methodology of the Delft Tradition of Research
Steenbergen (1990, 2008), Van der Ree, Smienk and Steenbergen (1992), Reh (1996),
Steenbergen and Reh (1996, 2003, 2011, 2012), Reh, Steenbergen and Aten (2007),
Steenbergen and Bobbink (2009) and Smienk and Niemeijer (2011), in their studies
of Italian, French, English, Dutch and other landscape design, use a methodology
with a technical-analytical approach that has been developed at the Delft University
of Technology in the Netherlands. This approach, which is part of the ‘Delft tradition
of research’ on architectural and urban design, utilizes detailed and precise analytical
tools with a broadbased overview.
This methodology, to analyze and compare architectural principles underlying the
landscape designs of all influential periods of the West European landscape tradition,
was developed by the Landscape Design Department of the Faculty of Architecture
at the above university. The basis for such a methodology was a combination of the
design/analytical tradition that had evolved in the architectonic and urban planning
disciplines of the same faculty and the typological and morphological research
developed by the Venetian School in Italy.
The analysis begins by examining the theoretical body of knowledge – the science,
ideology and art theory, concepts of nature and space – of the period. An outline
of the history of each landscape in relation to its commission is then provided. The
morphology and topography of the site is analyzed to explain the basic form of the
design. Next comes an analysis of the architectural design in more detail. Such a
methodology implies departing from the romanticized preconception of historic
examples in favor of “unearthing” the dynamic and creative thinking process behind
them. As Reh (1996:496) remarks, ‘the original design process cannot be precisely
reconstructed, as it is forever lost in history. But it can be brought to life by inviting the
reader to ‘redesign in his own mind’ the landscape gardens ...’ The result of the analysis
is a hypothetical compositional scheme of the design: an abstract model including all
active compositional elements of the design.
The analysis uses topographic maps of the surrounding landscape, longitudinal/
cross sections of the topography and digital three-dimensional terrain models to
show the geomorphology, axonometrics of the scheme, plans with sight lines, and
perspectives of how different elements of the scheme relate to each other. The text only
complements the above, becoming a secondary medium of communication. The most
121 The Methodology i

important aspect of this methodology is that it provides an insight into conceptual
thinking and the three-dimensional aspects of the landscape design, and one can
thus arrive at precise conclusions with a rational and logical language. As such, this
research methodology has made it possible to examine design techniques and make
comparisons of different designs from all the influential periods of the West European
landscape tradition.
In the spatial analysis of the landscape of the Neercanne Gardens in Maastricht, the
Netherlands, van Voorden and Kwast (1997) also follow a methodology similar to
the above. The spatial and architectural themes of the composition are presented in
a series of plans and analytical drawings. The text is also directly combined with the
images. Aben and De Wit (1999) also use the above methodology to analyze the design
of the European medieval ‘enclosed garden’.
Since the objective of the present study is to read Sigiriya as a landscape architectonic
design with special emphasis on the architectonic means employed to order the
elements in the composition and thereby to understand its design characteristics, it is
essential that this study adopt a technical-analytical approach. Out of the technical-
analytical methodologies mentioned above, that of the Delft tradition of research is
comprehensive and has delivered positive results. In order to adapt this methodology
to carry out the present study, it is important to be familiar with the analytical keys and
tools developed in the Delft tradition of research. For this reason, site visits were made
to Italian Renaissance villas, French formal baroque gardens and the English landscape
parks of the West European landscape tradition.65
In order to ‘read in reverse’ the landscape design, the landscape architectonic design
is conceptually anatomized into the following four aspects,66 which ‘layout the relation
between the architectonic design and its perception in a systematic way and afford
insight to the spatial dynamic of the design.’67
65 The sites visited were such Italian Renaissance villas as Villa Medici at Fiesole, Villa Lante at Bagnaia, Villa d’Este
at Tivoli, Villa Giulia in Rome and Villa Farnese at Caprarola; such French formal baroque gardens as Vaux-le-
Vicomte at Melun, near Paris, Chantilly and Versailles; and the English landscape garden at Castle Howard in
Yorkshire.
66 This layering system is similar to the theoretical model developed by the German architectural theorist Paul
Frankl (1914), to describe architectural forms in terms of four categories: Spatial Form or spatial composition;
Corporeal Form or treatment of mass and surface; Visual Form or treatment of light, color and other optical
effects; and Purposive Form or the relation of design to function.
67 See Steenbergen and Reh (2003:383).
122 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

• The Basic Form or the basic plan in which the topography of the natural
landscape and man-made landscape are rationalized.68
• The Spatial Form or the architectonic form and spatial effects of the three-
dimensional landscape space, through which spatial dynamics are created.69
• The Metaphorical Form in which the metaphorical images of natural and man-
made landscapes are adapted and come together with elements of the urban
program and metaphorical-spatial references.70
• The Programmatic Form or the Form of the Program, which brings the divisions
in the landscape and the architectonic expression of the program into relation
with the pattern of movement in and through them.71
§ 4.3 Adaptation of the Methodology for the Present Study
The above methodology of the Delft tradition of research is mainly used for the analysis
of gardens and landscapes that are in a good state of preservation and/or have enough
68 The basic form is the way in which the topography of the natural landscape or the man-made landscape is
reduced, rationalized and activated in the ground plan of the design. For instance, a rational matrix can be
laid notionally over the natural landscape. The components of the landscape that fall within the matrix are
then arranged geometrically. Formal laws of design can also be played against the natural morphology. In this
case, a balance is sought between the autonomy of the design and the irregularity of its landscape context. The
basic form is definitive for the concept of ‘place’. One might call playing with ‘place’ a prime generator of the
landscape architectonic composition (Steenbergen, 2008:39).
69 Spatial form is the form and operation of three-dimensional landscape space which creates a spatial dynamic.
This might be, for example, the framing of a landscape or urban panorama, or the construction of a spatial
series along the route of a picturesque landscape composition. Spatial form is definitive for the understanding
and experience of space. In landscape architecture the principle issue is always the coherence of the landscape
space, from very close by to the far distance, as distinct from its architectonic delineations (Steenbergen,
2008:127).
70 The metaphorical form is the way in which iconographic and mythological images and architectonic structural
forms are connected with one another and with elements from nature, such as water, the relief and vegetation.
It is the systematization of various references to origins and to other worlds. Natural elements such as soil,
water, plants and animals can play a role as references when they are connected to mythic elements or to the
world of classical gods. Both history and the future are represented in the composition, and thereby connected
with each other (Steenbergen, 2008:235).
71 Form of the program makes the functional zoning and the organization of the program in relation to patterns
of the movement explicit. Here one is constantly faced with the question of to what extent the program
determines the landscape architectonic composition, and vice versa. The form of the program is definitive
for the understanding of human activity, for the purposiveness of the spatial organization of the landscape
(Steenbergen, 2008:243).
123 The Methodology i

reliable documentary and literary information to visualize the total three-dimensional
aspect of the design. As far as Sigiriya is concerned, its physical remains have been
preserved only in a skeletal form (only basements/foundations of most of the
structures have survived to date), and no literary or documentary evidence is available
to visualize the three-dimensional appearance of the complex. Moreover, there is a
vast gap with regard to the time (about 1,500 years) and to the social, cultural, political
and geographical context between the western tradition and Sigiriya. As such, in the
following section, considering the context of Sigiriya, the analytical keys and tools
of the above methodology are adapted for the analysis. Observations with regard to
the western tradition are also provided in brief with reference to the three prototypes
introduced by Steenbergen and Reh (1996:8-9, 14-15)72: the Italian Renaissance Villa
Medici (1458-1462) at Fiesole, the French formal baroque garden Vaux-le-Vicomte
(1656-1661) at Melun, near Paris, and the English landscape garden of Castle Howard
(1698-1723) in Yorkshire.
a. Background Studies
I. The Theoretical Body of Knowledge: Science, Ideology and Art Theory of the Period
In the western examples, the examination of the above aspects in the landscape
design context of the period has contributed to the analysis and interpretation of the
design. Literature which gives direct reference to such subjects is available in the West
European context. However, such direct data during the 5th century AC, at the time of
the laying out of Sigiriya, are not available, and the compilation of such information
is beyond the scope of the present study. However, the contents covered under
environment, topography and society; attitude towards nature; cosmology; discourse
on kingship; city planning and architecture; irrigation engineering; pleasure activities
of royalty; and external contacts related to the society of the 5th century AC (see section
2.1) provide the context for this study.
II. Outline of the History of the Site in Relation to Its Commission
Since the outline of the history of western examples, together with the background
of the client and of the architect in relation to the commission is known, such
information has provided important background data for the analysis of these
examples. With regard to Sigiriya, the establishment of the chronological sequence
and periodization of the site in an archaeological sense and the client of the major
constructional phase are known by name. Although the functional requirements and
his aspirations are briefly recorded in the chronicles, such information cannot be
72 See Steenbergen and Reh (1996:8-9, 14-15).
124 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

regarded as precise data due to the biased nature of recording by the chroniclers. This
suggests that such aspects, although they are related to the design, are also excluded
from the present study.
b. The Basic Form
I. Characteristics of the Natural Landscape: Analysis of the Natural Geomorphologic
and Topographic Characteristics of the Site
With the aid of topographical maps, contour plans, digital three-dimensional
terrain models of the geomorphology, and engravings and literary descriptions of
the site before and after the laying out of the schemes of the western examples, the
characteristics of the natural landscape before the interventions (such as the natural
axes, boundaries, focal points, views and view points) are analyzed to understand
the internal logic of the natural landscape. At Villa Medici, there is an open view
from the site across the large Arno valley, while the higher hills along the northern
edge form a hard limit and the lower hills to the south form a diffuse boundary. The
geomorphologic characteristics of Vaux-le-Vicomte do not provide specific natural view
points. However, there are two natural axes formed by the valleys of Anqueil and Bobee.
The rolling hills at Castle Howard enable unrestricted views of the outer landscape.
In most of the design solutions, a balance is sought between the autonomy of the
landscape design and the characteristics of the existing natural and agricultural
landscape. Therefore, it is important to analyze the following aspects with regard to the
characteristics of the natural and agricultural landscape of Sigiriya before interventions.
Since Sigiriya rock rises to a height of about 180 meters above the virtual plain, it is
important to analyze the characteristics of the natural and agricultural landscape
in relation to the geomorphology and topography (including the geological system
and the agricultural landscape with its partly natural and partly man-made drainage
network) associated with Sigiriya rock, and the wider landscape context and in relation
to the natural, topographic configurations (such as natural lines, axes). Unlike in
the western examples, there are no engravings or literary descriptions of the natural
and agricultural landscape before its major constructional phase. However, the
archaeological research carried out at Sigiriya and at its hinterland (Bandaranayake,
1990b:19) suggests that no considerable change occurred during the past 1,500 years
with regard to the geomorphology and topography, as well as the natural, topographic
configuration of its natural and agricultural landscape. As such, the present
topographical maps and contour plans, and digital three-dimensional terrain models
of the geomorphology will be used for the present analysis.
II. The Interaction of the Formal Layout with the Natural and Agricultural Landscape
Using site plans, sections, layout plans with topographical maps, axonometrics and
digital three-dimensional terrain models of the geomorphology, the interaction of
the formal layout of the western examples with the characteristics of the natural
landscape is analyzed in relation to location, orientation, positioning of the house and
125 The Methodology i

garden, visual balance between the layout and the terrain’s natural form, in order to
examine the relationship between the internal logic of the natural landscape and the
design response upon it. Such an analysis, therefore, enables one to see whether the
formal layout has an autonomous architectural system (with no interaction with the
natural landscape) or total/part adaptation to the natural landscape. At Villa Medici,
the construction of garden terraces in a north-south direction is in keeping with the
natural contours of the terrain. The scheme is laid out like a balcony overlooking the
Arno valley and the city of Florence. At Vaux-le-Vicomte, the natural geomorphologic
characteristics of the river valley were used to isolate the layout from the rest of the
landscape. The cutting and filling of earth was also minimized by positioning the main
axis diagonally through the natural contours of the site. The width of the garden proper
was also determined by the natural width of the side valley. The complex interaction
with the garden’s axial symmetry, the geometric middle of the forest section and the
natural course of the river valleys create a visual balance between the plan’s symmetry
and the terrain’s natural form. This formal layout is isolated from the open agricultural
landscape by a dense forest wall. However, river Anqueil, which flows across the
site, was exploited to anchor the complex in the landscape. At Castle Howard, the
positioning of the architectonic set pieces along the Great Avenue forms a series of
composition that corresponds with important points of the natural morphology of the
site. The positioning of the house, facing south, makes the open agricultural landscape
part of the layout.
Since Sigiriya rock, a major natural feature, is part of the formal scheme and the layout
has an axial arrangement, it is important to analyze the interaction of the formal
layout of Sigiriya with the natural and agricultural landscape in relation to the lines of
the formal layout (boundaries of the overall layout and various enclosures), location
and orientation (of the overall layout, various enclosures, built elements within them),
and axial arrangement (of the overall layout, compound associated with the four-
quartered feature, rock summit). The site plans, sections, layout plans with contour
lines, axonometrics and digital three-dimensional terrain models are used for the
present analysis.
III. The Geometry
The analysis of the formal layout of the western examples in relation to its geometry
(system of measure and proportion and grid system, and its position in the landscape)
has enabled the establishment of whether the design is governed by a structuring
geometric system, which can eventually be used for a hierarchic/centralized
composition, or not (a move away from such a system to deliberately break this
composition). At Villa Medici, the geometric system can be interpreted as a dimensional
scheme in which the connection between the plan of the house, the garden and the
landscape could be controlled mathematically. The plan as a whole has a maximum
possible dimension in the given mountain slope. The geometric organization of the
plan at Vaux-le-Vicomte consists of an orthogonal grid. The axis is the central line in
the geometry. The grid module is larger towards the edges of the plan. This expanding
126 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

measurement system has basically three levels of scale: the house, the garden and the
estate. By laying the measurement schemes over each other, a hierarchical system exists
with a continuous series of jumps in scale between the interior and the landscape along
the axis. Castle Howard, on the other hand, witnesses a move away from the formal
geometric layout, with the fragmented rational and formal elements held together by
the contours of the natural morphology.
Since a geometric grid has also been noted at Sigiriya by Bandaranayake (1990:26,
1994a:15-16), the analysis of the geometric relationship of the layout (geometry of
the scheme) could be helpful to understand to what degree it was used to control the
composition and to organize the scale of the elements in the design. As in the case of the
western examples, the layout plans and detailed plans are used for the present analysis.
IV. The Symmetry and Asymmetry
Analysis of the symmetry of the formal layouts of the western examples shows how
the objects and elements are organized and ordered to understand the compositional
aspects of the design. At Villa Medici, the symmetricity is limited to the northern and
southern terraces. At Vaux-le-Vicomte, axial symmetry prevails along its central axis. At
Castle Howard, the symmetricity disappears among the physical and geographical line
of forces of the natural landscape.
Since symmetry as well as asymmetry are noted at Sigiriya (Bandaranayake, 1990b:26,
1994a:15-16), analysis of the overall layout, various enclosures such as pleasure
garden, hilly terrain, rock summit and the routes through various enclosures in
relation to the symmetry and asymmetry, will help in understanding how such aspects
contribute to order the composition of its design. As in the case of the western
examples, contour maps and plans are used.
c. The Spatial Form
I. The Spatial Entities of the Scheme in Relation to Their Incorporation and
Organization
Analysis of the spatial structure of the western examples in relation to the incorporation
and organization of the spatial entities (the house, garden and open landscape) has
contributed to understanding its hierarchical order. At Villa Medici, the house was at
one extreme of the spatial scheme, while at Vaux-le-Vicomte it has become the central
object of the space. At Castle Howard, the house as the central object of the scheme
was again diminished with the introduction of several autonomous structures that are
scenically composed in each other’s line of sight. The garden at Villa Medici was the
spatial and visual link between the house and the open landscape, while at Vaux-le-
Vicomte it was the ultimate space that is linked to the house along the central axis. At
Castle Howard, the garden merges with the open landscape and reads as a single entity.
Open landscape was the newly added spatial entity at Villa Medici, while at Vaux-
le-Vicomte the introduction of the forest as a thick wall between the garden and the
open agricultural landscape visually separates the latter from its spatial scheme. Open
127 The Methodology i

landscape reappears at Castle Howard and the space flows through the estate to the
open landscape as unbounded space.
Since Sigiriya offers an interesting example where gardens and structures are laid out
at different levels with a 360° panoramic view from its elevated position of the rock
summit, it is important to analyze the spatial structure to identify the spatial entities of
Sigiriya and how they are incorporated and organized, to understand its spatial design.
The plans and sections are used for the present analysis.
II. The Three-dimensional Aspects of the Panorama/Horizon in the Spatial Scheme
Analysis of the three-dimensional aspects of the panorama and horizon (which is
the limit of the outer landscape) in the spatial scheme of the western examples
also helps in understanding its spatial design. At Villa Medici, the introduction
of loggias and pergolas into the overall scheme provides scale to the panorama
and creates a perspective relationship with the horizon. Although the panorama
is not part of Vaux-le-Vicomte due to its location, the horizon was brought within
its boundaries by artificial means. At Castle Howard the panorama and horizon
reappear with all naturalness.
Since the panorama and horizon are noted at Sigiriya, the analysis of the three-
dimensional aspects of Sigiriya in relation to the treatment of the panorama/horizon
helps to understand its spatial design. Plans and exaggerated cross sections with
perspective picture planes are used.
III. The Spatial Depth in Relation to the Arrangement of Spaces/Elements
Analysis of the spatial design of the western examples in relation to the arrangement
of the spaces shows that the spatial depth resulting from the visual/optical
boundaries of a scheme help to understand its spatial design. For instance, the visual
boundaries of Villa Medici extend beyond the parameters of its property all the way
to the horizon. On the other hand, although the physical depth of Vaux-le-Vicomte
does not exceed more than a kilometer, its spatial depth cannot be gauged due to the
perspectively manipulated sequence of spaces within the layout. At Castle Howard
the reality prevails with its spatial depth again extending to the endless space beyond
the boundaries of the plan.
Since the east-west axis of Sigiriya is visually blocked by an enormous rock mass, to
see how this is spatially worked out it is therefore important to analyze the scheme in
relation to the spatial depth to understand its spatial design. Plans and cross sections
are used.
128 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

IV. The Scenography of Movement along the Three-dimensional Space
Analysis of the scenography of movement along the route of the three-dimensional space of
the western examples shows that acceleration, deceleration or even ceasing of movement
and the unrevealing technique (announcement in advance or sudden appearance) give
rise to the three-dimensional aspect of the spatial design. At Villa Medici, the scenography
of movement is almost static, while at Vaux-le-Vicomte it changes with dramatic rapidity
from point to point along its main axis. At Castle Howard the pictorial scenography of
the Grate Avenue indicates the vastness of the space as well as highlights the important
geomorphologic points of the topography to become the backbone of the landscape
composition. It is, therefore, a ‘decomposition’ of the formal model of axial symmetry.
Since the central rock formation at Sigiriya has an overwhelming presence in the overall
scheme, and large rock boulders are scattered around the base of the central rock, it is
important to see how these features are manipulated in the scenography of movement
along the three-dimensional space. Therefore, the analysis of the scenography of
movement of Sigiriya will help to understand its spatial design. Plans and sections with
sight lines, perspective sketches and photographs are used.
d. The Metaphorical Form
The Elements that Dictate the Image and Their Organization in the Pictorial Composition
Natural elements such as trees, rocks, forest, water, horizon and agricultural
landscape, and man-made features such as springs, pools, ponds, parterre, sculpture
and architectural objects in the scheme in relation to their visual expression,
materialization and symbolic meaning of the western examples help to understand
the elements that dictate the image and how they are visually organized in the pictorial
composition. At Villa Medici, the incorporation of the open landscape as an individual
spatial entity was a result of a change of attitude during the Renaissance. Natural
features such as earth, water and vegetation were a fixed and expressive form of reality.
At Vaux-le-Vicomte nature was depicted in a contrasting manner with parterre, the
tapis vert and the forest, in a hierarchical sequence of increasing naturalness. The open
landscape, which is the ultimate nature, was banished from the overall scheme and
subordinated. At Castle Howard man’s consideration of his classical past is represented
in the iconography of classical structures. The autonomous position of each structure
expresses the rising individualistic attitude of the age. Nature, which coexists in the
scheme, expresses the rightful place it received during this age of enlightenment.
Since Sigiriya also has natural features such as the rock, boulders and hilly terrain;
agricultural features such as tanks, fields and canals; and man-made features of
the built landscape such as rock/boulder and water-associated buildings, ponds
and pools, fountains, serpentine streams and cascades that are activated through
hydraulic features, analysis of the visual structure in relation to the visual expression,
materialization and symbolic meaning of such features in the architectural context will
help to understand the pictorial composition of its design. As in the case of the western
examples, maps, plans, pictures and diagrams are used.
129 The Methodology i

e. The Programmatic Form
Analysis of the organization of the functional spaces, the balance between negotium
(business activities, production, administration, daily ‘food’ functions) and otium
(scientific, cultural and religious interests and contact with nature, including places
for recreation, representation, cultural activities) of the western examples has helped
to understand how functional attributes of the scheme are reinforced through the
architectural means. At Villa Medici, the open landscape was the most important space
of the whole scheme, and most of the features were introduced to highlight this space.
At Vaux-le-Vicomte the axial zone was the major space where ceremonial functions
took place. At Castle Howard, again, the open agricultural landscape was the important
space.
Since Sigiriya has programmatic domains (such as royal, urban strata, common
masses, monastic communities) and spaces related to different activities (such as
pleasure sports, leisure, religious, agricultural use), analysis of the activities and
functional elements of Sigiriya will help to understand its design. Maps, plans and
diagrams are used.
130 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

5 The Analysis
§ 5.1 Characteristics of the Natural and Agricultural Landscape
§ 5.1.1 Geomorphology and Topography
5.1.1(a) The Wider Landscape Context
Extending northwards from Sri Lanka’s northern foothills (known as the Matale
Foothills) of the central massif is a vast and extensive peneplain. A series of
longitudinal ridges, resembling the fingers of an outstretched palm, splay fanwise from
these foothills on the peneplain (Perera, 1984:228). Lithologically, this area belongs to
the Wanni Complex, one of the three lithological subdivisions of Sri Lanka. Belonging to
the Precambrian age, the lithological characteristics of the area coupled with millions
of years of tropical weathering and erosion have given rise to a geomorphology of
prominent ridges and valleys (Dahanayake 1990:107). With regard to the lithological
characteristics of the wider landscape context and the weathering and erosion process,
Prema (2001) describes,
‘The ridges are composed of quartzo-feldspathic rocks with a high percentage of quartz.
Quartzites and quartz-rich granitoids are the most resistant of these to weathering. The
least resistant rocks are dolomitic marble, garnetiferrous, biotite-sillimanite gneisses
and hornblende bearing gneisses which form negative relief features and are usually
exposed in the valley bottoms.’
Another geological feature of this area is the inselbergs (erosion remnants) that have
stood out against the leveling process of nature largely due to the fact that they are
made of highly resistant rock-forming minerals. Their present heights give only an
indication of the original height of the land, for even the inselbergs have suffered
much leveling down (Cooray, P. G., 1967:54). Therefore, the area is characterized by
undulating topography with interspersed ridges and inselbergs. Flanked by two such
131 The Analysis i

south-north running ridges (Konduruvava ridge to the east and Inamaluva ridge to the
west), Sigiriya rock pillar, one of such inselbergs, rises to almost 180 meters above the
surrounding virtual plain (figures 5.1, 5.2, 5.3) or 360 meters above the mean sea level
(MSL).
Just south and about one kilometer to the north of Sigiriya rock are two other rock
formations of Mapagala and Pidurangala. Mapagala is elongated in plan and rises
only to a maximum height of about 65 meters above the surrounding plain (245
meters above MSL) and hence does not at all dominate the skyline. Compared to
Sigiriya, which has almost vertical walls on all sides and a roughly flattened summit,
Pidurangala is conical and elongated and rises to a height of about 162 meters above
the surrounding plain (342 meters above MSL), and therefore is about 20 meters
less in height than Sigiriya. The vertical rock mass of Sigiriya, which resembles a ‘rock
chimney’, therefore, dominates the skyline over Pidurangala and Mapagala from the
plain below (figures 5.4, 5.5).
132 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.1
Peneplain extending from the Matale Foothills showing the longitudinal ridges and positioning of Sigiriya rock in the wider
geomorphologic setting
133 The Analysis i

Figure 5.2
Sigiriya rock in the context of regional geological setting (courtesy: Prema 2001)
134 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.3
Terrain model showing the position of Sigiriya flanked by two longitudinal ridges (vertical scale exaggerated)
Figure 5.4
Contour map showing the relationship of Sigiriya with the rock formations of Pidurangala and Mapagala
135 The Analysis i

Figure 5.5
North-south profile across Sigiriya rock (A) showing the protuberant features of Pidurangala (B) and Mapagala (C)
rock formations
The presence of Pidurangala and Mapagala to the north and south, respectively, of
Sigiriya rock, however, makes an uneven topographical profile across Sigiriya rock in
both north and south directions (figures 5.6, 5.7). The profile along the east and west
directions from the rock, in contrast, has a smooth descent towards the virtual plain
without any significant protuberant topographical features. Unlike from the north and
south, the views of Sigiriya rock from the plains to the east and west below, therefore,
are unobstructed, and the rock rises abruptly against the eastern and western skies.
This shows that the best views of the rock from the plain below are offered in both east
and west directions.
Figure 5.6
Sigiriya rock showing the qualities of a ‘rock chimney’ (looking southwest) (photo: Dominic Sansoni/
ThreeBlindMen)
136 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.7
Terrain model showing the relationship of Sigiriya rock with Pidurangala and Mapagala rock formations
Since the summit of Sigiriya rock is situated at an elevation of about 180 meters above
the plain, it has an extensive panoramic view of the undulating topography extending
to the horizon in north, east and west directions. The panoramic view of undulating
topography consists of natural and agricultural landscape, that is the dense green
tropical forest cover over the extensive plain, which is interspersed with agricultural
fields and settlements, and dotted with waters of the man-made agricultural tank
cascades. The foregrounds of the northern and southern panoramas consist of
Pidurangala and Mapagala rocks, respectively. With regard to the distant southern
panorama, Perera (1984:229) remarks,
‘Looking south, one views the cul-de-sac of the Nuwaragala Kanda (mountain) while the
longitudinal ridges flanking the east-west – due to an illusion in perspective vision – give
an appearance of a basin around the two rock pillars of Sigiriya and Pidurangala.’
The virtual plain immediately beyond the hilly terrain on which Sigiriya rock stands
has an elevation of about 200 meters above MSL. If this plain is assumed as a level
surface with the same elevation of 200 meters above MSL, the theoretical (calculated)
optical boundary of the panorama (horizon), due to the curvature of the earth
surface, will lie at a radius of about 48 kilometers from the center of the rock summit.
But the panoramic depth in qualitative terms has little bearing on such objective
measurements, and is very much dependent on indicators of the perception of depth,
such as the effect of perspective and gradient of the texture in space (Von Meiss,
1986:104-105). Although the gradient texture together with the color and size of the
natural landscape features of the northern panorama, such as rocks, trees and tanks,
provide the depth to its foreground, as the eye travels towards the horizon, it gradually
137 The Analysis i

reaches a point where the perspective diminution is so great that the gradient of
texture together with color and size of the distant landscape features seem to melt into
each other and dissolve into the atmosphere. Since such an effect created by a diffuse
boundary does not permit a gauge of the panoramic depth, a real impression of its
depth is effected. Although the theoretical depth of the northern panorama is so great,
its visual depth is relatively shallow, and hence less impressive from the rock summit.
On the other hand, if the visual limits of the eastern and western panoramas are
plotted onto a map using view-shed analysis,73 it shows that the optical boundaries of
the scheme in east and west directions lie at about 8 and 11.5 kilometers, respectively,
from the center of the rock summit (figure 5.8). Therefore, it is very much less than
the theoretical depth, which is 48 kilometers. However, the geomorphology of the
landscape to the east and west of the panorama indicates that the ground descends
both in east and west directions to a certain distance from the rock and smoothly
ascends again to the moderate ridges that flank the rock in both east and west
directions. This concaved geomorphologic feature to the east and west, therefore,
provides a greater depth to the panorama in qualitative terms on these two directions
than is actually the case. As the distant landscape features (rocks, trees, tanks) of the
eastern and western panoramas are not far away from the rock, the gradient of texture
of these elements together with their color and size, in contrast to those of the northern
panorama, neither melt into each other nor dissolve into the atmosphere. Since the
comparison of these features in the distant background with their counterparts in the
foreground is possible, it helps to achieve a great spatial depth in eastern and western
panoramas in qualitative terms. On the other hand, in contrast to the smooth ascent of
the geomorphology in the eastern and western panoramas, the Matale Foothills of the
southern panorama rise abruptly (almost like vertical walls) to form a hard boundary to
the southern panorama. Therefore, it does not provide the same optical effect as those
of the eastern and western panoramas. All this suggests that the effect of the natural
panoramic depth in qualitative terms is more in the eastern and western panoramas
than in the other two directions. Therefore, as from the plain below, the best views of
the panorama are offered from the rock summit in both east and west directions.
73 The view-shed analysis using ArcGIS software enables one to see the area(s) that will be visible from one or more
observer points.
138 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.8
Panoramic depth from the rock summit as shown by the view-shed analysis
5.1.1(b) The Rock and Hilly Terrain
From the plain below, the slopes of the natural hill on which the rock stands give a
skirting effect to Sigiriya rock. These slopes are covered with natural vegetation, and
especially those to the west and southeast are dotted with clusters of boulders of varying
size and appearance. The natural overhangings at the base of most of the boulders
were earlier utilized by Buddhist monks as cave dwellings. Geologically, Sigiriya rock is
comprised of three distinct lithological units (Prema, 2001). The lowermost unit from the
base of the rock up to a certain level is garnet hornblende biotite gneiss, while the middle
139 The Analysis i

unit is of mafic layers, and the topmost unit or the ‘cap-rock’ is garnet bearing quartzo-
feldspathic gneiss. The middle unit, which is lithologically less resistant to tropical
weathering, is more weathered than the other two units to make the cap-rock overhang
from the upper level of the lowermost unit.74 The several depressions on the rock face,
particularly those of the western side of the middle unit, are formed due to extreme
weathering. Despite these geological conditions, Sigiriya rock rises almost vertically as a
pillar upon this natural hill.
Commenting on the rock of Sigiriya in the socio-religious context, Basnayake (1983:1)
suggests that ‘its [Sigiriya’s] very nature and character would have rendered it a place
of some importance as a marvelous un-scalable rock which possessed a considerable
degree of numinous power.’
Altitude (MSL)
A: 360 m.
B: 354 m.
C: 350 m.
D: 350 m.
E: 345 m.
F: 342 m.
G: 328 m.
H: 335 m.
I: 330 m.
Figure 5.9
Site morphology of the rock summit (conjectural)
74 Also see Vitanage (1959) and Perera (1984:229).
140 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

The natural rock summit, which is exposed at several places, indicates that it is not a
perfectly flat surface. The contours of the natural rock summit rise sharply from east
to west across the summit diagonally in a northeast-southwest direction. Both these
levels further descend separately from north to south. This morphologic feature,
therefore, splits the summit into two levels – the upper west and lower east – formed
by a natural embankment running at the center in a northeast-southwest direction to
the entire length of the rock summit (figure 5.9).
Due to this site morphology at the summit of the rock, the northwest quadrant of the
summit becomes the highest level above the surrounding plain, while the southwest
becomes the second highest, the northeast the third highest and the southeast the
lowest level of the summit. The angle of vision of the panoramic view from each quadrant
thus decreases in the same sequence: the northwest quadrant (360°), southwest (less
than 360°, but more than 270°), northeast (less than 270°, but more than 180°), and
southeast (less than 180°, but more than 90°). Moreover, the northwest and southwest
quadrants (the upper west level) offer views of both eastern and western panoramas,
while the northeast and southeast quadrants (the lower east level) offer views only
towards the eastern panorama. As far as the panoramic view is concerned, the western
half of the rock summit has, therefore, many advantages over its eastern half. The
northwest quadrant, which offers the full 360° angle of vision of the panoramic view, is
the most potential quadrant of the rock summit in this regard (figure 5.10).
1. Northwest Quadrant: 360°
2. Southwest Quadrant: less
than 360°, greater than 270°
3. Northeast Quadrant: less than
270°, greater than 180°
4. Southeast Quadrant: less than
180°, greater than 90°
Figure 5.10
Angles of panoramic visions from different levels of the rock summit
141 The Analysis i

§ 5.1.2 Natural, Topographic Configurations
5.1.2(a) Topographical Features and Geological System
The long individual ridges extending from the Matale Foothills in the wider landscape
context indicate that the topographical features are oriented in a rough south-
north direction. The geology of the region suggests that its geological system is also
oriented in the same direction75 (Prema, 2001). The crystalline limestone (dolomitic
marble) belt, which extends northwards as a 3,500-meter-wide band from Matale to
Habarana, runs 750 meters to the east from the center of Sigiriya rock at both surface
and subsurface levels76 (figures 5.2, 5.11). Sigiriya rock is oriented approximately 8°
clockwise from the true north-south direction. The natural plan configuration of the
cap-rock assumes a rough ellipse with its imaginary major axis oriented in the same
direction of the rock, while its minor axis is oriented in a direction of right angle to that
of the major axis (figure 5.12). (Although this imaginary axial formation is not oriented
in the directions of the major points of the compass, this orientation is referred to as
north-south and east-west for easy reference.) The outer limits of the natural hill on
which the rock stands is also roughly elliptical in plan, and the major and minor axes
roughly coincide with those of the plan configuration of the cap-rock. If the maximum
width of the east-west breadth of this second ellipse is extended as a strip both north
and south of the rock into the landscape, all significant topographical features such
as Pidurangala and Mapagala rocks, together with Sigiriya rock and its hilly terrain,
lie within it. This strip, which can be termed as ‘the corridor of natural topographical
features’, therefore, creates a strong visual axis – especially seen from Sigiriya rock
summit – in a north-south direction across the center of Sigiriya rock (figure 5.13).
The topographical features and the geological system of the wider landscape context
also enhance this north-south oriented natural axis across the rock. This indicates that
natural topographic features of the landscape create two axes in north-south and east-
west directions, which intersect at the center of the rock. The north-south oriented axis
of Sigiriya rock extends visually into the landscape in both north and south directions
to become the dominant natural axis of the site. The natural embankment of the rock
summit formed by the sharp cleavage of level differences (see 5.1.1(b) above), which
75 Also see Jayasinghe, P. (2010:308-310).
76 This is one of Sri Lanka’s largest bands of limestone, which runs to a total distance of about 96 kilometers with
its thickness varying from 1.5 to 15 meters (Cooray, P. G., 1967:54).
142 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

creates a diagonal axis in a northeast-southwest direction across the center of the rock,
however, gives a different local direction (on the rock summit) to that of the natural
north-south axis.
Figure 5.11
Sigiriya rock in relation to the limestone belt, Sigiri Oya and other rock formations (vertical scale exaggerated)
143 The Analysis i

Figure 5.12
Line of forces of the natural features of the rock summit and hilly terrain
144 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1. Sigiriya
2. Pidurangala
3. Mapagala
Figure 5.13
Corridor of the natural topographical features and the ‘natural axis’
145 The Analysis i

5.1.2(b) Natural-cum-Agricultural Drainage Network
With regard to the location of Sigiriya in the wider landscape context, Perera
(1984:229) comments,
‘Sigiriya and Pidurangala lie astride the main water parting of Sri Lanka and are, literally
speaking located on the rooftop of the island overlooking the drainage basins of Kala
Oya and Yan Oya. This axis or divide which separates the west flowing rivers from the
east flowing rivers constitutes the main water parting between the catchments of the
Bay of Bengal and the Gulf of Mannar.’
Bandaranayake (1990b:19) also states that Sigiriya forms a critical intermediate
or transition zone hemmed in by three ancient core regions, which he calls the
Kurunegala, Anuradhapura and Polonnaruva systems.
The location of Sigiriya in the wider landscape context, therefore, indicates that the
rainwater that cascades over one segment of the rock summit flows northwards as the
Sigiri-Habarana-Yan Oya system through Hurulu Palata to the Bay of Bengal, while the
rainwater that cascades over the other segment of the rock summit flows westwards as
the Mirisgoni-Kala Oya system to the Arabian Sea through the Gulf of Mannar (figure
5.14). This suggests that Sigiriya rock, in a symbolic sense, becomes the hydrographic
hub for the island’s two extensive natural-cum-agricultural drainage networks, whose
ultimate limits are the Arabian Sea to the west and the Bay of Bengal to the east.
Sigiri Oya, which flows about 960 meters west from the center of Sigiriya rock in a
northern direction, with its cascading tank system, indicates that the drainage axis of
the Sigiriya basin runs in a rough south-north direction. The notable exception is the
southern bay of the Sigiri Mahavava, which is located in the Mirisgoni Oya basin, whose
drainage axis is oriented in the east-west direction. Therefore, it is apparent that except
for those associated with the southern bay of the Sigiri Mahavava, the other lines of
forces created by the natural-cum-agricultural drainage network are oriented in a
south-north direction, and hence enhance the south-north oriented natural axis across
Sigiriya rock.
Due to the presence of Pidurangala and Mapagala rock formations, the boundaries of
the Sigiriya plain extending in north and south directions are confined to a distance of
approximately 600 meters and 560 meters, respectively, from the center of the rock.
On the other hand, the continuity of the plains to the east and west is also disturbed
by the limestone bed and the Sigiri Oya, which are approximately 750 meters east
and 960 meters west, respectively, from the center of the rock (figure 5.15). The
presence of topographical, geological and drainage patterns, therefore, limits the plain
immediately around Sigiriya rock in north, south, east and west directions to resemble
a rough rectangle. Therefore, the morphologic characteristics of the site indicate that
Sigiriya rock, which is elliptical in plan, is encompassed by the hilly terrain and the plain
in succession, whose outer limits are elliptical and rectangular in plan, respectively.
146 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1. Sigiri-Habarana-Yan Oya System
2. Mirisgoni-Kala Oya System
3. Sigiriya
4. Artificial Reservoir
5. Sigiri Mahavava
Figure 5.14
Sigiriya in relation to the drainage network
147 The Analysis i

Figure 5.15
Area demarcated by the natural features of the landscape of Sigiriya
148 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

§ 5.2 Interaction of the Formal Layout with the Natural and Agricultural
Landscape
§ 5.2.1 Lines of the Formal Layout
The superimposition of the formal layout over that of the natural and agricultural
landscape indicates that most of the lines of the formal layout more or less coincide
with those of the natural and agricultural landscape (figures 5.16, 5.17). The northern
and southern limits of Sigiriya proper, which are defined by the outer ramparts of
Sigiriya proper, coincide with the outer limits of the northern and southern plains,
which are determined by the topographical features of Pidurangala and Mapagala,
respectively, while its western limits coincide with the boundary demarcated by the
Sigiri Oya. The eastern limits of the inner eastern precinct again coincide with the
western edge of the limestone bed, which is a natural obstruction for the continuation
of the moat in an eastward direction through this limestone bed (figure 5.18). The
north-south axis of the formal layout also coincides with the common major axis of the
elliptical plan configurations of the cap-rock and the hilly terrain. This also shows that
the east-west axis of the formal layout is an extension of the minor axis of the above-
mentioned natural elliptical plan configurations. The plan of the walled-in enclosure
around the hilly terrain again roughly coincides with the outer contours of the hilly
terrain. The compound of the entire palace complex on the rock summit is roughly
elliptical in plan, which corresponds to the natural plan configuration of the cap-rock.
Therefore, all these suggest that the lines of the overall formal layout of the scheme
are greatly determined by the topographical, geological and drainage patterns of the
natural and agricultural landscape.
149 The Analysis i

Figure 5.16
Plan of the built landscape
Figure 5.17
Superimposition of the plan of the built landscape over that of the natural landscape
150 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.18
Geological map showing the location of Sigiriya in relation to the limestone bed (indicated in blue) (courtesy: Vitanage, 1959) (note
the eastern limits of the inner eastern precinct of Sigiriya, which coincide with the western edge of the limestone bed)
§ 5.2.2 Location and Orientation
The Lion Plateau, which protrudes northwards from the northern rock face, and the
Lion-Staircase-House, which is built on this plateau against the northern vertical
rock face in the form of the forepart of a colossal lion facing north, further heighten
the north-south orientation of the rock. Although the major axis of the natural plan
configuration of the hilly terrain is oriented in a north-south direction, the pronaos
projection introduced at the west on its east-west minor axis makes the hilly terrain
deliberately oriented in the east-west direction. This has made it possible to connect
linearly the two east-west oriented rectangular enclosures with this elliptical enclosure
harmoniously at its eastern and western sides. All these enclosures are further nested
by another east-west oriented larger rectangular enclosure. Due to such interventions,
the overall formal layout is, therefore, oriented in the east-west direction (figure 5.19).
This also shows that the orientation of the overall scheme is not determined in relation
to the exact cardinal directions, but specifically to that of the natural rock.
151 The Analysis i

Figure 5.19
Enhancement of the axial formation of the natural features
The linear-cum-concentric arrangement of several enclosures around the central
rock in the east-west direction, which offers the best views of the rock, make the rock
dominant in the overall scheme. This suggests that the scheme has a rock-oriented
composition.
Under 5.1.1(b), it was pointed out that due to the site morphology of the rock summit,
its western half has more advantages than its eastern half in terms of panoramic view.
The formal plan of the rock summit shows that the palace buildings are located on the
western half of the rock summit, while the palace gardens are on the eastern half. The
decision to locate the royal palace buildings, some of which were storied structures, at
the summit of the rock is hard to justify from a climatic point of view, due to the high
wind pressure at such a height. The principal royal residence is located at the northwest
quadrant, which is the highest level of the rock summit. Although it is the most
vulnerable building on the rock summit in terms of the effects of the heavy northeast
monsoon rains, the principal royal residence offers a 360° angle of panoramic view
of the undulating natural and agricultural landscape. The other palace buildings are
located at the southwest quadrant, which is the second highest level. Although these
buildings do not have the full 360° angle of panoramic view, it also offers the best
views of the panorama in both east and west directions. The upper and lower palace
152 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

gardens are located in the northeast (third highest level) and the southeast (lowest
level) quadrants of the summit, respectively, and their angles of panoramic view are
in a descending order to those of the upper two levels. Although the palace gardens
provide views of the eastern panorama, they do not provide views of the western
panorama (figure 5.20). This indicates, therefore, that the location of the above-
mentioned functional spaces on the rock summit has a hierarchical order in respect
of the angle of panoramic view and the qualitative aspects of the panorama. It also
shows that only the king, who dwelled in the principal royal residence located on the
northwest quadrant of the rock summit, had total command of the overall landscape.
On the other hand, the location of the palace complex upon the rock summit, which
is the highest elevation of the overall scheme, has made the palace complex the
dominant element and focal point of the overall scheme.
1. Main Palace
2. Other Palace Structures
3. Upper Palace Garden
4. Lower Palace Garden
Figure 5.20
Direction of panorama from different levels of the rock summit
153 The Analysis i

Most of the buildings on the rock summit, such as the central building of the principal
royal residence and the structure on the southwest quadrant, have a north-south
orientation (figure 5.21). Although this orientation has made the long sides of the
buildings exposed to both east and west directions, where heat absorption is more in
relation to the movement of the sun under tropical conditions, it enabled the maximum
views of both the eastern and western panoramas. By positioning the palace garden
in the eastern half of the rock summit and the pleasure garden in the inner western
precinct, the views from the palace buildings of the eastern and western panoramas
were mainly directed through these gardens to capture the great spatial depths gifted by
nature to the scheme. Similarly, the orientation of the rock-cut seat on the rock summit,
which is located at the western edge of the palace garden and provide a view towards the
eastern panorama, also explains this consideration of the designers (figure 5.22). This
suggests that the western and eastern panoramic views of the natural and agricultural
landscape are important factors in the orientation of the buildings on the rock, as well as
in the location of the palace garden and pleasure garden.
1. Main Palace
2. Other Palace Structures
3. Upper Palace Garden
4. Lower Palace Garden
5. Pool
6. Limestone paved Central
Pathway
7. Rock-cut Seat
Figure 5.21
Plan of the rock summit showing the buildings and the rock-cut seat oriented towards eastern and western panoramas
154 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

a. Main Palace
b. Other Palace Structures
c. Palace Garden
d. Limestone paved Central
Pathway
e. Rock-cut Seat
f. Pool
Figure 5.22
Cross sections through the rock summit showing the position of the built features in relation to the panoramic view
Compared to the ground below the base of the rock in the eastern direction, where it
almost abruptly meets the virtual plain, that in the western direction descends smoothly
to meet the virtual plain (figure 5.23). This topographic feature of the inner western
precinct has made it possible to regulate and activate various hydraulic features through
force of gravity and pressure, by laying in a series of descending terraces. Therefore, this
shows that it was a deliberate decision to lay out the water-associated garden features
in the western precinct. Similarly, the urban elite and nobility, who were basically the
non-agrarian community, are zoned within the outer eastern precinct, which sits on the
limestone belt and is not conducive to agrarian function.
155 The Analysis i

Figure 5.23
Cross section through the rock and hilly terrain in east-west direction (looking north) showing the smooth descent
of the hilly terrain on the western side in comparison to that of the eastern side (vertical scale exaggerated)
§ 5.2.3 Axial Arrangement
5.2.3(a) Overall Layout
The plan form of the overall layout, which consists of a series of rectangular and elliptical
enclosures, is arranged in a single axis by extending the common minor axis of the
natural plan configuration of the rock summit and that of the hilly terrain in both east and
west directions. Since the geomorphologic characteristics of the natural landscape offer
the best views of the rock from the eastern and western plains below, the extension of
the formal layout on the plain in east and west has made the rock the dominant element
of the overall layout. This also indicates that the formal interventions to the natural and
agricultural landscape are in a direction perpendicular to that of the major natural axis
of the landscape. As such, the extension of the minor natural (east-west) axis beyond
the hilly terrain can be explained as a design decision to heighten the dominance of
Sigiriya rock in the overall composition, and hence it becomes the major axis of the ‘built
landscape’. However, this axis, which is confined to the boundaries of the formal layout
between the eastern outer rampart and the western outer rampart, has no bearing on the
wider landscape context. In contrast, the north-south oriented natural axis of the scheme
continues visually beyond the boundaries of Sigiriya proper into the natural landscape,
and it is this axis that anchors the scheme in the wider landscape context. Moreover, the
north-south axis, which axially arranges the Lion Plateau with the rock, also strengthens
this aspect. Therefore, the north-south axis becomes the ‘external axis’, while the east-
156 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

west axis assumes the ‘internal axis’ of the scheme (figure 5.19). This north-south and
east-west axial formation, which intersects at the rough geometric center of the rock,
makes Sigiriya rock the central object of the overall scheme.
5.2.3(b) The Four-quartered Feature
The study of the compound associated with the four-quartered feature shows that
it consists of three compartments: two rectangular compartments attached to the
opposite sides of a central square compartment. These three compartments are
arranged linearly in a north-south running transverse axis to the east-west axis of the
overall layout. The transverse axis intersects the east-west axis at the center of the
square compartment, where there was originally a pavilion surrounded by a square pool
with cardinally oriented causeways linking the pavilion with the surrounding area of the
compartment. This axial formation, therefore, makes the compound associated with the
four-quartered feature a dominant element of the western precinct (figure 5.24).
1. Moated Central Pavilion
2. L-shaped Pond
3. Northern Outer Compartment
4. Southern Outer Compartment
5. Pavilion
Figure 5.24
Axial arrangement of the compound associated with the four-quartered feature
157 The Analysis i

5.2.3(c) The Rock Summit
The brick-built embankment, which separates the upper western and lower eastern
levels of the rock summit and traverses the entire north-south length of the rock
summit, and the limestone-paved central pathway, laid out halfway up along this
embankment to link the upper and lower levels of the rock summit, do not follow the
contour lines of the natural embankment. This embankment and the pathway follow
a staggered north-south direction and suggest that it was a design decision to rotate
the northeast-southwest directed natural morphological axis of the rock summit to
be aligned with the north-south orientation of the buildings on the rock summit, and
thereby to enhance the panoramic views in both east and west directions (figure 5.25).
Although the organizing lines of the structures and terraces on the rock summit
follow the north-south and east-west axial directions of the overall scheme, no
axial arrangement is present in its layout. The imaginary point of intersection of the
north-south and east-west axes of the overall layout (the rough geometric center of
the rock summit) is not highlighted by any of the features, while the axial lines of the
overall layout do not correspond with any specific organizing lines of the rock summit.
Therefore, the north-south and east-west axial formation of the overall layout do not
order any of the built elements on the rock summit.
158 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

AB Diagonal axis created due to site
morphology on rock summit
Figure 5.25
Staggered north-south axis created by the brick embankment and the limestone paved pathway
159 The Analysis i

§ 5.3 Geometry of the Scheme
Figure 5.26
Dimensional relationship of the cap-rock and the four-quartered feature
In order to analyze the geometric relationship of the layout, the survey map covering
the western half of the hilly terrain and the pleasure garden of Sigiriya (Somadasa,
1982) and other maps available at the Central Cultural Fund’s Sigiriya site office were
studied, together with on-site field measurements taken at the site (figure 5.27). The
comparison of the north-south and east-west maximum dimensions of the natural
plan configuration of the upper geological unit (the ‘cap rock’) of Sigiriya rock, with the
corresponding centerline measurements of the plan of the rectangular compound that
is associated with the central four-quartered feature, shows that they are almost equal
(approximately 200 meters by 120 meters, respectively, figure 5.26). If the maximum
east-west dimension of the plan configuration of the ‘cap rock’ (F1G1, see figure 5.28)
and that of the above rectangular compound (C1D1) is taken as a (approximately 120
meters), the east-west distances between the pronaos projection of the western arm of
the outer rampart and the western arm of the middle rampart in the western precinct
(A1B1), and between the western arm of the middle rampart and the western limit
160 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

of the above-interpreted rectangle (B1C1), also become a each, while the east-west
distances between the eastern limit of this rectangle and the pronaos projection of the
walled-in hilly terrain to the west (D1E1), and between this pronaos projection and the
westernmost edge of the ‘cap rock’ (E1F1), become 2a each. This shows that most of the
distances between elements in an east-west direction are based on the modular length a.
Figure 5.27
Geometric analysis of the scheme
161 The Analysis i

Figure 5.28
The geometric grid
If the maximum north-south measurement of the plan configuration of the ‘cap rock’
and the corresponding measurement of the above rectangular compound (D2G2)
is taken as b (approximately 200 meters), the north-south length of the pronaos
projection of the outer rampart in the western precinct and that of the walled-in
hilly terrain at the west also become b, while the north-south distance between the
northern and southern arms of the inner ramparts, which define the inner eastern
precinct (C2H2), become 2b.
The detailed examination of the geometry of the rectangular compound associated
with the four-quartered feature indicates that it is comprised of a central square (a
x a) and two smaller rectangles, each measuring a x (b-a)/2 (= 120 meters by 40
meters approximately). This large rectangle (figure 5.29) can also be interpreted as
being composed of two identical rectangles (ACFH and BDEG) measuring a x (a+b)/2
(= 120 meters by 160 meters approximately) with an overlapping square (BCFG = a
x a = 120 meters square approximately), which is the four-quartered feature at the
center. If the measurement of the long arms (AC and EG) of the above-interpreted
rectangles is taken as c = (a+b)/2 = 160 meters approximately), the northern and
southern arms of the inner and outer ramparts are ordered in such a way that the
162 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

distances between each of these elements and the above-interpreted rectangles
(ACFH and BDEG) are seen as a multiplication of c (see figure 5.28). This indicates
that most of the measurements and proportions between material elements
(especially the ramparts and walls that define the limits of various precincts and
enclosures) of the overall plan are related to the measurements of the compound
associated with the four-quartered feature. As far as the measurements and
proportions of this rectangular compound are concerned, this rectangle can also be
interpreted as the abstracting and geometrizing of the irregular plan configuration
of the natural rock. This suggests that the measurements and proportions related to
the above material elements are derived from that of the central rock. This system
of measure and proportions further indicates that a grid system exists in the ground
plan of Sigiriya in both north-south and east-west directions. In the east-west
direction the grid module of the plan is a (approximately 120 meters), while that of
the north-south direction is c or (a+b)/2 (approximately 160 meters).
Further analysis of the geometry of the scheme (figure 5.30) suggests that the layout,
of the western precincts in particular, can be interpreted as a system of overlapping
and expanding rectangles, whose grid module is again a x (a+b)/2 (approximately
120 x 160 meters). The basic module originates at the center of the large rectangle.
Figure 5.29
Geometric analysis of the rectangular compound associated with the four-quartered feature
163 The Analysis i

Figure 5.30
Grid plan as a system of overlapping rectangles
This analysis also shows that the grid system creates two central bays in north-south
and east-west directions across the rock. On the other hand, north-south and east-
west axes of the scheme do not assume the grid lines of the geometric plan; instead
they remain as imaginary lines that bisect the above central bays across the rock to
regulate the whole geometric system.
164 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

§ 5.4 Symmetry and Asymmetry
§ 5.4.1 Symmetry
5.4.1(a) Overall Layout
The rectangular enclosures extending in east and west directions beyond the hilly
terrain are symmetrically placed on the extended natural east-west axis created by the
somewhat irregular natural plan configurations of the hilly terrain and rock summit. The
moats and ramparts defining the rectangular precincts are also ordered symmetrically
through the east-west axis of the scheme (figure 5.31). The eastern and western
gateways/entrances to the rectangular enclosures and to the elliptical enclosure
associated with the hilly terrain, the central east-west axial zone including the axial
pathway of the pleasure garden, are also symmetrically placed on the central east-west
axis. This indicates that the overall scheme has a strong symmetry in relation to the
east-west axis, which contributes to incorporating and compositionally balancing the
irregular natural elements of the scheme, such as the hilly terrain and the rock.
Figure 5.31
Layout showing the strong symmetry along the east-west axis
165 The Analysis i

Features such as the moated islands, ponds, pools and fountains of the pleasure
garden are laid out as pairs on either side of the central east-west axis. Except for the
positioning of the entrances across the moats and certain areas of the layouts of the
retaining walls, the two moated island structures (so-called ‘summer palaces’) on
either side of the east-west axis are also seen as having mirror symmetry about the
same axis. The positioning of the entrances across the moats to these island structures
is decided by the availability of existing rock outcrops at the site. Compared to the other
enclosures of the overall formal layout, therefore, a strong symmetry prevails in the
pleasure garden. Since the layout incorporates the natural rock and the hilly terrain
on which it stands without the least alteration to such features, the extensive use of
symmetry to order the overall layout explains that symmetry is used to balance the
irregularities of these natural features.
Although the overall formal layout has a strong symmetry in relation to its east-west axis,
certain corresponding parts of the layout of the moats and ramparts on either side of
the east-west axis disturb perfect symmetry. For instance, the continuity of the northern
and southern sides of the inner moat defining the pleasure garden are interrupted at
several locations due to the presence of natural rock outcrops across them; the lengths
of the southern sides of the inner moat and inner rampart are less than their northern
counterparts due to the location of Sigiri Mahavava to the south; unlike the northern side
of the outer rampart, the continuity of its southern side is interrupted again due to the
overlapping of the Sigiri Mahavava with Sigiriya proper; and unlike the northern segment
of the inner rampart at the eastern precinct, its southern counterpart continues in a
southwesterly direction to join the earthen bund of Sigiri Mahavava.
The location of the entrances to the two moated island structures (so-called ‘summer
palaces’) and some of the structures within the two outer compartments associated
with the four-quartered feature of the pleasure garden, which are positioned away
from the central east-west axis, indicates that such features are also not symmetrically
arranged in relation to the east-west axis (figures 5.32, 5.33). All these indicate that
the idealized symmetry of the layout is increasingly affected by the natural and/or
agricultural features towards the northern and southern edges of the plan. Therefore,
this suggests that the perfect symmetry gradually diminishes to a visual symmetry from
the central east-west axis towards the boundaries of the plan in both northern and
southern directions.
Beyond the boundaries of the scheme, the natural and agricultural landscape takes its
own asymmetrical layout. This diminishing symmetry from the central east-west axis
in both north and south directions makes the built landscape blend and merge with
the natural and agricultural landscape in a harmonious manner without confrontation.
It also shows that the natural and agricultural features are not altered to give way to
the idealized symmetry, but are incorporated into the scheme in an increasing manner
towards the northern and southern edges of the plan. In this light, such an attempt
cannot be explained as a mere use of available natural features by the designers, but
rather as a deliberate decision or a design technique to reduce, gradually, the perfect
symmetry to a visual symmetry.
166 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.32
Elements related to symmetry through east-west axis
Figure 5.33
Elements that distract symmetry through east-west axis
167 The Analysis i

5.4.1(b) Axial Pathway
Figure 5.34
Symmetry of the axial zone
The central east-west axial pathway in the western rectangular precincts is laid
through a series of axially arranged compounds (figures 5.34, 5.35). The segment of
this pathway to the extreme west (from the western entrance of the outer western
precinct to the western entrance to the pleasure garden) runs along the minor axes
of symmetry of a series of north-south oriented subcompounds and features, which
are defined by walls and/or composed of sheets of water (a, b). The second segment
of this pathway from the western gate of the pleasure garden to the western limit of
the compound associated with the four-quartered feature runs across an enclosure
oriented in a west-east direction (c). Since this segment of the pathway is laid along the
major axis of symmetry of the compound, it has an increasing symmetricity along the
centerline of the pathway than to the extreme west, which in contrast is laid along the
minor axes of each subcompound. The pathway through the third compound from the
west, which is the four-quartered feature, is laid along its east-west axis of symmetry
(d). Compared to the featureless compound to its immediate west, the four-quartered
feature originally consisted of a central pavilion surrounded by four L-shaped ponds
and four cardinally oriented causeways. This square compound with the four-quartered
168 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

feature creates perfect symmetricity along the central line of the east-west pathway.
To the east of the four-quartered feature is again a narrow compound oriented in the
west-east direction. This compound is in two split-levels: lower western and upper
eastern (e, f). The pathway through this compound is laid along its major axis of
symmetry. The mirror symmetrical arrangement of various features about the east-
west axis in the lower western level again creates symmetricity along the centerline of
the pathway. Since some of the features on both sides of the axis on the upper eastern
level are not mirrored about the east-west axis, in contrast to the lower western level, it
has a diminishing symmetricity along the centerline of the pathway. The easternmost
compounds in the western plain are composed of two subcompounds: a smaller
square to the west (g) and a larger rectangle to the east (h). Since the larger rectangle
is oriented in a north-south direction, the pathway through this rectangle is laid along
its minor axis of symmetry. Therefore, the symmetricity along the centerline of the
pathway further diminishes in the east direction through this compound. Bordering
the walled-in enclosure to the west and the above rectangular compound to the north
are a large octagonal pond and a towering natural boulder, which forms the backdrop
to the pond, but both features are not mirrored to the south about the centerline
of the pathway. The rectangular pond and the walled-in enclosure by integrating a
cluster of boulders of relatively smaller scale located to the south of the centerline
of the pathway, however, do not form identical pairs with those to the north. Such
non-identical features located at either side of the extreme edge of the east-west axial
pathway further reduce the symmetricity.
Therefore, the degree of symmetricty along the axial pathway of the western
rectangular precincts gradually increases from the west to east up to the four-quartered
feature to make it the climax of symmetrical order, and again gradually diminishes
in an eastward direction to the eastern limit of the axial zone. This makes the four-
quartered feature not only the central element of the east-west axial zone, but also
the dominant one, which provides an overwhelming sense of order. The east-west
oriented transverse axis of symmetry across the four-quartered feature also shows that
symmetricity increases from both the northern and southern limits of the compound to
the center of the four-quartered feature to enhance this overwhelming sense of order.
169 The Analysis i

Figure 5.35
Axial pathway through the pleasure garden (photo: Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen)
170 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

5.4.1(c) The Lion Plateau
The plan configuration of the Lion Plateau, defined by the parapet wall, together with
the elements within it including the Lion-Staircase-House, which is built against the
northern rock face as the forepart of a colossal lion figure, are symmetrically arranged
in relation to the north-south axis. Since the elevational profile of the northern rock
face seen from the Lion Plateau is highly irregular as compared to that of the western
rock face seen from the west (figures 5.36, 5.37), the use of symmetry has therefore
balanced the irregularities of the northern rock face.
Figure 5.36
Northern rock face showing the irregular elevational profile
171 The Analysis i

1. Lion-Staircase-House
2. Pathway/Stairway associated
with Mirror Wall
3. Main Rock
4. U-shaped Structure
Figure 5.37
Plan of the Lion-Plateau showing the symmetry along the north-south axis against the northern rock face
However, in contrast to the east-west axis, there is no dominant symmetry in relation
to the north-south axis of the overall scheme. As far as symmetry is concerned, the
north-south axis is thus subordinated to the east-west axis to highlight the east-west
oriented built axis.
172 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

§ 5.4.2 Asymmetry
5.4.2(a) Hilly Terrain
The hilly terrain, which consists of clusters of boulders of varying size and appearance,
presents a highly irregular and rugged topography and morphology. Natural courtyards,
alleys and arches are formed by these clusters of boulders. Most of these boulders
were earlier utilized by monks of a Buddhist monastic settlement as cave dwellings.
As seen at numerous boulder-associated monastic landscapes of the early historic
period (3rd/2nd century BC to 1st century AC), such as Mihintale and as evident from
the archaeological research carried out at the hilly terrain of Sigiriya (Bandaranayake,
2010b:115), the area would have been originally utilized with minimum disturbance to
the natural setting for the monastic needs of Buddhist monks. This area was absorbed
by Kasyapa’s designers by utilizing it as the inner city, by constructing structures on
top of the boulders, plastering and painting the soffits of the cave shelters, laying out
pathways linking various clusters of boulders and constructing retaining walls of the
terrace structure.
The organizing lines of the pathways and terraces of this area do not at all correspond
to the directions of the north-south and east-west axial lines of the overall layout, but
rather follow the natural morphology to enhance the natural landscape qualities of the
hilly terrain. Study of the remains of buildings and other structures that were built upon
the boulders (such as the Audience Hall, Cistern Rock) and the cut-marks on numerous
other boulders, which served as footings for the foundations of the buildings and
structures built upon them, also suggests that the orientation of these buildings and
structures was dictated not by the overall axial directions, but by the buildable areas
on top of the boulders (figure 5.38). Compared to the rigid symmetry of the axial zone
within the pleasure garden, this area is freed of the rigidity of the overall symmetrical
plan with fuller respect to the characteristics of the existing natural landscape.
Therefore, control of the composition of various natural and built elements within the
hilly terrain has been achieved through asymmetrical planning, where the elements are
held by the contours of the natural morphology (figure 5.39).
173 The Analysis i

A. Audience Hall
B. Cistern Rock
C. Boulder B 7/8
D. Boulders B4 & B5
E. Preaching Rock
Figure 5.38
Plans at the top level of the selected boulders of the hilly terrain. The remains of the structures and the cut-marks
upon the boulders show that the orientation of these structures was dictated not by the overall axial directions,
but by the buildable areas on top of the boulders. (plans to different scale; the dotted lines indicate the direction
of the axial lines of the overall layout; for the locations of the boulders see figure 5.39)
Here, the articulation is more free and the views are of infinite variety. Each boulder
may be seen and enjoyed for itself or its relationship to other boulders, rather than
for its relationship to a prescribed plan as experienced within symmetrically laid-out
enclosures at Sigiriya. The marrying of built features with the natural features, such as
boulders and site topography, demonstrate the exceptional sensitivity of the designers
and hence that nature takes center stage in the hilly terrain. Although no evidence
exists other than the cut-marks on the rock surfaces for the brick masonry to support
the superstructure of the built elements on the boulders (as seen at Kaludiya Pokuna at
Mihintale, for instance, where the natural boulders are utilized to construct structures
upon them) (figure 5.40), it is reasonable to assume that these design interventions
at Sigiriya were also carried out with great sensitivity, without destroying the natural
174 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

qualities of the boulders or the surrounding environment. With the exception of those
of the Lion Plateau, the features within the hilly terrain in contrast to those within
the plain, therefore, escape from the central east-west axis of symmetry of the overall
scheme and present an asymmetric planning, which is totally different to that of the
plain below.
Figure 5.39
Asymmetry of the hilly terrain
175 The Analysis i

Figure 5.40
Structure on top of a boulder at Kaludiya Pokuna Monastery, Mihintale
5.4.2(b) Rock Summit
Analysis of the plan of the rock summit shows that the brick embankment and the
limestone pathway traversing the whole north-south length jointly create a dominant
dividing line across the rock summit. However, it does not divide the plan configuration
of the irregular rock summit into two physically identical parts. Compared to the
organizing lines of the elements within the hilly terrain, those on the rock summit are
created by the buildings, terraces, ponds, pools and pathways that are aligned with
the north-south and east-west axial lines of the overall layout, but they do not show
any symmetrical arrangement. Therefore, the layout of the rock summit also shows
an asymmetrical layout. In this context, the alignment of the organizing lines of the
elements within the rock summit with the north-south and east-west directions could
be explained as a response to enhance the panoramic view in both east and west
directions.
However, closer analysis of the ordering of the elements within the rock summit
shows that there is some hidden order in its layout. For instance, although the brick
embankment and the central limestone pathway do not jointly divide the rock summit
into two identical physical parts, it visually divides the area into two parts that are
roughly equal in terms of surface area. The areas of the northwest and southeast are
176 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

roughly equal, while the northeast and southwest are also similar in surface area (figure
5.41). This shows that there is a diagonal relationship of spaces within the rock summit
on either side of the dividing line. Similarly, the main palace building and the rock-cut
pool, which are the dominant elements of the rock summit, are also placed diagonally
on either side of this dividing line. Although they do not form identical pairs on either
side of the dividing line, they create equilibrium through asymmetrical balance (figure
5.42). This indicates that in contrast to the highly asymmetrical layout of the hilly
terrain, the elements on the rock summit are asymmetrically balanced diagonally on
the dividing line jointly created by the brick embankment and the central limestone
pathway.
Figure 5.41 Figure 5.42
Asymmetrical balance of various spaces of the Asymmetrical balance of various elements of the
rock summit rock summit
5.4.2(c) Route through the Hilly Terrain
Just outside the western entrance to the hilly terrain are the above-described octagonal
pond and the towering boulder to the north, and the rectangular pond and a walled
enclosure with a cluster of boulders to the south of the entrance. Although they do
not form identical pairs on either side of the gateway, equilibrium is achieved similar
to the layout of the rock summit through asymmetrical balance (figure 5.43). If the
layout of the Buddhist monastic site of the post-Kasyapan phase is ignored, the natural
arrangement of boulders within the compound formed by the pronaos projection
177 The Analysis i

of the walled-in elliptical enclosure also creates an asymmetrical balance on either
side of the pathway, which leads from its western entrance in an eastward direction
(figure 5.44). The next segment of this pathway from this area leading to a natural
boulder arch (Boulder Arch No. 1) is laid out through a series of narrow terraces (figures
5.45, 5.46). These terraces are enclosed by high walls by incorporating the natural
boulders of varying size and shape on either side of the pathway, which again creates
an asymmetrical balance on either side of the pathway. These walls on either side
of the pathway to a great extent shut out the highly asymmetrical layout beyond the
enclosed pathway within the hilly terrain. The highly asymmetrical layout can only
be experienced if one moves away from this enclosed pathway. This indicates that in
contrast to the highly asymmetrical layout of the hilly terrain, an asymmetrical balance
prevails within the enclosed pathway from the western entrance to the hilly terrain, at
least up to the Boulder Arch No. 1. The asymmetrical balance indicated at the western
limit of the hilly terrain can be explained as a means to hint at what prevails within the
enclosed pathway through the hilly terrain and on the rock summit.
Figure 5.43
Asymmetrical balance of the elements near the entrance to the hilly terrain
178 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.44
Pathway through the hilly terrain towards the rock summit through the Lion Plateau
Above the boulder arch, the pathway first assumes a covered steep stairway to meet
the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall, which is set along the western rock face.
This pathway associated with the Mirror Wall then leads up to the Lion Plateau, which
is again enclosed by a high parapet wall. The zigzag pathway above the Lion-Staircase-
House was also built as a continuation of the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall.
The height of the Mirror Wall, which is more than the average eye level (figure 5.66),
indicates that the pathway above Boulder Arch No. 1 to the rock summit also shuts
out the asymmetry of the hilly terrain. The pathway across the hilly terrain and above
the Lion-Staircase-House can therefore be interpreted as a covered corridor to link the
palace complex at the summit with the highly symmetrical pleasure garden through
the Lion Plateau, which is also symmetrical. In this light, the Lion Plateau functions as a
major pause within this long corridor (figure 5.44).
179 The Analysis i

Figure 5.45
Pathway from the pronaos projection of the hilly terrain up to Boulder Arch No. 1
Figure 5.46
View of the pathway across the hilly terrain leading up to Boulder Arch No. 1
180 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

§ 5.5 Incorporation and Organization of Spatial Entities
By positioning the palace complex at the highest elevation above the surrounding
landscape, the outer landscape beyond the physical boundaries of the built
landscape to the horizon becomes part of the spatial scheme. The outer landscape,
which has an extensive panoramic depth, consists of natural landscape (undulating
topography, tropical forest cover, for example) as well as built and agricultural
landscapes (monasteries, fortifications of Mapagala, agricultural tanks, fields,
settlements). The north-south orientation of most of the palace buildings on
the rock summit, which offers maximum views in both eastern and western
directions from these buildings, is a design decision to spatially and visually
link the palace buildings with the eastern and western panoramas. The pleasure
garden laid out in the inner western precinct and the palace gardens on the lower
eastern half of the rock summit provide appropriate foregrounds to the western
and eastern panoramas, respectively, so that the effects of the spatial depth of
the panorama is enhanced (figure 5.47). The rock-cut seat, positioned against
the brick-built embankment and located just below the eastern edge of the
central pathway overlooking the palace garden towards the eastern panorama,
further indicates that the spatial link between the rock summit and the eastern
panorama was established through the palace garden. The east-west axis of the
western rectangular precincts provides visual direction from the palace towards the
western panorama. By laying the central pathway halfway up along the brick-built
embankment, which separates the palace buildings and the palace garden, the
views from the palace buildings towards the eastern panorama are not obstructed
by pedestrian movement on the rock summit (figures 5.48, 5.49). Therefore,
the positioning of this central pathway is also a design decision to facilitate
this spatial link. All this indicates that the palace garden on the rock summit
establishes a spatial and visual link of the palace with the eastern panorama,
while the pleasure garden in the inner western precinct establishes a spatial and
visual link of the palace with the western panorama. Therefore, these two gardens
link the palace and the surrounding outer landscape in a meaningful manner,
and hence the palace does not appear to meet the surrounding outer landscape
as a confrontation. This suggests that the laying out of the pleasure garden and
the palace garden were design decisions to incorporate the panorama (outer
landscape) into the scheme. The inner and outer eastern precincts, on the other
hand, which are located at a distant lower level and lack significant architectural
layouts unlike that of the pleasure garden, are not capable of providing appropriate
foregrounds to establish spatial and visual links between the palace and the
eastern panorama. As such, the inner and outer eastern precincts do not perform
a significant role in respect of the spatial scheme and are hence reduced to mere
features in the eastern panorama.
181 The Analysis i

Figure 5.47
Spatial entities of the scheme and their schematic relationship
A. Main Palace Building
B. Rock-cut Seat
C. Palace Garden
D. Limestone Pathway
E. Brick Embankment
Figure 5.48
Axonometric view of the limestone-paved central pathway in relation to the eastern and western halves of the rock summit
182 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.49
A sectioned axonometric view of the limestone-paved central pathway in relation to the eastern and western
halves of the rock summit
All this indicates that the spatial structure is composed of three major autonomous
spatial entities organized in the hierarchical order of the palace, garden and panorama
(open landscape) in both east and west directions. The palace occupies the center of
the spatial structure and hence becomes the major and central object in the space.
183 The Analysis i

§ 5.6 Treatment of Panorama/Horizon
In the previous section the analysis focused on the role the formal layout of the eastern
and western precincts plays in the spatial treatment of the panorama and horizon. The
geometric analysis of the scheme (section 5.3) shows that the horizontal distances
between the western edge of the western precinct and the four-quartered feature (PQ),
between the four-quartered feature and the eastern limit of the pleasure garden (QR),
and between the eastern limit of the pleasure garden and the center of the rock (RS)
are equal (2.5 a of figure 5.28). When viewing the western panorama from the palace
on the rock summit, the following can be observed in respect of its constructed picture
plane (figure 5.50):
Figure 5.50
Picture plane of the western panorama from the rock summit (vertical scale of the section drawing exaggerated)
184 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

• horizon (AA’) becomes its top horizontal line77
• eastern limit of the pleasure garden (DD’) becomes its bottom horizontal line
• western edge of the outer western precinct (BB’) is composed in between
horizon (AA’) and bottom of the picture plane (DD’) with EF:EH=2:1
• transverse axis of the four-quartered feature (CC’) is composed at the exact middle
between the horizon (AA’) and the bottom of the picture plane (DD’) with GH:GF=1:1
• east-west axis of the western rectangular precincts is composed between the
horizon (AA’) and the bottom of the picture plane (DD’) with EF:FH=2:3
• central island pavilion of the four-quartered feature is composed at G, the
intersection of CC’ (transverse axis) and EF (main east-west axis)
77 In the construction of the perspective picture plane, the height of the view point determined the size of the
perspective depth measurement (such as AB, BC, CD of figure 5.50) and the effective picture plane height.
When the height of the view point increases, the size of the perspective depth and effective picture plane height
increases proportionately, so that the image as a whole is magnified (and therefore clearer), but the proportions
remain the same. Therefore, in the graphic construction for the perspective analysis of a profile, the vertical scale
can be exaggerated with regard to the horizontal scale (see Steenbergen and Reh, 1996:179).
FT / RT = OS / RS; FT / b =h / a; FT = bh / a
GT / QT = OS / QS; GT / (a+b) = h / 2a; GT = (a+b)h / 2a
ET / PT = OS / PS; ET / (2a+b) = h / 3a; ET = (2a+b)h / 3a
EF = ET-FT = (2a+b)h / 3a – bh / a = 2(a-b)h / 3a
EH = OS-ET = h – (2a+b)h / 3a = (a-b)h / 3a
GH = OS – GT = h – (a+b)h / 2a = (a-b)h / 2a
GF = GT – FT = (a+b)h / 2a – bh / a = (a-b)h / 2a
FH = OS – FT = h – bh / a = (a-b)h / a
185 The Analysis i

Therefore, the view towards the western panorama from the palace on the rock summit
consists of the four-quartered feature, with its central island pavilion composed at
the midpoint between the horizon and the eastern edge of the pleasure garden due
to the perspective effect. The horizon of the western panorama, which becomes the
top horizontal line of the picture plane, is also highlighted as the ultimate boundary
of the spatial scheme. This also shows that although the east-west axis in the western
precinct does not extend to the horizon, it covers two thirds of the distance between
the bottom of the picture plane and the horizon. This suggests that the axis in the
western precinct is one of the dominant elements in the overall spatial composition,
which provides visual direction towards the western panorama.
Figure 5.51
Picture plane of the eastern panorama from the rock summit (vertical scale of the section drawing exaggerated)
The geometric analysis of the scheme also shows that the horizontal distance between
the center of the rock and the eastern edge of the inner eastern precinct (XY) is 6a
(figure 5.28). The distance between the eastern edge of the inner eastern precinct and
the eastern edge of the outer eastern precinct (YZ) becomes twice the distance of XY,
which is 12a. When viewing the eastern panorama from the palace on the rock summit,
the following can be observed in respect of its constructed picture plane (figure 5.51):
186 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

• horizon (KK’) becomes its top horizontal line
• inner eastern precinct is hardly visible and hence it is not part of the eastern
panorama
• western limit of the outer eastern precinct (MM’) becomes its bottom
horizontal line
• eastern edge of the outer eastern precinct (LL’) is composed in between
horizon (KK’) and bottom of the picture plane (MM’) with the distances
between MM’ & LL’ and LL’ & KK’ being 2:1
A comparison of the picture planes of the eastern and western panoramas shows that
the formal layout of the east and west of the rock on the plain below covers two thirds
of the distance between the bottom of the picture planes and the horizons in both
directions. Therefore, from the palace building there is a balance of the panoramic
compositions in both eastern and western directions. This suggests that although the
overall formal layout is not symmetrical along the north-south axis of the scheme, and
the eastern half of the outer rectangular compound extends further in an eastward
direction than the western half, it is a deliberate attempt to achieve a compositional
balance in terms of the perspective effects from the rock summit.
However, in comparison to the western panorama, that to the east lacks monumental
architectural elements such as the four-quartered feature and the axial pathway.
Since the outer eastern precinct has not been subjected to vigorous archaeological
investigation, it does not allow us to see the compositional elements and by what
means they are organized in the composition to enhance the eastern panoramic view
from the rock summit.
In contrast to the eastern and western panoramas, where built features form part of
their composition, the natural panoramas in north and south directions from the rock
summit extend to the diffused horizon and the Matale Foothills, respectively (figures
5.52, 5.53).
187 The Analysis i

Figure 5.52
Natural panorama in the north direction
Figure 5.53
Natural panorama in the south direction
188 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Although the basements of the palace buildings and terrace structures together
with the rock-cut seat on the rock summit have survived to provide evidence of the
panorama-oriented composition, their superstructure is unfortunately missing,
and thus also an understanding of how the panorama/horizon was architecturally
treated from both the interior and exterior spaces of the rock summit, through three-
dimensional spatial design. The present remains also do not allow us to understand the
specific architectural devices and elements used by the designers to frame and enhance
the great spatial depths offered by the eastern and western panoramas. Although
Bandaranayake (2010a:31-32) does not provide the logic behind his conjectural
reconstruction of the buildings on the rock summit, the so-called ‘sunset pavilion’
for instance, they open up towards the panorama by means of shaded colonnaded
pavilion-type structures. Architectural elements such as colonnaded balconies and
roof terraces, as indicated in facades of buildings from relief fragments and miniature
relief shrines from urinal stones found at Anuradhapura and ancient mural paintings
from Polonnaruva and Kandy (but dating from a period later than the 5th century AC),
and openings such as doors and windows similar to those of the entrance porch at
Yapahuwa (figure 5.54), would have probably performed a specific role with regard to
the architectural treatment of the panorama/horizon.
Figure 5.54
The entrance porch of the Yapahuwa royal complex (13th century), which provides access to the palace on the
rock summit. Located at an elevated plateau of the hill on which Yapahuwa rock stands, the remains of this porch
still show how the panorama/horizon was architecturally treated from its interior
189 The Analysis i

The central limestone pathway, which is situated at midlevel along the massive
brick-built retaining wall and traverses the whole of the north-south length
of the rock summit, also offers views of the eastern panorama (figure 5.48).
Unfortunately, the present remains of this pathway hardly provide material
evidence to establish whether it was originally designed to be an open or a covered
walkway. If it was a covered walkway, to provide shade against the extreme heat of
the sun (by a lean-to roof built against the brick embankment and supported by a
colonnade at its eastern edge, like the long frontal verandahs of the ancient cave
temples, which also acted as covered walkways, as seen at Dambulla, for instance),
it would have presented a stunning experience to users of this pathway of the
eastern panorama through a series of views framed by the colonnades, due to the
staggered nature of the pathway.
§ 5.7 Spatial Depth
The western face of the main rock above the hilly terrain has a concave surface and
projects out as it rises above its base. The whole of the north-south length of this
rock face and a significant area of the northern rock face was originally plastered.
The golden and bluish-colored ladies carrying flowers are painted on this whitish
plaster. The figures are covered in clouds below their waists, as if they are floating in
the sky. This concaved great tapestry of painting rises above the parapet wall (Mirror
Wall) of the pathway to an average height of about 40 meters above the upper
limits of the hilly terrain, as if the sky emerges above the horizon. Therefore, when
viewed from the western precincts, this plaster band, which merges with the eastern
sky, gives an impression of an illusionary space above and beyond the Mirror Wall.
Similar artificial devices, such as interior garden sceneries and exterior perspective
paintings framed through the pilasters and artificial sets in a theater, were used
in ancient Roman gardens and in later French landscape designs, respectively, to
create illusionary space (Jashemski, 1979:55-87; Steenbergen and Reh, 1996:145).
Similarly, the great tapestry of plaster band on the natural concave rock face and
the Mirror Wall are used at Sigiriya as screens, one behind the other to achieve this
effect. The recently identified painted figures of ladies on the external plaster of the
Mirror Wall (Wagaachchi, 2005) also indicate that the whole of the external surface
of this parapet wall facing the west was also plastered with ladies, which provides
added evidence to heighten this illusionary space. As such, the plaster band on the
western rock face and the parapet wall running on the total north-south length of
the rock can be interpreted as architectural devices used to create illusionary space,
which provides spatial depth from the pleasure garden. This illusionary space, in turn,
visually and spatially separates the palace on the rock summit from the land, and
hence gives a floating effect from below to the skyward abode of the king. The ladies
190 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

painted on this plaster band, as if they are floating in the clouds between the upper
limits of the hilly terrain and the palace, also greatly contribute to achieve this effect.
As the actual proportions of the painted figures are smaller than life size, when seen
from the inner western precinct, their size also enhances the great spatial depth from
the inner western precinct.
Since the continuity of the east-west axis across the pleasure garden is visually
blocked by the presence of the enormous rock mass of Sigiriya, this illusionary
space also provided great spatial depth to the pleasure garden. This illusionary
aspect of the three-dimensional space is further dealt with under subheading 5.8
Scenography of Movement.
§ 5.8 Scenography of Movement
5.8(a) Axial Pathway
Since the pleasure garden is about three meters higher than the outer western
precinct, and the inner rampart rises to a further height of more than four meters
above the level of the pleasure garden, there is no hint of a formal garden in the
inner western precinct, to an observer approaching from the western gate at the
outer rampart. Looking east from this point (A) along the east-west axial line,
the inner rampart, hilly terrain and the Mirror Wall rise one behind the other as
a series of screens (figures 5.55, 5.56). Seen behind this series of screens, the
plaster band on the western rock face, which originally rose to a height of about
40 meters above the Mirror Wall, gives the effect of the sky emerging behind these
screens to create an illusionary space behind the hilly terrain and to give a floating
effect to the palace on the rock summit. As the observer progresses along the axial
line towards the east, the hilly terrain and the Mirror Wall will be increasingly
covered behind the inner rampart, and at one point (B), the top horizontal line
of the inner rampart becomes the visual horizon to this illusionary space. When
progressing further in an eastward direction along this axial line, the plaster band
will also be increasingly covered by the inner rampart, and at a certain point (C)
the inner rampart visually provides a monumental podium for the palace to stand.
Further moving along this axial line, the view of the palace will also be cut off
behind the inner rampart and only the sky above the palace, the real empty space,
will be visible above the rampart.
191 The Analysis i

Figure 5.55
Section showing different views composed when moving from the outer western precinct towards the rock on the
east-west axis (vertical scale exaggerated)
Since the pleasure garden is about three meters higher than the outer western precinct,
and the inner rampart rises to a further height of more than four meters above the level
of the pleasure garden, there is no hint of a formal garden in the inner western precinct,
to an observer approaching from the western gate at the outer rampart. Looking east
from this point (A) along the east-west axial line, the inner rampart, hilly terrain and
the Mirror Wall rise one behind the other as a series of screens (figures 5.55, 5.56).
Seen behind this series of screens, the plaster band on the western rock face, which
originally rose to a height of about 40 meters above the Mirror Wall, gives the effect of
the sky emerging behind these screens to create an illusionary space behind the hilly
terrain and to give a floating effect to the palace on the rock summit. As the observer
progresses along the axial line towards the east, the hilly terrain and the Mirror Wall
will be increasingly covered behind the inner rampart, and at one point (B), the top
horizontal line of the inner rampart becomes the visual horizon to this illusionary
space. When progressing further in an eastward direction along this axial line, the
plaster band will also be increasingly covered by the inner rampart, and at a certain
point (C) the inner rampart visually provides a monumental podium for the palace to
stand. Further moving along this axial line, the view of the palace will also be cut off
behind the inner rampart and only the sky above the palace, the real empty space, will
be visible above the rampart.
192 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.56
Different views composed from stand points A, B, C and D on the axial pathway (structures on the rock summit
are conjectured)
193 The Analysis i

Since there is no suggestion of the presence of a formal garden in the inner western
precinct from the outer western precinct, it appears as a surprise to the observer as
he reaches the gateway up on the inner rampart, by crossing the inner moat and then
ascending the flight of steps built into the projected retaining wall of the inner western
precinct. The hilly terrain, the Mirror Wall and the plaster band on the western rock
face will again be visible from this vantage point to re-create the illusionary space. As
he walks along the axial pathway in an eastward direction, he also feels the increasing
symmetry of the axial zone. When on the central pavilion of the four-quartered
feature (point D), the perfect symmetry of its plan gives the observer the experience
of an overwhelming sense of order. The palace, which seems to be floating in the sky,
becomes the main actor on stage, and will never be lost sight of when within the axial
zone of the inner western precinct. The high inner rampart enclosing the pleasure
garden, which does not provide views of the outer western precinct, further strengthens
the dominance of the rock. Although the present natural vegetation of the pleasure
garden allows views of Pidurangala rock over the rampart and somewhat distracts the
visual focus of Sigiriya rock, Dissanayake (2003:225) suggests that the area beyond the
axial zone within the pleasure garden, which functioned as spaces for garden sports,
had thick vegetation. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the original planting
scheme would have prevented such outside views from the pleasure garden in order to
focus the view on the rock and the palace complex upon it. The northern and southern
arms of the western segment of the inner rampart, the Mirror Wall and the plaster
band on the rock face, which are placed one behind the other on the east-west axial
line, act as a series of screens in front of the plastered and painted band of the rock to
create an illusionary spatial effect from the outer and inner western precincts. Although
the numerous north-south running walls of the axial zone have now been reduced to
ruins, their thicknesses suggest that they originally stood to a considerable height to
play the role of screens against the axial line to achieve the illusionary spatial effect.
The east-west axis within the western precincts, therefore, provides the visual interplay
of various elements to heighten these illusionary spatial effects. On the other hand,
these spatial effects created along the west-east direction towards the rock further
strengthen the scheme’s rock-oriented composition.
This compositional technique of the three-dimensional space, where the great plaster
band on the rock face was composed as a cloud below the rock summit and rises above
a series of architectural devices in the foreground to give a floating effect to the palace
complex, shows similarities to the painterly technique of the individual paintings of
the ladies on the plaster band, where a cloud is composed below the waist level (figure
5.57). Unfortunately, the whole plaster band has not survived, and so it is impossible
to understand how it was three dimensionally treated in the whole architectural
composition. Similar examples showing this painterly tradition are fairly common, the
best examples being from the 17th and 18th century mural paintings of the Kandyan
period (figures 5.58. 5.59). Although the architectural devices used are somewhat
different to those at Sigiriya, a similar technique of architectural composition can
194 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

be found at the royal precinct at Kandy, designed during the last decade of the 18th
century and first decade of the 19th century. At Kandy – with the large sheet of water of
the man-made lake in the foreground of the royal precinct, with a series of architectural
foregrounds (such as the walakulu bemma (cloud drift parapet wall) and diyareli
bemma (wave swell parapet wall)) rising one behind the other over the sheet of water
of the lake, as a base for the royal precinct, as in a stage set with reflections of the
parapet walls and the palace buildings on the water (figure 5.60) – the royal precinct
was deliberately designed to appear like an abode floating in the sky (De Silva, N.,
1993:159). In this respect, Sigiriya presents the earliest surviving example in Sri Lanka,
if not in Asia, of a technique of architectural composition that gives a floating effect in
three-dimensional form, which is very similar to a technique common in Sri Lanka’s
painting tradition.
Figure 5.57
A painting of a lady on the rock face (note the cloud composed below the waist) (photo: M. W. E. Karunaratne)
195 The Analysis i

Figure 5.58 Figure 5.59
A mural painting from Suriyagoda Temple near Kandy A mural painting from Dambulla Cave shrine (18th
(18th century) showing the painterly technique century) showing the painterly technique of using
of using cloud to give floating effects (courtesy: cloud to give floating effects (courtesy: Chutiwongs,
Bandaranayake, 1986a) Prematilleke and Silva, 1990b)
Figure 5.60
Royal precinct of Kandy showing the floating effects (note the parapet walls)
196 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

5.8(b) Routes through the Hilly Terrain
The positioning of the route from the western gateway to the hilly terrain up to the Lion
Plateau through the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall indicates that it does not
take the shortest and easiest locus between the two points. If a route with a flight of
steps were constructed along the slope of the hilly terrain in a northeasterly direction
to directly link the Lion Plateau, the enormous cost, labor and engineering problems of
constructing a pathway halfway up along the rock would have been avoided. However, a
close analysis of the natural site conditions of the hilly terrain in relation to the pleasure
garden suggests that this pathway is laid out in such a manner that it is hidden behind
the clusters of boulders of the hilly terrain (figures 5.61, 5.62). As this route reaches
the upper limits of this terrain, and where there are not enough boulders to cover the
pathway, the route takes rather a zigzag form to be hidden behind the boulders, which
are at a lower elevation (figure 5.63). Therefore, this pathway is hardly noticeable from
the western precincts. Likewise, the route from the southern gateway of the pleasure
garden up to the beginning of the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall through the
hilly terrain is also deliberately shut out of sight from the western precincts by taking
advantage of the topographical features of the hilly terrain. It could be reasonably
assumed that the original vegetation pattern on the hilly terrain would have also
contributed to provide added cover to these pathways. Moreover, the Mirror Wall of the
pathway, which is about two meters high, and therefore more than the average height
of a person, also deliberately shuts out of sight pedestrian movement. Therefore, this
indicates that pedestrian movement within the hilly terrain up to the Lion-Plateau is
shut out of sight from the western precincts. As such, when viewed from the western
precincts, the hilly terrain seems to be a human-free zone. The peripheral wall around
the base of the hilly terrain would have also given the impression that the hilly terrain
is not freely accessible from the plain. This deliberate positioning of the routes through
the hilly terrain and the high parapet wall of the Mirror Wall also avoids providing live
scale to the painted figures on the plaster band on the rock, which are in reality smaller
than actual human proportions. This is an important condition to create the spatial
illusion from the western precincts.
197 The Analysis i

Figure 5.61
Route across the lower half of the hilly terrain in relation to the topographic features
Figure 5.62
Semi-aerial view of the hilly terrain showing the route covered by boulders (photo: R. Swathe Inc.; courtesy:
Bandaranayake 1993b)
198 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.63
The route across the upper half of the hilly terrain (note the zigzag form of the route)
199 The Analysis i

However, after the observer advances through the western gate to the hilly terrain
(inner city), due to the laying of the route covered by the clusters of boulders, the
view of the central rock itself is also cut off from sight. Therefore, the spectator-stage
relationship, which is so dominant along the axial pathway in the western precincts,
is now lost. Since the observer is surrounded by varying sizes of rock masses in this
boulder-dominated landscape, a new relationship begins to form, as if the spectator
is now within the stage surrounded by many actors. Here, the boulders forming the
focus of the composition like the main actors on stage will become the stage set for the
next scene as the spectator moves freely through the hilly terrain (figure 5.64, 5.65).
The asymmetrical planning of the layout also greatly contributes to achieve this free
design. Here, the circulation is more free and the views are of infinite variety. Each
boulder in the landscape could be seen and enjoyed for itself or its relationship to other
boulders or landscape elements. The numerous paintings on the plaster that covers the
rock ceilings of these boulders would have given a dramatic effect to the whole spatial
experience. The spectator is, therefore, set free to discover the landscape for himself.
In order to heighten this effect, the observer is offered a specific view of neither the
central rock nor that of the formal layout of the pleasure garden, which is located at a
lower elevation than the hilly terrain. Therefore, the spatial design of the hilly terrain
remains introverted in character. Even when walking along the pathway associated
with the Mirror Wall towards the Lion Plateau, although this elevated pathway, like a
balcony, has the great potential of providing an overview of the formal layout of the
pleasure garden and of the western panorama, the high parapet wall constructed on its
western edge deliberately prevents such views. However, the reflective plaster on the
interior surface of the Mirror Wall of this pathway would have compensated the above
natural views by mirroring the plaster band (possibly with the painted figures at the
lower levels), that is on the rock surface, as if the observer is walking through a much
wider space, flanked by the floating Sigiriya ladies (figure 5.66). The emotional graffiti
inscribed by the later visitors to the site also indicates the stunning spatial and visual
effects experienced by them at this location, when most of the plaster on the western
rock face together with the paintings and also the reflective surface of the Mirror Wall
were in a much better state of preservation than at present.
200 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.64
Different views with regard to the changing composition of the boulders
201 The Analysis i

Figure 5.65
Plan showing different view points along the routes across the hilly terrain
a. Painted figures on the rock plaster
b. Reflective plaster
c. Mirror Wall
Figure 5.66
Section through the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall showing that a considerable area of the plaster on
the lower part of the rock face is reflected by the reflective plaster on the inner face of the Mirror Wall
202 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Although the parapet wall around the periphery of the Lion Plateau has not survived to its
original height at present, the Mirror Wall, which winds around the northwest corner of
the rock to connect the parapet wall of this plateau, indicates that the same height would
have continued around the Lion Plateau. If the zigzag stairway above the Lion-Staircase-
House was also a continuation of the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall, with the
same height of its parapet wall, it is reasonable to assume that the view of the formal
layout of the scheme and of the panorama was not provided until the observer reached
the rock summit. From the palace, which is the highest vantage point of the whole
scheme, the formal layout and the panorama are suddenly unfolded in all directions. The
observer now finds a new spatial relationship, this time with the open landscape. This
is a large, live and natural landscape theater with the urban and suburban settlements,
monasteries, agrarian settlements with their fields and reservoirs, together with their
respective actors, all playing their real and respective roles. The palace garden and the
pleasure garden assume stage sets in this immense landscape theater. Therefore, this
long spatial corridor, commencing from the western edge of the hilly terrain right up to
the rock summit, shuts out the overview of the formal layout of the pleasure garden and
the panorama to unfold the drama from the rock summit.
§ 5.9 Visual Structure
§ 5.9.1 Visual Layers
When viewed from below, the whole scheme can be interpreted as consisting of several
distinctive visual layers (figure 5.67). The lowest layer, which consists of natural and
agricultural landscape and the rectangular precincts of the formal layout, is associated
with the animals, agrarian population as well as the urban elite and nobility, and hence
represents the world of humans and animals. The hilly terrain, on which the rock stands
and where any view of human movement is deliberately cut off from the plain below,
by the laying of pathways hidden behind boulders, represents a human-free visual
layer. The plaster band on the rock face above this layer gives an illusionary space and
visually separates the palace from the land. The ladies painted in the plaster band
give the impression that they are floating in the sky. The use of clouds to horizontally
separate different layers is a common painterly technique of Sri Lanka’s mural painting
tradition (figure 5.68). With regard to Sri Lanka’s painting tradition, Bandaranayake
(1986a:28) also observes that the ‘use of clouds is not only a compositional device, but
a well established symbolic motif in the representation of celestial regions ...’ The cloud
203 The Analysis i

drift parapet wall introduced as an architectural device at Kandy’s royal precinct (figure
5.69) is another example of such a technique used in architectural composition. The
palace occupies the topmost visual layer, which is visually detached from the land. This
indicates that there is a bottom-up vertical sequence of visual structuring system of the
landscape with decreasing human and at the same time increasing divine habitation
from the virtual plain up to the rock summit (figure 5.70). This visual structuring of the
landscape resembles the subdivision of the world of sensation (laukika): the world of
animals and humans, the heavenly abodes of the world of gods high up on the Mount
Meru of the cosmic landscape, together with the atmospheric region above the rock
summit, the higher Brahma heavens, as per Buddhist cosmography78 (Adikaram,
1946:153-154; Duncan, 1990:43).
a. Plain (animals, agrarian population, urban elite and nobility)
b. Hilly Terrain (deliberate cut off of the human presence)
c. Plaster Band (illusionary space)
d. Palace Complex on the Rock Summit
Figure 5.67
Bottom-up layering system of the landscape (vertical scale exaggerated)
78 For more details see section 2.1.3.
204 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.68
Mural paintings of the Dambulla Cave shrine (18th century) showing clouds used to horizontally separate different
layers (courtesy: Bandaranayake 1986a (left) and Chutiwongs, Prematilleke and Silva, 1990b (right))
Figure 5.69
Cloud-drift parapet wall, Kandy
205 The Analysis i

Figure 5.70
The visual image of Sigiriya
§ 5.9.2 Hydraulic Elements
The gentle fall of the natural ground within the axial zone of the pleasure garden has
been formalized into a succession of terraces with slight level changes that step down
in a westward direction. These terraces were used to regulate and activate different
hydraulic elements of the scheme. The area to the south of the east-west axis within the
axial zone consists of several hydraulic elements, such as the serpentine stream, pressure
chambers, fountains, pond, pools and inner moat, arranged linearly in an east-west
direction. The flow of water in the serpentine stream is canalized into a pressure chamber
to activate the fountains. The water that sparkled from these fountains flows westwards
and cascades into an elongated pond. The large bathing pools of the four-quartered
feature fed by a system of underground conduits are located on a lower level to that of
the elongated pond. The excess and flushed water from these pools then finds its way
into the inner moat (figure 5.71). These hydraulic elements, which create audio and
visual effects, therefore give water a different form and movement within the axial zone.
If this linear arrangement of hydraulic elements is compared with that of the agricultural
landscape outside the formal layout, the serpentine stream, pressure chambers,
pond, pools and the inner moat could be interpreted as representing the natural river
or stream, the hydraulic elements to canalize water of natural rivers or streams, the
man-made reservoir to store water, the flooded fields fulfilling a utilitarian function,
and the water course that takes the excess water to the next tank or to the ocean (figure
5.72). Therefore, this suggests that the linear sequence of hydraulic features within the
axial zone of the pleasure garden is a miniature representation of the linear cascading
sequence of the hydraulic features in a typical agrarian landscape of Sri Lanka. This
sequence also underlines the philosophy of water conservation and management of the
ancient Sri Lankan agro-based society that ‘every drop of water that falls on the island
206 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

must not flow into the ocean without serving its people’.79 The incorporation of fountains
as an additional feature into this sequence suggests that hydraulics was also appreciated
as an aesthetic entity by royalty before it was used for a utilitarian purpose.
a. Serpentine Stream
b. Canalized Diversion
c. Pressure Chamber
d. Fountains
e. Elongated Pond
f. Bathing Pool
g. Moat
Figure 5.71
Linear sequence of hydraulic features within the axial zone (vertical scale exaggerated)
79 For more details see section 2.1.6.
207 The Analysis i

1. Serpentine Stream/Natural Stream or River
2. Canalized Diversion/Hydraulic Element
3. Fountains/Aesthetics
4. Pond/Reservoir (Storage)
5. Pool/Fields
6. Moat/Stream or River
Figure 5.72
Comparison of linear sequence of hydraulic features within the axial zone with hydraulic features of a typical agrarian landscape
In the same way, the large rock-cut pool on the rock summit together with rock-cut
vertical drains on the central rock and on boulders of the hilly terrain (figure 5.73),
Sigiri Mahavava and large water-retaining structures located around the base of the
hilly terrain,80 the pleasure garden and moats of the western precincts, which are
80 Ellepola (1990:197) notes that the elevation of the Sigiri Mahavava is similar, if not higher, than those of the
chain of garden pools lying immediately below the hilly terrain on the inner western precinct, and is therefore
easily irrigated by a water supply from Mahavava, and suggests that there is the possibility of underground
conduits linking these pools with Mahavava.
208 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

dominated by water features, the reservoirs beyond the formal layout, the paddy fields
of the agrarian landscape, and the two irrigation systems of Kala Oya and Yan Oya in
the wider landscape context represent the source, the natural water cascades of rivers
and streams, lakes, aesthetics, water storage, utilitarian need (fields) and back-to-
nature sequence of the hydrologic cycle (figures 5.74, 5.75). These features are visually
arranged from the rock summit, where the king resides, to the open, natural and
agricultural landscape through the pleasure garden mainly in an east-west direction, as
if the water originates from the rock summit. Since Sigiriya rock is symbolically located
on the hydrographical hub of the island’s two extensive natural-cum-agricultural
drainage networks,81 this visual structuring of hydraulic features provides added
meaning to this pictorial image of the scheme.
Figure 5.73
Rock-cut vertical drains on the rock boulders of the hilly terrain
81 For more details see section 5.1.2.
209 The Analysis i

1. Rock-cut pool on the rock summit: Source
2. Water cascades and other elements: Natural cascades
3. Sigiri Mahavava and ponds located around the base of
the hilly terrain: Lakes
4. Pleasure Garden: Aesthetics
5. Artificial Reservoirs: Water storage
6. Paddy Fields: Utilitarian needs
7. Kala Oya/Yan Oya Irrigation System: Back to nature
Figure 5.74
Sequence of hydraulic features of the overall scheme (macro scale)
210 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.75
Sequence of hydraulic features in Sigiriya’s wider landscape context (courtesy: Bandaranayake 1990b)
211 The Analysis i

This suggests that the elements within Sigiriya proper and wider landscape context
are visually structured as per the cosmic pattern in both micro and macro scales to
represent the hydrologic cycle that produces fertility on earth. Therefore, it reflects
the ecological characteristics that are so essential to the agrarian community, for
whom water is the essential commodity, where the monsoon was uncertain and crop
failure due to drought common.
§ 5.9.3 Natural and Built Elements
The study of the visual aspect of the natural and built elements as a bearer of image
and meaning of the scheme shows that Sigiriya rock, which is an enormous mass,
occupies the center of the scheme. The boulders scattered within the hilly terrain are
less in volume than the central rock, and the volume of the rock masses diminishes
gradually from the center towards the periphery of the formal layout. On the other
hand, the rock-cut pool on the rock summit, the four pools associated with the
four-quartered feature, the moats and man-made reservoirs in the wider landscape
context show that there is a gradual increase in the sheets of water from the center
of the rock towards the periphery of the formal layout (figure 5.76). Therefore, this
visual structuring system of decreasing solids, and at the same time of increasing
liquids from the rock summit to the edge of the plan, further reinforces the idea that
the water originates at the center of the scheme and flows downwards for the benefit
of human beings.
The main palace buildings are constructed on top of the main rock, while the other
buildings within the inner precinct (hilly terrain) are built upon boulders of smaller
size. At the pleasure garden in the plain below, the buildings are mostly built as
water-surrounding pavilions/structures. The whole complex is also practically
surrounded by moats (figure 5.77). Therefore, the scheme is visually structured
in the sequence of decreasing rock-associated structures and at the same time
increasing water-associated structures from the center to the edge of the formal
layout to enhance the above image.
212 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.76
Diminishing volume of rocks and increasing sheets of water from the center towards the periphery of the formal plan
Figure 5.77
Diminishing rock-associated and increasing water-associated structures from the center towards the periphery of
the formal plan
213 The Analysis i

The buildings and structures within the pleasure garden were mostly single story,
while the presence of remnants of the internal staircase of the main palace building
on the rock summit indicates that it was a storied structure. The areas of the ground
floors of the buildings within the pleasure garden are less than that of the main
palace building on the rock summit. Similarly, the buildings within the pleasure
garden occupy lower levels, while the elevation of those within the hilly terrain that
were built upon the boulders become increasingly higher towards the base of the
rock, and the main palace building occupies the highest elevation of the scheme
(figure 5.78). Therefore, this shows that the size, scale and elevation of the buildings
within the scheme are structured in an increasing manner to make the palace the
climax of the visual structure. This also highlights the palace on the rock summit as
the focal point of the overall scheme.
a. Four-quartered feature
b. ‘Summer Palace’
c. Boulder-associated Structures
d. Main Palace
Figure 5.78
Increasing size, scale and elevation of the buildings from the periphery towards the center of the formal plan
214 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

§ 5.10 Activities and Functional Elements
§ 5.10.1 Programmatic Domains
The study of the programmatic domains of the scheme suggests that the palace,
which was the domain of the king, occupies its highest level. It is also the innermost
enclosure of the scheme. The inner city, which occupies the hilly terrain, is exclusively
for royal functions and hence part of the programmatic domain of the king. The
precincts located on the plain immediately beyond the hilly terrain (except the
pleasure garden) were the domain of the urban elite and nobility, while the outer
landscape was mainly the domain of the suburban and agricultural populace or the
‘common man’ (figure 5.79). This horizontal and vertical sequence of organization
of functional spaces reflects the social hierarchical structure of ancient Sri Lanka. The
palace on the rock summit takes full control of the whole landscape that it surveys.
This structuring system of the programmatic domains provides the king with an
overview of the rest of the programmatic domains, and at the same time the visual
presence of the ruler to the rest of the social strata.
It is interesting to note that the Buddhist monasteries of Pidurangala and
Ramakele, which are the domain of Buddhist monks, are also located within the
outer landscape. On the other hand, the rock summit and the hilly terrain, which
are the programmatic domains of the king, are asymmetrical in layout, while those
of the urban elite and nobility are symmetrical in layout. This shows that symmetry
and asymmetry have also been used to distinguish the programmatic domains
within the formal layout.
215 The Analysis i

Figure 5.79
Programmatic domains of the scheme
§ 5.10.2 Pleasure Program
Overlooked by the palace, the axial location of the pleasure garden immediately outside
the hilly terrain (inner city), but within the walled-in city, suggests that it is one of the
major spaces in the overall programmatic form of the scheme. This is in contrast to
the location of pleasure gardens at the established political center at Anuradhapura,
which are located beyond the city walls and very much away from the city center in
insignificant location (figure 2.7).
The study of the layout of the pleasure garden shows that most of the water-associated
elements, such as ponds, bathing pools and water-surrounded pavilions, are
concentrated within the axially arranged central zone. Compared to this zone, the two
outer areas to the north and south beyond the axial zone within the pleasure garden
consist of only a few water-associated elements: a summer palace close to the axial
zone and another moated island (probably an island structure) on either side. Moreover,
the axial zone was well demarcated from the rest of the zone by a thick wall (figure
5.80). Bandaranayake (1984:7) identifies these two distinguishable zones as the ‘water
216 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

garden’ and ‘parks’, respectively. Dissanayake (2003:225) suggests that the outer zone
originally consisted of thick vegetation. Therefore, the presence of two types of gardens
further suggests that the central axial zone and the two zones on either side of it were
for water sports (diya-keli) and garden sports (uyan-keli), respectively, which are vividly
described in Sinhala literary works.82 The zoning of the space for water sports on the
principal axis flanked by the spaces for garden sports also confirms the importance
placed on water sports over garden sports in the overall pleasure program of royalty.
Figure 5.80
Pleasure garden showing the areas for water sports and garden sports
82 See Gooneratne (1983) and Dissanayake (2003:224-242).
217 The Analysis i

§ 5.10.3 Functional Relationship of Spaces
5.10.3(a) Overall Complex
The pleasure garden is directly linked to the hilly terrain and the palace on the rock
summit. The inner and outer eastern precincts on the other hand do not have direct
physical links with the palace. The pleasure garden, which has entrances at the north,
south and west sides of the rampart that defines its limits, allows physical links with
both these eastern precincts as well as the outer landscape (figure 5.81). Therefore,
this suggests that the links of the two eastern precincts and the outer landscape with
the palace are allowed only through the pleasure garden. Therefore, the pleasure
garden becomes an important element of the program form in establishing functional
relationships between the palace and other spaces. On the other hand, the two eastern
precincts, which are suggested by Bandaranayake (1993b:114-116) as inner city and
outer city and by Karunaratne, P. (1994) as ceremonial park and inner city, respectively,
do not become significant elements of the program form.
1. Palace
2. Pleasure Garden
3. Inner Eastern Precinct
4. Outer Eastern Precinct
5. Outer Landscape
Figure 5.81
Functional relationship of various spaces of the scheme
218 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

5.10.3(b) Pleasure Garden
The northern and southern gateways to the pleasure garden have wide openings and had
massive timber doorways, even considering the chariots driven by horses or elephants
that entered this precinct. Although these entrances are presently in a ruined state, the
remains suggest that they functioned as properly guarded gatehouses. In contrast to
these two entrances, that to the west, which is set on the east-west axis, is small in scale,
but has triple openings. It is positioned at a higher elevation and reached by a flight of
steps from the outer western precinct after crossing the inner moat, suggesting that
this approach is meant only for pedestrians. The width of the central opening of this
gateway is larger than those of the secondary openings on either side of it. Therefore,
from this western gateway, three separate but parallel avenues continue in an eastward
direction. The wall demarcating the western boundary of the four-quartered feature also
has a gateway with triple openings. However, the eastern gateway to the four-quartered
feature has only a single doorway. The gateway to the inner city (hilly terrain), which is
also set on the east-west axis, has a single doorway. Therefore, the decreasing number
of doorways beyond the central pavilion associated with the four-quartered feature in
a further eastward direction indicates that pedestrian movement beyond the center of
the compound associated with the four-quartered feature is relatively restricted (figure
5.82). Therefore, this shows that the pleasure garden is for the multitude of people, and
the movement beyond it towards the hilly terrain and the rock summit, which are the
domains of the king and the royalty, are restricted.
Figure 5.82
Axial pathway through the pleasure garden up to the western limits of the hilly terrain showing the decreasing number of openings
associated with gateways leading towards the hilly terrain
219 The Analysis i

5.10.3(c) Compound Associated with the Four-quartered Feature
The rectangular compound associated with the four-quartered feature is composed
of three spaces: the central square enclosing the four L-shaped ponds with the central
pavilion, and two rectangular enclosures attached to the north and south sides of the
central square enclosure along the north-south transverse axis. The L-shaped bathing
ponds of the central square enclosure are of immense proportions so that it could be
used by a multitude of people. The central square enclosure has access from all four
sides. The gateways, each with triple openings at the northern, southern and western
sides, indicates that they were meant to allow a multitude of people to this central
enclosure from respective directions. From the triple openings of each gateway, three
separate but parallel avenues continue as causeways towards the pavilion at the center
of the enclosure with the central avenue from each direction running at a higher level
than those on either side of it (figures 5.83, 5.84). The avenues at different levels
were probably meant for people of different social strata. Compared to these gateways
with triple openings, the one on the eastern side of the compound associated with
the four-quartered feature, which is connected with the route from the palace on the
rock summit through the hilly terrain, has a single opening. It was to provide access
to the king and possibly a select number of members of his royal court. Therefore,
this compound provides a destination from all directions from other programmatic
domains. Unlike the palace complex on the rock summit and the hilly terrain, the
central square enclosure associated with the four-quartered feature indicates its
public accessibility and reception. Dissanayake (2003:231) suggests that the pleasure
gardens also functioned as spaces for official receptions and entertainment. The
members of the rest of the social strata, nobility in particular, and state guests were
probably received here by the king and interacted. The central pavilion surrounded by
the L-shaped ponds could be the space where the king, who resides in the aerial palace,
would symbolically interact with the ‘public’. The two rectangular compartments
attached to the north and south sides of the central square enclosure would have also
been used in a great many ways for dining, relaxing, and so on.
220 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.83
The avenues and entrances leading to the rectangular compartment associated with the four-quartered feature
Figure 5.84
The triple avenues (section XX of Figure 5.83) leading towards the pavilion at the center of the enclosure
associated with the four-quartered feature
221 The Analysis i

5.10.3(d) Rock Summit
Figure 5.85
Central limestone pathway as the direct physical link between palace buildings and palace garden of the rock summit
The flight of steps set off from the central limestone-paved pathway constructed
between the western and eastern halves of the rock summit suggests that palace
buildings had a direct physical link with the palace garden (figure 5.85).
222 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

6 Conclusions
§ 6.1 Landscape Design Characteristics of Sigiriya
Since the main objective of the present study is to read Sigiriya as a landscape
architectonic design, it is intended under this subheading to identify its landscape
design characteristics based on the observations of the analysis carried out in Chapter
5. These characteristics will be presented together with the design tools, principles/
rules and techniques utilized by the designers of Sigiriya under the four aspects: the
basic form, spatial form, metaphorical form and programmatic form.
§ 6.1.1 The Basic Form
6.1.1(a) The Design Responses at Sigiriya Reflect the Internal Logic of the Natural Landscape
The remarkable geomorphologic characteristics associated with Sigiriya rock – a
visually independent rock pillar rising almost 180 meters above the surrounding
(virtual) plain, dominating the entire landscape and offering a 360° panoramic view,
its somewhat flattened, buildable summit to construct a palace upon the rock, the
almost vertical walls on all sides of the rock giving the impression of inaccessibility
and soaring effects – would have been the main considerations for selection of the
particular site at Sigiriya to establish Kasyapa’s new political center. The symbolic
positioning of the rock on the hydrographical hub for the island’s two extensive
natural-cum-agricultural drainage networks, whose ultimate limits are the Arabian
Sea to the west and Bay of Bengal to the east, and the presence of surrounding natural-
cum-agrarian landscape with agrarian infrastructure and settlements, which served
to strengthen the pictorial image of the new political center, would have undoubtedly
given added reasons for the selection of this site. The orientation, axial formation and
proportional relationship of the overall scheme were also determined/derived by that
of Sigiriya rock.
Since the major lines of vision of the site with regard to the dominance of the rock
from the plain below and panoramic view from the rock summit, due to the natural
223 Conclusions i

morphologic and topographic characteristics offered by the site, are in both to the east
and west directions, the design interventions upon the natural landscape were both
east and west of the rock. The physical boundaries of the layout to the north and south
sides were determined by the topographical features of Pidurangala and Mapagala,
respectively, which obstruct the hilly terrain upon which the rock stands, to descend to
the virtual plain. The eastern limits of the moated inner eastern precinct is determined
by the wide limestone belt which runs in a south-north direction to the east of the
rock, and hence was a physical obstruction for the continuation of the moat in a further
eastward direction. The western limits of the layout are determined by the presence of
the Sigiri Oya. However, unlike those of other sides of the layout, the consideration of
the designers here was not mainly due to the physical obstructions, but to deliberately
locate Sigiri Oya outside the layout to discharge water associated with the moats and
hydraulic features of the pleasure garden to the Sigiri Oya, and to make it part of the
structured hydrologic cycle to strengthen the pictorial image of the scheme. The outer
eastern precinct, which sits on the limestone belt and is not suitable for agricultural
activity, has been assigned for the urban elite and nobility, a community not directly
associated with agrarian function. The eastern limit of the outer eastern precinct is
determined to achieve a perspectival balance of the panorama from the rock summit.
As such, the designers made the outer rectangular compound not symmetrical along
the north-south axis, but its eastern half was deliberately extended in a further
eastward direction to achieve this effect.
The location of the principal palace building on the highest elevation of the rock
summit, which offers a 360° panoramic view of the natural and agricultural landscape,
shows the exploitation of the site characteristics for the maximum advantage by the
designers. The orientation of the palace buildings in the north-south direction, which
enables the great panoramic spatial depth offered in both east and west directions,
suggests that the view offered from the rock summit is one of the major determinant
factors for such a design decision. Although such interventions would have
undoubtedly made the designers find technical solutions and incur extra expenditure
to overcome the problems created by exposing the buildings directly to heavy wind
and harsh northeast monsoon rains, particularly the principal palace buildings that
consisted of storied structures and were located on the northwest quadrant of the rock
summit, and to the direct sun by exposing the long sides of the buildings, this shows
that the design responses are mainly influenced by the view rather that climatic/
environmental and economic factors.
The natural morphologic features of the rock summit, which splits it into upper west
and lower east levels, have also been exploited to position the palace buildings on the
highest elevation and palace garden on the lower level to be a foreground and a visual
link between the eastern panorama with the palace buildings.
The boulders scattered on the western slopes of the hilly terrain are also exploited to
the maximum to lay the pathways hidden behind them, in order to shut out human
movement within this area to facilitate achieving illusionary effects and the expected
visual structuring system of the scheme.
224 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Compared to the eastern slopes of the hilly terrain and the inner eastern precinct, the
topography of the western slopes and the inner western precinct provides different
elevations to activate the hydraulic features through regulated gravity and pressure.
Therefore, the designers preferred the inner western precinct over the inner eastern precinct
to have the water-associated features for pleasure and aesthetic purposes as well as to lay
out a linear sequence of hydraulic elements to represent the hydrologic cycle.
The natural features and morphology of the site are least altered in laying out the scheme.
For instance, the plan configuration of the enclosures defining such natural features as
the rock summit and hilly terrain do not assume geometric plan, but follow their natural
plan configuration to enhance the natural features. The natural terrain and especially the
boulders have been well incorporated as major features of its design.
The compositional balance/control of the irregular topographical features of the hilly
terrain and the rock summit have been achieved with minimal intervention to the site,
by employing both mirror symmetry and asymmetrical balance. Even the construction of
the staggered limestone pathway in a north-south direction, which deliberately rotates
the northeast-southwest oriented natural morphological axis of the rock summit, is a
compromise between the irregular topography and the desire to enhance the panoramic
view in both east and west directions.
Therefore, the design responses at Sigiriya reflect the internal logic of the natural landscape
and its landscape design, and is mainly an adaptation to the natural landscape of the site.
Most of the design solutions indicate that the characteristics of the natural, agricultural and
monastic landscape layers underneath Kasyapa’s architectural layers reflect on the landscape
design. The remarkable geomorphologic characteristics of the natural landscape associated
with Sigiriya rock, therefore, would have undoubtedly been an inspiration for its designers.
6.1.1(b) Hierarchic Ordering System and the Axial Arrangement of Various Enclosures and Their
Material Elements to Emphasize the Rock and Palace Complex as the Dominant Element of the
Overall Composition
The scheme consists of several enclosures that are defined by walls, ramparts and
moats. The horizontal sequence of concentric-cum-linear arrangement of the
enclosures, both in east and west directions from the base of the rock, made the palace
complex sitting upon it the central and innermost enclosure. In the vertical sequence
of organizing enclosures, the rock summit occupies the central and highest elevation
of the overall composition. This horizontal and vertical sequence of hierarchic ordering
of various enclosures has therefore emphasized the rock and the palace complex as the
dominant element and the focal point of the overall composition.
The rock, hilly terrain and various rectangular enclosures that extend in both east and
west directions from the base of the hilly terrain are axially arranged by extending the
natural east-west axis of the site. This axis also orders the material elements within
these enclosures, such as the principal gateways and entrances facing east and west of
the eastern and western precincts, the pronaos projections, the central axial pathway
225 Conclusions i

traversing the east-west length of the pleasure garden, and so on, by placing them
on the east-west axis. The north-south axis of the scheme, which is also derived by
the natural features of the site, axially arranges the Lion Plateau with the rock. It also
regulates the positioning of such material elements as the great lion figure and the
flight of steps/entrances that punctuate the north-south oriented approach up to
the Lion-Staircase-House. This north-south and east-west axial formation, which
intersects at the center of the rock, further emphasizes the rock and the palace complex
as the central objects of the overall composition.
6.1.1(c) Use of Symmetry and Asymmetry to Balance/Control the Composition of the Scheme
Since the scheme incorporates the somewhat irregular Sigiriya rock and the hilly terrain,
the compositional balance of the overall layout has been achieved by means of ordering
a series of enclosures using symmetry. Therefore, the east-west axis of the scheme
assumes the symmetry axis to regulate such elements as the moats and ramparts
defining various precincts, the compound associated with the four-quartered feature and
garden elements such as the moated island structures, ponds, pools and fountains of the
pleasure garden. The symmetricity is achieved either by placing the enclosures/elements
on the axis or by mirroring them as identical pairs on either side of the axis. The balance
of the highly irregular elevational profile of the northern rock face above the Lion-Plateau
has also been achieved by ordering the plateau and the elements within it using the
same technique. The dominant great lion figure composed against the northern rock face
and set on the north-south axis of symmetry has greatly heightened this compositional
balance. Therefore, symmetry has been used as a design tool/instrument as well as a
design technique to give a compositional balance to the overall scheme, as well as to
its various parts. In addition to creating a pleasing effect to the composition, symmetry
has provided the formality and orderliness to express the state of stability needed by
a royal center. The strong axial symmetry of the overall formal layout in an east-west
direction, which subordinates the north-south natural axis, also deliberately orients the
composition in the east-west direction to enhance the panoramic view from the rock
summit and the view of the rock from the plain below in both east and west directions.
In contrast to the rectangular precincts, the control of the composition of the hilly
terrain and the rock summit, which present irregular topographical features, has been
achieved through asymmetry. Instead of creating identical pairs on either side of a
central axial line by transforming the hilly terrain through significant interventions,
the designers controlled its composition through the use of highly asymmetrical
planning, where both natural and built elements are incorporated together and held
by the contours of the natural morphology. The design technique used to control
the composition of the irregular rock summit is the asymmetrical balance. Here,
equilibrium has been achieved of the elements that are diagonally placed on either side
of the dividing line jointly created by the brick embankment and the central limestone
pathway that traverse the whole north-south length of the rock summit. The asymmetrical
226 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

balance is often difficult to accomplish and, therefore, Sigiriya showcases a rare example
of such a design technique and speaks of the creativity of its designers during the 5th
century AC, to control a composition while preserving the natural landscape with minimal
interventions to the natural features of the site. Besides allowing greater plan flexibility, the
asymmetrical planning seen at Sigiriya, therefore, demonstrates that its landscape design
was developed in sympathy with and fuller respect for its natural landscape qualities.
With regard to the ceiling painting in the rock shelter, popularly known as the Cobra-
hood Cave (figure 6.1), Bandaranayake (1986a:33) comments,
‘The paintings combine geometrical shapes and motifs with free and complex
rendering of characteristic volute or whorl motif. It is nothing less than a masterpiece of
expressionist painting, deploying considerable imaginative range and artistic virtuosity
in a way not seen elsewhere in the surviving paintings of the Sri Lankan tradition.’
Therefore, this painting composition also shows some close conceptual similarities to
the symmetrical-cum-asymmetrical architectural composition of Sigiriya. The other
important aspect of the composition at Sigiriya is the skill of the designers in merging
symmetrical composition of the built landscape with the outer landscape by gradually
reducing the perfect mirror symmetry to a visual symmetry towards the boundaries of the
layout. This has made the symmetrical layout of the scheme merge and blend with the
natural unordered outer landscape in a harmonious manner without confrontation.
Figure 6.1
Part of the ceiling painting of Cobra-hood Cave (photo: Gamini Jayasinghe; courtesy: Bandaranayake, 1986a)
227 Conclusions i

The least interventions carried out at the hilly terrain, without its whole transformation,
where the boulder-associated monastic landscape had been originally established but
was in disuse by the time Kasyapa’s designers arrived at the site, reflects the earlier
concept of minimum disturbance to the natural environment that was practiced by the
predecessors to Kasyapa’s designers. This landscape was not only retained but greatly
enhanced through the use of highly sophisticated asymmetrical design techniques.
All this indicates that the landscape design of Sigiriya brings one in closest harmony
with nature, which reflects the attitude of ancient Sri Lankans towards nature.
6.1.1(d) Proportional Relationship of the Scheme to Control the Composition and to Give It a
Monumental Scale
The analysis shows that the ground plan of the built landscape has a geometric ordering
system derived from the measurements and proportions of the natural cap-rock, so that
there is a proportional relationship between different elements and parts of individual
elements as well as the layout as a whole. The designers used the geometric grid as
an instrument/tool, whose grid module is based on the measurements of the rock
to present the parts and the whole layout in an aesthetically satisfying proportional
relationship in a mathematical reciprocity in order to harmonize the built elements
with the natural rock. By dictating the measurements of the grid module that is derived
from the rock, and laying over it on the built landscape, an order is imposed by the rock
upon the surrounding landscape. Therefore, the geometric ordering system symbolically
establishes the authority of the king who dwelled on the rock summit, over those who
reside within various precincts and enclosures of the layout. This shows that as much
as the designers used hierarchy, axiality and symmetry/asymmetry to control the
composition, they used proportions to the same effect.
The size relationship between the natural rock and such built elements as the
compound associated with the four-quartered feature and the overall layout, which are
based on expanding rectangles based on the grid module derived by the monumental
proportions of the rock, also shows that the designers gave the scheme a monumental
scale to express royal grandeur.
On the other hand, the grid module that is derived from the central rock and laying it
upon the irregular landscape with insurmountable barriers reflects the high level of
scientific knowledge and skill with regard to measuring and setting out of monumental
complexes during the 5th century AC.
6.1.1(e) Use of Axis, Symmetry and Geometry to Emphasize the Rectangular Compound
Associated with the Four- quartered Feature as the Dominant Element of the Western Precincts
The compound associated with the four-quartered feature is positioned on the precise
midpoint of the segment of the east-west axis within the western precincts, from
228 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

the western limits of the outer western precinct to the eastern limits of the pleasure
garden. The north-south oriented transverse axis of this compound intersects the east-
west axis at the center of the four-quartered feature. The east-west axis of the scheme
and the north-south orientation of the transverse axis of the compound also become
symmetry axes to order elements within it using mirror symmetry. This axial formation,
therefore, empowers the compound associated with the four-quartered feature as
the dominant element of the western precincts. The arrangement of various elements
within the axial zone with a gradual increase of symmetricity from the western edge of
the outer western precinct in the eastward direction to the center of this compound,
and the gradual decrease of symmetricity in the eastward direction up to the eastern
limits of the pleasure garden, made the compound a climax of symmetricity and gave
an overwhelming sense of order to emphasize the compound as the dominant element
within the western precincts. The measurements and proportions of this compound
correspond with those of the abstracted and geometrizied plan configuration of the
natural ‘cap-rock’ to make it the physical geometric representation of the organic form
of the rock. This rectangular compound thus assumes the source and measuring stick
to lay the geometric grid over the built landscape to become the dominant element of
the geometric grid of the western precincts.
§ 6.1.2 The Spatial Form
6.1.2(a) The Panorama-oriented Spatial Composition Is Organized in the Hierarchical Order of the
Palace, Garden and Outer Landscape to Emphasize the Palace as the Central Object of the Scheme
The scheme consists of three distinct spatial categories: the palace (principal palace
building on the elevated western half of the rock summit), the garden (both the palace
garden on the lower eastern half of the rock summit and the pleasure garden) and
the outer landscape (panorama) beyond the formal layout. Since the palace is located
on the rock summit, which is the highest level of the overall scheme, and due to the
geomorphologic setting, the optical boundaries of the scheme are not confined to
the physical boundaries of the formal layout, but extend up to the visual limits of
the outer landscape. The palace buildings are specifically oriented for the enjoyment
of the panoramic view and the great spatial depth offered in the outer landscape,
particularly in the east and west directions. Composed in the directions of the eastern
and western panoramas from the palace, the palace garden and the pleasure garden
provide architectural foregrounds to eastern and western panoramas, respectively, to
visually link the outer landscape with the palace. The construction of the great brick
embankment in a north-south direction to lay out the palace garden at an elevation
229 Conclusions i

lower than that of the palace, and situating the limestone pathway at midlevel of this
embankment to prevent obstructions due to pedestrian movement between the palace
and the palace garden, visually connects the palace with the eastern panorama.
The compositional balance achieved between the eastern and western panoramas
from the rock summit by using the formal layout in the plain as part of its composition,
where they extend to an equal distance in terms of the perspectival effect towards
the horizon in both eastern and western panorama, also makes the palace the central
object of the panoramic composition. The view from the rock summit towards the
western panorama shows that due to the perspectival effects, the east-west axis of the
western precincts is one of the dominant elements of the spatial composition, as it
gives direction to the horizon in the western panorama from the rock summit. Similarly,
the compound associated with the four-quartered feature with its central pavilion is
visually composed at the exact midpoint between the horizon and the eastern edge
of the pleasure garden. The central position of this compound due to the perspectival
effects, therefore, enhances the spatial integration of the foreground and the western
panorama. It also becomes the reference object to observe the panoramic landscape and
to enhance its spatial depth. As such this compound, which is the dominant material
element, also becomes one of the dominant spatial elements of the scheme.
Therefore, this panorama-oriented, centralized hierarchic ordering of spaces in the
sequence of the palace, garden and open landscape, particularly in both the east and
west directions, has emphasized the palace on the rock summit as the central object
of the overall spatial composition. The great brick embankment, which separates the
palace and the palace garden, the limestone pathway built at the midlevel of this brick
embankment, the rock-cut seat and the terrace structure of the palace garden on the
rock summit, together with the east-west axis and the compound associated with the
four-quartered feature within the pleasure garden, are the major spatial elements of
the overall spatial form.
6.1.2(b) Illusionary Effects of the Three-dimensional Space
The designers have employed a special technique of composition similar to the
painterly technique of composition commonly used by artists of Sri Lanka’s mural
painting tradition to visually and spatially separate the palace on the rock summit from
the land to give a floating effect to the aerial palace, and to create an illusionary space
from the western precincts. The north-south running rampart walls, the Mirror Wall
and the great tapestry of painting on the rock face are placed one behind the other
in a transverse direction to the east-west axis, as in a stage set, to achieve this effect.
Composed of a succession of terraces that gently ascend in a west-east direction along
the east-west axis, the axial zone of the pleasure garden also heightens this effect.
230 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

6.1.2(c) The East-west Axis as the Spatial Axis of the Scheme
Since the east-west oriented main axis within the axial zone is the line along which the
illusionary effects are created and also the line of movement to provide visual interplay
of various elements in the scheme to heighten the illusionary effects, it assumes the
major line of the three-dimensional space within the western precincts and hence the
spatial axis of the scheme. Although the overwhelming presence of Sigiriya rock makes
a natural interruption to the visual continuity of this axis across the great rock mass in a
further eastward direction, the illusionary effects created within the western precincts,
in addition to giving great spatial depth to the pleasure garden, therefore makes this
spatial axis gradually dissolve towards the rock without an abrupt termination. The
gradual decrease of symmetry along this axis from the center of the four-quartered
feature in a further eastward direction to reduce it to an asymmetric balance at
the eastern end of the pleasure garden and its ultimate disappearance among the
asymmetrical layout of the hilly terrain further help to achieve this effect. However, the
axial arrangement of the eastern precinct and the built elements within it make the
main axis reappear beyond the rock in a further eastward direction, thus ensuring the
continuity of the main axis in the whole scheme by running ‘over’ the rock summit.
6.1.2(d) Reversibility of the Spatial Composition
From the rock summit, the scheme has a panorama-oriented spatial composition
in the sequence of the palace, garden and the panorama in the hierarchical order of
increasing dominance. From the plain below, the scheme also has a rock/palace-
oriented spatial composition in the hierarchical order of reverse sequence. Therefore,
the landscape design of Sigiriya has a reversible spatial composition depending on
the view point.
6.1.2(e) The Dramatic Composition
In contrast to the prescribed visual interplay of various elements along a central
line to create illusionary effects from the western precincts, the natural boulders
of picturesque appearance and varying size of the hilly terrain are composed using
a technique of free design, which is held by a series of picturesque scenes. The
asymmetrical layout, which orders the natural and built elements in relation to the
contours of the natural morphology, also contributes to achieve this effect. As the
spectator moves freely through the hilly terrain, the boulders forming the focus of one
scene are reduced to a stage set for the next scene to make it a dramatic composition.
231 Conclusions i

6.1.2(f) The Scenograhic Route through the Hilly Terrain up to the Rock Summit as a Spatial Element
to Link the Illusionary Space with the Real and to Unfold the Reality from the Rock Summit
In contrast to the illusionary effects from the plain below, the whole composition is
revealed from the rock summit and the reality regains in the panorama. This shows
that a drama is created for the countrymen from below to project a specific image of
the ruler, while the king reserves the right to have the overview of the real drama of
the natural and man-made landscape that he rules. The scenographic route from the
eastern limits of the pleasure garden up to the rock summit through the hilly terrain
and then along the pathway associated with the Mirror Wall and the zigzag stairway
above the Lion-Staircase-House has been designed with an introverted character
to deliberately prevent outside view. It is only from the palace on the rock summit,
the highest vantage point of the whole scheme, that the overall scheme is suddenly
unfolded in all directions. Therefore, the scenographic route through the hilly terrain
up to the rock summit is specifically designed to reveal the real drama of the natural
landscape theater, and hence remains as a spatial element to connect the illusionary
space with the real.
§ 6.1.3 The Metaphorical Form
The Hierarchic Ordering of Metaphorical Elements to Emphasize the Supranatural, Heavenly
Domain of the King
The bottom-up vertical sequence of the visual structuring system of the scheme
consists of several visual layers arranged along a visual vertical axis formed by the rock
in the order of the virtual plain, the hilly terrain, the plaster band with painted ladies
and the palace complex on the rock summit, reflecting decreasing human presence
and at the same time increasing divine habitation, which is similar to the subdivision
of the cosmic landscape as per Buddhist cosmography. This hierarchical order of the
visual layers makes the palace the dominant metaphorical element of the overall
composition. The use of a visual structuring system based on cosmography was also
probably intended to suggest the ‘divine’ status of the king.
The sequence of linear arrangement of hydraulic elements reflecting the cosmic
pattern, which represents the hydrologic cycle that produces fertility on earth, and
the philosophy behind ancient irrigation engineering to irrigate the land, is visually
structured from the rock summit to the open landscape through the pleasure garden as
if the water originates from the rock summit. The programming of hydraulic elements
to give water different forms and movement within the axial zone of the pleasure
232 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

garden suggests that hydraulic engineering had not been applied by the ancient Sri
Lankans only for utilitarian purposes, but also for aesthetics. This also showcases that
the state of the art in hydraulic engineering had reached full maturity during the time
of the laying out of Sigiriya in the 5th century AC. The visual structuring system of
decreasing masses of solids (rocks) and at the same time of increasing sheets of water
from the center (rock summit) to the edges of the plan also reinforces the idea that
the water originates at the center of the scheme and flows in the direction of the outer
landscape for the benefit of human beings. The visual structuring of the scheme in the
sequence of decreasing rock-associated structures and increasing water-associated
structures from the center towards the edge of the plan further enhances this idea.
The gradual increase in scale, size and elevation of the structures from the edges of the
formal layout up to the center of the scheme also makes the rock/palace the climax
and the dominant element of the overall visual composition.
Therefore, this visual structuring of various metaphorical elements makes the scheme
a rock-oriented composition and hence emphasizes the supranatural, heavenly
domain of the king and visualizes the unification of both local and cosmic orders. The
axial zone, through which the cosmic waters flow from the rock summit to the outer
landscape, the main rock, boulders, hydraulic elements, sheets of water, rock/boulder
and water-associated structures, palace complex, hilly terrain, painted plaster band,
man-made reservoirs and agricultural fields of the outer landscape become significant
metaphorical elements of the visual composition.
§ 6.1.4 The Programmatic Form
6.1.4(a) Hierarchic Ordering System of Programmatic Domains to Emphasize the Omnipresent
Eye of the Authority Who Rules All Functional and Cultural Activities
The scheme consists of several programmatic domains that are organized both
vertically and horizontally in the sequence of the palace, inner city, outer city, suburbs
and the natural-cum-agrarian settlements in the hierarchical order of decreasing
dominance from the center to the visual boundaries of the scheme to emphasize the
palace as the dominant programmatic domain, which also reflects the social hierarchy
in the decreasing sequence of the king, nobility and populace. The elevated and
centralized location of the palace complex, which is the symbolic representation of
the king, to be constantly visible to the rest of the programmatic domains, reflects the
authority of the ruler and the total control of the rest of the programmatic domains.
Such an ordering system would have also made it possible for the king to efficiently
rule the rest of the social strata through his symbolic presence. On the other hand, the
233 Conclusions i

rock and hilly terrain, which are associated with the programmatic domains of the king,
are freed of rigidity of the symmetrical layout of the plain (the domains of the urban
elite and nobility), and reflect the total detachment and independence of the king from
the rest of the systems. Therefore, the programmatic composition of Sigiriya speaks of
‘authority’ over the rest of the social strata and emphasizes the omnipresent eye of the
authority who rules all functional and cultural activities. This shows that the emphasis
of the palace complex as the dominant element of the overall composition is common
to the basic form, spatial form and programmatic form. Such characteristics make
the landscape design of Sigiriya closer to the landscape model of Sakran discourse on
kingship than to that of the Asokan discourse.
The relegation of the Buddhist monasteries to the outer landscape, which gives less
importance to Buddhist monks in the hierarchic order of the programmatic domain,
reflects the insignificant role played by Buddhist monks in the affairs of the state during
the reign of Kasyapa. This is in contrast to the ordering of programmatic domains
at the city of Anuradhapura, the established political center before the founding of
Sigiriya as Kasyapa’s new center of political power, where several large-scale Buddhist
monasteries are arranged encircling the citadel, reflecting the influential role played by
Buddhist monks in the spiritual guidance of the nation and as advisers to the king.
6.1.4(b) Pleasure Garden as a Significant Programmatic Element of Otium and Sensual Pleasure,
Opposite to Negotium
The significant position given to the pleasure garden in the overall programmatic
form at Sigiriya by ordering it immediately outside the hilly terrain (inner city) within
the fortified city, along the major east-west axis of the scheme, which is in contrast
to the insignificant position of the pleasure gardens in relation to the overall city
plan of Anuradhapura during the same period, reflects the major emphasis given
by Kasyapa for otium and sensual pleasure as against negotium. Therefore, the
programmatic composition also showcases the deliberate program of pleasure-
associated intent and probably its symbolic significance related to rainmaking and
the prosperity of the kingdom (see Dissanayake, 2003:238). The pleasure garden,
which acts as the spatial link between the palace and the outer landscape in the
spatial form, also assumes the major space where the king interacted with certain
sections of the social strata (nobility, harem, and so on, as indicated in the literary
works) through pleasure activities.
The zoning of the area dominated by bathing pools and other water-associated features
within the central axial zone, flanked by two identical zones of less association of water
features within the pleasure garden, emphasizes the central zone and reflects the
importance given to water sports over garden sports in the overall program of pleasure
activities of royalty.
The compound associated with the four-quartered feature, which is the dominant
material element (abstracted and geometrizied representation of the organic form of
234 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

the rock to lay the geometric system over the formal layout), as well as the dominant
spatial element that integrates the foreground and the panorama and the reference
object to observe the panoramic landscape, also becomes the dominant programmatic
element for the king to symbolically interact with the rest of the social strata.
§ 6.2 Sigiriya and Other Landscape Traditions: A Comparison of Landscape
Designs
As indicated under 1.3.1 of Chapter 1, one of the scientific objectives of the present
study is to position Sigiriya in the global landscape design context by comparison of
the landscape design with those of other international landscape traditions. Such a
comparison will, on the other hand, explore both the general and specific landscape
architectonic elements, aspects, characteristics and qualities. Since any design is deeply
embedded in the physical, historical, social and cultural contexts, the comparison of
designs of different contexts will only be possible by abstracting such designs devoid
of such contexts (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:17). Since the methodology of the Delft
tradition of research allows such scientific comparisons by reducing the landscape
architectural designs to abstract schemes, and the West European landscape tradition
comprising all influential periods – the Italian Renaissance villas (15th-16th century),
French baroque gardens (17th century) and landscape gardens of the English revival
(18th century) – has been extensively researched by applying this methodology, this
attempt will be limited to a comparison of Sigiriya with the compositions of the West
European landscape tradition analyzed by Steenbergen (1990), Van der Ree, Smienk and
Steenbergen (1992), Reh (1996) and Steenbergen and Reh (1996, 2003). Moreover,
this will only be a restricted comparison at a pure design instrumental level and hence
without conclusions about cultural significance and value.
Natural Morphology, Position
The central position of the vertical rock chimney of Sigiriya and the palace located
upon its summit, 180 meters above the surrounding plain, make the rock and palace
dominate the entire composition. Although the ‘house’ of the Italian Renaissance villas
is generally situated well above the floor of the outer landscape, its location at one end
of the layout does not allow the ‘house’ to dominate the composition. For instance,
although Villa Medici is situated about 250 meters above the floor of the Arno valley, its
‘house’ is positioned at a halfway level up the slope of a hill. Therefore, its composition
is not reversible from a standpoint from the outer landscape, as is that of Sigiriya (figure
6.2). However, a centralized composition, similar to that of Sigiriya begins to appear at
such Palladian villas as Villa Emo and Villa Rotonda in Veneto during the second half
235 Conclusions i

of the 16th century, which is the concluding phase of the Italian Renaissance. At Villa
Rotonda, for instance, the ‘house’ is positioned on a relatively high ground above the
surrounding flat landscape to emphasize the ‘house’ as the dominant element of the
overall composition (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:105-121).
Figure 6.2
Italian Renaissance villas and Sigiriya: position of the ‘house’/palace in relation to natural morphology of the site
(schemes to different scales)
236 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Geometric Ordering System, Proportions
Another parallelism between Sigiriya and Italian Renaissance villas is their geometric
ordering system. At Villa Medici, for instance, the geometric system is derived from
the measurements and proportions of the ‘house’, which is the representative center
of the villa, and also from the existing slope and the possibility of building terraces on
the sloping terrain (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:35, 38-39, 42), while that at Sigiriya
is derived from the rock itself as well as the natural topographical, geological and
hydrological features of the site. In both cases, the grid module is laid upon the built
landscape to impose an order by the ‘house’/rock upon the landscape, so that there is a
proportional relationship between different elements, parts and the built landscape as
a whole.
Domains and Scales
At Sigiriya and Italian Renaissance villas (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:39), the spatial
structure is composed of three distinct spatial categories organized in the sequence
of the palace/‘house’, garden and the open landscape (panorama) in the hierarchical
order of increasing dominance. The garden is the visual and spatial link between the
palace/‘house’ and the outer landscape. Such a composition of both Sigiriya and
the Italian Renaissance villas have made the optical boundaries of the schemes not
confined to the physical boundaries of the formal layout, but deliberately extended all
the way to the outer landscape. However, at Sigiriya there is a marked domain (outer
precincts to east and west) between the palace and garden and the outer landscape.
The scale of the palace and the garden at Sigiriya is much greater than those of Villa
Medici. On the other hand, at both Sigiriya and the Italian Renaissance villas, the open
landscape is a live theater of vast scale compared to the other two domains (figure 6.3).
At Italian Renaissance villas, such as Villa Medici, the verticality of the terrace structure
together with the ‘house’ are primarily tuned to the panorama across the valley of the
Arno and the city of Florence (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:35). At Sigiriya the verticality
of the brick embankment, which separates the palace garden by locating it at a lower
level to that of the palace, together with the central limestone pathway built into the
embankment, are also primarily tuned to the panorama across the palace garden and
the pleasure garden.
237 Conclusions i

A. ‘House’/Palace
B. Garden
C. Open Landscape
Figure 6.3
Villa Medici at Feasole and Sigiriya: the structuring of the spatial domains (the size of the ‘house’ and the garden
of Villa Medici is five times magnified)
Symmetry, Asymmetry
As far as mirror symmetry is concerned, the play between symmetry and the site
condition is also an important theme at Italian Renaissance villas (Steenbergen and Reh,
2003:86-91, 166-167), such as Villa Lante at Bagnaia and Villa d’Este at Tivoli. However,
clear parallelisms exist between Sigiriya and French baroque gardens, such as Vaux-le-
Vicomte, where a compositional balance of the irregular sites is achieved through mirror
symmetry (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:144, 147, 165).
Since the compositional principles developed at the landscape gardens of the English
revival reflect a move away from the formal geometric layout with the fragmented
rational and formal elements held together by the contours of the natural morphology,
the symmetry disappears among the physical and geographical line of forces of the
natural landscape, which is a ‘decomposition’ of the formal model of axial symmetry
(Steenbergen and Reh, 1996:14-15). This is somewhat similar to the compositional
principles of the clusters of boulders of the hilly terrain at Sigiriya, where the symmetry
gives way to asymmetry and the use of the technique of free design, in which the elements
are also held by the contours of the natural morphology of the hilly terrain. However, at
Sigiriya such a composition is confined only to a specific part of the layout and gives an
introverted character rather than an extroverted one. On the other hand, the asymmetrical
balance has been used to control the composition of the rock summit at Sigiriya.
238 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Axis, Scenographic Route
The axis is also used at Sigiriya and Italian Renaissance villas to arrange and order
various enclosures and material elements. At Villa Giulia in Rome, for instance, a
series of enclosures and material elements are arranged with the ‘house’ along a
single architectonic axis (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:77-83), whereas at Sigiriya
its north-south and east-west bilateral axial formation not only arranges and orders
various enclosures and material elements, but gives rise to a centralized hierarchic
composition. Although the centralized hierarchic composition is not preferred by
architects of the Italian Renaissance villas, at Palladian villas such as Villa Rotonda
and Villa Emo in Veneto (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:113-121), the bilateral axial
formation that intersects at the center of the ‘house’ shows that such principles begin
to appear during the concluding phase of the Italian Renaissance (figure 6.4). On the
other hand, the treatment of the axis at Sigiriya is very much different to that of the
French baroque gardens at Vaux-le-Vicomte in Melun and Versailles (Steenbergen
and Reh, 2003:137-167, 185-199), where the axis dominates all the way to the visual
boundaries of the scheme to become an autonomous element of the composition. The
axis at Sigiriya and Italian Renaissance villas (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:29), on the
other hand, remains as one of the elements around which the plan is composed.
The comparison between Sigiriya and French baroque gardens shows some
parallelisms in the treatment of the axis in their spatial structure. At French baroque
gardens, such as Vaux-le-Vicomte and Versailles (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:141-
168, 185-199), the axis assumes the centerline of the three-dimensional space,
extending all the way to the horizon. This spatial axis is used as the scenographic route
along which illusionary space is created by means of a central perspective structure. It
is the axis of movement to provide a visual interplay of various elements to highlight
illusionary aspects for the total length of the axis. At Sigiriya also the east-west axis
as the centerline of the three-dimensional space is active, but only within part of the
scheme – a certain length within the western precincts – where illusionary space is
created by artificial means and also assumes the axis of movement to provide a visual
interplay of various elements. From the rock summit the axis as a spatial element is
active within the western precinct at Sigiriya to give direction to the horizon in the
western panorama (figure 6.5). Steenbergen and Reh (2003:29, 30) point out that
where special perspective effects have been used at Italian Renaissance villas, such as
those at the Villa Giulia in Rome, or the perspective distortion of the cascade at Villa
Aldobrandini at Frascati, the axis remains linked to the special development of one of
the parts of the scheme.
At French baroque gardens, the composition resulting from the spatial axis is oriented
in one direction (from the house towards the garden) through neutralizing the
perspectival reduction, and hence its composition is not reversible in the opposite
direction due to the great perspective reduction (Steenbergen, 2008:192-193).
However, at Sigiriya the spatial effects through the scenographic route from the outer
239 Conclusions i

western precinct up to the rock summit through the hilly terrain are organized to reveal
the composition gradually from a rock-oriented to a panorama-oriented composition.
This makes its composition flexible in both directions, and hence its composition is
reversible.
AB Single architectonic axis
CD & EF Bilateral axial formation (landscape and urban axes)
GH & JK Bilateral axial formation (built and natural axes)
Figure 6.4
Axis of Italian Renaissance villas and Sigiriya in relation to the ordering of compartments and elements (schemes
to different scales)
240 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 6.5
Spatial axis of Sigiriya and the French baroque gardens in relation to the panorama/horizon
Illusionary Effects
At Sigiriya the floating effect of the palace on the rock summit and the creation of
illusionary space from the western precincts was achieved by the composition of the
great tapestry of painting on the rock summit. The series of screens, including the
Mirror Wall, which are placed one behind the other as in a stage set in the transverse
direction to the main axis for the great tapestry of painting to rise behind, also heightens
this illusionary effect of the three-dimensional space. At French baroque gardens,
the illusionary effects are created by means of perspective constructions. At Vaux-le-
Vicomte, for instance, the horizon is artificially brought within the garden boundary,
while the spatial depth cannot be gauged due to the perspectively manipulated
sequence of spaces within the layout (Steenbergen and Reh, 1996:15; 2003:155-161).
241 Conclusions i

Metaphorical Structure
At Italian Renaissance villas, the metaphorical elements are ordered in relation to the
axis and structured in pictorial gradation of naturalness from the ‘house’ in the direction
of the open landscape to strengthen the panorama-oriented composition of the scheme
(Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:43), while at the French baroque gardens they are ordered
on the axis and structured in a hierarchical sequence of increasing naturalness in the
direction of the horizon (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:161). At Sigiriya the metaphorical
elements – such as several visual planes along a visual vertical axis formed by the rock in
the bottom-up vertical sequence of decreasing human presence, and at the same time
increasing divine habitation, while the sequence of the linear arrangement of hydraulic
elements from the rock summit to the outer landscape, the sequence of decreasing
rock-associated structures and increasing water-associated structures arranged from the
center towards the edge of the plan, and the gradual increase in scale, size and elevation
of the structures from the edges of the formal layout up to the center of the scheme – are
structured to strengthen the rock and palace-oriented composition in both vertical and
horizontal directions as an image of ‘supernaturalness’.
Hydrologic System
The comparison between Sigiriya and Italian Renaissance villas (Steenbergen and Reh,
2003:43) shows some parallelisms in the ordering of the hydraulic elements in relation
to the axis to form a hydrologic system from spring to reflecting pond to be integrated
into their geometric and spatial system. However, as seen at Villa Lante at Bagnaia, for
example, the hydrologic system neither extends up to nor incorporates the hydraulic
elements within the outer landscape (Van der Ree, Smienk and Steenbergen, 1992:177-
182). At Sigiriya the hydrologic system is linearly arranged from the rock summit all the
way to the open landscape through the axial zone of the pleasure garden to represent the
hydrologic cycle, from ‘source to back to nature’ sequence. In this system, the agrarian
hydraulic elements within the outer landscape are also incorporated to play a significant
role, and hence the hydrologic system of Sigiriya links the palace, garden and outer
landscape in a single visual scheme. At French baroque gardens, as seen at Versailles,
for example, although the open agricultural landscape is not part of the scheme, the
hydrologic system is arranged through the axial zone from ‘spring to ocean’ sequence
ending at the horizon (Steenbergen and Reh, 1996:15, 2003:198-199), and therefore
shows some parallelism with that of Sigiriya (figure 6.6).
242 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

a. Formal layout
b. Urban landscape
c. Agricultural landscape
d. Horizon (visual
boundaries of the scheme)
1. Pool on the higher elevation
2. Spring/Fountain
3. Cascade
4. Pond
5. Reflecting Pond/Pool
6. Water retaining
structures
7. Water garden
8. Moat/Canal
9. Artificial Reservoir
10. Paddy Fields
11. Stream
12. ‘Town’
Figure 6.6
Ordering of the hydraulic elements at Villa Lante, Sigiriya and Versailles (schemes to different scales)
243 Conclusions i

Programmatic Zoning
The ordering system of the programmatic zones at Sigiriya, where the palace
occupies the elevated and centralized location of the scheme in relation to rest of
the programmatic zones with hierarchical order of increasing dominance from the
periphery up to the center of the composition, shows some parallelism to that of the
agricultural villas of Veneto. At Villa Emo and Villa Rotonda, for instance, the ‘house’
occupies the centralized and somewhat elevated location to command a better view
of, and to be seen from, the farmlands managed by the ‘landlord’, which were situated
on the flat landscape surrounding the ‘house’ (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:107). At
Sigiriya and the agricultural villas of Veneto this ordering system symbolizes the total
control of the landscape (figure 6.7). On the other hand, the decision by Louis XIV to
make the royal residence at Versailles the capital and seat of government, by shifting
the entire government machinery and zoning the town behind the chateau (palace) on
a lower elevation to house the nobility, civil servants, burghers and merchants, where
the monarch had an overview of the entire layout of the total landscape, including
the urban panorama, also shows a parallelism with Sigiriya in respect of the ordering
system of the programmatic zones (Steenbergen and Reh, 2003:188-194). The
pleasure garden of Sigiriya, which is axially arranged and programmatically linked to
the rest of the programmatic domains, is the major space for pleasure activities. This
ordering system is similar to that of the French baroque gardens at Vaux-le-Vicomte
and Versailles, where the axial zone was the major space in which ceremonial functions
took place (Steenbergen and Reh, 1996:15).
Therefore, the above comparison suggests that the designers of Sigiriya share many design
instruments with those of the Italian Renaissance villas. Some of the design instruments
developed by the designers of the French baroque gardens are also found at Sigiriya.
However, they are limited to some parts of the composition of Sigiriya, and hence their
effect is less on the overall composition. Therefore, as far as the use of design instruments
and design aspects is concerned, the landscape design of Sigiriya ranks closely to that
of the Italian Renaissance villa of the West European landscape design tradition. This
also shows that many compositional rules/principles, design instruments/tools and
techniques that were developed at Italian Renaissance villas (15th-16th centuries) of the
western landscape tradition existed during the 5th century in Asia, as displayed by the
landscape design of Sigiriya. The parallelisms between the landscape design of Sigiriya
and those of the West European tradition also underline the fact that some of the design
innovations of the West European landscape tradition from the 15th to 18th century were
already in existence in the 5th century landscape design of Sigiriya. On the other hand,
the present study shows that some of the design instruments at Sigiriya, such as the
compositional balance using asymmetrical balance, the integration of natural elements
into the geometrical ordering system, the use of screens to achieve illusionary effects and
the reversibility of the composition, are not found within the West European landscape
design tradition. This makes Sigiriya typologically different from the West.
244 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

1. ‘House/Palace’ (dwelling zone)
2. Agricultural zone
3. Village
4. Pleasure Garden
5. (Axial zone) Representation zone
6. Elites’ zone
7. Forestry
Figure 6.7
Programmatic zoning at Villa Emo, Sigiriya and Versailles (schemes to different scales)
245 Conclusions i

§ 6.3 Sigiriya as a Landscape Architectonic Composition
‘Composition’ as an artistic ideal is the way in which the parts and elements are
assembled and combined according to the rules of the program, construction, visual
communication and building process into an architectonic whole. Composition
integrates and activates all the above aspects into a structure or form that permits
reading and interpretation, over and above the boundaries imposed by the program or
the construction (Steenbergen, 2008:17). In this sense the composition is at the core
of architectonic design and determination of the architectonic quality.
Figure 6.8
Compositional scheme A: ‘Domain’
246 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

The analysis carried out in Chapter 5 made it possible to identify a number of
essential elements that are/were active in the spatial operation of the design (active
compositional elements). The compositional scheme (figures 6.8, 6.9) shows these
active compositional elements in relation to one another. With regard to the qualities
of landscape architectonic composition, Steenbergen and Reh (2003:388-389) use
the standards stipulated by the Roman architect Vitruvius (1st century BC), that
is ‘utilitas’, ‘firmitas’ and ‘venustas’ or utility, solidity and beauty.83 These themes
enable one to see how various aspects, layers and elements enhance each other and
fit together to assemble a coherent landscape architectonic composition.
Utilitas: The analysis shows that there is a clear functional zoning with different
functional domains with some of the domains, the pleasure garden in particular,
having a multifunctional character. There are also deliberate degrees of mixing
between individual, collective and public activities in each of these functional
domains. The landscape design of Sigiriya, while facilitating the enjoyment of nature,
sensual pleasure and leisure (otium) and the king’s efficient rule of the country
(negotium), also provides a planned balance between otium and negotium. This
functional organization is clearly expressed in both the ground plan and the spatial
structure of the complex.
Firmitas: The composition integrates everlasting geological features (central rock
pillar and the geomorphology of the wider landscape setting) in a basic geometric
pattern. The composition has a very strong but yet simple basic pattern (axes, rocks),
so that it can be reduced to the basic elements without losing its fundamental
dramatic power. There is also a strong formal coherence between different elements
and layers of the plan; they are complementary to one another and reinforce each
83 Steenbergen and Reh (2003: 389) define the three terms as follows:
‘Utilitas’ refers to the relation between otium and negotium. Otium is the measure for the manner in which
room is made in the program form for cultural reflection and a meaningful encounter with nature and
individual and collective forms of being outdoors, and how these relate to the negotium, economic utility.
The definition of the public domain affords an insight into the manner in which the spatial form is balanced
and geared to public functions.
‘Firmitas’ refers to the relation between stability and the openness to incorporate change. The functional
stability of the program form and the ecological stability of the spatial form are standards for sustainability. The
compositional stability affords insights into the sturdiness of the composition, the degree to which it can accept
spatial dynamics without breaking up.
‘Venustas’ refers to the relation between the architectonic form and the content of the landscape. The genius
loci afford insight into the manner in which the design anchors the basic plan in the topography and connects
it with the natural substratum. This is a measure of the local specificity or originality of the design. The
metaphorical structure expresses the various interpretations and materialization of nature, and is the measure
for ‘readability’ and the degree to which the designed landscape can be experienced and understood. The spatial
dynamics afford insight into the spatial effects of the architectonic composition.
247 Conclusions i

Figure 6.9
Compositional scheme B: ‘House and Garden’
other (for instance, the divisions and measurements of the ground plan have their
own meaning, but are also a necessary condition for the unfolding and sequence
of spaces, as well as for the observation of the panorama from the rock summit;
the position of the pleasure garden just outside the hilly terrain along the principal
axis has a specific role in the spatial structure but also facilitates the interaction of
different social strata in the programmatic structure; the four-quartered feature has
different meanings and roles to play in material, spatial and programmatic structure).
The composition is based on long-term functional, social and cultural elements that
are influenced by the traditional attitude towards nature, cosmology, discourse on
kingship and the philosophy of water management of society. As such the composition
has a stable and durable character.
Venustas: The basic plan of Sigiriya is anchored in the (natural) topography by a
careful geometrization of local natural features. These are slightly transformed and
nevertheless skillfully exposed in a new dramatic way. This gives Sigiriya a high degree
248 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

of local specificity and originality. The spatial effects of Sigiriya are organized in
scenographic sequence – view points and panoramas that reveal the composition step
by step from a rock-oriented to a panorama-oriented one. Thus, the composition spans
all scales of human perception. The metaphoric interpretation and materialization of
nature culminating in the great tapestry of the painted plaster band on the rock face
and the (original) water features add a specific cultural way of reading, understanding
and dramatizing nature and the natural conditions.
All these point out that the landscape design of Sigiriya constitutes multiple design
layers and multiple layers of significance. The present study, therefore, demonstrates
that the various aspects, layers and elements enhance one another and bind together,
thus assembling an architectonic composition with material-spatial-metaphorical-
functional coherence. Although such observations would naturally tend to raise
questions as to who and with what professional background designed Sigiriya (an
architect? landscape architect? did landscape architecture exist as a specific design
discipline during 5th century AC Sri Lanka?), how the complex was actually designed
(the design process?), it is not the intention of the present study to answer such
questions; the facts regarding these might be forever lost in time and history. Whatever
the answers are, the present study clearly shows that Sigiriya can certainly be read as a
real landscape architectonic composition. It has both general and very specific (unique)
landscape architectonic elements, aspects, characteristics and qualities. In this sense
Sigiriya can be considered a (unique) landscape architectonic design.
249 Conclusions i

250 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

7 Perspectives
§ 7.1 Conservation, Presentation and Management
As discussed under 3.2 of Chapter 3, the conservation and presentation programs
carried out so far within the formal layout of Sigiriya are primarily an attempt to
restore the ground morphology, as exposed through archaeological excavation, with
the primary objective of enhancing the antiquarian character of the property. As such,
except the elements that are related to visitor circulation and to practical reasons,
such as pathways, stairways and terraces, the overall policy adopted with regard to the
formal layout is ‘minimal’ intervention to the fabric of the material remains. However,
the present study points out that besides archaeo-historical value, Sigiriya has
landscape architectural value reflected by several attributes.
Although the overall policy with regard to the conservation, presentation and
management of a heritage site has to be based on its overall importance as determined
through the analysis of all the heritage values attributed to the site, what is attempted
here is to re-examine the validity of some of the interventions carried out at Sigiriya
and to discuss the policy issues and make suggestions based on the outcome of the
present study, for the consideration of heritage professionals in reformulating overall
policy and programs for conservation, presentation and management of Sigiriya as a
heritage site.
The Lines of the Formal Layout Corresponding to Those of the Natural Topographical Features
The north-south and east-west axial lines of the formal layout are derived from the
natural plan configurations of the hilly terrain and the cap-rock. The wall demarcating
the hilly terrain on which the rock stands and the outline of the compound on the rock
summit are the major lines of the formal layout that correspond with the outer limits of
the hilly terrain and of the cap-rock, respectively. Except for a small segment of the wall
demarcating the hilly terrain that has been conserved, its considerable length is still in
ruins with stonework deteriorated. Although there is hardly any evidence of the original
height of the parapet wall surrounding the rock summit, the series of cut-marks on the
edges around the entire rock summit, to receive the brick masonry, is quite evident to
restore the compound to a certain height. Therefore, a conservation program aimed at
strengthening such lines of the natural topographic features will highlight the origin of
the north-south and east-west axial formation of the formal layout.
251 Perspectives i

Axial Arrangement
As pointed out in 5.2.3 of Chapter 5, the east-west axis of the overall scheme is
designed to be confined only to the boundaries of the formal layout to become the
‘internal axis’ of the scheme, while it is the north-south axis (natural axis) of the
scheme that extends beyond the boundaries of the formal layout as a visual axis to
anchor the scheme in the wider landscape context to become the ‘external’ axis.
However, the laying out of the new approach to the site, together with the location of
the new Sigiriya village including a Buddhist monastery and tourist facilities beyond the
western boundaries of the formal layout in line with the east-west axis to terminate at
a newly built stupa (a ritual structure) of the Buddhist monastery, have made this axis
extend into the outer landscape (figure 3.14). Therefore, these interventions beyond
the formal layout contradict those of the original design, and hence create issues
regarding the authenticity expressed through ‘form and design’. The scale of these
interventions is also relatively irreversible.
Although the conservation work so far at the western precincts has highlighted the
east-west axis of the formal layout, hardly any effort has so far been made to highlight
the north-south oriented natural axis of the scheme. The Lion Plateau, together with
the surrounding parapet wall and the structures that are axially and symmetrically
arranged upon it, was originally designed to achieve this. Therefore, it is suggested
to have a conservation program to highlight the north-south oriented natural axis to
strengthen the scheme’s axial formation and thereby to further enhance Sigiriya rock
as the central object of the overall composition.
The consolidation work carried out on the brick embankment that separates the upper
west and lower east levels of the rock and the central limestone pathway on the rock
summit has not been effective in highlighting the series of staggered north-south
oriented axes. Therefore, it is also suggested to have a conservation program to restore
the brick embankment together with the limestone pathway as a single entity to
highlight the north-south orientation of this element.
Symmetry
As pointed out in this study, the rectangular compound associated with the four-
quartered feature is the climax of the symmetrical order along the axial zone from the
western limit of the formal layout to the eastern limit of the inner western precinct.
The present policy adopted for interventions to the site is to confine conservation
and presentation work mainly to the area south of the east-west axis and to leave
the surface and subsurface remains of the opposite side of the same axis for future
investigation and interpretation. Although this policy has presented the visitor with
the contrast of corresponding ‘untouched’ and conserved features on both sides of the
axial pathway, which are symmetrically located, the impact of the symmetrical order in
the progression through the axial zone is not fully effective. Therefore, it is suggested to
252 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

revise the existing policy on interventions to conserve and present the features on both
sides of the axial pathway, for the whole east-west length of the axial zone, to heighten
the effect of symmetrical order of the compound associated with the four-quartered
feature. The area beyond the axial zone in the north could be left as per the existing
intervention policy of the site.
Panorama-oriented Spatial Composition
The present study points out that the pleasure garden laid out in the inner western
precinct and the palace garden on the rock summit act as architectural foregrounds
to spatially and visually link the outer landscape with the palace on the rock summit.
Although the rectangular compound associated with the four-quartered feature is
composed at the exact midpoint between the horizon and the eastern edge of the
pleasure garden with regard to the constructed picture plane, the present ruined
condition of this compound and the conservation work carried out so far of the
compound have not adequately highlighted it as the central object of the western
panorama. As suggested under c. above, a conservation program for the four-quartered
feature will re-establish its role as the dominant element of the western panorama to
enhance the spatial integration of the foreground and the western panorama.
The consolidation of the remains and the layout program so far carried out at the
palace garden are also not effective enough to heighten the palace garden as an
architectural foreground to link the eastern panorama with the palace. Therefore, it
is suggested to have a program to conserve and lay out the palace garden to achieve
this effect. The terrace structure and the limestone pathway, which is visually hidden
behind the brick-built embankment on the rock summit and which facilitated this
panoramic view, is also suggested to be included in this program.
The present conservation policy adopted for the outer landscape is to treat it as a
‘setting’ to Sigiriya proper and to offer a pleasing view of the panorama from the rock
summit. In order to preserve such aspects, 9,400 hectares of land, which conforms to
the local administrative boundaries of Inamaluva Korale, have been gazetted under
UDA law. From a heritage management point of view, this area is also considered as
a ‘buffer zone’ for the heritage site of Sigiriya. However, the present study points out
that the panoramic view of the natural and agricultural landscape, whose boundaries
extend all the way to the horizon, covers a much larger area than the already gazetted
area (figure 7.1). This suggests that the present boundaries are arbitrarily decided.
Moreover, the present study points out that the outer landscape comprised of natural
and agricultural features with agrarian settlements is not a buffer zone, but a major
spatial component of the overall scheme. Therefore, it is suggested to extend the
present boundaries of the UDA declared zone to cover the whole panoramic view for its
planning control and to carry out a program of conservation with a policy of preserving
the outer landscape as a major spatial component of the overall scheme.
253 Perspectives i

The natural landscape (undulating topography, rock outcrops, tropical forest cover)
as well as the cultural landscape (historic monasteries, artificial reservoirs and
irrigation network constructed for agricultural purposes, rice fields, traditional
agrarian settlements) should be treated in this conservation program as important
features of this spatial component. On the other hand, its conservation policy should
not lead to freezing development within the area, but to allow socio-economic growth
of the community with the development of civil and tourist infrastructure to cater to
residents as well as tourists (such as the establishment of modern townships, roads,
electric and telecommunication facilities, tourist hotels, guest houses). However,
such facilities need to be located in such a way as to be covered under thick green tree
canopies or hidden behind the large rock outcrops that protrude above the landscape,
by carrying out a view-shed analysis of the topography to maintain the visual image
of the scheme. Such structures as telecommunication towers, the modern Buddha
image of the Buddhist monastery associated with the new Sigiriya village, which is
of colossal scale and thereby protrudes above and disturbs the natural setting, are
suggested to be taken out of this area to improve its visual integrity. On the other
hand, civil and tourist infrastructure facilities should not be located to obstruct the
views of the rock from the plain.
In order to have regulatory control of the outer landscape, it is suggested to declare
the whole panoramic landscape under the UDA law as a special development area. As
a management strategy, the outer landscape could be subdivided into two concentric
zones – the middle ground beyond the built landscape and the area associated with
the horizon – and to have different guidelines for their control.
As far as the built landscape is concerned, only the area covered by the hilly terrain,
including the rock, and the few meters beyond the middle rampart of the western
precinct are declared under the Antiquities Ordinance (1940, revised 1998) for its legal
protection and control. This means that part of the outer western precinct with outer
moat and rampart, and both the inner and outer eastern precincts with their moats
and ramparts, are not under the protection of the Antiquities Ordinance. Although
the whole area of the built landscape is covered under the Fauna and Flora Protection
Ordinance (1937, amended 2009) as the Sigiriya Sanctuary, whose focus is primarily
the legal protection of fauna and flora of the area and not the cultural aspects, it is
suggested to declare the whole built landscape demarcated by the outer ramparts on
all sides under the protection of the Antiquities Ordinance.
The airstrip at Kimbissa, located in the western panorama along the direction provided
by the east-west axis, is another incompatible construction within this outer landscape.
Although at present it is unnoticeable from the rock summit and the military air base
associated with this airstrip is not an active center, its strategic location in relation to
the whole country could make it be developed into a major military air base or, on the
other hand, a civilian airport with cultural tourism in mind. In this light, it is suggested
to relocate the airstrip along with the air base outside the area of the panoramic view of
the outer landscape.
254 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 7.1
Optical boundaries of the scheme (black color) and the UDA declared area (blue color)
Under 5.6 of Chapter 5, it is pointed out that the rectangular compound associated
with the four-quartered feature is composed at the center of the picture plane. The
central position of this compound between the horizon and the eastern edge of the
inner western precinct integrates both the foreground and the panorama to strengthen
the spatial structure of the scheme. However, the location of the new Sigiriya village
beyond the western boundaries of the formal layout along the east-west axis in the
255 Perspectives i

open landscape has made it a dominant element. Therefore, it competes with the
rectangular compound associated with the four-quartered feature and thereby disturbs
the original spatial treatment of the western panorama and hence raises issues related
to authenticity expressed through ‘form and design’, as well as ‘location and setting’.
This also shows that the location of the new Sigiriya village in relation to the original
scheme is unjustifiable. Since the scale of interventions at the new Sigiriya village is
relatively irreversible at present due to social and practical reasons, it is suggested to
explore the possibilities of creatively integrating these new elements into the outer
landscape, without hiding or camouflaging in the conventional manner, so as to reduce
its dominance in the western panorama. In the same way, the extended east-west axis
could also be decomposed and reduced like an axis in the English landscape garden.
The Illusionary Space
As pointed out in 5.7 of Chapter 5, the immense plaster band, which originally
covered the whole of the western rock face, was meant to rise behind the Mirror
Wall. Therefore, the plaster band, which merges with the eastern sky, has given an
impression of an illusionary space above and beyond the Mirror Wall. However, the
surviving patches of the original plaster band at present are not of adequate size
to convey the totality of this effect. Although the reproduction of the plaster on the
missing areas of rock face will re-create this effect, such an intervention will greatly
affect the archaeo-historical value of the property and raises issues regarding the
condition of authenticity expressed in ‘materials and substance’, and hence, such an
intervention should not be attempted.
The Boulder-associated Landscape
As pointed out under 3.1.2 of Chapter 3, the survey carried out by Sunnemark and
Wik (1997) on the cut-marks in one of the boulder clusters within the hilly terrain,
to map the structures on top of these boulders, shows that the built elements at the
ground level are related to the structures on top of the boulders. Although the present
conservation policy adopted at the boulder-associated landscape is to consolidate
the remains that are unearthed from the excavations, there is no serious attempt at
conserving and presenting these remains by studying and interpreting them in the
context of the buildings on top of the boulders. Although only the cut-marks to receive
the brick work are the main evidence of such structures, they will provide valuable data
in this regard. As a first step, it is suggested to document and study the cut-marks on
each of the boulders within the hilly terrain and study and interpret the remains that
have survived at the ground level. Such an attempt will certainly provide scientific
information to conserve and present the hilly terrain in a meaningful manner.
256 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

The Visual and Pictorial Image
As pointed out in 5.9 of Chapter 5, the scheme has a bottom-up visual layering system
with decreasing human habitation and increasing divine habitation from the plain up
to the rock summit, which reflects the Buddhist cosmography. In order to strengthen
this visual and pictorial image, the hilly terrain on which the rock stands is deliberately
kept as a human-free visual layer, and therefore the pathways across this area were laid
hidden behind such topographic features as boulders and the natural cladding given
to the hilly terrain by the thick vegetation to cut off the view of human movement.
Therefore, it is suggested to preserve the present jungle cladding of the hilly terrain
as it is. Any new intervention that is necessary to cater to practical demands has to
be located in such a way as to shut out its view from the plain below, as well as from
pedestrians moving up and down the pathways in the areas above the plain. Although
the Central Cultural Fund has introduced a new pedestrian circulation pattern to avoid
visitor congestion and human cross traffic movement, especially along the pathway
associated with the Mirror Wall, due to the large volume of visitors to the site, by
introducing a pathway as a loop to link the bottom of the stairway, which winds around
the northwestern edge of the rock, and a point just above Boulder Arch No. 1, it is well
hidden behind the boulder-strewn and jungle-clad western escarpment and thus
preserves the visual and pictorial image of the scheme.
The present study also points out that the Mirror Wall, which is taller than an average
human height, is also a deliberate design decision to facilitate the shutting out
of human movement within the upper visual layers of the scheme. However, the
conservation policy adopted so far at the site, which discourages reconstruction, has
made the missing segments of the Mirror Wall to be linked with the surviving segments
with steel bridges. Such a policy has, therefore, made visitor movement along this
pathway exposed to viewers from the plain below, thereby disturbing the intended
visual image of the scheme. Therefore, it is suggested to have a conservation program
to rectify this situation and to enhance the original architectural function of the Mirror
Wall as a screen to shut out human movement.
The modern spiral staircases leading from the pathway associated with the Mirror
Wall up to the ‘fresco-pockets’ not only expose visitor movement, but greatly affect
the visual integrity due to the verticality of its construction. Since the paintings of
Sigiriya are one of the major visitor attractions of the site, there is a practical need to
provide visitor access to these pockets, and therefore, as a compromise, alternative
strategies need to be worked out and an appropriate proposal implemented to at
least minimize this situation.
As pointed out in 5.9 of Chapter 5, the serpentine stream, ponds, pools, fountains
and moats within the formal layout, and the streams, artificial reservoirs and paddy
fields within the outer landscape, are visually integrated in both micro and macro
scale to represent the hydrologic cycle, which is part of the visual and pictorial scheme.
Therefore, the activation of such hydraulic features within the formal layout and the
rehabilitation and sustenance of features in the outer landscape will greatly strengthen
257 Perspectives i

the visual structuring system of the scheme. The rehabilitation of the network of
artificial reservoirs including Sigiriya Mahavava, on the other hand, will also solve the
problem of a shortage of water for irrigated agriculture within the outer landscape,
which in turn will prevent the local community from abandoning their traditional
livelihood based on agriculture and help to retain its present land use. Therefore, such
an intervention will undoubtedly contribute to preserve the agro-based elements of the
visual scheme.
Open/Built-up Space Relationship
The present conservation and presentation policy adopted at the site does not help
to understand the open/built-up space relationship, which contributes to visualize
the three-dimensional aspects and programmatic form of the scheme. As pointed out
under 5.10 of Chapter 5, the rectangular compound associated with the four-quartered
feature in the inner western precinct is the dominant programmatic element for the
king to symbolically interact with the rest of the social strata during water sports and
other festivals connected with water. Moreover, the idea of the central island structure
has also not been highlighted through conservation. The attempt made by Byrom
(1986) to reconstruct the superstructure of the buildings of the outer compartment
of the compound associated with the four-quartered feature invites a rethink of
the open/built-up space relationship of the axial zone, particularly the compound
associated with the four-quartered feature and the Miniature Water Garden. Moreover,
the specific design of the triple pathways leading from triple openings of the gateways
at the north, south and west ends of the compound towards the central island
structure, with the central pathway slightly elevated more than the pathways flanking
it, has not been conserved to express the hierarchical position of the programmatic
element. Therefore, it is suggested to carry out comprehensive investigations to
establish such facts so as to enable conservation and presentation of the compound
associated with the four-quartered feature. In the same way, the conservation and
presentation work carried out at the rock summit has also not highlighted the open/
built-up space relationship, which is very much confusing, especially for laymen.
Therefore, it is also suggested to carry out comprehensive investigations to establish
such facts to conserve the present remains on the rock summit to heighten this aspect.
Vegetation of the Pleasure Garden
Under 5.10, the central axial zone and the two identical zones that flank the axial zone
of the pleasure garden are interpreted as the areas associated with water sports and
garden sports, respectively. However, the present vegetation in the zone associated
with garden sports does not in any way reflect its original vegetation or the planting
scheme due to the change of vegetation as a result of many centuries of neglect
258 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

and disrepair. Although the present policy on vegetation at Sigiriya is to retain and
protect the indigenous forest species that have organically evolved up to now without
attempting any reconstruction scheme, it is suggested to reintroduce, if possible,
the original vegetation and planting scheme through scientific research to provide
meaning to the pleasure garden. Therefore, as a first step, it is suggested to carry
out in-depth scientific research through archaeological means (archaeo-botanical
studies?) and extensive literary studies on planting schemes of the pleasure gardens in
Sri Lanka and South Asia.
On the other hand, it was pointed out under 5.8 of Chapter 5 that the visual focus of
Sigiriya rock is at present distracted from the axial zone of the pleasure garden due to
the views of Pidurangala rock, as it provides views outside due to a lack of vegetation on
the zone associated with the garden sports. Therefore, the introduction of vegetation to
this zone will prevent such outside views from the pleasure garden to focus the view on
the rock and the palace complex upon it.
§ 7.2 Scientific and Methodological Aspects of the Research
The research methodology used for the present study, which follows a technical-
analytical approach where landscape design is anatomized in to four aspects (basic
form, spatial form, metaphorical form and programmatic form) has made it possible to
look differently at a historical example from the conventional art-historical approach
to bring positive results. As shown in Chapter 3 almost all studies related to the built
landscape of Sigiriya have been approached from art-historical perspectives, and
there is hardly any serious study on the landscape design of Sigiriya from a spatial-
technical viewpoint. The present study, therefore, fills this gap in research related to
the historical built heritage of Sigiriya. It also shows that in the absence of written and
archival documentation about the site, this methodology could be applied to sites of
an ‘archaeological’ nature, where considerable information is provided through their
architectural remnants.
Due to the relatively better state of preservation of the morphologic characteristics
and the ground plan of Sigiriya proper and of the geomorphology – the cultural and
agricultural landscape of Sigiriya’s wider landscape context for the past 1,500 years –
the analysis of the basic form was very successful. Although the analysis with regard to
the spatial form was also successful to a considerable extent based on the information
provided by the surviving architectural remnants, insufficient three-dimensional
spatial data on the planting scheme, open/built-up spatial relationship, arrangement
of spaces, positioning of openings, entrances, volumetric spaces, roof form, special
architectural devices within the individual structures, particularly those of the palace
building on the rock summit, has not allowed a complete analysis of the spatial
form of Sigiriya. Compared to archaeological sites in Europe, such as Villa Hadriana
259 Perspectives i

(2nd century BC) in Tivoli, Rome, where some spatial (three-dimensional) elements
have survived due to the use of durable construction materials and techniques, to
understand its spatial form, the present remains of Sigiriya have been reduced to
terraces and basements of buildings due to the use of timber for their superstructure,
which is a perishable building material under tropical weather conditions. This
is a challenge faced by researchers in most of tropical Asia related to historical
built heritage, where timber was extensively used for the superstructure. Being an
‘archaeological’ site, where original color and texture of the built elements are not
intact, all the data required for a complete analysis with regard to the metaphorical
form of Sigiriya is also not available. Due to the lack of conclusive data/interpretation
of the site in the identification of various functional spaces and the specific activities
related to the program, including how daily life was organized at Sigiriya, the analysis
with regard to the programmatic form to see the balance between negotium and
otium is also incomplete and had its limitations. As mentioned under 1.4 of Chapter
1, due to the limited material evidence, it is stressed again that the outcome of this
study should not be treated as final, but has to be elaborated on in the future with the
exposure of more data at the site employing advanced archaeological methods that will
be developed.
On the other hand, due to the availability of comprehensive and precise measured
drawings and site surveys of the European examples, which facilitate the effective
utilization of the analytical tools of this research methodology, the analysis of those
examples suggests that it gives better results. Compared to the degree of advanced
systems in recording of the European examples, such aspects related to Sigiriya could
be called ‘basic’. The survey map (scale 1:1,000) with 50-centimeter contour intervals,
which was carried out in 1982 at Sigiriya before the commencement of the UNESCO-
Sri Lanka Cultural Triangle Project, is the only detailed topographic map available for
the study of geomorphology of Sigiriya proper. However, this survey, which was limited
to the rock and the western precincts of the formal layout of Sigiriya, is also without
the contour survey of the main rock and the boulders within the site, and hence is of
limited use for the morphologic analysis of such a complex site. Although data from
the Geographic Information System (GIS) covering the Sigiriya region obtained through
aerial surveys by Sri Lanka’s Department of Survey (scale 1:10,000) were useful in
creating three-dimensional terrain models and other maps to analyze Sigiriya in the
wider landscape context, such data was found to be totally inadequate in creating
detailed three-dimensional terrain models and other maps as analytical tools for the
study of Sigiriya proper. For instance, the attempt to create analytical drawings of the
hilly terrain using view-shed analysis to study the positioning of the pathways through
the hilly terrain in relation to its topographic features (to show how these pathways
were deliberately hidden behind the boulders and other landscape features to shut out
human movement from the plain), was unsuccessful due to inadequate GIS data of the
hilly terrain. This suggests that this research methodology could be applied in the most
successful manner for the analysis of landscape designs, provided that the level of their
documentation is of the highest order. Therefore, the present study stresses the need
260 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

and importance of comprehensive documentation of historic built landscapes for their
effective analysis using this research methodology.
Despite the inadequacy of some data and lack of comprehensive documentation of
the material remains for the analysis, the overall outcome of the present study shows
the effectiveness of this methodology in exposing the richness in the composition of
Sigiriya’s landscape architectonic design.
This research methodology developed at the Delft University of Technology in the
Netherlands has so far been predominantly used for the analysis of European gardens
and landscapes, most of which are living historical examples. Most of the architectural
elements of the analyzed European gardens and landscapes are considerably well
preserved. These examples provide a wealth of scientific data on the architectural
theories, philosophies and approaches related to their design through drawings,
sketches and text, together with engravings for the analysis. In most cases original
designers are known together with their other projects. Sigiriya on the other hand offers
a contrasting example, which is mostly an ‘archaeological’ site, with comparatively
few surviving architectural remnants, and providing relatively limited information to
understand its design. Compared to the western examples, most of which are from
the Renaissance period (15th century onwards), with the only exceptions being the
medieval gardens of Europe (10th-14th century), Sigiriya is an example from the
distant past (5th century AC). Moreover, Sigiriya belongs to a cultural context in South
Asia that is very different to those of Europe. Therefore, Sigiriya is very different to the
examples analyzed so far in terms of age, degree of preservation as well as cultural and
geographical contexts. Despite such differences, the results of the present research
also demonstrate the effectiveness of this methodology in analyzing not only western
landscape compositions. Therefore, this methodology seems to be of universal
applicability for the research on landscape architecture.
The results of the present study also indicate that it has contributed to the
development of the existing research methodology. The technique of asymmetric
balance to control the composition at Sigiriya, for instance, has refined its existing
analytical instruments. The technique of design to create illusionary effects of the
three-dimensional space at Sigiriya using screens (including the Mirror Wall) and
the great tapestry of painting that are placed one behind the other as in a stage set,
on the other hand, points out that the existing methodology has been extended with
new analytical/design instruments. The present study also demonstrates the extent
of importance of the results of the analysis to understand the landscape architectural
value of the site in reshaping policy related to and making suggestions for the
conservation and presentation of Sigiriya as a heritage site, as well as its protection
and management as a green monument. In this regard, it demonstrates that the
existing research methodology has been given a new application in the conservation,
presentation and management of a historical built landscape.
261 Perspectives i

§ 7.3 Sigiriya in the Local and Global Design Context
§ 7.3.1 A Sri Lankan Tradition of Landscape Design?
In order to achieve the main objective, the present study has mainly read Sigiriya as
a landscape architectonic design in order to identify its design characteristics. If one
returns to the central issue mentioned under 1.2 of Chapter 1, the present research
is only a point of departure in the process of answering the research questions
mentioned therein. As stated in the same subheading, the next step is to carry out
separate studies on landscape designs of other significant historical built landscapes
of Sri Lanka to identify their own characteristics of landscape design. A comparison of
characteristics of all these landscape designs, including Sigiriya, will ultimately provide
insight into answering the research questions mentioned under 1.2 of Chapter 1.
Since the methodology adopted for the present study has delivered positive results, it
could be used to analyze Sri Lanka’s other historic built landscapes, such as Ranmasu
Uyana, Isurumuniya, Vessagiriya and Pancavasa monasteries at Anuradhapura, Dip-
uyana at Polonnaruva, Galabedda in southern Sri Lanka, Ritigala, Arankele, Kaludiya
Pokuna at Mihintale, the royal precinct at Kandy, and the royal capitals at Yapahuwa,
Dambadeniya and Kurunegala to understand the characteristics of landscape
design. Since the availability of spatial-technical information of each of these sites
is a prerequisite to apply the methodology, it is also suggested to have a program of
documenting such information of these historic built landscapes before the analysis.
§ 7.3.2 Landscape Design in the Global Context
Under 6.2 of Chapter 6, it was pointed out that only the West European landscape
tradition covering the Italian Renaissance, French baroque and English Revival has
been extensively researched to reduce individual designs to active compositional
schemes, which allows typological comparison. Therefore, the present efforts in
positioning Sigiriya in the global landscape design context have to be limited to
a comparison of Sigiriya with those of the West European landscape tradition.
Therefore, it is also suggested to initiate a series of research studies on different
landscape traditions around the globe, such as those of ancient Rome and India,
China, Japan, Korea, Moghul India and Pakistan, and Moorish Spain for typological
comparisons with that of Sigiriya, which will ultimately position Sigiriya in the global
262 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

landscape design context. Such a series of studies will also help to establish both
the parallelisms as well as differences of each landscape tradition and to see how
landscape architecture as a design discipline has evolved throughout the historical
period in a global sense.
Such a series of studies will also ultimately generate design knowledge on historic
built landscapes. As history has witnessed, as Moghul architects did with the ancient
Persian gardens, and even in modern times as architect Edwin Lutyens, for instance,
did with the Moghul gardens (when designing the garden for the Rashrapati Bhawan,
the viceroy house for the British Raj in New Delhi, India) (Moore, et al., 1997:188-
189), this will lead one not to copy the designs of a bygone era, or not merely to
stimulate present day designers, but to professionally equip already existing design
knowledge to create anew.
263 Perspectives i

264 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

List of Figures
(Photographs and drawings by the author unless otherwise credited)
Figure 0.1 21 Figure 2.3 49
Map of Sri Lanka showing sites referred to in the Cosmic lake of Anotatta, a painting from
text Dambulla cave shrine, 18th century AC (photo: M.
Figure 1.1 24 W. E. Karunaratne)
Location of royal and monastic landscapes in Figure 2.4 51
relation to Tisavava reservoir at Anuradhapura Mahathupa (Ruvanvalisaya), a colossal stupa
(courtesy: Bandaranayaka 1993a) at Anuradhapura, rising from the bank of an
Figure 1.2 26 artificial reservoir
Ranmasu Uyana at Anuradhapura Figure 2.5 53
Figure 1.3 26 Vastupurusa-mandala, the gridded centralized
Dip Uyana at Polonnaruva (photo: Roelof diagram (courtesy: Mayamata 1985)
Munneke) Figure 2.6 53
Figure 1.4 27 Bird’s-eye view of an ideal royal palace by P. K.
Layout, rock associated royal capital at Yapahuwa Acharya as per the descriptions given in Manasara
Figure 1.5 28 (1946)
Vessagiriya at Anuradhapura Figure 2.7 55
Figure 1.6 29 City plan of Anuradhapura
Layout, Isurumuniya at Anuradhapura (courtesy: Figure 2.8 57
Bandaranayake 1993a) Organization of reservoirs into a linear cascading
Figure 1.7 30 sequence (courtesy: Abeywickrama, 1991)
General view, Isurumuniya at Anuradhapura Figure 2.9 60
Figure 1.8 31 Ancient maritime trade routes between Rome and
Layout, Pancavasa Monastery, Puliyankulama, China (based on Huzayyin, 1942)
Anuradhapura Figure 2.10 64
Figure 1.9 32 Satellite image of Sigiriya and its immediate
Pathway, Ritigala forest monastery (photo environs (courtesy: Google Earth)
Lakshman Nadaraja; courtesy: Fernando, S. 2009) Figure 2.11 65
Figure 1.10 32 Semi-aerial view of Sigiriya from the northwest
Winding pathway, Arankele forest monastery (photo: Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen)
(photo: Lakshman Nadaraja; courtesy: Fernando, Figure 2.12 65
S. 2009) Plan, Sigiriya
Figure 1.11 33 Figure 2.13 66
Layout, Kaludiya Pokuna Monastery at Mihintale Greater Sigiriya showing Mapagala, Pidurangala,
Figure 1.12 34 Ramakele and Mahavava
General view, Kaludiya Pokuna Monastery at Figure 2.14 67
Mihintale Plan, western precincts
Figure 1.13 37 Figure 2.15 67
Schedule showing the antiquarian value of Plan, central zone of the western precincts
Sigiriya in relation to other international garden Figure 2.16 68
traditions Central zone of the inner western precinct from
Figure 2.1 42 the rock summit
Map of Sri Lanka showing climatic zones, Figure 2.17 69
topography, wind and the drainage pattern Plan, Miniature Water Garden
Figure 2.2 47 Figure 2.18 70
Relic chamber of a stupa at Mihintale on display Plan, four-quartered feature
at the site museum Figure 2.19 71
Plan, western escarpment
265 List of Figures i

Figure 2.20 72 Figure 3.4 98
Semi-aerial view of the western escarpment The cut-marks on one of the boulder clusters
(photo: R. Swathe Inc.; courtesy: Bandaranayake, indicating the structures upon them and their
1993b) relationship to the remains at the base (courtesy:
Figure 2.21 73 Sunnemark and Wik 1997)
Boulder showing the cut-marks on the top to Figure 3.5 105
receive the brick masonry of a structure The structures on the rock summit, after
Figure 2.22 73 excavation and after conservation (courtesy:
A rock-shelter at the base of a boulder Archaeology Department [top])
Figure 2.23 74 Figure 3.6 106
Boulder arch No. 01 A paw of the lion figure, before and after
Figure 2.24 74 conservation (courtesy: Archaeology Department)
Boulder arch No. 02 Figure 3.7 107
Figure 2.25 75 The Lion Plateau
The Mirror Wall and the pathway Figure 3.8 107
Figure 2.26 76 The Mirror Wall (before and after conservation)
Plan, Lion Plateau (courtesy: Archaeology Department [left])
Figure 2.27 76 Figure 3.9 108
Semi-aerial view of the Lion Plateau which Stairway traversing the western slope of the hilly
protrudes from the northern rock face (photo: terrain, before and after conservation (courtesy:
Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen) Archaeology Department [left])
Figure 2.28 77 Figure 3.10 111
Remains of the Lion-Staircase-House The central zone of the inner western precinct,
(photo: Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen) before and after conservation (photo: M. W. E.
Figure 2.29 78 Karunaratne [left])
Remnants of the plaster band on the rock face Figure 3.11 111
showing the Sigiriya Ladies floating among The Miniature Water Garden, after conservation
clouds (photo: Gamini Jayasinghe; courtesy: (photo: Upali Upananda; courtesy: Bandaranayake
Bandaranayake 1986a) 1993b)
Figure 2.30 79 Figure 3.12 112
Plan, rock summit Western route through the hilly terrain leading
Figure 2.31 80 up to the Boulder Arch No. 1, after excavations
Rock summit (view from southeast) (photo: and after conservation (courtesy: Central Cultural
Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen) Fund)
Figure 2.32 80 Figure 3.13 113
The large rock-cut pool at the rock summit Spiral staircases installed to view the surviving
Figure 2.33 81 paintings
The rock-cut seat at the rock summit (photo: M. Figure 3.14 114
W. E. Karunaratne) Layout of the Sigiriya complex showing the major
Figure 2.34 81 interventions
Limestone-paved central pathway at the rock Figure 3.15 117
summit Different protected zones related to Sigiriya
Figure 2.35 82 Figure 3.16 117
Rock summit showing the cut-marks to receive Proposed Structure Plan of the UDA for Sigiriya
the brick masonry. (courtesy: Prema 2001) (courtesy: UDA, 1989)
Figure 2.36 82 Figure 5.1 133
Ritual center of the post-Kasyapan monastic Peneplain extending from the Matale Foothills
phase showing the longitudinal ridges and positioning
Figure 3.1 89 of Sigiriya rock in the wider geomorphologic
Functional areas of the scheme as per the setting
interpretation by Bandaranayake (1994a:15) Figure 5.2 134
Figure 3.2 95 Sigiriya rock in the context of regional geological
Layout plan of Sigiriya by Blakesely (1876) setting (courtesy: Prema 2001)
Figure 3.3 97 Figure 5.3 135
Byrom’s (1986) reconstruction of part of the Terrain model showing the position of Sigiriya
southern outer compartment associated with the flanked by two longitudinal ridges
four-quartered feature
266 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.4 135 Figure 5.22 155
Contour map showing the relationship of Sigiriya Cross sections through the rock summit showing
with the rock formations of Pidurangala and the position of the built features in relation to the
Mapagala panoramic view
Figure 5.5 136 Figure 5.23 156
North-south profile across Sigiriya rock showing Cross section through the rock and hilly terrain in
the protuberant features of Pidurangala and east-west direction
Mapagala rock formations Figure 5.24 157
Figure 5.6 136 Axial arrangement of the compound associated
Sigiriya rock showing the qualities of a with the four-quartered feature
‘rock chimney’ (photo: Dominic Sansoni/ Figure 5.25 159
ThreeBlindMen) Staggered north-south axis created by the brick
Figure 5.7 137 embankment and the limestone paved pathway
Terrain model showing the relationship of Figure 5.26 160
Sigiriya rock with Pidurangala and Mapagala rock Dimensional relationship of the cap-rock and the
formations four-quartered feature
Figure 5.8 139 Figure 5.27 161
Panoramic depth from the rock summit as shown Geometric analysis of the scheme
by the view-shed analysis Figure 5.28 162
Figure 5.9 140 The geometric grid
Site morphology of the rock summit (conjectural) Figure 5.29 163
Figure 5.10 141 Geometric analysis of the rectangular compound
Angles of panoramic visions from different levels associated with the four-quartered feature
of the rock summit Figure 5.30 164
Figure 5.11 143 Grid plan as a system of overlapping rectangles
Sigiriya rock in relation to the limestone belt, Figure 5.31 165
Sigiri Oya and other rock formations Layout showing the strong symmetry along the
Figure 5.12 144 east-west axis
Line of forces of the natural features of the rock Figure 5.32 167
summit and hilly terrain Elements related to symmetry through east-west
Figure 5.13 145 axis
Corridor of the natural topographical features Figure 5.33 167
and the ‘natural axis’ Elements that distract symmetry through east-
Figure 5.14 147 west axis
Sigiriya in relation to the drainage network Figure 5.34 168
Figure 5.15 148 Symmetry of the axial zone
Area demarcated by the natural features of the Figure 5.35 170
landscape of Sigiriya Axial pathway through the pleasure garden
Figure 5.16 150 (photo: Dominic Sansoni/ThreeBlindMen)
Plan of the built landscape Figure 5.36 171
Figure 5.17 150 Northern rock face showing the irregular
Superimposition of the plan of the built landscape elevational profile
over that of the natural landscape Figure 5.37 172
Figure 5.18 151 Plan of the Lion-Plateau showing the symmetry
Geological map showing the location of Sigiriya in along the north-south axis against the northern
relation to the limestone bed (courtesy: Vitanage, rock face
1959) Figure 5.38 174
Figure 5.19 152 Plans at the top level of the selected boulders of
Enhancement of the axial formation of the the hilly terrain.
natural features Figure 5.39 175
Figure 5.20 153 Asymmetry of the hilly terrain
Direction of panorama from different levels of the Figure 5.40 176
rock summit Structure on top of a boulder at Kaludiya Pokuna
Figure 5.21 154 Monastery, Mihintale
Plan of the rock summit showing the buildings Figure 5.41 177
and the rock-cut seat oriented towards eastern Asymmetrical balance of various spaces of the
and western panoramas rock summit
267 List of Figures i

Figure 5.42 177 Figure 5.60 196
Asymmetrical balance of various elements of the Royal precinct of Kandy showing the floating
rock summit effects
Figure 5.43 178 Figure 5.61 198
Asymmetrical balance of the elements near the Route across the lower half of the hilly terrain in
entrance to the hilly terrain relation to the topographic features
Figure 5.44 179 Figure 5.62 198
Pathway through the hilly terrain towards the Semi-aerial view of the hilly terrain showing the
rock summit through the Lion Plateau route covered by boulders (photo: R. Swathe Inc.;
Figure 5.45 180 courtesy: Bandaranayake 1993b)
Pathway from the pronaos projection of the hilly Figure 5.63 199
terrain up to Boulder Arch No. 1 The route across the upper half of the hilly terrain
Figure 5.46 180 Figure 5.64 201
View of the pathway across the hilly terrain Different views with regard to the changing
leading up to Boulder Arch No. 1 composition of the boulders
Figure 5.47 182 Figure 5.65 202
Spatial entities of the scheme and their schematic Plan showing different view points along the
relationship routes across the hilly terrain
Figure 5.48 182 Figure 5.66 202
Axonometric view of the limestone-paved central Section through the pathway associated with the
pathway in relation to the eastern and western Mirror Wall
halves of the rock summit Figure 5.67 204
Figure 5.49 183 Bottom-up layering system of the landscape
A sectioned axonometric view of the limestone- Figure 5.68 205
paved central pathway in relation to the eastern Mural paintings of the Dambulla Cave shrine
and western halves of the rock summit (18th century) showing clouds used to
Figure 5.50 184 horizontally separate different layers (courtesy:
Picture plane of the western panorama from the Bandaranayake 1986a (left) and Chutiwongs,
rock summit Prematilleke and Silva, 1990b (right))
Figure 5.51 186 Figure 5.69 205
Picture plane of the eastern panorama from the Cloud-drift parapet wall, Kandy
rock summit Figure 5.70 206
Figure 5.52 188 The visual image of Sigiriya
Natural panorama in the north direction Figure 5.71 207
Figure 5.53 188 Linear sequence of hydraulic features within the
Natural panorama in the south direction axial zone (vertical scale exaggerated)
Figure 5.54 189 Figure 5.72 208
The entrance porch of the Yapahuwa royal Comparison of linear sequence of hydraulic
complex features within the axial zone with hydraulic
Figure 5.55 192 features of a typical agrarian landscape
Section showing different views composed when Figure 5.73 209
moving from the outer western precinct towards Rock-cut vertical drains on the rock boulders of
the rock on the east-west axis the hilly terrain
Figure 5.56 193 Figure 5.74 210
Different views composed from stand points A, B, Sequence of hydraulic features of the overall
C and D on the axial pathway scheme (macro scale)
Figure 5.57 195 Figure 5.75 211
A painting of a lady on the rock face (photo: M. W. Sequence of hydraulic features in Sigiriya’s wider
E. Karunaratne) landscape context (courtesy: Bandaranayake
Figure 5.58 196 1990b)
A mural painting from Suriyagoda Temple near Figure 5.76 213
Kandy (courtesy: Bandaranayake, 1986a) Diminishing volume of rocks and increasing
Figure 5.59 196 sheets of water from the center towards the
A mural painting from Dambulla Cave shrine periphery of the formal plan
(courtesy: Chutiwongs, Prematilleke and Silva,
1990b)
268 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Figure 5.77 213 Figure 6.8 246
Diminishing rock-associated and increasing Compositional scheme A: ‘Domain’
water-associated structures from the center Figure 6.9 248
towards the periphery of the formal plan Compositional scheme B: ‘House and Garden’
Figure 5.78 214 Figure 7.1 255
Increasing size, scale and elevation of the Optical boundaries of the scheme and the UDA
buildings from the periphery towards the center declared area
of the formal plan
Figure 5.79 216
Programmatic domains of the scheme
Figure 5.80 217
Pleasure garden showing the areas for water
sports and garden sports
Figure 5.81 218
Functional relationship of various spaces of the
scheme
Figure 5.82 219
Axial pathway through the pleasure garden up to
the western limits of the hilly terrain showing the
decreasing number of openings associated with
gateways leading towards the hilly terrain
Figure 5.83 221
The avenues and entrances leading to the
rectangular compartment associated with the
four-quartered feature
Figure 5.84 221
The triple avenues leading towards the pavilion
at the center of the enclosure associated with the
four-quartered feature
Figure 5.85 222
Central limestone pathway as the direct physical
link between palace buildings and palace garden
of the rock summit
Figure 6.1 227
Part of the ceiling painting of Cobra-hood
Cave (photo: Gamini Jayasinghe; courtesy:
Bandaranayake, 1986a)
Figure 6.2 236
Italian Renaissance villas and Sigiriya: position
of the ‘house’/palace in relation to natural
morphology of the site
Figure 6.3 238
Villa Medici at Feasole and Sigiriya: the
structuring of the spatial domains
Figure 6.4 240
Axis of Italian Renaissance villas and Sigiriya in
relation to the ordering of compartments and
elements
Figure 6.5 241
Spatial axis of Sigiriya and the French baroque
gardens in relation to the panorama/horizon
Figure 6.6 243
Ordering of the hydraulic elements at Villa Lante,
Sigiriya and Versailles
Figure 6.7 245
Programmatic zoning at Villa Emo, Sigiriya and
Versailles
269 i

270 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Summary (Samenvatting)
De koninklijke tuinen van Sigiriya:
Analyse van de landschapsarchitectonische compositie
Inleiding
Uit overblijfselen en historische en literaire documenten lijkt naar voren te komen
dat er sinds de derde eeuw voor Christus of nog eerder talrijke koninklijke parken en
bossen evenals Boeddhistische kloosterlandschappen in Sri Lanka hebben bestaan.
De beroemdste hiervan zijn de paleistuinen van Sigiriya, een relatief zeer goed
bewaard gebleven landschap dat teruggaat tot de vijfde eeuw na Christus. Hoewel
er diverse wetenschappelijke onderzoeken zijn gedaan naar bepaalde aspecten van
Sigiriya en andere gebouwde landschappen, is er tot dusverre nog geen serieus en
diepgravend onderzoek gedaan dat antwoord kan verschaffen op de vraag of Sri Lanka
zijn eigen landschapstraditie had, en of de historische voorbeelden die wij kennen,
waarvan Sigiriya er een is, daar een product van zijn. Om dergelijke vragen te kunnen
beantwoorden moet er afzonderlijk onderzoek worden verricht naar het ontwerp
van het landschap van Sigiriya en andere gebouwde landschappen in Sri Lanka om
de ontwerpkenmerken hiervan in kaart te brengen en te vergelijken. Omdat het
niet mogelijk is om een dergelijk project binnen het kader van één onderzoek uit te
voeren, zal dit onderzoek in eerste instantie gericht zijn op Sigiriya, met als doel dit te
interpreteren als een landschapsarchitectonisch ontwerp met speciale aandacht voor
de architectonische middelen (ontwerpmiddelen, -principes/regels/technieken, etc.)
die de ontwerpers hebben gebruikt om de elementen in de compositie te plaatsen/te
organiseren en zo inzicht te krijgen in de kenmerken van het ontwerp.
Dit onderzoek wil niet alleen de hierboven genoemde onderzoeksvragen
beantwoorden, maar heeft daarnaast nog twee secundaire doelstellingen, namelijk
Sigiriya een plaats geven in de internationale landschapsarchitectonische context door
het ontwerp van het landschap van Sigiriya te vergelijken met voorbeelden uit de West-
Europese traditie, en de bevindingen van dit onderzoek gebruiken om beleidskwesties
te bespreken en suggesties te doen die erfgoedspecialisten kunnen gebruiken bij het
opnieuw invullen van het lokale beleid met betrekking tot behoud, presentatie en
beheer.
In hoofdstuk twee wordt de algemene cultureel-geografische, technische en
historische context van dit onderzoek uiteengezet met aandacht voor de omgeving,
de topografie en de bewoners, de houding ten opzichte van de natuur, de
kosmologie, het koningschap, stadsplanning en architectuur, irrigatietechnologie,
de vrijetijdsbesteding van de koninklijke familie en externe culturele en commerciële
contacten in de loop van de geschiedenis van Sri Lanka. Daarnaast verschaft dit
hoofdstuk een basisinleiding over Sigiriya, het onderwerp van dit onderzoek, met
speciale aandacht voor de geschiedenis en de fysieke kenmerken van deze plek. In
271 Summary (Samenvatting) i

hoofdstuk drie wordt ingegaan op het beleid en benaderingen met betrekking tot
behoud, presentatie en beheer van Sigiriya, plus de werkwijzen en conclusies van
eerdere onderzoeken en interpretaties van Sigiriya, met als doel vast te stellen of die
benaderingen geschikt zijn om een methodologisch kader te bieden voor deze analyse
van de materiële overblijfselen in Sigiriya. Er wordt aangetoond dat onderzoek naar
het landschapsontwerp van Sigiriya zich tot dusverre heeft gericht op archeologisch
materiaal vanuit een historische, sociologische, sociaalhistorische en semiologische
invalshoek. Hoewel dat onderzoek een bijdrage heeft geleverd aan de erkenning van
het historisch belang van Sigiriya, komt daaruit niet naar voren waarom Sigiriya zo
belangrijk is vanuit het perspectief van het landschapsontwerp.
De methode
In hoofdstuk vier wordt dan ook onderzocht welke methodologieën onderzoekers op
internationaal niveau hanteren bij het bestuderen van landschapsontwerpen, teneinde
een geschikte methodologie te vinden voor dit onderzoek. Uit het onderzoek naar
de methodologieën die op internationaal niveau worden gebruikt voor onderzoek
naar landschapsontwerpen blijkt dat slechts enkele publicaties een technisch-
analytische benadering kiezen om inzicht te krijgen in dit onderwerp. Een van deze
methodologieën, die is ontwikkeld aan de TU Delft, maakt gebruik van gedetailleerde,
nauwkeurige analytische hulpmiddelen in combinatie met een breed overzicht
voor de analyse en vergelijking van ontwerpen uit alle belangrijke periodes uit de
West-Europese landschapstradities. Om het landschapsontwerp ‘omgekeerd’ te
interpreteren, wordt het landschapsarchitectonische ontwerp conceptueel opgedeeld
in ‘basisvorm’, ‘ruimtelijke vorm’, ‘metaforische vorm’ en ‘programmatische vorm’.
Gezien de positieve resultaten die deze methodologie oplevert en de verschillen
tussen de geanalyseerde voorbeelden en Sigiriya wat betreft de mate van behoud, de
beschikbaarheid van wetenschappelijke gegevens, de aard van de locatie etc., zijn de
aandachtspunten en hulpmiddelen voor de analyse voor dit onderzoek aangepast.
Voor deze analyse zijn topografische kaarten, hoogtekaarten, driedimensionale digitale
terreinmodellen van de geomorfologie, plattegronden, doorsneden, axomometrieën,
uitvergrote dwarsdoorsneden met perspectiefconstructies, kaarten en doorsneden met
zichtlijnen, perspectieftekeningen, foto’s etc. gebruikt.
Basisvorm
Uit de analyse in hoofdstuk vijf blijkt dat de ontwerpresponsen die we in Sigiriya
aantreffen de inwendige logica van de natuurlijke omgeving weerspiegelen, waarbij
het landschapsontwerp grotendeels is aangepast aan het omringende natuurlijke
landschap. De compositie integreert prominente geologische kenmerken (de
centrale rotspilaar en de geomorfologie van de wijdere omgeving) tot een basaal
geometrisch patroon. De basisindeling van Sigiriya is in de (natuurlijke) topografie
verankerd door middel van een zorgvuldige geometrisering van de lokale natuurlijke
272 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

omgeving, wat Sigiriya een hoge mate van lokale specificiteit en originaliteit
verleent. De symmetrische/asymmetrische ontwerptechnieken wijzen erop dat het
landschapsontwerp van Sigiriya de mens in diepe harmonie met de natuur brengt, wat
een weerspiegeling is van de houding van de oude Sri Lankanen ten opzichte van de
natuur. Uit analyse is verder gebleken dat de ontwerpers een geometrisch raster als
instrument/gereedschap hebben gebruikt, waarbij de rastermodule is gebaseerd op
een geabstraheerde, geometrische weergave van de natuurlijke rotsbodem.
Ruimtelijke vorm
Schematisch treffen we een panoramische, ruimtelijke compositie, ingedeeld op basis
van de hiërarchische volgorde van paleis, tuin en omringend landschap, met name in
oostelijke en westelijke richting, om de centrale ruimtelijke positie van het paleis te
benadrukken. Als gevolg van deze indeling vallen de optische grenzen van het ontwerp
niet samen met de fysieke grenzen van de formele indeling, maar worden ze verlegd
naar de visuele grenzen van het omringende landschap. De ontwerpers hebben een
speciale compositietechniek gebruikt die doet denken aan de schildertechniek die in
Sri Lanka veel werd gebruikt door traditionele muurschilders. Deze techniek scheidt
het paleis op zijn rots zowel visueel als ruimtelijk van het land, waardoor het paleis
lijkt te zweven en in westelijke richting de illusie van ruimte ontstaat. Het ontwerp
is niet alleen een panoramische ruimtelijke compositie (vanaf de top van de rots
gezien), maar ook – vanaf de grond bekeken – een ruimtelijke compositie met de rots
als oriëntatiepunt, waardoor het landschapsontwerp van Sigiriya een omkeerbare
ruimtelijke compositie is, afhankelijk van het gekozen gezichtspunt. De ruimtelijke
effecten van de indeling zijn ondergebracht in een scenografische sequentie,
gezichtspunten en panorama’s, waaraan stap voor stap is af te lezen hoe de compositie
verschuift van een op de rots georiënteerde compositie naar een panoramagerichte.
Metaforische vorm
Uit de analyse blijkt dat er verticaal sprake is van een bottom-up sequentie van visueel
structurerende systemen, bestaande uit verschillende visuele lagen die zijn verdeeld
langs een visuele verticale as gevormd door de rots. Dit is een weerspiegeling van de
afnemende aanwezigheid van de mens en, tegelijkertijd, de groeiende aanwezigheid
van het goddelijke – wat doet denken aan de indeling van het kosmische landschap
in de Boeddhistische traditie. De hiërarchische volgorde van de visuele lagen maakt
het paleis tot het dominante metaforische element in de compositie als geheel,
waarschijnlijk om de ‘goddelijke’ status van de koning te suggereren. Ook de
hydraulische elementen zijn visueel gestructureerd, van de top van de rots via de
lusthof naar het open landschap, alsof het water aan de top van de rots ontspringt. Dit
weerspiegelt de kosmische ordening: de waterkringloop die de aarde vruchtbaar houdt
en de filosofie achter irrigatietechnieken uit de oudheid. De grote schilderingen op de
273 Summary (Samenvatting) i

rots benadrukken de bovennatuurlijke, hemelse aard van het domein van de koning en
verbeelden de vereniging van de lokale en de kosmische orde.
Programmatische vorm
Het ontwerp bestaat uit een aantal programmatische domeinen die zowel verticaal
als horizontaal zijn georganiseerd in de hiërarchische volgorde van paleis, binnenstad,
omringende wijken, buitenwijken en natuurlijke/agrarische nederzettingen. De
hiërarchische ordening neemt af wanneer we van het middelpunt naar de visuele
randen van het geheel gaan, ter benadrukking van de dominante positie van het paleis
als programmatisch domein. Een dergelijk geordend systeem zou de koning in staat
hebben gesteld om de overige lagen van de samenleving efficiënt te leiden door middel
van zijn symbolische aanwezigheid. Er is bewust gekozen om in elk functioneel domein
individuele, collectieve en openbare activiteiten te combineren. Op die manier maakt
het landschapsontwerp van Sigiriya het zowel mogelijk om van de natuur, sensuele
genoegens en vrije tijd (otium) te genieten als, voor de koning, om het land efficiënt te
besturen (negotium), zodat er een balans ontstaat tussen otium en negotium.
Conclusies en perspectieven
In hoofdstuk zes wordt het landschapsontwerp van Sigiriya vergeleken met voorbeelden
uit de West-Europese landschapstraditie door het ontwerp te abstraheren. Uit die
vergelijking blijkt dat het landschapsontwerp van Sigiriya en die van de Italiaanse
villa’s uit de renaissance een groot aantal ontwerpinstrumenten gemeen hebben.
Daarnaast treffen we in Sigiriya ontwerpinstrumenten aan die ook zijn ontwikkeld door
de ontwerpers van Franse baroktuinen. In Sigiriya zijn echter ook ontwerpinstrumenten
gebruikt die het ontwerp een andere typologie geven dan die van westerse ontwerpen.
Dit onderzoek bewijst dat Sigiriya kan worden geïnterpreteerd als een volwaardige
landschapsarchitectonische compositie. Het is mogelijk gebleken om een aantal
essentiële elementen te identificeren die een actieve rol spelen/speelden in de
ruimtelijke werking van het ontwerp (actief ontwerpelement). Het landschapsontwerp
van Sigiriya vertoont een sterke formele samenhang tussen verschillende
elementen en lagen uit de compositie, die elkaar aanvullen en versterken. Daardoor
ontstaat een architectonische compositie die bestaat uit meerdere belangrijke
ontwerp- en betekenislagen, met zowel algemene als zeer specifieke (unieke)
landschapsarchitectonische elementen, aspecten, kenmerken en kwaliteiten.
De bevindingen van dit onderzoek stellen ons in staat het landschapsarchitectonische
belang van Sigiriya op waarde te schatten en een aantal suggesties te doen met
betrekking tot het behoud, de presentatie en het beheer ervan. Verder komt uit
dit onderzoek naar voren hoe effectief de gehanteerde methodologie is bij het
verkennen van de rijkdom van de compositie van het landschapsontwerp van Sigiriya.
Dat een methodologisch kader dat hoofdzakelijk is ontworpen voor de studie van
Europese tuinen en landschappen ook zijn vruchten afwerpt wanneer dit wordt
274 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

toegepast op Sigiriya, een archeologische locatie uit het verre verleden, ontstaan
in een Zuid-Aziatische culturele context, duidt erop dat dit methodologische kader
universeel toepasbaar is bij onderzoek naar landschapsontwerpen. Uit dit onderzoek
blijkt dat een bijdrage is geleverd aan de verdere ontwikkeling van de bestaande
onderzoeksmethodologie door de daarbij horende analytische instrumenten te
verfijnen en de methodologie aan te vullen met nieuwe instrumenten voor analyse en
ontwerp.
Daarnaast heeft de voor dit onderzoek aangepaste methodologie een kader heeft
opgeleverd voor onderzoek naar de andere historische tuinen en landschappen van
Sri Lanka. Op termijn zal dat inzicht verschaffen in de typologische aspecten van een
mogelijke Sri Lankaanse traditie in het landschapsontwerp, waarmee antwoord wordt
gegeven op de vragen die aan het begin van dit onderzoek zijn gesteld.
275 Summary (Samenvatting) i

276 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Curriculum Vitae
Nilan Cooray
1963: Born in Colombo, Sri Lanka
1981-1984: Undergraduate studies (B.Sc) in Built Environment at University of
Moratuwa, Sri Lanka
1986-1987: Postgraduate studies (M.Sc) in Architecture at University of Moratuwa,
Sri Lanka
1989-2009: Project Manager, Assistant Director and Director Conservation at
Central Cultural Fund, Sri Lanka
1989-to date: Member of the International Council on Monuments and Sites
(ICOMOS)
1992-to date: Chartered Architect and Associate Member of the Sri Lanka Institute
of Architects
1995, 1996, 1999 & 2003: Research Fellow, Faculty of Architecture, Delft University
of Technology, the Netherlands
1996-to date: Visiting Lecturer, Faculty of Architecture, University of Moratuwa,
Sri Lanka
1998-to date: Visiting Lecturer, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya,
Sri Lanka
1998-to date: Visiting Lecturer, Postgraduate Institute of Archaeology, Colombo,
Sri Lanka
2000: Expert of the ICOMOS for the Evaluation Mission to She-Phoksundo National
Park in Nepal for its World Heritage nomination
2004: Training course on Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Heritage in the
Asia-Pacific Region conducted by the UNESCO and ICCROM in Nara, Japan
2009-to date: Visiting Lecturer, Faculty of Engineering, University of Moratuwa,
Sri Lanka
2009-to date: Assistant Secretary General of the National Trust, Sri Lanka
2009: Expert of the ICOMOS in the joint UNESCO/ICOMOS Reactive Monitoring
Mission to World Heritage Site of Paharpur, Bangladesh
2010: Resource person and lecturer for Advance Course on Conservation and
Restoration Techniques of Traditional Architecture for the Asia-Pacific Region,
organized by the UNESCO in Suzhou, China
2012: UNESCO’s international expert resource person to provide technical advice
to Myanmar’s Department of Archaeology in preparing management plans for the
World Heritage nomination of Pyu Ancient Cities in Myanmar
277 Curriculum Vitae i

278 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Reference List
Aben, R. and De Wit, S. (1999) The Enclosed Garden: History and Development of the Hortus Conclusus and Its
Reintroduction into the Present Day Urban Landscape. Rotterdam, 010 Publishers.
Abeywickrama, B. A. (ed.) (1991) Natural Resources of Sri Lanka: Conditions and Trends. A Report Prepared for
the Natural Resources Energy and Science Authority. Colombo, Keels Business Systems.
Adams, W. H. (1978) The French Formal Garden: 1500-1800. New York, George Braziller Inc.
Adikaram, E. W. (1946) Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon (3rd print 2009). Dehiwala, Buddhist Cultural
Center.
Adikari, G. (1994) Approaches to the Pre-history of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. In: Bandaranayake, S. and
Mogren, M. (eds.) Further Studies in the Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo,
PGIAR, University of Kelaniya: pp. 45-51.
Adithiya, L. A. (1981) Fauna of the Mahavamsa. Ancient Ceylon, No. 4. Colombo: Department of Archaeology:
1-48.
Amarasinghe, M. (2003) Sri Lankave Purana Raja Maliga (Ancient Royal Palaces in Sri Lanka). Ja-Ela, Samanthi
Poth Prakasakayo.
Anonymous (1851) Notes from the Note Book of a Traveller: An Account of the Rock Fortress of Seegiry or Egiry,
Menery Lake & c. Yong Ceylon, Vol. II, No. 4, April: 77-78.
Antiquities Ordinance No. 9 of 1940, Revised Act No. 24 of 1998.
Aryawansa, H. D. H. (1958) Peradiga Citra Ha Nrthya Kala Hewath Sitiyame Ha Netime Muladharma (Principles
of Eastern Art of Painting and Dance). Colombo, M. D. Gunasena.
ASCAR, Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Annual Report; later Administration Report of the Archaeological
Commissioner. Colombo: Government of Ceylon.
Ashton, M. S., et al. (1997) A Field Guide to the Common Trees and Shrubs of Sri Lanka. Colombo, WHT
Publications (Pvt.) Ltd.
Bailey, J. (1853) Episode from Mahavansa IV, Kasyapa the Parricide (reproduced 1884). In: Goonetilleke, W.
(ed.) The Orientalist, Vol. I, August. London, Educational Society’s Press: pp. 178-180.
Bandaranayake, S. (1974) Sinhalese Monastic Architecture. Leiden, E. J. Brill.
Bandaranayake, S. (1976) The Historical Architecture of Sri Lanka. In: Viskam. Colombo, Department of Cultural
Affairs: pp. 16-34.
Bandaranayake, S. (1978) Sri Lanka and the Monsoon Asia: Patterns of Local and Regional Architectural
Development and the Problem of the Traditional Sri Lankan Roof. In: Prematilleke, L., Indrapala, K. and van
Lohuizen-De-Leeuw, J. E. (eds.) Senarat Paranavitana Commemoration Volume. Leiden, E. J. Brill: pp. 22-44.
Bandaranayake, S. (1984) Sigiriya Project: First Archaeological Excavation and Research Report (January-
September 1982). Colombo, Central Cultural Fund.
Bandaranayake, S. (1986a) The Rock and Wall Paintings of Sri Lanka. Colombo, Lake House Book Shop.
Bandaranayake, S. (1986b) The 5th Century Fortified City and Landscaped Gardens at Sigiriya: Excavation,
Conservation and Development. In: Conservation and Tourism. London, Heritage Trust: pp. 101-107.
Bandaranayake, S. (1990a) Sri Lanka’s Contribution to Asian Garden History: The Royal Gardens at Sigiriya and
Anuradhapura. Ancient Ceylon, Vol. 4, No. 11. Colombo, Department of Archaeology: 41-58.
Bandaranayake, S. (1990b) Approaches to the Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. In:
Bandaranayake, S., Mogren, M and Epitawatte, S. (eds.) The Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla
Region. Colombo, PGIAR, University of Kelaniya: pp. 15-38.
Bandaranayake, S. (1993a) Amongst Asia’s Earliest Surviving Gardens: The Royal and Monastic Gardens at
Sigiriya and Anuradhapura. In: Historic Gardens and Sites, ICOMOS Series. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund:
pp. 3-35.
Bandaranayake, S. (1993b) Sigiriya: City, Palace and Royal Gardens. In: Guruge, A. W. P. et al. (eds.) The Cultural
Triangle of Sri Lanka. Colombo, UNESCO and Central Cultural Fund: pp. 112-135.
Bandaranayake, S. (1993c) Souvenirs from Sigiriya. In Serandib: The Magazine of Air Lanka, Vol. 12, No. 4, July-
August 1993. Colombo, Air Lanka Ltd.: 16-20.
Bandaranayake, S. (1994a) Traversing an Archaeological Landscape. In: Bandaranayake, S. and Mogren, M.
(eds.) Further Studies in the Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo, PGIAR,
University of Kelaniya: 9-20.
279 Reference List i

Bandaranayake, S. (1994b) The Premodern City in Sri Lanka: The First and Second Urbanization. [Paper] World
Archaeological Congress, 1994, New Delhi, India.
Bandaranayake, S. (1994c) 100 Years of Archaeology at Sigiriya. Ceylon Daily News. 6, 18 & 19 April.
Bandaranayake, S. (1994d) The Sigiriya Environment Programme. Soba, November 1994. Colombo, Ministry of
Transport, Highways, Environment and Women’s Affairs: 40-47.
Bandaranayake, S. (1997) Sigiriya: Research and Management at a Fifth-century Garden Complex. Jacques, D.
(ed.) Journal of Garden History: Technique and Uses of Garden Archaeology, Vol. 17, No. 1. Oxford, Taylor and
Francis: 78-85.
Bandaranayake, S. (2005) Sigiriya: City-Palace-Gardens-Monasteries-Paintings. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund.
Bandaranayake, S. (2010a) Sigiriya: Notes on the Conjectural Reconstruction of the Palace and the Lion
Staircase. In: Gunawardhana, P. et al. (eds.) Sirinimal Lakdusinghe Felicitation Volume. Battaramulla,
Neptune Publications: pp. 25-40.
Bandaranayake, S. (2010b) The Lion Mountain and the Palace in the Sky: Notes on the Identity of the Royal
Complex at Sigiriya. In: Prematilleke, L. (ed.) Abhinandanamala: Nandana Chutiwongs Felicitation Volume.
Bangkok and Colombo, SPAFA Regional Center of Archaeology and Fine Arts and the Abhinandanamala
Committee: pp. 111-137.
Basnayake, H. T. (1983) Sigiriya in History and Archaeology. [Mimeo in bound volume of proceedings of Seminar
on Sigiriya]. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund.
Bentmann, R. and Muller, M. (1970) Die Villa als Herrshaftarchitektur. Frankfurt.
Berger, A. (2002) Reclaiming the American West. New York, Princeton Architectural Press.
Berral, J. S. (1978) The Garden: An Illustrated History. New York, Penguin Books.
Blakesley, T. H. (1876) On the Ruins of Sigiri in Ceylon. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (GB and I), New Series,
Vol. VIII. London, Trubner and Co.: 53-61.
Bopearachchi, O. (1990) Some Observations on Roman Coins Found in Recent Excavations at Sigiriya. Ancient
Ceylon, No. 7, Vol. 2. Colombo, Department of Archaeology: 20-37.
Bopearachchi, O. (1993) Jardins de Sigiriya au Sri Lanka. In: Asies: Amenager L’ Espace. Paris, Centre de
Recherche Sur l’Extreme Orient de Paris, Sorbonne: pp. 239-263.
Bopearachchi, O. (1996) Sea Faring in the Indian Ocean: Archaeological Evidence from Sri Lanka. In: Ray, H.
P. and Salles, J. F. (eds.) Traditional Archaeology: Early Maritime Contacts in the Indian Ocean. New Delhi:
59-77.
Brohier, R. L. (1934-1935) Ancient Irrigation Works in Ceylon, Part I, II, III. Colombo, Government Press.
Burrows, S. M. (1885) Buried Cities of Ceylon (2nd edition 1894). Colombo, A. M. and J. Ferguson.
Burrows, S. M. (1887) A.G.A. Diaries: Matale District.” Official Diary (handwritten bounded volume; printed in
1888 as “Extracts from Diary” in the “Report on Matale District for 1887.” In Ceylon Administrative Reports
for the Year 1887. Colombo: Ceylon Government Printer: pp. 89A-102A).
Burrows, S. M. (1889) A.G.A. Diaries: Matale District.” Official Diary (handwritten bounded volume; printed in
1890 as “Extracts from Dairy” in the “Report on Matale District for 1889.” In Ceylon Administrative Reports
for the Year 1889. Colombo: Ceylon Government Printer: pp. C12-C24).
Byrom, J. (1986) Sigiriya: The SW Outer Compartment of Water Garden No. 1 – Notes Towards a Suggested
Reconstruction. Landscape Occasional Papers. Unpublished study paper, University of Edinburgh.
Casie-Chitty, S. (1834) The Ceylon Gazetteer: Island of Ceylon. Colombo, Cotta Church Mission Press.
Charageat, M. (1955) Andre le Notre et l’optique de son temps. Bulletin de la Societe de l’Histoire de l’Art
Francais.
Culavamsa: Being the More Recent Part of the Mahavamsa, Part I &. II. 1891. Geiger, W. (tr.). Colombo, The
Ceylon Government Information Department.
Chutiwongs, N., Prematilleke, L. and Silva, R. (1990a) Paintings of Sri Lanka: Sigiriya. Colombo, Archaeological
Survey of Sri Lanka and Central Cultural Fund.
Chutiwongs, N., Prematilleke, L. and Silva, R. (1990b) Paintings of Sri Lanka: Dambulla. Colombo, Archaeological
Survey of Sri Lanka and Central Cultural Fund.
Chutiwongs, N., Prematilleke, L. and Silva, R. (1990c) Paintings of Sri Lanka: Kottimbulvala. Colombo,
Archaeological Survey of Sri Lanka and Central Cultural Fund.
Codrington, H. W. (1924) Ceylon Coins and Currency. Memoirs of the Colombo Museum, Series A, No. 3 (reprint
1975). Colombo, Government Printer.
Comito, T. (1978) The Idea of the Garden in the Renaissance. New Jersey, Rutgers University Press.
Coomaraswamy, A. K. (1908) Mediaeval Sinhalese Art (reprint 1956). London, Pantheon Books.
Coomaraswamy, A. K. (1927) History of Indian and Indonesian Art (Dover edition 1965). New York, Dover
Publications Inc.
280 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Cooray, N. (1997) The Restoration of the Gardens of Sigiriya, Sri Lanka. In: de Jong, E. (ed.) Restoration of
Baroque Gardens: Tuinkunst – Dutch Year Book of the History of Garden and Landscape Architecture, No. 2.
Amsterdam, Architectura and Natura: pp. 145-158.
Cooray, P. G. (1967) An Introduction to Geology of Sri Lanka (Ceylon) (second revised edition 1984). Colombo,
National Museum.
Corner, J. and MacLean, A. S. (1996) Taking Measures across the American Landscape. New Haven, Yale
University Press.
Dahanayake, K. (1990) Some Geological Aspects of the Sigiriya Fortress (5th century AD), Sri Lanka. In:
Seneviratne, S. et al. (eds.) Perspectives in Archaeology: Leelananda Prematilleke Festschrift. University of
Peradeniya, Department of Archaeology: pp. 107-110.
De Jong, E. (1988) Garden Art in the Period of William and Mary: 1650-1702. In: Hunt, J. D. and de Jong, E.
(eds.) The Anglo-Dutch Garden in the Age of William and Mary. London: pp. 15-40.
De Jong, E. (1990) For Profit and Ornament: The Function and Meaning of Dutch Garden Art in the Period
of William and Mary: 1650-1702. In: Hunt, J. D. (ed.) The Dutch Garden in the Seventeenth Century.
Washington, DC: pp. 13-48.
Deepthikumara, P. (1998) Lion Face [conjectural reconstruction: picture post card]. Bandaragama.
Deepthikumara, P. (2000) Sigiriya Fortress [conjectural reconstruction: picture post card]. Bandaragama.
Deraniyagala, P. E. P. (1951) Some Sidelights on the Sinhala Monastery-Fortress of Sihagiri. Spolia Zeylanica, Vol.
26, Part I. Colombo, Government Press: 69-75.
Deraniyagala, P. E. P. (1958) Guide to the Monastery Fortress of Sigiriya. Colombo, Government Press.
Deraniyagala, S. U. (1992) The Prehistory of Sri Lanka, Part I and II. Colombo, Department of Archaeological
Survey.
Deraniyagala, S. U. (2001) Man Before Vijaya in Sri Lanka: The Archaeological Evidence. In: Prematilleke, L. (ed.)
Man and Monument: D. T. Devendra, A Centennial Tribute. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund: pp. 54-62.
De Silva, N. (1988) Systems of Measurement in Traditional Architectural Usage. The Sri Lanka Architect, June-
August, Vol. 100, No. 3. Colombo, Sri Lanka Institute of Architects: 25-30.
De Silva, N. (1989) Traditional Concepts of Site Utilization in Architecture. The Sri Lanka Architect, Vol. 100, No.
5. Colombo, Sri Lanka Institute of Architects: 2-10.
De Silva, N. (1990) The Sri Lankan Tradition for Shelter. The Sri Lanka Architect, Vol. 100, No. 6. Colombo, Sri
Lanka Institute of Architects: 2-11.
De Silva, N. (1993) Kandy: The Historic Hill Capital. In: Guruge, A. W. P. et al. (eds.) The Cultural Triangle of Sri
Lanka. Colombo, UNESCO and Central Cultural Fund: pp. 156-175.
De Silva, N. (1996) Landscape Tradition of Sri Lanka: Philosophy, Principles and Practices. Colombo, Deveco
Designers and Publishers.
De Silva, N. (1997) A Chronological Development of Settlement Patterns in Sri Lanka. In: Kurukulasuriya, V. (ed.)
Fifty Years of Town and Country Planning in Sri Lanka: A Volume to Commemorate the Fiftieth Anniversary
of the Department of Town and Country Planning. Colombo, Department of Town and Country Planning: pp.
2-35.
De Silva, N. (1998) A Selection of Indigenous Trees for Traditional Landscape in Sri Lanka. Colombo, Deveco
Designers and Publishers.
De Silva, N. (2009) Monastic Gardens. In: Fernando, S. (ed.) Gardens of Sri Lanka. Singapore: pp. 38-61.
De Silva. N. (2012) Sigiriya Mirror Wall and Graffiti. [Monthly public lecture] National Trust Sri Lanka, February
2012.
De Silva, R. H. (1976) Archaeological Guide to Sigiriya. Colombo, Department of Archaeology.
De Silva, R. H. (1990) Painting (Early Period 247 BC to AD 900). In: Wijesekera, N. D. (ed.) Painting:
Archaeological Department Centenary Volume 1890-1990, Commemorative Series, Volume Five. Colombo,
Government Press: pp. 3-44.
De Silva R. H. (1997) Sigiriya: Neither Kasyapa’s Capital nor Pleasure Dome. The Island [Sunday Edition],
February 23, March 2 and 9.
De Silva, R. H. (2001) Mahavamsa, Mahavihara and Mahayana. In: Prematilleke (ed.) Man and Monument: D. T.
Devendra, A Centennial Tribute. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund: pp. 63-83.
De Silva, R. H. (2002) Sigiriya and its Significance: A Mahayana-Theravada Buddhist Monastery. Nawala,
Bibliotheque (Pvt.) Ltd.
De Silva, R. H. (2004) Archaeological Guide to Sigiriya (2nd ed). Nawala, Bibliotheque Pvt. Ltd.
De Silva, R. H. (2009) Sigiriya Paintings. Nawala, Bibliotheque Pvt. Ltd.
281 Reference List i

Dissanayake, S. (2003) Purana Lankave Rajakiya Mangala Udyana: Anuradhapura Avadhiya (Royal Pleasure
Gardens of Ancient Lanka: Anuradhapura Period). Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Postgraduate Institute of
Archaeology, University of Kelaniya.
Dissanayake, S. (2009) Royal Gardens. In: Fernando, S. (ed.) Gardens of Sri Lanka. Singapore: pp. 20-37.
Dissanayake, S. (2011) Sigiriya: Ehi Suprakata Sitivam, Raja Uyana ha anekut Nagaranga (Sigiriya: Its Famous
Paintings, Royal Park and Other Elements of the City). Kurunegala, Anura Printers.
Dixon Hunt, J. and Wills, P. (1975). The Genius of the Place: English Landscape Garden 1620-1820. London.
Duncan, J. S. (1990). The City as Text: The Politics of Landscape Interpretation in the Kandyan Kingdom. New
York, Port Chester, Melbourne and Sydney, Cambridge University Press.
Ellepola, C. (1990) Conjectured Hydraulics of Sigiriya. Ancient Ceylon, Vol. 5 (Centenary Volume), No. 11.
Colombo, Department of Archaeology: 172-227.
Ellepola, C. (1999). Sigiriya Project: Summary Conservation Report (1982-1998) [unpublished]. Colombo,
Architectural Alliance (Pvt.) Ltd.
Fairbrother, N. (1974). The Nature of Landscape Design. London, Architectural Press.
Fat, L. T. S. and De Jong, E. (eds.) (1991). The Authentic Garden: A Symposium in Garden. Leiden, Clusius
Foundation.
Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance (No. 2 of 1937, amended Act No. 22 of 2009). 2009. Colombo:
Department of Government Printer.
Fernando, D. N. (1980) Major Ancient Irrigation Works in Sri Lanka. Journal of the Sri Lanka Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society, New Series, Vol. XXII, Special Number. Colombo, RAS(CB): 1-23.
Fernando, S. (ed.) (2009). Gardens of Sri Lanka. Singapore.
Frank, C. (1956) Die Barock – Villen in Frascati. Munich.
Frankl, P. (1914) Die Entwicklungsphasen der neueren Baukunst (translated as Principles of Architectural
History: The Four Phases of Architectural Style, 1420-1900). 1968. London, The MIT Press.
Frobes, J. (1840) Eleven Years in Ceylon, 2 Vols (2nd ed. rev. 1841). London, Richard Bentley.
Fleming, L. and Gore, A. (1979) The English Garden. London, Michael Joseph Ltd.
Geiger, W. (1960) Culture of Ceylon in Mediaeval Times. H. Bechert (ed.). Wiesbaden, Otto Harrassowitz.
Godakumbure, C. E. (1970) Sinhalese Festivals: Their Symbolism, Origin and Proceedings. Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society (Ceylon Branch), New Series, Vol. XIV (125th Anniversary Issue). Colombo, RAS (CB): 91-133.
Gollwitzer, G. (1974) The Influence of Le Nostre on the European Garden of the Eighteenth Century. In:
Macdougall, E. B. and Hazelhurst, F. H. (eds.) The French Formal Garden. Washington, DC, Dumbarton Oaks
Trustees for Harvard University: pp. 71-87.
Gooneratne, S. P. (1983) Water Gardens and Water Sports in Sinhala Literature. [Mimeo in bound volume of
proceedings of Seminar on Sigiriya; 10pp]. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund.
Gothein, M. L. (1914) Geschichte der Gartenkunst, 2 Vols. Jena.
Gunawardana, R. A. L. H. (1972) Ceylon and Malaysia: A Study of Professor S. Paranavitana’s Research on
the Relations between the Two Regions. University of Ceylon Review, XXV, Nos. 1-2, April-October 1967.
Peradeniya: University of Ceylon: 1-64.
Gunawardhana, P. (2008) Sigiri Doratu (Sigiriya Entrances). Ja-Ela, Samanthi Publications.
Guruge. A. (1996) Senarath Paranavitana: As a Writer of Historical Fiction in Sanskrit. In: Vidanapathirana,
V. (ed). Vidyodaya Journal of Social Sciences, Vol. 7 (Parts 1 and 2). Nugegoda, University of Sri
Jayawardenapura: pp. 157-179.
Hazlehurst, F. H. (1980) Gardens of Illusion: The Genius of Andre Le Nostre. Nashville, TN, Vanderbilt University
Press.
Holmes, C. (ed). (2001). Icons of Garden Design. Munich, London, New York, Prestel Verlag.
Hussey, C. (1967) English Gardens and Landscapes: 1700-1750. London, Country Life Ltd.
Huzayyin, S. A. (1942) Arabia and the Far East. Cairo.
Indrapala, K. (1969) Book Reviews: Ceylon and Malaysia by S. Paranavitana. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
(Ceylon Branch), New Series, Vol. XI – 1967. Colombo, RAS (CB): 101-106.
Jayasinghe, G. and Rassapana, D. (2003). The Grandeur of Sinhala Buddhist Art: Classical Period, Vol. I.
Ratmalana, Sarvodaya Vishva Lekha.
Jayasinghe, P. (2010) Geological Background of Some Archaeological Sites of Sri Lanka. In: Gunawardhana, P. et.
al. (eds.) Sirinimal Lakdusinghe Felicitation Volume. Battaramulla, Neptune Publications: pp. 303-313.
Jashemski, W. F. (1979) The Gardens of Pompeii: Herculaneum and the Villas Destroyed by Vesuvius. New York,
Caratza Brothers.
Jellicoe, G. and Jellicoe, S. (1975) The Landscape of Man: Shaping the Environment from Prehistory to the Present
Day (reprint 1996). London, Thames and Hudson.
282 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Kangle, P. R. (1965) The Kautiliya Arthasastra, Part III: A Study (reprint 1992). Delhi, Motilal Banarsidars.
Karunaratne, P. and Adikari, G. (1994) Excavations at Aligala Pre-historic Site. In: Bandaranayake, S. and
Mogren, M. (eds.) Further Studies in the Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo,
PGIAR, University of Kelaniya: pp. 55-62.
Karunaratne, P. (1994) The Eastern Precinct of the Sigiriya Complex. In: Bandaranayake, S. and Mogren, M.
(eds.) Further Studies in the Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo, PGIAR,
University of Kelaniya: pp. 145-155.
Karunaratne, S. (1997) Pasveni Satavarshayedi Mahayana Vihara Arama Tibunu Bavata Sitanna Amarui (It is
difficult to believe that there were Mahayanic Monasteries in the Fifth Century). Vatmana, May 1, 1997.
Kask, T. (1971) Symmetrie und Regelmassigkeit, Franzosische Architektur im Grand Siecle. Basel, Stuttgart.
Kastof, S. (1991) The City Shaped: Urban Patterns and Meanings through History. London, Thames and Hudson.
Kiribamune, S. (2000) The Role of the Port City of Mahatittha (Mantota) in the Trade Networks of the Indian
Ocean. In: Gunawardena, R. A. L. H., Pathmanathan, S. and Rohanadeera, M. (eds.) Reflections on a Heritage:
Historical Scholarship on Premodern Sri Lanka, Part I. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund and Ministry of
Cultural Affairs: pp. 435-454.
Laird, M. (1992) The Formal Garden. London, Thames and Hudson.
Laurie, M. (1975) An Introduction to Landscape Architecture. New York, the Netherlands.
Lewcock, R., Sansoni, B. and Senanayake, L. (1998) The Architecture of an Island: The Living Heritage of Sri Lanka
(reprint 2002). Colombo, Barefoot (Pvt.) Ltd.
Liyanagamage, A. (1984-1985) Sigiriya Military Fortress or Pleasure Resort?: A Historical Perspective. In Kalyani:
Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences of University of Kelaniya, Vol. 3: 67-81.
Madduma Bandara, C. M. (1985) Catchment Ecosystem and Village Tank Cascades in the Dry Zone of Sri
Lanka: A Time Tested System of Land and Water Resource Management. In: Lundquist, J., Lohm, U. and
Falkenmark, M. (eds.) Strategies for River Basin Management. Dordrecht, Reidel Publishing Company: pp.
99-113.
Mahavamsa: or The Great Chronicle of Ceylon (1912). W. Geiger (tr. and ed.) (reprint 1986). Colombo, Ceylon
Government Information Department.
Manasara: Hindu Architecture in India and Abroad (1946). P. K. Acharya (tr.) (2nd edition 1979). New Delhi,
Oriental Books Reprint Corporation.
Manatunge, A. (1990) The Kiri Oya Valley. In: Bandaranayake, S., Mogren, M. and Epitawatte, S. (eds.) The
Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo, PGIAR, University of Kelaniya: pp. 73-92.
Manjusri Vastuvidyasastra (1995). Jayasuriya, M. H. F. et al. (eds.) Bibliotheca Zeylanica Series I. Colombo,
Archaeological Survey of Sri Lanka and Central Cultural Fund.
Mann, W. A. (1993) Landscape Architecture: An Illustrated History in Timelines, Site Plans and Biography. New
York, Chichester, Brisbane, Toronto, Singapore, John Wiley and Sons Inc.
Mariage, T. (1986) L’univers de le Nostre et les origins de l’amenagement du territoire. Monuments Historiques,
No. 143, Fevrier/Mars.
Mayamata: An Indian Treatise on Housing, Architecture and Iconography (1985). Dagen, B. (tr.). New Delhi,
Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Scientific Research.
Moore, C. W., Mitchell, W. J. and Turnbull, W. (Jr.) (1993) The Poetics of Gardens (Fifth print 1997). Cambridge,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Mosser, M. (1991) The Impossible Quest for the Past: Thoughts on the Restoration of Gardens. In: Mosser, M
and Teyssot, G. (eds.) The History of Garden Design. London.
Mostafavi, M. (ed.) (2003) Landscape Urbanism: A Manual for the Machinic Landscape. London, Architectural
Press.
Murray, A. L. C. K. (1891) The Rock Paintings of Sigiri. Ceylon Literary Register, Vol. VI, No. 6: 85-86.
Myrdal-Runebjer, E. (1994) The Archaeology of Irrigated Agriculture: A Case Study of Vavalaveva – Sigiri
Mahaveva Irrigation System. In: Bandaranayake, S. and Mogren, M. (eds.) Further Studies in the Settlement
Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo, PGIAR, University of Kelaniya: pp. 159-171.
Nakagawa, T. (1990) Roof Styles at Polonnaruva, Sri Lanka. In: Seneviratne, S. et al. (eds.) Perspectives in
Archaeology: Leelananda Prematilleke Festschrift. University of Peradeniya, Department of Archaeology: pp.
121-125.
Nakagawa, T. (1991) Ancient Architecture of Sri Lanka: Studies on Planning and Restoration of Temple
Architecture in the Late Anuradhapura and Polonnaruva Period. Tokyo.
Paranavitana, S. (1944) Magul Uyana (Royal Park) of Ancient Anuradhapura. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
(Ceylon Branch), Vol. XXXVI, Part I, No. 97. Colombo, RAS (CB): 193-209.
Paranavitana, S. (1946) The Stupa in Ceylon, Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Vol. V. Colombo.
283 Reference List i

Paranavitana, S. (1950) Sigiriya, the Abode of a God King. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (Ceylon Branch),
New Series, Vol. 1. Colombo, RAS (CB): 129-183.
Paranavitana, S. (1953) The Sculpture of Man and Horse near Tissaveva at Anuradhapura, Ceylon. In: Artibus
Asiae, Vol. XVI, No. 3. Ascona (Switzerland): pp. 166-190.
Paranavitana, S. (1955) The Art and Architecture of the Polonnaruva Period. In: Saparamadu, S. D. (ed.) The
Ceylon Historical Journal: The Polonnaruva Period (3rd ed. 1973), Vol. IV. Dehiwala, Tisara Publishers: pp.
77-101.
Paranavitana, S. (1956) Sigiri Graffiti: Being Sinhalese Verses of the Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Centuries. Vol. I and
II. London, Oxford University Press.
Paranavitana, S. (1958) The God of the Adam’s Peak (2nd print). In: Artibus Asiae, Supplementum Vol. XVIII.
Ascona (Switzerland).
Paranavitana, S. (1959) Civilization of the Early Period: Religion, Literature and Arts. In: Paranavitana, S. et. al.
(eds.) University of Ceylon History of Ceylon, Vol. I, Part I. Colombo, Ceylon University Press: pp. 378-409.
Paranavitana, S. (1961) The Significance of the Paintings of Sigiriya. In: Artibus Asiae, Vol. XXIV, Nos. 3-4.
Ascona (Switzerland): pp. 382-387.
Paranavitana, S. (1966) Ceylon and Malaysia. Colombo, Lake House Investments Ltd.
Paranavitana, S. (1967) Sinhalayo (3rd ed. 1980). Colombo, Lake House Investments Ltd.
Paranavitana, S. (1971) The Greeks and the Mauryas. Colombo, Lake House Investments Ltd.
Paranavitana, S. (1972a) Glimpses of Ceylon’s Past. Colombo, Lake House Investments Ltd.
Paranavitana, S. (1972b) The Story of Sigiriya. Colombo, Lake House Investments Ltd.
Parker, H. (1909) Ancient Ceylon (2nd reprint 1984). New Delhi, J. Jetly.
Pechere, R. (1987) Jardins Dessines, Grammaire, Des Jardines. Brussels.
Perera, M. P. (1984) The Plane of Sigiriya in its Geographical Setting. In: Bandaranayake, S. (ed.) Sigiriya Project:
First Archeaological Excavation and Research Report, January-September 1982. Colombo, Central Cultural
Fund: pp. 228-232.
Prema, A. (2001) Mitigation of Hazardous Zones on the North and West Faces of the Sigiriya Rock [Unpublished
report submitted to the Central Cultural Fund]. Dehiwala, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau.
Premathilake, T. R. (2000) Late Quaternary Environmental History of the Horton Plains, Central Sri Lanka
[Unpublished Ph.D. thesis]. Stcokholm University, Department of Quaternary Research.
Prematilleke, L. and Karunaratne, L. K. (1993) Polonnaruva: The Medieval Capital. In: Guruge, A. W. P. et al.
(eds.) The Cultural Triangle of Sri Lanka. Colombo, UNESCO and Central Cultural Fund: pp. 86-111.
Prickett-Fernando, M. (1990) Durable Goods: The Archaeological Evidence of Sri Lanka’s Role in the Indian
Ocean Trade. In: Bandaranayake, S. et al. (eds.) Sri Lanka and the Silk Road of the Sea (2nd edition 2003).
Colombo, Sri Lanka Institute of International Relations, Central Cultural Fund and Sri Lanka National
Commission for UNESCO: pp. 53-76.
Priyanka, B. (1990) Readings of Hitherto Unread Graffiti on the Mirror Wall and in the Asana Guha at Sigiriya.
In: Bandaranayake, S., Mogren, M. and Epitawatte, S. (eds.) The Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-
Dambulla Region. Colombo, PGIAR, University of Kelaniya: pp. 203-218.
Priyanka, B. (1994) Sigiri Graffiti: New Readings. In: Bandaranayake, S. and Mogren, M. (eds.) Further Studies
in the Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo, PGIAR, University of Kelaniya: pp.
199-223.
Priyanka, B. (2005) Meaning of the Sigiriya Paintings. Colombo, Godage International Publishers.
Priyanka, B. (2010) Recently Deciphered Records from the Mirror Wall at Sigiriya. Colombo, Godage International
Publishers.
Ratnayake, H. (1990) The Jetavana Treasure. In: Bandaranayake, S. et. al. (eds.) Sri Lanka and the Silk Road of the
Sea (2nd edition 2003). Colombo, Sri Lanka Institute of International Relations, Central Cultural Fund and
Sri Lanka National Commission for UNESCO: pp. 37-51.
Reh, W. (1996) Arcadia en Metropolis: Het Landschaps Experiment van de Verlichting (Arcadia and Metropolis:
The Landscape Experiment of the Enlightenment). Delft, Publikatieburo Bouwkunde.
Reh, W., Steenbergen, C. and Aten, D. (2007) Sea of Land: The Polder as an Atlas of Dutch Landscape
Architecture. Stiching Uitgeverij Nood-Holland.
Rhys Davids, T. W. (1875) Sigiri, the Lion Rock near Pulastipura, Ceylon, and the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the
Mahawamsa. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (GB and I), New Series, Vol. VII: 191-209, notes 209-219.
Selvaratnam and Perera (ed.) (1992) Sigiriya Project: Conservation Progress Report – 1982. Colombo, Central
Cultural Fund.
Seneviratne, A. (1983) Kandy (2nd edition 1993). Colombo, Central Cultural Fund.
284 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

Seneviratne A. (1991) The Ritualization of Buddhist Architecture in Sri Lanka. In: Vatsyayan, K. (ed.) Concept of
Space: Ancient and Modern. New Delhi, Indira Gandhi National Center for Arts: pp. 363-380.
Shepherd, J. C. and Jellicoe, G. A. (1986) Italian Gardens of the Renaissance. London, Alec Tiranti Ltd.
Silva, R. (1984) Note on the Project. In: Bandaranayake, S. (1984) Sigiriya Project: First Archaeological
Excavation and Research Report, January-September 1982. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund.
Silva, R. (1988) Religious Architecture in Early and Medieval Sri Lanka. Colombo.
Silva, R. (1993) The Cultural Triangle: International Safeguarding Campaign. In: Guruge, A. W. P. et. al. (eds.) The
Cultural Triangle of Sri Lanka. Colombo, UNESCO and Central Cultural Fund: pp. 176-193.
Silva, R. (1995) Comparison of the Forty Seven ‘Pancavasa’ Monastery Plans with Archaeological Material.
In: Jayasuriya, M. H. F. et al. (eds.) Manjusri Vastuvidyasastra, Bibliotheca Zeylanica Series I. Colombo,
Archaeological Survey of Sri Lanka and Central Cultural Fund: pp. 215-273.
Silva, R. (2000) Development of Ancient Cities in Sri Lanka with Special Reference to Anuradhapura. In:
Gunawardane, R. A. L. H. et. al. (eds.) Reflections on a Heritage: Historical Scholarship on Pre-modern Sri
Lanka. Colombo, Central Cultural Fund & Ministry of Cultural and Religious Affairs: pp. 49-81.
Silva, R. (2004) Thupa, Thupaghara and Thupa-Prasada. Memoires of the Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Vol. X,
Part II. Colombo, Department of Archaeology.
Silva, R. (2006) Environment, Town, Village and Monastic Planning. Memoires of the Archaeological Survey of
Ceylon, Vol. X, Part I. Colombo, Department of Archaeology.
Silva, R. (2008) Ancient and Medieval Monastic Architecture of Sri Lanka. In: Tokyo National Museum (ed.)
Cultural Heritage of Sri Lanka: The Land of Serendipity. Tokyo, The Yomiuri Shimbun: pp. 228-232.
Silva, R. and Guruge, A. W. P. (n.d.) The Safeguarding of the Cultural Triangle of Sri Lanka: Prospects and Progress.
Colombo, UNESCO and Ministry of Cultural Affairs, Sri Lanka.
Sirr, H. C. (1850) Ceylon and the Cingalese, 2 Vols. London, W. Sholberl.
Somadasa, T. B. (1982) Sigiriya Water Garden Survey: Plan No. 2145. Kandy.
Somathilake, M. (2008) Sigiriya: A Re-examination. Archaeologia: Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 4. Kelaniya,
Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya: 19-41.
Smienk, G. and Niemeijer, J. (2011). Palladio, the Villa and the Landscape. Basel, Birkhauser.
Steenbergen, C. (1990) De Stap Over de Horizon: Een Onleding van het Formele Ontwerp in de
Landschapsarchitectuur (The Step Over the Horizon: An Analysis of the Formal Design in Landscape
Architecture). Delft, Publikatieburo Bouwkunde.
Steenbergen, C. (2008) Composing Landscapes: Analysis, Typology and Experiments for Design. Basal, Berlin,
Boston, Birkhauser Publishers.
Steenbergen, C. and Bobbink, I. (2009) The Polder Atlas of the Netherlands: Pantheon of the Low Lands. Bussum,
Thoth Publishers.
Steenbergen, C. and Reh, W. (1996) Architecture and Landscape: The Design Experiments of the Great European
Gardens and Landscapes. Bussum, Thoth Publishers.
Steenbergen, C. and Reh, W. (2002) The Composition of New Landscapes. In: Steenbergen, C. et al. (eds.)
Architectural Design and Composition. Bussum, Thoth Publishers: pp. 192-207.
Steenbergen, C. and Reh, W. (2003) Architecture and Landscape: The Design Experiments of the Great European
Gardens and Landscapes (revised and expanded edition). Basal, Berlin, Boston, Birkhauser Publishers.
Steenbergen, C. and Reh, W. (2011) Metropolitan Landscape Architecture: Urban Parks and Landscapes.
Bussum, Thoth Publishers.
Steenbergen, C. and Reh, W. (2012) Architecture, Landscape and City: The Design Experiment of the
Metropolitan Landscape. Basal, Berlin, Boston, Birkhauser Publishers.
Still, J. (1907) Ancient Capitals of Ceylon. Colombo, H. W. Caves.
Strong, R. (1979) The Renaissance Garden in England. London, Thames and Hudson.
Sunnemark, E. and Wik, S. (1997) Boulder Garden, Sigiriya: A Survey of the Cut Marks in One Boulder Cluster.
[Unpublished Masters Degree essay]. Department of Archaeology, Stockholm University.
Tennent, J. E. (1859) Ceylon: An Account of the Island, Vol. 2. London, Longman, Green, Longman and Roberts.
Thacker, C. (1979) The History of Gardens. London, Croom Helm.
Tildon, S. J. (ed.) (2006). The Glory of Gardens: 2000 Years of Writings on Garden Design. New York, Abrams Inc.
Tobey, G. B. (1973) A History of Landscape Architecture: The Relationship of People to Environment. New York,
London, Amsterdam, American Elsevier Publishing Company Inc.
Turner, T. (2005) Garden History: Philosophy and Design 2000 BC-2000 AD. London, New York, Spon Press.
UDA, Urban Development Authority (1989) Development Plan for Sigiriya Heritage City, Vol. I and II. Colombo,
Ministry of Policy Planning and Implementation.
Upavana Vinodaya (1964). Kaviratne, H. (tr.). Colombo, M. D. Gunasena & Co.
285 Reference List i

UNESCO, (2008) Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention. Paris, World
Heritage Center.
Van Asbeck, J. B. B. (1976) Het Loo: The Dutch Treat – English Queen Influences Restoration of Netherlands
Estate. In: Preservation and Restoration of Historic Gardens and Landscapes, Landscape Architecture. USA:
5-13.
Van der Ree, P., Smienk, G. and Steenbergen, C. (1992) Italian Villas and Gardens. Amsterdam, Thoth Publishers.
Van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J. E. (1979) The Rock-cut Sculpture at Isurumuni. Ancient Ceylon, No. 3. Colombo,
Department of Archaeology: 321-362.
Van Voorden, F. 2001. Ancient City of Sigiriya, Sri Lanka – Environmental Impact Assesment: Quick Scan
[unpublished report submitted to ICOMOS]. Delft.
Van Voorden, F. and Kwast, B. (1997) Neercanne: Towards a Definition of a Dynamic Composition and Its
Characteristics. In: de Jong, E. (ed.) Restoration of Baroque Gardens: Tuinkunst – Dutch Year Book of the
History of Garden and Landscape Architecture, No. 2. Amsterdam, Architectura and Natura: pp. 51-59.
Vitanage, P. W. (1959) Geology of the Country around Polonnaruva. Colombo, Department of Mineralogy.
Von Meiss, P. (1986) De la Forme au Lieu. Lusanne: Press Polytechniques Romandes (translated as Elements of
Architecture: From Form to Place, 1990 (reprint 1998). London, E & FN Spon.
Wagaachchi, D. (2005) Sigiri Ketapath Pavure Pitupasa Sengavunu Lalanavo (Ladies Hidden on the Outer
Surface of the Mirror Wall at Sigiriya). Art Journal, Vol. 59. Colombo, Sri Lanka Arts Council: 1-14.
Weerakkody, D. P. M. (1986) Classical Reference in the Interlinear Inscriptions from Sri Lanka. Ancient Ceylon,
No. 6. Colombo, Department of Archaeology: 259-273.
Weerakkody, D. P. M. (1990) Sri Lanka through Greek and Roman Eyes. In: Bandaranayake, S. et. al. (eds.)
Sri Lanka and the Silk Road of the Sea (2nd edition 2003). Colombo, Sri Lanka Institute of International
Relations, Central Cultural Fund and Sri Lanka National Commission for UNESCO: pp. 155-163.
Weerasinghe, J. (2010) The ‘Apsaras’ of Political Promises: A Re-reading of the Meaning and Function of 5th
Century ‘Apsara’ Mural at Sigiriya. In: Gunawardhana, P. et. al. (eds.) Sirinimal Lakdusinghe Felicitation
Volume. Battaramulla, Neptune Publications: pp. 231-240.
Wickramasekera, C. (1990) The Sigiri Oya and Mirisgoni Oya Basins. In: Bandaranayake, S., Mogren, M.
and Epitawatte, S. (eds.) The Settlement Archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla Region. Colombo, PGIAR,
University of Kelaniya: pp. 93-104.
Wijesuriya, G. (1998) Buddhist Meditation Monasteries of Ancient Sri Lanka. Colombo, Department of
Archaeology.
Wittkower, R. (1949) Architectural Principles in the Age of Humanism (4th edition 1988). London, Academy
Edition.
Woodbridge, K. (1970) Landscape and Antiquity: Aspects of English Culture at Stourhead: 1718 to 1838. Oxford.
Woodbridge, K. (1982) The Stourhead Landscape. Hampshire, The National Trust.
Yong, D. and Yong, M. (2005) Japanese Garden. Singapore, Tuttle Publishing.
286 The Sigiriya Royal Gardens i

The
Sigiriya
Royal
Gardens
06
2012
The Sigiriya Royal Gardens
Analysis of the Landscape Architectonic Composition
Nilan Cooray
06
Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Architecture, 2012
Department of Urbanism