MORAL DILEMMA IN THE 
BODIDSATTV A IDEAL: ARE-
READING OF VESSANTARA 
JATAKA TALE 
Suwanna Satha-Anand
1 
Abstract 
This article offers an analysis of various 
situations of moral dilemma generated by 
the Bodhisattva ideal of extreme self-
sacrifice, with special reference to the 
career of V essantara. The analysis focuses 
on the dilemmas resulting from his 
marvelous giving of gifts (dana), as a 
prince of a kingdom, as a royal son to his 
parents, as a husband and as a father. 
Emphasis will be directed to the various 
lines of reasoning, both supportive and 
oppositional to the gift giving, voiced by 
the people around him who were directly 
effected by his generosity. Finally, some 
possibilities for reconciliation will be 
explored. 
Introductory note 
Thai Buddhists in general hold the view 
that the ideal of a bodhisattva, a being 
working on becoming a fully-enlightened 
one in the future, is more central to the 
traditions of Mahayana Buddhism than to 
the 
Theravada 
School of Thailand. 
However, many Buddhist scholars have 
pointed out the fact that the story of 
V essantara bodhisattva has been the most 
popular Buddhist tale in Thai society 
1 Ph.D., Faculty of Arts Chulalongkom University 
throughout her long history.
2 The tale of 
the 
great giving of V essantara, the 
penultimate life of Prince Sidhatta the 
future Buddha, has been transmitted in the 
Thet Mahachat chant festival throughout 
the kingdom for centuries. It has been 
popular both among the general populace 
and among the elite in the royal court. The 
story of Vessantara's career is also widely 
depicted in many temple murals in all 
regions of the land. As a major narrative in 
Thai cultural life for centuries, the general 
(pre-critical) understanding of this great 
Buddhist tale has been one of awe and 
admiration for his great self-sacrifice. 
Though there has been some uneasiness 
expressed in response to the giving away 
of wife and children of Vessantara, the 
general orientation of responses seems to 
be one of admiring acceptance, with the 
importance of the narrative centering on 
the 
generosity 
of Vessantara? 
The 
2 Steven Collins. 1998. Nirvana and other 
Buddhist Felicities. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University Press, pp.497-498. According to 
Brereton's research published in 1995, a recent 
catalog of Lan Na (Northern) Thai manuscripts, 
396 out of 2,700 (14%) were devoted to the 
Vessantara Jataka. (Ibid.,p.,498) Also, please 
take note of K.rompraya Damrongrajanupab. 
B.E.2460. "The Legend of Thet Mahachat", 
Mahachat Royal Chant. Bangkok: Rongpim 
Thai. 
3 See an interesting example of research 
questioning the moral adequacy of many 
bodhisattvas, including Vessantara in Rassagala 
Seewali Thero. B.£.2542. A Critical Study of 
Ethical Problems of Bodhisattva s Karuna in 
Jataka Stories. Bangkok: Mahachulalongkom 
Rajavidyalaya University. See also a defense of 
Vessantara's gift-giving in Phra Pimonlatham 
(Chob 
Anujareemahathera). 
B.E.2533. 
Vessantara Jataka Review. Bangkok: K.rongkarn 
Moonnithi Hortri (Hortri Foundation Project). 
In my view, a questioning in the frrst book and a 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
dramatic movements of the story are 
punctuated by each act of giving of 
Vessantara, beginning with the auspicious 
elephant, 
to 
his 
giving 
the 
seven 
marvelous gifts, his children and finally 
his wife, Madsi. In the middle of the story 
is the departure from his city and the 
journey toward the forest. At the end, the 
family reunites and everything given away 
is restored to Vessantara. 
This article is an attempt to "re-read" the 
story from other perspectives, namely 
from the perspectives of those around 
Vessantara, rather than from Vessantara 
himself. This new center of focus will 
form the basis for an analysis of the 
different reasons voiced by the people of 
Sipi, Ktng Sonchai, Queen Pussadi, Madsi 
and Ganha-Chalie. By turning the center 
of analysis to these people's voices, the 
different I evels of moral dilemma can be 
clarified and discussed. 
The purpose of my analysis is not to 
belittle the great generosity of Vessantara, 
but simply to open up a new vista for 
understanding this important jataka. In 
fact, the ethos of moral dilemma is clearly 
expressed in the text and several Buddhist 
scholars have pointed out some aspects of 
the moral conflicts inherent in the text. I 
hope that the bringing forth of the various · 
levels of moral dilemma would help 
provide an intimate point of contact 
between this great tale and the present 
generation of audience in contemporary 
life. I also hope that the two extremes of 
negation of anything traditional on the one 
hand, and a non-critical acceptance of 
anything inherited on the other, would be 
better balanced in· this process of re-
defense in the second one indicate a sense of 
uneasiness 
with 
Vessantara's 
seemingly 
extreme generosity. 
84 
orientation and re-appropriation of the 
story.
4 
Scope of Analysis of a Composite Text 
The term ''jataka , ·literally means "birth 
story. " It indicates a set of birth stories 
narrating the previous lives of the Buddha 
when he was born in human form or 
animal performing certain acts of self-
sacrifice in order to perfect attributes of a 
bodhisattva. These tales were collected 
into one group of texts in the Khuttaka 
Nikaya, comprising the last section of 
Sutta in the Tripitaka. 
It is generally 
understood 
that 
these 
stories 
were 
originally folktales used by the Buddha 
and his disciples for teaching the dhamma 
to the people. Later, these stories were 
collected and the main characters were 
infused with the idea of a former birth of 
the future Buddha.5 In other words, the 
See an interesting treatment of similar 
problems as viewed from within the Confucian 
traditions in Alan Chan. 1984. "Philosophical 
Hermeneutics and the Analects: The Paradigm 
of Tradition", Philosophy East and West. 
Vol.34 No.4, October 1984, pp.421-436. 
Although the "content" of the problem is 
different, the need to search for a prope~ 
transmission of one's tradition is always 
pertinent to a people who wish to avoid the 
two extreme positjons of total negation and un-
critical acceptance. In this sense the article by 
Alan Chan is highly relevant to our discussion 
in this paper. 
5 Uthong Prasartwinitchai. B.E. 2545. Te Cha 
Su Ne Ma: Roaming the Ten Births Through 
Mural Paintings. Bangkok: Khanapuggala 
Narnrin, 
pp.9-12. According to 
Uthong, 
"During the time of the Buddha, these stories 
were probably folk tales widely known among 
the peoples. The Buddha and his disciples 
probably used these tales to teach dhamma. 
Later a connection was created to link these 
stories with the career building paths of the 

Buddhist infusion is a later addition to the 
original folktales, thus creating a genre 
called "jataka" or birth story. The origins 
of these tales give rise to the question 
whether, and to what extent, these birth 
stories could be analyzed as representing 
"Buddhist philosophy." If and when we 
use these stories as expressing Buddhist 
philosophy, then do we not need to 
exercise 
caution 
in 
claiming 
full 
philosophical authority for the birth 
stories, as much as we do for other 
articulations like the Theory of Dependent 
Origination or the Three Characteristics of 
Existence? 
Second, we must take into consideration 
the fact that the Vessantara Jataka Tale has 
been chanted by popular monk chanters in 
different regions in the country for 
centuries. As a result, there are several 
hundred versions of the same story with 
different 
emphasis, 
elaboration, 
and 
interpretation. The "core" or common 
components remain relatively constant, 
namely, that the Prince Vessantara gives 
away the auspicious elephant of his 
kingdom to Brahmins from a neighboring 
land, is later expelled from his palace ·and, 
together with his wife and children, live in 
the forest. Again, he gives away his 
children to an old brahmin by the name of 
Jujaka, and finally his wife to the Lord 
Indra disguised as a brahmin. At the end of 
the story everything given away is 
returned to him. However, among the 
different chant versions, the nuances in the 
interpretations and elaborations are most 
telling. For example, Arnittada in some of 
the Northern versions does not give in to 
bodhisattvas in the Buddha's previous lives. 
These infusions were achieved by adding the 
beginning and the ending to the original 
stories." 
85 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
her fate of being the wife of an old 
brahmin as easily as those versions from 
the central region. When a text is 
transmitted through so many different oral 
versions, an analysis which is based on 
one particular version of the text needs to 
be credited with only relative authority. 
Third, the particular text used for analysis 
in this article is itself a composite text, 
collected and selected for reasons of 
literary merit and because of the cultural 
and political authority oft he c omposers.6 
The book Vessantara Jataka: A Royal 
Chant is comprised of 13 
chapters 
composed by distinguished authors like the 
royal poet Krompra Poramanuchitchinoros, 
Chao Praya Praklang, and King Rama IV. 
When this text is analyzed, it is analyzed 
as a whole, leaving aside the issue of the 
different authorship collected into one 
composite text. <It would be very awkward 
to offer analysis of a passage from one 
chapter composed by one author and then 
the analysis to shift to the authority or 
intention of another when analyzing 
another chapter in the same book.) 
Finally, given my limited knowledge in 
the Pali language, I still have not crossed-
checked 
this 
particular version of the 
Vessantara Jataka with the original Pali. 
Therefore, this article as yet cannot fathom 
the 
different 
nuances 
of meanmgs 
6 Vessantara Jataka: A Royal Chant of 13 
Chapters. 
Bangkok: 
Dhammabannakarn 
{Dhammabannakam Publisher), B.E.2521. Please 
take note of the preface saying, "Vessantara 
Jataka is considered a piece of classic 1bai 
literature. This is because it was composed by 
several leading sages of our land .... (We can 
understand) in what way all 13 chapters of this 
Ten Birth stories are so exquisitely composed and 
(why they would) enjoy undying appreciation." 
Insert added. 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
presumed to exist in the translation-
composition of the 13 chapters. That will 
need much more effort and perhaps will 
answer a different set of questions which 
are beyond the scope of this paper. 
Moral Dilemma Defined 
The term "moral dilemma" in this article 
indicates 
self-contradictory 
moral 
requirements established within one and 
the same particular ethical system. Both 
moral requirements are "good," and a 
negation of either choice would be equally 
unsatisfactory. In this sense, a moral 
dilemma is more problematic than a moral 
conflict as the latter indicates different sets 
of moral requirements in different ethical 
universes. A negation of 9ne choice would 
not create a problem for the whole 
particular ethical system. It is a matter of 
choosing one ethical system over another. 
While in the case of a moral dilemma, one 
could still be self-contradictory, if one 
follows the moral requirements of one and 
the same ethical system. For example, as a 
bodhisattva V essantara needs to give away 
his children, so as to perfect himself to 
become 
enlightened 
in 
the 
future. 
However, as a father, it is immoral of him 
to create such suffering for his children, 
simply to fulfill his own wish to be 
enlightened in the future. Both being a 
loving father and being a bodhisattva are 
~'good" in the Buddhist ethical system. 
Thus we have a moral dilemma, not just 
moral conflict.7 
7 I wish to thank Dr.Warayuth Sriwarakul for 
this observation that there is no mo.ral dilerruna 
in Kantian ethics as there is always a "way out" 
of a situation of "moral conflicts." In his view, 
Vessantara's acts of giving do not posit a 
"moral dilemma" as he does have a choice. 
However, it is still not clear to me why 
V essantara 's choices do not in a very impprtant 
sense violate other moral requirements within 
86 
Situations of Moral Dilemmas in the 
Text 
Before offering an analysis of the moral 
dilemma in the career of Vessantara, it is 
necessary to highlight certain passages 
from the text to illustrate the various 
situations of moral dilemma, both for 
Vessantara himself as well as for those 
around him who are directly effected by 
his great gift giving. We begin with the 
moral dilemma genera ted as a prince and 
thus putting King Sonchai, his father, into 
a moral dilemma; then the moral dilemma 
generated as a royal son to his mother, 
Queen Pussadi, then as husband to Madsi, 
then as a father to his children; and lastly, 
as himself in an interesting episode of 
emotional inner-fighting with Vessantara 
himself. 
As a Prince 
After Vessantara gave away the auspicious 
elephant to Brahmins from a foreign land, 
the people of Sipi created an uproar and 
came m large crowds to petition King 
Sonchai. 
_All the peoples of the land, from 
the city and the up-country, the carriage 
masters, the craftsmen, 
the military, 
gathered in the plaza, started to speak in a 
Buddhism itself. If they do, the occasion already 
constitutes a moral dilemma in my definition. I 
will therefore, stick to the definition outlined in 
the article until there is more time to explore 
this point further. (Dr.Warayuth gave this 
comment for the presentation of this paper in 
Thai at the Philosophy Department Seminar in 
honor of Dr.Wit Witsadawes and Dr.Sunthom 
NaRangsi's 6th cycle commemoration at the 
Faculty of Arts, Chulalongkorn University, 14-
15 November 2002.) 

loud voice to King Sonchai: Your Royal 
Highness, Lord of Sipi, now, your son 
Vessantara has committed wrong, has 
violated a royal tradition of old. This 
elephant should have been kept for the 
kingdom. He has created this rage among 
the people. If you were top rotect h im, it 
could prove dangerous for yourself 
Upon hearing those words, the 
King was very angry, as if engulfed in fire. 
He thus said to all the peoples, "My son 
has committed wrong, has violated a royal 
tradition of old by giving the auspicious 
elephant to the begging Brahmins. You use 
that to accuse him in such anger. 
However, it would be inappropriate to 
execute him with a wooden plank (of 
aromatic wood), neither is it suitable to 
use a weapon. " The peoples then s aid to 
the King, "In that case, he should be 
expelled from the city. " 8 
As a Son: A Mother's Defense with 
Vessantara and Madsi 
"0 Vessantara, my beloved son! 
You never have had to face a punishment. 
You always try to create great benefits. 
Days and n ights, you never overlook one 
beggar. What is it with the peoples? It is 
not their business to be so angry with you, 
accusing you so loudly, disturbing the 
whole palace. How could your father 
listen to them? 
"My son, if you are to be expelled 
from the palace, every day I will hold tight 
my breasts. I wilf. hang myself to death. 
You are not guilty at all. Why all this 
anger in the whole city?" 
8 Vessantara Jataka in I 3 Chapters. Bangkok: 
Bannakarn. B.E.2521, pp.29-30. (All translation 
of the text into English is done by the author.) 
87 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
"Where else can one find such a 
fine son? Your heart is pure, set only to 
give." 
"You are all duly cultivated in the 
different arts." 
"Your glory is recognized in all 
directions. Other heads of kingdoms all 
accept your glory and pay you their 
tributes in abundance. " 
"The kingdom is wealthy, the 
peoples are all happy. " 
"Why is it that the peoples are 
jealous and accuse you to your father and 
cause such anger in him? "9 
As a Son: A Mother's Defense with 
King Sonchai 
"Our young son has violated 
(ministerial) protocol in his giving away 
the auspicious elephant. The penalty is 
expulsion from the kingdom. " 
"The auspicious elephant cannot 
be found in any other land. It was found in 
our land where our glorious son is. Even if 
we expel our son from the kingdom, it does 
not mean that we will have the elephant 
back. " 
"How could you listen to foul 
words from the peoples. They accused our 
son and your anger could only create 
more trouble. " 
"You m us t exercise great caution 
now. When there is an emergency the 
peoples can be of no help. Neither can the 
elephant. Only your family could sacrifice 
their lives for you. " (Or your family could 
face death because of you/with you. ") 
"Our store of marit might yet 
find us another elephant so auspicious 
for our kingdom. But where can we 
find another son so dear?" 
9 Ibid., pp.46-4 7. 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
"Once your s on is departed from 
Your Royal Highness, who else could act 
as your eyes and ears? Our kingdom will 
be as deserted as a crow 's nest (once the 
chicks are gone.) " 
"You yourself are advanced in 
age. Your throne will be thrown into 
chaos." 
"It is like a mango tree with fruits 
plentiful. The ripe, sweet-smelling fruits 
will only drop to the ground, without 
anyone having even to look up the tree and 
ask for the fruits. The crowds of peoples 
would just pick them up and eat them all. 
All your treasures will be gone as you are 
without an heir. " 
"As for the court officials, it is 
difficult to rely on their loyalty. When we 
are in power, they come to us, asking to be 
of use, chorusing words of glory day and 
night. Once we make mistakes, they would 
only make things worse. We would be like 
a royal swan with broken wings falling 
into a ditch. The crows would come and 
eat on us." 
"If you are displeased with me 
and choose to believe the peoples, then 
please punish me to death. Only then you 
expel our son from the kingdom. Even if 
our son were guilty, I am beyond blame. 
Please have mercy on me, your loyal wife. 
Please forgive our dears on, just for this 
One time. "10 
As a Husband: Madsi Insisting to 
Depart for the Forest with Vessantara 
The followings 
are Madsi's reasons 
expressed to Vessantara. 
"Is there a tradition of letting a 
royal husband living in isolation in the 
10 Ibid., pp.50-52. <Words in parenthesis are 
added for clarification by this author.) 
88 
forest? Is it possible for a prince to depart 
for the forest all by himself? " 
"Whichever deep jungle your 
highness ventures into, I, your faithful 
servant, will follow you. I will not stay 
behind. I will spend my life and my body 
serving your highness in gratitude, until 
the end of my day. " 
"Even when the food is scarce, 
having to live only on fruits, I am willing 
to endure the hardship in your service. " 
"I think nothing of using up my 
life for you, serving you as golden shoes 
under your royal feet. " 
"If you were not to allow me to 
follow you, I, Madsi, will set up a fire and 
jump into it. Death looks better. " 
"Death would be better than 
facing the gossip of the peoples, who 
would judge me a wife only in time of 
comfort. When it is a time of trouble, the 
wife only enjoys her I ife of I eisure in the 
palace. " 
"If there were to be a danger of 
death, I, in front of your highness, will 
rush toward death as a token of gratitude 
for you. "
11 
In other passages, we find a continuation 
of Madsi's reasons to follow Vessantara 
into the jungle. The following are said to 
Madsi's parents-in-law. 
"Nobody cares about my royal 
husband in trouble. How could I rest in 
comfort in the palace? The peoples would 
only laugh at me. I, Madsi, would not 
know how to look at anyone in the eyes. It 
is better to endure the hardship in the 
forest. I will !fSe my hands and legs as 
knives thrashing clear the bushes in the 
Himavat. Your royal feet will noi be 
II Ibid., p.37. 

soiled. If I were to stay behind, I feared 
being a widow. " 
"A widow left behind by the 
husband is a sorrowful existence. It would 
be natural for h er to feel the passion for 
love inside. " 
"Having a husband is like having 
a crystal tiered umbrella above one's 
head, constantly enhancing one's honor. 
Being a widow still young can never rest 
in peace. It is like a deserted gem, soiled 
with dots of stain, even at low price, it 
would not attract a buyer. Even if there 
were a buyer, he would be embarrassed to 
put the gem on. " 
"Where else could I ever find a 
husband like your highness? Even a 
hundred deaths would not find me another 
sage like Vessantara. "12 
As a Father: Beseeching Wails from 
Chalie-Ganha 
Chalie suggests to his sister Ganha to hold 
their breath in embrace, and die together. 
"Ganha, my dear sister, why 
should we live on to face these sufferings 
inflicted by this Brahmin. He only hits us, 
giving us pain. A drop of milk never 
reaches our lips. Ganha my dear sister, let 
us embrace, hold our breath and die 
together as an escape from this evil 
Brahmin." 
Ganha wails to her father. 
"How could you remain so calm, 
so silent in the midst of my plea for your 
help to save my-life?" 
Of What a pitiful sight! Royal 
Ganha cries so hard, her tears snaking 
down her cheeks, beseeching her father, 
12 Ibid., pp.68-71. 
89 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
"My dear father, are you disowning me? 
How could you remain so calm and silent, 
letting that despicable Brahmin hit me and 
drag me on, right in front of your eyes. 
Was I born daughter of a slave? That 
Brahmin is no I onger a Brahmin, he hits 
me so hard. This old man is so evil. 
Perhaps he was a demon disguising 
himself as a beggar. His beatings cause 
me unbearable pain. He threatens me, he 
shouts at me, he causes me pain. He will 
tear me up into pieces and eat me up. But 
he cannot do that right away, so he 
pretends to beat me with the stick until you 
cannot see me anymore. Then he will 
break my neck, throw it on the ground. He 
will tear me to pieces, drink my blood and 
eat me up. My father, my lord, if you n o 
longer love me, I will bid thee farewell. 
Don't feel sad if I were to say to you let us 
not be reborn father-daughter again. Have 
no doubt that my blood and flesh will be 
food for this foul Brahmin. "1 3 
Vessantara 's Dilemma with Himself 
"My two beloved children are like 
a calm water, provoked into unsettling 
waves by the contemptuous beatings of the 
Brahmin. 
Vessantara 's calm mind is 
rudely awakened from his equanimity. 
Ignorance clouds his wisdom. He is 
frustrated with anger and delusion. His · 
anger ignites immediate intention of 
violence. He threatens the Brahmin: "Hey, 
you foul brahmin, you have overstepped 
your boundary. How could you beat up my 
children, right in front of me, their father. 
You Brahmin, I did not come here in the 
forest empty-handed. I brought with me my 
sword, bow and arrows. " He took up the 
weapons in his hand, trembling with 
anger, saying to himself, "Shall I kill this 
13 Ibid., pp.230-232. 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
Brahmin?" He feels great frustration 
within. 
Later on, he reflects on the great 
tradition of past buddhas and comes to the 
realization that, "I am here to build my 
career by perfecting the great children-
giving. " When his wisdom is regained, he 
says to himself, "Behold, V essantara, do 
not hesitate. You and I are fighting each 
other. This should not be. I already gave 
my children away, how is it possible to 
claim them back?" The Lord Vessantara 
re-establishes his mind, suppressing his 
sorrow. When his sorrow wanes, his face 
becomes radiant and pure. He then looks 
golden, as if with body molted ingold by 
someone, having been put there in the 
ashram. "14 
Different Faces of Moral Dilemma in 
Vessantara Jataka 
Vessantara's 
g1vmg 
away 
of 
the 
auspicious elephant to brahmins from a 
foreign land has created great anger 
among the peoples of Sipi. 15 The text tells 
us that people from the city, from 
up-
country, the military, the craftsmen all 
gathered in the city to show their anger, 
reasoning with the King that Vessantara 
has "violated royal tradition of the past." 
Judging from the response of the King, it 
seems fair to say that the King himself 
14 Ibid., pp.228-229. 
15 There are attempts to justify Vessantara's 
action of giving away the elephant as indicating 
his practical wisdom of protecting his own 
kingdom in light of a dangerous situation of 
inter-state competition for dominance. It shows 
his "political prowess." See, for example, Phra 
Pimontham 
(Chob 
Anujaree-rnahathera). 
B.E.2533. Prarithat Vessantara Jataka (A 
Review Of Vessantara Jataka). Bangkok: 
Krongkam Moonnithi Hohtri, pp.35-41. 
90 
accepted the reason put forth by the 
people. As a bodhisattva with intent on 
future enlightenment, V essantara's giving 
of the elephant is "natural." As a prince of 
the kingdom, he is supposed to protect the 
interests of the realm, and not to give away 
the elephant. Is itbeyond reason to suggest 
that in the eyes of the peoples, the elephant 
does not belong to V essantara in his 
personal capacity? The elephant belongs to 
the kingdom, and therefore, it is not for 
Vessantara to give it away. Is it not 
reasonable to conclude that when King 
Sonchai accepts the proposal of the people 
to expel V essantara, he is also accepting 
the anger of the peoples? Thus, is he, by 
implication, accepting the reason why the 
peoples are so angry with Vessantara? On 
the other hand, if Vesantara considers the 
elephant his own personal belonging, why 
is it that the people got the wrong idea the 
elephant belongs to the kingdom? Even so, 
it does not necessarily mean that the 
elephant belongs to the people. It could 
very well belong to the royal household, 
not the people. If this were the case, why 
is it that King Sonchai seems to give in to 
the reasoning of the people? 
This moral dilemma of Vessantara has 
created a situation of moral dilemma for 
his father as well. As a father, he naturally 
wishes to protect his own son. As a king, 
his kingdom's interest is paramount. When 
King Sonchai "agrees" with the people 
that Vessantara has violated a "royal 
tradition" of the past, he has decided to be 
king first, not first as father to V esssantara. 
It is important to note that the penalty of 
capital punishment came from the mouth 
of the King, not the people. He said, "To 
execute (Vessantara) with sandal wood 
plank is inappropriate, neither so with 
weapon." The focus here seems to be that 
it is the methods which are inappropriate, 
not the death penalty itself. The people 

then said, "In that case, (Vessantara) 
should be expelled from the city." King 
Sonchai seems to accept the verdict, 
without 
expressing 
any 
protest, 
or 
disagreement. He only said, "It is now 
quite late, let's wait until tomorrow. We 
will ask him to leave tomorrow." King 
Sonchai' s verdict on Vessantara is a 
judgment of a king, who needs to protect 
royal tradition of the past. That royal duty 
seems to carry more weight than to protect 
his son as a father. The best he could do as 
a father was to mitigate the punishment, 
from the death penalty to expulsion. In the 
text, there was no description of his doubt, 
or reluctance or sorrow as a father. In this 
situation 
of 
moral 
dilemma, 
King 
Sonchai' s 
choice 
IS 
clear. 
As 
for 
V essantara, the choice between being a 
royal prince and practicing generosity by 
giving the elephant is also clear. The aim 
for future enlightenment is paramount. 
The situation is very different when we 
listen to Queen Pussadi's reasons to 
protect her son. She is adamant that 
Vessantara is innocent. It is "none o f the 
business" of the people to put forth such 
accusation 
against Vessantara. 
"King 
Sonchai only too readily accepted the 
allegation." In the eyes of the Queen 
Mother, Vessantara is well-trained in the 
arts and sciences of a prince. His honor 
and glory are for all to see. Lords of 
different minor kingdoms all come to pay 
their tributes. For this reason, it is 
unacceptable for the people who are 
"jealous" of Vessantara to put forth that 
accusation against him. In the eyes of the 
Queen mother, it is not the "right" of the 
people to judge Vessantara. We should 
also notice that the only guilt of King 
Sonchai was to "give in" to the people's 
allegation. Moreover, not only do they not 
have the "right" to accuse him, they are 
even "ungrateful," as it is due to 
91 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
Vessantara's glory, both worldly and 
dhammic, that "the kingdom is wealthy, 
the people everywhere happy." If the well-
being of the people is due to Vessatara's 
glory, 
then the 
angry expulsion of 
Vessantara would certainly indicate a 
severe lack of gratitude on the part of the 
people. In this sense, the people are guilty, 
not Vessantara. 
It is interesting, however, to notice the 
different reasons used 
when 
Queen 
Pussadi is talking to Vessantara and Madsi 
and when she is reasoning with King 
Sonchai. The speech to her husband king 
started with admission of their "young" 
son's guilt. But the phrase for the violation 
has been changed from "royal tradition of 
the past" to "violation of some ministerial 
regulation." This initial saying emphasizes 
the fact that their son is still "young" and 
his guilt is far from grave, as the admitted 
violation is one of violation of some 
administrative regulation, not the sacred 
royal tradition. Then Queen Pussadi brings 
up the problem of the future of the throne, 
the 
foreseeable 
danger which could 
confront the King himself and his family, 
the untrustworthiness of the court officials, 
and the uselessness of losing the son after 
having already lost the elephant, the 
possibility of finding another elephant, but 
perhaps not another son (especially one 
like Vessantara). All her reasons are 
crucial and sound, especially for the royal 
household, which needs to exercise great 
caution against possible adversity and 
instability. The expulsion of a prince 
would only create great uncertainty and 
. instability for the future of the throne. If 
the king has to balanc~ out the small guilt 
or mistake of his young son against the 
great possible calamities against the throne 
and the kingdom as a whole, how should 
he decide? Wouldn't it be mqre reasonable 
to forgive the mistake of Vessantara than 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
to execute the expulsion penalty? It is very 
interesting to note that at that point the 
King remains silent, does not utter a word 
of agreement or disagreement. But the 
expulsion p enalty has b een earlier a greed 
upon between the King and the people. A 
King does not go back on his word. Even 
if all the possible calamities were to pass, 
the expulsion must take place. 
Vessantara's giving away ofthe elephant 
to the brahmins from a foreign land has 
created a tense and risky situation in his 
own kingdom. It led to the confrontation 
between the King and the people. King 
Sonchai had to leave aside his being a 
father, had to decide against the reasoning 
plea from his Queen, had to face imminent 
danger for himself and his family. In time 
of crisis, Queen Pussadi warned her 
husband, "Would the elephant help us? 
Your wife and children could die (because 
of) 
with 
you." 16 
The 
dangers 
are 
threatening at every comer, the danger to 
the family, to the throne, to the kingdom, 
loss of loyalty from the court officials. 
King Sonchai seems to accept all these 
possible calamities when he gave his word 
to the people of Sipi that the expulsion 
penalty for Vessantara is imminent. 
16 Ibid., p51. It is interesting to note the 
ambiguity here in the text. It says, "Once in time 
of great risk and imminent crisis, would the 
people or the elephant help us? Only your wife 
and children could die with (or because of) 
you." In Thai the last phrase could mean both 
"Your wife and children could die because of 
you," as well as "Only your wife and children 
could die with you." The context here seems to 
put a stronger indication to the latter meaning. 
That is, if we were to understand that because 
neither the elephant nor the people would be 
around to offer help, therefore, only the family 
would die together." 
92 
As for Vessantara, it seems that the 
possible risk of chaos in the kingdom does 
not sway his determination in the least. It 
might be more accurate to say that the text 
does not give evidence of Vessnatara's 
anxiety or concern here. The next scene in 
the text takes place in the early morning of 
the next day. After Vessantara is bathed 
and properly-dressed, the text describes 
him thus, "His face is pure for building up 
the career for future enlightenment. He 
came out to the "Dana-Pavilion" (Pavilion 
for Charity), he gives command to give 
away the money, the clothes, All the 
Magnificent Gifts of Seven Hundreds."17 
This same stem determination to perfect 
the virtue of Vessantara's giving will 
become evident again and again in his 
further giving. 
This expulsion penalty of Vessantara has 
become a nightmarish storm which blows 
everything asunder in the life of Madsi. 
Madsi herself insists on leaving the city to 
live in the forest with Vessantara. Early on 
both King Sonchai and Queen Pussadi 
forbid Madsi to follow Vessantara to the 
forest, especially with the two royal 
children. But Madsi is adamant that she 
and 
the 
children have to go with 
Vessantara. She 
begins her reasoning 
with the necessity to uphold a husband-
wife tradition. "Whence possible to find a 
customary practice of letting a royal 
person live alone in the forest?" Then she 
gives further reasons to follow Vessantara: 
to take care of him, to show him gratitude 
to the extent that she would gladly 
sacrifice her life for him. She says, "I 
think nothing of sacrificing my life for 
you. I will use my life as golden shoes 
17 Ibid, p59. The Magnificent Gifts of Seven 
Hundreds indicate seven types of fantastic gifts, 
seven hundred each, to be given freely to all. 
They are: elephants, horses, carriages, court 
ladies, cows, male slaves, female slaves 

protecting your royal feet." If they would 
not let her go, she would consider it better 
to, "set a fire, jump into it and die." This 
death would better than what? The jataka 
tells us that for Madsi, death would be, 
"better than staying behind and letting the 
people gossip about her regarding her 
clinging to her husband only in time of 
comfort. Once in time of trouble, (in 
Madsi's perception) in the eyes of the 
people, Madsi just refuses to share the 
suffering and would only enjoy her 
royal existence in the palace." For Madsi, 
this possibility of contemptuous gaze from 
the people would be a life much more 
horrible than to die in a fire. Madsi's real 
life lies in the "gaze" of the people. If she 
were to have to endure such harsh 
judgment from the people, she no longer 
wishes to continue her physical existence. 
In the midst of the tense situation 
V essantara does not forget to grant Madsi 
permission to remarry another prince in 
his 
absence. 
This 
gracious 
gesture 
suggests that V essantrara does not plan to 
come back. It could be a journey with no 
return. V essantara says this to his Queen, 
"If there should be a prince who wishes 
you to be his Queen, be sure to serve him 
well in every way. Do not yearn for me."18 
Madsi responds: 
"For me, having a husband is like 
having a crystal umbrella over my head 
constantly enhancing my honor. A young 
widow can only be restless, like a soiled 
precious jewel which would not fetch a 
good price. Even if there were someone 
who would be willing to buy it, it would 
only create shame. A woman with two 
husbands is not pure." 
18 Ibid, p.36. 
93 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
Although Madsi insists on being a loyal 
wife who strictly follows the rules of 
tradition, she does admit to having a 
natural sexual need, even as a widow. She 
says, "A widowed woman left lonely by 
herself, would only yearn for passion of 
love." But this natural desire carries no 
weight when it confronts her "real 
(cultural) life" as dictated by tradition. As 
a traditional wife, she must serve and 
protect her husband everywhere he goes. 
Madsi declares, "Even if there were 
extreme suffering or grave danger, I would 
rush forward to die first as an illustration 
of my gratitude for you." This great. 
sacrifice on Madsi's part would be nothing 
compared to much greater sacrifices she 
would make later on as events unfold in 
the story. Later she would submit to the 
children-giving of Vessantara as well as 
the giving away of herself to Lord Indra in 
disguise. All these "anumothana-dana" or 
"bless-the-giving" of Madsi are so great 
even the gods in the heavenly spheres 
could not remain still. "They all clasped 
their hands, sang words of praise for 
Madsi and showered her with heavenly 
flowers. "
19 It would be interesting to pose 
a hypothetical question here.What would 
have happened if Madsi refused to bless 
the giving of Vessantara both in the cases 
of children-giving and wife-giving? How 
would the Jataka proceed? How could an 
explanation of Vessantara' great giving be 
possible? 
So far the difficult confusion has not 
resulted in any emotional turmoil in 
19 Ibid., p.267. Please see an analysis.ofMadsi's 
great sacrifices without due credit in Suwanna 
Satha-Anand. 
1997. 
"Madsi: 
A 
Female 
Bodhisattva Denied?" in Virada Somswasdi and 
Sally Theobold (eds.). Women, Gender and 
Development 
vol.l. 
Chiangmai: 
Chiangrnai 
University Women' Studies Center, pp.245-256. 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
V essantara. When he realizes that he will 
be expelled from the city after giving away 
the auspicious elephant, his reaction is: 
"Not only the auspicious elephant 
I would give. Even internal gifts which are 
much more difficult to give, I would 
certainly do it. If there were to be a 
beggar begging for my arms and legs, my 
heart, my eyes, I would willingly cut them 
off or cut them out for him. This is in 
exchange for future enlightenment. The 
expulsion penalty is nothing. Even if the 
people were to be so angry that they 
demanded my life, I would not hesitate to 
devote myself to giving. "20 
It looks like V essantara is not worried in 
the least about the prospect of great 
calamities which are to befall him. But it is 
important to note that his concern does not 
include the grave consequence for the 
lives of his parents, for his wife and 
children. The merit of giving the elephant 
away is evaluated as something of lower 
value than the greater merit of giving parts 
of his body or his own life away. The 
recipient could be any one who would 
simply ask. From one perspective, it could 
be said that V essantara's c oncem is very 
limited, so limited that it could be 
paradoxically viewed as being selfish in 
his great self-sacrifice. When viewing his 
acts from the perspective of a traditional 
society, it could be impossible to see any 
moral value in his great generosity.21And 
20 Op.Cit., pp.33-34. 
21 Some scholars explain this paradox as 
indicating two systems of morality. One is 
based on the idea of a "self' as an individual, 
the other is based on the idea of a "person" 
whose existence is intrinsically inter-twined 
with other human beings 
in webs of 
relationships. In a way, Buddhism highlights 
94 
yet from another perspective, these acts of 
great generosity are part of a "tradition of 
Buddha-to-be." All bodhisattvas whq aim 
at future enlightenment need to go through 
this?2 
All the moral dilemmas so far illustrate 
limited 
emotional 
drama. 
Intensive 
emotional elements are highlighted for 
Vessantara himself and probably for the 
audience as well, only when it comes to 
the greatest giving of all,. namely, the 
g1vmg 
away of his 
children. The 
overwhelming agony of Ganha and Chalie 
are well depicted in this saying of the 
brother to his younger sister in the 
following. "Let's tightly embrace, hold our 
the necessity of the first type of morality, as 
indicated in the life of Prince Siddhatta, who 
had to leave his family and court life behind to 
search for the truth .of enlightenment. This is 
achieved so that all peoples of all times could 
benefit from his great achievement. On the 
other hand, Buddhism does not negate the 
tentative necessity of the second type of 
morality to keep the "normal" course of a 
society possible. Please see a very interesting 
article on this distinction in Patrick Olivelle, 
"Amrta: Women and Indian Technologies of 
Immortality," Journal of Indian Philosophy vol.25 
no.5, October 1997, pp.427-449. 
Please see a systematic evaluation and 
categorization of different acts of giving of a 
bodhisattva, from external gifts of things 
material, to internal gifts of bodily organs, to 
life of a bodhisattva in V en.Rassagala S eewali 
Thero. 1999. A Critical Study of Ethical 
Problems of Bodhisattava 's Karuna in Jataka 
Tales. 
. Bangkok: 
Mahachulalongkorn-
Rajavidyalaya University, pp.38-41. 
22 Please investigate the question of King 
Menander to Venerable Nagasena on the reasons 
why a bodhisattva needs to do what Vessantara 
does in this Jataka in Bhikkhu Pesala. 1998. The 
Debate_ of King Milinda. 
Delhi: 
Motilal 
Banarsidass Publishers, pp.82-83. 

breath and die together. This is the way to 
escape this evil old man. " Even at this 
moment, Vessantara remains calm. The 
father's calmness in the face of this 
impending tragedy proves too much to 
bear for the children. Ganha the daughter 
wails unceasingly to her father, but to no 
avail. She finally pronounces a severing of 
their father-daughter relationship in (this 
and?) future lives. She announces, "Father, 
please hold no grudge against me. Have no 
doubt that we will not be reborn father-
daughter in future lives." The pathetic 
depiction of the pain and suffering the two 
children have to go through under Jujaka's 
harsh treatment is gradually intensi~ed 
when the depiction of Jujaka himself is 
gradually 
changed. 
Jujaka 
has been 
transformed from a rather "poor" husband 
whose wife makes demands for domestic 
help otherwise she would leave him, to a 
despicable old man (depicted as an ugly 
elderly), to a pain-inflicting old brahmin 
whose heart is hardened with malice, to a 
"devil", to a "ghost" who is ready to break 
the necks of the children and then eat them 
up. 
This 
depiction 
of a 
gradual 
transformation of Jujaka the poor husband 
to Jujaka the dark devil on the verge of 
becoming a cannibal "naturally" increases 
the level of sympathy solicited from the 
heart and mind of the audience who by 
this time would be despising Jujaka and 
pouring out their hearts to Ganha and 
Chalie. At this point the jataka wrenches 
our tears thus: 
"Oh! Woe to Ganha! She cries so 
hard her tears trail down her cheeks. She 
beseeches her father 'Father, my dear 
father, have you cut me off? How could 
you be.so calm and silent? How could you 
let this despicable old brahmin hit me and 
drag me away right in front of your eyes? 
It is as if I were born daughter of a 
slave ... Father, he is no longer a brahmin. 
95 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
This brahmin might have been the devil 
who disguised himself to beg for me from 
you. He hits me so hard, it hurts so badly I 
could die. He shouts, he yells, he inflicts 
pain, he might mutilate me and eat my 
flesh ... He pretends to hit me with a stick, 
but when we are no longer in your view, 
he will be break my neck, throw me on the 
ground, rip my body apart and drink my 
brood ... 23 
The virtue of generosity, a key virtue in 
Buddhism, when performed to the utmost, 
beyond the common practice of cuitom 
and convention, painfully brings about 
chaos in all kinds of human socio-political 
relationships. These conflicts and this 
chaos could bring about great dangers, so 
catastrophic that V essantara could lose 
everything, including those so dear and 
close to him. Please note that the acts of 
giving, in all these cases, do not, in 
themselves, indicate a giving up of life. 
But the tragic consequences of the giving 
has led to the contemplation of suicide by 
Vessantara's mother, Madsi and the two 
children. King Sonchai had to face the 
possibility of great danger in confrontation 
with the people of Sipi. Queen Pussadi has 
challenged the King to "please kill me first 
before you expel Vessantara." Madsi 
protested to the parents i f not allowed to 
follow Vessantara to the forest, "I, Madsi 
will set up a fire, jump into it and die. That 
would be better for me." Ganha and Chalie 
said to each other, "You and I, let's 
embrace tightly, hold our breath and die 
together. This is the only escape from this 
old despicable brahmin." And yet, it is 
Clear from the jataka that Vessantara's 
calmness becomes emotional turmoil only 
after the children were given away, when 
23 Op.Cit. (footnote no.l2). 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
Jujaka still kept hitting them in full view 
of the father. This is an act of serve 
disrespect. Ganha and Chalie are children 
of royal brood. They need to be treated 
properly. In the jataka, one of the most 
emotional scenes is depicted thus: 
"His 
(Vessantara 's) 
calm 
is 
disrupted. Avijji clouds his wisdom. He 
becomes agitated, angry and throws these 
words at Jutaka, Hey! Hey! Jutaka! This 
Brahmin is contemptuous. " How could 
you hit my children right in front of me? 
Eh!Hermit! I did not come to the forest 
unarmed. I brought with me the sword and 
the bow. He then grasps the bow and the 
arrow tight in hands with intent on killing 
the Brahmin ... Moments later, he takes 
hold of himself reflecting on the noble 
tradition of past buddhas. 
Then 
he 
realizes, "I am building up this career (of 
a bodisattva) of children-giving. " Once he 
regains his wisdom, the royal hermit 
begins 
teaching 
himself, " 
Look, 
Vessantara, neither waiver nor hesitate. 
You and I fighting each other? That is not 
desirable. " At that moment, he regains 
tranquility, letting go of his sorrow. When 
he is calm a gain, h is face becomes pure, 
his body looks as pure as a pure gold 
Buddha, exquisitely designed and finely 
cast, having been put there in the 
hermitage (by an unseen artist/ 4 
Vessantara's intense conflict with himself 
at this moment is expressed in a situation 
where a father has to witness the beating 
of his own children. This is not merely a 
matter of the physical pain inflicted on the 
children. It implies a feeling that Jujaka is 
a dark devilish old brahmin who does not 
have the "rights" to inflict verbal abuse on 
24 Op.Cit. (footnote no.l3) 
96 
"children of royal blood." It is a violation 
not only oft he physical body, but also a 
transgression of the cultural taboo. The 
misery from the physical pain is increased, 
is added to the dark contempt expressed 
(symbolically) on the royalty of the 
children. Thi~ intense anger is elevated to 
ill intent, so unbearable that Vessantara, 
who has remained so calm throughout the 
narrative, rushes forward to grasp his 
weapons with an intent to kill Jujaka. And 
then, his wisdom regains its control 
(Earlier the text told us that Vessantara's 
calmness could be compared to still water 
which was agitated and thus disturbing the 
fish 
in 
the 
pond). 
At 
this 
time, 
Vessantara's humanity as a father has been 
transformed 
by his "knowledge" of 
traditions of past buddhas. Vessantara, of 
human flesh and blood, who is still 
capable of anger and emotional agitation 
of a moment earlier, has been transformed 
into a human golden Buddha. In other 
words, this intricate depiction has pointed 
to the transformation of a human person 
into a human-like gold statue.25 
Perhaps this is the scene with ultimate 
dramatic effect in the entire jataka tale. 
Later on, when Vessantara gives away his 
wife, who willingly accepts his great vow 
to achieve enlightenment in the future, his 
last act of giving does not solicit the same · 
emotional intensity as this one. The image 
of Madsi's willing acquiescence to her 
husband's wish depicts a pure and intense 
dignity. 
This 
female 
dignity 
is 
so 
complete, all the gods in heaven could not 
25 Given the time frame of this particular jataka 
tale, technically, one cannot say that Vessantara 
has become a golden buddha statue. As 
Vessantara has yet to be reborn Prince Siddhatta 
who then would become enlightened and thus 
become the Buddha. 

remain still. They all appear and sing 
songs of praise for the great devotion of 
Madsi. The atmosphere of pain, suffering 
and misery so prominent in the giving of 
the children is conspicuously absent here. 
The next great moment of emotional 
intensity in the story will recur only when 
the whole family reunite in the forest 
before they all return home to the city. 
A 
Critical 
Reflection 
of 
the 
Bodhisattva Ideology 
In the Thai and international scholarship 
on moral issues relating to the V essantara 
Jataka Tale, there are basically two groups 
of scholarly works. 
One 
group includes studies of the 
Vessantara Jataka Tale as a literary work 
of religious, cultural, historical or political 
significance. Some works relate this tale 
with the Thai political culture, some with 
court rituals, others with the history of the 
Bodhisattva ideal in Buddhism.26 
26 Please see outstanding examples of works in 
this category in the followings. Krompraya 
Dhamrongrajanupab. B.E.2460. "The Legend of 
Thet Mahachat ", Mahachat Royal Chant. 
Bangkok: RongpimThai. Also see, Sombat 
Chantomwong. 
B.E.2523. 
"The 
Political 
Meanings of Mahachatkumluang." in Sombat 
Chantomwong and Chaianan Smudavanich. 
Political Thoughts and Thai Society. Bangkok: 
Thammasat Univeristy. Also see Suwanee 
Chuansanit. B.E.2519. A Cultural A nalysis of 
Vessantara Jataka Tale. An M.A. thesis of the 
Department of Thai 
Language, 
Graduate 
School, 
Chulalongkom 
University. 
Also, 
Patrick Jory. 1996. A History of the Thet Maha 
Chat and Its Contributions to a Thai Political 
Culture .. A Ph.D. thesis submitted to the 
Australian National University. And lastly, 
Prapod Assavavirulhakam. B.E.2546. The Way 
of Bodhisattva: A Way for the Many. Bangkok: 
Faculty of Arts Publication Project, F acuity of 
Arts, Chulalongkom University. 
97 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
The other group includes studies of the 
Vessantara Jataka Tale as part of a larger 
body of bodhisattva literature, with special 
focus on the question of moral conflict or 
moral inadequacy of the bodhisattvas in 
the stories.27 As the scope of this article is 
more closely related to the issues raised in 
this second group of works, I will relate 
my discussion more closely with works 
produced under this category. 
In this second category of works, there are 
basically three main academic positions. 
First, the work by Ven.Rassagala Seewali 
Thero points to the moral inadequacy of 
many actions performed by bodhisattvas in 
the jataka tales. He has selected 1 0 from 
the over 500 stories for special analysis. 
His observations are that there are 
instances of obvious lack of compassion 
on the part of the bodhisattvas, although 
compassion is the central virtue not only in 
Buddhism, but especially in the practice of 
all 
bodhisattvas.28 
He 
cites 
several 
instances 
of 
moral 
wealmess 
of 
bodhisattvas, but only two will be given 
here. In the Chullapatum Jataka, there is the 
story of a bodhisattva whose 7 brothers got 
lost in the forest. When out of food to 
27 Please note the following works in this 
second 
category. 
Reiko 
Ohnuma. 
2000. 
"Internal and External Opposition to the 
Bodhisattva 's Gift of His Body ", Journal of 
Indian Philosophy. Vol.28 no.l February 2000, 
pp.43-75; 
Ven.Rassagala 
Seewali 
Thero. 
B.E.2542 (AD.l999). A Critical Study of 
Ethical Problems of Bodhisattva's Karuna in 
Jataka Stories, Bangkok: Mahachulalongkorn 
Rajavidyalaya University. Steven Collins. 1998. 
Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias 
of Pali Imaginaire. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
28 Ven.Rassagala Seewali Thero. Op.Cit., p.4. 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
sustain life, the 7 brothers agree among 
themselves that they will kill one of the 
wives each day and share the food with the 
rest. They start with the wife of the 
youngest brother first. The bodhisattva, 
when he receives his portion, keeps his 
portion and eats only from the portion of 
his wife. When the time comes to the 
killing of his wife, he distributes the saved 
portions of earlier days and thus saves the 
life of his wife. In the middle of the night, 
he and his wife run away.29 The critical 
observation of Ven.Rassagala is that as a 
bodhisattva, why not sacrifice his own life 
first as food for the rest? Why partake of 
the flesh from the wives of his brothers to 
save his own life and then cheat on the 
agreement when it comes to his wife's 
tum?30 In his analysis this is a clear 
example of moral weakness. 
In the case of V essantara, Ven.Rassagala 
makes the observation that the giving of 
the children is highly problematic because 
"Madsi holds equal rights to the two 
children."
3 1 Moreover, the giving away of 
the children has caused extreme misery 
and suffering for his wife and children. He 
asks how it is possible for a bodhisattva 
not show any compassion in this kind of 
situation.32 
It is interesting to note that Phra Seewali 
Thero's 
critical 
observation 
of the 
bodhisattvas' actions is not only that they 
are violating the principle of compassion, 
which is the core of Buddhist ethics, but 
oftentimes, the bodhisattvas themselves 
29 A summary of a longer version by this 
author from Ibid., pp.87-88. 
30 Ibid. 
31 Ibid., p.96. 
32 Ibid. 
98 
are falling short of what an "ordinary" 
person would do in the same situation.33 
However, we can see that the ana}ytical 
approach of his work sees certain actions 
of the bodhisattvas as themselves an 
"ethical problem." How could these 
actions be those of a bodhisattva, as they 
are supposed to be filled with a higher 
quality of compassion than others? The 
ethical 
problem 
here 
is 
that 
the 
bodhisattvas are "not good enough," as 
they have violated the most basic virtue in 
Buddhist ethics. 
Another 
~hought-provok:ing approach is 
used by Professor Reiko Ohnuma whose 
article focuses on the giving a way o f t he 
body (body parts or lives) of the 
bodhisattvas. She points out that "giving" 
is a basic virtue in Buddhism, but if the 
giving is conducted to the extreme, like 
the giving of flesh and blood, of bodily 
parts or of lives to others, the "virtue" of 
giving could create many problems for 
those closest to 
or related to the 
bodhisattvas. 
From 
this 
perspective, 
extreme 
giving 
becomes 
an 
ethical 
problem, when the giving is too extreme 
for a society. She uses a poignant 
comment by Professor Har Dayal from the 
widely-quoted The Bodhisattva Doctrine 
in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature (1932), as 
a starting point for her own analysis. 
"The heroes and heroines of these 
stories give away wealth, limbs, life, wives 
and children in a spirit of exaggerated and 
fantastic philanthropy. The lack of a sense 
of proportion and harmony is the f atal 
flaw of the Indian temperament as 
exhibited in literature and religion. The 
Indian thinkers and writers often push a 
33 Ibid., p.87. 

good idea to such extremes that it becomes 
grotesque and ridiculous "34 
The teaching on the Middle Path is a 
corner stone for a system of practice which 
avoids extremes, both of self-indulgence 
and self-torture. In this sense, it is odd to 
see that all the acts of giving of 
bodhisattvas 
must 
include 
extreme 
generosity as indicated in the theory of 
"The Five Givings:" namely, the giving of 
wealth, children, wife, body-parts and life. 
In the Sivijakata, King Sivi thinks to 
himself: "There is not a single external 
object that I have not given, ()'et) external 
gifts <bahira-dana)''do not satisfy me; I 
want to give an internal gift (ajjhattika-
dana). " The con text clearly suggests that 
"internal gifts" are vastly superior to 
"external gifts," and cites, as examples of 
"internal gifts," the flesh of the heart, the 
flesh of the body, the blood, and the 
eyes.35 The giving of these "internal gifts" 
leads to several types of arguments against 
them provided by the people affected by 
the giving. Professor Ohnuma gives 4 
different groups of those people. 
1) Officials and ministers 
2) Females 
close 
to 
the 
bodhisattva (such as mothers, 
wives and lovers) 
3) Commoners (such 
as 
the 
king's 
subjects, 
a 
man's 
friends and companions or the 
members of an animal-king's 
herd) 
4) Minor deities (such as the 
deity of a hermitage, the deity 
34 Reik;o Ohnuma, Op.Cit., pp.43-44. Professor 
Ohnuma 's analytical approach has served as an 
inspiration for the approach used in this article. 
35 Ibid., p.45. 
99 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
of a city-gate, the deity of a 
tree, or the deity of a pleasure-
park). 
When we analyze the arguments or 
criticisms put forth by these four groups of 
people, we could detect that the basis of 
their arguments is a particular benefit for a 
particular time, for a specific group of 
people or beings. They could be a 
particular benefit for a group of women 
close to the bodhisattva, or a particular 
benefit for a kingdom, or a particular 
benefit for a people, or a particular benefit 
for a local deity. All the while, the 
argument put forth by the bodhisattva 
would be the necessity of increasing his 
perfections, a tradition of past bodhisattvas 
and therefore the present giving is 
necessary as a fulfillment of requirements 
necessary for future enlightenment. The 
broader or universal benefits of all beings 
in the future provide a crucial argument 
from the view of the bodhisattva.36 
The overall analysis of Professor Ohnuma 
is based on the Buddhist idea of the 
Middle Path as critique of the extreme 
giving of bodhisattvas. Another point is 
the 
analysis of various reasons or 
criticisms put forth by those affected by 
the gift giving. All of the reasons provided 
by these people or beings could be broadly 
categorized as reasons of convention. The 
extreme giving of "internal gifts" reflects a 
"goodness" 
so 
extreme 
that 
it 
is 
unacceptable by the society of the time. 
The "virtue" of the extreme giving lies 
beyond the bounds of the convention.37 
36 Ibid., pp.47-64. 
37 Ibid., pp.57-64. It is interesting to note the 
different opinions of those past masters of 
exegesis of the acts of gift-giving of the 
bodhisattva. Professor Ohuma brings out these 
different voices both from within the tales or 
the texts themselves, as well as those voices 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
Thus it becomes an act of kindness which 
results in extreme suffering for the 
bodhisattva as well as for those people 
around him. Moreover, oftentimes, the 
recipient of the gifts is so undeserving. 
The most obvious case is that of Jujaka in 
the Vessantara Jataka Tale. On this point, 
Professor Ohnuma provides an interesting 
observation that the more undeserving the 
recipient (that is, he is greedy, evil, ugly), 
the more obvious is the greatness of the 
gift-giving. 38 
This point of the need for an imbalance or 
deliberate dissonance of the moral polarity 
of the gift giver and the recipient could be 
viewed from two angles. First, from the 
perspective of the dramatic effect of the 
tale, it could be said that when the moral 
degradation, the physical ugliness, the 
devilish intent of Jujaka are juxtaposed to 
the great sacrifice, the lavish generosity 
and the high royal standing of V essantara, 
a feeling of disgusting dissonance could be 
created in the audience. It could be a 
feeling of strong a version for Jujaka, a 
feeling of strong moral support for 
Vessantara, a feeling of condemnation of 
evil and approval of good. From another 
angle, it could be said that the undeserving 
nature of the recipient confirms the 
principle of giving without discrimination. 
The universality of the principle is 
explicitly 
manifest 
when 
the 
most 
undeserving 
(someone 
like 
Jujaka) 
recipient receives the most valuable 
(namely the royal children) gift, from the 
most generous V essantara. This possibility 
indicates the "anyone" element of the 
universal principle. This principle is truly 
"universal" as J ajaka is the manifestation 
from the exegetical literature. My article deals 
only with the voices from within the tale of 
V essantara. 
38 Ibid., pp.60-61. 
100 
of the worst possible recipient among all 
the possible "equal" recipients. 
At this point one might wonder if there 
could not be possibilities of reconciling 
these different moral dilemmas as put 
forth by the people around Vessantara. 
Professor Ohnuma has pointed out three 
possibilities. First, it could be argued that 
these extreme acts of kindness which 
involve intense emotional dimension are 
necessary 
as 
acts . of. 
sympathetic 
identification of the bodhisattva with the 
rest of human beings. The emotional 
intimacy is necessary to illustrate the 
"closeness" of the bodhisattva with the 
people, not the emotional detachment of 
an arahat. Second, these tales of extreme 
generosity 
could be viewed as 
an 
illustration of a mental deed not actual 
physical giving of gifts. These tales are 
allegorical tales to be grasped as a fictional 
story to make a nioral point. They are not 
meant to be taken literally. They merely 
illustrate the giving up of the self of the 
bodhisattva, when the "self' is expressed 
through the bonds or ties of relationships 
with people around him as well as his own 
body and life. Lastly, the tales are meant 
to illustrate the stories ofbodhisattvas who 
are "special" beings, who are different 
from 
us. 
These 
tales 
are 
to 
be 
"worshipped" not to be "emulated" by the 
audience?9 
Another 
possibility 
of 
compromise or reconciliation might be to 
view these acts of bodhisattvas as "moral 
experiments" through their journeys in 
different lives. They need to try out 
different moral possibilities to the extreme 
possibilities of those acts before they come 
to the realization that only wisdom can 
lead to enlightenment, not extreme self-
sacrifice. It is relevant to point out here the 
39 
. 
. 
Ibid., pp.64-66. 

in the life of Siddhatta, he leaves his wife 
and child, and does not "give" them away. 
There is also no giving of body parts or the 
life of the Buddha. 
These various 
experiences of moral experiments finally 
lead a bodhisattva to the Middle Path. The 
"Middle" is not easily or readily found. 
It could be said that the explanation and 
analysis of Professor Ohnuma indicates a 
critique of the giving of the body of the 
bodisattva from the view that these acts of 
extreme generosity are actually "too 
good."40 Unlike the analysis of Venerable 
Rassagala Seewali Thero, who focuses on 
the acts of bodhisattva which are not 
"good 
enough," Professor 
Ohnuma's 
analysis points to the opposite. In the 
following investigation we can see a 
possibility of explaining the dilemmas 
expressed in these two approaches. We 
would begin with the question: Is there 
any possibility of other "good" which is 
beyond the "good" defined in a society 
through the various forms and levels of 
relationships? 
An eminent Buddhist scholar, Professor 
Steven Collins suggests that in order to 
evaluate the "right" or "wrong" of the acts 
of V essantara, one needs to make a 
distinction between two levels of morality, 
one "mundane," the other "ideological-
transcendental."41 Professor Collins sees 
the Vessantara Jataka Tale both as a 
realist drama and an allegory. From one 
40 Although Professor Ohnuma begins her 
analysis with the cases of body-giving of 
different bodhisattvas, her analysis includes the 
case of Vessantara, 
in the sense that 
Vessantara's giving is an extreme act of 
generosity performed for a most undeserving 
recipient, that is, someone like Jujaka. 
41 Steven Collins, Op.Cit., pp.528-529. 
101 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
perspective, the audience should feel great 
empathy with and sympathy for the 
sufferings of different people in the story. 
The feelings need to be grounded in the 
"reality" of the story of people with flesh 
and blood who go through pain and 
suffering. On the other hand, these 
"realist" dramas need to be understood as 
allegory as well. This is because the 
sufferings of the people are "believable" 
and "real," but the decision of extreme 
generosity of 
Vessantara illustrates a 
narrative 
technique 
in 
presenting 
a 
"morality p lay."42 I tis this ambiguity in 
the story itself which makes the story so 
powerful as a religious narrative. One 
could imagine that the feelings of moral 
uneasiness could pose a challenge to a 
"normal" common sensical feeling of 
conventional morality. Professor Collins 
points out the fact that this highly 
emotional jataka tale forces the audience 
to face the dilemma of one of the key 
virtues of Buddhism, namely that of giving 
or dana. When this most highly valued 
virtue is performed to the extreme, it 
seems to become other than virtue, 
creating pain, suffering and chaos for 
everyone in the whole political entity. The 
political entity itself is threatened. This is 
a challenge to all the "goodness" (of 
people performing their moral duties in 
their different roles in their different 
relationships) in a common social world. 
All this goodness is inevitably related to 
familial, 
social 
and 
political 
relationships.43 
If the audience were to consider Vessatara 
"wrong" in his great generosity, they 
would have to admit that the moral 
wrongness of V essantara 
is not 
a 
42 Ibid., p.528. 
43 Ibid. 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
"criminal" act. It is not an evil act with an 
intention to hurt or destroy others. On the 
contrary, the tragedy of the whole story 
lies precisely in the goodness of the act, 
put to extreme. If, on the other hand, the 
audience were to consider that Vessantara 
is "right" in his generous gesture, the view 
has to come from another level of 
consideration. Professor Collins names 
this 
level 
"ideological-transcendental." 
This level of "goodness" is necessary for 
the achievement of future enlightenment. 
It is interesting to note that while Phra 
Rassagala S eewali Thero emphasizes that 
many of the bodhisattvas' acts are not 
"good enough," and Professor Ohnuma 
indicates that other acts (of extreme giving 
of body) are "too good" for society to 
tolerate, Professor Collins' analysis points 
to the paradox that an act which is "too 
good" is a necessary wrong, so that a 
"higher" good is possible in the future. 
This "higher good" might not be readily 
perceivable from one particular point in 
time or from a particular view from any 
member of the society in the story, but that 
is not so important when a future greater 
good demands these smaller sacrifices. 
From this analysis then, there is no need to 
"defend" 
the 
moral 
feasibility 
of 
Vessantara's acts, as they are actually 
necessary to a chi eve a higher goal in the 
future. Although at the end of the story, 
everything given away by Vessantara is 
retumed to the entire royal family at the 
final reunion, this could be seen as a 
"compromise" with the audience, more 
than a suggestion that "actually", at the 
end of the day, Vessantara did not give 
anything to anybody.44 
Possibilities of Reconciliation? 
44 See an interesting analysis of the end of the 
story ofVessantara in Ibid., pp.526-527. 
102 
It is interesting to note that all three 
analytical 
approaches 
outlined 
above 
utilize a common criterion as a conceptual 
framework to "evaluate" the acts of giving 
of Vessantara and other bodhisattvas. That 
criterion is developed from a temporal 
basis which lies beyond the text itself. In 
other words, the use of the Middle Path as 
a critique of extreme giving of the 
bodhisattvas, actually indicates a principle 
which was discovered by the Buddha, who 
is the future birth of Vessantara m 
particular 
and 
other bodhisattvas 
m 
general. 
One 
other 
criterion 
of 
"wholesome" giving is giving which does 
not incur suffering neither for oneself nor 
for others, is a teaching which was 
developed by the Buddha only after his 
enlightenment. All these criteria belong to 
a different time frame, namely, the future 
time framework, which is yet to come. 
These criteria maybe familiar for the 
reader in her/his world, but certainly they 
have yet to come into existence in the 
textual world of the jataka tales. 45 In this 
sense, the historical truth of the Buddha's 
enlightenment in the future (of the text) 
which is a fulfillment of the ardent wish of 
the bodhisattva, especially of Vessantara, 
has become a crucial reference or a key 
condition 
m 
explaining 
the 
moral 
dilemmas 
of 
Vessantara. 
But 
this 
possibility lies in the world of the reader, 
not in the world of the people who are 
directly affected by the acts of Vessantara. 
All three authors whose works are 
discussed here assume this post-story 
reader's world. These authors already 
possess 
one 
important 
piece 
of 
45 See the complicated relationships between 
the textual world and the reader world as 
conditions for discussing the truth and 
meaning of religious narratives in Gary 
Comstock. 1993. "The Truth of Religious 
Narratives", Philosophy of Religion (34). 

lmowledge which is not in any of the texts, 
namely, that the Buddha did actually attain 
enlightenment. 
The 
Buddha's 
enlightenment has actually, throughout 
Buddhist history, 
helped innumerable 
people alleviate or get rid of their 
suffering. This enlightenment (presumed 
in the reader's world of the three authors) 
was a "direct" result of life of the 
bodhisattvas under study. From this 
perspective, the meanings of the suffering 
of those in the jataka tale, whether those of 
the people of Sipi, or those of Queen 
Pusadi, or those of Mudsior those of 
Ganha and Chalie, all present an additional 
layer of meaning from the point of view of 
the audience or the reader's world. That 
additional layer of meaning helps provide 
a basis for understanding the "necessity" 
of those sacrifices. Those sacrifices did 
work. They did produce the intended 
results, namely, the enlightenment of the 
Lord Buddha. 
However, if we consider the meaning of 
the text by focusing merely on the 
temporal framework of the text itself, we 
will see that the future possibility of 
enlightenment is only a possibility. It is 
still merely an ardent wish of a bodhisattva 
who is still on the path. It is not yet a 
"lmowledge" that 
enlightenment will 
result. There is no prior lmowledge of the 
enlightenment of Prince Siddhattha. A key 
question here is then: Do the people 
around V essantara 
share this strong 
"hope" with him? If we consider the 
arguments and criticisms put forth by King 
Sonchai, Queen Pusadi, the people of Sipi, 
and the children, all do not indicate the 
sharing of that hope. They all criticize him 
(in the. case of King Sonchai, the people 
and the children) or defend him (as in the 
case of Queen Pusadi) on the basis of 
conventional morality. It is only Queen 
Madsi who explicitly joins Vessantara in 
103 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
his wish for future enlightenment. The 
giving of the children and the giving of 
Madsi herself are accepted by Madsi, 
ultimately because she shares the value of 
Vessantara's 
future 
pursuit. 
Madsi's 
devotion is total as she gives up all there is 
of her present life, for a vision of her 
husband. Perhaps in this we could say that 
Madsi is the only one in the entire story 
who 
"shares" 
his 
hope 
of future 
enlightenment. In this sense, Madsi's 
acceptance 
and 
understanding 
of 
Vessantara's great giving, offers his giving 
the possibility of justification and perhaps 
reco~tciliation from within the story itself. 
Her total devotion to her husband thus 
creates 
the 
possibility 
of 
moral 
justification within the time frame of the 
text itself. This is different from other 
possibilities of reconciliation which need 
to take into account the future of 
V essantara, and use that future time frame 
to re-work moral consideration back into 
the narrative. 
Moreover, it is interesting to note that the 
analysis of Professor Collins ultimately 
leads to the transformation of V essantara' s 
moral dilemmas into a moral paradox.In 
other words, if the criteria for moral 
evaluation of 
Vessantara' s generosity 
needs to posit two levels of moral 
consideration, one mundane, the other 
ideological-transcendental as 
discussed 
earlier, the one act which is "wrong" at the 
. mundane level is actually "right" from the 
perspective of the transcendental, then 
perhaps the question of moral dilemma as 
self-contradictory rules of moral judgment, 
needs to be re-understood under a different 
concept. If the wrong of an act at one level 
is necessary for the right of the same act at 
another level, then we have a paradox, not 
a moral dilemma. From this angle then, the 
extreme giving of Vessantara needs to be 
wrong, in order for it to be right. The 

MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 7.2, 2004 
wrongness of the act becomes the locus 
for the rightness of the same act. In this 
sense then, perhaps a reconciliation is no 
longer called for because a moral dilemma 
has been transformed into a moral 
paradox. 
Our next question is if we accept that the 
future success of enlightenment justifies 
the suffering and pain of the people around 
Vessantara, 
including 
himself, 
then 
perhaps it means we also accept that 
Buddhist ethics is utilitarian in nature. 
(The greater happiness of a greater number 
of people is the criterion for moral right 
and wrong.) As the number of people who 
follow the Buddha's path and alleviate 
their suffering is larger than those who 
suffer in thejataka tale, then Vessantara's 
moral act is justified. However, if we 
follow this line of logic, will we not incur 
for Buddhist ethics the same criticisms 
leveled against Utilitarianism? In other 
words, even if larger numbers of people 
actually 
benefit from 
the 
Buddha's 
enlightenment, where lies the possibility 
of justice for those fewer people around 
the life of Vessantara? 
One last point, which can not be dealt with 
here, is the question: How should people 
in this 21st century interpret the meanings 
of this complicated and controversial 
jataka tale? How should we interpret the 
rich and confusing messages put forth in 
this national text? There are new questions 
posed by human rights advocates, by 
feminist scholars who see the acts of 
Vessantara as perhaps unacceptable.46 
46 Please see an example of constructive 
engagement with Vessantara Jataka and others 
in Uthong Prasartwinitchai, Op.Cit. Also see 
an interesting analysis of the cultural meanings 
of giving in Thai society in Mukhom 
Wongthes. 2000. "The Gift of the Body as the 
"Gift of Knowledge": Body Donation in 
104 
Which questions are fair and legitimate? 
Which are not? Which questions do the 
present readers have the "right" to ask and 
which 
are 
anachronistic? 
All 
these 
questions 
require 
further 
reflection. 
Perhaps one strategy is useful, namely, the 
attitude of "challenge with respect.'>47 This 
attitude, which does not belittle or bedevil a 
text and its tradition, and yet does not rest 
content with conservative transmission of 
the message, needs to be adopted so that a 
cultural and religious text and tradition so 
rich as the Vessantara Jakata can live on 
and provide a meaningful cultural cosmos 
for people in Thai society who are braving 
the future now. 
References 
Assavavirulhakam, Prapod. B.E.2546. The 
Way of Bodhisattva: A Way for the 
Many. Bangkok: Faculty of Arts 
Publication Project, Faculty of Arts, 
Chulalongkom University. 
Chan, 
Alan. 
1984. 
"Philosophical 
Hermeneutics ahd the Analects: The 
Paradigm of Tradition", Philosophy 
East and West. Vo1.34 No.4, October 
1984. 
Thailand. " Mphil Degree Thesis, Cambridge 
University. 
47 Please see a discussion of the attitude of 
"challenge with respect" as a basis for inter-
religious dialogue and for a dialogue between 
philosophy and religion which could be 
applicable to the study of ancient religious 
narratives which have been transmitted to later 
generations for centuries, like Vessantara 
Jataka in Suwanna Satha-Anand. B."E.2545. 
Faith and Wisdom: A Philosophical Dialogue 
with 
Religion. 
Bangkok: 
Chulalongkom 
University Press. 

Olantomwong, Sombat B.E.2523. '1be Political 
Meanings of Mahachatkumluang." in 
Sombat Chaniomwong and Chaianan 
Smudavanich. Political Thoughl.s and 
Thai 
Society. Bangkok Tharmnasat 
Univeristy. 
Chuansanit, 
Suwanee. B.£.2519. 
A 
Cultural Analysis of Vessantara 
Jataka Tale. An M.A. thesis of the 
Department of Thai Language, 
Graduate School, Chulalongkom 
University. 
Collins, Steven. 1998. Nirvana and other 
Buddhist 
Felicities. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Jory, Patrick. 1996. A History of the Thet 
Maha Chat and Its Contributions to 
a Thai Political Culture. A Ph.D. 
thesis submitted to the Australian 
National University. 
Krompraya 
Damrongrajanupab. 
B.£.2460. "The Legend of Thet 
Mahachat ", 
Mahachat 
Royal 
Chant. Bangkok: Rongpim Thai. 
Ohnuma, Reiko. 
2000. "Internal and 
External 
Opposition 
to 
the 
Bodhisattva's Gift of His Body", 
Journal 
of Indian 
Philosophy. 
Vol.28 no.1 February 2000. 
Olivelle, Patrick "Amrta: 
Women and 
Indian Technologies of Immortality, " 
Journal of Indian Philosophy vol.25 
no.S, October 1997. 
Pesala, Bhikkhu. 1998. The Debate of King 
Milinda. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
Publishers. 
Prasartwinitchai, Uthong. B.E. 2545. Te 
Cha Su Ne Ma: Roaming the Ten 
Births Through Mural Paintings. 
Bangkok: Khanapuggala Namrin. 
Phra 
Pimonlatham 
(Chob 
Anujareernahathera). 
B.£.2533. 
Vessantara Jataka Review. Bangkok: 
Krongkarn Moonnithi Hortri (Hortri 
Foundation Project). 
105 
Moral Dilemma in Budhisattva 
Phra 
Pimontham 
(Chob 
Anujaree-
mahathera). 
B.£.2533. Prarithat 
Vessantara Jataka (A Review · Of 
V essantara 
Jataka). 
Bangkok: 
Krongkam Moonnithi Hohtri. 
Satha-Anand, Suwanna. 1997. "Madsi: A 
Female Bodhisattva Denied?" in 
Virada 
Somswasdi 
and 
Sally 
Theobold (eds.). Women, Gender and 
Development 
vol.I. 
Chiangmai: 
Chiangmai 
University 
Women' 
Studies Center. 
Satha-Anand, Suwanna. B.£.2545. Faith 
and 
Wisdom: 
A 
Philosophical 
Dialogue with Religion. Bangkok: 
Chulalongkom University Press. 
Ven Rassagala Seewali Thero. 
B.£2542. A 
Critical SbJdy of Ethical Problems of 
Bodhisattva$ Karuna in Jatak.a Sbries. 
Bangkok 
Mahachulalongkom 
Rajavidyalaya University. 
Vessantara Jatak.a: A Royal CJzant of 13 Olapters. 
Bangkok 
DhamrnabannalGnn 
(Dhammabannakmn Publisher)B.E.2521. 
Wongthes, Mukhom. 2000. "The Gift of the 
Body as the "Gift of Knowledge": 
Body Donation in Thailand. " Mphil 
Degree Thesis, Cambridge University. 

