TITLE: In Defense of Haribhaṭṭa: Authorship and Dating of Sanskrit Jātakamālā Legends
AUTHOR: Michael Hahn
YEAR: 2007
LANGUAGE: EN/Sanskrit
ORIGINAL_FILE: A089_In_defense_of_Haribhatta_2007_07_30.pdf
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 34226
STATUS: OK
============================================================

B. Kellner, H. Krasser, Horst Lasic,  M.T. Much, H. Tauscher (eds.), Pramāṇakīrtiḥ. Papers 
dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the occasion of his 70th birthday . Part 1. (Wiener Studien zur 
Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 70.1) Wien 2007, pp. 215–229. 
 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa1 
 
Michael Hahn, Marburg 
 
 
In 2004 the first legend from Haribha ṭṭa’s Jātakamālā became accessible to the 
English speaking world through the transl ation by the American scholar Reiko 
Ohnuma. A wide circulation was guarant eed since it was published in the an-
thology Buddhist Scriptures, ed. by Donald S. Lopez, Jr, London 2004, as part 
of the series Penguin Classics series. The legend translated by Ohnuma is No. 6 
of Haribha ṭṭa’s work, the Rūpyāvatījātaka. It forms chapter 19 of the above-
mentioned anthology which is entitled “R ūpyāvatī gives away her breasts” and 
covers pages 159-171. The textual basis is my edition of the Sanskrit text as 
contained in my booklet Haribhaṭṭa and Gopadatta. Two Authors in the 
Succession of Āryaķūra. On the Rediscovery of Parts of their J ātakamālās. 2 nd 
edition. Thoroughly revised and enlarged. Tokyo 1992. viii, 76 pp. (Studia Phi-
lologica Buddhica. Occasional Paper Series. 1.) (= Hahn 1992) 
As the editor of the story I was, of co urse, pleased to see its English version 
and my first impression, after having read a few paragraphs, was rather favour-
able. The English is very natural and the translator tries successfully to distin-
guish between the prose and verse portions. However, when I began to 
compare in detail the translation with  the Sanskrit text, the favourable 
impression rapidly vanished because I detected several unnecessary, sometimes 
even embarrassing mistakes. They could have been avoided, had it occurred to 
the translator or her advisers to contact the editor of the legend and ask him 
about his understanding of the crucial passages. I would have been more than 
ready to offer my full assistance. 
Instead I am now put in the awkward po sition of criticizing the work of a 
beginner, done with the best of intentions, thereby creating the impression of a 
know-all who will not admit any interpretation other than his own. I do this 
                    
 
1 My thanks are due to my friend Peter Khoroche, Cambridge, for “smoothing out the 
English.” A revised version was shown to Dr. Justin Meiland who again suggested 
several improvements of the style. 
Michael Hahn 216
only very reluctantly. However, the very fact that this translation will be read 
world-wide leaves me no other choice, si nce it creates a distorted notion of the 
work of a first-class poet. This notion should be corrected as soon as possible, 
at least among the scholarly community. It is my hope that through the world-
wide reputation that the scholar, honoured in this volume, will enjoy this 
attempt to defend Haribhaṭṭa, his poetic genius and hi s clear images will be no-
ticed. To be fair: several parts of the legend are translated correctly by Ohnuma 
into a very readable and enjoyable Amer ican English. However, the distorted 
passages simply do not reflect our current knowledge of the Indian kāvya 
literature and quite often lead the reader astray. 
In my opinion the most suitable way to illustrate the deficiencies of the ex-
isting translation is to replace it by a new one. In very brief footnotes the errors 
of the previous translation will be pointed out. I will also discuss some am-
biguous cases where different interpretatio ns are possible. It goes without say-
ing that the translation of a non-native speaker does not aim at being literary. 
Meanwhile a revised Sanskrit text of the Rūpyāvatījātaka has appeared in 
the book Haribhaṭṭa in Nepal: Ten Legends from his J ātakamālā and the 
Anonymous Ķākyasiṃhajātaka, Tokyo 2007. The text published in 1992 
contains four typos, none which should confuse the expert: ūḍhaḥsu for 
ūdhaḥsu (8d), kṣīnnānna- for kṣīṇānna- (10a), -keṣakam for keķakam (12b) and 
māṃ pratiy ācitā for māṃ prati y ācitā (47d). In one case I misread usrāḥ 
“cows” as uṣṭrāḥ “(male) camels,” misled by the Tibetan translation, and in 
another case I wrongly emended the so far unattested word ābhigāmika to 
*ābhikāmika. In a few other cases my Nepalese manuscript (A) contains some 
more serious mistakes that I had not been able to correct: pariķuṣyatsalilam for 
pariķuṣyatsaritsalilam (2+), parimlānakamalakedāraṃ for parimlānakedāraṃ 
(2+), -dūṣaṇāni for - dhūsarāṇi (5b), kavalavyāhti- for kavalāvyāhti- (7b), 
nivāsāya gataḥ for nivāsopahataḥ (10d), and valan for calan (19c). The correct 
readings can be found in the newly discovered Ms B which I have described in 
my paper “Haribha ṭṭa and the Mah ābhārata.”2 All these cases are discussed in 
the footnotes to the translation. 
As for the legend itself, suffice it here to refer to the paper “Two female bo-
dhisattvas in flesh and blood” by Dragomir Dimitrov, 3 in which he analyses 
and compares the two thematically related legends of R ūpyāvatī and Jñ ānavatī 
                    
 
2 In: Journal of the Center for Buddhist Studies, Sri Lanka, vol. 3 (2005), pp. 1–41. 
3 In: Aspects of the Female in Indian Culture . Proceedings of the Symposium in Mar-
burg, Germany, July 7–8, 2000. Ed. by Ulrike Roesler and Jayandra Soni, Marburg 
2004 (Indica et Tibetica. 44), pp. 3–30. 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa 217 
in all their known versions. Here the reader is informed of the wider context in 
which the two stories are to be placed. 
The legend of Rūpyāvatī 
1. Even when reborn as a woman  
the bodhisattva cut off flesh from her own body and gave it away. 
How much more (should he act in such a manner)4 when reborn as man 
with greater strength of heart5 and skill to help others! 
Once there was a royal capital called Utpal āvatī which is nowadays known as 
Puṣkalāvatī.6 Its outskirts were dark with various groves and its market-streets 
were overcrowded with merchants who seemed to rival Kubera, the Lord of 
Wealth.7 As if adorning the entire earth, it was a head ornament for the region 
of G āndhāra. There the bodhisattva was born as a woman by the name of 
Rūpyāvatī. Splendour, charm, and beauty had accumulated in her because she 
was in the prime of her youth, and she was like the goddess of her own house8. 
2. By her tranquillity, her determination to help others, 
and the sharpness of her mind 
she caused the greatest astonishment among the people 
and shone like the embodiment of compassion. 
                    
 
4 “Did he so” is certainly not incorrect, however I prefer “should he act in such a man-
ner” as complement since otherwise this st atement would belittle, to a certain extent, 
Rūpyāvatī’s sacrifice. Cf. also the concluding sentence of the legend. 
5 sattvabala- is ambiguous. It can be both a dvandva and tatpuru ṣa, “goodness and 
strength” (Ohnuma) or “strength of the heart. ” However, speaking of a man, I prefer to 
interpret sattva as “energy, vigour,” i.e. inner strength, in opposition to bala “physical 
strength.” HJMtib has lhag pa'i bsam pa stobs ldan  which can be interpreted as metri-
cal shortening of lhag pa'i bsam pa [da ṅ] stobs ldan  (dvandva) or of lhag pa'i bsam 
pa[’i] stobs ldan (tatpuruṣa). 
6 Puṣkalāvatī is situated north of Puru ṣapura (Peshawar), on the northern bank of the 
river Kubhā, at the present border between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Cf. A Historical 
Atlas of South Asia, ed. by Joseph. E. Schwartzberg, Chicago, London 1978, pp. 15 and 
foll. 
7 Ohnuma has “displaying their wares” for dhanadāyamāna. Obviously she did not 
recognize the verb dhanadāyate “behaves like Dhanada, i.e., Kubera” but analysed the 
form as dhana-dāyamāna-. 
8 Ohnuma “like a goddess dwelling in her own house.” 
Michael Hahn 218
At a certain time a terrible drought occu rred in that region because the karmic 
roots of prosperity had disappeared. The people were utterly dejected by the 
sight of the completely empty barns and storehouses, and the scorching heat of 
the sun’s rays had melted the remaining snow on the glaciers away. 9 Because 
of the lack of snow the water in the rivers had dried up, 10 and because of the 
lack of water the rice-fields had with ered away. Seeing that, the farmers 
became depressed, 11 and the needs of guests could no longer be fulfilled 
completely.12 Extremely weak cowherds followed the scanty herd of cows that 
had not yet died; the poor could not think of anything else than food. The 
whole situation was as painful as being in contact with wicked people.13 
3. The heavy breasts of the starving women, 
whose once captivating nipples had sunk inwards 
and which resembled cups made of pure gold,14 
lost their hardness. 
4. When their creeper-like arms had lost their lustre 
and become extremely thin, 
the bracelets of the women 
whose eyes were dejected, became loose.15 
5. The faces of the women 
were covered with bristly hair, 
                    
 
9 Ohnuma: “The burning heat of the sun failed to melt the Himalayan snow sufficient-
ly.” This would be a rare natural phenomenon! 
10 Ohnuma: “and because of this the rain [salila-! MH] dried up” (for atuhinatayā pari-
ķuṣyatsalilam). The reading pariķuṣyatsalilam is to be corrected as pariķuṣyatsarit-
salilam according to the newly found Ms. B. This is confirmed by HJMtib which has 
chu bo kun gyi chu kun nas bskams pa daṅ or *pariķusyatsarvasaritsalilam. 
11 Ohnuma: “(the fields withered away,) as the farmers looked on dejectedly.” 
12 Ohnuma: “their desires for guests went unfulfilled.” 
13 Ohnuma separated the expression asajjanasaṃgatam iva p īḍākaram into two sepa-
rate attributes of durbhikṣam: “terrible” and “like a meeting hall [!] for wicked men.” 
14 Ohnuma translated ķucicāmīkara as “shiny.” 
15 Ohnuma is too free, especially the second half: “Most of the women had become ex-
tremely thin / And lost  their clear complexions. / Their eyes were hollow / And their 
jewellery neglected.” 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa 219 
grey like the moon at the end of the night,16 
and the coquettish play of their eyebrows and their smile had disappeared. 
6. When the housewife smeared the interior of the house with mud 
and gave stale food to her child 
this did not hurt her as much17 
as to see her husband stricken with hunger. 
7. When the cow came from the forest, 
having given up grazing because her calf had died, 
her dewlap swaying while she was crying out for morsels (of grass) (?), 
she made the housewife’s eyes overflow with tears.18 
8. Due to the lack of food the cows  
had gradually become weak and were walking slowly; 
their udders had become lax 
and the milk in them had dried up.19 
9. The very weak and perturbed cowherd, 
clinging to the base of the tail and biting his lower lip,20 
                    
 
16 Ohnuma: “[Their faces,] whic h had formerly put to sh ame the night-destroying 
moon.” This is based on the wrong reading - dūṣaṇāni (Ms A). Ms B has the correct 
reading -dhūsarāṇi which is supported by HJMtib 'od med. In any case, the image of 
the “night-destroying moon” is somewhat stra nge, to put it mildly. One has only to 
think of the standard attribute niķākara “night-maker” of the moon. 
17 Strangely enough Ohnuma translates this line by “But she herself no longer even 
cared” while the rest of the stanza is rendered correctly. 
18 Ohnuma: “A cow came to the housewife’s house / Acting as though she had been 
banished from the forest, for her calf had died . / The folds at her throat trembled with 
pitiful cries, / And her eyes overflowed with tears.” I think, weeping cows are a compa-
ratively rare image in Indian poetry. Ohnuma seems to have emended karuṇaṃ for 
kavala-. Here Ms B. reads kavalā- which makes at least some sense. kavalāvyāhti 
could mean a) “without the sound of (chewing ) morsels (of grass),” or b) “without eat-
ing morsels (of grass).” The second interpretation is possible because of ĀJM 29.44d 
ķvavāyasair vy āhtamāṃsaķoṇitaṃ. The word vyāhti- occurs at three more places in 
HJM: taduttaravyāhticañcalauṣṭhād 30.19c virasataravyāhtī 32.27+, virasavyāhti-
lakṣyatālurandhram 32.28b. In all these places it means “utterance, sound.”  
19 Ohnuma has unnecessarily turned this into a general statement: “When cows have no 
grass to eat, / They gradually become weak, / And their gait becomes sluggish. / Their 
udders become lax, / And their milk disappears.” 
20 Ohnuma: “He bit into her hindquarters” (for ādaķya kiṃ cid avaraṃ). This would be 
a rather unusual image! Rather “chewing some despicable (food ).” Ms B, however, 
 
Michael Hahn 220
somehow lifted21 the old and emaciated cow 
whose rib cage was clearly visible. 
10. The people in that region had nothing to eat and drink, 
the cows – their wealth – had died,  
their pale bodies were covered with ragged clothes;  
they were impaired by remaining there,22 
and yet they were unable to leave their houses. 
At that time R ūpyāvatī saw a female servant in a house. Her body was tor-
mented by the fire of hunger that was burning beyond measure since she had 
given birth to a child. The cavities of her cheeks, eyes and belly were com-
pletely sunken in. 23 Her rib cage was clearly visible, and her body was covered 
by very dirty rags; because of the dominance of her self-love the love for her 
offspring had disappeared, and she was on  the verge of devouring that very 
child. Having seen her, (R ūpyāvatī) spoke to her: “Sister, why do you intend to 
do such a cruel deed?” The woman thought to herself: “This is indeed 
Rūpyāvatī who is in the habit of giving and who is compassionate. Therefore, if 
I tell her what has happened, she will certainly find something to still my 
hunger.” Thinking this, she spoke: “Sister, my body is terribly penetrated by 
the fire of hunger that has swelled from my recent delivery. This is why I 
intend to eat my little child.” 
11. For the self-love of beings 
who regard even their own child an enemy  
does not see right and wrong.24 
Then Rūpyāvatī, her lotus-like eyes obscured by tears that had been prompted 
by her compassion, spoke to that woman: 
                    
 
reads adharaṃ which I prefer although it is not confirmed by HJMtib dman pa (= ava-
raṃ). 
21 Ohnuma: “threw her down” (for uccikṣipe!) HJMtib has *bslaṅ bar* gyur  “raised 
(her).” The block prints wrongly read bslad par. uccikṣipe occurs a second time in 37d 
where it is translated correctly by Ohnuma! 
22 Ohnuma: “who had gone to live in that country” is based on the wrong text nivāsāya 
gataḥ o f  m y  M s  A .  M s  B  r e a d s  nivāsopahataḥ and this is confirmed by the HJMtib 
gnas pas ñe bar ñams pa'i. “impaired by staying (there).” 
23 Ohnuma: “Her cheeks, eyes, belly and other bodily cavities were sunken and de-
pressed.” I think, randhra- qualifies either kukṣi- or even all three preceding words. 
24 Ohnuma: “Look, indeed, how she shows hatr ed even for her own child!” The active 
present participle paķyatām (gen. pl.) was wrongly taken as an imperative! 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa 221 
12. “O you cruel woman, how can you eat 25 this little child 
whose pain can be inferred only26 from its pitiful crying, 
whose curly hair is tangled  
and whose tiny eyes are as charming as a young gazelle’s? 
13. Aren’t women with their soft hearts full of tenderness 
towards a child, even when born from another woman, 
its shock of hair upright and moving in the wind, 
its eyelashes rough with dust from the earth?27 
14. Why don’t you wish to behold the face of your son 
with his forehead-mark and long eyes, 
its bud-like lips quivering with laughter, 
his speech still confused and stumbling? 
15. What woman would not like to behold her son 
childishly mimicking a horse-ride, his side-locks dirty28 and tangled  
while he rides on his wooden horse, 
the beautiful row of his bud-like teeth quivering with laughter?  
16. A crow, even when she is troubled by hunger, 
feeds her chick, that follows her devoutly, 
its tiny beak wide open, its head raised and looking upwards, 
desirous of food, and emitting harsh squawks –  
how much more a female human?29 
                    
 
25 Ohnuma translates atsyasi as “How can you ignore!” 
26 Ohnuma: “Your baby’s great anguish is obvious / From the extent of its pitiful 
wails / And his tangled, knotted hair.” mātra- is not “extent,” but “only” and the second 
attribute kuṭilākulakeķakam is wrongly subordinated to vibhāvita in the first attribute. 
27 Ohnuma: “And his eyelashes full of soil and dust.” kṣitirajaḥ is certainly a tatpuruṣa, 
not a dvandva compound. 
28 Ohnuma: “black,” but malina- is rather “dirty” in this context. I don’t understand 
why Ohnuma add “holding a whip” which cannot be found in the Sanskrit text. 
29 Ohnuma: “How much more should a virtuous woman do so!” The Sanskrit text of 
line d runs: kākī kṣudhā parigatāpi satī kim u str ī Although the Tibetan breaks the sen-
tence in the same manner as Ohnuma does ( bud med dam pas smos ci dgos ) I prefer to 
take satī not as adjective but as active present participle, referring to parigatāpi and in-
dicating the durative aspect: “even when being afflicted with hunger.” This is a very 
common usage. strī is only “a female human being,” in contrast with the crow, an ani-
mal. 
Michael Hahn 222
And further: at some point the people will learn that you are the murderer of 
your child and full of anger they will then expel you like a demoness from this 
country. Therefore abstain from such a reckless act!” 
17. “Having eaten this little child 
as a tigress devours the cub of a deer, 
do you perhaps wish to eat red-hot iron balls, 
you wicked woman?”30 
She spoke: “What shall I do, sister, since I cannot stand this fire of hunger that 
penetrates all my limbs?” R ūpyāvatī then thought: “If I go, taking this child 
with me, she will certainly die. But if I go and fetch some food to ease her hun-
ger and return too late,31 then she will kill this little child. 
18. He who out of ignorance acts too late  
and therefore to no avail will feel only sorrow. 
A parasol should be carried only as long 
as the sun still shines in the sky. 
Therefore it is now appropriate that I remove her pain32 with my own flesh.” 
19. One should take the essence 
from this worthless, fragile body 
as one should take the fruit from the tree at the shore 
whose roots are destroyed by the current and therefore yielding.33 
Then the woman again spoke: “Sister, please go. I am not able to butcher 34 this 
little child in front of you.” R ūpyāvatī then spoke to her: “Please get me some 
sharp cutting instrument if you have one.” She gave Rūpyavatī a knife. 
                    
 
30 Ohnuma: “How will you eat flaming iron ba lls [in hell], O wicked woman?” This 
does not sound too meaningf ul. The construction with katham can also mean (besides 
“how can, will you possibly …) “do you perhaps wish to …” Cf. praveṣṭukāmo viṣayā-
rigocaraṃ kathaṃ pramādyann iva n āma lakṣyase (HJM 4.14) “Do you perhaps wish 
to be seen as someone desiring to enter th e realm of the enemy ‘object of the senses,’ 
like a drunkard?” 
31 Ohnuma: aticirād “too late” is omitted in her translation. 
32 Literally: “gladden, delight her.” 
33 Ohnuma: “Its roots flying to and fro / And being lashed by the current” (for srotobhi-
nnavalanmūlāt) is a somewhat strange image. B reads calan “moving, i.e., yielding” 
instead of valan, which is confirmed by the Tibetan (’gul ba’i); this is definitely better. 
34 Ohnuma: “I cannot get this child ready [to eat] in front of you!” It seems as if the 
meaning of pramāpayati “to slaughter, butcher” was not recognized. 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa 223 
20. R ūpyāvatī then cut off with that sharp knife both her breasts 
which had the shape of golden vessels, blood gushing forth from them. 
Disregarding the pain of her own body she gave them 
to that young woman who was tormented by hunger. 
21. Those who disregard their own sorrow 
remove the sorrow of others, 
because they are tormented by the sorrow of others, 
not by their own sorrow. 
After she had given her two breasts to that woman, R ūpyāvatī entered her own 
house. 
22. The blood that poured forth from cutting her two breasts 
smeared her pearl necklace,35 her garment and the strings of her girdle; 
the beautiful woman now resembled a golden statue 
adorned with red sandal. 
Then Rūpyāvatī’s husband, full of bewilderment, rose from his seat and asked: 
23. “What demon-like, ugly and evil being, 36 beautiful lady, 
has disfirgured your handsome body 
by cutting off your breasts?” 
She told her husband the whole story and then said to him: “Hurry, my noble 
husband, we have to give something to  eat and drink to that woman because 
she suffers from the fire of hunger that has swelled from her delivery.“ His 
heart filled with astonishment, Rūpyāvatī’s husband agreed 
24. and sent to that poor woman  
a full bowl of sweet rice 
as instructed by (his wife) who had become  
a worthy receptacle of compassion. 
25. When people observed R ūpyāvatī’s astonishing deed 
they repeatedly set their twig-like fingers in motion.37 
26. And people said to her: “This deed of yours 
has certainly inspired the hearts of even selfish 38 people to perform 
charity.” 
                    
 
35 Ohnuma: “pearl necklace” (hāra) is omitted in the translation. 
36 Akalyāṇena is deliberately translated twice. 
37 Ohnuma: “They suddenly shook their hands [in the air] / Like twigs [shaking on a 
tree].” 
Michael Hahn 224
27. The quality  known as the ‘virtue of charity’ 
among those who strive for awakening 
has oviously been embodied in you 
for the welfare of the world. 
28. “What a contrast between her womanhood and her sharp mind, 
between her fragility and her generosity! 
The generosity of this good woman that surpasses 
all other acts of charity has put to shame all other donors!” 
Rūpyāvatī’s husband then made the following vow of truth: 
29. “If it is true that such an act of charity 
is unheard of in any other being, even a man, 
then, by the truthfulness of this statement, 
may my wife immediately get back her breasts!” 
30. After the husband had spoken this vow of truth 
her chest became heavy again 
with the weight of her breasts. 
31. Once again the lotus-pond that was R ūpyāvatī in shone that city. 
Quenching the thirst of the people by the water of donations, 
decorated with the lotus of her lovely face 
its filaments were the rays of her teeth 
and on it swam a pair of cakravākas that were her breasts. 
Then Indra, Lord of the Gods, thought: “Does R ūpyāvatī perhaps wish to expel 
me from the city of the gods by such an act of generosity that surpasses the 
generosity of all other people and become the Lord of the Gods herself?” With 
this concern in mind, he wished to find out her intentions. He dived down 
through the sky, as blue as an expanded mass of rain clouds, and descended to 
the royal residence Utpal āvatī. He magically transformed himself into a Brah-
min whose chest was adorned with a sacrificial thread as white as lotus fibres; 39 
a rosary was fixed on a string around his neck; part of his shoulder was covered 
with the hide of a black antelope that was as spotted as a woman’s eye; 40 and he 
held a vessel made of leaves in his right hand. Pretending to beg for alms he 
came to Rūpyāvatī’s house. Rūpyāvatī then came with various edible foods and 
                    
 
38 Ohnuma: “wicked.” 
39 Ohnuma: “a white sacred thread woven from lotus-fibres.” 
40 Ohnuma: “one shoulder was hidden from the eyes of women by a spotted black ante-
lope skin.” 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa 225 
gave it to Śakra who was disguised as a Brahmin. Looking for a suitable begin-
ning, the Lord of the Gods said to her: 
32. “The world is adorned by your fame, 
that comes from the sacrifice of your breasts; 
it is as white as broken conch shells 
and penetrates (everything). 
33. Do you wish to usurp Indra’s station by this austerity? 
It is only out of curiosity that I ask you, good woman.” 
34. She then spoke truthfully 41 to the Lord of the Gods: 
“I desire Buddhahood in order to pacify the three worlds. 
If this is true, o Brahmin, then may I immediately 
attain manhood, the receptacle of virtues in the world!” 
35. After these words she became a man, 
and Śakra, satisfied in his heart, returned to his city. 
When the people had learned what a miraculous deed 
had happened in the world, their resolve became even stronger. 
36. When her two breasts, prominent like the temples of an elephant, 
beheld the appearance of a moustache on her moon-like face, 
dark like a few patches of collyrium, 
they immediately disappeared from her broad chest, as if out of shame. 
Then the bodhisattva became known as R ūpyāvata. One day the king died in 
the royal residence Utpal āvatī without an heir. After his death the city was no 
longer bright, like a night in which the moon has been devoured by R āhu. After 
some days had passed, the ministers, full of grief because of the king’s death, 
consoled the inhabitants of the female quarters and spoke thus to the citizens: 
“Because it is without a leader, some da y this country will be attacked by ene-
mies and lose its wealth. Our endeavours will then be too late, as if one were to 
dig a well in order to extinguish the fi re of a burning house, and they would 
only be a cause for distress. Therefore this is now the right time: This young 
man R ūpyāvata has all the characteristics of a king and is endowed with at-
tracting42 (?) virtues. Therefore let us consecrate him as sovereign.” 
                    
 
41 Yathāvad “truly, truthfully” is not translated by Ohnuma. She obviously correlated it 
with tathā in line d (“As I wish …”) which is, of course, not possible. 
42 Ohnuma: “desirable.” This goes back to ābhikāmikaguṇasampanna( as printed in 
Hahn 1992. Unfortunately * ābhikāmika- is a ghost word. It is my emendation for the 
likewise unattested ābhigāmika- of Ms A (and Ms B). HJMtib has mṅon par 'byuṅ ba'i 
yon tan rnams kyis phun tshogs pa da ṅ ldan pa ste which does not support my emenda-
 
Michael Hahn 226
37.  Then the citizens, full of joy, consecrated him 
whose heart was devoted only to the service of others. 
And the attendants raised over him a lovely white parasol 
together with a pair of chowrie-fans.43 
38. The citizens made the city similar to the palace of Kubera, 
adorning it with garlands on the gates and market-stalls, 
making it attractive by the performances of actors, 
and besprinkling its streets and highways with scented water. 
39. At the right time the clouds rained water in great quantities, 
the people were no longer tormented by illness; 
they never heard even the word sorrow 
while Rūpyavata ruled his realm there with justice. 
40. Without field-work the rice grew in rich quantities, 
the trees always bore many fruits and flowers, 
and the cows44 produced large streams of milk of their own accord, 
while that good king ruled as if he were Pthu, the first ruler.45 
41. The earth found a good king in this ruler 
who fulfilled the wishes (of the people) by uncurtailed donations,46 
                    
 
tion. We find ābhigāmika a second time in HJM 25.10+ in an almost identical expres-
sion: ābhigāmikaguṇopetam, referring to Sudhana. Here the Tibetan has mṅon par 'gro 
bar byed pa'i  yon tan rnams da ṅ ldan pa  which clearly goes back to - gāmika-. Hence 
my emendation has to be ignored and the meaning of ābhigāmika- has to be defined 
anew by deriving it from abhigama- 1) approching, arrival; 2) sexual intercourse. I 
think because of the context the second meaning can safely be excluded. So it has to 
mean something like “inviting, perhaps in the sense of enticing, attracting.” 
43 Ohnuma: “Together with his entourage, / They raised over him a beautiful white 
parasol / With a pair of chowrie-fans.” sārdhaṃ ca c āmarayugena manobhir āmam 
uccikṣipe parijanena sit ātapatram ||. Ohnuma wrongly connects sārdhaṃ with parija-
nena and makes paurāḥ in line b the subject of uccikṣipe! 
44 Ohnuma: “The water-buffalo.” This goes back to my wrong reading uṣṭrāḥ “camels” 
(thus also HJMtib: rṅa mo rnams kyaṅ) for usrāḥ. In any case, the correct equivalent of 
rṅa mo rnams  should have been uṣṭryaḥ since the feminine of uṣṭra- is uṣṭrī! Hari-
bhaṭṭa’s wording seems to be influenced by Mbh (critical edition) 12.255.30: svayaṃ 
caiṣām ana ḍuho yujyanti ca vahanti ca | svaya ṃ usr āķ ca  duhyante mana ḥsaṃkalpa-
siddhibhiḥ ||.  
45 Ohnuma: “As if kingship itself were ruling over the well-ruled earth” (tasmin surāja-
ni pthāv iva pāti rājyam). Ohnuma did not recognize the absolute locative tasmin surā-
jani (rājyam, object of) pāti and the proper name Pthu, the first monarch (cf. Apte, s.v. 
pthuḥ 4). 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa 227 
under whom the three constituents of regal power flourished,47 
who controlled his senses,  
and whose body was adorned with the ornaments of various virtues. 
42. That lion among the kings ascended his lion throne, 
studded with many beautiful jewels,48 
his lotus-like feet honoured by the other monarchs; 
his face resembled a lotus, he was characterized by his insight,49 
and he taught the dharma to the people  
whose fruit is the ultimate truth.50 
43. “Look how great are the fruits of my acts of charity 
by which already in this life my female nature has been removed 
and this male nature has been brought about, 
the most renowned fruit of birth, following the three pursuits of life, 
and lovely by the rulership over the people.51 
44. This single flower that has blossomed from the tree of giving 
will elsewhere become another great fruit. 
Considering this one should frequently deposit in the soil of the needy52 
numerous treasures in the form of gifts which are purified by morality. 
                    
 
46 Ohnuma: “He had fulfilled his desire for uncurtailed giving.” 
47 Ohnuma: “he possessed good fortune / And the three constituents of regal power.” 
ķaktitrayodayavatā is rather tatpuruṣa than dvandva. 
48 prauḍhamaṇicāru, literally “beautiful by its copious jewels” (attribute of siṃhāsa-
naṃ), is omitted in Ohnuma’s translation. 
49 Or: “insight/discrimination was his law.” Ohnuma: “Though solitary by nature” is 
certainly not correct. 
50 Ohnuma: “leading to the ultimate fruit” for paramārthaphalaṃ is not quite correct. 
Rather “leading (-phalaṃ) to the ultimate truth.” 
51  Ohnuma: “And as the fruit of a celebrated birth, / I have produced that state of a 
man – / Made delightful by its sovereignty over the world / And its three regal constitu-
ents.” The second half of the stanza is admittedly somewhat ambiguous and difficult: 
(yena) udbhāvitaṃ prathitajanmaphala ṃ trivarga ṃ lok ādhipatyaramaṇīyam ida ṃ na-
ratvam. Literally this should be translated as “And which ( yena, i.e., dānasya vipāka-
mahattvam) has produced [the fulfilment of] the three goals of life, whereby the fruit of 
[birth] has become visible, namely this state of a man, delightful by its sovereignty 
over the world.” trivarga (i.e., artha, k āma, dharma ) is different from ķaktitraya- 
mentioned in 41c! 
52 Ohnuma: “among the world of supplicants.” Ohnuma has missed the image. 
Michael Hahn 228
45. If the fields ‘supplicants’ were not irrigated with the water ‘virtues,’ 
how could the donor who is eager for the fruit ‘donation,’ 
grow the seed ‘donation?’ 
46. What man, if he has any wisdom, 
would wish to scare away with a snake-like frown 
those supplicants who surpass (even one’s) relatives 
since they provide fame and merit?53 
47. One repeatedly speaks words of praise, the other speaks harshly; 
one looks full of devotion, the other full of contempt 
in the arrogance of his wealth; 
one – the supplicant – gives properly merit and fame, 
while the other – the giver – gives only material objects. 
In my opinion the supplicant surpasses by far 
the giver by these very virtues.54 
48. If the directions should be made fragrant from the wreaths of virtues, 
or if one wishes to enjoy the tasty great fruit (of giving) 
one has to plant daily into the ground ‘supplicants’ 
the trees ‘wealth’ that give the shade ‘fame’ when fully grown.”55 
49. Then, having spent sixty years in the world, 
having made happy both supplicants and virtuous people,56 
and having illuminated the world with his fame as white as water-lilies, 
                    
 
53 Ohnuma: “Those who exceed their fellow man / In giving away their famous merit –
 / What man, if he has any wisdom, / Would wish to scare such people away from their 
supplicants, / Contracting his brows like a snake?” 
54 The second half of the stanza is translated by Ohnuma as follows: “One person gives 
away many things, / While another gives only one thing. / I am a giver, / And the girl 
rich in virtue whom I ask to  marry / Will conquer me / By her former qualities.” The 
Sanskrit text runs as follows: ekaḥ s ādhu dad āti pu ṇyayaķasī vastv ekam ev āparo / 
dūraṃ māṃ prati y ācitā vijayate d ātāram ebhir gu ṇaiḥ ||. Hahn 1992 contains a typo: 
dūraṃ māṃ pratiyācitā instead of dūraṃ māṃ prati yācitā. Obviously this was the ori-
gin of Ohnuma’s very fanciful interpretation. 
55 udayino literally “when rising, growing” is rendered as “flourishing” by Ohnuma. 
Haribhaṭṭa’s intention in the second half of the stanza is not fully grasped or expressed 
by Ohnuma: “Then flourishing trees of wealth / With shades of great fame / must be 
planted in the ground of supplicants / Every single day.” 
56 Ohnuma: “Having constantly gratified virtuous supplicants.” Ohnuma ignores the ca. 
In defence of Haribhaṭṭa 229 
the king, (still) endowed with great strength,57  
changed into another form of existence. 
“Therefore, if the Blessed One thus gave away his own flesh even when reborn 
as a woman, who, when reborn as a man, could pay too much attention to 
external objects?” With these words one should encourage people who are 
willing to give. 
 
The story of Rūpyāvatī, the sixth legend (of the first decade) 
 
                    
 
57 Ohnuma: “rich in virtue” It seems that Ohnuma has emended gurubalaḥ (Mss AB) as 
*guṇabalaḥ. This is not a bad idea, however, gurubalaḥ is also confirmed by HJMtib 
(stobs chen). 