UC Davis
UC Davis Previously Published Works
Title
Mindfulness Broadens Awareness and Builds Eudaimonic Meaning: A Process Model of
Mindful Positive Emotion Regulation
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qg8p1n2
Journal
Psychological Inquiry, 26(4)
ISSN
1047-840X
Authors
Garland, Eric L
Farb, Norman A
Goldin, Philippe R
et al.
Publication Date
2015-10-02
DOI
10.1080/1047840x.2015.1064294
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Psychol Inq. 2015 October 1; 26(4): 293–314. doi:10.1080/1047840X.2015.1064294.
Mindfulness Broadens Awareness and Builds Eudaimonic
Meaning: A Process Model of Mindful Positive Emotion
Regulation
Eric L. Garland,
University of Utah
Norman A. Farb,
University of Toronto
Philippe Goldin, and
University of California - Davis
Barbara L. Fredrickson
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill
Eric L. Garland: eric.garland@socwk.utah.edu; Norman A. Farb: norman.farb@utoronto.co; Philippe Goldin:
pgoldin@ucdavis.edu; Barbara L. Fredrickson: blf@unc.edu
Abstract
Contemporary scholarship on mindfulness casts it as a form of purely non-evaluative engagement
with experience. Yet, traditionally mindfulness was not intended to operate in a vacuum of
dispassionate observation, but was seen as facilitative of eudaimonic mental states. In spite of this
historical context, modern psychological research has neglected to ask the question of how the
practice of mindfulness affects downstream emotion regulatory processes to impact the sense of
meaning in life. To fill this lacuna, here we describe the Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory, from
which we derive a novel process model of mindful positive emotion regulation informed by
affective science, in which mindfulness is proposed to introduce flexibility in the generation of
cognitive appraisals by enhancing interoceptive attention, thereby expanding the scope of
cognition to facilitate reappraisal of adversity and savoring of positive experience. This process is
proposed to culminate in a deepened capacity for meaning-making and greater engagement with
life.
Keywords
affective science; broaden-and-build; emotion regulation; eudaimonic well-being; interoception;
mindfulness; Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory; positive emotion; post-traumatic growth;
reappraisal; upward spiral
A common misperception is that Buddhism uniformly denies the value of stimulus-
driven pleasures, as if it were morally wrong to enjoy the simple pleasures of life,
Corresponding author: Eric Garland, College of Social Work and Huntsman Cancer Institute, 395 South, 1500 East, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 2
let alone the joys of raising a family, creating fine works of art, or making scientific
discoveries… The enjoyment of such transient experiences is not in opposition to
the cultivation of positive attitudes and commitments or the cultivation of the types
of mental balance that yield inner well-being. In fact, one may derive greater
enjoyment from hedonic pleasures as a result of cultivating well-being.” (p. 692).
Mindfulness training has grown increasingly popular in the West by isolating meditative
practices from their traditional soteriological context. By eschewing ethically prescriptive
content, manualized mindfulness programs have found traction in clinics and communities
worldwide. Yet in avoiding prescription of particular values and virtues, contemporary
theories of mindfulness are left strangely silent on the generative manifestations of training-
related change. Indeed, most scientific models of mindfulness offer a primarily eliminative
account of how mindfulness functions, focusing on the extinction of maladaptive habits and
disengagement from negative states of mind rather than the cultivation of adaptive behavior
and positive states of mind. While extinction and disengagement seem to be important
components of mindfulness’ efficacy (Hölzel et al., 2011), an exclusive focus on the
reduction of negative mental states and behaviors provides an incomplete account of how
mindfulness engenders lasting positive change.
Consequently, modern psychological research on mindfulness has largely neglected to ask
the question of how the acute state of mindfulness during meditation affects downstream
positive emotion regulatory processes to promote meaning in life. Although scientific
advances have elucidated the cognitive, affective, and neurobiological correlates of the
meditative states evoked by mindfulness practice (Tang, Hölzel, & Posner, 2015), less is
known about what happens when practitioners “get off the cushion” and refocus on their
autobiographical selves constituted by language and personal narratives. This narrative
orientation is an imperative, insofar as the attribution of semantic and episodic meaning to
experience is fundamental to psychological development in Western society (Vygotsky,
1978), allowing for negotiation of the socio-cultural environment. Thus, while contemporary
scholarship claims that mindfulness techniques decrease semantic-evaluative processing
(Brown & Ryan, 2003; Hölzel et al., 2011; Kabat-Zinn, 1990), we argue that Westerners will
inevitably reengage with cognitive appraisals of self and world following the acute phase of
mindfulness practice. Psychological science has yet to thoroughly examine how the practice
of mindfulness impacts appraisal and meaning-making processes as the culturally-
embedded, autobiographical self navigates through life’s challenges. In this paper, we argue
that mindfulness promotes positive reappraisal, a salutary form of evaluative cognitive-
affective processing, to enhance eudaimonic well-being. Unlike hedonic approaches to
happiness, which depend on obtaining pleasure and avoiding pain, eudaimonic well-being is
characterized by a sense of purpose and meaningful, positive engagement with life that
arises when one’s life activities are congruent with deeply held values even under conditions
of adversity (Ryan & Deci, 2001; Rhyff, 2014). We propose that through the mechanism of
reappraisal, mindfulness may generate eudaimonic meaning and foster flourishing in life.
We note that this thesis deviates significantly from the prevailing scholarly focus on
mindfulness as a form of strictly non-conceptual attention and non-judgmental awareness.
As such, the contention that mindfulness promotes rather than extinguishes downstream
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 3
evaluative processes has sparked heated debate. Indeed, some contemporary psychological
scientists assert that mindfulness is antithetical to reappraisal (Brewer, Elwafi, & Davis,
2012; Chambers, Gullone, & Allen, 2009). From this view, linking mindfulness and positive
reappraisal may seem contradictory, as reappraisal introduces judgments to an ostensibly
non-evaluative process. These concerns are important for the clear definition of mindfulness
as a discrete psychological construct. On the other hand, we argue that focusing narrowly on
the non-conceptual, non-evaluative aspects of mindfulness may obscure its broader purpose
of engendering eudaimonic meaning - and a complete account of mindfulness must therefore
detail how attention training helps to realize this goal.
In the discussion below, we aim to advance an account of mindfulness training informed by
affective science that includes both eliminative and generative mechanisms for human
development. Whereas positive psychological states and behaviors may spontaneously arise
with the elimination of maladaptive habits, we argue that such outcomes are unlikely in the
absence of generative mechanisms that provide novel cognitive frames to guide thought,
feeling, and action. To achieve a more complete and balanced explanation of mindfulness-
based personal transformation, we suggest that such a comprehensive model is necessary for
understanding the therapeutic mechanisms of mindfulness in secular Western contexts. A
complete psychological science of mindfulness must therefore account for the generation
and maintenance of positive meaning if we are to understand and leverage the purported
benefits of mindfulness training. To that end, we describe herein the Mindfulness-to-
Meaning Theory.
The Explanatory Gap in Models of Mindfulness
The rise of mindfulness in the West is supported by its promise to engender eudaimonic
well-being (Brown & Ryan, 2003). Indeed, mindfulness practitioners report significantly
higher levels of eudaimonic well-being than non-practitioners, levels which are associated
with the propensity to be mindful in everyday life (Hanley, Warner, & Garland, 2014). The
flourishing of mindfulness in fields such as medicine and healthcare may be in due, in part,
to its potential eudaimonic benefits; yet, empirical reports have largely focused on the
efficacy of mindfulness-based interventions for reducing psychological distress (Goyal et al.,
2014). Initial evidence of beneficial outcomes led to the standardization of the Mindfulness-
Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) training program (Kabat-Zinn, 1990), followed by the
development of more specialized programs for persons with clinical disorders like
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT; Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002),
Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention (MBRP; Bowen, Chawla, & Marlatt, 2012), and
Mindfulness-Oriented Recovery Enhancement (MORE; Garland, 2013).
In these programs, the central practice of mindfulness has been operationalized as cultivating
an intentional, nonjudgmental form of attention focused on experience as it unfolds in the
present moment (Kabat-Zinn, 1990). Through focus on momentary physical sensation and
disengagement from mental proliferation, mindful attention is thought to extinguish habitual
negative reactions (Bishop et al., 2004) – a primarily eliminative account that accords with a
substantial literature on the regulatory benefits of psychological distance in the face of
negative experience (Kross & Ayduk, 2011). In the mindfulness literature, the process of
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 4
achieving psychological distance has been referred to as decentering (Fresco, Segal, Buis, &
Kennedy, 2007). In parallel, this shift from evaluative processing to non-judgmental
awareness has been described in neuroscientific explorations as an increased integration of
sensory information over neural systems for conceptual elaboration (Farb et al., 2007;
Kilpatrick et al. 2011).
While providing a compelling explanation for some therapeutic effects of mindfulness,
current models also exhibit an explanatory gap for how such nonjudgmental attention
promotes eudaimonic well-being. Repeated practice in attending to physical sensation such
as the breath may strengthen capacity for sustained sensory attention, as evidenced by
neuroimaging findings suggesting enhanced processing of respiratory signals following
mindfulness training (Farb, Segal, & Anderson, 2013). Consequently, cultivating sustained
attention ought to reduce mind-wandering, and indeed improvements to attentional control
and perceptual discrimination are quantifiable benefits of intensive meditation training
(MacLean et al., 2010). While changes in these cognitive capacities correlate with
improvements in well-being (Sahdra et al., 2011), they do not necessarily explain them – for
example, it is unclear how sustained attention to a target such as the breath could enhance
appraisals about the self or one’s purpose in the world.
It is often argued that the purpose of mindfulness practices is not to build attentional
capacities themselves, but instead to foster insight into one’s maladaptive patterns of
interpreting experience (Bishop et al., 2004). According to such accounts, by noticing one’s
habitual patterns of responding, a person can modify attentional habits – a potent emotion
regulatory strategy in itself (Todd, Cunningham, Anderson, & Thompson, 2012). In that
regard, mindfulness training has been associated with reduced attentional biases, particularly
in response to negative stimuli (Vago & Nakamura, 2011; Garland & Howard, 2013).
However, disengagement from fixation on negative events does not seem sufficient to
promote eudaimonic well-being. The insufficiency of cognitive capacity-based accounts of
mindfulness to provide an explanation for positive self-transformation towards eudaimonia
is a non-trivial gap in scientific models of mindfulness.
The central question we address in this paper is how mindfulness training fosters
eudaimonic responses to stress that engender a sense of meaningfulness in life. We propose
that the practice of mindfulness evokes a metacognitive state that transforms how one
attends to experience, thereby promoting positive reappraisals that facilitate positive affect
and adaptive behavior. Our use of the term positive reappraisal is not intended to imply that
mindfulness involves recasting inherently deleterious experiences as positive. Instead, the
process of positive reappraisal that flows from mindfulness involves broadening the scope of
appraisal to appreciate that even aversive experiences are potential vehicles for personal
transformation and growth. Through this re-orienting to aversive experience, positive
reappraisal provides meaningful experiences in the face of stress that complement and
sustain the extinction of maladaptive cognitive habits.
In addition to modulating the regulation of aversive experience, we would also argue that
positive reappraisal potentially improves savoring, the appreciation for positive experiences,
and thereby enhances natural reward processing. Given traditional contemplative models of
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 5
mindfulness, we put forward the claim that focusing on positive experiences should not be
taboo within contemporary mindfulness training, so long as this focus is not conflated with
clinging to such experiences when they arise. Given descriptions of mindfulness as
promoting happiness in addition to alleviating suffering (Brown & Ryan, 2003), a complete
theory of mindfulness must account for the cultivation of positive mental states rather than
focus exclusively on the reduction of negative states. Reappraisal and savoring may be
skillful means of such cultivation.
Why Reappraisal?
Outside of the mindfulness literature, reappraisal is already central to many contemporary
theories of emotion regulation. For instance, reappraisal is a key construct in Lazarus and
Folkman’s seminal transactional model of stress and coping (1984), which holds that the
experience of stress is cognitively-mediated. In subsequent research, reappraisal has
emerged as one of the most powerful mechanisms for transforming affective experience
(Gross & Thompson, 2007). According to the transactional model, humans appraise the
significance of a given stressor relative to its context, and stress reactions arise from the
appraisal that demands presented by the stressor exceed one’s resources and therefore pose a
threat to well-being or goal attainment (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Threat appraisals are
often automatic (Ohman, Carlsson, Lundqvist, & Ingvar, 2007), resulting in negative
emotions and stereotyped or habitual defensive behavior. By contrast, if the stressor is
appraised to be navigable or controllable, such challenge appraisals will result in a sense of
positive affect and self-efficacy (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984).
While stressful life events are often initially appraised negatively, with an influx of new data,
they may be reappraised as innocuous or valuable, with consequent effects on emotion,
physiology, and behavior. This cognitive strategy, known as positive reappraisal, is the
adaptive process through which stressful events are re-construed as benign, meaningful, or
even growth-promoting (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). In this paper, we propose the
Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory, which asserts that by modifying how one attends to the
cognitive, affective, and interoceptive sequelae of emotion provocation, mindfulness
introduces flexibility into the creation of autobiographical meaning, stimulating the natural
human capacity to positively reappraise adverse events and savor the positive aspects of
experience. By fostering positive reappraisals and emotions, mindfulness may generate deep
eudaimonic meanings that promote resilience and engagement with a valued and purposeful
life.
The seeds of this idea were sown in the modern scientific literature decades ago. Kabat-Zinn
(1990) first posited that mindfulness could enhance positive cognitive-affective responses to
stressors. Around this time, Teasdale (1993) concluded that negative emotions could be
alleviated by accessing and transforming implicit, implicational meanings derived
holistically from experience, and later, asserted that mindfulness might be a means of
transforming such implicational meanings (Teasdale, Segal, & Williams, 1995). Since then,
surprisingly little attention has been paid to the ways in which mindfulness may enhance
eudaimonic meaning-making in stressful contexts to generate positive emotions. Drawing on
insights from affective science, in the present paper we aim to expand on this earlier work by
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 6
further specifying this process and making a number of testable propositions regarding the
manner in which mindfulness techniques promote positive psychological states in the wake
of adverse life events.
To establish the basis for a conceptual framework in which mindfulness promotes
eudaimonic well-being, we first ground our proposal in the affective science of reappraisal.
We then detail a process model (c.f., Gross, 2015) of mindful positive emotion regulation
which offers a temporally extended, dynamic account of the manner in which mindfulness
modulates the attention-appraisal-emotion interface to promote meaning in the face of
adversity. Finally, we situate our theoretical proposal in a traditional Buddhist perspective
that likewise links the construct of mindfulness to that of insight, and thereby, to reappraisal.
Mindful Reappraisal as a Process for Promoting Positive Therapeutic
Change
Hedonic adaptation and eudaimonic change
Though some people are traumatized by adverse life events, most demonstrate remarkable
resilience under stressful conditions (Bonnano, 2004). Indeed, research shows that while
hedonic experiences vary from day to day, one’s sense of well-being remains consistent in
the face of negative events, a process known as hedonic adaptation (Frederick & Lowenstein,
1999). Ratings of subjective well-being are 30–40% stable even over multiple decades
(Diener & Lucas, 1999). Thus, fluctuations in daily emotion are often self-extinguishing in
the form of a damped oscillator (Chow, Ram, Boker, Fujita, & Clore, 2005), tending to
return to an individual set point via homeostatic mechanisms. Despite hedonic adaptation,
human happiness is not entirely fixed (Lucas, 2007; Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, & Schkade,
2005). Indeed, a substantial subset of individuals report reliable increases in happiness
across the lifespan, which appear to be related to focusing on non-zero sum goals (e.g.,
altruism, social activism) rather than monetary gains (Headey, 2008). The happiness-
boosting effects of prioritizing eudaimonic goals over mere hedonic gratification suggests
that practices that support eudaimonic ends may be especially important for positive changes
in life satisfaction. Indeed, experiences of eudaimonic meaning may provide perturbations of
sufficient intensity to shift a homeostatic affective system stabilized by negative feedback
mechanisms into an autoregressive yet forwardly-progressing, self-reinforcing, resonant
cycle of positive affect and cognition that elsewhere we (Garland, Fredrickson, Kring,
Johnson, Meyer, & Penn, 2010) have described as an upward spiral of psychological
resilience and flourishing.
The affective science of happiness (e.g., Fredrickson, 2013) therefore seems to offer two
major principles for promoting upward spirals of stress resilience and positive change. First,
hedonic adaptation appears to be an effective process for minimizing the psychological
impact of negative life events. Second, a focus on eudaimonic goals may be critical for
establishing a sustainable, positive trajectory of well-being. Recent work has in fact linked a
relative emphasis on eudaimonic or hedonic pursuits to a genomic profile that is potentially
health-generating (Fredrickson, Grewen, Coffey, Algoe, Firestine, Arevalo, Ma, & Cole,
2013; Fredrickson, Grewen, Algoe, Firestine, Arevalo, Ma, & Cole, 2015). In light of these
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 7
dual principles, we suggest that mindfulness training may facilitate adaptation and cultivate
eudaimonia through a process of promoting positive reappraisal in stressful contexts. We
propose that such “mindful reappraisal” occurs at multiple levels of temporal resolution, in
keeping with iterative process models of emotional experience (Cunningham, Zelazo,
Packer, & Van Bavel, 2007) and extended process models of emotion regulation (Gross,
2015). Immediately following a stressor, mindfulness attenuates negative attentional biases
and maladaptive elaborative habits, allowing positive reappraisal to enter into the iterative
emotion regulatory process to modulate the impact of a negative event. Over longer
timescales, mindfulness enables reflective processes to magnify the affective benefits of
positive reappraisal and generate eudaimonic well-being. Next, we outline evidence
supporting positive reappraisal as an emotion-regulatory strategy, and detail mechanisms by
which mindfulness might engender reappraisal.
Positive reappraisal as an adaptive cognitive change strategy
While threat appraisals elicit the evolutionarily-conserved stress response, an important
aspect of the human information processing system is to recognize threat resolution,
countering excitatory sympathetic activity with parasympathetic activation (Porges, 2007).
Consequently, the stress response is mutable, continuously reshaped as a function of the
dynamic interplay between shifting situational demands and internal resources. Reappraisals
modify the consequences of stress through dynamic feedforward mechanisms that alter the
meaning of the stressor while calibrating behavioral responses to it. Following reappraisal,
an event that was appraised as threatening may be reinterpreted as innocuous, benign, or
even serving some greater purpose for self or others.
Positive forms of reappraisal may be central means of adapting to the rigors of life. Indeed,
in the face of adverse conditions, people commonly believe that they have personally grown
from dealing with the stressful event. In one estimate, 42% of a sample of adults reported
having positively re-interpreted a life crisis, and 87% of this subset of individuals reported
that facing the crisis had enriched their sense of positive meaning in life (Ebersole & Flores,
1989). Over half (51.1%) of a large sample of survivors (N = 2080) of the devastating 2008
earthquake in Sichuan province, China reported having experienced meaningful growth in its
wake, including a sense of appreciation of life, an opening to new possibilities, or the
development of personal strength (Xu & Liao, 2011). Similarly, after a deadly tornado struck
Madison, Florida in 1988, 90% of survivors reported receiving some form of benefit from
undergoing the experience, such as personal growth or enhancing closeness with others
(McMillen, Smith, & Fisher, 1997) - history is replete with such examples. Profound
interpersonal challenges are also often met with positive reappraisal; for example, Folkman
(1997) found that many caregivers of partners with HIV held the belief that the shared
experience of illness had allowed them to develop deep levels of intimacy with their partners
that might not have been possible in the absence of the illness. Yet, finding positive meaning
in adversity does not only occur in the aftermath of disasters and serious relational adversity;
it also commonly occurs in the face of daily stressors. For instance, after being rudely
snubbed by a work supervisor, one might reappraise the mistreatment into an opportunity to
realize the value of being sensitive to the opinions and perspectives of others.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 8
Thus, positive reappraisal is not merely a form of saccharine “positive thinking” or a wishful
denial of reality. Instead, positive reappraisal may involve a reframing of stressful events as
inherently meaningful for personal growth and development – a means of learning and
developing resilience out of the encounter with adversity. Meta-analyses reveal that positive
reappraisal, alternately conceptualized as benefit-finding (Affleck & Tennen, 1996) or post-
traumatic growth (Tedeshi & Calhoun, 2004), is significantly associated with lower levels of
distress and improved mental health outcomes (Helgeson, Reynolds, & Tomich, 2006), and
tends to increase the ratio of positive to negative affect in response to stressors (Shiota &
Levenson, 2012). Positive reappraisal has salutary influences on stress physiology, including
immune, neuroendocrine, and cardiovascular parameters (Bower, Low, Moskowitz, Sepah,
& Epel, 2008), and enhances top-down, prefrontal cortical regulation of limbic circuitry
subserving negative affect (Ochsner & Gross, 2005). Importantly, positive reappraisal is not
a defense mechanism used to suppress unwanted experience. To the contrary, it is an active
coping strategy that involves direct contemplation of the stressor and its context (Folkman,
1997). As such, studies indicate that positive reappraisal has a distinct physiological
signature characterized by increased parasympathetic nervous system activation, unlike
suppression which leads to a physiological state characterized by sympathetic dominance
(Gross, 2002; but see Witvliet et al., 2011).
In contrast to suppression and other avoidant coping strategies, positive reappraisal is often a
critical step towards an active reengagement with the stressor. To illustrate, a person stricken
with a non-fatal myocardial infarction might positively reappraise the event as a chance to
modify their lifestyle and consequently begin to change their diet and exercise behaviors. A
person who has recovered from an incident of sexual victimization might view their survival
of the assault as evidence of their strength and resilience, and they might decide to dedicate
their life to helping others make similar recoveries. A person embroiled in an argument with
a spouse might initially vilify him and recoil from his attempts to resolve the conflict, and
then, after recognizing his unwavering devotion to their relationship, redouble her efforts to
understand his position. Hence, positive reappraisal is an adaptive and approach-oriented
strategy.
The role of mindfulness in positive reappraisal
The emotional processing of stressful life events is dynamic, involving the engagement,
adaptation, and re-engagement of attentional and appraisal mechanisms that subserve the
valuation process (Gross, 2015). Initial appraisals flow from orienting attention to the
stressor and the subsequent triggering of learned stimulus-outcome associations, which
include both implicit associations, as well as declarative, explicit interpretations of the
meaning of the stimulus grounded in schemas, beliefs, and goals (Ellsworth & Scherer,
2002). However, when attention shifts from the stressor to the interpretive context in which
it is experienced, reappraisal may occur, modifying the dynamic unfolding of habitual
associative responses by introducing information that alters the interpretive context for the
triggering stimulus and the core affective state. The reframed stimulus or one’s emotional
response to it may then serve as novel inputs into the valuation process, triggering a new
iteration of interpretive associations distinct from the initial associative response. In this
way, the co-activation and interaction of valuation systems can result in effective emotion
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 9
regulation. Critically, reappraisal requires an influx of novel information with which to
reformulate the original stress appraisal (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Yet, negative emotions
narrow attention (Gable & Harmon-Jones, 2010), elicit habitual responding (Schwabe &
Wolf, 2009), and bias information processing toward negative mental content and
environmental features (Garland et al., 2010), making reappraisal difficult to employ. An
effortful attentional stance may be required to access new, hopeful perspectives in the
presence of emotionally-charged stimuli that reflexively fixate attention onto adverse
contextual circumstances.
We argue that mindfulness is a key factor that can allow stimulus reframing to enter into the
appraisal process (Garland, 2007; Garland, Gaylord, & Park, 2009). In the first stage of this
process, mindfulness disrupts default activation of schemas and scripts to allow for flexible
selection of appraisals. In this capacity, mindfulness interrupts automatic conditioned
reactions, allowing for conscious reflection. By interrupting scripted defensive responses to
an appraised stressor, it is possible to re-evaluate the context in which initial stress appraisals
are made. Thus, mindfulness provides a buffer from immediate, automatic reactivity, thereby
clearing working memory (Teasdale & Chaskalson, 2011) and providing “psychological
space” for greater perspective taking and cognitive set shifting – the foundation of
reappraisal.
The set shifting feature of mindfulness involves decentering from thoughts, emotions, and
sensations into a metacognitive state of awareness (Teasdale et al., 1995). This mental
operation may be a key link between appraisal and reappraisal, involving a shift in attention
from the contents of consciousness to the process of consciousness itself. In this sense,
mindfulness involves a mode of apperception in which one monitors the object of cognition
as well as the meta-level of awareness in which dynamic models (e.g., schemas) of the
object level are contained (Nelson, Stuart, Howard, & Crowley, 1997). In other words, as
one decenters from distressing psychological content, one continues to monitor the contents
of consciousness while becoming aware of the quality of awareness itself – becoming aware,
for example, of how one is or is not paying attention to the subtle, ever-changing mental
phenomena that constitute each moment of consciousness. As a result of decentering into
this metacognitive state, one may come to the fundamental realization “thoughts are not
facts” (Segal, Williams, and Teasdale, 2002).
Through decentering, mindfulness is thought to lead to dis-identification from thoughts and
emotions, liberating awareness from schematized narratives about self and world, and
promoting flexible selection of adaptive responses (Shapiro, Astin, Carlson, & Freedman,
2006). Studies suggest that the psychological distance afforded by this process may facilitate
meaning making in response to negative events (Kross & Ayduk, 2011), which in turn
reduces distress over thoughts and emotions elicited by these events (Kross & Ayduk, 2008).
Moreover, viewing experiences at a psychological distance facilitates non-threatening
reflection on negative events, increases openness to alternative viewpoints, and fosters
reasoning (Kross & Grossman, 2012). Thus, decentering, as a form of psychological
distance, may promote re-construal of experience by taking the “big picture” into account to
engender insight and closure (Kross & Ayduk, 2011).
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 10
We theorize that mindfulness may engender positive reappraisal by virtue of its purported
ability to disrupt automatic appraisal and reactivity, creating psychological distance that is
fertile ground for constructive reframing of one’s circumstances. The unfolding of this
mindful reappraisal process is depicted in Figure 1. First, in order to re-construe an appraisal
of an adverse event as positive, one must suspend the initial stress appraisal and disengage
cognitive resources from it – in essence, “letting go” of the appraisal and its affective
concomitants by viewing them from a metacognitive vantage point that quells prior semantic
evaluations associated with the offending stimulus. This decentering process may be initially
cued by stress-evoked perturbations to bodily homeostasis interpreted as negative affect
(Friedman, 2010), or by social feedback indicating that one has come into the grip of strong
emotions. The optimal ‘dose’ or duration of decentering required may depend upon the
intensity of the stressor and the strength of the conditioned response that the practitioner is
attempting to moderate. Over time, decentering from stress appraisals into the state of
metacognitive awareness may extinguish conditioned responses, as one focuses attention on
one’s relation to the conditioned stimulus rather than fulfilling the conditioned response.
Through iterative reprocessing of stressors, mindful attention may facilitate extinction
learning of habitual responses, though admittedly the temporal dynamics that govern such
extinction are far from understood (Williams, 2010).
Further, mindful attention may release attentional fixation from rumination on the stressor
while enhancing sensory awareness of stressor’s broader, socio-environmental context.
Indeed, mindfulness has been empirically associated with increased attentional
disengagement from emotionally-salient stimuli (Garland & Howard, 2013), cognitive
flexibility (Moore & Malinowski, 2009), and attentional re-orienting capacity (Jha,
Krompinger, & Baime, 2007). Thus, theoretically, as one decenters into the metacognitive
state, attention is no longer narrowly constricted, but instead broadens to encompass the
stressor as well as previously unattended contextual information. In support of this claim,
mindfulness has been associated with improved detection of changes in stimulus sets
(Hodgins & Adair, 2010).
The attentional broadening afforded by mindfulness practice may derive from direct effects
on the dorsal and ventral attention streams in the brain (Hölzel et al., 2011). Alternatively, in
light of evidence that low-approach motivated positive affective states (e.g., contentment and
satisfaction) can broaden cognition (Harmon-Jones, Gable, & Price, 2013; Fredrickson &
Branigan, 2005), this cognitive broadening may be in part an indirect effect of the positive
emotions induced by mindfulness meditation. Contrary to some modern characterizations
that paint it as producing an austere, affectively-neutral state of bare attention, mindfulness
has been traditionally described as engendering positive or pleasurable qualities such as
serenity, appreciation, gratitude, happiness, joy, or even bliss (Namgyal, 2006).1 In that
regard, a number of observational studies (Schroevers & Brandsma, 2009; Orzech, Shapiro,
Brown, & McKay, 2009) and randomized controlled trials (Geschwind, Peeters, Drukker,
1Nonetheless, at certain stages of contemplative practice, mindfulness meditation may evoke acute or persistent psychological distress,
experiences of depersonalization, intense negative emotions, and existential terror. These “dark night of the soul” experiences may
provide fodder for developing a more profound compassion for the suffering of others, and this connectivity with others may in turn
provide the basis for positive emotions and eudaimonic well-being.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 11
vas Os, & Wichers, 2011; Henderson et al., 2012; Nyklíček & Kuijpers, 2008; Zautra et al.,
2008; Davis & Zautra, 2013) demonstrate effects of mindfulness on increasing positive
emotion. Such findings of mindfulness-induced increases in positive emotions may be the
result of training-related changes in brain function. In that regard, Davidson et al. (2003)
observed significantly greater asymmetrical left anterior prefrontal cortex activation, a
known neural correlate of approach-related, and generally positive emotions, among
participants of randomized to MBSR compared to persons randomized to a wait-list control
group. Similarly, brief mindfulness training led to frontal asymmetric
electroencephalographic activation associated with positive emotion (Moyer et al., 2011).
Moreover, a recent case study of an advanced Buddhist practitioner found that meditation-
induced joy coupled with activation of the mesolimbic reward system (Hagerty, Isaacs,
Brasington, Shupe, Fetz, & Cramer, 2013). We hypothesize that the positive emotions and
accompanying neural signatures evoked by mindfulness may provide a signal which tunes
the attentional system to detect stimuli that are congruent with the induced emotional state.
As a result of this broadened scope of attention and the tuning of the attentional system
toward the positively-valenced aspects of self and world, the individual may access new data
with which to reappraise circumstances as benign, meaningful, or growth-promoting.
Indeed, brief mindfulness induction has been shown to reduce negativity bias by increasing
positive judgments of neutral stimuli (Kiken & Shook, 2011), and improves positive emotion
information processing (Roberts-Wolfe, Sacchet, Roth, & Britton, 2012). Attending to the
positive aspects of the situation may result in additional positive emotions, which magnifies
positive reappraisal (Tugade & Fredrickson, 2004). Indeed, attention to positive stimuli and
positive reappraisals are known to hasten recovery from negative emotional arousal
(Fredrickson, Branigan, Mancuso & Tugade, 2000; Tugade & Fredrickson, 2004). From the
broadened, metacognitive state of mindfulness, positive features of the event or context
which had been previously unnoticed may now become accessible to consciousness as the
“stuff” of which reappraisals are made.
While mindfulness practice may temporarily suspend evaluative processing, because the
human mind is embedded in narratives which reduce uncertainty and produce a coherent life
story (Olivares, 2010), it is inevitable that one will re-engage a semantic-linguistic mode as
they integrate the encounter with the stressor into autobiographical memory. The
psychological distance afforded by mindfulness may allow for self-reflection that generates
a sense of closure or reckoning with the experience. As one returns to this narrative mode
from the mindful state, reappraisals may arise either through a conscious process of
reflection or through automatic processes grounded in working memory for intuitive
meanings, based on spontaneous insights. As Teasdale and Chaskalson (2011) state:
“mindfulness is characterized by configurations of cognitive processing in which working
memory for implicit, intuitive meaning plays a central role; when mindfulness transforms
suffering by changing the way experience is processed or viewed, the integration of
information into new patterns within this working memory plays a central role” (p. 109). As
the result of positive emotional tuning of the information processing system, the new
appraisals emerging from self-reflection or insight will tend to have a positive valence. As
detailed later in this paper, such reappraisals result in positive emotions, leading to a
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 12
deepened sense of eudaimonic meaning and motivation to engage in prosocial or valued
actions.
We have just described a single iteration of the mindful positive emotion regulation process.
However, both within and across emotion regulation episodes (which may extend from
seconds to minutes, hours, and even days), multiple iterations of this process are likely to
unfold, as the individual continues to practice mindfulness to contemplate and “sit with” the
meaning of stressor event. We (Garland, Fredrickson, et al., 2010) and others (e.g.,
Chambers et al., 2009) have hypothesized that the repeated, intentional engagement of the
metacognitive state of mindfulness via mindfulness practice may result in the development
of trait mindfulness over time, a proposal which has been supported by empirical research
(e.g., Carmody, Baer, Lykins, & Olendski, 2008). Subsequently, as a practitioner develops
greater mindful dispositionality and positive affectivity (plausibly mediated by meditation-
induced neuroplasticity) we hypothesize that he or she will be more likely to make positive
reappraisals in the face of distress as a habitual cognitive coping style. In contradistinction to
this notion, some theorists suggest that as mindfulness practitioners develop expertise, they
abandon reappraisal in favor of non-elaborative and non-conceptual forms of cognitive
processing (e.g., Hölzel et al., 2011). Congruent with this claim, according to Tibetan
Mahāmudrā tradition, the highest levels of meditative attainment are marked the mind
resting in an unmodulated state while simultaneously monitored by an clear and unwavering,
“non-cognizing” awareness (Namgyal, 2006). Given this possibility, there may be a u-
shaped function that describes the progressive adoption, strengthening, and later
relinquishment of positive reappraisal strategies. On the other hand, recent research indicates
that meditation practice frequency and duration are positively correlated with mindful
reappraisal use among practitioners from a wide range of contemplative (Buddhist and non-
Buddhist) traditions (Hanley, Garland, & Black, 2013). Clearly, these are empirical
questions that merit further study.
A Neural Account of How Mindfulness Promotes Reappraisal via
Interoceptive Recovery
Findings from neuroscience may bolster our claim that mindfulness facilitates positive
reappraisal. While positive reappraisal may be readily initiated in low-arousal, transitory
negative contexts, such attempts may become difficult or impossible within high-arousal or
chronic negative contexts. For instance, when a person is confronted with stressors while
entangled in a downward spiral of negative mood (Garland et al., 2010), the concomitant
narrowing of attention and increasing negativism of emotional context serve to perpetuate
negative appraisals (Figure 2, Panel A). Because the context for appraisal becomes
increasingly negative over time due to attentional and interpretational biases which deprive
the individual from positive inputs, attempts to positively reappraise events also become less
frequent; indeed, depressed individuals are more likely to attempt suppression strategies than
reappraisal, although suppression tends to be ineffective in reducing distress (Ehring et al.,
2010). This tendency towards suppression is associated with greater amygdala activity
(Abler et al., 2010), and in treatment-resistant depression even instructed reappraisal fails to
regulate limbic activity (Johnstone et al., 2007), which in turn may foster cognitive
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 13
elaboration on negativity (i.e., rumination) and ironically exacerbate emotional distress,
resulting in a move further down the spiral (Figure 2, Panel B). For such individuals,
reappraisal may seem unattainable.
This difficulty may arise when stress activates powerful automatic response systems in the
brain that evoke cognitive elaboration and obscure body awareness. Provocation of negative
emotions activates cortical midline regions of the brain related to self-representation (Grimm
et al. 2009; Farb et al. 2010), which in turn is associated with elevated risk of relapse to
depression (Farb, Anderson et al. 2011). Conversely, neural representations of
somatovisceral sensations may be suppressed during emotional challenge; this loss of
interoceptive representation is associated with greater depressive symptom severity (Farb et
al., 2010). The recovery of interoceptive representations may afford a broader sense of
context while appraisal is taking place, and thus is a strong candidate mechanism for the
cognitive experience of decentering.
We propose that decentering through mindfulness meditation acts to reset the emotional
context back to a low arousal, neutral state grounded in previously unappraised visceral
sensations that are neither negatively nor positively valenced. This process operates through
the neural principle of interoceptive recovery: a restoration from suppression of
viscerosensory brain circuits following emotional challenge (Farb et al., 2010). Rather than
attempting to reverse the tide of negative appraisals, decentering fundamentally shifts a
person’s regulatory orientation from appraisal to attending to perceptions of external
stimulus contexts and concurrent visceral sensations (Figure 2, Panel A). This shift is
important, because in neural terms, moving down the spiral involves a loss not only of
positively appraised representations, but also of unappraised perceptions from which new
appraisals may be generated. Appraisals leading to despair and hopelessness constrain
attention to focus further only on sensations and other perceptual contents that confirm these
dysphoric implications (Teasdale et al., 1995) (Figure 2, Panel B).
Such appraisal tendencies may be characterized through analysis of prefrontal cortical (PFC)
responses to experimental stimuli, both in terms of the particular sub-regions regions of PFC
that are activated, and also the neural regions that become functionally connected to the PFC
during the response. In particular, appraisals of self-relevance have been associated with
both dorsal and ventral aspects of the PFC (Schmitz & Johnson, 2006). During self-
referential tasks, the ventral PFC is functionally connected with limbic and paralimbic
regions such as the nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and insula, regions implicated in
monitoring affective and motivational relevance, whereas the dorsal PFC is connected an
executive control network independent from affective content (Seeley et al., 2007).
Activation and/or connectivity to the ventral PFC corresponds to affective judgments,
whereas activation and/or connectivity to the dorsal PFC corresponds to monitoring without
necessitating positive or negative appraisals.
A series of neuroimaging studies supports the hypothesis that mindfulness training initially
reduces appraisal tendencies in favor of unelaborated attentional monitoring. First,
mindfulness training appears to increase connectivity within sensory cortices (Kilpatrick et
al., 2011), including primary interoceptive cortex in the insula (Farb et al., 2013), suggesting
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 14
that mindfulness may restructure sensory representation. Second, mindfulness training is
associated with altered connectivity between primary sensory regions such as the posterior
insula and the PFC, such that connectivity to ventral, affective processing regions is reduced
(Farb et al., 2007), but connectivity to dorsal, attentional control regions is augmented (Farb
et al., 2013; Froeliger et al., 2014). The shift in connectivity from ventral to dorsal PFC
regions suggests a movement away from appraising a sensation’s affective salience in favor
of unelaborated monitoring, consistent with the formal instructions found in mindfulness
training programs.
In the context of emotion challenges, changes in sensory appraisal may be particularly
important. For example, in the Farb et al. (2010) study, insula suppression following sad
mood provocation was correlated with heightened depressive symptoms, whereas
participants who had completed mindfulness training demonstrated reduced depressive
symptoms and a recovery of insula activity. Thus, rather than attempting to operate on
deeply reinforced negative meanings through an appraisal orientation, decentering involves
disengaging from appraisal, and instead orienting attention mindfully to momentary
awareness of unappraised sensations and perceptions (Figure 2, Panel C). Two such sensory
targets include attention to the breath, which may carry the implicit meaning that one is alive
and safe, and the sensation of the feet against the ground, which may carry the connotation
of being “grounded” and “steady” despite the many upsets in life. As mindfulness practice is
prolonged, associations between sensations and habitual negative appraisals weaken,
providing decentered experience of momentary sensation. In effect, working memory is
cleared and the appraisal context is ‘reset’ to one of unappraised sensation framed within a
positively-valenced implicational context (Teasdale, 1993) of safety and groundedness.
The critical reason that decentering may work when appraisal becomes overdetermined by a
negative context is that decentering does not rely upon conceptual information. The process
of interoceptive recovery appears to engage attentional systems in the brain that eschew
reliance upon elaborative prefrontal cortical systems in favor of a more direct access to
knowledge of the body’s internal state, constituted by neural representation regions in the
insula, cingulate, and hippocampus (Farb et al., 2012). Encouragingly, while the capacity to
attend to internal sensation appears to be a natural human ability, the tendency to engage in
interoceptive processing in the face of stressors seems to be enhanced through mindfulness
training (Farb et al., 2010). Decentering appears to operate by restoring neural balance
between conceptual and sensory representations, serving to broaden attentional context
amidst stressors and thereby promote interpretive flexibility. The consequence of such
decentering practices is a return to a neutral emotional context (or even a positive context, in
the case when mindfulness produces pleasurable feeling states such as relaxation,
contentment, or joy), achieved through a gradual extinction of negative appraisal habits. By
refocusing on previously unappraised visceral sensations instead of negative appraisals,
attention is then able to widen to include a variety of internal and external sensory targets,
allowing for novel, adaptive reappraisals of stimuli that were previously construed only as
reinforcing negative expectations and meanings (Figure 2, Panel D).
Speculatively, this “mindful reappraisal” process may involve spreading activation in a
number of brain networks. Generating the state of mindfulness in the midst of a negative
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 15
affective state may initially activate the dorsal ACC and dorsolateral PFC (Chiesa & Serretti,
2010), which could facilitate metacognitive monitoring of emotional reactivity, attentional
disengagement from negative appraisals, and regulate limbic activation. In so doing, the
acute state of mindfulness may attenuate activation in brain areas that subserve self-
referential, linguistic processing during emotional experience (e.g., mPFC) while promoting
interoceptive recovery from negative appraisals by increasing activation in the insula (Farb et
al., 2010). Metacognitive disengagement from the initial negative appraisal is accomplished
through an attentional shift towards non-elaborative processing of somatic and sensory
information. Disengagement may then free processing resources for the set shifting function
of cognitive reappraisal. In neural terms, this function is accompanied by a dynamic shift
from posterior to anterior regions of prefrontal cortex during a reappraisal episode,
implicating cognitive control mechanisms for attenuating emotional interference while
allowing alternate appraisals to be retrieved from memory and evaluated for goodness-of-fit
with situational demands and one’s autobiographical narrative (Kalisch, 2009).
This process may exemplify the dynamic adjustment of emotion regulation sequences that
Gross (2015) highlights as necessary for regulatory flexibility (Bonanno & Burton, 2013)
and goal attainment in emotionally intense situations. Optimal regulatory flexibility may
require initial disengagement from elaborative self-referential processing through
mindfulness as a precursor to elaborative metacognitive reflection on the self-in-context
when hedonic drives need to be balanced with one’s eudaimonic goals and values (Mennin
& Fresco, 2015).
Evidence for a Link between Mindfulness and Positive Reappraisal
Our central hypothesis that mindfulness promotes positive reappraisal has been supported by
cross-sectional, observational, laboratory-based, and randomized controlled trials. Cross-
sectional research indicates that reappraisal mediates the association between dispositional
mindfulness and depressive symptoms among patients with psychiatric disorders
(Desrosiers, Vine, Klemanski, & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2013). Relatedly, among patients with
substance use disorders, the inverse association between trait mindfulness and craving was
partially mediated by positive reappraisal (Garland, Roberts-Lewis, Kelley, Tronnier, &
Hanley, 2014). Moreover, in the largest cross-sectional study of this phenomenon to date (N
= 819), across five diverse samples including college students, alcohol dependent adults, and
chronic pain patients, trait mindfulness was correlated with positive reappraisal (r = .41),
even after controlling for positive affect (Hanley & Garland, 2014). A similar pattern holds
for mindfulness practitioners; indeed, individuals with contemplative practice experience
report significantly higher levels of post-traumatic growth than non-practitioners, and the
correlation between trait mindfulness and post-traumatic growth is significantly stronger
among practitioners than non-practitioners (Hanley, Peterson, Canto, & Garland, 2015). In
that vein, a recent survey revealed that more than half of a sample of 118 meditation
practitioners from a variety of contemplative traditions reported regularly using mindfulness
to enhance positive reappraisal of stressful life events, and frequency of mindful reappraisal
was significantly positively correlated with practice experience and meditation frequency
(Hanley, Garland, & Black, 2013).
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 16
With regard to evidence derived from observational studies, we (Garland, Gaylord, &
Fredrickson, 2011) conducted a prospective observational investigation of 339 adult
participants in an eight-week long mindfulness-based stress and pain management program;
we found that increases in dispositional mindfulness over the course of mindfulness training
correlated with increases in positive reappraisal, and that the stress-reductive effects of
increases in dispositional mindfulness were partially mediated by increases in positive
reappraisal (Garland et al., 2011). A quasi-experimental study comparing college students
participating in a mindful communication course to those receiving a standard
communications curriculum found that mindfulness training was associated with significant
increases in dispositional mindfulness which were correlated with increases in positive
reappraisal (Huston, Garland, & Farb, 2011). In another student sample, brief mindfulness
training was also shown to significantly increase positive reappraisal relative to a non-
randomized comparison group (Jones & Hansen, 2015). A study of college students facing
examination stress found that mindfulness significantly predicted increased tendency to
appraise the exam as a challenge rather than a threat (Weinstein, Brown, & Ryan, 2009).
Similarly, positive reappraisal mediated the inverse association between trait mindfulness
and burnout (Gerzina & Porfeli, 2012). Among cancer patients participating in MBSR
versus a waitlist control group, MBSR participants demonstrated significantly increased
post-traumatic growth which was mediated by increases in mindfulness skills (Labelle,
Lawlor-Savage, Campbell, Faris, & Carlson, 2014). Another observational study of breast
cancer patients participating in MBSR found a correlation between increases in dispositional
mindfulness and increases in the sense of coherence (i.e., the ability to derive a sense of
meaning from life experience, a construct conceptually related to positive reappraisal, see
Antonovsky, 1993) occasioned by participation in the course (Matousek & Dobkin, 2010).
Similarly, breast and gynecologic cancer patients receiving MBCT evidenced significant
increases in post-traumatic growth that were correlated with increases in dispositional
mindfulness (Stafford, Foley, Judd, Gibson, Kiropoulos, & Couper, 2013).
Findings from several laboratory-based investigations are also consistent with our
hypothesis. An investigation employing fMRI identified a significant association between
trait mindfulness and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex activation during a reappraisal task
which was inversely correlated with amygdala reactivity to negative stimuli (Modinos,
Ormel, & Aleman, 2010). A more recent study found that individuals who had completed a
course of mindfulness training (MBCT) evidenced significantly greater positive reappraisal
ability during experimental sad mood induction than a matched control group or those who
had been treated with cognitive-behavior therapy (Troy, Shallcross, Davis, & Mauss, 2012).
In an experimental study of brief mindfulness training, the degree of state mindfulness
achieved during the act of mindfulness meditation was prospectively and positively
associated with increases in reappraisal; path analysis revealed that the indirect effect
between brief mindfulness training and reappraisal was significant through state mindfulness
(Garland, Hanley, Farb, & Froeliger, 2014). Finally, long-term yoga meditation practitioners
exhibited significantly more pronounced cardiac activation than control subjects during
positive reappraisal trials on an affective image processing task, signifying greater
engagement with the task (Pavlov, Reva, Loktev, Korenyok, Aftanas, 2015).
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 17
Lastly, longitudinal, randomized controlled trials indicate that mindfulness may promote
reappraisal. In that regard, a randomized wait-list controlled trial of persons undergoing a
month-long intensive mindfulness meditation retreat found that retreat participants had
significantly greater increases in sense of meaning in life than waitlist control participants
(Jacobs et al., 2011). These increases in meaning in turn mediated the effect of mindfulness
on increases in telomerase, a biomarker linked with longevity. In a randomized trial
involving early-stage breast cancer patients, participation in MBSR was associated with
significantly greater increases in meaningfulness in the face of adversity (as measured by the
Sense of Coherence Scale; Antonovsky, 1993) than participation in a usual care or health
education control condition (Henderson, Clemow, Massion, Hurley, Druker, & Hebert,
2012). Lastly, a randomized controlled trial of Mindfulness-Oriented Recovery
Enhancement (MORE), an intervention which explicitly teaches mindfulness skills as a
means of enhancing reappraisal, indicated that chronic pain patients assigned to 8 weeks of
MORE had significantly greater increases in positive reappraisal than those in a social
support group (Garland, Manusov, Froeliger, Kelly, Williams, & Howard, 2014). Convergent
findings across these diverse study designs, samples, and measurement approaches suggest
the presence of a fundamental relation between mindfulness and positive reappraisal that
reduces distress and supports psychological flourishing and health, providing support for the
Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory. And yet, more controlled experimental study is needed to
fully validate and explicate the mechanisms of the mindfulness-to-meaning linkage. We
suggest one additional mechanism, savoring, in the section below.
Positive Reppraisal Begets Savoring of Pleasant Life Experience
The process of mindful positive emotion regulation does not end with the reframing of
circumstances as benign, beneficial, or meaningful, but rather continues to unfold as
attention is tuned in accordance with the novel mental set and positive meaning induced by
the reappraisal. Indeed, holding a positive semantic frame will likely increase perception of
other positive events, an assertion supported by an experiment conducted by Koivisto and
Revonsuo (2007). The study demonstrated that semantic congruence between an observer’s
attentional set and unexpected stimuli determine whether those stimuli will be perceived:
unexpected stimuli whose meaning is congruent with the current concerns of the observer
are more likely seen, whereas unexpected stimuli incongruent with the semantic frame of the
observer tend to go unnoticed. Thus, meaning modulates attentional selection and may
determine whether a stimulus will even be perceived.
Given the influence of meaning on attentional selection, when an individual engages in
positive reappraisal, he or she may begin to focus on and become aware of the beautiful, life-
affirming, and rewarding elements of their current situation. In support of this contention,
the ability to find positive meaning in adversity has been associated with the tendency to
attend to positive information (Chan, Ho, Tedeschi, & Leung, 2011), and experiencing
adversity in the past predicts savoring (Croft, Dunn, & Quoidback, 2013) - one of the most
powerful means of amplifying positive emotion (Quoidback, Berry, Hansenne, &
Mikolajczak, 2010). In that regard, selectively attending to positive stimuli is a form of
positive emotion regulation (Wadlinger & Isaacowitz, 2010) that predicts increased levels of
life satisfaction (Cavanagh, Urry, & Shin, 2011). Savoring involves not only attending to the
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 18
most perceptually salient features of an object or event, but also becoming aware of its more
subtle features and emotional impacts, broadening the diversity and range of sensations and
feelings to be derived from the experience (Bryant, Chadwick, & Kluwe, 2011). Thus,
savoring involves metacognitive and self-reflective elements, where one focuses on both the
pleasurable features of the stimulus as well as positive emotions that arise from encountering
it (Frijda & Sundararajan, 2007). In these ways, savoring contains an element of
mindfulness. By mindfully attending to the positive state that emerges from the encounter
with the object, one can deepen and enrich the savored experience.2
Studies show that pleasant events actually outnumber unpleasant events by a 3-to-1 margin
in everyday life (Oishi, Diener, Choi, Kim-Prieto, & Choi, 2007). Thus, pleasant experiences
are plentiful, if people notice and appreciate them. Mindfully attending to the positive
aspects of life experience (e.g., the sight of a beautiful sunset or the touch of a loved one’s
hand) may increase the perceived value of natural rewards, and thereby counter anhedonia,
an insensitivity to pleasurable objects, events, and experiences that can result from chronic
stress (Koob & Le Moal, 2001) or from simple habituation to routine events. In this regard,
mindful savoring may amplify pleasure from perceptual and sensorimotor experience in a
similar fashion to sensate-focus techniques (Masters & Johnson, 1970) and promote emotion
regulation by generating positive attentional biases (Wadlinger & Isaacowitz, 2010). Such
increased attention to sensory experience has been shown to elevate pleasure in eating and
sex (Heiman & Meston, 1997; LeBel & Dubé, 2001), and attending to present-moment
experience has been prospectively associated with happiness in large-scale, time-lagged
analyses (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010).
As evidence of this hypothesis, an experimental mindful eating induction produced higher
ratings of subsequent food liking (Hong, Lishner, Han, & Huss, 2011), and in a large study
of 411 students, a mindful eating exercise led to higher levels of enjoyment in sampled food
relative to nonmindful eating control condition (Hong, Lishner, & Han, 2014). Moreover,
savoring through mindfulness may improve memory for positive experiences. In that regard,
among healthy individuals, mindfulness training increased recall of positive word stimuli
which was correlated with improvements in positive affect (Roberts-Wolf et al., 2012).
Given these findings, it is plausible that learning to mindfully attend to and savor positive
events may offset the negative affect and anhedonia characteristic of persons suffering from
clinical disorders. In support of this hypothesis, a recent randomized controlled trial of
MBCT with adults with residual depressive symptoms found that mindfulness training
increased the experience of reward and positive emotion from pleasant daily life activities
(Geschwind, Peeters, Drukker, van Os, & Wichers, 2011). Similarly, in a randomized
controlled trial involving a sample of opioid misusing chronic pain patients, participation in
Mindfulness-Oriented Recovery Enhancement led to enhanced parasympathetic
responsiveness to natural rewards which statistically mediated the effect of the intervention
on reductions in opioid craving (Garland, Froeliger, & Howard, 2014a). An analysis of
event-related potential data from this study found that Mindfulness-Oriented Recovery
2One concern in relation to mindful savoring is that this practice might lead to a ‘clinging’ to positive experience, resulting in
suffering when the experience inevitably ends. A critic of our mindful reappraisal theory may argue that a focus on positive experience
promotes attachment – a process eschewed by Buddhism. To address this concern, Wallace and Shapiro (2006) explain:
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 19
Enhancement significantly enhanced the late positive potential (LPP) of the EEG during
visual processing of images representing natural rewards; increased LPP to reward cues was
correlated with increases in positive affective response to the stimuli and decreases in
craving (Garland, Froeliger, & Howard, 2014b). Thus, mindfulness may promote savoring of
positive experiences, which in turn may enhance eudaimonic well-being.
According to the Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory, the end result of the regulatory process
linking mindfulness to reappraisal and savoring is not mere hedonic pleasure. Hedonic and
eudaimonic well-being can reciprocally influence one another (King & Hicks, 2012). In that
regard, positive affect predisposes individuals to find positive meaning (Fredrickson, Cohn,
Coffey, Pek, & Finkel, 2008), and finding positive meaning enhances positive affect
(Yamasaki, Uchida, & Katsuma, 2009). This reciprocal linkage between positive affect and
cognition has been shown in autoregressive trajectory analyses to be propelled by
mindfulness training into an upward spiral dynamic (Garland, Geschwind, Peeters, &
Wichers, 2015). As such, mindfulness, reappraisal, and savoring may interact to infuse
hedonic well-being with eudaimonia. This interaction emerges from the cultivation of self-
reflexive awareness during a positive emotion regulatory process in which one savors and
elaborates on the implications of the positive reappraisal, triggering networks of wider
associations and meanings in the course of this temporally-extended phase of contemplation.
In this way, the reappraisals that arise out of the state of mindfulness may become semantic
attractors for novel positive experiences. Through this process, mindfulness connects daily
life events with deeper meanings (eudaimonics), not by eschewing negative life experience
and hedonics, but instead by situating adversity and hedonics into a deeper and more
extensive meaning system. This meaning system is robust against positive and negative
experiences in that it acknowledges the transitory and somewhat impersonal nature of all
experience, which may facilitate reappraisal in difficult contexts and non-clinging forms of
savoring in hedonic ones.
Such elaborative processing of positive reappraisals and their resultant emotions, when
marked by the self-reflexivity of mindful savoring, may allow for the emergence of
implicational meaning and the “felt sense” that gives an experience its affective flavor
(Teasdale, 1993). Thus, through reappraisal and savoring, positive emotions may evolve into
positive meanings and, ultimately, into ways of being that further reinforce tendencies to
accentuate the positive and reappraise the negative. We propose that over time these
propensities may consolidate into a sustainable, stimulus-independent, positive affectivity
founded on a form of satisfaction that is “less a matter of getting what you want than
wanting what you have” (Myers & Diener, 1995, p. 13). In this way, mindfulness promotes a
self-reinforcing system of positive reappraisal and savoring – the expanding gyre of an
upward spiral that broadens awareness and builds meaning toward the growth of individual
flourishing and greater engagement with life.
A Case Example of Mindfulness-to-Meaning in Action
The following case example (depicted schematically in Figure 3) from a patient of the first
author (ELG) exemplifies principles of the Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory in action.
Consider the example of “Jacob,” a 63 year old man who was recently diagnosed and treated
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 20
for a potentially life threatening cancer. During the treatment process he had received
mindfulness training in three prior individual therapy sessions at the cancer hospital, where
he had been taught to engage in mindful breathing meditation by the first author (for a script
of the meditation instructions, see Garland, Hanley, Farb, & Froeliger, 2015); Jacob had
dutifully practiced this meditation for 15 minutes every other day for the past several weeks.
After completing a grueling series of surgeries followed by a series of chemotherapy and
radiation treatments, one morning Jacob found himself overwhelmed by thoughts of his
impending doom. He began to engage in mindfulness meditation, as he had been trained to
do, and subsequently was able to gain awareness of, acknowledge, and subsequently accept
the presence of these thoughts without suppression. After mindfully decentering from the
stress appraisal “My life is over – I’m doomed,” he began to metacognitively observe
feelings of a great despair coupled with intense sensations of heaviness in his chest and a
gnawing emptiness in his gut. Again, Jacob returned the focus of his attention back to his
breath to decenter from this negative emotional state, allowing him to again adopt a
metacognitive perspective of his own experience, which he sustained for several moments
until he found his attention automatically captured by the fresh scars on his belly where his
cancer had been surgically removed. Becoming aware of the constriction of his attention,
Jacob was again able to engage in mindful breathing as a means of decentering into the
mode of metacognitive awareness, which allowed his attention to broaden to encompass
both the sensation of his breath as well as the beautiful view out his window to the
snowcapped mountains beyond. Attending to these facts of his present survival, out of which
emerged the positive reappraisal “I’m lucky to be alive” and emotions of relief and
contentment.
Several minutes later as Jacob was filing bills from the hospital, he experienced distress with
the thought “What if I have a recurrence?” He again began to practice mindfulness, and then
became aware of embodied feelings of fear. Acknowledging these emotions and returning to
the breath, Jacob decentered from thoughts of cancer recurrence back into a state of
metacognitive awareness, from which he could watch the fearful thoughts and feelings
dissipate “like clouds dissolving into mist” and be gradually replaced by equanimity, out of
which arose a positive, buoyant state as his attention broadened to the photograph of his
grandchildren on his fireplace mantle. Admiring the image of their smiling faces, he made
another positive reappraisal, realizing “Cancer or no cancer, I still have so much I want to
share with them.” Consequently, his attention broadened further to encompass other positive
aspects of his past and present life circumstances, including his long marriage to a loving
partner, achieving significant professional accomplishments, and engaging in activities that
he loved. As Jacob began to savor the positive emotions arising during these moments of
contemplation, he came to the recognition that “cancer has strengthened my gratitude
muscle.” This reappraisal then matured into sentiments of deep gratitude and joy coupled
with the impulse to spend more time and energy devoted to his family – which enhanced his
sense of meaningfulness and purpose in life.
The foregoing example depicts the nonlinear trajectory of the mindful positive emotion
regulation process. Individuals may have to recurrently oscillate between mindfully
disengaging from negative appraisals and generating reappraisals before attaining a sense of
well-being; indeed multiple iterations of decentering are often needed to engender attention
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 21
to novel information from which positive reappraisals may be constructed to stimulate
savoring and eudaimonic meaning. The iterative re-processing that occurs during this cycle
may afford greater depth of insight and broader associations to be built, thereby producing
more durable positive affective consequences over longer timescales. Yet, the time course
from stress appraisal to mindfulness to eudaimonic meaning is currently unknown. Does
mindful reappraisal and savoring unfold over seconds, minutes, hours, days, or weeks? How
many repetitions of decentering are needed before a given thought content can be
reappraised? What duration of metacognitive awareness is necessary to engender broadened
attention to novel contextual information from which reappraisals may be constructed? How
do momentary reappraisals during a single episode of mindful emotion regulation
quantitatively and qualitatively differ from eudaimonic insights that emerge over time across
emotion regulatory episodes? Future empirical studies employing fine-grained experience
sampling are needed to elucidate the temporal dynamics of these phenomena.
Traditional Accounts of Mindfulness as Generative of Insight and Positive
Mental States
The Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory we have proposed is counter to the views of some
contemporary psychological scientists, who assert that mindfulness is antithetical to
reappraisal due to its purportedly nonjudgmental or non-conceptual approach to affective
experience (Brewer, Elwafi, & Davis, 2012; Chambers, Gullone, & Allen, 2009). In contrast,
traditional Buddhist definitions of mindfulness posit that the practice of stabilizing attention
and calming the mind (or shamatha in Sanskrit) is a key step towards the development of
cognitive insight (vipassana) into the nature of the self and world (Bodhi, 2011). Thus, as
some contemplative scholars have recently articulated, traditional Buddhist perspectives
prescribe more than an attentional practice - they also emphasize the importance of an
evaluative process intended to generate samprajηā̃na or “clear comprehension” of
phenomenological experience, leading to particular insights into the nature of self and world
(Dreyfus, 2011). By using mindfulness to stabilize attention, clear comprehension becomes
possible, and therefore allows one to reframe the meaning of life experiences. Thus, through
mindfulness “When we are able to remain carefully in touch with our experiences and
comprehend them as being impermanent, we are able to change their meaningfulness so as
to see them in a different light” (Dreyfus, 2011, p. 51).
Given the prioritization of certain insights and ethical modes of conduct, mindfulness across
Buddhist perspectives is by no means a nonjudgmental process - instead, intense study
instills belief in the value of meditation as a means of liberating oneself from self-inflicted
suffering, and also from the egoism that limits our ability to help others along this path
(Bodhi, 2011). Although nonjudgment is integral to mindfulness practice, as self-
deprecating judgments following mind-wandering are likely counter-productive, this
equanimity towards transient failures in attention is tempered by a broader scrutiny of one’s
practice and ensuing thoughts, speech and action that is integral to the project of self-
transformation. Thus, the experiential content of meditation becomes a target of evaluation
as a means of revealing metaphysical truths of phenomenological impermanence and the
illusory nature of the self. With such revelatory goals, meditation becomes a practice that
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 22
integrates culturally-derived ideals, allowing for a much greater impact on personal attitudes
and actions. Within this process, personal meaning is generated regarding one’s own
trajectory on a spiritual path towards self-actualization.
As such, traditional mindfulness practices were never intended to operate within a vacuum
of dispassionate observation in the absence of eudaimonic goals. To the contrary, Buddhism
clearly and strongly endorses “the cultivation of happiness, the genuine inner transformation
by deliberately selecting and focusing on positive mental states” (Dalai Lama & Cutler,
1998, pp. 44–45). In Buddhism, mindfulness is but one aspect of a broader Eightfold Path,
designed to transform destructive thoughts and behaviors into virtuous ones, and promoting
joy and equanimity (Rahula, 1959). Among the factors of the Eightfold Path, Right Effort
(sammappadhana) is defined as the will to prevent and remove negative states of mind, and
to generate and sustain positive mental states (Rahula, 1959). Thus, mindfulness practice
was originally intended to strengthen mental capacities in the service of disrupting negative
states and cultivating positive psychological processes rather than sustain an affectively
neutral state.
To be clear, there is no isomorphism between the positive aspirations endorsed by the
Buddhist ideal and the practitioner’s current emotional state – the positive aspirations of
Buddhism do not imply that a practitioner’s mind states are ideally positive. Indeed, a
compassion meditation on the suffering of others may yield intense feelings of sadness, pain,
and angst as the implicational meaning of suffering is first intuited and later consciously
contemplated. These painful “negative” emotions may in turn be a prerequisite for
subsequent positive emotions and actions that arise from a feeling of interconnectedness
with others. Thus, the ethical and altruistic commitments undertaken by Buddhist
practitioners do not necessarily correspond to positive affective states in a one-to-one
manner. To the contrary, negative affective states can serve to catalyze the motivation to be
of benefit to those who suffer. Yet, as described above, Right Effort is aimed at transforming
negative mental states into beneficent states of mind and actions designed to liberate self and
others from suffering (Bodhi, 2011).
One such practice found in Tibetan Buddhism is known as duk ngal lam du drub pa, a lo
jong (i.e., mind training) practice translated as “transforming adversity into the path of
awakening” (Wallace, 2003). During this practice, when difficult circumstances arise,
If we can shift our focus from our rigid, narrow, and habituated points of view, we
will empower our ability to embrace situations in a new way … We should
endeavor to think good thoughts about people who have in fact made our lives quite
difficult at times and try to turn these negative situations into our own spiritual
advantage… Every time we overcome an obstacle or an adversity, we become that
much more intelligent and resilient
(Kyabgon, 2007, p. 96–97).
This meditative teaching of re-envisioning adversity as an opportunity for spiritual practice
contains an element of positive reappraisal, exemplified in this aphorism by the 8th century
Indian Madhyamaka Buddhist scholar Shantideva, “So like a treasure found at home,
enriching me without fatigue, all enemies are helpers in my bodhisattva work, and therefore
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 23
they should be a joy to me” (cited in Kyabgon, 2007, p. 97). According to this view, enemies
are to be re-construed as helpers – a cognitive process in which one reappraises an adversary
or malign force as a helper who provides the opportunity to exercise compassion. In addition
to positive reappraisal, this teaching also involves positive mental qualities like equanimity,
tenacity, and compassion, as well as deep understanding of the interdependence between self
and others.
Such classic texts suggest that Buddhist scholars did not believe that mindfulness practice
alone was sufficient for the alleviation of suffering. Instead, mindfulness was seen as
facilitative of other forms of mental training (such as those centered on intentional positive
reappraisal) designed to modify cognitive processes underlying self-centeredness and
generate eudaimonic well-being (Wallace, 2003). Thus, the observational function of
mindfulness allows for clear comprehension, leading to insight and benevolence (Bodhi,
2011). According to Dreyfus (2011), mindfulness engenders “changes in the focus of
attention [that] lead to changes in cognitive content, something entirely obvious that seems,
however, to be lost in the rush to identify mindfulness with present-centered non-judgmental
awareness” (p. 52). Although this notion is integral to traditional Buddhist
conceptualizations of mindfulness, the modern psychological literature has failed to specify
temporally-dynamic, causal models that explain how mindfulness training changes cognitive
content to promote eudaimonic well-being. The Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory is intended
to fill this lacuna in the literature and further the next generation of research into the
downstream effects of mindfulness training on higher-order cognitive-affective processes
integral to meaning making and human flourishing.
Conclusion
The Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory raises an apparent paradox: mindfulness encourages
non-evaluative contact with phenomenological experience and attenuates emotional
distortions of the perceptual process, whereas positive reappraisal attributes a positively-
valenced, semantic meaning to experience. Striving to re-construe situations as positive
would seem to be contrary to the ethic and quality of mindfulness. In addition, the semantic
elaboration and emphasis on meaning involved in positive reappraisal may be seen in stark
contrast to the non-conceptual state that is the pinnacle of mindfulness practice. On the other
hand, there is a long tradition of using mindfulness as a means of gaining insight and
wisdom (Bodhi, 2011; Dreyfus, 2011).
A broader temporal perspective is needed to resolve this paradox. Although mindfulness is
not reappraisal, we contend that mindfulness and reappraisal are not contradictory
psychological operations, but rather represent distinct and complementary stages of a
positive emotion regulation process that unfolds over time. This process has yet to fully
specified; existing longitudinal research on the consequences of mindfulness training has
been modest in scope, perhaps driven by the exigencies of academic research and grant
funding cycles. To estimate longitudinal effects, cross-sectional designs comparing expert
meditators to novices or age-matched controls have been employed; but in looking at the
relatively ‘finished product’ of an expert meditator, these cross-sectional designs lack the
ability to determine the temporal order of emergent mindful attention, contemplative values
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 24
such as equanimity and compassion, and shifts in meaning around the self, the world, and
one’s role within it. Our current model descriptions are thus necessarily limited, as we are
not able to fully delineate the inevitable complexities that arrive in negotiating radical
transformations of eudaimonic meaning. We cannot make strong hypotheses about the
necessary dose of mindfulness training needed to realize new meanings, nor describe what
sorts of adversity may promote or hinder the positive reappraisal process, nor even whether
there are some forms of reappraisal that are ultimately more adaptive than others. In seeking
to answer these questions, future research may blaze new trails into the undiscovered
country spanning mindfulness to meaning, guided by the theoretical map we have proferred.
To reiterate, the Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory asserts that mindfulness facilitates positive
reappraisal in that it evokes a decentered mode of awareness in which thoughts and emotions
are viewed from a metacognitive perspective - allowing for the flexible construction of more
adaptive appraisals. By mindfully accepting experiences instead of perseverating on them,
cognitive resources are freed up to broaden the scope of attention to encompass pleasurable
and meaningful events and thereby build motivation toward purposeful engagement with
life.
Thus, mindfulness aids in undoing the linkage between the initial cognitive appraisal and the
conditioned responses that typically follow from it. By facilitating decentering, the initial
appraisal loses its power to elicit a behavioral reaction, as mindfulness opens a space in
which the individual witnesses distressing thoughts and emotions as merely transient events
- not immutable truths or determinants of action. It is in this space that new appraisals of self
and world can be made to further eudaimonic well-being. As such, acceptance of experience
through mindfulness may be a key mechanism that underlies the therapeutic efficacy of
reappraisal for promoting positive psychological outcomes. The aim of this therapeutic
process is not to anesthetize the individual from difficult life experiences by regulating
thoughts and emotions “away” with some Pollyanish delusion, but rather, to promote
commitment to valued action and imbue life with a sense of purpose. Ultimately,
mindfulness may be the fulcrum upon which reappraisals can be leveraged in service of
living with the freedom, and therefore, the responsibility, for constructing a more
meaningful and eudaimonic existence.
Acknowledgments
E.L.G. was supported by grant R34DA037005 from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in preparing this
manuscript. The conclusions in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official
position of the NIH.
References
Abler B, Hofer C, Walter H, Erk S, Hoffman H, Traue HC, Kessler H. Habitual emotion regulation
strategies and depressive symptoms in healthy subjects predict fMRI brain activation patterns
related to major depression. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging. 2010; 183(2):105–113. [PubMed:
20630713]
Affleck G, Tennen H. Construing benefits from adversity: Adaptational significance and dispositional
underpinnings. Journal of Personality. 1996; 64(4):899–922. [PubMed: 8956517]
Antonovsky A. The structure and properties of the sense of coherence scale. Social Science &
Medicine. 1993; 36:725–733. [PubMed: 8480217]
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 25
Bauer JJ, McAdams DP, Pals JL. Narrative identity and eudaimonic well-being. Journal of Happiness
Studies. 2008; 9:81–104.
Bishop SR, Lau M, Shapiro S, Carlson L, Anderson ND, Carmody J, Segal ZV, Abbey S, Speca M,
Velting D, Devins G. Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice. 2004; 11(3):230–241.
Bodhi B. What does mindfulness really mean? A canonical perspective. Contemporary Buddhism.
2011; 12(1):19–39.
Bonanno GA, Burton CL. Regulatory flexibility: An individual differences perspective on coping and
emotion regulation. Perspectives on Psychological Science. 2013; 8:591–612. [PubMed: 26173226]
Bowen S, Chawla N, Collins SE, Witkiewitz K, Hsu S, Grow J, Marlatt A. Mindfulness-based relapse
prevention for substance use disorders: A pilot efficacy trial. Substance Abuse. 2009; 30:295–305.
[PubMed: 19904665]
Bower J, Low C, Moskowitz J, Sepah S, Epel E. Benefit finding and physical health: Positive
psychological changes and enhanced allostasis. Social and Persoanlity Psychology Compass. 2008;
2(1):223–244.
Brewer JA, Elwafi HM, Davis JH. Craving to quit: psychological models and neurobiological
mechanism of mindfulness training as treatment for addictions. Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors. 2013; 27(2):366–79. [PubMed: 22642859]
Brown KW, Ryan RM. The benefits of being present: mindfulness and its role in psychological well-
being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2003; 84(4):822. [PubMed: 12703651]
Bryant FB, Chadwick ED, Kluwe K. Understanding the processes that regulate positive emotional
experience: Unsolved problems and future directions for theory and research on savoring.
International Journal of Wellbeing. 2011; 1(1):107–126.
Carmody J, Baer RA, Lykins LBE, Olendzki N. An empirical study of the mechanisms of mindfulness
in a mindfulness-based stress reduction program. Journal of Clinical Psychology. 2009; 65(6):613–
626. [PubMed: 19267330]
Cavanagh SR, Urry HL, Shin LM. Mood-induced shifts in attentional bias to emotional information
predict ill- and well-being. Emotion. 2011; 11:241–248. [PubMed: 21500893]
Chambers R, Gullone E, Allen NB. Mindful emotion regulation: An integrative review. Clinical
Psychology Review. 2009; 29(6):560–572. [PubMed: 19632752]
Chan MW, Ho SM, Tedeschi RG, Leung CW. The valence of attentional bias and cancer-related
rumination in post-traumatic stress and post-traumatic growth among women with breast cancer.
Psycho-oncology. 2012; 20:544–552. [PubMed: 20878854]
Chow S, Ram N, Boker SM, Fujita F, Clore G. Emotion as a thermostat: Representing emotion
regulation using a damped oscillator model. Emotion. 2005; 5(2):208–225. [PubMed: 15982086]
Croft A, Dunn EW, Quoidback J. From tribulations to appreciation: Experiencing adversity in the past
predicts greater savoring in the present. Social Psychological and Personality Science. in press.
Cunningham WA, Zelazo PD, Packer DJ, Van Bavel JJ. The iterative reprocessing model: A multilevel
framework for attitudes and evaluation. Social Cognition. 2007; 25(5):736–760.
Lama, Dalai; Cutler, HC. The Art of Happiness. New York, NY: Riverhead Books; 1998.
Davis MC, Zautra AJ. An online mindfulness intervention targeting socioemotional regulation in
fibromyalgia: results of randomized controlled trial. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2013; 46(3):
273–84. [PubMed: 23670111]
Davidson RJ, Kabat-Zinn J, Schumacher J, Rosenkranz M, Muller D, Santorelli SF, Urbanowski F,
Harrington A, Bonus K, Sheridan J. Alterations in brain and immune function produced by
mindfulness meditation. Psychosomatic Medicine. 2003; 65:564–70. [PubMed: 12883106]
Desrosiers A, Vine V, Klemanski &, Nolen-Hoeksema S. Mindfulness and emotion regulation in
depression and anxiety: common and distinct mechanisms of action. Depression and Anxiety.
2013; 30(7):654–61. [PubMed: 23592556]
Diener, E.; Lucas, RE. Personality and Subjective Well-Being. In: Kahneman, D.; Diener, E.;
Schwartz, N., editors. Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation; 1999. p. 213-229.
Dreyfus G. Is mindfulness present-centered and non-judgment? A discussion of the cognitive
dimensions of mindfulness. Contemporary Buddhism. 2011; 12(1):41–54.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 26
Ebersole P, Flores J. Positive impact of life crises. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality. 1989;
4:463–469.
Ehring T, Tuschen-Caffier B, Schnülle J, Fischer S, Gross JJ. Emotion regulation and vulnerability to
depression: Spontaneous versus instructed use of emotion suppression and reappraisal. Emotion.
2010; 10(4):563–572. [PubMed: 20677873]
Ellsworth, PC.; Scherer, KR. Appraisal processes in emotion. In: Davidson, RJ., editor. Handbook of
affective sciences. New York: Oxford University Press; 2002. p. 572-595.
Farb NAS, Segal ZV, Anderson AK. Attentional modulation of primary interoceptive and exteroceptive
cortices. Cerebral Cortex. 2013
Farb NAS, Anderson AK, Bloch R, Segal ZV. Mood-linked responses in medial prefrontal cortex
predict relapse in patients with recurrent unipolar depression. Biological Psychiatry. 2011; 70(4):
366–372. [PubMed: 21531382]
Farb NAS, Anderson AK, Mayberg HS, Bean J, McKeon D, Segal ZV. Minding one’s emotions:
Mindfulness training alters the neural expression of sadness. Emotion. 2010; 10(1):25–33.
[PubMed: 20141299]
Farb NAS, Segal ZV, Anderson AK. Towards a neuroimaging biomarker of depression vulnerability.
Translational Neuroscience. 2011; 2(4):281–292.
Farb NAS, Segal ZV, Mayberg H, Bean J, McKeon D, Fatima Z, Anderson AK. Attending to the
present: mindfulness meditation reveals distinct neural modes of self-reference. Social Cognitive
and Affective Neuroscience. 2007; 2(4):313–122. [PubMed: 18985137]
Folkman S. Positive psychological states and coping with severe stress. Social Science and Medicine.
1997; 45(8):1207–1221. [PubMed: 9381234]
Frederick, S Loewenstein. Hedonic adaptation. In: Diener, D.; Schwarz, N.; Kahneman, editors.
Hedonic Psychology: Scientific Approaches to Enjoyment, Suffering, and Wellbeing. Russel Sage
Foundation; New York: 1999. p. 302-329.
Fredrickson BL. Positive emotions broaden and build. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology.
2013; 47:1–53.
Fredrickson BL, Branigan C. Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention and thought-action
repertoires. Cognition and Emotion. 2005; 19(3):313–332. [PubMed: 21852891]
Fredrickson BL, Cohn MA, Coffey KA, Pek J, Finkel SM. Open hearts build lives: positive emotions,
induced through loving-kindness meditation, build consequential personal resources. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology. 2008; 95(5):1045–1062. [PubMed: 18954193]
Fredrickson BL, Grewen KM, Coffey KA, Algoe SB, Firestine AM, Arevalo JM, Ma J, Cole SW. A
functional genomic perspective on human well-being. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA. 2013; 110:13684–13689.
Fredrickson BL, Grewen KM, Algoe SB, Firestine AM, Arevalo JM, Ma J, Cole SW. Psychological
well-being and the human conserved transcriptional response to adversity. PLOS One. 2015;
10(3):e0121839. [PubMed: 25811656]
Friedman BH. Feelings and the body: The Jamesian perspective on autonomic specificity of emotion.
Biological Psychology. 2010; 84(3):383–393. [PubMed: 19879320]
Fresco DM, Segal ZV, Buis T, Kennedy S. Relationship of posttreatment decentering and cognitive
reactivity to relapse in major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2007;
75(3):447. [PubMed: 17563161]
Frijda NH, Sundararajan L. Emotion refinement: A theory inspired by Chinese poetics. Perspectives on
Psychological Science. 2007; 2(3):227–241. [PubMed: 26151967]
Garland EL. The meaning of mindfulness: A second-order cybernetics of stress, metacognition, and
coping. Complementary Health Practice Review. 2007; 12(1):15–30.
Garland EL, Fredrickson BL, Kring AM, Johnson DP, Meyer PS, Penn DL. Upward spirals of positive
emotions counter downward spirals of negativity: Insights from the broaden-and-build theory and
affective neuroscience on the treatment of emotion dysfunctions and deficits in psychopathology.
Clinical Psychology Review. 2010; 30(7):849–864. [PubMed: 20363063]
Gable P, Harmon-Jones E. The blues broaden, but the nasty narrows attentional consequences of
negative affects low and high in motivational intensity. Psychological Science. 2010
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 27
Garland EL, Gaylord SA, Fredrickson BL. Positive reappraisal coping mediates the stress-reductive
effect of mindfulness: An upward spiral process. Mindfulness. 2011; 2(1):59–67.
Garland EL, Gaylord SA, Park J. The role of mindfulness in positive reappraisal. Explore (NY). 2009;
5(1):37–44. [PubMed: 19114262]
Garland EL, Hanley A, Farb NA, Froeliger B. State mindfulness during meditation predicts enhanced
cognitive reappraisal. Mindfulness. 2013 Advance online publication. 10.1007/s1267-013-0250-6
Garland EL, Howard MO. Mindfulness-Oriented Recovery Enhancement reduces pain attentional bias
in chronic pain patients. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics. 2013; 82(5):311–318. [PubMed:
23942276]
Garland EL, Froeliger B, Howard MO. Effects of Mindfulness-Oriented Recovery Enhancement on
reward responsiveness and opioid cue-reactivity. Psychopharmacology. 2014a; 231(16):3229–
3238. [PubMed: 24595503]
Garland EL, Froeliger B, Howard MO. Neurophysiological evidence for remediation of reward
processing deficits in chronic pain and opioid misuse following treatment with Mindfulness-
Oriented Recovery Enhancement: Exploratory ERP findings from a pilot RCT. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine. 2014b
Garland EL, Manusov EG, Froeliger B, Kelly A, Williams JM, Howard MO. Mindfulness-Oriented
Recovery Enhancement for chronic pain and prescription opioid misuse: Results from an early-
state randomized controlled trail. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2014; 82(3):448–
459. [PubMed: 24491075]
Garland EL, Roberts-Lewis A, Kelley K, Tronnier C, Hanley A. Cognitive and affective mechanisms
linking trait mindfulness to craving among individuals in addiction recovery. Substance Use &
Misuse. 2014; 49(5):525–535. [PubMed: 24611848]
Garland EL, Geschwind N, Peeters F, Wichers M. Mindfulness training promotes upward spirals of
positive affect and cognition: Multilevel and autoregressive latent trajectory modeling analysis.
Frontiers in Emotion Science. 2015
Geschwind N, Peeters F, Drukker M, vas Os J, Wichers M. Mindfulness training increases momentary
positive emotions and reward experience in adults vulnerable to depression: a randomized control
trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2011; 79(5):618–28. [PubMed: 21767001]
Gerzina HA, Porfeli EJ. Mindfulness as a predictor of positive reappraisal and burnout in standardized
patients. Teaching and Learning in Medicine: An International Journal. 2012; 24(4):309–314.
Grimm S, Ernst J, Boesiger P, Schuepach D, Hell D, Boeker H, Northoff G. Increased self-focus in
major depressive disorder is related to neural abnormalities in subcortical-cortical midline
structures. Human Brain Mapping. 2009; 30:2617–2627. [PubMed: 19117277]
Gross JJ. Emotion regulation: affective, cognitive, and social consequences. Psychophysiology. 2002;
39(3):281–291. [PubMed: 12212647]
Gross JJ. Emotion regulation: Current status and future prospects. Psychological Inquiry. 2015; 26:1–
26.
Hagerty MR, Isaacs J, Brasington L, Shupe L, Fetz EF, Cramer SC. Case study of ecstatic meditation:
fMRI and EEG evidence of self-stimulating a reward system. Neural Plasticity. 2013; 2013:Article
ID 653572.
Hanley A, Garland EL, Black D. Use of mindful reappraisal coping among experienced and novice
meditation practitioners. Journal of Clinical Psychology. 2013; 70:294–301. [PubMed: 23818289]
Hanley AW, Garland EL. Dispositional mindfulness co-varies with self-reported positive reappraisal.
Personality & Individual Differences. 2014; 66:146–152. [PubMed: 24904191]
Hanley AW, Peterson GW, Canto AI, Garland EL. The relationship between mindfulness and
posttraumatic growth with respect to contemplative practice engagement. Mindfulness. in press.
Hanley AW, Warner A, Garland EL. Associations between mindfulness, psychological well-being, and
subjective well-being with respect to contemplative practice. Journal of Happiness Studies.
201410.1007/s10902-014-9569-5
Harmon-Jones E, Gable PA, Price TF. Does negative affect always narrow and positive affect always
broaden the mind? Considering the influence of motivational intensity on cognitive scope. Current
Directions in Psychological Science. 2013; 22(4):301–307.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 28
Heady B. Life goals matter to happiness: A revision of set-point theory. Social Indicators Research.
2008; 86:213–231.
Heiman JR, Meston CM. Empirically validated treatment for sexual dysfunction. Annual Review of
Sex Research. 1997; 8:148–194.
Helgeson VS, Reynolds KA, Tomich PL. A meta-analytic review of benefit finding and growth.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2006; 74(5):797–816. [PubMed: 17032085]
Henderson VP, Clemow L, Massion AO, Hurley TG, Druker S, Hebert JR. The effects of mindfulness-
based stress reduction on psychosocial outcomes and quality of life in early-stage breast cancer
patients: a randomized trial. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment. 2012; 131(1):99–109.
[PubMed: 21901389]
Hill CLM, Updegraff JA. Mindfulness and its relationship to emotional regulation. Emotion. 2012;
12(1):81–90. [PubMed: 22148996]
Hodgins HS, Adair KC. Attentional processes and meditation. Consciousness and Cognition. 2010;
19(4):872–8. [PubMed: 20430650]
Hölzel BK, Lazar SW, Gard T, Schuman-Olivier Z, Vago D, Ott U. How does mindfulness meditation
work? Proposing mechanisms of action from a conceptual and neural perspective. Perspectives on
Psychological Science. 2011; 6(6):537–559. [PubMed: 26168376]
Hong PY, Lishner DA, Han KH, Huss EA. The positive impact of mindful eating on expectations of
food liking. Mindfulness. 2011; 2:103–113.
Hong PY, Lishner DA, Han KH. Mindfulness and eating: An experiment examining the effect of
mindful raisin eating on the enjoyment of sampled food. Mindfulness. 2014; 5:80–87.
Huston D, Garland EL, Farb NA. Mechanisms of mindfulness in communications training. Journal of
Applied Communication Research. 2013
Jacobs TL, Epel ES, Lin J, Blackburn EH, Wolkowitz OM, Bridwell DA, Zanesco AP, Aichele SR,
Sahdra BK, MacLean KA, King BG, Shaver PR, Rosenberg EL, Ferrer E, Wallace BA, Sharon
CD. Intensive mindfulness training, immune cells telomerase activity and psychological mediators.
Psychoneurendocrinology. 2011; 36(5):664–81.
Jha A, Krompinger J, Baime M. Mindfulness training modifies subsystems of attention. Cognitive,
Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience. 2007; 7(2):109–119.
Johnstone T, van Reekum CM, Urry H, Kalin NH, Davidson RJ. Failure to Regulate:
Counterproductive Recruitment of Top-Down Prefrontal-Subcortical Circuitry in Major
Depression. Journal of Neuroscience. 2007; 27(33):8877–8884. [PubMed: 17699669]
Jones SM, Hansen W. The impact of mindfulness on supportive communication skills: Three
exploratory studies. Mindfulness. 2014 Advance online publication.
Kabat-Zinn, J. Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain,
and illness. New York: Random House, Inc; 1990.
Kalisch R. The functional neuroanatomy of reappraisal: time matters. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews. 2009; 33(8):1215–1226. [PubMed: 19539645]
Kiken LG, Shook NJ. Looking up: Mindfulness increases positive judgments and reduces negativity
bias. Social Psychological and Personality Science. 2011; 2(4):425–431.
Killingsworth MA, Gilbert DT. A wandering mind is an unhappy mind. Science. 2010; 330(6006):932.
[PubMed: 21071660]
Kilpatrick LA, Suyenobu BY, Smith SR, Bueller JA, Goodman T, Creswell JD, Naliboff BD. Impact of
mindfulness-based stress reduction training on intrinsic brain connectivity. Neuroimage. 2011;
56(1):290–298. [PubMed: 21334442]
King, LA.; Hicks, JA. Positive affect and meaning in life: The intersection of hedonism and
eudaimonia. In: Wong, PT., editor. The Human Quest for Meaning. New York: Routledge; 2012. p.
125-142.
Koivisto M, Revonsuo A. How meaning shapes seeing. Psychological Science. 2007; 18(10):845–849.
[PubMed: 17894599]
Koob GF, Le Moal M. Drug addiction, dysregulation of reward, and allostasis.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2001; 24(2):97–129. [PubMed: 11120394]
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 29
Kross E, Ayduk O. Facilitating adaptive emotional analysis: Distinguishing distanced-analysis of
depressive experiences from immersed-analysis and distraction. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin. 2008; 34:924–938. [PubMed: 18469151]
Kross E, Ayduk O. Making meaning out of negative experiences by self-distancing. Current Directions
in Psychological Science. 2011; 20(3):187–191.
Kross E, Grossman I. Boosting wisdom: Distance from the self enhances wise reasoning, attitudes, and
behavior. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 2012; 141:43–48. [PubMed: 21728454]
Kyabgon, T. The practice of lojong: Cultivating compassion through training the mind. Boston:
Shambhala Publications; 2007.
Lazarus, R.; Folkman, S. Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York: Springer; 1984.
LeBel, JL.; Dubé, L. The impact of sensory knowledge and attentional focus on pleasure and on
behavioral responses to hedonic stimuli. 13th annual American Psychological Society Convention;
Toronto, Ontario. 2001.
Lucas RE. Adaptation and the set-point model of subjective well-being: Does happiness change after
major life events? Current Directions in Psychological Science. 2007; 16(2):75–79.
Lyubomirsky S, Sheldon KM, Schkade D. Pursuing happiness: The architecture of sustainable change.
Review of General Psychology. 2005; 9(2):111.
MacLean KA, Ferrer E, Aichele SR, Bridwell DA, Zanesco AP, Jacobs TL, King BG, Rosenberg EL,
Sahdra BK, Shaver PR, Wallace BA, Mangun GR, Saron CD. Intensive meditation training
improves perceptual discrimination and sustained attention. Psychological Science. 2010; 21(6):
820–839. [PubMed: 20435951]
Masters, WH.; Johnson, VE. Human sexual inadequacy. Boston: Little & Brown; 1970.
Matousek RH, Dobkin PL. Weathering storms: a cohort study of how participation in a mindfulness-
based stress reduction program benefits women after breast cancer treatment. Current Oncology.
2010; 17:62–70. [PubMed: 20697517]
Mennin DS, Fresco DM. Advancing emotion regulation perspectives on psychopathology: The
challenge of distress disorders. Psychological Inquiry. 2015; 26:80–92.
McMillen JC, Smith EM, Fisher RH. Perceived benefit and mental health after three types of disaster.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1997; 65(5):733–739. [PubMed: 9337492]
Modinos G, Ormel J, Aleman A. Individual difference in dispositional mindfulness and brain activity
involved in reappraisal of emotion. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience. 2010; 5(4):
369–377. [PubMed: 20147457]
Moore A, Malinowski P. Meditation, mindfulness and cognitive flexibility. Consciousness and
Cognition. 2009; 18(1):176–186. [PubMed: 19181542]
Moyer CA, Donnelly MP, Anderson JC, Valek KC, Huckaby SJ, Wiederholt DA, Doty RL, Rehlinger
AS, Rice BL. Frontal electroencephalographic asymmetry associated with positive emotion is
produced by very brief meditation training. Psychological Science. 2011; 22(10):1277–1279.
[PubMed: 21921291]
Myers DG, Diener E. Who is happy? Psychological Science. 1995; 6:10–19.
Namgyal, DT. Mahamudra –The Moonlight – Quintessence of Mind and Meditation. Summerville,
MA: Wisdom Publications; 2006.
Nelson TO, Stuart RB, Howard C, Crowley M. Metacognition and clinical psychology: A preliminary
framework for research and practice. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy. 1999; 6:73–79.
Nyklíček I, Kuijpers KF. Effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction intervention on psychological
well-being and quality of life: is increased mindfulness indeed the mechanism? Annals of
Behavior Medicine. 2008; 35(3):331–340.
Ohman A, Carlsson K, Lundqvist D, Ingvar M. On the unconscious subcortical origin of human fear.
Physiology & Behavior. 2007; 92(1–2):180–185. [PubMed: 17599366]
Oishi S, Diener E, Choi D, Kim-Prieto C, Choi I. The dynamics of daily events and well-being across
cultures: When less is more. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2007; 93(4):685–698.
[PubMed: 17892339]
Olivares OJ. Meaning making, uncertainty reduction, and the functions of autobiographical memory: A
relational framework. Review of General Psychology. 2010; 14(3):204–211.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 30
Orzech KM, Shapiro SL, Brown KW, McKay M. Intensive mindfulness training-related changes in
cognitive and emotional experience. Positive Psychology. 2009; 4(3):212–222.
Pavolv SV, Reva NV, Loktev KV, Korenyok VV, Aftanas LI. Impact of long-term meditation practice
on cardiovascular reactivity during perception and reappraisal of affective images. International
Journal of Psychophysiology. 2015; 95:363–371. [PubMed: 25583571]
Porges SW. The polyvagal perspective. Biological Psychology. 2007; 74:116–143. [PubMed:
17049418]
Quoidback J, Berry EV, Hansenne M, Mikolajczak M. Positive emotion regulation and wellbeing:
Comparing the impact of eight savoring and dampening strategies. Personality and Individual
Differences. 2010
Rahula, W. What the Buddha Taught. New York, NY: Grove Press; 1959.
Rhyff CD. Self-realisation and meaning making in the face of adversity: A eudaimonic approach to
human resilience. Journal of Psychology in Africa. 2014; 24(1)
Roberts-Wolfe D, Sacchet M, Hastings E, Roth H, Britton W. Mindfulness training alters emotional
memory recall compared to controls: Support for an emotional information processing model of
mindfulness. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2012; 6:1–13. [PubMed: 22279433]
Ryan RM, Deci EL. On happiness and human potentials: A review of research on hedonic and
eudaimonic well-being. Annual Review of Psychology. 2001; 52:141–166.
Sahdra BK, MacLean KA, Ferrer E, Shaver PR, Rosenberg EL, Jacobs TL, Zanesco AP, King BG,
Aichele SR, Bridwell DA, Mangun GR, Saron CD. Enhanced response inhibition during
intensive meditation training predicts improvements in self-reported adaptive socioemotional
functioning. Emotion. 2011; 11(2):299–312. [PubMed: 21500899]
Schroevers MJ, Brandsma R. Is learning mindfulness associated with improved affect after
mindfulness based cognitive therapy? British Journal of Psychology. 2010; 101(pt 1):95–107.
[PubMed: 19327220]
Schwabe L, Wolf OT. Stress prompts habit behavior in humans. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2009;
29(22):7191–7198. [PubMed: 19494141]
Seeley WW, Menon V, Schatzberg AF, Keller J, Glover GH, Kenna H, Greicius MD. Dissociable
intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. The Journal of
Neuroscience. 2007; 27(9):2349–2356. [PubMed: 17329432]
Segal, ZV.; Williams, JMG.; Teasdale, JD. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression. New
York: The Guilford Press; 2002.
Shapiro SL, Carlson LE, Astin JA, Freedman B. Mechanisms of mindfulness. Journal of Clinical
Psychology. 2006; 62(3):373–386. [PubMed: 16385481]
Shiota MN, Levenson RW. Turn down the volume or change the channel? Emotional effects of
detached versus positive reappraisal. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2012
Stafford L, Foley E, Judd F, Gibson P, Kiropoulos L, Couper J. Mindfulness-based cognitive group
therapy for women with breast and gynecologic cancer: A pilot study to determine effectiveness
and feasibility. Supportive Care in Cancer. 2013; 21:3009–3019. [PubMed: 23775158]
Teasdale JD. Emotion and two kinds of meaning: cognitive therapy and applied cognitive science.
Behavior Research and Therapy. 1993; 31(4):339–354.
Teasdale JD, Chaskalson M. How does mindfulness transform suffering? I: the nature and origins of
dukkha; II: the transformation of dukkha. Contemporary Buddhism. 2011; 12(1):89–124.
Teasdale JD, Segal Z, Williams JM. How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive relapse and why
should attentional control (mindfulness) training help? Behavior Research and Therapy. 1995;
33(1):25–39.
Tedeshi, RG.; Calhoun, LG. Posttraumatic growth: Conceptual foundation and empirical evidence.
Philadelphia, PA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 2004.
Todd RM, Cunningham WA, Anderson AK, Thompson E. Affect-biased attention as emotion
regulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2012; 16(7):365–372. [PubMed: 22717469]
Troy AS, Shallcross AJ, Davis TS, Mauss IB. History of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy is
associated with increased cognitive reappraisal ability. Mindfulness. 2013; 4:213–222. [PubMed:
26005504]
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 31
Tugade MM, Fredrickson BL. Resilient individuals use positive emotions to bounce back from
negative emotional experiences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2004; 86(2):320–
333. [PubMed: 14769087]
Vago DR, Nakamura Y. Selective attentional bias towards pain-related threat in fibromyalgia:
preliminary evidence for effects of mindfulness meditation training. Cognitive Therapy and
Research. 2011; 35(6):581–594.
Wadlinger HA, Isaacowitz DM. Fixing our focus: training attention to regulate emotion. Personality
and Social Psychology Review. 2010; 15(1):75–102. [PubMed: 20435804]
Wallace, A. Buddhism with an attitude: The Tibetan seven-point mind-training. New York: Snow Lion
Publications; 2003.
Wallace BA, Shapiro SL. Mental balance and well-being: Building bridges between Buddhism and
Western Psychology. American Psychologist. 2006; 61(7):690–701. [PubMed: 17032069]
Weinstein N, Brown KW, Ryan RM. A multi-method examination of the effects of mindfulness on
stress attribution, coping, and emotional well-being. Journal on Research and Personality. 2009;
43(3):374–385.
Williams JMG. Mindfulness and psychological process. Emotion. 2010; 10(1):1–7. [PubMed:
20141295]
Witvliet C, De Young NJ, Hofelich AJ, DeYoung PA. Compassionate reappraisal and emotion
suppression as alternative to offense-focused rumination: Implications for forgiveness and
psychophysiological well-being. Journal of Positive Psychology. 2011; 6:286–99.
Xu J, Liao Q. Prevalence and predictors of posttraumatic growth among adult survivors one year
following 2008 Sichuan earthquake. Journal of Affective Disorders. 2011; 133(1–2):274–280.
[PubMed: 21684612]
Yacono Freeman LM, Gil KM. Daily stress, coping, and dietary restraint in binge eating. International
Journal of Eating Disorders. 2004; 36(2):204–212. [PubMed: 15282690]
Yamasaki K, Uchida K, Katsuma R. An intervention study of the effects of the coping strategy of
“finding positive meaning” on positive affect and health. International Journal of Psychology.
2009; 44(4):249–256. [PubMed: 22029553]
Zautra AJ, Davis MC, Reich JW, Nicassario P, Tennen H, Finan P, Kratz A, Parrish B, Irvin MR.
Comparison of cognitive behavioral and mindfulness meditation interventions on adaptation to
rheumatoid arthritis for patients with and without history of recurrent depression. Journal
Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2008; 76(3):408–21. [PubMed: 18540734]
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 32
Figure 1.
A graphical depiction of the Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory: a process model of mindful
positive emotion regulation. As this process unfolds over time, an increase in the width of
the spiral denotes an increasing magnitude and depth of eudaimonic well-being. First, the
practice of mindfulness meditation facilitates decentering from stress appraisals into the
non-evaluative, metacognitive state of mindfulness, which deautomatizes habitual cognitive
sets and induces positive affective tone, thereby broadening the scope of attention to
encompass previously unattended contextual information. Positive tuning of the attentional
system garners new data with which to formulate a positive reappraisal of the stressor,
resulting in positive emotions which may then be savored to infuse eudaimonic,
implicational meaning into hedonic processing of contextual features supporting the
reappraisal. This cycle ultimately leads to productive reengagement with stressful life events,
adaptive or prosocial action, and a sense of meaningfulness in life.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 33
Figure 2.
Panel A: the emotional spiral; illustrating the distinction between mindful and appraisal
orientations. The mindful orientation engages attention towards unappraised sensation,
representing a neutral point along the spiral, whereas appraisal orientations serve to mobilize
attentional and emotional resources, shifting emotional context either up or down the spiral.
Bubbles with plus (+) or minus (−) signs represent positively and negatively appraised
experiences, respectively. In the face of an unambiguously stressful life event, what varies is
the number of other experiences (i.e., positive events and stimuli) available to awareness
with which one may construct positive reappraisals to moderate the emotional context. The
emotional context is the total set of appraisals that occupy working memory, which over
time are ‘packaged’ into longer term memory as situational meanings. Panel B: the
conventional appraisal orientation; each step in the cycle constrains and determines the
following step, mutually constraining the deployment of attention and broader contextual
meaning. Panel C: a schematic of the deployment of mindful attention; inhibiting the
occurrence of appraisal and reorienting attention towards sensation when it is noticed that
appraisal is occurring. Panel D: the consequence of the mindful orientation; a weakening of
habitual appraisal and strengthening more adaptive reappraisals of experience.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

Garland et al. Page 34
Figure 3.
The Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory in action, as exemplified by a case example from a
cancer survivor. As the mindful positive emotion regulatory process unfolds over time,
eudaimonic well-being fluctuates as a function of the engagement and disengagement of
attentional, appraisal, and valuation mechanisms. Unlike the idealized schema depicted in
Figure 1, progress towards eudaimonic meaning is non-linear and often involves multiple
iterations of mindful decentering and reappraisal within and across emotion regulatory
episodes before a sustainable positive trajectory of well-being can be achieved. Though
future upsets and stress appraisals may result in temporary decreases in eudaimonic well-
being, hypothetically in the case of a flourishing person the slope of the overall trend line
increases as the individual builds self-regulatory skill and learns to construct a sense of
meaning in the face of recurrent adversity.
Psychol Inq. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript