Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: A Case
Study of Wat Phumin, Nan Province, Thailand
Tawipas Pichaichanarong
Suan Sunandha International School of Arts, Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University,
Nakhon Pathom Campus, Thailand
E-mail: tawipas.pi@ssru.ac.th
ABSTRACT
Thai mural paintings have played a significant role in Thai society since The
Sukhothai Kingdom period (1238-1438 AD) until the present. Wattana Boonjub
(2009) points out that Mural painting was used for teaching the Thai people in the
past. Throughout history, temples have become a crucial part of Thai' lives; for
example, Wat Phumin in Nan Province. Wat Phumin has exceptional architecture,
beautiful visual presentations of Buddhist storytelling on the walls which depict
scenes from the Buddhist Jataka tales, and scenes of everyday life in Nan. These
unique characteristics have attracted many visitors to this temple over the years.
Also, when those interested visit Wat Phumin, they experience this temple as a
Museum. Loïc Tallon et al. (2008) suggests that the museum experience provides
an appropriate situation for learning history in an unconventional setting. As a
result, previous research titled “Visual Research Practices on Thai Lanna Mural
Painting: A Case Study of Wat Phumin, Nan Province” was presented at The 4th
International Conference for Asia Pacific Arts Studies (ICAPAS 2016). The results
indicated that the information concerning the Lanna mural paintings inside the
temples was overwhelming. However, no directions are facilitating Thai and
foreign visitors in viewing and understanding at the first episode of storytelling on
Lanna mural paintings inside Wat Phumin. Therefore, this research is the result of
finding a solution to facilitating visitors in viewing Buddhist Jataka tales through
digital arts and digital technology (such as responsive web design, QR codes, etc.)
with practice-based design research.
Keywords: responsive web design, QR codes, wat phumin, practice-based design
research
ABSTRAK
Lukisan mural Thailand telah memainkan peran penting dalam masyarakat
Thailand sejak periode Kerajaan Sukhothai (1238-1438 M) hingga saat ini.
Wattana Boonjub (2009) menunjukkan bahwa lukisan Mural digunakan untuk
mengajar orang-orang Thailand di masa lalu. Sepanjang sejarah, kuil telah
menjadi bagian penting dari kehidupan Thailand; misalnya, Wat Phumin di
Provinsi Nan. Wat Phumin memiliki arsitektur yang luar biasa, presentasi visual
yang indah dari cerita Buddha di dinding yang menggambarkan adegan dari kisah
Buddha Jataka, dan adegan kehidupan sehari-hari di Nan. Karakteristik unik ini
telah menarik banyak pengunjung ke kuil ini selama bertahun-tahun. Juga, ketika
mereka yang tertarik mengunjungi Wat Phumin, mereka merasakan candi ini
sebagai Museum. Loïc Tallon et al. (2008) menunjukkan bahwa pengalaman
museum memberikan situasi yang tepat untuk belajar sejarah dalam lingkungan
yang tidak konvensional. Sebagai hasilnya, penelitian sebelumnya yang berjudul
157

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
“Praktik Penelitian Visual pada Lukisan Mural Lanna Thailand: Studi Kasus Wat
Phumin, Provinsi Nan” dipresentasikan pada Konferensi Internasional ke-4 untuk
Studi Seni Asia Pasifik (ICAPAS 2016). Hasilnya menunjukkan bahwa informasi
mengenai lukisan mural Lanna di dalam kuil sangat banyak. Namun, tidak ada
arahan yang memfasilitasi pengunjung Thailand dan wisatawan asing dalam
melihat dan memahami episode pertama pada cerita tentang lukisan mural Lanna
di dalam Wat Phumin. Oleh karena itu, penelitian ini adalah hasil dari menemukan
solusi untuk memfasilitasi pengunjung dalam melihat cerita Buddha Jataka
melalui seni digital dan teknologi digital (seperti desain web responsif, kode QR,
dll.) dengan penelitian desain berbasis praktik.
Kata Kunci: desain web responsif, kode QR, wat phumin, riset desain berbasis praktik
INTRODUCTION
The results from the author’s previous research titled “Visual Methods in Social
Research on Lanna Mural Painting: A Case Study of Wat Phumin, Nan Province”
presented at The 4th International Conference for Asia Pacific Arts Studies
(ICAPAS 2016) indicated that information regarding the Lanna mural painting
inside the temple is overwhelming. This is because there are no directions
facilitating Thai and foreign visitors in where to first begin in terms of the episodes
of the storytelling inside the targeted site. Therefore, this paper results from attempts
to find an apt solutions through practice-based research methodology.
Literature Review
Identifying a solution to facilitate the comprehension Thai and foreign
visitors of Thai Lanna mural paintings is not an easy task. This research has adopted
practice-based research methodology through practice in its attempt to do so.
Practice-Based Research
Practice-based research is an authentic investigation to garner new insights
from a variety of practices and the outcomes of those practices. According to
Laurene Vaughan (2017), the author describes practice–based research as the
collection of knowledge through creativity resultings in the scheme of designs,
music, digital media, performances and exhibitions (p.56). This research was
designed to explore an example solution to facilitate the visitors’ viewing
experience of Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin, Nan province using different
approaches.
158

IJCAS Vol. 6 No. 2, December 2019 | p-ISSN 2339-191X | e-ISSN 2406-9760
Wat Phumin as A Museum
Figure 1. Drawing of Wat Phumin, Nan province by Assist. Prof. Fua Haripitak
(Image accessed 27 May 2020 from https://www.silpa-mag.com/news/article_8542)
Wat Phumin in Nan province as figure 1, presents a dazzling visual presentation of
Buddhist storytelling on the walls (T. Pichaichanarong, 2016). In this research, the
setting at Wat Phumin has been treated as a museum. Ana Maria Theresa
Labradorpp (2018) points out that museums can be sites for investigation (p.78).
Therefore, treating Lanna mural paintings as museums would suffice as mentioned.
Objectives
1. Analyzing difference approaches to develop a solution through practice-based
research.
2. Develop tools to facilitate Thai and foreign visitors who attend Wat Phumin in
Nan province.
3. Use digital technology, such as responsive web design, QR codes to be examples
for solutions in this research.
Definition of Terms
Responsive Web Design
This research chose a website to act as the channel to facilitate Thai and
foreign visitors’ experience of Thai Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin, Nan
province because since the invention of the internet by Tim Berners-Lee 1989,it has
become a widely used means of communication. According to Jason A. Clarke,
(2015) there was a change in web development from 2010 to present. Web
development has expanded to mobile platforms with mobile computing which
includes browsing the web, watching movies, typing on word processors, etc.
Responsive web design is a set of know-how tools for creating web sites that work
on various devices and screens (p.2).
159

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
QR Code
QR code is a readable code comprising a batch of black and white strips,
used for linking URLS reading by a camera on a smartphone, as derived from the
Japanese industry in 1994 (Retrieved from the internet on February 27th,2016). The
QR code was introduced to this research with responsive web design for connecting
to videos on the YouTube channel. Indeed, video is itself another means of
facilitating visitors.
METHODOLOGY
Practice-Based Research Design
The first step in practice-based practice in this research starts with the inspiration
from Assistant Professor Fua Haripitak (1910–1993) who studied in India during
1940–1946, at Visva Bharati University, Santiniketan, India. He saw how the Indian
government has copied drawing samples of mural paintings from various ancient
sites in order to preserve India’s heritage. After Assistant Professor Fua Haripitak
returned to Thailand, he decided to copy drawing samples from various Thai
temples in Thailand.
Figure 2. Assist. Prof. Fua Haripitak, Thai National Artist
(Image accessed 27 May 2020 from https://www.the101.world/fua-haripitak/)
Figure 3. Assist. Prof. Fua Haripitak studied mural paintings before he copied the samples (Image accessed 27
May 2020 from https://www.greatstarsartshow.com/art/1268)
160

IJCAS Vol. 6 No. 2, December 2019 | p-ISSN 2339-191X | e-ISSN 2406-9760
Figure 4. Assist. Prof. Fua Haripitak copied drawing samples from mural painting
in order to preserve Thailand’s national heritage (Image accessed 27 May 2020 from
https://www.bloggang.com/viewdiary.php?id=haiku&group=2&month=05-2010&date=11)
As a result, this research adopted the copy drawing sample technique for the Thai
Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin, Nan province. In order to copy the entire
drawing sample technique, this project required the entire photograph of Thai
Lanna mural painting at the temple. Also, those photographs are in digital files, and
they can refer as “digital arts” in this research.
Figure 5. Thai Lanna mural painting at Wat Phumin, Nan province (North)
161

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
Figure 6. Copy drawing of Thai Lanna mural painting at Wat Phumin, Nan province (North)
The author’s previous research (2016) identified three major categories for
storytelling on Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin as follows: (i) ‘The Story of
the Buddha’; Second, (ii) ‘The Previous Life Stories of the Buddha’, and Third
‘Ordinary Life of the Local People. This research selected ‘Previous Life Stories of
the Buddha’ as the focus of practice-based research. To understand the storytelling
in ‘Previous Life Stories of the Buddha’, the researcher studied the relevant books
and interviewed those with the knowledge and expertise. First, to understand Thai
mural paintings in general, it is tradition when people visit the Thai temple, they
first come from the direction of the north of the temple, then follow clockwise to
the east, south, and west as shown below (figure7).
162

IJCAS Vol. 6 No. 2, December 2019 | p-ISSN 2339-191X | e-ISSN 2406-9760
Figure 7. Direction of Wat Phumin, Nan province
(Image from: The 7th Reginonal Office of Fine Arts, Nan province)
The second step of the practice-based practice research adopted the
Archaeological Mapping and Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinate for
the Thai Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin. as shown below (figure 8 and figure
9).
Figure 8. Archaeological Mapping
(Image accessed 27 May 2020 from
https://coastalarchaeology.wordpress.com/2012/07/19/archaeological-mapping-with-idraw/)
163

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
Figure 9. Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinate system
(Image accessed 27 May 2020 from
http://www.georeference.org/doc/universal_transverse_mercator_utm_.htm)
Thai Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin used the same idea from both
examples on the grid system. The researcher divided the image of Thai Lanna mural
paintings at Wat Phumin, Nan province as shown in figure10.
Figure 10. Divided image of Thai Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin
Third, the researcher used copy drawing samples of the Thai Lanna mural
painting at Wat Phumin to identify the direction of storytelling on ‘Previous Life
Stories of the Buddha’. The content on the ‘Previous Life Stories of the Buddha’
164

IJCAS Vol. 6 No. 2, December 2019 | p-ISSN 2339-191X | e-ISSN 2406-9760
derives from various sources. After confirming the narrative for ‘Previous Life
Stories of the Buddha’ to be in the correct order, the direction of the storytelling
starts with the north, followed by east, south, and west at Wat Phumin, as shown in
figure 11.
Figure 11. Order of narrative storytelling on ‘Previous Life Stories of the Buddha’
As a result, there are numbers of coordination for the storytelling on ‘Previous Life
Stories of the Buddha’ upon the four sides of the wall at Wat Phumin.
Next, this research adopted a QR code by placing them into the given
positions of storytelling on ‘Previous Life Stories of the Buddha’ starting with
episode 1 at the coordinate of point B9, and with the QR code image as given in
figure 12 placed with the other coordinates respectively.
Figure 12. An example of a QR code links to the video content uploaded to YouTube (Episode 1)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k6Dn8bAuRSo)
All of the QR codes on the images of Thai Lanna mural paintings linked to
2D moving images for the storytelling of Panya-Jataka at Wat Phumin uploaded to
YouTube.
165

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
In fact, the video contents on YouTube comprises 2D moving images for the
storytelling of Panya-Jataka for Wat Phumin, which the researcher received funds
from the Office of Contemporary Art and Culture (OCAC) Ministry of Culture,
Thailand in 2017. The 2D moving images for storytelling of Panya-Jataka at Wat
Phumin, Nan province totaled amounts of thirteen videos.
After that, the researcher has completed the placement 13 QR codes into 13
positions in the images of Thai Lanna mural paintings at Wat Phumin, as shown in
figure 13.
Figure 13. QR codes placed on the coordination of storytelling on ‘Previous Life Stories of the
Buddha’
Next, the researcher deleted the lines on the images as shown in figure 14.
Figure 14. Final image of storytelling on ‘Previous Life Stories of the Buddha’
in the north
166

IJCAS Vol. 6 No. 2, December 2019 | p-ISSN 2339-191X | e-ISSN 2406-9760
Responsive Web Design
What is RWD?
According to Jason A. Clarke (2015), the author of the book “Responsive
Web Design in Practice”, the idea of building web sites that work on multiple
devices and screens in order to serve the new era of digital technology with limitless
power.
The responsive web design was used in this research because of its ability
to work on multiple devices and screens. The researcher suggests RWD can
facilitate Thai and foreign visitors to Wat Phumin, in their experience of Thai Lanna
mural paintings at Wat Phumin in Nan Province.
Google Sites
For the first version of RWD, the researcher used Google Sites as a tool.
Google Sites is one of the products from Google first released in 2008. Google Sites
was created for anyone who wants to create a personal website. The new version of
Google sites has the responsive web ability to open its website on various platforms.
In addition, Tatpuje and Ganbote (2015) point out Google platform contains with
number of tools and apps, use of videos, online tools, interaction through Google
community.
In Thailand, there is the collaboration between Google and Thai Universities
called “Google for Education” in order to help the students improve their learning
and innovation (retrieved from https://edu.google.com on Feburary 28th, 2019).
The researcher used Google Site from Silpakorn University, Thailand for the first
version of RWD as shown in figure 15.
Figure 15. Google Sites version
167

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
RWD Frameworks
For the second version of RWD, the researcher used the RWD frameworks
to create a responsive web as a tool. A framework is a collection of files-scripts,
HTML, CSS, and so forth. In addition, Priyanka Panchal (2017) explains that the
quality of this web properties will calibrate from mobile screen to full desktop
resolution continuously.This research selected the “Bootstrap” framework
(http://getbootstrap.com/). Bootstrap is the most popular of the three frameworks
widely used globally presented in figure 16.
Figure 16. RWD Frameworks version
DISCUSSION
A result from both version of Google Sites and RWD Frameworks is an example of
the solution in order to facilitate Thai and foreign visitors at Wat Phumin through
digital technology. It is illustrated in figure 17.
168

IJCAS Vol. 6 No. 2, December 2019 | p-ISSN 2339-191X | e-ISSN 2406-9760
Figure 17. A diagram of a solution to facilitate visitors at Wat Phumin
through digital technology in this research
Data Analysis
This research used a practice-based research design in every steps of
producing the final outcome to answer the objectives of this research. Indeed, the
researcher followed all the practice-based approaches in the framework as given in
figure 18.
169

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
Figure 18. Practice-Based Research Design
This research focuses only on the storytelling on ‘Previous Life Stories of
the Buddha’, with Khattana Kumara Jataka on the northern wall, the eastern wall,
the south wall and the Nimi Jataka on the western wall as illustrated in figure 19.
Figure 19. Khattana Kumara Jataka (left), Nimi Jataka (right)
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, this study has achieved all the objectives as set. However, the idea of
this study derived from the creativity related to the literature review and in-depth
interviews from field trips. In addition, the researcher added digital technologies in
this study as well, and expects new knowledge to be derived from this experiment.
From the results from my research, I can conclude that new digital
technologies can influence the ways in which individuals and institutes act as a
170

IJCAS Vol. 6 No. 2, December 2019 | p-ISSN 2339-191X | e-ISSN 2406-9760
museum. Susana Smith Bautista (2014), author of “Museums in the Digital Age:
Changing Meanings of Place, Community, and Culture” asserts that museums (for
example, Wat Phumin in Nan province) today can integrate both traditional
elements and the context of the digital age to embrace the legacy of place, locality,
culture, and community (p.xxi). This can then reach a modern younger generation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am very grateful to The 4th International Conference for Asia Pacific Arts Studies
(ICAPAS 2016) committee, and The 1st International Conference on Intermedia
Arts and Creative Technology (CREATIVEARTS 2019), both held in Yogyakarta,
Indonesia for allowing me to begin my academic journey with ICAPAS in 2016,
and other episodes with CREATIVEARTS in 2019. In addition, I would like to
express my gratitude to Suan Sunandha International School of Arts, Suan
Sunandha Rajabhat University, Nakhon Pathom Campus, Silpakorn University and
The Office of Contemporary Art and Culture (OCAC) Ministry of Culture, Thailand
for their supports. Lastly, I would like to express thanks and gratitude to my loving
mother, who has supported me in every way.
REFERENCES
Bautista, S. S. (2014). Museums in the Digital Age: Changing Meanings of Place,
Community, and Culture. MD: AltaMira Press.
Clark, J. A. (2015). Responsive Web Design In Practice (Library Technology
Essentials). MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Dalferro, A. (2018). Museum NOW! Articles From Talks Presented at Academic
Conferences. Bangkok: National Discovery Museum Institute.
History of QR Code How was the QR Code created? How has it come to be used
so widely? And what is its future? (n.d.). Retrieved February 26, 2019, from
https://www.qrcode.com/en/history/
Panchal, P. (2017). Responsive Web Design and Web Development Using
Bootstrap Frond-End Framework. International Journal of Advance
Research in Science and Engineering, 6 (7), 1-8. Retrieved May 15, 2019,
from https://ijarse.com/images/fullpdf/149873599_GOA_1005_ijarse.pdf.
Pichaichanarong, T. (2017). Visual Methods In Social Research on Lanna Mural
Painting: A Case Study of Wat Phumin, Nan Province. International
Journal of Creative and Arts Studies, 3(2), 25. doi:10.24821/ijcas.v3i2.1842
171

Tawipas Pichaichanarong, Practice-Based Research in Digital Arts: ...
Tatpuje, D. U., & Ganbote, A. (2015). Study of skills development among the
youths with Google integrated entrepreneurial training. Researchgate.net.
Retrieved May 15, 2019, from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331890031_Study_of_Skills_De
velopment_Among_the_Youths_With_Google_Integrated_Entrepreneurial
_Training.
Vaughan, L. (2017). Practice-based design research. London: Bloomsbury
Academic an imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.
172