https://doi.org/10.4038/tjata.v3i2.77
TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Origins of Sri Lankan Kolam Drama, its Correlation of Caste
Hierarchy and Creativity.
(Special reference to Ambalangoda Kolam dance)
Lokuliyana Aruna
Department of Mass Communication, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka.
lokuliyana@kln.ac.lk
Abstract
This academic abstract focuses on an in-depth exploration of Sri Lankan Kolam
drama, with a specific focus on the characteristic features of the Ambalangoda Kolam
tradition, using a mixed-method research approach, this research delves into the
historical origins, cultural significance, and the fascinating relationship between
Kolam drama and the caste hierarchy in Sri Lankan society. Kolam drama, rooted in
Sri Lankan folklore, has a rich history spanning centuries. It seamlessly blends music,
dance, dialogues, and storytelling, using decorative costumes and masks to convey
folk narratives and religious stories. Ambalangoda Kolam, well-known for its
exceptional masks and identical costumes, stands out as a charming embodiment of
this art form. The uniqueness of Ambalangoda Kolam drama is the central point of
interest in this research. Compared to other regional variations, it showcases distinct
features, both in its craftsmanship and performances, which are attributed to the
regional influences on mask-making and artistic expression. This study aims to reveal
these unique traits and their significance in preserving Sri Lanka's cultural heritage.
The research methodology followed a combined historical-ethnographic
approach. Historical research traces back to the origin and routes of Kolam drama
concerning its regional differences. In parallel, ethnographic fieldwork is employed
to obtain ideas from specialists, traditional artists, and other experts in the discipline
to shed light on the peculiar aspects of Ambalangoda Kolam. The data that caste
backgrounds related to qualitative and quantitative are collected and analyzed. This
helps in shedding much light on the caste dynamics.
Keywords: Kolam Dance, Bali, Caste hierarchy, Creativity, Regional influences.
22

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Introduction:
Sri Lankan Kolam drama, a vibrant and captivating form of traditional and
ritualistic theatre, has been an integral part of the country's rich cultural
heritage for two centuries. Kolam combines elements of Story, dialogues,
music, dance, and traditional storytelling, using elaborate costumes and masks
to convey folk, mythological, and traditional narratives combined with
ritualistic and religious customs.
Ambalangoda Kolam, a regional difference of this art form, is celebrated for
the unique features that set it apart from other Kolam traditions in south Sri
Lanka. This study delves into the historical origins and distinctive
characteristics of Ambalangoda Kolam, while also exploring its correlation
with the caste hierarchy within Sri Lankan society.
This study focuses on providing an in-depth exploration of the historical
origins and exceptional features of Ambalangoda Kolam, focusing on its
remarkable Traditional families, craftsmanship and performances, and
examining its correlation with the caste hierarchy within Sri Lankan society.
Kolam has played an essential role in preserving and transmitting socio-
cultural dynamics, myths, legends, and historical narratives from one
generation to the next, ensuring the continuity of Sri Lanka's cultural heritage.
The Ambalangoda Kolam tradition, as a regional variation of this art form, is
significant not only for its attractive performances but also for its role in
condensing the essence of its origin of white and black magic ritualistic
harmony. Ambalangoda Kolam originated from the influence of south Indian
Kolam Thullal and the south Sri Lankan traditional white and black magic
rituals and the essence of Bali sacrifice hymns.
23

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Furthermore, the social dynamics and caste hierarchy in Sri Lanka have
historically influenced various aspects of this traditional dance form and
societal structural relationship. This study aims to uncover the correlation
between the caste hierarchy and the practice of Kolam drama. It explores the
roles played by different caste groups in association with traditional maritime
careers. It developed and preservated this art form, highlighting how caste
dynamics have shaped and evolved within this cultural context. By doing so,
this research contributes to our understanding of the complex interplay
between art and society in Sri Lanka.
In the subsequent sections, we will detail the methodology employed in this
study, and present the findings related to the uniqueness of Ambalangoda
Kolam, and its relationship with the caste hierarchy. We will conclude by
emphasizing the importance of recognizing and celebrating the diversity of Sri
Lankan culture and the role of Kolam drama, especially in the Ambalangoda
region, as a symbol of the nation's cultural richness.
Methodology:
This study is initiated on an interpretive philosophical approach and, based on
the Inductive research approach, employs Qualitative research methods to
collect the data. Qualitative data were gathered by using literary reviews, In-
depth Interviews, non-participant observations, narrative analysis, Studying
life histories, and ethnocultural background of the related communities.
Interviewed and studied Kolam artists, and experts in the field, shedding light
on the unique features and regional influences specific to Ambalangoda
Kolam. Observations of Musiam materials and, archives have been used to
clarify the facts taken from the Interviews and the field. Additionally,
qualitative data related to the caste backgrounds of Kolam participants are
collected through reports, and interviews under their ethical approval to
24

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
analyze their roles and contributions to the development of the Kolam
tradition.
An Analysis of Literature Sources:
Prof. Ediriweera Sarachchandra has stated that the meaning of the word
‘Kolam’ is the nature of getting into something, possession, and comic. To
entertain the audience actors use comics. Therefore literally ‘Kolam’ is
something that is performed for entertainment.
Providing a proper explanation about the meaning of the word ‘Kolam’, Dr.
M.H. Gunathilaka has mentioned in his book titled ‘Kolam Nataka Sahithya’
(1984), that the word ‘Kolam’ is not just a Sinhala word which is limited to
Sinhala language but also a word which can be found in Tamil language.
Further, he has explained that it gives the idea of beauty, shape, colour,
adornment, and jewellery. Among those sounds in the Tamil language, the two
words jewelry and adornment are predominant.
The book ‘Seelappadikaram’ which was written in the 6th century AD, tells
that ‘Kolam’ is a dancing costume that is used for a folk dance called Urwaree.
Especially with the meaning of ‘the shape of the mask, look, the beauty of the
costume, glory’ they have used the word ‘Kolam’ in Malayali language. The
same meanings can be found in the Kannada language as well. In Theligu
language the word ‘Kolam’ refers to the idea of dance. In the Thulu language,
it gives the idea of devil dance and in the book titled ‘Wesmuhunu and Kolam
Dance’ by Dr Nandadewa, he says the word Kolam means deformed.
The Rev.Charles Carter defined the word ‘Kolam’ as not in proper order,
obstinate, imagery, jovial, etc. (Carter, 1999) In the Sri Sumangala dictionary,
there is no tholam’ but the word ‘Kolakkara’. The synonym for ‘Kolakkara’
is ‘Konangiya’ and as it has been explained in this dictionary ‘Konangiya’ is
a joker character of Thelingu drama.5 The word ‘Konangiya’ comes in the
25

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
folklore dictionary composed by Mr. Siri Liyanage and in the book the word
folk dance is used as a synonym. This is a comedy character name of an actor
in Nadagam. According to the Sinhala dictionary of the cultural department,
the meaning of ‘Kolam’ is shyness, diffidence, and awkwardness. In the same
book the verb ‘Kolam karanawa’ is used to explain the activity of cracking
jokes. According to the Malalasekara English–Sinhala dictionary, this word
gives the idea of a drama done by wearing a mask. Sri Lankan Kolam Drama:
Sri Lankan Kolam drama, deeply rooted in the cultural and religious traditions
of the island nation, represents a significant form of ritualistic theatre. It
combines various artistic elements, such as music, dance, and storytelling, to
communicate myths, legends, and religious stories. These performances
typically employ intricate masks and costumes, each with its unique symbolic
significance (Balasooriya, 2016). Kolam drama plays a crucial role in the
preservation of Sri Lanka's cultural heritage, serving as a bridge between the
past and the present, ensuring that traditional narratives are passed down
through generations (Arsecularatne, 1999). It is important to note that the
characteristics of Kolam drama can vary significantly across different regions
of Sri Lanka, with Ambalangoda Kolam emerging as a prominent and
distinctive tradition due to its unique features (Holt, 2017).
Ambalangoda Kolam and Its Unique Features: The Ambalangoda region,
situated on the southwestern coast of Sri Lanka, is renowned for its unique
contribution to the Kolam drama tradition. Ambalangoda Kolam stands out
due to its exceptional craftsmanship in mask-making, as well as its distinct
regional influences on costumes and artistic expression (Obeyesekere, 2004).
The masks created in Ambalangoda are known for their intricate designs, each
representing specific characters, and are instrumental in conveying stories and
cultural narratives. Ambalangoda's mask-makers are highly regarded for their
expertise and dedication to preserving this ancient craft (Jayasuriya, 2013).
26

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Furthermore, Ambalangoda Kolam's performances incorporate traditional
music and dance, making them distinct and captivating cultural events that
attract both local and international audiences.
Caste Hierarchy and Its Influence: Sri Lanka has a long history of caste
divisions that have influenced various aspects of society, including cultural
and artistic practices (Spencer, 1990). The caste hierarchy has traditionally
determined social status and opportunities for individuals within the country.
The correlation between caste dynamics and the practice of Kolam drama is
an area of particular interest (Obeyesekere, 1968). Different caste groups have
played varied roles in the development and preservation of this art form, thus
shaping the dynamics of Kolam drama. This interplay between caste hierarchy
and the artistic tradition underscores the intricate relationship between culture
and society in Sri Lanka (Gunawardana, 1990).
In summary, the literature review reveals the unique characteristics of
Ambalangoda Kolam, compared to the other areas of Kolam, emphasizing its
exceptional craftsmanship, regional influences, and role in preserving Sri
Lanka's cultural heritage. It also highlights the historical context of caste
hierarchy and its influence on the development and practice of Kolam drama.
This review provides the foundation for our study, as we further explore the
interconnections between Ambalangoda Kolam, the caste hierarchy, and the
broader cultural context of Sri Lanka.
The Historical and Mythological base of the Origin of Kolam:
When it comes to the origin of Sri Lankan traditional ‘Kolam’, historical
sources explain that it was 200 years ago and there are enough proofs to
explain that ‘Kolam’ originated in ancient times.
27

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Considering the ancient Kolam scripts these are measured as the oldest scripts.
No 7/N (Script in the museum library, Colombo), OR 4995 (Script in the
British Museum), ‘Kolam Kawi Potha’ which was written by A.J.Prera
(Perera) Appuhami and published in 1895. Scripts were edited by Don Juwanis
Appuhami in 1928 and scripts were published in the book ‘Sinhala Jana
Sammatha Kawya’ by the Royal Asian Society in 1935. Similarly, mythical
stories of the origin of the ‘Kolam’ can be found in the books like, ‘Pahatharata
Natum’ by S.H.Sawris Silva, ‘Sri Lankawe Kolam Nataka’ by Prof.
M.H.Gunathilaka, ‘Sinhala Kolam Sampradaya’ by Prof.Gamini Dala
Bandara, ‘Wesmuhunu and Kolam Nateema’ by Dr Nandadewa Wijesekara,
‘Kolama Nataka Wimasauma’ by Prof. Ariyarathna Kaluarachchi and the
book titled ‘Maname Kolama’ by Prof.Thissa Kariyawasam. When we analyse
all those documents, it is very clear that the story of the origin of ‘Kolam’ is
almost the same in all those materials. The mythical King Mahasammatha's
wife wanted to see some funny and entertaining theatre while suffering
pregnancy cravings. To please her, the King had brought in actors from
various cities. But that was not enough for her to be happy and her desire kept
remained the same. Then the King brought in actors from various countries.
That also didn’t work and finally, the king called for his advisor and asked
what they could do to solve this. The book ‘Kolam Kawi Potha’ written by
A.G. Perera explains the above incident as follows.
(—f,dalfhys m<uq rc l, iïu; rcqf.a ld,fhys iajlSh w.% ufyaisldj ore Wm;la yg.;a
l,ays o`vqrej l%Svd ±lSug fod<la Wmk' ta fod< ixiS`oùu msKsi tl,g ;enQ ,S fl,s wd§
kdkdm%ldr l%Svdjka ±lajQfha kuq;a fod< fkdikaisÿKq neúka rcyq úiska weu;shka le`ojd
i.fhks f;dm wei ÿgq wksl al%Svdjla olajkafkñ hehs rc wiajid tjlg isá olaI jvqjka
/ialrjd w,xldr jQ kdkdúO o`vqrEm lmamjd úis;=re uvqjla i,iajd tys§ fuu hf:dala;
l%Svdj ±lúah' tl, ta ìijf.a fod< ikais`§fuka iem;g m;a úh' t;ekamgka fuh f,dalfhys
m;<j ;sî kej; fou< NdIdfjka weú;a ,xldjdiSkag iïNj ,xldjdiSka úiska isxy,
NdIdjg k.d uyckhd úisk a.refldg i,ldf.k tk fuu fmdf;ys'''˜ )(Perera, 1895)
28

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Writing a special note A.G. Perera mentioned that he did draft this story after
analyzing a few Kolam scripts which were written by hand and available at
that time. Also, he has emphasized that he did edit the mistakes that were made
by the copywriters when they copywrite these scripts. This is how the story of
the origin of kolam is explained in poems. There are a few changes in this
story which were mentioned in S.H.Sawris Silva’s book and John Calave’s
document Even though the story about the origin of Kolam differs slightly in
various cities, generally, the story says that the first Kolam drama was staged
because the Queen of King Mahasammatha had a great desire to watch Kolam.
Origin of Bali and its relationship with Cast of Oli:
In the book, ‘Caste Conflict and Elite Formation- The Rice of a Karava Elitein
Sri Lanka’, Michel Robert has stated how the casting system has been spread
according to the areas of Sri Lanka. As it is explained the cast ‘Oli’ has spread
out the areas like Colombo, Galle, Matara, and Tangalle. According to the folk
tale among the Oli community, In the Kotte period, after taking the Bali ritual
from the Indian Brahmana cast, it was given to the King’s men to perform at
the palace. This was done by Thotagamuwe Siri Rahula thero, as it was
ordered by Weedagama thero. And Weedagama thero has given the Oli people
to practice and contribute to serving the people. (Sedaraman, 1964) The book
titled ‘Lankawe Bali Upatha’ says, —fufia foaYSh l%uhgu ilia jQ miqìula we;s n,s
f;dú,h rcf.hs§ r`. ±laùu msKsi tjlg rcf.hs yd uyd ia:úrhka jykafiaf.a
wkaf;ajdisl .oUhska lsysmfofkl=g mqyqKq lrùh' fuhska miqj rcf.hso weu;s ueÿre j,o
.%yfodai" weiajy" lgjy wd§ Wjÿre ÿgqi`o flakaøh n,d n,s kshufldgf.k Ydka;s l%uhka
lsÍug fndfyda wh weíneys jyQ ' l,ahEfï§ ,xldj mqrdu n,s weÿfrda;a n,s lrjd .kafkda;a
jQy' óg fmr ;snqKq hla f;dú,a j,g jvd tlu wdpd¾h flfkl=f.a ukd ixúOdkhlska
hq;=j ìys jQ n,s hd.h Ydia;%Sh w;skq;a o¾YkSh;ajfhkq;a Wiia jQ ksid uyckhdf.a frdaìh
my lsÍug o th uyd T!IO ixfhda.hlau úh' hd.h mgka.;a ;ek isg wjidkh olajd .ehsh
hq;= meÈ ieye,s iaf;%da;% wÈh y`ÿkajdfok ,o lú mka;shla o úh' uq,a ld,fha§ ilia jQ lú
mka;s wkqlrKfhka miq ld, j,§ lúhka úiska iliafldg idys;Hhla ìysúh' tfiau uq,a
ld,fha§ W.;=ka w;u jQ n,s hd.h l%ufhka kQ.;a .eñhka w;rg m;aúh' W.;a weÿrkaf.au
29

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
wf;ys ;sìh§ isÿ fkdjQ wYdia;%Sh fhÿï o msgm;a lsÍfï fodai l,ahEfï§ we;s ùu je<elaúh
fkdyelalls' tod ùod.u ysñhka w;skau flrekehs lshk —r;ak w,xldrh˜ kï .%ka:fhys
n,shd.hg kshñ; lú .S iaf;da;% fufia kïfldg ;sfí'˜ (Sedaraman, 1964)
Thotagamuwe Siri Rahula thero who lived in Thotagamuwe Pirivena,
Thelwaththa. Thotagamuwe Siri Rahula, a Buddhist monk, is famous among
the folk stories in Sri Lanka as a powerful monk who could ride on air and
also get services from demons through the power of his magical oil called
‘Henaraja Thailaya’ made by himself. Thelwaththa ancient ‘Thotagamuwa
Privena’ is located between Ambalangoda and Hikkaduwa. Therefore this
explains how Oli cast got this Bali tradition because of that cast deployed to
play traditional drumming as a vership to the Buddha in Thelwaththa
Viharaya.. Further, Prof. M.H. Gunathilka explains in his book ‘Kolam Nataka
Saha Lankawe Wesmuhunu’ that mainly of Bali descent living in Elpitiya and
Benthara villages close to the Ambalangoda. The people of Oli cast are
traditionally those who perform sacrificial sacrifices by occupation and are
engaged in the work of fortune-telling and conducting ‘Druming Theva’ in
temples. ( Roberts, 1993) From ancient times, Kolam has been very popular
in districts like Matara and Galle in the southern province and Kalutara and
Panadura in the western province. ( Roberts, 1993) Below are’s and the
villages which were very famous for Kolam.
30

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
I. Bentara – Bentara, Kommala,
II. Suddagoda. Mirissa – Ginthota, Mirissa,
Udupila, Kaburugamuwa,
Thotagamuwa, Wakwella
III. Ambalangoda – Ambalangoda,
Hirewaththa.
IV. Raigam Koralaya – Aluthgama,
Mathugama, Raigama.
V. Western Province – Olaboduwa,
Batuwita, Pokunuwita, Bokundara,
Meegoda, Pitigala, Meegama,
Pereigama, Polgampola, Mathalana,
Rukgahawila, Thelikada, Horagamvita,
Gampaha, Ganemulla, Batuwaththa,  Villages located in Kolam Darama in Sri
Bemmilla, Wigada.
According to the books written by Brais Rayn and Michel Robert, above
mentioned areas which were stated by Prof. M.H. Gunathilaka, were also very
famous for Bali rituals.
The Origin and Expansion of Kolam in Ambalangoda:
Ambalangoda is famous as a place where artistic people lived for a very long
time. Even the renowned Sri Lankan author, philosopher Martin
Wickckramasinghe has admitted this fact in his biography. As he said, in New
Year's times, people from different villages have to Ambalangoda only
because there were glorious events created by those people. (Wickramasinghe,
Edition,1994)
Similarly, Amabalangoda is famous for, the Muppet industry. In addition,
there are a few pioneer artists who are famous for drawing paintings on temple
walls and who are considered hereditary drum players who live in areas like
Wathugedara and Karagahathota which are close to Ambalangoda. Among all
the facts another important thing is majority of the population who live in
31

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Ambalangoda belongs to the ‘Kawrawa’ lineage and the first traditional
profession of this pedigree is fishing and the second is carpentry. There were
four main carpentry community groups belonging to the catchment area of the
Ambalangoda Purana Rajamaha Viharaya, ( The Main Historical Buddist
Temple in Ambalangoda) and they have their folklore related to their equal
talent in wood carving and carpentry, generation which is popular in this area.
These carpenters are talented engravers and because of that Ambalangoda is
famous for artistic ancient wooden furniture even the present. To establish the
Ambalangoda ‘Kolam’ as an art these factors have been affected similarly and
carpentry people deployed the creating Kolam masks as their life experience
and after as their traditional ritualistic entertainment.
Lineage of Kolam Artists:
When we analyze the lineage of Kolam artists in Ambalangoda, it’s very
important to identify and understand the relationships between the ‘Kawrawa’
lineage and south India. As Michel Roberts explains in his book ‘The Caste in
Modern Ceylon’ fishing is their main profession and another important fact is
members of the cast called ‘Nakathi’ have worked together with ‘Kawrawa’
lineage when they are fishing using big fishing boats called ‘Theppam”. The
Nakathi people work as an assistant to the Karawa fishermen. The Cast based
job role of the ‘Nakathi’ is to check precious times, and horoscopes and
perform rituals. They are the experts in performing Bali rituals and especially
in designing and moulding those Bali. (Roberts, 1993) Some of them worked
in their free time as fishing boat assistants. (Roberts, 1993) ‘Kawrawa’ lineage
has received immense support from the Nakathi cast in terms of expanding
‘Kolam’. Especially the conceptual and theoretical knowledge which is
needed when craving wooden face masks. They creatively used ‘Bali Yaga
Kawi’ ( The Sacrificial poems which described mathematical measurements
32

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
of moulding Bali statutes) to get the Ideas to create Kolam face masks,
especially for its measurements and ideas of colouring. ( Gunathilaka, 1984)
Bali is a moulded clay statue. Ambalangoda carpenters have craved the
wooden Kolam faces following the poems which consist of the guidelines of
moulding Bali. (Sarathchandra, 1999) There are Kolam masks which are two
decades old and preserved carefully. Based on the correlations and interactions
they had with each other, have helped them in a way to secure their traditional
ritualistic knowledge about unique techniques and share them even more with
each other.
Analysis of Relationships of Ambalangoda Kolam Artists
The pedigree of Ambalangoda Kolam artists has originated from centralizing
one special family. That is T.W.Gunadasa Gurunnanse’s family who lived in
Mahaambalangoda and they have been living in this village from the very
beginning. The pedigree of Ambalangoda Kolam originated from the
grandfather of T.W. Gunadasa ‘Gurunnanse’ (Master Guru Gunadasa) and his
name was T.W.Oinis ‘Gurunnanse’ (Master Guru Oinis) It was around 1780
AD when he started carving Kolam masks with a person named S.H.Ondiris.
Prof. M.H. Gunathilaka has mentioned T.W. Gunadasa’s idea like this in his
book ‘Kolam Nataka Saha Lankawe Wesmuhunu’. (Gunathilaka, 1984) (—
.=Kodi .=rekakdkafiaf.a mshd jQ à' ví,sõ' mE,sia .=rekakdkafiaf.a iShd jQ ví,sõ' Thsksia
.=rekakdfia;a flda,ï kegqug fukau flda,ï lemSug o tl fia olaIh' Tjqkf.a uq,a kug
—jvq˜ kduh fh§ ;sîfuka fmfkkafka jvq l¾udka;hg iïnkaO iy f.j,a ;ekSfï
ld¾hhg Wmfoia ÿka ld¾ñl ×kfhka fyì l,dlrejka jQ njhs' Thsksia .=rekakdkafia iy
tia ' tÉ ´Èßia hk fofokd tl;= ù" .`. whsfka jegqKq Èx .iaj, ms;sj,sk a m%:ufhka fjia
uqyqKq lmkakg jQ nj;a" lÿre ,Sh fhdod .;af;a bka blaì;sj nj;a .=Kodi ndiqkakefya
mejiSh' wïn,kaf.dv flda,ï l=Ügu ks¾udKh lsÍfï§ ;=ka¥fõ iskaod .=rekakdkafiaf.kao
Tjqkag w.kd iydhla ,eìk' .=Kodi .=rekakdkafia i;= flda,ï fmdf;a f.daGhsïnr l:dj;a
ukfï l:dj;a ,shk úgo Tyqf.a iyh fkdu`oj ,nd.;a nj fmfka' fnr ;d, ks¾udKfha§o
iskaod .=rekakdkafiaf.a .=relï fnfyúka m%fhdackj;a jQ nj fmkS hhs'” )
33

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
The facts affected on originating Ambalangoda Kolam by deeply analyzing
the information which is mentioned in Prof.M.H.Gunathilaka’s book and also
from the data gathered by me by interviewing S.M.Somadasa who is a senior
member of another pioneer Kolam artist family.
The pedigree of Ambalangoda Kolam (Desultorily)
Thunduwe Sinda Gurunnanse
T.W.Oinis Gurunnanse
T.W.Oinis Gurunnanse (1780)
(T.W.Palis Gurunnanse’s father has tried to carve Kolam masks using Din wood with S.H.Odisri)
First Generation
T.W.Palis Gurunnanse (1850)
(Father of T.W.Gunadasa Gurunnanse)
Second Generation
S.M.Samel Silva Gurunnanse T.W.Gunadasa Gurunnanse J.W.Ariyapala Gurunnanse
1905 1903 1903
Third Generation
S.M.Somadasa T.W.Harischandra Bandu Wijesuriya
Historical, Social and Economic factors of Ambalangoda Kolam Artists:
Until the year 1950, fishermen who lived in the villages like Ambalangoda,
and Dodanduwa used to take two-three weeks to go to the sea and come back
to the land. They have gone to the deep sea to get the harvest and when the
harvest is pretty good, they have gone to South India to visit their relatives
who lived in fisherman’s villages in South India. While spending some time
with the relatives, they have made dry fish using excess harvest to keep them
34

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
for a longer period. And another method was ‘Jaadi’. ‘Jaadi’ is a fermented
fish product, produced by adding salt and preserving fish flesh long time
without outdated. Fishermans in the Ambalangoda area have gone to the
villages called ‘Rameshwaram’ and ‘Dhanuskodiya’, the coastal area which
runs from ‘Kerala’ to ‘Thrivenmpuram’ at present. As was mentioned earlier
in this paper, the majority of the people who live in Ambalangoda belong to
the ‘Kawrawa’ lineage and fishery is their hereditary profession. There is a
dragon in the logo of the Ambalangoda municipal council and it symbolises
the fact that they belong to the ‘Kawrawa’ lineage. South Indian fisherman
Community who belong to the ‘Kawrawa’ lineage is called the ‘Kariyar’
community and they also do the same profession as the Ambalangoda
fisherman Community.
The Karava Flag (www. https://defonseka.com) The Makara flag of the Karaiyars
(19th Century)
Urban Council Logo -
Citing a document produced by Valantine in 1726, Sir Pole E. Peris has
mentioned in his book titled ‘Portuguese Era’, that there are nine sectors in
‘Karaawa’ cast.
I. Oru Karawa (Trelrdj ¡ Trefjka f.dia uiqka ueÍu) – Fisherman's fishing by
boart
35

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
II. Madal Karawa (ud ±,a lrdj ¡ ud ±,a u.ska uiqka ueÍu) - Fisherman's fishing by
‘Madel Nets’
III. Dadu Karawa (o`vq lrdj ¡ jvq l¾udka;h) – Carpenters
IV. Kaspa Karawa (leiam lrdj ¡ leianEjqka we,a,Su) – Catchers of Sea Turteles
V. Baru Dal Karawa (nre ±,a lrdj ¡ nre ±,a oud uiqka we,a,Su) - Fisherman's fishing
by ‘Baru del Nets’
VI. Porawakaara Karawa (fmdrjldr lrdj ¡ .ia lmd ,S bÍu) – Tree Cutters and wood
shredders
VII. Goda Karawa (f.dv lrdj ¡ ñßÈh ëjr l¾udka;h) – Inland Fishermance
VIII. Gok Karawa (f.dla lrdj¡ .j uySId§ka we;s lsÍu) – Cattle Farmerce
IX. Idimal Karawa (bÈu,a lrdj ¡ ckhdg u,a iemhSu) – Flower suppliers to the
community.
Among above mentioned classes, ‘Porawa Karawa’ and ‘Dadu Karawa’ were
famous for carpentering and the rest of the classes were famous for fisheries.
But they also have engaged in carpentering in off-seasons where they can’t go
to the sea.
The famous Buddhist temple in Ambalangoda, ‘Sunandarama Maha
Viharaya’ had four alms-giving villages and all those villages had carpenter
workers and here are the names of Those villages called ‘Hathra Peruwa”.
‘Hathra Peruwa’
Ambalangoda Kaluwadumulla Hirewaththa Wilegoda
There are so many generations who live associating above mentioned villages
and here are few surnames. ‘Alagiyawadu, Peththawadu, Pemmawadu,
Tukkawadu, Manikkuwawadu, Aranawaththawadu, Udiriappuwadu,
Kalamullawadu, Hampalawadu, Dodanduwawadu, Piniyawadu, Peduruwadu,
36

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Balapuwadu, Mahawadu, Manawadu, Yathrawadu, Rathuwadu, Lasadawadu,
Lukkuwadu, Lokuwadu, Sampaathawadu, Uththamawadu, Arumawadu,
Waduthanthree, Wannkkuwaththa waduge, Ambalangoda Waduge.’
(Electoral Rolle – Ambalangoda) Those surnames mentioned their casting
relationship with the professionalism of carpentry.
Ambalangoda fishermans who went to South India from time to time had
experienced a religious ritual which was performed by South Indians to
worship the goddess Kali and it was performed by wearing masks. There is a
performing art called ‘Kolam Thullei’ in Western Kerala and in the Tamil
language the word ‘Kolam’ gives the idea of shape, beauty, colour, glory, and
jewellery. Similarly in the Malayali language, this word gives the idea of the
shape of the mask, look, and beauty of a costume. In Kannada language
‘Kolam’ stands for the same meaning and in Theligu language the word
‘Kolam’ is used to explain a dance.
Here is a poem used in rituals like Suniyam yagaya in Ambalangoda.
rdu jä. .=re¿ f;<s`.= f.!ä wd`ä ndfiks
u.O md,s fou< isy, ixialD;h ndfiks
l,a¿ jä`. foaj hlaI ismhs mÜge`ä ndfiks
fuf,i jä. mgqkh lSfõ oywg ndfik s
It is evident from all the given facts that there was a relationship between
South Inida and Ambalangoda fishermans. Also, there are prominent facts to
prove that Ambalangoda fishermans have been influenced by the folk dances,
dramas and other performances which has been done by South Indians and
once they came back to Sri Lanka they tried them out and they have introduced
these new performing arts to their community people. M.S.Somadasa who
lives in Mahaambalangoda confirms this information. By this time Thovil
37

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
ritual was very popular in the Ambalangoda area and Kolam artists had carved
the new masks taking ideas from them and using their imagination.
The pioneer Kolam drama artist in Ambalangoda ‘Tukkawadu Palis
Gurunnanse's relative married a lady from Thunduwa village and Thunduwe
Sinda Gurunnanse was the pioneer in creating drum beats and content of
Kolam. He is an uncle of Ambalangoda Palis Gurunanse. Because of this
connection, Ambalangoda people received poems called ‘Abum Kavi’ which
explains how the clay sculptures should be done for the Bali ritual and using
those guidelines Ambalangoda people have carved the faces on ‘Kaduru’
wood for Kolam. From the outlook, Ambalangoda kolam masks are very
similar to faces in Bali stratus faces and their colour themes.
Face masks in rituals like ‘Suniyam yagaya’ are flat and plain. Face masks in
‘Bali’ are three-dimensional and, Ambalangoda Kolam faces are similar to
Bali face masks not just in shapes and colours but also in this 3D effect. In the
early stages, facemasks were used in ‘Perahara’ events which happened in
areas like Ambalangoda and Hikkaduwa. As time went by, they organized this
event in a proper way which happened at one place throughout the night and
they adopted the structure of thovil and other yaga rituals. (Sarathchadra,1999)
Therefore we can assume that Ambalangoda Kolam originated 200 years ago
and the main reason for this was Sinhalese got the exposure to experience the
‘Bali’ ritual. The Kotte period belongs to 1412-1580 AD and this was the time
when the Portuguese invaded the country. Even though the fact that the
professional relationship between Ambalangoda Kolam pedigrees and
Benthara Bali pedigrees made a positive impact on developing the Kolam as
a unique art is controversial, the book titled ‘ Cast in Modern Ceylon’ written
by Prof. Bryce Ryan explains it properly.
38

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
The Reasons that affect Professional Relationships between the Kawrawa
lineage and the Oli Cast:
According to Prof. Bryce Ryan, the majority of the people in Oli's cast were
dancers who performed at rituals and events. “However, is there evidence that
the roles of Oli and Berawa are precisely separated? In some Kandyan villages,
Oli are entirely divorced from ceremonial mattes and are generally poor and
often landless peasants in the low Country they are in some instances
agricultural labourers and peasants, although one large village is almost
exclusively engaged in selling fish caught by neighboring Karava. Elsewhere
in the Low Country, they are termed “Nekati” and hold a virtual monopoly in
astrological practices usually they profess no ritual responsibilities, but are
aware of the Kandyan Oli. It is doubtful that marriages take place between
those of the low Country and the in terror, although caste oneness is claimed”
(Ryan, P-128-129, 1960) Citing Jhon Devi, Prof. Bryce Ryan has stated that
Oli cast has lived both in upcountry and low country. However, the largest
population has lived in a low country, specifically in the Southern province.
Oli who lived in the central and western provinces were dancers and were
engaged in Dewala rituals. So they have received Nindagam as a gift for their
service. In some cases, they have worked as labourers in fields to survive. In
the south, they have worked as helpers of the Kawrawa people and have
engaged in fisheries. Further, according to Bryce Ryan in low country areas,
they have converted into Nekathi cast and have maintained a monopoly in
astrology. Astrology plays a huge role in the Bali ritual. Oli people have
engaged in astrology by serving people and it is a practical fact that, since the
Bali ritual doesn’t happen frequently they have lived by checking horoscopes
of village people and calculating auspicious times.
39

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Another important fact which comes in Prof. Bryce Ryan’s book is low
country Oli community has lived with the Kawrawa people as neighbors and
because of the co-existence they have taken their professional relationships to
another level by doing cross-cultural marriages. In the book ‘Kolam Natema
Saha Lankawe ves muhunu’ by Prof. M.H. Gunathilaka, the author discusses
the relationship between the Ambalangoda Kawrawa people and the Benthara
oli cast.
The Relationship between Maha Ambalangoda Kolam lineage and
Benthara Bali lineage:
The professional connection between the Kawrawa lineage and the Oli cast is
evident in above mentioned historical facts and the documents written by
Michel Roberts and Jhon Devy. The bond both of these parties had for the
creative arts might be the fact which made them closer. It’s very practical to
understand that Oli cast didn’t get to work in astrology throughout the year
and this made these people go and work with Kawrawa people in carpentering
and fisheries. They have considered some other facts like neighbourhood,
talent, and professional connections in the first place rather than considering
the cast. They have valued practical facts more than any other thing.
As has been stated by Prof. H.M Gunathilaka, the Ambalangoda Kolam
tradition started with Maha Ambalangoda T.W.Oinis Gurunanse and he tried
to carve masks with S.H.Odiris. T.W.Oinis Gurunanse belongs to the
Kawrawa lineage and Thunduwe Sinda Gurunnanse belongs to the Nakathi
cast and he is a pioneer artist of the Benthara Bali tradition. This proves how
Ambalangoda Kolam and Benthala Bali are connected. Two pioneer families
were famous for the Benthara Bali ritual and Sinda Gurunnanse’s family and
Amarasa Gurunnane’s family were those two. As a relative Sinda Gurunnanse
was an uncle of T.W.Oinis Gurunanse and later he received support and
40

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
guidance from Sinda Gurunnanse to develop Kolam. The fifth chapter of the
book titled ‘Kolam Nataka Saha Lankawe Vesmuhunu’ written by Prof. M.H.
Gunathilaka provides a proper explanation of this matter.
T.W.Oinis Gurunanse, Sinda Gurunnanse, T.W.Palis Gurunnanse and
Benthara Dani Gurunnanse were famous in Ambalangoda for Kolam dance.
Maha Ambalangoda T.W. Gunadasa Gurunnanse and Hirewaththa J.W.
Ariyapala Gurunnanse were students of T.W.Palis Gurunnanse. In Sinda
Gurunnanse’s time, Thunduwe Eliya Gurunnanse was the popular drummer.
T.W. Palis Gurunnanse and T.W. Oinis Gurunanse were equally talented in
carving Kolam masks. The contribution of Sinda Gurunnanse is also
remarkable and his advice and guidance have been very useful in creating
Kolam drum beats. The same chapter says that Dingiri Gurunnanse, Dani
Gurunnanse and Laithenis Gurunnanse were the best drummers at that time in
Kolam dance.
Conclusion:
According to the above-mentioned formation, we can assume that the birth of
Ambalamgoda Kolam happened around 1780 AD and Ambalangoda Kolam
is a folk drama which is unique to the area. Here are the main points which
helped to derive this conclusion.
1. There is a hereditary cast factor in Ambalangod Kolam.
2. There is a professional background which is attached to this hereditary cast
factor and it is visible in this Ambalangoda Kolam.
3. This cast factor and professional background reveal the relationship of
these people with South India who were engaged in the fishery.
41

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
4. Ambalangoda Kolam has been influenced by the technical and creative
facts of the Benthara ‘Nakathi’ cast community, through professional and
socio-economic and cultural relationships.
Few conclusions can be derived based on above mentioned facts.
Kolam is an independent folk art that originated through South Indian
relationships in the early British colonial period or at the end of the Dutch
period. This art is located in areas like Benthara, Ambalangoda, Matara, and
Mirissa and is especially near the fishing harbours, associated with fisherman
communities. There are special stories in Kolam drama which is unique to
each area. For example ‘Gon Koti story’ is unique to Ambalangoda. These
characteristics have emerged with the rituals which can be found in these
areas. And all these things have happened within 200 years and it doesn’t go
beyond more than 200 years. Some sources say that the history of Kolam goes
as far as Gampola or Dabadeni period and these sources oppose that argument.
Kolam is the primary folk drama that originated among the Karawa
community in Sri Lanka influenced by their cast relations with the South
Indian Kariyar community.
References :
(English)
Ariyapala M.B. (1996), Medival Ceylon History, Second Print, Godage
Publication, Sri Lanka ( Sinhala)
Arsecularatne, S. N. (1999). Ritual and Drama in Sri Lanka. University of
California Press.
Balasooriya, P. A. (2016). Traditional Puppetry and Dance in Sri Lanka.
Social Scientists' Association.
Bates Daniel G., Plog Fred (1990) Cultural Anthropology. Third Edition,
MxGraw-Hill.
42

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Carter Charles. (1999). English Sinhalese Dictionary, Second Edition, Asian
Education Services, New Delhi
Frazer J.G (1957) The Golden Bough: Volum II. Six Edition, Macmillan
Gunawardana, R. A. L. H. (1990). Robe and Plough: Monasticism and
Economic Interest in Early Medieval Sri Lanka. University of Arizona Press.
Goonatilleke M.H(1978) Masks and Mask Systems of Sri Lanka, First Edition,
Tamarind Book.
Gudykunst William B., Kim Young Yun (1997) Communicating With
Strangers, Third Edition, McGraw
Guide to Cochin, Guide Book, (1958) Published by Krishan Bossk Company,
South India, Second Edition.
Gunasinghe Siri. (1962) Masks of Ceylon, First Edition, Department of
Cultural Affairs.
Holt, J. (2017). Introduction to the Short Story in English: Ambalangoda.
Ambalangoda Kolam Museum.
Jayasuriya, A. (2013). Crafts of Sri Lanka: An Introductory Guide.
Craftsmen's Corporation.
Mahendra, Sunanda. (1997) Key Terms in Culture and Communication, First
Edition, Gunasena Publication.
Mahendra, Sunanda (1986), Sri Lanka Journal of Communication, (Edition),
Department of Mass Communication.
Manukulasooriya R.C. De S. (2005) Mask of Sri Lanka and Mask and Kolam
Dancing. First Edition.
Obeyesekere, G. (2004). Imagining Karma: Ethical Transformation in
Amerindian, Buddhist, and Greek Rebirth. University of California Press.
Obeyesekere, G. (1968). The Sociology of Sinhalese Village Religion.
Cambridge University Press.
Pertold Otaker. (1973) Ceremonial Dances of the Sinhalese, reprint, Tisara
Prakasakaya.
Raghavan M.D. (1962) Ceylon. A Pictorial Survey of the Peoples and Arts,
First Edition. Gunasena Publications.
43

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
Raghavan M.D. (1967) Sinhala Natum, First Edition, Gunasena Publications.
Raghvan M.D. (1962) Ceylon, A Pictorial Survey of the Peoples and Arts,
First Edition, Gunasena.
Robert Michael. (1993) Caste Conflict and Elite Formation, The Rise of a
Karava Elite in Sri Lanka, 1500-1931, Navrang. New Delhi.
Ryan Bryce. (1993) Caste in Modern Ceylon, Reprint, Navarang, New Delhi.
Spencer, J. (1990). Sri Lanka: History and the Roots of Conflict. Routledge.
Seneviratne Anuradha. (1984) Traditional Dance of Sri Lanka, First Edition,
Central Cultural Fund, Sri Lanka.
Weerakoon, R. (1985) Sri Lanka's Mythology First Edition, Auther
Publications
Wilson James, Wilson, Stan Le Roy. (1998), Mass Media Mass Culture An
Introduction, Fourth Edition, McGraw-Hill.
Wijesekera Nandadeva. (1987), Deities and Demons Magic and Masks, Part
III, First Edition. Author Publication.
(Sinhala)
ඇතුගල ආරියරත්න. (1998) සංජානනය හා සන්නිෙව්දනය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, එම්. ඩී.
ගුණෙස්න ප්‍රකාශන.
සරච්චන්ද්‍ර එදිරිවීර (1999) සිංහල ගැමි නාටකය, ෙතවන මුද්‍රණය, ෙගාඩෙග්
ප්‍රකාශන.
සව්රිස් සිල්වා ඇස්.එච්. (1965) පහතරට නැටුම් (ප්‍රථම භාගය) පළමු මුද්‍රණය,
ගුණෙස්න ප්‍රකාශන.
මෙහ්න්ද්‍ර සුනන්ද.(1997) නාට්‍ය හා රංග කලා ශබ්දකරය, පළමු පුද්‍රණය,ෙගාඩෙග්
ප්‍රකාශන.
කලන්සුරිය ඒ. ඩී. පී. (1982) බටුන්ඩ් රසල් හා සමකාලීන දර්ශනය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය,
ආරිය ප්‍රකාශකෙයෝ.
කළු ආරච්චි ආරියරත්න, (2006) ෙකෝලම් නාටක විමසුම, පළමු මුදුණය. කර්තෘ
ප්‍රකාශන.
කාරියවසම් තිස්ස, (1986) බලියාග පිළිෙවළ, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, සමයවර්ධන
ප්‍රකාශකෙයෝ.
44

TRIVALENT/ ;s%ixhqc: Journal of Archaeology, Tourism & Anthropology, Department of Archaeology, University of Kelaniya Volume III: Issue II 2022
කාරියවසම් තිස්ස, (2001) මනෙම් ෙකෝලම, ෙදවැනි මුද්‍රණය,විෙජ්සූරිය ග්‍රන්ථ
ප්‍රකාශන.
කාරියවසම් තිස්ස, (1998) ශාන්තිකර් ම සහ සිංහල සමාජය, ෙදවන මුද්‍රණය,
ෙගාඩෙග් ප්‍රකාශන
ෙකෝට්ෙට්ෙගාඩ ජයෙස්න, (2006) ෙකෝලම් ගැමි නාටකයක් ෙනාෙව්, පළමු මුද්‍රණය,
කර්තෘ ප්‍රකාශන.
ගුණතිලක එම්.එච්. (1999) ෙකෝලම් නාටක සහ ලංකාෙව් ෙවස් මුහුණු, සංෙශෝධිත
නව මුද්‍රණය, රත්න ප්‍රකාශන.
ගුණතිලක එම්. එච්. (1994) ෙකෝලම් නාටක සාහිත්‍ය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, රත්න ප්‍රකාශන.
රත්නපාල තන්දස්න. (1999) ජනශ්‍රැති විද්‍යාව. ෙගාඩෙග් ප්‍රකාශන,
රත්නපාල නන්දෙස්න (2001) මානව විද්‍යාව, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, ආර්ය ප්‍රකාශන,
ලියනෙග් සිරි (1996) නිරුක්ති සහිත සිංහල ශබ්දෙකෝෂය, ෙගාඩයෙග් ප්‍රකාශන,
ලියනෙග් සිරි (1996) ජන විද්‍යා ශබ්දෙකෝෂය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, ෙගාඩෙග් ප්‍රකාශන,
ලියනෙග් සිරි, (2000) ජනශ්‍රැති ශබ්දෙකෝෂය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, සිරිලිය ප්‍රකාශාන.
ලියනෙග් සිරි (1968) ෙකෝලම් නැටුම් විචාරය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, කර්තෘ ප්‍රකාශන.
ෙලාකුලියන අරුණ. (2001) ශාන්තිකර් ම සන්නිෙව්දනය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, ෙගාඩෙග්
ප්‍රකාශන.
ෙවස් මුහුණු හා ෙකෝලම් නැටීම්. (1982) ඩිෙජ්ෙස්කර නන්දෙද්ව, පළමු මුද්‍රණය,
ගුණෙස්න ප්‍රකාශන.
විෙජ්ෙස්කර නන්දෙද්ව. (1986) ලංකා ජනතාව, ගුණෙස්න ප්‍රකාශන.
ෙස්දරමන් ෙජ්.ඊ. (1967) බලියාග විචාරය, පළමු මුද්‍රණය ගුණෙස්න ප්‍රකාශන.
ෙස්දරමන් ෙජ්.ඊ.(1964) ලංකාෙව් බලි උපත, පළමු මුද්‍රණය, ගුණෙස්න ප්‍රකාශන.
ෙසාරත වැලිවිෙය් පණ්ඩිත ස්වාමින්දයක් වහන්ෙස්. (1970) � සුමංගල ශබ්ද
ෙකෝෂය, කාණ්ඩ 1/11, ෙදවන මුද්‍රණය. අභය ප්‍රකාශන.
45