Vidyodaya Journal of Humanities
and Social Sciences
VJHSS (2025), Vol. 10 (01)
Methods, Techniques and Challenges in Deciphering the Sa-skaya
Codex: Karmmavibhāga as the Oldest Sinhala Manuscript into
Modern Sinhala
N. E. I. Wijerathne
Faculty of Graduate Studies, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka
Article Info ABSTRACT
Article History:
Received 21 Aug 2024 The Sa-skaya Codex is named as Karmmavibhāga, is acknowledged as the
Accepted 25 May 2025 oldest existing Sinhala manuscript and also possesses significant
Issue Published Online historical and cultural importance. It has been offered a unique insight
01 January 2025 into the religious, linguistic, and cultural tapestry of ancient Sri Lankan
society. The codex poses significant difficulties for contemporary
Key Words: researchers, because of its outdated language, unique writing style, and
physical decay. This research is been aimed to create an exact translation
Sa-skaya Codex
of the Sa-skaya Codex into modern Sinhala, while accurately, and it will
Karmavibhāga
be maintaining the linguistic subtleties and cultural richness of the
History
original. A multidisciplinary approach had utilized to accomplish this,
Palaeography
integrating paleography, philology, and digital humanities. Paleographic
Linguistic translation
examination had been utilized to interpret the script and grasp the
writing practices of that time period. Philological methods have been
*Corresponding author already aided in understanding ancient vocabulary and grammatical
E-mail address: forms and allowing them for more context-driven interpretation of the
eshanpanhinda@gmail.com text. Moreover, sophisticated digital technologies those are including
high-resolution imaging and machine learning were been employed to
https://orcid.org/0009- restore the faded or impaired portions of the manuscript. The results are
0000-7977-8699 highlighting the codex's complexity in language and spelling,
demonstrating the development of the Sinhala language across centuries.
Journal homepage: Additionally, the research uncovers the various historical and cultural
http://journals.sjp.ac.lk/in details within the manuscript that had not been acknowledged before. As
dex.php/vjhss the summary, this study is providing a dependable framework for
translating the ancient Sinhala documents and also highlighting the
http://doi.org/10.31357/fh greater importance of safeguarding and interacting with historical
ss/vjhss.v10i01.10 manuscripts. It significantly enhances the comprehension of linguistic
legacy of Sri Lanka and provides a model that would be able to replicated
VJHSS (2025), Vol. 10 (01), for future translation efforts concerning early textual traditions.
pp. 166-176
ISSN 1391-1937/ISSN
2651-0367 (Online)
Faculty of Humanities and
Social Sciences 2025

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
1. Introduction Sankrtyayana. This discovery of a Sinhala
manuscript at the Sa-skya monastery in Tibet
Six decades ago, P.E.E. Fernando examined was a significant event which brought to light
photographs of the Sa-skya Codex at the an important aspect of the activities of the
request of the Historical Manuscripts Buddhist religieux from Sri Lanka. The island
Commission of Sri Lanka. It was his opinion had emerged as a foremost centre of Buddhist
that, on consideration of its palaeographic activity at an early phase of its long history,
characteristics, the Sa-skya Codex should be and the monastic communities living there
assigned to the thirteenth century. He had begun to maintain contact with centres of
suggested that it could even be the original Buddhist learning in various parts of Asia.
copy made by the unknown author of this The present edition of the Karmmavibhāga is
text. The Historical Manuscripts Commission, based on the photographs of folios of the Sa-
which had among its members Senarath skya Codex brought by Sankrtyayana from
Paranavitana, the well-known epigraphist, Tibet. The story of this remarkable discovery
was more inclined to suggest a date in the goes back several decades to the time when
twelfth or the thirteenth century. The this indefatigable scholar who devoted his
Commission was also of the view that the whole life to research on Buddhism visited
manuscript was of great value as a document Tibet in search of ancient Sanskrit
containing data for the study of the manuscripts. His first visit, made in 1929, did
development of the Sinhala script. No not lead to the discovery of any Sanskrit
detailed study in the lines suggested by the manuscripts of major significance, but it
Commission has been made so far. In making provided him with the opportunity to secure
a palaeographical analysis of the Sa-skya several manuscripts written in Tibetan and to
Codex, it is useful to compare it with the collect material for his booklet on the history
Cullavagga Pāli manuscript of the H.C.P. Bell of Buddhism in Tibet (Sankrtyayana, 1952).
collection which is preserved at the Library of The manuscripts discovered during this visit
the National Museum, Colombo, and the drew his attention to the possibility of
Mahavagga Pāli manuscript in the University utilizing the Tibetan translations to
of Kelaniya collection, photocopies of which reconstruct the original Sanskrit texts. In fact,
are available at the Library of the University he appears to have formulated a project to
of Peradeniya. These two are considered to be reconstruct the Pramāna- vârttika, the work
the oldest palm-leaf manuscripts found in Sri on Buddhist logic written by the Indian
Lanka. In the following comparative study of savant Dharmmakîrtti in the sixth or the
the three manuscripts, the letters SC denotes seventh century AC.
the Sa-skya Codex, CP the Cullavagga Pāli and
MP the Mahavagga Pāli. In addition to these However, Sankrtyayana soon realized the
manuscripts, several inscriptions have been enormity of the methodological problems
utilized for comparison. The comparative involved in such a venture and that the
study of the palaeographic forms in the Sa- phenomenal effort required for such a task
skya Codex with those in inscriptions is would be in vain if a manuscript containing
particularly useful for determining the date of the original Sanskrit text were to be in vain if
the Codex. a manuscript containing the original Sanskrit
text were to be discovered at a later date. The
1.1 The Sa-Skya Codex and its Discovery search for this lost Sanskrit text and its
commentaries took him back to Tibet on
The discovery of the Sa-skya Codex several more missions. It was on the second
containing the text of the Karmmavibhāga of such visits that the manuscript containing
was the achievement of a Sri Lankan team of the text of the Karmmavibhāga was
scholars led by the late Professor Rahul discovered.
167

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
1.2 Literature Review Tibetan influences into China. Khublai Khan
conceded to Phags-pa authority over Tibetan
In May 1936 Sankrtyayana visited the Sa-skya affairs and exempted the monastic estates
monastery which is situated about eighty from taxes and interference by Mongol
kilometres to the north of the Mount Everest. couriers who had often used monasteries as
This monastery was founded in 1073 by Khon posting stations. In making these concessions
dKon- mchog rgyal-po (An-che Li, 1945; Shoju the Mongol ruler was probably trying to win
Inaba, 1963). The Sa-skya-pa school of over the support of the Buddhist clergy led by
Buddhism which emerged under the Phags-pa and to extend his control over Tibet.
leadership of the teachers of this monastery However, the relationship between the Sa-
was to become one of the most influential in skya monastery and the house of the Mongols
Tibet. It was influenced by the Yogaācāra was symbiotic in nature in that it also enabled
teachings and propounded the Phags-pa and his successors to assume an
hetuphalavada or "the doctrine of cause increasingly crucial political role and to
(rgyu) and effect ('bras)" as well as the view become the virtual rulers of Tibet.
that all phenomena appear only in the mind.
The Sa-skya teachers emphasized the value of The influence, the power and the intense
meditation and, in their ritual, gave an scholarly activities of the Sa-skya monastery
important place to the worship of the were only distant memories at the time of
Bodhisattva Manjusrî. Sankrtyayana's visit. By this time, the Chag-
pe-lha-khang Library at the Lha-khang-
The rise of the Sa-skya-pa to the preeminent chemo College of this monastery, built by
position was to a considerable extent due to Phgs-pa, was rarely used. The Mahayana
the patronage it received from the Mongol concept of dharmmadhātu, which stressed
rulers. Kun-dga rgyal-mtshan, also known as the importance of the doctrinal aspects of
the Sa- skya Pandita (Sa-skya-pan-cen), was Buddhism, was having a paradoxically
the abbot of this monastery when he was maleficent effect on Buddhist manuscripts.
invited to the court of Godan in about A.D. Rare manuscripts, which were held to be
1244. He succeeded in winning the patronage particularly sacred relics, were traditionally
of this powerful Mongol ruler. With Phags-pa, deposited within images and stûpas and thus
the next hierarch who led the Sa-skya lost to the world of Buddhist scholarship.
monastery from 1253 to 1280, the relations Sankrtyayana found that a particularly
between the monastery and the Mongol unfortunate practice had come into vogue. He
rulers reached the most crucial phase. Phags- noted that relics of the dharmmadhātu type
pa was invited to the court of Khublai Khan. were supposed to be endowed with
He made such a favourable impression on the miraculous healing powers and that Tibetan
Mongol ruler that he was requested to monks were wont to give pieces torn off
administer the ritual consecration and to sacred manuscripts as gestures of special
initiate the emperor and the members of his favour to devotees who pleased them with
court into the Hevajra circle. Consequently, he valuable presents. The dharmmadhātu
was appointed "royal preceptor" (ti-shih) and dissolved in water, was considered to be a
"teacher of the kingdom" (kuo-shih). Phags-pa "mixture" with most potent curative
utilized his position of influence to initiate a properties (JBORS, 1935).
major venture of Buddhist scholarship in
China, the compilation of a new edition of the On May 25th, 1936, the Chag-pe-lha-khang
Tripitaka. The emperor also appointed Library was opened for Sankrtyayana. When
another Tibetan monk to the position of the the clouds of dust which greeted this rare
Head of the Department of Fine Arts, and this opening of its doors had subsided,
move was to facilitate the penetration of Sankrtyayana and his companions beheld
168

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
"rows of open racks where volumes on was missing. Sankrtyayana states that the
volumes of manuscripts were kept." Among phrase bhogina vessantara occurs on the last
the "many thousand volumes" found in this folio of this manuscript and proceeded, on the
library were some of the important basis of this reading, to identify it as a copy of
manuscripts of Sanskrit texts that the Vessantara Jātaka. He listed the remaining
Sankrtyayana was searching for. These forty-seven palm-leaves in the volume as
included a commentary on the Pramāna- forming as forming the second manuscript.
vârttikā written by Dharmmakîrtti himself, a Sankrtyayana did not try to identify this
sub-commentary on the same by Kanaka- manuscript, but he gave a reading of its
gomin, a complete version of the Pramāna- opening lines as follows: namo tassa
vârttika-bhaya of Prajñākaragupta, and the bhagavato arahato sammasambuddhassa
Yogācārabhûmi of Asanga. This was indeed a Sanji (?) kadasanusa(?) (JBORS, p.6).
rich collection. Since photographic material Sankrtyayana refers to a third Sinhala
was inadequate, Sankrtyayana and manuscript which he identified as the
Abhayasimha had to make hand-copies of the Kalacakratîka Unlike the other two
important manuscripts. From May 26th the manuscripts, it is said to have been written on
two scholars worked earnestly on this task. paper and to have consisted of forty-seven
Abhayasimha mentions that he copied about folios (JBORS, p.6). Evidently, he could not
250 to 350 strophes each day. The Sa-skya spare the material to photograph this
monastery is situated about 4485 metres manuscript.
above sea level. The altitude and the
exceptionally cold weather affected the Sri 2. Materials and Methods
Lankan's health, and he had to leave Sa-skya
in about the middle of June (JBORS, p.6). 2.1 Decipherment of the Sa-Skya Codex
Sankrtyayana continued to work alone. By
the last week of July, he had copied the works Photographs of the manuscripts found during
relevant to his study of the Pramāna-vârttikâ, Sankrtyayana's expeditions in Tibet are now
and he had also compiled a catalogue of palm- preserved at the National Archives in
leaf manuscripts found in the library (JBORS, Colombo. In its report for the year
p.6). 1960/1961, the Historical Manuscripts
Commission of Sri Lanka drew attention to
In his catalogue Sankrtyayana lists fifty-seven the importance of Sankrtyayana's discovery.
manuscripts bound in thirty-eight volumes. It did not cite Sankrtyayana's view that there
Of these the thirty-seventh volume was were two distinct palm-leaf manuscripts but
written in the Sinhala script. Since merely referred to a manuscript which was
Sankrtyayana and Abhayasimha had to said to contain the text of the Sinhala prose
devote themselves to the time-consuming work called the Karmmavibhāga. This
task they had originally set for themselves, manuscript was described as "a unique
they could not afford the time to make document." (The Annual Report of the
anything more than a brief perusal of the Government Archivist 1960/61, 1963) In the
volume of Sinhala writings. Sankrtyayana introduction to their edition of the
records that this volume contained ninety- Karmmavibhāga published in 1961,
seven palm- leaves each of which measured Medauyangoda Vimalakîrtti and Nähinne
18 1/4 by 1 1/4 in. (46 x 3 cm.) and that there Sominda state that, during the course of the
were seven lines of writing on each folio. It preparation of their edition, they attempted
was his opinion that these folios belonged to to consult the Sa-skya Codex. They had to
two distinct manuscripts. He listed fifty of the abandon their attempt since they found it
palm-leaves as forming one manuscript and difficult to decipher the manuscript (Mäda-
noted that the first folio of this manuscript
169

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
uyangoda Vimalakîrtti and Nähinne Sominda, number 6.11 while its other side is identified
1961). by the number 1.9.
However, they were able to obtain readings of It is clear from the photographs that the palm-
some isolated words which they compared leaves constituting the Sa-skya Codex were
with parallel word- forms in the manuscripts not in a good state of preservation at the time
used for their edition, and it was their opinion they were found. Some were so brittle that
that the examples from the Sa-skya Codex they were evidently damaged while they
represented an earlier stage in the evolution were being arranged for photography. In at
of the Sinhala language. (Mäda-uyangoda least five instances, the palm-leaves had been
Vimalakîrtti and Nähinne Sominda, 1961) damaged after one side had been
Each of the photographs supplied by the photographed but before the other side could
National Archives contained reproductions of be photographed. (Mäda-uyangoda
a number of folios varying between nine and Vimalakîrtti and Nähinne Sominda, 1961)
twelve. Most of the photographs had been Some of the fragments, arranged together to
serially numbered, and, those which had not constitute a single folio for photography, did
been numbered had been assigned numbers not yield a continuous reading, and, on closer
by the present writer for the purpose of scrutiny, it was found that the fragments had
identification. Generally the photographs of been mismatched. In such cases, the identity
the obverse and reverse sides of each set of of each fragment is separately denoted (e.g.
palm-leaves bear the same number. The need 3B.3a and 3B.3b). In these instances, the
to distinguish each photograph in such pairs fragments of the same folio are to be found in
has been taken into consideration in the different sets of photographs (Mäda-
allocation of numbers. Thus, for instance, the uyangoda Vimalakîrtti and Nähinne Sominda,
obverse of the sixth folio in the first 1961).
photograph bears the number 1.6 while the
reverse is identified by the number 1(2).6. In The minute size of the characters in the form
certain instances, four photographs or two they appear in the photographs meant that
sets were found to bear the same number. In decipherment was possible only with the help
such instances one set will be cited as the A of a magnifying glass. The lack of clarity in
set and the other as the B set. some of the photographs and the
palaeographic characteristics of the
The tasks of deciphering and editing will have manuscript made the decipherment a difficult
been rendered much easier if the folios had and time-consuming task. Since some
been carefully arranged for photography so palaeographic forms, like the signs for medial
that the obverse side of a set of palm-leaves a and a, could be easily mistaken for each
would appear in one photograph and the other, in many instances, obtaining a reading
reverse side in another photograph bearing of a folio was as exacting as deciphering an
the same number. However, in several early medieval epigraphic record. The
instances, the obverse sides of some folios decipherment of the manuscript took in all
and reverse sides of other folios appear about two years of sustained effort.
together in the same photograph. Sometimes
it was also found that the reproduction of the During the course of the decipherment, it was
obverse of a palm-leaf appears in one set of found that a large number of folios had been
photographs while that of the reverse photographed more than once. Table 3 lists
appears in a set of photographs bearing a such instances of duplication. It will be noted
different number. Consequently, it will be that there are 102 additional reproductions
found that one side of a folio bears the of folios or fragments of folios in the
photographs studied by the present writer.
170

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
Four of the entries in Table 3 (Nos. work called the Karmmavibhāga which is also
95,96,98,99) represent fragments arranged known from other manuscripts.
as two folios in the photographs. This would
imply that 100 of the 291 reproductions of The second passage read by Sankrtyayana in
pages of manuscript are "double takes" and what he categorized as a separate manuscript
that we have before us reproductions of of 47 palm-leaves is to be found in Folio 1.1.
actual pages of the Sa-skya Codex. It will be Sankrtyayana's reading of the penultimate
evident from Table 4 that readings of a total word is incomplete and that of the last word
of 197 folios or fragments of folios have been is inaccurate. The correct reading of the
obtained. Fourteen of these passages relevant passage is as follows:
represent fragments of seven folios which
had been inadvertently placed in different svasti, namo tassa bhagavato arahato
sets of photographs. Hence the corrected total sammasambuddhassa - sanjiva kalasutra
of pages read would be 190. As noted earlier, samghata raurava maharaurava tapa
one page does not carry any Sinhala writing. pratapa aviciya yana ata-maha-
Thus, in all, 191 out of 194 pages (97 palm- narakayehi adi narakaya kanda kanda
leaves) found by Sankrtyayana and [k]ota yamapalun sinduna laddahu mehi
categorized under two different manuscripts la detiyi sanjiva nam viya
have now been studied.
These are, in fact, the opening lines of the
The two words bhogina vessantara read by Karmmavibhāga. Thus, we find that that 96 of
Sankrtyayana, which led him to believe that the 97 palm-leaves, categorized by
one of the manuscripts contained the text of Sankrtyayana as belonging to two distinct
the Vessantara Jataka, are to be found in Folio manuscripts, are clearly from the very same
5B (2).5. The two words are from the Pali manuscript.
strophe in the colophon which reads as
follows: During the course of the decipherment of the
Sa-skya Codex it became clear that the folios
karmmavibhaga nimi --- had not been arranged for photography in
imina [punnakammena ya va buddho their proper sequence. Though each palm-
bhavamaham leaf bears a symbol indicating its sequential
mahosadhova nanena jotisetthiva bhogina position, the pins used to fasten the palm-
vessantarova danena hotu mayham bhave leaves on a board for photography generally
bhave cover these symbols. Consequently, the
identification of the sequential position of
In this strophe the author expresses the wish most folios presented a formidable problem.
that, till such time he becomes a Buddha, he On completing the decipherment, the many
be born in each of his future births as pieces of this gigantic jig-saw puzzle were put
individuals who will be like Mahosadha in in place with the aid of a comparative study of
wisdom, Joti, the guild- leader, in wealth, and two other manuscripts and the printed
Vessantara in generosity. Just as much as it is version of the Karmmavibhāga (Mäda-
evident that the term Vessantara in this uyangoda Vimalakîrtti and Nähinne Sominda,
passage does not indicate the name of the 1961).
text, the words karmmavibhāga nimi which
precede the strophe make it clear beyond It will be evident from a perusal of that there
doubt that the identification proposed in the are hiatuses at six different places of the text.
report of the Historical Manuscripts Since 96 of the 97 palm-leaves found by
Commission is correct. The manuscript Sankrtyayana have been now studied, it
contains the text of the early medieval Sinhala would appear that the Sa-skya Codex was
171

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
incomplete at the time of its discovery and the "chair" of the Sa-skya monastery during
that several palm-leaves had been lost either the period A.D. 1172- 1216 (G. N. Roerich,
in Tibet or during the course of its long 1988) In this context, it is relevant to note
journey from Sri Lanka to Tibet. However, the that, according to Sankrtyayana, the Sinhala
text presented in the Sa-skya Codex amounts texts he found originally belonged to a Sri
to a substantial portion of what may be Lankan monk called Anantaśrî who, like
termed, as we shall see later on, the earliest Śâkya Śrî Bhadra, had come to Tibet in the
known version of the Karmmavibhāga. time of Śrî Kîrttidhvaja (JBORS, 1937).
Unfortunately, Sankrtyayana does not reveal
3. Results and Discussion the source of this valuable information. The
Sa-skya Codex makes no mention whatsoever
Though, as noted earlier, the Chag-pe-lha- of Anantaśrî.
khang Library where the Sa-skya Codex was
found had been built in the time of Phags-pa Evidence in the Tibetan source’s points to the
(A.D. 1253-1280), many manuscripts which fact that, despite the immense distance
had belonged to earlier hierarchs of Sa-skya between the two centres of Buddhist
were brought to this library not long after it learning, several Sri Lankan scholars were
was built. (JBORS,1937) Though, as noted known to Tibetan Buddhists. One of the
earlier, the Chag-pe-lha-khang Library where earliest references is to Prithivibandhu whose
the Sa- skya Codex was found had been built commentary (vrtti) on the Saddharma-
in the time of Hphags-pa (A.D. 1253-1280), pundarîka was obviously held in very high
many manuscripts which had belonged to regard (Rockhill, 1884).
earlier hierarchs of Sa-skya were brought to
this library from their original locations not This extensive work which is in eight parts is
long after it was built. (JBORS,1937) In fact, it to be found among the texts included in the
is evident from some of the manuscripts in Tibetan Tripitaka. The text which bears the
this library found and catalogued by number 5518 extends from folio 198a to 347a
Sankrtyayana that they had been brought to in Vol. CVII of Suzuki's edition. It is one of the
Tibet long before the time of Hphags- pa. The two works in this volume. Together with the
manuscript of the Pramāna-vârttika-bhāsya preceding text in this volume, the Arya-
discovered by Sankrtyayana belonged to a gambhira-samdhi-nirmocana-sûtra-tîkâ of
monk called Dānaśrî who came to Tibet with Ven-tshig, bearing the number 5517, it had
Śâkya Śrî Bhadra in A.D.1203. (JBORS,1937) It been translated from a Chinese original. In
is stated in the colophon of the the colophon Prithivibandhu (Sahi rtsa-lag) is
Gandavyûhasûtra, another manuscript from introduced as a teacher from Simhaladvîpa
the same library, that it belonged to Śrî (sin- ga-lahi slon-po) (Suzuki (ed), 1957).
Kîrttidhvaja. (JBORS,1937) Similarly, the
extensive manuscript of the Satasahasrika- 4. Conclusion and Recommendations
prajñāpāramitâ, containing 1160 palm-
leaves, which was found in the same The name of the Tibetan translator is not
collection as the Karmmavibhāga, bears the mentioned in the colophon, but it seems very
statement that it was "corrected" (śoddhite) likely that Chos-grub, who translated the
by Kîrttidhvaja (Śatasahasrika- preceding work (No. 5517), was responsible
prajñâpâramitâ manuscript, 1937). for translating Prithivibandhu's work from
Chinese into Tibetan. Most probably, the
Kîrttidhvaja, or Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan as he original version of the Sri Lankan teacher's
was known in Tibetan, was a leading work was in Sanskrit, and the fact that it was
translator of Buddhist Sanskrit works into translated into Chinese, and from that
Tibetan. He was also the hierarch who held language into Tibetan, clearly reflects the
172

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
high regard the text was held in the world of Kamalagupta. (Obermiller, (tr.) 1921) Some
Mahāyāna Buddhist scholarship. However, of the other Buddhist scholars from India who
though the writer and his work were known worked in Tibet as contemporaries of Ye śes
in Tibet, it seems most unlikely that he had were Jinamitra, Šîlendrabodhi, Jñânasiddhi
visited Tibet. Unfortunately, there are no and Dānaśîla. (Bischoff, 1968) There is a
references to Prithivibandhu in the Buddhist strong possibility that Candramālî
tradition of his native land. accompanied these scholars who came from
the Indian centres of learning.
If the influence of Sri Lankan scholarship
reached Tibet early through the intermediary In the Tibetan as well as the Mongol versions
of Chinese clerics, it would appear that the of the Tripitaka Candramālî is introduced as a
honour of being the first Sri Lankan to yoginî from Sri Lanka and a translator of
participate in the propagation of Buddhism in Buddhist texts of the Tantrayāna. (Louis
Tibet belongs to a woman, a nun named Ligeti, 1942-4) In the Beijing edition of the
Candramālî (or Candramālā (Tib. Tibetan Tripitaka, she is credited with the
Candiramāle, Candiramālā). Though the exact translation of five texts, and in these tasks she
details about Candramâlî's travels are not was a collaborator of Ye śes himself. The
known, like her spiritual forebears of an works in question are 1. Śrî jñâna-guhya-
earlier epoch who had braved the hazards of tantraraja (No. 37), 2. Śrî-jñānamala-
voyages to China, she appears to have tantraraja (No. 38), 3. Śrî-jñānajvala-
successfully overcome the rigours involved in tantraraja (No. 39), 4. Śri- vajraraja-
the long journey over rugged terrain infested mahātantra (No. 48) and 5. Śrî-rāgaraja-
by highwaymen to reach Tibet. (Widenfeld tantraraja (No. 50). (Suzuki (ed.), The Tibetan
and Nicolson, 1968) This second Sri Lankan Tripitaka)
whose name appears in the Tibetan Tripitaka
was remembered for her contributions as a There is another text in the same edition of
translator. the Tibetan Tripitaka which bears the name
Śrî- candramālā-tantraraja (No. 40) and, as
Candramālî reached Tibet in the early part of such, raises the possibility that it was one of
the eleventh century when a revival of her original works. (Suzuki (ed.), The Tibetan
Buddhism was beginning in that land under Tripitaka) In Bischoff's list the first five as
the leadership of Ye śes, a monk of noble well as the sixth are cited as Candramālî's
origin, who was opposed to those Tantric translations and two more are added to the
traditions which placed emphasis on sexual list: 7. Śrî-ratnajvala- tantraraja-nāma, 8. Śrî-
ecstasy. As Bu-ston points out, Ye śes was bent sûrya-cakra-tantraraja-nāma while, in the
on directing Tibetan Buddhism along case of another, 9. Śrî-[ñca na na saya?]
different paths and, with this end in view, sent tantraraja, she is cited as a co-translator with
many young monks to study in India and Ye śes. (Bischoff, 1968) In the catalogue of the
invited renowned Indian scholars to come Mongol Tripitaka prepared by Ligeti,
and work in Tibet. Tibetan scholars who were Candramâlî occurs together with Ye śes
to play a vital role in later times like Rin-chen- (Belge) as the co-translator of the first five
s'an-po were among those sent by Ye śes for works while Gayādhara and Ye śes (Belge)
higher studies in India. Several leading are cited as the co-translators of the sixth
Buddhist scholars from India, especially from work. (Ligeti, 1942-4) What is of interest here
the centres in the Northeast, came to Tibet to is not merely that Candramālî was a Sri
participate in this new awakening. Among Lankan scholar and translator who worked in
them were Dîpankaraśrījñāna, Dharmapāla, Tibet: she is in fact the only Tantrist nun from
Śāakyaprabha, Buddhapâla, Sri Lanka known to us from historical
Padmākaragupta, Gayādhara and records.
173

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
Evidence for the presence of another Sri described as a monk of Brahmana lineage
Lankan scholar in Tibet is to be found in the from Simhadvîpa (Singa glin-pa). It is further
Kanjur division of the Tibetan Tripitaka. Bu- stated that Ânandaśrî was a scholar who had
ston refers to this monk as Anantaśrî, but the mastered the three pitakas and that he had
colophons of the Tibetan and Mongol come to Tibet from the Vajrâsana monastery
versions of the Tripitaka suggest that the at Buddha Gayâ in the time of the Tibetan
reading Ânandaśrî (A nan da sri, var. A nan da patriarch Kîrttidhvaja. The translation was
sari) may be preferable, (Obermiller, E. (tr.) carried out at the latter's request.
1932) and in the present work, we shall be Sûryadhvaja who jointly participated in the
using this reading of the name. The Sri Lankan translation work is also credited with the
monk is first mentioned in connection with tasks of correcting and editing the Tibetan
thirteen sûtas included in the Ser-phyin versions. This may imply that the initial
section of the Kanjur. The thirteen tracts translations had been prepared by Ânandaśrî.
which are all to be found in Volume XXI of the The close relations which came to develop
Tibetan Tripitaka are: i. Dharmacakra- between Sa-skya hierarchs and the Mongol
pravarttana-sûtra (No. 747), ii. Jātaka-nidāna court evidently paved the way to a further
(No. 748), iii. Âtānātiya-sûtra (No. 749), iv. step in the penetration of the knowledge of
Mahâsamaya-sûtra (No.750), v. Maitrî-sûtra these sûtras for, subsequently, they were also
(No. 751), vi. Maitrîbhāvanā-sûtra (No. 752), translated into the Mongol language by
vii. Pañca-śiksânusamsâ-sûtra (No. 753), viii. Punyamangalam and Siteu bayasi.
Girimānanda-sûtra (No. 754), ix.
Nandopananda-nāgarāja-damana-sûtra (No. The collaboration between Ânandaśrî and
755), x. Mahākâśyapa-sûtra (No. 756), xi. Sûryadhvaja finds mention in Buston's
Sûrya-sûtra (No. 757), xii. Candra-sûtra (No. chronicle in the following words: "My own
758) and xiii. Mahāmangala-sûtra (No. 759). teacher Ni-ma-gyal-tshen-pal-s'a.n-po
(Suzuki, (ed.) 1956) The thirteen sûtras are studied in Nepal for fourteen years and
grouped within the Ser-phyin section in the translated 14 sûtras, the Giryânanda etc. with
versions of the Tripitaka found in Beijing and the assistance of Pandit Anantaśrî
Berlin as well as in the Mongol version (Ânandaśrî)." (Obermiller, (tr) 1932) Bu-
examined by Ligeti but, in the Narthang and ston's statement about the two scholars
Kumbun editions, they are to be found within collaborating in the translation of fourteen
the mDo section. (Ligeti, 1949) However, it is different sûtras does not find corroboration in
noteworthy that, in all these instances, the the Tibetan Tripitaka. There is, however,
thirteen tracts are treated as one unit and are another reference in the Tripitaka to
accompanied by a single colophon to be found Ânandaśrî participating in the translation of
at the end of the Mahāmangala-sûtra. This is one more text. It occurs in the colophon of a
probably because of their specific and text of the Ratnakûta class called the Ârya-
common, if not also atypical, origin. maitrî-sûtra-nâma where it is stated that "the
great” Ânandaśrî collaborated in the work of
The Mongol version of the colophons of the translating it to Tibetan.” It is possible that
Kanjur were published by Ligeti and, this was the fourteenth text that Bu-ston was
subsequently, they were translated into referring to. In this last colophon Ânandaśrî is
German by Bischoff. According to this described as "the leader of many thousands of
colophon, the translation of these works was Sri Lankan monks." It is also stated that he
carried out at the Thar-pa glin (Island of had come from the site of the Vajra-throne
Deliverance) monastery. The Tibetan monk (Buddha Gayā) and was known for his
Sûryadhvaja (Ñi-ma rgyal mtshan dpal bzan proficiency in both Indian and Tibetan
po) who undertook this task worked in languages. It is also stated that the translation
collaboration with pandita Ânandaśrî who is had been carried out at the Sa-skya
174

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
monastery in the year 1850 after the nirvâna (1957). The Tibetan Tripi taka, Peking
of the Śâkyamuni, which is equivalent to circa edition, Tokyo: Suzuki Research
A.D. 1206 (Bischoff, 1968). Foundation, Vol. 107, p.60, No. 5518, folio
347a, line 7.
It would appear that Ânandaśrî had achieved
a fairly high proficiency in Tibetan which Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. (1989). The Buddhist
enabled him to undertake scholarly tasks Manuscript in Sinhala language from the
which find mention in the Tibetan records. Sa-skya Monastery in Tibet. Patna: K.P
The exegetical text Kârya-karana-bhāva- Jayaswal commemoration Volume.
siddhi of Jñânaśrîmitra had been translated
into Tibetan by Kumārakalaśa at an early Ligeti, Louis. (1942-1924). Catalogue du
date, and Ânandaśri is said to have revised Kanjur Mongol Imprimé, Bibliotheca
this translation (Suzuki, 1962). However, it is Orientalis Hungarica III. Budapest:
noteworthy that the translator of Société Körösi Csoma.
Jñânaśrîmitra’s work is described as Bal yul
gyi pandita and literally this would mean a Obermiller, E. (tr) (1932). Bu-ston’s History of
scholar from Nepal". (Jäschke,1988) We have Buddhism (Chos-
.
hbyung) Part II: The
noted that the earlier references were to a History of Buddhism in India and Tibet.
scholar from Sri Lanka (Singa glin-pa). Two Heidelberg: Harrassowitz.
possible explanations come to mind. It would
be more prudent to suggest the translator of Rockhill, W.Woodville. (1884). The Life of the
Jñânaśrîmitra’s work was a scholar from Buddha. London:
Nepal of the same name but distinct from the
translator of the works cited previously. We Sankrtyayana, Rahul. (1937). "Second Search
cannot, however, rule out the possibility that of Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscripts in
the Sri Lankan scholar who had spent quite Tibet," JBORS. Vol. XXIII.
some time in Nepal during his journeyed from
Buddha Gayā to Tibet that in some quarters Sankrtyayana, Rahul. (1952). Tibbata Mem
he was associated with Nepal. Bauddhadharma, cited in Bibliographie
Bouddhique. Paris: Vols. XXI-XXIII (1947-
5. References 1950).
Abhayasimha, Nyayacarya. (1946). Hima Śatasahasrika-prajñāpāramitā manuscript.
Bhûmiya. Colombo: Lankabhinava Press. (1937). JBORS. Vol. XXIII.
An-che, Li. (1945) "The Sakya Sect of Snellgrove, David and Richardson, Hugh.
Lamaism," JWCBRAS, Vol. XVI, pp.72-86; (1968) in Mar- pa's song. A Cultural
Inaba, Shoju (1963) "The Lineage of the History of Tibet, London: Widenfeld and
Sa-skya-pa: A Chapter of the Red Annals". Nicolson.
Memoirs of the Research Department of
the Toyo Bunko. No. 22. Suzuki, Daisetz T. (ed.) (1956). The Tibetan
Tripitaka, Tokyo: Peking edition, Suzuki
Bischoff, A. F. (1968). Der Kanjur und seine Research Foundation, Vol. 21.
Kolophone. Bloomington: Selbstverlag
Press. Band I. Suzuki, D.T. (1962). The Tibetan Tripitaka:
Catalogue and Index, Tokyo: Suzuki
Dam-pa hi chos padma-dkarpo hi hgrel-pa yul Research Foundation, p.806, No.5763.
sin-ga-la hi slon-po sa hi rtsa lag-gis byas-
pa rdzogs-so. ed. Daisetz T. Suzuki (ed)
175

Withana, VJHSS (2025) Vol. 10 (01) pp. 166-176
The Annual Report of the Government
Archivist 1960/61. (1963). Colombo:
Government Print.
Vimalakîrtti, Mäda-uyangoda and Sominda,
Nähinne. (1961). in the introduction to
their edition of the Karmmavibhāga.
Colombo: Gunasena.
176