International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN: 2319-7064
SJIF (2022): 7.942
Original and Development of Buddhist Education
Reflected in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature Important
from the Saddharmapundarīka-sūtra
Truong Huy Trung
PhD Research Scholar, School of Buddhist Studies and Civilization. Gautam Buddha University, Greater Noida, UP, India
Email: thienbao24us[at]gmail.com
Ph, +918527119739
Abstract: Original and development of Buddhist Education reflected in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature Important from the
Saddharmapundarīka-sūtra The Saddharmapundarīka-sūtra also called the Lotus Sutra, White Lotus Sutra, Sutra of the White Lotus,
or Sutra on the White Lotus of the Sublime Dharma; (Sanskrit: Saddharmapundarīka-sūtra). Probably composed in its earliest form in
the period 100BCE – 100CE, the White Lotus proposes that the three yanas (Shravakayana, Pratyekabuddhayana, and
Bodhisattvayana) are not in fact three different paths leading to three goals, but one path, with one goal. The earlier teachings are said
to be of “skilful means” in order to help beings of limited capacities. Notable for the (re)appearance of the Buddha Prabhutaratna, who
had died several a earlier, because it suggests that a Buddha is not inaccessible after his parinirvana, and also that his life-span is said
to be inconceivably long because of the accumulation of merit in past lives. This idea, though not necessarily from this source, forms
the basis of the later Trikaya doctrine. Later associated particularly with the Tien Tai in China, Tendai school in Japan, and the
Nichiren schools in Japan. The earliest known Sanskrit title for the sūtra is the SaddharmaPuṇḍarīkaSūtra, which translates to the
Good Dharma Lotus Flower Sutra. In English, the shortened form Lotus Sūtra is common. The Lotus Sūtra has also been highly
regarded in a number of Asian countries where Mahāyāna Buddhism has been traditionally practiced. Translations of this title into the
languages of some of these countries include Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, English.
Keywords: Buddhist education, development of Buddhist education reflected in Buddhist Sanskrit literature, role of lotus sutra in
Buddhism
1. Introduction The goal of Buddha’s teaching-the goal of Buddhist
education is to attain wisdom. In Sanskrit, the language of
In India during the time of Buddha, there was racial ancient India, the Buddhist wisdom was called Anuttara-
discrimination in society. This discrimination was according Samyak-Sambhodi meaning the perfect ultimate wisdom3.
to the profession of man, and according to birth. In the
society, there were four divisions of many Brahmans was The Buddha taught us that the main objective of our practice
superior. Brahmanism1 dominated the society and or cultivation was to achieve this ultimate wisdom. The
established their supremacy in the country. They enjoyed Buddha further taught us that everyone has the potential to
rights for religious training and education. But another realize this state of ultimate wisdom, as it is an intrinsic part
category of people deprived of their religious and of our nature, not something one obtains externally.
educational rights. At that time there were 62 heretical The chief aim of Buddhist education was all round
doctrines in existence and the priesthood got the upper hand. development of child’s personality. This included his
In this background, a religious revolution started in ancient physical, mental, moral and intellectual development. The
India in 600 B. C. and a new doctrine or system developed aim of Buddhist Education is to make a free man, a wise,
which is called Buddhist doctrine or Buddhist philosophy2. intelligent, moral, non-violent & secular man. Students
became judicious, humanist, logical and free from
It is to be said that on the foundation of Buddhism a new and superstitious. Students became free from greed, lust and
special Education System originated in ancient India. ignorance. Buddhist Education was wide open and available
Buddhism made a tremendous movement that played a to people of all walks of life. The principal goal of Buddhist
valuable role in the development of the Education System in Education is to change an unwise to a wise, beast to a priest.
ancient India or the ancient Buddhist world. It is well-known
that with the rise of Buddhism in India there dawned the The Buddhist education system is aimed at regaining our
golden age of Indian culture and civilization. There was intrinsic nature. It also teaches absolute equality which
progress in all aspects of Indian civilization under the impact stemmed from Buddha‘s recognition that all sentient beings
of Buddhism there arose many centres of learning which did possess this innate wisdom and nature. Buddha‘s teaching
not exist before helps us to realize that innate, perfect, ultimate wisdom.
3 Developing wisdom is of central importance in Buddhist
1 A. L. Herman (1991). A Brief Introduction to Hinduism: Religion, traditions, where the ultimate aim is often presented as “seeing
Philosophy, and Ways of Liberation. Westview Press. pp. 143– things as they are” or as gaining a “penetrative understanding of all
148. ISBN 978-0-8133-8110-7. phenomena,” which in turn is described as ultimately leading to the
2David Kalupahana, Causality: The Central Philosophy of “complete freedom from suffering.” In Buddhism, developing
Buddhism. The University Press of Hawaii, 1975, p. 70 wisdom
Volume 11 Issue 3, March 2022
www.ijsr.net
Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: SR22326170618 DOI: 10.21275/SR22326170618 1294

International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN: 2319-7064
SJIF (2022): 7.942
With wisdom, we can then solve all our problems and turn encounter broad claims that the Lotus is one of the most
suffering into happiness. important, if not the uniquely most important, of Buddhist
scriptures. While these claims are understandable when
In the Buddhist era, religion was given top priority and made by devotees of the text, they are less understandable
education was imparted through it. The chief aim of when presented as objective, concrete facts.
education was the propagation of religion and inculcation of
religious feelings and education served as a means to Almost every textbook or introduction to Buddhism
achieve salvation or nirvana. discusses the major scriptures of the Buddhist tradition. And
almost invariably, along with the Perfection of Wisdom texts
Preparation for life, there was a provision for imparting and the Pure Land sutra, one finds mention of the Lotus as
wordily and practical knowledge along with religious one of the major texts of Mahayana Buddhism5. But there is
education so that when the students entered normal life they something potentially very misleading with such a presen-
may be able to earn their livelihood. tation, for nothing has importance or significance except to
some person or persons. Things are not important in the
In the early period, Buddhist Education was limited within abstract, but only at some time, in some place, and to some
the monasteries and only for the members of the monastery. person.
But later on, it was open to all; even laypeople got scope to
have education in those institutions. In modern days We should not ask then whether the Lotus is important as
Buddhist Education became wide open and embraced people such, but rather to whom it is important. And then we must
of all walks of life. The aim of Buddhist Education is to also ask ourselves what it is that makes the text important.
change an unwise to the wise, beast hood to Buddha-hood By this I do not intend a philosophical or theological ques-
(Sanskrit: Buddhatva, Pali: Buddhatta or Buddhabhāva). tion about what doctrines of the text are most profound, the
answer to which would tell us much about the investigator
Buddhist Education made a revolutionary change in society. but little about the investigated. Rather I intend something
The Buddhists in the world first made Education open to all. more concrete: if we want to claim that something is
Students irrespective of caste, creed, religion got the important for somebody, we must ask in what way that
opportunity to have an education which was denied by the importance is manifest.
superior class in the society. In India also, in Vedic
Educational school students from lower classes were refused What is it that someone might say or do which would
to get admission. indicate to us that he considers something important? One
answer is that something which one esteems and values, to
The monasteries or Buddha Vihars were the chief centres of which he attributes some authority, he finds significant or
learning and only the Buddhist monks could be admitted to important. If we want to suggest then that what makes a text
them for education. Thus there was no planned arrangement important or significant to some person or persons is that
for mass education as such during the period. It forms this those persons hold it to be of value or authoritative, we must
position it would be wrong to construe that the Buddhist look for signs of that esteem. Such signs are to be found in
monks were unmindful of the education of the people in the actions that people take with respect to the scripture,
general. So at the time of begging alms, the monks used to whether this involves copying it, producing art based upon
remove the religious doubts of the people through their or inspired by it, lecturing about it, quoting it, and so on and
interesting conversation or short and alp lectures. Thus the so forth. Without reference to some manifestation of the
people, in general, received moral and religious education significance being attributed to scripture by some person or
from the monks. community, we are not justified in claiming importance for
that scripture.
2. The Original Sources of the
3. The Role of the Saddharmapundarīka
Saddharmapundarīka Sūtra
Sūtra in Buddhism
In Buddhist Sanskrit literature
With regard to the Lotus Sutra in India, the question we
What do we really know about the Lotus Sutra in India? It must ask is what importance this text may have had to
hardly needs to be stated that the Lotus Sutra is a prominent Indian Buddhists. A full treatment of this question would
scripture in East Asian Buddhism, particularly in traditions require a consideration of the Indian manuscript evidence,
related to the Tiantai4 or Tendai, and later on in Japan treatment of textual parallels in other scriptures,
particularly for Nichiren-affiliated groups. There is also no investigation of art historical evidence, and so on. We can
question that the scripture was highly valued in Central Asia dispense with one of these items immediately. To the best of
in the medieval period, although naturally, our evidence here
is much less clear and convincing than that we have for East
5Mahāyāna (Sanskrit for "Great Vehicle") is one of two (or three,
Asia. However, in fact, it is not at all uncommon to
under some classifications) main existing branches of Buddhism
and a term for classification of Buddhist philosophies and practice.
4Tiantai (Chinese: 天台; pinyin: PRC Standard Mandarin: Tiāntāi, This movement added a further set of discourses, and although it
ROC Standard Mandarin: Tiāntái) is a school of Buddhism in was initially small in India, it had long-term historical
China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam that reveres the Lotus Sutra as significance.[1]The Buddhist tradition of Vajrayana is sometimes
the highest teaching in Buddhism. In Japan the school is known as classified as a part of Mahayana Buddhism, but some scholars may
Tendai, in Korea as Cheontae, and in Vietnam as Thiênthai consider it as a different branch altogether.
Volume 11 Issue 3, March 2022
www.ijsr.net
Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: SR22326170618 DOI: 10.21275/SR22326170618 1295

International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN: 2319-7064
SJIF (2022): 7.942
my knowledge, there exists at present no known art In any case, while all of this material certainly deserves our
historical or inscriptional evidence conclusively related to attention, my central focus here is on another form of
the Lotus in the Indian subcontinent. (I will discuss the so- evidence, that provided to us by unquestionably Indian
called astabhaya images of Avalokitesvara6 on another authors who quote or refer to the Saddharmapundarika. If we
occasion.) are particularly interested in the status of the sutra in India,
the references to the text by Indian Buddhist authors provide
As for manuscript evidence, as is well known we have a crucial set of hints for us. Of course, aside from the content
precious few Buddhist manuscripts of any kind from ancient of the quotations, their mere existence may tell us very
India, 1 but what there is comes mostly from Gilgit. There interesting things, for example about the circulation and
are at least six Lotus manuscripts from Gilgit, as well as accessibility of the text. In addition, quotations are
manuscripts from Central Asia which may have been written potentially useful for textual criticism. They provide us with
in India, and while it is not possible here to treat them in any a way to augment our knowledge of the textual transmission
detail, one of the interesting things about some of these of the scripture, and indeed, as is well known, since most of
manuscripts is that they are written in a kind of ornamental the Indian Buddhist scriptural literature is lost in its original
script which suggests that they were intended more as Indic language form, often the only Sanskrit fragments we
objects than as texts to be read. Limitations of space prevent have of work come from its quotations in the works of later
any further consideration of the manuscript evidence here, or authors.
the whole set of questions raised by possible parallel
passages in other texts, which may show influences from, or Unfortunately, as is the case with Indian Buddhist literature
on, the Lotus. Rather, I would like to concentrate on the as a whole, most of which exists only in Tibetan or Chinese
degree to which the text was taken into account by Indian translations, almost all of the texts which refer to the
satiric authors. Saddharmapundarika are also extant not in Sanskrit but only
in translations. These translations are obviously of
In the first place, we must note that there is one correspondingly less utility for close text-critical compari-
commentary, extant only in two Chinese translations or son, especially since it is often the case that Tibetan and
better to say two recensions of one and the same Chinese even Chinese translators of sastras made use of already
translation which claims to be an Indian commentary on the existing scripture translations when they ran across sutra
Lotus. The authorship of this commentary, the quotations in the works they were rendering.
Miaofalianhuajingyoubotishe or so-called “Saddharma-
pundarlkopadesa”, is attributed to Vasubandhu7. Setting To the best of my knowledge, there are only three texts
aside the question of whether Vasubandhu may actually be which quote or refer to the Saddharmapundarika in Sanskrit:
the author, which is problematic, it is quite likely that the Arya-Vimuktisena’s Abhisamayalamkaravrtti, Santideva’s
commentary is indeed Indian, and its existence should be Siksamuccaya and Haribhadra’s Abhisamayalamkaraloka.
noted. This commentary has been the focus of relatively Of these, the first appeals to the authority of the scripture in
little attention from modern scholars—although the force of only a general way, regarding the nirvana of the sravaka,
this statement may be blunted by the observation that the without referring to any specific passage in the text.
same is true of almost every Indian Buddhist text, and it is
worth mentioning only because so much attention is lavished 4. Conclusion
on certain other Lotus Sutra related materials. On the other
hand, there is no trace of the more than 50 Indian The positive goal of the Dharma Flower Sutra is described in
commentaries which are said in a seventh-century Chinese several different ways. Here I have used the idea of
reference, on the indirect authority of Paramartha to have at becoming a Buddha as the highest goal. Of course, being a
one time existed, including works by Nagarjuna, Sthiramati Buddha is also called “supreme awakening, ” often
and so on. It may well be that the quotations in the translated as “enlightenment. ” So it might rightly be said to
Mahdprajnaparamitopadesa of Nagarjuna and the be the highest goal. Another very prominent term in the
Mahayanavatara of Sthiramati (or Saramati) were confused sutra is “joy”. Over and over we are told that a result of
in this late Chinese tradition with the existence of hearing even a small part of the sutra is joy. And we are
independent commentaries. allowed to witness the great joy that comes to Shariputra
when he realizes that he too is a bodhisattva on the way to
becoming a Buddha. Joy can be said to be the goal of the
Lotus Sutra. Another equally important term is “peace. ” “It
6Avalokiteśvara is a bodhisattva who embodies the compassion of
is not my intent,” the Buddha says in chapter 3, to lead
all Buddhas. This bodhisattva is variably depicted, described and is
people to extinction. “I am the king of the Dharma, free to
portrayed in different cultures as either female or male. In Chinese
teach the Dharma, appearing in the world to bring peace and
Buddhism, Avalokiteśvara has become the somewhat different
female figure Guanyin. In Cambodia, he appears as Lokesvarak, comfort to all the living. ” Peace can also be said to be the
and in Japan he is called Kanzeon or Kannon goal of the Lotus Sutra.
7Vasubandhu (Sanskrit; traditional Chinese: 世親;
; pinyin: Shìqīn; Wylie: dbyiggnyen) (fl. 4th to 5th century C.E.) From Language and Literature of Mahayana Buddhism
was a very influential Buddhist monk and scholar from Gandhara. produced extensive and varied literature and much of it has
Vasubandhu was a philosopher who wrote on the Abhidharma from been lost forever. Whatever is available is in mixed Sanskrit.
the perspectives of the Sarvastivada and Sautrāntika schools. Along
It can be divided into two classes sutra or text attributed to
with his half-brother Asanga, he was also one of the main founders
the Buddha and the sastras or treatises by the Buddhist sages
of the Yogacaraschool after his conversion to Mahayana
and authors. The sastraincludes commentaries on the
Buddhism.
Volume 11 Issue 3, March 2022
www.ijsr.net
Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: SR22326170618 DOI: 10.21275/SR22326170618 1296

International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN: 2319-7064
SJIF (2022): 7.942
original sutra as well as original works. The earliest
Mahayana sutra is the Sadharmapundarika sutra and
Prajnaparamita sutra. Among the Mahayana sutra, nine
texts are regarded as the most important. They are also
called the Vaipulyasutra. Hardly less famous are the
Sukhavativyuha, the Amitayussutra. We have already
discussed this mass of literature in the previous section.
The teaching of the Buddha is truly a message of peace and
happiness for everyone in this world. It appeared and lived
strongly over 2.500 years. No doubt its spirit has been
absorbed by the majority of people in the world. Its true
values are a great contribution to humankind. These values
are still preserved and developed in future.
References
[1] THE DHAMMAPADA verses and stories, Tr. by
DawMya Tin, Burma Pitaka Association
Publishcation, Higher Tibetan Studies, reprint, 1990.
[2] THE JATAKA, Tr. by various scholars, 6 vols,
Cambridge University Press, 1895-1907.
[3] THE APADANA, Ed. By M. E. Lilley, 2 vols,
London: P. T. S., 1925-1927.
[4] THE CARIYAPITAKA AND THE
BUDDHAVAMSA, Ed. by N. A., Jayaurickrama,
London: P. T. S., 1974. Tr. by I. B. Horner, The Minor
Anthologies of the Pali Canon, London: P. T. S., 1975.
[5] THE VINAYA PITAKA, 5 Vols, Ed. by Hermann
Oldenberg, London: P. T. S., 1879-1883, Tr. by I. B.
Horner, The book of the Discipline, 5 Vols, London: P.
T. S., 1938-1966, reprint, 1992-1993.
[6] SAMMOHAVINODANI, Tr. by BhikkuNaramoli, The
Dispeller of Delusion, London P. T. S., 1987.
[7] THE PATH OF PURITY, 3 vols, Tr. by PeMaung Tin,
London P. T. S., 1975.
[8] THE PATH OF PURIFICATION, Tr. by
BhikkuNaramoli, Ceylon: R. Semage Colombo, 1956.
[9] SADDHARMAPUNDARĪKA, Tṛ by E. B. Cowell,
The Lotus of the True Law, in Sacred Books of the
East, Vol.21, Delhi; motilalBanarsidass, 1996.
[10] MAHĀPARINIRVĀNA SŪTRA, 3 vols, Tr. by K.
Yamomoto, Ube City: Karrinbunko, 1974.
[11] THE LANKAVATARA SŪTRA, Tr. by D. T. Suzuki,
London: Routledge, 1932.
Volume 11 Issue 3, March 2022
www.ijsr.net
Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: SR22326170618 DOI: 10.21275/SR22326170618 1297