Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_19\documents\1933-Indonesia-dutchcolonialheritage-Lombok_Expedition_1894_Dirk_Teeuwen_MSc.pdf
Total Pages: 30
Statistics: Chars=34439, ThaiWords=6887.8, EnglishWords=6919

--- Page 1 of 30 ---
1 
Lombok Expedition 1894, Dirk Teeuwen MSc 
Dutch military operations in Lombok 
 
Interested? You are allowed to make use of text and photographs/pictures of this article with 
written/mailed permission of the author. So, request! 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction 
1. Portrait Gallery 
2. Maps 
3. The immediate cause of the expedition 
4. Lombok, its people and its summarized history 
5. Number of inhabitants of Lombok, strength of the expeditionary forces 
6. Lombok and Dutch East-India – Indonesia 
7. The Dutch final ultimatum, the 5 th of July 1894 
8. The Lombok Expedition directly after the 11 th of July 1894 
9. The capture of Mataram, attack of Cakranegara 
Epilogue 
Referred sources of text and pictures 
 
Introduction 
 
 
The Battle of Cagranegara, Lombok 1894 
The original coloured school plate (a big one), a picture by J. Hoynck van 
Papendrecht (1858-1933), is part of the author’s personal collection. However, 
is was more practical to adapt a rather vague picture from Wikipedia and to 
reset it into black and white, after sharpening. 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 2 of 30 ---
2 
The aim of this article 
 
This article covers some aspects of the Balinese history of Lombok, one of the 
Sunda Islands east from Bali, as well as of its subordinate Sasak people. In 
1891 the Sasak Datus (chiefs) wrote a letter to the Dutch colonial government, 
asking for protection against the gruesome suppression by their Balinese 
neighbours. The grievances of the natives of Lombok, as well as Dutch 
imperialist aspirations, led to the military operations of the Royal Dutch EastIndian Army on Lombok, 1894. Dutch troops landed in July 1894. The military 
operated under the command of Major-General J. A. Vetter and, (finally), after 
a series of brilliant victories, succeeded in: 
- taking the reigning Balinese Raja of Lombok-Karangasem (Karangasem was a 
principality on Bali) prisoner; 
- restoring order on the island. 
In “Epilogue” you can find my conclusions. 
 
 
Major-General J. A. Vetter, later General and Commander of the Dutch EastIndian Army, 1837-1907 
From> Magazine “Eigen Haard”, Amsterdam Volume 1907 
General Vetter died in November 1907 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 3 of 30 ---
3 
Referred sources of text and pictures 
 
1. Photo and picture collection Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
2. Klerck, dr. E. S. de: History of the Netherlands East-Indies; Rotterdam 1938, 
volume II chapter XVII (library Dirk Teeuwen) 
3. Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok Expeditie 1894 (With the Dutch in the East, an 
outline of the Military Operations in Lombok 1894); Batavia 1896 (London, 1938 
edition in English, translation E. J. Taylor); hoofdstukken (chapters) V – XII 
(library Dirk Teeuwen) 
4. Have, J. J. ten: Het eiland Lombok en zijne bewoners (The island of Lombok 
and its people); The Hague Holland 1894, p. 11, 12, 13 (library Dirk Teeuwen) 
5. Booms, Colonel A. S. H.: Neerlands Krijgsroem in Insulinde (Dutch Valour in 
the East; The Hague Holland 1902, deel “Kameraadschappelijke Trouw” 
hoofdstuk VIII (volume “Comradely Loyalty” chapter VIII (library Dirk 
Teeuwen) 
 
6. Gelder, W. van: Schoolatlas van Nederlandsch-Indië; The Hague Holland 1916 
(library Dirk Teeuwen) 
7. Kepper, G. L.: Wapenfeiten van het Nederlandsch-Indisch Leger; The Hague 
Holland 1902 (library Dirk Teeuwen) 
8. Magazine “Eigen Haard” Volumes 1895 and 1906 (library Dirk Teeuwen) 
 
Lombok, July 1894 
Before the combat. The young Balinese Raja of Lombok Ketut and his nephew 
Djilantik, vice-Raja of Karangkasem, Bali, pay a visit to Major-General Vetter 
and his staff. Sitting from left to right: Raja Ketut, Major-General Van Ham, 
Major-General Vetter, resident Dannenberg, vice-Raja Djilantik. Standing from 
left to right: Captain Willemstijn, Captain Karnister, resident Liefrinck, resident 
Boersma, Major Kotting. 
From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” Volume 1907, library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 4 of 30 ---
4 
 
Sasaks in Lombok, 1890 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, p. 136 
 
Glossary 
 
1. Datu; tribal chief on Lombok, as well as on the other isles of the Sunda 
Archipelago and on the Philipines. 
2. Punggawa; Balinese ruler of a district: subordinated aristocrat, subordinated 
to the Balanise Raja of Lombok. 
3. Raja; Hindu sovereign 
4. Sultan; Muslim ruler, once the highest in rank in Turkey. But a “Sultan” 
elsewhere could be lower in rank. Lower than colonial European authorities 
(Sultan of Solo on Java, for example) or lower than a Caliph (f.e. Caliphate of 
Bagdad). 
5. Caliph; Muslim ruler, leader of a Muslim nation, a political successor of 
Mohammed. 
6. Vizir or katib; high ranking political advisor or minister. Katib was more a 
secretary. In the Koran Aäron is the vizir, or helper, of Moses. (Penguin 
Classics). From> Dawood, N. J. (translator of course): The Koran, Book Ta Ha; 
Harmonsworth Great Britain 1964, p. 220 etc. 
7. Gowa; formerly a principality in South-west Celebes (Sulawesi). 
8. Makassar; now Ujung Pandang in South Celebes. 
9. Praja; a larger kampong (hamlet) in the (centre of) the south-eastern part of 
Lombok. 
10. Dessa or desa; Indonesian countryside municipality. 
11. Kampung; Indonesian countryside village, hamlet. 
12. Hadjih; pilgrim to Mecca. 
13. Padi or padih or rice. This means a piece of land meant for cultivating rice. 
14. Raden; member of the royal family of lesser rank than a pangeran. 
15. Pangeran (prince); a title in Malay countries only worn by sons or brothers 
of reigning monarchs. 
16. Adat; the set of cultural norms, values, customs and practices found among 
ethnic groups in Indonesia (custom, common law) 
7. Puri; Balinese Hindu Temple, sometimes a combination of temple/palace 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 5 of 30 ---
5 
1. Portrait Gallery 
 
A survey of some main figures playing a part in the Lombok Expedition in 1894. 
 
 
Major-General J. A. Vetter, the Dutch 
Commander-in-Chief 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok 
Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, p. 13 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Major-general P. P. H. van Ham 
Second-in-Command, killed in battle 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok 
Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, p. 48 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
 
Lieutenant-Colonel P. van Lawick van 
Pabst, Commander 9th Battalion 
Infantry, killed in battle 
From> Kepper, G. L.: Wapenfeiten van 
het Nederlandsch-Indisch Leger; The 
Hague Holland 1902, p. 483 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Major-General M. Segov 
Second-in-Command, took the place of 
Van Ham 
From> Kepper, G. L.: Wapenfeiten van 
het Nederlandsch-Indisch Leger; The 
Hague Holland 1902, p. 486 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 6 of 30 ---
6 
 
 
Gusti Djilantik, ruler of Karangkasem 
(Bali, 1894) and subordinated to the 
Balinese Raja of Lombok, 
cooperated with the Dutch 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok 
Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, p. 6 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Anak Agung Ngurah Karangasem, 
Balinese Raja of Lombok (1893), 
died in Batavia-Jakarta (1896) 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok 
Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, p. 
363, also in “Eigen Haard “ magazine 
1895 Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
 
Anak Agung Petut, (Balinese) sun of 
Raja Ngurah, Crown Prince, Raja of 
Lombok in 1894, killed in the Battle of 
Mataram, 1894, 
fought very bravely 
From> magazine “Eigen Haard” 1895 
Anak Agung Madé, favourite 
(Balinese) son of Raja Ngurah (beget 
by a second wife), very cruel and 
forced by his father to commit suicide 
in 1893 
From> magazine “Eigen Haard” 1895 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 7 of 30 ---
7 
 
 
 
Governor-General of the Dutch EastIndies Jonkheer (Esquire) C. H. A. van 
der Wijck 1893-1899 From> Cool, 
Capt. W.: De Lombok Expeditie; 
Batavia-Jakarta 1896, 
p. 281 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Navy Captain H. Quispel 1841-1921 
(1899 Vice Admiral), commander of 
the Dutch fleet in the Straits of Lombok 
1894 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok 
Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, p. 
156 Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
Punggawas, Balinese rulers of districts in Lombok: subordinated aristocrats, 
subordinated to the Raja Anak Agung Ngurah Karangasem, the Balinese Raja of 
Lombok (circa 1890) 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, p. 108 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 8 of 30 ---
8 
2. Maps 
 
 
Map anno 1916, mark: Ampenan, Mataram, Tjakranegara-Cakranegara, Praja, 
Karangkasem (Bali) 
From> Gelder, W. van: Schoolatlas van Nederlandsch-Indië; The Hague Holland 
1916, nr. 5 (Library Dirk Teeuwen) 
 
 
 
Map of Lombok, 1896; see below 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, appendix 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 9 of 30 ---
9 
 
Western Lombok, detail from page 4 
Important in this article: Ampenan, Mataram, Cagranegara, Pagasangan, Kediri. 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, appendix 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 10 of 30 ---
10 
 
 
 
Eastern Lombok, detail from page 4 
Praja can be found at the left near nr 98. 
From> Cool, Capt. W.: De Lombok Expeditie; Batavia-Jakarta 1896, appendix 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 11 of 30 ---
11 
3. The immediate cause of the expedition 
 
Details of a (second!!) letter written by the Sasak Datus (chiefs) of the east 
coast of Lombok to the Dutch Resident of North-Bali and Lombok, written in the 
name of all the dessas and kampungs (hamlets) of their country about the 
position of the Mohammedans and Balinese there. The letter was sent to the 
Dutch Parliament in The Haque and submitted there by the Dutch Minister of 
the Colonies; July 7 th an 8 th , 1894. The letter was written Dec. 1891 (!!.) Maybe 
the endless difficulties of the campaign in Aceh had shaken Dutch confidence in 
themselves. 
 
Details of the Sasak letter 
 
- The Balinese took possession of our Muslim Kingdom of Salaparang. The 
Balinese took possession of the princely dignity and placed the whole country 
under their own rule. They are the masters now. We became their subjects. We 
carried out their commands, yet we have always been cruelly treated and 
robbed. We paid taxes and we brought in supplies of rice, paddy and money. 
- When there has been question of building houses, or raising other edifices, or 
laying pleasure grounds, we have done the work punctually. While thus 
employed we had to bring our own food, which was very hard for those living at 
a distance. 
- In addition to having to work like this for the Balinese princes, we had to do 
the same thing for the smaller Punggawas (Balinese supervising chiefs), and 
still, notwithstanding this, we have been shamefully treated. 
- People have been put to death without trial and have very frequently been 
drowned in the sea. If the Punggawas were annoyed with a man, he would be 
found guilty of some crime and condemned, and we dared not to rebel. Often 
our properties such as gardens, sawahs, buffalo-oxen and cows were stolen 
from us. Our sons were often made slaves and our daughters , especially girls of 
good birth, were taken away by force. Some they took for themselves, others 
were subjected to all sorts of outrages and finally became courtesans. 
Sometimes grown up girls were taken, but often little girls of about seven. 
Normally parents went out of their minds with grief. 
 
Balinese Raja and his Punggawas (subordinated aristocrats), circa 1880 
From> Cool p. 197 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 12 of 30 ---
12 
- Every year the taxes were raised in a very unjust manner. After the harvest on 
our coffee plantations Balinese hirelings came and seized nearly all. They also 
stole the coffee we received from North-Bali (Buleleng, 
Dutch territory) and from Sumbawa. If the Balinese princes and others wanted 
anything, either people or horses or wearing apparel, they simply took them, 
without any compensation. 
- By order of the Balinese Princes cock-fighting and dice-playing were 
continually kept up; those who owned any thing lost it, whilst others were 
thriven to theft; the Balinese Princes encouraged this pastime because fines 
were imposed on the players; as a result the small man became poor and in 
those dessas (countryside municipalities), where the games did not take place 
regularly, the Datus were punished. It was/is almost impossible to obtain a 
livelihood. All imports and exports were levied/taxed. All taxes and dues have 
been exorbitantly increased in the interest of the Balinese aristocracy only. The 
Balinese Princes put a duty on debts and on paid interests on debts. All goods, 
people of the interior of this island sell and buy at the coast, are taxed. The 
originators of such schemes are mostly Arabs from Ampenan, such as Entji 
Oemar. 
- When war broke out on Bali between the states of Karangasem and 
Klongkong, we were ordered to provide weapons and food. Some of us were 
immediately summoned up to take part in the war and they did so. They were 
poor and were very badly cared for. Later many were unable to come home. Are 
they dead or alive? We don’t know. 
- We must tell that when a Muslim dies here without leaving male issue, all 
his female relations, as well as all his real and personal estate are appropriated 
by the Balinese Princes; as a result of this the girls are mostly converted into 
prostitutes. If the deceased leaves brothers, they get nothing either. And later, 
when some Balinese is banished here from Karangasem, the lands are given to 
him, so that he may crush down the Sasak population to his heart’s content. As 
an example: when a man dies (no sons, one brother), his widow could be 
converted into a forced prostitute and the brother gets nothing. His heritage 
goes to the Balinese aristocracy. Tracts of land suitable for “sawahs” (rice 
fields) are frequently not allowed to be cultivated. 
 
Balinese Punggawa and his men, Lombok circa 1880 
From> Cool p. 73 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 13 of 30 ---
13 
- Our Balinese rulers have also made it known that they heard that some of the 
Muslims of Tangkah (in Lombok) were going to rebel against them and that 
owing to the complications connected with the war on Bali, they (Balinese) 
were unable to do anything. But after the war the rulers made it known that all 
those who had wanted to rebel, as well as all the notable Muslims, as well as all 
the “hadjihs” (pilgrims to Mecca), as well as the leaders of that faith should be 
put to death. The Balinese Punggawa, Ida Bargus Gama Oka, stated this fact at 
the house of the Arab Hadji Abdurrahman at Ampenan in the presence of 
several people, some of whom came from Dutch North-Bali (the 
district/residency of Buleleng). 
- For this decision there is absolutely no course whatever, and we are 
continually hearing that many Muslims are to be put to death, especially at 
Praja. But in service at the Balinese palaces etc., Sasak people had heard the 
same thing. Remember: “stealing” only some rice by a Muslim could put him or 
her to death, guilty or not. In consequence of this a Guru (Bangkol) and some 
Sasaks went three times to see responsible Punggawas (Balinese chiefs) in 
Ampenan. But their complaints remained unheeded and Sasaks, fellows of Guru 
Bangkol or not, were informed of what had occurred in Ampenan. 
 
 
 
 
 
Balinese Punggawa in Lombok, circa 
1880 From> Cool p. 264 
Buddhist temple at Lingsar in Lombok, 
circa 1880 From > Cool p. 283 
 
- The rebellion broke out at Praja, the other Muslims know nothing about it and 
we were obeyed by the Balinese to march against dessa Praja. Praja was 
besieged and many of the kampungs (hamlets) belonging to it were burned to 
the ground. Persons belonging to dessa Praja who surrendered (rebels or not) 
were nevertheless put to death immediately by command of the Balinese 
aristocracy. Amongst them, as usual, many old men, women and children. 
- We executed the Balinese Prince’s orders to fight against Praja and on our 
side there were some wounded and some killed. No provision was made for us, 
as we had to find our own food, so that those from great distances suffered

--- Page 14 of 30 ---
14 
untold privations. Praja was not brought into speedy subjection owing to the 
fact that the Muslims were secretly in unison with the rebels and did not throw 
themselves heart and soul into the fight. 
- Thereupon the Sasak Datu of Batu Klian, as well as Mami Ardina of Praja, and 
all their children and followers, thirteen in number, were summoned to come 
over to Sakra and on their arrival were all put to death. When these murders 
took place all the Sasak “Radens” and Sasak Datus of the District of Timor were 
present. 
- Mami Noersasi, Datu of Sakra, was ordered to come to Mataram with all his 
followers and bring a canon with him. But he learned that that they were all to 
be taken prisoners, so that Noersasi fled back to his dessa. The same day 150 
inhabitants of dessa Sakra, 150 of dessa Djero-Arn and 150 from other dessas, 
450 in all, were taken prisoners and put in chain. The Muslims decided now to 
rise in a body against the rulers. They were not longer going to submit to seeing 
their killed like chickens. The Balinese had expressed their determination that 
all the Lombok “Hadjis” should be put to death, because these “Hadjis” incited 
the Sasaks to rebel. But we decided to rebel among ourselves only. 
- We have endured all the things above set forth and they are certainly not a 
tenth part of what we have had to put up with. 
- (In the letter courtesies follow and the Sasaks remind the Dutch that in a 
previous letter they asked for help as well as asked about weapons.) 
- “We offer you our most respectful greetings and hope to receive an answer.“ 
 
Written at Kopang, December 9 
th 1891 (!) 
Djero Moestadi of Kopang 
Mami Bangkol of Praja 
Mani Noersasi of Sakra 
Ginawang of Batu Klian 
Raden Ratmawa of Rarang 
Raden Wiranom of Pringa Baja 
Raden Melajoe Koesoema of Mas Bage 
 
Balinese Punngawas in Lombok, circa 1890. From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” 
Volume 1897; library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 15 of 30 ---
15 
 
 
 
Balinese warriors, Lombok circa 1890 
From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” Volume 1895 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 16 of 30 ---
16 
3. Lombok, its people and its summarized history 
 
The Sasaks were (and are) the original people of the island of Lombok, location 
east from Bali. In the olden days Lombok consisted of several petty states. 
Already circa 1550, the Sasaks became Muslims. Such contrary to the Balinese. 
Balinese remained true to Hinduism until today. 
 
In 1723 one of the Lombok Datus (chiefs), asked the Raja of Karangkasem in 
Bali for help against military threads from Sumbawa, the Sunda Island east 
from Lombok. This Balinese Raja did so, but he and his men stayed on Lombok 
in their new residence of Mataram. In 1738 the Lombok Datu of the petty state 
of Praja, in the south-centre of the island, asked Raja Ratu Gadé Ngurah, the 
Raja of Karangkasem (Bali), to assist him (the Datu of Praja) to fight the other 
Lombok Datus. Ratu Gadé Ngurah subjected the Datus and then the Datu of 
Praja as well. 
 About 1740 the Balinese founded four principalities on Lombok: Mataram, 
Singasari-Karangkasem (in the continuation of this article simply Singasari), 
Pagasangan and Pagutan. Internal controversies were normal. And so was 
infighting until 1838. In 1838 a real bloody war between Singasari and Mataram 
burst out. The other two principalities took part in the fighting. The end of the 
story was that Mataram defeated all its enemies and conquered the whole 
island of Lombok. Mataram was subordinate to Karangkasem on Bali and so the 
residence of Mataram became capital of Lombok: the capital of a puppet state. 
 
The fact that, from 1738, Balinese Hindus ruled over Lombok was a gruesome 
reality for the Muslim Sasaks. Atrocities against Muslims became “normal” in 
Lombok. Which meant abuses like slavery, slave trade, slave hunting, extortion, 
hunger, trade in women and forced prostitution (mostly prostituting young 
Sasak girls) and the most horrible punishments for the most silly suspicions. 
 
One has to realize that in the parts of Indonesia in the nineteenth century (and 
in the centuries before), where the Dutch had no power or command, extreme 
rude suppression of subjects was common. An Indonesian Sultan or a Raja was 
surrounded by a court, an aristocracy and an army: a real host of “admirers”. 
Pretending admiration of the ruler and complete submission to him was 
necessary, because court, aristocracy, army were dependent on him and his 
royal house. Legacy problems and succession caused wars between heirs very 
often and forced court etc. to make a choice. Sometimes a wrong choice with 
bloody consequences. Sultans and Rajas of Indonesian autochthonous 
principalities had the power of life and death over their subjects. 
 
4. Lombok and Dutch East-India - Indonesia 
 
Lombok had long been a bone of contention between Bali and Gowa-Makassar 
on Celebes (Sulawesi). In second half of the 17 
th century Lombok came under 
the supremacy of the island of Sumbawa, west from Lombok. In a treaty in 
1675 between the Datus of Lombok and the Dutch East-India Company, V.O.C., 
the Datus swore allegiance both to the company and the Sultan of Sumbawa. 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 17 of 30 ---
17 
 
 
Dutch soldier in a Balinese kampong in Lombok, Lombok September 1894. 
 After taking this picture this kampong was razed to the ground by Dutch 
military. From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” volume 1895 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
The relations with the V.O.C. were not of a lasting character and Sumbawa’s 
domination over Lombok could not maintained in the long run. The Raja’s of 
Karangkasem on Bali gradually gained influence. An influence which weighed 
heavy upon the original population, the Sasaks. 
 In 1843 the Balinese Raja of Mataram – he ruled Lombok from 1838 – 
concluded a treaty with the Government of Dutch East-India. He ceded the 
island to the Government and pledged himself to pay honour to the Dutch 
Governor-General at Batavia-Jakarta every three years. The Raja had the right 
to self-government so long as the agreement was faithfully observed. 
 
I explained that the Raja of Mataram, ruler of Lombok, was subordinate to 
Karangkasem on Bali. From 1849 this worked the other way around. In 1849 
the third colonial expedition to Bali was organized under the Dutch General 
Michiels and the Balinese Raja of Mataram offered his support to the Dutch. The 
reason of his support was that by taking part in the Dutch expedition against 
the rebel princes of Bali, to which the Raja of Karangasem also belonged, there 
was a change of gaining Karangkasem, in consideration of services. The Raja of 
Karangasem in Bali and the Balinese Raja of Mataram in Lombok were relatives 
of each other. No matter, this did not spoil the fun. 
 After the expedition Karangasem was indeed allotted to Mataram. The 
acquisition was important because the Sasaks in Lombok were kept under 
control by military from Karangasem. Now, from 1849, these military were 
subject to the orders of Mataram. 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 18 of 30 ---
18 
In Lombok all positions of importance except that of Datu, village chief, were 
filled by Balinese. In each of the Sasak villages several Balinese were settled. 
Because of that the Raja always was kept acquainted with what was going on. 
The Raja maintained his authority with utmost tyranny. In 1855 a revolt broke 
out and in 1882 once more. The most cruel executions took place. 
 In 1891 the Raja of Lombok made use of 500 Sasak warriors to defend 
Karangasem on Bali against the principality of Mengwi on the same island 
(Bali). These Sasak troops were poorly motivated, were ill fed and badly 
equipped. Revolt (1891) broke out again and the complete Sasak population 
joined in. The Sasak Datus approached the Dutch Government with complaints 
against the Balinese (see chapter 3) about the most gruesome realities. The 
Balinese did not care. They purchased steamers and modern weapons in 
Singapore. The steamers were partly manned by English and the captains were 
not allowed to accept examinations by the Dutch navy. The Balinese treated the 
Dutch with contempt again and again. In March 1894 the Raja wrote that he 
was willing to receive Dutch officials, but offered no apologies. The Sasaks, in 
the utmost misery, asked once more for help. One of the Raja’s illegal sons 
Anak Agung Madé (not illegal in the eyes of the Balinese, namely a son from a 
second wife), his evil genius, had declared his intention having all Sasak Datus, 
Hadjis and other Sasak officials put to death as soon as the revolt was quelled. 
 
5. Number of inhabitants of Lombok, strength of the 
expeditionary forces 
 
In 1884 the inhabitants of Lombok would amount to 650.000 souls, of whom 
600.000 belonged to the aborigines of Lombok, the Sasaks, and 50.000 to the 
ruling race, the Hindu-Balinese. And maybe circa 6.000 persons belonging 
respectively to the Malay (Bugis), Arab or Chinese races. There were only 
120.000 men averaging from 15 to 40 years of age, 100.000 – 120.000 men 
were capable of carrying arms. One fifth of this number , 20.000, were capable 
of acting in the coolie service in time of war. 
 The Balinese Raja family had 6.000 military men at their disposal as well 
as 2.000 auxiliary troops from Karangasem in Bali under their own prince Gusti 
Djilantik. Their fire arms were modern. 
The total strength of the Dutch expeditionary forces. July 1894, were: 
107 officers, 1.320 European and 948 native soldiers, 386 horses, 37 mules, 216 
servents, 64 “mandoors” (foremen of the convicts) and 1718 convicts, besides 
the civil staff (military auditor, parson, almoner, panghulu (Indonesian Muslim 
Priest), twenty clerks). 
 
Source: 
Cool, Capt. W.: With the Dutch in the East, an outline of the Military Operations 
in Lombok, 1894; London 1934, p. 43 and p. 54 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 19 of 30 ---
19 
 
Military officers on Lombok, officers of the infantry column “Van Blommestein”, 
Benteng Kaleh, Lombok September 1894. Major Van Blommestein is the man 
left on the picture. From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” volume 1895 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
 
Our officers of the infantry column “Van Blommestein”, again on a picture of 
saddening quality; Benteng Kaleh, Lombok September 1894. Major Van 
Blommestein is sitting second from left. Benteng Kaleh is visible. I put some 
black stars on the defence wall of the Benteng (fortress). 
From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” volume 1895 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 20 of 30 ---
20 
 
Infantry of the Dutch East-Indian Army embarking, destination Lombok; 
Semarang Java, June 1894. From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” volume 1895 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
 
Infantry of the Dutch East-Indian Army embarking, destination Lombok, 
Semarang Java, June 1894. From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” volume 1895 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 21 of 30 ---
21 
 
 
Infantry of the Dutch East-Indian Army embarking, destination Lombok, 
Semarang Java, June 1894. From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” volume 1895 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
 
 
Infantry of the Dutch East-Indian Army embarking, destination Lombok, 
Semarang Java, June 1894. From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” volume 1895 
Library Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
Man overboard. 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 22 of 30 ---
22 
6. The Dutch final ultimatum, the 5 th of July 1894 
 
The Lombok Expedition fell into two subsequent expeditions, closely connected 
with each other: 
- June 13 to August 26, 1894; 
- September 2 to December 24. 
 The expeditions had a long previous history, as already stated. Several 
times, 1892-1893, the Raja of Lombok Anak Agung Ngurah Karangasem, the 
Balinese ruler of the island of Lombok and its subordinate principality BaliKarangasem were accused by the Dutch of working against their, Dutch, 
interests and of violation of the 1843 treaty, such as alliances (by the Raja of 
Lombok) with other colonial powers, specially the English. Purchasing steamers 
and manned by English looked like an alliance between Lombok and a foreign 
power in the eyes of the Dutch. The Raja rejected all the accusations. 
 Governor-General of the Dutch East-Indies, Van der Wijck, took steps to 
send a military expedition to conquer Lombok. Widespread famine among the 
Sasaks was the deciding factor. Van der Wijck installed Major-General J. A. 
Vetter as commander of the Expedition. Major-General Vetter was first in 
command, second in command was Major-General P. P. H van Ham and Captain 
H. Quispel was in command of the expeditionary navy. 
 Raja Anak Agung Ngurah Karangasem was presented an ultimatum with 
the command to hand over his power to his son, Crown Prince Anak Agung 
Petut. This crown prince could become an ideal puppet ruler. Well, the Dutch 
thought so. The Raja preferred an other sun, Anak Agung Madé, as his 
successor. But the Dutch foresaw more problems with him than with Ketut. 
Madé, even more than his father, was against the transfer of political 
independence to the Dutch. The Dutch asked exile of Madé. Other demands by 
the Dutch in their ultimatum: 
- sending of an delegation to the Dutch Governor-General to offer apologies and 
ask for pardon; 
- the concluding of a new treaty to be framed and dictated by the GovernorGeneral; 
- the reparation of war indemnities by the Raja. The Raja was a very wealthy 
man. 
 
The expedition started from Batavia-Jakarta and from Semarang on June 30 
1894 and appeared in the roads of Ampenan July 5. It was composed of six 
warships, twelve transport vessels, three infantry battalions and artillery – 107 
officers and 2268 men amongst whom 1320 Europeans - and a cavalry 
squadron. 
 The Dutch received no answer regarding their ultimatum up to July 7. So, 
the troops were disembarked south from Ampenan without any resistance by 
the enemy. The nephew of Raja Anak Agung Ngurah Karangasem, Gusti 
Djilantik the subordinate ruler of Bali-Karangasem, joined the Dutch forces and 
swore loyalty to the colonial government. Gusti Djilantik (together with Anak 
Agung Madé) was the man who tried to suppress the Sasak revolt in 1891 very 
cruelly. Two days later the Raja accepted all the conditions, except for the 
clause concerning the extradition of his son Anak Agung Madé. Later it became 
clear that Anak Agung Madé had been forced by the Raja to commit suicide after 
a false accusation of incest. The legal Crown Prince Anak Agung Petut had 
replaced his father and pledged to carry into effect all the measures desired. 
Soon reality showed to be very different. 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 23 of 30 ---
23 
 
Column Van Lawick van Pabst on its way to Batu Klian, Lombok August 1894 
From> Cool, page 215 
 
 Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 24 of 30 ---
24 
 
The column of Lieutenant-Colonel Van Lawick van Pabst in Cagranegara, 
Lombok August 1894 
From> Cool, page 242 
 
 
August 1894, Vetter’s retreat from Cagranegara, Lombok 
From> Klepper, page 478 
 
 Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 25 of 30 ---
25 
 
August 1894, Vetter’s retreat from Cagranegara, Lombok 
From> Klepper, page 479 
 
 Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 26 of 30 ---
26 
7. The Lombok Expedition directly after July 11 th 1894 
 
The military forces marched to Cakranegara on July 11 th after the landing. 
Headquarters were established near Mataram. After the suicide of Anak Agung 
Madé the principal difficulty had been removed and the expedition seemed to 
come soon to an end, because negotiations seemed possible. 
 On the evening of the 11 th of July the two Generals, Vetter and Van Ham, 
paid the old (former) Raja, Anak Agung Ngurah Karangasem, a visit at his Puri 
(temple-palace) at Cagranegara, a formality only. The Raja appeared to be 
rather deaf and much too stupid (Vetter thought so) to bear the strain of the 
conversation. On July 12 th the Generals requested the former Crown Prince, the 
new Raja Anak Agung Ketut, to be present at the headquarters to discuss future 
plans. He arrived four days later and was accompanied by his nephew Gusti 
Djilantik. The Generals received him with the greatest honour. The Generals 
found that Ketut had been kept completely in the dark by his brother Anak 
Agung Madé as well as by the Raja and Gusti Djilantik. Ketut was ill-informed of 
the ultimatum and current events on the island 
 The former Crown Prince Ketut, the Lombok Raja now, trembled with 
nervousness and big drops of perspiration dropped from his forehead. He 
accepted the articles of the ultimatum and he stated that he would comply with 
the Dutch demands. Later it became true (a terrible truth!) that he, Ketut, had 
not understand anything about the articles, printed in the Malay Javanese 
language, and he had not understand about everything, even anything, else. 
Ketut could only speak Balinese. However, Ketut was the new Raja now. Shortly 
after this meeting at the Dutch headquarters Ketut realized the meaning of the 
ultimatum and he was not amused. 
 
Situation August 1894. 
- The Dutch were not aware of the fact that Ketut was furious. He realized that 
Lombok lost its independence, that he lost his absolute power over the East- 
and West-Sasaks. The Dutch experienced that, against the expectation of the 
colonial government, the rule of Ketut as a new Raja guaranteed no peace. 
- The Dutch realized too late that the Sasaks would never submit themselves to 
Balinese again. The Sasaks were afraid that this could happen again under 
Dutch supervision (the Dutch acting as a watchdog on Ketut) when the 
ultimatum was accepted. No Sasak submission to Ketut: puppet monarch or not. 
- So, the political situation on Lombok was very uncertain. The Dutch ought to 
be alert, but they were not. Carelessness with all its sad consequences. 
 
On August 25 
th , between 5 and 6 pm, a Dutch officer arrived in the camp near 
Cakranegara with information Balinese contemplating attacking the Dutch 
bivouac at Cakranegara. Gusti Djilantik was enjoying opium and was not able to 
give his opinion. He was super stoned. Some field artillery arrived. Evacuation 
could make the Dutch ridiculous in the eyes of the Balinese. 
 On August 25 th , at 11 o’clock in the evening, the camp at Cakranegara was 
nevertheless surprised by a Balinese attack from the west side. The Balinese 
were armed with modern Wincester repeating rifles. The enemy receded after 
Dutch gun fire. 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 27 of 30 ---
27 
But then a turmoil of martial music reached the Dutch from kampungs and 
Puris, drums were beaten vigorously with intervals. These intervals were filled 
up with the most hideous war cries. The noise drew nearer and nearer. The 
Balinese no longer attacked in the open but continued their fire on the Dutch 
unprotected troops from behind walls. 
 Though the enemies of the Dutch were repulsed in the first place, the 
Dutch casualties became now such that the Dutch troops were forced to 
withdraw into a walled enclosure. The enemy tried to bore loop-holes in the 
walls through which they could fire their guns. The results were terrible. 
 There came no help from the encampment near Ampenan. So the Dutch 
troops (many casualties, lack of ammunition) had to withdraw further to 
Mataram (to the west, along the road to Mataram-Ampenan). While retreating, 
the Dutch were under fire. Major-General Van Ham was killed. He was hit in the 
chest and abdomen. He died shortly after arrival in Mataram. The troops 
sustained severe rebuffs while marching to the shore. The total Dutch casualties 
amounted to 9 officers and 90 men killed and 17 officers and 255 men 
wounded, whilst 14 men were missing. 
 
It was even worse. Major van Lawick van Pabst, commander of the ninth 
battalion of infantry, was sent with his men to conquer Kota Radja north east 
from Rarang and Batu Klian in the eastern part of Lombok. Van Pabst returned 
in Cakranegara shortly after the retreat of the Dutch. The Major and his men, 
unaware of the Dutch retreat were killed or taken prisoner. The prisoners were 
murdered in a gruesome way. 
 To make fools of the Dutch the Balinese paraded around in Dutch uniforms 
taken from the fallen military. 
 
 
Ampenan, Lombok June 5 th 1894 
The landing of te Dutch

--- Page 28 of 30 ---
28 
8. The capture of Mataram, attack of Cakranegara 
 
Governor-General Van der Wijck ordered the expedition to be reconstructed as 
soon as possible. On the 1 
st of September 1894 the reinforcements arrived. 
1. On the 29 th of September 1894 Mataram was attacked by the Dutch by 
surprise. Incidental fighting went on until October 5 th . The victory was Dutch. 
Dutch casualties: killed 1 officer, 13 soldiers, 3 convicts; wounded 4 officers, 58 
soldiers. These serious losses show us how heavy the fighting was: surprise or 
not. The number of dead enemies were computed at 300. Amongst them women 
and children, victims to Dutch bullets. Some women and children received death 
at the hands of their own people. Mataram was conquered without complete 
destruction. 
 Raja Ketut was dead also: he had fallen while defending the Puri very 
bravely. He died together with his soldiers. Some of his faithful followers had 
carried the corpse of Ketut to Cakranegara. The old Raja desired once more to 
look upon the features of his son. But he was persuaded not to do so. The body 
was too shockingly mutiliated. The Prince died in the honourable fashion as 
demanded by his adat and the conceptions regarding the honour of a Raja. 
2. The siege and bombardments of Cakranegara lasted from October 19 
th until 
November 17 th 1894. The actual attack on Cakranegara (after siege and 
bombardments) took place on November 18 th . The enemy had been driven from 
the west front by the Dutch artillery and was now defending the interior of the 
town with the greatest pertinacity and it was necessary to fight for it inch by 
inch. The homesteads had to be captured one by one and before the Dutch 
could do a step forward, fresh walls had to be thrown down again and again. 
 Time after time small bodies of Balinese troops advanced, lance or spear in 
hand, and flung themselves on the Dutch soldiers. They met their own death in 
this desperate struggle. But at a terrible cost of men to Dutch colonial side. 
Balinese were shooting with modern repeating rifles from trees and walls. 
 At one of the last side roads before the Dutch could reach the main road 
(Cagranegara-Mataram, right through the centre of the town until today) four 
Balinese rushed forward with their lances from a group of old men, women and 
children. Three of them were immediately killed by the Dutch; whilst the fourth, 
although wounded, rushed onwards and thrust his spear into Captain W. Scheib, 
who succumbed. This fourth man was soon killed. But the European and 
Indonesian colonial soldiers were infuriated. As a consequence it became really 
more frightful. The European and Indonesian soldiers showed no mercy any 
more. Balinese men were killed even amongst their wives and children, who 
asked mercy (ampon, ampon tuan) for them, for their men. 
 Women, magnificently dressed and belonging to the highest Brahmin 
caste, threw themselves blindly amongst the Dutch troops trying to defend 
themselves with spears, but they met their death as their husbands had done. 
They sought death in preference to dishonour. For these Balinese women it was 
(in their Balinese culture) normal that they were handed over to the conquering 
military as concubines and because of that they preferred death to the shame of 
being treated as a despised caste. 
 Cagranegara was taken by the Dutch. The Dutch overthrew Balinese power 
in Lombok. Their (Dutch) losses were severe again. Now 5 officers and 44 
soldiers were killed, 3 officers and 103 soldiers were wounded. The Balinese 
lost almost 800 men and women. The Balinese losses were great. It was 
impossible to determine their losses accurate. There were dead bodies 
everywhere: on the streets, in the Puris, in the houses, really everywhere, 
anywhere. 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 29 of 30 ---
29 
 
Cakranegara, Lombok November 1894 
Major-General Segov in action. Column Segov storming in Cagranegara, 
following its commander Segov. 
From> Magazine “Eigen Haard” 1895 
 
 
Cakranegara, Lombok November 1894 
The Raja family surrenders. 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland

--- Page 30 of 30 ---
30 
 
Epilogue 
 
1. Grievances of the Lombok Sasaks against their Balinese rulers as well as 
imperialism were the reasons of the the Dutch Lombok Expdition 1894. 
2. The Dutch took over power in Lombok and exiled the Balinese Lombok Raja 
family to Batavia-Jakarta and forced them to live in a large villa. The old Raja 
died in May 1895. 
3. Nephew Gusti Djilantik was no subordinate Raja anymore. He ruled 
Karangkasem on Bali, he was an independent monarch now. 
4. Dutch victory went together with great losses. Twelve percent of their 
soldiers died in battle as well as fifteen percent of their officers. The Dutch 
underestimated the enemy, like they did in Aceh 1873 and in Java 1825. 
They were not the only ones. The English and French had the same problems 
from tim to time. 
5. It is a mistake to see the Balinese (as well as the Acehnese, people in Aceh) 
as simple men and women fighting with selfmade bows and arrows. The 
Balinese fought with modern rifles, bought in Singapore. 
6. The Dutch transported the Lombok Raja treasury for the greater part to 
Holland. There it became a part of collections of several Dutch museums. In 
1977 the so-called Lombok Treasure, seventy percent, returned to Indonesia. 
Thirty percent stayed in Holland. By accepting this transfer, Indonesia had 
agreed officially that the rest of the treasure could remain in Dutch hands. 
 
 
Batavia-Jakarta 1894, arrival of the Raja family and a number of its followers at 
Tanjung Priok Harbour. 
 
Dirk Teeuwen, Holland 
End