Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_17\documents\1924-Thesiamsociety-366_MISCELLANEOUS_NOTES.pdf
Total Pages: 1
Statistics: Chars=2049, ThaiWords=409.8, EnglishWords=490

--- Page 1 of 1 ---
366 MISCELLANEOUS NOTES. 
tusks . From government officials with whom I was travel ing I 
learned that a herd of at least 200 elephants ranges over the vast 
grassy plain extending southward from near Nakon Sritamarat 
almost to Singora on th e west side of the Inland Sea and practic~lly 
from the Gulf of Siam to th e high mountains in the west . 'fhis 
plain, sintab le for rice growing, is ent irely uncultivated owing to the 
ravages of the elephants. I do not see how the th eory of an isolat ed 
herd in a reAtricted area, resulting in th e development of a distinct 
variety of elephant, can be maint ained , but it would be highly 
de8irabl e to make a critica l anatomical exa mination of the elephants 
of this region. 
H UGH .M. SMITH . 
• Bangkok , Octob er 1924. 
No. II. A New Bird from Siam. 
Among a few birds incidentally collect ed by me on Koh 
Chang in Apri l, 1924 , a specimen of babbler of the genus Pellorneum 
has prov ed to represen t a quite distinct form previously unr ecognized. 
The species has been described und er th e name Pe llorn eun~ smithi 
by Mr. J. H. Biley, of the United Stat es Nat ional Museum , in the 
Proc eedings of the Biological Society of Washil!gton (vol. 37, p. 
129 -130, October 21, 1924). The species, of which th e typ e is an 
adu lt femal e, resemb les Pello?•netLm r'I.Lficeps S'I.Lbochraceum , but the 
upp er parts, flank s, and streaks on the chest are much darker. 
The describ er makes the following r ema1·ks on the relations of this 
species : 
"Count Gyldenstolpe (Ibis, 1920 , 481) records only two 
rac es of Pellorneum for Siam : Pellorneum r•nficeps subochraceum 
Swinhoe and Pellm·?wu?n ru.ficeps minus Hume. Of the form er 
the U. S. National Museum possesses a good series, but the latt er i s 
not represented. Various description s of Hume's form which hav e 
been consu lted do not agree with Pellorneum smithi, nor does t he 
plat e (Cat . Birds Br. Muse um, 7, 1883, pl. 13, fig. 1) of P ellorne'I,L?n 
intermedius Sharpe which Oat es (Fauna British India, Birds, 1, 
1889, 141) puts in the synonymy of Pellorn eum mimL s. I£ the 
plat e and description s are anywhere near correct, Pellorn eum smithi 
is a much dark er bird and lacks the strea ks on the hind neck." 
H UGH M. SMITH. 
Bangkok, Jun e 18, 1925. 
No. Ill. A Fossil Crab from Siam. 
During a visit to Koh Chang in 1924 I obtain ed specim ens 
of a fossil crab imbedded in a very hard matrix of bluish gray, 
calcareous 'clay. The specimen s came from semi-cleared land on the 
JOURN. SIAM SOC. NAT. HIST . SUPl'L. 
•