Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_17\documents\1961-Thesiamsociety-174_REVIEW_ARTICLES.pdf
Total Pages: 38
Statistics: Chars=69056, ThaiWords=13811.2, EnglishWords=14507

--- Page 1 of 38 ---
174 REVIEW ARTICLES 
BACKGROUND TO THE SRI VIJAYA STORY-PART I 
Paul Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese (University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, 1961), pp. 338, maps. 
O.W. Wolters, Early Indonesian Commerce (Cornell University; 1967), 
pp. 404, maps. 
To discuss the early history of Southeast Asia without first iden
tifying the relevant placenames with some degree of certainty is an 
exercise in futility. Try to imagine the confusion that would reign in 
discussions of European history if the location of Rome were a point of 
controversy. This is precisely the state of affairs in discussions of early 
Southeast Asian history. Sri Vijaya is a case in point. In 1918, Professor 
Georges Coedes advanced the hypothesis that southern Sumatra was the 
seat of an empire that lasted from the seventh to the thirteenth century. 
This hypothesis, since its inception, bas become an article offaith among 
a number of scholars working in the field to the extent that unbelievers 
are scoffed at rather than argued with. But, like many articles of faith, 
this hypothesis plays havoc with reality, defying geography and meteoro
logy, archaeology and written evidence, both internal and external. Those 
scholars, however, do not seem to be discouraged be these enormous 
inconsistencies. Instead, they are prompted to ever more dazzling feats 
of intellectual contortionism. With all due recognition of their skill, it 
seems to be time to call a halt and root out this orthodoxy. 
The starting point for this paper is. an examination of three books 
by two of the latest practitioners of Coedes' school of acrobatics : Paul 
Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, and O.W. Wolters, Early Indonesian 
Commerce, and The Fall of Sri Vijaya in Malay History. The paper 
will go on to offer a corrective to Coedes' hypothesis, to argue that 
Chaiya and ,Nakorn Sri Thammaraj in peninsular Siam, rather than 
Palembang in Sumatra, were the centres of a medieval civilisation. This 
alternative hypothesis is based on equating Ptolemy's Aurea Kbersonesus 
with the Thai Laem Thong (both names mean the Peninsula of Gold); 
and ranges from the 2nd century A.D. to Marco Polo at the end of the . 
13th. The main argument is based on the evidence ofi-Ching, a 7th 
((en.tur~ Chinese monk who did his writin€> at a place h~ call~d foqhc

--- Page 2 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 175 
(short for Chele-!oche, which is thought to have referred to Sri Vijaya.) 
I-Ching's first-hand evidence can be supported by the science of meteoro
logy (see section 3 below), while the Sri Vijaya inscriptions of South 
Sumatra of the same period are so controversial that they have been 
treated as subsidiary evidence. !-Ching's evidence, then, runs like a 
red thread through a rather rambling story that purports to lay the ghost 
of Professor Coedes' theory of a Sri Vijaya Empire in South Sumatra but 
at the same time to review certain aspects of Wheatley's and Wolters' 
books. 
1. Langkasuka 
Wheatley's The Golden Khersonese is divided into seven parts, of 
which the first four deal- respectively with Chinese, Western, Indian and 
Arab records; Part V deals with Three Forgotten Kingdoms (Langkasuka, 
Takola and Kedah); Part VI, called the Isthmian Age, seems to be a lead
in to the last part on Malacca (Part VII). The book ends about 1500 A.D. 
with the arrival of the Europeans. I will first comment on two of the 
three kingdoms of Part IV (Langkasuka and Kedah), bringing in such 
sources from Chapters 3 and 4 of Part I to bear as may be relevant to 
the Sri Vijaya story. After that I will comment on the third Forgotten 
Kingdom, Takola Emporium, and on Ptolemy's two islands, Iabadieu and 
Sabadabai, which are not treated in Wheatley's book. 
In an Appendix to Chapter 16 on pages 266-7 there is a list of 
names, with their sources, dates and locations, starting with the Chinese 
Lang-ya-hsiu and Lang-ya-hsu of the 7th century to the Langkasuka of 
the Hikayat Marong Mahawamsa of the late 18th century, Alang-kah-suka · 
(Kedah folklore) and Lakawn Suka (Patani folklore) both of the early 
20th century, all of which Wheatley equated with Langkasuka. If the 
names are put into chronological order and a line. drawn at the Indian 
1/angasoka of 1030, then the Chinese names in the first lot, starting 
with the Lang-ya-hsiu and Lang-ya-hsu already mentioned, all end with 
a sibilant sound· while those below the demarcation line, starting with ' 
Ling-ya-ssu-(cbi~) in 1225 and Lang-ya-hsi-chio in 1349, all end with a 
harsh ka sound. So the two sets of names did not refer to the same 
place : the first lot, with the sibilant ending, referred to Lakorn Chaisri,

--- Page 3 of 38 ---
176 REVIEW ARTICLES 
while the second of course was Langkasuka. As the sources for these 
two names are different, I will deal with them separately. 
Wheatley gives the Chinese evidence, as well as Arab, Indian, 
Javanese and Malay, but no Thai evidence. There is a long quotation, 
of both text and translation, from the Hikayat Marong Mahawamsa or 
Kedah Annals (pages 260~2), but Wheatley has left out the beginning of 
the story and only starts from the time Raja Marong Mahawamsa, the 
founder of Langkasuka, landed on the coast of Kedah. The first part, 
rather mythical in nature, serves to date the story, and presumably the 
reason Wheatley has left it out is because he is more concerned with 
determining whether Langkasuka was a west coast state (Kedah), or an 
cast coast one (district of Patani) than in any fairy tale; and certainly 
Raja Marong is a fairy from out of the top drawer. I will start with 
the Thai evidence, most of which has not been translated. The story 
can be dated about 1200A.D., which is older than the Chinese toponyms 
below the demarcation line ending with the harsh ka sound. 
Curiously enough, the name Langkasuka does not appear in any 
Thai chronicle or legend, though Raja Marong, its traditional founder, 
does (in the Chronicles of Nakorn Sri Thammaraj and the Chronicles of 
the Phra Dhatu Nakorn); nor did the Portugese writers mention the name 
despite the fact that Tome Pires (1512~15) was writing a full century 
before the last Chinese mention in 1628 (as Lang· hsi-chia in the Wu~pei
chih Charts). Raja Marong Mahawamsa, or Raja Marong for short, 
was the emblem of one of the cities under the hegemony of Nakorn Sri 
Thammaraj. There were twelve such cities, known as the Twelve Naksat 
Cities. The full list of the cities with their emblems is : 
The Naksat Cities Present locations The Naksat Years 
Muang Sai(buri) Patani province Chuad Rat 
Muang Tani Pat ani Chaloo Ox 
Muang Kelantan Kelantan Khan Tiger 
Muang Pahang Pahang Tho a Rabbit 
Muang Thrai(buri) Kedah Marong Big Snake 
Muang Patulung Patalung Mas eng Little Snake 
Muang Trang Trang Mamia Horse

--- Page 4 of 38 ---
l:mvmw ARticLn:a 171 
The Naksat Cities Present locations The Naksat Years 
Muang Chumporn Chum porn Mamae Goat 
Muang Ban tai Smoe Krabi Vog Monkey 
Muang Sa-u-lao Ta Chana Raga Chicken 
Muahg Takua Talang Bbuket Chor Dog 
Muang Kra(buri) Kraburi Ghun Pig 
I might explain that naksat is the name of an animal which repre~ 
sents a year in the cycle of twelve and the Naksat Cities each used the 
animal of its year as the city's emblem. The fifth city in the list, Muang 
Thrai or Thraiburi, is Kedah and the emblem of this city is Marong, the 
year of the Big Snake, which is the same as the Raja Mahawamsa of 
the Kedah Annals. The story of Marong can be given roughly as follows. 
In the time of the wise king Solomon, a prince of Rome was betro
thed to a princess of China. The prince set out by sea on the long 
journey for his marriage, having in charge of the expedition one Rajah 
Marong Mahawamsa, another prince of the royal blo9d of Rome. 
Near the island of Lanka (Ceylon), Garuda, the mythical bird that 
is the god Narai's transport and whose favourite food is snakes, had his 
abode. When Garuda heard of the Prince of Rome's trip and purpose, 
he decided to wreck the whole scheme. Also possibly he was very, very 
hungry, not having had a good meal of big snakes for a long time. So 
he kidnapped the Princess of China and hid her on a remote island. 
Then be attacked the convoy and there was a running sea and air battle 
in which Garuda rained down stones, boulders and possibly mountains, 
while Marong's anti-aircraft fire consisted of magic arrows. In the end 
the ships were sunk and Marong managed to get ashore at Kedah, where 
he later founded Langkasuka. At this point Wheatley starts his quota
tion from the Kedah Annals (pages 260-2). 
Meanwhile the Prince of Rome was washed ashore at the island 
where the Princess of China was kept prisoner and she hid him from 
Garuda. The story finally came to a happy ending in the court of King 
Solomon, whom throughout Ourada had kept informed of his intentions 
and actions. Solomon's one and only comment was "It is the will of 
God,>•

--- Page 5 of 38 ---
118 i1EVIEW All.TICLES 
The above version is based on a .not very good transiation of the 
Hikayat Marong Mahawamsa, so it may not be very accurate. At any 
rate, the whole story smacks of many religions, and I would say from 
Solomon's remark "It is the will of God," that the source is Islamic (for 
Solomon's remark, read "It is Allah's will.") 
Of tbe Twelve Naksat Cities, most of the places in present-day 
Siam give no difficulty because they are provincial capitals. Of the 
others, Muang Sai is Saiburi, an Amphur or District on the border of 
Naratiwat province; while Muang Kra is Kraburi in Chumporn province, 
located on the portage between-that province and Victoria Point. Ta 
Chana or Victory Harbour (of the Maharaja) is on the Bandon Bight. 
There is a tradition still told down there ofahill wheretheJavakaraja(the 
Arabs' Maharaja of Zabag) manufactured the anchors for his fleet .. One 
chronicle gives Takua Talang (Bhuket Island or Junk Ceylon) as the next 
city in the list, while the other chronicle gives Takuapa, which is a 
district on the west coast in Pang-gna province. Of the three cities in 
present-day Malaya, Kedah and Kelantan give no difficulty, but Pahang 
obviously does not refer to the present location. The Naksat Cities were 
called Muangs, i.e. cities or towns, and were not districts or provinces. 
If Malay scholars can locate this lost city, the!f perhaps the history of 
Malaya will go back a couple of centuries before Malacca was founded. 
This would be a good half century before the Sri Intaratit Dynasty came 
to the throne of Sukhothai. 
The Twelve Naksat Cities were a sort of outer shield surrounding 
the capital, Nakorn Sri Thammaraj (as well as Chaiya and Singora, which 
are not in the list), and they were connected by land so that help could 
be sent from one city to another in case of a surprise attack. Very 
possibly these cities came into existence after, or perhaps as a result of, 
the Chola raids in 1025, and disintegrated in about the middle of the 
13th century when 'Chandrabanu was defeated in Ceylon. If Muang 
Pahang is still lost in the jungles, Malay scholars should look somewhere 
near. the Panarikan Pass which connects the east and west coasts. (See 
Appendix 2 to Chapter 10 in Wheatley's book, pages 163-172). But I 
think more likely the city is under water, so what I suggest is that Malay 
scholars should leave thejr books for a while, put on some skin-diving

--- Page 6 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 
equipment and jump into some recently formed lake. They could easily 
find a whole city, or at least the remains of some chedi or vihara-but not 
a mosque, I am afraid, because the Twelve Naksat Cities were far older 
than the Muslim period.* But to take Langkasuka all the way back to 
the Chinese toponyms of the 7th century, as Wheatley has tried to do, 
is quite impossible. Let us now look into this problem, starting with a 
note on Wheatley's book. 
2. I.akorn Chaisri 
The first or Chinese part of The 'Golden Khersonese is divided into 
eight chapters, of which the first five, from earliest times to the Tang 
Period, comprise what one scholar has called a witch-hunt for names. 
Playing the Chinese word-game is another description of this process. 
The next chapter (6), which deals with the 13th century, is a lot better, 
though Wheatley's identifications of Chao-ju-kua's placenames cannot 
be accepted with full confidence (see map on page 64). The last two 
chapters seem as accurate as can be judged by one who knows neither 
the Chinese language nor the coasts of Malaya. 
By the nature of the evidence the first two chapters must be a 
witch-hunt for names. In the second chapter, Wheatley has located some 
names in the Funan story (evidence of Kang-tai and Chu-ying in the 
middle of the 4th century), but the location of Funan itself is a highly 
controversial subject. Groeneveldt in 1880 located Funan in Siam 
(Notes on the Malay Archipelago and Malacca compiled from Chinese 
sources). Then Professor Coedes moved it to Lower Cambodia. Coedes' 
theory, which might be called the French Colonial Period Theory, was 
not very good because Professor Jean Boisselier, in what might be called 
the Post Colonial Period Theory, moved Funan back to Siam again, 
though he says the capital later was in Cambodia. The Thai however 
locate Funan in the Jsan or Northeastern Plateau of Siam, Prince 
Damrong putting it in the vicinity of the Dhatu Panom, and Nai Manit 
Vallipotama placing it further north in the Nong Harn district. Wheatley 
has followed Coedes so some of the places he has located in the Malay ' . 
Peninsula might well have been placed further north in the Central Plain 
* On this topic; see also Ivfom Chao Chand, "Lang-Ya-Shu and Langkasuka: A 
Reinterpretation", Nusa11tara, (Kuala Lumpur), No. 2 July 1972, PP· 277-284,

--- Page 7 of 38 ---
iBo imVtEW Airrtd .. Es 
of Siam if he had followed the Thai location of Funan. On the othef 
hand, if he had followed Groeneveldt and Boisselier, he could never have 
located any of his placenames anywhere at all. 
Wheatley has also treated the three middle cbapte~s on the Tang 
Period as a witch-hunt, though if he had used some other material as 
well as written evidence, he could have located several other toponyms 
with more certainty. I will deal with the two chapters on the 7th 
century, namely Chapter 3 on Chang Chun's trip to Chih-tu in 607 A.D., 
and Chapter 4 on the evidence of Huanchang and !-Ching, leaving Fa
Bien of the 5th century to be considered later. 
Wheatley has equated Lang-ya-hsu with Langkasuka, as we have 
seen, and he has accepted Coedes' identification of !-Ching's Chele-foche 
as being the Sri Vijaya of the South Sumatran inscriptions. This is what 
I mean by playing the Chinese word-game because it is contrary to the 
written evidence of the period. Not playing the Chinese word-game, 
however, is for Wheatley to write Shih-li-fo-shi'lz for !-Ching's Sri Vijaya 
when other and older Sinologists give the name as Chele-foche. Those of 
us who know no Chinese must assume that all Sinologists are correct, 
and this is something that is sent to try us. The reader is requested to 
take it in the sarpe light-hearted fashion. 
I will start my comments by giving the identifications that I accept, 
at least two of which agree with Wheatley's, namely Pan-Pan on the 
Bandon Bight and Chieh-ch' a as Kedah. If any of the new identifica
tions proposed can be accepted, then perhaps Sinologists, in particular 
Wheatley, might be able to extend them to cover other toponyms of the 
same period. 
Shih-tzu-shih 
Lang-ya-bsu 
The Mountains of 
Lang-ya-hsu 
Chi-lung 
,Pan-Pan 
Chele-foche 
Ho-ling 
Chih-tu 
Mo-lo-yu 
Chieh-ch'a 
Laem Singh, outside Chandaburi 
Nakorn Pathom (Lakorn Chaisri) 
Kbao Sam Roi Yod, Prachuab Kirikhand 
Province 
Koh Rang Kai, Chumporn Province 
on the Bandon Bight 
Chaiya (Sri Vijaya) 
Nakorn Sri Thammaraj (Tambralinga) 
in the Singora Inland Sea 
Muara Takus, Central Sumatra 
Kedah

--- Page 8 of 38 ---
181 
Nz1kom Pnthnm i~ u new name. The old name in the chronicles 
is Nakorn nr Lulam~ Clmi!i.ri. h was the chief city of a kingdom on the 
western side the ('entr<ll m l\:1erwm Chao Phya Plain. On the eastern 
side of the river \\'~ls mt<lther kingdom with the chief city at Lawo 
{Lopburi). Fllm J'io,;ers fluw through the Central Plain, including the 
Cbao Phy:a Ea~t of ~he muin stream is tbe Bang Pakong, while west 
are the Ta Chin and 11-fue (ilcmg. Even today the Cliinese living in the 
Ta Chin-l\fue (ikm~? an!~t call the district by some such sound as Lang
jia-jiu. N1JW ftn th<.~ Chinese evidence. 
In 607 cmc Chang, Chun was sent as an envoy to C!tih-tu. Chih-tu 
was in the lnlund Sea, and its capital was culled Seng-chih or 
Lion City c~r Sio81m-~omethifll!h which does not sound unlike the present 
Singora. Sin@,t)ra of course is u new city, but the name might have been 
an old nne Yihh:h wu~; moved to a new site. Chang Chun set sail when 
the Northtttlll. Mml!lt:Km lind set in, and reached Lin-yi. Lin-yi, or what 
the Thai called Chuhmi, wus Champa, that i~, present-day South Vietnam. 
From there, ••s WHiilated by Wheatley (page 29); 
"Then gclin~~ !iOUthwards they reached Shih-tzth~·hlh (Lion 
Rc>ck), \ldltncc thcr·e extended a chain of large and small islands. 
After two til' three da>•s' voyage they saw in the west the mountains 
or l.m(J·J•u·h.~u. Then, continuing southwards to Chi-lung (Fowl 
Cage IshmdJ, they reached the borders of C!ti!Hu." 
Lion Rock is L.aem Singha outside the Chandaburi River. Fowl 
Cage lllland i~• Koh Rung Kai (Chicken's Nest Island) off Patiew in 
Chumporn province. Another island in the same district that pairs 
with this one i!i catlled Koh Rung Pet (Ducks' Nest Jsland). Also in the 
same district !iUU'l the Koh Rung Nok (Birds' Nest Islands) that run 
down the coast l<) SingMa, one of which is called Koh Lang-ya-jiew. 
These are the same birds' nests that go into the Chinese soup of that 
name-very delicious indeed! So the mountains of Lang-ya-hsu, between 
Laem Singha and Koh Rang Kai, were Khao Sam Roi Yod (Three 
huudredpeaks mountain), which run through Prachuab Kirikhan province 
all the way down south. The boundaries of Nakorn or Lakorn Chaisri, 
then, run from the Ta Chin-Mae Glong delta (Lang-jia-jiew) down to 
the birds' nest islands (Lang-ya-jiew), outside Chumporn province.

--- Page 9 of 38 ---
182 REVIEW ARTICLES 
There is confirmation of the above from the Tang Histories, dating 
from 618 onwards. Wheatley's translation, page 48, is from the Old 
Tang History: 
"The kingdom of P'an-P'an is situated to the southwest of 
Lin-i (Champa) on a bay of the sea. To the north it is separated 
from Lin-i by the Small Sea. One can reach it by boat from Chiao
chou (Tongking) in forty days, and it adjoins the kingdom of 
Lang-ya-hsiu.'' 
Pan-Pan was on the Bandon Bight, first at Viengsra on the Tapi 
River, then it was moved to Pun Pin on the same river nearer the sea. 
One of the outlets of the Tapi is called Pak Pan Kuba (Pak = mouth, 
Kuha = cavern.) The geographical information in the Old Tang History 
is not as specific as in the New which Wheatley did not translate, so in 
his map on page 53, he bas placed Lang-ya-hsu above Pan-Pan, that is, 
south of Pan-Pan, because for some curious reason that I cannot guess, 
many of his Chinese maps are printed upside down. The following 
translation from the New Tang History, Chuan 222, was made by Mr. 
Peter Bee of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of 
London: 
"P'an-P'an is on the bend of the Southern Sea (Gulf of Siam). 
To the North, it goes as far as the surrounding king's border (and) 
a small amount of sea connects it with Lang-Su-Shih. From the 
crossing of the mainland it takes forty days of sea-travel to arrive 
(at P'an-P'an). The king is called Yang-su-Shih.'' 
1-Ching (671-95) too mentions Lang-ya-hsu, and also relevant is 
the evidence of another 7th century Chinese monk, Huan Chang 
(629-45): 
"Southwards from this, and bordering the sea-coast is the 
kingdom Shi-li-ch'a-ta-lo (Srikshetra). Further to the south-east 
is the kingdom of Lang-chia-shu. Further east is the kingdom of 
. She-ho-po-ti. In the extreme east is the kingdom of Lin-i (Champa)". 
"Thence north-eastwards is the kingdom of Shi-li-ch'a-ta-lo 
(Srikshetra), Next, to the south-east, in a recess of the ocean, is 
the kingdom of Chia-mo-lang-chia (Kamalanka). Next, to the 
east is the kingdom of To-lo-po-ti (Dvaravati). Next, to the east 
is the kingdom of I-shang-na-pu-lo (Jsanapura). Next to the east 
is the kingdom of Mo-ho-chan-po (Mahacampa), which is the same 
as Lin-i."

--- Page 10 of 38 ---
BEVIEW ARTICLES 183 
!~Ching's She-ho-po-ti and Huan Chang's To-lo-po-ti are thought to 
have been Lbe same place and that place was Dvaravati. Dvaravati was 
then thought to have been located at Nakorn Pathom. But from the 
foregoing evidence Nakorn Pathorn was Nakorn Chaisri, or the Lang
chia-shu of 1-Ching. So To-lo~po-ti must be moved to the eastern side of 
the Menam Chno Phya: Plain, and if this Chinese toponym was really 
Dvaravati, then its location was perhaps in the district of Ayodhia/ 
Ayudhia, that is to say, it was an older name for Ayodhia as Ayodhia 
itself was an older name for Ayudhia. 
ln the same way Huan Chang's Kamalanka has been thought to 
have been the same as !-Ching's Lang-chia~shu, and in turn identified as 
Langkasuka. Wheatley writes on page 257. 
"Clearly Karnalanka (suka ?) was situated in the same posi
tion relative to Sriksetra and Dvaravati as was 1-ching's Lang-chia
shu, and presumably these places were identical." 
There are several sites on the western side of the Chao Phya 
River with archaeological remains going back to the 7th century, so there 
is no need to think that Kamalanka was the same as Lang-chia-shu (or, 
from now on, Nakorn Chaisri.) I myself would locate Kamalanka at the 
present U-thong, but this is not relevant to the present study. As for 
Nakorn Chaisri, I do not know who was the first scholar to equate this 
name with Langkasuka. If it was not Professor Coedes, then he certainly 
accepted it. This is against the written evidence, for the record is quite 
specific that Nakorn Cbaisri was west of Dvaravati; whereas of course 
Langkasuka would be south, except that Langkasuka was at least five 
centuries after Nakorn Chaisri (at that time Nakorn Chaisri had disin
tegrated, as had U-thong.) 1-Chin·g mentioned Lang-chia two or three 
more times, but there is no need to continue because the evidence all 
agree, so I will end this section on Nakorn Chaisri with a short quotation 
from Professor Coedes {The Indian/zed States of Southeast Asia, pages 
76-77). 
"West of Dvaravati and southeast of Srikshetra, the .gre~t 
pilgrim Hsuan-tsang places the countr.Y of ~amalanka, wh~ch ts 
"near a large bay" and is perhaps iden uc~l wttb the Lang-chra-shu 
{i.e. Langkasuka) of !~Ching. In any case 1t must be located on the 
Malay Peninsula." 
I 
j 
I

--- Page 11 of 38 ---
184 REVIEW ARTICLES 
3. 1-Ching's Evidence 
I-Ching was at a place he called Foche (short for Chele-foche) 
between 671 A.D. and about 694. He wrote two books, called in trans
lation A Record of the Buddhist Religion as practised in India and the 
Malay Archipelago, and Memoir on the Eminent Monks who sought the Law 
in the West during the Tang Dynasty. The latter gives the biographies 
of some sixty Buddhist monks who went to India. Of these monks, 
thirty seven travelled by sea. The practice in those days was to set 
sail when the Northeast Monsoon set in, and to make a landfall on some 
place on the east coast of the Malay Peninsula. Of the 37 monks who 
travelled by sea, Roland Braddell cites 15 case histories in his Notes on 
Ancient Times in Malaya, of whom 9 arrived at Foche (Chaiya), including 
!-Ching himself; 6 arrived at Ho-ling (Nakorn Sri Thammaraj) and two 
at Lang-chia (this goes to show further that bang-chia was Nakorn 
Cbaisri off the main route, and not located at Langkasuka as was pre
viously thought.) The experts have equated Chele-!oche with Sri Vijaya, 
only unfortunately they, or more specifically Professor Coedes and the 
experts who have followed him, have located this Sri Vijaya in the 
environs of Palembang in South Sumatra, while Ho-ling they have located 
· in Java. This is against the written evidence in both cases. I will deal 
with the two place-names together. 
Two pieces of information from the New Tang History serve to 
locate both Ho-ling and Chele-foche above the equator. The first is that 
the products of Ho-ling included tortoise shell, gold and silver, rhinoceros 
horns and ivory. As Java has never been known to produce gold, we 
can say that wherever Ho-ling was located, it was not in Java. 
The second piece of information is that at noon on the day of the 
summer solstice, a sundial 8' (sh'ih) in height casts a southern shadow 
2'5" (fs'un) in length. This information is to be found in both the 
sections on Ho-ling and Foche, so we can say that wherever these two 
places were located, they were not below the equator. 
Chinese astronomical evidence is not considered good evidence, so 
it is either ignored altogether or the facts manipulated to suit the 
experts• pet theories. In this particular case, the summer solstice of the 
record is changed to winter, and the southern shadow is changed to a

--- Page 12 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 185 
northern one to enable Ho~ling to be placed in Java and Foche in South 
Sumatra. The only factor tbe experts have not changed is the time 
factor, because they still accept midday and have not changed it to 
midnight. 
But two scholars refused to accept all this monkey business. Sir 
Roland Braddell placed Ho-ling somewhere on the west coast of Borneo, 
but he accepted Chele~foche to have been in the environs of Palembang 
in South Sumatra, where it has generally been located.* J.L. Moens 
located Ho-ling at Kedah (Sri Vijaya, Java en Kataha), while Chele-foche 
he first located at Kelantan, then it was moved to Maura Takus on the 
Kampar river in Central Sumatra. Again this is based on Chinese 
astronomical information, Kedah and Maura Takus on the equator will 
come into the story when we get to !-Ching's evidence, and on this 
evidence Ho~ling could not have been at Kedah, or anywhere on the 
west coast of the Malay Peninsula for that matter. 
I myself prefer to locate Ho-ling at Nakorn Sri Tbammaraj, which 
at that time was called Tambralinga, while Chele-foche, if this was 
really Sri Vijaya, was Chaiya. Presumably the (supposedly ignorant) 
Chinese sailors called Tambralinga Ho-ling, while the Chinese who knew 
Sanskrit called the place Po-ling, and at a later period they called it 
Tan-ma-ling. Both Nakorn and Chaiya have produced many and varied 
archaeological remains going back to the 7th century and beyond. 
Nakorn and Chaiya also produced an inscription each bearing 
these two old names. (Also there is a hill near Chaiya called Khao Sri 
· Vijaya, and the name Chaiya itself is of course the shortened form of 
Sri Vijaya). The inscription from Nakorn is dated 1230 A.D. and bears 
the name Tambralinga, only unfortunately Coedes has stated that this 
inscription came from Chaiya. This is contrary to the records of the 
National Mus~um which says it came from Nakorn. The Chaiya or Sri 
Vijaya stele is dated 775 A.D. and came from Wat Hua Vieng in Chaiya. 
This is the inscription that Coedes says came from Wat Serna Muang, 
Nakorn Sri Thammaraj. Again this is against the Museum records, 
*Sir Roland Braddell, "Notes ·on Ancient Times in Malaya" Jo~trnal of _the 
Malayan Branch, Royal Asiattc Societ:r.. (Singapore), Vol. XXIll, Part l, {1950), 
P .1 S et passim. .

--- Page 13 of 38 ---
186 HEVJEW ARTIGLES 
which says it came from Vieng Sra, but the Chaiya people who prepared 
the stele for shipment to Bangkok maintained it came from Wat Hua 
Vieng in their district. But of this subject more later. 
We now come to !-Ching's evidence and only the account of his 
own voyage is necessary to kill Professor Coedes' theory of the Sri Vijaya 
Empire. In fact this can be done in a couple of sentences because the 
theory is based on equating I-Ching's Che./e-foche with the name Sri 
Vijaya, and then locating that Sri Vijaya in South Sumatra where several 
inscriptions of the same period have been found. Put another way, if 
1-Ching's Foche was not located in South Sumatra, then Coedes' theory 
will simply not hold water, even without knowing what the actual 
inscriptions say. (The South Sumatran Inscriptions will be dealt with 
later in Part li of this paper.) 
While in Canton in 671, !-Ching arranged for a trip to the south in 
a Po-ssu (Persian) ship. The ship sailed in the lith month (December) 
when "the east wind blew" and arrived at Foche in about twenty days. 
1-Ching's east wind is the Northeast Monsoon which blows from the 
direction of Japan towards the equator (Singapore). This same wind 
below the equator blows from the southeast, from the direction of 
Australia to the south coast of Java. Around the equator the winds 
are vanable, and in this season the doldrums extend down south to the 
north coast of Java. On this evidence, as well as on the Chinese astro
nomical evidence already cited, !-Ching's Foche could never have been 
at Palcmbang in South Sumatra, or anywhere below the equator. 
So Professor Coedes' theory of the Sri Vijaya Empire, which he 
put forward as long ago as 1918, was not only unscientific, but also 
thoroughly illogical. Trading in !-Ching's time was probably coastal, 
with frequent stops for reloading and taking on of food and water. But 
there were also ocean-going vessels. !-Ching took passage in one such 
ship (a Persian one.) Is it likely tbat a ship fully loaded with valuable 
cargo from the Celestial Empire for the Mediterranean market would 
make a detour of several degrees below the equator to South Sumatra? 
The average voyage in Tang times from Chtna to the Malay Peninsula 
took between 30 and 40 days, while !-Ching's own trip in 20 days was 
probably the fastest on record. The aim of such a ship (Persian) would

--- Page 14 of 38 ---
Map I 
Windchart for November when !-Ching set sail from Canton for Chele-foche in 671 A.D.

--- Page 15 of 38 ---
188 REVIEW ARTICLES 
be to slip round the Malacca Straits as quickly as possible and catch the 
same Northeast wind across tbe Ten Degree Channel to India or Ceylon. 
After passing Ceylon there would be no difficulty in getting home to one 
of the ports in the Middle East. The ship might make a short stop on 
the turn of the Peninsula (somewhere near the equator), and another on 
the west coast before crossing the Bay of Bengal, but the main aim would 
be not to miss the Northeast Monsoon, otherwise there might be a delay 
of a full year before the next monsoon season. All this can be seen 
clearly from I-Cbing's own trip to India and back to China (Wheatley, 
page 42). The outward trip was delayed .a year till the following 
Monsoon season because I-Ching stopped off at Sri Vijaya. 
"In less than twenty days we reached (Shih-li)-Fo-shih (Sri Vijaya) 
where I spent six months learning the Sabdavidya (Sanskrit 
grammar). The king befriended me and sent me to the country of 
Mo-lo-yu (Malayu=Jambi), where I stayed for two months. Then I 
changed direction to go to Chieh-ch'a (Kedah). In the twelth 
month I embarked on the king's ship and set sail for India. Sailing 
northwards from Chieh-ch'a for more than ten days, we came to 
the Kingdom of the Naked People (Nicobar Islands) ... From here, 
sailing in a north-westerly direction for half a month, we came to 
Tan-mo-li-ti (Tamralipti)." 
"(Tamralipti) is the place where we embark when returning. 
to China. Sailing from here towards the south-east, in two months 
we come to Chieh-ch'a. By this time a ship from (Shih-li)-Po-shih 
will have arrived, generally in the first or second month of the 
year ... We stay in Chieh-ch'a until winter, and then embark on a 
ship for the south. After a month we come to the country of 
Mo-lo-yu which has now become Po-shih. We generally arrive in 
the first or second month. We stay there till mid-summer, when 
we sail to the north and reach Kuang-fu (Kuang-tung) in about a 
month. The voyage is completed by the first half of the year." 
Chieh-ch'a is generally accepted to have been Kedah, while Mo-lo-yu 
has been located at Jambi in South Sumatra (to the north of Palem bang.)· 
i think Mo-lo-yu was Maura Takus on the Kampar river in Central 
Sumatra. !-Ching's outward journey would then be to Chaiya, then on 
to Maura Takus on the equator, and "changing directions" on to Kedah 
on the west coast. · The phrase in the second paragraph reading Mo-lo-yu· 
has Mw become Po-shih" is difficult to understand. This might mean.

--- Page 16 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 189 
that Mo-lo-yu had now been conquered by Sri Vijaya, w~ich would not 
be contrary to the text of one of the Sumatran inscriptions, except that 
it is difficult to see how a ship sailing from the equator could reach 
Canton in one month. Alternatively the ·sens~ might have been that 
from Kedab !-Ching went to' Maura Takus and made the turn up to 
Cbaiya without putting into port there. This would accord more with 
!-Ching's account of his own trip from Poche back to China. 
1-Ching returned from India to Poche in 685, and there started to 
do his writing. In 689 he found he had run out of paper and ink, and 
money to hire scribes, so he wrote a letter for these things and took it 
to a ship that was moored in the Poche river. At that time the wind 
started to blow, so the ship raised its sails to the full, and I-Ching was 
conveyed back to China. ''Even if I had wanted to stop the ship," be 
remarked, "there was no way of doing so." He arrived at Canton in 
about a month. 
The evidence of the sudden wind and one month's sailing time 
would indicate that the sbip sailed from Chaiya or somewhere on the 
east coast of the Peninsula, and not from the equator 8 degrees below 
Chaiya, where there would be variable winds to deal with, or from 
Palembang a couple of degrees below the equator. Moens however says 
that !-Ching spent ten years at the 'new Sd Vijaya' where he did his 
writing. This was on the equator, based on !-Ching's statement that 
'Mo-lo-yu has now become Sri Vijaya' and some astronomical evidence, 
namely that at the new Sri Vijaya, on the summer and winter solstices 
there was no shadow thrown at noon. The last sentence sounds impos
sible, but anyway Moens placed the new Sri Vijaya at Maura Takus. I 
do not know any Chinese so I cannot say whether I-Chings spent ten 
years at Moen's new Sri Vijaya or at Chaiya as on his outward trip. 
Maura Takus was an important location in the Sri Vijaya story, and the 
excavations being carried out there,' or about to be carried out by the 
University of Pennsylvania, should produce new evidence of importance. 
' 4. Takola Emporium / 
Takola is in Aurea Khersonesus, or what the Thai call Laem Thong. 
This Thai name is old but I cannot say how old it is, though it should ' ' 
-certainly be older than when. the Thai first heard of the Golden Khersonese 
I

--- Page 17 of 38 ---
190 REVIEW ARTICLES 
or of Ptolemy, which I presume, was only early in this century. Need
less to say, the Thai thought Laem Thong was, and still is, in present 
day Siam. As a member of the land today called Sri Thailand, I too 
think Aurea Khersonesus was in Siam-in fact exactly where my com
patriots, past and present, have placed Laem Thong. 
To locate Aurea Khersor.esus, it is only necessary to locate Takola, 
and this can be done even without Ptolemy's evidence. The first writer 
to mention the Golden Khersonese was Josephus in his Antiquities of the 
Jews, and the first man of whom there is any record to have actually 
sailed to the Khersonese was one Alexander the Sailor. Alexander's 
evidence was used by Marinus of Tyre in his handbook, and while both 
the evidence of Alexander and Marinus have been lost, Ptolemy, who 
was writing in approximately the middle of the 2nd century, quoted 
from Marinus' handbook in the first of the eight books that comprised 
his Geography. Alexander's evidence is very short and clear-cut. He 
stated that from Takola in Aurea Khersonesus one sailed for twenty days 
along a land that faced south (i.e. eastwards) and arrived at Zabai, where 
one made a turn, and in another twenty days or a little more, one got to 
Cattigara which was in Sinai. 
Sinai was South China (North China being Seres), and Cattigara in 
Sinai was Canton, or a city before Zayton as. Zayton itself was a city 
before Canton. Zabai was the southern tip of Chama (South Vietnam), 
probably where the Vo-:Cahn inscription, dated not later than the 3rd 
century A.D., was found. The land that faced south referred to the 
coast of Siam and Cambodia, where at least one very ancient port was 
located. This was Oc-eo where archaeological finds including Mediter
ranean-type beads have been found. Ptolemy called this port Akrada. 
The location of Takola has produced some of the dreariest argu
m-ents imaginable. General opinion today seems to locate the place at 
Takuapa or Trang on the west coast of the Peninsula. But I think on 
Alexander the Sailor's evidence, Takola should be placed on the east 
coast, because if the location had been on the other coast, then Alexander, 
in sailing due east, would have had to sail overland, which I doubt any 
self-respecting sailor would do. Then Ptolemy has a Cape beyond 
Takola, which be placed two of his degrees below Takola, and nearly

--- Page 18 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 191 
two degrees to the west. The only location that would fit this toponym 
is the Bay of Bhuket on the west coast. If Takola is located at Chaiya 
, on the Bandon Bight, then the latitudes and longitudes would fit because 
Chaiya is to the east of Bhuket .. and actually two degrees north. This 
would indicate that there was, or rather that Alexander the Sailor and 
Ptolemy thought there was, a sea route through the Peninsula from the 
Bay of Bhuket on the west coast to Bandon Bight on the east coast that 
turned Malaya into an island. There are traditions of Malaya having 
once been an island. 
The newspapers have recently been saying that the Government 
has ordered a feasibility survey for a "Kra Canal" to be cut through the 
Peninsula between Bhuket Bay and the Bight of Bandon. Unfortunately, 
as far as I know, no archaeologist has been attached to the survey. 
Cbaiya on the Bandon Bight has produced some very old remains, and 
on the other side of the Peninsula in Bhuket Bay, Mediterranean-type 
beads have been found at Khao Javabrab in Krabi province. A few years 
ago Cambridge University excavated some kiln sites in Singora province 
and discovered a •Ceramic Industry in the Sri Vijaya Period.' The finds 
from a site called Koh Mob are undergoing radio-carbon and thermolu
minescence tests for their exact dating. An archaeologist attached to 
the feasibility survey mentioned above might be able to collect more 
examples of Sri Vijaya pottery before they disappear for good. This is a 
subject that has not been studied to any extent, and the survey could 
produce, new evidence to change the present thinking on the Sri Vijaya 
story. 
Meanwhile starting with the supposition that there was a sea route 
through the Peninsula, Ptolemy's placenames and co-ordinates of Aurea 
Khersonesus fit into a pattern that can be recognised on modern maps. 
But as Ptolemy's Geography has produced such extraordinary arguments 
over the ages, it would be as well to add a few words. 
Ptolemy's Geography is divided into eight books, with 26 maps 
appended. The maps have all disappeared, and the oldest reconstruct 
is a Roman map dated 1477, or thirteen centuries after Ptolemy .. ?b
viously not very much sense can be expected from such reconstruc~wns. 
Of the eight books, the first, which contains Alexander the Sailor's

--- Page 19 of 38 ---
192 REVIEW ARTICLES 
evidence on Takola, is a treatise on how the maps were made, while the 
last contains a list of 8000 placenames with their co-ordinates. These 
placenames were an appendix to the maps and not a list from which the 
maps were made. The reconstructions fpllow this list, and thus Ptolemy's 
two islands, called Iabadieu and Sabadabai, do not appear on any of the 
reconstructs I have seen (see frontispiece in The Golden Khersonese.) 
We will leave Wheatley now, and I will end with a few words of 
appreciation. I think The Golden Khersonese is a very fine piece of work 
because it gives both texts and translations of the sources. But there 
are too many omissions, not the least important being the Thai sources. 
In the first or Chinese part, it would have been nice to have had I-Ching's 
evidence on Chele-foche in full, but unfortunately Wheatley accepted 
Professor Coedes' equation ofi-Ching's Chele-foche with the Sri Vijaya 
of the South Sumatran inscriptions, and considered Poche outside the 
scope of his work. Coedes was a great epigraphist and the Thai are 
grateful to him for the pioneer work he did on the Sukhothai inscrip
tions, but his interpretation of these and other inscriptions is simply 
a disaster because western writers tend to follow him blindly, not only 
on the Sri Vijaya story but on several other stories as well. 
The second part of The Golden Khersonese, dealing with the western 
writers, is divided into two chapters. The first (Chapter 9) deals with 
the pre-Ptolemaic, evidence, where neither Alexander the Sailor nor 
Marinus of Tyre is mentioned. .The second chapter deals with the 
Golden Khersonese itself, but here again Ptolemy's two islands, Jabadieu 
and Sabadabai, are omitted. Another chapter might have been included 
on the post-Ptolemaic evidence (Marco Polo, Friar Odoric, Nicolas di 
Conti etc.) The title of Wheatley's book, The Golden Khersonese, is 
derived from Ptolemy's Aurea Kbersonesus, but he does not seem to 
think very much of Ptolemy's work. (His identificationsonpages 151-7 
of the Ptolemaic placenames and co-ordinates in Aurea Khersonesus are 
a complete farce.) If Wheatley had equated the Golden Khersonese 
with the Thai Laem Thong (a name he also failed to mention), then most 
of Ptolemy's placenames and co-ordinates could be located without much 
difficulty, including some other names like Samarade and Perimula which 
have been left out of the map on page 148. But in thi~ way very few

--- Page 20 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 193 
of the Ptolemaic names, including the title of the book itself, would be 
in present-day Malaya, and this might not have been the object of 
Wheatley's treatise. What Wheatley should do is to revise his book, 
and with the material he already has in hand, he could easily produce a 
minor classic in this particular field. Students of Southeast Asian history 
would surely welcome identifications of placenames made without 
conjectures, because an anthology of wild surmises made by the master
minds of the past is not really of much use to anybody, particularly 
students who are starting to learn their job. 
5. Javadvipa and Java 
Ptolemy's Iabadieu island has generally been equated with the Indian 
Yavadvipa and Yamadvipa, and with the Javanese Javadvipa, all of 
which names were located outside India proper. Yavadvipa, along with 
Suvarnadvipa, the Island of Gold, appears in the Ramayana; Yamadvipa 
(thought to have been a gloss for Yavadvipa) in the Vayu Purana, as well 
as Malayadvipa, a name that will appear later in the story; and Javadvipa 
in a Central Javanese inscription dated 732 A.D. The Indian texts do 
not give any geographical evidence for the names, but the description of 
the locations are similar enough for all the placenames to be identified 
as the same locality. And that locality was not the present island of 
Java because Yavadvipa and Yamadvipa both produced gold, and gold 
was a commodity that Java has never been known to produce. The same 
applies to the Javadvipa of the Central Javanese.inscription. 
The lowest place in Ptolemy's Aurea Khersonesus was Sabana, 30" 
South latitude and 160" East longitude. I would be inclined to place 
Sabana at the present Kedab, where there was probably another passage 
or portage bet ween the Perlis river to the Singora Inland sea. Both 
Nakorn Sri Thammaraj and Kedah Peak have traditions of having been 
islands. 
Before going on to Ptolemy's two islands (labadieu and Sabadabai), 
I will say a few words about his latitudes and longitudes. In Ptolemy's 
time, those who did not think the world was flat thought it was far smaller 
than it actually is. It was only at the end of the 15th century when 
Colombus sailed across the Atlantic and arrived in the Americas, which

--- Page 21 of 38 ---
194 REVIEW ARTIC'LES 
be thought was India that it was realised the world was much larger than 
was previously thought. This was confirmed by Megellan and Drake 
when they circumnavigated the globe. Wheatley says that the Ptolemaic 
.cJegree is five-sixth of a true degree (page 153), and there was a displa
·cement of 230 nautical miles. This may be correct for some latitudes, 
but I think those nearer the equator were shorter than those further 
north. Ptolemy's latitudes can be manipulated to a certain extent by 
studying the movements of the sun in the seasons, but his longitudes are 
hopeless beyond saying that one place was east or west of another place. 
Anyway, if Ptolemy's co-ordinates of his placenames are plotted and, 
bearing in mind the geographical knowledge of the time, a much better 
pattern emerges relative to present-day maps than Wheatley allows for
providing the Golden Khersonese is moved lock, stock and barrel further 
north than the present-day Malaya. 
Ptolemy did not know very much about his two islands. He gives 
-only two co-ordinates for Iabadieu and one for Sabadabai, but tbey are 
:sufficient to locate the two places. 
Longitudes LatitudE's 
Takola 160. East 4· 15' North 
Cape beyond Takola 158' 20' East 2· 20' North 
Saban a 160' East 3' South 
Sabadabai 160' East s· 30' South 
Iabadieu, west 167' East 8" 30' South 
Iabadieu, east 169" East s· 10' South 
If Takola is located at Chaiya and Sabana at Kedah, then Iabadieu 
island, lying southeast of the Khersonese, would fit in as Malaya Island. 
:Sabadabai, lying due west of Jabadieu would then be Sumatra, or at least 
the northern part of Sumatra .. If Jabadieu can be equated with the Indian 
Yavadvlpa, then Sabadabai can probably be equated with the Indian 
:Suvarnadvipa, the Island of Gold. (Sumatra is called Pulau Mas in the 
Malay language, which also means the Island of Gold.) Needless to add, 
there are overlaps between the locations of the various names, especially 
·between the south of the Golden Khersonese and the north of Javadvipa. 
This we shall see in the evidence that follows on the names Java and 
Javadvipa.

--- Page 22 of 38 ---
HEVIEW :\HTICLES 195 
In the time of Ptolemy, the Chinese recorded that in 132 A.D. Yeh
tiao, a land or island in the southern seas, sent an embassy. Yeh-tiao 
has been equated with the Indian Yavadvipa and Ptolemy's Iabadieu 
(see Wheatley page 177), but as there is no geographical evidence, I will 
let this pass, though if it was on the main route between China and India, 
Wheatley is probably right. Pelliot identified it as Java, and he is 
probably right too, except that this Java was not the Java island of the 
present day, which is well out of the sailing route dictated by the North
east Monsoon. The name Java is also very old. It appears in the 
Maha Nidessa alongside Takola and Tamalinga (the Holing of the Chinese 
records already mentioned.) 
"Further, a man who is the slave of greed and thinks only 
of what he may acquire, sets sail on the oceans in search of wealth, 
suffering cold and heat, is tormented by gnats and insects, wind 
and sun, small snakes and big ones, and enduring hunger and 
thirst, arrives at the various ports, such as the port of Takola, 
Taksila, Java, Tamalinga and Suvannabhumi., 
Three centuries after Ptolemy, there is more definite evidence from 
Fa-Hien, a Chinese Buddhist monk of the 5th century. Fa-Hien left 
China in 399 and travelled to India by the land route. After remaining 
in India for 15 years he returned by sea, sailing from Ceylon for Ye-po-ti. 
The ship set sail in September 413 during the Inter-Monsoon period, and 
sailed eastwards before a fair wind for two days. After that it encoun
tered a Bay of Bengal Cyclone and was in it for J 3 days, when the ship 
arrived at a small island where the leaks were stopped. 
Then, proceeding on the correct course for Ye-po-ti, the ship ran 
into a storm and was blown before the wind (northeastwards) for 90 
days before arriving at, or perhaps "crawling into", Ye-po-ti. Fa-Bien 
stayed five months in Ye-po-ti to wait for a change of winds between 
January 414 A.D. and May, before he embarked on another ship for 
China. The ship then ran into a China Sea Typhoon, and after ninety 
days arrived in China. The story is recounted on pages 37-41 in The 
Golden Khersonese. 
It used to be thought that Ye-po-ti referred to the Java of the pre
sent day, that is, Fa-Hien was blown down south of the equator through

--- Page 23 of 38 ---


--- Page 24 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 197 
the Sunda Straits between Sumatra and Java. But in 1941 Mr. A. Grimes, 
a meteorologist then working at the Singapore Airport, showed that it 
was impossible for Fa-Hien to have been blown below the equator. 
Besides the prevailing wind in that season, which blows from the south 
and the west, the Bay of Bengal Cyclone and the China Sea Typhoon 
were phenomena that occurred only in the Northern Hemisphere. Grimes' 
theory is scientific, so it is generally accepted (by Sir Roland Braddell 
and Wheatley anyway), though Wolters would appear not to do so (see 
Early Indonesian Commerce, pages 35 and 176, and footnote 22, page 269). 
I certainly accept it, and I would go further by stating that the Sunda 
Straits were not, and are not, on the main sailing route between India 
and China. This can be seen clearly enough from !-Ching's evidence of 
the monks who went to India and back by sea. These monks set sail 
when the Northeast Monsoon blew, and made for a landfall at one of 
the ports on the east coast ' of the Peninsula ( Chele-foche and Ho-ling). 
Then the ship would slip through the Malacca Straits to a port on the 
west coast (Chieh-cha), and then sail through the Ten Degree Channel to 
India or Ceylon. To go below the equator would mean missing the Mon
soon and a delay of one whole season. The Sunda Straits was used at a 
much later period by ships rounding the C~pe of Good Hope, and then 
mainly by steam ships. ' Even today ships plying between Europe and the 
Far East use the Malacca rather than the Sunda Straits. 
To return to Fa-Hien, Braddell, Grimes and Wheatley locate Ye-po
ti on the west coast of Borneo. I think the east coast of the Peninsula 
would fit the facts better. Fa-Hien's ship, after having been battered 
for three months, would hardly have crawled down the Malacca Straits 
and then gone on to Borneo. It would most likely put into the nearest 
convenient port, and that port should be on the west coast of the Penin
sula. We do not know what Fa-Hien did at Ye-po-ti during the five 
months he was there before he took another ship (from Ye-po-ti) for 
China. He might have changed coasts by boat, or he might have gone 
over one of the portages. The main point is that Ye-po-ti straddled both 
coasts, as did Ptolemy's Iabadieu where two co-ordinates are given for 
the island.

--- Page 25 of 38 ---
198 REVIEW AHTICLES 
A decade after Fa-Hien, another 5th century monk named Guna
varman sailed from She'po direct to China. The Emperor Wen-ti (424453) invited Gunavarman to go to China. At that time the monk was 
at She'po and the Emperor offered to send a ship to fetch him. But the 
monk took a merchant ship that was already going to China and, as the 
wind was favourable, the ship sailed non-stop to its destination. Slze'po 
is thought to refer to Java and has generally been located in the island 
of that name. This is impossible. She'po must have been on the east 
coast of the Malay Peninsula or the northwest coast of Borneo because 
it is not possible to sail from Java direct to China, or from anywhere 
below the equator. The New Tang History stated that Ho-ling is also 
called She'po, and as I have already identified Ho-ling as Tambralinga 
(Nakorn Sri Thammaraj), Guna_varman's She'po was therefore the same 
as Fa-Hicn's Ye-po-ti. But the point is, if She'po was really Java, then 
Java was a generic name that could refer to several places. The same 
applies to Javadvipa. In the 13th century, Paragramababu VI set up 
an inscription which referred to a Simhalarama (Ceylonese church) 
established by Samarottunga on the Ratubaka Plateau in Central Java. 
The text, as translated by Dr. Paranavitana, reads: "By King Samarot
tunga, the forehead ornament of the Sailendra family, has been caused 
to be constructed the Simhalarama, the ornament of Javadvipa (Java)." 
As for Java being a generic name, I am afraid it will not be easy to 
convince Sinologists of this because these experts do not take into 
consideration things like prevailing winds and sailing distances; but even 
so I will have to try because while the location of Java is not of great 
import in the story of Sri Vijaya, the correct location of the seat of the 
Javakaraja is, and this seat cannot be located unless Java is first accepted 
as a generic name. 
Java as a Generic Name 
At the end of the 13th century, Marco Polo, after spending more 
than half his life in China, returned to Europe by the sea-route. He set 
sail from Canton (Zayton as he called it, or Alexander the Sailor's 
Cattigara), in the usual period of the Northeast Monsoon for a landfall 
on the east coast of the Peninsula, probably at the island of Malaiur, 
which is mentioned h1 the text. Polo first got to Champa, which he

--- Page 26 of 38 ---
HEVIEW AHTTCLES 199 
called Ziampa (Alexander's Zabai), then to Pentan island, where the 
water was very shallow, and then on to Malaiur. Polo mentioned three 
places, of which the third was Locac, 500 miles to the north; as well as 
four islands, which he called Java Major, Java Minor, Condur and Son
dur. Sondur is the larger of the two latter islands. From his landfall, 
Marco Polo went further south to Samara in the island of Java Minor, 
where he waited five months for the change of winds. At this place 
"the Northern Star does not appear; nor do the northwest stars appear, 
neither much nor little." This would indicate that Samara was well 
down the Peninsula, but the evidence is not clear whether it was on the 
east or west coast. From here Marco Polo went up the Malacca Straits, 
and then through the Ten Degree Channel between the Nicobars 
(Necuveran) and Andamans (Angaman) to Ceylon (Sei!an). 
Of Marco Polo's three places, Malaiur was Nakorn Sri Thammaraj. 
"The City", says the text, "is very large and noble." Nakom at that 
time was the largest and noblest city in the Peninsula. A century before, 
the Twelve Naksat Cities surrounding the capital extended to Muang 
Pahang, and Pahang was the name used to designate the whole of Southern 
Malaya. The contemporary Yuan History also mentioned Malaiur on 
the Peninsula, and this place should not be confused with the 7th century 
Mo-lo-yu, which was in Sumatra. The island of Penton was probably 
Bandon. Traditionally Nakorn was an island and Bandon would be the 
northern part of that island. Marco Polo would appear to have reached 
the east coast of the Peninsula at about Bandon, and then he sailed for 
60 miles between two islands where the water was very shallow (Koh 
Samui and Koh Panggnan) and then another 30 miles to Malaiur. Locac, 
the third place mentioned, is a "continental province", 500 miles north 
of Pentan. This can be identified as Lopburi which the Chinese called 
Lokok. I don't think Marco Polo was at Locac, but he told of, it before 
Pentan and Malaiur, directly after telling of the three islands which he 
never visited (Java Major, Condur and Sondur). This was to give his 
story more continuity. After Malaiur he told of the island of Java 
Minor, where be visited six localities, before crossing the Indian Ocean. 
Of Marco Polo's four islands, three come immediately to mind, 
pamely Borneo1 Java and Sumatra. Java Major, "the lar~est island in

--- Page 27 of 38 ---
200 Hf•:VIE\\' AHTICLES 
the world, having a compass of 3,000 miles", and lying 1,500 miles 
south-southeast of Champa, was obviously Borneo. 700 miles south
southwest of Java Major (Borneo) lie two islands called Sondur and 
Condur. Sondur, the larger island, was Sumatra while Condur was the 
present island of Java. The names Sondur and Condur sound very like 
Sunda, where the passage between them is called the Sunda Struits. 
This leaves Java Minor as Malaya Island, or what Ptolemy called 
Iabadieu and Fa-bien called Ye-po-ti. 
These identifications are not what the experts think at all. Ramusio, 
who died in 1557, identified Java Minor as Borneo, and Java Major as 
the present Java. This is contrary to the directions given in the text, 
and Borneo, the proposed Java Minor, is a larger island than the present 
Java (Java Major). I do not think Marco Polo would have got the sizes 
of his islands wrong. More modern scholars (by three centuries) have 
moved Java Minor from Borneo to Sumatra, and here again Sumatra is a 
larger island than Java. There are many discrepancies in the Marco 
Polo story, but a new consideration of the facts based on the true sizes 
of the islands and the sailing directions would give an interpretation that 
fits a modern map better than any of the old theories. 
Marco Polo passed through these islands in 1292 A.D. and died in 
1324. The oldest map of a Ptolemy reconstruct still extant is dated 
1477, or 153 years after Marco Polo's death and thirteen centuries after 
Ptolemy. None of the constructs that I have seen show the two islands, 
Iabadieu and Sabadabai. 
There is new evidence on Marco Polo, consisting of three pages of 
texts and three maps where the two islands appear.* The maps bear no 
resemblance to Ptolemy maps, and I will deal with only one of them 
dated 1338 A.D., which is 14 years after Marco Polo's death. This map 
bas some Chinese writing on the margin, and the names are Ptolemaic, 
viz. Cattigara, a port on the Yangtze River (Canton); Seres (North 
China); Sinai (South China) and India Gangem (c.f. India extra Gangem 
for Southeast Asia.) 
* Larry Sternstein and John Black, "A Note on Three Polo Maps" I in, Felicitation 
Volumes of Southeast-Asian Studies. fJrasentecl to His Highness Prince Dhanini-vat 
Ktomamun Biclyalabh Briclhyakom. Honorary President The Siam Society mzcler 
Royal PcLtronage. On the occasion of his eightieth birthday (The Siam Society, 
Bangkok, 7th November 1965), Vol. II, pp. 347-349. The three maps appear a11 
Fill· I., Fi~. 2., and Fi$· ~.

--- Page 28 of 38 ---
HEV!EW AHTICLES 201 
The map was not drawn by Marco Polo himself, but probably by 
one of his immediate family. Dr. Mote, a Sinologist, has pronounced 
the Chinese text to be 'blind copying', that is, it was written by someone 
who did not know the Chinese language, and while the characters can be 
read, no sense emerges. Two small islands appear below Malaya, 
aligned like Malaya and Sumatra in modern maps. 
Without beating about the bush, I think the maker of this map 
had a Chinese map in front of him, as well as a Ptolemy map (not a 
Ptolemaic construct). If Marco Polo had brought back a Chinese map, 
it would have been similar to a Yuan Dynasty map, such as the Yu-ti-t'u' 
(World Map, 1311-20 A.D.) drawn by Chu szu-Fen (1275-1335 or 40), 
though this map was actually completed after Marco Polo left China. 
But this Yuan map was possibly based on the Fo-teu tung-chi (1269-71), 
edited by Chih-P'an, a Buddhist monk of the Southern Sung Period. The 
map maker might have thought the names Marco Polo used would be 
strange to his readers, so he substituted Ptolemaic placenames instead. 
(Another map, very similar to this one, had "Polo" names, such as 
Zipangu for Japan.) So the two islands on the map were Malaya Island 
and Sumatra, or Ptolemy's Iabadieu and Sabadabai, or Marco Polo's Java 
Minor and Sondur. 
The point of all this is that Java was a generic name. It covered 
Borneo (Java Major), Malaya (Java Minor and Javadvipa), possibly 
Sumatra and certainly Java, if for no other reason that it does now. Ibn 
Batuta, a few decades later, had Java and mul-Java, which would seem 
to support this theory. Unfortunately 1 do not know when the name 
Java was first used for the present island. In the time of Marco Polo, 
Kublai Khan sent an expedition to Java (in the Singasari and Majapahit 
period), but I cannot remember what the island was called in the 
. Chinese text. 
One step beyond the problem of Java is the problem of the 
Javakaraja, the king of Javaka, whom the Arab records call Maharaja of 
Zabag, or just Maharaja. The Ceylon chronicles called Chandra Banu, 
a name that also appears in the Tambralinga inscription of Nakorn Sri 
Thammaraj dated 1230, a king of the Javaka. There is argument about 
where the Maharaja or Javakaraja had his seat, because the Arab records

--- Page 29 of 38 ---
202 HEVIEW ARTICLES 
are external evidence. Of the internal evidence, the name Maharaja 
appea1's in the Wat Hua Vieng inscription of Chaiya dated 775, and the 
Thai chronicles have one Phya Jivaka of Nakorn Sri Thammaraj. Phya 
Jivaka of course was the same as Jivakaraja, or Javakaraja, or the 
Maharaja of Zabag of the Arab records. He came on the scene early in 
the 1Oth century A.D. 
6. Wolters' first book on Sri Vijaya 
Professor Wolters' two books are: ( l) Early Indonesian Commerce 
(subtitled) A Study of the Origins of Sri Vijaya, and (2) The Fall of Sri 
Vijaya (subtitled) in Malay History. Both books have two themes, as 
suggested by their titles and subtitles. 
When I undertook to write a 'heterodox view' of the Sri Vijaya 
story so that scholars could reassess the facts of the case, I thought 
Wolters' two books would be a good starting point. So while I was 
waiting for the books to be sent, I sketched in a very broad background, 
thereby using up all the space that the Hon. Editor of this journal could 
. spare me. But when Wolters' books came to band, I found they bad 
nothing to do with the Sri Vijaya story. The Sri Vijaya story started in 
671 A.D. when 1-Ching set sail from China and arrived at a place he called 
Foche, and ended 600 years later when Chandra Banu of Nakorn Sri 
Thammaraj invaded Lanka in 1270 or 71, and was slain on the field. 
Wolters' first book, subtitled A Study of the Origins of Sri Vijaya, deals 
with the centuries before and including the 7th, while the second book 
deals with the founder of Singapore and Malacca a full century after 
Chandra Banu's death. 
A Study of tfle Origins of Srivijaya 
Presumably soon after the ancients learnt how to sail cross-wind, 
people from China set sail on the Northeast Monsoon and made a landfall 
at some port on the east coast of the Malay Peninsula; and other people 
set sail from the west coast of the same Peninsula through the Ten Degree 
Channel to some port in North India (such as Tamralipti), or in South 
India (Negapatum), or in' Ceylon. When the monsoon changed, people 
from India and Ceylon set sail to the west coast of the Peninsula; and

--- Page 30 of 38 ---
R.EVJEW ARTICLES 203 
other people set sail from the east coast for China. This rhythm of the 
monsoon, as some writers have called it, had been operative long before 
historic times, in fact probably long before proto-historic times too. 
The main reason for all this journeying was trade, though there 
were also envoys who went to China to pay tribute to the emperor 
(another form of trade), as well as Chinese monks who went to India on 
pilgrimages. The travellers included Chinese and Indians, Greeks and 
Persians (or Arabs), as well as indigenous people who lived by the sea 
and could sail a boat. Of these peoples, the Indians left the most form
idable imprint on these lands, culturally speaking. The reason was 
because the journeys were dangerous and the travellers bad to pray to 
their favouritegods for protection against untold dangers, particularly 
pirates. These gods might have been Avalokesvara, Kuan Yin or the 
Golden Calf, depending on what ethnic group adored which god. The 
Indian traders and sailors however did not like to say their own prayers 
so they brought with them their own shamans (technically called 
Brahmans) to do their praying for them. Portable Indian images have 
been found scattered over wide areas of Southeast Asia. In those days 
vandalism in the form of collecting ancient art for private museums had 
not come into fashion, so presumably the shamans brought by the traders 
in turn brought their portable gods because, speaking for myself, I would 
much prefer my shaman to pray to a physical god that I can see rather 
than to some abstract gods that no doubt the shamans prayed to in their 
private shrines. Then, when trading. centres were set up and kings came 
into existence, these same shamans, or perhaps their descendants, became 
court soothsayers and officiated at ceremonial functions. In this way 
Indian culture in the form of religions and art, languages and writing, 
was transplanted to Southeast Asia. Such, or something like it, is the 
view that Indians themselves have told me, though I understand it is not 
necessarily accurate and that other scholars hold other views. 
I do not know how old the earliest records of these journeys are, 
but the Chinese recorded that Yeh-tieu, a state in the Southern Seas, 
sent tribute in 132 A.D. Yeh-tieu might or might not have been on the 
Peninsula, but if this toponym referred to Javadvipa, then it probably 
was. In the same period Alexander the Greek Sailor sailed from Takola

--- Page 31 of 38 ---
204 
in the Golden Kbersonese and arrived at Cattigara in South China in 
about 40 days, 
Three centuries later Fa-Hien sailed from Ceylon for Ye-po-ti, and 
from Ye-po-ti to China. Fa-Hien bad a stormy trip and the whole 
journey took him the better part of a year, but he had with him Kuan 
Yin, the Hearer of Prayers, and in this way arrived safely at his destina
tion withot encountering any pirates, "to meet whom is death". The 
ships on both legs of the journey were large vessels that carried two 
hundred persons. On the second leg, which took 75 days instead of 50, 
there were Chinese merchants returning home, as well as Brahmans. A 
few years later another monk named Gunavarman, who had a smoother 
trip than Fa-Hien, sailed from She-po and reached China non-stop. The 
number of days the trip took is not stated. 
The 7th century produced many records, starting with Clwng Chun's 
trip to C!zih-tu in 607 and culminating in !-Ching's non-stop trips to Foche 
and back. The out ward trip, made in a Persian ship, took 20 dayli, while 
the return trip took 30. I-Ching gave a very sympathetic account of 
Foche, and he said that the king had his own ships. All this evidence 
goes to show that there were Greeks and Persians, Indians and Chinese, 
as well us the natives of Peninsular Southeast Asia engaged in this 
traffic. 
The northwest coast of Borneo (above the equator) and the north
cast coast of Sumatra (also above the equator) probably entered into 
this scheme of the rhythm of the monsoons, though more likely in a 
subsidiary manner because they were not quite on the main sailing route. 
The cast coast of Borneo and the west coast of Sumatra, as well as the 
southwest coast of Borneo and the southeast coast of Sumatra below the 
equator, would not have came into this scheme because they were off the 
monsoon track, and to go to them could mean a delay of a whole season. 
My concept of these places is that they are isolated coasts, swampy 
with but little cultivable land to suppon any substantial population. 
So if any Chinese went there, they were probably pirates rather than 
envoys and merchants. Pirates played an important role in the Sri 
Vijaya story, from Fa-Hien~s fear of thpm in the fifth century till the 
fifteenth century a thousand years later. With lairs in South Sumatra

--- Page 32 of 38 ---
REV!E\'.;' ARTICLES 205 
these pirates could raid the main traderoutes above the equator, and 
when they became too much of a nuisance, as they did at the end of the 
7th century, the king of Sri Vijaya attacked them with 20,000 men and 
took their strongholds in Palembang, Jambi and Bangka, where be put 
up 'imprecation stones' to keep them in order. The South Sumatran 
inscriptions containing these imprecations will be dealt with in the 
second part of this paper. 
Professor Wolters' Early Indonesian Commerce, like Professor 
Wheatley's The Golden Khersonese, was a doctoral thesis submitted to 
the University of London. There are other similarities, as well as 
variations. Wheatley located places in the peninsula from earliest times 
to 1500 A.D., while Wolters located places in Western Indonesia from 
earliest times up to and including the 7th century. Wheatley used all 
sorts of sources including Chinese, while Wolters· used mainly Chinese 
sources. Wolters' three penultimate chapters deal with the locations of 
Chinese placenames in the 3rd century, the 5th and 6th centuries, and the 
7th century. I have said previously that the first five chapters of 
Wheatley's first part on the Chinese evidence, from earliest times to the 
Tang Period in the 7th century and after, were a witch-bunt for names. 
Wolters, whole book, which purports to deal with the origins of Sri 
Vijaya, is a witch-hunt for an empire. 
Wolters locates the three related Chinese toponyms of the 7th 
century, She-po, Ho-ling and Chele-foche, in Java and South Sumatra 
below the equator, and he calls them Western Indonesia. Actually this 
theory is quite logical, but it is unscientific. A Chinese record stated 
that Ho-ling was also called She-po and on its west was To-po-teng; 
another that the King of Ho-ling lived in She-po; still another that Ho
ling was four days' sailing distance to the east of Poche. If Chele-!oche 
(Sri Vijaya) is equated with the contemporary South Sumatran inscrip
tions where the name Sri Vijaya appears, then Ho-ling, four days' distant 
to the east of Sumatra, would be in Java, and as ·Ho-ling was the· same 
as She-po, so She-po must have meant Java too. Then To-po-teng to the 
west of She-po must have been back in Sumatra, though nobody has 
quite succeeded in dealing with this toponym. This is what I mean by 
sayin~ that thv theory is quite lo~ical beca\lse the Chipe~v records, bein~

--- Page 33 of 38 ---
206 IlBVIF.W ARTIC.LES 
external evidence, must be equated with some internal evidence, in this 
case the South Sumatran inscriptions. On the other hand, if !-Ching's 
Poche, based on the evidence of the prevailing winds, is placed above 
the equator, then Ho-ling, She-po and To-po-teng must have been above 
the equator too. And if we locate Foche and Ho-ling at Chaiya and 
Nakorn Sri Thammaraj, then to go from Chaiya to Nakorn it is necessary 
to sail due east before turning down south, and the journey takes four 
days. As for To-po-teng to the west of Ho-ling, this would be Tnmg, 
the old name of which was Tuptieng. Using !-Ching's first-hand, on
the-spot evidence as basis, no doubt many other toponyms could be 
located with more certainty than previously. 
Professor Wolters' arguments on the 7th century evidence are set out 
in his chapter 13. This chapter is called "The favoured coast of early In
donesian commerce," though Wolters admits the coast was swampy. But 
it became 'favoured' because the Malays were good sailors. I wonder 
how he knows this, and in any case were the other people who lived by 
the sea not good sailors too? The reader is invited to the whole of this 
key chapter. I will quote just one short paragraph from the chapter 
(page 219), and I will number the sentences and comment on the para
graph sentence by sentence, This comment is on Wolters' methods and 
not on his conclusions. 
"(1) No reason has been found for disagreeing with Pelliot's 
major conclusion in 1904, which was that the Chinese knew only 
of the island of Java by the name of 'Java.' (2) Students in Indone~ 
sia need not be perplexed by the variety of views expressed on the 
meaning of She-po. (3) Any attempt to search for the She-po of 
these centuries elsewhere than in Java must be founded on new 
and convincing evidence, while the suggestion that She-po was 
sometimes used as the name of a kingdom on the Malay Peninsula 
must be regarded as extravagant. (4) The Arabs, and perhaps the 
inhabitants of mainland Southeast Asia, may have understood 
"Java" in a different sense, but not so, apparently, the Chinese who 
rec·orded details about the tributary kingdoms." 
( 1) I have no doubt that Pelliot was a great Sinologist. Southeast 
Asian studies require the use of many languages, of which Chinese is by 
far the most important, so any scholar who knows that language must 
surely be the object of envy amon~st his collea~ues in the same field.

--- Page 34 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 107 
~ut ?elliot's work was pioneer work, and in the half century since be 
wrote, so much new evidence has come forward that it might be asked 
why his conclusions should be accepted rather than those of, say, Gerini, 
who knew so many languages and had such a flair that he could run the 
gamut of Southeast Asian placenames without batting an eye. He also 
knew the topography of the places he was talking about. I thought I was 
the first to put forward the suggestion that Malaya was an island in his
torical times, but I found later that Gerini had come to this same con
clusion years ahead of me, for he wrote in 1909: "I believe, therefore, 
that I am the first to proclaim, after careful consideration ..... that the 
Malay Peninsula, or rather its southern portion, had been an island before 
assuming its present highly pronounced character." There is geological 
evidence that would seem to support this possibility. 
(2) Considering the mass that has been written over the years on 
the subject of She-po, I think students in Indonesia, as well as students 
anywhere, should be perplexed by the problem. After traversing this 
jungle, perhaps by taking a short cut by reading Wolters chapter 13, the 
student should be able to come to his own conclusion. But before be 
starts on his journey, be should make one of three suppositions, namely 
that She-po was in Java (as Wolters thinks), that it was on the Malay 
Peninsula (as I think) or that Java was a generic name (as I also think). 
I am by no means the first man to suggest that the Chinese She-po was 
in the Malay Peninsula or that Java was a generic name, so the writing 
of my predecessors with this line of thought- presumably including 
Gerini, J.L. Moens and Sir Roland Braddell, the Three Greats of Sou
theast Asian studies-should also be studied to see exactly why their 
theories have not been accepted. 
(3) I wonder what Wolters means by "new and convincing evi· 
dence"? Would a more scientific consideration of the existing data be 
considered new evidence? If so, locating She-po on the Peninsula cannot 
be regarded as extravagant. 
(4) Leaving aside the inhabitants of mainland Southeast Asia, 
surely the Arabs and the Chinese, who were recording the same places, 
must have understood 'Java' in the same sense. Perhaps any difference 
in the understanding was not due to the facts of the case so much as

--- Page 35 of 38 ---
208 llEVIEW ARTJCLES 
the interpretation of those facts. What Wolters is trying to do in this 
book is to piece together a story of Sri Vijaya without using the Arab 
records or the records of "mainland Southeast Asia' (central and nor
thern Thai inscriptions and chronicles); and even without the South In
dian and Sinhalese inscriptions. The Chinese word-game is a wonderful 
passtime, so Wolters has strong views on the location of Java, but he 
has no view on the Javakaraja at all. The Sri Vijaya story without 
the Javakaraja is rather like a whiskey and soda without the whiskey. 
Early Indonesian Commerce 
The second theme in Wolters' book is Trade. The six middle 
chapters (5 to 1 0) deal with what he calls the po-ssu trade. The loca
tion of products is not important. What is important is the correct 
location of placenames. I have said at the beginning that to write any 
kind of history of Southeast Asia without first correctly identifying some 
of the toponyms was an exercise in futility. I am not convinced that 
Wolters has identified the main locations with certainty, so the title of 
his book, Early Indonesian Commerce, is a misnomer. This is not a major 
problem because aH he has to do is to change the title of the book to 
"Early Southeast Asian Commerce". 
My general impression of the fauna and flora of Southeast Asia 
is that what one land produces can be duplicated by another. For 
instance, what Siam produces can be duplicated by Burma, the Shan 
States or Laos. Of course there are exceptions, such as the sea fishes 
that Siam and Burma produce cannot be duplicated ·by the Shan States 
or Laos. In the same way in the Archipelago, what is produced in 
Wolters' Western Indonesia could probably be duplicated in Malaya or 
any of the islands. In any case, if any product is not available, say some 
rare spice from the Moluccas, it would be transported to an entrepot on 
the main trade-route .. In this respect negative evidence is more important 
than positive. For instance, Sumatra has two-horned rhinosceros but 
not the one-horned variety, whereas Malaya has both kinds. So when 
~arco Polo said that he saw in the island of Java Minor "great numbers 
of unicorns, hardly smaller than elephants in size ..... and in no way 
iike what we think and say in our countries, namely a beast that lets

--- Page 36 of 38 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 209 
itself be taken in the lap of a virgin" (meaning a one-horned rhinosceros ), 
Marco Polo's Java Minor was not Sumatra because that island does not 
have any one-horned rhinosceros. It could only have been "Malaya 
Island". 
Another point that I personally would like to know about is that 
while Wolters gives an extensive list of the exports from parts of South 
east Asia to the Middle East (pa-ssu trade), what were the imports from 
the Middle East, particularly to his Western Indonesia. Mediterranean
type beads have been found in several localities, at Oc-eo in Indochina, 
at Nakorn Pathom, U-Thong and two or three other places in the Central 
Plain of Siam, at Khao Javabrab in the Bay of Bhuket, and on the north 
west coast of Borneo (on the equator); but Ihave not heard of any beads 
having been found anywhere in Java or Sumatra. Then again what did 
the ancients use for money ? What we call 'Funan coins' have been 
found in the Mekhong Delta, in the Nakorn Panom district, in the Central 
Plain of Siam as far north as Tapan Hin and Sawankalok, and at Pagan 
in Burma; and •Namo coins' have been found in the south, particularly 
at Nakorn Sri Thammaraj; but I have not heard of any ancient coins 
having been found in Malaysia or Indonesia. This is an interesting 
question that should be looked into, otherwise the problem of the pa-ssu 
trade could nevet· really become convincing. 
Summary 
Professor Coedes' theory of the Sri Vijaya Empire, with its capital 
at Palembang, is based on equating the evidence of !-Ching (671-695) 
and the South Sumatran inscriptions (683-686), ond of which has the 
name Sri Vijaya. I-Ching set sail from Canton when the Northeast 
Monsoon set in and arrived' at a place that he called Foche in South 
Sumatra. But on meteorological grounds, this toponym could never have 
been below the equator (see section 3 above.) The Th~i locate Foche 
at Chaiya where an inscription bearing the name Sri Vijaya bas also 
been found, though dated a century later. 1-Ching did his writing at 
Poche, and what he wrote about the place cannot be applied to Palem
bang. That is all that is necessary to kill Coedes' Sri Vijaya theory, 
but I will also quote a few sentences from a long paragraph on page 293 
of Wheatley's The Golden J(hersonese:

--- Page 37 of 38 ---
210 HEVIEW ARTICLES 
"A simple relief map of pentral and southern Sumatra is 
apt to induce an erroneous impression of fertility, for at least a 
third of the eastern lowlands are forested swamp which defies even 
modern technological control. Offshore a chain of flat marshy islands 
are building seawards by accretion of marine sediments, while west
wards rise the foothill of the Barisan Range. At the inner edge of 
the swamp belt, at a point where a line of low hills runs out towards 
the Musi River, was the city of Sri Vijaya ..... 
"Situated some seventy-five miles up the winding Palembang 
River and separated from the sea by leagues of marshland, at least 
three or four days' sailing from the Malacca Strait and almost as 
far from that of Sunda, the original settlement of Sri Vijaya was 
thus sundered from the great trade-routes of South-East Asia ..... 
"At this time we hear more of the intellectual eminence of 
the capital than of its commercial activities-because, of course, 
our informant is a religious scholar-but such a development could 
only have occurred in a milieu of economic prosperity. That Sri 
Vijaya was in direct communication with places as far distant as 
Canton and Tamralipti is attested by I-Ching.'' 
The above sentences, shorn of Wheatley's explanations or what 
might even be called his excuses for locating !-Ching's Chele-foche 
(Shih-lo-/o-shih) in South Sumatra, serve to show that his Shih-li-!9-shih 
could never have been at Palembang. The capital of an empire must 
~be located in a district that could grow enough food to feed a considerable 
population. Also Sri Vijaya was a sea-faring empire, and Palembang 
was too far off the regular trade-routes to have been the capital of such 
an empire. I am sure that if Wheatley bad concentrated on the purely 
geographical aspects of the evidence as a geographer should, instead of 
following Coedes' unscientific perigrinations as he has done, he would 
have come to these same conclusions himself. But I do not consider 
pulling Professor Coedes' Sri Vijaya theory apart is of great importance 
in the overall history of Southeast Asia compared to locating the ancient 
toponyms correctly. Here Wheatley has produced another major geogra
phical misconception. He says on page xviii of his book, "During the 
first fifteen hundred years of the historic period (from earliest historical 
times to the coming of the Europeans) this function (of the Peninsula 
,being a causeway) fell largely into abeyance, and the Peninsula assumed

--- Page 38 of 38 ---
1\EVJEW ARTICLES 211 
the role of a barrier." A better concept is to think of the Peninsula as 
a bridge between India and China rather than a barrier. If this is cor
rect then we should expect to find more history (or perhaps I should 
follow Professor Coedes and say 'more Indianization') on this bridge 
than on its periphery. The rest of this paper aims to find a part of this 
early Indianized history in the Peninsula where the more important 
toponyms were located. 
The second part begins with the Sri Vijaya inscriptions of South 
Sumatra in the 7th century and goes on to the Sailendra Period of the 
story in the 8th and 9th centuries. In this part another of Professor 
Coedes' glaring errors-namely his mixing up of two important inscrip
tions from Chaiya and Nakorn Sri Thammaraj-will be corrected at some 
length. A thesis is also submitted that there were two branches of the 
Sailendra family ruling in Central Java and the Malay Peninsula. Then 
Prof. de Casparis' theories that there were two contemporary dynasties 
in Central Java (Prasasti Indonesia I), and that there was a decline and 
fall of the Sailendras (Part II) will also be considered. This will then 
take us to the threshold of Dr. Paranavitana's Ceylon and Malaysia 
covering the lOth to the 13th centuries, and Professor Wolters' The Fall 
of Sri Vijaya covering the 14th, which will be dealt with in the third part 
of this paper. 
M.C. Chand Cllirayu Rajaui 
Chiengmai University