Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_17\documents\Unknown_Year-Thesiamsociety-The_Edible_Bird_Nest_Islands.pdf
Total Pages: 12
Statistics: Chars=22394, ThaiWords=4478.8, EnglishWords=5124

--- Page 1 of 12 ---
The Edible Bird Nest Islands 
of Siam. 
The Edible Bird Nest island s of the world are not numerous, 
and are probably confined to the Indian Ocean north of Madagascar 
and eastward over to the East and West coasts of the Siam Malaya 
Peninsula, down in th e Malay archipelago and some of the tropical 
islands of the Pacific. This pape r has to do with the Bird Nest 
island s of Siam , largely those of the Choompon region. The 
greater part of the time that I have spent in investigating this 
intere sting subject has been spent with an old friend. His Excel
lency Ph y~t Waiyawoot, the ex-Governor of C h~ti ya Proviuce, 
whom Mr. Warington Smyt h pronounced, "O ne of the most 
interesting men that he hacl met in his Siam tnwels, " who had 
char ge of the Bird Nest Farm for many years, and "·ho has been most 
enthusiastic in study of th e habit s o f these attractive little nest 
builders. His Excellency is by far the best authority on this 
.subject among our Siamese friends. And it is due to him to say that 
l1is knowl edge of the subject is in accord with the views of the 
scientists who have inv estigate d i t . The writer is inclebtecl. to him 
for man y o f the facts of this pape r. I have also glea.necl. some 
Jmowledge fr om numerous cruises, in the past twenty-five years, 
among the Bird Nest islands off Choompon, Lang Suan and Cbaiya , 
and many charming islets off Fangn, and Krabee Pro vinces, on the 
Bay of Bengttl side of Siam. The Bird Nest islands of Singora, 
five in number , located on the inbnd Sea, because of their natural 
beauty, and th e attractive caves fou nd within them , are well worth 
visiting. 
The most profitable group, for Siam , is the Thirty Bird Nest 
islands off th e coasts of Ohoompon, Lang Suan and Chaiya Pro
vinces. In this group of islands, the Bird Nests of three, viz., 
Lang-Ka-Chew, Koh-Ngarm -Yai and Koh-Ngarm -Noi, are whiter, 
l1eavier, more nourishing and high er priced than the nests from all 
other islands. The nests from these three islands are eagerly

--- Page 2 of 12 ---
[ 2 J 
sought after by the epicures of China, and called by them Kong
Ean. One small islet of this group, with an area of hardly more 
than four acres, just below the Choompon harbour, gave to the Bird 
Nest Farmer eighty-thousand Tir>q,ls worth of Edible Nests in one 
year. 
An holiday, any time during the months April to Septem
ber inclusive, might be delightfully spent in visiting this group of 
islands. 
The easiest way to reach them wouid be by one of the East 
Asiatic Company's steamers to Choornpon. And there procure a. 
Siamese sail boat (Rua Pet) for cruising among the islands. Of the 
thirty islands of this group, only fourteen are favoured by the birds 
with very large numbers of nests. The attractiveness of the Bird 
Nest islands on the west Coast of the Peninsula is simply gt·and. 
Their natural beauty surpasses that of either the coasts of J,w~ 
or Japan. Tourists in Europe and America travel long dista.nces to
enjoy much tamer scenery. 
The picturesque forms of these little islands are very sug
gestive of fairy stories. Once when sa.iling in a Chinese craft 
among these islands, we noticed an opening in an islet down to 
the sea level. The tide being out we waded into the tunnel some 
sixty feet through the solid stone wall of the island, thus entering 
a beautiful amphitheatre more than one-hundred feet in diamet~r. 
The walls were one-hundred and fifty feet high with a broad open sky 
light. Because of the rising tide we had to retreat from this charm
ing place. Not far from this islet is one shaped like a large Chinese 
tea-pot, and beyond that "Swan Island' ' vn which ri~es a gmceful 
slender rock shaped like a swan's hettd and neck, and yonder a. 
group resembling the gra.in stacks of a ha.rvest field. 
But I do not wish to we<try my hearer s with ecsta cies ovet· the 
almost matchless charm s of the se islands. Vve have seen, however, 
what beautifttl homes these hard working little nest buildet·s have 
chosen. I beg to assure you tha.t should you have time to cross the 
Peninsula, say from Bandon up the right branch of the Rive1· 
Looang, over the watershed to the Panga pl'ovince, that gem of 
Siam fol' na.tul'al beauty, and thel'e take a sail boat for ten d::tyt~ 
sailing among the islands and islets of Panga bay, you will be 
.abundantly rewarded. Would that all th~ members of this Society

--- Page 3 of 12 ---
[ 3 ] 
might realize the enticing natural scenet·y of Siam's coasts, especially 
of the Bird Nest islands. Then you would be ready to say, 0 
Siam! I admire Thee, I love you mot·e than ever. Forgive my lack of 
appreciati011, it was n.ll due to slight acquaintance. 
Now let us acquaint ourselves with the tiny birds that con
tribute so largely to the luxuries of the Royal feasts in China. They 
belong to the family of Swifts, so called because of the extreme speed 
of their flight. Classified by some s;;ientists with swa.llows as "Hirundo 
Esculenta." Others say that they fcrm a genus" collocalia," of which 
the number of species is uncertain. Whilst thet·e is some resemb
lance between the builders of the edible nests and the chimney swal
low of Enghu1d or the barn swallow of America, it is an outward 
resemblance. Our little friend on the Peninsula has no near affinity 
to the swallows there or the it· all:lies in England a.nd America. 
Whi lst the former avoids the abodes of men and builds its little 
home out at sea in the lonely caves and crevices of uninhabited is
lands, and rarely gets accustomed to the pt·esence of the few gu'trds 
and nest gatherers there, the swaJiow is so trustful that it establishes 
its home in the chimneys, bams and other structures erected by 
man, and even in unoccupied rooms if permitted to do so. We may 
also note a wide difference betwer.n the tmttel'ial and structure of 
the nests of these respective birds. The sw,tllow uses mud, stt·aws, 
and little twigs in making its nest, and is very economical oi the 
secretions used in glueing together the material. But our little 
species of the "Genus Collocolia" uses the secretions of its salivary 
glands almost, if not exclusively, in making its nests. In this nest 
there is an absence of mud,· twigs and othet· coarse material, there
fore it is considered eclible. But the swctllow's nest, who could eat 
that? We have also observed that the swallow of these coasts, as 
well as our homa swallow, is on the wing, much slowet·, less gt·aceful 
and more unsteady thn.n the flight of om· little edible nest builder, 
w·hich makes much swiftet· journeys and is free from the jerks in 
flight so characteristic of the swallow. This bit·d's graceful, easy 
evolutions in the air, where it is able to remain from daybreak to 
sunset, are simpi,Y admirable. 
l'hen again the edible nest bird is remarkable for the develop
ment of its salivary glands, being larger and having gt·eater capacity 
for secretions than those of the ordinary swallow. This difference 
seems reasonable when we remembet· that the one uses va.rious

--- Page 4 of 12 ---
[ 4 J 
coarse materials for its nest with only enough saliva to glue it to
gether, whilst the other weaves its nest, we believ e, wholly from the 
secretions of its glands , and it is finely wrought from slender thread s. 
Our industriou s littl e fri end has a short er bill than the swallows, 
and its bill has not lateral bris tles like the swallow, its wings are 
longer and it is small er th an the swallow of the coast. The weight 
of thi s important lit tle swift is only 2 Sa.lungs and 8 Hoons, or about 
165 grains. We ha ve frequently noticed the swallow of the coast 
lighting upon mud bank s fr om which it smuggly collects its food 
and mat erial f or its nest. B ut 'we have never seen the edible nest 
bird light eith er on l and or obj ects floatin g o n the sea. They leave 
their aboJe at the first break of day, keep on th e w ing a ll the day 
and return in th e evening to th eir work of ne&t buildin g. The 
swallow, owing t o th e use of vari ous materials easily procured, builds 
its nest quickly and rud ely. Th e edibl e nest bird weaves its sym
metri cal littl e nest fr om lo11 g spi der-web like thr eads of saliva which 
has been sought in th e a ir miles and miles il.way and the pain s
taking little crea.tur e spends about one-hundred days in ma.king its 
first nest. One int erestin g featur e commo:1 b th e two bird s is that 
they rememb er the exac t place of former n ests that h ave been 
either destro yed or taken away for commerce. 'rh e s wallow, whose 
nest has been destroyed durin g its a bsence, will return and build on 
the ind entic al spot of th e former n est. So with our is'and swift, . 
although the first n est h as been cleanly removed by the bird nest 
hunter. The bird at once commences to buil d t he second nest on 
the very spot of th e first, and when the second nest h as b een 
remo ved the third nest is hurri edly a ttac hed to th e sa me place. Our 
Siamese friends, lik e th e scientific men of E urope, who have writt en 
on this subje ct, malie a d istinction in na ming t hese respecti ve bird s. 
Whilst the land swallow and th e isla.nd swift a.re both called "N oke
Ee-Enn ," the latter are distin guished b y calling t hem " N oke
Kin-Lome," i. e., the wind eating bird. May I quote fl'om His 
Excellency Phya W aiya woot, the best Siamese authority on this 
SJ.Ibject. He says " The birds are two kind s. During the cool season 
we are accust omed to see one kind flying about high in th e a ir aud 
frequently perch ed upon the roofs of houses. Thi s is not th e kind 
that builds edible nests, although ther e is some resemblan ce. Both 
are small~ about the size of sparrows, a smoke blac k color. But· the 
bird that make s th e e dible nest i s more beautiful in form and

--- Page 5 of 12 ---
r s J 
smaller than the other, and may be distinguished by small white
dots in the tail plumage. The land bird is tamable, makes its home
among the houses ashore, but the edible nest builder can not be tamed 
and never frequents the homes of men." Please notice how closely 
this view accords with the results of scientific research. It is also-· 
well known that there is up little difference in the anatomical 
structure of the birds in question. The writer regrets that he was 
unable, during the preparation of this paper, to find any of the
several Scientific Articles that have been written on the subject. 
Otherwise information of a more definite and interesting character 
might have been furnished the Society. 
It is hoped, however , that the few facts obtained may prove 
of some interest. A.s to the question " Where and how does the 
bird get material for the edibl e nest?" This is a difficult question 
to answer, yet we can hardly give place or time to the popular dew 
that the edible nests are com posed of some kind of sea weed and 
other vegetable matter collected by the birds. The Siamese closely 
connected with the bird nest trade disbelieve this theory and 
testify that they have never seen the birds alight on such material; 
and they never bring it in their mouths to the nests, neither is 
there the least trace of vegetable mattet· in the nests. Phya 
Waiyawoot says that he has repeatedly ca11ght the birds when 
11earing the nest to engttge in building and invariably found theit· 
mouths filled with glutinous saliva resembling the white of an egg, . 
.His Excellency gives no pla ce to the sea weed or vegetable theory. 
Close observers in Java, more than fifty years ago, avowed thit· · 
disbelief in this popular view, and joined by others of later elate, 
after close examination and thorough analysis, have shown that: 
"These rema'rlmble nests consis t essentially of mucus, which is secret
ed by the salivary glands of th e birds ancl which dries and looks like 
isinglass." This is in keeping with the theory of the bird uest 
collectors as indicated by the name they have given the bird, "N oke
Kin-Lome," or wind eating bird, thus named because of their 
belief that the bird takes all its nutriment, as well as the material 
£rom which it builds it.s nest, from the air. Several years ago, 
the Bird Nest Farmer, having learned that in Java three set.s of 
nests were secured each season, resolved to secure three sets instead 
.of the two that he had been aceustomed to secure. So he weut 
patiently to work to train the birds to build three nests duriugo the

--- Page 6 of 12 ---
[ 6 J 
~eason. This was not an easy task for either the nest gatherers or 
the birds, but finally the earnest little workers were persuaded to 
build three instead of two nests as in former years. The nest is a 
neat little piece of work, especially the first nest. It is shaped like 
-Dne half the lid of the small China teacups that we often see in 
this country, or half of a very small saucer, a snug little pocket 
fastened securely to the stone wall, so constructed that it is well 
nigh impossible for the eggs or young birds to roll out of it, ancl 
were it let alone there would be no accident to the birds. The 
season for taking the nests begins with the month of April, or the 
beginning of the S. W. Monsoon, and closes at the end of 
September. If this Monsoon is tardy in gaining sway, then the bird;; 
ai·e tardy in building their nests . 
The second quality of nests is taken thit·ty days after the fit·st~ 
and must be taken promptly, otherwise the quality will not be 
preserved. About 90 days after this the third quality is t~tken. This 
ninety is allowed for building the nest, placing the eggs, hatching 
and rearing the birds. So soon as this nest is vacated it is taken, 
but it is very inferior beca.use hastily made and mixed with feathers. 
About thirty days are required for oviposition and incubation, and 
sixty days before the young birds are suffieiently developed to look: 
after themselves. At the end of the first yea,r the birds make rathe1· 
small nests, the second year larger, and not until the bit·d's thirJ. 
year are the nests made considered perfect. The fit·st take of ne;.;ts 
is graded as the first quality , because the nests are more carefully 
made, contain more nutl'iment, are heavier, thicket·, and whitel" 
than grades two and three. The birds have not had to hasten in 
weaving the nests, in fact the construction .lms consumed a. bout one 
hundred days. The first and second nests are made by the female 
"birds alone. The second quality is made vt:ry hastily. It often hap
pens that while the birds, both male and fema,le, a.re working at the 
.third nest, in their anxious struggling to deposit the mucus on the 
nest, and haste to complete it, a wing accidentally catches on to the 
nest, which soon dries, holding the bird fast until it perishes. 
The third quality is made, of course, with the greatest haste, it is 
poorly constru cted and smaller than the first or second nests. It is 
an interesting fact that whilst the male bird does not aid in building 
the first ar.d second nests, he works very earnestly in aiding hi:3 
anxious and suffering mate in making the third nest. It has beea

--- Page 7 of 12 ---
[ 7 ] 
observed that the bird, throug h anxiety and hurried work, grow;:; 
thin during the making of the third nest, so much thinner that its 
weight has been reduced from normall65 grains to 105 grains, and 
the female bird suffers so much while waiting for the completion of 
the third nest, the male bird seemingly sympathizing so deeply 
with its suffering mate, that the pair instead of making ·all day 
flights for nest material, go out for one to two hours, return 
hurriedly, and work unceasingly until the nest is completed. It 
often happens that, when the third nest is being used for incuba.tiou 
there is loss by the young bird s or the eggs falling out to destruct
ion, thus there is danger th at these plucky little creatures may be 
greatly diminished in number . Then too the nest gatherers often get 
more impatient than the birds , taking away the nests before the swi
ftlets have flown and leaving them to perish. The bird nest farmet· 
reckons that he loses no small amount of money each year from the 
death of birds adhering to the ne3t3, the perishing of the young, 
breaking of eggs, and inferiority of hastily made nests. Anothet· 
loss results from the fact that the Island guards and nest collector.~ 
are very fond of eating the yo ~ng birds. The swiftlet is so plump 
that when fried it is considered a dainty dish. At one time rats 
were numerous on one of the most productive islands, and annoye c1 
the guards and collectors by pilfering theit• food. To avoid this 
a good mother cat was carried off to the island, in course of time 
there was a large family of cats and th.e cats killed so many birds 
that the Farmer was compelle d to pay a reward of four ticals fol.' 
each cat killed. Thus the cats were exterminated but at no small 
loss to the Bird Nest Far mel'. It was also found that numerous 
Boa Constrictors on the var ious islands were making sad havoc 
among the birds. This loss was overcome by paying a reward of foUl' 
ticals for each snake killed, so the Boa Constrictors of the islands 
were exterminated. These birds do not migra,te like the swallow, they 
abide in the islands. " They bl'eed in caves which they in.habit it1 
great numbers and occupy them jointly and yet alternately with 
Ba:ts, the mammals being the loclgel's by clay anc1 the birds by 
11ight." ~~r. H. Prye1· has given one of the late:>t accounts of some 
o£ these caves in North Borneo ( Pt·oc. Zool. Society, 1885, pp . 
. )32-538.) The Bats and Bird s do not always dwell peacefully 
t ogether, and the Bats have been known to ch·ive the Swifts away from 
an island, thus causing another loss to the Farmer. This happene cl 
once on the island <( Kang Sua " Sawee Bay. In one year the Binl

--- Page 8 of 12 ---
r 8 1 
Nest Farmer collected fifteen piculs or 1500 caties of the three 
qualities of nests from this one island; averaging the nest at 60' 
ticals a Chang, ( the price this year), the amount realised was 
'90,000 ticals. Finally a dreadful battle took place between the Bats 
and Birds, the poor swifts were defeated and routed so that in the 
following year the Farmer collected only eight Ohangs or 480 ticals 
worth of nest from that same island. W'hen the Bats finally dis
appeared from the island, the brave little swifts retumed and last 
year yielded the Farmel' fifteen piculs of nests or ninety thousand 
Ticals. If the Siamese of the coast should emulate these persistent 
hard working little birds, what a gl'eat change would be wronght m 
the Peninsula ! 
One g1·eat annoya,nce to the Farmer is m the fttct that the 
island guards and nest collectors carry off a good amount of nests 
annually. Notwithstanding a strict watch of these valuable island~, 
l)y armed guards on the ishu1ds and patrol boats, there is frequent 
daring poaching of the nest s. The · poachers are largely Chinese, 
they use small sail boat s, u sually " Rna Pet," five or six poachers 
to a boat. The poacher pt'ep:tres himself fol' his dangerous wor :c by 
packing dried boiled rice, pepper, salt and salt-fish enough fol' three 
days, with torch, mat ches and knife for taking the nests, down into 
a large bamboo joint, which is then hermetically sen,led and fastene!l 
to his belt, also a long rope wound about his waist for use in 
descending the caves or going over the cliffs. They then sail their 
little craft in the shadow of the island, as closely as possible, when 
one or two of the poachers swim off to the island, o1· if in clay time 
.a quiet clive is made to the island. lbving reach ed the island the 
poacher -is quickly at work, securing enough .nests to 111ake it pro
fitable. Then at the appointed time, may be a few hours, may be 
one or two days, the boat returns to pick him up, and he quickly 
swims out to the craft havimg his bamboo joint well packed 1Vith 
valuable nests. But if caught in the act he is severely death with. 
Some have not lived to tell of the adventure. Accord ing to law the 
poachers are fined in proportion to the ReYenue from the Fn,rm. 
This fine is fixed at three days of the Revenue for the year in which 
the poaching was done, e. g., the Revenue for the Ohoompon Birds 
Nest Farm for the current year is 272,000 ticals, so that three days' 
Revenue is about 2,2.55 ticals, the fine for a single act o£ poaching 
edible . bird nests. The last and strangest loss of rhe Bil'd Ne~t

--- Page 9 of 12 ---
[ 9 J 
Farmer is caused by some of the guards and nest collectors, who· 
a1·e opium smokers and instead of using the ordinary lamp for 
heating the opium on their pipes, take the little bird, yet without 
feathers, from the nest, ldll it, punch a hole in its back, in this 
insert a small wick then place all in a China ·Cup and light it. The 
little bird is so fat, that in the estimation of the opium-smoker, it 
makes a good economical lamp . A former Bird Nest Farmer tried 
liard to compel these untiring little nest builders to make four nests 
in a season, instead of the three that they now so laboriously make,. 
hut he failed, and surely he deserved to fail. Since these birds 
choose caves, cliffs and othe t· dangerous places for placing their 
nests, the gathering of them is perilous work, thu s many a poor 
fellow has lost his life. 
The nest gatherer stands in a large basket made of rattan 
fastened to ropes in which he is lowered into the cave through 
-an aperture or sky light. He works from the top or ceiling of the
cave down to the bottom, the rope is lowered or hoisted acco1·ding to 
the number of taps made upon it by the man in the basket. He 
carries in his basket foUl' poles varying in length according to need. 
On the end of each pole is a sharp flat instrument resembling a. 
Siamese spade . 'With this instrument he pushes against the walls 
thus swinging himself from one side of the cave to the othel'. On the 
end of the instrument he has also a lighted torch that he may see 
to cut off the nests. This requires no little skill, fol' the nests must 
be removed without breakage. The collectot· descends from two to 
six-hundred . feet. When the basket is well filled, he signals by so 
n'lany taps on the rope, when he is dmwn up, rests for an hour or 
two, and then descends for ano ther haul. From three to fifteen days 
are spent in removing the nest s from a single cave. The nests are 
placed so thickly upon the walls that there is but little space bet
ween them. 'Ihe ca,e, being lighted by torches, presents a beautiful 
appearance. About five-hundr ed men, guards, boatmen, and nest 
collectors are engaged in the Choompon Edible Bird Nest Farm. 
Some one hundred and fifty of these are nest collectors, they are 
professionals called by the Siamese" Cha: Haw." A distinct class, 
they do not depart from their pursuit, and are succeeded by their 
children and grand-children. Each bird nest cave has three "Cha: 
Baw," divided, as to skill, into 1st, 2nd, and third class, and having 
.become acquainted with an · the ·dangers of that particular cave>

--- Page 10 of 12 ---
r 10 J 
there they remain .. The first gets two ticals, the 2nd one tical, and 
-the 3rd three salungs, and food per day. Formerly these '' Cha :. 
Haw '' were all slave3, exempt from all other set:vice, and held 
firmly for this only. They spend fifteen days in securing each take, 
or forty-five days in the season. From the Choompon Farm one 
hundted and twenty piculs of edible nests were gathered during the 
past year, these being sorted into three qualities, called first, second. 
and third grades. The price fluctuates, but at present it is as 
follows, in Hong Kong :-
1st Grade $4,700.- per picul. 
2nd , , 3, 700.- , ,, 
3rd , , 2,500.- ,, , 
The fit·st grade brings $ 47 .-per Chang ( i. e. 1 t 1 bs. ), 
the average of the three grades being $ 36.33 per Chang; turning 
-this into ticals we find that the bird nest farmer's income for the 
past year was 720,000 ticals. To the present Farmer the Govem
ment sold the bird nest farm for three years at 3,400 catties or 
272,000 ticals a year, even the small farm of a few bird nest islands 
in the Singora region selling for 36,000 ticals last year. I am indebted 
to a Siamese, intimately connected with the Farm, for these figures. 
Whilst the Farmer may lose on the investment in an occasional 
year, I have known him to clear 60,000 ticals in a single year. But 
owing to large investments in the start it would not pay the Farmer 
io undertake it for less than tht·ee years. It is an interesting fact 
that the Siamese learned of the importance of this trade from 
the Malays, and that the bird nest farm was started some time in 
the reign of "King Pra-Nang-Klow ," who began to reign A. D. 
1824. The Farm was then sold for 4·,800 ticals a year; now it is 
sold for 272,000 tica-ls. By far the greater part of the edible nests 
are shipped to China, and handled by agents in Hongkong. On 
arrival of a shipment, the agency is thronged with buyet·s, all eager 
to purchase the first quality. The ro.:>ms are soon cleared. 'l'he 
supply is not equal to the demand. As both a luxury for the 
table, and a valuable tonic, tl1e edible bird nest is ranked, by the 
Chinese above ginseng, edible sea leeches, soft deer hom, and shark's 
fins, all so highly valued in China,. The manner of preparing · this 
dainty in China, is to soak the nests in cool water over-night, _ then 
place them in a closely covered dish which is placed into a pot of 
boiling water for about one hour in which is put a sufficient

--- Page 11 of 12 ---
r n J 
-quantity of sliced ginseng and rock sugar. The most favorite and 
beneficial time for partaking of the dish is about daybreak before 
one has risen from his couch. Our friend Phya Waiyawoot, who is 
the edible bird nest connoissem· of Siam, offers the following 
favorite receipe :-"Expose the nests over-night to the heavy dew, 
then before day shred and boil them for one hour in well sweetened 
water." The nests also form a part of one of the best curries of 
Siam, called "Sip-Song-Yang ," or the curry of twelve ingredients. 
In Siam the edible bird nests have a high medicinal va1ue, and 
enter the pest prescriptions for the cough of consumptives. The 
favorite manner of prepaTing them for coughs is to mix the nests 
with pure water and rook sugar, closely cover the dish and set it 
down into boiling water, to throw a few grains of rice into the boiling 
water and not to open the dish in which the bird nests are placed 
until taken from the boiling pot. Examine the grains of the rice 
that were cast into the boiling watet·, for as soon as the rice is cookecl 
the edible bird nests should be considered sufficiently prepared. 
Then place the dish containing the bird nests, the lid having been 
removed, out in the dew on some elevation until midnight. At 
midn ight quietly awake the patient, he having been informed that 
he must remain passive, making no movement whatever save to 
·open his mouth and quietly swallow tlu·ee large table spoonfulls of 
the bird nest syrup. The benefkial effects are simply marvellous. 
The tonic properties of these nests are everywhere recognized in 
Siam. Given a knowledge of the Siamese language, an acquaintance 
with the Siamese romantic stories of the East and West coasts of 
the Siam lVIalaya Peninsula, such as the story of Chou Lai an(l 
:M:aa Rampung, a knowledge of the habits of the little birds that 
weave the edible nests, the life of the nest gatherers, the stories of 
the poaehers, an apprecia.tion of the sublime ly beautiful scenery of 
the islands, and active imagination and some poetic genius, then 
one might write romance on this subject that would attract atHl 
·charm the readers of all lands . 
EUGENE P. DuNLAP.

--- Page 12 of 12 ---
