CO
MALAY   MAGIC
MALAY   MAGIC
CKING
AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FOLKLORE
AND  POPULAR  RELIGION  OF  THE
MALAY  PENINSULA
BY
WALTER  WILLIAM  SKEAT
OF   THE  CIVIL   SERVICE  OF  THE   FEDERATED   MALAY  STATES
WITH  A  PREFACE
BY
CHARLES    OTTO    BLAGDEN
MEMBER   OF   THE   ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,  AND  FORMERLY  OF   THE STRAITS  SETTLEMENTS  CIVIL  SERVICE
ILonfcon MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,  LIMITED
NEW  YORK :  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY IQOO
A II  rights  reserved
KNIGHT  GRAND  CROSS  OF  THE  MOST  DISTINGUISHED  ORDER
OF ST.  MICHAEL  AND  ST.  GEORGE
AND  FORMERLY GOVERNOR  OF  THE  STRAITS  SETTLEMENTS
THIS  BOOK  IS  (BY  PERMISSION) DEDICATED
"The  cry  of  hosts  [we]  humour Ah  !  slowly,  toward  the  light."
RUDYARD  KIPLING.
PREFACE
THE  circumstances  attending  the  composition  and publication  of  the  present  work  have  thrown  upon me  the  duty  of  furnishing  it  with  a  preface  explaining its  object  and  scope.
Briefly,  the  purpose  of  the  author  has  been  to collect  into  a  Book  of  Malay  Folklore  all  that  seemed to  him  most  typical  of  the  subject  amongst  a  con- siderable mass  of  materials,  some  of  which  lay scattered  in  the  pages  of  various  other  works,  others in  unpublished  native  manuscripts,  and  much  in  notes made  by  him  personally  of  what  he  had  observed during  several  years  spent  in  the  Ma*lay  Peninsula, principally  in  the  State  of  Selangor.  The  book  does not  profess  to  be  an  exhaustive  or  complete  treatise, but  rather,  as  its  title  indicates,  an  introduction  to  the study  of  Folklore,  Popular  Religion,  and  Magic  as understood  among  the  Malays  of  the  Peninsula.
It  should  be  superfluous,  at  this  time  of  day,  to defend  such  studies  as  these  from  the  criticisms  which have  from  time  to  time  been  brought  against  them. I  remember  my  old  friend  and  former  teacher,  Wan
viii  PREFACE
'Abdullah,  a  Singapore  Malay  of  Trengganu  extrac- tion and  Arab  descent,  a  devout  and  learned  Muham- madan  and  a  most  charming  man,  objecting  to  them on  the  grounds,  first,  that  they  were  useless,  and, secondly,  which,  as  he  emphatically  declared,  was  far worse,  that  they  were  perilous  to  the  soul's  health. This ,  last  is  a  point  of  view  which  it  would  hardly be  appropriate  or  profitable  to  discuss  here,  but  a few  words  may  as  well  be  devoted  to  the  other  objec- tion. It  is  based,  sometimes,  on  the  ground  that these  studies  deal  not  with  "facts,"  but  with  mere nonsensical  fancies  and  beliefs.  Now,  for  facts  we all,  of  course,  have  the  greatest  respect ;  but  the objection  appears  to  me  to  involve  an  unwarrantable restriction  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  :  a  belief  which is  actually  held,  even  a  mere  fancy  that  is  entertained in  the  mind,  has  a  real  existence,  and  is  a  fact  just  as much  as  any  other.  As  a  piece  of  psychology  it must  always  have  a  certain  interest,  and  it  may  on occasions  become  of  enormous  practical  importance. If,  for  instance,  in  1857  certain  persons,  whose  con- cern it  was,  had  paid  more  attention  to  facts  of  this kind,  possibly  the  Indian  Mutiny  could  have  been prevented,  and  probably  it  might  have  been  foreseen, so  that  precautionary  measures  could  have  been  taken in  time  to  minimise  the  extent  of  the  catastrophe. It  is  not  suggested  that  the  matters  dealt  with  in  this book  are  ever  likely  to  involve  such  serious  issues ; but,  speaking  generally,  there  can  be  no  doubt
PREFACE  ix
that  an  understanding  of  the  ideas  and  modes  of thought  of  an  alien  people  in  a  relatively  low  stage of  civilisation  facilitates  very  considerably  the  task of  governing  them ;  and  in  the  Malay  Peninsula that  task  has  now  devolved  mainly  upon  English- men. Moreover,  every  notion  of  utility  implies  an end  to  which  it  is  to  be  referred,  and  there  are  other ends  in  life  worth  considering  as  well  as  those  to which  the  "practical  man"  is  pleased  to  restrict himself.  When  one  passes  from  the  practical  to the  speculative  point  of  view,  it  is  almost  impos- sible to  predict  what  piece  of  knowledge  will  be fruitful  of  results,  and  what  will  not ;  prima  facie, therefore,  all  knowledge  has  a  claim  to  be  con- sidered of  importance  from  a  scientific  point  of  view, and  until  everything  is  known,  nothing  can  safely be  rejected  as  worthless.
Another  and  more  serious  objection,  aimed  rather at  the  method  of  such  investigations  as  these,  is that  the  evidence  with  which  they  have  to  be  con- tent is  worth  little  or  nothing.  Objectors  attempt to  discredit  it  by  implying  that  at  best  it  is  only  what A.  says  that  B.  told  him  about  the  beliefs  B.  says  he holds,  in  other  words,  that  it  is  the  merest  hearsay  ; and  it  is  also  sometimes  suggested  that  when  A. is  a  European  and  B.  a  savage,  or  at  most  a  semi- civilised  person  of  another  breed,  the  chances  are that  B.  will  lie  about  his  alleged  beliefs,  or  that A.  will  unconsciously  read  his  own  ideas  into  B.'s
x  PREFACE
confused  statements,  or  that,  at  any  rate,  one  way  or another,  they  are  sure  to  misunderstand  each  other, and  accordingly  the  record  cannot  be  a  faithful  one.
So  far  as  this  objection  can  have  any  applica- tion to  the  present  work,  it  may  fairly  be  replied  : first  that  the  author  has  been  at  some  pains  to corroborate  and  illustrate  his  own  accounts  by  the independent  observations  of  others  (and  this  must be  his  justification  for  the  copiousness  of  his  quota- tions from  other  writers) ;  and,  secondly,  that  he  has, whenever  possible,  given  us  what  is  really  the  best kind  of  evidence  for  his  own  statements  by  record- ing the  charms  and  other  magic  formulae  which  are actually  in  use.  Of  these  a  great  number  has  been here  collected,  and  in  the  translation  of  such  of  the more  interesting  ones  as  are  quoted  in  the  text  of the  book,  every  effort  has  been  made  to  keep  to literal  accuracy  of  rendering.  The  originals  will  be found  in  the  Appendix,  and  it  must  be  left  to  those who  can  read  Malay  to  check  the  author's  versions, and  to  draw  from  the  untranslated  portions  such inferences  as  may  seem  to  them  good.
The  author  himself  has  no  preconceived  thesis to  maintain :  his  object  has  been  collection  rather than  comparison,  and  quite  apart  from  the  neces- sary limitations  of  space  and  time,  his  method  has confined  the  book  within  fairly  well-defined  bounds. Though  the  subject  is  one  which  would  naturally lend  itself  to  a  comparative  treatment,  and  though
PREFACE  xi
the  comparison  of  Malay  folklore  with  that  of  other nations  (more  particularly  of  India,  Arabia,  and  the mainland  of  Indo-China)  would  no  doubt  lead  to very  interesting  results,  the  scope  of  the  work  has as  far  as  possible  been  restricted  to  the  folklore  of the  Malays  of  the  Peninsula.  Accordingly  the  ana- logous and  often  quite  similar  customs  and  ideas  of the  Malayan  races  of  the  Eastern  Archipelago  have been  only  occasionally  referred  to,  while  those  of the  Chinese  and  other  non- Malayan  inhabitants  of the  Peninsula  have  been  excluded  altogether.
Moreover,  several  important  departments  of  cus- tom and  social  life  have  been,  no  doubt  designedly, omitted :  thus,  to  mention  only  one  subject  out  of several  that  will  probably  occur  to  the  reader,  the modes  of  organisation  of  the  Family  and  the  Clan (which  in  certain  Malay  communities  present  archaic features  of  no  common  interest),  together  with  the derivative  notions  affecting  the  tenure  and  inherit- ance of  property,  have  found  no  place  in  this  work. The  field,  in  fact,  is  very  wide  and  cannot  all  be worked  at  once.  The  folklore  of  uncivilised  races may  fairly  enough  be  said  to  embrace  every  phase of  nature  and  every  department  of  life :  it  may  be regarded  as  containing,  in  the  germ  and  as  yet  un- differentiated,  the  notions  from  which  Religion,  Law, Medicine,  Philosophy,  Natural  Science,  and  Social Customs  are  eventually  evolved.  Its  bulk  and  rela- tive importance  seem  to  vary  inversely  with  the
xii  PREFACE
advance  of  a  race  in  the  progress  towards  civilisa- tion ;  and  the  ideas  of  savages  on  these  matters appear  to  constitute  in  some  cases  a  great  and complex  system,  of  which  comparatively  few  traces only  are  left  among  the  more  civilised  peoples. The  Malay  race,  while  far  removed  from  the  savage condition,  has  not  as  yet  reached  a  very  high  stage of  civilisation,  and  still  retains  relatively  large  rem- nants of  this  primitive  order  of  ideas.  It  is  true that  Malay  notions  on  these  subjects  are  under- going a  process  of  disintegration,  the  rapidity  of which  has  been  considerably  increased  by  contact with  European  civilisation,  but,  such  as  they  are, these  ideas  still  form  a  great  factor  in  the  life  of  the mass  of  the  people.
It  may,  however,  be  desirable  to  point  out  that the  complexity  of  Malay  folklore  is  to  be  attributed in  part  to  its  singularly  mixed  character.  The development  of  the  race  from  savagery  and  bar- barism up  to  its  present  condition  of  comparative civilisation  has  been  modified  and  determined,  first and  most  deeply  by  Indian,  and  during  the  last five  centuries  or  so  by  Arabian  influences.  Just as  in  the  language  of  the  Malays  it  is  possible  by analysis  to  pick  out  words  of  Sanskrit  and  Arabic origin  from  amongst  the  main  body  of  genuinely native  words,  so  in  their  folklore  one  finds  Hindu, Buddhist,  and  Muhammadan  ideas  overlying  a  mass of  apparently  original  Malay  notions.
PREFACE  xiii
These  various  elements  of  their  folklore  are,  how- ever, now  so  thoroughly  mixed  up  together  that  it is  often  almost  impossible  to  disentangle  them.  No systematic  attempt  has  been  made  to  do  so  in  this book,  although  here  and  there  an  indication  of  the origin  of  some  particular  myth  will  be  found ;  but a  complete  analysis  (if  possible  at  all)  would  have necessitated,  as  a  preliminary  investigation,  a  much deeper  study  of  Hindu  and  Muhammadan  mythology than  it  has  been  found  practicable  to  engage  in.
In  order,  however,  to  give  a  clear  notion  of  the relation  which  the  beliefs  and  practices  that  are  here recorded  bear  to  the  official  religion  of  the  people, it  is  necessary  to  state  that  the  Malays  of  the  Penin- sula are  Sunni  Muhammadans  of  the  school  of  Shafi'i, and  that  nothing,  theoretically  speaking,  could  be more  correct  and  orthodox  (from  the  point  of  view of  Islam)  than  the  belief  which  they  profess.
But  the  beliefs  which  they  actually  hold  are another  matter  altogether,  and  it  must  be  admitted that  the  Muhammadan  veneer  which  covers  their ancient  superstitions  is  very  often  of  the  thinnest description.  The  inconsistency  in  which  this  in- volves them  is  not,  however,  as  a  rule  realised  by themselves.  Beginning  their  invocations  with  the orthodox  preface  :  "In  the  name  of  God,  tJie  merciful, the  compassionate"  and  ending  them  with  an  appeal to  the  Creed :  "  There  is  no  god  but  God,  and  Mu- hammad is  the  Apostle  of  God"  they  are  conscious
xiv  PREFACE
of  no  impropriety  in  addressing  the  intervening matter  to  a  string  of  Hindu  Divinities,  Demons, Ghosts,  and  Nature  Spirits,  with  a  few  Angels  and Prophets  thrown  in,  as  the  occasion  may  seem  to require.  Still,  the  more  highly  educated  Malays, especially  those  who  live  in  the  towns  and  come  into direct  contact  with  Arab  teachers  of  religion,  are disposed  to  object  strongly  to  these  "  relics  of  pagan- ism "  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  increasing diffusion  of  general  education  in  the  Peninsula  is contributing  to  the  growth  of  a  stricter  conception of  Islam,  which  will  involve  the  gradual  suppression of  such  of  these  old-world  superstitions  as  are  ob- viously of  an  "unorthodox"  character.
This  process,  however,  will  take  several  genera- tions to  accomplish,  and  in  the  meantime  it  is  to  be hoped  that  a  complete  record  will  have  been  made both  of  what  is  doomed  sooner  or  later  to  perish, and  of  what  in  all  likelihood  will  survive  under  the new  conditions  of  our  time.  It  is  as  a  contribution to  such  a  record,  and  as  a  collection  of  materials to  serve  as  a  sound  basis  for  further  additions  and comparisons,  that  this  work  is  offered  to  the  reader.
A  list  of  the  principal  authorities  referred  to  will be  found  in  another  place,  but  it  would  be  improper to  omit  here  the  acknowledgments  which  are  due to  the  various  authors  of  whose  work  in  this  field such  wide  use  has  been  made.  Among  the  dead special  mention  must  be  made  of  Marsden,  who  will
PREFACE  xv
always  be  for  Englishmen  the  pioneer  of  Malay studies ;  Leyden,  the  gifted  translator  of  the  Se- jarah  Malayu,  whose  early  death  probably  inflicted on  Oriental  scholarship  the  greatest  loss  it  has  ever had  to  suffer ;  Newbold,  the  author  of  what  is  still, on  the  whole,  the  best  work  on  the  Malay  Peninsula  ; and  Sir  William  Maxwell,  in  whom  those  of  us  who knew  him  have  lost  a  friend,  and  Malay  scholarship a  thoroughly  sound  and  most  brilliant  exponent.
Among  the  living,  the  acknowledgments  of  the author  are  due  principally  to  Sir  Frank  Swetten- ham  and  Mr.  Hugh  Clifford,  who,  while  they  have done  much  to  popularise  the  knowledge  of  things Malay  amongst  the  general  reading  public,  have also  embodied  in  their  works  the  results  of  much careful  and  accurate  observation.  The  free  use which  has  beey  made  of  the  writings  of  these  and other  authors  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  held  to  be  justified by  their  intrinsic  value.
It  must  be  added  that  the  author,  having  to  leave England  about  the  beginning  of  this  year  with  the Cambridge  scientific  expedition  which  is  now  explor- ing the  Northern  States  of  the  Peninsula,  left  the work  with  me  for  revision.  The  first  five  Chapters and  Chapter  VI.,  up  to  the  end  of  the  section  on Dances,  Sports,  and  Games,  were  then  already  in the  printer's  hands,  but  only  the  first  100  pages  or so  had  had  the  benefit  of  the  autho/s  revision.  For the  arrangement  of  the  rest  of  Chapter  VI.,  and  for
xvi  PREFACE
some  small  portion  of  the  matter  therein  contained, I  am  responsible,  and  it  has  also  been  my  duty  to revise  the  whole  book  finally.  Accordingly,  it  is only  fair  to  the  author  to  point  out  that  he  is  to  be credited  with  the  matter  and  the  general  scheme  of the  work,  while  the  responsibility  for  defects  in  detail must  fall  upon  myself.
As  regards  the  spelling  of  Malay  words,  it  must be  said  that  geographical  names  •  have  been  spelled in  the  way  which  is  now  usually  adopted  and  without diacritical  marks  :  the  names  of  the  principal  Native States  of  the  Peninsula  (most  of  which  are  repeatedly mentioned  in  the  book)  are  Kedah,  Perak,  Selangor, Johor,  Pahang,  Trengganu,  Kelantan,  and  Patani. Otherwise,  except  in  quotations  (where  the  spelling of  the  original  is  preserved),  an  attempt  has  been made  to  transliterate  the  Malay  words  found  in  the body  of  the  book  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  the ordinary  reader  a  fairly  correct  idea  of  their  pro- nunciation. The  Appendix,  which  appeals  only  to persons  who  already  know  Malay,  has  been  some- what differently  treated,  diacritical  marks  being  in- serted only  in  cases  where  there  was  a  possible ambiguity,  and  the  spelling  of  the  original  MSS. being  changed  as  little  as  possible.
A  perfect  transliteration,  or  one  that  will  suit everybody,  is,  however,  an  unattainable  ideal,  and the  most  that  can  be  done  in  that  direction  is  neces- sarily a  compromise.  In  the  system  adopted  in  the
rREFACE  xvii
body  of  the  work,  the  vowels  are  to  be  sounded (roughly  speaking)  as  in  Italian,  except  e  (which resembles  the  French  e  in  que,  le,  and  the  like),  and the  consonants  as  in  English  (but  ng  as  in  singer, not  finger ;  g  as  in  go  ;  ny  as  ni  in  onion  ;  ch  as  in church  ;  final  k  and  initial  h  almost  inaudible).  The symbol  '  represents  the  Arabic  'ain,  and  the  symbol  ' is  used  (i)  between  consonants,  to  indicate  the  pres- ence of  an  almost  inaudible  vowel,  the  shortest  form of  <?,  and  elsewhere  (2)  for  the  kamzah,  and  (3)  for the  apostrophe,  i.e.  to  denote  the  suppression  of  a letter  or  syllable.  Both  the  'ain  and  the  hamzah may  be  neglected  in  pronunciation,  as  indeed  they are  very  generally  disregarded  by  the  Malays  them- selves. In  this  and  other  respects,  Arabic  scholars into  whose  hands  this  book  may  fall  must  not  be surprised  to  find  that  Arabic  words  and  phrases suffer  some  corruptions  in  a  Malay  context.  These have  not,  as  a  rule,  been  interfered  with  or  cor- rected, although  it  has  not  been  thought  worth while  to  preserve  obvious  blunders  of  spelling  in well-known  Arabic  formula;.  It  should  be  added that  in  Malay  the  accent  or  stress,  which  is  less marked  than  in  English,  falls  almost  invariably  on the  penultimate  syllable  of  the  word.  Exceptions  to this  rule  hardly  ever  occur  except  in  the  few  cases where  the  penultimate  is  an  open  syllable  with  a  short vowel,  as  indicated  by  the  sign  w.
The  illustrations  are  reproduced  from  photographs
b
xviii  PREFACE
of  models  and  original  objects  made  by  Malays ; most  of  these  models  and  other  objects  are  now in  the  Cambridge  Archaeological  and  Ethnological Museum,  to  which  they  were  presented  by  the  author. The  Index,  for  the  compilation  of  which  I  am indebted  to  my  wife,  who  has  also  given  me  much assistance  in  the  revision  of  the  proof-sheets,  will,  it  is believed,  add  greatly  to  the  usefulness  of  the  work  as a  book  of  reference.
C.  O.  BLAGDEN.
WOKING,  -2.%th  August  1899.
CONTENTS
CHAPTER  I NATURE,  pp.  1-15
(a)  CREATION  OF  THE  WORLD
(b)  NATURAL  PHENOMENA       .
CHAPTER  II
MAN  AND  His  PLACE  IN  THE  UNIVERSE,  pp.  16-55
(a)  CREATION  OF  MAN  .  .16
(/;)  SANCTITY  OF  THE  BODY    .  .  .  -23
(c)  THE  SOUL  .  .  .  .  .  .  -47
(d)  ANIMAL,  VEGETABLE,  AND  MINERAL  SOULS          .  52
CHAPTER   III
RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL  WORLD,  pp.  56-82
(a)  THE  MAGICIAN       .  .  .  .  .  •       56
(b)  HIGH  PLACES         .  .  .  .  .  .61
(c)  NATURE  OF  RITES  .  .  .  .  71
CONTENTS
CHAPTER  IV
THE  MALAY  PANTHEON,  pp.  83-106
PAGE
(a)  GODS  .......        83
(b)  SPIRITS,  DEMONS,  AND  GHOSTS     .  .  .  -93
CHAPTER  V
MAGIC  RITES  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  SEVERAL  DEPARTMENTS OF  NATURE,  pp.  107-319
(a)  AIR — i.  WIND  AND  WEATHER  CHARMS    .  .  .107
2.  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  .  .  .109
(b)  EARTH — i.  BUILDING  CEREMONIES  AND  CHARMS  .     141
2.  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  .  .  .149
3.  VEGETATION  CHARMS  .            .  .  193
4.  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  .  .     250
(c)  WATER — i.  PURIFICATION  BY  WATER       .  .  -277
2.  THE  SEA,  RIVERS,  AND  STREAMS  .  .279
3.  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  .  .282
4.  FISHING  CEREMONIES  .  .  .     306
(d)  FIRE — i.  PRODUCTION  OF  FIRE  .  .  .  .317
2.  FIRE  CHARMS    .  .  .  .  .318
CHAPTER  VI MAGIC  RITES  AS  AFFECTING  THE  LIFE  OF  MAN,  pp.  320-580
1.  BIRTH-SPIRITS         ......     320
2.  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  .....     332
3.  ADOLESCENCE  .  .  .  .352
CONTENTS  xxi
PAfiK
4.  PERSONAL  CEREMONIES  AND  CHARMS       .  .361
5.  BETROTHAL  ...  .  364
6.  MARRIAGE.  ......     368
7.  FUNERALS.  ....  .     397
8.  MEDICINE  ....  .     408
9.  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES      .  .  .  .457
10.  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  ....     503
11.  WAR  AND  WEAPONS         .  .  .  .522
12.  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  .  .     532
APPENDIX        ...  .581
NOTE  ON  THE  WORD  KRAMAT  ....     673
LIST  OF  CHIEF  AUTHORITIES  QUOTED  .  .  .675
INDEX    .  .....     677
LIST  OF   ILLUSTRATIONS
FIG.  PAGE
1.  SACRIFICING  AT  THE  FISHING  STAKES    .  .  .311
2.  INVOKING  THE  TIGER  SPIRIT      ....       438
3.  STAND  USED  AT  INVOCATION  OF  SPIRITS  .  -447
4.  MAIN  GALAH  PANJANG   .....       500
5.  TAPERS  USED  IN  EXORCISING  EVIL  SPIRITS       .  .       511
6.  TAPER  AND  RING  USED  IN  SAME  CEREMONY     .  .       512
7.  HEPTACLE  ON  WHICH  THE  SEVEN-SQUARE  is  BASED      .       558
PLATES
PLATE
1.  SELANGOR  REGALIA         .....        40
2.  SPIRITS    .......        94
3.  THE  SPECTRE  HUNTSMAN  .  .  .  .116
4.  PIGEON  DECOY  HUT       .  .  .  .  133
5.  RICE-SOUL  BASKETS        .....      244
6.  BAJANG  AND  PELESIT  CHARMS    .  .  .321
7.  PENANGGALAN  AND  LANGSUIR     ....       326
8.  BETROTHAL  GIFTS  .  -365 9-           ...»                           •  •       366
10.  CURTAIN  FRINGE  .  .       372
11.  FIG.   i. — BRIDAL  BOUQUETS        .     }
2. — THE  HENNA  CAKE,  ETC.  /
xiv  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS
PLATE  PAGE
12.  FIG.  i.— BRIDEGROOM'S  HEADDRESS  )  g
„     2. — PILLOW-ENDS     .  .        /
13.  WEDDING  PROCESSION     .            .            .  .381
14.  POKO'  SIRIH        ......       382
15.  WEDDING  CENTREPIECE  WITH  DRAGONS,  ETC.  .            .       388
1 6.  BOMOR  AT  WORK            .            .            .  /.       410
17.  ANCHAK  ....  .414
1 8.  GAMBOR  .            .  .                   464
19.  PEDIKIR  .  .                   466
20.  FIG.   i. — MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  )  g
„     2. — DEMON  MASK  .  /
21.  MASKS  OF  CLOWNS  AND  DEMON  .       513
22.  KUDA  SEMBRANI              .  5J4
23.  FIG.   i. — HANUMAN          .                  \  6
„       2. — PAUH    JANGGI    AND    CRAB    /
24.  FIG.  i. — WEATHER  CHART  \
„     2. — DIAGRAM          .     ]
25.  DIAGRAMS            .  -555
26.  „  -558
27.  „  •       56i
28.  FIG.  i. — WAX  FIGURES  .                        •     \  ,
2.— SPIRIT  UMBRELLAS  AND  TAPERS  j
CHAPTER   I
NATURE (a)  Creation  of  the  World
THE  theory  of  the  Creation  most  usually  held  by Peninsular  Malays  is  summarised  in  the  following passage,  quoted  (in  1839)  by  Lieutenant  Newbold from  a  Malay  folk-tale  : —
"  From  the  Supreme  Being  first  emanated  light towards  chaos  ;  this  light,  diffusing  itself,  became  the vast  ocean.  From  the  bosom  of  the  waters  thick vapour  and  foam  ascended.  The  earth  and  sea  were then  formed,  each  of  seven  tiers.  The  earth  rested  on the  surface  of  the  water  from  east  to  west.  God,  in order  to  render  steadfast  the  foundations  of  the  world, which  vibrated  tremulously  with  the  motion  of  the watery  expanse,  girt  it  round  with  an  adamantine chain,  viz.  the  stupendous  mountains  of  Caucasus,  the wondrous  regions  of  genii  and  aerial  spirits.  Beyond these  limits  is  spread  out  a  vast  plain,  the  sand  and earth  of  which  are  of  gold  and  musk,  the  stones rubies  and  emeralds,  the  vegetation  of  odoriferous flowers.
"  From  the  range  of  Caucasus  all  the  mountains  of
B
2  NATURE  CHAP.
the  earth  have  their  origin  as  pillars  to  support  and strengthen  the  terrestrial  framework."
The  Mountains  of  Caucasus  are  usually  called  by Malays  Bukit  Kof  (i.e.  Kaf),  or  the  Mountains  of  Kaf (which  latter  is  their  Arabic  name).  These  mountains  are not  unfrequently  referred  to  in  Malay  charms,  e.g.  in  in- vocations addressed  to  the  Rice-Spirit.  The  Mountains of  Kaf  are  to  the  Malays  a  great  range  which  serves as  a  "  wall "  (dinding)  to  the  earth,  and  keeps  off  both excessive  winds  and  beasts  of  prey.  This  wall,  how- ever, is  being  bored  through  by  people  called  Yajuj and  Majuj  (Gog  and  Magog),  and  when  they  succeed in  their  task  the  end  of  all  things  will  come.  Besides these  mountains  which  surround  the  earth  there  is  a great  central  mountain  called  Mahameru  (Saguntang Maha  Biru,  or  merely  Saguntang-guntang).2  In many  Malay  stories  this  hill  Mahameru  is  identified with  Saguntang-guntang  on  the  borders  of  Palembang in  Sumatra.
The  account  which  I  shall  now  give,  however, differs  considerably  from  the  preceding.  It  was  taken down  by  me  from  an  introduction  to  a  Malay  charm- book  belonging  to  a  magician  (one  'Abdul  Razzak  of Klang  in  Selangor),  with  whom  I  was  acquainted,  but who,  though  he  allowed  me  to  copy  it,  would  not  allow me  either  to  buy  or  borrow  the  book  :3 —
"  In  the  days  when  Haze  bore  Darkness,  and Darkness  Haze,  when  the  Lord  of  the  Outer  Silence Himself  was  yet  in  the  womb  of  Creation,  before  the existence  of  the  names  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  of  God and  Muhammad,  of  the  Empyrean  and  Crystalline
1  Newbold,  British    Settlements   in  2    Vide  Vishnu  Ptirana,   vol.    ii.   p.
the  Straits  of  Malacca,  vol.  ii.  pp.  360,        109  ;  trans,  by  Wilson. 361.  3  The  full  Malay  text  of  this  intro-
duction will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.
ORIGIN  OF  THE  UNIVERSE
spheres,  or  of  Space  and  Void,  the  Creator  of  the entire  Universe  pre-existed  by  Himself,  and  He  was the  Eldest  Magician.  He  created  the  Earth  of  the width  of  a  tray  and  the  Heavens  of  the  width rof  an umbrella,  which  are  the  universe  of  the  Magician. Now  from  before  the  beginning  of  time  existed  that Magician — that  is,  God — and  He  made  Himself  mani- fest with  the  brightness  of  the  moon  and  the  sun, which  is  the  token  of  the  True  Magician."
The  account  proceeds  to  describe  how  God "  created  the  pillar  of  the  Ka'bah,1  which  is  the  Navel of  the  Earth,  whose  growth  is  comparable  to  a  Tree, .  .  .  whose  branches  are  four  in  number,  and  are called,  the  first,  '  Sajeratul  Mentahar,'  and  the  second '  Taubi,'  and  the  third,  '  Khaldi,'  and  the  fourth  'Nasrun 'Alam,'  which  extend  unto  the  north,  south,  east,  and west,  where  they  are  called  the  Four  Corners  of  the World."
Next  we  read  that  the  word  of  God  Almighty  came in  secret  to  Gabriel,  saying,  "  Take  me  down  the  iron staff  of  the  '  Creed '  which  dangles  at  the  gate  of heaven,  and  kill  me  this  serpent  Sakatimuna."  ' Gabriel  did  so,  and  the  serpent  brake  asunder,  the head  and  forepart  shooting  up  above  the  heavens,  and the  tail  part  penetrating  downwards  beneath  the  earth.3 The  rest  of  the  account  is  taken  up  with  a  description, that  need  not  here  be  repeated,  of  the  transformation of  all  the  various  parts  of  the  serpent's  anatomy,  which
1  Lit.    "A  cube."     The  cube-like  of  the  1 2th  century. — Newbold,  op.  cit. building  in  the  centre  of  the  Mosque  vol.  ii.  p.  199  n.     It  is  also  given  as at  Makkah    (Mecca),   which   contains  "  Icktimani "  by  Leyden  in  his  trans, the  Hajaru  'l-Aswad,  or  black  stone. —  of  the  Malay  Annals.
Hughes,  Diet,  of  Islam,  s.v.  Ka'bah.  3  For   the   parting   asunder   of  the
2  Sakatimuna  (or  "  Sicatimuna")  is  snake,  vide  the  note  on  page  n  infra, the  name  of  an  enormous  serpent,  said  which  gives  what  may  be  the  origin  of to  have  ravaged  the  country  of  Menang-  this  myth  as  it  is  known  to  the  Malays, kabau  in  Sumatra  about  the  beginning
4  NATURE  CHAP.
are  represented  as  turning  with  a  few  exceptions  into good  and  evil  genii.
The  most  curious  feature  of  the  description  is perhaps  the  marked  anthropomorphic  character  of this  serpent,  which  shows  it  to  be  a  serpent  in  little more  than  name.  It  seems,  in  fact,  very  probable  that we  have  here  a  reminiscence  of  the  Indian  "Naga."1 Thus  we  find  the  rainbow  (here  divided  into  its  com- ponent parts)  described  as  originating  from  the  serpent's sword  with  its  hilt  and  cross-piece  (guard),  grass  from the  hair  of  its  body,  trees  from  the  hair  of  its  head, rain  from  its  tears,  and  dew  from  its  sweat.
Another  account,  also  obtained  from  a  local  magi- cian, contains  one  or  two  additional  details  about  the tree.  "  Kim"  said  God,  "  Pay  ah*  kun"  said  Muham- mad, and  a  seed  was  created.
"  The  seed  became  a  root  (lit.  sinew),  the  root  a tree,  and  the  tree  brought  forth  leaves.
"  lKun,}  said  God,  l  Pay  ah  kun?  said  Muhammad  ; .  .  .  Then  were  Heaven  and  Earth  (created),  '  Earth of  the  width  of  a  tray,  Heaven  of  the  width  of  an umbrella.'"
This  is  a  curious  passage,  and  one  not  over-easy  to
1  The  Nagas  are  generally  repre-  its  folded  arms.  The  pattern  of  these sented  in  old  sculptures  as  bearing  the  hilts,  which  are  universally  used  for  the human  form,  but  with  a  snake  attached  national  Malay  Kris  or  dagger,  varies to  their  backs,  and  the  hooded  head  from  an  accurate  representation  of  the rising  behind  their  necks.  —  Naga-  human  figure  to  forms  in  which  nothing nanda,  translated  by  Palmer  Boyd,  but  the  hood  (which  is  occasionally  much p.  6 1  ;  vide  also  ib.  p.  84.  This  exaggerated)  is  recognisable.  Euro- may  be  the  explanation  of  the  Malay  peans  seeing  these  hilts  for  the  first Kris  hilt,  or  dagger  hilt,  which  repre-  time  sometimes  take  them  for  snakes' sents  a  seated  human  form  with  folded  heads,  sometimes  for  the  heads  of  birds, arms  and  a  hood  at  the  back  of  its  2  Payah  probably  stands  for  supaya, neck  rising  over  its  head.  These  perhaps  with  the  meaning  "  so  also." hilts  are  called  hulu  Malayu  (the  Kun  in  Arabic  means  "be."  The "Malay  hilt"),  or  Jawa  demam  (lit.  tree  would  appear  to  be  identifiable the  "Fever-stricken  Javanese"),  in  allu-  (vide  App.  i.,  iii.)  with  that  mentioned sion  to  the  attitude  of  the  figure  with  in  the  first  account.
SHAPE  OF  THE  EARTH
explain  ;  such  evidence  as  may  be  drawn  from  analogy suggests,  however,  that  the  "  Earth  of  the  width  of  a tray,  and  Heaven  of  the  width  of  an  umbrella,"  may be  intended  to  represent  respectively  the  "souls" (semangat)  of  heaven  and  earth,  in  which  case  they would  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  material  heaven and  earth  as  the  man-shaped  human  soul  does  to  the body  of  a  man.
(b)  Natural  Phenomena
"Most  Malays,"  says  Newbold,  "with  whom  I have  conversed  on  the  subject,  imagine  that  the  world is  of  an  oval  shape,  revolving  upon  its  own  axis  four times  in  the  space  of  one  year  ;  that  the  sun  is  a  circular body  of  fire  moving  round  the  earth,  and  producing the  alternations  of  night  and  day."
To  this  I  would  add  that  some  Malays,  at least,  whom  I  questioned  on  the  subject  (as  well  as some  Sakais1  under  Malay  influence),  imagined  the firmament  to  consist  of  a  sort  of  stone  or  rock  which they  called  Batu  hampar,  or  "  Bed  rock,"  the  appear- ance of  stars  being  caused  (as  they  supposed)  by  the light  which  streams  through  its  perforations.
A  further  development  of  the  Malay  theory  of  the earth  declares  it  to  be  carried  by  a  colossal  buffalo upon  the  tip  of  its  horns.2  When  one  horn  begins  to tire  the  buffalo  tosses  it  up  and  catches  it  upon  the  tip of  the  other,  thus  causing  periodical  earthquakes.
1  Sakais    are   certain   of    the   non-  largely  influenced  some  departments  of Malayan    heathen    (i.e.    not    Muham-  Malay  folk-lore,  it  is  an  elephant  which madan)  inhabitants   of  the   hills   and  supports  the  earth.     So,  too,  Vishnu  in jungles  of  the  Peninsula.  the  boar-incarnation   raised   the  earth
2  Some     say    a     bullock     (tfmbu),  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea  upon  his but  the  most  usual  version  gives  the  tusks.
buffalo.     In  the  Ramayana,  which  has
NATURE
CHAP.
This  world-buffalo,  it  should  be  added,  stands  upon an  island  in  the  midst  of  the  nether  ocean.1  The universe  is  girt  round  by  an  immense  serpent  or dragon  (Ular  Naga),  which  "  feeds  upon  its  own  tail."
The  Malay  theory  of  the  tides  is  concisely  stated by  Newbold  :2-
"Some  Malays  ascribe  the  tides  to  the  influence of  the  sun  ;  others  to  some  unknown  current  of  the ocean ;  but  the  generality  believe  confidently  the following,  which  is  a  mere  skeleton  of  the  original legend.  In  the  middle  of  the  great  ocean  grows  an immense  tree,  called  Pauh  Jangi,3  at  the  root  of
1  This  island  (for  which  a  tortoise  or the  fish  "  Nun  "  is  occasionally  substi- tuted) may  be  compared  with  the  Batak (Sumatran)  belief  concerning  the  raft which  was  made  by  Batara  Guru  for the  support  of  the  earth  at  the  creation of    the    world     (/.  R.  A.  S.,    N.    S. vol.   xiii.    part    i.   p.    60) ;    and   vide Klinkert's   Malay  -  Dutch    Diet.,    s.v, Nun.
2  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  359. The  spelling  of  "  Jangi "  is  incorrect.   It should  be  spelt  "  Janggi."
3  This  tree  appears  to  be  a  tradition of  the  Cocos  Maldiva,  of  which  Sir  H. Yule,  s.v.  Coco-de-Mer,  gives  the  fol- lowing interesting  account  : —
"  Coco-de-Mer,  or  Double  Coco-nut, the  curious  twin  fruit  so  called,  the produce  of  the  Lodoicea  Sechellarum, a  palm  growing  only  in  the  Seychelles Islands,  is  cast  up  on  the  shores  of  the Indian  Ocean,  most  frequently  on  the Maldive  Islands,  but  occasionally  also on  Ceylon  and  S.  India,  and  on  the coasts  of  Zanzibar,  of  Sumatra,  and some  others  of  the  Malay  Islands. Great  virtues  as  medicine  and  antidote were  supposed  to  reside  in  these  fruits, and  extravagant  prices  were  paid  for them.  The  story  goes  that  a  '  country captain,'  expecting  to  make  his  fortune, took  a  cargo  of  these  nuts  from  the Seychelles  Islands  to  Calcutta,  but  the only  result  was  to  destroy  their  value for  the  future.
"The  old  belief  was  that  the  fruit  was produced  on  a  palm  growing  below  the sea,  whose  fronds,  according  to  Malay seamen,  were  sometimes  seen  in  quiet bights  on  the  Sumatran  coast,  especially in  the  Lampong  Bay.  According  to one  form  of  the  story  among  the  Malays, which  is  told  both  by  Pigafetta  and  by Rumphius,  there  was  but  one  such  tree, the  fronds  of  which  rose  above  an abyss  of  the  Southern  Ocean,  and  were the  abode  of  the  monstrous  bird  Garuda (or  Rukh  of  the  Arabs).  The  tree itself  was  called  Pau-scngi,  which Rumphius  seems  to  interpret  as  a corruption  of  Bzrwa-zangi,  '  Fruit  of Zang,'  or  E.  Africa.  They  were  cast up  occasionally  on  the  islands  of  the S.  W.  coast  of  Sumatra ;  and  the wild  people  of  the  islands  brought them  for  sale  to  the  Sumatran  marts, such  as  Padang  and  Priamang.  One of  the  largest  (say  about  twelve  inches across)  would  sell  for  150  rix  dollars. But  the  Malay  princes  coveted  them greatly,  and  would  sometimes  (it  was alleged)  give  a  laden  junk  for  a  single nut.  In  India  the  best-known  source of  supply  was  from  the  Maldive Islands.
"The  medical  virtues  of  the  nut  were not  only  famous  among  all  the  people of  the  East,  including  the  Chinese,  but are  extolled  by  Piso  and  by  Rumphius, with  many  details.  The  latter,  learned and  laborious  student  of  nature  as  he
CAUSE  OF  THE  TIDES
which  is  a  cavern  called  Pusat  Tassek,  or  navel  of the  lake.  This  is  inhabited  by  a  vast  crab,  who  goes forth  at  stated  periods  during  the  day.  When  the creature  returns  to  its  abode  the  displaced  water causes  the  flow  of  the  tide  ;  when  he  departs,  the  water rushing  into  the  cavern  causes  the  ebb."
Mr.  Clifford  gives  a  slightly  different  expla- nation :—
"  The  Pusat  tasek,  or  Navel  of  the  Seas,  supposed to  be  a  huge  hole  in  the  ocean  bottom.  In  this  hole there  sits  a  gigantic  crab  which  twice  a  day  gets  out in  order  to  search  for  food.  While  he  is  sitting  in  the hole  the  waters  of  the  ocean  are  unable  to  pour  down into  the  under  world,  the  whole  of  the  aperture  being filled  and  blocked  by  the  crab's  bulk.  The  inflowing of  the  rivers  into  the  sea  during  these  periods  are supposed  to  cause  the  rising  of  the  tide,  while  the downpouring  of  the  waters  through  the  great  hole when  the  crab  is  absent  searching  for  food  is  supposed to  cause  the  ebb."
Concerning    the    wonderful    legendary    tree    (the
was,  believed  in  the  submarine  origin  or  "  Pauh,"  which  is  perfectly  good of  the  nut,  though  he  discredited  its  Malay,  and  is  the  name  given  to growing  on  a  great  palm,  as  no  traces  various  species  of  mango,  especially of  such  a  plant  had  ever  been  discovered  the  wild  one,  so  that  "  Pau-sengi  " on  the  coasts.  The  fame  of  the  nut's  actually  represents  (not  "Buwa," virtues  had  extended  to  Europe,  and  but)  "  Pauh  Janggi,"  which  is  to  this the  Emperor  Rudolf  II.  in  his  latter  day  the  universal  Malay  name  for  the days  offered  in  vain  4000  florins  to  tree  which  grows,  according  to  Malay purchase  from  the  family  of  Wolfert  fable,  in  the  central  whirlpool  or Hermanszen,  a  Dutch  Admiral,  one  Navel  of  the  Seas.  Some  versions  add which  had  been  presented  to  that  com-  that  it  grows  upon  a  sunken  bank mander  by  the  King  of  Bantam,  on  (tubing  runtok),  and  is  guarded  by the  Hollander's  relieving  his  capital,  dragons.  This  tree  figures  largely  in attacked  by  the  Portuguese  in  1602." —  Malay  romances,  especially  those  which Hobson-Jobson,  loc.  cit.  form  the  subject  of  Malay  shadow- To  this  valuable  note  I  would  add  plays,  (vide  infra,  PI.  23,  for  anillustra- that  Rumphius  is  evidently  wrong  if  he  tion  of  the  Pauh  Janggi  and  the  Crab), derives  the  name  of  the  tree,  "  Pau-  Rumphius'  explanation  of  the  second sengi,"  from  the  Malay  "  Buwa-zangi."  part  of  the  name  (i.e.  Janggi)  is,  no The  first  part  of  the  word  is  "  Pau  "  doubt,  quite  correct.
8  NATURE  CHAP.
Pauh  Janggi)  the  following  story  was  related  to  me by  a  Selangor  Malay  : —
"There  was  once  a  Selangor  man  named  Haji Batu,  or  the  Petrified  Pilgrim,  who  got  this  name from  the  fact  that  the  first  joints  of  all  the  fingers  of one  hand  had  been  turned  into  stone.  This  happened in  the  following  manner.  In  the  old  days  when  men went  voyaging  in  sailing  vessels,  he  determined  to visit  Mecca,  and  accordingly  set  sail.  After  sailing for  about  two  months  they  drifted  out  of  their  course for  some  ten  or  fifteen  days,  and  then  came  to  a  part of  the  sea  where  there  were  floating  trunks  of  trees, together  with  rice-straw  (batang padi]  and  all  manner of  flotsam.  Yet  again  they  drifted  for  seven  days, and  upon  the  seventh  night  Haji  Batu  dreamed  a dream.  In  this  dream  one  who  wore  the  pilgrim's garb  appeared  to  him,  and  warned  him  to  carry  on his  person  a  hammer  and  seven  nails,  and  when  he came  to  a  tree  which  would  be  the  Pauh  Janggi  he was  to  drive  the  first  of  the  nails  into  its  stem  and  cling thereto.  Next  day  the  ship  reached  the  great  whirl- pool which  is  called  the  Navel  of  the  Seas,1  and  while
1  The  following  passage  describes  and  dashed  him  against  the  sea  bottom
how  a  magic  prince  visited  the  Navel  with  such  force  that  his  head  was
of  the  Seas  : —  buried  in  the  ground,  but  the  little
"  Presently  he  arrived  at  his  destina-  dragon  cared  not  at  all.  Then  the
tion — the  Navel  of  the  Seas — (Pusat  Raja  Naga  said  :  '  Tell  me  the  truth  !
taseK).  All  the  monsters  of  the  ocean,  from  what  land  hast  thou  fallen  (titek
the  whales  and  monster  fishes,  and  col-  deri  pada  n/gri  ninggua  mand),  and
ossal  dragons  (naga  umbang),  and  the  whose  son  and  offspring  art  thou  ? '
magic  dragons  (naga  sri  naga  ka-sak-  To  which  the  Golden  Dragon  made
tian),  assembled  together  to  eat  and  answer,  saying,  '  I  have  no  land  nor
devour  him,  and  such  a  tumult  arose  country,  I  have  neither  father  nor
that  the  Raja  Naga,  who  was  superior  mother,  but  I  was  incarnated  from  the
to  all,  heard  it  and  came  to  see.  Now  hollow  part  of  a  bamboo  ! '  When  the
when  he  beheld  the  Golden  Dragon  Raja  Naga  heard  this  he  sent  for  his
he  opened  his  jaws  to  their  full  extent,  spectacles  (cA/rmzn  mata),  and  by  their
and  made  three  attempts  to  seize  and  aid  he  was  able  to  see  the  real  parentage
swallow  him,  but  failed  each  time.  of  the  Golden  Dragon  and  all  con-
At  length,  however,  he  caught  him,  cerning  him,  and  he  at  once  told  him
LEGEND  OF  HAJI  BATU
the  ship  was  being  sucked  into  the  eddy  close  to  the tree  and  engulfed,  Haji  Batu  managed  to  drive  the first  nail  home,  and  clung  to  it  as  the  ship  went  down. After  a  brief  interval  he  endeavoured  to  drive  in  the second  nail,  somewhat  higher  up  the  stem  than  the first  (why  Haji  Batu  could  not  climb  without  the  aid of  nails  history  does  not  relate),  and  drawing  himself up  by  it,  drove  in  the  third.  Thus  progressing,  by  the time  he  had  driven  in  all  the  seven  nails  he  had reached  the  top  of  the  tree,  when  he  discovered  among the  branches  a  nest  of  young  rocs.  Here  he  rested, and  having  again  been  advised  in  a  dream,  he  waited. On  the  following  day,  when  the  parent  roc  had  returned and  was  engaged  in  feeding  its  young  with  an  elephant which  it  had  brought  for  the  purpose,  he  bound  himself to  its  feathers  with  his  girdle,  and  was  carried  in  this manner  many  hundreds  of  miles  to  the  westward, where,  upon  the  roc's  nearing  the  ground,  he  let himself  go,  and  thus  dropping  to  the  earth,  fell  into a  swoon.  On  recovering  consciousness  he  walked on  till  he  came  to  a  house,  where  he  asked  for  and obtained  some  refreshment.  On  his  departure  he was  advised  to  go  westward,  and  so  proceeded  for  a long  distance  until  he  arrived  at  a  beautifully  clear pool  in  an  open  plain,  around  which  were  to  be  seen many  stone  figures  of  human  beings.  The  appearance of  these  stone  figures  rendering  him  suspicious,  he
everything  concerning  his  birth  (usul  place,  since  he  was  very  old.     Thus  the
asal  ka-jadt-an-nya),  and  informed  him  Golden   Dragon   continued   to  live  in
that  they  were  close  relations,  since  the  increasing  state  and  prosperity  at  the
Golden  Dragon's  mother  was  a  relative  Pusat  tasek,  and  was  greatly  beloved
of  the   Raja  Naga.     Then    the    Raja  by  his  uncle,  the  Raja  Naga ;  and  in
Naga  kissed  and  embraced  his  nephew,  the  course  of  time  his  horn  (chula)  split
and   congratulated   himself  on  having  up  and  was  replaced  by  six  other  heads
seen  him  before  his  time  came  to  die,  — making  seven  in  all." — Hikayat Raja
and    calling    together    all    his    people  Budtman,    part    ii.    pp.   7,  8.       Pub-
to  feast,  installed  (tabal)  the    Golden  lications  of  the    S.    B.   of  the  Royal
Dragon  as  king  over  them  in  his  own  Asiatic  Society,  No.  3.
io  NA  TURE  CHAP.
refrained  from  drinking  the  water,  and  dipped  into  it merely  the  tips  of  his  fingers,  which  became  immedi- ately petrified.  Proceeding  he  met  a  vast  number of  wild  animals — pigs,  deer,  and  elephants — which were  fleeing  from  the  pursuit  of  a  beast  of  no  great size  indeed,  but  with  fiery  red  fur.  He  therefore prudently  climbed  into  a  tree  to  allow  it  to  pass. The  beast,  however,  pursued  him  and  commenced  to climb  the  tree,  but  as  it  climbed  he  drove  the  point  of his  poniard  (badik)  into  its  skull,  and  killed  it.  He then  robbed  it  of  its  whiskers,  and  thereafter,  on  his reaching  a  town,  everybody  fled  from  him  because  of the  whiskers  which  had  belonged  to  so  fierce  a  beast. The  Raja  of  that  country,  begging  for  one  of  them, and  giving  him  food,  he  presented  him  with  one  of  the whiskers  in  payment.  After  paying  his  way  in  a  similar manner  at  seven  successive  villages,  the  Petrified Pilgrim  at  length  reached  Mecca."
"  Bores,"  or  "eagres,"  at  the  mouths  of  rivers,  and floods l  due  to  heavy  rain,  are  conceived  to  be  caused by  the  passage  of  some  gigantic  animal,  most  prob- ably a  sort  of  dragon,  as  in  the  case  of  landslips, which  will  be  mentioned  later.
This  animal,  whose  passage  up  rivers  is  held  to cause  the  tidal  wave  or  bore,  is  called  Bena  in  Sel- angor.  It  is  a  matter  of  common  report  among
1  "  The  Malays  give  the  names  '  Bah  ejaculated  my  head  boatman.  In
Jantan'  and  'Bah  Betina,'  viz.  the  common  with  other  Malays,  he  held
'  male '  and  the  '  female '  floods,  re-  the  belief  that  floods,  like  other  moving
spectively  to  the  first  rising  of  a  freshet,  things,  go  in  couples.  The  first  to  come
and  to  the  flood  which  sometimes  en-  is  the  male,  and  when  he  has  passed
sues  after  the  waters  have  partially  upon  his  way  the  female  comes  after
subsided.  The  latter  is  generally  sup-  him,  pursuing  him  hotly,  according  to
posed  to  be  more  serious  than  the  the  custom  of  the  sex,  and  she  is  the
former." — Cliff,  and  Swett.,  Ma,l.  Diet.  more  to  be  feared,  as  she  rushes  more
s.v.  Bah.  furiously  than  does  her  fleeing  mate."
"'If  this  be  the  likeness  of  the  male  — Cliff.,  Stud,  in  Brown  Humanity,  p.
flood,  what  will  that  of  the  female  be  ?  '  213.
i  CAUSE  OF  ECLIPSES  n
Malays  at  Jugra,  on  the  Selangor  coast,  that  a  bore formerly  "  frequented "  the  Langat  river,  near  its mouth.  This  was  anterior  to  the  severance  of  the narrow  neck  of  land1  at  Bandar  that  divided  the old  channel  of  the  Langat  river  from  the  stream into  which  the  waters  of  the  Langat  now  flow, forming  the  short  cut  to  the  sea  called  the  Jugra Passage.  In  the  days  when  the  bore  came  up  the river  the  Malays  used  to  go  out  in  small  canoes or  dug-outs  to  "  sport  amongst  the  breakers "  (main gelombang),  frequently  getting  upset  for  their  pains. Eventually,  however  (I  was  told),  the  bore  was  killed by  a  Langat  Malay,  who  struck  it  upon  the  head  with a  stick  !  It  is  considered  that  this  must  be  true,  since there  is  no  bore  in  the  Langat  river  now !
Eclipses  (Gerhana)  of  the  sun  or  moon  are  con- sidered to  be  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  the devouring  of  those  bodies2  by  a  sort  of  gigantic dragon  (ra/m) 3  or  dog  (anjing).  Hence  the  tumult
1  This    neck    of    land    was    called  Vipra-'citti  and  Sinhika,  and  had  four "  Penarek  Prahu,"  or  the  "  Place  of  arms,  his  lower  part  ending  in  a  tail), the  dragging  (across)  of  Boats. "  he  was  the   instigator  of  all   mischief
2  "  The  belief  (probably  borrowed  among  the  daityas,  and  when  the  gods from  the  Hindoos)  of  a  serpent  devour-  had    produced   the   amrita    or    nectar ing  the  sun  or  moon,  whenever  they  from  the  churned  ocean,  he  disguised are  eclipsed,  and  the  weird  lamentations  himself  like  one  of  them  and  drank  a of  the  people  during  the  continuance  portion  of  it,  but  the  sun  and  moon of  these  phenomena,  are  well  known."  having  detected  his  fraud  and  informed — Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  358.  Vishnu,  the  latter  severed  his  head  and
3  "  During     an    eclipse    they    (the  two  of  his  arms  from  the  rest  of  his Malays)  make  a  loud  noise  with  sound-  body  ;  the  portion  of  nectar  he  had ing  instruments  to  prevent  one  lumin-  swallowed  having  secured  his  immor- ary  from  devouring  the  other,  as  the  tality,  the  head  and  tail  were   trans- Chinese,  to  frighten  away  the  dragon."  ferred  to  the  stellar  sphere,  the  head — Marsden,  Hist,  of  Sum.  p.  157.      I  wreaking    its   vengeance   on    the   sun have  not  yet   met  with  the   explana-  and  moon  by  occasionally  swallowing tion  given  in  this  passage  of  Marsden's  them  for  a  time,  while  the  tail,  under work.  the    name   of  Ketu,  gave    birth    to    a
"  Rahu,  a  daitya  or  demon  who  is  numerous  progeny  of  comets  and  fiery
supposed  to  seize  the  sun  and  moon,  meteors."  —  Monier     Williams,     Skt.
and  thus  cause  eclipses  (according  to  Diet.  s.v.  Rahu. the  common  myth  he   was  a   son   of
12  NATURE  CHAP.
made  during  an  eclipse  by  the  Malays,  who  imagine that  if  they  make  a  sufficient  din  they  will  frighten  the monster  away.
The  following  is  an  excellent  description  of  a  lunar eclipse  from  the  Malay  point  of  view  : —
"  One  night,  when  the  Moon  has  waxed  nearly  to the  full,  Pekan  resounds  with  a  babel  of  discordant noise.  The  large  brass  gongs,  in  which  the  devils  of the  Chinese  are  supposed  to  take  delight,  clang  and clash  and  bray  through  the  still  night  air ;  the  Malay drums  throb  and  beat  and  thud  ;  all  manner  of  shrill yells  fill  the  sky,  and  the  roar  of  a  thousand  native voices  rises  heavenwards,  or  rolls  across  the  white waters  of  the  river,  which  are  flecked  with  deep shadows  and  reflections.  The  jungles  on  the  far bank  take  up  the  sound  and  send  it  pealing  back  in recurring  ringing  echoes  till  the  whole  world  seems  to shout  in  chorus.  The  Moon  which  bathes  the  earth  in splendour,  the  Moon  which  is  so  dear  to  each  one  of us,  is  in  dire  peril  this  night,  for  that  fierce  monster, the  GerMna,1  whom  we  hate  and  loathe,  is  striving  to swallow  her.  You  can  mark  his  black  bulk  creeping over  her,  dimming  her  face,  consuming  her  utterly, while  she  suffers  in  the  agony  of  silence.  How  often in  the  past  has  she  served  us  with  the  light ;  how  often has  she  made  night  more  beautiful  than  day  for  our tired,  sun-dazed  eyes  to  look  upon  ;  and  shall  she  now perish  without  one  effort  on  our  part  to  save  her  by scaring  the  Monster  from  his  prey?  No  !  A  thousand times  no  !  So  we  shout,  and  clang  the  gongs,  and  beat the  drums,  till  all  the  animal  world  joins  in  the  tumult, and  even  inanimate  nature  lends  its  voice  to  swell  the
1   Gtrh&na  is  from  a  Sanskr.  word  meaning   "eclipse."     The  name   of  the monster  is  Rahu.
i  THE  MAN  IN  THE  MOON  13
uproar  with  a  thousand  resonant  echoes.  At  last  the hated  Monster  reluctantly  retreats.  Our  war-cry  has reached  his  ears,  and  he  slinks  sullenly  away,  and the  pure,  sad,  kindly  Moon  looks  down  in  love  and gratitude  upon  us,  her  children,  to  whose  aid  she  owes her  deliverance."  l
The  "  spots  on  the  moon  "2  are  supposed  to  repre- sent an  inverted  banyan  tree  (Beringin  songsang), underneath  which  an  aged  hunchback  is  seated  plait- ing strands  of  tree  bark  (pintal  tali  kulit  t'rap)  to  make a  fishing-line,  wherewith  he  intends  to  angle  for  every- thing upon  the  earth  as  soon  as  his  task  is  completed. It  has  never  been  completed  yet,  however,  for  a  rat always  gnaws  the  line  through  in  time  to  save  man- kind from  disaster,  despite  the  vigilance  of  the  old  man's cat,  which  is  always  lying  in  wait  for  the  offender.3  It is  perhaps  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  when  the  line reaches  the  earth  the  end  of  the  world  will  come.
" Bujang  ('single,'  'solitary,'  and  hence  in  a secondary  sense  '  unmarried ')  is  a  Sanskrit  word bhujangga,  'a  dragon.'  'Bujang  Malaka,'  a  moun- tain in  Perak,  is  said  by  the  Malays  of  that  State  to have  been  so  called  because  it  stands  alone,  and  could be  seen  from  the  sea  by  traders  who  plied  in  old  days between  the  Perak  river  and  the  once  flourishing  port
1  Clifford,  Stud,  in  Brown  Humanity  >  and  was  taken  up  by  the  moon  into
p.  50.     For  ceremonies  to  be  observed  her  arms.     This  is  no  doubt  the  real
during  an  eclipse,  more  especially  by  explanation     of    the    Malay    phrase,
women   in    travail,    vide   Birth    Cere-  " Bulan     bunting   pflandok"     ("the
monies  (infra).  moon  is  great  with  the  mouse-deer  "),
2  "They   (the   Malays)  observe  in  an    expression    often    used   when   the the  moon  an  old  man  sitting  under  a  moon  is  three-quarters  full. bZringin  tree  (the  Banyan,  Ficus  In-  3  "  They  tell  of  a  man  in  the  moon, dica)." — Maxwell,  in  J. R.  A. S.,  S.B.,  who  is  continually  employed  in  spin- No.  7,  p.  27,     In  Sanskrit  mythology  ning  cotton,  but  that  every  night  a  rat the  spots  on  the  moon  are  supposed  gnaws  his  thread,  and  obliges  him  to to  be  caused  by  a  hare  or  antelope,  begin  his  work  afresh." — Marsd.,  Hist. which  being  hard  pressed  by  a  hunter  of  Sum.  p.  187. appealed  to  the  moon  for  protection,
14  NATURE  CHAP.
of  Malacca.  But  it  is  just  as  likely  to  have  been  named from  some  forgotten  legend  in  which  a  dragon  played a  part.  Dragons  and  mountains  are  generally  con- nected in  Malay  ideas.  The  caves  in  the  limestone hill  Gunong  Pondok,  in  Perak,  arc  said  to  be  haunted by  a  genius  loci  in  the  form  of  a  snake  who  is  popularly called  Si  Bujang.  This  seems  to  prove  beyond  doubt the  identity  of  bujang  with  bhujangga?  The  snake- spirit  of  Gunong  Pondok  is  sometimes  as  small  as  a viper,  and  sometimes  as  large  as  a  python,  but  he  may always  be  identified  by  his  spotted  neck,  which  re- sembles that  of  a  wood-pigeon  (tekukur}.  Landslips on  the  mountains,  which  are  tolerably  frequent  during very  heavy  rains,  and  which,  being  produced  by  the same  cause,  are  often  simultaneous  with  the  flooding of  rivers  and  the  destruction  of  property,  are  attri- buted by  the  natives  to  the  sudden  breaking  forth  of dragons  (naga),  which  have  been  performing  religious penance  (ber-tapa) 2  in  the  mountains,  and  which  are making  their  way  to  the  sea."3
So,  too,  many  waterfalls  and  rocks  of  unusual  shape are  thought  to  owe  their  remarkable  character  to  the agency  of  demons.  This,  however,  is  a  subject  which will  be  treated  more  fully  later  on.
"  Palangi,  the  usual  Malay  word  for  the  rainbow, means  'striped.'  The  name  varies,  however,  in  different localities.  In  Perak  it  is  called palangi  minum^  (from a  belief  that  it  is  the  path  by  which  spirits  descend  to the  earth  to  drink),  while  in  Penang  it  is  known  as
1  It  is,  however,  also  possible  that  2  Sanskrit  tapasya.
there  may  be  two  "  bujangs,"  and  that  3  Maxwell,  in  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.
we   have  here  a  simple  case  of  what  7,  p.  28.
philologists  call  "confluence,"  so  that  4  In   Selangor   I  have   also   heard
the  derivation,  though  quite  possible,  "Ular  mznum,"  "  the  snake  drinks. " must  not  be  accepted  without  reserve.
RAINBOWS  AND  SUNSET
ular  danu  ('the  snake  danu').  In  P£rak,  a  rainbow which  stretches  in  an  arch  across  the  sky  is  called bantal  ('  the  pillow  '),  for  some  reason  that  I  have  been unable  to  ascertain.1  When  only  a  small  portion  of  a rainbow  is  visible,  which  seems  to  touch  the  earth,  it is  called  tunggul  (f\h.z.  flag'),2  and  if  this  is  seen  at  some particular  point  of  the  compass — the  west,  I  think — it  betokens,  the  Perak  Malays  say,  the  approaching death  of  a  Raja.  Another  popular  belief  is  that  the ends  of  the  rainbow  rest  upon  the  earth,  and  that  if one  could  dig  at  the  exact  spot  covered  by  one  end  of it,  an  untold  treasure  would  be  found  there.  Unfor- tunately, no  one  can  ever  arrive  at  the  place."3
"  Sunset  is  the  hour  when  evil  spirits  of  all  kinds have  most  power.4  In  Perak,  children  are  often  called indoors  at  this  time  to  save  them  from  unseen  dangers. Sometimes,  with  the  same  object,  a  woman  belonging to  the  house  where  there  are  young  children,  will  chew kuniet  terus  (an  evil-smelling  root),  supposed  to  be much  disliked  by  demons  of  all  kinds,  and  spit  it  out at  seven  different  points  as  she  walks  round  the  house.
"  The  yellow  glow  which  spreads  over  the  western sky,  when  it  is  lighted  up  with  the  last  rays  of  the dying  sun,  is  called  mambang  kuning  ('the  yellow deity '),  a  term  indicative  of  the  superstitious  dread associated  with  this  particular  period." 5
1  A  Selangor  Malay  told  me  that  3  Maxwell,  /. R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7, the  full  phrase  was  "  Ular  Danu  btrban-  p.  2 1 .
tal"  "the  snake  Danu  is  pillowed  (in  4  So,  too,  midday,  especially  when  a
sleeP)-  light  rain  is  falling  and  the  sun  shining
2  A   fuller   expression    is   tunggul-  ftt  Qne  and  the  samfi  u         -s  u*
tunggul  mtmbangun.^     A  double  ram-  r        ded  as          j,    d         rous. bow  is  calIed/a/a//£T  sa-klamin.
Maxwell  points  out,  in  a  note,  that  6  Maxwell,   loc.    cit.      Vide   infra,
dhanuk,  in  Hindustani,  means  a  bow,  Chap.  IV.  pp.  92,  93. and  is  a  common  term  in  India,  among Hindus,  for  the  rainbow.
CHAPTER   II MAN  AND  HIS  PLACE  IN  THE  UNIVERSE
(a)  Creation  of  Man
A  COMMON  feature  in  Malay  romances  and  legends is  a  description  of  the  supernatural  development  of  a young  child  in  the  interior  of  some  vegetable  produc- tion, usually  a  bamboo.
Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  has  pointed  out  the  fact  of  the existence,  both  in  Malay  and  Japanese  legends,  of  the main  features  of  this  story,  to  which  he  assigns  a Buddhistic  origin.  He  tells  the  story  as  follows  : —
"  The  Raja  of  the  Bamboo. — Some  years  ago  I collected  a  number  of  legends  current  among  Malayan tribes  having  as  their  principal  incident  the  supernatural development  of  a  prince,  princess,  or  demi-god  in  the stem  of  a  bamboo,  or  tree,  or  the  interior  of  some closed  receptacle.1  I  omitted,  however,  to  mention that  this  very  characteristic  Malay  myth  occurs  in  the "  Sri  Rama,"  a  Malay  prose  hikayat?  which,  as  its
1  JournaloJ 'the Royal Asiatic Society ',  incarnated  from  the  hollow  part  of  a
N.S.  vol.  xiii.  part  iv.    Cp.  also  the  note  bamboo."     See  also  J.R.A.S.,   S.B.,
to  page  8  supra,  in  which  the  Golden  No.  9,  p.  91.
Dragon    is    made    to    say,    "I    have  2  Hikayat ;  i.e.  "romance." neither  father  nor  mother,  but   I  was
CHAP.  1 1  5  U PERN  A  TURAL  BIR  THS  \  7
name  betokens,  professes  to  describe  the  adventures of  the  hero  of  the  Ramayana.
"  Roorda  van  Eysinga's  edition  of  the  Sri  Rama opens  with  an  account  of  how  Maharaja  Dasaratha sent  his  Chief  Mantri,1  Puspa  Jaya  Karma,  to  search for  a  suitable  place  at  which  to  found  a  settlement. The  site  having  been  found  and  cleared,  the  narrative proceeds  as  follows  : —
"  '  Now  there  was  a  clump  of  the  belong*  bamboo (sarumpun  buluh  belong),  the  colour  of  which  was  like gold  of  ten  touch  (amas  sapuloh  mutu),  and  its  leaves like  silver.  All  the  trees  which  grew  near  bent  in  its direction,  and  it  looked  like  a  state  umbrella  (payong manuwangi*\  The  Mantri  and  people  chopped  at  it, but  as  fast  as  they  cut  down  a  branch  on  one  side,  a fresh  one  shot  forth  on  the  other,  to  the  great  astonish- ment of  all  the  Rajas,  Mantris,  and  warriors.  Puspa Vikrama  Jaya  hastened  back  to  King  Dasaratha  and laid  the  matter  before  him.  The  latter  was  greatly surprised,  and  declared  that  he  would  go  himself  the next  day  and  see  the  bamboo  cut  down.  Next  day  he set  out  on  a  white  elephant,  attended  by  a  splendid train  of  chiefs  and  followers,  and  on  reaching  the  spot ordered  the  bamboo  clump  to  be  cut  down.  Vikrama Puspa  Jaya  pointed  it  out,  shaded  by  the  other  forest trees.  The  king  perceived  that  it  was  of  very  elegant appearance,  and  that  an  odour  like  spices  and  musk proceeded  from  it.  He  told  Puspa  Jaya  Vikrama  to cut  it  down,  and  the  latter  drew  his  sword,  which  was as  big  as  the  stem  of  a  cocoa-nut  tree,  and  with  one stroke  cut  down  one  of  the  bamboos.  But  immediately a  fresh  stem  shot  forth  on  the  other  side,  and  this  hap-
1  Mantri;  i.e.  "Minister  of  State."  3  Manu-wangi;  perhaps  a  mistake  for
2  Bftong ;  i.e.  "big."  manuwanggi,  cp.  btraduwanggi,  infra.
C
1 8  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
pened  as  often  as  a  stroke  was  given.  Then  the  king grew  wroth,  and  getting  down  from  his  elephant  he drew  his  own  sword  and  made  a  cut  with  it  at  the bamboo,  which  severed  a  stem.  Then,  by  the  divine decree  of  the  Dewatas,  the  king  became  aware  of  a female  form  in  the  bamboo  clump  seated  on  a  highly ornamented  platform  (geta),  her  face  shining  like  the full  moon  when  it  is  fourteen  days  old,  and  the  colour of  her  body  being  like  gold  of  ten  touch.  On  this, King  Dasaratha  quickly  unloosed  his  girdle  and saluted  the  princess.  Then  he  lifted  her  on  to  his elephant  and  took  her  to  his  palace  escorted  by  music and  singing.'" l
I  myself  have  heard  among  the  Selangor  Malays similar  legends  to  the  above,  which,  as  already  pointed out,  are  common  in  Malay  romances.  A  parallel  myth is  described  in  the  following  words  :—
"  Now,  the  Perak  river  overflows  its  banks  once  a year,  and  sometimes  there  are  very  great  floods. Soon  after  the  marriage  of  Nakhodah  Kasim  with the  white  Semang,2  an  unprecedented  flood  occurred and  quantities  of  foam  came  down  the  river.  Round the  piles  of  the  bathing-house,  which,  in  accordance with  Malay  custom,  stood  in  the  bed  of  the  river close  to  the  bank  in  front  of  the  house,  the  floating volumes  of  foam  collected  in  a  mass  the  size  of  an elephant.  Nakhodah  Kasim's  wife  went  to  bathe, and  finding  this  island  of  froth  in  her  way  she attempted  to  move  it  away  with  a  stick  ;  she  removed the  upper  portion  of  it  and  disclosed  a  female  infant
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,   No.    17.      Notes       mates  to  that  of  the  Negritos  of  the and  Queries,  No.  4,  sec.  94.  Andaman  Islands  and  the  Philippines,
2  Semangs   are  aboriginal  non-Mu-       but  the  one  referred  to  in  this  legend hammadan  inhabitants  of  the  interior       had  white  blood,  which  is  considered of  the  Peninsula.     Their  type  approxi-       by  Malays  to  be  the  royal  colour.
ii  CREATION  OF  MAN  19
sitting  in  the  midst  of  it  enveloped  all  round  with cloud-like  foam.  The  child  showed  no  fear,  and  the white  Semang,  carefully  lifting  her,  carried  her  up  to  the house,  heralding  her  discovery  by  loud  shouts  to  her husband.  The  couple  adopted  the  child  willingly,  for they  had  no  children,  and  they  treated  her  thence- forward as  their  own.  They  assembled  the  villagers and  gave  them  a  feast,  solemnly  announcing  their adoption  of  the  daughter  of  the  river  and  their intention  of  leaving  to  her  everything  that  they possessed.
"  The  child  was  called  Tan  Puteh,  but  her  father gave  her  the  name  of  Teh  Purba.1  As  she  grew  up the  wealth  of  her  foster-parents  increased ;  the  village grew  in  extent  and  population,  and  gradually  became  an important  place."  2
The  usual  story  of  the  first  creation  of  man,  how- ever, appears  to  be  a  Malay  modification  of  Arabic beliefs.
Thus  we  are  told  that  man  was  created  from  the four  elements — earth,  air,  water,  and  fire — in  a  way which  the  following  extract,  taken  from  a  Selangor charm-book,  will  explain  : —
"  God  Almighty  spake  unto  Gabriel,  saying, '  Be  not  disobedient,  O  Gabriel, But  go  and  get  me  the  Heart  of  the  Earth.' But  he  could  not  get  the  Heart  of  the  Earth. '  I  will  not  give  it,'  said  the  Earth. Then  went  the  Prophet  Israfel  to  get  it, But  he  could  not  get  the  Heart  of  the  Earth.
1  Teh,  short  for  Putch,  "white";  on  a  certain  day  that  the  river  of
Pfirba,  or  Pfirva,  Sanskrit  "  first."  Palembang  brought  down  a  foam-bell
This  name  is  also  given  to  the  first  of  uncommon  size,  in  which  appeared
Malay  Raja  in  the  Sajarah  Malayu.  a  young  girl  of  extreme  beauty."  She
"  J. R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  9,  pp.  90,  was  adopted  by  the  Raja,  and  "  named
91.  For  a  similar  story  vide  Leyden's  Putri  Tunjong  Bui,  or  the  Princess
Malay  A  mi  (-.Is,  p.  29:  "It  happened  Foam-bell."
20  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
Then  went  Michael  to  get  it,
But  he  could  not  get  the  Heart  of  the  Earth.
Then  went  Azrael  to  get  it,
And  at  last  he  got  the  Heart  of  the  Earth.
When  he  got  the  Heart  of  the  Earth
The  empyrean  and  crystalline  spheres  shook,
And  the  whole  Universe  (shook).
When  he  got  the  Heart  of  the  Earth  he l  made  from  it  the  Image  of
Adam.
But  the  Heart  of  the  Earth  was  then  too  hard  ; He  mixed  Water  with  it,  and  it  became  too  soft, (So)  he  mixed  Fire  with  it,  and  at  last  struck  out  the  image  of  Adam. Then  he  raised  up  the  image  of  Adam, And  craved  Life  for  it  from  Almighty  God, And  God  Almighty  gave  it  Life.
Then  sneezed  God  Almighty,  and  the  image  of  Adam  brake  in  pieces, And  he  (Azrael)  returned  to  remake  the  image  of  Adam. Then  God  Almighty  commanded  to  take  steel  of  Khorassan, And  drive  it  down  his  back,  so  that  it  became  the  thirty-three  bones, The  harder  steel  at  the  top,  the  softer  below  it. The  harder  steel  shot  up  skywards, And  the  softer  steel  penetrated  earthwards. Thus  the  image  of  Adam  had  life,  and  dwelt  in  Paradise. (There)  Adam  beheld  (two  ?)  peacocks  of  no  ordinary  beauty, And  the  Angel  Gabriel  appeared. '  Verily,  O  Angel  Gabriel,  I  am  solitary, Easier  is  it  to  live  in  pairs,  I  crave  a  wife.' God  Almighty  spake,  saying,  '  Command  Adam To  pray  at  dawn  a  prayer  of  two  genuflexions.' Then  Adam  prayed,  and  our  Lady  Eve  descended, And  was  captured  by  the  Prophet  Adam ; But  before  he  had  finished  his  prayer  she  was  taken  back, Therefore  Adam  prayed  the  prayer  of  two  genuflexions  as  desired, And  at  the  last  obtained  our  Lady  Eve. When  they  were  married  (Eve)  bore  twins  every  time, Until  she  had  borne  forty-four  children, And  the  children,  too,  were  wedded,  handsome  with  handsome,  and
plain  with  plain."
The  magician  who  dictated  the  above  account stated  that  when  Azrael  stretched  forth  his  hand  to take  the  Heart  of  the  Earth,  the  Earth-spirit  caught hold  of  his  middle  finger,  which  yielded  to  the  strain, and  thus  became  longer  than  the  rest,  and  received  its Malay  name  of  the  "  Devil's  Finger"  (jari bantu).
1  It  is  Gabriel  who  performs  this  office  in  the  account  which  follows.
ii  ANOTHER  ACCOUNT  21
A  parallel  account  adds  that  the  Heart  of  the  Earth was  white,  and  gives  a  fuller  description  of  the  inter- view between  Azrael  and  his  formidable  antagonist,  the Earth.  After  saluting  the  latter  in  the  orthodox Muhammadan  fashion,  Azrael  explains  his  mission, and  is  met  by  a  point-blank  refusal.  "  I  will  not give  it,"  said  the  Earth  (referring  to  its  Heart), "  forasmuch  as  I  was  so  created  by  God  Almighty, and  if  you  take  away  my  Heart  I  shall  assuredly  die." At  this  brusque,  though  perhaps  natural  retort,  the archangel  loses  his  temper,  and  rudely  exclaims  that he  "  will  take  the  Earth's  Heart  whether  it  will or  no."  Here  Azrael  "gave  the  Earth  a  push  with his  right  hand  and  his  left,  and  grasping  at  the  Heart of  the  Earth,  got  hold  of  it  and  carried  it  back  to  the presence  of  God."  God  now  summons  Gabriel  and orders  him  to  mould  (lit.  forge)  the  image  of  Adam. Then  Gabriel  took  the  lump  of  earth  which  was  the Earth's  Heart  and  mixed  it  first  with  water  to  soften it,  then,  as  it  was  too  soft,  with  fire  to  harden  it,  and when  the  image  was  made,  obtained  life  from  God  to put  into  it.1  [The  breaking  of  the  first  image  which
1   ' '  Concerning  the  creation  of  Adam,  remorse,  for  which  reason  God  appointed
here  intimated,  the  Mohammedans  have  that  angel  to  separate  the  souls  from
several  peculiar  traditions.      They  say  the  bodies,  being  therefore  called  the
the  angels  Gabriel,  Michael,  and  Israfil  angel  of  death.      The   earth   he   had
were  sent  by  God,  one  after  another,  to  taken  was  carried  into  Arabia,   to  a
fetch  for  that  purpose  seven  handfuls  place  between  Mecca  and  Tayef,  where,
of  earth  from  different  depths,  and  of  being  first  kneaded  by  the  angels,    it
different  colours  (whence  some  account  was  afterwards  fashioned  by  God  him-
for  the  various  complexions  of  mankind);  self  into  a  human  form,  and  left  to  dry
but  the  Earth  being  apprehensive  of  the  for   the   space   of  forty   days,    or,    as
consequence,    and    desiring    them    to  others  say,  as  many  years,  the  angels
represent   her   fear    to   God    that    the  in  the  meantime  often  visiting  it,  and
creature   He  designed  to  form  would  Eblis  (then  one  of  the  angels  who  are
rebel  against  Him,  and  draw  down  His  nearest   to   God's  presence,  afterwards
curse  upon  her,  they  returned  without  the  devil)  among  the  rest ;  but  he,  not
performing  God's  command  ;    where-  contented  with  looking  on  it,  kicked  it
upon  He  sent  Azrael  on  the  same  errand,  with  his  foot  till  it  rung,  and  knowing
who  executed  his  commission  without  God  designed  that  creature  to  be  his
22  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
was  made,  and  the  making  of  the  second,  are  here omitted].  Finally,  the  creation  of  "our  Lady"  Eve  and the  birth  of  her  first-born  are  described,  the  latter occasion  being  accompanied  by  a  thick  darkness,  which compelled  Adam  to  take  off  his  turban  and  beat  the child  therewith  in  order  to  dispel  the  evil  influences (badi)  which  had  attended  its  birth.1
The  following  extract  (from  a  Malay  treatise  quoted by  Newbold)  fairly  describes  the  general  state  of  Malay ideas  respecting  the  constitution  of  the  human  body  : —
"  Plato,  Socrates,  Galen,  Aristotle,  and  other  philo- sophers affirm  that  God  created  man  of  a  fixed  number of  bones,  blood-vessels,  etc.  For  instance,  the  skull  is composed  of  5  J  bones,  the  place  of  smell  and  sense  of  7 bones,  between  this  and  the  neck  are  32  bones.  The neck  is  composed  of  7  bones,  and  the  back  of  24  bones  ; 208  bones  are  contained  in  the  other  members  of  the body.  In  all  there  are  360  bones  and  360  blood-vessels in  a  man's  body.  The  brains  weigh  306  miscals,  the blood  573.  The  total  of  all  the  bones,  blood-vessels, large  and  small,  and  gristles,  amounts  to  1093  ;  and the  hairs  of  the  head  to  six  lacs  and  4000.  The  frame of  man  is  divided  into  40  great  parts,  which  are  again
superior,  took  a  secret  resolution  never  reft  in  pieces  and  scattered  into  the
to  acknowledge  him  as  such.      After  air.     Those  fragments  of  the  first  great
this  God  animated  the  figure  of  clay  Failure  are  the  spirits  of  earth  and  sea
and  endued  it  with  an  intelligent  soul,  and  air.
and  when  He  had  placed  him  in  para-  "The  Creator  then  formed  another
disc,  formed  Eve  out  of  his  left  side. " —  clay   figure,    but    into    this   one    He
Sale's  Koran,  ch.   ii.  (of  translation),  wrought  some  iron,   so  that   when  it
p.  4  (note).  received   the  vital  spark  it  withstood
1  "  The  Creator  determined  to  make  the  strain  and   became  Man.       That
man,   and  for  that  purpose   He  took  man  was  Adam,  and  the  iron  that  is  in
some  clay  from  the  earth  and  fashioned  the  constitution  of  his  descendants  has
it  into  the  figure  of  a  man.     Then  He  stood  them  in  good  stead.     When  they
took  the  Spirit  of  Life  to  endue  this  lose    it  they   become   of    little    more
body  with  vitality,  and  placed  the  spirit  account  than  their  prototype  the  first
on  the  head  of  the  figure.      But  the  failure." — Swettenham,  Malay  Sketches t
spirit  was  strong,  and  the  body,  being  p.  199. only  clay,  could  not  hold  it,  and  was
ii  ROYAL  SANCTITY  23
subdivided.  Four  elements  enter  into  his  composition, viz.  air,  fire,  earth,  and  water.  With  these  elements are  connected  four  essences — the  soul  or  spirit  with air,  love  with  fire,  concupiscence  with  earth,  and  wisdom with  water."  l
(b)  Sanctity  of  the  Body
In  dealing  with  this  branch  of  the  subject  I  will first  take  the  case  of  the  kings  and  priestly  magicians who  present  the  most  clearly-  marked  examples  of personal  sanctity  which  are  now  to  be  found  among Malays,  and  will  then  describe  the  chief  features  of the  sanctity  ascribed  to  all  ranks  alike  in  respect  of certain  special  parts  of  the  ordinary  human  anatomy. The  theory  of  the  king  as  the  Divine  Man  is  held perhaps  as  strongly  in  the  Malay  region  as  in  any other  part  of  the  world,  a  fact  which  is  strikingly emphasised  by  the  alleged  right  of  Malay  monarchs "  to  slay  at  pleasure,  without  being  guilty  of  a crime"  Not  only  is  the  king's  person  considered sacred,  but  the  sanctity  of  his  body  is  believed  to communicate  itself  to  his  regalia,  and  to  slay  those who  break  the  royal  taboos.  Thus  it  is  firmly  be- lieved that  any  one  who  seriously  offends  the  royal person,  who  touches  (even  for  a  moment)  or  who imitates  (even  with  the  king's  permission)  the  chief objects  of  the  regalia,2  or  who  wrongfully  makes  use
1  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  351,  speak    personally,   as   when   a   set   of 352.     In  Selangor,  some  of  the  greater  models  of  the   Selangor  regalia  were bones,  at  least,  have  their  own  mystic  being   made    for    me,    with    the    late nomenclature,  e.g.  the  backbone,  which  Sultan's  full  permission  and  knowledge, is  called  tiang  'arasb,  or  the  "  Pillar  I  found  it  impossible  to  get  them  made of  the  Heavens."  really  like  the  originals  either  in  shape
2  Of  the  superstition  which  forbids  or  size,  the  makers  alleging  their  fear the  imitation  of  the  royal  insignia  I  can  of  being   struck  dead  in  spite  of  this
24  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
of  any  of  the  insignia  or  privileges  of  royalty,  will be  kena  daulat,  i.e.  struck  dead,  by  a  quasi -electric discharge  of  that  Divine  Power  which  the  Malays suppose  to  reside  in  the  king's  person,1  and  which is  called  "  Daulat "  or  "Royal  Sanctity."  Before  I proceed,  however,  to  discuss  this  power,  it  will  be  best to  give  some  description  of  the  regalia  in  which  it resides  : —
Of  Malacca  Newbold  says  :  "  The  articles  of  Malay regalia  usually  consist  of  a  silasila,  or  book  of  genealo- gical descent,  a  code  of  laws,  a  vest  or  baju,  and  a few  weapons,  generally  a  kris,  kleywang,  or  spear. " :
"  The  limbing  is  a  sort  of  lance ;  the  tombak bandrang  a  spear  of  state,  four  or  seven  of  which  are usually  carried  before  the  chiefs  in  the  interior  of  the Peninsula.  The  handle  is  covered  with  a  substance flowing  from  it  like  a  horse  -  tail,  dyed  crimson, sometimes  crimson  and  white ;  this  is  generally  of hair."3
So  in  Leyden's  translation  of  the  Malay  Annals (1821)  we  read —
"  My  name  is  Bichitram  Shah,  who  am  raja. .  .  .  This  is  the  sword,  Chora  sa  mendang  kian (i.e.  mandakini\  and  that  is  the  lance,  Limbuar  (i.e. limbuara) ;  this  is  the  signet,  Cayu  Gampit,  which  is employed  in  correspondence  with  rajas."'
"  The  Chora  sa  medang  kian  (i.e.  mandakini)  is  the
permission  by  this   Divine    Power   or  *  "  The  kabesaran  or  regalia  of  every
"Daulat"    if    they  were     to    imitate  petty  state  is  supposed  to  be  endowed
them  too  accurately.      In    Perak   the  with  supernatural  powers,  for  instance
custom     would     appear    to    be    less  that  of  the  ex-Panghulu  of  Naning."
strict.       Thus    from    Malay    Sketches  — Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  193.
(p.    215)   we    may  gather  that  in  the  2  Ibid.
"silver"  state  even  the  most  sacred  3  Ibid.  p.  195.
pieces  of    the  regalia  accompany  the  4  Leyden,  Malay  Annals,  pp.  22-23.
royal  party  upon  their  annual  expedi-  The  words  in  brackets  are  mine. — W.  S. tion  to  seek  for  turtles'  eggs.
ii  REGALIA  OF  MALAY  SOVEREIGNS  25
celebrated  sword  with  which  Peramas  Cumunbang killed  the  enormous  serpent  Sicatimuna,  which  ravaged the  country  of  Menangkabowe  about  the  beginning  of the  twelfth  century."
Of  the  Perak  regalia  we  read  :  "Tan  Saban  was commanded  by  his  mistress  to  open  negotiations  with Johor,  and  this  having  been  done,  a  prince  of  the  royal house  of  that  kingdom,  who  traced  his  descent  from  the old  line  of  Menangkabau,  sailed  for  Perak  to  assume the  sovereignty.  He  brought  with  him  the  insignia  of royalty,  namely,  the  royal  drums  (gandang  nobat\  the pipes  (nafiri),  the  flutes  (sarunei  and  bangsi\  the betel-box  (puan  naga  taru\  the  sword  (chora  man- dakini),  the  sword  (perbujang\  the  sceptre  (kayu gamit\ the  jewel  (kamala),  the  surat  chiri,  the  seal  of  state (chap  halilintar),  and  the  umbrella  (ubar-ubar\  All these  were  enclosed  in  a  box  called  Baninan"'
In  Selangor  the  regalia  consisted  of  the  royal  instru- ments of  music — (the  big  State  Drum  or  naubat,  beaten at  the  king's  coronation ;  the  two  small  State  Drums (gendang) ;  the  two  State  Kettle-drums  (langkara)  \ the  lempiri  or  State  Trumpet,  and  the  serunei  or State  Flute — to  which  perhaps  a  bangsi  should  be added,  as  in  the  Perak  list) — which  were  seldom,  if ever,  moved,  and  the  following  articles  which  were carried  in  procession  on  state  occasions  : 3 —
1  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  199  ;  this  supposition  is  accepted,  the  name
cp.  Leyden,  Mai.  Annals,  pp.  38,  39.  would  mean  "lion  of  the  world,"  vide
Limbuara,  limbuana,  or  slmbuana  (  =  App.  xxviii.-xxx.
singkabuana)  is  the  name  given  to  the  a  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  9,  pp.  91,  92.
lance  of  the  Spectre  Huntsman,  (vide  3  It     would     appear     from     Malay
Chap.  V.  p.  ii 8),  whose  Kris  is  called  romances    that    the    full    complement
saltngkisa.      It  has  been  suggested  that  of   musical    instruments    forming   part
singhabuana  may  be  composed  of  two  of  a  royal  orchestra  was,  at  all  events
Sanskrit  words  meaning   "  lion  "  and  sometimes,   twelve.      Thus  when   S'ri
"  world,"  but  put  in  the  Malay  order,  Rama  is  bidden  by  the  astrologers  to
which  is  the  opposite  of  Sanskrit.     If  get  up  an  expedition  by  water  for  the
26  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
1.  The  royal  Betel-box.
2.  The  Long  K'ris — a  kind  of  rapier  used  for  Malay  executions.
3.  The  two  royal  Swords ;  one  on  the  right  hand  and  one  on
the  left  (all  of  the  articles  mentioned  hitherto  being  carried in  front  of  the  Sultan).
4.  The  royal  "  Fringed "  Umbrella  (payong  ubor-ubor\  carried
behind  the  right-hand  sword-bearer.
5.  The  royal  "  Cuspadore,"  carried  behind  the  left-hand  sword-
bearer.
6.  The  royal  Tobacco-box,  carried  at  the  Sultan's  back.
7.  The  eight  royal  tufted  Lances  (tombak  bendrang  or  bandan-
gan),  whose  bearers  were  followed  by  two  personal  attendants, the  latter  of  whom  attended,  besides,  to  anything  that  was broken  or  damaged ;  so  that  the  procession  numbered seventeen  persons  in  all.1
Of  the  Pahang  regalia  I  have  not  been  able  to  ob- tain a  list  with  any  pretensions  to  completeness,  but from  a  remark  by  Mr.  Clifford  (the  present  Resident) in  one  of  his  books,  they  would  appear  to  be  essen- tially the  same  as  those  of  the  other  Federated  States.2
A  list  of  the  Jelebu  regalia  (given  me  by  Ungku Said  Kechil  of  Jelebu)  ran  as  follows  : —
1.  A  single-bladed  Sword  (pedang pemanchor).
2.  The  Long  K'ris  (Kris  panjang,penyalang},  used  for  executions.
3.  The  royal  Lances  (tombak  bendrang).
4.  The  royal  Umbrella  (payong  kabesaran).
5.  The  royal  Standard  and  Pennants  (tunggul  ular-ular).
amusement  of  his   Princess,    "dresses  called   tombak    b2rch?ranggah    or    the
of  honour  were  given  to  the  attend-  "  Branching    Lance."     The    ordinary
ants,    and  musical  instruments  of  the  lances    might    be    borrowed    by    the
twelve    kinds   were   got   together." —  people,   and  carried,   for  example,  in
Maxw.,  in  Sri  Rama,  J.R.A.S.^  S.H.,  the  procession  escorting  a  bridegroom
No.  17,  p.  93.  (by  virtue  of  his  supposed  "one  day's
1  This  list  was  given  me  by  H.H.  sovereignty,"  Raja  sa-hari)  to  the  house
Raja    Bot   of  Selangor.     Besides   the  of  his  bride,  but  the  trident  never,
above   there  are   several  royal   "pro-  2  "All  the  insignia  of  royalty  were
perties "  not  usually  included    in  any  hastily  fashioned  by  the  goldsmiths  of
list  of  regalia.     These  are  H.H. 's  chain  Penjum,  and  whenever   To'    Raja   or
jacket  (baju  rantef) ;  a  species  of  shield  Wan   Bong   appeared   in   public  they
or  targe,  said  to  be  made  of  brass,  and  were  accompanied   by   pages   bearing
called  otar-otar ;  H.H.'s  seal,  and  pos-  betel-boxes,  swords,   and    silken  um-
sibly  his  mat  and  the  dish  he  ate  from.  brellas,   as    in    the   manner   of  Malay
One  of  the  tombak  belonging  to  H.H.  kings." — Cliff.,  In  Court  and  Kampong,
was    a    species   of  trident,    and   was  p.  115.
ii  MAGIC  POWERS  OF  THE  REGALIA  27
6.  The  royal   Ceiling -cloth  and    Hangings   (tabir,   langit-langit
dewangga).
7.  The  "  Moving  Mountains "  (gttnong  dua  berangkat\  perhaps
the  names  of  two  peaked  pillows.
8.  The  royal  Drums  (gendang  naubat) ;  said   to  be  "  headed  "
with  the  skins  of  lice  (kulit  tuma)  and  to  emit  a  single chord  of  twelve  tones  when  struck  (dua-tflas  bunyi  sakali di-pukot).
~,  ,  ~  .  /7-    ...  .         .    . .  .x  "i  Each  of  these  was
9.  The  royal  Trumpet  (lempirt  or  «&**/).  I      alsQ  gaid  tQ  emit
10.  The  roya  Gong.  \        si     le  chord    f
1 1.  The  royal  Guitar  (kechapt).  }      ^  notes.
12.  The  royal  rcbab  or  Malay  fiddle.
This  latter  peculiarity  (of  the  multiplication  of notes)  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  traditions  of the  king's  musical  instruments  in  Malay  romances. Thus  of  Raja  Donan's  magic  flute  we  are  told,  "The first  time  (that  he  sounded  it),  the  flute  gave  forth  the sounds  of  twelve  instruments,  the  second  time  it  played as  if  twenty -four  instruments  were  being  sounded, and  the  third  time  it  played  like  thirty-six  different instruments."  No  wonder  we  are  told  that  "the Princesses  Che  Ambong  and  Che  Muda  dissolved in  tears,  and  the  music  had  to  be  stopped." *
My  informant  declared  that  these  objects  came into  existence  of  themselves  (terjali  sendiri),  at a  spot  between  the  two  peaks  of  a  burning mountain  {gunong  merapi}  in  the  country  of Menangkabau  in  Sumatra.  He  also  averred  that "rain  could  not  rot  them  nor  sun  blister  them," and  that  any  one  who  "  brushed  past  them " (di-lintas)  would  fall  to  the  ground;2  whilst  no fewer  than  seven  buffaloes  have  to  be  slaughtered
1  Maxw.  in  Raja  Donan.J.R.  A.  S.,  Pfsaka   di  toras   (?  turis)  di-tHla- S.S.,  No.  18,  p.  253.  dan,
"  To1  lapok  de'  hujan,  P/saka  di-lintas  tumbang." To?  ttkang  d<?  panas,
28
MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE
CHAP.
before   the    "  moving    mountains "   (when    worn    out) can  be  replaced.1
An  enumeration  of  the  writer's  regalia  often  forms an  important  part  of  a  letter  from  one  Malay  sovereign to  another,  more  especially  when  the  writer  wishes  to emphasise  his  importance.2
1  It  is  usually  upon  a  portion  of  his insignia  (as,  for  instance,  his  k'ris,  which is  dipped  into  water  which  he  drinks) that  a  Malay  sovereign  swears  his  most solemn  oath.     Sometimes,  however,  it is   upon   a   lump  of  iron  called   bfsi kawi,    which    not    unfrequently   forms part   of  the   regalia   as  well.  —  Vide Klink.  s.v.  Besi.
2  The  following  recital  of  the  titles of  a  Sumatran  Raja  will  show  at  least the  extraordinary  pretensions  to  sanctity which  to  this  day  (with,  in  some  parts, no  great  diminution)  hedge  about  the person  of  the  Malay  king  : —
"The  Sultan  of  Menangcabow,  whose residence  is  at  Pagarooyoong  (after  par- don asked  for  presuming  to  mention his  name),  who  is  king  of  kings,  son  of Raja  Iscunder-sulcarnainny,  .... master  of  the  third  of  the  wood  mac- cummat,  one  of  whose  properties  is  to enable  matter  to  fly ;  of  the  lance ornamented  with  the  beard  of  Jangee, of  the  palace  of  the  city  of  Rome  ; ....  of  the  gold  of  twelve  grains named  coodarat  coodaratfee,  resembling a  man  ;  .  .  .  .  who  is  possessed  of the  sword  named  Chooree-se-mendong- geree,  which  has  an  hundred  and  ninety gaps,  made  in  the  conflict  with  the arch-devil,  Se  Cattee-moono,  whom  it slew  ;  who  is  master  of  fresh  water in  the  ocean,  to  the  extent  of  a  day's sailing ;  possessed  of  a  lance  formed of  a  twig  of  ejoo  (the  gomuti,  or sugar-palm) ;  of  a  calrwang  (scimitar) wrapped  in  an  unmade  chinday  (cloth) ; of  a  creese  (dagger)  formed  of  the  soul of  steel,  which,  by  a  noise,  expresses an  unwillingness  at  being  sheathed, and  shows  itself  pleased  when  drawn  ; of  a  date  coeval  with  the  creation  ; possessed  of  a  gun  brought  from  heaven, named  soubahana  hou  ouatanalla ;
of  a  horse  of  the  race  of  sorimbor- aknee,  superior  to  all  others ;  Sultan of  the  Burning  Mountain,  and  of  the mountains  goontang-goontang,  which divide  Palembang  and  Jambee ;  who may  slay  at  pleasure  without  being guilty  of  a  crime  ;  who  is  possessed  of the  elephant  named  settee  dewa;  who is  Vicegerent  of  Heaven  ;  Sultan  of  the Golden  River ;  Lord  of  the  Air  and Clouds ;  master  of  a  balli  (Audience- Hall),  whose  pillars  are  of  the  shrub jelattang;  of  gandangs  (drums)  made of  hollowed  branches  of  the  minute shrubs  pooloot  and  seelosooree ;  of  the gong  that  resounds  to  the  skies  ;  of  the buffalo  named  Se  Binnooang  Satiee, whose  horns  are  ten  feet  asunder ;  of the  unconquered  cock,  Sengonannee;  of the  cocoa  -  nut  tree  whose  amazing height,  and  being  infested  with  serpents and  other  noxious  reptiles,  render  it impossible  to  be  climbed  ;  of  the  flower named  seeree  menjeree,  of  ambrosial scent ;  who,  when  he  goes  to  sleep, wakes  not  till  the  gandang  nobat  (state drum)  sounds  ;  one  of  whose  eyes  is as  the  sun  and  the  other  as  the  moon." — Marsden,  Hist,  of  Sum.  p.  270.
On  the  foregoing  list  I  should like  to  remark  (l)  that  the  necessity of  asking  pardon  for  mentioning  the king's  name  is  considered  by  the  Penin- sular Malays  to  be  as  imperative  as ever.  (2)  The  expression  "who  is  mas- ter of  fresh  water  in  the  ocean "  is explained  by  a  passage  in  Leyden's Malay  Annals  (p.  37),  where,  all  the fresh  water  being  exhausted,  "Raja Sang  Sapurba  directed  them  to  bring rotans  and  tie  them  in  circles  and throw  them  in  the  water  ;  then  having himself  descended  into  a  small  boat, he  inserted  his  feet  into  the  water, within  the  circles  of  bamboo  (sic),  and
ii  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  ROYALTY  29
But  the  extraordinary  strength  of  the  Malay  belief in  the  supernatural  powers  of  the  regalia  of  their sovereigns  can  only  be  thoroughly  realised  after  a study  of  their  romances,  in  which  their  kings  are credited  with  all  the  attributes  of  inferior  gods,  whose birth,  as  indeed  every  subsequent  act  of  their  after  life, is  attended  by  the  most  amazing  prodigies.
They  are  usually  invulnerable,  and  are  gifted with  miraculous  powers,  such  as  that  of  transforming themselves,  and  of  returning  to  (or  recalling  others to)  life ;  in  fact  they  have,  in  every  way,  less  of  the man  about  them  and  more  of  the  god.  Thus  it is  that  the  following  description  of  the  dress  of an  old-time  Raja  falls  easily  into  line  with  what would  otherwise  appear  the  objectless  jargon  which still  constitutes  the  preamble  of  many  a  Malay  prince's letters,  but  which  can  yet  be  hardly  regarded  as  mere rhetoric,  since  it  has  a  deep  meaning  for  those  who read  it : —
"  He  wore  the  trousers  called  beraduwanggi, miraculously  made  without  letting  in  pieces  ;  hundreds of  mirrors  encircled  his  waist,  thousands  encircled  his
by  the  Power  of  God  Almighty  and  the  another    Sultan    of    "  Menangcabow  "
virtue  of  a  descendant  of  Raja  Secander  named  "Gaggar  Allum"(Gegar 'Alam),
Zulkameini,    the   water   within    these  "were  a  sacred  crown  from  God";  "the
circles  became  fresh,  and  all  the  crews  cloth  sansistah  kallah,  which   weaves
supplied  themselves  with  it,  and  unto  itself,  and  adds  one   thread  yearly  of
this  day  the  fresh  water  is  mixed  with  fine  pearls,  and  when  that  cloth  shall
the  salt  at  this  place."     (3)  The  horse,  be  finished  the  world  will  be  no  more  "  ;
which    is   usually  called  "  Sembrani,"  "  the  dagger  Hangin  Cinga  (Singa  ?)
is  a   magic   steed,    "  which   could  fly  which  will,  at  his  command,  fight  of
through  the  air  as  well  as  swim  through  itself";    "the  blue  champaka  flower,
the   water"    (Leyd.,    Mai.    Ann,     p.  which  is  to  be  found  in  no  country  but
17).      (4)   For  the  mountains  Goon-  his    (being    yellow    elsewhere),"    and
tang-goontang  (or  Saguntang    Maha-  many   others    worthy   of    the    Sultan
miru),  cp.   Leyden's  Mai.  Ann.  p.  20  "  whose  presence  bringeth  death  to  all
seqq.     (5)  The   privilege  of  "slaying  who  attempt  to  approach  him  without
at  pleasure  without  being  guilty  of  a  permission, "  and   of  the    "  Sultan   of
crime "  is  a  privilege  which  still  belongs  Indrapore,     who    has     four    breasts."
to  Malay  sovereigns  of  the  first  rank.  — Marsden,  Hist,  of  Sum.  p.  272. Similar  sacred  objects,  belonging  to
30  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
legs,   they  were   sprinkled   all    about   his   body,    and larger  ones  followed  the  seams."
Then  his  waistband  (kain  ikat  pinggang)  was of  "flowered  cloth,  twenty-five  cubits  in  length,  or thirty  if  the  fringe  be  included  ;  thrice  a  day  did  it change  its  colours — in  the  morning  transparent  as  dew, at  mid-day  of  the  colour  of  lembayong?  and  in  the evening  of  the  hue  of  oil."
Next  came  his  coat.  It  was  "of  reddish  purple velvet,  thrice  brilliant  the  lustre  of  its  surface,  seven times  powerful  the  strength  of  the  dye ;  the  dyer  after making  it  sailed  the  world  for  three  years,  but  the  dye still  clung  to  the  palms  of  his  hands."
His  dagger  was  "  a  straight  blade  of  one  piece  which spontaneously  screwed  itself  into  the  haft.  The  grooves, called  retak  mayat?  started  from  the  base  of  the  blade, the  damask  called  pamur  janji  appeared  half-way  up, and  the  damask  called  lam  jilallah  at  the  point ;  the damask  alif  was  there  parallel  with  the  edge,  and where  the  damasking  ended  the  steel  was  white.  No ordinary  metal  was  the  steel,  it  was  what  was  over after  making  the  bolt  of  God's  Ka'abah  (at  Meccah). It  had  been  forged  by  the  son  of  God's  prophet, Adam,  smelted  in  the  palm  of  his  hand,  fashioned with  the  end  of  his  finger,  and  coloured  with  the  juice
1  I.e.  purple,  -vide  Klinkert,  s. v.;  cf.  Indo-Chinese  nation.      "  Le  general  en
the  following  from /.  R.A.S.,  S.£.,  No.  chef    doit    se    conformer   a   plusieurs
9,  p.  93  :   "Tan  Saban  was  frequently  coutumes et observances superstitieuses ;
to  be  seen  on  the  outworks  of  his  fort  par  exemple,  il  faut   qu'il   mette  une
across  the  river,  dressed  in  garments  of  robe  de  couleur  differente  pour  chaque
conspicuous  colours.      In  the  morning  jour   de   la  semaine  ;    le    dimanche   il
he  wore  red,  at  mid-day  yellow,  and  in  s'habille  en  blanc,  le  lundi  en  jaune,
the  evening  his  clothes    were    green.  le  mardi  en  vert,  le  mercredi  en  rouge,
When  he   was   pointed  out  to  Magat  le  jeudi  en  bleu,  le  vendredi  en  noir,  et
Terawis,  it  was  the  morning,  and  he  le     samedi     en    violet."  —  Pallegoix,
was  dressed  in  red."  Description  de  St'am,  vol.  i.  p.  319.
The  foregoing  superstitious  observ-  2  Lit.  "corpse  grooves." ance  is  found   among  more  than  one
ii  EQUIPMENTS  OF  ROYALTY  31
of  flowers  in  a  Chinese  furnace.  Its  deadly  qualities came  down  to  it  from  the  sky,  and  if  cleaned  (with acid)  at  the  source  of  a  river,  the  fish  at  the  embouchure came  floating  up  dead.
"  The  sword  that  he  wore  was  called  lang  pen- gonggong?  'the  successful  swooper/lit.  the  'kite  carry- ing off  its  prey.'
"  The  next  article  described  is  his  turban,  which, among  the  Malays,  is  a  square  handkerchief  folded and  knotted  round  the  head."
"  He  next  took  his  royal  handkerchief,  knotting it  so  that  it  stood  up  with  the  ends  projecting ;  one  of them  he  called  dendam  ta  sudah  (endless  love) :  it  was purposely  unfinished  ;  if  it  were  finished  the  end  of  the world  would  come.  It  had  been  woven  in  no  ordinary way,  but  had  been  the  work  of  his  mother  from  her youth.  Wearing  it  he  was  provided  with  all  the love-compelling  secrets.  (The  names  of  a  number  of charms  to  excite  passion  are  given,  but  they  cannot  be explained  in  the  compass  of  a  note)." 2
He  wore  the  Malay  national  garment — the  sarong. It  was  "a  robe  of  muslin  of  the  finest  kind;  no ordinary  weaving  had  produced  it ;  it  had  been  woven in  a  jar  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean  by  people  with gills,  relieved  by  others  with  beaks ;  no  sooner  was  it finished  than  the  maker  was  put  to  death,  so  that  no one  might  be  able  to  make  one  like  it.  It  was  not  of the  fashion  of  the  clothing  of  the  rajas  of  the  present day,  but  of  those  of  olden  time.  If  it  were  put  in  the sun  it  got  damper,  if  it  were  soaked  in  water  it  became drier.  A  slight  tear  mended  by  darning  only  increased
1  The  usual  form  is  ptnggonggong,  leman,"  "Asam  garam"  "  Ahadan
from  gonggong,  to  carry  in  the  mouth.  mabuk,"  "  Sa-palit  gila"  "  Sri  gfgah"
-  Their  Malay  names  are  "  Si-mula-  and  "  Doa  unus." — J.R.A.S.,  S.£.,
jadi"  "  Ashik  sa-kampong"  "  Si-putar  No.  17,  pp.  94-97.
32  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
its  value,  instead  of  lessening  it,  for  the  thread  for  the purpose  cost  one  hundred  dollars.  A  single  dewdrop dropping  on  it  would  tangle  the  thread  for  a  cubit's length,  while  the  breath  of  the  south  wind  would  dis- entangle it."
Finally,  we  get  a  description  of  the  way  in  which the  Raja  (S'ri  Rama)  set  out  upon  his  journey.
"He  adopted  the  art  called  sedang  budiman, the  young  snake  writhed  at  his  feet  (i.e.  he  started  at mid-day  when  his  own  shadow  was  round  his  feet), a  young  eagle  was  flying  against  the  wind  overhead  ; he  took  a  step  forward  and  then  two  backward,  one forward  as  a  sign  that  he  was  leaving  his  country,  and two  backward  as  a  sign  that  he  would  return  ;  as  he took  a  step  with  the  right  foot,  loud  clanked  his accoutrements l  on  his  left ;  as  he  put  forth  the  left  foot a  similar  clank  was  heard  on  his  right ;  he  advanced, swelling  out  his  broad  chest,  and  letting  drop  his slender  fingers,  adopting  the  gait  called  '  planting beans,'  and  then  the  step  called  '  sowing  spinach.' '
In  addition  to  the  sanctity  of  the  regalia,  the  king, as  the  divine  man,  possesses  an  infinite  multitude  of prerogatives  which  enter  into  almost  every  act  of  his private  life,  and  thus  completely  separate  him  from  the generality  of  his  fellow-men.
These  prerogatives  are  too  numerous  to  be mentioned  in  detail,  but  the  following  extract  from Leyden's  translation  of  the  "  Malay  Annals  "  will  give  a general  idea  of  their  character  and  extent : —
1  The     Malay     word     is   changgei,  the  arms  reminds  the  Malay  of  the  way which  means   "long  nails"   (whether  a  man  steps  and  raises  his  arm  to  plant natural  or  artificial) ;  artificial  nails  are  bean-seeds  six  feet   apart ;    a   quicker several  inches  in  length,  being  much  step  and  a  rounder  swing  of  the  arms  is affected  by  Malay  actors  performing  as  compared   to  the  action  of  scattering royalty.  small  seeds. — -J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  loc.  cit.
2  A  long  step  and  a  slow  swing  of
ii  ROYAL  PREROGATIVES  33
"Sultan  Muhammed  Shah  again  established  in order  the  throne  of  his  sovereignty.  He  was  the first  who  prohibited  the  wearing  of  yellow  clothes  in public,  not  even  a  handkerchief  of  that  colour,  nor curtains,  nor  hangings,  nor  large  pillow-cases,  nor coverlets,  nor  any  envelope  of  any  bundle,  nor  the cloth  lining  of  a  house,  excepting  only  the  waist  cloth, the  coat,  and  the  turban.  He  also  prohibited  the  con- structing of  houses  with  abutments,  or  smaller  houses connected  with  them  ;  also  suspended  pillars  or  timbers (tiang  gantong] ;  nor  timbers  the  tops  of  which  project above  the  roofs,  and  also  summer  houses.1  He  also prohibited  the  ornamenting  of  creeses  with  gold,  and the  wearing  anklets  of  gold,  and  the  wearing  the  koron- chong,  or  hollow  bracelets  (anklets  ?)  of  gold,  ornamented with  silver.  None  of  these  prohibited  articles  did  he permit  to  be  worn  by  a  person,  however  rich  he  might be,  unless  by  his  particular  licence,  a  privilege  which the  raja  has  ever  since  possessed.  He  also  forbade any  one  to  enter  the  palace  unless  wearing  a  cloth petticoat 2  of  decent  length,  with  his  creese  in  front ; s and  a  shoulder-cloth ;  and  no  person  was  permitted to  enter  unless  in  this  array,  and  if  any  one  wore  his creese  behind  him,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  porter  of the  gate  to  seize  it.  Such  is  the  order  of  former  time respecting  prohibition  by  the  Malayu  rajas,  and  what- ever is  contrary  to  this  is  a  transgression  against  the raja,  and  ought  to  incur  a  fine  of  five  cati.  The  white
1  In   house  -  building   it   is    further  that    of    the     main     building     (kelek
forbidden  to  dovetail  or  make  the  ends  anak),
of  the    timbers  (e.g.    of  the   roof)  fit  2  I.e.  the  sarong  or  Malay  national
accurately  together,  and  also  to  build  garment ;   for  the  custom,  vide  Cliff.,
two   verandahs,   one  on  each  side  of  In  Court  and  Kampong,  p.   158,  and
the  house,  with  their  floors  on  a  level  for  an  exception,  ib.  2"j.
with   the   floor    of    the    main    build-  3  The  hilt  of  the  creese  (frt's)  must,
ing ;  if  two   verandahs  are  used,   the  however,  be  hidden  by  a  fold  of  the
floor    of    one   must   be    lower    than  cloth  about  the  wearer's  waist.
34  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
umbrella,  which  is  superior  to  the  yellow  one,  because it  is  seen  conspicuous  at  a  greater  distance,  was  also confined  to  the  raja's  person,1  while  the  yellow  umbrella was  confined  to  his  family."  '
A  number  of  other  particulars  bearing  on  this  sub- ject will  be  found  in  other  parts  of  the  text,  and  in  the Appendix  references  are  given  to  other  works  for additional  details,  which  are  too  numerous  to  be recorded  here.
"At  funerals,  whether  the  deceased  has  been  a great  or  insignificant  person,  if  he  be  a  subject,  the use  of  the  Payong  (umbrella)  and  the  Puwadi  is interdicted,  as  also  the  distribution  of  alms,  unless  by royal  permission  ;  otherwise  the  articles  thus  forbidden will  be  confiscated."  "Puwadi  is  the  ceremony  of spreading  a  cloth,  generally  a  white  one,  for  funeral and  other  processions  to  walk  upon.  Should  the  de- ceased be  of  high  rank,  the  cloth  extends  from  the  house where  the  corpse  is  deposited,  to  the  burial-ground."  *
Similar  prohibitions  are  still  in  force  at  the  courts of  the  Malay  Sultans  in  the  Peninsula,  though  a  yellow umbrella  is  now  generally  substituted  for  the  white,  at least  in  Selangor.
A  distinction  is  also  now  drawn  between  manu- factured yellow  cloth  and  cloth  which  has  been  dyed yellow  with  saffron,  the  wrongful  use  of  the  latter (the  genuine  article)  being  regarded  as  the  more especially  heinous  act.
In  addition  to  the  royal  monopoly  of  such  objects
1  ' '  The  covered  portion  of  the  barge  bows   with   long   bamboo   poles    held
which  carries  the  Sultan's  principal  wife  close    together   and    erect. "  —  Malay
is  decorated  with  six  scarlet-bordered  Sketches,  p.  214.
white  umbrellas.     Two  officers  stand,  2  Leyden,  Malay  Annals,  pp.   94,
all  day  long,  just  outside  the  state-room,  95.
holding    open    black    umbrellas   with  3  Code   of  Malacca,    translated    in
silver  fringes,  and  two  others  are  in  the  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  234,  235.
ii  LINGUISTIC  TABOOS  35
as  have  been  mentioned,  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  mentions three  royal  perquisites  (larangan  raja),  i.e.  river  turtles (tuntong)  (by  which  he  no  doubt  means  their  eggs) ; elephants  (by  which  he  doubtless  means  elephants' tusks);1  and  the  fruit  of  the  "  ketiar"  from  which  oil is  made  by  the  Perak  Malays.  He  adds,  "It  used  to be  a  capital  offence  to  give  false  information  to  the  Raja about  any  of  these.  The  '  ketiar '  tree  is  said  to  affect certain  localities,  and  is  found  in  groves  not  mixed with  other  trees.  In  former  days,  when  the  fruit  was ripe,  the  whole  of  the  Raja's  household  would  turn  out to  gather  it.  It  is  said  to  yield  a  very  large  percentage of  oil." 2
The  only  tree  in  Ridley's  list 3  whose  name  at  all resembles  the  "ketiar"  is  the  katiak,  which  is  identi- fied as  Acronychia  Porteri,  Wall  (Rutaceae).
A  description  of  the  gathering  of  the  eggs  of  river turtles  by  the  royal  party  in  Perak  will  be  found  in Malay  Sketches?
Besides  the  above  there  are  not  a  few  linguistic taboos  connected  with  the  king's  person,  such  as the  use  of  the  words  santap,  to  eat ;  beradu,  to sleep;  bersemaiam,  to  be  seated,  or  to  "reside"  in a  certain  place;  berangkat,  to  "progress";  siram, to  bathe ;  gring,  to  be  sick ;  and  mangkat,  to  die ; all  of  which  words  are  specially  substituted  for  the ordinary  Malay  words  when  reference  is  made  to  the king.5  Moreover,  when  the  king  dies  his  name  is
1  In  Selangor  this  royal  right  to  one  2  Notes  and  Queries,  No.  4,  issued
of  each  pair  of  elephant's  tusks  is  still  wihJ.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  17,  sect.  75.
a  tradition  to  which  an  allusion  is  oc-  3  J.R.A.S.>  S.B.,  No.  30,  p.  127.
casionally  made.      There  are  said  to  4  Swettenham,  op.  cit.  pp.  211-226.
have  been  other  perquisites  as  well  as  6  Others    are    titah     (commands)  ;
those  mentioned,  e.g.  rhinoceros'  horns  patek  (slave) ;  mtrka  or  murka  (wrath) ;
(suml/u     badak)     and     bezoar    stones  karnia  or  kumia  (favour) ;  and  nlgrah
\guliga).  or  anugrah  (permission)  ;  the  penalty  of
36  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
dropped,  and  he  receives  the  title  of  "  Marhum,"  the late  or  "deceased,"  with  the  addition  of  an  expression alluding  to  some  prominent  fact  in  his  life,  or  occasion- ally to  the  place  of  his  decease.  These  titles,  strange as  it  may  seem,  are  often  the  reverse  of  complimentary, and  occasionally  ridiculous.1
It  must  not  be  forgotten,  too,  in  discussing  the divine  attributes  of  the  Malay  king,  that  he  is  firmly believed  to  possess  a  personal  influence  over  the  works of  nature,  such  as  the  growth  of  the  crops  and  the bearing  of  fruit-trees.  This  same  property  is  supposed to  reside  in  a  lesser  degree  in  his  delegates,  and  even in  the  persons  of  Europeans  in  charge  of  districts. Thus  I  have  frequently  known  (in  Selangor)  the  suc- cess or  failure  of  the  rice  crops  attributed  to  a  change of  district  officers,  and  in  one  case  I  even  heard  an outbreak  of  ferocity  which  occurred  among  man-eating crocodiles  laid  at  the  door  of  a  most  zealous  and  able, though  perhaps  occasionally  somewhat  unsympathetic, representative  of  the  Government.  So,  too,  on  one
uttering  any  of  which,  except  in  address-  Siam.  The  various  kings  of  those ing  the  sovereign,  is  death,  i.e.  should  countries  are  generally  distinguished  by the  offender  be  a  royal  slave ;  should  some  nickname  derived  from  facts  in he  be  any  other  individual,  he  is  struck  their  reign  or  personal  relations,  and on  the  mouth. — Newbold,0/.  cit,  vol.  ii.  applied  to  them  after  their  decease. PP-  233'2345  vide  also  Malay  Sketches,  Thus  we  hear  among  the  Burmese p.  218,  where  the  same  list  of  linguistic  kings  of  'the  king  dethroned  by taboos  appears  to  be  used  in  Perak.  foreigners,'  '  the  king  who  fled  from 1  Marhum,  one  who  has  found  the  Chinese,'  'the  grandfather  king,' mercy,  i.e.  the  deceased.  It  is  the  and  even  '  the  king  thrown  into  the custom  of  Malays  to  discontinue  after  water.'  Now  this  has  a  close  parallel the  death  of  a  king  the  use  of  the  title  in  the  Archipelago.  Among  the  kings which  he  bore  during  his  life.  A  new  of  Macassar,  we  find  one  king  known title  is  invented  for  the  deceased  only  as  the  '  Throat-cutter ' ;  another monarch,  by  which  he  is  ever  after-  as  '  He  who  ran  amuck  ' ;  a  third, wards  known.  The  existence  of  a  '  The  beheaded ' ;  a  fourth,  '  He  who similar  custom  among  other  Indo-  was  beaten  to  death  on  his  own  stair- Chinese  races  has  been  noticed  by  case. ' "  Colonel  Yule  ascribes  the  origin Colonel  Yule:  "  There  is  also  a  custom  of  this  custom  to  Ancient  India, of  dropping  or  concealing  the  proper  [  Journal  Anthrop.  Institute. ]_/..£. .,4. -S1., name  of  the  king.  This  exists  in  S.B.,  No.  9,  p.  98. Burma  and  (according  to  La  Loubere)  in
SALUTATION  37
occasion  when  three  deaths  occurred  during  a  District Officer's  temporary  absence,  the  mere  fact  of  his absence  was  considered  significant.  I  may  add  that royal  blood  is  supposed  by  many  Malays  to  be  white, and  this  is  the  pivot  on  which  the  plot  of  not  a  few Malay  folk-tales  is  made  to  turn.1
Finally,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the  greatest possible  importance  is  attached  to  the  method  of  salut- ing the  king.
In  the  "  Sri  Rama "  (the  Malay  Ramayana)  we read,  even  of  the  chiefs,  that —
"  While  yet  some  way  off  they  bowed  to  the  dust, When  they  got  near  they  made  obeisance, Uplifting  at  each  step  their  fingers  ten,
The  hands  closed  together  like  the  rootlets  of  the  bakong  palm  2 The  fingers  one  on  the  other  like  a  pile  of  sirih 2  leaves."  8
Equals  in  rank  when  saluting  one  another  touch 4 (though  they  do  not  shake)  each  other's  hands,  but a  person  of  humble  birth  must  not  touch  hands in  saluting  a  great  chief.  "A  man,  named  Imam Bakar,  was  once  slain  at  Pasir  Tambang,  at  the  mouth of  the  Tembeling  river.  He  incautiously  touched hands  in  greeting  with  a  Chief  called  To'  Gajah,  and the  latter,  seizing  him  in  an  iron  grip,  held  him  fast, while  he  was  stabbed  to  death  with  spears."5
In  saluting  a  great  Chief,  like  the  Dato'  Maharaja Perba  j£lai,  the  hands  are  "lifted  up  in  salutation with  the  palms  pressed  together,  as  in  the  attitude of  Christian  prayer,  but  the  tips  of  the  thumbs  are
1  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  288,  superior  in  rank,  it  is  proper,  in  draw- note,  ing  back  your  hands,  to  bring  them  at
8  The  bakong  is  a  kind  of  lily  ;  the  least  as  high  as  your  chest ;  and  if  the
sirih  is  the  Malay  betel-vine.  other  is  decidedly  your  superior,  even
3  J.R.A.S.,  S,B.,  No.  17,  p.  93.  as  high  as  your  forehead,  bending  for-
4  Touching  hands  is  done  with  both       ward  somewhat  while  doing  so. hands  together.      If  you   touch  hands  8  Cliff.,  Stud,  in  Brown  Humanity, with   a   man  who   is   somewhat   your       p.  175.
38  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
not  suffered  to  ascend  beyond  the  base  of  the  chin. In  saluting  a  real  Raja,  the  hands  are  carried higher  and  higher,  according  to  the  prince's  rank, until,  for  the  Sultan,  the  tips  of  the  thumbs  are  on a  level  with  the  forehead.  Little  details  such  as these  are  of  immense  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the Malays,  and  not  without  reason,  seeing  that  in  an Independent  Native  State  many  a  man  has  come  by  his death  for  carelessness  in  their  observance." l
In  the  king's  audience  hall  the  formal  saluta- tions are  performed  in  a  sitting  posture,  and  in this  case,  too,  the  greatest  attention  is  paid  to  the height  to  which  the  hands  are  raised.  The  chief  twice makes  salutation  in  a  sitting  posture  as  he  advances, and  at  the  third  advance  bends  over  the  Sultan's hands,  two  more  salutations  being  made  on  his  way back  to  his  place.
A  flagrant  infringement  of  any  of  the  prerogatives of  the  Sultan,  such  as  those  I  have  described,  is  certain, it  is  thought,  to  prove  fatal,  more  or  less  immediately.
Thus  the  death  of  Penghulu  Mohit,  a  well-known Malay  headman  of  the  Klang  district,  in  Selangor,  which took  place  while  I  was  in  charge  of  that  district,  was at  the  time  very  generally  attributed  by  the  local Malays  to  his  usurpation  of  certain  royal  privileges or  prerogatives  on  the  occasion  of  his  daughter's wedding.  One  of  these  was  his  acceptance  of  gift-
1  Cliff.,    In    Court   and   Kampong,  has  passed,  for  according  to  Malay  ideas
p.  113,  and  compare  the  following  : —  it  shows  a  want  of  respect  in  a  subject
"Visitors  to  Jugra  may  often  in  the  to  remain  standing  in  the  presence  of
evening  see  a  party  of  some  30  or  40  men  his  Raja"  .   .   .   "  on  replying  to  His
coming  along  the  road  with  His  High-  Highness  natives  place  the   palms  of
ness  "    [the  late    Sultan  'Abdulsamad  their  hands  together  and  so  raise  them
of  Selangor]    "  walking   a   few    paces  to  their  forehead,  by  way  of  obeisance,
ahead  of  them.     Should  a  native  meet  and   this    is   done   even   by   his   own
the  little  procession  he  will  squat  down  children. " — Selangor  Journal,   vol.    i.
at  the  side  of  the  road  until  the  Sultan  No.  i,  p.  5.
ii  INFRINGEMENT  OF  ROYAL  TABOOS  39
buffaloes,  decorated  after  the  royal  fashion,  which  were presented  to  him  as  wedding  gifts  in  his  daughter's honour.  These  buffaloes  had  a  covering  of  cloth  put over  them,  their  horns  covered,  and  a  crescent-shaped breast -ornament  (dokok)  hung  about  their  necks. Thus  dressed  they  were  taken  to  Mohit's  house  in solemn  procession.1  It  was,  at  the  time,  considered significant  that  the  very  first  of  these  gift-buffaloes, which  had  been  brought  overland  from  Jugra,  where the  Sultan  lived,  had  died  on  arrival,  and  whatever the  cause  may  have  been,  it  is  a  fact  that  Mohit's mother  died  a  day  or  two  after  the  conclusion  of  the wedding  ceremonies,  and  that  Mohit  himself  was taken  ill  almost  immediately  and  died  only  about  a fortnight  later.
The  only  person  who,  in  former  days,  was  not in  the  least  affected  by  the  royal  taboos  which  pro- tected the  regalia  from  the  common  touch  was  the (now  I  believe  extinct)  official  who  held  the  post  of Court  Physician  (Maharaja  Lela).  He,  and  he  alone, might  go  freely  in  the  royal  apartments  wherever  he chose,  and  the  immunity  and  freedom  which  he  en- joyed in  this  respect  passed  into  a  proverb,  the  ex- pression "  to  act  the  Court  Physician  "  (buat  Maharaja Lela)  being  used  to  describe  an  altogether  unwarrant- able familiarity  or  impertinence.
The  following  story  (though  I  tell  it  against  myself) is  perhaps  the  best  illustration  I  can  give  of  the  great danger  supposed  to  be  incurred  by  those  who  meddle with  the  paraphernalia  of  royalty.  Among  the  late Sultan's  insignia  of  royalty  (in  1897)  were  a  couple  of
1  This  dressing  up  of  the  buffaloes,  their  necks,  suggests  the  survival  of when  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  anthropomorphic  ideas  about  the  sacri- suspension  of  the  breast-ornament  about  ficial  buffalo.
MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE
CHAP.
drums  (gendang]  and  the  long  silver  trumpet  which  I have  already  described.  Such  trumpets  are  found among  the  kabesaran  or  regalia  of  most  Malay  States, and  are  always,  I  believe,  called  lempiri  or  nempiri (Pers.  nafiri\  They  are  considered  so  sacred  that  they can  only  be  handled  or  sounded,  it  is  believed,  by  a tribe  of  Malays  called  "Orang  Kalau,"  or  the  "  Kalau men,"1  as  any  one  else  who  attempted  to  sound  them would  be  struck  dead.  Even  the  "  Orang  Kalau," moreover,  can  only  sound  this  instrument  at  the proper  time  and  season  (e.g.  at  the  proclamation  of  a new  sovereign),  for  if  they  were  to  sound  it  at  any other  time  its  noise  would  slay  all  who  heard  it,  since it  is  the  chosen  habitation  of  the  "  Jin  Karaja'an  "  or State  Demon,2  whose  delight  it  would  be,  if  wrongfully disturbed,  to  slay  and  spare  not.3
This  trumpet  and  the  drums  of  the  Selangor regalia  were  kept  by  the  present  Sultan  (then  Raja Muda,  or  Crown  Prince  of  Selangor)  in  a  small  gal-
1  Among  the  Malays  the  use  of  the naubat   is    confined    to    the    reigning Rajas  of  a  few  States,  and  the  privi- lege is  one  of  the  most  valuable  insignia of  royalty.      In    Perak    the   office  of musician  used  to  be  an  hereditary  one, the     performers    were     called    Orang Kalauy  and  a  special  tax  was  levied  for their  support  (J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  9, p.  104).
2  I   was  told  that  these  dangerous genii  or  spirits   resided  in  the  naubat or   Big    State   Drum,    the    two  g?n- dang  or  Small  State  Drums,  the  two langkara    or    State     Kettle    Drums, the   l/mpiri  or    State   Trumpet,    the sgrunei     or     State     Flute,     and    the Kris    or     State    Dagger,     called    (in Selangor)      tfrok     b/rayun,     or      the "Swaying   Baboon,"  which   latter   is
said  to  have  slain  "a  hundred  men less  one"  since  it  was  first  used. [I  learnt  this  from  H.H.  the  late Sultan  himself,  and  here  record  it,
because  it  has  sometimes  been  asserted that  H.H.  the  Sultan  claimed  to have  slain  these  ninety-nine  men  with his  own  hand,  which  H.H.  assured me  was  not  the  case.]  The  sanctity  of the  remaining  pieces  of  the  regalia appears  to  be  less  marked.  They  are the  payong  ubor-ubor  or  State  Um- brella, the  State  Trident,  and  the  State Lances  or  tombak  bandangan.  Of the  Selangor  State  Trumpet  I  was  told that  any  one  who  "  brushed  hastily  past it  "  (siapa-siapa  mUlintas-nya}  would  be fined  one  dollar,  even  if  he  were  the Sultan  himself  (walo"  Sultan-pun  ktfna juga).
8  But  in  Malay  Sketches  (p.  2 1 5)  we read  that  in  Perak  the  royal  instru- ments accompany  the  royal  water- parties,  and  that  "  the  royal  bugler  sits on  the  extreme  end  of  the  prow,  and from  time  to  time  blows  a  call  on  the antique  silver  trumpet  of  the  regalia."
ii  PECULIAR  SANCTITY  OF  THE  REGALIA  41
vanised  iron  cupboard  which  stood  (upon  posts  about three  feet  high)  in  the  middle  of  a  lawn  outside  His Highness'  "garden  residence  "  at  Bandar.  His  High- ness himself  informed  me  that  they  had  once  been  kept in  the  house  itself,  but  when  there  they  were  the  source of  infinite  annoyance  and  anxiety  to  the  inmates  on account  of  their  very  uncanny  behaviour !
Drops  of  perspiration,  for  instance,  would  form  upon the  Trumpet  when  a  leading  member  of  the  Royal House  was  about  to  die  (this  actually  happened,  as  I was  told,  at  Langat  just  before  the  death  of  Tungku 'Chik,  the  late  Sultan's  eldest  daughter,  who  died during  my  residence  in  the  neighbourhood).  Then one  Raja  Bakar,  son  of  a  Raja  'AH,  during  the  re- thatching  of  the  house  at  Bandar,  accidentally  trod upon  the  wooden  barrel  of  one  of  the  State  Drums — and  died  in  consequence  of  his  inadvertence.  When, therefore,  a  hornet's  nest  formed  inside  one  of  these same  drums  it  was  pretty  clear  that  things  were  going from  bad  to  worse,  and  a  Chinaman  was  ordered  to remove  it,  no  Malay  having  been  found  willing  to  risk his  life  in  undertaking  so  dangerous  an  office — an  un- willingness which  was  presently  justified,  as  the  China- man, too,  after  a  few  days'  interval,  swelled  up  and died.  Both  these  strange  coincidences  were  readily confirmed  by  the  present  Sultan  on  an  occasion when  I  happened  to  question  the  authenticity  of  the story,  and  as  His  Highness  is  one  of  the  most  en- lightened and  truthful  of  men,  such  confirmation  cannot easily  be  set  aside.  But  the  strangest  coincidence  of all  was  to  follow,  for  not  long  afterwards,  having  never seen  that  portion  of  the  regalia  which  was  in  the  Raja Muda's  charge,  I  happened  to  mention  to  a  Malay friend  of  mine  at  Jugra  my  wish  to  be  allowed  to
42  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
examine  these  objects,  and  was  at  once  begged  not to  touch  them,  on  the  ground  that  "  no  one  could  say what  might  follow."  But  shortly  after,  having  occasion to  visit  the  Raja  Muda  at  his  house  at  Bandar,  I  took the  opportunity  of  asking  whether  there  was  any objection  to  my  seeing  these  much  debated  objects, and  as  His  Highness  not  only  very  obligingly  assented, but  offered  to  show  them  to  me  himself,  I  was  able both  to  see  and  to  handle  them,  His  Highness  himself taking  the  Trumpet  out  of  its  yellow  case  and  handing it  to  me.  I  thought  nothing  more  of  the  matter  at  the time,  but,  by  what  was  really  a  very  curious  coincidence, within  a  few  days'  time  of  the  occurrence,  was  seized with  a  sharp  attack  of  malarial  influenza,  the  result  of which  was  that  I  was  obliged  to  leave  the  district,  and go  into  hospital  at  headquarters.  In  a  Malay  village news  spreads  quickly,  and  the  report  of  my  indisposi- tion, after  what  was  no  doubt  regarded  as  an  act  of extraordinary  rashness,  appears  to  have  made  a  pro- found impression,  and  the  result  of  it  was  that  a  Malay who  probably  considered  himself  indebted  to  me  for some  assistance  he  had  received,  bound  himself  by  a vow  to  offer  sacrifice  at  the  shrine  of  a  famous  local saint  should  I  be  permitted  to  return  to  the  district. Of  this,  however,  I  knew  nothing  at  the  time,  and nothing  could  have  exceeded  my  astonishment  when I  found  upon  my  return  that  it  was  my  duty  to  attend the  banquet  which  took  place  at  the  saint's  tomb  in honour  of  my  own  recovery  ! l
Having  shown  the  wide  gulf  which    divides  the
1  TheMalayheadman(Haji  Brahim),  ceremony.     A  goat  had  been  killed  for
the    priest    of  the    local    mosque,    the  the  occasion,   and  the  party  who  were
Bilal    (an    inferior    attendant    at    the  paying  the  vow  brought  its  flesh  with
mosque),  and  some  thirty  Malays  be-  them,  together  with  a  great  heap  of  rice
longing  to  the  village,  took  part  in  this  stained  with  saffron  (turmeric).     The
n  SANCTITY  OF  THE  HEAD  43
"  divine  man  "  from  his  fellows,  I  have  still  to  point  out the  extent  to  which  certain  portions  of  the  human  frame have  come  to  be  invested  with  sanctity,  and  to  require  to be  treated  with  special  ceremonies.  These  parts  of  the anatomy  are,  in  particular,  the  head,  the  hair,  the  teeth, the  ears,  and  the  nails,  all  of  which  I  will  take  in  their order.
The  head,  in  the  first  place,  is  undoubtedly  still  con- sidered by  the  Malays  to  possess  some  modified  degree of  sanctity.  A  proof  of  this  is  the  custom  (ladat)  which regulates  the  extent  of  the  sacrifice  to  be  offered  in  a case  of  assault  or  battery  by  the  party  committing the  injury.  If  any  part  of  the  head  is  injured,  nothing less  than  a  goat  will  suffice  (the  animal  being  killed  and both  parties  bathed  in  the  blood)  ;  if  the  upper  part  of the  body,  the  slaughter  of  a  cock  (to  be  disposed  of  in a  similar  way)  will  be  held  to  be  sufficient  reparation, and  so  on,  the  sacrifice  becoming  of  less  value  in  pro- portion as  the  injured  part  is  farther  from  the  head. So,  too,  Mr.  Frazer  writes:  "The  .  .  .  superstition (of  the  sanctity  of  the  head)  exists  among  the  Malays  ; for  an  early  traveller  reports  that  in  Java  people  '  wear nothing  on  their  heads,  and  say  that  nothing  must  be  on their  heads,  .  .  .  and  if  any  person  were  to  put  his hand  upon  their  head  they  would  kill  him ;  and  they do  not  build  houses  with  stories  in  order  that  they may  not  walk  over  each  other's  heads.'  It  is  also  found in  full  force  throughout  Polynesia."1
From  the  principle  of  the  sanctity  of  the  head  flows, no  doubt,  the  necessity  of  using  the  greatest  circum-
men  assembled  at  the  tomb,  incense  was  banquet    followed,    in    which    we    all
burned,  and  Arabic  prayers  read,  after  took  part.
which  a  white  cloth,  five  cubits  long,  l  Frazer,  Gotten  Bough,  \o\.  i.  p.  189. was    laid    on    the   saint's   grave.       A
44  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
spection  during  the  process  of  cutting  the  hair.1  Some- times throughout  the  whole  life  of  the  wearer,  and frequently  during  special  periods,  the  hair  is  left  uncut. Thus  I  was  told  that  in  former  days  Malay  men  usually wore  their  hair  long,  and  I  myself  have  seen  an  instance of  this  at  Jugra  in  Selangor  in  the  person  of  a  Malay2 of  the  old  school,  who  was  locally  famous  on  this  account. So,  too,  during  the  forty  days  which  must  elapse before  the  purification  of  a  woman  after  the  birth  of her  child,  the  father  of  the  child  is  forbidden  to  cut  his hair,  and  a  similar  abstention  is  said  to  have  been formerly  incumbent  upon  all  persons  either  prosecut- ing a  journey  or  engaging  in  war.  Often  a  boy's head  is  entirely  shaven  shortly  after  birth  with  the exception  of  a  single  lock  in  the  centre  of  the  head, and  so  maintained  until  the  boy  begins  to  grow  up, but  frequently  the  operation  is  postponed  (generally, it  is  said,  in  consequence  of  a  vow  made  by  the  child's parents)  until  the  period  of  puberty  or  marriage.  Great care,  too,  must  be  exercised  in  disposing  of  the  clip- pings of  hair  (more  especially  \hefirst  clippings),  as  the Malay  profoundly  believes  that  "the  sympathetic  con- nection which  exists  between  himself  and  every  part
1  For  the  ideas  referred  to  in  this  and  to  have  been  for  men  to  wear  their  hair the  preceding  paragraph,  cp.  Frazer,  op,  down  to  the  shoulders  (rambut  panjang fit.  vol.  i.  pp.  187-207.    Cp.  also  for  the  jijak  bahu),  but  they  would  frequently abstention  from  hair-cutting  at  child-  wear  it  below  the  waist  (rambut  sa-pifr- birth,     Clifford's     Studies    in    Brown  hfmpasan),  in  which  case  it  appears  to Humanity,  p.   48.      The  idea  of  long  have  been  commonly  shorn  at  puberty hair  is  found  even  in  animistic  concep-  or  marriage.     When  worn  full  length tions   of  natural   objects.      Thus   the  by  men   it  was  usually,   for  conveni- wind   (Angiri)  is  begged   in   a  wind-  ence,  coiled  up  inside  thejhead-cloth charm    "  to   let   down   its    long    and  or  turban  (saputangan  or  tanjak),   or flowing  locks."  was  made  up  into  rolls  or  chignons
2  Raja  Berma,  son  of  Raja  Jaman  of  (sanggul  dan  sipuf)  like  that   of  the Bandar  (Wan  Bong).    Cp.  also  Clifford,  women.      It  was  not  infrequently  used In  Court  and  Jfampong,  p.  1 14,  "He  as  a  place  of  concealment  for  one  of  the wore  his  fine  black  hair  long,  so  that  it  small  Malay  poniards  called  "  Pepper- hung  about  his  waist."  crushers  "  (tumbok  lada),  not  only  by
The  old  custom  in  Selangor  is  said      men  but  by  women.
ii  HAIR-CUTTING  AND  THE  LIKE  45
of  his  body  continues  to  exist  even  after  the  physical connection  has  been  severed,  and  that  therefore  he will  suffer  from  any  harm  that  may  befall  the  severed parts  of  his  body,  such  as  the  clippings  of  his  hair  or the  parings  of  his  nails.  Accordingly  he  takes  care that  those  severed  portions  of  himself  shall  not  be  left in  places  where  they  might  either  be  exposed  to accidental  injury,  or  fall  into  the  hands  of  malicious persons  who  might  work  magic  on  them  to  his detriment  or  death." x
Thus  we  invariably  find  clippings  of  the  victim's  hair mentioned  (together  with  parings  of  his  nails,  etc.)  as forming  part  of  the  ingredients  of  the  well-known  wax image  or  mannikin  into  which  pins  are  stuck,  and  which is  still  believed  by  all  Malays  to  be  a  most  effective method  of  causing  the  illness  or  death  of  an  enemy.2  I was  once  present  at  the  curious  ceremony  of  cutting the  hair  of  a  Malay  bride,  which  had  all  the  character- istics of  a  religious  rite,  but  the  detailed  account  of it  will  be  reserved  for  a  later  chapter.3
The  same  difficulties  and  dangers  which  beset  the first  cutting  of  the  hair  apply,  though  perhaps  in  a  less degree,  to  the  first  paring  of  the  nails  (bertobafc],  the  bor- ing of  the  ears  of  girls  (bertindek  telinga),  and  the  filing of  the  teeth  (berasah  gigt]  of  either  sex  whether  at  puberty or  marriage.  One  or  more  of  the  nails  are  frequently worn  long  by  Malays  of  standing,  and  the  women  who engage  in  "nautch"  dancing  and  theatrical  perform- ances invariably  wear  a  complete  set  of  artificial nails  (changgei).  These  latter  are  usually  of  brass, are  often  several  inches  in  length,  and  are  made  so
1  Frazer,  op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  193.  8   Vide  infra,  Chap.  VI.   pp.   353-
2  Vide   infra,    Chap.    VI.    p.   569,       355,  Adolescence. se.)  etc.
46  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
as  to  fit  on  to  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Occasionally a  brass  ring  with  a  small  peacock,  or  some  such  bird,  of the  same  material  will  be  attached  to  the  end  of  the nail  by  a  minute  brass  chain.  The  practice  of  wear- ing long  nails  is  sometimes  attributed  to  Chinese  in- fluence, but  it  is  hard  to  see  why  this  particular  detail of  Malay  custom,  which  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the general  trend  of  Malay  ideas  about  the  person,  should be  supposed  to  be  derived  from  China.  The  borrow- ing, if  any,  is  much  more  likely  to  have  been  on  the part  of  the  Chinese,  who  undoubtedly  imported many  Indian  ideas  along  with  Buddhism.  The custom  appears  to  be  followed,  moreover,  in  many places,  such  as  the  interior  of  Sumatra,  where  Chinese influence  is  non-existent.  In  Siam,  again,  it  appears to  obtain  very  strongly ; l  but  no  reason  has  yet  been shown  for  supposing  that  this  is  anything  but  an instance  of  the  similarity  of  results  independently  ar- rived at  by  nations  starting  with  similar  premisses.
The  ear-boring  and  tooth-filing  ceremonies  which still  not  infrequently  take  place  at  the  age  of  puberty in  both  sexes  are  of  no  less  religious  import  than  the rite  of  cutting  the  first  lock.  The  main  details  of  these ceremonies  will  be  described  in  a  later  part  of  this book.2
To  the  same  category  (of  sacred  things  having physical  connection  with  the  body)  should  doubtless  be referred  such  objects  as  the  eyebrows,  the  saliva,  and soil  taken  from  the  (naked)  footstep,  all  of  which  are utilised  by  the  magician  to  achieve  his  nefarious  ends.
1   "  Ces  danseurs  et  ces  danseuses  ont  thumb-nails  very   long,  especially  that
tous  des  ongles  faux,  et  fort  longs,  de  on  their  left  thumb,  for  they  do  never
cuivre  jaune." — La  Loubere,  Royaume  cut  it,  but  scrape  it  often." — Dampier's
de  Siam,  tome  i.  pp.  148-150  (quoted  Voyages,  vol.  i.  pp.  325,  326.
by  Crawf.,.#z.rf.  Indian  Arch.  i.  p.  131).  2    Vide   infra,   Chap.  VI.   pp.    355-
Cp.   "  They  have  a  custom  to  wear  their  360.
THE  SOUL  OF  MAN  47
(c)    The  Soul
The  Malay  conception  of  the  Human  Soul ngaty-  is  that  of  a  species  of  "Thumbling,"  "a thin,  unsubstantial  human  image,"  or  mannikin,  which is  temporarily  absent  from  the  body  in  sleep,  trance, disease,  and  permanently  absent  after  death.
This  mannikin,  which  is  usually  invisible  but  is supposed  to  be  about  as  big  as  the  thumb,  corresponds exactly  in  shape,  proportion,  and  even  in  complexion,  to its  embodiment  or  casing  (sarong),  i.e.  the  body  in  which it  has  its  residence.  It  is  of  a  "vapoury,  shadowy,  or filmy"  essence,  though  not  so  impalpable  but  that  it  may cause  displacement  on  entering  a  physical  object,  and as  it  can  "fly"  or  "flash"  quickly  from  place  to  place, it  is  often,  perhaps  metaphorically,  addressed  as  if  it were  a  bird.2
Thus  in  a  charm  given  in  the  Appendix  we  find —
"  Hither,  Soul,  come  hither  ! Hither,  Little  One,  come  hither  ! Hither,  Bird,  come  hither ! Hither,  Filmy  One,  come  hither  !  "  3
As  this  mannikin  is  the  exact  reproduction  in  every way  of  its  bodily  counterpart,  and  is  "the  cause  of  life and  thought  in  the  individual  it  animates,"  it  may  readily be  endowed  with  quasi-human  feelings,  and  "independ- ently possess  the  personal  consciousness  and  volition  of
1  Or  Sumangat.     The  derivation  of  word  kur  or  kerrt  by  which  fowls  are
the  word  is  unknown  :  possibly  it  may  called,  is  almost  always  used  ;  in  fact,
be  connected  with  sangat,  "  excessive,"  "  kur    sZmangat'"     ("cluck!     cluck!
or    bangat,    "sudden,    quick."      The  soul!")  is  such  a  common  expression  of
meaning  covers  both  "soul"  and  "life"  astonishment  among  the  Malays  that  its
(i.e.  not  the  state  of  being  alive,  but  the  force  is  little  more  than  "good  gracious
cause  thereof  or  "vital  principle").  me  !"  (vide  infra,  p.  534,  note).
-  In   calling    the   soul,    a  clucking  3   Vide  App.  vi.
sound,   represented   in   Malay   by  the
48  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
its  corporeal  owner."  Thus  we  find  the  following appeal  addressed  to  the  soul  in  the  charm  just quoted : —
"  Do  not  bear  grudges, Do  not  bear  malice, Do  not  take  it  as  a  wrong, Do  not  take  it  as  a  transgression."
These  quasi-human  attributes  of  the  soul  being  so complete,  it  is  an  easy  stretch  of  the  imagination  to provide  it  with  a  house,  which  is  generally  in  practice identified  with  the  body  of  its  owner,  but  may  also  be identified  with  any  one  of  its  temporary  domiciles. Thus  in  the  charm  already  quoted  we  read —
"  Return  to  your  own  House  and  House-ladder, To  your  own  House-floor,  of  which  the  planks  have  started, And  your  Roof-thatch  '  starred '  with  holes."
The  state  of  disrepair  into  which  the  soul's  house (i.e.  the  sick  man's  body)  is  described  as  having  fallen, is  here  attributed  to  the  soul's  absence.1  The  com- pleteness of  this  figurative  identification  of  the  soul's "  house "  with  its  owner's  body,  and  of  the  soul's "  sheath  "  or  casing  with  both,  is  very  clearly  brought out  in  the  following  lines  : —
"  Cluck  !  cluck  !     Soul  of  this  sick  man,  So-and-so  ! Return  into  the  Frame  and  Body  of  So-and-so^ To  your  own  House  and  House-ladder,  to  your  own  Clearing  and
Yard, To  your  own  Parents,  to  your  own  Casing."
And  this  is  no  mere  chance  expression,  for  in  another charm  the  soul  is  adjured  in  these  words : —
1  In   another  charm  we  find   the  sick  man's  body  compared  to  a  weather- beaten  barque  at  sea.
ii  CALLING  THE  SOUL  49
"  As  you  remember  your  own  parents,  remember  me, As  you  remember  your  own  House  and  House-ladder,  remember me."  i
The  soul  "  appears  to  men  (both  waking  and  asleep) as  a  phantom  separate  from  the  body  of  which  it  bears the  likeness,"  "  manifests  physical  power,"  and  walks, sits,  and  sleeps  :—
"  Cluck  !  cluck  !     Soul  of  So-and-so,  come  and  walk  with  me, Come  and  sit  with  me, Come  and  sleep  with  me,  and  share  my  pillow.  "  2
It  would  probably  be  wrong  to  assume  the  fore- going expressions  to  have  always  been  merely  figura- tive. Rather,  perhaps,  we  should  consider  them  as  part of  a  singularly  complete  and  consistent  animistic  system formerly  invented  and  still  held  by  the  Malays.  Again, from  the  above  ideas  it  follows  that  if  you  call  a  soul  in the  right  way  it  will  hear  and  obey  you,  and  you  will thus  be  able  either  to  recall  to  its  owner's  body  a  soul which  is  escaping  (riang  semangat),  or  to  abduct  the soul  of  a  person  whom  you  may  wish  to  get  into  your power  (mengambil  semangat  orang],  and  induce  it  to take  up  its  residence  in  a  specially  prepared  receptacle, such  as  (a)  a  lump  of  earth  which  has  been  sympa- thetically connected  by  direct  contact  with  the  body  of the  soul's  owner,  or  (<£)  a  wax  mannikin  so  connected by  indirect  means,  or  even  (c)  a  cloth  which  has  had  no such  connection  whatever.  And  when  you  have  suc- ceeded in  getting  it  into  your  power  the  abducted  and now  imprisoned  soul  will  naturally  enjoy  any  latitude
1  Vide  App.  cclxxi.  tion  in  Primitive  Culture,   vol.   i.  p.
2  The  entire  conception  of  the  soul  387,  and  hence  I  have  not  hesitated  to among  the  Malays  agrees  word  for  word  use  his  exact  words  in  so  far  as  they with  Professor  Tyler's  classical  defini-  were  applicable.
E
50  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
allowed    to    (and    suffer   from    any    mutilation   of)    its temporary  domicile  or  embodiment.1
Every  man  is  supposed  (it  would  appear  from Malay  charms)  to  possess  seven  souls2  in  all,  or,  per- haps, I  should  more  accurately  say,  a  sevenfold  soul.3 This  "  septenity  in  unity  "  may  perhaps  be  held  to  ex- plain the  remarkable  importance  and  persistency  of  the number  seven  in  Malay  magic,  as  for  instance  the seven  twigs  of  the  birch,  and  the  seven  repetitions  of the  charm  (in  Soul-abduction 4),  the  seven  betel  leaves, the  seven  nights'  duration  of  the  ceremony,  the  seven blows  administered  to  the  soul  (in  other  magical  and medical  ceremonies),  and  the  seven  ears  cut  for  the Rice-soul  in  reaping.5
And,  finally,  it  might  explain  why  the  lime-branch which  is  hung  up  in  the  mosquito-curtain  (in  another form  of  soul-abduction6)  is  required  to  possess  seven fruits  on  a  single  stalk,  i.e.  to  ensure  there  being  a separate  receptacle  for  each  one  of  the  seven  souls.
At  the  present  day  the  ordinary  Malay  talks  usually of  only  a  single  soul,  although  he  still  keeps  up  the old  phraseology  in  his  charms  and  charm-books.  For the  rest,  it  would  appear  that  there  may  be  some method  in  the  selection  and  arrangement  of  colours.
The  "lump  of  earth  from  the  victim's  footprint" used  in  one  form  of  the  soul-abduction  ceremony 7  is  to
1  Cp.    Tylor,  Prim.    Cult.    vol.    i.  Cp.   Tylor,    op.   cit.   vol.    i.    pp.   391, p.  422.  392.
2  What  these  seven  souls  were  it  is  3  Professor    Tylor    calls    this    "  a impossible  without  more    evidence   to  combination  of  several  kinds  of  spirit, determine.      All    that   can    be  said   is  soul,    or    image,    to    which    different that   they  were    most    probably  seven  functions  belong  "(<?/.  cit.  vol.  i.  pp.  391, different    manifestations    of   the    same  392).
soul.      Such  might  be  the  Shadow-soul,  4  Infra,  Chap.  VI.  p.  569.
the  Reflection -soul,  the   Puppet -soul,  5  Infra,  Chap.  V.  p.  241.
the  Bird-soul  (?),  the  Life-soul,  etc,  but  6  Infra,  Chap.  VI.  p.  575.
as  yet  no  evidence   is  forthcoming. —  7  Infra,  Chap.  VI.  p.  568.
ii  IMPORTANCE  OF  COLOUR  51
be  wrapped  up  in  three  thicknesses  of  cloth,  which  must be  red,  black,  and  yellow  respectively,  the  yellow  being outside.  Again  (in  the  ceremony  of  casting  out  "  the mischief"  from  a  sick  man),  a  white  cosmetic  is  assigned for  use  in  the  morning,  a  red  cosmetic  for  mid -day, and  black  for  sundown.1
Now  in  all,  I  believe,  of  what  are  now  called  the Federated  Malay  States,  and  probably  in  all  Malay States  whatsoever,  yellow  is  the  colour  used  by royalty,  whereas  the  more  exalted  and  sacred  colour, white  (with  occasional  lapses  into  yellow),  has  been adopted  by  Malay  medicine-men  as  the  colour  most likely  to  conciliate  the  spirits  and  demons  with  whom they  have  to  deal.  Thus  the  soul-cloth,  which,  by  the way,  is  always  five  cubits  long  (lima  hasta),  is  sometimes white  and  (much  more  rarely)  yellow,  and  hence  in  the first  instance  just  quoted,  the  yellow  cloth,  being,  next to  white,  of  the  colour  which  is  most  complimentary  to the  demons,  is  the  one  which  is  put  outside ;  and  in the  second  instance,  for  similar  reasons,  the  white cosmetic  is  to  be  used  first.
The  working  out  of  this  system,  however,  must await  fresh  evidence,  and  all  I  would  do  now  is  to emphasise  the  importance  of  colour  in  such  investi- gations, and  to  urge  the  collection  of  fresh  material. 2
1  Infra,  Chap.  VI.  p.  431.
2  We  might  then  expect  to  get  some  such  table  as  the  following  : —
Colours  of  Cloths  /-.  ,  f  /->         ,-  Colours  of  Rice
(used  to  enwrap  the  lump      ,  C°T^  tf  C9s{"etlci\       (such  as  may  be  used of  earth  from  the  footprint).     <used  ^  the  slck  man>'          by  medicine-men).
white  white.          Highest  Colour,
yellow  ...  yellow.      \
blue.
red  red  red.          >  Medium      „
purple  or  orange  I green.      J
black  black  black.         Lowest        ,,
Green  is  not  a  common  colour.  Blue  ever,  the  colour  assigned  to  a  (fabu- appears  to  be  rarely  used.  It  is,  how-  lous  (?))  champaka  flower,  which
52  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
(d)  Animal,  Vegetable,  and  Mineral  Souls
Hitherto  I  have  treated  of  human  souls  only, but  animal,  mineral,  and  vegetable  souls  will  now  be briefly  discussed.  Speaking  generally,  I  believe  the soul  to  be,  within  certain  limits,  conceived  as  a diminutive  but  exact  counterpart  of  its  own  em- bodiment, so  that  an  Animal-soul  would  be  like  an animal,  a  Bird-soul  like  a  bird ;  however,  lower  in  the scale  of  creation  it  would  appear  that  the  Tree-  or Ore-souls,  for  instance,  are  supposed,  occasionally  at least,  to  assume  the  shape  of  some  animal  or  bird. Thus  the  soul  of  Eagle -wood  is  thought  to  take  the shape  of  a  bird,  the  soul  of  Tin-ore  that  of  a  buffalo, the  Gold-soul  that  of  a  deer.1  It  has,  how- ever, always  been  recognised  that  the  soul  may enter  other  bodies  besides  its  own,  or  even  bodies of  a  different  kind  to  its  own,  and  hence  these may  be  only  apparent  exceptions  to  the  rule  that the  soul  should  be  the  counterpart  of  its  own  embodi- ment.2
"Among  races  within  the  limits  of  savagery,  the general  doctrine  of  souls  is  found  worked  out  with remarkable  breadth  and  consistency.  The  souls  of animals  are  recognised  by  a  natural  extension  from the  theory  of  human  souls ;  the  souls  of  trees  and plants  follow  in  some  vague,  partial  way,  and  the
is  supposed  to  be  the  rarest  of  its  kind  be  explained  by  the  "  notion  of  a  vege-
(vide  p.  29  n.  supra).   Orange  (jingga]  is  table  soul,  common  to  plants  and  to  the
also  extremely  rare,  though    it  is  oc-  higher  organisms,  possessing  an  animal
casionally  used    for  certain  decorative  soul  in  addition  "  ?  and  are  we  to  take
work  (e.g.  small  wedding-pillows).  this  as  only  "one  more  instance  of  the
1  Infra,  Chap.  V.  pp.  211,250,  251.  fuller   identification    of    the    souls    of
2  Or  is  this  phenomenon  of  a  bird-  plants  with  the  souls  of  animals"? — shaped  soul  inhabiting  certain  trees  to  Tylor,  op.  cit.  vol.  i.  pp.  428,  429.
ii  SOULS  OTHER  THAN  HUMAN  53
souls   of  inanimate  objects  expand  the  general  cate- gory to  its  extremest  boundary."1
To  the  Malay  who  has  arrived  at  the  idea  of  a generally  animated  Nature,  but  has  not  yet  learned  to draw  scientific  distinctions,  there  appears  nothing remarkable  or  unnatural  in  the  idea  of  vegetation-souls, or  even  in  that  of  mineral -souls — rather  would  he consider  us  Europeans  illogical  and  inconsistent  were he  told  that  we  allowed  the  possession  of  souls  to  one half  of  the  creation  and  denied  it  to  the  other.
Realising  this,  we  are  prepared  to  find  that  the Malay  theory  of  Animism  embraces,  at  least  partially, the  human  race,2  animals3  and  birds,4  vegetation5  (trees and  plants),  reptiles  and  fishes,6  until  its  extension  to inert  objects,  such  as  minerals,7  and  "  stocks  and  stones, weapons,  boats,  food,  clothes,  ornaments,  and  other objects,  which  to  us  are  not  merely  soulless,  but  life- less," brings  us  face  to  face  with  a  conception  with which  "  we  are  less  likely  to  sympathise."
Side  by  side  with  this  general  conception  of  an  uni- versally animate  nature,  we  find  abundant  evidences  of a  special  theory  of  Human  Origin  which  is  held  to account  not  only  for  the  larger  mammals,  but  also  for the  existence  of  a  large  number  of  birds,  and  even  for that  of  a  few  reptiles,  fishes,  trees  and  plants,  but seems  to  lose  its  operative  force  in  proportion  to  its descent  in  the  scale  of  creation,  until  in  the  lowest scale  of  all,  the  theory  of  Human  Origin  disappears
1  Professor  Tylor's  pregnant  phrase-  subject,    ibid.   p.    423. — Prim.    Cult.
ology  in  this  connection  is  entirely  ap-  vol.  i.  p.  422.
plicable   to   the    Malays,    who    "talk  2  Infra   Medicine,  Divination,  etc.
quite  seriously  to  beasts  alive  or  dead  3  Infra
as  they  would  to  men  alive  or  dead,  *  Infra
offer  them  homage,  ask  pardon  when  it  5  Infra
is  their  painful  duty  to  hunt  and  kill  e  Infra
them. "    Cp.  also  his  remarks  upon  this  7  Infra
Hunting  charms. Fowling  charms. Vegetation  charms. Fishing  charms. Mining  charms.
54  MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE  CHAP.
from  sight,  and  nothing  remains  but  the  partial  ap- plication of  a  few  vague  anthropomorphic  attributes.1 It  is,  doubtless,  to  the  prevalence  of  this  theory  that we  owe  the  extraordinary  persistence  of  anthropo- morphic ideas  about  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  trees,  if not  of  minerals,  in  Malay  magical  ceremonies ; 2  and it  is  hard  to  say  which  of  these  two  notions — the theory  of  Human  Origin,  or  the  other  theory  of  Uni- versal Animism — is  to  be  considered  the  original  form of  Malay  belief.
The  following  tale,  which  is  entitled  Charitra Megat  Sajobang,  and  is  told  by  Selangor  Malays,  will serve  as  an  illustration  of  the  idea  of  Human  Origin  :—
"  There  was  a  married  Sakai  couple  living  at  Ulu Klang,  and  they  had  a  son  called  Megat  Sajobang. When  he  grew  up  he  said  to  his  mother,  '  Mother,  get me  a  passage,  I  want  to  go  and  see  other  countries.' She  did  so,  and  he  left  Ulu  Klang ;  and  ten  or  twelve years  later,  when  he  had  grown  rich  enough  to  buy  a splendid  ship  (p'rafat),  he  returned  with  his  wife,  who was  with  child,  and  seven  midwives,  who  were  watched over  by  one  of  his  body-guard  with  a  drawn  sword. His  mother  heard  the  news  of  his  return,  and  she  made ready,  roasting  a  chika  (monkey)  and  lotong  (monkey), and  went  with  his  father  on  board  their  bark  canoe  to meet  their  son.
"  As  they  approached  they  hailed  him  by  his  name ; but  he  was  ashamed  of  their  humble  appearance,  and forbade  his  men  to  let  them  on  board.  Though  his wife  advised  him  to  acknowledge  them,  '  even  if  they
1  The  central  idea  of  this  conception  which  they  were  not  invariably  them  -
appears  to  be  that  these  animals,  birds,  selves  responsible, and  trees  were  once  human  beings,  but  2   Vide     introductory    remarks     to
were  turned  into  their  present  shapes  Hunting,  Fowling,   Fishing,  Planting,
by  reason  of  some   wrongful   act   for  and  Mining  charms.
ii  METAMORPHOSES  55
were  pigs  or  dogs,'  the  unfilial  son  persisted  in  turning them  away.  So  they  went  back  to  the  shore  and  sat down  and  wept ;  and  the  old  mother,  laying  her  hand upon  her  shrivelled  breast,  said,  '  If  thou  art  really  my son,  reared  at  my  breast,  mayest  thou  be  changed  into stone.'  In  response  to  her  prayer,  milk  came  forth from  her  breast,  and  as  she  walked  away,  the  ship  and all  on  board  were  turned  into  stone.  The  mother turned  round  once  more  to  look  at  her  son,  but  the father  did  not,  and  by  the  power  of  God  they  were both  turned  into  trees  of  the  species  pauh  (a  kind  of mango)  one  leaning  seawards  and  the  other  towards the  land.  The  fruit  of  the  seaward  one  is  sweet,  but that  of  the  landward  one  is  bitter.
"  The  ship  has  now  become  a  hill,  and  originally was  complete  with  all  its  furniture,  but  the  Malays  used to  borrow  the  plates  and  cups,  etc.,  for  feast  days  and did  not  return  them,  until  at  last  there  were  none  left."
CHAPTER   III RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL  WORLD
(a)  The  Magician
"  THE  accredited  intermediary  between  men  and spirits  is  the  Pawang  ;l  the  Pawang  is  a  functionary  of great  and  traditional  importance  in  a  Malay  village, though  in  places  near  towns  the  office  is  falling  into abeyance.  In  the  inland  districts,  however,  the Pawang  is  still  a  power,  and  is  regarded  as  part of  the  constituted  order  of  society,  without  whom  no village  community  would  be  complete.  It  must  be clearly  understood  that  he  has  nothing  whatever  to  do with  the  official  Muhammadan  religion  of  the  mosque  ; the  village  has  its  regular  staff  of  elders — the  Imam, Khatib,  and  Bilal — for  the  mosque  service.  But  the Pawang  is  quite  outside  this  system,  and  belongs  to  a different  and  much  older  order  of  ideas ;  he  may  be regarded  as  the  legitimate  representative  of  the  primi- tive '  medicine  -  man  '  or  '  village  -sorcerer,'  and  his very  existence  in  these  days  is  an  anomaly,  though  it does  not  strike  Malays  as  such.
1  "  The  titles  Pawang  and  Bomor  are  The  Bomor  usually  practise  their  art
given  by  the  Malays  to  their  medicine  for  the  cure  of  human  disease.      Both
men.     The  Pawang  class  perform  magic  terms  are,  however,  often  used  as  though
practices  in  order  to  find  ore,  medicine  they  were  interchangeable." — Clifford,
crops,  or  ensure  good  takes  of  fish,  etc.  Hik.  Raja  Budiman,  pt.  ii.  p.  28  n.
CHAP,  in  THE  MALAY  MAGICIAN  57
"Very  often  the  office  is  hereditary,  or  at  least  the appointment  is  practically  confined  to  the  members  of one  family.  Sometimes  it  is  endowed  with  certain 1  properties '  handed  down  from  one  Pawang  to  his successor,  known  as  the  kabesaran,  or,  as  it  were, regalia.  On  one  occasion  I  was  nearly  called  upon  to decide  whether  these  adjuncts — which  consisted,  in this  particular  case,  of  a  peculiar  kind  of  head-dress — were  the  personal  property  of  the  person  then  in  pos- session of  them  (who  had  got  them  from  his  father,  a deceased  Pawang],  or  were  to  be  regarded  as  official insignia  descending  with  the  office  in  the  event  of  the natural  heir  declining  to  serve !  Fortunately  I  was spared  the  difficult  task  of  deciding  this  delicate  point of  law,  as  I  managed  to  persuade  the  owner  to  take  up the  appointment.
11  But  quite  apart  from  such  external  marks  of  dig- nity, the  Pawang  is  a  person  of  very  real  significance. In  all  agricultural  operations,  such  as  sowing,  reaping, irrigation  works,  and  the  clearing  of  jungle  for  plant- ing, in  fishing  at  sea,  in  prospecting  for  minerals,  and in  cases  of  sickness,  his  assistance  is  invoked.  He  is entitled  by  custom  to  certain  small  fees ;  thus,  after  a good  harvest  he  is  allowed,  in  some  villages,  five gantangs  of  padi,  one  gantang  of  rice  (beras\  and  two chupaks  of  emping  (a  preparation  of  rice  and  cocoa-nut made  into  a  sort  of  sweetmeat)  from  each  householder. After  recovery  from  sickness  his  remuneration  is  the very  modest  amount  of  tiga  wang  baharu,  that  is,  7^ cents.
"It  is  generally  believed  that  a  good  harvest  can only  be  secured  by  complying  with  his  instructions, which  are  of  a  peculiar  and  comprehensive  character.
"  They  consist  largely  of  prohibitions,  which   are
58  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
known  as  pantang.  Thus,  for  instance,  it  is  pantang  in some  places  to  work  in  the  rice-field  on  the  i4th  and 1 5th  days  of  the  lunar  month  ;  and  this  rule  of  enforced idleness,  being  very  congenial  to  the  Malay  character, is,  I  believe,  pretty  strictly  observed.
"Again,  in  reaping,  certain  instruments  are  pro- scribed, and  in  the  inland  villages  it  is  regarded  as  a great  crime  to  use  the  sickle  (sabif)  for  cutting  the padi ;  at  the  very  least  the  first  few  ears  should  be  cut with  a  tuai,  a  peculiar  small  instrument  consisting  of  a semicircular  blade  set  transversely  on  a  piece  of  wood or  bamboo,  which  is  held  between  the  fingers,  and which  cuts  only  an  ear  or  two  at  a  time.  Also  the padi  must  not  be  threshed  by  hitting  it  against  the  in- side of  a  box,  a  practice  known  as  banting  padi.
"In  this,  as  in  one  or  two  other  cases,  it  may  be supposed  that  the  Pawangs  ordinances  preserve  the older  forms  of  procedure  and  are  opposed  to  innova- tions in  agricultural  methods.  The  same  is  true  of the  pantang  (i.e.  taboo)  rule  which  prescribes  a  fixed rate  of  price  at  which  padi  may  be  sold  in  the  village community  to  members  of  the  same  village.  This system  of  customary  prices  is  probably  a  very  old  relic of  a  time  when  the  idea  of  asking  a  neighbour  or  a member  of  your  own  tribe  to  pay  a  competition  price for  an  article  was  regarded  as  an  infringement  of  com- munal rights.  It  applies  to  a  few  other  articles  of local  produce l  besides  padi,  and  I  was  frequently  as-
1  In  Bukit  Senggeh  the  articles  subject  to  this  custom  are  priced  as  follows : — Padi  (unhusked  rice)      .      3  cents  a  gantang  (about  a  gallon). B?ras  (husked  rice)         .    10  cents  a  gantang.
Kabong  (i.e.  palm)  sugar     2\  cents  a  "  buku  "  of  two  pieces  and  weigh- ing a  kati  (l£  Ib.  avoir.) Cocoa-nuts   .          .  I  cent  each.
Hen's  eggs  .          .          •     i  cent  each- Duck's  eggs  .         .     I  cent  each.
in  HIS  POWER  AND  FUNCTIONS  59
sured  that  the  neglect  of  this  wholesome  rule  was  the cause  of  bad  harvests.  I  was  accordingly  pressed  to fine  transgressors,  which  would  perhaps  have  been  a somewhat  difficult  thing  to  do.  The  fact,  however, that  in  many  places  these  rules  are  generally  observed is  a  tribute  to  the  influence  of  the  Pawang  who  lends his  sanction  to  them." 1
"  The  Pawang  keeps  a  familiar  spirit,  which  in  his case  is  a  hantu  piisaka,  that  is,  an  hereditary  spirit which  runs  in  the  family,  in  virtue  of  which  he  is  able to  deal  summarily  with  the  wild  spirits  of  an  obnoxious character."1
The  foregoing  description  is  so  precise  and  clear that  I  have  not  much  to  add  to  it.  There  are,  how- ever, one  or  two  points  which  require  emphasis.  One of  these  is  that  the  priestly  magician  stands  in  certain respects  on  the  same  footing  as  the  divine  man  or king — that  is  to  say,  he  owns  certain  insignia  which  are exactly  analogous  to  the  regalia  of  the  latter,  and  are, as  Mr.  Blagden  points  out,  called  by  the  same  name (kabesaran).  He  shares,  moreover,  with  the  king  the right  to  make  use  of  cloth  dyed  with  the  royal  colour (yellow),  and,  like  the  king,  too,  possesses  the  right  to enforce  the  use  of  certain  ceremonial  words  and  phrases, in  which  respect,  indeed,  his  list  is  longer,  if  anything, than  that  of  royalty.
He  also  acts  as  a  sort  of  spirit-medium  and  gives oracles  in  trances  ;  possesses  considerable  political  in- fluence ;  practises  (very  occasional)  austerities ;  observes some  degree  of  chastity,  and  appears  quite  sincere  in his  conviction  of  his  own  powers.  At  least  he  always has  a  most  plausible  excuse  ready  to  account  for  his
1  C.  O.  Blagden  mJ.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  29,  pp.  5-7. 2  Ibid.  p.  4.
60  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
inability  to  do  whatever  is  required.  An  aged  magician who  came  from  Perak  to  doctor  one  of  H.H.  the Sultan's  sons  (Raja  Kahar)  while  I  was  at  Langat,  had the  unusual  reputation  of  being  able  to  raise  a  sand- bank in  the  sea  at  will ;  but  when  I  asked  if  I  could  see it  done,  he  explained  that  it  could  only  be  done  in  time of  war  when  he  was  hard  pressed  by  an  enemy's  boat, and  he  could  not  do  it  for  the  sake  of  mere  ostentation  ! Moreover,  like  members  of  their  profession  all  the world  over,  these  medicine-men  are,  perhaps  naturally, extremely  reticent ;  it  was  seldom  that  they  would  let their  books  be  seen,  much  less  copied,  even  for  fair payment,  and  a  Pawang  once  refused  to  tell  me  a charm  until  I  had  taken  my  shoes  off  and  was  seated with  him  upon  a  yellow  cloth  while  he  repeated  the much-prized  formula.
The  office  of  magician  is,  as  has  been  said,  very often  hereditary.  It  is  not  so  always,  however,  there being  certain  recognised  ways  in  which  a  man  may "  get  magic."  One  of  the  most  peculiar  is  as  follows  : "  To  obtain  magical  powers  ('etmu)  you  must  meet  the ghost  of  a  murdered  man.  Take  the  midrib  of  a  leaf of  the  '  ivory '  cocoa-nut  palm  (pelepak  niyor  gading), which  is  to  be  laid  on  the  grave,  and  two  more  midribs, which  are  intended  to  represent  canoe-paddles,  and carry  them  with  the  help  of  a  companion  to  the  grave of  the  murdered  man  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon  (the 1 5th  day  of  the  lunar  month)  when  it  falls  upon  a  Tues- day. Then  take  a  cent's  worth  of  incense,  with glowing  embers  in  a  censer,  and  carry  them  to  the head-post  of  the  grave  of  the  deceased.  Fumigate the  grave,  going  three  times  round  it,  and  call  upon the  murdered  man  by  name  : —
in  ACQUISITION  OF  MAGIC  POWER  61
'  Hearken,  So-and-so, And  assist  me ;
I  am  taking  (this  boat)  to  the  saints  of  God, And  I  desire  to  ask  for  a  little  magic.' 1
Here  take  the  first  midrib,  fumigate  it,  and  lay  it  upon the  head  of  the  grave,  repeating  '  Kur  Allah '  ('  Cluck, cluck,  God  ! ')  seven  times.  You  and  your  companion must  now  take  up  a  sitting  posture,  one  at  the  head and  the  other  at  the  foot  of  the  grave,  facing  the  grave post,  and  use  the  canoe- paddles  which  you  have brought.  In  a  little  while  the  surrounding  scenery will  change  and  take  upon  itself  the  appearance  of  the sea,  and  finally  an  aged  man  will  appear,  to  whom you  must  address  the  same  request  as  before."
(6)  High  Places
"  Although  officially  the  religious  centre  of  the village  community  is  the  mosque,  there  is  usually in  every  small  district  a  holy  place  known  as  the kramat?  at  which  vows  are  paid  on  special  occasions, and  which  is  invested  with  a  very  high  degree  of reverence  and  sanctity.
1  The  Malay  version  runs  : —  to  get  whatever  he  wishes  for,  who  is "Jfet  angkau  Si  Anu,                              able   to   foretell    events,    and    whose
Tolong-lah  aku  presence  brings  good  fortune  to  all  his
Aku  bawakan  kapada  anlia  Allah,  surroundings.      District  officers  will  be
Aku  'na&  minta  *elmu  sadikit."  proud  to  know  that  in  this  last  sense
This  method  of  getting  magic  is  an  the    word    is   occasionally   applied   to
exact   transcription   of   the   words   in  them.       When   the   name    kramat   is
which  it  was  dictated  to  me  by  a  Kel-  applied  to  a  place,  I  understand  it  to
antan  Malay  ('Che  'Abas)  then  residing  mean  a  holy  place,  a  place  of  pilgrim-
at  KJanang  in  Selangor.  age ;  but  it  does  not  necessarily  mean
2  Cp.  Mr.  G.  C.  Bellamy  in  Selangor  a  grave,  as  many  people  think.     I  can Journal,  vol.  ii.   No.    6,    p.   90,  who  quote  the  kramat  at  Batu  Ampar,  Jugra, says:   "  The  word  kramat,  as  applied  and   numerous  places  on  river  banks to  a  man  or  woman,  may  be  roughly  where  no  graves  exist,  but  yet  they  are translated  prophet  or  magician.     It  is  called  kramat "s."     [There  is,  however, difficult    to   convey  the  real  idea,   as  a    tradition    that    a    saint's    leg  was Malays  call  a  man  kramat  who  is  able  buried  at  Batu  Ham  par !  — W.  S.]
62  RELA  TIONS   WITH  THE  SUPERNA  TURAL        CHAP.
"  These  kramats  abound  in  Malacca  territory  ;  there is  hardly  a  village  but  can  boast  some  two  or  three  in its  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  they  are  perfectly well  known  to  all  the  inhabitants.
"  Theoretically,  kramats  are  supposed  to  be  the graves  of  deceased  holy  men,  the  early  apostles  of  the Muhammadan  faith,  the  first  founders  of  the  village who  cleared  the  primeval  jungle,  or  other  persons  of local  notoriety  in  a  former  age ;  and  there  is  no  doubt that  many  of  them  are  that  and  nothing  more.  But even  so,  the  reverence  paid  to  them  and  the  ceremonies that  are  performed  at  them  savour  a  good  deal  too much  of  ancestor-worship  to  be  attributable  to  an orthodox  Muhammadan  origin.
"  It  is  certain,  however,  that  many  of  these  kramats are  not  graves  at  all :  many  of  them  are  in  the  jungle, on  hills  and  in  groves,  like  the  high  places  of  the  Old Testament  idolatries  ;  they  contain  no  trace  of  a  grave (while  those  that  are  found  in  villages  usually  have grave-stones),  and  they  appear  to  be  really  ancient sites  of  a  primitive  nature- worship  or  the  adoration  of the  spirits  of  natural  objects.
"  Malays,  when  asked  to  account  for  them,  often have  recourse  to  the  explanations  that  they  are  kramat jin,  that  is,  "  spirit  "-places  ;  and  if  a  Malay  is  pressed on  the  point,  and  thinks  that  the  orthodoxy  of  these practices  is  being  impugned,  he  will  sometimes  add  that the/zVz  in  question  is  &jin  is  lam,  a  Muhammadan  and quite  orthodox  spirit !
"  Thus  on  Bukit  Nyalas,  near  the  Johol  frontier, there  is  a  kramat  consisting  of  a  group  of  granite boulders  on  a  ledge  of  rock  overhanging  a  sheer  descent of  a  good  many  feet ;  bamboo  clumps  grow  on  the place,  and  there  were  traces  of  religious  rites  having
in  SACRED  PLACES  63
been  performed  there,  but  no  grave  whatever.  This place  was  explained  to  me  to  be  the  kramat  of  one Nakhoda  Hussin,  described  as  a  jin  (of  the  orthodox variety),  who  presides  over  the  water,  rain,  and  streams. People  occasionally  burned  incense  there  to  avert drought  and  get  enough  water  for  irrigating  their fields.  There  was  another  kramat  of  his  lower  down the  hill,  also  consisting  of  rocks,  one  of  which  was shaped  something  like  a  boat.  I  was  informed  that \h\sjin  is  attended  by  tigers  which  guard  the  hill,  and are  very  jealous  of  the  intrusion  of  other  tigers  from the  surrounding  country.  He  is  believed  to  have revealed  himself  to  the  original  Pawang  of  the  village, the  mythical  founder  of  the  kampong  of  Nyalas.  In  a case  like  this  it  seems  probable  that  the  name  attached to  this  object  of  reverence  is  a  later  accretion,  and  that under  a  thin  disguise  we  have  here  a  relic  of  the  wor- ship of  the  spirit  of  rivers  and  streams,  a  sort  of elemental  deity  localised  in  this  particular  place,  and still  regarded  as  a  proper  object  of  worship  and  pro- pitiation, in  spite  of  the  theoretically  strict  monotheism of  the  Muhammadan  creed.  Again,  at  another  place the  kramat  is  nothing  but  a  tree,  of  somewhat  singular shape,  having  a  large  swelling  some  way  up  the  trunk. It  was  explained  to  me  that  this  tree  was  connected  in a  special  way  with  the  prospects  of  local  agriculture, the  size  of  the  swelling  increasing  in  good  years  and diminishing  in  bad  seasons !  Hence  it  was  naturally regarded  with  considerable  awe  by  the  purely  agricul- tural population  of  the  neighbourhood.
"  As  may  be  imagined,  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to discover  any  authentic  facts  regarding  the  history  of these  numerous  kramats :  even  where  there  is  some evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  grave,  the  name  of  the
64  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
departed  saint  is  usually  the  one  fact  that  is  remembered, and  often  even  that  is  forgotten.  The  most  celebrated of  the  Malacca  kramats,  the  one  at  Machap,  is  a representative  type  of  the  first  class,  that  in  which  there really  is  a  grave  :  it  is  the  one  place  where  a  hardened liar  respects  the  sanctity  of  an  oath,  and  it  is  occasion- ally visited  in  connection  with  civil  cases,  when  the  one party  challenges  the  other  to  take  a  particular  oath.  A man  who  thinks  nothing  of  perjuring  himself  in  the witness-box,  and  who  might  not  much  mind  telling  a lie  even  with  the  Koran  on  his  head,  will  flinch  before the  ordeal  of  a  falsehood  in  the  presence  of  the  Dato' Machap."1
After  explaining  the  difference  between  beneficent spirits  and  the  spirits  of  evil,  Mr.  Blagden  continues  : "  Some  time  ago  one  of  these  objectionable  hantus (spirits  of  evil)  had  settled  down  in  a  kerayong  tree  in the  middle  of  this  village  of  Bukit  Senggeh,  and  used to  frighten  people  who  passed  that  way  in  the  dusk  ; so  the  Pawang  was  duly  called  upon  to  exorcise  it,  and under  his  superintendence  the  tree  was  cut  down,  after which  there  was  no  more  trouble.  But  it  is  certain that  it  would  have  been  excessively  dangerous  for  an ordinary  layman  to  do  so.
"  This  point  may  be  illustrated  by  a  case  which  was reported  to  me  soon  after  it  occurred,  and  which  again shows  the  intimate  connection  of  spirits  with  trees. A  Javanese  coolie,  on  the  main  road  near  Ayer  Panas, cut  down  a  tree  which  was  known  to  be  occupied  by  a hantu.  He  was  thereupon  seized  with  what,  from the  description,  appears  to  have  been  an  epileptic  fit, and  showed  all  t,  $\f  ^aditional  symptoms  of  demoniac
1  C.  O.  Blagden  &J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  29,  pp.  1-3.
in  SPIRITS  AND  TREES  65
possession.  He  did  not  recover  till  his  friends  had carried  out  the  directions  of  the  spirit,  speaking  through the  sufferer's  mouth,  it  seems,  viz.,  to  burn  incense, offer  rice,  and  release  a  fowl.  After  which  the  hantu left  him.
"In  many  places  there  are  trees  which  are  pretty generally  believed  to  be  the  abodes  of  spirits,  and  not one  Malay  in  ten  would  venture  to  cut  one  down, while  most  people  would  hardly  dare  to  go  near  one after  dark.  On  one  occasion  an  exceptionally  intelli- gent Malay,  with  whom  I  was  discussing  the  terms  on which  he  proposed  to  take  up  a  contract  for  clearing the  banks  of  a  river,  made  it  an  absolute  condition  that he  should  not  be  compelled  to  cut  down  a  particular tree  which  overhung  the  stream,  on  the  ground  that  it was  a  'spirit'  tree.  That  tree  had  to  be  excluded from  the  contract." l
The  following  description,  by  Sir  W.  Maxwell,  of  a Perak  kramat  may  be  taken  as  fairly  typical  of  the kramat,  in  which  there  really  is  a  grave : —
"  Rightly  or  wrongly  the  Malays  of  Larut  assign an  Achinese  origin  to  an  old  grave  which  was  dis- covered in  the  forest  some  years  ago,  and  of  which  I propose  to  give  a  brief  description.  It  is  situated about  half-way  between  the  Larut  Residency  and  the mining  village  of  Kamunting.  In  the  neighbourhood the  old  durian  trees  of  Java  betoken  the  presence  of  a Malay  population  at  a  date  long  prior  to  the  advent  of the  Chinese  miner.  The  grave  was  discovered  about twenty  years  ago  by  workmen  employed  by  the Mentri  of  Perak  to  make  the  Kamunting  road,  and it  excited  much  curiosity  among  the  Malays  at  the
1  C.  O.  Blagden  in  J.R.A.S.,  S.&.,  No.  29,  pp.  4,  5. F
66  RELA  TIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNA  TURAL        CHAP.
time.  The  Mentri  and  all  the  ladies  of  his  family went  on  elephants  to  see  it,  and  it  has  been  an  object of  much  popular  prestige  ever  since.
"The  Malays  of  Java  were  able  from  the  village tradition  to  give  the  name  and  sex  of  the  occupant  of this  lonely  tomb,  '  Toh  Bidan  Susu  Lanjut/  whose name  sounds  better  in  the  original  than  in  an  English translation.  She  is  said  to  have  been  an  old  Achinese woman  of  good  family  ;  of  her  personal  history  nothing is  known,  but  her  claims  to  respectability  are  evinced by  the  carved  head  and  foot  stones  of  Achinese  work- manship which  adorn  her  grave,  and  her  sanctity  is proved  by  the  fact  that  the  stones  are  eight  feet  apart. It  is  a  well-known  Malay  superstition  that  the  stones placed  to  mark  the  graves  of  Saints  miraculously increase  their  relative  distance  during  the  lapse  of years,  and  thus  bear  mute  testimony  to  the  holiness  of the  person  whose  resting-place  they  mark.
"  The  kramat  on  the  Kamunting  road  is  on  the spur  of  a  hill  through  which  the  roadway  is  cut.  A tree  overshadows  the  grave  and  is  hung  with  strips  of white  cloth  and  other  rags  (panji  panjt]  which  the devout  have  put  there.  The  direction  of  the  grave  is as  nearly  as  possible  due  north  and  south.  The  stones at  its  head  and  foot  are  of  the  same  size,  and  in  every respect  identical  one  with  the  other.  They  are  of  sand- stone, and  are  said  by  the  natives  to  have  been brought  from  Achin.  In  design  and  execution  they are  superior  to  ordinary  Malay  art,  as  will  be  seen,  I think,  on  reference  to  the  rubbings  of  the  carved surface  of  one  of  them,  which  have  been  executed  for me  by  the  Larut  Survey  Office,  and  which  I  have transmitted  to  the  Society  with  this  paper.  The extreme  measurements  of  the  stones  (furnished  from
in  DESCRIPTION  OF  A  KRAMAT  67
the  same  source)  are  2'  i"  x  o'  9"  x  o'  7".  They are  in  excellent  preservation,  and  the  carving  is  fresh and  sharp.  Some  Malays  profess  to  discover  in  the three  rows  of  vertical  direction  on  the  broadest  face  of the  slabs  the  Mohammedan  attestation  of  the  unity  of God  (La  ilaka  illa-lla)  repeated  over  and  over  again  ; but  I  confess  that  I  have  been  unable  to  do  so.  The offerings  at  a  kramat  are  generally  incense  (istangi  or satangi)  or  benzoin  (kaminian) ;  these  are  burned  in little  stands  made  of  bamboo  rods  ;  one  end  is  stuck  in the  ground  and  the  other  split  into  four  or  five,  and then  opened  out  and  plaited  with  basket  work  so  as to  hold  a  little  earth.  They  are  called  sangka ;  a Malay  will  often  vow  that  if  he  succeeds  in  some particular  project,  or  gets  out  of  some  difficulty  in which  he  may  happen  to  be  placed,  he  will  burn  three or  more  sangka  at  such  and  such  a  kramat.  Persons who  visit  a  kramat  in  times  of  distress  or  difficulty,  to pray  and  to  vow  offerings,  in  case  their  prayers  are granted,  usually  leave  behind  them  as  tokens  of  their vows  small  pieces  of  white  cloth,  which  are  tied  to the  branches  of  a  tree  or  to  sticks  planted  in  the ground  near  the  sacred  spot.  For  votary  purposes the  long-forgotten  tomb  of  Toh  Bidan  Susu  Lanjut enjoys  considerable  popularity  among  the  Mohamme- dans of  Larut ;  and  the  tree  which  overshadows  it has,  I  am  glad  to  say,  been  spared  the  fate  which awaited  the  rest  of  the  jungle  which  overhung  the road.  No  coolie  was  bold  enough  to  put  an  axe  to it."1
Mr.  George  Bellamy,  writing  in  1893,  thus  described the  kramat  at  Tanjong  Karang  in  the  Kuala  Selangor district : —
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  2,  p.  236.
68  RELATIONS   WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
"  The  kramat  about  which  I  am  now  writing  is  a very  remarkable  one.  It  is  situated  on  the  extreme point  of  land  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Selangor,  close to  where  the  new  lighthouse  has  been  erected.  A magnificent  kayu  ara  (a  kind  of  fig-tree)  forms  a prominent  feature  of  the  tanjong  (point  or  cape),  and at  the  base  of  this  tree,  enveloped  entirely  by  its roots,  is  an  oblong-shaped  space  having  the  appear- ance of  a  Malay  grave,  with  the  headstones  complete. ....  To  this  sacred  spot  constant  pilgrimages  are made  by  the  Malays,  and  the  lower  branches  of  the tree  rarely  lack  those  pieces  of  white  and  yellow  cloth which  are  always  hung  up  as  an  indication  that  some devout  person  has  paid  his  vows.  The  Chinese  also have  great  respect  for  this  kramat,  and  have  erected a  sort  of  sylvan  temple  at  the  foot  of  the  tree."  Mr. Bellamy  tells  how  one  Raja  'Abdullah  fell  in  love with  a  maiden  named  Miriam,  who  disappeared  and was  supposed  to  have  been  taken  by  the  spirits (though  she  was  really  carried  off  by  an  earlier  lover named  Hassan).  Raja  'Abdullah  died  and  was  buried at  the  foot  of  the  fig-tree.  Mr.  Bellamy  concludes : "If  you  ever  happen  to  see  a  very  big  crocodile  at the  mouth  of  the  Selangor  river,  floating  listlessly about,  be  careful  not  to  molest  it :  it  is  but  the  buaya kramat,  which  shape  the  spirit  of  Raja  Abdullah sometimes  assumes.  When  walking  along  the  pantai (shore),  if  you  chance  to  meet  a  very  large  tiger  let him  pass  unharmed.  It  is  only  Raja  Abdullah's ghost,  and  in  proof  thereof  you  will  see  it  leaves no  footmarks  on  the  sand.  And  when  you  go to  see  the  new  lighthouse  at  Tanjong  Kramat, you  may  perhaps  come  face  to  face  with  a  very- old  man,  who  sadly  shakes  his  head  and  dis-
in  GRAVES  OF  THE  SAINTED  DEAD  69
appears.  Do  not  be  startled,  it  is  only  Raja Abdullah."1
In  No.  2  of  the  same  volume  of  the  Selangor Journal  Mr.  Bellamy  refers  to  another  kramat — that  of 'Toh  Ketapang — which  he  appears  to  localise  in  Ulu Selangor.
It  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  ensure  the  popu- larity of  a  kramat  or  shrine  that  the  saint  to  whose memory  it  is  dedicated  should  be  a  Malay.  The cosmopolitan  character  of  these  shrines  is  attested  in the  following  note  which  I  sent  to  the  Selangor  Jour- nal* about  the  shrines  in  the  Ulu  Langat  (Kajang) district  of  Selangor  : —
"  The  chief  kramats  in  the  district  are  '  Makam 'Toh  Sayah '  (the  tomb  of  a  Javanese  of  high  repute) ; '  Makam  Said  Idris,'  at  Rekoh,  Said  Idris  being  the father  of  the  Penghulu  of  Cheras ;  '  Makam  'Toh Janggut  (a  'Kampar'  man),  on  the  road  to  Cheras; and  '  Makam  'Toh  Gerdu  or  Berdu,'  at  Dusun  Tua, Ulu  Langat.  'Toh  Berdu  was  of  Sakai  origin."
I  have  never  yet,  however,  heard  of  any  shrine being  dedicated  to  a  Chinaman,  and  it  is  probable that  this  species  of  canonisation  is  confined  (at  least in  modern  times)  to  local  celebrities  professing  the Muhammadan  religion,  as  would  certainly  be  the  case of  the  Malays  and  Javanese  mentioned  in  the  fore- going paragraph,  and  quite  possibly  too  in  the  case  of the  Sakai.
It  is  true  that  Chinese  often  worship  at  these shrines — just  as,  on  the  same  principle,  they  employ Malay  magicians  in  prospecting  for  tin  ;  but  there appear  to  be  certain  limits  beyond  which  they
1  Selangor  Journal,  vol.  ii.  No.  6,  p.  90,  stqq. 2  Ibid.  vol.  v.  No.  19,  p.  308.
70  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
cannot  go,  as  it  was  related  to  me  when  I  was living  in  the  neighbourhood,  that  a  Chinaman  who had,  in  the  innocence  of  his  heart,  offered  at  a Moslem  shrine  a  piece  of  the  accursed  pork,  was pounced  upon  and  slain  before  he  reached  home  by one  of  the  tigers  which  guarded  the  shrine.
The  shrine  of  'Toh  Kamarong  is  one  of  the  most celebrated  shrines  in  the  Langat  district,  the  saint's last  resting-place  being  guarded  by  a  white  elephant and  a  white  tiger,  the  latter  of  which  had  been  a  pet (pemainan)  of  his  during  his  lifetime.  In  this  respect it  is  exactly  similar  to  the  shrine  of  'Toh  Parwi  of Pantei  in  Sungei  Ujong,  which  is  similarly  guarded, both  shrines  having  been  erected  on  the  seashore,  it  is said,  in  the  days  when  the  sea  came  much  farther  inland than  it  does  at  present.  The  fame  of  'Toh  Kamarong filled  the  neighbourhood,  and  it  is  related  that  on one  occasion  an  irate  mother  exclaimed,  of  a  son  of hers  who  was  remarkable  for  his  vicious  habits,  "  May the  'Toh  Kramat  Kamarong  fly  away  with  him." Next  day  the  boy  disappeared,  and  all  search  proved fruitless,  until  three  days  later  'Toh  Kamarong appeared  to  her  in  a  dream,  and  informed  her  that he  had  carried  the  boy  off,  as  she  had  invited  him  to do,  and  that  if  she  were  to  look  for  his  footprints  she would  be  able  to  discover  them  inside  the  pad-tracks of  a  tiger  one  of  whose  feet  was  smaller  than  the  rest, and  which  was  then  haunting  the  spot.  She  did  so, and  discovered  her  son's  footprints  exactly  as  the saint  had  foretold.  This  Ghost-tiger,  which  no  doubt must  be  identified  with  'Toh  Kamarong's  "pet,"  used to  roam  the  district  when  I  was  stationed  in  the neighbourhood,  and  both  I  and,  I  believe,  the  then District  Engineer  (Mr.  Spearing),  saw  this  tiger's
in  TUTELARY  ANIMALS  71
tracks,  and  can  vouch  for  the  fact  that  one  footprint  was smaller  than  the  rest.  This  curious  feature  is  thought by  the  local  Malays  at  least,  to  be  one  of  the  speci- ally distinctive  marks  of  a  rimau  kramat,  or  Ghost- tiger,  just  as  the  possession  of  one  tusk  that  is smaller  than  the  other  is  the  mark  of  a  Ghost- elephant.1
Closely  connected  with  the  subject  of  shrines  is  that of  high  places,  such  as  those  spots  where  religious penance  was  traditionally  practised.  One  of  these sacred  spots  is  said  to  have  been  situated  upon the  "  Mount  Ophir"  of  Malacca,  which  is  about  4000 feet  high,  and  on  which  a  certain  legendary  Princess known  as  Tuan  Putri  Gunong  Ledang  is  said  to  have dwelt,  until  she  transferred  her  ghostly  court  to  Jugra Hill,  upon  the  coast  of  Selangor.2
Such  fasting-places  are  usually,  as  in  Java,  either solitary  hills  or  places  which  present  some  great natural  peculiarity ;  even  remarkable  trees  and  rocks being,  as  has  already  been  pointed  out,  pressed  into the  service  of  this  Malay  "natural  religion."
(c)  Nature  of  Rites
The  main  divisions  of  the  magico- religious  cere- monies of  the  Malays  are  prayer,  sacrifice,  lustration, fasting,  divination,  and  possession.
Prayer,  which  is  defined  by  Professor  Tylor  as  "  a request  made  to  a  deity  as  if  he  were  a  man,"  is  still in  the  unethical  stage  among  the  Malays ;  no  request
1  Infra,  Chap.  V.  pp.  153,  163.  cat,  sometimes  as  a  young  and  beauti-
2  The  local  Malacca  tradition  repre-  fill  girl  dressed  in  silk.     She  can  trans- sents  her  as  still  haunting  her  original  form    her   cat   into   a  tiger  if  people seat.     She  is  said  to  appear  sometimes  molest  her.    J.ft.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  24, in  the  shape  of  an  old  woman  with  a  pp.  165,  166  ;    No.  32,  pp.  213,  214.
72  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
for  anything  but  personal  advantages  of  a  material character  being  ever,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  preferred by  the  worshipper.  The  efficacy  of  prayer  is,  how- ever, often  supposed  to  be  enhanced  by  repetition.
"  As  prayer  is  a  request  made  to  a  deity  as  if  he were  a  man,  so  sacrifice  is  a  gift  made  to  a  deity  as
if  he  were  a  man   The  ruder  conception
that  the  deity  takes  and  values  the  offering  for  itself, gives  place,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  idea  of  mere homage  as  expressed  by  a  gift,  and,  on  the  other,  to the  negative  view  that  the  virtue  lies  in  the  worshipper depriving  himself  of  something  prized." l
A  general  survey  of  the  charms  and  ceremonies brought  together  in  this  volume  will,  I  think,  be  likely to  establish  the  view  that  the  Malays  (in  accordance with  the  reported  practice  of  many  other  races)  prob- ably commenced  with  the  idea  of  sacrifice  as  a simple  gift,  and  therefrom  developed  first  the  idea of  ceremonial  homage,  and  later  the  idea  of  sacrifice as  an  act  of  abnegation.  Evidences  of  the  original gift-theory  chiefly  survive  in  the  language  of  charms, in  which  the  deity  appealed  to  is  repeatedly  invited to  eat  and  drink  of  the  offerings  placed  before  him, as  a  master  may  be  invited  to  eat  by  his  servants. The  intermediate  stage  between  the  gift  and  homage theories  is  marked  by  an  extensive  use  of  "sub- stitutes," and  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  part  or  parts  for the  whole.  Thus  we  even  find  the  dough  model of  a  human  being  actually  called  "the  substitute" (tukar  ganti],  and  offered  up  to  the  spirits  upon  the sacrificial  tray ;  in  the  same  sense  are  the  significant directions  of  a  magician,  that  "  if  the  spirit  craves  a human  victim  a  cock  may  be  substituted,"  and  the
1  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  p.  340.
in  RITES  AND  SACRIFICES  73
custom  of  hunters  who,  when  they  have  killed  a  deer, leave  behind  them  in  the  forest  small  portions  of  each of  the  more  important  members  of  the  deer's  anatomy, as  "representatives"  of  the  entire  carcase.  In  this  last case  the  usual  "  ritualistic  change  may  be  traced  from practical  reality  to  formal  ceremony."  "  The  originally valuable  offering  is  compromised  for  a  smaller  tribute or  a  cheaper  substitute,  dwindling  at  last  to  a  mere trifling  token  or  symbol." l
This  homage -theory  will,  I  believe,  be  found  to cover  by  far  the  greater  bulk  of  the  sacrifices  usually offered  by  Malays,  and  the  idea  of  abnegation  appears to  be  practically  confined  to  votal  ceremonies  or  vows (niat\  in  which  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  offering are  not  regulated  by  custom,  but  depend  entirely  upon the  wealth  or  caprice  of  the  worshipper,  there  being merely  a  tacit  understanding  that  he  shall  sacrifice something  which  is  of  more  than  nominal  value  to himself.
Of  the  manner  in  which  offerings  are  supposed  to be  received  by  the  deity  to  whom  they  are  offered it  is  difficult  to  obtain  very  much  evidence.  I  have, however,  frequently  questioned  Malays  upon  this  sub- ject, and  on  the  whole  think  it  can  very  safely  be  said that  the  deity  is  not  supposed  to  touch  the  solid  or material  part  of  the  offering,  but  only  the  essential  part, whether  it  be  "  life,  savour,  essence,  quality  "  or  even the  "soul."
It  will  perhaps  be  advisable,  in  order  to  avoid  repe- tition, to  describe  a  few  of  the  special  and  distinctive sub-rites  which  form  part  of  many  of  the  more  import- ant ceremonies,  such  as  (in  particular),  rites  performed at  shrines,  the  rite  of  burning  incense,  the  scattering
1  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  p.  341.
74  RELATIONS   WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
of  (or  banqueting  upon)  sacrificial  rice,  and  the  appli- cation of  the  "Neutralising"  Rice-paste  (tepong tawar).
Of  the  rites  performed  at  shrines,  Mr.  Blagden says  :  "  The  worship  there,  as  with  most  other  kramats, consists  of  the  burning  of  incense,  the  offering  of  nasi kunyet  (yellow  rice),  and  the  killing  of  goats  ;  but  I  also noticed  a  number  of  live  pigeons  there  which  illustrate the  practice,  common  in  Buddhist  countries,  of  releas- ing an  animal  in  order  to  gain  'merit'  thereby."  At a  shrine  on  the  Langat  river  I  have  seen  fowls  which had  (I  was  told)  been  similarly  released.
Mr.  Blagden's  remarks  apply  with  equal  force  to the  services  performed  at  the  shrines  of  Selangor,  and I  believe  also  of  other  States.  It  should,  however, I  think,  be  pointed  out  that  the  nasi  kunyit  (yellow rice)  is,  usually  at  all  events,  eaten  by  those  who  take part  in  the  service.  At  a  ceremony  which  was  held  on one  occasion  after  my  recovery  from  sickness,  and  in which,  by  request,  I  took  part,1  incense  was  burnt, and  Muhammadan  prayers  chanted,  after  which the  usual  strip  of  white  cloth  (five  cubits  in  length) was  laid  upon  the  saint's  grave  (the  saint  being  the father  of  the  present  Sultan  of  Selangor),  and  the  party then  adjourned  to  a  shelter  some  twenty  or  thirty  yards lower  down  the  hill,  where,  first  the  men,  and  then  the women  and  children,  partook  of  the  flesh  of  the slaughtered  goat  and  the  saffron-stained  rice  (pulut}. After  the  meal  the  Bilal  (mosque  attendant,  who  was present  with  the  Malay  headman  and  the  local  priest of  the  mosque),  returned  to  the  tomb,  and  making obeisance,  recited  a  Muhammadan  prayer,  craving  per-
1    Vide  supra,  Chap.  II.  p.  42.
in  CEREMONIAL  USE  OF  INCENSE  75
mission  to  take  the  cloth  back  for  his  own  use,  which he  presently  did.  These  Bilals  are  needy  men  and live  upon  the  alms  of  the  devout,  so  I  suppose  he thought  there  was  no  reason  why  the  saint  should  not contribute  something  to  his  support.
The  burning  of  incense  is  one  of  the  very  simplest, and  hence  commonest,  forms  of  burnt  sacrifice. Some  magicians  say  that  it  should  be  accompanied  by an  invocation  addressed  to  the  Spirit  of  Incense,  which should  be  besought,  as  in  the  example  quoted  below,  to "  pervade  the  seven  tiers  of  earth  and  sky  respectively." It  would  appear  that  the  intention  of  the  worshipper  is to  ensure  that  his  "  sacrifice  of  sweet  savour "  should reach  the  nostrils  of  the  gods  and  help  to  propitiate them,  wherever  they  may  be,  by  means  of  a  foretaste of  offerings  to  follow.  This  invocation,  however,  is not  unfrequently  omitted,  or  at  least  slurred  over  by the  worshipper,  in  spite  of  the  contention  of  the  magi- cians who  use  it,  that  "  without  it  the  spell  merely rises  like  smoke  which  is  blown  away  by  the  wind." The  following  is  one  form  of  the  invocation  in question  : —
Zabur1  Hijau  is  your  name,  O  Incense,
Zabur  Bajang  the  name  of  your  Mother,
Zabur  Puteh  the  name  of  your  Fumes,
Scales  from  the  person  of  God's  Apostle  2  were  your  Origin.
May  you  fumigate  the  Seven  Tiers  of  the  Earth,
May  you  fumigate  the  Seven  Tiers  of  the  Sky,
And  serve  as  a  summons  to  all  Spirits,  to  those  which  have  magic
powers,  and  those  which  have  become  Saints  of  God, The  Spirits  of  God's  elect,  who  dwell  in  the  Halo  of  the  Sun, And  whose  resort  is  the  "  Ka'bah  "  of  God, At  even  and  morn,  by  night  and  day ;
1  Zabur  is  the  Arabic  for  "psalm,"  *  Another  account  derives  the  origin
especially   for  the    Psalms  of  David  ;  of  incense  from  the  eye  gum   of   the
but   the  connection  here   is  not  very  Prophet  Muhammad's  eyes, obvious.
76  RELATIONS   WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
And  serve  as  a  summons  to  the  Elect  of  God,
Who  dwell  at  the  Gate  of  the  Spaces  of  Heaven,
And  whose  resort  is  the  White  Diamond
In  the  Interior  of  Egypt,  at  morn  and  eve,
Who  know  (how)  to  make  the  dead  branch  live,
And  the  withered  blossom  unfold  its  petals,
And  to  perform  the  word  of  God  ;
By  the  grace  of  (the  creed)  "  There  is  no  god  but  God,"  etc.
The  direction  taken  by  the  fumes  of  the  incense  is observed  and  noted  for  the  purpose  of  divination  ; this  feature  of  the  rite  will  be  noticed  under  the heading  of  Medicine.1
Another  form  of  sacrifice  consists  in  the  scattering of  rice.  The  sacrificial  rice  (Oryza  saliva)  used  in  the ceremonies  is  always  of  the  following  kinds  :  firstly, parched  rice  (d'ras  bertifi) ;  secondly,  washed  rice (Uras  basok)  ;  thirdly,  saffron-stained  rice  (Uras kunyit,  i.e.  rice  stained  with  turmeric) ; 2  and,  finally, a  special  kind  of  glutinous  rice  called  pulut  (Oryza glutinosa),  which  is  also  very  generally  used  for  sacri- ficial banquets.
Of  these,  the  parched  rice  is  generally  used  for strewing  the  bottom  of  the  sacrificial  tray  (anckak) when  the  framework  has  been  covered  with  banana leaves,  but  the  offerings  have  not  yet  been  deposited within  it.
The  washed  and  saffron  rice  are  generally  used for  scattering  either  over  the  persons  to  be  benefited by  the  ceremony,  or  else  upon  the  ground  or  house- floor.
With  reference  to  the  selection  of  rice  for  this purpose,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  rice  is  intended to  attract  what  may  be  called  the  "  bird-soul "  (i.e.  the soul  of  man  conceived  as  a  bird)  to  the  spot,  or  to
1  Infra,  Chap.  VI.  p.  410,  infra.          with   other   colours,    e.g.    red,    green,
2  This  rice  is   occasionally   stained       black  (vide  pp.  416,  421,  infra.)
in  THE  RICE-PASTE  CEREMONY  77
keep  it  from  straying  at  a  particularly  dangerous moment  in  the  life  of  its  owner.
The  pulut  or  glutinous  rice  is  the  kind  of  rice generally  used  for  sacrificial  banquets,  e.g.  for  banquets at  "high  places,"  etc.
Lustration  is  generally  accomplished  either  by means  of  fire  or  of  water.  The  best  examples  of  the former  are  perhaps  the  fumigation  of  infants,  and the  api  saleian  or  purificatory  fire,  over  which women  are  half-roasted  when  a  birth  has  taken  place, but  these  being  special  and  distinctive  ceremonies, will  be  described  with  others  of  the  same  nature  in Chapter  VI.
One  of  the  forms  of  lustration  by  water,  however, appears  rather  to  take  the  place  of  a  sub-rite,  forming an  integral  portion  of  a  large  class  of  ceremonies, such  as  those  relating  to  Building,  Fishing,  Agriculture, Marriage,  and  so  forth.  Hence  it  will  be  necessary  to give  a  general  sketch  of  its  leading  features  in  the present  context.
The  ceremony  of  lustration  by  water,  when  it  takes the  form  of  the  sub-rite  referred  to,  is  called  "  Tepong Tawar,"  which  properly  means  "  the  Neutralising Rice-flour  (Water),"  "  neutralising  "  being  used  almost in  a  chemical  sense,  i.e.  in  the  sense  of  "  sterilising  " the  active  element  of  poisons,  or  of  destroying  the active  potentialities  of  evil  spirits.
The  rite  itself  consists  in  the  application1  of  a  thin paste  made  by  mixing  rice-flour  with  water :  this  is taken  up  in  a  brush  or  "bouquet"  of  leaves  and applied  to  the  objects  which  the  "  neutralisation "  is intended  to  protect  or  neutralise,  whether  they  be  the
1  Sometimes  it  is  "  dabbed  "  on  the      as  to  spread  as  evenly  as  possible,  more object,  sometimes  "painted"  on  it  so       rarely  "sprinkled."
78  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
posts  of  a  house,  the  projecting  ends  of  a  boat's  ribs \tajok  p'rahu),  the  seaward  posts  of  fishing-stakes {puchi  kelong),  or  the  forehead  and  back  of  the  hands of  the  bride  and  bridegroom.
The  brush  must  be  first  fumigated  with  incense, then  dipped  into  the  bowl  which  contains  the  rice- water,  and  shaken  out  almost  dry,  for  if  the  water  runs down  the  object  to  which  it  is  applied  it  is  held  to "portend  tears,"  whereas  if  it  spreads  equally  all round  (benckar)  it  is  lucky.  The  composition  of  the brush,  which  is  considered  to  be  of  the  highest importance,  appears  to  vary,  but  only  within  certain limits.  It  almost  invariably,  in  Selangor,  consists  of a  selection  of  leaves  from  the  following  plants,  which are  made  up  in  small  bouquets  of  five,  seven,  or  nine leaves  each,  and  bound  round  with  ribu-ribu  (a  kind of  small  creeper),  or  a  string  of  shredded  tree  bark (daun  trap}.
The  following  is  a  list  of  the  leaves  generally used : —
1 .  Leaves  of  the  grass  called  sambau  dara,  which is  said  to  be  the  symbol  of  a  "  settled  soul "  ('alamat menetapkan  semangat},  and  which  hence  always  forms the  core  of  the  bouquet.1
2.  The  leaves  of  the  selaguri,  which  appears  to  be "a  shrub  or  small  tree  with  yellow  flowers   (Clero- dendron    disparifolium,    Bl.,     Verbenaceae ;    or    Sida rkombifolia,  L.,   Malvaceae,  a  common  small  shrub  in open  country),"2  which  is  described  as  one  of  the  first of  shrubs  (kayu  asal),  and   is  said   to   be  used  as  a "  reminder  of  origin  "  (peringatan  asal).
1  It    is    not    unfrequently    used     in  harvest  are  spread  out   to  dry,  and  to
medicinal  and  other  ceremonies,  e.g.  the  centre  of  the  long  wooden  pestle
it  is  tied  to  each  corner  of  the  new  mat  which  is  used  for  husking  them, on  which  the  first-fruits  of  the  rice-  "  J.R.A.S.,  S.JS.,  No.  30,  p.  240.
in  THE  SPRINKLING  BRUSH  79
3.  The  leaves  of  the  pulut-pulut  (the  exact  identity of  which   I  have  not  yet  ascertained,  but  which  may be  the  Urena  lobata,  L.,  one  of  the  Malvaceae),  which is   said   to   be   used   for    the    same   purpose   as   the preceding.
4.  The  leaves  of  \htgandarusa  (Insticia  gandarusa, L.,  Acanthaceae),  a  plant  described  as  "  often  cultivated and  half-wild — a  shrub  used  in  medicine."
The  selection  of  this  plant  is  said  to  be  due  to  its reputation  for  scaring  demons  ('alamat  menghalaukan kantu).  So  great  is  its  efficacy  supposed  to  be,  that people  who  have  to  go  out  when  rain  is  falling  and the  sun  shining  simultaneously — a  most  dangerous time  to  be  abroad,  in  Malay  estimation, — put  a  sprig  of the  gandarusa  in  their  belts.
5.  The  leaves  of  the  gandasuli  (which  I  have  not yet  been  able  to  identify,  no  such  name  appearing  in Ridley's  plant-list,  but  which  I  believe  to  be  a  water-side plant  which  I  have  seen,  with  a  white  and  powerfully fragrant  flower).1     It  is  considered  to  be  a  powerful charm   against    noxious    birth  -  spirits,    such    as    the Langsuir.
6.  The  leaves  of  the  sapanggil  (which  is  not  yet identified).
7.  The   leaves   of  the    lenjuang  merah,    or  "  the common    red   dracaena"     (Cor dy line    terminalis,    var. ferrea,  Liliaceae).2    This  shrub  is  planted  in  graveyards,
and  occasionally  at  the  four  corners  of  the  house,  to drive  away  ghosts  and  demons.
8.  The    leaves    of   the   sapenoh   (unidentified),    a plant  with   big  round  leaves,  which  is  always  placed outside  the  rest  of  the  leaves  in  the  bunch.
1  According  to  Favre  and  v.  d.  Wall,  Hedychititn  coronarium. 2  J.R.A.S.,  S.3.,  No.  30,  p.  158.
8o
RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CHAP.
9.  To  the  above  list  may  be  perhaps  added  the satawar,  sitawar  or  tawar-tawar  (Costus  speciosus,  L., Scitamineae,  and  Forrestia,  spp.  Commelinacese) ;  and
10.  The   satebal    (Fagrtza    racemosa,    Jack.,    Lo- ganiacese).
Leaves  of  the  foregoing  plants  and  shrubs  are made  up,  as  has  been  said,  in  small  sets  or  combina- tions of  five,  seven,  or  even  perhaps  of  nine  leaves a  piece.  These  combinations  are  said  to  differ according  to  the  object  to  which  the  rice-water  is  to be  applied.  It  is  extremely  unlikely,  however,  that all  magicians  should  make  the  same  selections  even for  the  same  objects — rather  would  they  be  likely  to make  use  of  such  leaves  on  the  list  as  happen  to  be most  readily  available.  Still,  however,  as  the  only example  of  such  differentiation  which  I  have  yet  been able  to  obtain,  I  will  give  the  details  of  three  separate and  distinctive  combinations,  which  were  described  to me  by  a  Selangor  magician  : —
( i )  For  a  wedding  ceremony
Igandarusa         \ sSlaguri  tied  with  the
sapanggil  |-    creeper
iSnjuang  merah  I     ribu-ribu. sap&noh
sambau  dara siflaguri pulut-pulut sapanggil sapSnoh
tied     round with  a  string of  shredded tree-bark.
ISnjuang  merah
(3)  For  the  ceremony  of  taking   I
the  rice-soul  I       ,          •/
I  sapanggil
^  sapSnok
tied  with ribu-ribu.
Further  inquiry  and  the  collection  of  additional material  will  no  doubt  help  to  elucidate  the  general principles  on  which  such  selections  are  made.
in  FASTING  AND  PENANCE  81
Short  rhyming  charms  are  very  often  used  as accompaniments  of  the  rite  of  rice-water,  but  appear to  be  seldom  if  ever  repeated  aloud.  The  following  is  a specimen,  and  others  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix  :l —
"  Neutralising  Rice-paste,  true  Rice-paste, And,  thirdly,  Rice-paste  of  Kadangsa  ! Keep  me  from  sickness,  keep  me  from  death, Keep  me  from  injury  and  ruin."
Other  not  less  important  developments  of  the  idea of  lustration  by  water  are  to  be  found  in  such  cere- monies as  the  bathing  of  mother  and  child  after  a birth  and  the  washing  of  the  floor  (basoh  lantei]  upon similar  occasions,  the  bathing  of  the  sick,  of  bride  and bridegroom  at  weddings,  of  corpses  (meruang)?  and the  annual  bathing  expeditions  (mandi  Safar],  which are  supposed  to  purify  the  persons  of  the  bathers  and to  protect  them  from  evil  (tolak  bala).
Fasting,  or  the  performance  of  religious  penance, which  is  now  but  seldom  practised,  would  appear  to have  been  only  undertaken  in  former  days  with  a definite  object  in  view,  such  as  the  production  of  the state  of  mental  exaltation  which  induces  ecstatic  visions, the  acquisition  of  supernatural  powers  (sakti},  and  so forth.
The  fast  always  took  place,  of  course,  in  a  solitary spot,  and  not  unfrequently  upon  the  top  of  some  high and  solitary  hill  such  as  Mount  Ophir  (Gunong  Led- ang),  on  the  borders  of  Malacca  territory.  Frequently, however,  much  lower  hills,  or  even  plains  which  pos- sessed some  remarkable  rock  or  tree,  would  be  selected for  the  purpose.
Such  fasting,  however,  did  not,  as  sometimes  with
1  Vide  App.  xiii.,  xxxvi.,  xxxvii.,  cli.,  etc.
2  Vide  Birth,  Marriage,  Funerals,  Medicine.
G
82  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL        CH.  m
us,  convey  to  the  Malays  the  idea  of  complete  abstin- ence, as  the  magicians  informed  me  that  a  small  modi- cum of  rice  contained  in  a  ketupat  (which  is  a  small diamond-shaped  rice-receptacle  made  of  plaited  cocoa- nut  leaf)  was  the  daily  "  allowance  "  of  any  one  who  was fasting.  The  result  was  that  fasts  might  be  almost indefinitely  prolonged,  and  the  thrice-seven-days'  fast of 'Che  Utus  upon  Jugra  Hill,  on  the  Selangor  coast,1 is  still  one  of  the  traditions  of  that  neighbourhood, whilst  in  Malay  romances  and  in  Malay  tradition  this form  of  religious  penance  is  frequently  represented  as continuing  for  years.
Finally,  I  would  draw  attention  to  the  strong  vein of  Sympathetic  Magic  or  "  make  believe  "  which  runs through  and  leavens  the  whole  system  of  Malay  super- stition. The  root-idea  of  this  form  of  magic  has  been said  to  be  the  principle  that  "  cause  follows  from  effect."
"  One  of  the  principles  of  sympathetic  magic  is  that any  effect  may  be  produced  by  imitating  it.  ...  If  it is  wished  to  kill  a  person,  an  image  of  him  is  made and  then  destroyed  ;  and  it  is  believed  that  through  a certain  physical  sympathy  between  the  person  and  his image,  the  man  feels  the  injuries  done  to  the  image  as if  they  were  done  to  his  own  body,  and  that  when  it  is destroyed  he  must  simultaneously  perish."5
The  principle  thus  described  is  perhaps  the  most important  of  all  those  which  underlie  the  "  Black  Art " of  the  Malays.
1  It  was  on  Jugra  Hill,  according  to  2  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  i.  pp.
tradition,  that  the  Princess  of  Malacca       9-12. fasted  to  obtain  eternal  youth.
CHAPTER   IV
THE  MALAY  PANTHEON
(a)  Gods
A  CAREFUL  investigation  of  the  magic  rites  and  charms used  by  a  nation  which  has  changed  its  religion  will not  unfrequently  show,  that  what  is  generally  called witchcraft  is  merely  the  debris  of  the  older  ritual,  con- demned by  the  priests  of  the  newer  faith,  but  yet stubbornly,  though  secretly,  persisting,  through  the unconquerable  religious  conservatism  of  the  mass  of the  people.
"  There  is  nothing  that  clings  longer  to  a  race  than the  religious  faith  in  which  it  has  been  nurtured. Indeed,  it  is  impossible  for  any  mind  that  is  not thoroughly  scientific  to  cast  off  entirely  the  religious forms  of  thought  in  which  it  has  grown  to  maturity. Hence  in  every  people  that  has  received  the  impression of  foreign  beliefs,  we  find  that  the  latter  do  not  expel and  supersede  the  older  religion,  but  are  engrafted  on it,  blent  with  it,  or  overlie  it.  Observances  are  more easily  abandoned  than  ideas,  and  even  when  all  the external  forms  of  the  alien  faith  have  been  put  on,  and few  vestiges  of  the  indigenous  one  remain,  the  latter still  retains  its  vitality  in  the  mind,  and  powerfully colours  or  corrupts  the  former.  The  actual  religion  of
84  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
a  people  is  thus  of  great  ethnographic  interest,  and demands  a  minute  and  searching  observation.  No other  facts  relating  to  rude  tribes  are  more  difficult  of ascertainment,  or  more  often  elude  inquiry." *
"  The  general  principle  stated  by  Logan  in  the passage  just  quoted  receives  remarkable  illustration from  a  close  investigation  of  the  folk-lore  and  super- stitious beliefs  of  the  Malays.  Two  successive  religious changes  have  taken  place  among  them,  and  when  we have  succeeded  in  identifying  the  vestiges  of  Brahman- ism  which  underlie  the  external  forms  of  the  faith  of Muhammad,  long  established  in  all  Malay  kingdoms, we  are  only  half-way  through  our  task.
"  There  yet  remain  the  powerful  influences  of  the still  earlier  indigenous  faith  to  be  noted  and  accounted for.  Just  as  the  Buddhists  of  Ceylon  turn  in  times  of sickness  and  danger,  not  to  the  consolations  offered  by the  creed  of  Buddha,  but  to  the  propitiation  of  the demons  feared  and  reverenced  by  their  early  pro- genitors, and  just  as  the  Burmese  and  Talaings,  though Buddhists,  retain  in  full  force  the  whole  of  the  Nat superstition,  so  among  the  Malays,  in  spite  of  centuries which  have  passed  since  the  establishment  of  an  alien worship,  the  Muhammadan  peasant  may  be  found invoking  the  protection  of  Hindu  gods  against  the spirits  of  evil  with  which  his  primitive  faith  has  peopled all  natural  objects."2
"  What  was  the  faith  of  Malaya  seven  hundred  years ago  it  is  hard  to  say,  but  there  is  a  certain  amount  of evidence  to  lead  to  the  belief  that  it  was  a  form  of Brahmanism,  and  that,  no  doubt,  had  succeeded  the original  spirit  worship."3
1  Journal of  the  Indian  Archipelago,       2  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  pp.  II,  12. vol.  iv.  p.  573.  3  Swettenham,  Malay  Sketches,  p.  192.
iv  HINDU  AND  MALA  Y  DIVINITIES  85
The  evidence  of  folk-lore,  taken  in  conjunc- tion with  that  supplied  by  charm -books  and romances,  goes  to  show  that  the  greater  gods  of  the Malay  Pantheon,  though  modified  in  some  respects by  Malay  ideas,  were  really  borrowed  Hindu  divinities, and  that  only  the  lesser  gods  and  spirits  are  native  to the  Malay  religious  system.  It  is  true  that  some  of these  native  gods  can  be  with  more  or  less  distinctness identified  with  the  great  powers  of  nature  :  the  King  of the  Winds  (Raja  Angin)  for  instance  ;  "  Mambang  Tali Harus,"  or  the  god  of  mid-currents  (the  Malay  Nep- tune) ;  the  gods  of  thunder  and  lightning,  of  the  celes- tial bodies,  etc.  ;  but  none  of  them  appear  to  have  the status  of  the  chief  gods  of  the  Hindu  system,  and  both by  land  and  water  the  terrible  Shiva  ("  Batara  Guru  " or  "Kala")  is  supreme.  Yet  each  department  of nature,  however  small,  has  its  own  particular  godling or  spirit  who  requires  propitiation,  and  influences  for good  or  evil  every  human  action.  Only  the  moral element  is  wanting  to  the  divine  hegemony  —  the "cockeyed,"  limping  substitute  which  does  duty  for it  reflecting  only  too  truthfully  the  character  of  the people  with  whom  it  passes  as  divine.
I  will  first  take,  in  detail,  the  gods  of  Hindu  origin. "Batara  (or  Bgtara)  Guru"  is  "the  name  by  which Siva  is  known  to  his  worshippers,  who  constitute  the vast  majority  of  the  Balinese,  and  who  probably  con- stituted the  bulk  of  the  old  Javanese." 1
In  the  magic  of  the  Peninsular  Malays  we  find Vishnu  the  Preserver,  Brahma  the  Creator,  Batara Guru,  Kala,  and  S'ri  simultaneously  appealed  to  by  the Malay  magician  ;  and  though  it  would,  perhaps,  be  rash,
1  Mr.  R.  J.  Wilkinson  mJ.R.A.S.,  S.B.t  No.  30,  p.  308.
86
THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON
CHAP.
(as  Mr.  Wilkinson  says),  to  infer  solely  from  Malay romances  or  Malay  theatrical  invocations  (many  of which  owe  much  to  Javanese  influence),  that  Hinduism was  the  more  ancient  religion  of  the  Malays,  there is  plenty  of  other  evidence  to  prove  that  the  "  Batara Guru  "  of  the  Malays  (no  less  than  the  Batara  Guru  of Bali  and  Java)  is  none  other  than  the  recognised  father of  the  Hindu  Trinity.1
Of  the  greater  deities  or  gods,  Batara  Guru  is unquestionably  the  greatest.  "In  the  Hikayat  Sang Samba  (the  Malay  version  of  the  Bhaumakavya), Batara  Guru  appears  as  a  supreme  God,  with  Brahma and  Vishnu  as  subordinate  deities.  It  is  Batara  Guru who  alone  has  the  water  of  life  (ayer  utama  (atama) jiwa]  which  brings  the  slaughtered  heroes  to  life."  :
So  to  this  day  the  Malay  magician  declares  that 'Toh  Batara  Guru  (under  any  one  of  the  many  corrup- tions which  his  name  now  bears 3)  was  "  the  all-powerful
1  The  following  are  the  deities  most usually  inscribed  in  the  "magic  square" of  five  :    I .  Kala  (black),  which  is  an epithet  of  Shiva  ;  2.  Maheswara,  which means  Great  Lord,  an  epithet  of  Shiva  ; 3.    Vishnu;  4.  Brahma;  5.  S'ri  (the wife  of  Vishnu) ;  or  else  the  names  are mentioned  in  this  order  :   I.  Brahma  ; 2.   Vishnu  ;  3.  Maheswara  (Shiva) ;  4. S'ri  ;  5.  Kala.     Kali,  Durga,  or  Gauri, is  the  wife  of  Shiva  ;  Sarasvati  is  the wife  of  Brahma.    See  inf.  p.  545,  seqq. In  the  magic  word  Aum  (OM):  A  = Vishnu,  U  =  Shiva,  M  =  Brahma.
2  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  30,  p.  309. This  is  the  water  of  life  called  Amrita, to  obtain  which,  by  churning  the  ocean, Vishnu  assumed  one  of  his  avatars — that  of  the  tortoise.
3  Cp.    Crawfurd,  Hist,   of  the  Ind. Archipelago,  vol.  ii.  p.   219.      "From some  of  the  usual   epithets    bestowed upon  Siwa  by  the  pagan  Javanese,  and still  familiar  to  their  posterity,  the  pre- eminence of  this  deity  is  clearly  demon-
strated. .  .  .  He  is  the  same  personage who  acts  so  distinguished  a  part  in  the machinery  of  Malayan  and  Javanese romances,  under  the  appellation  of  Guru, or  the  instructor,  prefixing  to  it  the  word Batara,  a  corruption  of  Avatara,  both in  sense  and  orthography,  for  with  the Indian  islanders  that  word  is  not  used as  with  the  genuine  Hindus,  to  express the  incarnation  of  a  god,  but  as  an appellation  expressing  any  deity  ;  nay, as  if  conferring  an  apotheosis  upon  their princes,  it  has  been  sometimes  prefixed to  the  names  of  some  of  the  most  cele- brated of  their  ancient  kings.  When Siwa  appears  in  this  character,  in  the romances  of  the  Indian  islanders,  he  is painted  as  a  powerful,  mischievous,  and malignant  tyrant — a  description  suffici- ently consonant  to  his  character  of Destroyer  in  the  Hindu  triad " ;  and, again,  "ywang  is  a  Javanese  word used  in  the  same  sense  as  batara.  .  .  . Usually  the  obsolete  relative  pronoun sang,  which  has  the  sense,  in  this  case,
iv  BATARA  GURU  OR  SHIVA  87
spirit  who  held  the  place  of  Allah  before  the  advent of  Muhammadanism,  a  spirit  so  powerful  that  he  could restore  the  dead  to  life ;  and  to  him  all  prayers  were addressed."
Mr.  Wilkinson,  in  the  article  from  which  we  have already  quoted,  deals  with  another  point  of  interest, the  expression  sang-yang,  or  batara,  which  is  pre- fixed to  guru.  After  pointing  out  that  yang  in this  case  is  not  the  ordinary  Malay  pronoun  (yang, who),  but  an  old  word  meaning  a  "deity,"  he remarks,  that  so  far  as  he  has  been  able  to  discover, it  is  only  used  of  the  greater  Hindu  divinities,  and not  of  inferior  deities  or  demi-gods.  Thus  we  find it  applied  to  Shiva  and  Vishnu,  but  never  to  the monkey -god  Hanuman,  or  a  deity  of  secondary importance  like  Dermadewa.  Such  inferior  divinities have  only  the  lesser  honorific  "  sang "  prefixed  to their  names,  and  in  this  respect  fare  no  better  than mere  mortals  (such  as  Sang  Sapurba  and  Sang  Ran- juna  Tapa)  and  animals  (such  as,  in  fables,  Sang Kanchil,  Mr.  Mousedeer ;  and  Sang  Tikus,  Mr. Rat).
"  The  expression  batara  is  also  limited  to  the greater  Hindu  divinities  (except  when  used  as  a royal  title),  e.g.  Batara  Guru,  Batara  Kala,  Batara Indra,  Batara  Bisnu,  etc.  Thus  the  expressions sang-yang  and  batara  are  fairly  coincident  in  their application.1  But  there  are  a  few  deities  of  whom
of  a  definite  article,  is  placed  before  it.  Malays,    becomes    "yang,"   sangyang
Thus  sangywang  guru  is  the  same  as  being  also  found.
batara  guru.  ...   It  is  probably  the  Another  (and  probably  better)  ety-
same  word  also  which  forms  the  last  mology  of  batara  is  given  by  Favre  and
part  of  a  word  in  extensive  use,  sam-  Wilken,  viz.  Sanskr.  bhattara,  "lord."
bahayang,  'worship  or  adoration.'" —  *  To  these  should  perhaps  be  added
Crawfurd,  Mai.   Grammar,  p.  cxcviii.  dewa,   mambang  (?),   and  sa-raja  (or
To    this    I    may   add   that   the    form  sang  raja),    if    Mr.    Wilkinson's    ex-
ywang,  when  used  by  the  Peninsular  planation   of   this   last   expression   be
88  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
the  honorific  sang-yang  is  used,  but  not  batara,  e.g. sang-yang tunggal,  'the  only  God,'  sang-yang sokma,  etc.
"  Thus  batara  would  seem  to  be  limited  in  use  to the  actual  names  of  Hindu  deities  as  distinct  from epithets  describing  those  deities.  "Batara  Guru" would  seem  to  be  an  exception — the  only  one — to this  rule,  and  to  point  to  the  fact  that  the  original meaning  of  guru  had  been  lost  sight  of,  and  that  the expression  had  come  to  be  regarded  only  as  a  proper name."
Occasionally,  as  is  only  to  be  expected,  the Malays  get  mixed  in  their  mythology,  and  of  this Mr.  Wilkinson  gives  two  examples,  one  of  the  iden- tification of  Batara  Guru  (Shiva)  with  Brahma  (Berah- mana),  and  another  of  the  drawing  of  a  distinction between  "Guru"  (Shiva)  and  "  Mahadewa,"  which latter  is  only  another  name  for  the  same  divinity.
Such  slips  are  inevitable  among  an  illiterate  people, and  should  always  be  criticised  by  comparison  with the  original  Hindu  tenets,  from  which  these  ideas may  be  presumed  to  have  proceeded.
taken   as  correct.      And    in   any  case  god    of  mid-currents,   has    even    been
its     use    in    combination    with    guru  explained  as  referring  to  Batara  Guru
appears    to    warrant    its    classification  (Shiva).     This,  however,  is  no  doubt
with  the  titles  applied  to  the  greater  an  instance  of  confusion,  as  it  generally
deities.      It    is    also,    however,    used,  appears  to  be  used  with  the  "colour"
like     sang,     of    inferior     deities     and  attributes  (e.g.   M.  puteh,  White ;  M.
even   of  animals  (e.g.  in  a  "Spectre  hitam,    Black;    M.    kuning,   Yellow)
Huntsman  "  charm)  we  find  "  Lansat,  usually  assigned  to  the  inferior  divini-
sa-raja  anjing,   etc."     Dewa   is   used  ties ;  and,  moreover,  in  an  invocation
indiscriminately   (occasionally  in   con-  addressed  to  the  sea-spirit,  the  "  god  of
junction  with   mambang)   both  of  the  mid-currents"  is  requested  to  forward
greater  and  lesser  divinities.     Thus  we  a   message   to   Dato'    Rimpun    'Alam,
not  unfrequently  find  such  expressions  which  appears  to  be  merely  another
as  Dewa   Bisnu    (i.e.    Vishnu),    dewa  name  for  Batara  Guru,  the  reason  given
mambang,  dewa  dan  mambang,  etc.- ;  for  the  preferment  of  this  request  being
and  we  are    expressly  told   that   they  that  he  is  in  the  habit  of  "visiting  the
(the  Dewas)    "are   so   called    because  Heart    of  the    Seas"    in    which  'Toh
they  are  immortal."  Mambang  (per  se)  Rimpun  'Alam  dwells  (the  title  of  the
is  said  to  be  similarly  used,  not  only  of  latter   being    perhaps    taken  from   the
greater  (vide  App.  xvii.),  but  of  lesser  tree,  Pauh  Janggi). divinities,  and  "Mambang  Tali  Harus,"
iv  KALA  AND  S'Rl  89
Mr.  Wilkinson  quotes  an  extraordinary  genealogy representing,  inter  alia,  "  Guru  as  the  actual  father of  the  Hindu  Trinity,"  and  also  of  "Sambu"  (whom he  cannot  identify),  and  "  Seri,  who  is  the  Hindu Sri,  the  goddess  of  grain,  and,  therefore,  a  deity of  immense  importance  to  the  old  Javanese  and Malays."
On  this  I  would  only  remark  that  Sambu  (or Jambu)  is  the  first  portion  of  the  name  almost  uni- versally ascribed  to  the  Crocodile-spirit  by  the  Pen- insular Malays.1
It  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work  to attempt  the  identification  of  Batara  Guru  (Shiva)  with all  the  numerous  manifestations  and  titles  attributed to  him  by  the  Malays,  but  the  special  manifestation (of  Shiva),  which  is  called  "  Kala,"  forms  an  integral part  of  the  general  conception,  whether  among  the
1  Footnote  supra.  Sambu  (Sambhu,  ant  and  becomes  tapa.  Avatar,  '  a the  Auspicious  One)  is  merely  another  descent,'  is  converted  into  batara  ; name  for  Shiva  (rarely  of  Brahma),  and  instead  of  implying  the  descent  or and  its  application  to  the  crocodile-  incarnation  of  a  deity,  is  used  as  an spirit  would  appear  to  indicate  that  this  appellative  for  any  of  the  principal latter  was,  formerly,  at  least,  regarded  Hindu  deities.  Combined  with  guru, as  an  embodiment  of  that  supreme  also  Sanskrit,  it  is  the  most  current god's  manifestation  as  a  water -god.  name  of  the  chief  god  of  the  Hindus, It  is  worth  while  to  compare  this  with  worshipped  by  the  Indian  islanders, the  expression  "  'Toh  Panjang  Kuku,"  supposed  to  have  been  Vishnu,  or  the which  is  applied  to  the  corresponding  preserving  power.  It  may  be  trans- manifestation  of  the  supreme  god  on  lated  "  the  spiritual  guide  god,"  or, land,  and  which  strongly  suggests  the  perhaps,  literally  "  the  god  of  the tiger.  spiritual  guides,"  that  is,  of  the  Brah-
"  Most  of  the  theological  words  of  this  mins.   Agama  in  Sanskrit  is  "authority
list  [printed  in  App.  xiv.]  are   Sans-  for  religious  doctrine";  in  Malay  and
krit,  and  afford  proof  sufficient,  if  any  Javanese  it  is  religion  itself,  and  is  at
were  needed,  of  the  former  prevalence  present  applied  both  to  the  Mahome-
of  the  Hindu  religion  among  the  Malays  dan  and  the  Christian  religions.     With
and    Javanese.      Many    of    them    are  nearly  the  same  orthography,  and   in
more  or  less  corrupted  in  orthography,  the  same  sense,  Sanskrit  words,  as  far
owing  to  the  defective  pronunciation  as  they  extend,  are  used  throughout  the
and  defective  alphabets  of  the  Archi-  Archipelago,   and  even  as  far  as  the
pelago.     Some,    also,    are   altered   or  Philippines." — Crawfurd,  Mai.  Gram-
varied  in  sense.      Tapas,   'ascetic  de-  mar,  pp.  cxcvii.-cxcviii. votion,'  is  deprived  of  its  last  conson-
90  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
Malays  or  Hindus,  and  is,  therefore,  deserving  of some  attention.
The  Malay  conception  of  Batara  Guru  seems  to have  been  that  he  had  both  a  good  and  a  bad  side to  his  character.  Though  he  was  "Destroyer"  he was  also  "  Restorer-to-life,"1  and  it  would  appear that  these  two  opposite  manifestations  of  his  power tended  to  develop  into  two  distinct  personalities, a  development  which  apparently  was  never  entirely consummated.  This,  however,  is  not  the  only difficulty,  for  on  investigating  the  limits  of  the respective  spheres  of  influence  of  Batara  Guru  and Kala,  we  find  that  the  only  sphere,  which  is  always admitted  to  be  under  Kala's  influence,  is  the  inter- mediate zone  between  the  respective  spheres  of  influ- ence of  Batara  Guru  (as  he  is  called  if  on  land,  "  Si Raya  "  if  at  sea)  and  a  third  divinity,  who  goes  by the  name  of  "  'Toh  Panjang  Kuku,"  or  "  Grandsire Long-Claws."
Now  Hindu  mythology,  we  are  told,  knows  next to  nothing  of  the  sea,  and  any  such  attempt  as  this to  define  the  respective  boundaries  of  sea  and  land is  almost  certain  to  be  due  to  the  influence  of  Malay ideas.  Again,  the  intermediate  zone  is  not  neces- sarily considered  less  dangerous  than  that  of  definitely evil  influences.  Thus  the  most  dangerous  time  for children  to  be  abroad  is  sunset,  the  hour  when  we can  "call  it  neither  perfect  day  nor  night";  so too  a  day  of  mingled  rain  and  sunshine  is  regarded as  fraught  with  peculiar  dangers  from  evil  spirits,  and it  would  be  quite  in  keeping  with  such  ideas  that  the intermediate  zone,  whether  between  high  and  low water-mark,  or  between  the  clearing  and  primeval
1  Supra,  p.  86.
iv  GODS  OF  THE  SEA  gi
forest,  should  be  assigned  to  Kala,  the  Destroyer. In  which  case  the  expression  "  Grandsire  Long- Claws"  might  be  used  to  signify  this  special  mani- festation of  Shiva  on  land,  possibly  through  the personality  of  the  Tiger,  just  as  the  Crocodile -spirit appears  to  represent  Shiva  by  water.1
We  thus  reach  a  point  of  exceptional  interest,  for hunting,  being  among  the  old  Hindus  one  of  the seven  deadly  sins,  was  regarded  as  a  low  pursuit,  and one  which  would  never  be  indulged  in  by  a  god.  Yet I  was  repeatedly  told  when  collecting  charms  about the  Spectre  Huntsman  that  he  was  a  god,  and,  ex- plicitly, that  he  was  Batara  Guru.  This  shows  the strength  of  the  Malay  influences  which  had  been  at work,  and  which  had  actually  succeeded  in  corrupting the  character,  so  to  speak,  of  the  supreme  god  of  this borrowed  Hindu  Trinity.2
The  Batara  Guru  of  the  Sea,  who  by  some magicians,  at  all  events,  is  identified  with  Si  Raya (the  "  Great  One "),  and,  probably  wrongly,  with  the God  of  Mid-currents3  (Mambang  Tali  Harus),  is  of  a much  milder  character  than  his  terrestrial  namesake  or compeer,  and  although  sickness  may  sometimes  be
1  Some    confirmation   of   this   view  and  Batara  Guru  di  Laut  (Shiva  of  the
may  be  found  if  we  admit  the  explana-  Ocean)  from  low-water  mark  out  to  the
tion  given  me  by  a  medicine-man,  who  open  sea.
identified  the  Spectre  Huntsman  with  3  It  is  very  difficult  to  ascertain  the
'Toh    Panjang  Kuku,   and   both  with  exact  relation  that 'Toh  Mambang  Tali
Batara  Guru.  Harus  (God  of  Mid-currents)  bears  to
1    The   supreme   god    in    the  State  Batara  Guru  di  Laut.     Most  probably,
Chamber  (balei)  is  Batara  Guru,  on  the  however,    the   God   of  Mid -currents,
edge   of  the  primeval  forest   (di-gigi  whose  powers  are  less  extensive  than
rimba)  it  is  Batara  Kala,  and  in  the  those  of  the  "Shiva  of  the  Sea,"  is  an
heart  of  the  forest  (di  hati  rimba)  it  is  old  sea-deity,  native  to  the  Malay  (pre-
Toh   Panjang  Kuku,   or   "  Grandsire  Hindu)  religion,  and  that   "  Shiva  of
Long-Claws."      Similarly  "Grandsire  the  Sea"  was  merely  the  local  Malay
Long-  Claws  "  is  lord  of  the  shore  down  adaptation  of  the  Hindu  deity  after-
to  high-water  mark  ;  between  that  and  wards  imported, low-water  mark  Raja  Kala  is  supreme,
92  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
ascribed  to  the  sea-spirit's  wrath,  it  is  neither  so  sudden nor  so  fatal  as  the  sickness  ascribed  to  the  wanton  and unprovoked  malice  of  the  Spectre  Huntsman,  or  Spirit of  the  Land.
Fishermen  and  seafarers,  on  the  other  hand,  obtain many  a  favour  from  him,  and  even  hope  to  make friends  with  him  by  means  of  simple  sacrifices  and charms.
Si  Raya  (or  Madu-Raya)  is  said  to  have  a  family, his  wife's  name  being  Madu-ruti,  and  his  children "Wa'  Ranai,"  and  "Si  Kekas"  (the  scratcher),  all  of whom,  however,  have  their  own  separate  spheres  of influence.  The  "Great  One"  himself  (Madu-Raya) rules  over  the  sea  from  low-water  mark  (at  the  river's mouth)  out  to  mid-ocean  ;  and  if  his  identity  with "  'Toh  Rimpun  'Alam "  is  accepted,1  his  place  of abode  is  at  the  navel  of  the  seas,  within  the  central whirlpool  (Pusat  Tasek),  from  the  centre  of  which springs  the  Magic  Tree  (Pauh  Janggi),  on  whose boughs  perches  the  roc  (garuda)  of  fable,  and  at whose  foot  dwells  the  Gigantic  Crab,  whose  entrance into  and  exit  from  the  cave  in  which  he  dwells  is supposed  to  cause  the  displacement  of  water  which results  in  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide.2
The  only  other  divinities  (of  the  rank  of  "  Mam- bangs  ")  which  are  of  any  importance  are  the  "  White divinity,"  who  dwells  in  the  Sun,  the  "  Black  divin- ity," who  dwells  in  the  Moon,  and  the  "'Yellow  divin- ity," who  dwells  in  the  Yellow  Sunset-glow,  which latter  is  always  considered  most  dangerous  to  children.
When  there  is  a  decided  glow  at  sunset,  any  one who  sees  it  takes  water  into  his  mouth  (di-kemam  ayer)
1    Vide  supra,  p.  88,  note.      Yang  b£rulang  ka  pusat  tasek  is  the  expression applied  to  Mambang  Tali  Harus.  2   Vide  supra,  pp.  6,  7.
iv  THE  GENII  93
and  dislodges  it  in  the  direction  of  the  brightness,  at the  same  time  throwing  ashes  (di-sembor  dengan  abu)
saying : —
Mambang  kuning,  mambang  kUabu^ Pantat  kuning  di-sembor  abu.
This  is  done  "  in  order  to  put  out  the  brightness,"  the reason  that  it  must  be  put  out  being  that  in  the  case of  any  one  who  is  not  very  strong  (lemah  semangaf] it  causes  fever.
(b]  Spirits,  Demons,  and  Ghosts
The  "Jins"or  "Genii,"  generally  speaking,  form a  very  extensive  class  of  quite  subordinate  divinities, godlings,  or  spirits,  whose  place  in  Malay  mythology is  clearly  due,  whether  directly  or  indirectly,  to  Muham- madan  influences,  but  who  may  be  most  conveniently treated  here  as  affording  a  sort  of  connecting  link between  gods  and  ghosts.  There  has,  it  would  appear, been  a  strong  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  Malays  to identify  these  imported  spirits  with  the  spirits  of  their older  (Hindu)  religion,  but  the  only  Genie  who  really rises  to  the  level  of  one  of  the  great  Hindu  divinities is  the  Black  King  of  the  Genii  (Sang  Gala1  Raja,  or Sa-Raja  Jin),  who  appears  at  times  a  manifestation  of Shiva  Batara  Guru,  who  is  confounded  with  the  de- structive side  of  Shiva,  i.e.  Kala.  This  at  least  would appear  to  be  the  only  theory  on  which  we  could  explain the  use  of  many  of  the  epithets  or  attributes  assigned to  the  King  of  the  Genii,  who  is  at  one  time  called "  the  one  and  only  God  "  ;  at  another,  "  Bentara  (i.e.
1  It  would    appear  not  impossible  higher  rank    of  this   particular  spirit,
that  Sang  Gala  may  be  a  corruption  of  and  for  his  possession  of  the  titles  enu-
Sangkara,  one  of  the  names  of  Shiva,  merated  above, which  would  account  at  once  for  the
94  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
Batara),  Guru,  the  Genie  that  was  from  the  beginning," and  at  another,  "  the  Land  Demon,  the  Black  Batara Guru,"  etc.
The  following  is  a  description  of  this,  the  mightiest of  the  Genii  :—
Peace  be  with  you  ! Ho,  Black  Genie  with  the  Black  Liver, Black  Heart  and  Black  Lungs, Black  Spleen  and  tusk-like  Teeth, Scarlet  Breast  and  body-hairs  inverted, And  with  only  a  single  bone.1
So  far  as  can  be  made  out  from  the  meagre  evidence obtainable,  the  spirit  thus  described  is  identifiable  with the  Black  King  of  Genii,  who  dwells  in  the  Heart of  the  Earth,  and  whose  bride,  Sang  Gadin  (or  Gading), presented  him  with  seven  strapping  Black  Genii  as children.2
Altogether  there  are  one  hundred  and  ninety  of these  (Black?)  Genii — more  strictly,  perhaps,  one  hun- dred and  ninety-three,  which  coincides  curiously  with the  number  of  "Mischiefs"  (Badi),  which  reside  in "all  living  things."  The  resemblance,  I  may  add, does  not  end  here  ;  for  though  the  Genii  may  do  good, and  the  "  Badi "  do  not,  both  are  considered  able  to do  infinite  harm  to  mortals,  and  both  make  choice  of the  same  kind  of  dwelling-places,  such  as  hollows  in the  hills,  solitary  patches  of  primeval  forest,  dead parasites  on  trees,  etc.  etc.
As  to  the  origin  of  these  Genii,  one  magician  told me  that  all    "Jins"    came    from   the   country    "Ban
1  Vide  App.  ccxxviii.     Another  ac-  bolt ");  ("£)  Sa-rukup  (  =  rungkup)  Rang count  adds  (with)  "  Black  Throat  and  Bumi   ("  World  -  coverer  ");     (4)    Sa- White  Blood,"  white    blood    being    a  g?rtak  Rang  Bumi  (" World-pricker"); royal  attribute.  (5)  Sa-gunchang Rang  Bumi  ("World-
2  Their  names  were   (I)  Sa-lakun  shaker");   (6)  Sa-tumbok  Rang  Bumi darah  ("He  of  the  Blood-pool  (?))";  ("  World-beater")  and  (?)  (7)  Sa-gempar (2)  Sa-halilmtar("H.Q  of  the  Thunder-  *Alam  ("  Universe-terrifier  ").
a
t-    a
iv  ORIGIN  OF  THE  GENII  95
Ujan,"  which  may  possibly  be  Persia) ; l  other magicians,  however,  variously  derive  them  from  the dissolution  of  various  parts  of  the  anatomy  of  the  great snake  "  Sakatimuna,"  of  the  "First  Great  Failure" to  make  man's  image  (at  the  creation  of  man) ;  from the  drops  of  blood  which  spirted  up  to  heaven  when the  first  twins,  Abel  and  Cain  (in  the  Malay  version Habil  and  Kabil)  bit  their  thumbs  ;  from  the  big cocoa-nut  monkey  or  baboon  (berok  besar\  and  so  on.
The  theory  already  mentioned,  viz.  that  the  Black King  of  the  Genii  gradually  came  to  be  identified  with Kala,  and  later  came  gradually  to  be  established  as  a separate  personality,  appears  to  be  the  only  one  which will  satisfactorily  explain  the  relations  subsisting  be- tween the  Black  and  White  Genii,  who  are  on  the  one hand  distinctly  declared  to  be  brothers,  whilst  the White  Genie  is  in  another  passage  declared  to  be Maharaja  Dewa  or  Mahadewa,  which  latter  is,  as  we have  already  seen,  a  special  name  of  Shiva.
This  White  Genie  is  said  to  have  sprung,  by  one account,  from  the  blood-drops  which  fell  on  the  ground when  Habil  and  Kabil  bit  their  thumbs ;  by  another, from  the  irises  of  the  snake  Sakatimuna's  eyes  (benih mata  Sakatimuna],  and  is  sometimes  confused  with  the White  Divinity  ('Toh  Mambang  Puteh),  who  lives  in the  sun.
The  name  of  his  wife  is  not  mentioned,  as  it  is  in the  case  of  the  Black  Genie,  but  the  names  of  three  of his  children  have  been  preserved,  and  they  are  Tanjak
1  The    magician    appears   to    have  Father  of  the  Genii,  or,  according  to
interpreted  it  as  B2n.ua  'ajatn ;   but  it  others,  a  particular  class  of  them  who
may  be  conjectured  that  this  is  a  mis-  are  capable  of  being  transformed  into
taken  inference  from  some  expression  "Jin."      Vide  Hughes,  Diet,  of  Islam,
like  Jin  ibnu  Jan,  "Jan,"  according  s.v.  Genii, to  some  Arabic  authorities,  being  the
96
THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON
CHAP.
Malim  Kaya,  Pari  Lang  (lit.  kite-like,  i.e.  "  winged  " Skate),  and  Bintang  Sutan  (or  Star  of  Sutan).1
On  the  whole,  I  may  say  that  the  White  Genie  is very  seldom  mentioned  in  comparison  with  the  Black Genie,  and  that  whereas  absolutely  no  harm,  so  far  as  I can  find  out,  is  recorded  of  him,  he  is,  on  the  other  hand, appealed  to  for  protection  by  his  worshippers.
A  very  curious  subdivision  of  Genii  into  Faithful (Jin  Islam)  and  Infidel  (Jin  Kafir)  is  occasionally  met with,  and  it  is  said,  moreover,  that  Genii  (it  is  to  be hoped  orthodox  ones)  may  be  sometimes  bought  at Mecca  from  the  "  Sheikh  Jin  "  (Headman  of  Genii)  at prices  varying  from  $90  to  $100  a  piece.2
1  Perhaps  a  corruption  of  Sartan, the  Crab  (Cancer)  in  the  Zodiac.
2  The  following   account  of  Genii (printed  in  the  S clangor  Journal,  vol.  i. No.  7,  p.  1 02)  was  given  me  by  a  Mecca pilgrim  or  "  Haji."     This  man  was  a native  of  Java  who  had  spent  several years  in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  and  as Mecca  is  the  goal  of  the  pilgrimage  to all   good    Muhammadans   alike,    it   is important  to  know  something  of  the ideas  which  are  there  disseminated,  and with  which  the  Malay  pilgrim  would be   likely  to  come  in  contact.       "  In the    unseen  world    the    place   of  first importance    must    be     accorded,     on account  of  their  immense  numbers,  to the  '  Jins '  (the  '  Genii '  of  the  Arabian Nights)."
"  The  Javanese,  drawing  a  slightly stronger  line  of  distinction  (than  that of  good  and  bad  genii  in  the  Arabian Nighls),  call  these  two  (separate)  classes the  Jin  Islam  and  the  Jin  Kafir,  or  the Faithful  and  the  Infidel.  Of  these  two classes,  the  former  shrink  from  what- ever is  unclean,  and  the  latter  only  will approach  the  Chinese,  to  whom  the Jin  Islam  manifests  the  strongest  re- pugnance. The  good  genii  are  perfectly formed  in  the  fashion  of  a  man,  but  are, of  course,  impalpable  as  air,  though they  have  a  voice  like  mortals.  They live  in  a  mosque  of  their  own,  which
they  never  leave,  and  where  they  offer up  unceasing  prayers.  This  mosque  is built  of  stone,  and  stands  beside  a  lake called  '  Kolam  Yamani ' ;  into  this lake  the  whole  of  the  waters  from  the neighbouring  country  drain,  and  the overflow  runs  down  to  the  sea.  In this  lake  the  good  genii  bathe,  and  if any  wicked  or  childless  mortals  bathe in  it  they  carry  them  off  and  detain them  in  the  mosque  until  they  (the mortals)  have  shown  proof  of  their reformed  character  by  continuing  for  a long  while  without  committing  a  wrong action,  when  they  are  sent  back  in safety  to  their  native  land.  I  should add  that  the  Jin  Islam  exact  tribute from  the  unfaithful — e.g.  Chinamen — and  if  they  do  not  receive  their  due, they  will  steal  it  and  give  it  to  a  son of  Islam.  [They  may  be  bought  from the  "  Sheikh  Jin  "  at  Mecca  for  prices varying  from  $90  to  $100  each.]
"The  Jin  Kafir,  or  bad  genii,  are invariably  deformed,  their  heads  being always  out  of  their  proper  position  ;  in short,  they  are  Othello's
Men  whose  heads Do  grow  beneath  their  shoulders.
Their  commonest  name,  'Jin  isi-isi didalam  Dunia '  (the  Genii  who  Fill the  World),  is  owing  to  the  fact  that their  enormous  numbers  fill  the  whole atmosphere  from  earth  to  sky.  Like
IV
JIN  A ND  J&MBA LANG  97
Besides  these  subdivisions,  certain  Genii  are  some- times specifically  connected  with  special  objects  or ideas.  Thus  there  are  the  Genii  of  the  royal  musical instruments  (Jin  Ne'mfiri,  or  Lempiri,  Gendang,  and Naubat),  who  are  sometimes  identified  with  the  Genii of  the  State  (Jin  Karaja'an),  and  the  Genii  of  the Royal  Weapons  (Jin  Sembuana),  both  of  which  classes of  Genii  are  held  able  to  strike  men  dead.  The  only other  Genie  that  I  would  here  specially  mention  is the  Jin  'Afrit  (sometimes  called  Jin  Rafrit),  from whom  the  "White  Man"  (a  designation  which  is often  specially  used  in  the  Peninsula  as  a  synonym for  Englishman)  is  sometimes  said  to  have  sprung,  but who  belongs  in  Arabian  mythology  to  a  higher  class than  the  mere  Genii.  Before  leaving  the  subject  of Genii,  I  must,  however,  point  out  the  extremely common  juxtaposition  of  the  Arabic  word  "Jin"  and the  Malay  "  Jembalang."  From  the  frequency  with which  this  juxtaposition  occurs,  and  from  the  fact  that the  two  appear  to  be  used  largely  as  convertible  terms, we  might  expect  to  find  that  Jin  and  Jembalang  were mere  synonyms,  both  applicable  to  similar  classes  of spirits.  The  process  is  not  quite  complete,  however,  as although  the  expression  Jembalang  Tunggal  (the  only Jembalang),  is  found  as  well  as  Jin  Tunggal,  the  higher
the  good  Genii,  they  cannot  die  before  them  invisible  cocoa-nut  shells,  one  for
the  great  day  of  judgment,  but  (unlike  each  drop  of  rain.     In  these  they  catch
them)  they  are  dumb.  each  rain-drop  as  it  falls,  and  herbs
"  Great  as  their  numbers  are  they  are  and    trees   alike   wither    for    lack    of
continually    increasing,    as    they    are  moisture.       Then    the    angels    being
suffered  by  God  to  get   children  after  wroth,  cast  thunderbolts  upon  them  out
their  kind.     They  are  imps  of  mischief,  of  heaven,   and  these  malicious  elves
and  their  whole  time  is  spent  in  works  take   shelter  in  tall  trees,  which   the
I     of  malice.      Sometimes  when  there  has  thunderbolts   blast    in    their   fall.     At
been  a  long  drought  and  a  heavy  shower  another  time  they  will  climb  one  upon
of  rain  is  poured  down  upon  the  earth  the  other's  shoulders  until  they  reach
by  the  angels  at  the  bidding  of  God  to  the  sky,  when  the  topmost  elf  kicks  a
cool   the   parched   verdure,    they  will  neighbouring  angel,  and  then  they  all
assemble  their  legions,   bringing  with  fall  together  with  a  crash  like  thunder. "
H
98  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
honorific  Sang  Raja  or  Sa-Raja  is  never,  so  far  as  I  am aware,  prefixed  to  the  word  "  Jembalang,"  though  it  is frequently  prefixed  to  "Jin."  Of  the  other  members of  the  Malay  hierarchy  who  owe  their  introduction  to Muhammadan  influences,  the  only  ones  of  importance are  angels  (Mala'ikat),  prophets  (Nabi),  and  headmen (Sheikh).
I  will  take  them  in  this  order.
Of  the  angels,  unquestionably  the  most  important are  Azrael  ('Azra'il  or  'Ijrail),  Michael  (Mika'il),  Israfel (Israfil,  Ijrafil,  or  Serafil),  and  Gabriel  (Jibra'il  or 'Jabra'il,  often  corrupted  into  Raja  Brahil).  There can  be  no  doubt  that  the  foregoing  are  meant  for the  names  of  a  group  of  four  archangels,  the  name of  Israfel  corresponding  to  Abdiel,  who  generally occupies  the  fourth  place  in  our  own  angelic  hierarchy.
Their  customary  duties  are  apportioned  among  the four  great  angels  as  follows  : —
Azrael  is,  as  with  us,  the  angel  of  death,  who "  carries  off  the  lives  of  all  creatures  "  ;  Israfel  is  "  lord of  all  the  different  airs  "  in  our  body  ;  Michael  is  the "giver  of  daily  bread  ";  and  Gabriel  is  a  messenger or  "  bringer  of  news."
Sometimes,  again,  a  White  Angel  (Mala'ikat  Puteh) is  mentioned,  e.g.  as  being  in  "  charge  of  all  things in  the  jungle,"  but  what  his  specific  duties  are  in this  connection  does  not  transpire.
In  an  invocation  addressed  to  the  Sea-spirit,  how- ever, we  find  four  more  such  angels  mentioned,  all  of whom  hold  similar  charges  : —
Chitar  AH  is  the  angel's  name,  who  is  lord  of  the  whirlpool ; Sabur  AH  is  the  angel's  name,  who  is  lord  of  the  winds ; Sir  AH  is  the  angel's  name,  who  is  lord  of  the  waters  of  the  sea  ; Putar  AH  is  the  angel's  name,  who  is  lord  of  the  rainbow.
iv  ANGELS  AND  PROPHETS  99
No  doubt  the  names  of  many  more  of  the  sub- ordinate angels  might  be  collected,  as  we  are  repeatedly told  that  they  are  forty-four  in  number.
Of  the  prophets  (Nabi)  there  are  an  indefinite number,  the  title  being  applied  to  many  of  the  more prominent  characters  who  figure  in  our  own  Old Testament  (as  well  as  in  the  Koran),  but  who  would not  by  ourselves  be  considered  to  possess  any  special qualifications  for  prophetic  office.  Among  the  more famous  of  these  I  may  mention  (after  Muhammad  and his  immediate  compeers)  the  prophet  Solomon  (some- times considered — no  doubt  owing  to  his  unrivalled reputation  for  magical  skill — as  the  king  of  the  Genii, whose  assistance  the  hunter  or  trapper  is  continu- ally invoking) ;  the  prophet  David,  celebrated  for the  beauty  of  his  voice ;  and  the  prophet  Joseph, celebrated  for  the  beauty  of  his  countenance.  Besides these  (and  others  of  the  same  type),  there  is  a  group of  minor  prophets  whose  assistance  is  continually  in- voked in  charms ;  these  are  the  prophet  Tap  (Tetap or  Ketap?),  "lord  of  the  earth;"  the  prophet  Khailir (Khaithir  or  Khizr),  "lord  of  water ;"  the  prophet Noah,  "  lord  of  trees  ;  "  and  the  prophet  Elias,  "  planter of  trees."
Khizr  is  often  confounded  with  Elias.  He  dis- covered and  drank  of  the  fountain  of  life  (whence  his connection  with  water),  and  will  consequently  not  die till  the  last  trump.
Next  to  the  prophets  comes  the  "Sultan"  (Sultan), or  "King"  (Malik),  both  of  which  Arabic  titles, however,  are  somewhat  rarely  used  by  Malay magicians.  Still  we  find  such  expressions  as  Sa- Raja  (Sang- Raja?)  Malik  (King  of  Kings)  applied  to Batara  Guru.
ioo  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
Next  to  these  royal  honorifics  comes  the  title  of "Headman"  or  "Sheikh."
There  are,  it  is  usually  stated,  four  of  these  Sheikhs who  are  "  penned  "  (di-kandang]  in  the  Four  Corners of  the  Earth  respectively,  and  whose  names  are  'Abdul Kadir,  'Abdul  Muri,  a  third  whose  name  is  not  men- tioned, and  'Abdul  'Ali.1
Sometimes  they  are  called  "Sheikh  'Alam  "  (or  Si Putar  'Alam),  and  are  each  said  to  reside  "within  a  ring- fence  of  white  iron."  Hence  we  obtain  a  perfectly intelligible  meaning  for  the  expression,  "  Ask  pardon  of the  Four  Corners  of  the  World"  i.e.  of  the  Sheikhs who  reside  therein,  though  the  phrase  sounds  ridi- culous enough  without  such  explanation.
The  only  other  Arabic  title  which  is  perhaps  worth noticing  here2  is  that  of  "  Priest  "  (Imam),  which  we find  somewhat  curiously  used  in  an  invocation  addressed to  the  sea-spirit.  "  Imam  An  Jalil  is  the  name  of  the 'Priest  of  the  Sea.'"
In  the  invocation  addressed  to  the  Sea-spirit  we find  the  expression  : —
"  Jungle-chief  of  the  World  is  the  name  of  the  Old Man  of  the  Sea."
There  can,  however,  be  little  doubt  that  this  "  Old Man  of  the  Sea"  is  a  mere  synonym  for  Batara  Guru.
A  set  of  expressions  to  which  special  reference should  perhaps  be  made  consists  of  the  titles  used by  the  wild  jungle  tribes  (Sakais),  the  use  of  which
1  It   is   probable    that   the   Arabic  ally   used,    e.g.     Sidang   (or   Sedang) spirits  here  mentioned  have,  as  in  other  Saleh,    Sidang    (or    Sddang)    Mumin. cases,  taken  the  place  of  native  (Malay)  It  is  probable  that  "  Sidang  "  in  these spirits  to  whom  similar  functions  were  cases  is    a   Malay  word  implying  re- assigned,  but  whose  names   are  now  spectability  (v.  v.  d.  W.  s.v.),  so  that lost.  Sidang  Saleh  may  be  translated  "  Sir
2  There  are,  besides,  one  or  two  partly  Devout,"   and    Sidang   Mumin,    "Sir Arabic  expressions  which  are  occasion-  Faithful."
iv  DEMONS  AND  VAMPIRES  101
is  important  as  confirming  the  principle  that  the "  Autochthones  "  are  more  influential  with  the spirits  residing  in  their  land  than  any  later  arrivals can  be,  whatever  skill  the  latter  may  have  acquired in  the  magic  arts  of  the  country  from  whence  they came.
"Abdullah  bin  Abdul  Kadir,  Munshi,  in  his Autobiography,  has  an  interesting  passage  on  the beliefs  of  the  Malays  on  the  subject  of  spirits  and demons,  beliefs  which  are  much  more  deeply-rooted than  is  generally  supposed.  He  does  not,  however, differentiate  between  national  customs  and  beliefs,  and those  which  have  come  in  with  the  Muhammadan religion.  And  indeed  it  is  not  easy  to  do  so.  Here, everything  is  classed  under  the  generic  term  sheitan, which  is  Arabic,  and  we  find  the  rakshasa  of  Hindu romances  and  the/w  and  'efrit  of  the  Arabian  Nights in  the  company  of  a  lot  of  Indo-Chinese  spirits  and goblins,  who  have  not  come  from  the  West  like  the others  :—
"  I  explained  to  Mr.  M.  clearly  the  names  of  all the  sheitan  believed  in  by  Chinese  and  Malays ;  all ignorance  and  folly  which  have  come  down  from  their ancestors  in  former  times,  and  exist  up  to  the  present day,  much  more  than  I  could  relate  or  explain.  I merely  enumerated  the  varieties,  such  as  hantu, sheitan^  polong?  pontianak^  penanggalan?  jin?  pelisit? mambang?  hantu  pemburu?  hantu  rimba,  jadi-jadi-
1  Hantu    and    sheitan   are   generic  6  ThePe/isttorPH/sif,  like  the /Wo«f,
terms  for  evil  spirits,  the  former  being  is  a  familiar  spirit  (vide  pp.  329-331,
the  Malay  term,  the  latter  Arabic.  infra).
-  The  Polong  is  a  familiar  spirit.  6  The  Mambangs  are  inferior  Malay 8  The  Pontianak   and  PUnanggalan  divinities  (vide  pp.  88  n.,  91-93,  supra).
are  childbirth  spirits  (vide  pp.  327,  328,  7  The  Hantu  PUmburu  is  the  Spectre
infra).  Huntsman  (vide  pp.   113-120,  infra),
*  They*«  is  the  genie  of  the  "Arabian  for  whom  Hantu  Rimba  is  probably  a Nights  "  (vide  pp.  93-97,  supra).  mere  synonym.
IO2
THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON
an,1  hantu  bengkus?  bota,  gargasi,  raksaksa?  nenek kabayan?  himbasan?  sawan?  hantu  mati  di-bunoh? bajang?  katagoran,  sempak-kan,  puput-kan?  'efrit™ jemalang^  terkena™  ubat  guna™  Besides  all  these there  are  ever  so  many  ilmu-ilmu  (branches  of  secret knowledge),  all  of  which  I  could  not  remember,  such as  gagah™  penundok^  pengasih™  kebal™  kasaktian^ tuju™  'alimun,~Q  penderas^-  perahuh^  chucha?*  pelali^ perangsang™  and  a  quantity  of  others.  All  these  are
1  The  Jadi-jadian  is  the  Were-tiger (vide  pp.  160-163,  infra}.
2  The  Bengkus  I  have  not  yet  been able  to  identify.
3  The  Bota,  Gargasi,   and  Raksasa (not  raksaksa)  are  giants.
4  The    Nenek    Kabayan    does    not appear  to  be  a  ghost  at  all ;  it  may, however,  possibly  be   a  rare   synonym for  some  well-known  character  in  Malay folklore  (such  as  the  wife  of  the  Man in  the  Moon).     It  is  not  so  explained  in the  best  Dutch  dictionaries,  however, but    simply  as    the  village    messenger (dorpsbode)    who     sells     flowers     and carries  lovers'  messages.
6  The   Himbasan    I    have   not   yet identified.
6  The   Sawan    (i.e.  Hantu    Sawan) is  the  demon  or  devil  which  is  believed to  cause  convulsions.
7  The  Hantu  (orang)  mati  di-bunoh is  the  ghost  of  a  murdered  man.
8  The  Bajang  is    a    familiar    spirit (vide  pp.  320-325,  infra).
9  The    Hantu    katagoran,    sempak- kan,   and  puput-kan  I  have  not  been able  to  identify,  and  as  the  two  last possess  the  verbal  suffix  it  is  clear  that each  is  the  name  of  a  state  or  process and  not  of  a  ghost  or  demon.     In  fact, v.    d.    Wall    gives    (under    sampok), ke'sampokan,    which    he    explains     as meaning    "  door    een'     boozen    geest getroffen    zijn,"    to    be    attacked    or possessed  by  an    evil  spirit,   which   is doubtless   the  correcter   form    of  the word.      So    with  puput  -  kan,    which is  also  a  verbal  form  meaning  (ace.  to v.  d.  W.)  "to  blow  (tr.),"  to  " sound  a wind    instrument."      It    would    seem
that   'Abdullah's   list  of  "ghosts"   is not  very  systematically  drawn  up.
10  The  lefrit  is  a  spirit  of  Arabian origin.
11  The  Jemalang  (Je"mbalang)  is   a Malay  earth-spirit.
12  T2rk2na  is  a  past  participial  form used  of  people  who  are  thought  to  be "struck  by"  or  "affected  by"  one  of the  foregoing  demons.
13  Ubat  guna  is  a  love-philtre.
14  Gagah     (usually     pgnggagaK)    is the  art  of  making  one's  self  bold  or courageous.
15  Ptfnundok,  the  art  of  making  one's enemy  yield  (tundok).
16  Pfngasih,  the  art  of  making  one's self  beloved  by  another.
17  KZbal  (p?ng2bal)  the  art  of  making one's  self  invulnerable.
18  Kasaktian,   the  art  of  acquiring magic  powers.
19  Tuju    (pfnuju),    the    art    called "sending."
20  'Alimun,  the  art  of  making  one's self  invisible.
21  PendZras,  the  art  of  making  one's self  swift-footed.
22  Perahuh   (a  misprint  for  pZruah =peruang  ?)  that  of  keeping  water  at  a distance  from  one's  face  when  diving, and  also,   it   is    said,    of  walking  on the  water  without   sinking   below  the ankles.
23  Chucha    is,    I    believe,    a     love charm.
24  Pelali,   is  the  art  of  numbing  or deadening  pain.
25  PPrangsang,  the  art  of  exciting  or whetting  the  temper  of  the  dogs  when hunting.
iv  SPIRITS  AND  GHOSTS  103
firmly  believed  in  by  the  people.  Some  of  these  arts have  their  professors  (guru)  from  whom  instruction may  be  got.  Others  have  their  doctors,  who  can  say this  is  such  and  such  a  disease,  and  this  is  the  remedy for  it,  and  besides  these  there  are  all  those  arts  which are  able  to  cause  evil  to  man.  When  Mr.  M.  heard all  this  he  was  astonished  and  wondered,  and  said, '  Do  you  know  the  stories  of  all  these  ? '  I  replied, '  If  I  were  to  explain  all  about  them  it  would  fill  a large  book,  and  the  contents  of  the  book  would  be all  ignorance  and  nonsense  without  any  worth,  and sensible  persons  would  not  like  to  listen  to  it,  they would  merely  laugh  at  it.'  " l
To  the  foregoing  the  following  list  of  spirits  and ghosts  may  be  added.
The  Hantu  Kubor  (Grave  Demons)  are  the  spirits of  the  dead,  who  are  believed  to  prey  upon  the  living whenever  they  get  an  opportunity.  With  them  may be  classed  the  "Hantu  orang  mati  di-bunoh"  or "  spirits  of  murdered  men."
"  ^he  Hantu  Ribut  is  the  storm-fiend  that  howls in  the  bfcist  and  revels  in  the  whirlwind." :
The  Hantu  Ayer  and  Hantu  Laut  are  Water  and Sea-spirits,  and  the  Hantu  Bandan  is  the  Spirit  of the  Waterfall,  which  "may  often  be  seen  lying  prone on  the  water,  with  head  like  an  inverted  copper (kawak)"  where  «he  water  rushes  down  the  fall  between the  rocks.
The  Hantu  Loaggak 8  is  continually  looking  up  in
1  Hik.  Abdullah,  p.  145.     [Maxwell  is  sometimes  identified  with  the  Hantu v&J.R,A.S.,S.B.,'No.\i,N.andQ.,  Pemburu,    or    wild    huntsman,    who, No.  4,  sec.  98.]  after  hunting  the  earth,  harked  on  his
2  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.u.  p.  191.  dogs  through  the  sky,  and  whose  head,
3  The  name  of  this  derron  is  prob-  from  his  continually  looking  upwards, ably  connected  with  the  Many  dongak,  became  fixed  in  that  position.
which  means  to  "look  upwards."     It
104  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP.
the  air.     Those  who  are  attacked  by  him  foam  at  the mouth.
The  Hantu  Rimba  (Deep-forest  Demon),  Hantu Raya1  ("Great"  Demon),  Hantu  Denei  (Demon  of Wild-beast-tracks),  the  Hantu-hantuan  (Echo-spirits), and  I  think  the  Hantu  Bakal,  are  all  spirits  of  the jungle,  but  are  perhaps  somewhat  less  localised  than the  large  class  of  spirits  (such  as  the  Malacca-cane, gharu,  gutta,  and  camphor- tree  spirits)  which  are specially  associated  with  particular  trees.
The  Hantu  B'rok  is  the  Baboon  Demon  (the B'rok  being  what  is  generally  called  the  "  cocoa-nut monkey,"  a  sort  of  big  baboon) ;  it  is  sometimes supposed  to  take  possession  of  dancers,  and  enable them,  whilst  unconscious,  to  perform  wonderful  climb- ing feats.
The  Hantu  Belian,  according  to  many  Selangor Malays,  is  a  tiger-spirit  which  takes  the  form  of  a  bird. This  bird  is  said  to  be  not  unlike  the  raquet-tailed king-crow  (chenchawt),  and  to  sit  on  the  tiger's  bsck, whence  it  plucks  out  the  tiger's  fur  and  swallows  it, never  allowing  it  to  fall  to  the  ground.2
The  Hantu  Songkei3  is  the  spirit  who  so  often interferes  with  the  toils  for  catching  wild  animals  and snares  for  wildfowl  (yang  kachau  jarinf  dan  rachik\. He  is  described  as  being  invisible  below  the  breast,
1  The  Hantu  Raya  is  sometimes  said  fere  with  are^nares  and  rope-traps,  and to  dwell  in  the   centre   of  four  cross-  as  the  most  obvious  way  in  which  they roads.    There  is  a  sea-spirit  of  the  same  could  be    '  interfered  "  with  would  be name,  Si  Raya,  which  should,  however,  by  untying  or  loosening  their  knots, probably   be    identified    with    Batara  the   connection  between   the   name  of Guru.  this     spirit    md    the    Malay    rungkei
2  Malay  Sketches,  p.  197.  to     unloose   or    undo,    is    sufficiently
3  The  name  of  this  Demon  (songkei  obvious.     The  name,  therefore,  would =  sa-ungkei?)  is   no   doubt   connected  appear    to  mean    the    "Untying"    or with    the   Malay    ungkei   or   rungkei,  "  Looseniig  Demon,"  naturally  a  most which  means  to  undo  or  unloose  a  knot.  vexatious  >pirit  to  have  anywhere  near The  only  traps  which  it  is  said  to  inter-  your  sna£S  or  nooses.
iv  HANTU  SONGKEI  105
with  a  nose  of  enormous  length,  and  eye-sockets stretched  sideways  to  such  an  extent  that  he  can  see all  round  him.
The  following  charm  is  recited  in  order  to "  neutralise  "  his  evil  influence  : —
Peace  be  with  you,  grandson  of  the  Spectre  Huntsman,
Whose  Dwelling-place  is  a  solitary  patch  of  primeval  forest,
Whose  Chair  is  the  nook  between  the  buttresses  (of  trees),
Whose  Leaning-post  the  wild  Areca-palm,
Whose  Roof  the  (leaves  of  the)  Tukas,
Whose  Body-hairs  are  leaves  of  the  Re'sam,
Whose  Mattress  leaves  of  the  Lerek,
Whose  Swing  the  (tree)  Medang  Jelawei,
And  whose  Swing-ropes  are  Malacca-cane-plants
The  Gift  of  His  Highness  Sultan  Berumbongan,
Who  dwelt  at  Pagar  Ruyong,
In  the  House  whose  posts  were  heart  of  the  Tree-nettle,
Whose  threshold  a  stem  of  Spinach,
Strewn  over  with  stems  of  the  Purut-purut,
Whose  Body-hairs  were  inverted,
And  whose  Breasts  were  four  in  number,
To  whom  belonged  the  Casting-net  for  Flies,
And  whose  drum  was  "headed"  with  the  skins  of  lice.
Break  not  faith  with  me,
(Or)  you  shall  be  killed  by  the  Impact  of  the  Sanctity  of  the
Four  Corners  of  the  World, Killed  by  the  Impact  of  the  Forty-four  Angels, Killed  by  the  Impact  of  the  Pillar  of  the  Ka'bah, Killed  by  the  Thrust  of  the  sacred  Lump  of  Iron, Killed  by  the  Shaft  of  the  Thunderbolt, Killed  by  the  Pounce  of  Twilight  Lightning, Killed  by  the  Impact  of  the  Thirty  Sections  of  the  Koran, Killed  by  the  Impact  of  the  Saying,  "  There  is  no  god  but  God,"
etc.
Giants  are  called  Bota  (Bhuta),  Raksasa,  and Gargasi  (gasi-gasi  or  gegasi\  or  sometimes  Hantu Tinggi  ("  Tall  Demons  "),  the  first  two  of  these  names being  clearly  derivable  from  a  Sanskrit  origin.
In  addition  to  those  enumerated  we  may  add  the various  classes  of  "  good  people,"  such  as  the  Bidadari
io6  THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON  CHAP,  iv
(or  Bediadari)  or  Peri  (fairies  and  elves),  which  are of  foreign  origin,  and  the  "  Orang  Bunyian,"  a  class of  Malay  spirits  about  whom  very  little  seems  known. The  latter  appear  to  be  a  race  of  good  fairies,  who  are so  simple-minded  that  they  can  be  very  easily  cheated. Thus  it  is  always  said  of  them,  that  whenever  they come  into  a  hamlet,  as  they  may  occasionally  do,  to buy  anything,  they  always  pay  without  bargaining whatever  price  is  asked,  however  exorbitant  it  may  be. I  have  been  told  of  their  existence  at  Kapar  village (near  Klang  in  Selangor),  at  Jugra,  where  it  was  said they  might  formerly  be  heard  paddling  their  boats upon  the  river  when  no  boat  was  visible,  and  else- where.
Besides  these  there  are  several  kinds  of  blood- sucking (vampire)  demons,  which  are  mostly  Birth- spirits  ;  and  also  certain  inciibi,  such  as  the  Hantu Kopek,  which  is  the  Malay  equivalent  of  our  own "night-mare."
CHAPTER  V
MAGIC  RITES  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  SEVERAL DEPARTMENTS  OF  NATURE
(a)  Air
I.  WIND  AND  WEATHER  CHARMS
NOT  the  least  important  attribute  of  the  Malay  magi- cian in  former  days  was  his  power  of  controlling  the weather — a  power  of  which  Malay  magic  incantations still  preserve  remarkable  traces.
Thus  when  the  wind  fails  and  the  sails  of  a  boat are  flapping  (kalau  layer  K lepek-K lepefc),  a  Selangor magician  would  not  unfrequently  summon  the  wind  in the  following  terms  :—
"  Come  hither,  Sir,  come  hither,  my  Lord, Let  down  your  locks  so  long  and  flowing."
And  if  the  wind  is  contrary  he  would  say  : —
"  Veer  round,  Wind,  a  needle  or  twain  (of  the  compass), A  needle  to  (let  me)  fetch  Kapar}- However  heavy  the  merchandise  that  I  carry  unassisted, Let  me  repair  to  Klang.ioi  the  (morning)  meal, And  Langat  for  the  (evening)  bathe.
1  Kapar, Klang, Langat: the Pawang  in  succession  during  the  day  "if  the
(magician)  mentions,  by  way  of  example,  wind  will  listen  to  him."    The  Pawang
the  names  of  three  places  on  the  Se-  who  told  me   this  was  a  Kapar  man
langor  coast  which  he  wishes  to  visit  ('Che  'Akob).
CHAP.
1 08  AIR
Come  hither,  Sir,  come  hither,  my  Lord, And  let  down  your  locks  so  long  and  flowing."
Again,  if  the  wind  grew  violent  he  would  say  : —
"Eggs  of  the  House-lizard,  Eggs  of  the  Grass-lizard, Make  a  trio  with  Eggs  of  the  Tortoise. I  plant  this  pole  thus  in  the  mid-stream (That)  Wind  and  Tempest  may  come  to  naught. Let  the  White  (ones)  turn  into  Chalk, And  the  Black  (one)  into  Charcoal.1
Sometimes  the  magician  will  fasten  a  rice-spoon (chemcha) 2  horizontally  to  the  mast  of  the  vessel,  and repeat  some  such  charm  as  the  following : —
"The  bird  ' Anggau-anggau '  flies To  perch  on  the  house  of  Malim  Palita. May  you  die  as  you  lean,  may  you  die  from  a  push, May  you  die  by  this  '  sending  '  of  '  Prince  Rice-spoon's.' "  3
Of  rain-making  ceremonies  in  Selangor  there  now remains  little  but  tradition.  Yet  a  Langat  Malay  told me  that  if  a  Malay  woman  puts  upon  her  head  an inverted4  earthenware  pan  (fflanga),  and  then,  setting it  upon  the  ground,  fills  it  with  water  and  washes  the cat  in  it  until  the  latter  is  more  than  half  drowned, heavy  rain  will  certainly  ensue.5
1  The  first  two  lines  are  no  doubt  3  P£ngiran  Chgmcha,  which  I  trans- (as  elsewhere)  a  sort  of  rhymed  memoria  late  Prince  Rice-spoon,  appears  to  be tecknica,  intended  to  "memorise"  the  a  mock  title  of  Bornean  origin.     Thus accessories  required  for  the  rite.     The  we  read  that  "P£ngiran"or  "Pangeran" tortoise   here  would   appear   to   be  a  is  the  title  of  the  four  Ministers  of  State symbol  of  rain,  as  among  the  Sakais  (wazirs)  in  Brunei,  one  of  whom  was (wild  tribes)  of  the   Malay  Peninsula.  called  Pengiran  Pamancha,  of  which  the v.  Haddon,  Evolution  of  Art,  p.   246.  present  name  (Pengiran  ChSmcha)  looks Can  the  "white "(or  gray?)  "ones"  like    a    corruption. — J.R.A.S.,    S.B., be  the  two  lizards  ;    and   the  "  black  No.  20,  p.  36.
one "  the  tortoise  ?     The  grass  lizards  4  Inverted  (I  was  given   to  under-
are  of  various  colours.  stand),  by  way  of  symbolising  the  vault
2  The  rice-spoon  is  a  favourite  weapon  of  heaven — a  good  example  of  sympa- against  spirits  of  evil,  v.   Maxwell  in  thetic  magic. J.R.A.S.^S.B.^o.  7,  p.  19,  which  de-  6  For  other  superstitions  about  the
scribes  how  a  woman  in  travail  is  armed       cat,  vide  pp.  190-192,  infra. with  a  [rice-]  spoon  during  an  eclipse.
v  IDEAS  ABOUT  BIRDS  109
On  the  other  hand  the  recital  of  the  following  charm will,  it  is  believed,  effectually  stop  the  heaviest  down- pour : —
"Though  the  stem  of  the  MSranti  tree1  rocks  to  and  fro  (in  the
storm),
Let  the  Yam  leaves  be  as  thick  as  possible,2 That  Rain  and  Tempest  may  come  to  naught."
With  the  foregoing  should  be  classed  such  charms as  are  used  by  the  Malays  to  dispel  the  yellow  sunset glow.3
2.    BIRDS    AND    BIRD    CHARMS
The  chief  features  of  the  Bird-lore  of  the  Peninsular Malays,  which,  as  will  appear  in  the  course  of  this chapter,  is  strongly  tinged  with  animism,  have  been thus  described  by  Sir  William  Maxwell : —
"  Ideas  of  various  characters  are  associated  by Malays  with  birds  of  different  kinds,  and  many  of their  favourite  similes  are  furnished  by  the  feathered world.  The  peacock  strutting  in  the  jungle,  the argus  pheasant  calling  on  the  mountain  peak,  the  hoot of  the  owl,  and  the  cry  of  the  night-jar,  have  all suggested  comparisons  of  various  kinds,  which  are embodied  in  the  proverbs  of  the  people.4  The  Malay
1  The  mtranti  is  a  fine  hard-wood  The  idea  is  that  the  beauty  of  the forest  tree.  bird  is  thrown  away  when  exhibited  in
2  i.e.  "May  we  be  well  sheltered."  a  lonely  spot  where  there  is  none  to
3  Vide  p.  93,  supra.  admire  it.
4  The  proverbs  referred  to  are  to  be
found   in   the   collections  of  proverbs  ?2'  Sepertt  ponggok  menndu  bulan.
sent  by  Mr.   Maxwell  to  Nos.    i,   2,  "  As  the  owl  sighs  longingly  to  the
and   3  of  the  Journal  of  the  Straits  moon."
Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.  A    figure    often    used    by   Mal         in
The  numbers  are  consecutive.  describing  the  longing  of  a  lover  for
4.   Apa  guna-nia  merak  mengigal  di  his    mistress.     It    recalls    a    line    in
hutan?  Gray's  "Elegy,"   "The   moping    owl
"What  is  the  use  of  the  peacock  doth  to  the  moon  complain."     [As  to
strutting  in  the  jungle  ?  "  the  story  connected  with  the  ponggok,
110
BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS
CHAP.
is  a  keen  observer  of  nature,  and  his  illustrations, drawn  from  such  sources,  are  generally  just  and  often poetical.
"  The  supernatural  bird  Gerda  (Garuda,  the  eagle  of Vishnu),  who  figures  frequently  in  Malay  romances,  is dimly  known  to  the  Malay  peasant.  If,  during  the day,  the  sun  is  suddenly  overcast  by  clouds  and shadow  succeeds  to  brilliancy,  the  Perak  Malay  will say  "  Gerda  is  spreading  out  his  wings  to  dry." l  Tales are  told,  too,  of  other  fabulous  birds 2 — the  jintayu, which  is  never  seen,  though  its  note  is  heard,  and which  announces  the  approach  of  rain ; 8  and  the chandrawasi,  which  has  no  feet.  The  chandrawasi
vide  infra,  p.  122.   Capt.  Kelham,  vide infra,    supposes    the  ponggok    to    be Scops  lempiji,  Horsf.] 73.  Seperti    kuang    mekik    di-puchuk
gunong.
"  Like  the  argus  pheasant  calling  on the  mountain  peak."
Another  poetical  simile  for  a  complain- ing lover.     Here  he  is  compared  to  a lonely  bird  sounding  its  note  far  from all  companions. 93.   Seperti  tetegok  di-rumah  tinggal.
"  Like  the  night-jar  at  a  deserted house."
The  tegok  or  tetegok  is  a  bird  common in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  whose  habits are  nocturnal  and  solitary.  It  has  a peculiar,  liquid,  monotonous  call.  The phrase  is  used  to  signify  the  solitude and  loneliness  of  a  stranger  in  a  Malay kampong.
Elsewhere  (in  notes  afterwards published  in  the  Selangor  Journal} (vol.  i.  No.  23,  p.  360)  Sir  W.  E. Maxwell  says  "  The  burong  tetegok  is not  a  night  bird,  but  flies  by  day.  It can  be  distinguished  by  its  short  rapid note,  which  resembles  tegok-tegok-tegok- tegok"  Apparently  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell identifies  this  bird  with  the  Malay  night- jar (Caprimulgus  macrurus.  Horsf.) described  by  Capt.  Kelham,  in  No.  9,
page  122  of  ttieJ.R.A.S.,  S.B.  None of  the  Dutch  Dictionaries  identify  it clearly,  though  Klinkert  (probably wrongly)  identifies  it  with  the  small owl  called  ponggok,  which  is  taken  by Capt.  Kelham  to  be  Scops  IPmpiji, Horsf.
1  Gerda  meniumur  kepah-nia.
2  Another  fabulous  bird  which  Max- well does  not  mention  is  the  Walimana (which  I  have  more  than  once  heard called  Wilmana  in  Selangor).     On  the identity  of  this  bird,my  friend  Mr.  Wilkin- son, of  the  Straits  Civil  Service,  sends  me in  a  letter  the  following  note  : — "The word  is  walimana.     I  have  often  met
it  in  old  MSS.  written/.
The  '  wait '  is  the  same  as  the  second word  in  Rajawali.  The  mana  is '  human  ' ;  cp.  man,  manushya,  etc. The  ivalimana  in  old  Javanese  pottery is  represented  as  a  bird  with  a  human head,  a  sort  of  harpy.  In  the  Hikayat Sang  Samba  it  is  the  steed  of  Maharaja Boma,  and  repeatedly  speaks  to  its master."
3  Laksanajintayu  menantikan  hujan "as  tiiejintayu  awaits  the  rain,"  is  a proverbial  simile  for  a  state  of  anxiety and  despondency.  Jintayu  =  jatayu (Sanskrit),  a  fabulous  vulture.
MYTHICAL  BIRDS  in
lives  in  the  air,  and  is  constantly  on  the  wing,  never descending  to  earth  or  alighting  on  a  tree.  Its  young even  are  produced  without  the  necessity  of  touching the  earth.  The  egg  is  allowed  to  drop,  and  as  it  nears the  earth  it  bursts,  and  the  young  bird  appears  fully developed.  The  note  of  the  chandrawasi  may  often be  heard  at  night,  but  never  by  day,  and  it  is  lucky, say  the  Malays,  to  halt  at  a  spot  where  it  is  heard calling.
"  There  is  an  allusion  to  this  bird  in  a  common pantun — a  kind  of  erotic  stanza  very  popular  among the  Malays  : —
"  Chandrawasi  burong  sakti, Sangat  berkurong  didalam  awan, Gonda  gulana  didalam  hati, Sahari  tidak  memandang  tuan}-
"  Nocturnal  birds  are  generallyconsidered  ill-omened all  over  the  world,  and  popular  superstition  among  the Malays  fosters  a  prejudice  against  one  species  of owl.  If  it  happens  to  alight  and  hoot  near  a  house, the  inhabitants  say  significantly  that  there  will  soon  be
1  The  chandrawasi,  bird  of  power,  romances)  to  the  golden  oriole  and  even
Is  closely  hidden  among  the  clouds.  to  the  ostrich.  In  the  Malay  Peninsula,
Anxiety  reigns  in  my  heart,  too,  it  is  said  to  fly  feet  upwards  (which
Each  day  that  I  see  not  my  love.  peculiarity  it  shares,  according  to  Mr.
[To  the  above  I  may  perhaps  be  Clifford,  with  the  Btrek-berek,  Pub.
allowed  to  add  that  the  (dialectal)  form  J-R.A.S.,S.B.,Hik.Raj.Budiman,^-
chandrawasiris  the  form  generally  used  "•  35)>  an^  its  eggs  are  sometimes  said,
in  the  southern  part  of  Selangor  (where  on  falling,  to  develop  into  the  snake
the  final  "r"  is  still  commonly  pre-  called  chintamani.  It  is  always
served).  The  regular  (Dictionary)  form  considered  lucky,  and  the  "Bird  of
of  the  word,  however,  appears  to  be  Paradise  Prayer,"  (do'a  chandrawasi)
chandrawasih  or  chtndfrawaseh  (the  as  it  is  called,  generally  takes  an
forms  chJnddrawangsa,  chfndfrawasa,  important  place  in  the  formulas  recited
and  chtndSrawangseh  being  also  found).  at  the  ceremonies  connected  with  the
In  origin  the  word  is  undoubtedly  Rice-soul,  q.v.  For  the  confusion
Sanskrit.  between  the  chandrawasi  and  berek-
It  means  the  Bird  of  Paradise,  but  in  berek  (probably  due  to  the  fact  that
those  Malay  countries  where  the  Bird  the  chfndrawasit  or  Bird  of  Paradise,  is
of  Paradise  is  unknown,  it  is  also  n°t  to  be  found  in  the  Peninsula)  vide
applied  to  other  birds,  such  as  (in  Malay  note  on  App.  xxx.]
112  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
'  tearing  of  cloth '  (koyak  kapan)  for  a  shroud.  This does  not  apply  to  the  small  owl  called  punggok,  which, as  soon  as  the  moon  rises,  may  often  be  heard  to  emit a  soft  plaintive  note.  The  note  of  the  punggok  is admired  by  the  Malays,  who  suppose  it  to  be  sighing for  the  moon,  and  find  in  it  an  apt  simile  for  a  despond- ing lover.
"  The  baberek  or  birik-birik,  another  nocturnal  bird, is  a  harbinger  of  misfortune.  This  bird  is  said  to  fly in  flocks  at  night ;  it  has  a  peculiar  note,  and  a  passing flock  makes  a  good  deal  of  noise.  If  these  birds  are heard  passing,  the  Perak  peasant  brings  out  a sengkalan  (a  wooden  platter  on  which  spices  are ground),  and  beats  it  with  a  knife,  or  other  domestic utensil,  calling  out  as  he  does  so:  " Nenek,  bawa hati-nia  "  ("  Great-grandfather,  bring  us  their  hearts  "). This  is  an  allusion  to  the  belief  that  the  bird  baberek flies  in  the  train  of  the  Spectre  Huntsman  (hantu pembnru),  who  roams  Malay  forests  with  several •ghostly  dogs,  and  whose  appearance  is  the  forerunner of  disease  or  death.  "  Bring  us  their  hearts "  is  a mode  of  asking  for  some  of  his  game,  and  it  is  hoped that  the  request  will  delude  the  hantu  pemburu into  the  belief  that  the  applicants  are  ra'iyat,  or followers  of  his,  and  that  he  will,  therefore,  spare  the household.
"  The  baberek?  which  flies  with  the  wild  hunt,  bears a  striking  resemblance  to  the  white  owl,  Totosel,  the nun  who  broke  her  vow,  and  now  mingles  her  "tutu  " with  the  "  holloa  "  of  the  Wild  Huntsman  of  the  Harz.2
1  The    baberek    appears   to    be    yet  events,  the  legend  of  the  Wild  Hunts- another    name  for  the    goat-sucker  or  man  and  his  dogs  (or  Gabriel's  Hounds, night -jar      (Caprimulgus      macrurns,  as  they  are  often  called)  is  explained  by Horsf.)     Dawn  of  History,  page  171.  the   cries  of  wild    geese    flying   over-
2  As  it  appears  that  in  Europe,  at  all  head  on  dark  nights,   it  seems   most
THE  SPECTRE  HUNTSMAN
"  The  legend  of  the  Spectre  Huntsman  is  thus  told by  the  Perak  Malays  : —
"In  former  days,  at  Katapang,  in  Sumatra,  there lived  a  man  whose  wife,  during  her  pregnancy,  was seized  with  a  violent  longing  for  the  meat  of  the  pelan- dok  (mouse-deer).  But  it  was  no  ordinary  pelandok that  she  wanted.  She  insisted  that  it  should  be  a  doe, big  with  male  offspring,  and  she  bade  her  husband  go and  seek  in  the  jungle  for  what  she  wanted.  The man  took  his  weapons  and  dogs  and  started,  but  his quest  was  fruitless,  for  he  had  misunderstood  his  wife's injunctions,  and  what  he  sought  was  a  buck  pelandok, big  with  male  offspring,  an  unheard-of  prodigy.
convenient  to  give  the  Malay  legend  in connection  with  the  birds  with  which  the Malays  associate  him.  The  explanation to  which  I  refer  is  to  be  found  in  Prof. Newton's  Dictionary  of  Birds  (1893), sub  voce  "Gabble-ratchet."  I  quote in  exienso  : —
"In  many  parts  of  England,  but especially  in  Yorkshire,  the  cries  of some  kind  of  wild  goose,1  when  flying by  night,  are  heard  with  dismay  by those  who  do  not  know  the  cause  of them,  and  are  attributed  to  '  Gabriel's Hounds,'  an  expression  equivalent  to 'Gabble -ratchet,'  a  term  often  used for  them,  as  in  this  sense  gabble  is  said to  be  a  corruption  of  Gabriel,  and  that, according  to  some  mediaeval  glossaries, is  connected  with  gabbara  or  gabares,  a word  meaning  a  corpse  (cp.  Way, Promptorium  Parvulorum,  p.  320, su6  voce  '  Lyche ')  ;  while  ratchet  is undoubtedly  the  same  as  the  Anglo- Saxon  race  and  Middle  English  racche or  rache,  a  dog  that  hunts  by  scent  and gives  tongue.  Hence  the  expression would  originally  mean  '  corpse- hounds,'  and  possibly  has  to  do  with legends  such  as  that  of  the  Wild  Hunts- man. .  .  .  The  sounds  are  at  times very  marvellous,  not  to  say  impressive, when  heard,  as  they  almost  invariably
are,  on  a  pitch-dark  night,  and  it  has more  than  once  happened  within  the writer's  knowledge  that  a  flock  of geese,  giving  utterance  to  them,  has continued  for  some  hours  to  circle  over a  town  or  village  in  such  a  way  as  to attract  the  attention  of  the  most  un- observant of  its  inhabitants,  and  inspire with  terror  those  among  them  who  are prone  to  superstition.  (Cp.  Atkinson, Notes  and  Queries,  ser.  4,  vii.  pp. 439,  440,  and  Cleveland  Glossary,  p. 203  ;  Herrtage,  Catholicon  Anglicum, p.  147  ;  Robinson,  Glossary  Whitby, (Engl.  Dial.  Soc.)  p.  74;  and  Addy, Glossary  Sheffield  (Engl.  Dial.  Soc.) p.  83.  Mr.  Charles  Swainson  (Prov. Names,  Br.  B.,  p.  98),  gives  'Gabble- ratchet  '  as  a  name  of  the  night-jar, but  satisfactory  proof  of  that  statement seems  to  be  wanting."2
1  Prof.  Newton  here  has  a  note  :  "  Presum- ably the  BRANT,  on  the  rare  occasions  when, losing   its  way,  it  comes  inland,  for  the  call- notes  proceeding  from  a  flock  of  this  species curiously  resemble  the  sound  of  hounds  in  full cry  (Thompson,   B.  Irel.   iii.   p.   59),   though some   hearers   liken   them   to  the  yelping    of puppies.    The  discrepancy  may  to  some  extent depend  on  distance."
2  Possibly  the  sounds  made  by  the  geese might    be    attributed    to    the    night  -  jar    by peasants  through  the  latter' s  appearing  at  the time  they  were  made.     It  is  curious  that  the Malays  as  well  should  connect  the  night-jar with  the  Wild  Huntsman.
BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS
11  Day  and  night  he  hunted,  slaying  innumerable mouse-deer,  which  he  threw  away  on  finding  that  they did  not  fulfil  the  conditions  required.
"  He  had  sworn  a  solemn  oath  on  leaving  home  that he  would  not  return  unsuccessful,  so  he  became  a regular  denizen  of  the  forest,  eating  the  flesh  and drinking  the  blood  of  the  animals  which  he  slew,  and pursuing  night  and  day  his  fruitless  search.  At  length he  said  to  himself :  '  I  have  hunted  the  whole  earth over  without  finding  what  I  want ;  it  is  now  time  to try  the  firmament.'  So  he  holloa'd  on  his  dogs  through the  sky,  while  he  walked  below  on  the  earth  looking up  at  them,  and  after  a  long  time,  the  hunt  still  being unsuccessful,  the  back  of  his  head,  from  constantly gazing  upwards,  became  fixed  to  his  back,  and  he  was  no longer  able  to  look  down  at  the  earth.  One  day  a  leaf from  the  tree  called  St  Limbak  fell  on  his  throat  and took  root  there,  and  a  straight  shoot  grew  upwards  in front  of  his  face.1  In  this  state  he  still  hunts  through Malay  forests,  urging  on  his  dogs  as  they  hunt  through the  sky,  with  his  gaze  evermore  turned  upwards.2
"His  wife,  whom  he  left  behind  when  he  started on  the  fatal  chase,  was  delivered  in  due  time  of  two children — a  boy  and  a  girl.  When  they  were  old enough  to  play  with  other  children,  it  chanced  one  day that  the  boy  quarrelled  with  the  child  of  a  neighbour with  whom  he  was  playing.  The  latter  reproached  him with  his  father's  fate,  of  which  the  child  had  hitherto
1  Selangor  Malays  add  further  that  (pinang  senawar).     He  then  binds  it his   whole    body    became    overgrown  up  again  with  a  creeper  (akar  gasing- with  orchids,  a  conceit  which  recalls  gasing),  and  roasts   it    over  an    earth their  story  of  a  local  hero  who  went  on  hearth  (saleian),    the  floor   (lantei)   of swimming  in   the  sea  until  his    body  which  is  of  the  pinang  boring  (another became  covered  with  oysters  !  wild  areca  palm),  and  covers  it  over
2  The  Spectre  Huntsman  is  said  to  with  wild  banana  leaves  (tudong  salei butcher  (bantai)  his  game,  whenever  he  daun  pisang  hutan]  and  leaves  of  the gets  it,  under  a  kind  of  wild  areca  palm  r/sa»i  bracken.
v  HIS  ORIGIN  AND  HISTORY  115
been  ignorant,  saying  :  '  Thou  art  like  thy  father,  who has  become  an  evil  spirit,  ranging  the  forests  day  and night,  and  eating  and  drinking  no  man  knows  how. Get  thee  to  thy  father.'
"  Then  the  boy  ran  crying  to  his  mother  and  related what  had  been  said  to  him.  '  Do  not  cry,'  said  she, '  it  is  true,  alas !  that  thy  father  has  become  a  spirit  of evil.'  On  this  the  boy  cried  all  the  more,  and  begged to  be  allowed  to  join  his  father.  His  mother  yielded at  last  to  his  entreaties,  and  told  him  the  name  of  his father  and  the  names  of  the  dogs.  He  might  be known,  she  said,  by  his  habit  of  gazing  fixedly  at  the sky  and  by  his  four  weapons — a  blow-pipe  (sumpitan), a  spear,  a  kris,  and  a  sword  (klewang).  'And,'  added she,  '  when  thou  hearest  the  hunt  approaching,  call upon  him  and  the  dogs  by  name,  and  repeat  thy  own name  and  mine,  so  that  he  may  know  thee.'
"The  boy  entered  the  forest,  and,  after  he  had walked  some  way,  met  an  old  man  who  asked  him where  he  was  going.  'I  go  to  join  my  father/  said the  lad.  '  If  thou  findest  him,'  said  the  old  man,  'ask him  where  he  has  put  my  chisel  which  he  has  borrowed from  me.'  This  the  boy  promised  to  do,  and  con- tinued his  journey.  After  he  had  gone  a  long  way  he heard  sounds  like  those  made  by  people  engaged  in hunting.  As  they  approached,  he  repeated  the  names which  his  mother  had  told  him,  and  immediately  found himself  face  to  face  with  his  father.  The  hunter  de- manded of  him  who  he  was,  and  the  child  repeated  all that  his  mother  had  told  him,  not  forgetting  the  message of  the  old  man  about  the  chisel.  Then  the  hunter  said  : '  Truly  thou  art  my  son.  As  for  the  chisel,  it  is  true that  when  I  started  from  home  I  was  in  the  middle  of shaping  some  bamboos  to  make  steps  for  the  house.
ri6  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
I  put  the  chisel  inside  one  of  the  bamboos.  Take  it and  return  it  to  the  owner.  Return  now  and  take  care of  thy  mother  and  sister.  As  for  him  who  reproached thee,  hereafter  we  will  repay  him.  I  will  eat  his  heart and  drink  his  blood,  so  shall  he  be  rewarded.'
"  From  that  time  forward  the  Spectre  Huntsman  has afflicted  mankind,  and  many  are  those  whom  he  has destroyed.  Before  dismissing  his  son,  he  desired  him to  warn  all  his  kindred  never  to  use  bamboo  for  mak- ing steps  for  a  house,  and  never  to  hang  clothes  to  dry from  poles  stuck  in  between  the  joists  supporting  the floor,  and  thus  jutting  out  at  right  angles  with  a  house, '  lest,'  said  he,  '  I  should  strike  against  such  poles  as  I walk  along.  Further,'  he  continued,  'when  ye  hear the  note  of  the  bird  birik-birik  at  night,  ye  will  know that  I  am  walking  near.'
"Then  the  boy  returned  to  his  mother  and  de- livered to  her  and  all  their  kindred  the  injunctions  of  the lost  man.  One  account  says  that  the  woman  followed her  spectre  husband  to  the  forest,  where  she  joins  in the  chase  with  him  to  this  day,  and  that  they  have there  children  born  in  the  woods.  The  first  boy  and girl  retained  their  human  form,  according  to  this account,  but  some  Pawangs  say  that  the  whole  family are  in  the  forest  with  the  father.1
"  Numerous  mantra,  or  charms,  against  the  evil influence  of  the  Wild  Huntsman  are  in  use  among  the
1  Selangor    Malays    add    that    the  kunta    and    pinang   kunta.       Before
Spectre   Huntsman  himself  instructed  administering  it,  however,  an  augury
his  son  how  to  cure  people  who  were  has  to  be  taken  :  young  shoots  of  the
suffering  from  the  effects  of  his  magic.  (wild  ?)     cotton  -  tree     (puchok     daim
These  instructions  were :   "Take  leaves  kapas)  are  plucked  and  have  the  sap
of  the    bonglei,   resam,  gasing-gasing,  squeezed  out  of  them  (dj-ramas).     If
and  wild  banana,  shred  and  distil  them  the  liquor  is  red  the  patient  may  be
(di-ttraskan),  and  administer  the  potion  cured  ;    but    if  it   has  a  black    look,
to    the    patient,    together   with   sirih  nothing  can  be  done  to  save  him."
ill!
g>  a  „  J3
1  I  *-fl
if*   *   3 o   v  "^  *"
^^  i;    jT  -g
n   S.  P   - Iw~'i
_  ..       .M  —
£     2  It   g
«  S  §  '-5
v  CHA  RM  A  GAINST  HIS  I  NFL  UENCE  1 1 7
Pawangs,  or  medicine-men  of  Perak.  These  are  re- peated, accompanied  by  appropriate  ceremonies,  when the  disease  from  which  some  sick  person  is  suffering has  been  traced  to  an  encounter  with  the  hantu pemburu}-
"  The  following  may  serve  as  a  specimen  :-—
"  Bi-smi-lldhi-r-rahmdni-r-rahim. Es-salamu  ^aleykum  Hei  Si  Jidi  laki  Mah  Jadah.
Pergi  buru  ka-rimba  Ranchah  Mahang.
Katapang  nama  bukit-nia,
Si  Langsat  nama  anjing-nta,
Si  Kumbang  nama  anjing-nia,
Si  Nibong  nama  anjing-nia,
Si  Pintas  nama  anjing-nia,
Si  Aru-Aru  nama  anjing-nya,
Timiang  JBalu  nama  sumpitan-nia,
Lankapuri  nama  lembing-nia,
Singha-buana  nama  mata-nia,
Pisau  raut  panjang  ulu
Akan  pemblah  pinang  berbulu,
Ini-lah  pisau  raut  deripada  Maharaja  Guru,
Akan  pemblah  prut  hantu  pemburu.
Aku  tahu  asal  angkau  mula  menjadi  orang  Katapang.
Pulang-lah  angkau  ka  rimba  Ranchah  Mahang.
Jangan  angkau  meniakat-meniakit  pada  tuboh  badan-ku.
In  the  name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful, Peace  be  on  thee,  O  Si  Jidi,  husband  of  Mah  Jadah.
Go  thou  and  hunt  in  the  forest  of  Ranchah  Mahang.
Katapang  is  the  name  of  thy  hill,
Si  Langsat  is  the  name  of  thy  dog,
Si  Kumbang  is  the  name  of  thy  dog,
Si  Nibong  is  the  name  of  thy  dog,
Si  Pintas  is  the  name  of  thy  dog,
Si  Aru-Aru  is  the  name  of  thy  dog,
Timiang  Balu  is  the  name  of  thy  blow-pipe
1  The  sickness  which  results   from  or   summons  (katHgoran)   begins  with
crossing  the  path  of  the  Spectre  Hunts-  persistent    fever     (d/mam    salama-la-
ma.n(kalintasan)  has  choleraic  symptoms  ma-nya),  but  does  not  prove  so  rapidly
(vomiting  and  voiding)  and  is  quickly  fatal, fatal ;  that  resulting  from  his  challenge
ii8  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
Lankapuri  is  the  name  of  thy  spear,
Singha-buana  is  the  name  of  its  blade,
The  peeling-knife  with  a  long  handle
Is  to  split  in  twain  the  fibrous  betel-nut.
Here  is  a  knife  from  Maharaja  Guru,
To  cleave  the  bowels  of  the  Hunter-Spirit.
I  know  the  origin  from  which  thou  springest,
O  man  of  Katapang.
Get  thee  back  to  the  forest  of  Ranchah  Mahang.
Afflict  not  my  body  with  pain  or  disease.
"  In  charms  intended  to  guard  him  who  repeats them,  or  who  wears  them  written  on  paper,  against the  evil  influences  of  the  Spectre  Huntsman,  the names  of  the  dogs,  weapons,  etc.,  constantly  vary. The  origin  of  the  dreaded  demon  is  always,  how- ever, ascribed  to  Katapang1  in  Sumatra.  This  super- stition strikingly  resembles  the  European  legends of  the  Wild  Huntsman,  whose  shouts  the  trembling peasants  hear  above  the  storm.  It  is,  no  doubt,  of Aryan  origin,  and,  coming  to  the  Peninsula  from Sumatra,  seems  to  corroborate  existing  evidence  tend- ing to  show  that  it  is  partly  through  Sumatra  that  the Peninsula  has  received  Aryan  myths  and  Indian phraseology.  A  superstitious  prejudice  against  the use  of  bamboo  in  making  a  step-ladder  for  a  Malay house  and  against  drying  clothes  outside  a  house  on poles  stuck  into  the  framework,  exists  in  full  force among  the  Perak  Malays.
"  The  note  of  the  birik-birik  at  night,  telling  as  it does  of  the  approach  of  the  hantu  pemburu,  is  listened to  with  the  utmost  dread  and  misgiving.  The  Bataks in  Sumatra  call  this  bird  by  the  same  name — birik-birik. It  is  noticeable  that  in  Batak  legends  regarding  the creation  of  the  world,  the  origin  of  mankind  is  ascribed
1  As  to  this,  vide  App.  xxx. ,  note.
OTHER  CHARMS  119
to  Putri-Orta-Bulan,  the  daughter  of  Batara-Guru, who  descended  to  the  earth  with  a  white  owl  and  a  dog"^
To  the  information  contained  in  the  foregoing  pas- sage I  would  add  the  following  observations  : —
Charms  for  neutralising  the  power  of  the  Spectre Huntsman  are  by  no  means  uncommon,  and  though they  almost  invariably  differ  in  unimportant  details, such  as  the  names  of  his  dogs  and  weapons,  they  still bear  strong  and  unmistakable  family  likeness.  Still there  are  some  versions  which  contain  important divergencies  (two  or  three  of  these  versions  will  be found  in  the  Appendix),  and  it  will  only  be  after  the diligent  collation  and  compilation  of  a  great  many versions  that  the  real  germ  or  nucleus  of  the  myth  as known  to  the  Malays  will  be  clearly  apparent.
One  of  the  charms  given  in  the  Appendix  evi- dently alludes  to  a  different  version  of  the  story ;  the lines  which  contain  the  allusion  being  as  follows  : —
"  I  know  your  origin,  O  man  of  penance, Whose  dwelling  was  upon  the  hill  of  Mount  Ophir, [You  sprang]  from  a  son  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  who  was  wroth
with  his  mother, Because  she  would  eat  the  hearts  of  the  birds  of  Paradise."
Yet  even  here,  if  we  except  the  obvious  interpola- tion of  the  reference  to  the  "son  of  the  Prophet Joseph,"  the  task  of  reconciling  the  conflicting  versions may  be  easier  than  would  appear  at  first  sight.2
A  still  more  curious  deviation  occurs  in  another version,3  where  the  Spectre  Huntsman's  poniard  and Kris  are  declared  to  be  the  insignia  of  the  great Spirit-King  Rama.  The  passage  is  as  follows  :—
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  pp.  12-18.
2  Vide  App.  xxx.,  lines  13,  14,  15,  and  16.  3  App.  xxviii.
120  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  With  a  blind  crow  as  his  guide, The  giant  demon,  Si  Adunada, Carries  (his  weapons)  slung  over  his  shoulder  with  back  bent
double.
Salampuri  is  the  name  of  his  poniard  (sekiri), Silambuara  the  name  of  his  ffris, The  insignia  of  the  Demon  Rama."
That  it  is  his  weapons  which  the  Spectre  Hunts- man's son  (Adunada)  carries  on  his  back  appears  from a  passage  below,  which  runs  :—
"  O  Si  Adunada,  with  the  sword  slung  at  your  back, Bent  double  you  come  from  the  lightwood  swamps, We  did  not  guess  that  you  were  here."
This  reference  to  Rama  opens  up  a  long  vista  of possibilities,  but  for  the  present  it  will  be  sufficient  to remark  that  the  Spectre  Huntsman  himself  is  almost universally  declared  by  the  Malays  to  be  the  King of  the  Land -folk  (Raja  orang  darat\  It  is  on account  of  this  kingship  that  his  weapons  receive distinguishing  titles  such  as  are  given  to  royal weapons.  This,  too,  is  the  reason  that  he  is  so  much more  dreaded  by  Malays  than  ordinary  spirits  of  evil ; his  mere  touch  being  considered  sufficient  to  kill,  by the  exercise  of  that  divine  power  which  all  Malay Rajas  are  held  to  possess.1
To  return  from  the  foregoing  digression  :  there  are many  other  curious  legends  connected  with  Birds. Thus,  in  1882,  Captain  Kelham  wrote  as  follows : —
1  I  was  once  stationed  for  about  Huntsman  (di-sepak  ulch  Hantu  P2m- eighteen  months  in  a  small  out-of-  burn)  as  he  was  going  down  the  hill  to the -way  village  on  the  Selangor  the  village  in  the  morning.  He  took coast,  where  three  subordinate  officers  no  notice  of  the  occurrence  and  pro- of the  Government  (foremen  of  works)  ceeded  down  the  river  in  a  boat.  Three had  died  successively,  at  comparatively  hours  later  he  vomited  mangrove  leaves(!) short  intervals.  The  last  of  these  men,  and  was  brought  back  dead  !  Cp.  N. I  was  informed  by  the  local  Malays,  and  Q.,  No.  2,  sec.  32  (issued  with received  a  kick  from  the  Spectre  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  15).
v  LEGENDS  ABOUT  BIRDS  121
"From  Mr.  W.  E.  Maxwell,  H.M.  Assistant  Resi- dent, of  Larut,  I  hear  that  the  Malays  have  a  strange legend  connected  with  one  of  the  large  Hornbills;  but which  species  I  was  not  able  to  find  out.  It  is  as  fol- lows : —
"  '  A  Malay,  in  order  to  be  revenged  on  his  mother- in-law  (why,  the  legend  does  not  relate),  shouldered his  axe  and  made  his  way  to  the  poor  woman's  house, and  began  to  cut  through  the  posts  which  supported  it. After  a  few  steady  chops  the  whole  edifice  came tumbling  down,  and  he  greeted  its  fall  with  a  peal  of laughter.  To  punish  him  for  his  unnatural  conduct  he was  turned  into  a  bird,  and  the  tebang  mentuah  (liter- ally, He  who  chopped  down  his  mother-in-law)  may often  be  heard  in  the  jungle  uttering  a  series  of  sharp sounds  like  the  chop  of  an  axe  on  timber,  followed  by Ha!  ha!  ha!'"1
The  following  account  of  the  bird-lore  of  the  Malay Peninsula  was  compiled  by  me  from  notes  supplied to  the  Selangor  Journal*  by  the  late  Sir  William Maxwell : —
The  Night-jar  (Burong  cheroh*}  takes  its  name  from the  word  applied  to  the  second  stage  in  the  operation of  husking  rice.  Malay  women  husk  rice  by  pounding it  in  a  mortar  with  a  wooden  pestle.  The  husked grain  is  then  commonly  winnowed  in  a  sieve,  and
1  ¥romJ.R.A,S.,  S.B.,  No.  9,  pp.  very  high  trees.     The  legend  about  it
129,  130,  "  Malayan  Ornithology,"  by  is  very  common,  but  I  do  not  know
Captain  H.  R.  Kelham,  who  adds  : —  the  scientific  name  of  that  particular
"I  asked  Mr.  Low,  H.B.M.   Resi-  Hornbill  ;  but  it  is  not  that  you  refer
dent  of  Perak,  if  he  could  give  me  any  to,  viz.  Berenicomis  comati4s,  Raffles  ;
information    as    to   which   species   of  nor  is  it  the  Rhinoceros. ' "
Hornbill  this  legend  relates  to,  and  he  2  Vol.  i.  No.  23,  pp.  360-363.
writes —  3  If  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  is  right  this
"  '  It  is  the  largest  Hornbill  which  is  must  be  another  name  for  the  night-jar
found  in  Perak,  bigger,  I  should  say,  (vide p.  lion,  supra).     But  the  identi-
than   the  Rhinoceros    Hornbill,  but  I  fication  is  at  least  doubtful, have  never  seen  it  except  flying,  or  on
122  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
the  unhusked  rice  (antak)  which  remains  has  to  be separated  from  the  husked  rice  and  pounded  over again.  The  second  process,  which  is  called  cheroh, is  that  from  which  the  night-jar  derives  its  name, the  quick  fancy  of  the  Malay  hearing  in  the  note of  the  bird  the  slow  measured  stroke  of  a  pestle (antan)  descending  in  a  mortar  (lesong).  This  is possibly  the  foundation  of  the  legend  that  the  Night- jar is  a  woman  who,  while  engaged  in  husking  rice by  moonlight,  was  turned  into  a  bird  in  consequence of  a  quarrel  with  her  mother.  Another  name  for the  night-jar  is  burong  chempak.
The  Burong  sepah  putri  ("Princess's  betel-quid") belongs  to  the  Honey-birds  or  Bee-eaters,  of  which there  are  several  species,  remarkable  chiefly  for  their brilliant  metallic  plumage.  [A  quaint  story  is  told  in explanation  of  its  name  :  once  upon  a  time  the  Owl {ponggok)  fell  in  love  with  the  Princess  of  the  Moon (Putri  Bulan)  and  asked  her  to  marry  him.  She promised  to  do  so,  if  he  would  allow  her  first  to  finish her  quid  of  betel  undisturbed  ;  but  before  finishing  it she  threw  it  down  to  the  earth,  where  it  took  the  form of  the  small  bird  in  question.  The  Princess  then requested  the  Owl  to  make  search  for  it,  but  as,  of course,  he  was  unable  to  find  it,  the  proposed  match fell  through.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Owl,  to quote  the  Malay  proverb,  "sighs  longingly  to  the Moon,"  and  is  the  type  of  the  plaintive  lover.1]
The  Burong  tinggal anak  (lit.  "Good-bye,  children  " bird)  is  a  small  bird  whose  note  is  to  be  heard  at  the season  when  the  young  rice  is  sprouting  (musim  padi pechak  anak}.  As  soon  as  her  young  are  hatched out  this  bird  dies  in  the  nest,  repeating  the  words
1    Vide  supra,  p.  109,  note.
v  BIRDS  OF  ILL  OMEN  123
"  Tinggal  anak"  ("Good-bye,  children"),  and  the maggots  which  breed  in  her  corpse  afford  an  un- natural nourishment  to  her  unsuspecting  offspring.
Burong  diam  'kau  Tuah,  or  "  Hold  your  peace, Tuah,"  is  the  name  of  a  small  bird  which  is  said  to repeat  the  words —
"  Diam  'kau,  Tuah,
K'ris  aku  ada," or,
"  Hold  thy  peace,  Tuah,
My  Kris  (dagger)  is  with  me."
The  story  runs  that  once  upon  a  time  there  was  a man  who  had  a  slave  called  Tuah,  who  answered  him back,  and  with  whom  he  accordingly  found  fault,  using the  words  given  above.  In  the  transport  of  his rage  he  was  turned  into  a  bird.
The  bird  called  Kuau  in  Perak  (kuau  is  the  name given  in  Malacca  and  Selangor  to  the  argus  pheasant, which  in  Perak  is  called  kuang]  is  about  the  size  of the  mynah  (gambala  kerbau),  and  is  said  to  have been  metamorphosed  from  a  woman,  the  reason  of whose  transformation  is  not  known.  It  is  said  to  be unknown  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Perak  River.
The  "  '  Kap-kap '  bird  "  is  the  name  of  a  night-bird of  evil  omen,  whose  note  heard  at  night  prognosticates death.
The  Tearer  of  the  shroud  (Burong  charik  kapan) is  also  a  night-bird,  with  a  slow,  deliberate  note  which the  Malays  declare  sounds  exactly  like  the  tearing of  cloth.1  This  signifies  the  tearing  of  the  shroud, and  unerringly  forebodes  death.  Yet  another  night- bird  ominous  of  approaching  dissolution  is  the Tumbok  larong.  This  bird,  like  the  two  preceding,
1  Cp.  Swett.,  Mai.  Sketches,  p.  1 60.
124  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
is  probably  a  variety  of  owl  ;  the  first  and  third  are only  found  inland  at  a  distance  from  the  sea.
1 '  To/i  katampi  ("  Old  -man  -winnow-  the-rice-for-the- burial-feast,"  as  Sir  Frank  Swettenham  calls  him,1)  is a  species  of  horned  owl,  which  derives  its  name  from  a word  meaning  to  winnow  (tampi,  menampi\  Malays say  that  this  bird  has  a  habit  of  treading  upon  the extremities  of  its  own  wings,  and  fluttering  the  upper part  while  thus  holding  them  down.  This  singular habit  produces  a  sound  resembling  that  of  winnowing.
The  'Tok  katampi  is  larger  than  the  Jampuk> another  species  of  owl,  which  is  popularly  supposed to  enter  the  fowl-house  and  there  live  on  the  intestines of  fowls,  which  it  extracts  during  life  by  means  of  a certain  charm  ('elmu pelali,  a  charm  similar  to  those used  by  the  Malays  for  filing  teeth,  etc.)  which  it uses  in  order  to  perform  the  operation  painlessly.
The  "  Luck-bird  "  (Burong  untong]  is  a  very  small white  bird  about  the  size  of  a  canary.  It  builds  a very  small  white  nest,  which  if  found  and  placed  in a  rice-bin  possesses  the  valuable  property  of  securing a  good  harvest  to  its  owner.  As,  however,  the  nest is  built  on  branches  in  places  difficult  of  access  it  is but  rarely  found,  and  Malays  will  give  $10  for  a genuine  specimen,  while  sellers  are  known  to  ask  as much  as  $25.
The  Ruwak-ruwak  is  a  kind  of  Heron  whose  nest if  discovered  would  give  the  possessor  the  power  of becoming  invisible  (alimun).  But  as  neither  nest nor  eggs  can  usually  be  found  it  is  held  to  be  child- less. Yet,  however,  if  it  is  possible  to  approach sufficiently  near,  when  the  bird  is  heard  calling  in the  swamps,  it  may  be  seen  dipping  a  twig  or  else
1  Swett.,  Mai.  Sketches,  pp.  159,  1 60.
LUCKY  BIRDS  125
its  bent  leg  into  the  water,  and  accompanying  its action  with  its  call,  as  if  it  were  bathing  a  child  on its  knee ;  hence  the  Malay  who  hears  its  note  says mockingly,  "the  Ruwak-ruwak  is  bathing  its  young one."
Tukang  is  the  name  given  in  Kedah  to  a kind  of  Hornbill,  which  is  believed  to  be  the  same as  the  langlin  of  Perak.  The  horn  is  of  a  yellow tinge,  and  is  made  into  buttons,  which,  the  Malays say,  turn  to  a  livid  colour  whenever  the  wearer  is about  to  fall  sick,  and  black  when  he  is  threatened by  the  approach  of  poison.1
The  Merbu  (?  merbok]  is  a  variety  of  Dove  which brings  good  luck  to  its  owner.  Instances  have  been known  where  all  the  houses  in  a  village  have  been burnt  except  that  which  contained  a  merbu;  indeed, treatises  have  been  written  on  the  subject  of  keeping them.  When  the  merbu  dies  its  body  merely  shrivels up  instead  of  breeding  worms,  which,  it  is  added,  would be  worth  keeping  as  curiosities  should  any  appear.2
The  bird  called  Pedrudang  is  a  diver  which  has the  power  of  remaining  under  water  for  a  very  long time.  It  is  only  to  be  found  where  the  fish  called kelesah  exist  in  large  quantities.  The  eggs  of  the kelesah  are  of  great  size,  and  the  Malays  say,
1  In  Selangor  I  have  heard  a  similar  is  the  luckiest  number  of  scales  for  one story  ;  but  in  this  case  it  was  a  red-  of  these  birds  to  possess.     An  example crested    hornbill    which    supplied    the  is :      "  Manuk     (3),     Manumah    (5), buttons,  which  latter  were  said  to  turn  Sangkesa  (6),  Desa  (i),  Dewa  (4),  Raja green  on  the  approach  of  poison.     The  (2),"  which  has  to  be  repeated  as  the only  solid-crested  hornbill  is,  I  believe,  scales  are  counted  (beginning  with  the the  Rhinoplax.  lowest  scale).     The  numbers  after  the
2  The  amount  of  luck  which  goes  words  indicate  the  order  of  the  luck with  any  particular  bird  of  this  species  which  the  birds  are  supposed  to  bring  ; depends  on  the  number  of  scales  on  its  a  ground-dove  of  the  first  order  bring- feet,  for  counting  which  certain  verbal  ing   luck  worth  a   ship's   cargo   (tuah categories  (like  our  own  "tinker,  tailor,  mtrbok  tuah  sa-kapal).      I   have  kept soldier"  formula)  are  used.     Forty-four  these  birds  myself.
126  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
therefore,  that  it  cohabits  with  the  pedrudang.  These eggs  are  considered  a  delicacy  by  the  Malays,  who make  them  into  a  sort  of  custard  pudding  (sri-kaya).
To  the  Ground-pigeon  (Tekukur)  belongs  the  fol- lowing story:  —  "Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a maiden  who  lived  in  the  forest  with  her  parents  and little  sister.  When  she  grew  up  she  was  troubled by  an  anxiety  to  accompany  her  father  in  his  ex- peditions to  the  forest,  where  he  was  engaged  in clearing  the  ground  for  a  rice  -  plantation.  Her parents,  however,  persuaded  her  to  stay  at  home ; first  until  the  trees  were  felled,  then  until  the  fallen timber  had  been  burnt  off,  then  till  the  rice  had  been planted,  and  then  again  till  it  was  cut.  When, however,  they  attempted  to  put  her  off  yet  once more,  until  the  rice  should  be  trodden  out,  she could  bear  it  no  longer,  and  taking  off  her  bracelets and  earrings,  which  she  left  behind  the  door,  and placing  her  little  sister  in  the  swinging  -  cot,  she changed  herself  into  a  ground-dove  and  flew  away  to the  clearing.  [She  retained  her  necklace,  however, and  this  accounts  for  the  speckled  marks  on  this dove's  neck.]  On  arriving  at  the  spot  where  her parents  were  engaged  at  work,  she  alighted  on  a dead  tree  stump  (changgong],  and  called  out  thrice  to her  mother,  '  Mother,  mother,  I  have  left  my  earrings and  bracelets  behind  the  door,  and  have  put  my  little sister  in  the  swing.'  Her  mother,  amazed  at  these words,  hastened  home,  and  found  her  daughter  gone. She  then  returned  to  the  bird,  which  repeated  the same  words  as  before,  this  time,  however,  concluding with  the  coo  of  a  dove.  In  vain  the  distressed parents  endeavoured  to  recapture  her,  by  cutting down  the  tree  on  which  she  had  perched ;  before
v  THE  WEAVER- BIRD  127
they  had  done  so  she  flew  to  another,  and  after following  her  from  tree  to  tree  for  several  miles they  were  obliged  to  desist,  and  she  was  never recaptured."  1
The  following  notes  on  birds  are  taken  from  a reprint2  of  "Museum  Notes"  by  Mr.  L.  Wray,  jun., the  official  curator  of  the  Perak  Museum.  Mr.  Wray says  : —
"  The  Weaver-bird,  which  makes  the  long  hanging bottle -shaped  nests  occasionally  seen  hanging  from the  branches  of  a  low  tree,  is  said  to  use  a  golden needle  in  the  work ;  and  it  is  affirmed  that  if  the nest  is  carefully  picked  to  pieces,  without  breaking any  part  of  it,  the  needle  will  be  found ;  but  if  it  is pulled  ruthlessly  apart,  or  if  even  a  single  piece  of the  grass  of  which  it  is  made  is  broken  in  unravelling it,  the  golden  needle  will  disappear.  The  makers  of these  curious  and  beautiful  nests  are  said  to  always choose  trees  that  are  infested  with  red  ants  or  wasps, or  which  grow  in  impassable  swamps."
The  Weaver-bird  (Ploceus  Baya,  Blyth)  is  called (in  Selangor)  Burong  Tempua  or  Ckiak  Ray  a.  It  is said  to  use  only  the  long  jungle  grass  called  lalang for  making  its  nest,  which  latter  is  called  buah  rabun, and  is  used  by  the  Malays  for  polishing  sheaths and  scabbards.  When  an  infant  keeps  crying, one  of  the  parents  takes  the  weaver- bird's  nest, reduces  it  to  ashes,  and  fumigates  the  child  by  thrice moving  it  round  in  a  circle  over  the  smoke.  Whilst doing  so,  the  parent  either  stands  up  with  the  right toe  resting  upon  the  toe  of  the  left  foot,  or  else  squats
•    J  Cp.  the  Malay  pantun  : —  Lagi  lumpor  jala*  sfmak
Seoao  kasin  maka-nya  datang."
"  Tfkvkur  di gulti  lemak  2   In  Sel.  Jount.  vol.  iii.  No.  6,  pp.
Sulasi di-bawak  ba.ta.ng  g,     ne
128  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
upon  the  left  heel,  bending  the  right  knee,  and  saying, '  As  the  weaver-bird's  young  in  its  nest,  so  rest  and weep  not '  (Bagimana  anak  tempua  dalam  sarang-nya, bagitu-lah  'kau  diam  jangan  menangis).  To  the above  I  may  add  that  besides  the  ordinary  bottle- shaped  nest,  the  weaver-birds  also  occasionally  make a  hood-shaped,  or  rather  a  helmet-shaped  nest,  which is  alleged  by  the  Malays  to  be  the  male  bird's '  swing '  (buayan).  This  '  swing '  resembles  the  upper half  of  an  ordinary  bottle-shaped  nest,  with  a  perch across  it,  which  latter  is  also  woven  of  grass.  On the  walls  of  the  swing,  just  over  each  end  of  the perch,  is  a  small  daub  of  clay.  The  Malays  allege that  the  male  bird  swings  in  it  while  the  hen  bird is  sitting,  and  that  the  young  too  'take  the  air'  in it  as  soon  as  they  are  able  to  fly  so  far.  Into  the two  daubs  of  mud  over  the  perch  the  male  bird  (say the  Malays)  sticks  fire -flies  to  give  itself  light  at night.
"  The  King  crow x  is  called  by  the  Malays  the  Slave of  the  Monkeys  (Burong  hamba  kra).  It  is  a  pretty, active,  noisy  little  bird,  incessantly  flying  about  with its  two  long  racquet -shaped  tail  feathers  fluttering after  it.  They  say  that  when  it  has  both  of  these feathers  it  has  paid  off  its  debt  and  is  free,  but  when it  is  either  destitute  of  these  appendages,  or  has  only one,  it  is  still  in  bondage.
"  The  Gray  Sea-eagle 2  is  called  Burong  hamba  siput 'the  Slave  of  the  Shell-fish,'  and  its  office  is  to  give warning  by  screaming  to  the  shell-fish  of  the  changes of  the  tide,  so  that  they  may  regulate  their  move- ments, and  those  species  which  crawl  about  on  the mud  at  low  water  may  know  when  to  take  refuge
1  Disscmurus  platurus,  Vieill.  2  Halitztus  leucogastcr,  Gm.
v  LEGEND  OF  THE  TOUCAN  129
in  the  trees  and  escape  the  rising  tide,  or  when  the tide  is  falling,  that  they  may  know  when  to  descend to  look  for  food.
"The  Burong  demam,  or  'Fever  bird,'  is  so  called from  its  loud,  tremulous  note,  and  the  Malays  say that  the  female  bird  calls  in  its  fever-stricken  voice  to its  mate  to  go  and  find  food,  because  it  has  fever  so badly  that  it  cannot  go  itself.  This  bird  is  probably one  of  the  large  green  barbets.  The  note  is  often heard,  and  doubtless  the  bird  has  been  collected,  but  it is  one  thing  shooting  a  bird  and  another  identifying  it as  the  producer  of  a  certain  note.
"Another  bird,  the  White-breasted  Water-hen,  a frequenter  of  the  edges  of  reedy  pools  and  the  marshy banks  of  streams,  is  reputed  to  build  a  nest  on  the ground  which  has  the  property  of  rendering  any  one invisible  who  puts  it  on  his  head.  The  prevailing  idea among  the  Malays  is  that  the  proper  and  legitimate use  to  put  it  to  is  to  steal  money  and  other  species  of property."
The  next  few  notes  on  Malay  bird-lore  were  col- lected by  the  writer  in  Selangor  : —
The  Toucan  or  small  Hornbill  (Enggang)  was metamorphosed  from  a  man  who,  in  conjunction  with a  companion,  broke  into  the  house  of  an  old  man  living by  himself  in  the  jungle,  and  slew  him  for  the  sake  of his  wealth.  When  life  was  extinct  they  threw  a  sheet over  the  body,  and  proceeded  to  ransack  the  house, throwing  the  loot  into  a  second  sheet  close  to  the corpse.  Day  was  about  to  dawn,  when  a  false  alarm induced  them  to  make  a  hurried  departure,  so  that they  picked  up  the  sheet  with  their  loot  and  made  off with  it,  carrying  it  slung  hastily  upon  a  pole  between them.  As  they  proceeded  on  their  way  day  commenced
K
130  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
gradually  to  dawn,  and  the  man  behind  noticing  some- thing unexpected  about  the  bundle,  and  divining  the cause,  called  out  to  his  companion  "Orangl"  (pr.  o  rang] "  The  man  !  "  His  companion,  misunderstanding  his exclamation,  thought  he  meant  that  they  were  pursued by  "a  man,"  and  only  went  all  the  faster,  until,  on hearing  his  comrade  repeat  the  cry  a  second  and  a third  time,  he  turned  round,  and  there  saw  the  feet  of the  man  he  had  murdered  protruding  from  the  sheet, a  sight  which  startled  him  to  such  a  degree  that  he turned  into  a  bird  upon  the  spot,  and  flew  away  into  a tree,  repeating  as  he  went  the  fatal  cry  of  "O'Rang! 'Rang  !  "  which  had  caused  the  transformation.  And to  this  day,  whenever  the  Malay  hears  among  the  tree- tops  the  cry  of  "  'Rang !  'rang  !  "  he  knows  that  he  is listening  to  the  cry  of  the  murderer.1
The  Argus-pheasant 2  and  the  Crow 3  in  the  days  of King  Solomon  were  bosom  friends,  and  could  never do  enough  to  show  their  mutual  friendship.  One  day, however,  the  argus- pheasant,  who  was  then  dressed somewhat  dowdily,  suggested  that  his  friend  the  crow should  show  his  skill  with  the  brush  by  decorating  his (the  argus -pheasant's)  feathers.  To  this  the  crow agreed,  on  condition,  however,  that  the  arrangement should  be  mutual.  The  argus -pheasant  agreed  to this,  and  the  crow  forthwith  set  to  work,  and  so  sur- passed himself  that  the  argus-pheasant  became,  as  it is  now,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  birds  in  the  world. When  the  crow's  task  was  done,  however,  the  argus-
1  An  old  Malay  (in  Selangor)  once  where  the  latter  did  not  exist,  this  may
told  me  that  the  hornbill  was  the  king  be  important, of  the  birds  until  dispossessed  by  the  2  Jrgus  giganteus,  Temm.
eagle  (JKajawah).      If,  as  seems  prob- able, the  hornbill  was  taken  as  a  sub-  C*™™   ***>    Horsf-   the
stitute   for   the   frigate-bird  in   places  crow.
v  THE  BARAU-BARAU  131
pheasant  refused  to  fulfil  his  own  part  of  the  bargain, excusing  himself  on  the  plea  that  the  day  of  judgment was  too  near  at  hand.  Hence  a  fierce  quarrel  ensued, at  the  end  of  which  the  argus-pheasant  upset  the  ink- bottle  over  the  crow,  and  thus  rendered  him  coal- black.1  Hence  the  crow  and  the  argus-pheasant  are enemies  to  this  day.
The  bird  called  "  Barau-barau  "  is  said  to  have  once been  a  bidan  (midwife)  whose  employers  (anak  bidan] refused  to  pay  her  for  her  services,  and  kept  con- stantly putting  her  off.  Her  patience,  however,  had its  limits,  and  one  day,  after  experiencing  the  usual evasion,  she  broke  out  into  a  torrent  of  intemperate language,  in  the  midst  of  which  she  was  changed  into a  bird,  whose  querulous  note  may  be  recognised  as  the voice  of  the  aged  woman  as  she  cries  out  for  the  pay- ment of  her  just  wages.
About  the  big  Kingfisher  (Pekaka)  an  amusing parallel  to  the  fable  of  the  Fox  and  the  Crow  is  related. It  is  said  that  this  kingfisher  once  caught  a  fish,  and flew  to  a  low  branch  just  overhanging  the  water  to devour  it.  The  fish,  seeking  for  a  means  to  save  his life,  decided  to  try  the  effect  of  a  speech,  and  accord- ingly addressed  his  captor  in  the  following  verses, judiciously  designed  to  appeal  at  once  to  her  vanity and  compassion : —
"  O  Kingfisher  !  Kingfisher  ! What  a  glistening,  glittering  beak ! Yet  while  you,  Big  Sister,  are  filling  your  maw, Little  Brother  will  lose  his  life."
At  this  critical  juncture  the  Kingfisher  opens  her  beak
1  I  believe  that  a  similar  story  exists       turpentine  play  the  part  of  the  ink  in in  Siam,  the  Siamese,  however,  making       the  Malay  story.
132  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
to  laugh,  and  the  fish  slips  back  into  his  native  ele- ment and  escapes !
Fowling  Ceremonies
Ideas  of  sympathetic  magic  run  very  strongly through  all  ceremonies  connected  with  the  taking  of wild  birds,  such  for  instance  as  jungle-fowl  or  pigeon.
The  commonest  method  of  snaring  jungle-fowl  is to  take  a  line  (called  rackik),  with  a  great  number  of fine  nooses  attached  to  it,  and  set  it  so  as  to  form  a complete  circle,  enclosing  an  open  space  in  the  forest. You  must  bring  a  decoy-bird  with  you,  and  the  in- structions which  I  collected  say  that  you  should  on arriving  enter  the  circle,  holding  the  bird  like  a  fight- ing cock,  and  repeat  these  lines  : —
"  Ho,  Si  Lanang,  Si  Tempawi, Come  and  let  us  play  at  cock-fighting On  the  border-line  between  the  primary  and  secondary
forest-growth.
Your  cock,  Grandsire,  is  spurred  with  steel, Mine  is  but  spurred  with  bamboo"
Here  deposit  the  bird  upon  the  ground.  The  chal- lenge of  the  decoy-bird  will  then  attract  the  jungle- fowl  from  all  directions,  and  as  they  try  to  enter  the circle  (in  order  to  reach  the  decoy),  they  will  entangle themselves  in  the  nooses.
As  often  as  you  succeed,  however,  in  catching  one, you  must  be  careful  to  cast  the  "mischief"  out  of  it, using  the  same  form  of  words  as  is  used  to  drive  the "mischief"  out  of  the  carcase  of  the  deer.
The  method  of  catching  wild  pigeon  is  much  more elaborate,  and  brings  the  animistic  ideas  of  the  Malays into  strong  relief,  the  "souls  "  of  the  wild  pigeon  being repeatedly  referred  to.
SNARING  WILD  PIGEON  133
First  you  build  a  small  sugar-loaf  (conical)  hut  (called in  a  carefully  selected  spot  in  the  jungle. This  hut  may  be  from  four  to  five  feet  high,  is  strongly built  of  stakes  converging  to  a  point  at  the  top,  and is  thickly  thatched  with  leaves  and  branches.  The reason  for  making  it  strong  is  that  there  is  always  an ofT-chance  that  you  may  receive  a  visit  from  a  tiger. At  the  back  of  the  hut  you  must  leave  a  small  square opening  (it  can  hardly  be  dignified  with  the  name  of  a door),  about  two  feet  high  and  with  a  flap  to  it,  through which  you  can  creep  into  the  hut  on  your  hands  and knees.  [I  may  remark,  parenthetically,  that  you  will find  the  hut  very  damp,  very  dark,  and  very  full  of mosquitoes,  and  that  if  you  are  wise  you  will  take with  you  a  small  stock  of  cigarettes.]  In  front  of  the hut,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  side  away  from  the  door,  if you  want  to  proceed  in  the  orthodox  way,  you  will have  to  clear  a  small  rectangular  space,  and  put  up round  it  on  three  sides  (right,  left,  and  front  opposite the  hut)  a  low  railing  consisting  of  a  single  bar  about 1 8  inches  from  the  ground.  This  is  to  rail  off  what  is called  "  King  Solomon's  Palace-yard,"  and  will  also  be useful  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  as  it  will  serve as  a  perch  for  your  "  decoy." *
The  instructions  proceed  as  follows  : — Before   entering    the    hut    the   wizard    must    go through  what  is  called  the  "Neutralising  Rice-paste"
1  Besides  the  hut,  the  necessary  ap-  (3)  A  rod  with  decoy-bird  attached  to
paratus  consists   of:    (l)   Three   rods  it  (by  means  of  a  string  and  noose  at
(called ampeian or pinggiran)  laid  across  the  end  of  the  rod).     (4)  A  rod  with
the  top  of  short  forked  sticks  at  a  height  fine   hair-like   noose   at    the   end,   for
of  one  or  two  feet  from  the  ground.  snaring  the  wild  pigeon,  and  dragging
The  whole  space  enclosed  by  these  is  them  into  the  hut.     There  is  a  door  at
called    King    Solomon's   palace  -  yard  back  of  hut  as  well  as  a  small  door  or
(halaman).     (2)  The  biiluh  dtkut,  or  opening  in  front  of  hut,  called  pintu
bamboo  pigeon-call,  from  6  to  8  ft.  in  bangri  (mangsi  or  mansi). length,    called    "Prince    Distraction."
134  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
(tepong  tawar]  ceremony,  first  in  the  centre  of  the enclosed  space,  and  then  in  each  corner  successively, beating  each  of  the  forked  sticks  (uprights)  at  the corners  with  a  bunch  of  leaves.  He  must  then  take the  decoy -tube,  and  after  reciting  the  appropriate charm,  sound  a  long-drawn  note  in  each  corner  succes- sively, and  then  insert  the  mouth-end  of  it  into  the  hut through  a  hole  in  the  thatch,  supporting  the  heavy outer  end  upon  a  forked  upright  stick.  Then  entering the  hut,  he  slips  the  noose  at  the  end  of  the  decoy- bird's  rod  on  to  the  decoy -bird's  feet,  and  pushing the  bird  out  through  the  front  door  of  the  hut,  makes it  flutter  on  to  one  of  the  horizontal  rods,  where it  will  sit,  if  well  trained,  and  call  its  companions. After  a  time  the  decoy -bird's  challenge  is  met  by first  one  and  then  many  counter  challenges,  then  the wild  pigeon  approach,  there  is  a  great  fluttering  of wings,  and  presently  one  of  the  first  arrivals  flies  down and  commences  to  walk  round  and  round  the  hut. Then  the  wizard  awaits  his  opportunity,  and  as  the pigeon  passes  in  front  of  the  door  he  pushes  out one  of  the  rods  with  a  noose  at  the  end,  slips the  noose  over  the  bird's  neck  or  feet,  and  drags  it into  the  hut.
The  hut  must  be  used,  if  possible,  before  the  leaves with  which  it  is  thatched  have  faded,  as  the  wild pigeon  are  less  likely  to  be  suspicious  of  the  hut  when its  thatch  is  green.
In  the  way  just  described  any  number  of  pigeon can  be  taken,  a  bag  of  twenty  or  thirty  being a  fair  average  for  a  day's  work  under  favourable conditions.
The  "  call  "  will  occasionally,  for  some  unexplained reason,  attract  to  the  spot  wild  animals  such  as  deer
v  CEREMONIES  AND  CHARMS  135
(especially  mouse-deer)  and  tigers.  Is  it  not  possible that  the  story  of  the  lute  of  Orpheus  may  have  had  its origin  in  some  old  hunting  custom  of  the  kind  ?
The  following  are  specimens  of  the  charms  used by  the  wizard : —
When  you  are  about  to  start  (to  decoy  pigeons) say—
"  It  is  not  I  who  am  setting  out, It  is  Toh  Bujang  Sibor l  who  is  setting  out."
Then  sound  the  decoy-tube  (buluh  dekut)  thrice loudly,  and  say —
"  I  pray  that  they  (the  pigeon)  may  come  in  procession,  come  in
succession, To  enter  into  this  bundle  2  of  ours."
Now  set  out,  and  when  you  reach  the  conical  hut (bumbun)  say —
"  My  hut's  name  is  the  Magic  Prince, My  decoy's  name  is  Prince  Distraction, Distraught  be  ye,  O  Kapor  3  (pigeon), Distraught  be  ye,  O  Puding  3  (pigeon), Distraught  be  ye,  O  Sarap  3  (pigeon), Distraught  (with  desire)  to  enter  our  bundle."
Or  else  when  you  first  reach  the  hut,  "take  the (leaves  of)  the  branch  of  a  tree  which  is  as  high  as your  head,  the  leaves  of  the  branch  of  a  tree  which  is as  high  as  your  waist,  the  leaves  of  the  branch  of  a  tree which  is  as  high  as  your  knee,  and  the  leaves  of  a  tree which  is  only  as  high  as  your  ankle-joint.  Make  them
1  Bujang  Sibor  literally  means  the  the  names  of  three  varieties  of  pigeon, "Bachelor     (i.e.     solitary)    Scooper."  generally  styled   "princesses"  in    the The  name  has  no  doubt  been  chosen  charms  used  by  pigeon-catchers.    Their because   it   is   thought   to   be    lucky,  names  are  also  given  as  Bujang  Kapor, possibly  because  it  suggests  "  scooping  (the  Solitary  Kapor),  Lela  Puding  (?), in  "  (birds).  and   Dayang  Sarap  (the  Handmaiden
2  Vide  App.  xxxii.  Sarap).
3  Kapor,    Puding,    and    Sarap,    are
136  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
all  into  a  bunch,  and  with  them  "flick"  the  outside  of the  hut,  saying  these  lines —
"  Dok  Ding  [stands  for  the]  '  Do'ding  '  Pigeon, Which  makes  three  with  the  Madukara  Pigeon, The  twig  breaks,  and  the  twig  is  pressed  down, And  our  immemorial  customs  are  restored."
When  scattering  the  rice,  say —
"  Sift,  sift  the  broken  rice-ends, Sift  them  over  the  rush-work  rice-bag, As  one  disappears  another  is  invited, Invited  and  brought  down.
If  you  descend  not,  the  Bear-cat  (Binturong)  shall  devour  you, If  you  come  not,  wild  beasts  shall  devour  you, And  if  you  perch  on  a  twig,  you  shall  fall  headlong, If  you  perch  on  a  bough,  you  shall  be  killed  by  a  woodcutter, If  you  perch  on  a  leaf,  you  shall  be  bitten  by  the  leaf-snake, If  you   descend  to  the  ground,  you   shall   be  bitten   by  a
venomous  serpent, If  you  fly  upwards,  you  shall  be  swooped  upon  by  kites  and
eagles,
(That  is)  if  you  descend  not. Cluck,  cluck !  souls  of  Queen  Kapor,  of  Princess  Puding,  and
Handmaid  Sarap.
Come  down  and  assemble  in  King  Solomon's  audience-hall, And  put  on  King  Solomon's  breast-ornaments  and  armlets."
When  sprinkling  the  rice-paste  (tepong  tawar)  on the  uprights  at  each  corner  of  the  railed-off  enclosure, say —
"  Neutralising  rice-paste,  genuine  rice-paste, Add  plumpness  to  plumpness,
Let  pigeon  come  down  to  the  weight  of  thousands  of  pounds, And  alight  upon  the  Ivory  Hall, Which  is  carpeted  with  silver,   and  whose  railings  are  of
amalgam, Unto  the  dishes  of  Her  Highness  Princess  Lebar  Nyiru
(Broad-sieve).
Come  in  procession,  come  (in  succession), The  '  assembly-flower '  begins  to  unfold  its  petals, Come  down  in  procession,  come  down  as  stragglers, King  Solomon's  self  has  come  to  call  you.
v  OTHER  FOWLING  CHARMS  137
Sift,  sift  (the  rice)  over  the  rice-bag,
King  Solomon's  self  bids  you  haste.
Sift,  sift  the  rice-ends,
Sift  them  over  the  rush-work  bag.
As  one  disappears  another  is  invited,
Is  invited  and  escorted  down.
Sift,  sift  the  rice-ends,
Sift  them  over  the  salt-bag,
As  one  disappears  another  is  invited,
And  escorted  inside  (the  hut)."
When  you  are  sounding  the  call  (melaung),  stand in  the  middle  of  the  enclosure  and  say  : —
"  Cluck,  cluck !  soul  of  Princess  Puding,  of  Queen  Kapor,  and
Queen  Sarap, Enter  ye  into  our  Bundle, And  perch  upon  the  Ivory  Railing. Come  in  procession,  come  in  succession, The  assembly-flower  unfolds  its  petals. Come  down  in  procession,  come  down  in  succession, King  Solomon's  self  is  come  to  call  you. If  you  do  not  come  down,  the  Bear-cat  shall  eat  you, If  you  do  not  appear,  wild  beasts  shall  devour  you, If  you  perch  upon  a  twig,  you  shall  fall  headlong (All  over)  the  seven  valleys  and  seven  knolls  of  rising  ground. If  ye  go  to  the  hills,  ye  shall  get  no  food  ; If  ye  go  to  the  forest-pools,  ye  shall  get  no  drink."
Or  else  the  following : —
"  Cut  the  mengkudu  J  branch, Cut  it  (through)  and  thrust  it  downwards. Let  those  which  are  near  be  the  first  to  arrive, And  those  which  are  far  off  be  sent  for, Let  those  which  have  eggs,  leave  their  eggs, And  those  which  have  young,  desert  their  young, Let  those  which  are  blind,  come  led  by  others, And  those  which  have  broken  limbs,  come  on  crutches. Come  and  assemble  in  King  Solomon's  audience-hall. Cluck,  cluck !  souls  of  Queen  Kapor,  Princess  Puding,  Hand- maid Sarap,
1  The  mengkudu  is  a  Malay  forest  tree  (Morinda  tinctoria}.
138  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
Come  down  and  assemble  in  King  Solomon's  audience-hall, And  put  on  King  Solomon's  necklace  (breast-ornaments)  and armlets."1
When  about  to  enter  the  hut  say —
"  [Hearken],  O  Hearts  of  Wild  Doves, Cut  we  the  Rod  of  Invitation, This  hut  is  named  the  Magic  Prince, This  tube  is  named  Prince  Distraction, Distraught  (be  ye)  by  day,  distraught  by  night, Distraught  (with  longing)  to  assemble  in  King  Solomon's  Hall, Cluck,  cluck  !  souls  of  Queen  Kapor,"  etc.  (as  before).2
When  you  have  just  entered,  and  before  you  seat yourself,  say —
"  Sift,  sift  the  rice-ends, Sift  them  over  a  rush-work  rice-bag,"  etc.  (as  before).
Put  your  lips  to  the  decoy-tube,  and  sound  the  call, saying —
"  Cut  the  mengkudu  stem ; Cut  it  (through)  and  thrust  it  downwards,"  etc.  (as  before).
(or  else  some  longer  version,  such  as  one  of  those given  in  the  Appendix).  When  the  wild  pigeon  have arrived  and  have  entered  the  enclosure  or  "  Palace- yard,"  wait  till  they  are  in  a  good  position,  and  then push  out  one  of  the  rods  with  the  fine  noose  at  the end,  slip  the  noose  over  the  bird's  neck,  and  drag  it into  the  house,  saying  as  you  do  so —
1  An  alternative  version  runs  : —  2  Another  version  has  : —
cffi'rfSSwifeu  Thist.shn°?.t  °f  a  creeper  is " prince  invita-
Over  the  seven  valleys,  seven  knolls  of  rising  Th;s  hut'  k  ca,led  tfae  Magic  prmce
Re-efhothe  voice  of  my  decoy.  This  decoy  is  called  PHnCe  Distracti°n"
Come  down,  Queen  Kapor,  Queen  Puding,  _.  _    .     ,T   ..     ,r            .,          ",,..*r*\  4e  tVi»
Handmaid  Sampah,  Si  Raja  Nyila  (from  sila,  menytla)  is  the
With  one  hundred  and  ninety  others.  name  given  to  the  long  slender  rods
Come  down  to  this  spot  I  stand  on.  ith  fine  hajr_iike  nooses  at  the  end
Come  down  from  the  north,  .  j        j
Come  down  from  the  south,  with  which  the  pigeons  are  snared  and
Come  down  from  the  east,  dragged  into  the  hut  (vide  App.  xli. )
Come  down  from  the  west.
v  FIGURA  77  VE  NOMENCLA  TURE  1 39
"  Wak-wak  [stands  for]  a  heron  on  the  kitchen  shelf, Covered  over  with  the  top  of  a  cocoa-nut  shell, Do  you  move  aside,  Sir  Bachelor,  Master  of  the  Ceremonies, I  wish  to  ensnare  the  necks  of  the  race  of  wild  doves."
Now  that  you  understand  the  process  of  decoying pigeon  with  a  pigeon-call,  I  must  explain  something  of the  curious  nomenclature  used  by  the  wizard ;  for  dur- ing the  ceremony  you  must  never  call  a  spade  a  spade. In  the  first  place,  the  hut  must  not  on  any  account  be mentioned  as  such  :  it  is  to  be  called  the  Magic  Prince —why  so  called,  it  is  hard  to  say,  but  most  likely  the name  is  used  in  allusion  to  the  wizard  who  is  concealed inside  it.  The  name  given  to  the  calling-tube  itself  is more  appropriate,  as  it  is  called  "  Prince  Distraction  " (Raja  Gila),  this  name  of  course  being  an  allusion to  the  extraordinary  fascination  which  it  evidently exercises  on  the  pigeon.  Then  the  decoy  (or  rather, perhaps,  the  rod  to  which  it  is  linked)  is  called Putri  Pemonggo',  or  the  Squatting  Princess.  Next to  these  come  three  Princesses  which  prove  to be  merely  the  representatives  of  three  important species  of  wild  pigeon.  Their  names,  though variously  given,  are  perhaps  most  commonly  known as  Princess  "  Kapor,"  Princess  "Sarap,"  and  Princess "  Puding."
Finally,  even  the  rod  used  for  ensnaring  the  pigeon has  its  own  special  name,  Si  Raja  Nyila  (Prince  In- vitation).
"  King  Solomon's  necklaces  "  and  armlets  are  of course  the  nooses  with  which  they  are  to  be  snared, and  which  will  catch  them  either  by  the  neck  or  by the  leg.
The  Princesses  are  invited  to  enter  a  gorgeous palace : —
140  BIRDS  AND  BIRD  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  Come  down,  pigeons,  in  your  myriads, And  perch  upon  the  '  Ivory  Hall,' (That  is)  carpeted  with  silver,  and  railed  with  amalgam, (Come  down)  to  the  dishes  of  Her  Highness  Princess    Lebar Nyiru  (Broad-sieve)."1
The  "dishes  of  Her  Highness  Princess  Broad- sieve  "  cleverly  suggest  an  abundance  of  provender such  as  is  likely  to  appeal  to  a  hungry  bird !
In  another  version  the  three  Princesses  are  in- vited to  enter  the  "Palace  Tower"  called  "  Fatimah Passes"  (Mahaligei  Fatimah  Lalu).
Moreover  those  who  issue  the  invitation  are  no respecters  of  persons  : —
"  Let  those  which  are  near,  arrive  the  first, Let  those  which  are  far  off  be  sent  for, Let  those  which  have  eggs,  leave  their  eggs, Those  which  have  young,  leave  their  young, Those  which  are  blind,  be  led  by  others, Those  which  have  broken  limbs,  come  on  crutches ; Come  and  assemble  in  King  Solomon's  Audience-Chamber."  5
And  a  similar  passage  in  another  charm  says —
"  Let  those  which  are  near,  arrive  the  first, Let  those  which  are  far  off  be  sent  for, Cluck  !  cluck  !  souls  of  the  children  of  forest  doves, Come  ye  down  and  assemble  together In  the  fold  of  God  and  King  Solomon."
If  blandishments  fail,  however,  there  is  to  be  no doubt  about  the  punishments  in  store  for  their  wilful Highnesses  :  thus,  a  little  later,  we  find  the  alternative, a  thoroughgoing  imprecation  calculated  to  "convince" the  most  headstrong  of  birds  : —
"  I  call  you,  I  fetch  you  down, If  you  come  not  down  you  shall  be  eaten  by  the  Bear-cat,
Vide  App.  xxxvii.  2   Vide  App.  xlv.
SELECTION  OF  BUILDING  SITES  141
You  shall  be  choked  to  death  with  your  own  feathers, You  shall  be  choked  to  death  with  a  bone  in  your  throat. If  you  perch  on  a  creeper  you  shall  be  entangled  by  it, If  you  settle  on  a  leaf  you  shall  be  bitten  by  the  '  leaf  snake,' Come  you  down  quickly  to  God's  fold  and  King  Solomon's."
And  an  imprecation  of  similar  import  says—
"  [If  you  do  not  come  down,  the  Bear-cat  shall  eat  you], If  you  perch  on  a  bough,  you  shall  slip  off  it, If  you  perch  on  a  creeper,  you  shall  slide  off  it, If  you  perch  upon  a  leafless  stump,  the  stump  shall  fall ; If  you  settle  on  the  ground,  the  ground-snake  shall  bite  you, If  you  soar  up  to  heaven,  the  eagle  shall  swoop  upon  you."
(b)  Earth
I.    BUILDING   CEREMONIES  AND    CHARMS
The  first  operation  in  building  is  the  selection  of the  site.  This  is  determined  by  an  elaborate  code  of rules  which  make  the  choice  depend — firstly,  upon the  nature  of  the  soil  with  respect  to  colour,  taste,  and smell ;  secondly,  upon  the  formation  of  its  surface  ;  and, thirdly,  upon  its  aspect : —
"  The  best  soil,  whether  for  a  house,  village,  orchard, or  town,  is  a  greenish  yellow,  fragrant-scented,  tart- tasting  loam  :  such  a  soil  will  ensure  abundance  of  gold and  silver  unto  the  third  generation.1
"The  best  site,  whether  for  a  house,  village, orchard,  or  town,  is  level.2
"The  best  aspect  (of  the  surface)  is  that  of  land which  is  low  upon  the  north  side  and  high  upon  the south  side :  such  a  site  will  bring  absolute  peace- fulness."  8
1  Vide  App.  xlvii.  faces  southwards  there  will  be  no  luck
2  Ibid.  in  the  house  and   everything  will  go
3  Ibid.     Note  that  the  house-door  wrong.— -J.R.A. S.,  S.£.,  No.   30,  p. must  not  face  towards  the  south  ;  if  it  306.      Vide  App.  Iv.
142  EARTH  CHAP.
When  you  have  found  a  site  complying  with  more or  less  favourable  conditions,  in  accordance  with  the code,  you  must  next  clear  the  ground  of  forest  or undergrowth,  lay  down  four  sticks  to  form  a  rect- angle in  the  centre  thereof,  and  call  upon  the  name of  the  lords  of  that  spot  (i.e.  the  presiding  local  deities or  spirits).  Now  dig  up  the  soil  (enclosed  by  the  four sticks),  and  taking  a  clod  in  your  hand,  call  upon  the lords  of  that  spot  as  follows  : —
"  Ho,  children  of  Mentri l  Guru, Who  dwell  in  the  Four  Corners  of  the  World, I  crave  this  plot  as  a  boon."
(Here  mention  the  purpose  to  which  you  wish  to  put  it.)
"  If  it  is  good,  show  me  a  good  omen, If  it  is  bad,  show  me  a  bad  omen."  z
Wrap  the  clod  up  in  white  cloth,  and  after  fumi- gating it  with  incense,  place  it  at  night  beneath  your pillow,  and  when  you  retire  to  rest  repeat  the  last  two lines  of  the  above  charm  as  before  and  go  to  sleep. If  your  dream  is  good  proceed  with,  if  bad  desist from,  your  operations.  Supposing  your  dream  to  be "good,"  you  must  (approximately)  clear  the  site  of the  main  building  and  peg  out  the  four  corners  with dead  sticks ;  then  take  a  dead  branch  and  heap  it up  lightly  with  earth  (in  the  centre  of  the  site  ?) ;  set fire  to  it,  and  when  the  whole  heap  has  been  reduced to  ashes,  sweep  it  all  up  together  and  cover  it  over while  you  repeat  the  charm  (which  differs  but  little from  that  given  above).  Next  morning  uncover  it early  in  the  morning  and  God  will  show  you  the  good and  the  bad.
1  Perhaps  a  corruption  of  "Bgntara,"       charms     a    few    pages     farther    on), or  Batara,  Guru  (i.e.   Shiva),  which  is       "  MSntri "  usually  means  "minister." what  we  should  here  expect  (vide  the  2   Vide  App.  xlvii.
v  ERECTING  THE  CENTRE-POST  143
The  site  being  finally  selected,  you  must  proceed to  choose  a  day  for  erecting  the  central  house-post,  by consulting  first  the  schedule  of  lucky  and  unlucky months,  and  next  the  schedule  of  lucky  and  unlucky days  of  the  week.1
[The  best  time  of  day  for  the  operation  to  take  place is  said  to  be  always  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning. Hence  there  seems  to  be  no  need  to  consult  a  schedule to  discover  it,  though  some  magicians  may  do  so.]
The  propitious  moment  having  been  at  last  ascer- tained, the  erection  of  the  centre-post  will  be  proceeded with.  First,  the  hole  for  its  reception  must  be  dug (the  operation  being  accompanied  by  the  recital  of  a charm)  and  the  post  erected,  the  greatest  precautions being  taken  to  prevent  the  shadow  of  any  of  the workers  from  falling  either  upon  the  post  itself  or  upon the  hole  dug  to  receive  it,  sickness  and  trouble  being otherwise  sure  to  follow.2
[The  account  in  the  Appendix,  of  which  the  above is  a  rdsumd,  omits  to  describe  the  sacrifice  which  has to  be  made  before  the  erection  of  the  centre-post,  which has  therefore  been  drawn  from  the  instructions  of  other magicians.]
"  When  the  hole  has  been  dug  and  before  the  centre- post  is  actually  erected,  some  sort  of  sacrifice  or  offer- ing has  to  be  made.  First  you  take  a  little  brazilwood (kayu  sepang],  a  little  ebony-wood  (kayu  arang),  a  little assafcetida  (inggu),  and  a  little  scrap-iron  (tahi  besi\ and  deposit  them  in  the  hole  which  you  have  dug. Then  take  a  fowl,3  a  goat,  or  a  buffalo  [according  to
*  As  to  lucky  and  unlucky   times,  pected  on  the  part  of  the  earth-spirit,
v ide  Chap.  VI.  pp.  54S-55°»  infra.  even  an   egg  (as  the  "symbol"  of  a
2  Cp.  pp.  244-245,  248,  infra.  fowl)  may  be  sufficient  as  a  sacrifice.
3  In  a  case  where  no  trouble  is  ex-
144  BUILDING  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
the  ascertained  or  reputed  malignity  of  the  locally  pre- siding earth-demon  (puaka)\,  and  cut  its  throat  accord- ing to  Muhammadan  custom,  spilling  its  blood  into  the hole.  Then  cut  off  its  head  and  feet,  and  deposit  them within  the  hole  to  serve  as  a  foundation  for  the  centre- post  to  rest  upon  (buat  lapik  tiang  sri}.  Put  a  ring on  your  little  finger  out  of  compliment  to  the  earth- spirit  (akan  membujok  jembalang  ztu),  repeat  the charm *  and  erect  the  post."  2
Another  form  of  the  above  ceremony  was  described to  me  by  a  magician  as  follows  : —
"  Deposit  in  the  hole  a  little  scrap-iron  and  tin-ore, a  candle  nut  (buah  kras  or  buah  gorek],  a  broken hatchet  head  (b'liong  patak),  and  a  cent  (in  copper). Wait  till  everybody  else  has  returned  home,  and, standing  close  to  the  hole,  pick  up  three  clods  (kefial} of  earth,  hold  them  (genggam)  over  the  incense,  turn '  right-about-face '  and  repeat  the  charm.8  Then  take the  three  clods  home  (without  once  turning  round  to look  behind  you  till  you  reach  home),  place  them  under your  sleeping  pillow  and  wait  till  nightfall,  when  you may  have  either  a  good  or  a  bad  dream.  If  the  first night's  dream  be  bad,  throw  away  one  of  the  clods and  dream  again.  If  the  second  night's  dream  be
1  Vide  App.  1.  substituted  (the   goat,  fowl,    and    egg
2  An  alternative  method   was   thus  representing   further   successive  stages described  to  me  by  a  magician  :  Take  in  the  depreciation  of  the  rite).      Malays a  white  cup,  fill  it  with  water,  fumigate  on  the  Selangor  coast  more  than  once it  with  incense,  and  deposit  it  in  the  told  me  they  had  heard  that  the  Govern- hole   dug   to  receive  the  centre-post.  ment  was  in  the  habit  of  burying  a Early  next  morning  take  note  of  it ;  if  human  head   under  the  foundations  of it  is  still  full  of  water,  it  is  a  good  sign  ;  any  unusually   large  structure   (e.g.    a if  the  water  has  wasted  (sustit),  a  bad  bridge),  and  two  cases  where  a  local one.     If  live  insects  are  found  in  it,  scare  resulted  from  the  prevalence  of it  is   a  good  sign,  if  dead   ones,  bad.  this   idea  were  recorded   in  the   local There  can,   however,   be   little   doubt  press    (the    Malay    Mail)    in    1897. that  the  original  victim  of  this  sacrifice  For  similar  traditions  of  human  sacrifice, was  a  human  victim  (generally  perhaps  vide  p.  2 1 1  infra.
a  slave),    for   whom   the   buffalo  was  3   Vide  App.  Hi.
v  MAGIC  MEASUREMENTS  145
bad,  repeat  the  process,  and  whenever  you  get  a  good dream  deposit  the  clod  or  clods  under  the  butt-end of  the  centre-post  to  serve  as  a  foundation."
A  magician  gave  me  this  specimen  of  a  charm used  at  this  ceremony  (of  erecting  the  centre-post)  :—
"  Ho,  Raja  Guru,  Maharaja  Guru, You  are  the  sons  of  Batara  Guru. I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  spring, From  the  Flashing  of  Lightning's  spurs  ; I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  spring, From  the  Brightening  of  Daybreak. Ho,  Spectre  of  the  Earth,  Brains  of  the  Earth,  Demon  of  the
Earth,
Retire  ye  hence  to  the  depths  of  the  Ocean, To  the  peace  of  the  primeval  forest. Betwixt  you  and  me Division  was  made  by  Adam."
Another  rule  of  importance  in  house-building  is that  which  regulates  the  length  of  the  threshold,  as to  which  the  instructions  are  as  follows  :  —
"  Measure  off  (on  a  piece  of  string)  the  stretch (fathom)  of  the  arms  of  her  who  is  to  be  mistress  of the  proposed  house.  Fold  this  string  in  three  and cut  off  one  third.  Take  the  remainder,  fold  it  in  eight and  cut  off  seven-eighths.  Take  the  remaining  eighth, see  how  many  times  it  is  contained  in  the  length  of the  threshold,  and  check  off  the  number  (of  these measurements)  against  the  "category"  (bilangan)  of the  "eight  beasts"1  (benatang  yang  cTlapan}.  This category  runs  as  follows  :  —  (i)  The  dragon  (naga)  ;  .(2) the  dairy-cow  (sapi)  ;  (3)  the  lion  (singa]  ;  (4)  the  dog fan/ing)  ;  (5)  the  draught  -cow  (lembu)  ;  (6)  the  ass (kaldei)  ;  (7)  the  elephant  (gajah\  and  (8)  the  crow \  all  of  which  have  certain  ominous  significa-
1  For  other  "categories"  vide  p.  559,  infra. L
146  BUILDING  CEREAfONIES  CHAP.
tions.  If  the  last  measurement  coincides  with  one  of the  unlucky  beasts  in  the  category,  such  as  the  crow (which  signifies  the  death  of  the  master  of  the  house), the  threshold  is  cut  shorter  to  make  it  fit  in  with  one that  is  more  auspicious."1
The  names  of  the  "eight  beasts,"  coupled  with  the events  which  they  are  supposed  to  foreshadow,  are often  commemorated  in  rhyming  stanzas.
Here  is  a  specimen  : — .
I. — The  Dragon  (naga).
"  A  dragon  of  bulk,  a  monster  dragon, Is  this  dragon  that  turns  round  month  by  month.2 Wherever  you  go  you  will  be  safe  from  stumbling-blocks, And  all  who  meet  you  will  be  your  friends."
II. — The  Dairy-Cow  (sapi).
"  There  is  the  smoke  of  a  fire  in  the  forest, Where  Inche  'Ali  is  burning  lime ; They  were  milking  the  young  dairy-cow, And  in  the  midst  of  the  milking  it  sprawled  and  fell  down dead."
III. — The  Lion  (singa).
"  A  lion  of  courage,  a  lion  of  valour, Is  the  lion  gambolling  at  the  end  of  the  Point. The  luck  of  this  house  will  be  lasting, Bringing  you  prosperity  from  year  to  year."
IV. —  The  Dog  (anjing).
"  The  wild  dog,  the  jackal, Barks  at  the  deer  from  night  to  night ; Whatever  you  do  will  be  a  stumbling-block ; In  this  house  men  will  stab  one  another."
1  Another  form  of  measurement  was  2  This  probably  refers  to  the  mystic
from  the  threshold  (of  the  front  door)  Dragon    which    does    duty   (in    Malay
to    the    end    of   the    house ;    but    the  charm-books)  as  an  "  aspect  compass. "
method  of  augury  in  this  case  is  not  Vide   Chap.   VI.    p.    561,  infra,    and
yet  quite  clear.  App.  cclvii.
SELECTION  OF  A   TOWN  SITE  147
V. — The  Draught-  Cow  (l£mbu).
"  The  big  cow  from  the  middle  of  the  clearing Has  gone  to  the  Deep  Forest  to  calve  there. Great  good  luck  will  be  your  portion, Never  will  you  cease  to  be  prosperous."
VI.— The  Ass  (kaldei).
"  The  ass  within  the  Fort Carries  grass  from  morn  to  eve  ; Whatever  you  pray  for  will  not  be  granted, Though  big  your  capital,  the  half  will  be  lost."
VII.— The  Elephant  (gajah).
"The  big  riding  elephant  of  the  Sultan Has  its  tusks  covered  with  amalgam. Good  luck  is  your  portion, No  harm  or  blemish  will  you  suffer."
VIII. — The  Crow  (gagak).
"  A  black  crow  soaring  by  night Has  perched  on  the  house  of  the  great  Magic  Prince  ; Great  indeed  is  the  calamity  which  has  happened : Within  the  house  its  master  lies  dead."
In  close  connection  with  the  ceremonies  for  the selection  of  individual  house  sites  are  the  forms  by which  the  princes  of  Malay  tradition  selected  sites for  the  towns  which  they  founded.  The  following extract  will  perhaps  convey  some  idea  of  their character :  —
"  One  day  Raja  Marong  Maha  Podisat  went  into his  outer  audience  hall,  where  all  his  ministers, warriors,  and  officers  were  in  attendance,  and  com- manded the  four  Mantris  to  equip  an  expedition with  all  the  necessary  officers  and  armed  men,  and with  horses  and  elephants,  arms  and  accoutrements. The  four  Mantris  did  as  they  were  ordered,  and  when
BUILDING  CEREMONIES
all  was  ready  they  informed  the  Raja.  The  latter waited  for  a  lucky  day  and  an  auspicious  moment, and  then  desired  his  second  son  to  set  out.  The Prince  took  leave  after  saluting  his  father  and  mother, and  all  the  ministers,  officers,  and  warriors  who  fol- lowed him  performed  obeisance  before  the  Raja. They  then  set  out  in  search  of  a  place  of  settlement, directing  their  course  between  south  and  east,  intend- ing to  select  a  place  with  good  soil,  and  there  to  build a  town  with  fort,  moat,  palace,  and  balei.1  They amused  themselves  in  every  forest,  wood,  and  thicket through  which  they  passed,  crossing  numbers  of  hills and  mountains,  and  stopping  here  and  there  to  hunt wild  beasts,  or  to  fish  if  they  happened  to  fall  in  with a  pool  or  lake.
"After  they  had  pursued  their  quest  for  some time  they  came  to  the  tributary  of  a  large  river which  flowed  down  to  the  sea.  Farther  on  they came  to  a  large  sheet  of  water,  in  the  midst  of  which were  four  islands.  The  Prince  was  much  pleased with  the  appearance  of  the  islands,  and  straightway took  a  silver  arrow  and  fitted  it  to  his  bow  named Indra  Sakti,  and  said  :  '  O  arrow  of  the  bow  Indra Sakti,  fall  thou  on  good  soil  in  this  group  of  islands  ; wherever  thou  mayest  chance  to  fall,  there  will  I make  a  palace  in  which  to  live.'  He  then  drew  his bow  and  discharged  the  arrow,  which  flew  upwards with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  and  with  a  humming sound  like  that  made  by  a  beetle  as  it  flies  round  a flower,  and  went  out  of  sight.  Presently  it  came  in sight  again,  and  fell  upon  one  of  the  islands,  which on  that  account  was  called  Pulau  Indra  Sakti.  On that  spot  was  erected  a  town  with  fort,  palace,  and
1  Audience  hall.
THE  ELEPHANT  149
balei,  and  all  the  people  who  were  living  scattered about  in  the  vicinity  were  collected  together  and  set to  work  on  the  various  buildings."
Even  in  the  making  of  roads  through  the forest  it  would  appear  that  sacrificial  ceremonies are  not  invariably  neglected.  On  one  occasion  I came  upon  a  party  of  Malays  in  the  Labu  jungle who  were  engaged  in  making  a  bridle-track  for  the Selangor  Government.  A  small  bamboo  censer,  on which  incense  had  been  burning,  had  been  erected in  the  middle  of  the  trace ;  and  I  was  informed  that the  necessary  rites  (for  exorcising  the  demons  from the  trace)  had  just  been  successfully  concluded.
2.    BEASTS    AND    BEAST   CHARMS
All  wild  animals,  more  especially  the  larger  and more  dangerous  species,  are  credited  in  Malay  folk- lore with  human  or  (occasionally)  superhuman  powers.
In  the  pages  which  now  follow  I  shall  deal  with  the folklore  which  refers  to  the  more  important  animals, first  pointing  out  their  anthropomorphic  traits,  then detailing  some  of  the  more  important  traditions about  them,  and  finally,  where  possible,  describing  the methods  of  hunting  them.
The  Elephant
Of  the  Elephant  we  read  :—
"The  superstitious  dread  entertained  by  Malays for  the  larger  animals  is  the  result  of  ideas  regarding
1  J.R.A.S.,S.B.y  No.  9,  pp.  85,  86.  sattva)    indicates    Indo-Chinese    Bud-
This  is  an  extract  from   the   Marong  dhist  influence.     It  does  not  seem  to
Mahawangsa,  the  legendary  history  of  occur   elsewhere    in   Malay  literature,
Kedah,  a  State  bordering  on   Lower  though  Buddhism  flourished  in  Sumatra
Siam.     The  name  Podisat  (i.e.  Bodhi-  in  the  seventh  century  A.D.
ISO  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
them  which  have  been  inherited  from  the  primitive tribes  of  Eastern  Asia.  Muhammadanism  has  not been  able  to  stamp  out  the  deep-rooted  feelings  which prompted  the  savage  to  invest  the  wild  beasts  which he  dreaded  with  the  character  of  malignant  deities. The  tiger,  elephant,  and  rhinoceros l  were  not  mere brutes  to  be  attacked  and  destroyed.  The  immense advantages  which  their  strength  and  bulk  gave  them over  the  feebly-armed  savage  of  the  most  primitive tribes  naturally  suggested  the  possession  of  super- natural powers  ;  and  propitiation,  not  force,  was  the system  by  which  it  was  hoped  to  repel  them.  The Malay  addresses  the  tiger  as  Datoh  (grandfather),  and believes  that  many  tigers  are  inhabited  by  human souls.  Though  he  reduces  the  elephant  to  subjection, and  uses  him  as  a  beast  of  burden,  it  is  universally believed  that  the  observance  of  particular  ceremonies, and  the  repetition  of  prescribed  formulas,  are  necessary before  wild  elephants  can  be  entrapped  and  tamed. Some  of  these  spells  and  charms  (mantra]  are  supposed to  have  extraordinary  potency,  and  I  have  in  my possession  a  curious  collection  of  them,  regarding which,  it  was  told  me  seriously  by  a  Malay,  that  in consequence  of  their  being  read  aloud  in  his  house three  times  all  the  hens  stopped  laying !  The  spells in  this  collection  are  nearly  all  in  the  Siamese  language, and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  modern  Malays owe  most  of  their  ideas  on  the  subject  of  taming  and driving  elephants  to  the  Siamese.  Those,  however, who  had  no  idea  of  making  use  of  the  elephant,  but
1  Of  the  rhinoceros  not  many  super-  "fiery"  rhinoceros  (badak  apt)  which
stitions  are  yet  known.     The  rhinoceros  is    excessively  dangerous    if  attacked,
horn,    however   (called    chula),   is   be-  This  latter  is  probably  a  mere  fable,
lieved  to  be  a  powerful  aphrodisiac,  and  vide   Cliff. ,   In   Court  and  Kampong,
there  is  supposed   to  be   a  species  of  p.  33.
v  THE  ELEPHANT  CITY  151
who  feared  him  as  an  enemy,  were  doubtless  the  first to  devise  the  idea  of  influencing  him  by  invocations. This  idea  is  inherited,  both  by  Malays  and  Siamese, from  common  ancestry."1
To  the  above  evidence  (which  was  collected  by Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  no  doubt  mainly  in  Perak)  I  would add  that  at  Labu,  in  Selangor,  I  heard  on  more  than one  occasion  a  story  in  which  the  elephant-folk  were described  as  possessing,  on  the  borders  of  Siam,  a  city of  their  own,  where  they  live  in  houses  like  human beings,  and  wear  their  natural  human  shape.  This story,  which  was  first  told  me  by  Ungku  Said  Kechil of  Jelebu,  was  taken  down  by  me  at  the  time,  and  ran as  follows  : —
"  A  Malay  named  Laboh  went  out  one  day  to  his rice-field  and  found  that  elephants  had  been  destroying his  rice.
"He  therefore  planted  caltrops  of  a  cubit  and  a half  in  length  in  the  tracks  of  the  offenders.  That night  an  elephant  was  wounded  in  the  foot  by  one  of the  caltrops,  and  went  off  bellowing  with  pain.
"  Day  broke  and  Laboh  set  off  on  the  track  of  the wounded  elephant,  but  lost  his  way,  and  after  three days  and  nights  journeying,  found  himself  on  the borders  of  a  new  and  strange  country.  Presently  he encountered  an  old  man,  to  whom  he  remarked  '  Hullo, grandfather,  your  country  is  extraordinarily  quiet ! ' The  old  man  replied,  '  Yes,  for  all  noise  is  forbidden, because  the  king's  daughter  is  ill.'  'What  is  the matter  with  her  ? '  asked  Si  Laboh.  The  old  man replied  that  she  had  trodden  upon  a  caltrop.  Si  Laboh then  asked,  '  May  I  see  if  I  can  do  anything  to  help her?'  
1  J.R.A.S^  S.B.,  No.  7,  pp.  23,  24.
152  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  The  old  man  then  went  and  reported  the  matter to  the  king,  who  ordered  Si  Laboh  to  be  brought  into his  presence.
"  [Now  the  country  which  Si  Laboh  had  reached was  a  fine  open  country  on  the  borders  of  Siam.  It is  called  '  Pak  Henang,'  and  its  only  inhabitants  are the  elephant-people  who  live  there  in  human  guise. And  whoever  trespasses  over  the  boundaries  of  that country  turns  into  an  elephant.]
"Then  Si  Laboh  saw  that  the  king's  daughter, whose  name  was  Princess  Rimbut,  was  suffering  from one  of  the  caltrops  which  he  himself  had  planted. He  therefore  extracted  it  from  her  foot,  so  that  she recovered,  and  the  king,  in  order  to  reward  Si  Laboh, gave  him  the  Princess  in  marriage.
"  Now  when  they  had  been  married  a  long  time, and  had  got  two  children,  Si  Laboh  endeavoured  to persuade  his  wife  to  accompany  him  on  a  visit  to  his own  country.  To  this  the  Princess  replied  '  Yes  ;  but if  I  go  you  must  promise  never  to  add  to  the  dish  any young  tree-shoots  at  meal-time.' l
"  On  this  they  started,  and  at  the  end  of  the  first day's  journey  they  halted  and  sat  down  to  eat.  But Si  Laboh  had  forgotten  the  injunctions  of  his  wife,  and put  young  tree-shoots  into  the  dish  with  his  rice.  Then his  wife  protested  and  said,  '  Did  I  not  tell  you  not  to put  young  tree-shoots  into  your  food  ?  '  But  Si  Laboh was  obstinate,  and  merely  replied,  '  What  do  I  care  ? ' so  that  his  wife  was  turned  back  into  an  elephant  and  ran off  into  the  jungle.  Then  Si  Laboh  wept  and  followed her,  but  she  refused  to  return  as  she  had  now  become an  elephant.  Yet  he  followed  her  for  a  whole  day,  but
1  Young  shoots  of  bamboo  are  eaten  by  Malays  with  curry.
v  SACRED  ELEPHANTS  153
she  would  not  return  to  him,  and  he  then  returned homewards  with  his  children.
"  This  is  all  that  is  known  about  the  origin  of elephants  who  are  human  beings."
A  Malay  charm  which  was  given  me  (at  Labu)  to serve  as  a  protection  against  elephants  (J>$ndinding gajak)  gives  the  actual  name  of  the  Elephant  King—
"  O  Grandfather  Moyang  Kaban, Destroy  not  your  own  grandchildren."
Ghost  elephants  (gajah  kramaf)  are  not  uncommon. They  are  popularly  believed  to  be  harmless,  but  in- vulnerable, and  are  generally  supposed  to  exhibit  some outward  and  visible  sign  of  their  sanctity,  such  as  a stunted  tusk  or  a  shrunken  foot.  They  are  the  tutelary genii  of  certain  localities,  and  when  they  are  killed the  good  fortune  of  the  neighbourhood  is  supposed  to depart  too.  Certain  it  is,  that  when  one  of  these ghost  elephants  was  shot  at  Klang  a  year  or  two  ago, it  did  not  succumb  until  some  fifty  or  sixty  rifle-bullets had  been  poured  into  it,  and  its  death  was  followed  by a  fall  in  the  local  value  of  coffee  and  coffee  land,  from which  the  district  took  long  to  recover.1
A  ghost  elephant  is  very  often  thought  to  be  the guardian  spirit  of  some  particular  shrine — an  idea  that is  common  throughout  the  Peninsula.
Other  general  ideas  about  the  elephant  are  as follows  : —
"Elephants  are  said  to  be  very  frightened  if  they see  a  tree  stump  that  has  been  felled  at  a  great  height
1  The  skull  of  this  elephant,  riddled  one  stunted  tusk.     The  present  State
with  bullets,  was  sent  to  the  Govern-  surgeon  (Dr.  A.    E.    O.   Travers)  can
ment  Museum   at   Kuala  Lumpor,   in  speak  to  the  facts. Selangor.   It  had,  so  far  as  I  remember,
154  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
from  the  ground,  as  some  trees  which  have  high  spread- ing buttresses  are  cut,  because  they  think  that  giants must  have  felled  it,  and  as  ordinary-sized  men  are  more than  a  match  for  them  they  are  in  great  dread  of  being caught  by  creatures  many  times  more  powerful  than their  masters.  Some  of  the  larger  insects  of  the  grass- hopper kind  are  supposed  to  be  objects  of  terror  to elephants,  while  the  particularly  harmless  little  pan- golin (Manis  pentadactyla]  is  thought  to  be  able  to  kill one  of  these  huge  beasts  by  biting  its  foot.  The pangolin,  by  the  bye,  is  quite  toothless.  Another method  in  which  the  pangolin  attacks  and  kills elephants  is  by  coiling  itself  tightly  around  the  end  of the  elephant's  trunk,  and  so  suffocating  it.  This  idea is  also  believed  in  by  the  Singhalese,  according  to  Mr. W.  T.  Hornaday's  Two  Years  in  the  Jungle."1
The  foregoing  passage  refers  to  Perak,  but  similar ideas  are  common  in  Selangor,  and  they  occur  no  doubt, with  local  variations,  in  every  one  of  the  Malay  States. Selangor  Malays  tell  of  the  scaring  of  elephants  by  the process  of  drawing  the  slender  stem  of  the  bamboo down  to  the  ground  and  cutting  off  the  top  of  it,  when it  springs  back  to  its  place.
The  story  of  the  "  pangolin "  is  also  told  in Selangor  with  additional  details.  Thus  it  is  said  that the  "Jawi-jawi"  tree  (a  kind  of  banyan)  is  always avoided  by  elephants  because  it  was  once  licked  by  the armadillo.  The  latter,  after  licking  it,  went  his  way, and  "the  elephant  coming  up  was  greatly  taken  aback by  the  offensive  odour,  and  swore  that  he  would  never go  near  the  tree  again.  He  kept  his  oath,  and  his example  has  been  followed  by  his  descendants,  so  that
1  SeL  Journ.  vol.  iii.  No.  6,  p.  95   (quoted  from   Perak  Museum  Notes  by Mr.  L.  Wray).
HUNTING  THE  ELEPHANT  155
to  this  day  the  '  Jawi-jawi '  is  the  one  tree  in  the  forest which  the  elephant  is  afraid  to  approach."
The  following  directions  for  hunting  the  elephant were  given  me  by  L£bai  Jamal,  a  famous  elephant hunter  of  Lingging,  near  the  Sungei  Ujong  border  :—
"  When  you  first  meet  with  the  spoor  of  elephant or  rhinoceros,  observe  whether  the  foot-hole  contains any  dead  wood,  (then)  take  the  twig  of  dead  wood,  to- gether with  a  ball  of  earth  as  big  as  a  maize-cob  taken from  the  same  foot-hole  (if  there  is  only  one  of  you, one  ball  will  do,  if  there  are  three  of  you,  three  balls will  be  wanted,  if  seven,  seven  balls,  but  not  more). Then  roll  up  your  ball  of  earth  and  the  twig  together in  a  tree-leaf,  breathe  upon  it,  and  recite  the  charm  (for blinding  the  elephant's  eyes),  the  purport  of  which  is that  if  the  quarry  sees,  its  eyesight  shall  be  destroyed, and  if  it  looks,  its  eyesight  shall  be  dimmed,  by  the help  of  God,  the  prophet,  and  the  medicine-man,  who taught  the  charm.
"  Now  slip  your  ball  of  earth  into  your  waistband just  over  the  navel,  and  destroy  the  scent  of  your  body and  your  gun.  To  do  this,  take  a  bunch  of  certain leaves 2  (daun  sa-cherek\  together  with  stem-leaves  of the  betel-vine  (kerapak  siri/i),  leaves  of  the  wild  camphor (chapa),  and  leaves  of  the  club-gourd  (labu  ayer  puteti], break  their  midribs  with  your  left  hand,  shut  your  eyes, and  say  '  As  these  tree  leaves  smell,  so  may  my  body (and  gun)  be  scented.'
"  When  the  animal  is  dead,  beat  it  with  an  end  of black  cloth,  repeating  the  charm  for  driving  away  the
1  SeL  Journ.  vol.  i.  No.  6,  p.  83,  by  the  medicine-man  for  his  leaf-brush, where  this  note  is   given.      Probably  i.e.  leaves  of  the  piilut-puhit,  stlaguri, "armadillo"  is    a  mistake  for   "pan-  gandarusa,  and  the  red  clracrena  (Itn- golin."  juang  merah).
2  These  leaves  are  such  as  are  used
156  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
'mischief  (badi]  from  the  carcase,  which  charm  runs as  follows  : —
"  Badiyu,  Mother  of  Mischief,  Badi  Panji,  Blind  Mother, I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  sprang,1
Three  drops  of  Adam's  blood  were  the  origin  from  which  you  sprang, Mischief  of  Earth,  return  to  Earth, Mischief  of  Ant-heap,  return  to  Ant-heap, Mischief  of  Elephant,  return  to  Elephant,2 Mischief  of  Wood,  return  to  Wood, Mischief  of  Water,  return  to  Water, Mischief  of  Stone,  return  to  Stone And  injure  not  my  person. By  the  virtue  of  my  Teacher, You  may  not  injure  the  children  of  the  race  of  Man."
The  perquisites  of  the  Pawang  (magician)  are  to  be "  a  little  black  cloth  and  a  little  white  cloth,"  and  the only  special  taboo  mentioned  by  Lebai  Jamal  was  "  on no  account  to  let  the  naked  skin  rub  against  the  skin of  the  slain  animal."
Before  leaving  the  subject  of  elephants,  I  may  add that  Raja  Ja'far  (of  Beranang  in  Selangor)  told  me that  Lebai  Jamal,  when  charged  by  an  elephant  or rhinoceros,  would  draw  upon  the  ground  with  his  finger a  line  which  the  infuriated  animal  was  never  able  to cross.  This  line,  he  said,  was  called  the  Baris  Lak- samana,  or  the  "Admiral's  Line,"  and  the  knowledge of  how  to  draw  it  was  naturally  looked  upon  as  a  great acquisition.
1  "The  Malays  believe  that  the  person's  ancestry  implied  common power  to  inform  a  spirit,  a  wild  beast,  tribal  origin.  For  the  explanation  of or  any  natural  object,  such  as  iron  rust,  "  Badi,"  vide  Chap.  IV.  p.  94,  supra, of  the  source  from  which  it  originates  and  Chap.  VI.  p.  427,  infra, (usul  asal  ka-jadi-an-nyd),  renders  it  2  "  Rhinoceros "  should  be  sub- powerless."  H.  Clifford  in  No.  3  of  stituted  for  "elephant"  passim,  if  it the  Publications  of  the  R.A.S.,  S.B.,  was  the  object  of  the  hunter's  pursuit. Hikayat  Raja  Budiman,  pt.  ii.  p.  8.  This  particular  line  should  probably This  belief  is  found  among  all  tribes  come  at  the  end  of  the  charm  instead of  Malays  in  the  Peninsula.  Possibly  of  the  middle, the  idea  was  that  knowledge  of  another
THE  TIGER  157
The  Tiger
"The  Tiger  is  sometimes  believed  to  be  a  man or  demon  in  the  form  of  a  wild  beast,  and  to  the numerous  aboriginal  superstitions  which  attach  to  this dreaded  animal  Muhammadanism  has  added  the  notion which  connects  the  Tiger  with  the  Khalif  Ali.  One of  Ali's  titles  throughout  the  Moslem  world  is  '  the Victorious  Lion  of  the  Lord,'  and  in  Asiatic  countries, where  the  lion  is  unknown,  the  tiger  generally  takes the  place  of  the  '  king  of  beasts.'  " l
But  the  anthropomorphic  ideas  of  the  Malays about  the  Tiger  go  yet  farther  than  this.  Far  away  in the  jungle  (as  I  have  several  times  been  told  in  Selan- gor)  the  tiger-folk  (no  less  than  the  elephants)  have  a town  of  their  own,  where  they  live  in  houses,  and  act in  every  respect  like  human  beings.  In  the  town  re- ferred to  their  house-posts  are  made  of  the  heart  of the  Tree-nettle  (fras  jelatang],  and  their  roofs  thatched with  human  hair — one  informant  added  that  men's bones  were  their  only  rafters,  and  men's  skins  their house  walls — and  there  they  live  quietly  enough  until one  of  their  periodical  attacks  of  fierceness  (nieng- ganas)  comes  on  and  causes  them  to  break  bounds and  range  the  forest  for  their  chosen  prey.
There  are  several  of  these  tiger-villages  or  "  en- closures" in  the  Peninsula,  the  chief  of  them  being Gunong  Ledang  (the  Mount  Ophir  of  Malacca),  just as  Pasummah  is  the  chief  of  such  localities  in Sumatra.2  So  too,  from  Perak,  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell writes  in  1881  : —
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  NO.  7,  p.  22.
2  Marsden,  Hist,  of  Sum.  p.  292,  ed.  1811.
i58
S  EASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS
CHAP.
"A  mischievous  tiger  is  said  sometimes  to  have broken  loose  from  its  pen  or  fold  (peckak  kandang], This  is  in  allusion  to  an  extraordinary  belief  that,  in parts  of  the  Peninsula,  there  are  regular  enclosures where  tigers  possessed  by  human  souls  live  in  associa- tion. During  the  day  they  roam  where  they  please, but  return  to  the  kandang  at  night."  l
Various  fables  ascribe  to  the  tiger  a  human origin.  One  of  these,  taken  down  by  me  word for  word  from  a  Selangor  Malay,  is  intended  to account  for  the  tiger's  stripes.  The  gist  of  it  ran  as follows : —
"  An  old  man  picked  up  a  boy  in  the  jungle  with  a white  skin,  green  eyes,  and  very  long  nails.  Taking the  boy  home  his  rescuer  named  him  Muhammad  Yatim (i.e.  '  Muhammad  the  fatherless '),  and  when  he  grew  up sent  him  to  school,  where  he  behaved  with  great cruelty  to  his  schoolfellows,  and  was  therefore  soundly beaten  by  his  master  ('Toh  Saih  Panjang  Janggut,  i.e. 'Toh  Saih  Long-beard),  who  used  a  stick  made  of  a
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  I.e.
"  They  (the  Sumatran  Malays)  seem  to think,  indeed,  that  tigers  in  general  are actuated  with  the  spirits  of  departed men,  and  no  consideration  will  prevail on  a  countryman  to  catch  or  to  wound one,  but  in  self-defence,  or  immediately after  the  act  of  destroying  a  friend  or relation.  They  speak  of  them  with  a degree  of  awe,  and  hesitate  to  call  them by  their  common  name  (rimau  or  ma- chang),  terming  them  respectfully  satwa (the  wild  animals),  or  even  nenek (ancestors),  as  really  believing  them such,  or  by  way  of  soothing  or  coaxing them,  as  our  ignorant  country  folk  call the  fairies  '  the  good  people. ' "  \Dato1 hutan,  "elder  of  the  jungle,"  is  the common  title  of  the  tiger  in  Selangor. Various  nicknames,  however,  are  given, e.g.  Si  Pudong,  "  he  of  the  hairy  face  "
(Cliff.,  In  Court  and  Kampong,  p.  201), 'PahRandau, "  father  shaggy-face,  "etc.  ] "When  an  European  procures  traps  to be  set ...  the  inhabitants  of  the  neigh- bourhood have  been  known  to  go  at night  to  the  place  and  practise  some forms  in  order  to  persuade  the  animal, when  caught,  or  when  he  shall  perceive the  bait,  that  it  was  not  laid  by  them or  with  their  consent.  They  talk  of  a place  in  the  country  where  the  tigers have  a  court,  and  maintain  a  regular form  of  government,  in  towns,  the  houses of  which  are  thatched  with  women's hair." — Marsden,  I.e.  (The  italics  are mine.)  It  is  curious  that  the  Fairy Princess'  hall  on  Gunong  Ledang  is similarly  described  in  the  Se'jarah Malayu  (Malay  Annals,  p.  279)  as being  of  bone  and  thatched  with  hair.
v  ORIGIN  OF  THE  TIGER  159
kind  of  wood  called  los1  to  effect  the  chastisement. At  the  first  cut  the  boy  leapt  as  far  as  the  doorway  ; at  the  second  he  leapt  to  the  ground,  at  the  third  he bounded  into  the  grass,  at  the  fourth  he  uttered  a growl,  and  at  the  fifth  his  tail  fell  down  behind  him and  he  went  upon  all  fours,  whereat  his  master  (impro- vising a  name  to  curse  him  by),  exclaimed,  '  This  is  of a  truth  God's  tiger !  (Harimau  Alla/i).  Go  you,'  he added,  addressing  the  tiger,  '  to  the  place  where  you will  catch  your  prey — the  borderland  between  the primeval  forest  and  the  secondary  forest-growth,  and that  between  the  secondary  forest-growth  and  the  plain —catch  there  whomsoever  you  will,  but  see  that  you catch  only  the  headless.  Alter  no  jot  of  what  I  say, or  you  shall  be  consumed  by  the  Iron  of  the  Regalia, and  crushed  by  the  sanctity  of  the  thirty  divisions  of the  Koran.' '  Hence  the  tiger  is  to  this  day  compelled to  "  ask  for  "  his  prey,  and  uses  divination  (bertenung], as  all  men  know,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  whether his  petition  has  yet  been  granted.
Hence,  too,  he  carries  on  his  hide  to  this  very  day the  mark  of  the  stripes  with  which  he  was  beaten  at school.
The  method  of  divination  said  to  be  practised  by the  tiger  is  as  follows  :  The  tiger  lies  down  and  gazes (bertenung)  at  leaves  which  he  takes  between  his  paws, and  whenever  he  sees  the  outline  of  a  leaf  take  the
1  Also    called   Vaj.      The   tiger    is  an  adequate  protection  against  any  tiger.
still  supposed  to  be  mortally  afraid  of  I  do  not  know  what  species  of  tree  it
fas  or  Voj  wood.     In  fact,  I  was  more  belongs  to,  but  a  gorse  stick  (which  I
than  once  told  of  a  trapped  tiger  who  had  bought  some  years  before  in  Ire-
on  being   shown  a  piece  of  'fas  wood  land)  was  taken  to  be  a  piece  of  fas
"  became  quite  silent,"  though  it  had  wood,  and  was  begged  from  me  by  a
previously    been     savagely    growling,  local  Malay  headman,  who  cut  it  up
and  shrank  into  a  corner  of  the  trap.  into  inches  for  distribution  among  his
A  single  inch  of  this  wood  is  thought  following.
160  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
shape  of  one  of  his  intended  victims,  without  the  head, he  knows  it  to  be  the  sign  that  that  victim  has  been "  granted  "  to  him,  in  accordance  with  the  very  terms of  his  master's  curse.
I  once  asked  (at  Labu)  how  it  was  known  that  the tiger  used  divination,  and  was  told  this  story  of  a  man who  had  seen  it: —
"A  certain  Malay  had  been  working,  together with  his  newly-married  wife,  in  the  rice-fields  at  Labu, and  on  his  stepping  aside  at  noon  into  the  cool  of  the forest,  he  saw  a  tiger  lying  down  among  the  under- wood apparently  gazing  at  something  between  its  paws. By  creeping  stealthily  nearer  he  was  able  at  length  to discern  the  object  at  which  the  tiger  was  gazing,  and  it proved  to  be,  to  his  intense  horror,  a  leaf  which  pre- sented the  lineaments  of  his  wife,  lacking  only  the  head. Hurrying  back  to  the  rice-field  he  at  once  warned  the neighbours  of  what  he  had  seen,  and  implored  them  to set  his  wife  in  their  midst  and  escort  her  homeward. To  this  they  consented,  but  yet,  in  spite  of  every  pre- caution, the  tiger  broke  through  the  midst  of  them  and killed  the  woman  before  it  could  be  driven  off.  The bereaved  husband  thereupon  requested  them  to  leave him  alone  with  the  body  and  depart,  and  when  they  had done  so,  he  took  the  body  in  his  arms,  and  so  lay  down embracing  it,  with  a  dagger  in  either  hand.  Before sunset  the  tiger  returned  to  its  kill,  and  leapt  upon  the corpse,  whereupon  the  husband  stabbed  it  to  the heart,  so  that  the  points  of  the  daggers  met,  and  killed it  on  the  spot."
The  power  of  becoming  a  man-  or  were-tiger  (as  it has  sometimes  been  called),  is  supposed  to  be  confined to  one  tribe  of  Sumatrans,  the  Korinchi  Malays,  many of  whom  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  Malay  Native  States.
WERE-TIGERS  161
This  belief  is  very  strongly  held,  and  on  one  occasion, when  I  asked  some  Malays  at  Jugra  how  it  could  be proved  that  the  man  really  became  a  tiger,  they  told me  the  case  of  a  man  some  of  whose  teeth  were  plated with  gold,  and  who  had  been  accidentally  killed  in  the tiger  stage,  when  the  same  gold  plating  was  discovered in  the  tiger's  mouth.1
Of  the  strength  of  the  Malay  belief  in  were-tigers Mr.  Clifford  writes  : —
"  The  existence  of  the  Malayan  Loup  Garou  to  the native  mind  is  a  fact,  and  not  a  mere  belief.  The Malay  knows  that  it  is  true.  Evidence,  if  it  be  needed, may  be  had  in  plenty ;  the  evidence,  too,  of  sober- minded  men,  whose  words  in  a  Court  of  Justice  would bring  conviction  to  the  mind  of  the  most  obstinate jurymen,  and  be  more  than  sufficient  to  hang  the  most innocent  of  prisoners.  The  Malays  know  well  how Haji  'Abdallah,  the  native  of  the  little  state  of  Korinchi in  Sumatra,  was  caught  naked  in  a  tiger  trap,  and thereafter  purchased  his  liberty  at  the  price  of  the buffaloes  he  had  slain  while  he  marauded  in  the  like- ness of  a  beast.  They  know  of  the  countless  Korinchi men  who  have  vomited  feathers,  after  feasting  upon fowls,  when  for  the  nonce  they  had  assumed  the  forms of  tigers  ;  and  of  those  other  men  of  the  same  race  who have  left  their  garments  and  their  trading  packs  in thickets  whence  presently  a  tiger  has  emerged.  All these  things  the  Malays  know  have  happened,  and  are
1  It  appears  that  in  Java  there  are  only  cover  his  great  toes,  but  which  he supposed  not  only  to  be  men  who  is  able  gradually  to  stretch  until  it can  themselves  become  tigers  at  will,  covers  his  whole  person.  This  sarong but  men  who  can  turn  other  people  resembles  the  hide  of  a  Bengal  tiger into  tigers  as  well.  This  is  done  (being  yellow  with  black  stripes),  and by  means  of  a  species  of  sympa-  the  wearing  of  it  in  conjunction  with thetic  magic,  the  medicine-man  draw-  the  necessary  charms  will  turn  the  re- ing  on  a  sarong  (Malay  skirt)  of  quired  person  into  a  tiger, marvellous  elasticity,  which  at  first  will
M
162  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
happening  to-day,  in  the  land  in  which  they  live,  and with  these  plain  evidences  before  their  eyes,  the  empty assurances  of  the  enlightened  European  that  Were- Tigers  do  not,  and  never  did  exist,  excite  derision  not unmingled  with  contempt."  l
Writing  on  the  same  theme,  Sir  Frank  Swettenham says  : —
"  Another  article  of  almost  universal  belief  is  that the  people  of  a  small  State  in  Sumatra  called  Korinchi have  the  power  of  assuming  at  will  the  form  of  a  tiger, and  in  that  disguise  they  wreak  vengeance  on  those they  wish  to  injure.  Not  every  Korinchi  man  can  do this,  but  still  the  gift  of  this  strange  power  of  meta- morphosis is  pretty  well  confined  to  the  people  of  the small  Sumatran  State.  At  night  when  respectable members  of  society  should  be  in  bed,  the  Korinchi man  slips  down  from  his  hut,  and,  assuming  the  form of  a  tiger,  goes  about  '  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.'
"  I  have  heard  of  four  Korinchi  men  arriving  in  a district  of  Perak,  and  that  night  a  number  of  fowls were  taken  by  a  tiger.  The  strangers  left  and  went farther  up  country,  and  shortly  after  only  three  of  them returned  and  stated  that  a  tiger  had  just  been  killed, and  they  begged  the  local  headman  to  bury  it.
"  On  another  occasion  some  Korinchi  men  appeared and  sought  hospitality  in  a  Malay  house,  and  there  also the  fowls  disappeared  in  the  night,  and  there  were  un- mistakable traces  of  the  visit  of  a  tiger,  but  the  next day  one  of  the  visitors  fell  sick,  and  shortly  after vomited  chicken-feathers.
"It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  the  Korinchi  people strenuously  deny  the  tendencies  and  the  power  ascribed to  them,  but  aver  that  they  properly  belong  to  the
1  Clifford,  In  Court  and  Kampong,  pp.  65,  66.
SACRED  TIGERS  163
inhabitants  of  a  district  called  Chenaku  in  the  interior of  the  Korinchi  country.  Even  there,  however,  it  is only  those  who  are  practised  in  the  ettmu  sehir,  the occult  arts,  who  are  thus  capable  of  transforming  them- selves into  tigers,  and  the  Korinchi  people  profess themselves  afraid  to  enter  the  Chenaku  district."
There  are  many  stories  about  ghost  tigers  (rimau krawat),  which  are  generally  supposed  to  have  one foot  a  little  smaller  than  the  others  (kaki  tengkis). During  my  stay  in  the  Langat  district  I  was  shown on  more  than  one  occasion  the  spoor  of  a  ghost  tiger. This  happened  once  near  Sepang  village,  on  a  wet and  clayey  bridle -track,  where  the  unnatural  small- ness  of  one  of  the  feet  was  very  conspicuous.  Such tigers  are  considered  invulnerable,  but  harmless  to man,  and  are  looked  upon  generally  as  the  guardian spirits  of  some  sacred  spot.  One  of  these  sacred spots  was  the  shrine  (kramat)  of  'Toh  Kamarong, about  two  miles  north  of  Sepang  village.  This shrine,  it  was  alleged,  was  guarded  by  a  white  ghost elephant  and  ghost  tiger,  who  ranged  the  country round  but  never  harmed  anybody.  One  day,  how- ever, a  Chinaman  from  the  neighbouring  pepper plantations  offered  at  this  shrine  a  piece  of  pork, which,  however  acceptable  it  might  have  been  to  a Chinese  saint,  so  incensed  the  orthodox  guardians  of this  Muhammadan  shrine  that  one  of  them  (the  ghost tiger)  fell  upon  the  Chinaman  and  slew  him  before he  could  return  to  his  house.
By  far  the  most  celebrated  of  these  ghost  tigers, lowever,  were  the  guardians  of  the  shrine  at  the  foot )f  Jugra  Hill,  which  were  formerly  the  pets  of  the Princess  of  Malacca  (Tuan  Putri  Gunong  Ledang).
1  Malay  Sketches,  pp.  200,  201.
1 64  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
Local  report  says  that  this  princess  left  her  country when  it  was  taken  by  the  Portuguese,  and  established herself  on  Jugra  Hill,  a  solitary  hill  on  the  southern portion  of  the  Selangor  coast,  which  is  marked  on old  charts  as  the  "  False  Parcelar"  hill.
The  legend  which  connects  the  name  of  this princess  with  Jugra  Hill  was  thus  told1  by  Mr.  G.  C. Bellamy  (formerly  of  the  Selangor  Civil  Service).
"  Bukit  Jugra  (Jugra  Hill)  in  its  isolated  position, and  conspicuous  as  it  is  from  the  sea,  could  scarcely escape  being  an  object  of  veneration  to  the  uneducated Malay  mind.  The  jungle  which  clothes  its  summit and  sides  is  supposed  to  be  full  of  hantus  (demons or  ghosts),  and  often  when  talking  to  Malays  in  my bungalow  in  the  evening  have  our  discussions  been interrupted  by  the  cries  of  the  langswayer  (a female  birth-demon)  in  the  neighbouring  jungle,  or the  mutterings  of  the  bajang  (a  familiar  spirit)  as he  sat  on  the  roof-tree.  But  the  'Putri'  (Princess) of  Gunong  Ledang  holds  the  premier  position  amongst the  fabulous  denizens  of  the  jungle  on  the  hill,  and  it is  strange  that  places  so  far  apart  as  Mount  Ophir and  Bukit  Jugra  should  be  associated  with  one another  in  traditionary  lore.  The  story  runs  that this  estimable  lady,  having  disposed  of  her  husband by  pricking  him  to  death  with  needles,2  decided thenceforth  to  live  free  from  the  restrictions  of married  life.  She  was  thus  able  to  visit  distant lands,  taking  with  her  a  cat3  of  fabulous  dimensions as  her  sole  attendant.  This  cat  appears  to  have been  a  most  amiable  and  accommodating  creature, for  on  arriving  at  Jugra  he  carried  the  Princess  on
1  Set.  Jourtt.  vol.  i.  No.  6,  p.  87.  3  Or  two  cats,  vide  infra.
2  Or  with  a  needle,  vide  infra.
v  THE  PRINCESS  OF  JUGRA  165
his  back  to  the  top  of  the  hill.  Here  the  lady  re- mained for  some  time,  and  during  her  stay  constructed a  bathing- place  for  herself.  Even  to  this  day  she pays  periodical  visits  to  Jugra  Hill,  and  although  she herself  is  invisible  to  mortal  eye,  her  faithful  attendant, in  the  shape  of  a  handsome  tiger,  is  often  to  be  met with  as  he  prowls  about  the  place  at  night.  He  has never  been  known  to  injure  any  one,  and  is  reverently spoken  of  as  a  rimau  kramat  (ghost  tiger)."
To  the  above  story  Mr.  C.  H.  A.  Turney  (then Senior  District  Officer  and  stationed  at  Jugra)  added the  following : —
"  The  Princess  and  the  stories  about  her  and  the tiger  are  well  known,  and  the  latter  are  related  from mother  to  daughter  in  Langat.
"  There  are,  however,  they  say,  one  or  two omissions ;  instead  of  one  tiger  there  were  two,  the real  harimau  kramat  and  an  ambitious  young  tiger who  would  also  follow  the  Princess  in  her  round  of visits.  This  brute  came  to  an  untimely  and  igno- minious end  (as  he  deserved  to)  at  the  hands  of  one Innes,  who  was  disturbed  whilst  reading  a  newspaper, and  this  can  be  verified  by  Captain  Syers.
"  The  other  tiger  jogged  along  gaily  with  his phantom  mistress,  and  made  night  hideous  with  his howlings  and  prowlings  all  about  the  Jugra  Hill. He  was  really  kramat,  and  was  said  to  have  been shot  at  by  several  Malays,  and  the  present  Sergeant- Major  Allie,  now  stationed  at  Kuala  Lumpur,  can vouch  for  this."1
1  Sel.  Journ.  vol.  i.  No.  8,  p.  115.  (ghost  tigers)  reminds  me  of  the  excite- Later  Mr.  Turney,  writing  under  ment  there  was  in  the  town  because  a the  nom  de  plume  of  a  well-known  clever  lady,  called  Miss  Bird,  was Chinese  servant,  added  the  follow-  coming  and  would  write  about  the ing : —  place  and  people.
"Talking  of  the    harimau  kramat  "  My  master  had  obtained  intimation
166  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
I  myself  collected  at  the  time  the  following  extra details  : —
"  The  local  version  of  the  legend  about  the  kramat at  the  foot  of  Jugra  Hill  runs  somewhat  as  follows  :— Once  upon  a  time  one  Nakhoda  Ragam  was  travelling with  his  wife  (who  is  apparently  to  be  identified  with the  Princess  of  Malacca,  Tuan  Putri  Gunong  Ledang) in  a  boat  (sampan),  when  the  latter  pricked  him  to death  with  a  needle  (mati  di-chuchok  jarum).  His blood  flooded  the  boat  (darah-nya  hanyut  dalam  sam- pan], and  presently  the  woman  in  the  boat  was  hailed by  a  vessel  sailing  past  her.  '  What  have  you  got  in that  boat  ? '  said  the  master  of  the  vessel,  and  the Princess  replied:  'It  is  only  spinach -juice'  (kiiak bayani).  She  was  therefore  allowed  to  proceed,  and landed  at  the  foot  of  Jugra  Hill,  where  she  buried all  that  yet  remained  of  her  husband,  which  consisted of  only  one  thigh  (paha).1  She  also  took  ashore  her two  cats,  which  were  in  the  boat  with  her,  and  which, turning  into  ghost  tigers,  became  the  guardians  of  this now  famous  shrine. "!
Tigers  are  naturally  too  fierce  to  be  tracked  by  the Malays,  and  are  usually  caught  in  specially  con- structed traps  (penjara  rimau},  or  killed  by  a  self-
of  this  lady's  wants,  and  was  directed  the  tiger,  which  was  in  a  state  of  good
to  receive  her  on  a  certain  date,  and  preservation,  and  Miss  Bird  regretted
the   Sultan's  people  were  told  that  a  that  she  was  too  late  to  taste  the  flesh,
great  '  cherita  (story)  writer '  was  cpm-  which,    my    master    said,    made    very
ing  who  would   tell  the  world  of  our  good     'devilled    steaks,'    not     unlike
Sultan  and  his  dominions.  venison!"  —  (S.    J.    vol.    i.    No.     II,
' '  On   the  appointed    day  the   lady  p.  171.)
arrived,   and    accompanying  her  were  J  It  may  perhaps  be  supposed  that
a  crowd  of  gentlemen,  who  were  sup-  she  had  thrown  the  rest  of  the  body
posed  to  help  her  to  get  information.  overboard  before  she  was  surprised  by
"They  all  dined  at  my  master's,  and  the  sailing  vessel.
the  subjects  discussed  were  very  various,  2  Cp.  the  other  versions  of  this  tale
among  others  was  the  kramat  (ghost)  given  in  N.  and  Q.,  No.   3,  Sees.  33,
tiger,  which  had  been  shot  a  few  days  34   (issued  with  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.
previously.     They  admired  the  skin  of  15).
x  CHARMS  AGAINST  TIGERS  167
acting  gun  or  spear-trap  (Vlantek  snapang,  tilantek tfrbang,  Vlantek  parap,  etc.) ;  but  even  in  this  case the  Pawang  explains  to  the  tiger  that  it  was  not  he but  Muhammad  who  set  the  trap.  There  are,  how- ever, as  might  be  expected,  a  great  number  of  charms intended  to  protect  the  devotee  in  various  ways  from the  tiger's  claws  and  teeth.  Of  these  I  will  give  one or  two  typical  specimens.
Sometimes  a  charm  is  used  to  keep  the  tiger  at  a distance  (penjauh  rimau):—
"  Ho,  BSrsenu  !     Ho,  Bgrkaih  ! I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  sprang ; (It  was)  Sheikh  Abuniah  Lahah  Abu  Kasap. Your  navel  originated  from  the  centre  of  your  crown, Your  breasts  are  [to  be  seen]  in  [the  spoor  of]  your  fore-feet.1 May  you  go  wide  (of  me)  as  the  Seven  Tiers  of  Heaven, May  you  go  wide  (of  me)  as  the  Seven  Tiers  of  Earth  ; If  you  do  not  go  wide, You  shall  be  a  rebel  unto  God,"  etc.
Sometimes   the  desired  effect  is  expected  to   be obtained  by  a  charm  for  locking  the  tiger's  jaws  :—
"  Ho,  Sir  Cruncher  !     Ho,  Sir  Muncher  ! Let  the  twig  break  under  the  weight  of  the  wild  goose. Fast  shut  and  locked  be  (your  jaws),  by  virtue  of  'AH  Mustapah, OM.     Thus  I  break  (the  tusks  of)  all  beasts  that  are  tusked, By  virtue  of  this  Prayer  from  the  Land  of  Siam." 2
1  The   explanation   given  to  me  of  certainly  bear  a  grudge  against  you  !  " these  two  lines  was  that  they  were  both  To  do  this  you  must  repeat  the  Arabic based  on  a  fancied  resemblance  between  words    with   which    the    charm    (just the  parts  referred  to.  quoted)  concluded,  and  then  pronounce
2  A  similar  charm   runs,   "  Madam  the   Malay   word   buka,   which   means Ugly  is  the  name  of  your  mother,  Sir  "open."      The    Malays   are   fond   of Stripes  the  name  of  your  body.     I  fold  enigmatical  expressions,  in  which  the up  your  tongue  and  muzzle  your  mouth  ;  part  of  a  word  is  made  to  stand  for  the -wig  -eak  [stands  for]  let  the  twig  break  whole.      Cp.  infra  "  Teng  [stands  for] — break  with  the  weight  of  this  well-  the    Satengteng  flower."      Sometimes fed  wild  goose.     Be  (your  mouth)  shut  these  expressions  are    propounded    as fast  and  locked.     If  a  bachelor  loses  riddles,  e.g.  "  Ti  tiong  kalau  kalau" his  vocation,  it  does  not  matter."   (Here  out  of  which  the  guesser  was  supposed follow  a   few   words  of  Arabic.)     On  to  make  " Ranyak-banyak  &>SI, reaching  home  you  must  never  forget
to  unlock  the  tiger's  jaws,  or  "//«  will
168  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
The  next  specimen  is  described  as  a  "charm  for fascinating  "  (striking  fear  into)  a  "  tiger  and  hardening one's  own  heart  "  : —
"  O  Earth-Shaker,  rumble  and  quake ! Let  iron  needles  be  my  body-hairs, Let  copper  needles  be  my  body-hairs  ! Let  poisonous  snakes  be  my  beard, A  crocodile  my  tongue,
And  a  roaring  tiger  in  the  dimple  of  my  chin. Be  my  voice  the  trumpet  of  an  elephant, Yea,  like  unto  the  roar  of  the  thunderbolt. May  your  lips  be  fast  closed  and  your  teeth  clenched ; And  not  till  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  are  moved May  your  heart  be  moved To  be  wroth  with  or  to  seek  to  destroy  me. By  the  virtue  of  '  There  is  no  god  but  God,' "  etc.
To  which  may  be  added —
"  Kun  !     Payah  Run  !
Let  (celestial)  splendour  reside  in  my  person. Whosoever  talks  of  encountering  me, A  cunning  Lion  shall  be  his  opponent. O  all  ye  Things  that  have  life Endure  not  to  confront  my  gaze  ! It  is  I  who  shall  confront  the  gaze  of  you, By  the  virtue  of  'There  is  no  god  but  God.'  "
When  tigers  were  wounded,  it  was  said  (in  Selan- gor)  that  they  would  doctor  themselves  with  ubat tasak,  which  is  the  name  generally  given  to  a  sort  of poultice  used  by  those  who  have  just  undergone  cir- cumcision. And  when  a  tiger  was  killed  a  sort  of public  reception  was  formerly  always  accorded  to  him on  his  return  to  the  village.
Though  I  have  not  seen  the  actual  reception (generally  miscalled  a  "wake"),  I  once  saw  near Kajang  in  Selangor  a  tiger  which  had  been  prepared for  the  ceremony.  The  animal  was  propped  up  on  all fours  as  if  alive,  and  his  mouth  kept  open  by  propping
v  RECEPTION  OF  A  DEAD  TIGER  169
the  roof  with  a  stick.  It  was  unfortunately  impossible for  me  to  wait  for  the  ceremony,  but  from  a  description which  I  received  afterwards,  it  was  evidently  regarded as  a  sort  of  "  reception  "  given  by  the  people  of  the village  to  a  live  and  powerful  war-chief  or  champion (hulubalang)  who  had  come  to  pay  them  a  visit,  the dancing  and  fencing  which  takes  place  on  such  occa- sions being  intended  for  his  entertainment.
One  of  these  ceremonies,  which  took  place  in  Jugra in  Selangor,  was  thus  described  : —
A  Tiger's  Wake
"At  10  A.M.  a  great  noise  of  rejoicing,  with  drums and  gongs,  approaching  Jugra  by  the  river,  was  heard, and  on  my  questioning  the  people,  I  was  told  Raja Yakob  had  managed  to  shoot  a  tiger  with  a  spring gun  behind  Jugra  Hill,  and  was  bringing  it  in  state  to the  Sultan.  I  went  over  to  the  Sultan's  at  Raja Yakob's  request  to  see  the  attendants  on  the  slaughter of  a  tiger.  The  animal  was  supported  by  posts  and fastened  in  an  attitude  as  nearly  as  possible  approach- ing the  living.  Its  mouth  was  forced  open,  its  tongue allowed  to  drop  on  one  side,  and  a  small  rattan  attached to  its  upper  jaw  was  passed  over  a  pole  held  by  a  man behind.  This  finished,  two  swords  were  produced  and placed  crosswise,  and  a  couple  of  Panglimas *  selected for  the  dance  ;  the  gongs  and  drums  were  beaten  at  a quick  time,  the  man  holding  the  rattan  attached  to  the tiger's  head  pulled  it,  moving  the  head  up  and  down, and  the  two  Panglimas,  after  making  their  obeisance  to the  Sultan,  rushed  at  their  swords,  and  holding  them  in their  hands  commenced  a  most  wild  and  exciting  dance.
1  Chiefs,  especially  with  reference  to  military  functions.
i?o  BEAS7*S  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
They  spun  around  on  one  leg,  waving  their  swords, then  bounded  forward  and  made  a  thrust  at  the  tiger, moving  back  quickly  with  the  point  of  the  weapon  facing the  animal ;  they  crawled  along  the  ground  and  sprung over  it  uttering  defiant  yells,  they  cut  and  parried  at supposed  attacks,  finally  throwing  down  their  weapons and  taunting  the  dead  beast  by  dancing  before  it  un- armed. This  done,  Inas  told  me  the  carcase  was  at my  disposal.
"  The  death  of  the  tiger  now  establishes  the  fact of  the  existence  of  tigers  here,  for  asserting  which  I have  been  pretty  frequently  laughed  at.  However this  is  not  the  Jugra  pest,  a  brute  whose  death  would be  matter  for  general  rejoicing,  the  one  now  destroyed being  a  tigress  8  feet  long  and  2  feet  8  inches  high."
I  may  add  that  both  the  claws  and  whiskers  of tigers  are  greatly  sought  after  as  charms,  and  are almost  invariably  stolen  from  a  tiger  when  one  is  killed by  a  European.  I  have  also  seen  at  Klang  a  charm written  on  tiger's  skin.
The  Deer'1
Anthropomorphic  ideas  are  held  by  the  Malays almost  as  strongly  in  the  case  of  the  Deer  as  of  any other  animal.
The  Deer  is,  by  all  Malays,  believed  to  have  sprung from  a  man  who  suffered  from  a  severe  ulcer  or  abscess (chabuK)  on  the  leg,  (which  is  supposed  to  have  left  its
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  3,  p.  139.  own    red    deer;    and    the    axis    (A.
2  "  Two  large   and    four  species  of  maculata)    or   spotted    deer.      Of    the small  deer  are  found  in  the  Peninsula,  small  or  Moschine  species,  the  kijang besides    the    babi   rusa   or    hpg-deer,  is  the  largest ;  next  to  this  comes  the which  however  is  not  a  member  of  the  napuh  ;    the  third  in  size  is  the  lanak  ; same   order.     The   large  species  are  :  and    the    smallest   is    the  pelandok  or the     sambur      (Rusa      Aristotelis),    a  true     pigmy    deer."  —  Denys,    Descr. rather  savage  animal,  larger  than  our  Diet,  of  Brit.  Malaya,  s.v.  Deer.
v  LEGEND  ABOUT  THE  DEER  171
trace  on  the  deer's  legs  to  this  day).  Of  the  Perak form  of  this  legend  Sir  William  Maxwell  writes  as follows  :—
"  The  deer  (rusa)  is  sometimes  believed  to  be  the metamorphosed  body  of  a  man  who  has  died  of  an abscess  in  the  leg  (chabiik),  because  it  has  marks  on the  legs  which  are  supposed  to  resemble  those  caused by  the  disease  mentioned.  Of  course  there  are  not wanting  men  ready  to  declare  that  the  body  of  a  man who  has  died  of  chabuk  has  been  seen  to  rise  from the  grave  and  to  go  away  into  the  forest  in  the  shape of  a  deer."1
The  Selangor  legend  is  practically  identical  with that  current  in  Perak.
The  deer  are  frequently  addressed,  in  the  charms used  by  the  hunters,  exactly  as  if  they  were  human beings,  e.g.—
"  If  you  wish  to  wear  bracelets  and  rings Stretch  out  your  two  fore-feet."
These  rings  and  bracelets  are  of  course  the  nooses which  depend  from  the  toils.
In  a  charm  of  similar  import  we  find  :—
"  Ho,  Crown  Prince  (Raja  Muda)  with  your  Speckled  Princess
(Ptitri  Dandi),
Rouse  you  quickly  (from  your  slumbers) And  clasp  (round  your  neck)  King  Solomon's  necklace."
I  may  add  that  in  some  places  the  Pawang  (magi- cian) will  himself  first  enter  the  toils,  probably  with the  object  of  deceiving  the  stag  as  to  their  nature  and purpose.
The  ceremonies   for  hunting  deer  are  somewhat
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  NO.  7,  p.  26.
i?2  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
intricate,  and  it  will  perhaps  be  best  to  commence  by giving  a  general  description  of  deer-catching  as  prac- tised by  the  Malays.
"  This  pastime  "  1  (deer-catching)  "  is  one  the  Malay delights  in.  After  a  rainy  night,  deer  may  be  easily traced  to  their  lair  by  their  footprints,  and  as  they remain  stationary  by  day  the  hunters  have  ample  time to  arrange  their  apparatus.  When  the  hiding-place is  discovered  all  the  young  men  of  the  kampong- assemble,  and  the  following  ceremony  is  performed before  they  sally  out  on  the  expedition  :  Six  or  eight coils  of  rattan  rope,  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  are placed  on  a  triangle  formed  with  three  rice-pounders, and  the  oldest  of  the  company,  usually  an  experienced sportsman,  places  a  cocoa-nut  shell  filled  with  burning incense  in  the  centre,  and  taking  sprigs  of  three  bushes, viz.  the  jellatang,  sapunie,  and  sambon 3  plants  (these, it  is  supposed,  possess  extraordinary  virtues),  he  walks mysteriously  round  the  coils,  beating  them  with  the sprigs,  and  erewhile  muttering  some  gibberish,  which, if  possessing  any  meaning,  the  sage  keeps  wisely  to himself.  During  the  ceremony  the  youths  of  the village  look  on  with  becoming  gravity  and  admiration. It  is  believed  that  the  absence  of  this  ceremony  would render  the  expedition  unsuccessful,  the  deer  would prove  too  strong  for  the  ropes,  and  the  wood  demons frustrate  their  sport  by  placing  insurmountable  obstacles in  their  way.  Much  faith  appears  to  be  placed  in  the ceremony.  Each  coil  referred  to  above  is  sixty  to seventy  fathoms  long,  and  to  the  rope  running  nooses, made  also  of  rattan  rope,  are  attached  about  three  feet
1  J.  D.  Vaughan  in  J.LA.  vol.   xi.  of  this  name.      Possibly  it  may  stand quoted  in  Denys,  I.e.  for   sarimbun   or    samdau,   the    latter
2  Village  or  hamlet.  of  which    at    least  is  commonly  used
3  Sambon.     I  do  not  know  any  plant  by  Malay  medicine-men.
v  HUNTING  THE  DEER  173
apart  from  each  other.  On  reaching  the  thicket wherein  the  deer  are  concealed,  stakes  are  driven  into the  ground  a  few  feet  apart  in  a  straight  line,  the  coils are  then  opened  out,  and  the  rope  attached  to  the stakes,  two  or  three  feet  above  the  ground,  with  the nooses  hanging  down,  and  two  of  the  party  conceal themselves  near  the  stakes  armed  with  knives  for  the purpose  of  despatching  the  deer  when  entangled  in  the nooses.  The  remainder  of  the  hunters  arrange  them- selves on  the  opposite  side  of  the  thicket  and  advance towards  it,  shouting  and  yelling  at  the  top  of  their voices.  The  deer,  startled  from  their  rest,  spring  to their  feet  and  naturally  flee  from  the  noise  towards  the nooses,  and  in  a  short  time  are  entangled  in  them.  As they  struggle  to  escape,  the  concealed  hunters  rush  out and  despatch  them.  Occasionally  the  flight  is  pro- longed till  the  major  party  arrives,  and  then  the  noble creatures  soon  fall  beneath  the  spears  and  knives  of their  assailants.  The  animal  is  divided  between  the sportsmen." l
The  "gibberish"  employed  by  the  deer  Pawangs when  the  latter  enter  the  jungle  is  intended  to  induce the  wood  demons  and  earth  demons  to  recede,  or  at least  to  dissuade  them  from  active  interference  with the  proceedings.  Charms  are  also  employed  by  the Pawang,  as  he  proceeds,  from  time  to  time,  to  "ask for "  a  tree  (to  which  the  toils  may  be  fastened) ;  to "  ask  for  "  a  deer  ;  to  unroll  and  suspend  the  toils ;  to call  upon  the  spirits  (who  are  the  herdsmen  of  the deer)  to  drive  the  latter  down  to  meet  the  dogs ;  to turn  back  the  deer  when  they  have  got  away ;  to
1  I  may  add  that  the  first  person  to       neys  (?)  and   the  Paiuang  to  get  the draw  blood  is  supposed  to  get  sabatang      other  half. daging  ttmbusir,  a  moiety  of  the  kid-
174  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
"prick"  or  urge  on  the  dogs,  or  make  them  bark; to  stop  wild  dogs  from  barking  in  the  jungle,  or  those of  the  pack  from  barking  at  the  wrong  moment ;  to deceive  the  deer  as  to  the  reality  of  the  toils  used  by the  hunters ;  to  deceive  the  spirits  as  to  the  identity of  the  hunting-party  ;  and,  finally,  to  drive  out  the "  mischief"  (badi)  from  the  carcase  of  the  slain  animal ; examples  of  all  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  course  of the  next  few  pages.
The  first  charm  which  I  give  is  one  used  in  "  ask- ing for  deer  "  :—
"  Ho  !  master  of  me  your  slave,  Sidi  the  Dim-eyed, Si  Lailanang  and  Si  Laigan  his  brother, Si  Deripan,  Si  Baung,  Si  Bakar,
Si  Songsang  (Sir  Topsy  Turvy),  Si  Berhanyut  (Sir  Floater), Si  Pongking,  Si  Temungking  ! I  demand  Deer,  a  male  and  a  female, Blunt-hoofed,  hard-browed, Long-eared,  tight-waisted, Shut-eyed,  shaggy-maned,  spotted; If  not  the  shut-eyed,  the  shaggy-maned  and  the  spotted, The  "  rascal,"  the  starveling,  the  mere  skeleton. Most  fervently  we  beg  this  boon,  by  the  light  of  this  very  same  day, By  virtue  of  the  c  kiraman  katibin.' 1 And  here  is  the  token  of  my  petition."  2
The  directions  proceed  :— "  On  first  entering  the  jungle,  say —
"  Ho,  Hantu  Bakar,  Jembalang  Bakar, Turn  a  little  aside, That  I  may  let  loose  my  body-guard."
(By  which  the  "pack  "  is  no  doubt  intended.)
1  Kiramun  katibun  (lit.  "illustrious  tioned  in  the  Koran.      Vide  Hughes,
writers")  are  the  two  recording  angels  Diet,  of  Islam,  s.v.
who  are  said  to  be  with  every  man,  2  The    token    consists    in  chopping
one  on  the  right  hand  to  record  his  down  a  small  tree  and  with  it  piercing
good   deeds,   and   one  on   his  left  to  the  slot  of  the  deer, record  the  evil  deeds.     They  are  men-
v  CEREMONIES  AND  CHARMS  175
"When  you  meet  the  slot,  examine  the  slot.  If  it  is  a  little shortened  on  one  side,  the  quarry  is  in  some  danger ;  if  it  has  gone lame  of  one  hoof,  it  is  a  sign  that  it  will  be  killed  within  seven days.
"  After  entering  the  jungle,  and  finding  the  dogs,  wait  for  the dogs  to  bark,  and  then  give  out  this  '  cooee ' —
"  Ho  !  Si  Lanang,  Si  Lambaun, Si  K£tor,  Si  Becheh  !
Ye  Four  Herdsmen  of  the  Deer,
Come  ye  down  to  meet  the  dogs.
And  refuse  not  to  come  down
Or  ye  shall  be  rebels  unto  God,  etc.
It  is  not  I  who  am  huntsman,
It  is  Pawang  Sidi  (wizard  Sidi)  that  is  huntsman ;
It  is  not  I  whose  dogs  these  are,
It  is  Pawang  Sakti  (the  '  magic  wizard ')  whose  dogs  these  are ;
Let  Dang  Durai  cross  the  water,
It  is  only  a  civet-cat  that  is  left  for  me.
Grant  this  by  virtue  of  my  teacher,  'Toh  Raja —
May  his  art  be  yet  more  powerful  in  my  hands.1
By  virtue  of  c  There  is  no  god  but  God,'  "  etc.
A  deer  Pawang  ('Che  Indut)  also  gave  me  this charm  for  recital  when  the  support  (lit.  "shoulder")  of the  noose  is  being  cut  (for  which  purpose  it  would appear  that  a  young  tree  of  the  kind  called  "  Delik  "  is usually  taken).
"  The  Delik's  branches  spread  out  horizontally  (at  the  top),2 Chop  at  it,  and  it  will  produce  roots.
Though  its  bark  is  destroyed,  a  cudgel  is  still  left  for  people's  bones, Even  though  it  be  worked  on  by  the  charm  Kalinting  Bakar." 3
1  Or,  ' '  whose  art  is  more  powerful  '  Peace  be  with  you,  O  'Tap,  Prophet  of  God,  in
tv-n  mirip  "  whose  charge  is  the  Earth.
""r ,  I  ask  for  this  tree  (to  enable  me)  to  make  fast
P  Possibly  an  allusion  to  the  branch-  these  toils.'
ing  of  the  stag's  horns.     The  last  two  Here  ^         ^  ^  ^          . lines  of  this  charm  are  obscure.
•    3  Another    Pawang    gave    me    the  '  Sir  Tuft '  is  the  name  of  our  rattan,
following     account,     which     is     much  'Sir  Ring' is  the  name  of  our  toils." fuller  :  —  "On    entering    the    jungle  [The  point  of  this  charm  is  that  "  Sir
carry  the  toils  with  you  till  you  meet  Tuft "  is  an  allusion  to   the  origin  of
with  the  slot  of  the  deer,  and  then  ask  the  rattan  rope,  which  must  have  come,
for  a  tree,  saying  as  follows —  of  course,  from  the  "  tufted  "  creeper
176  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
From  the  same  source  I  obtained  this  charm,  ad- dressed to  the  Deer,  but  intended  for  fixing  the  scent (menetapkan  6au],  and  for  suspending  the  toils  (mema- sang  jerat)  :—
"  Teng l  [stands  for]  the  satengteng  flower, Ascend  ye  the  twin  stream. If  you  delight  in  bracelets  and  rings Push  forward  your  two  fore-feet.
"When  setting  the  nooses  (bubohkan perindu  jeraf)  say,  address- ing the  deer  as  before  : —
"  Be  filled  with  yearning,  be  filled  with  longing, As  the  Holy  Basil  grows  even  to  a  rock,
Be  filled  with  yearning  as  you  sit,  be  filled  with  yearning  as  you  go, Fast-bound  by  love  of  this  noose  of  mine."
The  directions  given  me  by  another  Pawang  com- menced with  a  charm  for  emboldening  the  dogs, after  which  the  account  proceeds  : —
"When  you  have  finished  (the  charm  referred  to),  take  seven steps  forward,  leaving  the  toils  behind  you,  and  standing  erect,  look forward  and  call  as  follows  : —
"  O  all  ye  Saids  (lawful  descendants  of  the  Prophet), Unto  you,  my  Lords,  belong  the  Deer, Si  Lambaun  was  the  origin  of  the  Deer, Si  Lanang  is  their  Herdsman, Drive  ye  the  Deer  into  our  toils.
of  that  name.      Similarly,  "  Sir  Ring  "  Sir  Yellow  Glow  knows  all  the  ins  and  outs  of
is  supposed    to  be  an  allusion  to  the  These  toils  of  ours  are  twofold,  O  let  them  not ring  which  formed  the  original  unit  of  be  staled.
the  toils,  a  collection  of  rings  or  nooses  **%  SWo^SSaTfiST
The  object  of  mentioning  the  origin  of  If  they  are  staled  by  the  dogs,  let  our  toils  still anything  is  that  doing  so  is  supposed  kill  the  quarry.
1  ,       &  .,  ,  •  i  If  they  are  staled  by  men,  let  our  toils  still  kill
to  give  one  power  over  the  article  so  ^  quarryj  by  'virtue  ofj.  etc->  etc- ..
addressed,  v.  p.  156  n.,  supra.}    "Hav- ing completed  the  unrolling  of  the  toils,  l  Probably  a  pun  upon  teng,  which
double  the  connecting  rope  (from  which  was    explained    to    me    as    meaning
the  nooses  hang)  in  two,  and  when  this  kaki  ta-6'laA  ("one  foot  only"),  as  in
is  done,  enter  them,  holding  them  by  bMeng-teng,   "to    go   on    one    foot,"
the  connecting  rope  (kajar),  and  say —  to  hobble;    tengkis,   "with    one    foot
•;  shortened    or    shrunken,"    etc.        The
'  O  Mentala  (i.e.  Batara)  Guru,  and  Teachers  "satengteng     flower"    was    explained one  and  all  (dengan  Guru uru-urv),  and  Sir  ,        ,
Yellow  Glow,  as  another  name  for  the  satawar.
v  OTHER  HUNTING  CHARMS  177
This  causeway  of  rock  (f if  fan  bahi)  is  your  high  road  and  market- square,
The  resort  of  innumerable  people. Follow,  follow  in  long  procession, And  let  the  "  Assembly  "-Flower  unfold  its  petals. Come  in  procession,  come  in  succession, Our  toils  have  come  to  summon  you  to  the  spot. Ho,  Deer  that  are  unfortunate,  Deer  that  are  curst, Enter  this  path  of  mine  which  is  empty  of  men. On  the  left  stand  spearmen, On  the  right  stand  spearmen, And  whichever  of  (those  two)  ways  you  go, By  that  self-same  way  will  you  be  turned  back.
"  Now  proceed  till  you  meet  the  stag,  and  as  he  rouses  himself from  slumber,  say  : —
"  Ho,  Crown  Prince  with  your  Speckled  Princess, Rouse  you  in  haste  and  slip  on  King  Solomon's  royal  breast  orna- ment.
Receive  it,  receive  it  in  your  turn, And  do  ye  (huntsmen)  shout  '  Bi '  again  and  again.
"  [Here  the  spearmen  right  and  left  shout  in  concert.] "  So,  too,  when  spearing  the  deer,  say —
"  It  is  not  I  who  spear  you, It  is  Pawang  Sidi  who  spears  you.
"  When  you  have  secured  a  deer,  flick  (kebaskari)  the  carcase thrice  in  a  downward  direction  with  a  black  cloth  or  with a  leafy  spray  (if  you  will),  such  as  the  deer  feed  upon,  for  in- stance with  the  sendayan  (or  sendereian,  a  kind  of  sedge),  or with  fern-shoots,  and  call  out : —
"  O  Si  Lanang,  Si  Lambaun, Si  KStor,  Si  Becheh,  who  are  Four  Persons, Take  back  your  own  share  (of  the  carcase).1
1  The  corresponding  charm  for  driv-  D°  me  n°  harm  °r  scathe.
ing  out  the  mischief,  given  by  another  "*£SgS?££**  *  sha"  *  con'
deer   Pawang  ('Che  Indut),  appears  to  Eaten  and  enclosed   in  Disaster  (bintongan),
be  more  appropriate  :—  ofTh^Koran"'11  by  tbe  ^^  Divisions
,  - ,.    ,  .  ,  Smitten  by  the  sanctity  of  the  Four  Corners  of O  Mischief,  Mother  of  Mischiefs,  tne  g^rth
MLschiefsOne  Hundred  and  Ninety  (in  number),  By  virtue  of  e'tc.   etc. [ 1  know  the  origin  from  which  you  sprang.
The  mischief  of  an  Iguana  was  your  origin.  Bintongan  was  explained  to  me  care-
The  Heart  of  Timber  was  your  origin,  f..iiv       --   _  h^nfkana        fralnmitv       or
The  Yellow  Glow  of  Sunset  was  your  origin,  -  oetunana      (calamity     or
Return  to  the  places  from  whence  ye  came,  disaster).
N
1 78  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  Here  '  take  the  representative  parts,  pierce  them  with  a  rattan line,  and  suspend  them  from  a  tree.' "
But  the  fullest  account  of  this  ceremony  (of  driving out  the  mischief  from  the  carcase)  runs  as  follows  :—
"  When  you  have  caught  the  deer,  cast  out  the  mischief  from  it (buang  dia-punya  badt).  To  effect  this,  take  a  black  jacket  such  as can  cast  out  this  mischief  (if  no  black  jacket  is  obtainable,  take  the branch  of  any  tree),  and  stroke  (the  carcase)  from  the  head  down- wards to  the  feet  and  the  rump,  saying  as  you  do  so : —
"  Ho  Badi  Serang,  Badi  Mak  Buta, Si  Panchor  Mak  Tuli, It  is  not  I  who  cast  out  these  mischiefs, It  is  the  Junior  Dogboy  who  casts  them  out. It  is  not  I  who  cast  out  these  mischiefs, It  is  the  Dogboy  Rukiah  who  casts  them  out. It  is  not  I  who  cast  out  these  mischiefs, It  is  Mukael 1  (Michael)  who  casts  them  out. It  is  not  I  who  cast  out  these  mischiefs, It  is  Israfel  who  casts  them  out. It  is  not  I  who  cast  out  these  mischiefs, It  is  Azrael  who  casts  them  out. It  is  not  I  who  cast  out  these  mischiefs, It  is  Mukarael  (?)  who  casts  them  out. I  know  the  origin  of  these  mischiefs, They  are  the  offspring  of  the  Jin  Ibni  Ujan,2 Who  dwell  in  the  open  spaces  and  hill-locked  basins. Return  ye  to  your  open  spaces  and  hill-locked  basins, And  do  me  no  harm  or  scathe. I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  spring, From  the  offspring  of  the  Jin  Ibni  Ujan  do  ye  spring.
"  Here  take  small  portions  of  his  eyes,  ears,  mouth,  nose,  hind-feet, fore-feet,  hair  (of  his  coat),  liver,  heart,  spleen  and  horns  (if  it  be  a stag),  wrap  them  up  in  a  leaf,  and  deposit  them  in  the  slot  of  his approaching  tracks,  saying  :  '  O  Mentala  (Batara)  Guru,  one  a  month, two  a  month,  three  a  month,  four  a  month,  five  a  month,  six  a  month, seven  a  month  (be  the  deer  which  fall)  by  night  to  you,  by  day  to me.  One  deer  I  take  with  me,  and  one  I  leave  behind.' "
A  deer  Pawang  named  'Che  Indut  gave  me  a  charm
1  This  and  the  four  succeeding  names       Israfel,  Azrael,  and    Gabriel."       Vide are  evidently  corruptions  of  the  names       p.  98,  supra. of    the    four    archangels,     "  Michael,  2    Vide  pp.  94,  95,  note,  supra.
v  THE  MOUSE-DEER  179
for  turning  the  deer  back  upon  their  tracks,  "though their  flesh  was  torn  to  rags  and  their  bones  well- becudgelled."  It  concluded  with  the  following  appeal to  the  spirits  :—
"  Ho  (ye  Spirits)  turn  back  my  Deer  ! If  you  do  not  turn  them  back, At  sea  ye  shall  get  no  drink, Ashore  ye  shall  find  no  food. By  virtue  of  the  word  of  God,"  etc.
I  will  conclude  with  the  following  charm,  believed to  be  a  means  of  bringing  the  stag  low  :—
"  Measure  off  three  sticks  (probably  dead  wood  taken  from  the slot  of  the  deer,  as  in  the  case  of  the  elephant),  their  length  being measured  by  the  distance  from  the  roof  of  your  mouth  to  the teeth  of  the  lower  jaw.  Lay  these  sticks  in  a  triangular  form  in- side the  slot  of  the  stag,  press  the  left  thumb  downwards  in  the centre  of  the  triangle,  and  humble  your  heart.  This  will  humble the  deer's  heart  too."
The  Mouse-deer  or  chevrotin  is  the  "  Brer  Rabbit " of  the  Malays.  It  figures  in  many  proverbial  sayings and  romances,  in  which  it  is  credited  with  extraor- dinary sagacity,  and  is  honoured  by  the  title  of  "  Mentri B'lukar,"  the  "Vizier  of  the  (secondary)  Forest- Growth."1
It  is  generally  taken  by  means  of  a  snare  called tapah  pelandok,  but  sometimes  by  tapping  on  the ground  with  sticks  (niengetok  pelandok\  the  sound  of which  is  supposed  to  imitate  the  drumming  of  the buck's  fore-feet  upon  the  ground  in  rutting-time,  by which  the  attention  of  the  doe  is  attracted.  Whatever the  reason  may  be,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  method is  often  successful.
When    this    "tapping"    method    is   adopted,    the
1   In  the  Pllandok  Jinaka,  a  Malay       "  Sheikh  lalam  (or  Shah  'aJam)  di  Rim- beast-fable,  the  Mouse-deer   is  styled       6a,"  "  Chief  (or  King)  of  the  Forest"
i8o  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
charms  used  are  similar  to  those  used  for  calling  the big  deer,  e.g. —
"  Arak-arak  iring-iring Kembang  bunga  si  Panggil-Panggil, Datang  berarak,  datang  beriring, Raja  Suleiman  datang  memanggil.
Follow  in  procession,  follow  in  succession, The  Assembly-flower  has  opened  its  petals. Come  in  procession,  come  in  succession, King  Solomon  comes  to  summon  you."
But  at  the  end  of  the  charm  is  added,  "  Ini-lah gong-nya"  i.e.  "This  is  his  (King  Solomon's)  gong."
The  stick  which  is  used  may  be  of  any  kind  of wood  except  a  creeper,  and  the  best  place  for  the operation  is  where  the  ground  sounds  hollow  when tapped.  Either  three,  five,  or  seven  leaves  must, however,  be  laid  on  the  spot  before  the  tapping  is commenced.
The  directi9ns  for  setting  the  snare  (jerat  or  tapah pelandok}  were  taken  down  by  me  as  follows  : —
First  look  for  a  tree  whose  sap  is  viscid,  and  chop at  it  thrice  (with  a  cutlass).  If  the  splinters  fall,  one the  right  and  the  other  the  wrong  way  up  (lit.  one prone  and  the  other  supine),  it  is  a  bad  sign  (though  it is  a  good  sign  when  one  is  setting  a  trap) ;  for  in  the case  of  a  snare  they  must  fall  the  wrong  way  up (supine).
When  this  is  done,  commence  to  set  the  snare near  the  foot  of  a  tree,  at  about  a  fathom's  distance, and  say  :—
"  As  a  cocoa-nut  shell  rocks  to  and  fro When  filled  with  clay, Avaunt  ye,  Jembalang  and  Badi, That  I  may  set  this  snare."
HUNTING- DOGS  181
Next  you  say  : —
"  Ho,  Sir  '  Pointed-Hoof,' Sir  'Sharp-Muzzle,'
Do  you  step  upon  this  snare  that  I  have  spread Within  two  days  or  three.
If  you  do  not  step  upon  this  snare  that  I  have  spread Within  two  days  or  three,
You  shall  be  choked  to  death  with  blood  in  your  throat, You  shall  be  in  sore  straits  within  the  limits  of  your  own  Big  Jungle. At  sea  you  shall  get  no  drink, Ashore  you  shall  get  no  food, By  virtue  of,"  etc.
Hunting-Dogs
Hunting-dogs  are  spoken  to  continually  as  if  they were  human  beings.  Several  examples  of  this  occur in  the  deer  charms.
Thus  we  find  the  following  passage  addressed  to the  dogs  :—
"  Let  not  go  the  scent, Formidable  were  you  from  the  first ;
Hot-foot,  hot-foot,  do  you  pursue,
If  you  do  not  pursue  hot-foot,
I  will  minimise  my  benediction  (lit.  my  '  Peace  be  with  you ').
If  it  (the  deer)  be  a  buck,  you  shall  have  him  for  a  brother ;
If  it  be  a  doe,  you  shall  have  her  for  a  wife."
So  too,  again,  after  calling  several  dogs  by  name, the  Pawang  gets  together  the  accessories  (leaves  of  the tukas  and  lenjuang,  a  brush  of  leaves  (sa-cherek)  and  a black  cloth),  and  exclaims  : —
"  Bark,  Sir  Slender-foot ;  bark,  Sir  Brush-tail."
The  Pawang  generally  tries  to  deceive  the  deer  as to  his  ownership  of  the  hunting-dogs.  Thus  he  will say  : —
182  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  It  is  not  I  whose  dogs  these  are, It  is  the  magical  deer  Pawang  whose  dogs  these  are."
So,  too,  they  are  called  by  certain  specific  names (according  to  their  breed  and  colour),  which  are  in several  cases  identical  with  the  names  of  the  dogs with  which  the  wild  Spectre  Huntsman  (the  most terrible  of  all  personified  diseases  in  the  Malay  cate- gory) hunts  down  his  prey.1
Ugliness  is  by  no  means  looked  upon  as  a  dis- advantage, but  rather  the  opposite.  An  ugly  dog  is apparently  formidable.  Thus  we  find  a  dog  addressed as  follows  : —
"  Let  not  go  the  scent  (of  the  quarry) As  you  were  formidable  (lit.  ugly)2  from  the  first."
Again,  the  description  of  the  "good  points"  of some  of  these  dogs  which  is  given  in  the  Appendix would,  if  ugliness  and  formidability  are  convertible terms,  satisfy  the  most  exacting  whipper-in,  the  so- called  good  points  being  for  the  most  part  a  mere list  of  deformities.  These  points,  however,  are  merely the  external  sign  of  the  Luck  to  which  dogs,  as  well as  human  beings,  are  believed  to  be  born.  In  a fine  passage  we  are  told  : —
"  From  the  seven  Hills  and  the  seven  Valleys Comes  the  intense  barking  of  my  Dogs. My  Dogs  are  Dogs  of  Luck, Not  Luck  that  is  adventitious, But  Luck  incarnate  with  their  bodies. Go  tread  upon  the  heaped  and  rotting  leaves, And  never  desert  the  scent."
Speaking  of  dog-lore  generally,  it  may  be  remarked that  though  dogs  are  very  frequently  kept  by  the
1   Vide  p.  117. 2  Cp.  our  use  of  the  phrase  "  an  ugly  customer,"  -vide  App.  Ixxxi.
WILD  DOGS  183
Malays,  it  is  considered  unlucky  to  keep  them.  "The dog  ...  is  unlucky.  He  longs  for  the  death  of  his master,  an  event  which  will  involve  the  slaying  of animals  at  the  funeral  feast,  when  the  bones  will  fall  to the  dogs.  When  a  dog  is  heard  howling  at  night,  he is  supposed  to  be  thinking  of  the  broken  bones  (niat handak  mengutib  tulang patati)" *
Even  the  wild  dogs  in  the  jungle 2  are  warned  not to  bark,  and  are  addressed  as  if  they  were  human  : —
"  If  you  bark  your  windpipe  shall  burst, If  you  smack  your  lips  your  tongue  shall  be  docked.
If  you  come  nearer,  you  shall  break  your  leg ;
Return  to  the  big  virgin  jungle,
Return  to  your  caverns  and  hill-locked  basins,
To  the  stream  which  has  no  head-waters,
To  the  pond  which  was  never  dug,
To  the  waters  which  bear  no  passengers
To  the  fountain-head  which  is  [never]  dry.
If  you  do  not  return,  you  shall  die,
Cursed  by  the  First  Pen  (i.e.  the  Human  Tongue),
Pierced  by  the  twig  of  a  gomu/i-pa\m,s
Impaled  by  a  palm  thatch-needle,
Transfixed  by  a  porcupine's  quill."
Bears  and  Monkeys
"  The  Bear 4  is  believed  to  be  the  mortal  foe  of  the Tiger,  which  he  sometimes  defeats  in  single  combat.
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  p.  26.  we   shall    not    be   affected   by   them.
2  The  wild  dogs  of  the  jungle  are  Therefore  do  all  Malays  give  tongue considered  by  Malays  to  be  not  natural  when  they  meet  the  wild  dog  in  the dogs,  but  "ghost  "dogs  of  the  pack  of  the  forest."
Spectre  Huntsman.  They  are  regarded  3  Or  Sugar-palm  (Arenga  sacchari- ns most  dangerous  to  meet,  for,  accord-  /era).
ing  to  a  Malay  informant,  "  if  they  bark  4  "  The  Malayan  Sun-bear,  the  only at  us,  we  shall  assuredly  die  where  we  animal  of  the  bear  species  in  the  Pen- stand  and  shall  not  be  able  to  return  insula.  It  is  also  known  as  the  Honey  - home  ;  if,  however,  we  see  them  and  bear,  from  its  fondness  for  that  sweet, bark  at  them  before  they  bark  at  us,  It  is  black  in  colour,  with  the  excep-
1 84  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
(jBruang,  the  Malay  word  for  'bear,'  has  a  curious resemblance  to  our  word  'Bruin.'1)  A  story  is  told of  a  tame  bear  which  a  Malay  left  in  charge  of  his house  and  of  his  sleeping  child  while  he  was  absent from  home.  On  his  return  he  missed  his  child,  the house  was  in  disorder,  as  if  some  struggle  had  taken place,  and  the  bear  was  covered  with  blood.  Hastily drawing  the  conclusion  that  the  bear  had  killed  and devoured  the  child,  the  enraged  father  slew  the  animal with  his  spear,  but  almost  immediately  afterwards  he found  the  carcase  of  a  tiger,  which  the  faithful  bear  had defeated  and  killed,  and  the  child  emerged  unharmed from  the  jungle,  where  she  had  taken  refuge.  It  is unnecessary  to  point  out  the  similarity  of  this  story  to the  legend  of  Beth-Gelert.  It  is  evidently  a  local version  of  the  story  of  the  Ichneumon  and  the  Snake in  the  Pancha-tantra. "
Monkeys  and  men  have  always  been  associated  in native  tradition,  and  Malay  folklore  is  no  exception to  the  rule.  Thus  we  get  the  tradition  of  the  great man-like  ape,  the  Mawas  (a  reminiscence  of  the  orang- outang or  mias  of  Borneo),  which  is  said  to  make shelters  for  itself  in  the  forks  of  trees,  and  to  be  born with  the  blade  of  a  cutlass  (woodknife)  in  place  of  the bone  of  the  forearm,  so  that  it  is  able  to  cut  down the  undergrowth  as  it  walks  through  the  jungle.  It
tion    of  a  semi-lunar-shaped  patch  of  l  Bruin  is  also  the  Dutch  word  for  a
white  on   the   breast,  and  a  yellowish-  bear.     The  Malay  form  Beruang  has
white  patch  on  the  snout  and  upper  also  been  derived  from  ruang,  which
jaw.       The  fur  is  fine  and  glossy.      Its  is  assumed,  for  this  occasion  only,  to
feet  are  armed  with  formidable  claws,  mean  a   "cave,"  in  order  that  Beru-
and  its  lips  and  tongue  are  peculiarly  ang  may  be  explained  as  meaning  the
long    and    flexible,    all    three    organs  cave-animal.       There   is  no   evidence,
adapting  it  to  tear  open  and  get  at  the  however,  to  show  that  ruang  ever  did
apertures   in  old  trees  where  the  wild  mean  a  cave,  nor  is  the  Malay  bear  a
bees  usually    build." — Denys,    Descr.  cave-animal.
Die.  Brit.  Mai.,  s.v.  Bruang.  2  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  p.  23.
v  BEARS  AND  MONKEYS  185
is  believed,  moreover,  occasionally  to  carry  off  and mate  with  human  kind.1
The  Siamang  (Hylobates  lar)?  which  walks  on  its hind-legs,  is,  however,  the  species  which  is  most commonly  associated  in  legend  with  the  human  race ; in  fact,  it  is  not  impossible  that  there  may  sometimes have  been  a  confusion  between  its  name  (siamang) and  Semang,  which  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  abori- ginal (Negrito)  races  of  the  interior.  The  following Malay  legend,  which  I  took  down  at  Labu  in  Selangor is  believed  to  explain  its  origin,  and  also  that  of  the Bear:8-
Once  upon  a  time  her  Highness  the  Princess Telan  became  the  affianced  bride  of  Si  Malim Bongsu.  After  the  betrothal  Si  Malim  Bongsu sailed  away  and  did  not  return  when  the  period  of the  engagement,  which  was  fixed  at  from  three  to four  months,  came  to  an  end.
Then  Si  Malim  Panjang,  elder  brother  of  Si Malim  Bongsu,  decided  to  take  the  place  of  his younger  brother,  and  be  married  to  the  Princess Telan.  The  latter,  however,  repelled  his  advances, and  he  therefore  attacked  her  savagely ;  but  she
1  Cp.  Cliff.,  Stud,  in  Brown  Hum.  bank  of  the  river.     If  any  matter  of p.  243  seqq.  (The  Strange  Elopement  fact  person  should  doubt  the  truth  of of  Chaling  the  Dyak).  this  tradition,  are  there  not  two  facts
2  There  seems  to  be  some  doubt  as  for  the  discomfiture  of  scepticism — the to  the  scientific  nomenclature  properly  monkey  forts  (called   Batu   Mawah  to applicable  to  the  Siamang.  this  day)  threatening  each  other  from
The  following  is  a  specimen  of  a  opposite  banks  of  the  river,  and  the monkey  legend  :  "A  little  farther  up-  assurance  of  all  Perak  Malays  that  no stream  two  rocks  facing  each  other,  one  Mawah  is  to  be  found  on  the  left  bank?" on  each  side  of  the  river,  are  said  to  — -J.R.A.S.^  S.B.,  No.  9,  p.  48. have  been  the  forts  of  two  rival  tribes  3  According  to  another  account,  the of  monkeys,  the  Mawah  (Simia  lar)  siamang  is  said  to  have  originated and  the  Siamang  (Simia  syndactyla),  in  from  akar  pulai,  i.e.  the  roots  of  a a  terrible  war  which  was  waged  between  pulai  tree  (the  Malay  substitute  for them  in  a  bygone  age.  The  Siamangs  cork,  used  to  form  floats  for  the  fishing- defeated  their  adversaries,  whom  they  nets), have  ever  since  confined  to  the  right
r86  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
turned  herself  into  an  ape  (siamang)  and  escaped  to the  jungle,  so  that  Si  Malim  Panjang  desisted  from pursuit.  Then  the  ape  climbed  up  into  a  pagar- anak  tree  which  grew  on  the  sea-shore,  and  leaned over  the  sea,  and  there  she  chanted  these  words  :—
"  O  my  dear  Malim  Bongsu,
You  have  broken  your  solemn  promise  and  engagement, And  I  have  to  take  upon  myself  the  form  of  an  ape."
Now  Si  Malim  Bongsu  was  passing  at  the  time, and  on  recognising  the  voice  of  the  Princess  Telan  he took  a  blow-gun  and  shot  her  so  that  she  fell  into  the sea.  Then  he  took  rose-water  and  sprinkled  it  over her,  so  that  she  resumed  her  natural  shape,  and  they started  to  go  home  together.  Still,  however,  Si Malim  Bongsu  would  not  wed  her,  but  promised  that he  would  do  so  when  he  came  back  from  his  next voyage,  whereupon  the  Princess  chanted  these words  : —
"  If  you  do  not  return  within  three  months You  will  find  me  turned  into  an  ape."
The  same  course  of  events,  however,  happened  as before.  Malim  Bongsu  did  not  return  at  the  time appointed ;  his  elder  brother,  Malim  Panjang  once more  attacked  her,  and,  leaping  towards  an  areca palm,  she  once  more  became  an  ape,  whereupon  she chanted  as  before  :—
"  O  my  dear  Malim  Bongsu,
You  have  broken  your  solemn  promise  and  engagement, And  I  am  forced  to  become  an  ape."
Again  Malim  Bongsu,  as  he  passed  by,  heard  and recognised  her  voice  ;  but  upon  learning  that  he  had been  for  the  second  time  the  cause  of  his  Princess's troubles,  he  exclaimed,  "  Better  were  it  for  me  were
METAMORPHOSES  187
I  nothing  but  a  big  fish  "  ;  and  leaping  into  the  water he  disappeared,  and  was  changed  into  a  big  fish  as  he desired.
Now  the  Princess's  nurse  (who  was  called  "The Daughter  of  Sakembang  China  ")  was  at  the  same  time transformed  into  a  bear,  and  as  they  were  bathing at  the  time  when  they  were  surprised,  and  had  not time  to  wash  off  all  the  soap  (rice-cosmetic),  the  white marks  on  the  breast  and  brows  of  the  bear  and  on the  breast  and  brows  of  the  ape  (siamang)  have remained  unto  this  day.
Occasionally  the  opposite  transformation  is  believed to  take  place,  some  species  of  the  monkey  tribe  being supposed  to  turn  into  fish.
Thus  the  tira  (Macacus  cynomolgus)  is  believed  to develop  into  a  species  of  fish  called  senunggang, and  of  the  fish  called  kalul  (kalui  or  kalue),  Sir  W.  E. Maxwell  writes  :  "  The  ikan  kalul  (is  believed)  to  be a  monkey  transformed.  Some  specially  favoured  ob- servers have  seen  monkeys  half  through  the  process of  metamorphosis — half-monkey  and  half-fish."  The species  of  monkey  which  is  believed  to  turn  into  the ikan  kalul  is,  as  I  was  told  in  Selangor,  the  ffrok  or "cocoa-nut  monkey."
"  Ber hakim  kapada  brok  is  a  Malay  proverbial expression  which  means,  "'To  make  the  monkey judge,'  or,  'to  go  to  the  monkey  for  justice.'  A fable  is  told  by  the  Malays  of  two  men,  one  of  whom planted  bananas  on  the  land  of  the  other.  When  the fruit  was  ripe  each  claimed  it,  but  not  being  able  to come  to  any  settlement  they  referred  the  matter  to the  arbitration  of  a  monkey  (of  the  large  kind  called brok].  The  judge  decided  that  the  fruit  must  be
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  NO.  7,  p.  26.
i88  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
divided ;  but  no  sooner  was  this  done  than  one  of the  suitors  complained  that  the  other's  share  was  too large.  To  satisfy  him  the  monkey  reduced  the  share of  the  other  by  the  requisite  amount,  which  he  ate himself.  Then  the  second  suitor  cried  out  that  the share  of  the  first  was  now  too  large.  It  had  to  be reduced  to  satisfy  him,  the  subtracted  portion  going  to the  monkey  as  before.  Thus  they  went  on  wrangling until  the  whole  of  the  fruit  was  gone,  and  there was  nothing  left  to  wrangle  about.  Malay  judges,  if they  are  not  calumniated,  have  been  known  to  pro- tract proceedings  until  both  sides  have  exhausted their  means  in  bribes.  In  such  cases  the  unfortunate suitors  are  said  to  ber hakim  kapada  brok."1
The  Wild  Pig  and  Other  Animals
There  are  several  superstitions  about  the  Wild Boar  which  prove  that  it  was  not  always  regarded  as an  unclean  animal.
Of  these  the  following  recipe,  which  was  given me  by  a  Jugra  (Selangor)  Malay,  for  turning  brass into  gold  is  the  most  remarkable  :—
"  Kill  a  wild  pig  and  rip  open  its  paunch.  Sew up  in  this  a  quantity  of  old  'scrap'  brass,  pile  timber over  it,  burn  it,  and  then  leave  it  alone  until  the  grass has  grown  right  over  it.  Then  dig  up  the  gold." Again,  certain  wild  boars  are  believed  to  carry  on their  tushes  a  talisman  of  extraordinary  power,  which is  called  rantei  babi,  or  "Wild  Boar's  Chain." This  chain  consists,  it  is  asserted,  of  three  links  of various  metals  (gold,  silver,  and  amalgam),  and  is hung  up  on  a  shrub  by  the  wild  boar  when  he  is
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  I,  pp.  93,  94.
v  BOARS  AND  BUFFALOES  189
enjoying  his  wallow,  so  that  it  is  occasionally  stolen by  Malays  who  know  his  habits.  I  may  add  that, according  to  a  Malay  at  Langat,  the  "  were-tiger" (rimau  jadi-jadian)  occasionally  appears  in  the  shape of  a  wild  boar  escaping  from  a  grave,  in  the  centre of  which  may  be  afterwards  seen  the  hole  by  which the  animal  has  escaped.
"  Among  the  modern  Malays  avoidance  of  the  flesh of  swine  and  of  contact  with  anything  connected  with the  unclean  animal  is,  of  course,  universal.  No  tenet of  El-Islam  is  more  rigidly  enforced  than  this.  It  is singular  to  notice,  among  a  people  governed  by  the ordinances  of  the  Prophet,  traces  of  the  observance of  another  form  of  abstinence  enjoined  by  a  different religion.  The  universal  preference  of  the  flesh  of the  Buffalo  to  that  of  the  Ox  in  Malay  countries  is evidently  a  prejudice  bequeathed  to  modern  times by  a  period  when  cow -beef  was  as  much  an  abomina- tion to  Malays  as  it  is  to  the  Hindus  of  India  at the  present  day.  This  is  not  admitted  or  suspected by  ordinary  Malays,  who  would  probably  have  some reason,  based  on  the  relative  wholesomeness  of  buffalo and  cow-beef,  to  allege  in  defence  of  their  preference of  the  latter  to  the  former."  l
To  the  above  I  may  add  that  it  is  invariably  the flesh  of  the  Buffalo,  and  not  that  of  the  Ox,  which  is eaten  sacrificially  on  the  occasion  of  festivities.2  But the  flesh  of  the  so-called  White  (albino)  Buffalo (kerbau  balar]  is  generally  avoided  as  food,  though  I have  known  it  to  be  prescribed  medicinally  (as  in  the case  of  Raja  Kahar,  a  son  of  H.H.  the  Sultan  of
1  J.R.A.S,,  S.B.,  No.  7,  p.  22.  breast-ornament  (dokoh)  hung  round  its
2  The  sacrificial  buffalo  (when  pre-       neck(z*V&  PI.  n,Fig.  2).     In  the  case  of sented  to  a  Raja)  is  covered  with   a      a  great  Raja  or  Sultan,  yellow  cloth  is cloth,  and  has  its  horns  dressed  and  a      used.
igo  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
Selangor,  the  circumstances  of  whose  illness  will  be detailed  elsewhere).1  As  might  be  expected,  a  story  is told  by  the  Malays  to  account  for  this  distinction.  The general  outline  of  the  tale  is  to  the  effect  that  a  Malay boy  (a  mere  child)  fell  into  the  big  rice-bin  (kepok)  in his  parents'  absence  and  was  suffocated  by  the  rice. After  some  days  the  body  began  to  decompose,  and the  ooze  emanating  from  the  rice-bin  was  licked  up  by a  buffalo  belonging  to  the  boy's  parents.  The  atten- tion of  these  latter  being  thus  attracted  to  the  rice-bin, they  found  therein  the  remains  of  their  child,  and thereupon  cursed  the  buffalo,  which  (we  are  led  to infer)  became  "  white,"  and  has  remained  so  ever since.  According  to  one  version,  a  ground  -  dove (tekukur)  was  implicated  both  in  the  offence  and  the punishment  which  followed  it.  Wherefore  to  this day  no  man  eats  of  the  flesh  of  either  of  the  offenders.
Perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  transformation in  which  the  Malays  implicitly  believe  is  that  of  the Squirrel,  which  is  supposed  to  be  developed  from  a large  caterpillar  called  ulat  sentadu?
About  the  Cat  there  are  many  superstitions  which show  that  it  is  believed  to  possess  supernatural powers.  Thus  it  is  supposed  to  be  lucky  to  keep cats  because  they  long  for  a  soft  cushion  to  lie  upon, and  so  (indirectly)  wish  for  the  prosperity  of  their
1  Infra,  Chap.  VI.  pp.  450-452.  disiacs    by    the   natives.   .   .   .   Among
2  I  may  add  that  the  dried  penis  of  them    are    the    ovipositor  of  a   grass- the  squirrel  (chtila  tupei)  is  believed  to  hopper,  which  is  popularly  supposed  to be  a  most  powerful  aphrodisiac,  and  be    the    male    organ    of  the    squirrel ; that  many  Malays  believe  that  squirrels  Balanophora,  sp. ,  a  rare  plant  growing are  occasionally  found  dead  with  this  on  Mount  Ophir,  and  the  Durian  (Durio organ  caught  fast  in  cleft  timber.  zibetkinus)."     Mr.  Ridley  regards  the
Mr.  H.  N.  Ridley,  in  a  pamphlet  on  use  of  Balanophora  for  this  purpose  as
Malay  Materia  Medica,  already  referred  an  illustration  of  the  "doctrine  of
to,  says  : —  signatures."
"Many  things  are  used  as  aphro-
v  IDEAS  ABOUT  CATS  191
master.1  On  the  other  hand,  cats  must  be  very carefully  prevented  from  rubbing  up  against  a  corpse, for  it  is  said  that  on  one  occasion  when  this  was neglected,  the  badi  or  Evil  Principle  which  resides in  the  cat's  body  entered  into  the  corpse,  which  thus became  endowed  with  unnatural  life  and  stood  up upon  its  feet.  So  too  the  soaking  of  the  cat  in  a  pan of  water  until  it  is  half-drowned  is  believed  to  produce an  abundance  of  rain.2  It  is,  besides,  believed  to  be extremely  unlucky  to  kill  cats.  Of  this  superstition Mr.  Clifford  says  : —
"  It  is  a  common  belief  among  Malays  that  if  a cat  is  killed  he  who  takes  its  life  will  in  the  next world  be  called  upon  to  carry  and  pile  logs  of  wood, as  big  as  cocoa-nut  trees,  to  the  number  of  the  hairs on  the  beast's  body.  Therefore  cats  are  not  killed ; but  if  they  become  too  daring  in  their  raids  on  the hen-coop  or  the  food  rack,  they  are  tied  to  a  raft  and sent  floating  down  stream,  to  perish  miserably  of hunger.  The  people  of  the  villages  by  which  they pass  make  haste  to  push  the  raft  out  again  into mid-stream,  should  it  in  its  passage  adhere  to  bank or  bathing-hut,  and  on  no  account  is  the  animal suffered  to  land.  To  any  one  who  thinks  about  it, this  long  and  lingering  death  is  infinitely  more  cruel than  one  caused  by  a  blow  from  an  axe ;  but  the Malays  do  not  trouble  to  consider  such  a  detail,  and would  care  little  if  they  did."8
Before  leaving  the  subject  of  cats,  I  must  mention the  belief  that  the  "  fresh- water  fish  called  ikan  belidah  " was  "originally  a  cat."  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  says  that many  Malays  refuse  to  eat  it  for  this  reason,  and
1  VideJ.R.A.S.,  S.3.,  I.e.  3  In  Court  and  Kampong,  p.  47.
2  Vide  p.  108,  supra.
192  BEASTS  AND  BEAST  CHARMS  CHAP.
adds,  "  They  declare  that  it  squalls  like  a  cat  when harpooned,  and  that  its  bones  are  very  white  and fine  like  a  cat's  hairs."1  A  story  is  also  sometimes told  to  account  both  for  the  general  similarity  of  habits of  the  cat  and  the  tiger  and  for  the  fact  that  the  latter, unlike  most  of  the  Felida,  is  not  a  tree-climber.  It is  to  the  effect  that  the  cat  agreed  to  teach  the  tiger its  tricks,  which  it  did,  with  the  exception  of  the  art of  climbing  trees.  The  tiger,  thinking  it  had  learnt all  the  cat's  tricks,  proceeded  to  attack  its  teacher, when  the  cat  escaped  by  climbing  up  a  tree ;  so  the tiger  never  learnt  how  to  climb  and  cannot  climb  trees to  this  day.
Even  the  smallest  and  commonest  of  mammals,  such as  Rats  and  Mice,  are  the  objects  of  many  strange beliefs.  Thus  "clothes  which  have  been  nibbled  by rats  or  mice  must  not  be  worn  again.  They  are  sure to  bring  misfortune,  and  are  generally  given  away  in charity."2
So  too  on  the  Selangor  coast  a  mollusc  called  siput tantarang  or  mentarang  is  believed  to  have  sprung from  a  mouse  ;  and  many  kinds  of  charms,  generally addressed  to  the  "  Prophet  Joseph  "  (Nabi  Yusuf),  are resorted  to  in  order  to  drive  away  rats  and  mice  from the  rice-fields.
The  following  passage  describes  the  general  ideas about  animal  superstitions  which  prevail  on  the  east coast  of  the  Peninsula  : —
"The  beliefs  and  superstitions  of  the  Fisher  Folk would  fill  many  volumes.  They  believe  in  all  manner of  devils  and  local  sprites.  They  fear  greatly  the demons  that  preside  over  animals,  and  will  not willingly  mention  the  names  of  birds  or  beasts  while
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  p.  26.  2  Ibid.
v  SUPERSTITIONS  OF  FISHERMEN  193
at  sea.  Instead,  they  call  them  all  ch$weh  l — which, to  them,  signifies  an  animal,  though  to  others  it  is meaningless,  and  is  supposed  not  to  be  understanded of  the  beasts.  To  this  word  they  tack  on  the sound  which  each  beast  makes  in  order  to  indicate what  animal  is  referred  to ;  thus  the  pig  is  the grunting  chSweh,  the  buffalo  the  ch£weh  that  says  'uak,' and  the  snipe  the  chdweh  that  cries  '  kek-kek'  Each boat  that  puts  to  sea  has  been  medicined  with  care, many  incantations  and  other  magic  observances  having been  had  recourse  to,  in  obedience  to  the  rules  which the  superstitious  people  have  followed  for  ages.  After each  take  the  boat  is  '  swept '  by  the  medicine  man with  a  tuft  of  leaves  prepared  with  mystic  ceremonies, which  is  carried  at  the  bow  for  the  purpose.  The omens  are  watched  with  exact  care,  and  if  they  be adverse  no  fishing-boat  puts  to  sea  that  day.  Every act  in  their  lives  is  regulated  by  some  regard  for  the demons  of  the  sea  and  air,  and  yet  these  folk  are nominally  Muhammadans,  and,  according  to  that  faith, magic  and  sorcery,  incantations  to  the  spirits,  and prayers  to  demons,  are  all  unclean  things  forbidden to  the  people.  But  the  Fisher  Folk,  like  other inhabitants  of  the  Peninsula,  are  Malays  first  and Muhammadans  afterwards.  Their  religious  creed  goes no  more  than  skin  deep,  and  affects  but  little  the  manner of  their  daily  life."2
3.    VEGETATION    CHARMS
The  Vegetation  Spirit  of  the  Malays  "  follows  in some  vague  and  partial  way,"  to  use  Professor  Tyler's
1  I  have  not  heard  this  word  used  a  In  Court  and  Kampong,  pp.  147,
on  the  west  coast.     It  is  of  the  east       148. coast  that  Mr.  Clifford  is  here  writing.
O
194  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
words,  from  the  analogy  of  the  Animal  Spirit.  It  is difficult  to  say,  without  a  more  searching  inquiry  than I  have  yet  had  the  opportunity  of  making,  whether Malay  magicians  would  maintain  that  all  trees  had souls  (semangaf]  or  not.  All  that  we  can  be  certain of  at  present  is  that  a  good  many  trees  are  certainly supposed  by  them  to  have  souls,  such,  for  instance,  as the  Durian,  the  Cocoa-nut  palm,  and  the  trees  which produce  Eagle- wood  (gharu\  Gutta  Percha,  Camphor, and  a  good  many  others.
What  can  be  more  significant  than  the  words  and actions  of  the  men  who  in  former  days  would  try  and frighten  the  Durian  groves  into  bearing  ;  or  of  the toddy-collector  who  addresses  the  soul  of  the  Cocoa-nut palm  in  such  words  as,  "  Thus  I  bend  your  neck, and  roll  up  your  hair ;  and  here  is  my  ivory  toddy- knife  to  help  the  washing  of  your  face  " ; 1  or  of  the collectors  of  jungle  produce  who  traffic  in  Eagle- wood,  Camphor,  and  Gutta  (the  spirits  of  the  first two  of  which  trees  are  considered  extremely  powerful and  dangerous)  or,  above  all,  of  the  reapers  who  carry the  "  Rice-soul  "  home  at  harvest  time  ?
A  special  point  in  connection  with  the  Malay  con- ception of  the  vegetation  soul  perhaps  requires  par- ticular attention,  viz.  the  fact  that  apparently  dead  and even  seasoned  timber  may  yet  retain  the  soul  which animated  it  during  its  lifetime.  Thus,  the  instruc- tions for  the  performance  of  the  rites  to  be  used  at  the launching  of  a  boat  (which  will  be  found  below  under the  heading  "  The  Sea,  Rivers,  and  Streams")2  involve an  invocation  to  the  timbers  of  the  boat,  which  would therefore  seem  to  be  conceived  as  capable,  to  some extent,  of  receiving  impressions  and  communications
1    Vide  p.  217,  infra.  2    Vide  p.  279,  infra.
v  KNOTS  AND  CONCRETIONS  195
made  in  accordance  with  the  appropriate  forms  and ceremonies.
So,  too,   a  boat  with  a  large  knot  in   the  centre of  the  bottom  is  considered  good  for  catching  fish, and     in     strict    conformity    with    this    idea    is     the belief  that  the  natural   excrescences  (or  knobs)  and deformities  of  trees  are  mere  external  evidences  of an  indwelling  spirit.    So,  too,  the  fruit  of  the  cocoa-nut palm,  when  the  shell  lacks  the  three  "  eyes  "  to  which we  are  accustomed,  is  believed  to  serve  in  warfare  as  a most  valuable  protection  (pelias)  against  the  bullets  of the  enemy,   and  the  same  may  be  said  in  a  minor degree  of  the  joints  of  "  solid  "  bamboo  (buluh  tumpat] which  are  occasionally  found,  whilst  to  a  slightly  differ- ent category  belong  the  comparatively  numerous  ex- amples of  "  Tabasheer "   (mineral   concretions  in  the wood  of  certain  trees),  which  are  so  highly  valued  by the  Malays  for  talismanic  purposes.     Such  trees  as  the Mali  mali,  Rotan  jernang  (Dragon's-blood   rattan), Buluk   kasap    (rough  bamboo),    etc.,   are  all    said    to supply  instances  of  the  concretions  referred  to,  but  the most  famous  of  them  all  is  without  doubt  the  so-called "cocoa-nut  pearl,"  of  which    I    quote    the    following account  from  Dr.    Denys's  Descriptive  Dictionary  of British  Malaya.
Cocoa-nut  Pearls
The  following  remarks  concerning  these  peculiar accretions  are  extracted  from  Nature : —
"  During  my  recent  travels,"  Dr.  Sidney  Hickson writes  to  a  scientific  contemporary,  "  I  was  frequently asked  by  the  Dutch  planters  and  others  if  I  had  ever seen  '  a  cocoa-nut  stone.'  These  stones  are  said  to be  rarely  found  (i  in  2000  or  more)  in  the  perisperm
196  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
of  the  cocoa-nut,  and  when  found  are  kept  by  the natives  as  a  charm  against  disease  and  evil  spirits. This  story  of  the  cocoa-nut  stone  was  so  constantly told  me,  and  in  every  case  without  any  variation  in its  details,  that  I  made  every  effort  before  leaving  to obtain  some  specimens,  and  eventually  succeeded  in obtaining  two.
"One  of  these  is  nearly  a  perfect  sphere,  14  mm. in  diameter,  and  the  other,  rather  smaller  in  size,  is irregularly  pear-shaped.  In  both  specimens  the  sur- face is  worn  nearly  smooth  by  friction.  The  spherical one  I  have  had  cut  into  two  halves,  but  I  can  find  no concentric  or  other  markings  on  the  polished  cut surfaces.
"  Dr.  Kimmins  has  kindly  submitted  one-half  to  a careful  chemical  analysis,  and  finds  that  it  consists  of pure  carbonate  of  lime  without  any  trace  of  other  salts or  vegetable  tissue.
"  I  should  be  very  glad  if  any  of  your  readers could  inform  me  if  there  are  any  of  these  stones  in any  of  the  museums,  or  if  there  is  any  evidence beyond  mere  hearsay  of  their  existence  in  the  peri- sperm  of  the  cocoa-nut."  1
On  this  letter  Mr.  Thiselton  Dyer  makes  the following  remarks  : — "  Dr.  Hickson's  account  of  the calcareous  concretions  occasionally  found  in  the  central hollow  (filled  with  fluid — the  so-called  '  milk ')  of  the endosperm  of  the  seed  of  the  cocoa-nut  is  extremely interesting.  It  appears  to  me  a  phenomenon  of  the
1  One   of  these    stones    (cocoa  •  nut  nut  in  which   it  was  found,  for  it   is
pearls)   in  my  possession  has  recently  asserted  that  it  is  usually,  if  not  always,
been    presented    to    the    Ethnological  found  in  the  open  eye  or  orifice  at  the
Museum  at  Cambridge.    It  is  encircled  base  of  the  cocoa-nut,  through  which
by  a  dark  ring,  caused,  I  was  told,  by  the  root  would  otherwise  issue. — W.  S. its  adherence  to  the  shell  of  the  cocoa-
THE  DURIAN  TREE  197
same  order  as  tabasheer,  to  which  I  recently  drew attention  in  Nature.
"  The  circumstances  of  the  occurrence  of  these stones  or  '  pearls '  are  in  many  respects  parallel  to those  which  attend  the  formation  of  tabasheer.  In both  cases  mineral  matter  in  palpable  masses  is  with- drawn from  solution  in  considerable  volumes  of  fluid contained  in  tolerably  large  cavities  in  living  plants ; and  in  both  instances  they  are  monocotyledons.
"In  the  case  of  the  cocoa-nut  pearls  the  material is  calcium  carbonate,  and  this  is  well  known  to  concrete in  a  peculiar  manner  from  solutions  in  which  organic matter  is  also  present.
"In  my  note  on  tabasheer  I  referred  to  the reported  occurrence  of  mineral  concretions  in  the wood  of  various  tropical  dicotyledonous  trees.  Ta- basheer is  too  well  known  to  be  pooh-poohed  ;  but some  of  my  scientific  friends  express  a  polite  incre- dulity as  to  the  other  cases.  I  learn,  however,  from Prof.  Judd,  F.R.S.,  that  he  has  obtained  a  specimen of  apatite  found  in  cutting  up  a  mass  of  teak-wood. The  occurrence  of  this  mineral  under  these  circum- stances has  long  been  recorded ;  but  I  have  never had  the  good  fortune  to  see  a  specimen."
The  Durian
The  Durian  tree  (for  an  account  of  whose  famous fruit  the  classical  description  in  Wallace's  Malay Archipelago  may  be  referred  to)  is  a  semi- wild  fruit- tree,  whose  stem  frequently  rises  to  the  height  of some  eighty  or  ninety  feet  before  the  branches  are
1  Quoted  from  the  Singapore  Free  Press  in  Denys'  Descriptive  Dictionary  of British  Malaya,  p.  80.
198  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
met  with.  It  is  generally  planted  in  groves,  which are  often  to  be  found  in  the  jungle  when  all  other traces  of  former  human  habitation  have  completely  dis- appeared, though  even  then  its  fruit,  if  tradition  says true,  is  as  keenly  fought  over  by  the  denizens  of  the forest  (monkeys,  bears,  and  tigers)  as  ever  it  was  by their  temporary  dispossessors.  Interspersed  among the  Durian  trees  will  be  found  numerous  varieties  of orchard  trees  of  a  less  imperial  height,  amongst  which may  be  named  the  Rambutan,1  Rambei,2  Lansat,3 Duku,4  Mangostin,5  and  many  others.  A  small  grove of  these  trees,  which  was  claimed  by  the  late  Sultan 'Abdul  Samad  of  Selangor,  grew  within  about  a  mile  of my  bungalow  at  Jugra,  and  I  was  informed  that  in  years gone  by  a  curious  ceremony  (called  Menyemah  durian) was  practised  in  order  to  make  the  trees  more  pro- ductive. On  a  specially  selected  day,  it  was  said,  the village  would  assemble  at  this  grove,  and  (no  doubt with  the  usual  accompaniment  of  the  burning  of incense  and  scattering  of  rice)  the  most  barren  of the  Durian  trees  would  be  singled  out  from  the  rest. One  of  the  local  Pawangs  would  then  take  a  hatchet (be Hong)  and  deliver  several  shrewd  blows  upon  the trunk  of  the  tree,  saying  : —
"  Will  you  now  bear  fruit  or  not  ? If  you  do  not  I  shall  fell  you."  6
To  this  the  tree  (through  the  mouth  of  a  man  who  had
1  Nephelium  lappaeum,  L.   (Sapin-  *  Resembling   the   last   named,  but daceae).  larger,  and  finer  in  flavour.
2  Baccaurea   motleyana,    Hook.   fil.  '  G"rcinia    «"•»&«'»*>  L-    (Gutti'
^uphorbiaceae).  ,     ,„  ,      ,
I     r  °  bakarang  kau  mahu  berbuah,  atau
'-  Or  Langsat  (Lansium  domesticum,  tidak  ?
Jack'  Meliaceae).  Kalau  tidak,  aku  tebangkan.
THE  MALACCA  CANE  199
been  stationed  for  the  purpose  in  a  Mangostin  tree hard  by)  was  supposed  to  make  answer  : —
"  Yes,  I  will  now  bear  fruit ; I  beg  you  not  to  fell  me." J
I  may  add  that  it  was  a  common  practice  in  the fruit  season  for  the  boys  who  were  watching  for  the fruit  to  fall  (for  which  purpose  they  were  usually stationed  in  small  palm -thatch  shelters)  to  send echoing  through  the  grove  a  musical  note,  which  they produced  by  blowing  into  a  bamboo  instrument  called tuang-tuang.  I  cannot,  however,  say  whether  this custom  now  has  any  ceremonial  significance  or  not, though  it  seems  not  at  all  unlikely  that  it  once  had.2
The  Malacca  Cane
No  less  distinct  are  the  animistic  ideas  of  the Malays  relating  to  various  species  of  the  Malacca- cane  plant.  Mr.  Wray  of  the  Perak  Museum  writes as  follows : —
"  A  Malacca-cane  with  a  joint  as  long  as  the  height of  the  owner  will  protect  him  from  harm  by  snakes and  animals,  and  will  give  him  luck  in  all  things. What  is  called  a  samambu  bangku?  or  daku,  possesses
1  Ya-lah,  sakarang  aku  'tia£  blrbuah  3  In  Selangor  a  freak  of  this  kind  is Aku  minta?  jangan  di-t?bang.  called  samambu  bangkut,  or  "dwarfed
2  This    instrument    consisted    of    a  (stunted)    samambu."      One    of    this single   short  joint   of  bamboo,   about  species  belonged  to  the  Sultan,  and  was nine  inches  in  length  by  three  inches  kept   in   a   yellow  case.     Sometimes, in  diameter,  closed  at  one  end  only,  whether  through  the  splitting  of  the near  which  was  an  orifice  into  which  bark  on  one  side  or  some  similar  cause, the    performer    blew.      These    instru-  an  excrescence  like  a  gigantic  rat-tail ments   (tuang-tuang)   are  reported    to  will  form  on  one  side  of  the  stem,  a lave  been  formerly  used  by  the  Langat  peculiarity  which  is  believed   to  give pirates,  and  are  said  to  be  still  used  the  stick  that  is  made  from  it  immense by  the   Malay   fishermen  at   Bernam,  value.    To  merely  tap  a  person  in  play in   Selangor,    for   calling   their   boats  with  one  of  these   sticks  (which    are together.  called    sfngat   part    or    "sting -rays'
200  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
the  power  of  killing  any  one  even  when  the  person is  only  slightly  hurt  by  a  blow  dealt  with  it.  These are  canes  that  have  died  down  and  have  begun  to shoot  again  from  near  the  root.  They  are  very  rare, one  of  eighteen  inches  in  length  is  valued  at  six  or seven  dollars,  and  one  long  enough  to  make  a  walking stick  of,  at  thirty  to  fifty  dollars.  At  night  the  rotan samambu  plant  is  said  to  make  a  loud  noise,  and, according  to  the  Malays,  it  says,  '  Bulam  sampei,  bulam sampei,'  *  meaning  that  it  has  not  yet  reached  its  full growth.  They  are  often  to  be  heard  in  the  jungle at  night,  but  the  most  diligent  search  will  not  reveal their  whereabouts.  The  rotan  manoh^  is  also  said to  give  out  sounds  at  night.  The  sounds  are  loud and  musical,  but  the  alleged  will-o'-the-wisp  character of  the  rattans  which  are  supposed  to  produce  them seems  to  point  to  some  night-bird,  tree-frog,  or  lizard as  being  the  real  cause  of  the  weird  notes,  though it  is  just  possible  that  the  wind  might  make  the rattan  leaves  vibrate  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  the sounds."3
In  Selangor  it  is  the  stick-insect  (keranting)  which is  believed  to  be  the  embodiment  of  the  "  Malacca- cane  spirit "  (Hantu  Samambu],  by  which  last  name it  is  most  commonly  called.  These  stick-insects  are believed  by  the  Selangor  Malays  to  produce  the  sounds to  which  Mr.  Wray  refers,  and  in  order  to  account for  their  peculiar  character  a  story  is  told,  the  main features  of  which  are  as  follows  : —
tails  ")  will,  it  is  believed,  raise  a  most  invulnerable     (jadi    pPlias).   —  Cp.
painful  weal,  whilst  to  strike  a  person  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  17,  p.  155.
hard    with    one    would   assuredly    kill  *  In   Selangor  bflum  sampei  is  the
him.     A  Malacca-cane,  one  of  whose  phrase  used.
knots  is  inverted  and  the  other  not,  is  2  In  Selangor  rotan  manau.
also  considered  of  great  value,  being  3  Sel.  Journ.  vol.  iii.  No.  6,  pp.  95>
believed   to   render   the   bearer   of   it  96.
v  LEGEND  OF  THE  STICK -INSECT  201
Once  upon  a  time  a  married  couple  fell  out,  and the  husband  surreptitiously  introduced  stones  into  the cooking-pot  in  place  of  the  yams  which  his  wife  was cooking.  Then  he  went  off  to  climb  for  a  cocoa-nut, and  as  he  climbed,  he  mocked  her  by  calling  out "  Masak  btlum  ?  Masak  bZlum  ?  "  ("Are  they  cooked yet  ?  Are  they  cooked  yet  ?  ").  What  she  did  by way  of  retaliation  is  not  clear,  but  as  he  climbed  and mocked  her,  she  is  said  to  have  retorted,  "  Panjat bZlum?  Panjat  belum?"  ("Have  you  climbed  it yet  ?  Have  you  climbed  it  yet  ? "),  a  reply  which clearly  shows  that  her  woman's  wit  had  been  at  work, and  that  she  was  not  going  to  allow  her  husband  to get  the  better  of  her.1  However  this  may  be, a  deadlock  ensued,  the  result  of  which  was  that both  parties  were  transformed  into  stick -insects, but  were  yet  condemned  to  mock  each  other  as they  had  done  during  the  period  of  their  human existence.
I  have  often  from  my  boat,  during  dark  nights  on the  Langat  river,  listened  to  the  weird  note  which  my Malays  invariably  ascribed  to  these  insects,  and  which is  not  inaptly  represented  by  one  of  the  Malay  names for  them,  viz.  "  belum-belam"  I  have  not  yet,  how- ever, succeeded  in  identifying  the  real  producer  of  the note,  of  which  all  I  can  say  at  present  is,  that  although it  may  not  be  itself  discoverable,  the  Malays  look  upon it  as  a  certain  guide  to  the  localities  where  the  Malacca- canes  grow.
1  Another  Selangor  version  says  that  "  Are    they    cooked    yet  ?  "    (Masak
whilst  the  wife  is  boiling  the  stones,  the  bllum  f),  as  in  the  version  just  given,
husband  is  climbing  the  Malacca-cane  and  the  wife  cries,  "  Have  you  reached
plant  (samambu)  in  order  to  get  to  the  it  yet?     Have  you   reached   it   yet?"
sky.     The  husband  keeps  calling  out,  (Sampei  bZlum  >)
202  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
The  Tualang  or  Sialang  Tree
So  too  of  the  Tualang-tree  Mr.  Wray  writes  : — "  One  of  the  largest  and  stateliest  of  the  forest trees  in  Perak  is  that  known  as  Toallong,  or  Toh Allong ; x  it  has  a  very  poisonous  sap,  which  produces great  irritation  when  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  skin. Two  Chinamen  who  had  felled  one  of  these  trees  in ignorance,  had  their  faces  so  swelled  and  inflamed  that they  could  not  see  out  of  their  eyes,  and  had  to  be  led about  for  some  days  before  they  recovered  from  the effects  of  the  poison.  Their  arms,  breasts,  and  faces were  affected,  and  they  presented  the  appearance  of having  a  very  bad  attack  of  erysipelas.  These  trees are  supposed  to  be  the  abiding  -  places  of  hantu,  or spirits,  when  they  have  large  hollow  projections  from the  trunk,  called  rumah  hantu,  or  spirit  houses.  These projections  are  formed  when  a  branch  gets  broken  off near  the  trunk,  and  are  quite  characteristic  of  the  tree. There  are  sometimes  three  or  four  of  them  on  a  large tree,  and  the  Malays  have  a  great  objection  to  cutting down  any  that  are  so  disfigured,  the  belief  being  that if  a  man  fells  one  he  will  die  within  the  year.  As  a rule  these  trees  are  left  standing  when  clearings  are made,  and  they  are  a  source  of  trouble  and  expense  to planters  and  others,  who  object  to  their  being  left uncut.
"  The  following  series  of  events  actually  happened:
—A  Malay  named  Panda  Tambong  undertook,  against
the  advice  of  his  friends,  to  fell  one  of  the  Toh  Allong
trees,  and  he  almost  immediately  afterwards  was  taken
ill  with  fever,  and  died  in  a  few  weeks'  time.     Shortly
1  In  Selangor  it  is  called  Tualang      Alang  ?),  and  is  the  tree  on  which  the (='Toh    Alang?)    and    Sialang    (  =  Si       wild  bees  build  their  nests.
v  BEE  TREES  203
after  this  some  men  were  sitting  plaiting  ataps l  under the  shade  of  another  of  these  ill-omened  trees,  when, without  any  warning,  a  large  branch  fell  down,  breaking the  arm  of  one  man,  and  more  or  less  injuring  two others.  There  was  not  a  breath  of  wind  at  the  time, or  anything  else  likely  to  determine  the  fall  of  the branch.  After  this  it  was  decided  to  have  the  tree felled,  as  there  were  coolie  houses  nearly  under  it. There  was  great  difficulty  in  getting  any  one  to  fell  it. Eventually  a  Penang  Malay  undertook  the  job,  but stipulated  that  a  Pawang,  or  sorcerer,  should  be employed  to  drive  away  the  demons  first.  The Pawang  hung  pieces  of  white  and  red  cloth  on  sticks round  the  tree,  burnt  incense  in  the  little  contrivances made  of  the  split  leaf-stalks  of  the  bertam  palm,  used by  the  Malays  for  that  purpose,  cut  off  the  heads  of two  white  fowls,  sprinkled  the  blood  over  the  trunk, and  in  the  midst  of  many  incantations  the  tree  was felled  without  any  mishap ;  but,  strange  to  say,  the Pawang,  who  was  a  haji^  and  a  slave-debtor  of  the Toh  Puan  Halimah,  died  about  nine  months  after- wards."3
There  appears  to  be  very  little  reason  to  doubt that  the  word  Tualang  (To/i  Alang  or  Sialang]  is  the name  not  of  a  particular  species  of  tree,  but  rather  the generic  name  of  all  trees  in  which  wild  bees  have  built their  nests,  so  that  in  reality  it  simply  means  a  "  Bee- Tree."
I  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  obtaining  any  of  the Malay  charms  used  by  the  collectors  of  these  bees' nests,  except  such  as  are  used  by  Sakais  under  Malay
1  Strips  of  palm-leaves  for  thatching  -  One  who  has  made  the  pilgrimage
houses.  to  Mecca.
3  SeL  Journ.  vol.  iii.  No.  6,  p.  96.
204
VEGETATION  CHARMS
CHAP.
influence  on  the  Selangor  coast,  the  Sakais  being most  usually  the  collectors.  Some  of  these  latter, however,  were  pure  Malay  charms,  and  may  perhaps be  considered,  in  the  absence  of  charms  collected  from Malays,  as  evidence  of  at  least  secondary  importance. One  of  these  charms  commences  as  follows  :—
"  Here  is  the  Peeling-knife,  the  knife  with  the  long  handle, Stuck  into  the  buttress  of  a  Pulai-Tree."  l
And  another,  which  is  almost  word  for  word  the same,  as  follows  :  —
"  Here  is  the  Peeling-knife,  the  knife  with  the  long  handle, With  which  to  stab  (lit.  peck  at)  the  buttress  of  the  Pulai-Tree."  2
It  will  be  noticed  that  both  refer  to  the by  name,  and  not  to  the  Tualang.  The  footnote  which I  here  quote  with  reference  to  the  customs  of  Siak  is, almost  word  for  word,  equally  true  of  the  Bee-Trees in  Selangor.3
1  Vide  App.  Ixxxvi.
2  Vide  App.  Ixxxvii.
3  "Certain  customs  are  observed  in Siak  in   the  collection  of  wax  which may  be  mentioned  here.
"  The  sialang  (that  is,  a  tree  on  which bees  have  made  nests)  is  generally  con- sidered to  belong  to  him  who  finds  it, provided  it  stands  in  a  part  of  the forest  belonging  to  his  tribe.  Should the  tree  stand  in  a  part  of  the  jungle apportioned  to  another  tribe,  the  finder is  permitted  to  take  for  once  all  the wax  there  is  on  the  tree,  and  ever  after- wards, during  his  lifetime,  all  the  wax  of one  branch  of  the  tree.  After  his  death the  tree  becomes  the  property  of  the tribe  to  whom  that  part  of  the  jungle belongs.
"  When  wax  is  collected  from  a  tree there  are  generally  three  persons  to share  in  it,  and  the  proceeds  are  divided as  follows  :  viz.,  one-third  to  the  pro- prietor of  the  tree,  one-third  to  the  man
who  climbs  the  tree,  and  one-third  to the  man  who  keeps  watch  below. These  two  latter  offices  are  considered rather  dangerous,  the  first  because  he has  to  climb  the  towering  sialang  trees, branchless  to  a  considerable  height,  by means  of  bamboo  pegs  driven  into  the trunk ;  and  the  watch-keeper  under- neath, because  he  has  to  face  the  bears and  tigers  who  (so  it  is  said)  come  after the  wax  and  honey.
"The  following  trees  are  generally inhabited  by  bees  (lebah},  and  then become  sialangs ;  near  the  sea,  pulei, kempas,  kayu  arah,  and  babi  kurus ; whilst  farther  in  the  interior  ringas manuk  and  chempedak  ayer  are  their general  habitats.
"  Besides  the  lebah  there  is  to  be found  in  Siak  another  bee,  called neruan,  which  does  not  make  its  nest on  trees,  but  in  holes.
"The  regulations  observed  when taking  the  wax  of  the  lebah  do  not
HAUNTED  TREES  205
Other  haunted  trees  (pokok  b&rhantu)  are  the Jawi-jawi,  the  Jelotong,  and  BeYombong,  of  which the  following  tradition  will  perhaps  suffice  :—
"  All  trees,"  according  to  Malay  tradition,  "  were planted  by  'the  Prophet  Elias,'1  and  are  in  the 'Prophet  Noah's'  charge.  In  the  days  of  King Solomon,  trees  could  speak  as  well  as  birds  and animals,  and  several  of  the  trees  now  to  be  seen  in the  forest  are  really  metamorphosed  human  beings. Such  are  the  'Jelotong'  and  the  '  Berombong,'  which in  the  days  of  King  Solomon  were  bosom  friends, until  there  broke  out  between  them  an  unfortunate quarrel,  which  terminated  in  '  Si  Jelotong's '  lacing  the skin  of  'Si  Berombong'  all  over  with  stabs  from  his dagger,  the  effect  of  which  stabs  remains  visible  to this  day.  Si  Berombong,  on  the  other  hand,  cursed Si  Jelotong  with  his  dying  breath,  praying  that  he might  be  turned  into  a  tree  without  any  buttresses  to support  his  trunk,  a  prayer  which  was,  of  course,  duly fulfilled.  Thus  originated  the  lack  of  buttresses  at  the base  of  the  former  tree,  and  the  laced  and  slashed  bark of  the  latter."
The  Lime-Tree
Yet  another  tree  whose  spirit  is  the  object,  as  it were,  of  a  special  cult,2  is  the  lime-tree,  which  is  revered and  looked  up  to  almost  as  their  chief  patron  by  the
apply  to  the  taking  of  the  wax   and  a  description  will  be  given  of  a  method
honey  of  the  neruan.     Anybody  is  at  of  augury  by  means  of  one  of  these
liberty  to  look  for  them  wherever  and  lime  -  fruits    into   which    a   spirit  was
whenever  he  likes." — F.    Kehding,  in  supposed  to  have  entered.      See  also
J.K.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  17,  pp.  156,  157.  one  of  the  methods  of  abducting  another
1  When  the  orchid  was  to  be  planted  person's  soul  by  causing  it  to  enter  into it  was  found  that  there  was  no  room  a  bunch  of  seven  lime-fruits.     The  use for  it  on  the  ground  between  the  trees,  of  the   lime-fruit    by   the   Malays   for and  hence  it  was  planted  upon  them.  purposes  of  ablution  was  no  doubt  of
2  Under  the  heading  of  Divination  ceremonial  origin.
206  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
theatrical  players  (prang  mayong]  of  Penang.  The invocations  addressed  to  this  spirit  show  that,  as  in most  branches  of  magic,  every  part  of  the  tree  had  its appropriate  "alias."  Thus  the  root  was  called  the "Seated  Prince,"  the  trunk  the  "Standing  Prince,"  the bark  the  "  Prince  Stretching  Himself,"  the  boughs  the "  Stabbing  Prince,"  the  leaves  the  "  Beckoning  Prince," the  fruit  the  "  Prince  loosing  an  arrow."
The  Eagle-wood  Tree
The  following  account  of  Eagle-wood  and  of  the tree  which  produces  it  is  quoted  from  the  Journal  of the  Straits  Asiatic  Society : —
"In  Crawfurd's  Dictionary  of  the  Malay  Archi- pelago1 I  find  the  following: — 'Agila,  the  Eagle- wood of  commerce.  —  Its  name  in  Malay  and  Javanese  is kalambak  or  kalambah,  but  it  is  also  known  in  these languages  by  that  oigkaru  or  kayu  gharu,  gharu-wood, a  corruption  of  the  Sanskrit  agahru.  .  .  .  There  can  be no  doubt  but  that  the  perfumed  wood  is  the  result  of disease  in  the  tree  that  yields  it,  produced  by  the thickening  of  the  sap  into  a  gum  or  resin.'
"This  'Eagle-wood  of  commerce,'  under  its  more familiar  name  gkaru,  is  one  of  the  rarest  and  most valuable  products  of  our  Malayan  jungles,  and  the following  notes  may  be  of  interest.  They  are  the result  of  inquiries  amongst  the  Malays  and  Pawangs  in Ulu  Muar  and  Johbl,  and  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  L.  J. Cazalas  for  much  assistance  in  obtaining  the  informa- tion contained  in  them.
"  The  g/iaru-tree  is  a  tall  forest  tree,  sometimes reaching  the  size  of  fifteen  feet  in  diameter.  The  bark is  of  a  silvery  gray  colour,  and  the  foliage  close  and
1  Correctly,  Descriptive  Dictionary  of  the  Indian  Islands  and  Adjacent  Countries.
EAGLE  WOOD  207
dense,  of  a  dark  hue.  The  Malay  name  for  the  tree  is "  tabak"  and  no  other  maybe  used  by  the  Pawang when  in  search  of  the  kayu  gharu?  Gharu,  the  diseased heart-wood  of  the  tabak,  is  found  in  trees  of  all  sizes, even  in  trees  of  one  foot  in  diameter,  thus  showing that  the  disease  attacks  the  tree  at  an  early  stage.
"  "^^  gharu  is  found  in  pockets,  and  may  sometimes be  discovered  by  the  veins  which  run  to  these  pockets. In  other  trees  the  veins  are  absent,  which  renders  the process  of  searching  more  difficult.  The  tree  is  gener- ally cut  down  and  left  to  rot,  which  exposes  the  gharu in  about  six  months.
"'Pockets'  are  found  to  contain  as  much  as  104 catties ;  a  single  tree  has  been  known  to  yield  400 catties.2  Gharu  is  seldom  found  in  the  sap-wood, generally  in  the  heart-wood  or  teras.
"Many  ta<fo£-trees  do  not  contain  gharu  at  all.  To select  the  right  trees  is  the  special  province  of  the Pawang  or  wise  man.  The  to£o£-trees  are  under  the care  of  certain  hantu  or  wood-spirits,  and  it  would  be hopeless  for  the  uninitiated  to  attempt  to  find  gharu  ; even  the  Pawang  has  to  be  very  careful.
"  The  following  is  the  process  as  far  as  I  have  been able  to  ascertain  it : —
"  On  the  outskirts  of  the  forest  the  Pawang  must burn  incense,  and  repeat  the  following  charm  or formula : —
"Homali  hamali*  matilok  (mandillah?)  serf  a  kalam  mandiyat
1  The  tree  is  also  in  Selangor  known  Baru  -  &aru,  but  I  cannot  in  any  way
as    'Aaras    or    tfngkaras,       Tabak   or  vouch  for  this.
'long  tabak  is  the  name  given  to  the  2  A  catty  (kati)  is  i^  Ib.  avoir.
tree  by   the  wild  jungle-tribes,   but  I  3  Homali  hamali  looks  like  a  corrup-
cannot  say  if  it  is  therefore  a  Sakai  tion  of  S'ri  Dang<wwa/a,  S'ri  Dang<7wo//
word  in  origin.     I  was  told  that  this  in  the  Rice-charms  (</.v.)       Otherwise
product  eagle-wood  was  also  occasion-  this  first  sentence  is  evidently  too  cor-
ally  found  in  other  trees,  such  as  the  rupt  to  be  translated.
208  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
serta  teboh.  Turun  suhaya l  trima  suka  turun  kadim  serta  aku kabul  kata  gharu  mustajak  2  kata  Allah  Berkat  la  ilaha  il'allah.  Hei Putri  Bclingkah?  Putri  Berjuntei,  Putri  Mengi?ijan  4  aku  meminta isi  tabak.  TJboleh  di  surohkan,  ttfboleh  lindong  kapada  aku  kalau di-suroh  di-lindong-kan  biar  duraka  kapada  tuhan?
"There  is  no  "pantang  gharu"  except  that  the words  "isi"  and  "tabak"  must  be  used  instead  of "tras"  and  "gharu"'0
"He  then  proceeds  to  search  for  a  likely  tree,  and upon  finding  one  he  again  burns  incense  and  repeats the  spell  as  above.  The  tree  having  been  cut  down, the  next  thing  is  to  separate  the  gharu  from  the  sap- wood.  The  best  way  is  to  let  the  tree  rot,  but  the Pawangis  often  "  hard-up,"and  does  not  mind  wasting some  of  the  gharu  in  his  hurry  to  realise.
"The  following  are  said  to  be  the  tests  for  finding gharu  in  a  standing  tree  : —
1.  The  tree  is  full  of  knots.     (Berbungkol.}
2.  The  bark  full  of  moss  and  fungus.   (Bertumuh  bcrchandawan.}
3.  Heart-wood  hollow.     (Berlobang.}
4.  Bark  peeling  off.     (Bergugor  kulit.)
5.  A  clear  space  underneath.     (Mengelenggang.}
6.  Stumps  jutting  out.      (Berchulak.}
7.  Tree  tapering.     (Bertirus.}
8.  The  falling  of  the  leaves  in  old  trees.
"  There  are  great  differences  in  the  quality  of 'gharu, and  great  care  is  taken  in  classifying  them.  It  requires
1  Read  sahya.  no  god  but  God.'      Ho,  Princess  that
3  Mzistajak:    the   Selangor  form   is  art  Coiled-up,  Princess  that  Danglest,
"9t&fata6"  Princess   that    Stretchest   forth    (thine
arms),  I  ask  that  this  tree  may  be  full
3  BXtngkah:  read  Ar/»#*ar.  of  eagle-wood.     Attempt  not   to  com-
4  Menginjan  (sic]  :  (?)  Mfnginjau  or  mand  me,  attempt  not  to  conceal  your- MZninjau.     A  rough  translation  is  as  self  from  me,  for  if  you  do  you  shall follows  :     [The    first    sentence    is   un-  be  a  rebel  unto  the  Lord." intelligible.]       "'Come  down   and    I  6  This  statement  must  not  be  accepted shall  be  bound  en  to  you.    Come  down,  without  reserve,  though  it  may  be  true O  Kadim,  in  company  with  me.'       '  I  of  the  particular  districts  in  which  the grant  this,'  says  Eagle-wood.      '  So  be  information   contained  in   this   article it,'  says  God.     By  virtue  of  '  there  is  was  collected.
v  QUALITIES  OF  EAGLE-WOOD  209
a  skilled  man  to  distinguish    between    some   of  the varieties.
"  The  names  are  as  follow  :—
1.  Chandan}  5.   Sikat  Lampam?
2.  Tandok.  6.  Bulu  Rusa.
3.  Menjulong-ulong?  7.   Kemandangan.
4.  Sikat.  8.    Wangkang.
11  The  chandan  (pada  tiada  champur)  is  oily,  black, and  glistening.  It  sinks  in  water.
"  The  tadak  very  closely  resembles  the  chandan.
"  The  menjulong-ulong  may  be  distinguished  from the  chandan  and  the  tandok  by  its  length  and  small breadth.  Splinters,  36  inches  long,  have  been  found evidently  from  veins,  not  pockets.4
"  Sikat  (bertabun  champur  kubal  dan  teras),  fibrous, with  slight  lustre,  will  just  float  in  water.  Black  and white  streaks.
"Sikat  lampam — the  same  as  sikat,  only  white streaks  more  prominent.
"Bulu  Rusa  will  float  in  water,  fibrous,  generally of  a  yellow  colour.
"  Kemandangan  floats  in  water,  whitish,  fibrous fragments  small.
"  Wangkang  floats  in  water,  fibrous  blocks  whitish in  colour.
"  The  chandan  tree  differs  from  other gkaru-trzes  in having  a  maximum  diameter  of  about  i^-  feet,  and  very soft  sap-wood.
"  Gharu  varies  in  price  between  200  and  50  dollars
1  In  some  parts  of  Selangor,  said  to  Selangor  gharu  "  ist  kang  tua."  The
be  called  "  nibong"  or  gharu  "  tulang  following  are  the  names  of  certain
s.Viini."  other ^ar*/- trees,  of  which  the  product,
-  In  Selangor  called  gharu  "jfnjo-  however,  is  said  to  be  useless  for
long.'"  market  purposes.  They  are  gharu
3  Here  "  lampan  "  (?)  tutor ;  gharu  dtdap,  gharu  kundor,  and
4  Yet  another  variety  is   called   in  gharu  akar.
210  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
a.pikull  according  to  the  variety.  The  chandan  and the  tandok  are  the  most  valuable.
"  Chinese  and  Malays  burn  it  in  their  houses  on  high days  and  festivals  —  the  latter  generally  take  a  supply with  them  on  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  The  better varieties  are  used  in  the  manufacture  of  aromatic  oils."  :
Before  setting  out  to  search  for  gharu,  the  gharu- wizard  burns  incense  and  repeats  these  words,  "  O Grandsire  Duita,  Divinity  of  Eagle-wood,  if  you  are far,  be  so  good  as  to  say  so  ;  if  you  are  near,  be  so good  as  to  say  so,"  and  then  sets  out  on  his  quest.  On finding  a  /£#?m-tree  he  chops  the  bark  of  the  trunk lightly  with  his  cutlass,  and  then  puts  his  ear  to  the trunk  to  listen.  If  he  hears  a  kind  of  low  singing,  or rather  whispering  noise  (bunyi  ting  ting]  in  the  tree, he  takes  this  as  a  signification  that  the  tree  contains gharu  (zsi),3  and  after  marking  the  bark  with  a  cross (silang  ampat)  he  collects  wood  to  build  a  temporary shelter  (pondong)  for  himself,  and  when  about  to  plant the  first  post  repeats  the  following  charm  :  —
"  O  Grandsire  Batara  of  the  Earth,  Earth-Genie,  Earth-Spirit, Idol  of  Iron,  Son  of  Wani,  Solitary  Wani, Son  of  Wayah,  Bandan  the  Solitary, I  ask  you  to  show  me  (an  eagle-wood  tree), If  you  do  not  do  so You  shall  be  a  rebel  against  God,"  etc.
The  result  of  this  invocation  is,  or  should  be,  that the  ^flr^-spirit  appears  to  the  wizard  (generally,  no
1  Apikulis  133^  Ibs.  avoir.  heard,  even  without  putting  the  ear  to
vTD-rD^ccaxr  the  bark>  when  the  tree  was  struck  by
,»  K.JN.U.    in  J.K.A.S.,  .X^.,   JNo.  the  cutlass.    The  Malays,  however,  look
l8>  PP-  359-301-  upon  it  as  the  voice  of  the  spirit,  and  add
3  On  putting  this  theory  to  the  test,  thatifyouhearitatnightyou  must  repeat
I  found  that  the  singing  noise  referred  the  charm,  altering  the  first  line  only
to  was  in  reality  nothing  but  the  low  to  "  Ho,  offspring  of  the  King  of  Forest
whispering  noise  caused  by  the  flow  of  Butterflies  "  (Hei  anak  S'ri  Rama-rama
the    sap,    which    could    be    distinctly  hutan).
v  SPIRIT  OF  EAGLE-WOOD  211
doubt,  in  a  dream),  and  informs  him  what  kind  of sacrifice  he  requires  on  this  particular  occasion.  What- ever kind  of  sacrifice  is  asked  for,  must  of  course  be given,  with  the  exception  of  a  human  sacrifice  which,  as it  is  expressly  stated,  may  be  compounded  by  the  sacrifice of  a  fowl.
When  the  tree  has  been  felled  you  must  be  ex- ceedingly careful  to  see  that  nobody  passes  between the  end  of  the  fallen  trunk  and  the  stump ;  whoever does  so  will  surely  be  killed  by  the  "eagle- wood spirit,"  who  is  supposed  to  be  extremely  powerful  and dangerous.  I  myself  received  a  warning  to  this  effect from  some  Labu  Malays  when  I  saw  one  of  these  trees felled.  Malays  maintain  that  men  are  frequently killed  by  this  spirit  (mati  de  Hantu  Gharu),  but  that they  may  be  recalled  to  life  if  the  following  recipe  is acted  upon  : — "  Take  two  '  cubits  '  (?)  of  '  Panchong leaves '  (daun  panchong  dua  heta),  flowers  of  the sunting  mambang,  and  '  bullock's  eye '  limes  (limau mata  kerbau],  squeeze  [the  limes  (?)]  and  rub  them  over the  corpse,  saying,  '  Sir  Allah  !  Sir  Mangga  Tangan ! God's  Essence  is  in  your  heart  (lit.  liver).  God's  attri- butes are  in  your  eyes.  Go  and  entertain  the  male Borer-Bee  that  is  in  your  heart  and  liver.'  The  dead man  will  then  revive  and  stand  upon  his  feet."
The  most  important  point  about  eagle-wood,  how- ever, from  the  animistic  point  of  view,  is  the Pawang's  use  of  the  gharu  merupa,  a  strangely shaped  piece  of  eagle-wood  which  possesses  a  natural resemblance  to  some  animal  or  bird.  It  is  believed to  contain  the  soul  of  the  tree,  and  therefore  is  always, when  possible,  carried  by  the  collectors  of  eagle- wood  in  the  belief  that  it  will  aid  them  in  their  search. I  myself  once  owned  one  of  these  gharu  merupa,
212  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
which  possessed  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  a  bird. This  appears  to  me  very  fairly  sufficient  evidence  to prove  that  the  tree-soul  is  not  supposed  by  the  Malays necessarily  to  resemble  a  tree.1
The  following  account  of  the  superstitious  notions connected  with  the  search  for  Camphor  (kapur Barus)  is  extracted  from  a  paper  by  Messrs.  H.  Lake and  H.  J.  Kelsall2:-
"  The  chief  interest  attaching  to  the  Kapur  Barus in  Johor  lies  in  the  superstitions  connected  with  the collection  of  the  camphor  by  the  natives,  or  Orang Hulu?
"  Amongst  these  superstitions  the  most  important  is the  use  of  a  special  language,  the  subject  of  the  present paper,  which  has  been  the  means  of  preserving  some remnants  of  the  aboriginal  dialects  of  this  part  of  the Malay  Peninsula.  This  language  is  called  by  the Orang  Hulu  "  Pantang  Kapur  "  ;  pantang  means  for- bidden or  tabooed,  and  in  this  case  refers  to  the  fact that  in  searching  for  the  camphor  the  use  of  the ordinary  Malay  language  is  pantang,  or  forbidden. In  addition  to  this  there  are  restrictions  as  to  food,  etc.
1  "  Thegaharu  merupa  is  a  piece  of  it  in  hand,  the  holder  is  sure  to  make
strangely  formed  gaharu  wood,  having  large    finds    of  gaharu   wood   in    the
a  rough  resemblance  to   some   living  jungle.
creature,  be  it  a  bird,  a  dog,  a  cat,  or  "Thegatiaru  wood  is  not  the  wood
something  else.  of  a  tree  named  gaharu,   but   is   the
"  The  writer  of  these  lines  has  never  product  of  a  tree  of  the  name  of  karas."
been  able  to  see  one  of  these  gaharu  — -J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  17,  p.  154.
merupa,  and  it  would  seem  that  none  2  J.R.  A. S.,  S.B.,  No.  26,  pp.  39, 40.
have    been    found    in    Siak    in  recent  3  Orang  hulu  literally  means  "  men
times.  of  the  inland  country,"  but  here  denotes
"  The  power  which  it  is  believed  to  especially  the  aborigines  known  to  the
possess  rests  on  the  supposition  that  it  Malays  as  Jakun,  orang  hutan,  orang
is  the  spirit  of  the  kayu  gaharu.     With  bukit,  and  by  other  names.
v  THE  CAMPHOR  SPIRIT  213
"  This  Camphor  language  is  first  referred  to  by  Mr. Logan  in  his  account  of  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  the Malay  Peninsula,1  and  he  gives  a  list  of  eighty words,  thirty-three  of  which  are  Malay  or  derived from  Malay."
"  The  Jakuns  believe  that  there  is  a  "  bisan"  or spirit,  which  presides  over  the  camphor-trees,  and without  propitiating  this  spirit  it  is  impossible  to obtain  the  camphor.  This  bisan  makes  at  night a  shrill  noise,  and  when  this  sound  is  heard  it  is  a sure  sign  that  there  are  camphor- trees  near  at  hand. (This  bisan  is  really  one  of  the  Cicadas  which  are so  numerous  in  the  Malayan  jungles.)
"When  hunting  for  camphor  the  natives  always throw  a  portion  of  their  food  out  into  the  jungle  before eating,  as  an  offering  to  the  bisan.
"No  prayers  are  offered  up,  but  all  food  must  be eaten  dry,  i.e.  without  sumbul?  or  stewed  fish,  or  vege- tables. Salt  must  not  be  pounded  fine ;  if  it  is  eaten fine,  the  camphor  when  found  will  be  in  fine  grains ; but  if  eaten  coarse  the  grains  of  camphor  will  be  large. In  rainy  weather  the  cry  of  the  bisan  is  not  heard. At  certain  seasons  regular  parties  of  Jakuns,  and sometimes  Malays,  go  into  the  jungle  to  search  for camphor,  and  they  remain  there  as  long  as  three  or four  months  at  a  time.  Not  only  must  the  men  who go  into  the  jungle  to  search  for  the  camphor  speak the  '  Pantang  Kapur,'  but  also  the  men  and  women left  at  home  in  the  Kampongs.
"  The  camphor  occurs  in  the  form  of  small  grains deposited  in  the  cracks  in  the  interior  of  the  trunk
1  J.  I.  A.,  vol.  i.  p.  293.     Nos.  i,  a  Sic:  no  doubt  this  is  for  samdat,  a
3,  and  8  of  thzJ.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  contain       variety  of  condiments  (more  or  less  re- further  notes  on  the  subject.  sembling  chutney)  and  eaten  with  curry.
214
VEGETATION  CHARMS
CHAP.
of  the  tree.  Camphor  is  only  found  in  the  older trees,  and  not  in  all  of  these,  and  to  obtain  it  the tree  must  be  cut  down  and  split  up.  There  are certain  signs  which  indicate  when  a  tree  contains camphor,  one  of  which  is  the  smell  emitted  from  the wood  when  chipped.  A  man  who  is  skilled  in  detect- ing the  presence  of  camphor  is  called  Penghulu  Kapur.1 The  camphor  when  taken  away  from  the  tree  is  washed, and  all  chips  of  wood  and  dirt  carefully  removed,  and it  is  then  sold  to  Chinese  traders  at  Kwala  Indau  at prices  varying  according  to  the  quality  from  $15  to $40  per  katti.
"  The  Camphor  language  consists  in  great  part  of words  which  are  either  Malay  or  of  Malay  origin,  but contains,  as  above  mentioned,  a  large  number  of words  which  are  not  Malay,  but  which  are  presum- ably remnants  of  the  original  Jakun  dialects,  which  are apparently  almost  obsolete  otherwise  in  the  Indau  and Sembrong  districts  of  Johor." 2
1  Penghulu  Kapur,   i.e.   "Camphor Chief."
2  "  Camphor  is  a  gum  (not  the  pith or    heart  of  wood,    as  Avicenna    and some  others  think),  which,  falling  into the  pith-chamber  of  the  wood,  is  ex- tracted   thence  or    exudes    from    the cracks.      This  I  saw  in  a  table  of  cam- phor wood  at  a  certain    apothecary's, and  in   a   piece  of  wood  as  thick  as the  thigh,  presented  to  me  by  Gover- nor John  Crasto,  and  again  in  a  tablet a  span  broad  at  a  merchant's.      I  would not,  however,  deny  that  it  may  some- times be  deposited  in  the  hollow  of  a tree.      It  is  told  me  as  a  fact,  that  it  is the  custom   that  when  any  one  who goes   out   to  collect   it   has  filled  his gourd,  if  any  other  stronger  person  sees him  with  the  gourd,  he  can  kill  him with  impunity  and  take  away  the  gourd, fortune  assisting  him  in  this.      That which  is  brought  from  Borneo  is  usually
mixed  with  small  bits  of  stone,  or  some kind  of  gum  called  Chamderros,  much like  raw  sugar  or  sawdust.  But  this  de- fect is  easily  detected  ;  I  know  no  other method  of  adulteration.  For  if  some- times it  is  seen  to  be  spotted  with  red  or blackish  dots,  that  is  due  to  treatment with  dirty  or  impure  hands,  or  they  may be  caused  by  moisture.  But  this  de- fect is  easily  remedied  by  the  Indians. If  it  is  tied  up  in  a  cloth  and  dipped in  warm  water  to  which  soap  and  lime- juice  has  been  added,  and  then  care- fully dried  in  the  shade,  it  becomes very  white,  the  weight  not  being altered.  I  saw  this  done  by  a  Hindu friend  who  entrusted  me  with  the secret.  .  .  .  What  they  say  as  to  all kinds  of  animals  flying  together  to  its shade  to  escape  the  fiercer  beasts  is fabulous.  Nor  is  it  what  some,  follow- ing Serapion,  write  less  so,  namely, that  it  is  an  omen  of  larger  yields  when
v  THE  GUTTA-PERCHA  SPIRIT  215
Gutta-percha
The  trees  from  which  Gutta-percha  is  taken  are also  supposed  to  be  inhabited  by  a  spirit ;  but  this, the  Gutta-spirit,  being  far  less  dangerous  than  the Eagle-wood  spirit,  fewer  precautions  are  taken  in dealing  with  it.  In  the  invocation  addressed  to  the Gutta-spirit,  the  petitioner  asks  for  the  boon  of  a drop  of  the  spirit's  blood,  which  of  course  is  an indirect  way  of  asking  for  the  tree's  sap.
Here  is  a  specimen  of  the  charms  used  by  the gutta-collectors  :•—
"  Ho,  Prince  S'ri  Bali, Prince  S'ri  Bandang,
I  wish  to  crave  the  boon  of  a  drop  of  blood  ; May  the  yield  be  better  than  from  this  notch  of  mine.
(Here  the  speaker  notches  the  tree.)
"If  it  be  not  better You  shall  be  a  rebel  unto  God,"  etc.1
the  sky  glitters  with  frequent  lightning,  "The  gratuity  to  be  given  to  the
or  echoes  with  constant  thunder.     For  Pawang  is   not  fixed   by  law,  but   is
as  the  island  of  Sumatra,  which  some  settled  beforehand  on  every  expedition ;
think  to  be  Taprobane,  and  the  adjacent  also  the  share  of  the  Sultan,
regions  are  near  the  equinoctial   line,  "  The  regulations  which  have  to  be
it  follows  that  they  are  subject  to  con-  observed  when  collecting  camphor  are
stant  thunderstorms,  and  for  the  same  most  strange ;  for  instance,  those  who
cause  have  storms  or   slight  showers  go  on  the  expedition  are  not  permitted
every  day ;    so  camphor  ought  to  be  during  the  whole  time  of  its  duration
abundant  every  year.     From  which  it  to  wash  or  bathe  ;  they  have  to  use  a
is  clear  that  the  thunder  is  neither  the  peculiar  language,  which  differs  from
cause  nor  indication  of  a  larger  supply  ordinary    Malay.       Compare   what    is
of  camphor." — Garcia  in  the  Historia  known  on  this  point  of  similar  usages
Aromatum  (1593),  quoted  mJ.R.A. S.,  amongst  the  Battaks.
S.B.,  No.  26,  p.  37.  "The  collectors  ha  veto  go  on  through
"The  camphor  is  so  far  considered  the  jungle  until  the  hantu  kapur  (the
as  a  barang  larangan  that  nobody  is  camphor  spirit),  a  female,  appears  to
allowed   to  go  and  collect  it  without  the  Pawang  in  his  dreams,  and  shows
having  a  special  permit  from  the  Sultan.  him  the  direction  in  which  success  may
This  permit  is  only  given  after  the  Sultan  be  expected."— -J.R.A.S.,S.B.,  No.  17,
has  made  sure  that  a  good  Pawang  ac-  pp.  1*55,  156.     This  account  has  refer-
companies  the  party,  a  man  who  is  able  ence  to  Siak,  in  Sumatra,
to  know  from    the  outside  of  a   tree  ,    y.JfA       lxxxix whether  it  contains  camphor  or  not.
2 1 6  VEGE TA  TJON  CHARMS
The  Cocoa-nut  Palm
The  following  instructions  to  be  followed  by  toddy- collectors  (who  tap  the  Cocoa-nut  palm  for  its  juice, which  is  boiled  into  sugar)  were  given  me  by  a Kelantan  Malay  ('Che  'Abas  of  Klanang)  :—
"  When  you  are  about  to  set  foot  against  the base  of  the  trunk  (i.e.  to  start  climbing)  repeat  these lines  :  —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Abubakar  ! Drowse  not  as  you  keep  watch  and  ward  in  the  heart  of  this  tree
Here  climb  half-way  up  and  say  :—
"  Peace  be  with  you,  Little  Sister,  Handmaiden  Bidah, Drowse  not  as  you  keep  watch  and  ward  in  the  middle  of  the
trunk, Come  and  accompany  me  on  my  way  up  this  tree."
Here  climb  up  among  the  leaf-stalks,  lay  hold  of  the central  shoot,  give  it  three  shakes,  and  say  —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  Little  Sister,  Youngest  of  the  Princesses, Drowse  not  as  you  keep  watch  and  ward  over  the  central  shoot, Do  you  accompany  me  on  my  way  down  this  tree."
Now  commence  by  bending  down  one  of  the  blossom- sheaths,  lay  hold  of  the  central  shoot,  and  thrice repeat  the  following  lines  :—
"  Peace  be  with  your  Highnesses,  Princesses  of  the  Shorn  Hair  and
(perpetual)  Distillation, Who  are  (seen)  in  the  curve  (lit.  swell)  and  the  ebbing  away  of
the  Blossom-sheath,
Of  the  Blossom-sheath  Si  Gedebeh  Mayang, Seven  Princesses  who  are  the  Handmaidens  of  Si  Mayang."
(Here  the  speaker  addresses  the  soul  (or  rather  souls) of  the  tree.)
RULES  FOR  PLANTING  217
Come  hither,  Little  One,  come  hither,
Come  hither,  Tiny  One,  come  hither,
Come  hither,  Bird,  come  hither,
Come  hither,  Filmy  One,  come  hither.
Thus  I  bend  your  neck,
Thus  I  roll  up  your  hair,
And  here  is  an  Ivory  Toddy-knife  to  help  the  washing  of  your  face.
Here  is  an  Ivory  Toddy-knife  to  cut  you  short,
And  here  is  an  Ivory  Cup  to  hold  under  you,
And  there  is  an  Ivory  Bath  that  waits  below  for  you.
Clap  your  hands  and  splash  in  the  Ivory  Bath,
For  it  is  called  the  '  Sovereign  Changing  Clothes.' " l
Rules  for  planting  various  Crops
The  following  rules  have  an  evident  bearing  upon the  subject  of  vegetable  animism.  They  were  collected at  Langat,  in  Selangor  : —
The  time  to  plant  Sugar-cane  is  at  noon  :  this  will make  it  sweeter,  by  drying  up  the  juice  and  leaving the  saccharine  matter.  If  you  plant  it  in  the  early morning  its  joints  will  be  too  long,  if  in  the  middle of  the  day  they  will  be  short.
Plant  Maize  with  a  full  stomach,  and  let  your dibble  be  thick,  as  this  will  swell  the  maize  ear.
For  Plantains  (or  Bananas)  you  must  dig  a  big hole,  and  the  evening  is  the  time  to  plant  them.  The evening  is  the  quicker,  and  if  planted  after  the  evening meal  they  fill  out  better.
Plant  Sweet  Potatoes  on  a  starry  night  to  ensure their  filling  out  properly  (by  getting  plenty  of  eyes  ?)
Plant  Cucumbers  and  Gourds  on  a  dark  moonless
1  These  last  five  lines  contain  allu-  is   received.     The  Ivory   Bath  is   the
lions  to  the  implements  with  which  the  copper  in  which  the  cocoa-nut  sugar  is
Paivang  does    his    work  ;     the   Ivory  made,  the  name  given  to  it  being  an
Cup   is    the   tagok,    a   bamboo  vessel  allusion  to  the  chemical  change  which
in  which  the  sap  of  the  Blossom-shoot  accompanies  the  process.
21 8  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
night,  to  prevent  them  from  being  seen  and  devoured by  fire-flies  (api-api).
Plant  Cocoa  -  nuts  when  the  stomach  is  over- burdened with  food  (kalau  kita  'nak  sangat  beraK] ; run  quickly  and  throw  the  cocoa-nut  into  the  hole prepared  for  it  without  straightening  the  arm  ;  if  you straighten  it  the  fruit -stalk  will  break.  Plant  them in  the  evening,  so  that  they  may  bear  fruit  while they  are  still  near  the  ground.  When  you  pick  seed cocoa-nuts  off  the  tree  somebody  should  stand  at  the bottom  of  the  tree  and  watch  whether  the  "  monkey- face  "  of  each  seed  cocoa-nut,  as  it  is  thrown  down, turns  either  towards  himself  or  the  base  of  the  tree, or  whether  it  looks  away  from  both.  In  the  former case  the  seed  will  be  good,  in  the  latter  it  is  not worth  planting.
Plant  Rice  in  the  early  morning,  about  five,  because that  is  the  hour  at  which  infants  (the  Rice  Soul  being considered  as  an  infant)  get  up.
The  Cultivation  of  Rice
The  most  important  contribution  of  the  Malays to  the  animistic  theory  of  vegetation  is  perhaps  to  be found  in  the  many  strange  ceremonies  with  which they  surround  the  culture  of  Rice.  In  order  to properly  understand  the  significance  of  these  cere- monies, however,  a  proper  understanding  of  the Malay  system  of  rice  -  planting  is  essential,  and  I therefore  quote  in  extenso  a  description  of  rice- culture,  which  possesses  the  additional  interest  of being  translated  from  the  composition  of  a  Malay  : *-
"  It  is  the  established  custom  in  Malacca  territory
1  Inche  Muhammad  Ja'far,  of  Malacca.
v  CULTIVATION  OF  RICE  219
to  plant  rice  once  a  year,  and  the  season  for  doing so  generally  falls  about  the  month  of  Zilka'idah  or Zilhijah.1
"  In  starting  planting  operations,  however,  the object  is,  if  possible,  to  coincide  with  the  season when  the  West  wind  blows,  because  at  that  time  there are  frequent  rains,  and  accordingly  the  earth  of  the rice-field  becomes  soft  and  easy  to  plough.  Moreover, in  planting  rice  it  is  an  invariable  rule  that  there  must be  water  in  the  field,  in  order  that  the  rice  may  sprout properly  ;  though,  on  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  too great  a  depth  of  water  the  rice  is  sure  to  die.  It has  also  been  observed  that  as  a  rule  the  season  of the  West  wind  coincides  with  the  fourth  month 2  of the  Chinese  calendar,  and  sometimes  also  with  the month  of  Zilka'idah  or  Zilhijah.8
"  2.  In  olden  time  the  order  of  planting  operations was  as  follows:  —  First,  the  elders  had  to  hold  a consultation  with  the  Pawang ;  then  the  date  was fixed ;  then  Maulud*  prayers  were  read  over  the 'mother-seed,'  and  benzoin,  (incense)  supplied  by  the Pawang,  was  burned ;  then  all  the  requisites  for  rice- planting  were  got  ready,  viz.  :—
1  [In   1893  these  months  extended  are  required.     This  is  not,  of  course, from  the  iyth  May  to  the  I4th  July.  intended  to  be  an  exhaustive  descrip- — C.O.B.]  tion  of  the  differences  between  the  two
2  [In  1893  from  the   i6th  May  to  systems  (for  which   there   is  here  no the  1 3th  June. — C.O.B.]  space),  but  merely  to  point  out  certain
3  In  what  may  be  called  the  "  dry  "  salient  differences.     A  specimen  of  the method  of  planting  rice  (bfrhuma  or  charms  used    by  the  orang  bOrhuma bMadang)    the    ceremonies    naturally  ("  dry  padi  "  planters)  will  be  found  in differ  somewhat,  as  the  forest  has  to  the  Appendix.     The  account  in  the  text be  felled,  if  not  every  year,  at  least  more  refers  only  to  the  wet  method,  which  is often  than  is  the  case  with  the  ' '  wet  "  by  far  the  more  important  one,  though system  ;  and  the  rice-seed  is  not  sown  the  dry  cultivation  is  probably  the  more in  nurseries  (as  a  rule),  but  either  scat-  ancient  of  the  two.
tered    broadcast  or   planted   with   the  4  An  account  of  the  birth  of  Muham-
dibble  whilst  the  ground  cultivated  is  mad  which  is  intoned  by  a  number  of
comparatively  dry  and  no  embankments  people  in  the  mosque.
220  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
"(i)  A  strong  buffalo  (to  pull  the  plough).
(2)  A  plough  with  its  appurtenances  (to  turn  over  the  earth  and
the  short  weeds).
(3)  A  harrow  with  its  appurtenances  (to  level  and  break  up
small  the  clods  of  earth  left  by  the  plough).
(4)  A  roller  with  its  appurtenances  (to  knock  down  the  long
weeds,  such  as  sedges,  in  fields  that  have  lain  fallow  for a  long  while).
(5)  A  wood-cutter's  knife,  to  mend  any  of  the  implements  that
may  get  out  of  order  at  the  time  of  ploughing.
(6)  A  hoe  to  repair   the   embankments  and  level  the  higher
grounds.
(7)  A  scythe l  to  cut  the  long  weeds.
(8)  And  a  whip  to  urge  the  buffalo  on  if  he  is  lazy.
"  3.  When  the  proper  season  has  arrived  for  begin- ning the  work  of  planting,  and  the  elders  have  come to  an  agreement  with  the  Pawang,  then  on  some Friday  after  the  service  in  the  Mosque  the  Penghulu addresses  all  the  people  there  present,  saying  that on  such  a  day  of  the  month  every  one  who  is  to take  part  in  rice-cultivation  must  bring  to  the  Mosque half  a  quart  of  grain  (for  '  mother-seed ')  in  order  that Maulud  prayers  may  be  read  over  it.  (At  that  time ketupats'2'  and  lepats*  are  prepared  for  the  men  who are  to  read  those  prayers.)
"  When  the  Maulud  prayers  are  over,  every  man goes  down  to  the  rice-field,  if  possible  on  the  same day  or  the  next  one,  in  order  to  begin  ploughing  the nursery  plot,  that  is,  the  plot  which  is  near  his  house or  in  which  he  has  been  in  the  habit  of  sowing  the seed  every  year.
1  The  tajak  may  perhaps  be  better  the  expressed  juice  of  the  pulp  of  the described  as  a   (kind   of)   hoe  than   a  cocoa-nut,  and  put  into  a  piece  of  plan- scythe,  tain  leaf  about  two  fingers  long,  which
2  Two  strips  of  cocoa-nut  leaf  are  is  then  folded  and  the  whole  is  steamed, braided  into  a  square  bag,  hollow  in-  that  is  put  into  a  pail  known  as  kukusan, side,  which  is  half  filled  with  rice,  and  which  is  placed  in  a  large  pan  contain- then  boiled  so  that  when  cooked  the  ing  water  having  a  fire  lighted  under  it rice  fills  the  bag.  so  that  the  contents  of  the  kukusan  are
3  Flour  is  mixed  with  sugar  and  with  cooked  by  means  of  steam  only.
v  SOWING  221
"  But  if  a  man  has  a  great  number  of  plots,  he  will begin  by  ploughing  half  of  them,  and  then  at  the  end of  the  month  of  Zilhijah  he  must  diligently  prepare the  nursery  plot  so  as  to  be  ready  in  about  ten  days' time.
OF  SOWING
"4.  Before  sowing  one  must  first  of  all  lay  out the  grain,  both  the  seed-grain  and  the  'mother-seed,' each  separately,  to  dry.  It  must  then  be  soaked  in a  vessel  (a  bucket  or  pot)  for  two  days  and  two  nights, after  which  it  is  taken  out,  strained  and  spread  quite evenly  on  a  mat  with  fresh  leaves  (areca-nut  fronds are  best),  and  every  afternoon  one  must  sprinkle  water on  it  in  order  that  the  germ  may  quickly  break through,  which  will  happen  probably  in  two  days'  time or  thereabouts.
"5.  While  the  seed  is  soaking,  the  nursery  plot must  be  carefully  prepared  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  must  be ploughed  over  again,  harrowed,  levelled,  ditched,  and the  soil  allowed  to  settle  ;  the  embankments  must  be mended,  and  the  surface  made  smooth.  When  the germs  have  sprouted  the  seed  is  taken  to  the  nursery plot.  Benzoin  supplied  by  the  Pawang  is  burnt, and  the  plot  sprinkled  with  tepong  tawar.1  Then a  beginning  is  made  by  sowing  the  'chief  of  the seed,'  i.e.  'mother-seed,'  in  one  corner  of  the  nursery prepared  for  the  purpose,  and  about  two  yards  square ; afterwards  the  rest  of  the  seed  is  sown  all  over  the plot.  It  is  well  to  sow  when  the  plot  contains  plenty of  water,  so  that  all  the  germs  of  the  seed  may  be
1   Ttyong  tawar  consists  of  rice-flour  dara,  sipuleh,  sitawar  and  chakar  bebek
mixed  with  water.     A  bundle  is  made  (a  small  shrub) ;  the  end  of  this  bundle
of  the  following  leaves,   ribu-ribu  (a  is  dipped  into  the  tfpong  tawar,  which
creeper),  gandarusa,  sfnjuang,  sambar  is  then  sprinkled  about.
222  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
uppermost,  and  the  roots  may  not  grow  long,  but  may be  pulled  up  easily.  The  time  for  sowing  must  be during  the  dark  half  of  the  month,  so  that  the  seedlings may  be  preserved  from  being  eaten  by  insects?
"  Three  days  after  the  seed  is  sown  the  young  shoots begin  to  rise  like  needles,  and  at  that  time  all  the water  should  be  drawn  off  the  plot ;  after  seven  days they  are  likened  to  a  sparrow's  tail,  and  about  the tenth  or  fifteenth  day  they  break  out  into  blades.  At that  period  the  water  is  again  let  into  the  plot,  little  by little,  in  order  that  the  stalks  of  the  seedlings  may grow  thick.
"  The  seedlings  have  to  remain  in  the  nursery  for  at least  forty  or  forty-four  days  from  the  time  of  sowing before  they  are  sufficiently  grown  ;  it  is  best  to  let  them remain  till  they  are  about  seventy  days  old.
"  6.  While  the  seedlings  are  in  the  nursery  the  other plots  are  being  ploughed,  one  after  another ;  and  this is  called  the  first  ploughing.  Then  the  embankments are  mended  and  re-formed  with  earth,  so  that  the  water in  the  field  may  not  escape  and  leave  it  dry.  After the  embankments  have  been  mended  the  harrowing begins  :  a  start  is  made  with  the  plot  that  was  first ploughed  (other  than  the  nursery  plot),  for  there  the earth  will  have  become  soft,  and  the  weeds  being rotten  after  many  days  of  soaking  in  the  water  will form  a  sort  of  manure.  Each  plot  is  so  dealt  with  in its  turn.  Then  all  have  to  be  ploughed  once  more (which  is  called  the  second  ploughing)  and  harrowed again  ;  for  the  first  harrowing  merely  breaks  up  the clods  of  earth,  and  a  second  is  required  to  reduce  them to  a  fine  state  and  to  kill  the  weeds.  Most  people, having  fin.t  used  an  iron  harrow,  use  a  wooden  one
1  The  italics  are  mine. — W.  S.
PLANTING  223
for  the  second  harrowing,  in  order  that  the  earth may  be  broken  up  quite  fine.  Their  rice  is  sure  to thrive  better  than  that  of  people  who  are  less  careful ; for  in  rice-planting,  as  the  saying  goes,  there  is  '  the plighted  hope  of  good  that  is  to  come,'  in  the  way  of bodily  sustenance  I  mean.  So  day  by  day  the  different plots  are  treated  in  the  way  that  has  been  described in  connection  with  the  nursery  plot  in  paragraph  5 above.
OF  PLANTING
"  7.  When  the  seedling  rice  has  been  in  the  nursery long  enough,  and  the  fields  are  clean  and  ready  for planting  (which  will  be  about  the  month  of  Safar,  or August)  the  seedlings  are  pulled  up  and  tied  together with  strips  of  dried  palas^  leaves  into  bundles  of the  size  known  as  sachekak  (i.e.  the  space  enclosed by  the  thumb  and  the  index  finger  when  their ends  meet).  If  the  roots  and  blades  are  long the  ends  can  be  clipped  a  little,  and  the  roots  are then  steeped  in  manure.  This  manure  is  made  of buffalo  bones  burnt  with  chaff  till  they  are  thoroughly calcined,  and  then  pounded  fine,  passed  through  a sieve  and  mixed  with  mud  :  that  is  the  best  kind of  manure  for  rice-planting,  and  is  known  as  '  stock manure.'  (It  can  also  be  applied  by  merely  scatter- ing it  in  the  fields.  In  that  case,  after  cutting  off  the ends  of  the  blades,  the  seedlings  are  planted,  and afterwards,  when  they  are  green  again  and  appear  to be  thriving,  the  manure  is  scattered  over  the  whole field.  There  are  some  places,  too,  where  no  manure at  all  is  used  because  of  the  perennial  richness  of the  soil.)
1  Licuala  paludosa,  Griff,  and  other  species.
224  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
"Afterwards  the  seedlings  are  allowed  to  remain exposed  to  the  air  for  about  two  nights,  and  then  taken to  the  field  to  be  planted.  The  bundles  are  broken up,  and  bunches  of  four  or  five  plants  together  are planted  at  intervals  of  a  span  all  over  the  different plots  till  all  are  filled  up.  If  there  are  very  many plots,  ten  or  fifteen  female  labourers  can  be  engaged to  assist  in  planting,  and  likewise  in  pulling  up  the seedlings,  at  a  wage  of  four  cents  for  every  hundred bundles.
OF    THE    RlCE    AFTER    IT    HAS    BEEN    TRANSPLANTED
"  8.  Ten  days  after  the  young  rice  has  been  trans- planted it  recovers  its  fresh  green  colour ;  in  thirty days  the  young  shoots  come  out ;  in  the  second  month it  increases  more  and  more,  and  in  the  third  it  becomes even  all  over.  After  three  months  and  a  half  its growth  is  stayed,  and  in  the  fourth  month  it  is  styled bunting  kechil.
"  At  that  stage  the  stalk  has  only  five  joints,  and from  that  period  it  must  be  fumigated  daily  till  the grain  appears.
"  About  the  time  when  the  stalk  has  six  joints  it  is called  bunting  besar  ;  in  forty  days  more  the  grain  is visible  here  and  there,  and  twenty  days  later  it  spreads everywhere.  At  this  time  all  the  water  in  the  field must  be  drawn  off  so  that  the  grain  may  ripen  quickly. After  five  or  six  days  it  ripens  in  patches,  and  a  few days  later  the  rice  is  altogether  ripe.
"  From  the  time  of  transplanting  to  the  time  when it  is  ripe  is  reckoned  six  months,  not  counting  the days  spent  in  ploughing  and  in  growing  it  in  the nursery,  which  may  be  a  month  or  two,  or  even  (if
v  REAPING  22$
there  are  many  plots)  as  much  as  three  months  to  the end  of  the  ploughing.
OF  REAPING  AND  TAKING  THE  SOUL  OF  THE  RICE
"  9.  When  one  wishes  to  begin  reaping  the  grain one  must  first  have  the  Pawang's  permission,  and  burn benzoin  supplied  by  him  in  the  field.
"  The  following  implements  must  be  got  ready, viz.  : —
"(r)  A  small  basket  to  hold  the   rice  cut  first,  known  as  the '  Soul  of  the  Rice '  (semangat  padt).
(2)  Kjari  lipan1  to  put  round  the  small  basket.
(3)  A  string  of  terap-  bark  to  tie  up  the  rice  that  is  cut  first.
(4)  A  small  stem  of  bamboo,  of  the  variety  known  as  buloh
kasap,  with  a  flag  attached,  which  is  to  be  planted  in  the small  basket  as  a  sign  of  the  '  Soul  of  the  Rice '  that  has been  cut  first.
(5)  A  small  white  cloth  to  wrap  up  the  '  Soul  of  the  Rice.'
(6)  An  anchak  3  to  hold  the  brasier.
(7)  A  brasier,  in  which  to  burn  the  incense  provided  by  the
Pawang.
(8)  A  nail  and  a  kind  of  nut,  known  as  buah  kerasf  to  be  put
into  the  anchak  together  with  the  brasier.
"  When  the  rice  is  ripe  all  over,  one  must  first  take the  '  Soul '  out  of  all  the  plots  of  one's  field.  You choose  the  spot  where  the  rice  is  best  and  where  it is  '  female '  (that  is  to  say,  where  the  bunch  of  stalks is  big)  and  where  there  are  seven  joints  in  the  stalk. You  begin  with  a  bunch  of  this  kind  and  clip  seven stems  to  be  the  '  soul  of  the  rice ' ;  and  then  you clip  yet  another  handful  to  be  the  '  mother-seed '  for
1  Jari  lipan — lit.   centipede's   feet,       leaf  braided  into  an  open  square  shape i.e.  a  sort  of  fringe  generally  made  of      with  cords  attached  to  the  four  corners, plaited  strips  of  cocoa-nut  leaf.  the  ends  of  the  cords  being  joined  so
2  Tfrap — a  kind  of  wild  bread-fruit       that  it  can  be  hung  up.
tree.  *  Buah  kfras,  the  "  Candle-nut."
3  Strips  of  bamboo  or  fronds  of  palm-
226  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
the  following  year.  The  '  Soul '  is  wrapped  in  a  white cloth  tied  with  a  cord  of  terap  bark,  and  made  into the  shape  of  a  little  child  in  swaddling  clothes,  and put  into  the  small  basket.  The  '  mother-seed '  is  put into  another  basket,  and  both  are  fumigated  with benzoin,  and  then  the  two  baskets  are  piled the  one  on  the  other  and  taken  home,  and  put  into the  kepuk  (the  receptacle  in  which  the  rice  is  stored).
"  10.  One  must  wait  three  days  (called  \he.pantang tuai)  before  one  may  clip  or  cut  any  more  of  the  rice. At  first  only  one  or  two  basketfuls  of  rice  are  cut ;  the rice  is  dried  in  the  sun,  winnowed  in  a  winnowing basket,  and  cleaned  in  a  fanning  machine,  pounded  to free  it  from  the  husk,  so  that  it  becomes  beras  (husked rice),  and  then  boiled  so  that  it  becomes  nasi  (cooked rice),  and  people  are  invited  to  feast  on  it.
"n.  Then  a  bucket  is  made  for  the  purpose  of threshing  the  rest  of  the  rice,  and  a  granary  built  to keep  it  in  while  it  remains  in  the  field,  and  five  or  six labourers  are  engaged  to  reap  and  thresh  it  (banting)? Their  hours  of  working  are  from  6  to  11.30  A.M., and  all  the  rice  they  thresh  they  put  into  the  granary.
"12.  If  the  crop  is  a  good  one  a  gallon  of  seed  will produce  a  hundredfold.  Each  plot  in  a  field  takes about  a  gallon  of  seed.
"13.  When  the  rice  has  all  been  cut  it  is  winnowed in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  chaff,  and  then  laid  out  in the  sun  till  quite  dry,  so  that  it  may  not  get  mouldy  if kept  for  a  year.
"  Then  the  wages  of  the  labourers  are  taken  out  of it  at  the  rate  of  two  gallons  out  of  every  ten.  When
1  The  cut  rice  is  beaten,  by  handfuls,  this  process  is  called  mimbanting  padi, against  the  inner  edge  of  the  bucket  so  a  phrase  here  rendered  by  "  threshing." that  the  grain  falls  into  the  bucket ;
v  METHODS  OF  REAPING  227
that  is  settled,  if  the  rice  is  not  to  be  sold,  it  is  taken home  and  put  into  the  rice-chest.
"  Whenever  you  want  to  eat  of  it,  you  take  out  a basketful  at  a  time  and  dry  it  in  the  sun.  Then  you turn  it  in  the  winnowing  basket,  and  clean  it  in  the fanning  machine,  pound  it  to  convert  it  into  beras, and  put  a  sufficiency  of  it  in  a  pot  and  wash  it. Enough  water  is  then  poured  over  it  to  cover  it, and  it  is  put  on  the  kitchen  fire  till  it  is  boiled  and becomes  nasi,  when  it  can  be  eaten.
"14.  The  custom  of  reaping  with  a  sickle  (sabit)  and threshing  the  rice  as  described  in  paragraph  1 1  is  a modern  method,  and  is  at  present  mainly  practised  by the  people  living  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  town  of Malacca,  in  order  to  get  the  work  done  quickly ;  but in  olden  times  it  was  not  allowed,  and  even  to  this  day the  people  who  live  in  the  inland  parts  of  the  territory of  Malacca  prefer  to  clip  their  rice  with  a  tuai,1  and put  it  into  their  baskets  a  handful  at  a  time  [i.e.  without threshing  it].  (If  labourers  are  employed  to  do  this their  wage  is  one-tenth  of  the  rice  cut.)  It  takes  ever so  many  days  to  get  the  work  done,  but  the  idea  is that  this  method  is  the  pious  one,  the  '  Soul  of  the Rice '  not  being  disturbed  thereby.  A  good  part  of the  people  hold  this  belief,  and  assert  that  since  the custom  of  threshing  the  rice  has  been  introduced,  the crops  have  been  much  less  abundant  than  in  years of  olden  time  when  it  was  the  custom  to  use  the  tuai only.
"15.  If  a  man  has  broad  fields  so  that  he  is  unable to  plant  them  all  by  his  own  labour,  he  will  often  allow another  to  work  them  on  an  agreement,  either  of  equal
1  The  tuai  or  pftntwai  is  a  much       (sabit)  and  cuts  only  a  few  ears  at  a smaller    instrument    than    the    sickle       time,  vide  supra,  p.  58.
228  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
division  of  the  produce  (each  bearing  an  equal  share of  the  hire  of  a  buffalo  and  all  other  expenses  incidental to  rice-planting),  or  of  threefold  division  (that  is,  for example,  the  owner  bears  all  expenses,  in  which  case the  man  who  does  the  work  can  get  a  third  of  the produce ;  or  the  latter  bears  all  expenses,  in  which case  the  owner  only  gets  a  third  of  the  produce).  Or again,  the  land  can  be  let ;  for  instance,  a  field  which ordinarily  produces  a  koyan l  of  rice  a  year  will  fetch  a rent  of  about  two  hundred  gallons  more  or  less.
"  1 6.  Every  cultivator  who  does  not  act  in  accord- ance with  the  ordinance  laid  down  in  paragraphs  9 and  10  above,  will  be  in  the  same  case  as  if  he disregarded  all  the  prohibitions  laid  down  in  connection with  planting.  If  a  man  does  not  carry  out  this procedure  he  is  sure  to  fail  in  the  end ;  his  labour  will be  in  vain  and  will  not  fulfil  his  desires,  for  the  virtue of  all  these  ordinances  and  prohibitions  lies  in  the  fact that  they  protect  the  rice,  and  drive  away  all  its enemies,  such  as  grubs,  rats,  swine,  and  the  like."2
I  will  now  deal  with  the  ceremonies  indicated  in the  foregoing  article  from  the  ceremonial  point  of  view exclusively.
THE  SOWING  OF  THE  RICE-SEED
The  ceremony  to  be  observed  at  the  sowing  of  the rice-seed  was  thus  described  to  me  by  the  Pawang who  performed  the  reaping  ceremony  described  be- low : —
1  A  koyan,  as  a  measure  of  weight,  The  term  gantang\&s  been  rendered
contains  40 pikuls=  5333 \  Ibs.  here   by   "gallon,"   of  which  it  is  at
Rather  over  20  gallons  (gantang)  of  present  the  legal  equivalent,   but   the
rice  (padi)  go  to  a  pikul.  native  gantang  had  a  standard  varying
The  term  koyan   is   also  used  as  a  according  to  locality,
measure  of  capacity,  in  which  sense  it  2  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  30,  pp.  297-
contains  800  gantangs.  304.
v  THE  SOWING  CEREMONY  229
"  First  arrange  four  poles  upon  the  ground,  so  as to  form  a  rectangular  frame  (galang  dapor),  in  the middle  of  the  clearing.  Then  plant  in  succession  at the  four  corners—
"  i.  A  young  banana- tree.
2.  A  plant  of  lemon  grass  (serai}.
3.  A  stem  of  sugar-cane  (of  the  kind  called  lanjong).
4.  A  plant  of  saffron  (kunyif).
Perform  the  operation  carefully,  so  that  they  are  all likely  to  live.
"In  the  centre  of  the  ground  enclosed  by  the  frame deposit  a  cocoa-nut  shell  full  of  water.
"  Early  next  morning  go  out  and  observe  the  omens. If  the  frame  has  moved  aside  (berkuak)  ever  so  little, or  if  the  water  has  been  spilt,  it  is  a  bad  omen.  But if  not,  and  if  the  water  in  the  cocoa-nut  shell  has  not been  spilt,  or  if  a  black  ant  (semuf)  or  a  white  ant (anei-anei)  is  found  in  the  water,  it  is  a  good  sign.
"When  good  omens  have  been  obtained,  proceed by  planting  rice-seed  in  seven  holes  with  a  dibble  of satambun  wood,  repeating  the  following  charm  :—
"  In  the  name  of  God,  etc., Peace  be  with  you,  Prophet  'Tap,
Here  I  lodge  with  you,  my  child,  S'ri  Gading,  Gemala  Gading,1 But  within  from  six  months  to  seven I  will  come  and  receive  it  back, Cluck,  cluck,  soul !  cluck,  cluck,  soul !  cluck,  cluck,  soul ! "
THE  PLANTING  OUT  OF  THE  YOUNG  RICE
The  following  account  (by  Mr.  C.  O.  Blagden)  of the  ceremony  of  planting  out  the  young  rice  (from  the
1  On   my   asking    her   what    these       and   "gfniala  gading"  the  kernel  or names  signified,  the  Pawang  told  me       grain  of  the  rice-fruit, that   "  S'ri  gading"   meant  the  husk,
230  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
rice-nursery)  appeared  in  the  Journal  of  the  Straits Asiatic  Society  in  1896  : —
"In  agricultural  operations  the  animistic  ideas  of the  Malays  are  clearly  apparent :  thus,  before  the  rice is  cut  a  sort  of  ritual  is  performed  which  is  known  as puji  padi,  and  which  is  regarded,  apparently,  as  a  kind of  propitiatory  service,  a  sort  of  apology  to  the  padi (rice)  for  reaping  it.  The  padi  is  usually  sprinkled with  tepong  tawar  (flour  mixed  with  water)  before  the reaping  is  commenced,  and  the  first  lot  cut  is  set  apart for  a  ceremonial  feast.
"  At  planting  there  are  also  ceremonies  :  as  a  rule  the beginning  of  the  planting  season  is  ushered  in  by  a visit  of  the  whole  body  of  villagers  to  the  most  highly revered  kramat  in  the  neighbourhood,  where  the  usual offerings  are  made  and  prayers  are  said.  Sometimes, however,  there  is  a  special  service  known  as  bapua? consisting  of  a  sort  of  mock  combat,  in  which  the evil  spirits  are  believed  to  be  expelled  from  the  rice- fields  by  the  villagers  :  this  is  not  done  every  year,  but once  in  three  or  four  years.
"  Another  occasional  service  of  a  peculiar  character, which  is  not  of  very  frequent  occurrence,  is  the  cere- mony which  would  perhaps  be  best  described  as  the propitiation  of  the  earth-spirit.  Some  years  ago  I happened,  by  chance,  to  be  present  at  a  function  of  this kind,  and  as  its  details  may  be  of  some  interest  as illustrating  the  wide  dispersion  of  certain  points  of ritual,  I  will  end  these  notes  by  giving  a  full  descrip- tion of  it  as  noted  down  at  the  time.  It  was  in  the month  of  October,  and  I  happened  to  be  out  shooting
1  Menangkabau    and    Naning   pro-  used  as  a  sort  of  javelin  in  this  mock nunciation   for  blrpuar.     Puar  is  the  combat.     [In  Selangor  this  mock  corn- name  of  a  jungle  plant,  said  to  be  akin  bat  is  called  singketa. — W.S.] to  cardamom,   the  stem   of  which    is
v  THE  PLANTING  CEREMONY  231
snipe  in  the  /0afr-fields  of  the  village  of  Sebatu  on  a Sunday  morning,  when  I  was  met  by  the  Penghulu, the  headman  of  the  village,  who  asked  me  to  leave  off shooting  for  an  hour  or  so.  As  I  was  having  fair sport,  I  naturally  wanted  to  know  the  reason  why,  so he  explained  that  the  noise  of  gunshots  would  irritate the  hantu,  and  render  unavailing  the  propitiatory  service which  was  then  about  to  begin.  Further  inquiry elicited  the  statement  that  the  hantu  in  question  was the  one  who  presided  over  rice-lands  and  agricultural operations,  and  as  I  was  told  that  there  would  be  no objection  to  my  attending  the  ceremony,  I  went  there and  then  to  the  spot  to  watch  the  proceedings.  The place  was  a  square  patch  of  grass-lawn  a  few  yards wide,  which  had  evidently  for  years  been  left  untouched by  the  plough,  though  surrounded  by  many  acres  of rice-fields.  On  this  patch  a  small  wooden  altar  had been  built :  it  consisted  simply  of  a  small  square  plat- form of  wood  or  bamboo  raised  about  three  or  four feet  above  the  ground,  each  corner  being  supported  by a  small  sapling  with  the  leaves  and  branches  left  on  it and  overshadowing  the  platform,  the  sides  of  which appeared  to  face  accurately  towards  the  four  cardinal points.  To  the  western  side  was  attached  a  small bamboo  ladder  leading  from  the  ground  to  the  edge  of the  platform.  At  the  four  corners  of  the  patch  of  grass were  four  larger  saplings  planted  in  the  ground.  On the  branches  of  all  these  trees  were  hung  a  number  of ketupats,  which  are  small  squarish  bags  plaited  of  strips of  the  leaves  of  the  screw-pine  (mengkiiang)  or  some similar  plant,  like  the  material  of  which  native  bags and  mats  are  made.  A  larger  ketupat  hung  over  the centre  of  the  altar,  and  all  of  them  were  filled  with  a preparation  of  boiled  rice.  On  the  altar  were  piled  up
232  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
various  cooked  foods  laid  on  plantain  leaves,  including the  flesh  of  a  goat  cooked  in  the  ordinary  way,  as  well as  rice  and  different  kinds  of  condiments  and  sweet- meats. The  Pawang  was  present  as  well  as  a  number of  the  villagers,  and  soon  after  my  arrival  with  the Penghulu  the  ceremony  began  by  some  of  the  villagers producing  out  of  a  bag  the  skin  of  a  black  male  goat with  the  head  and  horns  attached  and  containing  the entrails  (the  flesh  having  been  cooked  and  laid  on  the altar  previously).  A  large  iron  nail  four  or  five  inches long,  and  thick  in  proportion,  was  placed  vertically  in a  hole  about  two  feet  deep  which  had  been  dug  under the  altar,  and  the  remains  of  the  goat  were  also  buried in  it,  with  the  head  turned  towards  the  east,  the  hole being  then  closed  and  the  turf  replaced.  Some  of  the goat's  blood,  in  two  cocoa-nut  shells  (tempurong),  was placed  on  the  ground  near  the  south  side  and  south- west corner  of  the  altar  close  to  the  ladder.
"  The  Pawang,  after  assisting  at  these  preliminaries, then  took  his  stand  at  the  west  side  of  the  altar,  looking eastward :  he  covered  his  head,  but  not  his  face,  with his  sarong  wrapped  round  it  like  a  shawl,  and  pro- ceeded to  light  a  torch,  the  end  of  which  was  tipped with  incense  (kemenyari).  With  this  he  touched  the bottom  of  the  altar  platform  four  times.  He  then  took a  cup  of  tepong  tawar  and  dipped  in  it  a  small  bundle of  four  kinds  of  leaves,  with  which  he  then  sprinkled the  north-west  and  south-east  corners  of  the  platform. He  then  coughed  three  times — whether  this  was  part  of the  ritual,  or  a  purely  incidental  occurrence,  I  am  unable to  say,  as  it  was  not  practicable  to  stop  the  ceremony for  the  purpose  of  asking  questions — and  again  applied the  torch  under  the  altar  and  sprinkled  with  tepong  tawar all  the  corners  of  it,  as  well  as  the  rungs  of  the  ladder.
v  PROPITIATION  OF  THE  SPIRIT  233
"  At  this  stage  of  the  proceedings  four  men  stationed in  the  rice-field  beyond  the  four  corners  of  the  patch of  turf,  each  threw  a  kVtupat  diagonally  across  to  one another,  while  the  rest  of  the  assembly,  headed  by  the PVnghulu,  chanted  the kalimak,or  Muhammadan  creed, three  times.
"  Then  a  man  holding  a  large  bowl  started  from  a point  in  the  rice-field  just  outside  the  north  side  of the  patch  of  turf,  and  went  round  it  (first  in  a  westerly direction).  As  he  walked,  he  put  handfuls  of  the  rice into  his  mouth  and  spat  or  vomited  them  out,  with much  noise,  as  if  to  imitate  violent  nausea,  into  the field.  He  was  followed  closely  by  another  who  also held  a  bowl  filled  with  pieces  of  raw  tapioca  root  and beras  bertih  (rice  roasted  in  a  peculiar  way),1  which  he threw  about  into  the  field.  Both  of  them  went  right round  the  grass  plot.  The  Pawang  then  took  his  cup of  tepong  tawar  and  sprinkled  the  anak  padi,  that  is, the  rice-shoots  which  were  lying  in  bundles  along  the south  and  east  sides  of  the  altar  ready  for  planting. Having  sprinkled  them  he  cut  off  the  ends,  as  is  usually done ;  and  after  spitting  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  he proceeded  to  plant  them  in  the  field.  A  number  of others  then  followed  his  lead  and  planted  the  rest  of the  rice-plants,  and  then  a  sweetmeat  made  of  cocoa- nut  and  sugar  was  handed  round,  and  Muhammadan prayers  were  said  by  some  duly  qualified  person,  an orang  'alim  or  a  lebei,  and  the  ceremony  was  concluded.
"It  was  explained  to  me  that  the  blood  and  the  food were  intended  for  the  Jtantu,  and  the  ladder  up  to  the altar  was  for  his  convenience  ;  in  fact  the  whole  affair was  a  propitiatory  service,  and  offers  curious  analogies with  the  sacrificial  ceremonials  of  some  of  the  wild
1  Bfras  MHtfft,'"  parched"  rice.
234  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
aboriginal  tribes  of  Central  India  who  have  not  been converted  to  Hinduism  or  Islam.  That  it  should  exist in  a  Malay  community  within  twenty  miles  of  the  town of  Malacca,  where  Muhammadanism  has  been  estab- lished for  about  six1  centuries,  is  certainly  strange.  Its obvious  inconsistency  with  his  professed  religion  does not  strike  the  average  Malay  peasant  at  all.  It  is, however,  the  fact  that  these  observances  are  not  re- garded with  much  favour  by  the  more  strictly Muhammadan  Malays  of  the  towns,  and  especially  by those  that  are  partially  of  Arab  descent.  These  latter have  not  much  influence  in  country  districts,  but privately  I  have  heard  some  of  them  express  dis- approval of  such  rites  and  even  of  the  ceremonies performed  at  kramats.  According  to  them,  the  latter might  be  consistent  with  Muhammadan  orthodoxy  on the  understanding  that  prayers  were  addressed  solely to  the  Deity  ;  but  the  invocation  of  spirits  or  deceased saints  and  their  propitiation  by  offerings  could  not  be regarded  as  otherwise  than  polytheistic  idolatry.  Of course  such  a  delicate  distinction — almost  as  subtle  as that  between  dulia  and  latria  in  the  Christian  worship of  saints — is  entirely  beyond  the  average  Malay  mind  ; and  everything  is  sanctioned  by  immemorial  custom, which  in  an  agricultural  population  is  more  deeply- rooted  than  any  book-learning  ;  so  these  rites  are  likely to  continue  for  some  time,  and  will  only  yield  gradually to  the  spread  of  education.  Such  as  they  are,  they  seem to  be  interesting  relics  of  an  old-world  superstition.
"  I  have  mentioned  only  a  few  such  points,  and  only such  as  have  been  brought  directly  to  my  knowledge  ; there  are  hosts  of  other  quaint  notions,  such  as  the  theory
1  Five  would  probably  be  nearer  the  mark,  but  Malay  chronology  is  very uncertain.
v  THE  REAPING  CEREMONY  235
of  lucky  and  unlucky  days  and  hours,  on  which  whole treatises  have  been  written,  and  which  regulate  every movement  of  those  who  believe  in  them  ;  the  belief  in amulets  and  charms  for  averting  all  manner  of  evils, supernatural  and  natural ;  the  practice  during  epidemics of  sending  out  to  sea  small  elaborately  constructed vessels  which  are  supposed  to  carry  off  the  malignant spirits  responsible  for  the  disease  (of  which  I  remember a  case  a  few  years  ago  in  the  village  of  Sempang, where  the  beneficial  effect  was  most  marked) ;  the widespread  belief  in  the  power  of  menuju,  that  is, doing  injury  at  a  distance  by  magic,  in  which  the Malays  believe  the  wild  junglemen  especially  to  be adepts  ;  the  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  forms  of  words  as love-charms  and  as  a  protection  against  spirits  and wild  beasts — in  fact,  an  innumerable  variety  of  super- stitious ideas  exist  among  Malays." l
THE  REAPING  CEREMONY
On  the  28th  January  1897  I  witnessed  (at  Chodoi, in  the  Kuala  Langat  district  of  Selangor)  the  cere- mony of  fetching  home  the  Rice-soul).
Time  of  Ceremony. — I  arrived  at  the  house  belong- ing to  the  Malay  owner  of  the  rice-field  a  little  past
8  A.M.,  the  hour  at  which  the  ceremony  was  to  take place    having    been    fixed    at   angkat   kening  (about
9  A.M.)  a  few  days  previously.     On  my  arrival  I  found the  Pawang  (sorceress),    an   aged    Selangor  woman, seated  in  front  of  the  baskets  required  for  the  cere- mony.2
1  J.R.A.S.)  S.B.,  No.  29,  pp.  7-12.       her  left  (the  big  one  being  supposed  to
2  These  were  newly -plaited  round       contain   seven,    the  medium  size  five, baskets,  three  in  number,  and  diminish-       and  the  smallest  one  three,  gtmalan  of ing  in  size  from  the  Paivang's  right  to      padf)  ;    they  were  each  bound   round,
236  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
Accessories. — At  her  extreme  left  stood  one  of  the circular  brass  trays  with  high  sides  which  are  called dulang  by  the  Malays,  containing  the  following objects  :—
1 .  A  small  bowl  of  u  parched  rice  "  (b'ras  ber'titi).
2.  A  small  bowl  of  "saffron  rice"  (Vras  kunyif),
3.  A  small  bowl  of  "  washed  rice  "  (tfras  basoK).
4.  A  small  bowl  of  "  oil  of  frankincense."
5.  A  small  bowl  of  "oil  of  Celebes  "  (minyak  Bugis\
6.  A  small  bowl  of  "  incense  "  (kem'nyati).
7.  A  small  bundle  of  incense  (in  addition  to  the  bowl).
8.  One  of  the  hard  jungle-nuts  called  buah  Kras  (the  candle-nut).
9.  One  of  the  shells  called  Krang  (a  cockle  shell).
10.  A  hen's  egg.
11.  A  stone  (a  small  block  of  quartz).
12.  A  large  iron  nail.
13  to  15.  Three  Malay  reaping  instruments  (penuwei).1
Close  to  the  dulang  stood  a  cocoa-nut  shell  filled with  the  tepong  tawar,  which  plays  so  prominent a  part  in  Malay  magic  ceremonies,  and  a  brush  made up  of  the  leaves  of  seven  different  plants,  bound  up as  usual  with  a  cord  of  kulit  frap  (the  bark  of  the Wild  Breadfruit),  and  ribu-ribn  (a  kind  of  small  creeper). The  plants  which  supplied  the  leaves  of  which  the brush  was  composed,  were  as  follows  :—
i.  Sapenok.  2.  SapanggiL  3.  Jenjuang  (or  len- juang]  merah  (the  Red  Dracaena).  4.  Gandarusa. 5.  Pulut-pulut.  6.  Selaguri.  7.  Sambau  dara  (a  kind of  grass).
But  the  most  interesting  object  was  a  small  oval- just  under  the  rim,  with  the  female  wood  called  pompong ;  the  reason variety  of  the  creeper  called  ribu-ribu  given  being  that  the  pompong  was freshly  gathered  that  morning.  the  wood  of  which  these  instruments
1  One  of  these  was  called  the  p?nu-  were  originally  made,  whilst  what  I wet  sulong  (lit.  eldest  rice  -  cutter),  may  call  the  handle  of  the  instrument which  was  only  to  be  used — when  the  was  made  of  a  slip  of  bamboo  stopped Pawang  had  done  with  it  —  by  the  from  end  to  end  with  wax.  About owner  of  the  rice-field,  and  the  blade  the  other  two  penuweis  there  was of  which  is  fitted  into  a  piece  of  the  nothing  specially  remarkable.
v  CEREMONIAL  PREPARATIONS  237
shaped  basket  bound  with  the  ribu-ribu  creeper, and  about  fourteen  inches  long,  which  was  standing just  in  front  of  the  three  rice-baskets  and  close  to  the Pawang,  and  which,  as  I  afterwards  found  out,  was intended  to  serve  as  the  cradle  of  the  Rice-soul  (or "  Rice-baby ").  I  examined  it,  however,  and  found that  as  yet  it  only  contained  the  following  objects  :—
1.  A  strip  of  white  cloth  (folded  up  and  lying  at  the  bottom  of
the  basket).
2.  Some  parti-coloured  thread  (benang  panchawarna  or  pancha-
rond).
3.  A  hen's  egg.
4.  One  of  the  hard  jungle-nuts  (candle-nuts)  already  referred  to.
5.  A  cockle  shell  (k 'rang).
6.  A  long  iron  nail.
7.  Five  cubits  of  red  cloth  by  means  of  which  the  soul-basket
was  to  be  slung  round  the  neck  of  its  bearer.  (The  cor- recter  custom  would  require  an  expensive  cloth  of  the kind  called  jong  saraf,  or  the  "  Loaded  Junk,"  accord- ing to  my  informant  the  Pawang.)
Three  new  Malay  skirts  or  sarongs  were  added, (one  to  each  basket),  and  everything  being  ready,  the various  receptacles  described  above  were  entrusted  to five  female  bearers  (Penjawat),  who  descended  from the  house,  with  the  Pawang  at  their  head,  and  set  out for  the  rice-field.  Before  they  had  gone  many  yards they  were  joined  by  the  owner  of  the  field,  who  walked in  front  of  them  bearing  what  was  called  ti\z  junjongan padi.  This  was  the  stem  and  leaves  of  a  dark  red kind  of  sugar-cane,  which  was  used  in  substitution for  the  black  or  "  raven  "  variety  (tebu  gagaK]  which, the  Pawang  explained,  would  have  been  used  in  pre- ference if  it  had  been  obtainable.  Meanwhile  the procession  passed  on,  and  the  Pawang  repeated  as we  went  the  following  prayer  to  the  spirits  : —
238  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate, Peace  be  with  thee,  O  Prophet  'Tap,  in  whose  charge  is  the  Earth, I  know  the  origin  of  the  Rice,  S'ri  Gading,  Gemala  Gading, That  (dwelleth  at)  the  end  of  the  clearing,  and  that  (dwelleth  at)
the  beginning  (top)  of  the  clearing ; That  is  scattered  broadcast,  that  is  cast  headlong, That  is  over-run  (!)  by  the  ants  called  Silambada. Ho,  Dang  'Pok,  Dang  Meleni,1  (and) Dang  Salamat,  who  carriest  the  pole  slung  on  thy  back, Gather  together  and  press  hitherwards  your  attendants. May  safety  and  our  daily  bread  be  granted  us  by  God."
On  reaching  the  rice  the  procession  filed  through a  lane  already  made  in  the  rice,  until  the  "mother- sheaf"  was  reached  from  which  the  Rice-soul  was  to be  taken.  But  immediately  on  arriving  at  the  spot, and  before  depositing  the  rice-baskets  on  the  ground, the  Pawang  repeated  these  lines  : —
"  Herons  from  all  this  region, Roost  ye  upon  the  shaft  of  my  bow ; Retire  ye,  O  Spectral  Reapers, That  we  may  deposit  our  baskets  upon  the  ground."
Here  the  baskets  were  deposited,  and  the  Pawang
1  These  are  the  names  of  two  girls  fire.       Then    said    Ampu    to    Malin,
mentioned   in   the    "Malay   Annals"  '  What  is  that  light  which  is  so  brilliant  ?
(Sejarah  Malayu)  to  whose  rice  there  I  am  frightened  to  look  at  it.'      'Make
happened  a  strange  phenomenon.     The  no  noise,'  said  Malin,  'it  is  some  great
following   is    Leyden's   translation    (in  snake  or  naga.'1     Then  they  both  lay
which  the  names  appear  as  Ampu  and  quiet  for  fear.      When  it  was  daylight
Malin).    "  The  name  of  its  (the  country  they  arose  and  went  to  see  what  it  was
of  Palembang's)  river  was  Muartatang  shone  so  bright  during  the  night.    They
(Muartenang  ?)  into  which  falls  another  both  ascended  the  hill,  and  found  the
river  named    Sungey    Malayu    (Malay  grain  of  the  rice  converted  into  gold,
River),  near  the  source  of  which  is  a  the  leaves  into  silver,  and   the  stalks
mountain  named  the  mountain  Sagan-  into   brass,   and   they   were    extremely
tang  Maha  Miru  (v.  p.  2,  supra).   There  surprised,  and  said,  '  This  is  what  we
were  two  young  women   of  Belidung,  observed    during    the    night.'  "       The
the  one   named   Wan-Ampu,  and  the  account    proceeds    to    show    how    the
other  Wan-Malin,  employed   in  culti-  prodigy  was  due  to  a  supernatural  visit
vating  rice  on   this    mountain,    where  from  a  descendant  of  Raja   Secander
they   had    large    and    productive  rice-  Zulkarneini.  —  Leyden,    Mai.     Ann.,
grounds.     One  night  they  beheld  their  pp.   20,  21.      The  words  in  brackets
rice-fields  gleaming  and  glittering  like  are  mine.
v  RITUAL  OF  THE  CEREMONY  239
took  up  her  station  in  front  of  the  mother-sheaf,  of which  mention  has  just  been  made.
Covering  her  head  with  a  flowing  white  cloth  of which  the  ends  fell  upon  her  shoulders,  the  Pawang now  stood  up  facing  the  sheaf,  and  waved  the  ends  of this  cloth  thrice  upward  to  the  right,  thrice  upward  to the  left,  and  finally  thrice  upward  to  the  right  again. Then  for  a  few  moments  she  stood  still,  close  to  the sheaf  with  her  head  bent  forward  and  buried  among the  ears,  after  which  she  reseated  herself  and  dabbled the  tepong  tawar  thrice  upon  the  roots  of  the  sheaf. One  of  the  female  bearers  now  planted  the  stem  of  the sugar-cane  upright  in  the  centre  of  the  sheaf,1  whilst the  Pawang  sprinkled  it  with  the  tepong  tawar, and  then  holding  the  sharpened  end  of  it  over  the incense,  fumigated  it,  saying  : —
"  Peace  be  with  thee,  O  Prophet  'Tap  ! Lo,  I  plant  this  Sugar-cane For  you  to  lean  against,
Since  I  am  about  to  take  away  this  Soul  of  yours,  S'ri  Gading, And  carry  it  home  to  your  palace, Cluck,  cluck,  soul !  cluck,  cluck,  soul !  cluck,  cluck,  soul !  "
Here  the  Pawang  and  Penjawat  (Female  Bearer), together  proceeded  to  plant  the  sugar-cane  in  the centre  of  the  sheaf,  and  (pressing  the  sheaf  more  tightly round  the  sugar-cane)  drew  the  waist  of  the  sheaf together  and  belted  it  with  some  of  the  outer  stems  of the  sheaf  itself ;  then  the  Pawang  applied  the  tepong
1  Whilst  drawing  together  the  heads  "  Cluck,  cluck,  soul  of  S'ri  Gading,  Gemala r  the   sheaf  before   actually  planting          This^emof  yours  is  molten  silver, tie    sugar-cane    in    the    ground,    the          Your  leaves  are  copper  overlaid, allowing  lines  were  repeated  by  the          Your  stalk  is  gold, o  Your  gram  is  fine  gold.
I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  what
slmansat^riGading&malaGadinsl        >mas    "•*&**    means,    as    the   Pawang Batane-' kau  perak  bfrtuanf  could  not  explain  it  (though  she  insisted
3£&*Ste£S&'~*~*-'    ?at.u  was  right>' and  u  is  not  in  an>'
(sic).  dictionary.
240  VEGETA  TION  CHARMS  CHAP.
tawar  once  more  to  the  sheaf,  and  after  fumigating  it in  the  usual  manner,  ran  her  hands  up  it.  Next  she took  in  one  hand  (out  of  the  brass  tray)  the  stone  and the  egg,  cockle-shell  and  candle-nut,  and  with  the  other planted  the  big  iron  nail  in  the  centre  of  the  sheaf  close to  the  foot  of  the  sugar-cane.  Then  she  took  in  her left  hand  the  cord  of  tree-bark,  and  after  fumigating  it, together  with  all  the  vessels  of  rice  and  oil,  took  up some  of  the  rice  and  strewed  it  round  about  the  sheaf, and  then  tossed  the  remainder  thrice  upwards,  some of  it  falling  upon  the  rest  of  the  company  and  myself.
This  done,  she  took  the  end  of  the  cord  in  both hands,  and  encircling  the  sheaf  with  it  near  the  ground, drew  it  slowly  upward  to  the  waist  of  the  sheaf,  and tied  it  there,  after  repeating  what  is  called  the  "  Ten Prayers"  (do'a  sapulofi]  without  once  taking  breath: —
"  The  first,  is  God, The  second,  is  Muhammad, The  third,  Holy  Water  of  the  five  Hours  of  Prayer  by  Day  and
Night,
The  fourth,  is  Pancha  Indra, The  fifth,  the  Open  Door  of  Daily  Bread, The  sixth,  the  Seven  Stories  of  the  Palace-Tower, The  seventh,  the  Open  Door  of  the  Rice-sifting  Platform, The  eighth,  the  Open  Door  of  Paradise, The  ninth,  is  the  Child  in  its  Mother's  Womb, The  tenth,  is  the  Child  created  by  God,  the  reason  of  its  creation
being  our  Lord. Grant  this,  'Isa  ! x Grant  this,  Moses  ! Grant  this,  Joseph ! Grant  this,  David  ! Grant  me,  from  God  (the  opening  of)  all  the  doors  of  my  daily
bread,  on  earth,  and  in  heaven."
This  prayer  completed,2  she  dug  up  with  the  great
1  The  Muhammadan  name  for  the       part  of  the  ceremony  (which  is  called Founder  of  Christianity.  chZrangkan  tali  frap]  omens  are  taken
2  During    the    performance   of   this       as  to  the  prosperity  or  otherwise  of  the
v  TAKING  THE  RICE-CHILD  241
toe  of  the  left  foot  a  small  lump  of  soil,  and  picking  it up,  deposited  it  in  the  centre  of  the  sheaf.
Next  she  took  the  contents  of  the  soul-basket  (the egg  and  stone,  candle-nut  and  shell  as  before),  and after  anointing  them  with  oil  and  fumigating  them, replaced  them  in  the  basket;  then  taking  faepenuwei sulong  ("Eldest  Rice-cutter"),  anointed  the  blade with  the  oil  of  frankincense,  and  inserting  the  thumb of  the  right  hand  into  her  mouth,  pressed  it  for  several moments  against  the  roof  of  her  palate.  On  with- drawing it  she  proceeded  to  cut  the  first  seven  "  heads  " of  rice,  repeating  "  the  Ten  Prayers  "  as  she  did  so. Then  she  put  the  seven  "  heads  "  together,  and  kissed them ;  turned  up  the  whites  of  her  eyes  thrice,  and thrice  contracting  the  muscles  of  her  throat  with  a  sort of  "click,"  swallowed  the  water  in  her  mouth.1  Next she  drew  the  small  white  cloth  which  she  took  from the  soul-basket  for  the  purpose  across  her  lap,  and
people  of  the  house,  and  the  observa-  if  you  want  it   to   be   a   little   rough
tions  have  therefore  to  be  made  with  (k&at),  so  that  you  may  not  be  tempted
the  greatest  care.     The  most  disastrous  to  eat  too  much  of  it  during  hard  times,
omen  is  the  cawing  of  a  crow  or  rook  ;  instead  of  directly  swallowing  the  water
next  to  this  (in  point  of  disastrous  sig-  in  your  mouth,  you  must  put  the  tip  of
nificance)  comes  the  mewing  cry  of  the  your  tongue  to  the  roof  of  your  mouth,
kite,   and,    thirdly,    the  flight    of  the  and  contract  the  throat  thrice,  slowly
ground-dove  (tPkukur).     A  good  omen  swallowing  as  you  do  so."      To  the
is  the  flight  of  the  bird  called  the  Rice's  above  she  then  added  :   "  Besides  this,
Husband  (LakiPadi),  but  the  best  omen  you  can  make  the  whole  field  of  rice
is  the  absence  of  any  portent  or  sound,  break    into   waves    by    standing    up,
even  such  as  the  falling  of  a  tree,  the  clapping  the  hands,  and  then  pushing
crackling  of  a  branch,  or  a  shout  in  the  each  hand  right  up  the  sleeve  of  the
distance,  all  of  which  are  harbingers  of  opposite  arm  (I  am  not  quite  sure  if  I
misfortune  of  some  sort.  rightly   understood    this  last,   but  am
1  The    Pawang  said    to    me    after-  fairly  certain   that   it  is   correct  —  my
wards,   when  I  questioned   her  about  notes  have  only  '  run  the  hands  up  the
this,  "  If  you  want  your  husked  rice  to  arms  '),  saying  as  you  do  so  : —
be  white  and  smooth  (puteh  lanchap\  ,  ,  .,
fl  "  Al-saZam  'aleikum.
you  must  stand  up  facing  the  sun  at  Waman  ivamat,
nine  o'clock  (angkat  kfning,  lit.  '  Raise  Pakui,  a?"ai>'
the  eyebrow '),  turn  up   the  whites  of
your  eyes,  swallow  the  water  in  your  This  will  swell  the  grains,  and  prevent
mouth,  and  your  rice  will  be  smooth  them   from   getting  empty  (minching,
and  white  and  easily  swallowed.      But  jangan  banyak  hampd)."
242  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
laying  the  little  bundle  of  seven  ears  in  it,  anointed them  with  oil  and  tied  them  round  with  parti-coloured thread  (benang  panchawarna),  after  which  she  fumi- gated them  with  the  incense,  and  strewing  rice  of  each kind  over  them,  folded  the  ends  of  the  cloth  over them,  and  deposited  them  as  before  in  the  basket, which  was  handed  to  the  first  bearer.  Then  standing up,  she  strewed  more  rice  over  the  sheaf,  and  tossing some  backwards  over  her  head,  threw  the  remainder over  the  rest  of  the  party,  saying  "  tabek  "  ("pardon")  as she  did  so,  and  exclaiming  "  kur  semangat,  kur  seman- gat, kur  semangat  /"  ("  cluck,  cluck,  soul !  ")  in  a  loud voice.  Next  she  pushed  the  cocoa-nut  shell  (which had  contained  the  tepong  tawar)  into  the  middle  of  the sheaf,  and  removed  all  traces  of  the  lane  which  had been  trodden  round  the  sheaf  (to  make  it  accessible) by  bending  down  the  surrounding  ears  of  rice  until  the gap  was  concealed.
Then  the  First  Bearer,  slinging  the  basket  of  the Rice-child  about  her  neck  (by  means  of  the  red  cloth before  referred  to),  took  an  umbrella l  from  one  of  the party,  and  opened  it  to  shield  the  Rice-child  from  the effects  of  the  sun,  and  when  the  Pawang  had  reseated herself  and  repeated  an  Arabic  prayer  (standing  erect again  at  the  end  of  it  with  her  hands  clasped  above her  head),  this  part  of  the  ceremony  came  to  an  end. Moving  on  to  another  part  of  the  field,  the  Pawang now  cut  the  next  seven  "  heads  "  and  deposited  them in  one  of  the  three  rice-baskets,  which  she  then  handed to  one  of  the  female  bearers,  telling  her  and  her  two companions  to  reap  the  field  in  parallel  straight  lines
1  This  umbrella  had  been  forgotten,  house  to  fetch  it ;  as  without  it,  I  was and  we  were  compelled  to  wait  while  told,  the  Rice -child  could  not  be one  of  the  "bearers"  returned  to  the  escorted  home.
BRINGING  HOME  THE  RICE-CHILD  243
facing  the  sun,  until  they  had  filled  the  three  rice- baskets,  after  which  they  were  to  return  to  the  house. Leaving  the  three  reapers  at  their  task,  I  followed  the Pawang  and  Eldest  Bearer  (the  latter  still  shielding the  Rice-child  from  the  sun  with  the  umbrella)  and arrived  in  time  to  witness  the  reception  of  the  party as  they  reached  the  foot  of  the  house-ladder.  Here (on  the  threshold)  we  were  met  by  the  wife  of  the owner,  and  other  women  of  his  family,  the  former thrice  calling  out  as  we  approached,  "Apakkobarf" ("What  news?"),  and  thrice  receiving  the  reply,  "Baik" ("  It  is  well").  On  receiving  this  reply  for  the  third time  she  threw  saffron -rice  over  the  Pawang  and repeated  these  lines  :—
"  Chop  the  '  tree '  Galenggang  (a  kind  of  shrub), Chop  it  to  pieces  in  front  of  the  door  : Yonder  comes  One  swinging  (her)  arms  ; That  (methinks)  is  a  child  of  mine."
To  which  the  Pawang  immediately  replied  : —
"  Chop  the  young  bamboo-shoots  as  fine  as  you  can, If  you  wish  to  stupefy  the  fish  in  the  main  stream. In  good  sooth  I  have  crossed  the  stream, For  great  was  my  desire  to  come  hither."
And  the  bearer  of  the  Rice-child  added — doubtless on  the  Rice-child's  behalf: —
"  This  measure  is  not  a  measure  filled  with  pepper, But  a  measure  filled  with  rice-husks. My  coming  is  not  merely  fortuitous, But  great  (rather)  was  my  desire,  the  wish  of  my  heart."
She  then  entered  the  house  and  laid  the  Rice-child (still  in  its  basket)  on  a  new  sleeping-mat  with  pillows at  the  head.  About  twenty  minutes  later  the  three
244  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
Bearers  returned,1  each  of  their  rice-baskets  covered with  a  sarong.  These  baskets  were  carried  into  the bedroom  and  deposited  in  order  of  size  on  the  mat  at the  foot  of  the  soul-basket,  the  largest  basket  being the  nearest  to  the  soul-basket.  Finally,  the  Pawang removed  the  sarongs  which  covered  each  basket  and deposited  them  on  the  Rice-child's  pillow,  and  sticking the  "penuweis  "  into  her  hair,  fumigated  the  entire  row of  baskets  and  the  Rice-child,  and  covered  them  over with  the  long  white  cloth,  after  which  the  wife  of  the master  of  the  house  was  told  to  observe  certain  rules of  taboo  for  three  days.
The  following  were  the  taboos  imposed  upon  her  :—
1.  Money,  rice,  salt,  oil,  tame  animals,  etc.,  were  forbidden  to
leave  the  house,  though  they  might  enter  it  without  ill consequences.
2.  Perfect  quiet  must  be  observed,  as  in  the  case  of  a  new-born
child.
3.  Hair  might  not  be  cut.
4.  The  reapers,  till  the  end  of  the  reaping,  were  forbidden  to  let
their  shadows  fall  upon  the  rice.  ( Yang  menuwei  sampei habis  menuwei,  tiada  buleh  menindeh  bayang.}
5.  The  light  placed  near  the  head  of  the  Rice-child's  bed  might
not  be  allowed  to  go  out  at  night,  whilst  the  hearth -fire might  not  be  allowed  to  go  out  at  all,  night  or  day,  for the  whole  three  days.
The  above  taboos  are  in  many  respects  identical with  those  which  have  to  be  observed  for  three  days after  the  birth  of  a  real  child.
1   I    was    told    by    the   Pawang    that  "Al-salam'aleikum,nal>rTa.p,jmtigmemeg- ...                              i      ,          i     /.,!    j  anerkan  bumil
when  the  three  reapers  had  each  filled         Tetapkan  anak  aku,
her    basket,     each    of     them     tied     the  Janga.nrosak,janganbinasaka.n
leaves   of   the  rice   clumps    together,  %*/££$$'££"***"
and   dug   up    a   lump    of    earth    with
the  great  toe  of  the  left  foot,  and  in-  "  Peace  be  with  you,  Prophet  'Tap,  in  whose
.°        ,        ,  £_•.«.!.  -j  ..       r  charge  is  the  earth,
sertmg    the    lump    into    the    midst  ^  of          Confirm  this  my  child, each   clump,    repeated    the    following          Do  it  no  harm  or  scathe,
j  But  remove  it  far  from  Demons  and  Devils,
woras  :  By  virtue  of> ..  etc
tfll
'5)2  S •=•3,2
I  S  a
0  g:s
="n  =• 5  w  —
l-5'g 8 1  ?
•£'§  *
III 112
|l|
5    *"•      U
v  *v    rt
•s^-?
bjo-S  3 |  i  j
O  «j  •- X  K  U *  -^  -
|i!
ADDITIONAL  CEREMONIES  245
I  may  add  that  every  day,  when  the  reapers  start their  reaping,  they  have  to  repeat  the  following charm  : —
"  A  swallow  has  fallen,  striking  the  ground, Striking  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  our  house-yard; But  ye,  O  Shadows  and  Spectral  Reapers, See  that  ye  mingle  not  with  us."
When  reaping,  they  must  cover  their  heads  and  must face  the  sun,  no  matter  what  hour  of  the  day  it  is,  in order  to  prevent  their  own  shadows  from  falling  upon the  rice  in  the  basket  at  their  side.
Pounding  the  first  of  the  padi. — I  witnessed  this ceremony  three  days  later,  at  about  9  A.M.  The  three baskets  filled  with  the  first  reapings  were  removed from  the  mat  on  which  they  had  been  placed,  and  their contents  emptied  out  upon  a  new  mat,  to  each  corner of  which  four  rice-ears  were  tied,  and  trodden  out  (di- irekkari)  by  the  owner  of  the  field.  Then  the  rice was  poured  back  into  two  of  the  baskets,  and  the  straw of  the  rice  "  heads  "  was  plaited  into  a  wreath.1
Drying  the  first  of  the  padi. — Preparations  being complete,  the  two  baskets  full  of  newly-cut  rice  were carried  down  the  steps  and  out  to  an  open  part  of  the field,  a  little  way  from  the  house,  and  there  spread  on a  mat  in  the  sun  to  dry.  To  spread  it  properly  is  not an  easy  matter,  the  operator  (who  in  this  case  was  the owner),  standing  on  the  mat  and  spreading  the  grains with  a  long  sweeping  motion  of  the  hand  from  one side  of  the  mat  to  the  other  (the  process  being  called di-kekar,  di-kachau,  or  membalikkan  jemoran).  In
1  A  cat  having  given  birth  to  kittens  rule  that  if  there  was  nobody  else  who
the  night  before  the  ceremony,  I  was  could  bear  children  at  the  time,  God
told  by  the  Pawang  that  it  was  a  very  was  wont  to  substitute  a  cat  (nifnggan~
good  sign,  and   that  it  was  a  known  tikan  tucking).
246  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
the  present  case  several  objects  were  placed  in  the centre  of  the  mat,  consisting  of —
1.  A  basket-work  stand  (one  of  those  used  for  the  cooking-pots,
and  called  lekar  jantari).
2.  A  bowl  of  water  deposited  upon  this  stand  and  intended
"  for  the  Rice-soul    (semangat  padi)    to    drink  when    it becomes  thirsty  with  the  heat  of  the  sun."
3.  A  big  iron  nail.
4.  A  candle-nut  (buah  Kras).
5.  Six  trodden-out  rice  "  heads,"  a  couple  of  which  tied  in  a
slip  knot  (simpul  puliK)  are  fastened  to  each  corner  of  the matting.
Pounding  of  the  rice  from  the  three  baskets. — When the  rice  had  been  sufficiently  dried,  it  was  once  more collected  in  the  baskets,  and  carried  back  to  the  house to  be  pounded.1  That  operation  took  place  the  same evening,  when  the  rice  was  pounded  and  winnowed 2 in  the  ordinary  way,  the  only  noteworthy  addition being  the  tying  of  bunches  of  the  grass  called  sambau dara  to  the  upper  ends  of  the  long  wooden  pestles which  the  Malays  use  for  the  pounding  operation.
Disposal  of  the  empty  rice-stalks  from  the  three baskets. — The  chaff  thus  obtained  was  deposited  in  a heap  by  the  owner  of  the  field  in  a  place  where  three paths  met,  crowned  with  a  wreath  made  of  the  empty rice-stalks,  and  covered  by  a  big  stone  which  was  in- tended, I  was  told,  to  keep  it  from  being  blown  away.
The  sugar-cane  was  left  to  grow  in  the  midst  of the  mother-sheaf,  until  the  latter  should  be  reaped  by the  wife  of  the  owner;  when  this  takes  place,  it  is carried  back  to  the  house  and  used  for  next  year's reaping.  Meanwhile  the  "  heads  "  of  the  mother-sheaf
1  The  drying  usually  takes  longer,  2  Nothing  of  the  male  sex  may  stand
but  the  exceptional  heat  of  the  sun  on  or  sit  opposite  the  point  of  the  sieve
the  day  in  question  enabled  the  opera-  (nyiru)  during  this  winnowing, tion  to  be  hastened.
v  SEARCHING  FOR  THE  MOTHER-SHEAF  24?
are  pounded,  and  the  grain  thus  obtained  is  mixed with  the  grain  obtained  from  the  Rice-soul,  and  de- posited in  the  rice-bin  (ktpok]  together  with  a  stone,  a lump  of  rosin  (damar\  and  a  wreath  composed  of  the empty  rice-ears.  I  may  add  that  I  saw  the  articles which  had  been  deposited  in  the  previous  year  in  the rice-bin  of  the  Malay  at  whose  house  I  witnessed  the ceremony  which  I  have  just  described.
I  did  not  witness  the  preliminary  search  for  the mother-sheaf  (in  which  the  Rice-soul  was  supposed  to be  contained),  but  it  was  described  to  me  by  the Pawang,  and  performed  for  my  benefit  by  the  people of  the  house.  The  Pawang  s  description  ran  as  follows : In  order  to  confine  the  "  Rengkesa "  (a  Spectral Reaper)  to  the  boundaries,  visit  the  four  corners  of the  field,  and  at  each  corner  tie  a  knot  in  a  rice-leaf, and  hold  your  breath  while  you  repeat  the  following charm  : —
"  In  the  name  of  God,  etc., A  swallow  has  fallen  striking  the  ground, Striking  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  our  house-yard. But  ye,  O  Shadows  and  Spectral  Reapers  (R£ngkesa), Have  your  appointed  place  on  the  Boundaries  (of  this  field). By  virtue  of,"  etc.
These  noxious  spirits  being  thus  confined  to  the Four  Corners,  you  may  search  in  safety  till  you  find one  of  the  special  varieties  of  rice-ear  in  which  the Rice-soul  resides.
There  are  several  varieties,  of  which  the  best  is called  Tongkat  Mandah;  it  may  be  described  as  an ordinary  "rice-head"  bending  over  to  meet  the  tip  of second  (adventitious)  "rice-head,"  but  it  is  produced only  by  a  freak  of  nature.  There  is  some  risk  con- nected with  this  variety,  however,  for  if  the  "Reception
248  VEGETATION  CHARMS  CHAP.
(Sambut)  Ceremony "  is  not  properly  performed the  owner  will  die.  The  second  best  is  called  "  The Kite"  (Lang).  The  third  best  is  called  "The  Veiled Princess  "  (Putri  Bertudong] ;  in  this  case  the  sheath of  the  "head"  is  of  unusual  length,  and  overshadows the  "head"  itself.  A  fourth  kind  is  called  Padi  Bertel- 'kum,  and  is  described  as  a  "  Female  Rice  "  (padi betina) ;  like  the  "  Veiled  Princess,"  it  has  an  unusually well-developed  sheath  ;  whilst  a  fifth  kind  is  the  "  Padi Mendhara  " — a  rice-plant  whose  leaves  show  white lines  or  markings.
How  women  should  reap  on  ordinary  occasions. — Whenever  women  go  out  to  reap  they  should repeat  certain  charms  before  leaving  the  house,1  and again  before  depositing  their  baskets  on  the  ground. Their  heads  should  be  covered,  and  they  should always  be  careful  to  reap,  as  has  been  said,  facing the  sun,  to  prevent  their  shadow  from  falling  upon the  rice  in  the  basket  at  their  side.  Occasionally, however,  the  body  is  uncovered,  and  I  was  even told  of  one,  Inche  Fatimah  of  Jugra,  in  Selangor, who  when  reaping  stripped  herself  bare  from  the waist  upwards,  and  when  asked  why  she  did  so  said it  was  "to  make  the  rice-husks  thinner,  as  she  was tired  of  pounding  thick-husked  rice."
The  sheaf  which  is  left  standing  after  the  taking home  of  the  Rice-soul  is  called  the  Mother  of  the Rice-soul  (Ibu  Semangat  Padi],  and  treated  as  a newly-made  mother  ;  that  is  to  say,  young  shoots  of trees  (putik-putik  kayu)  are  taken,  pounded  together
1  The  charms  are  the  same  as  those  tion  discernible  between  the  first  and
given    supra,    viz.    "A   swallow    has  the  second  half  of  the  quatrain;  the
fallen,"  etc.,  and  "  Herons  from  all  this  latter  always  contains  the  actual  point,
region."    They  are  in  the/a«ta«  form,  the  former  at  most  something  analogous
and  accordingly  there  is  little  connec-  or  remotely  parallel.
v  TREATMENT  OF  THE  MOTHER-SHEAF  249
(di-tumbok),  and  scattered  broadcast  (di-tabor)  every evening  for  three  successive  days.
When  the  three  days  are  up  you  take  cocoa-nut pulp  (isi  niyor)  and  what  are  called  "  goat  flowers  " (bunga  kambing),  mix  them,  and  eat  them  with  a little  sugar,  spitting  some  of  the  mixture  out  among the  rice.  [So,  after  a  birth  (as  the  Pawang  informed me),  the  young  shoots  of  the  jack -fruit  (kababal nangka),  the  rose -apple  (jambu),  and  certain  kinds of  banana  (such  as  pisang  abu  and  pisang  Benggala), and  the  thin  pulp  of  young  cocoa-nuts  (kelongkong niyor)  are  mixed  with  dried  fish,  salt,  acid  (asam), prawn -condiment  (tflachan),  and  similar  ingredients, to  form  a  species  of  salad  (rojak\  For  three  suc- cessive days  this  salad  is  administered  to  mother  and child,  the  person  who  administers  it  saying,  if  the  child be  a  girl,  "  Your  mother  is  here,  eat  this  salad,"  and  if the  child  be  a  boy,  "  Your  father  is  here,  eat  this  salad."]
Invariably,  too,  when  you  enter  the  rice-clearing (menempoh  ladang)  you  must  kiss  the  rice  -  stalks (chium  tangkei  padt),  saying,  "  Cluck,  cluck,  soul  of my  child!"  (kur,  semangat  anak  akuf}  just  as  if  you were  kissing  an  infant  of  your  own.
The  last  sheaf  (as  I  think  I  have  said)  is  reaped by  the  wife  of  the  owner,  who  carries  it  back  to  the house  (where  it  is  threshed  out  and  mixed  with  the Rice-soul).  The  owner  then  takes  the  Rice-soul  and its  basket  and  deposits  it  in  the  big  circular  rice-bin used  by  the  Malays,  together  with  the  product  of  the last  sheaf.  Some  of  the  product  of  the  first  seven "  heads "  will  be  mixed  with  next  year's  seed,  and the  rest  will  be  mixed  with  next  year's  tepong  tawar?
1  The    extreme    voluminousness   of      rice-planting    makes    it  impossible   to Malay  folk-lore  upon   the    subject    of      do    more    than    give    a    general    idea
250  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
4.    MINERALS    AND    MINING    CHARMS
In  the  Western  States  of  the  Peninsula  by  far  the most  important  branch  of  industry  has  for  many  years been  that  of  Tin-mining.  Though  something  like  90 per  cent  of  the  labourers  employed  in  the  mines  are Chinese,  the  ceremonies  used  at  the  opening  of  tin- mines  are  purely  Malay  in  character.
The  post  of  mining  wizard,  once  a  highly  lucrative one,  was  in  past  days  almost  always  filled  by  a  Malay, though  occasionally  the  services  of  a  Jungle -man (Sakai)  would  be  preferred.  These  mining  wizards enjoyed  in  their  palmy  days  an  extraordinary  reputa- tion, some  of  them  being  credited  with  the  power  of bringing  ore  to  a  place  where  it  was  known  that  no ore  existed ;  some,  too,  were  believed  to  possess  the power  of  sterilising  such  ore  as  existed,  and  of  turning it  into  mere  grains  of  sand.
The  ore  itself  is  regarded  as  endued  not  only  with vitality,  but  also  with  the  power  of  growth,  ore  of indifferent  quality  being  regarded  as  too  young  (muda], but  as  likely  to  improve  with  age.  Sometimes,  again, it  is  described  as  resembling  a  buffalo,  in  which  shape it  is  believed  to  make  its  way  from  place  to  place underground.  This  idea,  however,  is  probably  based upon  traditions  of  a  lode,  though  it  is  quite  in  keeping
of    the    ceremonies    described.      The  details.       One    of    these    invocations
ceremonies,  however,  are  comparatively  should  certainly  help  to  emphasise  the
homogeneous  in  all  parts  of  the  Penin-  strength  of  the  anthropomorphic  concep-
sula,  and  the  specimens  given  may  be  tion  of  the  Rice-soul  as  held  by  Malays,
taken  as  fairly  representative.      In  the  It  runs  as  follows  (vide  App.  ex.) : — Appendix  (xciii.  seqq.},  will  be  found  a  "Cluck,  cluck,  soul  of  my  child  !
number    of    invocations,    collected    by  Come  and  return  home  with  me,
_,_„.  '.       ...         '  Our  agreement  has  reached  its  term.
Mr.  O  Sullivan  and  myself,  which  are  Let  not  the  Heat  afflict  you,
addressed  to  the  rice-spirit  and  may  help  Let  not  the  Wind  afflict  you.
to  emphasise  or  explain  some  of  the  ^  aot  l^jj
TIN -MINING  251
with  Malay  ideas  about  the  spirits  residing  in  other minerals,  the  Gold  spirit  being  supposed  to  take  the shape  of  a  kijang  or  roe-deer  (whence  the  tradition of  a  golden  roe-deer  being  found  at  Raub  in  Pahang).
In  connection  with  the  subject  of  tin-mining  the account  contributed l  in  1885  by  Mr.  Abraham  Hale (then  Inspector  of  Mines  in  the  Kinta  district  of Perak)  to  the  Journal of the  Straits  Asiatic  Society  is  of such  value  as  to  necessitate  its  being  quoted  in  extenso. It  will  be  followed  by  such  notes  upon  mining  invoca- tions as  I  was  able  to  collect  in  Selangor,  after  which a  few  remarks  upon  the  Malay  theory  of  animism  in minerals  generally  will  bring  the  subject  to  a  conclusion.
To  commence  with  Mr.  Male's  account: — "The valley  of  the  Kinta  is,  and  has  been  for  a  very  long time,  essentially  a  mining  country.  There  are  in  the district  nearly  five  hundred  registered  mines,  of  which three  are  worked  by  European  Companies,  the  rest being  either  private  mines,  i.e.  mines  claimed  by Malays,  which  have  been  worked  by  them  and  their ancestors  for  an  indefinite  period,  or  new  mines,  in other  words  new  concessions  given  indifferently  on application  to  Malays  and  Chinese.  There  are  about three  hundred  and  fifty  private  Malay  mines,  and  it  is with  these  principally  that  the  following  paper  will deal.
"So  far,  no  lodes  have  been  discovered  in  Kinta ; it  is,  however,  probable  that,  as  the  country  is  opened up  and  prospectors  get  up  amongst  the  spurs  of  the main  range,  the  sources  of  the  stream  tin  will  come  to light.
"  Mining  in  Kinta,  like  mining  in  Larut,  is  for stream  tin,  and  this  is  found  literally  everywhere  in
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.t  No.  16,  pp.  303-320.
252  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
Kinta  ;  it  is  washed  out  of  the  sand  in  the  river-beds— a  very  favourite  employment  with  Mandheling  women  ; Kinta  natives  do  not  affect  it  much,  although  there  is more  than  one  stream  where  a  good  worker  can  earn  a dollar  per  day  ;  it  is  mined  for  in  the  valley,  and  sluiced for  on  the  sides  of  hills  ;  and,  lastly,  a  very  suggestive fact  to  a  geologist,  it  has  been  found  on  the  tops  of isolated  limestone  bluffs  and  in  the  caves l  which  some of  them  contain.
"  This  stream  tin  has  probably  been  worked  for several  centuries  in  Kinta ;  local  tradition  says  that  a very  long  time  ago  Siamese  were  the  principal  miners, and  there  is  evidence  that  very  extensive  work  has been  done  here  by  somebody  at  a  time  when  the method  was  different  from  that  which  is  commonly adopted  by  Kinta  Malays  at  the  present  day.  There are  at  least  fifty  deep  well-like  pits  on  the  Lahat  hill, averaging  about  eight  feet  in  diameter  and  perhaps twenty  feet  deep.
"  Further  up  country  I  have  seen  a  large  pit  which the  natives  called  a  Siamese  mine ;  this  is  about  fifty feet  in  diameter  and  over  twenty  feet  deep,  and  its  age may  be  conjectured  from  the  virgin  forest  in  which  it is  situated.  Besides  these,  at  many  places  extensive workings  are  continually  brought  to  light  as  the  country is  opened  up,  and  these  appear  to  have  been  left  un- disturbed for  at  least  a  hundred  years.  Further  evidence of  old  work  is  furnished  by  slabs  of  tin  of  a  shape unlike  that  which  has  been  used  in  Perak  in  the memory  of  living  persons  ;  and  only  a  few  weeks  ago two  very  perfect  '  curry  stones '  of  an  unusual  shape and  particularly  sharp  grit  were  found  at  a  depth  of
1  Report     on      the      Geology     and      Perak,  by  Rev.  J.  E.  Tennison-Wood, Physical    Geography   of   the   State  of      F.G.S.,  F.L.S.,  etc.
v  THE  MINING  PA  WANG  253
eight  feet  in  natural  drift.     These  may,  perhaps,  have been  used  to  grind  grain.
"  So  peculiarly  is  Kinta  a  mining  district,  that  even the  Sakais  of  the  hills  do  a  little  mining  to  get  some tin  sand  wherewith  to  buy  the  choppers  and  sarongs which  the  Malays  sell  to  them  at  an  exorbitant price.
"The  Malay  pawang,  or  medicine-man,  is  probably the  inheritor  of  various  remnants  and  traditions  of  the religion  which  preceded  Muhammadanism,  and  in the  olden  time  this  class  of  persons  derived  a  very fair  revenue  from  the  exercise  of  their  profession,  in propitiating  and  scaring  those  spirits  who  have  to  do with  mines  and  miners  ;  even  now,  although  the  Malay pawang  may  squeeze  a  hundred  or  perhaps  two  hundred dollars  out  of  the  Chinese  towkay l  who  comes  to  mine for  tin  in  Malaya,  the  money  is  not  perhaps  badly invested,  for  the  Chinaman  is  no  prospector,  whereas a  good  Malay  pawang  has  a  wonderful  '  nose  '  for  tin, and  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  Chinese  towkay  and, before  his  time,  the  Malay  miner,  would  not  pay  a  tax to  the  pawang  unless  they  had  some  ground  for  believ- ing that,  by  employing  him  and  working  under  his advice,  there  would  be  more  chance  of  success  than  if they  worked  only  on  their  own  responsibility.
"  The  pawang  being  a  person  who  claims  to  have powers  of  divination  and  other  imperfectly  understood attributes,  endeavours  to  shroud  his  whole  profession in  more  or  less  of  mystery.  In  his  vocabulary,  as  in that  of  the  gutta-hunters,  special  terms  are  used  to signify  particular  objects,  the  use  of  the  ordinary  words being  dropped  ;  this  is  called  '  bahdsa  pantang. ' "
1  The    mining   contractor,    also    called    towkay   lombong  and   towkay  labur, vide  infra.  *  Lit.  "  Taboo  language. "
254  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  The  following  are  some  of  the  special  terms alluded  to  :—
"Ber-olak  tinggi?  instead  of  gajah — elephant. The  elephant  is  not  allowed  on  the  mine,  or  must  not be  brought  on  to  the  actual  works,  for  fear  of  damage to  the  numerous  races  and  dams ;  to  name  him,  there- fore, would  displease  the  spirits  (kantu).
"  Ber-olak  ddpor,  instead  of  kuching — cat.  Cats  are not  allowed  on  mines,  nor  may  the  name  be  mentioned.
"  A  tiger  of  enormous  size  called  Ber-olak  is  said  to haunt  Kinta.  The  legend  about  him  is  as  follows  : — A  long  time  ago,  in  the  pre-Muhammadan  days,  a  man caught  a  tiger  kitten  and  took  it  home ;  it  grew  up quite  tame  and  lived  with  the  man  until  he  died,  when it  returned  to  the  jungle  and  grew  to  an  enormous  size, nine  cubits  (hasta]  long  ;  it  is  still  there,  though  nobody ever  sees  it ;  it  does  no  harm,  but  sometimes  very  large tracks  are  seen,  and  men  hear  its  roar,  which  is  so  loud that  it  can  be  heard  from  Chemor  to  Batu  Gajah  ; when  heard  in  the  dry  season,  it  is  a  sure  prognostica- tion of  rain  in  fifteen  days'  time.
"  Sial?  instead  of  kerbau — water-buffalo.  The buffalo  is  not  allowed  on  the  mine  for  the  same  reason as  the  elephant.
"  Salah  nama?  instead  of  limau  nipis — lime  (fruit). If  limes  are  brought  on  to  a  mine,  the  hantu  (spirits) are  said  to  be  offended ;  the  particular  feature  of  the fruit,  which  is  distasteful,  appears  to  be  its  acidity.  It
1  Bfrolak    here    means    to     "  turn  2  Sial     means     literally     anything
one's  self  about,  "and  the  whole  phrase  which   brings    bad    luck;    so  perhaps
would  mean  "  The  Tall  One  that  Turns  we    might    translate    it    "Mr.    Bad-
Himself  about" — perhaps  the    "Tall  luck."
Loafer "  would  be  as  near  as  we  can  3  Salah     nama     means      "  Wrong
get  to    it    in    English.      So,  too,    her-  name "  (Misnomer) ;    limau  nipis,   lit.
olak    dapor    means     "The     Kitchen  means  "thin  lime." Loafer  "  (Loafer  of  the  Kitchen).
MINING  TABOOS  255
is  peculiar  that  Chinese  have  this  superstition  con- cerning limes  as  well  as  Malays  ;  not  very  long  ago  a Chinese  towkay  of  a  mine  complained  that  the  men  of a  rival  kongsi1  had  brought  limes  and  squeezed  the juice  into  his  head  race,  and,  furthermore,  had  rubbed their  bodies  with  the  juice  mixed  with  water  out  of  his head  race,  and  he  said  they  had  committed  a  very grave  offence,  and  asked  that  they  might  be  punished for  it.
"  With  Malays  this  appears  to  be  one  of  the  most important  pantang'  rules,  and  to  such  a  length  is  it carried  that  belachan  (shrimp-paste)  is  not  allowed to  be  brought  on  to  a  mine  for  fear  it  should  induce people  to  bring  limes  as  well,  lime-juice  being  a necessary  adjunct  to  belachan  when  prepared  for  eating.
"  Buah  rumput?  or  bunga  rumput,  instead  of  biji— tin  sand.
"  Akar,  or  akar  hidop?  instead  of  ular — snake.
"  Kunyit?  instead  of  lipan — centipede.
"  Batu  puteh?  instead  of  timah — metallic  tin.
"It  was  important  that  the  Pawang  should  be  a marked  man  as  to  personal  appearance  ;  for  this  reason there  are  certain  positions  of  the  body  which  may  be assumed  by  him  only  when  on  the  mine.  These attitudes  are — first,  standing  with  the  hands  clasped behind  the  back  ;  and,  secondly,  with  the  hands  resting on  the  hips.  This  second  position  is  assumed  when  he is  engaged  in  '  invocating '  the  '  spirits '  of  a  mine  ; the  pawang  takes  his  station  in  front  of  ti\z  genggulang?
1  Kongsi,     i.e.     "company,     firm,  6  Kunyit   means    "saffron."      The
gang."  allusion  is  not  evident.
"  Pantang)  i.e.  "taboo."  a  Batu  puteh  means  "  white  stone"
3  Buah     rumpnt    means     "Grass-  or  "white  rock."
seed ;"  Bunga  rumput,  "  Grass-flower. "  "  Gettggulang,    explained    by    Mr.
4  Akar  hidop,   lit.    "live  creeper."       Hale  as  meaning  " altar,"  vide  p.  260, The  allusion  is  obvious.  infra.
256
MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS
having  a  long  piece  of  white  cloth  in  his  right  hand, which  he  waves  backwards  and  forwards  over  his shoulder  three  times,  each  time  calling  the  special hantu  whom  he  wishes  to  propitiate,  by  name ;  whilst engaged  in  this  invocation  his  left  hand  rests  on  his
o    o
hip.  During  the  performance  of  any  professional  duty he  is  also  invariably  dressed  in  a  black  coat ;  this nobody  but  ti\z.  pawang  is  allowed  to  wear  on  a  mine. These  attitudes  and  the  black  coat  comprise  what  is technically  termed  \h&  pakei  pawang.
"  The  professional  duty  of  the  pawang  of  a  mine consists  in  carrying  out  certain  ceremonies,  for  which he  is  entitled  to  collect  the  customary  fees,  and  in enforcing  certain  rules  for  the  breach  of  which  he  levies the  customary  fines.1
"  At  the  time  of  the  opening  of  a  mine  he  has  to erect  a  genggulang?  and  to  call  upon  the  tutelary
1  About  1878,  the  principal pawang  of  the  Larut  district,  one Pa'Itam  Dam,  applied  to  me  as  Assist- ant-Resident to  reinstate  him  in  the duties  and  privileges  which  he  had  en- joyed under  the  Orang  Kaya  Mantri, and  before  him,  under  Che  Long  J'affar. He  describes  the  customary  ceremonies and  dues  to  be  as  follows  : — He  had  to visit  all  the  mines  from  time  to  time, especially  those  from  which  tin-ore  was being  removed  ;  if  the  daily  output  of tin  suddenly  decreased  on  any  mine  it was  his  business  at  once  to  repeat certain  invocations  (puja}  to  induce  the tin-ore  to  remain  (handak  di-pulih  balik sapaya  jangan  mengorang  bijf).  Once in  every  two  or  three  years  it  was necessary  to  carry  out  an  important ceremony  {puja  besar}  which  involved the  slaying  of  three  buffaloes  and  a great  feast,  the  expense  of  which  had to  be  borne  by  the  pawang.  On  the day  of  the  puja  besar  strict  abstinence from  work  is  enjoined  on  every  one  in the  district,  no  one  might  break  ground
or  even  pull  up  weeds  or  cut  wood  in the  whole  province.  Further,  no stranger  whose  home  was  three  days' journey  away  might  enter  one  of  the mines  under  a  penalty  of  twenty-five dollars.
The  pawang  was  entitled  to  exact from  the  owners  of  mines  a  custom- ary payment  of  one  slab  of  tin  (or $6.25  in  cash)  per  annum  for  every sluice-box  (palong)  in  work  during  the year.
In  any  mine  from  which  the  tin-ore had  not  yet  been  removed  it  was  strictly forbidden  to  wear  shoes  or  to  carry  an umbrella ;  no  Malay  might  wear  a sarong.
The  Chinese  miners,  always  super- stitiously  disposed,  used  (under  Malay rule)  to  adhere  to  these  rules  and  sub- mit to  these  exactions,  but  since  1875 the  pawang  has  found  his  occupation and  income,  in  Larut  at  all  events, gone.— Ed././?. A.S.,  S.B.
2  Altar.
v  SPECIAL  PROHIBITIONS  257
hantu  of  the  locality  to  assist  in  the  enterprise.  The fee  for  this  is  one  bag  (karong]  of  tin  sand.
"At  the  request  of  the  miners,  instead  of  a  geng- gnlang  a  kapala  nasi1  may  be  erected,  as  cheaper  and more  expeditious.  The  fee  is  one  gantang 2  of  tin  sand.
41  He  also  assists  in  the  ceremony  of  hanging  the ancha 3  in  the  smelting-house ;  his  principal  associate in  this  is  the  Panglima  Klian,  who  draws  the  ancha up  to  its  proper  position  close  under  the  attaps.
"  i.  Raw  cotton  must  not  be  brought  on  to  a mine  in  any  shape,  either  in  its  native  state  or  as stuffing  of  bolsters  or  mattresses.  The  fine  (hukum pawang]  is  $i  2.50 ;  the  ordinary  pillow  used  by  a  miner is  made  of  some  soft  wood.
"  2.  Black  coats  and  the  attitudes  designated  pakei pawang*  may  not  be  assumed  by  any  one  on  the  mine, with  the  exception  of  the  pawang.  (Hukum  pawang, $12.50.)
"  3.  The  gourd  used  as  a  water  vessel  by  Malays, all  descriptions  of  earthenware,  glass,  and  all  sorts  of limes  and  lemons,  and  the  outer  husk  of  the  cocoa-nut, are  prohibited  articles  on  mines.  (Hukum  pawang, $12.50.)
"  Note. — All  eating-  and  drinking-vessels  should  be made  of  cocoa-nut  shell  or  of  wood  :  the  noise  made  by earthenware  and  glass  is  said  to  be  offensive  to  the hantu.  But  in  the  case  of  a  breach  of  this  regulation the  pawang  would  warn  the  offenders  two  or  three times  before  he  claimed  the  fine.
1  A  small  tray  or  platform  for  offer-  8  In  Selangor   anchak  is  the  form i«gs,   supported   by  a  central   "  leg,"  used.     It  means  a  sacrificial  tray  (for vide  Mr.  Hale's  description,  s.v.  Kapala  offerings  to  the  spirits),  vide  infra,  pp. nasi  (infra).  260,  310-313,  414-423.
2  Gantang  is    a    measure   approxi-  *  Lit.  the  "  Magician's  wear. " mately  equivalent  to  a  gallon.
258  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  4.  Gambling  and  quarrelling  are  strictly  forbidden on  mines ;  the  fine  is  claimed  for  the  first  offence. (Hukum  pawang,  $12.50.)
"  5.  Wooden  aqueducts  (palong)  must  be  prepared in  the  jungle  a  long  way  from  the  mine.  (Hukum pawang,  $12.50.)
"  The  noise  of  the  chopping  is  said  to  be  offensive to  the  hantu.
"  6.  Any  breach  of  the  bahasa  pantang  is  an offence.  (Hukum  pawang,  $12.50.)
"7.  Charcoal  must  not  be  allowed  to  fall  into  the races.  (Hukum  pawang,  $12.50.)
"  8.  A  miner  must  not  wear  and  go  to  work  on  the mine  in  another  man's  trousers.  (Hukum  pawang,  one karong  of  tin  sand.)
"Note. — This  applies  only  to  the  senar  seluar basah,  or  working  dress.  It  is  also  an  offence  to  work in  the  garment  called  sarong.
"9.  If  the  chupak  (measure)  of  the  mine  is  broken, it  must  be  renewed  within  three  days.  (Hukum pawang,  one  bhara  of  tin.)
"  10.  No  weapon  may  be  brought  within  the  four posts  of  the  smelting-house  which  immediately  surround the  furnace.  (Hukum  pawang,  $1.25.)
"n.  Coats  may  not  be  worn  within  this  space. (Hukum  pawang,  $1.25.)
"12.  These  posts  may  not  be  cut  or  hacked. (Hukum pawang,  one  slab  of  tin.)
"13.  If  a  miner  returns  from  work,  bringing  back with  him  some  tin  sand,  and  discovers  that  somebody has  eaten  the  cold  rice  which  he  had  left  at  home,  he may  claim  from  the  delinquent  one  karong  of  tin  sand. The  pawang  adjudicates  in  the  matter.
"14.  An  earthenware  pot  (priok)  which  is  broken
v  SUPERSTITIONS  ABOUT  TIN -ORE  259
must  be  replaced  within  three  days.  (Hukum  pawang, one  karong  of  tin  sand.)
"  15.  No  one  may  cross  a  race  in  which  a  miner  is sluicing  without  going  some  distance  above  him,  up stream  ;  if  he  does  he  incurs  a  penalty  of  as  much  tin sand  as  the  race  contains  at  the  moment,  payable  to the  owner  of  the  race.  The pawang  adjudicates.
"  1 6.  A  kris,  or  spear,  at  a  mine,  if  without  a  sheath, must  be  carefully  wrapped  in  leaves,  even  the  metal setting  (simpei)  must  be  hidden.  Spears  may  only  be carried  at  the  "trail."  (Hukum pawang,  uncertain.)
"  1 7.  On  the  death  of  any  miner,  each  of  his  com- rades on  that  mine  pays  to  the  pawang  one  chupak (penjuru)  of  tin  sand.
"It  will  be  noticed  that  the  amount  of  the  majority of  these  fines  is  $12.50  ;  this  is  half  of  the  amount  of the  fine  which,  under  the  Malay  customary  law,  a chief  could  impose  on  a  ra'iyat l  for  minor  offences.  It is  also  the  amount  of  the  customary  dowry  in  the  case of  a  marriage  with  a  slave  or  with  the  widow  or  divorced wife  of  a  ra'iyat.
"  The  Malay  miner  has  peculiar  ideas  about  tin  and its  properties ;  in  the  first  instance,  he  believes  that  it is  under  the  protection  and  command  of  certain  spirits whom  he  considers  it  necessary  to  propitiate  ;  next  he considers  that  the  tin  itself  is  alive  and  has  many  of the  properties  of  living  matter,  that  of  its  own  volition it  can  move  from  place  to  place,  that  it  can  reproduce itself,  and  that  it  has  special  likes — or  perhaps  affinities —for  certain  people  and  things,  and  vice  versa.  Hence it  is  advisable  to  treat  tin-ore  with  a  certain  amount  of respect,  to  consult  its  convenience,  and  what  is,  perhaps,
1  Ra'iyat  is  used  here  to  denote  a       to  a  Chief  or  Raja.      It  is  sometimes man  of  the  common  people,  as  opposed       used  by  Malays  in  other  senses.
260  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
more  curious,  to  conduct  the  business  of  mining  in  such a  way  that  the  tin-ore  may,  as  it  were,  be  obtained without  its  own  knowledge ! "
Mr.  Hale  adds  an  interesting  vocabulary  of  Malay mining  terms  from  which  the  following  words  are  ex- tracted as  being  specially  connected  with  the  supersti- tions of  the  miners  : —
Ancha. — A  square  frame  i'  6"  x  i'  6",  composed  of  strips  of split  bamboo  for  the  floor  and  four  pieces  of  peeled  wood for  the  sides.  The  proper  wood  is  kayu  sungkei?-  because  it has  flat  even  twigs  and  leaves  which  lie  flat  and  symmetrically; these  must  be  bound  together  with  a  creeper :  rattan  may not  be  used;  it  is  hung  to  the  tulang  bumbong^  just  under the  attaps 3  of  the  smelting-shed ;  it  is  used  as  an  altar,  the offerings  made  by  the  miners  to  the  spirits  being  placed on  it.
Genggulang. — The  platform  or  altar  erected  by  the  pawang  at the  opening  of  a  mine.  It  should  be  built  entirely  of  kayu sungkei.  The  wood  is  peeled,  except  the  four  branches which  serve  as  posts ;  these  are  only  peeled  up  to  the  twigs and  leaves,  which  are  left  on,  about  4  feet  6  inches  from the  ground.  At  3  feet  3  inches  from  the  ground  a  square platform  of  round  peeled  sticks,  about  i  foot  3  inches each  way,  is  arranged ;  one  foot  above  the  level  of  the  plat- form a  sort  of  railing  is  fixed  round  three  sides  of  the  square, and  from  the  open  side  a  ladder  with  four  steps  reaches down  to  the  ground ;  the  railing  is  carried  down  to  the ground  on  each  side  of  the  ladder,  and  supports  a  fringe  of cocoa-nut  leaves  (jari-lipan).  The  whole  erection  must  be tied  together  with  creepers ;  rattan  must  not  be  used.
Jari  lipan. — A  fringe  made  of  the  young  white  leaflets  of  the cocoa-nut  palm  plaited  together.4
Jampi. — The  incantation  of  the  pawang.
Kapala  nasi. — A  stake  of  peeled  wood  (kayu  sungkei)  stuck  in the  ground ;  the  top  of  this  is  split  into  four  so  as  to  support
1  Seperti  sungkei  be-rendam,  "like  2  Beam  or  rafter  of  the  shed.
a  soaked  sungkei  stick. "     When    the  3  Palm-leaf  thatch.
sungkei  stick  has  been  soaked  for  a  4  Forbes    mentions    a    "palm -leaf
long  time,  say  three  months,  the  peel  fringe "  used   in   certain   rites  by  the
comes  clean  away ;  proverbial  expres-  Kalangs    of   Java.  —  A    Naturalist's
sion  used  of  a  person  "cleaned  out."  Wanderings,  p.  101.
v  THE  MINING  PA  WANG  261
a  platform  similar  to  that  of  the  genggutang.     Offerings  are made  upon  it1
Pantang  burok  mata. — The  period  of  mourning  observed  when a  death  occurs  at  a  mine.
Mourning  consists  in  abstention  from  work  (in  the  case  of a  neighbour  or  comrade)  for  three  days,  or,  in  the  case  of  the death  of  the  pawang,  penghulu  kelian,  or  the  feudal  chief,  for seven  days.  The  expression  is  derived  from  the  supposition that  in  three  days  the  eyes  of  a  corpse  have  quite  disappeared. Chinese  miners  have  a  similar  custom ;  whoever  goes  to  assist in  the  burial  of  a  corpse  must  not  only  abstain  from  work, but  must  not  go  near  the  mine  or  smelting  furnace  for  three days.2
Perasap. — Half  a  cocoa-nut  shell,  a  cup,  or  any  other  vessel,  in which  votive  offerings  of  sweet-smelling  woods  and  gums  are burnt.
Sangka. — A  receptacle  in  which  to  burn  offerings  of  sweet  woods and  gums ;  it  is  made  of  a  stick  of  bamboo  about  three  feet long,  one  end  being  split  and  opened  out  to  receive  the  char- coal ;  it  is  stuck  in  the  ground  near  races  and  heaps  of  tin sand.3
Tatin  gulang. — The  pawang's  fee  for  the  ceremony  of  erecting  a gcnggulang*
The  following  notes  on  tin -mining  in  Selangor were  contributed  to  the  Selangor  Journal  \*y  Mr.  J.  C. Pasqual,  a  well-known  local  miner  : —
"  The  Malay  mining  pawang  will  soon  be  a  thing of  the  past,  and  many  a  pawang  has  returned  to  tilling the  soil  in  place  of  his  less  legitimate  occupation  of imposing  upon  the  credulity  of  the  miners.  The reason  for  this  is  not  far  to  seek,  as  the  Malay  miner,
1   "It  is  quite  a  common  thing  in  3  The  derivation  of  the  name  of  this
Java  to  encounter  by  the  wayside  near  primitive  Malay  censer  from  the  Sans-
a  village,  or  in  a  rice-field,  or  below  krit    fankha    (conch    shell)    has   been
the  shade  of  a  great  dark  tree,  a  little  pointed  out  (Maxwell,  Malay  Manual,
platform  with  an  offering  of  rice  and  p.  32).      Forbes  notes  having  seen  in
prepared    fruits    to  keep   disease   and  a  sacred  grove  in  Java  "  the  remnants
blight  at  a  distance  and  propitiate  the  of  small  torches  of  sweet  gums  which
spirits." — A  Naturalists  Wanderings,  had    been    offered." — A   Naturalist's
Forbes,  p.  103.  Wanderings,  p.  97.
8  In  Selangor  this  custom  is  now  *  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  16,  pp.  310-
obsolete. — Sel.  Jour.  vol.  iii.  No.  18,  320. p.  294.
262  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
as  well  as  the  Chinese  miner,  of  the  old  school,  with their  thousand-and-one  superstitions,  has  given  place to  a  more  modern  and  matter-of-fact  race,  who  place more  reliance  for  prospecting  purposes  on  boring  tools than  on  the  divination  and  jampi  of  the  pawang. But  the  profession  of  the  pawang  has  not  altogether died  out,  as  he  is  sometimes  called  into  requisition  for the  purpose  of  casting  out  evil  spirits  from  the  mines  ; of  converting  amang1  (pyrites)  into  tin -ore,  and  of invoking  the  spirits  of  a  mine  previous  to  the  breaking of  the  first  sod  in  a  new  venture.  These  ceremonies generally  involve  the  slaying  of  a  buffalo,  a  goat,  or fowls,  and  the  offering  of  betel-leaf,  incense,  and  rice, according  to  the  means  of  the  towkay  lombong.
"  The  term  pawang  is  now  used  by  the  Chinese to  indicate  the  'smelter'  (Chinese)  of  a  mine  (prob- ably from  the  fact  that  this  office  was  formerly  the monopoly  of  the  Malay  pawang].
"To  the  pawangs  are  attributed  extraordinary powers,  for  besides  inducing  tin-ore  to  continue  or become  plentiful  in  a  mine,  he  can  cause  its  disappear- ance from  a  rich  '  claim  '  by  the  inevitable  jampi,  this latter  resource  being  resorted  to  by  way  of  revenge in  cases  where  the  towkay  lombong  (or  labor]  fails to  carry  out  his  pecuniary  obligation  towards  the pawang  whose  aid  he  had  invoked  in  less  prosperous times.  Some  of  the  stories  told  of  the  prowess  of pawangs  are  very  ridiculous ;  for  instance,  a  native lady  in  Ulu  Langat  (for  women  are  also  credited  with the  pawang  attributes),  who  was  the  pawang  of  Sungei Jelok  in  Kajang,  could  command  a  grain  of  tin-ore
1  Cliff,  and  Swett. ,  Malay  Diet.  >  s.v.  this  name.  They  are  all  considered Amang :  "tourmaline,  wolfram,  and  impurities,  and  tourmaline  is  the  one titaniferous  iron-ore  are  all  called  by  most  commonly  met  with. "
MINING  TABOOS  263
to  crawl  on  the  palm  of  her  hand  like  a  live  worm.1 The  failure  of  the  Sungei  Jelok  mines  was  attributed to  her  displeasure  on  account  of  an  alleged  breach  of contract  on  the  part  of  the  towkay  lombong.
"  The  term  pawang  is  sometimes  used  as  a  verb in  the  sense  of  '  to  prospect '  a  sungei  or  stream  ; thus  in  alluding  to  certain  streams  or  mines,  it  is  not uncommon  to  hear  a  Malay  say  that  they  have  been prospected  (sudah  di-pawangkan)  by  'Inche'  So-and- so — meaning  that  the  stream  had  been  discovered and  proved  by  a  pawang  prior  to  the  opening  of  the mines."2
In  a  later  article  Mr.  Pasqual  says:  "It  is  be- lieved that  tin  will  even  on  rare  occasions  announce its  presence  by  a  peculiar  noise  heard  in  the  stillness of  night,  and  that  some  birds  and  insects  by  their chirrupings  and  whirrings  will  proclaim  its  where- abouts."8
In  a  still  later  article,  after  briefly  referring  to  the use  of  the  bhasa  pantang,  or  "  Taboo  Language," by  tin-miners  in  Selangor,  Mr.  Pasqual  proceeds  : —
11  There  are,  again,  certain  acts  which  are  forbidden. In  the  mine,  especially  if  the  karang*  has  not  yet  been removed,  it  is  forbidden  to  wear  shoes  or  carry  an umbrella.  This  rule,  it  seems,  originated  with  the coolies  themselves,  who  in  olden  times  insisted  that  the Towkay  Labur  should  take  off  his  shoes  and  close  his umbrella  whenever  he  visited  the  mine,  so  that,  as  they alleged,  the  spirits  might  not  be  offended.  But  their real  object  was  not  to  allow  him  to  pry  too  much  into
1  The  Malay  was  saptrti  ulat  hidup,  3  Set.  Journ.    vol.    iv.    No.    2,    p.
which  would  rather  mean  "  like  live  26.
maggots." — W.S.  *  i.e.  tin-bearing  stratum  and  stone
8  Sel.  Journ.  vol.   iii.   No.    1 8,  pp.  overlying  the  ore. 293.  294-
264  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
the  mine,  in  case  it  might  not  bear  scrutiny ;  and  thus, by  depriving  him  of  the  protection  from  the  sun  and from  the  rough  mining  quartz  which  would  have  been afforded  by  the  umbrella  and  shoes,  they  prevented him  from  going  about  here,  there,  and  everywhere,  and making  unpleasant  inquiries,  as  he  would  otherwise have  liked  to  do.
"  Quarrelling  and  fighting  in  the  mine  is  strictly forbidden,  as  it  has  a  tendency  to  drive  away  the  ore.
"  Bathing  in  the  mine  is  not  allowed.
"  A  man  must  not  work  in  the  mine  with  only his  bathing- cloth  around  his  body.  He  must  wear trousers.
"  If  a  man  takes  off  his  sun  hat  and  puts  it  on  the ground,  he  must  turn  it  over  and  let  it  rest  upon  its crown.
"  Limes  cannot  be  brought  into  the  mine.  This superstition  is  peculiar  to  the  Malay  miner,  who  has  a special  dread  of  this  fruit,  which,  in  pantang  language, he  calls  salah  nama  (lit.  '  wrong  name  ')  instead  of  limau nipis.
"In  looking  at  the  check-roll  it  is  forbidden  to  point at  the  names  with  the  finger.  No  one  may  examine the  check-roll  at  night  with  an  open  light,  owing  more probably  to  the  fear  of  setting  it  on  fire  than  to  super- stitious prejudices.
"It  is  considered  unlucky  for  a  man  to  fall  off  the mining  ladder,  for,  whether  he  is  hurt  or  not,  he  is likely  to  die  within  the  year.
"An  outbreak  of  fire  in  the  mine  is  considered  an omen  of  prosperity.  Several  mines  have  been  known to  double  or  treble  their  output  of  tin  after  the  occur- rence of  a  fire.
"It  is   unlucky  for  a  coolie  to  die  in  the  kongsi
MINING  CHARMS  265
house.  When,  therefore,  a  man  is  very  sick  and  past all  hopes  of  recovery,  it  is  customary  to  put  him  out  of the  house  in  an  extempore  hut  erected  in  the  scrub, so  that  death  may  not  take  place  in  the  kongsi  amongst the  living.  His  ckuleis1  attend  him  during  his  last hours  and  bury  him  when  dead.  These  and  other superstitious  ideas  and  observances  are,  however,  fast dying  out,  though  it  would  still  be  an  unsafe  experi- ment to  enter  a  mine  with  shoes  on  and  an  umbrella over  your  head." 8
The  remaining  notes  on  mining  ceremonies  and charms  were  collected  by  me  in  Selangor.  On  reach- ing the  tin-bearing  stratum,  the  tin-ore  is  addressed by  name  : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Tin-Ore, At  the  first  it  was  dew  that  turned  into  water, And  water  that  turned  into  foam, And  foam  that  turned  into  rock, And  rock  that  turned  into  tin-ore ; Do  you,  O  Tin-Ore,  lying  in  a  matrix  of  solid  rock, Come  forth  from  this  matrix  of  solid  rock ; If  you  do  not  come  forth You  shall  be  a  rebel  in  the  sight  of  God. Ho,  Tin-Ore,  Sir  '  Floating  Islet,' 1  Flotsam-at-sea,'  and  '  Flotsam-on-land,' Do  you  float  up  to  the  surface  of  this  my  tank,3 Or  you  shall  be  a  rebel  to  God,"  etc.
Sometimes  each  grain  of  ore  appears  to  be  con- sidered as  endowed  with  a  separate  entity  or  individu- ality. Thus  we  find  in  another  invocation  the  following passage,  where  the  wizard  is  addressing  the  grains  of ore : —
1  i.e.  his  "connections."  are  worked  in  the  Malay  States  being
*  Set.  Journ.  vol.  iv.  No.  8,  p.  139.       **  °f  thre  removaj  of  the  overburden,
which,  of  course,  forms  immense  pits,
3  "This  my  tank"  is  an  allusion  to       such  as  are  here  likened  to  an  (empty), the  mine,  the  system  on  which  mines      tank  or  reservoir.
266  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
"  Do  You  (Grains  of  Ore)  that  are  on  the  Hills  descend  to  the
Plains,
You  that  are  at  the  Head-waters  descend  to  Mid-stream, You  that  are  at  the  Estuary  ascend  to  Mid-stream. And  assemble  yourselves  together  in  this  spot.
Assemble  yourselves  together,  '  Rice-grains '  and  '  Spinach-seed,'
'Tobacco-seed,'  'Millet,'  and  'Wild  Ginger-Seed,'
Assemble  ye  together  in  this  spot.
I  am  desirous  of  excavating  this  spot,
And  of  making  a  mine  here ;
If  ye  do  not  assemble  yourselves  together
I  shall  curse  you  ;
You  shall  be  turned  into  dust,  and  turned  into  air,
And  you  shall  also  be  turned  into  water."
The  separate  personality  of  each  individual  grain is  remarkably  clear  in  the  above  passage.  The  names of  the  different  kinds  of  seed  are  in  allusion  to  the various  shapes  and  sizes  of  the  grains  of  ore.
Yet  in  the  very  same  charm  various  kinds  of lizards  and  centipedes  are  begged  to  "bring  the  tin- ore  with  them,  some  of  them  a  grain  or  two,  some  of them  a  fistful  or  two,  some  of  them  a  gallon  or  two, some  of  them  a  load  or  two,"  and  so  on.  No  doubt the  wizard  was  determined  to  allow  the  grains  no loophole  for  escape.
The  objects  of  the  charms  employed  by  the  mining wizards  are  the  following  : —
(i)  To  clear  the  jungle  of  evil  spirits  (and  pro- pitiate the  good  ones?)  before  starting  to  fell,  as  is shown  by  the  following  passage  : —
"  O  Grandfather  King  Solomon,  Black  King  Solomon, I  desire  to  fell  these  woods, But  it  is  not  I  who  am  in  charge  of  these  woods, It  is  Yellow  King  Solomon  who  is  in  charge  of  them, And  Red  King  Solomon  who  is  in  charge  of  them. It  is  I  who  fell  the  jungle,
But  only  with  the  permission  of  those  two  persons. Rise,  rise,  O  Ye  who  watch  it  (the  tin  ?),
v  OBJECTS  OF  THE  CHARMS  267
[Here  are]  three  'chews'  of  betel  for  you,  and  three  cigarettes,
0  Maimurup,  O  Maimerah,  O  Gadek  Hitam,
Si  Gadek  Hitam  (Black  Grannie)  from  Down-stream, Si  Gadek  Kuning  (Yellow  Grannie)  from  Up-stream, And  Si  Maimerah  from  Mid-stream."
(Here  some  lines  follow  which  are  as  yet  untrans- latable.)
"  Retire  ye  and  avaunt  from  hence, If  ye  retire  not  from  hence, As  you  stride,  your  leg  shall  break,
As  you  stretch  your  hand  out,  your  hand  shall  be  crippled, As  you  open  your  eye  (to  look),  your  eyeball  shall  burst, Your  eye  stabbed  through  with  a  thorn  of  the  T'rong  Asam,1 And  your  hand  pierced  with  the  Sega  jantan? And  your  finger-nails  with  Heart  of  Brazilwood. Moreover,  your  tongue  shall  be  slit  with  a  bamboo  splinter, For  thus  was  it  sworn  by  '  Grandfather  Sakernanaininaini ' 3 Into  the  leaf  (of  the)  Putajaya, Upon  the  summit  of  the  mountain  of  Ceylon.
1  know  the  origin  from  which  you  spring, From  the  Black  Blood  and  the  Red, That  was  your  origin.
We  are  two  sons  of  one  father,  but  with  different  inheritances ; In  my  charge  is  Gold  and  Tin-ore, In  yours  are  Rocks  and  Sand, With  chaff  and  bran."
(2)  To  clear   evil   spirits  away  from  the  ground before   commencing   the    work   of  excavation.     The charm  for  this  is  given  in  the  Appendix,  but  is  little more  than  a  list  of  names.
(3)  To  propitiate  the  local  spirits  and  induce  the tin-ore  to  show  itself,  when  the  tin-bearing  stratum  is reached,  by  means  of  the  charm  quoted  above.
1  A  plant,  possibly  Solatium  aculea-  of  the  kabong-yakm.  (Artnga  sacchari-
tissimnm,  Jacq.,  which  has  very  thorny  fera,  L.)
orange-coloured  fruits.  s  Presumably  a  corruption  of  Iskandar
8  Stga  is  a  species  of  rattan  (Calamus  zu  '1-Karnain,  i.e.  Alexander  the  Great,
viminalis  or  Calamus  ornatus,  Griff. ) ;  who  plays  a  considerable  part  in  Malay
but  probably  the  better  reading  here  is  legendary  history. sfgar,  which  means  a  long  black  spike
268  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
(4)  To  induce  the  spirits  to  partake  of  a  banquet which  is  spread  for  them  in  a  receptacle  intended to  be  the  model  of  a  royal  audience-chamber.
This,  the  "spirits'  audience -chamber"  (as  it  is called),  is  usually  from  two  to  three  feet  square,  and is  filled  with  offerings  similar  in  character  to  those usually  deposited  on  the  sacrificial  tray  (anchaK),  with the  addition,  however,  of  certain  articles  which  are considered  to  be  specially  representative  of  the  miners' food.  These  articles  are  sugar-cane,  plantains,  yams, sweet  potatoes,  and  fish,  etc. ;  all  of  which  should  be placed  together  with  the  customary  offerings  in  the "  spirits'  audience-chamber."  Outside  the  "audience- hall,"  at  each  of  the  two  front  corners,  should  be placed  a  red  and  a  white  flag  and  a  wax  taper ;  and  at each  of  the  two  back  corners  should  be  placed  a  taper, making  in  all  four  flags  and  seven  tapers.
A  standard  censer  (perasapan)  must  be  erected  in front  of  the  "  audience-chamber,"  and  a  second  small censer  must  also  be  obtained,  so  that  burning  incense may  be  "  waved  "  to  and  fro  underneath  the  floor  of the  audience-chamber  in  order  to  fumigate  it  before the  offerings  are  deposited  inside  it.
During  the  fumigation  a  charm  is  recited,  in  which the  assistance  of  the  spirits  of  certain  canonized Muhammadan  worthies  is  invoked,  concluding thus : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  White  Sheikh,  wizard  of  the  virgin
jungle,
Wizards  old,  and  wizards  young,
Come  hither  and  share  the  banquet  I  have  prepared  for  you. I  crave  pardon  for  all  mistakes, For  all  shortcomings  I  beg  pardon  in  every  particular."
Then  when  the  tapers  are  all  lighted  and  the  offer-
MINING  TABOOS  269
ings  ready,  a  further  charm  is  recited,  which  begins  as follows : —
"  Ho,  White  Sheikh,  king  of  the  virgin  jungle, It  is  you  to  whom  belong  all  people  of  the  jungle  and  virgin
forest,
Do  you,  whose  back  is  turned  towards  heaven, Give  your  orders  to  all  the  Elders  of  the  earth  and  Princes
who  are  here,
You  who  here  hold  the  position  of  Indra, Come  hither  and  partake  of  my  banquet.
I  wish  to  ask  for  your  assistance,
I  wish  to  open  (excavate)  this  mine." l
The  chief  taboos  are  the  killing  of  any  sort  of  living creature  within  the  mine ;  to  wear  a  sarong  (Malay skirt) ;  to  bring  into  the  mine  the  skin  of  any  beast ; and  to  wear  shoes  or  use  an  umbrella  within  the  mine. These  are  some  of  the  perpetual  taboos,  but  no  doubt there  are  many  others.
In  the  case  of  a  sacrifice,  however,  the  white  buffalo may  of  course  be  killed,  not  within  the  mine  itself,  but still  upon  its  brink ;  and  when  this  is  done,  the  head  is buried,  and  small  portions  (which  must  be  "  repre- sentative "  of  every  part  of  the  carcase)  should  be  taken and  deposited  in  the  "  audience-chamber."
Among  the  seven  days'  taboos  are  mentioned  the killing  of  any  living  timber  (within  the  precincts  of  the mine  ?),  lewdness,  and  the  praising  or  admiring  of  the "grass  seed"  (puji  buah  rumpuf],  which  is  the  name by  which  the  tin-ore  must  invariably  be  called  within the  precincts  of  the  mine.  This  last  taboo  is  due  to the  use  of  a  special  mining  vocabulary  to  which  the greatest  attention  was  formerly  paid,  and  which  did not  differ  very  greatly  from  that  used  in  Perak.
1    Vide  App.  cxviii.,  cxix.
270  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
Another  account  of  the  ceremony  runs  as  follows  ; I  give  it  word  for  word  as  I  took  it  down  from  my Malay  informant : —
"  Take  five  portions  of  cooked  and  five  portions  of uncooked  fowls,  both  white  and  black,  together  with black  pulut  rice,1  millet-seed  (sekoi\  seeds  of  the chebak  China,  etc.  etc.  When  all  is  ready,  burn incense,  scatter  the  black  rice  with  the  right  hand  over the  bottom  of  a  tray,  i.e.  an  ancJiak  (such  as  is  used  for offerings  to  the  spirits),  fumigate  and  deposit  the  offer- ings in  five  portions  upon  this  layer  of  rice  (one  portion going  to  each  corner  and  one  to  the  middle  of  the tray).  Take  black  cloth,  five  cubits  long,  fumigate  it, and  wave  it  thrice  round  the  head  with  the  right  hand from  left  to  right,  repeating  the  following  invocation (serapaK) : —
"  O  Grandfather  '  Batin ' 2  the  Elder, In  whose  charge  are  caverns  and  hill-locked  basins, O  Grandfather  '  Batin '  the  Younger,
In  whose  charge  are  all  these  your  civil  and  military  companies, May  the  Ore  which  is  on  the  Hills  descend  to  the  Plain, May  that  which  is  Up-stream  descend  to  Mid-stream, And  that  which  is  Down-stream  ascend  to  Mid-stream, Assemble  you  together,  O  Ores,  in  this  spot ; It  is  not  I  who  call  you,
It  is  Grandfather  Batin  the  Elder  who  calls  you, It  is  Batin  the  Younger  who  calls  you, It  is  the  Elder  Wizard  who  calls  you, It  is  the  Younger  Wizard  who  calls  you, Assemble  yourselves  together,  Rubbish  and  Trash, House-lizards,  '  Kalerik]  Centipedes,  and  Millipedes, And  partake  of  my  banquet. Let  whosoever  comes  bring  me  ore, A  ketongz  or  two,
1  Oryza  sativa,  L.  var.  3  Kftong  as  a  dry  measure   is  not
2  Batin  is  a  title  of  certain  Chiefs  to  be  found  in  the  dictionaries.     V.  d. amongst  the  aboriginal   tribes   of  the  Wall,  however,  gives  a  form  kentong southern   part  of  the    Peninsula.      It  (with  which  it  may  be  connected)  as appears  to  have  been  in  former  days  meaning  an  earthen  pot,  formerly  used sometimes  borne  by  Malays  also.  for  holding  /a/a«,f-sugar.
GOLD-MINING  271
A  fistful  or  two,
An  arai l  or  two,
A  gallon  or  two,
A  basket  or  two,
Assemble  yourselves  together,  Boiled  Rice-seed,
Spinach-seed,  Tobacco-seed,  Millet-seed,  Wild  Ginger-seed,
Assemble  yourselves  together  in  this  spot.
I  wish  to  excavate  this  spot,
I  wish  to  open  a  mine  :
If  you  do  not  come,  if  you  do  not  gather  yourselves  together,
I  shall  curse  you  ;
You  shall  turn  into  dust,  into  air,  and  into  water.
By  virtue  of  the  magic  arts  of  my  teacher  be  my  petition
granted.
It  is  not  I  who  petition, It  is  the  Elder  Wizard  who  petitions, It  is  the  Younger  Wizard  who  petitions. By  the  grace  of  '  There  is  no  god  but  God/  "  etc.
The  foregoing  descriptions  of  mining  ceremonies and  charms  refer  to  tin  only,  but  in  so  far  as  general animistic  ideas  go,  they  might  be  equally  well  applied to  other  metals,  such  as  silver  and  gold.
It  has  already  been  remarked  that  as  the  Tin  spirit is  believed  to  take  the  form  of  a  buffalo,  so  the Gold  spirit  is  said  to  take  the  form  of  a  golden roe-deer  (kijang).  Of  the  ceremonies  which  the Malays  believe  to  be  essential  for  successful  gold- mining,  not  much  information  has  yet  been  published. In  Denys'  Descriptive  Dictionary,  however,  we  read the  following : —
"  Gold  is  believed  to  be  under  the  care  and  in  the gift  of  a  dewa,  or  god,  and  its  search  is  therefore  un- hallowed, for  the  miners  must  conciliate  the  dewa  by prayers  and  offerings,  and  carefully  abstain  from  pro- nouncing the  name  of  God  or  performing  any  act  of worship.  Any  acknowledgment  of  the  sovereignty  of Allah  offends  the  dewa,  who  immediately  '  hides  the
1  An  arai  is  an  Achinese  measure  [  =  2  chtipak\,  about  3 \  Ibs.
272  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
gold,'  or  renders  it  invisible.  At  some  of  the  great limbongan 1  mas  or  gold-pits  in  the  Malay  States  of  the interior,  any  allusion  to  the  Deity  subjects  the  unwitting miner  to  a  penalty  which  is  imposed  by  the  Penghtilu. The  qualities  of  the  gold  vary  greatly  in  the  same country.  The  finest  gold  brought  to  market  is  that  of the  principality  of  Pahang,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the Malay  Peninsula,  which  brings  a  higher  price  than even  that  of  Australia  by  better  than  three  per  cent. The  gold  is  all  obtained  by  washing,  and  the  metal  has never  been  worked,  and  scarcely  even  traced  to  the original  veins.  It  is  mostly  in  the  form  of  powder  or dust — the  mas-urai  of  the  Malays,  literally  'loose  or disintegrated  gold.' " 2
Gold,  silver,  and  an  amalgam  formed  of  the  two, are  regarded  as  the  three  most  precious  metals,  and  of these  gold  is,  to  a  very  uncertain  and  partial  extent, still  sometimes  regarded  as  a  royal  prerogative.3
Of  Silver  still  less  information  has  been  collected than  of  gold.  This,  however,  is  but  natural,  as  silver has  not  yet  been  found  in  payable  quantities,  whereas many  gold  mines  exist.  It  is  just  possible,  however, that  silver  may  be  worked  by  the  Malays  on  a  small scale  in  the  Siamese-Malay  States,  as  it  would  be  diffi- cult on  any  other  hypothesis  to  account  for  the  follow- ing invocation,  which  was  given  me  by  a  Malay  of Kelantan  ('Che  'Abas)  :—
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Child  of  the  Solitary  Jin  Salaka  (Silver), I  know  your  origin.
1  Sic :  quaere  lombong  ?  the  wearing  the  koronchong,  or  hollow
2  Denys,     Descr.     Diet,     of   Brit.  bracelets    of    gold,    ornamented   with Malaya,  s.v.  Gold.  silver."
3  Vide  Leyden,  Malay  Annals,   p.  Two   legends,    which    connect    the 94.    "  He  (the  Sultan),  also  prohibited  wild   boar   with   the  precious  metals, the  ornamenting  of  creeses  with  gold,  have  already  been  mentioned,  -vide  p. and  the  wearing  anklets  of  gold,  and  188,  supra.
v  SILVER  AND  IRON  273
Your  dwelling-place  is  the  Yellow  Cloud  Rock ;
The  Place  of  your  Penance  the  Sea  of  Balongan  Darah  ;
The  Place  of  your  Penance  is  a  Pond  in  every  stream ;
The  Place  of  your  Birth  was  the  Bay  where  the  Wind  Dies ;
Ho,  Child  of  the  Solitary  Jin  Salaka,
Come  hither  at  this  time,  this  very  moment,
I  wish  to  make  you  a  propitiatory  offering,  to  banquet  you  on
arrack  and  toddy.
If  you  do  not  come  hither  at  this  very  moment You  shall  be  a  rebel  unto  God, And  a  rebel  unto  God's  Prophet  Solomon, For  I  am  God's  Prophet  Solomon"
No  other  metals,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  are  worked to  any  extent  in  the  Peninsula,  yet  there  is  the  clearest possible  evidence  of  animistic  ideas  about  Iron.  Thus for  the  Sacred  Lump  of  Iron  which  forms  part  of  the regalia  of  more  than  one  of  the  petty  Sultans  in  the Peninsula,  the  Malays  entertain  the  most  extraordinary reverence,  not  unmingled  with  superstitious  terror.1  It is  upon  this  "  Lump  of  Iron,"  when  placed  in  water, that  the  most  solemn  and  binding  oath  known  to  those who  make  use  of  it  is  sworn  ;  and  it  is  to  this  "  Lump  of Iron  "  that  the  Malay  wizard  refers  when  he  recites  his category  of  the  most  terrible  denunciations  that  Malay magic  has  been  able  to  invent.2
It  is  possible  that  there  may  be,   in  the   Malay
1   Vide  v.  d.  Wall,    Malay  -  Dutch  oath   would    be   affected    by  a  severe
Diet.,  s.v.   Kawi,  one   of  the   mean-  sickness,  and   in  the  case  of  a  Chief
ings  of  which  he  explains  as  the  super-  the  sickness  affects  the  whole  tribe. " natural  power  of  anything.     He  pro-  jBisa  kawi  is  another  (West  Surna-
ceeds      to     explain      btsi     kawi     as  tran)  form  of  this  expression.      Under
follows  : — It  is  "a  piece  of  old  scrap-  Bisa  III.,  </.v.,  v.  d.  W.  remarks  that
iron  with  supernatural  powers,  belong-  to  say,  ' '  May  you  be  struck  by  the  Bisa
ing  to  the  royal  insignia  of  the  former  Kawi"  (lit.   Poison  of  Kawi),  is  the
Kingdom  of  Johor,  now  [then?]  in  the  ugliest  wish  you  can  address  to  any-
possession  of  the    Sultan   of   Lingga.  body,  as  it  is  supposed  to  bring  upon
Whenever  an  oath  was  to  be  taken  by  the  person  so  addressed  every  possible
a  subject,  the  Iron  would  be  immersed  kind  of  sickness.
in  water  for  a  time,  and  the  patient  [sic]  2  For    examples    vide   the    charms
had  to  drink  of  this  water  before  he  quoted   in   almost   every  part  of  this
took  the  oath.     Whoever  took  a  false  book.
274  MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS  CHAP.
mind  at  all  events,  some  connection  between  the supernatural  powers  ascribed  to  this  portion  of  the regalia  and  the  more  general  use  of  iron  as  a  charm against  evil  spirits.  For  the  various  forms  of  iron which  play  so  conspicuous  a  part  in  Malay  magic, from  the  long  iron  nail  which  equally  protects  the new-born  infant  and  the  Rice-Soul  from  the  powers of  evil,  to  the  betel-nut  scissors  which  are  believed  to scare  the  evil  spirits  from  the  dead,  are  alike  called  the representatives  (symbols  or  emblems)  of  Iron  (tanda best).  So,  too,  is  the  blade  of  the  wood- knife,  or  cutlass, which  a  jungle  Malay  will  sometimes  plant  in  the  bed of  a  stream  (with  its  edge  towards  the  source)  before he  will  venture  to  drink  of  the  water.  So,  too,  is  the blade  of  the  same  knife,  upon  the  side  of  which  he will  occasionally  seat  himself  when  he  is  eating  alone in  the  forest ;  both  of  these  precautions  being  taken, however,  as  I  have  more  than  once  been  told,  not only  to  drive  away  evil  spirits,  but  to  "confirm"  the speaker's  own  soul  (menetapkan  semangaf).
Even  Stone  appears  to  be  regarded  as  distinctly connected  with  ideas  of  animism.  Thus  the  stone deposited  in  the  basket  with  the  Rice-soul,  the  stone deposited  in  the  child's  swinging  cot  by  way  of  a substitute  when  the  child  is  temporarily  taken  out of  it,  and  above  all  the  various  concretions  to  be  found from  time  to  time  both  in  the  bodies  of  animals ("Bezoar"  stones)  and  in  the  stems  or  fruit  of  trees (as  tabasheer],  are  examples  of  this.  Examples  of tabasheer  have  already  been  quoted  (under  Vegetation Charms),  but  a  few  remarks  about  Bezoar  stones  may be  of  interest.
The  Bezoar  stones  known  to  the  Peninsular  Malays are  usually  obtained  either  from  monkeys  or  por-
REZOAR  STONES  275
cupines.  Extraordinary  magical  virtues  are  attached to  these  stones,  the  gratings  of  which  are  mixed with  water  and  administered  to  the  sick.1
I  was  once  asked  $200  for  a  small  stone  which its  owner  kept  in  cotton-wool  in  a  small  tin  box, where  it  lay  surrounded  by  grains  of  rice,  upon  which he  declared  that  it  fed.2  I  asked  him  how  it  could be  proved  that  it  was  a  true  Bezoar  stone  (which  it undoubtedly  was  not),  and  he  declared  that  if  it  were placed  upon  an  inverted  tumbler  and  touched  with the  point  of  a  Kris  (dagger)  or  a  lime-fruit  it  would commence  to  move  about.  Both  tests  were  therefore applied  in  my  presence,  but  the  motion  of  the  Bezoar stone  in  each  case  proved  to  be  due  to  the  most overt  trickery  on  the  part  of  the  owner,  who  by pressing  on  one  side  of  the  stone  (which  was  spherical in  shape)  naturally  caused  it  to  move ;  in  fact  I  was easily  able  to  produce  the  same  effect  in  the  same way,  as  I  presently  showed  him,  though  of  course he  could  not  be  brought  to  admit  the  deception.3
1  "  It  is  a  very  general  belief  among  article  of  export  from  the  Rejang  and Malays  that  Guliga  [and]  Buntat,  viz.  Bintulu  rivers  in  the  Sarawak  territory, stones  that  are  found  in  the  bodies  of  These  concretions  are  chiefly  obtained animals  or  contained  in  trees,  have  great  from  a  red  monkey  (a  species  of  Seat- magic   and  vegetable  virtue.      These  nopithecus),   which   seems   to  be  very stones  are  worn  as  charms,  and  are  abundant    in   the  interior   districts  of also  scraped,  the  scrapings  being  mixed  Borneo.       A   more   valuable    Guliga, with  water  and  given  to  the  sick  as  called    the    '  Guliga    Landak,'   is   ob- medicine." — Pubns.    of  the    R.A.S.,  tained  from  the  porcupine,   but  it   is S.B.,  No.  3,  p.  26  n.  comparatively     rare.        The     Sepoys
2  This  idea  recalls  a  similar  super-  stationed  at  Sibu  Fort  in  the  Rejang stition   about  what   are  called  in  the  formerly  exported  considerable  numbers Straits  Settlements  "  breeding-pearls,"  of  these  calculi  to  Hindustan,  where, i.e.  a  kind  of  pearl  which  is  supposed  in  addition  to  their  supposed  efficacy to  reproduce  itself  when  kept  in  a  box  as  an  antidote  for  the  poison  of  snakes and  fed  with  pulut  rice  for  a  suffici-  and   other   venomous   creatures,   they ently  lengthy  period. —  Vide  J.R.A.S.,  appear  to  be  applied,  either  alone  or S.B.,  No.    I,  pp.   31-37,  No.  3,  pp.  in  combination  with  other  medicines, 140-143.  to  the  treatment  of  fevers,   asthmatic
3  "The    Guliga,    more    commonly  complaints,  general  debility,  etc.     A known  as  Bezoar,  forms  a  recognised  few   years   ago,    however,   these    men
276
MINERALS  AND  MINING  CHARMS
Before  I  leave  this  portion  of  the  subject,  I  may mention  that  magic  powers  are  very  generally  ascribed to  the  "  celts  "  or  "  stone-age  "  implements  which  are frequently  found  in  the  Peninsula,  and  are  called thunderbolts  (batu  halilintar).  They  are  not  un- frequently  grated  and  mixed  with  water  and  drunk
ceased  to  send  any  but  the  Guliga Landak,  since  their  hakims  had  in- formed them  that  the  concretions obtained  from  the  monkeys  had  come to  be  considered  of  very  doubtful,  if any,  value  from  a  medicinal  point  of view.  The  usual  test  for  a  good Guliga  is  to  place  a  little  chunam  on the  hand  and  to  rub  the  Guliga  against it,  when,  if  it  be  genuine,  the  lime becomes  tinged  with  yellow.  Imita- tions are  by  no  means  rare,  and  on  one occasion  which  came  to  my  own  know- ledge, some  Bakatans  succeeded  in deceiving  the  Chinamen,  who  trade  in these  articles,  by  carefully  moulding some  fine  light  clay  into  the  form  of  a Bezoar,  and  then  rubbing  it  well  all  over with  a  genuine  one.  The  extreme lightness  of  a  real  Guliga  and  the  lime test  are,  however,  generally  sufficient to  expose  a  counterfeit  Bezoar.  The Sepoys  and  Malays  apply  various  im- aginary tests.  Thus  they  assert  that if  a  true  Guliga  be  clasped  in  the closed  fist  the  bitter  taste  of  the  con- cretion will  be  plainly  susceptible  to the  tongue  when  applied  to  the  back of  the  hand,  and  even  above  the  elbow if  the  Guliga  be  a  good  '  Landak ' ;  and a  Sepoy  once  assured  me  that  having accidentally  broken  one  of  the  latter  he immediately  was  sensible  of  a  bitter taste  in  the  mouth.
"Accounts  vary  very  much  among the  natives  as  to  the  exact  position  in which  the  Guligas  are  found :  some saying  they  may  occur  in  any  part  of the  body,  others  that  they  occur  only in  the  stomach  and  intestines,  whilst  I have  heard  others  declare  that  they have  taken  them  from  the  head  and even  the  hand  !  Bezoar  stones  are sold  by  weight,  the  gold  scale  being used,  and  the  value  varies  according
to  quality  and  to  the  scarcity  or  abund- ance of  the  commodity  at  the  time  of sale.  The  ordinary  prices  paid  at Rejang  a  few  years  ago  were  from $1.50  to  $2  per  amas  for  common stones  and  from  $2.50  to  $4  per  amas for  Guliga  Landak.  I  have  seen  one of  the  latter  which  was  valued  at  $100. It  was  about  the  size  of  an  average Tangiers  orange,  and  was  perfectly spherical.  The  surface,  where  not artificially  abraded,  was  smooth,  shin- ing, bronze-brown,  studded  with  nume- rous irregularly -shaped  fragments  of dark  rich  brown  standing  out  slightly above  the  general  mass  of  the  calculus. These  fragments,  in  size  and  appear- ance, bore  a  close  resemblance  to  the crystals  in  a  coarse-grained  porphyritic rock.
"  The  common  monkey-bezoars  vary much  in  colour  and  shape.  I  have seen  them  of  the  size  of  large  filberts, curiously  convoluted  and  cordate  in shape,  with  a  smooth,  shining  surface of  a  pale  olive-green  hue.  Mr.  A.  R. Houghton  once  showed  me  one  which was  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  and shaped  like  an  Indian  club.  It  was of  a  dirty  greenish  colour,  perfectly smooth  and  cylindrical,  and  it  had become  aggregated  around  a  portion of  a  sumpitan  dart,  which  appears  to have  penetrated  the  animal's  stomach, and  being  broken  off  short  has  sub- sequently served  as  the  nucleus  for  the formation  of  a  calculus.  The  same gentleman  had  in  his  possession  two Landak  stones,  one  of  which  bore  a close  resemblance  to  a  block  in  shape, and  was  of  a  bright  green  colour,  and the  second  was  of  a  rich  chocolate brown,  and  could  best  be  likened  in form  to  a  constable's  staff.  One porcupine  stone  which  was  opened  was
PURIFICATION  BY  WATER
277
like   the    Bezoar   stones,   but   usually   they   are   kept merely  as  a  touch-stone  for  gold.
(c)   Water
1.    PURIFICATION    BY   WATER
The  following  description  (by  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell) of    the     bathing    ceremony,    as     practised    by    the
found  to  be  a  mere  shell  full  of  small brown  shavings  like  shred  tobacco.
"  The  part  of  the  island  which  pro- duces these  stones  in  greatest  abund- ance seems  to  be,  by  a  coincidence  of native  reports,  the  district  about  the upper  waters  of  the  BaluRgar  (Batang Kayan).  The  story  is  that  the  head- waters of  this  river  are  cut  off  from its  lower  course  by  an  extensive  tract of  hills  beneath  which  the  river  dis- appears, a  report  by  no  means  unlikely if  the  country  be,  as  is  probable,  lime- stone. The  people  of  the  district have  no  communication  with  the  lower course  of  the  river,  and  are  thus  with- out any  supply  of  salt.  In  lieu  of  this necessity  they  make  use  of  the  waters of  certain  springs,  which  must  be saline  mineral  springs,  and  which  the Kayans  call  '  Sungan.'  These  springs are  also  frequented  by  troops  of  the red  monkeys  before  mentioned,  and the  Bezoars  are  most  constantly  found in  the  stomachs  of  these  animals through  their  drinking  the  saline  water. The  hunters  lie  in  wait  about  such springs,  and,  so  runs  the  report,  on the  animals  coming  down  to  drink  they are  able  to  guess  with  tolerable  cer- tainty from  external  signs  which  of  the monkeys  will  afford  the  Guliga,  and they  forthwith  shoot  such  with  their sumpitans.  I  have  this  account,  curi- ous in  more  ways  than  one,  from geveral  quite  independent  sources.  In concluding  these  brief  notes,  I  may remark  that  the  wide-spread  idea  of  the medicinal  virtue  of  these  concretions would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  there is  some  foundation  for  their  reputa-
tion."—J.K.A.  S. ,  S.£.,  No.  4,  pp. 56-58.
"The  guliga  in  Siak,  which  is considered  to  belong  to  the  larangan raja  [royal  property],  is  an  intestinal stone  found  in  a  kind  of  porcupine  living principally  in  the  upper  reaches  of  the Mandau.  The  Sake-is  living  in  this region  are  the  only  persons  who  collect these  stones,  which  they  deliver  to  the Sultan  partly  as  a  revenue,  partly  as barang  larangan.
"  By  right  all  the  guligas  found  by them  are  the  Sultan's ;  the  greater number,  however,  are  clandestinely sold  to  Malay  and  Chinese  traders.
"  According  to  their  size  they  are worth  from  $40  to  $600  a  piece.
"Their  value,  however,  does  not merely  rise  with  their  weight  but,  as in  the  case  of  precious  stones,  rises  out of  all  proportion  with  the  mere  increase in  weight.  A  guliga  weighing  i ringgit  (8  mayam)  costs  $600,  whereas one  of  the  weight  of  3  mayam  will  only be  worth  $100.
"  ¥  or  guligas,  particularly  large  ones, extraordinary  prices  are  sometimes  paid. The  Sultan  of  Siak  possesses  one  said to  be  valued  at  §900.
"Natives  maintain  that  they  are  an almost  infallible  medicine  in  cases  of chest  or  bowel  complaints,  but  their principal  value  is  founded  on  their reputed  virtue  as  a  powerful  aphro- disiac. To  operate  in  this  way  one  is worn  on  the  navel  tied  up  in  a  piece  of cloth,  or  water  in  which  one  has  been soaked  is  drunk." — F.  Kehding  on  Siak (Sumatra)  mJ.K.A.S.,  S.B.t  No.  17, PP-  153-4-
278  WA  TER  CHAP.
Perak  Malays,  may  be  taken  as  typical  of  this subject  :—
;<  Limes  are  used  in  Perak,  as  we  use  soap,  when  a Malay  has  resolved  on  having  a  really  good  "scrub." They  are  cut  in  two  and  squeezed  (ramas)  in  the  hand. In  Penang  a  root  called  sintok  is  usually  preferred to  limes.  When  the  body  is  deemed  sufficiently cleansed  the  performer,  taking  his  stand  facing  the East,  spits  seven  times,  and  then  counts  up  seven aloud.  After  the  word  tujoh  (seven)  he  throws  away the  remains  of  the  limes  or  sintok  to  the  West,  saying aloud,  Pergi-lah  samua  sial  jambalang  deripada  badan aku  ka  pusat  tasek  Pawjangi,  'Misfortune  and  spirits of  evil  begone  from  my  body  to  the  whirlpool  of  the lake  Paujangi ! '  Then  he  throws  (jurus]  a  few buckets  of  water  over  himself,  and  the  operation  is complete.
"  The  lake  Paujangi  is  situated  in  mid-ocean,  and its  whirlpool  most  likely  causes  the  tides.  All  the waters  of  the  sea  and  rivers  are  finally  received  there. It  is  probably  as  eligible  an  abode  for  exorcised spirits  as  the  Red  Sea  was  once  considered  to  be by  our  forefathers." *
The  ceremony  just  described  is  evidently  a  form of  purification  by  water.  Similar  purificatory  cere- monies form  an  integral  part  of  Malay  customs  at birth,  adolescence,  marriage,  sickness,  death,  and  in fact  at  every  critical  period  of  the  life  of  a  Malay  ; but  will  be  most  conveniently  discussed  in  detail under  each  of  the  particular  headings  referred  to. The  tepong  tawar  ceremony  (for  the  details  of  which see  Chapter  III.,  and  which  is  perhaps  the  commonest
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,    No.   9,   p.    24  n.     As   to  Paujangi  (Pauh  Janggi)  vide pp.  6-9,  supra.
v  THE  WATER  SPIRIT  279
of  all  Malay  magic  rites)  would   also  seem  to  have originated  from  ideas  of  ceremonial  purification.
2.    THE    SEA,    RIVERS,    AND    STREAMS
The  Malays  have  been  from  time  immemorial  a sea-faring  race,  and  are  quite  as  superstitious  in  their ideas  of  the  sea  as  sailors  in  other  parts  of  the  world.
As  has  been  already  indicated,1  their  animistic notions  include  a  belief  in  Water  Spirits,  both  of  the sea  and  of  rivers,  and  occasionally  this  belief  finds expression  in  ritual  observances.
Thus,  for  instance,  it  was  formerly  the  custom  to insert  a  number  of  sugar-palm  twigs  (segar  kabong]  into the  top  of  the  ship's  mast,  making  the  end  of  it  look not  unlike  a  small  birch  of  black  twigs.2
This  was  intended  to  prevent  the  Water  Spirit (Hantu  Ayer)  from  settling  on  the  mast.  His  appear- ance when  he  does  settle  is  described  as  resembling the  glow  of  fire  flies  or  of  phosphorescence  in  the  sea — evidently  a  form  of  St.  Elmo's  fire.
The  ship  being  a  living  organism,  one  must,  of course,  when  all  is  ready,  persuade  it  to  make  a  proper start.  To  effect  this  you  go  on  board,  and  sitting down  beside  the  well  (petak  ruang\  burn  incense  and strew  the  sacrificial  rice,  and  then  tapping  the  inside  of the  keelson  {jintekkan  serempii]  and  the  next  plank above  it  (apit  lempong),  beg  them  to  adhere  to  each other  during  the  voyage,  e.g. : —
"Peace  be  with  you,   O   'big  MSdang'  and   'low-growing
Mgdang ! ' Be  ye  not  parted  brother  from  brother,
1   Vide  Chapter  IV.  supra. 2  For  the  charm  used  at  the  insertion  of  the  twigs,  vide  App.  cxxii.
280  THE  SEA  AND  RIVERS  CHAP.
I  desire  you  to  speed  me,  to  the  utmost  of  your  power,
To  such  and  such  a  place  ;
If  ye  will  not,  ye  shall  be  rebels  against  God,"  etc.
I  need  hardly  explain,  perhaps,  that  "big  medang" and  "low-growing  medang"  are  the  names  of  two varieties  of  the  same  tree,  which  are  supposed  in  the present  instance  to  have  furnished  the  timber  from which  these  different  parts  were  made.
Then  you  stand  up  in  the  bows  and  call  upon  the Sea  Spirits  for  their  assistance  in  pointing  out  shoals, snags,  and  rocky  islets.1
Sometimes  a  talisman  is  manufactured  by  writing an  Arabic  text  on  a  leaf  which  is  then  thrown  into the  sea.
So,  too,  it  is  not  unusual  to  see  rocks  in  mid-stream near  the  mouths  of  rivers  adorned  with  a  white  cloth hanging  from  a  long  stick  or  pole,  which  marks  them out  as  "sacred  places,"  and  sometimes  in  rapids  where navigation  is  difficult  or  dangerous,  offerings  are  made to  the  River  Spirits,  as  the  following  quotation  will show  : —
"We  commenced  at  last  to  slide  down  a  long reach  of  troubled  water  perceptibly  out  of  the horizontal.  The  raft  buried  itself  under  the  surface, leaving  dry  only  our  little  stage,  and  the  whole  fabric shook  and  trembled  as  if  it  were  about  to  break  up. Yelling  '  Sambut,  sambut'  ('Receive,  receive')  to  the spirits  of  the  stream,  whom  Kulup  Mohamed  was propitiating  with  small  offerings  of  rice  and  leaves, the  panting  boatmen  continued  their  struggles  until we  shot  out  once  more  into  smooth  deep  water,  and  all danger  was  over."2
1    Vide  App.  cxxiv.  2  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  9,  p.  26.
v  IMPORTANCE  OF  RIVERS  281
The  importance  of  rivers  in  the  Malay  Peninsula, and  for  that  matter,  in  Malayan  countries  generally, can  hardly  be  overrated.  It  was  by  the  rivers  that Malay  immigration,  coming  for  the  most  part,  if  not entirely,  from  Sumatra,  entered  the  interior  of  the Peninsula,  and  before  the  influx  of  Europeans  had superseded  them  by  roads  and  railways  the  rivers were  the  sole  means  of  inland  communication.  All old  Malay  settlements  are  situated  on  the  banks  of rivers  or  streams,  both  on  this  account  and  because of  the  necessity  of  having  a  plentiful  supply  of  water for  the  purpose  of  irrigating  the  rice-fields,  which constitute  the  main  source  of  livelihood  for  the  in- habitants.
Accordingly  the  backbone,  so  to  speak,  of  a  Malay district  is  the  river  that  runs  through  it,  and  from which  in  most  cases  the  district  takes  its  name  ;  for here,  as  elsewhere,  the  river-names  are  generally  older than  the  names  of  territorial  divisions.  They  are  often unintelligible  and  probably  of  pre-Malayan  origin,  but are  sometimes  derived  from  the  Malay  names  of  forest trees.  As  a  rule  every  reach  and  point  has  a  name known  to  the  local  Malays,  even  though  the  river  may run  through  forest  and  swamp  with  only  a  few  villages scattered  at  intervals  of  several  miles  along  its  banks.
Of  river  legends  there  are  not  a  few.  The  follow- ing extract  relates  to  one  of  the  largest  rivers  of  the Peninsula,  the  river  Perak,  which  gives  its  name  to the  largest  and  most  important  of  the  Malay  States  of the  West  Coast.  Perak  means  silver,  though  none  is mined  in  the  country  ;  and  the  legend  is  a  fair  specimen of  the  sort  of  story  which  grows  up  round  an  attempt to  account  for  an  otherwise  inexplicable  name : —
"  On  their  return  down-stream,  the  Raja  and  his
282  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
followers  halted  at  Chigar  Galah,  where  a  small  stream runs  into  the  river  Perak.  They  were  struck  with astonishment  at  finding  the  water  of  this  stream  as white  as  santan  (the  grated  pulp  of  the  cocoa-nut mixed  with  water).  Magat  Terawis,  who  was despatched  to  the  source  of  the  stream  to  discover the  cause  of  this  phenomenon,  found  there  a  large  fish of  the  kind  called  haruan  engaged  in  suckling  her young  one.  She  had  large  white  breasts  from  which milk  issued.1
"  He  returned  and  told  the  Raja,  who  called  the river  'Perak'  ('silver'),  in  allusion  to  its  exceeding whiteness.  Then  he  returned  to  Kota  Lama."2
3.    REPTILES    AND    REPTILE    CHARMS The  Crocodile
Of  the  origin  of  the  Crocodile  two  conflicting  stories, at  least,  are  told.  One  of  these  was  collected  by  Sir William  Maxwell  in  Perak ;  the  other  was  taken down  by  me  from  a  Labu  Malay  in  Selangor,  but I  have  not  met  with  it  elsewhere ;  a  parallel  version of  the  story  quoted  by  Maxwell  being  the  com- monest form  of  the  legend  in  Selangor  as  well  as Perak.
Sir  William  Maxwell's  account  runs  as  follows  : — "In  the  case  of  the  crocodile,  we  find  an  instance of  a  dangerous  animal  being  regarded  by  Malays  as possessed   of   mysterious    powers,    which    distinguish
1  This  recalls  the  account  in  Northern  colour  white  is  an  all-important  feature,
mythology  of  the  four  rivers  which  are  In  this  legend  we  have  the  white  Semang
said  to  flow  from  the  teats  of  the  cow  and  the  white  river.  In  others  white
Audhumla.  animals  and  white  birds  are  introduced.
In  a  great  many  Malay  myths  the  2  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  9,  p.  95.
v  ORIGIN  OF  THE  CROCODILE  283
him  from  most  of  the  brute  creation,  and  class  him with  the  tiger  and  elephant.  Just  as  in  some  parts of  India  sacred  crocodiles  are  protected  and  fed  in tanks  set  apart  for  them  by  Hindus,  so  in  Malay rivers  here  and  there  particular  crocodiles  are  con- sidered kramat  (sacred),  and  are  safe  from  molesta- tion. On  a  river  in  the  interior  of  Malacca  I  have had  my  gun- barrels  knocked  up  when  taking  aim at  a  crocodile,  the  Malay  who  did  it  immediately falling  on  his  knees  in  the  bottom  of  the  boat  and entreating  forgiveness,  on  the  ground  that  the  indi- vidual reptile  aimed  at  was  kramat,  and  that  the speaker's  family  would  not  be  safe  if  it  were  injured. The  source  of  ideas  like  this  lies  far  deeper  in  the Malay  mind  than  his  Muhammadanism ;  but  the new  creed  has,  in  many  instances,  appropriated  and accounted  for  them.  The  connection  of  the  tiger with  AH,  the  uncle  of  the  prophet,  has  already  been explained.  A  grosser  Muhammadan  fable  has  been invented  regarding  the  crocodile.
"  This  reptile,  say  the  Perak  Malays,  was  first created  in  the  following  manner  : —
"  There  was  once  upon  a  time  a  woman  called  Putri Padang  Gerinsing,  whose  petitions  found  great  favour and  acceptance  with  the  Almighty.
"  She  it  was  who  had  the  care  of  Siti  Fatima,  the daughter  of  the  Prophet.  One  day  she  took  some clay  and  fashioned  it  into  the  likeness  of  what  is  now the  crocodile.  The  material  on  which  she  moulded the  clay  was  a  sheet  of  upih  (the  sheath  of  the  betel- nut  palm).  This  became  the  covering  of  the  croco- dile's under-surface.  When  she  attempted  to  make the  mass  breathe  it  broke  in  pieces.  This  happened twice.  Now  it  chanced  that  the  Tuan  Putri  had  just
284  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
been  eating  sugar-cane,  so  she  arranged  a  number  of sugar-cane  joints  to  serve  as  a  backbone,  and  the peelings  of  the  rind  she  utilised  as  ribs.  On  its  head she  placed  a  sharp  stone,  and  she  made  eyes  out  of bits  of  saffron  (kuniet) ;  the  tail  was  made  of  the mid-rib  and  leaves  of  a  betel-nut  frond.  She  prayed to  God  Almighty  that  the  creature  might  have  life, and  it  at  once  commenced  to  breathe  and  move. For  a  long  time  it  was  a  plaything  of  the  Prophet's daughter,  Siti  Fatima ;  but  it  at  length  became treacherous  and  faithless  to  Tuan  Putri  Padang Gerinsing,  who  had  grown  old  and  feeble.  Then Fatima  cursed  it,  saying,  '  Thou  shalt  be  the  croco- dile of  the  sea,  no  enjoyment  shall  be  thine,  and  thou shalt  not  know  lust  or  desire.'  She  then  deprived it  of  its  teeth  and  tongue,  and  drove  nails  into  its jaws  to  close  them.  It  is  these  nails  which  serve the  crocodile  as  teeth  to  this  day.  Malay  Pawangs in  Perak  observe  the  following  methods  of  proceeding when  it  is  desired  to  hook  a  crocodile  : — To  commence with,  a  white  fowl  must  be  slain  in  the  orthodox  way, by  cutting  its  throat,  and  some  of  its  blood  must  be rubbed  on  the  line  (usually  formed  of  rattan)  to which  the  fowl  itself  is  attached  as  bait.  The  dying struggles  of  the  fowl  in  the  water  are  closely  watched, and  conclusions  are  drawn  from  them  as  to  the  prob- able behaviour  of  the  crocodile  when  hooked.  If the  fowl  goes  to  a  considerable  distance  the  crocodile will  most  likely  endeavour  to  make  off;  but  it  will be  otherwise  if  the  fowl  moves  a  little  way  only  up and  down  or  across  the  stream.
"  When  the  line  is  set  the  following  spell  must  be repeated  :  '  Aur  Dang  sari  kamala  sari,  sambut  kirim Tuan  Putri  Padang  Gerinsing ;  tidak  di-sambut  mata
v  ANOTHER  CROCODILE  LEGEND  285
angkau  chabut '  (O  Dangsari,  lotus  -  flower,  receive what  is  sent  thee  by  the  Lady  Princess  Padang Gerinsing ;  if  thou  receivest  it  not,  may  thy  eyes  be torn  out ').  As  the  bait  is  thrown  into  the  water  the operator  must  blow  on  it  three  times,  stroke  it  three times,  and  thrice  repeat  the  following  sentence,  with his  teeth  closed  and  without  drawing  breath  :  '  Kun kata  Allah  sapaya  kun  kata  Muhammad  tab  paku? ('Kun  saith  God,  so  kun  saith  Muhammad;  nail  be fixed.')  Other  formulas  are  used  during  other  stages of  the  proceedings."
The  rarer  story,  to  which  allusion  has  been  made, was  the  following  : —
"  There  was  a  woman  who  had  a  child  which  had just  learnt  to  sit  up  (tahu  dudok},  and  to  which  she gave  the  name  of 'Sarilang.'  One  day  she  took  the child  to  the  river-side  in  order  to  bathe  it,  but  during the  latter  operation  it  slipped  from  her  grasp  and  fell into  the  river.  The  mother  shrieked  and  wept,  but  as she  did  not  know  how  to  dive  she  had  to  return  home without  her  child.  That  night  she  dreamed  a  dream, in  which  her  child  appeared  and  said,  '  Weep  no  more, mother,  I  have  turned  into  a  crocodile,  and  am  now called  'Grandsire  Sarilang'  ('Toh  Sarilang):  if  you would  meet  me,  come  to-morrow  to  the  spot  where you  lost  me.'  Next  morning,  therefore,  the  mother repaired  to  the  river  and  called  upon  the  name  of  her child,  whereupon  her  child  rose  to  the  surface,  and  she saw  that  from  the  waist  downwards  he  had  already turned  into  a  crocodile,  though  he  was  still  human down  to  the  waist.  Now  the  child  said,  '  Come  back again  after  fourteen  days,  and  remember  to  bring  an egg  and  a  plantain  (banana).'  She  therefore  went
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  pp.  24-26.
286  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
again  at  the  time  appointed,  and  having  called  upon him  by  his  new  name  ('Toh  Sarilang),  he  again  came to  the  surface,  when  she  saw  that  from  the  waist  up- wards he  had  also  now  turned  into  a  crocodile.  So she  gave  him  the  egg  and  the  plantain,  and  he  devoured them,  and  when  he  had  done  so  he  said,  '  Whenever the  crocodiles  get  ferocious  (ganas],  and  commence  to attack  human  beings,  take  a  plantain,  an  egg,  and  a handful  of  parched  rice,  and  after  scattering  the  rice on  the  river,  leave  the  egg  and  the  plantain  on  the bank,  calling  upon  my  name  ('Toh  Sarilang) 1  as  you  do so,  and  their  ferocity  will  immediately  cease. "''
The  notes  on  crocodile  folklore  which  will  now  be given  were  reprinted  in  the  Selangor  Journal  from  the "  Perak  Museum  Notes  "  of  Mr.  Wray.
"When  the  eggs  of  a  crocodile  are  hatching  out, the  mother  watches  ;  the  little  ones  that  take  to  their native  element  she  does  not  molest,  but  she  eats  up all  those  which  run  away  from  the  water,  but  should any  escape  her  and  get  away  on  to  the  land  they  will change  into  tigers.  Some,  of  these  reptiles  are  said  to have  tongues,  and  when  possessed  of  that  organ  they are  very  much  more  vicious  and  dangerous  than  the ordinarily  formed  ones.  When  a  crocodile  enters  a river  it  swallows  a  pebble,  so  that  on  opening  the stomach  of  one  it  is  only  necessary  to  count  the  stones in  it  to  tell  how  many  rivers  it  has  been  into  during  its life.  The  Malays  call  these  stones  kira-kira  did?  on this  account.  The  Indians  on  the  banks  of  the  Orinoco, on  the  other  hand,  assert  that  the  alligator  swallows stones  to  add  weight  to  its  body  to  aid  it  in  diving  and
1  The  most  usual  name  of  the  croco-       Sambu  Agai,  or,  as  it  is  also  called, dile-spirit,    as    given    in    such  charms       Jambu  Rakai. as   I  have  succeeded  in  collecting,  is  2  Kira-kira  means  "accounts."
v  CROCODILE  FOLKLORE  287
dragging  its  prey  under  water.  Crocodiles  inhabiting a  river  are  said  to  resent  the  intrusion  of  strangers from  other  waters,  and  fights  often  take  place  in  con- sequence. According  to  the  Malays  they  are  gifted with  two  pairs  of  eyes.  The  upper  ones  they  use when  above  water,  and  the  under  pair  when  beneath the  surface.  This  latter  pair  is  situated  half-way  be- tween the  muzzle  and  the  angle  of  the  mouth,  on  the under  surface  of  the  lower  jaw.  These  are  in  reality not  eyes,  but  inward  folds  of  skin  connected  by  a  duct with  a  scent  gland,  which  secretes  an  unctuous  sub- stance of  a  dark  gray  colour,  with  a  strong  musky odour.  Medicinal  properties  are  attributed  to  the flesh  of  the  males,  which  are  believed  to  be  of  very rare  occurrence,  and  to  be  quite  unable  to  leave  the water  by  reason  of  their  peculiar  conformation.  The fact  is  that  the  sexes  are  almost  undistinguishable, except  on  dissection,  and  therefore  the  natives  class  all that  are  caught  as  females.  While  on  this  subject,  it may  be  worth  mentioning  that  at  Port  Weld  there used  to  be  a  tame  crocodile  which  would  come  when called.  The  Malays  fed  it  regularly,  and  said  it  was not  vicious,  and  would  not  do  any  harm.  It  was repeatedly  seen  by  the  yearly  visitants  to  Port  Weld, or  Sapetang,  as  the  place  was  then  called,  and  was  a fine  big  animal,  with  a  bunch  of  seaweed  growing  on its  head.  Some  one  had  it  called,  and  then  fired  at  the poor  thing  ;  whether  it  was  wounded  or  only  frightened is  uncertain,  but  it  never  came  again." *
The  following  notes  upon  the  same  subject  were collected  by  me  in  Selangor  :—
The  female  crocodile  commonly  builds  her  nest, with  or  without  the  aid  of  the  male,  among  the  thorny
1  Selangor  Journal,  vol.  iii.  No.  6,  pp.  93,  94.
288  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
clumps  of  fempiei  (or  dempiei}  trees  just  above high-water  mark,  using  the  fallen  leaves  to  form  the nest,  and  breaking  up  the  twigs  with  her  mouth.  The season  for  laying  is  said,  in  the  north  of  the  Peninsula, to  coincide  with  the  time  "when  the  rice-stalks  swell with  the  grain,"  i.e.  the  end  of  the  wet  season.
The  most  prolific  species  of  crocodile  is  reputed to  be  the  buaya  lubok,  or  Bight  crocodile  (also  called buaya  rawang,  or  Marsh  crocodile),  which  lays  as many  as  fifty  or  sixty  eggs  in  a  single  nest.  Other varieties,  I  may  add,  are  the  buaya  tembaga  (Copper crocodile),  the  buaya  katak  (Dwarf  crocodile),  which is,  as  its  name  implies,  "short  and  stout,"  and  the buaya  hitam  or  besi  (Black  or  Iron  crocodile),  which  is reported  to  attain  a  larger  size  than  any  other  variety. This  latter  kind  is  often  moss-grown,  and  is  hence called  buaya  berlumut  (Mossy  crocodile).  The  largest specimen  of  this  variety  of  which  I  have  had  any reliable  account  is  one  which  measured  "  four  fathoms, less  one  hasta"  (about  23  feet),  and  which  was  caught in  the  time  of  Sultan  Mahmat  at  Sungei  Sembilang, near  Kuala  Selangor,  by  one  Nakhoda  Kutib.
The  buaya  jo  long-jo  long,  which  has  attracted attention  owing  to  its  reputed  identification  with  the gavial  of  Indian  waters,  and  which  is  therefore  no true  crocodile,  is  pointedly  described  by  Malays  as separating  itself  from  the  other  species.
Finally,  there  is  the  buaya  gulong  tenun  (the "  Crocodile  that  Rolls  up  the  Weft "  ?),  which  is  not, however,  the  name  of  a  separate  variety,  but  is  the name  applied  to  the  Young  Person  or  New  Woman  of the  world  of  crocodile-folk — the  aggressive  female  who "  snaps  "  at  everything  and  everybody  for  the  mere glory  of  the  snap ! '
v  HABITS  OF  THE  CROCODILE  289
"  After  hatching,"  says  Mr.  Wray,  "  the  mother watches,  and  .  .  .  eats  up  all  those  which  run  away from  the  water,  but  should  any  escape  her  and  get away  on  to  the  land  they  will  turn  into  tigers." There  is  perhaps  more  point  in  the  Selangor  tradition, according  to  which  the  little  runaways  turn,  not  into tigers,  but  into  "iguanas"  (Monitor  lizards).
As  regards  the  want  of  a  tongue,  which  is  supposed to  be  common  to  all  crocodiles,  it  is  said  they  were  so created  by  design,  in  order  that  they  might  not  acquire too  pronounced  a  "  taste "  for  human  flesh.  Hence the  proverb  which  declares  that  no  carrion  is  too  bad for  them  to  welcome  :  "  Buaya  mana  tahu  menolak bangkei?"  ("When  will  crocodiles  refuse  corpses?")1
After  the  outbreak  of  ferocity  (ganas)  among  the crocodiles  in  the  Klang  River  last  year,  some  account of  the  way  in  which  the  crocodile  is  here  said  to  capture and  destroy  his  human  victims  may  prove  of  interest.
Every  crocodile  has,  according  to  the  Selangor Malay,  three  sets  of  fangs,  which  are  named  as  follows  : (i)  si  hampa  day  a*  (two  above  and  two  below),  at the  tip  of  the  jaws  ;  (2)  entah-entah  (two  in  the  upper and  two  in  the  lower  jaw),  half-way  up  ;  (3)  charik kapan  (two  in  the  upper  and  two  in  the  lower  jaw), near  the  socket  of  the  jaws.
The  first  may  be  translated  by  "  Exhaust  your devices  "  ;  the  second  by  "  Yes  or  no  "  ;  and  the  third by  "  Tear  the  shroud,"  the  latter  being  a  reference  to the  selvage  which,  among  the  Malays,  is  torn  off  the
1  The  shortness   of  the   crocodile's  sometimes     called     kail    sS/uang,    or tongue,  which  is  a  mere  stump  of  a  "  seluang  "  hook,  or  hook  for  catching tongue,  has  probably  given  rise  to  this  the  sMuang,  a  small  fish  resembling  the idea.  sardine. — Vide  H.  C.  C.  in  N.  and  Q.
2  Also     sometimes     called     "  Apa  No.  4,  sec.  95,  issued  with  No.  17  of daya,"  lit.  "  What  device  ?  "  or  "  What  the/.^.^.-S1.,  S.B.
resource?"     The  front  teeth  are  also
U
290  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
shroud  and  afterwards  used  for  tying  it  up  when  the corpse  has  been  wrapped  in  it.
If  a  man  is  caught  by  the  "  Exhausters  of  all Resources,"  he  has  a  fair  chance  of  escape;  if  caught by  the  "Debateable"  teeth  his  escape  is  decidedly problematical ;  but  if  caught  by  the  "  Tearers  of  the Shroud,"  he  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a  dead man.  Whenever  it  effects  a  capture  the  crocodile carries  its  victim  at  once  below  the  surface,  and  either tries  to  smother  him  in  the  soft,  thick  mud  of  the  man- grove swamp,  or  pushes  him  under  a  snag  or  projecting root,  with  the  object  of  letting  him  drown,  while  it retires  to  watch  him  from  a  short  distance.  After what  it  considers  a  sufficient  interval  to  effect  its  pur- pose, the  crocodile  seizes  the  body  of  the  drowned  man and  rises  to  the  surface,  when  it  "  calls  upon  the  Sun, Moon,  and  Stars  to  bear  witness  "  that  it  was  not  guilty of  the  homicide —
"  Bukan  aku  membunoh  angkau, Ayer  yang  membunoh  angkau"
Which,  being  translated,  means —
"  It  was  not  I  who  killed  you, It  was  water  which  killed  you."1
After  thrice  repeating  this  strange  performance, the  crocodile  again  dives  and  proceeds  to  prepare  the corpse  for  its  prospective  banquet.  Embracing  the corpse  with  its  "arms,"  and  curving  the  tip  of  its
1  The  question  of  the  mental  attri-  same  time,  it  is  credited   with  strong
butes  ascribed  to  the  crocodile  is  one  common  sense  (since  it  is    known    to
of  great  interest,  as  it  is  credited  by  "laugh"   at   those   misguided  mortals
Malays  with  a  human   origin.      It  is  "  who  pole  a  boat  down  stream"  no  less
not    alleged    to    shed    tears   over    his  than  the  tiger  which  "  laughs "  at  those
victim ;    but,    as    the    above    account  who  "  carry  a  torch  on  a  moonlight
shows,  it   is    far    from    insensible    to  night  "),  and  also  has  a  strict  regard  for
the  enormity  of  manslaughter.     At  the  honesty.     ( Vide  infra. )
v  MAN- EATING  CROCODILES  291
powerful  tail  under  its  own  belly  (until  the  tail  is  nearly bent  double),  it  contrives  to  break  the  backbone  of  the victim,  and  then  picking  up  the  body  once  more  with its  teeth,  dashes  it  violently  against  a  trunk  or  root  in orcler  to  break  the  long  bones  of  the  limbs.  When the  bones  are  thus  so  broken  as  to  offer  no  obstruction, it  swallows  the  body  whole — thus  affording  a  remark- able parallel  to  the  boa  in  its  method  of  devouring  its prey,  and  recalling  Darwinian  ideas  of  their  cousin- hood.  Miraculous  escapes  have,  however,  occasionally occurred.  Thus  Lebai  'Ali  was  caught  by  a  crocodile at  Batu  Burok  (Kuala  Selangor),  one  evening  as  the tide  was  ebbing,  and  the  crocodile,  after  smothering him  effectually  (as  it  thought)  in  the  thick  mud,  retired to  await  the  end.  Insensibly,  however,  it  floated farther  and  farther  off  with  the  falling  tide,  and  Lebai 'Ali,  seeing  his  opportunity,  made  a  bold  and  successful dash  for  freedom.
A  similar  case  was  that  of  Si  Ka',  who  was  pushed under  a  bamboo  root  on  the  river  bank  by  the  croco- dile which  caught  him,  and  who,  after  waiting  till  his formidable  enemy  had  floated  a  little  farther  off  than usual,  drew  himself  up  by  an  overhanging  stem  and swarmed  up  it.  At  the  same  moment  the  crocodile made  a  rush,  and  actually  caught  him  by  the  great  toe, which  latter,  however,  he  willingly  surrendered  to  his enemy  as  the  price  of  his  liberty.
A  yet  more  marvellous  escape,  was  that  of the  youth  belonging  to  the  Government  launch at  Klang,  who  escaped,  it  is  related,  by  the  time- honoured  expedient  of  putting  his  thumbs  into  the crocodile's  eyes.  In  connection  with  this  latter  exploit, by  the  way,  Malay  authorities  assert  that  the  crocodile's eyes  protrude  from  their  sockets  on  stalks  (like  those
292  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
of  a  crab)  so  long  as  he  stays  under  water,  the  stalks being  "as  long  as  the  forefinger,"  so  that  it  is  quite an  easy  matter  to  catch  hold  of  these  living -pegs."
For  the  rest,  crocodiles  are  said  by  the  Malays  to have  a  sort  of  false  stomach  divided  into  several pouches  or  sacs,  one  sac  being  for  the  stones  which they  swallow,  and  another  for  the  clothes  and  accoutre- ments of  their  human  victims,  these  pouches  being  in addition  to  their  real  stomach  (in  which  the  remains  of monkeys,  wild  pig,  mouse-deer,  and  other  small  animals are  found),  and,  in  the  case  of  female  specimens,  the ovary.  The  second  pair  of  eyes  in  the  neck  which, Mr.  Wray  says,  they  are  supposed  to  use  when  below the  surface,  are  in  Selangor  supposed  to  be  used  at night,  whence  they  are  called  mata  malam,  or  night- eyes,  as  opposed  to  their  real  eyes  which  they  are supposed  to  use  only  by  day.
As  regards  the  stones,  which  crocodiles  undoubtedly swallow,  they  are  sometimes  supposed  to  enable  each male  crocodile  to  keep  an  account  of  the  number  of rivers  which  it  has  entered,  of  the  number  of  bights  it has  lived  in,  or  even  of  the  number  of  its  human victims.  The  noise  which  crocodiles  make  when  fight- ing resembles  a  loud  roar  or  bellow,  and  the  Malays apply  the  same  word  menguak  to  the  bellow  of  the crocodile  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  buffalo.
The  wrath  of  the  crocodile-folk  is  provoked  by those  who  wish  to  shoot  them,  in  various  ways,  of which,  perhaps,  the  commonest  is  to  dabble  a  sarong, or  (as  is  said  to  be  more  effectual)  a  woman's  mosquito- curtain,  in  the  water  of  the  river  where  they  live.  So also  to  keep  two  sets  of  weights  and  measures  (one for  buying  and  another  for  selling,  as  is  sometimes
v  THE  CROCODILE-  WIZARD  293
done  by  the  Chinese),  is  said  to  be  a  certain  means  of provoking  their  indignation.
The  crocodile-wizard  is  sometimes  credited  with the  power  of  calling  the  crocodile-folk  together,  and of  discovering  a  man-eater  among  them,  and  an  eye- witness lately  described  to  me  the  scene  on  one  such occasion.  A  Malay  had  been  carried  off  and  devoured by  a  crocodile  at  Larut,  and  a  Batu  Bara  man,  who went  by  the  sobriquet  of  Nakhoda  Hassan,  undertook to  discover  the  culprit.  Sprinkling  some  of  the  usual sacrificial  rice -paste  (tepong  tawar)  and  "saffron" rice  upon  the  surface  of  the  river,  he  called  out  in  loud tones  to  the  various  tribes  of  crocodiles  in  the  river, and  summoned  them  to  appear  on  the  surface.  My informant  declares  that  not  less  than  eight  or  ten crocodiles  actually  appeared,  whereupon  the  Pawang commanded  them  all  to  return  to  the  bottom  with  the exception  of  the  one  which  was  guilty.  In  a  few moments  only  one  crocodile  remained  on  the  surface, and  this  one,  on  being  forthwith  killed  and  cut  open, was  found  to  contain  the  garments  of  the  unfortunate man  who  had  been  captured  by  it.  Similar  stories  of the  prowess  of  crocodile  charmers  are  told  by  the Javanese.1
I  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  methods  and ceremonies  used  for  the  catching  of  crocodiles.  The following  is  a  description  by  Mr.  J.  H.  M.  Robson,  of Selangor,  of  the  most  usual  method,  at  all  events  in Selangor,  but  it  would  appear  from  remarks  upon the  subject  in  Dr.  Denys'  work,  that  live  as  well as  dead  bait  is  commonly  used  :—
'•  "  A  small  piece  of  hard  wood,  about  6  in.  or  8  in. long,   and  about   three-quarters  of  an   inch   thick,   is
1  Rewritten  from  Sel.  Journ.  vol.  iii.  No.  19,  pp.  309-312.
294  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
sharpened  at  both  ends,  and  to  the  middle  of  this the  end  of  a  yard  of  twine  is  firmly  fastened,  the twine  having  about  a  dozen  strands  just  held  together by  say  a  couple  of  knots,  so  as  to  prevent  the  crocodile from  biting  it  through,  as  the  strands  simply  get between  his  teeth ;  to  the  other  end  of  this  twine  is fastened  a  single  uncut  rattan,  at  least  20  feet  long, which  can  be  only  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter, but  may  with  advantage  be  a  little  bigger;  a  small stick  affixed  to  the  end  of  the  line,  to  act  as  a  visible float,  completes  this  part  of  the  gear.  Probably  a crocodile  will  eat  anything,  but  he  is  certainly  partial to  chicken — at  least  that  bait  is  always  successful  in the  Sepang  river — so,  having  killed  some  sort  of  fowl, the  body  is  cut  right  through  the  breast  lengthways from  head  to  tail,  and  the  small  piece  of  pointed  hard wood  inserted,  and  the  bird  bound  up  again  with  string. Next,  two  pieces  of  light  wood  are  nailed  together, forming  a  small  floating  platform  about  a  foot  square, and  on  this  the  fowl  is  placed,  raised  on  miniature trestles.  The  small  platform  thus  furnished  is  placed in  a  likely  spot  near  the  bank,  and  the  rattan  line  is hitched  over  a  small  branch  or  a  stake,  so  that  the bait  platform  may  not  be  carried  away  by  the  tide. By  the  next  morning  the  rattan  line,  bait  and  platform may  all  have  disappeared,  which  probably  means  that the  crocodile,  having  swallowed  the  fowl,  has  gone  off with  the  rattan  in  tow,  a  tug  being  sufficient  to  set  it free,  whilst  the  platform,  thus  released,  has  drifted away.  A  crocodile  will  try  the  aggressive  sometimes, so,  when  going  in  pursuit,  it  is  better  to  have  a  boat than  a  sampan?  but  Malay  paddles  are  the  most convenient  in  either  case.  It  is  also  advisable  to  have
1  A  native-built  canoe  hollowed  out  of  a  tree-trunk  is  no  doubt  referred  to.
v  CATCHING  THE  CROCODILE  295
a  second  man  with  a  rifle.  The  crocodile  has  probably a  favourite  place  up-stream,  so  the  boatmen  paddle  up on  the  look-out  for  the  rattan  (which  always  floats), finding  it  at  length  close  to  the  mangrove  roots bordering  on  the  river,  perhaps.  The  boat-hook  picks up  the  floating-stick  end  of  the  line,  and,  with  a  couple of  boatmen  on  to  this  and  a  crocodile  at  the  other  end, with  the  small  pointed  hard  wood  stick  across  his throat,  the  excitement  begins.  The  crocodile  plunges about  amidst  the  mangrove  roots  under  the  water,  and then  makes  a  rush  ;  the  rattan  is  paid  out  again  and the  boat  follows ;  then  he  rushes  under  the  boat, perhaps  at  the  boat,  whilst  the  line  is  steadily  pulled in.  This  sort  of  thing  may  last  some  time,  but  the only  thing  to  be  afraid  of  is  the  rattan's  getting  twisted round  a  bakau^  root  under  water,  which  might prevent  a  capture ;  otherwise,  after  a  good  deal  of playing  of  a  rather  violent  nature,  the  continual pulling  of  the  rattan-holders  in  the  boat,  or  his  own aggressiveness,  induces  him  to  show  his  head  above the  surface,  whereat  the  rifles  crack,  and  the  crocodile dies,  though  often  not  till  four  or  five  bullets  have  been put  into  different  parts  of  his  body."2
I  will  now  proceed  to  describe  the  religious ceremonies  which  accompany  this  performance.
The  following  outline  of  the  ceremonies  used  in catching  a  crocodile  who  is  known  to  be  a  man-eater, was  taken  down  by  me  from  the  mouth  of  a  noted crocodile- wizard  on  the  Langat  river.  First,  you take  strips  of  bark  of  a  river-side  bush  or  tree  called baru-baru  (which  must  be  cut  down  at  a  single stroke),  and  fasten  them  together  at  each  end  only,
1  Mangrove,    of     various     species,  *  Sel.  Journ.   vol.   i.    No.   22,   pp.
chiefly  Rhizophorca,  3  50-3  5 1 .
296  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
so  that  they  form  a  rope  with  divided  (unravelled) strands.  This  will  form  that  part  of  your  tackle  which corresponds  to  the  gut  (perambuf)  of  a  fishing  line, (i.e.  the  part  just  above  the  hook),  and  the  advantage of  it  is  that  the  loose  strands  get  between  the crocodile's  teeth,  and  prevent  it  from  being  bitten through  as  a  rope  would  certainly  be.
Next,  you  take  a  piece  of  the  bottommost  rung  of a  house-ladder  (anak  tangga  bongsu),  and  sharpen  it to  a  point  at  both  ends,  so  as  to  form  a  cross-piece (palang)  such  as  will  be  likely  to  stick  in  the  crocodile's throat.  Having  fastened  one  end  of  the  "gut"  round the  middle  of  the  cross-piece,  and  the  other  to  your rattan  line,  the  length  of  which  may  be  from  ten  to  fifteen fathoms  or  so,  according  to  the  depth  of  the  river  at the  spot  where  the  crocodile  is  supposed  to  lie,  you must  next  cut  down  a  young  tree  to  serve  as  the  pole (chanckang)  to  which  the  floating  platform  and  bait may  be  subsequently  attached.  This  pole  may  be  of any  kind  of  wood  except  bamboo ;  so  when  you  have found  a  suitable  tree,  take  hold  of  it  with  the  left  hand and  chop  at  it  thrice  with  the  right,  saying  a  charm as  you  do  so —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Prophet  Tetap,  in  whose  charge  is  the
earth,
Peace  be  with  you,  O  Prophet  Noah,  Planter  of  Trees, I  petition  for  this  tree  to  serve  as  a  mooring-post  for  my
crocodile-trap ;
If  it  is  to  kill  him  (the  crocodile),  do  you  fall  supine, If  it  is  not  to  kill  him,  do  you  fall  prone."1
These  last  two  lines  refer  to  the  omens  which  are taken  from  the  way  the  tree  falls ;  the  "  supine " position  being  that  of  a  crocodile  which  has  "turned
1    Vide  App.  cxxviii.
v  CEREMONIAL  PREPARATIONS  297
turtle,"  whereas  the  prone  position  would  be  its  natural attitude  as  it  swims.
Then  start  making  the  floating  platform  or  raft (rakif)  by  chopping  a  plantain  stem  (any  kind  will  do) into  three  lengths  (di-ttratkan  tigd),  and  then  skewering these  lengths  together  at  their  ends  so  as  to  form  a triangle.
Into  the  apex  of  this  triangle  firmly  plant  the  lower end  of  a  strong  and  springy  rod,  making  the  upper end  curve  over  slightly  in  a  forward  direction  (di-pas- ang-nya  kayu  melentor  ka-atas)  and  securing  it  in its  position  by  two  lashings,  which  are  carried  down from  its  tip  and  fastened  to  the  two  front  corners  of the  triangle.  Then  utter  the  charm  and  plant  the pole  by  the  river-side  in  the  spot  you  have  selected, holding  your  breath  and  making  believe  that  you are  King  Solomon  (di-sifatkan  kita  Raja  Suleiman]  as it  sinks  into  the  ground.  The  charm  consists  of these  lines : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Prophet  Khailir, In  whose  charge  is  the  water; Peace  be  with  you,  O  Prophet  T£tap, In  whose  charge  is  the  earth ; Pardon,  King  of  the  Sea,  Deity  of  Mid-currents, I  ask  only  for  the  '  guilty '  (crocodiles), The  innocent  do  you  assist  me  to  let  go, And  drive  out  only  the  guilty  which  devoured  So-and-so. If  you  do  not  do  so,  you  shall  die,"  etc.
Now  prepare  the  bait.  To  do  this  you  must  kill  a fowl  (in  the  orthodox  way),  cut  it  partly  open  and insert  the  ladder- rung  into  its  body,  wrapping  the flesh  and  feathers  round  it,  and  binding  the  whole >ird  seven  times  round  and  seven  times  across  with piece  of  rattan,  not  forgetting,  however,  to  observe silence  and  hold  your  breath  as  you  pass  the  first
298  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
rattan  lashing  round  the  fowl's  carcase.  When  you have  finished  binding  it  up  as  directed,  chew  some betel-leaf  and  eject  (semborkan)  the  chewed  leaf  upon the  fowl's  head,  repeating  the  appropriate  charm.1 Then  hook  the  bait  (sangkutkan  umpan)  on  to  the tip  of  the  bent  rod  (on  no  account  tie  it  on,  as  it must  be  left  free  for  the  crocodile  to  swallow),  and having  prepared  the  wonted  accessories  —  including three  chews  of  betel  -  leaf,  a  richek  of  ginger  (halia bara  sa-rickek\  and  seven  white  pepper-corns  (lada sulah  tujoh  biji} — breathe  (jampikan)  upon  the  betel- leaf,  and  at  the  end  of  the  invocation  eject  the chewed  betel-leaf  upon  the  head  of  the  cock  intended for  the  bait.
The  charm  to  be  recited  (which  makes  allusion to  the  fable  concerning  the  supposed  origin  of  the crocodile)  runs  as  follows  : —
"  Follow  in  procession,  follow  in  succession, The  '  Assembly-flower '  begins  to  unfold  its  petals ; Come  in  procession,  come  in  succession, King  Solomon's  self  comes  to  summon  you. Ho,  Si  Jambu  Rakai,  I  know  your  origin ; Sugar-cane  knots  forty-four  were  your  bones, Of  clay  was  formed  your  body ; Rootlets  of  the  areca-palm  were  your  arteries, Liquid  sugar  made  your  blood, A  rotten  mat  your  skin, And  a  mid-rib  of  the  thatch-palm  your  tail, Prickles  of  the  pandanus  made  your  dorsal  ridge, And  pointed  berembang  suckers  your  teeth.2 If  you  splash  with  your  tail  it  shall  break  in  two, If  you  strike  downwards  with  your  snout  it  shall  break  in  two,
1  FzafeApp.  cxxx.  central  shoot  or  cabbage  of  a  cocoa-nut
2  This     and     the     preceding     lines  (umbi  niyor),  its  blood  of  saffron,  and clearly  refer  to  the  fable  quoted  by  Sir  its   eyes    from  the    star   of  the   east ; W.  E.  Maxwell.    There  are,  however,  another  asserting  that  its  dorsal  ridge many  differences  in  minor  details,  one  was    manufactured    (by   Siti   Fatimah) version  asserting  that  the  head  of  the  from  the  eaves  of  the  thatch.
first    crocodile    was    made    from    the
v  CROCODILE  CHARM  299
If  you  crunch  with  your  teeth  they  shall  all  be  broken.
Lo,  Si  Jambu  Rakai,  I  bind  (this  fowl)  with  the  sevenfold  binding,
And  enwrap  it  with  the  sevenfold  wrapping
Which  you  shall  never  loosen  or  undo.
Turn  it  over  in  your  mouth  before  you  swallow  it
O,  Si   Jambu   Rakai,  accept  this  present  from   Her  Highness
Princess  Rundok,  from  Java  : l If  you  refuse  to  accept  it, Within  two  days  or  three
You  shall  be  ....  choked  to  death  with  blood, Choked  to  death  by  Her  Highness  Princess  Rundok,  from  Java. But  if  you  accept  it,
A  reach  up-stream  or  a  reach  down-stream,  there  do  you  await  me ; It  is  not  my  Word,  it  is  King  Solomon's  Word ; If  you  are  carried  down-stream  see  that  you  incline  up-stream, If  you  are  carried  up-stream  see  that  you  incline  down-stream, By  virtue  of  the  Saying  of  King  Solomon,  '  There  is  no  god  but
God,' "  etc.
Then  take  a  canoe  paddle  (to  symbolise  the  crocodile's tail)  and  some  strong  thread,  fasten  one  end  of  the thread  to  the  front  of  the  floating  platform,  and  the other  end  to  the  bow  of  your  boat,  back  water till  it  grows  taut,  and  strike  the  surface  of  the  water thrice  with  the  aforesaid  "  mock  "  crocodile's  tail.  If the  first  time  you  strike  it  the  sound  is  clearest  (terek bunyi)  it  is  an  omen  that  the  crocodile  will  swallow the  bait  the  first  day ;  if  the  second  time,  it  will  be the  second  day  when  he  does  so ;  if  the  third  time, it  will  be  the  third  day.  But  every  time  you  strike the  water  you  must  say  to  yourself,  "  From  Fatimah was  your  origin  "  (Mani  Fatimah  asal  'kau  jadi),  in order  to  make  the  crocodile  bold.  After  striking  the water  you  may  go  home  and  rest ;  but  you  must  get up  again  in  any  case  at  about  two  in  the  afternoon (dlohor\  and  whatever  happens  you  must  remember
1  Her   Highness    Princess  Rundok,       evidently  the  name  given  to  the  fowl as  appears  from    the   line   below,    in       used  as  a  bait, which   she    is    again    referred   to,    is
300  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
never  to  pass  underneath  a  low  overhanging  bough (because  such  a  bough  would  resemble  the  bent  rod of  the  floating  platform),  and  never  (for  the  time being)  to  eat  your  curry  without  starting  by  swallow- ing three  lumps  of  rice  successively.  If  you  do this  it  will  help  the  bait  to  slide  more  easily  down the  crocodile's  throat,  and  in  the  same  way  you  must never,  until  the  brute  is  safely  landed,  take  any  bones out  of  the  meat  in  your  curry — if  you  do,  the  wooden cross-piece  is  sure  to  get  loose  and  work  out  of  the fowl — so  it  is  just  as  well  to  get  somebody  to  take the  bones  out  of  your  meat  before  you  begin,  other- wise you  may  at  any  moment  be  compelled  to choose  between  swallowing  a  bone  and  losing  all  your labour.
I  will  pass  on  to  the  final  capture.  The  crocodile has  taken  the  bait,  we  will  say,  and  with  the  last  of  the ebb,  not  unfrequently  in  a  perilously  rickety  boat,  you go  out  to  look  for  the  tell-tale  end  of  the  line  that floats  up  among  the  forked  roots  of  the  mangrove trees.  First  you  must  go  to  the  place  where  you  left the  floating  platform ;  take  hold  of  the  pole  to  which it  is  moored  and  press  it  downwards  into  the  river- bottom,  saying  (to  the  hooked  crocodile)  as  you  do so : —
"  Do  not  run  away,
Our  agreement  was  a  cape  (further)  up-stream, A  cape  (further)  down-stream." l
(Here  hold  your  breath  and  press  upon  the  pole.) Then  wait  for  the  tide  to  turn,  search  for  the  end of  the  line  (which,  being  of  rattan,  is  sure  to  float)
1  Jangan  angkau  lari  ! Perjanjian  kita  sa-tanjong  ka  hulu, Sa-tanjong  ka  hilir.
v  CAPTURING  THE  CROCODILE  301
up  and  down  the  river  banks,  and  when  you  find  it take  hold  of  the  end  and  give  it  three  tugs,  repeating as  you  do  so  this  "  crippling  charm  "  : —
"  I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  sprang, From  Fatimah  did  you  take  your  origin. Your  bones  (she  made  from)  sugar-cane  knots, Your  head  from  the  cabbage  of  a  cocoa-nut  palm, The  skin  of  your  breast  from  the  leaf-case  of  a  palm, Your  blood  from  saffron, Your  eyes  from  the  star  of  the  east,
Your  teeth  from  the  pointed  suckers  of  the  berembang  tree, Your  tail  from  the  sprouting  of  a  thatch-palm."
As  you  utter  the  last  words  give  the  end  of  the  line three  twists  (piok)  and  then  clench  the  teeth  upon  it (katup  di  gigi)  thrice,  holding  your  breath  as  you do  so ;  then  jerk  it  (rentafc)  thrice  and  haul  upon  it (runtun) ;  if  you  feel  much  resistance  slack  it  off again  and  repeat  the  ceremony,  using  the  "  crippling charm  "  as  before,  "  until  you  break  all  the  bones  in his  body."  Besides  this,  in  order  to  drive  the  "  mis- chief" out  of  the  crocodile,  you  may  say  :—
"  Pardon,  King  of  the  Sea,  God  of  Currents, I  wish  to  drive  the  'mischief  out  of  this  crocodile."1
And  strike  the  water  and  middle  of  the  line  with  the end  of  the  line  itself.
Now  you  haul  on  the  line,  and  the  crocodile  comes up  to  the  top  with  a  rush,  and  the  fun  begins.  As he  comes  up  to  the  surface  you  ask  him,  "  Was  it  you who  caught  So-and-so  ?  "  And  if  he  wishes  to  reply in  the  affirmative  he  will  bellow  loudly.  When  he does  so,  say,  "  Wind  yourself  up  "  ("  lilit "),  and  he  will wind  the  line  round  his  muzzle.  And  when  you  want
1   Tabek   Raja    di  Lout,  Mambang          2  Angkau  mfnangkap  Si  Anu  ?
Tali  Harus, Aku  'nak  buang  badi  buaya  ini.
302  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
to  kill  him,  chop  across  the  root  of  his  tail  with  a cutlass  ;  this  will  kill  him  at  once.
I  may  add  that  it  is  not  generally  wise  to  keep  a captured  crocodile  alive  overnight,  as  he  happens  to  be one  of  the  clientele  of  a  certain  powerful  hantu  (spirit) named  Langsuir^  who  comes  to  the  assistance  of  his follower  at  night  and  endows  him  with  supernatural strength,  thus  enabling  him,  if  he  is  not  very  suffici- ently tied  up,  to  get  loose,  which  might  be  awkward. You  should  also  never  bring  one  into  the  house,  on account  of  an  understanding,  prejudicial  to  yourself, which  exists  between  him  and  the  common  house- lizard  (chichak).
Of  the  folklore  which  is  concerned  with  other classes  of  "  reptilia  "  that  which  deals  with  Snakes  is the  most  important.
"  The  gall-bladder  of  the  python,  uler  sawak,  is in  great  request  among  native  practitioners.  This serpent  is  supposed  to  have  two  of  these  organs,  one of  which  is  called  lampedu  idup,  or  the  live  gall- bladder. It  is  believed  that  if  a  python  is  killed  and this  organ  is  cut  out  and  kept,  it  .will  develop  into a  serpent  of  just  twice  the  size  of  that  from  which it  was  taken.  The  natives  positively  assert  that  the python  attains  a  length  of  sixty  to  seventy  feet,  and that  it  has  been  known  to  have  killed  and  eaten  a rhinoceros.
"  One  of  the  pit  vipers  is  exceedingly  sluggish  in its  movements,  and  will  remain  in  the  same  place  for days  together.  One  individual  that  was  watched,  lay coiled  up  on  the  branch  of  a  tree  for  five  days,  and probably  would  have  remained  much  longer,  but  at the  end  of  that  time  it  was  caught  and  preserved.
1    Vide  Chap.  VI.  pp.  325-327,  infra.
SNAKE  LEGENDS  303
The  Malays  call  it  uler  kapak  daun,  and  they  say that  it  is  fed  three  times  a  day  by  birds,  who  bring it  insects  to  eat.  One  man  went  so  far  as  to  say that  he  had  actually  once  seen  some  birds  engaged in  feeding  one  of  these  beautiful  bright -green snakes." *
In  Selangor,  as  in  Perak,  the  "live  gall-bladder" of  the  python  will  (it  is  believed),  if  kept  in  a  jar, develop  into  a  serpent ;  when  dried  it  is  in  great request  as  a  remedy  for  small-pox.  The  story  that Mr.  Wray  tells  of  the  pit  viper  (ular  kapak  daun)  is in  Selangor  told  of  a  snake  called  chintamani. Selangor  Malays  say  that  it  was  once  upon  a  time a  Raja  of  the  country,  and  that  the  birds  which bring  it  food  were  then  its  subjects.  A  Malay  told me  that  he  once  saw  this  operation,  and  that  the birds  fed  it  with  insects.  It  is  reputed  to  be  a perfectly  harmless  snake,  and  it  is  considered  ex- tremely lucky  to  keep  one  of  the  species  in  one's  house, or  even  to  see  it.  It  is  described  as  of  a  bright  and glittering  blue2  colour  (biru  berkilat-kilaf],  and  is frequently  referred  to  in  charms,  especially  those connected  with  the  Rice-soul  ceremony,  and  is  some- times said  to  spring  from  the  egg  of  the  chandra- wasih  or  bird  of  paradise.
The  cobra  (ular  tedong]  is  said  to  have  a  bright stone  (kemala  or  gemala) 3  in  its  head,  the  radiance of  which  causes  its  head  to  be  visible  on  the  darkest night.  A  "  snake  bezoar "  (guliga  ular)  is  also  said
1  Mr.  L.  Wray  in  "  Perak  Museum  3  I  have  heard  this  same  word  used Notes,"  quoted  in  the  Selangor  Journal,  to  describe  a  sort  of  unnatural  "  glow  " vol.  iii.  No.  6,  p.  94.  which  was  supposed  to  illumine  certain
2  Other  accounts  make  it  out  to  be  parts  of  the  country  at  night ;  one  such of   a    golden   colour.       Vide  p.    506,  region  being  a  portion  of  the  coast  at infra.  Lukut  in  Sungei  Ujong.
304  REPTILES  AND  REPTILE  CHARMS  CHAP.
to  be  occasionally  found  in  the  back  of  a  snake's head  (?),  whilst  the  snake-stone  (batu  ular)  is  carried in  its  mouth.
This  batu  ular  is  a  prize  for  the  possession  of which  snakes  are  not  unfrequently  believed  to  fight, and  appears  to  correspond  to  the  pearl  for  which  in Chinese  legendary  lore  the  dragons  of  that  country were  believed  to  engage  in  mortal  combat.  A  Malay remarked  to  me  that  it  was  always  worth  while  if  one came  upon  two  snakes  thus  engaged  to  kill  them  both, as  one  of  them  was  sure  to  possess  this  much-coveted stone,  which  is  said  to  confer  an  almost  certain  victory upon  its  possessor.
Another  species  of  "snake-stone,"  which  is  said  to be  manufactured  by  Pawangs  from  gold,  silver, amalgam  (of  silver  and  gold),  tin,  iron,  and  quicksilver, is  called  Buntat  Raksa,  and  is  said  to  be  invaluable in  case  of  snake-bite.  It  is  believed  that  this  stone will  adhere  to  the  wound,  and  will  not  fall  off  until  it has  sucked  out  all  the  poison.  One  of  these  stones, which  was  sold  to  me  in  Selangor  for  a  dollar, was  about  an  inch  long  and  oval  in  shape ;  it  was evidently  made  of  some  mixture  of  metals,  and  was perforated  so  as  to  enable  it  to  be  carried  on  a string.
The  ular  gantang  \s  said  to  be  a  snake,  though  from the  description  given  it  would  seem  more  likely  to  be some  species  of  slow- worm  or  blind-worm.  It  is  only a  "few  inches"  long,  and  is  "black,"  and  there  is  said to  be  little  if  any  difference  between  its  head  and  its tail.  It  is  considered  to  be  extremely  lucky,  and  when a  Malay  meets  it,  he  spreads  out  his  head -cloth  or turban  on  the  ground,  and  allows  it  to  enter,  when  he carries  it  home  and  keeps  it.
v  IDEAS  ABOUT  TOADS  305
To  dream  of  being  bitten  by  a  snake  is  thought  to portend  success  in  a  love  affair.1
"A  horned  toad,  known  as  katak  bertandok,  but not  the  common  one  of  that  name  (Megalophrys nasuta,  Gunther),  has  a  very  bad  reputation  with  the Malays.  It  is  said  to  live  in  the  jungle  on  the  hills, and  wherever  it  takes  up  its  abode  all  the  trees  and plants  around  wither  and  die.  So  poisonous  is  it,  that it  is  dangerous  even  to  approach  it,  and  to  touch  or  be bitten  by  it  is  certain  death.
"  The  bite  of  the  common  toad  (Bufo  melanostictus, Cantor)  is  also  said  to  prove  fatal.  That  toads  have no  teeth  is  an  anatomical  detail  that  does  not  seem  to be  thought  worthy  of  being  taken  into  account.
"  The  supposed  venomous  properties  of  this  useful and  harmless  tribe  have  a  world -wide  range.  In Shakespeare  many  allusions  to  it  are  made ;  one  of them,  which  mentions  the  habit  of  hibernation  pos- sessed by  those  species  which  inhabit  the  colder  parts of  the  earth,  says—
'  In  the  poison'd  entrails  throw, Toad,  that  under  coldest  stone Days  and  nights  hast  thirty-one, Swelter'd  venom  sleeping  got, Boil  thou  first  i'  the  charmed  pot.'
"  In  another,  reference  is  made  to  the  toad-stone, which  seems  to  be  represented  in  Malayan  tradition by  the  pearl  carried  in  the  bodies  of  the  hamadryad, the  cobra,  and  the  bungarus,  the  three  most  deadly snakes  of  the  Peninsula  :—
'  Sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity, Which,  like  the  toad,  ugly  and  venomous, Wears  yet  a  precious  jewel  in  its  head.'
1  Clifford,  In  Court  and  Kampong,  p.  189. X
306  FISHING  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
"  There  is  some  foundation  of  fact  for  the  popular belief,  as  toads  secret  an  acrid  fluid  from  the  skin, which  appears  to  defend  them  from  the  attacks  of  car- nivorous animals."  l
It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  give  here  a  Malay tradition  about  a  species  of  snail : —
"  A  strange  superstition  is  attached  to  a  small  snail which  frequents  the  neighbourhood  of  the  limestone hills  in  Perak.  It  belongs  to  the  Cyclophorida,  and is  probably  an  Alycceus.  Among  the  grass  in  the shadow  of  a  grazing  animal  these  creatures  are  to  be discovered,  and  if  one  of  them  is  crushed  it  will  be found  to  be  full  of  blood,  which  has  been  drawn  in  a mysterious  way  from  the  veins  of  the  animal  through its  shadow.  Where  these  noxious  snails  abound,  the cattle  become  emaciated  and  sometimes  even  die  from the  constant  loss  of  blood.  In  the  folklore  of  other countries  many  parallels  to  this  occur,  but  they  differ in  either  the  birds,  bats,  or  vampires,  who  are  supposed to  prey  on  the  life-blood  of  their  fellows,  going  direct to  the  animals  to  suck  the  blood,  instead  of  doing  so through  the  medium  of  their  shadows. ":
4.    FISHING    CEREMONIES
Fish  are  in  many  cases  credited  by  the  Malay peasant  with  the  same  portentous  ancestry  as  that which  he  attributes  to  some  of  the  larger  animals  and birds.
"  Many  Malays  refuse  to  eat  the  fresh-water  fish called  ikan  belidah*  on  the  plea  that  it  was  originally
1  Selangor  Journal,  vol.   iii.  No.  6,  ikan  lidah-lidah  and  letidak,  probably p.  92.  derived   from   lidah,  a  tongue,    owing
2  Hid.,  p.  91.  to  its   shape.     This  fish  is  sometimes
3  A  kind  of  flat  fish  (sole  ?),  also  called  sisa  Nal/i,    or  the    "  Prophet's
METAMORPHOSES  OF  FISH
307
a  cat.  They  declare  that  it  squalls  like  a  cat  when harpooned,  and  that  its  bones  are  white  and  fine  like a  cat's  hairs.  Similarly  the  ikan  tumuli  is  believed  to be  a  human  being  who  has  been  drowned  in  the  river, and  the  ikan  kalul  to  be  a  monkey  transformed.  Some specially  favoured  observers  have  seen  monkeys  half through  the  process  of  metamorphosis — half-monkey and  half-fish."1
Similarly,  the  Dugong  (Malay  duyong]  is  asserted
leavings,"  the  story  being  that  it  had originally  the  same  amount  of  flesh on  both  sides,  but  that  the  Prophet Muhammad,  having  eaten  the  whole  side of  one  of  these  fish  (which  had  been cooked  and  served  up  to  him  as  a  meal) cast  the  remaining  side  back  into  the sea,  whereupon  it  revived  and  com- menced swimming  about  as  if  nothing had  happened,  retaining,  however,  the shape  of  a  flat  fish  to  the  present  day.
Cp.     the    following   note   in   Sale's Translation  of  the  Kordn : —
"This  miracle  is  thus  related  by  the commentators.  Jesus  having,  at  the  re- quest of  his  followers,  asked  it  of  God, a  red  table  immediately  descended,  in their  sight,  between  two  clouds,  and  was set  before  them,  whereupon  he  rose  up, and  having  made  the  ablution,  prayed, and  then  took  off  the  cloth  which covered  the  table,  saying,  In  the  name of  God,  the  best  provider  of  food.  What the  provisions  were  with  which  this table  was  furnished  is  a  matter  wherein the  expositors  are  not  agreed.  One will  have  them  to  be  nine  cakes  of bread  and  nine  fishes  ;  another,  bread and  flesh  ;  another,  all  sorts  of  food, except  flesh  ;  another,  all  sorts  of  food except  bread  and  flesh  ;  another,  all except  bread  and  fish ;  another,  one fish,  which  had  the  taste  of  all  manner of  food  ;  and  another,  fruits  of  paradise, but  the  most  received  tradition  is  that when  the  table  was  uncovered,  there •  appeared  a  fish  ready  dressed,  without scales  or  prickly  fins,  dropping  with fat,  having  salt  placed  at  its  head  and vinegar  at  its  tail,  and  round  it  all  sorts
of  herbs,  except  leeks,  and  five  loaves of  bread,  on  one  of  which  there  were olives,  on  the  second  honey,  on  the third  butter,  on  the  fourth,  cheese,  and on  the  fifth,  dried  flesh.  They  add that  Jesus,  at  the  request  of  the  apostles, showed  them  another  miracle,  by  re- storing the  fish  to  life,  and  causing  its scales  and  fins  to  return  to  it,  at  which the  slanders -by  being  affrighted,  he caused  it  to  become  as  before ;  that 1300  men  and  women,  all  afflicted with  bodily  infirmities  or  poverty,  ate of  these  provisions  and  were  satisfied, the  fish  remaining  whole  as  it  was  at first ;  that  then  the  table  flew  up  to heaven  in  the  sight  of  all ;  and  every one  who  had  partaken  of  this  food  were delivered  from  their  infirmities  and  mis- fortunes ;  and  that  it  continued  to descend  for  forty  days  together  at dinner-time,  and  stood  on  the  ground till  the  sun  declined,  and  was  then taken  up  into  the  clouds.  Some  of  the Mohammedan  writers  are  of  opinion that  this  table  did  not  really  descend, but  that  it  was  only  a  parable ;  but most  think  the  words  of  the  Koran  are plain  to  the  contrary.  A  further  tradi- tion is,  that  several  men  were  changed into  swine  for  disbelieving  this  miracle, and  attributing  it  to  magic  art ;  or,  as others  pretend,  for  stealing  some  of  the victuals  from  off  it.  Several  other fabulous  circumstances  are  also  told which  are  scarce  worth  transcribing." — Sale's  Kor&n  Trans,  ch.  v.  p.  87, note.
i  Maxwell  mJ.R.A.S,,  S.B.,  No.  7, p.  26.
308  FISHING  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
by  some  Malays  to  have  sprung  from  the  remains  of  a pig,  which  Muhammad  himself  dined  off  before  he  pro- nounced pork  to  be  the  accursed  thing.  Being  cast  by the  Prophet  into  the  sea,  it  revived  and  took  the  shape of  the  dugong,  in  which  shape  it  is  still  to  be  found  off the  coast  of  Lukut  and  Port  Dickson,  where  it  feeds upon  sea -grass  (rumput  setul\  in  common  with  a species  of  small  tripang  or  b^che-de-mer^
The  origin  of  the  Eel  (ikan  tiluf)  is  derived  from a  stem  of  the  gli-gli  plant ;  the  "  white-fish  "  (ikan puteh]  from  splinters,  or  rather  shavings  of  wood  (fatal kayu  or  tarahan  kayu] ;  the  senunggang  fish  from the  long -tailed  monkey  (kra) ;  the  aruan  fish  from a  frog  (kataK)  or  lizard  (mengkarong) ;  the  bujok fish  from  charred  fire-logs  (puntong  api] ;  the  telan fish  from  the  creeping  roots  of  the  yam  (sulur  kladi] ; and  so  on.  There  is  even  the  leaf  of  a  certain  tree which  is  sometimes  said  to  turn  into  a  fish  (the  ikan belidah)?  while  the  following  story  is  held  to  account for  the  origin  of  the  Porpoise  :—
Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  fishing- wizard (Pawang  Pukat)  who  had  encountered  nothing  but misfortune  from  first  to  last,  and  who  at  length  de- termined to  put  forth  all  his  skill  in  magic  in  one  last desperate  effort  to  repay  the  burden  of  debt  which threatened  to  crush  him.  One  day,  therefore,  having tried  his  luck  for  the  last  time,  and  still  caught  nothing, he  requested  his  comrades  to  collect  an  immense quantity  of  mangrove  leaves  in  their  boat.  Having  car- ried these  leaves  out  to  the  fishing-ground,  he  scattered
1  The  tears  of  the  dugong  are  be-  the  sea,  the  Malays  have  their  mermaids,
lieved  to  be  an  exceedingly  potent  love-  of  which  the  dugong  is  the  probable
charm. —  F/i&Swettenham, Unaddressed  origin. — J.I. A.,  i.  9."  —  Quoted  by
Letters,  p.  217.  Denys,  Diet.  Brit.  Mai.,  s.v.  Mermaid.
"  Like  most  nations  dwelling  near  2  Videy  however,  supra.
v  ORIGIN  OF  THE  PORPOISE  309
them  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  together  with  a  few handfuls  of  parched  and  saffron-stained  rice,  repeating a  series  of  most  powerful  spells  as  he  did  so.  The next  time  they  fished,  the  leaves  had  turned  into  fish of  all  shapes  and  sizes,  and  an  immense  haul  of  fish was  the  result.  The  wizard  then  gave  directions  for the  payment  in  full  of  all  his  debts  and  the  division of  the  balance  among  his  children,  and  then  without further  warning  plunged  into  the  sea  only  to  reappear as  a  porpoise.
"A  species  of  fish-like  tadpole,1  found  at  certain seasons  of  the  year  in  the  streams  and  pools,  is  sup- posed to  divide  when  it  reaches  maturity,  the  front portion  forming  a  frog  and  the  after-part  or  tail  becom- ing the  fish  known  as  ikan  kli,  one  of  the  cat-fishes  or Siluridtz.  In  consequence  of  this  strange  idea  many Malays  will  not  eat  the  fish,  deeming  it  but  little  better than  the  animal  from  which  it  is  supposed  to  have  been cast.
"  The  ikan  kli  is  armed  with  two  sharp  barbed  spines attached  to  the  fore-part  of  the  pectoral  fins,  and  can and  does  inflict  very  nasty  wounds  with  them,  when incautiously  handled.  The  spines  are  reputed  to  be poisonous,  but  it  is  believed  that  if  the  brain  of  the offending  fish  is  applied  to  the  wound,  it  will  act  as  a complete  antidote  to  the  poisonous  principle,  and  the wound  will  heal  without  trouble.  The  English  cure for  hydrophobia — that  is,  '  the  hair  of  the  dog  that bit  you ' — will  occur  to  all  as  a  modification  of  the
•  J  »  o
same  idea.
1  Mr.  Wray  no  doubt  refers  to  the  the  hinder  part  develops  into  the  ikan
Prudu   (tadpole),    the    upper    half  of  lembat.
which  is  declared  by  Selangor  Malays  *  Sel.  Journ.  vol.  iii.  No.  6,  p.  93.
to  develop  into  a  frog  (katak),  while
310  FISHING  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
The  fish  called  seluang  is  used  for  purposes  of magic.  It  is  supposed  that  any  one  who  pokes  out  its eyes  with  a  special  needle  (which  must  be  one  out  of  a score — the  packets  being  made  up  in  scores — and  must possess  a  torn  eye)  will  be  able  to  inflict  blindness,  by sympathy,  upon  any  person  against  whom  he  has  a grudge.1
The  fish  called  kedera  is  supposed  to  change into  a  sea-bird.
I  will  now  proceed  to  describe  the  ceremony  which is  supposed  to  secure  an  abundant  catch  of  fish  in  the stakes.
In  January  1897  I  witnessed  the  ceremony  of sacrificing  at  the  fishing-stakes  (menyemah  b'lat]  which took  place  at  the  hamlet  of  Ayer  Hitam  (lit.  "  Black- water"),  in  the  coast  district  of  Kuala  Langat  (Se- langor).  The  chief  performer  of  the  rites  was  an  old Malay  named  Bilal  Umat,  who  had  owned  one  of  the fishing-stakes  in  the  neighbourhood  for  many  years past,  and  had  annually  officiated  at  the  ceremony which  I  was  about  to  witness.  I  and  my  small  party arrived  in  the  course  of  the  morning,  and  were  received by  Bilal  Umat,  who  conducted  us  to  the  long,  low palm-thatch  building  (bangsal  kelong),  just  above  high- water  mark,  in  which  he  and  his  men  resided  during the  fishing-season.  Here  we  found  that  a  feast  was in  course  of  preparation,  but  what  most  attracted  my attention  was  the  sight  of  three  large  sacrificial  basket- work  trays,2  each  about  2^  feet  square,  and  with  high fringed  sides  which  were  suspended  in  a  row  from  the roof  of  the  verandah,  on  the  seaward  side  of  the  build-
1  Vide  App.  cclxxiv.  Malays    to    contain    offerings    to    the
2  These    were    trays    of    the    kind       spirits.     For  fuller  details,  cp.  pp.  414- called  anchak  which  are  used  by  the       422,  infra.
SACRIFICE  AT  FISHING-STAKES
3"
ing.  These  trays  were  empty,  but  had  been  lined with  banana  leaves  to  prepare  them  for  the  reception of  the  offerings,  which  latter  were  displayed  upon  a raised  platform  standing  just  in  front  of  them.
Sea.
Direction  of  shoal  and fishing -stakes  where the  other  two  trays were  suspended.
Raised  platform
I       I  (with  offerings,  before  the  loading  of  the  trays).
fro  "cm  R
Three  trays.
Verandah.
Bangsal  Kelong.
Verandah.
O  Tree  where  one  of  the  trays  was  suspended. FIG.  i.— Ceremony  of  sacrificing  at  the  fishing-stakes.
Shortly  after  our  arrival  the  loading  of  the  trays commenced.  First  Bilal  Umat  took  a  large  bowl  of parched  rice,  and  poured  it  into  the  trays,  until  the bottom  of  each  tray  was  filled  with  a  layer  of  parched rice  about  an  inch  in  depth.
Next  he  took  a  bowl  of  saffron-stained  rice,  and deposited  about  five  portions  of  it  in  the  centre  and four  corners  of  each  tray  ;  then  he  made  a  similar  dis- tribution of  small  portions  of  washed  rice,  of  sweet )Otatoes  (KledeK],  of  yams  (k'ladi),  of  tapioca  (ubi kayu),  of  bananas  (pisang),  and  betel  -  leaf  (sirik)— there  being  two  sets,  one  cooked  and  one  uncooked, of  each  of  these  portions,  except  the  last.  Finally,  he
312  FISHING  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
added  one  cigarette  to  each  portion,  the  cigarette  being intended  for  the  spirits  to  smoke  after  their  meal !
A  fine  black  goat,  "  without  blemish  and  without spot,"  had  been  killed  by  Bilal  Umat  early  that  morn- ing, and  he  now  deposited  its  head  in  the  middle  of  the central  tray,  two  of  the  feet  in  the  middle  of  the  right- hand  tray,  and  the  other  two  feet  in  the  middle  of  that on  the  left.  To  each  of  these  three  central  portions were  now  added  small  portions  of  the  animal's  viscera (liver,  spleen,  lights,  tripe,  heart,  etc.),  and  then  the small  diamond-shaped  (ketupaf)  and  cylindrical  (lepaf] rice-bags *  were  suspended  in  the  usual  manner.  A wax  taper  was  added  to  each  portion  of  each  tray,  and the  loading  of  the  trays  declared  complete.
Everything  being  now  ready,  Bilal  Umat  carried  a smoking  censer  thrice  round  the  row  of  trays  (walking always  towards  the  left),  and  then  lighting  the  five  wax tapers  of  the  left-hand  tray,  directed  two  of  his  men  to take  down  this  tray  and  sling  it  on  a  pole  between  them. This  they  did,  and  we  set  offin  procession  alongthesandy foreshore  at  the  back  of  the  building  until  we  came  to a  halt  at  a  spot  about  fifty  yards  off,  where  Bilal  Umat suspended  the  tray  from  the  branch  of  a  mangrove-tree about  five  feet  from  the  ground.  This  done,  he  faced round  towards  the  land,  and  breaking  off  a  branch  of the  tree,  gave  utterance  to  three  stentorian  cooees, which  he  afterwards  informed  me  were  intended  to notify  the  Land  Spirits  (Orang  darat,  lit.  "  Land  Folk") of  the  fact  that  offerings  were  awaiting  their  accept- ance. Returning  to  the  house,  he  manufactured  one of  the  leaf-brushes2  which  the  Malays  always  used
1  For  details  of  a  similar  ceremony,  mony  which  is  to  be  performed.      In vide  pp.  416-418,  infra.  this  case  leaves  or  sprays  of  the  follow-
2  The  composition  of  these  brushes  ing  plants  were  used  : — varies  apparently  according  to  the  cere-  I.   Sapenoh,
CEREMONIAL  ACCESSORIES
3'3
for  the  "  Neutralising  Rice-paste "  (tepong  tawar) rite,  and  we  then  started  in  a  couple  of  boats  for the  fishing-stakes,  taking  with  us  the  two  remaining trays.
Of  these  two  trays,  one  was  suspended  by  Bilal Umat  from  a  high  wooden  tripod  which  had  been erected  for  the  purpose,  the  site  selected  being  the centre  of  a  shoal  about  half-way  between  the  fishing- stakes  and  the  house.  The  third  tray,  which  contained the  head  of  the  goat  (kapala  kambing  dengan  buah- nya),  was  then  taken  on  to  the  fishing-stakes,  Bilal Umat  disposing  of  a  large  quantity  of  miscellaneous offerings  which  he  had  brought  with  him  in  a  basket by  strewing  them  upon  the  surface  of  the  sea  as  we went  along.1
On  reaching  the  stakes,  the  Pawang  (Bilal  Umat)
2.  Ltnjuang  merah  (the   red    Dra- caena).
3.  Gandarusa.
4.  Satawar.
5.  Sadingin.
6.  Pulut-pulut  (?)  or  Sflaguri(i)
7.  Mangrove  (bakau).
These  leaves  were  tied  together  with  a small  creeper  called  ribu-ribu  (a  so- called  ' '  female  "  variety,  which  is  said to  have  larger  leaves  than  the  "  male variety,"  being  used).  For  further details,  vide  Chap.  III.  pp.  78-80, supra.
1  The  following  is  a  list,  as  correct as  I  was  able  to  make  it,  of  the  number and  order  of  the  offerings  which  were thus  distributed  : —
1.  A  portion  of  parched  rice.
2.  A  portion  of  sweet  potatoes.
3.  Two  (cooked)  bananas.
4.  Two     Ifpats    (small     cylindrical rice-bags).
5.  Three  (cooked)  bananas.
6.  Two    kftupats    (small    diamond- shaped  bags).
7.  Three  yams  (k'ladt),
8.  A  portion  of  parched  rice.
9.  Three  short  lengths  of  the  stem of  the  tapioca  plant  (ubi  kayu}.
10.  Three  sweet  potatoes. 1  1.   Four  sweet  potatoes.
12.  A   portion    of    uncooked    liver (half).
13.  A  portion  of  cooked  meat.
14.  Four  sweet  potatoes.
15.  Three  cooked  bananas. 1  6.   Three  kttupats.
17.  Three  (green)  bananas. 1  8.  Three  kttupats.
19  .....
20.  Three  green  bananas.
22. 23. 24.
25- 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. rice. 32.
Three  sweet  potatoes. Three  yams. Three  Itpats.
,»       » Two  Itpats. Five  kttupats. Two  yams. Two  sweet  potatoes. One  cooked  banana. Three  handfuls  of  white  pulut
Three  handfuls  of  parched  rice.
314  FISHING  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
suspended  the  tray  from  a  projecting  pole  at  the  sea- ward end  of  the  fishing-stakes,1  and  then  seating  him- self upon  one  of  the  timbers  almost  directly  underneath it,  scattered  handfuls  of  saffron-stained  rice,  "washed" rice,  and  native  cigarettes  upon  the  water,  just  outside the  two  seaward  posts  at  the  end  of  the  stakes,  and emptied  out  the  remainder  of  the  parched  rice  upon  the water  just  inside  the  "  head  "  of  the  stakes.  Then  he recited  a  charm,  stirred  the  bowl  of  neutralising  rice- paste  (tepong  tawar)  with  the  brush  of  leaves,  and taking  the  latter  out  of  the  bowl,  sprinkled,  or  rather daubed  it  first  upon  the  two  "  tide-braces "  of  the stakes  (first  upon  the  left  "  tide-brace,"  and  then  upon the  right),  then  upon  the  heads  of  the  two  upright posts  next  to  the  tide-braces,  and  then  delegated  the brush  to  two  assistants.  One  of  these  sprinkled  the heads  of  all  the  (remaining)  upright  posts  in  the  sea- ward compartment  of  the  stakes,  while  the  other boarded  the  big  boat  belonging  to  the  stakes,  and sprinkled  the  boat  and  all  its  gear  from  stem  to  stern (commencing  on  the  left  side  of  the  bows,  and  working right  down  to  the  stern,  and  then  recommencing  on  the right  and  working  down  to  the  stern  again).  Finally, the  same  assistant  returning  to  the  stakes,  washed  the rice-bowl  in  the  sea  just  beneath  the  place  where  Bilal Umat  was  sitting,  and  fastened  up  the  leaf-brush  to  the left-hand  head-post  (kayu  puchi  kiri)  at  the  seaward end  of  the  stakes.  To  the  above  account  I  may  add that  a  number  of  taboos  are  still  pretty  rigorously enforced  by  the  fishing-wizards  (Pawang  B'lat)  upon the  coast  of  Selangor.  I  was  never  allowed  to  take either  an  umbrella  or  boots  into  the  fishing-stakes
1  This  was  one  of  the   tide-braces      stakes,  the  one  used  being  that  on  the which    are    used    to    strengthen    the       left  hand  looking  seaward.
FISHING  TABOOS  315
when  I  visited  them — the  spirits  having,  I  was  told, the  strongest  possible  objection  to  the  use  of  either.
Other  "perpetual  taboos"  (pantang  salama-lama- nya)  are  to  bathe  without  wearing  a  bathing-cloth (mandi  ttlanjang],  to  throw  the  wet  bathing-cloth  over the  shoulder  when  returning  to  the  house,  and  to  rub one  foot  against  the  other  (gosok  satu  kaki  dengan lain).  Sarongs,  umbrellas,  and  shoes  must  never  on any  pretence  be  worn.  I  may  add  that  the  first  pole planted  is  called  Turns  Tuah  (tua  ?),  and  if  the response  of  the  spirits  to  the  invocation  be  favourable, it  is  believed  that  it  will  enter  the  ground  readily,  as  if pulled  from  below.  The  only  seven-days'  taboo  which I  have  heard  mentioned  (though,  no  doubt,  there  are many  others)  is  the  scrupulous  observance  of  chastity.
A  boat  which  possesses  a  knot  in  the  centre  of  its keel,  or  to  which  the  smell  of  fish  long  adheres  (p'raku peranyir,  or  perhanyir),  is  supposed  to  bring  good  luck to  the  fishermen.
There  is  also  a  regular  "taboo  language"  used  by the  fishermen,  of  which  the  following  are  examples  : —
"  Fish  =  daun  kayu  (tree-leaves)  or  sampah  laut  (jetsam). Snake  =  akar  hidup  (living  creeper). Crocodile  =  batang  kayu  (tree-log). Seaward  compartment  of  the  stakes  (bunohari)  =  kurong.n
At  the  close  of  the  ceremony  Bilal  Umat  repeated to  me  one  of  the  belong1  invocations  which  he  had just  been  making  use  of,  and  which  ran  as  follows  :—
"  Peace  be  with  you,  God's  Prophet,  Tap  ! Peace  be  with  you,  God's  Prophet,  Khizr ! Peace  be  with  you,  God's  Prophet,  Noah ! Peace  be  with  you,  god  of  the  Back-water !
1  Kelong  is  the  name  given  to  one       like  weirs)  common  on  the  coasts  of  the of  the  kinds  of  fishing-stakes  (something       Peninsula.
316  FISHING  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
Peace  be  with  you,  god  of  the  c  Bajau ' !
Peace  be  with  you,  god  of  Mid-currents  !
Peace  be  with  you,  god  of  the  Yellow  Sunset-glow !
Peace  be  with  you,  Old  Togok  the  Wizard  !
Peace  be  with  you,  O  Elder  Wizard  !
It  is  not  I  who  make  you  this  peace-offering,
It  is  Old  Togok  the  Wizard  who  makes  it.
It  is  the  Elder  Wizard  who  makes  it,
By  the  order  of  Old  Aur  Gading  (lit.  '  Ivory  Bamboo ').
By. virtue  of  'There  is  no  god,'  "  etc.1
The  following  was  the  charm  used  by  the  Pawang at  the  planting  of  the  first  pole  of  a.jerma.1  :*-
"  Peace  be  with  you,  Eldest  Wizard,  First  of  Wizards,  Allah, And  Musa,  the  Converser  with  Allah. Sedang  Bima,  Sedang  Buana, Sedang  Juara,  and  King  of  the  Sea, Come  let  us  all  together Plant  the  pole  of  this  jermal."
Even  when  fishing  with  rod  and  line,  a  serapah (invocation)  of  some  sort,  such  as  the  following,  was generally  used : —
"  Ho,  God  of  Mid-currents, See  that  you  do  not  agitate  my  hook ! If  my  hook  is  to  the  left, Do  you  go  to  the  right. If  my  hook  is  to  the  right, Do  you  go  to  the  left. If  you  approach  this  hook  of  mine You  shall  be  cursed  by  the  Saying  of  God,"  etc.
1  A  different  Pawang  gave  me  the  Your  father's  in  the  tip  of  the  "wings"
following  (alternative)  instructions:—  WetefflSdSt
' '  When  you  are  about   to  plant  the  If  in  truth  we  be  brothers,
(first)  seaward  pole  of  the  fishing-stakes,  Do  V°u  lend  me  vour  Assistance.'
take  hold  of  it  and  say  :—  "  Here  Plant  the  Pole»  and  »y  :~
'  My  foot  is  planted  in  the  very  heavens,
'  O  Pawang  Kisa,  Pawang  Berima,  Si  Arjuna,  My  pole  rests  against  the  pillar  of  the  firma-
King  at  Sea,  ment.
O  Durai,  Si  Biti  is  the  name  of  your  mother,  God  lets  it  down,  Muhammad  receives  it.
Si  Tanjong  (Sir  Cape)  that  of  your  father!  Six  fathoms  to  the  left.six  fathoms  to  the  right,
In  your  charge  are  the  points  of  the  capes,  in  Do  you,    O  family  of  three,   assist  in  my
your  charge  all  borders  of  the  shore,  maintenance.
In  your  charge,  too,  are  the  river  bars  !  May  this  be  granted  by  God,'    etc.
Your  mother's  place  is  on  the  seaward  pole,  2  Jfrmal  is  another  kind  of  fish-trap,
your  child  s  at  the  shoreward  end  of  the  j-o-         .  /•          .1       ?   ,
screens,  different  from  the  kelong.
v  PRODUCTION  OF  FIRE  317
(Before  casting  the  line,  a  chew  of  betel-leaf  should be  thrown  into  the  water.)
Another  very  common  rhyming  charm  would frequently  be  addressed  to  the  fish  :—
"  Swallow  (lit.  receive)  the  gut  of  my  line, Be  it  broken  sooner  than  torn  from  my  hands, If  you  tear  it  from  my  hands Your  eye  shall  be  plucked  out."
(d]  Fire
I.    PRODUCTION    OF    FIRE
"  Procuring  fire  by  friction  is  an  accomplishment as  common  to  the  Malay  as  to  the  North  American Indian.  The  process  is,  however,  slightly  different. While  the  latter  resorts  to  circular  friction,  the  Malay cuts  a  notch  on  the  converse  surface  of  a  bamboo, across  which  he  rapidly  rubs  another  piece  cut  to  a sharp  edge.  A  fine  powder  is  rubbed  away  and  this ignites.  Bamboo  is  also  used  as  a  flint  with  tinder. The  all -pervading  match,  however,  is  alone  used  in all  districts  under  foreign  influence." l
The  foregoing  description  requires  to  be  supple- mented, for  the  method  of  procuring  fire  by  circular friction  is  hardly  (if  at  all)  less  common  among  the Malays  than  the  method  of  cross  friction.  The former  process  takes  the  form  of  the  well-known "fire-drill,"  both  the  block  and  the  upright  stick being  generally  made  of  makang  wood.  The upright  stick  is  frequently  worked  by  a  species  of "  bow,"  such  as  that  used  by  carpenters,  and  is  kept from  jumping  out  of  the  socket  in  which  it  revolves
1  Denys,  Descr.  Diet,  of  Brit.  Mai.,  s.v.  Fire.
3i8  FIRE  CHAP.
by  means  of  a  cocoa-nut  shell,  which  is  pressed  down from  above.  When  cross  friction  is  used,  a  long narrow  slit  is  usually  cut,  following  the  grain,  in  the convex  surface  of  the  piece  of  bamboo,  the  dust which  is  rubbed  away  falling  through  it  and  gradually forming  a  little  pile  which  presently  ignites.  It  is hardly  necessary  to  cut  a  notch  for  the  cross-piece, as  a  groove  is  very  quickly  worn  when  the  friction is  started.  A  species  of  fire  -  syringe  has  also,  I believe,  been  collected  by  Mr.  L.  Wray  in  Perak.
2.    FIRE    CHARMS
In  procuring  fire  by  circular  or  cross  friction  the performer  will  often  say,  by  way  of  a  charm —
"  The  Mouse-deer  asks  for  Fire l To  singe  his  mother-in-law's  feathers."
The  "  mouse-deer's  mother-in-law  "  is  the  name  of  a small  bird,  which  is  said  to  have  very  gay  plumage  of five  colours  and  to  resemble  the  green  pigeon  (flunei) in  shape,  and  the  explanation  of  this  charm  is  said to  be  that  in  the  days  of  King  Solomon,  when  both the  mouse-deer  and  his  mother-in-law  wore  their human  forms,  the  Mouse -deer  was  greatly  annoyed by  the  conduct  of  his  mother-in-law,  who  kept  dan- cing in  front  of  him  as  he  went.  A  quarrel  ensued,2 as  the  result  of  which  they  were  both  transformed into  the  shapes  which  they  now  respectively  bear ; but  the  mother-in-law  has  not  yet  abandoned  her exasperating  tactics,  and  may  still  often  be  seen
1  PUandok  minta"  apit  cursed    his    mother-in-law,    saying  : — 'Nak  membakar  bulu  mfntua-nya.       "  Kalau    betul    aku   pSmainan    Raja
2  The  Mouse-deer  is  said  to  have       Suleiman  angkau  bfrsayap. "
v  IDEAS  ABOUT  FIRE  319
tantalising  the  Mouse-deer  by  hopping  in  front  of  it as  it  goes  along.
There  are  still  some  traces  of  the  influence  of animistic  ideas  in  that  part  of  Malay  folklore  which is  concerned  with  fire.  If  an  inflammable  object, such  as  wood,  falls  by  accident  into  the  fire,  a  stick must  be  used  in  extracting  it,  and  the  stick  left,  as a  substitute,  in  its  place.
The  hearth-fire  (api  dapor]  must  never  be  stepped over  (di-langkah-nya),  nor  must  the  rice-pot  which stands  upon  it,  as  in  the  latter  case  the  person  who does  so  will  be  "cursed  by  the  Rice."
Both  fire  and  smoke  (fumigation)  are  a  good  deal used  by  the  Malays  for  purposes  of  ceremonial  puri- fication, but  the  details  of  such  rites  cannot  be  con- veniently discussed  except  in  connection  with  the complete  ceremonies  of  which  they  form  a  part ;  they will  accordingly  be  found  under  such  headings  as Birth,  Adolescence,  Marriage,  Medicine,  and  Funerals.1
1  Illumination  with  tiny  lamps  is  Fasting  ;  and  the  Malays  have  to  some also  common  on  feast-days  (hari  raya),  extent  adopted  the  Chinese  penchant especially  at  the  end  of  the  Month  of  for  fireworks.
CHAPTER   VI MAGIC  RITES  AS  AFFECTING  THE  LIFE  OF  MAN
I.  BIRTH-SPIRITS
WE  now  come  to  the  spirits  which  are  believed  to attack  both  women  and  children  at  childbirth.
These  are  four  in  number :  the  Bajang,  which generally  takes  the  form  of  a  pole-cat  (musang)  and disturbs  the  household  by  mewing  like  a  great  cat  ; the  Langsuir,  which  takes  the  form  of  an  owl  with long  claws,  which  sits  and  hoots  upon  the  roof-tree ; the  Pontianak  or  Mati-anak,  which,  as  will  be  seen presently,  is  also  a  night-owl,  and  is  supposed  to  be a  child  of  the  Langsuir,  and  the  Penanggalan,  which is  believed  to  resemble  a  trunkless  human  head  with the  sac  of  the  stomach  attached  to  it,  and  which  flies about  seeking  for  an  opportunity  of  sucking  the  blood of  infants.
With  the  above  are  often  associated  the  Polong, which  is  described  as  a  diminutive  but  malicious species  of  bottle -imp,  and  the  Pelesit,  which  is  the name  given  to  a  kind  of  grasshopper  (or  cricket  ?), but  these  latter,  though  often  associated  with  the regular  birth-spirits,  partake  also  of  the  character  of
CHAP.  VI
THE  BAJANG
321
familiar  spirits1  or  bottle-imps,  and  are  usually  private property.
I  will  now  take  these  spirits  in  the  above  order. The  Bajang,  as  I  have  said,  is  generally  described as  taking  the  form  of  a  pole -cat  (musang),  but  it appears  to  be  occasionally  confused  with  the  Pe'lesit. Thus  a  Malay  magician  once  told  me  that  the  Bajang took  the  form  of  a  house-cricket,  and  that  when  thus embodied  it  may  be  kept  by  a  man,  as  the  Pe'le'sit may  be  kept  by  a  woman.  This  statement,  however, must  not  be  accepted  without  due  reserve,  and  it may  be  taken  as  a  certainty  that  the  usual  conception of  the  Bajang's  embodiment  is  a  pole-cat.2
I  need  hardly  say  that  it  is  considered  very  danger- ous to  children,  who  are  sometimes  provided  with  a sort  of  armlet  of  black  silk  threads,  called  a  "bajang bracelet"  (glang  bajang),  which,  it  is  supposed,  will protect  them  against  it.  On  the  opposite  page  will
1  "  To  return  to  the  elemental  spirits, it  was  explained  to  me  by  a  Malay, with  whom  I  discussed  the  subject  at leisure,  that  apart  from  the  spirits which  are  an  object  of  reverence,  and which  when  treated  with  proper  defer- ence are  usually  beneficent,  there  are a  variety  of  others.  To  begin  with, spirits  (the  word  used  on  this  occasion was  hantu)  are  of  at  least  two  kinds — wild  ones,  whose  normal  habitat  is  the jungle,  and  those  that  are,  so  to  say, domesticated.  The  latter,  which  seem to  correspond  to  what  in  Western magic  are  called  '  familiars,'  vary  in character  with  their  owners  or  the persons  to  whom  they  are  attached. Thus  in  this  particular  village  of  Bukit Senggeh,  a  few  years  ago,  there  was  a good  deal  of  alarm  on  account  of  the arrival  of  two  or  three  strangers  believed to  be  of  bad  character,  who  were  sup- posed to  keep  a  familiar  spirit  of  a
peculiarly  malignant  disposition,  which was  in  the  habit  of  attacking  people  in their  sleep  by  throttling  them.  One or  two  cases  of  this  kind  occurred,  and it  was  seriously  suggested  that  I  should make  the  matter  the  subject  of  a  ma- gisterial inquiry,  which,  however,  I  did not  find  it  necessary  to  do.  But  the familiar  spirits  are  by  no  means  neces- sarily evil   The  chief  point  of
importance  is  to  keep  these  wild  spirits in  their  proper  place,  viz.  the  jungle, and  to  prevent  them  taking  up  their abode  in  the  villages.  For  this  reason charms  are  hung  up  at  the  borders  of the  villages,  and  whenever  a  wild  spirit breaks  bounds  and  encroaches  on  human habitations  it  is  necessary  to  get  him turned  out." — Blagden  in  J.R.A.S., S.B.  No.  29,  p.  4.
2   Vide  Klinkert,  v.  d.  Wall,  and  Pijn- appel,  sub  voce.
322  BIRTH-SPIRITS
be  seen  a  remarkable  drawing l  (of  which  a  facsimile is  here  given),  which  appears  to  represent  the  outline of  a  Bajang,  "  scripturally "  modified  to  serve  as  a counter-charm  against  the  Bajang  itself.2
The  following  account  of  the   Bajang  is  by   Sir Frank  Swettenham  : —
"  Some  one  in  the  village  falls  ill  of  a  complaint the  symptoms  of  which  are  unusual ;  there  may  be convulsions,  unconsciousness,  or  delirium,  possibly  for some  days  together  or  with  intervals  between  the attacks.  The  relatives  will  call  in  a  native  doctor, and  at  her  (she  is  usually  an  ancient  female)  sug- gestion, or  without  it,  an  impression  will  arise  that the  patient  is  the  victim  of  a  bajang.  Such  an  im- pression quickly  develops  into  certainty,  and  any trifle  will  suggest  the  owner  of  the  evil  spirit.  One method  of  verifying  this  suspicion  is  to  wait  till  the patient  is  in  a  state  of  delirium,  and  then  to  question him  or  her  as  to  who  is  the  author  of  the  trouble. This  should  be  done  by  some  independent  person  of authority,  who  is  supposed  to  be  able  to  ascertain the  truth.
1  This    "Bajang"    was   copied   for  parts  of  the   Peninsula,  however,  the me    by   'Che    Sam    (for    many    years  Bajang   is    regarded    as    one    of    the Malay    munshi    and    clerk    at    Kuala  several   kinds    of  demons   which,   the Lumpur,   Selangor),  from  the  original  Malays  hold,  can  be  enslaved  by  man which  was  posted  up  on  the  door  of  and  become  his  familiar  spirit.     Such one  of  his  neighbours.     The  outlines  familiars,    it    is    believed,    are  handed of  the  figure  are  made  up  from  varying  down  in  certain  families  as  heirlooms, combinations  of  the  names  "  Allah,"  The  master  of  the  familiar  is  said  to "Muhammad,"   "  'Ali,"  etc.,    in    the  keep    it    imprisoned    in   a   tabong,    or Arabic  character.  vessel  made  from  a  joint  of  the  bamboo,
2  "In   all    parts    of  the    Peninsula  which  is    closed   by  a    stopper   made the    Bajang    is    said    to    be    of    the  from  the  leaves  of  the  Cotyledon  ladni- male   gender,   while    the  Langsuir  is  ata,  the  Daun  chekar  bebek,  or  Daun supposed  to  be  a  female.      It  is  usually  sadingin,  as  they  are  variously  termed believed  by  Malays  that  the  Bajang  is  by  the    Malays.     Both   the    case  and merely  a  malignant  spirit  which  haunts  the  stopper  are    prepared    by   certain mankind,  and  whose  presence  foretells  magic  arts  before  they  can  be  employed disaster.      In   Perak  and  some   other  in  this  way.     The  familiar  is  fed  with
vi  DETECTION  OF  SORCERY  323
"  A  further  and  convincing  proof  is  then  to  call in  a  ' Pawang*  skilled  in  dealing  with  wizards  (in Malay  countries  they  are  usually  men),  and  if  he knows  his  business  his  power  is  such  that  he  will place  the  sorcerer  in  one  room,  and,  while  he  in another  scrapes  an  iron  vessel  with  a  razor,  the culprit's  hair  will  fall  off  as  though  the  razor  had been  applied  to  his  head  instead  of  to  the  vessel ! That  is  supposing  he  is  the  culprit ;  if  not,  of  course he  will  pass  through  the  ordeal  without  damage.
"  I  have  been  assured  that  the  shaving  process  is so  efficacious  that,  as  the  vessel  represents  the  head of  the  person  standing  his  trial,  wherever  it  is  scraped the  wizard's  hair  will  fall  off  in  a  corresponding  spot. It  might  be  supposed  that  under  these  circumstances the  accused  is  reasonably  safe,  but  this  test  of  guilt is  not  always  employed.  What  more  commonly happens  is  that  when  several  cases  of  unexplained sickness  have  occurred  in  a  village,  with  possibly  one or  two  deaths,  the  people  of  the  place  lodge  a  formal complaint  against  the  supposed  author  of  these  ills, and  desire  that  he  be  punished.
"  Before  the  advent  of  British  influence  it  was  the practice  to  kill  the  wizard  or  witch  whose  guilt  had been  established  to  Malay  satisfaction,  and  such  execu- tions were  carried  out  not  many  years  ago.
"  I  remember  a  case  in  Perak  less  than  ten  years ago,  when  the  people  of  an  up-river  village  accused a  man  of  keeping  a  bdjang,  and  the  present  Sultan,
eggs    and    milk.      When    its    master  which   can   only  be   cured   by  magic
wishes  to  make  use  of  it  he  sends  it  agencies.     If  the  Bajang  is  neglected
forth  to  possess   and   prey   upon   the  by  its  owner,  and  if  the  latter  omits  to
vitals  of  any  one  whom  his  malice  may  feed  it  regularly,  it  is  said  that  he  often
select   as   a   victim.      The   individual  falls  a  victim  to  his  own  familiar. "  —
thus  persecuted   is   at  once  seized  by  Clifford  and   Swett.,  Mai.    Die.,  s.v.
a  deadly  and  unaccountable  ailment,  Bajang.
324  BIRTH-SPIRITS  CHAP.
who  was  then  the  principal  Malay  judge  in  the  State, told  them  he  would  severely  punish  the  bdjang  if  they would  produce  it.  They  went  away  hardly  satisfied, and  shortly  after  made  a  united  representation  to  the effect  that  if  the  person  suspected  were  allowed  to remain  in  their  midst  they  would  kill  him.  Before anything  could  be  done  they  put  him,  his  family,  and effects  on  a  raft  and  started  them  down  the  river. On  their  arrival  at  Kuala  Kangsar  the  man  was  given an  isolated  hut  to  live  in,  but  not  long  afterwards  he disappeared.
"  The  hereditary  bdjang  comes  like  other  evils, the  unsought  heritage  of  a  dissolute  ancestry,  but  the acquired  bdjang  is  usually  obtained  from  the  newly- buried  body  of  a  stillborn  child,  which  is  supposed to  be  the  abiding-place  of  a  familiar  spirit  until  lured therefrom  by  the  solicitations  of  some  one  who,  at dead  of  night,  stands  over  the  grave  and  by  potent incantations  persuades  the  bdjang  to  come  forth."  x
"It  is  all  very  well  for  the  Kedah  ladies  to  sacrifice their  shadows  to  obtain  possession  of  a  pelsit,  leaders of  society  must  be  in  the  fashion  at  any  cost ;  but there  are  plenty  of  people  living  in  Perak  who  have seen  more  than  one  ancient  Malay  dame  taken  out into  the  river  and,  despite  her  protestations,  her tears,  and  entreaties,  have  watched  her,  with  hands and  feet  tied,  put  into  the  water  and  slowly  pushed down  out  of  sight  by  means  of  a  long  pole  with  a fork  at  one  end  which  fitted  on  her  neck.  Those who  have  witnessed  these  executions  have  no  doubt of  the  justice  of  the  punishment,  and  not  uncommonly add  that  after  two  or  three  examples  had  been  made there  would  always  ensue  a  period  of  rest  from  the
1  Swell.,  Mai,  Sketches,  p.  194,  seqq.
vi  THE  LANGSUIR  325
torments  of  the  bdjang.  \  have  also  been  assured that  the  bdjang,  in  the  shape  of  a  lizard,  has  been seen  to  issue  from  the  drowning  person's  nose.  That statement  no  doubt  is  made  on  the  authority  of  those who  condemned  and  executed  the  victim."1
The  popular  superstition  about  the  Langsuir  is thus  described  by  Sir  William  Maxwell  :—
"  If  a  woman  dies  in  childbirth,  either  before delivery  or  after  the  birth  of  a  child,  and  before  the forty  days  of  uncleanness  have  expired,  she  is  popu- larly supposed  to  become  a  langsuyar,  a  flying demon  of  the  nature  of  the  '  white  lady '  or  '  banshee.' To  prevent  this  a  quantity  of  glass  beads  are  put  in the  mouth  of  the  corpse,  a  hen's  egg  is  put  under each  arm-pit,  and  needles  are  placed  in  the  palms  of the  hands.  It  is  believed  that  if  this  is  done  the dead  woman  cannot  become  a  langsuyar,  as  she cannot  open  her  mouth  to  shriek  (ngilai)  or  wave her  arms  as  wings,  or  open  and  shut  her  hands  to assist  her  flight. ":
The  superstitions  about  the  Langsuir,  however, do  not  end  here,  for  with  regard  to  its  origin  the Selangor  Malays  tell  the  following  story  : —
The  original  Langsuir  (whose  embodiment  is supposed  to  be  a  kind  of  night-owl)  is  described  as being  a  woman  of  dazzling  beauty,  who  died  from  the shock  of  hearing  that  her  child  was  stillborn,  and  had taken  the  shape  of  the  Pontianak.8  On  hearing  this
1  Swett.,  Mai.   Sketches,   pp.    198,       elfin  children." — Swett. ,  Mai.  Sketches, 199.  p.  198.
2  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,   No.    7,    p.    28.  3  '  'Pontianak  "appears  to  be  synony- Cp.  "  Langsuior,  the  female  familiar,  mous  with  "  Mati-anak,"  which  may differs  hardly  at  all  from  the  bdjang,  perhaps   be   a   shorter   form  of  Matt except  that  she  is  a  little  more  baneful,  bfranak    ("stillborn");     indeed,    one and  when  under  the  control  of  a  man  of  the  charms  against  the  Pontianak he  sometimes  becomes  the  victim  of  her  which  I  collected,  commenced  with  the attractions,  and  she  will  even  bear  him  words,  "Pontianak  matt  bfranak."
326  BIRTH-SPIRITS  CHAP.
terrible  news,  she  "clapped  her  hands,"  and  without further  warning  "  flew  whinnying  away  to  a  tree, upon  which  she  perched."  She  may  be  known  by her  robe  of  green,  by  her  tapering  nails  of  extraordinary length  (a  mark  of  beauty),  and  by  the  long  jet  black tresses  which  she  allows  to  fall  down  to  her  ankles- only,  alas !  (for  the  truth  must  be  told)  in  order  to conceal  the  hole  in  the  back  of  her  neck  through  which she  sucks  the  blood  of  children  !  These  vampire-like proclivities  of  hers  may,  however,  be  successfully  com- bated if  the  right  means  are  adopted,  for  if  you  are able  to  catch  her,  cut  short  her  nails  and  luxuriant tresses,  and  stuff  them  into  the  hole  in  her  neck,  she will  become  tame  and  indistinguishable  from  an  ordi- nary woman,  remaining  so  for  years.  Cases  have  been known,  indeed,  in  which  she  has  become  a  wife  and a  mother,  until  she  was  allowed  to  dance  at  a  village merry-making,  when  she  at  once  reverted  to  her ghostly  form,  and  flew  off  into  the  dark  and  gloomy forest  from  whence  she  came.
In  their  wild  state,  a  Malay  once  informed  me, these  woman-vampires  are  exceedingly  fond  of  fish, and  once  and  again  may  be  seen  "sitting  in  crowds on  the  fishing -stakes  at  the  river  mouth  awaiting an  opportunity  to  steal  the  fish."  However  that  may be,  it  seems  curiously  in  keeping  with  the  following charm  for  "  laying  "  a  Langsuir  : —
"  O  ye  mosquito-fry  at  the  river's  mouth When  yet  a  great  way  off,  ye  are  sharp  of  eye, When  near,  ye  are  hard  of  heart. When  the  rock  in  the  ground  opens  of  itself Then  (and  then  only)  be  emboldened  the  hearts  of  my  foes  and
opponents !
When  the  corpse  in  the  ground  opens  of  itself Then  (and  then  only)  be  emboldened  the  hearts  of  my  foes  and opponents !
PLATE  7. — P&NANGUALAN  AND  LANGSUIK.
Models  of  the  Penanggalan  and  Langsuir,  the  former  being  the  head  on  the  left. Note  the  length  of  the  Langsuir  s  nails.
Page  326.
vi  PONTIANAK  AND  P&NANGGALAN  327
May  your  heart  be  softened  when  you  behold  me, By  grace  of  this  prayer  that  I  use,  called  Silam  Bayu."
The  "  mosquito-fry  at  the  river's  mouth  "  in  the  first line  is  no  doubt  intended  as  an  allusion  to  the  Lang- suir  who  frequent  the  fishing-stakes.
The  Pontianak  (or  Mati-anak),  as  has  already  been said,  is  the  stillborn  child  of  the  Langsuir,  and  its embodiment  is  like  that  of  its  mother,  a  kind  of  night- owl.1  Curiously  enough,  it  appears  to  be  the  only  one of  these  spirits  which  rises  to  the  dignity  of  being addressed  as  a  "  Jin  "  or  "  Genie,"  as  appears  from  the charms  which  are  used  for  laying  it.  Thus  we  find  in a  common  charm  :—
"  O  Pontianak  the  Stillborn,
May  you  be  struck  dead  by  the  soil  from  the  grave-mound. Thus  (we)  cut  the  bamboo-joints,  the  long  and  the  short, To  cook  therein  the  liver  of  the  Jin  (Demon)  Pontianak. By  the  grace  of  'There  is  no  god  but  God,' "  etc.
To  prevent  a  stillborn  child  from  becoming  a  Ponti- anak the  corpse  is  treated  in  the  same  way  as  that  of the  mother,  i.e.  a  hen's  egg  is  put  under  each  armpit, a  needle  in  the  palm  of  each  hand,  and  (probably)  glass beads  or  some  simple  equivalent  in  its  mouth.  The charm  which  is  used  on  this  occasion  will  be  found  in the  Appendix.
The  Penanggalan  is  a  sort  of  monstrous  vampire which  delights  in  sucking  the  blood  of  children.  The story  goes  that  once  upon  a  time  a  woman  was  sitting, to  perform  a  religious  penance  (dudok  bertapa),  in  one of  the  large  wooden  vats  which  are  used  by  the  Malays for  holding  the  vinegar  made  by  drawing  off  the  sap
1  Mr.  Clifford  (of  Pahang),  however,  beast  noises  round  the  graves  of  chil- speaks  of  "that  weird  little  white  dren."  —  In  Court  and  Kampong,  p. animal,  the  Mati-&nak,  that  makes  231.
328
BIRTH-SPIRITS
CHAr.
of  the  thatch-palm  (menyadap  nipaJi],  Quite  unex- pectedly a  man  came  in,  and  finding  her  sitting  in  the vat,  asked  her,  "  What  are  you  doing  there  ? "  To this  the  woman  replied,  "What  business  have  you  to ask  ? "  but  being  very  much  startled  she  attempted  to escape,  and  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment,  kicked her  own  chin  with  such  force  that  the  skin  split  round her  neck,  and  her  head  (with  the  sac  of  the  stomach depending  from  it)  actually  became  separated  from  the trunk,  and  flew  off  to  perch  upon  the  nearest  tree. Ever  since  then  she  has  existed  as  a  spirit  of  evil, sitting  on  the  roof-tree  whinnying  (mengilai)  whenever a  child  is  born  in  the  house,  or  trying  to  force  her  way up  through  the  floor  on  which  the  child  lies,  in  order to  drink  its  blood.1
The  only  two  spirits  of  this  class  which  now  re- main are  the  Polong  and  the  Pelesit,  and  these, as  I  have  said,  partake  to  a  great  extent  of  the  charac-
1  Cp.,  however,  "The  Penangal, that  horrible  wraith  of  a  woman  who has  died  in  childbirth,  and  who  comes to  torment  small  children  in  the  guise of  a  fearful  face  and  bust,  with  many feet  of  bloody,  trailing  entrails  in  her wake."— Clifford,  loc.  tit.
"He  (Mr.  M.)  said,  'Very  well then,  tell  me  about  the  penanggalan only,  I  should  like  to  hear  it  and  to write  it  down  in  English  so  that  Euro- peans may  know  how  foolish  those persons  are  who  believe  in  such  things." I  then  drew  a  picture  representing  a woman's  head  and  neck  only,  with  the intestines  hanging  down.  Mr.  M. caused  this  to  be  engraved  on  wood  by a  Chinese,  and  inserted  it  with  the story  belonging  to  it  in  a  publication called  the  Anglo-Chinese  Gleaner.  And I  said,  '  Sir,  listen  to  the  account  of the  penanggalan.  It  was  originally  a woman.  She  used  the  magic  arts  of  a devil  in  whom  she  believed,  and  she devoted  herself  to  his  service  night  and
day  until  the  period  of  her  agreement with  her  teacher  had  expired  and  she was  able  to  fly.  Her  head  and  neck were  then  loosened  from  the  body,  the intestines  being  attached  to  them,  and hanging  down  in  strings.  The  body remained  where  it  was.  Wherever  the person  whom  it  was  wished  to  injure happened  to  live,  thither  flew  the  head and  bowels  to  suck  his  blood,  and  the person  whose  blood  was  sucked  was sure  to  die.  If  the  blood  and  water which  dripped  from  the  intestines touched  any  person,  serious  illness immediately  followed  and  his  body broke  out  in  open  sores.  The  penang- galan likes  to  suck  the  blood  of  women in  childbirth.  For  this  reason  it  is customary  at  all  houses  where  a  birth occurs  to  hang  upjeruju 1  leaves  at  the doors  and  windows,  or  to  place  thorns wherever  there  is  any  blood,  lest  the penanggalan  should  come  and  suck  it,
1  A  kind  of  thistle.
VI
POLONG  AND  P&L&SIT  329
ter  of  familiar  spirits  or  bottle  imps,  and  are  by  no means  confined  to  a  single  "  role "  as  the  preceding ones  have  been.
The  Polong  resembles  an  exceedingly  diminu- tive female  figure  or  mannikin,  being  in  point  of  size about  as  big  as  the  top  joint  of  the  little  finger.  It will  fly  through  the  air  to  wherever  it  is  told  to go,  but  is  always  preceded  by  its  pet  or  plaything (p$mainan),  the  Pelesit,  which,  as  has  already  been said,  appears  to  be  a  species  of  house-cricket.  When- ever the  Polong  wishes  to  enter  (di-rasoki}  a  new victim,  it  sends  the  Pelesit  on  before  it,  and  as  soon  as the  latter,  "  flying  in  a  headlong  fashion  (menelentang m$nj$rongkong)"  has  entered  its  victim's  body,  which it  usually  does  tozY-foremost,  and  begins  to  chirp,  the Polong  follows.  It  is  generally  hidden  away  outside the  house  by  its  owner  (Jinjangan),  and  fed  with blood  pricked  from  the  finger.  The  description  usually given  of  a  Polong  tallies  curiously  with  the  Malay definition  of  the  soul.1
The   last  of  these  spirits,  the    Pelesit  (or  house-
for  the  penanggalan  has,  it  seems,  a  many  people  who  have  seen  the  penang- dread  of  thorns  in  which  her  intestines  galan  flying  along  with  its  entrails  dan- may  happen  to  get  caught.  It  is  said  gling  down  and  shining  at  night  like that  a  penanggalan  once  came  to  a  fire-flies.
man's  house  in  the  middle  of  the  night  "  'Such  is  the  story  of  the penang- to  suck  his  blood,  and  her  intestines  galan  as  I  have  heard  it  from  my  fore- were  caught  in  some  thorns  near  the  fathers  but  I  do  not  believe  it  in  the hedge,  and  she  had  to  remain  there  least.  God  forbid  that  I  should.'" — until  daylight,  when  the  people  saw  Hikayat  Abdullah,  p.  143. and  killed  her.  1  "  The  origin  of  the  Polong  is  this  : "  '  The  person  who  has  the  power  of  — The  blood  of  a  murdered  man  must becoming  a  penanggalan  always  keeps  be  taken  and  placed  in  a  bottle  (buK- at  her  house  a  quantity  of  vinegar  in  a  bttli,  a  bottle  having  a  spherical  or  wide jar  or  vessel  of  some  kind.  The  use  body  and  a  long  narrow  neck).  Then of  this  is  to  soak  the  intestines  in,  for  prayers  are  said  over  it,  and  something when  they  issue  forth  from  the  body  or  other  is  read,  I  don't  know  what,  but they  immediately  swell  up  and  cannot  it  has  to  be  learnt.  After  seven  days be  put  back,  but  after  being  soaked  in  of  this  worship,  according  to  some vinegar  they  shrink  to  their  former  size  people,  or  after  twice  seven  days  ac- and  enter  the  body  again.  There  are  cording  to  others,  a  sound  is  heard  in
33°
BIRTH-SPIRITS
CHAP.
cricket  ?),  which  is  the  Polong's  "  plaything "  or  pet, flies  to  and  fro  (rasok  sini,  rasok  sana)  till  it  finds  the body  which  its  mistress  has  ordered  it  to  enter,  harm only  being  done  when  it  enters  tail-foremost,  as  it generally  does.  It  is  occasionally  caught  and  kept  in a  bottle  by  Malay  women,  who  feed  it  either  on parched  or  saffron-stained  rice,  or  on  blood  drawn from  the  tip  of  the  fourth  finger  which  they  prick  for the  purpose,  and  who,  when  they  wish  to  get  rid  of  it, bury  it  in  the  ground.  When  a  sick  person  is  affected by  a  Pelesit  (one  of  the  signs  of  which  is  to  rave  about cats)1  the  medicine -man  comes  and  addresses  the
the  bottle  like  the  chirping  of  young birds.  The  operator  then  cuts  his finger  and  inserts  it  into  the  bottle  and the  Polong  sucks  it.  The  person  who thus  supports  the  Polong  is  called  his father,  or,  if  it  happens  to  be  a  woman, she  is  his  mother.  Every  day  the parent  feeds  it  with  his  (or  her)  blood. The  object  of  doing  this  and  the  ad- vantage to  be  gained  from  it  are  these  : — if  he  entertains  a  feeling  of  anger against  any  one  he  orders  the  Polong to  go  and  afflict  him,  that  is  to  say,  to cause  him  pain  or  sickness  ;  or  if  a third  person  is  at  enmity  with  another he  goes  in  secret  to  the  person  who keeps  the  Polong,  and  gives  him  a  sum of  money  to  send  the  Polong  to  attack the  person  against  whom  he  bears  ill- will.  This  is  the  use  of  it.  The person  who  is  tormented  by  the  Polong, whether  a  virgin,  or  a  married  woman, or  a  man,  cries  out  and  loses  conscious- ness of  what  he  (or  she)  is  doing,  and tears  and  throws  off  his  (or  her)  cloth- ing, biting  and  striking  the  people near,  blind  and  deaf  to  everything,  and does  all  sorts  of  other  things.  Wise men  are  called  in  to  prescribe  remedies ; some  come  and  chant  formulas  over  the head  of  the  patient,  others  pinch  his thumb  and  apply  medicines  to  it.  When the  remedy  is  successful  the  sick  person cries  out,  '  Let  me  go,  I  want  to  go home. '  The  doctor  replies,  '  I  will not  let  you  go  if  you  do  not  make
known  who  it  is  that  has  sent  you  here, and  why  you  have  come,  and  who  are your  father  and  mother.'  Sometimes he  (the  Polong  in  the  patient)  remains silent  and  will  not  confess  or  give  the names  of  his  parents  ;  sometimes  he confesses,  and  says  '  Let  me  go,  my father  is  such-a-one  and  lives  at  such- and-such  a  kampong,  and  my  mother  is so-and-so.  The  reason  that  I  have come  here  is  that  such-a-one  came  to my  parents  and  asked  for  their  aid,  and gave  them  a  sum  of  money  because  he bore  ill-will  against  this  person '  (or whatever  the  reason  may  have  been). Sometimes  he  makes  a  false  statement, and  mentions  entirely  wrong  persons  in order  to  conceal  the  names  of  his parents.  As  soon  as  the  people  know the  name  of  the  person  who  has  con- trived the  attack  and  the  reason,  they let  him  go,  and  the  sick  person  at  once recovers  his  consciousness,  but  he  is left  weak  and  feeble.  When  a  Polong attacks  a  person  and  will  confess  no- thing, the  person  who  is  attacked shrieks  and  yells  in  anger,  and  after  a day  or  two  he  dies.  After  death  blood pours  forth  bubbling  (ber-kopak-kopaK) from  the  mouth,  and  the  whole  body  is blue  with  bruises. ' ' — Hikayat  Abdullah, p.  143.  Notes  and  Queries,  6".  B. R.  A.S. No.  4,  sec.  98,  issued  with  No.  17  of the  Journal.
1  Merepet  kata  kuching.
VI
ACQUIRING  A  P&L&SIT  331
Pe'le'sit  (or  Polong  ?),  which  has  taken  up  its  residence in  the  patient's  body,  with  the  words :  "  Who  is  your mother?"  To  this  question  the  Pe'le'sit  replies, speaking  with  the  patient's  voice,  but  in  a  high  falsetto key,  and  giving  the  name  of  the  person  who  sent  it, whereupon  prompt  measures  are  taken  to  compel  the owner  to  recall  it.  It  now  only  remains  to  describe the  means  employed  by  the  Malays  to  secure  one  of these  familiar  spirits,  which  can  be  guaranteed  to  cause the  greatest  possible  annoyance  to  your  enemy,  with the  least  possible  trouble  on  your  own  part.
Receipt  for  securing  a  PZlZsit
"  Go  to  the  graveyard  at  night  and  dig  up  the body  of  a  first-born  child  whose  mother  was  also  first- born, and  which  has  been  dead  less  than  forty  days. On  digging  it  up,  carry  it  out  to  an  ant-hill  in  the  open ground, ^and  there  dandle  it  (di-timang).  After  a  little while,  when  the  child  shrieks  and  lolls  its  tongue  out (terjelir  lidah-nya),  bite  off  its  tongue  and  carry  it  home. Then  obtain  a  cocoa-nut  shell  from  a  solitary  '  green  ' cocoa-nut  palm  (niyor  hijaii},  and  carry  it  to  a  place where  Three  Roads  Meet,  light  a  fire  and  heat  the shell  till  oil  exudes,  dip  the  child's  tongue  in  the  oil, and  bury  it  in  the  heart  of  the  three  cross  roads  (hati sempang  tiga).  Leave  it  untouched  for  three  nights, then  dig  it  up  and  you  will  find  that  it  has  turned  into aPelesit."1
1  Cp.  Clifford,  In  Court  and  Kant-  the  other  day,  eulogising  the  advantage
fongi    PP-    230-244.       "  PSlong  and  of  possessing  a  familiar  spirit  (she  said
ptlsit  are  but  other  names  for  bdjang,  that,  amongst  other  things,  it  gave  her
the  latter  is  chiefly  used  in  the  state  absolute  control  over  her  husband  and
of  Kedah,  where  it  is  considered  rather  the    power   of  annoying   people  who
chic  to  have  a  pflrit.     A  Kedah  lady  offended     her),     thus    described     the
332
BIRTH  CEREMONIES
CHAP.
2.    BIRTH   CEREMONIES
In  or  about  the  seventh  month  of  pregnancy (mengandong  tujoh  bulan}  a  "Bidan"1  (sage  femme)  is engaged  (menempah\  the  ceremony  being  described  as follows : —
A  copper  vessel  called  cherana  (which  is  some- thing like  a  fruit-dish  with  a  stand  or  foot  to  it)  is filled  with  four  or  five  peeled  areca-nuts,  a  small  block of  gambier,  a  portion  of  lime  (kapor  sa-per kapor  an), a  "tahil"  (sa-tahil]  of  tobacco,  and  three  or  four packets  (susun)  of  betel-leaf,  and  carried  to  the Bidan's  house,  where  it  is  presented  to  her  with  the words,  "  I  wish  to  engage  you  for  my  child  "  (Ini  'ku mahu  menempah  anak  'ku),  or  words  to  that  effect.2
Usually  the  contents  of  the  cherana  are  enclosed
method      of      securing      this      useful ally  :—
"  « You  go  out,'  she  said,  '  on  the night  before  the  full  moon,  and  stand with  your  back  to  the  moon,  and  your face  to  an  ant-hill,  so  that  your  shadow falls  on  the  ant-hill.  Then  you  recite certain  jampi  (incantations),  and  bend- ing forward  try  to  embrace  your  shadow. If  you  fail,  try  again  several  times, repeating  more  incantations.  If  not successful,  go  the  next  night  and  make  a further  effort,  and  the  night  after,  if necessary — three  nights  in  all.  If  you cannot  then  catch  your  shadow,  wait till  the  same  day  on  the  following month  and  renew  the  attempt.  Sooner or  later  you  will  succeed,  and,  as  you stand  there  in  the  brilliance  of  the moonlight,  you  will  see  that  you  have drawn  your  shadow  into  yourself,  and your  body  will  never  again  cast  a  shade. Go  home,  and  in  the  night,  whether sleeping  or  waking,  the  form  of  a  child will  appear  before  you  and  put  out  its tongue ;  that  seize,  and  it  will  remain while  the  rest  of  the  child  disappears.
In  a  little  while  the  tongue  will  turn into  something  that  breathes,  a  small animal,  reptile,  or  insect,  and  when  you see  the  creature  has  life  put  it  in  a  bottle and  \hepelsit  is  yours.'
"  It  sounds  easy  enough,  and  one  is not  surprised  to  hear  that  every  one  in Kedah,  who  is  anybody,  keeps  a p?lsit." Swett.,  Malay  Sketches,  pp.  197,  198.
1  No  less  than  seven  "  Bidans,"  it  is said,  were  formerly  requisitioned  at  the birth  of  a  Raja's  child,  and  occasions when  even  nine  are  mentioned  are  to be  met  with  in  Malay  romances.     The most  general  custom,  however,  seems to  have  been  to  summon  seven  "Bidans" only,   the  number  being  possibly  due to  the   Malay    theory   of  a   sevenfold soul  (v.  Soul).     The  profession  was  an honourable  one,  and  the  Bidans  received the  title    of   "  Dato '   (abbreviated    to 'Toh)  Bidan  " ;  but  if  the  child  of  a  Raja happened  to  die,  the  Bidan  who  was adjudged   to  be  responsible   paid   the penalty  with  her  life.
2  Vide  also  N.  &*  Q.  No.  3,  sec.  65, issued  with/../?.^.^.,  S.£.,  No.  16.
vi  ENGAGING  A  MIDWIFE  333
in  small  brass  receptacles,  but  on  such  occasions  as  the present  no  receptacles  are  used,  the  usual  accessories of  the  betel-chewing  ceremony  being  deposited  in the  chtrana  itself.  The  Bidan,  on  receiving  the cherana,  and  charming  the  contents,  inverts  it,  pour- ing out  (di-chorahkan)  its  contents  upon  the  floor,  and taking  omens  for  the  coming  event  from  the  manner in  which  they  fall.1  She  then  commences  to  chew  the betel-leaf,  and  when  she  has  taken  as  much  as  she requires,  she  generally  performs  some  species  of divination  (tengd  dalam  petua)  in  order  to  ascertain the  nature  of  the  child's  horoscope.  This  object  may be  achieved  in  several  ways ;  e.g.  by  astrological calculations ;  by  casting  up  (palak  or  falakiak)  the numerical  values  of  the  letters  of  both  parents'  names, in  accordance  with  the  abjad,  or  secret  cipher alphabet ; 2  by  observance  of  a  wax  taper  fixed  upon the  brim  of  a  jar  of  water  (dian  di  tepi  buyong  ayer) ; and  by  observance  of  a  cup  of  "  betel-leaf  water  "  (ayer siriti).*
When  the  time  arrives  the  Bidan  is  sent  for  and escorted  to  the  spot,  where  she  points  out  the  luckiest place  in  the  house  for  the  child  to  be  born.  Such  a spot  must  not  be  under  the  ends  of  the  slats  of  the palm-thatch,  but  between  them,  the  exact  spot  being discovered  by  repeatedly  dropping  the  blade  of  a hatchet  or  cutlass  haft  downwards  into  the  ground below  the  raised  floor  of  the  house,  until  a  spot  is found  wherein  it  sticks  and  remains  upright.  A  rattan loop  (tali  anggas)  to  enable  the  patient  to  raise  herself to  a  sitting  posture,  is  suspended  from  the  rafters  over
1  If  the   betel-leaf  adheres   to   the  *    Vide  p.  551,  infra,
chfrana  it  is  a  bad  sign  (uri  mtttkat          3   Vide  App.  clxxxiv.
tiada  mahu  k'luar).
334  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
the  spot  selected,1  while  just  exactly  beneath  it  under the  floor  of  the  house  (which  is  raised  on  piles  like the  old  Swiss  lake-dwellings)  are  fastened  a  bunch  of leaves  of  the  prickly  pandanus,  the  "  acid  "  egg-plant,2 and  a  lekar  jantan,  which  is  a  kind  of  rattan  stand used  for  Malay  cooking-pots.  The  leaves  of  these plants  are  used  because  it  is  thought  that  their  thorns will  prick  any  evil  spirit3  which  tries  to  get  at  the  child from  below,  whilst  the  circular  cooking-pot  stand  will act  as  a  noose  or  snare.  Over  the  patient's  head,  and just  under  the  rafters,  is  spread  a  casting-net  (Jala), together  with  a  bunch  of  leaves  of  the  red  dracsena (jenjuangor  lenjuang merati)  and  the  "acid"  egg-plant.4
A  big  tray  (talam)  is  now  filled  with  a  measure  of uncooked  husked  rice  (tiras  sa-gantang),  and  covered over  with  a  small  mat  of  screw-palm  leaves  (tikar mengkuang}.  This  mat  is  in  turn  covered  with  from three  to  seven  thicknesses  of  fine  Malay  sarongs  (a sort  of  broad  plaid  worn  as  a  skirt),  and  these  latter again  are  surmounted  by  a  second  mat  upon  which the  newly-born  infant  is  to  be  deposited.
The  next  process  is  the  purification  of  mother  and child  by  a  ceremony  which  consists  of  bathing  both  in warm  water  just  not  hot  enough  to  scald  the  skin  (ayer pesam-pesam  jangan  melochak  kulif),  and  in  which  are
1  So,  too,  in  the  report  of  the  Dutch  and  can  be  punished   by  having  her Expedition  to  Mid-Sumatra,  vol.  i.  p.  stomach  filled  up  with  ground  glass  and 266,  it  is  stated  that  delivery  took  place  sherds  of  earthenware,  which  will  kill "  in  a  sitting  posture."  her  in  about  seven  days'  time  !
2  T'rong asam.  4  When  the  "sickness"  is  severe,
3  One  account  says  that  the  Penang-  the  Bidan  draws  upon  her  almost  in- galan  (or  Manjang,  i.e.   Pemanjangan  exhaustible  stock  of  Malay  charms,  a another  name  for  her)  if  she  comes  will  specimen  of  which  will  be  found  in  the be  caught  in  this  snare,  and  that  next  Appendix.     Salt  and  asam  are   taken morning  when  the  fowls  are  let  loose  (apparently   by  the   Bidan  ?)    into  the out  of  the  fowl-house  they  will  peck  at  mouth  (di-k?mam  asam  garani)  while the  sac  of  her  stomach  to  get  at  its  the  selected  charm  is  repeated, contents.     Thus  she  will  be  detected,
vi  PURIFICATION  AFTER  BIRTH  335
leaves  of  Itfngkuas,  kalia,  kimyit  frus,  kunyit,  pandan bau,  areca-palm  blossom,  and  the  dried  leaves  (k$ron- song  or  kZresek)  of  the  pisang  Klat.  This  has  to  be repeated  (every?)  morning  and  evening.  In  most places  the  new-born  infant  is,  as  has  been  said,  laid upon  a  mat  and  formally  adopted  by  the  father,  who breathes  into  the  child's  ear 1  a  sort  of  Muhammadan prayer  or  formula,  which  is  called  bang  in  the  case of  a  boy,  and  kamat  in  the  case  of  a  girl.  After purification  the  child  is  swaddled  in  a  sort  of  papoose  ; an  inner  bandage  (barut)  is  swathed  round  the  child's waist,  and  a  broad  cloth  band  (kain  lampin)  is  wound round  its  body  from  the  knees  to  the  breast,  after  which the  outer  bandage  (kain  bedong)  is  wound  round  the child's  body  from  the  feet  to  the  shoulder,  and  is  worn continually  until  the  child  is  three  or  four  months  old, or,  in  Malay  parlance,  until  he  has  learned  to  crawl (taku  meniarap).  This  contrivance,  it  is  alleged,  pre- vents the  child  from  starting  and  straining  its  muscles. Over  the  child's  mat  is  suspended  a  sort  of  small conical  mosquito-net  (kain  bochok},  the  upper  end  of which  is  generally  stitched  (di-semat)  or  pinned  on  to the  top  of  the  parent's  mosquito  curtain,  and  which  is intended  to  protect  the  child  from  any  stray  mosquito or  sandfly  which  may  have  found  its  way  into  the bigger  net  used  by  his  parents.
1   Vide    McNair,    Perak    and     the  (twice),    ashahadun    Muhammad    al-
Malays,  p.  231.     "  The  children  of  the  Rasul  Allah   (twice),  hei '•AH  al-saleh
Malays  are  received  into  the  world  quite  (twice),  hei  'Alt  al-faleh  (twice),  Allahu
in  religious  form,  prayer  being   said,  akbar (twice),  la-ilaha-illa- llah  (twice);
and    the   Azan   or  Allah  Akbar  pro-  and  the  kamat  as  follows  : —
nounced   by  the  father   with   his    lips  Allahu  akbar  (twice),  ashahadun  la-
'.close  to  the  tender  infant's  ear."     The  tiaha-illa-llah,  ashahadun  Muhammad
bang,    according    to    'Che     Sam,    a  al- Rasul  Allah.     Hei  1AH  al-saleh,  hei
Malay  pandit  of  Kuala  Lumpor,   ran  'AH  al-faleh,  had  kamat  al-salata(tvt\cz),
somewhat  as  follows  : — Allahu  Akbar  la-ilaha-illa-' llah. (twice),    ashahadun    la-ilaha-illa- llah
336  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
Next  comes  the  ceremony  of  marking  the  forehead (chonting  muka),  which  is  supposed  to  keep  the  child from  starting  and  straining  itself  (jangan  terkejut  ter- kekaii],  and  from  convulsions  (sawan),  and  at  the  same time  to  preserve  it  from  evil  spirits.  The  following are  the  directions  : — Take  chips  of  wood  from  the  thin end  (kapala  ?)  of  the  threshold,  from  the  steps  of  the house-ladder,  and  from  the  house  furniture,  together with  a  coat  (kesip]  of  garlic,  a  coat  of  an  onion,  assa- fcetida,  a  rattan  cooking-pot  stand,  and  fibre  from  the "  monkey-face  "  of  an  unfertile  cocoa-nut  (tampo  niyor jantan].  Burn  all  these  articles  together,  collect  the ashes,  and  mix  them  by  means  of  the  fore-finger  with a  little  "  betel- water."
Now  repeat  the  proper  charm,1  dip  the  finger  in the  mixture,  and  mark  the  centre  of  the  child's  fore- head, if  a  boy  with  a  sign  resembling  what  is  called  a bench  mark  v  ,  if  a  girl  with  a  plain  cross  + ,  and  at  the same  time  put  small  daubs  on  the  nose,  cheeks,  chin, and  shoulders.  Then  mark  the  mother  with  a  line drawn  from  breast  to  breast  (pangkah  susu]  and  a daub  on  the  end  of  the  nose  (cholek  hidong\  If  you do  this  properly,  a  Langat  Malay  informed  me,  the Evil  One  will  take  mother  and  child  for  his  own  wife and  child  (who  are  supposed  to  be  similarly  marked) and  will  consequently  refrain  from  harming  them !
In  addition  to  the  above,  if  the  child  is  a  girl,  her eyebrows  are  shaved  and  a  curve  drawn  in  their  place, extending  from  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the  ear  (di- pantiskan  bentok  taji  deri  muka  sampei  pelipis).  The mixture  used  for  marking  these  curves  consists  of manjakani  mixed  with  milk  from  the  mother's  breast.
Another  most  curious  custom  which  recalls  a  parallel
1    Vide  App.  cl.
vi  COMPRESSING  THE  HEAD  337
custom  among  North  American  Indians,  is  occa- sionally resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  altering  the shape  of  the  child's  head.  When  it  is  considered  too long  (tVrlampau panjang],  a  small  tightly-fitting  "yam leaf  cap"  (songkd  daun  k'ladi),  consisting  of  seven thicknesses  of  calladium  (yam)  leaves  is  used  to  com- press it.  This  operation  is  supposed  to  shorten  the child's  skull,  and  the  person  who  fits  it  on  to  the  child's head  uses  the  words — "  Muhammad,  short  be  your head  "  in  the  case  of  a  boy,  and  "  Fatimah,  short  be your  head  "  in  the  case  of  a  girl.
Now  comes  the  ceremony  of  administering  to  the infant  what  is  called  the  "  mouth-opener"  (lit.  "  mouth- splitter,"  pXmtflah  mulut) ;  first,  you  take  a  green cocoa-nut  (niyor  sungkoran),  split  it  in  halves  (di-tf lah niyor),  put  a  "  grain  "  of  salt  inside  one-half  of  the  shell (di-buboh  garam  sa-buku\  and  give  it  to  the  child  to drink,  counting  up  to  seven,  and  putting  it  to  the child's  mouth  at  the  word  seven  (letakkan  di  mulut- nyd).  Then  repeat  the  ceremony,  substituting  asam (tamarinds?)  for  the  salt.  Finally,  take  a  gold  ring, and  after  rubbing  it  against  the  inside  of  the  cocoa-nut (cholek  di-dalam  niyor),  lay  it  upon  the  child's  lips, (letakkan  di  bibir-nya),  saying  "  Bismillah,"  etc.  Do the  same  with  a  silver  and  amalgam  (gold  and  silver) ring  respectively,  and  the  ceremony  will  be  at  an  end.
I  may  note,  in  passing,  that  it  is  in  allusion  to  the above  ceremony  that  you  will  sometimes  hear  old  men say  "  It's  not  the  first  time  I  tasted  salt,  I  did  so  ever since  I  was  first  put  into  my  swinging-cot  "  (aku  makan garam  dakulu,  deripada  tatkala  naik  buayari).
Sometimes  a  little  "rock"  sugar  (gula  batu]  is  added to  make  the  "  mouth-opener  "  more  palatable.
From  the  time  when  the  child  is  about  twenty-four
z
338  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
hours  old  until  it  is  of  the  age  of  three  months,  it  is fed  with  rice  boiled  in  a  pot  on  the  fire,  "broken" (di-lechek)  by  means  of  a  short  broad  cocoa-nut shell  spoon  {pelechefc),  mixed  with  a  little  sugar  and squeezed  into  small  receptacles  of  woven  cocoa-nut  leaf (ketupat\
Later  it  is  taught  to  feed  at  the  breast  (menetek\ which  continues  until  it  is  weaned  by  the  application of  bitter  aloes  (j'adam)  to  the  mother's  breasts.
In  the  rice-jar  (buyong  tiras)  during  this  period,  a stone,  a  big  iron  nail,  and  a  "  candle-nut "  must  be  kept, and  a  spoon  (sendoK)  must  always  be  used  for  putting the  rice  into  the  pot  before  boiling  it.  Moreover,  the mother,  when  eating  or  drinking,  must  always  cross her  left  arm  under  her  breasts  (di-ampu  susu-nya di  lengan  kiri]  leaving  the  right  arm  free  to  bring  the food  to  the  mouth.
When  the  child  has  been  bathed,  it  is  fumigated, and  deposited  for  the  first  time  in  a  swinging-cot  (the Malay  substitute  for  a  cradle)  which,  according  to immemorial  custom,  is  formed  by  a  black  cloth  slung from  one  of  the  rafters.  To  fumigate1  it  you  take leaves  of  the  red  dracsena  {jenjuang  merah],  and  wrap them  round  first  with  the  casing  of  the  charred  torch {puntong}  used  at  the  severing  of  the  cord  (pembuang
1  Mr.  H.  N.  Ridley,  Director  of  other  leaves  till  one-third  of  the  liquor Gardens  and  Forests  at  Singapore,  in  a  is  evaporated,  and  the  decoction  exposed pamphlet  on  Malay  Materia  Medica  to  the  dew  for  a  night,  and  the  child  is (dated  1 894)  describes  a  somewhat  bathed  with  it ;  or  a  quantity  of  road- similar  ceremony  as  follows  : —  side  rubbish,  dead-leaves,  sticks,  chewed
' '  When  a  child  suffers  from  sampuh  sugar-cane,  etc.  is  boiled  and  the  child pachut,  that  is  to  say,  when  it  persist-  is  bathed  in  the  liquid  (it  is  washed ently  cries  and  will  not  take  its  food,  it  afterwards),  and  it  is  then  smoked  over is  treated  in  the  following  way  :  the  a  fire  consisting  of  a  nest  of  a  weaver- leaves  of  Hedyotis  congesta,  Br. ,  a  tall  bird  (sarang  tampur),  the  skin  of  a jungle  weed,  known  as  Lidajin  \lidah  bottle-gourd  (labu),  and  a  piece  of  wood jin,  lit.  Demon's  Tongue]  or  Poko1  which  has  been  struck  by  lightning." Sampuh  Packut,  are  boiled  with  some
vi  ROCKING  THE  CRADLE  339
tali pusat\  then  with  leaves  of  the  frong  asam  ("  acid  " egg-plant),  and  tie  them  round  at  intervals  with  a string  of  shredded  tree-bark  (tali  t'rap}.  The  funnel- shaped  bouquet  thus  formed  is  suspended  above  the child's  cot  (buayan) ;  a  spice-block  (batu  giling]  is deposited  inside  it,  and  underneath  it  are  placed  the naked  blade  of  a  cutlass  {parang  pitting) ,  a  cocoa-nut scraper  (kukoran)^  and  one  of  the  basket-work  stands used  for  the  cooking-pots  (lekar  jantan\  which  latter is  slung  round  the  neck  of  the  cocoa-nut  scraper.  This last  strange  contrivance  is,  I  believe,  intended  as  a hint  to  the  evil  spirit  or  vampire  which  comes  to  suck the  child's  blood,  and  for  whom  the  trap  described above  is  set  underneath  the  house-floor.
Now  get  a  censer  and  burn  incense  in  it,  adding  to the  flame,  as  it  burns,  rubbish  from  beneath  a  deserted house,  the  deserted  nest  of  a  merbah  (dove),  and the  deserted  nest  of  the  "  rain-bird  "  (sarang  burong ujan-ujan).  When  all  is  ready,  rock  the  cot  very gently  seven  times,  then  take  the  spice-block  out  of the  cot  and  deposit  it  together  with  the  blade  of  the cutlass  upon  the  ground,  take  the  child  in  your  arms and  fumigate  it  by  moving  it  thrice  round  in  a  circle over  the  smoke  of  the  censer,  counting  up  to  seven as  you  do  so,  and  swing  the  child  gently  towards  your left.  At  the  word  "seven"  call  the  child's  soul  by  saying "  Cluck,  cluck  !  soul  of  Muhammad  here !  " a  (if  it  is  a boy),  or  "  Cluck,  cluck !  soul  of  Fatimah  here  !  "  (if  it  is a  girl) ;  deposit  the  child  in  the  cot  and  rock  it  very gently,  so  that  it  does  not  swing  farther  than  the  neck of  the  cocoa-nut  scraper  extends  (sa-panjang  kukoran sa/iaja).  After  this  you  may  swing  it  as  far  as  you
1  A 'ur,  stmangat  Muhammad  ini  !  Kiir,  sfmangat  Fatimah  ini  !
340  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
like,  but  for  at  least  seven  days  afterwards,  whenever the  child  is  taken  out  of  the  cot,  the  spice-block,  or stone-child  (anak  batu]  as  it  is  called,  must  be  deposited in  the  cot  as  a  substitute  for  the  child  (pengganti budak\
Once  in  every  four  hours  the  child  should  be bathed  with  cold  water,  in  order  that  it  may  be  kept "  cool."  This  custom,  I  was  told,  is  diametrically opposite  to  that  which  obtains  at  Malacca,  where  the child  is  bathed  as  rarely  as  possible.  The  custom followed  in  Selangor  is  said  to  prevent  the  child  from getting  a  sore  mouth  (guam).
For  the  first  two  months  or  so,  whenever  the  child is  bathed,  it  is  rubbed  over  with  a  paste  obtained  by mixing  powdered  rice  with  the  powder  obtained  from a  red  stone  called  batu  kawi.  This  stone,  which  is said  by  some  Malays  to  take  its  name  from  the  Island of  Langkawi,  is  thought  to  possess  astringent  (klaf] qualities,  and  is  used  by  Malay  women  to  improve their  skin.  Before  use  the  paste  is  fumigated  with  the smoke  of  burning  eagle- wood,  sandal-wood,  and  incense, after  which  the  liquid,  which  is  said  to  resemble red  ink,  is  applied  to  the  skin,  and  then  washed  off, no  doubt,  with  lime-juice  in  the  ordinary  way.
In  the  cold  water  which  is  used  for  bathing  the child  are  deposited  a  big  iron  nail  (as  a  "symbol  of iron  "),  "  candle-nuts  "  and  cockle-shells  (kulit  Krang), to  which  some  Malays  add  a  kind  of  parasite  called si  bernas  (i.e.  Well- Filled  Out,  a  word  applied  to children  who  are  fat,  instead  of  the  word  gemok,  which is  considered  unlucky)  and  another  parasite  called sadingin  or  si  dingin,  the  "  Cold  "  one.
After  bathing,  the  Bidan  should  perform  the ceremony  called  sembor  sirih,  which  consists  in  the
vi  NAMING  THE  CHILD  341
ejecting  of  betel-leaf  (mixed  with  other  ingredients) out  of  her  mouth  on  to  the  pit  of  the  child's  stomach, the  ingredients  being  pounded  leaves  of  the  bunglei, chVkor,  and  firangau,  and  chips  of  brazil-wood,  ebony, and  sugar- palm  twigs  (sVgar  kabong)  ;  to  these  are sometimes  added  small  portions  of  the  "Rough" bamboo  (buluh  kasap\  of  the  bemban  balu,  and  of the  leaf-cases  of  the  areca-palm  (either  upih  Vlak batang  or  upih  sarong],
The  child  is  generally  named  within  the  first  week, but  I  have  not  yet  heard  of  any  special  ceremony  con- nected with  the  naming,  though  it  is  most  probably considered  as  a  religious  act.  The  name  is  evidently considered  of  some  importance,  for  if  the  child  happens to  get  ill  directly  after  the  naming,  it  is  sometimes re-adopted  (temporarily)  by  a  third  party,  who  gives  it a  different  name.  When  this  happens  a  species  of bracelets  and  anklets  made  of  black  cloth  are  put  upon the  child's  wrists  and  ankles,  the  ceremony  being  called tumpang  sayang.
A  few  days  later  the  child's  head  is  shaved,  and  his nails  cut  for  the  first  time.  For  the  former  process  a red  lather  is  manufactured  from  fine  rice-flour  mixed with  gambier,  lime,  and  betel-leaf.  Some  people  have the  child's  head  shaved  clean,  others  leave  the  central lock  (jambul}.  In  either  case  the  remains  of  the  red lather,  together  with  the  clippings  of  hair  (and  nails  ?) are  received  in  a  rolled-up  yam-leaf  (daun  kladi  di- ponjuf]  or  cocoa-nut  (?),  and  carried  away  and  deposited at  the  foot  of  a  shady  tree,  such  as  a  banana  (or  a pomegranate  ?).
Sometimes  (as  had  been  done  in  the  case  of  a  Malay bride  at  whose  "  tonsure "  I  assisted *),  the  parents
1   Vide  pp.  353-355.  «'»>«•
342  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
make  a  vow  at  a  child's  birth  that  they  will  give  a feast  at  the  tonsure  of  its  hair,  just  before  its  marriage, provided  the  child  grows  up  in  safety.
Occasionally  the  ceremony  of  shaving  the  child's head  takes  place  on  the  44th  day  after  birth,  the  cere- mony being  called  balik  juru.  A  small  sum,  such as  $2.00  or  $3.00,  is  also  sometimes  presented  to  a pilgrim  to  carry  clippings  of  the  child's  locks  to  Mecca and  cast  them  into  the  well  Zemzem,  such  payment being  called  'kekah  ('akekati)  in  the  case  of  a  boy, and  kerban  in  the  case  of  a  girl.1
To  return  to  the  mother.  She  is  bathed  in  hot water  at  8  o'clock  each  morning  for  three  days,  and from  the  day  of  birth  (after  ablution)  she  has  to  under- go the  strangest  ceremony  of  all,  "  ascending  the  roast- ing-place  "  (naik  saleian].  A  kind  of  rough  couch  is prepared  upon  a  small  platform  (saleian},  which  is about  six  feet  in  length,  and  slopes  downwards  towards the  foot,  where  it  is  about  two  feet  above  the  floor. Beneath  this  platform  a  fireplace  or  hearth  (dapor) 2  is constructed,  and  a  "  roaring  fire "  lighted,  which  is
1  Of  the  Pahang  customs  Mr.  Clif-  cents  being  deemed  sufficient  for  each
ford  writes  : —  subsequent  event." — Clifford,   Studies
"  Umat  rushes  off  to  the  most  famous  in  Brown  Hum.,  pp.  47,  48. midwife  in  the  place,  and  presents  her  2  To  each  corner  of  this  hearth  is with  a  little  brass  dish  filled  with  fastened  a  bunch  of  lemon-grass  leaves, smooth  green  sirih  leaves,  and  sixpence  each  of  which  is  separately  charmed  by of  our  money  (25  cents)  in  copper,  for  ejecting  betel-leaf  upon  it  (di-sembor) ; such  is  the  retaining  fee  prescribed  by  at  the  same  time  a  pillow  is  prepared Malay  custom.  The  recipient  of  these  for  it  by  the  insertion  of  a  needle  at treasures  is  thereafter  held  bound  to  each  end.  The  fire  (apt  saleian)  is attend  the  patient  whenever  she  may  be  always  lighted  by  the  Bidan,  and  must called  upon  to  do  so,  and  when  the  never  be  allowed  to  go  out  for  the  whole confinement  is  over  she  can  claim  other  of  the  44  days.  To  light  it  the  Bidan moneys  in  payment  of  her  services.  should  take  a  brand  from  the  house-fire These  latter  fees  are  not  ruinously  high,  (api  dapor),  and  when  it  is  once  pro- according  to  our  standard,  two  dollars  perly  kindled,  nothing  must  be  cooked being  charged  for  attending  a  woman  at  it,  or  the  child  will  suffer.  More- in  her  first  confinement,  a  dollar  or  a  over,  whenever  during  this  same  period dollar  and  a  half  on  the  next  occasion,  there  happens  to  be  a  hen  sitting  on and  twenty-five,  or  at  the  most  fifty  its  eggs  in  the  house,  the  blades  of
vi  ROASTING  THE  MOTHER  343
intended  to  warm  the  patient  to  a  degree  consistent with  Malay  ideas  of  what  is  beneficial !  Custom, which  is  stronger  than  law,  forces  the  patient  to  recline upon  this  couch  two  or  three  times  in  the  course  of the  day,  and  to  remain  upon  it  each  time  for  an  hour or  two.  To  such  extremes  is  this  practice  carried, that  "  on  one  occasion  a  poor  woman  was  brought to  the  point  of  death  .  .  .  and  would  have  died  if  she had  not  been  rescued  by  the  kind  interposition  of  the Civil  Assistant  -  Surgeon ;  the  excessive  excitement caused  by  the  heat  was  so  overpowering  that  aber- ration of  mind  ensued  which  continued  for  several months."1
As  if  this  were  not  enough,  one  of  the  heated  hearth- stones (batu  tungkit)  is  frequently  wrapped  up  in  a piece  of  flannel  or  old  rags,  applied  to  the  patient's stomach  so  as  to  "roast"  her  still  more  effectually. This  "roasting"  custom  is  said  to  continue  for  the whole  of  the  forty-four  days  of  uncleanness.  During this  period  there  are  many  birth -taboos  (pantang beranak]  applying  to  food,  the  following  articles  being usually  forbidden:  (i)  things  which  have  (from  the Malay  point  of  view)  a  lowering  effect  on  the  con- stitution (sagala  yang  sejuk-sejuK],  e.g.  fruits,  with some  exceptions,  and  vegetables ;  (2)  things  which have  a  heating  effect  on  the  blood  (sagala  yang bisa-bisd),  e.g.  the  fish  called  part  (skate),  the  Prickly Fish  (ikan  duri\  and  the  sembilang  (a  kind  of  mud-
weapons,  such  as  daggers  (k'risses)  "  Later,  comes  a  day  when  Selema and  spears,  must  not  be  reset  nearly  loses  her  life  by  reason  of  the in  their  handles  (m/m&a/au)  either  barbarities  which  Malay  science  con- ever  the  hearth-fire  or  the  fire  of  the  siders  necessary  if  a  woman  is  to  win saleian.  through  her  confinement  without  mis-
1  T.  D.  Vaughan  in  vol.  xi.  of  hap."— Clifford,  Stud,  in  Br.  Hum.,
J.I.A.  p.  51.
Cp.  the  following  passage  : —
344  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
fish  with  poisonous  spines  on  both  sides  and  back), and  all  fresh-water  fish  ;  (3)  all  things  which  have  an irritating  effect  on  the  skin  (sagala  yang  gatal-gatal), e.g.  the  fish  called  tenggiri,  and  terubok,  shell-fish, and  the  egg-plant  or  Brinjal,  while  the  fish  called  kurau, g  lama,  senahong,  parang-parang  may  be  eaten,  so long  as  they  are  well  salted  ;  (4)  things  which  are supposed  to  cause  faintness  (sagala  yang  bentan- bentan),  or  swooning  (pengsan),  such,  for  instance,  as uncooked  cocoa-nut  pulp,  gourds  and  cucumbers ;  (5) sugar  (with  the  exception  of  cocoa-nut  sugar),  cocoa- nuts,  and  chillies.1
The  following  description  of  birth  -  taboos  in Pahang,  taken  from  Mr.  H.  Clifford's  Studies  in Brown  Humanity,  will  give  a  good  general  idea  of this  part  of  the  subject : —
"  When  Umat  has  placed  the  sirih  leaves  he  has done  all  he  can  for  Selema,  and  he  resigns  himself to  endure  the  anxiety  of  the  next  few  months  with the  patience  of  which  he  has  so  much  command. The  pantang  ber-dnak,  or  birth-taboos,  hem  a  husband in  almost  as  rigidly  as  they  do  his  wife,  and  Umat, who  is  as  superstitious  as  are  all  the  Malays  of  the lower  classes,  is  filled  with  fear  lest  he  should  unwit- tingly transgress  any  law,  the  breach  of  which  might cost  Selema  her  life.  He  no  longer  shaves  his  head periodically,  as  he  loves  to  do,  for  a  naked  scalp  is very  cool  and  comfortable ;  he  does  not  even  cut  his
1  The  following  methods  are  resorted  paratus,    is  kept;    (b)    the    "rattan"
to  for  the  curing  of  faintness  :  (a)  the  (rotan  s/gn)   "  cure,"  which  is  said  to
patient  is  made  to  smell  (di-isapkan],  consist  in  charring  the  end  of  a  piece  of
first  with  one  and  then  with  the  other  rattan  (rotan   s/ga),  taking  the  burnt
nostril,  the  bottom  of  the  copper    (or  end  in   the   mouth,   and  blowing   the
brass)  receptacle  (pekaporan]  in  which  smoke   into  the  patient's   ear  (di-em-
the  lime,  which  is  one  of  the  invariable  buskan). concomitants  of  the  betel-chewing  ap-
vi  BIRTH  TABOOS  345
hair,  and  a  thick  black  shock  stands  five  inches  high upon  his  head,  and  tumbles  raggedly  about  his  neck and  ears.  Se^Sma  is  his  first  wife,  and  never  before has  she  borne  children,  wherefore  no  hair  of  her husband's  must  be  trimmed  until  her  days  are  ac- complished. Umat  will  not  kill  the  fowls  for  the cook  now,  nor  even  drive  a  stray  dog  from  the  com- pound with  violence,  lest  he  should  chance  to  maim it,  for  he  must  shed  no  blood,  and  must  do  no  hurt to  any  living  thing  during  all  this  time.  One  day he  is  sent  on  an  errand  up-river  and  is  absent  until the  third  day.  On  inquiry  it  appears  that  he  passed the  night  in  a  friend's  house,  and  on  the  morrow found  that  the  wife  of  his  host  was  shortly  expecting to  become  a  mother.  Therefore  he  had  to  remain at  least  two  nights  in  the  village.  Why?  Because if  he  failed  to  do  so,  Selema  would  die.  Why  would she  die  ?  God  alone  knows,  but  such  is  the  teaching of  the  men  of  old,  the  wise  ones  of  ancient  days. But  Umat's  chief  privation  is  that  he  is  forbidden to  sit  in  the  doorway  of  his  house.  To  understand what  this  means  to  a  Malay,  you  must  realise  that the  seat  in  the  doorway,  at  the  head  of  the  stair- ladder  that  reaches  to  the  ground,  is  to  him  much what  the  fireside  is  to  the  English  peasant.  It  is here  that  he  sits  and  looks  out  patiently  at  life,  as the  European  gazes  into  the  heart  of  the  fire.  It  is here  that  his  neighbours  come  to  gossip  with  him, and  it  is  in  the  doorway  of  his  own  or  his  friend's  house that  the  echo  of  the  world  is  borne  to  his  ears.  But, while  Selema  is  ill,  Umat  may  not  block  the  doorway, or  dreadful  consequences  will  ensue,  and  though  he appreciates  this  and  makes  the  sacrifice  readily  for  his wife's  sake,  it  takes  much  of  the  comfort  out  of  his  life.
346  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
"  Selema,  meanwhile,  has  to  be  equally  circum- spect. She  bridles  her  woman's  tongue  resolutely, and  no  word  in  disparagement  of  man  or  beast  passes her  lips  during  all  these  months,  for  she  has  no desire  to  see  the  qualities  she  dislikes  reproduced  in the  child.  She  is  often  tired  to  death  and  faint  and ill  before  her  hour  draws  nigh,  but  none  the  less  she will  not  lie  upon  her  mat  during  the  daytime  lest her  heavy  eyes  should  close  in  sleep,  since  her  child would  surely  fall  a  prey  to  evil  spirits  were  she  to do  so.  Therefore  she  fights  on  to  the  dusk,  and Umat  does  all  he  can  to  comfort  her  and  to  lighten her  sufferings  by  constant  tenderness  and  care."  *
The  medicine  (sambaran  bara),  used  by  the mother  after  her  confinement,  consists  of  the  ashes  of a  burnt  cocoa-nut  shell  pounded  and  mixed  with  a pinch  of  black  pepper  (lada  hitam  sa-jimput\  a  root of  garlic  (bawang  puteh  sa-labuti),  and  enough  vinegar to  make  the  mixture  liquid.  This  potion  is  drunk  for three  consecutive  mornings.  A  bandage  is  swathed about  her  waist,  and  she  is  treated  with  a  cosmetic (bedafc)  manufactured  from  temu  kuning,  which  is pounded  small  (and  mixed  as  before  with  garlic, black  pepper,  and  vinegar),  and  applied  every  morn- ing and  evening  for  the  first  three  days.  During  the next  three  days  a  new  cosmetic  (bedak  kunyit  t'rus) is  applied,  the  ingredients  being  kunyit  frus  pounded and  mixed  in  the  same  way  as  the  cosmetic  just described.
At  the  same  time  the  patient  is  given  a  potion made  from  the  ash  of  burnt  durian  skins  (abu kulit  durian),  mixed  as  before  with  vinegar ;  the  fruit-
1  Clifford,  Stud,  in  Brown  Hum,,  pp.  48-50.
vi  SPECIAL  MEDICINES  347
stalk,  or  "spire,"  of  a  cocoa-nut  palm  (manggar  niyor) being  substituted  if  the  durian  skin  is  not  obtainable.
A  poultice  (iibat  pupok}  is  also  applied  to  the patient's  forehead,  after  the  early  bathing,  during  the "forty-four  days"  of  her  retirement;  it  consists  of leaves  of  the  tahi  babi,  jintan  hitam,  and  garlic, pounded  and  mixed  as  usual  with  vinegar.
After  three  days  an  extraordinary  mixture,  called in  Selangor  the  "  Hundred  Herbs  "  (rempah  'ratus\ but  in  Malacca  merely  "  Pot-herbs  "  (rempah  firioK), is  concocted  from  all  kinds  of  herbs,  roots,  and  spices. The  ingredients  are  put  into  a  large  vessel  of  water and  left  to  soak,  a  portion  of  the  liquor  being  strained off  and  given  to  the  patient  as  a  potion  every  morning for  about  ten  days.  Similar  ingredients  boiled  in  a large  pot,  which  is  kept  hot  by  being  hermetically sealed  (di-getang),  and  by  having  live  embers  placed underneath  it  from  time  to  time,  furnish  the  regular beverage  of  the  patient  up  to  the  time  of  her  puri- fication. After  the  first  fortnight,  however,  the  lees are  extracted  from  the  vessel  and  used  to  compose a  poultice  which  is  applied  to  the  patient's  waist,  a set  of  fresh  ingredients  replacing  the  old  ones.1  It is  sold  for  fifty  cents  a  jar.
On  the  forty -fourth  day  the  raised  platform  or roasting-place  (saleian)  is  taken  down  and  the  cere- mony called  Floor-washing  (basoh  lantei)  takes  place, the  whole  house  being  thoroughly  washed  and  cleaned.
1  The  following  is  the  list  of  actual  chingkeh  pala,  buah  ptlaga,  katumbar,
ingredients  so  far  as  I  could  ascertain  jftnuju  Jawa,  jfmuju  Jk/rsant,   chabti
them  :    bark   of    the  jambus,    stntul,  tali,    chabei   pintal,    changkoh,    sudtt
Wruas,rambutan,kachangkayu,  'Wan,  ayer,  mur  daging,  mur  tulang,  pekak,
dfdap,  pHtaling,  rambei,  laiaang,  kayu  jintan  puteh,  jintan  hitam,  manjakani,
man  is,    strapat,    and  m/mp'las   hari ;  manjarawai   or    mlfnjtlawai  (?),    akar
and    the    following    herbs,    roots,    or  manis,  biji  sawi,  jadam,  puchok  ganti,
spices,     such    as    kunyit    frits,    lada  mesur,  alim,  mustakim,  chuchor  a/a/,
hitam,  baivang  puteh,  ba-wang  merah,  kfmuktts,  and  kadtfkai.
348  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
The  floor  having  been  smeared  with  rice -cosmetic (bedak)  (such  as  the  Malays  use  for  the  bathing ceremony),  it  is  well  scratched  by  the  claws  of  a fowl,  which  is  caught  (and  washed)  for  the  purpose, and  then  held  over  the  floor  and  forced  to  do  the scratching  required  of  it.  The  cosmetic  is  then removed  (di-langir}  by  means  of  lime-juice  (again  as in  the  bathing  ceremony)  and  the  hearth  -  fire  is changed.  The  Bidan  now  receives  her  pay,  usually getting  in  cash  for  the  eldest  child  $4.40  (in  some places  $5.40),  for  the  second,  $3.40,  the  third,  $2.40, and  for  the  fourth,  and  all  subsequent  children,  $1.40; unless  she  is  hastily  summoned  (bidan  tareK)  and  no engagement  (menempali}  has  been  made,  in  which case  she  may  demand  half  a  bhara  ($11).  Besides this  somewhat  meagre  remuneration,  however,  she receives  from  the  well-to-do  (at  the  floor- washing ceremony)  such  presents  as  cast  -  off  clothes  (kain bekas  tuboti),  a  bowl  of  saffron  rice,  a  bowl  of  the rice-cosmetic  and  limes  (bedak  limau],  and  a  platter of  betel  -  leaf,  with  accessories  (cherana  sirilt). Though  the  remuneration  may  appear  small,  it  was, nevertheless,  sure ;  as  in  former  days  an  unwritten law  allowed  her  to  take  the  child  and  "cry  it  for sale"  (di-jaja)  round  the  country,  should  her  fee remain  unpaid.
Before  concluding  the  present  subject  it  will  be necessary  to  describe  certain  specific  injunctions  and taboos  which  form  an  important  part  of  the  vast body  of  Malay  customs  which  centre  specially  round the  birth  of  children.
Before  the  child  is  born  the  father  has  to  be  more than  usually  circumspect  with  regard  to  what  he  does, as  any  untoward  act  on  his  part  would  assuredly  have
vi  INFRINGEMENT  OF  TABOOS  349
a  prejudicial  effect  on  the  child,  and  cause  a  birth- mark or  even  actual  deformity,  any  such  affection being  called  kVnan.  In  a  case  which  came  to  my notice  the  son  was  born  with  only  a  thumb,  forefinger, and  little  finger  on  the  left  hand,  and  a  great  toe  on the  left  foot,  the  rest  of  the  fingers  and  toes  on  the left  side  being  wanting.  This,  I  was  told,  was  due  to the  fact  that  the  father  violated  this  taboo  by  going  to the  fishing-stakes  one  day  and  killing  a  crab  by  chop- ping at  it  with  a  cutlass.
In  former  days  during  this  period  it  was  "taboo" (pantang)  for  the  father  to  cut  the  throat  of  a  buffalo or  even  of  a  fowl ;  or,  in  fact,  to  take  the  life  of  any animal  whatever — a  trace  no  doubt  of  Indian  influ- ences. A  Malay  told  me  once  that  his  son,  soon after  birth,  was  afflicted  with  a  great  obstruction  of breathing,  but  that  when  the  medicine-man  (Pawang) declared  (after  "diagnosing"  the  case)  that  the  child was  suffering  from  a  "  fish-affection  "  (kenan  ikan),  he remembered  that  he  had  knocked  on  the  head  an extraordinary  number  of  fish  which  he  had  caught on  the  very  day  that  his  son  was  born.  He  there- fore, by  the  advice  of  the  medicine -man,  gave  the child  a  potion  made  from  pounded  fish  bones,  and  an immediate  and  permanent  recovery  was  the  result.
Such  affections  as  those  described  are  classified by  the  Malays  according  to  the  kind  of  influence which  is  supposed  to  have  produced  them.  Thus the  unoffending  victim  may  be  either  fish  -  struck (kenan  ikari),  as  described  above,  ape-struck  (kenan b'rok\  dog-struck  (kenan  anjing),  crab-struck  (kZnan ketam),  and  so  forth,  it  being  maintained  that  in every  case  the  child  either  displays  some  physical deformity,  causing  a  resemblance  to  the  animal  by
350  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  CHAP.
which  it  was  affected,  or  else   (and  more  commonly) unconsciously  imitates  its  actions  or  its  "voice."
Another  interesting  custom  was  that  the  father was  stringently  forbidden  to  cut  his  hair  until  after the  birth  of  the  child.
The  following  passage  bearing  on  the  subject  is taken  from  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell's  article  on  the  "  Folk- lore of  the  Malays  "  : l—
"In  selecting  timber  for  the  uprights  of  a  Malay house  care  must  be  taken  to  reject  any  log  which is  indented  by  the  pressure  of  any  parasitic  creeper which  may  have  wound  round  it  when  it  was  a  living tree.  A  log  so  marked,  if  used  in  building  a  house, will  exercise  an  unfavourable  influence  in  childbirth, protracting  delivery  and  endangering  the  lives  of mother  and  child.  Many  precautions  must  be  taken to  guard  against  evil  influence  of  a  similar  kind,  when one  of  the  inmates  of  a  house  is  expecting  to  become a  mother.  No  one  may  '  divide  the  house '  (belah mmati),  that  is,  go  in  at  the  front  door  and  out  at  the back,  or  vice  versa,  nor  may  any  guest  or  stranger  be entertained  in  the  house  for  one  night  only  ;  he  must be  detained  for  a  second  night  to  complete  an  even period.  If  an  eclipse  occur,  the  woman  on  whose account  these  observances  are  necessary  must  be  taken into  the  penangga  (kitchen),  and  placed  beneath  the shelf  or  platform  (para)  on  which  the  domestic  utensils are  kept.  A  spoon  is  put  into  her  hand.  If  these precautions  are  not  taken,  the  child  when  born  will be  deformed."
Sir  W,  E.  Maxwell  in  the  above   is  speaking  of Perak  Malays.     The  passage  just  quoted  applies  to  a
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  p.  19.
vi  PRECAUTIONS  AGAINST  DEMONS  351
great  extent  to  Selangor,  but  with  a  few  discrepancies. Thus  a  house-post  indented  by  a  creeper  is  generally avoided  in  Selangor  for  a  different  reason,  viz.  that  it is  supposed  to  bring  snakes  into  the  house.
"  Dividing  the  house,"  however,  is  generally  con- sidered an  important  birth  -  taboo  in  Selangor,  the threatened  penalty  for  its  non  -  observance  being averted  by  compelling  the  guilty  party  to  submit  to  the unpleasant  ceremony  called  sembor  ayer,  a  member of  the  family  being  required  to  eject  (sembor)  a  mouth- ful of  water  upon  the  small  of  the  culprit's  back.
In  Selangor,  again,  a  guest  must  stay  three  nights (not  two]  in  the  house,  his  departure  on  the  first  or second  night  being  called  "Insulting  the  Night" (menjolok  malam).  To  avert  the  evil  consequences  of such  an  act,  fumigation  (rabun-rabun)  is  resorted  to, the  "  recipe  "  for  it  running  as  follows  : — "  Take  assa- fcetida,  sulphur,  kunyit  frus  (an  evil -smelling  root), onion  skins,  dried  areca-nut  husk,  lemon-grass  leaves, and  an  old  mat  or  cloth,  burn  them,  and  leave  the ashes  for  about  an  hour  at  sunset  on  the  floor  of  the passage  in  front  of  the  door."  That  a  sensible  and self-respecting  "  demon  "  should  avoid  a  house  where such  an  unconscionable  odour  is  raised  is  not  in  the least  surprising !
In  the  event  of  an  eclipse  the  customs  of  the  two sister  States  appear  to  be  nearly  identical ;  the  only difference  being  that  in  Selangor  the  woman  is  placed in  the  doorway  (in  the  moonlight  as  far  as  possible), and  is  furnished  with  the  basket-work  stand  of  a  cook- ing pot,  as  well  as  a  wooden  rice-spoon,  the  former  as  a trap  to  catch  any  unwary  demon  who  may  be  so  foolish as  to  put  his  head  "into  the  noose,"  and  the  latter as  a  weapon  of- offence,  it  being  supposed  that  "the
352  ADOLESCENCE  CHAP.
rattan  binding  of  the  spoon  (which  must,  of  course,  be of  the  orthodox  Malay  pattern)  will  unwind  itself  and entangle  the  assailant "  in  the  case  of  any  real  danger. Finally,  the  Bidan  must  be  present  to  "  massage  "  the woman,  and  repeat  the  necessary  charms.
From  the  following  passage  it  would  appear  that the  corresponding  Pahang  custom  does  not  materially differ  from  that  of  Perak  and  Selangor  : —
"  But  during  the  period  that  the  Moon's  fate  hung in  the  balance,  Selema  has  suffered  many  things.  She has  been  seated  motionless  in  the  fireplace  under  the tray-like  shelf,  which  hangs  from  the  low  rafters, trembling  with  terror  of — she  knows  not  what.  The little  basket-work  stand,  on  which  the  hot  rice-pot  is wont  to  rest,  is  worn  on  her  head  as  a  cap,  and  in  her girdle  the  long  wooden  rice-spoon  is  stuck  dagger-wise. Neither  she  nor  Umat  know  why  these  things  are done,  but  they  never  dream  of  questioning  their  neces- sity. It  is  the  custom.  The  men  of  olden  days  have decreed  that  women  with  child  should  do  these  things when  the  Moon  is  in  trouble,  and  the  consequences  of neglect  are  too  terrible  to  be  risked ;  so  Selema  and Umat  act  according  to  their  simple  faith."1
3.    ADOLESCENCE
Of  the  purely  Malay  ceremonies  performed  at Adolescence,  the  most  important  are  the  "filing  of  the teeth  "  (berasah  gigi}?  and  the  cutting  of  the  first  locks of  hair,  in  cases  where  this  latter  operation  has  been postponed  till  the  child's  marriage  by  a  vow  of  its parents.
1  Clifford,  Stud,  in  Brown  Hum.,  p.  51. 2  Lit.  "  sharpening  ol  the  teeth."
vi  CEREMONIAL  HAIR-CUTTING  353
The  following  is  a  description  of  the  rite  of  tonsure (b$rckukor\  at  which  I  was  present  in  person  :—
"Some  time  ago  (in  1897)  I  received,  through  one of  my  local  Malay  headmen,  an  invitation  to  attend  a tonsure  ceremony.
"When  I  arrived  (about  two  P.M.),  in  company  of the  headman  referred  to,  the  usual  dancing  and  Koran- chanting  was  proceeding  in  the  outer  chamber  or verandah,  which  was  decked  out  for  the  occasion  with the  usual  brilliantly  coloured  ceiling-cloth  and  striped wall-tapestry.  After  a  short  interval  we  were  invited to  enter  an  inner  room,  where  a  number  of  Malays  of both  sexes  were  awaiting  the  performance  of  the  rite. The  first  thing,  however,  that  caught  the  eye  was  a gracefully-draped  figure  standing  with  shrouded  head, and  with  its  back  to  the  company,  upon  the  lowest step  of  the  dais  (grei}>  which  had  been  erected  with a  view  to  the  prospective  wedding  ceremony.  This was  the  bride.  A  dark -coloured  veil,  thrown  over her  head  and  shoulders,  allowed  seven  luxuriant tresses  of  her  wonderful  raven -black  hair  to  escape and  roll  down  below  her  waist,  a  ring  of  precious  metal being  attached  to  the  end  of  each  tress.  Close  to the  bride,  and  ready  to  support  her,  should  she  require it,  in  her  motherly  arms,  stood  the  (on  such  occasions) familiar  figure  of  the  Duenna  (Mak  Inang\  whose duty,  however,  in  the  present  instance  was  confined to  taking  the  left  hand  of  the  bride  between  her  own, and  supporting  it  in  a  horizontal  position  whilst  each of  the  seven  Representatives  (orang  waris) l  in  turn was  sprinkling  it  with  the  '  Neutralising  Rice- paste  '  (tepong  tawar)  by  means  of  the  usual  bunch
1  Lit.    "  heirs "   (warith),   but  often,  as   here,  used    in    the   sense  of  repre- sentative members  of  the  family.
2  A
354  ADOLESCENCE  CHAP.
or  brush  of  leaves.  A  little  in  front  of  this  pair stood  a  youth  supporting  in  his  hands  an  unhusked cocoa-nut  shell.  The  crown  of  this  cocoa-nut  had been  removed,  and  the  edges  at  the  top  cut  in  such a  way  as  to  form  a  chevroned  or  '  dog-tooth '  border. Upon  the  indentations  of  this  rim  was  deposited  a necklace,  and  a  large  pair  of  scissors  about  the  size of  a  tailor's  shears  were  stuck  point  downwards  in the  rim.  The  cocoa-nut  itself  was  perhaps  half-filled with  its  'milk.'  Close  to  this  youth  stood  another, supporting  one  of  the  usual  circular  brass  trays (with  high  sides)  containing  all  the  ordinary  acces- sories of  the  tepong  tawar  ceremony,  i.e.  a  bowl  of rice-paste,  a  brush  of  leaves,  parched  rice,  washed saffron-stained  rice,  and  benzoin  or  incense.
"  I  was  now  requested  to  open  the  proceedings, but  at  my  express  desire  the  Penghulu  (Malay  head- man) did  so  for  me,  first  scattering  several  handfuls (of  the  different  sorts  of  rice)  over  the  bride,  and then  sprinkling  the  rice-paste  upon  the  palm  of  her left  hand,  which  was  held  out  to  receive  it  as  described above.  \  The  sprinkling  over,  he  took  the  scissors  and with  great  deliberation  severed  the  end  of  the  first lock,  which  was  made  to  fall  with  a  little  splash,  and with  the  ring  attached  to  it,  into  the  cocoa-nut  with the  '  dog-tooth  '  border.
"  Five  other  waris  (Representatives)  and  myself followed  suit,  the  seven  tresses  with  the  rings  attached to  them  being  all  received  in  the  cocoa-nut  as  described.
"  A  child  of  the  age  of  about  two  or  three  years underwent  the  tonsure  at  the  same  time,  each  of  the Representatives,  after  severing  the  bride's  lock,  snip- ping off  a  portion  of  the  child's  hair.  The  child  was in  arms  and  was  not  veiled,  but  wore  a  shoulder-cloth
vi  CEREMONIAL  TOOTH-FILING  355
(bidak)  thrown  over  his  shoulder.  At  the  conclusion of  the  ceremony  we  left  the  room,  and  the  Koran- chanting  was  resumed  and  continued  until  the  arrival of  the  bridegroom  in  procession  (at  about  five  P.M.), when  the  bride  and  bridegroom  went  through  the ceremony  of  being  '  seated  side  by  side '  (ber sanding), and  the  business  of  the  day  was  concluded.
"The  cocoa-nut  containing  the  severed  tresses  and rings  is  carried  to  the  foot  of  a  barren  fruit-tree  (e.g. a  pomegranate-tree),  when  the  rings  are  extracted  and the  water  (with  the  severed  locks)  poured  out  at  the tree's  foot,  the  belief  being  that  this  proceeding  will make  the  tree  as  luxuriant  as  the  hair  of  the  person shorn,  a  very  clear  example  of  'sympathetic  magic.' If  the  parents  are  poor,  the  cocoa-nut  is  generally turned  upside  down  and  left  there ;  but  if  they  are well-to-do,  the  locks  are  usually  sent  to  Mecca  in charge  of  a  pilgrim,  who  casts  them  on  his  arrival into  the  well  Zemzem."
I  will  now  describe  the  ceremony  of  filing  or "sharpening"  the  teeth,  from  notes  taken  by  myself during  the  actual  ceremony  (2Oth  March,  1897).
The  youth  whose  teeth  I  saw  filed  must  have been  quite  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  of  age,  and  had not  long  before  undergone  the  rite  of  circumcision. When  I  arrived  I  found  the  house  newly  swept  and clean,  and  all  the  accessories  of  the  ceremony  already prepared.  These  latter  consisted  of  a  round  tray (dulang)  containing  the  usual  bowl  of  rice  -  paste (tepong  tawar),  with  the  brush  of  leaves,1  three  cups (containing  different  sorts  of  rice),  an  egg,2  three  rings
1  The  leaf-brush  in   this  case  con-       sZlaguri,  and  was  bound  up  with  ribu- sisted  of  leaves  of  the  sapfnoh,  puhtt-       ribu  (a  kind  of  creeper). /«/«/,    sapanggil,    sambau    dara,    and  2  Into  this  egg,  it  is  supposed,  all
356  ADOLESCENCE  CHAP.
of  precious  metals  (gold,  silver,  and  amalgam),  a couple  of  limes,  and  two  small  files  (to  which  a  small tooth-saw  and  two  small  whetstones  should  be  added).1 The  ceremony  now  commences  :  the  tooth -filer (Pawang  gigi)  first  scatters  the  three  sorts  of  rice  and sprinkles  the  tepong  tawar  upon  his  instruments, etc.,  repeating  the  proper  charm 2  at  the  same  time ; the  patient  meanwhile,  and  throughout  the  operation, reclining  upon  his  back  on  the  floor  with  his  head resting  on  a  pillow.  Next  the  Pawang,  sitting beside  the  patient,  "touches"  the  patient's  teeth,  first with  each  of  the  three  rings  of  precious  metal  and then  with  the  egg,  throwing  each  of  these  objects away  as  he  does  so,  and  repeating  each  time  a  charm (Hu,  kata  Allah,  d.  s.  &.),  which  is  given  in  the Appendix.  Next  he  props  open  (di  -  sengkang)  the patient's  mouth  by  means  of  a  dried  areca-nut, and  repeats  another  charm  (Hei,  Bismi)  in  order  to destroy  the  "  venom "  of  the  steel,  laying  the  file upon  the  teeth,3  and  drawing  it  thrice  across them  at  the  end  of  the  charm.  He  then  cuts off  (di-k'rat)  the  crowns  of  the  teeth  (with  one
evil    influences    proceeding    from    the  (badi)   issues    from    the  teeth.       This
teeth  enter.     Hence  it  is  regarded  after  dulang-dulang  is  valued  at  a  quarter
the  ceremony  as  sial  (unlucky),   and  of  a  dollar,  and  is  taken  as  part  pay-
cannot  be  eaten — indeed  it  is  considered  ment  of  the  tooth-filer's  services,  or  it
"bad"  (t?mtf lang).  may  be  retained  by  the    householder
1  Besides    the    tray    containing    the  when  the  full  fee  of  fifty  cents  is  paid,
articles  described,  there  stood  at  one  This      dulang  -  dulang      is     thought,
side    of    the    room    what   is    called    a  moreover,    to    dispel    evil    influences
dulang-dulang.      This    consists    of   a  (membuang  sial),   the    hank    of  yarn
tray  full  of  unhusked  rice  surmounted  by  being  used  by  the  Pawang  to  wipe  his
a  tray  full  of  husked  rice  and  a  roughly-  eyes  should  any  harm  to  them  accrue
husked  cocoa-nut  (niyor gubalan)  which  from    evil    influences    residing    in    the
rests  upon  the  latter.  The  pc of  the  cocoa-nut  referred  to  is by  a  hank  of  "Java"  threac Jaiva),  which  is  said  to  avert the  tooth  -  filer's  eyes  whei
inted  top  teeth.       Such    evil    influences    (badi),
Sr circled  however,  can  only  accrue  when  people
nang  are  having  their  teeth  filed  for  the  first
ry  to  time  (orang  bttngaran).
as  2    Vide  App.  cli.
sometimes  happens,  the  evil  influence  3   Vide  App.  cliii.
vi  OMENS  FROM  TOOTH- FILING  357
of  the  files),  smooths  their  edges  (di-papar)  with one  of  the  whetstones,  and  polishes  them  (mtlechek). During  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  performance, which  is  a  trying  ordeal  to  witness,  although  it  is borne  with  the  utmost  fortitude  on  the  part  of  the sufferer,  the  latter  holds  a  small  mirror  in  front  of  his mouth  in  order  to  be  assured  that  the  operation  is progressing  to  his  satisfaction.  When  the  actual filing  is  over,  the  areca-nut  is  extracted,  and  a  piece of  cocoa-nut  husk  or  small  block  of  pulai  wood inserted  in  its  stead,  in  order  to  facilitate  the  proper polishing  of  the  now  mutilated  teeth.  This  latter part  of  the  operation  is  accomplished  by  means  of the  file,  a  small  piece  of  folded  white  cloth  protecting the  lips  from  injury.
Considerable  interest  attaches  to  the  filing  of  the first  tooth,  on  account  of  the  omens  which  are  taken from  the  position  in  which  the  crown  happens  to  lie when  it  falls.  If,  when  the  tooth  is  filed  through,  the crown  adheres  to  the  file,  it  is  taken  as  a  sign  that the  patient  will  die  at  home  ;  if  it  flies  off  and  lies with  its  edge  turned  upwards,  this  means,  on  the  con- trary, that  he  will  die  abroad.
At  the  conclusion  of  the  operation  a  species  of poultice  (ubat  tasafc),  consisting  mainly  of  cooked ginger  (halia  bara  di-pahis-ki\  which  is  intended  to "deaden  (the  feeling  of)  the  gums"  (matikan  daging g^ls^)  is  duly  charmed *  and  applied  to  the  gums  of the  jaw  which  happens  to  be  under  treatment.  The Pawang  now  lays  one  hand  (the  left)  on  the  top  of the  patient's  head  and  the  other  upon  the  teeth  of the  upper  jaw,  and  presses  them  together  with  a  show of  considerable  force,  making  believe,  as  it  were,  that
1    Vide  App.  civ.
358  ADOLESCENCE  CHAP.
he  is  pressing  the  patient's  upper  teeth  firmly  into  their sockets.  Finally,  a  portion  of  betel -leaf  is  charmed (with  the  charm  Hong  sarangin,  etc.)  and  given  to the  patient  to  chew,  after  which,  it  is  asserted,  all pain  immediately  ceases.  The  Pawang  then  washes his  hands,  resharpens  his  tools,  and  those  present  sit down  to  a  meal  of  saffron-stained  pulut  rice.  This concludes  the  ceremony  for  the  day,  the  lower  jaw being  similarly  treated  upon  a  subsequent  occasion.
In  the  course  of  three  such  operations  (the  Pawang informed  me)  the  teeth  can  be  filed  down  even  with the  gums,  in  which  case  they  are,  I  believe,  in  some instances  somewhat  roughly  plated  or  cased  with  gold. Sometimes,  however,  they  are  merely  filed  into  points, so  that  they  resemble  the  teeth  of  a  shark.1  Very frequently,  too,  they  blacken  them  with  a  mixture  of the  empyreumatic  oil  of  the  cocoa-nut  shell  (baja  or grang)  and  kamunting  (Kl.  karamunting]  wood,2 which  is  also  used  for  blackening  the  eyebrows. These  customs,  however,  are  already  dying  out  in the  more  civilised  Malay  States.
1  "  Both  sexes  have  the  extraordinary  applied  the  filing  does  not,  by  destroy  -
custom  of  filing  and  otherwise  disfigur-  ing  what  we  term  the  enamel,  diminish
ing    their    teeth,   which    are    naturally  the  whiteness  of  the  teeth.   .  .   .  The
very    white    and    beautiful,    from    the  great  men  sometimes  set  theirs  in  gold
simplicity    of  their    food.       For   files  by  casing  with  a  plate  of  that  metal  the
they  make   use   of  small   whetstones,  under  row ;   and  this  ornament,  con-
and    the  patients    lie    on    their    backs  trasted  with    the    black   dye,   has,   by
during  the  operation.      Many,  particu-  lamp  or  candle  light,  a  very  splendid
larly    the    women    of    the    Lampong  effect.    It  is  sometimes  indented  to  the
country,  have  their  teeth  rubbed  down  shape  of  the  teeth,  but  more  usually
quite  even  with  the  gums  ;  others  have  quite  plain.     They  do  not  remove  it
them  formed  in  points,  and  some  file  either  to  eat  or  sleep."— Marsden, //&/.
off  no  more  than  the  outer  coat  and  of  Sumatra  (ed.  1811),  pp.  52,  53. extremities  in  order  that  they  may  the  2  The  oil  used   for  this  purpose  is
better  receive  and  retain  the  jetty  black-  also  obtained  by  burning  the  leaves  of
ness  with  which  they  almost  universally  the  lime-tree  (Clifford  and  Swett.,  Mai.
adorn  them.     The  black  used  on  these  Diet.,  s.v.  Baja)  or  (in   Selangor)  the
occasions  is  the  empyreumatic  oil  of  the  wood    of  certain    trees,    such    as    the
cocoa  -  nut    shell.     When   this   is    not  jambu  biawas  and  meSpoyan.
vi  EAR- BORING  359
Whenever  I  made  inquiries  as  to  the  reason  of this  strange  custom,  I  was  invariably  told  that  it  not only  beautified  but  preserved  the  teeth  from  the  action of  decay,  which  the  Malays  believe  to  be  set  up  by  the presence  of  a  minute  maggot  or  worm  (ulat),  their  most usual  way  of  expressing  the  fact  that  they  are  suffering from  toothache  being  to  say  that  the  tooth  in  question is  being  "eaten  by  a  maggot"  (di-makan  ulaf).
The  "  Batak  "  Malays  (a  Mid-Sumatran  tribe,  many of  whom  have  settled  in  Kuala  Langat)  are  said  to chip  the  teeth  of  their  children  into  the  desired  shape by  the  use  of  a  small  chisel,  the  operation  causing  such exquisite  agony  that  the  sufferer  will  not  unfrequently leap  to  his  feet  with  a  shriek.
Even  when  the  file  is  used,  the  work  of  an  unskilful performer  (who  does  not  know  how  to  destroy  the "venom"  of  his  instruments)  will  cause  the  sufferer's face  to  be  completely  swollen  up  (bakup]  for  a  long period  subsequent  to  the  operation.  Yet  young  people of  both  sexes  cheerfully  submit  to  the  risk  of  this discomfort,  and  the  only  remark  made  by  the  youth whom  I  saw  undergoing  it  was  that  it  "  made  his  mouth feel  uncomfortable  "  (jelejek  rasa  mulut-nya).
The  ear-boring  ceremony  (bertindek)  appears  to have  already  lost  much  of  its  ceremonial  character  in Selangor,  where  I  was  told  that  it  is  now  usually  per- formed when  the  child  is  quite  small,  i.e.  at  the  earliest, when  the  child  is  some  five  or  seven  months  old,  and  when it  is  about  a  year  old  at  the  latest,  whereas  in  Sumatra (according  to  Marsden)  it  is  not  performed  until  the child  is  eight  or  nine.1  Still,  however,  a  special  kind
1  "  At  the  age  of  about  eight  or  nine  monies  that  must  necessarily  precede they  bore  the  ears  and  file  the  teeth  of  their  marriage.  The  former  they  call the  female  children  ;  which  are  cere-  betendt,  and  the  latter  bedabong ;  and
360  ADOLESCENCE  CHAP.
of  round  ear-ring,  which  is  of  filagree-work,  and  is called  subang,  is  as  much  the  emblem  of  virginity  in the  western  States  as  it  ever  was.  The  "discarding" of  these  ear-rings  (tanggal  subang],  which  should  take place  about  seven  days  after  the  conclusion  of  the marriage  rites,  is  ceremonial  in  character,  and  it  is  even the  custom  when  a  widow  (janda)  is  married  for  the second  time,  to  provide  her  with  a  pair  of  subang (which  should,  however,  it  is  said,  be  tied  on  to  her ears  instead  of  being  inserted  in  the  ear-holes,  as  in  the case  of  a  girl  who  has  never  been  married).
The  rite  of  circumcision  is  of  course  common  to Muhammadans  all  over  the  world.  Some  analogous practices,  however,  have  also  been  noticed  among  the non-Muhammadan  Malayan  races  of  the  Eastern Archipelago,  and  it  is  at  least  doubtful  whether  cir- cumcision as  now  practised  by  Malays  is  a  purely Muhummadan  rite.  Among  Malays  it  is  performed by  a  functionary  called  the  "Mudim,"1  with  a  slip of  bamboo,  at  any  age  (in  the  case  of  boys) from  about  six  or  seven  up  to  about  sixteen  years, the  wound  being  often  dressed  (at  least  in  town districts)  with  fine  clay  mixed  with  soot  and  the yolk  of  eggs,  but  when  possible,  the  clay  is  mixed with  cocoa-nut  fibre  (rabok  niyor),  selumur  paku  uban, and  the  young  shoots  of  the  Klat  plantain  {puchok pisang  Klat\  the  compound  being  called  in  either  case
these  operations  are  regarded  in   the  a  rivet  or  nut  screwed  to  the  inner
family  as  the  occasion  of  a  festival.    They  part." — Marsden,    Hist,    of   Sumatra
do  not  here,  as  in  some  of  the  adjacent  (ed.  181 1),  p.  53.
islands  (of  Nias  in  particular),  increase  x  The   formula  (shahadat)  used   by
the  aperture  of  the  ear  to  a  monstrous  the  Mudim  (tukang  memotong)  runs  as
size,  so  as  in  many  instances  to  be  large  follows  : —
enough  to  admit  the  hand,  the  lower  "  Ashahadun   la-ilaha-illa-'llak    wa
parts   being  stretched   till   they   touch  ashahadun  Muhammad  al-Rasul  Allah
the    shoulders.      Their    ear-rings    are  allahumma   aja'lni    mina    U-taivabina
mostly  of  gold  filagree,  and  fastened,  wa  aja'lni  mina  '  l-matatakirrina."
not  with  a  clasp,  but  in  the  manner  of
vi  PROTECTIVE  CHARMS  361
ubat  tasak.  The  ceremony  is  associated  with  the common  purificatory  rite  called  tepong  tawar,  and with  ayer  tolak  bala  (lit.  evil-dispelling  water).  Lights are  kept  burning  in  the  house  for  several  days  ("until the  wound  has  healed  "),  and  the  performance  of  the ceremony  is  always  made  the  occasion  for  a  banquet, together  with  music  and  dancing  of  the  kind  in  which Malays  take  so  much  delight.  The  cause  of  these rejoicings  is  dressed  for  the  occasion  "like  a  bride- groom" (pengantin),  and  is  said  to  be  sometimes  carried in  procession.
4.  PERSONAL  CEREMONIES  AND  CHARMS
Ceremonies  and  charms  for  protecting  or  render- ing the  person  more  attractive  or  formidable,  form one  of  the  largest,  but  not  perhaps  the  most  inter- esting or  important  division  of  the  medicine-man's repertory.
The  following  remarkable  specimen  of  the  charms belonging  to  the  first  of  these  classes  was  given  me by  'Che  'Abas  of  Klanang  in  Selangor,  a  Kelantan Malay  :—
"  If  the  corpse  in  the  grave  should  speak, And  address  people  on  earth, May  I  be  destroyed  by  any  beast  that  has  life, But  if  the  corpse  in  the  grave  do  not  speak, And  address  people  on  earth,
May  I  not  be  destroyed  by  any  beast  that  has  life,  or  by  any foe  or  peril,  or  by  any  son  of  the  human  race.
And  if  the  chicken  in  the  egg  should  crow, And  call  to  chickens  on  earth, May  I  be  destroyed  by  any  beast  that  has  life, But  if  the  chicken  in  the  egg  do  not  crow,"
(etc.  etc.,  as  before.)
As  a  general  rule,  however,  this  particular  class  of
362  PERSONAL  CHARMS  CHAP.
charms  shows  particularly  strong  traces  of  Arabic influence,  most  often,  perhaps,  taking  the  form  of  an injunction  (addressed  to  Jins  or  Angels)  to  watch  over the  person  of  the  petitioner.
To  rightly  understand  charms  of  the  second  class, which  includes  Bathing  and  Betel-charming  charms,1  we must  have  some  idea  of  the  Malay  standard  of  beauty. This,  I  need  hardly  say,  differs  widely  from  that  enter- tained by  Europeans.  In  the  case  of  manly  beauty we  should,  perhaps,  be  able  to  acquiesce  to  some extent  in  the  admiration  which  Malays  express  for "Brightness  of  Countenance"  (ckakia),  which  forms one  of  the  chief  objects  of  petition  in  almost  every one  of  this  class  of  charms  ; 2  but  none  of  our  modern Ganymedes  would  be  likely  to  petition  for  a  "  voice like  the  voice  of  the  Prophet  David  "  ; 3  or  a  "  coun- tenance like  the  countenance  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  "  ; still  less  would  he  be  likely  to  petition  for  a  tongue "curled  like  a  breaking  wave,"  or  "a  magic  serpent," or  for  teeth  "like  a  herd  of  (black)  elephants,"  or for  lips  "like  a  procession  of  ants."4
Malay  descriptions  of  female  beauty  are  no  less curious.  The  "  brow  "  (of  the  Malay  Helen,  for  whose sake  a  thousand  desperate  battles  are  fought  in  Malay romances)  "is  like  the  one-day-old  moon,"5  her  eye- brows resemble  "pictured  clouds,"6  and  are  "arched like  the  fighting-cock's  (artificial)  spur,"7  her  cheek resembles  "  the  sliced-off-cheek  of  a  mango,"8  her  nose "an  opening  jasmine  bud,"9  her  hair  the  "  wavy blossom-shoots  of  the  areca-palm,"10  slender11  is  her
1  Some  of  these   charms   are   also  7  B?ntok  taji. Love-charms,  vide  App.  clxv.  8  Pauh  di-layang.
2  Vide  App.  clxiii.      3  Ibid.     *  Ibid.  9  Kuntum  mflor  belum  k?mbang. 6  Sa-hari  bulan.                                             10  Ikal  mayang.
6  Arvan  di-tulis.  u  Jinjang.
vi  BEAUTIFYING  CHARMS  363
neck,  "with  a  triple  row  of  dimples,"1  her  bosom ripening,2  her  waist  "lissom  as  the  stalk  of  a  flower,"1 her  head  "of  a  perfect  oval"  (lit.  bird's-egg-shaped), her  fingers  like  the  leafy  "spears  of  lemon-grass,"4  or the  "quills  of  the  porcupine,"5  her  eyes  "like  the splendour  of  the  planet  Venus,"0  and  her  lips  "like the  fissure  of  a  pomegranate."7
The  following  is  a  specimen  of  an  invocation  for beautifying  the  person  which  is  supposed  to  be  used by  children  : —
"  The  light  of  four  Suns,  five  Moons, And  the  seven  Stars  be  visible  in  my  eye. The  brightness  of  a  shooting  star  be  upon  my  chin, And  that  of  the  full  moon  be  upon  my  brows. May  my  lips  be  like  unto  a  string  of  ants, My  teeth  like  to  a  herd  of  elephants, My  tongue  like  a  breaking  wave, My  voice  like  the  voice  of  the  Prophet  David, My  countenance  like  the  countenance  of  the  Prophet  Joseph, My  brightness  like  the  brightness  of  the  Prophet  Muhammad, By  virtue  of  my  using  this  charm   that  was  coeval  with  my
birth, And  by  grace  of  '  There  is  no  god  but  God,' "  etc.
When  personal  attractions  begin  to  wane  with  the lapse  of  years,  invocations  are  resorted  to  for  the purpose  of  restoring  the  petitioner's  lost  youth.  In one  of  the  invocations  referred  to  (which  is  said  to have  been  used  by  the  Princess  of  Mount  Ophir, Tuan  Putri  Gunong  Ledang,  to  secure  perpetual youth),  the  petitioner  boasts  that  he  (or  she)  was  "  born under  the  Inverted  Banyan  Tree,"  and  claims  the granting  of  the  boon  applied  for  "by  virtue  of  the  use of  the  "  Black  Lenggundi  Bush,"  which  when  it  has
1  Gttak  (Mlak)  tiga.  «  Duri  landak.
8  Bidang.  c  Qhahia  bintang  Zuhrah.
3  Ramping  saptrti  tangkei  bunga.  7  Dalima  mfrkah.
*   Tombak  strai.
364  BETROTHAL  CHAP.
died,  returns  to  life  again,"  1  the  idea  being,  no  doubt, that  a  judicious  use  of  black  magic  will  enable  the petitioner  to  "live  backwards."
The  third  class  of  invocations,  for  rendering  the person  formidable,  belong  rather  to  the  chapter  on war,  under  which  heading  they  will  be  included.
5.    BETROTHAL
Betrothal  is  called  tunangan  or  pinangan.  When the  parents  of  a  marriageable  youth  perceive  a  suitable "match"  for  their  son,  they  send  a  messenger  to  her parents  to  ask  if  she  has  yet  been  "  bespoken  "  (kalau ada  orang  sebuf}.  If  the  reply  is  satisfactory,  the messenger  is  again  despatched  to  intimate  the  desire of  the  youth's  parents  to  "bespeak"  the  hand  of  the favoured  individual  for  his  son,  and  to  arrange  a  day for  a  meeting.  These  preliminaries  are  accompanied by  the  usual  polite  self-depreciation  on  both  sides. Thus,  the  girl's  father  begins  by  saying,  "  You  wish  to bespeak  the  hand  of  my  daughter,  who  knows  neither how  to  cook  nor  how  to  sew "  (yang  tdtaku  masak, tdtahu  menjait\  But  the  custom  is  not  carried  to  such extremes  as  it  is  in  China.2
1  Vide  App.  clxxv.  I  know  not  whether  good  luck  or  calamity
will  follow  it,
2  The   youth's   representatives    had  But  my  heart  turns  towards  you." further  the  right  to  interview  the  girl,  Here  one  of  the  girl's  representatives and  personally  assure  themselves  that  says,  ' '  Look  well  at  this  buffalo-calf  of she  was  "  without  blemish  and  without  mine  that  has  been  allowed  to  forage spot."     This  interview  passed  by  the  for  itself.      Maybe  its  coat  is  torn,  its name  of  the  "  Inspection  of  the  Buffalo-  limbs  broken,  or  its  sight  lost."     The calf,"  and  was  conducted  somewhat  as  youth's  representative,   if  all  is  satis- follows : — When  the  youth's  representa-  factory,  then  replies —
tives  (the  Wooing  Party)  go  to  inspect  «The  sun  being  so  high,
the  girl,  one  of  them  says —  The  buffalo-calf  will  die  if  tethered  ;
This  long  while  have  I  been  prosecuting
"  See  how  fruitful  are  the  satela  yams,  my  search,
Where  the  hills  of   Bantan  rise  by  the  But  not  till  to-day  did  I  meet  with  what  I
sea ;  wanted."
8  £
\i  CUSTOMS  AT  BETROTHAL  365
The  girl's  parents  next  call  four  or  five  witnesses (saksi)  of  either  sex  to  "witness"  the  betrothal,  and after  preparing  a  meal  (nasi  dan  kuek]  for  their expected  guests,  await  the  arrival  of  the  youth's "  Representatives,"  the  youth  himself  remaining  at home.  One  of  the  party  carries  a  betel-leaf  tray furnished  with  the  usual  betel-chewing  appliances, together  with  half  a  bhara  of  dollars  ($11)  according to  the  stricter  custom ;  although  (failing  the  dollars), a  ring  or  bracelet,  or  other  jewellery  of  that  value,  may be  substituted.
Bearing  these  presents  with  them,  the  youth's  re- presentatives proceed  to  the  house  of  the  girl's  parents, where  they  are  invited  to  enter  and  partake  of  the betel-leaf  provided  for  them.  A  meal  is  then  served, Malay  cakes  (kueh-kueK)  brought  forward,  and  the company  again  partake  of  betel.
The  two  parties  now  sit  down  in  a  "family  circle," and  one  of  the  youth's  representatives  pushes  forward (di-sorongkan)  the  betel  which  they  had  brought  with them,  and  offers  it  to  the  people  of  the  house,  saying, "  This  is  a  pledge  of  your  daughter's  betrothal."  The girl's  father  replies,  "Be  it  so,  I  accept  it,"  or  words  to that  effect,  and  inquires  how  long  the  engagement  is to  last,  the  answer  being  "  six  months  "  or  "  a  year  "  as the  case  may  be.  Both  parties  then  appeal  to  the witnesses  to  "hear  what  is  said,"  and  the  youth's  rela- tives return  to  their  homes.
The  marriage  portion  being  fixed  (in  Selangor)  by an  almost  universal  custom  at  two  bharas  of  dollars ($44),  the  amount  is  not  usually  mentioned  at  the  be- trothal, it  being  understood  that  the  usual  amount  is intended.  But  if  the  girl's  parents  should  afterwards prove  reluctant  to  proceed  with  the  match,  they
366  BETROTHAL  CHAP.
forfeit  twice  the  amount  of  the  pledge  -  money which  they  have  received ;  whereas  if  the  youth  re- fuses to  proceed  he  merely  forfeits  the  pledge-money ($i  i)  already  paid  to  the  girl's  parents.  Some  families pay  a  marriage  portion  of  $30  only,  and  others  (such as  the  family  of  'Toh  Kaya  Kechil  of  Klang)  pay as  much  as  $50,  but  exceptions  are  rare,  $44  being now  generally  recognised  as  the  customary  wedding portion.
However,  the  girl's  family  does  not  really  receive anything  like  the  full  value  of  the  $44,  because  if  the $44  is  paid  in  full  the  proposer  has  a  right  to  de- mand a  complete  outfit  (persalinan)  of  silk  attire,  to the  value  of  about  $20,  so  that  the  amount  which actually  changes  hands  is  seldom  more  than  about
The  Malay  fiancde,  unlike  her  European  sister,  is at  the  utmost  pains  to  keep  out  of  her  lover's  way,  and to  attain  this  object  she  is  said  to  be  "  as  watchful  as  a tiger."  No  engagement-ring  is  used  in  this  neigh- bourhood, no  priest  (or  Lebai)  is  present  at  the engagement  ceremony,  nor  is  the  girl  asked  for  her consent.  On  the  other  hand,  a  regular  system  of  ex- changing presents,  after  the  engagement,  is  said  to have  been  formerly  in  vogue  in  Selangor,  the  man sending  betel-leaf,  fruit,  and  eggs  to  his  fiancee  from time  to  time  in  net-work  receptacles,  and  the  woman sending  specially  prepared  rice,  etc.  in  rush-work  re- ceptacles of  various  patterns.  It  is  said,  too,  that  the woman  would  occasionally  carve  a  chain,  consisting  of three  or  four  links,  out  of  a  single  areca-nut,  in  which case  the  prospective  bridegroom  was  supposed  to  re- deem it  by  the  payment  of  as  many  dollars  as  there were  links.  The  betel-nut  presented  on  these  occa-
11
Jl
-    V
8P-S
II
O     i
»J
p
s  <*
U      '/!
«  s
ll s'-si
vi  BETROTHAL  VERSES  367
sions  would  be  wrapped  up  in  a  gradation  of  three beautifully  worked  cloths,  not  unlike  "  D'oyleys " in  general  appearance,  whilst  the  actual  engagement ceremony  in  former  days  is  said  to  have  received  ad- ditional interest  and  formality  from  the  recital  of  verses appropriate  to  the  occasion  by  chosen  representatives of  each  party.  Specimens  of  the  betrothal  verses  for- merly used  in  Selangor  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix. The  following  is  a  translation  :—
"  Q.  Small  is  my  cottage,  but  it  has  five  shelves For  roasting  the  kerisi  fish  ; Hearken,  good  people,  whilst  I  inquire  of  you What  is  the  price  of  your  Diamond l  here  ?
A.  Your  fishing-line  must  be  five  fathoms  long If  you  would  catch  the  tenggiri  fish  ; Seven  tahils,  a  kati,  and  five  laksa? That  is  the  price  of  our  Diamond  here.
Q.  If  there  are  no  rengas  trees  growing  on  the  Point, One  must  go  up-stream  and  cut  down  a  screw-palm  ; If  one  has  not  gold  in  one's  girdle, One  must  make  over  one's  person  to  begin  with.
A.  If  there  are  no  rengas  trees  growing  on  the  Point,
You  must  take  banyan-wood  for  the  sides  of  your  trays ;
If  you  have  no  gold  in  your  girdle,
You  need  not  hope  to  get  Somebody's  daughter.
Q.  Thousands  are  the  supports  required
For  the  stem  of  the  sago-palm  to  recline  upon ;  3 Though*  it  be  thousands  I  would  accept  the  debt So  I  be  betrothed  to  Somebody's  daughter.
1   Diamond,  i.e.  the  girl  about  whom  cal  expression  =  sa-ktti  lima  laksa,  i.e.
T^e  wooing  party  has  come  to  treat.  150,000  cash  (pitis).      Vide  Kl.   sub
'2  The  kati  is  the  "  Indian  "  pound  voce.
(ij  pound  avoir.),  and  the  tahil  is  its  3  i.e.    when  the  sago  is  being  ex- sixteenth  part.     The  phrase  sakati  lima  traded  from  the  stem, is'explained  by  Klinkert  as  an  ellipti-
368  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
A.  My  head-kerchief  has  fallen  into  the  sea, And  with  it  has  fallen  my  oar-ring  ; l I  stretch  out  my  hand  in  token  of  acceptance, Though  I  have  naught  wherewith  to  requite  you.
Q,  Oar-ring  or  no,
The  lenggundi  bush  grows  apace  in  the  thatch  channels.
Whether  it  is  well  to  go  slowly  or  no,
It  is  the  favour  you  have  shown  me  that  subdues  my  heart."
If,  however,  there  is  a  hitch  in  the  proceedings,  and the  parties  commence  to  lose  their  temper,  the  stanzas may  end  very  differently  ;  for  instance,  the  girl's  father or  representative  will  say  :—
"A.  My  lord  has  gone  up-stream
To  get  his  clothes  and  wash  out  the  dye.2
If  that  is  all,  let  it  alone  for  the  present ;
If  there  is  anything  else  you  will  always  find  me  ready.
Q.  'Che  Dol  Amat's  mango-tree
When  it  fell  rolled  into  the  swamp.
If  I  cannot  get  what  I  want  by  peaceful  means,
Look  that  you  be  not  hit  in  the  war  of  strategy.
A .  If  the  rim  is  not  properly  fitted  to  the  rice-box,8 Let  us  get  saffron-rice  and  roast  a  fowl. If  I  cannot  get  you  to  make  acknowledgment, Let  Heaven  reel  and  Earth  be  submerged."
These  last  two  lines  constitute  a  direct  challenge, and  no  more  words  need  be  wasted  when  once  they have  been  uttered.
6.    MARRIAGE
When  the  term  of  betrothal  is  drawing  to  its  close, a  suitable  day  (which  is  frequently  a  Tuesday)  is
1  The  native  substitute  for  a  rowlock.       merely  a  longer  form  of  biku),  not  ap-
2  y  •.    •    j-  pearing  in  any  dictionary.     The  next
line  also  is  not  quite  clear,  but  it  would
•"  This  line  is  obscure,  the  word  appear  to  mean  "  let  us  make  sacrifice," "  bingku  "  (which  I  have  translated  rim,  rice  stained  with  saffron  being  always on  the  supposition  that  it  may  be  used  sacrificially.
VI
MARRIAGE  CUSTOMS
369
chosen  for  the  work  of  decoration  (b$rgantong-gan- tong]  by  the  parents  of  both  parties,  and  notified  to the  relations  and  friends  who  wish  to  assist  in  the preparations  for  the  wedding.1
Both  houses  are  decorated  with  vertically  striped hangings  (/ ' lang  tabir)  and  ornamental  ceiling-cloths (langit '-  langit\  and  mats,  rugs,  carpets,  etc.  are  laid down.  In  the  bridegroom's  house  little  is  done beyond  erecting  a  small  platform  or  dais  (petarana) about  six  feet  square,  and  raised  about  ten  inches  from the  floor,  upon  which  he  is  to  don  his  wedding  gar- ments when  he  sets  out  to  meet  the  bride.  A  similar platform  (petarana}  is  erected  in  the  bride's  house,  and a  low  dais  called  rambat  in  front  of  her  door,  at  the outer  corners  of  which  are  fixed  two  standard  candle- sticks (iiang  rambat},  which  are  sometimes  as  much  as six  feet  high,  and  each  of  which  carries  three  candles, one  in  the  centre  and  one  on  each  side,  those  at  the side  being  supported  by  ornamental  brackets  (sulor bayong).  The  rambat  may  measure  some  14  feet  in
1  In  Denys'  Descriptive  Dictionary of  British  Malaya,  under  the  word "  Marriage,"  we  find  : —
' '  The  only  terms  for  marriage  in Malay  are  the  Arabic  and  Persian  ones, respectively  nikah  and  kah-win,  the native  ones  having  probably  been  dis- placed by  these  and  forgotten."
Both  these  words  are  used  inSelangor, the  first  (nikah),  which  properly  signifies the  mere  ceremony  or  "  wedding," being  more  commonly  used  by  the better  class  of  Malays  than  the  more comprehensive  kahwin,  which  corre-
ands  pretty  nearly  to  the  English vord  "  marriage."  Words  describing the  married  state  with  reference  to  one of  the  parties  only,  however,  are  in frequent  use  :  such  as  the  bfrsuami and  bfristri  of  the  higher  classes,  and
the  bMaki  and  bfrbini  of  the  common people  ;  and  yet  again  there  is  the  word b/rumah-rumah,  which  is  applied  indif- ferently to  either  of  the  two  parties  or to  both,  and  is  the  politest  word  that  can be  used  with  reference  to  the  common people,  but  is  never  applied  to  Rajas, in  whose  case  btrsuami  and  btristri alone  are  used.
I  may  add,  on  the  authority  of  Mr. H.  Conway  Belfield,  lately  Acting- Resident  of  Selangor,  that  a  curious periphrastic  expression  is  sometimes used  by  Perak  women  in  talking  of  their husbands,  whom  they  call  rumah tangga,  which  literally  means  "House and  House-ladder, "  and  which  is  tanta- mount to  saying,  "  My  household,''  in- stead of  "  My  husband."
2   B
370  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
length   by  5  feet  in  width,   and  should  be  about    14 inches  in  height.
A  dais  (with  two  steps  to  it)  is  then  built  as  follows, generally  opposite  the  doorway,  but  standing  a  little way  back  from  it,  and  facing  the  rambat,  so  as  to leave  a  narrow  passage  (tela  kechit]  between  the threshold  and  the  dais,  which  latter  is  decked  with scarlet,  or  at  least  scarlet-bordered  cloth  (kain  berumpok dengan  sakalat}.  The  lower  step  of  the  dais  (ibu  grei] is  raised  about  1 2  inches  from  the  floor,  and  measures from  10  feet  to  12  feet  in  length  by  8  feet  in  width. The  upper  step  (grei  penapak]  is  a  little  smaller,  and is  only  raised  about  10  inches  above  the  lower  one. The  top  of  the  dais  is  covered  with  a  mattress,  and both  steps  are  decorated  with  expensive  borders,  which at  the  wedding  of  a  Raja  are  made  of  embossed  gold or  silver,  and  may  easily  cost  as  much  as  $150  each,  or even  more.  The  mattress  is  covered  in  its  turn with  a  quilt  (lihap  or  pelampap\  made  of  coloured silk  stuffed  with  cotton  ;  upon  this  quilt  is  laid  a  white cotton  sheet,  and  the  whole  is  surmounted  by  a  row  of colossal  "  pillows  "  (of  the  size  of  small  packing-cases), surmounted  by  others  of  moderate  size.
A  mosquito-curtain  is  hung  over  all,  and  the  com- pleted couch  is  called  pelamin.  The  head  of  the pelamin,  it  must  be  added,  where  the  pillows  are  piled, is  always  on  the  left-hand  side  as  you  look  towards  it.
The  number  of  the  pillows  used  is  of  the  highest importance,  as  indicating  the  rank  of  the  contracting parties.  The  larger  ones  are  about  5  feet  in  length and  2  feet  in  height  by  ij  feet  in  width.  They are  covered  with  rich  embroidery  at  the  exposed end,  and  are  arranged  in  a  horizontal  row  (sa-tunda), with  their  sides  just  touching,  in  the  front  left-
vi  IMPORTANCE  OF  PILLOWS  371
hand  corner  of  the  mosquito-curtain,  so  as  to  leave a  clear  passage  of  about  3  feet  behind  them  (at  the back  of  the  curtain)  by  which  the  bride  and  bridegroom may  escape  to  ihefltfraduan  after  the  ceremony.  These big  pillows  are  white,  with  the  exception  of  the  em- broidered ends,  unless  they  are  intended  for  a  Raja, when  the  royal  colour  (yellow)  is  of  course  substituted. The  one  nearest  the  centre  of  the  couch  is  called bantal  tumpu,  and  usually  has  a  hexagonal  or  (in  the case  of  a  Raja)  octagonal  bolster  deposited  beside  it.
The  smaller  pillows  are  red  (occasionally  purple, ungu,  or  orange,  jingga],  and  are  called  the  "  em- broidered pillows  "  (bantal  bertekat,  or  bantal  p'rada). Occasionally  a  set  of  twelve  small  pillows  is  used (when  they  are  called  bantal  dua-b'las,  or  the  Twelve Pillows),  but  often  there  is  only  one  of  them  to  each "  Big  Pillow,"  the  set  of  twelve  being  said  to  be  an innovation,  probably  introduced  from  Malacca.  Some- times, however,  when  many  small  pillows  are  piled  upon each  other,  measures  have  to  be  taken  to  keep  them from  falling,  in  which  case  the  space  between  the  piles is  said  to  be  filled  up  with  wool  or  cotton  stuffing (Penyclat\  the  front  being  covered  with  embroidered cloth,  the  upper  border  of  which  is  carried  up  diagon- ally from  the  top  of  one  pile  to  the  top  of  the  next.
As  regards  the  permissible  number  of  big  pillows, according  to  a  scale  in  use  at  Klang,  the  common people  are  allowed  three  big  pillows  (including  the bantal  tumpu} ;  a  wealthy  man,  four  ;  and  a  Headman, such  as  the  'Toh  Kaya  Ke'chil,  five  ;  a  Raja  being  pre- sumably allowed  one  or  two  more.  According  to  this scale  it  is  only  the  big  pillows  that  are  of  importance,1
1  I  remember  Mr.  C.  H.  A.  Turney       telling  me  of  a  great  disturbance  that (then  Senior  District  Officer  at  Klang)       arose  at  Klang  because  too  many  of
372  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
and  the  people  are  allowed  to  use  as  few  or  as  many small  ones  as  they  like.  The  topmost  small  pillow, however,  is  always  triangular,  and  is  called  giinong- gunongan.
The  mosquito-curtain  (enclosing  the  couch  on which  the  pillows  rest)  of  course  varies  in  size  accord- ing to  the  dimensions  of  the  pelamin,  but  may  be roughly  taken  to  be  from  7  to  9  hasta 1  in  length,  by  8 ft.  in  width,  and  4  ft.  to  5  ft.  in  height  (reaching  to  the ceiling-cloth).  Its  upper  edges  (kansor)  are  stiffened externally  with  a  square  frame,  consisting  of  four bamboo  rods  (galah  Klambu),  and  it  is  decorated  in front  with  a  beautifully  embroidered  fringe  called  "  Bo- tree  leaves  "  (daun  budi}.  The  front  of  this  mosquito- curtain  is  rolled  up2  to  within  2  or  3  ft.  of  the  top, instead  of  being  drawn  aside  as  usual.  At  the  back of  the  curtain  is  suspended,  except  in  the  case  of  a Raja's  wedding,  a  bamboo  clothes-rod  (buluh  sangkut- kan  kain).  This  rod  terminates  at  each  extremity  in an  ornamental  piece  of  scroll-work  (sulor  bayong] covered  with  scarlet  cloth,  which  is  sometimes  made  to issue  from  a  short  stem  of  horn  or  ivory,  and  has  a wooden  collar  called  dulang-dulang.  This  dulang- dulang,  moreover,  is  sometimes  provided  with  small hollows  (^mbat-mbaf)  at  the  top,  two  in  front  which are  filled  with  rose-water  or  perfume  (ayer  mawar or  ayer  wangi),  and  two  at  the  back  which  are filled  with  flowers.
these  big  pillows  were  being  used  at  2  There  is,  I  believe,  a  special  cere-
a    Malay  wedding.      Order  was    only  mony  connected  with  the   opening  of
restored    by   the    intervention    of    the  this  curtain  which  is  performed  by  the
police.  bridegroom   after    the    wedding   cere-
1  A  hasta  is  the  length  of  the  fore-  mony,  special  cakes,  called   "  curtain -
arm  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of  the  openers "    (kueh    pembuka
middle  finger,  or  about  eighteen  inches.  being  eaten.
1
vi  WEDDING  ACCESSORIES  373
Above  the  clothes-rod,  and  between  its  suspending cords  (tali ptnggantong] — which,  by  the  way,  are  also covered  with  scarlet  cloth — an  inner  fringe  of  "  Bo- leaves  "  (daun  budi  dalam)  is  sometimes  added  at  the top  of  the  curtain.
At  the  wedding  of  a  Raja  nothing  else  should  be put  inside  the  curtain,  but  at  an  ordinary  wedding  a few  small  articles  of  typical  marriage  furniture  are usually  added  as  follows  : —
Three  or  four  small  clothes  boxes  (saharati),  such as  are  kept  by  every  Malay  family,  and  peti  kapor (boxes  whose  corners  are  strengthened  and  decorated with  brass)  are  ranged  upon  the  mattress  just  below  the clothes-rod.  Upon  these  should  be  placed  (a)  the bangking,  which  is  a  kind  of  jar  or  urn  of  lacquered wood,  ranging  from  about  half  a  foot  to  a  foot  in height,  and  contains  a  portion  of  the  bride's  wardrobe  ; and  (£)  the  bun,1  which  is  either  octagonal  (peckak dlapan),  or  hexagonal  (peckak  anam),  as  the  case  may be,  and  which  may  be  described  as  a  box  of  tin,  or sometimes  of  lacquered  wood,  whose  contents  are as  follows  : — ( i )  a  couple  of  combs  (sikat  dua  bilafi], one  with  large  and  one  with  small  teeth ;  (2)  a  small cup  or  saucer  of  hair  oil  (a  preparation  of  cocoa-nut  oil), or  attar  of  roses  (minyak  attar],  or  pomatum  (kateneh) ; (3)  a  small  pen-knife  for  paring  the  nails ;  (4)  a  pair of  scissors ;  (5)  a  preparation  of  antimony  (chelak], which  is  a  sort  of  black  ointment  applied  by  the  Malays to  the  inside  edge  of  the  eyelids  ;  and  (6)  a  Malay work-box  (called  dulang  in  Selangor  and  bintang  at Malacca),  which  is  a  circular  box  of  painted  or  lacquered
1  C.  and  S.  give — "  Bun  (Dutch),  a       is  given  as  a  "  trunk"  in  a  Dutch  Die- large  tin  or  copper  box  for  tobacco  or       tionary. sirih  leaves — Van  der  Tuuk."    "  Bun  "
374  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
wood,  furnished  with  a  lid,  and  containing  needles, cotton,  and  the  rest  of  the  Malay  housewife's  parapher- nalia.
Near  the  door  of  the  curtain  is  placed  an  earthen- ware water -jar,  called  gelok  (gelok  Kedah  and gelok  Perak  are  the  usual  "makes");  this  jar stands  upon  a  small  brass  or  earthenware  plate  with high  sides  (bokor),  and  its  mouth  is  covered  with  a brass  or  earthenware  saucer  (chepir\  on  which  is  laid the  brass  or  earthenware  bowl  (fienchedok  ayer  or batil}  which  is  used  for  scooping  up  water  from  the water-jar,  and  which,  when  it  is  in  use,  is  temporarily replaced  by  an  ornamental  cap  woven  from  strips  of screw-palm  leaves.  A  couple  of  candlesticks  placed near  the  water -jar,  a  betel  tray  (tepah  or  puan),  a basin  (batil  besar]  for  washing  off  the  lees  of  henna, and  a  "  cuspadore "  (ketor\  all  of  which  are  placed inside  the  curtain,  complete  the  preparations  for  this portion  of  the  ceremony.
The  day  concludes,  as  far  as  the  workers  are  con- cerned, with  a  meal  in  which  all  who  have  assisted in  the  preparations  take  part,  and  this  is  followed by  various  diversions  dear  to  Malays,  such  as  the chanting  of  passages  from  the  Koran.1
At  a  royal  wedding,  either  the  "  Story  of  'Che Megat"  (Che  Megat  Mantri),  or  a  royal  cock-fight (main  denok),  or  a  performance  by  dancing  girls  or fencers  (pedikir),  may  be  substituted  for  these  more devotional  exercises.
These  performances  (whatever  they  may  be)  are kept  up  (with  intervals  for  rest  and  refreshment)  till four  or  five  in  the  morning,  when  the  guests  disperse
1  This    is    called    main  zikir — or,       is  unaccompanied,  and  zikir  bfrdah  if more   commonly,  jikir — maulud  if  it       accompanied  by  musical  instruments.
.2   a
vi  WEDDING  CEREMONIES  375
to  their  respective  homes  to  sleep  off  the  night's fatigue.
Whilst  the  games  are  progressing  (at  about  nine or  ten  P.M.)  the  first  staining  of  the  finger-nails  of  the bride  and  bridegroom  is  commenced,  the  ceremony on  this  occasion  being  conducted  in  the  seclusion  of the  inner  apartments,  and  hence  called  the  "  Stolen Henna-staining"  (berhinei  ckuri).  Leaves  of  henna are  taken  and  pounded  together  with  a  small  piece of  charcoal,  and  the  "  mash  "  is  applied  to  the  finger- nails of  both  hands  (with  the  exception  of  the  middle or  "  Devil's  finger,"  jari  hantu\  The  centre  of each  palm  is  also  touched  with  the  dye,  the  area stained  being  as  much  as  would  be  covered  by  a dollar.  A  line  (of  a  finger's  breadth)  is  also  said  to be  drawn  along  the  inner  side  of  the  sole  of  each  foot, from  the  great  toe  to  the  heel  (hinei  kaus\
A  couple  of  what  we  should  call  "pages,"  of about  ten  years  of  age,  are  seated  right  and  left  of the  bridegroom,  and  are  called  Pengapit.
The  bride  usually  provides  herself  with  one  or more  girl  companions ;  but  these  are  supposed  to "  hide  themselves  "  when  there  is  company,  their  place being  taken  by  more  staid  duennas,  who  are  called Tukang  Andam  (i.e.  "coiffeurs"),  and  a  personal attendant  or  nurse,  called  Mainang  (Mak  Inang,} who  appears  to  act  as  a  sort  of  Mistress  of  the Ceremonies.
The  second  day  is  spent  by  the  guests  (as  was said  above)  in  sleeping  off  their  night's  fatigue,  and they  do  not  reassemble  till  evening,  at  about  five  P.M.
When  the  last  has  arrived  (at  about  seven  P.M.)  a meal  is  served,  and  at  about  half-past  eight  the  games recommence ;  but  after  a  round  or  so  (zikir  sa-jurus\
376  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
say  at  about  ten  P.M.,  the  bride  at  her  house  and bridegroom  at  his  respectively  make  their  first  ap- pearance in  public,  clad  in  their  wedding  garments, for  the  ceremony  of  staining  the  finger-nails,  this time  in  public.  When  they  are  seated  (between  the two  candlesticks,  which  are  lighted  to  facilitate  the operation)  a  tray  is  brought  forward,  furnished  with the  usual  accessories  of  Malay  magic,  rice  -  paste (tepong  tawar],  washed  rice,  "saffron"  rice,  and parched  rice,  to  which  is  added,  in  this  instance,  a sort  of  pudding  of  the  pounded  henna- leaves.  A censer  is  next  produced,  and  a  brass  tray  with  a  foot to  it  (called  s&mVrip)  is  loaded  with  nasi  berhinei (pulut  or  "glutinous"  rice  stained  with  saffron),  in which  are  planted  some  ten  to  fifteen  purple  eggs (dyed  with  a  mixture  of  brazil  wood  (sepang]  and  lime, and  stuck  upon  ornamental  sprays  of  bamboo  decorated with  coloured  paper).  The  bride  (or  bridegroom)  is then  seated  in  a  "begging"  attitude,  with  the  hands resting  upon  a  cushion  placed  in  the  lap  ;  the  first  of the  guests  then  takes  a  pinch  of  incense  from  the tray  and  burns  it  in  the  brazier  (temp  at  bara] ;  next  he takes  a  pinch  of  parched  rice,  a  pinch  of  newly-washed rice,  and  a  pinch  of  saffron  rice,  and,  squeezing  them together  in  the  right  fist,  fumigates  them  by  holding them  for  a  moment  over  the  burning  incense,  and  then throws  them  towards  the  sitter,  first  towards  the  right, then  towards  the  left,  and  finally  into  the  sitter's  lap.
The  "  Neutralising  Paste " *  is  then  brought  and the  usual  leaf -brush  dipped  into  the  bowl  of  paste, with  which  the  forehead  of  the  sitter  and  the  back of  each  hand  are  duly  "  painted."
1   Tgpong  tawar,    or   "Neutralising       (membuang  sial);    for    further    details Paste,"   is   believed    to   avert   ill-luck      vide  Chap.  III.  pp.  77-81,  supra.
vi  USE  OF  HENNA  377
A  pinch  of  the  henna  is  then  taken  and  dabbed upon  the  centre  of  each  palm,  the  hands  of  the  sitter being  turned  over  to  enable  this  to  be  done.
The  sitter  then  salutes  the  guest  by  raising  his  (or her)  hands  with  the  palms  together  before  the  breast in  an  attitude  of  prayer ;  the  guest  replies  by  a  similar action,  and  the  ceremony  is  at  an  end.
The  same  operation  is  performed  by  from  five to  seven,  or  even  nine,  relations  (Orang  IVaris,  lit. "  Heirs,")  the  last  operator  concluding  with  an  Arabic prayer.
While  this  ceremony  is  proceeding  inside,  music strikes  up  and  a  special  dance,  called  the  Henna Dance  (menari  hinei]^  is  performed,  a  picturesque feature  of  which  is  a  small  cake  of  henna,  which  is contained  in  a  brazen  cup  (gompong  kinei]  and  sur- rounded by  candles.  This  cup  is  carried  by  the dancer,"  who  has  to  keep  turning  it  over  and  over without  letting  the  candles  be  extinguished  by  the wind  arising  from  the  rapid  motion.
The  step,  which  is  a  special  one,  is  called  the "Henna-dance  Step"  (Langkah  tar1  kinei,  i.e.  tari hinei],  and  the  tune  is  called  the  "  Henna-staining tune  "  (Lagu  berhinei].
This  ceremony  over,  the  "henna-staining"  rice (nasi  berhinei}  is  partaken  of  by  those  present,  the remainder  being  distributed  to  the  guests  engaged  in "  main  zikir"
On  the  third  night  the  same  ceremonies  are repeated  without  variation.
On   the  fourth   morning,  called  the   "  Concluding
1  Not  at  a  Raja's  wedding. 2  This  ceremony  is  also  called  mfnyllcmg  or  bMtbat,
378  MARRIAGE
Day "    (ffari    Langsong)>    everybody    puts     on    his finest  apparel  and  jewellery.
The  bride's  hair  is  done  up  in  a  roll  (sanggul] and  this  is  surmounted  with  a  head-dress  of  artificial flowers  (called  grak  gempa),  cut  out  of  p'rada  kresek ("crackling  tinsel")  and  raised  on  fine  wires;  her forehead  is  bound  with  a  band  or  fillet  of  tinsel — gold- leaf  (ftrada  Siam]  being  used  by  the  rich— which  is  called  tekan  kundei,  and  is  carried  round by  the  fringe  of  the  hair  (gigi  rambut}  down  to the  top  of  each  ear  (pelipis) * ;  for  the  rest  the bride  is  clad  in  a  "wedding  jacket"  (baju  pengantin), which  has  tight-fitting  sleeves  extending  down  to  the wrist,  or  sleeves  with  gathers  (simak]  over  the  arm, and  which  is  generally  made  of  "  flowered  satin " (siten  berbunga)  in  the  case  of  the  rich,  or  of  cloth dyed  red  with  kasumba^  (kain  kasumba)  in  the case  of  the  poorer  classes.  This  "  wedding  jacket " fits  tightly  round  the  neck,  has  a  gold  border  (pen- depun  ymas),  is  fastened  with  two  or  three  gold buttons,  and  fits  closely  to  the  person ;  the  wealthy add  a  necklace  or  crescent -shaped  breast -ornament (rantei  merjan  or  dokok]  round  the  bride's  neck. She  also  wears  bracelets  (glang)  and  ear-rings  (subang] and  perhaps  anklets,  of  five  different  metals  (keron- chong  panchalogam).  A  silk  sarong,  which  takes  the place  of  a  skirt,  and  is  girt  about  the  waist  with  a waist-cord  (but  not  usually,  in  Southern  Selangor, fastened  with  belt  and  buckle),  and  a  pair  of  silk trousers,  complete  her  attire.
1  One  of  these   fillets,   which   was  The  substitute  used  by  poor  people  is
purchased   by  the  writer,  had   for   its  frequently  manufactured  from  the  leaf
pattern    two    dragons     (naga),    which  of  the  thatch-palm  (nipah). looked  different  ways,  and  a  couple  of  2  According  to  v.  d.  Wall  this  plant
butterflies  as    pendants   at   each    end.  is  Carthamus  tinctorius.
;
i
vi  WEDDING  COSTUMES  379
The  groom,  on  the  other  hand,  is  clad  in  his  best jacket  and  trousers,  with  the  Malay  skirt  (sarong], fastened  at  the  side,  and  girt  above  the  knee  (kain ktimbang).  His  head  is  adorned  with  the  sigar,  a peculiar  head-dress  of  red  cloth  arranged  turbanwise, with  a  peak  on  the  right-hand  side,  from  which  arti- ficial flowers  (gunjei)  depend,  and  which  preserves  its shape  through  being  stuffed  with  cotton- wool.  Its border  is  decorated  with  tinsel,  and  it  has  a  gold fringe  (kida-kida).  Besides  this  head-dress  the  bride- groom has  a  small  bunch  of  artificial  flowers  (sunting- sunting)  stuck  behind  each  ear,  whilst  two  similar bunches  are  stuck  in  the  head-dress  (one  on  the  right and  the  other  on  the  left).
Bridegrooms,  however,  who  belong  to  the  richer classes  wear  what  is  called  a  tester  ( =  destar  ?},  whilst former  Sultans  of  Selangor  are  said  to  have  worn  a gold  cap  (songkok  leleng),  which  is  reputed  to  have contained  eighteen  bongkal1  (or  bungkal}  of  gold.
The  remainder  of  the  company  are  of  course  merely dressed  in  their  best  clothes.
The  "Rice  of  the  Presence"  (nasi  adap-adap}  is now  prepared  for  what  is  called  the  astakona  or setakona,  which  may  be  described  as  a  framework with  an  octagonal  ground-plan,  built  in  three  tiers,  and made  of  pulai  or  meranti  or  other  light  wood  ;  it  has a  small  mast  (tiang)  planted  in  the  centre,  with  cross pieces  (palang-palang)  in  each  of  the  upper  stories  to keep  it  in  its  place ;  the  framework  is  supported  by four  corner-posts,  on  which  it  is  raised  about  a  foot  and L  a  half  from  the  floor.  The  box  thus  formed  is  filled  to
1  A  weight  used  for  weighing  the  822  grains  troy  ;  according  to  Max- precious  metals.  According  to  C.  and  well,  Manual  of  the  Mai,  Lang.,  p.  141, S.  Diet.,  s.v.  Bungkal,  it  is  equal  to  to  832.
380  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
the  top  with  "saffron  rice"  (nasi  kunyif),  and  in  the rice  at  the  top  are  planted  the  aforesaid  coloured  eggs. I  nto  a  hole  at  the  top  of  the  mast  is  fitted  the  end  of  a short  rattan  or  cane,  which  is  split  into  four  branches, each  of  which  again  is  split  into  three  twigs,  whilst  on the  end  of  each  twig  is  stuck  one  of  the  coloured  eggs (telor  joran),  an  artificial  flower,  and  an  ornamental streamer  of  red  paper  called  layer?  which  is  cut  into all  sorts  of  artistic  and  picturesque  patterns.
The  setakona  is  erected  in  front  of  the  pelamin, on  which  the  bride  takes  her  seat  at  about  4  P.M.  to await  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom,  the  members  of her  own  bridal  party,  including  the  Muhammadan priest  or  Imam,  continuing  the  zikir  maulud  in  the reception  room  at  frequent  intervals  from  9  A.M. until  the  bridegroom's  arrival.  The  arrangements are  completed  by  placing  ready  for  the  bridegroom  the "Bridal  Mat"  (lapik  nikati),  which  consists  of  a  mat of  screw-palm  leaves  (or  in  the  case  of  a  Raja,  a  small quilt,  embroidered  in  the  manner  called  Jong  saraf] five  cubits  of  white  cloth,  which  are  rolled  up  and  put on  one  side,  and  a  tray  of  betel.
Returning  to  the  bridegroom,  holy  water  (ayer sembahyang]  is  now  fetched  in  a  cherek  (a  kettle- shaped  vessel)  or  bucket,  for  the  bridegroom  to  wash his  face  and  hands,  and  he  then  proceeds  to  put on  his  wedding  garments,  as  described  above, after  which  a  scarf  (salendang]  is  slung  across  his shoulder.  The  marriage  procession  (perarakan) then  sets  out,  the  women  heading  it  (penganjor)  and the  men  following,  the  bridegroom  carried  upon  some-
1  The  mast  with  its  branches  carry-  atic  of  a  fruit-tree,  the  eggs  represent- ing artificial  flowers,  streamers,  and  ing  the  fruit,  the  artificial  blossoms  its coloured  eggs,  appears  to  be  emblem-  flowers,  and  the  streamers  its  leaves.
Itf
8  I
vi  MIMIC  CONFLICTS  381
body's  shoulders  (di-sompoJi),  and  right  and  left  the musicians  beating  drums,  tabors,  etc.,  whilst  those  who have  any  skill  amuse  the  company  with  exhibitions  of Malay  fencing  (main  silaf]  and  dancing,  etc.,  to  the accompaniment  of  the  zikir  intoned  by  their  com- panions.
The  arrival  of  the  bridegroom  at  the  bride's  house is  the  signal  for  a  mimic  conflict  for  the  person  of  the bride,  which  is  called  melawa,  and  is  strangely  remi- niscent of  similar  customs  which  formerly  obtained  in Europe.
In  some  cases  a  rope  or  piece  of  red  cloth  would be  stretched  across  the  path  to  bar  the  progress  of  the bridegroom's  party,  and  a  stout  enough  resistance would  be  offered  by  the  defenders  until  the  bridegroom consented  to  pay  a  fine  which  formerly  amounted,  it is  said,  to  as  much  as  $20,  though  not  more  than  $3 or  $4  would  now  be  asked.  Occasionally  the  bride- groom would  pay  the  fine  by  pulling  the  ring  off  his finger  and  handing  it  to  the  bride's  relations,  but  the ceremony  would  not  unfrequently  end  in  a  free  fight. Verses  were  recited  on  these  occasions,  of  which  a  few stanzas  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.1
On  arriving  at  the  door  the  musicians  strike  up their  liveliest  tune,  and  as  the  bridegroom  is  carried up  the  steps  he  has  to  force  his  way  through  an Amazonian  force  consisting  of  the  ladies  of  the  bride's party,  who  assemble  to  repel  the  invader  from  the threshold.  A  well-directed  fire  is  maintained  by  others, who  pour  upon  the  foe  over  the  heads  of  the  defenders
1  For  instance,  in  reply  to  an  appeal  "  Even  the  woodpecker  knows  how  to  fly, from    the    Bride's  Relations  to  "take  And  how  much  more  the  lory ;
.  .,      ,    .        ..  ,   .   .,  Even  my  grandsire  s  commands  I  take  into
into  account  the  duty  which  is  the  custom  account,
of  the  country,"  one  of  the  Bridegroom's  And  how  much  more  the  duty  imposed  by
Relations  would  repeat  the  following:—
382  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
repeated  volleys  of  saffron  rice  (or,  at  a  royal  wedding, ambor-ambor  —  i.e.  clippings  from  a  thin  sheet  of silver  or  gold  which  are  thrown  among  the  crowd  as largess).
Meanwhile  the  bridegroom  persists  until  his  efforts are  crowned  with    success,    and   he   makes   his    way (assisted  possibly  by  some  well-meant  act  of  treachery on  the  part  of  the  garrison)  to  the  reception  room, when  the  mat  already  referred  to  is  unrolled  and  the white  cloth  suspended  over  it.     Here  the  bridegroom takes  his  seat  and  the  priest  comes  out  to  perform  the wedding  ceremony.1     This,  strangely  enough,  is  per- formed with  the  bridegroom  alone,  the  priest  saying  to him  in  the  presence  of  three  or  four  witnesses  and his  surety   (wali),   generally  his  father,   "  I  wed  you, A.,  to    B.,  daughter   of    C.,    for    a    portion    of    two bharas"      To  this   the  bridegroom    has    to    respond without  allowing  an  interval,  "  I  accept  this  marriage with  B.,  for  a  portion  of  two  b haras"  (or  one  bhara if  one  of  the  parties  has  been  married  before).     Even this  short  sentence,  however,  is  a  great  deal  too  much for  the  nerves  of  some  Malay  bridegrooms,  who  have been  known  to  spend  a  couple  of  hours  in  abortive attempts  before  they  could  get  the   Imam  to  "pass" it.      As  soon,    however,    as    this   obstacle   has    been surmounted,  the  priest  asks  those  present  if  they  will bear  witness  to  its  correctness,  and  on  their  replying in  the  affirmative,  it  is  followed  by  the  "bacha  salawat" which  consists  of  repeated  shouts  from  the  company
1  It  is  said  that  this  is  a  departure  widow  who  has  no  children  by  her from  the  old  custom,  according  to  which  former  husband  there  is  no  procession the  wedding  ceremony  took  place  the  at  all,  and  the  ceremonies  are  some- day before  the  procession  (except  at  what  abridged.  I  may  add  that  a the  re-marriage  of  a  widow  who  has  childless  widow  has  the  subang  (ear- no  children,  kahwin  janda  berhias).  rings  which  are  the  symbol  of  virginity) In  the  case  of  the  re-marriage  of  a  tied  on  to  her  ears.  Vide  p.  360,  supra.
STB  .5  g
|
d,  and  are  call<
;••
.£
1 1
3
r •
s
1
B
-=
1    •*
>
1
1
55      u
t
Si
H
0      J
~Z
P
cj
*      2
_i
3
j
a-     -o
•g
5
^
'I
-^
|
|
g
M      :«
1
*
M
a     .?
V
•
c
H        5
3
g
^
<     .
^^
r     ^
(
*
"a!
"     ^
g
•
J
j
—
P«i
9
jj E
~.
>•
,c
8
j=
rt
9
7
T
_=
1
-
f5
B
V
_:
H
V
1
«"*
1
1
-
•1
b
a   .
e
8
n c u
-y;
~J g
i
~  _c
'       C
ll
vi  THE  MARRIAGE  CEREMONY  383
of  "  Peace  be  with  thee."  This  part  of  the  ceremony completed,  one  of  the  brothers  or  near  relations  of  the bridegroom  leads  him  into  the  bridal  chamber,  and seats  him  in  the  usual  cross-legged  position  on  the left  side  of  the  bride,  who  sits  with  her  feet  tucked  up on  his  right.  Even  the  process  of  seating  the  couple (bVrsanding)  is  a  very  fatiguing  one  ;  each  of  them has  to  bend  the  knees  slowly  until  a  sitting  posture  is reached,  and  then  return  to  a  standing  posture  by slowly  straightening  the  knees,  a  gymnastic  exercise which  has  to  be  repeated  thrice,  and  which  requires  the assistance  of  friends.1
The  seating  having  been  accomplished,  friends  put in  the  right  hands  of  bride  and  bridegroom  respectively handfuls  of  rice  taken  from  the  nasi  setakona ;  with this  the  two  feed  each  other  simultaneously,  each  of them  reaching  out  the  hand  containing  the  rice  to  the other's  mouth.  (This  part  of  the  ceremony  is  often made  the  occasion  for  a  race.)
The  bridegroom  is  then  carried  off  by  his  friends to  the  outer  chamber,  where  he  has  to  pay  his  respects (minta  ma'af,  lit.  "  ask  pardon  ")  to  the  company,  after which  he  is  carried  back  to  his  old  post,  the  bride  in the  meantime  having  moved  off  a  little  in  the  mosquito curtain.
1  A  couple  of  matronly  ladies  are  2.   They   are   similarly   raised,    and
generally  told  off  for  this  service,  the  repeat  as  before,  in  turn,  the  words,
ceremony  being  as  follows  : —  "Assuredly    I    will   not  do   thee  any
I.  They  raise  first  the  man  and  then  shame  whatever  "  (Sahya  ta'buleh  buat
the  woman  slowly  to  a  standing  posture ;  satu  apa  kamaluan  di-atas  awak).
when  it  is  reached  the  bridegroom  says  3.  When   raised   for  the   third   and
to  the  bride,  "  Take  heed,  care  for  thy  last  time  they  say,   "  I  ask  the  Lord
•husband,  care  for  my  good  name,  care  God  to  give  us  both  long   life,    and
Jfbr  me "    (Baik-baik  jaga  laki  awak,  that  all  our  handiwork  may  prosper  "
jaga  nama   saAya,  jagakan  aku)  ;    to  (Sahya  mint  a*  kapada  Tuhan  Allah  bUr-
this  the  bride  responds  in  a   similar  sama-sama panjang  'umor,  samua  k&ja
strain,  mutatis  mutandis,  and  they  are  dtngan  salamat). then  as  slowly  re-seated.
384  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
The  sweetmeats  are  then  brought  and  handed round,  the  setakona  is  broken  up,  and  the  bundles of  rice  wrapped  in  plantain  leaves  which  it  contains distributed  to  the  company  as  largess  or  berkat. Each  of  the  company  gets  one  of  the  telor  chachak, the  telor  joran  being  reserved  for  the  Imam  and any  person  of  high  rank  who  may  attend,  e.g.  a Raja.1
This  completes  the  wedding  ceremony,  but  the bridegroom  is  nominally  expected  to  remain  under  the roof  (and  eye)  of  his  mother-in-law  for  about  two  years (reduced  to  forty-four  days  in  the  case  of  "royalty"), after  which  he  may  be  allowed  to  remove  to  a  house of  his  own.  No  Kathi 2  was  present  until  quite  recently at  marriages  in  Selangor,  nor  has  it  in  the  past  been the  practice,  so  far  as  I  could  find  out,  for  him  to attend.  Sir  S.  Raffles  gives  as  part  of  the  formula used  in  Java : — "  If  you  travel  at  sea  for  a  year,  or ashore  for  six  months,  without  sending  either  money or  message  to  your  wife,  she  will  complain  to  the judge  and  obtain  one  talak  (the  preliminary  stage  of divorce),"  and  this  condition  should,  strictly  speaking, be  included  in  the  Malay  formula.  It  is  now  growing obsolete,  but  was  in  former  days  repeated  first  by  the priest,  and  then  by  the  bridegroom  after  him.  The marriage  portion  (isi  kahwin,  Arabic  mahar)  is  here generally  called  tflanja  kahwin  or  mas  kahwin?  No wedding-ring  should,  strictly,  be  given.
1  It  used  to  be  considered  an  insult       with  marriage,  divorce,  and  ecclesiasti- to  omit  offering  one  of  these  eggs  to  a       cal  affairs  generally.     The  Imam  is  the guest,  so  much  so,  that  I  was  assured       chief  elder  of  one  mosque.
that  in  former  days  a   woman  whose  3  There  is  a  difference  bet  ween  Vlanja
husband  had  been  thus  slighted  would  and   mas  kahwin,   the   former  usually
have  a  right  to  sue  for  a  divorce.  meaning    the    wedding   expenses,    the
2  The   Kathi    is   an  official    having  latter  the  dower ;  at  least  this  is  the superintendence  over  several  mosques  Malacca  terminology,  which  probably and  jurisdiction  in  matters  connected  also  obtains  elsewhere.
vi  STEALING  THE  BRIDEGROOM  385
For  three  days  lustrations  are  continued  by  the newly-married  pair,  but  before  they  are  completed,  and as  soon  as  possible  after  the  wedding,  friends  and acquaintances  once  more  put  on  their  finery,  and proceed  to  the  house  to  pay  their  respects,  to  bathe, and  to  receive  largess.
On  the  third  day  after  the  hari  langsong  there  is  a very  curious  ceremony  called  mandi  tolak  bala,  or  mandi ayer  salamat  (bathing  for  good  luck).
On  the  night  in  question  the  relatives  of  the  bride- groom assemble  under  cover  of  the  darkness  and  make a  bonfire  under  the  house  of  the  newly-married  couple by  collecting  and  burning  rubbish ;  into  the  fire  thus kindled  they  throw  cocoa-nut  husks  and  pepper,  or anything  likely  to  make  it  unpleasant  for  those  within, and  presently  raise  such  a  smoke  that  the  bridegroom comes  hastily  down  the  steps,  ostensibly  to  see  what is  the  matter,  but  as  soon  as  he  makes  his  appearance, he  is  seized  by  his  relatives  and  carried  off  bodily  to his  own  parents'  house;  these  proceedings  being  known as  the  stealing  of  the  bridegroom  (churi  pengantiii). Next  day  there  is  a  grand  procession  to  escort  him back  to  the  house  of  his  bride,  which  he  reaches  about one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  processionists  carrying "  Rice  of  the  Presence  "  (nasi  adap-adafi}  with  the  eggs stuck  into  it  as  on  the  last  day  of  the  wedding,  two sorts  of  holy  water  in  pitchers,  called  respectively  ayer salamat  (water  of  good  luck),  and  ayer  tolak  bala  (water to  avert  ill-luck),  vases  of  flowers  (gumba]  containing blossom-spikes  of  the  cocoa-nut  and  areca-nut  palms,  and young  cocoa-nut  leaves  rudely  plaited  into  the  semblance of  spikes  of  palm-blossom,  k'risses,  etc.  etc.,  together  with a  large  number  of  rude  syringes  manufactured  from  joints of  bamboo,  and  called  panah  ayer,  or  "water-bows."
2  c
386  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
A  set  of  similar  objects  (including  nasi  adap-adap], is  prepared  by  the  relatives  of  the  bride,  and  deposited upon  the  ground  in  the  place  selected  for  the  bathing ceremony.  A  bench  being  added  for  the  bride  and bridegroom  to  sit  upon,  the  ceremony  commences  with the  customary  rite  of  tepong  tawar,  after  which  the  two kinds  of  holy  water,  ayer  tolak  bala  and  ayer  salamat, are  successively  thrown  over  the  pair.
Now,  according  to  the  proper  custom,  during  the proceedings  which  follow,  all  the  bride's  relatives should  surround  the  bride's  seat,  and  the  bridegroom's relatives  should  stand  at  a  distance  ;  but,  in  order  to save  themselves  from  a  wetting,  the  women  of  both parties  now  usually  assemble  round  the  bride  and bridegroom,  where  they  are  protected  by  a  sheet  which is  hung  between  them  and  the  men  ;  for  all  the  young men  now  proceed  to  discharge  their  "  water  arrows," and  as  they  are  stopped  by  the  sheet  they  proceed  to turn  their  syringes  against  each  other,  until  all  are thoroughly  wetted.
Meanwhile  a  young  cocoa-nut  frond,  twisted  into a  slip-knot  with  V-shaped  ends  (something  like  the "  merry  thought "  of  a  fowl),  is  presented  to  the  bride and  bridegroom,  each  of  whom  takes  hold  of  one  end, and  blowing  on  it  (sembor)  thrice,  pulls  it  till  it  comes undone,  and  the  lepas-lepas  rite  is  concluded.  Finally, a  girdle  of  thread  is  passed  seven  times  over  the  heads and  under  the  feet  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  when the  bridegroom  breaks  through  the  thread  and  they are  all  free  to  return  homewards.  This  latter  ceremony is  called  'lat-lat.  The  guests  then  return  to  their homes,  divest  themselves  of  their  wet  garments,  and put  on  their  wedding  attire.  The  bersuap-suapan,  or feeding  ceremony,  is  then  performed  (both  vessels
vi  CEREMONIAL  RATHING  387
of  adap-adap  rice  being  used),  and  then  all  parties disperse  for  the  usual  games.  Seven  days  after  the "  Concluding  Day "  (Hari  Langsong),  the  ceremony of  Discarding  the  Earrings  (i.e.  subang,  the  emblems of  virginity)  is  performed  by  the  bride.
Raja  Bot  of  Selangor,  who  attaches  great  importance to  the  lustration  ceremony,  and  says  that  it  ought  not to  take  place  later  than  the  seventh  day  (at  a  Raja's wedding),  thus  describes  the  full  ceremony  as  once arranged  by  himself: — A  small  bath-house  was  built at  the  top  of  a  flight  of  seven  steps,  and  water  was pumped  up  to  it  through  a  pipe,  whose  upper  end  was made  fast  under  the  roof  of  the  shed,  and  terminated in  the  head  of  a  dragon  (naga\  from  whose  jaws the  water  spouted.  The  steps  were  completely  lined with  women,  of  whom  there  must  have  been  an immense  number  (no  men  being  allowed  to  be  present), and  the  Raja  and  his  bride  bathed  before  them.  A royal  bath-house  of  this  kind  is  called  balei  pancha tiersada,  and  should  be  used  not  only  at  "  royal " weddings,  but  at  coronations  (waktu  di-naubatkan} ; it  is  described  in  the  following  lines  :—
"  Naik  balei  pancha  persada Di-hadap  uleh  saga/a  JBiduaiida, Dudok  semaiam  dengan  bertakhta. Mandi  ayer  yang  kaluar  di  mulut  Naga  " —
which  may  be  translated  :—
"  Ascend  to  the  Royal  Bath-House In  the  presence  of  all  your  courtiers, Take  your  seat  in  royal  state,
And  bathe  in  the  water  that  flows  from  the  Dragon's Mouth."
It  must  not  be  supposed  that,  with  such  a  mass  of detail,  many  things  may  not  have  been  overlooked,
388  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
but  it  may  be  remarked  as  some  sort  of  a  practical conclusion  to  this  account,  that  the  Malay  wedding  cere- mony, even  as  carried  out  by  the  poorer  classes,  shows that  the  contracting  parties  are  treated  as  royalty, that  is  to  say,  as  sacred  human  beings,  and  if  any further  proof  is  required,  in  addition  to  the  evidence which  may  be  drawn  from  the  general  character  of  the ceremony,  I  may  mention,  firstly,  the  fact  that  the bride  and  bridegroom  are  actually  called  Raja  Sari, (i.e.  Raja  sa-kari,  the  "sovereigns  of  a  day");  and, secondly,  that  it  is  a  polite  fiction  that  no  command of  theirs,  during  their  one  day  of  sovereignty,  may  be disobeyed.
I  will  now  give  accounts  of  two  Malay  weddings which  took  place  at  Klang :  both  accounts  were  com- posed by  respectable  Malays,  the  first  one  being  trans- lated by  Mr.  Douglas  Campbell  of  Selangor,  and  the second  by  the  present  writer  :—
"The  following  account  of  the  ceremonies  con- nected with  the  marriage  of  Siti  Meriam,  a  daughter of  the  Orang  Kaya  Badu,1  of  Selangor,  to  Wan Mahamed  Esa,  a  son  of  Datoh  Mentri2  Ibrahim  of Perak,  has  been  furnished  by  a  Malay  contributor, Haji  Karrim,  and  in  translating  it  into  English  an endeavour  has  been  made  to  follow,  as  far  as  possible, the  style  of  the  native  writer.
"  On  Monday,  the  ist  of  August,  the  house  was  pre- pared and  the  hangings  and  curtains  put  up,  and  on that  evening  the  ceremony  of  dyeing  the  fingers  of  the bridegroom  with  henna  was  performed  for  the  first time.  Then  there  were  readings  from  the  Koran, with  much  beating  of  drums  and  kettledrums  and
1  The  descendant  of  one  of  the  four  great  Chiefs  (Orang  Besar  btr-ampat) of  Selangor.  2  Ex- Prime  Minister  of  Perak.
i-ga
ii   e  'u' S.O  £
*  l-a
>>  §  ^
•    O    41
5  e  -
S    p   c
i  2
M    -J!    -5
u  2  o- « •5. -5  2  I
vi  DESCRIPTION  OF  A   WEDDING  389
Malay  dances,  and  when  this  had  gone  on  for  some time,  supper  was  served  to  all  the  men  present  in  the balei,  or  separate  hall,  and  to  the  women  in  the  house adjoining.  Supper  over,  readings  from  the  Koran  and beating  of  drums  were  continued  till  daylight.
"  On  Tuesday  evening  the  dyeing  of  the  fingers  of the  bridegroom  was  performed  for  the  second  time,  as on  the  preceding  evening.
"The  third  occasion  of  dyeing  the  fingers  of  the bridegroom  took  place  on  Wednesday  evening,  but with  much  more  ceremony  than  previously.  The bridegroom,  after  being  dressed  in  silks  and  cloth  of gold,  was  paraded  in  an  open  carriage.  On  each  side of  him  was  seated  a  groom'sman  shading  him  with  a fan,  and  behind,  holding  an  umbrella  over  him,  was another.  And  thus,  with  many  followers  beating  drums and  singing,  and  with  the  Royal  ffVftfeMbox,  on  which are  seated  the  dragons  known  as  naga  pura  and naga  taru,  and  with  two  Royal  spears  carried  before him  and  two  behind,  the  bridegroom  was  taken through  the  streets  in  procession.  On  arriving  at  the bride's  house  he  was  received  with  showers  of  rose- water,  and  then  conveyed  by  the  elders  to  the  raised dais  on  which  the  bride  and  bridegroom  awaited  their friends.
"  The  bridegroom  being  seated,  fourteen  of  the elders  came  forward  and  dyed  his  fingers  with  henna, and  afterwards  others,  who  were  clever  at  this,  followed their  example.  While  this  was  going  on  there  was much  beating  of  gongs  and  drums,  and  then  the  same process  of  dyeing  was  repeated  on  the  bride  by  women Next  the  Imam  came,  and,  after  stating  that  the dowry  was  $100  cash,  heard  Wan  Mahamed  Esa
1  Sink  or  sirih,  the  betel  leaf.
390  MARRIAGE
publicly  receive  Siti  Meriam  as  his  wife,  whereupon the  Bilal l  read  a  prayer  and  afterwards  pronounced  a blessing.
"  Supper  was  then  served  to  all  the  guests  present as  before,  the  men  having  their  meal  in  the  6a/ei and  the  women  in  the  house  adjoining,  and  singing and  dancing  was  kept  up  until  daylight.
"  On  Thursday  afternoon  the  bride,  dressed  in  her best,  with  her  father  and  relations,  received  the  Resi- dent, who  was  accompanied  by  Mrs.  Birch,  the  Senior District  Officer  and  Mrs.  Turney,  Captain  and  Mrs. Syers,  Mr.  Edwards,  and  many  other  ladies  and gentlemen.  Cakes  and  preserves  were  served,  of which  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  present  partook. Then  the  bridegroom  arrived,  seated  in  an  open carriage  with  a  groom'sman  on  each  side  of  him,  while one,  carrying  the  Royal  silk  umbrella,  kindly  lent  by H.H.  the  Sultan,  went  before  him.
"  The  procession  was  headed  by  one  of  the  Royal spears,  and  two  more  were  carried  before  the  bride- groom and  two  behind  him,  and  so,  accompanied  by the  Selangor  Band,  kindly  lent  by  the  Resident,  and by  a  crowd  of  people  singing  and  beating  gongs  and drums,  he  was  conveyed  to  the  bride's  house.  His arrival  was  greeted  with  showers  of  rice,  and  he  was seated,  together  with  the  bride,  on  the  dais,  where they,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Birch,  helped each  other  to  partake  of  yellow  rice.
"  So  the  marriage  was  completed  satisfactorily,  and then,  as  it  was  evening,  the  Resident  and  Mrs.  Birch, and  the  other  ladies  and  gentlemen  present,  returned  to
1  The  Bilal  is  an  elder  of  the  mosque ;  in  western  Muhammadan  countries  he is  styled  Muezzin.
vi  ANOTHER  ACCOUNT  391
Kuala   Lumpur ;   the  people  who  remained  amusing themselves  with  dagger  dances  (main  dabus).
44  On  Friday  evening  the  bride  and  bridegroom  left for  Jugra  in  the  Esmeralda,  which  had  been  lent  by the  Resident,  to  pay  their  respects  to  H.H.  the  Sultan, returning  to  Klang  on  Saturday.
"  On  the  same  afternoon  the  ceremony  of  the  bath was  performed,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  every  one present,  and  was  kept  up  till  six  o'clock,  by  which  time every  one  was  wet  through.
44  This  was  the  last  ceremony  in  connection  with  the marriage,  and  then  every  one  wished  the  bride  and bridegroom  much  happiness."
The  following  account  was  translated  by  the writer  : —
44  Preparations  for  the  wedding  of  Inche  Halimah, daughter  of  Sheikh  'Abdul  Mohit  Baktal,  and  Said 4Abdul  Rahman  Al  Jafri,  commenced  on  Monday,  the 2nd  of  August  1895.
44  The  mosquito-curtain,  tapestries  and  canopies  were suspended,  and  decorations,  including  the  marriage furniture  (peti  betuah  dan  bangking},  arranged.  More- over, the  bridal  couch  was  adorned  with  decorations of  gold  and  mattresses  raised  one  above  the  other,  one with  a  facing  of  gold  and  the  other  with  a  facing  of silver,  and  four  pillows  with  gold  facings,  and  five piled-up  pillows  with  silver  facings  ;  and  the  kitchen apparatus  was  got  ready,  including  ten  pans  and coppers  of  the  largest  size,  and  the  sheds  for  those  who were  to  cook  rice  and  the  meats  eaten  therewith.  On this  day,  moreover,  a  buffalo  was  sent  by  Towkay Teck  Chong,  with  the  full  accompaniments  of  music, and  so  forth.
1  Selattgor  Journal,  vol.  i.  No.  2,  p.  23.
392  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
"  On  Tuesday,  the  3rd  day  of  the  month,  took  place the  first  Henna-staining,  the  bride  being  led  forth  by her  Coiffeur  and  seated  upon  the  marriage  throne. And  the  bride  seated  herself  against  the  large  pillow, which  is  called  '  The  Pillow  against  which  One  Rests,' or  bantal  saraga.  And  towards  evening  all  the  rela- tives on  the  woman's  side  sprinkled  the  tepong  tawar (upon  the  forehead  and  hands  of  the  bride),  and  after the  Henna-staining,  dishes  of  confectionery  and  pre- served fruits  were  offered  to  all  the  guests  who  were present  in  the  reception-room.
"  And  on  the  3rd1  day  of  the  month  there  took  place in  like  manner  the  second  Henna-staining.  And  on the  5th  day  of  the  month  took  place  the  Private  Henna- staining  (berhinei  ckuri] ;  the  bride's  hair  being  dressed after  the  fashion  known  as  Sanggul  Lintang,  and further  adorned  with  ornaments  of  gold  and  diamonds to  the  value  of  about  $5000.  And  after  this  Henna- staining  all  persons  present  descended  to  the  rooms below,  where  fencing  and  dagger  dances,  and  music and  dancing  were  kept  up  at  pleasure.
"  On  the  6th  day  of  the  month,  being  Friday,  Inche Mohamad  Kassim,  Penghulu  of  the  Mukim  of  Bukit Raja,  was  commissioned  by  Datoh  Penghulu  Mohit  to summon  the  bridegroom,  inasmuch  as  that  day  was fixed  for  the  marriage  rite.  And  the  bridegroom, wearing  the  robe  called  jubah  and  a  turban  tied  after  the Arab  fashion,2  arrived  at  about  three  o'clock,  and  was met  by  the  priest  (Tuan  Imam)  at  the  house.  Very many  were  the  guests  on  that  day,  and  many  ladies
1  Probably  this  should  be  4th.  not  unusual  even  in  the  case  of  purely
2  He  was  of  Arab  extraction.     But       Malay  bridegrooms, wearing  clothes  in  the  Arab  fashion  is
vj  WEDDING  CEREMONIES  393
and  gentlemen,  and  his  renowned  Highness  the Tungku  Dia-Uddin,  were  assembled  in  the  house.
"And  the  Tuan  Imam  read  the  marriage  service, Datoh  Pgnghulu  Mohit  giving  his  permission  for  Tuan Haji  Mohamad  Said  Mufti  to  wed  Inche  Halimah  to Said  'Abdul  Rahman  Al  Jafri,  with  a  marriage  portion of  $100.  And  after  the  marriage  rite  Tuan  Imam proceeded  to  read  prayers  for  their  welfare.  And afterwards  dishes  of  rice  were  brought,  of  which  the guests  present  were  invited  to  partake.  And  when all  had  eaten,  the  Coiffeur  led  forth  the  bride  to  the scaffolding  for  the  ceremony  called  '  Bathing  in  State.' And  upon  that  same  evening  took  place  the  Great Henna-staining,  and  the  guests  assembled  in  exceed- ing great  numbers,  both  men  and  women,  and  filled the  house  above  and  below  to  overflowing.  And when  the  henna-staining  was  completed,  all  the  men who  were  present  chanted  (bacha  maulud)  until  day- break.
"And  upon  the  7th  day  of  the  month,  being  Satur- day, the  bride  being  adorned,  the  bridegroom  seated in  a  buggy  was  drawn  in  procession  at  about  5  o'clock from  the  house  of  his  renowned  Highness  Tungku  Dia- Uddin,  accompanied  by  the  Government  Band  and  all kinds  of  music,  to  the  house  of  the  Datoh  Penghulu, where  he  was  met  and  sprinkled  with  saffron-rice  and rose-water.  Afterwards,  being  seated  on  the  marriage throne  side  by  side,  both  husband  and  wife,  they offered  each  other  in  turn  the  mouthfuls  of  saffron-rice which  were  presented  by  the  ladies  and  gentlemen .and  His  Highness  Tungku  Dia-Uddin.
"And  afterwards  the  elder  relatives  on  the  side  of both  husband  and  bride  presented  the  rice,  and  Inche Mohamad  Kassim  presented  red  eggs  (telor  berjoran)
394  MARRIAGE
to  all  the  ladies  and  gentlemen,  and  the  bridegroom led  the  bride  with  him  into  the  bridal  chamber  by  the finger,  walking  upon  cloth  of  purple  and  gold.  And afterwards  all  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  were  invited to  eat  and  drink,  and  the  band  played,  fireworks  and artificial  fires  were  burned,  and  great  was  the  bright- ness thereof,  and  all  the  young  people  danced  and  sang at  their  pleasure  until  the  evening  was  spent."  l
The  marriage  customs  hitherto  described  have been  only  such  as  are  based  on  a  peaceful  understand- ing between  the  parents  of  the  contracting  parties.  An account  of  Malay  marriage  customs  would  not,  how- ever, be  complete  without  some  mention  of  the  customs which  regulate,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  even  the forcible  abduction  of  a  wife.  Of  these  customs  Sir W.  E.  Maxwell  says  : —
"The  word  panjat  in  Malay  means  literally  'to climb,'  but  it  is  used  in  Perak,  and  perhaps  in  other Malay  States,  to  signify  a  forcible  entry  into  a  house for  the  purpose  of  securing  as  a  wife  a  woman  whom her  relations  have  already  refused  to  the  intruder. This  high-handed  proceeding  is  recognised  by  Malay custom,  and  is  regulated  by  certain  well-known  rules.
"  Panjat  is  of  two  kinds — panjat  angkara  and  panjat 'adat — entry  by  violence  and  entry  by  custom.  In  the first  case,  the  man  makes  his  way  into  the  house  armed with  his  kris,  or  other  weapon,  and  entering  the women's  apartment,  or  posting  himself  at  the  door, secures  the  person  of  his  intended  bride,  or  prevents her  escape.  He  runs  the  risk  of  being  killed  on  the spot  by  the  girl's  relations,  and  his  safety  depends
1  Selangor  Journal,  vol.   iv.   No.  2,        buffaloes,  a  bullock,  goats,  spices,  plate, pp.    23-5.      The   list  of  presents  sent       and  jewellery, by  friends    on   this  occasion    included
vi  ABDUCTION  395
upon  his  reputation  for  courage  and  strength,  and  upon the  number  of  his  friends  and  the  influence  of  his family.  A  wooer  who  adopts  this  violent  method  of compelling  the  assent  of  unwilling  relations  to  his marriage  to  one  of  their  kin  must,  say  the  Malays, have  three  qualifications —
"  Ka-rapat-an  baniak, Wang-nia  ber-lebi/i, Jantan-nia  ber-lebih,
1  A  strong  party  to  back  him,  plenty  of  money,  and  no lack  of  bravery.'
"  Plenty  of  money  is  necessary,  because,  by  accepted custom,  if  the  relations  yield  and  give  their  consent all  the  customary  payments  are  doubled  ;  the  fine  for the  trespass,  which  would  ordinarily  be  twenty-five dollars,  becomes  fifty  dollars ;  the  dower  is  likewise doubled,  and  the  usual  present  of  clothes  (salin)  must consist  of  two  of  each  of  the  three  garments  (salendang, baju,  kain\  instead  of  one  as  usual.  The  fine  for panjat  angkara  may  be  of  any  amount,  according  to the  pleasure  of  the  woman's  relations,  and  they  fix  it high  or  low  according  to  the  man's  position.  I  have heard  of  one  case  in  Perak,  where  the  fine  was  five hundred  dollars,  and  another  in  which  the  suitor,  to obtain  his  bride,  had  to  pay  one  thousand  seven  hun- dred and  fifty  dollars,  namely,  one  thousand  two  hun- dred and  fifty  dollars  as  a  fine,  and  five  hundred  dollars for  the  marriage  expenses.  But  in  this  case  the  girl was  already  betrothed  to  another,  and  one  thousand dollars  out  of  the  fine  went  to  the  disappointed  rival.
"  Sometimes  the  relations  hold  out,  or  the  man,  for want  of  one  of  the  three  qualifications  mentioned  above, has  to  beat  an  ignominious  retreat.  In  the  reign  of Sultan  Ali,  one  Mat  Taib,  a  budak  raja,  or  personal
396  MARRIAGE  CHAP.
attendant  on  the  Sultan,  asked  for  Wan  Dena,  the daughter  of  the  Bandahara  of  Kedah  (she  then  being at  Kota  Lama  in  P£rak)  in  marriage.  Being  refused he  forced  his  way  into  the  house,  and  seizing  the  girl by  her  long  hair  drew  his  kris,  and  defied  everybody. No  one  dared  to  interfere  by  force,  for  the  man,  if attacked,  would  have  driven  his  kris  into  the  girl's body.  This  state  of  things  is  said  to  have  lasted  three days  and  three  nights,  during  which  the  man  neither ate  nor  slept.  Eventually  he  was  drugged  by  an  old woman  from  whom  he  accepted  some  food  or  water, and  when  he  fell  asleep  the  girl  was  released  from  his grasp  and  taken  to  the  Sultan's  palace,  where  she  was married  off  straightway  to  one  Mat  Arshad.  Mat Taib  had  his  revenge,  for  within  a  year  he  amoked  at Bandar,  where  Mat  Arshad  lived,  killing  the  latter  and wounding  Wan  Dena.
"  Panjat  'adatis  a  less  lawless  proceeding.  A  man who  is  in  love  with  a  girl,  the  consent  of  whose  parents or  relations  he  cannot  obtain,  sends  his  kris  to  their house  with  a  message  to  the  effect  that  he  is  ready with  the  dower,  presents,  etc.,  doubled  according  to custom,  and  that  he  is  ready  to  make  good  any demands  they  may  make.
"  The  kris  is  symbolical  of  the  violent  entry,  which in  this  case  is  dispensed  with.  If  the  girl's  guardians are  still  obdurate  they  send  back  the  kris,  but  with  it they  must  send  double  the  amount  of  the  dower  offered by  the  man.1 "
1  Sir  William  Maxwell  in  N.  and  Q.,  No.  4,  sec.  91,  issued  with  No.  17  of the/. X.A.S.,  S.B.
VI
FUNERALS
397
7.    FUNERALS1
When  a  man  dies,  the  corpse  (called  Maiat,  except in  the  case  of  a  Raja,  when  it  is  called  Jenaja  or JPnazak)  is  laid  on  its  back,  and  composed  with  the feet  towards  Mecca,  and  the  hands  crossed  (the  right wrist  resting  upon  the  left  just  below  the  breast-bone, and  the  right  fore-finger  on  the  top  of  the  left  arm). It  is  next  shrouded  from  head  to  foot  in  fine  new sarongs,  one  of  which  usually  covers  the  body  from the  feet  upwards  to  the  waist,  the  other  covering  it from  the  waist  to  the  head.  There  are  generally  (in the  case  of  the  peasantry)  three  or  four  thicknesses  of these  sarongs,  but  when  a  rich  man  (prang  kayo] dies,  as  many  as  seven  may  be  used,  each  of  the  seven being  made  in  one  long  piece,  so  as  to  cover  the  body from  the  head  to  the  feet,  the  cloth  being  of  fine
1  "  At  their  funerals  the  corpse  is carried  to  the  place  of  interment  on  a broad  plank,  which  is  kept  for  the public  service  of  the  ditsun,  and  lasts for  generations.  It  is  constantly  nibbed with  lime,  either  to  preserve  it  from decay  or  to  keep  it  pure.  No  coffin is  made  use  of,  the  body  being  simply wrapped  in  white  cloth,  particularly  of the  sort  called  hummnms.  In  forming the  grave  (kubur),  after  digging  to  a convenient  depth  they  make  a  cavity in  the  side,  at  bottom,  of  sufficient dimensions  to  contain  the  body,  which is  there  deposited  on  its  right  side.  By this  mode  the  earth  literally  lies  light upon  it ;  and  the  cavity,  after  strewing flowers  in  it,  they  stop  up  by  two  boards fastened  angularly  to  each  other,  so that  the  one  is  on  the  top  of  the  corpse, whilst  the  other  defends  it  on  the  open side,  the  edge  resting  on  the  bottom •of  the  grave.  The  outer  excavation  is then  filled  up  with  earth  ;  and  little white  flags,  or  streamers,  are  stuck  in order  around.  They  likewise  plant  a shrub,  bearing  a  white  flower,  called
kumbangkamboja  (Plumeria  ol>tusa),a.n& in  some  places  wild  marjoram.  The women  who  attend  the  funeral  make a  hideous  noise,  not  much  unlike  the Irish  howl.  On  the  third  and  seventh day  the  relations  perform  a  ceremony at  the  grave,  and  at  the  end  of  twelve months  that  of  tegga  l>atu,  or  setting up  a  few  long  elliptical  stones,  at  the head  and  foot,  which,  being  scarce  in some  parts  of  the  country,  bear  a  con- siderable price.  On  this  occasion  they kill  and  feast  on  a  buffalo,  and  leave the  head  to  decay  on  the  spot,  as  a token  of  the  honour  they  have  done  to the  deceased  in  eating  to  his  memory. The  ancient  burying-places  are  called kranimat,  and  are  supposed  to  have been  those  of  the  holy  men  by  whom their  ancestors  were  converted  to  the faith.  They  are  held  in  extraordinary reverence,  and  the  least  disturbance  or violation  of  the  ground,  though  all traces  of  the  graves  be  obliterated,  is regarded  as  an  unpardonable  sacrilege,'' — Marsden,  Hist.  cfSumatra(e<\..  1 8 1 1 ), pp.  287,  288.
398  FUNERALS
texture,  of  no  recognised  colour,  but  richly  interwoven with  gold  thread,  while  the  body  is  laid  upon  a  mat- tress, which  in  turn  rests  upon  a  new  mat  ®t pandanus leaf;  finally,  all  but  the  very  poorest  display  the  hang- ings used  on  great  occasions.  At  the  head  of  the corpse  are  then  piled  five  or  six  new  pillows,  with  two more  on  the  right  and  left  side  of  the  body  resting against  the  ribs,  while  just  below  the  folded  hands  are laid  a  pair  of  betel-nut  scissors  (kackip  best],  and  on the  matting  at  either  side  a  bowl  for  burning  incense  is placed.  Some  say  that  the  origin  of  laying  the  betel- nut  scissors  on  the  breast  is  that  once  upon  a  time  a cat  brushed  against  the  body  of  a  dead  person,  thereby causing  the  evil  influence  (badi)  which  resides  in  cats to  enter  the  body,  so  that  it  rose  and  stood  upon  its feet.  The  "contact  with  iron"1  prevents  the  dead body  from  rising  again  should  it  happen  by  any  mis- chance that  a  cat  (which  is  generally  the  only  animal kept  in  the  house,  and  which  should  be  driven  out  of the  house  before  the  funeral  ceremonies  commence) should  enter  unawares  and  brush  against  it.  From this  moment  until  the  body  is  laid  in  the  grave  the "  wake  "  must  be  religiously  observed,  and  the  body  be watched  both  by  day  and  night  to  see  that  nothing which  is  forbidden  (pantang]  may  come  near  it.2
1  The  explanation  usually  given  by  It  is  still  the  custom  to  keep  both Malays   is  that   the  betel -nut  scissors  the  hearth-fire   (api  dapor)  and  lamps symbolise  iron.       Short    weapons  are  (palita)  burning  not  only  for  so  long sometimes  substituted.  as  the  corpse  may  be  in  the  house,  but
2  Tradition  says   that    formerly   the  for  seven  days  and  nights  after  occur- corpse  was  watched  for  three  days  be-  rence    of  the  death.       It    is  also   the fore  burial,  and  that  sometimes  it  was  custom  to  open  the  sick  person's  mos- kept  for  a  week  or  even  a  longer  period.  quito-curtain  when  death  is  approach- One  Raja  S'nei  is  reported  to  have  been  ing,  and  in  some  cases,  at  all  events, kept  40  days  in  her  coffin  above  ground !  the  dying  are  taken  out  of  their  beds It  is  also  stated  that  before  the  intro-  and  laid  upon  the  floor.      I  may  add duction  of  Muhammadanism  the  dead  that  the  material  for  fumigation  (pfra- were  burned.  btm)  is  placed  upon  the  hearth-fire  after
vi  THE  COFFIN  399
The  Imam,  Bilal,  or  Khatib,  or  in  their  absence  the Pah  Doja,  or  Pah  Le"bai,  is  then  summoned,  and  early notice  of  the  funeral  is  given  to  all  relations  and  friends to  give  them  an  opportunity  of  attending.  Meanwhile the  preparations  are  going  on  at  the  house  of  the deceased.  The  shroud  (kain  kapari)  and  plank  or planks  for  the  coffin  are  got  ready  :  of  coffins  there  are three  kinds,  the  papan  sakeping  (the  simplest  form, generally  consisting  of  a  simple  plank  Q{ p^lla^  or  jelu- tong  wood  about  six  feet  long  by  three  spans  wide), the  karanda  (a  plain,  oblong  plank  box,  of  the  same dimensions),  and  the  long  (consisting  either  of  two planks  which  form  a  sort  of  gable  with  closed  ends called  kajang  rungkop,  or  the  long  betul,  which  is  like three  sides  of  a  box  with  its  sides  bulging  out,  both ends  open,  and  no  bottom).  Varnish  or  paint  is  for- bidden in  Malay  coffins,  but  the  planks  are  washed  to insure  their  cleanliness,  and  lined  with  white  cloth (alas put eh\  About  three  inches  of  earth  is  put  into the  karanda  ordinarily,  but  if  the  coffin  is  to  be  kept, about  a  span's  depth  of  earth,  quicklime,  and  several katis^  of  tea-leaves,  rush -piths  (sumbii  kumpai],  and camphor  are  also  deposited  in  it,  in  successive  layers, the  rush-piths  at  the  top.  Afterwards  when  the  corpse has  been  laid  on  the  top,  tea-leaves  are  put  at  front  and back  of  the  corpse  as  it  lies.
The  next  operation  is  to  wash  the  corpse,  which  is carried  for  this  purpose  into  the  front  or  outer  room. If  there  are  four  people  to  be  found  who  are  willing  to undertake  this  disagreeable  duty,  they  are  told  to  sit
a  death,  to  scare  away  the  evil  spirits,  the  demons   who   are  believed  to  be
just   as  salt  is   thrown  upon   the  fire  casting  the  thunderbolts.
during  a  thunderstorm,  in  order  that  it  T  The  kati  is  a  weight  equivalent  to
may  counteract  the  explosions  of  thunder  i^  Ib.  avoirdupois.
(rnfmbalas  pttir),  and  thus  drive  away
400  FUNERALS  CHAP.
upon  the  floor  in  a  row,  all  looking  the  same  way,  and with  their  legs  stretched  out  (belunjor  kaki),  the  body being  then  laid  across  their  laps  (riba).  Several  men are  then  told  off  to  fetch  water  in  jars,  scoop  it  out  of the  jars  and  pour  it  on  the  body  in  small  quantities  by means  of  the  "scoop"  (penckedok  ayer],  which  is  usu- ally a  small  bowl,  saucer,  or  cocoa-nut  shell  (tempurong\ It  frequently  happens,  however,  that  this  unpleasant task  finds  no  volunteers,  in  which  case  five  banana stems  are  turned  into  improvised  "  rollers  "  (galang), on  which  the  body  is  raised  from  the  floor  during  the process  of  washing  (meruang).  When  the  body  is ready  for  washing,  a  chief  washer  (orang  meruang]  is engaged  for  a  fee  of  about  a  dollar ;  this  is  usually  the Bilal  or  Imam,  who  "shampoos"  the  body  whilst  the rest  are  pouring  water  on  it.  The  body  then  under- goes a  second  washing,  this  time  with  the  cosmetic  called ayer  bedak  which  is  prepared  by  taking  a  handful of  rice  (sa-genggam  bras),  two  or  three  "  dips  "  of  lime (cholek  kapur\  and  a  pinch  of  gambier  (gambir  sa-chubif] — the  last  three  being  the  usual  concomitants  of  a single  "  chew  "  of  the  betel-leaf — and  pounding  them up  together  with  the  rice.  When  pounded  they  are mixed  with  water  (di-banchor *)  in  a  large  bowl  holding about  two  gallons,  the  water  at  the  top  being  poured off  into  a  vessel  of  similar  capacity,  and  scooped  up and  sprinkled  as  before  on  the  corpse.  The  next washing  is  with  juice  of  limes.  Four  or  five  limes (limau  nipis]  are  taken,  the  ends  cut  off,  and  each  lime slashed  crosswise  on  the  top  without  completely  sever- ing the  parts.  These  limes  are  then  squeezed  (di-ramas- kan]  into  another  large  bowl  containing  water,  and  the washing  repeated.  The  final  washing,  or  "Nine  Waters"
1  The  form  found  in  most  dictionaries  is  banchoh  or  banchnli.
vi  WASHING  THE  BODY  401
(ayer  sambilan,  so  called  from  the  water  being  scooped up,  and  poured  thrice  to  the  right,  thrice  to  the  left, and  thrice  over  the  front  of  the  corpse  from  head  to foot)  is  performed  with  fresh  water  as  at  first,  and the  whole  ceremony  when  completed  is  called  bedara. The  washing  completed,  the  orifices — e.g.  ears,  nostrils, eyes — are  generally  stopped  with  cotton,  and  the  body is  carried  back  to  its  mattress,  and  laid  in  a  shroud  of white  cotton  cloth,  which  should  be  about  seven  feet long  by  four  feet  in  width  (salabuK),  so  that  the  edges meet  over  the  breast.  After  this  the  last  kiss  is  given by  the  nearest  relatives,  who  must  not,  however,  disturb the  corpse  by  letting  their  tears  fall  upon  its  features. The  shroud  is  usually  of  three  thicknesses  in  the  case of  poor  people,  but  wealthier  families  use  five,  and even  seven- fold  shrouds.  In  Selangor,  however, each  shroud  is  usually  a  separate  piece  of  cloth.  The dead  body  of  a  child  is  sometimes  covered  in  addition with  a  fine  sort  of  white  powder  (abok  tanah  or  taya- mam),  which  is  sprinkled  over  the  face  and  arms. Five  knots  are  used  in  fastening  the  shroud,  the  ends being  drawn  up  and  tied  (kochong]  by  means  of  the unravelled  hem  or  selvage  of  the  shroud  torn  into  tape- like  strips?  which  are  bound  thrice  round  the  body  at the  breast,  the  knees,  and  the  hips  respectively,  as well  as  above  the  head  and  below  the  feet.  The corpse  is  then  laid  on  the  mattress  or  mat  again,  this time  with  its  head  to  the  north,  and  on  its  right  side looking  towards  the  west  (Mecca),  which  is  the  position it  is  to  occupy  in  the  grave.  Prayers  are  then  offered by  four  or  five  "praying-men"  (orang  menyembah-
1  Whence    the   expression    "  charik      of  the  shroud,  and   not  to  tear  off  a kapan"  which  means  literally  to  tear       piece  of  cloth  to  form  the  shroud), the  shroud  (i.e.  to  tear  off  the  selvage
2  D
402  FUNERALS  CHAP.
yang),  who  know  the  burial  service  by  heart,  the  Bilal or  Imam  joining  in  the  service,  and  all  turning  towards the  west  in  the  usual  way.  One  "praying-man"  is sufficient,  if  no  more  are  to  be  had,  his  fee  ranging from  50  cents  to  a  dollar  in  the  case  of  the  poorer classes,  and  among  the  rich  often  amounting  to  $5  or $6.  This  service  is  held  about  i  P.M.  so  as  to  give plenty  of  time  to  carry  the  body  to  the  grave  and return  before  nightfall.
A  jugful  of  eagle-wood  (gkaru)  and  sandal-wood (chendana)  water  is  then  prepared,  a  small  piece  of each  wood  being  taken  and  grated  on  a  stone  over the  jug  until  the  water  becomes  appreciably  scented  ; about  twenty  leaves  of  the  sweet-scented  pandanus (pandan  wangi]  are  then  added,  together  with  a bunch  of  fragrant  areca-palm  blossoms,  and  other scented  flowers,  such  as  the  champaka  and  kenanga, which  are  shredded  (di-iris]  into  a  wooden  tray  and mixed  together,  whilst  fragrant  essences,  such  as  rose- water  (ayer  mawar),  lavender  water  (ayer  labenda), attar  of  roses  (minyak  attar  or  turki)  are  added  when obtainable.  A  betel  -  leaf  tray  containing  all  the articles  required  for  chewing  betel  is  then  prepared, together  with  a  new  mat  of  pandanus-leaf,  in  which are  rolled  up  five  hasta^  of  white  cloth,  and  a  brass bowl  or  alms  box,  in  which  latter  are  to  be  placed the  contributions  (sedekak)  of  the  deceased's  rela- tions. The  preparations  are  completed  by  bringing in  the  bier  (usongan),  which  has  to  be  made  on purpose,  except  in  towns  where  a  bier  is  kept  in  the mosque.
In  the  case  of  the  single  plank  coffin  the  body  is laid  on  the  plank  (which  is  carried  on  the  bier)  and
1  Cubit,  the  length  of  the  forearm.
vj  THE  FUNERAL  PROCESSION  403
a  sort  of  wicker-work  covering  (lerang - lerang)  of split  bamboo  is  placed  over  the  corpse,  so  as  to protect  it  on  its  way  to  the  grave.  In  the  case  of the  karanda  the  body  is  laid  in  the  coffin,  which  is carried  on  the  bier ;  and  in  the  case  of  the  long,  there being  no  bottom  in  this  form  of  coffin,  the  body  lies on  a  mat  In  each  case  the  bier  is  covered  with  a pall  (kain  tudong]  of  as  good  coloured  cloth  (never white,  but  often  green)  as  may  be  obtainable.  There are  generally  two  or  three  of  these  coverings,  and floral  decorations  are  sometimes  thrown  across  them, the  blossoms  of  the  areca-palm  and  the  scented  pan- danus  being  woven  into  exquisite  floral  strips,  called "Centipedes'  Feet"  (j'ari  lipari),  about  three  feet long  by  two  fingers  in  breadth,  and  laid  at  short intervals  across  the  pall.  There  are  generally  from five  to  six  of  these  floral  strips,  the  areca  blossom alternating  with  the  pandanus.  The  number  of bearers  depends  on  the  rank  of  the  deceased  ;  in  the case  of  a  Sultan  as  many  as  possible  bear  a  hand  in sending  him  to  the  grave,  partly  because  of  the pahala  or  merit  thereby  obtained,  and  partly  (no doubt)  for  the  sake  of  the  sedekah  or  alms  given  to bearers.  The  procession  then  starts  for  the  grave  ; none  of  the  mourners  or  followers  here  wear  any special  dress  or  sign  of  mourning,  such  as  the  white sash  with  coloured  ribbon  which  is  sometimes  worn  at Singapore  (unless  the  kabong  putek  or  strip  of  white cloth  which  is  distributed  as  a  funeral  favour  at  the death  of  a  Sultan  may  be  so  reckoned).  The  only mourning  which  appears  to  be  known  to  Malays  is the  rare  use  of  a  kind  of  black  edging  for  the  en- velopes of  letters,  and  that  is  no  doubt  copied  from the  English  custom,  though  I  may  add  that  a  letter
404  FUNERALS  CHAP.
which  announces  a  death  should  have  no  kapala? Loud  wailing  and  weeping  is  forbidden  by  the  Imam for  fear  of  disturbing  the  dead.  The  mosque  drum is  not  usually  beaten  for  funerals  in  Selangor,  nor  is the  body  usually  carried  into  the  mosque,  but  is  borne straight  to  the  tomb.  If  the  coffin  is  a  single  plank one,  on  arriving  at  the  grave  (which  should  have been  dug  early  in  the  morning)  an  excavation  is  made on  the  left  side  of  the  grave  for  the  reception  of  the corpse,  the  cavity  being  called  Hang  lahad.  Three men  then  lower  the  corpse  into  the  grave,  where three  others  are  waiting  to  receive  it,  and  the  corpse is  deposited  in  the  cavity  on  its  right  side  (mengiring ka  lambong  kanan],  looking  towards  the  west  (Mecca), and  with  the  head  therefore  lying  towards  the  north. Four  pegs  (daka-dakd)  are  then  driven  in  to  keep the  plank  in  a  diagonal  position  and  prevent  it  from falling  on  the  body,  while  the  plank  in  turn  protects the  corpse  from  being  struck  by  falling  earth.
The  karanda  is  lowered  into  the  centre  of  the grave  in  the  same  way  as  a  European  coffin,  the body,  however,  being  invariably  deposited  in  the position  just  described  ;  whilst  the  long  acts  as  a  sort of  lid  to  a  shallow  trench  (just  big  enough  to  contain the  body)  which  is  dug  (di-fcroli}  in  the  middle  of  the grave-pit.  The  five  bands  swathing  the  corpse  (lima tali- pengikat  maiaf)  are  then  removed,  and  at  this point  the  bystanders  occasionally  hand  lumps  of  earth (tanah  sa-kepat)  to  the  men  standing  in  the  pit,  who, after  putting  them  to  the  nostrils  of  the  deceased "  to  be  smelled,"  deposit  them  at  the  side  of  the grave,  when  they  are  shovelled  in  by  those  standing
1  The  short  motto  which  usually  heads  Malay  letters.
vi  BURIAL  405
at  the  top.1  The  filling  of  the  grave  then  proceeds, but  as  it  is  "  taboo  "  (pantang)  to  let  the  earth  strike against  the  coffin  in  its  fall,  the  grave-diggers,  who are  still  standing  in  the  pit,  receive  it  as  it  falls upon  a  sort  of  small  hurdle  or  screen  made  of branches,  and  thence  tilt  it  into  the  grave.  As  the grave  (which  is  usually  dug  to  about  the  level  of  a man's  ear)  fills  up,  the  grave-diggers,  who  are  for- bidden to  shovel  in  the  soil  themselves,  tread  down the  earth  and  level  it,  and  they  are  not  allowed  to leave  the  pit  till  it  is  filled  up  to  the  top.  One  of the  relations  then  takes  a  piece  of  any  hard  wood, and  rudely  fashions  with  a  knife  a  temporary  grave- post  (nisan  or  nts/ian),  which  is  round  in  the  case of  a  man  and  flattened  in  the  case  of  a  woman ;  one of  these  grave-posts  is  placed  exactly  over  the  head (rantau  kapald]  and  the  other  over  the  waist  (rantau pinggang\  not  at  the  feet  as  in  the  case  of  Europeans. Thus  the  two  grave-posts  are  ordinarily  about  three feet  apart,  but  tradition  says  that  over  the  grave  of a  kramat  or  saint,  they  will  always  be  found  some  five or  six  feet  at  least  apart,  one  at  the  head  and  one at  the  feet,  and  it  is  said  to  be  the  saint  himself  who moves  them.  To  the  knob  of  the  grave-post  is  tied a  strip  of  white  cloth  as  a  sign  of  recent  death.2
Leaves  are  then  strewn  on  the  ground  at  the  left of  the  grave,  and  the  five  cubits  of  white  cloth  alluded
1  I   may  add  that  in   pre-Muham-  the  earlier  form  of  a  tomb  was  a  cir- madan  days  certain  articles  are  said  to  cular  mound  with  a  single  grave-post have  been  buried  with  the  corpse,  viz.  in   the   centre.      It  is  said  that  such "Pros  sa-p'riol:,asam,garam, "together  mounds  were  formerly  used  in  Sungei with   (in    the   case  of  a   man)    rough  Ujong,  but  I  am  unable  to  say  if  this wooden     models    of    the    deceased's  is  so.     Sultan  Zeinal  'Abidin  of  Johor weapons.  is  also  described  as  having  a  tomb  of
2  Tradition  says  that  originally  one  this  description  at  Kota  Tinggi. grave-post  (nisan)  was  used,  and  that
406  FUNERALS  CHAP.
to  above  are  spread  out  to  form  a  mat,  upon  which the  Imam  takes  his  seat,  the  rest  of  the  company being  seated  upon  the  leaves.  Eagle  -  wood  and sandal  -  wood  water  (ayer  gharu  chendand]  is  then brought  to  the  Imam,  who  pours  it  out  in  three libations,  each  time  sprinkling  the  grave  from  the head  to  the  foot.  If  any  water  is  left,  the  Imam sprinkles  it  upon  any  other  graves  which  may  be near,  whilst  the  shredded  flowers  (bunga  rampai] are  then  similarly  disposed  of.  Next  is  read  the talkin,  which  is  an  exhortation  (ajaran)  addressed  to the  deceased.  It  is  said  that  during  the  process  of reading  the  Talkin  the  corpse  momentarily  revives, and,  still  lying  upon  its  side,  raises  itself  to  a  listen- ing position  by  reclining  upon  its  right  elbow  (ber- telku)  and  resting  its  head  upon  its  hand.1  This is  the  reason'2'  for  removing  the  bands  of  the  shroud, as  the  body  is  left  free  to  move,  and  thus  in  groping about  (meraba-raba)  with  its  left  hand  feels  that  its garment  is  without  a  hem  or  selvage,  and  then  first realising  that  it  must  be  really  dead,  composes  itself to  listen  quietly  to  whatever  the  Imam  may  say, until  at  the  close  of  the  exhortation  it  falls  back really  lifeless!  Hence  the  most  absolute  silence must  be  observed  during  the  exhortation.  The  Imam then  repeats,  by  way  of  "doxology,"  the  tahalil or  meratib,  "  la-ilaha-illa- llah "  ("there  is  no  god but  God  "),  in  company  with  the  rest  of  the  assembly,
1  This  notion  probably  arose  from  an  strips    into   a  rough  sort   of  bracelet, erroneous  idea  of  etymological  connec-  which  they  wear  as  long  as  it  lasts  in tion    between    the   words    talkin   and  memory  of  the  deceased.      Little  chil- bfrtglku.  dren  are  made  to  pass  thrice  underneath
2  Of  course  if  the  karanda  is  used  the    karanda    of    their   parents    when the  bands  have  to  be  removed  before  it  it  is  first  lifted  in  the  chamber,    "to is   nailed   down.       On   their   removal  prevent    them    from    pining    for    the these  bands  are  handed  to  the  next-of-  deceased."
kin,   who  tear  them  up  and  plait  the
vi  FUNERAL  PRA  YERS  407
all  present  turning  their  heads  and  rocking  them- selves from  side  to  side  as  they  sit,  whilst  they reiterate  the  words  a  hundred  times,  commencing slowly  till  thirty-three  times  are  reached,  then  in- creasing the  pace  up  to  the  sixty -sixth  time,  and concluding  with  great  rapidity.  The  contributions in  the  alms-basin  (batil)  are  then  divided  among  the entire  company  as  alms  (sedekaJi).  The  master  of the  house  then  invites  those  present  to  partake  at about  five  P.M.  of  the  funeral  feast,  which  in  no  way differs  from  an  ordinary  Malay  banquet,  the  more solid  portion  of  the  meal  (makan  nasi]  being  fol- lowed by  the  usual  confectionery  and  preserved  fruits. The  Imam  then  reads  prayers,  and  the  company breaks  up.  The  decorations  for  the  funeral  are  left for  three  days  undisturbed.  During  these  three days  the  nearer  neighbours  are  feasted,  both  in  the morning  and  evening,  at  the  usual  Malay  hours ;  and for  three  days  every  night  at  about  ten  P.M.  the service  called  "  Reading  the  Koran  to  the  Corpse " (mengajikan  maiat]  is  performed,  either  by  the Imam  or  somebody  hired  for  the  purpose.  This  is an  important  duty,  the  slightest  slip  being  regarded as  a  great  sin.  At  the  end  of  the  three  days  there is  yet  another  feast,  at  one  P.M.  (kanduri  meniga hari],  when  those  who  are  farther  off  are  invited, and  after  this  meal  the  tahalil  is  repeated  as  before.
On  the  seventh  day  a  similar  feast  (called  kanduri menujoh  hari]  is  followed  by  the  tahalil,  which  neces- sitates a  further  distribution  of  fees  (sedekah  tahalil}  ; but  in  the  case  of  poor  people  this  second  tahalil  may be  omitted,  or  the  master  of  the  house  may  say  to  the company,  "  I  ask  (to  be  let  off)  the  praying  fees"  (Sahya minta  sedekah  tahalil},  in  which  case  the  tahalil  is  free.
408  MEDICINE  CHAP.
Yet  another  feast  is  held  on  the  fourteenth  day (kanduri  dua  kali  tujoh  kari],  when  the  ceremonies are  at  end,  except  in  the  case  of  the  richer  classes  who keep  the  kanduri  ampat  puloh  kari,  or  forty  days' feast,  and  the  kanduri  meratus  hari,  or  - 100  days' feast,  whilst  the  anniversary  is  also  kept  as  a  holiday by  all  who  wish  to  show  respect  for  the  deceased. This  closes  the  usual  funeral  ceremonies,  but  a  day  is generally  chosen  at  pleasure  in  the  month  of  Ramthan or  Maulud  for  the  purpose  of  offering  prayers  and feasting  the  ancestors.
The  only  difference  made  in  the  case  of  the  death of  a  woman  is  that  the  washing  of  the  corpse  devolves upon  women,  whilst  in  the  case  of  very  young  infants the  talkin  is  sometimes  omitted.  The  woman's  nisan, as  has  been  explained,  is  distinguished  by  its  shape.1 The  temporary  nisan  may  be  replaced  by  a  permanent one  at  any  time  after  the  funeral.  At  the  time  the grave  is  made  up,  four  planks  (dapor-dapor),  with  the upper  edges  and  ends  roughly  carved  and  scolloped,  are placed  round  the  grave  mound  (tanah  mati)  to  keep the  earth  from  falling  down.  Whenever  the  grave  is thus  finally  made  up  a  feast  is  held,  but  from  the necessities  of  the  case  this  pious  duty  is  generally  left to  the  rich.
8.  MEDICINE
"The  successful  practice  of  (Malay)  medicine  must be  based  on  the  fundamental  principle  of  '  preserving the  balance  of  power '  among  the  four  elements.  This is  chiefly  to  be  effected  by  constant  attention  to,  and
1  From   observing  a  good  many  of  evolved  from  a  phallic  emblem,  whilst
these  grave-posts  in  different  localities,  that    used     for     women     occasionally
I  should  be  inclined  to  suppose  that  assumes  a  rude  resemblance  to  a  human
the  grave-post  used  for  men  had  been  being.
vi  MEDICAL  RITES  409
moderation  in,  diet.  To  enforce  these  golden  precepts, passages  from  the  Koran  are  plentifully  quoted  against excess  in  eating  or  drinking.  Air,  they  say,  is  the cause  of  heat  and  moisture,  and  earth  of  cold  and dryness.  'They  assimilate  the  constitution  and  passions of  man  to  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and  the  seven planets,  etc."
"  The  mysterious  sympathy  between  man  and external  nature  ....  was  the  basis  of  that  system of  supernatural  magic  which  prevailed  in  Europe  during the  Middle  Ages."1
The  foregoing  quotation  shows  that  the  distinctive features  of  the  Aristotelian  hygienic  theory,  as  borrowed by  the  Arabs,  did  eventually  filter  through  (in  some cases)  until  they  reached  the  Malays.  Such  direct references,  however,  to  Greek  theories  are  of  the  rarest character,  and  can  hardly  be  considered  typical.
Most  of  the  more  important  rites  practised  by  the Malay  medicine-men  (Bomor^  may  be  divided  into two  well-defined  parts.  Commencing  with  a  cere- monial "  inspection  "  (the  counterpart  of  our  modern "diagnosis"),  the  Bomor  proceeds  to  carry  out  a therapeutic  ceremony,  the  nature  of  which  is  decided by  the  results  of  the  "  inspection."  For  the  purposes of  the  diagnosis  he  resorts  to  divination,  by  means  of omens  taken  from  the  smoke  of  the  burning  censer, from  the  position  of  coins  thrown  into  water-jars (batu  buyong),  and  parched  rice  floating  upon  the water's  surface.
The  therapeutic  rites,  on  the  other  hand,  may be  roughly  classified  as  follows  according  to  their types  :3—
1  Newbold,  Malacca^  vol.  ii.  p.  352.  3  There  are,  it  need  hardly  be  said,
2  As  to  the  titles  Bomor  and  Pawangt       innumerable    charms     and     talismans see  Chapter  III.  p.  56,  note.  which  are   valued  by   the  Malays  for
410  MEDICINE  CHAP.
1.  Propitiatory  Ceremonies  (limas,  ambangan,  etc.).
2.  "  Neutralisatory  "  Ceremonies  for  destroying  the  evil  principle
(tawar).
3.  "  Expulsory "  Ceremonies  (for  the   casting   out  of  the  evil
principle;1  of  which  the  "sucking  charm"  rite  (mengalin) is  an  example).
4.  "  Revivificatory "   Ceremonies  (for  recalling  a  sick  person's
soul,  riang  semangaf).
I  shall  take  each  of  the  types  in  order.
For  the  water-jar  ceremony  three  jars  (buyong)  con- taining water  are  brought  to  the  sick  man's  room  and decorated  with  the  fringe  or  necklace  of  plaited  cocoa- nut  leaves,  which  is  called  "Centipedes'  Feet"  (jari 'lipan).  A  fourth  jar  should  contain  a  sort  of  bouquet of  artificial  flowers  to  serve  as  an  attraction  to  the  sick man's  soul  (semangaf).  You  will  also  require  a  tray filled  with  the  usual  accessories  of  Malay  magic ceremonies  (incense,  three  sorts  of  rice,  etc.),  besides three  wax  tapers,  one  of  which  you  will  plant  upon  the brim  of  each  of  the  three  jars.
When  all  is  ready,  drop  the  incense  upon  the embers,  and  as  the  smoke  rises  repeat  this  charm  :—
"  If  you  are  at  one  with  me,  rise  towards  me,  O  smoke ; If  you  are  not  at  one  with  me,  rise  athwart  me,  O  smoke, Either  to  right  or  left."2
As  you  say  this,  "  catch  "  the  first  puff  of  smoke  and
their  supposed   efficacy  in   preventing  such  as  an  egg,  a  substituted  image  or
disease;    there  are   also   an    immense  scapegoat  (tukarganti),  a  "Spirit-Hall,"
number   of  short  charms  (often   mere  or  spirit-boat,  in  which  the  evil  spirits
texts  from  the  Koran)  which  are  con-  are  carried  out  of  the  house  and  got  rid
sidered  invaluable  for  checking  minor  of;  or  else  he  may  induce  a  stronger
ailments.       It  being  impossible,  how-  spirit,  e.g.,  the  Tiger  Spirit  (vide  infra),
ever,   in  the    scope    of   this    work    to  to    enter   into    his    own    person,    and
give  specimens  of  the  entire  "materia  assist  him  in  the  task  of  evicting  the
medica "  of  the   Malays,  examples  of  offender.
the  more  important  branches  only  are  2  Jikalau  sa-rasi  dengan  aku,  m/nga-
given.  dap-lah     angkau,      asap,     kapada'ku,
1  The  Pa-wang  may  either  effect  this  kalau  to?  sa-rasi,  m2lintang-lah   'kau
himself,  by  luring  the  evil  spirits  out  of  dlngan   akn,   atau   ka   kiri,    atau   ka
the  sick  person's  body  into  some  object,  kanan.
PLATE  16. — BOMOR  AT  WORK.
Model,  showing  a  medicine-man  (bomor  or  pawang)  at  work,  the  patient  lying  in  bed  with  his  child at  his  side.  The  "three  jars "  (Imyong  tiga)  used  by  the  medicine-man  are  standing  in  a  row at  the  side  of  the  room.  They  are  a  little  too  large  in  proportion.
Page  410.
vi  CEREMONIAL  INSPECTION  4"
inhale  it  (tangkap-lah  puchok  asap,  ckium),  as  it  rises towards  you.  If  the  smell  is  pleasant  (sedap)  it  is  a good  sign  ;  if  it  has  a  scorched  smell  (kangit)  it  is  bad  ; but  if  it  smells  offensive  (busoK]  no  medicine  can  save the  patient.
Next,  before  you  look  into  the  jars,  take  handfuls of  "parched,"  "washed,"  and  "saffron"  rice,  and  after fumigating  them  over  the  incense,  strew  them  all round  the  row  of  jars,  saying  as  you  do  so  : —
"  Cluck,  cluck  !  souls  of  So-and-so,  all  seven  of  you  ! J Come,  and  let  all  of  us  here  together See  (about  the)  medicine  for  (you)  O  souls  of  So-and-so"
Here  strew  (tabor)  the  rice  first  to  the  right,  then to  the  left,  and  then  to  the  right  again.
Before  removing  the  calladium-leaves  from  the  jar- mouths,  repeat  the  following  : —
"Peace  be  with  you,  Prophet  'Tap,  in  whose  charge  is  the  earth, Suawam,  in  whose  charge  are  the  heavens, Prophet  Noah,  in  whose  charge  are  the  Trees, Prophet  Elias,  Planter  of  Trees,
And  Prophet  Khailir  (Khizr),  in  whose  charge  is  the  water, I  crave  permission  to  see  the  remedies  for  So-and-so"
Here  remove  the  calladium-leaves  from  the  jar- mouths,  and  taking  one  of  the  wax  tapers,  wave  it in  the  smoke  of  the  censer  seven  times  towards  the right,  and  say  : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Tanju,  I  adopt  you  to  be  a  guardian  for
my  brother,
You  who  are  sprung  from  the  original  elements, From  the  former  time  unto  the  present, You  who  sprang  from  the  gum  of  the  eyes  of  Muhammad, I  ask  to  see  the  disease  of  So-and-so"
Here  plant  the  taper  firmly  upon  the  edge  of  the
1  Kur!   Stmangat  Si  Anu  ka-tujoh-nya  /    Mari-lah  kita  dfrsama-sama  ini, Tengcfkan  ubat,  stmangat  Si  Anu  !
412  MEDICINE  CHAP.
jar,   and   "gaze"   into  the  water  "to  see  the  signs" ('alamat-nya).
Thus  if  there  is  an  oily  scum  on  the  water  (ayer berkrak  lemafc)  it  is  a  bad  sign ;  and  to  this  may  be added  that  if  the  calladium-leaf  covering  has  acquired a  faded  look  (layu]  in  the  interim,  it  is  a  sign  of  severe sickness.
Fumigate  the  outside  of  the  jars  with  the  smoke of  the  incense  (the  medicine-man  does  this  by "washing"  his  hands  in  the  smoke  and  then  rubbing over  the  outside  of  the  jars  as  if  he  were  "  shampooing  " them) ;  and  anoint  them  with  "oil  of  Celebes"  (minyak Bugis).  Then  take  a  "closed  fistful"  (sa-genggam)  of parched  rice,  and  holding  it  over  the  smoke  of  the  censer {ganggang  di  asap  keninyan),  repeat  this  charm  : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  Mustia  Kembang, I  adopt  you  as  a  guardian  for  my  brother, If  in  truth  you  are  sprung  from  the  primordial  elements, From  the  former  time  unto  the  present, I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  sprang, For  you  sprang  from  our  Lady  Eve  (Siti  Hawa), You  I  order,  your  co-operation  I  invoke, That  whatsoever  shape  you  assume Within  this  your  garden  of  splendour, You  break  neither  plighted  faith  nor  solemn  promise."
Here  throw  the  parched   rice  into  the  jars,  and
say  :—
"  Peace  be  unto  you,  O  Prophet  'Tap,  in  whose  charge  is  the Earth,
0  Prophet  Noah  in  whose  charge  are  the  Trees, And  Prophet  Khailir  in  whose  charge  is  the  Water,
1  crave  this  water  (lit.  '  exudation ')  as  a  boon, For  the  healing  of  So-and-so."
And  observe  these  signs  :—
1.  If  the  water  is  perfectly  still  it  is  a  bad  sign.
2.  If  it  is  a  little  disturbed  it  is  a  good  sign.
vi  OMINOUS  SIGNS  413
3.  If  the  rice  floats  in   a  line  across  the  sun's  path  (berator
melintang  matahari)  it  is  a  fatal  sign.
4.  If  you  see  a  solitary  grain  travelling  by  itself  (bersiar)  you
may  know  the  sickness  to  be  caused  by  the  making  of  an image  (buatan  orang).
5.  If  the  parched  rice  travels  towards  the  right  of  the  jar  the
patient  will  recover  quickly.
6.  If  it  travels  towards  the  left  of  the  jar  he  will  recover,  but
slowly.
7.  If,    however,    it   floats    right   underneath   the   candle   it   is
generally  a  fatal  sign.
Next,  see  what  patterns  are  formed  by  the  rice- grains  as  they  lie  on  the  water  :—
1.  If  they  take  the  shape  either  of  a  boat  or  a  crocodile,  this
means  that  the  spirit  demands  the  launching  of  a  spirit- boat  (lanchang).
2.  If  they  take  a  square  shape,  a  tray  of  offerings  (anchaK)  is
demanded.
3.  If  they  take  the  shape  of  a  house,  a  '  state-hall '  (balei)  is
demanded.
Now  take  all  kinds  of  fragrant  flowers  and  shred them  (buat  bunga  rampai),  add  the  shredded  blossoms of  four  which  are  scentless  (for  instance,  blossoms  of the  selaguri,  pulut-pulut,  bali-adap,  and  kedudoK),  mix them  and  throw  them  into  the  jars,  then  plant  in  each jar  the  flower-spathe  of  an  areca-palm  (mayang  pinang). Throw  into  each  a  "jar-stone"  (i.e.  a  dollar),  and  the jars  will  be  ready.  You  should  then  read  the  fore- going charms  over  each  of  them.
The  extra  jar  which  is  filled  with  a  sort  of  big  nose- gay (gumbo)  represents  a  pleasure-garden  (taman bunga),  and  is  intended  to  attract  the  soul  (semangat) of  the  sick  man.
Now  take  parched  rice  and  hold  it  over  the  incense (di-ganggang)  saying  :-
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Wheat, You  I  wish  to  command,  your  co-operation  I  invoke
414  MEDICINE  CHAP.
In  '  inspecting '  the  sickness  of  So-and-so.
Break  neither  plighted  faith  nor  solemn  promise,
But  inspect  the  sickness  of  this  grandson  of  Adam,
This  follower  of  the  Prophet  Muhammad,  of  the  race  of  the  sons
of  men,  So-and-so  ; If  anything  should  supervene, Do  you  '  stir '  within  this  pure  heart  (of  mine)."
Now  scatter  the  parched  rice  upon  the  surface  of the  water  in  the  jars,  and  watch  for  the  signs  : —
1.  If  the  rice  is  lumped  together  (bulat  or  berluboK)  it  is  a
good  sign.
2.  If  it  extends  itself  crosswise  (panjang  melintang)  it  is  a  bad
sign.
3.  If  it  takes  the  shape  of  a  spirit-boat  (lanchang)  you  must
make  a  spirit-boat ;  that  is  what  is  wanted.
4.  If  it  keeps  travelling  either  to  the  left  or  the  right,  it  is  a
stream-spirit  (anak  sungei)  which  has  affected  the  patient.
5.  If  it  takes    the  shape  of  a  crocodile,  or  anything  of  that
sort,  it  is  an  earth-spirit  (puaka)  which  has  affected  the patient.
The  most  popular  method  of  propitiating  evil spirits  consists  in  the  use  of  the  sacrificial  tray  called Anchak.
This  is  "  a  small  frame  of  bamboo  or  wood," a usually  from  two  to  three  feet  square  and  turned  up at  the  sides,  which  are  decorated  with  a  long  fringe (jari  'lipan)  of  plaited  cocoa-nut  leaf.  Four  rattan "  suspenders "  of  equal  length  (tali  penggantong) are  fastened  to  the  four  corners,  and  are  thence carried  up  to  meet  at  a  point  which  may  be  from  two to  three  feet  above  the  tray.
These  trays  appear  to  be  divisible  into  two  classes, according  to  the  objects  which  they  are  intended to  serve.  In  the  one  case  certain  offerings  (to
1  If  ashore,  it  is  usually  suspended       tripod,  or  a  projecting  pole  affixed  to from  a  tree.     If  at  sea,  from  a  wooden       the  seaward  end  of  a  fishing-stake.
PLATE  17. — ANCHAK.
Model  of  the  sacrificial  tray  (attchak)  used  by  the  medicine-man,  showing  the kind  of  fringe  round  the  tray  called  "  centipedes'  feet,"  and  the  rice  receptacles of  plaited  palm -fronds  (kftupat  and  tipai)  which  are  attached  to  the "  suspenders"  of  the  tray.
1'age  414.
vi  THE  SACRIFICIAL  TRAY  415
be  described  presently)  are  laid  upon  the  tray,  which is  carried  out  of  the  house  to  a  suitable  spot  and there  suspended  to  enable  the  spirits  for  whom  it  is designed  to  feed  upon  its  contents.1  In  the  other  case certain  objects  are  deposited  upon  it,  into  which  the evil  spirits  are  ceremoniously  invited  to  enter,  in  which case  it  must  obviously  be  got  rid  of  after  the  ceremony, and  is  therefore  hung  up  in  the  jungle,  or  set  adrift  in the  sea  or  the  nearest  river ;  in  the  latter  case  it  is called  the  "  keeled  sacrifice-tray "  (anchak  pelunas), and  falls  into  line  with  other  objects  which  are  occasion- ally set  adrift  for  the  same  purpose.
The  offerings  placed  on  the  sacrificial  tray vary  considerably,  according  to  the  object  of  the ceremony,  the  means  of  the  person  for  whose  benefit they  are  offered,  the  caprice  of  the  medicine-man  who carries  out  the  ceremony,  and  so  on.2
I  shall  therefore,  in  the  present  place,  merely  de- scribe the  contents  of  a  more  or  less  typical  tray,  with the  main  points  of  the  accompanying  ritual.
The  bottom  of  the  tray  having  been  lined  with banana -leaf,  and  thickly  strewn  with  parched  rice, there  are  deposited  in  the  tray  itself  five  "  chews  "  of betel-leaf,  five  native  "  cigarettes "  (rokofc),  five  wax tapers,  five  small  water -receptacles  or  limas  (made of  banana-leaf  and  skewered  together  at  each  end), and  five  copper  cents  (or  dollars).  The  articles  just enumerated  are  divided  into  five  portions,  one  of  which
1  Another  method  is  described  by  allowed  to  fly  up,  and  all  the  things
Messrs.  Clifford  and  Swettenham  (vide  on   it   are   scattered  by  this  means,"
their  Malay  Dictionary,  s.v.  Anchak)  but  it  is  not  yet  clear  to  which  class
as  follows :   "  The  (anchak  pgrbingkas}  this    use    of    the    anchak    should    be
is   fastened   to  the   end  of  a  branch,  referred.
which  is  pulled  down  almost   to  the  2  Some    of    them   are    enumerated
ground,    and    held    there    while    the  under    Fishing    Ceremonies,    pp.  311
medicine-man  goes  through  his  incanta-  se</y.t  supra.  See  also  pp.  76,  257,  260. tion  or  invocation,  after  which  it  is
416  MEDICINE  CHAP.
is  deposited  in  the  centre  of  the  tray,  and  the  remainder in  its  four  corners.  Besides  this  there  are  to  be deposited  in  the  tray  fourteen  portions  of  meat  (of fowl,  goat,  or  buffalo,  as  the  case  may  be),  and  fourteen portions  of  Malay  "cakes,"  care  being  taken  in  each case  to  see  that  there  are  seven  portions  of  cooked and  seven  portions  of  uncooked  food  provided.  The rattan  "  suspenders,"  again,  are  hung  with  two  sets of  ornamental  rice-receptacles  made  of  plaited  cocoa- nut  leaf  (fourteen  of  the  long-shaped  kind,  or  lepat, and  fourteen  of  the  diamond-shaped  kind,  or  ketupaf). Besides  this,  two  sets  of  (cooked  and  uncooked)  packets of  rice  (each  stained  a  different  colour)  are  sometimes deposited  in  the  tray,  the  colours  used  being  white, yellow,  red,  black,  blue,  green,  and  purple.  The  only other  articles  required  for  the  tray  are  a  couple  of  eggs, of  which  one  must,  of  course,  be  cooked  and  the  other raw.
Of  the  water-receptacles,  those  in  alternate  corners are  filled  with  water  and  cane-juice,  the  central  recep- tacle being  filled  with  the  blood  of  the  fowl  (or  other animal  slain  for  the  sacrifice).
Upon  the  ground,  exactly  underneath  the  tray, should  be  deposited  the  feathers,  feet,  entrails,  etc.,  of the  fowl,  portions  of  whose  flesh  have  been  used  for the  tray,  together  with  the  refuse  of  the  parched  rice and  a  censer.  Strictly  speaking,  a  white  and  a  black fowl  should  be  killed,  but  only  half  of  each  cooked,  the remainder  being  left  raw.  The  "portions"  of  fowl  are as  small  as  they  can  possibly  be,  a  mere  symbol (*isharat)  of  each  kind  of  food  being  all  that  the  spirits are  supposed  to  require.  Sometimes  funnel-shaped rice -receptacles  are  used,  which  are  skewered  with a  bamboo  skewer  and  called  keronchot.  Occasion-
vi  CONTENTS  OF  THE  TRA  Y  417
ally  a  standard  censer  (sangga  ?)  is  used,  the  end  of  a piece  of  bamboo  being  split  up  and  bent  or  opened  out- wards for  several  inches,  and  a  piece  of  rattan  (cane) being  wound  in  and  out  among  the  split  ends,  so  as  to form  a  sort  of  funnel  (about  nine  inches  in  diameter  at the  top),  which  is  lined  with  banana  leaf,  filled  with earth,  and  planted  vertically  in  the  ground,  great  care being  taken  to  see  that  it  does  not  lean  out  of  the  per- pendicular. Live  embers  are  placed  upon  it,  incense crumbled  over  it  (between  the  finger  and  thumb),  and the  appropriate  charm  recited.  A  specimen  of  a  charm or  formula  used  during  the  burning  of  incense  will  be found  in  the  Appendix.1
The  ketupats  are  called — (i)  Sri  negri  (seven- cornered),  or  the  "luck  of  the  country";  (2)  Buah kras  (six-cornered),  or  the  "  candle-nut "  ;  (3)  Bawang puteh  (six-cornered),  or  "garlic";  (4)  Ulu  pengayoh (four-cornered),  or  the  "  paddle-handle " ;  (5)  Pasar (five-cornered),  or  the  "  market  "  ;  (6)  Bawang  merah (six-cornered),  or  the  "onion  "  ;  (7)  Pasar  Pahang  (six- cornered),  or  the  "  Pahang  market  "  ;  (8)  Telor,  or  the 11  hen's  egg."
The  lepats  are  called — (i)  Lepat  daun  niyor  (5-6 inches  long  and  made  of  cocoa-nut  leaves)  ;  (2)  Lepat tilam  (of  plantain  leaves) ;  (3)  Lepat  daun  palas  (of palas  leaves,  three-sided).
Diminutive  models  of  various  objects  (also  made  of cocoa-nut  leaves)  are  often  added,  e.g.  burong  ponggok, the  owl  ;  kerbau,  the  buffalo  ;  rusa,  the  stag  ;  tekukur, the  ground-dove ;  ketam,  the  crab ;  and  (but  very rarely)  kuda,  the  horse.
The  things  deposited  in  the  tray  are  in- tended for  the  spirits  (Hantus)  themselves;  the
1  Vide  App.  xii. 2  E
4i  8  MEDICINE  CHAP.
refuse   on    the    ground    beneath    it   for   their   slaves (hamba).
Of  the  food  in  the  tray,  the  cooked  food  is  for  the king  of  the  spirits  (Raja  Hantu\  who  is  sometimes  said to  be  the  Wild  Huntsman  (Hantu  Pemburu]  and  some- times Batara  Guru,  and  the  uncooked  for  his  follow- ing. But  of  the  two  eggs,  the  uncooked  one  is  alleged to  be  for  the  Land-spirit  (i.e.  the  Wild  Huntsman),  and the  cooked  for  the  Sea-spirit ;  this  assertion,  however, requires  some  further  investigation  before  it  can  be unreservedly  accepted.
The  Wave-Offering
On  one  occasion,  during  my  residence  in  the Kuala  Langat  district  of  Selangor,  I  had  the  good fortune  to  be  present  at  the  "waving"  of  a  sacrificial  tray (anckak)  containing  offerings  to  the  spirits.  The  ac- count of  this  ceremony,  which  I  shall  now  give,  is  made up  from  notes  taken  during  the  actual  performance.  To commence  : — The  Pawang  sat  down  with  his  back  to the  patient,  facing  a  multitude  of  dishes  which  con- tained the  various  portions  of  cooked  and  uncooked food.  The  tray  itself  was  suspended  at  a  height  of about  three  feet  from  the  ground  in  the  centre  of  the room,  just  in  front  of  the  Pawang's  head.  Lighting  a wax  taper  and  removing  the  yam-leaf  covering  from the  mouth  of  the  jar  containing  "holy"  water,  the Pawang  now  "  inspected "  the  water  in  the  jar  by gazing  intently  into  its  depths,  and  re-extinguished  the taper.  Then  he  fumigated  his  hands  in  the  smoke  of the  censer,  extended  them  for  a  brief  interval  over  the "  holy  "  water,  took  the  censer  in  both  hands,  described three  circles  round  the  jar  with  it,  set  it  down  again,
vi  WA  VING  THE  ANCHAK  419
and    stirred    the   water  thrice   with   a  small    knife  or dagger  (Kris],  the  blade  of  which  he  kept  in  the  water while  he   muttered   a   charm    to   himself.      Then    he charmed  the  betel-stand  and  the  first  dish  of  cooked food,    pushing    the     latter    aside     and     covering    it with    a   small    dish-cover   as    he  finished    the  charm. Next,  at  the  hands  of  one  of  the  company,  he  accepted, in  two  pieces,  five  cubits  of  yellow  cloth  (yellow  being the  royal  colour),  and  a  small  vessel  of  "  oil  of  Celebes," with  which,  it  may  be  added,  he  anointed  the  palms  of both  hands  before  he  touched  the  cloth  itself.     Next, he  fumigated  the  latter  in  the  smoke  of  the  censer,  one end  of  the  cloth  being  grasped  firmly  in  the  right  hand, and  the  remainder  of  it  being  passed  round  the  right wrist,  and  over  and  under  the  right  arm,   while  the loose  end  trailed  across  his  lap.     Next,  after  repeating the  usual  charm,  he  breathed  on  one  end  of  the  cloth, passed    the   whole  of  the  cloth  through    his  fingers, fumigated  it,  and  laid  it  aside ;  took  an  egg  which  was presented  to  him  upon  a  tray,  and  deposited  it  exactly in  the  centre  of  a  large  dish  of  parched  rice.     Next, he  pushed  aside  the  jar  of  holy  water,  lowered  the  tray by  means  of  the  cord  attached  to  it  (which  passed  over a  beam),  and  proceeded  to  supervise  the  preparation  of the  tray,  which  was  being  decorated  with  the  "centi- pede"  fringe  by  one  of  the  company   acting  as  an assistant.     The  fringe  having  been  fitted  by  the  latter to  the  edges  of  the  tray,  and  the  latter  lined  with  three thicknesses  of  banana  leaf,  the   Pawang  described   a circle  round  it  thrice  with  the  censer,   and  then  de- posited the  censer  upon  the  floor,  exactly  under  the centre  of  the  tray.     Then  anointing  his  hands  again  he passed  them  over  both  tray  and  fringe.     A  brief  pause followed,  and  then  the  Pawang  took  the  larger  piece  of
420  MEDICINE  CHAP.
yellow  cloth  and  wrapped  it  like  a  royal  robe  around the  shoulders  of  the  patient  as  he  sat  up  inside  his mosquito  curtain.  Another  brief  pause,  and  the Pawang  betook  himself  once  more  to  the  filling  of  the tray.  Taking  a  large  bowl  of  parched  rice,  he  scooped up  the  rice  in  his  hands,  and  let  it  run  through  his fingers  into  the  tray,  until  there  was  a  layer  of  parched rice  in  the  latter  of  at  least  an  inch  in  depth,  and  then deposited  the  egg,  already  alluded  to,  in  the  very centre  of  the  parched  rice.  Next  he  took  a  comb  of bananas  (presented  by  one  of  the  company),  and  cut- ting them  off  one  by  one  deposited  them  in  a  dish, from  which  they  were  presently  transferred  to  the  tray. The  Pawang  now  returned  to  the  patient,  and  kneeling down  in  front  of  him,  fumigated  his  hands  in  the  smoke of  the  censer,  and  then,  muttering  a  charm,  wrapped the  smaller  piece  of  yellow  cloth  turban-wise  round  his own  head,  and  slowly  and  carefully  pushed  the  yellow- robed  patient  (who  was  still  in  a  sitting  posture)  for- ward until  he  reached  a  spot  which  was  exactly  under the  centre  of  the  tray,  and  which  faced,  I  was  told,  the "place  of  the  Rising  Sun."
The  long  straw-coloured  streamers  of  the  tray- fringe  dropped  gracefully  around  the  patient  on  every side,  and  had  it  not  been  for  occasional  bright  glimpses of  the  yellow  cloth  he  would  have  been  almost  in- visible.
The  censer,  voluming  upwards  its  ash-gray  smoke, was  now  passed  from  hand  to  hand  three  times  round the  patient,  and  finally  deposited  on  the  floor  at  his feet.
The  loading  of  the  tray  now  recommenced,  and  the Pawang  standing  up  and  looking  towards  the  south, deposited  in  it  carefully  the  several  portions  of
vi  CONTENTS  OF  THE  ANCHAK  421
"cooked"  offerings  (the  sum  of  the  various  portions making  up  a  whole  fowl).  Then,  after  washing  his hands,  he  added  to  the  tray  small  portions  of  rice  vari- ously prepared  and  coloured  (viz.  parched  and  washed rice,  and  rice  stained  yellow  (saffron),  green,  red,  blue, and  black,  seven  kinds  in  all).  Next  he  deposited  in the  tray  the  uncooked  portions,  whose  sum  also amounted  to  a  whole  fowl,  then,  after  a  further  hand- washing,  the  "cakes,"  and  finally,  after  a  last  washing, he  fastened  to  the  "  suspenders  " l  of  the  tray  the  small ornamental  rice-bags  called  ketupat  and  lepat?
But  the  list  of  creature  comforts  provided  for  the spirits  comprised  other  things  besides  food.  Five miniature  water -buckets,  each  manufactured  from  a strip  of  banana  leaf  skewered  together  at  each  end with  a  bamboo  pin,  were  now  filled,  the  alternate corner  ones  with  water  and  cane-juice  (called  "palm- toddy"  in  the  Spirit  Language),  and  the  central  one  with the  blood  of  the  fowls  killed  for  the  sacrifice.  They were  then  duly  deposited  in  the  tray  by  the  Pawang. Five  waxen  tapers,  to  "light  the  spirits  to  their  food," were  next  "  charmed  "  and  lighted,  and  planted  in  the centre  and  four  corners  respectively.
Finally,  no  doubt  for  the  spirits'  after-dinner  enjoy- ment, five  "chews"  of  betel-leaf  and  five  native-made cigarettes  (tobacco  rolled  in  strips  of  palm-leaf),  were charmed  and  actually  lighted  at  a  lamp,  and  deposited in  the  tray  with  the  other  offerings,  and  at  the  same
1  So  called  in  Malay  (tali  pfnggan-  8  Kttupat  and   Ityat.      There  were
tong) ;  they  consist  of  the  four  cords  fourteen    of   each    kind    of   bag,   the
rhich  start  from  the  four  corners  of  the  kZtupats  being  diamond-shaped  and  the
ay  respectively,  and  are  carried  up  to  IZpats  cylindrical.     Each  set  of  fourteen
eet  at  a  point  some  two  or  three  feet  bags  contains  seven  portions  of  cooked
ove  the  centre  of  the  tray,  from  which  and  seven  portions  of  uncooked  food,
aint  upwards   a   single  cord  only  is  Vide  also  supra.
422  MEDICINE  CHAP.
time  five  50  cent  (silver)  pieces  of  Straits  money,  called "tray-stones,"  were  added  to  the  medley,  evidently with  the  object  of  preventing  the  good  temper  of the  spirits  from  being  disturbed  by  "  shortness  of cash."
The  loading  of  the  tray  being  now  complete,  the Pawang  walked  thrice  round  the  patient  (who  was  still overshadowed  by  the  tray),  and  passed  the  censer round  him  thrice.  Standing  then  with  his  face  to  the east,  so  as  to  look  in  the  same  direction  as  the  patient, he  grasped  the  "  suspenders "  of  the  tray  with  both hands  at  their  converging  point,  and  thrice  muttered  a charm,  giving  a  downward  tug  to  the  cord  of  the  tray at  the  end  of  each  repetition.  This  done,  he  removed the  yellow  cloth  from  his  head,  and  fastened  it  round the  tray-cord  at  the  point  where  the  "  suspenders  "  con- verged, and  then  "waved"  the  offering  by  causing  the loaded  tray  with  its  flaring  tapers  to  swing  slowly backwards  and  forwards  just  over  the  patient's  head. Next,  letting  the  tray  slowly  down  and  detaching  it from  the  cord,  at  the  converging  point,  he  again "waved"  it  slowly  to  and  fro  amid  the  flaring  of  the tapers,  seven  times  in  succession,  and  held  it  out  for the  patient  to  spit  into.  When  this  was  done  he sallied  out  into  the  darkness  of  the  night  carrying  the tray,  and  gaining  the  jungle,  suspended  it  from  a  tree (of  the  kind  called  petal  belalang]  which  had  been selected  that  very  day  for  the  purpose.  A  white  ant, immediately  settling  upon  the  offering,  was  hailed  by the  Malays  present  with  great  delight  as  a  sign  that the  spirits  had  accepted  the  offering,  whereupon  we  all returned  to  the  house  and  the  company  broke  up.  The ceremony  had  commenced  about  8  P.M.,  and  lasted about  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  the  number  of  people
vi  THE  LI  MAS  423
present  was  fourteen,  seven  male  and  seven  female, which  was  the  number  stipulated  by  the  Pawang.
Another  form  of  "propitiation"  (buang-buangan limas]  ceremony  consists  in  loading  a  limas  with the  offerings.  The  limas  is  a  receptacle  of  about a  span  (sa-jengkaf)  in  length,  made  of  banana -leaf folded  together  at  the  ends  and  skewered  with  a  bam- boo pin.  Inside  it  are  deposited  the  offerings,  which consist  of  the  following  articles :  a  chupak  (half cocoa-nutful)  of  "  parched  "  rice,  a  set  of  three,  five, or  seven  bananas,  a  "pinch"  (sa-jempuf]  of  "saffron" rice,  a  pinch  of  "  washed "  rice,  a  native  cigarette (rokoK),  an  egg,  a  wax  taper,  two  "chews"  of  betel- leaf,  and  a  betel-leaf  twisted  up  into  the  shape  of  a spiral  (pantat  siput\  One  (at  least)  of  the  two "chews"  of  betel  must  be  specially  prepared,  as  it  is to  be  left  behind  for  the  spirits  to  chew,  whilst  the other  is  taken  back  into  the  presence  of  the  sick man,  where  the  medicine  -  man  chews  it  and  ejects the  chewed  leaf  (di-sembor)  upon  the  "small"  of  the sick  man's  back.  In  the  case  of  the  "chew"  which is  left  behind  for  the  spirits,  the  ordinary  portion  of betel -nut  must  be  replaced  by  nutmeg,  the  gambier by  mace,  and  the  lime  by  "oil  of  Celebes"  (minyak Bugis],
When  the  ceremony  of  loading  the  limas  is complete,  it  is  carried  down  to  the  nearest  river or  sea,  and  there  set  adrift  with  the  following words  : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  Khailir  (Khizr),  Prophet  of  God  and  Lord
of  water,
Maduraya  is  the  name  of  your  sire, Madaruti  the  name  of  your  mother, Si  KSkas  the  name  of  their  child  ; Accept  this  present  from  your  younger  brother,  Si  Kelcas,
424  MEDICINE  CHAP.
Cause  him  no  sickness  or  headache.
Here  is  his,  your  younger  brother's,  present."
Here  the  limas  is  set  adrift,  and  the  water  underneath it  scooped  up  and  carried  home,  where  it  is  used  for bathing  the  sick  man.
Another  very  simple  form  of  "  propitiation "  is called  ambang  -  ambangan,  and  is  performed  as follows : —
Take  seven  "chews"  of  betel-leaf,  seven  native cigarettes  (rokok),  seven  bananas,  an  egg,  and  an overflowing  chupak  (half  cocoa-nutful)  of  parched rice  (bertih  sa-chupak  abong),1  roll  them  all  up together  in  a  banana  leaf  (which  must  be  a  cubit  in length  and  of  the  same  variety  of  banana  as  the  first), and  deposit  them  in  a  place  where  three  roads  meet (if  anything  "a  little  way  along  the  left-hand  road  of the  three,")  and  repeat  this  charm  :—
"  Jembalang  Jembali,  Demon  of  the  Earth, Accept  this  portion  as  your  payment And  restore  So-and-So. But  if  you  do  not  restore  him I  shall  curse  you  with  the  saying, '  There  is  no  god  but  God,' "  etc.
The  above  ceremony  is  generally  used  in  the  case of  fever  complaint.
Counter  -  charms  for  "neutralising"  the  active principle  of  poisons  form,  as  a  rule,  one  of  the  most important  branches  of  the  pharmacopceic  system among  the  less  civilised  Malay  tribes.  A  settled form  of  government  and  the  softening  of  manners due  to  contact  with  European  civilisation  has,  how- ever, diminished  the  importance  (I  speak,  of  course,
1  Abong  =f\i\\  to  overflowing  ;  cp.  mfrabong^  etc.
vi  NEUTRALISING  POISONS  425
from  the  Malay  point  of  view)  of  this  branch  of  the subject  in  the  Western  Malay  States  of  the  Penin- sula, where  poisoning  cases  are  very  rarely  heard  of. Malay  women  have  always  possessed  the  reputation of  being  especially  proficient  in  the  use  of  poison  ; ground  glass  and  the  furry  spicules  obtained  from the  leaf-cases  of  some  kinds  of  bamboo  being  their favourite  weapons.
This  idea  (of  using  a  charm  to  "  neutralise "  the active  principle  of  poison)  has  been  extended  by Malay  medicine -men  to  cover  all  cases  where  any evil  principle  (even,  for  instance,  a  familiar  spirit)  is believed  to  have  entered  the  sick  person's  system. All  such  charms  are  piously  regarded  by  devout Muhammadans  as  gifts  due  to  the  mercy  of  God, who  is  believed  to  have  sent  them  down  to  the Prophet  Muhammad  by  the  hand  of  his  servant  Gab- riel. This  doctrine  we  find  clearly  stated  in  the charms  themselves,  e.g.  (somewhat  tautologically) : —
"  Neutralising  charms  sprang  from  God, Neutralising  charms  were  created  by  God, Neutralising  charms  were  a  boon  from  God, Who  commanded  Prince  Gabriel To  bring  them  unto  Muhammad."
The  ceremony  of  applying  such  charms  generally takes  the  form  of  grating  a  bezoar  -  stone *  (batu guliga],  mixing  the  result  with  water,  and  drinking it  after  repeating  the  charm.
Thus  in  one  of  the  charms  quoted  in  the  Appendix we  read  :—
"  The  Upas  loses  its  venom, And  Poison  loses  its  venom, And  the  Sea-Snake  loses  its  venom,
1  As  to  these  stones,  vide  p.  274,  supra.
426  MEDICINE  CHAP.
And  the  poison-tree  of  Borneo  loses  its  venom,
Everything  that  is  venomous  loses  its  venom,
By  virtue  of  my  use  of  the  Prayer  of  the  Magic  Bezoar- Stone."
Of  the  sea-snake  (ular  gerang]  I  was  told  that  it was  about  two  cubits  in  length,  and  that  it  was  the  most poisonous  snake  in  existence  ;  "In  fact,"  my  informant declared,  "if  your  little  finger  is  bitten  by  it  you  must cut  off  the  finger ;  if  your  oar-blade  is  bitten  by  it you  must  throw  away  the  oar."1  And  again  of  the Ipoh,  or  "  upas  "  (which  is  one  of  the  chief  ingredients in  the  blow-gun  poison  used  by  the  wild  tribes),  I  was told  that  if  a  man  who  was  "struck"  by  it  was  sup- ported by  another  his  supporter  would  die,  and  that so  far  from  its  virulence  becoming  then  exhausted,  it would  even  kill  a  person  who  was  seven  times  re- moved, in  point  of  contact,  from  the  person  originally affected.2
The  above  charm  terminates  as  follows  : —
"  Let  this  my  prayer  be  sharp  as  steel, Swift  as  lightning, Fleet  as  the  wind  ! Grant  this  by  virtue  of  my  use  of  the  prayer  of  Dato'  Malim
Karimun,
Who  has  become  a  saint  through  religious  penance Performed  at  the  headwaters  of  the  river  of  Sairan  in  the  interior
of  Egypt, By  the  grace  of,"  etc.
I  may  add  that  when  you  are  collecting  the materials  for  a  neutralising  ceremony  (tawar)  the following  formula  should  be  used  : —
1  Kalau  k?na  kttingking,  Krat-lah  I    believe,    venomous.       Vide  Miscell.
kc'lingking,   kalau  kena  datin  dayong,  Papers  relating  to   Indo  -  China,   First
di-chatok-nya,    champak-lah    dayong.  Series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  226-238.
Numerous  sea-snakes    do,   as    a    fact,  2  Ipoh  ra'yat  laut,   kalati  kttna  sa-
exist  in  the  seas  of  the  Malay  Penin-  orang  di-sandarkan   sa- orang,    matt
siila  and  Archipelago.     They  are  all,  sampei  tujoh  orang  Mrsandar.
vi  BADI  427
"  Not  mine  are  these  materials, They  are  the  materials  of  KSmal-ul-hakim  ; l Not  to  me  belongs  this  neutralising  charm, To  Malim  Saidi  belongs  this  neutralising  charm. It  is  not  I  who  apply  it, It  is  Malim  Karimun  who  applies  it."
Badi
The  next  class  of  medicinal  ceremonies  consists  of rites  intended  to  effect  the  expulsion  from  the  patient's body  of  all  kinds  of  evil  influences  or  principles,  such as  may  have  entered  into  a  man  who  has  unguardedly touched  a  dead  animal  or  bird  from  which  the  badi has  not  yet  been  expelled,  or  who  has  met  with  the Wild  Huntsman  in  the  forest.'2
Badi  is  the  name  given  to  the  evil  principle  which, according  to  the  view  of  Malay  medicine-men,  attends (like  an  evil  angel)  everything  that  has  life.  [It  must not  be  forgotten  when  we  find  it  used  of  inert  objects, such  as  trees,  and  even  of  stones  or  minerals,  that  these too  are  animate  objects  from  the  Malay  point  of  view.] Von  de  Wall  describes  it  as  "the  enchanting  or destroying  influence  which  issues  from  anything,  e.g. from  a  tiger  which  one  sees,8  from  a  poison-tree  which one  passes  under,  from  the  saliva  of  a  mad  dog,  from an  action  which  one  has  performed ;  the  contagious principle  of  morbid  matter."
Hence  the  ceremony  which  purports  to  drive  out this  evil  principle  is  of  no  small  importance  in  Malay
1  Supposed  to  l>e  identical  with  fascination  which  a  tiger  has  for  its
Lukmanu-'l-hakim,  a  mysterious  person  prey.  In  Selangor  this  fascination  is
mentioned  in  the  Koran.  Vide  Hughes,  called  g'run  or  pangs'" run  i°  the  case
-Diet,  of  Islam,  s.v.  Luqman.  of  a  tiger,  and  badi  only  in  the  case
1  For  the  Wild  Huntsman,  vide  of  a  snake — the  person  affected  by  it
Birds  and  Bird-charms,  Chap.  V.  pp.  being  said  to  be  kfna  g'run  or  kfna
1 13-120,  supra.  badi,  as  the  case  may  be.
3  Apparently  v.    d.    W.   means   the
428  MEDICINE  CHAP.
medicine.  I  may  take  this  opportunity  of  pointing  out that  I  have  used  the  word  "mischief"  to  translate  it when  dealing  with  the  charms,  as  this  is  the  nearest English  equivalent  which  I  have  been  able  to  find  ; indeed,  it  appears  a  very  fairly  exact  equivalent  when we  remember  its  use  in  English  in  such  phrases  as "  It's  got  the  mischief  in  it,"  which  is  sometimes  used even  of  inanimate  objects.
There  are  a  hundred  and  ninety  of  these  mischiefs, according  to  some,  according  to  others,  a  hundred and  ninety-three.  Their  origin  is  very  variously  given. One  authority  says  that  the  first  badi  sprang  from three  drops  of  Adam's  blood  (which  were  spilt  on the  ground).  Another  (rather  inconsistently)  declares that  the  "mischief"  (badi)  residing  in  an  iguana (biawak)  was  the  origin  of  all  subsequent  "mischiefs," yet  adds  later  that  the  "  Heart  of  Timber"  was  their origin,  and  yet  again  that  the  yellow  glow  at  sunset (called  Mambang  Kuning  or  the  "  Yellow  Deity ") was  their  origin.  These  two  latter  are,  perhaps  the most  usual  theories,  but  a  third  medicine-man  declares that  the  first  badivras  the  offspring  of  the  Jin  ("genie") Ibn  Ujan  (Ibnu  Jan?),  who  resides  in  the  clouds  (or caverns  ?)  and  hollows  of  the  hills.  Thus  do  Malay medicine-men  disagree.
These  "mischiefs"  reside  not  only  in  animate,  but also  in  inanimate  objects.  Thus  in  one  of  the  ele- phant-charms given  in  the  Appendix  several  different "  mischiefs "  are  described  as  residing  in  earth,  ant- hills, wood,  water,  stone,  and  elephants  (or  rhinoceroses) respectively.  Again,  in  a  deer-charm,  various  "  mis- chiefs "  are  requested  to  return  to  their  place  of  origin, i.e.  to  the  Iguana  (strictly  speaking,  the  Monitor Lizard),  Heart  of  Timber,  and  the  Yellow  Glow  of
vi  CASTING  OUT  MISCHIEFS  429
Sunset.  Yet  another  deer-charm  calls  upon  "  Badi " (as  the  offspring  of  the  Jin  Ibn  Ujan,  who  resides  in the  clouds  and  hollows  of  the  hills),  to  return  thereto.1
I  will  now  proceed  to  describe  the  ceremony  of "  casting  out  "  these  "  mischiefs."
The  chief  occasions  on  which  this  casting  out  takes place  are,  first,  when  somebody  is  ill,  and  his  sickness is  attributed  to  his  accidental  contact  with  (and  conse- quent "  possession  by  ")  one  of  these  mischiefs  ;  and, secondly,  when  any  wild  animal  or  bird  is  killed. The  ceremony  of  casting  out  the  mischief  from  the carcases  of  big  game  will  be  found  described  under the  heading  of  "  Hunting  Ceremonies."  I  shall  here confine  myself  to  a  brief  description  of  the  ceremony as  conducted  for  the  benefit  of  sick  persons.
First  make  up  a  bunch  of  leaves  (sa-ckerek),  con- sisting of  the  shrubs  called  pulut-pulut  and  selaguri, with  branches  of  the  gandarusa  and  lenjuang  merah (red  dracaena),  all  of  which  are  wrapped  together  in  a leaf  of  the  si-pulih,  and  tied  round  with  a  piece  of tree -bark  (kulit  trap),  or  the  akar  gasing-gasing. With  this  leaf-brush  you  are  to  cast  out  the  mischief. Then  you  grate  on  to  a  saucer  small  pieces  of  ebony wood,  brazil  wood,  "  laka"  wood,  sandal  wood,  and eagle-wood  (lignaloes),  mix  them  with  water,  putting in  a  few  small  pieces  of  scrap-iron,  and  rub  the patient  all  over  with  the  mixture.
1   Vide  App.  lx.,  Ixxii.,  Ixxix.     The  "  Sang  Marak,  Sang  Badi"  (v.  App.
different  names  under  which  "Badi"  Ixxix.), and "//iwfa/awf  Badi"(v.  App.
is   invoked    are    worth    noting  ;     e.g.  Ixxx. ).      I  may  remark  that  Sabaliyu  is
"Badiyu,  Mak  Badi,  Badi  Panji,  Mak  given  by  Logan  in  the_/.  /.  A.  vol.  i.
Buta,"    in    an   elephant-charm   (App.  p.  263,  as  meaning  a  deer  in  the  Cam-
"lx.);    and    again    "  Ah    Badi,    Mak  phor  Language  (bhasa  kapor  or pantang
Badi"  in  a  deer-charm  (v.  App.  Ixxii.),  kapor)  of  Johor,  and  this  word  was  after  -
and  in  a  later  deer-charm,  "  Hei  Badi  wards   confirmed   by   Mr.    D.    F.   A.
Serang,  Badi  Mak  Buta,  Si  Panckur,  Hervey. Mak  Tuli"  (v.  App.  Ixxix.),  and  again
430  MEDICINE  CHAP.
As  you  do  this,  repeat  the  appropriate  charm  ; then  take  the  brush  of  leaves  and  stroke  the  patient all  over  downwards  from  head  to  foot,  saying  : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  Prophet  Noah,  to  whom  belong  the  trees, And  Prophet  Elias  who  planted  them. I  crave  as  a  boon  the  leaves  of  these  shrubs To  be  a  drug  and  a  neutralising  (power) Within  the  body,  frame,  and  person  of  So-and-So. If  you  (addressing  the  leaves)  refuse  to  enter  (the  body  of  So- and-So),
You  shall  be  cursed  with  my  ( curse  of  the  nine  countries,' By  (the  power  of)  the  word  'There  is  no  god  but  God,' "  etc.
Whilst  reciting  the  above,  stand  upright,  close  to  the patient's  head,  grasping  a  spear  in  your  left  hand. Brandish  this  spear  over  the  body  of  the  patient, drawing  a  long  breath.1
This  spear  must  afterwards  be  ransomed,  (say)  for forty  cents  ;  in  default  of  which  payment  it  is  forfeited to  the  medicine-man.
The  directions  for  another  form  of  the  ceremony just  described  ("casting  out  the  mischief"),  are  as follows  : —
Whenever  a  person  is  suffering  from  the  influence of  a  waxen  image  (such  as  is  described  elsewhere),2
1  Influence  of  the  Breath  in  Healing.  Western    magnetists    and    mesmerists.
— In  Notes  and  Queries,  No.  I,  p.  24,  The  miraculous  cures  of  the  Messiah
a  Malay  bomor,  or  doctor,  is  described  were,    according  to    Moslems,    mostly
as  blowing  upon  something  to  be  used  performed  by  aspiration.      They  hold
as  medicine.     Breathing  upon  sick  per-  that  in  the    days  of  Isa,    physic  had
sons  and  upon  food,  water,  medicines,  reached  its  highest   development,    and
etc.,  to    be    administered    to    them   is  that  his  miracles  were  mostly  miracles
a   common    ceremony    among    Malay  of  medicine ;  whereas  in  Mohammed's
doctors  and  midwives.      The  following  time  eloquence  had  attained  its  climax,
note  would    seem    to    show    that    the  and,  accordingly,  his  miracles  were  those
Malays  have  learnt  it  from  their  Mu-  of  eloquence,   as  shown  in  the  Koran
hammadan  teachers  : —  and  Ahadis." — The  Book  of  the  Thou-
"Healing    by    the    breath    [Arab.  sand  Nights  and  a  Night,  Burton,  vol.
Nafahal,  breathings,  benefits,  the  Heb.  v.p.  30. — NotesandQueries,y.^?.^4.6".,
Neshamah,  opp.  to  Nephest  (soul),  and  S.B.,    No.    4,    sec.    92,    issued    with
Ruach  (spirit)]  is  a  popular  idea  through-  No.  1 7. out    the    East,  and    not   unknown    to  2    Vide  pp.  569-574,  infra.
vi  CEREMONIES  AND  CHARMS  431
you  must  rub  him  (or  her)  all  over  with  limes  in  order to  "  cast  out  the  mischief."  These  limes  must  be  of seven  different  kinds,  and  you  will  require  three  of each  kind.  When  you  have  got  them,  fumigate  them with  incense  and  repeat  the  appropriate  charm,  which is  practically  an  appeal  addressed  to  the  spirit  of  the limes  to  assist  in  extracting  the  poisonous  principle from  the  body  of  the  sick  man  : —
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Lelang,
We  have  been  brothers  from  the  former  time  until  now, I  am  fain  to  order  you  to  assist  me  in  extracting  everything  that
is  poisonous
From  the  body  and  limbs  of  So-and-So. Break  not  your  solemn  promise, Break  not  your  plighted  faith, And  use  not  deceit  or  wiles,"  etc.
Of  course  the  luckless  spirit  is  told  that  if  he  does not  do  exactly  as  he  is  bidden  he  must  expect  the  curse to  follow.
This  charm  must  be  repeated  overnight,  and  early next  morning  three  thicknesses  of  birah  leaves  must be  laid  down  (for  the  patient  to  stand  upon  during  the lustration).  The  seven  sorts  of  limes  are  at  the  same time  to  be  squeezed  into  a  bowl  and  divided  into  three portions.  These  portions  are  to  be  used  three  times during  the  day,  at  sunrise,  noon,  and  sundown  respec- tively, partly  for  washing  off  the  cosmetics  (which  are rubbed  all  over  the  body),  and  partly  as  a  medicinal draught  or  potion.
In  the  morning  the  cosmetic  must  be  white  (bedak puteh  lulut\  at  noon  it  must  be  red  (bedak  merak),  and .  at  sundown  black  (bedak  hitain).  The  "  trash  "  of  the limes  (after  squeezing)  is  wrapped  up  in  a  birak leaf  at  evening,  and  either  carried  out  to  the  sea  (into which  it  is  dropped),  or  deposited  ashore  at  a  safe
432  MEDICINE  CHAP.
distance  from  the  house.  The  only  special  taboo mentioned  for  this  ceremony  is  that  the  patient  must not  during  its  continuance  meet  anybody  who  has  come from  a  distance.
Another  very  curious  form  of  this  ceremony  of "  casting  out  devils  "  was  described  to  me  by  a  Kelan- tan  Malay.  It  is  worked  on  the  substitute  or  "scape- goat" principle  (tukar  gantt),  and  the  idea  is  to  make little  dough  images  of  all  kinds  of  birds,  beasts,  fishes, and  even  inanimate  objects  (a  few  of  the  former  being fowls,  ducks,  horses,  apes,  buffaloes,  bullocks,  wild cattle  (seladang),  deer,  mouse-deer,  and  elephants, besides  those  enumerated  in  the  charm  itself,  whilst exceptions  are  to  be  the  "  unlucky  "  animals  (benatang sial)  such  as  cats,  tigers,  pigs,  dogs,  snakes,  and  iguanas). When  made  they  are  to  be  deposited  together  in  a heap  upon  a  sacrificial  tray  (anckak],  together  with betel-leaves,  cigarettes,  and  tapers.  One  of  the  tapers is  made  to  stand  upon  a  silver  dollar,  with  the  end  of a  piece  of  particoloured  thread  inserted  between  the dollar  and  the  foot  of  the  taper  ;  and  the  other  end  of this  thread  is  given  to  the  patient  to  hold  whilst  the necessary  charm  is  being  repeated.
Part  of  this  charm  is  worth  quoting,  as  it  helps  to explain  the  line  of  thought  on  which  the  medicine- man is  working : —
"  I  have  made  a  substitute  for  you, And  engage  you  for  hire.
As  for  your  wish  to  eat,  I  give  you  food,
As  for  your  wish  to  drink,  I  give  you  drink.
Lo,  I  give  you  good  measure  whether  of  sharks,
Skates,  lobsters,  crabs,  shell-fish  (both  of  land  and  sea) —
Every  kind  of  substitute  I  give  you,
Good  measure  whether  of  flesh  or  of  blood,  both  cooked  and  raw.
Accept,  accept  duly  this  banquet  of  mine.
vi  THE  SPIRIT  BOA  T  433
It  was  good  at  the  first :  if  it  is  not  good  now, It  is  not  I  who  give  it."
The  explanation  of  this  part  of  the  ceremony  is that  the  evil  spirit,  or  "mischief,"  is  supposed  to  leave the  body  of  the  sick  man,  and  to  proceed  (guided,  of course,  by  the  many-coloured  thread  which  the  patient holds  in  his  hand)  to  enter  into  the  choice  collection  of "  scapegoats  "  lying  in  the  tray.  As  soon  as  his  devil- ship  is  got  fairly  into  the  tray,  the  medicirie-man  looses three  slip-knots  (lepas-lefias),  and  repeats  a  charm  to induce  the  evil  spirit  to  go,  and  throws  away  the  untied knots  outside  the  house.
The  original  "  disease-boat "  used  in  Selangor  was a  model  of  a  special  kind  of  Malay  vessel  called  lan- chang.  This  lanchang  was  a  two-masted  vessel  with galleries  (dandan)  fore  and  aft,  armed  with  cannon, and  used  by  Malay  Rajas  on  the  Sumatran  coast. This  latter  fact  was,  no  doubt,  one  reason  for  its  being selected  as  the  type  of  boat  most  likely  to  prove  accept- able to  the  spirits.  To  make  it  still  further  acceptable, however,  the  model  was  not  unfrequently  stained  with turmeric  or  saffron,  yellow  being  recognised  as  the royal  colour  among  the  Malays.
Occasionally,  on  the  other  hand,  a  mere  raft  (rakit) is  set  adrift,  sometimes  a  small  model  of  the  balei (state-chamber),  and  sometimes  only  a  set  of  the banana-leaf  receptacles  called  limas.
The  vessel  in  the  case  of  an  important  person  is occasionally  of  great  size  and  excellent  finish — indeed, local  tradition  has  it  that  an  exceptionally  large  and perfect  specimen  (which  was  launched  upon  the  Klang river  in  Selangor  some  years  ago,  on  the  occasion  of an  illness  of  the  Tungku  "Chik,  eldest  daughter  of  the late  Sultan),  was  actually  towed  down  to  sea  by  the
2  F
434  MEDICINE  CHAP.
Government  steam  launch  'Abdul  Samad.  When  all is  ready  the  lanchang  is  loaded  with  offerings,  which are  of  an  exactly  similar  character  to  those  which  are deposited  on  the  sacrificial  tray  or  anchak^  already described.  Then  one  end  of  a  piece  of  yellow  thread is  fastened  to  the  patient's  wrist  (the  other  end  being presumably  made  fast  to  the  spirit-boat,  or  lanchang]  ; incense  is  burnt  and  a  charm  recited,  the  purport  of it  being  to  persuade  the  evil  spirits  which  have  taken possession  of  the  patient  to  enter  on  board  the  vessel. This,  when  they  are  thought  to  have  done  so,  is then  2  taken  down  to  the  sea  or  river  and  set  adrift, invariably  at  the  ebb  tide,  which  is  supposed  to  carry the  boat  (and  the  spirits  with  it)  "to  another  country." One  of  the  charms  used  at  this  stage  of  the  ceremony even  mentions  the  name  of  the  country  to  which  the devils  are  to  be  carried,  the  place  singled  out  for this  distinction  being  the  Island  of  Celebes!  The passage  in  question  runs  as  follows  :—
"  Peace  be  unto  you,  Devils  of  the  sea,  and  Demons  of  the  sea, Neither  on  cape,  nor  bay,  nor  sandbank  be  ye  stuck  or  stranded  ! This  vessel  (lanchang)  is  that  of  Arong,3
1  Vide  pp.  418  seqq.,  supra.  and    repeats    the    charm.       A    small Strictly    speaking,     money     (which       portion  of  each  dish  deposited  in  the
is  called  batu-batu  lanchang  or  lanchang  lanchang  has  to  be  carried  back  to  the
stones)  should  always  form  part  of  them.  patient's  house,  and  there  administered
In  Kedah  three  kendgri  (one  ktnderi  to    the    patient,    together    with    water
amounting  to   three  cents)  are  said  to  scooped  up  in  a  bowl  from  underneath
be  used  ;  in  Perak  three  -wang,  and  in  the  lanchang  as  it  lay  in  the  water  be-
Selangor  three  duits  (cents).  fore  drifting  away.     As  the  sick  man
2  I  believe  this  usually  takes  place  receives  the  offerings,  the  person  who immediately   after  the  ceremony,   but  administers  them  says,  addressing  the one  medicine-man  whom  I  knew  ('Che  spirit    of  evil,    "  Here  is  your  wage, Amal  of  Jugra)  used  to  keep  the  boat  return  not  back  here  unto  So-and-So  ; into  which  the  spirits  were  thought  to  and  cause  him  to  be  sick  no  more,"  and have  entered  until  the  patient  recovered,  the    spirit    replies    through    the   man's and  then  set    it   adrift.        When    the  mouth,  "  I  will  never  return." medicine-man  is  launching  it,  he  takes  3  Arong  also  means  "  to  cross  the the  boat  in  both  hands,  and  repeatedly  water,"  and  there  may  be  some  doubt gives  it  a  rotatory  movement  towards  as  to  the  precise  meaning  of  this  line, the  left  (as  if  he  were  using  a  sieve),  See  the  original  in  App.  cciv.
vi  LANCHANG  CHARMS  435
Do  you  assist  in  guarding  this  offering  from  his  grandchildren,
And  vex  not  this  vessel.
I  request  you  to  escort  it  to  the  land  of  Celebes,
To  its  own  place.
By  the  grace  of,"  etc.
This  same  charm  is  used  -mutatis  mutandis  for  the Balei  (Spirit-hall).
A  common  form  of  the  "Lanchang"  charm  runs as  follows  : —
"  Ho,  elders  of  the  upper  reaches, Elders  of  the  lower  reaches, Elders  of  the  dry  land, Elders  of  the  river-flats,
Assemble  ye,  O  people,  Lords  of  hill  and  hill-foot, Lords  of  cavern  and  hill-locked  basin, Lords  of  the  deep  primeval  forest, Lords  of  the  river-bends,
Come  on  board  this  Lanchang,  assembling  in  your  multitudes, So  may  ye  depart  with  the  ebbing  stream, Depart  on  the  passing  breeze, Depart  in  the  yawning  earth, Depart  in  the  red-dyed  earth. Go  ye  to  the  ocean  which  has  no  wave, And  the  plain  where  no  green  herb  grows, And  never  return  hither. But  if  ye  return  hither, Ye  shall  be  consumed  by  the  curse. At  sea  ye  shall  get  no  drink, Ashore  ye  shall  get  no  food, But  gape  (in  vain)  about  the  world. By  the  grace  of,"  etc.
Sometimes  the  crocodile-spirit  is  requested  to  act as  the  forwarding  agent  in  the  transaction  ;  thus  we find  a  short  lanckang-c\\2irm  running  as  follows  : —
"  Ho,  Elder  of  the  Sloping  Bank,  Jambu  Agai,1 Receive  this  (lanchang)  and  forward  it  to  the  River-Bay, It  is  So-and-So  who  presents  it Sa-r£kong  is  the  name  of  the  (spirit  of  the)  Bay,
1  i.e.  the  Crocodile-spirit  (vide  pp.  286  (note),  298,  supra.)
436  MEDICINE  CHAP.
Sa-reking  the  name  of  the  (spirit  of  the)  Cape, Si  'Abas,  their  child,  is  the  rocky  islet ;
I  ask  (you)  to  forward  this  present  at  once  to  the  God  of  Mid- currents."
A  somewhat  longer  charm,  which  is  given  in  the Appendix,  commences  by  making  an  interesting point—
"  Peace  be  with  you !  O  crew  newly  come  from  your  shipwrecked
barque  on  the  high  seas,
Spurned  by  the  billows,  blown  about  by  the  gale ; Come  on  board  (this  lanchang)  in  turn  and  get  you  food."
The  speaker  goes  on  to  say  that  he  recognises  their right  to  levy  toll  all  over  the  country,  and  has  made this  lanchang  for  them  as  a  substitute  (tukar  ganti}, implying,  no  doubt,  in  place  of  the  one  which  they had  lost.  In  any  case,  however,  there  can  be  little doubt  that  the  "  barque  wrecked  on  the  high  seas  "  is the  wasted  body  of  the  sick  man,  of  which  the  spirits were  so  recently  in  possession,  and  in  substitution  for which  they  are  offered  the  spirit-boat  in  question.
Tiger  Spirit
I  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  ceremony  of invoking  the  Tiger  Spirit  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining his  assistance  in  expelling  a  rival  spirit  of  less  power.
In  the  autumn  of  1896  (in  the  Kuala  Langat  District of  Selangor)  the  brother  of  my  Malay  collector  'Umar happening  to  fall  ill  of  some  slight  ailment,  I  asked and  obtained  permission  to  be  present  at  the  ceremony of  doctoring  the  patient.  The  time  fixed  for  the commencement  of  the  ceremony  (which  is  usually repeated  for  three  consecutive  nights)  was  seven o'clock  on  the  following  evening.  On  reaching  the
vi  THE  TIGER  SPIRIT  437
house  at  the  time  appointed  I  was  met  by  'Umar, and  ascending  the  house -ladder,  was  invited  to  seat myself  upon  a  mat  about  two  yards  from  the  spot where  the  medicine-man  was  expected  to  take  up  his position.  Having  done  so,  and  looking  round,  I found  that  there  were  in  all  nine  persons  present (including  myself,  but  exclusive  of  the  Pawang,  his wife,  or  the  patient),  and  I  was  informed  that  although it  is  not  necessary  for  the  same  persons  to  be  present on  each  of  the  three  nights,  the  greatest  care  must be  taken  to  see  that  the  number  of  persons  present, which  should  never,  in  strictness,  be  an  even  number, does  not  vary  from  night  to  night,  because  to  allow any  such  variation  would  be  to  court  disaster.  Hence I  myself  was  only  enabled  to  be  present  as  a  substi- tute for  one  of  the  sick  man's  relatives  who  had  been there  on  the  preceding  night.1
The  accompanying  diagram  shows  (approximately) the  relative  positions  of  all  who  were  present.  In  one corner  of  the  room  was  the  patient's  bed  (sleeping- mat)  and  mosquito  curtain  with  a  patchwork  front, and  in  a  line  parallel  to  the  bed  stood  the  three  jars of  water,  each  decorated  with  the  sort  of  fringe  or collar  of  plaited  cocoa-nut  fronds  called  "centipedes' feet"  (jari  ' lipan],  and  each,  too,  furnished  with  a fresh  yam-leaf  covering  to  its  mouth.  A  little  nearer to  me  than  the  three  water-jars,  but  in  the  same  line, stood  a  fairly  big  jar  similarly  decorated,  but  filled with  a  big  bouquet  of  artificial  "flowers"  and  orna-
1  In  this  connection  it  may  be  added  with   cocoa-nut  leaves   hung  on  it.  is
that  there  are  sundry  medical  "taboos"  often  drawn  across  the  path  as  an  in-
in  use  on  various  occasions  :  e.g.  it  is  dication  of  such  prohibition.     The  fine
sometimes  forbidden  to  enter  the  house  for   breaking   such    a   taboo    (langgar
where  the  sick  man  lies  or  to  approach  gawar-gawar)  was  "  half  a  bhara,"  or
it  by  a  particular  path,  and  a  string,  in  the  case  of  a  Raja  "two  bharas."
438
MEDICINE
CHAP.
ments  instead  of  the  water.  These  flowers  were skilfully  manufactured  from  plaited  strips  of  palm- leaf,  and  in  addition  to  mere  "  flowers "  represented such  objects  as  rings,  cocoa-nuts,  centipedes,  doves,  and the  like,  all  of  which  were  made  of  the  plaited  fronds referred  to.  This  invention  was  intended  (I  was
^Medicine-man's  wife J^fwith  tambourine)
Head
^A  woman  of j^the  household      |
Sleeping  -mat
fp"**'    Medicine-man  \ r*fc£>     A/    !- 5       ^  ^vVy^     ^^  j \~^\Censer
r      j  i/or  with  artificial  J
&  curtain  of the  Patient
root
'lowers
Self                                                                       ~£
¥    ¥    ¥    ¥  ¥  4
/Pest  o/  company
FIG.  2. — Ceremony  of  invoking  the  tiger  spirit.
informed)  to  represent  a  pleasure  -  garden  (toman bunga),  and  indeed  was  so  called;  it  was  (I  believe) intended  to  attract  the  spirit  whom  it  was  the  object of  the  ceremony  to  invoke.  In  front  of  the  three jars  stood,  as  a  matter  of  course,  a  censer  filled  with burning  embers,  and  a  box  containing  the  usual accessories  for  the  chewing  of  betel.  Everything being  now  ready,  the  medicine- man  appeared  and took  his  seat  beside  the  censer,  his  wife,  an  aged
vi  THE  INVOCATION  439
woman,  whose  office  was  to  chant  the  invocation,  to her  own  accompaniment,  taking  her  seat  at  the  same time  near  the  head  of  the  patient's  sleeping  -  mat. Presently  she  struck  up  the  invocation  (lagu  pemang- gil),  and  we  listened  in  rapt  attention  as  the  voice, at  first  weak  and  feeble  with  age,  gathered  strength and  wailed  ever  higher  and  shriller  up  to  the  climax at  the  end  of  the  chant.  At  the  time  it  was  hard to  distinguish  the  words,  but  I  learnt  from  her  after- wards that  this  was  what  she  sang  : —
"  Peace  be  unto  you,  Penglima  Lenggang  Laut !
Of  no  ordinary  beauty
Is  the  Vessel  of  P£nglima  Lenggang  Laut !
The  Vessel  that  is  called  '  The  Yellow  Spirit-boat,'
The  Vessel  that  is  overlaid  with  vermilion  and  ivory,
The  Vessel  that  is  gilded  all  over ;
Whose  Mast  is  named  '  Prince  MSndela,'
Whose  Shrouds  are  named  'The  Shrouds  that  are  silvered,'
Whose  Oars  are  named  '  The  Feet  of  the  Centipede '
(And  whose  Oarsmen  are  twice  seven  in  number).
Whose  Side  is  named  '  Civet-cat  Fencing,'
Whose  Rudder  is  named  'The  Pendulous  Bees'-nest,'
Whose  Galleries  are  named  '  Struggling  Pythons,'
Whose  Pennon  flaps  against  the  deckhouse,
Whose  Streamers  sport  in  the  wind,
And  whose  Standard  waves  so  bravely.
Come  hither,  good  sir ;  come  hither,  my  master,
It  is  just  the  right  moment  to  veer  your  vessel.
Master  of  the  Anchor,  heave  up  the  anchor ;
Master  of  the  Foretop,  spread  the  sails ;
Master  of  the  Helm,  turn  the  helm ;
Oarsmen,  bend  your  oars  ;
Whither  is  our  vessel  yawing  to  ?
The  vessel  whose  starting-place  is  the  Navel  of  the  Seas,
And  that  yaws  towards  the  Sea  where  the  '  Pauh  Janggi '  grows,
Sporting  among  the  surge  and  breakers,
Sporting  among  the  surge  and  following  the  wave-ridges.
It  were  well  to  hasten,  O  Penglima  Lenggang  Laut, '  Be  not  careless  or  slothful,
Linger  not  by  inlet  or  river-reach,
Dally  not  with  mistress  or  courtesan,
But  descend  and  enter  into  your  embodiment."
440  MEDICINE  CHAP.
A  number  of  rhymed  stanzas  follow  which  will  be found  in  the  Appendix.
Meanwhile  the  medicine-man  was  not  backward in  his  preparations  for  the  proper  reception  of  the spirit.  First  he  scattered  incense  on  the  embers  and fumigated  himself  therewith,  "shampooing"  himself, so  to  speak,  with  his  hands,  and  literally  bathing in  the  cloud  of  incense  which  volumed  up  from  the newly-replenished  censer  and  hung  like  a  dense  gray mist  over  his  head.  Next  he  inhaled  the  incense through  his  nostrils,  and  announced  in  the  accents of  what  is  called  the  spirit- language  (bhasa  hantu} that  he  was  going  to  "lie  down."  This  he  accord- ingly did,  reclining  upon  his  back,  and  drawing  the upper  end  of  his  long  plaid  sarong  over  his  head so  as  to  completely  conceal  his  features.  The  invo- cation was  not  yet  ended,  and  for  some  time  we  sat in  the  silence  of  expectation.  At  length,  however, the  moment  of  possession  arrived,  and  with  a  violent convulsive  movement,  which  was  startling  in  its suddenness,  the  "  Pawang "  rolled  over  on  to  his face.  Again  a  brief  interval  ensued,  and  a  second but  somewhat  less  violent  spasm  shook  his  frame, the  spasm  being  strangely  followed  by  a  dry  and ghostly  cough.  A  moment  later  and  the  Pawang, still  with  shrouded  head,  was  seated  bolt  upright facing  the  tambourine  player.  Then  he  fronted  round, still  in  a  sitting  posture,  until  he  faced  the  jars,  and removed  the  yam -leaf  covering  from  the  mouth  of each  jar  in  turn.
Next  he  kindled  a  wax  taper  at  the  flame  of  a  lamp placed  for  the  purpose  just  behind  the  jars,  and  planted it  firmly  on  the  brim  of  the  first  jar  by  spilling  a little  wax  upon  the  spot  where  it  was  to  stand.  Two
vi  DETAILS  OF  THE  CEREMONY  441
similar  tapers  having  been  kindled  and  planted  upon the  brims  of  the  second  and  third  jars,  he  then partook  of  a  "  chew  "  of  betel-leaf  (which  was  presented to  him  by  one  of  the  women  present),  crooning  the while  to  himself.
This  refreshment  concluded,  he  drew  from  his girdle  a  bezoar  or  talismanic  stone  (batu  penawar\  and proceeded  to  rub  it  all  over  the  patient's  neck  and shoulders.  Then,  facing  about,  he  put  on  a  new  white jacket  and  head-cloth  which  had  been  placed  beside him  for  his  use,  and  girding  his  plaid  (sarong]  about his  waist,  drew  from  its  sheath  a  richly-wrought  dagger (Kris)  which  he  fumigated  in  the  smoke  of  the  censer and  returned  to  its  scabbard.
He  next  took  three  silver  2o-cent  pieces  of "Straits"  coinage,  to  serve  as  batu  buyong,  or  "jar- stones,"  and  after  "charming"  them  dropped  each  of  the three  in  turn  into  one  of  the  water-jars,  and  "  inspected  " them  intently  as  they  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  water, shading,  at  the  same  time,  his  eyes  with  his  hand  from the  light  of  the  tapers.  He  now  charmed  several handfuls  of  rice  ("parched,"  "washed,"  and  "saffron" rice),  and  after  a  further  inspection  declared,  in  shrill, unearthly  accents,  that  each  of  the  coins  was  lying exactly  under  its  own  respective  taper,  and  that  there- fore his  "child"  (the  sick  man)  was  very  dangerously ill,  though  he  might  yet  possibly  recover  with  the  aid of  the  spirit.  Next,  scattering  the  rice  round  the  row of  jars  (the  track  of  the  rice  thus  forming  an  ellipse), he  broke  off  several  small  blossom -stalks  from  a  sheaf of  areca-palm  blossom,  and  making  them  up  with sprays  of  champaka  into  three  separate  bouquets, placed  one  of  these  improvised  nosegays  in  each  of  the three  jars  of  water.  On  the  floor  at  the  back  of  the
442  MEDICINE  CHAP.
row  of  jars  he  next  deposited  a  piece  of  white  cloth, five  cubits  in  length,  which  he  had  just  previously fumigated.  Again  drawing  the  dagger  already  re- ferred to,  the  Pawang  now  successively  plunged  it  up to  the  hilt  into  each  of  the  three  bouquets  (in  which hostile  spirits  might,  I  was  told,  possibly  be  lurking). Then  seizing  an  unopened  blossom-spathe  of  the  areca- palm,  he  anointed  the  latter  all  over  with  "oil  of Celebes,"  extracted  the  sheaf  of  palm-blossom  from  its casing,  fumigated  it,  and  laid  it  gently  across  the patient's  breast.  Rapidly  working  himself  up  into  a state  of  intense  excitement,  and  with  gestures  of  the utmost  vehemence,  he  now  proceeded  to  "stroke"  the patient  with  the  sheaf  of  blossom  rapidly  downwards, in  the  direction  of  the  feet,  on  reaching  which  he  beat out  the  blossom  against  the  floor.  Then  turning  the patient  over  on  to  his  face,  and  repeating  the  stroking process,  he  again  beat  out  the  blossom,  and  then  sank back  exhausted  upon  the  floor,  where  he  lay  face downwards,  with  his  head  once  more  enveloped  in  the folds  of  the  sarong.
A  long  interval  now  ensued,  but  at  length,  after many  convulsive  twitchings,  the  shrouded  figure  arose, amid  the  intense  excitement  of  the  entire  company, and  went  upon  its  hands  and  feet.  The  Tiger  Spirit had  taken  possession  of  the  Pawang's  body,  and presently  a  low,  but  startlingly  life-like  growl — the unmistakable  growl  of  the  dreaded  "  Lord  of  the Forest " — seemed  to  issue  from  somewhere  under  our feet,  as  the  weird  shrouded  figure  began  scratching furiously  at  the  mat  upon  which  it  had  been  quietly lying,  and  then,  with  occasional  pauses  for  the  emission of  the  growls,  which  had  previously  startled  us,  and  the performance  of  wonderful  cat-like  leaps,  rapidly  licked
vi  POSSESSION  443
up  the  handfuls  of  rice  which  had  been  thrown  upon the  floor  in  front  of  it.  This  part  of  the  performance lasted,  however,  but  a  few  minutes,  and  then  the evident  excitement  of  the  onlookers  was  raised  to fever  pitch,  as  the  bizarre,  and,  as  it  seemed  to  our fascinated  senses,  strangely  brute-like  form  stooped suddenly  forward,  and  slowly  licked  over,  as  a  tigress would  lick  its  cub,  the  all  but  naked  body  of  the patient — a  performance  (to  a  European)  of  so  power- fully nauseating  a  character  that  it  can  hardly  be conceived  that  any  human  being  could  persist  in  it unless  he  was  more  or  less  unconscious  of  his  actions. At  all  events,  after  his  complete  return  to  consciousness at  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony,  even  the  Pawang experienced  a  severe  attack  of  nausea,  such  as  might well  be  supposed  to  be  the  result  of  his  performance. Meanwhile,  however,  the  ceremony  continued.  Revert- ing to  a  sitting  posture  (though  still  with  shrouded head),  the  Pawang  now  leaned  forward  over  the patient,  and  with  the  point  of  his  dagger  drew  blood from  his  own  arm  ;  then  rising  to  his  feet  he  engaged in  a  fierce  hand-to-hand  combat  with  his  invisible  foe (the  spirit  whom  he  had  been  summoned  to  exorcise). At  first  his  weapon  was  the  dagger,  but  before  long  he discarded  this,  and  laid  about  him  stoutly  enough  with the  sheaf  of  areca-palm  blossom.
Presently,  however,  he  quieted  down  somewhat, and  commenced  to  "stroke"  the  sick  man  (as  before) with  the  sheaf  of  palm  -  blossom,  beating  out  the blossom  upon  the  floor  as  usual  at  the  end  of  the operation.  Then  sitting  down  again  and  crooning  to himself,  he  partook  of  betel-leaf,  faced  round  towards the  patient  and  stooped  over  him,  muttering  as  he  did so,  and  passing  his  hands  all  over  the  prostrate  form.
444  MEDICINE  CHAP.
Next  he  turned  once  more  to  the  jars  and  again plunged  his  dagger  into  each  of  them  in  turn  (to  make sure  that  the  evil  spirit  was  not  lurking  in  them),  and then  drawing  his  -head-cloth  over  his  head  so  as  to completely  hide  his  face,  he  once  more  took  his  seat beside  the  patient,  stooping  over  him  from  time  to time  and  crooning  charms  as  he  did  so.
Finally  he  clapped  his  hands,  removed  his  head- cloth,  "  stroked  "  the  patient  over  and  flicked  him  with the  corners  of  it,  and  then  shrouding  himself  once more  in  the  sarong,  lay  down  at  full  length  in  a  state of  complete  exhaustion.  A  pause  of  about  ten  minutes' duration  now  followed,  and  then  with  sundry  convulsive twitchings  the  Pawang  returned  to  consciousness  and sat  up,  and  the  ceremony  was  over.
The  following  description  of  a  ceremony  similar  to the  one  just  described  is  taken  from  Malay  Sketches : —
"  The  ber-hantu  is,  of  course,  a  survival  of  prse- Islam  darkness,  and  the  priests  abominate  it,  or  say they  do  ;  but  they  have  to  be  a  little  careful,  because the  highest  society  affects  the  practice  of  the  Black Art.
"  To  return  to  the  king's  house.  In  the  middle  of the  floor  was  spread  a  puddal,  a  small  narrow  mat,  at one  end  of  which  was  seated  a  middle-aged  woman dressed  like  a  man  in  a  short-sleeved  jacket,  trousers, a  sarong,  and  a  scarf  fastened  tightly  round  her  waist. At  the  other  end  of  the  mat  was  a  large  newly-lighted candle  in  a  candlestick.  Between  the  woman  and  the taper  were  two  or  three  small  vessels  containing  rice coloured  with  turmeric,  parched  padi,  and  perfumed water.  An  attendant  sat  near  at  hand.
"  The  woman  in  male  attire  was  the  Pawang,  the Raiser  of  Spirits,  the  Witch,  not  of  Endor,  but  of  as
vi  THE  SPIRIT  LANGUAGE  445
great  repute  in  her  own  country  and  among  her  own people.  In  ordinary  life  she  was  an  amusing  lady named  Raja  Ngah,  a  scion  of  the  reigning  house  on the  female  side,  and  a  member  of  a  family  skilled  in  all matters  pertaining  to  occultism.  In  a  corner  of  the room  were  five  or  six  girls  holding  native  drums, instruments  with  a  skin  stretched  over  one  side only,  and  this  is  beaten  usually  with  the  fingers.  The leader  of  this  orchestra  was  the  daughter  of  Raja Ngah.
"  Shortly  after  I  sat  down,  the  proceedings  began by  the  Pdwang  covering  her  head  and  face  with  a silken  cloth,  while  the  orchestra  began  to  sing  a  weird melody  in  an  unknown  tongue.  I  was  told  it  was  the spirit  language  ;  the  air  was  one  specially  pleasing  to a  particular  Jin,  or  Spirit,  and  the  invocation,  after reciting  his  praises,  besought  him  to  come  from  the mountains  or  the  sea,  from  underground  or  overhead, and  relieve  the  torments  of  the  King.
"  As  the  song  continued,  accompanied  by  the rhythmical  beating  of  the  drums,  the  Pdwang  sat  with shrouded  head  in  front  of  the  lighted  taper,  holding  in her  right  hand  against  her  left  breast  a  small  sheaf  of the  grass  called  daun  sambau,  tied  tightly  together  and cut  square  at  top  and  bottom.
''This  chddak  she  shook,  together  with  her  whole body,  by  a  stiffening  of  the  muscles,  while  all  eyes  were fixed  upon  the  taper.
"  At  first  the  flame  was  steady,  but  by  and  by,  as the  singers  screamed  more  loudly  to  attract  the  atten- tion of  the  laggard  Spirit,  the  wick  began  to  quiver and  flare  up,  and  it  was  manifest  to  the  initiated  that they/'w  was  introducing  himself  into  the  candle.  By some  means  the  Pdwang,  who  was  now  supposed  to
446  MEDICINE  CHAP.
be  '  possessed  '  and  no  longer  conscious  of  her  actions, became  aware  of  this,  and  she  made  obeisance  to  the taper,  sprinkling  the  floor  round  it  with  saffron-coloured rice  and  perfumed  water ;  then,  rising  to  her  feet  and followed  by  the  attendant,  she  performed  the  same ceremony  before  each  male  member  of  the  reigning family  present  in  the  room,  murmuring  all  the  while  a string  of  gibberish  addressed  to  the  Spirit.  This  done, she  resumed  her  seat  on  the  mat,  and,  after  a  brief pause,  the  minstrels  struck  up  a  different  air,  and, singing  the  praises  of  another  Jin,  called  upon  him  to come  and  relieve  the  King's  distress.
"  I  ascertained  that  each  Malay  State  has  its  own special  Spirits,  each  district  is  equally  well  provided, and  there  are  even  some  to  spare  for  special  individuals, In  this  particular  State  there  are  four  principal  Jin; they  are  the  Jin  ka-rdja-an,  the  State  Spirit — also called  Junjong  dunia  uddra,  Supporter  of  the  Firma- ment ;  Mdia  uddra,  the  Spirit  of  the  Air ;  Mahkota si-rdja  Jin,  the  Crown  of  Royal  Spirits ;  and  Stan AH.
"These  four  are  known  as Jin  druah,  Exalted  Spirits, and  they  are  the  guardians  of  the  Sultan  and  the  State. As  one  star  exceeds  another  in  glory,  so  one  Jin  sur- passes another  in  renown,  and  I  have  named  them  in the  order  of  their  greatness.  In  their  honour  four white  and  crimson  umbrellas  were  hung  in  the  room, presumably  for  their  use  when  they  arrived  from  their distant  homes.  Only  the  Sultan  of  the  State  is  en- titled to  traffic  with  these  distinguished  Spirits  ;  when summoned  they  decline  to  move  unless  appealed  to with  their  own  special  invocations,  set  to  their  own peculiar  music,  sung  by  at  least  four  singers,  and  led by  a  Beduan  (singer)  of  the  royal  family.
vi  SPIRITS  OF  VARIOUS  RANKS  447
ka-rdja-an  is  entitled  to  have  the  royal  drums  played by  the  State  drummers  if  his  presence  is  required,  but the  other  three  have  to  be  satisfied  with  the  instru- ments I  have  described.
"  There  are  common  devils  who  look  after  com- mon people  ;  such  as  Hantu  Songkei,  Hantu  Maldyu, and  Hantu  Bltan;  the  last  the  'Tiger  Devil,'  but out  of  politeness  he  is  called  '  Bllan,'  to  save  his feelings.
"  Then  there  is  Kemdla  ajaib,  the  'Wonderful  Jewel,' Israng,  Raja  Ngah's  special  familiar,  and  a  host  of others.  Most  hantu  have  their  own  special  Pdwangs, and  several  of  these  were  carrying  on  similar  proceed- ings in  adjoining  buildings,  in  order  that  the  sick monarch  might  reap  all  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from a  consultation  of  experts,  and  as  one  spirit  after  another notified  his  advent  by  the  upstarting  flame  of  the  taper, it  was  impossible  not  to  feel  that  one  was  getting  into the  very  best  society.
"  Meanwhile  a  sixteen-sided  stand,  about  six  inches high  and  shaped  like  this  diagram,  had  been  placed  on the  floor  near  the  Pdwangs  mat. The  stand  was  decorated  with  yellow cloth ;  in  its  centre  stood  an  enor- mous candle,  while  round  it  were gaily -decorated  rice  and  toothsome delicacies  specially  prized  by  Jin. There  was  just  room  to  sit  on  this
j  1_  •    1_         •  1 1     J  T>v,      +  vocation  of  spirits.
stand,  which  is  called  Petrana panchalogam  (meaning  a  seat  of  this  particular shape),  and  the  Sultan,  supported  by  many  attend- ants, was  brought  out  and  sat  upon  it.  A  veil  was placed  on  his  head,  the  various  vessels  were  put in  his  hands,  he  spread  the  rice  round  the  taper,
448  MEDICINE  CHAP.
sprinkled  the  perfume,  and  having  received  into  his hand  an  enormous  chddak  of  grass,  calmly  awaited  the coming  of  the  Jin  Ka-rdja-an,  while  the  minstrels shouted  for  him  with  all  their  might.
"  The  Sultan  sat  there  for  some  time,  occasionally giving  a  convulsive  shudder,  and  when  this  taper had  duly  flared  up,  and  all  the  rites  had  been  per- formed, His  Highness  was  conducted  back  again  to his  couch,  and  the  Pdwang  continued  her  ministrations alone.
"  Whilst  striding  across  the  floor  she  suddenly  fell down  as  though  shot,  and  it  was  explained  to  me  that Israng,  the  spirit  by  whom  she  was  possessed,  had seen  a  dish-cover,  and  that  the  sight  always  frightened him  to  such  an  extent  that  his  Pdwang  fell  down. The  cause  of  offence  was  removed,  and  the  perform- ance continued.
"  There  are  other  spirits  who  cannot  bear  the  bark- ing of  a  dog,  the  mewing  of  a  cat,  and  so  on.
"  Just  before  dawn  there  was  a  sudden  confusion within  the  curtains  which  hid  the  Sultan's  couch ;  they were  thrown  aside,  and  there  lay  the  King,  to  all appearance  in  a  swoon.  The  Jin  Ka-rdja-an  had taken  possession  of  the  sick  body,  and  the  mind  was no  longer  under  its  owner's  control.
"  For  a  little  while  there  was  great  excitement,  and then  the  King  recovered  consciousness,  was  carried  to a  side  verandah,  and  a  quantity  of  cold  water  poured over  him.
"So  ended  the  stance.
"  Shortly  after,  the  Sultan,  clothed  and  in  his  right mind,  sent  to  say  he  would  like  to  speak  to  me.  He told  me  he  took  part  in  this  ceremony  to  please  his people,  and  because  it  was  a  very  old  custom,  and  he
vi  THE  SUCKING  CHARM  449
added,  '  I  did  not  know  you  were  there  till  just  now  ; I  could  not  see  you  because  I  was  not  myself  and did  not  know  what  I  was  doing.'
"  The  King  did  not  die,  after  all — on  the  contrary,  I was  sent  for  twice  again  because  he  was  not  expected to  live  till  the  morning,  and  yet  he  cheated  Death — for a  time."1
The  ceremony  called  Mengalin,  or  the  "  sucking charm  "  ceremony,  is  one  which  is  very  curious,  and deserves  to  be  described  in  some  detail.
First  of  all  you  perform  the  ceremony  called  "  Driv- ing out  the  Mischief"  (buang  badi}  from  the  sick man  (vide  supra]  in  order  to  drive  away  all  evil  spirits (menolak  sakalian  chengkedi  atau  hantu).  Then  wrap the  patient  up  in  a  white  or  black  cloth,  and  taking  a ball  of  (kneaded)  dough  (tepong  pengalin),  eggs  and saffron,  repeat  the  suitable  charm,  and  roll  it  all  over the  skin  of  the  patient's  body  in  order  to  draw  out all  poisonous  influences  (menchabut  sagala  bisa-bisa). Then  if  you  find  inside  the  ball  of  dough  after  opening it  an  infinitesimally  small  splinter  of  bone,  or  a  few red  hairs,  you  will  know  that  these  belong  to  the  evil spirit  who  has  been  plaguing  the  patient.  The  charm to  be  used  when  rolling  the  ball  of  dough  over  the  skin runs  as  follows  : —
"  Peace  be  unto  you,  O  Shadowy  Venom  ! Venom  be  at  ease  no  longer ! Venom  find  shelter  no  longer  ! Venom  take  your  ease  no  longer !
May  you  be  blown  upon,  O  Venom,  by  the  passing  breeze  ! May  you  be  blown  upon,  O  Venom,  by  the  yellow  sunset-glow, May  the  Pounce  of  this  Lanthorn's  lightning  kill  you ; May  the  Pounce  of  this  Twilight's  lanthorn  kill  you,
1  Swettenham,  Malay  Sketches,  pp.       ceremony  will  be  found  in  J.K.A.S. I53-I59-     Another  excellent  account,       S.B.,  No.  12,  pp.  222-232. also   by  an  eye-witness,   of  a  similar
2  G
450  MEDICINE  CHAP.
May  the  Shaft  of  the  Thunderbolt  kill  you  ;
May  the  Fall  of  the  heavy  Rains  kill  you,
May  the  Inundation  of  Flood-waters  kill  you  ;
May  you  be  towed  till  you  are  swamped  by  this  my  head-cloth,
May  you  be  drowned  in  the  swell  of  this  my  dough-boat.
By  the  grace  of,"  etc.
A  second  charm  of  great  length  follows,  the  object of  which  is  to  drive  out  the  evil  spirit  in  possession  of the  man.
An  example  of  this  form  of  cure  as  practised  by Malay  medicine -men  is  referred  to  by  Mr.  Clifford, who,  in  speaking  of  his  punkah-puller,  Umat,  says  :—
"It  was  soon  after  his  marriage  that  his  trouble  fell upon  Umat,  and  swept  much  of  the  sunshine  from  his life.  He  contracted  a  form  of  ophthalmia,  and  for  a time  was  blind.  Native  Medicine  Men  doctored  him, and  drew  sheaves  of  needles  and  bunches  of  thorns  from his  eyes,  which  they  declared  were  the  cause  of  his affliction.  These  miscellaneous  odds  and  ends  used  to be  brought  to  me  at  breakfast-time,  floating,  most  un- appetisingly,  in  a  shallow  cup  half-full  of  water ;  and Umat  went  abroad  with  eye-sockets  stained  crimson  or black,  according  to  the  fancy  of  the  native  physician. The  aid  of  an  English  doctor  was  called  in,  but  Umat was  too  thoroughly  a  Malay  to  trust  the  more  simple remedies  prescribed  to  him,  and  though  his  blindness was  relieved,  and  he  became  able  to  walk  without  the aid  of  a  staff,  his  eyesight  could  never  really  be  given back  to  him." l
In  the  above  connection  I  may  remark  that,  whether from  the  working  of  their  own  imaginations  or  other- wise, those  who  were  believed  to  be  possessed  by demons  certainly  suffered,  and  that  severely.  H.H. Raja  Kahar,  the  son  of  H.H.  the  late  Sultan  of
1  Studies  in  Brown  Humanity,  p.  46.
vi  RAJA  KAHAWS  ILLNESS  451
Selangor,  was  attacked  by  a  familiar  demon  during  my residence  in  the  Langat  District,  and  shortly  after- wards commenced  to  pine  away.  He  declared  that the  offending  demon  was  sitting  in  his  skull,  at  the back  of  his  head,  and  that  it  dragged  up  and  devoured everything  that  he  swallowed.  Hence  he  refused  at length  to  eat  any  sort  of  solid  food,  and  gradually wasted  away  until  he  became  a  mere  skeleton,  and went  about  imploring  people  to  take  a  hatchet  and split  his  skull  open,  in  order  to  extract  the  demon which  he  believed  it  to  contain.  Gradually  his  strength failed,  and  at  length  I  learned  from  H.H.  the  Sultan (then  Raja  Muda)  that  all  the  Malays  in  the  neigh- bourhood had  assembled  to  wail  at  his  decease.  As we  strolled  among  the  cocoa-nut  palms  and  talked,  I told  him  of  the  many  miraculous  cures  which  had attended  cases  of  faith-healing  in  England,  and  sug- gested, not  of  course  expecting  to  be  taken  seriously, that  he  should  try  the  effect  of  such  a  cure  upon  his uncle,  and  "make  believe"  to  extract  some  "man- tises"  from  the  back  of  his  head.  To  my  intense astonishment  some  days  later,  I  learned  that  this  idea had  been  carried  out  during  my  temporary  absence from  the  district,  and  that  the  Muhammadan  priest, after  cupping  him  severely,  had  shown  him  seven  large mantises  which  he  pretended  to  have  extracted  from the  back  of  his  head.  The  experiment  proved  extra- ordinarily successful,  and  Raja  Kahar  recovered  at  all events  for  the  time.  He  declared,  however,  that  there were  more  of  these  mantises  left,  and  eventually  suffered a  relapse  and  died  during  my  absence  in  England  on leave.  For  the  time,  however,  the  improvement  was quite  remarkable,  and  when  Said  Mashahor,  the  Peng- hulu  of  Kerling,  visited  him  a  few  days  later,  Raja
452  MEDICINE  CHAP.
Kahar,  after  an  account  of  the  cure  from  his  own  point of  view,  declared  that  nobody  would  now  believe  that he  had  been  so  ill,  although  "  no  fewer  than  seven  large mantises"  had  been  "extracted  from  his  head."
I  now  give  a  specimen  of  the  ceremonies  used  for recalling  a  wandering  soul  by  means  of  a  dough  figure or  image  (gambar  tepong].  It  is  not  stated  whether any  of  the  usual  accessories  of  these  figures  (hair  and nails,  etc.)  are  mixed  with  the  dough,  but  an  old  and famous  soul-doctor  ('Che  Amal,  of  Jugra)  told  me  that the  dough  figure  should  be  made,  in  strictness,  from the  ball  of  kneaded  dough  which  is  rolled  all  over  the patient's  body  by  the  medicine-man  during  the  "suck- ing-charm "  ceremony  (mengalin).  The  directions  for making  it  run  as  follows  : —
Make  an  image  of  dough,  in  length  about  nine inches,  and  representing  the  opposite  sex  to  that  of the  patient.  Deposit  it  (on  its  back)  upon  five  cubits of  white  cloth,  which  must  be  folded  up  small  for  the purpose,  and  then  plant  a  miniature  green  umbrella (made  of  cloth  coated  thickly  with  wax,  and  standing from  four  to  five  inches  in  height)  at  the  head  of  the image,  and  a  small  green  clove-shaped  taper  (of  about the  same  height)  at  its  feet.  Then  burn  incense  ;  take three  handfuls  each  of  "parched,"  "washed,"  and "saffron"  rice,  and  scatter  them  thrice  round  the  figure, saying  as  you  do  so  :—
"  O  Flying  Paper, Come  and  fly  into  this  cup. Pass  by  me  like  a  shadow,
I  am  applying  the  charm  called  the  '  Drunken  Stars    ] Drunken  stars  are  on  my  left, A  full  moon  (lit.  1 4th  day  moon)  is  on  my  right,
1  Bintang,  a  star,  means  "the  eye"  in  Malay  ghost  language
vi  RECALLING  THE  SOUL  453
And  the  Umbrella  of  Si  Lanchang  is  opposite  to  me Grant  this  by  virtue  of  '  There  is  no  god  but  God,' "  etc.
The  statement  that  this  dough  image  should  repre- sent the  opposite  sex  to  that  of  the  patient  should  be received  with  caution,  and  requires  further  investigation to  clear  it  up.  My  informant  explained  that  the  "  Fly- ing Paper"  (kretas  layang-layang)  referred  to  the  soul- cloth,  and  the  "  cup  "  to  the  image,  but  if  this  explana- tion is  accepted,  it  is  yet  not  unlikely  that  a  real  cup was  used  in  the  original  charm.  The  "  drunken  stars  " he  explained  as  referring  to  the  parched  rice  scattered on  his  left,  and  the  full  moon  to  the  eyes  of  the  image. Arguing  from  the  analogy  of  other  ceremonies  con- ducted on  the  same  lines,  the  wandering  soul  would be  recalled  and  induced  to  enter  the  so-called  cup  (i.e. the  dough  image),  and  being  transferred  thence  to  the soul-cloth  underneath  it,  would  be  passed  on  to  the patient  in  the  soul-cloth  itself.
Another  way  to  recall  a  soul  (which  was  taught  me by  'Che  'Abas  of  Kelantan)  is  to  take  seven  betel-leaves with  meeting  leaf-ribs  (sirih  bertemu  urat\  and  make them  up  into  seven  "chews"  of  betel.  Then  take  a plateful  of  saffron -rice,  parched  rice,  and  washed  rice, and  seven  pieces  of  parti-coloured  thread  (benang pancharona  tujoh  uraf]  and  an  egg ;  deposit  these at  the  feet  of  the  sick  man,  giving  him  one  end  of the  thread  to  hold,  and  fastening  the  other  end  to  the
egg-
The  soul  is  then  called  upon  to  return  to  the  house which  it  has  deserted,  is  caught  in  a  soul -cloth,  and passed  (it  is  thought)  first  of  all  into  the  egg,  and thence  back  into  the  patient's  body  by  means  of  the thread  which  connects  the  egg  with  the  patient.  The charm  runs  as  follows  : —
454  MEDICINE  CHAP.
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Breath  ! Hither,  Breath,  come  hither  ! Hither,  Soul,  come  hither  ! Hither,  Little  One,  come  hither  ! Hither,  Filmy  One,  come  hither  ! Hither,  I  am  sitting  and  praising  you ! Hither,  I  am  sitting  and  waving  to  you  ! Come  back  to  your  house  and  house-ladder, To  your  floor  of  which  the  planks  have  started, To  your  thatch-roof  '  starred '  (with  holes). Do  not  bear  grudges, Do  not  bear  malice, Do  not  take  it  as  a  wrong, Do  not  take  it  as  a  transgression. Here  I  sit  and  praise  you. Here  I  sit  and  drag  you  (home), Here  I  sit  and  shout  for  you, Here  I  sit  and  wave  to  you, Come  at  this  very  time,  come  at  this  very  moment,"  etc.
Another  way  of  recalling  the  soul  is  as  follows  :— Put  some  husked  rice  in  a  rice-bag  (sumpif)  with an  egg,  a  nail,  and  a  candle-nut ;  scatter  it  (kirei)  thrice round  the  patient's  head,  and  deposit  the  bag  be- hind his  pillow  (di  kapala  tidor\  after  repeating  this charm  : —
"  Cluck,  cluck,  souls  of  So-and-so,  all  seven  of  you, Return  ye  unto  your  own  house  and  house-ladder ! Here  are  your  parents  come  to  summon  you  back, Back  to  your  own  house  and  house-ladder,  your  own  clearing  and
yard, To  the  presence  of  your  own  parents,  of  your  own  family  and
relations,
Go  not  to  and  fro, But  return  to  your  own  home."
When  three  days  have  expired,  gather  up  the  rice again  and  put  it  all  back  into  the  bag.  If  there  is  a grain  over  throw  it  to  the  fowls,  but  if  the  measure falls  short  repeat  the  ceremony.
Again,  in  order  to  recall  an  escaping  soul  (riang
vi  INVOCATIONS  TO  THE  SOUL  455
stmangai)  the  soul-doctor  will  take  a  fowl's  egg,  seven small  cockle-shells  (kulit  krang  tujoh  kVping),  and  a kal1  of  husked  rice,  and  put  them  all  together  into a  rice-bag  (sumpit\  He  then  rubs  the  bag  all  over the  skin  of  the  patient's  body,  shakes  the  contents well  up  together,  and  deposits  it  again  close  to  the patient's  head.  Whilst  shaking  them  up  he  repeats the  following  charm  : —
"  Cluck  !  cluck  !  soul  of  this  sick  man,  So-and-so, Return  into  the  frame  and  body  of  So-and-so, To  your  own  house  and  house-ladder,  to  your  own  ground  and
yard, To  your  own  parents,  to  your  own  sheath."
At  the  end  of  three  days  he  measures  the  rice  ;  if  the amount  has  increased,  it  signifies  that  the  soul  has returned  ;  if  it  is  the  same  as  before,  it  is  still  half out  of  the  body  ;  if  less,  the  soul  has  escaped  and  has not  yet  returned.  In  this  case  the  soul  is  expected to  enter  the  rice  and  thus  cause  its  displacement.
Another  method,  not  of  recalling  the  soul,  but  of stopping  it  in  the  act  of  escaping,  is  to  take  a  gold ring,  not  less  than  a  maidm*  in  weight,  an  iron  nail, a  candle-nut  (buak  Kras\  three  small  cockle-shells, three  closed  fistfuls  of  husked  rice  (ttras  tiga  genggam bunyi],  and  some  parti-coloured  thread.  These  articles are  all  put  in  a  rice-bag,  and  shaken  up  together  seven times  every  morning  for  three  days,  by  which  time the  soul  is  supposed  to  be  firmly  reseated  in  the patient's  body ;  then  the  rice  is  poured  out  at  the door  "to  let  the  fowls  eat  it."  The  ring  is  tied  to •  the  patient's  wrist  by  means  of  a  strip  of  tree-bark (kulit  trap),  and  it  is  by  means  of  this  string
1  About  5  lb.  avoirdupois. 2  A  maiam  is  ^th  of  a  bungkal  and  equal  to  52  grains.
456  MEDICINE
that  the  soul  is  supposed  to  return  to  its  body. When  the  shaking  takes  place  the  following  charm must  be  recited  : —
"  Peeling-Knife,1  hooked  Knife, Stuck  into  the  thatch-wall ! Sea-demons !  Hamlet-demons ! Avaunt  ye,  begone  from  here, And  carry  not  off  the  soul  of  So-and-so"  etc.
In  conclusion,  I  will  give  a  quotation  from  Malay Sketches,  which  is  perhaps  as  good  an  example  as could  be  given  of  the  way  in  which  the  Black  Art  and the  medical  performances  that  in  their  methods  closely resemble  it,  are  regarded  by  many  respectable  Malays: —
"  One  evening  I  was  discussing  these  various superstitions  with  the  Sultan  of  Perak,  and  I  did  not notice  that  the  spiritual  teacher  of  His  Highness  had entered  and  was  waiting  to  lead  the  evening  prayer. The  guru,  or  teacher,  no  doubt  heard  the  end  of  our conversation,  and  was  duly  scandalised,  for  the  next day  I  received  from  him  a  letter,  of  which  the  follow- ing is  the  translation  :—
"  '  First  praise  to  God,  the  Giver  of  all  good,  a Fountain  of  Compassion  to  His  servants.
"  '  From  Haji  Wan  Muhammad,  Teacher  of  His Highness  the  Sultan  of  Perak,  to  the  Resident  who administers  the  Government  of  Perak.
"  '  The  whole  earth  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Most  High God,  and  He  gives  it  as  an  inheritance  to  whom  He will  of  His  subjects.  The  true  religion  is  also  of God,  and  Heaven  is  the  reward  of  those  who  fear the  Most  High.  Salvation  and  peace  are  for  those
1  The  peeling -knife  (pisau  rout)  is  other  end  flies  up  and  wounds  them,
mentioned    because   it   is    dreaded    by  Such  spirits  as  the  Wild  Huntsman  are
the  demons,  who  hurt  themselves  (it  is  specially  mentioned  as  being  afraid  of
alleged)  by  treading  on  one  end  of  it,  it.      Vide  p.  118,  siipra. when,  owing  to  its  curved  blade,  the
vi  DANCES  457
who  follow  the  straight  path,  and  only  they  will  in the  end  arrive  at  real  greatness.  No  Raja  can  do good,  and  none  can  be  powerful,  except  by  the  help of  God,  the  Most  High,  who  is  also  Most  Mighty.
" '  I  make  ten  thousand  salutations.  I  wish  to inquire  about  the  practice  of  ber-hantu,  driving  one- self mad  and  losing  one's  reason,  as  has  been  the custom  of  Rajas  and  Chiefs  in  this  State  of  Perak ; is  it  right,  according  to  your  religion,  Mr.  Resident, or  is  it  not  ?  For  that  practice  is  a  deadly  sin  to  the Muhammadan  Faith,  because  those  who  engage  in it  lose  their  reason  and  waste  their  substance  for nothing ;  some  of  them  cast  it  into  the  water,  while others  scatter  it  broadcast  through  the  jungle.  How is  such  conduct  treated  by  your  religion,  Mr.  Resident; is  it  right  or  wrong  ?  I  want  you  in  your  indulgence to  give  me  an  answer,  for  this  practice  is  very  hard on  the  poor.  The  Headmen  collect  from  the  rayats, and  then  they  make  elaborate  preparations  of  food, killing  a  buffalo  or  fowls,  and  all  this  is  thrown  away as  already  stated.  According  to  the  Muhammadan religion  such  proceedings  lead  to  destruction.
"  '  I  salute  you  many  times;  do  not  be  angry,  for I  do  not  understand  your  customs,  Mr.  Resident.
"  '  (Signed)     Haji  Muhammad  Abu  Hassan.'  "  l
9.    DANCES,    SPORTS,    AND    GAMES Dance  Ceremonies
The  following  passage  is  an  account  of  a  character- istic Malay  dance,  the  Joget  :—
"  Malays  are  not  dancers,  but  they  pay  professional
1  Swettenham,  Malay  Sketches,  pp.  208-210.
458  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES'  CHAP.
performers  to  dance  for  their  amusement,  and  consider that  '  the  better  part '  is  with  those  who  watch,  at their  ease,  the  exertions  of  a  small  class,  whose members  are  not  held  in  the  highest  respect.  The spectacle  usually  provided  is  strangely  wanting  in attraction :  a  couple  of  women  shuffling  their  feet and  swaying  their  hands  in  gestures  that  are  practi- cally devoid  of  grace  or  even  variety — that  is  the Malay  dance — and  it  is  accompanied  by  the  beating of  native  drums,  the  striking  together  of  two  short sticks  held  in  either  hand,  and  the  occasional  boom of  a  metal  gong.  The  entertainment  has  an  un- doubted fascination  for  Malays,  but  it  generally  forms part  of  a  theatrical  performance,  and  for  Western spectators  it  is  immeasurably  dull.1
"In  one  of  the  Malay  States,  however,  Pahang,  it has  for  years  been  the  custom  for  the  ruler  and  one or  two  of  his  near  relatives  to  keep  trained  dancing girls,  who  perform  what  is  called  the  '  Joget ' — a real  dance  with  an  accompaniment  of  something  like real  music,  though  the  orchestral  instruments  are  very rude  indeed.
"  The  dancers,  budak  joget,  belong  to  the  Raja's household,  they  may  even  be  attached  to  him  by  a closer  tie ;  they  perform  seldom,  only  for  the  amuse- ment of  their  lord  and  his  friends,  and  the  public are  not  admitted.  Years  ago  I  saw  such  a  dance,2 and  though  peculiar  to  Pahang,  as  far  as  the  Malay States  are  concerned,  it  is  probable  that  it  came originally  from  Java ;  the  instruments  used  by  the
1  This    is    a    description    of    Malay  it    has    a    real    meaning,    which    by
dancing  from   the   European  point  of  Europeans    (like    that    of    the    Malay
view;   the  reason  of  the  "undoubted  four-rhymed  stanza  or pantuti)  is  quite
fascination  which  it  has  for  the  Malays  "  inadequately  understood, being  no  doubt  the  fact  that  for  them  2  In  1875.
vi  THE  JOGET  459
orchestra  and  the  airs  played  are  certainly  far  more common  in  Java  and  Sumatra  than  in  the  Peninsula.
14  I  had  gone  to  Pahang  on  a  political  mission accompanied  by  a  friend,  and  we  were  vainly  court- ing sleep  in  a  miserable  lodging,  when  at  i  A.M.  a message  came  from  the  Sultan  inviting  us  to  witness a  joget.  We  accepted  with  alacrity,  and  at  once made  our  way  to  the  astana,  a  picturesque,  well-built, and  commodious  house  on  the  right  bank  of  the Pahang  river.  A  palisade  enclosed  the  courtyard, and  the  front  of  the  house  was  a  very  large  hall, open  on  three  sides,  but  covered  by  a  lofty  roof  of fantastic  design  supported  on  pillars.  The  floor  of this  hall  was  approached  by  three  wide  steps  con- tinued round  the  three  open  sides,  the  fourth  being closed  by  a  wooden  wall  which  entirely  shut  off  the private  apartments  save  for  one  central  door  over which  hung  a  heavy  curtain.  The  three  steps  were to  provide  sitting  accommodation  according  to  their rank  for  those  admitted  to  the  astana.  The  middle of  the  floor  on  the  night  in  question  was  covered by  a  large  carpet,  chairs  were  placed  for  us,  and  the rest  of  the  guests  sat  on  the  steps  of  the  dais.
"When  we  entered,  we  saw,  seated  on  the  carpet, four  girls,  two  of  them  about  eighteen  and  two  about eleven  years  old,  all  attractive  according  to  Malay ideas  of  beauty,  and  all  gorgeously  and  picturesquely clothed.  On  their  heads  they  each  wore  a  large  and curious  but  very  pretty  ornament  of  delicate  workman- ship— a  sort  of  square  flower  garden  where  all  the flowers  were  gold,  trembling  and  glittering  with  every movement  of  the  wearer.  These  ornaments  were secured  to  the  head  by  twisted  cords  of  silver  and gold.  The  girls'  hair,  combed  down  in  a  fringe,  was
460  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
cut  in  a  perfect  oval  round  their  foreheads  and  very becomingly  dressed  behind.
"  The  bodices  of  their  dresses  were  made  of  tight- fitting  silk,  leaving  the  neck  and  arms  bare,  whilst a  white  band  of  fine  cambric  (about  one  and  a  half inches  wide),  passing  round  the  neck,  came  down  on the  front  of  the  bodice  in  the  form  of  a  V,  and  was there  fastened  by  a  golden  flower.  Round  their waists  were  belts  fastened  with  large  and  curiously- worked  pinding  or  buckles  of  gold,  so  large  that they  reached  quite  across  the  waist.  The  rest of  the  costume  consisted  of  a  skirt  of  cloth  of gold  (not  at  all  like  the  sarong],  reaching  to  the ankles,  while  a  scarf  of  the  same  material,  fastened in  its  centre  to  the  waist-buckle,  hung  down  to  the hem  of  the  skirt.
"  All  four  dancers  were  dressed  alike,  except  that the  older  girls  wore  white  silk  bodices  with  a  red  and gold  handkerchief,  folded  corner-wise,  tied  under  the arms  and  knotted  in  front.  The  points  of  the  handker- chief hung  to  the  middle  of  the  back.  In  the  case  of  the two  younger  girls  the  entire  dress  was  of  one  material. On  their  arms  the  dancers  wore  numbers  of  gold bangles,  and  their  fingers  were  covered  with  diamond rings.  In  their  ears  were  fastened  the  diamond buttons  so  much  affected  by  Malays,  and  indeed  now by  Western  ladies.  Their  feet,  of  course,  were  bare. We  had  ample  time  to  minutely  observe  these details  before  the  dance  commenced,  for  when  we came  into  the  hall  the  four  girls  were  sitting  down in  the  usual l  Eastern  fashion  on  the  carpet,  bending forward,  their  elbows  resting  on  their  thighs,  and
1  The  attitude   is   that   obtained    by  transferring   the   body  directly  from   a kneeling  to  a  sitting  position.
\  i  THE  ORCHESTRA  461
hiding  the  sides  of  their  faces,  which  were  towards the  audience,  with  fans  made  of  crimson  and  gilt paper  which  sparkled  in  the  light.
"  On  our  entrance  the  band  struck  up,  and  our special  attention  was  called  to  the  orchestra,  as  the instruments  are  seldom  seen  in  the  Malay  Peninsula. There  were  two  chief  performers  :  one  playing  on  a sort  of  harmonicon,  the  notes  of  which  he  struck with  pieces  of  stick  held  in  each  hand.  The  other, with  similar  pieces  of  wood,  played  on  inverted  metal bowls.  Both  these  performers  seemed  to  have  suffici- ently hard  work,  but  they  played  with  the  greatest spirit  from  10  P.M.  till  5  A.M.
"  The  harmonicon  is  called  by  Malays  chelempong, and  the  inverted  bowls,  which  give  a  pleasant  and musical  sound  like  the  noise  of  rippling  water,  a  gam- bang.  The  other  members  of  the  orchestra  consisted of  a  very  small  boy  who  played,  with  a  very  large  and thick  stick,  on  a  gigantic  gong,  an  old  woman  who beat  a  drum  with  two  sticks,  and  several  other  boys who  played  on  instruments  like  triangles  called  chdnang. All  these  performers,  we  were  told  with  much solemnity,  were  artists  of  the  first  order,  masters  and  a mistress  in  their  craft,  and  if  vigour  of  execution  counts for  excellence  they  proved  the  justice  of  the  praise.
"  The  Hall,  of  considerable  size,  capable  of  accom- modating several  hundreds  of  people,  was  only  dimly lighted,  but  the  fact  that,  while  the  audience  was  in semi-darkness,  the  light  was  concentrated  on  the  per- formers added  to  the  effect.  Besides  ourselves,  I .  question  whether  there  were  more  than  twenty  spec- tators, but  sitting  on  the  top  of  the  dais,  near  to  the dancers,  it  was  hard  to  pierce  the  surrounding  gloom. The  orchestra  was  placed  on  the  left  of  the  entrance
462  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
to  the  Hall,  that  is,  rather  to  the  side  and  rather  in the  background,  a  position  evidently  chosen  with  due regard  to  the  feelings  of  the  audience.
"  From  the  elaborate  and  vehement  execution  of  the players,  and  the  want  of  regular  time  in  the  music,  I judged,  and  rightly,  that  we  had  entered  as  the  over- ture began.  During  its  performance  the  dancers  sat leaning  forward,  hiding  their  faces  as  I  have  described  ; but  when  it  concluded  and,  without  any  break,  the music  changed  into  the  regular  rhythm  for  dancing, the  four  girls  dropped  their  fans,  raised  their  hands  in the  act  of  Sembah  or  homage,  and  then  began  the dance  by  swaying  their  bodies  and  slowly  waving  their arms  and  hands  in  the  most  graceful  movements making  much  and  effective  use  all  the  while  of  the scarf  hanging  from  their  belts.  Gradually  raising themselves  from  a  sitting  to  a  kneeling  posture,  act- ing in  perfect  accord  in  every  motion,  then  rising to  their  feet,  they  floated  through  a  series  of  figures hardly  to  be  exceeded  in  grace  and  difficulty,  con- sidering that  the  movements  are  essentially  slow,  the arms,  hands,  and  body  being  the  real  performers, whilst  the  feet  are  scarcely  noticed  and  for  half  the time  not  visible.
"  They  danced  five  or  six  dances,  each  lasting  quite half  an  hour,  with  materially  different  figures  and  time in  the  music.  All  these  dances,  I  was  told,  were  sym- bolical :  one  of  agriculture,  with  the  tilling  of  the  soil, the  sowing  of  the  seed,  the  reaping  and  winnowing  of the  grain,  might  easily  have  been  guessed  from  the dancer's  movements.  But  those  of  the  audience  whom I  was  near  enough  to  question  were,  Malay -like,  un- able to  give  me  much  information.  Attendants  stood or  sat  near  the  dancers,  and  from  time  to  time,  as  the
vi  SYMBOLIC  DANCES  463
girls  tossed  one  thing  on  the  floor,  handed  them another.  Sometimes  it  was  a  fan  or  a  mirror  they held,  sometimes  a  flower  or  small  vessel,  but  oftener their  hands  were  empty,  as  it  is  in  the  management  of the  fingers  that  the  chief  art  of  Malay  dancers  consists.
"  The  last  dance,  symbolical  of  war,  was  perhaps  the best,  the  music  being  much  faster,  almost  inspiriting, and  the  movements  of  the  dancers  more  free  and  even abandoned.  For  the  latter  half  of  the  dance  they  each held  a  wand,  to  represent  a  sword,  bound  with  three rings  of  burnished  gold  which  glittered  in  the  light  like precious  stones.  This  nautch,  which  began  soberly  like the  others,  grew  to  a  wild  revel  until  the  dancers  were, or  pretended  to  be,  possessed  by  the  Spirit  of  Dancing, hantu  mendrtzs  they  called  it,  and  leaving  the  Hall  for a  moment  to  smear  their  fingers  and  faces  with  a fragrant  oil,  they  returned,  and  the  two  eldest,  striking at  each  other  with  their  wands,  seemed  inclined  to  turn the  symbolical  into  a  real  battle.  They  were,  how- ever, after  some  trouble,  caught  by  four  or  five  women and  carried  forcibly  out  of  the  Hall,  but  not  until  their captors  had  been  made  to  feel  the  weight  of  the  magic wands.  The  two  younger  girls,  who  looked  as  if  they too  would  like  to  be  "possessed,"  but  did  not  know how  to  accomplish  it,  were  easily  caught  and  removed.
"  The  bands,  whose  strains  had  been  increasing  in wildness  and  in  time,  ceased  playing  on  the  removal  of the  dancers,  and  the  nautch,  which  had  begun  at  10 P.M.,  was  over.
"  The  Raja,  who  had  only  appeared  at  4  A.M.,  told me  that  one  of  the  elder  girls,  when  she  became "properly  possessed,"  lived  for  months  on  nothing  but flowers,  a  pretty  and  poetic  conceit.
"As  we  left  the  Astana,  and   taking  boat  rowed
464  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
slowly  to  the  vessel  waiting  for  us  off  the  river's  mouth, the  rising  sun  was  driving  the  fog  from  the  numbers of  lovely  green  islets,  that  seemed  to  float  like  dew- drenched  lotus  leaves  on  the  surface  of  the  shallow stream.1 "
The  religious  origin  of  almost  all  Malay  dances  is still  to  be  seen  in  the  performance  of  such  ritualistic observances  as  the  burning  of  incense,  the  scattering of  rice,  and  the  invocation  of  the  Dance-spirit  accord- ing to  certain  set  forms,  the  spirit  being  duly  exorcised again  (or  "escorted  homewards,"  as  it  is  called)  at  the end  of  the  performance.
The  dances  which  have  best  preserved  the  older ritual  are  precisely  those  which  are  the  least  often  seen, such  as  the  "  Gambor  Dance "  (main  gambor],  the "  Monkey  Dance "  (main  b'rok],  the  "  Palm-blossom Dance  "  (main  mayang],  and  the  "  Fish-trap  Dance  " (main  lukak).  These  I  will  take  in  the  order mentioned.
The  "  Gambor  Dance  "  (lit.  Gambor  Play)  should be  performed  by  girls  just  entering  upon  womanhood. The  debutante  is  attired  in  an  attractive  coat  and  skirt (sarong],  is  girt  about  at  the  waist  with  a  yellow  (royal) sash,  and  is  further  provided  with  an  elaborate  head- dress, crescent-shaped  pendants  (dokoJi)  for  the  breast, and  a  fan.  The  only  other  "necessary"  is  the "  Pleasure-garden "  (taman  bunga],  which  is  repre- sented by  a  large  water-jar  containing  a  bunch  of  long sprays,  from  the  ends  of  which  are  made  to  depend artificial  flowers,  fruit,  and  birds,  the  whole  being intended  to  attract  the  spirit  (Hantu  Gambor).  In addition  there  is  the  usual  circular  tray,  with  its  com- plement of  sacrificial  rice  and  incense.  Everything
1  Swettenham,  Malay  Sketches,  ch.  vii.  pp.  44-52.
I'I.ATK  18. — GAMBOK.
Model,  showing  the  performance  of  the  kind  of  dance  called  gaml'or.  The suspended  figure  in  the  centre  is  the  performer,  the  musicians  sitting  on  the left.  Iiehind  the  musicians  are  to  he  seen  some  of  the  sprays  of  the  bouquet of  artificial  flowers,  etc..  which  is  used  to  represent  a  pleasure  garden  (ta»ian /•iingu)  f"r  the  attraction  of  the  dance-spirit.  The  bird  at  the  top  of  it  is a  hornliill.
rage  464.
THE  MONKEY  DANCE  465
being  ready,  the  debutante  lies  down  and  is  covered over  with  a  sheet,  and  incense  is  burnt,  the  sacrificial rice  sprinkled,  and  the  invocation  of  the  spirit  is chanted  by  a  woman  to  the  accompaniment  of  the tambourines.  Ere  it  has  ended,  if  all  goes  well,  the. charm  will  have  begun  to  work,  the  spirit  descends, and  the  dance  commences.
At  the  end  of  this  dance,  as  has  already  been  said, the  spirit  is  exorcised,  that  is,  he  is  "  escorted  back  " to  the  seventh  heaven  from  whence  he  came.
The  invocations,  which  are  used  both  at  the  com- mencement and  the  conclusion  of  the  performance, consist  of  poems  which  belong  unmistakably  to  the "  Panji  "  cycle  of  stories  ;  here  and  there  they  contain old  words  which  are  still  used  in  Java.
The  "  Monkey  Dance"  is  achieved  by  causing  the "  Monkey  spirit "  to  enter  into  a  girl  of  some  ten  years of  age.  She  is  first  rocked  to  and  fro  in  a  Malay infant's  swinging-cot  (buayan),  and  fed  with  areca-nut and  salt  (pinang  garam).  When  she  is  sufficiently dizzy  or  "  dazed  "  (mabok),  an  invocation  addressed to  the  "Monkey  spirit"  is  chanted  (to  tambourine accompaniments),  and  at  its  close  the  child  commences to  perform  a  dance,  in  the  course  of  which  she  is  said sometimes  to  achieve  some  extraordinary  climbing feats  which  she  could  never  have  achieved  unless "  possessed."  When  it  is  time  for  her  to  recover  her senses  she  is  called  upon  by  name,  and  if  that  fails  to recall  her,  is  bathed  all  over  with  cocoa-nut  milk  (ayer niyor  hijau}.
The  foregoing  does  not,  of  course,  in  any  way  ex- haust the  list  of  Malay  dances.  Others  will  be  found described  in  various  parts  of  this  book,  amongst  them the  "  Henna  Dance "  (at  weddings) ;  the  medicine-
2  H
466  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
man's  dance,  as  performed  at  the  bedside  of  a  sick person  ;  the  dance  performed  in  honour  of  a  dead tiger ;  theatrical  dances,  and  many  kinds  of  sword  and dagger  dances,  or  posture-dances  (such  as  the  main bersilat,  or  main  berpenchaK],  whether  performed  for  the diversion  of  the  beholders  or  by  way  of  defiance  (as  in war).  The  main  dabus  is  a  dance  performed  with a  species  of  iron  spits,  whose  upper  ends  are  furnished with  hoops,  upon  which  small  iron  rings  are  strung,  and which  accordingly  give  out  a  jingling  noise  when  shaken. Two  of  these  spits  (buah  dabus]  are  charmed  (to deaden  their  bite),  and  taken  up,  one  in  each  hand,  by the  dancer,  who  shakes  them  at  each  step  that  he takes.  When  he  is  properly  possessed,  he  drives  the points  of  these  spits  through  the  muscle  of  each  fore- arm, and  lets  them  hang  down  whilst  he  takes  up  a second  pair.  He  then  keeps  all  four  spits  jingling  at once  until  the  dance  ceases.  The  point  of  each  spit goes  right  through  the  muscle,  but  if  skilfully  done, draws  no  blood.1
We  now  come  to  a  class  of  dances  in  which certain  inanimate  objects,  that  are  believed  to  be temporarily  animated,  are  the  performers,  and  which therefore  closely  correspond  to  the  performances  of our  own  spiritualists.
The  Palm-blossom  dance  is  a  very  curious  exhibi- tion, which  I  once  saw  performed  in  the  Langat District  of  Selangor.  Two  freshly-gathered  sheaves  of areca-palm  blossom  (each  several  feet  in  length)  were deposited  upon  a  new  mat,  near  a  tray  containing  a censer  and  the  three  kinds  of  sacrificial  rice.
The  magician  ('Che  Ganti  by  name)  commenced the  performance  by  playing  a  prelude  on  his  violin.
1  This  dance  is  said  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Arabs.
PLATK  19.— P£DIKIR.
Model,  showing  the  performance  of  f>"'dikir  (a  kind  of  dance)  before  a  newly-married  couple.  The performers  are  two  girls,  who  carry  fans  and  wear  a  peculiar  head-dress  towards  the  left  of  the picture  are  seated  the  musicians  with  tambourines  (rfbana),  and  on  the  right  some  spectators. The  bride  and  bridegroom  are  seated  on  the  dais,  the  latter  towards  the  middle  of  the  picture. Near  him  are  seen  the  marriage-pillows  (which  are  in  correct  proportion),  and  overhead  the ornamental  clothes-rod  with  clothes.  The  tree-like  object  on  the  left  is  the  sftakona :  it  is  the only  object  out  of  proportion,  being  too  large.  Rolled  up  in  front  are  the  striped  hangings  used at  Malay  weddings.
Page  466.
vi  THE  PALM-BLOSSOM  DANCE  467
Presently  his  wife  (an  aged  Selangor  woman)  took some  of  the  rice  in  her  hand  and  commenced  to  chant the  words  of  the  invocation,  she  being  almost  immedi- ately joined  in  the  chant  by  a  younger  woman. Starting  with  the  words,  "  Thus  I  brace  up,  I  brace  up the  Palm-blossom "  (ku  anggit  mayang  'ku  anggit\ their  voices  rose  higher  and  higher  until  the  seventh stanza  was  reached,  when  the  old  woman  covered  the two  sheaves  of  Palm-blossom  with  a  Malay  plaid  skirt (sarong)  and  the  usual  "  five  cubits  of  white  cloth  " (folded  double),  both  of  which  had  of  course  first been  fumigated.  Then  followed  seven  more  stanzas ("  Borrow  the  hammer,  Borrow  the  anvil,"  and  its companion  verses),  and  rice  having  been  thrown  over one  of  the  sheaves  of  palm-blossom,  its  sheath  was opened  and  the  contents  fumigated.  Then  the  old woman  took  the  newly-fumigated  sheaf  between  her hands,  and  the  chant  recommenced  with  the  third septet  of  stanzas  ("  Dig  up,  dig  up,  the  wild  ginger plant "),  as  the  erect  palm-blossom  swayed  from  side to  side  in  time  to  the  music.  Finally  the  fiddle  stopped and  tambourines  were  substituted,  and  at  this  point the  sheaf  of  blossom  commenced  to  jump  about  on  its stalk,  as  if  it  were  indeed  possessed,  and  eventually dashed  itself  upon  the  ground.  After  one  or  two repetitions  of  this  performance,  other  persons  present were  invited  to  try  it,  and  did  so  with  varying  success, which  depended,  I  was  told,  upon  the  impressionability of  their  souls,  as  the  palm-blossom  would  not  dance for  anybody  whose  soul  was  not  impressionable  (lemah semangat).
When  the  first  blossom-sheaf  had  been  destroyed by  the  rough  treatment  which  it  had  to  undergo,  the second  was  duly  fumigated  and  introduced  to  the
468  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
company,  and  finally  the  performance  was  brought  to a  close  by  the  chanting  of  the  stanzas  in  which  the spirit  is  requested  to  return  to  his  own  place.  The two  spoiled  sheaves  of  blossom  were  then  carried  re- spectfully out  of  the  house  and  laid  on  the  ground beneath  a  banana-tree.
The  Dancing  Fish-trap  (main  hikak]  is  a  spiritual- istic performance,  in  which  a  fish-trap  (lukafi)  is  sub- stituted for  the  sheaf  of  palm-blossom,  and  a  different invocation  is  used.  In  other  respects  there  is  very  little difference  between  the  two.  The  fish-trap  is  dressed up  much  in  the  same  way  as  a  "scare-crow,"  so  as  to present  a  rough  and  ready  resemblance  to  the  human figure,  i.e.  it  is  dressed  in  a  woman  s  coat  and  plaid skirt  (sarong],  both  of  which  must,  if  possible,  have been  worn  previously ;  a  stick  is  run  through  it  to serve  as  the  arms  of  the  figure,  and  a  (sterile)  cocoa-nut shell  (tempurong  jantan]  clapped  on  the  top  to  serve as  a  head.  The  invocation  is  then  chanted  in  the same  manner  and  to  the  same  accompaniment  as  that used  for  the  "  Palm-blossom."  At  its  conclusion  the magician  whispers,  so  to  speak,  into  the  fish-trap's  ear, bidding  it  "  not  to  disgrace  him,"  but  rise  up  and  dance, and  the  fish-trap  presently  commences  to  rock  to  and  fro, and  to  leap  about  in  a  manner  which  of  course  proves it  to  be  "  possessed "  by  the  spirit.  Two  different specimens  of  the  invocations  used  will  be  found  in  the Appendix.
Buffalo  Fights  and  Cock  Fights
"  The  Malays  are  passionately  addicted  to  buffalo and  cock  fighting.  Whole  poems  are  devoted  to enthusiastic  descriptions  of  these  'sports  of  princes,'
vi  BUFFALO  FIGHTS  469
and  laws  laid  down  for  the  latter  as  minute  as  those  of the  Hoyleian  code."
"The  bulls  have  been  trained  and  medicined  for months  beforehand,  with  much  careful  tending,  many strength-giving  potions,  and  volumes  of  the  old-world charms,  which  put  valour  and  courage  into  a  beast. They  stand  at  each  end  of  a  piece  of  grassy  lawn,  with their  knots  of  admirers  around  them,  descanting  on their  various  points,  and  with  the  proud  trainer,  who is  at  once  keeper  and  medicine-man,  holding  them  by the  cord  which  is  passed  through  their  nose-rings. Until  you  have  seen  the  water-buffalo  stripped  for  the fight,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  how  handsome  the ugly  brute  can  look.  One  has  been  accustomed  to  see him  with  his  neck  bowed  to  the  yoke  he  hates,  and breaks  whenever  the  opportunity  offers ;  or  else  in the  pddi  fields.  In  the  former  case  he  looks  out of  place, — an  anachronism  belonging  to  a  prehistoric period,  drawing  a  cart  which  seems  also  to  date  back to  the  days  before  the  Deluge.  In  the  fields  the buffalo  has  usually  a  complete  suit  of  grey  mud,  and during  the  quiet  evening  hour  goggles  at  you  through the  clouds  of  flies  which  surround  his  flapping  ears and  brutal  nose,  the  only  parts  that  can  be  seen  of him  above  the  surface  of  the  mud-hole  or  the  running water  of  the  river.  In  both  cases  he  is  unlovely,  but in  the  bull-ring  he  has  something  magnificent  about him.  His  black  coat  has  a  gloss  upon  it  which  would not  disgrace  a  London  carriage  horse,  and  which  shows him  to  be  in  tip-top  condition.  His  neck  seems  thicker and  more  powerful  than  that  of  any  other  animal,  and it  glistens  with  the  chili  water,  which  has  been  poured over  it  in  order  to  increase  his  excitement.  His
1  Newbold,  Malacca,  vol.  ii.  p.  179.
470  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
resolute  shoulders,  his  straining  quarters, — each  vying with  the  other  for  the  prize  for  strength, — and  his great  girth,  give  a  look  of  astonishing  vigour  and vitality  to  the  animal.  It  is  the  head  of  the  buffalo, however,  which  it  is  best  to  look  at  on  these  occasions. Its  great  spread  of  horns  is  very  imposing,  and  the eyes,  which  are  usually  sleepy,  cynically  contemptuous and  indifferent,  or  sullenly  cruel,  are  for  once  full  of life,  anger,  passion,  and  excitement.  He  stands  there quivering  and  stamping,  blowing  great  clouds  of  smoke from  his  mouth  and  nose  : —
"  With  his  nostrils  like  pits  full  of  blood  to  the  brim, And  with  circles  of  red  for  his  eye-socket's  rim.
"  The  wild  joy  of  battle  is  sending  the  blood  boiling through  the  great  arteries  of  the  beast,  and  his accustomed  lethargic  existence  is  galvanised  into  a new  fierce  life.  You  can  see  that  he  is  longing  for  the battle  with  an  ardour  that  would  have  distanced  that of  a  Quixote,  and,  for  the  first  time,  you  begin  to  see something  to  admire  even  in  the  water-buffalo.
"A  crowd  of  Rajas,  Chiefs,  and  commoners  are assembled,  in  their  gaily  -  coloured  garments,  which always  serve  to  give  life  and  beauty  to  every  Malay picture,  with  its  setting  of  brilliant  never-fading  green. The  women  in  their  gaudy  silks,  and  dainty  veils, glance  coquettishly  from  behind  the  fenced  enclosure which  has  been  prepared  for  their  protection,  and where  they  are  quite  safe  from  injury.  The  young Rdjas  stalk  about,  examine  the  bulls,  and  give  loud and  contradictory  orders  as  to  the  manner  in  which the  fight  is  to  be  conducted.  The  keepers,  fortunately, are  so  deafened  by  the  row  which  every  one  near  them is  making,  that  they  are  utterly  incapable  of  following
vi  THE  BULL- RING  471
directions  which  they  cannot  hear.  Malays  love  many people  and  many  things,  and  one  of  the  latter  is  the sound  of  their  own  voices.  When  they  are  excited — and  in  the  bull-ring  they  are  always  wild  with  excite- ment— they  wax  very  noisy  indeed,  and,  as  they  all talk,  and  no  one  listens  to  what  any  one  else  is  saying, the  green  sward  on  which  the  combat  is  to  take place  speedily  becomes  a  pandemonium,  compared with  which  the  Tower  of  Babel  was  a  quiet  corner  in Sleepy  Hollow.
"  At  last  the  word  to  begin  is  given,  and  the  keepers of  the  buffaloes  let  out  the  lines  made  fast  to  the  bulls' noses,  and  lead  their  charges  to  the  centre  of  the green.  The  lines  are  crossed,  and  then  gradually drawn  taut,  so  that  the  bulls  are  soon  facing  one another.  Then  the  knots  are  loosed,  and  the  cords slip  from  the  nose-rings.  A  dead  silence  falls  upon the  people,  and  for  a  moment  the  combatants  eye  one another.  Then  they  rush  together,  forehead  to  fore- head, with  a  mighty  impact.  A  fresh  roar  rends  the sky,  the  backers  of  each  beast  shrieking  advice  and encouragement  to  the  bull  which  carries  their  money.
"  After  the  first  rush,  the  bulls  no  longer  charge,  but stand  with  interlaced  horns,  straining  shoulders,  and quivering  quarters,  bringing  tremendous  pressure  to bear  one  upon  the  other,  while  each  strives  to  get  a grip  with  the  point  of  its  horns  upon  the  neck,  or cheeks,  or  face  of  its  opponent.  A  buffalo's  horn  is not  sharp,  but  the  weight  of  the  animal  is  enormous, and  you  must  remember  that  the  horns  are  driven  with the  whole  of  the  brute's  bulk  for  lever  and  sledge- hammer. Such  force  as  is  exerted  would  be  almost sufficient  to  push  a  crowbar  through  a  stone  wall,  and, tough  though  they  are,  the  hardest  of  old  bull  buffaloes
472  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
is  not  proof  against  the  terrible  pressure  brought  to bear.  The  bulls  show  wonderful  activity  and  skill  in these  fencing  matches.  Each  beast  gives  way  the instant  that  it  is  warned  by  the  touch  of  the  horn-tip that  its  opponent  has  found  an  opening,  and  woe betide  the  bull  that  puts  its  weight  into  a  stab  which the  other  has  time  to  elude.  In  the  flick  of  an  eye- as  the  Malay  phrase  has  it — advantage  is  taken  of the  blunder,  and,  before  the  bull  has  time  to  recover  its lost  balance,  its  opponent  has  found  an  opening,  and has  wedged  its  horn-point  into  the  neck  or  cheek. When  at  last  a  firm  grip  has  been  won,  and  the  horn has  been  driven  into  the  yielding  flesh,  as  far  as  the struggles  of  its  opponent  render  possible,  the  stabber makes  his  great  effort.  Pulling  his  hind-legs  well under  him,  and  straightening  his  fore-legs  to  the  utmost extent,  till  the  skin  is  drawn  taut  over  the  projecting bosses  of  bone  at  the  shoulders,  and  the  knots  of muscle  stand  out  like  cordage  on  a  crate,  he  lifts  his opponent.  His  head  is  skewed  on  one  side,  so  that the  horn  on  which  his  adversary  is  hooked  is  raised  to the  highest  level  possible,  and  his  massive  neck  strains and  quivers  with  the  tremendous  effort.  If  the  stab  is sufficiently  low  down,  say  in  the  neck  or  under  the cheek-bone,  the  wounded  bull  is  often  lifted  clean  off his  fore-feet,  and  hangs  there  helpless  and  motionless 'while  a  man  might  count  a  score.'  The  exertion  of lifting,  however,  is  too  great  to  admit  of  its  being continued  for  any  length  of  time,  and  as  soon  as  the wounded  buffalo  regains  its  power  of  motion — that  is to  say,  as  soon  as  its  fore -feet  are  again  on  the ground — it  speedily  releases  itself  from  its  adversary's horn.  Then,  since  the  latter  is  often  spent  by  the extraordinary  effort  which  has  been  made,  it  frequently
v  i  THE  FIGHT  473
happens  that  it  is  stabbed  and  lifted  in  its  turn  before balance  has  been  completely  recovered.
"  Once,  and  only  once,  have  I  seen  a  bull  succeed in  throwing  his  opponent,  after  he  had  lifted  it  off  its feet.  The  vanquished  bull  turned  over  on  its  back before  it  succeeded  in  regaining  its  feet,  but  the  victor was  itself  too  used  up  to  more  than  make  a  ghost  of a  stab  at  the  exposed  stomach  of  its  adversary.  This throw  is  still  spoken  of  in  Pahang  as  the  most marvellous  example  of  skill  and  strength  which  has ever  been  called  forth  within  living  memory  by  any  of these  contests.
"  As  the  stabs  follow  one  another,  to  the  sound  of the  clicking  of  the  horns  and  the  mighty  blowing  and snorting  of  the  breathless  bulls,  lift  succeeds  lift  with amazing  rapidity.  The  green  turf  is  stamped  into  mud by  the  great  hoofs  of  the  labouring  brutes,  and  at length  one  bull  owns  himself  to  be  beaten.  Down goes  his  head — that  sure  sign  of  exhaustion — and  in a  moment  he  has  turned  round  and  is  off  on  a  bee- line,  hotly  pursued  by  the  victor.  The  chase  is  never a  long  one,  as  the  conqueror  always  abandons  it  at  the end  of  a  few  hundred  yards,  but  while  it  lasts  it  is  fast and  furious,  and  woe  betide  the  man  who  finds  himself in  the  way  of  either  of  the  excited  animals.
"  Mr.  Kipling  has  told  us  all  about  the  Law  of  the Jungle — which  after  all  is  only  the  code  of  man, adapted  to  the  use  of  the  beasts  by  Mr.  Rudyard Kipling — but  those  who  know  the  ways  of  buffaloes are  aware  that  they  possess  one  very  well-recognised law.  This  is,  'Thou  shalt  not  commit  trespass.' Every  buffalo-bull  has  its  own  ground ;  and  into  this no  other  bull  willingly  comes.  If  he  is  brought  there to  do  battle,  he  fights  with  very  little  heart,  and  is
474  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
easily  vanquished  by  an  opponent  of  half  his  strength and  bulk  who  happens  to  be  fighting  on  his  own  land. When  bulls  are  equally  matched,  they  are  taken  to fight  on  neutral  ground.  When  they  are  badly  matched the  land  owned  by  the  weaker  is  selected  for  the  scene of  the  contest.
"  All  these  fights  are  brutal,  and  in  time  they  will, we  trust,  be  made  illegal.  To  pass  a  prohibitionary regulation,  however,  without  the  full  consent  of  the Chiefs  and  people  of  Pahang  would  be  a  distinct  breach of  the  understanding  on  which  British  Protection  was accepted  by  them.  The  Government  is  pledged  not to  interfere  with  native  customs,  and  the  sports  in which  animals  are  engaged  are  among  the  most cherished  institutions  of  the  people  of  Pahang.  To fully  appreciate  the  light  in  which  any  interference with  these  things  would  be  viewed  by  the  native population,  it  is  necessary  to  put  oneself  in  the position  of  a  keen  member  of  the  Quorn,  who  saw Parliament  making  hunting  illegal,  on  the  grounds that  the  sufferings  inflicted  on  the  fox  rendered  it  an inhuman  pastime.  As  I  have  said  in  a  former  chapter, the  natives  of  Pahang  are,  in  their  own  way,  very  keen sportsmen  indeed  ;  and,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  it is  doubtful  whether  hunting  is  not  more  cruel  than anything  which  takes  place  in  a  Malay  cock-pit  or bull-ring.  The  longer  the  run  the  better  the  sport, and  more  intense  and  prolonged  the  agony  of  the  fox, that  strives  to  run  for  his  life,  even  when  he  is  so  stiff with  exertion  that  he  can  do  little  more  than  roll along.  All  of  us  have,  at  one  time  or  another, experienced  in  nightmares  the  agony  of  attempting to  fly  from  some  pursuing  phantom,  when  our  limbs refuse  to  serve  us.  This,  I  fancy,  is  much  what  a  fox
vi  COCK-FIGHTING  ON  THE  EAST  COAST  475
suffers,  only  his  pains  are  intensified  by  the  grimness of  stern  reality.  If  he  stops  he  loses  his  life,  there- fore he  rolls,  and  flounders,  and  creeps  along  when every  movement  has  become  a  fresh  torture.  The cock,  quail,  dove,  bull,  ram,  or  fish,1  on  the  other  hand, fights  because  it  is  his  nature  to  do  so,  and  when  he has  had  his  fill  he  stops.  His  pluck,  his  pride,  and his  hatred  of  defeat  alone  urge  him  to  continue  the contest.  He  is  never  driven  by  the  relentless  whip  of stern,  inexorable  necessity.  This  it  is  which  makes fights  between  animals,  that  are  properly  conducted, less  cruel  than  one  is  apt  to  imagine."
I  will  now  pass  to  the  subject  of  cock-fighting,  of which  the  following  vivid  description  is  also  taken  from Mr.  Clifford's  In  Court  and  Kampong?
"In  the  Archipelago,  and  on  the  West  Coast  of  the Peninsula,  cock-fights  are  conducted  in  the  manner known  to  the  Malays  as  ber-tdji,  the  birds  being  armed with  long  artificial  spurs,  sharp  as  razors,  and  curved like  a  Malay  woman's  eyebrow.  These  weapons  make cruel  wounds,  and  cause  the  death  of  one  or  other of  the  combatants  almost  before  the  sport  has  well begun.  To  the  Malay  of  the  East  Coast  this  form  of cock-fighting  is  regarded  as  stupid  and  unsportsman- like, an  opinion  which  I  fully  share.  It  is  the marvellous  pluck  and  endurance  of  the  birds  that  lend
1  "  I  have  said  that  all  birds  fight  of  their  horny  foreheads  is  sufficient  to
more  or  less,  but  birds  are  not  alone  reduce  a  man's  hand   to  a  shapeless
in    this.     The    little,  wide -mouthed,  pulp   should  it   find   its  way-  between
goggled  -  eyed    fishes,     which      Malay  the    combatants'    skulls.      Tigers    box
ladies  keep  in  bottles  and  old  kerosine  like   pugilists,    and   bite   like    French
tins,  fight  like  demons.     Goats  sit  up  school  -  boys ;      and     buffaloes     fight
and  strike  with  their  cloven  hoofs,  and  clumsily,    violently,    and    vindictively,
butt  and  stab  with  their  horns.     The  after  the  manner  of  their  kind." — In
silly  sheep  canter  gaily  to  the  battle,  Court  and  Kamfong,  p.  52.
deliver     thundering     blows     on    one  z  Ibid.  pp.  54-61.
another's   foreheads,    and    then    retire  3  Ibid.  pp.  48-52. and  charge  once  more.     The  impact
476  DANCES,  SPOR7^S,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
an  interest  to  a  cock-fight — qualities  which  are  in  no way  required  if  the  birds  are  armed  with  weapons  other than  those  with  which  they  are  furnished  by  nature.
"  A  cock-fight  between  two  well-known  birds  is  a serious  affair  in  Pahang.  The  rival  qualities  of  the combatants  have  furnished  food  for  endless  discussion for  weeks,  or  even  months,  before,  and  every  one  of standing  has  visited  and  examined  the  cocks,  and  has made  a  book  upon  the  event.  On  the  day  fixed  for the  fight  a  crowd  collects  before  the  palace,  and  some of  the  King's  youths  set  up  the  cock-pit,  which  is  a ring,  about  three  feet  in  diameter,  enclosed  by  canvas walls,  supported  on  stakes  driven  into  the  ground. Presently  the  Judra,  or  cock-fighters,  appear,  each carrying  his  bird  under  his  left  arm.  They  enter  the cock-pit,  squat  down,  and  begin  pulling  at,  and  sham- pooing the  legs  and  wings  of  their  birds,  in  the  manner which  Malays  believe  loosen  the  muscles,  and  get  the reefs  out  of  the  cocks'  limbs.  Then  the  word  is  given to  start  the  fight,  and  the  birds,  released,  fly  straight at  one  another,  striking  with  their  spurs,  and  sending feathers  flying  in  all  directions.  This  lasts  for  perhaps three  minutes,  when  the  cocks  begin  to  lose  their  wind, and  the  fight  is  carried  on  as  much  with  their  beaks  as with  their  spurs.  Each  bird  tries  to  get  its  head  under its  opponent's  wing,  running  forward  to  strike  at  the back  of  its  antagonist's  head,  as  soon  as  its  own emerges  from  under  its  temporary  shelter.  This  is varied  by  an  occasional  blow  with  the  spurs,  and  the Malays  herald  each  stroke  with  loud  cries  of  approval. Basah  !  Bdsah  !  '  Thou  hast  wetted  him !  Thou  hast drawn  blood  ! '  Ah  itu  dia  !  '  That  is  it !  That  is  a good  one ! '  Ah  sakit-lah  itu  !  '  Ah,  that  was  a  nasty one ! '  And  the  birds  are  exhorted  to  make  fresh
vi  THE  FIGHT  477
efforts,  amid  occasional  burst  of  the  shrill  chorus  of yells,  called  sorak,  their  backers  cheering  them  on,  and crying  to  them  by  name.
"  Presently  time  is  called,  the  watch  being  a  small section  of  cocoa-nut  in  which  a  hole  has  been  bored, that  is  set  floating  on  the  surface  of  a  jar  of  water, until  it  gradually  becomes  filled  and  sinks.  At  the word,  each  cock-fighter  seizes  his  bird,  drenches  it with  water,  cleans  out  with  a  feather  the  phlegm  which has  collected  in  its  throat,  and  shampoos  its  legs  and body.  Then,  at  the  given  word,  the  birds  are  again released,  and  they  fly  at  one  another  with  renewed energy.  They  lose  their  wind  more  speedily  this time,  and  thereafter  they  pursue  the  tactics  already described  until  time  is  again  called.  When  some  ten rounds  have  been  fought,  and  both  the  birds  are beginning  to  show  signs  of  distress,  the  interest  of  the contest  reaches  its  height,  for  the  fight  is  at  an  end  if either  bird  raises  its  back  feathers  in  a  peculiar  manner, by  which  cocks  declare  themselves  to  be  vanquished. Early  in  the  tenth  round  the  right  eye-ball  of  one  cock is  broken,  and,  shortly  after,  the  left  eye  is  bunged  up, so  that  for  the  time  it  is  blind.  Nevertheless,  it refuses  to  throw  up  the  sponge,  and  fights  on  gallantly to  the  end  of  the  round,  taking  terrible  punishment, and  doing  but  little  harm  to  its  opponent.  One  cannot but  be  full  of  pity  and  admiration  for  the  brave  bird, which  thus  gives  so  marvellous  an  example  of  its pluck  and  endurance.  At  last  time  is  called,  and  the cock-fighter  who  is  in  charge  of  the  blinded  bird,  after examining  it  carefully,  asks  for  a  needle  and  thread, and  the  swollen  lower  lid  of  the  still  uninjured  eye-ball is  sewn  to  the  piece  of  membrane  on  the  bird's  cheek, and  its  sight  is  thus  once  more  partially  restored.
478  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
Again  time  is  called,  and  the  birds  resume  their  con- test, the  cock  with  the  injured  eye  repaying  its adversary  so  handsomely  for  the  punishment  which  it had  received  in  the  previous  round,  that,  before  the cocoa-nut  shell  is  half  full  of  water,  its  opponent  has surrendered,  and  has  immediately  been  snatched  up by  the  keeper  in  charge  of  it.  The  victorious  bird, draggled  and  woebegone,  with  great  patches  of  red flesh  showing  through  its  wet  plumage,  with  the membrane  of  its  face  and  its  short  gills  and  comb swollen  and  bloody,  with  one  eye  put  out,  and  the other  only  kept  open  by  the  thread  attached  to  its eyelid,  yet  makes  shift  to  strut,  with  staggering  gait, across  the  cock-pit,  and  to  notify  its  victory  by  giving vent  to  a  lamentable  ghost  of  a  crow.  Then  it  is carried  off  followed  by  an  admiring,  gesticulating, vociferous  crowd,  to  be  elaborately  tended  and  nursed, as  befits  so  gallant  a  bird.  The  beauty  of  the sport  is  that  either  bird  can  stop  fighting  at  any moment.  They  are  never  forced  to  continue  the conflict  if  once  they  have  declared  themselves  defeated, and  the  only  real  element  of  cruelty  is  thus  removed. The  birds  in  fighting  follow  the  instinct  which  nature has  implanted  in  them,  and  their  marvellous  courage and  endurance  surpass  anything  to  be  found  in  any other  animals,  human  or  otherwise,  with  which  I  am acquainted.  Most  birds  fight  more  or  less — from  the little  fierce  quail  to  the  sucking  doves  which  ignorant Europeans,  before  their  illusions  have  been  dispelled by  a  sojourn  in  the  East,  are  accustomed  to  regard  as the  emblems  of  peace  and  purity ;  but  no  bird,  or beast,  or  fish,  or  human  being  fights  so  well,  or  takes such  pleasure  in  the  fierce  joy  of  battle,  as  does  a  plucky, lanky,  ugly,  hard-bit  old  fighting-cock.
vi  WEST  COAST  CUSTOMS  479
"  The  Malays  regard  these  birds  with  immense respect,  and  value  their  fighting-cocks  next  to  their children.  A  few  years  ago,  a  boy,  who  was  in  charge of  a  cock  which  belonged  to  a  Raja  of  my  acquaintance, accidentally  pulled  some  feathers  from  the  bird's  tail. 'What  did  you  do  that  for?  Devil!'  cried  the Raja.
"  '  It  was  not  done  on  purpose,  Ungku !'  said  the boy.
"  '  Thou  art  marvellous  clever  at  repartee ! '  quoth the  Prince,  and,  so  saying,  he  lifted  a  billet  of  wood, which  chanced  to  be  lying  near  at  hand,  and  smote  the boy  on  the  head  so  that  he  died.
" '  That  will  teach  my  people  to  have  a  care  how they  use  my  fighting-cocks ! '  said  the  Raja  ;  and  that was  his  servant's  epitaph.
" '  It  is  a  mere  boyish  prank,'  said  the  father  of  the young  Raja,  when  the  matter  was  reported  to  him, '  and,  moreover,  it  is  well  that  he  should  slay  one  or two  with  his  own  hand,  else  how  should  men  learn  to fear  him  ? '  And  there  the  matter  ended  ;  but  it  should be  borne  in  mind  that  the  fighting-cock  of  a  Malay Prince  is  not  to  be  lightly  trifled  with."
Of  the  form  of  cock-fighting  practised  on  the  West Coast  of  the  Peninsula  Newbold  writes  : —
"  The  following  is  a  specimen  from  a  Malay  MS. on  the  subject,  commencing  with  remarks  on  the various  breeds  of  this  noble  bird  : —
"  The  best  breeds  of  game-cocks  are  the  Hiring, the  Jalak,  the  Teddong,  the  Chenantan,1  the  Ijou,  the Pilas,  the  Bongkas,2  the  Su,  the  Belurong,3  and  the 'Krabu.4
1  Su,  correctly  Kenantan.  3  Sic,  correctly  Bclurang.
2  Sic,  better  Bangkas.  *  Sic,  correctly  K'labu.
480  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
"  The  colour  of  the  Hiring  is  red  with  yellow  feet and  beak.
"  The  Jalak  is  white  mixed  with  black,  with  yellow feet,  and  beak  also  yellow  mixed  with  black.
"  The  Teddong  has  black  eyes  and  legs,  red  and black  plumage,  and  a  black  beak.  It  is  named  from  a sort  of  serpent,  whose  bite  is  accounted  mortal.
"  The  Chenantan  has  white  feathers,  feet,  and  beak.
"  The  Ijou  has  a  greenish  black  beak,  feathers  black mixed  with  white,  legs  green.
"  The  Pilas  has  a  black  beak,  red  and  black feathers,  legs  white  mixed  with  black.
"  The  Bongkas  has  a  yellow  beak,  white  feathers and  yellow  feet.
"The  Su  has  a  white  beak  with  white  spots, plumage  white  and  black,  legs  white  with  black  spots.
"  The  Belurong  has  a  white  beak  with  red  spots, plumage  red,  white  feet.
"  The  Krabu  has  a  red  beak  mixed  with  yellow, red  feathers  and  yellow  feet.
"  There  are  two  kinds  of  spurs  :  first,  the  Golok Golok,  in  the  form  of  a  straight  knife  known  by  this name  and  in  use  with  the  Malays  ;  and,  secondly,  the Taji  Benkok,  or  curved  spur :  the  last  is  most  in vogue.
"  There  are  various  modes  of  tying  on  the  spur,  viz. Salik,  or  below  the  natural  spur  ;  Kumbar,  on  a  level with  it ;  Panggong,  above  the  spur ;  Sa  ibu  Tangan,  a thumb's  breadth  below  the  knee  joint ;  Sa  Kalinking, a  little  finger's  breadth ;  Andas  Bulu,  close  to  the feathers  under  the  knee ;  Jankir,  upon  the  little  toe ; Sauh  wongkang,  on  the  middle  toe ;  Berchingkama, tying  the  three  large  toes  together  with  the  spur — this is  the  most  advantageous ;  Golok,  binding  the  little
vi  RULES  OF  COCK -FIGHTING  481
toe  and  the  toe  on  the  left  with  the  spur ;  Golok  di Battang,  below  the  natural  spur.  It  is  necessary  to observe  that  the  Malays  generally  use  one  spur; though  two  spurs  are  sometimes  given  to  match  a weaker  against  a  stronger  bird.
"i.  The  winner  takes  the  dead  bird.
"  2.   If  a  drawn  battle  (Sri)  each  takes  his  own.
"  3.  No  person  but  the  holder  shall  interfere  with the  cocks  after  they  have  been  once  set  to,  even  if  one of  them  run  away,  except  by  the  permission  of  the Juara,  or  setter-to.  Should  any  person  do  so,  and  the cock  eventually  win  the  battle,  the  owners  shall  be  en- titled to  half  the  stakes  only.
"  4.  Should  one  of  the  cocks  run  away,  and  the wounded  one  pursue  it,  both  birds  shall  be  caught  and held  by  their  Juaras.  Should  the  runaway  cock  refuse to  peck  at  its  adversary  three  times,  the  wings  shall  be twined  over  the  back,  and  it  shall  be  put  on  the ground  for  its  adversary  to  peck  at ;  should  he  too refuse,  after  it  has  been  three  times  presented,  it  is  a Sri,  or  drawn  battle.  The  cock  that  pecks  wins.
"  5.  The  stakes  on  both  sides  must  be  forthcoming and  deposited  on  the  spot.
"6.  A  cock  shall  not  be  taken  up  unless  the  spur be  broken,  even  by  the  Juaras.
"When  a  cock  has  won  his  disposition  changes.
"  A  cock  is  called  Cheyma  when  he  chooses  round grains  of  paddy,  or  fights  with  his  shadow,  or  spurs  or pecks  at  people.
"  The  Malays  believe  in  the  influence  of  certain periods  in  the  day  over  the  breeds  of  cocks.  They will  not  bet  upon  a  bird  with  black  plumage  that  is matched  against  one  with  yellow  and  white  at  the period  Kutika  Miswara ;  nor  against  a  black  one  set
2   I
482  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
to  with  a  white  one  at  the  period  Kutika  Kala. Kutika  Sri  is  favourable  in  this  case  for  the  white feathered  bird.  Kutika  Brahma  is  propitious  to  a  red cock  matched  against  a  light  grey  ;  and  Kutika  Vishnu for  a  green  cock.1
"  I  once  witnessed  a  grand  contest  between  two Malayan  States  at  the  breaking  up  of  the  Ramazan fast.  Most  of  the  cock-fighters  presented  themselves at  the  Golongan  or  cock-pit  with  a  game-cock  under each  arm.  The  birds  were  not  trimmed  as  in  Eng- land, but  fought  in  full  feather.  The  spurs  used  on this  occasion  were  about  two  and  a  half  inches  long,  in shape  like  the  blade  of  a  scythe,  and  were  sharpened on  the  spot  by  means  of  a  fine  whetstone  ;  large  gashes were  inflicted  by  these  murderous  instruments,  and  it rarely  happened  that  both  cocks  survived  the  battle. Cocks  of  the  same  colour  are  seldom  matched.  The weight  is  adjusted  by  the  setters-to  passing  them  to and  from  each  other's  hands  as  they  sit  facing  each other  in  the  Golongan.  Should  there  be  any  differ- ence, it  is  brought  down  to  an  equality  by  the  spur being  fixed  so  many  scales  higher  on  the  leg  of  the heavier  cock,  or  according  to  rules  adverted  to,  as deemed  fair  by  both  parties.  One  spur  only  is  used, and  is  generally  fastened  near  the  natural  spur  on  the inside  of  the  left  leg.  In  adjusting  these  preliminaries the  professional  skill  of  the  setters-to  is  called  into action,  and  much  time  is  taken  up  in  grave  delibera- tion, which  often  terminates  in  wrangling.  The  birds, after  various  methods  of  irritating  them  have  been  prac- tised, are  then  set  to.  During  the  continuance  of  the battle,  the  excitement  and  interest  taken  by  the  Malays in  the  barbarous  exhibition  is  vividly  depicted  in  their
i  Vide  pp.  545-547.  infra.
vi  VARIOUS  GAMES  483
animated  looks  and  gestures — everything  they  possess in  the  world  being  often  staked  on  the  issue.
"  The  breed  of  cocks  on  the  Peninsula  more  re- sembles the  game-fowl  of  England  than  the  large  lanky breed  known  in  Europe  under  the  term  '  Malay.' Great  attention  is  paid  by  natives  to  the  breed  and feeding  of  game-cocks." l
Games
"  Gambling  of  various  descriptions,  both  with  dice and  with  cards,  is  much  in  vogue.  These,  as  well  as the  poe-table,  have  been  introduced  by  the  Chinese, who  are  even  greater  adepts  than  the  Malays  in  all that  relates  to  this  pernicious  vice.
"  Saparaga 2  is  a  game  resembling  football,  played  by ten  or  twenty  youths  and  men,  who  stand  in  a  circle, keeping  up  a  hollow  ratan  ball  in  the  air,  which  is passed  to  and  fro  by  the  action  of  the  knees  and  feet —the  object  being  to  prevent  the  ball  from  touching the  ground  ;  it  is  frequently,  however,  taken  at  the rebound.  The  awkwardness  of  novices  occasions great  merriment.
"The  Sangheta3  is  a  game  implicating  broken  heads ; but,  properly  speaking,  is  a  '  vi  et  armis '  mode  of arbitration  in  matters  of  dispute  between  two  Sukus  or tribes.  A  certain  number  of  men  from  each  tribe  turn out  and  pelt  each  other  with  sticks  and  logs  of  wood, until  one  of  the  parties  gives  in.  The  victors  in  this petty  tourney  are  presumed  to  have  the  right  on  their side.
"  The  Malays  are  remarkably  attached  to  singing
1  Newbold,  Malacca,  vol.  ii.  pp.  179-183.
8  i.e.  Sepak  raga,  which  means  "kick  the  wicker-work  (ball)."
3  Also  Singketa.
484  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
reciprocal  Pantuns,  stanzas  comprising  four  alternate rhyming  lines,  of  which  notice  has  been  taken  else- where. Poetical  contests  in  the  Bucolic  style  are  often carried  on  to  a  great  length  by  means  of  Pantuns.  To music  Malays  are  passionately  devoted,  particularly  to that  of  the  violin.  They  evince  a  good  ear,  and  great readiness  in  committing  to  memory  even  European airs.  A  voyage  or  journey  of  any  length  is  seldom undertaken  by  the  better  classes  without  a  minstrel.
"  Takki  Takki l  are  riddles  and  enigmas,  to  the propounding  and  solving  of  which  the  females  and  edu- cated classes  of  the  people  are  much  inclined.
"  The  games  played  by  children  are  Tujoh  Lobang," Punting,  Chimpli,  Kechil  Krat,  Kuboh,  etc.":
Of  all  minor  games,  top-spinning  and  kite-flying are  perhaps  the  most  popular.  The  kites  are  called layang-layang,  which  means  a  "  swallow,"  but  are sometimes  of  great  size,  one  which  was  brought  to me  at  Langat  measuring  some  six  feet  in  height  by about  seven  feet  between  the  tips  of  the  wings.  The peculiarity  of  the  Malay  kite  is  that  it  presents  a convex,  instead  of  a  concave,  surface  to  the  wind,  and that  no  "tail"  is  required,  the  kite  being  steadied  by means  of  a  beak  which  projects  forward  at  the  top of  the  framework.  They  are  also  usually  provided with  a  thin,  horizontal  slip  of  bamboo  (dengong) stretched  tightly  behind  the  beak,  and  which  hums loudly  in  the  wind.  They  are  of  a  great  number  of different  but  well -recognised  patterns,  such  as  the
1  Also  T$ki-t?ki.     Examples  are, —  out    of  his    own    body?"     Ans.    "A
"What  is  it  which  you  leave  behind  spider."
when  you  remember  it,  and  take  it  with  2  i.e.  "  Tuju  lobang"  which  means
you  when  you  forget  it?"     Ans.  "A  "Aim  at  the  Hole."
leech."     "  What  is  it  that  builds  a  house  3  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  183-
within  a  house,  getting  the  materials  185.
\  i  CHESS  485
"  Fighting  Dragons  "  (Naga  bZrjuang),  the  Crescent (Sakari  bulan\  the  Eagle  (Rajawali),  the  Bird  of Paradise  (Ch$ndrawasih\  and  so  forth.  A  small kind  of  roughly-made  kite  is,  as  is  well  known,  used at  Singapore  for  fishing  purposes,  but  I  have  never yet  met  with  any  instance  of  their  being  used  ceremoni- ally, though  it  is  quite  certain  that  grown-ups  will  fly them  with  quite  as  much  zest  as  children.
Top-spinning,  again,  is  a  favourite  pastime  among the  Malays,  and  is  played  by  old  and  young  of  all ranks  with  the  same  eagerness.1  The  most  usual  form of  top  is  not  unlike  the  English  pegtop,  but  has  a shorter  peg.  It  is  spun  in  the  same  way  and  with  the same  object  as  our  own  pegtop,  the  object  being  to split  the  top  of  one's  opponent.
Teetotums  are  also  used,  and  I  have  seen  in Selangor  a  species  of  bamboo  humming-top,  but  was told  that  it  was  copied  from  a  humming-top  used  by the  Chinese.
"  The  game  of  chess,  which  has  been  introduced from  Arabia,2  is  played  in  almost  precisely  the  same manner  as  among  Europeans,  but  the  queen,  instead of  being  placed  upon  her  own  colour,  is  stationed  at the  right  hand  of  the  king.  In  the  Malay  game  the king,  if  he  has  not  been  checked,  can  be  castled,  but over  one  space  only,  not  over  two,  as  in  the  English game.  The  king  may,  also,  before  he  is  checked  or moved  from  his  own  square,  move  once,  like  a  knight, either  to  left  or  right,  and  he  may  also,  if  he  has  not
1  "  Yes,  it's  sweet  While  the  country's  bowling  gaily ...  to  grouse  about  the  crops,  down  to  hell."
And  sweet  to  hear  the  tales  the  — Hugh  Clifford  (adapted  from
natives  tell,  Rudyard  Kipling).
To  watch  the  king  and  chieftains  2  More  probably  India  or  Persia  (?). playing  leisurely  at  tops,
486  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
moved  or  been  checked,  move  once  over  two  vacant squares  instead  of  one."  The  following  are  the  names of  the  pieces  : —
1.  Raja,  the  King.
2.  Mentri  ("Minister"),  the  Queen.
3.  Ter  or  Tor,  the  Castle.
4.  Gajah  ("  Elephant "),  the  Bishop.
5.  Kuda  ("  Horse  "),  the  Knight.
6.  Bidak,  the  Pawns.1
Main  chongkak,  again,  is  a  game  played  with  a board  (papan  chongkak]  consisting  of  a  boat-shaped block.
In  the  top  of  this  block  (where  the  boat's  deck would  be)  are  sunk  a  double  row  of  holes,  the  rows containing  eight  holes  each,  and  two  more  holes  are added,  one  at  each  end.  Each  of  the  eight  holes (in  both  rows)  is  filled  at  starting  with  eight  biiah gorek  (the  buah  gorek  being  the  fruit  of  a  common tree,  also  called  kelichi  in  Malacca).  There  are  usually two  players  who  pick  the  buah  gorek  out  of  the  holes in  turn,  and  deposit  them  in  the  next  hole  accord- ing to  certain  fixed  rules  of  numerical  combination,  a solitary  buah  gorek,  wherever  it  is  found,  being  put back  and  compelled  to  recommence  its  journey  down the  board.
A  similar  game  is,  I  believe,  known  in  many  parts of  the  East,  and  was  formerly  much  played  even  by Malay  slaves,  who  used  to  make  the  double  row  of holes  in  the  ground  when  no  board  was  obtainable.
The  Malay  game  of  Draughts  (main  dam)  is played,  I  believe,  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  the English  game.  Backgammon  (main  tabat),  on  the other  hand,  is  played  in  two  different  ways.
1  Taken  from  Clifford  and  Swett.,  Mai.  Diet.,  s.v.  Chator.
vi  CARD  GAMES  487
The  "  Tiger  "  Game  (main  rimau\  or  "  Tiger  and Goat "  Game  (main  rimau  kambing),  is  a  game  which has  a  distinct  resemblance  to  our  own  "fox  and goose,"  there  being  usually  four  tigers  to  a  dozen  of the  goats.
Cards
"  Cards  are  called  Kerf  as  sakopong.  The  Malays are  fond  of  card  games,  but  few  Europeans  have  taken the  trouble  to  understand  or  describe  them.  The  late Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  contributed  the  following  descrip- tion of  daun  tiga  'lei  to  the  Notes  and  Queries  of  the Journal  of  the  Straits  Asiatic  Society.  It  refers  to  the game  in  question  as  played  in  Perak  :—
"  Hearts,  Lekoh.  King,  Raja.
Diamonds,  Retin.  Queen,  Bandahara.
Clubs,  Kalalawar.  Knave,  Pekah.
Spades,  Sakopong.  Ace,  Sat.
To  shuffle,  Kiyat,  mengiyat.
To  deal,      Membaiva.
To  cut,        Kerat.
To  sweep  the  board,  make  every  one  pay,  Mengelong.
"  Three  cards  are  dealt  out  to  each  player.  The highest  hand  counting  by  pips  is  that  which  contains the  greatest  number  of  pips  after  the  tens  are  deducted. Thus  a  knave,  ten,  and  nine  is  a  good  hand.
"  The  best  hand  is  three  aces,  Sat  tiga.
"The  next  best  is  three  court-cards,  Kuda ;  naik kuda.
"  The  next  is  nine.
"The  next  is  eight.
"  All  these  four  hands  are  known  as  terus.  A hand  of  three  threes  is  really  a  good  hand,  being  nine, but  it  is  considered  a  propitiation  of  good  luck  to  throw
DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES
it  down  (without  exposing  it),  and  announce  that  one is  buta,  in  the  hopes  of  getting  good  luck  afterwards.
"  Each  player  makes  two  stakes  —  kapala  and  ekor. They  may  be  of  equal  value,  or  the  ekor  may  be  of greater  value  than  the  kapala.
"  The  kapala  must  not  be  of  greater  value  than  the ekor  ;  that  is  called  tual  ka  ujong  (tual=  berat).
"  Or  there  may  be  a  single  stake  only,  which  is called  poduL
"  Betting  between  players  is  called  sorong,  or  tuwi, or  sorong  tuwi.
"  A  pool,  tuwi  tengah.
"  The  ekor  stake  is  only  paid  to  the  dealer  if  he holds  one  of  the  hands  called  term,  and  if  a  smaller  hand is  held  by  a  player,  then  the  dealer  takes  both  kapala and  ekor  (mengelong).
"  A  player  who  holds  thirty  exactly  (except  when  he has  three  court-cards,  kudo)  is  said  to  be  out  (buta).
"  Any  one  except  the  player  on  the  right  of  the dealer  may  cut.  The  player  who  cuts  looks  at  the bottom  card  of  those  that  he  lifts,  and  if  he  thinks  it  is a  lucky  cut  he  accepts  it  and  puts  down  the  card  he has  lifted  (pengerat).
"  The  dealer  then  puts  the  rest  of  the  pack  on  top of  the  cut,  and  in  his  turn  lifts  a  portion  of  the  pack (pengangkat),  and  looks  at  the  bottom  card.
"  There  are  all  sorts  of  names  for  different  cards and  combinations  of  cards  of  various  degrees  of  luck, and  these  are  quoted  by  the  cutter  and  dealer,  each declaring  his  confidence  in  the  luck  coming  to  him  by reason  of  the  cutting  or  lifting  of  a  particular  card.
Five  of  clubs  ^  Tiang  amPat  Pen8hulu
\  Chukup  dengan  gambala-nia.
Nine  of  diamonds,  Bunga  kachang  raja  budiman.
VI
RULES  OF  PLA  Y  4«9
(  Gagak  sa-kawan  raja  di-hilir. Ten  of  clubs,  \  Singgah  makan  pedindang  masak.
(  Masak  pun  lalu  muda  pun  lalu. Ace  of  diamonds  if  cut,  Buntut  kris  Raja  Bandahara.
,       (  Anak  yatim  jalan  sa'orang. Do.  if  the  hands  of  the  dealer,  j  &/^  ^  marabahaya.
Two  of  diamonds,  Semut  ginting  Che  Amat  pelak.
Two  of  hearts,  Batang  jamban.
Six  is  an  unlucky  card,  Daun  anam  jahanam,
Nine  of  hearts,  Hari  panas  kubang  ber-ayer.
"A  player  does  not  hastily  look  at  his  three  cards and  learn  his  fate  at  once,  but  he  prolongs  the  excite- ment by  holding  his  cards  tight  together,  and  looking alternately  at  the  outside  ones,  and  last  of  all  at  the middle  one,  sliding  out  the  latter  between  the  two others  little  by  little.  Thus  it  is  left  uncertain  for some  time  whether  a  card  is  an  eight  or  a  seven,  a nine  or  a  ten.
"  A  man  to  whom  a  court-card,  an  eight,  and  an  ace is  dealt  (if  the  eight  is  in  the  middle),  on  finding  that  he has  eleven  by  the  two  outside  ones,  says,  for  instance, Handak  kaki  tiga,  and  then  commences  to  slide  out the  middle  card,  hoping  that  it  is  going  to  be  an eight,  or  at  all  events  a  seven  (three  pips  on  each side).  This  particular  hand  is  called  lang  siput, because  it  is  certain  to  carry  off  something.
"  A  man  who  has  just  held  a  winning  hand  will  say, in  expressing  a  hope  of  continued  good  luck,  '  Tcman Jiandak  pisang  sarabu,  sudah  sa-batang  sa-batang pula' (The  plantain  called  sarabu  is  one  which  puts  out fruit  from  every  stem  of  \heperdu  about  the  same  time, or  one  immediately  after  another.)"1
The  following  account  of  card  games  as  played  in
1  Notes  and  Queries  No.    I,  sec.  23,  issued  with  J.K.A.S.,  S.B.    No.    14. Quoted  in  Denys,  Descriptive  Dictionary  of  British  Malaya,  s.v.  Cards.
490  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
Selangor  was  compiled  some  years  ago  by  the  writer. The  names  of  the  cards  used  in  Selangor  are  these  :—
Hearts,        Lekok  or  Pangkah.
Diamonds,  Reten  (retim),  or  Chiduk.
Clubs,  K'lawer,  or  Kelalawer.
Spades,        Dayong  Kling,  or  Sakopong.
King,  Raja.
Queen,          Proh,  or  Nyonya.
Knave,          Pekak,  or  Hamba.
Ace,  Sat.
To  shuffle,  Banchoh,  or  Menggaul.
To  deal,       Membagi.
To  cut,         K'rat.
To  sweep  the  board,  Merelong,  or  Mengg'long.
To  pay  all  round,        Mendader  chingkeh.
A  picture  or  court  card,  Angkong,  or  Kuda.
A  three,  Jalor  (e.g.  two  threes,  dua  jalor}.
A  card  (ordinary),  Daun.
A  sequence,  G'lik  (Daun  sa-g'HK).
The  three  most  important  card  games  are — (i) main  sakopong,  (2)  main  chabut,  (3)  main  tiga  'lei,  or pakau.
1.  In  the  game  called  sakopong  all  cards  from  two to  six  are  cast  out,  and  five  cards  are  dealt  out  to  each of  the   players    (who   may    be   from  two   to    four  in number)  ;    a  player  leads    (turunkan)  the   card,    and the   next  player  has  either  to  follow  suit  (turunkan daun  sagaji]  or  throw  down  a  card,  turning  it  over (susupkan).     If  the  next  player  is  able  to  follow  suit, whoever  plays  the  highest  card  of  the  suit  wins.     If each  player  wins  a  trick  it  is  declared  drawn  (sri),  and in  this  case  all  stakes  are  returned.
2.  Main  chab^lt  is  a  species  of  vingt-et-un,  and  is played  with   either  twenty-one   or  thirty-one   points. If  twenty-one  points  only  is    the  game,   court-cards are  not  counted  ;  but  if  the  game  is  thirty-one  points they  are  also  added   in.       Two  cards    are  dealt  by
vi  MAIN  CHABUT  49»
the  dealer  (perdi)  to  each  player,  who  draws  (chabuf) fresh  cards  from  the  bottom  of  the  pack  in  his  turn,  and gets  as  near  as  possible  to  thirty-one.  If  he  thinks  he cannot  safely  draw  another  card  (e.g.  after  twenty-six pips  are  in  his  hand)  he  "  passes "  (which  is  called Vlit  kechil  if  he  stops  at  twenty-six,  twenty-seven, or  twenty-eight,  and  fflit  besar  if  he  stops  at  twenty- nine  or  thirty).
If  he  obtains  exactly  thirty-one  pips  he  is  said  to "enter  the  points"  (masokmata)\  but  no  player  can draw  more  than  seven  cards,  and  if  he  has,  after  draw- ing to  the  full  limit,  still  failed  to  obtain  as  many  pips as  he  wants,  he  is  said  to  "enter  the  pack"  (rnasok daun).  I  may  add  that  the  first  two  cards  are  called lunas  or  "keels,"  and  this  may  be  of  various  kinds, e.g.:-
1.  Lunas  nikah,  i.e.  angkong  dengan  sat  (a  court-card  and  an
ace).
2.  Kachang  di-rendang  di-tugalkan,  i.e.  two  aces ;  a  very  con-
venient hand,  as  the  aces  may  be  reckoned  as  either  one  or eleven,  as  occasion  may  require.
3.  Lunas  sa-glabat,  or  sagaji  ampat-b'las>  i.e.   angkong  dengan
daun  ampat  (court-card  and  four).
4.  Lunas  dua  jalor,  two  threes.
5.  Ace  and  two,  which  is  the  best  of  all.
In  playing  chabut  or  "  casting  out,"  the  tens should  be  thrown  away  (di-buang  daun  pulott].  When two  players  have  the  same  number  of  pips — e.g.  nine and  nine  or  eight  and  eight — the  coincidence  is  de- scribed in  the  words,  Jumpa  di  jalan,  di-adu,  kalak, di-chabut,  mati.  To  be  "bluffed"  is  called  kena ranjau  (wounded  by  a  caltrop).
And  again,  when  a  player  has  obtained,  let  us  say, twenty-six  pips  with  six  cards,  and  so  has  only  one more  chance,  and  is  afraid  to  risk  it,  his  position  is
492  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
ridiculed  in  the  phrase,  Sa-nepak  Ulu  Klang,  a  jest of  obviously  local  coinage.
The  phrase  Tengah  tiang  (half  mast),  again,  is applied  to  twenty-five  pips  held  irrespective  of  the number  of  cards ;  and  if  more  than  thirty-one  are obtained,  the  player  is  said  to  be  out  (mati>  or  masok piring}.
3.  Daun  tiga  'lei  or  Pakau  is  played  here  as follows : —
Three  cards  are  dealt  by  the  dealer  to  each  player, and  the  winner  is  he  who  holds  the  greatest  number  of pips,  with  certain  exceptions.
The  best  hand  is  three  aces  (tiga  sat}.
The  next  is  three  threes  (tiga  jalor).
The  next  is  three  tens  (tiga  puloK).
The  next  is  three  court-cards  (tiga  angkong  or  tiga
kudo). Of  other  hands  the  best  is  a  remainder  of  nine  pips
left  after  deducting  ten  from  a  hand  of  nineteen
pips. The   next   is   a   remainder  of  eight   pips,   and    so
on.
A  hand  of  three  threes,  it  will  be  observed,  is  the second  best  hand  in  Selangor,  whereas  in  Perak, according  to  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell,  it  is  thrown  away  as the  worst.
The  stakes,  which  are  deposited  in  two  heaps by  each  player,  are  here  called  kapala  or  "head," and  buntut  (or  ekor),  the  "tail,"  respectively;  the kapala  being  generally,  though  perhaps  not  always, greater  than  the  ekor  in  Selangor,  instead  of  the reverse.  The  latter  can  only  be  lost  when  a  player sweeps  the  board.  A  single  stake,  again,  is  podul  (or occasionally  tuat),  but  bertuwi  is  applied  to  betting between  players,  and  sorong  or  tokong  means  to  put down  a  stake  before  your  rival  replies  with  a  counter-
Daun  frus
v.  DA  UN  TIG  A  >LEf  493
stake  (b$rteban  or  topah}.  A  player  who  holds  thirty exactly  is  not  out  here — e.g.,  he  may  hold  a  court- card  and  two  tens.  To  look  at  the  bottom  card  is mtinengc?  angkatan.
Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  gives  a  number  of  names  and phrases  applied  to  particular  cards  and  combinations  of cards,  to  which  I  may  add—
Two  nines  and  a  two — China  Keh  mengandar  ayer.
An  eight  and  an  ace  (making  nine)  with  a  court-card,  or  a  ten
and  two  nines — Sembilang  bertelor. Two  court-cards  and  a  nine — Parak  hart  'nak  siang. The  four  of  any  suit — Tiang  jamban  Lebai  1AH.
The  explanation  of  handak  kaki  tiga,  as  applied to  an  eight,  appears  to  be  that  the  eight  has  three  pips on  each  side.  It  is  also  called  berisi  sa-Vlah.  Minta penoh  (I  ask  for  a  full  one)  means  I  want  a  nine  (?), and  minta  tombak  (I  ask  for  a  lance),  I  want  two pips  (or  three,  as  the  case  may  be).
Besides  the  above,  there  are  miniature  or  bijou cards  (cheki] — e.g.  cheki  dua-V  las,  cheki  lima-ftlas  and 'tan  or  here  tan  daun  sambilan,  etc.,  the  daun  cheki being  distinguished  by  their  borders,  e.g.  iyu  kuching, iyu  nyonya,  iyu  panjang,  iyu  merak  besar,  iy^l  kasut ; and  again  gapet,  gapet  krang,  gapet  rintek,  gapet lichin ;  babi,  babi  rintek,  babi  pusat,  babi  lichin  ;  kau merah,  kau  bulat,  kau  lichin  ;  layer,  layer  rintek,  layer pitis,  layer  lichin.  Six  to  seven  people  play  these games.  A  sort  of  whist  is  also  played  from  time  to time  under  the  name  of  main  trup.  At  this  game  a trick  is  called  sapudi;  to  sweep  the  board  is  pukol tani ;  and  the  players  who  get  no  tricks  at  all  are  said to  be  sold  up  (kena  kot}.1
1  Selangor  Journal,  vol.  v.  No.  13,       to    depend    upon    fortunate    dreams, pp.  210-12.      I  may  add  that  luck  in        I'ide  p.  563,  infra. gaming  is  largely  thought  by  the  Malays
494  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
Children's  Games
I  will  now  give  some  specimens  of  the  games  I have  seen  played  by  children  : —
"  Throwing  the  Flower  across "  (champak  bunga sa-ftlati)  is  a  game  which  I  have  seen  thus  played  by boys.
A  handkerchief  was  twisted  up  (like  a  rope)  from corner  to  corner,  folded  in  half,  and  then  tied  together at  the  ends.
Two  couples  stood  facing  one  another  at  a  few yards'  distance,  and  at  a  given  signal  one  of  the  boys in  each  couple  took  his  companion  up  on  to  his  should- ers. The  two  who  were  mounted  threw  the  handker- chief across  to  each  other,  and  back  again  by  turns. When  the  one  failed  to  catch  it,  both  riders  dis- mounted and  offered  backs  to  their  late  "mounts,"  who thus  became  riders,  and  threw  the  handkerchief  in their  turn.  Each  time,  however,  that  a  catch  was made  both  parties  crossed  over.  When  three  catches were  made  in  unbroken  succession  (kelerify  the riders  had  the  privilege  of  being  carried  across  three times  before  recommencing  play.
I  should  add  that  a  coin  was  tossed  up  at  the  out- set of  the  game  to  decide  who  were  to  start  as  the riders,  and  who  were  to  be  the  ridden.
Main  Sesel  (or  Kachau  kueti)  bears  a  strong family  resemblance  to  our  own  "  Hen  and  chickens." When  I  witnessed  it,  a  big  boy  played  the  "  Pater- familias "  with  a  string  of  children  at  his  back,  each  of whom  was  holding  on  to  the  one  in  front  of  him. Presently  a  "  Cakeseller "  presented  himself,  and  the following  conversation  ensued :—
vi  CHILDREN'S  GAMES  495
PATERFAMILIAS  :  Ada  kueh  ?     (Have  you  any  cake?)
CAKESELLER:  Ada.     (I  have.)
P.P. :  Buleh  aku  Vlil     (Can  I  buy  some  ?)
C:  Buleh.     (Yes.)
Here  the  Cakeseller  hands  a  ball  of  earth  to  Pater- familias, who  passes  it  down  the  line  of  children  to  the youngest  child  at  the  end  of  the  row.  The  conversa- tion then  recommenced—
CAKESELLER  :  Aku  min/a'  duit.     (I  want  my  money.) P.F.  :  Duit  fada,  anak  kunchi  tinggal  di  jamban.      (I  have  got no  money,   I  have  mislaid  the  key.)     Kalau  mahu  ambil  budak, ambil  yang  di-tilakang.     (If  you  wish  to  take  one  of  my  children, take  the  last.)
Here  a  desperate  effort  was  made  by  the  poor  Cake- seller  to  dodge  past  Paterfamilias  and  get  at  the  boy, whom  he  eventually  succeeded  in  carrying  off.
Main  Tul  is  a  game  somewhat  resembling  our own  "  Puss  in  the  corner,"  but  with  only  one  "home." The  "  home  "  consisted  of  a  stake  planted  upright,  and the  first  "  Puss  "  (prang  tul}  was  selected  by  a  species of  divination  depending  upon  repetition  of  the  same formula  as  is  used  to  select  the  blind  man  in  Blind Man's  Buff  (Main  China  Buta\  There  was  (as  I  have said)  only  one  home  in  this  game,  from  which  the players  sallied  forth  to  taunt  the  orang  tul,  and which  they  were  obliged  to  touch  in  order  to  save themselves  when  closely  pursued.
Main  Seladang  (Wild  Bull  game)  is  an  excellent game  for  children  with  the  shoeless  feet  of  the  East. A  "  wild  bull "  having  been  selected  by  repetition  of the  Ping  hilang  formula,  went  upon  all  fours,  and .entered  into  the  following  conversation  between  him- self and  one  of  the  other  players  specially  selected  for the  purpose.  The  latter  opened  negotiations  with  the clearly  non-committal,  if  not  very  lucid  remark,  "  Tarn
496  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
tarn  kul"  to  which  the  "  Bull  "  replied,  "  Buat  apa  guna bakul"  (What  are  you  going  to  do  with  your  basket?)
BOY  :  Mengisi  arang.     (To  hold  charcoal.) BULL  :  Buat  apa  guna  arang  ?    (What  will  you  do  with  the  char- coal ?)
BOY  :  Menempa  (or  masak)  lembing.     (I  shall  forge  a  spear.) BULL  :  Buat  apa  guna  lembing  ?     (What  use  will  you  make  of the  spear?)
BOY:  Menikam  seladang.     (To  stab  a  bull  with.) BULL  (who  is  getting  excited) :  Buat  apa  guna  di-tikam  ?    (What use  will  it  be  to  stab  him  ?)
BOY  :  Mengambil  hati-nya.     (To  get  his  heart.) BULL   (who  is   now  fairly  savage)  :    Bitat  apa  guna  hati-nya  f (What  use  will  you  make  of  his  heart  ?)
BOY  :  Buat  santap  Raja  Muda.  (Get  the  Crown  Prince  to  par- take (of  it).)
The  Bull  at  the  end  of  this  baiting  was  ready  to "  charge  "  anybody  and  everything,  and  did  accordingly run  at  the  rest  of  the  players,  kicking  out  with  all  his might  at  anybody  who  came  near.  As  he  had  to move  on  all  fours  he  could  not  go  very  fast,  and  the other  players  took  advantage  of  this  to  bait  him  still further  by  slapping  him  on  the  back  and  jumping  over him.  Whenever  they  came  near  enough  he  lashed out  with  his  heels,  and  when  he  succeeded  in  kicking another  player  below  the  knee,  the  latter  became  a Bull  in  his  turn.  Much  agility  is  displayed  in  this game,  which  is  thoroughly  enjoyed  by  the  players.
"  Blind  Man's  Buff"  (Main  China  Buta,  or  "  Blind Chinaman  ")  is  played  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as our  own  Blind  Man's  Buff;  one  of  the  party,  with bandaged  eyes,  being  required  to  catch  any  one  who comes  near  him.
The  first  blind  man — at  the  commencement  of  the game  — is  chosen  as  follows  :  the  intending  players sit  down  together  in  a  close  circle,  each  of  them putting  down  the  tips  of  their  forefingers  in  the
VI
NURSERY  RHYMES
497
centre  of  the  circle ;  then  somebody  who  is  not playing  taps  each  of  them  on  the  head  in  turn,  re- peating at  each  tap  a  word  of  the  following  formula : —
ping
plate  (=piring?)
5 dalam
within
9
ping
2
hilang disappear
6
biling chamber  (
10
got
3 patah ar             break
4 paku nail
7 chhari
8
aku
bilek  ?)     search  for
me
ii
12
'ning clear  (?)
'dah got
'3 hilang. disappear.
The  meaning  of  this  formula  (as  is  the  case  with so  many  ' '  nursery  "  rhymes)  is  very  obscure,  several words  being  unintelligible  or  at  least  doubtful.  It  is, however,  the  regular  formula  used  for  such  games  and is  quite  common.1
Chan  chan  siku  rembat  is  a  game  which  I  saw played  in  Selangor  as  follows  :—
The  intending  players  stood  in  a  row,  looking straight  in  front  of  them,  but  with  their  hands  behind their  backs,  whilst  another  boy,  who  had  a  piece  of wood  in  his  hand,  walked  down  the  line  touching their  hands  and  counting  as  he  went  the  words  of the  following  refrain  :—
i
chan
2
chan
3 siku
4 rembat
5  6       .
buah  lalu
the  fruit  (or  ball)  is  passing
7  8
di-  Vlakang
behind  (you)
1  I  cannot  find  either  ping,  ning,  or /tiling  in  the  dictionaries,  and  the  only chance  perhaps  of  finding  out  the meaning  will  be  to  collate  the  rhymes
2  K
used  for  this  game  in  other  States.  I have  heard  it  several  times  here,  and  it has  always  been  the  same.
DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
9
10
ii
12
mata
pejam
tangan
lihat
your  eyes
(are)  closed
(but  your)  hand
sees  !
13
14
15
16
siapa
chepat
dia
melompat
whoever
(is)  nimble
(let)  him
take  the  leap.
The  "fruit"  (or  piece  of  wood,  as  the  case  may  be) was  left  in  the  palm  of  one  of  the  boys,  and  as  soon as  the  reciter  came  to  the  end  of  the  rhyme  the  boy with  the  token  had  to  jump  out  of  the  ranks  before he  was  stopped  by  the  boys  on  each  side  of  him, each  of  whom  suddenly  stretched  out  his  legs  for the  purpose  of  tripping  up  the  runaway.  When  they touched  him  he  lost  his  turn,  but  if  he  succeeded  in getting  clear  without  being  touched  he  obtained  the privilege  of  going  to  the  other  end  of  the  ground and  calling  any  boy  he  chose  out  of  the  ranks  to carry  him  back  again,  at  the  invitation  of  the  late spokesman.  On  his  return  he  was  stopped  in  front of  the  ranks  with  the  challenge  : —
Q.  Datang  de'mana  1     (Whence  do  you  come  ?)
A.  Datang  de'Bali.     (I  come  from  Bali.)
Q.  Apa  di-bawa  ?     (What  do  you  bring  ?)
A.  Bawa  kuali.     (I  bring  a  cooking-pot.)
Q.  Siapa  nakhoda  ?     (Who  is  the  master  (of  the  vessel)  ?)
A.  Nakhoda  'Che  lAli.     ('Che  'Ali  is  the  master.)
Q.  Mana  sampan  tunda  ?    (Where  is  the  boat  you  were  towing  ?)
A.  Putus  tali.     (Parted  from  the  rope.)
Q.  Mana  pas  ?     (Where  is  your  pass  ?)
In  reply  to  this  last  question  the  pass  (i.e.  the  fruit or  piece  of  wood)  was  shown  and  both  boys  rejoined the  ranks,  whereupon  the  game  recommenced  da  capo. Hantu  Musang  or  "The  Pole-cat  Fiend,"  is  a game  in  which  a  boy  sits  down  (between  two  others) with  a  cloth  thrown  over  his  head,  the  ends  of  which are  twisted  up  (like  rope  ends)  by  the  two  boys  on
vi  HANTU  MUSANG  499
each  side  of  him  ;  the  cloth  fits  his  head  like  a  cap, with  a  long  end  at  the  back  and  in  front.  First  the boy  in  front  pulls  his  end  of  the  cloth  and  then  the boy  at  the  back  pulls  his  end,  thus  causing  the  boy between  them  to  rock  to  and  fro.  This  treatment is  continued  for  some  time  while  they  repeat  the following  rhyme : —
Chok  gehchok  ....
Gali-gali  ubi.  A-digging  tapioca
Mana  kayu  bongkok  Wherever  (there  is)  knotted  timber
Disitu  musangjadi.  There  the  pole-cat  breeds.
Chang  gulichang  ....
Serak  bunga  lada  Scatter  (?)  pepper-blossom.
Datang  hantu  musang       The  pole-cat  fiend  has  arrived Ayam  sctekor  fada.  And  not  a  fowl  is  left.
As  soon  as  this  rhyme  is  finished  the  two  outside boys  make  off  as  fast  as  they  can,  pursued  by  the "pole-cat,"  who  is  allowed  to  give  a  really  good  bite (in  the  arm)  to  the  first  person  he  overtakes.
Main  Tunggul. — This  game  I  saw  played  with four  boys  a  side.  A  boy  was  selected  to  represent the  tunggul  or  stump,  and  took  up  his  position at  a  little  distance  (about  half-way  between  the  two parties  as  they  stood  facing  each  other  a  few  yards apart).  Up  to  the  stump  (tunggul)  a  boy  from each  of  the  sides  alternately  ran  and  whispered  the name  of  a  boy  belonging  to  the  opposite  party.  This whispering  was  continued  until  the  names  of  the  two boys  selected  happened  to  agree,  the  tunggul  then making  a  gesture,  at  which  the  boys  of  one  of  the  sides crossed  over  and  carried  back  on  their  shoulders  the boys  belonging  to  the  opposite  side.
Kuching  (the  Cat  Game)  was  a  mere  guessing game.  The  "  guesser,"  or  witness  (saksi),  stood  at
500
DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES
CHAP.
a  little  distance  with  his  face  turned  away  whilst another  boy  was  selected  to  play  "puss,"  and  yet another  boy  was  permitted  to  twitch  him  on  the  ear or  wherever  else  he  might  prefer.  Then  the  "  wit- ness" was  told  to  turn  round,  and  going  up  to  the "cat"  he  made  his  guess.
Sorok-sorok  is  merely  the  Malay  equivalent  of our  hide-and-seek,  with  the  exception  that  whereas hide-and-seek  may  be  played  by  day  as  well  as  by night,  the  game  of  sorok-sorok  should  properly  be played  at  night  alone.
Main  Galah  Pan- jang.  —  A  square  of ground  is  marked  out into  four  quarters  by  a cross  (as  in  the  accom- panying figure),  and  on it  a  game  not  unlike  our own  "  Tom  Tiddler's Ground "  is  played (by  three  players  on each  side).  The  name means  the  "  Long  Pole" game.
Another  child's  game  is  called  Sanebang,  and  is played  as  follows  : —
Two  players  sit  down  on  the  floor  facing  each  other and  chant  the  following  rhyme,  one  of  them  lightly touching  the  other's  left  arm  in  time  to  the  music  : —
B
FIG.  4. — Main  Galah  Panjang.
Sanebang  sanebu Kuala  Sambau Ujan  bunut Mandi  katong
Sanebang !  sanebu !
At  the  mouth  of  the  (river)  Sambau
In  the  drizzling  rain
Bathes  the  Katong,1
1  Probably  the  species  of  sea-turtle  known  by  that  name.
vi  SAPU-SAPU  *RINGIN  501
Stntak  pelok  Twitch  and  embrace
Tangan  Tuan  Putri        The  Princess's  hand.
The  well-known  game  called  Sapu-sapu  'Ringin I  have  seen  played  as  follows  : —
Two  players  sit  down  on  the  floor  opposite  each other,  with  their  legs  stretched  out  straight  in  front of  them  and  their  hands  in  their  laps,  and  join  in singing  these  lines  :—
Sapu-sapu  beringin,  Brush,  brush  the  banyan-tree,
Katimbun  dayong-dayong,         A  pile  of  oars  lies  stacked ; Datang  'Che  Aji  Lcbai  Here  comes  'Che  Aji  LSbai
Bawa  buaya  kudong.  Bringing  a  maimed  crocodile  :
Kudong  kakt,  kudong  tangan,  Maimed  in  foot  and  maimed  in  hand, Tiada  buleh  bcrpulangan.         It  can't  go  home  again.
Here  both  players  double  up  one  leg  under  them  as they  sit ;  then  they  repeat  the  lines  just  quoted, doubling  up  the  left  leg  at  the  end  of  the  recital ; then  they  close  the  fists  and  pile  them  one  on  each other,  the  lowest  resting  on  one  of  the  player's  knees, and  say—
Pong  along-along  ......
Kerinting  n'ang-n'ang,  Crick-crick  (?)  (sing)  the  crickets  (?)
Ketapong  kebalok
Minyak  'Arab,  minyak  sapi,  Arabian  oil  and  ghee  j x
Pechah  telor  sa-biji.  Here's  one  egg  broken.
Here  the  lowest  fist  is  flattened  out.  In  the  same way  each  of  the  four  eggs  (i.e.  fists)  is  broken  till the  top  is  reached,  when  the  four  hands  are  moved up  and  down  on  the  left  knee  of  one  of  the  players as  the  chant  recommences —
Pram  p'ram  pisang  .          .          .         the  plantain,
Masak  sa-biji  di-gonggong  ban-ban  The  fruit-bat  seizes  a  ripe  one,
Bawa  Sari,  And  takes  it  away
Terbang-lah  dia  !  As  off  he  flies  !
1  The  ordinary  Indian   name  for  "clarified  butter,"  which  is   used   largely in  Eastern  cookery.
502  DANCES,  SPORTS,  AND  GAMES  CHAP.
Here   both   players    raise    their    hands  above   their
heads ;  then  one  player  commences   to  rock  to  and
fro  (with  arms  now  folded),   the  other  holding  him (or  her)  by  the  arms  and  crying —
Goyang-goyang  Pah  Ponggor  Swing,  swing,  Father  Ponggor ;
Pah  Ponggor  mati  akar  !  Father  Ponggor,  the  climbing  rattan  is
dead !
Si  1AH  ka  padang  Si  'Ali's  gone  to  the  plain,
\JDi-~\tudongkan  daun  Sheltered  by  the  leaves,
Sa-hari  fa*  makan,  With  nothing  to  eat  for  a  day,
Ta'  makan  sa-tahun.  Nothing  to  eat  for  a  year.
Here    they   hook   their   little   fingers    together,    and rock  their  bodies  to  and  fro,  singing —
Angkei-angkei  p'riok  .     .     .     the  cooking-pot,
P'riok  deri  Jawa  The  cooking-pot  from  Java ;
Datang  '  Wd  Si  Bagok  Here  comes  Uncle  Bagok
Bawa  ketam  sa'ekor :  Bringing  a  crab.
Chepong  masok  ayer,  A  dish  (?)  to  put  water  in,
Chepong  masok  apt,  A  dish  (?)  to  put  fire  in,
O  nenek,  O  nenek,  O  granny,  O  granny,
Rumah  kita  'nak  runtoh  !  Our  house  is  tumbling  down.
Reh!  Reh!  Rum!   
Finally  they  sit   still  with   hands  clasped  on    knees, and  sing —
Nuria  I  Nuria  !  ......
Tali  timba  'ku  The  rope  of  my  bucket,
'Nak  'nimba  lubok  dalam,      To  draw  water  from  a  deep  hole, Dalam  sama  tengah,  Right  in  the  middle  of  it,
Saput  awan  tolih  mega.         Veiled  by  the  clouds,  looking  up  at  (?)
the  welkin.1
Of  minor  children's  games  the  following  may  be mentioned : —
(i)  Tuju  (not  tujok,"}  lobang,  which  appears  to be  identifiable  with  " Koba"  and  which  is  played
1  It  is  almost  impossible  to  trans-      garded  as  tentative  and  necessarily  im- late  nursery  rhymes  satisfactorily,  and      perfect, the  versions  here  given  must  be  re-  2   Vide  supra,  p.  484,  note.
vi  THE  MALA  Y  DRAMA  503
by  throwing  coins  as  near  as  possible  to  a  hole  (or holes  ?)  in  the  ground.
(2)  Chimplek,   which    is    a    sort    of  "  heads   and tails  "    game ;     "  heads "    being    called    chaping,    and "  tails  "  sim.
(3)  Porok,    which   consists    in    kicking   (with    the side  of  the.  foot)   a  small    cocoa-nut  shell,  with   the object  of  hitting  a  similar  shell  a  few  yards  off.
This  game  appears  to  be  identical  with  what  is called  main  gayau  in  Selangor,  in  which,  however, a  fruit  or  seed  called  buah  gandu  is  substituted  for the  cocoa-nut  shell  and  propelled  by  the  big  toe  of the  player's  foot.
(4)  Main  seremban,  which  is  played  with  cockle- shells by  two  girls  at  a  time,  each  player  taking  twenty cockle-shells  (kulit  fcrang)  into  her  lap.     Each  player in  turn  has  to  toss  up  one  of  the  cockle-shells  and catch,  simultaneously  snatching  a  fresh  shell  from  the heap.     If  the  girl  who  is  playing  fails  in  either  task, she  loses  to  her  opponent.
IO.    THEATRICAL    EXHIBITIONS
The  Malay  Drama,  taking  the  word  in  its  widest sense  as  comprising  every  kind  of  theatrical  exhibition, includes  performances  of  several  different  types,  which derive  their  origin  from  various  distinct  sources.  Most of  them  bear  some  traces  of  their  foreign  extraction, and  though  they  have  been  much  modified  by  the Malays,  and  are  now  quite  "naturalised"  in  the Peninsula,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  the  greater  part  have been  borrowed  from  India,  Siam,  China,  and  possibly other  countries.  It  is  noteworthy  that  many,  perhaps most,  of  the  plots  represented  in  these  performances
504  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  CHAP.
owe  their  origin  to  the  old  classical  Indian  Epics,  and especially  to  the  story  of  the  Ramayana,  which  has  been handed  down  traditionally,  much  modified  by  local colouring,  in  Java  and  Siam  as  well  as  in  the  Malay Peninsula.
It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  work  to  give  any- thing like  a  full  description  of  these  different  kinds  of dramatic  representations,  but  it  is  desirable  to  give some  account  of  the  ritual  which  accompanies  them, and  the  ideas  and  superstitions  which  they  seem  to involve.
The  most  important  of  the  ceremonies  which  relate to  the  Malay  theatre  is  that  of  inaugurating  or  "open- ing "  (as  it  is  called)  a  site  for  the  performance.  The following  is  an  account  (by  Mr.  Hugh  Clifford)  of  the performance  of  this  ceremony  : —
"  When  one  of  these  companies  arrives  at  a  place where  it  intends  to  'open,'  it  erects  a  small,  square shed,  open  at  all  four  sides,  but  carefully  roofed  in,  and with  a  hand-rail  running  round  it  about  two  feet  from the  ground.  This  shed  is  called  a  Bangsal,  and  the space  which  its  sides  enclose  is  termed  Panggong.  Be- fore the  play  begins,  the  ceremony  called  Buka  Pang- gong,  which  has  for  its  object  the  invocation  and propitiation  of  certain  spirits,  is  gone  through.  .  .  .
"  The  ceremony,  which  is  a  curious  one,  is  per- formed in  the  following  manner :  The  company  having entered  the  shed  and  taken  their  seats,  a  brazier  is placed  in  front  of  the  Pdwang,  or  Medicine- Man,  who is  also  the  head  of  the  theatrical  troop.  In  this  brazier precious  woods  and  spices  are  burned,  and  while  the incense  ascends,  the  Pdwang  intones  the  following incantation,  the  other  members  of  the  troop  repeating each  sentence  in  chorus  as  he  concludes  it.
vi  INAUGURATION  CEREMONY  505
"  '  Peace  be  unto  Thee,  whose  mother  is  from  the earth,  and  whose  father  has  ascended  to  the  Heavens ! Smite  not  the  male  and  female  actors,  and  the  old  and young  buffoons  with  Thy  cruelty,  nor  yet  with  the  curse of  poverty  !  Oh,  do  not  threaten  with  punishment the  members  of  this  company,  for  I  come  not  hither to  vie  with  Thee  in  wisdom  or  skill  or  talent :  not such  is  my  desire  in  coming  hither.  If  I  come  unto this  place,  I  do  so  placing  my  faith  in  all  the  people,1 my  masters  who  own  this  village.  Therefore  suffer not  any  one  to  oppress,  or  envy,  or  do  a  mischief  unto all  the  body  of  male  and  female  actors,  together  with the  young  and  old  buffoons,  and  the  minstrels  and bridegroom,2  together  with  Sri  Gemuroh,  Sri  Ber- dengong.3  Oh,  suffer  them  not  to  be  hurt  or  destroyed, injured,  or  maimed ;  let  not  the  male  or  female  actors be  contused  or  battered,  and  let  them  not  be  injured or  maimed  ;  let  them  not  be  afflicted  with  headache, nor  with  undue  physical  heat,  nor  yet  with  throbbing pains  or  with  shooting  aches.  Oh,  let  them  not  be injured  by  collisions  like  unto  ships,  the  bows  of  which are  telescoped,4  nor  afflicted  with  excessive  voiding.
1  Literally,    "Brothers  and  Sisters  the  cross-pieces  of  kris  scabbards,  is and  Chiefs  "  ;  this  refers  to  the  Spirits  formed  from  kilning  ( =  yellow).    Dfng- who  inhabit  the  villages,  and  not  to  the  ong  is  the  word  used  to   describe  the Humans.  noise  made  by  a  gong,  by  the  wind,  or
2  The  term  used  is  Penjak pengantin,  any  other  sonorous  sound.
which  means  musicians  and  bridegroom.  *  The    phrase    in    the   original    is
The  former  term   includes  all  people  ffal&an    sfisun.       The    former    word
belonging  to  the  Maiong  who  make  a  means  the  bows  of  a  boat,  the  latter  is
noise.     The  latter  term  means  a  man  applied  to  things  fitted  together,  as  sirih
whose  wedding  is  being  celebrated,  but  leaves  are  fitted  when  one  leaf  is  laid
in  this  connection  it  is  applied  to  the  on  the  top  of  another.     The  use  of  this
Pet iong  at  jeune  premier,  phrase  is  very  curious,  and  I  believe  it
3  These   names   are   given    by   the  to   convey   the   sense   which    I    have iMa'iong  people  to  the  two  big  gongs  rendered.       I    have   never   heard    the used    by    them    (tet&wak    or    tdwak-  phrase  in   any   other  connection,    nor tdwak).    GZmtiroh  is  formed  from  g&roh  have  I  met  with  it  except  in  this  in- ( =  thunder),  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  cantation.     [Should    not    the    correct ktm&ning,  the  yellow  wood  used  for  reading  Ix:  halun  ( =  altin)  susun,  which
5o6  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  CHAP.
Suffer  them  not  to  vomit  freely,  nor  to  be  overcome by  heavy  weariness  or  fatigue  or  weakness.  I  ask  that Thou  wilt  suffer  them  to  be  as  they  have  been  accus- tomed to  be  in  former  times,  and  to  feel  cool  and  fresh like  unto  the  snake,  the  chinta-mdni?
" '  Peace  be  unto  Thee,  O  Black  Awang,2  who  art King  of  the  Earth  !  Be  not  startled  nor  deranged,  and be  not  offended,  for  Thou  art  wont  to  wander  in  the veins  of  the  ground,  and  to  take  Thy  rest  in  the  portals of  the  Earth.3  I  come  not  hither  to  vie  with  Thee  in wisdom,  for  I  only  place  my  trust  in  Thee,  and  would surrender  myself  wholly  into  thy  hands  ;  and  I  beg Thee  to  retire  but  three  paces  from  the  four  corners  of our  shed,  and  that  Thou  shalt  refrain  from  wandering hither  and  thither,  for  under  Thy  care  I  place  the  male and  female  actors,  and  all  the  buffoons,  both  young  and old,  together  with  all  the  musicians  and  the  bride- grooms. I  place  them  under  Thy  care,  and  do  not oppress  or  envy  them,  neither  suffer  evil  to  befall  them, do  not  strike  against  them  as  Thou  passest  by.  I place  them  under  Thy  charge,  together  with  the  actors and  actresses,  the  musicians  and  bridegrooms,  the buffoons,  both  young  and  old,  also  the  spectators  and the  owners  of  this  house  and  compound ;  suffer  them not  to  be  afflicted  with  headaches,  throbbing  pains,  nor yet  with  shooting  pains,  nor  yet  with  toothache,  nor with  itchings  and  skin  irritations,  nor  with  burning
is  a  fairly  common  Malay  phrase  used  whose  name  is  not  known  it  is  always
of  the  waves   "crowding"  one  upon  used,    much    as   Kfilop    is    employed
another  on  a  stormy  day? — W.S.]  among  the  natives  of  Perak.
1  Ckinta-mdni,  the  name  of  a  very  3  Malays  believe  Spirits  to  be   ex- short  snake  of  a  golden  yellow  colour,  tremely  sensitive  as  regards  their  origin the  presence  of  which  is  regarded  as  a  and  their  habits,  and  any  knowledge lucky  omen.  possessed  by  a  human  being  on  these
2  Awang  is   a  very  common  male  subjects   renders   the   spirit  harmless, proper   name   among    the   natives    of  [The  same  idea  has  been  noticed  supra Kelantan,  and  in  addressing  any  man  with  reference  to  animals,  etc.]
vi  INVOCATION  TO  THE  SPIRITS  507
sensations ;  for  I  pray  that  they  may  be  suffered  to get  cool  and  refreshed  like  unto  the  snake,  the  chinta- mdni?
"  The  Pdwang  here  scatters  parched  rice  stained with  saffron  in  every  direction,  and  chants  the  follow- ing incantation  the  while  :  '  Peace  be  unto  thee !  I  am about  to  move  from  within  this  enclosure  four  paces  in each  direction  of  the  four  corners  of  the  universe.  O ye  Holy  Ones  who  are  present  in  this  place,  within the  space  of  these  four  paces  towards  the  four  extrem- ities of  the  universe,  be  not  startled  nor  deranged,  do not  remove  to  a  distance,  and  be  not  angry  or  wrath- ful, for  thy  servant  cometh  not  hither  to  vie  with  ye  in wisdom  within  this  thy  territory  and  village.  Your servant  cometh  to  satisfy  the  desires  of  all  the  people who  own  this  place,  and  your  servant  desires  to abandon  himself  unto  ye,  his  guardians,  the  Holy  Ones of  this  place,  and  thus  presuming  he  asks  pardon of  ye,  and  would  commend  to  your  care  himself,  and the  actors  and  actresses,  O  Grandsires,  ye  Holy  Ones of  this  place ;  and  in  like  manner  would  he  commend unto  ye  the  musicians  and  the  bridegrooms,  the  buf- foons, both  old  and  young ;  and  he  prays  ye  not  to show  envy  towards  them,  nor  yet  to  oppress  them,  nor do  them  any  injury ;  suffer  them  not  to  be  destroyed or  injured ;  and  he  entreats  thee,  his  Grandsires,  and all  your  many  imps,  to  refrain  from  striking  against them  as  ye  pass  by  them,  neither  to  address  them,  nor to  pinch  or  nip  them,  and  let  not  your  youths,  O Grandsires,  remove  our  means  of  livelihood ;  and your  servant  prays  ye  to  refrain  from  destroying  or damaging,  injuring  or  hurting  the  whole  company  of the  maiong,  and  suffer  them  to  be  cool  and  refreshed like  unto  the  snake,  the  chinta-mdni.
5o8  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  CHAP.
"  '  Peace  be  unto  Thee !  I  am  about  to  remove  from thee  my  Grandsire  who  art  styled  Petera  Guru,  the original  teacher,  who  art  from  the  beginning,  and  who art  incarnate  from  thy  birth.  Teacher  who  dwellest as  a  hermit  in  the  recesses  of  the  Moon,  and  who practises!  thy  magic  arts  in  the  womb  of  the  Sun  ; teacher  of  mine  whose  coat  is  wrought  of  green  beads, whose  blood  is  white,  who  hast  stumps  for  bones,  the hairs  of  whose  body  are  turned  the  wrong  way,  and the  veins  of  whose  body  are  adamant,  whose  neck  is black,  whose  tongue  is  fluent,  whose  spittle  is  brine ! 1 Oh,  because  thou,  my  Grandsire,  art  a  man  of  magic, whose  prayers  are  answered,  whose  desires  come  to pass,  do  not,  O  Grandsire,  show  cruelty,  or  afflict  with poverty  or  with  punishment  any  of  the  actors  or actresses,  the  musicians  and  bridegrooms,  and  the buffoons  both  young  and  old !  And  I  pray  thee,  O Grandsire,  to  stretch  forth  thy  feet — the  feet  at  which I  prostrate  myself ;  and  thy  hands — the  hands  which  I take  in  salutation.  And  I  beg  from  thee,  O  Grandsire, the  white  charm  (antidote),  the  medong  ber-sila  ;  cause to  descend  upon  me  three  drops  thereof  together  with thy  magic,  O  Grandsire ;  I  wish  to  sprinkle  therewith all  the  actors  and  actresses,  the  buffoons  both  young and  old,  together  with  all  the  musicians  and  bride- grooms, and  suffer  them  not  to  be  destroyed  or  injured, and  let  them  not  be  laid  open  or  exposed  to  any  evil influence  ;  I  pray  thee  not  to  suffer  them  to  be  injured, maimed,  or  battered.  And  now  I  will  arouse  all  the actors  and  actresses  from  within  the  seven  Chambers of  the  seven  Palaces,  the  seven  Pavilions — the  Palaces which  are  on  high,  the  Palaces  which  were  from  the
1  The    least  sensitive  spirit   in    the       so  many  personal   remarks  of  such   a world  might  not  unreasonably  dislike       frankly  unflattering  nature.
—      t:  5?
<      6^
a    a
%*
2  v
<fi  •$ U.S
(I
vi  EXHORTATION  TO  THE  PERFORMERS  509
beginning,  which  in  the  beginning  came  into  being  in their  entirety.1  I  am  about  to  open  the  portals  of the  seven  Chambers  of  the  seven  Palaces ;  I  am about  to  open  the  closed  doors  from  the  exterior  even unto  the  inner  portals  of  the  seven  chambers  of  the seven  Palaces.  Let  them  be  opened  together  with the  Gates  of  Lusts  and  Passion,  together  with  the Gate  of  Desire  and  Faith,  together  with  the  Gates of  Longing  and  Supreme  Desire.  The  Longing which  lasts  from  Dawn  unto  Dawn,  which  causes food  to  cease  to  satisfy,  and  renders  sleep  uneasy, which  remembering  causes  to  remember  unceasingly, hearing  to  hear,  seeing  to  see !  I  will  awake  all from  the  exterior  even  unto  the  inner  Chambers of  the  seven  Apartments  of  the  seven  Palaces ! remain  not  plunged  in  slumber,  but  awake !  One and  all  awake  and  hear  my  tidings  and  my  words ! Awake  and  hearken  unto  my  words,  for  they  vanish not,  neither  are  my  senses  slumbering,  nor  is  my memory  a  blank  !  Awake,  O  actors  and  actresses,  and await  one  upon  another !  Awake,  O  buffoons,  together awake !  Awake,  ye  drummers,  together  awake ! Awake,  ye  gong-smiters,  together  awake  !  Awake,  ye bridegrooms,  together  awake !  Be  not  removed  far from  your  means  of  livelihood,  nor  destroyed  or injured  !  Oh,  suffer  them  not  to  be  hurt  or  damaged —all  this  company  of  actors  and  actresses,  all  this company  of  players  who  sit  within  this  shed ! '
"  When  this  incantation  is  finished  the  player,  whose turn  it  is  to  begin  the  performance,  prostrates  himself before  the  Herbab,  or  large  Malay  fiddle,  washes  his
1  This  is  hardly  an  accurate  descrip-       the  Malays,  as  with  other  Orientals,  is tion  of  the  temporary  shed  in  which       the  mystic  number. mctiong  people  perform.     Seven  among
5io  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  CHAP.
face  in  some  imaginary  essence  which  the  gong  is supposed  to  contain,  and  then  arises  and  begins  to  act his  part."1
A  similar  ceremony  was  witnessed  in  1897  by  Mr. Everard  Fielding  and  the  present  writer  at  the  back of  the  Bungalow  at  Jugra  (in  Selangor).  The  object of  the  ceremony  was  to  drive  away  evil  spirits  from the  spot  where  the  performance  was  to  take  place, and  the  performers  were  a  little  band  of  players from  Penang  who  had  settled  in  the  neighbour- hood and  had  planted  their  holdings  with  Liberian coffee.
The  Pawang  or  magician  in  this  instance  was  a Malay  named  'Che  Hussein,  who  acted  as  clown,  and subsequently  wrote  out  at  my  request  rough  tran- scripts of  more  than  a  dozen  of  the  plays  acted  by  his company.
A  big  mat  or  mats  having  been  laid  upon  the ground  in  a  spot  carefully  selected  for  the  purpose,  four corner  posts  were  planted  and  a  big  awning  or  ceiling- cloth  (langit-langti)  stretched  between  them.  The square  space  between  the  posts  was  then  fenced  off  by carrying  a  couple  of  cords  round  it  horizontally  from post  to  post,  one  at  the  height  of  two,  and  the  other about  five  feet  above  the  ground.  From  these  cords were  suspended  various  ornamental  objects  made  of plaited  strips  of  cocoa-nut  leaf,  fashioned  into  rough resemblances  of  animals,  birds,  fruit  and  flowers,  a  few bananas  being  added  at  intervals,  these  latter  serving as  light  refreshments  for  the  players  whenever  they felt  so  minded.  Stems  of  banana  trees  with  their leaves  fastened  at  each  post  made  the  structure  com- plete, and  the  general  effect,  enhanced  by  the  bright
1  Selangor  Journal,  vol.  ii.  No.  26,  pp.  423-429.
vi  CEREMONIAL  511
costumes  of  the  performers,  was  extremely  pictur- esque, and,  as  it  was  intended  to  be,  extremely rural.1
A  tray  with  the  usual  brazier  of  incense  and  small bowls  of  rice  variously  prepared  was  then  brought  in, and  all  the  instruments,  though  not  necessarily  the players,  being  in  their  places,  the  ceremony  commenced as  follows : —
First  came  the  Lagu  Pemanggil,  or  Invocation,  a peculiar  air  performed  on  the  instruments  and  accom- panied by  the  Pawang.  The  latter  heaped  incense  on a  brazier  in  front  of  him,  and  "waved"  in  the  incense first  the  fiddle  (rebab)  and  then  the  masks,  wooden daggers,  and  other  "  properties  "  of  the  company,  until they  were  well  fumigated.  He  next  lighted  three  tapers, which  he  charmed  and  took  between  the closed  palms  of  his  hands  (held  in  front  of him),  with  the  fingers  straight  and  the thumbs  crossed.  He  then  proceeded  to "wave"  these  tapers,  pointing  them  fimi%££35*£ to  the  right,  then  in  front  of  him,  and finally  to  the  left,  and  then  distributed  the  tapers, putting  the  first  on  the  rebab,  and  the  second  on  the big  gong,  and  the  third  on  the  edge  of  a  brazen  ring in  front  of  the  place  where  he  is  sitting.  He  now reached  for  the  betel-leaf  box  (which  should  be  close by),  and  dipping  the  tip  of  his  finger  into  the  moist lime  which  it  contained,  smeared  the  metal  all  round with  it,  and  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  inside  the  ring. Next  he  shrouded  his  head  with  a  black  cloth, and  taking  a  handful  of  rice  in  his  closed  fist  held ft  in  the  incense,  sprinkled  some  of  it  over  the
1  If  the  performance  is  to  last  for  more  than  one  or  two  nights,  a  proper shed  (bangsat)  may  be  erected.
512  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  CHAP.
brazier  and  "  charmed "  it,  holding  it  close  to  his mouth.  Then  he  suddenly  scattered  it  first  to  the right,  then  in  front,  and  lastly  to  the  left,  the  scatter- ing being  in  each  case  accompanied by  a  single  boom  of  the  big  gong.
The  distribution  of  the  rice  being completed,  he  took  four  "  chews  "  of betel  and  handed  one  to  each  of  the two  drummers  (jiiru-gendang) ;  the third  he  threw  on  to  the  top  of  the ceiling-cloth  (or  roof  in  the  case  of  a shed,  bumbong  bangsal},  and  the fourth  he  buried  underneath  the bottom  mat.1  With  his  head  still shrouded  he  now  placed  the  tip of  his  right  thumb  within  the  metal  ring,  in the  very  centre  of  the  cross,  called  the  Heart of  the  Earth  (pusat  bumi  or  hati  tanafi),  and pressing  downwards  with  it,  worked  it  round  to the  left  and  back  again  repeatedly  whilst  he  recited the  necessary  charm.  After  this  he  leaned  in  turn on  the  upper  end  of  each  of  the  drums,  which  he inclined  over  the  brazier  and  "charmed,"  concluding in  each  case  with  three  loud  taps  on  the  drum  which he  was  "charming,"  each  tap  being  accompanied  by similar  taps  on  the  other  two  drums.  Finally,  the Pawang  put  the  flageolet  (serunei)  to  his  lips,  and  the other  instruments  accompanied  him  in  the  performance of  the  tune  called  taboh?
As  has  already  been  observed,  the  performances at  these  theatrical  exhibitions  are  of  several  distinct
1  The  third  is  for  the  Jin  Putek,  or  2  The   Malay  account  of  this  cere-
"  White  Genie,"  and  the  fourth  for  the      mony  with  the  text  of  the  charms  used Jin  Hitam,  or  "Black  (Earth)  Genie."       will  be  found  in  App.  ccxxiv.  seqq.
PI.ATK  21. — MASKS  OF  CLOWNS  AND  DEMON.
Theatrical  masks  used  by  Malay  strolling  players.  The  two  masks  at  each  end  are  worn  by  the clowns  (flran),  and  cover  the  upper  jaw  only,  the  eyes  being  mother-of-pearl  with  hollow  pupils. The  central  mask  represents  a  forest  demon  (liantu  ritnba).
Page  513.
vi  TUNES  513
kinds,  and  vary  considerably  in  different  places.     The Joget,  a  kind  of  dramatic  and  symbolical  dance,  has been   described   under   the    head   of    Dances.      The Mdyong  is  a  theatrical   performance  which   includes both  dancing  (or  posturing  as  Europeans  would   be tempted    to   call    it)    and    singing.       It    is   generally performed    by   travelling   companies    of    professional actors   and   actresses,  who  go  on  tour  and   perform either  at  the  houses  of   Rajas  or   other   persons    of some  social  standing,  or  before  the  general  public  in some  public  place.1     Just  as  the  dances  of  the  Joget are   supposed   to    be   symbolical  of  different   actions and  ideas,  and  are  accompanied  by  appropriate  music, so  in  the  Mayong  there  is  quite  a  long  list  of  tunes, each  of  which   is  considered  to  be  appropriate  to  a particular   action,   or    to   some    one   or   more  of  the dramatis  persona.     In  fact,  one  may  almost  say  that we   have    here,   in    principle,   the   rude   germ   of  the Wagnerian     Leitmotif.      Thus    when     one    of     the performers  is  supposed  to  be  sent  to  sleep,  the  Lagu Legor  Radin  is  the  one  used ;  in   the   representation of  a  death,  the  Lagu  Merayu  ;  when  a  character  is supposed  to  be  entering  the  jungle,  the  Lagu  Samsam  ; when   any  one  sits  down,   the    Lagu  Patani    Tuah. Similarly  the  Lagu  Puyuh,  the  Lagu  Dang  Dondang Lanjut  Kedah,   and   the  Lagu   Sendayong  Dualapis Putri  are  appropriated  to  the  Princess  (Putri),  one of  the  stock  characters  of  this  species  of  play,  while other  tunes  can  be  used  only  by  the  Princess  and  the Raja  or  principal  male  character  (Payong] ;  and  others, again,  are  employed  indifferently  to  accompany  any  of the  parts,  whether  prince,  princess,  clown  (P'ran),  or maid  (Inang).
1   VideJ.R.A.S.,  S.B.t  No.  2,  p.  163. 2  L
514  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  CHAP.
The  costumes  of  the  performers  in  the  various kinds  of  dramatic  exhibitions  vary,  of  course,  with  the subject-matter  of  the  representation.  The  clown's masks  and  the  forest  demon  (hantu  kutan),  of  which illustrations  are  given,  will  serve  as  specimens  to indicate  the  nature  of  some  of  the  accessories  in  use. A  fairly  full  list  of  their  Malay  names  will  be  found in  the  classification  given  below.
The  Mayong  is  perhaps  the  most  typical  form  of Malay  theatrical  representations,  but  another  very characteristic  performance  is  the  Shadow -Play,  pro- perly termed  Wayang,  a  name  that  has  been  loosely extended  to  cover  theatrical  exhibitions  in  general.
"The  show  is  called  Wayang  Kulit,  or  leather puppets.  It  is  exhibited  in  a  rough  shed,  which  has a  flooring  raised  about  three  feet  from  the  ground ; the  building  is  usually  twenty  feet  square  and  enclosed on  three  sides,  the  front  alone  being  open ;  across this  opening  a  white  sheet  is  stretched  on  which  the shadows  of  the  puppets  are  thrown  and  seen  through by  the  audience ;  the  latter  sit  or  stand  in  the  open air.
"The  show  seems  to  be  of  Hindu  origin,  if  we may  judge  from  the  strong  resemblance  the  figures bear  to  the  representations  of  gods  and  goddesses worshipped  by  the  Hindus  of  India;  it  is  probably obtained  from  Java.
"  The  figures  are  made  of  buffalo  hide,  and  the arms  alone  are  movable ;  they  are  moved  by  slips  of wood  attached  to  them,  which  are  very  clumsily contrived,  and  as  their  shadows  are  seen  with the  puppets  the  effect  is  very  much  destroyed. Various  scenes  of  a  domestic  nature  are  exhibited, and  they  take  the  shape  of  a  play,  but  with  no  definite
PLATE  22. — KUDA  S&MBRANI.
Maj-ic  flying  horse  (kuiia  ssmbrani)  used  in  the  shadow-play  by  'Che  'Abas.     It  is  said  to  be  able to  swim  through  the  water  as  well  as  to  fly  through  the  air.
Page  514.
SHA  DO  W-  PLA  YS  515
plot    running    through    or    connecting    the    different scenes.
"  The  following  is  a  specimen  :—
"  An  old  man  appears  weeping  for  a  long-lost  son, and  moves  to  and  fro  for  some  time  bewailing  his loss ;  the  showman  speaks  each  figure's  part,  and alters  the  tone  of  his  voice  to  suit  the  age  of  the speaker;  a  second  figure  comes  on,  representing  a young  man  armed  with  a  kris,  who  endeavours  to pick  a  quarrel  with  the  first  comer,  and  the  conver- sation is  witty  and  characteristic,  eliciting  roars  of laughter  from  the  lookers-on ;  a  fight  ensues,  and  the old  man  is  wounded ;  he  falls  and  cries  out  that  were he  a  young  man,  or  if  his  lost  son  were  present,  his adversary  should  not  thus  triumph  over  him.  In  his conversation  he  happens  to  mention  his  son's  name ; the  young  man  intimates  that  his  name  is  the  same, an  explanation  ensues,  and  it  ends  by  the  old  man discovering  in  his  late  adversary  his  long -lost  son. The  old  fellow  weeps  and  laughs  alternately,  caresses his  son  frequently,  and  declares  they  shall  never  part again ;  the  scene  ends  by  the  youth  shedding  tears over  his  late  inhuman  conduct,  and  he  finally  walks off  with  the  old  gentleman  on  his  back.
"The  conversation  is  carried  on  solely  in  the Malayan  dialect.  Warlike  scenes  please  most :  a warrior  comes  on  the  stage  and  challenges  his  in- visible enemy  to  mortal  combat ;  suddenly  another figure  comes  on  at  the  opposite  side  and  a  desperate fight  ensues,  which  lasts  for  a  very  long  time,  and  ends in  one  of  the  combatants  being  killed.  Occasionally a  battle  in  which  ten  or  twelve  figures  join  takes  place, and  for  hours  will  the  Malays  look  on  at  such  scenes.
"  The  show  concludes  with  an  exhibition  of  various
516  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  CHAP.
animals  —  deer,  horses,  tigers,  crocodiles,  etc.,  also birds  and  fishes.  The  figures  are  perforated  to represent  the  eyes,  shape  of  the  dress,  etc.
"At  the  back  of  the  shed,  concealed  by  the  sheet, sit  the  musicians,  who  keep  up  an  incessant  din  on drums  and  cymbals."1
The  puppets  for  these  shadow-plays  are  usually  cut out  of  deer-skin  (not  buffalo  hide)  and  it  is  worth  re- marking that  they  are  all  considered  to  be  more  or less  animated  ;  a  stringent  propitiatory  ceremony  has  to be  performed  in  their  honour,  incense  being  burnt  and rice  scattered  about,  just  as  in  the  Mayong  ceremony already  described.
The  present  writer,  while  in  Selangor,  bought  from a  Kelantan  Malay  named  'Che  'Abas,  a  performer  of shadow-plays,  his  entire  stock-in-trade,  including  not only  his  musical  instruments  (amongst  which  were some  curious  drums  called  gedu  and  gedombafc),  but  also his  candle  (with  its  shade),  the  rice  used  for  the  cere- mony, and  his  entire  stock  of  shadow-pictures,  all  of which  are  now  in  the  Cambridge  Museum.
The  following  classification  of  the  more  important kinds  of  theatrical  performances,  which  was  drawn  up for  the  present  writer  by  'Che  Hussein  of  Penang,  the actor  of  whom  mention  has  already  been  made,  may  be of  interest,  and  will  serve  to  indicate  briefly  their  several characteristic  features,  though  it  does  not  profess  to  be absolutely  exhaustive  : —
1  J.  D.  Vaughan  in  J.I. A.,  quoted  in  Denys,  Desc.  Diet,  of  Brit.  Mai., s.v.  Puppet  Shows.
,«   '"I
O     a  JS
3    «
*       *L  *< H        aT-^
2     =v
CLASSIFICATION  OF  PERFORMANCES
517
of  Stori sented.
pre
fl
5S   •*
F
«  *>  « '
«
o  o
.§  S.
c
S B
II
o   bo  £
o
2  s
s  ill jirs/a-giS
<u
•5
i  *1  g
SJ    <i    R    &
^  tf  § cl  1
*** :  -       «*
Q  <>     t  •*    K-
•<i  ^      Ojft   ^0
5;  **     S^
S  V>  ~5>    C
S!  T3 S  C •*<  rt
SB'
^    rt
518
THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS
CHAP.
mes  of  Stories epresented.
IJ
•sg
Sa
5
*  .S
i-«»:
s  s  n<i  *  £ .!
3
g  S1
-
VI
CLASSIFICA  TION  OF  PERFORMANCES
5<9
rt    S
1 1
c/3
R
.*  s<
o  0
o  o
•73  i/l
C
11
'•si
c    53    c
S
O    rt    S oo
«*  t3t^  tr  g
•3  1  -3  1  S  I
6-S
!  I1
>
^•S  ^rf-13  Sj
s
<u   o
Si
E  XI    t/J  ^3
«  .2
It ^   rt
520
THE  A  TRICAL  EXHIBITIONS
Names  of Represe
•Js
!  «
of  Perform ce,  etc.
X    <i>    <u    O    C
°*8:§  8  S
-  8     -     8
2  DH.S  .S  «  -§  3  £  .S  -5  -3 c
g,S cg 31  £
bo
<u  4^    rt
I  §-|
us      u
*c3  a
Name  of  Perfor and  Reputed of  Origin
•§•
£     o
2 1
q
.2
OH
rt W
S  a  >"^r2"^'£2  8  •?
nJto«Kijrt>S.i2ajrt
§    «  n*8    ?.  -S    W
,
?c     s.a  ^  g>
£    t^^>  <«  >  —  O    «o  v  —  •  01    ^  v^>  b^
\  1
CLASSIFICATION  OF  PERFORMANCES
52'
•O    4>
«    «0  «     "  C    "   -V  >    ^    «
C    in
rt    v
•  *  s!  »S  ^.Q   g1  ?£   ^
o-~  5
^       *>."^'X.§'**V'^QSk*>1*^
^3  2
^  K*          .^  *^3           «l
^  u
i/S  >S        •   _**        Vj           .
^5     ^   ^^    ^A     ^0          ?     t-^   3S
Is
«j  •^  ••r  F^aQS^cjsQa ••—>•*»  ""^-sJ  w.^'v»i-2  R  5  3?  *•
•^{  "rt
aj
3     ,                .^     ^
2
8
1
•o
c
c
JJ
2  c
'
o
N
c
0
1
£
c    .
i
£  1
rt •5
B  |
.s
bo  &
£
'"H  £•
c
Si
ja
u
u
<
c
el
S  i$
in
rt  7
a
u>    o
0
V   •i"
•c
J=  *"
oj
H
**
1
-t-f     V             ii !H    8    9
,«
s        •  i/)         •—  5s iiT!         *)    aTCO  ^
•^   S****
*S        'C    <"        -rt
hA  °^
K/\rt"  O    *2    >^  c
^.s
s;    >.  In   rt  «   rt  t-i,
Q     *C
3    rt    4)    >    rt    4)    D
1^
^
oo              O
522  WAR  AND   WEAPONS  CHAP.
II.    WAR    AND    WEAPONS
Such  charms  as  might  be  used  in  time  of  war,  or in  case  of  danger  from  wild  beasts  or  other  enemies, are  partly  what  may  be  called  "  defensive  "  and  partly "offensive"  in  character.
The  Malays  who  use  them  pray,  on  the  one  hand, for  a  supernatural  appearance  wherewith  to  scare  their enemies  and  protect  themselves,  and  on  the  other  for supernatural  powers  to  assist  in  the  destruction  of  their foes.
Thus,  one  of  their  charms  runs  :—
"  Let  me  face  the  Seven  Suns, But  let  not  my  enemies  face  me. Ha !  I  am  a  Tiger  and  them  art  a  Dog."1
The  use  of  such  charms  is  supplemented  in  various ways  :  thus  a  champion  (penglima)  will  sometimes  draw a  line  in  front  of  him,  which  he  believes  his  enemy  will be  unable  to  pass  ; 2  this  is  done  by  simply  scraping  the ground  with  the  right  foot  and  threatening  the  foe with  a  dire  curse  if  he  attempts  to  cross  it.
"Push  and  you  die,  step  across  and  your  leg  shall  break. I  apply  the  charm  of  the  Line  called  the  Swollen  Corpse."
According  to  another  method  of  gaining  martial vigour  and  immunity  in  fighting,  you  take  a  wick  as long  as  the  short  span  between  your  thumb  and  first finger  (sa-jengkal  telunjofc),  and  after  passing  it  over your  body  upwards  (tK-naikkari)  thrice,  take  it  between your  two  hands  and  try  and  turn  it  round  while  you repeat  the  charm.  The  ceremony  must  take  place  at
1  Vide  App.  ccxxxi,  stopped  in  this  way  ;  see  Beast  Charms,
2  Even  wild  beasts,  it  is  said,  can  be       p.  156,  supra.
vi  CHARMS  AND  TABOOS  523
the  time  of  full  moon,  and  if  you  do  not  succeed  in turning  it  the  first  time,  you  can  try  again  at  the  next full  moon,  and  so  on  up  to  three  full  moons.  At  night, if  you  succeed  you  will  (according  to  the  Malay  account) see  the  vision  of  a  man,  a  sign,  it  is  to  be  supposed, that  the  charm  has  been  effectual,  and  that  the  prayer has  been  heard.
The  charm  begins  as  follows  :—
"  In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate  ! May  this  nerve  of  stone  pierce  stone, Pierce  stone  and  split  stone, Pierce  planks  and  go  right  through  them, Pierce  water  and  dry  it  up, Pierce  the  earth  and  make  a  hole  in  it, Pierce  the  grass  and  wither  it, Pierce  mountains  and  cause  them  to  fall, Pierce  the  heavens  that  they  may  fall,"  etc.
The  charm  concludes  with  the  following  magnificent boast  :—
"  Of  Iron  am  I,  and  of  Copper  is  my  frame, And  my  name  is  'Tiger  of  God.'"
In  a  somewhat  similar  charm,  a  warrior  prays  that he  may  be
"  Fenced  with  Hell-fire  up  to  the  eyes  ; "
and  another  expresses  the  wish  that  his  enemies  may be
"  Ground  to  powder  like  tin-ore  after  washing."
In  actual  warfare  a  number  of  rules  are  laid  down, the  observance  of  which  is  supposed  to  be  necessary  in order  to  achieve  success.  As  in  several  other  pur- suits,1 there  is,  of  course,  a  "  taboo  "  language  of  war (bhasa  pantang  p'rang),  of  which  the  following  are examples  :—
1    Vide  Eagle-wood  tree,  Camphor,  Fishing,  etc.,  supra.
524  WAR  AND  WEAPONS  CHAP.
Dagger  (Kris)  -  pisau  (lit.  knife).
Bullet  (peluru  senapang)  =  kumbang  puteh  (lit.  white  beetle).
Ball  of  swivel-gun  (peluru  leld)  =  kumbang  hitam  (lit.  black  beetle).
Stockade  (kubu)  =  batang  melintang  (lit.  transverse  trunk),  or  balei
melintang. Cannon   (meriani)  -  batang  kabu-kabu   (lit.    cotton-tree    trunk),    or
batang  buloh  (lit.  trunk  of  bamboo). Cannon-ball  —  buah  niyor  (lit.  cocoa-nut).
When  a  man  is  out  in  the  wars  his  pillows  and sleeping-mat  at  home  have  to  be  kept  rolled  up.  If any  one  else  were  to  use  them  the  absent  warrior's courage  would  fail,  and  disaster  would  befall  him  (ter- tentu-lah  kachcut  hati  tuan-nya  yang  di  p'rang  itzt, datang-lah  mara).  His  wife  and  children  must  not have  their  hair  cut  (ta  buleh  potong  rambut  atau  beran- dam)  during  his  absence,  nor  may  he  himself.  Strict chastity  must  be  observed  in  a  stockade,  or  the  bullets of  the  garrison  will  lose  their  power  (peluru  jinak  di kubu-nyot],  and  it  is  also  forbidden  to  abuse  or  mock at  the  enemy,  or  even  at  their  weapons.1
Bullets  are  frequently,  if  not  always,  "  charmed " before  being  used,  and  their  efficacy  is  supposed  to  be increased  thereby.  The  Orang  Kaya  Pahlawan,  a chief  of  some  local  notoriety  in  recent  times,  claimed  to be  invulnerable  (kebat)  to  the  extent  that  nothing  but a  silver  bullet  would  hurt  him.
The  following  legendary  tale  illustrates  a  somewhat similar  idea : — The  assailant,  one  Magat  Terawis,  an unknown  warrior  who  had  joined  the  Sultan's  investing army,  had  four  bullets,  on  each  of  which  were  inscribed the  words :  "This  is  the  son  of  the  concubine  of  the Raja  of  Pagar-ruyong ;  his  name  is  Magat  Terawis ; wherever  his  bullet  falls  he  will  become  a  Chief."
1  Defiance  is  intimated  by  a  war-       or  btrentak  di-atas  kubii).     Cp.  Begbie, dance  on  the  ramparts  (penglima  bersilal       Malayan  Peninsula,  p.  170.
vi  THE  WRIS  525
"  Magat  Terawis  levelled  his  matchlock  and  fired, and  his  bullet  struck  Tan  Saban's  leg.  The  skin  was hardly  broken,  and  the  bullet  fell  to  the  ground  at  the chiefs  feet ;  but,  on  taking  it  up  and  reading  the inscription,  he  knew  that  he  had  received  his  death- wound.  He  retired  to  his  house,  and,  after  ordering his  flag  to  be  hauled  down,  despatched  a  messenger  to the  opposite  camp  to  call  the  warrior  whose  name  he had  read  on  the  bullet.  Inquiries  for  Magat  Terawis were  fruitless  at  first,  for  no  one  knew  the  name.  At length  he  declared  himself,  and  went  across  the  river with  Tan  Saban's  messenger,  who  brought  him  into  the presence  of  the  dying  man.  The  latter  said  to  him, '  Magat  Terawis,  thou  art  my  son  in  this  world  and  the next,  and  my  property  is  thine.  I  likewise  give  thee my  daughter  in  marriage,  and  do  thou  serve  the  Raja faithfully  in  my  place,  and  not  be  rebellious  as  I  have been.'  Tan  Saban  then  sued  for  the  Sultan's  pardon, which  was  granted  to  him,  and  the  marriage  of  his daughter  with  Magat  Terawis  was  permitted  to  take place.  Then  Tan  Saban  died,  and  was  buried  with  all the  honours  due  to  a  Malay  chief."
The  national  and  favourite  weapon  of  the  Malays is  the  Kris?  a  short  dagger  usually  with  an  undulating or  wavy  blade  set  in  a  handle  of  peculiarly  carved pattern,  as  to  the  probable  origin  of  which  some  allu- sion has  already  been  made,3  and  furnished  with  a sheath  which  is  generally  of  wood  and  quite  plain,  but
1  This  legendary  war  of  Tan  Saban  a  When  swearing  fidelity,  alliance,
with  the  second  king  of  Perak  owes  its  etc.,  water  in  which   daggers,   spears
origin   probably   to    mythological   ac-  (Ifmbing),  or  bullets  have  been  dipped
counts  of  the  wars  of  Salivahana  and  is  drunk,  the  drinker  saying,  "  If  I  turn
Vikramaditya,  which    Hindu    settlers,  traitor,    may    I   be   eaten   up  by  this
not    improbably,    brought    to    Malay  dagger"  or  "spear,"  etc.,  as  the  case
countries.     Saban  is  a  natural  corrup-  may  be  (jika  aku  belut,  aku  di-makan
tion  of  Salivahana. — -J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  k'ris  ini  d.s.b.) No.  9,  p.  94.  3   Vide  supra,  p.  4,  note.
526  WAR  AND   WEAPONS  CHAP.
sometimes  of  metal  chased,  hammered,  and  set  with gems  in  the  most  elaborate  and  lavish  style.  The blade  is  quite  different  in  appearance  from  the  steel  or iron  blades  to  which  we  are  accustomed,  being  prepared in  a  peculiar  way  by  a  process  of  "  damasking  "  which produces  a  variety  of  designs  on  the  roughened  sur- face. To  the  shape  of  these  designs  much  importance is  attached,  as  will  appear  from  the  following  passage extracted  from  Newbold's  British  Settlements  in  the Straits  of  Malacca  :—
"  Translation  of  Malayan  MS.  on  K rises  and  Process  of
Damasking
"  FASL  I. — ON  THE  PAMUR,  OR  DAMASKING  OF  KRISES
"If  the  damasking  of  a  kris  only  reach  within  a finger's  breadth  of  the  point,  and  if  it  reach  the  edge, it  is  inauspicious  for  combat.  Should  the  damask  not be  even  with  the  point,  a  stab  made  with  such  a  kris would  err  ;  but  if  even,  then  the  kris  will  never  deviate, although  its  possessor  lose  strength  to  thrust ;  still,  by the  grace  of  God,  it  will  hit  the  mark  should  he  cast  it at  his  adversary.  If  it  be  damasked  on  both  sides,  it is  good  ;  but  not  so  should  the  damask  be  separated  at intervals.
"  If  the  damask  on  the  point  be  that  of  Alif  besar (a  damask  running  in  the  shape  of  the  Arabian  letter Alif},  the  kris  is  good  for  combat ;  but  it  is  not  lucky to  wear  such  a  weapon  while  trading,  nor  one  in  which the  damask  runs  from  the  pangkal  (the  stem  which runs  into  the  handle),  to  the  tali.
"  If  it  possess  the  Alif  damask  near  the  handle, the  middle,  and  point,  it  is  very  auspicious  for  com- mercial transactions  ;  men  cannot  resist  the  force  of  the
vi  LUCKY  WEAPONS  527
possessor's  arguments  ;  should  it  be  worn  whilst  plant- ing, the  crop  will  be  fruitful.  The  possessor  will  be irresistible  in  fight,  nor  can  any  person  thwart  his wishes.
"  If  the^rw  (called  Tuak]  have  the  pamur  kittilang, or  the  bird's-eye  damask,  at  its  point  and  stem,  it  be- comes entitled  to  the  appellation  Manikam1  di  Ujong Gala  (the  ruby  at  the  end  of  the  pole).  The possessor  of  such  a  kris  is  most  lucky.  I  f  the  damask be  that  of  battu  ampar,  and  reach  to  the  ganja  (the lower  part  of  the  blade  immediately  above  the  ikat  tali\ it  ensures  the  safety  of  the  wearer.
"FASL  II. — ON  THE  BLADE  OF  THE  KRIS
"  If  the  blade  of  the  kris  be  split  in  the  direction  of the  tali  tali  (the  silk  and  ratan  appendage  by  which the  kris  is  fastened  in  the  girdle),  you  cannot  return an  adversary's  thrust  with  it.  If  the  betala  be  cracked to  the  ikat  tali  (or  bottom  welt),  it  is  not  auspicious. Should  the  point  of  the  kris  be  split,  it  is  a  sign  that  it requires  blood ;  if  this  want  be  not  gratified,  the possessor  becomes  sick.
"FASL  III. — ON  THE  BADIK,  OR  SENDRIK
"If  the  blade  of  the  badik  be  damasked  all  over to  its  edge,  it  is  lucky  to  wear  while  trading  or  dividing property.  If  the  back  bear  the  damask  Alif,  it  is  also good  for  trading  with,  or  for  combat,  by  God's  assist- ance. If  the  blade  have  the  pamur  gunong,  or mountain  damask,  it  softens  the  hearts  of  men,  and  is good  for  trading  and  warlike  excursions.  If  the  lines
1   In  original,  Manikou.
528  WAR  AND   WEAPONS  CHAP.
of  damask  be  of  equal  breadth  from  the  pangkal  to  the tali,  and  straight,  it  is  auspicious.
"  Should  the  belly  of  the  blade  be  veined,  it  is  lucky to  trade,  and  good  for  making  a  stab  with,  as  the possessor's  antagonist  will  not  be  able  to  return  the thrust.  If  the  damask  be  that  called  pamur  kait  (or the  damask  like  a  hook),  it  is  auspicious.
"Should  the  back  of  the  blade  be  damasked  and streaked,  it  is  good  ;  and  also,  if  it  has  the  pamur belanga  1  in  one  or  two  places  only,  and  on  its  back. If  the  damask  run  waving  from  the  top  to  the  bottom of  the  back,  it  is  very  auspicious.2
"  How  to  damask  krises. — Place  on  the  blade  a mixture  of  boiled  rice,  sulphur,  and  salt  beat  together, first  taking  the  precaution  to  cover  the  edges  of  the weapon  with  a  thin  coat  of  virgin  wax.  After  this  has remained  on  seven  days,  the  damask  will  have  risen  to the  surface ;  take  the  composition  off,  and  immerse the  blade  in  the  water  of  a  young  cocoa-nut,  or  the juice  of  a  pineapple,  for  seven  days  longer,  and  wash it  well  with  the  juice  of  a  sour  lemon.  After  the  rust has  been  cleared  away,  rub  it  with  warangan  (arsenic) dissolved  in  lime  juice  ;  wash  it  well  with  spring  water  ; dry,  and  anoint  it  with  cocoa-nut  oil.
"  FASL  IV. — MEASUREMENT  OF  KRISES
"  Measure  the  kris  with  a  string  below  its  aring  (a jutting  out  of  the  blade  near  its  bottom)  to  its  point  ; cut  the  string  and  fold  it  trebly  ;  cut  off  one  of  the trebles,  and  with  the  remaining  two  measure  up  the
1  In  original,  bclangur.  damask  given  in  a  plate,  which  is  not
2  The  original  text  proceeds  to  give       reproduced  here, an  explanation  of  certain  patterns  of
vi  VARIETIES  OF  THE  K'RIS  529
blade  of  the  kris,  then  make  a  mark  how  far  the  string reaches.  Measure  the  blade  across  at  this  mark,  and find  how  many  times  its  breadth  is  contained  in  two- thirds  of  its  length  ;  cut  the  string  into  as  many  pieces. These  form  the  sloca,  or  measure,  of  which  the  kris consists.  If  none  of  the  string  remain  over,  the  blade  is perfect,  if  a  minute  portion  remain,  it  is  less  perfect,  but  if half  the  breadth  remain,  or  more,  it  is  chelaka,  unlucky."
Newbold  adds  : —
"The  krises  most  preferred  are  those  of  the  kinds termed  Simpana,  Cherita,  and  Sapokal.  The  kris panjang  is  worn  generally  by  the  Malayan  aristocracy and  bridegrooms.  I  have  seen  some  beautiful  speci- mens of  this  weapon  in  Rumbowe,  worn  by  the  chiefs of  that  state.  The  blades  resembled  that  of  a  long, keen  poniard  of  Damascus  steel  ;  the  handles  of ebony,  covered  with  flowered  gold,  and  sheaths  richly ornamented  with  the  same  metal ;  they  are  used  in  the execution  of  criminals.  Malays  do  not  prize  their krises  entirely  by  the  quantity  of  gold  with  which  they may  be  inlaid,  but  more  for  their  accurate  proportions agreeably  to  the  measurement  which  is  laid  down  in their  treatises  on  this  subject ;  the  damask  on  the  blade  ; the  antiquity  and  a  certain  lucky  quality  that  they  may possess  either  from  accurate  proportions,  the  damask, the  having  shed  human  blood,  or  from  supernatural endowment,  like  the  famous  sword  "  Excalibur."  This property  is  termed  betuah,  which  signifies  literally exempt  from  accident,  invulnerable.  The  reverse  is termed  ckelaka,  ill  -  omened.  They  believe  the betuah  in  some  cases  imparts  invulnerability  to  the possessor  of  such  a  kris,  which  is  handed  down  as  an heirloom  from  father  to  son,  and  honoured  as  some- thing divine.  The  kris  is,  as  with  the  Javanese,  an
2  M
530  WAR  AND  WEAPONS  CHAP.
indispensable  article  in  dress  on  particular  occasions, and  there  are  numerous  regulations  regarding  the wearing  of  it.  The  Undang  Undang  Malacca1  con- tains strict  injunctions,  which  are  observed  to  this  day, against  a  person  of  inferior  birth  wearing  a  kris  orna- mented with  gold."2
Besides  the  mode  above  described,  several  other methods  of  measuring  the  Kris  are  also  in  vogue. They  differ  in  various  matters  of  detail,  and  will  be found  in  the  Appendix.
The  measurement  of  one-edged  weapons  is  effected as  follows  :—
Measure  the  length  of  the  weapon  from  hilt  to point,  and  fold  the  string  so  measured  in  two.  Measure off  this  half-length  from  the  hilt  and  see  how  often the  breadth  of  the  blade  is  contained  in  the  whole length  of  the  string.  Each  time,  however,  that  the edge  is  reached,  the  string  must  be  marked  or  dented, and  the  long  end  wrapped  round  and  round  the  blade, so  that  the  measurement  of  each  breadth  is  consecutive  to the  preceding  breadth,  the  portion  of  the  string  which  is stretched  across  the  back  of  the  blade  not  being  counted.
This  method  is  called  ukor  mata  sa-b'lak,  and  is used  by  Sumatran  Malays,  especially  in  Menangkabau.
Spearheads  can  also  be  measured  :—
1  The  Code  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Shah,  Undang,  to  be  compiled,"  but  the  pre-
the  last  Malay  Raja  of  Malacca,  who  ceding  chapter  of  the  same  work  has
was  expelled  by  the  Portuguese  under  a  good  deal  to  say  about  the  laws  of
Alboquerque  in  A.D.  1511.  Sultan  Muhammad  Shah,  and  mentions
This  Code  was  probably  founded  on  that  he  "prohibited  the  ornamenting
earlier  regulations   ascribed  to   Sultan  of  creeses  with  gold,  etc."  See  Leyden,
Muhammad  Shah,  the  first  Muhamma-  op.  cit.,  pp.  94,  118. dan  Raja  of  Malacca,  and  Sultan  Mud-  A  similar  prohibition  occurs  in  sec-
hafar  Shah,  his  son.    Nothing  is  known  tion  i.  of  Sultan  Mahmud's  Code,  of
about  the  laws  of  the  last  named,  ex-  which   a  translation  will   be  found  in
cept    that    (according    to    the    Sejarah  Newbold,  Malacca,  vol.  ii.  pp.  231  seq. Malayu,  chap.  xii. ),  "he  ordered  the  2  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  202-
Book  of  Institutes,  or  Kitab  Undang-  208.      Vide  Chap.  II.  p.  33,  supra.
vi  MEASUREMENT  OF  WEAPONS  531
Measure  off  the  length  of  the  spearhead  and  fold the  string  in  two  ;  see  how  often  the  breadth  is  con- tained in  the  half  of  the  string ;  if  the  blade  is  a  good one,  it  must  be  five  and  a  half  times  (tengah  anam). This  is  called  ukor  orang  Perak  or  ukor  tengah  anam.
Another  superstition  connected  with  weapons  is described  as  follows  by  Sir  Frank  Swettenham.  It illustrates  the  magic  powers  attributed  to  the  Pawang in  so  many  departments  of  nature  and  life,  but  does not  seem  to  have  any  special  object  or  meaning.
"  A  great  many  Malays  and  one  or  two  Europeans may  be  found  who  profess  to  have  seen  water  drawn from  a  kris.  The  modus  operandi  is  simple.  The pdwang  (I  dare  not  call  him  conjurer)  works  with  bare arms  to  show  there  is  no  deception.  He  takes  the kris  (yours,  if  you  prefer  it)  from  its  wooden  handle, and,  holding  the  steel  point  downwards  in  his  left hand,  he  recites  a  short  incantation  to  the  effect  that he  knows  all  about  iron,  and  where  it  comes  from,  and that  it  must  obey  his  orders.  He  then  with  the  thumb and  first  two  fingers  of  his  right  hand  proceeds  to gently  squeeze  the  steel,  moving  his  fingers  up  and down  the  blade.  After  a  little  while  a  few  drops  of water  fall  from  the  point  of  the  kris,  and  these  drops quickly  develop  into  a  stream  that  will  fill  a  cup.  The pdwang  will  then  hand  round  the  blade  and  tell  you  to bend  it ;  this  you  will  find  no  difficulty  in  doing,  but  by making  two  or  three  passes  over  the  kris  the  pdwang can  render  it  again  so  hard  that  it  cannot  be  bent.
"  The  only  drawback  to  this  trick  or  miracle  is  that the  process  ruins  the  temper  of  the  steel,  and  a  kris that  has  been  thus  treated  is  useless."1
The  subject  of  this  section,  more  perhaps  than  any
1  Swettenham,  Malay  Sketches,  pp.  207,  208.
532  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
of  the  others,  has  lost  its  former  importance,  and  be- come almost  a  matter  of  merely  historical  interest.  In the  Malay  Peninsula,  at  least  in  the  States  which  are under  British  protection,  offensive  weapons  are  seldom worn  now-a-days  except  on  State  occasions  and  for purely  ceremonial  purposes ;  and  warfare,  it  may  be hoped,  is  now  a  thing  of  the  past.  In  spite  of  the  halo of  romance  thrown  round  it  in  native  writings,  Malay warfare  (in  modern  times,  at  least)  has  never  been anything  but  the  barest  and  most  bloodthirsty  piracy by  sea,  and  the  merest  "bushwhacking"  and  stockade- fighting  on  land  ;  its  final  suppression,  even  if  in  some degree  it  should  involve  a  slackening  of  fibre  in  the Malay  character,  is  not  a  matter  for  regret.  With  it will  disappear  much  of  the  curious  lore  that  surrounded it,  and  indeed  a  good  deal  of  it  must  have  been  lost already.  Little  has  been  said  here  of  the  methods  of divination  used  in  warfare  which  take  up  so  much space  in  Malay  treatises  on  the  subject ;  success  in war  is  held  to  depend  on  a  great  number  of  minute observances,  and  to  be  capable  of  being  foretold  by careful  attention  to  omens  and  signs.  But  the  divina- tion applied  in  warfare  does  not  seem  to  differ  in  prin- ciple from  that  which  is  used  in  all  the  other  avocations of  life,  and  a  sufficient  idea  of  its  nature  will  be  gathered from  the  account  given  in  the  next  section.
12.    DIVINATION    AND    THE    BLACK   ART
Omens  and  Dreams
The  significance  of  ominous  signs  and  dreams  is  a subject  which  possesses  vast  ramifications,  extending so  deeply  into  every  department  of  the  Malay  national life,  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  do  it  anything  like
vi  OMENS  FROM  ACTIONS  533
full  justice  within  the  narrow  limits  of  this  book.  My object  will  be  merely  to  indicate  the  main  lines  on which  these  two  important  doctrines  of  the  Malay natural  religion  appear  to  have  been  developed.
Briefly,  then,  omens  may  be  drawn  either  from  the acts  of  men  or  the  events  of  nature.  Examples  of  the ominous  import  attributed  to  the  acts  of  man  will  at once  suggest  themselves.  Thus  sneezing  is  said  to  be fortunate  as  tending  to  drive  away  the  demons  of disease ; l  yawning  is  a  bad  sign,  for  obvious  reasons, if  the  breath  is  loudly  emitted,  but  if  a  quiet  yawn occurs  when  the  stomach  is  craving  for  food,  it  imports that  it  will  soon  be  filled.  So  too  stumbling  is  a  bad omen,  especially  if  the  person  who  stumbles  is  about to  set  out  on  a  journey.2  Then,  again,  "to  be  long  in getting  up  after  a  meal  is  said  to  be  a  bad  omen.  It means  that  the  person,  if  unmarried,  will  meet  with  a bad  reception  from  his  or  her  parents-in-law  hereafter. The  Malay  saying  in  the  vernacular  is  '  Lambat bangket  deritampat  makan,  lambat  di-tegur  mentuwak* Clothes  which  have  been  nibbled  by  rats  or  mice must  not  be  worn  again.  They  are  sure  to  bring misfortune,  and  are  generally  given  away  in  charity. .  .  .  When  a  Malay  dinner  is  served,  the  younger members  of  the  family  sometimes  amuse  themselves by  throwing  rice  into  the  pan  from  which  the  curry  has just  been  taken,  stirring  it  round  in  the  gravy  that remains  and  then  eating  it.  This  is  not  permitted when  one  of  them  is  to  be  married  on  the  following
1   Yet  the  act  of  sneezing  is  considered  chicken,   and   the  regular   use  of  the
so  fraught  with   the  risk  of  the  soul's  phrase  "  Al-hamdu  Itllah  "( Praised  be
escaping,  that  not  unfrequently  after  a  God),   after  sneezing  suggests  that  he
severer   sneeze   than    usual,    a    Malay  may  te  relieved  to  find  his  soul  still  in
will  attempt  to  call  his  soul  back  by  his  own  possession,
ejaculating   "Cluck!  Soul  ! "  (kur,  s/-  *  See  J.K.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.   7,  pp.
mangatl)    as    if    he    were    calling   a  19,  20.
534  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
day,  as  it  would  be  sure  to  bring  rainy  weather.  It  is unlucky  for  a  child  to  lie  on  his  face  (menyehrap],  and kick  his  feet  together  in  the  air  (menyabong  kaki}.  It betokens  that  either  his  father  or  mother  will  die. A  child  seen  doing  this  is  instantly  rebuked  and stopped.  .  .  .
"The  evil  eye  is  dreaded  by  Malays.  Not  only are  particular  people  supposed  to  be  possessed  of  a quality  which  causes  ill-luck  to  accompany  their  glance (the  mal  'occhio  of  the  Italians),  but  the  influence  of the  evil  eye  is  often  supposed  to  affect  children,  who are  taken  notice  of  by  people  kindly  disposed  towards them.  For  instance,  it  is  unlucky  to  remark  on  the fatness  and  healthiness  of  a  baby,  and  a  Malay  will employ  some  purely  nonsensical  word,  or  convey  his meaning  in  a  roundabout  form,  rather  than  incur possible  misfortune  by  using  the  actual  word  '  fat.' '  Ai  bukan-nia poh-poh  genial  budak  ini  ?'  ('  Isn't  this child  nice  and  round  ? ')  is  the  sort  of  phrase  which  is permissible."  1
Among  omens  drawn  from  natural  events  are  the following  : —
"  When  a  star  is  seen  in  apparent  proximity  to the  moon,  old  people  say  there  will  be  a  wedding shortly.  .  .  .
"The  entrance  into  a  house  of  an  animal  which does  not  generally  seek  to  share  the  abode  of  man  is regarded  by  the  Malays  as  ominous  of  misfortune.  If a  wild  bird  flies  into  a  house  it  must  be  carefully caught  and  smeared  with  oil,  and  must  then  be  released in  the  open  air,  a  formula  being  recited  in  which  it  is bidden  to  fly  away  with  all  the  ill-luck  and  misfortunes
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  7,  pp.  26-28.       ini,"  "  My  soul !  the  bodyof  the  boy,"or ln.?>Q\2.-ngoif'Kurs/mangat,tul>ohbzidak       some  such  phrase  is  occasionally  used.
vi  OMENS  FROM  NATURAL  EVENTS  535
(sial  jambalang)  of  the  occupier.  An  iguana,  a  tortoise, and  a  snake,  are  perhaps  the  most  dreaded  of  these unnatural  visitors.  They  are  sprinkled  with  ashes,  if possible,  to  counteract  their  evil  influence.
"  A  swarm  of  bees  settling  near  a  house  is  an  un- lucky omen,  and  prognosticates  misfortune."1
So,  too,  omens  are  taken  either  from  the  flight  or cries  of  certain  birds,  such  as  the  night-owl,  the  crow, some  kinds  of  wild  doves,  and  the  bird  called  the "Rice's  Husband"  (laki padi).
Passing  from  the  idea  of  mere  omens  drawn  from fortuitous  events  we  easily  arrive  at  the  idea  of  a  con- scious attempt  on  the  part  of  the  worshipper  to  ascertain the  divine  pleasure  with  respect  to  a  sacrifice  newly offered.  This  effort  of  the  worshippers  becomes crystallised  in  time  into  a  sub-rite,  which  yet  forms an  integral  portion  of  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  more  im- portant ceremonies,2  and  eventually  develops  into  a special  and  separate  rite  called  Tilek  (divination),  of which  examples  will  now  be  given.
One  form  of  this  rite  was  taught  by  a  Malay  of Penang  extraction,  whose  instructions,  taken  down  by me  at  the  time,  ran  as  follows  :—
Take  a  lemon  (limau  purut\  a  hen's  egg,  a  taper made  of  bees'- wax  (lilin  lebati),  four  bananas,  four Malay  (palm  -  leaf  covered)  cigarettes,  four  "  chews  " of  betel-leaf,  a  handful  of  parched  rice,  washed  rice,
1  J.R.A.S.y  S.8.,  No.  7,  p.  27.  ing,    etc.);    (5)    the   sound   of  water
2  Examples  are  : — ( I )  the  burning  of  struck  by  a  canoe  paddle  (vide  Croco- incense. ..  (vide Medicine,  pp.  41  Qseqq.  dile  -  catching)  ;    (6)    the    manner    of and  elsewhere,  passim) ;  (2)  the  inspec-  falling  of  the  filed-off  portion  of  a  tooth, tion  of  the  water  in  the  "  Three  Jars  "  (vide  Adolescence) ;  (7)  the  whisper  of ceremony,  ibid.;  (3)  the  scattering  of  the  sap  in  the  bark  of  a  #4ar»-tree, parched  rice,  ibid.  ;    (4)    the  applica-  when  the  latter  is  struck  by  a  cutlass tion    of    the    "  Rice- Paste"    (ttfong-  (vide  Vegetation  Charms),  and  a  host  of tawar)  ceremony  (vide  Marriage,  Fish-  others.
536  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
and  rice  stained  with  turmeric  (saffron),  one  of  the prickles  or  "  thorns  "  (duri)  of  a  thorn-backed  mudfish, a  needle  with  a  torn  eye  (taken  out  of  one  of  the  sets of  a  "score"  in  which  they  are  sold — jarwn  rabit dalam  sekudi\  and  a  couple  of  small  whips,  or  rather birches,  one  of  which  must  be  composed  of  seven,  and the  other  of  twelve,  leaf-ribs  of  the  "  green  "  cocoa-nut palm  (niyor  hijait].
Two  of  the  bananas,  two  cigarettes,  two  chews  of "betel,"  half  of  each  of  the  three  kinds  of  rice,  the egg,  and  the  birch  of  seven  twigs,  must  now  be  taken outside  the  house  and  set  down  under  a  tree  selected for  the  purpose.  When  setting  it  down  the  egg  must be  cracked,  the  cigarettes  lighted,  and  finally  the  taper also.  On  one  occasion  when  I  witnessed  the  per- formance, the  taper,  after  being  taken  up  between  the outstretched  fingers  of  my  friend's  two  hands,  was waved  slowly  to  and  fro — first  to  the  right  and  then  to the  left ;  finally  it  was  set  down  on  the  ground  and began  to  burn  blue,  the  flame  becoming  more  and more  dim  until  it  almost  expired.  On  seeing  this  the medicine-man  exclaimed,  "He  has  promised"  (dia mengaku],  and  led  the  way  back  to  the  house,  where he  proceeded  to  go  through  the  remainder  of  the ceremony.
First,  he  deposited  the  brazier  with  incense  upon the  leaf  of  a  banana-tree,  then  took  the  prickle  of  the fish  and  thrust  it  horizontally  through  the  lower  end  of the  lemon,  leaving  both  ends  exposed  ;  then  he  thrust the  needle  through  in  a  transverse  direction,  so  as  to form  a  cross,  the  ends  of  the  needle  being  likewise  ex- posed, and  slipped  the  noosed  end  of  a  piece  of  silken thread  of  seven  different  colours  over  the  points  thus exposed.
vi  TILEK  537
Next  he  scattered  the  rice  round  the  censer  and fumigated  the  birch  and  the  lemon,  recited  a  charm as  he  held  the  latter  in  his  right  hand,  recited  the charm  for  the  second  time1  as  he  took  the  birch  in both  hands,  with  the  upper  end  close  to  his  mouth and  the  lower  (spreading)  end  over  the  brazier,  and finally  repeated  the  charm  for  a  third  time,  suspending, as  he  did  so,  the  lemon  over  the  brazier  by  means  of the  thread  held  in  his  left  hand  and  holding  the  birch in  the  right.
Everything  being  ready,  he  now  began  to  put questions  to  the  lemon  into  which  the  spirit  was  sup- posed to  have  entered,  rebuking  it  and  threatening  it with  the  birch  whenever  it  failed  to  answer  distinctly and  to  the  point.  The  conversational  powers  of this  spirit  were  extremely  limited,  being  confined to  two  signs  signifying  "Yes"  and  "No."  The affirmative  was  indicated  by  a  pendulum  -  like swaying  of  the  lemon,  which  rocked  to  and  fro  with more  or  less  vehemence  according  to  the  emphasis (as  my  friend  informed  me)  with  which  the  reply  was to  be  delivered.  Negation,  on  the  other  hand,  was indicated  by  a  complete  cessation  of  motion  on  the part  of  the  lemon.
When  it  is  required  to  discover,  for  instance,  the name  of  a  thief,  the  names  of  all  those  who  are  at  all likely  to  have  committed  the  theft  are  written  on scraps  of  paper  and  arranged  in  a  circle  round  the brazier,  when  the  lemon  will  at  once  swing  in  the direction  of  the  name  of  the  guilty  party.  The  best .  night  for  the  performance  of  this  ceremony  is  a  Tuesday.
1  My  informant  did  not  make  it  or  whether  a  different  charm  was  used plain  whether  the  same  charm  was  re-  in  each  case.  Probably  the  latter peated  on  each  of  these  three  occasions,  would  be  the  more  correct  course.
538  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
Sir  Frank  Swettenham's  account  of  a  similar  cere- mony of  which  he  was  an  eye-witness  will  serve  as  a good  illustration  of  the  methods  in  use  for  this  pur- pose : —
"  It  was  my  misfortune  some  years  ago  to  be robbed  of  some  valuable  property,  and  several  Malay friends  strongly  advised  me  to  take  the  advice  of  an astrologer,  or  other  learned  person  who  (so  they  said) would  be  able  to  give  the  name  of  the  thief,  and  prob- ably recover  most  of  the  stolen  things.  I  fear  that  I had  no  great  faith  in  this  method  of  detection,  but  I was  anxious  to  see  what  could  be  done,  for  the  East  is a  curious  place,  and  no  one  with  an  inquiring  mind  can have  lived  in  it  long  without  seeing  phenomena  that are  not  always  explained  by  modern  text-books  on Natural  Philosophy.
"  I  was  first  introduced  to  an  Arab  of  very  remark- able appearance.  He  was  about  fifty  years  old,  tall, with  pleasant  features  and  extraordinary  gray -blue eyes,  clear  and  far-seeing,  a  man  of  striking  and  im- pressive personality.  I  was  travelling  when  I  met him,  and  tried  to  persuade  him  to  return  with  me,  but that  he  said  he  could  not  do,  though  he  promised  to follow  me  by  an  early  steamer.  He  said  he  would  be able  to  tell  me  all  about  the  robbery,  who  committed it,  where  the  stolen  property  then  was,  and  that  all  he would  want  was  an  empty  house  wherein  he  might fast  in  solitude  for  three  days,  without  which  prepara- tion, he  said,  he  would  not  be  able  to  see  what  he sought.  He  told  me  that  after  his  vigil,  fast,  and prayer,  he  would  lay  in  his  hand  a  small  piece  of  paper on  which  there  would  be  some  writing ;  into  this  he would  pour  a  little  water,  and  in  that  extemporised mirror  he  would  see  a  vision  of  the  whole  transaction.
vi  CLAIRVOYANCE  539
He  declared  that,  after  gazing  intently  into  this  divin- ing-glass,  the  inquirer  first  recognised  the  figure  of  a little  old  man.  That  having  duly  saluted  thisy^,  it was  necessary  to  ask  him  to  conjure  up  the  scene  of the  robbery,  when  all  the  details  would  be  re-enacted in  the  liquid  glass  under  the  eyes  of  the  gazer,  who would  there  and  then  describe  all  that  he  saw.  I  had heard  all  this  before,  only  it  had  been  stated  to  me then  that  the  medium  through  whose  eyes  the  vision could  alone  be  seen  must  be  a  young  child  of  such tender  years  that  it  could  have  never  told  a  lie ! The  Arab,  however,  professed  himself  not  only  able  to conjure  up  the  scene,  but  to  let  me  see  it  for  myself  if I  would  follow  his  directions.  Unfortunately,  my gray-eyed  friend  failed  to  keep  his  promise,  and  I never  met  him  again.
"A  local  Chief,  however,  declared  his  power  to read  the  past  by  this  method,  if  only  he  could  find  the truthful  child.  In  this  he  appeared  to  succeed,  but when,  on  the  following  day,  he  came  to  disclose  to  me the  results  of  his  skill,  he  said  that  a  difficulty  had arisen,  because  just  when  the  child  (a  little  boy)  was beginning  to  relate  what  he  saw  he  suddenly  became unconscious,  and  it  took  the  astrologer  two  hours  to restore  him  to  his  normal  state.  All  the  mothers  of tender-aged  and  possibly  truthful  children  declined  after this  to  lend  their  offspring  for  the  ordeal.
"  My  friend  was  not,  however,  at  the  end  of  his resources,  and,  though  only  an  amateur  in  divination, he  undertook  to  try  by  other  methods  to  find  the culprit.  For  this  purpose  he  asked  me  to  give  him the  names  of  every  one  in  the  house  at  the  time  the robbery  was  committed.  I  did  so,  and  the  next  day he  gave  me  one  of  those  names  as  that  of  the  thief.  I
540  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
asked  how  he  had  arrived  at  this  knowledge ;  he  de- scribed the  method,  and  consented  to  repeat  the  ex- periment in  my  presence.  That  afternoon  I  went  with him  to  a  small  house  belonging  to  his  sister.  Here  I found  the  Chief,  his  sister,  and  two  men  whom  I  did not  recognise.  We  all  sat  in  a  very  small  room,  the Chief  in  the  centre  with  a  copy  of  the  Koran  on  a reading-stand,  near  to  him  the  two  men  opposite  to each  other,  the  sister  against  one  wall,  and  I  in  a corner.  A  clean,  new,  unglazed  earthenware  bowl  with a  wide  rim  was  produced.  This  was  filled  with  water and  a  piece  of  fair  white  cotton  cloth  tied  over  the  top, making  a  surface  like  that  of  a  drum.
"  I  was  asked  to  write  the  name  of  each  person present  in  the  house  when  the  robbery  was  committed on  a  small  piece  of  paper,  and  to  fold  each  paper  up  so that  all  should  be  alike,  and  then  to  place  one  of  the names  on  the  cover  of  the  vessel.  I  did  so,  and  the  pro- ceedings began  by  the  two  men  placing  each  the  middle joint  of  the  fore-finger  of  his  right  hand  under  the  rim of  the  bowl  on  opposite  sides,  and  so  supporting  it about  six  inches  above  the  floor.  The  vessel  being large  and  full  of  water  was  heavy,  and  the  men  sup- ported the  strain  by  resting  their  right  elbows  on  their knees  as  they  sat  cross-legged  on  the  floor  and  face  to face.  It  was  then  that  I  selected  one  of  the  folded papers,  and  placed  it  on  the  cover  of  the  vessel.  The Chief  read  a  page  of  the  Koran,  and  as  nothing happened  he  said  that  was  not  the  name  of  the  guilty person,  and  I  changed  the  paper  for  another.  This occurred  four  times,  but  at  the  fifth  the  reading  had scarcely  commenced  when  the  bowl  began  to  slowly  turn round  from  left  to  right,  the  supporters  letting  their hands  go  round  with  it,  until  it  twisted  itself  out  of
vi  DETECTION  OF  CRIMINALS  541
their  fingers  and  fell  on  the  floor  with  a  considerable bang  and  a  great  spluttering  of  water  through  the  thin cover.  '  That,'  said  the  Chief,  '  is  the  name  of  the thief.'
"It  was  the  name  of  the  person  already  mentioned by  him.
"  I  did  not,  however,  impart  that  piece  of  informa- tion to  the  company,  but  went  on  to  the  end  of  my papers,  nothing  more  happening.
"  I  said  I  should  like  to  try  the  test  again,  and  as the  Chief  at  once  consented  we  began  afresh,  and  this time  I  put  the  name  of  the  suspected  person  on  first, and  once  more  the  vessel  turned  round  and  twisted itself  out  of  the  hands  of  the  holders  till  it  fell  on  the floor,  and  I  was  surprised  it  did  not  break.  After  try- ing a  few  more  I  said  I  was  satisfied,  and  the  ordeal of  the  bowl  was  over.  Then  the  Chief  asked  me whose  name  had  been  on  the  vessel  when  it  moved, and  I  told  him.  It  was  a  curious  coincidence  certainly. I  wrote  the  names  in  English,  which  no  one  could read  ;  moreover,  I  was  so  placed  that  no  one  could  see what  I  wrote,  and  they  none  of  them  attempted  to  do so.  Then  the  papers  were  folded  up  so  as  to  be  all exactly  alike ;  they  were  shuffled  together,  and  I  did not  know  one  from  the  other  till  I  looked  inside  my- self. Each  time  I  went  from  my  corner  and  placed  a name  on  the  vessel  already  held  on  the  fingers  of  its supporters.  No  one  except  I  touched  the  papers,  and no  one  but  the  Chief  ever  spoke  till  the  stance  was over.  I  asked  the  men  who  held  the  bowl  why  they made  it  turn  round  at  that  particular  moment,  but  they declared  they  had  nothing  to  do  with  it,  and  that  the vessel  twisted  itself  off  their  fingers  against  their  in- clination.
542  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
"The  name  disclosed  by  this  experiment  was certainly  that  of  the  person  whom  there  was  most reason  to  suspect,  but  beyond  that  I  learnt  nothing.
"  Another  plan  for  surprising  the  secret  of  the  sus- pected person  is  to  get  into  the  room  where  that  person is  sleeping,  and  after  making  certain  passes  to  question the  slumberer,  when  he  may  truthfully  answer  all  the questions  put  to  him.  This  is  a  favourite  device  of the  suspicious  husband.
"Yet  another  plan  is  to  place  in  the  hand  of  a pdwang,  magician,  or  medium,  a  divining-rod  formed  of three  lengths  of  rattan,  tied  together  at  one  end,  and when  he  gets  close  to  the  person  'wanted,'  or  to  the place  where  anything  stolen  is  concealed,  the  rod vibrates  in  a  remarkable  manner."1
A  somewhat  analogous  practice  is  the  ordeal  by diving,  described  by  the  late  Sir  W.  E.  Maxwell  as  "a method  of  deciding  a  disputed  point  which  was  occa- sionally resorted  to  in  Perak  in  former  times.  I  got the  following  account  of  the  manner  of  conducting  the ordeal  from  a  Malay  chief  who  saw  it  carried  out  once at  Tanjong  Sanendang  near  Pasir  Sala,  in  the  reign of  Sultan  Abdullah  Mohamed  Shah,  father  of  the present  Raja  Muda  Yusuf : —
"  The  ordeal  by  diving  requires  the  sanction  of  the Sultan  himself,  and  must  be  conducted  in  the  presence of  the  Orang  Besar  Ampat,  or  Four  Chiefs  of  the  first rank.  If  two  disputants  in  an  important  question agree  to  settle  their  difference  in  this  way  they  apply to  the  Raja,  who  fixes  a  day  (usually  three  days  off)  for the  purpose,  and  orders  that  a  certain  sum  of  money shall  abide  the  event.  This  appointment  of  time  and place  is  the  first  stage  in  the  proceedings,  and  is  called
1  Swettenham,  Malay  Sketches,  pp.  201-207.
vi  ORDEAL  BY  DIVING  543
bertepat  janji,  and  the  laying  of  the  bet  or  deposit  of stakes  is  called  bertiban  taroh.  On  the  day  appointed the  parties  attend  with  their  friends  at  the  Raja's  balei? and  there,  in  the  presence  of  the  Court,  a  krani'2  writes down  a  solemn  declaration  for  each  person,  each  main- taining the  truth  of  his  side  of  the  question.  The  first, invoking  the  name  of  God,  the  intercession  of  the Prophet,  and  the  tombs  of  the  deceased  Sultans  of  the country,  asserts  the  affirmative  proposition,  and  his adversary  with  the  same  solemnity  records  his  denial. This  is  called  bertangkap  mangmang  or  '  taking  up  the challenge.'  Each  paper  is  then  carefully  rolled  up  by the  krani,  and  is  placed  by  him  in  a  separate  bamboo tube ;  the  ends  of  both  are  then  sealed  up.  When thus  prepared  the  bamboo  tubes  are  exactly  alike,  and no  one,  not  even  the  krani,  can  tell  which  contains  the assertion  and  which  the  denial.  Two  boys  are  then selected  ;  one  of  the  bamboos  is  given  to  each,  and they  are  led  down  to  the  river,  where  the  Raja  and Chiefs  take  up  their  station,  and  the  people  flock  down in  crowds.  Two  stakes  have  been  driven  into  the  bed of  the  river  in  a  pool  previously  selected,  and  the  boys are  placed  beside  them,  up  to  their  necks  in  water.  A pole  is  placed  horizontally  on  their  heads,  and  on  a given  signal  this  is  pressed  downwards,  and  the  boys are  made  to  sink  at  the  same  moment.  Each  holds on  to  his  post  under  water  and  remains  below  as  long as  he  can.  As  soon  as  one  gives  in  and  appears above  water  his  bamboo  tube  is  snatched  from  him and  hurled  far  out  into  the  stream.  The  victor  is  led up  in  triumph  to  the  balei,  and  the  crowd  surges  up  to hear  the  result.  His  bamboo  is  then  opened  and  the winner  declared.
1  Hall.  J  Clerk.
544  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
"  The  Perak  Malays  believe  this  to  be  an  infallible test  of  the  truth  of  a  cause.  The  boy  who  holds  the false  declaration  is  half-drowned,  they  say,  as  soon  as his  head  is  under  the  water,  whereas  the  champion of  the  truth  is  able  to  remain  below  until  the  by- standers drag  the  post  out  of  the  river  with  the  boy still  clinging  to  it.  Such  is  the  power  of  the  truth backed  by  the  sacred  names  and  persons  invoked !
"  The  loser  is  often  fined  in  addition  to  suffering the  loss  of  his  stakes  (one-half  of  which  goes  to  the Raja).  He  also  has  to  pay  the  customary  fees,  namely, $6.25  for  the  use  of  the  balei,  $12.50  to  the  krani,  and $  S  to  each  of  the  boys.
"  \j  *
"This  ordeal  is  not  peculiar  to  Perak.  I  find  a short  description  of  a  similar  custom  in  Pegu  in Hamilton's  New  Accounts  of  the  East  Indies  (1727). In  Pegu,  he  says,  the  ordeal  by  water  is  managed  '  by driving  a  stake  of  wood  into  a  river  and  making  the accuser  and  accused  take  hold  of  the  stake  and  keep their  heads  and  bodies  under  water,  and  he  who  stays longest  under  water  is  the  person  to  be  credited.' " 1
But  by  far  the  largest  class  of  divinatory  rites  con- sists of  astrological  calculations  based  on  the  supposed values  of  times  and  seasons,  or  the  properties  of numbers.  For  the  purposes  of  the  native  astrologer, exhaustive  tables  of  lucky  and  unlucky  times  and seasons  have  been  compiled,  which  are  too  long  to  be all  examined  here  in  detail,  but  of  which  specimens will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.  Few  of  them  are likely  to  be  original  productions,  most,  if  not  all,  being undoubtedly  translated  from  similar  books  in  vogue
1  /.  R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  3,  pp.  30,  31.  mentioned  in  the  old  Johor  Code  of Ordeals  by  immersion  of  the  hands  in  Laws.  Vide  Crawford,  Diet,  of  Ind* boiling  oil  or  molten  tin  are  also  Isl.,  s.v.  Ordeal.
.(.'.
-  ,    *     :    ..•
'  -*'•'"
'  f  \
II
•  2  I •o  -c u  rt
VI
LUCKY  AND  UNLUCKY  TIMES
545
either  in  India  or  Arabia.  Besides  these  tables,  how- ever, use  is  frequently  made  of  geometrical  (and  even of  natural)  diagrams,  to  the  more  important  parts  of which  certain  numerical  values  are  assigned.1
Perhaps  the  oldest  and  best  known  of  the  systems of  lucky  and  unlucky  times  is  the  one  called  Katika 2 Lima,  or  the  Five  Times.  Under  it  the  day  is  divided into  five  parts,  and  five  days  form  a  cycle 8 :  to  each  of these  divisions  is  assigned  a  name,  the  names  being Maswara  (Maheswara),  Kala,  S'ri,  Brahma,  and  Bisnu (Vishnu),  which  recur  in  the  order  shown  in  the  follow- ing table  or  diagram  : —
Morning.     Forenoon.  Noon.         Afternoon.  Evening.
(pagf)     (tengah naiK)
(ist  day)  Maswara     Kala (and  day)      Bisnu    Maswara
(3rd  day)  Brahma     Bisnu (4th  day)         S'ri       Brahma (5th  day)        Kala         S'ri
These  names  are  the  names  of  Hindu  divinities,
(tengah hart)
(tengah tururi)
(petang)
S'ri
Brahma
Bisnu
Kala
S'ri
Brahma
Maswara
Kala
S'ri
Bisnu
Maswara
Kala
Brahma
Bisnu
Maswara
1  A  number  of  these  diagrams,  all of  which  are  in  the  author's  possession, are  shown  in  the  illustrations  to  this section.     They  seem  to  be  closely  con- nected   with   the   system    of    ' '  magic squares,"  which  has  probably  come  to Europe  from  the  East.
2  Or  Kutika.
3  "  The  original  Javanese  week,  like that  of  the  Mexicans,  consists  of  five days,  and  its  principal  use,  like  that  of the  same  people,  is  to  determine  the markets  or  fairs  held  in  the  principal villages  or    districts.       This   arbitrary period  has  probably  no  better  founda- tion than  the  relation  of  the  numbers to  that  of  the  fingers  of  the  hand.     The names  of  the  days  of  this  week  are  as follows  : — Ldggi,  Pahing,  Pan,  Wagi, Kliwon.  .  .  .  The  Javanese  consider  the
names  of  the  days  of  their  native  week to  have  a  mystical  relation  to  colours, and  to  the  divisions  of  the  horizon.
"  According  to  this  whimsical  inter- pretation, the  first  means  -white,  and  the east ;  the  second,  red,  and  the  smith; the  third,  yellow,  and  the  west ;  the fourth  black  and  the  north  ;  the  fifth, mixed  colour,  and  focus,  or  centre.  It is  highly  probable  that,  like  the  week of  the  continental  nations  of  Asia  and Europe,  the  days  were  named  after  the national  gods.  In  an  ancient  manu- script found  in  Java,  which  will  be afterwards  referred  to,  the  week  of  five days  is  represented  by  five  human figures,  two  of  which  are  female  and three  male." — Crawfurd,  Hist,  of  the Indian  Archipelago,  vol.  i.  pp.  289, 290.
2   N
546  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
Maheswara  being  Shiva,  and  constituting  with  Brahma and  Vishnu  the  so-called  Hindu  Trinity,  while  Kala  is either  another  title  of  Shiva,  or  stands  for  Kali,  his wife,  and  S'ri  is  a  general  title  of  all  Hindu  gods1; but  it  may  be  doubted  whether  this  division  of  time is  not  of  Javanese  or  Malayan  origin,  although  the importance  of  the  number  five  is  also  recognised  by  the Hindus.2
The  same  mystic  notions  of  colour  and  the  like are  attached  to  these  divisions  by  the  Malays  as obtain  in  the  case  of  the  Javanese  days  of  the  week  : thus  Maheswara's  colour  is  yellow  -  white  (putek kumng] :  if  you  go  out  you  will  meet  a  man  of  yellow- white  complexion,  or  wearing  yellow-white  clothes ;  it is  a  lucky  time  for  asking  a  boon  from  a  Raja,  or  for doing  any  kind  of  work  ;  good  news  then  received  is true,  bad  news  is  false,  and  so  on.
Kala's  colour  is  a  reddish  black  (hitam  merah 3) ;  if you  go  out  you  will  meet  a  bad  man  or  have  a  quarrel ; it  is  an  unlucky  time  altogether  :  the  good  news  one hears  turns  out  untrue,  and  the  bad  true ;  illness occurring  at  this  time  is  due  to  a  ghost  (hantu  orang), and  the  remedy  is  a  black  fowl ;  in  cock-fighting  a black  cock  will  beat  a  white  one  at  this  time,  but  when setting  him  to  fight  you  must  not  face  towards  the west,  etc.
1  Communicated  by  Sir  George  Bird-  invocations  connected  with  rice-plant- wood  of  the  India  Office.  ing  ;  vide  p.  89,  siipra,  and  App.  cix.
But  in  Bali  S'ri  is  the  wife  of  Vishnu,  a  Cf.  such  words  in  Malay  as  pancha-
or  more  usually  of  Shiva.     "  As  goddess  warnaorpancharona(\\\..  of  five  colours),
of  the  rice-fields  she  is  called  S'ri  .   .   .  panchalogam  (lit.  of  five  metals),  which
and  has  temples  on  the  sawahs  [rice-  are  of  Indian  origin,  with  the  Indian
fields],    and    on    the    roads    between  pancharangi,  panchatantra,  etc. them." — Misc.  Papers  relating  to  Indo-  3  Or  does  this  mean  "black  or  red"  ?
China,  etc.,   Second  Series,  vol.  ii.  p.  But  red  is   Brahma's  colour,   and   for
105.  Kala  one  would  a  priori  expect  black
She  is  frequently  mentioned  in  Malay  to  be  appropriate.
VI
KAT1KA  LIMA
547
Similarly  S'ri's  colour  is  white,  Brahma's  is  red, Vishnu's  is  green,  and  each  division  has  its  respective advantages  or  disadvantages.1
Another  version  of  this  system,  known  as  the  Five Moments  (sa'af),  is  based  on  a  somewhat  similar diagram,  but  has  orthodox  Muhammadan  names  for its  divisions,  viz.  Ahmad,  Jibra'il  (Gabriel),  Ibrahim (Abraham),  Yusuf  (Joseph),  and  'Azra'il  (Azrael).
Its  diagram,  as  will  be  seen,  is  not  quite  the  same as  that  of  the  Katika  Lima,  though  the  general  scheme of  the  two  systems  corresponds  closely.
Sunrise.
Forenoon.
Noon.
Afternoon.
Sunset.
(Vluar  mata
(fhtgah
(tPngah
(tfngah
(•waktu
hart)
naik)
Aari)
turun)
maghrib)
(ist  day)
Ahmad
Jibra'il
Ibrahim
Yusuf
'Azra'il
(2nd  day)
Jibra'il
Ibraham
Yusuf
'Azra'il
Ahmad
(3rd  day)
Ibrahim
Yusuf
'Azra'il
Ahmad
Jibra'il
(4th  day)
Yusuf
'Azra'il
Ahmad
Jibra'il
Ibrahim
(5th  day)
'Azra'il
Ahmad
Jibra'il
Ibrahim
Yusuf2
So  in  Ahmad's  division  if  you  lose  a  buffalo  or  a bullock,  it  has  gone  to  the  southward  and  will  be  re- covered ;  good  news  then  received  is  true,  bad  news is  false ;  the  time  is  auspicious  for  any  kind  of  work, for  going  on  a  voyage,  sailing,  or  planting,  and  very profitable  for  trading ;  it  is  a  lucky  time  for  going  to war,  but  you  must  wear  white  clothes  and  face  south- wards by  a  little  east,  and  pray  to  God  Almighty. Jibra'il's  time  is  fairly  lucky  too,  being  good  for planting  and  profitable  for  trading,  and  if  gold  or silver  is  lost  then,  it  will  be  quickly  found,  but  there may  be  some  trouble  in  getting  it  back  ;  a  lost  buffalo
1  See  App.   ccxliii.    for   an   extract from  a  treatise  on  these  subjects.
2  Both  this  table  and   that  of  the A'atika  Lima  have  been  reversed   in
translating  from  the  originals,  which, being  in  the  Arabic  character,  run  from right  to  left.
548  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
or  bullock  has  gone  southwards,  but  will  be  recovered after  some  slight  trouble  ;  if  you  go  to  war  at  this time  you  must  wear  green,  but  must  not  face  towards the  south.  Ibrahim's  time  is  most  unlucky,  and  going out  then  is  sure  to  involve  bloodshed  or  other  misfor- tune ;  bad  news  is  true,  good  is  false  ;  things  lost  then will  not  be  recovered ;  going  to  war  is  ruinous,  and  if you  do  go,  the  only  way  of  safety  is  to  face  to  the north,  but  it  is  best  to  stay  at  home  altogether  at  this time.
Yusuf 's  time  is  lucky  in  some  respects,  but  unlucky in  others  ;  in  warfare  one  must  face  towards  the  west, and  wear  yellow.  'Azra'il's  time  is  most  unlucky  ;  to go  to  war  then  is  most  disastrous  ;  any  business  pend- ing at  this  ill-omened  time  should  be  postponed  to  a more  favourable  occasion.1
Besides  these  two  there  is  a  system  in  which  each of  the  seven  days  of  the  ordinary  week  is  divided  into five  parts,  each  of  which  is  characterised  by  one  of  the words  ampa,  bangkei,  rezki,  and  aral  (for  'aradl),  sym- bolical apparently  of  No  Success,  Death,  Success,  and Unforeseen  Obstacle.2
Another  scheme  (Katika  Tujok],  based  on  the Seven  Heavenly  Bodies,  divides  each  day  into  seven parts,  each  of  which  is  distinguished  by  the  Arabic name  of  one  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies.
The  first  day  runs, —
(i)  Shams
(2)  Zuhrah
(3)  'Utarid
(4)  Kamar
Sun
Venus
Mercury
Moon
(5)  Zuhal
(6)  Mushtari
and
(7)  Mirrikh
Saturn
Jupiter
Mars
and  the  times  are — early  morning  (pagi-pagi),  morning
1  See  App.  ccxliv.  for  an  extract  from  a  short  treatise  on  this  subject. u2  The  table  is  given  in  App.  ccxlv.
vi  KATIKA  TUJOH  549
(tVngah  naik],  just  before  noon  (hampir  tfngah  hart), noon  (tZngah  hari),  afternoon  (dlohr),  late  afternoon ('asr),  and  sunset  (magkrib).
For  the  second  day  the  series  begins  with  the Moon,  and  goes  on  in  the  above  order  to  Mercury ; and  for  the  third  day  it  begins  with  Mars  ;  so  that each  day  of  the  week  begins  with  its  appropriate planet  in  the  usual  order,  which  is  best  seen  in  the French  names  Mardi,  Mercredi,  Jeudi,  Vendredi,  and the  English  Saturday,  Sunday  and  Monday.
Each  of  the  seven  divisions  has  its  lucky  or  unlucky characteristics,  much  as  in  the  systems  already  de- scribed.
Besides  these,  each  day  of  the  week  has  its  own appropriate  occupations,  according  to  another  system, at  times  ascertained  by  measuring  the  length  of  one's shadow.  Further,  it  would  appear  that  some  days are  unlucky  altogether :  one  account  gives  seven  un- lucky days  in  every  month ;  another  asserts  that  Thurs- day is  unlucky  in  the  months  Dhu-'l-hijjah,  Muharram, and  Safar ;  Tuesday  in  Rabi'-al-awal,  Rabi'-al-akhir, and  Jumada-'l-awal ;  Saturday  in  Jumada-'l-akhir, Rejab  and  Sha'ban ;  Sunday  in  Ramadhan,  Shawal, and  Dhu-'l-ka'idah ;  a  third  specifies  twelve  other most  inauspicious  days  in  every  year,  viz.  the  28th  of Muharram,  the  loth  of  Safar,  the  J4th  of  Rabi'-al-awal, and  so  on,  while  for  greater  convenience  a  calendar has  been  drawn  up,  which  is  far  too  long  to  be  repro- duced here,  but  which  closely  resembles  the  weather chart  illustrated  on  another  page,  and  gives  the  whole list  of  days  of  the  Muhammadan  year  classified  under the  heads  lucky  (baik],  somewhat  unlucky,  very  un- lucky, and  neutral.
Besides  this,   whole  years  are   lucky  or  unlucky
550  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
according  as  the  first  of  Muharram  falls  on  a  Sunday, Monday,  etc.  ;  and,  moreover,  years  vary  in  luck  accord- ing to  the  letter  they  bear  in  the  Cycle  of  Eight.1
Most  of  these  systems  of  divination  involve  the construction  of  a  sort  of  calendar,  and  require  some degree  of  astronomical  knowledge ;  but  of  astronomy properly  so-called  the  Malays  have  scarcely  even  a smattering,  its  place  being  taken  by  the,  to  them, far  more  important  science  of  astrology.  "  Their meagre  ideas  regarding  the  motions  of  the  heavenly bodies  are  derived,  through  the  Arabs,  from  the Ptolemaic  system."
The  seven  Heavenly  Bodies  (Bintang  Tujok], mentioned  above,  whose  motions  they  believe  to  be produced  by  the  agency  of  angels,3  retain  their  Arabic names,4  and  are  believed  to  rule  the  "  seven  ominous moments "  (Katika  Tujok\  which  are  supposed  to depend  on  the  influences  of  these  several  sidereal bodies.5
The  signs  of  the  Zodiac  similarly  bear  Arabic  ap- pellations, the  form  of  divination  in  which  they  bear the  principal  part  being  called  the  Twelve  Constella- tions (Bintang  Dua-Ulas\*
This  form  of  divination  is  not  quite  so  common as  are  those  of  the  Five  Ominous  Times  (5-square)  and the  Seven  Heavenly  Bodies  (/-square),  and  I  have not  been  able  to  find  out  much  about  the  methods  of working  it,  but  a  copy  of  one  of  the  diagrams  used for  the  purpose  will  be  found  on  another  page.
1  Vide  p.  554,  infra.  and    Bintang    Bali ;    vide   Kl.,    s.v.
2  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  354.  Bintang.
3  Ibid.  p.  358.  5  Maxwell  in  /.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  7,
4  The  names  are  given  supra.    Katib  p.  2 1 .
is  another  name  for  Mercury,  and  Venus  6  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  355. is  sometimes  known  as  Bintang  Kajura
vi  BINTANG  DUA-B'LAS  55'
According  to  one  view,  which  is  perhaps  the prevalent  one,  every  man's  luck  is  determined  by  one or  other  of  the  zodiacal  constellations,  and  in  order to  find  out  which  one  it  is,  the  following  direction  is given  : —
"  Reckon  the  numerical  equivalent  of  the  person's name  and  of  the  name  of  his  mother  by  the  values  of the  letters  according  to  the  system  of  the  Abjad ;  add the  two  numerical  equivalents  together,  and  divide the  total  by  twelve;  if  the  remainder  is  i,  his  sign  is the  Ram,  if  2,  the  Bull,  and  so  on."
Each  constellation  has  a  series  of  characteristics which  are  supposed  to  influence  the  whole  life  of  the person  who  is  subject  to  it.1
Besides  the  above,  a  few  of  the  other  constellations are  known  to  possess  Malay  names,  and  wherever  this is  the  case,  the  name  given  appears  usually  to  be quite  original,  having  no  connection  with  the  nomen- clature obtaining  among  nations  with  which  we  are more  familiar.2
In  addition  to  the  above,  the  Malays  possess  a curious  system  by  which  the  lunar  month  is  divided into  a  number  of  parts  called  Rejang.  According  to Newbold,  "the  twenty-eight  Rejangs  resemble  the  Nac- shatras  or  lunar  mansions  of  the  Hindoos,  rather  than
1  There  is  a  treatise  on  the  Bintang  Spring-gun,  or  rather  Spring-spear- Dua-VIast  too  long  to  give  in  full,  of           trap  (also  called  by  its  Arabic  name which  a  short  extract  will  be  found  in           al-jubar),  Orion.
App.  ccliv.  Bintang  Bidok,  or  Bintang  Jong,  the
2  The  following  names  of  constella-           Great  Bear  (lit.  the  Boat  or  Junk), tions  are  taken  from  Klinkert,  s.v.  Bin-           Others   bear   more  familiar  names, tang  and  elsewhere  :  e~  .  
'Bintang'  Mayang,  the  Virgin  (lit.   the  Bintang  Utara  or  Kotub  (?),  the  Pole- Spathe  of  Palm-blossom).  Star  (lit.  North  Star).
Bintang  Part,  the  Southern  Cross  (lit.  Bintang  Kalat  the  Scorpion.
the  Skate  or  Sting-ray).  Whilst  Bintang  Alnasj  (Alnash)  is  the
Bintang  B lantek  (C.  and  S.)  i.e.  the  "Wain."
552  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
the  Anwa  of  the  Arabs  "  ; l  and  it  is  a  priori  very  prob- able that  they  owe  their  origin  to  this  Hindu  system. But  by  the  Malays  their  application  has  been  generally misunderstood,  and  their  number  is  usually  raised  to thirty  so  as  to  fit  the  days  of  the  lunar  month.  Each of  these  divisions  has  its  symbol,  which  is  usually  an animal,  and  the  first  animal  in  the  list  is  (in  almost  all versions)  the  horse.  A  horse's  head  is  also  the  figure of  the  first  of  the  Hindu  Nakshatras,  but  there  seems to  be  little  trace  of  identity  in  the  remaining  figures, which  for  the  sake  of  comparison  are  given,  side  by side  with  the  Malay  symbols,  in  the  Appendix.  The Malays  have  embodied  this  system  in  a  series  of mnemonic  verses  (known  as  Sha'ir  Rejang],  of  which there  are  several  versions,  e.g.  the  Rejang  of  'Che Busu,  the  Rejang  Sindiran  Maiat,  and  others.2
The  Rejangs  are  also  dealt  with  at  length  in  prose treatises :  one  of  these,  which  identifies  the  Rejangs with  the  days  of  the  lunar  month,  begins  "  on  the first  day  of  the  month,  whose  rejang  is  a  horse,  God Almighty  created  the  prophet  Adam  ;  this  day  is  good for  planting,  travelling,  and  sailing,  and  trading  on this  day  will  be  profitable ;  it  is  also  a  good  day  for  a wedding,  and  on  this  day  it  is  lucky  to  be  attacked  (i.e. in  war),  but  rather  unlucky  to  take  the  offensive ;  .  .  . good  news  received  (at  this  time)  is  true,  bad  news  is false ;  property  lost  (on  this  day)  will  soon  be  re- covered ;  the  man  who  stole  it  is  short  of  stature, with  scanty  hair,  a  round  face,  a  slender  figure  and  a yellow  complexion ;  the  property  has  been  placed  in a  house,  .  .  .  under  the  care  of  a  dark  man  ;  ...  if  a
1  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  355.   Cf.  lished  at  Singapore,  and  for  an  extract Colebrooke's  Life  and  Essays,  vol.  iii.  from  the  RPjang  of  'Che  Busu,   the p.  284.  reader  is  referred  to  the  Appendix.
2  A  Shamir  Rejang  has  been  pub-
VI
RfyANG  553
child  is  born  on  this  day  it  will  be  extremely  fortunate ; if  one  is  ill  on  this  day,  one  will  quickly  recover ;  the proper  remedy  for  driving  away  the  evil  (tolak  bala), is  to  make  a  representation  of  a  horse  and  throw  it away  towards  the  (East?)"1  In  other  respects  this system  of  divination  seems  to  agree  in  its  main features  with  those  which  have  already  been described.
Having  mentioned  the  divisions  of  the  calendar which  are  chiefly  used  in  divination,  it  seems  desirable, for  the  sake  of  completeness,  to  allude  briefly  to  those that  remain.
"  The  better  informed  Malays  acknowledge  the solar  year  of  365  days,  which  they  term  the  toun (tahun)  shemsiah,  but  in  obedience  to  their  Moham- medan instructors,  adopt  the  lunar  year  (toun  kum- riah)  of  354  days."'
This  remark  is  still  true,  no  doubt,  of  the  up-country Malays  on  the  West  Coast,  but  in  most  districts, and  to  an  extent  commensurate  with  European influence,  the  solar  year  is  now  being  gradually  intro- duced.
The  same  remark  applies  to  the  method  of  reckon- ing months,  a  dual  system  being  now  in  vogue  in many  places  where  there  is  most  contact  with  Euro- peans. Regarding  the  native  methods  the  following quotation  is  to  the  point : —
"  There  are  three  ways  of  reckoning  the  months. First,  the  Arabian,  computing  thirty  days  to  the  first
1  The  MS.  here  and  in  the  blanks  to  be  thrown   away  of  course   corre-
above  is   defective  or  illegible.      But  spends  with  the  symbol  of  the  particular
the  prescriptions  for  the  other  days  show  day.
that  the  image  is  to  be  thrown  either  2  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  356,
in  some  definite  direction  or  into  the  357. jungle,  simply  ;  on  each  day  the  thing
554  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
month,  and  twenty-nine  to  the  second  month,  and  so on  alternately  to  the  end  of  the  year.
"  Second,  the  Persian  mode,  viz.  thirty  days  to  each month  ;  and,  thirdly,  that  of  Rum,  i.e.  thirty-one  days to  the  month.  The  first  is  in  general  use.  Some  few, with  greater  accuracy,  calculate  their  year  at  354  days eight  hours,  intercalating  every  three  years  twenty-four hours,  or  one  day  to  make  up  the  deficiency,  and  thirty- three  days  for  the  difference  between  the  solar  and lunar  years.
"  But  the  majority  of  the  lower  classes  estimate  their year  by  the  fruit  seasons  and  by  their  crops  of  rice only.  Many,  however,  obstinately  adhere  to  the  lunar months,  and  plant  their  paddy  at  the  annual  return  of the  lunar  month."
"  The  Malay  months  have  been  divided  into  weeks of  seven  days,  marked  by  the  return  of  the  Moham- medan Sabbath.  Natives  who  have  had  intercourse with  Europeans  divide  the  day  and  night  into  twenty- four  parts,  but  the  majority  measure  the  day  by  the sun's  apparent  progress  through  the  heavens,  the  crow of  the  cock,  etc.  The  religious  day  commences  at sunset,  like  that  of  the  Arabs  and  Hebrews."
"There  are  two  cycles  borrowed  from  the  Arabs, and  known  only  to  a  few,  viz.  one  of  120  years, the  dour1  besar,  and  the  other  of  eight,  dour  kechil. The  latter  is  sometimes  seen  in  dates  of  letters,  and resembles  the  mode  adopted  by  us  of  distinguishing  by letters  the  different  days  of  the  week,  substituting  eight years  for  the  seven  days.  The  order  of  the  letters  is as  follows :  Alif-ha-jim-za-dal-ba-wau-dal-Ahajazdabu- da.  The  present  year  (1251)  is  the  year  Toun-za.
"  In  a  Malay  MS.  history  of  Patani,  in  my  possession,
1  Qu.  da/war?
I
7f
\*T'>:::x:v   •  \  •  \  •  \ /•."•::  -  vW    \  •  v  •  > «
.  x  ?  x   *    Jt  *^  x         ^v.
•  •  v*\  \^s  \        *  K  ,  v  -         v*  BK.
:•:  •  \  •  \  -V    \ » «^»  \ .     WMS
•  X!  !/!>•*!•    «\-\*:>   Eki
VI
MAGIC  SQUARES
555
I  find  the  Siamese  mode  of  designating  the  different years  of  the  cycle  by  the  names  of  animals  adopted."
Most  if  not  all  these  systems  of  reckoning  seem  to have  been  treated  by  the  Malays  from  the  astrological point  of  view  as  forming  a  basis  for  divination,  and these  crude  notions  of  the  lucky  or  unlucky  nature  of certain  times  and  seasons  are  to  some  extent  systemat- ised  by  or  in  some  degree  mixed  up  with  the  idea  of the  mystic  influence  of  numbers  and  geometrical figures.
Of  the  mystic  figures  used  in  divination,  the  first  in importance  is,  no  doubt,  what  has  been  called  the "magic  square,"  a  term  applied  to  "a  set  of  numbers arranged  in  a  square  in  such  a  manner  that  the  vertical, horizontal,  and  diagonal  columns  shall  give  the  same sums."
The  ordinary  form  of  magic  square,  which  was  for- merly in  use  in  Europe,  is  the  following ;  it  is  occa- sionally found  even  among  the  Malays.
Magic  Square
Magic  Square  of  5.
Magic  Square  of  7.
8
i
6
3
5
7
4
9
2
17
24
i
8
15
^
5
7
H
16
4
6
13
20
22
10
12
19
21
3
II
18
25
2
9
30
39
48
i
10
19
28
38
47
7
9
18
27
29
46
6
8
17
26
35
37
5
H
16
25
34
36
45
13
15
24
33
42
44
4
21 22
23
32
4i
43
3
12
3i
40
49
2
II
2O
But  the  form  of  magic  square  generally  used  by the  Malays  is  the  same  figure  reversed.
1  Newbold,  loc.  cit.
556
DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART
CHAP.
Magic  Square
Magic  Square  of  5.'
Magic  Square
IS
8
I
24
17
16
H
7
5
23
22
20
13
6
4
3
21
19
12
10
9
2
25
18
ii
28
19
10
I
48
39
30
29
27
18
9
7
47
38
37
35
26
17
8
6
14 15
46 5 i3
45
36
34
25
16
4
44
42
33
24
12
3
43
4i
32
23
21
20
ii
2
49
40
31
22
The  ordinary  Malay  astrologer  most  likely  under- stands very  little  of  the  peculiar  properties  of  a  magic square,  and  consequently  he  not  unfrequently  makes mistakes  in  the  arrangement  of  the  figures.  I  believe, also,  that  in  using  the  squares  for  purposes  of  divination he  now  usually  begins  at  one  corner  and  counts  straight on,  the  beginning  place  being  almost  always  distin- guished by  a  small  solitary  crescent  or  crescent  and star  just  over  the  square.2  When  coloured  squares are  introduced,  as  is  the  case  with  several  of  the  5- squares,  the  sum  of  25  squares  is  subdivided  into  five sets  or  groups  of  five  squares  each,  a  different  colour being  assigned  to  each  group.  These  colours  would  no doubt  retain  the  comparative  values  usually  assigned
1  Occasionally  these  squares,  instead  of  being  reversed,  are  turned  sideways, thus  :—
3°
38
46
5
13
21
22
39
47
6
14
IS
23
31
48
7
8
16
24
32
40
i
9
17
25
33
41
49
10
18
26
34
42
43
2
19
27
35
IT
44
3
II
28
29
37
45
4
12
20
2  The  crescent,   or  crescent  and  star,  are  here  used  as  emblems  of  the  1st day  of  the  (lunar)  month.
vi  ORDER  OF  THE  COLOURS  557
to  them  by  Malay  astrologers.  Thus  white  would  be the  best  of  all ;  yellow,  as  the  royal  colour,  little,  if  at all  inferior  to  white ;  brown,  blue,  or  red  would  be medium  colours ;  black  would  be  bad,  and  so  on.
Sometimes,  again,  the  names  of  the  five  Hindu deities  already  mentioned  will  be  found  similarly arranged,  in  which  case  they  appear  to  refer  to  the divisions  of  the  day,  described  above  under  the  name of  Katika  Lima.  Besides  this  class  of  magic  squares, however,  there  are  other  kinds  which  present  irregu- larities, and  are  not  so  easily  explainable.  Some  of these  violate  the  fundamental  rule  of  the  magic square,  which  insists  that  each  square  shall  have  an equal  number  of  small  squares  running  each  way,  and that  this  number  shall  be  an  odd  one.
Others  exhibit  the  right  number  of  small  squares (3  x  3  or  5  x  5  or  7x7),  but  instead  of  a  subdivision into  sub-groups,  have  merely  an  arrangement  of  alter- native emblems,  such  as  a  bud  and  a  full-blown  flower, or  the  like.
An  analysis  of  the  squares  whose  figures  are  given in  the  illustrations  shows  that  the  order  of  the  colours, deities,  and  planets  is  by  no  means  always  the  same.
Thus,  in  the  matter  of  the  order  of  the  five  colours, we  have  :—
In  Plate  26,  Fig.  i,  and  in  another  figure,
1-5  brown  (?  red).  1-5  white.
6-10  yellow.  6-10  black  (red  is  substituted  by
mistake  in  No.  9).
11-15  white.  11-15  red.
16-20  black.  16-20  blue  (17  is  made  black  by
mistake). 21-25  white.  21-25  yellow.
And  in  the  matter  of  the  order  of  the  Five  Deities we  find : —
558  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
In  Plate  26,  Fig.  i,  and  in  another  figure,
1-5  Brahma  (Brahma).  1-5  Besri  (S'ri).
6-10  Bisnu  (Vishnu).  6-10  Kala.
11-15  Maswara  (Maheswara).  11-16  Maswara  (Maheswara).
16-20  S'ri  (17  is  called  Kala  by  16-20  Bisnu  (Vishnu).
mistake).1
21-25    Kala    (23     and    24    are  21-25  Brahma. called  .SW  by  mistake).
And  yet  another  5-square  containing  the  names  of Deities  (PI.  26,  Fig.  2)  is  composed  as  follows  :—
1-5  Bisnu  (Vishnu). 6-10  Brahma.
11-15  Maswara  (Maheswara). 16-20  [a  diagonal  cross]. 21-25  [a  small  circle].
From  PL  26,  Fig.  2,  it  would  appear  that  this  form of  the  5-square  is  used  to  ascertain  the  best  time  of  day to  commence  an  operation,  e.g.  to  start  on  a  journey.
In  a  7-square  we  find  the  following  : —
1-7  Shams  (Sun) ;  Sunday  (i). 8-54  Mirrikh  (Mars) ;  Tuesday  (2). 15-21  Mushtari  (Jupiter) ;  Thursday  (3). 22-28  Zuhal  (Saturn)  ;  Saturday  (4). 29-35  Kamar  (Moon);  Monday  (5). 36-42  Ketab1*-  (Mercury);  Wednesday  (6). 43-49  Zahari*  (Venus);  Friday  (7).
This  y-square  is  based  on  a  heptacle  in  which  every alternate  day  is  skipped,  thus  : —
This  form  of  square  is  evidently used  to  ascertain  the  best  day  of  the week  to  commence  any  operation.
Next  in  importance  to  the methods  of  divination  by  the  use  of magic  squares,  come  those  which
FIG.  7. — Heptacle  on  which          ,  .  »  i     •  i
the  7-square  is  based.         depend  upon  "  aspect,     andinvolve the  use  of  diagrams  which  I  propose  to  call  "aspect-
1  The  order  should  (it  would  seem)  2  For  'Utarid.
be  Kala,  S^ri.  3  For  Zuhrah.
Mon. (S)
-  •
•
wV
NT*/
E
i
•L$-
ii
X
?o
1
fei
I
\'
X
°5
J.03
•V'
•A-
s
2
g
^
«3
£
1
i
—  -  —
A~
II
E  ,0
N      =.b    "
•-•     •=  "  ~
i  iss
0=0
"'is? i  ,0  J
ll  *
vi  ASPECT-COMPASSES  559
compasses."  Of  these  the  commonest  form  is  a  draw- ing, in  which  the  places  usually  occupied  by  the  points of  the  compass  are  occupied  by  the  names  of  certain things  (usually  animals  or  birds)  which  are  supposed to  be  naturally  opposed  to  each  other.  Thus  in  one of  these  compass-like  figures  we  find  (vide  PI.  25, Fig.  2)  :—
The  Bird  [st'f]  (N.)     opposed  to  the  Fowl  (S.) The  Crocodile  (N.E.)      „         „    „    Fish  (S.W.) The  Rat  (E.)  „         „    „    Cat  (W.)
The  Tiger  (S.E.)  „         „    „    Stag  (N.W.)
Another  has : —
The  Kite  (N.)  opposed  to  the  Fowl  (S.)
The  Crocodile  (N.E.)      „         „    „    Fish  (S.W.) The  Rat  (E.)  „         „    „    Cat  (W.)
The  Tiger  (S.E.)  „         „    „    Stag  (N.W.)
And  a  third  :—
The  New  Moon  (N.)  opposed  to  the  Kite  (S.) The  Cat  (N.E.)  „         „    „    Rat  (S.W.)
The  Crocodile  (E.)          „         „    „    Fish  (W.) The  Stag  (S.E.)  „         „    „    Tiger  (N.W.)
whilst  a  fourth  has  alternately  cape  and  bay.
The  way  in  which  these  figures  were  used  for  divi- nation is  very  clearly  shown  by  PI.  25,  Fig.  i,  which  is copied  from  a  figure  in  one  of  my  (Selangor)  charm- books,  which  had  the  days  of  the  month,  from  the  ist to  the  3<Dth,  written  round  it  in  blue  ink.  Starting from  the  north  aspect,  you  count  round  to  the  left  until (allowing  one  day  to  each  aspect)  you  arrive  at  the aspect  corresponding  to  the  number  of  the  day  of  the month  upon  which  you  wish  to  start  your  journey. If  it  coincides  with  an  aspect  assigned  to  one  of  the weaker  influences,  it  wiU  be  most  imprudent  to  start on  that  day.  Start  on  a  day  assigned  to  one  of  the
560  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
stronger  influences,  and  you  will  be  all  right.  If  the first  aspect-compass  which  you  consult  is  not  accom- modating enough  for  your  requirements,  go  on  con- sulting others  until  you  find  one  which  is  satisfactory.
Other  forms  of  the  compass-figure  are  used  for divining  whether  if  he  starts  on  a  certain  day  the  man will  get  the  better  of  his  enemy,  or  meet  with  a  person (e.g.  a  slave  or  a  thief)  who  has  run  away.  In  the former  case  a  double  circle  of  human  figures  is  used, the  figures  of  the  inner  circle  representing  the  person who  seeks  the  information,  and  those  of  the  outer circle  his  enemy.  The  counting  is  carried  out  in  pre- cisely the  same  manner  as  before,  and  the  headless figure  in  each  case  represents  the  man  who  will  lose. In  the  case  of  a  drawn  battle  neither  party,  of  course, loses  his  head.
In  the  case  of  an  absconder,  a  single  circle  of figures  is  used,  the  figures  pointing  towards  the  centre signifying  that  the  absconding  party  will  return  or  be caught,  and  those  pointing  away  from  the  centre  signi- fying the  opposite.  In  one  case  (PI.  25,  Fig.  2)  there are  fourteen  human  figures  arranged  in  two  opposing rows  of  seven,  every  alternate  figure  being  headless. In  this  case  you  start  the  counting  at  the  right-hand figure  of  the  bottom  row,  and  count  towards  the  left. Yet  another  form  of  divination  in  which  the  human figure  is  made  use  of,  is  shown  in  PI.  25,  Fig.  i  ;  a number  of  small  red  circles  (which  should  be  alter- nately dark  and  light)  are  drawn  at  the  salient  points of  the  figure,  and  counted  down  to  the  left  in  order, beginning  at  the  head.  All  I  have  yet  been  able  to discover  about  the  villainous-looking  individual  here portrayed  is  the  fact  that  he  is  said  to  represent  one (<  Unggas  Telang,"  who  was  described  to  me  as  an
x    -5  :£   %    "9     ?    ."&
4.V  '•*»  >>»  -•>><>•>  '*• ^>  1P_^  J>J
vi  OMENS  561
"old  war-chief"  (kulubalang  tua]  of  the  Sea-gypsies (Orang  Laiti}  and  the  Malay  pirates.
Figures  of  dragons  (naga]  and  scorpions  (kala)  are sometimes  used  in  a  similar  manner  ;  and  there  is  also an  aspect-compass  known  as  the  Rajal-al-ghaib  or I inazah  Sayidna  'Ali  ibn  Abie  Talib  (the  body  or bier  of  Our  Lord  'Ali,  the  son  of  Abu  Talib),  which, according  to  this  notion,  "is  continually  being  carried by  angels1  towards  the  different  quarters  of  the heavens,  and  must  not  be  faced  \  for  if  one  faces  to- wards it,  one  is  sure  to  be  defeated  in  battle  or  fight." The  aspect  to  be  avoided  varies  from  day  to  day, turning  towards  each  of  the  eight  points  of  the  ordinary Malay  compass  three  or  four  times  in  the  lunar  month.
The  subject  of  omens  in  general  has  been  shortly dealt  with  at  the  beginning  of  this  section,  and  also incidentally  mentioned  in  connection  with  various departments  of  nature  and  human  life.  It  would hardly  be  possible  to  make  a  complete  or  systematic list  of  the  things  from  which  omens  are  taken.  Apart from  those  depending  merely  on  Times,  Seasons, Numbers,  and  Aspect,  which  have  been  already  dealt with  at  quite  sufficient  length,  it  may  be  noted  that omens  are  drawn  from  earthquakes,  thunder,  "house- lizards,  rats,  and  other  four-footed  things,"  according to  the  times  at  which  they  are  observed,  from  the colour,  smell,  and  nature  of  soil  (in  choosing  building- sites),  from  birds,  and,  in  fact,  from  a  very  large  variety of  matters  which  cannot  be  classified  under  any  general head.  The  lines  of  the  hand  are,  of  course,  interpreted
1  Possibly  this  notion   is  partly  re-  of  which  idea  there  seems  to  be  no
sponsible  for  the  ridiculous   European  trace  amongst  the  Muhammadans  them  -
legend  about  Muhammad's  coffin  being  selves, suspended  between  heaven  and  earth,
2  O
562  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
among  the  Malays,  as  elsewhere,  as  signs  of  good  and evil  fortune.  It  has  not  been  possible  to  collect  much information  on  the  subject  of  Malay  chiromancy,  but for  the  benefit  of  European  adepts  in  "palmistry"  (as it  seems  to  be  usually  styled  nowadays)  it  may  be worth  while  mentioning  that  the  Malays  attach  im- portance, as  an  indication  of  long  life  ('alamat  panjang 'umor),1  to  the  intersection  of  the  line  round  the  base of  the  thumb 2  with  the  one  which  runs  round  the  wrist (simpeian  'Afi),  while  a  broken  line  across  the  palm (retak  putus)  is  believed  by  them  to  be  a  sign  of invulnerability  (tanda  penggetas,  t(j  bulek  di-tikam). Upright  lines  running  up  the  lower  joints  of  the  fingers, in  tfie  same  line  as  the  fingers  themselves,  are  a  sign of  prospective  wealth  ('alamat  'nak  di-panjat  de'  duit, tanda  orang  kayo),  and  a  whorl  of  circular  lines  on the  fingers  (pusat  belanak]  is  a  sign  of  a  craftsman ( 'alamat  orang  tukang].
More  important,  perhaps,  are  the  omens  believed to  be  derived  from  dreams,  of  which  there  seem  to be  several  different  methods  of  interpretation.  Ac- cording to  one  system  the  initial  letter  of  the  thing dreamt  of  determines  the  luck  :  thus  to  dream  of  a thing  beginning  with  T  is  very  lucky  indeed,  to  dream of  a  thing  beginning  with  H  means  that  a  visitor  from a  distance  is  to  be  expected  ;  N  indicates  sorrow,  L  is a  hint  to  give  alms  to  the  poor  and  needy,  and  so forth.  According  to  another  system,  a  purely  arbitrary meaning  is  put  upon  the  subject-matter  of  the  dream, or,  at  most,  some  slight  analogy  is  the  basis  of  the  in- terpretation. Thus  to  dream  of  a  gale  of  wind  in  the early  morning  is  an  omen  of  sorrow,  to  dream  of  hail
1  Another   such    indication    is   hair  2  Double  lines  round  the  base  of  the
growing  close  to  the  ears.  thumb  are  called  retak  madu.
v  i  DREAMS  563
means  acquisition  of  property,  to  dream  of  bathing  in a  heavy  shower  of  rain  indicates  escape  from  a  very great  danger,  a  dream  about  mosquitoes,  flies,  and  the like,  means  that  an  enemy  is  coming  to  the  village,  to dream  about  eating  jack -fruit  (nangka)  or  plantain (pisang)  is  an  indication  of  great  trouble  impending, and  so  on  ;  an  extract  from  a  treatise  on  this  subject  is given  in  the  Appendix,  and  it  is  impossible  to  dwell  at greater  length  upon  it  here.  Among  Malay  gamblers special  importance  is  attached  to  dreams  as  an  indica- tion of  luck  in  gambling  (mimpi  paksa  or  dapat paksa}.  If  the  gambler  dreams  of  "sweeping  out  the gambling  farm  "  (menyapu  pajak),  i.e.  "  breaking  the bank,"  or  of  running  amok  in  it  (mengamok  pajak\ or  of  bailing  out  the  ocean  (menimba  lautan\  or  of the  ocean  running  dry  (lautan  kring),  or  even  of  his breeding  maggots  on  his  person  (badan  berulat},  he  is confident  of  great  good  fortune  in  the  near  future.
As  a  specimen  of  the  importance  traditionally ascribed  to  dreams,  it  seems  worth  while  to  give  the following  popular  legend,  which  also  illustrates  the type  of  folk-tales  in  which  hidden  treasure  plays  a great  part : —
"Che  Puteh  Jambai  and  his  wife  were  very  poor people,  who  lived  many  generations  ago  at  Pulo Kambiri  on  the  Perak  river.  They  had  so  few  clothes between  them  that  when  one  went  out  the  other  had to  stay  at  home.  Nothing  seemed  to  prosper  with them,  so  leaving  Pulo  Kambiri,  where  their  poverty made  them  ashamed  to  meet  their  neighbours,  they moved  up  the  river  to  the  spot  since  called  Jambai. Shortly  after  they  had  settled  here  Che  Puteh  was troubled  by  a  portent  which  has  disturbed  the  slumbers of  many  great  men  from  the  time  of  Pharaoh  downwards.
564  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
He  dreamed  a  dream.  And  in  his  dream  he  was  warned by  a  supernatural  visitant  to  slay  his  wife,  this  being, he  was  assured,  the  only  means  by  which  he  could hope  to  better  his  miserable  condition.
"Sorely  disturbed  in  mind,  but  never  doubting  that the  proper  course  was  to  obey,  Che  Puteh  confided  to his  wife  the  commands  which  he  had  received,  and desired  her  to  prepare  for  death.  The  unhappy  lady acquiesced  with  that  conjugal  submissiveness  which  in Malay  legends,  as  in  the  Arabian  Nights,  is  so  char- acteristic of  the  Oriental  female  when  landed  in  some terrible  predicament.  But  she  craved  and  obtained permission  to  first  go  down  to  the  river  and  wash  her- self with  lime  juice.  So  taking  a  handful  of  limes  she went  forth,  and,  standing  on  the  rock  called  Batu Pembunoh,  she  proceeded  to  perform  her  ablutions after  the  Malay  fashion.  The  prospect  of  approaching death,  we  may  presume,  unnerved  her,  for  in  dividing the  limes  with  a  knife  she  managed  to  cut  her  own hand  and  the  blood  dripped  down  on  the  rocks  and into  the  river ;  as  each  drop  was  borne  away  by  the current,  a  large  jar  immediately  rose  to  the  surface  and floated,  in  defiance  of  all  natural  laws,  up-stream  to  the spot  whence  the  blood  came.  As  each  jar  floated  up Che  Puteh's  wife  tapped  it  with  her  knife  and  pulled  it in  to  the  edge  of  the  rocks.  On  opening  them  she found  them  all  full  of  gold.  She  then  went  in  search of  her  husband  and  told  him  of  the  treasure  of  which she  had  suddenly  become  possessed.  He  spared  her life,  and  they  lived  together  in  the  enjoyment  of  great wealth  and  prosperity  for  many  years.  Their  old  age was  clouded,  it  is  believed,  by  the  anxiety  attending the  possession  of  a  beautiful  daughter,  who  was  born to  them  after  they  became  rich.  She  grew  up  to  the
vi  LEGEND  OF  JAMB AI  565
perfection  of  loveliness,  and  all  the  Rajas  and  Chiefs of  the  neighbouring  countries  were  her  suitors.  The multitude  of  rival  claims  so  bewildered  the  unhappy parents  that,  after  concealing  a  great  part  of  their riches  in  various  places,  they  disappeared  and  have never  since  been  seen.  Their  property  was  never found  by  their  children,  though,  in  obedience  to  in- structions received  in  dreams,  they  braved  sea-voyages and  went  to  seek  for  it  in  the  distant  lands  of  Kacha- puri  and  Jamulepor.
"  Several  places  near  Jambai  connected  with  the legend  of  Che  Puteh  are  still  pointed  out ;  at  Bukit Bunyian  the  treasure  was  buried  and  still  lies  con- cealed. A  deep  gorge  leading  down  to  the  river  is  the ghaut  down  which  Che  Puteh's  vast  flocks  of  buffaloes used  to  go  to  the  river.  Its  size  is  evidence  of  the great  number  of  the  animals,  and  therefore  of  the wealth  of  their  owner.  Two  deep  pools,  called  re- spectively Lubuk  Gong  and  Lubuk  Sarunai,  contain  a golden  gong  and  a  golden  flute  which  were  sunk  here by  Che  Puteh  Jambai.  The  flute  may  sometimes  be seen  lying  on  one  of  the  surrounding  rocks,  but  always disappears  into  the  depths  of  the.  pool  before  any mortal  can  approach  it.  The  treasures  of  Lubuk Gong  might  before  now  have  passed  into  human  pos- session, had  it  not  been  for  the  covetousness  of  the individual  selected  as  their  recipient.  A  Malay  of Ulu  Perak  was  told  in  a  dream  to  go  and  fish  in  the pool  of  the  gong  and  to  take  a  pair  of  betel-nut  scissors (kachip]  with  him.  He  was  to  use  the  kachip  immedi- ately on  being  told  to  do  so.  Next  morning  he  was  at the  pool  early,  and  at  his  first  cast  hooked  something heavy  and  commenced  to  draw  it  up.  When  the  hook appeared  above  water  there  was  a  gold  chain  attached
566  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
to  it.  The  lucky  fisherman  then  commenced  to  pull up  the  chain  into  his  canoe,  and  hauled  up  fathoms  of it,  hand  over  hand,  until  the  boat  could  hardly  hold any  more.  Just  then  a  little  bird  alighted  on  a  branch close  by  and  piped  out  a  couple  of  notes,  which  sounded for  all  the  world  like  kachip.  The  man  heard,  but  he wanted  a  little  more,  and  he  went  on  hauling.  'Kachip! said  the  bird  again.  'Just  a  very  little  more,'  thought the  fisherman,  and  he  still  continued  dragging  up  the chain.  Again  and  again  the  warning  note  sounded, but  in  vain,  and  suddenly  a  strong  pull  from  the  bottom of  the  pool  dragged  back  the  chain,  and  before  the Malay  had  time  to  divide  it  with  his  tweezers,  the  last link  of  it  had  disappeared  beneath  the  water." 1
Charms  >  Talismans^  and  Witchcraft
While  by  divination  and  by  inferences  from  omens and  dreams,  Malays  attempt  to  ascertain  the  course of  fate,  so  by  charms  of  the  nature  of  amulets  and talismans  they  sometimes  endeavour  to  influence  its direction  or  modify  its  force.  Charms  of  the  nature of  invocations  have  been  dealt  with  already  under different  headings  in  connection  with  a  variety  of matters,  and  it  will  only  be  necessary  to  refer  here  to  a few  miscellaneous  ones  of  a  less  elaborate  character. It  should  be  observed  that  some  charms  are  directly effective  or  protective,  like  amulets  or  talismans, while  others  are  supposed  to  work  only  by  influen- cing the  volition  of  another  mind.  Under  the  latter head  come  the  great  mass  of  love -charms,  charms for  securing  conjugal  fidelity,  or  for  compelling  the
1  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  9,  pp.  23-26.
vi  TALISMANS  567
revelation  by  another  person  of  his  or  her  secret thoughts,  and  the  like,  of  which  Malay  books  of magic  are  full ;  while  under  the  former  come  sundry recipes  of  a  more  or  less  medicinal  nature  for  the  pur- pose of  curing  various  diseases,  of  increasing  physical power  or  virility,  or  of  protecting  the  person  against evil  influences,  natural  or  supernatural.  In  most  of these  cases  the  modus  operandi  is  of  the  simplest  char- acter ;  the  charm  consists  usually  of  a  short  Arabic prayer  or  a  few  letters  and  figures,  sometimes  quite meaningless  and  conventional,  sometimes  making  up one  or  more  of  the  sacred  names  (Allah,  Muhammad, 'Ali,  etc.).  These  charms  are  written  on  paper  or  cloth and  worn  on  the  person  ;  sometimes  they  are  written on  the  body  itself,  especially  on  the  part  to  be  affected  ; occasionally  they  are  written  on  a  cup  which  is  then used  for  drinking  purposes.  Such  prescriptions  are infinite  in  number,  and  are  to  be  found  in  Malay  charm- books,  wedged  in  amongst  matter  of  a  more  strictly medical  kind ;  in  fact,  it  would  be  quite  correct  to  say that  letter-charms  (rajah,  'azimaf)  and  sacred  names have  their  place  in  the  Malay  Pharmacopceia  side  by side  with  spices,  herbs,  roots,  and  the  like.  But  such charms  are  also  used  for  many  other  purposes  :  "to ward  off  demons  (sheitan),  to  make  children  feed  at the  breast  properly,  to  prevent  them  from  crying  and from  going  into  convulsions,  to  prevent  the  rice-crops from  being  devoured  by  pigs,  rats,  and  maggots," are  consecutive  instances  of  the  charms  contained  in a  page  of  one  of  the  numerous  Malay  treatises  on these  matters.  It  would,  from  the  nature  of  the  case, be  utterly  impossible  to  exhaust  this  endless  subject, and  it  is  not  necessary  to  dwell  upon  it  at  greater length,  as  the  details  of  the  charms  used  (of  which  a
568  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
few  are  quoted  in  the  Appendix)  do  not  as  a  rule  offer any  features  of  general  interest.1
Far  more  interesting  is  that  form  of  the  Black  Art which  attempts  to  "abduct,"  or  in  some  way  "get  at" another  person's  soul,  whether  (as  in  the  case  of  the ordinary  love-charm),  in  order  to  influence  it  in  the operator's  favour,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  with  a  view  to doing  the  victim  some  harm,  which  may  take  the  form of  madness,  disease,  or  even  death.
These  results  can  be  arrived  at  by  a  variety  of methods  :  in  some  of  them  the  influence  works  entirely without  contact,  in  others  there  is  some  sort  of  contact between  the  victim  and  the  receptacle  into  which  his soul  is  to  be  enticed.  A  few  specimens  of  the  methods employed  will  conclude  this  part  of  the  subject ;  they are  necessarily  somewhat  of  a  miscellaneous  character, but  it  will  be  seen  that  they  are  really  only  different applications  of  the  same  general  principle,  the  nature of  which  has  already  been  indicated  in  the  section  on the  Soul.2
The  following  is  an  instance  of  direct  contact between  the  soul  receptacle  and  its  owner's  body—
"  Take  soil  from  the  centre  of  the  footprint  (hati- hati  tapak)  of  the  person  you  wish  to  charm,  and '  treat  it  ceremonially '  (di-puja]  for  about  three  days.
"  The  '  ceremonial  treatment '  consists  in  wrapping it  up  in  pieces  of  red,  black,  and  yellow  cloth3  (the
1  An  analysis  of  them  would,  how-  ends  are  different.     The  medical  man ever,  show  what  objects  are  most  gene-  always  professes  to  aim  at  the  cure  of rally  aimed  at  by  those  who  use  them.  his  patient,  whereas  here  the  intention It  may  be  safely  estimated  that   the  is  to  cause  harm  to  the  person  to  be sexual  relations  are  here  of  the  first  affected,  or  at  least  to  acquire  an  influ- importance,  the  majority  of  the  charms  ence  over  him  for  the  operator's  own having  reference  to  them,  directly  or  benefit    or    satisfaction    (as    in    love- indirectly,  charms).
2  Supra,  pp.  49,  50.     The  methods  3  For  the  colours  of  the  cloth  used, here  given  are  closely  akin  to  those  of  and  the  purport  of  the  number  seven, medicine^,  pp.  452-456,  ,m/ra);butthe  vide  pp.  50,  51,  supra.
VI
SOUL- ADDUCTION  $69
yellow  being  outside),  and  hanging  it  from  the  centre of  your  mosquito-curtain  with  parti-coloured  thread {p$ngganiong-nya  benang  pancharona).  It  will  then become  (the  domicile  of)  your  victim's  soul  (jadi semangaf].  You  must,  however,  to  complete  the  cere- mony, switch  it  with  a  birch  of  seven  leaf-ribs  taken from  a  '  green '  cocoa-nut  (penyembat-nya  lidi  niyor hijau  t^ljoh  'let)  seven  times  at  sundown,  seven  times at  midnight,  and  seven  times  at  sunrise,  continuing this  for  three  days,  and  saying  as  you  do  so  :—
"  '  It  is  not  earth  that  I  switch, But  the  heart  of  So-and-so.'
(Bukan-nya  aku  menyembat  tanah, Aku  menyembat  hati  Si  Anu).
"  Then  bury  it  in  the  middle  of  a  path  where  your victim  is  sure  to  step  over  it  (supaya  buleh  di-langkah- nya),  and  he  will  certainly  become  distraught.  The only  taboo  in  connection  with  it  is  that  you  should  let no  one  share  your  sleeping -mat."  The  soul -recep- tacle in  this  case  is  the  lump  of  earth  taken  from  the centre  of  the  victim's  footprint.  It  is  said  to  actually "  become  (the  victim's)  soul,"  but  no  doubt  this  is merely  figurative,  though  it  completely  proves  the identification  of  the  soul  with  its  receptacle  in  the Malay  mind.  The  object  of  the  birching  is  not  self- evident,  but  may  be  intended  to  dispel  evil  influences, and  so  purify  it  for  the  incoming  soul.
Another  way  of  obtaining  the  required  result  is  to scrape  off  some  of  the  wood  of  the  floor  from  the  place where  your  intended  victim  has  been  sitting.  Having secured  this,  take  some  of  the  soil  from  his  or  her footprint  and  mix  them  both  together  with  wax  from a  deserted  bees'  comb,  moulding  the  figure  into  his
570  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
or  her  likeness.  Fumigate  it  with  incense,  and "  beckon "  to  the  soul  by  waving  a  cloth  (lambei semangaf]  every  night  for  three  nights  successively, reciting  this  charm  : —
'•' '  OM  ! '  shout  it  again  and  again  ! Stupid  and  dazed Be  the  heart  of  Somebody, Thinking  of  me. If  you  do  not  think  of  me, The  forty-four  angels  shall  curse  you."
Another  method  is  as  follows  :—
Take  parings  of  nails,  hair,  eyebrows,  saliva,  etc.  of your  intended  victim  (sufficient  to  represent  every  part of  his  person),  and  make  them  up  into  his  likeness with  wax  from  a  deserted  bees'  comb.  Scorch  the figure  slowly  by  holding  it  over  a  lamp  every  night  for seven  nights,  and  say  : —
"  It  is  not  wax  that  I  am  scorching, It  is  the  liver,  heart,  and  spleen  of  So-and-so  that  I  scorch."
After  the  seventh  time  burn  the  figure,  and  your victim  will  die.
The  description  of  the  next  ceremony  is  taken word  for  word  from  a  charm-book  which  I  obtained from  a  Langat  Malay  (named  'Che  Indut),  and  which is  still  in  my  possession.  As  it  illustrates  several  new points  about  these  wax  figures,  and  as  such  charms  are exceedingly  rare  and  all  but  impossible  to  obtain,  I here  give  a  word  for  word  translation  of  the  whole text,  the  original  Malay  version  of  which  will  be  found in  the  Appendix  : *—
"  This  refers  to  making  images  to  harm  people. You  make  an  image  to  resemble  a  corpse  out  of  wax
1    Vide  App.  cclxvi.
PLATK  28.  — FIG.  i.  WAX  FIGURES.
S|>< -i  linens  of  the  wax  figures  used  for  sticking  pins  into,  vide  the  central  figure.
FIG.  2.  SPIRIT  UMBRELLAS  AND  TAPKKS.
Two  umbrellas  (made  of  cloth  coated  with  wax)  and  two  nail-shaped  tapers,  used  in the  ceremony  for  charming  the  wax  figures
rage  570.
vi  THE  WAXEN  IMAGE  571
from  an  empty  bees'  comb,1  and  of  the  length  of  a  foot- step. If  you  want  to  cause  sickness,  you  pierce  the eye  and  blindness  results ;  or  you  pierce  the  waist and  the  stomach  (lit.  the  waist)  gets  sick,  or  you  pierce the  head  and  the  head  gets  sick,  or  you  pierce  the breast  and  the  breast  gets  sick.  If  you  want  to  cause death,  you  transfix  it  from  the  head  right  through  to the  buttocks,  the  '  transfixer '  being  a  jromuti-pa\m 2 twig ;  then  you  enshroud  the  image  as  you  would  a corpse,  and  you  pray  over  it  as  if  you  were  praying over  the  dead ;  then  you  bury  it  in  the  middle  of the  path  (which  goes  to)  the  place  of  the  person whom  you  wish  to  charm,  so  that  he  may  step  across it.  This  refers  to  when  you  want  to  bury  the  image—
"  Peace  be  to  you  !  Ho,  Prophet  'Tap,  in  whose  charge  the  earth  is, Lo,  I  am  burying  the  corpse  of  Somebody^ I  am  bidden  (to  do  so)  by  the  Prophet  Muhammad, Because  he  (the  corpse)  was  a  rebel  to  God. Do  you  assist  in  killing  him  or  making  him  sick : If  you  do  not  make  him  sick,  if  you  do  not  kill  him, You  shall  be  a  rebel  against  God, A  rebel  against  Muhammad. It  is  not  I  who  am  burying  him, It  is  Gabriel  who  is  burying  him. Do  you  too  grant  my  prayer  and  petition,  this  very  day  that  has
appeared, Grant  it  by  the  grace  of  my  petition  within  the  fold  of  the  Creed
La  ilaha"  etc.
There  are,  as  I  have  said,  several  new  points  to  be got  from  this  charm.  You  must  make  the  image resemble  a  corpse ;  you  must  make  it  of  the  length of  the  footstep  (doubtless  that  of  the  intended  victim) ;
1  I  class  this  with  the  instances  of  up  with  the  wax,  and  that  they  are  not
indirect  contact  (between  the  soul  and  mentioned,  because  understood, the  body  of  its  owner),  because  there  is  8  Generally  called  kabong  when  cul-
no  doubt  whatever  that  the  usual  in-  tivated,  or  (h)?natt  when  wild  (Arenga
gradients  (clippings  of  hair,  paring  of  scucharifera,  L.,  Palmeoe). nails,  etc.)  would  have  to  be  worked
572  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
you  must  pierce  the  part  which  you  want  to  affect ;  if you  want  to  kill  your  man,  you  must  transfix  him  from the  head  downwards  with  the  twig  of  a  gomuti-$a\m (that  is  to  say,  with  one  of  the  black  splinters  used  as pens  by  the  Malays l) ;  you  must  wrap  the  image  in  a shroud,  and  read  the  burial  service  over  it ;  and,  finally, in  order  to  absolve  yourself  from  blood-guiltiness,  you shift  the  burden  of  your  crime  on  to  the  shoulders  of the  Archangel  Gabriel ! ! !
There  are,  of  course,  many  slight  variations  of  the actual  ceremony.  Sometimes  the  wizard,  during  the insertion  of  the  pins  into  the  image,  exclaims  : —
"  It  is  not  wax  that  I  slay  2 But  the  liver,  heart,  and  spleen  of  So-and-so"
And  then,  after  "  waving  "  the  figure  in  the  smoke  of the  incense,  and  depositing  it  in  the  centre  of  a  sacri- ficial tray  (anchak),  he  invites  the  spirits  to  banquet upon  his  victim's  body  : —
"  I  do  not  banquet  you  upon  anything  else,3 But  on  the  liver,  heart,  and  spleen  of  So-and-so."
When  the  ceremony  is  over  the  image  is  buried  in  the usual  way  in  front  of  the  victim's  door-step. Another  method  is  described  as  follows  :— "  Make  the  wax  figure  in  the  usual  way  and  with  the usual  ingredients.     At  sundown  take  parched  rice,  with white,  black,  green,  and  yellow  (saffron)  rice,  a  "  chew  " of  betel-leaf,  a  wax  taper  and  an  egg — this  latter  as the  representative  of  a  fowl   ('iskarat  ay  am).      Burn incense,  and  recite  this  charm  :—
1  Cp.  the  charm  on  p.  183,  supra,  3  Bukan-nya  aku  mfnjamu  sakalian and  App.  Ixxxiii.  yang  lain,
2  Bukan-nya  aku  mtmbantai  lilin  Aku  mtnjamu  had,  jantong ,  Kmpa Akum?tnbantaihati,jantong,limpa  Si  Anu.
Si  Anu.
vi  SOWING  DISSENSION  573
"  Peace  be  with  you,  O  Earth  Genie,
Bull-shaped  Earth-spirit,  Earth-demon,  Bull-shaped  World-spirit. Come  hither,  come  down,  I  pray  you,  and  accept  the  banquet  I
offer.
I  have  a  something  that  I  want  you  for, I  want  to  give  you  an  order, 1  want  to  get  you  to  aid  me
C  sickness       "j And  assist  me  in  causing  the  <  or  madness  V  (as  the  case  may  be),
(  or  death       J of  Somebody.
If  you  do  not  accept  the  banquet  I  offer You  shall  be  a  rebel  to  God,"  etc.
This  is  a  charm  for  sowing  dissension  between husband  and  wife  (pembencki) : —
Make  two  of  the  wax  figures  in  the  ordinary  way, but  taking  care  that  one  resembles  the  husband  and the  other  the  wife.  Sit  down  with  your  legs  stretched out  before  you,  and  hold  the  figures  face  to  face  while you  repeat  the  charm  thrice,  and  at  the  end  of  each repetition  breathe  upon  their  heads.  Then  lay  the man  upon  the  ground  on  your  right  side  close  to  your thigh,  but  looking  away  from  it ;  and  the  woman  at  the side  of  the  left  thigh  in  a  similar  position,  so  that  they both  look  away  from  each  other.  Then  burn  incense and  recite  the  same  charm  twenty-two  times  over  the man  and  twenty-two  times  over  the  woman.  Now put  them  back  to  back,  and  wrap  them  up  in  seven thicknesses  of  the  leaves  of  tukas?  and  tie  them  round with  thread  of  seven  colours  wrapped  seven  times round  them,  repeat  the  charm  and  bury  them.  Dig them  up  after  seven  days  and  see  if  they  are  still  there. If  you  find  them  the  charm  has  failed,  but  if  not,  it will  work,  and  they  will  assuredly  be  divorced.  The charm  runs  as  follows  : —
1  Probably  Ventilago  leiocarpa,  Benth.  (Rhamneae).
574  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
"  "Ndit  marangan  yndit ! Angkau  Fatimah  kambing, Si  Muhammad  harimau  Allah  ; Kalau  Fatimah  tentangkan  Muhammad, Saperti  kambing  tentang  harimau. Muhammad  sabenar-benar  hulubalang, Harimau  Allah  di-atas  dunia. Dengan  berkat"  d.  s.  b.
Which,  so  far  as  it  is  intelligible,  appears  to mean  :—
"  Thou,  Fatimah,  art  a  goat ; Muhammad  is  God's  tiger. If  Fatimah  is  face  to  face  with  Muhammad, She  will  be  as  a  goat  facing  a  tiger. Muhammad  in  very  truth  is  the  Chief, The  Tiger  of  God  upon  earth. By  the  grace  of,"  etc.
The  following  is  a  clear  example  of  soul  abduction without  contact  :—
The  simplest  way,  perhaps,  of  abducting  another person's  soul  is  to  go  out,  when  the  sun  clears (matahari  mencharak,  at  sunrise?),  or  when  the newly-risen  moon  looks  red,  and  standing  with  the big  toe  of  the  right  foot  resting  on  the  big  toe  of the  left,  to  make  a  trumpet  of  your  right  hand  and recite  the  appropriate  charm  through  this  improvised speaking-trumpet  thrice.  At  the  end  of  each  recital you  blow  through  the  hollowed  fist.  The  charm runs  as  follows  :—
"  '  OM.'     I  loose  my  shaft,  I  loose  it  and  the  moon  clouds
over,
I  loose  it,  and  the  sun  is  extinguished, I  loose  it,  and  the  stars  burn  dim. But  it  is  not  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  that  I  shoot  at, It  is  the  stalk  of  the  heart  of  that  child  of  the  congregation,
So-and-so.
Cluck  !  cluck  !  soul  of  So-and-so,  come  and  walk  with  me, Come  and  sit  with  me.
vi  BEATING  THE  SHADOW  575
Come  and  sleep  and  share  my  pillow. Cluck  !  cluck  !  soul,"  etc.
A  second  method  is  to  beat  your  own  shadow,1 ceremonially ;  according  to  this  method  you  take  a cane  (of  rattan  or  rotan  sega\  in  length  as  long  as  your body,  fumigate  it  with  incense  and  recite  a  charm  over it  seven  times,  striking  your  own  shadow  with  tlie  cane once  after  each  recital.  Repeat  this  at  sundown,  mid- night, and  early  morning,  and  sleep  under  a  coverlet made  of  five  cubits  of  white  cloth,  and  the  soul  you wish  for  will  assuredly  come  to  you.  The  following  is the  charm,  a  very  curious  one  : —
"  Ho  !  Irupi,  Shadowy  One, Let  the  Queen  come  to  me. Do  you,  if  Somebody  is  awake, Stir  her  and  shake  her,  and  make  her  rise, And  take  her  breath  and  her  soul  and  bring  them  here, And  deposit  them  in  my  left  side. But  if  she  sleep,
Do  you  take  hold  of  the  great  toe  of  her  right  foot Until  you  can  make  her  get  up,
And  use  your  utmost  endeavours  to  bring  them  to  me. If  you  do  not,  you  shall  be  a  rebel  to  God,"  etc.
Another  method  of  abducting  another  person's  soul is  as  follows  : —
"  Take  a  lime  branch  which  has  seven  limes  on a  single  stalk,  and  suspend  it  from  the  top  of  your
1  The  explanation  of  this  ceremony  influences  from  it,  before  it  starts  on
is  that  the  shadow  is  supposed  in  some  its  journey,  but  this  latter  suggestion  is
way  to  embody  or  at  least  represent  merely  conjectural.     The  first  line  of
the  soul.     Thus  the  female  reapers  of  the    charm,    however,    in    which    the
the  first  ripe  padi  are  specially  enjoined  speaker  addresses  his  shadow  by  name
to  reap  in  a  straight  line  facing  the  sun,  (Irupi)  as  he  strikes  it  with  the  cane,
',    so  that  their  shadow  may  not  fall  upon  points  out  most  clearly  the  connection
•'  the  rice-soul  in  the  basket  at  their  sides  between  the  body-soul  (or  puppet-soul)
(vide  pp.  242-244,  supra}.    No  doubt  and  the  shadow-soul,  to  which  I  have
the  speaker's  shadow-soul  is  expected  referred.      The  coverlet  or  white  cloth
to  fetch  the  woman's  body-soul,  and  the  is  no  doubt  the  soul-cloth,  into  which
beating  of  the  shadow-soul  is  perhaps  the  woman's  soul  is  expected  to  enter
purely  ceremonial,  to  drive  away  evil  when  it  arrives.
576  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
mosquito-curtain  on  three  successive  nights.  When you  suspend  it  recite  the  charm  already  given  *  (be- ginning '  Om  !  shout  it  again  and  again  ! ')."
The  following  ceremony  is  one  in  which  the  soul  of another  person  is  abducted  without  any  direct  contact between  the  soul-receptacle,  which  in  this  case  is  a head-cloth,  and  the  soul-owner.  The  directions  are  as follows : —
"Go  out  on  the  fourteenth  night  of  the  lunar month  (full  moon)  and  two  successive  nights ;  seat yourself  on  a  male  ant-hill  (busut  jantan]  facing  the moon,  burn  incense,  and  repeat  the  charm  :—
"  I  bring  you  a  (betel-)  leaf  to  chew, Dab  the  lime  on  to  it,  Prince  Ferocious, For  Somebody,  Prince  Distraction's  daughter,  to  chew. Somebody  at  sunrise  be  distraught  for  love  of  me, Somebody  at  sunset  be  distraught  for  love  of  me. As  you  remember  your  parents,  remember  me, As  you  remember  your  house  and  house-ladder,  remember  me.
When  thunder  rumbles,  remember  me,
When  wind  whistles,  remember  me,
When  the  heavens  rain,  remember  me,
When  cocks  crow,  remember  me,
When  the  dial-bird  tells  its  tales,  remember  me,
When  you  look  up  at  the  sun,  remember  me,
When  you  look  up  at  the  moon,  remember  me,
For  in  that  self-same  moon  I  am  there.
Cluck  !  cluck  !  soul  of  Somebody  come  hither  to  me,
I  do  not  mean  to  let  you  have  my  soul,
Let  your  soul  come  hither  to  mine."
Here  wave  the  end  of  your  head-cloth  (punc/ia detar)  in  the  direction  of  the  moon  seven  times  every night  for  three  successive  nights.  Then  take  the turban  (detar)  home  and  place  it  under  your  pillow
1  p.  570,  supra.
M  RECALLING  A  SOUL  577
(for  the  three  nights).     If  you  want  to  use  it  by  day, burn  incense,  and  say  :—
"  It  is  not  a  turban  that  I  carry  in  my  girdle  but  the  soul  of  Some- body? »
At  sundown,  when  the  sun  is  hovering  on  the brink  of  the  horizon  (matahari  ayun  termayun),  chew betel,  and  spit  out  (semborkati]  the  chewed  leaf  thrice. Then  stand  opposite  the  door,  looking  if  possible towards  the  west,  burn  incense,  and  repeat  this  charm  :— -
"  Nur  Mani  is  your  name, Si  Pancha  Awalis  my  name  ; By  the  grace  of  my  using  the  prayer  called  '  Kundang
Maya  Chinta  Berahi* Concentrate  your  thoughts  on  me, Be  enamoured  of  me, Be  distraught  for  love  of  me, Distraught  both  by  day  and  by  night, Distraught  seven  times  in  the  day, And  distraught  seven  times  in  the  night. Come  back  to  your  home, Come  back  to  your  palace."
Although  this  looks  at  first  sight  not  unlike  a  love- charm,  the  last  two  lines  show  that  it  is  really  intended to  induce  a  wandering  soul  (semangat  riang)  to  return to  its  owner.  In  fact,  the  wizard  who  gave  me  this charm  told  me  that  it  was  taboo  to  let  any  one  pass during  the  whole  evening,  when  this  charm  was  used, between  the  light  and  the  patient.
It  seems  possible,  however,  that  it  might  be  used on  occasion,  and  mutatis  mutandis,  as  a  love  charm  as .well.
The  following  ceremony  is  professedly  a  species  of divination  (tilek  or  penilek),  but  as  it  is  clearly  only
1  Bukan-nya  akit  mtmbcnva  Jetar,  aku  kandong  sfmatigat  Si  Anu. 2  P
578  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART  CHAP.
another  form  of  soul-abduction   I  give  it  here.     The instructions  are  as  follows  :—
"  First  take  some  wax  from  a  deserted  bees'  comb and  make  a  wax  taper  out  of  it  as  well  as  you  can  ; stick  it  upon  the  rim  of  a  white  cup,  and  repeat  this charm,  when  you  will  be  able  to  see  the  person  you wish  to  affect  in  the  taper's  flame  (buleh  di-tengo orang-nya  didalam  puchok  apt}.  The  charm  runs  as follows  : —
"  I  know  the  origin  from  which  you  sprang, From  the  glitter  of  the  White  Blood. Come  down  then  to  your  mother, Stemming  both  ebb  and  flood  tides, Cluck  !  cluck  !  souls  of  Somebody, Come  all  of  you  together  unto  me. Whither  would  ye  go  ?
Come  down  to  this  house  and  house-ladder  of  yours. This  solitary  taper  is  your  house  and  house-ladder, Since  already  the  liver,  stomach,  heart,  spleen,  and  great
maw
Of  all  of  you  have  been  given  into  my  care, So  much  the  more  have  the  body  and  life Of  all  of  you  been  given  into  my  care. Grant  this  by  the  grace  of  my  use
Of  the  prayer  called  divination   by  (secret)    cognizance (tilek  malrifat]  of  Somebody.
"Next  you  take  a  fathom's  length  of  thread,  with seven  strands,  and  seven  colours  running  through the  strands  (benang  tujoh  urat,  titjoh  warna  melintang benang],  and  a  pen  made  of  a  splinter  of  the  sugar- palm  (puckok  kabong],  and  draw  a  portrait  of  the person  you  wish  to  charm  (menulis  gambar  orang  itu}. When  the  portrait  is  finished  you  suspend  it  from  the end  of  a  pole  by  means  of  the  parti-coloured  thread, and  make  fast  the  lower  end  of  the  pole  to  the  branch of  a  tree,  fixing  it  at  an  angle,  so  that  the  portrait  may hang  free  and  be  blown  to  and  fro  without  ceasing
vi  .  INIMISM  579
by  every  breath  of  wind.     This  will  cause  her  heart  to love  you."
It  will  be  noticed  that  a  general  similarity  underlies these  several  methods  of  soul-abduction  in  spite  of  their apparent  variety,  and  the  diversity  of  the  objects  in view  in  the  different  cases.  On  this  point  it  is  impos- sible to  enlarge  here  :  the  purpose  of  this  book  has been  primarily  to  collect  authentic  specimens  of  the various  magic  practices  in  vogue  among  the  Malays  of the  Malay  Peninsula,  and  to  indicate  the  nature  of  the beliefs  on  which  these  practices  are  based,  leaving  it for  others  to  draw  from  them  such  inferences  and  to make  such  comparisons  as  may  throw  further  light  on the  subject.  It  has  not  been  deemed  desirable  to anticipate  such  inferences  and  comparisons  here  ;  but, without  trespassing  beyond  the  scope  of  the  present work,  it  may  be  noticed  that  there  is  a  special  appro- priateness in  concluding  it  with  the  above  account  of the  various  methods  of  soul-abduction.  From  them, taken  together  with  what  has  already  been  said  on  the subject,1  a  fairly  complete  idea  can  be  gathered  of  the Malay  conception  of  the  Soul ;  and  it  is  hardly  too much  to  say  that  this  conception  is  the  central  feature of  the  whole  system  of  Malay  magic  and  folklore, from  which  all  the  different  branches  with  their  various applications  appear  to  spring.
The  root-idea  seems  to  be  an  all  -  pervading Animism,  involving  a  certain  common  vital  principle (scmangaf)  in  Man  and  Nature,  which,  for  want  of  a more  suitable  word,  has  been  here  called  the  Soul. The  application  of  this  general  theory  of  the  universe
1  Supra,  pp.  47-54,  76,  77,  452-456,  and  under  the  headings  Birds,  Beasts, Vegetation,  Minerals,  etc.
5So  DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART        CHAP,  vi
to  the  requirements  of  the  individual  man  constitutes the  Magic  Art,  which,  as  conceived  by  the  Malays, may  be  said  to  consist  of  the  methods  by  which this  Soul,  whether  in  gods,  men,  animals,  vege- tables, minerals,  or  what  not,  may  be  influenced, captured,  subdued,  or  in  some  way  made  subject  to  the will  of  the  magician.
It  would,  however,  probably  be  a  mistake  to  push this  analysis  too  far ;  for  side  by  side  with  the  theory of  a  universe  animated  by  souls,  which  by  the  use  of the  appropriate  words  and  forms  can  be  cajoled  or threatened,  there  are  the  ideas  of  Luck  and  Ill-luck, and  the  notion,  strong  in  Muhammadans  all  over  the world,  of  a  preordained  course  of  events.  Sometimes, presumably  in  extreme  cases,  there  is  no  escape  from this  destiny  :  if  a  man  is  fated  to  die  at  a  certain  time, die  he  must,  whatever  he  may  do.  But  to  a  great extent  ill-luck  can  be  avoided  if  one  knows  how ; though  we  cannot  stop  it,  we  need  not  expose  our- selves to  its  influence.  Thus  a  particular  hour  may be  unlucky  for  the  doing  of  a  certain  act ;  but  if  we know  that  it  is  so,  we  need  not  incur  the  danger.
There  are,  therefore,  for  a  Malay  three  alternatives, it  would  seem  :  viz.  Charms,  for  occasions  where  moral pressure  can  be  brought  to  bear ;  Divination,  to  assist in  detecting  dangers  which  in  the  ordinary  course must  come  but  can  be  avoided ;  and,  finally,  Islam (Resignation),  when  he  has  to  meet  the  inevitable, whether  it  be  regarded  as  the  course  of  Fate  or  the eternal  purpose  of  God.
APPENDIX
CHAPTER   I
NATURE
Creation  of  the  World [ij  INTRODUCTION  TO  PAWANG'S  BOOK  >    [Chap.  i.  p.  2.
BAHWA  ini  fasal  pada  menyatakan  surat  pawang  yang  pertama-tama  katurunan deripada  Nabi  Allah  Adam,  dengan  berkat  mu'jizat  Nabi  kita  Muhammad  Rasul Allah  sail'  Allahu  'aleihi  al-salam  dengan  berkat  Dato'  Kathi  Rabun  Jalil,  yang diam  di  Medinah  yang  sembahyang  di  Ka'bat  Allah  dengan  berkat  Toh  Sheikh A'alim  Puteh  yang  bersandar  di  tiang  'arash,  yang  tahu  'kan  Lokh  Mahpar  yang menyuratkan  dua  kali  mahshadat  yang  mengedap  di  pintu  Ka'bah  serta  dengan berkat  Toh  Saih  Panjang  Janggut  yang  diam  di  Beringin  Sonsang  serta  dengan berkat  Toh  Kuning  Ma'alim  Jaya  yang  berdiam  di  Gunong  Ledang  dengan  berkat Toh  Puteh  Sabun  Mata  yang  diam  di  Gunong  Berapi  serta  dengan  berkat  Toh Ma'alim  Karimun  yang  berdiam  di  Pulau  Karimun,  serta  dengan  berkat  Toh Lambang  Lebar  Daun  yang  diam  di  hulu  Palembang  di  lembah  Patawalau  di  bukit Saguntang-guntang  tempat  pinang  beribut,  dengan  berkat  Dang  Pok  Dang  Leni, dengan  berkat  sakalian  Wali  Allah,  dengan  berkat  Ibu  serta  Bapa,  dengan  berkat mu'jizat  Bulan  dan  Matahari,  dengan  berkat  Daulat  Sultan  Manikam  yang  diam di  Puncha  'Arash,  yang  memegang  sakalian  benih  anak  Adam  ia  itulah  ada-nya.
Tatkala  Klam  di-kandong  Kabul,  Kabul  lagi  di-kandong  Klam,  lagi  didalam rahim  hewanan  Tuhan  diam-diam  aldiaman,  Bumi  belum  bernama  Bumi,  Langit pun  belum  bernama  Langit,  Allah  pun  belum  bernama  Allah,  Muhammad  pun belum  bernama  Muhammad,  'Arash  pun  belum,  Krusi  pun  belum,  Samad  awang- awang  pun  belum  ada,  maka  sedia  terjali  dengan  sendiri,  yang  jadikan  sakalian 'alamini,  maka  la-lah  Pawang  yang  Tuha  ada-nya.  Maka  jadikan  Bumi  itu  sa- lebar  dulang  Langil  sa-lebar  payong,  maka  ia-itu  'alam-nya  Pawang  ada-nya, maka  datang-lah  ia  berahi  sedia  itu  dengan  sendiri-nya,  maka  terpanchar-lah  sri manikam-nya  itu  di  hati  bumi  sa-tapak  [k]adam2itu,  tersunjam  tujoh  pelala  Bumi, tersondak  tujoh  petala  Langit,  maka  bergetoh-lah 3  tiang  'arash,  maka  ia-itulah kuderal  Pawang  ada-nya.
Shahadan  adalah  asal-nya  Pawang  itu  terlebeh  dahulu  deripada  dahulu,  ia-itu - 1ah  Allah  serta  di-thahirkan-nya  dengan  chahia  bulan  dan  matahari,  maka  ia-itu kanyala'an-nya  pawang  yang  sabenar-benar-nya  pawang  ada-nya.
1  Note.—  It  may  be  as  well  to  observe  generally  ent  versions  of  each  charm,  etc.  would  be  a
that   the   Malay  texts    here  given    are  often  necessary  preliminary  to  the  establishment  of  a
evidently  corrupt,  and  that  it  has  not  always  really  sound  text,
been    found    possible  to    suggest   satisfactory  a  Ou.  Ka  dalam.
emendations.     A  comparison  of  several  differ-  s  Qu.  Bcrgctar.
582  APPENDIX  CHAP.
Menyatakan  sri  mana  manikam  itu  menjadikan  pusat  Bumi  tiang  Ka'bah, maka  tumboh-lah  ia  di-'ibaratkan  sa-pohun  kayu,  di-namai  kayu  itu  Kayu  Rampak, Kayu  Sinang,  Kayu  Langkah  Langkapuri,  kayu  tumboh  di  halaman  Allah  maka ia-itulah  tumboh-nya ;  dan  ampat  chawang  kayu  itu,  dan  sa-chawang  bernama Sajeratul  Mentahar,  dan  sa-chawang  bernama  Taubi,  dan  sa-chawang  nama Khaldi,  dan  sa-chawang  bernama  Nasrun  'Alam,  sa-chawang  ka  [dak]sina,  sa- chawang  ka  pa'sina,  dan  sa-chawang  ka  mashrik,  dan  sa-chawang  ka  maghrib, maka  bharu-lah  bernama  ampat  penjuru  'alam.
Maka  pusat  Bumi  itulah  yang  bernama  Ular  Sakatimuna,  ia-lah  yang memblit  Bumi  sa-tapak  Nabi  itu.1
Maka  firman  Allah  ta'ala  didalam  rahsia-nya  kapada  Jibrail  "  Palukan-lah aku  Ular  Sakatimuna  itu,  ambil  uleh-mu  besi  tongkat  Kalimah  yang  terjuntei di  pintu  Langit  itu,"  maka  di  ambil-lah  besi  itu  serta  di  palukan-nya  kapada  ular itu  maka  putus  dua  ular  itu,  sa-k'rat  kapala-nya  ka-atas  Langit  menyentak  naik, ekor-nya  ka-bawah  Bumi  pun  menyentak  turun.
Dan  kapala-nya  itu  menjadi  Jin  Sri  'Alam,  lidah-nya  itu  menjadi  Jin  Sakti, dan  benih  yang  didalam  mata-nya  itu  menjadi  Jin  Puteh  ;  dan  ruang-ruang  mata- nya  itu  jadi  Dato'  Mentala  Guru,  dan  chahia  mata-nya  itu  jadi  sakalian  Jin,  Jin Hitam,  Jin  Hijau,  Jin  Biru,  Jin  Kuning,  dan  nyawa-nya  itu  jadi  Si  Raja  Jin. Dan  hati-nya  itu  jadi  Lembaga  Nyawa  dan  buah  mata-nya  itu  menjadi  limau  dan tahi  mata-nya  itu  menjadi  kem'nyan  ;  dan  salupat  mata-nya  itu  jadi  kapas  ;  dan hujut-nya  itu  jadi  Jin  Si  Putar  'Alam.
Dan  prut-nya  itu  jadi  Jin  Si  Lengkar  'Alam  dan  jantong-nya  itu  jadi  Jin Bentara  'Alam,  dan  chahia  manikam-nya  itu  menjadi  Jin  Gentar  'Alam,  dan suara-nya  itu  menjadi  Halilintar  'Alam,  dan  chahia  pedang-nya  jadi  kilat.  Dan hawa  pedang  itu  menjadi  tuju  Si  Raja  Wana.
Dan  pedang-nya  itu  menjadi  plangi,  dan  hulu  pedang  jadi  tunggul-nya,  dan sengkang  hulu  pedang-nya  itu  menjadi  bantal-nya ;  dan  darah-nya  itu  jadi Mambang  Kuning  dan  chahia  darah-nya  itu  menjadi  Mambang  Sina ;  dan  haba darah-nya  itu  jadi  api.
Dan  ruh-nya  itu  menjadi  angin,  dan  jamjam-nya  itu  menjadi  ayer.  Dan mani-nya  itu  jadi  bumi,  dan  sirmani-nya  itu  menjadi  besi,  dan  bulu  roma-nya  itu menjadi  rumput,  dan  rambut-nya  itu  menjadi  kayu,  dan  ayer  mata-nya  itu menjadi  hujan,  dan  ploh-nya  itu  menjadi  ambun  ;  dan  sri  mani-nya  itu  jadi  padi, dan  dirmani-nya  itu  menjadi  ikan,  dan  darah  pusat-nya  itu  jadi  upas ;  dan penyakit  datang  deripada  sir,  penawar-nya  datang  deripada  nur.
Maka  inilah  fasal  yang  ka-atas  (langit).
Fasal  ekor-nya  yang  ka-bawah  itu  menjadi  tanah  lembaga  Adam,  yang  bharu, maka  di-namai  uri,  tembuni,  pusat,  tentuban.  Maka  yang  ampat  inilah  menjadi sakalian  penyakit  yang  di-bawah.  Dan  darah-nya  itu  jatoh  ka  bumi  menjadi Hantu  Jembalang  Puaka.  Dan  semangat  uri  tembuni  pusat  tentuban-nya  itu  jadi Polong  Penanggal.
Dan  bulu  mata-nya  itu  menjadi  Jin  Bala  Saribu.  Waktu-nya  saperti  kilat manikam  itu,  ia-lah  menjadi  Mambang  dan  Dewa,  dudok-nya  didalam  bulan  dan matahari  :  maka  sebab  di-katakan  dewa  dan  mambang  ia-itu  tiada  mati,  dan  Toh Mambang  Puteh  itu  dudok-nya  dalam  matahari,  dan  Toh  Mambang  Hitam  dudok- nya  dalam  bulan.  Dan  jikalau  ka  laut  di-katakan  Mambang  Tali  Harus  didalam- nya  itu.  Jikalau  ka  darat  di-namakan  ia  Toh  Jin  Puteh  Gemala  'Alam,  yang diam  didalam  matahari,  maka  Toh  Jin  Hitam  Lembaga  Adam,  yang  diam  didalam bulan,  maka  dem'kian-lah  aton-nya  2  Pawang  sakalian-nya  itu  terhimpun  kapada kalimah  la  ilaha,  d.  s.  b.
Ampat  Kuderat  Pawang
1 I )  Sri  'Alam  :     kanyata'an  kapada  ruang-ruang  mata  kita.
(2)  Si  Gentar  'Alam  :  „  ,,      nafar  kita.
1  Newbold,  op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  84  and  199.  2  Em.  Atoran.
i  NATURE  583
(3)  Si  Putar  'Alum  :  kanyata'an  kapada  jantong  kita.
(4)  Bentara  'Alain  :      ,,  ,,  kalimah  itulah  nyawa  Pawang.
(Pawang  itulah  Toh  Kathi  Kabun  Jalil.)
Asal  Jin  Hantu,  d.  s.  b.
(1)  Asal  Jin  deripada  pancharan  manikam.
(2)  ,,     Sheitan  deripada  brahi  Adam,  tatkala  beluin  bertemu  dengan  Hawa.
(3)  »     Jembalang  Puaka  deripada  uri,  tembuni,   pusat,  tentuban  (menjadi nyawa  kapada  tanah,  diam  di  gaung  guntong,  busut,  kayu,  batu,  tras).
[ii]  ASAL    K  A  YANG  AN
Inilah  risik  S£mar  Hitam  : —
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Jin  Hitam, Jembalang  Tunggal,  Jin  Kuning, Hei  Jin  Ishma l  Allah  Tunggal.
Tahu'kan  asal-mu  kaluar  deripada  bayang  Allah  mu  yang  bernama  Isma  Allah n.iina  yang  awal  lagi  yang  dahulu  ;  tatkala  ashikkan 2  diri-mu  bernama  Jin Salenggang  Bumi  Tunggal  rupa  'kan  diri-mu  maka  ashikkan  diri-mu  bernama Raja  Jin  Sahabak  mu  tinggal  rupa  akan  diri-mu  ashikkan  diri-mu  di  pintu langit  yang  pertama  bernama  nenek  Bgrumbung  Sakti  bertekak  hitam  berdarah puteli  bertulang  tunggal  beroma  songsang  hulubalang  yang  asal  maka  tinggal  rupa 'kan  diri-mu  masa  maka  jatoh  deri  atas  pohun  narun-narun  3  bernamakan  Dewana maka  datang  uleh  Suri  Peri  yang  baik  rupa-nya  maka  terpandang  atipak  uleh Dewana  maka  berchita  si  kaluar  mani  satitek  maka  che'rah  gilang  gemilang  maka terpandang  uleh  Suri  Peri  maka  di-ambil  uleh  Suri  Peri  maka  memiling4  maka kaluar-lah  anak  ampat  orang  sa-hulu-hulu,  sa-hilir-hilir  akan  Dewana  tinggal  rupa 'kan  diri-nya  maka  mengashik  akan  diri-mu  kamana  jatoh  ura-masa  maka  kern bali- lah  angkau  rupa-mu  bersipat  dengan  sipat  yang  kahar  rupa  angkau-mu  sedia  kala maka  bernama  Isma  Allah  tatkala  sujucl  [kapada]  Tuhan  maka  sakian  lama  minta menjadi  negri  kayang-kayangan,  antara  langit  tudongan  6  bumi  maka  di-benar  uleh Tuhan  maka  memohun  kapada  Tuhan  maka  hilang  akan  diri-nya  dia  ka-mana jatoh  ura-masa,  maka  jatoh  kapada  awan  yang  kuning  maka  bernama  Dewa  Asal Yang  Tunggal  maka  berikat  tapa  'umor  dua-b'las  talum  maka  tinggal  rupa6  akan dirimu-nya,  maka  di-bangkitkan  Aji  Pesuna,  maka  tutup  lambongan  kiri,  tutup lambongan  kanan,  tujoh-tujoh  ekhlas  ;  maka  pandang  sa-b'lah  awun  t'rus  sa-b'lah awun,  pandang  sa-b'lah  wetan  t'rus  sa-b'lah  wetan,  maka  pandang  sa-b'lah  pipiran t'rus  sa-b'lah  pipiran,  pandang  sa-b'lah  pagalan  t'rus  sa-b'lah  pagalan  pandang  turun tujoh  petala  bumi  t'rus  tujoh  petala  bumi,  pandang  naik  tujoh  petala  langit,  t'rus tujoh  petala  langit  maka  di-jadikan  satu  hikmat  maka  di-jadikan  satu  negri kakayangan  tujoh  maka  masokkan  7  diri-mu  kamana  jatoh  ura  masa  jatoh  didalnm negri  kakayangan,  didalam  negri  ratna  gading  pgtah  tinggi  mutu  manikam  maka di-jadikan  Dewa  Bentara  'Umar  di-tilek  uleh  Dewa  Bentara  'Umar  aku  sa-orang- orang  diri  maka  di-jadikan  Dewa  Bentara  Guru,  maka  di-tilek  uleh  Bentara  Guru aku-lah  Dewa  Asa  yang  tunggal,  Jin  yang  dahulu,  Dewa  yang  asal,  aku-lah mengakukan  diri  aku-lah  sa-orang-orang  Dewa  asal  yang  tunggal  cherah  gilang .gemilang,  terlalu  baik  rupa-nya  bersemayam  terlalu  malu  akan  Dewa  yang  katiga, maka  sujud,  maka  lalu  berpesan  tinggal  jikalau  rosak  didalam  negri  kakayangan di-sebut  akan  nama  aku  Isma  Allah  nama  aku  yang  asal  lagi  dahulu,  maka
1  Isma.  *  i.e.  Bunting.
-  Qu.   'ashikkan,  and  so  infra  throughout  ;'  Ou.  dengan.
this  section.  6  Beralih  rupa.
s  i.f.  Kenny  in.  7  Km.  Meng'ashikkan  and  so  infra.
584  APPENDIX  CHAP.
masokkan  diri-mu  kamana  jatohura  masamaka  jatohdidalam  awanyanghitam  niaka bernama  Jin  Sagebang  Langit,  sa-b'lah  hidong  mengidukan  langit,  sa-b'lah  hidong mengidukan  bumi,  maka  tinggal  rupa  akan  diri-mu  mengashik  tatkala  mutu-mutu 'kan  'alam  dunia  maka  bemama  Jin  Hitam  Sa-halilintar,  maka  tinggal  akan  rupa diri-mu  maka  mengashik  jadi  mengambor  naik  ka  kayangan  tujoh  maka  di-tilek ampat  penjuru  'alam  maka  mengambor  turun  berikat  tapa  di-bawah  baloh  matahari jatoh  bernamakan  Ajai  Biku  Puteh  maka  di-tinggal  rupa-mu  mengashikkan diri-mu  bernama  Anak  Jin  Sakti  'Alam  tunggal  maka  berdiri  di  pintu  langit sa-b'lah  kaki  berdiri  di  pintu  bumi  sa-b'lah  kaki  jatoh  ka  tanah  Jawa  maka bernama  Alan  Semar.
CHAPTER    II
MAN    AND    HIS    PLACE    IN    THE    UNIVERSE
(a)   Creation  of  Man
[iii]  ASAL  PAVVANG  [Chap.  i.  p.  4.
[Chap.  ii.  p.  19
"  Kun  "  kata  Allah,  payah l  "  kun  "  kata  Muhammad  : Menjadi  benih,  benih  jadi  urat, Urat  jadi  batang,  batang  jadi  daun  ; "  Kun  "  kata  Allah,  payah *  "  kun  "  kata  Muhammad  : Tanah  sa-tapak  pembahagian  Tuhan, Tanah  sa-tapak  didalam  Tuhan ; Ada  Bumi,  ada  Langit, Kechil  Bumi  sagelang  dulang, Kechil  Langit  sagelang  payong. Bertitah  Allah  ta'ala  : "  Jangan  angkau  engkar  Jibrail, Pergi  ambil  hati  Bumi." Ta'  dapat  ambil  hati  Bumi  : "  Aku  ta'  kasih  "  kata  Bumi. Pergi  mendapat  Nabi  Israfil, Ta'  dapat  juga  ambil  hati  Bumi. Pergi  mendapat  'Ijrail,2 Tiada  juga  dapat  hati  Bumi. Pergi  mendapat  'Ijrail,3 Bharu-lah  dapat  hati  Bumi.
Sudah  dapat  hati  Bumi  bergunchang  'arash  dengan  krusi Dengan  sagala  'alam.
Dapat  hati  Bumi  di-buat-nya  lembaga  Adam, Menjadi  kras  pula  hati  Bumi  itu. Ayer  pula  masok  lampau  lembut  pula, Masok  api,  bharu  di-tempa  lembaga  Adam. Sudah-lah  bangkit  lembaga  Adam, Minta  nyawa  kapada  Allah  ta'ala.
1  Em.  Supaya.  2  Em.  Mikail.  3  i.e.  'Azrail :  so  infra,  in  iv.
ii  MAN  5«5
Bri-nya  nyawa  Allah  ta'ala,  bersin-lah
Allah  ta'ala,  redam-lah  lembaga  Adam.
Balik  memhuat  lembaga  Adam  ;
Menyuroh  Allah  ta'ala  ambil  besi  Khcrsani,
Di-Iantakkan  di  blakang,  menjadi  tiga  puloh  tiga  tulang,
Di-atas  besi  yang  tua,  yang  muda  di-bawah.
Besi  yang  tua  tersundak  ka  langit,
Besi  muda  tertunjam  ka  bumi.
Sudah  bernyawa  lembaga  Adam
Tinggal  didalam  shurga,
Di-tengok-nya  mgrak  chantek  bukan  kapalang,
Tiba  malaikat  Jibrail  :
"  Ya  malaikat  Jibrail,  aku  sa'orang  diri,
Murah  lagi  berdua,  aku  minta  bini."
Bertitah  Allah  ta'ala,  "  Suroh-lah  Adam
Sembahyang  suboh  dua  raka'at,"
Sembahyang-lah  Adam,  turun-lah
Baba  Hawa,  di-tangkap-nya  Nabi  Adam
Belum  chukup  sembahyang,  di-ambil  balik.
Maka  sembahyang  hajat  dua  raka'at,
Habis  di-dapat-lah  Baba  Hawa  :
Sudah  nikah,  sakali  beranak
Berdua,  sampei  ampat  puloh  ampat  anak.
Maka  anak  pun  kahwin,  chantek  sama  chantek,
Burok  sama  burok.
Uri  anak  yang  sulong  Dato'  Petala  Guru Jadi  bijeh  :
Darah-nya  jadi  amas  nur  Allah. Maka  anak-nya  Dato'  Gemalakim  '  tinggal  di  langit, Itulah  Pawang  yang  Tua, Yang  ka'ampat  kita. [iv]
A'uzu  billahi  min  al-sheitani  '1-rajimi.  Bismillahi  '1-rahmani  '1-rahimi.  Adapun angin  bertiup,  ombak  berpalu,  'arash  belum  bernama  'arash,  kursi  belum  bernama kursi,  tanah  satapak  pembei  i  Tuhan  kita  singga(h)  tanah  terbalik  sahdei  akar  putus sabatang  kayu  r£bah,  maka  ada  pawang di-jadikan  Allah  ta'ala,  " Kun"  kata  Allah, paya  "Kun"  kata  Muhammad,  ada  Langit,  ada  Bumi,  di-jadikan  Allah  ta'ala,  maka bertitah  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  kapada  Jibrail  [suroh  pergi  mengambil  hati Bumi,  maka  Jibrail  pun]  sudah  pergi  tidak  dapat ;  kemdian  Jibrail  balik  mengadap Tuhan  mengatakan  tidak  dapat,  kemdian  berlitah  Allah  ta'ala  kapada  Mikail menyuroh  mengambil  hati  Bumi  warna-nya  puleh  ;  kemdian  Mikail  pun  tidak dapat  juga,  kemdian  bertitah  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  kapada  Isnilil,  menyuroh mengambil  hati  Bumi  warna-nya  puteh,  kemdian  Israfil  pun  tidak  dapat  juga ; kemdian  bertitah  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  ilengan  merka-nya  kemdian  lalu  ber- titah Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  kapada  'Ijrail  menyuroh  mengambil  hati  Bumi kemdian  'Ijrail  pun  lalu-lah  pergi.  Kemdian  apakala  sampei  kapada  Bumi  maka 'Ijrail  pun  lalu  member!  salam  kapada  Bumi  maka  kata-nya  "  Al-salam  'aleikum, Ya  Bumi ! "  dan  Bumi  pun  menyahut  "  W'aleykum  salam,  wa  rahmat  Allah,  wa bertuah,  ya  'Ijrail!"  Kemdian  'Ijrail  pun  berchakap  kapada  Bumi  "Aku  ini datang  kapada  angkau,  aku  di-titahkan  uleh  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  mengam- bil hati  angkau,"  kemdian  di-jawab  uleh  Bumi  "  Aku  tidak  kasih,  karna  aku Allah  ta'ala  yang  membuat  dan  jikalau  angkau  ambil  hati  aku  tentu  aku  mati," Kemdian  marah  'Ijrail  "Jikalau  angkau  kasih-pun  aku  ambil  juga,  dan  jikalau
1  Km.   Kemalu-'l-hakim,  i.e.  Lukmanu-'l-hakim.
586  APPENDIX  CHAP.
angkau  tidak  kasih-pun  aku  mengambil  juga,"  kemdian  'Ijrail-pun  menolakkan Bumi  dengan  tangan  kanan-nya,  dan  tangan  kiri-nya  menchapei  hati  Bumi  lalu di-dapat-nya,  b£tul  juga  warna-nya  puteh.  Kemdian  'Ijrail  pun  lalu  mengadap Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  menyembahkan  hati  Bumi ;  kemdian  sudah  di-tfirima Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  hati  Bumi  itu,  kemdian  maka  di-panggil  Allah  ta'ala Jibrail,  kemdian  Jibrail  pun  datang  mengadap  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala,  kemdian bertitah  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  kapada  Jibrail  "Angkau  tfimpa  lembaga  Adam itu  ; "  kemdian  Jibrail  handak  menSmpa  lembaga  Adam  tidak  buleh  jadi  sebab keras,  kemdian  bertitah  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  "  Buboh  ayer,"  maka  Jibrail  lalu di-buboh  ayer,  kemdian  terlalu  banyak  ayer  jadi  chayer  pula,  kemdian  Jibrail pun  pergi  mengadap  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  menyembahkan  terlalu  chayer, maka  bertitah  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  kapada  Jibrail  "Buboh  api,"  kemdian  lalu- lah  Jibrail  mdnempa  lembaga  Adam.  Kemdian  sudah  jadi  Adam,  kemdian Jibrail  pun  pergi  mengadap  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  memintakan  nyawa  lem- baga Adam,  kemdian  di-bri  Allah  ta'ala  nyawa  kapada  Jibrail  dan  Jibrail  pun pegang  dengan  tangan  kanan  nyawa  lembaga  Adam  dan  nyawa  Siti  Hawa di-sablah  tangan  kiri,  kemdian  sampei  di  tengah  jalan  di-buka  Jibrail  tangan kiri-nya  kemdian  nyawa  Siti  Hawa  balik  kapada  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala  dan nyawa  lembaga  Adam  lalu  di-hinggapkan  kapada  ubun-ubun  lembaga  Adam nyawa  itu,  lalu-lah  hidup  lembaga  Adam  kemdian  Siti  Hawa  pun  sudah  jadi, kemdian  lalu-lah  kahwin  lembaga  Adam  sama  Siti  Hawa,  kemdian  lalu  hamil Siti  Hawa  lama-nya  sambilan  bulan,  kemdian  lalu  beranak,  kemdian  gelap gulita  tidak  tampak  handak  mengrat  pusat  anak  Adam  itu,  kemdian  lalu  Adam mengambil  serban-nya  lalu  di-k6baskan  kapada  anak-nya,  lalu-lah  trang :  itu- lah  asal  terbit  badi  kapada  anak  Adam,  dan  uri-nya  anak  Adam  itu  di-timbun- kan  didalam  tanah,  dan  itulah  asal  jadi  bijeh,  dan  chahia-nya  anak  Adam  itu jadi  intan,  dan  darah-nya  anak  Adam  itu  jadi  amas.
Adapun  terbuat  Pawang  itu  kapada  lembaga  Adam  adapun  sahabat  lembaga Adam  itu  am  pat  orang,  nomber  satu  nama  Kedus,  nomber  dua  nama  Kedim, nomber  tiga  nama  Kempas,  nomber  ampat  nama  Mcrjan — itulah  ampat  orang asal  Pawang  yang  di-jadikan  Allah  subhana  wa  ta'ala.
Dan  yang  nomber  satu,  dia-nya  tinggal  di  hulu  ayer  ;  dan  yang  nomber  dua tinggal  di-sablah  matahari  hidup  ;  dan  yang  nomber  tiga  tinggal  di-sablah matahari  mati,  dan  yang  nomber  ampat  tinggal  didalam  lautan.
(l)  Anak  Pawang  Hutan  ;  (2)  anak  Pawang  [?];  (3)  anak  Pawang  Rusa ; (4)  anak  Pawang  Bijeh.  Maka  anak  sakalian  Pawang-Pawang  melainkan  di-satu- lah l  terbit  (?)  dan  ta'lok-nya,  dan  itulah  Pawang  yang  di-turunkan  Allah  subhana wa  ta'ala  ada-nya.
[v]  (b}   Sanctity  of  the  Body         [Chap.  ii.  p.  23.
It  is  impossible  for  want  of  space  to  give  illustrations  of  this  subject  other than  those  quoted  in  the  text.
For  further  details,  vide  inter  alia  Leyden,  Malay  Annals,  pp.  20-24,  95" 107;  Newbold,  British  Settlements  in  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  vol.  ii.  pp.  83-86, 176,  178;  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.  No.  9,  pp.  87-89;  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.  No.  28,  pp. 67-72.
(c)    The  Soul INVOCATIONS  TO  THE  SOUL         [Chap.  ii.  p.  47.
[vil  Mengalih  semangat  [Chap.  vi.  p.  454.
Al-salam  'aleikum  hei  Run  yang  berusoh2       Mari  Ruh  kamari,
yang  berasal  Mari  Semangat  kamari,
1  Qu.  Disitu.  2  Em.  Berusul.
in  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  SUPERNATURAL          587
Mari  Kcchil  kamuri.  Jangan  angkau  berkechil  rasa
Mari  Burong  kaman,  Jangan  angkau  mengambil  salah
Mari  Halus  kamari,  Jangan  angkau  mengambil  sileh.
Mari,  aku  dudok  puja  nm  Aku  dudok  puja  urn
Mari,  aku  dudok  melambei  mu  Aku  dudok  hela  mu
Balik  kapada  ntmah  tangga  mu  Aku  dudok  sru  mu
Kapada  lantei  sudah  jongkat-jongkatan,        Aku  dudok  lambei  mu
Atap  sudah  bintang-bintangan  Mari  pada  waktu  ini,  mari  pada  katika
Jangan  angkau  berkechil  hati  ini.
[vii]  Riang  Semangat  [Chap.  ii.  p.  48.
[Chap.  vi.  p.  455. Kur  !  Semangat  Si  Anu  ini  yang  sakit, Kembali-lah  kamu  ka-dalam  salerang  tuboh  Si  Anu  ini Ka  rumah  tangga  kampong  'laman, Ka  mak  bapa,  sarong  kamu.
[viii]  Another  Version  [Chap.  ii.  p.  50.
[Chap.  vi.  p.  454.
Kur,  semangat-semangat  Si  Anu  yang  Ka  rumah  tangga,  kampong  'laman,
ka-tujoh ,  Mengadap  ka  mak  bapa ,  ka  kaum  kalurga :
Balik-lah  kamu  ka  rumah  tangga  sendiri,  Jangan  'kau  sara-bara,
Inilah  mak  bapa  'kau  datang  memanggil,  Pulang  ka  rumah-'kau  sendiri.
[ix]
The  Malays  believe  that  it  is  very  bad  for  one  to  be  awakened  suddenly,  and even  when  one  coolie  is  waking  another,  he  does  so  with  the  greatest  gentleness, calling  him  softly  by  his  name  in  an  ever  varying  tone  until  he  has  succeeded  in awaking  him.  Rajas  and  Chiefs  are  never  aroused  until  they  wake  naturally. The  European  passion  of  being  called  in  the  morning  is  regarded  by  the  Malays as  only  one  more  symptom  of  the  madness  which  is  known  to  possess  these people. l
CHAPTER    III
RELATIONS    WITH    THE    SUPERNATURAL    WORLD The  Magician
[x]  'ISHARAT  PAWANG  [Chap.  iii.  p.  56.
The  Pawang's  Shibboleth
"Ashahadu  Allah  ilaha-illa-'llah  Ya   saudara-ku  Jibrail,    Mikail,    Israfil,
Wa  ashiidu    anna    Muhammadu-'l-rasul  'Azrail,
Allah.  Angkau  berampat  berlima  dengan  aku
'  Hikavat  Raja.  Budiman,  Part  ii.  No.  3,        connected  with  the  Soul  vide  infra  Chap.  VI. p.  35,  Publications  of  tltt  Straits  Branch  of       esp.  sees,  ccxiii,  ccxiv,  cclxv,  ccfxxv. the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.     For  other  charms
588  APPENDIX  CHAP.
Aku  dudok  di  Krusi  Allah  Ya  Allah  arastu  rabi-ku
Aku  bersandar  di  tiang  'Arash  La-ilaha-illa-'llah  ya  pata
Aku  bertongkatkan  di  pusat  tiang  Ka'bah,  Lul-uyu-bi-'l-athim
Tembuni  akan  alas-ku.  La-ilaha,  d.s.b. Hak  Bumi,  satahan  Bumi,  sengga  Langit
[xi]  Pendinding  Pawang
Hei  S'ri  'Alain,  Si  Gen  tar  'Alam  Hu  tidor  di-luar,  liput  chahia  ensan,
Sheikh  'Alam,  Dato'  Si  Putar  'Alam,  Ensan  tidor  di-luar,  liput  chahia  Hu.1
Yang  diam  di  kandang  besi  puteh  ampat  Ghaib-lah  aku  di-dalam  kandang  kalimah
penjuru  'alam  :  La-ilaha-illa-'llah  :  Hu  ! Yang  diam  di  kandang  hulubalang  ampat
penjuru  'alam  :
NATURE  OF  RITES
[xii]  Invocation  to  the  Spirit  of  Incense  [p.  75.
Zabur  Hijau  nama-nya  kem'nyan,  Yang  berulang  ka  Ka'bat  Allah,
Zabur  Bajang  nama-nya  abu-'kau,  'Kan  pemanggil  aulia  Allah,
Zabur  Puteh  nama-nya  asap-'kau,  Yang  diam  di  Pintu  Lawang  Langit,
Daki  Rasul  Allah  asal  'kau  jadi ;  Yang  berulang  ka  Intan  Puteh
Asap  dikau  tujoh  Petala  Bumi,  Dahulu 2  Misir,  petang  dan  pagi,
Asap  dikau  tujoh  Petala  Langit,  Tahu  menghidupkan  ranting  yang  mati
'Kan  penyeru  sagala  ruh  yang  sakti  yang  Tahu  mengembang  bunga  yang  layu,
kramat,  Tahu  menjawatkan  kata  Allah,
Ruh  aulia  Allah,  yang  diam  di  galang-  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah,
gang  matahari,  Muhammad  Rasul  Allah.
[xiii]  Rice  Paste  Invocations  and  Charms  [p.  8 1 .
(a)  Tepong  tawar,  tepong  jati,  Jangan  sakit,  jangan  mati,
Katiga  dengan  tepong  Kadangsa,  Jangan  chachat,  jangan  binasa.
Jikalau  buleh  kahandak  hati
(The  tepong  tawar  is  made  of  rice-flour  and  water  with  pounded  leaves  of selaguri  and  sambau  dara  mixed  up  in  it.  The  brush  is  censed  first  at  the bottom  and  then  at  the  top  before  being  used  to  sprinkle  the  tepong  tawar.}
(d)  Tepong  tawar,  tepong  jati,  Gunong  runtoh  di-riba  aku.
Katiga  dengan  tepong  Kadangsa,  Bukan  aku  yang  punya  tepong  tawar,
Naik-lah  'mas  berkati-kati,  Toh  Sheikh   Puteh  Gigi  yang  punya Naik-lah  wang  be-ribu  laksa.  tepong  tawar  ;
(c)  Tepong  tawar,  tepong  jati,  Bukan  aku  yang  punya  tepong  tawar, Tepong  tawar  sa-mula  jadi,  Dato'   La'ailbau    yang    punya  tepong Barang  'ku  chinta,  aku  peruleh,  tawar  ;
Barang    yang     di-pinta    samua-nya  Bukan  aku  yang  punya  tepong  tawar,
dapat.  Dato'  Betala  Guru  yang  punya  tepong
(d)  Tepong  tawar,  tepong  jati,  tawar  : Kerakap  turn  boh  di  batu,  Kabul  Allah,  d.s.b. Allah   menawar,    Muhammad    men-
jampi,
(e)  Ini  'isharat  menurunkan  padi ;  maka  tepong  tawar :  dahulu  pertama ambil  daun  ati-ati  daun  gandarusa  daun  ribu-ribu  daun  sadingin  daun  sipuleh dan  tanah  Hat  puteh  :  ini  tawar-nya  : —
1  Bunyi  nafas  yang  masok  "  Allah,"  bunyi  nafas  yang  kaluar  "  Hu,"kata  orang  Malayu.
2  Em.  di  hulu.
THE  MALAY  PANTHEON
589
Tcpong  tawar,  tepong  jati. Dapat  amas  bcrkati-kati, Aku  mcnepong  tawar  bcnis  padi Sudah  berisi  maka  menjadi.
CHAPTER    IV
THE    MALAY    PANTHEON
[xiv]  Gods  [Chap.  iv.  p.  88.
LIST  OF  MYTHICAL  AND  RELIGIOUS  TERMS  i
English. A  god,  a  deity. A  goddess. A  great  god. Vishnu  (?) Vishnu. Durga. Varuna. Yama. Buddha. Brahmin. Spiritual  guide.
Malay.
Dewa,  dewata. Dewi. Batara. Batara  Guru. Bisnu. Durga. Baruna. Batara  Yama. Buda. Brahman  a. Guru.
English. God.
Praise,  adoration. Heaven. Hell. The  soul. Fast. Idol.
Astrology. Astrologer. Charm,  spell.
Malay.
Tuhan,  Allah. Fuji,  puja. Swarga.
Naraka,  Patala. Nyawa. Puwasa. Brahala. Panchalima. Satrawan. Guna,  ubat,  mantra.
[xv]
INVOCATION  OF  THE  EARTH-SPIRIT
Hei,    Toh    Mentala   Guru    Sakti   yang
di  hutan, Aku-lah  yang   bernama  Dato'    Mentala
Guru  Sakti  yang  di  rumah, Kita  berdua  bersaudara. Sgdang  Saleh  nama-nya  angkau S&iang  Sidi  nama-nya  aku  :
'Kau  di  hutan,  aku  di  rumah.
Aku  meminta  membuat  kuasa  [yang  aku
kahandak]. Perminta'an    aku   sa-pgmukol     ggndang
ka-hulu, Sa-pfimukol  gSndang  ka-hilir.
[xvi]
Pendinding
Sa-pemukol  gendang  ka  laut,
Sa-pemukol  gendang  ka  darat,
Yang    aku   pinta,    mana-mana  sakalian
anak  chuchu  angkau. Tolong-lah  kawalkan  anak  chuchu  aku, Jangan-lah  rosakkan,  jangan  'kau  bin-
asakan,
'  Angkau  bla  pleherakan-lah, Mana-mana  sakalian  anak  chuchu  angkau , Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  gunong, Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  bukit.
Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  busut. Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  tras, Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  akar  kayu, Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  batang, Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  dahan, Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  daun, Mana-mana  yang  bertapa  di  bungkul, Mana  sakalian  itu,  aku  minta  kawalkan Ampat  penjuru  ladung-ku. Jangan-lah    angkau    mungkirkan    satia kapada  aku  :
1  Extracted  from  Crawfurd,  Mai.  Cram.  p.  cxcvii.
590
APPENDIX
Jikalau  angkau  mungkirkan,
Mati-lah  angkau  di-timpa  tiang  Ka'bah,
Mali  di-sula  Besi  Kawi,
Mati  di-panah  halilintar  'Alam, la-itu-lah  ada-nya !
[xvii]
Relation  of  various  Deities
Batara  Guru  nama  di  balei, Batara  Kala  nama  di  gigi  rimba, Panjang  Kuku  nama  di  hati  rimba.
[p.  90.
Raja  Kala  pegang  deripada  ayer  timpas  sampei  ayer  naik  besar  sakali. Raja  Guru  di  Laut  is  identified  with  Mambang  Tali  Haras  or  Nabi  Khidhr ; Panjang  Kuku  with  the  Hantu  Pemburu.  Batara  Guru  membri  hukum  kapada  Jin Ibni  al  Ujan,  di-suroh  memarentahkan  ra'yat-nya  :  dia  sendiri  berjalan  bawa  sum- pitan  chari  makan.
Nama-nama  Hantu  Laut
Si  Raya  nama  bapa-nya,  tinggal  di  kuala,  Madaruti  nama  mak-nya,  tinggal di  hulu,  Wa'  Ranai  nama  anak-nya,  tinggal  di  tengah.
[xviii]
TANGKAL  HANTU  HITAM
Fasal  Hantu  Hitam  dtidok  di  pusat  Bumi
[P-  93-
Jin  Hitam,  Lembaga  Adam,
Yang  berjijak  di  hati  Bumi,
Yang  bergantong  di  pintu  Langit,
Berkat  Sidi  terjali  sendiri
Menjadikan  sakalian  'Alam  !
Barang  aku  chinta,  aku  peruleh  ;
Barang  'ku  minta,  samua-nya  dapat !
Aku  taku  asal-nya  Tanah,
Uri  tembuni  pusat  tentoban
Mula  asal-'kau  jadi :
Jangan   angkau   naik   angkau    ganggit1
Si  Anu  itu, Karana  aku  tahu  asal-'kau  jadi,
Aku    talakkan2-lah  tiada  buleh  menjadi
manah.s Hei  saudara-ku  Jibrail,   Mikail,    'Azrail,
Israfil !
Angkau  berampat  berlima  dengan  aku  ! Aku  dudok  di  Krusi  Allah Aku  bersandar  di  tiang  'Arash Tembuni  akan  alas-ku Hak  Bumi  satahan  Bumi Sangga  Langit,  ya  Allah  arastu Ya  rabi-kum  ya  katu  hul  Ali Ya  hulallah  kuwata  illah  billah Hil  Ali  yil  Ali.
[xix]  INVOCATION  TO  THE  EARTH-SPIRIT
Memanggil Jembalang  Tanah  ia-itu  Nyawa  Tanah yangderi  uri  tembuni  tentoban,  d.s.b.
Al-salam  'aleikum  !
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi,  sa-pachal  Nabi
Muhammad  asal  'kau  jadi Sa-pachal  Baginda   '  Ali  asal-nya  mula-
'kau  jadi Diri-mu  tanah  lembang,  turun  bertudong
daun  golah4 Jadi  diri-mu  pagi-pagi,  Raja  Sinar  nama-
nya  diri  ; Jadi   diri-mu   tengah  naik,    Raja    Paksi
nama-nya  diri ; Jadi    diri-mu  tengah   hari,   Raja   Buana
nama-nya  diri  ;
1  i.q.  usik.
2  i.q.  larang.
3  i.q.  kekal,  pusaka.
Jadi  diri-mu  tengah  turun,  Raja  Kilu nama-nya  diri ;
Jadi  diri-mu  petang-petang,  Kilat  Senja nama-nya  diri.
Diam  'kau  di  rimba  besar,  Sakat  Rendang nama-nya  'kau,
Diam  'kau  di  kayu  ara,  Si  Chakah  nama- nya  'kau,
Diam  'kau  di  tunggul  buta,  Si  Rempenai5 nama-nya  'kau,
Diam  'kau  di  busut  jantan,  Si  Rimpun  " nama-nya  'kau,
4  Golah,  daun  kayu  sakatilima.
5  Rempenai,  nama  akar.
6  Rimpun,  nama  kayu.
IV
THE  MALA  Y  PANTHEON
59'
1  >:.un  'kau  di  gunong guntong,  Si  Betoto' '
11.  in  i.  in  v.i  'kau, Diani  'kau  di  tengah  padang,  Si  Hampar
nama-nya  'kau. Diani  'kau  di  anak  ayer,  Si  Belunchau2
n;ima-nya  'kau, Diani  'kau   di   mata    ayer,    Si    Linchir
nama-nya  'kau  ; Jangan-lah   angkau    mungkirkan    satia
kapada-'ku !
Jikalau  angkau  mungkirkan, Mati  berkalentong,8  mati  berkalentang,
Mat!  tergantong  di  awan-awan
Ka  bumi  t;i'  sainpei,  kalangit  ta'  sampei,
Mati  di-panah  halunlintar,4
Mati  di-sambar  kilat  senja,
Mati   di-timpa    malaikat    yang    ampat-
puloh-ampat, Mati    di-timpa    daulat    ampat    pcnjuni
'  alam.
Berkat  daulat  Kamalu-'l-Hakim, Berkat  tawar  Maliku-'l-Rahman La-ilaha,  d.s.  b.
[xx]
ORIGIN  OF  THE  SPIRITS
Asal  Hantu
[P-  94-
When  the  twins  Habil  and  Kabil  were  in  the  womb  of  their  mother  Eve  they bit  their  thumbs  till  the  blood  came,  and  when  they  were  born  the  blood  turned into  spirits  both  good  and  evil.
The  blood  which  spurted  up  to  heaven  became  Kunchi  Sa-Raja  Ayer  ;  that which  reached  the  clouds  (awan)  became  Jin  Hitam  ;  and  that  which  fell  on  the ground  Jin  Puteh.
Darah  sagenggan  kiri,  darah  sagenggan  kanan,  itu-lah  asal  Hantu  Darat. For  the  rest,  uri  menjadi  harimau,  tembuni  menjadi  buaya,  bali  (tali  pusat) menjadi  gajah,  tentoban  menjadi  Hantu  Ayer.
[xxi]
Charm  to  cast  out  Evil  Influence
Daun  pekak,  daun  pegaga Katiga  dengan  mali-mali Aku  pinta'  mana  yang  ada, Membuang  sial  dengan  pemali.
I^ang  Pok  Lang  Melini, Katiga  dengan  awan  Shurga, Di-tepok  jangan-lah  tangan  kiri, Aku  pinta'  mana  yang  ada.
[xxii]        An  Incantation  called  Arak-arak  Jin  Sa'ribu,  or  the  Procession of  the  Thousand  Spirits
(It  is  the  first  formula  used  by  a  Pawang  -when  commencing  an important  series  of  operations}
Bi-smi-llahi-i -rahmani-r-rahim
Hei !  Jin  Allah  akan  kata-ku
Kata  hak  yang  sa-benar-nia
Hei !  Janu,  jin  janu,  jin  pari,  jin  amah,
Jin   manusia,    jin    bahdi,   jin    pela,    jin
pfidaka Jin   jfimbalang,   jin   beranang,   jin  ebni
jana,
Aku  tahu  asal  mula-mu  jadi Imam  Jamala  nama  bapa-mu Siti  Indra  Sendari  nama  mak-mu »Rubiah  Jamin  nama  datoh-mu Hakim  Liar  Suri  nama  moyang-mu Chichit  Malim  di  hutan Piyat  Berangga  Sakti  di  belukar
Siah  Badala  di  rimba
Siah  Rimba  di  langit
Sri  Jambalang  Makar  Alam  (iya  yang di-sru  sakarang  Tungku  Malim  ka- raja-an)  di  burnt
Sang  Berangga  Bumi  (iya  yang  di-sru  sa- karang Tungku  Setia  Guna)  yang bertegak  di  pintu  bumi  di  Bukit  Kaf.
Bantara  Alam  di  awan-awan
Sang  Rangga  Buana  di  angin
Berangga  Kala  di  gunong
Tambar  Boga  di  bukit
I^anggi  Tambar  Boga  di  pangsa  tanah
Berangga  Kala  di  barat
Sang  BSgor  (iya-lah  Nasahi)  di  timer
1  Betoto'  (not  Betutu),  i.q.  bersama-s.im.-i.
2  Btlunchau,  i.q.  ayer  berjalan.
3  Berkalentong,  ta'  tentu.
4  Halunlintar,  i.q.  halilintar.
592  APPENDIX  CHAP.
Sang  DSgor  (iya-lah  Nasahu)  di-utara  Jin  Pari  di  kayu
Sang  Rangga  Gampita{  iya-lah  Nasahah)  Jin  Bota  Sri  di  umah
di  selatan  Rangga  Kala  di  bendang
Sang  Rangga  Gambira( iya-lah  Nasahud)  Sangka  Kala  di  danau
di  tanah  datar  Dangga  Rahab  di  pay  a
Apa-apa  Sipar  Tapa  di  tanah  16pan  Sang  Lela  Chandra  di  ayer
Astara  Pancha-mahbota  di  tanah  d6rut  Misei  di  arus  di  ayer  mati
Jamshid  di  tanjong  Sangka  Pana  di  laut
Sangka  Kala  Degor  di  pangkal  tanjong  Mambang  Indra  Gampita  Sitnun  Bang- Anei-anei  Siku  Tanei  di  ujong  tanjong  kana  di  tasek
Anin-anin  Siku  Tanin  di  busut  Sang  Begor  Indra  di  arus
Si-Kuda  Belang  di  jerulong  Sri  Gemuntar  di  tasek
Si-B6dut  di  mata  ayer  Sri  Jala  di  pulau
Sang  Kabul  Lela  di  pSrigi  buta  Sri  Gantala  di  kuala  sungei
Sang  Lela  Ma-indra  Panchalogam  di  tras  Jiji  Azbar  Jiji  Dang  Siti  Udara  Salam  di Shah  Cardan  di  padang  sungei
Changhong  di  gaung  Mezat  di  dusun
Sang  Rangga  Berhala  di  tanah  ruab  Simun  di  dalarn  kampong
Rakshasa  Sang  Grahab  di  tanah  busoug  Adas  di  rumah
Sangka  Rakshasa  di  guha  Sang  Lela  di  dalam  manusia
Sang  B£gor  Indra  di  teluk  Al  kanas  ruh  hewani  nama  niawa-mu
Purba  Kala  di  permatang  Gardam-gardin  kapada  tampat-mu  diam
Sri  Permatang  di  lurah  Nabi  Kayani  nama  Penghulu-mu
Dalik  Rani  di  dani  Aku  jangan  angkau  pechat-i.1 Sri  Danglit  di  batu
[xxiii]  Invocation  to  the  Hantu  Songkei  ["p.   105.
. \l-salam  '  aleikum,  anak  chuchu  Hantu  Yang  bersusu  ampat  susu-nya,
Pemburu  !  Yang  menaroh  jala  lalat,
Yang  diam  di  rimba  sa-kampong  Yang  bergendang  kulit  tuma.
Yang  dudok  di  chSroh  banir,  Jangan-lah  angkau  nmngkir  satia  kapada Yang  bersandar  di  pinang  boring,  'ku.
Yang  bertedoh  dibawah  tukas,  Mati-lah  angkau  di-timpa  daulat  ampat Yang  berbulukan  daun  resam,  penjuru  'alam,
Yang  bertilamkan  daun  lerek,  Mati  di-timpa  malaikat  yang  ampat  puloh Yang  berbuai  di  medang  jelawei  ampat,
Tali  buayan-nya  samambu  tunggal,  Mati  di-timpa  tiang  Ka'bah,
Kernia  Tungku  Sultan  Berumbongan  Mati  di-sula  Besi  Kawi,
Yang  diam  di  Pagar  Ruyong,  Mati  di-panah  halilintar,
Rumah  bertiang  t6ras  jSlatang,  Mati  di-sambar  kilat  senja,
Rumah  berbendul  batang  bayam  Mati  di-timpa  Koran  tiga  puloh  juz,
(Bertaborkan  batang  purut-purut),  Mati  di-timpa  Kalimah,  d.s.b. Yang  berbulu  roma  songsang,
CHAPTER    V
MAGIC    RITES    CONNECTED    WITH    THE    SEVERAL DEPARTMENTS    OF    NATURE
Air
[xxiv]  CHARM  TO  CALL  THE  WIND      [Chap.  v.  p.  107.
Timangan  Memanggil  Angin
Mari-lah  Inche,  mari-lah  Tuan
Ureikan  rambut-'kau  yang  panjang  lampei.
1  N.  and  Q.,  No.  4  sec.  97,  issued  with  No.  17  of  the/./?.  A.  S.,  S.S.
WIND  AND  WEATHER  CHARMS
593
(If  the  wind  is  to  be  changed. )
Getir-lah  Angin,  sa-jarum,  dua  jarum, Sa-jarum  menampnng  Kapar, B'rat-b'rat  dagangan  membawasa-orang
Ka  Klang  berulang  makan, K.i  Langat  berulang  mandi. Mari-Iah  Inche,  mari-lah  Tuan, Ureikan     rambut-'kau     yang     panjang lam  pel.
CHARM  TO  RESTRAIN  THE  WIND
[xxv]  Menahan  Angin
Telor  chichak,  telor  mengkarong, Ka-tiga  dengan  si  labi-labi. Panchang  'ku  chachak  tengah  harong,
[p.   1 08.
Angin  ribut  tidak  menjadi. Puteh  menjadi  kapor, Hitam  menjadi  arang.
CHARM  TO  ALLAY  THE  STORM FIEND
[xxvi]      Taivar  Hantu  Ribut
Terbang  burong  si  anggau-anggau Hinggap  di  rumah  Malim  Palita, Mati  tersandar,  mati  tersorok, Mali  di-tuju  Pangeran  Chemcha.
CHARM  TO  PREVENT  RAIN [xxvii]        Menahan  Ujan      [p.  109.
Enggang  inggut  batang  meranti,
Tebal-tebal  daun  k'ladi, Ujan  ribut  tidak  menjadi.
[xxviii]
BIRD  CHARMS
(Hantu  Pemburu) Charm  against  the  Spectre  Huntsman
[P-  "3-
Take  the  extreme  tips  of  the  shoots  (puchok-nya  yang  bulat]  of  the  kapas,1 lerik?  rfsam?  and  lenjuang  mera/i,*  and  chew  them  with  betel-leaf,  repeating  this charm  : —
Si  Tompang9  nama  saudara-nya ;
Si  Kedah  nama  laki-nya,
Si  Gadeh  nama  bini-nya,
Si  Aduan  nama  anak-nya
Si  Adunada  menyandang  p£dang,
Terbongko'  -  bongko'    datang    angkau
deri  benchah  mahang, Tiada  sangkil 10  angkau  disini , Kama  Si  Aduan  ada  disini "Nak  pulang  malu  rasa-nya, Kama  sudah  menjadi  hantu, Hantu  Pemburu. Kabul  berkat  pengajar  guru-ku.
Hei  Kedah,8  kamana  Kadim?
Pergi  berburu  ka  benchah  mahang  ?
Kun  tapi,  kun  talak,
Juru-juru  gagak  buta,
Hantu  bota,  Si  Adunada8
Menyandang  terbongko' -bongko',
Salampuri  nama  sfkin-nya,
Silambuara  nama  kris-nya,
Terantan  7  Hantu  Rama.
Si  Pintas  8  nama  anjing-nya,
Si  Tampoi  nama  anjing-nya,
Si  Arau  nama  anjing-nya,
Si  Sukum  nama  anjing-nya  yang  tua.
1  Kapas.  i.e.  Kapas  hutan  or  Kapas  hantu, Hibiscus  abelmoschus,  L.  (Malvaceae).
2  Lerik,  probably  Pkrynium  parviflorum, Roxb.  (Scitamineae)  or  Phrynium  Griffithii, Bak.
3  Rlsam,  Glcichenia  linearis  (Filicese),  a common  fern.
1  *  Lfnjuang  mera/t,  the  common  red Dracaena,  Cordyline  tenninalis,  var.  ferrea (I.iliaceac).
8  Kedah  is  the  name  of  the  old  Spectre Huntsman,  and  Kadim  (or  Gadeh  =  grand- mother) that  of  his  wife.
8  Si  Adunada  and  Si  Aduan  were  explained as  the  names  of  his  two  children,  but  the
names  look  as  if  they  had  been  confused  in some  way.
1  Tarantan,  v.l.  terantang,  was  explained as  meaning  senjata  kabcsaran  (royal  weapons or  insignia)  of  the  Hantu  Rama.
8  To  these  names  may  be  added  Si  Lansat, Si  Kumbang,  and   Si    Desa,  a  lame  old  dug which  the  Spectre  Huntsman  is  said  to  carry at  his  side  in  a  wallet,  until  he  comes  up  with his  quarry,  but  whose  bite  is  then  the  worst  of them  all. — Cp.  Note  to  1.  6  of  sec.  xxx.
9  Si  Tompang    is    said    to   be  the   jack.il (srigala),  the  brother  of  Si  Sukum.
2  Q
594
APPENDIX
CHAP.
[xxix]
Another  Version  of  the  same
[p.  119.
Hei  Kedah,  kamu  Kadim,
Pergi  berburu  ka  kinchah J  mahang,
Sirih-pun  kunta,2  pinang-pun  kunta,
Teletak  di  juru-juru,3
Gagak-pun  buta,  Hantu-pun  buta  ;
Tabong  tertuntong  4  antara  mani,8
Silambuara  nama  kris-nya
Silambuara  \sic\  nama  sekin-nya,
Si  Kapas  nama  anjing-nya,
Si  Pintau  nama  anjing-nya,
Si  Merbah  nama  anjing-nya,
Si  Kusanun  nama  istri-nya,
Nyah-lah  angkau  ka  kinchah  mahang.
Si  Aduan  tiada  disini,
Si  Aduan  sakali  tiada  pula  disini,
Si   Aduan   mengenyahkan   Si    Hantu
Pemburu
'Nak  pulang  malu,  sudah  menjadi Si  Hantu  Pemburu.  6
[xxx]
Another  Charm  against  the  Spectre  Huntsman
[p.  119.
Pisau  raut,  panjang  ulu Akan  pSraut  pinang  berbulu, Si  K6dah  laki,  mak  Kedeh, Berburu  ka  benchah  mahang. Si  Kumbang  nama  anjing-nya, Si  Lansat7  nama  anjing-nya, Si  Muntong  nama  anjing-nya, Rangkesa  nama  anjing-nya, Dang  Saleh  nama  anjing-nya, Dang  Mesa(h)  8  nama  anjing-nya,
Langkat  Langkapuri  batang  lembing-
nya,
Dang  Buara  nama  mata-nya. Aku  tahu  asal-mu,  orang  petapa'an,9 Yang  dudok  di  bukit  Gunong  Ledang 10 Anak  Nabi  Yusuf11  merajok   kapada
bunda-nya Sebab    mahu     makan    hati     burong
chendrawasi. 12 Dengan  berkat,  d.s.  b. Hu,  Allah  !
[xxxi]
Fowling  Ceremonies
O  Si  Lanang,  Si  Tempawi, Mari-lah  kita  menyabong Mentara 13  rimba  dan  belukar.
[p.   132.
Ayam  nenek  bertaji  besi, Ayam  sahya  bertaji  buluh.
[xxxii]
On  setting  out —
Charms  used  in  Snaring  Wild  Pigeon
Bukan-nya  aku  yang  menggrak,
'Toh  Bujang  Sibor  yang  menggrakkan.
[P-  135-
1  Kinchah  =  benchah.
2  Kunta  =  terkena  (?).
3  Juru-juru,  sc.  mulut,  the  corners  of  the mouth.     Gagak :  lit.  a  crow,  but  here  said  to mean  the  goat-sucker  or  nightjar,  the  steed  of the  Spectre  Huntsman.
*  Tertuntong,  turned  upside  down,  the phrase  signifying  the  vomiting  which  accom- panies the  sickness  caused  by  the  Spectre Huntsman.
5  Antara  mani,  explained  as  meaning  be- tween noon  and  the  hour  of  prayer,  called dlohor  (early  in  the  afternoon),  that  being the  time  of  day  when  the  Spectre  Huntsman most  commonly  strikes  people  with  sickness.
*>  Si  Hantu  Pemburu,  here  definitely  ex- plained to  me  as  Batara  Guru  (Shiva).
7  Si  Lansat,  also  called  Si  Sukum,  a  lame old  hound  which  Si  Kedah  carries  on  his  back (anjing  bapa  tepok  di-dokong  uleh-nya).
°  Dang  Mesa(h),  also  called  Si  Pintal, always  accompanies  Si  Lansat.
9  Cp.  this  line  with  1.  18  of  Maxwell's version,  "Aku  tahu  asal  angkau  mula  men-
jadi, orang  Katapang."  "  Orang  petapa'an  " and  "orang  Katapang"  are  the  two  readings, and  the  ease  with  which  the  one  might  pass into  the  other,  possibly  through  a  medial  form "orang  katapa'an,"  will  be  readily  admitted by  students  of  Malay,  especially  when  the general  family  resemblance  of  this  version  to other  versions  of  the  same  charm  is  taken  into consideration.
10  G.  Ledang  is,  of  course,  the  well-known Mount  of  Penance  of  this  part  of  the  Penin- sula,  the  so-called   Mount  Ophir  of  Malacca territory.
11  Anak  Nabi  Fz«z</"  looks  like  an  interpola- tion/but  fresh  versions  will  no  doubt  explain  it.
"  Chendrawasi,  possibly  due  to  confusion with  the  berek-berek  of  the  commoner  ver- sions, but  this  point  also  requires  further investigation.  Mr.  Clifford  has  recorded  a similar  confusion  (the  berek-berek  being supposed,  he  says,  to  fly  feet  upwards  like  the chendrawasi).  See  note  on  chandrawasih  in text,  p.  in,  supra.
13  i.q,  antara.
BIRD  CHARMS
595
After  sounding  the  decoy-tube —
Aku  minta'  arak,  minta'  iringkan, Masok  kadalam  gendala  '  kami.
On  reaching  the  hut —
Bumbun  bernaina  Raja  Sakti,a  Gila  Kapor,  gila  Puding,  gila  Sarap,
Dfikut  bemama  Si  Raja  Gila8  Gila  masok  gendala  kami.
[xxxiii]
Do'  Ding,4  punei  Do'ding Katiga  punei  Madukara  ;  5
Another  Version
[p.   136.
Patah  ranting,  tindeh  ranting, Pulang  'adat  sedia  kala.
[xxxiv]
Indang-indang  melukut Indang  di  lapek8  purun,
When  Scattering  the  Rice Tabor  Melukut
Hilang-hilang  di-j6put Di-j6put  di-bawa  turun.
[xxxv]
A  longer  Version  of  the  same
Indang-indang  melukut Indang  di  sumpit  purun, Hilang-hilang  di-jeput Hilang  di-bawa  turun. Ta'turun  makan  menturun,7 Ta'  datang,  makan  benatang Hinggap  di  ranting  terpelanting Hinggap  di  dahan  mati  terbahan. Hinggap  di  daun  di-petok  ular  daun Turun   ka  tanah   di-petok  ular   yang bisa,
Terbang    ka    atas    di-sambar    sikap
rajawali, Kalau  ta'  turun.
Kur,  semangat !  Si  Raja  Kapor, Putri  Puding,  Dayang  Sarap  ! Turun    berkampong    ka  balei     Raja
Suleiman, Mengenakan     dokoh 8     lolah      Raja
Suleiman.
fxxxvi]  When  Sprinkling  the  Rice-water
Tepong  tawar,9  tepong  jati
Menawar  sakalian  bisa,  menolak  sakalian  bala.
1  Gendala,  elsewhere    nienala    (v.  in/r.) '.
(a)  I   can  find   nothing  nearer   to  it   in    the dictionaries    than    gendala   (with     a    cross- reference  to  kendala)  in    Khnkert,  who  ex- plains it  as  meaning  an  obstacle  or  hindrance. If  this  is  right  it  may  perhaps  be  translated "  Hold-fast,'    as  a  euphemism  for  "  snares  "  ;
(b)  on  the  other  hand,  if,  as  seems  most  likely. menala  is  the  correct  form,  it  may  simply  stand for  mendala  (=  ban  Jala,  a   bundle),  and    so mean  "enter  my  sack"  ;  (c)  or  it  may  even conceivably  mean  "  enter  my  circle  "  (referring to  the  circular  hut),   from  a  Sanskrit    word meaning  circle  or  disc  (v.  Kl.  s.v.).      This, however,  seems  far-fetched,  and  perhaps  (b)  is the  most  natural  explanation.
2  Raja  SaJtti.  "  Magic  Prince,"  a  euphem- l  ism  for  the  hut  (bumbun) ;  possibly  in  allusion 'to  the  wizard  concealed  inside  it.
*  Raja    Gila,    "  Prince     Distraction,"    a euphemism  for  the  decoy-tube  (buluh  dekuf).
*  Do'  Ding  is  evidently  a  name  given   in allusion  to  some  kind  of  pigeon,  but  the  only pigeon   name   which  comes  at  all  near  it  is foui ing.      It   is  quite  possible  that  this  may be  right,  although  one  of  my  informants  told me   that  it  was  meant   to  refer  to  a  kind  of
pigeon  called  rangob,  which  is  not  given  in Klinkert's  dictionary.
8  Madukara  was  explained  to  me  by  a Malay  as  referring  to  a  kind  of  pigeon  gener- ally called  punei  jambu.  Klinkert  only gives  rnadoe-kara  as  meaning  "silken  stuff inwoven  with  gold  or  embroidered  with  a special  pattern,"  etc.
'  Lapek,  v.  1.  sumpit  (a  rice  bag).
7  Menturun,  the  Selangor  name  of  the  bear- cat (Arctictis  binturong).
8  Dokoh  is  a  crescent-shaped  breast-orna- ment rather  than  a  necklace  in  the  ordinary sense.     Still  it  is  suspended  round  the  neck  of the  wearer,  and  necklace  is  perhaps  the  best translation.     I  may  remark  that  such  a  "  neck- lace "  (dokoh)  is  often  worn  by  Malay  brides and    bridegrooms,    and     may    even    be    seen decorating  the  neck  of  an  animal,  such  as  the buffalo,  when  it  is  dressed  up  and  sent  as  a present  to  some  great  man.
»  Tawar  means  to  neutralise  (the  power  or effect  of)  anything.  Hence  it  is  applied  even  to the  neutralising  of  the  power  of  diseases  and  of evil  spirits,  as  well  as  of  noxious  potions  and influences.
596
APPENDIX
CHAP.
[xxxvii]
A  longer  Version  of  the  same
Tepong  tawar,  tepong  jati,  Indang-indang  (di)  sumpit  bgras,
Tambah  tumbun  berisi,  Raja  Suleiman  menyuroh  dSras,
Turun  limbok  beribu  kati,  Indang-indang  ujong  melukut
Naik  kabaleian  a  gading  Indang-indang  di  sumpit  purun
Hamparan  perak,  susoran  suasa,  Hilang-hilang  di-jSput,
Hidangan  Tuan  Putri  Sa-lebar  Nyiru.  Di-j6put  di-bawa  turun.
Arak-arak  kalangkiri 2  Indang-indang  melukut
Kembang  bunga  Si  Panggil-Panggil  Indang  di  sumpit  garam
Turun  berarak,  turun  berderei,  Hilang-hilang  di-jfiput,
Raja  Suleiman  datang  memanggil.  Bawa  kadalam.
[xxxviii]  When  Sounding  the  Call  (mglaung)  Pp.  137.
Kur  semangat,  Putri  Puding,  Raja  Suleiman  datang  memanggil.
Si  Raja  Kapor,  Si  Raja  Sarap,  Ta'  turun  makan  menturun
Masok-lah  kadalam  mgnala  kami.  Ta'  datang  makan  benatang
Hinggap-lah  di  ampeian  3  gading.  Hinggap  di  ranting  terpelanting
Arak-arak,  iring-iring  Tujoh  lorah  tujoh  pematang,
Kembang  bunga  Si  Panggil-Panggil,  Pergi  ka  bukit  ta'  dapat  makan,
Turun  berarak,  turun  beriring  Pergi  ka  lembah  ta'  dapat  minum.
Another  Charm  used  on  the  same  occasion
[xxxix]
Tgtak  dahan  4  mengkudu  8  Datang  berkampong  ka  balei  Raja  Sulei-
Tetak  tfikan  6  tekankan,  man,
Yang  dekat  datang  dahulu  Kur   semangat,    Si    Raja    Kapor,    Putri
Yang  jauh  pesan-pesankan  ;  Puding,  Dayang  Sarap,
Yang  bertelor  tinggalkan  telor  Turun  berkampong  ka  balei  Raja  Sulei-
Yang  beranak  tinggalkan  anak  man,
Yang  buta  datang  berpimpin  Mengenakan  dokoh  lolah  Raja  Suleiman.
Yang  patah  datang  bertongkat.    '
Alternative  version  to  be  repeated  both  in  the  centre  and  at  each  corner  of  the [xl]                                           "Palace-yard"  (halatnan)
Pelaung  buluh  pfilaung  Dengan  saratus  sambilan  puloh.
Pelaung  merpati  utan  Turun-lah  ka  tanah  tumpu  ini
Tujoh  lorah  tujoh  pematang  Turun  deri  utara
Ka  lampau  suara  dekut-ku.  Turun  deri  selatan
Turun-lah  Si  Raja  Kapor,  Raja  Puding,  Turun  deri  timor
Si  Dayang  Sampah,  Turun  deri  barat.
[xli]                                      When  about  to  enter  the  Hut  [p.  138.
Hati-hati  si  merpati  Bumbun  nama  Si  Raja  Sakti
Tetak  sa-nila-nila  7  Buluh  bernama  Si  Raja  Gila
1  Kabaleian,  v.L  ka-ampeicM,  which  would  7  Sa-nila-nila:  this  looks  as  if  it  ought  to  be refer  to  the  railings  in  front  of  '.he  hut.  the  name  of  some  shrub  or  tree  (ftila,  indigo)  ;
2  Kalangkiri  appears  to  be  corrupt.  Quaere  but   the  variant  in   the   second  of  these  two kanan  kiri  ?     The  commoner  version  of  these  charms  is  the  most  likely  to  be  the  right  reading ; lines  has  "iring-iring."  in  which  case  Si  Raja  Nila  (or  more  properly
3  Ampeian  gading ;  this,  of  course,  refers  to  Nyila)  might  be  translated  as  "  Prince  Invita- the  railing  around  the  "  Palace-yard."  tion."     Si  Raja.   Nyila  is,  in  fact,  the  name
4  Var.  lee.  batang.  sometimes  given   to   the   long  slender  wands 6  Mengkudu,  a  Malay  forest-tree,  Morinda  with  fine   nooses  at  the  end  with  which  the
tinctoria.  wild  pigeon  are  snared,  the  name  being  clearly
6  Var.  lee.  tetak.  an  allusion  to  its  pretended  character.
BIRD  CHARMS
597
Gila  siang,  gila  malam,
Gila   'nak   berkampong    ka   bale!    Raja
Suleiman Kur   semangat    Si    Raja    Kapor,    Putri
Puding,  Dayang  Sarap.
Turun  berkampong  ka  balei  Raja  Sulei- man
'Nak  mengenakan  dokoh  lolah  Raja Suleiman.
[xlii]
Hati-hati  kelampati ' Futik  akar  Si  Raja  Nila  (or  Nyila) Bumbun  bernama  Si  Raja  Sakti Dekut  bernama  Si  Raja  Gila.
Alternative  Version
Gila  Kapor,  gila  Puding,
Gila  Lela  Sarap,
Hinggap  di  ampeian  gading,  d.s.b.
(And  the  rest  as  in  charm  No.  xxxviii. )
[xliii]
Alternative  Version
Arak-arak,  etc.  (with  three  lines  following
as  in  previous  charms) Ta"  datang  mati  mampeh  3 Mali  rnawah,8  mati  sapepak  rimba  raya Ka  lorah  ta'  buleh  minum Ka  darat  ta'  buleh  makan Kalau  'kau  turun  kembang  bfiriak  4
Kalau  'kau  turun  kembang  ber-ingin Kembang  sapepak  B  rimba  raya. Turun-lah  Raja  Kapor,  etc.  (as  in  No.  xl.
down  to  barat ) Turun  ka  tanah  tumpu  ini Masok  mahaligei  "  Fatimah  lalu."  «
[xliv]
Alternative  Version
Pglaung  buluh  pfilaung
Pfilaung  buluh  merpati  utan
Tujoh  bukit,  tujoh  lorah,
Tujoh  permatang,  tujoh  pelaung,
Akan  pelaung  anak   burong   merpati
hutan, Mengampongkan  ka  'laman  Nabi  Allah
Suleiman.7 Arak-arak  iring-iring Kembang  bunga  Si  Panggil-panggil Datang  berarak  turun  beriring Nabi  Suleiman  datang  memanggil Memanggil  anak  burong  merpati  hutan Ka  'laman  Nabi  Allah  Suleiman. Indang-indang  melukut
Aku  indang  di  sumpit  purun
Aku  kundang,  aku  jeput,
Aku  jeput,  aku  bawa  turun,
Turun  ka  'laman  Nabi  Allah  Suleiman.
Ta'  turun,  makan  menturun
Ta'  datang,  makan  benatang,
Mati  mampik8  mati  mawai,'
Mati  sengk'lan  bulu,
Mati  telan  tulang,
Hinggap  di  akar  di-lilit 10  akar,
Hinggap  di  daun  di-petok  "  ular  daun,
Segra-lah  angkau  turun
Ka  kandang  Nabi  Allah  Suleiman.
Tetak  batang  mengkudu,
Tetak  tekan  tekankan.
[xlv]
Alternative  Version
Buluh  telang,  buluh  perindu Katiga  dengan  buluh  bulang-baling, Turun  limbok  saperti  bulang-baling, Buluh  telang,  buluh  perindu,
Turun-lah  limbok  beribu-ribu, Mendengarkan  bunyi  buluh  merindu-
rindu. Tanam  sulasi  tumboh  di-julang,
1  Kelampati:  appears  to  be  corrupt;  the  pre-  a    Malay    woman    without    her    name    being
ceding  charm  giving   the  correct  reading  (si  mentioned.    (Muhammad  is  used  under  similar
merpati).  circumstances  of  men.)    In  this  case  the  name
8   Mati  mampeh:  was  explained  as  =  »iafi  "Fatimah  passes"  is  evidently  considered  a
£a/a,fatherless;  or  perhaps  =  matitinggalbapa,  lucky  one    for  pigeon-catching,    Fatimah,   of
to  die  leaving  a  father  (the  converse  of  "  father-  course,  representing  the  female  birds, less").  7  Both  here  and   below  the  original  reads
3  Mati  mawah:   was  explained  as  — mati  Allah  Nabi,  but  the  emendation  seems  clearly
'mak ;  motherless,  but  query  ?
•*  Beriak :  not  in  Khnkert,  but  evidently  of cognate  meaning  to  ber-ingin.
»  Sa-pfpak:  was  explained  as  meaning sa-kcliling  rimba  raya,  i.e.  through  the length  and  breadth  of  the  forest.
•  Fatimah,  as  being  the  name  of  the  daughter of  the  Prophet  (Muhammad),  is  often  used  in Malay  charms  when  they  are  intended  to  affect
necessary.
8  Mati  mampik :  this  word  is  not  in  Klin- kert.     Vide  note  on  mampek  (supra).
9  Mati  mawai:  vitie  note  on  mawah  (supra), for  which  word    it  appears  to  be   a  variant form.
10  Di-lilitakar:\.  \.  chelar(fhelaM)bakar.
11  Di-petok:  v.L  di-chetok,  with  same  mean- ing.
598
APPENDIX
CHAP.
Menyelisih  angkau  di  bumbun  orang, Tundok  kasih  ka  bumbun  aku, Anak  salempati,  anak  itek  nyila-nyila, Gila  Kapor,  gila  Puding, Gila  (di)  hutan  rimba  raya  ; Yang  patah  datang  bertongkat, Yang  buta  meraba-raba. Ta'  datang  makan  benatang, Ta'  turun  makan  menturun, Hinggap  di  dahan  tergfilinchir, Hinggap  di  akar  tergglanchar, Hinggap  di  ponggor,  ponggor  rebah, Turun  ka  tanah,  di-patok  ular  tanah.
Terbang  melambong  tinggi,  di-sambar
rajawali,
Jika  tidak  datang  ini  hari, Ka  laut  ta'  dapat  minum,  ka  darat  ta'
dapat  makan Mali  mengklan  bulu,  mati  mengklan
darah.
Yang  dekat,  datang-lah  dahulu, Yang  jauh,  pesan-pesankan. Kur  semangat   anak  burong  merpati
hutan  !
Turun-lah  angkau  berkampong Ka  kandang  Nabi  Allah  Suleiman.1
[xlvi]
When  the  Pigeons  are  Snared
Wak-wak  2  di-atas  para Di-sungkopdengan  kapala  tempurong ; Berkuak-lah  angkau  bujang  juara,3
[P-
Aku  'nak  menjeYat  leher  anak  burong merpati  hutan.
[xlvii]
Earth BUILDING  CEREMONIES  AND  CHARMS
Directions  for  selecting  a  Suitable  Site  for  Building  [~p.  141.
Fasal  pada  menyatakan  melihat  warna  tanah  rupa  dan  rasa-nya  baik  dan jahat,  jikalau  handak  berbuat  negri  atau  kampong  dan  dusun  atau  rumah  sepaya sentosa  kadiaman  tempat  itu  : —
Bermula  jikalau  bumi  itu  warna-nya  hijau  kuning  bau-nya  manis  dan  pedas baik,  'alamat  beruleh  amas  dan  perak  sampei  pada  anak  chuchu-nya  beruleh kakaya'an  ada-nya.
Dan  jika  bumi  itu  warna-nya  merah  rasa-nya  masam  baik  sagala  kelurga-nya kasih  akan  dia.
Dan  jika  bumi  itu  Iain-lain  warna-nya  dan  bau-nya  busok  dan  hanyir  'a- lam at  beruleh  dukachita  dan  penyakit  banyak  padah-nya.
Dan  jika  bumi  itu  warna-nya  puteh  bau-nya  harum  rasa-nya  manis  maha utama  kapala  baik  kadiami,  barang  siapa  diam  disana  banyak  beruleh  amas  dan perak  dan  sentiasa  bersukachita.  Dan  jika  bumi  itu  warna-nya  Iain-lain  bau-nya p£das  kelat  manis  banyak  kelurga-nya  dan  jika  bumi  itu  hijau  kuning  dan  merah bau-nya  manis  rasa-nya  pfidas  'alamat  beruleh  laba  amas  dan  perak  lagi  beruleh anak  dan  sahya.
Dan  jika  bumi  itu  warna-nya  hitam,  bau-nya  busok  tertalu  jahat,  barang  siapa diam  disana  papa  lagi  dukachita  padah-nya  ada-nya.  Bahwa  bumi  itu  yang  baik di-diami  pertama-tama  puteh,  kadua-nya  merah,  katiga-nya  kuning,  ka'ampat k'labu,  kalima  hitam  mesri  ada-nya.
Dan  yang  jahat  b£nar  delapan  perkara  : — Pertama-tama  hitam  bgnar,  ka-dua bglah-belah,  katiga  bursurut-surut,  ka-ampat  berlobang-lobang,  ka-lima  berbusut- busut,  ka-anam  ber-mSnggul  -  menggul,  ka-tujoh  tere'ban-re'ban,  ka-d£lapan  ber- sungei  -  sungei  bersurut-surut,  akan  papa  padah-nya.
1  Vide  note  on  last  charm.  rack."    This  latter  seems  to   make  the  best
2  Wak-wak,  v.   1.   sengkuak,  d.s.b.    which        sense.
apparently  could  only  mean  (ace.  to  Klinkert)  3  Juara  means  (i)  the  umpire  or  manager  of
extension  of  the  roof  over  the  kitchen  rack.  a  cock-fight,  and  (2)  a  master  of  ceremonies  (v.
Another  reading  is  ncwak-ruwak,   in  which  Klinkert,  j.  v.). case  it  would  mean  a  "  heron  on  the  kitchen
v  BUILDING  CEREMONIES  599
Dan  jikalau  berlobang-lobang  anak  istri  akan  mati  dan  hamba  sahya  pun  akan l.tri  rabia  (?  rimba  raya)  kahilangan  padah-nya.
Dan  lagi  jikalau  tanah  itu  rendah  ka  mashrik  tinggi  ka  maghrib  baik  'alamat beruleh  laba  ada-nya.  Dan  jikalau  tanah  itu  rendah  ka  maghrib  tinggi  ka  mashrik tiada  baik,  akan  papa  dan  kamatian  dan  katurunan  harta  padah-nya  ada-nya.  Dan jikalau  tanah  itu  rendah  ka  selatan  tinggi  ka  utara  'alamat  katurunan  harta  dan papa  dan  miskin  padah-nya  ada-nya.
Dan  jikalau  tanah  itu  rendah  ka  utara  tinggi  ka  selatan  maha  [b]aik  beruleh sentosa  sediakala  ada-nya.  Dan  jikalau  tanah  itu  berbukit-bukit  dan  berpusar- pusar  tiada  harus  di-kadiami,  sediakala  dukachita  dan  papa  padah-nya  ada-nya. Dan  jikalau  tanah  itu  berlobang-lobang  itu  pun  tiada  baik  di-kadiami,  'alamat anak  istri  akan  mati  hamba  sahya-nya  akan  lari  padah-nya.  Dan  jikalau  tanah  itu berpusar-pusar  dan  berbukit-bukit  dan  tergban-rfiban  itu  pun  tiada  baik  di-ka- diami sahari-hari  hamba  sahya-nya  akan  habis  dan  harta,  yang  berbukit-bukit  itu akan  karugian  lagi  penyakitan  banyak  tempat  itu  chelaka  padah-nya  ada-nya. Bahwa  tanah  itu  rata  yang  baik-nya  di-perbuat  rumah  atau  kampofng]  atau dusun  atau  negri  ada-nya,  dan  lagi  jika  handak  berbuat  negri  dan  kampong  dan dusun  atau  rumah  atau  mengkalei  barang  suatu-nya  pertama-tama  terangi  dahulu tanah  itu  lebar-nya  sa-dgpa  bujor-nya  [?]  sengkar  kalang  dengan  kayu  ampat penjuru,  maka  sebut-lah  yang  punya  pdgangan,  kemdian  gali  tanah  itu  ambil sa-kepal  s£but  nama  yang  mgme'gang  tanah  itu.
"  Hei,  anak  Mentri  Guru  yang  dudok  ampat  penjuru  'alam  ! Aku  mtJmohunkan  tanah  ini."
[Sebut-lah  apa  yang  handak  di-perbuat] 11  Jikalau  baik  tunjokkan  'alamat  baik, Jikalau  jahat  tunjokkan  'alamat  jahat."
Maka  bungkus  tanah  itu  dengan  kain  puteh,  asap  dengan  kemenyan  taroh  di-bawah bantal  kita  tidor,  tatkala  handak  tidor  itu  berniat-lah.
"  Jikalau  baik  tunjokkan  'alamat  baik, Jikalau  jahat  tunjokkan  'alamat  jahat !  "
Lalu-lah  tidor  ;  jikalau  baik,  perbuat-lah,  jikalau  jahat  jangan  di-perbuat  ada-nya. Dan  lagi  jikalau  handak  menchhari  tempat  akan  berbuat  rumah  maka  terangi dahulu  tanah  itu  kira-kira  arah  (?)  ruang  tengah-tengah,  ambil  kayu  mati-mati tandah-kan  (?)  buat  ampat  penjuru  kemdian  chhari  ranting  kayu  mati  timbunkan kadalam-nya,  bakar  telah  hangus  samua-nya  jadi  habu  kumpulkan  baik-baik tudong,  mak[a]  demkian  kata-nya.
"  Hei,  sagala  orang  yang  mgmggang  tanah  ini  ampat  penjuru  'alam  ! Kama  aku  handak  berbuat  rumah  ; Jikalau  baik  tunjokkan  'alamat  baik Jikalau  jahat  tunjokkan  'alamat  jahat !  "
Pada  esok  hari  buleh  [buka]  tudong  itu  pagi-pagi  hari  Allah  tandahi  (?  tanda-i) baik  dan  jahat  :  w"aleyhi  al-salam.
[xlviii]  Lucky  and  Unlucky  Seasons  for  Building
Dan  lagi  pada  menyatakan  jika  handak  mendirikan  rumah  mahu-lah  di- katahui  baik  dan  jahat-nya  didalam  bulan  yang  duabglas  itu : — Pertama-tama kapada  bulan  Muharram  mendirikan  rumah  banyak  haru-biru-nya.  Dan  kapada bulan  Safar  mendirikan  rumah  banyak  beruleh  harta  dan  sahya.  Dan  kapada bulan  Rabi'-al-awal  mendirikan  rumah  satelah  sudah  rumah  itu  tuan-nya  mati. Dan  kapada  bulan  Rabi'-al-akhir  mendirikan  rumah  baik  sentosa  yang  ampunya rumah  itu.  Dan  kapada  bulan  Jumada-'l-awal  mendirikan  rumah  itu  'alamat  ka- hilangan harfta]  dan  pakeian.  Dan  kapada  bulan  Jumada-'l-akhir  mendirikan rumah  itu  penyakitan  lagi  perchinta'an  padah-nya.  Dan  kapada  bulan  Rejab
6oo  APPENDIX  CHAP.
mendirikan  rumah  terlalu  jahat  tiada  balik  lagi  harta  kahilangan  itu  ada-nya.  Dan kapada  bulan  Sha'ban  mendirikan  rumah  di-kasih  sagala  Raja-raja  dan  orang besar-besar  bun  rahmat  akan  dia  sakalian  ada-nya.  Dan  kapada  Ramthan  men- dirikan rumah  itu  'alamat  kadatangan  amas  dan  perak  ada-nya.  Dan  kapada bulan  Shawal  mendirikan  rumah  itu  'alamat  terbakar  lagi  bercherei  dengan  kasih atau  istri-nya,  tiada  baik  padah-nya  ada-nya.  Dan  kapada  bulan  Zulka'idah mendirikan  rumah  itu  'alamat  kasukaran  akan  beruleh  padah-nya  ada-nya.  Dan kapada  bulan  Zulhaji  mendirikan  rumah  beruleh  harta  dan  sahya  dan  kerbau dan  lembu  di-negrahi  Allah  ta'ala  akan  dia :  w''aleyhi  al-salam.
fxlixl  Directions  for  Building  Pp.  143.
Dan  lagi  jikalau  handak  mengorek  lobang  tiang,  jangan  kena  bayang-bayang, atau  handak  mendirikan  tiang,  tiada  baik  kasusahan-nya  lagi  penyakitan  terlalu amat  jahat  padah-nya.  Dan  tatkala  mengorek  lobang  tiang  itu  bacha-lah  do'a ini  dahulu  : —
' '  Bismillah  al-rahman  al-rahim  'aleyhi  al-salam
Ani  aslak  enta  (?) Hei  Benuri  Kelbi  ma'rifat-ku Berahmat-ku  ya  al-rahim  al-rahimin Amin,  amin."
[11  Ceremonies  in  fixing  the  Foundation  Posts  of  the  House
Tetar  Rumah
[Ambil]  sepang,  tahi  besi,  kayu  arang,  inggu  :  masokkan  di  lobang  tiang sadikit-sadikit,  di  tiang  s'ri.  Kalau  besar  puaka  semblihkan  ayam  ka  lobang  itu, biar  tumpah  darah-nya  ka  dalam-nya,  krat  kapala  dengan  kaki,  buat  lapik  tiang s'ri.  Kalau  besar  lagi,  [ambil]  kambing  atau  kerbau  ;  kalau  kechil  puaka,  telor pun  jadi.  Maka  telor  d.  s.  b.  itu  menjadi  upah  Jembalang  Tanah.  Kalau  'nak tijakkan  (?)  tiang  baik  pakei  chinchin  di  kelingking,  akan  membujok  jembalang itu.  Kemdian  sudah,  masokkan  Iain-lain  ramuan  yang  tersebut,  tegahkan tiang.
Pagi-pagi  pukol  tujoh  lebeh  mengadap  utara,  katakan  :
"Sang  Bumi,  Berakam  Bumi, SSdang  Prahun  Hantu  Ayer, SSdang  Janggi  Maharaja  Lela,
"  Aku  minta  ma'af  yang  memegang  bumi,  aku  minta  undor  dengan pertengahan,  aku  'nak  dirikan  tiang  ini,
' '  Dengan  berkat  mengajar  Guru-ku La-ilaha,"  d.  s.  b.
[li]  Handak  Mendirikan  Tiang  S'ri
Ambil  mangko'  sabun  isi  ayer,  Jetakkan  di  bekas  tiang  s'ri,  asapkan  dengan kemenyan.  Esok  pagi  tengok  ;  kalau  isi  ayer  pula,  baik,  kalau  susut  burok  ; benatang  masok  ka  mangko',  kalau  hidop,  baik,  mati,  burok.
[liil  Tetar  Tanah  Rumah  ("p.  144.
Hei  Dato*  Si  Maharaja  Lela  !  Padang  Sanjana,  ka  bukit  Kaf.
Jangan  'kau  lalu,  anak  chuchu  takut  :  Berkat  deripada  guru-ku  Si  Ann.
Siah  angkau  kasana,  ka  'alam  luas  'Aleikum  al-salam.
Tanamkan  tahi  besi,  biji  timah,  buah  kras  (atau  gorek),  bliong  patah,  duit  satu
v  BUILDING  CEREMONIES  601
sen.  Nanti,  kalau  lain  orang  samua  sudah  pulang  berdiri  dekat  lobang-nya, ambilkan  tanali  itu  tiga  kepal,  di-genggam  paling  ka  blakang  katakan  "Al-salam 'aleikum."
Pantang-nya  jangan  pandang  ka  blakang  hingga  sampei  rumah  ;  sudah  bawa tanah  tiga  kepal  itu  ka  rumah,  taroh  di  bawah  bantal,  nanti  malam  buleh  dapat mimpi  atau  baik  atau  ta'  baik.  Kalau  mimpi  ta'  baik,  esok  pagi  buang  satu kepal,  sampei  tiga  malam  [bagitu  juga].  Kalau  baik,  tanamkan  tanah  itu  di bawah  tiang  s'ri  di  tengah  rumah.
[liii]  Tetar  Tanah  (chachak  tiang  rumah)  [p.   145.
Hei  Raja  Guru,  Maharaja  Guru  !  Deripada  tajar  menyenseng.
Angkau-lah  anak  Batara  Guru  :  Hei  Hantu  Tanah,  benah  Tanah,
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi  :  Jembalang  Tanah  !
Deripada  kilat  sabong  menyabong.  Undor  'kau  deri  sini  ka  laut  yang  dalam
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi :  Ka  rimba  yang  sunyi  !
Deripada  ambun  sa-titek.  Antara  aku  dengan  angkau
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi :  Di-bagi  uleh  Adam.
[liv]  Tetar  Tanah
Al-salam    'aleikum,    hei     sahabat    yang  Berkat  Dato'  Kamalu-'l- Hakim,
bertujoh  !  Tiada-lah  angkau  yang  buleh,  aku  yang
Mula  pertama  namai  (?)  Si  Kopat  buleh  hal  ini.
Ka-dua-nya  Si  Kapit  Nyah-lah  angkau  ka  tasek  ta'  berhulu,  ka
Ka-tiga  Awat  ranting  ta'  patah,
Ka-ampat  Mawat  Ka  burong  ta'   terbang,   ka  ayer  tiada
Ka-lima  Dab  bergemuroh  !
Ka-anam  Deh  Disana  -  lah    ampat    tempat     kadiaman
Ka-tujoh  Du  angkau :
Mari-lah  angkau  ka-tujoh  ini  bersama-  Jangan  'kan  mara 1  kamari  lagi !
sama  dengan  aku.  Jikalau  'kan  mara l  kamari  lagi
Aku  bernama  Si  Putar  'Alam  Derhaka-lah  'kau  kapada  'ku
Aku  bernama  Si  Lindong  'Alam  Derhaka-lah  'kau  kapada  Allah
Aku  bernama  Si  Gentar  'Alam.  Derhaka-lah  'kau  kapada  Muhammad  !
Berkat  tolong  Nabi  Allah  Ibrahim,  Hu  Allah !  (tiga  kali). Berkat  tolong  Dato'  Si  Tunggang  Awak,
[lv]  Direction  of  House-door  [p.  141,  n.
Bermula  jika  pintu  rumah  mengadap  ka  mashrik,  baik  :  'alamat  beruleh  anak chuchu  banyak,  lagi  sentosa ;  jika  mengadap  ka  utara,  baik  :  'alamat  beruleh mas  perak,  lagi  semperna ;  jika  mengadap  ka  maghrib,  bertambah-tambah  'elmu baik  atau  orang  'alim  datang  kapada-nya,  lagi  salamat ;  jika  mengadap  ka  selatan malang  pada  barang  kerja-nya,  tiada  semperna  maksud-nya.
[Ivi]  To  determine  the  Dimensions  of  the  House  [p.  145.
Ini  fasal  ukoran  bendul  rumah  ;  maka  ambil  depa  perampuan  yang  ampunya rumah  itu  dua  depa  di-lipatkan  tiga,  buang  sabhagi ;  yang  dua  bhagi  itu,  itu lipatkan  lipat  delapan,  buangkan  tujoh  ambil  satu,  ukorkan  deripada  kapala bendul  itu  sampei  ujong  bendul  itu,  inilah  nama-nama  benatang-nya  yang tersebut  : —
Pertama-tama  Naga,  ka-dua  Sapi,  ka-tiga  Singa,  ka-ampat  Anjing,  ka-lima •'Lembu,  ka-anam  Kaldei,  ka-tujoh  Gajah,  ka-delapan  Gagak.  Dan  jikalau  tiba pada  Naga,  terlalu  amat  baik  ;  jika  tiba  kapada  Sapi,  dukachita  orang  yang ampunya  rumah  itu  ;  jika  tiba  kapada  Singa,  salamat  orang  yang  ampunya  rumah itu  lepas  deripada  marabhaya  lagi  beruleh  kakaya'an ;  jika  tiba  kapada  Anjing, orang  yang  ampunya  rumah  itu  sakalian  lagi  hina  pada  mata  orang  sakalian  ;
1  Qu.  mari.
602  APPENDIX  CHAP.
jika  tiba  kapada  Lembu,  orang  yang  ampunya  rumah  itu  beruleh  kakaya'an  lagi di-permuliai  orang  lagi-pun  barang  kata-nya  pun  di-dengar  orang ;  jika  tiba kapada  Gajah,  orang  yang  ampunya  rumah  itu  berkat  sagala  pencharian,  jikalau berniaga  beruleh  laba  ada-nya  ;  jika  tiba  kapada  Gagak,  rumah  itu  sudah  (?)  tuan- nya  mati  atau  sakit  payah  bageimana-pun  merugikan  jua  :  w"aleyhi  al-salam.
[ivii]  The  Rhyme  used  for  this  purpose*  [p.   146.
I.   Naga  umbang,  naga  gentala,1  Pergi  beranak  didalam  rimba  ;
Naga  beredar  sagenap  bulan  ;  Tuah  besar  pendapatan  7
Ka  mana  pergi  tidak  gendala,2  Tiada  pernah  8  membuang  laba.
Sakalian   yang   terjumpa   menjadi  VI.   Kaldei  didalam 9  kota
taulan.  Pagi  petang  menanggong  rumput  ;10
II.  Asap  api  didalam  hutan  :  Tidak  sampei  barang  di-chita  n
Inche  'AH  membakar  kapor ;  Modal-nya  banyak  satengah  luput
Anak  sapi  tengah  prahan,  (?) 12
Tengah  di-prah  mati  tersungkor.  VII.  Gajah  besar  penaikan  Sultan
III.  Singa  gagah,  singa  perkasa,  Gading     bersalut     (?)13    tembaga Singa  bermain  di  ujong  tanjong  ;  suasa  ;
Tuah  rumah  sanantiasa,  Tuah  besar  pendapatan 14
Beruleh  laba  sagenap  tahun.  Tiadamenanggongchachat15binasa
IV.  Anjing  hutan  s'rigala3  VIII.  Gagak  hitam  melayang16  malam Menyalak  rusa  sagenap  malam  ; 4  Hinggap17  di  rumah  Maharaja18 Barang  di-buat  jadi  gendala,6  Sakti ;
Didalam  rumah  6  orang  bertikam.  Bala 19  besar  sudah-lah  datang,
V.   Lembu  besar  tengah  ladang  Rumah  sudah  tuan-nya  mati.
BEAST  CHARMS
The  Elephant [Iviii]  Pendinding  Gajah  [p.   153.
O  Dato'  Moyang  Kaban  ! Jangan-lah  bmasakan  anak  chuchu.
Moyang  Kaban  is  explained  as  the  name  of  the  Raja  Gajah  (King  of  the Elephant-folk),  and  calling  upon  him  by  name  is  considered  to  be  a  sufficient protection  against  wild  elephants.
[lix]  Charm  for  blinding  an  Elephant
Perabun  Gajah
Tanah  liat,  tanah  perabun Ka-tiga  dengan  tanah  merkah  ; Melihat,  mata  angkau  rabun, Memandang,  mata  angkau  pechah.
DIRECTIONS  FOR  HUNTING  THE  ELEPHANT  OR  RHINOCEROS [lx]  [p.  155.
Mula-mula  berjumpa  jijak  gajah  atau  badak,  perhatikan  kalau  ada  kayu  mati didalam  jijak,  ambilkan  ranting  kayu  mati  itu,  dengan  tanah  sa-besar  jagong  deri
*  The  following  various  readings  are  found  1°  Menchabut  rumput  petang  pagi.
in  another  version  : —  n  Di-kata.  l2  Modal  liput  sudah  rugi.
1  Jintala.         2  Binasa.        3  S'ri  menyalak.  13  Berpalut.          14  Bukan  buatan.
4  Menyalak  kadalam  hutan.  1S  Sadikit  tidak  tanggong.
5  Chelaka  besar  sudah  datang.  le  Terbang.          17  Singgah.
6  Rumah  sudah.  1  Sudah  datang.  18  Raja.  19  Chelaka. 8  Sadikit  tidak.                      »  Di  tepi.
BEAST  CHARMS  603
dalam  tapak-nya,  kalau  sa-orang  sa-buku,  tiga  orang  tiga  buku,  sampei  tujoh orang  tujoh  buku,  lebeh  ta'  buleh  ;  kemdian  kita  bungkuskan  ranting  sama  tanah sa-buku  diclalam  daun  kayu,  kita  jampi,  kata-nya  : —
"  Tanah  liat,  tanah  benchah,  Kabul  Baginda  Rasul  Allah
Tanah  memandang  deri  kabun  Kabul-lah  do 'a  Guru  aku,
Melihat,  niat.i  IIV.L  pechah,  Guru  Lebai  Jamal,
Memandang,  mata-nya  rabun,  Kabul  kapada  aku,
Kabul  Allah,  kabul  Muhammad  Kabul-lah  la-ilaha,"  d.s.  b.
Kemdian  kita  sisip  di  pusat,  maka  pembuang  bau  badan,  bau  snapang,  kita ambil  daun  kayu,  daun  sa-cherek,  daun  kerakap  sirih,  daun  chapa  (sambong), daun  labu  ayer  puteh ;  sudah  dapat  daun  itu,  mula-mula  ambil  daun  itu,  patah- kan  daun  itu  dengan  tangan  kiri,  di-pejam  mata,  katakan  :  "kalau  berbau  daun kayu  ini,  berbau-lah  badan,  snapang  aku."
Kalau  sudah  mati  benatang  itu,  di-kSbas  dengan  kain  hitam  sa-kabong,  kata- kan : —
"  Badiyu,  Mak  Badi,  Badi  Panji,  Mak       Badi  kayu,  pulang  ka  kayu,
Buta  !  Badi  ayer,  pulang  ka  ayer,
Aku  tabu  asal  'kau  jadi,  Badi  batu,  pulang  ka  batu, Darah  Nabi  Adam  tiga  titek  asal  'kau       Jangan  rosakkan  diri  kita  !
jadi !  Berkat  Guru  aku
Badi  tanah  pulang  ka  tanah,  Ta'    buleh    di  -  rosakkan    anak    sidang
Badi  busut  pulang  ka  husut,  manusia. " Badi  gajah  pulang  ka  gajali,1
Hadia,  kain  hitam  sadikit,  kain  puteh  sadikit.  Pantang-nya  jangan  biar bergesil  kulit  kita  dengan  kulit  gajah  atau  badak  itu.
The  Tiger
[Ixi]  Penjauh  Rimau  [p.  167.
A  Charm  to  drive  away  Tigers
Hei  BersSnu !     Hei  Berkaih  !  Simpang  'kau  tujoh  petala  langit
Aku  tabu  asal  'kau  jadi :  Simpang  'kau  tujoh  petala  bumi
Sheikh  Abuniah  Lahah  Abu  Kasap  Kalau  ta'  simpang
1'usat-nm  puchok  ubun-ubun  Derhaka  kapada  Allah,  d.  s.b. Susu  'kau  di  tapak  tangan
[Ixii]  Pengunchi  Mulut  Benatang  Buas
A  Charm  for  locking  the  Mouths  of  Wild  Beasts
Hei  Si  Gerenchang,  Si  Gerenching,  Hum  2  aku  patahkan  sakalian  yang  ber-
Patah  ranting  titian  angsa  taring
Tertutop  terkunchi  berkat  'Ali  Mustapah       Berkat  do 'a  negri  Siam.
[Ixiii]  Pengunchi  Muhit  Rimau
A  Charm  for  locking  the  Tiger's  Mouth
Si  Odoh  nama-nya  mak-nya  Patah  dengan  Si  Gomok  Angsa  ;
Si  Balang  nama-nya  tuboh-nya  Tertutop  terkunchi
Lidah    'kau    'ku   lipat,    mulut-kau  'ku       Bujang  malas  tidak  mengapa.
simpei.  'Alam  terakai  Pafar  Allah  Rap.
'Tah  'ting  patah  ranting
1  Or  badak  (rhinoceros),  as  the  case  may  be.        OM  ;  though  the  form  which  the  latter  takes  in 8  Hum  is  probably  a  form  of  the  Buddhist        Malay  magic  is  usually  "  Ong  "  or  "  Hong."
604
APPENDIX
CHAP.
Sampei  ka  rumah  'nak  buka  ;  kalau  tidak  dia  dendam  :  katakan  : — "  'Alam terakai  Pafar  Allah  Rap.     Buka  ! "
[bay]  Tangkal  Harimau
Waman  takun  berasulillahi  nas-ra  toho
Ental  koho  (?  kahul)  as-dupin  ajar  miha  tajumi.
[Ixvl  Charm  for  blinding  a  Tiger  s  Eyes  and  driving  him  off
Perabun  serta  Selisch  Harimau
Seliseh  seliseh,  salamun  salamun, Tersalah  tersileh ; Tersiah  kiri  tersiah  kanan
Di-siahkan  Allah,  satru  buja  lawan-ku, Di-siahkan  Allah,  di-siahkan  Muhammad, Di-siahkan  Baginda  Rasul  Allah.
[Ixvi]  Penggrun  kapada  Harimau  atau  Penggarang  Hati
Charm  for  fascinating  a  Tiger  or  hardening  one's  own  Heart
[p.  168.
Ah  Si  Gempar  'Alam Gegak  gempita ! Jarum  besi  akan  ruma-ku, Jarum  tembaga  akan  ruma-ku, Ular  bisa  akan  janggut-ku, Buaya  akan  tongkat  [mulut]  i-ku, Harimau  mendram  di  pengri2-ku, Gajah  mendring  bunyi  suara-ku, Suara-ku  saperti  bunyi  halunlintar  ! Bibir  terkatup,  gigi  terkunchi !  3 Jikalau  bergrak  bumi  dengan  langit, Bergrak-lah  4  hati  angkau
For  a  Were-Tiger  story  the  reader  is  referred  to  Clifford's  In  Court  and Kampong,  pp.  66-77.
The  idea  is  traceable,  with  a  difference,  as  far  back  as  A.D.  1416  :  a  Chinese account  of  Malacca  (in  the  Ying-yai  Shhig-lan}  relates,  inter  alia — "  Sometimes there  is  a  kind  of  tiger  which  assumes  a  human  shape,  comes  to  the  town,  and goes  among  the  people  ;  when  it  is  recognised  it  is  caught  and  killed."
Handak  marah  atau  handak  membina-
sakan  kapada  aku  ! Dengan  berkat  la  ilaha,  d.s.b.
(and  add)
Kun  paya  kun  chahia  masok  ka  tubch-ku  ! Siapa  chakap  melawan  aku Singa  pasih  B  akan  lawan-nya  ! Ah,  sagala  yang  bernyawa Tiada-lah  dapat  menentang  mata-ku, Aku  yang  mendapat  menentang  mata-nya Dengan  berkat  la  ilaha,  d.s.b.
[Ixvii]
The  Deer
Minta  Rusa
Asking  for  Deer
[p.   174.
Hei  tuan  patek  Rabun  Sidi,
Si  Lailanang,  Si  Laigan  saudara
Si  DSripan,  Si  Baung,  Si  Bakar,
Si  Songsang,  Si  Berhanyut,  Si  Pongking,
Si  Temungking,
Aku  minta  rusa  sa'ekor  jantan,  sa'ekor
betina,
Yang  tumpul  tapak,  yang  bangkar  kSning, Yang    jurei    telinga,   yang  bebat    ping- gang,
1  Tongkat ;  the  tongue  is  commonly  said tongkatkan  mulut  (to  prop  open  the  mouth) when  the  tip  of  it  is  pressed  against  the  roof  of the  mouth.  I  therefore  venture  to  read  tongkat mulut  for  tongkat,  because  the  context  shows that  this  is  what  is  meant,  the  tongue  being (not  inaptly)  compared  in  shape  to  a  crocodile. Tongkat  can  hardly  be  used  here  in  the  sense of  a  'staff";  even  if  mulut  is  not  actually  read, it  must  still  be  understood.
2  Pengri  was  explained  to  me  as  the  indenta- tion above  the  chin,  but  I  have  never  met  the word  elsewhere.
3  Here  the  speaker  addresses  the  tiger  direct.
4  Bergrak-lah  must  be  taken  with  handak.
6  Pasih  or  fasih  was  the  word  given  me ; unless  a  mistake  for  something  else,  it  must mean  cunning  or  savage  (qaxr&fastk).
BEAST  CHARMS  605
Yang  luju,  yang  jombang,  yang  berttk  :  Sabuleh  -  buleh    pinta  -  pinla1   kami    ari Tidak  buleh  yang  luju,  yang  jombang,  bekari,8  (ini)
yang  bertik,  Berkat  k Iranian  katibin  :
Yang  burok,  yang  kunis,  yang  kechar,  Inilah  tanda  aku  meminta.
[Ixviii]
Tanda-nya  di-panchong  kayu,  di-tikamkan  k£san  rusa. 'Che  Induf*  Version
Fasal  minta  rusa,  katakan  : —
"  Sirih  lontor,  pinang  lontor, Teletak  di-atas  penjuru  ; Hantu  buta,  Jembalang  buta, Aku  mengangkatkan  jembalang  rusa."
[Ixix]  Membalikkan  Rusa  [p.  179.
To  turn  back  Deer  upon  their  Tracks
Hei  hilir  DClik,  patah  DClik,  Kalau  ta'  angkau  balikkan
Lfitak  mari  tfpian  lalang,  Ka  laut  'kau  ta'  dapat  minum,
Kata  berturut  jijak  berbalik,  Ka  darat  'kau  ta'  dapat  makan,
Hanchor  daging  bgrbalun  3  tulang  !  Berkat  dengan  kata  Allah,
Balikkan  Allah  Kata  Muhammad,  kata  Baginda  Rasul
Balikkan  Muhammad  Allah,
Balikkan  Baginda  Rasul  Allah  !  Sena  dengan  kata  ki  rain  an  katibin,
Hei  balikkan  rusa  aku  !  Kabul  berkat  Guru-ku.
("Ixxl  Directions  for  hunting  Deer  [p.  174.
Mula-mula  masok  ka  hutan,  katakan  : —
' '  Hei  Hantu  Bakar,  Jembalang  Bakar  ! Berkuak-lah  angkau, Aku  melepaskan  hulubalang  aku."
Kalau  sudah  jumpa  tapak-nya  tengo'  tapak-nya.  Kalau  sengkat  sa-blah, adalah  groh  sedikit.  Kalau  terjingket  kuku,  'alamat  mati-nya  didalam  tujoh hari.  Sudah  masok  jumpa  dengan  anjing,  anjing  pun  menyalak,  bharu-Iah berkuai : —
[P-   175-
"  Hei  Si  Lanang,  Si  Lambaun,  Bukan-nya  aku  yang  punya  anjing,
Si  Ketor,  Si  Becheh,  Pawang  Sakti  yang  punya  anjing  ;
Angkau  berampat  gembala  rusa  Dang  Durai  menyembrang  lautan,
Turun  'kau  kapada  anjing  !  Tenggalong  tinggal  kapada  aku  ;
Jangan  'kau  ta'  turun,  Kabul   berkat   deripada    Guru-ku    Ton Derhaka-lah  'kau  kapada  Allah,  Raja
Derhaka  kapada  Muhammad,  d.s.b.  Lebeh  jadi  deripada  aku
Bukan-nya  aku  yang  berburu,  Berkat  la  ilaha,"  d.s.b. Pawang  Sidi  yang  berburu,
[Ixxil  On  entering  the  Jungle  to  set  the  Snare
Masok  ka  dalam  hutan,  bawa  jaring  sudah  jumpa  kesan  rusa  pohunkan  satu poko'  dengan  chakap  bagini  : —
1  Pinta-pinta=permlnta.'an,  request.  which  form  he  does  not  give  in  its  right  place.
a  Aribfkari  :  so  pronounced  by  Che  Indut  I  found  bffari,  however,  in  Piinappel,  q.v.    s.v.
and  other  Langat  Malays.     Blkari  is  in  no  He  explains  it  as  meaning      to  appear,"  "to
dictionary  that  I  could  And.  and  I  only  came  come   to  light."    A  similar  phrase  occurs  in
upon  bigari  by  accident  in  Klinkert,  who  only  cclxvi,  infra.
gave,   however,   a  cross-reference  to  plgan,  3  v.l.  Membalun.
606  APPENDIX  CHAP.
"Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Allah  "Tap, Yang  memegang  bumi,  d.s.b. Aku  pohun  ini  kayu 'Nak  tambat  jaring. "
Kemdian  mulai  buka  jaring  serta  berkata  : —
' '  Si  Gombak  nama-nya  rotan Si  Chinchin  nama-nya  jaring."
Sudah  itu,  buka-lah  jaring,  sa-habis-habis,  dan  bagikan  dua  jaring  itu,  sudah bagi  dua,  masok  pegang  kajar  jaring  serta  kata-nya  : —
"  O  Mentala  Guru,  Kalau  magan  di-tapakan,2
Dengan  Guru  uru-uru,1  Jaring  kita  bunohkan  juga  !
Si  Mambang  Kuning  !  Kalau  magan  di  anjing,
Mambang  Kuning  tahu  Jaring  kita  bunohkan  juga  !
Akan  salah-sileh-nya.  Kalau  magan  di  orang
Jaring  kita,  jaring  berdua,  Jaring  kita  bunohkan  juga  !
Jaring  jangan  di-bri  magan  !  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b."
[Ixxii]  Jaring  Rusa  [p.   175.
Preparing  the  Snare Bila  mahu  ambil  kayu  memasang  bau  jerat,  kata-nya  : —
' '  Delik  kayu  mendulang Tetak  berakar-akar  ; Habis  kulit  pemalun  tulang Kena  do'a  kalinting  bakar. "
Menetapkan  bau,  dan  bila  mahu  memasang,  katakan  : —
' '  Teng  bunga  satengteng, Mudik  sungei  yang  kadua  ; Kalau  suka  berglang  berchinchin, Sorongkan  kaki  yang  berdua."
Bubohkan  pula  pgrindu  jerat,  kata  : —
"  Rindu  rindu  rindang  rindang,3 Sulasih  tumboh  di  batu  ; Dudok  'kau  rindu,  berjalan  'kau  rindang, Tonak  kasih  ka  jerat  aku."
Kalau  'nak  buang  badi-nya  rusa  itu  : —
"Ah  Badi,  mak  Badi,  Kalau  'kau  chachat  menchidakan,   'kau Badi  saratus  sambiian  puloh  !  di-makan  sumpah,
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi :  Di-makan  kutop  kabintongan.di-hempap Badi  biawak  asal  'kau  jadi,  Koran  tiga  puloh  juz,
Deri  tras  asal  'kau  jadi,  Di-timpa  daulat  ampat  penjuru  'alam
Mambang  Kuning  asal  'kau  jadi,  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b. Kembili-lah  ka  mana  tempat  'kau  jadi ; Jangan    angkau    menchachat    menchi- dakan !
ke
1  Uru-uru:  the  only  sense  given  by  Klin-  3  Rindang  was  explained  as  =  rindu  (suka i^ert  is  that  of  a  kind  of  rattle  used  to  decoy  gemar).  A"«fo/  =  tutop.  -5z#/<7«£vi«  =  bench- fish — made  of  a  cocoa-nut  shell,  and  some  ana,  kasusahan.  Teng-  explained  as  =  kaki Chinese  copper  coins.  But  in  this  context  it  sablah,  as  in  tengkis.  Bertengteng  =  jalan looks  most  like  a  double  rhyme  to  guru.  kaki  sablah.  The  Bunga  satengteng  is  also
-  Qu.  di-tapakan,  i.e.  by  footsteps.  called  the  Satawar.
BEAST  CHARMS  607
[Ixxiii]  Serapah  waktu  anjing  mengejar  Kusa
Charm  used  when  Dogs  are  hunting  Deer
Asa     sabulan,      dua     sabulan,  tiga       Melompat  'kau  patah,
sabulan,  Mengram  'kau  lumpoh  !
Ampat,    lima    sabulan,    anam,  tujoh       Halaukan  ka  medan  yang  ramei,
sabulan,  Tujoh  telok,  tujoh  tanjong,  tujoh  mahali
Bunohkan  anjing  aku  !  gei,
Bukan  aku  yang  berburu,  Pisang  masak  dua  biji,
Toh  Patek  Sang  Sidi  yang  berburu,  Siamang  didalam  rimba.
Sang  Kadadat  punya  rusa,  Tinggal  Si  Langau  hijau  ;
Sunting  Hari  yang  gembala  Ta'  tinggalkan  Langau  hijau,
Hei  Tintanah !  Betala  2  Guru  Di-sembar  Si  Patong  rimba  !
Turun  ka  ra'yat  turun  ka  bfila  !  Lengah  membuka  kain  panjang,
Menyalak  Sukum  Srigala  Lengah  membuka  kain  pandak.
Si  Lansat,  Si  Raja  Anjing,  Terjun  ka  tebing  belulok
Menyalak  Si  Rinching  Kaki,  Si  Rim-       Di-tikam  de'  besi  belimbing,
bun  Ekor  !  Berkat  tuah  anjing  nenek  Batin  Tualang
[Ixxiv]  (On  entering  the  Jungle)
Kalau  masok  hutan,  kata-nya  : —
"  O  Lingkian,  mu  salipatin  (?)  Kalau  'kau  lindong,  'kau  endapkan,
Jangan  'kau  tudong,  jangan  endapkan       Di-sumpah  de'  Allah  ta'ala  ! " rezki  kami !
Kalau  ikut  kesan-nya,  katakan  : —
"  Hantu  Raya,  Si  Buta  Raya,  Ta'tabek  rimba  yang  raya
Hantu  berjalan,  anak  beranak,  Aku'nakmenempohhantuyangbanyak.
[Ixxv]  J'rat
(On  setting  any  kind  of  Snare] Menchachak  jerat  sabarang  jerat,  katakan  : —
Bukan-nya  jerat,  bukan-nya  reman,  Kalau  di-pandang  mata  buta  1
Kalang  kaki  sa-mata-mata,  Terpandang,  mata-'kau  buta  !
Kfina  pferabun  Raja  Suleiman,
[Ixxvi]  Rusa  [p.  176.
(After  setting  the  Snare)
Dua  sabulan,  tiga  sabulan,  Anam  sabulan,  tujoh  sabulan,
Ampat  sabulan,  lima  sabulan,  Malam  di-angkau,  siang  di-aku.
Sudah  itu,  masok  tujoh   langkah   meninggalkan   jaring  di   blakang  berdiri betul  mengadap  ka  dapan,  di-panggilkan  : —
O  Serba  Saidi  Kembang  bunga  Si  Panggil-panggil ;
Tuan  patek  yang  punya  rusa  !  Datang  berarak,  datang  beriring,
i.    Si  Lambaun  asal-nya  rusa,  Jaring-ku  datang  memanggil !
Si  Lanang  gembala-nya,  Hei  Rusa  Malang,  Rusa  Chelaka,
Halaukan  rusa  ka  jaring  kita.  Jalan-ku  masok  tidak  ber-orang  !
Ini  titian  batu  jalan  yang  raya,  Di  kiri  orang  berlembing
Pasar  yang  medan,  Di  kanan  orang  berlembing
Kasuka'an  orang  yang  ramei :  Dimana  jalan  'kau  masok
Arak-arak  iring-iring,  De'  situ  angkau  jalan  balik  !
1  Em.  Jin  Tanah.  2  Or  Petala,  i.e.  Katara.
6o8
APPENDIX
Sudah  itu  di-jumpa  itu  rusa,  dia  pun  bangun  deri  tidor,  kita  pula  kata  : —
' '  Hei  Raja  Muda,  Putri  Dandi, Bangun-lah  angkau  dengan  segra-nya! Sarongkan  dokoh  berdandan
Raja  Suleiman,
Sambut  beriring  sambut  !
Bersorak  '  bi '  bersorak  !  "
Sudah  itu,  orang  kiri  dan  kanan  pun  bersorak  sama-sama.
rixxviil  Charm  used  when  striking  the  Deer
Waktu  menikam  kata  : —
1 '  Bukan-nya  aku  yang  menikam Pawang  Sidi  yang  menikam."
[Ixxviii]
To  cast  out  the  Mischief,  after  catching  the  Deer
Kalau  sudah  dapat,  kebaskan  tiga  kali  ka  bawah,  dengan  kain  hitam-pun buleh,  daun  kayu  (pemakanan  rusa  saperti  sendayan,  atau  poko'  paku)  pun  buleh, triakkan  : —
"  O  Si  Lanang,  Si  Lambaun, Si  Ketor,  Si  Becheh,  orang  yang  berampat, Ambil  kembali  bhagian-kau  1 "
Ambil  'isharat-nya  di-chuchok  dengan  rotan  gantong  pada  poko'  kayu. Another  "  kuai  "  is  : —
Hei  Si  Meliok,  Si  MSlimbai,
Si    Bujang   Lanang,    Si    Biding    Baun,
dengan  ggmbala-nya ! Mfirak  *  turun  de'  ekor, Badi  turun  de'  kapala, M6rak  turun  de'  kapala, Badi  turun  de'  ekor  !
Palis  Si  Paling !
Kulit  lokan  saparoh  Badi,
Badi  yang  bukan.
Hei  hilir  batang  k'ladi  kertah  !
Dibawah  batang  Ifipas  anjing  ku  tadi
Siah  samua  sakalian  benatang  !
[Ixxix]  (Another  version)  [p.   177.
Kalau  sudah  tangkap,  buang-lah  dia  punya  badi :  maka  mahu-lah  baju  hitam yang  buleh  buang  dia  punya  badi,  kalau  tada  baju  hitam,  daun  kayu  sabarang kayu,  urut  deripada  kapala-nya  sampei  di  kaki,  di  buntut,  di  ponggong-nya  serta berkata  : —
Hei  Badi  Serang, Badi  Mak  Buta, Si  Panchur  Mak  Tuli ! Bukan-nya  aku  yang  buang  badi, Pran  Muda  yang  buang  badi  ; Bukan-nya  aku  yang  buang  badi, Pran  Rukiah  yang  buang  badi ! Bukan  aku  yang  buang  badi, Mika'il  yang  buang  badi ; Bukan  aku  yang  buang  badi, Serafil  yang  buang  badi ! Bukan  aku  yang  buang  badi,
'Ijra'il  yang  buang  badi ;
Bukan  aku  yang  buang  badi,
Mukarael  yang  buang  badi  !
Aku  tahu  asal-nya  badi,
Anak  Jin  Ibni  Ujan
Diam  di  awan  guntong.
Kembali  angkau  ka  awan  guntong,
Jangan  angkau  menchachat  menchela
kapada  aku  ! Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi, Anak  Jin  Ibni  Ujan  asal  'kau  jadi.
Sudah  itu,  ambil  sadikit  deripada  dia  punya  mata,  telinga,  mulut,  hidong, kaki,  tangan,  bulu,  hati,  jantong,  limpa  dan  tandok  (kalau  jantan),  tarok  di  daun kayu,  tarokkan  di  jijak  datang-nya  serta  berkata  : —
1  Merak  in  the  "  Bhasa  Hantu,"  or  "  Spirit        ordinary  meaning  of  merak  (peacock)  makes Language,"  means  sirih,  and  it  is  in  this  sense        nonsense, that  it  should  apparently  be  taken  here.     The
BEAST  CHARMS  609
0  Mentala  Guru  Tujoh  sabulan,  malam  di-angkau,  siang Asa  sabulan,  dua  sabulan,  di-aku.
Tiga  sabulan,  am  pat  sabulan,  Sa'ekor  aku  bawa  balik,
Lima  sabulan,  anam  sabulan,  Sa'ekor  aku  tinggalkan.
Buang  Badi  Rusa (To  drive  the  Mischief  out  of  a  Stag)
Siali  yang  malang,  yang  berpuaka,  Sang  Marak,  sang  Badi,
Nabi  Momilil  yang  berbadi,  min  hak,  Badi  turun  de1  kapala
yang  berbadi,  Badi  turun  ka  kaki.
[Ixxx]  Snare  for  Mouse-deer  [p.   1 80.
Jerat  Plandok
Mula-mula  charikan  kayu  yang  bergetah,  tako'kan  kayu  ini  tiga  kali,  kaluar bahanan-nya  satu  telentang,  satu  tertiarap  ta'  baik  (kalau  buat  perangkap,  balk), kalau  jerat,  mahu-lah  telentang.
Habis  itu,  mula-kan  memasang  jerat  di  pangkal  kayu,  sa-kira-kira  satu  depa jauh-nya.  Habis  itu,  kata  : —
• '  Tempurong  tergolek-golek  Pergi-lah  angkau  Jembalang  Badi
Berisi  tanah  Hat,  Aku  handak  memasang  jerat !  "
Kemdian  di-katakan  pula  : —  Pp.  181.
' '  Hei  Si  Ranchap  Kaki,  Angkau    mati     terchekek     mengklan Si  Runching  Munchong,  darah,
Angkau  pijak-lah  jerat  tinjak  aku  ini !  Sesak  ka  hutan  rimba  raya  angkau,
Dua  ban  akan  katiga  Ka  laut  ta'  dapat  minuni,
Jikalau  tidak  angkau  pijak  Ka  darat  ta'  dapat  makan.
Jerat  tinjak  aku  ini,  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b." Dua  hari  akan  katiga
Another  charm  or  serapah  used  when  setting  the  snare  runs  as  follows  : —
Jembalang  Jembali !  Nyah-lah  angkau  Jembalang  Badi !
Tempurong  berisi  tanah  liat :  Aku  handak  memasang  jerat.
A  charm  to  be  used  when  setting  mouse-deer  traps,  given  me  by  a  Labu Malay  named  Said  Chi'  : —
Sirih  unta,  pinang  unta,  Suroh  kaluar  berchuchu-chuchu,
Kerakap  memanjat  puar.  Suroh  kaluar  berchichit-chichit,
Pfisan  pada  Jembalang  rimba  Suroh  kaluar  bermoyet-moyet,
Kutu  hutan *  suroh  kaluar  !  Suroh  kaluar  berentah-entah,
Suroh  kaluar  beranak-anak,  Tampoh  lapang  2  Raja  Suleiman !
[IxxxiJ  Charm  for  urging  on  Dogs  [p.  1 8 1.
Peransang  Anjing
Sugara*  nama  anjing-ku  Bukan  tuah  di-buat-buat
Menyalak  memungkal  bumi,  Tuah  tumboh  sama  badan.
Tujoh  lorah,  tujoh  bukit,  Jijak  katimbunan  sarap
Terlampau  salak  anjing-ku  !  Bau  jangan  angkau  tinggalkan
Anjing  aku  anjing  betuah  Odoh  angkau  salama-lama,
1  Kutu  hutan,  lit.  "  flea  of  the  forest,"  i.e.        harking  them  on,  e.g.  Sukum,  Sugara,  Tampoi, the  mouse-deer.  Sujugara,  Lansat,  Si  Indra,  Si  Kumbang,  Sa'
2  La.pa.ng,  i.e.  "trap."  Untara. :1  Hunting  dogs  have  special  names  used  for
2   R
6io
APPENDIX
CHAP.
Kayu  arang  selara  arang
Tanam  Si  Padi-Padi ; l
Hati  berang  mata  berang
Aku  mengenakan  peransang  hati.
Si  Kujut  nama  rusa-ku,
Si  Lompat  nama  anjing-ku,
Kuat-kuat  angkau  mengejar  ! Kalau  ta'  kuat  angkau  mengejar Aku  surut  al-salam. Kalau  jantan  saudara  'kau, Kalau  betina  'kan  bini  'kau ! Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha  d.s.b.
[Ixxxii]
Charm  to  make  Dogs  courageous Penggagah  anjing
Pulih,  pulih,  Sidang  Pulih  !
Bukan  aku  yang  memulih
Si  Pulih  yang  buleh.
Selang  kayu  lagi  pulih,
Lagi  rimbun,  lagi  rampak,
Lagi  pulang  bagi  dahulu  kala  :
Kunun-lah  anjing  kita  lagi  pulih,
Lagi  rimbun,  lagi  rampak,
Lagi  pulang  bagi  dahulu  kala.
Si  Lampeh  nama-nya  mansor,
Si  Kubah  nama-nya  bisa,
Pandei  memandang  salah  yang  sileh,
Tilek  de'  anjing,   anjing-ku,  jangan  bri
magan,
Tilek  de'  rimba,  jangan  bri  magan, Tilek  de'  ayer,  jangan  bri  magan, Salah  tikam  bunohkan  anjing-ku, Salah  bantai,  bunohkan  anjing-ku, Asa  sabulan,  d.s.b. Bunohkan  anjing  aku,  jangan  di-arabil,
jangan  di-pSpah,
Jangan  di-ikut  pulang  ka  rumah,  sahari turun  bunoh  pula  rusa.
[Ixxxiii]  Charm  to  prevent  Wild  Dogs  from  barking  [p.   183.
Tangkal  menyalak  anjing
Menyalak  anjing  didalam  benchah
Menyalak  si  anak  t6dong  ! 2
Menyalak  tSkum  'kau  pechah,
Menjilat  lidah  'kau  kudong  !
Undor  sa-tapak,  mara  sa-tapak,
Jikalau  undor,  lepas  kembali,
Jikalau  mara,  patah  kaki  'kau  !
Datang  'kau  menfilSntang
Pulang  'kau  meniarap  !
Pulang-lah  angkau  kapada  rimba  sakam-
pong, Pulang-lah  angkau  kapada  rimba  yang
besar, Pulang-lah  angkau  kapada  gaung  gun-
tong
Pulang-lah  angkau  kapada  sungei  yang
tiada  berulu,
Kapada  kolam  yang  tiada  bergali, Kapada  tasek  yang  tiada  berorang, Kapada  mata  ayer  yang  [tiada]  kring Jikalau  'kau  tiada  mahu  kembali,  mati-
lah  angkau,
Di-sumpah  kalam  yang  awal Mali  angkau  di-sondak  segar  kabong Mali  di-sula  chuchok  rabong Mali  di-tikam  duri  landak  ! Hei  tebu  hitam,  kladi  hitam, Di-tanam    tepi    prigi,    di-pukol    dengan
kain  yang  hitam, Segra-lah  angkau  pergi  lari Berkat  la  ilaha-illa-'llah,  d.s.b.
Ramu-ramuan-nya  daun    tukas,    daun    sa-cherek,    daun    lenjuang    merah, kain  hitam.
[Ixxxiv]  Charm  to  prevent  Wild  Boars  from  damaging  Crops  [p.   188.
Ah  Semawi 3  nama-nya  babi ! Ka  laut  jadi  lomba-lomba, Ka  darat  jadi  babi  sungko'  4  nama-nya, Bata  bawah  sakat  bengkarong  ;  5 Jangan    'kau    rosak    binasakan    sawah ladang  'ku  !
Jikalau  'kau  rosakkan,
'Kau  mati  mampe' ,G  mati  mawei,
Mati   pangkalan   darah   mati   pangkalan
tulang
Mati  pangkalan  bulu  ! Jikalau  tidak  'kau  rosa'i
1  There  is  a  grass  called  rumput  pad:  bu- rong.
2  Tcdong :   no  doubt  a  play  on  the  word, which  means  not  only  a  cobra  (ular  tedong)  but
s  applied  to  cocks  (and  query  dogs?)  of  a  certain colour.
3  Semawi  is  said  to  be  the  name  by  which the  wild  pigs  are  addressed.
4  Sungko'  :  quaere  sungkor.
5  Unintelligible.  Bengkarongmea.T&  "lizard. " *  Mampe,  mawei:  apparently  the  pigs  are
threatened  with  various  terrible  forms  of  death.
v  VEGETATION  CHARMS  611
'Kau  kcmbang  beribu,  kembang  belaksa,       Aku  [tahu]  asal  'kau  jadi  :
Kembang  sayap1  rimba  blukar  !  I  .ampin   anak   Fatimah  asal  inula  'kau
Hckua'  'kau  ka  rimba  jauh  !  jadi.
This  charm,  which  was  copied  from  a  book  in  the  possession  of  'Che  Daud  of Naning,  Malacca,  is  evidently  corrupt  in  places.
[Ixxxv]  A  Charm  against  Rats  [p.   192.
Tangkal  Tikus
Inilah  asal  tikus  :  deripada  Nabi  Adam  ia-ini  haris-nya-(?)  didalam  baktal  3(?) Nabi  Allah  Yusoh  kaluar  deridalam  lobang  hidong  babi  masa  baktal-nya.  Dan jikalau  di-jadikan  tangkal  padi,  handak-lah  kita  masokkan  sadikit  bulu  babi, dan  sekam  padi  sadikit  dan  tahi  besi  sadikit,  di-champor  tiga-tiga  itu,  di-tanam ampat  penjuru  ladang  kita.  Dan  fasal  yang  ka-dua,  perasapan-nya  petang- petang,  tiga  petang  atau  tujoh  petang  :  pertama-tama  minyak  tir  sadikit,  dan ka-dua  kapor  tohor  sadikit,  dan  ka-tiga  balerang  yang  kuning,  bakar  petang  hari didalam  ladang  kita.  Maka  inilah  do'a-nya,  bri  salam  kapada  Nabi  Yusoh  : —
'Al-salam  'aleikum  Noh,  'aleyhi  Noh'  (tiga  kali) '  Noh  salam'  (tiga  kali)
petang  petang.     Kemdian  bacha  fatihah  akan  Nabi  satu  kali.
'  Kul  huallah  akhir-nya'  (tiga  kali) '  Kul  a'uzu  bi  rabil  halaki'  (tiga  kali) '  Kul  a'uzu  bi  rabi  nuasi'  (tiga  kali)
Niatkan  kapada   ladang   itu   jangan  binasa  tikus.     Pantang-nya  jangan  makan petang  atau  berjalan-jalan  dalam  ladang  atau  berklahi  atau  bermaki  disitu.
VEGETATION  CHARMS [Ixxxvi]  THE  SIALANG  TREE  [p.  204.
Charm  used  on  commencing  to  climb  the  Tree (A  Malay  Charm  collected  from  the  "  Orang  Laut ")
Pisau  raut  pisau  renchong  Kulit    bernama   Raja    Meligi    (?Ma- Ters'lit  [di]  banir  pulai,  haligei)
Hantu  laut,  hantu  kampong  Dahan  bernama  Raja  Menjulei.
Minta'   undorkan   hantu    laut    hantu  Ranting  bernama  Raja  Melenggang
rimba.  Daun  bernama  Raja  Melayang
Akar  bernama  Raja  Bersila  Puchok  bernama  Raja  Mfintri. Batang  bernama  Raja  Berd'rei.
Here  blow  upon  the  tree  and  scrape  off  the  combs  (into  your  basket).
[Ixxxvii]       Alternative  version  (collected  from  the  "  Orang  Bukit  ")
Pisau  raut,  pisau  renchong  Ranting  bernama  Changgei  Putri.
»   Menchato'  banir  pulai.  Puchok  bernama  Putri  Meninjau,
.-  Hantu  laut,  hantu  [kampong],  Daun  bernama  daun  t'rap,
Kuching  meniti  dahan  pulai.  Daun  t'rap  jatoh  melayang
Akar  bernama  Raja  Bersila  Jatoh  [ka]  lubok  Indragiri
Batang  bernama  Raja  Berd'rei  Tidor  sa-g'lap  bangun  ku  dayang
Kulit  bernama  Putri  Kemoeban  (?)  Ingatkan  rumah  tinggal  sendiri. Dahan  bernama  Raja  Menganjor
1  Explained  as  i.y.  banyak.     Qua-re  emend  a  Explained  as  i.y.  perminta'an.
fayii/>,  "afar  off."  a  Explained  as  i.y.  bahtru.
612
APPENDIX
CHAP.
On  reaching  the  top  :-
Chinchang  chendawan  chinchang Chinchang  mari  buku  buloh,
Pfisan  mari  mambang  dewana  bintang Jangan  bri  tumboh.
[Ixxxviii]
THE  EAGLE-WOOD  TREE Pemanggil  Hantu  Gharn
Hei  nenek  Duita  Mambang  gharu, Kalau  jauh,  tolong  katakan, Kalau  dekat,  tolong  katakan.1 O    Dato*    Bgtala    Bumi,    Jin   Tanah,
Jembalang  Tanah, Berhala  Besi,  anak  Ruwani,  Si  Bujang
Ruwani, Anak  Wayah,  Si  Bujang  Bandan,
[p.  2IO.
Aku  minta'  tunjokkan  [hajat-ku]  : Kalau  tidak  kau  tunjokkan [Kau]  derhaka  kapada  Allah,  d.s.b. Sir  Allah,  Sir  Mangga  tangan, Dat  Allah  hati-'kau, Sipat  Allah  mata-'kau, Pergi  kau  jgput  kumbang  jantan  dalam hati  jantong-'kau. "
[Ixxxix]
GUTTAPERCHA Charm  used  by  Gutta  Collectors
[p.  215.
Al-salam  'aleikum  !
Hei  anak  Raja  S'ri  Bali
Anak  Raja  S'ri  Bandang,
Aku  handak  minta'  darah  sa-titek.
Menang  isi  deri  takek  :
Kalau  tidak  menang  isi  deri  takek,
Derhaka  'kau  kapada  Allah,  d.s.b.
[xc]  THE  COCOA-NUT  PALM
Waktu  'nak  pijak  pangkal  batang-nya  bachakan  : —
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Abubakar  ! Jangan  ghalip  tunggu  jaga  pada  umbi  !
Panjat  sampei  satengah  batang  :  katakan  :—
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  adik  Dara  Dang  Bidah  ! Jangan  ghalip  tunggu  jaga  pada  tengah  batang  ! Mari-lah  bersama-sama  dengan  aku Naik  sampei  atas  pelepah.
Pegang  puchok,  gunchang  tiga  kali,  katakan  : —
[p.  2 1 6.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  adik  Putri  Busu  ! Jangan  ghalip  tunggu  jaga  pada  puchok  ! Turun-lah  bersama-sama  dengan  aku.
Mula-mula    melentor    mayang,    pegangkan    puchok,    gunchang    tiga   kali,
bacha  tiga  kali : —
Al-salam     'aleikum    Putri    Satukum2
Besir  3
Yang  berhalun  berhilir4  Si  Mayang, Si  Gedebeh  Mayang, Putri  tujoh  Dara  Dang  Mayang ! Mari  kechil  kamari  ! Mari  senik  kamari  !
Mari  burong  kamari  !
Mari  halus  kamari  !
Aku  memaut  leher-mu,
Aku  menyanggul  rambut-mu,
Aku  bawa  sada'  s  gading  mahu  basoh
muka-mu. Uri  manis,  tembuni  manis,
1  When   the  voice  of  the  gharu -spirit    is heard  at  night.
2  Satukum    is    the  Kelantan  form  of  sa- totepng,  from  tokong,  to  cut  the  hair.
3  Besir,   lit.   incontinent,   referring    to  the
running  of  the  sap  when   the  flower-spike  is tapped.
4  Berhilir,  i.q.  berleler.
5  i.q.  pisaii  sadap.
v  VEGETATION  CHARMS  613
Manis  satupci  ka  jari  manis  ;  Kolam  gading  menanti  dibawah-mu  !
Uri  manis,  tembuni  inanis,  Bertepuk    berkSchar    didalam    kolam Manis  sampei  ka  muka  mayang  !  gading,2
Sada'  gading  meranchong  kanni,  Kolam  bernama  Maharaja  Bersalin. Kacha     gading  menadahkan-mu,
RULES  FOR  PLANTING  VARIOUS  PLANTS
["xcil  Ftual petua  bertanam  tumboh-tumbohan  [p.  217.
Piantan  tanam  tebu  tengah  hari,  jadi  manis  jadi  terkring  ayer-nya  tinggal  hati : kalau  tanam  pagi  panjang  mas,  kalau  tengah  hari  pandak.  Tagong,  'nak  tanam prut  kenyang ;  penugal  besar,  besar-lah  mayang-nya.  Pisang,  nak  gali  lobang besar,  piantan  petang.  Bangat  petang,  lepas  makan  petang  jadi  berisi.  Kledek, 'nak  bintang  banyak,  jadi  banyak  isi-nya.  Labu,  timun,  bulan  glap  piantan-nya, jangan  di-makan  uleh  api-api.  Niyor,  kalau  kita  'nak  sangat  berak  lari  bawakan niyor  itu  champak  ka  lobang,  jangan  di-luruskan  tangan  ;  kalau  lurus  patah tandan.  Piantan  petang  supaya  lagi  rendah  buleh  berbuah.  Padi,  pagi-pagi kira-kira  pukol  lima,  sebab  budak  kechil  pagi  lagi  bangkit.
[xcii]  RICE-CULTIVATION  [p.  218.
The  Malay  original  of  the  description  of  rice-cultivation  as  carried  on  in Malacca  territory  is  too  long  to  quote,  but  will  be  found  in  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No. 30,  pp.  286-296.
CHARM  USED  IN  CLEARING  A  PATCH  OF  GROUND  FOR  DRY RICE-PLANTING
[xciii]  Tetar  huma  [p.  219.
O  Dato'  Mentala  Guru,  Saraja  Guru,  Tujoh  lorah,  tujoh  permatang,
Gampitar  'Alam,  [Jin]  Saraja  Malik  ;  Tujoh  antaran  tempat  ini :
Mari-lah  bersama-sama  dengan  aku  !  Jangan  angkau  berbalik-balik  kamari !
Aku  handak  meminta'  tempat  ini  Kalau  'kau  berbalik,  kaki-'kau  patah,
Aku  handak  tebang  tebas       .  Kalau  'kau  memandang,  mata-'kau  buta,
Aku   handak   tanam    sakalian   tumboh-  Telinga  -  'kau    menengar,     telinga  -  'kau
tumbohan.  pekak !
Hei  Satinjau  Rantau,  Sakuntum  Raya,  Bukan-nya  aku  yang  punya  kata,
Orang   bertujoh    beranak  tujoh    bersau-  Datoh  Mentala  Guru  yang  punya  kata ,
dara,3  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b. Pergi-lah  angkau  ka  bukit  Siamang  Biru,
CEREMONIAL  USED  WHEN  SOWING  THE  RICE  SEED
fxcivl  Mcnurunkan  benik  [p.  229.
Di-buatkan  galang  dapor  di  tengah  ladang  pada  tempat  yang  di-tetar.  Di penjuru-nya  (i)  anak  pisang  pinang  satu  batang,  (2)  poko'  serai  satu  batang,  (3) ebu  lanjong  satu  batang,  (4)  kunyit  satu  batang,  akan  buleh  hidup  samua  blaka. i  tengah  ayer  sa-tempurong.  Besok  tengo'  petua  :  kalau  galang  dapor  berkuak, ta'  buleh  jadi  ;  kalau  tidak  tumpah  tempurong,  kalau  semut  atau  anei-anei masok  tempurong  baik  juga.  Jika  baik  petua-nya  tugal  padi  tujoh  Hang  dengan tugal  satambun,  bacha  : —
1  Explained    as    i.q.    tagok,    bekas    buloh  to  be  (i)  Satinjau  Rantau,  (2)  Sakuntum  Raya, yang  dt-isi  ayer  mayang.  (3)  Malim  Karimun,  (4)  Si  Ali  Pachi,  and  three
2  Explained  as  kawah  'nak  tnasak  gvla.  others,  children  of  Mentala  Guru.
3  The  tujoh  orang  bersavdara  are  explained
614
APPENDIX
CHAP.
Bismillahi-'l-rahmani-'l-rahimi ! Al-salam  'aleikum  NabiTap,  yang  meme-
gang  bnmi  !
Aku  menumpangkan  anak-ku S'ri  Gading,  Gemala  Gading
Anam  bulan  akan  ka-tujoh Aku  datang  mengambil  balik, Dengan  la-ilaha,  d.s.b. Kur  semangat !  kur  semangat  !  kur  se- mangat !
[xcv]  CEREMONIES  AT  SEED  TIME
"  Fuji  padi,"  or  " propitiation  of  the padi."     An  Invocation  to  Dangomala  and Dangomali,  spirits  of  the  Sun  and  Moon
Sri  Dangomala,  Sri  Dangomali ! Handak  kirim  anak  sambilan  bulan  ; Sagala  inang,  sagala  pengasoh  ; Jangan  bri  sakit,  jangan  bri  demam  ; Jangan  bri  ngilu  dan  pening Kechil  menjadi  besar ; Tuah  jadi  muda ;
O  illustrious  spirits  of  the  sun  and  moon  !
Let  there  be  fruit  (offspring)  nine  months hence.
O  royal  nurses,  all  preserve  it  from  sick- ness and  fever,  vertigo  and  head- ache.
May  it  reach  the  full  stature.
Yang  ta'  kejap  di-per-kejap  ; Yang  ta'  sama  di-per-sama  ; Yang  ta'  hijau  di-per-hijau  ; Yang  ta'  tinggi  di-per-tinggi  ; Hijau  seperti  ayer  laut ; Tinggi  seperti  Bukit  Kaf.
May  the  old  become  young  again. Where  backward  may  it  become  forward. Where  unequal  may  it  be  made  equal. Where  colourless  may  it  be  made  green. Where  short  may  it  become  long. Green  as  the  waters  of  the  Ocean. High  as  the  mountains  of  Kaf.
[xcvi]
A  hyperbolical  description  of  each  of  the  nine  months  during  which  the  grain  is coming  to  maturity  ;  the  tenth,  or  harvest  time,  is  compared  ivith  the  birth  of Mahomed,  and  the  incantation  closes  with  a  prayer  for  an  abundant  crop.
Bintang  mara  chuacha  limpat ; Ka-dua  limpat  di  langit  ; Ka-tiga  limpat  di  bumi ; Ka-ampat  ayer  sambayang  ; Ka-lima  pintu  mazahap  ; Ka-anam  pintu  rezuki  ; Ka-tujoh  pintu  mahaligei ; Ka-dilapan  pintu  shurga  ; Ka-sambilan  anak  di-kandong  ibu  ;
The  gloriously  resplendent  stars  lighting
the  firmament  are  the  first ; The  full  refulgence  is  the  second  ; The  fulness  spreading  over  the  earth  is
the  third — causing  abundance  ; The  fourth  the  blessed  waters,  harbingers
of  fertility ; The  fifth  the  foui  gates  of  the  world,
pouring  out  plenty. The  sixth  is  the  door  to  the  abundance
of  food  ;
The  seventh  is  the  portal  of  the  palace  ; The  eighth  the  floor  of  Surga  or  Heaven  ;
Ka-sapuloh  Mahomed  jadi.
Jadi  sakilian  jadi.
Bayan  Allah  didalam  rongga  batu.
Lagi  ada  rezuki ;
Deri  hulu  deri  hilir
Saref  mengaref ;
Deri  sina  ka  daksina
Manghantar  rezuki
Bertambah  bertambun.
The  ninth  the  pregnant  mother  ;
The  tenth  (i.e.,  the  harvest)  month  the
birthday  of  Mahomed  (the  luckiest
day  of  the  year) ; May  all  prove  prosperous, May  dry  grain  prosper. May  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  appear  in
the  filling  of  the  husk,  as  the  hole
in  a  rock  is  shut  up  by  degrees. From    above,    from    below,    let    plenty
always  flow, From    East  and  West  may  abundance
ever  increasing  pour  in.
[xcvii] An  Invocation  of  the  Earth-spirit  Noh  and  Dewa  Imbang,  a  sprite  of  Air
Hei !    Noh  yang  dalam  bumi, Dewa  Imbang  deri  udara,
Anak  saraja  jin  ketala  bumi, Yang  memegang  bumi.
v  VEGETATION  CHARMS  615
Hail!      Noh    who    dwellest  within    the       Sonofthespiritwhorulesthefieldsofearth, earth !  Who  guardest  with  thy  power  the  gates
And  thou,  Imbang.who  art  ruler  in  the  air,  of  earth.
[xcviii] An  Invocation  to  Setia  Gum,  an  Earth-spirit
Hei  Tuanku  Setia  guni  Sampei  lima  bulan  ka-anam
Yang  memegang  bumi  tujoh  lapis  Aku  datang  mengambil  balik
Aku  bertarohkan  anak  aku  Jangan  angkau  bagi  rasa  binasa
Sri  Chinta  rasa  chukup  dengan  inang  Chachat  chelah  inilah  upah-kan  mu. Pengasoh  kanda  manda  itu
Hail !  Lord  Setia  Guni,  And  when  the  fifth  moon  wanes  unto  the Who  dost  rule  the  seven-fold  earth,  sixth
I  herewith  lay  my  child  upon  thy  breast,  I  shall  come  to  claim  him  back  again.
My  child,  the  darling  of  my  heart,  Let  him  taste  no  harm  or  evil,  great  or With   his  full  following  of  nurses  and  small ;
attendants,  Here  is  thy  reward.
The  "  upah,"  or  payment  of  the  services  of  the  spirit,  is  generally  as follows  : —
An  egg,  a  bunch  of  betel-vine  leaves,  some  "  bras  kunniet"  (pryza  gtutinosa), some  "bras  bertik"1  (i.e.,  the  white  pulp  which  exudes  from  rice  grains  when roasted),  and  a  "  ketupat"  or  little  woven  basket  of  cocoa-nut  leaves  filled  with rice.
After  this  invocation  of  Setia  Guni  loadfuls  of  rice  are  sprinkled  on  the ground,  and  the  following  invocation  is  then  raised  to  the  spirit  of  the  air : —
Hei !  Tuanku  Malim  ka-raja-an  Hail !  Malim,  who  dost  supremely  rule
Yang  memegang  langit  tujoh  lapis  The  seven  folds  of  sky,
Aku  bertarohkan  anak  aku  I  lay  my  child  in  pledge  with  thee,
Sri  Chinta  rasa,  etc.  (as  in  the  last).  My  child,  the  darling  of  my  heart,  etc.
After  this  the  rice  is  thrown  into  the  air,  and  the  ceremony  is  completed.
The  "  pawangs"  sorcerers,  or  rather  "wise  men"  who  are  skilled  in  these incantations,  are  in  great  request  at  the  sowing  of  the  padi  crop.
The  above  five  charms  are  extracted  from  a  paper  entitled  ' '  Ceremonies  at Seedtime,"  by  A.  W.  O'Sullivan,  inf.JR.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  18,  pp.  362-365.  The first  two  are  from  a  work  by  Captain  James  Low  on  the  Soil  and  Agriculture  of I'enang,  1836.
CHARMS  USED  IN  THE  REAPING  CEREMONY
[xcix]  Prayer  used  in  the  Procession  to  the  Field  [p.  238.
Bismillahi-'l-rahmani-'l-rahimi.  Yang  terper'chik,  yang  terplanting,
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Tap  yang  meme-  Yang  di-orong  semut  silambada.
gang  bumi !  Hei  Dang  'Pok,  Dang  Meleni,
Aku  tabu  asal-nya  padi  Dang  Salamat  menyandang  galah  !
>   S'ri  Gading,  Gemala  Gading  Bertapok  bertimbun  dayang  kamari,
Yang  di  ujong  ladang,  yang  di  pangkal  Salamat  rezki  di-bri-nya  Allah.
ladang,  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
[c]  On  Arrival  at  the  Field
Ruwak-ruwak  sakandang  desa  Berkuak-lah  angkau  Rengkesa,
Bertenggek  di  bnuran  panah.  'Nak  letakkan  bakul  di-atas  tanah.
1  ffrat  bertih  "  parched  "  rice  (W.  S.).
616  APPENDIX  CHAP.
[cil  On  Planting  the  Sugar-cane  in  the  Sheaf  ["p.  239.
Al-salam  'aleikum  Nabi  Tap  !  Aku  'nak  bawa  ka  rumah,  ka  istana-'kau.
Inilah  'ku  chachakkan  tebu  ini,  Kur    semangat !     kur    semangat !    kur Akan  sandaran  'kau.  semangat !
Aku  'nak  mengambil  semangat  'kau,  S'ri Gading,
[cii]  Do'a  Sapuloh — The  Ten  Prayers  ]"p.  240.
Ka-sa,  Allah,  Ka-sapuloh,  anak  di-jadikan  Allah  ;
Ka-dua,  Muhammad,  Jadi,   karna  jadi,   jadi  karna  Tuhanku Ka-tiga,  Ayer  Sembahyang  lima  waktu  juga.
sa-hari  sa-malam,  'Isa,  karun  !
Ka-ampat,  Pancha  Indra,  Musa,  karun  !
Ka-lima,  Pintu  rezki-ku  terbuka,  Yusuf,  karun  !
Ka-anam,     Pangkat     Mahaligei     tujoh  Daud,  karun !
pangkat,  Karun  sakalian  pintu  rezki-ku,  di  Bumi, Ka-tujoh,  Pintu  Rengkiang  terbuka,  di  Langit,  deripada  Allah.
Ka-lapan,  Pintu  Shurga  terbuka,  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah,  etc. Ka-sambilan,   anak  di-kandong  bunda-
nya,
[ciii]  On  Arrival  at  the  House  Pp.  243.
Di-chinchang  galenggang  batang,  Sunggoh  sahya  sabrang  sungei,
Di-chinchang  di  muka  pintu,  Besar  maksud  datang  kamari. Di-tentang  melenggang-nya  datang,
Anak  aku  rupa-nya  itu.  Bukan  gantang  gantang  lada.
Gantang  berisi  hampa  padi,
Di-chinchang  rebong  lumai-lumai  Bukan-nya  datang  datang  sahaja,
Buat  penuba  batang  ari,  Besar  maksud  kahandak  hati.
[civ]  Charm  used  by  the  Reapers  after  filling  the  Baskets  [~p.  244.
Al-salam  'aleikum  Nabi  Tap,  yangmeme-       Jangan  rosak,  jangan  binasakan,
gangkan  bumi,  Jauhkan  deripada  Jin  dan  Sheitan,
Tetapkan  anak  aku,  Dengan  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[cv]  Charm  used  by  the  Reapers  daily  on  beginning  to  Reap          [p.  245.
Layang-layang  jatoh  bertimpa,  Bayang-bayang  dengan  Rengkesa,
Timpa  di  laman  kami,  Jangan  berchampor  dengan  kami.
[cvi]  [p.  247.
Charm  to  confine  the  Spectral  Reapers  to  the  Boundaries  of  the  Field
Bismillah,  d.s.  b.  Bayang-bayang  dengan  Rengkesa,
Layang-layang  jatoh  bertimpa,  Tempat  Rengkesa  di  sempadan,
Bertimpa  di  tengah  'laman,  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
[cvii] Charm  quoted  in  connection  -with  a  Mythical  Legend  of  the  Origin  of  Rice l
Hei  Padi,  aku  tahu  Datang  deri  Shurga  di-bawa
Mula  asal  angkau  jadi !  Nabi  Adam  dengan  Hawa
Buah  kelubi  asal  'kau  jadi,  Ka  bukit  Kaf.
1  This  and  the  next  four  charms  are  extracted  from  a  paper  by  the  author  which  appeared  in Sel.Journ.,  vol.  iii.  No.  iz,  pp.  I96--20O.
v  VEGETATION  CHARMS  617
[cviii] Charm  used  during  Sowing  (quoted  in  the  same  connection  as  the  last)
Al-salam  'aleikum  ibu  aku  Bumi  ;  Jangan  rosak  binasakan
Al-salam  'aleikum  bapa  aku  Langit ;  Dalam  lima  bulan  ka-anam
'Nak  bertanam  Si  Dangomala  dengan  Si  Sahya  datang  mengambil  balik. Dangsani  ;
[cix]  Charm  used  when  the  Seed  is  about  to  be  sown
Lagi  didalam  Shurga  Buah  S'ri,  temiang  S'ri
Bernama  buah  Khaldi,  Karna  apa  sebab  sudah  bersumpah
Sampei  ka   dunia  bernama    buah    S'ri.  Di  bukit  Saguntang  Mahaberu,
temiang  S'ri  Kalau  'kau  rosakkan,
'Kan  penghidup  anak-anak  Adam  'Kau  di-makan  sumpah,
Tumboh  di  tanah  menang,  di-menang-  Di-makan  besi  kawi,
kan  Allah  Di-timpa  daulat  am  pat  penjuru  'alam  ;
Tumboh    di    tanah    sakti,    di-saktikan  Sidik-ku  sidik-lah  aku
Allah,  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah,
Jangan  rosak  jangan  binasakan  Muhammad  Rasul  Allah.
[ex]  When  Reaping  is  about  to  begin  [p.  250,  n.
Kur  !  Semangat  anak  aku  Jangan  kena  angin,
Mari-lah  pulang  ka  rumah  aku.  Jangan  di-gigit  nyamok,
Perjanjian  kita  sudah  sampei  !  Jangan  di-gigit  agas  kemus  ! Jangan  kena  panas,
[cxi]
Charm  used  when  the  Jungle  is  to  be  cleared,  after  calling  on  Toh  Mentala Guru,  Saraja  Gurit,  Gampitar  'Alam,  and  Saraja  Malik
Mari-lah  bersama-sama  dengan  aku,  Tujoh  lorah,  tujoh  permatang,
Aku  handak  meminta'  tempat  ini,  Tujoh  antaran  tempat  aku,
Pergi-lah  angkau  ka  bukit  Siamang  Biru        Mengenyahkan  Hantu  Sheitan  !
[cxii]  Do'a  Sapuloh  (Mengambil  fadi)
Another  Version  of  the  Ten  Prayers
Ka-sa  Allah  Ka-tujoh  Pintu  Shurga
Ka-dua-nya  Bumi  Ka-'lapan  anak  'ku  kandongkan,
Ka-tiga  dengan  ayer  sembahyang,  Ka-sambilan  Muhammad  menjadi,
Ka-ampat  dengan  hari  Isnayan,  Ka-sapuloh  t£nak  taman,
Ka-lima  dengan  pangkat  Mahaligei,  Dengan  kampong  'laman-ku. Ka-anam  Bintang  Rezki,
5
[cxiii]       Do'a  Sapuloh  (atau  Chendrawasi)  (mengambil  semangat  padi) Another  Version  of  the  same
a-sa  'kan  Allah,  Ka-sapuloh  jadi  Allah,  jadi  Muhammad.
Ka-dua  'kan  Langit,  Sejok   dingin    aku    sapgrti   ular   chinta-
Ka-tiga  'kan  Bumi  mani,
Ka-ampat  'lean  bulan  Baya  Allah,  aku-lah  anak  ku  kasih  Allah
Ka-lima  'kan  bintang  Didalam  Laut  Hasin  !
Ra-anam  'kan  Matahari  Kawa  rirang  kawa  rira
Ka-tujoh  'kan  'arash  kursi  Kata  ular  chintamani ;
Ka-'lapan  'kan  anak  di-kandong  ibu,  Aku  yang  kechil  menjadi  besar,
Ka-sambilan  sambilan  bulan  Yang  tua  menjadi  muda,
6i8
APPENDIX
CHAP.
Yang  hina  menjadi  mulia,
Yang  miskin  menjadi  kaya,
Dengan  kudgrat  Allah  ta'ala.
Raja  sagala  burong
Mengantarkan  raakan-makanan-nya,
Yang  di  hulu,  yang  di  hilir,
Yang  di  laut,  yang  di  darat,
Anak  unta  bertujoh  ekor
Mengantarkan  rezki-nya,
Dan  lagi  gajah  puteh  sabrang  lautan
Mengantarkan  rezki-mu.
Rambut  sa-'lei  di-bglah  tujoh, Menjadikan  sengk'la-mu, Pisang  sa-biji  akan  makan-makanan-mu, Tebu  sa-katang  akan   makan-makanan- mu,
Telor  sa-biji  akan  kulum-kuluman-mu, Dengan  kudgrat  Allah  ta'ala Mengantarkan  rekzi-mu Insha'allah Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
[cxiv]
Dola  Chendrawasi
Allah  Mabirah  mati  kaya  jelah-jelaleh  ya
munsha !
Ya  Nabi  Musa  illahi ! Ya  Nabi  Abubakar  illahi ! Ya  Nabi  'Sman  illahi  ! Ya  Nabi  'All  illahi  1 Ya  Nabi  'Umar  illahi ! Ya  tuanku  illahi !
Makbul  do 'a  aku  hamba-nya  'alam Terbuat  kuasa  isi  laut  dan  darat Tiada  berchita-nya  kapada  aku, Dengan  berkat  do 'a  chintamani. Berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah. Bayang  aku  ini  bayang  ku  kasih  Allah. Bayang  aku  ini  bayang  ku  kasih  Nabi. Bayang  aku  ini  bayang  ku  kasih  mala'i-
kat  ampat  puloh  ampat, Didalam  kubor, Yang  kechil  menjadi  besar Yang  tua  menjadi  muda, Yang  hina  menjadi  mulia, Yang  miskin  menjadi  kaya, Kaya  deri  rumah  tangga-nya  Raja  sagala
burong,
Mengantar  makan-makanan-nya,
Allah  Humah  menjadi  suatu  niat  sa-bala-
bala,
Laba  dunia,  laba  akhirat. Sejok  dingin  aku  saperti  ular  chintamani, Tada    siapa    yang    memakei   do 'a   ular
chintamani,
Melainkan  aku  yang  memakei-nya. Allah  Humah  jadi  sa-pohun  kayu  yang
besar,
Di  tengah  laut  yang  puteh Antara  langit  dengan  bumi. Disana-lah  tfimpat  burong  chendrawasi Bertelor  bersarang  menetas. Menjadikan  anak  ular  chintamani.1 Ya  Allah  Humah,  Ya  Jibra'il Salamat  semperna  kabajikan  aku, Salamat  semperna  pebuatan  aku, Salamat  semperna  kabaikan  aku, Aku  saperti  ular  chintamani, Insha'allah, Berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
MINING  CHARMS
[cxv]  Balai  Lumbong  [p.  265.
Charm  used  -when  the  Karang  (tin-bearing  stratum  or  overburden)  is  reached
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Bijeh?2 Asal  ambun  menjadi  ayer Asal  ayer  menjadi  buih,3 Asal  buih  menjadi  batu Asal  batu  menjadi  Bijeh. Bijeh    terkandong   dalam   batu  yang pejal,
Kaluar-lah  angkau   deri  dalam   batu
yang  pejal  !
Jikalau  angkau  t'ada  kaluar, Derhaka  angkau  kapada  Allah  ! Hei  Bijeh,  Si  Apong-apong, Apong  di  laut,  Apong  di  darat  ! Timbul-lah  angkau  didalam  kolam  aku
1  Ular  ckintainani :  the  snake  chintamani springs  from  the  eggs  of  the  bird  chandrawasih. (chendrawasi),  which  fall  into  the  sea ;  if  you find  dust  (aiu)  or  a  piece  of  sugar-cane  inside  a floating  cocoa-nut-shell  at  sea,  you  may  know  it to  be  the  snake  chintamani.  If,  on  the  other hand,  the  eggs  fall  into  primeval  forest,  they turn  into  the  doves  called  merbo'  titek  aim,
if  upon  a  hill,  they  turn  into  the  doves  called merbo'  apt.  Sometimes,  however,  even  after falling,  they  take  the  shape  of  bananas,  sugar- cane, or  hen's  eggs ;  and  that  is  why  sugar- cane, hen's  eggs,  and  bananas  are  used  when the  "  Soul  of  the  Rice  "  is  fetched  home.
2  Bijeh,  i.q.  biji,  tin-ore,  lit.  seed,  grain.
3  Buih,  i.q.  buhi,  foam.
MINING  CHARMS
619
Jika   t'ada    timbul.    dcrhaka    angkau kapada  Allah
Derhaka  kapada  Muhammad,  derhaka kapada  Baginda  Rasul  Allah.1
[cxvi]
Tangkal  Lumbong Before  felling  the  Jungle
[p.  266.
O  nenek  Raja  Suleiman
Raja  Suleiman  Hitam  !
Aku  'nak  menebang  hutan  ;
Aku  tidak  memegang  hutan,
Raja    Suleiman    Kuning    memegang
hutan, Raja  Suleiman  Merah  yang  memegang
hutan  ;
Aku  yang  menebang  hutan, Tetapi  di-bri  orang  yang  berdua. Bangun,    bangun,    yang    menunggu-
nya  : Sirih   yang    tiga    kapor,    roko'    yang
tiga  batang  '2 O  Si  Mai  Mump,  O  Si  Mai  Merah,  Si
Gadek  Hitam,
Si  Gadek  Hitam  yang  di  hilir  ayer, Si  Gadek  Kuning  yang  di  hulu, Si  Mai  Merah  (yang  di  tengah  ayer), Kalau  di-bawa  lauk  pesok, Kalau  di-bawa  dulang  pechah, Jamu-lah  jamu  wadi Ali  berjuntei  jamu  watang Kalau  sa-kisah  bharu  jadi
Kalau  sa-kisah  bharu  datang,
Undor  siah-lah  angkau  deri  sini,
Kalau  tidak  angkau  undor  deri  sini
Kaki  melangkah  patah,
Tangan  menengkan  (?)  sompong
Mata  menchelek  pechah
Mata  di-tikam  duri  trong  asani,
Tangan  di-lantak  tras  sepang
Lidah  di-sayat  sembilu  telang
Sudah  di-sumpah  nenek  Sakernanaini-
naini
Didalam  daun  Putajaya  (?) Diatas  bukit  gunong  Selan, Bila  'kau  kechok  'kau  kechal Di-kutok  Koran  tiga  puloh  juz, Di-kampar  Bumi  dengan  Langit ! Aku  tahu  asal  angkau  jadi : I), i rali  hitam  darah  merah, Itu  asal  angkau  jadi. Kita  asal  sama  sa-bapa Bahagian  asing-asing  : Aku  memegang  mas  dan  bijeh, Angkau  memegang  batu  dan  pasir Dan  sekam  dan  dedak.
[cxvii]
Tangkal  Lumbong Before  clearing  the  Ground  to  start  working
Al-salam  'aleikum  kapada  Malai'kat,
Ibu-ku  Bumi,  bapa-ku  Ayer,
Hei  Nang  Terni,  Kun  Pali,  Jin  Puteh,
Jembalang  di  Bumi,
Nang  Prak  songsang,  Jin  Hitam,
Yang  bertapa  di  kulit  Bumi,
Nang  Prak  Weihah,  Jin  Kuning,
Yang  bertapa  di  selisi  Awan,
Hei  Marang  Kuan,  Berhala  Muda,
Nang  Kriak,  Raja  di  Gunong,
Hei  Si  Arang-arang,  Si  Arong-arong
Asal  nanah  ampu  nanah
Asal  puteh  berchampor  puteh.
[cxviii]
Charm  used  during  Fumigation
[p.  268.
Al-salam  'aleikum  minta'  tabek Kapada  Sheikh  'Abdul  Ghraib Sheikh  'Abdul  Rahman .  Sheikh  'Abdul
Kadir,
Dan  Sheikh  'Abdul  Han  ! Tolong-lah    kapit   bimba    aku,    pada
hari  ini !
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Puteh,  Pawang
di  Rimba
Pawang  Tua,  Pawang  Muda  ! Mari-lah,  aku  handak  jamu  ; Mana  yang  salah  minta'  ampun, Mana    yang    kurang,    minta'    tabek
samua-nya.
1  The  last  two  lines  must  be  said  quite  in  a  -  Tika  terlanggar  atau  tersepek,  itulah  akan whisper  to  one's  self,  as  the  name  of  God  or  pern  pas  dan  dendang-nya  (i.q.  ubat-nya)  maka Muhammad  must  never  under  any  circum-  isharat-nya  ayam  sa  ekor,  tanam  kapala,  turn- stances  be  mentioned  aloud  in  the  mine.  pah  darah.
620
APPENDIX
Then  when  the  tapers  are  lighted  and  the  offerings  ready,  say : —      Pp.  269.
Hei  Puteh  Raja  di  Rimba  ! Angkau-lah  yang  memegang  ra'yat  di
rimba  di  hutan Yang  b'lakang  ka  langit, Mehukumkan  sakalian  Dato'  di  bumi
dan  Putra  disini
'Kau  yang  sa-ka'indra'an  disini ! Mari  makan  jamu-nya  aku,
Bukan  sisa  bukan  telah, Sulong  ka'indra'an,  sulong  Dasman, Al-salam  'aleikun,  hei  Sang  Gana  ! Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Sang  Gani ! Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Sang  Krema-
sena, Sang  Kremaseni,  Sang  Dermaseni !
[cxix]
An  Invitation  to  the  Spirits
Hei  Si  Arong-arong,  Si  Arang-arang, Marang  Kuan,  Raja  di  Rimba, Rang  Jana  Rut  Jana,  Sang  Merlin, Sah  Merlin,  Sang  Bujok,  Ummai  Bujok  ! Sah  Jihin  nama  anak-mu, Marang  Kuan  nama  ibu-mu. Hei  Marang  Kuan  Raja  di  Rimba ! Angkau-lah  yang  memegang   ra'yat  di hutan  di  rimba
Mari-lah  angkau  aku  'nak  suroh-suroh. Panggil  mari  sagala  ra'yat  bala-mu, Hamba,  sahya-mu ;  budak,  kanak-kanak-
mu,
Mari  makan  jamuan  aku  ini. Aku  'nak  minta'  tolong-mu, Aku  'nak  buka  kalian  ini.
[cxx]
Mining
[p.  270.
O  Dato'  Batin  Tua
Yang  memegang  gaung  guntong
Yang  memegang  suak  sungei,
O  Dato'  Batin  Muda,
Yang    memegang    sagala     ra'yat    bala
tantra ! (Bijeh)    yang    di    atas    bukit   turun   ka
bawah, Yang    di    hulu    ayer   turun    ka   tengah
sungei, Yang  di  kuala  sungei  mudik-lah  ka  tengah
sungei,
Berkampong-lah  angkau  disini  1 Bukan-nya  aku  yang  memanggil, Dato1  Batin  Tua  yang  memanggil, Batin  Muda  yang  memangil, Pawang  Tua  yang  memanggil, Pawang  Muda  yang  memanggil, Berkampong-lah  sampan,  sarap,  chichak,
kalerik,1  lipan,  kelmayer Makan  jamuan  aku.
Mana  yang   datang  bawakan  (kapada)
aku  bijeh
Sa-ketong,  dua  ketong, Sa-genggam,  dua  genggam, Sa-arai,  dua  arai, Sa-gantang,  dua  gantang, Sa-sentong,  dua  sentong, Berkampong-lah  biji  nasi,  biji  baiam, Biji  'makau,  biji  sekoi,  biji  kantan, Berkampong-lah  'kau  disini ! Aku  handak  buka  tempat  ini, Aku  handak  buat  lombong, Kalau  'kau  ta'  datang,  ta'  berkampong, 'Kau  aku  sumpah, Jadi    abu   angkau,    jadi   angin    angkau,
jadi  ayer  angkau, Berkat  petua  guru-ku,  kabul  perminta'an-
ku:
Bukan  aku  yang  meminta' Pawang  Tua  yang  minla Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah,  d.s.b.
[cxxi]
Jin  Salaka  Tunggal Invocation  to  the  Silver-Spirit
[p.  272.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  anak  Jin  S?laka Tunggal,  \^t
Aku  tahukan  asal-mu ('Mu)  dudok  kapada  awan  yang  kun     \—
•   !     \
..*  Kalerik,  not  given  in  dictionaries,  nor  i. jintu-jintu,  which  is  another  name  for  it.  The  / sound  of  a  lizard's  chuckle  is  considered  a  good omen  at  this  juncture.  Ketong,  not  in  diction- aries, but  explained  as  a  grain  (sa-biji).  Arai, not  given  in  dictionaries,  but  explained  as  a
Katapa'an-mu  di  laut  Balongan  Darah, Katapa'an-mu  kolam  m6rata  sungei, Tempat  menjadi-mu  di  telok  mali  angin, Hei  anak  Jin  Salaka  Tunggal
V'cocoa-nut'shell  full  (sa-chupak).  Sentong,  lit.  = c'  basketful  here,  the  basket  being  such  a  basket •  as  is  filled  with  jungle  produce  and  fitted  to  the back  of  the  carrier.  Makau  stands  for  tern- bakau.  Kantan  is  probably  Nicolaia  hnperi- alis  Horan  (Scitamineae).
SEA  CHARMS  621
Mari-lah  kapada  waktu  ini,  katika  ini,  Derbaka  'kau  kapada  Allah,
Aku  handak  bersemah,  "ku  handak  her-  Derhaka  'kau  kapada  Nabi  Allah  Sulei-
jamu  'arak  dan  tuak  !  man,
Kalau  'mu  ta1  kamari  pada  katika  ini,  Aku-lah  Nabi  Allah  Suleiman  !
Water
CHARMS  AND  CEREMONIES  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  SEA [cxxii]  [p.  279.
Invocation  to  the  Water  Spirit,  used  at  the  insertion  of  the  Twigs  in  the  Masthead
Al-salam  'aleikum  Jangan  'kau  hampir-hampir
Hei  Ayer  Si  Hantu  Ayer,  Kembali-lah  kapada  tempat-'kau,
Anak  bernama  Laskar  Allah,  Kapada  uri  tembuni  Nabi  Allah  Musa  :
Bersahabat  baik  dengan  Mambang  Tali  Kalau  kau  ta'  berbalik
Harus,  Derhaka  'kau  kapada  Allah,  d.s.b. Jangan  'kau  imbang-imbang  prahu  aku
[cxxiiil  Starting  a  Ship  on  its  Journey
Dudok  didalam  petak  ruang,  bakar  kemenyan,  tabor  bras  kunyit  ;  jintekkan serempu,  kemdian  jintekkan  apit  lempang,  katakan  : —
Al-salam     'aleikum,      Medang     Raya,  Ka  mana-mana  le mpat  handak pergi.
Medang  Katanah  !  Kalau  tidak,  angkau  derhaka  kapada Jangan  angkau  bercherei  dua  beradek  :  Allah,  d.s.b.
Aku  'nak  menghantar  sabuleh-buleh-nya
[cxxivl      Invocation  to  the  Spirits ;  asking  them  to  point  out  Rocks,  etc.    fp.  280. Stand  facing  the  bows,  and  say  :  —
Hei  saudara  aku,  Uri  Buni  Tentoban,  Tukun 1  pulau  aku  ta'  tabu,
Aku  'nak  b'layer  ka  Pulau  Pinang,  Angkau  yang  tahu.
Ampang  larang  aku  ta'  tahu,  Inilah  b'ras  sa-genggam  buni,  d.s.b.
Tunggul  batang  aku  ta'  tahu
Charms  and  Ceremonies  used  to  propitiate  the  Sea  Spirits [cxxvl  Bersahabat  Orang  Laut
Si  Minas  yang  tua  (di  tali  harus),  Si  Munas  yang  tengah  (di  puchok  gelom- bang),  Si  Ganas  yang  bongsu  (di  tepi  pantai),  [itulah]  anak  Raja  di  Arongan  (?) yang  memegang  tali  harus  yang  besar  ;  mak-nya  Si  Julam.  Tanda  sahabat  [-nya] roko'  tiga  batang,  sirih  tiga  kapor,  ayam  puteh  sa-ekor  [katakan]  : —
Hei  sahabat-ku  [Si  Anu] Aku  minta'  sampeikan  kapada
\tempat  anu\ Jangan  rosak,  jangan  binasa.
Ini  yang  menjaga  puting  bliong  ayer  memusing  hamba-nya  yang  bernama Penglima  Si  Awang,  dada-nya  berbulu,  mata-nya  merah,  kulit-nya  hitam,  rambut- nya  kreting  :  itulah  yang  naik  ka  puchok  tiang.  Kalau  'nak  timbulkan  beting, tabor  bras  kunyit  tiga  [?  kali]  keliling  prahu,  panggilkan.
1  i.q.  tokoHf,  a  rocky  islet,  a  rock.
622
APPENDIX
[cxxvil        A  General  Invocation  of  the  Hantu  Laut  and  other  Spirits
Hei  Toh  Mambang  Puteh,  Toh  Mam- bang  Hitam
Yang  diam  di  bulan  dan  matahari Melempahkan    sakalian    'alam   asal-nya
pawang,
Menyampeikan  sakalian  hajat-ku, Melakukan  sagala  kahandak-ku, Al-salam  'aleikum  ! Hei  sahabat-ku  Mambang  Tali  Harus, Yang  berulang    ka   pusat   tasek    Pauh
Janggi,
Sampeikan-lah  pesan-ku  ini Kapada  Dato'  Si  Rimpun  'Alam Aku    minta  tolong    p'leherakan   kawan-
kawan-ku.
Hei,  sakalian  sahabat-ku  yang  di  laut  ; Hei,  Sidang  Saleh,  Sidang  Bayu, Sidang  Mumin,  Sidang  Embang, Sidang  Biku,  Mambang  Sagara, Mambang        Singgasana,         Mambang
Dewata, Mambang    Laksana,1    Mambang    Sina
Mata,
Mambang  Dewati,  Mambang  Dewani, Mambang  Tali  Harus. Imam  An  Jalil  nama-nya  Imam  di  laut, Bujang   Ransang  nama-nya  hulubalang
di  laut,
'Nek    Rendak   nama-nya   yang  diam  di
bawah, 'Nek  Joring  nama-nya   yang   diam    di
telok, 'Nek    Jfiboh    nama-nya   yang   diam    di
tanjong, Dato'  Batin  'Alam  nama-nya  yang  Dato'
di  laut, Bujang  Sri  Layang  nama-nya  yang  diam
di  awan-awan, Mala'ikat    Chitar    Ali    nama-nya    yang
memegang  puting  bliong, Mala'ikat    Sabur    Ali     nama-nya    yang
memegang  angin,
Mala'ikat  Sir  Ali  nama-nya  yang  meme- gang ayer  laut, Mala'ikat    Putar    Ali    nama-nya    yang
memegang  palangi, la-itulah    ada-nya :    ya  Nabi,    ya  Wali
Allah, Tertegak  panji-panji  Muhammad,  geda-
geda  Allah
Aku  minta  kramat  Pawang, Berkat     kramat     Dato'     Mengkudum 2
Puteh Berkat   kramat  daulat  Sultan    Iskandar
Sah  ada-nya. s
CROCODILE  CHARMS
When  cutting  and  planting  the  stake  (to  which  the  floating  platform  with fcxxviil  the  bait  is  loosely  attached)  [p.  296.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Allah,  'Tap
Yang  memegang  bumi
Nabi  Khailir  yang  memegang  ayer,
Nabi  Setia  yang  memegang  langit,
Nabi  Alias  yang  memegang  kayu,
Nabi  Noh  yang  tanam  kayu  !
Aku  pohunkan  ini  kayu
'Nak  buat  tern  pat  meletakkan  pekiri-
man4  kapadaulubalang5di  rantau.
Al-salam     'aleikum,     Mambang    Tali
Harus,
Yang  dudok  di  tali  harus, Al-salam  'aleikum,  Jin  Hitam, Yang  dudok  pematahan  6  telok, Al-salam  'aleikum,  Jin  Puteh, Yang  dudok  di  ujong  tanjong  : Jangan-lah  angkau  berkachau-kachau!
cxxviii
iii]
An  alternative  shorter  Version
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Tetap  meme- gang bumi
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Noh  tanam kayu,
Aku  memohunkan  kayu  ini  'nak  buat
panchang  alir : 7
Kalau  membunoh  kau  telentang  8 Kalau  ta'  membunoh  'kau  telangkup.
1  [Sic.     1  Laksamana.]
2  i.q.  Ma-khdum,   or  perhaps    mukaddam, chief.
3  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  31,  p.  28.
4  Pekiriman:    lit.    a    "sending,"  a    thing which    is    sent,    and    hence    a    present,   the "  present  "  being  the  bait.
»  Ulubalang,  or  hulubalang^  a  captain  or champion  (v.  Kl.  s.v.) :  in  this  context  the crocodile  is  of  course  intended.
6  Pematahan:  lit.  the  "break"  of  the  bay, i.e.  the  central  point  (from  patah,  to  break).
7  Alir:  the  name  of  this  particular  method
of  crocodile  catching.  Thus  tnengalir  =  to catch  crocodiles  in  this  particular  way  (as described  above).  Rotan  alir  =  the  long rattan  line  attached  to  the  bait.
8  Telentang:  this  and  the  next  line  probably refer  to  some  form  of  omen  which  is  taken from  the  way  in  which  the  tree  falls ;  but  this was  not  explained  to  me  at  the  time.  The "supine  position"  in  this  case  would  no  doubt be  an  allusion  to  the  position  of  a  dead  croco- dile which  has  "  turned  turtle,"  whe_reas  to  be "prone"  would  be  its  natural  position  as  it swims.
REPTILE  CHARMS
623
[cxxix]
When  about  to  plant  the  Pole  in  the  Water
[P-  297-
Al-salam   'aleikum  Nabi  Khailir  meme-
gang  ayer, Al-salam    'aleikum    Nabi  Tetap  meme-
gang  I  mini, Tabek,    Raja   di   Laut,   Mambang  Tali
Harus !
Aku  memohunkan  yang  berdosa  : J Mana     yang     tiada     berdosa,     tolong
lepaskan ,
Halaukan  yang  berdosa  itu  yang  makan
Si  Anu  ! 2
Jikalau  tidak  di-halaukan Mati  mampek,  mati  mawai, Mali  di-sumpah  kalangan  3  darah  ! Kalau  di-halaukan, Biak  *  k£mbang  beribu-'kau, Di-mudahkan  Allah  rezki-'kau, Dengan  berkat  Nabi  Suleiman  !
[cxxx]
When  hanging  up  the  Bait  at  the  end  of  the  Rod
Sambu  s  Agak,  Sambu  Agai !
Sambut  pekiriman  Nabi  Allah  Suleiman,
tujoh  pengikat ;
Sa-tanjong  ka  hulu,  sa-tanjong  ka  hilir Sambut  dalam  satu  hari  akan  katiga  ! Kalau  'kau  ta'  sambut  pekiriman  Raja
Suleiman  itu,
Satu  hari  akan  katiga, Mati  mampek,  mati  mawai, Mati  di-sumpah  kalangan  darah  ; Ka  laut  ta'  dapat  minum, Ka  darat  ta'  dapat  makan, Dengan  kata  kita  Nabi  Suleiman.
Repeat  this  same  charm  when  you  blow  out  the  chewed  betel  on  the  head  of the  cock.
[cxxxi]
Arak-arak,  iring-iring Kembang  bungi  si  Panggil-Panggil, Datang  berarak,  datang  beriring Raja  Suleiman  datang  memanggil. Hei  Si  Jambu  Rakai,  aku  tahu  asal  'kau
jadi, Buku  tebu  ampat  puloh  ampat  akan
tulang  'kau
Tanah  liat  akan  tuboh-'kau, Akar  pinang  akan  urat-'kau, Gula  chayer  akan  darah-'kau, Tikar  burok  akan  kulit-'kau, Pelepah  nipah  akan  ekor-'kau. Duri  pandan  akan  ridip-'kau, Tunjang      berembang      akan      gigi-
'kau, Melibas  patah  ekor-'kau,
Alternative  Version
[p.  298.
Mengempas  patah  munchong-'kau,
Menguniah  patah  gigi-'kau  !
O  Si  Jambu  Rakai,    aku    ikat    tujoh
pengikat,
Aku  barut  tujoh  pembarut, Di-orak  di-kembang  jangan  : Lulum-lulum  bharu  'kau  tfilan. Hei    Si    Jambu    Rakai,     sambut-lah
pekiriman  Tuan  Putri  Rundok Datang  deri  Jawa  ; Jikalau  angkau  tidak  sambut, Didalam  dua  hari  akan  katiga Mati  mampek,  mati  mawai, Mati  mfingk'lan  darah, Mati  mengk'Ian  Tuan   Putri   Rundok
deri  Jawa  ! Jikalau  'kau  ambil,
1  \  'ang  berdosa :  this,  of  course,  refers  to  the guilty  crocodile  or  crocodiles,   i.e.  the  man- eaters,  who  are  considered  to  have  "  sinned  "  in eating  human  flesh.
2  Si  Anu :  the  name  of  the  victim  or  victims should  be  mentioned  here.
b
3  Kalangan  darah :    it    is  difficult  to  see I  the  exact  meaning  of  this  phrase  ;  at  first  sight
it  looks  like  "  the  curse  of  the  barring  of  the blood,"  but  my  Malay  authority  insisted  that  it meant  the  "  blood-bars,"  and  that  it  was  an allusion  to  the  bones,  which  were  supposed  to "  bar  off"  blood  from  blood,  and  that  the  real significance  of  the  phrase  was  "choked  to death  with  bones."  It  looks  to  me,  however, much  more  like  a  mistake  for,  or  variation  of, the  phrase  mengklan  darah,  of  which  there are  plenty  of  examples ;  but  until  more  instances
are  collected  the  explanation  must  be  con- sidered doubtful.
•*  Biak  kembang,  d.s.b.:  "increase  and multiply"  is  the  only  sense  given  to  biak  or bijak  (v.  Kl.  s.v.),  but  the  phrase  may  possibly be  corrupt.
5  Sambu  Agak,  Sambu  Agai:  in  other charms  "  Jambu  Rakai "  is  given,  which  evi- dently corresponds  to  "  Sambu  A^ai,"  and  is the  name  given  to  the  human  being  who, according  to  what  must  undoubtedly  be  the older  (pre-Muhammadan)  legend,  was  meta- morphosed into  the  crocodile.  The  story which  makes  the  first  crocodile  a  plaything  into which  Muhammad's  daughter  Patimah  gave life,  must  at  any  rate  in  that  respect  be  much modified  by  Munammadan  ideas,  but  there  arc indications  here  which  seem  to  point  to  the interweaving  of  two  separate  stories  (».  snf>ra).
624  APPENDIX  CHAP.
Sa-rantau  ka  hulu  sa-rantau  ka  hilir.  Jikalau   di-bawa   ka   hulu,   chondong di-situ-lah  'kau  nanti  aku.  kau  ka  hilir,
Bukan   aku   yang  punya   kata,    Raja  Dengan      berkat      perkata'an      Raja Suleiman  punya  kata,  Suleiman
Jikalau   di-bawa  ka   hilir,    chondong  La-ilaha-illa-'llah,  d.s.b. 'kau  ka  hulu,
[cxxxiil  Another  Version
Hei  Si  Jambu  Rakai,  sambut  pekiriman  Putri  Rundok  de'  Gunong  Ledang  : —
Ambachang  masak  sa-biji  bulat,  Mali  mampek,  niati  mawai,
Pengikat  tujoh  pengikat,  Mali  tersadai  pangkalan  tambang  !
Pengarang  tujoh  pengarang,  Kalau  angkau  sambut,
Di-orak  di-kembang  jangan,  Dua  hari  jangan  tiga,
Lulor  lalu  di-telan  !  Ka  darat  'kau  dapat  makan,
Tidak  angkau  sambut  Ka  laut  'kau  dapat  minum  ! Dua  hari,  jangan  katiga,
[cxxxiii]  Crippling  Charm  [p.  301.
Pehimpoh
Aku  tahu  asal  kau  jadi  Dada-'kau  upih,
Mani  Fatimah  asal  'kau  jadi,  Darah-'kau  kunyit
Di-kepal  di  tanah  liat  Mata-'kau  bintang  Timor,
Tulang-'kau  buku  t6bu  Gigi-'kau  tunjang  berembang
Kanala-'kau  umbi  niyor  Ekor-'kau  puchok  nipah.
Or  else  this  version  : —
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi  Darah-'kau  gula,  dada-'kau  upih,
Tanah  liat  asal  'kau  jadi  Gigi-'kau  tunjang  berembang,
Tulang  buku  tebu  asal  'kau  jadi,  Ridip-'kau  chuchoran  atap.
Then  blow  (jampi)  thrice  upon   the  line,   and   carry  the  end  of  it  over  your shoulder  backwards,  and  then  strike  the  bow  of  the  boat  with  its  end  thrice.
[cxxxivl  If  the  Crocodile  shows  Fight  when  taken
Pasu  jantang,  pasu  renchana,  Berdgrei  daun  sulasi :
Tutop  pasu,  penolak  pasu,  Aku  tutop  hati  yang  besar,
Angkau  menentang  kapada  aku,  Aku  gantong  lidah  yang  fasik,
Terjentang  mata-'kau,  Jantong-'kau  sudah  'ku  gantong,
Jantong-'kau  aku  gantong  Hati-'kau  sudah  'ku  rantei,
Hati-'kau  sudah  'ku  rantei !  Rantei  Allah,  rantei  Muhammad,
Si  Pulut  nama-nya  usar,  Rantei  Baginda  Rasul  Allah  !
FISHING
[cxxxv]  Kelong  Invocation  [p.  315.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Nabi  Allah  Tap  !  Al-salam   'aleikum,   hei  Mambang   Tali Al-salam     'aleikum,     hei     Nabi     Allah  Hams !
Khailir  !  Al-salam   'aleikum,  hei  Mambang  Kun- Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Nabi  Allah  Noh  !  ing  !
Al-salam     'aleikum,     hei    Mambang    di  Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Toh  Pawang  To-
Olak  !  gok  !
Al-salam    'aleikum,    hei    Mambang    di  Al-salam    'aleikum,    hei    Toh    Pawang
Bajau  !  Tua !
v  FISHING  CEREMONIES  625
Bukan  -  nya    aku    yang    mCnyemahkan       Toh  Pawang  Tua  yang  menjamukan,
jamuan  ini :  Yang  menyuroh  Toh  Aur  Gading.
Toh  Pawang  Togok  yang  menjamukan,         Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[cxxxvi]  Alternative  Chann  [p.  316.
Pawang  Kisa,  Pawang  Berima,  Mak-'kau  buboh  di  puchi  tua,
Si  Langjuna,  Raja  di  Laut ;  Anak-'kau  di-buboh  di  ujong  penajor,
Ai,  Durai,  Si  Biti  nama  mak-'kau,  Bapa-'kau  di-buboh  di  pemingkul  "blah
Si  Tanjong  nama  bapa-'kau  !  bar.u,
'K.iu  yang  memegang  ujong  tanjong,  Berampat  kita  bersaudara  !
'Kau    yang    memegang     sakalian    tepi  Kalau  ya  kita  bersaudara,
pantei,  'Kau  tolong  bantu  aku  ! 'Kau  yang  memegang  beting  alang.
(Here  plant  the  pole.)
Kaki-'ku  berpijak  di  dul  angkasa,  'Kau  yang  tiga  beranak,
Puchi-'ku  tersandar  di  tiang  'arash.  '  Kau  tolong  piarakan  !
Allah  mengulor,   Muhammad  menyam-  Kabul  Allah,  d.s.b.
but,  Berkat  do'a  Pawang  Tua  'ku,
Anam  depa  kiri,  anani  depa  kanan,  Berkat  Dato'  Kamalu-'l-Hakim.
[cxxxvi  i]  Propitiation  of  the  Water  Spirit
Bawa  (i)  b'ras  bertih,  (2)  b'ras  basoh,  (3)  b'ras  kunyit,  tabor  diatas  ayer  tiga genggam  petang-petang,  serta  kata : —
Inilah  bras  sa-genggam  buni, Tanda  kita  bersaudara !
Kemdian  pulang  ka  rumah,  jam  mahu  tidor  bachakan  nama  Hantu  itu  tujoh kali  :  maka  kalau  ada  untong,  datang-lah  ia  dalam  mimpi.  Maka  pagi  makan demkian  itu  juga  sampei  tujoh  petang.  Sudah  itu  pasang  kelong.  Maka chachak  turns  tua(h),  kayu  sa-batang,  pulang  ka  darat.  Maka  tabor-lah  b'ras  tiga macham  tadi,  maka  berdiri  panggil  hantu  yang  kabanyakan  : —
Hei  saudara-'ku,  uri,  buni,  tentoban,  Hang  yang  tabu  !
Angkau  yang  tua,  [aku  yang  muda]  !  Aku  minta'  tengo'  tempat   aku   pasang
Aku  minta'   tengo'   tempat  aku  pasang  kelong
kelong  :  Inilah  b'ras  sa-genggam,  d.s.b. Ampang  aku  ta'  tahu,  tegor  sapa  aku  ta'
tabu,
The  charm  used  at  the  planting  of  the  turus  tua(h)  begins  the  same  way,  sub- stituting for  the  third  line  the  words —
Aku  handak  chachak  b'lat or  the  like.
When  finished,  stand  at  the  seaward  end  and  repeat  the  charm,  inserting  the words  aku  yang  muda  as  shown  above,  followed  by —
Kampong-lah  sakalian  permainan  angkau Bawa  kamari  kapada  tempat  ini  aku  buat Inilah  b'ras,  d.s.b.
2  S
626
APPENDIX
[cxxxviii]
Jermal  Charm
Al-salam  'aleikum !
Pawang  Tua,  Pawang  Pertama  Allah  !
Musa  Kalam  Allah,1
Sedang  Bima,  Sedang  Buana,
Sedang  Juara,  Raja  Laut ! Mari-lah  kita  sama-sama Berchachak  tiang  jermal.
[cxxxix]
Serapah  Kail When  fishing  with  a  Line  and  Hook
Hei  Mambang  Tali  Harus  !  Jikalau  kail  aku   di   kanan,   angkau  di Jangan   'kau    imbang-imbang    kail-'ku  kiri !
ini !  Jikalau  angkau  hampiri  kail  aku  ini,
Jikalau  kail  aku  di  kiri,  angkau  di  kanan,  Angkau  kasumpahi  dengan  kata  Allah  !
[cxl]
Charm  addressed  to  the  Fish
Sambut  tali  perambut ! Biar  putus,  jangan  rabut ! Kalau  rabut,  mata-'kau  chabut !
[P-
CHAPTER    VI
MAGIC    RITES    AS    AFFECTING    THE    LIFE    OF    MAN
[cxli]
BIRTH-SPIRITS
Langsuir  Charm
[Chap.  vi.  p.  326.
Jintek-jintek  di  kuala  ! Jauh  tajam  mata-nya, Dekat  tumpul  hati-nya  ; Terbuka  batu  dalam  tanah, Terbuka  hati  satru  lawan  'ku.
Terbuka  maiat  dalam  tanah, Terbuka  hati  satru  lawan-'ku. Sayu  hati  memandang  aku Berkat   aku    memakei   do 'a  Silam Bayu.
[cxliil  Charm  for  laying  a  Pontianak  fp.  327.
Pontianak,  mati  beranak, Mali  di-timpa  tanah  tambah  ! Krat  buluh  panjang  pandak 'Kan  pelSmang  hati  Jin  Pontianak. Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
Another  version  is  exactly  the  same  as  far  as  the  words  Jin  Pontianak,  but continues —
Jembalang,  Jembali,
Daun  lalang  gulong-gulong,
Datang  angkau  kamari,
'Ku  tetak  dengan  parang  gudong.
(Here  expel  your  breath  forcibly.)
1  Em.  Kalimu  'llah,  the  special  title  of  Moses.
VI
BIRTH-SPIRITS
627
[cxliii]
Lada  kechil,  lada  hi  tarn  ' Sanipei  ka  tunggul  muda  P6ri a Adek  yang  kechil,  adek  yang  hitam  3 Si  Ann  terkena  samhar  (ini). Jin  Pontianak  rimba ! Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi
Alternative  Charms Tangkal  Mail  Anak  (Pontianak}
Berutnah  'kau  diatas  Sa-lembar4 Minta'  tawar,  minta'  jampikan. Kabul-lah  do 'a  Pontianak Kabul  Guru,  kabul  aku, Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[cxliv]
Charm  for  laying  a  Penanggalan
Kur,  ayam  put  eh, Kur,  ayam  hitam,
Chatok-lah  prut   Manjang  yang  terjela- jela  itu,
Chatok-lah  hati,  jantong,  limpa  Manjang
itu, Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
[cxlv]
Charm  for  laying  (lit.  neutralising)  a  Polong
[P-  329-
Hei  Si  Tinjak,  Si  Tertib,
Ular  dan  lipan  berkelamfintang  !
Terbato'  terber'sin,
Berkat   aku   menangkal   polong  dengan
bajang  bantu  sakalian. Asal-'kau  di  tanah  kang,5 Pulang-'kau  ka  tanah  kang, Asal-'kau  di  tanah  dengkang, Pulang  'kau  ka  tanah  dengkang,
Datang  'kau  menelentang, Pulang  angkau  meniarap, Pulang-lah  angkau  kapada  jinjang  ang- kau,
Hei,  Dato'  Ulan,  Dato'  Puteh, Tfitap-lah  angkau  kapada  tempat  angkau, Kapada  hulu  aycr  paya  berlgndang Berkat,  d.s.b.
[cxlvi]     Charm  for  killing  a  Polong  (apparently  addressed  to  the  Pelesit)
Hu,  aku  tahu  asal  'kau  mula  menjadi,
Si  Ruchau  nama  'kau  mula  menjadi,
Datang  menelentang,  pulang  'kau  menelangkop,
Terlangkop  jinjang  guru-'kau,
Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[cxlvi  i]
Tangkal  Pelesit
[P-  330-
Sa-pertama-nya  Nyawa Ka-dua-nya  Darah Ka-tiga-nya  Daging Ka-ampat-nya  Prehat ! 8 Hantu  orang  asal  'kau  jadi, Tanah  puteh  asal  'kau  jadi, Tahi  Adam  asal  'kau  jadi, Tahi  Bali 7  asal  'kau  jadi ! Jangan  'kau  dengki, Jangan  'kau  aniaya Kapada  anak  sidang  (manusia) Jikalau  'kau  dengki,
Jikalau  'kau  aniaya,
'Kau  di-makan  besi  kawi,
Makan  kutop  ka  bintongan,
Di-hempap  Koran  tiga  puloh  juz,
Di-timpa  daulat  ampat  penjuru  'alam  !
Bukan-nya  aku  punya  tawar  :
Nenek    Malim    Karimun8  yang    punya
tawar,
Tawar  tersurat  di  pintu  Ka'bah  ! Sidik  Guru,  sidik-lah  aku, Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
1  Di-sembor  kapada  yang  kena.
-  ;'.c.  rumah  Pontianak.
'•*  Orang  yang  kena  Pontianak  jadi  hitam saperti  jantong  di-bembam.
•*  Qu.  selintbar,  a  plant?
5  Tanah  kang :  explained  as  an  allusion  to that  part  of  the  lower  jaw  which  is  beneath  the tongue  (tnulut  di-bawa.lt  HdaK),  the  intention evidently  being  to  allude  to  the  "pelesit's" coming  out  of  its  owner's  mouth.  In  the  next line  but  one,  tanah  dengkang  is  similarly
explained  as  alluding  to  the  roof  of  the  owner's mouth,  so  that  asking  the  "pelesit"  to  return to  it  is  tantamount  to  requesting  it  to  fly  back down  its  owner's  throat.  And  thus,  three  lines later,  it  is  requested  to  return  to  its  "embodi- ment "  (Jinjangan). "  i.f.  amah  J  in.
7  i.e.  sa-habis-habis  burok.
8  Apparently  a  demi-god,  descended  (accord- ing to  one  account)  from  Batara  Guru.
628  APPENDIX  CHAP.
In  the  case  of  a  pelesit  (kalau  orang  sakit  merepet  kata  kuching)  add  : —
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  menjadi ; Minyak  niyor  hijau  asal  'kau  menjadi. Kalau  ta'  undor  deri  sini, Kena  salang  mak  angkau, 'Ku  sula  melentang  mak  'kau  !
[cxlviii]  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  [p.  334.
The  treatment  of  the  umbilical  cord  is  generally  somewhat  as  follows  : — The cord  is  rubbed  with  dust  between  the  finger  tips  (di-gentil  dengan  abtt),  and kneaded  towards  the  child  (di-urut-nya  kapada  budak),  the  words  "  Bismillah wadi  mari  kamari "  being  pronounced  at  the  same  moment.  Then  it  is  tied round  with  strips  of  the  wild  bread-fruit  bark  (tali  trap)  in  seven  places,  each  a thumb's  breadth  from  the  next  (pengnkor  ibii  tangan}.  Saffron  (turmeric)  and  a piece  of  charcoal  (arang  saketul)  are  now  laid  upon  a  coin,1  over  which  the  cord is  drawn  tightly ;  and,  finally,  the  cord  is  severed  at  a  point  between  the  second and  third  bindings,  by  means  of  a  splinter  (sembilu)  of  bamboo.  The  severed ends  are  now  cooled  with  betel-leaf  water  (di-jehim  dengan  ayer  siri/i),  rubbed with  pounded  garlic  mixed  with  fine  dust  (bawang  puteh  di-giling-nya  dengan  hati a6u),  plugged  with  a  roasted  peppercorn  2  and  covered  (di-tekup)  with  mengkudu leaves,  after  which  the  child  is  swaddled  (di-bedong).  Within  from  three  to  seven days  the  dead  end  of  the  cord  will  fall  off  (tanggal  tali  pusat),  and  the  pepper which  had  previously  been  inserted  will  be  poured  out  (di-chichir).  The  caul (uri)  is  deposited  in  a  small  rice-bag  (swnpit) 3  with  salt,  black  pepper,  and  asam gelugor.  The  bag  is  then  tied  up  and  roasted  in  a  split  stick  (sepit)  such  as  is used  for  cooking  fish.  After  this  it  is  dried  by  being  kept  near  the  fire  in  the back  premises  (where  it  is  subjected  from  time  to  time  to  the  sembor  sirih treatment).  When  the  child  can  walk,  the  uri  is  buried  in  a  hole  in  the  ground, with  the  nail,  candle-nut,  brazil-wood,  etc.,  mentioned  elsewhere.4  In  this  case  a cocoa-nut  is  usually  planted  to  mark  the  spot  where  it  was  buried.  Sometimes, however,  the  bag  with  its  contents  is  merely  thrown  into  the  nearest  river  or the  sea.
[cxlix]  If  the  Labour  is  difficult
Kalau  sakit  benar,  di-kemam  asam  garam,  katakan  : — -
Bena  mudik  ka  hulu,  Aku  'nak  menengo'  anak  Si  Anu  lalu.
KeVpok-keVpak  pematah  paku,  Kabul-lah    pengajar   guru-'ku   mestajap Ambil  ijok  'kau  pengikat  si  alu-alu  kapada  'ku
De'  tujoh  bukit,  tujoh  kuala.  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah. Berkuak  bersiah-lah  angkau !
[ell         When  putting  the  Marks  (pangkahan)  on  the  Mother  and  Child  [p.  336.
Tfitak  buluh  tSlang,  Ayer  lior  gilang  gemilang
Tgtak  serba  bersisa  ;  Menawar  serba  yang  bisa.
1  In  the  case  of  a  Raja's  child  as  much  as  used  by  Malays  to  hold  their  supply  of  tobacco ten  (silver)  dollars  should  be  used,  but  for  poor  and  betel.
people  even  one  cent  will  do.  *  In  the  case  of  a  boy,  a  piece  of  paper  and
2  Cp.  Report  of  Dutch  Expedition  to  Mid-  a  sugar-palm   twig  (such  as   the  Malays  use Sumatra,  vol.  i.  p.  266.  for  writing  with)  may  be  added  to  the  other
3  Or  a  small  wallet  (bit/am),  such  as  is  often  objects.
TOOTH-FILING  CHARMS  629
ADOLESCENCE
When  scattering  the  Rice,  and  applying  the  Tepong  Tawar  before  commencing [cli]  to  file  the  Teeth  [p.  356.
Tepong  tawar.  tepong  jati,  Buangkan  sial  dengan  pemali,
Fatah  puchok  niali-niali ;  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah.
[clii]     When  touching  the  Patient's  Teeth  with  any  of  the  Rings  or  the  Egg
Hu,  kata  Allah  !  Wasam  si  in  Allah  aku  matikan
Hak,  kata  Muhammad  !  Kabul    aku   me"makei   do'a   mgngantok
Bismillah  al-rahman  al-rahim  amas.2
Uru  Allah,  kopak-kapek  Kabul  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah.
Aku  Kadim,  pauh 1  mfinyemblah
[cliii]
To  destroy  the  "  Venom  "  of  the  Steel  (buang  bisa  besi)
Bismillah  al-rahman  al-rahim  Tiada  aku,  tiada  angkau  ada  !
Hei,  Bismi !  Kalau  'kau  derhaka  kapada  aku,
Aku  tabu  asal  'kau  jadi !  'Ku  buang  ka  laut  D6mi  dalam  !
Aku  menjadi  chahia  Allah,  Hak  tiada  aku3  bisa,
Angkau  menjadi  mani  Allah,  Kalau  aku3  bisa,  derhaka  kapada  Tuhan.
Ada  aku,  bharu  angkau  ada,  Kabul  berkat,  d.s.b.
[cliv]  When  first  laying  the  File  across  the  Teeth
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Tap  [yang  memegang  bumi], Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Khailir  Tyang  memegang  ayer], Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  Elias  yang  memegang  poko.'4
To  charm  the  Betel-leaf  (jampi  sirih)  which  is  presented  to  the  Patient [civ]  after  the  Operation  [p.  357.
Bismillah  al-rahman  al-rahim  !  Berjalan  aku  berlebih,
Hong  sarangin  bulan  bintang  matahari !  Berkain  aku  berlgbih,
Tegak    ruh-ku    saperti    bulan    bintang  Berbaju  aku  berlebih,
matahari !  Bersaputangan  aku  berlebih,
Kabul   aku   memakei   do'a    Si    Awang  Kuat  kuasa-ku  aku  berlebih  !
L6bih  Kabul  berkat,  d.s.b.
[clvi]  Circumcision  [p.  360.
A  ceremony  equivalent  to  circumcision  is  performed  in  the  case  of  girls  at between  five  and  seven  years  of  age,  a  wound  "like  the  sting  of  a  gadfly" (saperti  di-gigit  pikat),  i,e.  just  sufficient  to  draw  blood,  being  inflicted  by  means of  scissors  wielded  by  a  Bidan  (who  offers  prayers  and  burns  incense).  In  the case  of  a  boy  the  skin  parted  from  the  wound  is  received  in  a  cleft  stick  (sepit), and  after  being  dried  is  made  up  into  a  sort  of  ring,  and  used  as  a  charm  to  secure invulnerability  (pelias)  in  war,  or  else  carried  out  on  a  piece  of  banana  leaf  and thrown  away  with  ashes  from  the  hearth  (abu  dapor),  which  latter  are  used  to stanch  the  blood.  The  small  bit  of  skin  got  from  the  girl  is  similarly  dealt  with.
1  (?)  Kau.  was  necessary  to  invoke  the  three  "  Prophets"
2  Mutatis  mutandis.  who  are  supposed  to  be  in  charge  of  those  de- 8  Qu.  angkau.  partments  of  creation.     The  explanation,  how- 4  The  Filer  of  Teeth  explained  that  the  file  ever,  is  not  a  satisfactory  one,  and  it  is  more
being  of  iron,  and  hence  emblematic  of  earth,  probable  that  these  jines  have  taken  the  place
the  bowl  of  water  in  which  the  file  was  to  be  of  an  older  invocation  now  forgotten.     Their
dipped  emblematic  of  water  in  general,  and  the  Arabic  character  in  itself  is  almost  conclusive
limes  emblematic  of  the  vegetable  creation,  it  on  this  point.
630
APPENDIX
CHAP.
PERSONAL  CHARMS
[clvii]
Charms  for  Protection Tahan  Tanggal
[p.  361.
Hei  benang,  bertali  benang,
Tujoh  besi,  peratus1  besi,
Tujoh  pengikat  sangka  raya  !
Maka  [kalau]  menguchap  maiat  dalam
kubor
Di-sahut-ki  orang  yang  di-atas  dunia, Maka  aku  di-binasakan Sagala  benatang  yang  bernyawa  ! Jikalau   tidak  menguchap  maiat   dalam
kubor,
(Then  blow  to  right,
Maka  tidak -lah  aku  di-binasakan Sagala  benatang  yang  bernyawa, Sagala  musoh  bahia, Sakalian  anak  sidang  manusia  ! Maka  [kalau]  berkokok  ayam  dalam  telor Di-sahut-ki  ayam  di-atas  dunia, Maka  aku  di-binasakan,  d.s.b. Tahan  Allah,  tahan  Muhammad, Tahan  Baginda  Rasul  Allah, Berkat  aku  memakei  do 'a  tahan  tunggal. to  left,  and  in  front.)
[clviii]
O  Jin  Sa-Raja  Jin, Jin  bernama  G6mpa  di  Rimba, Jin  bernama  GSmpa  di  Bukit, Jin  bernama  Gfimpa  di  Baru,2 Saribu    Garang    Kapala    Tujoh angkau,
Pendinding
Itulah  Jin  Sa-Raja  Jin Jin  Puteh  saudara-'kau  ! Jangan  angkau  rosak  binasakan Jangan  angkau  menchachat  menchedra 'Kau-lah  saudara-'ku.
[clix]
Pendinding  ('Che  Muntil)
Allah  'kan  payong-ku !
Nabi  muhammad  Mimbar-'ku !
Raja  Brahil  di  kanan-'ku  !
Serafil  di  kiri-'ku !
Rasul  Allah  di  hadapan-'ku  !
Turun  mala'ikat  yang  berampat,
Terkunchi  terkanching  pintu  bahia-'ku.
Turun  mala'ikat  yang  berampat, 'Kau  jadi  pagar  badan-'ku. Kain  Asadasan  Asadusin, Astabarukin  'kan  ganti  tudong-'ku  ! Terlindong-lah  diri-'ku  didalam  kalimah la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[clx]
Hei  Nur  Puteh  Maharaja  Besi, Yang  menunggu  Astana  Allah, Jin  Puteh  Maharaja  Dewa, Yang  menunggu  Pintu  Langit. Hei,  Mala'ikat  Puteh  yang  didalam
'ku, Yang  di-kiri,  di-kanan,  di-hadapan,
blakang, Tolong    kawal   pleherakan   aku   ini
Si  Ann  ini) !
[clxi]
Besi  kling,3  besi  tembaga4 Besi  melilit 5  di  pinggang-'ku Aku  tidor,  angkau-lah  jaga,
Pendinding
Serta  angkau  temukan  dengan  Nabi, Didalam  ampat  puloh  ampat  hari Dengan  berkat  daulat  Anak  Raja  Bulan
mengambang,
diri-       Dengan  berkat  daulat  Sultan  Muhammad, Dengan  berkat  mu'jizat  Bulan  dan  Mata- di-  hari,
Dengan  berkat  mu'jizat  Ibu  serta  Bapa, (or       Dengan  berkat  mu'jizat   Nabi   Muham- mad salla  Allah,  d.s.b.
Pendinding
Datang    marabaya,     grak    bangun    sa-
bangat-bangat, Datang  de'  kiri,  grak  di-kiri,
1  Qu.  beratus  or  sa.ra.tus  1
4  The  breastbone.
2  Qu.  baruh.  3  The  neckbone.
5  The  backbone.
vi  PERSONAL  CHARMS  631
Datang  de'  kanan,  grak  di-kanan  Kalau  'kau  ta'  grak  bangun,
Datang  de'  kapala,  menjunjong  naik,  Derbaka  kapada  Allah,
Datang  de'  kaki,  nicngangkit  bangun,  Berdosa  kapada  aku,
Hei  mala'ikat  Isrufil,  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah,  d.s.b.
Isr.Uil  yang  memegang  sakalian  angin  di  badan  kita 'Azra'il  yang  mengambil  nyawa  sagala  makhlok. Mika'il  yang  membri  rezki Jibra'il  yang  membawa  wahi  (khabar).
[clxii]  Charm  for  Health
S.ilira  reksa  baik-baik  tuboh  badan-mu  Biar  lepong-lasa
Jangan  bri  bersengit  riang  Biar  tegoh-tegap
Berchelah  chachak,1  berhadoh  hanal,  Bagei  turns  di  tengah  'laman
Jangan  bri  sakit  dan  pgning,  Pulang  tetap  pulang  nin
Biar  segar-degar,  sehat  pulang  pulis  Bagei  ayer  di  taman  kacha
Pulang  pulis  sedia  kala  Simpan  chawan-nya  :
Bagei  'adat  zaman  dahulu  ;  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
Charm  for  Beauty,  used  by  Children [clxiii]  Pemanis  Budak  [p.  363.
Ambil  ayer  dalam  batil  besar,  sapu  muka  di  misei-nya.     Bachakan  ini  yang sebut : —
Matahari  ampat,  bulan  lima,  Suara  aku  saperti  suara  Nabi  Daud,
Bintang  tujoh  ka  mala  aku,  Rupa  aku  saperti  rupa  Nabi  Yusoh,
Bintang  berayun  ka  dagu  aku,  Chahia   aku   saperti   chahia   Nabi   Mu-
Bulan  pernama  di  kening  aku,  hammad,
Semut  berliring  '2  di  biber  aku,  Berkat  aku   memakei   pemanisan   sama
Gajah  sa-kawan  di  gigi  aku,  jadi  dengan  aku
Ombak  beralun  di  lidah  aku  !  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha-illa-'llah,  d.s.b.
[clxiv]  Another  Version
Pemanis
Sub  kalubi  anta  kalubi  Hai,  chahia-ku  chahia  Nur  !
'Arash  mandi  krusi  mandi  Nur  Allah,  Nur  Muhammad,
Loh  mandi,  kalam  mandi,  Chahia  Baginda  Rasul  Allah.
Aku  mandi  didalam  'izat  Allah  Bintang  tiga  berator  di  dada-'ku,
Mandi  didalam  sifat  Allah,  S€mut  beriring  di  bibir-'ku,
Mandi    didalam    kandang  kalimah    la       Ular  chintamani  di  lidah-' ku.
ilaha,  d.s.b.  Berkat  'ku  memakei  chahia  Nur.
[clxv]  Another  Version,  combined  with  a  Love  Charm
Hong  si  bintang  tujoh,  Bagitu-lah  gila  kasih  sayang  kapada  'ku,
Bulan  perlima a  di  muka  aku,  Di-bawa  makan  tiada  termakan,
Ombak  mengalun  di  lidah  'ku,  Di-bawa  tidor  tiada  tertidorkan
Semut  beriring  di  bibir  'ku,  Berchinta  kasih  sayang  kapada  'ku  !
Angin  bertiup  di-serta-nya,  Panah  ma'rifat-'ku
Gajah  puteh  sabrang  lautan,  Sudah  terkena  terlekat
Songsang  tapak,  sonsang  bulu,  Terpaku    kapada    jantong,    hati,    rah,
Songsang  belalei,  songsang  gading,  limpa,  mempadu,  semangat  Si  Anu
Itu  lagi  bertemu  kapada  'ku  1  itu.
Ini  'kan  pula  Si  Anu  itu  Kabul  berkat,  d.s.b.
1  £m.  Berchela  chachat.  '-  i.e.  beriring,  also  hiring.  s  Qu.  pernama  or  6erfintat
632
APPENDIX
[clxvi]
For  Beauty Pcmanis
Bismillah,  d.s.b.
Titek  'ku  titek,  ayer  lior  sa-titek  di-atas
permeidani, Tundok  kasih  sayang  ummat  Muhammad
memandang  aku. Saperti  asam  garam l  bertentangan  chahia
aku,
Matahari  s'ri  aku,  bulan  rupa  aku, Berkat  aku  memakei  do 'a  asam  garam  ! S'ri  manis,  tengkuling2  manis, Aku-lah  yang  manis  ;
Bukan-nya  s'ri  manis,  tengkuling  manis,
Aku-lah  yang  manis.
Di-pandang  ummat  Muhammad  sakalian
laki-laki  sakalian  perampuan, Chahia  naik  ka  muka  aku, S'ri  turun  ka  dada  aku, Chahia  Allah,  chahia  Muhammad, Lebih  pagi  di-bawa(h)  petang, Lebih  petang  di-bawa(h)  pagi. Berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[clxvii]
Another  Version Pemanis  (makan  sirih}
"Tik,  pinang  'ku  titek,3
Titek  di-atas  batu  !
Makan  sirih  bercharik-charik,
Naik  s'ri  ka  muka  aku  !
S'ri  manis,  temuning  manis  ;
Bukan-nya  s'ri  manis  temuning  manis,
Aku-lah  yang  manis,
Manis  di-pandang  ummat  Muhammad  ! Ta'  si  kulita'  si  kulita'  tepi  laut Tepi  laut  bunyi  guroh  halilintar, Nabi  Baud  menengo'  chahia  muka-'ku
yang  lebeh, Chahia      Allah,     chahia     Muhammad,
chahia  Baginda  Rasul  Allah  !
[clxviii]
Before  starting  on  a  Journey
Sekam  burok,  sekam  bharu, [Di-]tampi  terlayang-layang, Tundok  hantu  'ku  'nak  lalu, Jangan  tindeh  bayang-bayang,
[clxix]
Undor-undor Angkah-angkah, Hantu  tundok Aku  langkah.
Bathing  Charm Pemandi  bersikat
[clxx]
Merak  Si  Anggul-anggul Anggul-anggul  atas  kota Gerak  ikat  sanggul, S'ri  naik  ka  muka  aku, Chahia  melampar  ka  tuboh-ku.
Mengajar  Sultan  Makan
Tabek  tuanku  ampun  beribu-ribu  ampun Ampun  S'ri  'Alam  S'ri  Paduka  Jamad- al-'Alam  !
Si  Jolong  menggali  lembah Sa  Derit  tiang  panjang Tiang  sudut  menti 4  dulapan
1  Asam,   which  comes  from   the    land,   is mixed  with  salt,  which  comes  from  the  sea,  and ihe  two  bring  out  each  other's  qualities.
2  Tengkuling,  or  tengguli,  is  said  to  be  made with  the  squeezings  of  cocoa-nut  pulp  mixed  with sugar,  and  cooked  till  the  oil  and  sugar  come out  and  float  on  the  top ;  this  is  called  tengguli.
3  V.I.  'Ku  titek  pinang  'ku  titek
'Ku  titek  di-atas  batu 'Ku  makan  pinang  sadikit Naik  s'ri  ka  muka  aku. Tintek,  is  from  titekka  to  hammer,  and  so
to  smash,  hence  'ku  titek  =  'ku  kachipkan, I  break  with  the  betel-nut  scissors  ?
Temuning,  v.  I.  tengkuling  or  tengguli  (z>. supra).
Ta'  si  kulita'  seqq.  should  probably  be taken  as  meaning  "  Ta'  si  kulita'  stands  for Tepi  laut  bunyi  guroh  halilintar."
Cp.  "  'TaA  'ting  stands  for patah  ranting," etc.
4  Menti  is  explained  as  a  minor  title  of  rank, below  that  of  mentri.
vi  LOVE  CHARMS  633
Tapak  tangga  jari  'ku  aran  (?)  Lagi  tundok  patek  menyembah
Tulang  bumbongan  sawa  mengampei  Minta  ampun  ka-bawah  Dull.
Bergemunchah  lebah  mengirap,  Ampun  Tuanku,  beribu-ribu  ampun
Bersampang  dengan  chahia  Linggam.  Ampun  Tuanku,  S'ri  Paduka,  S'ri  Jamad- Kadudok  tanam  di-lCmbah  al-'Alam.
Hatang  padi  tCpi  prigi
Jjrve  Charms [clxxi]  Pemanis
Hong  Si  Lala,  pinang  Si  Laling,  Gila  siang,  gila  malam,
Katiga  dengan  pinang  Si  Lia-lia,  Berkahandakan  kapada  aku
Tergelak  Si  Anu  lalu  tersinyum  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b. Kena  ka  pancbong  Si  Guyu  Gila,
Iclxxiil  Kasih  Sa-Kampong
Bab  ini  kasih  sa-kampong  :  di-[?]  kan  malam  waktu  handak  tidor,  'isharat- nya  handak  bertelanjang,  sudah  di-bacha  tiga  kali,  maka  naikkan l  deripada kaki  sampei  muka  ;  pagi-pagi  sakali  bangun  deripada  tidor  atau  tengah  mandi pagi  pun  buleh  juga.
Bismillahi-'I-rahmani-'l-rahimi !  Ampar  Suleiman  di  dada  aku,
Hu  yahu  rupa  chermin  Rasul  Allah,  Berkat    aku    memakei    do'a  kasih    sa-
Allah  akan  payong-'ku,  kampong,
Muhammad  akan  selimut-'ku,  Tundok  bias  kasihan  ummat  Muhammad
Bernama    chinta   manis 2   berendamkan  Sakalian  laki-laki,  sakalian  perampuan  ;
Nabi  gulongan-'ku,  S'ri  tengkuling  yang  manis,  d.s.b.
[clxxiiil  Pengasih  Sa~fCarnpong  (backed an  laki-laki)
Minyak  sibuli  belang,  Menggila    bernama   si   do'a  Si   Awang
Terletak  di  hati  tangan,  Lebeh
Kembang  bunga  semandeka,  Aku  yang  di  lebehkan  Allah
Kembang  laugsong  ka  taman  Malayu,  Aku  yang  di  lebehkan  Muhammad
Terbit  bulan  sapernama,  Aku  yang  di    lebehkan  Baginda   Rasul
Terbit  memanchar  ka  muka  aku,  Allah.
Paku  irang,  paku  meranti,  Berkat    aku   memakei   do'a   Si   Awang
Paku  terletak  di  tengah  huma  ;  Lebeh
Tegak  sagala  Raja-raja  mentri  Aku  yang  terlebeh  dalam  dunia
Aku  sa'orang  tiada  bersama,  Yang  jadi  'kan  anak  Nabi  Adam  yang
Berkat   aku  memakei  do'a  Nabi  Allah  pertama
Karimun.  Hu  Allah  la-khu  Allah,  d.s.b.
[clxxiv]  Kasih  Sa-Kamp<mg  (bacha'an  betina)
Sirih  si  asi-asi,  Tundok  khadmat  kapada  aku,
Letak  menyila-nyila,  Berkat  aku  memakei   do'a  Nabi  Allah
Menurunkan  Si  Raja  Kasih,  Suleiman  !
Menetapkan  Si  Raja  Gila,  Hu  Allah  akbar  akbar
Sila  ginjang,  gila  serbaya,  La  khalu  Allah  kuwata  illah  billah  ali.
Gila  sa-kampong,  kampong  raya,  Ya  al-athi  hak,  ya  raba-'l-'alamin,
Gila  sa-'laman,  'laman  raya,  Berkat  aku  memakei  do'a  Nabi  Idris
Gila  mabok  hati  jantong  Berkat  makbul  kapada  aku.     Hu  Allah  !
Sakalian  yang  bernyawa
1  i.e.  Knead  your  limbs  upwards.  8  Qu.  chintttmnni.
634  APPENDIX  CHAP.
Charm  against  Old  Age Tangkal  jangan  jadi  tua
[clxxv]
Nur  puteh,  Rum  puteh,  Aku  jadi  di  beringin  songsang,
Puteh  buleh  menjadi  hitam,  Kabul     berkat     aku     memakei      do'a
Hitam  buleh  menjadi  puteh,  Lenggundi  Hitam,
S'ri  Jaya  sifat-nya  aku,  Sudah  mati  hidup  sa-mula,
S'ri  Allah,  S'ri  Muhammad  !  Berkat,  d.s.b.
BETROTHAL
[clxxvi]  At  the  Inspection  of  the  Girl  [p.  364.
Waris  sa-blah  jantan  pareksa  betina  ;  katakan  : —
Hei  berbuah  gadong  satela, Gunong  Bantan  di  tepi  laut  ; Antah  bertuah,  antah  chelaka, Kapada  Tuan  hati  tersangkut.
[Kata  waris  betina  "  Choba  menengo'  kerbau  aku,  kerbau  lepas  ;  antahkan rabit,  antah  patah,  antah  buta."]
Tinggi  tinggi  matahari Anak  kerbau  mati  tertambat ; Salama  ini  sahya  menchari, Inilah  bharu  sahya  mendapat.
[clxxvii]  Menghantarkan  Blanja  [p.  367.
Rumah  kechil  para-nya  lima  Kalau  tidak  mas  di-kandong,
Tempat  menyalei  ikan  kerisi  ;  Badan  dahulu  di-serahkan.
Aiu  hei,  Inche,  sahya  bertanya  Kalau  tiada  rengas  di  tanjong,
Brapa-kah_harga  intan  disini  ?  Ambit  beringin  pagarkan  dulang  ;
Tali  kail  panjang-nya  lima  Kalau  tiada  mas  di-kandong,
'Kan  pengail  ikan  tenggiri ;  Jangan  inginkan  anak  orang.
Tujoh  tahil  sakati  lima,  Ribu-ribu  batang  terpanggong,
Itulah  harga  intan  disini.  'Kan  dudok  batang  rumbia  ;
Kalau  tidak  rengas  di  tanjong  Meski  sa-ribu  hutang  'ku  tanggong,
Pandan  di  hulu  di-rebahkan  ;  Asal  'ku  pinang  anak  dia.
[ICalati  mahu~\
Saputangan  jatoh  ka  laut,  Baik  kalas,  baik  tidak,
^    Jatoh  dengan  kalas-kalas-nya  ;  Lenggundi  tumboh  di  panchor  ;
Panjang  tangan  sahya  menyambut,  Baik  baik,  baik  tidak,
Satu  tidak  akan  balas-nya.  Tegal  de'  budi  hati-'ku  hanchor.
\Kalau  td  ma&u]
'Che  Ungku  mudik  ka  hulu  Kalau  ta'  dapat  dengan  hikmat,
Ambil  kain  basoh  nila-nya  ;  Tilekkan  tuju  prang  maya.
Kalau  yang  itu,  biar-lah  dahulu,  Kalau  ta'  rapat  puan  de'  bingku
Kalau  yang  lain,  barang  bila-nya.  Nasi  kunyit  panggang  ayam  ;
'Plam  'Che  Dol  Amat  Kalau  ta'  dapat  Tuan  di-aku,
Jatoh  tergolek  ka  dalam  paya  ;  Langit  sengit,  dunia  karam  !
VI
MARRIAGE  635
MARRIAGE
[clxxviiij  Melawa  [p.  381.
Kalau  naik  tangga,  [kataj  waris  sa-blah  betina  : —
Tatang  puan,  tatang  cherana,  Inche  terdiri  mari-lah  naik,
Tatang  bidok  S'ri  Rama  ;  Sahya  ta'  tahu  menyebut  nama-nya.
Datang-lah  Tuan,  datang-lah  nyawa,  'Nak  tajok,  tajok-lah  puan,
Datang-lah  dudok  bersama-sama.  Remunggei  batang  berduri ;
Diri-diri  pagar  'Che  Naik  'Nak  masok,  masok-lah  Tuan,
Galu-galu  anak  tangga-nya  ;  Timbang-lah  chukei  'adat  negri.
Kata  waris  sa-blah  jantan  : —
Belatok  lagi  terbang, Ini  pula  si  burong  nuri ; Hukum  dato'  lagi  'ku  timbang Ini  'kan  pula  chukei  negri.
Di-brikan  chinchin  di-chabut  atau  wang  tiga  ampat  ringgit.
MEDICINE
[clxxix]       Before  removing  the  Calladium-leaves  from  the  Jar  Mouths      [p.  411.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi   'Tap   yang  Nabi  Elias  yang  menanam  kayu,
memegang  bumi,  Nabi  Khailir  yang  memegang  ayer.
Suawa'm  yang  memegang  langit,  Aku  memohunkan  tengo'ubat-Sz'  Anu. Nabi  Nob  yang  memegang  kayu,
[clxxx]  After  removing  them
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  Tanju  !  Deri  dahulu  sampei  sakarang  !
Angkau   'ku   angkat  jadi   wali    akan  Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi,
saudara-ku  Tahi  mata  Muhammad  asal  'kau  jadi,
Angkau  yang  berusul,  yang  berasal,  Aku  minta'  tengo'kan  ini  sakit  Si  Anu.
[clxxxi]  When  holding  the  Rice  over  the  Censer  [p.  412.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Mustia  Kfimbang,  Siti  Hawa  asal  'kau  jadi.
Angkau    'ku  angkat  jadi   wali   akan  Angkau  'ku  suroh,  'ku  sfiraya,
saudara,  Barang  sa-bagei  'kau  rupakan,
Kalau    sunggoh    'kau    yang   berusul  Didalam  taman  yang  endah.
berasal  Jangan   'kau   mungkirkan  janji    atau Deri  dahulu  sampei  sakarang,  satia.
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi :
[clxxxii]  After  throwing  the  Rice  into  the  Jars
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Nabi  'Tap  yang  memegang  bumi, Nabi  Noh  yang  memegang  kayu, Nabi  Khailir  yang  memegang  ayer  ! Aku  memohunkan  jamjam  ini Akan  ubat  Si  Anu  itu.
[clxxxiii]  When  holding  the  Rice  over  the  Incense  [p.  413.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Gandum  !  Jangan  mungkir  janji  atau  satia,
Angkau  'ku  'nak  suroh,  'nak  sfiraya,  Tengo'kan  penyakit  ini  anak  chuchu
Menengo'  penyakit  Si  Anu  I  Adam,
636  APPENDIX  CHAP.
Ummat     Nabi     Muhammad     sidang  Bergrak-lah     dalam     kelebu      yang
manusia  Si  Anuf  suchi !
Kalau  datang  satu  hal
[clxxxiv]  Tilek  Penyakit
Another  method  of  "  water-gazing,"  by  looking  into  a  cup  containing  saliva produced  by  chewing  betel
The  directions  for  this  ceremony  run  as  follows  : —
Get  (preferably)  a  woman  (or  failing  a  woman,  a  man),  to  chew  up  for  you three  "  chews  "  of  betel-leaf  (betel-leaf  with  meeting  leaf-ribs  (sirih  bertfmu  ztrat) is  the  best).  Receive  the  saliva  in  a  cup  and  cover  it  over  with  a  betel-leaf. Fumigate  it  with  incense  and  then  remove  the  covering,  and  "gaze"  at  it  (tilek) intently.  The  following  are  the  signs  which  you  must  look  for  : —
1 i )  If  it  looks  yellowish  it  shows  that  the  patient  has  been  affected  by  rain  in the  heat  of  the  day.
(Kalau  rfahak-rechak  kuning  rupa  chahia-nya,  kena  hujan  panas.)
(2)  If  it  is  pitted  (with  hollows)  it  shows  that  the  patient  has  been  affected by  a  stopped-up  well  or  buffalo-wallow.
(Kalau  rupa  berlubok-lubok,  kena  prigi  buta  atau  kubangan. )
(3)  If  it  has  long  streaks  running  right  through  it,  it  shows  that  the  patient has  been  affected  by  the  Heart  of  Wood.
(Kalau  rupa-nya  berurat  panjang  terjantang  ayer  sirih-nya,  kena  te'ras ada-nya.)
(4)  If  round,  he  has  been  affected  by  a  hidden  tree-stump. (Kalau  rupa-nya  bulat,  kena  tunggul  buta.)
(5)  If  frothy,  he  has  been  affected  by  an  ant-hill. (Kalau  ada  buih,  kena  busut).
(6)  If  you  see  in  it  anything  that  resembles  cloth  or  a  ring,  it  is  a  soul  which has  done  it.
(Kalau  rupa-nya  ada  kain  atau  chinchin,  semangat  yang  buat, )
Before  you  commence  to  "gaze,"  recite  the  following  charm  : —
Barang  apa  yang  menyakitkan  orang  Kalau  bantu  sheitan,  benchar-lah  'kau.
ini,  Kalau  puaka  tunjok  de'  kanan.
'Kau  tunjokkan,  kalau  ada  kamudah-  Kalau    ta'    sarasi,    tunjok -lah     buih
mudahan,  berator  melintang  matahari.
Kalau  buatan  orang,  tunjok  de'  kiri,  Kalau  'kau  ta'  tunjokkan,  d.  s.  b.
Then  perform  the  ceremony  with  the  three  water  jars.  ( Vide  p.  410  seqq. of  the  text.)
N.B. — Another  method  of  using  the  jars  is  to  take  seven  jars  and  fill  them with  water  taken  from  seven  different  streams  (ayer  buyong  tujoh  buyong,  di- ambil  deripada  tujoh  anak  sungei).  Then  get  ready  (kalengkapan-nya)  five cubits  of  white  cloth,  a  mat  for  sitting  on  (tikar  sa-gulong  tempat  dudok),  a  birch of  seven  "green"  cocoa-nut  twigs  (lidi  niyor  hijau  tujoh  'lei),  and  the  necessary sorts  of  rice.
Now  the  Pawang  summons  the  spirits  as  follows  :—
O  Jin,  Saraja  Jin,  Pari  Lang,  Bintang  Sutan,
Jin  yang  memegang  tanah  Makkah  [Mari  mendapat  jinjangan  kamu, Jin  yang  memegang  Ka'bat  Allah  d.s.b.]
Anak  Jin  Puteh,  Tanjak  Malim  Kaya,
So,  at  least  on  the  first  night ;  on  the  second,  "  Lanchang  Kuning"  (sic)  and
vi  MEDICINE  637
"  Samambu  Tunggal "  are  invoked  in  place  of  1'ari  Lang  and  Bin  tang  Sutan. On  their  arrival  the  wizard  (Pawang)  becomes  unconscious.
[clxxxv]  Bwmg  limas  [p.  423.
Al-salani 'aleikum,  Nabi  Allah  Khailir,  Sambut      pekiriman     adek-'kau,     Si
yang  memegang  ayer  !  KSkas,
Maduraya  nama  bapa-'kau,  Jangan  sakit  pening,  jangan  kembong
M.idaruti  naraa  mak-'kau,  Inilah  pekiriman  adek-'kau. Si  Krk.is  nama  anak-nya  :
[clxxxvi]  Ambang-ambangan  [p.  424.
Jembalang  Jembali  Hantu  Tanah  Kalau  'kau  tidak  baikkan,
'Kau   ambil   ini  bhagian   'kan  upah-  Aku   sum  pah   dengan   kata    la-ilaha
'kau,  d.s.  b.
'Kau  baikkan  Si  Ann.
[clxxxvii]  Charm  against  the  Cramp
Tawar  Senak
Batang  penak,  batang  pejam, Katiga  dengan  batang  kladi  ; Datang  senak,  datang  tajam, Datang  tawar  tidak  menjadi.
[clxxxviii]  Charm  against  Abdominal  Swelling
Tawar  Kembong  Prut
Kra  chika  untut  jari-nya, Kembong  segah  untut  jadi-nya.
[clxxxix]  Charm  against  Convulsions  (in  Children)
Tangkal  Sawan  Budak
Songko1  kopiah  'Arab,  Uri  tembuni  akan  tempat-nya,
Pusat-ku  bernilam,  Tentuban  saudara  yang  tua  !
Darah  mani-ku  manikam,  Aku  menangkal  sawan  kembong. 'Arash  akan  tiang-nya,
The  following  lines  are  the  same,  substituting  for  kembong  the  words  : — ( I ) tergtger,  (2)  terstntap,  (3)  terjun,  (4)  angin  yang  hitam,  (5)  angin  yang  merah, (6)  angin  yang  biru,  (7)  angin  yang  ungu,  (8)  angin  yang  kuning,  (9)  angin yang  Aij'au,  (10)  sa-mulajadi,  respectively;  then  follows: —
Terbit  kapada  mak  dengan  bapa-nya,  Masok   kadalam  urat  sendi   salerang Aku   menangkal   sawan   yang  ampat  Si  Anu  itu,
puloh  ampat.  Ujut  anggota  Si  Anu  itu  !
Marikan  kapada  bapa-nya,  Berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b. Kabul  pengajar  guru-ku
Ramuan-nya  lekar  jantan  tiga  krat,  sapanjang  tapak  orang  yang  sakit,  sakat mengkarong  tiga  krat,  kaki  benang  'mas,  mempulor  bawang  puteh,  jintan  hitam sadikit,  jintan  puteh,  bawang  merah,  sabut  pinang  kotei,  kem'nyan  puteh  ; bakar,  taroh  dalam  ponggong  niyor  jantan,  champor  ayer  nasi  sadikit,  chonting- kan  dahi  dan  sendi-sendi  yang  sakit  itu,  saperti  kaki  ayam.
638
APPENDIX
CHAP.
[cxc]  Cholera
It  is  related  that  a  Malay  named  Satuba,  who  lived  at  Kuala  Selangor,  had a  wife  and  two  children,  both  of  whom  died  of  cholera  and  (apparently)  became cholera-demons.  The  wife  enters  the  right-eye  socket  (chengkong  ?)  of  the  cholera patient,  and  is  named  Sapu-laman ;  and  the  two  children,  who  enter  the  left  eye, are  called  Sapu-negri  and  Sapu-rantau.
Satuba  (when  his  wife  and  children  died)  ran  off  to  the  woods,  and  there  he met  an  orang  kramat,  who  gave  him  this  charm  against  cholera  : —
Ya  kayun  Muhammad  baka  kallah Ka  hatal  Makah.
The  charm  is  called  Satuba's  charm,  or  the  charm  against  "  Prince  '  Lick-up- the-men-of-war-ships '  "  (Raja  Jilat  juak  kapal  prang}.  The  wife's  name  in Arabic  was  Adayatu'llah,  and  the  children's,  Hidayatu'llah  and  Ayatu'llah respectively.
[cxci]
Charm  for  neutralising  Poison Tawar  rachnn
[P-  425.
Idu  puteh,  penawar  puteh,
Turun  deri  gunong  puteh,
Bertijak  dengan  pinggan  puteh,
Bergantong  di  langit  puteh
Terbang  burong  garuda  puteh
Membawa  haniran  1  tawar,
Hak  !  upar-pun2  t'ada  bisa,
Upas-pun  t'ada  bisa,
Rachun-pun  t'ada  bisa,
Ular  gerang  pun  t'ada  bisa,
Ipoh  Brunei  pun  t'ada  bisa,
Ah  !  sakalian  yang  bisa  t'ada  bisa,
Berkat    aku    memakei     do 'a    guliga
kasaktian.
Asal  tawar  deripada  Allah, Penjadian  tawar  deripada  Allah, Pohun  tawar  deripada  Allah, Raja  'Brahil3  di-suroh  Allah Membawa  tawar  kapada  Muhammad  !
Berkat  Muhammad,  ya  Muhammad  !
Turun-lah  sagala  bisa
Naik-lah  sagala  tawar.
Tawar  aku  pemadam  bisa
Tawarkan  Allah,
Tawarkan  Muhammad,
Tawarkan  Baginda  Rasul  Allah.
Waya  telap  tap.  [Seven  times  re- peated. ]
Kabul  aku  penajam  gabus
Do'a-'ku  tajam  saperti  kundor
Tangkas  bah  saperti  kilat
D'ras  saperti  angin,
Kabul  aku  memakeikan  do 'a  Dato" Malim  Karimun
Yang  kramat  bertapa  di  hulu  sungei Sa'iran  (di  hulu  Misir)
Dengan  berkat,  d.  s.b.
[cxcii]      Charm  for  neutralising  the  Venom  of  Snakes,  Centipedes,  and  Scorpions
To  bring  the  poison  out  (naikkan),  rub  the  place  upwards  (ttrut  ka-atas) ;  to cause  it  to  subside  (turunkari),  rub  it  downwards  (urtit  ka-bawah).  In  the  first case  say  : —
' '  However  venomous  the  snake  which  is  within  ourselves, Yet  more  venomous  be  the  snake  which  comes  (to  meet  it)."
In  the  second  case —
"  However  venomous  the  snake  which  comes  (to  meet  it), Yet  more  venomous  be  the  snake  which  is  within  ourselves."
and  (in  either  case)  mtttatis  mutandis  for  centipedes  and  scorpions.
It  was  explained  that  the  ' '  snake  which  is  wi'hin  ourselves  "  (ular  dalam  dirt
Qu.  lianyiran  from  iutnyir.
-  Qu.  tifau,  a  snake.
3  i.e.  Jibra'it,  Gabriel.
vi  MEDICINE  639
kita)  means  the  muscle  of  the  shoulder-blade  (urat  belikat),  and  that  similarly "  the  centipede  which  is  within  ourselves"  is  the  neck  bone  (tulang  batang  leher), and  "  the  scorpion  which  is  within  ourselves"  the  loins  (ujong soldi).
[cxciii]  Charm  against  Venom
Tawar  Bisa
Bismillah.  d.s.b.  Menaikkan  tawar,  katurunkan  bisa,
Allah  Hu  !  Muhammad  Hu  !  Berkat  tawar  Dato'  Gunong  Tujoh  Tanah Berkat  tawar  Baginda  'Ali  Mirah
Aku  menawar  sakalian  yang  bisa,  Tawar  Allah,  d.s.b.
[cxciv]  Another  Charm  of  similar  Import
Tawar
Apa-apa  mestapa,1  Kembali  kamu  ka  sempang  ampat  ;
Terlayang-hiyang,  terLitok-latok,  Datang  [kamu]  deri  bakal,3
Teranai-anai,  sira-sanai,2  Kembali  kamu  ka  bakal  kamu  ;
Dudok  di  sempang  ampat,  Datang  kamu  deri  lubok  tada  berikan,
Bersandar  di  pinang  boring  ;  Kembali  kamu  ka  lubok  tada  berikan. Datang  kamu  deri  sempang  ampat,
The  rest  of  the  charm  is  of  the  same  construction,  the  first  line  of  each  couplet beginning  with  datang  kamu  deri,  and  the  second  with  kembali  kamu  ka ;  the other  words  are  tunggul  buta,  tras  tentnjam^  fadang  fa'  berumput,  gating  gun- tong,  rimba  sa-kampong,  sakat  rambai,  nibong  alai,  Mambang  Knning,  hujan patias,  kapialu  Bajau,  after  which  it  ends  thus : —
Kembali-lah  kamu  ka  takok,  ka  tanggam  lama  !
Kalau  'kau  tidak  balik,
'Kau  di-sumpah  de'  Jin  ibnu-'l-Ujan.
[cxcv]  Another  Charm  of  similar  Import
Siti  Daya  uama  laki-mu,  Jangan  'kau  mungkir  janji,
Maduruti  nama  bini-nya,  Jangan  'kau  mungkir  satia  !
Wa'  Ranai  nama  anak-nya,  Aku    pinta'    tolong,    pinta'    tumpulkan
Ka  hempasan   ombak  Maduruti  nama-  sagala  yang  tajam,
'kau,  Aku  pinta'  turunkan  sagala  yang  bisa
Ka  telok  Jin  Terkilat  nama-mu,  De'  dalam  salerang  badan  tuboh  Si Ka  tanjong  Katimuna  nama-mu,  Anu  ;
Ka  anak  sungei  Hantu  Muna  nama-mu,  Minta"  chabutkan  sagala  yang  bisa
Ka  tali   harus    Mambang    Tali    Hams  De'  dalam  salerang  badan  tuboh  Si  Anu  !
nama-mu  !  Kalau  tidak  'kau  chabut,
Kita    bersaudara    deri    dahulu    sampei  'Kau  'ku  sumpah  dengan  kata  la-ilaha,
sakarang  :  d.  s.  b.
[cxcvi]  Penawar  Orang  Darat
Sirih  gunta,  pinang  gunta, Memanjat  kerakap  puar  ; Inchit  nyah  Hantu  Jembalang  Buta, Tawar  jampi  nenek  'dah  kaluar  !
The  ingredients  are  two  or  three  leaves  of  sirih  gitnta,  an  areca-nut,  black
1  i.e.  Nestapa.  2  Explained  as  meaning  "  to  roll  in  anything  sticky."
3  Tracks,  qu.  bangkai.  *  ''Thrust  deeply  down."
640
APPENDIX
CHAP.
pepper,  bawang  mcrah,  chttkor,  bunglei,  lengkztas,  brazil-wood  (sepang),  ebony (kayu  arang),  jerangau,  and  a  porcupine  quill  (duri  landak).  Grate  these  and mix  them  well  up  together,  and  when  there  is  a  slight  storm  on  (hari  ribut kechil),  take  the  mixture  into  the  mouth  and  spit  it  out  upon  the  patient.  The only  taboo  mentioned  is  that  neither  cats  nor  fowls  must  be  allowed  to  come  in contact  with  the  amulets  of  the  patient  (di-langgarkan  tangkal-nya).
[cxcvii]
Hei  Hantu  rimba  raya  ! Patahkan  aku  ranting  kayu  ara. Buat  apa  ranting  kayu  ara  ? Buat  tangkal  hantu  rimba  raya. Angkau  datang  de'  gaung  guntong  ; Datang  de'  rimba  sa-kampong, Pulang-lah  'kau  ka  rimba  sa-kampong  ; Datang  de'  sakat  mati, Pulang  ka  sakat  mati ; Datang  de'  sakat  besar, Pulang  ka  sakat  besar  ;
Tawar  Hantu  Darat
Datang  de'  brok  besar,
Pulang-lah  ka  brok  besar  !
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  menjadi :
Brok  besar  asal  'kau  menjadi !
Tidak  'kau  pulangkan  semahgat  Si  Anu,
Mati  di-kutop  berkelentong,
Mati  mawak,  mati  mampeh,
Mati  makan  sengklan  darah  tulang,
Kabul  Allah,  d.s.b.
Berkat  do 'a  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[cxcviii]
Bismillahi  '1-rahmani  '1-rahimi ! Kayu  medang,  kayu  patani, Tumboh  di  padang  merbani, Akar  tersunjam  tujoh  petala  bumi, Puchok  tersandar  ka  angkasa  ; Tuan  Putri  deri  angkasa Membawa  tawar  sakalian  yang  bisa. Ipoh  puteh  menawar  ipoh  merah, Ipoh  merah  menawar  ipoh  puteh  ; Ipoh  puteh  bena'  Rasul  Allah,
Penawar
Ipoh  merah  darah  Rasul  Allah  ! Berkat  tawar  Si  Kamamai, Berkat  tawar  Si  Kadua  ; Bukan  aku  yang  punya  tawar, Hitam  di  Pasei  yang  punya  tawar  ; Bukan  aku  yang  punya  tawar, Malim  Karimun  yang  punya  tawar, Toh  Petala  Guru  yang  punya  tawar  ! Berkat  tawar  Toh  Petala  Guru Tawarkan  sagala  yang  bisa.
[cxcix]     When  collecting  the  Accessories  for  a  "neutralising"  Ceremony  [p.  427.
Bukan  aku  yang- punya  ramuan, Kemal-ul-Hakim  yang  punya  ramuan  ; Bukan  aku  yang  punya  tawar, Malim  Saidi  yang  punya  tawar  ; Bukan  aku  yang  menawar, Malim  Karimun  yang  menawar.
[cc]
Hong  badi,  mak  badi,
Badiyu,  badi  sengkiyu,
Badi  saratus  sambilan  puloh  tiga  !
Bukan  aku  yang  berbadi,
Sakalian  bernyawa  yang  berbadi !
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi  :
Badi
Uri   tembuni   pusat  tentuban   asal  'kau
jadi ! Turun  'kau  deri  urat  sendi  darah  daging
Si  Anu  I
Kalau  'kau  tiada  turun, Aku  sumpah  dengan  kata  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[cci]
To  cast  out  the  Mischief  produced  by  an  Image Buang  badi  buatan  orang
[P-  43 '•
Limes  of  seven  kinds  are  wanted  :  e.g.  limau  (i)  ptirut,  (2)  pftgar,  (3)  lelang, (4)  kasturi,  (5)  krat  lentang,  (6)  hantu,  (7)  abong.  Take  three  of  each  kind, fumigate  them  with  incense,  and  say  : —
vi  MEDICINE  641
Al-.s.ilam  'aleikutn,  Lelang  !  Jangan  'kau  mungkirkan  janji,
Kita    bersaudara    deri    dahulu    sampei  Jangan  'kau  mungkirkan  satia,
sakarang  ;  Jangan  'kau  menipu  mendaya,
Angkau  'nak  'ku  su-oh  seraya  menchabut  Jangan  'kau  membohong  berakah  !
sagala  yang  bisa,  Kalau  'kau  membohong  berakah,
Du'  dalam  salira  tuboh  Si  Anu :  Aku  sumpah  dengan  kata  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[ccii]  Providing  the  Mischief  with  a  Sitbstitute  or  Scapegoat        [p.  432.
Tukar  Ganti (Buang-buangan  orang  sakit)
Al-salam  'aleikum  sagala  juak-juak  !  Jikalau  'kau  mungkir  kapada  aku,
Mak  Raja  Angin,  angin  yang  berusoh,  Aku  mungkir  kapada  'kau.
Angin    Hayu   Manu,    angin   ampat-blas  Angkau  jaga  baik-baik  !
bhasa,  Fasal    angkau   'nak    makan,    aku   bagi Angin   kaluar    deri    tapak    tangan    kiri  makan ;
Raja  Brahil !  'Nak  minum,  aku  bagi  minuni.
Aku  tahu  asal  angkau  ;  Aku  bagi  chukop  dengan  iyu,  pari,
Bapa  sakalian  angin1  Abu  Jahal,  Abu  Udang,  ketam,  siput,  kechar,2
Lihat !  Sakalian  tukar  ganti  kapada  angkau,
Jangan  angkau  menggoda  seksa  deripada  Chukop  dengan  darah,   daging,    masak
tuboh  badan  diri  hamba  Allah  dan  mentah,
Anak  chuchu  Adam,  Trima-lah  baik-baik,   trima-lah  jamuan Kama  aku  buat  tukar  ganti,  aku  ini,
Aku  upah  angkau  !  Asal-nya  baik  ;    kalau  ta'  baik,  aku  ta' Jangan  'kau  mungkir  kapada  aku  ;  bagi  juga.
[cciii]  Additional  Charm  used  in  the  same  Ceremony
{Probably  used  for  blessing  the  articles  of  food,  etc. ,  before  laying  them  in  the  tray)
Pawang  Tua,  Pawang  Pertama,  Berma  Sakti,  Si  Katimuna,
Musa  kalam Allah,3  SedangBima,  Sedang  Aku  minta'  ma'af  kapada  ampat  penjuru
Buana,  alam.
Bujang  Juara  Raja  di  Laut,4  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b. Batara  Guru,  Batara  Giri,
[cciv]  Lanchang  Charms  [p   434.
Membuang  balei,  lanchang
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Angkau  tolong  pleherakan  persembahan
Jembalang  laut,  hantu  laut !  anak  chuchu-nya,
Baik  di  telok,  tanjong,  Jangan  di-usik  lanchang  ini ;
Baik  di  beting,  jangan  sangkap  sampei !        Aku  minta'  hantarkan  ka  tanah  Bugis, Ini  Arong  yang  punya  lanchang :  Ka  tempat-nya
(Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b. )
[C
CCv]  Another  Lanchang  Charm
Inilah  upah-'kau  !
Jangan  berbalik-balik  lagi  kapada  5*  Polan,
Jangan  di-sakitkan  lagi  Si  Polan.
1  i.e.  yang  dalam  diri  kiu.  *  Raja  di  Laut:    in  this  connection   my
informant  quoted  :
-  /.(•.  siput  darat.  Maduraya  nama  bapa-n\  a,
Mudaruti  nama  anak-nya, 3  Km.  Kalimu  'llah.  Si  Kekas  nama  anak-nya.
2   T
642  APPENDIX  CHAP.
To  which  the  evil  spirit  replies  : —
Aku  tidak  datang  lagi  kapada  Si  Polan, Kalau  aku  datang  lagi, Langkas-langkas  buah  betik, Masak-masak  buah  rembia, Men6tas  enggang  meng'ram  di  hutan, Bharu-lah  kita  berjumpa  lagi.
[ccvi]  Another  Lanchang  Charm  [p.  435.
O  Dato'  yang  di  hulu  ayer,  Di-bawa~angin  lalu,
Dato1  yang  di  hilir  ayer,  Di-bawa  tanah  merkah,
Dato'  yang  di  darat,  Pergi-lah  angkau  ka  laut  ta'  berombak,
Dato'  yang  di  baru,1  Padang  ta'  berumput,
Berkampong-lah  orang  yang  memegang  Jangan-lah  angkau  berbalik-balik  kamari ;
bukit  bukau  Jikalau  angkau  berbalik  kamari,
Yang  memegang  gaung  guntong,  Angkau  di-makan  sumpah,
Yang  memegang  rimba  raya,  Ka  laut  ta'  dapat  minum,
Yang  memegang  suak  sungei,  Ka  darat  ta'  dapat  makan,
Mari-lah  naik  lanchang  ini  berkampong  Menangkop  melintang  bumi,
ramei-ramei,  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b. Buleh  di-bawa  ayer  hilir,
[ccvii]  Another  Lanchang  Charm
Hei  Dato'  Kasang,  Jambu  Agai !  Sa-r6king  nama-nya  tanjong,
Trima  ini,  hantarkan  ka  telok,  Si  'Abas  anak  tokong  pulau.
Si  Ann  yang  membrikan.  Minta'    langsongkan     persembahan    ka
Sa-r6kong2  nama-nya  telok,  Mambang  Tali  Harus.
[ccviii]  Another  Lanchang  Charm  [p.  436.
Al-salam  'aleikum  Menjajar  naik  menchari  makan
Hei  juak-juak  yang  bharu  datang,  Tujoh  buah  negri  sa' orang  bernama  'Alim
Pechah  Jong  laut-lautan  Palita
Di-sepak  de'  ombak,  di-tiup  de'  angin,  Sa' orang  bernama  Sa  Merah  Muda.
The  following  lines  are  the  same  as  the  last,  only  substituting  the  names (i)  Sa  Malim  Busu,  (2)  Sa  Jebat  Lalah,  (3)  Sa  Palik  Gila,  (4)  Awan  Senik  Salih, (5)  Satu  Karagan  Daulah,  (6)  Salamat  Yalim,  (7)  Sutan  Muhammad,  (8)  Sutan Hamat  (Ahmad  ?)  : —
Hei  al-salam   'aleikum  Awan  Sajembul  Aku  'nak  bersembah  kapada  angkau
Lebat,  Kapada  waktu  katika  ini !
Hulubalang  lidah  bergulong,  Kama  angkau  mengutib  hasil
Hei  al-salam  'aleikum  Hidu  Dana  !  Masu  chukei  krajab  sagenap  negri,
Mari-lah  sakalian  kaum  puak-'kau,  Sagenap  telok,  sagenap  tanjong,
Berkumpul  kamari  kechil  besar,  tua  dan  Sagenap  pasar  lorong  rumah  orang  dalam
muda,  negri ;
Tepak  dan  tempang,  buta  dan  rungga,  Tnilah  aku  buat  tukar  ganti  pada  angkau. Sakalian  berkumpul  habis  kamari  !
( To  dismiss  the  spirits)
Jangan 'kau tuntut  dawa'  pada tempat  ini!       Karna   sudah    chukup   'ku    bagi    pada Undor-lah    angkau    pergi    pada   tempat  angkau !
yang  lain  ;  Kalau  angkau  ta'  undor,
1  Em.  Baruh. a  Or  Si-rekong,  Si-reking  ;  pronounced  Serkong,  Serking.
V!
MEDICINE
643
Derhaka  angkau  pada  Nabi  Allah  Sulei- man ! Aku-lah  anak  chuchu  Nabi  Suleiman,
Sidik  guru,  sidik-lah  aku, Uengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
[ccix]
Another  Lanchang  Charm
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Telok  Rantau, Angkau  tolong  sampeikan  pekiriman  Si
Polan,
Jangan  'kau  chachat,  chelakan, Jikalau  'kau  chachat,  chelakan, 'Kau  mati  di-soloh1  pagar  melintang Mali  di-pukol  samambu  kuning, Mati  di-junjong  lesong  tembok, Mati  di-timpa  upih  tersangkut,
Mati  di-timpa  ponggor  berdaun,
'Kau  di-sumpah  !
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi  :
Nar  asal  'kau  jadi  1
Al-salam  '  aleikum,  Jin  Ibni  Ujan
Tolong    bantu   hukumkan   ra'yat
tantra-mu  ! Kalau  tidak, Aku  sum  pah  dengan  kata  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
bala-
[ccx]         "Lanchang'''  Invocation  used  in  summoning  the  Tiger  Spirit    [p.  439.
Lagn  Pemanggil
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Penglima  Lenggang
Laut !
Endah-nya  bukan  alang  kapalang Lanchang  Penglima  Lenggang  Laut ! Lanchang  bernama  Lanchang  Kuning, Lanchang  bersudu  linggam  gading Lanchang  berturap  ayer  emas. Tiang-nya  nama  Raja  Mgndela Temberang-nya  nama  Perak  belfipeh Dayong-nya  nama  Jari  Lipan Anak  dayong  dua  kali  tujoh Tepi  bernama  Pagar  tenggalong Kemudi  bernama  LSbah  bergantong Dandan  bernama  Sawa  mengampei, Ula-ula  2  menumbok  kurong, Gada-gada  bermain  angin, Pfimepah  berkibat-kibatan,
Mari-lah  Inche,  mari-lah  Tuan, Sedang  elok  edarkan  lanchang Jgrbatu  3  bongkar-lah  sauh Jgrtinggi  juak-lah  layer, Jgrmudi  putar  kemudi Anak  dayong  paut-lah  dayong, Kamana  Lanchang  beredar-edar  ? Lanchang  bertumpu  ka  Pusat  Tasek  ; Lanchang  beredar  ka  laut  Pauh  Janggi, Main  ombak,  main  g'lombang, Main  g'lombang,  m£niti  riak Jangan-lah  leka,  jangan-lah  lalei, Baik-lah  lekas  Penglima  Lenggang  Laut, Jangan  lengah  di  tfilok  rantau, Jangan  leka  di  gundek  chandek Turun  mendapat  jinjangan.
[ccxi]  Healing  Charm,  used  with  the  last  one
Tatang  puan,  tatang  chSrana, Tatang  dengan  batang  satawar, Datang-lah  tuan,  datang-lah  nyawa, Datang  membawa  ubat  penawar.4
In  the  other  quatrains  the  1st  and  3rd  lines  are  the  same  as  the  ist  and  3rd of  the  first  quatrain  respectively ;  the  2nd  and  4th  lines  only  are  given,  accordingly, as  follows : —
Tatang  dengan  kait  padi-nya,6 Datang  dengan  baik  hati-nya. Tatang  dengan  tunjang  nyirih Datang  dudok  bermakan  sirih. Vatang  dengan  lembah  paku-nya, ng  dengan  tfingkah  laku-nya.
Tatang  dengan  kait-kait-nya,a Datang  dengan  baik-baik-nya. Tatang  dengan  batang  'bola-nya,7 Datang  dengan  ayah  bunda-nya. Tatang  dengan  chandit-chandit-nya, Datang  dengan  gundek  chandek-nya.
1  Ou.  Sula.
2  UlU-ulA  is  the 'name  given  to  a  pennon attached   to  the   mainmast.     It  was  of   such length  that  it  reached  to  the  poop,  which  it flapped    ajgainst    or    "whipped."     Gada-gada was  explained  here  as  a  short  pennon  attached to  the  foremast.     Plmfpah  was  the  standard  at the  stern.
3  i.e.  jura  batu.
4  Or  else  this  first  verse :
Tatang  puan,  tatang  cherana Datang  oidok  pagi  hari Datang-lah  tuan  datang-lah  nyawa, Memanggil  tuan  datang  kamari.
8  i.e.  Penuwei.
8  /./.  Polco'  kait-kait.
7  Or  Kembola.
644  APPENDIX  CHAP.
After  these  seven  quatrains  the  following  is  added  : —
Telipok  bunga  telipai, Bunga  kantan  kgmbang  di  hulu, Bangun  bertepok  membuang  limbei Anak  jantan  sahaja  bagitu.
Here  "  rise  and  dance  "  (bangkit  menari),  saying  : —
Mari-lah  Inche,  mari-lah  Tuan, Jangan-lah  leka  jangan-lah  lalei, Turun  meniti  tali  Bayu, Jangan  leka  di  gundek  chandek. Jangan  leka  di  hamba  sahya.
Here  call  the  spirit-steeds  : —
Mari-lah  kuda  Lengkong  Pulau Mari-lah  kuda  Nibong  Hangus, Sa'ekor-nya  kuda  Lang  Jengkat Sa'ekor-nya  kuda  Raja  Jin  PSria.1
[ccxii]  Sucking  Charm  [p.  449.
Serapah  Mengalin
Al-salam  'aleikum,  Bisa  di  bayang,  Mati  di-sambar  kilat  sfinja,
Bisa  jangan  bersenang  lagi,  Mati  di-panah  halilintar,
Bisa  jangan  bernaung  lagi.  Mati  di-timpa  ujan  lebat
Bisa  jangan  olang-olitan,  Mati  di-ampuh  ayer  bah,
Bisa  di-puput  Bayu  lalu,  Mati  di-tunda  undong-undong
Bisa  di-puput  Mambang  Kuning,  Mati  di-alun  tfipong  pglunas,
Mati  di-sambar  kilat  tanglong,  Kabul  berkat,  d.  s.  b.
[ccxiii]  The  Dough  figure  [p.  452.
Krfitas  Si  Layang-layang,  Bintang  Mabok  di  kiri-ku,
Layang  lalu  ka-dalam  mangko',  Bulan  ampat-blas  di  kanan-ku
Terlintas  saperti  bayang-bayang,  Payong  Si  Lanchang  melintang  aku,
Aku  mengenakan  do 'a  Bintang  Mabok.  Kabul-lah  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[ccxiv]  Orang  Riang  Semangat  [p.  456.
Pisau  raut,  pisau  renchong,  Pulangkan-lah  balik
TersSlit  kapada  dinding  ;  Masok  sifat  jasad  Si  Ann  itu,
Hantu  laut,  bantu  kampong,  Dudok-lah  angkau  tetap-tepap
Inchit-lah  angkau,  nyah-lah  angkau  Mana  mana  yang  datang,  jangan
deri-sini  'kau  ikut.
Jangan-lah  angkau  kundang  seman-  Berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
gat  Si  Anu  itu,
For  other  charms  connected  with  the  medical  or  magic  treatment  of  the  soul, vide  sees,  vi-viii,  supra  and  cclxv-cclxxv,  infra.
vi  MEDICINE  645
[ccxv]
MEDICINE
Senna.—  As  an  example  of  the  present  state  of  medical  science  among  the Malays,  the  following  translation  of  instructions  for  the  use  of  a  well-known  drug may  be  of  interest.  It  will  be  seen  that  it  cures  as  many  diseases  as  some  of the  patent  pills  of  modern  advertisements.  The  mention  of  grapes,  dates,  and pomegranates  as  ingredients  may  show  that  the  Malay  prescription  is  itself  a translation  from  Indian  or  Arabic  sources  : —
"  This  is  designed  to  explain  the  virtues  of  the  senna  of  Mecca  (daun  sana- ina&ki),  which  is  famous  among  all  doctors  of  experience.
"  First.  Take  some  senna  leaves  with  their  stalks  and  bark,  pound  the whole  up  fine,  and  then  weigh  out  a  quantity  as  heavy  as  three  Java  duits.  Let this  be  mixed  with  honey.  If  this  is  swallowed,  its  properties  are  to  cause  all diseases  of  the  chest  to  disappear.
"  Second.  Mix  the  senna  leaves  with  moist  sugar.  If  this  is  taken  internally, the  effect  is  to  expel  cold  from  the  body  and  to  give  strength  to  the  organs.
1 '  Third.  Mix  the  senna  leaves  with  sugar  candy.  This  gives  strength  to the  bones.
' '  Fourth.  Mix  the  senna  leaves  with  clarified  butter  and  moist  sugar.  If this  is  taken  for  three  days  it  will  get  rid  of  all  bad  humours  in  the  body,  and will  give  health.
"  Fifth.  Mix  the  senna  leaves  with  fresh  butter  to  which  no  salt  has  yet  been added.  The  properties  of  this  mixture  are  to  cure  headaches  and  to  cleanse  the brain  and  to  remove  any  bad  taste  in  the  mouth.
"Sixth.  Mix  the  senna  leaves  with  curds.  This  mixture  operates  as  an antidote  to  poison  and  prevents  evil  consequences  from  it.
"  Seventh.  If  senna  be  taken  with  goat's  milk,  it  will  cause  an  accession  of strength,  though  complete  weakness  existed  just  before.
"Eighth.  If  senna  be  taken  with  dates,  everything  offensive  is  removed from  the  mouth,  and  the  body  is  made  healthy,  and  a  good  appetite  is  established.
"Ninth.  If  senna  be  taken  with  pomegranates,  the  body  becomes  strong, and  though  the  patient  may  be  old,  nevertheless  there  is  an  addition  of  strength, and  the  organs  of  the  chest  are  cleansed,  and  the  appetites  are  stimulated.
"  Tenth.  If  senna  be  taken  with  grapes,  it  gives  light  to  the  eyes  which  were dim.  This  is  proved  by  experience.
"  Eleventh.  If  senna  be  drunk  with  vinegar,  it  cures  fever  accompanied  by shivering  and  trembling  of  the  bones,  and  expels  all  mischief  from  the  stomach, and  cleanses  the  organs  of  the  chest.
"  Twelfth.  If  senna  leaves  be  taken  with  orange  juice,  all  internal  heat  is removed,  and  a  man  who  was  before  quite  thin  will  speedily  grow  fat.
"  Thirteenth.     If  senna  is  drunk  with  dew,  the  eyes  become  bright  and  clear.
"Fourteenth.  If  senna  is  taken  in  water  in  which  pomegranate  peel  has been  boiled,  it  cures  dysentery.
"  Fifteenth.  If  senna  is  boiled  with  cocoa-nut  water  and  taken  internally,  it will  cure  diabetes  and  gravel,  by  the  will  of  God  ever  to  be  praised  and  Most
f  Hieh-"
Thus  the  properties  of  the  senna  of  Mecca  are  concluded  under  fifteen headings.1
J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  17,  p.  116.
646
APPENDIX
SPECIMEN  WORDS  OF  THE  SPIRIT  LANGUAGE  USED  BY  PA  WANGS [ccxvi]  Bhasa  Hantu
English. betel-leaf bird blood candle
cane-sugar  juice cat child daylight dead
dwelling-place eye fish fowl head house ill jar life
lightning night
Pig
rice
sleep
spear
thunder
tobacco
water
wind
wood
Malay. sirih burong darah lilin
ayer  tebu kuching anak siang mati
tempat  tinggal mata ikan ayam kapala rumah sakit buyong nyawa kilat malam babi b'ras tidor lembing guroh tembakau ayer angin kayu
Spirit  Language. me'rak  b'layang simbangan kasai talong
tuwak  (tuak) rimau  dapor dSmit sinar merat
jinjangan  or  sandaran bintang
sampah  laut  or  daun  kayu mSndong hulu balei 'rayu lobok kSlbu
panah  lodan silam
pandak  kaki gandum  or  jSr'ba merapat  bintang ton  ok lodan
ranting  berjela jamjam bayu jetun  or  jeitun
DANCES [ccxvii]  [p.  464.
The  Gambor  Dance  (Main  Gambor}  should  be  illustrated  by  the  Sha'ir  Radin, which,  however,  is  far  too  long  to  be  given  in  extenso.
It  begins  : —
Anggrek  dewana  berjambangan, Kapala  Gempa  Raja  Wolanda  ; Tabek  Tuan  Dewa  Kayangan, Handak  di-sambut  Paduka  chunda. Anggrek  dewana  tengah  sagara, SSlang  berawan  di-makan  kuda  ; Tabek  Tuan  Dewa  Udara Di-pobunkan  turun  chunda  anak'nda. Anggrek  dewana  diatas  papan, Jatoh  sa-kaki  di-makan  kuda  ; Tabek  Tuan  Batara  Kuripan, Di-pohunkan  Tuan  sakalian  anak'nda.
The  ending  is  : —
Anggrek  dewana  berjambangan, Kapal  kembali  lalu  ka  Jawa  ;
Anggrek  dewana  di  tengah  sagara, Daun  di-makan  burong  Garuda  ; Tabek  Tuan  Batara  Indra, Di-pohunkan  turun  Paduka  anak'nda. Anggrek  dewana  di-sambar  helang, Bunga-nya  habis  di-makan  kuda  ; Tabek  Tuan  Batara  Gugelang, Di-pohunkan  turun  Paduka  anak'nda. Anggrek  dewana  Naga  Sari, Meraksi  kain  Wolanda ; Tabek  Tuanku  Batara  Sari, Di-pohunkan  turun  Paduka  anak'nda.
Tabek  Tuanku  Dewa  Kayangan, Sudah  kembali  chunda  anak'nda,
VI
DANCES
647
Anggrek  dewana  <li  tengah  sagara, Sfidang  berclaun  di-makan  kuda  ; Tabek  sakalian  isi  Udara, Sud. ill  kembali  chunda  anak'nda. Adoh  Pekulun  Sang  Perbu, Mu  terjalan  Dewa  Kayangan Semperna  pekulun  Batara  Guru, Sudan  kembali  chunda  sakalian. Jangan  Tuan  berpauh  (?)  padi, Jikalau  bidok  sfcrSmpu  juga  ; Jangan-lah  Tuan  berjauh  hati, Jikalau  hidup  bertfimu  juga.
Tanam  kfimbili  didalam  jambangan, An.tk  rus.i  memakan  rum  put ; Kembali-lah  Tuan  orang  kayangan Esok  lusa  pula  'ku  j  6m  put. [Tamat-lah  Sha'ir  Dewa  Kayangan, Tamat  didalam  balei  pengadapan  ; Serta  meminta'  bias  kasihan Kapada  tuan  wakil  karaja'an. Tamat  kapada  bari-nya  Khamis, Perkata'an  banyak  tiada  berjenis  ; Didalam  masa  dudok  menulis Terkenangkan  sakit  penghabis-habis]
[ccxviii]
Monkey  Dance  Invocation Main  B'rok
[p.  465.
Lok  Lok,  Si  Mundi,
Si  Mundi,  Si  Munaya  !
Datang  Berok  Tunggal
Menggunchang-gunchang  tanggok.
Tanggok  siapa  ini  ?
Tanggok  Si  Mara  Pati.
O  lambak  !  O  lambai !
Si  Olong  meniti  batang,
Titi  teranggok-anggok.
'Ku  mimpi  Dayang  ku  mimpi
'Ku  mimpi  bayok-nya1  B6rok  ! Ka  seYok,2  kaserangan, Ka  sambar,  ka  si  mukan  ! 'Ku  tengo'  ka  danau Antah  B€rok,  antah  bukan. Daun  dedap,  daun  simpor, Tertudong  ladang  kami Lelap-lelap  nenek  tidor Dengarkan  b'rita  kami. Hendikl  Hok  !
[ccxix]
Palm-blossom  Invocation Main  Mayang
[p.  466.
Di-anggit  mayang  di-anggit, Di-anggit  di  pantat  pasu, 'Ku  panggil  dayang  'ku  panggil, 'Ku  panggil  turun  bersatu. 'Ku  anggit  mayang  'ku  anggit, 'Ku  anggit  di  poko'  tua, 'Ku  panggil  dayang  'ku  panggil 'Ku  panggil  turun  berdua. 'Ku  anggit  mayang  'ku  anggit 'Ku  anggit  di  poko'  gSliga 'Ku  panggil  dayang  'ku  panggil, 'Ku  panggil  turun  bertiga 'Ku  anggit  mayang  'ku  anggit 'Ku  anggit  di  poko'  pfirepat, 'Ku  panggil  dayang  'ku  panggil 'Ku  panggil  turun  berampat. 'Ku  anggit  mayang  'ku  anggit 'Ku  anggit  di  poko'  delima, 'Ku  panggil  dayang  'ku  panggil 'Ku  panggil  turun  berlima. 'Ku  anggit  mayang  'ku  anggit 'Ku  anggit  di  poko'  kSrfinam, 'Ku  panggil  dayang  'ku  panggil Bidadari  turun  beranam. 'Ku  anggit  mayang  'ku  anggit 'Ku  anggit  di  pangkal  buloh 'Ku  panggil  dayang  'ku  panggil
1  i.e.  Kahwin-nya.
Bidadari  turun  bertujoh. Pinjam  tukol  pinjam  landasan 'Nak  menukol  tengko'  Pari Pinjam  dusun  pinjam  'laman Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Pinjam  tukol  pinjam  landasan, 'Nak  menukol  bfelakang  Pari, Pinjam  dusun  pinjam  'laman Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Pinjam  tukol  pinjam  landasan, 'Nak  menukol  gelabang  Pari, Pinjam  dusun  pinjam  'laman Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Pinjam  tukol  pinjam  landasan 'Nak  menukol  kapala  Pari, Pinjam  dusun  pinjam  'laman Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Pinjam  tukol  pinjam  landasan 'Nak  menukol  gerongok  Pari, Pinjam  dusun  pinjam  'laman Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Pinjam  tukol,  pinjam  landasan 'Nak  menukol  ensang  Pari, Pinjam  dusun,  pinjam  'laman Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Pinjam  tukol,  pinjam  landasan 'Nak  menukol  ekor  Pari,
»  i.e.  JSrok.
648
APPENDIX
CHAP.
Pinjam  dusun,  pinjam  'laman, Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Gali-gali  halia, Dapat  sa-jari  dua  jari, Chhari-chhari  padang  mulia Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Gali-gali  bunglei Dapat  sa-jari  dua  jari, Chhari-chhari  padang  yang  s616sei Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Gali-gali  s6rei Dapat  sa-jari  dua  jari, Chhari-chhari  padang  yang  sukor, Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Gali-gali  t6mu Dapat  sa-jari  dua  jari Chhari-chhari  padang  yang  j£mor Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Gali-gali  kunyit Dapat  sa-jari  dua  jari Chhari-chhari  padang  yang  sulit Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Gali-gali  ISmpoyang Dapat  sa-jari  dua  jari Chhari-chhari  padang  yang  loyang, Menurunkan  anak  bidadari. Tatang  puan,  tatang  cherana, Tatang  di  tengah  taman, Datang-lah  tuan,  datang-lah  nyawa, Datang-lah  dudok  di  tengah  'laman. Tatang  puan,  tatang  cherana, Tatang  puan  pagi  hari, Datang-lah  tuan  datang-lah  nyawa, Datang  naik  membasoh  kaki. Tatang  puan  tatang  cherana Tatang  bidok  di  sglasar Datang-lah  tuan  datang-lah  nyawa Datang  dudok  'nak  bentang  tikar. Tatang  puan  tatang  cherana Tatang  dengan  kait  padi-nya, Datang-lah  tuan  datang-lah  nyawa Datang  dengan  baik  hati-nya.
Tatang  puan  tatang  cherana Tatang  bidok  S'ri  Rama, Datang-lah  tuan  datang-lah  nyawa Datang-lah  dudok  bersama-sama. Tatang  puan,  tatang  cherana Tatang  dengan  tunjang  nyiris  (nyirih) Datang-lah  tuan  datang-lah  nyawa Datang-lah  dudok  makan  sirih. Tatang  puan  tatang  cherana Tatang  dengan  ISmbah  paku-nya, Datang-lah  tuan  datang-lah  nyawa, Datang  dengan  tengkah  laku-nya. [Maka    turun-lah    Bidadari    bertenggek
diatas  mayang  itu] 'Ku  lansar  mayang  ku  lansar 'Ku  lansar  ka  chawan  puteh, Di-hantar  Dayang  di-hantar Di-hantar  ka  awan  puteh. 'Ku  lansar  mayang  ku  lansar 'Ku  lansar  ka  chawan  hitam, 'Ku  hantar  Dayang  'ku  hantar 'Ku  hantar  ka  awan  hitam. 'Ku  lansar  mayang  'ku  lansar 'Ku  lansar  ka  chawan  hijau 'Ku  hantar  Dayang  'ku  hantar '  Ku  hantar  ka  awan  hijau 'Ku  lansar  mayang  'ku  lansar 'Ku  lansar  ka  chawan  biru. 'Ku  hantar  Dayang  'ku  hantar, 'Ku  hantar  ka  awan  biru. 'Ku  lansar  mayang  'ku  lansar 'Ku  lansar  ka  chawan  merah. 'Ku  hantar  Dayang  'ku  hantar 'Ku  hantar  ka  awan  merah. 'Ku  lansar  mayang  'ku  lansar 'Ku  lansar  ka  chawan  ungu, 'Ku  hantar  Dayang  'ku  hantar 'Ku  hantar  ka  awan  ungu. 'Ku  lansar  mayang  ku  lansar 'Ku  lansar  ka  chawan  kuning 'Ku  hantar  Dayang  ku  hantar 'Ku  hantar  ka  awan  kuning.
[ccxx]
Fish-trap  Invocation Main  Lukah
[p.  468.
Tahaseh  !  Tahaseh  !
Mak  Si  Banding  siat  lukah,
Jumpa  bemban  sikutari
Kalau  'nak  menengo'  lukah  menari.
'Nak  menengo'  kaya  Allah.
Ka  ch6ti  kambing  ka  cheti
Ka  tasek  ka  gumba  jangan,
Ingat-ingat  dalam  hati
Kata-ku  tadi  lupa  jangan.
Ka  kSbun  kita  ka  kSbun Jangan  di-bSli  mangko'  kSrang, Berhimpun  kita  ka^balei  Dato' Mak  Si  Banding  gila  sa'orang. Hilir  lorah,  mudik  lorah, Siku  bemban  sikutari I'.alau  ada  di-p8mudah 'Nak  menengo'  lukah  menari.
[ccxxi]
Di-bisekkan
"  Jangan  'kau  bri  malu, Bangkit-lah  menari." Bangkit-lah  dia.
vi  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  649
[ccxxii]  Alternative  Version
Silawasi  tahu  Dandi  asal  jadi,  Dua  di  batang  bertindeh  juga,
Dudok  di  balci  kota  mangkn,  Bagei  tabek  bagei  bintang
Lima  raut,  raut  rotan,  Lukah  melenggang  bagei  naga.
Kalau  rautan  penjalin  lukah,  Agai-agai  perfimbek  pagai
Ka  lukah  si-bagei  Allah.  PerSmbek  tumboh  di  mata-nya,
Kachiti  kambing  kachiti  Suroh  pulang  de'  nan  langkai,
Puchok  katari  lumba  jangan.  Lukah  lupa  di-kata-nya.
Pikir-pikir  didalam  hati  KeYembek  kerSmbang  batang
Bisek  nan  tadi  lupa  jangan.  Penyajar  sawah  teruka
Hilir  lorah  mudik  lorah  Suroh  pulang  de'nan  langkai
Dapat  bemban  ya-ka-tari,  Tersirak  darah  di  muka,
Menchoba  pakeian  Allah,  Kumbang  menengong  di  bulohminyak
Menengo'  lukah  menari.  Jangan    tSgak    termfinong   lukah   de' Tang  terbalik  tergelintang  orang  banyak.
THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS
[ccxxiii]       Invocation  used -when  opening  a  Theatre  for  the  Met yong        [p.  504. Bachtfan  Pawang  handak  membuka  Panggong  main  Mdyong
Al-salam  'aleikum,  ibu  deri  bumi  bapa  ka  langit  !  Jangan  bertulah  papa sagala  pa'  yong,  ma'  yong,  pran  tua,  pran  muda,  jangan-lah  menggoda  seksa pada  sakalian  kaum  kawan  ma'yong,  dengan  karna  bukan  aku  mari  mengadu bijak  pandei  pitah  itu-pun  tidak  deri  ta'lok  sini.  Jikalau  aku  mari  deri  sini  aku handak  deripada  harap  adek  kakak  tuan  penghulu  dan  jangan-lah  siapa  aniaya dengki  khianat  pada  sakalian  kawan  pa'yong  ma'yong  samua  sakali  dengan  pran tua  muda  dengan  panjak  pengantin  sakali  dengan  Sri  Gemuroh  Sri  Berdengong. Jangan  bri  rosak  binasa  berchachat  chela  jangan  di-bri  pa'yong  ma'yong  ber- sumbing  runting  dan  jangan  bri  chachat  chfila  dan  jangan  bri  berpgning  ralu  dan berchochak  tikam  panas  hangat  pun  jangan  dan  jangan  bri  bersenak  tajam  dan bri  berhalun  susun  clan  chgrah  chirit  dan  sangkak  sdbak  itu-pun  jangan  dan jangan  bri  bermuntah  cherah  itu-pun  jangan  berbrat  patah  itu-pun  jangan  Igngoh lumpoh  itu-pun  jangan,  'nak  minta'  segar  dikar  'adat  zaman  sedia  kala  'nak minta  sejok  dingin  saperti  ular  chintamani.
Al-salam  'aleikum  hei  Awang  Itam,  Raja  di  Bumi,  mu  jangan  terkejut tergemam  dan  mu  jangan  berpungoh  juah  karna  mu  berjalan  ikut  urat  tanah  dan mu  beradu  di  pintu  bumi  dan  bukan-nya  aku  mari  mengadu  bijak  itu  dengan  mu karna  aku  'nak  tumpang  manja  dan  berkirim  diri  sendiri  maka  aku  'nak  minta' - lah  kapada  mu  berundor  bertiga  langkah  ampat  buchu  perbaruan  dan  mu  jangan kasana  kasini  aku  'nak  kirim  pa'yong  ma'yong  sakalian  pran  tua  muda  dengan panjak  pengantin  aku  tahukan  l  baik  pada  diri-mu  dan  jangan-lah  aniaya  dengki khianat  dan  mu  jangan  bertimpah  langgar  dengan  sakalian  pa'yong  ma'yong  dan panjak  pengantin  dan  pran  tua  dan  muda  dan  ka-samua  sakali  dengan  orang yang  menengo'  dan  ka-samua  sakali  dengan  tuan  rumah  tuan  kampong  dan  mu .  jangan  bri  pgning  ralu  berchochak  tikam  dan  berkgtik  gigi  dan  bergatal  ming dan  panas  pgdis  pun  jangan,  'nak  minta'  biar  sejok  dingin  saperti  ular  chintamani.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  'ku  'nak  gunchang  deri  galanggang  sini  ampat  pendahap dan  ampat  penjuru  'alam.  Mana-mana  yang  kramat  ampat  pendahap  ampat penjuru  'alam  yang  disini,  jangan-lah  terkejut  tergdmam  dan  jangan-lah  berpungoh juah  clan  jangan-lah  murih  marah  karna  bukan-nya  hamba  mengadu  bijak  deri ta'lok  sini  dalam  kampong  sini  maka  hamba  mari  'nak  mel£pas  deripada  harap hajat  adek  kakak  tuan  penghulu  sini  maka  'nak  tumpang-lah  deripada  nenek yang  kramat  sini  serta  manja  dan  berma'  du'  handak  berkirim  diri  sendiri
1  Qv.  tarohkan.
650  APPENDIX
serta  handak-lah  berkirim  ma'yong  pa'yong  kapada  nenek  yang  kramat  disini ka-samua  sakali  dengan  panjak  pengantin  pran  tua  dan  pran  muda  'nak  minta' jangan-lah  dengki  aniaya  khianat  pun  dan  jangan-lah  bri  rosak  binasa  dan  minta' deripada  nenek  sakalian  kaum  budak  nenek  jangan-lah  bri  budak  nenek  berlak pajan  dan  'nak  minta' -lah  deripada  nenek  jangan  bri  rosak  binasa  berchela chachat  sakalian  puak  ma'yong  dan  'nak  minta'  biar  sejok  dingin  saperti  ular chintamani.
Al-salam  'aleikum  'ku  'nak  gunchang  deripada  nenek  'ku  yang  bernama P£tra  Guru,  guru  awal  mula  menjadi  dan  jadi-nya  itu  dengan  jasad  jadi.  Maka Guru  bertapa  didalam  baluh  bulan  dan  Guru  ber'amal  didalam  kendong  matahari dan  Guru  'ku  berbajukan  manik  hijur  dan  Guru  'ku  berdarah  puteh  bertulang tunggal  beroma  songsang  berurat  kajur  bertSngko'  itam  lidah  fasih  ayer  lior  pun masin.  Dengan  karna  nenek  ku  orang  bersidi  sakti  sabarang  pinta'  sabarang menjadi  dan  barang  kahandak  barang  buleh  maka  nenek  pun  jangan  bertulah papa  kadapatan  seksa  pada  sakalian  pa'yong  ma'yong  sakalian  panjak  pengantin dan  pran  tua  pran  muda  dan  minta'  nenek  hulor  kaki  kaki  hamba  sujud  dan hulor  tangan  tangan  hamba  jabat  hamba  handak  minta'  peuawar  puteh  mddong bersila  deripada  nenek  yang  sendi-sendi  kramat  hamba  'nak  minta'  nenek turunkan  tiga  titek  serta  dengan  kasaktian  mu  hamba  'nak  perchik  sakalian pa'yong  ma'yong  pran  tua  pran  muda  ka-samua  sakali  dengan  panjak  pengantin dan  nenek  jangan-lah  bri  berosak  binasa  dan  nenek  jangan-lah  berlak  pajan  'nak minta'  jangan-lah  bri  rosak  binasa  chachat  chedra  sakalian  pa'yong  ma'yong. Maka  sakarang  handak  grakkan  pa'yong  ma'yong  deri  anjong  tujoh  astana  tujoh mahligei  tujoh  astana  yang  atas  astana  yang  awalan  awal  mula  menjadi  dengan jasad  jadi.  Maka  aku  'nak  buka-lah  pintu  anjong  astana  yang  tujoh  pintu  yang berselak.  Aku  'nak  buka  deri  luar  lantas  ka  dalam  anjong  tujoh  astana  tujoh. Maka  terbuka-lah  dengan  pintu  hawar  nafsu  dan  terbuka  sakali  dengan  sir  (?) pintu  e'tikad  dan  pintu  chinta  berahi  dan  terchinta-chinta  siang  menjadi  malam makan  ta'  kenyang  tidor  ta'  jfindra  ingat  ta'  ingat  dengar  ta'  dengar  tengo'  ta' tengo.  Maka  aku  grak  deri  luar  lantas  ka  dalam  anjong  tujoh  astana  tujoh. Jangan  du'  ralib  tidor  beradu  !  Jaga  sa'orang,  jaga  ka-samua  mendengar  khabar tutor-'ku  !  Jaga  mendengar  petutoran-'ku  !  Karna  tutor-'ku  tiada  gha'ib  dan berasa-'ku  tiada  lelap  jajaran-'ku  tiada  luput.  Maka  jaga-lah  pa'yong  menjem- bakan  pa'yong,  jaga  ma'yong  menjemba  ma'yong,  jaga  pran  bersama  pran,  jaga jiiru  gendang  bersama  juru  gendang,  jaga  jura  gong  bersama  juru  gong,  jaga pengantin  bersama  pengantin,  jaga  panjak  bersama  panjak  !  Jangan  berlak pajan,  jangan  berosak  binasa  dan  jangan  bri  sumbing  runting  berchachat  chela sakalian  pa'yong  ma'yong  sagala  kawan  ma'yong  mana  yang  didalam  perbaruan.1
[ccxxiv]  The  Same  Ceremony  as  described  by  'Che  Hussein  [p.  511.
Pasang  lilin  tiga  batang,  satu  minta'  ampun  kapada  kramat  yang  memegang tanah  disini,  satu  pada  guru  kita  (Batara  Guru),  satu  kapada  sagala  jin  ma'yong. Sudah  itu,  mendpong  tawar,  katakan  :
Invocation  to  the  Earth  Spirit(s) Panggil  Hulubalang  (Jin  Tanah)
Hei  Hantu  Tanah,  Jembalang  Tanah  !  Dato'  jangan  membisakan,
Aku  tahu  asal  'kau  jadi :  Dato1  jangan  membe'ngkakkan  :
Bintang  Timor  asal  'kau  mula  jadi.  Biar  suka  sagala  hamba  Allah
Berkat  Dato'  Batara  Guru,  Mendengar  permainan  kita  ! Dato'  jangan  menyakitkan,
1  Romanized  from  the  Set.  Journ.,  vol.  ii.  No.  26,  pp.  424-426.
n  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS  651
[ccxxv]  To  Batara  Guru
To  charm  (jampi)  the  Lime Sama  Raja-nya  (Batara  Guru}
Hei  batang  bernama  Raja  Berdiri,  Hei  Siti  Terjali  nuri  Muhammad  !
Akar  bernama  Raja  Bersila,  Angkau  melemahkan  sagala  hati  ummat Kulit  bernama  Raja  Bersenam,  Muhammad,
Dahan  bernama  Raja  Bersula,1  Yang  kasuka  dengar  permainan  kita.
Daun  bernama  Raja  Berpanah,  Kalau  angkau  ta'  sukakan, Panahkan  sakalian  hati  ummat  Muham-       Aku  sumpah  dengan  kata  Allah, mad  !
[ccxxvi]  To  the  Kramat
Kapada  Kramat
Hei  Jin  Tanah !  undor  angkau  tiga  tapak  Kapada  panjak  pengantin,  yang  bermain Ampat  penjuru  'alam  sakalian-nya,
Tujoh  j£rong  dulapan  desa  ;  Yang  pukol  buloh,  yang  gesek  rebab,
Aku  'nak  minta'  buka  panggong  !  Pran  tua,  pran  muda. Jangan  'kau  membri  sakit  dSmam,  pfining, kelu,
[ccxxvii]  Perkata'an  Kapada  Kramat
Kramat  di  kampong,  tabek  di  kampong  !
The  next  six  lines  are  similar,  only  substituting  for  the  word  kampong  the words  (i)  padang,  (2)  rimba,  (3)  gunong,  (4)  piilau,  (5)  laut,  (6)  darat,  respec- tively.
Tabek  sa'orang  samua  rata  ! Mana  sSbut,  ta'  tahu  nama, Mana  s£mbah,  ta'  tahu  tempat. Hamba  'nak  mohun  tempat  bermain. Jangan  bri  sakit  dSmam,  pfining,  kfelu Sagala  panjak  pengantin,  d.s.b.
[Ambil]  dua  biji  limau  purut  gantong  satu  didalam  gong  betina,  dan  gantong satu  lagi  pada  timbal  ayer  mengadap  barat  tepat,  sebab  limau  poko'  ma'yong  :  - berubat  pun  pakei,  'nak  chuchi  perkakas  pun  pakei  limau  :  di-sebut-nya  : —
Hei  limau  purut,  limau  kak  lelang  ! 3 Bukan  aku  menanam  limau, Semurah  yang  menanam  limau.
[ccxxviii]  Another  Invocation  to  the  Black  Genie
Al-salam  'aleikum  hei  Jin  Hitam  berhati  Pada    tuboh   badan   din    hamba   Allah
hitam,  ummat    Muhammad    anak    chuchu
Berjnntong  hitam  berpeparu  hitam,  Adam  :
Berhampedu  hitam  bergigi  jongan,  Sah  pindah-lah  'kau  pada  tempat  yang
Berdada  merah  beroma  songsang,  awal !
Bertulang  tunggal  saribu  rupa,  Kalau  ta'  pindah
Saribu  jenis  saribu  maya,  Derhaka  'kau  pada  Allah  dengan  berkat
Saribu  jadi  jangan  'kau  menggoda  seksa  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
1  Qu.  Bersulor.
3  Kalau  berlaga  atau  bertanding  pun  gantong  juga  dua-dua. 3  Bangsa  limau  butan.
652  APPENDIX  CHAP.
[ccxxix]     Invocation  to  the  Sheikhs  of  the  Four  Corners  of  the  World,  etc.
Al-salam  'aleikum  Sailillah  berkat  Sheikh  Al-salam  'aleikumhei  Jin  Hitam  Sagempar ampat  penjuru  'alam  !  'alam  yang  bernama  Jin  Tunggal  !
Al-salam  'aleikum  Sailillah  berkat  Sheikh  Al-salam  'aleikum  hei  Jin  Tanah  !
'Abdul  Kadir  !  Aku  tahukan  asal  nama  bapa-mu  :
Al-salam  'aleikum  Sailillah  berkat  Sheikh  Sang  Gala  nama  bapa-mu,
'Abdul  Muri !  Sang  Gading  nama  ibu-mu  !
Al-salam  'aleikum  Sailillah  berkat  Sheikh  Hei  Jin  Tanah,  Jembalang  Tanah,
'Abdul  'Ali !  Hantu  Tanah,  Jembalang  Bumi,
Hei  Jin   Puteh    membawa    sagala  kaum  Hei  Jin  di  Padang,  Jembalang  di  Padang,
puak-mu  !  Al-salam  'aleikum  hei  Raja  Jin  bernama
Hei  Jin  Hitam  Sahalilintar  Sarukup  Rang  Jin  Panah  Lanjuna  !
Bumi !  Mu-lah   membawa   sagala   Jin   yang   di
Hei  Jin  Hitam  Sagertak  Rang  Bumi  !  kampong  Jembalang  di  kampong,
Hei  Jin  Hitam  Sagunchang  Rang  Bumi  !  Mari  blaka  ka-samua  kechil  besar  tua  dan
Hei  Jin  Hitam  Satumbok  Rang  Bumi  !  muda
Hei  Jin  Hitam  tujoh  bersaudara  !  Tepok-tepak,    tempang,    buta,   rungga,
Al-salam   'aleikum  hei  Sang  Gala  Raja  meraba,
Jin  !  Mari  trimakan  jamuan  aku  ini
Anak  Raja  Jin  bernama  Jin  Bala  Saribu  !  Dengan  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
Al-salam  'aleikum  hei  anak  Raja  Jin  ber- nama Jin  Hitam  Sa  Lakun  Darah  !
[ccxxx]  Specimen  of  a  Mdyong  Song  [p.  513.
Lagtt  dudok  atau  bertabek  (Patani  tua) {Siapa-siapa  pun  bulehjuga  bernyanyi)
Abong  e-e  dondang  dang  dondang  dondang  we  dondang  dondang  yong  de-de  he- he  de-de  abong  hilang  rayuk l  timbul  timbul  tersebut  jaman  ( =  zaman)  dang  d'ulu yong  -we  de  de-de  abong  ada  d'ulu  ada  sakarang  hubong  berhubong  hikayat  ma'yong yong  we  de-de  abong  e  s(i)apa  menengar  hikayat  ma'yong  s'apa  b'las  s'apa  ta' rawan  yong  -we  de  abong  we  bagei  burong  chandrawangsih  bagei  ular  we  chinta- mani  yong  we  de  abong  we  bagei  ambun  katujoh  titek  jadi  pengasoh  di  badan hamba  yong  we  de  de-de  abong  we  chari  di  laut  dapat  di  laut  tujoh  hari  berjalan jauh  yong  we  de  abong  we  tujoh  hari  berjalan  jauh  re(z)ki  ta'  putus  sapanjang jalan  yong  we  de  abong  we  ruyak  hilang  berita  timbul  timbul  tersebut  sabuah negri  yong  we  de  abong  we  negri  b(h)aru  bersalin  raja  dudok  beradu  di  balei  besar yong  we  de  :  habis.
WAR  AND  WEAPONS
[ccxxxi]  Charms  to  render  a  Warrior  more  formidable  [p.  522.
Penggagah
Hei,  Bali-Bali,  aku  tahu  mula  asal  mu  'Ku  tSntang  matahari  yang  katujoh,
jadi,  Tiada  tertSntang  satru  lawan-'ku  !
Ruh  Jenaban  asal  mula  mu  jadi ;  Ah  !  aku  'rimau  angkau  anjing  !
Turun  ruh  Jenaban  ka  pusat  aku,  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b. Naik  darah  brani  ka  muka  aku  !
Here  draw  a  long  breath,  putting  the  tip  of  the  tongue  up  to  the  roof  of  the mouth  (tongkatkan  lidah  di  langit-langit  mulut).
1  Em.  ruayat,  i.e.  kesah.
VI
WAR  AND  WEAPONS
653
[ccxxxii]
Penggagah
Hinei  di-surat,1  bacha  de'  hft,a 'Ku  asal  lulus,3  Si  Dayang  Melena, Di-soroki  mati,  di-langkah  patab, Aku  mengenakan  do 'a  Baris    Si  Kem-
bang  Maiat. HAH  !  HAH  !  HAH  !
Kai  'All,  gCntar  'Ali,  gCntar  bumi ! Aku    'Ali,     niCmakei    pCtenggang    raya
besar  !
Nyah  angkau  !  Nyah  'Ali !  (sic) HAH  !  HAH  !  HAH  !
[ccxxxiii]
Bismillahi  '1-rahmani  '1-rahimi ! Urat  batu  menikam  batu, Batu  di-tikain,  batu  blah, Papan  di-tikam,  papan  timbus, Ayer  di-tikam,  ayer  kring, Bumi  di-tikam,  bumi  tembok, Rumput  di-tikam,  rumput  layu, Gunong  di-tikam,  gunong  runtoh, Langit  di-tikam,  langit  runtoh, Tegak  terdiri  di  halaman  'Ali.
Penggagah
LP-
Sifat  aku  sifat  Allah
Sifat  didalam  kandang  Kalimah
La-ilaha- ilia-'  llah  !
Hu  Allah  !  Hu  Allah  !
Lesong  besi,  anak  tembaga,
Ah  (?)  kuat-'ku  saperti  Baginda  'Ali,
Gagah-'ku  saperti  ummi  Fatimah  !
Aku  besi,  tulang  aku  tembaga,
Aku  bernama  harimau  Allah
Hah  !  Berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
[ccxxxiv]
Bismillah,  d.s.b.
Allahu,  ya  tuanku
Ta"  junjong  Nabi  Muhammad,  in  Mah
guru-ku, Sangka8  mata,  jadi  pendinding  api  na-
raka,
Hu  Allah  !  Hu  Allah  Samad  ! Tinggi  'ku,  tinggikan  besar-'ku,
Besarkan  aku  bernama  Hak  Allah
Sifat-'ku  sifat  Allah
Sifat  didalam  kandang  Kalimah,
La-ilaha,  d.s.b.
Hu  !  kulit  ku  tiada  membri  jalan,
Jalan  tiada  membri  kulit ;
Bernama  belulang  kSring
Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b.
[ccxxxv]  Penggagah
Hei  Blah  Balu  dudok  telapak  tangan  kanan-'ku, Hei  Blah  Balu  dudok  telapak  tangan  kiri-'ku, 'Nak  turunkan  darah  gemburoh  ka  pusat  aku, Naik  darah  brani  ka  muka  aku, Gen  tar  hati  sagala  lawan-'ku, Di-gentarkan  Allah,  d.s.b.
[ccxxxvi]
Hong  anak  lampang  6 Lalu  tegak  di  pintu  raya  besar Tinju  rejang7  aku  lalu,  ah  lalu, Panchong-ku  panchong  'Ali, Panchong-ku  saperti  kumbang Hinggap  di  ayer  lagi  kring, Hinggap  di  batu  lagi  blah, Hinggap  di  gunong  lagi  runtoh, Hinggap  di  langit  lagi  tembok  8
Penggagah
Hinggap  di  bumi  lagi  lembang, Kunum  nyawa  musoh  satru  lawan-ku, Hanchor  lulu  saperti  timah  dalam  peren-
dangan
Saperti  ambun  di  ujong  rumput, Di-bisakan  Allah  jari-'ku, Di-bisakan  Muhammad, Di-bisakan  Baginda  Rasul  Allah.
1  Di-surat,  Le.  aku.
-  Ha,  i.e.  angkau.    (Hutgu.  etn.  e/o'afor  dS ha.)
*  "  Penetration  is  from  me,"  i.e.   "  it  rests with  me  whether  you  penetrate  or  not."
•*  QK.  ia.
5  Em.  sa-hingga. *>  Gampang(p.
7  Rejang,  said  to  Le  Achinese,  equivalent  lo tinju. »   7V;/;3oX-  =  menchedok  ayer  (?)•
654  APPENDIX  CHAP.
[ccxxxvii]  Penggagah
Hong  besi  tang,1  tang  besi,  Brat  saperti  batu  terbgnam,
Besi  bertentang  sangga  ber'ja,  Brat  saperti  batu  tersgnjam,
Sangga  bSr'ja,  sangga  bunoh  !  Brat  saperti  k6dei  raya.
Hei,  Maya-rnaya.  Brat  saperti  tangga  maulana
'Ku  titik,  'ku  pijak-pijak,  Brat  sa-brat  bumi  dengan  langit
Saperti  bangkei  tengah  jalan,  Kabul  berkat,  d.s.b. Kabul  aku  memakei  do 'a  membrat  hati,
[ccxxxviii]  Pelawan
Tahan  aku,  menahan  aku,  Kukok  ayam  dalam  telor,
Datang  Jat  (?)2  bunga  saribu  ;  Berkata  maiat  dalam  kubor,
Tala  talor  datang  gajah  sa'ekor  Jangan  khianat  madu  (?)4 satru  lawan  'ku.
Tongkatkan  halilintar  'alamkan3  bayang- bayang  'ku  ;
[ccxxxix]  Charm  to  destroy  an  Enemy
Tangkal  Saudara  Ampat
Al-salara  'aleikum,  Bawa-lah  pergi  kamana-mana  !
Hei  Jin  Tanah,  Jembalang  Tanah,  Jikalau  'kau  ta'  mahu  mengambil,
Jin  Hitam,  Si  Ali  Li  tar  !  5  'Kau  di-makan  sumpah  !
Bersaudara-lah  angkau  dengan  aku  Kama  apa  sebab  'kau  bersaudara  dengan
'Kau-lah  yang  aku  harap  :  aku,
Pergi-lah  ambil  nyawa  orang  itu,  'Kau  menunggoh6  di  pintu  pagar  aku.
[ccxl]  Measurement  of  K^ris  [p.  530.
1.  Measure  the  Kris  from  the  bottom  of  the  blade  (in  the  centre)  to  the  point with  a  thin  strip  of  cocoa-nut  leaf  about  half  an  inch  wide.     Cut  the  strip  to  this length  and  fold  it  trebly  ;  notch  one  of  the  third  parts  at  the  fold ;  measure  off the  length  of  the  two  remaining  thirds  on  the  blade  from  the  bottom  towards  the point,  and  mark  the  blade  at  this  distance.     Then  measure  off  the  remaining third  round  the  blade  at  this  mark  as  follows  : — See  that  its  extreme  end  exactly coincides  with  the  left  side  of  the  blade,  and  stretch  it  across  the  blade  at  right angles,  bending  the  strip  of  leaf  round  the  edge  at  the  exact  spot  reached  on  the opposite  edge  of  the  blade  by  making  a  dent  but  not  severing  the  leaf.     Then measure  it  a  second  time  from  the  dent  thus  made,  making  a  second  dent  on  the strip  at  the  point  reached.     Repeat  this  a  third  time,  making  a  third  dent,  when the  dent  on  the  strip  of  leaf  should  be  found  to  come  exactly  in  the  centre  of  the blade,  if  the  blade  is  a  good  one.
If  it  falls  on  either  side  it  is  bad,  and  if  it  requires  four  measurements  (instead of  three)  it  is  very  bad,  though  five  would  be  good.  There  will  never  be  more than  five.
This  measurement  is  called  the  Malay  measurement  {Ukoran  Malayu)  as  dis- tinguished from
2.  The  Bugis'  measurement  (Ukoran  Bugis),  which  is  made  nearer  the  hilt, as  follows  : — Begin  as  before,  but  measure  off  the  remaining  two-thirds  from  the point  instead  of  ;he  hilt.      This  will  give  a  mark  farther  up  the  blade,  and  the strip  of  leaf  must  then  be  folded  round  the  Kris  to  see  where  the  notch  (between
1  Tang = kit  a  in  the  spirit  language  (bhasa  4  Em.  Mengadu.
kantu).  6  i.e.  Halilintar.    These  four  are  the  Saudara
2  Quart.  3  Qucere.  Ampat.  6  Qu.  Menunggu.
WAR  AND  WEAPONS  655
the  second  and  third  divisions)  will  come  on  the  blade.  The  number  of  times which  the  breadth  of  the  k'ris  will  go  into  the  third  division  is  now  of  no  im- portance. Merely  measure  from  the  end  of  the  third  division  as  before,  continuing until  the  notch  is  right  over  the  blade.  If  it  comes  at  the  left  side  of  the  blade it  is  good,  but  if  in  the  centre  or  on  the  right  it  is  unlucky.
3.  Another  method,  called  Ukor  Toh  Mujud  Date?  Lukut  (the  measurement  of Toh  Mujud,  chief  or  founder  of  Lukut),  is  used  especially  by  Selangor  Malays. The  story  goes  that  Toh  Mujud's  wife  was  unfaithful  with  a  Kedah  man,  and that  her  husband,  being  jealous  to  desperation,  searched  everywhere  in  vain  for  a Kris  which  would  settle  his  adversary.     At  length,  however,  in  a  dream  a  vision appeared  to  him,  and  told  him  to  look  for  a  Kris  sapukal  in  the  possession  of  a man  who  was  digging  up  r/mis  or  tepeh  (a  kind  of  mollusc  ?).      Toh  Mujud went  accordingly  to  look  for  the  man,  and  on  meeting  with  one  so  occupied  at Pulau  Labuhan  Bilek,  near  Tanjong  Tuan,  found  that  he  had  a  very  old  and rusty  Pris,  which  he  thereupon  bought  from  him  for  25  cents.     Armed  with  this k'ris  Toh  Mujud  then  found  and  slew  his  adversary,  and  the  proportions  of  the lucky  weapon  corresponded  with  the  measurement  here  given.
Fold  the  string  or  strip  of  leaf,  and  cut  it  in  half.  Take  one  of  the  halves, fold  it,  and  measure  from  the  point  upwards  as  far  as  it  will  go.  Mark  the  spot, and  measure  off  the  string  in  breadths  of  the  Kris  at  that  spot :  there  must  be ten  breadths,  and  at  the  measuring  of  the  tenth  the  end  of  the  string  must  be  in the  centre  of  the  blade,  if  it  is  to  be  of  any  use.
Then  take  the  other  half,  fold  it  also  in  two,  and  measure  up  from  the  bottom of  the  blade  as  far  as  the  folded  string  will  go :  there  must  be  seven  breadths  of the  blade  in  the  length  of  the  half  string,  and  the  end  of  the  string  should  come within  a  hair's-breadth  of  the  edge  of  the  blade,  or,  as  the  Malays  say,  "  leaving space  for  an  ant  to  pass."
4.  Another  method  is  known  as  the   Ukoran  GZnap,  or  Ukor  Mandar  (of Celebes).
Fold  the  string  in  two,  and  measure  off  the  half-length  thus  obtained  on the  blade,  commencing  at  the  bottom.  Then  see  how  many  times  the  breadth of  the  blade  is  contained  in  the  whole  length  of  the  string,  which  should  be fourteen.
5.  Another  way  of  measuring,  to  see  how  many  thumbs'-breadths  there  are in  the  length  of  the  blade,  is  as  follows.     It  is  not  considered  of  much  importance  : — Lay  the  right  thumb  across  the  foot  of  the  blade  near  the  hilt,  and  the  thumb of  the  left  hand  also  on  the  blade  immediately  above  the  other  ;  continue  placing the  thumbs  alternately  one  in  front  of  the  other  until  the  point  is  reached,  repeat- ing for  the  first  thumb's-breadth  the  word  gunong  (mountain),  for  the  second runtoh  (fall),  for  the  third  madu  (honey),  for  the  fourth  stgara  (ocean),  after which  recommence  with  gunong,  and  so  on.      If  gunong  or  madu  brings  the thumb   to  the   point   the   blade   is   a   good  one,   but  not   if  it   is   runtoh  or sfgara.
6.  Another  measurement  is  thus  described  : — Put  the  tip  of  the  right  thumb upon  the  spot  where  the  hilt  joins  the  blade,  with  the  back  of  the  first  joint against  the  blade  ;  next  to  this  put  the  left  thumb  horizontally  across  the  blade, and  continue  to  alternate  the  first  joint  of  the  right  thumb  with  the  breadth  of the  left  till  the  point  of  the  Kris  is  reached,  repeating  as  follows  : —
For  the  length  of  the  first  joint  of  the  right  thumb  .     bfrjong.
For  the  breadth  of  the  left  thumb  .  .  .     btrkapal.
And  so  on  alternately       .....     sampan  tunda.
fa?  bfrtali.
bPrubong.
bMampal.
makan.
ta>  tfrchahari.
656  APPENDIX  CHAP.
The  only  good  blades  are  those  in  which  this  method  of  measurement  gives bZrjong  or  bZrkapal  at  the  point.
[ccxli]  Fencing  Terms
B'lah  mumbang  (lit.  to  split  the  young  cocoa-nut),  to  cut  straight  downwards.
Tibas  (lit.  to  cut  down  undergrowth),  to  make  a  horizontal  stroke.
Tebas  sepak,  to  "  cut "  from  left  to  right  with  an  upward  motion  at  the  end
of  the  stroke. Paras gantang,  to  "cut"  from  right  to  left  with  the  back  of  the  hand  turned
downwards,  as  in  "  levelling  a  measure  "  of  rice. Panchong  Malayu,  to  ' '  cut  "  from  right  to  left  with  an  upward  motion  at  the
end  of  the  stroke.
Of  "stabbing"  strokes  the  following  are  the  most  important: — "  Tikam titnggal"  " tikam  beranak"  " tikam  sfmbor  anak"  and  the  "tikam  tupei ttrjun,"  the  latter  taking  its  name  from  the  way  in  which  the  stroke  curves slightly  downwards  in  the  course  of  delivery,  "like  a  squirrel  taking  a  header."
DIVINATION  AND  THE  BLACK  ART
[ccxlii]          To  ascertain  the  Whereabouts  of  a  Lost  Piece  of  Property         [p.  534.
Al-salam  'aleikum  !    Hei,  Dato'  Batara  Siti   Terjali    (?)  nuri    Muhammad   raja- Guru?  'kau,
Ini  'ku  bagi  makan  !  Batara  Guru  hulubalang.
Hei,   Jin  Tanah  !    Aku    tahu   asal    'kau  Inilah  'ku  membri  makan  ;
[jadi]  Minta  tolong  menilek  barang.
Bintang  Timor  asal  'kau  jadi,
(Here  mention  the  article  whose  whereabouts  you  wish  to  ascertain.)
The  Five  Ominous  Times
[ccxliii]  Katika  Lima  [p.  545.
Katika  Maswara
Ini  pada  menyatakan  katika  Maswara  :  jika  berjalan  bertemu  dengan  orang kaya  puteh  kuning  warna-nya  atau  melihat  perampuan  puteh  kuning ;  dan  laba puteh  jua,  dan  jika  orang  lari  ka  matahari  hidop  pergi-nya  pada  rumah  neschaya kadapatan  jua  ;  dan  berniaga  puteh,  laba  ;  dan  harta  hilang,  orang  puteh  kuning menchuri  [dia  ?]  di-taroh-nya  pada  kapala-nya  tidor  tetapi  berbulan  maka dapat ;  jika  khabar  baik  sunggoh  jika  khabar  jahat  tiada  sunggohan J  jika  sakit sebab  [?2];  jika  di-serang  orang  baik,  jika  menyerang  orang  tiada  baik; jika  menyabong  ayam  puteh  menang,  hitam  alah,  jika  marga  [satwa  ?]  puteh  cli kanan  hitam  di  kiri  ;  jika  zakat  puteh  kuning  warna-nya  saperti  amas  dan  perak dan  di-brikan  kapada  fakir  dan  miskin.
As  an  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  Malay  MSS.  vary,  another  version (from  Naning,  Malacca)  is  here  given  : —
Bab  pada  katika  Maswara :  kalakuan-nya  puteh  kuning ;  jika  berjalan bertemu  dengan  orang  puteh  kuning  atau  orang  berbangsa  pakeian-nya  puteh kuning ;  jika  kita  di-perjamu  orang  [pada]  katika  itu  Igmak  manis,  jika mengadap  raja-raja  baik,  atau  barang  kerja  pun  baik  ;  jika  warta  baik  sunggoh,
1  On.  sunggoh-nya. 2  Some  word  like  Itantw,  puaka,  buatan  orang,  or  the  like,  is  missing  here.
vi  DIVINATION  657
jika  warta  jahat  tiada  sunggoh  ;  jika  melawan  orang  ka  kanan  'isharat-nya,  jika di-riba-i  hilang  orang  puteh  kuning  menchuri  dia  di-bawa-nya  ka  hulu  sungei, rum;ih-nya  orang  itu  mardaheka  tanda  itu  tiada  hilang  atau  lupa  jua  marah  dia  (?) jika  sahya  [la]ri  ka  mashrik  pergi-nya  diam-nya  kapada  rumah  orang  tinggal, jika  ka  laut  'alamat  di-tangkap  orang  sahya  [la]ri  itu,  tiada  hilang ;  jika berniaga,  beruleh  laba ;  jika  mendatangi,  orang,  baik  ;  jika  di-s€rang  orang tiada  baik  ;  jika  menerka  (?)  puteh  kuning  deri  kanan  hijau  deri  kiri ;  jika [membuat]  bilah  pandak  deri  kanan  panjang  deri  kiri ;  jika  biji,  genap  bilang- nya  ;  jika  luka  pada  katika  itu  hingga  lutut-nya  ka  bawah.
In  the  following  sections  the  two  versions  have  been  combined :  words appearing  in  the  Naning  version  only  being  in  italics,  words  of  the  other  version only  enclosed  in  round  brackets,  and  the  rest  being  common  to  both  versions  : —
Katika  Kala
Bab  (ini)  pada  (menyatakan)  katika  Kala  :  kalakuan-nya  hitam  merah,  jika kita  berjalan  bertemu  dengan  orang  jahat  atau  berklahi ;  jika  kita  pergi  pada sualH  tidak  baik  atau  tiada  kita  dapati ;  jika  di-perjamu  orang  kita  [?]  sayor  atau daging ;  jika  warta  baik,  tiada  sunggoh  ;  jika  warta  jahat,  stinggoh  ;  jika  kita mengadap  raja  atau  orang  kaya-kaya  pada  katika  itu  baik  kita  berheibat-nya l  [?]  ; jika  di-riba-i  hilang  orang  hitam  memaling  dia  parut  kapala-nya  ka  selatan  di- bawa-nya  ikal  rambut-nya,  lagi  kuasa  bersumpaJi  [?]  orang  itu  ;  [?]  (penchuri) [?]  (di-bawa-nya  ka  utara,  tiada  dapat  lagi)  ;  jika  sahya  \lar\i  ka  hilir  pergi- nya  lambat  dapat,  atau  ka  laut  jika  tiada  di-ikut  dalam  tiga  hart  neschaya  jauh pergi-nya  (dan)  jika  sakit  pada  katika  itu  (pedih  sakit-nya)  hantu  orang menyakat  dia :  akan  penawar-nya  ayam  hitam  satflah  genap  tujoh  hart  maka  di- mandikan  'afiat  uleh-nya  ;  jika  menygrang  baik,  jika  di-serang  (orang  jahat) tiada  baik;  jika  menyabong  ayam  hitam  menang,  puteh  alah,  telapi  tatkala melfpas  dia  jangan  mengadap  ka  barat ;  jika  marga 2  [satwa]  hitam  deri  kanan puteh  kuning  (hitam)  di  kiri  (jika  .  .  .  jahat) ;  jika  \rnembuaf\  bilah  pandak deri  kanan  panjang  di  kiri;  biji  tiada  genap  bilang-nya ;  jika  luka  hingga pinggang  ka  bawah,  (jika  sakit  akan  ubat-nya  hitam  warna-nya  ;  jika  kahilangan amas  dapat,  jika  kahila[ngan]  suasa  tiada  dapat).
Katika  S'ri
Bab  (ini)  pada  katika  S'ri :  kalakuan-nya  puteh ;  (jika  berjalan  bertemu dengan  perampuan  berbangsa ;  jika  [bejniaga  laba  kita  puteh  ;  jika  hamba  lari ka  matahari  mati  pergi-nya,  pada  rumah  orang  banyak,  neschaya  dapat  jua insha'allah) ;  jika  kita  di-perjamu  orang  lemak  susu  atau  ayam  puteh  ;  jika  di-bri orang  pun  serta  deripada  puteh  atau  kuning  ;  jika  di-riba-i  hilang  kanak  [-kanak] perampuan  memaling  dia,  di-bawa-nya  ka  hilir  di-taroh-nya  kapada  rumah.  orang berdinding papan  atau  buloh  ;  benda  itu  disana  di-taroh-nya  tiada  akan  hilang ; nka  sahya  lari  pergi-nya  ka  maghrib  jika  ka  baruh  [?]  di-tangkap  orang  kemdian kembali  \f\jua  kapada  ampu-nya  sahya ;  jika  warta  baik  sunggoh,  jika  warta  jahat tiada  sunggoh  ;  jika  sakit  pada  katika  itu  penyakit-nya  pada  blakang-nya  lalu \ka\  kapala-nya  kapialu  tiada  mengapa  segra  (baik)  semboh  ;  akan  penawar-nya ayam  puteh  berchampor  vierah  darah-nya  di-suratkan  'azimat  ini  rajah-nya [here  follow  the  magic  letters]  ;  jika  berpiutang  baik  ;  jika  mengadap  raja  pada katika  ini  baik ;  jika  mendatangi  orang  tiada  baik ;  jika  di-datangi  orang  pun baik,  tetapi  jika  melawan  kapada  tempat  tinggi  baik ;  \jika~\  menyabong  ayam puteh  menang,  hitam  alah ;  tatkala  melepas  dia  mengadap  ka  barat  pakeian handak  puteh  ;  jika  (merga)  [?]  menerka  puteh  kuning  (d^  deri  kanan,  merah  (di)
1  The  reading  is  doubtful ;  the  word  might  3  As  in   the  first  section  the  Naning  MS.
be  read  berhenti.  here  has  menerka.
2  U
658  APPENDIX
deri  kiri  ;  (jika l  harta  hilang,  perampuan  menchuri  dia  tiada  mengapa,  handak di  [?]  bersinggah  [?]  kembali)  ;  jika  [membuaf]  bilah  pandak  deri  kanan  panjang deri  kiri ;  jika  biji  genap  bilang-nya ;  jika  luka  hingga  prut  ka  dada-nya  ; (jika  [sakit]  akan  ubat-nya  puteh  warna-nya,  tetapi  sakit  payah  deripada  sheitan  ; jika  kekal  hilang,  maka  perampuan  dapat  jua-nya[?]).
Katika  Brahma
Bab  (ini)  pada  (menyatakan)  katika  Brahma  :  kalaktian-nya  merah ;  jika kita  berjalan  (-jalan)  bertemu  dengan  orang  (merah)  bandahara ;  bermula  pada katika  itu  amat  jahat ;  (atau  berniaga  laba  merah  ;  jika  belayer  tiada  karam padah-nya  ;  atau  bertemu  dengan  orang  bergadoh,  kita  pun  berkalah  pula  ;  jika berburu  beruleh  daging)  ;  jika  kita  di-perjamu  orang  dengan  makanan  merah atau  daging ;  jika  warta  (khabar)  baik  tidak  sunggoh,  jika  warta  jahat  (tiada) sunggoh  ;  jika  (herta)  di-riba-i  hilang  pada  katika  itu  (orang  jilas  [?]  kalau  pun  [?]) laki-laki  merah  kulit  yang  memaling  dia  atau  rambut-nya  jarang  merah  atau mata-nya  merah  (menchuri  dia)  di-baiva-nya  ka  pohon  kayu  hampir  sungei  di- taroh-nya  (di-bawah  [?]  neschaya  akan  dapat  jua  ;  jika  berprang  atau  menyabong merah  menang) ;  jika  sahya  (hamba)  lari  ka  barat  hala-nya,  (hilang;  jika  kerbau  [?] menjara  (?)  dapat ;)  jika  mengadap  raja-raja  pun  jangan ;  jika  handak  pergi kafada  kaluarga  tiada  bertemu  ;  jika  menyfrang  orang  baik ;  jika  orang  sakit pada  katika  itu  (handak  di-pleherakan  baik)  ayam  puteh  berchampor  merah  hijau maka  di-buang-buang  (adapun  akan  ubatan  merah  warna-nya  ;  jika  perampuan sakit  payah,  tiada  mengapa,  adapun  akan  berbuat  ubat  perang  warna-nya  tuboh- nya ;)  jika  berZbut  beruleh  hika ;  jika  mata-nya  kiri  atau  juru  [?]  mata-nya kiri;  jika  menyabong  ayam  merah  menang,  ayam  hijau  alah ;  melPpas  dia mengadap  ka  selatan  ;  jika  menerka  [?]  merah  deri  kanan  hijau  deri  kiri.
Katika  Bismi
Bab  (ini)  pada  (menyatakan)  katika  Bisnu  :  kalakuan-nya  hijau ;  jika  kita berjalan  bertemu  dengan  ayer  besar  atau  kita  mendapat  hujan  atau  tabuan  atau kita  bertemu  dengan  orang  (bermusoh)  berklahi  (kita  pun  serta  berkalah) ;  jika kita  di-perjamu  orang,  dengan  sayor  ;  jika  di-riba-i  hilang  laki-laki  memaling  dia atau  hamba  orang  itu  berparut  pada  tuboh-nya ;  (jika  hamba  lari  atau  kahi- langan  harta  itu  di-bawa-nya  ka  selatan  pergi-nya  tiada  mengapa)  benda  itu  di- taroh-nya  di-bawah  kayu  besar  hijau  daun-nya  hampir  sungei  di-bawah  kayu (di-bawa-nya  ka  pohon  kayu  berpuchok  merah  atau  pada  orang  itu  hitam  manis atau  pada  rumah  tempat  tebing  sungei,  disana  di-taroh-nya,  neschaya  kadapatan jua  jika  kita  berjalan  kasana  lagi  pun  ia  menyebrang  sungei  besar  ;  atau  [?]  laba kita  pun  ayer  madu  atau  ayer  susu  atau  ayer  chak  [?]  jika  [merga  ?]  satwa  [?] hijau  di  kanan,  puteh  di  kiri ;  jika  belayer  neschaya  karam  padah-nya,  atau angin  besar;  jika  sakit  payah,  jika  perampuan  yang  sakit  tiada  mengapa)  ;  jika khabar  jahat,  sunggoh,  jika  khabar  baik,  tiada  sunggoh ;  (jika  kahilangan  harta tiada  akan  dapat,  saperti  jatoh  ka  dalam  laut ;)  jika  mengadap  raja-raja  berhenti, lagi  orang  di-merka-i  raja,  atau  kita  melihat  darah ;  adapun  pada  katika  itu jangan  kita  berjalan  atau  men/bus  sahya,  jangan  kita  mendatangi  orang  baik dan  jika  di-datangi  orang  tiada  baik,  berdiam  neschaya  ada  kuat-nya,  tetapi barang  mendahului  menang,  pakeian-nya  pun  handak  juga  sa-lapis  hijau  senjata- nya  busar  baik  ;  jika  menerka  [?]  hijau  deri  kanan  puteh  kuning  deri  kiri ;  jika [membuaf]  bilah  panjang  deri  kanan  pandak  deri  kiri ;  jika  luka  lutut-nya  ka- baivah :  Allahti  a'tam  (la  hula  wa  lakut  alah  billah  'aleyhi  al-'athim  :  tamat).
1  Qu.  dia  bersunggoh.
vi  DIVINATION  659
[ccxliv]  Extract  from  the  "  Ominous  Moments"  [p.  547.
Sa'at  Fwjw/and  Sa'at  'Azrail
Jika  pada  sa'at  Yusuf  itu  baik,  jika  kita  berjalan  atau  mengadap  pada  orang besar  pun  baik,  jika  berniaga  banyak  laba  salamat ;  jika  ada  khabar  jahat  jadi baik-nya,  jika  ada  khabar  jahat  [sic]  jadi  sunggoh-nya  ;  jika  kahilangan  amas atau  perak  tiada  [di-]dapat-nya  tetapi  ka  timor  pergi-nya,  jika  di-dapat-nya terlalu  banyak  bichara-nya  kemdian  tiada  di-dapat-nya  ;  jika  pergi  prang  salamat kita  mengadap  ka  barat  dan  sakalian-nya  memakei  pakeian  kuning  insha'  Allah ta'ala.  Jika  sa'at  'Azrail  itu  jahat  mengerjakan,  yang  baik  jadi  jahat  dan  datang jamuan  tiada  buleh  laba  dan  tetapi  rugi  [?]  ;  baik  jadi  jahat  dan  nigi  yang mengambil  itu  orang  banyak  melainkan  s£rahkan  kapada  Allah  subahanahu  wa ta'ala  dan  sahaja-nya  ia  handak  membunoh  kita  ;  dan  jika  khabar  baik  tiada sunggoh  dan  khabar  jahat  sunggoh  :  jika  kita  pergi  prang  banyak  mati  atau  jadi rosakan  kapada  kita  dan  jika  ada  bichara  pada  sa'at  itu  nantikan  pada  sa'at  yang lain  karna  sa'at  itu  terlalu  jahat  :  tamat.1
[ccxlv]
Another  System
[p.  548.
Ahad
Ithnain
Thalatha
Arba'
Khamis
Jum'at
Sabtu
ampa
oral
bangkei
rezki
bangkei
rezki
ampa
bangkei
rezki
rezki
ampa
rezki
ampa
rezki
rezki
bangkei
aral
bangkei
aral
bangkei
aral
anil
rezki
ampa
rezki
ampa
rezki
rezki
rezki
ampa
rezki
aral
rezki
aral
bangkei
This  table  is  read  downwards,  in  columns.  The  parts  of  the  day  appear  to be  the  same  as  in  the  Katika  Lima.
[ccxlvi]  The  Seven  lime;
Katika  Tujoh
[There  are  two  versions  of  this  system  differing  entirely  from  each  other. The  one  has  been  alluded  to  in  the  text.  The  other  has  a  different  order,  and  is given  here.  Besides  these  two  there  is  yet  a  third,  which  is  much  longer  and  goes into  greater  detail.  It  takes  the  Celestial  bodies  in  the  reverse  order,  beginning with  Zuhal  (Saturn),  and  ending  with  Kumar  (the  Moon).]
Bab  ini  pri  mengatahui  katika  yang  tujoh  karna  Allah  ta'ala  menjadikan langit  yang  tujoh  lapis  dan  bintang  yang  tujoh  dan  hari  yang  tujoh.  Adapun bintang  yang  tujoh  pertama  nama-nya  Kamar  :  ia-nya  pada  langit  yang  pertama, adapun  warna-nya  merah  ;  apakala  melangkah  kita  pad^  katika  itu,  ada-lah barang  yang  bersua  melainkan  merah  jua,  atau  benatang  atau  buahan  atau  makan- makanan  atau  darah  atau  sakit  atau  luka  atau  ajal-nya ;  maka  jangan-lah melangkah  pada  katika  itu  karna  terlalu  jahat  katika  itu.
Bab  yang  ka-dua,  bintang  Katib  2  (?)  nama-nya,  diam-nya  [pada]  langit  yang ka-dua,  warna-nya  hitam  ;  apakala  kita  [melangkah]  pada  katika  itu,  ada-lah barang  yang  bersua  hitam  jua,  atau  orang  yang  jahil  atau  benatang  atau  buahan atau  makan-makanan  melainkan  hitam  jua  bersua,  barang  kahandak  kita  tiada sampei ;  jangan  melangkah  kita  pada  katika  itu,  atau  barang  pekerja'an  tiada jadi  ;  kembali  jua  hanya  kapada  tempat  yang  sedia.
Bab  yang  ka-tiga,  nama-nya  bintang  Zahari,3  diam-nya  pada  langit  yang ka-tiga,  warna-nya  puteh  ;  apakala  melangkah  [pada]  katika  itu  barang  bersua
1  The  substance  of  the  rest  of  this  short  treatise  will  be  found  in  the  text. -  For  'UtariJ.  3  Zuhrah.
660  APPENDIX  CHAP.
puteh  jua,  atau  orang  yang  saleh  kain-nya  puteh  atau  benatang  atau  makan- makanan  pun  puteh  ;  inilah  sa-baik-baik  langkah  pada  katika  ini  sa-baik-baik barang  pekerja'an  tiada  terbelintang  (?)  kahandak  [pada]  katika  itu.
Bab  yang  ka-ampat  nama  bintang-nya  Shams,  warna-nya  hijau ;  diam-nya pada  langit  yang  ka-ampat  ;  apakala  melangkah  kita  pada  katika  itu  ada-lah kras  uleh  kita  atau  bersua  dengan  orang  yang  besar-besar,  atau  benatang  yang besar,  atau  ular  yang  besar-besar,  atau  angin  yang  besar-besar,  atau  barang sabagei-nya  besar-besar  jua,  hijau-hijau  warna-nya ;  pada  katika  itulah  kita hanya  pekerja'an  jangan-lah  melangkah  karna  kusmus  (?)  pada  katika  itu ; wa'llahu  a'lam.
Bab  yang  ka-lima,  nama  bintang-nya  Marikh,1  warna-nya  merah,  hitam, hijau,  biru ;  diam-nya  pada  langit  yang  ka-lima ;  pada  katika  itu  sakalian pekerja'an  itu  amat  binasa,  hanya  barang  yang  bersua  ada-lah  benatang  yang bika-bika  (?)  atau  orang  binasa  atau  luka,  atau  merugi,  atau  sakit  atau kadatangan  ajal  atau  binasa ;  sakali-kali  jangan  kita  melangkah  pada  katika  itu atau  berbuatan  kita  binasa  jua,  hanya  atau  hampir  ajal-nya  datang  :  wa'llahu a'lam.
Bab  yang  ka-'nam,  warna-nya  puteh  kuning ;  nama  bintang[- nya] Mushtari,  diam-nya  pada  langit  yang  ka-'nam,  warna-nya  puteh  kuning  ;  apakala melangkah  kita  pada  katika  itu,  ada-lah  langkah  rezki  dan  barang  yang  bersua puteh  kuning  jua,  orang  atau  benatang  atau  makan  -  makanan  atau  barang pekerja'an  atau  [?] ;  ada-lah  pada  langkahan  ini  salamat ;  dan  sa-baik-baik langkah  pada  katika  itu  dan  barang  yang  di-kahandak-nya  ada-lah  di-perlakukan Allah  ta'ala,  apakala  melangkah  pada  katika  itu  insha'  Allah  ta'ala  suka'an  [di-] per  [-uleh]  :  wa'llahu  a'lam.
Bah  yang  ka-tujoh,  nama  bintang-nya  Zahal,2  diam-nya  pada  langit  yang ka-tujoh,  warna-nya  puteh,  kuning,  hitam,  hijau,  merah,  dan  barang  pekerja'an pada  katika  itu  atau  perlangkahan  baik  pun  ada  jahat  pun  ada  tetapi  jahat deripada  baik  sangat  :  wa'llahu  a'lam.
[ccxlvii]  Lucky  and  Unlucky  Days  of  the  Week  [p.  549.
Fasal  pada  menyatakan  malam  Ahad  terlalu  baik,  barang  di-chita-mu  segra di-peruleh  :  demkian-lah  padah-nya  ;  dan  jika  pada  malam  Ithnin  itupun  terlalu baik  barang  pinta-mu  segra  di-peruleh  ;  demkian-lah  padah-nya  ;  dan  jika  pada malam  Thalatha  baik  juga  'alamat  akan  menjadi  mentri  atau  penghulu  besar  : demkian-lah  padah-nya  ;  dan  jika  pada  malam  Arba'  orang  itu  jadi  pertapa, jika  jahil  jadi  jahat,  padah-nya  ;  dan  jika  pada  malam  Khamis  baik  barang  yang melihat  jadi  dia  jadi  kasih,  padah-nya  ;  dan  jika  pada  malam  Jum'at  terlalu amat  baik  akan  beruleh  sukachita,  padah-nya;  dan  jika  pada  malam  Sabtu 'alamat  beruleh  berkat  dan  salamat  di-bri  Allah  ta'ala.
Amin  !  Ya  Rabb'-al-'alamin.
[ccxlviii]  Days  -which  are  Unlucky  in  certain  Months  only
Dan  lagi  nahas  pada  bulan  yang  dua-b'las  itu  pada  tiap-tiap  bulan  : — Pertama-tama  pada  bulan  Muharram  kapada  5  hari  bulan  nahas  dan  kapada 1 5  pun  nahas  juga ;  dan  kapada  bulan  Safar  i  hari  bulan  nahas  dan  kapada 3  hari  bulan  pun  nahas  juga ;  dan  kapada  bulan  Rabi'-al-awal  kapada  I  hari bulan  nahas,  kapada  2  hari  bulan  pun  nahas  juga;  dan  kapada  bulan  Rabi'-al- akhir  I  hari  bulan  nahas  kapada  7  hari  bulan  pun  nahas  juga  ;  dan  kapada  bulan Jumada  - '1-awal  2  hari  bulan  nahas  kapada  15  hari  bulan  pun  nahas  ;  dan kapada  bulan  Jumada-'l-akhir  2  hari  bulan  nahas,  kapada  4  hari  bulan  pun nahas;  dan  kapada  bulan  Rejab  II  hari  bulan  nahas  kapada  13  hari  bulan
1  Mirrikh.  2  Zuhal.
vi  DIVINA  TION  661
nahas  juga  ;  dan  kapada  bulan  Sha'ban  3  hari  bulan  nahas  kapada  4  hari  bulan pun  nahas  dan  [?]  hari-nya  pun  nahas  juga ;  dan  kapada  bulan  Ramthan pada  9  hari  bulan  nahas  kapada  20  hari  bulan  nahas  ;  dan  kapada  bulan  Shawal 6  hari  bulan  nahas,  kapada  7  hari  bulan  pun  nahas  ;  dan  kapada  bulan  Zu-'l- Ka'idah  2  hari  bulan  nahas,  kapada  9  hari  bulan  pun  nahas ;  dan  kapada  bulan Zu-'l-Haji1  6  liari  bulan  nahas,  kapada  7  hari  bulan  pun  nahas  juga ;  wa'llahu a'lam  bi-'l-sawab,  telah  di-wasiatkan  Nabi  sail'  Allahu  'aleyhi  wa'1-salam  kapada Amir  Al-Mu'minfin]  'All,  rathi  Allah  'anahu  ajm'ain  kapada  tiap-tinp  bulan punya  nahas,  yang  besar  didalam  satu  tahun  nahas  dua-puloh  anipat  kali  24  yang besar  ada-nya  :  wa'llahu  a'lam.
[ccxlix]  Days  Unlucky  in  any  Month
Ini  nahas  pada  tiap  -  tiap  bulan  :  —  Pertama-tama  kapada  tiga  hari  bulan di-k'luarkan  Allah  ta'ala  Nabi  Allah  Adam  'aleyhi  al-salam  deri  dalam  shurga ; dan  kapada  lima  hari  bulan  di-karamkan  Allah  ta'ala  kaum  Nabi  Allah  Noh 'aleyhi  al-salam  ;  dan  kapada  tiga-b'las  hari  bulan  di-buangkan  Allah  ta'ala  akan Nabi  Allah  Yusuf  di-buang  uleh  saudara-nya  kadalam  telaga  ;  dan  kapada salekor  hari  bulan  di-karamkan  Allah  ta'ala  Per'aun  ka-dalam  sungei  Nil ;  dan kapada  ampat  lekor  hari  bulan  di-telan  uleh  ikan  Nabi  Allah  Yunas,  'aleyhi al-salam  didalam  laut  ;  dan  kapada  lima  lekor  hari  bulan  tatkala  itu  sumbing gigi  Rasul  Allah  sail'  Allahu  'aleyhi  wa'1-salam.
[ccl]  Lticky  and  Unlucky  Months
(Mtiharram  is  missing ;  it  is  generally  believed  to  be  lucky]
Fasal  pada  menyatakari  bulan  Safar,  orang  beruleh  dukachita  lagi  (lagi) kasakitan  handak-lah  membri  sedekah  tujoh  kali  pada  sabulan  demkian-lah  itu padah-nya.  Jika  pada  bulan  Rabi'-al-awal  maha  baik  orang  itu  beruleh  sukachita dan  semper[na]  dunia  akhirat  padah-nya.  Jikalau  pada  bulan  Rabi'-al-akhir itu  pun  baik  terlalu  sukachita  dan  lagi  di-puji  orang  [itu  ?]  uleh  sagala  taulan handaki-nya  (?)  kasih  padah-nya.  Jika  pada  bulan  Jumada-'l-awal  itu  pun, handak-lah  juga  orang  itu  beruleh  laba  demkian-lah  padah-nya.  Jika  pada bulan  Jumada-'l-akhir  'alamat  akan  beruleh  kernia  raja  atau  mentri  demkian-lah padah-nya.  Jika  pada  bulan  Rejab  'alamat  orang  itu  akan  beruleh  khabar  benar dan  n'emat  di-b'ri  Allah  ta'ala  orang  itu  demkian-lah  padah-nya.  Dan  jika pada  bulan  Sha'ban  'alamat  orang  itu  akan  saperti  di-pleherakan  Jibrail  'aleyhi al-salam  datang  pada  orang  itu,  barang  yang  di-pinta-nya  di-peruleh-nya  pada Allah  ta'ala,  demkian  padah-nya.  Jika  pada  bulan  Ramthan  maha  baik  di-bri Allah  ta'ala  pahala  Mikail  'aleyhi  al-salam  handak-lah  orang  itu  berbuat  benar demkian-lah  padah-nya.  Jika  pada  bulan  Shawal  'alamat  pahala  saperti  Israfil 'aleyhi  al-salam,  orang  itu  akan  memegang  karaja'an  yang  benar  demkian-lah padah-nya.  Jika  pada  bulan  Zu'1-Ka'idah  inilah  besar  pahala -nya  saperti 'Izrail  'aleyhi  al-salam  di-bri  Allah  ta'ala  akan  orang  itu,  amanat  handak-lah juga  membunoh  demkian-lah  padah-nya.  Jika  pada  bulan  Zu'1-Haji  terlalu amat  baik,  di-bri  Allah  ta'ala  pahala-nya  saperti  'Umar  ibni  Al-Khattab  akan katika  pahala-nya,  saperti  Ashmat  (?)  ibni  Afan  (?)  pahala-nya,  saperti  Amir-al- Mu'min[in]  'aleyhi  rathi  Allah  'asanat  (?),  di-negrahkan  Allah  ta'ala  orang  itu ada-nya.
[ccli]  Times  when  Storms  are  to  be  expected
Dan  lagi  fasal  nahas  angin  pada  tiap-tiap  bulan  angin  besar  akan  turun  : — Bermula  jikalau  bulan  Muharram  kapada  27  atau  28  turun  angin  ;  dan  jikalau
1  Or  Zu-'l-hijjah.
662  APPENDIX  CHAP.
bulan  Safar  kapada  25  turun  angin ;  dan  jikalau  bulan  Rabi'-al-awal  23  tuir.n angin;  dan  jikalau  bulan  Rabi'-al-akhir  21  atau  24  turun  angin;  dan  jikalau bulan  Jumada-'l-awal  kapada  9  hari  bulan  turun  angin  ;  dan  jikalau  bulan Jumada-'l-akhir  kapada  16  atau  20  hari  bulun  turun  angin  ;  dan  jikalau  bulan Rejab  kapada  9  hari  bulan  turun  angin  ;  dan  jikalau  bulan  Sha'ban  kapada  13 hari  bulan  turun  angin  ;  dan  jikalau  bulan  Ramthan  kapada  1 1  hari  bulan  atau kapada  14  hari  bulan  turun  angin  ;  dan  jikalau  bulan  Shawal  kapada  9  hari  bulan atau  12  hari  bulan  turun  angin  ;  dan  jikalau  kapada  bulan  Zu-'l-ka'idah  kapada 7  hari  bulan  atau  kapada  15  hari  bulan  atau  kapada  1 6  hari  bulan  turun  angin  ; dan  jikalau  kapada  bulan  Zu-'l-haji  [kapada]  5  hari  bulan  atau  8  hari  bulan  turun angin  :  wa'llahu  a'lam  bi'1-sawab.
[cclii]  Omens  [p.  550.
Depending  on  the  day  of  the  Week  which  begins  the  Year
Bab  ini  pada  menyatakan  'alamat  kapala  tahun.  Bermula  kapada  bulan  itu Muharram,  jika  Ahad  sa-hari  bulan  Muharram  'alamat  raja  didalam  negri  itu akan  'adil  hukum-nya  ada-nya.  Dan  jikalau  hari  Ithnin  sa-hari  bulan  Muharram 'alamat  banyak  kasakitan  orang  didalam  negri  itu  ada-nya.  Dan  jikalau  hari Thalatha  sa-hari  bulan  Muharram  'alamat  melihat  tumpah  darah  didalam  negri itu  ada-nya.  Dan  jikalau  hari  Arba'  sa-hari  bulan  Muharram  'alamat  pandita akan  datang  ka  negri  itu  ada-nya.  Dan  jikalau  hari  Khamis  sa-hari  bulan Muharram  'alamat  dagang  akan  datang  ka  negri  itu  ada-nya.  Dan  lagi  jikalau hari  Jum'at  sa-hari  bulan  Muharram  'alamat  banyak  orang  kaya-kaya  akan  sakit atau  mati  didalam  negri  itu  ada-nya.  Dan  lagi  jikalau  hari  Sabtu  sa-hari  bulan Muharram  'alamat  banyak  menuntut  harta  didalam  negri  itu  atau  didalam  dunia ini,  dan  aniaya-aniaya  hukum-nya  :  wa'llahu  a'lam,  tamat.
[ccliii]  Omens
Depending  on  the  Letter  which  the  Year  bears  in  the  Cycle  of  Eight
Dan  lagi  pada  menyatakan  laksana  tahun  :  jikalau  tahun  itu  Alif,  benatang- nya  tikus,  laksana  dingin,  hujan  pun  banyak,  ayer  sungei  pun  besar,  huma  ladang pun  jadi,  tanam-tanaman  pun  jadi  ada-nya.
Dan  jikalau  tahun  itu  Ha,  benatang-nya  harimau,  laksana  panas,  orang  muda- muda  pun  banyak  mati,  orang  berniaga  pun  banyak,  huma  ladang  pun  jadi  ada- nya.
Dan  jikalau  tahun  itu  Jim,  benatang-nya  pelandok,  laksana  korang  kuat panas,  manusia  banyak  sakit  dan  angin  pun  besar  ada-nya.
Dan  jikalau  tahun  itu  Zei,  benatang-nya  naga,  laksana  dingin,  huma  ladang pun  jadi  akan  tetapi  banyak  orang  lapar,  manusia  pun  banyak  huru-hara  kemdian baik  ada-nya.
Dan  jikalau  tahun  itu  Dal  awal,  benatang-nya  ular,  laksana  dingin,  orang pun  banyak  sakit,  hujan  pun  banyak  dengan  ribut  ada-nya.
Dan  jikalau  tahun  itu  Ba,  benatang-nya  kambing,  laksana  lapar,  manusia orang  pun  banyak  sakit,  hujan  pun  korang,  sungei  pun  kring,  kanak-kanak  banyak jadi,  manusia  banyak  kasukaran  dan  duka  hati  (?)  kahandak  padah-nya  ada-nya.
Dan  jikalau  tahun  itu  Wau,  benatang-nya  ayam,  laksana  dingin,  orang  ber- niaga deri  jauh  banyak  datang,  'wang  itu  sakejap  sahaja  banyak,  tetapi  manusia banyak  bersalahan  sebab  tiada  berbuat  kabaktian  kapada  Allah  ta'ala  ;  angin  pun korang  ada-nya.
Dan  jikalau  tahun  itu  Dal  akhir,  benatang-nya  rusa,  laksana  terlalu  panas, hujan  pun  sadikit-sadikit,  huma  ladang  pun  jadi,  tetapi  banyak  orang  di-kuto'ki Allah  ta'ala  sebab  tiada  berkabenaran  ;  itulah  ada-nya  :  wa'llahu  a'lam.
DIVINA  TION  663
There  appears  to  be  another  version  of  this  Cycle,  in  which  the  years  are  sym- bolised by  different  animals,  viz.  : —
Alif  by  the  Buffalo  (?),  Ha  by  the  Buffalo  or  Bullock,  Jim  by  the  Tiger  and the  Dog,  Zei  by  the  Mouse-deer  and  the  Pig,  Dal  awal  by  the  Crocodile  and  the Dragon  (naga),  Ba  by  the  Dragon  and  the  Lion,  Wau  by  the  Horse  and  the 1  lawk  (htlang),  and  Dai  akhir  by  the  Flying-fox  (kubong)  and  the  Dog.
[ccliv]  Extract  from  the  "  Twelve  Constellations  "
Bintang  Dua~tflas
Maka  handak-lah  kita  abjadkan  huruf  nama  perampuan  dan  nama  laki-laki clan  serta  ibu-nya,  maka  buang  dua-b'las  dua-b'las  :  berapa  yang  tinggal  itulah nama-nya  bintang  orang  itu  laki-laki  atau  perampuan  :  jika  tinggal  satu,  Hamal nama  bintang-nya,  jika  tinggal  [dud],  Thaur  nama  bintang -nya,  demkian-lah lihat  pada  sharat-nya  itu.1
Bab  yang  pertama,  jika  berbintang  Hamal,  laksana  api  naraka,  dan  nabi-nya Adam  'aleihi-'l-salam,  binatang-nya  biri-biri,  guru-nya  tikus,  burong-nya  rajawali, kayu-nya  khorma,  teman-nya  Mizan,  satru-nya  'Akrab,  berkata-kata  karang(?), warna  tuboh-nya  puteh  atau  hitam  :  wa'llahu  a'lam.  Bermula  orang  itu  tuboh- nya  sadarhana  lagi  rendah  rambuni  dan  sir(?)-nya  tersangat  panas  deripada  dingin dan  orang  itu  perkata'an-nya  benar  lagi  pula  suroh-surohan  orang  dan  bhagi-nya saperti  ayer  didalam  timba  rezki-nya.  Bermula  ada  parut  pada  tuboh-nya  maha besar  atau  tahi  lalat,  dan  orang  itu  tiada  mufakat  dengan  kulawarga-nya  sagala sahabat-nya,  tetapi  orang  itu  kras,  satru-nya  pun  alah  pada-nya,  sabermula  orang itu  jangan  ia  berlayer,  baik  ia  berniaga  didalam  negri,  karna  rasi-nya  api  karna satru-nya  ayer,  dan  kahidopan-nya  pula  kuning  serta  puteh  dan  jikalau  berhuma kapala  benih-nya  kuning  baik  didalam  pada  itu  :  wa'llahu  a 'lam.  Bermula  orang itu  bulan  yang  baik  pada-nya  Muharram,  hari-nya  Thalatha,  dan  bulan  yang jahat  pada-nya  Safar,  hari-nya  Ithnain,  clan  jika  sakit  ambil  daging  kambing merah  di-sembilihkan  dan  di-rendang  dengan  minyak  maka  di-makan  daging-nya, jangan  bergaram  minyak-nya,  sapukan  pada  sagala  tuboh-nya  'alamat-nya  orang itu  penyakit-nya  di  prut  dan  ka  hulu  hati,  insha'  Allah  ta'ala  'afiat ;  dan  jika handak  memakei  chinchin  kuning  permata-nya  baik  pada-nya  dan  gha[ib?] sheitan-nya  pula  orang  itu  uleh  itulah  yang  hampir  pada-nya  dan  tempat  sheitan itu  pada  sagala  pohun  kayu  di-sana-lah  tempat  'kau  diam  barang  siapa  laki-laki dan  perampuan  berbintang  Hamal  lain  ka  sana  apabila  'kau  lihat  tiada  menygbut nama  Allah  dan  nama  Rasul  Allah  maka  maka  'kau  tangkap-lah  'kau  persakit- sakitkan  sagala  tuboh-nya  terlalu  sakit-nya ;  jika  ia  sakit  ayer  mata-nya  pun  men- gilir  dan  lidah-nya  'kau  pandakkan  tiada-lah  buleh  berkata-kata  dan  ubat-nya ambil  paroh  enggang  dan  kunyet  kring  dan  bawang  merah  dan  daun  Inning  (?) clan  daun  mengkudu  maka  di-salimutkan  dengan  kain  puteh  maka  di-hasabkan [sic]  di-bawah-nya  dan  bachakan  do 'a  ini  ambuskan  deri  kapala-nya  sampei kapada  kaki-nya,  tatkala  mengubat  itu  petang  Khamis  atau  Sabtu  maka  sapukan minyak  itu  pada  kapala-nya  kemdian  mandikan  dengan  ayer  bermalam  :  insha' Allah  ta'ala  'afiat  :  inilah  'azimat-nya.
Bismillahi  U-rahmani  'l-rahimi
[Here  comes  an  Arabic  prayer  or  text,  followed  by  four  six-pointed  stars,  each formed  by  putting  an  equilateral  triangle  on  the  top  of  another ;  then  come  six sets  of  "magic  letters."]
Bermula  beranak,  jika  laki-laki  yang  baik  nama-nya  Ya'kub  atau  Endin  atau
1  Inserted  from  another  version,  which  also  gives  the  numbers  of  the  Abjad  ;  for  these  vide Hughes'  Diet,  of  I  slain,  s.v.
664
APPENDIX
CHAP.
'Abdullah  atau  'Abdulsamad  atau  Saif  atau  Ahmad,  jika  perampuan  Maimunah atau  Salamah  atau  'Ayesha,  didalam  pada  itu  wa'llahu  a'lam.
[This  constitutes  the  first  part  of  the  treatise,  which  consists  of  twelve  parts of  about  the  same  size.  The  names  of  the  Zodiacal  signs  are  the  Arabic  ones  : Hamal  (the  Ram),  Thaur  (the  Bull),  etc.  They  will  be  found  in  Hughes'  Diet, of  Islam,  s.v.  Zodiac.]
[cclv]
The  Hindu  Nakshatras  and  the  Malay  Rejangs.
551-
Figures  of  the            Figures  of  t  lie
Figures  of  the            Figures  of  the
Nakshatras                  Rejangs
Nakshatras                   Rejangs
I.  Horse's  head       Horse  (kudo)
17.  Row  of  oblations  Kite  or  eagle  (lang)
2.  Yoni                    Deer  (kijang)
1  8.  Ring                    Centipede  (lipan)
3.  Razor  or  knife    Tiger  (harimau)
19.  Lion's  tail           ?  Turtle  (baning  or
4.  Wheeled             Cat  (kuching}
tuntong  ?)
carriage
20.  Couch                 Ghost     or     Demon
5.  Antelope's  head  Cow  (sapi)
(hantu)
6.  Gem                     Buffalo  (kerbau)
21.  Elephant's          Charcoal  (arang)
7.  House                  Rat  (tiktts)
tooth
8.  Arrow                  Ox  (lembu}
22.  Triangular  nut    Man  (prang)
9.  Potter's  wheel    Dog  (anjing)
23.  Three  footsteps  Sea  (lauf)
10.  House                  Dragon  (naga)
24.  Drum                  ?  Skate  (part?)
II.  Couch  or    bed-  Goat  (kambing}
25.  Circle                  ?  (pasik?)
stead
26.  Figure  with        ?  (gunong  or  enggo-
12.  Bed                     Palm-blossom
double  face         nong  ?)
(mayang)
27.  Couch  or  bed     ?  (gula  or  kaldei?)
13.  Hand                   Elephant  (gajah)
28.  Tabor1                Green  pigeon
14.  Pearl                   Lion  (singa)
(punai)
15.  Coral  bead          Fish  (ikan)
29.  [None]                Leaf  (daun)
1  6.  Festoon               Pig  (babi)
30.  [None]                 ?  (sani?)
[Where  a  query  appears  in  the  Rejang in  the  MS.  is  doubtful.]
column  it  indicates  that  the  reading
[cclvi]
Extracts  from  the  Rejang  of  Che  Busu
552.
Che  Busu  pandei  bilang  malam  ;
Malam  ini  malam  ka-sa  :
Chabut  sa-pedang  dewasa
Handak  memarang  2  bandar  sa-buah,
Hidup  kita  sama  biasa
Chakap  sa-patah  jangan  di-ubah.
Che  Busu  pandei  bilang  malam  : Malam  ini  malam  ka-'nam  : Che  Andak,  orang  Bernam, Singgah  di  Pangkor  menjemor  jala, Anjing  menyalak,  rimau  pun  demam  (?),
Kuching  di  dapor  pening  kapala. Deri  Kling  lalu  ka  Jawa Naik  sigei  ka  atas  atap, Ikan  kring  lagi  tertawa, Mendengar  tupei  membacha  kitab.
Che  Busu  pandei  bilang  malam  : Malam  ini  ka-tiga-puloh  : Tamat  rejang  tiga  puloh, Hati  dalam  hanchorkan  luloh, Di-ambil  papan  berlanteikan  buloh, Koyakkan  kain  bekas  tuboh.
[cclvii]        Omens  depending  on  Aspect  which  varies  from  Day  to  Day      [p.  559.
Pengadapan  Nabi
Fasal  ini  pada  menyatakan  Nabi-nabi  punya  pengadapan  kapada  hari  yang tujoh  masing-masing  dengan  adap-nya.
1  VromLi/eanii  Essayso/H.  T.  Colebrooke,  2  Qu.  meinerang  from  prang,  or  memarang
vol.  iii.  p.  284.  from  parang  ?
vi  OMENS  665
Bermula  kapada  hari  Ahad  Nabi  Allah  Adam  'aleyhi  al-salam  mengadap  ka timer  laut  ;  dan  kapada  hari  Ithnin  Nabi  Allah  Musa  'aleyhi  al-salam mengadap  ka  timor  tepat  ;  dan  kapada  hari  Thalatha  Nabi  Allah  'Isa  'aleyhi al-salam  mengadap  ka  tenggara  ;  dan  kapada  hari  Arba'  Nabi  Allah  Ibrahim 'aleyhi  al-salam  mengadap  ka  selatan  ;  dan  kapada  hari  Khamis  Yunus  menga- dap ka  barat  daya  ;  dan  kapada  hari  Jum'at  Nabi  Muhammad  sail'  Allahu 'aleyhi  wa'1-salam  mengadap  ka  barat  t£pat  ;  dan  kapada  hari  Sabtu  Nabi Allah  [?]  'aleyhi  al-salam  mengadap  ka  utara  ada-nya.
Itulah  hari  yang  tersebut  katahui  uleh-mu,  hei,  Talib  sakalian-nya  itu didalam-nya  jangan  bersia-sia  ada-nya.
Besides  the  above,  there  are  other  systems  of  Omens  from  Aspect :  e.g.  one in  which  the  figure  is  a  Dragon  (naga)  which  changes  its  position  at  the  end  of every  three  months  of  the  Muhammadan  calendar.  This  system  applies  especially to  warfare  ;  thus,  it  is  ruinous  to  approach  an  enemy  from  the  point  of  the compass  to  which  the  mouth  of  the  Dragon  is  pointing,  but  good  to  come  from the  quarter  towards  which  its  back  is  turned,  and  so  on.
Another,  the  Rajal-al-ghaib,  begins  thus  : —
Fasal  pada  menyatakan  edaran  Rajal-al-ghaib  : J  ia-itu  yang  di-kata  Rajal-al- ghaib  itu  jinazah  Sayidna  'Ali  ibn  Abu  Talib  radhi  Allah  'anahu,  ia-itu  di-arak uleh  sagala  malaikat  ampat  penjuru  dunia  ini  ;  itulah  kita  katahui,  jikalau berhadap  dengan  jinazah  itu  neschaya  lemah  kita  dan  jikalau  berprang  atau berklahi  alah  kita ;  ia-itu  itulah  handak  kita  katahui  supaya  semperna  perbuatan kita  dengan  berkat  shefa'at  Nabi  kita  Muhammad  sail'  Allahu,  d.s.b.  dan dengan  berkat  Rajal-al-ghaib  itu.  [The  rest  of  the  account  specifies  the  aspect towards  which  the  "  bier  "  faces  on  the  several  days  of  the  month,  and  directs  it to  be  solemnly  saluted  (membri  salam).  An  elaborate  diagram  follows,  con- structed on  the  same  principle  as  the  aspect-compasses  illustrated  in  the  text.]
[cclviii]      Fragment  of  a  Treatise  on  Omens  drawn  from  Earthquakes      [p.  561.
Bab  ini  pri  menyatakan  ta'bir  gempa  baik  dan  jahat  :  bermula  jika  pada bulan  Muharram  gempa  pada  siang  hari,  perchinta'an  pada  orang  banyak  padah- nya  ;  dan  jika  pada  malam  gempa,  perchinta'an  pada  [?],  ada  bras  padi  pun mahal,  orang  sakalian  duka  chita.  .  .  .
[cclix]  End  of  a  Treatise  on  Omens  drawn  from  Lightning
Bab  jika  pada  hari  Sabtu  halilintar  memblah  (?),  neschaya  akan  bertambah kabesaran  raja  dalam  negri  itu  :  jika  pagi  hari  ia  memblah,  'alamat  musoh  akan datang ;  jika  tengah  hari  ia  memblah,  'alamat  tiada  mufakat  isi  negri  itu  ;  jika waktu  'asr  halilintar  memblah,  'alamat  tiga  perkara  akan  datang,  suatu  sampar dan  ka-dua  kapar  (?)  ka-tiga  orang  dalam  negri  itu  handak  berbunohan  sama sendiri-nya  tetapi  handak-lah  membri  derma  akan  sagala  fakir  miskin  supaya terplehera  orang  [deri-]pada  kajahatan  itu  :  wa'llahu  a'lam  :  tamat.
[cclx]  Omens  from  Lizards,  and  the  like
Bab  ini  pri  laksana-nya  chichak  atau  tikus  atau  ular  atau  bengkarong  atau barang  yang  ampat  kaki-nya  itu  sama,  dan  jika  jatoh  d(er)i  kapala  kita  pada  hari Ahad  kita  takut  padah-nya,  dan  jika  pada  hari  Ithnain  satru  kita  akan  binasa padah-nya  dan  jika  pada  hari  Thalatha  bapa  kita  mati  padah-nya,  dan  jika [pada]  hari  Arba'  anak  akan  mati  padah-nya,  dan  jika  pada  hari  Khamis kulawarga  akan  mati  padah-nya,  dan  jika  pada  hari  Jnm'at  kerbau  atau  lembu atau  kambing  bercherei  dengan  kita  padah-nya  dan  jika  pada  hari  Sabtu  diri
1  Lit.  the  Invisible  (or  Hidden)  Man.
666  APPENDIX  CHAP.
kita  akan  mati  padah-nya,  dan  jika  jatoh  di  kanan  kita  ada  laba  padah-nya  pada kita  dan  jika  jatoh  di  kiri  kita  berchinta  mashghrul  padah-nya,  dan  jika  jatoh di  blakang  kita,  kita  akan  kahilangan  padah-nya  :  wa  llahu  a'lam  :  tamat.
[cclxi]  Interpretation  of  Dreams  [p.  562.
(by  the  initial  letter  of  the  object}
Bab  ini  pri  mengatahui  ta'fbir]  mimpi  baik  dan  jahat  :  maka  lihat  pada huruf-nya  itu,  pertama  melihat  huruf  mula-nya  barang  mana  kita  handak  katahui supaya  beruleh  kabajikan  insha1  Allah  ta'ala  beruleh  salamat.  [Alif  is  wanting, and  the  next  section  is  imperfect.  The  original  MS.  from  which  this  is  copied was  no  doubt  damaged  in  this  part.]  Jika  bermimpi  Ba  terlalu[?]'ali  rafa'at al-hajat  (?)  Jika  bermimpi  Ta,  terlalu  amat  baik  langkap  beruleh  kabajikan dengan  rahmat  Tuhan  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Tha,  barang-barang  'kau kerja  itu  ingat-ingat  jangan  di-perbuat  neschaya  menyesal  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Jim,  ingat-ingat-lah  angkau  (sagala  bala)  itu  banyak  handak sabar  ada-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Ha  ada  orang  deri  jauh  datang  padah-nya. Jika  bermimpi  Za  terlalu  baik  'alamat  akan  beruleh  rahmat  dan  shefa'at  padah- nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Ra,  barang  kerjakan-lah  sakahandak  hati-mu  'alamat  segra angkau  peruleh  atau  laba  yang  besar  'kau  peruleh  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi Zei,  angkau  kadatangan  kiriman  atau  mendapat  perampuan  yang  baik  paras padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Sin,  barang  kita  kerja  baik  padah-nya,  kahandak itu  segra  di-peruleh.  Jika  bermimpi  Shin,  barang  kerja-mu  itu  dengan  sabar kalau  datang  sesal  kapada  mu  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Sod,  barang  kerja-mu 'kau  perbuatkan  (jemu  itu)  baik  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Thod,  barang kerja-mu  itu  jadi  beruleh  sukachita  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Tau,  barang kerja  'kau  peruleh  dengan  suka  chita  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Thau,  baik sakalian  kerja-mu  itu  berkahandak  segra  'kau  peruleh  padah-nya.  Jika bermimpi  'Ain,  segra  beruleh  lagi  beruleh  laba  'kau  peruleh  padah-nya.  Jika bermimpi  Chain,  barang  kerja-mu  jangan  angkau  perbuat,  terlalu  amat  beruleh gusar  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Pa,1  ada-lah  orang  kerja  'kau  datang  pada  mu  membawa  laba padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Kof,  ada-lah  orang  membawa  khabar  yang  baik padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Kaf,  angkau  akan  beruleh  'negrah  deripada  Raja  atavi  Mentri padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Lam,  handak-lah  angkau  membri  sedekah  pada fakir  miskin  demkian-lah  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Mim,  'alamat  angkau beruleh  bhagia  padah-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  Nun,  'alamat  kadatangan  sukachita padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Wau,  'alamat  kita  [  ?  ].  Jika  bermimpi  Ha,  'alamat orang  besar -besar  datang  pada  mu,  beruleh  laba  angkau  padah-nya.  Jika bermimpi  Lam-Alif,  terlalu  baik  ada  khabar  yang  terbunyi  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Ya,  terlalu  baik  'alamat  beruleh  'negrah  deripada  Allah subhana  wa  ta'ala  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Cha,  'alamat  angkau  melihat  orang  membawa  khabar  yang baik  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Tha,2  'alamat  melainkan  melihat  orang  miskin  datang padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Nga,  'alamat  ada  khabar  pada  mu  terlalu  sukachita  hati-mu mendengarkan  khabar  itu  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Pa(?),  ada  perampuan  baik  kasih  pada  mu  barang  kahandak- mu  diturut-nya  demkian  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  Ga,  'alamat  melihat  orang  berklahi  serta  angkau  ingat-ingat demkian  padah-nya.
1  Probably  fa  is  intended,  v.  inf.  2  Qu\  TJuil  or  Dal.
vi  DREAMS  667
Jika  bermimi'i  Ny.i,  terlalu  amat  baik  mimpi  iNya  itu,  angkau  akan  beruleh surat  yang  gharib,  demkian-lah  arti  inhnpi  itu  insha'  Allah  ta'ala  ada-nya.
[cclxii]  Another  System  of  Interpreting  Dreams
Adapun  kata  sagala  'ulama  dan  hukama  dan  kata  sidang  budiman  : — Ada  mitnpi  raja  lebeh  deripada  mimpi  pandita ;  adapun  mimpi  pandita  labeh deripada  mimpi  mentri  ;  [adapun  mimpi  mentri]  lebeh  deripada  mimpi  orang kaya-kaya  ;  [adapun]  mimpi  orang  kaya  itu  lebeh  deripada  mimpi  orang  yang 'alim-'alim;  [adapun  mimpi  orang  'alim]  lebeh  [deripada]  mimpi  [orang] petapa'an  ;  [adapan  mimpi  orang  petapa'an]  lebeh  deripada  mimpi  hamba  orang dan  mimpi  [hamba]  orang  lebeh  deripada  mimpi  orang  jahil  :  wa'llahu  a'lam bi'1-sawab,  ada-nya.
[cclxiii]  Another  System  of  Interpretation
Fasal  pada  menyatakan  bermimpi  berbagei-bagei  jinis,  ini-lah  ta'bir-nya  : kita  lihat  di-bawah  setar  ini  :  wa'llahu  a'lam.  Pertama-tama  jika  bermimpi mengaji  Koran  atau  membacha  Koran  atau  do'a  di  rumah-nya,  'alamat  beruleh 'negrah  Allah  ta'ala  atau  raja-raja,  atau  lepas  deripada  bahia  dunia  dan  akhirat ada-nya.  Jika  bermimpi  menjual  apam,  'alamat  korang  rezki-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  burong  makan  'alamat  beruleh  istri  yang  baik  'akal  bichara- nya.  Jika  bermimpi  angin  pagi-pagi  hari,  'alamat  beruleh  sukachita.
Jika  bermimpi  angin  petang  atau  bachang-bachang  di- lihat -nya,  'alamat beruleh  rahmat  lepas  deripada  sagala  bala.
Jika  bermimpi  hujan  batu,  'alamat  beruleh  harta  yang  halal  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  klam  kabut,  'alamat  akan  kembali  satru-nya  ka  negri  itu orang  pun  banyak  teraniaya-niaya  raja-raja  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  mandi  ayer  hujan  lebat,  'alamat  lepas  deripada  bala  yang besar  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  sungei  penoh  dengan  ayer-nya,  'alamat  beruleh  harta  banyak ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  telaga  penoh  dengan  ayer-nya,  'alamat  beruleh  harta  juga.
Jika  bermimpi  berenang  didalam  ayer,  'alamat  apa  kata-kata-nya  di-turut orang,  barang  yang  di-chita  di-peruleh-nya  lagi  di-perkenankan  Allah  ta'ala ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  melempah  (?)  sungei  besar,  'alamat  memgrentah  orang  kerja raja-raja  ada-nya.  Jikalau  bermimpi  menyelam  di  sungei,  'alamat  akan  beruleh ne'mat  dunia  akhirat.
Jika  bermimpi  minum  ayer  laut  terlalu  manis  atau  pahit,  'alamat  beruleh harta  dan  lepas  deripada  sagala  bahia  dan  dukachita  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  di-gantong  orang,  'alamat  lepas  deripada  hutang-nya  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  makan  nasi,  'alamat  beruleh  harta  yang  halal  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  melihat  orang  jatoh  dalam  telaga,  'alamat  di  -  perdayakan orang,  berjaga-jaga  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  melihat  burong,  mela[in]kan  beruleh  baik  jasa  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  menangkap  burong  belibis  atau  melihat  dia  'alamat  akan beruleh  dirham  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  nyamok  atau  lalat  atau  pikat  atau  maru,1  'alamat  satru-nya datang  ka  kampong  itu.
Jika  bermimpi  burong  Iain-lain,  'alamat  beruleh  sahya  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  minum  ayer  madu  atau  melihat  dia,  'alamat  bertudongan  orang kaya-kaya  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  tuma  di  kain  atau  di  baju,  'alamat  pangsa  (?)  yang  baik-baik, jikalau  (?)  ada-nya.
1  Explained  as  yang  bising.  Kl.  "plaaggee-*!."
668  APPENDIX  CHAP.
Jika  bermimpi  belalang  makan  padi,  'alamat  satru-nya  datang  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  berbang  (?)  juga  (?)  'alamat  satru-nya  kembali  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  ikan  besar  atau  kechil,  'alamat  beruleh  istri  atau  sahya  atan harta  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  menangkap  merbo'  akau  terkukur,  'alamat  akan  beruleh harta.
Jika  bermimpi  kayu  hanyut  turun,  'alamat  katurunan  kakaya'an-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  berjalan  sesat,  'alamat  perampuan  kasih  dan  sakalian-nya orang  pun  kasih.
Jika  bermimpi  naik  gajah  atau  kuda  atau  berpayong,  'alamat  barang  kerja menjadi  kasih  sakalian  orang  pun  menurut  kata-kata-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  melihat  burong  sakian  banyak,  'alamat  tampil  musoh  deri  laut datang  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  menge'rat  buloh  atau  [tu]lang  atau  minum  manisan,  'alamat kena  benchana  orang  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  kain  berbunga,  'alamat  orang  sakit  hati,  handak-lah  bersuchi diri-nya  serta  mandi  berlimau  minta  do'a  kapada  Allah  ta'ala  supaya  lepas  bala itu  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  orang  dudok  bermain-main,  'alamat  penyakit  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  ular  besar  datang  ka  rumah,  'alamat  orang  datang  deripada berlayer  atau  berjalan  beruleh  beruleh  laba  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  bermain-main  burong,  'alamat  beruleh  harta  deri  jauh  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  menaroh  prahu,  'alamat  mendengar  warta  deri  jauh  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  mendengar  bunyi  gong,  'alamat  warta  orang  mati  handak-lah bersuchi  diri-nya  serta  mandi  berlimau  supaya  lepas  deri  bahia  itu.
Jika  bermimpi  naik  ka-atas  gunong,  baik,  'umor-nya  pun  lanjut  lagi,  beruleh harta  pada  tahun  itu  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  matahari  dan  bulan  dan  bintang  saperti  susu  mentah  chhaya- nya,  maka  handak-lah  segra-lah  lari  deri  tempat  itu,  musoh  yang  amat  besar pada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  prahu  mudik  ka  hulu  sungei,  'alamat  orang  banyak  kena penyakit  didalam  negri  itu  handak-lah  bersuchi  diri-nya  serta  berlimau  memakei bauan  supaya  lepas  deripada  bahia  itu  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  makan  nangka  atau  pisang,  'alamat  susah  hati  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  makan  daging  kerbau  atau  menjabat  dia,  'alamat  [orang] berda'wa  akan  datang  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  membunoh  ular  yang  besar,  'alamat  beruleh  kakaya'an  deripada raja-raja  atau  mentri  :  [?]  w'  'aleyhi  al-salam.
Jika  bermimpi  serban  hilang  atau  di-makan  api,  'alamat  kadatangan  bahia  dan duka  handak-lah  membri  sedekah  fakir  miskin  atau  kain-kain  serta  minta  do'a kapada  Allah  supaya  lepas  bahia  itu.
Jika  bermimpi  k£mu  (?)  atau  minum  ayer  sungei,  'umor-nya  lanjut.
Jika  bermimpi  makan  nasi  atau  kunyit  nasi,  'alamat  beruleh  amas  dan perak.
Jika  bermimpi  rimau  datang  ka  rumah,  'alamat  pandita  datang  ka  rumah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  kachang  rasa-nya,  'alamat  beruleh  laba.
Jika  bermimpi  minum  'arak  atau  tuwak  atau  melihat  tuwak,  'alamat  ayer besar  atau  gempa  tanah  itu.
Jika  bermimpi  ombak  bersabong-sabong  ka  darat,  'alamat  akan  berprang  atau sampar  turun.
Jika  bermimpi  di-tandok  kerbau  naik  ka-atas  balei  atau  kayu,  'alamat  orang memanggil  makan.
Jika  bermimpi  kayu  rebah,  'alamat  orang  besar-besar  akan  mati.
Jika  bermimpi  tabuan  atau  lebah,  'alamat  kadatangan  panas  pada  bulan  itu.
Jika  bermimpi  kuching  datang  ka  rumah,  'alamat  orang  menchuri  atau  satru datang.
vi  DREAMS  669
Jika  anak  kuching  banyak,  'alamat  lepas  deripada  bahia.
Jika  bermimpi  landak  datang,  'alamat  beruleh  anak  laki-laki.
Jika  bermimpi  memegang  landak,  'alamat  beruleh  harta.
Jika  lx-rmimpi  kra  datang  ka  rumah,  'alamat  jahat  datang-nya.
Jika  [bermimpi]  bermain-main  kra,  'alamat  bersahabat  dengan  orang  dosta.
Jika  bermimpi  Iblis  atau  Sheitan  atau  hantu  satru  handak  membunoh  atau bcnchana,  'alamat  dukachita.
Jika  bermimpi  mengambil  apa-apa,  'alamat  beruleh  kabajikan.
Jika  bermimpi  menjerumat  kain,  'alamat  berklahi  dengan  orang-orang.
Jika  bermimpi  mengambil  ikan  lalu  ka  laut,  'alamat  senantiasa  minta  makan.
Jika  bermimpi  membuat  berhala,  'alamat  pekerja'an  akhirat.
Jika  bermimpi  ikan  banyak,  'alamat  musoh  datang.
Jika  bermimpi  limau,  'alamat  beruleh  amas  dan  perak.
Jika  bermimpi  berpayong,  'alamat  beruleh  kabesaran  dalam  dunia  lagi sukachita.
Jika  bermimpi  bersenda-senda  lalu  bermain  serta  menari,  'alamat  beruleh duka.
Jika  bermimpi  berklahi  dengan  orang,  'alamat  lepas  deripada  dukachita.
Jika  bermimpi  bertemu  dengan  kathi,  'alamat  beruleh  kabajikan.
Jika  bermimpi  melihat  dagang  banyak,  'alamat  beruleh  rezki  yang  halal, jika  sakit  segra  sumboh.
Jika  bermimpi  orang  mati  terhentar  di-lihat-nya  lalu  menjabat  serta- nya, 'alamat  menjadi  pekerja'an  raja-raja,  jika  didalam  negri  orang  segra  kembali.
Jika  bermimpi  berchukor  orang  kapala  atau  janggut,  'alamat  beruleh  kabajikan maha  besar  di-negrahi  Allah  ta'ala.
Jika  bermimpi  mata  buta  atau  tuli,  'alamat  duka  atau  sakit.
Jika  bermimpi  meng£rat  kuku,  'alamat  bertemu  orang-orang  deri  jauh.
Jika  bermimpi  berkain  dan  sapu-tangan  atau  ikat  pinggang,  'alamat  beruleh istri,  menjadi  penghulu,  sakalian  orang  pun  kasih.
jika  bermimpi  bersalimut  kain  puteh,  'alamat  akan  lepas  deripada  sagala penyakit  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  kain  merah,  'alamat  orang  dengki  akan  dia.
Jika  bermimpi  terpenjara,  'alamat  akan  pakerti-nya  [jahat]  sakalian  orang  pun benchi.
Jika  bermimpi  gigi  patah  yang  di-atas,  'alamat  saudara  atau  kulawarga-nya mati.
Jika  bermimpi  orang  ikat  atau  gantong,  'alamat  beruleh  laba  lagi  kabaktian.
Jika  bermimpi  di-palu  orang  berdarah,  'alamat  katurunan  [?]
Jika  bermimpi  tangan  di-kerat  orang,  'alamat  akan  datang  bahia  dan  hilang.
Jika  bermimpi  berglang  perak,  'alamat  beruleh  kakaya'an.
Tika  bermimpi  beristri,  'alamat  dukachita  padah-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  beruleh  amas  serta  perak,  'alamat  berklahi.
Jika  bermimpi  melihat  bintang  matahari,  'alamat  beruleh  kakaya'an  di-negrah Allah  ta'ala.
Jika  bermimpi  melihat  bintang  jatoh  atau  datang  atau  hu[jan  ?]  akan  nama bintang  itu,  'alamat  beranak  istri  yang  kabajikan  ada-nya.
Jika  bermimpi  jatoh  kadalam  telaga,  'alamat  beruleh  kabajikan  ada-nya.
[cclxiv]  Specimens  of  Miscellaneous  Charms  or  Recipes  [p.  567.
Bab  ini  'azimat  pengunchi  perampuan  supaya  tiada  dapat  bersuami :  di-surat pada  kalam  *  kita  bawa  juma' 2  dengan  dia  :  inilah  rajah-nya  :  h  h  h  TV  la  2  J.y Bab  ini  'azimat  perampuan  tiada  dapat  bermukah  dengan  orang  lain  deripada
1  Membrum  virile.  2  Coitus.
3  Transliteration  of  the  magic  letters  and  figures  directed  to  be  used.
670  APPENDIX  CHAP.
kita  :  di-surat  pada  kertas  maka  bri  di-pakei-nya  :  inilah  rajah-nya  :  alu  75  bis- millah  wa  Allah  s(a)l(a)ma  kamal.  .  .  .  Bab  ini  membuka  rahsia  perampuan  ; di-surat  pada  hati  tangan  (?)  taroh  atas  dada-nya  supaya  berkata-kata  sendiri-nya  : inilah  rajah-nya  :  al(a)h  gggwwwdd  and  s(a)ma  iv  w  a  d  r  'a  fa  mr  t  mh  2  jf 2luJ3()j8c)Q()'W'w  kam  2  2  him  linn  lu.  .  .  .
Ini  'azimat  kanak-kanak  jangan  menangis  malam  :  di-surat  pada  kertas  suroh pakei  :  ini  rajah-nya  [here  follow  mystic  symbols  and  figures].  Ini  'azimat  tang- kal  sawan  :  di-surat  pada  timah  hitam  maka  pakeikan  pada  budak  itu  :  ini  rajah- nya  [another  set  of  symbols,  figures,  and  letters].  ...  Ini  ubat  padi  supaya tiada  di-makan  babi  dan  tikus  dan  hulat  maka  di-surat  pada  tembikar  maka tumbok  (?)  jadikan  tampung-tampung  (?)  maka  tatkala  menugal  maka  hamborkan tampung  tembikar  itu  berkliling  huma  :  insha'  Allah  ta'ala  terplehera  deripada sagala  bahia  benatang  itu  dengan  berkat  ayat  :  ini  yang  di-surat  pada  tembikar itu  [here  follows  an  Arabic  text]  sabagei  lagi  ubat  padi  supaya  jangan  suatu penyakit-nya  maka  di-surat  pada  kertas  maka  bubohkan  di  tengah  huma  tatkala kita  menugal  :  insha'  Allah  ta'ala  salamat,  suatu  pun  tiada  penyakit-nya  padi  itu  : ini  rajah-nya  yang  di-surat  [the  diagram  is  (i)  a  magic  square  of  4x4:  in  each of  the  sixteen  divisions  is  a  small  circle  ;  the  ends  of  all  the  lines  forming  the square  zx&fleury,  as  the  heralds  would  call  it ;  (2)  a  smaller  square  containing four  mystic  symbols].
[cclxv]        Ambil  Semangat  Orang,  or  Penggantong  Semangat  Orang      [p.  570. A  charm  for  hanging  up  a  person's  soul
Hong  berseru-seru,  Kalau  'kau  ta'  teringatkan  aku,
Terbengu-bengu  ' Kau  di-sumpah  de'  malaikat  ampat  puloh Hati  Si  Ann  ampat.
Teringat  aku.
[cclxvi]  Buatan  orang
Ini  fasal  gambar  membuat  orang  tiada  baik.  Maka  di-buat  gambar  orang mati  lilin  sambang  panjang-nya  satu  tapak.  Jikalau  handak  buat  sakit  di-tikam- nya  di  mata-nya  [mata-nya]  buta,  di-tikam  di  pinggang  sakit  [pinggang],  di-tikam di  kapala,  sakit  kapala,  di-tikam  di  dada,  sakit  dada.
Jikalau  handak  membunoh  di-tikam  deri  kapala  di-lantas  ka  ponggong-nya, penikam-nya  segar  kabong,  kemdian  di-kapankan  itu  gambar  saperti  orang  mati, bharu  di-sembahyangkan  saperti  sembahyang  orang  mati,  kemdian  di-tanamkan di  tengah  jalan  tempat  orang  yang  kita  handak  buat,  supaya  buleh  di-langkah- nya.
Ini  fasal  handak  tanam  itu  gambar.
Al-salam  'aleikum,  hei  !   Nabi  Tap  yang  Derhaka  angkau  kapada  Allah,
memegang  bumi,  Derhaka  angkau  kapada  Muhammad  :
Aku  ini  bertanamkan  rnaiat  Si  Anu  :  Bukan-nya  aku  yang   bertanam,  Jibrail Aku  di-suroh  Nabi  Muhammad,  yang  bertanam
Sebab  ia 1  derhaka  kapada  Allah.  Angkau     kabulkan     juga     pinta  -  pinta Angkau   buleh    tolong    bunohkan    atau  kami,  ari  bekari  ini  juga
sakitkan  :  Kabul  berkat  aku  meminta  didalam  kan- Jika  tidak  sakitkan,  atau  angkau  bunoh-  dang  kalimah  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
kan,
1  la  was  explained  by  'Che  Indut  as  refer-        identification  of  the  soul  -  receptacle  with  the ring  to  the  figure  (gambar),  not  to  the  person        person  it  would  be  hard  to  find, who  was  to  be  charmed.      A   more   complete
THE  BLACK  ART  671
[cclxvii]  Buatan  orang  [p.  573.
Al-salam  'aldkum,  hei  Jin  Tanah,  Aku  'nak  selang-seraya  angkau
Jembalang  Tanah,  Hantu  Tanah.  Jemba-  Aku   'nak  minta  sakitkan    (or   gilakan,
laiig  Bumi,  or  bunohkan,  or   kasihkan,  as  the
Mari-lah   angkau  aku  minta  turun,  t5r-  case  may  be)  Si  Anu,
inux  jamuan  aku.  Kalau  'kau  ta'  terima  jamuan  ini,
Aku  berkahandak  pada  angkau,  Derhaka  'kau  kapada  Allah,  ds.b. Aku  'nak  surohkan  angkau,
[cclxviii]  Pembtnehi  orang  laki-bitii
Rurong  chandrawasi  Jikalau  angkau  tiada  demkian,
Sa'  ekor  terbang  ka  laut  Neraka J  angkau  kapada  Allah,
Sa'  ekor  terbang  ka  bukit  Berdosa  'kau  kapada  aku,
Tiada  bertemu  ka-dua-dua-nya,  Dengan  berkat  betua2  guru
Benchi-lah  Si  Anu  akan  Si  Anu:  La-ilaha-illa-'llah,  d.s.b.
Ambil  misei  kuching  hitam  tujoh  'lei  sa-b'lah  kiri,  dengan  misei  anjing  pun tujoh  'lei  sa-b'lah  kiri  juga,  kain  burok  koyak-rabak  satu  percha,  bakarkan  sama- sama,  di-ginchor3  dengan  kapor  sadikit,  silang  ampat4di  tepi  bendul  langkah pintu.
[cclxix]  Ambil  Semangat  [p.  574.
Hong  'ku  panah,  'ku  panahbulan  gobar,  Kur  !  Semangat  Si  Anu,  mari  sa-jalan 'Ku  panah  matahari  padam,  dengan  aku,
'Ku  panah  bintang  malap,  Mari  sa-dudok  dengan  aku,
Bukan-nya  aku  memanah  bulan  bintang  Mari  sa-tidor  sa-bantal  dengan  aku  !
matahari,  Kur!  Semangat  anak  sidang  Si  Anu!
Aku  memanah  tangkei  had  anak  sidang  Kabul  berkat  la-ilaha,  d.s.b.
Si  Anu.
[cclxx]  For  taking  another  person 's  soul  [?•  575-
Hei  Irupi  bayang-bayang,  Taroh  dalam  lambongan  kiri  aku.
Permeisuri  mendapati  aku  ;  Kalau  dia  tidor
Jikalau  Si  Anu  ta'  tidor  Angkau  pegang  ibu  kaki  kanan,
Angkau     grak    juga,    'kau     gunchang  Senjak  liar  bangkit
bangun,  Angkau  bawa  kamari  kapada
Angkau  ambil  ruh  semangat  dia  Aku  juga  sabuleh-buleh.
Bawa  kamari  Jika  tidak,  derhaka,  d.s.b.
[cclxxi]  Melambei  Semangat  Orang  [p.  576.
Kapor  aku  kapor  perak,  Angkau  teringat  kapada  aku,
Tuang  daun  keladi,  Angkau  teringat  kapada  rumah  tangga Lepas  jinak  'ka  pejinak  'kau,
vAku  bawa  sa-daun  makan.  Angkau  teringat  kapada  aku,
fulit  kapor  Si  Raja  Garang  P'rut-'kau  lapar,  'kau  teringat  kapada  aku,
(Di-)makan  anak  Si  Raja  Gila,  Si  Anu,  Guroh    berbunyi,   'kau    teringat    kapada Gila  pagi  Si  Anu  kapada  aku,  aku,
Gila  petang  Si  Anu  kapada  aku,  Angin  bertiup,  'kau  teringat  kapada  aku,
Angkau  teringat  kapada  mak  bapa-kau,  Hari  ujan,  'kau  teringat  kapada  aku,
1  Em.  Derhaka.  3  Mix  them.
-  Bettiah  or  pctua  ?  *  Qturre.
672  APPENDIX  CHAP,  vi
Ayam  berkoko' ,  'kau  teringat  kapada  aku,  Ada-lah  aku  didalam  bulan  itu.
Mureiberkichau.teringat'kaukapadaaku,  Kur  !    Semangat  Si  Ann,  mari  kapada Kena-dah  raatahari,  teringat  'kau  kapada  aku,
aku,  Semangat  aku  tiada  'ku  brikan  ;
Kena-dah  kapada  bulan,   teringat  'kau  Semangat  angkau,  mari  kapada  aku.
kapada  aku,
[cclxxii]  Ambil  Semangat  [p.  577.
Nur  Mani  nama  angkau,  Gila  siang,  gila  malam,
Si  Pancha  Awal  nama  aku,  Gila  tujoh  kali  sa-hari,
Kabul    berkat    aku    memakei  do 'a               Gila  tujoh  kali  sa-malam.
Kundang  Maya  Chinta  Berahi,  Pulang-lah  ka  rumah  angkau
Berchinta  'kau  kapada  aku,  Pulang-lah  ka  istana  angkau
Berahi  'kau  kapada  aku,  Dengan  berkat,  d.s.b. Gila  'kau  kapada  aku,
[cclxxiii]  Tilek  [p.  578.
Aku  tahu  asal  angkau  jadi :  Dian  sabatang  ini  rumah  tangga  angkau
Didalam  chahia  Darah  Puteh  Selangkan    hati    prut,  jantong,    limpa,
Turun  kapada  ibu-mu  mempedal  raya,
Pasang  surut  di-tongkatkan.  Angkau  sakalian  lagi  'kan  pulang  kapada
Kur,  semangat  Si  Ann  itu,  aku,
Mari-lah,  angkau  bersama-sama  kapada  Ini  'kan  pula  badan  nyawa  angkau  saka-
aku !  lian
Kamana-lah  angkau  handak  pergi  ?  Lagi  sudah  pulang  kapada  aku.
Mari-lah  angkau  ka-dalam  rumah  tangga  Kabul  berkat  aku  memakei
angkau  ini  :  Do'a  tilek  ma'rifat  kapada  Si  Ann  itu.
[cclxxiv]  Mtmbuat  buta  [p.  310.
Ambil  ikan  seluang  sa'ekor,  buboh  dalam  mangkok,  lagi  hidup  di-chuckok mata  ikan  seluang  itu  dengan  jarum  rabit  dalam  sakudi.1  Bakar  kemenyan, bachakan  ini  : —
Bukan  aku  berchuchok  mata  ikan, Aku  berchuchok  mata  Si  Ann.
[cclxxv]  Pantun  describing  the  effect  of  the  Black  Art
Niyor  manis,  siamang  bulan,
Kalapa  tumboh  di  batu, Si  Ami  menangis  menentang  bulan,
Dia  kena  hikmat  aku.
For  other  charms  connected  with  the  human  soul  vide  sees,  vi-viii  and  ccxiii, ccxiv,  supra.
1  A  single  needle  which  has  a  broken  eye  out  of  a  score  (needles  being  made  up  in  scores).
NOTE  ON  THE  WORD  KRAMAT
THE  following  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  by  the  author  which  was  received  too late  for  insertion  in  the  text  of  the  book  : —
"I  think  that  the  best  translation  for  kramat,  in  the  case  of  beasts,  etc.,  is 'sacred.'  I  have  been  going  into  the  kramat  question,  and  it  appears  to  me  that kramat  animals,  trees,  and  other  objects  occupy  the  same  place  in  Malay  popular religion  as  is  occupied  by  Totems  in  the  popular  religion  of  other  countries.
"I  do  not  wish  to  be  understood  (before  going  more  deeply  still  into  the matter)  that  they  are  totems,  but  that  they  possess,  generally  speaking,  the  same characteristics.  They  are  the  bodily  tenements  or  receptacles  containing  the souls  of  the  departed  ancestors  of  the  village.  Incense  is  burnt  and  prayers  are offered  to  them  (e.g.  in  the  case  of  the  sacred  elephant),  and  the  mere  fact  of meeting  them  when  one  is  engaged  in  a  difficult  enterprise  is  believed  to  insure success.  On  the  other  hand,  to  kill  or  wound  them  is  to  court  disaster."
To  the  above  I  may  add  that  kramat  (which  is  a  word  of  Arabic  derivation) properly  appears  to  mean  "sanctity,"  but  is  in  Malay  generally  used  adjectively, being  applied  to  men,  animals,  plants,  stones,  etc.  When  the  word  stands  alone it  almost  invariably  means  a  holy  place,  the  word  tZmpat  being  presumably  under- stood. When  applied  to  a  person  it  implies  special  sanctity  and  miraculous power.  I  remember,  in  1895,  hearing  of  a  little  girl,  living  with  her  parents  at Sungei  Baru  in  the  Alor  Gajah  district  of  Malacca,  who  was  reputed  to  be  kramat. People  used  to  travel  considerable  distances  in  order  to  visit  her,  and  thereby  gain some  benefit  or  other.  I  was  informed  that  the  modus  operandi  was  to  swallow a  small  quantity  of  her  saliva  in  a  cup  of  water,  but  I  never  verified  this  state- ment. These  pilgrimages  were  rather  disapproved  of  by  the  local  Kathi,  who was  my  informant.
As  regards  true  totemism,  I  am  not  sure  that  it  can  be  traced  among  the Malays  of  the  Peninsula,  although  a  few  elements  of  the  system  are  to  be  found here  and  there  among  them.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  certain  districts  (e.g.  northern Malacca  and  the  Negri  Sembilan)  there  are  clans  descending  in  the  female  line among  whom  exogamy  is  still  the  rule,  to  the  extent,  at  least,  that  intermarriage is  forbidden  between  the  children  of  sisters  (J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  23,  p.  143) ; and  we  also  sometimes  find  tutelary  or  taboo  animals,  etc.  more  or  less  closely connected  with  certain  families  ;  but  these  two  sets  of  facts  do  not  seem  to  be interwoven  as  they  appear  to  be  among  certain  other  races.  Traces  of  animals, etc.  being  regarded  as  specially  connected  with  particular  families  are  not,  I believe,  very  common  :  two  instances  occur  in  the  Stjarah  Malayu,  viz.  the  man "  Bat'h,"  who  emerged  from  foam  vomited  by  a  bull  (Malay  Annals,  p.  23),  and who  is  regarded  as  the  progenitor  of  the  still  existing  Malay  tribe  (Bangsa Muntah  Lembu)  of  hereditary  bards,  to  whom  beef,  milk,  etc.  are  taboo1;  and  the Indian  prince  "Mani  Farendan"  (ibid.  p.  no),  who  on  his  voyage  to  Malacca
i  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  14,  p.  313. 2  X
674  NOTE
was  preserved  from  drowning  by  the  alu-alu  fish  and  the  gandasuli  tree,  and  on that  account  "forbade  all  his  descendants  to  eat  of  the  fish  alu-alu  or  to  wear the  flower  of  the  gandasuli.'''  His  descendants  formed  a  noble  family  in  Malacca, the  heads  of  which  usually  bore  the  title  of  S'ri  Naradiraja,  and  during  the  I5th century  A.D.  often  held  the  highest  offices  of  state ;  so  the  legend  may,  probably enough,  preserve  the  record  of  an  actual  custom  peculiar  to  that  family.  Both the  above  cases,  however,  seem  to  be  derived  from  a  Hindu  origin.
The  tutelary  animals  connected  with  holy  (kramat)  places  may  perhaps  some- times be  in  point  in  this  connection  :  for  instance,  at  Malacca  Pindah,  in  Malacca territory,  I  remember  seeing  the  private  burial-place  of  a  certain  family  (which lived  close  by),  and  being  informed  by  the  local  village  headman  that,  whenever any  member  of  that  family  died,  certain  tigers  were  in  the  habit  of  wailing (menangis)  round  the  place  at  night.
It  has  been  observed  by  the  author  (pp.  71,  153,  163)  that  kramat  animals generally  have  some  physical  peculiarity,  such  as  a  shrunken  foot  or  stunted  tusk  ; it  may  be  added  that  they  are  sometimes  white  (i.e.  albino  individuals  of  a  species which  is  not  usually  white),  and  thus  marked  out  from  their  fellows  by  the characteristic  sacred  colour.  I  remember  reading  in  the  local  Straits  newspaper some  years  ago  that  a  white  mouse-deer,  which  was  caught  somewhere  in  the Negri  Sembilan,  was  regarded  by  the  Malays  as  kramat :  very  soon  after  its capture,  I  believe  on  the  same  evening,  it  escaped  from  its  cnge  overnight,  a  fact which  no  doubt  further  corroborated  the  natives  in  their  belief  as  to  its  sacred character.  I  have  little  doubt  that  it  was  purposely  released  by  some  super- stitious Malay,  who  thought  that  no  good  would  come  of  keeping  a  sacred  animal in  captivity.
C.  O.  B.
LIST    OF
Clifford,  Hugh.     In  Court  and  Kampong.     London,  1897.
Studies  in  Brown  Humanity.      London,   1898. Clifford,    Hugh,    and    Swettenham,    Frank    A.      A    Dictionary   of  the    Malay
Language,  parts  i.-iii.  letters  A-Ch.     Taiping,  Perak,  1894-1897. Crawfurd,  John.     History  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  3  vols.      Edinburgh,  1820. A  Grammar  and  Dictionary  of  the  Malay  Language,  2  vols.      London,  1852. A   Descriptive  Dictionary  of  the  Indian  Islands  and  Adjacent  Countries.
London,  1856.
Denys,  N.  B.     A  Descriptive  Dictionary  of  British  Malaya.      London,  1 894. Frazer,  J.  G.      The  Golden  Bough,  2  vols.     London,  1890. Hughes,  Thomas  P.     A  Dictionary'  of  Islam,  2nd  ed.      London,  1896. Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  1 2  vols.      Singapore,  1847-1862.
[Abbreviated  reference,  J.I. A.] /oitrnal  of  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  32  Nos.     Singapore,
1878-1899.
[Abbreviated  reference,  J.R.A.S.,  S.£.~\
Klinkert,  H.  C.     Nituiv  Maleisch-Nederlandsch  IVoordenboek.      Leiden,  1893. Leyden,  John.      Malay  Annals.      London,  1821. Marsden,  William.      The  History  of  Sumatra,  2nd  ed.      London,  1784.
Third  ed.     London,  1811.
Maxwell,  W.  E.     A  Manual  of  the  Malay  Language,  2nd  ed.      London,  1888. Miscellaneous  Papers  relating  to  Indo-China  and  the  Indian  Archipelago,   two
series  of  2  vols  each.     London,  1886,  1887. Newbold,  T.  J.      Political  and  Statistical  Account  of  the  British  Settlements  in
the  Straits  of  Malacca,  2  vols.      London,  1839, Notes  and  Queries  issued  with  the  Journal  of  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal
Asiatic  Society,  4  Nos.      Singapore,  1885-1887. Publications  of  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  3  Nos.      Singapore,
1895-1896.
Selangor  Journal,  5  vols.      Kuala  Lumpur,  1892-1897. Swettenham,  Frank  A.      Malay  Sketches.      London,  1895. Tylor,  E.  B.     Primitive  Culture,  2  vols.      London,  1871. Wall,    II.   von  de.     Maleisch-Nederlandsih    IVoordenboek  uitgegeven  door  H.  N,
van  der  Tuuk,  2  vols.      Batavia,  1877,  1 880.
Yule,   Henry,  and    Burnell,   A.   C.     Hobson  Jobson,  being  a  Glossary  of  Ang'c- Indian  Colloquial  Words  and  Phrases.      London,  1886.
INDEX
Abduction  of  the  soul,  49,  50,  568- 573.  574-579  5  °f  women,  394-396
Adolescence,  ceremonies  at,  352-361  ; hair-cutting  at,  353-355  ;  tooth- filing  at,  355-359 ;  ear-boring  at, 559  ;  circumcision  at,  360,  361
Air,  charms  connected  with  the,  107- 109
Anchak  (sacrificial  tray),  76,  225,  260, 270,  310-313,  4H-423.  432,  433
Angels,  98,  99
Animals,  see  Beasts,  Birds,  Fish, Reptiles
Animism,  47-54,  579,  580  ;  see  Soul
Astrological  calculations,  544-555
Badi  (mischiefs,  evil  influences),  origin and  number  of,  94,  428,  429 ; casting  out,  155,  156,  177,  178, 427-436
Bajang  (vampire),  320-325
Bamboo,  supernatural  development  of children,  etc.,  in,  16-18 ;  super- stition regarding  use  of,  1 16  ;  used in  fire-production,  317,  318;  used in  circumcision,  360
Bananas,  time  for  planting,  217
Batara  Guru,  85-92
Bathing,  ceremonial,  81,  277,  278, 334,  335.  338  (note),  385,  387, 399-401,  424,  431,  465
Bear,  legends  about  the,  183-187; his  enmity  towards  the  tiger,  183, 184
Beasts,  ideas  about,  52,  53,  141-193; souls  of,  52,  53  ;  legendary,  human origin  of,  53,  151-153,  158,  159; sacred  and  tutelary,  68,  70,  153, 163-166,  283  ;  superstitious  dread of  the  larger,  149,  150;  evil  in- fluences in  dead,  155,  156,  177, 178
Beating,  expulsion  of  evil  influences  by, 22,  155,  177
Bee-trees,  202-204
Bees,  an  unlucky  omen,  535
Betrothal  ceremonies,  364-368
Bezoar  stones,  magic  properties  and use  of,  274-277,  425,  426,  441
Bidan  (midwife),  ceremonies  connected with  engagement  of,  332,  333
Birds,  ideas  about,  109-141  ;  super- natural or  mythical,  no,  ill; nocturnal,  in,  112;  of  ill  omen, in,  112,  123,  124;  legendary, human  origin  of,  121-123,  126,  129- 131;  lucky,  124,  125;  nests,  127, 128  ;  decoy,  132-141
Birth  ceremonies,  332-352;  taboos, 343-346,  348-351
Birth-spirits    or     vampires,     320-331,
334 Bisnu  (Vishnu),  85,  86  (note),  87,  545,
546
Black  divinity,  92 Black  King  of  the  Genii,  93-96 Blinding  by  magic,  155,  310 Blood,   supposed    colour   of  royal,    18
(note),  37  ;  offered   to  spirits,    143,
144,  232,  233,  416 Bloodsucking  demons,  see  Birth-spirits Bloodsucking  snail,  306 Blue,  rare  use  of,  51  (note) Boar,  ideas  about  the  wild,  188,  189 Boats,  used  to  carry  away  evil  spirits,
235.  4I3»  414,  433-436 Body,  theories  about  the  constitution
of  the  human,  22,  23  ;  sanctity  of
the,  23-46
Bomor,  see  Magicians,  Medicine Bores,  cause  of,  IO,  n Bracelet   used  as  a  protection  against
spirits,  321 !   Brahma,  85,  86  (note),  545,  546
678
INDEX
Brides,  353-355,  368-396
Buffalo,      mythical,      supporting     the
world,  5,  6 ;  used  for  sacrifices,  189  ;
preferred    to    the    ox    or    cow,    ib. ;
white,  origin  of,    190  ;  fights,    469-
474
Building  ceremonies,  141-147 Bullets,  charmed,  524,  525 Burial,  403-407
Calendar,  division  of  the,  545-555
Camphor,  mode  of  obtaining,  212-214  '•> spirit,  propitiation  of  the,  ib.
Card  games,  487-493
Caterpillar,  transformation  of,  into  the squirrel,  190
Cats,  ideas  and  legends  about,  108, 190-192;  powers  of  transformation of,  191  ;  evil  principle  in,  191,  398  ; not  allowed  on  mines,  254  ;  turned out  of  doors  when  a  death  occurs, 398
Caucasus,  mountains  of,  1,2
Caves,  haunted,  14
Celts  (stone  weapons),  ideas  about,  276, 277
Chandrawasih,  mythical  bird,  no,  in
Charms,  to  the  soul,  47-49  ;  to  acquire magic,  61  ;  to  incense,  75,  76  ;  used with  rice -paste,  81  ;  to  the  Black Genie,  94  ;  to  the  Sea-spirit,  98  ;  to the  Hantu  Songkei,  105  ;  to  the wind,  107,  108  ;  to  stop  rain,  109; against  the  Spectre  Huntsman,  117- 120;  fowling,  132,  135-141;  in selecting  a  site,  142  ;  in  building, 145;  elephant,  150,  153,  156;  tiger, 167,  168  ;  deer,  171,  174-179; mouse-deer,  180,  181  ;  connected with  dogs,  181-183  ;  bee-trees,  204  ; eagle-wood,  210;  gutta-percha,  215  ; cocoa-nut,  216,  217;  sowing,  229; reaping,  238-240,  243,  245,  247, 250  ;  mining,  265-273  ;  boat,  279, 280  ;  crocodile,  284,  285,  296-301  ; fishing,  315-317;  fire,  318;  Lang- suir,  326,  327  ;  Pontianak,  327  ; protecting,  361  ;  beautifying,  363  ; medical,  410-414,423-427,430-436, 439,  449,  450,  452-456  ;  theatrical, 505-509 ;  used  in  war,  522,  523  ; used  in  soul-abduction  and  the  black art,  569-578
Chastity,  observance  of,  59,  269,  315,
524 Chess,  game  of,  485,  486
Children,  supernatural  development  of, etc.,  in  bamboos,  16-18  ;  in  foam, 1 8,  19;  ideas  and  customs  connected with,  127,  128,  274,  320-352
Children's  games,  494-503
Chintamani,  the  lucky  snake,  ill (note),  303,  506
Circumcision,  360,  361
Clairvoyance,  538,  539
Cobra,  ideas  about  the,  303
Cocoa-nut  palm,  charms  connected  with the,  216,  217  ;  rules  for  planting the,  218
Cocoa-nut  pearls,  195-197
Cock-fighting,  475-483;  rules  of,  481
Cocks,  fighting,  different  kinds  of,  479, 480
Coffins,  kinds  of,  399
Colour,  mystic  importance  of,  30,  33, 34,  51,  60,  155,  156,  237,  256,  416, 420,  421,  431,  433,  481,  482,  545- 548,  557,  568,  569
Compass,  aspect-,  divination  by,  558- S6l
Corpses,  superstitions  about,  398,  406
Cows,  objection  to  the  flesh  of,  189
Crab,  mythical,  the  cause  of  tides,  7, 92
Creation  of  the  world,  1-5  ;  of  man, 16-22
Crocodile,sacred,68,283;  spirit.Sg,  286, 435  5  legends  of  origin  of  the,  282- 286  ;  other  ideas  about  the,  286-302 ; varieties  of,  288  ;  man-eating,  289- 291  ;  escapes  from  the,  291  ;  num- ber of  stomachs  of  the,  292  ;  catch- ing the,  293-302  ;  charms  connected with  the,  296-301
Cucumbers,  times  for  planting,  217, 218
Cycles  of  years,  554
Dances,  457-468  ;  ceremonial  character of,  464  ;  the  Joget,  458-463  ;  the Gambor,  464,  465  ;  the  Monkey dance,  465  ;  the  Dabus,  466  ;  the Palm-blossom,  466-468  ;  the  Fish- trap,  468
Dancing  girls,  costumes  of,  460,  461, 464
Days,  lucky  and  unlucky,  545-550
Dead,  graves  of  the  sainted,  62,  64-70, 163,  405  ;  malignant  spirits  of  the, 103,  325,  327-329  ;  disposal  of  the, 397-408
Deer,  theory  about  the  origin  of  the,
INDEX
679
1 70,  1 7 1 ;  hunting,  171-179;  charms connected  with,  171,  174-179
Deities,  85-93,  545,  546
Demons,  93-106  ;  see  a/so  Birth-spirits, Genii,  Ghosts,  Spectre  Huntsman, Spirits
Dew,  origin  oi",  4
Dewa  (deities),  88  (note)
Divination,  used  by  the  tiger,  159,  160; to  ascertain  a  child's  horoscope,  333  ; for  medical  purposes,  409-414 ; various  forms  of,  535-561  ;  thieves discovered  by,  537-542  ;  with  magic squares,  555-558  ;  with  aspect-com- passes, 558-561
Diving,  ordeal  by,  542-544
Divining  rod,  542
Dogs,  hunting,  181,  182;  lucky,  182; unlucky,  183  ;  wild,  183
Dragon,  mythical,  surrounding  the world,  6 ;  dragons,  the  cause  of floods  and  eclipses,  10-12;  associ- ated with  mountains,  13,  14;  the cause  of  landslips,  14 ;  as  aspect- compasses,  146,  561
Dreams,  omens  from,  142,  144,  305, 562,  563  ;  legend  illustrating  the importance  attached  to,  563-566
Dress,  description  of  an  old-time  raja's, 29-32  ;  taboos  connected  with,  33,
34  ;  of  dancing  girls,  460,  461,  464 ; of  actors,  517-521
Dugong,  ideas  about  the,  307,  308 Durian,  ideas  and  ceremonies  connected with  the,  197-199
Eagle- wood,  ideas  about,  206-212 Ear-boring  ceremony,  45,  46,  359 Earth,  creation  of  the,  1-5  ;  navel  of
the,   3  ;   theories  of  the  shape  and
position  of  the,  5,  6  ;  legend  about
the  heart  of  the,  19-21 Earthquakes,  cause  of,  5 Earth-spirit,  propitiating  the,  230-233,
506,  5°7 Eclipses,  cause  of,  11-13;  precautions
taken   by  pregnant  women  during,
350-352
Eel,  origin  of  the,  308 Elephant,    tusks,    the    royal   right  to,
35  ;  superstitious  dread  of  the,  149- 151;     towns,     151-153;     princess, f52»    '535    ghost  or  sacred,    153; other   ideas  about   the,    153,    154; hunting  the,  155,  156
Evil  eye,  534
Evil  influences,  see  Badi,  Spirits
Fairies,  good,  105,  106
Fasting,  places  for,  71  ;  rules  of,  8 1,  82
Feasts,  42,  74
Fighting  cocks,  different  kinds  of,  479,
480 Fights,   buffalo,  468-474  ;  cock,   475-
483 Figures,    mystic,    used    in    divination,
555-561
Finger,  reason  of  length  of  middle,  20 ; staining  with  henna,  375-377,  388, 389.  392
Fire,  production  of,  317,  318  ;  charms, 318;  lustration  by,  319,  342,  343
Firmament,  ideas  about  the,  5
First-fruits,  ceremonial  treatment  of, 225,  226,  235-249
Fish,  ideas  about  the  origin  of,  187, 306-309 ;  powers  of  transformation of,  191,  192,  310;  ceremonies  con- nected with  catching,  310-317; taboos  connected  with,  314,  315; charms,  3 1 5-3 1 7
Fishermen,  superstitious  ideas  of,  192
Five  times,  system  of  the,  545-547
Five  moments,  system  of  the,  547,  548
Floods,  cause  of,  10
Flute,  magic,  25,  27
Foam,  child  found  in,  18,  19
Food  offered  tospirits,  76, 231-233, 268, 280,  311-314.  415-424.  432-434
Football,  483
Fowling,  ceremonies  connected  with, 132-141
Funerals,  34,  397-408
Gabriel,  the  archangel,  3, 19-21,  98,  425 Games,    483-503;     card,     487-493!
children's,  494-503 Garuda  or  Gerda,  mythical  bird,  no Genii,  number  and  origin  of  the,  93-
97  ;  black  king  of  the,  93-95  ;  white
genie,   95,    96 ;     Solomon,    king    of
the,  99
Gharu,  see  Eagle-wood Ghosts,    various    kinds    of,    101-105  ;
ghost   tigers,    63,    163-166;    ghost
elephants,    153;    see   also   Demons,
Spectre  Huntsman,  Spirits Giants,  105 Goats,    sacrificial    killing   of,    43,   74,
143,  232,  262,  312 God,   the   name   of,    objectionable    to
spirits,  271
68o
INDEX
Gods,  83-93,  545.  546
Gold,  recipe  for  turning  brass  into,  188;
spirit  of,  251,  271  ;  ore,  271,  272 Grass,  origin  of,  4 Grave-stones,  ideas  about,  66,  405 Ground  pigeon,  legends  about  the,  126,
127,  190 Gutta-percha,  charms  connected  with,
215
Hair,  ideas  and  ceremonies  connected with,  44,  45,  244,  341,  342,  344,
345.  353-355*  524,  57o
Harvest,  rice,  225  -  228,  235-249 ; taboos  connected  with,  225-228,  244, 248
Hatred,  charm  to  cause,  573,  574
Head,  sanctity  of  the,  43-45  ;  com- pressing the,  337  ;  shaving  the, 341,  342
Heart  of  the  earth,  19-21
Heavens,  creation  of  the,  3-5
Heron,  ideas  about  the,  124,  125
High  places  or  holy  places,  61-71,  8 1
Hinduism,  influence  of,  2-4,  84-91, 189.  545.  546
Hornbills,  legends  about  various  kinds of,  125,  129,  130
House,  selection  of  a  site  for  a,  141- 143  ;  rules  for  building  a,  143-147
Human  origin  of  animals,  plants,  etc., 53-55,  I2I>  I22.  I26,  127,  129, 130,  151,  152,  158,  159,  170,  171, 185-187,  285,  286,  308,  318
Hunting,  elephant,  155,  156;  tiger, 166-168;  deer,  172-179;  mouse- deer,  179-181;  dogs,  181,  182
Huntsman,  spectre,  9 1  ;  legend  of  the, 1 1 2- 1 20;  charms  against  the,  117- 120  ;  the  wild  jungle  dogs,  the  pack of  the,  183  (note)
Illness,  attributed  to  the  agency  of spirits,  64,  65,  91,  92,  116,  117, 120,  322-325,  330,  410-456,  505-
509,  573
Images  for  harming  people,  45,  413, 430,  569-574 ;  for  recalling  lost souls,  49,  452,  453 ;  intended  to attract  spirits,  72,  417,  432,  433, 438,  464
Incense,  ceremonial  burning  of,  60,  6 1 , 65,  67,  75,  76,  78,  142,  144,  149,
172,  2O7,  2O8,  219,  221,  225,  232, 239,  240,  242,  244,  268,  270,  312, 376,  410-413,  417-420,  440,  465,
467,  504,  5".  537,  57°,  572,  575-
577  ;  invocations  to,  75,  76,  410 Invocations,  see  Charms Iron,   magic   use    of,    225,    232,  236,
237,  273,  274,  338,  398,  429,  454-
456
Jambu  Agai  or  Rakai,  see  Sambu Jembalang,  97,  98 Jintayu,  mythical  bird,  no Justice,  Malay,  187,  188
Ka'bah,  pillar  of  the,  3
Kaf  (or  Kof),  mountains  of,  i ,  2
Kala,    85,    86    (note),     89-91,     545,
546
King,  see  Raja
Kingfisher,  fable  about  the,  1 3 1 Kinta,  mining  district  of,  251-253 Kite-flying,  484,  485 Korinchi  were-tigers,  161-163 Kramat   (holy)   places,  61-71  ;    mixed character  of,  62-64,  69-70  ;  guarded by  sacred  animals,  63,  68,  70,  71, 153,  163-165;  oaths   taken  at,  64; see  Sacred  animals
K'ris,  the  national  weapon,  26,  33  ; rules  for  damasking  and  measuring the,  526-530 ;  drawing  water  from
a,  531
K'ris-hilts,  shape  of,  4  (note)
Lanchang  (spirit  boat),  235,  413,  414,
433-4S6
Landslips,  cause  of,  14
Langsuir  (vampire),  320,  325-327
Language,  special,  appropriated  to royalty,  35  ;  other  language  taboos and  figurative  language,  139,  140, 192,  193,  206,  208,  212,  254,  255, 269,  271,  315,  523,  524
Leaves,  magic  use  of,  78-80,  155,  J72, 208,  221,  232,  236,  312,  313,  334, 355,  376,  4",  412,  414,  419,429, 431,  437,  445
Legends,  of  the  creation  of  the  world, 1-5  ;  of  the  buffalo  supporting  the world,  5,  6 ;  of  the  tree  Pauh Janggi  and  the  petrified  pilgrim,  7- ro ;  of  the  man  in  the  moon,  13; of  Bujang  Malaka  and  Gunong Pondok,  13,  14  ;  of  the  Raja  of  the bamboo,  16-18  ;  of  the  child  in  the foam,  18,  19;  of  the  creation  of man,  19-22 ;  of  Megat  Sajobang, 54,  55  >  °f  Nakhoda  Hussin,  63  ;
INDEX
681
of  'Toh  Bidan  Susu  Lanjut,  66  ;  of Raja  •Abdullah,  68,  69 ;  of  Toh Kamarong,  70,  71  ;  of  the  Princess of  Mount  Ophir,  71,  82  (note),  158 (note),  163-166,  363;  of  the  Spectre Huntsman,  91,  112-120;  of  the origin  of  the  genii,  93-96  ;  of  the archangels,  98;  of  the  prophets,  99; of  fairies,  106  ;  of  birds,  110-112, 121-132  ;  of  the  founding  of  Perak, 147-149;  of  beasts,  151-155,  158- 166,  171,  184-187,  189,  190,  191, 192,  254,  318,  319;  of  the  stick- insect,  20 1  ;  of  trees,  205  ;  of  the I'erak  river,  281,  282  ;  of  reptiles, 282-286;  of  fish,  306-309;  of vampires,  320-331  ;  of  the  origin  of Badi,  427-429;  of  Magat  Terawis, 524,  525  ;  of  'Che  Puteh  Jambai, 563-566 Licking,  casting  out  evil  influences  by,
443 Lime-tree,  the  object  of  a  special  cult,
205,  206 Limes,    not   allowed    on    mines,  254,
255,     264  ;     used    for    ceremonial
washing,  278,  400,   431  ;    used    in
soul-abduction,  575 Love-charms,    362    (note),   566,   568,
577
Lucky  snakes,  1 1 1  (note),  303,  506  ; birds,  124,  125;  dogs,  182;  wea- pons, 524-531 ;  days  and  times,  545- 56i
Lustration,  by  water,  77-81,  277-279, 347,  348,  387;  by  fire,  77,  342- 344  ;  see  also  Bathing,  Rice-paste
Magic,  sympathetic,  82,  108  (note),  161 (note),  2 1 3,  217,  241,248,310,  323, 355.  570-573  5  squares,  555-558
Magicians  or  Pawangs,  significance  of, 56  ;  prerogatives  of,  57  ;  possessing familiarspirits,  59;  mode  of  acquiring the  powers  of,  60,  61  ;  exorcising spirits,  64  ;  controlling  the  weather, 107-109;  fowling,  133;  hunting, 1 72- 1 79 ;  eagle- wood,  207 ;  camphor, 214;  planting,  219,  232;  reaping, 225,  235-249;  mining,  253-271; power  over  inanimate  objects,  262, 263,  531  5  crocodile,  293-302  ; fishing,  308,  310-316  ;  medical (Bomors),  409-455  ;  theatrical,  504- 512  ;  power  over  the  soul,  568-578
Mahameru,  Mount,  2
Maize,  rules  for  planting,  217
.Malacca  cane,  ideas  about  the,  199-201
Mambang  (inferior  deities),  85,  88 (note),  91-93
Man,  in  the  moon,  13;  creation  of, 16-22  ;  sanctity  of  the  body  of,  23- 46  ;  the  soul  of,  47-49  ;  plurality  of souls  in,  50,  411,  454,  578
Marking  the  body,  a  protection  against evil  influences,  336
Marriage,  customs  and  ceremonies  at, 368-396;  decorations,  369-373; accessories,  373, 374 ;  finger-staining at,  375-377  ;  costumes,  378,  379  ; ceremonial  rice  used  at,  379,  380, 383  ;  lustrations  at,  380,  385-388  ; mimic  conflict  at,  381,  382  ;  sitting in  state  at,  383,  384 ;  royal  character of  the  married  pair,  388  ;  accounts of  two  weddings,  388-394  ;  forcible abduction  with  a  view  to,  394-396
Maswara  (Maheswara),  86  (note),  545, 546
Ma'yong,  invocations  and  ceremonies used  when  opening  site  for  a,  504- 512;  tunes,  513;  instruments  and costumes,  518
Medicine,  346,  347,  408-457  ;  magic character  of  the  diagnosis  in,  409- 414;  propitiatory  ceremonies  used in,  414-424  ;  neutralising  poisons by,  424-427 ;  expelling  evil  in- fluences by,  427-452 ;  taboos  in, 437»  577  »  recalling  the  soul  by, 452-456,  577  ;  an  orthodox  view  of,
456,  457
Medicine-men,  see  Magicians Metamorphoses,  53-55,  121-123,  I26» 129-131,    152,    160-163,   170,  185- 187,  190-192,  201,  205,  262,  283- 286,  302,  206-309 Midwife,  engaging  a,  332,  333 Minerals,  souls  of,  52  ;  ideas  and  cere- monies connected  with,  250-277 Mining,  tin,  250-271  ;  magicians,  253- 257,     261-263;    taboos,     254-259, 263-265,   269,   271,   272  ;    charms, 265-271,    273;    gold,    271,     272; silver,  272,  273 Mischiefs,  see  Badi Moments,  the  five,  547,  548 Monkeys,  legends  about,  184-188 Monopolies,    royal,    33-35  ;    see    also
Raja,  Regalia,  Taboos Months,  methods   of  reckoning,    553, 554
682
INDEX
Moon,  ideas  about  eclipses  of  the,  1 1  - 13  ;  precautions  taken  during eclipses  of  the,  ib.,  350-352  ;  spots on  the,  13  ;  man  in  the,  ib.
Mountains,  in  legend,  I,  2 ;  asso- ciated with  dragons,  13,  14
Mouse-deer,  the,  in  fable,  179;  snaring the,  179-181  ;  legend  about  the, 318,  319
Musical  instruments,  supernatural power  of  royal,  25,  27,  40-42;  used to  accompany  invocations  to  spirits, 445  ;  used  to  accompany  dances, 461  ;  used  at  theatrical  exhibitions, 5°S.  509,  5".  512,  516-521
Naga,  the  Indian,  4
Nails,    worn   long,    45,  46 ;    artificial,
ib. ;  staining  with  henna,  375*377 Names,  importance  of,  341 Nature,     1-7,     10-15;     influence    of
kings,  chiefs,  or  magicians  over,  36,
60,  106-109,  262,  263 Navel,    of   the   earth,   3  ;    of  the  sea,
7-9
Night-jar,  origin  of  the  Malay  name  of
the,  121,  122 Noise,    objection    of    spirits    to,    231,
257,  258 Nursery  rhymes,  494-502
Oaths,  64,  273,  525  (note)
Omens,  from  natural  events,  15,  129, 144,  264,  411,  534,  535;  from  in- cense, 76,  410,  411  ;  from  the  rice- paste  ceremony,  78 ;  from  birds, in,  112,  123,  535  ;  from  dreams, 142,  144,  305,  562-566  ;  from  the direction  of  things  falling,  1 80,  296, 297>  33°>  357>  4°9  >  from  sounds, 210,  299  ;  from  actions,  264,  349, 351,  533,  534  ;  from  scattered  rice, 411-414;  from  animals,  254,  534, 535»  5^1  5  from  the  lines  of  the hand,  561,  562
Orchids,  205  (note)
Ordeals,  542-544
Origin,  magic  power  involved  in  the knowledge  of  a  thing's,  156
Owls,  omens  of  ill-luck,  123,  124
Palmistry,  561,  562 Pantang,  see  Taboos Pauh  Janggi  (mythical  tree),  6-9 Pearls,  cocoa-nut,    195-197  ;  breeding, 275  (note)
Pel&it  (familiar  spirit),  330,  331 Penance  or  religious  retreat,  71,  8 1 Penanggalan  (vampire),  327,  328,  334 Performances,  theatrical,  503-521 Petrified  pilgrim,  legend  of  the,  8-10 Pheasant,    Argus,    legend    about   the,
Physician,   court,   his  exemption  from
taboos,  39
Pig,  wild,  ideas  about  the,  188,  189 Pigeon,  ground,  legends  about  the,  126,
127,  190;  method  of  snaring  wild,
132-141  ;  charms  used  in  decoying,
I35-H2 Pillar  of  the  Ka'bah,  the  navel  of  the
earth,  3
Plays,  theatrical,  503-521 Poisons,  charms  against,  424-427,  449,
45°
Polong  (familiar  spirit),  329 Pontianak  (demon),  327 Porpoise,  origin  of  the,  308,  309 Potatoes,  sweet,  time  for  planting,  217 Prayer,  71,  72 Pregnancy,   precautions   taken  during,
344-346,  348-352 Prerogatives,  royal,  23,  24,  27,  33-36,
38-42,  215  (note),  277 Price,  customary,  sanctioned  by  taboo,
58,  59 Princes    and    princesses,    development
of,  in  bamboo,  16-18 Princess,  legendary,  of  Mt.  Ophir  and
Jugra  Hill,  71,  82  (note),  158  (note),
163-166,  363;  elephant,    151-153;
Telan,  185-187. Prohibitions,  see  Taboos Prophets,  98,  99 Pusat  tasek,  see  Navel  of  the  sea Python,  ideas  about  the,  302,  303
Rain,  origin  of,  4 ;  charm  to  produce, 1 08  ;  charm  against  excessive,  109  ; announced  by  the  note  of  a  mythical bird,  no
Rainbow,  origin  of  the,  4  ;  ideas  about the,  14,  15
Raja,  sanctity  of  the  person  of  the,  23, 24  ;  miraculous  powers  of  the,  28 (note),  29  ;  legendary  description  of the  dress  of  a,  29-32  ;  prerogatives of  the,  33-36,  37-42;  title  after death  of  the,  35,  36 ;  personal influence  over  natui-e  of  the,  36,
37 Rats,  ideas  about,  192
INDEX
683
Regalia,     sanctity     and     supernatural
powers  of  the,  23-29,  39-42 Religion,   56,   61,   83,   84,    193,  234,
457
Reptiles,  ideas  about,  282-306
Rhinoceros,  150
Rice,  instruments  to  be  used  in  reaping, 58,  226,  227  ;  fixed  customary  price of,  58 ;  ceremonial  and  sacrificial use  of,  74,  76,  77.  231-233,  240, 270,  280,  293,  311,  334,  376,  385- 387,  4"-4i7,  419-421,  423.  424» 441,  447,  453-455.  465-467,  511, 5'2,  5'7,  537;  sowing,  221-223, 228,  229  ;  planting,  223-225,  230- 233;  reaping,  225-228,  235-249; soul  of  the,  ib.  ;  ceremonial  respect shown  to  cooked,  319
Rice-paste,  ceremonial  use  of,  77,  78, 81,  133.  '34,  136,  221,  232,  233, 236,  239,  293,  312-314,  354,  356, 376,  386  ;  composition  of  the  leaf- brush  used  in  this  rite,  78-80,  221 (note),  236,  312  (note),  355
Riddles,  484
Rings,  magic  use  of,  337,  353
Rites,  nature  of,  performed  at  sacred places,  74-77
Rivers,  spirits  of,  103,  279-280 ;  im- portance of,  281  ;  legends  about, 281,  282
Roads,  ceremonies  connected  with  the making  of,  149
Roc,  9  ;  see  also  Garuda
Royalty,  see  Raja
Rubbing,  casting  out  evil  influences  by, 431,  441,  449,455
Sacred  animals,  63,  68,  70,  71,  153, 163-166,  283
Sacrifices,  propitiatory,  43  ;  to  spirits, etc.,  65,  67,  72-77,  143,  H4,  H9, 203,  207,  210,  230-233,  235,  268- 270,  280,  286,  293,  310-314,  414- 424,  432-434,  5",  5'2,  535-537; traditions  of  human,  144  (note),  211
Sakatimuna,  mythical  serpent,  3,  4,  25, 28  (note),  95
S:iml)u  (or  Jambu  Rakai  or  Agai),  the crocodile-spirit,  89,  286  (note),  298,
435 Scapegoats,  ceremonial  use  of,  72,  432,
433
Sea,  navel  of  the,  7  ;  spirits  and  gods of  the,  90-92,  279,  280,  434  ;  priest of  the,  100
Sea-eagle,  ideas  about  the,  128,  129 Semangat,  see  Soul
Seven,  importance  of  the  number,  50,
241,  431,  508,  509,  548,  569,  570
Seven  times,  the  system  of  the,  548,
549
Shadow,  importance  of  the,  143,  244, 245,  248,  306,  332,  575
Shadow-plays,  514-516
Sheikhs,  the  four  legendary,  100
Ships,  ideas  about,  279,  280,  315
Shiva,  85-91,  546
Silver,  ideas  about,  272,  273  ;  invoca- tion addressed  to  the  spirit  of,  ib.
Sites,  selection  of,  for  houses,  141-143  ; for  towns,  147-149
Snails,  bloodsucking,  306
Snakes,  mythical,  3,  4,  6,  14,  25,  28 (note),  95,  in  (note),  303,  506; ideas  about,  302-305,  426
Soil,  kinds  of,  141
Sorcerers,  detection  of,  323
Sorcery,  methods  of,  568-579
Soul,  conception  of  the,  47-53,  579, 580  ;  recalling  a  wandering,  48,  49, 452-456,  577  ;  abduction  of  the,  49, 568-579  ;  plurality  of  souls  in  man, 50,  41 1,  454,  578  ;  cloth  used  to  at- tract the,  51,  452,  453,  575,  576  ;  in animals,  vegetables  and  minerals,  52, 53,  138,  194,  200,  211,  213,  215- 217,  225-227,  237,  250,  251,  271  ; rice  used  to  attract  the  human,  76,
77,  4"
Spectre  Huntsman,  divinity  of  the,  91  ; bird  companions  of  the,  112;  legend of  the,  1 1 3- 1 20  ;  charms  against  the, 117-120
Spirits,  of  various  kinds,  40,  59,  93- 106,  113-120,  445-448,  5°5-5°9; familiar,  59,  320,  322-325,  329- 331  ;  in  holy  places,  62,  63  ;  in trees,  64,  65,  200,  202,  205,  211, 213,  215;  evil,  64,  91,  92,  94-96, 101-106,  1 12-120,  143,  144,  245,
247,  320-331,  334,  4IO-451.  505- 509,  573  ;  medical  treatment  for illness  caused  by,  64,  65,  410,  414- 451  ;  food  offered  to,  76,  231-233, 268,  280,  311-314,  415-424,  432- 434,447;  in  beasts,  150;  objecting to  noise,  231,  257,  258;  in  minerals, 251,  253-258,  266-273;  objecting to  the  name  of  God,  271  ;  afraid  of weapons,  456  (note) Spoons,  magic  use  of,  108,  350-352
684
INDEX
Squares,  magic,  555-558
Squirrel,  origin  of  the,  1 90
S'ri,  86  (note),  89,  545,  546
Stars,  ideas  about  the,  5  ;  names  of  the, 548,  550.  551
Stick-insect,  ideas  about  the,  200,  201
Stones,  magic  use  of,  236,  338-340; ideas  about,  274-277  ;  bezoar,  ib., 425,  426  ;  in  the  heads  of  snakes,
303,  304 Stroking,  expulsion  of  evil  influences
by,  178,  430,  442 Substitutes,  72,  73,    143,    144  (note),
211,  340,  432,  433 Sucking  charm,  449,  450 Sugar-cane,  time  for  planting  the,  217;
magic  use  of  the,  237,  239,  240,  246 Sun,  divinity  living  in  the,  92 Sunset,   evil  influence  of,  15,   90,  92,
93,  109,  428,  429 Sympathetic  magic,  82,  108  (note),  161
(note),  213,  217,  241,  248,  310,  323,
355,  570-573
Taboos,  royal,  23,  24,  27,  33-42 ; linguistic,  35,  139,  140,  192,  193, 206,  208,  212,  254,  255,  269,  271, 315,  523,  524;  connected  with birth,  44,  344-346,  348-351;  war, 44,  523.  524;  agriculture,  57-59, 225-228,  231,  244,  248;  the  Spectre Huntsman,  116,  118;  building,  141 ; in  legend,  152;  connected  with animals,  156,  189,  191-193  ;  trees, 202,  211,  213;  mining,  254-259; 263-265,  269,  271,  272  ;  crocodiles, 292,  299,  300,  302  ;  fishing,  314, 315  ;  marriage,  370,  371  ;  funerals, 399,  401,  404,  405  ;  medicine,  437, 577  ;  miscellaneous,  533,  534 ;  de- pending on  times  or  aspects,  552, 56i
Tadpole,  ideas  about  the,  309 Talismans,  361,  522-524,  566,  567 Tapers,  magic  use  of,  268,  411,  421, 422,  440,  441,  447,  452,  sir,  536, 572,  578
TSpong  tawar,  see  Rice-paste Theatrical  exhibitions,  503-521;  foreign origin  of,  503,  504,  517-521  ;  cere- monies connected  with,  504-512  ; the  Ma'yong,  513,  514;  the  Way  - ang,  514-516  ;  classification  of,  517- 521
Thieves,  discovery  of,  by  divination, 537-542
Tides,  cause  of,  6,  7 Tiger,  ideas  about  the,  157-170;  towns or  villages,   157;   human  origin  of the,  158,  159;  divination  practised by  the,    159,    160;    man  or  were-, 160-163  5  ghost  or  sacred,  163-165, 254;  hunting  the,  166-168;  charms against  the,  167,  168  ;  reception  of a  dead,  168-170  ;  spirit,  436-444 Times,  lucky  and  unlucky,  545-561 Tin,  soul   of,   52,  250,   271  ;  mining, ideas  and  ceremonies  connected  with, 250-271
Toads,  ideas  about,  305,  306 Tooth-filing  ceremony,    45,    46,    355,
359
Top -spinning,  481
Towns,  selection  of  sites  for,  147-149  ; elephant,  151-153;  tiger,  157
Tray,  sacrificial,  see  Anchak
Trees,  mythical,  3,  7-9  ;  origin  of,  4  ; souls  of,  52,  53,  193,  194,  211,  212  ; human  origin  of  certain,  54,  55  ; sacred,  63,  67  ;  spirits  in,  64,  65  ; ideas  about,  193-217  ;  durian,  197- 199;  sialang,  202-204;  haunted, 205  ;  lime,  205,  206  ;  eagle-wood, 206-212;  camphor,  212-214;  gutta- percha,  215  ;  cocoa-nut,  216,  217
Umbrellas,  royal,  26,  33,  34 ;  inter- diction of,  at  funerals,  34
Vampires,  bloodsucking,  320-331,  334 Vegetation  souls,    52,    53,    193,    194,
2OO,   202,   211,   213,   215,   2l6,   225,
226,  237-249
Viper,  ideas  about  the,  302,  303
Walimana  (mythical  bird),  1 10  (note) War,  522-525,  531,  532;  charms  and
ceremonies  used  in,  522-524 Water,  lustration  by,  77,  Si,  277-279,
347,     348,     387,     399-401,     424;
spirits,  91,  103,  279,  280 Wave-offering,  418-422 Waxen  images,  magic  use  of,  45,  413,
430,  569-574
Weapons,  royal,  24-26;  30,  31,  33, 40  (note) ;  of  the  Spectre  Huntsman, 117-120;  magic  use  of,  430,  441, 442;  ideas  about,  524-531
Weaver  bird,  ideas  about,  127,  128
Weddings,  description  of  two,  388-394  ; see  also  Marriage
White,  colour  of  royal  blood,  1 8  (note),
INDEX
685
37  ;  umbrellas,  33,  34  ;  appropri- ated to  spirits,  5 1  ;  divinity,  92  ; genie,  95,  96
Wind,  charms  connected  with  the,  107, 1 08
Wizards,  see  Magicians,  Sorcerers
Vajuj  and  Majuj  (Gog  and  Magog),  2 Year,  549,  550,  553-555 Yellow,  use  of  the  royal  colour,  33,  34 51,  419-421,  433
Zemzem,  the  well,  342,  355
THE    END
Printed  by  R.  &  R.  CLAKK    LIMITED   EdMmrgk
MESSRS.  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.S BOOKS  ON  ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  FOLK-LORE.
THE  GOLDEN  BOUGH.  A  Study  in  Magic  and  Religion.  By  J. G.  FRAZER,  Litt.D.,  Hon.  D.C.L.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  2  vols.  8vo.
TRAVELS  IN  WEST  AFRICA.  By  MARY  H.  KINGSLEY.  8vo. 2 is.  net.  Abridged  Edition.  Extra  Crown  8vo.  7s.  6d.
WEST  AFRICAN  STUDIES.  By  MARY  H.  KINGSLEY,  Author  of "  Travels  in  West  Africa."  With  Illustrations  and  Maps.  8vo.  2is.  net.
THE  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  CENTRAL  AUSTRALIA.  By BALDWIN  SPENCER,  M.A.,  sometime  Fellow  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford, Professor  of  Biology  in  the  University  of  Melbourne,  and  F.  J.  GILLEN,  Special Magistrate  and  Sub- Protector  of  the  Aborigines,  Alice  Springs,  South  Australia. With  numerous  Illustrations.  Demy  8vo.  2is.  net.
IN  THE  AUSTRALIAN  BUSH  AND  ON  THE  COAST  OF  THE CORAL  SEA.  Being  the  Experiences  and  Observations  of  a  Naturalist  in Australia,  New  Guinea,  and  the  Moluccas.  By  RICHARD  SEMON.  With  86 Illustrations  and  4  Maps.  Super  Royal  8vo,  gilt  top.  2is.  net.
KAMILAROI  AND  KURNAI  GROUP.  Group -Marriage  and Relationship,  and  Marriage  by  Elopement.  By  LORIMER  FISON,  M.A.,  and A.  W.  HOWITT,  F.G.S.  With  an  Introduction  by  LEWIS  H.  MORGAN, LL.D.  8vo.  153.
HISTORY  OF  MANKIND.  By  Professor  FRIEDRICH  RATZEL. Edited  by  E.  B.  TYLOR,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.  3  vols.  125.  net  each.  Also  in 30  parts.  Royal  8vo.  is.  net  each.
THE  BUDDHIST  PRAYING  WHEEL.  A  Collection  of  Material bearing  upon  the  Symbolism  of  the  Wheel  and  Circular  Movements  in  Custom nnd  Religious  Ritual.  By  WILLIAM  SIMPSON,  R.I.  Illustrated.  Svo. IDS.  net.
THE  SOUL  OF  A  PEOPLE.  An  Account  of  the  Life  and  Belief  of the  Burmese.  By  HAROLD  FIELDING.  Second  Edition.  Demy  Svo.  14*.
THE  SACRED  TREE;  OR,  THE  TREE  IN  RELIGION  AND MYTH.  By  Mrs.  J.  HENRY  PHILPOT.  8vo.  8s.  6d.  net.
LIFE  IN  ANCIENT  EGYPT.  By  A.  ERMAN.  Translated  by  H.  M. TIRARD.  Illustrated.  Super  Royal  Svo.  2is.  net.
FOLK  TALES  OF  BENGAL.  By  the  Rev.  LAL  BEHARI  DAY. Crown  Svo.  45.  6d.
MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON.
MESSRS.  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S
BOOKS  ON  ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  FOLK-LORE.
ANTHROPOLOGY.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Man  and  Civilisa- tion. By  EDWARD  B.  TYLOR,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.  With  Illustrations.  Crown 8vo.  75.  6d.
THE  BURMAN  :  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS.  By  SCHWAY  YOE, Subject  of  the  Great  Queen.  Second  Edition.  8vo.  I2s.  6cl.
THE  HISTORY  OF  HUMAN  MARRIAGE.  By  EDWARD  WESTER- MARCK,  Ph.D.,  Lecturer  on  Sociology  at  the  University  of  Helsingfors.  With Preface  by  Dr.  A.  R.  WALLACE.  Second  Edition.  8vo.  145.  net.
STUDIES  IN  ANCIENT  HISTORY.  Second  Series.  Comprising an  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  Exogamy.  By  the  late  JOHN  FERGUSON M'LENNAN.  Edited  by  his  Widow  and  ARTHUR  PLATT.  8vo.  2is.
BEAST  AND  MAN  IN  INDIA.  A  Popular  Sketch  of  Indian Animals  in  their  Relations  with  the  People.  By  JOHN  LOCKWOOD  KIPLING, C.I.E.  With  Illustrations  by  the  Author.  Extra  Crown  8vo.  73.  6d.
THE  PHILIPPINE  ISLANDS  AND  THEIR  PEOPLE.  By  DEAN C.  WORCESTER,  Assistant  Professor  of  Zoology,  University  of  Michigan. With  Maps  and  Illustrations.  Royal  8vo.  I5s.net.
THE  CIVILISATION  OF  SWEDEN  IN  HEATHEN  TIMES. By  OSCAR  MONTELIUS,  Ph.D.,  Professor  at  the  National  Historical  Museum, Stockholm.  Translated  from  the  second  Swedish  edition,  by  Rev.  F.  H. WOODS,  B.D.,  Vicar  of  Chalfont  St.  Peter.  Illustrated.  8vo.  145.
PALEOLITHIC  MAN  IN  NORTH-WEST  MIDDLESEX.  By JNO.  ALLEN  BROWN.  8vo.  75.  6d.
EARLY  MAN  IN  BRITAIN,  AND  HIS  PLACE  IN  THE  TERTI- ARY PERIOD.  By  Prof.  W.  BOYD  DAWKINS.  Medium  8vo.  255.
THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  WRITING.  By  WALTER  JAMES  HOFFMAN, M.D.,  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Smithsonian  Institution.  With an  Introduction  by  Professor  FREDERICK  STARR.  Crown  8vo.  6s.  net.
WOMAN'S  SHARE  IN  PRIMITIVE  CULTURE.  By  OTIS  TUFTON MASON,  A.M.,  Ph.D.,  Curator  of  the  Department  of  Ethnology  in  the  United States  National  Museum.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  6s.  net.
STRUCTURE  OF  GREEK  TRIBAL  SOCIETY.  An  Essay.  By HUGH  E.  SEEBOHM.  8vo.  53.  net.
THEORY  OF  DEVELOPMENT  AND  HEREDITY.  By  HENRY B.  ORR,  Ph.D.,  Professor  at  the  Tulane  University  of  Louisiana.  Crown  8vo. 6s.  net.
By  FRANCIS  GALTON,  F.R.S.  D.C.L.  and  Hon.  Sc.D.
NATURAL  INHERITANCE.     8vo.     93.
RECORD  OF  FAMILY  FACULTIES.     Consisting  of  Tabular  Forms
and  Directions  for  Entering  Data.     410.     2S.  6d. HEREDITARY  GENIUS  :  An  Enquiry  into  its  Laws  and  Consequences.
Extra  Crown  8vo.     75.  net. FINGER  PRINTS.     8vo     6s.  net. BLURRED  FINGER  PRINTS.     8vo.     2s.  6d.  net. FINGER-PRINT  DIRECTORIES.     8vo.     55.  net.
o          MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON.
isvaan
xapuj  -j
'"«  3V
OINOHOI
