Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_21\documents\2021-Hidayati-Legal_Politics_in_the_Establishment_of_the_Sultan_.pdf
Total Pages: 16
Statistics: Chars=35232, ThaiWords=7046.4, EnglishWords=6845

--- Page 1 of 16 ---
Al-Istinbath 
Jurnal Hukum Islam 
 Vol. 6. No. 2, November 2021, 367-382 
P-ISSN: 2548-3374 (p), 25483382 (e) 
http://journal.iaincurup.ac.id/index.php/alistinbath 
 
Legal Politics in the Establishment of the Sultan Adam Law 
(Positivization of Islamic Law in the Banjar Kingdom) 
Tri Hidayati 
Institut Agama Islam Negeri (IAIN) Palangka Raya 
tri.hidayati@iain-palangkaraya.ac.id 
Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah 
Universitas Islam Negeri (UIN) Antasari Banjarmasin 
syarif.muhammad849@gmail.com 
DOI: http:dx.doi.org/10.29240/jhi.v6i2.3486 
Received: 04-07-2021 Revised: 30-10-2021 Approved: 03-11-2021 
Abstract 
This study aims to determine the position and authority of Sultan Adam 
al-Watsiq Billah (1826-1857) in the formation of the Law of Sultan Adam 
1835 and to describe the political aspects of law in the formation of the 
Law of Sultan Adam 1835. The method us ed is normative legal research 
with statutory, political, and socio -historical approaches. The results are 
first, Sultan Adam has authority as King a nd a religious leader in 
establishing Islamic law as the positive law of the Banjar kingdom in 
Sultan adam law. Second, the legal-political aspect in Sultan Adam Law is 
found in the purpose of its formation as stated in the preamble of the 
sultan adam law Martapura version. They were named, perfecting religion 
and i'tikad; maintain ing the harmony of the unity , and guidelines for 
judges in deciding a case during their reign so that the people become 
good. As K ing a nd qadhi (judge), Sultan Adam used t he religious and 
political a pproach through Sultan Adam Law when his political power 
weakened under Dutch rule. He has successfully applied it to the character 
of the Banjar Society , which is thick with Islamic (tradition) , which is 
more obedient to religious leaders than rulers. The Banjar people still 
apply some of the Sultan Adam Law provisions to this day. 
Keywords: Politics of law; Islamic law; Sultan Adam's Law 
Abstrak 
Penelitian ini bertujuan mengetahui kedudukan dan otoritas Sultan Adam 
al-Watsiq Billah (1826-1857) dalam pembentukan Undang-Undang Sultan 
Adam (UUSA 1835), dan mendeskripsikan aspek politik hukum dalam 
pembentukan UUSA 1835 . Metode yang digunakan yaitu penelitian

--- Page 2 of 16 ---
368 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021 
hukum normatif dengan pendekatan perundang -undangan, politik, dan 
sosio-historis. Data yang digunakan bersifat sekunder dianalisi s dengan 
teknik content analysis dan disajikan secara deskriptif kualitatif. Hasil nya 
pertama, Sultan Adam memiliki otoritas dalam kedudukannya sebagai raja 
sekaligus pemuka agama dalam menetapkan hukum Islam sebagai hukum 
positif kerajaan Banjar dalam dalam bentuk UUSA. Kedua, aspek politik 
hukum dalam UUSA dapat ditemukan dari tujuan pembentukannya yang 
tertuang dalam Mukaddimah UUSA versi Martapura yaitu 
menyempurnakan agama dan i‟tikad; menjaga kerukunan kesatuan; dan 
pedoman para hakim dalam memutuskan suatu perkara saat 
pemerintahannya agar rakyatnya menjadi baik . Pendekatan agama dan 
politik yang digunakan Sultan Adam selaku raja sekaligus qadhi melalui 
UUSA pada saat kekuatan politiknya melemah di bawah kekuasaan 
Belanda telah berhasil diterapkan terhadap karak ter Masyarakat Banjar 
yang kental dengan (tradisi) Islam yang lebih patuh kepada pemuka agama 
ketimbang penguasa , dan sebagian dari ketentuan UUSA itupun masih 
diterapkan masyarakat Banjar hingga saat ini. 
Kata Kunci: Politik Hukum, Hukum Islam, Undang-undang Sultan Adam 
Introduction 
South Kalimantan has historical storie s of the development of Islamic 
law that are interesting to study, one of which is the combination of religion and 
the institutions of the Banjar kingdom. The position of Religion-based 
institutions is firmly one level below the King. At that time, the Islamic religious 
leaders structurally occupied a strategic role as nobles to regulate all traders, 
ordinary people, and farmers in the country.1 
The religious approach as a legal norm in leading the people of the 
Banjar kingdom has been carried out by the King of the Banjar kingdom, 
including t he most famous for its monumental positive legal product, namely 
the 1835 Sultan Adam Law during the reign of King Sultan Adam al-Watsiq 
Billah (1826-26). 1857). Its influence is still lingering today for the people and 
residents of South Kalimantan in pa rticular. Many people visit his grave in 
Martapura. His name is immortalized as a street name both in Martapura and in 
the city of Banjarmasin. His name is also immortalized for a Law College in 
Banjarmasin, the Sultan Adam School of Law (STIHSA) , and the Sultan Adam 
Riam Kanan Forest Park, as confirmed by Presidential Decree number 5l In 
 
1 Hayatun Na’imah, “Lahirnya Perda Berbasis Syari’ah Di Provinsi Kalimantan 
Selatan,” Syariah: Jurnal Hukum Dan Pemikiran 16, no. 1 (10 Oktober 2017): 25 –32, 
https://doi.org/10.18592/sy.v16i1.1430.

--- Page 3 of 16 ---
Tri Hidayati, Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah: Legal Politics in the …….| 369 
1989 and inaugurated by the President on December 18, 1989 . T he Haulan 
event (the anniversary of his death) is always held as a regional event every year.2 
There is a relationship between politics, law, and legal politics that needs 
to be studied further on the existence of the Sultan Adam Law and its relevance 
to Islamic law in the archipelago lately. Discuss legal politics by raising 
historical-social settings in the past needs to realize an ideal national and state 
life system that contains goodness (mashlahah) at a pragmatic-practical level, legal 
politics, which may affect the character and legal culture ; that exists in today's 
society. 
Political contestation in a country will potentially influence the 
development of legal products that apply in that country and produce products 
with certain characters. 3 There is debate in legal and political relations; whether 
law controls politics or vice versa , politics influences regulation. Mahfudh MD 
gave three answers. First, the law has a determining influence on politics 
because political activities are regulated and subject to the rule of law. Second, 
political determinants of law result from the crystallization of political wills that 
interact and even compete. Third, politics and regulation as a social subsystem 
are in a position where the degree of determinants is balanced . Even though the 
law is a product of political decisions, all political activities must be subject to 
legal rules once the law is made . 4 Relevant to empiricism, which sees law from 
the legal material (in the book) and the formation and function (action) in social 
and political life. 
Legal politics is interpreted in various ways, one of which is conveyed by 
Van Apeldoorn that legal politics is the politics of setting a goal and the content 
of laws and regulations that ar e limited to what is written. Satjipto Raharjo 
argues that legal politics is an activity to determine a choice regarding the goals 
and methods to be used to achieve legal goals in society, not limited to 
legislation. Teuku Muhammad Radhie argues that legal politics is a statement of 
the will of the rulers of the state and regarding the laws that apply in the 
territory of the state and regarding the direction of legal development. 5 These 
three definitions show that a l awful product cannot be separated from specific 
goals in law, the process of achieving goals, and the actor, namely the ruler. 
 
 2 Abdurrahman, “Undang -Undang Sultan Adam 1835 Dalam Perspektif Sejarah 
Hukum,” Al-Banjari : Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu -Ilmu Keislaman, hlm. 76, accessed October 7, 2020, 
https://jurnal.uin-antasari.ac.id/index.php/al-banjari/article/view/1042. 
3 Athoillah Islamy, “Eksistensi Hukum Keluarga Islam di Indonesia dalam Kontestasi 
Politik Hukum dan Liberalisme Pemi kiran Islam,” Al-Istinbath : Jurnal Hukum Islam 4, no. 2 (30 
November 2019): Hal. 166, https://doi.org/10.29240/jhi.v4i2.1059. 
4 Moh. Mahfud MD, Politik Hukum di Indonesia (Jakarta: Rajawali Pres, 2009). p. 8 
5 Summarized by Mohamad Nur Yasin, Politik Hukum Ekonomi Syariah di Indonesia (Malang: 
UIN Maliki Press, 2018). p. 92-94

--- Page 4 of 16 ---
370 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021 
Procedurally, according to Padmo Wahyono, legal politics includes the law's 
formation, application, and enforcement. 6 
So far, there have been several studies related to Sultan Adam Law 1835, 
including Hasan et al. , which focus on examining the procedural aspects of law 
in the Sultan Adam Law , which contain legal principles and norms that are 
considered identical modern legal procedurals. 7 Rustam Efendi analyzes the 
structure and meaning of Sultan Adam Law with a hermeneutic approach8 and a 
historical approach that Ridha widely discusses. Efendi traces the history of the 
birth of Sultan Adam Law with a socio -political system, and Abdurrahman and 
Anis use a legal history approach to ascertain the socio -political conditions 
during the Adam sultanate enforced Sultan Adam Law after ten years of his 
reign.9 These previous studi es do not seem to have touched on the perspective 
of legal politics in -depth, which is the object of this research. For this reason, 
this study examines two problem formulations, namely how the position and 
authority of Sultan Adam in the formation of the Sultan Adam Law during the 
Banjar Sultanate and how the political-legal aspects in the construction of the 
Sultan Adam Law during the Banjar Sultanate. 
This research is normative using a statutory, political, sociological -
historical approach in analyzing primary legal materials, namely the Martapura 
version of the Sultan Adam Law 1835 manuscript and supplemented with 
secondary materials in the form of several relevant books and journals. All 
materials were analyzed using content analysis techniques and presented in a 
qualitative descriptive manner. 
The results of this study are expected to provide an overview of the 
political dynamics of Islamic law at tha t time to reflect and at the same time 
relevance the legal culture and customs of the Banjar community today, that law 
is indeed a means of changing the order of life in society, nation and state to be 
better through political power. 
 
 
 
 
 6 Yasin. 
7 Ahmadi Hasan, A nwar Hafidzi, dan Yusna Zaidah, “Modern Law Aspect on 
Procedural Decision of Sultan Adam Law,” Al-Ahkam 29, no. 2 (7 November 2019): 159 –66, 
https://doi.org/10.21580/ahkam.2019.29.2.4285. 
8 Rustam Effendi, “Struktur dan Makna Undang -Undang Sultan Adam pada Masa 
Kerajaan Banjar Kalimantan Selatan,” Litera: Jurnal Penelitian Bahasa, Sastra, dan 
Pengajarannya, Vol No.2 2013, https://journal.uny.ac.id/index.php/litera/article/view/1586. 
9 Abdurrahman, “Undan g-Undang Sultan Adam 1835 dalam Perspektif Sejarah 
Hukum”; M. Zaenal Arifin Anis, “Undang -Undang Sultan Sebagai Budaya Tandingan (Praktik 
Undang-Undang Sultan Adam di Tanah Kesultanan Banjar),” 2016, 
http://eprints.ulm.ac.id/8556/.

--- Page 5 of 16 ---
Tri Hidayati, Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah: Legal Politics in the …….| 371 
Discussion 
The positi on and authority of Sultan Adam in the formation of Sultan 
Adam Law during the Sultanate of Banjar 
The Law of Sultan Adam 1835 is a law issued by Sultan Adam al-Watsiq 
Billah in the tenth year after his coronation as King of Banjar in 1825, and his 
reign ended in 1857 (32 years), three years before the Dutch government 
dissolved the Banjar kingdom in 1860.10 
Sultan Adam is the 18th king in the lineage that reigns in the Banjar 
Kingdom. This is based on the Ranji or genealogy followed by his descendants , 
better known as the pedatuan version and contained in Manaqib Sultan Adam alWatsiq Billah, which is read on the 12th date 148 Haul (commemorate the day 
of the dead) (June 4, 2001). When viewed from the Banjar era, Prince Samudera 
(the first king who converted to Islam, Sultan Suriansyah) held the kingdom . 
Sultan Adam was the 12th King of the Banjar Sultanate lineage.11 
There are differen t opinions about the position of Sultan Adam as the 
King who ruled in the kingdom of Banjar. According to H. Gusti Shuria Roem, 
one of the compilation team of Sultan Adam's History . It is similar to the 
statement of a scholar figure Sheikh Abdurrahman Shidiq Al -Banjari or better 
known as Sheikh Abdurrahman Shidiq Sapat (1857 -1939). In his famous work " 
Treatise Sejaratul Arsyadiyah" he wrote that Sultan Adam is the 18th sultan.12 It is 
different again in the book History of Banjar published by the South 
Kalimantan Provincial Government. The ranks of the 16th Sultan Adam noted 
in the lineage of the King of Banjar and Gazali Usman in his book "Kingdom of 
Banjar, History of the Devel opment of Political Economy, Trade and Islam" 
puts Sultan Adam in the first place. The first 16 in the lineage of the kings of 
Banjar. Meanwhile, according to Eisenberger , Sultan Adam was the 20th sultan 
in the order of Banjar kings starting from Soeria Anata. Another opinion is from 
Kyai Haji Januri bin Haji Roys, and Sultan Adam al -Watsiq Billah is the 11th 
sultan in the order of the kings of Banjar. 13 
Sultan Adam is known as a person who is liked by the people and is 
steadfast in religious principles. He is said to be very concerned about the peace 
and welfare of his people. He is also known to be close to scholars, including 
 
 10 Abdurrahman, “Undang -Undang Sultan Adam 1835 dalam Perspektif Sejarah 
Hukum.” 
 11 Muhammad Fahmi Al Amruzi, Masyitah Umar, dan Anwar Hafidzi, “Sultan Adam 
Law in T he Progressive Law Perspective in Banjar Communities In The 18th Century Ad,” 
Jurnal Ilmiah Mizani: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi Dan Keagamaan 7, no. 1 (19 Juni 2020): 11 –24, 
https://doi.org/10.29300/mzn.v7i1.3133; Abdurrahman, “Undang -Undang Sultan Adam 1835 
dalam Perspektif Sejarah Hukum.” 
 12 Al Amruzi. 
 13 Al Amruzi.

--- Page 6 of 16 ---
372 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021 
having received lessons from Sheikh Muhammad Arsyad al -Banjari, a friend and 
advisor to his grandfather. During his re ign, he also had many teachers and 
advisors, namely Mufti Haji Jamaluddin, son of Sheikh Muhammad Arsyad al -
Banjari. The latter also had a role in the formation of Sultan Adam Law. 
According to research by Eissenberger, who had served as Controleur van 
Banjarmasin en Marabahan in 1936, the original manuscript of Sultan Adam Law , 
which was handwritten in Arabic -Malay letters , was never found again. 
Eisenberger once found a manuscript in Martapura . It was written in 1880 but 
even then could not be seen again. In 1885 Eisenberger found a manuscript 
stored in the archives of the Banjarmasin Resident Office written by 
Tumenggung Soeri Ronggo in 1885. The first publication of the text of the Law 
of Sultan Adam was carried out by A.M. Joekes, who had served as Governor of 
Borneo (1891 -1894) in Indische Gids Magazine in 1891. The manuscript was 
written in Banjar Malay Latin script accompanied by a Dutch translation. This 
manuscript was then reprocessed by the Commission for Customary Law 
Koninklijke Instituut Voor de Taal , Land en Volkenkunde van Nederlands Indie in the 
Netherlands which was later published in the Adatrecht Bundels, volume XIII in 
1917.14 
Assistant Resident Amuntai Helderman , on April 16, 1910, also wrote 
the legal product of the 13th Sultan of Banjar from the Suriansyah dynasty. 
However, this version of Amuntai is different from the Martapura version 
found by Eisenberger because there are additional articles after article 30. The 
contents are the same in articles 1 to 30 , but Articles 31 to 38 are very different 
and close with closing words in the Amuntai version found The Helmerman.15 
The structure of the Sultan Adam Law consists of two major parts, 
namely (1) the introduction or preamble and (2) the body or content of the law. 
In addition, Sultan Adam Law is also equipped with Transitional Regulations. 
The preamble of the Sultan Adam Law contains one paragraph, and the body of 
the Sultan Adam Law includes 31 cases (31 articles). This law includes matters 
of religion and worship, Administrative Law issues , Marriage Law, Judicial 
Procedure Law, Land Law, and Transitional Regulations. All regulations in each 
section of the articles in the Sultan Adam Law are Islamic law positivism, 
especially following the Shafi'i school, which is clearly stated in it. 
1. Regulation of religion and worship (Articles 1, 2, 3, and 20 in Sultan Adam 
Law) 
Article 1 contains an order to all people to have the intention (to 
believe) in ahlu al sunnah wa al jama'ah. Artcle 2 includes four orders from the 
 
14 Abdurrahman. 
15 Effendi, “Struktur dan Makna Undang-Undang Sultan Adam pada Masa Kerajaan Banjar 
Kalimantan Selatan.”

--- Page 7 of 16 ---
Tri Hidayati, Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah: Legal Politics in the …….| 373 
King, namely: (i) an order to the village elders to make a surau, (ii) an order to all 
the people to bring their children to pray five times in congregation, (iii) an 
order to all the people to bring their children Friday prayers, and (iv) orders to 
all the people to report to the King if there are people or groups of people who 
are reluctant to pray in congregation and or Friday prayers. All of these 
commands are intended to counteract the teachings of the ahlal albidaah belief. 
Article 3 contains the King's order to all the people so that there are no disputes 
or disputes among citizens. What is meant by disputation here is primarily a 
dispute in terms of belief in the faith of religious teachings. 
Article 20 contains an order to the village elders to guard the month . 
That article regulates to determine the beginning of Ramadan ( start of the fast 
of Ramadan), the end of Ramadan (the feast of Eid al-Fitr), the beginning of the 
month of Hajj (the holiday of Hajj or Eid al -Adha), and the beginning of the 
month of Maulud (the month of the Prophet's birth). Furthermore, village 
elders who saw the moon were also ordered to convey it again to the judge , and 
the judge also brought it to the King. 
2. Governance Law (articles 21 and 31 in Sultan Adam Law) 
The spearhead of governance is entrusted to the village elders (tetuha) 
even though they do not receive wages from the King. They work sincerely and 
proudly to maintain security and peace, determine Islamic holidays and others, 
even take care of land disput es and domestic disputes first brought before the 
village Tetuha as a peacemaker. The division of government tasks in the 
kingdom's territory started from the lalawangan (district) led by a mantri; the lurah 
showed several villages assisted by the caliph (khalifah), bilal, and kaum, and the 
pembakal led a village. Thea are three obligations burdened to the people: paying 
votive money, paying the baktin money, and carrying out gawi and poepoe pinta. 
Nazar is usually done by people who are classified as rich and to avoid the work 
of gawi poepoe pinta. Gawi poepoe pinta is the obligation of every people to carry out 
sincere work for the kingdom and without expecting a reward. In addition to 
the gawi poepoe pinta, the people are also required to pay service fees (baktin). The 
baktin fees can be paid with labor or doing some work for the benefit of the 
kingdom.16 Sultan Adam also forbade royal servants, such as mantri, lalawangan, 
lurah, and pambakal not to interfere in the affairs of the judges. 
3. Marriage Law (articles 4, 5, 6, 18, 25, and 30 in Sultan Adam Law) 
Articles 4 and 5 regulate the conditions for a valid marriage according to 
the Shafi'i school . At a wedding, a man pays a gift ( mahar/dowry) and makes a 
promise. The promises called ekral are pronounced in front of the wife, judge, 
and witnesses and become the reason for the wife's right to divorce and sue 
 
16 Effendi, “Struktur dan Makna Undang-Undang Sultan Adam pada Masa Kerajaan Banjar 
Kalimantan Selatan.”

--- Page 8 of 16 ---
374 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021 
pasakh (broken) from the wife (article 6). Article 18 regulates how to deal with 
cases of barambangan ("separate beds") with the provision that the husband may 
not hold or touch (have intercourse) with his wife before there is an agreement 
to reconcile. To prevent slander in marriage, Sultan Adam Law made an article 
25 in which the point is that a husband cannot accuse his wife of being a virgin 
(not a virgin or not single) without witnesses. Finally, Article 30 concerning the 
prohibition of adultery, the status of children resulting from adultery called 
kampang children, and the law on adulterers who the King directly imposes. 
4. Law of Judic ial Procedure (10 articles: Article 7 -15, 19, and 24 in Sultan 
Adam Law) 
This section stipulates in detail the duties and functions of the mufti as 
an adviser, not case breaker, which is the authority of the judge, except by order 
of the King with a valid appointment letter (royal stamp). It also regulates the 
prohibition of case lobbying between litigants and those with authority. Judges 
carry out their duties carefully and progressively, receiving input from the village 
head (Lurah) and caliph. The person sentenced is sentenced and can be assisted 
by Bilal and his clan to clarify the situation. In examining evidence-based cases, 
the defendant is given the right to reply in front of the village elders without 
abandoning the mediation proces s. If mediation is successful, judges can 
terminate the patient. The judge's decision is considered valid if it has been 
affixed with the royal seal held by the ading-ading (the sultan's younger brother) , 
who holds the duty as mangkubumi , who will keep the archives of the judge's 
decision. The judge's decision is considered final and cannot be contested. 
5. Land Tenure Law (Article 17, 23, 26, 27, 28, and 29 in Sultan Adam Law) 
Article 17 regulates the recording and bookkeeping system of muamalah 
transactions, especially land-related, to avoid land disputes. Article 23 governs 
the expiration period (20 years or more) in claiming land ownership rights, 
almost the same as verjaaring in the Civil Code. Article 26 also stipulates an 
expiration period of 10 years for the heirs against claiming the rights to the 
inherited land that the testator has previously traded . Article 27 concerning 
claims for arable land disputes , and if the plaint iff wins the case in court, the 
plaintiff who wins the case may not claim land rent as long as the land is in the 
hands of his opponent. Article 28 concerning abandoned land is considered to 
have no owner to be managed by residents, especially Halabiu village residents 
or Negara village residents . Article 29 determines the expiry date of land 
ownership that has not been cultivated for two seasons so that the people make 
the best use of the land.

--- Page 9 of 16 ---
Tri Hidayati, Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah: Legal Politics in the …….| 375 
6. Transitional Regulations are outlined in the middle of the Sultan Adam Law, 
namely Article 16. 
Article 16 regulates three things, namely (i) regulations that existed 
before Sultan Adam must be accepted or are not allowed to be reformed again, 
(ii) Somebody can revise the regulations contained in the Sultan Adam Law if it 
turns out that the contents of the law are clearly wrong, (iii) ) who has the right 
to revise the Sultan Adam Law is the judge. 
Sultan Adam Law as a Political Product of Islamic Law of the Kingdom 
of Banjar 
Sultan Adam is the sultan who is strict in carrying out worship and is 
respected by the people. He was also one of the sultans who was very concerned 
about the development of Islam. 17 During the reign of Sultan Adam, the 
Kingdom of Banjar underwent a process of change in the way of life of the state 
and society due to the influx of Dutch colonialism an d the entry of foreign 
cultures, especially Christianity. Sultan Adam issued a law on the 15th day of the 
month of Muharram 1251 H or 1835 to c ounteract the influence of Western 
civilization and strengthen the unity of the kingdom and the unity and integrity 
of the Banjar people. 
As a king, Sultan Adam can regulate the people to submit and obey his 
orders with a specific purpose. Sultan Adam created Sultan Adam Law with the 
aim that it can be judged as his legal politics as stated in the preamble o f the 
Sultan Adam Law Martapura version and in Dutch as follows: 
 “Pada hoedzrat 1 1251 pada hari kamis jang kelima belas hari boelan 
Almoeharram djam poekoel sambilan pada koetika itoelah akoe Soeltan Adam 
memboeat oendang oendang pada sekalian ra‟ iatkoe soepaja djadi sampoerna agama 
ra‟iatkoe dan atikat mareka itoe dan soepaja djangan djadi banjak djadi 2 
perbantahan mereka itoe dan soepaja djadi kamoedahan segala hakim hakim 
manghoekoemkan mereka itoe akoe harap harap djoea bahwa djadi baik sekali an 
hal mereka itoe dengan sebab oendang oendangkoe ini maka adalah oendang 
oendangkoe ini beberapa perkara” (Martapura's version of Banjar Malay) 
“In het jaar 1251 op Donderdag den vijfitienden dag van de maand al‟ moharam, „s 
morgens te negen ure, heb ik Sultan Adam deze verordening uitgegeven voor al mijne 
onderdanen opdat hun godsdienst en hun geloof volmaakt worden en opdat tusschen 
hen niet veelvuldige geschillen mogen bestaa--zoomede dat het den rechter gemakkelijk 
moge worden recht over hen te spreke n. Ik hoop zeer dat al hunne verhondingen door 
deze mijne verordening geregeld (goed) mogen worden. Deze verordening bevat de 
volgende artikelen” (Martapura's Dutch version) 
 
17 Gusti Khairul Saleh, Manaqib Sultan Adam Al -Watsiq Billah Martapura Kalimantan Selatan 
(Kalimantan Selatan: Yayasan Sultan Adam Al-Watsiq Billah, 2001), Hal. 6.

--- Page 10 of 16 ---
376 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021 
According to Rustam Effendi, the preamble of the Sultan Adam Law 
implies that Sult an Adam has three objectives in making Sultan Adam Law a 
legal product. Namely first, for the perfection of religion and faith; second, to 
maintain harmony so that there is no dispute ; and, third, to facilitate judges in 
deciding a case during their reign so that the people become good.18 
The first objective i ndicates that when Sultan Adam made the Sultan 
Adam Law, religion and people's intentions were still rudiment s. Ideham et al., 
in the book History of Banjar (2003), quoted by Efendi, explained that in the 
period before Sultan Adam Law was drafted, two Banjar scholars taught Sufism 
which was very different from the methods developed by the royal cleric Sheikh 
Muhammad Arsyad Al -Banjari. The Sufism in question is the Sufism of 
Wahdatul Form which was developed by two Banjar scholars named Sheikh 
Muhammad Nafis bin Id eris bin Husein Al -Banjari and Sheikh Abdul Hamid 
Abulung. Sheikh Muhammad Nafis and Sheikh Abdul Hamid Abulung taught 
Sunni Sufism which was expanded with Wahdatul Wujud Sufism. Wahdatul 
Wujud is a tradition that teaches that nature (including humans) is one breath so 
that it cannot be separated. Nature is God , and God is Nature. Sheikh Abdul 
Hamid Abulung said, "No one exists but only Him. There is no me but 
Him. He is me. And I am Him".19 
The second objective is also related to the 'hot' situation in religious 
life. On the one hand, the King and Sheikh Arsyad Al-Banjari wanted the Shafi'i 
school, ahlusunah waljama'ah , as the on ly school in the Banj ar kingdom. On the 
other hand , there was also Sheikh Muhammad Nafis or Sheikh Abdul Hamid 
Abulung. He developed the school or flow called wahdatul form . The intention of 
ahlusunah waljamaah is the religion of Islam based on the Sunni ideology and the 
Samaniyah tradition.20 
The third objective is to make it easier for judges to decide cases. The 
judge of the Banjar Kingdom is the person appointed by the King, and that 
person must understand the Islamic religion of the Ahlusunah waljamaah school 
of Islam. The judges' knowledge of Islam is essential because Sultan Adam Law 
contains 31 thoroughly imbued with Islamic teachings. Jamali (2012) stated that 
the spirit and desire of Sultan Adam to ground the teachings of Islam based on 
the ahlusunah waljama'ah school were so at the forefront of Sultan Adam Law.21 
Al Amruzi et al. considered that Sultan Adam Law is a progressive law 
because as a legal instrument, this law can get out of existing traditions and 
respond to society's problems and always strives to find meanings continuously. 
 
18 Effendi, “Struktur dan Makna Undang-Undang Sultan Adam pada Masa Kerajaan Banjar 
Kalimantan Selatan.” 
19 Effendi. 
20 Effendi. 
21 Effendi.

--- Page 11 of 16 ---
Tri Hidayati, Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah: Legal Politics in the …….| 377 
New and not shackled to absolute sense. This law can also act as a law that lives 
in the community and can meet their needs. 22 Sheikh Muhammad Arsyad Al -
Banjary inspired Sultan Adam by several breakthroughs made in his 
grandfather's era, Sultan Tahmidillah (1561 -1801). Sultan Adam reaffirmed t he 
idea of Sheikh Muhammad Arsyad Al -Banjary to form a Mufti and Qadhi 
institution to implement Islamic Shari'a following the principle of ahlusunah 
waljama'ah to continue to be obeyed by the people, 23 as stated in article 16 
(transitional rules) Sultan Adam Law, which reads: 
“Mana mana segala perkara ja ng doeloe dari pada zamankoe tiada koebarikan 
dibabak lagi dan mana mana segala perkara pada zamankoe adja dibabak 
diboedjoerkan oleh hakim” (Martapura's version of Banjar Malay) 
“Zaken van voor mijnen tijd (voor den aanvang mijner regreering), mogen niet meer 
in behandeling worden genomen, maar zaken gedurende maijn tijd (de tijd mijner 
regeering) is gebleken dat er een fout is begun. (Dutch version of Martapura) 
Article 16 regulate three things, namely (i) regulations that existed before 
Sultan Adam must be accepted or are not allowed to be revised (remodeled) 
again, (ii) regulations contained in the Sultan Adam Law may be changed if it 
turns out that the contents of the law it is clear that the error is clear, (iii) the 
judge has the right to overhaul the Sultan Adam Law . The critical meaning 
contained in this article 16 is that Sultan Adam Law only contains additions and 
reinforcements to regulations made by previous sultans that have not been 
made in writing. 24 
However, according to Abdurrahman's hypothesis, the position of Qadhi 
(judge) at the time of Sultan Adam was most likely not functioned (not 
abolished), where Sultan Adam immediately took over the position of 
Qadhi. The function of the sultan as a political and religious ruler is based the 
reason. In Sultan Adam Law, the dominant authority of Sultan Adam in making 
and enforcing Sultan Adam Law can see. He placed his name to signed it as 
stated in the preamble : " Aku Sultan Adam memboeat oendang -oendang pada sekalian 
rakjatku ...".25 Sultan Adam involved the ulema as "resources" in its preparation, 
namely Hadji Djamaloedin (son of Sheikh Muhammad Arsyad Al-Banjari). 26 
 
22 Amruzi, Umar, dan Hafidzi, “Sultan Adam Law in The Progressive Law Perspective in 
Banjar Communities In The 18th Century Ad.” 
23 Mufti as the highest official who functions as the highest judge, religious advisor and 
supervisor of the Banjar Kingdom court as a whole. Meanwhile, Qadhi functions as the executor 
of the law that regulates the course of the syar'iyyah court. 
24 Effendi, “Struktur dan Makna Undang-Undang Sultan Adam pada Masa Kerajaan Banjar 
Kalimantan Selatan.” 
25 Martapura's version of Sultan Adam Law. 
26 Hadji Jamaluddin's name was mentioned by Sultan Adam in aerticle 31 of the Sultan 
Adam Law. Effendi, “Struktur dan Makna Undang -Undang Sultan Adam pada Masa Kerajaan 
Banjar Kalimantan Selatan.”

--- Page 12 of 16 ---
378 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021 
According to M. Faqih de Rida, the local nuanced Islamic law regulated 
in the Sultan Adam Law indicated that the ruler (Su ltan) does not consider it a 
problem if the social rules of society are based on Islamic law. The first reason 
was that the people at that time had long embraced Islam. Second, the factor of 
the ulama as a figure can be accepted by all parties and becomes a social glue. 
27 The Kingdom of Banjar at the time of Sultan Adam was a theocratic state. In 
a theocratic state, the King considers himself to be the executor of God's 
law. So that the implementation of God's law can be carried out properly, the 
King asked the scholars to be directly involved in the government. Ulama leads 
religious ceremonies and, more than that becomes advisors to the King in 
making decisions. 28 
In addition, Rida considered that Sultan Adam had an interest in 
perpetuating his power, which was actually de jure weak because the Dutch had 
controlled it. At the time of Sultan Adam, Banjar was already under Dutch rule 
and only had the status of a vassal state even though it was still recognized as a 
kingdom. Sultan Adam's policies were challenging to heed because his political 
power was fragile. Nevertheless, the Dutch still gave Sultan Adam space to lead 
the community. For this reason, the sultan is required to be able to translate this 
recognition into "like" political power with his strategy through the 
implementation of the law and his position as a Qadhi (judge) who has the 
capacity as a religious leader who is more obeyed by the community than the 
King. The Banjar community is a society known to be thick with Islamic 
(tradition), which continues on social compliance. People are more obedient to 
religious leaders than rulers so that the legal power exercised by the ulama 
contains formal and non-formal submission. 29 
In the aspect of implementing and enforcing the law, Sultan Adam Law 
has succeeded in forming a society following the purpose of its formation. In 
fact, according to Al Amruzi et al ., several legal provisions in the Sultan Adam 
Law are still valid and inherent in the lives of the Banjar people until 
now.30 Include the establishment of a surau/mushalla in every village, the culture 
of praying together. Some of the rules regarding marriage are a source of law in 
Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage and the Compilation of Islamic 
Law (KHI) (Presidential Instruction Number 1 of 1991). E xcept for the 
barambangan, which does not appear to be included in the two products of the 
 
27 M. Faqih Ridha, “Potret Lain Perjalanan Hukum Di Kerajaan Banjar,” Al-Banjari : Jurnal 
Ilmiah Ilmu -Ilmu Keislaman 12, no. 1 (14 Agustus 2015), https://doi.org/10.18592/al -
banjari.v12i1.452. 
28 Effendi, “Struktur dan Makna Undang-Undang Sultan Adam pada Masa Kerajaan Banjar 
Kalimantan Selatan.” 
29 Ridha, “Potret Lain Perjalanan Hukum Di Kerajaan Banjar.” 
30 Amruzi, Umar, dan Hafidzi, “Sultan Adam Law in The Progressive Law Perspective in 
Banjar Communities In The 18th Century Ad.”

--- Page 13 of 16 ---
Tri Hidayati, Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah: Legal Politics in the …….| 379 
National Law. That proves that the purpose of establishing Sultan Adam Law by 
Sultan Adam has succeeded in forming a community structure that persists with 
a solid religious culture by maintaining the symbols of the existence of Islam, 
especially in the sphere of worship and muamalah. In line with the opinion of 
Lawrence M. Frie dman, that the law has the functions of dispute settlement, 
social control, social engineering, and social maintenance, and politics play a role 
in maintaining and adapting systems, conversions, and capability functions. 31 
Regardless of whether the hypothesis is true or false about the purpose 
of making the Sultan Adam Law , we can deny the legal politics of establishing 
the Sultan Adam Law that it occurs within the scope of power. In the first 
hypothesis, against the three objectives stated in the preamble of the Sultan 
Adam Law , we can stud y that the differences in understanding and 
implementation of Islamic law teachings that occurred during the time of Sultan 
Adam contained poten tials and resistances that went hand in hand. For this 
reason, in the study of legal politics, it is necessary to harmonize potential and 
resistance through academic instruments that are multi -functional, constructive, 
and solution-oriented. The natural di versity of social -mental attitudes and laws 
gives rise to fluctuating patterns of interaction between people and always 
intersects with the political dimension. 32 
Politics is often associated with an administration of government and 
the state. Politics is a process of formation and distribution of power in society 
manifested in the decision -making process, especially in the state.33 Politics as 
part of power has a dependence on the law. If it is related to the current politics 
in Indonesia, it must be submissive and obedient to the constitution and local 
wisdom. Meanwhile, the politics referred to in Sultan Adam Law refers to the 
Islamic law adopted by the sultan to solve socio-religious problems in his area of 
authority as local wisdom. Politics and law are interrelated and need each 
other. According to Mochtar Kusumatdkadja , law without power is wishful 
thinking, and authority without the law is despotism. 34 According to Salman 
Luthan, this statement implies that the rules of law will be of no use if they are 
not enforced, and the law can only be implemented with power, and power 
without the law will lead to arbitrariness. 35 This opinion aligns with Hans 
 
31 Yasin, Politik Hukum Ekonomi Syariah di Indonesia, 11. 
32 Yasin, 11. 
33 Rosdalina Bukido dkk., “Ilmu dan Kepentingan Politik Tinjauan Hukum Islam,” AlIstinbath : Jurnal Hukum Islam 4, no. 1 (26 Mei 2019): Hlm. 71, 
https://doi.org/10.29240/jhi.v4i1.780. 
34 Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, Fungsi dan Perkembangan Hukum dalam Pembangunan Nasional. 
(Bandung: Bina Cipta, tt), 5. 
35 Dikutip oleh Yasin dari Sultan Luthman, “Dialektika Hukum dan Kekuasaan”, Jurnal 
Hukum, No. 14 Vol.7, Agustus 2000. Yasin, Politik Hukum Ekonomi Syariah di Indonesia, hal. 85.

--- Page 14 of 16 ---
380 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021 
Kelsen's theory of legal function , which says that "law is a political instrument ," 
the law cannot be separated from politics. 36 
Conclusion 
Based on the results of this study, there are two conclu sions. F irstly, 
Sultan Adam al-Watsiq Billah served as the last King of the Banjar kingdom for 
32 years (1835-1857 Masehi), who succeeded in Islamic law positivism in Sultan 
Adam Law 1835. With his position, Sultan Adam had the authority to make 
norms binding law for its people through 31 articles (the Martapura version ) 
contained in Sultan Adam Law 1835. Second, Sultan Adam Law 1835 is a 
political product by King Sultan Adam al-Watsiq Billah with three objectives of 
its formation. Namely, the perfection of religion and the intentions of Muslims, 
maintaining harmony and the unity of Muslims, and as a material and formal law 
to facilitate judges in deciding a case during their reign so that the people 
become good. Sultan Adam has legal -political authority because he is both a 
king and a religious leader ( qadhi), informally establishing the law in Sultan 
Adam Law . According to the Theocratic States in the Banjar Kingdom, t he 
King is the executor of God's law , and the Banjar people are known to be more 
obedient to religious leaders than to rulers. In its implementation, Sultan Adam 
Law can have succeeded in forming a community following its formation . 
Several legal provisions in the Sultan Adam Law are still valid and inherent as 
legal culture in the life of the Banjar people until now. 
References 
Abdurrahman. “Undang -Undang Sultan Adam 1835 dalam Perspektif Sejarah 
Hukum.” Al -Banjari : Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu -Ilmu Keislaman. Diakses 7 
Oktober 2020. https://jurnal.uin -antasari.ac.id/index.php/albanjari/article/view/1042. 
Amruzi, Muhammad Fahmi Al, Masyitah Umar, dan Anwar Hafidzi. “Sultan 
Adam Law in The Progressive Law Perspective in Banjar Communities 
In The 18th Century Ad.” Jurnal Ilmiah Mizani: Wacana Hukum, Ekonomi 
Dan Keagamaan 7, no. 1 (19 J uni 2020): 11 –24. 
https://doi.org/10.29300/mzn.v7i1.3133. 
Anis, M. Zaenal Arifin. “Undang -Undang Sultan Sebagai Budaya Tandingan 
(Praktik Undang -Undang Sultan Adam di Tanah Kesultanan Banjar),” 
2016. http://eprints.ulm.ac.id/8556/. 
 
36 Lawrence M. Friedman, The Legal System: A Social Science Perspektive (New York : Russel 
Sage Foundation, 1975), p.5

--- Page 15 of 16 ---
Tri Hidayati, Muhammad Syarif Hidayatullah: Legal Politics in the …….| 381 
Bukido, Rosdalina, Misbahul Munir Makka, Djihan Magfirah Rivai, dan Faradila 
Hasan. “Ilmu dan Kepentingan Politik Tinjauan Hukum Islam.” AlIstinbath : Jurnal Hukum Islam 4, no. 1 (26 Mei 2019): 69. 
https://doi.org/10.29240/jhi.v4i1.780. 
Effendi, Rustam. “Struktur dan Makna Undan g-Undang Sultan Adam pada 
Masa Kerajaan Banjar Kalimantan Selatan.” Litera: Jurnal Penelitian 
Bahasa, Sastra, dan Pengajarannya, Vol No.2 2013. 
https://journal.uny.ac.id/index.php/litera/article/view/1586. 
Friedman, Lawrence M. The Legal System: A Social Science Perspektive. New York: 
Russel Sage Foundation, 1975. 
Hasan, Ahmadi, Anwar Hafidzi, dan Yusna Zaidah. "Modern Law Aspect on 
Procedural Decision of Sultan Adam Law. " Al-Ahkam 29, no. 2 
(November 7 2019): 159 –66. 
https://doi.org/10.21580/ahkam.2019.29.2.4285. 
Islamy, Athoillah. “Eksistensi Hukum Keluarga Islam di Indonesia dalam 
Kontestasi Politik Hukum dan Liberalisme Pemikiran Islam.” AlIstinbath : Jurnal Hukum Islam 4, no. 2 (30 November 2019): 161. 
https://doi.org/10.29240/jhi.v4i2.1059. 
Kusumaatmadja, Mochtar. Fungsi dan Perkembangan Hukum dalam Pembangunan 
Nasional. Bandung: Bina Cipta, tt. 
Mahfud MD, Moh. Politik Hukum di Indonesia. Jakarta: Rajawali Pres, 2009. 
Na’imah, Hayatun. “Lahirnya Perda Berbasis Syari’ah Di Provinsi Kalimantan 
Selatan.” Syariah: Jurnal Hukum Dan Pemikiran 16, no. 1 (10 Oktober 
2017): 25–32. https://doi.org/10.18592/sy.v16i1.1430. 
Ridha, M. Faqih. “Potret Lain Perjalanan Hukum Di Kerajaan Banjar.” AlBanjari : Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu -Ilmu Keislaman 12, no. 1 (14 Agustus 2015). 
https://doi.org/10.18592/al-banjari.v12i1.452. 
Saleh, Gusti Khairul. Manaqib Sultan Adam Al-Watsiq Billah Martapura Kalimantan 
Selatan. Kalimantan Selatan: Yayasan Sultan Adam Al -Watsiq Billah, 
2001. 
Yasin, Mohamad Nur. Politik Hukum Ekonomi Syariah di Indonesia . Malang: UIN 
Maliki Press, 2018.

--- Page 16 of 16 ---
382 | Al-Istinbath: Jurnal Hukum Islam, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2021