--- PAGE 1 ---Orissa Review  *  January - 2009
43
Introduction
The word "Tradition" comes from the Latin
word "Traditio" which means "to hand down" or
"to hand over". In Archaeology a tradition is a set
of cultures which appear to developed  from one
another over a period of time. Traditional
knowledge is an authority system. It set out the
rules governing the use of resources, respect, and
an obligation to share. It is dynamic, cumulative
and stable. It is truth. Some time tradition is
preserved in artifacts handed over by father to
son and mother to daughter.  In indigenous
knowledge systems, there is usually no real
separation between secular and sacred
knowledge and practice.  They are one and the
same.  In virtually all of these systems, knowledge
is transmitted directly from generation to
generation. The history of writing in Orissa is very
old, may be it is older then the script.1  The process
of writing was started when figures, decoration
and different types of letters were inscribed on
the stone, soil, sand or imperishable material. As
time passed, they were written on the materials
which were easily available and durable at the
same time.  In this process, sometimes the leaves
of certain trees were also used.  In Eastern Orissa
palm leaves and bamboo leaves were used as a
writing materials where as in Western Orissa were
used only palm leaves as a writing material.2 In
North India, Birch bark or Bhuja patra was used
as a writing element. Like many other eco-friendly
inventions of ancient and medieval India, the
discovery of palm leaf as a medium had far
reaching consequences. Above all this tradition
ensures continuity of the habits of mind, which is
called the mental culture of a community.
Sources of palm leaf manuscript
Before the advent of paper, palm leaf was
one of the most important source of writing
element. This was used for writing and painting in
South and South East Asian countries. Orissa is
not an exception to it. Absolutely large collations
of palm leaf manuscripts are preserved in the
custody of many of the old libraries, temples,
monasteries, learned institutions and in a few
cases private individuals.3They depict various
aspects of ancient Orissan history and culture.
Therefore, the preservation of palm leaf
manuscript is an obligation and a responsible duty.
Characteristic features of palm leaf as a
writing element
            Palm leaf is an extent element for record.
When compared with good quality hand made
paper, it is found three times stronger then the
hand made paper.4 Palm leaf having very good
tensile strength, is even better than that of good
quality ledger paper. Its folding endurance is
Tradition of Palm Leaf Manuscripts in Orissa
Ramesh Meher
--- PAGE 2 ---44
Orissa Review  *  January - 2009
almost nil in the case of very old and dry leaves.5
It has poor resistance to wear and tear and hence
it is not suitable element for histological study. The
palm leaf consists of epidermis consisting of thick
walled cells.
Choice of leaf
          In Orissa, people have chosen the palm
leaves to prepare the manuscript which are just
about to open. Tender green leaves of different
varieties of palm trees are selected and cut. These
cut leaves are then dried in a controlled manner
and seasoned.
Processing of Palm leaves
For the preparation of palm leaf as writing
material, it is processed in order to make the
leaves suitable for writing. It is known as
seasoning.  Several methods of seasoning are
applied to the palm leaves in various regions.  In
Western Orissa people hang their palm leaves in
their kitchen, take them out and apply turmeric
paste to them.  In some parts, leaves are dried
completely under the sun and are then kept under
the mud or silt of a pond for 10-15 days.  After
this, they are removed cleaned and dried again
under the sun for some time and finally a paste of
turmeric is applied on the surface of the leaves.
In some parts of Western Orissa, the palm leaves
are allowed to boil with paddy husk and then they
are cleaned with soft cloth and kept alternately
under dew and sun for a few days.  They are
polished and cut into the required size.
Skill of Writing on Palm leaves
The art of writing on these leaves was
unique for which no ink or pen was required.  The
stylus (thick metal needle with a sharp point) was
used to inscribe or engrave letters on the palm
leaf.  To write on the palm leaf, the leaf is to be
supported by the fingers of the left hand. The
stretched forefinger and the thumb pressed the
palm leaf so that the leaf will not shake or move
during the time of the writing.  The thumb and the
forefinger are kept on the leaf in a "V" shaped
angle.6 The middle finger of the right hand moves
the stylus, using the cut thumbnail as a lever, in
smooth, light pressured, rounded movements to
incise evenly sized writing in the leaf.  It was
expected that the stylus was to be held in proper
position by its user and the right pressure to be
applied so that the leaf would not be torn.  Then
lamp black is applied on the surface of the palm
leaves.  In doing so the letters became more
conspicuous and they could be read more easily.
Drawings and Images
Besides floral designs, animal and bird
motifs were used sometimes for the borders of
palm leaf pages. Nature has been depicted in
various ways in those folios.  For example in
Vaishnava texts symbols like Shankha (conch),
Chakra (wheel) and Nama (red mark on fore-
head) are drawn which are associated with Lord
Vishnu. Similarly a manuscript of Ramayana
possess the coronation picture of Lord Ram on
the cover. Shaiva text are generally decorated
with Shivalinga as well as with sketches of the
sacred bull called Nandi.
Colour used and Their Composition
Black:
Lamp (carbon) black mixed with
wood apple gum.
Red pigment:  Ground Cinnabar (iron oxide) it is
locally known as Hingula.
White:
Burnt conch shell powder mixed
with plant gum.
Yellow:
Prepared out of the adhesive of
wood apple mixed with Turmeric
powder.
Blue:
Ground juice of Indigo plant leaves
mixed with some plant gum.
--- PAGE 3 ---Orissa Review  *  January - 2009
45
Green:
Ground bean leaves, mixed with
plant gum.
Name of the Adhesives and Process of
making
In ancient and medieval periods, people
were using original plant adhesives,  such as starch
paste, wood apple gum, Bel gum, etc. Starch is a
commonly used adhesive material which is applied
as a binding factor for ink.  It is a slimy substance
of rice, maize, wheat and potato etc.  Wood apple
gum is also a plant gum which is nearly colourless
and soluble in water.  Bel gum is also a plant gum.
It is collected from Bel fruits.
Name and Types of Tools used
In early times people were using iron tools,
sharp pointed iron stylus for engraving and hatchet
for cutting leaves from the tree.  Terracotta pot
was used for boiling water, chisel, bodkin and
drill for preparation of wooden cover board.
Stone plates and stone were used for preparation
of pigments.
Technology of Storing Palm leaf Manuscripts
In ancient and medieval periods most of
the manuscripts are stored in the temple or in the
place of worship of the house. The stake or
wooden planks were used for the storage of the
palm leaf manuscripts.  For the preservation of
the manuscripts the indigenous materials such as
Ghodabacha powder, Emblic myrobalan powder,
Belleric myrobalan Powder, vitex negundo leaves
Powder, Neem Leaves powder, Cinamon oil
powder, black pepper powder, pipali powder etc
were kept beside the manuscripts for better
protection.  Some people were storing their
manuscripts in the bamboo baskets.  They were
keeping storage area clean. During the Nabanna
Ceremony they were cleaning all their manuscripts
and the store.  At that time, all the palm leaf
manuscripts were properly read and recited by
the people.  Till now we follow the above
indigenous materials in the manuscripts storage
to protect manuscripts from the damaging agents.
Role of Copyist
Copyists, known as Lipikaras or scribes
(writers) were divided into three categories.
Some were professionals (self employed). Some
were appointed by the king and the administrators
to do this job, while some others undertook it as
a hobby and practice copying leisurely at home,
in mathas or in other educational centres.  Since
the third group was not that qualified or
experienced as the first two, they were generally
committing grammatical as well as linguistic errors.
The palm leaf manuscripts on Shrutis (Vedic
Texts), Smritis (Dharmasastra), the Puranas
including Ramayana as well as Mahabharata and
Bhagabata were presented to scholars of
respective field, so that they could recite and
interpret them during public discourses.  This
undertaking was meant to achieve merit (punya)
and to spread popular education. Most of the
temples, mathas had a specific time in the
afternoon or evening for this purpose.
Agnipurana records an important verse in this
regard.
"Puranam bharatam Vayapi Ramayanam tathaiva Cha
Likhitva pustakam datva muktibhuktim avapnuyat".7
Importance of Palm leaf Manuscripts
The palm leaf manuscripts are most
important sources of the historical events.  Many
scholars refer the manuscripts for their research
works.  In the palm leaf manuscript we find most
important knowledge of our traditional life style.
In Ayur Vedic and medicinal manuscripts we can
find the names of medicinal trees, which are
available in our environment.  Till now, we use
these types of trees for medicinal purposes in our
life. In "Bhagabata" , "Ramayana", "Mahabharata",
--- PAGE 4 ---46
Orissa Review  *  January - 2009
"Vayupurana", "Matsya purana" etc.  we also do
find evidences of certain historical events, which
are very much helpful in our research work.8 It
may be said that without reference of the palm
leaf manuscripts a research work is said to be
incomplete. So, the palm leaf manuscripts are very
important sources of our research works.
Conclusion
In Orissa, palm leaf manuscripts were in
use at large till the reign of Rama Chandra Deva,
Mukunda Deva, Divyasimha Deva, etc.9
Foreigners (whether travelers or ambassadors)
were very much impressed with the tradition of
writing and copying on palm leaf manuscripts in
India.  Quite often they wrote about this in their
travelogues. In 1442 C.E. the Persian
ambassador Abdur Razzak wrote about a
dafterkhana(wing or annex of documents) where
a number of writers were engaged to write down
accounts on palm leaf.10 Similarly the Portuguese
traveler Duarte Barbosa has expressed surprise
over the scribe's briskness of writing with the stylus
on long and rough palm leaves.11 From the above
discussion it is clear that the palm leaf writing
tradition was very old in India as well as Orissa.
In Orissa also palm leaves were being used as
writing materials since very early period.  A large
number of palm leaf manuscripts are also available
in these parts. It is time now to preserve and save
valuable treasures of our nation.
References:
1.
Banamali Biswal, "Tradition of Palm leaf
Manuscripts in India", in Neha Paliwal (ed.), Kriti
Rakshana, Vol. I; no 5, New Delhi,April; 2006,
p.25.
2.
H.C. Das (ed.) A Guide to Orissa State Museum,
Bhubaneswar, 1991,p.59.
3.
C.B.Patel,"Glimpses of the Palmleaf Manuscript
Heritage of Orissa, in Orissa Review, April, 1997,
pp.7-8.
4.
Swarna Kamal, Protection and Conservation of
Museum Collection, Baroda, p.122.
5. 
Ibid.
6.
Anupam Sah, Save Palm Leaf Manuscript.
Heritage, Lucknow, 2001,  pp. 4-5.
7.
Agnipurana, Poona, 1900, Chapter - 211, Sloka -
53-54.
8.
P.K. Nayak, "Dr. N.K. Sahu Museum," in D. Kabi
(ed.), Souvenir, P.G. Department of History,
Sambalpur University, 2003, p.5.
9.
P.K. Mishra (ed.), Descriptive Catalogue of Palm
Leaf  Manuscripts, Sambalpur University, 1985,
pp.45-90.
10.
Banamali Biswal, Op-cit, p-26.
11.
Ibid.
Ramesh Meher is a Conservator in the Manuscript
Conservation Centre, P.G. Department of History,
Sambalpur University, Jyoti Vihar, Burla, Sambalpur.
