--- PAGE 1 ---Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcon20
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rcon20
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript
conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf
preparation, materials and media, palm leaf
manuscripts at the British Library and the
common types of damage
Julia Wiland, Rick Brown, Lizzie Fuller, Lea Havelock, Jackie Johnson, Dorothy
Kenn, Paulina Kralka, Marya Muzart, Jessica Pollard & Jenny Snowdon
To cite this article: Julia Wiland, Rick Brown, Lizzie Fuller, Lea Havelock, Jackie Johnson, Dorothy
Kenn, Paulina Kralka, Marya Muzart, Jessica Pollard & Jenny Snowdon (2022) A literature review
of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and
media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British Library and the common types of damage, Journal of
the Institute of Conservation, 45:3, 236-259, DOI: 10.1080/19455224.2022.2115093
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/19455224.2022.2115093
Published online: 04 Oct 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 199
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
--- PAGE 2 ---Julia Wiland
1, Rick Brown1, Lizzie Fuller2,
Lea Havelock1, Jackie Johnson1, Dorothy Kenn1,
Paulina Kralka
1, Marya Muzart
1, Jessica Pollard1 and
Jenny Snowdon1
1Conservation Department, British Library, London, UK; 2Conservation Department, National
Archives, London, UK
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript
conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf
preparation, materials and media, palm leaf
manuscripts at the British Library and the common
types of damage
Abstract
The closure of the British Library during the 2020–2021 Covid-19 pandemic allowed the
conservation department to undertake a treatment review of the conservation of palm
leaf manuscripts in order to make better-informed decisions about the treatment of
these complex objects. As part of the review a questionnaire was posted in 2020 to
the Global Conservation Forum asking about the treatment of palm leaf manuscripts
by others in the field. This two-part Literature Review uses the available literature
and the survey results to address the wide range of issues inherent in the practical con-
servation of palm leaf materials. Part 1 includes an historic overview of palm leaf manu-
scripts and their production, leaf preparation methods, manuscript materials and
media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British Library and the common types of
damage found in such manuscripts. Part 2 details historic treatments and current con-
servation techniques as informed by our review and survey, as well as storage, religious
and ethical issues, before concluding with our practical recommendations. The authors
wish to share the collated information as widely as possible and help create greater
continuity and consistency in palm leaf manuscript conservation by presenting our rec-
ommendations for best practice for conservators who treat these amazing objects.
Keywords
palm leaf; boxing; long-term storage; conservation treatment; ethical conservation; tra-
ditional preservation methods
Introduction and context of the review
The closure of the British Library (BL) during the 2020–2021 Covid-19 pan-
demic allowed the conservation department to undertake a treatment
review of the conservation of palm leaf manuscripts to develop our knowl-
edge in order to make better-informed decisions about the treatment of
these complex objects. As part of the review a survey was posted to the
Global Conservation Forum on the treatment of palm leaf manuscripts in
August 2020.1 This two-part review uses the available literature and the
survey results to address the wide range of issues inherent in the practical
conservation of palm leaf materials. Our goal is to share this information as
widely as possible to help create greater continuity and consistency of
Contact Julia Wiland (Julia.Wiland@bl.uk); Rick Brown (rick.brown@bl.uk); Lizzie Fuller (lizzie.
fuller@nationalarchives.gov.uk); Lea Havelock (lea.havelock@bl.uk); Jackie Johnson (jackie.
johnson@bl.uk); Dorothy Kenn (dorothy.kenn@bl.uk); Paulina Kralka (paulina.kralka@gmail.
com); Marya Muzart (maryamuzart@gmail.com); Jessica Pollard (jessica.pollard@bl.uk);
Jenny Snowdon (jenny.snowdon@bl.uk)
(Received 18 February 2022; Accepted 16 August 2022)
1 ‘The Treatment of Palm Leaf Manu-
scripts’ survey as posted to the AIC
Global Conservation Forum: https://
docs.google.com/forms/d/e/
1FAIpQLSfuMtQB8HeUDABn47hc0
O61IiAdXZEjaUiZj87Df1YTvBX
8mQ/viewform
(accessed
8
August
2022).
Journal of the Institute of Conservation, 2022
Vol. 45, No. 3, 236–259, https://doi.org/10.1080/19455224.2022.2115093
© 2022 Icon, The Institute of Conservation
--- PAGE 3 ---treatments and improved practice among the relatively small numbers of
conservators who treat these amazing objects.
Part 1 includes a historic overview of palm leaf manuscripts and their pro-
duction, leaf preparation methods, manuscript materials and associated
media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British Library, and the common types of
damage found in palm leaf manuscripts. Part 2 will focus on historic treatments
and current conservation techniques, and encompass boxing and storage, reli-
gious and ethical issues, and our recommendations for best practice.
There are four appendices: in Part 1 these include the survey findings,
sources for further reading and an annotated bibliography (available on
the BL Open Access Repository). In Part 2 there are two decision-making
flowcharts, and our recommendations for best practice in handling,
storage and treatments for conservators.
Historic overview of palm leaves and the main types of palm leaf
manuscript
Before the introduction of paper, palm leaf was one of the main writing
supports used in South and Southeast Asian countries including: India,
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Indonesia and Cambodia. Therefore,
it comes as no surprise that palm leaf manuscripts comprise a very diverse
body of texts including, but not limited to, sacred religious scriptures, lit-
erature, music, history, medicine, mathematics and astronomy. For that
reason, collections of palm leaf manuscripts are found not only in
museums and libraries but also—especially in Asia—in monasteries, gran-
thagars (manuscript storehouses) and private houses.2
It is debatable when palm leaves first began to be used as writing sup-
ports as there are almost no surviving manuscripts from before the tenth
century, with the exception of one example preserved at Horyuji temple
in Japan, dated to the sixth century.3 However, written records as well as
visual representations in other media such as sculpture point to the wide-
spread use of palm leaf as a writing support long before that period. A frag-
ment of text discovered in Central Asia from 2 CE is currently the oldest
known and dated fragment of palm leaf in existence.4 Dating itself poses
a challenge in researching palm leaf manuscripts according to Anupam
Sah, as many of them don’t mention their authors, scribes or completion
date in the text, and existing colophons often contain mistakes. Therefore,
dating is often based on the style of text or script alone (Fig. 1).5
It seems that, when paper was introduced in South Asia around the tenth
century, it very slowly began to replace palm leaf as the primary writing
support. However, the cultural impact of palm leaves can be seen in the
ornaments painted on some of the paper manuscripts, reminiscent of
the holes punched in palm leaves for binding, despite their different struc-
ture and binding method. Palm leaf continued to be used widely until the
nineteenth century, when the introduction of modern printing methods in
mainland Southeast Asia resulted in the decline of its production during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as palm leaf manuscripts became
largely replaced by bound or folded paper books.6 These days, palm leaf
is mostly used for artistic and ritualistic purposes.7
Made of an organic material prone to degradation, palm leaf manu-
scripts have been continuously recopied over the centuries as a way of pre-
serving the text they bear. As such, extant early manuscripts are very
scarce. The surviving examples attest to the longevity, continuity and the
spread of the palm leaf tradition across the Asian continent.
Though the use of a generic term ‘palm leaf’ is widespread, especially in
the English literature, vernacular names, often implying a particular variety
of leaf, are commonly used across Asia. For example, variants include Ola
in Sri Lanka, Larn in Thailand, Lontar (meaning palmyra) in Myanmar and
2 Anupam Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts
of The World: Material, Technology and
Conservation’, Studies in Conservation
47, Supp. 1: Reviews in Conservation 3
(2002): 15–24.
3 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 16.
4 Om Prakash Agrawal, Conservation
of Manuscripts and Painting of South
Asia (London: Butterworth Heinemann,
1984), 24.
5 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 16.
6 See Jana Igunma, The Beauty of Palm
Leaf Manuscripts (2): Northern Thai, Lao
and Shan Traditions, British Library Blog
Post,
23
January
2015,
https://
britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/asian-and-
african/2015/01/the-beauty-of-palm-
leaf-manuscripts-2-northern-thai-lao-
and-shan-traditions.html
(accessed
3
August 2022).
7 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 16.
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
237
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 4 ---Indonesia, and Tala, Sritala or Karalika in different parts of India.8 While there
are numerous varieties of palm trees, three have been most widely used as
writing supports: Borassus flabellifer linn (palmyra palm), Corypha umbracu-
lifera linn (talipot palm, fan palm) and Corypha taliera Roxb.9
1 Borassus flabellifer linn, palmyra or toddy palm (Sanskrit name: Tal;
Hindu: Tar)
The palmyra palm grows in many parts of India, Myanmar and Sri Lanka. It is
native to Africa and needs a drier climate. The trees grow up to 15–20m and
the leaf stalks grow to around 1m in height. The leaves are initially flexible,
but this flexibility decreases over time. The leaves from the palmyra palm are
thicker and coarser compared to those of the talipot. The leaves also appear
to be more prone to insect attack than those of the talipot variety.10
2 Corypha umbraculifera linn, talipot or fan palm (Sanskrit name:
Karalika, Sritalam, Tali)
The talipot palm grows in the forests of Sri Lanka, Myanmar—where it is
known as gebang—Thailand, Malaysia and South India. It needs a wet
climate, and the trees can grow up to 20–25m. The leaves from the
talipot are used for making things like fans, mats and umbrellas. The
leaves remain flexible and supple for a long period of time and are
smoother than those of the palmyra palm.11
3 Corypha taliera Roxb
This palm grows in Bengal and some coastal areas of Tamilnadu in India.
The trees grow up to 10m tall. The leaves are thick and not very flexible,
and more prone to insect attack.12
The leaves vary between different varieties of palms in shape, length,
thickness and colour, but further research into structure and chemical com-
position (e.g. presence of essential oils) and the differences between palm
varieties and regions is necessary in order to determine the roles they play
in leaves’ resilience, longevity and resistance to biological attacks.13
Preparation, seasoning and production of palm leaves
Once harvested—usually during the dry season—palm leaves require
additional processing or ‘seasoning’ in order to make them fit for writing
Fig. 1 Prajnaparamita stotra, tenth century, eastern India, Mahayana Buddhism text, Sanskrit, Pala-Bengali- Nepali scripts, MS Add.1464
from Cambridge University Library. Image by Sarah Welch.
8 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 17.
9 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 25.
10 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 25.
11 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 25.
12 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 26.
13 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 17.
238
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 5 ---on for manuscripts.14 Several processing methods are used and these vary
according to the leaf type, custom and region. Palm leaves treated in such
ways are relatively robust and have been known to last as long as 500–600
years even in the humid, tropical climate of Southeast Asia.15 Variations in
seasoning according to country include the following.
1 South India
Fresh palm leaves are dried in the shade and rubbed with gingili oil to make
them smooth.16
2 South India, eastern India and Odisha
Tender palm leaves are hung and smoked for several days (typically in a
kitchen) after which any surface deposits are wiped off so that the leaves are
ready for writing.17 In Odisha there are some further variants including where:
(a) tender palm leaves are smoked for a few days, and then rubbed with
turmeric paste. The turmeric paste contains the roots of the shrub
Curcuma longa, which have been boiled in earthen pots and dried in
the sun, mixed with water;
(b) the palm leaves are dried in the sun and buried for 10–15 days under
pond mud or silt, after which they are cleaned and dried and maybe
rubbed with turmeric paste;
(c) the mature palm leaves are boiled in water, making the leaves thin and
soft, after which they are cleaned with a soft cloth and turmeric paste is
applied.18
3 Sri Lanka
Fresh palm leaves are boiled in water or limewater for a few hours and
dried in the shade.19 They are also sometimes boiled interspersed with
pineapple leaves, then washed, fumigated and burnished.
4 Myanmar
Using methods similar to Sri Lanka and India, palm leaves are boiled and
once the black secretions have been removed, the leaves are weighed
down to dry and burnished.20
5 Bali
Bundles of leaves are dried in the sun, then soaked in water for 3–4 days,
rubbed clean in the water, dried again in the sun, cut to size and boiled
for 8 hours in a herbal solution, then gently cleaned in water with a cloth,
and laid out to dry in the sun. After being wiped with a cloth, they are
pressed repeatedly and finally polished with a cloth.21
6 Thailand
Processing in Thailand is considerably different to other countries and
regions. While palm leaves can be typically found in nearly all Thai
forests, it is the golden leaf from the Lopburi region that is preferred.
After being cut the leaves are dried in the shade, the midrib removed
with a sharp blade and the leaves then cut to uniform size. Bundles of
leaves are then placed in a kiln for 24 hours, causing a black oil to exude
from the edges. The oil is wiped off, the leaf held over a fire for a few
minutes before finally being polished with hot sand.22
Leaf colouring and coatings
Leaf colouring and coatings as part of processing are typically only found in
Thailand and Myanmar. For other regions, the extent of leaf colouring and
coating is generally limited to rubbing in turmeric paste to create a slight
yellow hue, alongside its assumed insect-repellent properties. In contrast,
14 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 17.
15 Cf. Jana Igunma, ‘The Beautiful Art
of Tai Palm Leaf Manuscripts’, South-
east Asia Library Group Newsletter 46
(December 2014): 36.
16 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 27.
17 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 27.
18 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 27–8.
19 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 28.
20 Noed F. Singer, ‘Palm Leaf Manu-
scripts of Myanmar (Burma)’ p. 12,
blog
post,
https://www.burmese-
buddhas.com/palm-leaf-manuscripts-
of-myanmar.pdf (accessed 3 August
2022).
21 Ann Kumar and John McGlynn, eds,
Illuminations: The Writing Traditions of
Indonesia (Jakarta: Weatherhill, 1996),
136–7.
22 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 28–9; Bhoi Panchanan, ‘Scribe
as Metaphor: Patterns of Processing
and Writing Palm Leaf Manuscripts’,
Indian
Anthropologist
40,
no.
1
(January–June 2010): 82.
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
239
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 6 ---there are several types of colouring found in Thailand: the leaf can be dyed
red, black or blue or lacquered with red or black. In some cases leaves can
be fully gilded with gold or only have their edges decorated with lacquer,
gilding or both. These all serve as a means of protecting the edges of the
leaves. Lacquer coatings can also be found in Myanmar, where they are
typically amber coloured.23 However, there are few comparative studies
that explain the reasons behind some of these treatments and it has
been suggested by some authors that physical deterioration of palm
leaves may actually stem from some of these traditional preparation
methods.24
Materials of palm leaf manuscripts (boards, cords and more …)
There are different formats for palm leaf manuscripts, with the most
common one being the ‘bundle’, where a number of similarly sized folios
are bound between two wooden panels.25
1 Format and size
The manuscripts are most often found in elongated horizontal format due
to the natural long and narrow shape of the leaves (Fig. 2). The length of
palm leaf manuscripts can vary from 15 to 60cm and with a width
between 3 and 12cm. The dimensions depend on the available sizes of
the leaves as well as regional variations.26 For example, according to cura-
tors at the British Library, Burmese manuscripts tend to be much larger
than Javanese manuscripts. In nearly every country, there are different
sizes of manuscripts and different formats of use, such as, for example, a
different number of holes and different ways of stringing through holes.
Manuscripts are also stored differently. Finally, while most manuscripts
Fig. 2 Thai palm leaf manuscript with incised text, black lacquered wooden covers painted in
gold with scrolling foliage, leaves with gilded edges and central band of vermillion, first half of
the nineteenth century. Shown with metal stylus and decorative wrapper. Image: Wellcome
Trust.
23 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 31.
24 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 17.
25 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 18.
26 Cf. for example, D. Udaya Kumar
et al., ‘Traditional Writing System in
Southern
India—Palm
Leaf
Manu-
scripts’,
Design
Thoughts,
Industrial
Design Centre (IDC) at the Indian Insti-
tute of Technology (IIT Bombay), July
2009,
3,
http://www.idc.iitb.ac.in/
resources/dt-july-2009/Palm.pdf
(accessed 3 August 2022).
240
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 7 ---are typically rectangular some have been cut into ‘novelty’ shapes such as
fish, a fan, beads and so on.27
When the leaves are ready after initial processing, they are cut to size
and, if not done previously, the leaf midribs are removed.28 There are
occasions where the rib is retained with the centre of the leaf folded and
only the outside of the leaf used to write on.29
The trimmed leaves are put into bundles, varying from just a few leaves
to hundreds, but are usually small with a height of under 10cm. In some
cases, two or more leaves are stitched together at the edges to make a
broader surface for writing.30
2 Boards
Bundles are typically stored between two wooden boards (or panels) which
are slightly larger than the leaves. The wooden boards can be left blank but
they are often carved, gilded, lacquered, or decorated with ivory and
mother-of-pearl or contain painted illustrations, especially for those with
religious texts.31 A red or black lacquer is a popular material to apply to
covers; it also provides protection against water and humidity, as well as
being a good background for gold leaf or paint application, or even in
some cases for shell inlay. Bamboo strips or boards, which are cut to the
size of the manuscript leaves, are popular covers in Lanna and Laos and
among the Shan of Myanmar.32
In Thailand and Laos there were two common methods of applying gold
designs to lacquer. One technique—popular in Thailand and some parts
of Laos—involves applying several coats of black lacquer to the wooden
board. The lacquer is a resin produced by a tree in the sumac family
growing in mainland Southeast Asia. The drawing is then traced, and the
areas which should remain black are covered in all their smallest details
with a painted layer of liquid natural rubber. Once the rubber is dry, a thin
coat of lacquer is applied to the board, and when nearly dry, gold leaf is
applied over the whole surface of the panel. After about 20 hours the
board is rinsed with water to detach the rubber paint in order to let the
remaining gold design appear in all its beauty (Fig. 3). This art is called lai
rot nam in Thai—meaning designs washed with water. A second simpler
method, popular in northern Thailand and Laos, is to use stencils to apply
gold leaf or gold paint onto the surface of the wooden or bamboo covers.
Another method of decorating the wooden boards was to coat them
with black lacquer and then use a stylus to incise floral ornaments once
the lacquer was dry. After this, red lacquer was rubbed on the incisions
to create a vibrant red and black design. This technique may have been
imported into northern Thailand and Laos from Myanmar, where it is an
extremely popular method of decorating wood.33
3 Cords and wrappers
Holes are punched through the leaves and boards. Their placement can
differ, mainly due to size and regional variation of the leaves, with a hole
in the centre if the leaf is small, at either end, or sometimes because of
size, two or more holes are punched through each leaf.34 These holes
enable a cord to pass through so that it can be tied around the manuscript
to secure it (Fig. 4). The bundles are usually wrapped in cloth in order to
protect the manuscript from dust and dirt, and then bound to keep
secure. Traditionally the cloth wrappers were coloured, either red or
yellow (possibly using vermillion and orpiment as noted below), as these
were believed to have strong insect-repellent properties (Fig. 5). In
Lanna, Laos and among the Shan there are also examples of bamboo
strips woven into cotton cloth.35
27 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 34.
28 Kumar et al., ‘Traditional Writing
System in Southern India’, 3.
29 T. A. Davis and Dennis V. Johnson,
‘Current Utilization and Further Devel-
opment of the Palmyra Palm (Borassus
Flabellifer L, Arecaceae) in Tamil Nadu
State, India’, Economic Botany 41, no.
2 (1987): 247–66.
30 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 34.
31 Cf. Agrawal, Conservation of Manu-
scripts, 34, 36; Yana van Dyke, ‘Sacred
Leaves: The Conservation and Exhibi-
tion of Early Buddhist Manuscripts on
Palm Leaves’, The Book and Paper
Group Annual 28 (2009): 87.
32 Igunma, The Beauty of Palm Leaf
Manuscripts (2).
33 Jana Igunma and San San May, Bud-
dhism Illuminated: Manuscript Art from
Southeast Asia (London: British Library,
2018), 38.
34 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 34.
35 Igunma, The Beauty of Palm Leaf
Manuscripts (2).
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
241
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 8 ---British Library curator Jana Igunma states that some palm leaf manu-
scripts have textile wrappers which are often in very poor condition and his-
torically replaced rather than retained.36 Such replacement is a traditional
practice in Buddhist communities. However, the original wrapper is an inte-
gral part of the manuscript, which in the Buddhist tradition adds meritor-
ious value to the religious scripture. Usually, believers commission the
wrapper or make it as a religious offering. The original wrapper also
gives information on the origin and historical use of the manuscript and
should always be preserved.
Fig. 4 Upper image: British Library Indian palm leaf manuscript of sacred Tamil hymns
(Tēvāram) from the eighteenth century, Or. 12212, tied with a loop and wooden pointer (or
dowel). The cord is secured with a knot under the bottom board so it can be loosened for
reading and turning the leaves without losing the cord. The main function of the pointer is
to follow along the lines while reading (reciting); keeping the cord in place with the loop is
a secondary function. Lower image: wooden title indicator for palm leaf manuscript (bai lān)
with gold leaf, Or. 16555 from Northern Thailand (Lānnā), nineteenth century.
Fig. 3 Covers belonging to a Thai royal edition of the Paññāsa Jātaka, British Library, Or 12524. The wooden covers are decorated with black
lacquer and gilded plant forms, nineteenth century.
36 Igunma and May, Buddhism Illumi-
nated.
242
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 9 ---As with wrappers, the cords or strings on a manuscript vary in size,
colour, material (silk or cotton being most common) and style depending
on the manufacturer of the manuscript and the regional or local style.
For example, some cords have ornaments such as beads and others are
intertwined with human hair which, in the case of one Thai example from
the BL collection, belonged to the manuscript’s female patron. Indonesian
manuscripts often have Chinese coins called kepeng (with a central hole) as
string ornaments, but may also have glass beads or buttons.37 Further-
more, some Burmese manuscripts have hand-woven sazigyo or binding
ribbons made from silk or cotton thread. Like manuscripts and their wrap-
pers, sazigyo are commissioned to gain merit as the manuscripts are often
donated to a Buddhist monastery or temple.38
For identification purposes, a slip of palm leaf, ivory, bamboo or wood,
labelled with the manuscript title and foliation, often called a ‘title indi-
cator’, can be placed over the cover of the manuscript.39 In the Burmese
and Thai traditions, these title indicators vary from plain to elaborately
carved in various shapes (see Fig. 4). Some of their signs or labels were
carved in dagger shapes and contained the titles, number of leaves and
Fig. 5 Upper image: British Library palm leaf manuscript Or. 12212 in its calico, cotton
wrapper. The original wrapper is probably lost. Lower image: original two-layered cotton
wrapper for British Library manuscript Or. 1044, Sārasaṅgaha from Thailand, nineteenth
century. The inner layer made from red handwoven cotton, outer layer made from blue
printed cotton with floral design and broken cotton cord .
37 Cf. for example, Dick van Der Meij,
‘Indonesian
Manuscripts
from
the
Islands
of
Java,
Madura,
Bali
and
Lombok’,
in
Handbook
of
Oriental
Studies Section 3: Southeast Asia, Vol.
24 (Leiden: Brill, 2017), 158.
38 Annabel Gallop et al., ‘More than a
Book: A New Display of Southeast
Asian Manuscripts’, African and Asian
Studies Blog, The British Library, 14
March 2016, https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-
and-african/2016/03/more-than-a-
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
243
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 10 ---other information such as the donor of the manuscript.40 Igunma and San
San May explain that the title indicators (or gabyidan in Burmese) are also
referred to as ‘wooden pointers’ and can be used to follow along the lines
when reading. The main characteristic that distinguishes a title indicator
from a wooden pointer is the inscriptions to identify the manuscript as
shown in the Tamil example in Fig. 4.
The structure of palm leaf manuscripts means the leaves are read from
left to right, top to bottom, lifted and turned to place one leaf over
another. The openness of the format of the binding structure has meant
that the text block can be leafed through more easily without causing phys-
ical damage to the leaves. However, the format has also led to text blocks
being found mixed, missing and out of order and, in addition, covers have
become separated from their original text blocks.41
Inks, pigments and other media
The text written on palm leaf manuscripts was most commonly created
using two different methods. Texts were either first incised using a stylus
and then written on or written directly onto the surface of the leaf with a
pen or brush. The species of palm leaf used for the production of a manu-
script informed the writing technique applied, as different species proved
to be more suited for one technique or the other. Anupam Sah reasons that
the palmyra type was rarely surface written because it was darker and
waxier than the talipot, thus less able to absorb media.42 The range of
media applied to palm leaves reflects regional variations and availability
of materials, as well as aspects such as the status and subject matter of
manuscripts. Finally, the long-term condition of a manuscript is affected
by the application method, which also informed traditional preservation
measures and subsequent conservation approaches.
1 Incised text
Incised text was produced using a pointed metal, bone or hard wooden
stylus (see Fig. 2). Sah notes that in Sri Lanka where a metal stylus
is used, beginners start with a blunt stylus and then progress to using a
Fig. 6 Upper image: British Library manuscript Or. 12212 in Tamil script with incised and black-
ened text. Lower image: British Library Thai palm leaf manuscript, Sārasaṅgaha, Or. 1044 with
incised text, nineteenth century.
book-a-new-display-of-southeast-
asian-manuscripts.html
(accessed
3
August 2022).
39 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 34, 36.
40 Igunma and May, Buddhism Illumi-
nated, 14.
41 Cf. van Dyke, ‘Sacred Leaves’, 87.
42 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 21.
244
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 11 ---decorated and well-balanced sharp stylus usually 25–35cm long. The
incisions were then inked or treated in some other way (see Fig. 6). The
most common media used was soot (carbon black) combined with a
binder of either plant juice, resin or oil, which was wiped or rubbed
across the text. Excess media would then be wiped off with a dry cloth
or rice husk to ensure that only areas where the incisions were made
would be stained. In Thailand, sand was also used after wiping with a
cloth to absorb any remaining excess media.43
Regional examples of media variations include soot combined with
Dummala and Kakuna oils in Sri Lanka,44 turmeric powder, soot and citro-
nella or gingili oil in India,45 and the use of red ink, indigo and vermillion in
Thailand.46 Other materials identified include bean plant juice, pulverised
burnt candlenut and coconut oil,47 gum arabic and wood oil.48
In his research, David Jacobs found that there was a lack of awareness
that some incised manuscripts were never intended to be inked with
carbon black, but were initially treated with plant juice, with the text
being made visible when desired through the application of water or by
rubbing with fresh leaves. Dr S. Jayabarathi similarly mentions the appli-
cation of turmeric powder followed by water for reading,49 and Yeni
Budi Rachman details a traditional Javanese method of applying candlenut
powder to highlight the text.50 This lack of understanding of the intended
appearance of some manuscripts has led to the perception that ink has
been lost, and led to the practice of re-inking, a technique that has also
been applied for those that were originally inked. In his notes on the
India Office Library and Records (IOLR) studio, Jacobs described how, in
the twentieth century at the British Library, carbon black ink powder
would be mixed with camphor oil and rubbed into incised text that
looked faded or bare, and the same treatment is also referred to by
Alfred Crowley.51 Anupam Sah discusses how re-inking is applied when
binders in the inks have weakened with the subsequent loss of pigment
particles, but argues that this practice limits the ability to use media for
dating and that the risks and benefits of re-inking versus consolidation
should be further considered: ‘ … is the purpose only to render the
incisions visible or is it also to preserve the “original” ink particles?’.52 It
is often perceived that certain substances used for media were selected
for their insecticide properties, but Sah also argues that this is something
that is taken for granted in the literature and there is scope for further
research.53
2 Surface written text
Surface writing was applied directly to the surface of an oiled palm leaf with
either a reed, bamboo pen or brush (Fig. 7). Janay Laudat describes how
the oiled, smooth surface of the leaf allowed the ink to flow, while prevent-
ing it from penetrating or staining unwanted areas.54 As with incised
leaves, the most common media used for writing was carbon black
mixed with a binder and the rolled manuscripts with clay seals from
Nepal are one of the best examples of surface written text.55
Surface writing can be vulnerable to abrasion and loss. Yana van Dyke
has stated that the ink used is generally chemically stable, but ‘inherently
susceptible to microscopic instability or losses due to mechanical abrasion
in the stack’.56 This vulnerability often leads to surface written (or painted)
manuscripts needing to be consolidated or conserved at a later date.
3 Illustration and decoration
Palm leaf manuscripts can contain illustrations (or paintings) as well as text
(see Fig. 1), which are similarly either painted directly on the leaf surface or
incised then coloured. For example, Igunma states that the majority of Thai
43 Anupam Sah, ‘Puskola Pothi: Palm
Leaf Manuscripts of Sri Lanka’, Studies
in Conservation 47, supp. 2 (2002): 14;
Montgomery Schuyler Jr, ‘Notes on
the Making of Palm-Leaf Manuscripts
in Siam’, Journal of the American Orien-
tal Society 29 (1908): 282.
44 Cf.
for
example,
David
Jacobs,
‘Workshop Notes of The Conservation
and Stabilization of Palm Leaf Manu-
scripts’,
South
Asia
Library
Group,
Newsletter 40, December 2010, 26.
45 Susan Ghosh, Arnab Mahajan, and
Swapna Banerjee, ‘Palm Leaf Manu-
script Conservation, The Process of
Seasoning’,
International
Journal
of
Information Movement 2, no. 2 (2017):
123.
46 Janay Laudat, ‘South Asian Heritage
Month Collection Close Up: Preserving
Palm Leaf—A Sacred Manuscript Tra-
dition’, blog post, The John Rylands
Library,
Manchester,
August
2020,
https://rylandscollections.com/2020/
08/03/south-asian-heritage-month-
collection-close-up-preserving-palm-
leaf-a-sacred-manuscript-tradition/
(accessed 3 August 2022).
47 Jacobs, ‘Workshop Notes’, 25.
48 Laudat,
‘South
Asian
Heritage
Month’.
49 S. Jayabarathi, ‘Palm Leaf Writing by
the Ancient Tamils’, video, May 2015,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
vvxGbSsYDx8
(accessed
3
August
2022).
50 Yeni
Budi
Rachman,
‘Palm
Leaf
Manuscripts
from
Royal
Surakarta,
Indonesia:
Deterioration
Phenomena
and Care Practices’, Restaurator—Inter-
national Journal for The Preservation of
Library and Archival Materials 39, no. 4
(2018): 238.
51 Alfred Crowley, ‘Repair and Conser-
vation of Palm Leaf Manuscripts’, Res-
taurator—International Journal for The
Preservation of Library and Archival
Materials 1 no. 2 (1969): 106–7.
52 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 21.
53 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 19.
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
245
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 12 ---manuscripts are composed of text only, but those that contain illustrations
are either blackened like the text or coloured with red or brown lacquer sol-
ution.57 Sah describes how illustrations were either incised or surface drawn,
with the incised lines then filled with gum tempera paint (Fig. 8).58 From a
case study of 45 Indian manuscripts, van Dyke found that the images were
formed by thickly applied opaque paint applied directly to the leaf surface
with no preparation layer or ground. The adhesion of the paint layer to
the leaf was usually found to be strong, but that flaking and friable paint
layers could be attributed to poor adhesion, desiccation of the binder,
abrasion and stress caused when the leaves were turned.59
Various researchers have aimed to identify the pigments employed in
palm leaf media. Both van Dyke and Deepakshi Sharma et al., identified
carbon black, blue derived from indigo, yellow from orpiment, red from
vermillion or cinnabar, white from calcium carbonate or China clay, and
green from a mixture of indigo and orpiment.60 Orpiment, which contains
arsenic, was sometimes used as it was thought to have insect-repellent
qualities. In another study, Sharma et al. confirmed the presence of
starch paste and pectin as binders in the paint layer of an illustrated
Fig. 7 British Library Javanese gebang manuscript, made from the talipot or fan palm, MSS Jav
105 with surface written text, previously laminated to prevent further ink loss with leaves
blocking (sticking together), fifteenth–sixteenth century.
Fig. 8. British Library Burmese palm leaf manuscript, Or. 12010 J with lacquered leaves. Outer
leaves painted with silver pigment and black lacquered designs of lotuses in roundels,
showing damage to lacquer with beige underlayer visible, in Pali script, nineteenth century.
54 Laudat,
‘South
Asian
Heritage
Month’.
55 Cf.
for
example,
Naoko Takagi,
Yoriko Chudo, and Reiko Maeda, ‘Con-
servation of Digitisation of Rolled Palm
Leaf Manuscripts in Nepal’, Paper Con-
servators Asia Unlimited, blog post
November 2005, https://www.asianart.
com/articles/tamsuks/
(accessed
3
August 2022).
56 van Dyke, ‘Sacred Leaves’, 87.
57 Igunma, The Beautiful Art of Thai
Palm Leaf, 37.
58 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 18.
59 van Dyke, ‘Sacred Leaves’, 89.
60 van Dyke, ‘Sacred Leaves’, 88; Dee-
pakshi Sharma et al., ‘Pigment Analysis
of Palm Leaf Manuscripts of India’,
Current Science 118, no. 2 (2020): 285.
246
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 13 ---Indian manuscript,61 and in their pigment study concluded that colours
were prepared by mixing primary pigments with locally available gum or
adhesive.62
Jacobs summarised the materials used for media as:
Lamp black mixed with wood apple gum (resembles gum arabic in properties)
Vermillion as a red pigment from ground cinnabar (iron oxide), known in India
as Hingula
Red lead mixed with plant gum (gum arabic)
Red ochre mixed with plant gum
White made from burnt conch and oyster shells powdered and mixed with
plant gum
Yellow made from orpiment and realgar, both arsenic sulfide minerals
Yellow prepared from an adhesive made out of wood apple mixed with tur-
meric powder
Blue made from the ground juice of indigo plant leaves mixed with plant gum
Green made from a mixture of indigo and orpiment with plant gum
Green made from ground bean leaves, mixed with plant gum.63
The leaves of a palm manuscript can be more heavily decorated with
lacquer, gold leaf, gold paint, inlaid mother-of-pearl (Fig. 9), mirror glass,
crystals or precious stones.64 The leaves of Burmese ‘Kammavaca’ manu-
scripts were lacquered and gilded, sometimes with added pigment for
colour.65 Anupam Sah suggests that the use of lacquer is one of the
factors that distinguishes the manuscripts of Thailand and Myanmar from
those of other regions.66 Furthermore, the boards for these manuscripts
were commonly made from wood and occasionally decorated with
materials such as mother-of-pearl, gold leaf, gold paint or lacquer.
Igunma states that ‘mother-of-pearl inlay was a very popular method of
wood decoration in central Thailand, but it was also adopted in Lanna
and Laos due to close cultural relationships and exchange or transfer of
Buddhist scriptures’.67 Boards could also be made from other materials
such as metal or ivory, which could also be highly decorative.
4 Oiling
Varnish or oil may also be present as a layer or within the leaf. For instance,
Om Prakash Agrawal reports that shellac was used as a popular protective
Fig. 9 Upper image: ornate top board with mother-of-pearl shell inlay, from British Library
palm leaf manuscript Or. 16077 in Pali from Northern Thailand, nineteenth century. Lower
image: British Library palm leaf manuscript with red lacquer and gilt decoration in Pali
script, Kammavācā, Or. 12010a, Burmese, nineteenth century.
61 Deepakshi Sharma, Manager Rjdeo
Singh, and Bhushan Dighe, ‘Chromato-
graphic Study on Traditional Natural
Preservatives Used for Palm Leaf Manu-
scripts
in
India’,
Restaurator—Inter-
national Journal for The Preservation
of Library and Archival Materials 39,
no. 4 (2018): 259.
62 Sharma et al., ‘Pigment Analysis of
Palm Leaf Manuscripts of India’, 287.
63 Cf. Jacobs, ‘Workshop Notes’, 25.
64 Igunma, The Beautiful Art of Thai
Palm Leaf, 40.
65 Melanie Nief, Wolfgang Baatz, and
Sigrid Eyb-Green, ‘Kammavacas: Lac-
quered and Gilt Palm Leaf Manuscripts
from Burma. Analysis of Materials and
Techniques in the Context of a Conser-
vation Case Study’, The Journal of
Paper Conservation 11, no. 3 (2010): 19.
66 Sah, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscripts of The
World’, 18.
67 Igunma, The Beautiful Art of Thai
Palm Leaf, 41.
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
247
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 14 ---coating in India,68 and Susan Gawlowicz at Rochester Institute of Technol-
ogy concluded that the leaves in her study had aged dark brown as a result
of ‘time and a misguided application of oil’, which was obscuring the text.69
Other authors reference the application of different oils to impart flexibility
or as insecticides, relating to treatment by both indigenous communities
and conservators.70
Palm leaf manuscripts at the British Library
The India Office Library and Records (IOLR) collection of palm leaf manu-
scripts, now part of the British Library’s vast Asian and African Collections,
is extensive. Many of the manuscripts were stored in less than ideal con-
ditions before coming to the library but since their arrival many have only
rarely been opened and received little or no care. When they arrived in
the collection some manuscripts were very fragile with weak and brittle
leaves and/or leaves stuck together from mould or past treatments (block-
ing). However, some were also in good condition with text intact and
ornate pigments or lacquered covers.
Like many other collections, the most common types of damage for palm
included brittleness, mechanical damage, insect damage, staining, split-
ting of the surface layer and cleavage (separation of the upper from the
lower surface). Since the 1970s, the manuscripts have been treated in
various ways and by different studios, first at the British Museum and
then the British Library after its creation in 1973, starting with the India
Office Library and Records conservation studios.
1 IOLR treatments, 1970–1990
Often the first stage of treatment for manuscripts with incised text was to
fumigate the unopened manuscripts with thymol vapours to stop and/or
prevent mould growth. Once fumigated the manuscript was left to air,
before being surface cleaned with a soft brush in a fume cupboard.
The next step was to introduce some flexibility into each leaf with an
application of camphor oil. Where the incised and inked text had faded,
or if it had never been inked, a carbon black ink powder would be mixed
with the camphor oil and rubbed into the incised text. Excess ink was
then wiped away with a cotton cloth.
During this period, it was not known that some of the palm leaf manu-
scripts were never intended to be inked. As discussed, some palm leaf
manuscripts were incised so a bean plant or berry juice and aromatic oil
could be rubbed into the incised palm leaf, before oil or a little water
would be rubbed onto the leaf to make the text visible.
If there was no obvious physical damage the manuscripts were wrapped
in a plain cotton cloth and sometimes boxed. Traditionally a yellow or red
dyed silk cloth was used to wrap the manuscript. The dye in the cloth was
also thought to prevent insect attack. More important texts were wrapped
and kept in sandalwood boxes.
2 IOLR conservation studio (1970–1990)
Sewing was the traditional method used to repair damaged palm leaf
manuscripts in Asia. In contrast, in the IOLR conservation studio several
repair methods were used to attach loose fragments, repairs and infills
using various adhesives such as polyvinyl acetate (PVA), polyvinyl alcohol
(PVOH) and other wood adhesives. Losses were replaced with toned Japa-
nese tissue using PVA and methyl cellulose. Conservators did not build up
layers of tissue to match the exact thickness of the palm leaf, instead
the repairs were kept slightly thinner and lighter, so as not to stress the
repaired edge. Watercolours and cloth dyes were used to tone the
tissue. Local pulp application was also used to infill insect lacunae, consist-
68 Agrawal,
Conservation
of
Manu-
scripts, 58.
69 Susan Gawlowicz, ‘Imaging Technol-
ogy
Restores
700-Year-Old
Sacred
Hindu
Text’,
Rochester
Institute
of
Technology website, News, 18 Septem-
ber
2006,
https://www.rit.edu/news/
imaging-technology-restores-700-year-
old-sacred-hindu-text
(accessed
3
August 2022).
70 See, for example, D. G. Suryawanshi,
M. V. Nair, and P. M. Sinha, ‘Improving
the Flexibility of Palm Leaf’, Restaurator
13, no. 1 (1992): 37–46; Sah, ‘Palm Leaf
Manuscripts of The World’, 19; Jacobs,
‘Workshop Notes’, 29; Ghosh, Mahajan,
and Banerjee, ‘Palm Leaf Manuscript
Conservation’,
123;
Rachman,
‘Palm
Leaf Manuscripts from Royal Surakarta’,
238; Sharma, ‘Chromatographic Study
on
Traditional
Natural
Preservative’,
252–3.
248
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 15 ---ing of paper pulp toned with watercolour. It is probable that the IOLR
studio did not use the method developed in the OMPB (Oriental Manu-
scripts and Printed Books) studio of infilling losses in the manuscript with
new palm leaf material.
2a Encapsulation
Various materials were used to encapsulate palm leaf manuscripts, some
with greater success than others. Materials used included glass, cellulose
acetate, perspex (Fig. 10) and polyester films, such as Melinex® pockets
or sleeves with the edges sewn or spot welded in place.
2b Fragments
Fragments were often stored in Melinex® to avoid loss and further
damage. However, this may not always have been the best choice for
heavily damaged or brittle fragments, as Melinex® is very flexible and
may have allowed too much movement in some cases.
3 Oriental Manuscripts and Printed Books studio at the British Library
(OMPB)
As solvents can have a desiccating effect on palm leaves, water on cotton
swabs was generally used for cleaning in the OMPB studio. However,
ethyl alcohol (ethanol) was used for cleaning leaves that weren’t incised,
Fig. 10 British Library palm leaf manuscript IOL San 1492 written in Sanskrit, housed between
perspex sheets.
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
249
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 16 ---avoiding the text or pigmented areas, and any old repairs made with tape
were removed and cleaned of residues using acetone where necessary.
Infills were carried out using pieces of new palm leaf with ethylene-vinyl
acetate (EVA) or using sa paper, a thick type of Thai mulberry (kozo) fibre
paper, with EVA and methyl cellulose. Often repairs wouldn’t adhere to oily
palm leaves, so the surface oil needed to be removed first using a small
amount of ethanol on a cotton swab.
3a Repairs with new palm leaf
Once the infill area was ready, a new piece of palm leaf was carefully cut out
using a tracing made on Melinex® to get the exact shape. The repair piece
would be cut slightly larger than the original, so that it could overlap on the
verso by about 2mm. The new palm leaf was then pared and applied with a
small amount of EVA on the overlapping edge. The method of attaching
new palm leaf infills with EVA is described in detail by David Jacobs.71
3b Repairs with Japanese papers
Tears were repaired in the OMPB studio using 100% Japanese kozo papers of
different weights or thick sa paper for larger losses. The papers were toned
with Cartasol K dyes in various shades.72 The dyes (now produced by Arch-
roma) have been used in the British Library for many years and have shown
good colour fastness and stability. The repairs were adhered with a water-
soluble mixture of a small amount of soluble EVA and methyl cellulose.
If a large part of the leaf was missing, a piece of thick kozo or sa paper
would be carefully torn or water-cut to match the missing area. The infill
was then applied, slightly overlapping the edge of the leaf with the
repair paper on the verso. When dry, it was supported on both sides of
the infill by Japanese tissue in the manner described above. Loose leaf
fragments were secured the same way. The cracks, vertical folds and
creases were also supported with thin Japanese paper from the verso.
4 British Library conservation studio treatments 2005–present
Repair methods continued to evolve in the British Library conservation
studios in the 2000s. Cascamite—a urea formaldehyde resin—was a wood
glue used in the conservation studios in the early 2000s to attach new
pieces of palm leaf as infills for damaged leaves. This technique was used
for thick palmyra leaf manuscripts, with varying levels of success and they
were attached flush, edge-to-edge, and done in the fume cupboard. Casca-
mite is no longer used as it’s irreversible as well as toxic. Other wood glues
such as Araldite epoxy resin were previously used to repair wooden boards,
and Paraloid B-72 (in acetone) was used to consolidate wood. Otherwise,
manuscripts without boards were often given new support boards made
of acid free mount board, cut slightly bigger than the manuscript to
protect the edges before wrapping in calico and boxing.
More recently palm leaf conservation at the British Library has seen con-
servators returning to use toned Japanese papers of various weights for
tear repairs and infills due to their stability and reversibility (Fig. 11).
Depending on the thickness and type of manuscript, wheat starch paste
and methyl cellulose have been used as adhesives in more recent work,
with isinglass or fish glue sometimes used for lacquered items. Due to its
ease and convenience, fish glue was used rather than isinglass in some
cases; but further research and investigation is needed for an accurate
comparison with isinglass.
Common types of damage
The common types of damage, as described in the available literature,
highlight both historical and continuing types of damage found in palm
71 Jacobs, ‘Workshop Notes’.
72 Cartasol K are cationic, direct dyes
developed especially for toning wood-
free pulp paper.
250
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 17 ---leaf collections today. There are inherent defects in the organic structure of
palm leaves and when combined with environmental factors, constant
handling and improper storage, all can greatly affect the deterioration of
palm leaf manuscripts.
1 Inherent defects
The palm leaf is an organic product prone to natural ageing and deterio-
ration. The chief constituent of the palm leaf is cellulose, which on ageing
loses suppleness and becomes fragile and embrittled. As Julia Poirier has
recently written, ‘degradation agents inherent to the palm leaf, such as
the lignin content, lead to the palm’s tendency to become rigid and
lose flexibility, therefore becoming prone to brittleness over time’.73
The substances used in the manufacturing process of palm leaves can
also have a damaging effect on the structure with, for example, the resi-
nous oils that are applied to retain suppleness eventually evaporating and
reducing the flexibility of the leaves.
2 Environmental factors
This structural deterioration is exacerbated by environmental factors, namely
light, heat and moisture and fluctuations in these elements. Damage occurs
as planar distortions (or cockling), splitting (longitudinal cracks in the surface
layer) and cleavage (the surface layer separating from the inner layer).
By far the most prevalent damage found in palm leaf collections is from
insects which appear as tiny bore holes penetrating the structure or tunnels
(losses across the surface). The insects responsible are mostly termites, cock-
roaches, silverfish and booklice. Rodent damage (rats and mice) in the form of
gnawing marks and losses along the edges is less common, as is fungal attack,
where a greenish to black mould can infest and discolour the leaves.
Staining is a common occurrence on palm leaves, mostly from the
accumulation of dust and dirt (which can also be abrasive) and less com-
monly from insect excreta. Contact with water or other liquids can cause
staining and can often lead to blocking (where leaves stick to one
another) and mould growth.
Other environmental factors that cause significant damage to palm
leaves are from the oxidation of cellulose and acidic gases present in the
Fig. 11 Infills being applied to a palm leaf manuscript with wheat starch paste by building up
layers of Japanese paper to reach the desired thickness.
73 Cf. for example, Julia Poirier, ‘Dela-
minating and Fraying Fibres: Develop-
ing an Advanced Treatment Approach
for the Conservation of a 12th Century
Palm Leaf Manuscript’, Chester Beatty
blog
post,
March
2020,
https://
chesterbeatty.ie/conservation/
delaminating-and-fraying-fibres
(accessed 3 August 2022).
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
251
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 18 ---atmosphere. Not to be confused with the natural browning of the leaves as
they dry out, this type of discolouration appears as yellowing or blacken-
ing, often found along edges or where exposed when cover boards are
missing. The historical re-oiling or protective varnishing of leaves can
also produce discolouration.
3 Handling
Poor handling can result in localised delamination, fraying, breakages and
loss. Frequent opening of the manuscript leaves can lead to a widening of
the holes in the binding structure, as they are damaged by the repeated
friction of the cords when opening or of pages being turned (Fig. 12).
van Dyke suggests that ‘fraying, delamination, and splitting of the structure
are to be expected around the binding holes and from the edges; tears are
much less common’.74 Further mechanical damage is caused by a tra-
ditional binding method that involves winding the threaded cord around
the edges of the manuscript which can cause breakage to leaf edges.75
Old and inappropriate repairs and treatments can also cause irreparable
damage to palm leaves with, for example, Sellotape being employed as a
repair method in the past. The use of palm leaf manuscripts as objects of
worship and daily prayers mean they are often subjected to an environment
containing burning candles and/or incense and are susceptible to staining
from any soot particles.
4 Improper storage
Improper storage and housing can have an adverse effect on the preservation
of palm leaves. Flood, fire, infestation or other climatic disasters can devastate
collections. As described, traditionally manuscripts were wrapped in a cloth
and bound with cord but they can be found stored in bespoke wooden
boxes or suspended on racks. More commonly they are shelved and
stacked in piles in local repositories and this stacking can cause breakages.
If not kept in a museum-like environment, the physical protection of
manuscripts can be less than ideal and conditions within buildings can
offer minimal protection from the elements and nature. Differing climatic
conditions can make palm leaves more susceptible to degradation—such
as planar distortion from excess humidity—whereas a controlled environ-
ment can improve their longevity.
Fig. 12 Close-up of damage to a cord hole on a Tamil manuscript revealing the fractured inner
layers of the leaf created by the binding cord, British Library manuscript Mss Tamil 171, India,
nineteenth century.
74 van Dyke, ‘Sacred Leaves’, 88.
75 Jacobs, ‘Workshop Notes’, 26.
252
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 19 ---5 Media
The range of media applied to palm leaves is commonly described as
unstable because the surface of the leaf is not very absorbent and any
ink, for example, remains on the surface and is prone to physical loss or
flaking. Abrasion from the stacking of leaves can lead to the surface
written text becoming very faint over time. The organic binder in the ink
also has a tendency to degrade and cause flaking and powdering.
Both surface and incised inks can be lost through fading (light damage)
and oxidation. Staining and discolouration of the support can make
the text illegible, and any distortion of the support can cause partial or
complete loss of the text.
Repeated handling of palm leaves, particularly illustrated manuscripts
with liquid gold decorations and where letters appear raised, can lead to
abrasion and scratches of the painted or written surface.
6 Boards
The mostly wooden (occasionally metal or ivory) protective cover boards
are an integral part of a palm leaf manuscript. They provide an additional
layer of physical protection against the elements. Wooden objects, being
porous in nature, often require coating with a surface protection as well
as ornamentation. As detailed, boards are often decorated with inlays
(mirror glass, mother-of-pearl), or painted and varnished, gilded (gold
leaf) or lacquered or a combination of these. These decorative elements
are often prone to loss, flaking, separation, deterioration or damage
mostly from environmental factors and poor handling.
The structural deterioration of wood is somewhat similar to that of palm
leaves, and is exacerbated by environmental factors, the most pronounced
being from the fluctuations in temperature and humidity. Damage occurs
as shrinkage and expansion, warping and splitting, all of which can disturb
and distort the surface coatings and ornamentation. Damage from light
can cause a change of colour (fading or discolouration) and a change in
texture or finish with, for example, varnished boards appearing to have an
opaque coating. Wood is also prone to attack from insects, rodents,
mould including fungi in common with the palm leaf support.
The repeated handling of the boards can cause abrasion and loss of the
surface treatment. Boards can be separated or lost from the manuscript
after the untying of the binding cords, leaving the palm leaf support vulner-
able and without protection. This loss can lead to the misplacement of the
title indicator (if present) and invariably disassociation of the object. Often
broken wooden boards were simply replaced with new boards as was tra-
ditional practice in Buddhist communities.
7 Cords
The binding cords—often cotton but traditionally a braided silk in South
East Asia—are used to string palm leaves together and are commonly
wrapped around the cover boards in order to secure the manuscript. Silk
and cotton, being organic materials, are prone to natural ageing and
deterioration. This deterioration can lead to embrittlement causing the
fibres to split, fray and ultimately break.
Silk is particularly sensitive to environmental degradation with light
being a major cause of damage, particularly because of UV radiation.
Exposure to UV can cause yellowing, weakening of the fibres and signifi-
cantly contributes to fading of dyes and colourants. Heat and moisture,
and fluctuations in these elements, contribute further to the physical
decay of silk fibres, if already extant from things like insect damage such
as from clothes moths and carpet beetles. Insect damage appears as tiny
holes or losses or residual webs and insect casings. Water damage can
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
253
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 20 ---cause the bleeding of dyes and the accumulation of mould deposits which
can lead to staining.
As with the boards, repeated handling can cause stress to the silk fibres from
turning the palm leaf folios when being read. This strain on the binding cords,
as when wrapped around the covers, can cause severe breakages to the cords
(as well as to the leaves). If the binding cords are removed, leaving the support
unbound, this can lead to a disordering of the folios. Handling can also impart
oils and acids from the skin which can lead to ingrained dirt or staining.
Due to the causes of damage inherent to the organic nature of palm
leaves, and other materials that comprise palm leaf manuscripts, it is vital
that they are handled and stored properly to deter any further damage.
Conclusions
Palm leaf manuscripts and paintings represent a complex range of objects
with a huge variety of types and sizes, physical characteristics, and local tra-
ditions with strong regional variation. These variations are heavily influ-
enced by the types of palm trees the leaves are made from, which
dictates the size and type of leaf that can be used to create these objects.
Some of our key findings from undertaking this review of the available lit-
erature have demonstrated the importance of understanding the region and
culture that the manuscripts come from such that, due to their diversity, any
decisions about their conservation must be taken on a case-by-case basis.
Furthermore, good communication with curators and subject specialists is
vital to understanding the manuscripts and their materiality. Other com-
ponents of the manuscripts, such as boards, cords and wrappers, all have
their own significance and should always be retained with the manuscript.
We have also seen that some of the historic conservation treatments
carried out at both the British Museum and the British Library, while done
with good intentions, are no longer approved methods. A less interventive
approach, with attention given to proper storage and handling, is more
appropriate to prevent irreversible damage or loss.
The research carried out for this review has highlighted a lack of consist-
ency in conserving, housing and repairing palm leaf manuscripts. This is a
developing area of conservation, to which it is hoped this review will con-
tribute. Please see the Appendix for survey results and the British Library
blogs list. Our Annotated Bibliography and further results of the survey
can be found on the BL Open Access Repository.76
The Palm Leaf Treatment review will continue with Part 2, which will focus
on historic treatments and current conservation techniques, boxing and
long-term storage, as well as religious and ethical issues, and our rec-
ommendations for best practice for conservators. The Appendix for Part
2 will also include two decision-making flowcharts—one for curators and
another for conservators—that can be useful when assessing palm leaves
and making treatment or housing decisions.
ORCID
Julia Wiland
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9023-7412
Paulina Kralka
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3496-8477
Marya Muzart
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5650-2390
Appendix 1: Results of the conservation of palm leaf manuscripts survey
A survey on the treatment of palm leaf manuscripts was posted on the
Global Conservation Forum (formerly the Conservation DistList) in
August 2020 by the Palm Leaf Treatment Review team of conservators at
the British Library. Graphs created using Google Forms.
76 https://doi.org/10.23636/8hbd-xj49
(accessed 16 August 2022).
254
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 21 ---Group responses
*Most likely all are talipot, a fuller survey for identification needs to be
completed.
**I am not familiar with the above terms, we use the term Lontar when it
concerns Indonesian palm leaves, and these do come in the thin, some-
times warped leaves, and also in very thick and sturdy leaves.
*I’m not sure whether the above (stylus with ink applied with brush) is
applicable—the ink may have been applied in a different manner—but
we definitely have the combi stylus and ink.
**Some manuscripts were applied with vegetable juice with lamp shoot.
***Purportedly carbon black, but not sure.
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
255
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 22 ---*Friable substrate of palm leaf.
**Fragile leaves with breakages and sometimes losses at back and front.
Also warping (due to type of leaf) which is a problem when we need to digi-
tise, and dust and some abrasion.
***Brittle leaves, loss of lacquer and gilt decorations.
****Missing leaves, dissociation, combined manuscripts in one box.
*I did not use any adhesive on my treatment.
**Have also used Araldite and Cascamite wood glues for old method of
board repair and palm infills.
***In a few instances we have used a mixture of MC and EVA, ca. 50:50.
****The percentage is generally adjusted from 3% methyl cellulose to
create suitable flow/penetration. The same is for starch paste. In some
cases, thicker adhesives are brushed out and dotted onto the area to be
repaired in order to reduce moisture while making a repair. With adhesive
use, we try to select an adhesive that is flexible and not stronger than the
area to be repaired—we prefer that the repair fails rather than introduce
new tensions and stresses to the work of art that can initiate damage.
*****Poly vinyl acetate emulsion in thin form.
Appendix 2: List of British Library blogs, research and other
information on palm leaf collections
1. Collection Care Blog
256
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 23 ---Magic in Conservation—Using Leaf-Casting on Paper and Palm Leaves, 10
October 2017, Iwona Jurkiewicz, https://blogs.bl.uk/collectioncare/2017/
10/magic-in-conservation-using-leaf-casting-a-mechanical-pulp-repair-
technique-on-paper-and-palm-leaves-as-the-library-i.html
2. Asian and African Studies Blog
A Thai Royal Edition of Pannasa Jataka, 5 June 2020, Jana Igunma and
Henry
Ginsburg,
https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2020/06/a-thai-
royal-edition-of-pannasa-jataka.html
Sir Hans Sloane’s Old Javanese manuscript, Sloane 3480, 20 June 2018,
Ida Bagus Komang Sudarma, Wayan Jarrah Sastrawan, and Arlo Griffiths,
https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2018/06/sir-hans-sloanes-old-
javanese-manuscript-sloane-3480.html
Javanese Manuscripts in the Sloane Collection, 19 June 2018, Annabel
Teh
Gallop,
https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2018/06/javanese-
manuscripts-in-the-sloane-collection.html?_ga = 2.210299285.182101380.
1528836642-768445457.1421359745
Buddhism Illuminated through Southeast Asian Manuscript Art (1), 8
June 2018, San San May, Jana Igunma, and Henry Ginsburg, https://
blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2018/06/buddhism-illuminated-through-
southeast-asian-manuscript-art-1.html
Kammavaca: Burmese Buddhist Ordination Manuscripts, 17 February
2017,
San
San
May,
https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2017/02/
kammavaca-burmese-buddhist-ordination-manuscripts.html
More than a Book: A New Display of Southeast Asian Manuscripts, 14
March 2016, Annabel Gallop, San San May, Jana Igunma, and Sud Chonch-
irds,
https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2016/03/more-than-a-book-a-
new-display-of-southeast-asian-manuscripts.html
The Beauty of Palm Leaf Manuscripts (3): Storage and Preservation, 6
February 2015, Jana Igunma and Henry Ginsburg, https://blogs.bl.uk/
asian-and-african/2015/02/the-beauty-of-palm-leaf-manuscripts-3-
storage-and-preservation.html
The Beauty of Palm Leaf Manuscripts (2): Northern Thai, Lao and Shan
Traditions, 23 January 2015, Jana Igunma and Henry Ginsburg, https://
britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/asian-and-african/2015/01/the-beauty-of-
palm-leaf-manuscripts-2-northern-thai-lao-and-shan-traditions.html
The Beauty of Palm Leaf Manuscripts (1): Central Thailand, 20 November
2014, Jana Igunma and Henry Ginsburg, https://britishlibrary.typepad.co.
uk/asian-and-african/2014/11/the-beauty-of-palm-leaf-manuscripts-1-
central-thailand.html
A New Catalogue of Malay and Indonesian Manuscripts in British Collec-
tions, 1 September 2014, Annabel Teh Gallop, https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-
and-african/2014/09/a-new-catalogue-of-malay-and-indonesian-
manuscripts-in-british-collections.html
The Javanese Story of the Prophet Joseph, 3 December 2013, Annabel
Teh Gallop, https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2013/12/the-javanese-
story-of-the-prophet-joseph.html
3. Endangered Archives Blog
Fragile Palm Leaves Digitisation Initiative (EAP1150), June–July 2020,
https://eap.bl.uk/project/EAP1150
Sanskrit and Malayalam Manuscripts from The Thrissur Monastic
Complex (EAP1039), April–May 2020, https://eap.bl.uk/project/eap1039
Constituting a digital archive of Tamil agrarian history (1650–1950)—
phase II (EAP689), May 2016–June 2016, https://eap.bl.uk/project/EAP689
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
257
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 24 ---Cataloguing, digitisation, and preservation of ancient palm leaf and
paper manuscripts archived in Chinmaya International Foundation (CIF)
(EAP729), February 2016, https://eap.bl.uk/project/eap729
Acknowledgements
We would like to give our thanks to the many people who helped
and contributed to this project including Dr Cordelia Rogerson
and the British Library Conservation Department, Annabel Gallop,
Jana Igunma, and the British Library Southeast Asian and South
Asian curators. We give thanks to all those who answered our
survey on the Global Conservation Forum, and the conservators
from various institutions whom we contacted for further infor-
mation.
Résumé
« Une revue littéraire de la restauration des manuscrits sur feuilles
de palmier: Partie 1: aperçu historique, préparation des feuilles,
matériaux et media, manuscrits sur feuilles de palmier de la
British Library et types d’altérations courantes »
La fermeture de la British Library lors de la pandémie de Covid-19
2020–2021 a permis au département de la restauration d’entre-
prendre un recensement des traitements de conservation des man-
uscrits sur feuilles de palmier afin de prendre des décisions plus
éclairées sur le traitement de ces objets complexes. Dans le cadre
du recensement, un questionnaire fut posté en 2020 sur le Forum
international de la conservation comprenant des questions sur le
traitement des manuscrits sur feuilles de palmier réalisé par
d’autres personnes dans ce domaine. Cette revue de la littérature
en deux parties exploite la littérature disponible et les résultats
de l’enquête pour aborder le large éventail de problèmes inhérents
à la conservation matérielle des matériaux en feuilles de palmier. La
partie 1 comprend un aperçu historique des manuscrits sur feuilles
de palmier et de leur fabrication, des méthodes de préparation des
feuilles, des matériaux et medias dans les manuscrits, des manu-
scrits sur feuilles de palmier à la British Library et des types d’altéra-
tions courantes observées dans ces manuscrits. La partie 2 détaille
les traitements anciens et les techniques de conservation actuelles
tels qu’ils ressortent de l’examen et de l’enquête, ainsi que les
questions de stockage, religieuses et éthiques, avant de conclure
par les recommandations pratiques.* Les auteurs souhaitent parta-
ger les informations rassemblées aussi largement que possible et
aider à créer une plus grande continuité et cohérence dans la con-
servation des manuscrits sur feuilles de palmier en présentant leurs
recommandations de bonnes pratiques pour les restaurateurs qui
traitent ces objets étonnants.
Zusammenfassung
„Eine Literaturübersicht über die Konservierung von Palmblattma-
nuskripten: Teil 1: Historischer Überblick, Blattvorbereitung, Mate-
rialien und Medien, Palmblattmanuskripte in der British Library und
häufige Schadensarten“
Die Schließung der British Library während der Covid-19-Pandemie
in den Jahren 2020–2021 ermöglichte es der Abteilung Bestandser-
haltung, die Behandlung von Palmblattmanuskripten zu überprü-
fen, um fundiertere Entscheidungen über die Behandlung dieser
komplexen Objekte treffen zu können. Im Rahmen dieser Überprü-
fung wurde 2020 ein Fragebogen an das Global Conservation
Forum geschickt, in dem nach der Behandlung von Palmblattmanu-
skripten in anderen Sammlungen gefragt wurde. Diese zweiteilige
Literaturübersicht nutzt die verfügbare Literatur und die Ergebnisse
der Umfrage, um das breite Spektrum an Fragen zu behandeln, die
mit der Restaurierung von Palmblattmaterialien verbunden sind.
Teil 1 enthält einen historischen Überblick über Palmblattmanu-
skripte und ihre Herstellung, Blattpräparationsmethoden, Manu-
skriptmaterialien
und
-medien,
Palmblattmanuskripte
in
der
British Library und die in solchen Manuskripten häufig vorkommen-
den Schadensarten. Teil 2 geht auf historische Behandlungsmetho-
den und aktuelle Restaurierungstechniken ein, die sich aus unserer
Untersuchung und Umfrage ergeben haben, sowie auf die Lager-
ung, religiöse und ethische Fragen, bevor wir mit unseren prak-
tischen Empfehlungen schließen.* Die Autoren möchten die
gesammelten Informationen so weit wie möglich verbreiten und
dazu beitragen, mehr Kontinuität und Konsistenz bei der Restau-
rierung von Palmblatthandschriften zu schaffen, indem sie unsere
Empfehlungen für bewährte Verfahren für Restauratoren, die
diese erstaunlichen Objekte behandeln, vorstellen.
Resumen
“Una revisión bibliográfica sobre la conservación de manuscritos de
hoja de palma. Primera parte: descripción histórica, preparación de
hojas, materiales y medios, manuscritos de hojas de palma en la
Biblioteca Británica y tipos comunes de daños”
El cierre de la Biblioteca Británica durante la pandemia de Covid-19
de 2020 al 2021 permitió al departamento de conservación llevar a
cabo una revisión de los tratamientos de conservación de los man-
uscritos en hoja de palma y así tomar decisiones más fundamenta-
das en relación con el tratamiento de estos complejos objetos.
Como parte de la revisión, en 2020, se envió un cuestionario al
Global Conservation Forum preguntando a otros conservadores
sobre el tratamiento de los manuscritos de hojas de palma. Esta
reseña bibliográfica en dos partes utiliza la literatura disponible y
los resultados de la encuesta para abordar la amplia problemática
de la conservación práctica de los materiales de hoja de palma.
La primera parte incluye una descripción histórica de los manuscri-
tos en hoja de palma y su producción, los métodos de preparación
de la hoja, los materiales y medios del manuscrito, los manuscritos
en hoja de palma en la Biblioteca Británica y los tipos de daños
comunes a dichos manuscritos. La segunda parte detalla los trata-
mientos históricos y las técnicas de conservación actuales según
lo informado por nuestra revisión y encuesta, así como cuestiones
de almacenamiento, religiosas y éticas, antes de concluir con nues-
tras recomendaciones prácticas. Los autores desean compartir la
información recopilada lo más ampliamente posible y presentar
nuestras recomendaciones de mejores prácticas para los conserva-
dores que tratan estos objetos fascinante para así ayudar a crear
mayor continuidad y consistencia en la conservación de manuscri-
tos de hoja de palma.
摘要
“有关保护棕榈叶手稿的文献回顾——第一部分：历史概述、叶子制
备、材料和媒介、大英图书馆的棕榈叶手稿以及常见损伤类型”
大英图书馆在2020-2021年新冠疫情期间关闭，使得保存修复部可以
对棕榈叶手稿的保护进行审查，以便在修护这类复杂藏品时做出更
明智的决定。作为审查的一部分，2020年大英图书馆在全球保护论
坛上发布了一份调查问卷，询问了该领域其他人对棕榈叶手稿的修
护情况。这篇由两部分组成的文献综述使用了现有文献和调查结
果，来探讨棕榈叶材料在保护实践中所涉及的广泛问题。
第一部分
包括对棕榈叶手稿及其制作的历史概述、叶子的制备方法、手稿材
258
Wiland, Brown, Fuller, Havelok, Johnson, Kenn, Kralka, Muzart, Pollard and Snowdon
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
--- PAGE 25 ---料和媒介、大英图书馆的棕榈叶手稿，以及在此类手稿中发现的常
见损伤类型。第二部分详细介绍了我们审查和调查所了解到的历史
处理方法和当前保护技术，以及存储、宗教和伦理问题，最后提出
了我们的实际建议。*
作者希望尽可能广泛地分享这些整理过的信
息，并通过向修护这些非凡物件的修复师建议我们的最佳做法，来
帮助促成在棕榈叶手稿保护方面的连续性和一致性
Biographies
Julia Wiland is an accredited paper conservator working at The
British Library in London since 2003, specialising in Asian and
Western art on paper and photographs. She has an MA in Conser-
vation of Works of Art on Paper from Camberwell College of Arts,
University of the Arts London.
Rick Brown is a book conservator and conservation team leader
working at The British Library in London. He joined the library in
1984 where he completed a 5-year apprenticeship and specialises
in book structures.
Lizzie Fuller is a paper conservator currently working at The
National Archives as a digitisation and large-scale projects con-
servator. She previously worked at the British Library, and com-
pleted her MA in Paper Conservation at Camberwell College of
Arts, UAL.
Lea Havelock is an accredited book conservator working at The
British Library in London since 2012 and specialises in library and
archive materials. She has an MA in Conservation as well as a BA
(Hons) in the History of Drawing and Printmaking from Camberwell
College of Arts, UAL.
Jackie Johnson received a BA in Conservation from the University of
Lincoln and her MA in Conservation of Books from Camberwell
College of Arts, UAL. She has had internships at the Landesmuseum
in Zurich, the V&A and the Parliamentary Archives in the House of
Lords. Currently, she works as a book conservator at the British
Library.
Dorothy Kenn is a book and paper conservator specialising in
photographs and album structures. She has been working at The
British Library since 1992, after completing a 5-year traineeship at
the library.
Paulina Kralka is a digitisation and scroll conservator who joined the
Lotus Sutra Manuscripts Digitisation project at The British Library in
March 2020. She holds an MA in Art Conservation and Restoration
from the Jan Matejko Academy of Fine Arts in Cracow and a BA in
Art History from Jagiellonian University, Krakow. She has also com-
pleted a Postgraduate Diploma in Asian Art at SOAS, University of
London.
Marya Muzart is a digitisation and scroll conservator who has been
working on the Lotus Sutra Manuscripts Digitisation project at The
British Library since 2018. She holds an MA in Paper Conservation
from Camberwell College of Arts, UAL and a BA in Art History
and Material Studies from University College London.
Jessica Pollard is a paper conservator working at The British Library.
She has an MA in Paper Conservation from Camberwell College of
Arts, UAL and a BA in Conservation of Historic Objects from Univer-
sity of Lincoln.
Jenny Snowdon is a book conservator working at The British Library
since 2015. She has an MA in Book Conservation at Camberwell
College of Arts, UAL and a BA (Hons) in Contemporary Fine Art
from Sheffield Hallam University. She also completed a yearlong
Icon internship at the Staffordshire Record Office in paper, parch-
ment and book conservation.
A literature review of palm leaf manuscript conservation—Part 1: a historic overview, leaf preparation, materials and media, palm leaf manuscripts at the British
Library and the common types of damage
259
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
Vol. 45
No. 3
2022
