=== PAGE 1 ===
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
HTS Teologiese Studies/Theological Studies 
ISSN: (Online) 2072-8050, (Print) 0259-9422
Page 1 of 12 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Author:
Václav Ježek1 
Affiliation:
1Department of Byzantine 
Studies, Faculty of Orthodox 
Theology, Prešov University, 
Prešov, Slovakia
Corresponding author:
Václav Ježek,
vaclavjezek111@gmail.com
Dates:
Received: 05 Aug. 2022
Accepted: 22 Oct. 2022
Published: 20 Dec. 2022
How to cite this article:
Ježek, V., 2022, ‘Ethiopian 
exegetical traditions and 
exegetical imagination 
viewed in the context of 
Byzantine Orthodoxy, HTS 
Teologiese Studies/
Theological Studies 78(1), 
a7997. https://doi.
org/10.4102/hts.v78i1.7997
Copyright:
© 2022. The Author. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License. Introduction
The aim of this article is to draw attention to the often neglected and underappreciated originality 
of the exegetical traditions of the Ethiopian Orthodox church, which uniquely combine local 
indigenous African contexts with Christian traditions. These local exegetical traditions are, among 
other areas, developed in traditional Ethiopian church schools. The article, as a contribution in a 
theological setting, does not aim to reconstruct Ethiopian exegesis and its history through a 
historical critical prism as has been begun by others but attempts to draw attention to the simple 
fact of its dynamic originality, especially if compared to the rather lost horizons of contemporary 
post-Byzantine Orthodox exegesis. The central question brought forward is why is this exegesis 
so potent in offering original and contemporary exegesis? 
There is a certain urgency here, because the rapid development of modern education has adversely 
impacted traditional schools, the Ethiopian theological mindset generally and local indigenous 
theological traditions. Modern forms of education in Ethiopia have a consistent presence in 
Ethiopia and had already been introduced into Ethiopia at the beginning of the 20th century 
(1908) (Mengesha 2021:4146). But it seems that the overbearing emphasis on economical and 
industrial development, seen especially in our period, is increasing the pressure on traditional 
forms of education to their detriment. However, even contemporary theology with its emphasis 
on rationalism seems to have little appreciation for ‘mystical’ interpretations offered by Ethiopian 
exegesis and therefore limits its study of this exegesis, often in the confines of a historical cultural 
phenomenon. Here, ‘mystical’ essentially means having an open heart to the Divine and accepting 
the unpredictability of revelation itself or therefore its ‘mystical quality’. Here, the author would 
like to draw attention especially to the Byzantine or Orthodox context to draw conclusions. 
The following article analysed the originality and creativity of Ethiopian Orthodox exegesis in 
a broader context of Byzantine and post-Byzantine Orthodox traditions. The originality of 
Ethiopian exegesis lies in its relative freedom from the conservative and traditionalist 
development of exegesis in other Eastern Orthodox contexts marked by the Graeco-Roman 
philosophical milieu. The Ethiopian exegetical tradition, being linked with traditional 
schooling, has managed to maintain a highly contextual and lively relationship with the 
community, with contemporary problems and issues and with other traditions, while 
maintaining a relationship with its own historical background. Analysing the Ethiopian 
traditions in comparativist contexts is important, but some important questions need to be 
further asked as to ‘how’ and ‘why’ is an interpretation being produced, what is its exegetical 
premise and how exegetical imagination functions. 
Contribution: The article‘s input and contribution is manifold. As we have seen, a greater 
emphasis on the role and potential of the Ethiopian traditional ecclesial schools would facilitate 
their future preservation and function in a rapidly changing world with differing but often 
linear and exclusive developments in education. Furthermore, as discussed and demonstrated 
in the article, Ethiopian theological exegesis has a unique potential to contribute especially to 
contemporary Orthodox theology, which often struggles to maintain a balance between 
tradition and contextual or contemporary theology. The article further showed in this context 
that analysing exegetical traditions must also move beyond mere comparativist analysis and 
must include a broader study of the indeterminate or ‘mystical’ nature of interpretation which 
is intimately linked with the unpredictable or indeterminate dynamics of the world around us. 
Or in other words, how the exegete understands his or her freedom in interpretation.
Keywords: theology; exegesis; Ethiopia; traditional schools; Byzantium; Orthodox; 
commentary; Bible.
Ethiopian exegetical traditions and exegetical imagination 
viewed in the context of Byzantine Orthodoxy
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
=== PAGE 2 ===
Page 2 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
To appreciate the issues at hand, the author must draw 
attention to the state of exegesis in the Byzantine or Orthodox 
context generally. For some time, there has been a negative 
assessment of the originality of Byzantine exegesis, especially 
after the 6th century (Kolbaba 2012:458). This assessment, 
however, can be perhaps drawn even more broadly and 
include post-Byzantine Orthodox exegesis generally 
(including the Slavic Orthodox context). Especially after the 
‘Patristic age’, there can be seen a clear ‘conservationist’ 
attitude in the various Orthodox churches and contexts, 
which had a bearing on exegetical imagination.
The flexibility or freedom of exegesis in the Patristic period 
was undoubtedly conditioned by the rich interaction between 
Greek philosophical traditions, Judaism and Christianity. As 
seen in such authors as Gregory of Nazianzus, Clement of 
Alexandria and others, their good knowledge of Greek 
philosophy also conditioned a flexibility in interpretation. 
This is not only a question of allegorical or literal exegesis but 
a way of approaching and working with the biblical text. 1 In 
the Judaic world, exegetical or interpretative endeavours 
were also stimulated by the destruction of the Temple in 
Jerusalem and by a need to refocus the spiritual lives of the 
Jews towards a new or different engagement with the biblical 
heritage. 
In terms of the Byzantine tradition, the Greek philosophical 
influence was a blessing but also a curse for originality. A 
curse in the sense that Greek philosophy, especially in relation 
to Neoplatonism, does enable engagement but according to 
its own rules, terms and concepts, which undoubtedly 
reduced the exegetical endeavours, at least in the context of 
the non-Greek world. Another issue noted by some 
commentators is that after the 4th to 6th centuries, there was 
a tendency to limit ‘originality’ in exegesis to repeating or 
relying on existing creeds or existing texts of the fathers 
(Irmscher & Kazhdan 1991:769).
It is also true that regardless of heresies, orthodoxy or patristic 
authority, there was a goal from the outset of Christianity to 
‘identify Christ’ in the Old Testament. These Christological 
‘eyes’ are also important in assessing the interpretative 
freedom or its lack among Christian authors.2 Here, the Jewish 
exegetical traditions were marked by a greater liberty, even 
though there was also the same tendency to a polarity between 
conservationism and originality. Here, the contrast between 
the Midrash and Talmudic literature can encapsulate this 
tendency. More scholars are recently also studying the question 
of originality in Jewish exegesis in terms of imagination and 
freedom of textual interpretation (Fishbane 1998).
The issue and stumbling block in any discussions in terms of 
exegesis is how to explain ‘originality’. Any theologian 
drawing on spirituality or mystical theology and not relying  
only on comparativist studies immediately faces the 
1.For a recent work on this theme, see, for example, Despotis and Wallace (2022).
2.Origen, for example, writes, ‘In the Law, everything hints at Christ in figurative and 
enigmatic form’ (De principiis, 4:1).
possibility of facing accusations of being unscholarly, 
especially when it is almost impossible to establish a clear-cut 
causality in interpretation, and perhaps this is one of the 
reasons why African or Ethiopian spiritual traditions have 
been of lesser interest among theologians. Here, the Ethiopian 
context is all the more remarkable for any Orthodox 
theologian, because it seems to have been protected from the 
rationalistic conservationism so indicative of the Byzantine 
Orthodox world after the 6th century and from the Greek 
philosophical Neoplatonist borderlines of interpretation. All 
the more paradoxical this may appear, given the traditionalist 
character of Ethiopian theology and educational system, yet 
it produces such freedom in exegesis. 
In terms of the modern Orthodox world, challenges in 
contemporary theology have produced a self-reflection, 
which for example has designated new ways of being 
‘conservative and liberated’ at the same time, like for example 
in the context of neopatristic synthesis. ‘Father George 
Florovsky (1975), speaking at the Congress of Orthodox 
theologians held in Athens at the end of 1936, formulated the 
project of “neo-patristic synthesis”’ as follows: 
[T]he authority of the Fathers has been re-emphasised and a 
‘return to the Fathers’ advocated and approved. Indeed, it 
must be a creative turn. An element of self-criticism must be 
therein implied. This brings us to the concept of Neopatristic 
synthesis, as the task and the aim of the orthodox theology 
today. The Legacy of the Fathers is a challenge for our 
generation, in the orthodox Church and outside of it. Its 
recreative power, has been increasingly recognised and 
acknowledged in these recent decades, in various corners of 
divided Christendom. (p. 22)
On a completely primitive scale, we may state that ‘originality’ 
in exegesis assumes ‘imagination’ based on ‘revelation’, 
which is itself ‘mystical’ as it is in essence ‘unpredictable’ 
through simple rational theological reconstructions. In our 
contemporary world, rationalism brings in a temptation of 
predictability. We are often convinced that we can predict 
and control the forces of nature and so on. But any Ethiopian 
villager, or perhaps African villager living off the land and 
devoting himself or herself to agriculture, realises the 
unpredictability of nature and its forces, whether he or she 
will have something to eat or not. This is similar to the Ancient 
Egyptians, who regardless of measuring the inundation by 
the Nile River could not always determine next year’s 
inundation and therefore harvests. This kind of 
unpredictability is reflected in exegetical imagination. 
Here, in relation to the Ethiopian issues, the author quotes 
Douglas (1936) who writes about Egyptian and Syrian 
Christianity: 
Egyptian and Syrian Christianity in the early days of the church 
formulated and developed quite different theologies from 
those of Greek and Latin theologians: Their minds continued to 
move in the simplest, uncoordinated theological categories. 
The concepts of the Latin and Greek theologies belonged to a 
plane which was incomprehensible to them. Their language 
had no idiom to express the processes of Latin and Greek 
=== PAGE 3 ===
Page 3 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
theological thought, and possessed no real equivalents, e.g., for 
such terms as being, substance, person and nature ... In brief, 
the Coptic and the Syrian Christianities have remained as static 
as anything in earth can remain static, and appear to consist 
today, as they consisted in the first centuries, of what to us a 
current term by described as Ur-Christianity. That is to say, 
they conform in everything to the common Catholicity of the 
primitive Church, but possess theologies which only state the 
facts of Revelations as recorded in the Scriptures and Tradition, 
and neither coordinated nor interpret them as a system. (p. vii)
Reading this statement, one has in mind the Ethiopian 
Christian context, which obviously resonates in the statement. 
The Ethiopian tradition, just as the others mentioned here, 
developed outside of the Greek theological orbit, with a great 
degree of independence. Here, it would be more precise to 
say not outside of contact with the Greek traditions but 
outside of Byzantine imperial enforcement of these elements.
But here there is the problem of Western a priori perceptions 
of these traditions. The Ethiopian, Coptic or Syrian traditions 
are anything but static or underdeveloped. In fact, the 
dynamism of these traditions lies in their liberation from 
a priori  set Graeco-Roman philosophical or theological 
terminology. Today, Byzantine theology is juxtaposed with, 
for example, Syrian traditions, to show how rich is the Syrian 
tradition and its contribution in the early church. Similarly, 
not long ago the Byzantine liturgical tradition was viewed as 
completely static, and it has been shown that this is not the 
case by many commentators (e.g., Taft 1992) and that this 
tradition was extremely dynamic and diverse and that the 
problem was not with the tradition but with the methodology 
and eye of the beholder. The problem lies in how one 
approaches the material beforehand. Cowley, who is a well-
known scholar in this regard, wrote about the beginnings of 
his relations with the tradition in Ethiopia. Cowley (1988) 
writes:
I had probably absorbed some prejudices about the state of 
biblical and patristic studies in the Ethiopian church, and for the 
most part I had not read or even heard of, the non-Ethiopian 
sources which contributed to the And ěmta Commentary 
tradition. Principally however, I was unaware of the And ěmta 
Commentary as a possible object of study, and conditions of 
study were unfavorable. (p. 5)
Cowley (1988), in his important book, offered an in-depth 
comparativist study of Ethiopian exegesis, where Ethiopian 
exegetical commentaries were aligned with other traditions. 
This is very important, but it also seems that it needs to be 
supplanted by an exploration of the hermeneutics of the 
process of the exegetical endeavour. From the perspective of a 
Byzantine commentator or Byzantine Orthodox commentator, 
as the author has alluded, what is seminal about Ethiopian 
exegesis (at least from a superficial glance) is its unsystematic 
nature, or in other words, its nonsystemic nature, being as it 
is liberated from the increasingly rigid anthropological 
imprisonment of Byzantine theology or Latin theology 
marked by system creation. This in no way means that the 
Ethiopian tradition developed in a vacuum and did not 
interact with other traditions, a point sufficiently made in 
the work of Cowley (1988), who demonstrates the relations 
and connections of exegetical traditions. Regardless of the 
possible comparisons, Cowley concluded in his work: ‘I am 
unconvinced that it is possible to construct a system, the 
application of which reveals the meaning of the text’, 
(Cowley 1988:374).
Cowley, commenting on Jewish exegesis and Ethiopian 
commentaries, concluded that bringing a ready-made 
philosophical system and applying it to this material is 
basically flawed and unworkable if we desire to assess the 
exegetical system, but the author can add to Cowley that this 
is also true for bringing in a system which precludes 
‘imagination’. Rather, as he rightly implies generally in his 
work, one must discern the rules, being initially a mere 
observer, as these naturally appear and observe how they 
interact with the biblical or other text itself. 
This would be especially inspiring for Orthodox writers, who 
often bring in a system with them in studying theological 
material. Having said this, however, Cowley does not let 
himself be carried away and perhaps denies the absolute 
freedom of interpretation, which is expected, because he 
concludes that Ethiopian exegesis is more indebted to the 
Antiochene tradition (Cowley 1988:375), also implying that 
the basic goal of exegesis is to enhance instruction (Cowley 
1988:382). Some authors have been surprised by Cowley’s 
emphasis on limiting allegory and its role in Ethiopian 
exegesis and view it as another testimony for our inability to 
liberate our approach from an overt rationalistic deterministic 
form of thought (Keon-Sang 2015:135).
Perhaps what would be useful here is to move beyond 
traditional categories of literal, allegorical exegesis by 
analysing the dynamics of how the exegesis internally 
develops and why such and such interpretation is reached, 
which is the reason for paying greater attention to the 
traditional Ethiopian schools and the complex relations 
between oral tradition and written commentary. Here, the 
difference between an uncontrolled ‘gnostic’ imagination 
and a ‘sober’ balanced exegesis is safeguarded in the 
community, the concrete ecclesial community, which 
‘guarantees rationality in irrationality’ and also makes sure 
that exegesis is based on an appreciation of Christological 
and biblical frameworks.
There is a new emphasis on a reappraisal of exegetical 
methods and forms of their analysis in other contexts which 
have a similarity to the Ethiopian one, in terms of the basic 
tension inherent in a religious or philosophical system with 
a codified sacral text versus interpretation. Here, as implied 
above, a predetermined classificatory taxonomic system has 
often proved to be detrimental to an appreciation of the local 
exegetical culture. Similarly, in the Indian tradition, with the 
exegetical endeavour linked to Mimamsa (school of 
interpretation or exegesis), there was often a projection of 
contemporary Western notions and categories which could 
=== PAGE 4 ===
Page 4 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
have limited the appreciation of the exegetical and cultural 
traditions, as noted by some scholars (Bilimoria 2004). 
Bilimoria relates generally to a useful concept developed by 
Tuck, termed isogesis, linked with the projection of one’s 
prejudices, prejudgements and views onto one’s approach to 
texts and sources. Thus, we look in the text for that which is 
of direct interest in our context or period, which obviously 
limits the ‘freedom of the text’ to speak for itself (Bilimoria 
2004; Tuck 1990).
Education and exegesis
The importance of Ethiopian traditional (religious) education 
lies also in the fact that it has survived as a complex 
integrated whole, while in many other Orthodox settings it 
has virtually disappeared. Nowhere else it is thus possible to 
study the dynamics of theological instruction in such 
complexity as in Ethiopia. However, this has not prevented 
superficial criticisms of this system. Scholars commenting 
on the topic of Ethiopian education and exegetical tradition 
are themselves realising that, partly as a result of an 
indiscriminate reliance on secondary sources and other 
factors such as a lack of empirical knowledge of these 
traditions, a rather negative and unfair image of the 
Ethiopian educational and theological system has often been 
promulgated (Kenaw 2004:107–121). 
Unsurprisingly, many of the Ethiopian authors criticising the 
system of traditional church education wrote in the context of 
the former communist era in Ethiopia. However, much of 
these opinions and rhetoric were simply carried over into our 
period, especially in the context of positivistic progressivism. 
To truly understand the potential of Ethiopian theology, one 
of course needs to have a full knowledge of the Ethiopian 
and modern theological environment, which is of course 
difficult to attain without graduating from all the levels. The 
basic question is to enquire as to how a traditional form of 
education with a formalistic and conservative structure can 
produce or maintain exegetical traditions or ‘originality’ in 
interpretation.
Another important thing to realise is that Ethiopian Orthodox 
traditions, regardless of their Christian content, are 
remarkably aligned with other indigenous African traditions. 
In fact, it seems that the Ethiopian tradition has produced a 
remarkable synthesis of the Christian and African tradition. 
This can be seen in the kind of ‘freedom’ associated in the 
Christian terms with the Holy Spirit. 
Oral transmission is very important in Ethiopian education, 
similar to other African contexts, and this is not necessarily 
linked with the lack of resources for writing and other forms 
of transmission. The mechanics of why this or that information 
is preserved through oral transmission, while other 
information is ‘discarded’ or neglected, is a complex one. 
One of the reasons for this kind of oral taxonomy is related to 
community issues. Knowledge is preserved in oral traditions 
which is important for the community. This community-
focused context is especially important in African contexts. 
The liturgical experience is firmly related to the community 
and vice versa, and the liturgy itself provided instruction and 
reflection, as Cowley (1988) himself notes: 
The Liturgy of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, contains 
extensive doctrinal teaching, and the material on the Trinity and 
Christology, is especially to be found in the anaphoras of 
St. Mary, of the Three hundred, of St. John Chrysostom and of 
St. Cyril. (p. 283)
As is well known, the Ethiopian tradition had long-term 
links with the Arabian Peninsula, even before the appearance 
of the Holy Qur’an and the Holy Bible. The linguistic links 
between Ge’ez and Arabic have been attested to and were 
obviously linked with mutual commercial and cultural 
contacts between the areas of Ethiopia and the southern 
Arabian Peninsula, which could have been accompanied by 
an emerging common exegetical tradition which was then 
linked with approaches to the sacral texts of the Bible and 
the Qur’an.
For example, there are instances of Ethiopian linguistic 
influences on Arabic, with terms in the Holy Qur’an having 
Ethiopian origin (Dadoo 2016:708). The scholar Dadoo 
importantly reminds us of a ‘genre of rhythmic prose, called 
saj’, which was used by orators and fortune-tellers and which 
could be used to offer advice through aphorisms and 
proverbs (Dadoo 2016:708; Daif 2009:24). Dadoo also 
mentions the author Quss bin S āidah al-Iy ādī, who was 
bishop of Najr ān, as one who utilises this genre and 
who in his compositions intertwines typical Ethiopian 
exegetical mechanisms, such as instruction, exhortation and 
interpretation (Dadoo 2016:709). Further, as some scholars 
notice, such as Ibn ‘ Ābidīn (n.d.:122; Dadoo 2003:711), it is 
possible that the practice of including a poetic extract to 
conclude a sermon was a prominent feature of Ethiopian 
preachers for some time, and it may be concluded that it is a 
common feature of our own contemporary period in many 
Ethiopian churches.
The Arabic and Ethiopian contexts betray in some instances 
the same educational exegetical platform with the important 
feature of placing the exegesis into the contemporary 
situation. Thus, racism against black people in the Arab 
environment in some segments of society of the 7th century 
is nicely addressed by the verses: ‘They blame my black 
complexion While their evil deeds are darker than my skin’ 
by an Arab poet of Ethiopian descent (died 608), ‘Antarah 
(Dadoo 2003:711).
Even though Ethiopian education can be divided into stages 
or phases similar to the Western European forms, it entails a 
life-long educational journey. Education here is not something 
one experiences at a certain phase or intellectual step, but it is 
a life-long journey, because education is something more 
than the sum of intellectual knowledge. Further basic 
misunderstandings and flaws in scholarship have amounted 
to an oversimplification of church education, which is often 
viewed as a simple whole (Kenaw 2004:120). 
=== PAGE 5 ===
Page 5 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
For example, in the context of adult education, the Ethiopian 
context offers a life-long educational system which can go 
on for decades. Other African indigenous contexts also 
emphasise this life-long process of education (Achi 2021).
The traditional forms of education incorporate exegesis in 
many forms. This includes the tradition of Qenie, a form of 
religious poetry, which requires a high degree of individual 
talent, education and ability to compose new poems or letters 
in Ge’ez. Importantly, exegesis is not limited to the biblical 
books but includes a variety of other sources ( Ye-Metsehaft 
Tereguamie; Exegesis of Metsehafte Liqawnt , the Book of 
Scholars; Metsehafe Menekosat , the Book of Monks). Or in 
other words, how the exegete understands his or her freedom 
in interpretation in relation to the spiritual and practical 
challenges around us. 
Some commentators have noted the emphasis on 
memorisation in the traditional schools. For example, at the 
outset of his study, Robso Mengesha (2021) writes: 
But, in all forms of the instructional methodology, learning by 
heart or memorisation commonly characterises the provision of 
traditional church education. An adult learner needs is expected 
to ought to stay more than forty years in Ye ̉abinet timhrt bet 
(Orthodox Church adult school) to complete the church 
education within/typical of the curriculum of the Ethiopian 
Orthodox Church. (p. 4147)
It would be fair to conclude that memorisation does produce 
an essential stratum of horizons for any exegesis to take 
place. Technically, memorisation sets a firm paradigm 
consisting of oral or textual material (from which it is drawn) 
which naturally limits and at the same time directs the flow of 
interpretation. But the value of memorisation can touch on 
psychology and spirituality. For example, memorisation and 
repetition are both instruments touching on important 
psychological aspects offering ‘space’ for reflection and 
harmony, similar to prayer, where the repetition of prayers is 
not a form of limitation but a platform for freedom and 
harmony. Recent explorations into the various roles of 
memory touch on issues of mental consistency, and more 
research can be carried out into mental categories including 
episodic, semantic or procedural memory in relation to 
education.
A basic criticism of memorisation of certain passages and 
texts can suggest that such a process limits the vision of 
things to a particular passage, to the detriment of other 
passages or writings and sources which are not memorised 
or repeated. If one remembers a quote or passage from a saint 
or a parable and does not remember anything else or other 
passages from the same saint, this limits the scope of vision at 
least to the taxonomic classificatory ability of the individual 
in remembering this or that passage and nothing else. 
Similarly, obviously, this is the same for the Bible, where a 
favourite passage, quote or story can create a mental 
perception that this is the main or most important message of 
the Bible, to the detriment of other passages. However, 
arguably, the contemporary disdain for anything linked with 
memorisation is also not overall positive, because without 
data and information and learning or memorisation there can 
be no interpretation. 
The role of memorisation is related to community building, 
because if various individuals from the same group memorise 
the same text or oral material, this serves as a pillar or 
reference point for the identity of such a community and its 
interpretative framework in the future. With our contemporary 
culture of completely eradicating the need to memorise, it is 
difficult to appreciate the benefits of memorisation. Here, 
memorising undoubtedly does not limit one’s ability to accept 
further information but on the contrary enables one to 
‘classify’ and ‘authenticate’ material. In the traditional 
schools, the need to memorise was of course also related to 
the scarcity of available materials. In today’s media world, the 
lack of memories or memorisation of material can create an 
environment of loosely entangled abstract concepts and 
information which loses its potential to enrich the community. 
The memorisation of texts and biblical writings is the first 
stage of learning in the Ethiopian church. These texts are also 
part of the services, which means that those knowing them 
become part of the liturgical communal system. Thus, 
memory enables one to enter the communal ‘interpretative’ 
framework. This process has multiple levels and aspects, as 
Pankhurst Richard (1962) notes: 
There is also another unique character which is the teaching 
methodology. The method of teaching is mainly providing oral 
lesson or [Yẻqal Timihrt] in a melodious sound the word, which is 
performed by recitation and memorization. In all schools, in 
school of Fidel, school of Zema, school of Qene or school of 
Metshaf Tirguame. Recitation and memorization are the dominant 
methods of teaching in traditional church schools. (p. 241)
Here, undoubtedly, the important thing to realise is that this 
process is not a mark of some form of backwardness or a lack 
of written materials. On the contrary, this process is a mark of 
one’s ability to interact with his or her environment generally 
by drawing on the commonalities and mutuality (memories 
and memorisation) in a given community and its environment. 
It is, after all, the community which ‘chooses’ the common 
material to be memorised. Memory is a static concept; 
remembering is a process. To remember means action – 
remembering something from memory. Here, the content of 
memory is not only a recollection of data, but it is an enlivening 
similar to the process of remembering seen in the Last Supper. 
As Christ during the Last Supper commanded, ‘do this in the 
remembrance of me’ (see Lk 22:18–20; 1 Cor 11:23–25). The 
Ethiopian tradition understands the Eucharist as a holistic 
sacrifice, as a unique service drawing on all forms of sacrifice 
(Gebrsellasie 2020:4) through the dynamics of remembering.
As implied earlier, memory is linked with the community. 
Shared memories are common ground to which everyone 
can relate. Some scholars have correctly pointed to features of 
the Bible which show that there is a marked emphasis on 
collective memory (Cockayne & Salter 2021:278). The word 
=== PAGE 6 ===
Page 6 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
Zakhar [to remember] is often used in Deuteronomy in the 
sense of collective remembering (Dt 5:15), (Cockayne & Salter 
2021:278). Also, the noun zikkaron can be mentioned (Ex 13:9), 
which in the Septuagint is translated as anamnesis (1 Cor 
11:24–25). The author may state that the exegesis and 
interpretation of the Bible in the liturgical situation is linked to 
this aspect of interpretation as to how one needs to understand 
his or her life in the community and the possible sacrifices 
this entails. 
In other Orthodox contexts, theological education in the post-
Byzantine world was marked by many factors. The Greek 
world was, for example, subjected for centuries to Ottoman 
rule. These various factors and conditions themselves 
provided for a sieve which perhaps influenced the survival 
and pre-eminence of certain theological themes and material 
at the expense of others. Here, regardless of the written or 
oral possibilities of transmission or the objective importance 
of theological material, certain theologically specific themes 
and contents gained pre-eminence in the catechetical or 
educational system, perhaps at the expense of others. Thus, 
various ‘synopses’ or ‘summaries’ or selections served 
educational purposes such as the Philokalia compiled by 
Nicodemus of the Holy Mountain. The inadequacies of 
transmission are in Orthodox theology relativised by a belief 
that the Holy Spirit guides the process.
Here, the Holy Spirit is traditionally regarded as a basic 
‘corrective’ principle governing the process of theology in 
the Orthodox Church but also in the Ethiopian setting. 
The possible inadequate or negative characteristics of 
transmission and memory are ‘easily’ overcome by the 
miraculous work of the Holy Spirit linked with its work in 
the community. God is the ultimate spiritual guide. It is, after 
all, the Holy Spirit which guides the hand of the author and 
offers the correct taxonomy in selecting this or that. The work 
of the Holy Spirit is easily discerned in the community itself. 
In the long run, the community and the Holy Spirit are the 
taxonomic elements of tradition and theology. The Holy 
Spirit is thus not a subjective magical force but ‘verifiable’ 
through its fruits in the community. Unsurprisingly, it is the 
Holy Spirit which is the principle of imagination and 
creativity in interpretation. 
The selective and transmission process involved in the 
education system relates to exegetical possibilities. Other 
factors play a role in the survival or existence of certain 
material. That there is no general ‘historical logic’ in the 
preservation of certain material can be seen in the example of 
the so-called Garima Gospels, which miraculously survived 
until today being preserved by a monastic community which 
functioned for centuries and was a kind of taxonomic 
guarantor of the survival of this work. 
The exegetical principle
Exegesis can serve various purposes, and it can be used for 
instruction or for theological reflection. In the Ethiopian 
context, undoubtedly, both play a role. For example, in one 
such eucharistic setting, the author recalls hearing a homily 
after the gospel reading where one priest offered a traditional 
poetic composition in the original ancient Ge’ez language 
based on the content of the reading, while another following 
priest translated this into modern Amharic, then another 
priest followed with an original poetic composition or 
interpretation, which was followed by a contemporary 
contextual interpretation, drawing on, among other things, 
the unique parish setting and environment. The exegesis 
serves as instruction but also as a bridge to reflection. 
Undoubtedly, the post-Byzantine context of Orthodoxy has 
been limited to ‘repetition’ or pedagogical conservationism 
which marks it as unoriginal, if exegesis is understood as a 
platform for new contextualisations.
If we use the language of ‘mystery’ in relation to the Ethiopian 
tradition, this can be explained in the context of 
contextualisation. The And ěmte commentary is also related 
to a need in understanding the Ge’ez texts of the liturgical, 
biblical and patristic material, because Amharic (used by 
these Anděmte commentaries) became the primary language 
of Ethiopian Christianity after the medieval period. Here 
Massimo Villa (2019) observes: 
Commentaries are subdivided into t ərgwāme and ̉andəmtā 
commentaries. The former represent an early stage of the Ethiopian 
traditional exegesis. They are in G ə̒ əz and are attested from the 
fourteenth century onwards. They constitute a heterogeneous 
corpus since different manuscripts admit different interpretations 
of the same passage. The decline of the tərgwāme corpus is linked 
to the rise of the ̉andəmtā commentaries. The Amharic ̉andəmtā 
corpus, originating in the Gondarine Age and committed to 
writing only in recent times, intends to explore in depth the true 
meaning of a given text, verse by verse. (p. 6)
Pederson (1995) states that the commentary: 
[I]ntends to clarify and illustrate the meaning of the transmitted 
Ge’ez text. It is a theological commentary in the sense, that it sees 
the Bible, as the book of divine revelation, but it shows little 
tendency, of theological dispute. The And ěmta comprises both 
the so-called näţäla těrgwame, i.e simple and direct translation of 
the text, without commentary, and the m ěstir t ěrgwame, 
“interpretation of the mystery”, which is a clarification based on 
the sense without too much attention to the words. (p. 4)
Clarification is perhaps needed to define exactly how 
‘mysterious’ the commentary can be. We have to realise that 
a close proximity to the biblical text and issues of instruction 
do not preclude exegetical imagination, at least in terms 
of contextualisation. The exegetical imaginative character 
of exegesis seems to appear even in the designation of the 
commentaries. The term Anděmta is perhaps derived from the 
Amharic word anděm, and ‘(another) one, which introduces 
an alternative opinion’ (Pedersen 1995:4), or as Villa specifies, 
‘The Amharic word ̉andəm, meaning “and (there is) one (who says)’’ 
(from which the term  ̉a ndəmtā is derived)’ (Villa 2019:6). 
Pedersen further notes that the word and ěm corresponds to 
the Hebrew word (ים )אומר ויש and there is one (there are those) 
who say(s)’ מפרושים ויש and there are those who interpret’. פרוש 
אחרanother interpretation’ (Pedersen 1995:4). Pedersen also 
=== PAGE 7 ===
Page 7 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
stresses that the ‘Bible is an inspired Word of God’, and Villa 
adds ‘that the term andəm is typically used to introduce the hidden 
explanation of a canonical passage’ (Villa 2019:6). Girma writes: 
‘Andemta can be translated as “and [there is] one [who says]’’ 
[...]. The term andemta is derived from the repeated use of the 
Amharic word andem in the commentary corpus’ and further 
according to M.A. Girma (2011; cf. Keon-Sang 2015:118):
The etymological origin of the term Andemta is the Amharic 
word Aand-which literally means ‘number one’. Andem means 
‘for one’ with [ the] obvious expectation of lelam which means 
‘for another’. The term occasionally introduces a chain of 
successive comments. (p. 385)
It is also necessary to keep in mind that the Ge’ez version of 
the Old Testament is a translation of the Septuagint, not the 
Hebrew Masoretic Text (Pedersen 1995):
It is a translation of the Septuagint from the period after the third 
century, when Origen and others corrected the mistakes of the 
Septuagint in relation to the Hebrew text (Pedersen 1995:6). The 
purification process went even longer in the context of Antioch, 
until the fifth century. (p. 6)
As can be seen from the following quotation of an 
Ethiopian introduction to the book of Genesis, an 
alternative opinion can radically depart in content and 
become a new interpretation rather than an alternative 
opinion. ‘For example, in the introduction of the Book of 
Genesis, the word andem (“Another says”) is repeatedly 
used in order to suggest alternative interpretations of the 
word Orit (Torah)’. Cowley (1974; Keon-Sang 2015:118) 
adds an example: 
(Torah) means ‘zéna’ (narrative), for it narrates the story of the 
false Messiah, the second coming and the kingdom of Heaven. 
Another says, it means ‘testimony’, for it says, ‘Testify, O Israel, 
the Lord thy God is one’. Another says, it means ‘law’, for having 
made a law, it says, ‘Let this be a law to you’ [...]. Another says, a 
mirror shows dirt on the teeth and grime on the head; the Orit 
reveals sin and righteousness, apostasy and faith. Also they liken 
it to a hill. A man on a hill sees stony ground and pasture, and 
people ascending and descending; the Orit shows what is done 
from the creation until the second coming. (pp. 135–136)
We can state that ‘a different opinion’ here would be much 
freer than in the Talmudic Jewish tradition, where alternative 
opinions are more developed along rational discourse. Here, 
there would be more a resemblance to the Haggadah and 
Midrashic traditions. Cowley noted that there is a continuity 
with the Haggadah tradition which could have been further 
developed in the Ethiopian tradition. Cowley (1988) writes:
After a particular Haggadah has developed and stagnated, in a 
non-Ethiopian tradition, it may later develop further in the 
Anděmta Commentary . The transition to another culture 
presumably, provided a stimulus to redevelopment … elements 
which may be considered legendary, are frequently if not always, 
derived from scriptural exegesis. (p. 380)
The Ethiopian exegetical tradition betrays clear evidence of a 
selective process. The exegete was not limited by the availability 
of material, as one would believe at first glance, but chose 
between material and themes. Cowley, for example, concludes 
on the Anděmta Commentary on Genesis 1 that ‘its proximate 
sources contain, a variety of categories of material, - the 
interpretation of words, theology, natural science, cosmology, 
calendrics, and homiletic application’ (Cowley 1988:262) and on 
the theme of Melchizedek’s ancestry: ‘The Compilers of the 
Anděmta Commentary evidently had a wide choice of material. 
The concerns which prompted their selection appear to have 
been exegetical ones (rather than idle curiosity)’ (Cowley 1988:29). 
The problem with comparative historical reconstruction of 
exegesis is that it often produces an idea that the usage of 
a particular work by one tradition from another tradition 
is a mark of dependence and therefore, in a sense, a certain 
inferiority. For example, the Ethiopian work called 
‘Miracles of Jesus: ( Taʼammɘra I ʼyasus)’ is a translation 
mostly of the apocryphal Gospel of John (preserved in 
Arabic), (Witakowski 2012:209). Regardless of the complex 
history and reworking of this work, the usage within the 
Ethiopian tradition would perhaps at first glance suggest a 
dependence of Ethiopian traditions on Syriac or later 
Arabic Christian works. 
However, in terms of the ‘Miracles of Jesus’, its popularity in 
Ethiopia is related to a particular emphasis and concern 
congenial to the Ethiopian context, which already suggests 
an original interpretative hermeneutic. Here, the appetite to 
create or implant ‘new stories’ about Christ is linked with an 
interest in the ‘mysterious’ or ‘miraculous’ with an obvious 
link to the exegetical enquiry. The local interest or tradition 
was the a priori taxonomy for selecting this or that ‘foreign 
work’. The popularity of miracles and the miraculous is 
shown by the dissemination of such works as the Miracles of 
Gabriel, Miracles of Michael and the Miracles of the Trinity 
(Witakowski 1995:286). 
Here, the author can postulate the creation of what may be 
called ‘reverse exegesis’. That is, an exegesis which actually 
produces a new ‘primary’ text, supplanting the original or 
building a new one, being inspired by a different text. Thus, 
paradoxically, the Miracles of Jesus can be understood as a 
new creation or recreation of the Gospel but also of previous 
apocryphal traditions. 
A certain Ethiopian freedom in appreciating the ‘mysterious’ 
in exegesis is certainly linked with allegorical exegetical 
traditions which were so prominent also in the Alexandrian 
Egyptian area. The later Byzantine concern for dogmatism de-
emphasised the liberty associated with allegorical 
interpretation. An important feature of Ethiopian spirituality 
is the popularity of the Mother of God. In Ethiopian thought, 
Mary is associated with many spiritual, apocryphal and 
cultural aspects, perhaps giving her a greater scope than in 
other traditions. 
In this regard, there is perhaps a relationship with the Coptic 
Mariological tradition. One may mention the Egyptian 
author Rufus of Shotep (6th century), who, building on the 
=== PAGE 8 ===
Page 8 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
story of Annunciation, creates a notion where Mary is an 
exegete in her own right, being able to ‘discern’ the good 
intentions of the Archangel in contrast to the ‘ignorance’ of 
the first woman Eve (Sheridan 1995). The Ethiopian 
allegorisation of the Mother of God created many possible 
inspirations for exegetical interpretation.
Of course, exegesis is not linear and there are various forms 
and techniques of exegesis. For example, Yandemta Tirguame 
(interpretation by alternatives), offering various alternatives 
which could be introduced by the word ‘or’, the literal 
meaning ( Net̉ela Tirguame ) and also Yẻmistir Tirguame  
(idiomatic interpretation), concentrating on the possible 
meaning of a given sentence regardless of its structure (Abera 
2012; Mengesha 2021:4151).
Here, we have to remind ourselves that many exegetical 
principles simply follow what would be general and ‘logical’ 
interpretative rules which could have been well known 
throughout the various areas, with different technical names. 
The ‘wax and gold’ method in this sense can be understood as 
a common method of interpretation. Here, we can be 
reminded of the Alexandrian Coptic tradition. There is also 
the ‘image of the exegete as a wise bee’ (Ps 6:8, LXX), which 
was a common understanding of how to approach texts 
(Sheridan 1995:4).
It would be fair to state, at least in the spiritual sense, that 
the directive for differing interpretations is related to the 
variety of community and life situations in the Ethiopian 
tradition more than a desire to offer alternative commentaries 
or opinions in the abstract theological sense (which is also a 
safeguard against abstract mysticism). This perhaps is the 
stepping stone for a freer and looser interpretation, which 
perhaps could have resulted in the creation of explanatory 
stories (known as Tarik) in the Ethiopian tradition.
Here, we can cite an example of a commentary explanation 
quoted by Villa of Isaiah 40:31 ( እለሰ፡ ይሴፈውዎ፡ ለእግዚአ 
ብሔር፡ ይሔድሱ፡ ኀይሎሙ፡ ወይበቍሉ፡ ክነፊሆሙ፡ ከመ፡ ንስር፡, 
‘those who hope in God will renew their strength; and their 
wings will sprout like eagles’) is as follows (Villa 2019):
ንስር ባረጀ ጊዜ ዐብዶ የሚባል ጭቃ አለ ያነን ተቀብቶ እንጨቱን 
ከምሮ ወያስተጣግዕ ክነፊሁ ክንፍና ክንፉን ያማታዋል፤ ወይወፅእ 
እሳት እምአካለ ዝኩ ዖፍ፤ እንዲል ጊዮርጊስ ወልደ አሚድ፤ ከአካሉ 
እሳት ወጥቶ እንጨቱን ያቃጥለዋል፤ እሱም አብሮ ይቃጠላል፤ 
በግብፅ ዝናም ዘንሞ አያውቅም፤ ባምስት መቶ ዘመን ለሐድሶተ 
ንስር እንደ ካፊያ ያለ ይዘንማል፤ በመጀመሪያ ቀን ትል ይህላል፤ 
በሁለተኛው ቀን ዖፍ ያህላል፤ በሦስተኛው ቀን በሮ ይሄዳል፤ 12. 
(Villa 2019:9)
When the eagle grows old, it secretes the so-called ̒abdo. After 
smearing itself with it and after collecting firewood, it fits 
closely its wings and flutters them. ‘Fire comes out of the body 
of that bird’ ( Gə̒ əz), as Giyorgis Walda ̒Amid says: fire comes 
out its body. Then, it burns the firewood and burns down itself 
together with the wood. In Egypt it has not rained for five 
hundred years; however, as soon as the eag le has renovated 
itself, it drizzles. The first day (the eagle) is a worm; the second 
day [ it becomes ] a bird; the third day, (having the sky) cleared 
up, it goes away. (p. 9) 3 
As we can see, the exegesis offered here, to say the least, is 
very complicated and multilayered for a relatively 
‘straightforward’ text. It cannot be pinned down to simple 
literal or allegorical exegesis. Even though we can critically 
identify the sources or layers of this exegesis, the essential 
thing is to identify the way the exegete weaves and concocts 
the material, what the ‘way of thinking’ is here. The challenge 
with any exegetical studies relates to identifying the 
inspiration, method or presupposition of the exegesis. Many 
of the African or Ethiopian traditions of exegesis are 
underappreciated or misunderstood because there is an a 
priori rejection based on logic, rationality or comprehension. 
In today’s world, where rationalistic forms of theology 
dominate, this is even more pronounced, conjoined with a 
lack of openness to the spiritual or the unpredictable. 
It is important to stress that the exegete does not necessarily 
form their exegesis by studying the reliability or veracity of 
their source or sources. The Ethiopian exegete is capable of 
using all possible sources and means for their writings, and as 
theologians we should primarily be concerned in the 
underlining way these are connected rather than dissecting 
them and individually evaluating them. A true theological 
appreciation of these accounts entails a general understanding 
of the imaginative and often completely ‘illogical’ connectivity 
which can be only summarised as the work of the ‘Holy Spirit’.
This seeming irrational or illogical character of exegesis 
cannot be overcome by a simple critical dissection of its 
components. This dissection and rationalisation or 
categorisation of cultural or theological phenomena is so 
common to the western philosophical or theological 
approaches to African or other non-Western forms of culture. 
The African cultural environment especially offers a greater 
appreciation of the holistic dynamics and spirit of freedom, 
which is related to the appreciation of the broader 
interconnectivity of people, nature and other elements, so 
missing in contemporary Western thought. 
The exegesis of Isaiah mentioned here has as its basis the 
central idea of resurrection. The exegesis offers a link to 
something related to the local environment. The interplay 
with the eagle and fragrance (‘abdo) builds on something 
indigenous – here, the specific fragrance from a specific 
known area or even a local bird if we interpret the word 
abdo in various ways. The general hint of resurrection is 
localised. This localisation is not only a localisation of 
familiar elements but of activities linked with survival. 
3.Villa uses this passage to compare the Ethiopian version of the ̉andəmtā with a similar 
story in the Philostorgus, claiming that in this instance, there is a difference between 
the two accounts and that the Philostorgus also mentions another similar account but 
in a different story context. He suggests that the Ethiopian commentary relates to 
another account, also in the Philostorgus, the story of the phoenix. ‘According to the 
Physiologus, the phoenix, when it has reached the age of five hundred years, enters 
the forest of Lebanon and fills its wings, with the scent called ̉abdu, then it enters the 
city of the sun, i.e. Heliopolis, and burns itself above the altar. When the priest 
examines the ashes, he finds a worm, which turns then into a big bird. The phoenix 
then greets the priest and comes back to its place’. As Villa suggests, the Ethiopian 
exegete perhaps suggests that the exegete replaced the word phoenix, which could 
have been lesser known, with the word ‘ abdo (bird); the similarity here is with the 
word ‘abdu (fragrance).
=== PAGE 9 ===
Page 9 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
Collecting firewood and warmth from a fire are essential 
aspects of survival familiar to all. The rather abstract 
message of resurrection from Isaiah is thus localised and 
linked with what it means to survive (be resurrected), 
understandable to every person.
The idea of renewal has a cyclical character which is here 
linked with both death and renewal. Death and birth are, of 
course, facts of everyday life. The Isaiah account is more of a 
one-time event. For an ordinary person who hears this 
exegesis, evoking the idea of cycles of life is more congenial 
and facilitates an understanding of a more complex divine 
form of resurrection or renewal.
Having said this, we should note that the exegete transforms 
the abstract statement of Isaiah into a highly concrete event 
and aspect into a commonplace occurrence of an ageing 
‘local’ bird which dies and emanates a fragrance. One has 
the idea that nothing extraordinary is actually happening, 
that the biblical statement is simply a continuation of an 
occurring feature of everyday life. Of course the 
‘miraculous’ is also present here, but one has the impression 
that it is simply occurring side by side with the ordinary 
and forms with it one reality. There is also the image of self-
sacrifice or expected death which could be interpreted 
Christologically.
Similar to Jewish exegesis, an authority is evoked. Gyiorgis 
Walda here offers a spiritual grounding to the statement. 
Interestingly, the statement ‘Fire comes out of the body of that 
bird’ (Gə̒ əz) is then repeated with an emphasis from Giyorgis 
Walda ‘Amid, who says that; ‘fire comes out of its body’ (Villa 
2019:9). This could be an allusion to many related concepts of 
fire and body in the spiritual tradition.
Fire and burning can be found in various contexts (Jos 7):
And he who is taken with the devoted things shall be burned 
with fire, he and all that he has, because he has transgressed the 
covenant of the Lord, and because he has done an outrageous 
thing in Israel. (vv. 15–25)
Similarly, here the fire can purify or be the source of renewal. 
The other ‘sudden’ statements such as that in ‘Egypt it has 
not rained for five hundred years’ are seemingly completely 
strange here, but the exegesis links the events with renewal 
and rain, and the number three is perhaps linked with the 
resurrection of Christ after three days. 
Further, we read (Villa 2019):
In Matthew 3, 7 Jesus calls the Pharisees ‘brood of vipers’: 
ወይቤሎሙ፡ ኦ ትውልደ፡ አራዊተ፡ ምድር፡ መኑ፡ አመረክሙ፡ ትጕየዩ፡ 
እመቅሰፍት፡ ወ እመንሱት፡ ዘይመጽእ፡, and (Jesus) told them: ‘you 
brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the punishment 
and the coming wrath?’ The Amharic commentary to that 
passage is as follows: ትወልደ አራዊተ ምድር ያላት አርዌ ገሞራዊት 
ናት አፈ ማኅፀኑዋ ጠባብ ነው ዘሩን ባፏ ትቀበለዋች አባለ ዘሩን 
ቆርጣ ታስቀረዋለች። በፅንስ ጊዜ እባት ሥጋዋን በልተው ሆዷን 
ቀደው ይወጣሉ። በዚህ ጊዜ እናት ትሞታለች። እኒህም እንዳባት 
የሚሆኑዋቸውን ነቢያት እንደ እናት የሚሆኑዋቸው ሐዋርያት 
ገድለዋና።16
‘Brood of vipers’ (the viper) is a snake of Gomorrah, and the 
opening of her womb is tight. (The female) receives the semen 
from her mouth. After cutting off the (male) organ, she abandons 
him. At birth the sons eat the flesh (of their mother), lacerate her 
belly, and come out. Thus she dies. The prophets, which are like 
the fathers (of the vipers), and the apostles, which are like the 
mothers (of the vipers), were likewise killed. (p. 9)4
Here, the citation is almost identical to an account attributed 
to Galen (transl. Robert 2016):
The female viper has a head more suited for destruction than any 
other creature. For they say it opens its mouth to receive the male’s 
semen and then when it has got it to cut off his head; and this 
method of their foul intercourse. Then the creatures born from the 
sperm by a sort of natural revenge eat through the mother’s 
stomach and emerge into the open. (p. 107)
Here, the Ethiopian account undoubtedly utilises this 
passage from Galen and adds biblical themes. Undoubtedly, 
again, the snake or other similar creatures evokes a common 
experience shared by many in the region of Ethiopia. The 
author possibly here explores the theme of sacrifice and the 
necessity of death linked with a kind of rebirth. Sacrifice 
here is something constant, a feature of life required of both 
children and parents. The parents, men or women, must 
prepare themselves for self-sacrifice, just like the next 
generation. Saints from the church are equally caught in this 
cycle of self-sacrifice or sacrifice and death. Saintliness will 
not automatically protect one from the necessity of sacrifice. 
Life in God means an almost automatic death from forces 
that are earthly (earth) – here, Gomorrah. Anybody 
advocating a feel-good version of Christianity is thus 
realistically disappointed and should expect the worst. 
These small examples show us a broader view of theology, 
which was understood as having a direct influence to practice 
and theory, not separating both. Theology had a direct 
implication on how the community functioned and how 
people formed relationships within the community. Further in 
the Ethiopian context, the entire community being part of an 
ecclesial experience functioned as a teacher or mentor for 
children, not leaving this role only to the biological parents. 
This type of thinking was also common in many other 
indigenous contexts throughout the world, where it was the 
community which educated the children, which supplemented 
any flaws or inadequacies of education which could have 
otherwise emerged if education was left to parents or a few 
individuals. 
Comparing this tradition with the late Byzantine but also 
post-Byzantine Orthodox context, it is obvious that the 
Ethiopian tradition is more advanced in terms of originality 
and contextualisation (mystery). Here a comparison with the 
Byzantine catenae comes into mind. More studies are needed 
to assess the role of Byzantine biblical commentaries in the 
4.Again Villa (2019:11) sees a similarity with the Physiologus (chapter on the Echidna 
or viper) but also with the ̉andəmtā commentary of a renowned Arabic-based 
compilation of law, ‘The Law of Kings’ (Fətha nagást).
=== PAGE 10 ===
Page 10 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
form of catenae and compare them with the Ethiopian 
tradition. The catenae are chains of commentaries attached to 
a biblical text (See Devreesse 1928). 
Whatever the case, it is true that the catenae overall offer 
perhaps an interpretation closely linked with the idea of 
‘tradition’ and its preservation (Crostini 2019:76). However, 
it is also true, as noticed by Kolbaba and Devreesse, that the 
catenae did not necessarily distinguish between ‘orthodox’ 
and ‘nonorthodox’ commentaries, which essentially means 
that they provided some degree of freedom for exegesis 
(Kolbaba 2013:491; Devreesse 1928:1093). Interestingly, 
however, the exegetical material was clearly termed so. As 
Kolbaba observes, the most common designations in Greek 
manuscripts are eklogai exegetikai and variations on the theme 
of sylloge exegeson, synagogue exegeseon or epitome exegeseon  
(Kolbaba 2013:486). 
Here, we can note an interesting parallel with the exegesis of 
Saint John Chrysostom, who, however, at first glance offers a 
more literal and nonallegorical exegetical tradition than the 
Ethiopian one. However, this is only a first impression 
because, with his emphasis on the deeper psychological 
dimensions of faith and spirituality, coupled with an overall 
emphasis on the community as the primary vehicle of faith 
and theology, he runs parallel with the Ethiopian concerns, 
showing us that regardless of exegetical form there is an 
underlining principle related to personal and communal 
growth moving beyond categories.
Commenting on Acts 8:
And the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying, arise and go 
toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem 
unto Gaza, which is desert. And he arose and went. (v. 26)
Chrysostom notes the obedience to the mission by Phillip: 
‘And he did not ask, wherefore? but he “arose and went’’’. 
Chrysostom mentions the Ethiopian eunuch, who read the 
prophet Isaiah (Ac 8:27, 28). Chrysostom mentions that the 
eunuch was reading constantly, ‘that even sitting in his 
chariot he read’. The Spirit tells Philip to go near. Chrysostom 
stresses that the eunuch needed interpretation of what he 
was reading; this interpretation was forthcoming on the basis 
of the Holy Spirit:
Understandest thou what thou readest? And he said, How can I, 
except some man should guide me? [...]. Observe again his piety; 
that though he did not understand, he read, and then after 
reading, examines. (vv. 29–31)
Chrysostom notes that after he gained knowledge and 
interpretation he immediately desired to be baptised. 
‘Observe how it is be baptized (v. 36). Mark the eager desire, 
mark the exact knowledge’.
Phillip goes on to Azotus. Chrysostom goes on to note that 
the conversion of this eunuch meant the conversion of others 
in Ethiopia. His quest for exegesis resulted in knowledge and 
the knowledge of an entire nation. Chrysostom shows that 
Phillip is patient with the eunuch: ‘Observe the wisdom of 
Philip: he did not accuse him, not say, “I know these things 
exactly: [...]”. Understandest thou what thou readest?’ (v. 30). 
Chrysostom continues to show that it is because the eunuch 
had a humble disposition that he was able to receive the 
explanation of the passage by Phillip who was also humble to 
the eunuch: 
On the contrary, he confesses his ignorance: wherefore also 
he learns. He shows his hurt to the physician: sees at a glance, 
that he both knows the matter, and is willing to teach. 
(Chrysostom Homily XIX, Ac VIII, 26,27) (transl. Walker, 
Sheppard & Browne 1889)
Chrysostom is an author who would be hardly classified as 
an allegorical interpreter, but as we have seen, his 
interpretation offers a freer dimension, something which was 
lost later on. Importantly, as noticed for example by 
Dragutinović (2015):
The freedom of an ancient interpreter toward the authorities of 
the past can be illustrated by a statement from John Chrysostom 
(on Gal. 4: 24), who did not hesitate in saying that the apostle 
Paul used the term ‘allegory’ in Gal 4:24 ‘in the wrong way’ 
(καταχρηστικῶς). (p. 15) 
Chrysostom resembles aspects of the Ethiopian tradition in 
his aim to instruct and to explain why, for example, the 
Apostle Paul said or did things as he did. Here, there is a 
departure from mere textual analysis to understand the 
behaviour or activity of biblical figures which is subjected to 
an overall goal or pastoral goal. A similar concern appears in 
the following commentary on Hebrews in Paul in the 
Ethiopian tradition as Cowley (1988) cites: 
And he wrote this epistle concentrating on spiritual wisdom; and 
he omitted mention of his name at the beginning of his epistle, 
for this apostle did not write his name, saying: ‘From Paul an 
Apostle’, like all his (other) epistles, because he knew that all his 
relatives, would hate him intensely, and all the Jewish people 
would reject him, because he was removing their law, and 
reproaching them, and (because) he loved the erring Gentiles, 
who had believed. But if the Apostle had written his name at the 
beginning of this epistle, who would have read his epistle, and 
who would have given heed to it? Rather they would have been 
dispersed quickly, breaking up the gathering, without hearing 
the word of wisdom, which is in it. Similarly, this (apostle) 
omitted, mention of Moses’ name, at the beginning of his epistle, 
and he wrote in place of it, ‘In many matters’, and in many 
portions God gave information to our fathers, in his prophets 
from former times. And he said this verifying that the first 
ordinance came by the hand of a servant, But as for the messianic 
ordinance he says, ‘But in the latter days he spoke to us in his 
son, whom he made inheritor of all’. (p. 273)5
Role of teacher
Instruction linked with a goal and aim is linked with the 
personality of the teacher. Here, the role of the teacher, the 
elder, is not of a mere ‘information disseminator’ but of a person 
who had the ‘same experiences’ and embodied that which he 
5.Prologue 3.1.14, Hebrews. MS Cambridge, Or 192f., 109b–110b. with corrections 
from MSS BL. Or 526f., 4b, Or 528f., 110a–111a, and or 503f., 164a–165a.
=== PAGE 11 ===
Page 11 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
taught, making his teaching authentic. A teacher here must be 
able to correctly choose between information, and this ability 
stems from his or her own personal experience. The taxonomy 
of discernment and decision to teach this or that stems from 
one’s own experiences with a view to the concrete situation and 
needs of the children or community at hand. Therefore, what 
marks the good teacher is not his or her knowledge or the 
amount of intellectual information he or she possesses but the 
ability to ‘apply’, to ‘choose’ this or that information for 
instruction, which posits exegesis as a special role. 
The instruction provides a horizon of spiritual intimacy, 
mysticism and historical continuity. One such contemporary 
Ethiopian account, speaking about political issues, betrays the 
influence of such teachers in relation to religious class and 
discussion of virtues. The necessity of finding one’s own teacher 
or school, for example around the age of 15, promotes intellectual 
variety and exchange. Travelling afar, begging and utilising the 
hospitality of various people would have undoubtedly served 
to disseminate knowledge through social interaction, and 
undoubtedly, students staying at the houses of various villagers 
would have had an impact on their surroundings, even if 
superficially, informing their hosts of their studies and their 
contents. The support of these students would have also 
facilitated a spirit of solidarity and philanthropy. 
Hailemariam Ared (Abebe 2020) speaks thus:
‘I was either in the 3rd or 4th grade when I first learned about the 
umbilical cord bonding the great Empire of Axum to Adolis. I 
remember it clearly, after these so many years, in whose class I 
first learned about it. It was in the Gibre Guebnet class taught by 
one of Axum’s premier priest and scholar of Saint Yared, Mregata 
Fisseha (may he rest in peace). And it is not only with regards to 
his class of Gibre Guebnet that I remember him so dearly but for 
the transforming event I had seen him do too.’
And further: 
‘Gibre Gebnet was not only about religion, faith, morals and ethics 
but was also about history. And it was in one of his religion classes, 
I remember him teaching us about the visit of the Queen of Sheba 
to Jerusalem to meet King Solomon, and how her son Menelik 
(Emne Melek) brought the Ark of Covenant to Axum. Never it was 
through the Nile river or across the desert of Beja (Begemdir) of the 
Sudan to Lake Tana, so concocted by those peddlers of the bogus 
“Solomonic Dynasty” on whose squatting, no archaeologist could 
find a trace of anything of civilisation of archaeological value, but 
through Axum, Adolis the Red Sea, and Jerusalem! I vividly 
remember it all, the lesson of my life from that great teacher, that 
renowned scholar and guardian of faith, the priest extraordinaire, 
the student of St. Yared, and great citizen of the Tigray Nation, the 
late Mregata Fisseha! There was something else I remember too. 
There was something angelic about Mregata Fisseha. When he 
taught, his words were like a beautiful August midnight rain, 
powerfully soothing as they were both spiritually and intellectually 
transforming. His words were like music took, full of life and 
vitality, vivacity, intensely enlightening, and magically healing, 
energizing, rejuvenating and powerfully empowering! His words 
had colors too, and did he draw with his words, rainbows of 
angels and Saints, the Crucifixion and the Resurrection, and not to 
mention Heaven and Hell! And in the center of it all was always, 
the seat of that great Empire the world has known for so long as 
the Axumite Kingdom/Empire: Tigray, unlike today, whole all the 
way to the sea, and all its people one and a mighty family, the 
former as the land of God, and the latter as the angels of just, 
committed to live by the laws of God! (n.p.)
Here, the figure of the teacher, his teaching, his spiritual 
disposition, history and contemporary issues are all conflated 
into an almost mythical presentation. Here, historical accuracy 
is somehow relativised and given over to a community 
narrative which forms the backbone of interpretation and 
appreciation. The account primarily helps the individual to 
orient himself, to find his own spiritual grounding, and thus 
inaccuracies or phantasies are not the most important issues 
to be studied here. What is important is how the teacher and 
the content of teaching help the growth of the individual and 
community involved, which is the primary aim of education 
and exegesis rather than a simple succession of information.
The Ethiopian schooling system offered a way out for 
students who would otherwise for one reason or another not 
be able to work on the farms of their parents. Begging and 
physical labour accompanied or accompany study, with 
strenuous regimes. Students can sleep a mere four hours a 
day, sleeping in simple huts (Kassa 2021). Little study has 
been carried out on the relationship between physical labour 
or activity with the development of mental capacities. It has 
been recently shown that walking and strenuous physical 
exercises have a relationship with brain function. 
Conclusion
The importance and originality of Ethiopian exegesis can 
perhaps appear only if one compares it to other traditions, 
such as the Byzantine or post-Byzantine Orthodox exegetical 
traditions. Authors coming from the Orthodox world 
especially can appreciate the richness of this Ethiopian 
tradition and its relevancy in being able to contextualise and 
offer a rich interaction with its surroundings and world, 
whereas the Orthodox Byzantine traditions have somehow 
drifted to an overt emphasis on conservationism. Here lie the 
possibilities for inspiration, because the Ethiopian tradition 
maintains all which is ‘dear’ to Orthodoxy, that is, a reliance 
on tradition and mystical theology but especially on the 
theology and centrality of the community. 
We have seen that the exegetical material and its originality 
are not solely based on ‘different’ opinions or a rational 
scholastic discourse, that is, the exegetical product is not a 
logical product or fruit of syllogism of one form or another 
but is more related to a revelatory experience based on the 
interaction with the community and the Divine. Here the 
Ethiopian tradition has managed to keep itself liberated from 
the predetermination of Greek and Roman philosophical 
limits, perhaps also by its loyalty to the Old Testament Judaic 
traditions and African traditions. 
It is important to realise is that this imaginative and consistent 
tradition is produced in schools which are mistakenly viewed 
by many modern commentators as inadequate because of 
=== PAGE 12 ===
Page 12 of 12 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za Open Access
their ‘traditional forms of teaching’, including memorising. 
Steps need to be taken to learn and maintain these schools. On 
the other hand, the traditional forms of schooling are not 
devoid of standard academic reflection and criticism. Students 
are aware of the differences between manuscripts and editions 
(see Kenaw 2004). Exegesis is becoming more important in 
today’s world, where Christianity is rapidly losing relevancy, 
perhaps partly because the Christian traditions have lost 
the ability to listen to revelation as it appears every day and 
in every possible context and which therefore requires  
non-predetermined interpretation.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that they have no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced 
them in writing this article.
Author’s contributions
V .J. is the sole author of this article.
Ethical considerations
This article followed all ethical standards for research 
without direct contact with human or animal subjects.
Funding information
This research received no specific grant from any funding 
agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Data availability
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data 
were created or analysed in this study.
Disclaimer
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those 
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official 
policy or position of any affiliated agency of the author.
References
Abebe, H., 2020, ‘Tigray-Tigrigni: Time long overdue for the molecular wall to be 
atomized and the real“Singapore” to rise!’, in Aigaforum, East Africa News, and 
the best peoples forum , viewed 08 August 2022, from http://www.aigaforum.
com/article2020/Tigray-Tigrigni-Long-Overdue.htm.
Abera, J., 2012, An introduction to the legal history of Ethiopia, 1434–1974 , Shama 
Books, Addis Ababa.
‘Abidin’ Abdal-Majid, 1947, Bayna al-habasha wa’l-’arab, Daral-Fikral-’ Arabi, Cairo.
Achi, A., 2021, African indigenous education, viewed 06 January 2021, from https: //
www.researchgate.net/publication/357050398.
Bilimoria, P ., 2004, Hermeneutics, exegesis, and reasoning in Indian Scholasticism: 
Friend and folly , viewed 20 September 2022, from https://www.academia.
edu/8537918/Hermeneutics_exegesis_and_reasoning_in_Indian_scholasticism_
friend_and_folly.
Cockayne, J. & Salter G., 2021, ‘Feasts of memory, collective remembering, liturgical 
time and travel, and the actualisation of the past’, Modern Theology 37(2), 275–
295. https://doi.org/10.111/moth.12683
Cowley, R.W., 1974, ‘Old Testament introduction in the andemta commentary 
tradition’, Journal of Ethiopian Studies 12(1), 135–136.
Cowley, R.W., 1988, Ethiopian biblical interpretation: A study in exegetical tradition 
and heremeneutics, Cambridge University press, Cambridge.
Crostini, B., 2019, ‘What are Psalter Catanae for? Considerations from the Vaticanus 
Graecus 752 Project’, in M.A. Barbàra & M.R. Petringa (eds.), Letteratura Cristiana 
Antica, Giornate di studio, in Ricordo, di Sandro Leanza, pp. 74–86, Sicania, Messina.
Dadoo, Y ., 2016, ‘Linguistic and cultural affinities: The case of Arabic and Ethiopic 
languages’, Journal for Semitics  25(2), 700–725. https://doi.org/10.25159/ 
1013/8471/2553
Daif, S., 2009, Tarīkh, al-Adab, al-Arabī, Dār-al Maārif, Cairo.
Despotis, A. & Wallace, J.B. (eds.), 2022, ‘Greek and Byzantine philosophical exegesis’, 
in Easter Church Identitites, vol. 5, Ferdinand Schoningh Wilhelm Fink, Paderborn.
Devreesse, R., 1928, ‘Chaines exégétiques grecques’ in L. Pirot (ed.), Dictionnaire de la 
Bible, suppl.1, Letouzey et Ané, Paris.
Douglas, J.A., 1936, ‘Introduction, xxvi–xxvii’, in A.E. Matthew & J.A. Douglas (eds.), 
The teaching of the Abyssinian Church, pp. vii–xll, The Faith Press, London.
Dragutinović, P ., 2015, ‘Is there an orthodox exegesis? Engaging contextual 
hermeneutics’, Ortodoksia 55, 7–41.
Gebrsellasie, E., 2020, Celebration of the Ethiopian Eucharistic liturgy , viewed 13 
March 2022, from https://www.academia.edu/43761506/Celebration_of_the_
Ethiopian_Eucharistic_liturgy.
Girma, M.A., 2011, ‘W hose meaning?: Acritical look at wax and gold tradition as 
aphilosophical foundation for aunique Ethiopian hermeneutics’ Sophia 50(1), 
175–187.
Fishbane, M., 1998, The exegetical imagination, Harvard University Press, Harvard.
Florovsky, G., 1975, ‘Patristic theology and the Ethos of the Orthodox Church’, in 
Aspects of history, collected works of Georges Florovsky IV , pp. 15–22, Nordland 
Publishing Company, Belmond, MA.
Irmscher, J. & Kazhdan, A., 1991, ‘Exegesis’, in A.P . Kazhdan (ed.), Oxford dictionary of 
Byzantium, 3 vols, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Kassa, T., 2021, ‘Construction of national identity among children in traditional schools 
of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church’, French Center for Ethiopian Studies, viewed 26 
January 2022, from https://cfee.hypotheses.org/7978.
Kenaw, S., 2004, ‘Studying traditional schools of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church: A 
quest for fresh methodology’, Ethiopian Journal of the Social Sciences and 
Humanities 11(1), 107–121. https://doi.org/10.4314/ejossah.v2i1.29860
Keon-Sang, An, 2018, An Ethiopian reading of the Bible, Biblical interpretation of the 
Ethiopian Orthodox Tawahido Church , An American Society of Missiology, 
Pickwick, OR.
Kolbaba, T.M., 2013, ‘Byzantine orthodox exegesis’, in E. Richard Marsden  & E. Ann 
Matter (eds.), The new Cambridge history of the Bible, volume 2, From 600 to 
1450, pp. 483–504, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Mengesha, R., 2021, ‘Where indigenous knowledge is beyond modernity: An 
experience from the Ethiopian Orthodox Church traditional adult education 
practices, Ethiopia’, PalArch‘s Journal of Archaeology of Egypt/Egyptology  18(1), 
4143–4160.
Pankhurst, R.K., 1962, ‘The foundation of education, printing, newspapers, books, 
production, libraries and literary in Ethiopia’, Ethiopian Observer VI(3), 241–290.
Pedersen, K., S., 1995, Traditional Ethiopian exegesis of the Book of Psalms , 
Harassowitz, Weisbaden.
Robert, L., transl., 2016, On theraic to Piso, attributed to Galen, a critical edition with 
translation and commentary, Brill, Leiden.
Sheridan, M.J., transl., 1995, Rufus of Shotep, Homilies on the Gospels of Matthew and 
Luke, introduction, text, translation, commentary, Roma, CIM.
Taft, R.F., 1992, The Byzantine rite: A short history, Liturgical Press, Collegeville, MN.
Tuck, A.P ., 1990, Contemporary philosophy and the philosophy of scholarship: On the 
Western interepretation of Nagarjuna, Oxford University Press, New York, NY .
Villa, M., 2019, ‘Exegesis and lexicography in the Ethiopian tradition: The role of the 
Physiologus’, Comparitive Oriental Studies Bulletin 5(1), 5–19.
Walker, J., Sheppard J., Browne H. & Stevens, G.B., 1889, ‘Saint John Chrysostom 
Homily XIX, on Acts, The Homilies of Saint John Chrysostom, Archbishop of 
Constantinople, on the Acts of the Apostles, translated with notes and indices’, in 
P . Schaff (ed.), Nicene and post Nicene Fathers, First Series , vol. 11, WM. B. 
Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids, MI.
Witakowski, W., 1995, ‘The miracles of Jesus, an Ethiopian Apocryphal Gospel’, 
Apocrypha, 6, 279–298.
Witakowski, W., 2012, ‘Syrian influences in Ethiopian Culture’, in F. Jullien (ed.), 
Eastern Christianity: Acrossroad of cultures, pp. 201–232, Peeters, Leuven.