Z Badań nad Książką i Księgozbiorami Historycznymi 2020, t. 14, z. 3
The Studies into the History of the Book and Book Collections 2020, vol. 14, no. 3
www.bookhistory.uw.edu.pl
http://doi.org/10.33077/uw.25448730.zbkh
© Copyright by Uniwersytet Warszawski; CC BY-NC 4.0                                  
„Z Badań nad Książką i Księgozbiorami Historycznymi” – Udział zagranicznych recenzentów w ocenie publikacji; Stworzenie anglojęzycznej 
wersji wydawniczej publikacji; Digitalizacja tomów archiwalnych rocznika w celu zapewnienia otwartego dostępu do nich przez Internet oraz 
wdrożenie i utrzymanie cyfrowej platformy redakcyjnej – zadanie finansowane w ramach umowy nr 653/P-DUN/2019 ze środków Ministra 
Nauki i Szkolnictwa Wyższego przeznaczonych na działalność upowszechniającą naukę.
Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
The École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE) – PSL, Paris, France
ngemilie@outlook.fr
 0000-0001-9250-5695
Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot 
Collection stored in the National Library of France 
(Bibliothèque nationale de France)
“One day in my office, a heated discussion was raging about the material that the Chinese use 
for making paper. Their paper is far better than ours because the raw material is better; and 
a good deal was said about this thin, light Chinese paper, for it is light and thin, the texture 
is smooth, and there are no transparent patche”.
Honoré de Balzac, Lost illusions
Abstract: This paper describes the preliminary results of my PhD research within the ERC pro­
ject “HisTochText”. The aim is to perform macroscopic analyses of archaeological papers from 
the Pelliot Collection. They are stored in the National Library of France (Bibliothèque nationale 
de France). Most were discovered in the oasis kingdom of Kucha, inscribed in an ancient Indian 
writing, brāhmῑ. The language was unknown in France. Kucha was a meeting place for many 
influences both western and eastern, insofar as paper analysis seeks to determine technological 
influences and local adaptations. Macroscopic analyses rely on traces found in the material of the 
paper which may be the result of the many stages in the life of the document: the raw material, 
the manufacturing process, the conditions of use and the storage conditions, both ancient and 
modern. To this day 350 fragments have been observed. Little is known about papermaking in 
Central Asia. As a consequence, every shred of information must be examined in order to deter­
mine the differences from and similarities to paper manufacturing in Xinjiang. 
Key words: Central Asia, Xinjiang, Papermaking technology, Macroscopic analyses, Paul 
Pelliot, Bibliothèque nationale de France.
https://doi.org/10.33077/uw.25448730.zbkh.2020.630

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
386
Introduction
The “HisTochText” project, “History of the Tocharian Texts of the Pelliot 
Collection”1, aims at rendering the written Buddhist culture during the first 
millennium of our era. A multidisciplinary team2 is examining manuscripts 
excavated in the Kucha region. So far the language and contents of these 
documents have been studied, but not their materiality. Little is known about 
papermaking in the Tarim basin3, and it is why macroscopic and microscopic 
analyses of papers were carried out in order to determine the raw materials and 
the manufacturing process used.
The historical context of the Pelliot collection creation at the National 
Library of France (Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF))4
The documents studied as part of this doctoral work were discovered by 
Paul Pelliot. They are currently stored in the department of manuscripts in the 
National Library of France. The collection dates back to the early twentieth 
century. At that time France was beginning to organise geographical and 
scientific expeditions in many Asian regions. Over time these missions attracted 
local interest. Politics was also a major stimulus. That epoch is characterised 
1  The project has a five-year sponsorship from the European Research Council (action number 
788205) which began on 1st October 2018, principal investigator Georges-Jean Pinault (EPHE, PSL). 
This study forms part of my PhD thesis (cotutelle EPHE, Paris and CSMC, Hamburg) prepared 
within the “HisTochText” project under the supervision of Georges-Jean Pinault and Agnieszka Hel­
man-Ważny.
2  Codicological, philological, linguistic, technological and material studies. 
3  Julius von Wiesner was the first, as early as 1902, to describe and analyse fragments from 
Kucha (J. Wiesner, Mikroskopische Untersuchung alter Ostturkestanischer und anderer Asiatischer 
Papiere nebst histologishen Beiträgen zur mikroskopischen Papieruntersuchung, Wien 1902). Schol­
ars such as Kazuyuki Enami, Anna-Grethe Rischel and Agnieszka Helman-Ważny have analysed 
papers found in Central Asia. (K Enami et al, ‘Origin of the difference in papermaking technologies 
between those transferred to the East and the West from the motherland China’, Journal of the In­
ternational Association of Paper Historians, vol.14, Issue 2, 2010, pp. 11-22, A.-G. Rischel, Anal­
ysis of papermakers choice of fibrous materials and technology along the paper road, [in:] Paper 
as a Medium of Cultural Heritage. Archaeology and Conservation, 26th Congress – International 
Association of Paper Historians, edited by R. Graziaplena, Rome, 2006, pp. 202-208, A.-G. Rischel 
and S-C. Raschmann, Old Turkish fragments from the Berlin Turfan collection, Paper analysis of 
62 manuscripts and block prints, [in:] Altt ürkische Handschriften, Teil.18, Franz Steiner Verlag, 
Stuttgart, 2012, pp. 265-311, A. Helman-Ważny, More than meets the eye: Fibre and Paper Analysis 
of the Chinese Manuscripts from the Silk Roads, “STAR: Science & Technology of Archaeological 
Research” 2016, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 127-140, R. Nöller, A. Helman-Ważny, The Materials of Turfan 
and Dunhuang Manuscripts: Analysis of Paper, Pigments and Dyes, “International Dunhuang Project 
News” 2013, no. 41, pp. 6-7.
4  The Collection was named after P. Pelliot (1878-1945), French explorer, philologist and lin­
guist. For his career and his work, see J.-P. Drège, G.-J. Pinault, Paul Pelliot: de l’histoire à la légen­
de, eds. G.-J. Pinault, M. Zink, Paris 2013.

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
387
by the spirit of competition between European powers for discoveries and 
archaeological trophies. France was felt to be late in this, which is the reason 
Sylvain Lévi wrote in 1910: “Obliged by its glorious oriental traditions and 
by its Asian interests, France was obliged to play a part in this unearthing of 
an ancient past”5. 
In this context the French decided to take on other nations6 in order to 
establish a presence in Asia7. At the beginning of 1905 a committee formed 
to organise a mission in Central Asia and in 1906 a second expedition set out 
for Turkestan on the initiative of the Archaeological Survey of India8. It was 
led by Aurel Stein.
Paul Pelliot was member of the EFEO, student of the sinologist Edouard 
Chavannes and of Sylvain Lévi. He was chosen for that mission because of 
his excellent understanding of both ancient and modern Chinese, but he also 
spoke many languages, such as Turkish, Uighur, Mongolian, Tibetan, as well 
as knowing Sanskrit. He carried out excavations in Central Asia between 1906 
and 1908 after a long and perilous journey, worthy of the ancient caravans, 
crossing northern Central Asia on horseback. He reached the oasis of Kucha on 
2nd January 1907. He favoured studying isolated and little-explored sites9, such 
as the monastic complex of Duldur-Akhur, which supplied the first manuscripts 
written in brāhmῑ. He went on to explore Kumtura and Subashi10, bringing 
to light new languages, such as Sogdian and Tocharian. He also discovered 
some two hundred fragments written in Chinese11. The site of Subashi yielded 
5  S. Lévi, La mission Pelliot en Asie centrale, “Annales de Géographie“ 1910, vol. 19, no. 105, 
pp. 274-276. 
S. Lévi (1863-1935) is a French Indianist, Professor at the Collège de France, honorary member 
of the École Française d’Extrême Orient (EFEO). He was one of the first to take an interest in the 
Tocharian language. He participated in the deciphering of it and the identification of the Buddhist 
texts. For details about that aspect of his work, see G.-J. Pinault, Sylvain Lévi déchiffreur et lecteur 
des textes des frontiers, [in:] Sylvain Lévi (1863-1935). Études indiennes, histoire sociale Actes du 
colloque tenu à Paris les 8-10 octobre 2003, eds. L. Bansat-Boudon, R. Lardinois, Turnhout 2007, 
pp. 111-144.
6  England, Russia, Germany and Japan.
7  In 1894 Sven Hedin became the first explorer to traverse these territories. Four years later the 
Academy of Science in Saint Petersburg sent a team lead by Dimitri Klementz in order to explore the 
Turfan region. England assigned A. Stein to Kashgar and Khotan between 1900 and 1902. Stein sub­
sequently ran two later missions. His last expedition lasted from 1906 to 1908 and ended at Dunhu­
ang. Germany organised Albert Grünwedel’s expedition to Turfan in 1902 and 1903. There followed 
two missions directed by Albert von Le Coq in 1903 and 1904 and 1905 and 1907. 
8  The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is an agency of the Indian government attached 
to the Ministry of Culture. It was established in 1861 with responsibility for archaeological research 
and heritage conservation. 
9  S. Lévi described those sites as Hindu-Chinese “Pompeii”, buried in central Asian sands.
10  The Duldur-Akhur monastery is located to the West of Kucha, beyond the River Muzart. 
The city of Subashi is located to the North and straddles the River Kucha.
11  They constitute the Pelliot Chinois Douldour-Âqour collection of the BnF.

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
388
a set of poplar wood strips and fragments with an Udānavarga12 text written in 
Sanskrit and some manuscripts bore texts written in several languages.
At the end of 1909 Pelliot undertook a brief inventory of manuscripts written 
in Chinese, the majority of which came from the Library Cave of Dunhuang. 
The results of his findings were shared among various institutions and books, 
manuscripts and sheets were deposited at the National Library of France. Other 
findings, such statues, frescoes, artefacts, paintings and banners, were stored 
largely at the Louvre, but some were offered to Émile Guimet. Between 1945 
and 1946 works preserved in the Louvre were relocated to the Guimet Museum 
(Musée Guimet) and the Natural History Museum in Paris (Museum d’Histoire 
naturelle) received every specimen of an herbarium containing eight hundred 
plants, two hundred birds, mammals, insects and geological samples13.
The oasis kingdom of Kucha, a flourishing multicultural town 
along the silk road
The number of fragments found and the many high-quality artefacts and 
wall paintings show that the ancient oasis-town of Kucha was a flourishing 
kingdom. In addition to its manifold natural resources14, its location was 
commercially strategic (Fig. 1).
The town lies in the northern Tarim basin in the modern Xinjiang region. 
Its territory expanded beyond the city ramparts to spread along the Silk Road, 
which borders the Taklamakan desert. The phrase “Silk Road” (Seidenstrasse in 
German) was coined in 1877 by the traveller and geographer Baron Ferdinand 
von Richthofen. It designates trade networks from China through central Asia 
and Persia, as far as modern Syria and beyond to the Mediterranean Sea. These 
roads were originally referred to as “The Road to Samarkand” or to any other 
significant city along the route15. This network was a set of roads leading to 
a number of oasis-towns in desert areas. In the case of the Tarim basin, sites 
12  Part of the Pelliot Sanskrit collection of the BnF, the Udānavarga, is a compilation of stanzas 
credited to Buddha. That is the equivalent of the Dhammapada in the Pāli Canon. This is one of the 
most widespread texts in Central Asia. It is also known thanks to several paper manuscripts written 
in Sanskrit but also with translations into other Buddhist languages.
13  For further details about the collection’s history and the way it was shared among collections 
of French institutions, see: N. Monnet, Paul Pelliot et la Bibliothèque nationale, [in:] Paul Pelliot de 
l’histoire à la légende, eds. J.-P. Drège and M. Zink, Colloque international organisé par Jean-Pierre 
Drège, Georges-Jean Pinault, Christina Scherrer-Schaub et Pierre-Etienne Will au Collège de France 
et à l’Académie des Belles-Lettres (Palais de l’Institut), 2-3 octobre 2008, Paris, Académie des In­
scriptions et des Belles-Lettres, 2013. 
14  Minerals and metals, such as jade, copper, iron and brass; products such as leather and its 
by-products (boots and saddles); sugar, spices and herbs. See V. Hansen, The Silk Road, a new story, 
New York 2012, p. 237. 
15  Ibidem, p. 7.

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
389
were located around towns and, specifically in the case of Kucha, in what were 
huge monastic complexes. They were established either on plains, or in caves16. 
The prevailing local religion was Buddhism and this permeated the every 
aspect of life. Unearthed leaves tend to be from Buddhist books, but they are 
largely fragments or scattered sheets. The original and most common form of 
book is poṭhῑ (or pustaka17). Some paper manuscripts are gathered in the form 
of scrolls, imitating Chinese manuscripts type (Fig. 2). These different forms 
partly correspond to the type of text, but some secular texts were written on 
paper scrolls or sheets. They consist of economic or administrative documents 
and texts not strictly Buddhist, but drawn from Indian culture, such as medical 
texts18. 
Fig. 1. Main trade routes in Central Asia. Map by Vaillant
16  Duldur-Akhur, Qumturâ, Subashi, Hiçar and Khitai bazar.
17  The poṭhῑ format, (the word means book in Punjabi and is related to the Sanskrit term pus­
taka) hails from India, where palm leaves were used as writing support. The oblong shape of the 
leaves determines the shape and dimension of the books’ sheets. These latter are bound together with 
a thread through a hole drilled into the folio. This shape was then replicated in Asia for Buddhist 
books, while paper was adopted as support. See: A. Helman-Ważny, The archeology of Tibetan book, 
Leiden, Boston, Brill, 2014, p. 49.
18  The inventory of the Pelliot Koutchéen collection was made in the 1980s and published by 
G.-J. Pinault, Concordance des manuscrits tokhariens du fonds Pelliot, [in:] Instrumenta Tocharica, 
ed. M. Malzahn, Heidelberg 2007, pp. 162-219. The ensemble is divided in several series and sub-se­
ries, cited later: ancienne série [old series], nouvelle série [new series], DAM.M.507 [monastery 
account], lettres commerciales [business letters], bois [caravan passes and administrative documents 
written on wooden strips].

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
390
Fig. 2. Left: poṭhῑ (pustaka) format © Pratapaditya 2002 Right: scroll format. 
Illustration based on Tsuen-Hsuin 1985
Manuscripts
The fragments analysed come from Buddhist manuscripts, monastery 
ledgers and drafts of ledgers, trade contracts and administrative letters written 
by the Chinese administration19. Palaeographic dating20 puts all these documents 
between the 6th and 9th centuries. During the excavation Pelliot briefly described 
the leaves. He records in his diary expressions such as “paper manuscript”, 
“Chinese paper” and “Indian paper”. It is likely that he saw no need to be more 
specific. The history of paper and the development of papermaking has been 
little studied. He specified that “[in] the inner courtyard of Duldur-Akhur, we 
excavated an important batch of manuscripts written in brāhmi”21.
Many of these documents were written neither in Sanskrit nor any Persian 
language, but in an Indo-Iranian language unknown at the time, one deciphered 
in 1908 by two German Indologists, Emil Sieg and Wilhem Siegling, on the 
basis of manuscripts discovered during the Turfan expeditions. From 1910 
this work was continued by Lévi with manuscripts found during the Pelliot 
mission22. The name “Tocharian” covers in fact two languages: Tocharian A and 
Tocharian B. These terms were coined by German researchers according to 
19  For an accurate description of manuscriptscontents, read C. Chao-Jung, Secular documents 
in Tocharian : Buddhist economy and society in the Kucha region, Doctoral thesis directed by Georg­
es-Jean Pinault, presented in 2010, École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris and É. Trombert, 2000
20  The study was carried out as part of Athanaric Huard’sPhDthesis at the École pratique des 
hautes études, EPHE, PSL. For dating of the Tocharian documents on the basis of script, see M. Mal­
zahn, The most archaic manuscripts of Tocharian B and the varieties of Tocharian B language, 
[in:] Instrumenta Tocharica, op. cit., pp. 255-297.
21  Brāhmῑ is a writing system which emerged in India some time before Asoka inscriptions, 
i.e. in the middle of the third century BCE.
22  M. Cohen, La mission Paul Pelliot en Asie Centrale, [online] https://archivesetmanuscrits.
bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cc4395j [accessed 24.01.2019]; G.-J. Pinault, Concordance des manuscrits…, 
op. cit.

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
391
a false identification with the assumed language of a people named Tochari 
in Latin, which refers to the Kushan people.
The majority of texts from the Pelliot collection are written in “Tocharian B”. 
Lévi proposed the name kutchean23, but the language gradually died out 
when the Uighurs invaded the region in the 9th century, and the first Uighur 
Buddhist period in the 11th century in the Turfan region. The Turfan region 
is characterised by a strong Tocharian influence, but the language did not 
survive the disappearance of Buddhist culture due to the proliferation of 
Islam in the region. Both Tocharian languages (A and B) discovered so far 
are understood due to their use in translating Buddhist texts into Sanskrit. 
The most ancient manuscripts written in Tocharian B were dated to the late 
fourth or early fifth century. The early centuries of CE are characterised by 
the influx of Buddhist monks who crossed the region from oasis to oasis doing 
missionary work. The characters of both these Indo-European languages is 
closely related with a writing borrowed by north-western India. It reached 
the Tarim basin with Buddhist missionaries from the West, the region that 
corresponds to modern Pakistan and Afghanistan, the centre of which was 
Gandhara24. Broadly speaking, influences came to the kingdom of Kucha from 
both West and East at an early stage. There was as a result of Alexander the 
Great conquered Gandhara in 327 BCE and left a Greek settlement there, but 
in the second century BCE, during the Xiongnu Empire (209 BCE- 93 (156) 
CE) the nomadic tribes of Yuezhi and Xiongnu25 invaded. During the Tibetan 
Empire (618-842 CE) Tibet invaded and then the Chinese seized control over 
the territory26. As a consequence, the oasis town was a meeting point for 
migrants involved in trade, the military, the arts and religion. The importance 
of the Indo-Buddhist culture of Gandhara and other Persian civilisations, 
i.e. Bactria or Sogdia, should be highlighted. It was spread by missionaries 
from Parthia and Sogdia in the first place before India, but also by merchants 
trading in the region.
23  Hence the current title of the collection “fonds Pelliot Koutchéen”, which is a part of the 
Pelliot collection stored at the National Library of France by “fonds Pelliot Sanskrit”, “fonds Pelliot 
chinois”.
24  O. von Hinüber, Expansion to the North: Afghanistan and Central Asia, [in:] The World of 
Buddhism, eds. H. Bechert, R. Gombrich, London 1991, pp. 99-107; R. Salomon, The Buddhist lit­
erature of ancient Gandhara: an introduction with selected translation, Sommerville, MA 2018 (The 
world of Gandharan Buddhism, pp. 11-49). 
In a narrow sense Gandhara corresponds to the region of Peshawar (the north-western province 
of Pakistan) and areas along the River Kabul; in a broad sense it includes a part of western and north­
ern Afghanistan (Swat valley, Bactria) and the western Punjab (Taxila).
25  The Xiongnu people comprise a confederation of a number of tribes. For further information, 
see N. Di Cosmo, Ancient China and Its Enemies, the Rise of Nomadic Power in East Asian History, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
26  For an overview see J.P Mallory, V.H. Mair, The Tarim mummies, London 2000, pp. 34-63.

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
392
From the east there was the Chinese influx from the beginning of the Tang 
dynasty (618-907)27. This influence is seen in crafts and arts, such as wall 
paintings and architecture28.
The history of the Gandhara is punctuated by its more or less belligerent 
relations with its numerous neighbours29. The Kings were regularly compelled 
to fight for the country’s independence30. The year 658 was particularly 
significant, since Kucha, ruled at the time by the Tang Dynasty, became the 
headquarters of one of the four Anxi garrisons31. The Chinese administration 
then took control over the region, although the local king maintained his 
power32. Within that multicultural context the technical analysis of paper may 
help to determine the way papermaking spread and its possible local uses.
Macroscopic analysis of documents: preliminary results
A macroscopic analysis of paper fragments mostly relies on observation 
and interpretation of traces printed on the material. These traces reflect not 
only the stages of papermaking but also the stages of a document’s life. The 
nature of raw materials, the manufacturing processes and the shape of the 
sheet influence the properties of the sheet of paper such as colour, resistance, 
appearance, and texture. 
Within the Tarim Basin and during earlier periods, two types of raw materials 
were used for pulp: recycled materials such as old rags, ropes, fishing nets and 
used papers, and plant materials such as grasses and specific barks, mainly 
mulberry. These materials would be subjected to several processes, chemical 
and mechanical, in order to reduce them to fibres. They would firstly be allowed 
to rot before being boiled in a caustic lye. They would finally be pounded and 
formed into dough. 
The pulp, made of fibres diffused in a small amount of water, is spread 
evenly over a cloth pinned across a wooden frame. The sheet of paper is shaped 
27  M. Hallade, S. Gaulier, Mission Pelliot, Soubachi et Douldou-âqour, vol. 4, Recherche sur 
les civilisations, Paris 1982, p. 30.
28  Traces of this new style were observed on buildings located in Duldur-Akhur and Subashi.
29  S. Lévy, Le ‘Tokharien B’, langue de Koutcha, “Journal Asiatique, XIe série” 1913, vol. 2, 
pp. 311-380: This article describes the many conflicts between Kutcha and the other oasis kingdoms 
as well as China and Tibet.
30  V. Hansen, op. cit., p. 66.
31  É. Trombert, Les manuscrits chinois de Koutcha, Fonds Pelliot de la Bibliothèque nationale 
de France, Paris 2000. Four garrisons of the Chinese army were established between 648 and 658. 
Besides Kutcha, the towns of Khotan, Kashgar and Karashar were also headquarters of Chinese 
military bases. The Protectorate General to Pacify the West (Anxi Grand Protectorate) was a pro­
tectorate (640 – c. 790 CE) established by the Tang dynasty in 640 and above mentioned garrisons 
were supposed to monitor the area. The Chinese intention was to pacify and control the Tarim Basin.
32  See translation of Chinese documents found in Kucha in É. Trombert, op. cit.

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
393
by allowing it to dry under the sun. The dipping mould brought technical 
improvement, in which the papermaking sieve no longer forms part of the 
rigid frame. This innovation enabled papermakers to remove sheets as soon 
as they were shaped. As a consequence, paper making production increased 
significantly. Wet sheets would be piled on top of each other and pressed 
in order to drain the water before drying them stretched out on a flat surface. 
During the period we are dealing with, both kinds of moulds were used. 
As a consequence, raw materials and manufacturing processes may determine 
certain features that may be observed in the paper. The presence of threads 
(coloured or plain) or cloth, for example, may indicate the use of rags. 
The sheet shaping method (Fig. 3) and the drying method (Fig. 4) likewise leave 
specific traces in the structure of the paper. The finishing stages, i.e. polishing, 
calendaring and coating, are also detectable.
Figs 3 A-D. The two main sheet shaping processes. Top A and B: Floating mould, 
pulp is spread manually (left) or by means of a tool (right). Bottom C and D: 
Dipping mould from Japan (left) and China (right). Photographs A by Trier, 
B by Josh Summers, bottom C and D www.cnnews.com

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
394
Figs 4 A-C. A. Drying support: Left on a wall. Photograph courtesy of Claude 
Laroque; B. Top: on a mould. Photograph by Jesper Trier; C. Bottom: On a wooden 
plank. Photograph after Dard Hunter
Macroscopic analysis also enables the detection of some practices and some 
uses of documents. Certain leaves show numerous folds which look deliberate. 
Other documents show vertical traces due to being stored rolled (Fig. 5). Some 
fragments bear little holes. These would be magical texts of a medical nature. 
They would be pinned to the sick33. Some other manuscripts show coloured 
stains (white, purple, pink or red) the composition and origin of which have 
yet to be determined34.
33  Communication with prof. G.-J. Pinault.
34  They may be stains resulting from degradation (moulds), accidental stains or even intentional 
stains resulting from a document’s usage. The BnF Laboratory needs to analyse these stains.

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
395
Figs 5 A-D A. Top: folds B-C. Middle: coloured stains D. Bottom: regular folds due 
to being stored rolled. Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Storage conditions on the site of the find have an impact on the paper 
(Fig. 6). Besides common paper degradation35, sheets of paper are marked by 
the extreme conditions in which they have been stored for many centuries. Some 
sites were ransacked and burnt, the papers left in the open and subjected to bad 
weather. Conditions in which documents were transported also affected their 
condition (Fig. 6). Documents would be placed in wooden crates, manhandled 
onto horse carts and buffeted and battered, as they shuddered and juddered 
across the rough terrain. Temperature changes and bad weather also took their 
toll36. 
35  Yellowing, dust, folds, tears and losses of paper. 
36  Pelliot’s diaries illustrate severe winters and blistering summers which characterise the cli­
mate of the Tarim basin, located between the Taklamakan desert and the mountain ranges of the 
Tianshan. For greater accuracy regarding the climate of the region, read the book by L. Golomb, 
Die Bodenkultur in Ost-Turkestan. Oasenwirtschaft und Nomadentum, Freiburg 1959.

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
396
Figs 6 A-D Top: A. A convoy heading for Kutcha (left), B. “Manuscripts house” 
in Khitai Bazar (right) Bottom: C. The road to Qumtura (left) D. Et Hiçar excavation 
(right). Photographs by Nouette
A pad of manuscript leaves has been kept untouched. It consists of fragments 
of paper and agglomerated mud, which illustrates storage conditions on the site 
where it was found.
To this day 350 leaves and fragments have been viewed under natural 
light, low-angled light and transmitted light. They have been photographed 
and measured (height, length and width). Documents are inspected with the 
naked eye before using a digital Dino-Lite microscope37 to focus on details. 
General characteristics may already be identified. They are more or less clear 
depending on the dimensions of the fragment, its state of conservation38 and 
whether there was a coating.
Colour is the first feature of paper observed (Fig. 7). Conclusion may 
not, however, be drawn from the colour. There are many causes of colour 
37  Dino-Lite FC OC 1.
38  In fact, a small size lowers the possibility to identify some features. Likewise, a poor state of 
conservation may change the paper inner structure. It gets impossible to note typical manufacturing 
features. 

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
397
changes: raw materials, fibres, sizing, coating, the way the paper had been 
used, the length of time it was cooked, whether an alkaline product was used 
and the length of time it was beaten. External factors, such as temperature, 
humidity, light, contact with pollutants or substances that hasten the natural 
aging process of paper, also have an impact. Black traces may be visible on 
calcinated edges, for example; the presence of dirt (dust, silica) may be due to 
the site it was discovered, as described by Pelliot39.
It makes sense, therefore, to describe the colour of the paper in order to 
facilitate comparison between items of the same manufacture and composition. 
Colour evaluation also depends on the observer and observing conditions, 
in particular the light source and the surface aspect40. 
Figs 7 A-D. Shades of paper colours (Pelliot Koutchéen Lettre Commerciale 
XXXVI, Pelliot Koutchéen Nouvelle Série 400, Pelliot Sanskrit Udānavarga 1.21, 
Pelliot Koutchéen Ancienne Série 5). Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
39  P. Pelliot, Carnets de route, 1906-1908, Paris 2008, p. 120: “Thursday 18th October 1907 
«We found some rather large page fragments on birch bark, and especially some fragments in San­
skrit and Chinese on paper. The Chinese fragments are largely accounts. The whole thing was found 
mostly in piles of rubbish, mingled with dung, seeds, apricot kernels, walnut shells»”. [“Jeudi 18 
octobre 1907 «Nous avons quelques fragments assez grands de feuillets sur écorce de bouleau et 
surtout des fragments sanscrits et chinois sur papier. Les fragments chinois appartiennent surtout à 
des comptes; le tout est généralement trouvé dans des tas de déchets, mêlés à du fumier, des graines, 
des noyaux d’abricots, des cosses de noix»”].
40  Light reflexion differs between a smooth and a rough surface. This modifies the perception 
of colour.

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
398
Terminology used to describe paper colour remains subjective and somewhat 
lacking in accuracy41. Instruments are not necessarily any more accurate 
because the use of an absolute white standard, used in industrial paper mills is 
sometimes unsuitable for uneven surfaces.
The absolute white standard was nonetheless considered suitable for the 
Pelliot collection, as long as documents where compared with each other. Broadly 
speaking, paper colour ranges from creamy white through beige to brown42. When 
the coating is in good condition, the surface of the paper is white, smooth and glossy 
(Fig. 8). That indicates the care and the quality of the finishing process afforded 
some manuscripts. The coating consists of a thick gypsum-based substance. Papers 
with a coated surface display an even surface making it possible to write on it 
with a wooden stick. In the case of non-coated paper, ink would also not bleed 
through the paper. It may be thus assumed that paper was sized. Micro-sample 
analyses alone, however, is able to confirm this and specify the nature of the sizing. 
Ink analyses identified a carbon ink that sometimes contained metallic elements 
such as copper43. Copper would commonly be used to liquefy it and stabilise the 
colour44. It is uncertain, however, whether the presence of copper was accidental 
or intentional. The region was known for its copper mines and archaeological digs 
have revealed a number of ovens used in the extraction of metal (Fig. 9). Copper 
may nonetheless have been a common ingredient in carbon ink in Central Asia45.
41  A range from white to dark brown is used.
42  For more about Chinese paper colour read J.-P. Drège, Le papier dans la Chine impériale : 
Origine, fabrication, usage. Textes présentés, annotés et traduits, Paris 2017, and also the artic­
le Note sur les couleurs des papiers des manuscrits de Dunhuang, “Cahiers d’Asie” 1987, vol. 3, 
pp. 147-150. Still, it seems more or less impossible to transpose Chinese paper colour typology of 
Tang Dynasty manuscripts and apply to comparative study of those written in Sanskrit and Tocharian. 
To better understand the problem, however, V. Bunting’s article, The prints and the papers: Whistler’s 
Venice sets at the Freer Gallery of art, [in:] Looking at Paper, ed. J. Slavin, Ottawa 1999, pp. 53-62.
43  Numerous analyses were performed in situ:
Coating: Gypsum was identified by total reflection X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (equipped 
with an X-Ray tube containing a rhodium tube. It worked with a voltage value equal to 40kV and an 
intensity of 100 mA) and by use of a reflectance spectrometer (spectral range analysed from 350 to 
2500 nm with a halogen source). Analyses performed by Kilian Laclavetine (EPHE/ CRC) and Anne 
Michelin (CRC).
Sizing: Analysed by Fourier Transform InfraRed Spectrometry (FTIR) (Specular reflection spec­
tral range analysed from 350 to 4000 cm-1) and et Raman (red laser at minimal 700 µW). Analyses 
performed by Ludovic Bellot-Gurlet and Céline Paris (MONARIS, Sorbonne Université Campus 
Pierre et Marie Curie), Kilian Laclavetine and Anne Michelin.
Ink: Carbon was identified through Raman spectroscopy. Copper was identified with reflection 
X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy. Analyses were carried out by Ludovic Bellot-Gurlet, Céline Paris, 
Kilian Laclavetine and Anne Michelin. 
44  S. van Schaik, A. Helman-Ważny, R. Nöller, Writing, painting and sketching at Dunhuang: 
assessing the materiality and function of early Tibetan manuscripts and ritual items, “Journal of 
Archaeological Science” 2015, pp. 110-132.
45  R. Nöller, O. Hahn, Illuminated manuscripts from Turfan: Tracing Silk Road glamour by analy­
zing pigments, “STAR: Science & Technology of Archaeological Research” 2015, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 50-59.

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
399
Fig. 8. Burnished, glossy surface (Pelliot Koutchéen Nouvelle Série 112). 
Photograph by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Fig. 9. Copper mining ovens in Kutcha. Photograph by Nouette

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
400
Manuscripts were little restored. Back in France Pelliot oversaw the restoration 
of the leaves once they had been deposited at the National Library of France 
in 1910. He was opposed to certain treatments; dry cleaning was one such 
treatment46. This was intended to preserve documents as they were together with 
their component parts47 and debris from the place they were discovered48. As was 
mentioned above, on-site storage conditions left traces on the great majority 
of documents. Burn marks, paper losses such as holes and tears, abrasions from 
insects and scratches from rodents all feature here (Fig. 10). 
A calliper49 was used to measure paper thickness. Whenever sample sizes 
permitted it, the four edges were measured. That informs us about the evenness of 
the paper thickness, thus revealing the papermakers’ expertise. It assesses two main 
skills: the papermakers’ ability to form thin sheets and make them even. This last 
characteristic is relevant when dimensions of paper analysed is significant. 
The average thickness fluctuates between 0.10 mm and 0.20 mm50 with 
little variation in one sheet. One may therefore conclude that papermakers 
had acquired a mastery of their craft. We may conclude then that papermaking 
was not in its infancy. This raises questions as to whether these papers were 
imported, whether skilled papermakers had migrated to the region and whether 
the paper had been manufactured in the region before the time of writing of 
the manuscripts studied. 
There remains uncertainty regarding layered paper. Some paper delaminates, 
but this may be the result of two sheets being glued together or the natural 
degradation of paper. We can infer many stages of the papermaking process from 
the structure of the paper. In one case the brush strokes from the application of the 
white coating revealed a hair from the brush used51. Some straight traces can also 
be observed on paper surface, sometimes also within paper structure (Fig. 11). 
They may result from a polishing or even a calendaring stage. The present state 
of our knowledge does not enable to favour one process in particular (Fig. 12).
46  For more information on the various methods for treating and packaging manuscripts 
from their excavation up until today read Nathalie Silvie’s master’s thesis Problèmes de traitement 
et de reconditionnement des documents de la collection Pelliot de la Bibliothèque nationale dégradés 
par le Rhodoïd, Université Paris I, Paris 1995, not published. 
47  As an example, some conservation treatments, such as lining irreversibly introduce extraneo­
us material. Cleaning with water may likewise eliminate specific components, no longer observable, 
such as mica. This occurs naturally in soil and is readily visible on the surface of paper. In the case of 
too invasive a treatment it may disappear without trace. 
48  This remark must be relativised, as former storage and conservation decisions will have 
modified some aspects of paper and some of its properties. 
49  The calliper used is Mitutoyo PK-0505APX.
50  Two extreme thicknesses were measured: 0.06 mm and 0.30 mm. The thinnest is a document 
written in a Persian language (Pelliot Douldour Aqour_Divers K_M_914_1). 
51  A strand of hair was found embedded in the coating. The animal to which it belongs is so far 
unidentified.

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
401
Figs 1 A-D Top: A. Scratches (left); B. Insect remains (right); Bottom: C. Burn 
marks (left); D. Coating patches (right). Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Figs 2 A-C Right top and bottom: A and B. Straight traces on paper surface Left 
bottom: C. Brush strokes. Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
402
Figs 12 A-B Top: A. Longitudinal traces observable under ranking and transmitted 
light; Bottom: B. Brush strokes observable under transmitted light. Photographs 
by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Among the 350 manuscripts observed, 64 retained their oblong shape. 
The most common dimension is 8 cm × 20 cm52. Almost two-thirds of the 
papers show no traces betraying the mould used, as many of the fragments 
are tiny or opaque. A partial transparency, however, enables us to observe the 
distribution of fibres (Fig. 13). A formation aid may have been added to the 
vat to disperse the fibres evenly. Papermakers would have been unlikely to 
use this, as it resulted in a cloudy distribution of fibres along the sheet. This is 
particularly the case when the pulp is coarse. Laid lines appear sporadically 
along the sheet. This results from a modified sieve, on which a cloth would 
have been sewn (Fig. 14). This is a practice that continues in some papermaking 
workshops in Nepal, in Himalayan regions and in eastern Asia. This method 
handily slows down the dripping of the water which allows the papermaker 
more time to spread the fibres evenly and produce an even thickness.
52  The pustaka manuscripts are found in three sizes:
Size 1: 8 cm × 20 cm (18 manuscripts) / 8 cm × 30 cm (15 manuscripts) / 8 cm × 40 cm 
(2 manuscripts) / 8 cm × 10 cm (1 manuscript);
Size 2: 9 cm × 20 cm (2 manuscripts) / 9 cm × 30 cm (9 manuscripts); 
Size 3: 7 cm × 20 cm (6 manuscripts) / 7 cm × 30 cm (2 manuscripts) / 7 cm × 40 cm (4 manu­
scripts).

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
403
Fig. 13. Cloudy distribution of fibres (Pelliot Koutchéen Lettre Commerciale X). 
Photograph by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Figs 14 A-B Traces of a modified dipping mould (PK DAM 507 32). 
Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Many questions remain unanswered. The long period of transition of the 
method manufacturing the sheet of paper must be taken into consideration. 
There was a changeover from the so-called archaic53 papermaking technology 
marked by the use of a stationary floating mould to a more sophisticated, 
efficient process using a dipping mould equipped with movable sieve. The paper 
produced by the latter mould is characterised by chain and laid lines visible 
in its structure. Laid lines were found on 93 fragments54. There are between 
53  The chronology used to describe the evolution of papermaking technology was highlighted 
by D. Hunter in his book Papermaking: the history and techniques of an ancient craft, London, 
1957. It was thereafter questioned, as both processes were practiced simultaneously. The dipping 
mould, nonetheless, offers a higher performance and efficiency which probably tempted papermak­
ers. Its economic benefit is even more evident when craftsmen would have to produce more paper 
and maintain the quality.
54  This was observed in 13 fragments of the Pelliot Koutchéen Ancienne Série, 39 scrolls of 
the Pelliot Koutchéen DAM 507 collection (of which 16 also show chain lines), 10 of the Pelliot 
Koutchéen Lettre Commerciale collection, 19 of the Pelliot Koutchéen Nouvelle Série, 4 of the Pel­
liot Chinois Douldour-Âqour collection, 3 of the Pelliot Douldour-Âqour Divers collection, 3 of the 

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
404
6 and 7 per centimetre. Only a small number of papers show chain lines. When 
regular, they are 5 centimetres apart (Fig. 15). Sometimes, transversal or thicker 
chain lines bear witness to the sieve having been repaired (Fig. 15).
Fig. 15. Chain and laid lines, lacking in regularity (PK DAM 507 9).
 Photograph by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Papermakers’ skill may also be judged by the defects in the paper such as 
folds, skinned areas and water droplets (Fig. 16). The first two imperfections 
occur during the drying stage, when the wet sheet is brushed onto a flat surface 
and then detached from it. Droplets of water occur when the papermaker is 
careless when draining the wet sheet. A minority of fragments in the Pelliot 
collection displays these defects because of their small size and opacity.
The use of a  Dino-Lite digital microscope enables us to observe the 
presence of bundles of fibres, threads (whether coloured or not), pieces of 
silk cloth and a good many impurities from plant matter, straw, grass, bark, 
wood and even cereal spikelets (Figs 17 and 18). Larger threads were observed 
in scrolls, so these documents were written on low-quality paper. Pulp was 
partly made from raw fibres with variable quantities of recycled material. This 
was confirmed by analysis under a microscope55. Bundles of fibres are caused 
by low separated fibrils. The pulping process is, however, adapted to the raw 
material in question. Whether it may be concluded that either the cooking stage 
or the beating stage were shortened is a moot point. 
Godfrey collection and 2 of the Pelliot Sanskrit Udānavarga collection.
55  Identification of the fibres was performed in situ by Lucas Llopis (EPHE / CRC) and Léon­
-Bavi Vilmont (CRC) without sampling thanks to the digital microscope Keyence VHX 6000 equip­
ped with VH-Z 1000 R focus. Transmitted and low-angled lightning were used. The surface of the 
sheet was scanned with a × 100 magnification. Magnification between ×200 and ×500 enables us to 
observe and identify coarse elements such as thread or bundles of fibres, but a ×1000 magnification 
was used to identify the fibres. 

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
405
Microscopic analysis reveals that, whatever the material used, recycled 
or raw, the same fibres are present: hemp and linen56 , hemp mixed with ramie 
or mulberry57, or even a combination of the three fibres. 
Fig. 16. A piece of another sheet of paper: this defect occurred when the sheet of 
paper was split before the drying stage or when they were detached from their drying 
support (PK DAM 507 4). Photograph by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Figs 17 A-B Top: A. A piece of cloth, coloured fibres, bundles of fibres and 
impurities Bottom: B. Blue thread, impurities, bundle of fibres. 
Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
56  These plants share similar features, which makes them difficult to distinguish from one 
another. 
57  It was impossible to determine which species of the Moraceae family was used: Morus 
alba L. or Broussonetia papyrifera (L.) l’Hér. Ex Vent. Both genera are mulberry used to make pa­
per. The former was initially used in the breeding of silkworms. The latter is the paper mulberry, used 
exclusively in the manufacture of paper.

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
406
It was impossible to determine whether cereal spikelets came from wheat or 
barley (Fig. 18). These spikelets show that papers were likely to be manufactured 
in an agricultural environment. A good deal of the paper also contained tiny 
wood pieces, suggesting that the paper was produced in a wooded area. In such 
an environment, papermakers would make use of coarser materials in the 
vicinity of the workshop. Adding cheap material proved an economical way of 
increasing the quantity of the pulp and thus enabled them to meet the increasing 
demand for paper. Some elements suggest that there was a lack of raw material. 
As common corrections and repairs, some leaves were composed of several 
sheets coarsely joined to form a pustaka format. This was not always done with 
the requisite attention to detail, showing that some workers, be they merchants 
or monks, depending on the nature of the place the binding was made, varied 
in their diligence or skill (Fig. 19).
Corrections were made by applying a  layer of coating over the text 
or erasing the text. In the case of repairs, a strip of paper might have been 
glued to cover a tear, or the document might even have been sewn together. 
In this last case, the holes through which the thread passed may be observed 
along the tear (Fig. 20). We may therefore assume that there would have been 
a high demand for paper, since repairing leaves was favoured to writing new 
ones. In the Buddhist world, where copying religious texts represented an act 
of merit, making a new manuscript to replace a degraded manuscript would 
have been preferred. 
Fig. 18. Spikelet of cereal on the surface of paper. 
Photograph by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
407
Figs 19 A-B Left: A. Two sheets of paper are joined to make a complete leaf (Pelliot 
Koutchéen Ancienne Série 14.2); Right: B. Three sheets of paper are coarsely joined 
together (Pelliot Koutchéen Ancienne Série 7N). 
Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
Figs 20 A-C Top: A. A tear has been repaired by stitching (left, Pelliot Koutchéen 
Nouvelle Série 15A), B-C. With a strip of coated paper (right, Pelliot Koutchéen 
Nouvelle Série 19). Photographs by Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
408
Conclusion
Macroscopic analyses of papers from the Pelliot collection found in Kucha 
reveal a certain manufacturing homogeneity with similar general features, such 
as the presence of impurities and bundles of fibres. They attest to an imperfect 
pulping process, whereas the sheet shaping seems fully mastered. The increasing 
demand for paper may have given rise to a fast and abundant production which 
in turn may have been the reason for the low-quality of the pulp. We can assess 
the practice of at least two papermaking technologies: the dipping mould and 
a modified mould. The finishing process on religious manuscripts was skilfully 
carried out, giving a smooth, white, glossy surface. The addition of coarser 
material, resulting in an uneven surface, was thus corrected. The thinness 
and even the thickness of paper, and the almost systematic finishing process 
used on religious texts show that papermakers were highly skilled craftsmen. 
Paper production was thus not in its infancy in the Xinjiang of the 7th century. 
The question of whether the paper would have been imported or produced 
locally remains to be resolved. Less than a third of papers analysed showed 
laid lines and this may be explained on the one hand by the diminutive size 
of documents, and on the other hand by the use of a number of papermaking 
technologies in the same place during the same period. Other questions, such as 
coloured stains or the presence of particular folds on some religious documents 
remain to be answered. These remarks should be correlated with observations 
of papers found in the Xinjiang region, dated to the same period in order to 
create a typology of the materials, tools and papermaking processes in the same 
region. 
I wish to express my thanks to Claude Laroque and Georges Pinault for their 
valuable advice in the writing of this article and their careful rereading of it.
Bibliography
Bunting V., The prints and the papers: Whistler’s Venice sets at the Freer Gallery of art, 
[in:] Looking at Paper, ed. J. Slavin, Ottawa 1999, pp. 53-62.
Chao-Jung C., Secular documents in Tocharian: Buddhist economy and society in the Ku­
cha region, Doctoral thesis supervised by Georges-Jean Pinault, presented in 2010, 
École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris.
Di Cosmo N., Ancient China and its Enemies, the Rise of Nomadic Power in East Asian 
History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
Drège J.-P., Pinault G.-J., Paul Pelliot: de l’histoire à la légende, eds. G.-J. Pinault, 
M. Zink, Paris 2013.
Cohen M., La mission Paul Pelliot en Asie Centrale, [online] https://archivesetmanuscrits.
bnf.fr/ark:/12148/cc4395j [accessed 24.01.2019].

Paper Analyses of Tocharian manuscripts of the Pelliot Collection
409
Drège J.-P., Le papier dans la Chine impériale. Origine, fabrication, usages. Textes pré­
sentés, annotés et traduits, Paris 2017.
Drège J.-P., Note sur les couleurs des papiers des manuscrits de Dunhuang, “Cahiers 
d’Asie” 1987, vol. 3, pp. 147-150.
Golomb L., Die Bodenkultur in Ost-Turkestan. Oasenwirtschaft und Nomadentum, 
Freiburg 1959.
Hallade M., Gaulier S., Mission Pelliot, Soubachi et Douldou-âqour, vol. 4, Recherche sur 
les civilisations, Paris, 1982.
Hansen V., The Silk Road, A new History, New York 2012. 
Helman-Ważny A., The archaeology of Tibetan books, Leiden, Boston, Brill, 2014.
Helman-Ważny A., More than meets the eye: Fibre and Paper Analysis of the Chinese 
Manuscripts from the Silk Roads, “STAR: Science & Technology of Archaeological 
Research” 2016, vol. 2 no. 2, pp. 127-140.
Hinüber O. von, Expansion to the North: Afghanistan and Central Asia, [in:] The World of 
Buddhism, eds. H. Bechert, R. Gombrich, London 1991, pp. 99-107.
Hunter D., Papermaking: the history and technique of an ancient craft, London, 1957.
Lévi S., La mission Pelliot en Asie centrale, “Annales de Géographie“ 1910, vol. 19, 
No. 105, pp. 274-276.
Mallory J.P, Mair V.H., The Tarim mummies, London 2000.
Malzahn M., The most archaic manuscripts of Tocharian B and the varieties of the 
Tocharian B languages, [in:] Instrumenta Tocharica, ed. M. Malzahn, Heidelberg 
2007, pp. 255-297.
Monnet N., Paul Pelliot et la Bibliothèque nationale, [in:] Paul Pelliot de l’histoire à la 
légende, eds. J.-P. Drège and M. Zink, Colloque international organisé par Jean-Pier­
re Drège, Georges-Jean Pinault, Christina Scherrer-Schaub et Pierre-Etienne Will au 
Collège de France et à l’Académie des Belles-Lettres (Palais de l’Institut), 2-3 octobre 
2008, Paris, Académie des Inscriptions et des Belles-Lettres, 2013, pp.137-204.
Nöller R., Hahn O., Illuminated manuscripts from Turfan: Tracing Silk Road glamour 
by analyzing pigments, “STAR: Science & Technology of Archaeological Research” 
2015, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 50-59.
Nöller R., Helman-Ważny A., The Materials of Turfan and Dunhuang Manuscripts: 
Analysis of Paper, Pigments and Dyes, “International Dunhuang Project News” 2013, 
no. 41, pp. 6-7.
Pelliot P., Carnets de route, 1906-1908, Paris 2008.
Pinault G.-J., Sylvain Lévi déchiffreur et lecteur des textes des frontiers, [in:] Sylvain 
Lévi (1863-1935). Études indiennes, histoire sociale Actes du colloque tenu à Pa­
ris les 8-10 octobre 2003, eds. L. Bansat-Boudon, R. Lardinois, Turnhout 2007, 
pp. 111-144.
Pinault G.-J., Concordance des manuscrits tokhariens du fonds Pelliot, [in:] Instrumenta 
Tocharica, ed. M. Malzahn, Heidelberg 2007, pp. 163-219.

Emilie Arnaud-Nguyen
410
Salomon R., The Buddhist literature of ancient Gandhara: an introduction with selected 
translation, Sommerville, MA 2018.
Trombert É., Les manuscrits chinois de Koutcha, Paris 2000.
Schaik S. van, Helman-Ważny A., Nöller R., Writing, painting and sketching at Dunhu­
ang: assessing the materiality and function of early Tibetan manuscripts and ritual 
items, “Journal of Archaeological Science” 2015, vol. 53, pp. 110-132.
Silvie N., Problèmes de traitement et de reconditionnement des documents de la collection 
Pelliot de la Bibliothèque nationale dégradés par le Rhodoïd, Université Paris I, Paris 
1995, not published. 
Wiesner J., Mikroskopische Untersuchung alter Ostturkestanischer und anderer Asiati­
scher Papiere nebst histologishen Beiträgen zur mikroskoppischen Papieruntersu­
chung, Wien 1902.
