--- Page 1 ---
Vidyodaya Journal of Humanities
and Social Sciences
VJHSS (2022), Vol. 07 (02)
Preservation and Conservation of Palm Leaf Manuscripts at the
Library of University of Sri Jayewardenepura
M. Nishanthi* and N. D. Wijayasundara
Library, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka
Article Info ABSTRACT
Article History:
Received 13 Feb 2022 Palm leaf manuscripts are one of the vital types of documents
Accepted 03 June 2022 containing the indigenous knowledge of Sri Lanka. Treated and
Issue Published Online
seasoned Palmyra leaf was widely used for writing before paper
01 July 2022
was utilized as writing material. Ancient people were not hesitant
to write down their wealth of local knowledge in these palm leaf
Key Words: manuscripts. Today, there is a threat of extinction for the palm leaf
Digitization manuscripts. The Library, University of Sri Jayewardenepura has
Indigenous Knowledge launched a project on the Preservation and Conservation of Palm
Palm Leaf Manuscripts
leaf manuscripts to address this issue. This gigantic task is
Preservation and
important in preserving indigenous knowledge for future
Conservation
generations. The project began by collecting and physically
Sri Lankan Heritage
conserving the palm leaf manuscripts scattered throughout Sri
Lanka. In parallel to the project, we established the Preservation
*Corresponding author
and Conservation unit at the library, intending to preserve rare
E-mail address:
books in addition to the palm leaf manuscripts. We applied
nishanthi@sjp.ac.lk
established conservation methods according to the defect type
https://orcid.org/0000- found in manuscripts. After conservation, preservation techniques
0002-2703-0002 that suit the local environmental conditions were used. Finally, we
digitized the complete set of manuscripts where researchers are
Journal homepage:
allowed to use them according to the established policy.
http://journals.sjp.ac.lk/in
dex.php/vjhss
http://doi.org/10.31357/fh
ss/vjhss.v07i02.06
VJHSS (2022), Vol. 07 (02),
pp. 81-96
ISSN 1391-1937/ISSN
2651-0367 (Online)
Faculty of Humanities and
Social Sciences 2022

--- Page 2 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
1. Introduction availability of many well-preserved
manuscripts is the lack of practising proper
The beginning of the documentation of conservation methods. Therefore, it is
human history goes back to the prehistoric essential to pay attention to preserving
era. People in that era created paintings in the valuable historical documents. Therefore,
caves where they lived to express themselves. researchers and other scholars pursue
Since then, archaeological evidence for restoring and conserving these sources of
hierography (chitraksara) has been found in information (Gandhi & Ponnavaikko, 2017).
Sri Lanka. Evidence for those are black and
red wear, and red wear clay tools According to Ghosh, Mahajan and Banerjee
hierography (chitraksara) found together in (2017), recorded knowledge in palm leaf
places like Gedige, Anaikottei, Ibbankatuwa, manuscripts could be considered a national
Kantharodai, Kollan Kanatta and Pomparippu heritage. Palm leaf manuscripts were
(Lagamuwa, 2006). Afterwards, clay tablets, considered one of the primary sources of
stones and wood were used to write. Due to writing before the advent of paper. Palm leaf
the difficulty of storing these materials, the manuscripts have existed for years, and
leaves of trees were used as an alternative. preserving these manuscripts are considered
Palmyra leaves have been widely used to vital for retaining age-old knowledge.
write in Sri Lanka, India and other countries
in South Asia. One of history’s most widely There were no correct sources to determine
used document types was the art of palm leaf when people started using palm leaves as a
manuscripts. writing medium. However, it can be
determined that most of the palm leaf
It is widely accepted that writing in Sri Lanka manuscripts (95%) found in various
became popular upon the arrival of the Maha institutions were written in the 18th and 19th
Mahinda Thero. However, chronicles clearly centuries. There are also books written in the
show an art form in Sri Lanka even before the early 20th century. It is rare before the 18th
advent of Maha Mahinda Thero. The earliest century. There is no evidence to prove that
mention of this is that Prince Vijaya, after his palm leaf manuscripts were written in the
arrival and the settlement in this country, has Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa periods.
sent messengers with gifts and documents to Chulla Wagga, one of the oldest palm leaf
bring a daughter of the King of Padi (from manuscripts in Sri Lanka, was written in the
India) for his coronation (Sumangala, 13th century A.D. It is currently on display at
Dewarakshita & Batuvantudawe, 1994). the Colombo National Museum (Alahakoon,
Further, they state that Prince Vijaya, on the 2006).
eve of his old age, has sent a letter to his
brother Prince Sumitta informing him to take Kotte period was considered the ‘golden era’
over the kingdom of Lanka. These facts show of Sinhala Literature (Wijenayake, 1995).
that correspondence happened even during Many chronicles and Sandesha Kavyas were
Prince Vijaya’s time. added to history during this period under the
reign of King Parakramabahu VI. Some of
1.1 History of palm leaf manuscripts those chronicals and Kavyas were, Budu Guna
Alankaraya and Hansa Sandeshaya by
Historical manuscripts reveal information
Weegagama Maithree Thero,
about the past civilization. Ancient
Saddarmarathnakaraya by Wimalakiththi
manuscripts range from stone and metal
Maha Sthavira, Kawsilumina by King
carvings and palm leaf manuscripts to paper
Parakramabahu II, Kawyashekaraya, Parawi
manuscripts. However, for various reasons,
Sandeshaya, Salalihini Sandeshaya and
many manuscripts are in the condition of
Parakumba Siritha by Thotagamuwe Sri
degradation. One of the reasons for the non-
82

--- Page 3 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
Rahula Thero, Kokila Sandeshaya by − Talipot palm – Corypha umbraculifera
Dewnuwara Irugalkulathilaka Thero − Palmyra palm – Borassus Flabellifera
(Ilangasinghe, 2003). In addition to the new − Lonta palm – Coryphautan (Lagamuwa,
set of writings, many palm leaf manuscripts 2006).
were used to copy from the original sets. The
manuscripts are found in religion, language, 1.3 Preparation of palm leaves and the
literature, medicine, veterinary medicine, writing process
astrology, yantra mantra, fiction, customs and
ceremonies, law, discontinuities, annals, The preparation process of palm leaves
history, taxes and income, agriculture, state begins with cutting them to the required size
administration, Buddhist education, and from immature palm leaves and boiling them
world descriptions. Further, there were also in water. Kappettiya leaves, Pineapple fronds,
many palm leaf manuscripts on various Papaya nodal and leaves are also added when
subjects such as music and art (Lagamuwa, boiling the leaves. The addition of these
2006). materials to palm leaves makes them
colourful and flexible. In addition, it helps to
Ancient manuscripts in India also depict the protect palm leaves against insect infestation
glorious history of India. There are about five (Lagamuwa, 2006). Next, the leaves are dried
million manuscripts in India with excellent for three days in the dew (moisture
research value. However, it is believed that condensed from the atmosphere) in the
there are thousands of scattered unpublished moonlight and seasoned by stretching it with
manuscripts all over India. Some manuscripts a stem of an arecanut tree crosswise. Properly
exist in foreign collections that are no longer seasoned dried palm leaves are soaked in a
accessible to Indian scholars (Gaur & water basin for about an hour before writing.
Chakraborty, 2009). However, due to the lack The palm leaves are then ironed. These irons
of proper conservation mechanisms for these use burnt coconut shell charcoal to give the
unpublished manuscripts, an invaluable pool heat. This ironing makes the leaves smooth,
of knowledge is under evere threat of and writing on them makes it easier. A
disappearance. Sageer and Fransis (2014) "Panhinda" (Stylus) made of steel is used for
state that many palm leaf manuscripts in the writing on the palm leaves. Writing on a palm
Indian state of Kerala need to be preserved. leaf requires the writer to have the necessary
Further in their study, the factors that affect skills, training, and patience.
the deterioration of palm leaf manuscripts
are mentioned, and the best option proposed The Maha Bodhi Vamsa (Upatiss, 1891) states
to protect those is digital preservation. that there were even permanent posts
created for writing in the past. When bringing
1.2 Type of palm leaf material the sapling of the sacred Sri Maha Bodhi to Sri
Lanka by the Sangamitta Therani, another
There was evidence that the leaves of various seven hundred people with various skills
trees were used as writing material in the accompanied the Therani.
past. For example, there are shreds of
evidence on the usage of Sugarcane leaves In awarding positions to the people who
(Saccharum officinarum), Hal leaves (Vetaria accompanied Therani, the Maha Bodhi Vamsa
acuminata) and Wetakeiya leaves (Pandanus states that Prince Bodhi Gupta was conferred
odoratissimus) as writing materials. In the title of "Lanka Jagathi Mahalano", or
addition, ancient people used palm leaves to writing a post of Jaya Maha Lanka. Prince
write meaningful, advanced and durable Sumiththa was given the title
writings in various religious, linguistic and "Jayamahalano”, an alias writing post of Jaya
royalty fields. Leaves were obtained from Maha.
three types of palm trees;
83

--- Page 4 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
1.4 Preservation of palm leaf manuscripts manuscripts. Insects such as Cockroaches,
Silverfish and Termites damage the
In the past, leaflets were regularly inspected
manuscripts. Other biological factors that
for safety and smoked with various
cause physical deterioration are light, heat,
fragrances and herbs. Especially, palm leaf
moisture, improper handling and neglect of
manuscripts were wrapped in cloths like silk
proper storage. Due to these factors,
and put in a metal or wooden box. It was
manuscripts can turn yellow and gradually
customary for our ancients. Similarly,
become brittle, breaking even with the
preventive conservation methods were used
slightest touch. It is challenging to distinguish
frequently. Natural herbal insecticide
between physical and chemical degradation
products and materials have been used for
in palm leaf manuscripts. Physical
this purpose. In the past, the essential
degradation happens due to light, heat, and
safeguards were the use of protective covers
humidity.
(Kamba) made of hardwood or metal, ivory,
and the safe placement of wooden boxes on
Ghosh (2012) and Sah (2002) focused their
shelves and cupboards. Kohomba
studies on traditional measures used to
(Azadirachta indica) wood is often used for
prevent insect attacks. So the folios were
this purpose as it is also an insect repellent.
stored in a box made of hardwood, which had
Later, the conservation of palm leaf
insect-resistant properties, such as the Neem
manuscripts was done using fumigation and
(Kohomba) tree. It is a common practice in
chemical methods. In the present context,
India to wrap manuscripts in a red or yellow
digitization is identified as the best solution
cotton cloth and keep various oils and herbs
for preserving palm leaf manuscripts.
with manuscripts to repel insects. The bark,
leaves, seeds and wood of the Margosa and
According to Sahoo and Basudev (2004),
Neem trees have been used for conservation
historical documents in libraries, museums
of manuscripts in India. In modern chemical
and archives are invaluable assets to
compounds, it can be used as an insecticide
humankind. Historical documents are
solution or as a solvent.
considered sources of ancient fiction,
manuscripts, and authentic literature. In
According to Ghosh, Mahajan & Banerjee
addition, these manuscripts contain
(2017), traditionally, the manuscripts were
information on national and cultural heritage.
often stored in kitchens, where the firewood
Preservation of these manuscripts is,
smoke from hearths helped keep insects
therefore, crucial. In addition to chemical
away from palm leaf manuscripts. Another
preservation, it has been reported that
method they have stated in their study is
traditional preservation methods have also
giving antiseptic effects to the manuscripts by
been used to preserve these national
burying the palm leaves in mud or boiling
resources.
them in water before writing on them. It helps
to create natural protection against insects.
Ghosh (2012) described deterioration types
They further stated that wrapping in silks
identified in Indian palm leaf manuscripts.
protects the manuscripts as the damage from
They are biological, physical and chemical.
bookworms and similar insects to the silk
Further, Ghosh (2012) mentions that in
clothes is minimal.
tropical countries, biological agents cause
significant damage to palm leaves
Agrawal (1984), in his study, stated that palm
manuscripts, and the most critical biological
leaves should not be stored in arid conditions.
organisms are fungi, bacteria, algae, yeast and
Various oils such as citronella oil, camphor oil
protozoa. In addition to Ghosh (2012), Sah
and walnut oil can be used to make palm
(2002) mentions that insect attack is a widely
leaves more flexible. He also mentioned that
reported problem with palm leaf
84

--- Page 5 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
seasoning palm leaves is prevalent in South preserving the originals; therefore,
Asian countries such as India, Sri Lanka and reformatted copies could be used.
Thailand.
Alahakoon (2006) published a research
International Federation of Library paper on identifying the physical problems of
Associations and Institutions (IFLA) (2014) palm leaf manuscript collections in Sri Lanka.
stated that digitizing a unique and rare The study was conducted to find and
collection is multifaceted. It is significant to maintain the most extensive collection of
preserve physical, intellectual, and contextual palm leaf manuscripts, deficiencies, and
relationships between a single opponent and issues related to conservation processes and
the collection. Nair (2004) observed that conservation programs in Sri Lanka. She
digital conversion allows durable storage and focussed her study on the palm leaf
speedy and efficient transmission/retrieval manuscript collections in the Colombo
of information in all the analogue formats. Museum Library, the library of the University
There is much information regarding the of Peradeniya, and the Department of
digital preservation of printed materials, but National Archives. Palm leaf manuscripts are
the digital preservation of palm leaf scarce, valuable, and irreplaceable among
manuscripts is comparably only a few at various libraries and archival materials.
present. Therefore, their conservation would be time-
consuming if neglected (Alahakoon, 2006).
Some studies were done in Sri Lanka about However, manuscripts made of palm leaves
the conservation and preservation of palm are unique, historically valuable research
leaf manuscript collections. Ranasinghe material whose physical preservation is
(2015) states that the conservation and deemed essential and must be protected
preservation of palm leaf manuscripts in Sri more carefully.
Lanka are still not at a reasonable level.
Libraries are collecting and preserving palm Cabral and Ratnabahu (2021) published a
leaf manuscripts, and there has been no new report on the best practices for
private or public sector support. It has been preserving of palm leaf manuscripts in Sri
mentioned that the palm leaf manuscripts are Lankan Libraries to IFLA. They pointed out
being collected and preserved digitally by the traditional oil used in ancient times to
Academic and Research Library of Palm Leaf preserve palm leaf manuscripts. They are
Manuscripts of the Faculty of Social Sciences Madhuka longifolia seed oil (Ericales:
of the University of Kelaniya. Further, it was Sapotaceae) or Mee oil and Vateria
noted that using modern technology, copallifera, (Malvales: Dipterocarpaceae)
collecting, preserving and accessing them is a resin oil or Dummala oil. It is believed that by
national priority, and libraries have a huge using these oils, the flexibility of the palm
role in that process. The Faculty of Social leaves can be improved. In addition, it helps
Sciences at the University of Kelaniya has to keep away the bacteria, mold and insects,
started a digital library project to digitize which are harmful to the permanence of the
palm leaf manuscripts (Ranasinghe & Dilruk, palm leaf manuscripts.
2013). As they mentioned, they have
completed digitizing more than a hundred However, there is no documentation process
thousand folios. According to specifically carried out on the preservation
Gangabadachchchi and Amarasiri (2006), the and conservation of palm leaf manuscripts in
printed material continues to deteriorate the library of the University of Sri
rapidly and thus; digitization is a remedy for Jayewardenepura in a holistic view from the
these problems and would contribute to inception to the present. Hence, it is essential
to document the processes carried out under
85

--- Page 6 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
the preservation and conservation project to these manuscripts was not known. For some
help future researchers and interested other reason, it has been named “James De Alwis
librarians to get an idea of the process. Collection” in the past. No record was found
regarding this collection’s acquired date or
1.5 Establishment of the Preservation and the source. The main objective of the project
Conservation Unit of the Library of the was to collect palm leaf manuscripts
University of Sri Jayewardenepura (USJ) scattered in various places in Sri Lanka and to
preserve them for the use of future
The existing palmleaf manuscript collections generations.
in the USJ Library should be preserved as they
contain valuable information. According to As the initial step, a unit was established to
anecdotal evidence, it is believed that palm preserve and conserve library material when
leaves used to compose the chronicles during perceived as a national requirement to
the Kotte period were taken from the palm preserve our cultural heritage. The final step
tree garden that belonged to Pepiliyane would be digitizing identifying palm leaf
Sunethra Devi Pirivena, which is the present manuscripts to be accessible to readers. In
location of the University of Sri between these two ends, there were many
Jayewardenepura. Sunethra Devi was the processes, including conducting awareness
beloved mother of King Parakramabhahu VI, programmes, collecting manuscripts from
ruling the country during the Kotte period. various places on the island, the appreciation
Later, Reverend Medagoda Sumanatissa process of the donors, cost determination,
Thero, the Chief Incumbent of Sunethra Devi cleaning, reading, categorizing, inventorying,
Pirivena gifted this land to Vidyodaya cataloguing and digitization of palm leaf
Pirivena. Vidyodaya Privena was established manuscripts. The formation of a few
in 1873. It was given university status in committees and preparing policy documents
1959, naming it as Vidyodaya University. were essential tasks. The challenges were in
Now it is known as the University of Sri human capital, infrastructure, funds and
Jayewardenepura. The library of the USJ was technology.
renamed Rev. Medagoda Sumanatissa Thero
Memorial Library in gratitude to the Thero in The Library Committee of USJ decided that
2017. Due to this unique history, based on the collection building of palm leaf
some facts with written evidence and some manuscripts should be done by advertising in
facts from oral tradition, the USJ library has a the media. Accordingly, newspaper
special responsibility than any other advertisements were published asking those
institution on the island to conserve this interested in providing palm leaf manuscripts
valuable knowledge written on palm leaf to contact us. One such advertisement is given
manuscripts for future use of the researchers. in Annexure 1. However, we received very
few responses through the newspaper
We started the project on preserving our advertisements. Then the Library Committee
indigenous knowledge for future generations decided to post television advertisements.
in 2018 at the USJ library. This project was The advertisement was published in the
established under the vision of the then Vice- ‘News Bar’ during the news broadcast on two
Chancellor of the University of Sri leading television channels in Sri Lanka. This
Jayewardenepura, Senior Professor Sampath advertisement was aired for about a month
Amaratunga identifying this project as a and was cost-free. As a result, we received
national requirement. When starting the many responses from various places in the
project, the library had 20 palm leaf island expressing their willingness to provide
manuscripts and another 12, which were palm leaf manuscripts to the library of USJ. In
copied from other manuscripts. The source of addition, some palm leaf manuscript owners
86

--- Page 7 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
were generous enough to donate their palm Following those, the other manuscripts were
leaf manuscripts to us, which they possessed purchased. Most of the owners handed over
for generations. the manuscripts to the library without
hesitation to value those manuscripts,
Under the leadership of the Librarian, the trusting the university.
library staff made arrangements to collect
palm leaf manuscripts from various places in The committee appointed to value the
the island. Required documents, for example, manuscripts considered several facts such as
the consent letters from the owners of the rareness or the uniqueness, physical
manuscripts when transferring the condition, contents and the year or the
ownership temporary or permanently to the period of writing in deciding a value for a
university, physical details of manuscripts manuscript. In addition, an appreciation
recording forms (number of folios, their ceremony was organized to recognize the
length and width) were prepared. Priority donors of palm leaf manuscripts. Some
was given to collecting the manuscripts photographs of the ceremony are depicted in
which were donations. Figure 1.
Figure 1. Appreciation ceremony held on 07th March 2019 for the donours of palm leaf
manuscripts
There are very few reports on how the 1.6 Objectives
ancient palm leaf manuscripts were spread
The study’s main objective is to find methods
throughout Sri Lanka. However, as recorded
to preserve and conserve our indigenous
in the literature, a few institutions have
knowledge for future generations. In order to
implemented to conserve and preserve palm
fulfil this primary objective, the following
leaf manuscripts in the country.
sub-objectives are identified.
This study focuses on the palm leaf
a) Identify the types of deterioration on palm
manuscripts in possession of the USJ. We
leaf manuscripts.
hope to identify the practical implications of
b) Find methods of rectifying the
preserving and conserving them.
deterioration according to deterioration
categories.
For this purpose, creating a database (Digital
c) Explore the challenges in capturing the
Repository) of bibliographical details about
contents to make manuscripts complete.
palm leaf manuscripts, including digital
d) Propose the metadata creation and
images, would enable researchers to quickly
digitization methods of the contents.
and conveniently obtain information.
87

--- Page 8 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
e) Formulate an access policy for palm leaf preserved. These preserved palm leaf
manuscripts for the researchers. manuscripts were used as a sample for this
research. In order to identify the defect
Through this study, it is expected to preserve, categories, we manually inspected each folio
conserve, and make the palm leaf manuscript of a manuscript and recorded it. This process
collection available for researchers. Most of is experimental, including observations. The
these manuscripts are unpublished materials conservation and preservation project was
relating to the history and culture of Sri initiated to perform physical and digital
Lanka. Our library has collected the scattered conservation of manuscripts. Conservation
manuscripts on the island to conserve and remedies were applied to the palm leaf
preserve. It is also expected to add value to manuscripts upon identifying the type of
the existing library resources and enhance deterioration. A database was created using
the information services of the USJ library. DSpace open-source software as a method of
digital conservation of palm leaf manuscripts.
2. Materials and Methods
3. Results and Discussion
The collection of palm leaf manuscripts at the
USJ library has been built from donations of
Table 1 shows the source and the details of
personal collections and the rare palm leaf
the manuscripts we obtained as donations.
manuscripts purchased from individuals and
Details of the purchased collections are given
institutions. Currently, the library has a
in Table 2.
collection of 543 palm leaf manuscripts, out of
which 240 palm leaf manuscripts have been
Table 1. Palm leaf manuscripts collected through donations
Source/Donor Number of Palm
No Name of the Collection
Leaf Manuscripts
Udathalawinna Walauwa Mr. M.C.P. Samarawikrama
01. 19
(Kandy) Muhandiram
Prof. Chandra Prof.Chandra
02. 01
Wikcramagamage Wikcramagamage
01. Pasyala Mr. K. W. C. J. Siriwardana 188
02. Kandy Mr. S. V. Nagodawithana 01
03. Kadawatha(Mahara) Mr. G. Herath 01
04. Embilipitiya Mr. R. I. Edirisingha 01
05. Kaduwela II Mr. D. P. Rajapaksha 13
06. Kaduwela I Mr. T. N. S. Warnasingha 01
07. Pannipitiya (Mahalwarawa) Mr. K. G. N. Ginadasa 07
08. Kegalle (Hapuwita) Mrs. C. Kanthi 29
09. Akuressa (Palatuwa) Mr. J. Gunawathi 04
10. Naththandiya (Paluwelgala) Mr. L. Narendrasingha 03
11. Katugasthota (Uduwawala) Mr. S. Ilangakon 35
12. Kekirawa I Mr. R. M. S. Rajapaksha 01
13. Kekirawa II Mr. R. D. Gunadasa 08
14. Bandarawela (Helahalpe) Mr. G. M. W. Bandara 69
15. Diyathalawa (Ellegama) Mr. A. Nishshanka 23
16. Arakagoda Mr. K. K. Rupasiri 02
88

--- Page 9 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
Table 2. Palm leaf manuscripts collected through purchasing
Source Number of Palm
No Name of the Collection
Leaf Manuscripts
Medawachchiya
01. Mr. G. Kumaradasa 110
(Thamarahalmillewa)
02. Walapane (Yobuwelthenna) Mr. J. Wijekon 06
Kirinda – Puhulwella
03. Mr. H. S. Romiyel 05
(Dammullagoda)
04. Beliaththa (Mahahilla) Mr. K. Liyanage 01
05. Ahangama (Galgoda) Mr. M. D. P. Gunawardana 01
06. Mathale Mr. B. H. G. Piyathissa 02
Table 3. Copied palm leaf manuscripts
No Name of the Collection Number of Palm Leaf Manuscripts
01. James De Alwis Collection 12
According to Figure 2, 75% of the total palm quickly to avoid further deterioration.
leaf manuscript collection consists of Generally, physical, biological, human
donations, while 23% were purchased. Only negligence, natural disasters (floods,
2% of the collection was made up of hurricanes, and tsunamis), and chemical
photocopies of palm leaf manuscripts; hence agents caused due to light, heat, moisture,
they do not fall into the category of original fire, fungi, insects and air pollution are the
manuscripts. causes of deterioration. Out of the 543 palm
leaf manuscripts in the library, 44% have
Palm leaf manuscripts are made from leaves been preserved, and the deterioration types
that contain natural organic matter, and have been identified. For example, our
therefore, they are naturally susceptible to collection contains palm leaf manuscripts
damage. Therefore, upon inspection, it was damaged by the tsunami in 2004 (Figure 3).
clear that this collection should be treated
Copies of
PLM -2%
Purchasing -
23%
Donation -
75%
Figure 2. Ways of collection building
89

--- Page 10 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
Figure 3. Some of the palm leaf manuscripts damaged by the tsunami in 2004
These manuscripts were contaminated with Kambas (Cover boards) was carried out using
dry salt layers for more than 12 years when a soft brush. The folios were cleaned using a
we received them. We took immediate 50% strength alcohol solution (isopropyl
measures to remove the salt residue of these alcohol) and allowed to dry at room
palm leaf manuscripts. The salt layer of the temperature. Resin oil (dummela oil) mixed
palm leaf manuscripts was removed slowly, with charcoal powder was applied to dried
and they were physically conserved. The folios. This application was made using clean
folios on these palm leaf manuscripts were cotton clothes. Charcoal powder made out of
stuck together because of the seawater. Trema Orientalis (Rosales: Cannabaceae)
Therefore, they were first separated into (Gaduba in Sinhala) tree was purchased to
folios. Stuck folios were kept in a tray of water use in this process.
at a temperature of 60°C for about half an
hour, and with the help of a spatula and a soft Besides, the collection contains palm leaf
wet brush, the folios were separated. manuscripts damaged by insects like
Separated folios were dried in a closed area. silverfish and mice (Figure 4).
Then the removal of dust in folios and
Figure 4. Palm leaf manuscripts damaged by mice
90

--- Page 11 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
Figure 5. Manuscripts turning to black or brown due to oxidation
Figure 6. Palm leaf manuscripts damaged by fungi
When treating insect-bitten palm leaf brittle. The cause of such instability may be
manuscripts, removing dust and cleaning due to acidity. Another possible reason is that
were done as explained earlier. Then, the palm leaves are hygroscopic and have a
damaged folios were repaired, and holes weak resistance to wear and tear. These
were filled with acid-free Japanese tissue and manuscripts were cleaned using the alcohol
handmade papers with CMC (Carboxymethyl solution. After trimming all the repaired
cellulose or cellulose gum) or binder glue. folios, the resin oil and charcoal mixture was
After that, the repaired folios were trimmed applied using cotton clothes.
to get a neat finish. Finally, resin (Dummala)
oil and charcoal powder mixture was applied. Further, fungi have been observed in grey-
It was observed that some manuscripts lose black colonies in certain manuscripts. Unlike
their colour, turning them black or brown insect bites, fungal attacks have been
from the original colour. As shown in Figure detected on the entire leaf structure in this
5, in some manuscripts, only the segments archive (Figure 6). While insects migrate
near the edges are faded. The leading cause from one infested collection to another or
for this desecration may be the oxidation of from surrounding areas, sometimes the
green matter. Kamba themselves could be the source of
insect infestation. The symptoms of insect
Despite all the restraints, the edges of the attack on palm leaves are the presence of
palm leaves are particularly affected and neat, pinhead-sized holes, irregularly eaten
91

--- Page 12 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
edges, the presence of larvae which eat the Apart from the dust, indirect fungi are found
leafy matter forming channels in such a way in the glue used in palm leaf manuscripts. As
that a paper-thin surface remains intact on a treatment, thymol fumigation and the
one side of the folio. conservation process were carried out.
Figure 7. Storing of conserved palm leaf manuscripts
If we do not take immediate action to restore Rituals (Shanthikarma), Astrology, History
the damaged palm leaf manuscripts, the and Language. These are written in Sinhala,
contents may not be readable. As a nation, we Pali and Sanskrit. In addition, some palm leaf
may face a situation to suffer due to the loss manuscripts were written both in Sinhala and
of our indigenous knowledge, which Sanskrit. These palm leaf manuscripts date
adversely affects the decision-making back to the 18th and 19th centuries A.D. Most
process of the present and future palm leaf manuscripts are about indigenous
generations. Therefore, we had to find medicine. Further, the library also has old
knowledgeable and skilled persons to manuscripts on Buddhism, such as
preserve and conserve palm leaf Saddharmaratnawaliya, addharmalankaraya,
manuscripts, especially those who know how Manorathapuranaya, Buddhavandanawa and
to read the contents of the palm leaf Gihi Piritha.
manuscripts and categorize them into
subjects. Rare palm leaf manuscripts are available in
our collection, such as Besajjamanjusawa,
The palm leaf manuscripts obtained by the Besajjamanjusa Sannaya, and Saraswathi
library were first projected for physical Niganduwa (drugs recipes) of indigenous
preservation and digital conservation. After medicine. These manuscripts are on
this conservation process, manuscripts were medication and prescriptions for various
housed in a suitable environment for their diseases. It is assumed that specific
longevity. Storage units of palm leaf prescriptions are for the illnesses which are
manuscripts at the USJ library are shown in considered could not be cured in the present
Figure 7. day. Manorathapuraniya is a commentary
(Atuwawa) for the Anguttara sect of the
After conserving, the palm leaf manuscripts Tripitaka Suthra Pitakaya containing
were identified and categorized. Our Buddhism (19th century A.D.).
collection of palm leaf manuscripts consists of Dammapadatta is a written version of the
various subjects such as Buddhism, story and contains about 300 stories and
Indigenous Medicine, Veterinary Science, belongs to the early 19th century.
92

--- Page 13 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
Besajjamanjusa Sannaya contains the initially entered into the palm leaf register,
therapeutic prescription for monks in and the metadata was entered into the
Sanskrit (19th century A.D.). Saraswathi database. After completing the database, the
Niganduwa written in Sanskrit and Sinhala bibliographic data will be linked to the
consists of verses. It belongs to the 19th library’s Online Public Access Catalogue
century and contains information on trees, (OPAC). Users interested in getting details on
flowers, plants, spices and fruits. these manuscripts can obtain bibliographic
details of the palm leaf manuscripts via the
Some manuscripts on medicines for treating OPAC. It is expected to build a mechanism for
various diseases like fever, children's worms' interested researchers to read the palm leaf
pain (ringworm), toothache, boils, manuscripts in the library. Upon proper
stomachache, cough, strangulation, authorization, researchers can access
diarrhoea, rickets, hypochondria, catarrh, scanned copies of palm leaf manuscripts. A
headache and skin diseases. In addition, the policy document was also prepared for the
collection also contains palm leaf users' rules and regulations in accessing the
manuscripts on Shanthikarma (Rituals) to palm leaf manuscripts.
cure specific ailments such as the fear of
inhumanity. Since this indigenous knowledge We digitize complete sets of palm leaf
is valuable in the present context, preserving manuscripts. It is a challenge to make
palm leaf manuscripts is pivotal. complete sets out of the mixed lot. Most
researchers can use these manuscripts only if
After categorizing palm leaf manuscripts they are translated into modern languages.
according to their subjects, folios were
scanned. A database was created using Hence, experts to read different languages
DSpace open source software to develop the written in manuscripts are required.
digital library on palm leaf manuscripts. It is Digitizing as an image would not help
linked to the library’s digital repository, researchers to search. Hence we must work
Scholar Bank (Figure 8). The bibliographic collaboratively with IT staff to make them
details of the palm leaf manuscripts were searchable.
Figure 8. Scholar Bank
93

--- Page 14 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
4. Conclusion and Recommendation Cabral, U., & Rathnabahu, R.M N., (18 June
2021), Report on the best practices for
The project on preserving and conserving
conservation of Palm-Leaf Manuscripts in
palm leaf manuscripts at the USJ library plans
Sri Lankan Libraries, IFLA (International
to collect the scattered manuscripts
Federation of Library Associations and
throughout the island, conserve, preserve,
Institutions). Retrieved from:
and make them available for researchers.
https://www.ifla.org/news/pac-sri-
These manuscripts are unpublished
lanka-publishes-a-new-report-on-best-
materials relating to the history and culture
practices-for-the-conservation-of-palm-
of Sri Lanka. The USJ library has made efforts
leaf-manuscripts/
to preserve palm leaf manuscripts as the
process gives a lasting impression of its deep-
Gandhi R, I., & Ponnavaikko, V. (2017). A
rooted knowledge system, which was
Study towards Ancient and Modern
available in our country. Therefore, especially
Preservation Techniques of Historical
in the Sri Lankan community, palm leaf
Manuscripts against Deterioration.
manuscripts are considered a valuable
International Journal Of Emerging Trends
cultural heritage, and the manuscripts are
& Technology In Computer Science
helpful to study and research in various fields
(IJETTCS), 6(4),8-10 Retrieved from:
to support the country's national
https://www.ijettcs.org/Volume6Issue4/
development.
IJETTCS-2017-07-04-9.pdf
The palm leaf manuscript collection at the USJ
Gangabadadarachchi, V. and Amarasiri, M.
library was digitized to ensure the original
(2009). Digital Collection Building
palm leaf manuscript’s safety and longevity.
Initiatives of National Library and
Researchers who read the contents may use
Documentation Centre. Sri Lankan Journal
the digitized copy for research purposes. It is
of Librarianship and Information
challenging to read and translate the palm
Management, 2(1), 38-43. Retrieved from:
leaf manuscripts into modern languages and
http://doi.org/10.4038/sllim.v2i1.440
make the scanned copies searchable text. The
process is time-consuming, and this project
Gaur, R., & Chakraborty, M. (2009).
will run for many years. However, it is worth
Preservation and Access to Indian
working on this task to disseminate our
Manuscripts : A Knowledge Base of Indian
documented indigenous knowledge.
Cultural Heritage Resources for Academic
Preserving these manuscripts will help pass
Libraries. In International Conference on
on our wealth of knowledge to future
Academic Libraries (ICAL-2009), Delhi,
generations.
India. Retrieved from:
http://crl.du.ac.in/ical09/papers/index_f
5. References
iles/ical-14_227_489_2_RV.pdf
Agrawal, O. P. (1984). Conservation of
Manuscripts and Paintings of South-east Ghosh, R. (2012). Plam leaf manuscripts
Asia, London: Butterworths. conservation-A study. Global Research
methodology Journal, (4), 1-4. Retrieved
Alahakoon, C. (2006). Identification of from:
physical problems of major palm leaf http://grmgrlaranya.org/Journals/4th%
manuscripts collections in Sri Lanka. 20issue/PALM%20LEAF%20MANUSCRI
Journal of University Librarian Association PTS%20CONSERVATION.pdf
of Sri Lanka, 10, 54–65. Retrieved from:
https://jula.sljol.info/articles/abstract/1 Ghosh, S., Mahajan, A., & Banerjee, S. (2017).
0.4038/jula.v10i0.318 International Journal of Information
94

--- Page 15 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
Movement, 2(II), 122-128. Retrieved Ranasinghe, P. (2015). Collection,
from: Preservation and Provision Access to
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper Palm Leaf Manuscripts in Sri Lanka.
/PALM-LEAF-MANUSCRIPT- Heritage as Prime Mover in History,
CONSERVATION%2C-THE-PROCESS-OF- Culture and Religion of South and
Ghosh- Southeast Asia, In: Sixth International
Mahajan/f122bf0642539b3317aa37443c Conference of the South and Southeast
db9c98847f3c8a#citing-papers Asian Association for the Study of Culture
and Religion (SSEASR). pp.81. Retrieved
Ilangasinghe, M. (2003). Literature and the from:
arts, History of Ceylon: part II. http://repository.kln.ac.lk/handle/1234
Baththaramulla: Department of Education 56789/8296
International Federation of Library Sageer, T. M. & Francis, A. (2014). Palm
Associations and Institutions (2014). Leaves Manuscripts in Kerala and their
Guidelines for planning the digitization of Preservation: Factors necessitating digital
rare book and manuscript collections, IFLA. archiving. International Journal of
Retrieved from: Scientific and Research Publications, 4 (2),
https://www.ifla.org/files/assets/rare- 1-5. Retrieved from:
books-and-manuscripts/rbms- https://www.ijsrp.org/research-paper-
guidelines/guidelines-for-planning- 0214.php?rp=P262323
digitization.pdf
Sah, A. (2002). Palm Leaf manuscripts of the
Lagamuva, A.(2006). Sri Lankave Puskola world: material, technology and
Poth Lekhana Kalava. Baththaramulla: conservation, Studies In Conservation,
Department of Cultural Affairs. 47(1), 15-24. Retrieved from:
https://doi.org/10.1179/
Nair, R. R. (2004). Digital archiving of sic.2002.47.Supplement-1.15
manuscripts and other heritage items for
conservation and information retrieval. e- Sahoo, J., & Mohanty, B. (2004). Indigenous
LiS (e-print in library and information methods of preserving manuscripts: An
science), Retrieved from: overview. OHRJ, Vol.XLVII (No. 3).
http://eprints.rclis.org/9627/ Retrieved from:
http://magazines.odisha.gov.in/Journal/j
Ranasinghe, P. & Dilruk, W. (2013). ournalvol3/pdf/28-32.pdf
Preserving Sri Lanka’s traditional
manuscript culture: role of the palm leaf Sumangala, H., Dewarakshita, B. &
digitization project of the Faculty of Social Batuvantudawe, R. (1994). Sinhala
Sciences, University of Kelaniya. In: IFLA Mahawansaya. Colombo: Ratna.
World Library and Information Congress.
Upatiss Thero (1891). Maha - Bodhi - Vamsa.
Ranasinghe, P. (2013). Palm leaf manuscript London: Pali Text Society.
culture in Sri Lanka. In: Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Social Wijenayaka, N.K.S. (1995). Detailed History of
Sciences. pp.18. Retrieved from: Ceylon, Colombo: Godage.
http://repository.kln.ac.lk/handle/1234
56789/5720
95

--- Page 16 ---
Nishanthi & Wijayasundara, VJHSS (2022) Vol. 07 (02) pp. 81-96
Annexure: Extract copy from Newspaper
advertisements (Sunday Observer, October
28, 2018)
96