Source PDF File: output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_A01\documents\ijapr_2022_ayurveda_ms_critical_edition.pdf
Total Pages: 6
Health Check: PASS (avg 3420.5 chars/page)
Statistics: Chars=20607, ThaiWords=4121.4, EnglishWords=3721

--- Page 1 of 6 ---
ISSN: 2322 - 0902 (P) 
ISSN: 2322 - 0910 (O) 
 
 
 
 
 
IJAPR | February 2022 | Vol 10 | Issue 2 
 58 
International Journal of Ayurveda 
and Pharma Research 
 
Review Article 
 
A REVIEW ON CRITICAL EDITION OF AYURVEDA MANUSCRIPTS 
Anjana R S1*, Resmi B2 
*1Assistant Professor, Dept of Samhita, Samskrita and Sidhanta, VPSV Ayurveda College, Kottakkal, Malappuram, 
2Professor, Dept of Samhita, Samskrita and Sidhanta, Govt Ayurveda College, Trivandrum. 
Article info 
Article History: 
Received: 14-01-2022 
Revised: 28-01-2022 
Accepted: 08-02-2022 
KEYWORDS: 
Critical edition, 
Ayurveda 
manuscript, lower 
criticism, higher 
criticism. 
ABSTRACT 
Ayurveda is an ancient science dealing with health care. In the ancient period, the 
knowledge was passed down from mouth to ear in an oral tradition. Later on, the Acharyas 
began to record these knowledge by writing it down on different materials like palm 
leaves, birch bark, copper plates.etc. Thus, Ayurveda began to be codified through 
centuries in written documents called Manuscripts. India is rich in its collection of medical 
as well as other manuscripts. Most of these remain unpublished. As such, several unique 
disease conditions and medical formulations contained in these texts are being lost by 
decaying. Many versions of the same text can be obtained from different places and 
therefore different readings about the same subject are seen. Ayurveda being mostly 
presented in Sanskrit language, a slight difference in reading makes a lot of difference in 
the interpretation of its meaning. Critical edition of a manuscript deals with the analysis of 
various versions of a text, to find out which is more meaningful and closer to the original 
text. It conveys many unique ideas; clarify the existing confusions and misinterpretations. 
Thus critical edition of all Ayurveda manuscripts is necessary. In the recent times a lot of 
Ayurveda scholars are coming up with the aim of bringing out the knowledge hidden 
inside these manuscripts through their critical edition. The aim of this paper is to review 
the various steps involved in the critical edition of a manuscript through examples. 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
Ayurveda being a health science deals with 
certain guidelines to lead a healthy life, free of diseases 
of both Sareera and Manas and also to cure any disease 
affecting both of these. For centuries, the knowledge of 
Ayurveda was passed down from mouth to ear in an 
unbroken oral tradition through ‘Gurukulas’. Gradually, 
they came to be written down on different materials 
such as stones, copper plates, birch bark, palm leaves, 
parchments and paper. The treasure of the wisdom 
containing the ancient knowledge came down to us in 
the form of manuscripts. Manuscript is any document 
which is handwritten or typewritten as opposed to 
being mechanically printed. Composed in different 
languages, these manuscripts are spread all over the 
world, in different institutions, libraries, mutts, 
monasteries, temples, mosques and in several private 
collections. 
Access this article online 
Quick Response Code 
 
https://doi.org/10.47070/ijapr.v10i2.2281 
Published by Mahadev Publications (Regd.) 
publication 
licensed 
under 
a 
Creative 
Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercialShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) 
A very few of these texts have been published during 
the past decades and many of the published works are 
unfortunately not available today. As such, several 
treatment 
methods 
and 
medical 
formulations 
contained in these texts which are likely to exist in 
palm leaf manuscripts are being lost by decaying. 
Manuscripts are the proof of our well-developed 
ancient science. There are various versions of the same 
text at different places and accordingly different 
readings about the same topic are seen. Even a slight 
difference in reading makes its interpretation of 
meaning difficult. Thus, critical edition of all old 
Ayurveda 
texts 
with 
different 
manuscripts 
is 
necessary. In the critical edition process, all the copies 
of the text for its availability are identified through 
various methods. Then, these manuscripts are 
collected and analyzed for their mutual relationship. 
Then, the critical edition of the text is carried out 
considering 
omissions, 
substitutions/repetitions, 
additions etc. 
Etymology and Definition of Manuscript 
The word Manuscript is originated from two 
Latin words, ‘Manu’ and ‘scriptus’, which means 
written by hand. Here, the word ‘Manu’ means hand

--- Page 2 of 6 ---
Anjana R S, Resmi B. A Review on Critical Edition of Ayurveda Manuscripts 
 
 
 
 
 
IJAPR | February 2022 | Vol 10 | Issue 2 
 59 
and ‘scriptus’ means to write[1]. A handwritten 
document which has scientific, historical, literary or 
aesthetic value can be considered as a manuscript[2]. 
Adhara/writing Apparatus of Manuscripts[3] 
The writing apparatus of manuscripts include, 
1. Lekhyasamagri or the writing surface 
Shilalekha (rock edits), Tamrapatra (inscriptions 
in copper plates), Taalipatragrantha (palm leaf), 
Bhurjapatra (birch bark), Sanchapat (Aloe wood 
bark) and paper are the different Lekhyasamagris. 
2. Lekhanasamagri or the instruments used for 
writing. 
Stylus is the hard and sharp instrument used to 
incise manuscript. Dyes are used to make the letters on 
a palm leaf darker. After incising palm leaf with stylus; 
the dye is smeared over the letters to make it clearer. 
After using stylus, carbon powder with gum and sugar 
is smeared over the manuscript. Soft and smooth 
tipped instruments used with ink act as pen for writing 
the manuscript. Black ink was used for writing books, 
yellow ink (Haratala) for corrections, red ink to mark 
chapters and sections, and gold and silver to draw 
borders. Various brushes were used for painting. 
Rakshanasamagri or the materials for binding. 
Palm leaf and birch bark cannot be stitched, so 
a cord is passed through them. 
Lipikara/Lekhaka (scribe) 
Lipikara 
is 
a 
professional 
who 
copies 
manuscripts or documents for others. He should take 
utmost care to reproduce what is there in the original 
text. There are mainly three kinds of Lekhaka. They are 
Pustaka lekhaka who copies manuscripts, Kayastha 
lekhaka who are writers of accounts and Shasana 
lekhaka who are the royal scribes. The scribes, while 
copying the manuscripts make certain errors which 
are called as the scribal errors. The common scribal 
errors 
include 
deletion, 
addition, 
substitution, 
orthographic confusion and transposition. 
Manuscriptology 
Manuscriptology 
means 
the 
science 
of 
collecting, classifying, preserving and editing of 
manuscripts. There are two steps involved in it: 
primary and secondary steps. 
Primary Steps 
i. Collection 
The 
collection 
of 
maximum 
number 
of 
manuscripts scattered all over, forms the primary 
requisite in manusriptology. Manuscripts are huge 
oceans of knowledge containing innumerable pearls of 
principles and information. These are available in 
personal possessions of some people who are even 
unaware of its importance[4]. There are various 
dangers to the collection of manuscripts. These factors 
can be categorized as human factors and natural 
factors. The biggest danger to collections is the human 
factor, as humans can destroy entire collections by 
their inaction as well as by their wrong actions. 
Alternatively, humans can also become the biggest 
protectors of manuscripts if they take proper action to 
preserve them. The natural factors include, fire, water, 
natural 
calamities, 
insect 
and 
worm 
attack, 
microbiological attack, dust, environmental pollutions, 
fluctuations in temperature and relative humidity [5]. 
The 
availability 
of 
particular 
Ayurveda 
manuscript can be single many a times. Hence, if the 
available manuscript is not in good condition, the 
critical 
edition 
could 
be 
difficult, 
so 
proper 
preservation of manuscript is very important to 
protect it from damage. A few years ago procuring a 
manuscript was really challenging. But now, this has 
changed for good. Now, procuring the copies through 
online is the easiest way and does not consume much 
time. For example, the accessibility of Ayurvedic 
manuscripts available in I.P.G.T & R.A may be done 
through the website-www.ayurvedamanuscripts.com. 
Digitization of manuscript copies is also included as a 
type of conservation and preservation. But for 
transmission of knowledge, both theoretical and 
practical utility is very much essential. So, beyond 
mere digitization, critical edition should also be 
done.[6] 
ii. Conservation 
The methods used to save manuscripts or 
enhancing the life of the manuscript can be termed as 
conservation. If not preserved properly they are 
subjected to physical damage and decay. Every 
manuscript has its own style of preservation based on 
its material, ink etc. 
Preventive Conservation: Reducing future risks of 
deterioration 
can 
be 
termed 
as 
preventive 
conservation. Various methods including regular 
inspection 
of 
the 
manuscripts, 
microfilming, 
photocopying, lamination, digitization etc. can be used. 
Curative Conservation: Stopping active deterioration 
in the manuscript(s) can be termed as curative 
conservation. For example, fumigation, application of 
lemon grass oil etc. 
iii. Cataloguing 
It is the process of classifying and arranging 
manuscripts in a particular order. A catalogue helps 
the reader to locate the manuscript easily in a short 
time. Cataloguing is the method of making the 
manuscripts 
easily 
accessible 
for 
the 
research 
community. Catalog of Catalogues or New Catalogues 
Catalogorum (NCC) is a comprehensive collection of 
information about all the manuscripts that are 
available all over the world that lists the manuscripts 
under name of the author and title of work. One of the 
greatest drawbacks of the old and new Catalogus 
Catalogorum is that the information is not widely

--- Page 3 of 6 ---
Int. J. Ayur. Pharma Research, 2022;10(2):58-63 
 
 
 
 
 
Available online at: http://ijapr.in 
 60 
available. A descriptive catalogue gives a clear idea of 
the exact location of the manuscript [7]. 
Secondary steps 
i. Transcription: Transcription means to write or to 
type the text as it is. So it helps the person to read 
in a better way. Manuscripts are copied in the same 
language. 
ii. Translation: Translation 
is 
the 
process 
of 
converting the words of one language to another. 
So, a person from another place and culture can 
easily understand our ancient systems and 
knowledge. 
iii. Critical Edition: Editing of the work means 
reconstructing the text, nearest to the author’s 
autograph work on the basis of evidences. The 
term Critical edition means close reading and 
detail analysis of a particular text [6]. 
Publication: It is the final step in manuscriptology. It 
is a very sad fact that only a few of the available 
material from medical manuscripts are in the printed 
form. The National Mission for Manuscript's most 
ambitious project is to create a database of all Indian 
manuscripts in the country and abroad. The National 
Database of Manuscripts, Kriti Sampada is also 
available on the internet through the Mission's 
website.[8] 
Critical Edition of a Medical Manuscript 
The critical edition is done to reconstruct the 
text nearest to the author’s autograph work on the 
basis of evidences. The edition is done considering the 
scribal errors. The main scribal errors include, 
 Deletions or omissions: The scribes accidently 
leave materials between two occurrences of the 
word. 
 Addition: Sometimes the scribe cannot differentiate 
the synonymous words and adds it as a part of the 
main text. 
 Substitution: This is an intentional error. This 
occurs when the scribe thinks that the original text is 
wrong and substitutes it with his own text. 
 Orthographic confusion: When a scribe copies 
information from one script to another, certain 
errors are introduced due to confusion of letters. 
 Transposition: This is an involuntary positional 
variation of script. 
While constituting a text, only one reading is 
accepted while others are rejected. Those that are 
rejected 
without 
accepting, 
forms 
the 
critical 
apparatus. They also need to be presented as foot 
notes on the same page on which the related text 
appears. If the editor comes across a new manuscript 
of the text, after the completion of the edition, he 
should mention the new reading at the end for the 
benefit of others. The text part from which various 
readings are considered is marked with continually 
running numbers as super script. If there are many 
readings considered, then the word or the Pada, the 
critical apparatus has separate paragraphs with their 
own numbers given at the beginning. 
V.S.Suktankar (1993) has given a list of 
accepted symbols that can be used for critical edition 
of a manuscript.[9] 
Table1: List of Accepted Symbols that can be used for Critical Edition of a Manuscript.[7] 
S.No 
Symbol 
Correction 
1 
[ ] 
Editorial completion- damaged- edition to manuscript reading 
2 
< > 
Editorial completion of a surmised lacuna 
3 
{[]} 
Conjectural authentication 
4 
{} 
Parts deleted conjecturally 
5 
() 
Text which may not have been in the original 
6 
Ϯ 
(dragger) Irremediable or false localized corruption 
7 
* 
Conjectural emendation 
8 
~ 
(below the text) Text is less than certain 
9 
** 
 Loss due to injury to manuscript 
10 
¤ ¤ 
Citation from commentary. 
 Methods of Critical Edition 
The actual process of editing depends on the 
work that is under examination. Broadly dividing, 
there are two methods of critical edition. 
They are: 
Lower criticism: Presenting the text as close as 
possible to the original work on the basis of available 
material. 
Higher criticism: Editing the text taking into 
consideration the question of authorship, date of 
author, influence of other works in the field that could 
have influenced the author etc.

--- Page 4 of 6 ---
Anjana R S, Resmi B. A Review on Critical Edition of Ayurveda Manuscripts 
 
 
 
 
 
IJAPR | February 2022 | Vol 10 | Issue 2 
 61 
Lower criticism 
This process goes towards the selection of original 
reading based on evidences. It goes through three 
stages- Heuristics, Recension and Emendation. 
Heuristics: 
This 
includes 
the 
methodological 
collection, analysis and study of evidences with respect 
to the text[7]. Heuristics include 3 stages- 
 Siglum: It is the identification mark given to the 
various manuscripts taken for critical edition using 
numbers, letters.etc. The siglum could be based on 
the script, the source of the codex, age of the copy or 
a combination of any of these. 
For example, A manuscript collected from Oriental 
Research 
Institute 
& 
Manuscript 
Library, 
Kariavattom, University of Kerala, Trivandrum 
(TVM) with the manuscript number 9650 may be 
given a siglum, TVM9650 
 Collation– collation is the process of collecting all 
the information concerning the text in one 
document. It should be done in a special collation 
sheet. Now a days, one can use the excel sheets. In 
this sheet, the letters should be written in each 
block. A most trustworthy codex is taken as the 
base and that is written in the first row of squares, 
one letter in each square. On the left side and 
against a row, the siglum of the codex compared is 
written. By this method, the relationship between 
the different codices could be identified. 
 Secondary Sources of Evidences- All works that 
are directly and closely related to the text on hand 
but not the source manuscripts are the secondary 
sources of evidence. They are the commentaries, 
translations.etc. 
Recension: Recension means the critical revision of 
the text. It is the process of choosing among the 
variants of the reading, which one is closer to the 
author’s intension. 
Emendation: The word meaning is ‘correct the text’. 
They are the valid suggestions given by the editor 
himself, if he is not satisfied with the evidence 
available to prove that the text was originally written 
by the author. 
Higher Criticism 
After lower criticism, one can go for higher 
criticism. Here we are assessing the period and 
peculiarities of the author. Higher criticism probes the 
following: the style, the language, the literary aspects, 
sources of the work, life of the author, the 
circumstances that made the author to compose the 
work, the situation at which the work was composed, 
influence of other writers in the field, the popularity of 
the work.etc. 
Higher criticism follows 5 steps 
a) Source criticism- A document, a person, a speech, 
an observation used to obtain knowledge. 
b) Form criticism- Method that classifies units of 
scripts by literary pattern and that attempts to trace 
each type. 
c) Redaction criticism- Analysis of the purpose of 
text, commonly repeating themes, vocabulary and 
style of writer. 
d) History/tradition criticism- The tradition passed 
through various stages to their final stage. 
e) Radical criticism- Concerned with the literature 
and religious system of the old script.[10] 
By doing critical edition of manuscripts many 
new formulations and drugs can be recognized based 
on the place and time of author. For instance, a critical 
study of Paryayamuktavali, a Nighantu of Odisha has 
explored many new drugs and synonyms which were 
not mentioned in other Nighantus which existed prior 
to Paryayamuktavali.[11] 
Manuscript ‘Chikitsasara’ 
A manuscript Chikitsasara was taken up as an 
endeavour to initiate a research inquisition of edition 
of medical manuscripts for contributing to the 
literature of the science of Ayurveda. 
Table2: Details of Manuscript Taken for Critical 
Edition 
Manuscript Number 
50047 
Script 
Devanagari 
Measurement 
12’x4’ 
Folios 
1-92 
Lines per folio 
9 
Complete/incomplete Complete 
Condition 
Normal 
Author 
Gopaladasa 
Source 
Unmesha Research Institute 
of Indology, Mysore 
Further, the following steps are adopted 
 Collection of data- Here, all the copies of the text for 
its availability are identified using, New Catalogous 
Catalogorum (NCC), online catalogue of Indira 
Gandhi National Centre for Arts, visitation, E mail 
and telephone correspondence carried out with 
various manuscript preservation centers and 
Oriental research institutes for availability of copies 
of the manuscript with similar title, content, author. 
etc. 
 Analysis of mutual relationship among the collected 
manuscripts. 
 Critical edition of the text considering omissions, 
substitutions/repetitions, additions etc.

--- Page 5 of 6 ---
Int. J. Ayur. Pharma Research, 2022;10(2):58-63 
 
 
 
 
 
Available online at: http://ijapr.in 
 62 
Summary of the Conclusions Drawn after Critical 
Edition of the Text 
The 
readings 
that 
were 
taken 
into 
consideration (accepted reading) were more from the 
one obtained from Govt. Oriental Research Institute, 
Kariavatom, Trivandrum. The name of the author is 
mentioned as Gopala at the beginning and Gopaladasa 
vadindra at the end of the treatise. The text was 
translated to Telugu and Marathi languages in 1877 
and 1881 respectively, which are not widely available 
today. The time period of the text by considering the 
internal and external evidences, influence of the text 
on other medieval texts can be placed as late 
seventeenth century. The Chikitsasara is a medical 
treatise on material medica and pathology, containing 
also, a section on the purification and processing of 
mercury. Chikitsasara is found to be belonging to the 
Kayachikitsa because it is more related with pacifying 
treatments as in Caraka Samhitha rather than surgical 
procedures as in Susrutha Samhitha[12]. The content of 
the text is also very much similar to the seventeenth 
century work Yogaratnakara. 
 
Figure 1: Folio 1 of the manuscript ‘Chikitsasara’ taken for critical edition 
 
Figure 2: Kairava grama. Example of a Taalipatragrandha (palm leaf manuscript) 
In the recent years many researchers have taken up 
the critical edition of Ayurveda manuscripts. For 
example. 
 Aswini Samhite- Critical edition of manuscript 
with English translation by Sriharsha K V. 
Dissertation 
submitted 
to 
the 
Rajiv 
Gandhi 
University of Health Sciences, Karnataka in 2014. 
 Critical edition of Krishna Pandita commentary on 
Lolimbaraja’s 
vaidyajivana 
by 
Divya 
Jyoti. 
Dissertation 
submitted 
to 
the 
Rajiv 
Gandhi 
University of Health Sciences, Karnataka in 2015. 
 Sutrasthana 
sanjivini- 
Critical 
edition 
of 
manuscript with English translation by Revilekha R 
S. Dissertation submitted to the Kerala University of 
Health Sciences, Kerala. 2018. 
 Chikitsasara- Critical edition of manuscript with 
English translation by Anjana R S Dissertation 
submitted to the Kerala University of Health 
Sciences, Kerala. 2018. 
 Govinda 
dasolsavam- 
Critical 
edition 
of 
manuscript 
by 
Anusha 
Baburaj. 
Dissertation 
submitted to the Kerala University of Health 
Sciences, Kerala. 2021

--- Page 6 of 6 ---
Anjana R S, Resmi B. A Review on Critical Edition of Ayurveda Manuscripts 
 
 
 
 
 
IJAPR | February 2022 | Vol 10 | Issue 2 
 63 
 Upakrama khandam of bheshaja padhathi-critical 
edition of manuscript by Adarsh KR. Dissertation 
submitted to the Kerala University of Health 
Sciences, Kerala. 2021 
CONCLUSION 
Manuscripts are the unique proof of our welldeveloped ancient science of health. There are various 
versions of the same text at different places and the 
language being primarily Sanskrit different readings 
about the same topic are seen. Even a slight difference 
in reading makes the interpretation of its meaning 
difficult and confusing. Thus, critical edition of all old 
Ayurvedic 
texts 
with 
different 
manuscripts 
is 
necessary by adopting the systematic way of critical 
edition of manuscript. Apart from manuscript studies 
on individual level, it should be well organized at 
institutional level, involving experts. It is the need of 
the hour to transform the knowledge of manuscript 
into forms that can easily be conveyed to the global 
community. As a part of the propagation, general 
awareness on manuscript can be given to the public 
and also effective research projects can be launched 
which will help to preserve the knowledge in 
manuscript for the upcoming generation. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Manuscriptdictionarydefinition:vocabulary.com,ht
tps//www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/manuscrip
t, retrieved on 21/01/2021 
2. 
Gaur Ramesh C. Preservation and Access to Indian 
Manuscripts: A Knowledge Base of Indian Cultural 
Heritage Resources for Academic Libraries ical; 
2009. p.90-98 
3. 
Dr.Muley Sanskruti Pramod et al. An overview on 
Manuscriptology: 
Journal 
of 
Ayurveda 
and 
Integrated Medical Sciences. 2020;5(3):96. 
4. 
Dr.Nikram Pallavi Dattaray. Literary Research the 
Intense Need of Time. Journal of Ayurveda 
Research AYUSHYA. 2014; 3(6): 17-18 
5. 
Basic Minimum Standards for Conservation of 
Manuscripts-National Mission for Manuscripts-
[02: cited on 2021 Jan 20]. Available from: www. 
Namami.org 
6. 
Anusha Baburaj et al. Scope of Manuscriptology in 
Ayurveda. Journal of Ayurveda and integrated 
medical sciences. 2021; 6(1): 286. 
7. 
Dr.G.G.Gangadharan 
and 
Dr.Geetha 
Anand. 
Handbook 
of 
Medical 
Manuscriptology. 
1st 
edition. Bangalore; Foundation for Revitalisation 
of Local Health Traditions (FRLHT); 2010, 10. 
8. 
Anoop AK, Neenu Jessy Sabu, K.K. Bindu. A Review 
on 
Manuscriptology- 
Retrieval 
of 
Ancient 
Knowledge. 2019; 7(4): 47. 
9. 
Gangadharana G G.et.al. Hand book of Medical 
Manuscriptology. Bengaluru: Institute of Ayurveda 
and Integrative Medicine; 2010 p.148-156. 
10. Divya.C.C. An exploratory study on the selected 
portions of manuscript titled Visamocanam and its 
comparison with Brihat trayis and Visavaidya 
Jyotsnika (MD thesis); KUHS 2021 
11. Deepa KK, Acharya RN, Paryayamuktavali- An 
unexplored Nighantu of Odisha, India. Global J Res. 
Med. Plants & Indigen. Med. 2017; 6(2): 24-33. 
12. Gerrit Jan Mulenblend. History of Indian Medical 
literature. Various Auothors. Vol II B P. 426, 459. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer: IJAPR is solely owned by Mahadev Publications - dedicated to publish quality research, while every effort has been taken to verify the 
accuracy of the content published in our Journal. IJAPR cannot accept any responsibility or liability for the articles content which are published. The 
views expressed in articles by our contributing authors are not necessarily those of IJAPR editor or editorial board members. 
Cite this article as: 
Anjana R S, Resmi B. A Review on Critical Edition of Ayurveda Manuscripts. 
International Journal of Ayurveda and Pharma Research. 2022;10(2):58-63. 
https://doi.org/10.47070/ijapr.v10i2.2281 
Source of support: Nil, Conflict of interest: None Declared 
*Address for correspondence 
Dr. Anjana R S 
Assistant Professor, 
Dept of Samhita, Samskrita and 
Sidhanta, VPSV Ayurveda College, 
Kottakkal, Malappuram. 
Ph: 949725293 
Email: anjanars9@gmail.com