Source URL (Puppeteer): https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02666030.2025.2578887

=== Plain Text Content ===

Skip to Main Content Journals Close Journals Menu Browse all journals Browse all journals A-Z Open access journals Open Select (hybrid) journals Browse all books Explore Taylor & Francis eBooks Publish Find a journal Search calls for papers Journal Suggester Open access publishing Find guidance on Author Services Browse by subject Area Studies Arts Behavioral Sciences Bioscience Built Environment Communication Studies Computer Science Earth Sciences Economics, Finance, Business & Industry Education Engineering & Technology Environment & Agriculture Environment and Sustainability Food Science & Technology Geography Global Development Health and Social Care Humanities Information Science Language & Literature Law Mathematics & Statistics Medicine, Dentistry, Nursing & Allied Health Museum and Heritage Studies Physical Sciences Politics & International Relations Social Sciences Sports and Leisure Tourism, Hospitality and Events Urban Studies Search Close Search Menu Publish Why publish with us? Find a journal Search calls for papers Journal Suggester Step-by-step guide Open access publishing We're here to help Find guidance on Author Services Login | Register Log in or Register Login Register Cart Add to Cart Search, Browse, or PublishClose Menu Search Close search Journals Browse by subject Social Sciences & Humanities Area Studies Arts Communication Studies Economics, Finance, Business & Industry Education Geography Humanities Language & Literature Law Museum and Heritage Studies Politics & International Relations Social Sciences Sports and Leisure Tourism, Hospitality and Events Physical Sciences & Engineering Computer Science Engineering & Technology Food Science & Technology Information Science Mathematics & Statistics Physical Sciences Medicine, Health & Life Sciences Behavioral Sciences Bioscience Health and Social Care Medicine, Dentistry, Nursing & Allied Health Earth & Environmental Sciences Built Environment Earth Sciences Environment & Agriculture Environment and Sustainability Global Development Urban Studies Browse all journals A-Z Open access journals Open Select (hybrid) journals Explore Taylor & Francis eBooks Publish Why publish with us? Find a journal Search calls for papers Journal Suggester Step-by-step guide Open access publishing Find guidance on Author Services Home All Journals Area Studies South Asian Studies List of Issues Volume 41, Issue 2 Querying the Raison d’Être of the Oldest .... Search in: This Journal Anywhere Advanced search South Asian Studies Volume 41, 2025 - Issue 2 Journal homepage Open access 1,751 Views 0 CrossRef citations to date 0 Altmetric Listen Special Issue: Interreligious Interactions in South AsiaQuerying the Raison d’Être of the Oldest Dated and Illustrated Manuscript of a Persian Translation of Śiva PurāṇaPranav PrakashFaculty of Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKCorrespondencepranavprakash12@outlook.comhttps://orcid.org/0009-0002-6503-5127 Pages 295-311 | Published online: 29 Dec 2025 Cite this article https://doi.org/10.1080/02666030.2025.2578887 CrossMark In this articleArticle contentsRelated researchA Chance Discovery of a Persian Śiva PurāṇaAn Exploration of Scribal SubjectivityA Community of Relators, Translators and EditorsConclusion: The Raison d’Être of Ms. Or 14341Supplemental materialAcknowledgementsAdditional informationFootnotes Full Article Figures & data Supplemental Citations Metrics Licensing Reprints & Permissions View PDF (open in a new window) PDF (open in a new window) View EPUB (open in a new window) EPUB (open in a new window) AbstractThis essay elaborates upon my discovery of the oldest dated and illustrated manuscript of a Persian translation of Śiva Purāṇa at the British Library in London. This manuscript bears the shelfmark Or 14341 and was purchased by the library in 1986. My essay seeks to understand why Śiva Purāṇa was translated into Persian at the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and how the translated work was intended to be received, appreciated and circulated in Persophone societies. More specifically, it examines whether the manuscript Or 14341 was aimed at facilitating inter-religious and cross-cultural exchanges among peoples of diverse backgrounds in early modern South Asian and Persian societies. Drawing upon the material, textual and literary attributes of Or 14341, I argue that this manuscript embodies compelling evidence of the already prevalent use of Persian as a viable and legitimate mode of transmitting religious knowledge among Śaiva communities and their broader Hindu following. Furthermore, even though this manuscript – like any object of translation – could in principle participate in the cross-cultural and trans-regional exchange of ideas and materials, the makers of the manuscript were largely disinterested in stimulating inter-religious interaction among Śaiva and non-Śaiva communities.Keywords: ShaivismHinduismPersianate South AsiaŚiva Purāṇaearly moderntranslation A Chance Discovery of a Persian Śiva PurāṇaOn 20 November 1986, Sotheby’s in London organized an auction of “Fine Oriental Manuscripts and Miniatures” from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. Among the many valuable objects they intended to sell that day were two manuscripts whose titles and textual contents could not be identified by their in-house cataloguers. Their sales catalogue described one of the manuscripts as “A work on Hindu deities, illustrated Persian manuscript on paper, India, eighteenth century”.Footnote1 They did not provide any details about the physical or textual attributes of the second manuscript. Both manuscripts were grouped in the lot 392, and their total cost was estimated in the range of GBP £200–300. When the lot 392 was put up for auction, the British Library (BL) made a final bid of GBP £322.00 and succeeded in purchasing both manuscripts. The BL cataloguers identified the titles of both manuscripts correctly. In their acquisition register, they described the illustrated Persian manuscript as “Tarjuma-ʾi Shīv Pūrān” [The Translation of Śiva Purāṇa] and assigned the shelfmark Or 14341 to it.Footnote2 The second manuscript received the shelfmark Or 14342 and was identified as a copy of the Iqbālnāmah-i Jahāngīrī of Muḥammad Sharīf Muʿtamad Khān (d. 1049 AH/1639–40 CE), a courtier of the Mughal emperors Jahāngīr (r. 1605–1627) and Shāh Jahān (r. 1628–1658).The British archives were already rife with manuscript copies of Iqbālnāmah and the one that Sotheby’s put on auction that day was a distinctly modern copy dating 1896.Footnote3 In contrast to Iqbālnāmah, there were only four manuscripts in British libraries and archives, which had then been identified as Persian translations of Śiva Purāṇa.Footnote4 British cataloguers were aware of one more manuscript of Persian Shīv Pūrān (Ms. Sprenger 1659) at the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin (Berlin State Library in Germany).Footnote5 Most of these manuscripts were copies of an eighteenth-century translation by Kishan Singh “Nishāṭ” (Nishāṭ hereafter).Footnote6 In an autographed keepsake manuscript, Nishāṭ copied and illustrated what he believed were some of his most significant works. Whereas he records 1786 VS/1730 CE as the year he completed his translation of Śiva Purāṇa,Footnote7 he finished copying his translation in his personal manuscript on 27 Muḥarram 1163/6 January 1750 CE (folio 202b, Eton Pote 282). The widely circulated copies of his translation gave rise to the view that the Persian translation of Śiva Purāṇa was a predominantly eighteenth-century phenomenon. In a similar vein, the sales catalogue of Sotheby’s conjectured an eighteenth-century provenance for their copy of Shīv Pūrān. In both their acquisition register and published handlist, the British Library cataloguers likewise opined that the recently purchased Ms. Or 14341 was perhaps datable to the twelfth century AH/eighteenth century CE.In the spring of 2023, I organized a workshop on the history and materiality of early Hindi manuscripts at the British Library. To elucidate how the Nastaʿlīq script was adopted in the context of Hindi manuscripts, I consulted several Persian translations of Hindu religious works that circulated in the Hindi-speaking regions of early modern and colonial India.Footnote8 When I perused the Persian translation of Ms. Or 14341, I noticed a terse colophon on its last folio, which recorded the year of its completion as 1018 AH.Footnote9 The year 1018 AH commenced on 6 April 1609 and ended on 25 March 1610. It immediately dawned on me that this manuscript precedes all other dated manuscripts of the Persian renditions of Śiva Purāṇa by more than a century and a half.As exciting as this discovery was, it gave rise to several questions and critical concerns. Could the isolated colophon be a later interpolation in the manuscript? As manuscriptologists have long known, colophon dates were at times altered – even erased – from their manuscripts so as to enhance their value and significance for prospective patrons, buyers and owners. Was Ms. Or 14341 tempered by a later hand? If not, why would anyone want to translate Śiva Purāṇa from Sanskrit, Hindi or any other Indian languages into Persian at the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries? Who would have patronized this translation project, and who would be the intended readers and owners of this seemingly lone manuscript? Above all, was this manuscript aimed at cultivating cross-cultural relations and interreligious interactions among Śaivas and non-Śaiva religious communities?These questions about the raison d’être of Ms. Or 14341 did not arise in previous scholarship as the manuscript was practically unknown to scholars until recently.Footnote10 In general, there is a grave paucity of scholarship on Persian renditions of Śiva Purāṇa in early modern and colonial India.Footnote11 A notable exception is Ayelet Kotler’s examination of a manuscript copy of Nishāṭ’s Persian translation of Śiva Purāṇa, which Richard Johnson (1753–1807), an employee of the East Indian Company and a vassal (manṣabdār) of the Mughal Emperor Shāh ʿĀlam (reign 1766–1806), commissioned during his stay in India (1770–1785).Footnote12 Her research elucidates how Nishaṭ, an accomplished poet and writer hailing from a family of professional scribes (munshīs) and from the dominant caste of Khatrīs, approached his translation of Śiva Purāṇa based on several abridged Sanskrit recensions circulating in the mid-to-late eighteenth century.Footnote13 Whereas her study elaborates upon the eighteenth-century milieux of the Persian translation by Nishāṭ, the prior scholarship on Persian and South Asian cultural exchanges remains unaware of similar translational projects among the Śaiva communities in the preceding centuries. Against this backdrop, Ms. Or 14341 constitutes a rare and exceptional resource with which to unravel the late-sixteenth– and early-seventeenth–century milieux of Persian recasting of Śiva Purāṇa from Sanskrit and other languages.Certain methodological and theoretical stipulations are necessary here. The first issue concerns the presence of individual authorship in Persian translations of Hindu religious works. Although Persian translations of works originating in Indian languages were fairly widespread in early modern India, they were primarily undertaken by two classes of translators that were often mutually constitutive and overlapping. One of these classes included poets, writers, scholars and philosophers (ahl-i hunar or ahl-i fażl), who were supported by imperial, subimperial and provincial courts, and/or religious endowments. The second group comprised a professional class of secretaries, scribes and record-keepers, who were collectively referred to as munshīs and who often hailed from Khatrī and Kāyastha castes.Footnote14 Individual authorship was the norm among both classes of translators, even when some translators were known to engage one or more interlocutors while preparing their translations. Translators active in such elitist contexts – from ʿAbd al-Qādir Badāʾūnī (d. c. 1615) and Dārā Shukhoh (d. 1659) to Lālā Amānat Rāy (fl. 1730s) to Brahman Delārām (fl. 1790s) – seldom efface their unique authorial identity, narrative voice and literary style. Consequently, previous inquiries into the raison d’être of their translations necessarily entailed grappling with and accounting for the presence of individual authorship. This method is untenable in the case of Ms. Or 14341 as it not only lacks any discernible traces of individual authorship but also remains disinterested in addressing any intellectual and political communities who were known to appreciate and cultivate Persian translations at the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Consequently, to fathom the creative processes that underscore the genesis of Ms. Or 14341, my essay draws upon a range of philological, paleographic, orthographic, literary and physical attributes, and argues for the collective authorship of its Persian Shīv Pūrān and for the collaborative craft of scribes, editors, painters and other book artists involved in its material production.The second issue concerns the thematic periodization of Persian translations in South Asia. More than two decades ago, Carl Ernst tentatively proposed a fourfold classification to discern some key trends in “the translation movement between the Indian and Islamic cultures.”Footnote15 In his reckoning, the earliest translations focused on “practical arts and sciences,” followed by translations of Indic works whose “historical and political considerations” were of interest to the Mughal ruler Akbar and his contemporaries.Footnote16 The third category of Persian translations was motivated by the intellectual circle of Dārā Shukōh (d. 1659) and focused on “metaphysical and mystical” works. The fourth and final category of translations in Ernst’s formulation was “an extensive series of works commissioned by British colonial officials” that he referred to as “Anglo-Persian” for simplicity’s sake. His provisional typology aspired to generate more research on the history of Persian translations of Indian works, and recent scholarship has indeed sought to add more nuances to his typology. Appraising the history of Persian translations of Vaiṣṇava texts, Stefano Pellò has argued for a fifth category of the “more or less devotional (especially but not only Kṛṣṇaite) works by munshīs” who identified with and were often recognized as “hindū idolaters” in the early eighteenth century.Footnote17 For the late eighteenth century, Kotler contends that Nishāṭ’s translation of Śiva Purāṇa represents the worldview of “lay Śaiva communities in northern South Asia.”Footnote18In light of the early date (1018 AH/1609–10) of Ms. Or 14341, one may argue for revising both the temporal frame and the thematic range of Ernst’s classification of “metaphysical and mystical” works. Alternatively, one may posit an early beginning for the “more or less devotional” works that Pellò conceived as the fifth category. One may even approach Ms. Or 14341 as the earliest evidence of a “lay Śaiva” history that Kotler seeks to unravel in her analysis of Nishāṭ’s work. Such critical interventions can be provisional at best and misleading at worst. Critiquing the prevalence of revisionist and reactionary responses to the translations of religious works, Shankar Nair persuasively argues for recovering the “emic Hindu and Muslim philosophical and theological conceptualizations” that were formed through centuries of “scholarly inquiry and theoretical reflection” among Hindu and Muslim translators.Footnote19 That kind of deeply dialogic and collaborative exchange of critical ideas that Nair meticulously delineates in his exploration of Jūg Bāshist is as yet indiscernible in the history of Persian Shīv Pūrāns during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Ms. Or 14341 is an isolated case of a seventeenth-century Persian Shīv Pūrān extant today. Unless more sixteenth–and seventeenth–century Persian manuscripts on Śaiva themes are uncovered, any theoretical reframing of the history of Persian translations of Hindu religious works in light of Ms. Or 14341 would necessarily remain hypothetical and exceptional.There is almost nothing known about Ms. Or 14341 beyond what is to be found in the body of this manuscript. There are no external testimonies. Nor do we know of any additional copies of the manuscript, or any commentaries or critiques of its translation. Consequently, any inference about the raison d’être of the Ms. Or 14341 has to be drawn by examining the material, textual and literary attributes of the manuscript per se and by gauging the circumstantial and historical factors that underscored the production and circulation of similar manuscripts in the late-sixteenth and early-seventeenth centuries. Particularly crucial for this inquiry is an exploration of the scribal subjectivity and creative imagination of individuals involved in the production of Ms. Or 14341. A coherent and compassionate appraisal of their worldview is sine qua non for elaborating the relevance of this manuscript for the historiography and cultural history of South Asian and Persophone societies.An Exploration of Scribal SubjectivityThe leaves of Ms. Or 14341 bear demonstrable traces of multiple hands and minds at work. The very first folio of the manuscript, for instance, could not have materialized without an active collaboration among translators, scribes, editors, painters, illuminators and their fellow craftworkers. First of all, one of the translators would have drafted the main narrative of Shīv Pūrān to be copied on the first folios of the manuscript.Footnote20 As was the customary practice in Persian manuscript cultures, the scribe commences writing with black ink on the verso of the first folio (1b). They leave sufficient space in the upper half of the folio for the painters and illuminators to create the frontispiece and endow it with ornate borders. Since the folio is devoid of the indentations caused by the threads of a ruler (misṭar, misṭarah or khaṭṭ-kish in Persian), the scribe most likely copied the text freehand. Most of their rows are evenly spaced and their letters are rather deftly laid out in each row. When a row of text is left with an undesirable empty space at the end, the scribe fills it with a decorative flower (Figure 1).Footnote21 The presence of irregular and conspicuous spaces amidst the written words diminishes the beauty and grace of calligraphy. Although the scribe strives to spread out their words equitably in each row, some rows are more even than others. Their writing is relatively fast-paced, even as they are getting accustomed to copying a Persian work that abounds in words borrowed from Indian languages. The majority of words in the first two rows are of Indian provenance. In the fourth row, the scribe reflects on how they may render the Sanskrit title Śiva Purāṇa into Persian and opts for Shīvah Pūrān [شیوه پوران]. Figure 1. Folio 1b, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.Display full sizeWhen another scribe enters the mise-en-page to draw a red line over all the loanwords from Indian languages, they disagree with the lead scribe’s Persianization of Śiva Purāṇa. Donning the role of an editor (muṣaḥḥiḥ), they blot out the final -ah of Shīvah Pūrān with red ink. Shīv Pūrān is thus affirmed as the standard transliteration of their title. Other scribes, editors and relators follow suit. After they finalize the transcript of their main narrative, the folio receives the attention of their fellow illustrators and illuminators. Cognizant of the central themes of Shīv Pūrān, the illustrators depict a scene in which Śiva is seated on a lotus that is in turn placed on the back of a peacock-like bird. Gaṇeśa and Pārvatī are admiring Śiva from the left-hand side of the portrait. They are also sitting on a lotus, but their lotus is borne by two mice. The devotional gaze of Gaṇeśa and Pārvatī on Śiva serves to highlight the central role Śiva is slated to play in the ensuing narrative (Figure 2). Figure 2. Folio 1b, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.Display full sizeThe first folio could not have acquired its final form without a mutual understanding and cooperation among translators, scribes, editors, illustrators, illuminators and other craftspeople. Not all folios benefit from the same degree of coordination among the fellow book artists and relators. For example, the lead scribes, who copy the main narrative of Shīv Pūrān with black ink, are required to leave some empty space at the end of each chapter so that one of their supporting scribes can write down the title of the following chapter with red ink in that space. Their conjecture of how much space would be sufficient for their fellow scribes to write the next title is not always accurate. When chapter titles fail to fit in the left-over spaces, the scribes – who are entrusted with the task of writing chapter headings – fill the empty space with a decorative pattern comprising of four dots arranged in the shape of a rhombus (Figure 3).Footnote22 In a few instances, they use the same decorative flower that the lead scribe introduced in the first folio of the manuscript.Footnote23 When the left-over spaces are inadequate for their respective chapter headings, the scribes stack the remaining words in the interlineal space near the end of the title.Footnote24 More than two-thirds of chapter-headings fail to fit into the space left by the lead scribes. In one particular instance, on folio 73b, the main scribe leaves one and a half rows blank for the next scribe to copy the title of the forty-fourth chapter. The next scribe, however, does not make full use of the space allocated to them. Even though their title is incomplete, they leave one full row empty of any textual content (Figure 4). This vacant row exposes the lack of coordination and communication among the scribes, editors and translators of Shīv Pūrān. Figure 3. Folio 3a, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.Display full size Figure 4. Folio 73b, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.Display full sizeIllustrators, illuminators and painters, too, struggle to liaise with their fellow translators, editors and scribes on a few folios. There are eleven paintings in the manuscript, all of which depict pivotal scenes from Shīv Pūrān.Footnote25 In practice, artists consult with scribes and translators to determine the placement of each painting.Footnote26 Scribes leave blank spaces specifying the location – and sometimes even the theme – of a painting in the manuscript. Wherever their instructions are clear and coherent, the artists are able to situate their paintings seamlessly into the body of the written text. In contrast, when their communication is confusing and ruptured, it results in awkward empty spaces and improvised textual layouts around their paintings. Although a few paintings in Ms. Or 14341 are integrated harmoniously into the textual space of Shīv Pūrān, others are not so fortunate. Preceding the portraits on folios 34a, 41a, 107b and 127a are gratuitous blank folios that abruptly rupture the flow of narrative and images.Footnote27 In some instances, scribes and artists were divided on the issue of how much space in the textual block was adequate for any given painting. As a compromise, scribes spread out the text in a triangular shape to cover the excess space they ended up allocating for the ensuing paintings (Figure 5).Footnote28 Such triangular text blocks precede the paintings on folios 17a, 24b, 30b and 41a.Footnote29 Eight out of eleven paintings are thus affected by the irregular communication among artists, scribes and translators of Ms. Or 14341. Figure 5. Folio 30b, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.Display full sizeApart from the challenges of coordinating across diverse professional groups, there were differences of opinion among scribes, editors and translators on a variety of orthographic and stylistic issues. Professional scribes are skilled in imitating the handwriting of other scribes. This skill is particularly necessary when they need to complete a partially copied work and/or when they have to collaborate with other scribes in preparing composite manuscripts. As adept as they are in replicating the scribal behaviour of their peers, it is not always easy for them to efface some of their mental habits, muscle memory, aesthetic sensibilities and stylistic preferences. Their unique identities are all the more manifest when they are confronted with unconventional and pioneering works. Such works pose peculiar problems and challenges to their craft. While attempting to resolve such issues, they necessarily resort to their personal intuition, creative imagination and experiential knowledge, which in effect causes them to leave behind traces of their distinctive scribal personae in the manuscript. Such markers of scribal personae abound in Ms. Or 14341.A discernible expression of the scribal personae in Ms. Or 14341 concerns the use of hamzah [] for denoting the iżāfah particle in the final position of words ending in the letters -he [ه] and -vāv [و]. Although Persian orthography had largely stabilized in most parts of India, Iran and Central Asia by the sixteenth century, there were nevertheless regional scribal traditions that continued to evolve in the broader Persianate world.Footnote30 Particularly instructive in this regard is the orthography of the iżāfah particle that is pronounced as an enclitic -i vowel. The enclitic sounds are so short and unstressed that it is difficult to utter them without attaching them to the preceding word. When the enclitic -i of the iżāfah particle appears after a word ending in a consonant, the prevalent practice in early Persian orthography is to leave it unwritten. In rare instances, however, scribes are known to add the kasrah diacritic [] below the preceding consonant. In contrast to the words ending in consonants, when the enclitic -i of the iżāfah particle appears after a word ending in a vowel, it is pronounced as a glide sound and written down as the letter -yā [ی]. This orthographic practice was normalized quite early in the history of Persian orthography.Footnote31 Although Ms. Or 14341 conforms to the orthographic norm of eliding the iżāfah particle after consonants, it displays divergent tendencies in the case of words ending in vowels.Some scribal personae in Ms. Or 14341 consistently use hamzah [] – and not the letter -yā [ی] – to denote the iżāfah particle for words ending in -he [ه] and -vāv [و]. In the preface and the first two chapters of the manuscript, for example, eighteen out of twenty-four words with -he [ه] or -vāv [و] endings use hamzah [] to denote the iżāfah particle. In contrast, the scribal personae of chapters twenty-nine, thirty and thirty-one prefer to use neither hamzah [] nor the letter -yā [ی] for denoting the iżāfah particle. In these three chapters, there are eighteen words with -he [ه] or -vāv [و] endings, which require the iżāfah particle.Footnote32 Except for one word irādah on folio 47b, none of them are marked with either hamzah [] or the letter -yā [ی]. The scribal personae in these chapters elide iżāfahs in the words ending in -he [ه] and -vāv [و]. In their writing, therefore, irrespective of whether a word ends in a vowel or a consonant, they like to leave their iżāfahs unmarked.The peculiar habits of scribal personae are traceable in the chapter headings of Ms. Or 14341 too. All chapter headings follow a tripartite formulaic structure. First comes the term adhyāya that is a loanword from Sanskrit meaning “chapter”. It is followed by a cardinal number denoting the chapter order. Finally, a set phrase dar bayān that literally means “for describing”. After the tripartite expression “adhyāya + cardinal number + dar bayan”, the main themes of the respective chapter are summarized in the heading.Footnote33 All scribes responsible for writing the chapter headings adhere to the tripartite structure consistently throughout the manuscript. Some scribes, however, prefer to add the corresponding ordinal numeral right above the chapter’s cardinal number. These ordinal numbers appear in the headings of chapters ten, fourteen, twenty, twenty-five, thirty, sixty-nine, seventy-one and seventy-four (Figure 6).Footnote34 Figure 6. Folio 125a, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.Display full sizeThe distinctive features of their scribal personae are perceptible further in their unique renditions of loanwords from Sanskrit, Hindi and related languages. The Sanskrit word sannyāsin (meaning “a renunciate”) is a case in point. It appears nineteen times altogether in Ms. Or 14341. It is rendered eleven times as sanās [سناس] and eight times as saniyās [سنیاس]. The former sanās shows up in chapters four, seventeen, fifty-six, sixty-one and sixty-three. In contrast, all eight instances of saniyās are found in chapters fourteen and fifteen. In other words, those scribes who were active in these two chapters heard and wrote the Sanskrit term sannyāsin differently from the rest of their fellow scribes. Another comparable example is that of the “eight accomplishments” of Śiva, which is collectively referred to as aṣṭa-siddhi in Sanskrit.Footnote35 The Persian language is devoid of the retroflex sound -ṭa and the sibilant -ṣa, both of which are found in aṣṭa-siddhi. This technical term appears in four chapters of the Persian Shīv Purān. The scribes responsible for copying the eighth and twenty-seventh chapters prefer to transcribe it as ashta-siddih [اشت سده]. On the other hand, the scribes active in chapters fifteen and eighteen choose to Persianize it as ashtah-siddih [اشته سده]. The differences in their scribal personae and orthographic preferences are likewise visible in the transliteration of words like kathā, kṣatriya and himācala among others.Even as scribes leave behind traces of their distinctive scribal personae and stylistic preferences throughout the manuscript, they share several peculiar attributes that elucidate their common background and scribal training. Whenever the verb dāshtan appears after ṭalab, maʿrūż and nigah in Ms. Or 14341, the scribes attach them as if they were one word. The compound verb ṭalab dāshtan is used ten times in the narrative, and they are always joined in writing.Footnote36 Similarly, maʿrūż dāshtan shows up as a compound verb seven times in the manuscript, and they are affixed to each other six times. The one instance where they could not be joined is because the scribe ran out of space after writing maʿrūż and was therefore compelled to move dāshtan to the next row (folio 33b).Footnote37 In contrast to maʿrūż dāshtan and ṭalab dāshtan, the compound verb nigah dāshtan is more frequently used and more evenly distributed in the narrative of Shīv Pūrān. It surfaces twenty-five times in the manuscript and is always joined together.Footnote38In the wider Persian world, it was optional to join -ki with the preceding nouns in writing. When -ki appears after hingāmī, vaqtī and qismī, all scribes of Ms. Or 14341 connect it with -ki without fail. The standard practice among Persian scribes was to use the diacritics for short vowels as sparingly as they could. Unless they came across a rare, archaic or foreign word, they refrained from adding diacritics for short vowels. Strangely, even though irādah is a commonly used word in the Persian language and needs no diacritics for vocalization, all scribes in Ms. Or 14341 prefer to add the fatḥah [] diacritic over -ra in irādah [ارَاده]. Another peculiar habit shared by all of them is that they elide hamzah [] over the base [kursī] of -vāv [ؤ] in words like muʾ [مؤثر], suʾāl [سؤال] and sāʾil [سائل]. That the scribes share these peculiar orthographic habits and stylistic preferences shows that they imbibed and cultivated their craft under the tutelage of like-minded mentors and that their ethos of scribal arts united them as a community of book artists.A Community of Relators, Translators and EditorsPersian and Islamic manuscripts record information about their provenance, patronage and circulation in a variety of ways – most notably, through their ownership statements (tamīlkat, tamallukāt, amānah, istiṣḥāb, damaghah), imperial seals (khatam/khātim, ṭābiʿ, muhr), bequest records (waqfīyāt, taḥbīṣāt), encomia for patrons (muhtamm, muʿtanin), certificates of transmission (ijāzāt, samāʿat, qirāʾat) and decorative medallions (turunj, shamsah). These details are typically found on their flypages, the first and last folios, the marginalia (ḥāshiyah) and interlineal comments (iʿf, taʿīf), and their bookcovers (jild) and pastedowns (baṭn, bāṭin).Footnote39 Furthermore, imperial and sub-imperial workshops tended to hire accomplished scribes, calligraphers, painters, illustrators, illuminators, bookbinders, papermakers and other book artists, all of whom could – in principle – sign their choice manuscripts with their autographs. Given that none of these details appear in Ms. Or 14341, one can cautiously infer that this manuscript was neither produced in imperial workshops nor was it intended for an elite Muslim readership.That the Persian Shīv Purān is disinterested in Muslim audiences is further evident from the language of its translation and the thematic focus of its narrative. Its translation makes use of numerous loanwords from Sanskrit, Hindi and related languages, which could be readily replaced with synonymous Persian words without affecting the meaning and symbolism of the original purāṇa. For instance, the Sanskrit word adhyāya, meaning “chapter”, could be supplanted with corresponding Persian words like bāb, faṣl or bakhsh. Loanwords like caraṇa (feet), kamala (lotus), bhakta (devotee), ākāśa (sky), mahārāja (emperor), śaṅkha (conch shell), cakra (wheel), gadā (mace) and padma (lotus), to cite just a few, could likewise be substituted by Persian synonyms.In contrast to these commonly used loanwords, the Persian Shīv Pūrān also makes frequent use of technical terms from Sanskrit and related languages. These terms are, however, deployed in the main narrative without much effort towards explaining them to a multicultural Persian readership unaware of Hindu ideas and contexts. In the first two chapters, for example, the narrator uses a plethora of Hindu terms: mahātmya, mukti, namaskāra, daṇḍavat, sūta, pūrānaka, pūjā, liṅga, ṛṣīśvara, munīśvara, svāmī, bhakti, jñāna, tīrtha, veda, śāstra, puruṣa, prakṛti, kāraṇa, tapas, pañca-tattva, ākāśa, guṇa, rājas, tāmas, sāttvika, ahaṃkāra, mātrā, yojana, avatāra and pātāla. None of these terms are explained in a way that would render them intelligible to a non-Hindu readership. In a similar vein, while Hindu characters and figures – Pārvatī, Nārāyaṇa, Vyāsa, Mahādeva, Naimiṣa, Nārada, Viṣṇu, Brahma, Nārāyaṇī and haṃsa – move the plot forward, the narrator does not pause to elucidate their diverse identities, roles and backgrounds to audiences unfamiliar with South Asian religious cultures and literatures.Their overreliance on both mundane and technical terms from Sanskrit and other Indian languages, as well as their facility with Hindu characters and figures, shows that the manuscript was aimed at a readership already familiar with Hindu discourses in Mughal India. To draw such a Hindu following into the cult of Śiva, the Persian Shīv Pūrān not only preserves several chapters detailing the religious beliefs and theological concerns of Śaiva communities but also underscores the immediate benefits of performing rituals and pilgrimages in the honour of Śiva. Their emphasis on the ritual worship (pūjā) of Śiva and his liṅga is sustained throughout the manuscript.Footnote40Were the translation aimed at a broader Persian and Islamic readership, it would – unlike the ritualistic and doctrinal focus of Ms. Or 14341 – amplify the narrative content of Śiva Pūrāṇa and strive to highlight concurrences in the worldview of Hindu, Muslim and other religious communities.Footnote41 The Persian Shīv Pūran rarely grapples with popular Qurʿānic ideas, Prophetic traditions and Zoroastrian beliefs among others. Nor is it keen to explore its inter-textual and para-textual relationships with classical Persian literature, Islamic philosophy, Sufi thought and other religious traditions. Even when a famed verse from Niẓāmī Ganjavī’s Khusrau va Shīrīn (1141–1209) and a proverb attributed to Maḥmūd Shabistarī (1288–1340) appear in the translation, there is barely any effort to forge a dialogic relationship between diverse religious and literary cultures in Persophone and South Asian societies.Footnote42 Both quotations were quite popular in Persophone societies, hence the narrators use them proverbially, and in passing, while they remain disinterested in engaging with the original context and/or the reception history of either quotations.Just as the makers of the manuscript Or 14341 remain anonymous, so do their translators, relators and narrators. Their silence is both surprising and concerning. Not many Persian scholars were competent readers of purāṇic literature in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Besides, even for a seasoned translator, it would be an ambitious and herculean undertaking to translate the seventy-five chapters of Śiva Purāṇa in early modern India. By translating such a challenging work, a Persian translator could secure a high rank in imperial courts, Sufi orders, religious schools, literary circles and/or other intellectual communities. Mughal-era rulers, courtiers, landlords, mystics and scholars were known to commission, acquire and reward translations of canonical Hindu works. Against this backdrop, why would any translator choose to withhold their identity?In the case of the Persian Shīv Pūrān, it is possible to extrapolate some of the reasons why translators and narrators preferred to remain unidentified. For one thing, there are multiple translators at work, none of whom could in all conscience lay claim to the singular authorship of the overall translation. The shifting attributes of the narrative persona, literary style and language use attest to the presence of diverse translators. Regardless, Shīv Pūrān does not deploy the first-person narrative voice. When a narrative persona has to share their views directly with the readers, they do so as an omniscient third-person voice. This narrative strategy preserves the anonymity of individual translators while also fashioning a collective authorship for the translated work. Their collective authorship – despite emerging in a disparate linguistic and historical context – resonates with the discursive mode of narration characteristic of Sanskrit purāṇas.Collective authorship is in effect the mainstay of narrative traditions that are transmitted orally for centuries. The earliest purāṇic narratives emerged in oral cultures and were later recast in the predominantly literary and scribal media of Sanskrit. Notwithstanding the transmediation of purāṇas, several attributes of oral and performative cultures remained firmly embedded in Sanskrit purāṇas. One such feature is the frame narrative. A group of curious sages and pupils pose challenging questions to the all-knowing bard Sūta Pūrānak,Footnote43 who in turn addresses their concerns by narrating stories involving Gods, kings and mortals as well as by expounding upon their religious, theological and doctrinal matters.Each chapter of the Persian Shīv Pūrān is, therefore, structured around a question (istifsār) and its answer (javāb). The expression sūta pūrānak guft – meaning “Sūta Pūrānak replied” – serves as an oral formula and a sine qua non for the narrative of each chapter to unfold. For a chapter to form a coherent narrative unit, then, the narrative persona would require the oral formula – sūta pūrānak guft – just once in response to a key question posed at the beginning of the same chapter. This organizing principle is observed in most chapters of Shīv Pūrān. However, since multiple translators are at work, their narrative personae display divergent tendencies even when they are all inclined to cultivate collective authorship in their Persian translation. Some narrative personae end up using the oral formula several times in their retellings.Footnote44 Particularly notable are chapters fifty-four to sixty-one, all of which consistently use the oral formula twice. Furthermore, some translators give in to the temptation of creatively reconstituting the oral formula per se. Some of them experiment with the verb guftan (to speak) in sūta pūrānak guft and deploy alternate expressions like bayān namūdan, dar javāb pardākhtan, iẓhār namūdan, rivāyat kardan and dar al-bayān gardīdan.Footnote45 Others incorporate a list of adjectives and poetic phrases in the oral formula so as to elucidate the many admirable qualities of Sūta Pūrānak.Footnote46Stylistic differences among the narrative personae are noticeable in how they choose specific loanwords to describe the religious, cultural and social backgrounds of their key characters. Purāṇic characters perform a variety of ritualistic gestures – namaskāra, pāda-praṇāma and daṇḍavat to name a few – for the sake of conveying their respect and reverence for others. The translators of Shīv Pūrān differ in their choice of these rituals of deference. Some narrative personae opt for namaskār [],Footnote47 whereas others prefer dandavat [].Footnote48 A minority of narrative personae like to use pāda-pranām [] as well.Footnote49 Several narrative personae are wont to crafting a collocation of two gestures as a way of emphasizing their deference for others. Consequently, some chapters deploy the phrase “namaskār and dandavat” []Footnote50 whereas one chapter deploys pāda-pranām and namaskar []Footnote51 and yet another prefers to use pāda-pranām with dandavat [].Footnote52 In grappling with the social backgrounds of their characters, the translators of Shīv Pūrān have to Persianize the terminology of Hindu castes and communities. Most narrative personae render kṣatriya – the caste of warriors, soldiers, aristocrats and royal dynasties – into Persian as khatrī [].Footnote53 However, one of them opts for the term chhatrī []Footnote54 and a second narrative persona likes to use both chhatri [] and khatrī [].Footnote55 Although both chhatrī and khatrī were already current in South Asian languages in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, they did not necessarily refer to the same caste groups and communities throughout the Indian subcontinent.Footnote56 In contrast, even as the narrative personae of Ms. Or 14341 rely on their vernacular preferences for either terms, they nevertheless deploy both terms to Persianize specifically the caste of kṣatriya as envisioned within the fourfold classification (varṇāśrama) of Hindu society.The differences in the attributes of narrative personae, literary styles, cultural knowledge and social norms point to the presence of translators of diverse backgrounds who – despite sharing the ground rules of translating Śiva Purāṇa into Persian – remain embedded in their particular ways of thinking and writing about Hindu societies. Their collective authorship is a mutually agreed upon literary contract aimed at fostering internal coherence and stylistic order among diverse narrative personae and authorial voices. To that effect, some of the translators also assume editorial responsibilities in the manuscript. Serving as editors, they not only address grammatical, orthographic and stylistic issues in the main text but also supply missing words, phrases and sentences in the marginalia.That there were multiple editors at work is evidenced by the difference in their handwriting, the choice of their reed pen and ink, and their use of editorial symbols. Whereas some editors add their remarks in red ink only,Footnote57 others prefer to stay with black ink.Footnote58 Not everyone deploys editorial symbols to mark the specific location of their suggested changes. Some editors record their comments in a marginalium note right next to the row that needs editing. Others, however, like to use editorial symbols: first in the main text specifying the precise location of the error and then again at the start of the marginalium rectifying that same error. For instance, one of the editors active on folio 66b writes with black ink and prefers to use a cross-mark [x] to specify the site of error in the main text and again at the beginning of its corresponding marginalium. On that very folio, a second editor takes charge of adding an overline on non-Persian words and the diacritic ḏimmah [] on Persian words with red ink. This editor opts for the symbol [ه۱] instead of the cross-mark [x]. Another editor, who uses black ink and is active on folio 89b, also uses the same symbol [ه۱] for editing their section.These unique ways of editing the translation could be construed as evidence of readers engaging diachronically with the text. Whereas competent readers are certainly capable of discerning and rectifying errors in a work that was composed in a different historical and cultural milieux, the uniformity of textual practice among the editors of Ms. Or 14341 – especially, their adherence to the formal, grammatical, stylistic and scribal norms of the main text – shows that all editors synchronically upheld their literary contract with the translators and scribes in ensuring that the manuscript coheres as a unique Śaiva work. Were the diachronic tendencies in the editorial hands more pronounced – say, by the presence of datable commentarial remarks, orthographic differences and anachronous grammatical forms – in the marginalia, it would be plausible to interpret these textual interventions as evidence of later readership. For want of evidence of later intervention, one may cautiously conclude that the collective authorship in Ms. Or 14341 is the result of a synchronic collaboration and mutual understanding among a community of translators, editors, scribes and book artists at the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. This mode of collective authorship is radically different from that of the Sanskrit Śiva Purāṇa whose narratives acquired the attributes of collective authorship through centuries of diachronic oral transmission before they were committed to the literate media of Sanskrit relators and that continued to change even after they were committed to writing in manuscripts and books.Footnote59Conclusion: The Raison d’Être of Ms. Or 14341What motivated a community of translators, relators, scribes, editors, painters and other book artists to anonymously produce an illustrated Persian retelling of Śiva Purāṇa in 1018 AH/1609–1610 CE? Their collective resolve to remain nameless transpires throughout the manuscript. None of them ever attempts to state overtly their identities, backgrounds and intentions in the manuscript. Nor do they seem interested in staking claim to their individual contributions to the manuscript. That all scribal and narrative personae – despite their peculiar attributes, styles and habits – choose to remain unnamed and unidentified is further affirmed by the terse colophon that records solely the year of the completion of the manuscript: 1018 AH/1609–1610 CE. Were anyone so inclined to record their names and contributions in the colophon, they had more than one and a half sides of the last folio empty to do so.Footnote60 From the quality of the ink, the movement of the reed pen and the style of handwriting, it is apparent that the scribe who copied the final chapter of the manuscript also handwrote the colophon. That the colophon refrains from revealing any details about its scribes, translators, book artists and patrons, among others, shows that everyone upheld the collective will and ethos of their community – a community that espoused unwavering faith in Śiva and that sought to elucidate the power and glory of Śiva for his current and future religious followings.In other words, the Persian Shīv Pūrān of Ms. Or 14341 was produced by and for the devotees of Śiva. All of its narrative personae unanimously avow that Śiva is the greatest of all gods and that one can allay all worldly miseries by reading and/or listening to Śiva Purāṇa. Their unequivocal celebration of the divine powers and cosmic sports of Śiva is directed towards Persophone Hindu communities, some of whom may in the end be persuaded to follow Śaiva doctrines, rituals and sects. Aware of their target readerships and audiences, the translators generously borrow loanwords from Sanskrit, Hindi and related languages. They do not exert themselves towards supplanting Hindu concepts and Indic terminologies with comparable ideas from Persophone societies of diverse religious persuasions. Their overreliance on the vernacular, cultural and religious knowledge that was locally accessible, and their matter-of-the-fact narrative style with occasional forays into poetic and literary registers, were effective strategies for making their translation amenable to broader Śaiva and Hindu readerships, whose Persophony was limited to everyday interactions and not necessarily grounded in the perusal of ornate prose and classical poetry.Their communal ethos and collective authorship could not have taken shape at the spur of the moment. Without a preexisting history of Persian retellings of Sanskrit narrative literature and the widespread use of Persian among Hindu communities, they would not have had the confidence to translate a sectarian scriptural work like Śiva Purāṇa into Persian. Nor would they borrow ideas, concepts and terms from South Asian languages, religions and cultures in such an unrestrained manner. Indeed, in the preface of Shīv Pūrān, the omniscient narrator relates that the Sanskrit original has been translated (tarjumah kardah shud) into Persian because most people are unable to read Sanskrit, whereas they find Persian easy to comprehend (fārsī ki bi-fahm qarīb ast).Footnote61Even as they continue the prior tradition of narrating Hindu tales in Persian, their work differs from their predecessors in some crucial ways. Most previous translations of Sanskrit narrative literature, particularly purāṇas and itihāsas, had materialized at the behest of Sultanate- and Mughal-era courtly elites, who viewed translation per se as a viable mode of facilitating imperial politics, community outreach and intellectual cultures. In the Persian Shīv Pūrān of Ms. Or 14341, translation is effectively a means of reifying the sectarian bonds of Śaiva communities and of bringing others into their fold. Their translation articulates an inward-looking ethos of Śaiva communities; it remains disinterested in transregional, imperial and cross-cultural mediation of their religious worldview. Their translation seeks to mobilize Persophone Hindu communities towards Śaiva ideologies; it is not as keen to refashion Śaiva discourses for non-Hindu Persophone communities. This privileging of the communal and provincial over the transregional and cosmopolitan distinguishes the Shīv Pūrān of Ms. Or 14341 from other eighteenth-century Persian retellings of Śiva Purāṇa.More than a century later, in the 1730s, when Nishāṭ decided to translate Śiva Purāṇa into Persian, his rationale for translation resonated with that of Ms. Or 14341. Like the translators of Ms. Or 14341, he argues for a Persian Shīv Pūrān on the premiss that most believers of Śiva were unable to read and comprehend Sanskrit and that Persian was more accessible to them. However, unlike the translators of Ms. Or 14341, he makes a few unsubstantiated remarks about the history of Persian translations of Sanskrit works. For instance, he contends that Śaiva scholars – having noticed the decline of Sanskrit literacy among the wider populace – had already translated key Sanskrit works like Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata, Śrī Bhagavata and Yoga Vāsiṣtha.Footnote62 Reflecting upon the precedents set by such Śaiva translators, he too was motivated to translate a key scriptural work into Persian. In his reckoning, Śiva Purāṇa conveys the pure essence of all Vedas (khullaṣ-i bēd-hā) and elucidates the attributes of the divine sports of Śiva (kavāyif-i līlā-hā). Consequently, he considers it his religious and moral duty to render Śiva Purāṇa into Persian.Footnote63Towards the end of his preface, Nishāṭ relates that he divided his translation into seventy-four chapters based on a hindī version of purāṇa (muṭābiq-i pūrān-i hindī). In early modern Persian discourses, the substantive hindī was a catch-all term for any Indian language; its specific referent depended on the context of its use. Insofar as Nishāṭ discusses the challenges of appreciating religious works in Sanskrit, one may argue that his hindī purāṇa was in effect a reference to a Sanskrit purāṇa. Indeed, as Kotler has shown recently, several eighteenth-century Sanskrit manuscripts abridged the sizeable premodern compendia (saṃhitās) of Śiva Purāṇa into a treatise of seventy-four to seventy-six chapters.Footnote64 Nishāṭ would have consulted one of those Sanskrit manuscripts for his Persian translation.Were eighteenth-century Sanskrit manuscripts the only sources of Nishāṭ’s translation? Was his translation the first ever work to narrate the exploits of Śiva in Persian, hindī and related languages? If so, how does it differ from the myriad ways in which the glory of Śiva was performed in the oral and vernacular cultures of South Asia? In his preface, Nishāṭ argues for a Persian Shīv Pūrān because, to the best of his knowledge, no such translation was available to Śaiva readers in the past. Granting the benefit of the doubt to Nishāṭ and likewise trusting the colophon of Ms. Or 14341, it appears that – despite the collective effort of a community of translators, relators scribes, editors, painters and book artists in the first decade of the seventeenth century – the Persian Shīv Pūrān had ceased to exist – either as manuscript copies or in the cultural memory of Hindu societies in western India – by the beginning of the eighteenth century. Whereas this may as well be true, there are tantalizing overlaps between Nishāṭ’s translation and that of Ms. Or 14341.A vast majority of chapter headings in Nishāṭ’s work correspond with those of Ms. Or 14341. The thematic concerns of most of their chapters are likewise indistinguishable. They similarly concur in their decision to leave untranslated certain loanwords from Sanskrit, Hindi and related languages. Like Ms. Or 14341, Nishāṭ does not translate the following words in the first two chapters: mahātmya, sūta, pūrānaka, namaskār, ṛṣīśvar, dhyāna, lakṣmī, jñāṇa, mahārāja, veda, pūjā, bhakta, kṣetra, adhyāya, tirtha, mukti, puruṣa, prakṛti, kāraṇa, rajas, rāmas, sāttvika, ahaṃkāra, guṇa, saṃkha, cakra, gadā, padma, bhagvān, paramātmā, māyā, liṅga, varāha, pātāla and haṃsa. Above all, both Nishāṭ and Ms. Or 14341 deploy identical set phrases and idiomatic expressions in corresponding chapters. In the first chapter, for example, both use expressions like adā-yi namaskār, jāyī ast mutabarrakah, murtāż-i kāmil and iqāmat-guzīn, among others. In some instances, Nishāṭ restyles some of the expressions found in Ms. Or 14341 with the intention of enhancing their poetic and literary qualities. For example, one of the translators of Ms. Or 14341 likens the writing of a reed pen on paper to that of “the rein of the horse of imagination” (ʿinān-i kumayt-i khāmah) running wild in the field of rhetoric (maydān-i bayān).Footnote65 In the corresponding chapter, Nishāṭ uses the same metaphor but attempts to make it more attractive. In his rendition, the pen is still the horse of imagination and its writing still the rein of that horse. But his horse is not just any horse rather one endowed with dun skin colour and high speed (ʿinān-i ashhab-i tīzkām-i qalam).Footnote66Nishāṭ is a poet and mystic at heart. He does not shy away from connecting the themes of Śiva Purāṇa with those found in the works of classical Persian poets like Niẓāmī, Rūmī, Saʿdī and Hilālī, to name a few.Footnote67 Nor does he refrain from sharing his own verses in the narrative. His grammar, diction and rhetoric show a higher degree of finesse and refinement than that of Ms. Or 14341. Consequently, when the same phrases, idioms and sentences recur in both translations, Nishāṭ’s is more poetic, introspective and intertextual. His ability to ground his narrative in the broader Persian and Islamic contexts renders his translation more pliable to the transregional Persophone and Islamic communities.One wonders, then, whether the similarities between Nishāṭ and Ms. Or 14341 are just fortuitous. Multiple translations of the same work – especially one rife with doctrinal, ritualistic and sectarian details – inadvertently end up sharing their key terminologies, themes and concerns. Whether or not Nishāṭ was acquainted with any prior efforts at translating Śiva Purāṇa into Persian, hindī and related languages, his approach to translation and the reception history of his work differed considerably from that of Ms. Or 14341. Multiple copies of Nishāṭ’s work were in circulation in the past and are extant today. In contrast, the circulation and reception history of Ms. Or 14341 remains unknown between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries. The manuscript eventually ended up traveling outside the Śaiva communities in the twentieth century, if not before. On one of its flypages appears a note written with a twentieth-century ball-point pen, “The Book of Curious Beings among the Strange Creations of God for the Indian publisher Taqī al-Dīn Hamzah” (Kitāb-i Gharāʾib al-Kaʾināt fī ʿAjāʾib al-Makhlūqāt fī Taqī al-Dīn Hamzah al-Nāshirī al-Hindī). The modern owner – unaware of the raison d’être of Ms. Or 14341 – believed that this work belonged to the Perso-Arabic genre of the “marvels of creation” (ʿajāʾib al-makhlūqāt).Footnote68 Another contemporary reader of the manuscript was so uncomfortable with portraits of the divine figures – Śiva and Parvatī – in the frontispiece that they chose to whiten the facial details of both figures.Footnote69 Unable to fathom the collective will and communal ethos of the makers of Ms. Or 14341, these modern readers projected their presentist concerns onto the manuscript. Primed for intra-religious interactions within the Hindu communities at the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Ms. Or 14341 strangely became the site of an Islamicate reenvisioning of the cultural past of modern South Asian nations in the twentieth century. How the fate of a historical object changes over time!Display full sizeDisplay full sizeSupplemental materialRSAS_2578887_Supplementary_MaterialDownload PDF (319.8 KB)RSAS_2578887_Supplementary_MaterialAcknowledgementsMy research on the study of Persian translations of Śiva Purāṇa has benefitted immensely from the mentorship and guidance of Prof. Iraj Shahbazi. Likewise, I am grateful to Prof. Frederick M. Smith, Prof. Carl W. Ernst, Prof. Philip A. Lutgendorf, Prof. Jagjeet Lally, Dr. Ursula Sims-Williams, Dr. Ankur Barua, Dr. Soumen Mukherjee, Dr. Hina Khalid, Prof. Elizabeth Cecil, Prof. Peter C. Bisschop and Dr. Ayelet Kotler for discussing some of the earlier drafts of my essay. Finally, I express my deepest gratitude to my writing partners: Dr. Mark Hammond, Dr. Miriam Rothenberg, Dr. Mirela Zaneva, Dr. Antonia Weberling and Ms. Sarah Savić Kallesøe. Without their unwavering support and encouragement, this essay would remain unwritten.Disclosure StatementNo potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).Supplementary MaterialSupplementary data and appendices for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/02666030.2025.2578887.Additional informationFundingThis project was funded by the Junior Research Fellowship and the Research Centre Grant of Christ Church, University of Oxford, as well as a Research Bursary of the Ancient India & Iran Trust, Cambridge, UK.Notes1. See Appendix 1 for the entries recorded in the sales catalogues of Sotheby’s, as well as the acquisition register and published handlist of the British Library. I am grateful to Dr. Ursula Sims-Williams, the Lead Curator of Persian manuscripts at the British Library, and Eyob Derillo, a reference specialist in the Asian and African Studies Section of the same library, for sharing the details of the acquisition register with me.2. Śiva Purāṇa is the transliteration of the title found in Sanskrit, Hindi and related languages. The Persianized title is transliterated as Shīv Pūrān. In some older dialects of Hindi and other Indian languages, purāṇa is rendered as purān. Note the difference between the Hindi purān and the Persian pūrān: the short vowel ‘u’ in Hindi changes to the long vowel ‘ū’ in Persian. I have followed the Library of Congress (LoC) transliteration scheme for Persian and the International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration (IAST) for Sanskrit, Hindi and related languages. In quotations from other publications, I have preserved the transliteration of their respective authors. Unless stated otherwise, I have translated all Persian and South Asian extracts in this essay.3. See Appendix 2 for a list of manuscript copies of Iqbālnāmah then owned by British libraries.4. See Appendix 3 for the details of these four manuscripts.5. For the details of Ms. Sprenger 1659 at Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, see: Wilhelm Pertsch, Die Handscriften-Verzeichnisse der Königlichen Bibliothek zu Berlin. Vierter Band. Verzeichniss der Persischen Handschriften (Berlin: A. Asher & Co., 1888): 1028–1029.6. In prior scholarship, the pen-name of Kishan Singh has often been rendered as “Nashāt”. This is an inapt reading of his pen-name. Fortunately, an autographed manuscript of Kishan Singh has survived and is now housed in the Cambridge University Library with the shelfmark “Eton Pote 282”. Kishan specifies his pen-name on several folios of the manuscript. Particularly notable in this regard is his habitual reiteration of “the penname of Nishāṭ” (mutakhalluṣ bi nishāṭ) – not ‘Nashāt’ – in the marginalia next to the opening paragraphs of several works (see, for example, folios 113a, 249b, 259b, and 285b). Moreover, he regularly makes figurative use of his nom de plume in his literary works; one of his pithy mas̱navīs (folios 336a–338b) is titled Bāgh-i Nishāṭ (The Garden of Nishāṭ). The word nishāṭ refers to joy, exultation, happiness, cheerfulness, vivacity and similar emotional states. Nishāṭ is pronounced as nashāṭ in some of the regional dialects of Persian. In contrast, nashāt is a Persianized form of a verbal noun derived from the Arabic root [نشء], and it denotes any living being that is in the state of growing up and developing in this world.7. On the dating of his colophon, see: Ayelet Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation of Śivapurāṇa and Eighteenth-Century North Indian Śaivism’, Journal of Hindu Studies (2025) 18.1: 36–37.8. I am grateful to Marina Chellini, the lead curator of Hindi and North Indian Languages at the British Library, for generously sharing her knowledge of Hindi manuscripts with me and for drawing my attention to several overlooked manuscripts in their collection.9. The folios of the manuscript are numbered by a modern hand with a lead pencil. All folio numbers cited in this essay are based on the foliation by that very hand.10. With the exception of an article I published in 2024, this manuscript has remained outside the ambit of previous scholarship. My previous article offers a brief and preliminary discussion of the manuscript from the vantage point of paratextual studies. See: Pranav Prakash, ‘Paratexting Persian Purāṇas: Probing Religious and Communal Boundaries in South Asian History’, Textual Cultures: Texts, Contexts, Interpretation (2024) 17.2: 157–193.11. For gauging the contours of prior scholarship on Persian Shīv Pūrāns, see: Ayelet Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation’, 31–54; Pranav Prakash, ‘Paratexting Persian Purāṇas’; Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, On History and Historians of Medieval India (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd., 1983), 21; N. S. Gorekar, Indo-Iran Relations: Cultural Aspects (Bombay: Sindhu Publications Private Ltd, 1970), 93–94; N. S. Gorekar, ‘Persian Language and Sanskritic Lore’, Indica (1965) 2.2: 107–119; Sayyid ʿAbdullāh, Adabiyāt-i Fārsī měn Hindūʾon kā Ḥiṣṣah (Delhi, 1942), translated into Persian as Adabiyāt-i Fārsī dar-miyān-i Hinduvān by Muḥammad Islam Khān (Tehran: Intishārāt-i Adabī va Tārīkhī-yi Mauqūfāt-i Maḥmūd Afshār Yazdī), 114; A. B. M. Habibullah, ‘Medieval Indo-Persian Literature relating to Hindu Science and Philosophy, 1000–1800 A.D.’, The Indian Historical Quarterly (1938) 14: 167–181.12. This manuscript is now owned by the British Library and has the shelfmark of IO Islamic 760. See Appendix 3 for more details about these manuscripts.13. Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation’, 41–42.14. For exploring the role of scribal communities in early modern and colonial India, see: Christopher D. Bahl and Stefan Hanß (eds.), Scribal Practice and the Global Cultures of Colophons, 1400–1800 (Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2022); Rosalind O’Hanlon, Anand Venkatkrishnan and Richard David Williams (eds.), Scribal Service People in Motion: Culture, Power and the Politics of Mobility in India’s Long Eighteenth Century, c. 1680–1820, a special issue of The Indian Economic and Social History Review (2020) 57.4; Hayden J. Bellenoit, The Formation of the Colonial State in India: Scribes, Paper and Taxes, 1760–1860 (Oxford/New York: Routledge, 2017); Rajiv Kinra, Writing Self, Writing Empire: Chandar Bhan Brahman and the Cultural World of the Indo-Persian State Secretary (Oakland: University of California Press, 2015); Rosalind O’Hanlon and David Washbrook (eds.), Munshis, Pandits and Record-Keepers: Scribal Communities and Historical Change in India, a special issue of The Indian Economic and Social History Review (2010) 47.4; Muzaffar Alam and Sanjay Subrahmanyam, ‘The Making of a Munshi,’ Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East (2004) 24.2: 61–72.15. Carl W. Ernst, ‘Muslim Studies of Hinduism? A Reconsideration of Arabic and Persian Translations from Indian Languages,’ Iranian Studies 36.2 (2003), 173–195.16. For some recent publications on the translation projects in the Mughal period, see: Michael Willis (ed.), Translation and the State: The Mahābhārata at the Mughal Court (Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter, 2022); Shankar Nair, Translating Wisdom: Hindu–Muslim Intellectual Interactions in Early Modern South Asia (California: University of California Press, 2020); Supriya Gandhi, The Emperor Who Never Was: Dara Shukoh in Mughal India (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2020); Audrey Truschke, Culture of Encounters: Sanskrit at the Mughal Court (New York: Columbia University Press, 2016).17. Stefano Pèllo, ‘Black Curls in a Mirror: The Eighteenth–Century Persian Kṛṣṇa of and the Tongue of Bīdil,’ International Journal of Hindu Studies (2018) 22: 72.18. Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation’, 33.19. Nair, Translating Wisdom, 9.20. I discuss the issue of multiple translators in the third section of this essay.21. In the main text of the narrative, the decorative flower appears in black ink on the following folios: 1a (row 4), 2b (row 2), 9b (rows 10 and 11), 19b (row 14), 21b (row 9), 27b (row 12), 29a (row 7), 32b (row 3), 40b (rows 12 and 14), 42b (row 11), 48b (row 13), 49b (row 6), 50a (row 7), 51a (row 8), 51b (row 9), 63a (row 9), 67b (row 9), 68b (row 5), 79b (row 5), 88a (row 7), 89b (row 5), 96b (row 4), 97a (row 2), 107a (row 14), 111a (row 12), 113a (row 10), 114a (rows 2 and 6), 114b (row 7), 124b (row 13) and 136a (row 14). It shows up three times in chapter titles as well: folios 3a (row 7), 19b (row 7) and 50a (row 4). Here they are inscribed in red ink. There is just one instance in the main body of the narrative (row 14, folio 40b) where the decorative flower is copied in red ink (instead of black ink). Figure 1 shows the decorative flower that appears in the fourth row of folio 1b.22. This pattern is found in the titles of the following chapters: 2, 5, 9, 19, 24, 27, 39, 43, 52 and 68. Figure 3 shows the chapter heading and decorative patterns found on folio 3a.23. As mentioned in the endnote 21, the decorative flower is used in chapters 2 (folios 3a, row 7), 12 (folio 19b, row 7) and 32 (folios 50a, row 4).24. This kind of interlineal stacking is noticeable in thirty-eight out of seventy-four chapters. These chapters are as follows: 4, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 25, 28, 31, 33, 35, 37, 38, 41, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 69, 71, 72 and 74. In some instances, the scribes do not wait until the end of the title to stack the excess letters or words in the interlinear spaces. When a given title is spread over multiple rows, some scribes strategically pile up a few letters, words or expressions at the end of one or more preceding rows. This saves them from mounting all excess letters or words at the tail end of their title. The chapters listed in this endnote do not include those in which the scribe has strategically distributed excess letters or words over multiple rows.25. See Appendix 4 for the details of these illustrations.26. The manuscript does not bear any evidence of a royal patron, a prospective buyer or a book owner. Were they involved in the manuscript project, the artists would have heeded their requests in planning the placement and themes of their paintings.27. As mentioned in endnote 9, a modern hand has assigned the folio numbers in the manuscript. They did not assign any number to blank folios. The blank folios mentioned in this paragraph are located between folios 33 and 34, 40 and 41, 107 and 108, 116 and 117, and 126 and 127.28. Figure 5 reproduces the triangular text block found on folio 30b.29. The triangular text blocks themselves appear on folios 16b, 24b, 30a and 40b.30. On the orthographic history of hamzah, see: Paola Orsatti, ‘Persian Language in Arabic Script: The Formation of the Orthographic Standard and the Different Graphic Traditions of Iran in the First Centuries of the Islamic Era’ in Creating Standards: Interactions with Arabic Script in 12 Manuscript Cultures, ed. Dmitry Bondarev, Alessandro Gori and Lameen Souag (Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter, 2019): 39–72; Forogh Hashabeiky, Persian Orthography. Modification or Changeover? (1850–2000) (Stockholm: Uppsala University Library, 2005); and Kubrā Shīrvānī, Barrasī-yi imlāyī-yi Dastnavīsī az Tafsīr-i Sūrābādī (Tehran: Intishārāt-i Farhangistān-i Zabān-i Īrān, 1974). For an overview of iżāfah, see: Muḥammad Muʿīn, Iżāfah [Alternate Title: Izāfa (The Genitive Case)], chāp-i chāhurum (Tehran: Muʾasassah-i Intishārāt-i Amīr Kabīr, 1363/1984).31. John R. Perry and Ali Ashraf Sadeghi, ‘Eżāfa’, Encyclopædia Iranica, vol. ix, fasc. 2, pp. 127–128; Gilbert Lazard, La langue des plus anciens documents de la prose persane (Paris: Klincksiek, 1963), 200, §162; Vladimir Minorski, ‘Some Early Documents in Persian’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. 74, issue 3–4 (1942): 188.32. See Appendix 5 for the list of these words.33. See Appendix 6 for examples of a few chapter headings.34. Figure 6 displays the heading of the sixty-ninth chapter.35. The list of “eight attainments” in Ms. Or 14341 (folio 15) are as follows: (i) atimā [اتما] (Sanskrit: aṇiman) – the ability to turn oneself as minute as an invisible particle; (ii) laghimā [لگهما] (Sanskrit: laghiman) – the ability to make oneself as light and weightless as one wills; (iii) mahimānā [مهمانا] (Sanskrit: mahiman) – the ability to make oneself as large and expansive as one wills; (iv) garimā [گرما] (Sanskrit: gariman) – the ability to make oneself as heavy and dense as one wills; (v) parāpat [پراپت] (Sanskrit: prāpti) – the ability to move into any space and acquire anything and everything; (vi) parākāmī [پراکامی] (Sanskrit: prākāmya) – one endowed with the absolute freedom of will; (vii) insabit [] (Sanskrit: īśitva) – one who has the absolute power to create and destroy anything and everything; (viii) basiyat [بسیت] (Sanskrit: vaśitva) – one endowed with the power to subdue and control others at their own will.36. See Appendix 7.37. See Appendix 8.38. See Appendix 9.39. It is possible that some of the flypages were lost when the manuscript was rebound by a modern bookbinder. The original folios of the manuscript, however, have considerable empty spaces at the beginning (folio 1a) and the end (folio 143a and 143b). Typically, these are the spaces for patrons, owners, book-sellers, scribes, authors and readers, among others, to add their comments, signatures, seals and other statements.40. The ritual worship of Śiva and his liṅga is invoked and discussed in the following chapters: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 36, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 61, 63, 66, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72 and 73.41. Several early modern Persian translations of Indic works focused on specialized subjects – from musical theories (Ras Baras’s Shams al-Aṣvāt, 1698) to mathematical concepts (ʿAṭāʾullāh Rushdī’s Tarjūmah-i Bījaganit, 1634) to theological schools (Niẓām al-Dīn Pānīpatī’s, Jagannātha Miśra Banārasī’s and Paṭhān Miśra Jājīpūrī’s Jūg Bāshisht, 1597). These translations were targeted at elite readerships and/or specialist audiences. Such translations were usually undertaken by translators whose individual intellectual and philosophical leanings determined the content of the translated work. Such translations were neither driven by collective authorship nor assumed a mass readership. On the translations mentioned in this endnote, see: Mehrdad Fallahzadeh and Mahmoud Hassanabadi, Shams Al-Aṣvāt: The Sun of Songs by Ras Baras (Uppsala: Uppsala Universitet, 2012); Zeinab Karimian, ‘Translating Indian Algebra in the Seventeenth Century: ʿAtāʾollāh Roshdi’s Persian Version of Bhāskara II’s Bījagaṇita,’ Journal of Persianate Studies (2024) 17.2: 69–89, and Nair, Translating Wisdom.42. Niẓāmī’s verse is deployed in the second chapter of the Shīv Pūrān (folio 3a) to describe Nārada’s influential presence in the world. This verse is found in the fourteenth chapter of Khusrau va Shīrīn.In the nineteenth chapter (folio 31a), the narrator uses a proverb that is comprised of the first half of a couplet from Shabistarī’s Gulshan-i Rāz. The original couplet appears in its seventh chapter (bakhsh-i haft) of Gulshan-i Rāz as follows.43. Here I have preferred the Persian rendition of the bard’s epithet pūrānak [پورانک]. The comparable Sanskrit and Hindi terms were purāṇaga, purāṇaka or paurāṇika. In one of the manuscript copies of Nishāṭ’s translation of Śiva Purāṇa that the Orientalist Richard Johnson (1753–1807) commissioned for his personal collection (IO Islamic 760, British Library), Johnson and his interlocutors prefer the reading of paurāṇika (folio 3a) over purāṇaga or purāṇaka. Most colonial-era lexicons of Sanskrit and older Hindi dialects, however, identify purāṇaga as a reader, reciter or performer of purāṇas. Paurāṇika, in contrast, is used as an all-encompassing adjective to describe anything relating to purāṇas, or as a common noun to refer to someone who is knowledgeable about purāṇas and is, therefore, a competent relator of purāṇas. Although both the letters kāf [ک] and gāf [گ] could be written as just kāf [ک] in early modern Persian orthography, the scribes of Ms. Or 14341 consistently preserve the differences between the letters kāf [ک] and gāf [گ]. The overline on the letter gāf [گ] is rarely elided in this manuscript. Hence, the term pūrānak cannot be read as pūrānag. Also, the scribes always add the diacritic ḏimmah [] over the first consonant -p of to ensure that readers pronounce the long vowel -ū, not diphthong -au, in pūrānak.44. See Appendix 10 for a comprehensive list of these chapters.45. See: chapters 8, 20, 40, 41, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 70, 74 and 75.46. See: chapters 41, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67 and 74.47. See: chapters 2, 3, 4, 26, 36, 55, 67 and 75.48. See: chapters 14, 34 and 41.49. See: chapters 11 and 14.50. See: chapters 11, 13, 16, 17, 19, 37, 42 and 66.51. See: chapter 11.52. See: chapter 14.53. See: chapters 8, 43, 53, 56 and 63.54. See: chapter 4.55. See: chapter 8.56. For instance, compare the references to chhatrī and khatrī found in the Mughal vizier Abū al-Fażl’s (1551–1602) Āʾīn-i Akbarī, translated by H. S. Jarrett (Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, 1891), 144, and revised and further annotated by Jadunath Sarkar (Calcutta: Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1948), 126; the Rajasthani poet Vṛnda’s (1643–1723) Raghunāth Rūpak Gītāṃro, edited by Mahtāb-candra Khāraiḍa (Kāśī: Nāgarīpracāriṇī Sabhā, 1997 VS/1941), 76–77; James Fawns Norton Wise’s (1835–1886), a colonialist scholar and civil surgeon based in Dhaka, Notes on the Races, Castes and Trades of Eastern Bengal (London: Harrison and Sons, 1883), edited with an introduction by Ananda Bhattacharyya (London and New York: Routledge, 2017), 382–383; Harnan Das Varma’s An Account of the Khatris as a Race of Ancient Kshatriyas (Lahore, 1901); and Moti Lal Seth, A Brief Ethnological Survey of the Khattris (Agra: Khattri Hitkari Association, 1905) among others.57. See, for example, folios 66b and 109a.58. See, for instance, folios 33a, 88b, 89b, 102b and 136b.59. On the dynamic transmission of Purāṇic texts, see: Peter C. Bisschop, ‘Vyāsa’s Palimpsest: Tracking Processes of Transmission and Recreation in Anonymous Sanskrit Literature,’ in Perspectives on Lived Religion: Practices–Transmission–Landscape, edited by N. Staring, H. Twiston Davies and L. Weiss (Leiden: Sidestone Press, 2019); Hans Teye Bakker, Holy Ground: Where Art and Text Meet: Studies in the Cultural History of India (Leiden: Brill, 2019).60. Since the manuscript has a modern binding, it is difficult to know whether the original manuscript contained more empty folios at the end of the manuscript. In its current state, there are only five rows of text in the last folio. So, if needed, the scribes could add nine rows of text on the recto and fourteen rows on the verso of the last folio.61. See: folio 1b–2a, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.62. Ayelet Kotler has justifiably dismissed Nishāṭ’s claim that these works were translated by Śaiva writers. See: Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation’, 40.63. See: folio 113b–114a, Eton Pote 282, Cambridge University Library; and folios 2a–2b, IO Islamic 760, British Library.64. Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation’, 41–42.65. See: folio 2a, Ms. Or 14341, British Library.66. See: folio 114a, Eton Pote 282, Cambridge University Library; and folio 3a, IO Islamic 760, British Library.67. One such section features in Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation,’ 44–45.68. Prakash, ‘Paratexting Persian Purāṇas,’ 180.69. Prakash, ‘Paratexting Persian Purāṇas,’ 182.70. Sotheby’s, Fine Oriental Manuscripts and Miniatures (London: Sotheby’s, 1986): 200.71. Italicization in the original.72. Muhammad Isa Waley, Supplementary Handlist of Persian Manuscripts, 1966–1998 (London: British Library, 1998): 14.73. This table is based on the details found in the published catalogues and handlists of British archives, libraries and collections. In a few catalogue entries, the calendar conversation from AH to CE were either incomplete or incorrect. I have rectified them in the table. For the count of folios, I have relied solely on the details provided in published catalogues and handlists.74. The acquisition column denotes the period during which a given manuscript most likely came into the possession of British Orientalists, civil servants, traders, agents and travelers to India and was subsequently sold, donated and/or deposited to the archives, libraries and/or other private collections in the UK. As the table reveals, the circulation and acquisition history of several manuscripts are sketchy and uncertain.75. See the endnote 74 above regarding the accuracy of this column.76. For codicological details of the manuscript, see: Shiva Mihan, ‘Eton Pote 82 (Eton College Library, Eton College)’, Fihrist: Union Catalogue of Manuscripts from the Islamicate World, accessed 17 April 2025, https://www.fihrist.org.uk/catalog/manuscript_15421; D. S. Margoliouth, Catalogue of the Oriental Manuscripts in the Library of Eton College (Oxford: Horace Hart, 1904), no. 156: 20–21.77. Kotler, ‘The Persian Translation’, 36–37.78. For additional details on this manuscript, see: Hermann Ethé, Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office (Oxford: The India Office, 1903), vol. 1, column 1093, no. 1958.79. Ursula Sims-Williams, ‘“White Mughal” Richard Johnson and Mir Qamar al-Din Minnat’, Asian and African Studies Blog, British Library, accessed 17 April 2025, https://blogs.bl.uk/asian-and-african/2014/04/white-mughal-richard-johnson-and-mir-qamar-al-din-minnat.html.80. Muzaffar Alam and Seema Alavi record the years of his arrival and departure as 1757 and 1788 respectively. See: Muzaffar Alam and Seema Alavi, A European Experience of the Mughal Orient: The Iʿjāz-i Arsalānī (Persian Letters, 1773–1779) of Antoine-Louis Henri Polier (New Delhi: Oxford University Press), 3–8. Klaus Karttunen, however, notes that Polier arrived at Madras in 1759 and returned to Europe in 1789. See: Klaus Karttunen, ‘Polier, Antoine-Louis-Henri,’ Who was Who of Indian Studies, URL (as accessed on 18 April 2025): https://whowaswho-indology.info/4832/polier-antoine-louis-henri/. According to Ursula Sims-Williams, Johnson arrived in Calcutta in 1770 and served as an employee of the East India Company until 1785. See: Ursula Sims-Williams, ‘“White Mughal” Richard Johnson’.81. See: Ethé, Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts, vol. 1, column 1093, no. 1958.82. See: Waley, Supplementary Handlist, 14.83. E. Denison Ross and Edward G. Browne, Catalogue of Two Collections of Persian and Arabic Manuscripts preserved in the India Office Library (London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1902), no. LXXVII, 59; Charles Wilkins, ‘XIX. A Catalogue of Oriental Manuscripts Presented to the Royal Society by Sir William and Lady Jones’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London (1799), vol. 89, 582–593; Charles Wilkins, ‘XXIV. A Catalogue of Sanscrita Manuscripts presented to the Royal Society by Sir William and Lady Jones’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London (1798), vol. 88, 582–593.84. Wilkins, ‘XIX. A Catalogue of Oriental Manuscripts’, 340.85. See: ‘ms. 44740 (SOAS Library, School of Oriental and African Studies)’, Fihrist: Union Catalogue of Manuscripts from the Islamicate World, accessed 1 June 2025, https://www.fihrist.org.uk/catalog/manuscript_8547.86. I am grateful to Alex Kither, the Curator of the Rare Books & Manuscripts at the SOAS Library, University of London, for sharing the provenance details of this manuscript. For an official report of D. D. Dickson’s bequest, see: Report of the Governing Body, Statement of Accounts and Departmental Reports for the Year ending 31 July 1943 (London: School of Oriental and African Studies, 1943), 17.87. The folio 11a has one painting with two labels. The painting is divided into two sections: the upper section shows Brahma standing next to the centrally positioned Mahārudra; and the lower section shows four sons of Brahma who are collectively known as “Sanakādika” meaning ”Sanaka and others”. Sanaka is the eldest of the four sons, and the rest of them are Sanandana, Sanātana and Sanatkumāra. They are also referred to as the Kumāra brothers. They are said to be born of the mind of Brahma and vowed – against the wish of their creator Brahma – to remain celebate eternally.88. The next word is hastī [هستی] and its first letter -ha [ه] begins right above the letter -va of jilvah [جلوه]. Since the lower detached stroke of the Nastaʿlīq letter -ha in hastī [ہستی] covers most of the space above the -ah ending of jilvah, it was difficult for scribe to fit in a hamzah there. It is difficult to know whether the scribe intentionally arranged the letters to eliminate the space for hamazah or whether it was the fallout of writing fastly. Even though the lower stroke looks like the hamzah and may even serve as a visual cue for the missing hamzah, their orthographic forms are distinct and dissimilar to each other.89. The -za of fazāyandah is undotted in the manuscript.90. This word appears in the marginalia of the manuscript. Download PDF Share Back to Top Related research People also read lists articles that other readers of this article have read. Recommended articles lists articles that we recommend and is powered by our AI driven recommendation engine. Cited by lists all citing articles based on Crossref citations.Articles with the Crossref icon will open in a new tab. People also read Recommended articles Cited by Resisting Religious Labels in Early Modern Punjab: Why Place Still Matters Purnima Dhavan South Asian Studies Published online: 29 Oct 2025 Open Access Interreligious Interactions in South Asia Ankur Barua et al. South Asian Studies Published online: 6 Jan 2026 Free Access Textual Multi-Religiosity: The Usage of Indian Religious Lexica and Symbols in Parsi Sanskrit Martina Palladino South Asian Studies Published online: 15 Oct 2025 View more To cite this article: Reference style: APA Chicago Harvard Citation copied to clipboard Copy citation to clipboard Reference styles above use APA (6th edition), Chicago (16th edition) & Harvard (10th edition) Download citation Download a citation file in RIS format that can be imported by citation management software including EndNote, ProCite, RefWorks and Reference Manager. Choose format: RIS BibTex RefWorks Direct Export Choose options: Citation Citation & abstract Citation & references Download citations Your download is now in progress and you may close this window Did you know that with a free Taylor & Francis Online account you can gain access to the following benefits? Choose new content alerts to be informed about new research of interest to you Easy remote access to your institution's subscriptions on any device, from any location Save your searches and schedule alerts to send you new results Export your search results into a .csv file to support your research Have an account? Login now Don't have an account? Register for free Save your searches and schedule alerts to send you new results. Register for free Login now View all benefits of registration Choose new content alerts to be informed about new research of interest to you Export your search results into a .csv file to support your research Save your searches and schedule alerts to send you new results Information for Authors R&D professionals Editors Librarians Societies Open access Overview Open journals Open Select Dove Medical Press F1000Research Opportunities Reprints and e-prints Advertising solutions Accelerated publication Corporate access solutions Help and information Help and contact Newsroom All journals Books Keep up to date Register to receive personalised research and resources by email Sign me up Copyright © 2026Informa UK Limited Privacy policy Cookies Terms & conditions Accessibility Registered in England & Wales No. 010729545 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG ×View all notes ✓Thanks for sharing!×AddToAnyMore…
