A NOTE ON TAMIL RELATIONS WITH 
SOUTH THAILAND AND THE IDENTIFICATION 
OF PTOLEMY'S TACOLA 
by 
J.J. Boeles 
Western historinns have warned time and again against an 
exaggerated view of early Indian influence in the Far East. They 
make their point by reminding us that none of the countries in this 
area have ever been under colonial rule by any Indian Power; 1 that 
each of the countries in the Far East has developed its own identity 
whilst incorporating outside influences compatible with its national 
character. In this light, let us briefly discuss-as have many before 
us, an aspect of Tamil relations with South Thailand. The epigra­
phical evidence available consists of two Tamil stone inscriptions: one 
found in district Takuapa, province Phangnga, on the west coast of 
peninsular Thailand:. the othel· at Vat Mahadhatu in the town of 
Nakorn Srithamaraj ( Ligor) on the east coast of peninsular Thailand. 
Both inscriptions have been published by Coedes 2 who says that the 
only document on the Malay Peninsula which may be attributable to 
the first half of the ninth century is the Tamil stone inscription found 
at Takuapa. This mentions that a tank or pond named Avani~Nara~xam, 
dug by the chief of Nmigur, was placed under the protection of the 
members of the Ma1}igraman, residing in the military camp. Coedes 
points out that Ava1li-naraymJa, being a surname of the Pallava King 
Nandivarman III who reigned from A.D. 826 to 849, may indicate an 
approximate date for the inscription 3 ~one of the few documents found 
I Cocdes, G., Les peuples de la pbzimule indochinoise, Paris 1962, p. 54. 
2 Coed0s, G., Recueil des Inscriptions du Siam, lie Partie, 19 61, stone 
inscriptions XXVI and XXIX. According to Prof. Hultzsch, trnnslator of 
inscription XXVI, the language is Tamil and the script Tamil of an archaic 
type. The language of the second face of Inscription XX!X is also Tamil 
as is the script, though of a later date than that of Inscription XXVI-possibly 
Chola period. 
3 Coedes, G., Les Etats liindouisf.s d' lndochine et d' lndonf.sie, Paris I 9 64, 
pp, 200-01. 
222 J, J. Boeles 
outside India, in a vernacular of that country:1- Unfortunately, the 
Tamil inscription from Wat Mahadhatu, dating from the Chola 
dynasty, is too damaged to yield much information. 5 
The site of the discovery of the Tamil inscription at Khau 
Brab Narayarya close to Takuapa ( tahua =lead and formerly also tin; 
pa=jungle, forest), yielded also three damaged stone sculptures: a 
standing four-armed Hindu deity, which, as Coecles suggests, could 
possibly represent Siva, and a male and female deity. These are illus­
trated by le May in his Buddhist llrt in S'iam (figures 41 and 42 ). 
The style of the figures being clearly South Indian, more specifically 
Pallava, these could well elate from the same period as the Tamil 
inscription found nearby.6 In fact, we may even speak of a Tamil 
influence in the Pallava style of these three almost life .. sizc stone 
sculpture~ now partially covered by a tree. Obviously no longer in 
situ, the original site of the figure:s and the inscription has not been 
established with certainty. 
The implications of the inscription and of iw position relative 
to the related Pallava-style sculptures at. Takuapa, has been most 
recently discussed by Alastair Lamb.7 Following a visit to the site 
he proposes that the Tamil inscription and the three :stone figures 
were removed from an original location on the plain called Tung Tlik 
(tung= plain, tlik=stone [brick] building) on Kakao Island 8 at the 
mouth of the Takuapa River. Further, from surface finds at Tung 
·---············· - -----------------·-· 
4 Ibid, p. 62. 
5 A third Tamil inscription known in the Far East, is that of Lobu Tuwa in 
Sumatra which dates from A.D. 1088. See Krom, N.J., lfindoe Ja;·aansche 
Geschiedenis, The Hague 1931, p. 304. 
6 For the story of the discovery of the three stone figures and the Tamil 
inscription, see Bourke, W. W ., 'Some Archaeological Notes on Monthon 
Puket', Journal of the Siam Society vol 2, 1905, pp, 55-57 with facsimile of 
a portion of the inscription. 
7 Lamb, A., 'Takuapa. The Probable Site of a Pre-Malaccan Entrepot in the 
Malay Peninsula' pp. 76-86 in Bastin, J. and Roolvink, R. (eds), ll1alayan 
and Indonesian Studies, 1964. 
8 Prof. Lamb uses the name 'Kakao Island'. Apparently this is meant to be the 
name of the island ~nmnwn1 (Koh Ko Kao) in which Tung Tiik i~ situated. 
I 
I 
I 0 j 
.g,. 
I 
I 
• 8- "" 
INDIAN 
fo( 
BOUNDA~IES 
-··-·· HIGHWAY w w a w 111 
CHANG WAT, AM PHlJR ® 0 RAIL ROAD IIIII- ...,,...,_ 
t-iAE. NAM ( RIVE.R ) · ..-c:::--~ RoAD UNDER 
--,~ ---l CONSTRUCTION 
,.. * ~.~ * ~ /'f' 
MAP OF ROYAL INSTITUTE OF THAILAND 
( 1961. nr. 2) 
(;'\ 
c ~ 
----~-y~~-~ ~~--~~~~~------\---~~~4--------r~---------------------tg 
I . 
OC!:AN 
SeALE 1: 2.,500,000 
60 
.. 
eo 
cf' 
1o Km. 
0 
1\. 
A NO'I'E liN 'I'A~lll, IU•:J.,~'J'lllNS IVI'I'Il SOUTH THAILANIJ 225 
Ttik, Lamb is led to believe that this could have been the site of 'an 
entrepot situated at the mid-point of the sea routes between the ports 
of the Indian Ocean and those of the Chinese Seas.'9 This is an im­
portant conclusion; however, it is one long since arrived at. In 1935, 
F.H. Giles ( Phya Indra Montri ), late President of the Siam Society, 
from information supplied by Scott, an eyewitness, remarked that 'it 
seems quite clear that Tung Tiik was a great emporium or mart where 
traders met, and it is probable that the gold dust he [Scott] refers to 
as having been found in the sand amongst the ruins was either an 
article of trade or the currency used.'1° Giles also indicates why the 
watershed between the Takuapa and Menam Luang rivers was of 
importance in establishing an overland route across the peninsula 
from Takuapa to a site on the Bay of Bandon close to the ancient 
town of Jaiyu which may have been a centre in the maritime Sr!vijaya 
Empire. 11 
The gold dust or Takuapa brings to mind the considerable 
number or gold ornaments which have been excavated from the Funan 
site at Oc-Eo in the region of the delta of the Mekong; more particu­
larly in that the beads associated with the Funan civilisation have 
also been found at Tung Ti.ik. Though Lamb's surface :finds suggest 
a seventh to tenth century civilisation at Tung TUk, 12 we are reluc-
9 Lamb, ojJ. cit., p, 82. Trade routes crossing the Peninsula are discussed by 
Cocdes, Les Etats.,, oj>. cit., p, 60. 
1 0 See 'Remarks on the Land Routes across the Malay Peninsula,' .Tuunwl of the 
Siam Society, vol 28, 1935, pp. 79-84. In Mr. Scott's relevant letter, dated 
4th January 1934 and included in Ibid,, pp. 83-84 it is stated 'that in 1908 
or 1909 a considerable amount of coarse and fine gold was recovered from 
the top two or three feet of the ground at Tong Teuk on the Island of Kow 
Kaow, Takuapa'. Mr. Scott, a tin miner, makes it clear that this gold must 
have been brought to the site by man. 
11 This route has been explored by H.G. Quaritch Wales, see his 'A Newly 
Explored Route of Ancient Indian Cultural Expansion,' lllilian Art and 
Letters, vol 9 no 1, 1935 and the romantic Towards llnglw1·, in the 
footstejJs of the Indian lnvade1·s, 19 3 7. See Giles, op. cit., pp, 81-82 regarding 
the possibility of a west-east route across the peninsula between Srivijaya 
on Sumatra and Nakorn Thom, u centre in the Khmer Kingdom, via Sri 
Mahaphoti in Thailand. 
12 Lamb, ojJ, cit. p. 82. 
A section of INDIA EXTRA GANG EM from Ptolemy's woodcut map, circa A.D. 1541 
TAB V LA V N DE: 
cimaAfi~ 
contind I ndi4m atra Gan;,'lm)(!J' 
S;,n.mJmregwnttn. 
~~~iii~ S I .£ tabula undecima tropico f!liuo gradibus 17.quinra P.tc. 
corinctlndiamextra Gaw Randamarcoramaximadicm habet hor. 
,.gem,& Sinas. IJ.14.Etdill:at abAkx.tndriaucrfusor 
· Paralldusipfiusmediusfe nrmhor.7 !.fer~. 
r( candcm ration em habet MccropolisArgyrc in labadij inful;z,ma• 
quam meridianus. ximam diem ha~ct hor.l.t !. Oilhtcf! 
CirCII'![crihitur .uttcm t.JJIJla abAiexiidria uerlus ortum,aultr .. ti 'p.1 
Abortu tcrraincognira. lo firper .rcrram clcuaco .hor.7 octai.J~ 
Amcrididlnu magno,& Gangetico,qui parr~.HJCquocp fol b:s ·~•mno fupru 
in pel ago (unt }ndico, UCrtlccm fitdlltans a trop!CO hya"mllll, 
Ab occidcntdndiaintra Gangcm, ex urracp parte partes css d· 
A fcptetrionibuspartc Saccarum,& Scy1 
· chi a extra lmaum montc,arq; Scrica. 
lnf&;nicru 'iuitatii l nr:M mra G.u!f;·F 
Tacola maximam die habcrhorarii fqtrif 
noCtialium l.t *.EtdJH:at abAiexadria 
ucrfus Ol'[U ho.61. Hie quoq; fol bis in 
an no Jidi.rpra ucrriccm,dilh.m..l rropi1 
coa:olbuo aburra'll partcgra.7.? 1· 
Zaba: maximam dkm hJ.ba hor.l.t 4.& 
:~liqmJ plu8,0i!l:att'fl ab Alcxan.ucrfus 
orrum hor. 7 !.Hie t1uoq;fol his in an1 
nol1t fl•pra ucrcicc,di!Uis hropico ocfti 
uo Jb ucraqqiartc gradibus 78 j. 
Tofal:lrnaximam diem habed10r.1J f.Et 
clili:at ab Alcxan.uerfusortii ho • .s.Hic 
:~utcm Col r~md in an no fit fupra ucrti, 
cern in ipfo rropico a-l1iuo. 
Tugma maximiidicmhabct.hor. IJ J ~. 
bdiftar.ab Alcxan,ucrfusortii ho.c> ~. 
H ic quo~ fol bis in an no fie fi1pra um 
tkctn ,difhns a tropico £fbuo ab utraqt 
partcgradibus 18 ~· 
Trilingu maximiidicbabethor.IJ oc1aua 
parcc.13t dilhr ab Akxadria ucrfus or' 
1uhor.6~,Hic quoqJfolbisinanno fit 
fupra ucrticcm, diltas a tropico ocHiuo 
ab utractl partcgradibus 311 {. 
~lam1ra maximam du:m habet horarii 
u 1 P~t diCtat ab Alexandria ucrfusor 
tum hor.tSj,Hicfol bis in anno fir fi11 
pra ucrticcm,diilans ab utraqJ p:u-cc .1. 
InSinis A(pichra maximam diem haber 
hor.IJ.Et dilhc ab Alcxadria ucrfus or 
tum ho.7 Ho.Hicqt.icqJfolbisinanno 
firfuprauerdcc,d;(taus a tropico ocfii, 
uo,ab utrag; parte gra.ff i tt• 
Sinocmccropolismaximamdii: habet ho. 
11 j ocraua partc.Et diftat ab Alexan, 
dria ucrfus ortu horis B.fm~.Hic quoq­
•fol bisin an no ficfupra ucrciccm qt1um 
diltar a tropico hy bcrno ab utraq; part 
tc grad1bus Bz. f. 
Cawgara Ita rio max imam die habet hor. 
12. i.Er diftat ab Alexandria poloAw 
firali fupa tcrram cia to ad orrii horis 
7 H.Hicquoq; (ol bisinanno ficfupra. 
ucrticcm,dill:ans a cropico hyberno ab 
mra'll parccgradibus cSS, ~· 
VndedmaAfioctabula conrinct a parti' 
bus IJ6, aut per fomcs Oiamonis Ru1 
minis,qui G;,.n~i admifccwr 1 J+ ~.·uf'l! 
ad parces 18o.Ec fie LonginJdo paruu 
am++· aut 46. !. Latiwoo ab ocqumo1 
ctiali ad Borcam parcibus J7· Aha-qui 
noC!iali ucroad aullrum Sf.ud?.Fitt) 
Latitudo+j !.aut¥· %f 
Ptolemy's reference to Taco1a and Cattigara, in latin, on back of map, 
circa A.D. 1541 