TWO ANCIENT SHIPWRECKS IN THE 
GULF OF THAILAND: 
A REPORT ON ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS 
by 
Pensak Chagsuchinda Howitz* 
In 1975, the author presented a project prop osal to the Danish 
Government and Mr. Ole Crumlin-Pederseni, Director of the Viking 
Ship Museum in Roskilde, Denmark, for a thorough and scientific study 
of the underwater wreckage of ancient cargo ships lying in the Gulf of 
Thailand. As a result, beginning in early 1975 the Fine Arts Depart­
ment of the Ministry of Education, in co-operation with the Royal Thai 
Navy and Danish experts, conducted exp«Jratory excavations . The 
first director of the expedition was Mr. Crumlin-Pedersen . In 1977 work 
was continued under the supervision of the author. To date a total 
of eighteen ships has been investigated . 
The investigations were divided into two phases during 1977: (a) 
discovery and exploration of sunken junks by plotting and following 
possible ancient trade routes taken by cargo vessels; and (b) concentrated 
excavations at the Sattahip site2. Sources for the extensive preliminary 
* Advisor, Faculty of Archeology, Silpakorn University, Bangkok; and Chief 
Project Expert, Underwater Archeol ogical Sur vey, Department of Fine Arts , 
Ministr y of Educat ion. 
I. Mr. Ole Crumlin-Pedersen is the underwater archeologist who directed the 
excavation of five Viking ships found in Roskildefjord, Denmark, 1957 -1962; 
author of "Vik ing ships", Congre ss of Under water Activ ities, 1962 (London, 
1968) ; "The Skulde1ev ships" , Acta A rclzaeologica, vol. XXXIX, 195 8; Fem 
Vikingskibe (Roskilde , 1969). 
2. The Sattabip ship wreck was explored by a joint Thai-D anish group in 197 5. 
The ship lies at a depth of 42-44 meters on the seabed of Sattabip Bay, Chon 
Buri Province. The ship is about 12-H meters in width and 32-34 meters 
in length. To date, almos t 4,000 pieces of ceramic ware have been salv aged 
from the cargo compartments . More than 7 5 per cent of the ceramics is 
Sukhothai and Sawankhalok products ; the rest is Annamese ware and a number 
of underglazed dishes with an unclear identit y. The vessel is made of teak , 
and is about 400 years old . The utensils found indicate that the crew of the 
ship was mainly Siamese . 
2 Pensak Chagsuchinda Howitz 
research and study included historical records of the relations between 
Siam and foreign countries during the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries A.D., records of ancient Chinese maritime trade routes, stone 
inscriptions, and chronological records of the twelfth to eighteenth 
centuries A.D. 
The investigations indicate that three ancient Siamese maritime 
trade routes, dating from Sukhotbai and early Ayutthaya times, may 
have existed. The first trade route (see map) progresses from the Chao 
Pbraya River delta along the eastern coast of the Gulf of Thailand, to 
the Thai province ofTrad on the Cambodian border. The second route 
goes directly south, bypassing Sattahip, down to Nakhon Si Thammarat , 
Songkhla, Phatth~lung and Pattani. The third route beads westward 
from the Chao Phraya along the coast to Prachuap Khiri Khan, 
Chumphon and Pattani. 
Explorations have revealed seven wrecks along the first route, ten 
along the second, and one along the third. One very fascinating obser­
vation was the differences between ship's cargoes along each route . 
For example, the eastern coast wrecks contained very little Sukhothai or 
Sawankhalok ceramic ware. Wrecks on second route, however, bore 
large quantities of ceramic ware, some of which is of very high quality . 
Some wrecks along this route also contained Chinese and Annamese 
ceramics as well. The third route yielded a smaller ship size than the 
other two routes, and the quantities and quality of cargo were notably 
inferior. 
Of the eighteen wrecks discovered so far, four are of note, and three 
of these have been studied in depth: at Sattabip, Prasae 3, Pattaya and 
Kob Kradad. The Prasae wreck contained as much cargo as that at 
Sattabip, although there bas not been enough time to explore it fully . 
The wrecks at Kob Kradad and Pattaya will be covered in this report , 
3. The Prasae ship lies on the seabed in Rayong Province. Great amounts of 
ceramic ware have been lost through pirate diggings. The wreck is a very 
interesting one, lying at a depth of 44 meters. Most of the cargo is Annamese 
and Sawankhalok products. 
•· 
\ 
I 
/ 
.-..I 
'- ,.... f1611~ 
~~- - - -~ .. 
\ ' : ) 
\ . 
w ··-- . .f 
'·· ) 
, 
I 
Map of possible sea routes taken by Siamese traders from the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries A.D. 
4 Pensak Chagsuchinda Howitz 
while the discoveries at Sattahip and Prasae will be the subject of a 
longer, more detailed paper at a later date . Handicapped by a lack of 
adequately trained personnel, work nevertheless proceeded very well, 
yielding large quantities of artifacts. An on-site laboratory was 
constructed to provide not only immedia -te and detailed observation s, 
but to preserve the specimens from sudden and extensive deterioration 
from contact with the air, and from accidents which could occur in 
transit to distant laboratories. The artifacts were soaked in continuously 
circulating fresh water for four weeks, after which the coral and debris 
were carefully removed. The objects thus properly preserved, detailed 
observations were noted and all objects were fully cataloged, pho~o­
graphed and described on site. 
Descriptions of the two wrecks below, those at Koh Kradad and 
Pattaya, begin with a short history of the discovery of the site and a 
description of the site itself, followed by details of the excavation and 
of the finds studied . A short discussion of the results of the study and 
analysis concludes each section. 
The author wishes to note the timely and very professional contri­
butions of several people who greatly facilitated an otherwise very 
difficult project. Mr . Nikom Musigakana4, archeologist with the 
Fine Arts Department, and Lieutenant Nakorn Aranyanak5, a Royal 
Thai Navy frogman, both went to Denmark for extensive training 
in unde rwa ter archeology. Lieutenant Nakorn worked with Mr. 
Crumlin-Pedersen for . three months to obtain valuable first-hand 
experien ce in under wate r excavations and techn iques. Mr. Pong Sono of 
the Divisi on of Wood Analysis, Royal Forestry Department of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Co-operatives, did excellent work on the wood and 
lea ves. Dr. Cbyagrit Siri -Upatbum of the Institute of Atoms for Peace 
4. Mr. Nikom was working as the manager of this project dur ing 1974-1 976 . 
5. Lt. Nakorn Aranyanak has been responsible for the exploratory excavation 
of the Sattahip ship since 197 4, and has been lead ing the ac tual excavation of 
the same wreck from December 1976 to May 1977. His report on the exca­
vation of the Sattahip ship will be published at a late r date. 
TW O ANC!Et\T SHIPWRE CKS IN THE GULF OF THAILA ND 5 
did the Ct ~ dating. Professor Kaset Pitakpaivan of the Geological 
Survey Division, Department of Mineral Resources of the Ministry of 
Industry, also provided valuable analysis. These three advisors went to 
Denmark in the Summer of 1977 for further studies. Mrs. Chiraporn 
Aranyanak, conservator at the Bangkok National Museum, who also 
trained in Denmark in conservation and underwater archeology, 
was responsible for immediate preservation and conservation of the 
ceramics and artifacts salvaged . 
A special debt of gratitude is owed to the Danish Ministry of 
Education, which contributed Danish experts to work with the official 
team, and which granted a series of scholarships to Thai archeologists 
and divers to go to Denmark for studies and training. 
·The Koh Kradad shipwreck 
Discovery 
Kob ("Island") Kradad is a small island located off the eastern coast 
of the Gulf of Thailand, in Trad Province. The immediate area is peaceful 
and calm, with beautiful coral outcroppings in the shallow waters. 
Local fishermen have known for many years that there are several 
shipwrecks scattered offshore, and have experience in diving and 
collecting cargo from them. Our official survey group succeeded in 
locating a shipwreck in co-operation with one fisherman, who reluctantly 
led us to the proper location of the wreck to be described. 
The exploratory excavation took place in February 1977. The 
working period was limited, and we were unfortunately handicapped by 
a lack of trained personnel. The information obtained from the wreck 
is, therefore, moderate; further investigation will be carried out in the 
near futur e. 
The site and excavation 
The wreck is imbedded in a coral reef under two meters of wate r 
south of Kradad Islan d, and only a few hundred meters from the coas t. 
Being at a dis tance from the dee p rift of about 40 meters, it is no wond er 
6 Pensak Chagsuchinda Howitz 
that the site has been subjected to pirate digging for several years. While 
the ship was not covered by sand, coral has gradually taken possession 
of the surrounding area. 
A great number of hard, grey stones are found in and around the 
wreck, covering an area of approximately 10 by 20 meters . Planks, 
lumps of wood, pottery and sherds are scattered around the site within 
an area of about 20 by 40 meters. 
Naval divers, under the direction of Lieutenant Nakorn, started 
the excavation by removing the coral and stones from the northern area 
of the site, digging a trench and collecting planks, wood fragments, 
stones and other artifacts for further study. Before leaving the s~te, . the 
stones that had been removed were replaced in order to protect and 
preserve the wreck from damage. 
Finds 
In general, the finds can be classified into the following categories : 
wooden objects, stones, and pottery. 
(a) Wooden objects 
Planks and wooden pegs. The planks and most of the wooden 
remains pictured here are side-planks and wooden pegs. Several pieces 
found scattered around the site have been sent for Ct 4 dating. 
A double-planking method was used at the joints. Planks were 
joined lengthwise with hardwood pegs (Terminalis sp., indigenous only 
to southeast Asia and Africa) 6 • Pegs varied in size, though each had 
one end sharpened in a fou·r-bladed form. Some of the specimens pulled 
from between two planks were transferred to Mr. Pong for further study. 
The samples depicted in figure I have a diameter . (d) of 3.2 centimeters 
(em) and 3.1 em, respectively, and a length or height (bt) of 12 em and 
6 em. Actual length of the .pegs used is unknown, as thus far no complete 
6. I.H. Burkill, A D ictionary of the Economic Product s of the Malay Peninsula 
.I .. 111" I : 1212, 2 : ! 319 (Kuala Lumpur, 1966); Pong Sono, 1J'Yl1J1'11'll!l~'Yll.l·mM1'11lll UJ 
1 'll. hmm~flnM1L 1a 1m1m'l!a~m3.1~~1l1m (Bangkok; Division of Wood Analy sis, 
Ministry of Agriculture; 1977). 
TWO ANCIENT SHIPWRECKS IN THE GULF OF THAILAND 7 
sample has been found. This type of peg is known to have been used by 
traditional Chinese boat-builders7. 
(b) Sto11es 
Large numbers of rectangular granite stones of various sizes 
littered the entire site. The specimen depicted here is 3.8 em, 7.5 em 
and 12.6 em in thickness, width and length respectively (fig. 2). 
(c) Potte,.y 
Several pieces of the pottery were raised for study. The site has 
been disturbed by pirate digging for more than ten years, and undoubtedly 
other complete and valuable finds have been stolen from the wrecks. 
The pottery from the Koh Kradad site will need much research and 
further discussion. 
Sugar palm pots . Small, baked clay pots (fig. 3) had been filled with 
palm sugar for transport and sale. They are made of clay mixed with 
coarse sand, and have reddish-yellow coloration . (UNEX-K-47/77 8, 
d 12 em, ht 5 em; UNEX-K-41 j77, d 11 em, ht 5.5 ern.) 
Basin. This specimen (fig. 4) is of unglazed red clay with no 
decorative design. (UNEX-K-71/77, d 30.5 em.) 
Vases. The vase with a long slender neck and flared mouth (fig. 5) 
bas an underglaze decorative design in iron-black color, with three 
circular band s on the shoulder and two on the lower body. The design, 
framed in a circle, comprises a set of "blusb-stroke"9. The unglazed 
footrim is slightly carved, and beige in color. The design bears a close 
resemblance to Sukhothai products, but the piece is unquestionably from 
Sawankbalok kilns. (UNEX-K-20/77, d 5.2 em, ht 6 em.) 
7. Chaen Patchusanon, H istory of the Thai Navy (Bangkok, 1967). 
8. Artifact numbers of the field catalog of the underwater excavation, 1977 
(Bangkok National Museum). 
9. For samples of "blush- stroke", see William Willetts, Ceramic Art of Southeast 
A sia (Singapore, 1971 ). An example appears on the shoulder of a Sawankhalok 
vase, p. 139, fig 178. 
8 Pensak Chagsucbinda Howitz 
The glazed design of the pear-shaped vase or bottle with the flared 
mouth (fig. 6) bas been deteriorated by the sea, and is very dirty. It 
also is from the Sawankhalok kilns . (UNEX-K-20/77, d 5.2 em, ht 6 
em.) 
Boxes. The shape and decorative designs of the four boxes 
collected from the site (fig. 7) are typical of Sawankbalok covered 
boxes. 
The specimen illustrated at upper left is Sawaokbalok ware, 
decorated in an iron-black underglaze. The body is painted with 
rectangular panels, alternating with a cross-hatched I o design, with the 
base and footrim unglazed and beige in color. (UNEX-K-38 / 77 d 8.7 em, 
bt 5.5 em.) 
The specimen on bottom right, also Sawankhalok ware, is painted 
in brown monochrome .underglaze. The body is covered with a set of 
circular bands above tbe unglazed footrim, and a group of vertical lines 
surrounds the mouth rim . (UNEX-K-37 ;77, d 18 em, bt 6 em.) 
Lids of covered boxes. The lids in figures 8 and 9, unfortunately, 
do not fit the illustrated boxes nor do they fit others found at the site. 
The handle rising from the centre of each lid appears in one of two 
forms. 
(i) Lids with a lotus-bud handle (fig. 8) have an iron-black underglaze 
decoration, with six circular bands above a set of six decorative panels. 
These panels form a continuous pattern between the lid and the body of 
the box, and are divided into two sets: three with a floral design, and 
thr ee in a cross-hatch ed pattern. The characteristics of the specimens 
are identical to tho se produced from the Sawankbalok kilns. (UNEX­
K-16/77, d 7.5 em, bt 2.5 em; UNEX-K-24/77, d 9 em, ht 4 em.) 
(ii ) Lids with a fruit-sh ape d handle (fig. 9) have the form of a four­
sepal man gosteen stalk , and are decorated with three or five ungl azed, 
monochrome , circular bands. These lids also share six rect angular 
10. [bid .. pp . 144-145. 
TWO ANCLE,\1"1" SHIPWRECKS LN THE GULF OF THAILAND 9 
panels with the body of the box: three of a cross-hatched design, 
and three floral. A series of vertical lines separates the panels. 
(UNEX-K-3/77, d 7 ern, ht 2.5 ern; UNEX-K-2/77, d 7.5 em, bt 3 em .) 
Lid of a jar. Found among the coral and stones was an earthen­
ware lid, probably the lid of a jar (fig. 10). It bas a coarse, unglazed 
body with a lotus-bud handle. The paste is a reddish-yellow color 
mixed with coarse sand. This type of lid is commonly found among 
Sukhothai and Sawankhalok products. (UNEX-K-50/77, d 13 em, ht 3 
em.) 
Jars. Two large, brown-monochrome, Sawankhalok storage jars 
with four ring-handles were safely raised from the wreck, one of which 
appears in figure II. Both of them have five circular bands decorating 
the neck . A chocolate-brown glaze covers the upper body to the waist. 
The wide, flat, unglazed base is beige in color . (UNEX K-7/77, d 15 
em, ht 55 em; UNEX-K-74/77, d 18 em, ht 38 em .) 
Bowl. A part of a large, red cla y bowl was found, the rim of 
wbicb is everted and the body without decor at ive design. (UNEX-K-
71/77, d 30.5 em.) 
Blue -and-white ceramics . Part of a Min g bowl \VHS found (fig. 12), 
decorated in the center with a blue-painted bird on flowering plan ts, 
encircled by two rings. The blue design on tb e outer cavetto compri ses 
panels ?f growing plants and lotus flowers . The design is in underglaze 
with a duller blue color. (UNEX-K-26/77.) 
The piece in figure 13 belongs to a blue-and-white Ming bowl 
bearing a limpid design. The glaze is whiter than that in figure 12, 
and the blue is bluer and purer. The base and foot design is in 
underglaze, with the center of the bowl bearing plants and a bird framed 
in a double-ring design. The inside moutbrim is turned slightly outward, 
decorated in wavy lines between circular bands, one above and two 
below. The outer cavetto is painted in underglaze blue in the form of 
lotus panels . The footrim shows traces of adhered sand and wheel lines 
beneath the glaze. (UNEX-K-81 f77, d 14.5 em, bt 8 em.) 
10 Pensak Cbagsucbinda Howitz 
The fragment of a bowl in figure 14 (Ming ware) has a shallow form 
with an everted lip. The inside mouthrim is painted with a floral spray 
beneath a clear glaze. The design in the center of the bowl shows two 
circular bands framing a bird among plants and grasses. The design 
appearing on the outer cavetto (fig. 15) is a free rendering of a marsh 
with two geese swimming among lotus clumps. The footrim is rather 
tall, and clearly shows wheel lines. The glaze on the base has 
deteriorated, permitting the fine white paste to be observed. (UNEX­
K-35/77, d 17 em, ht 7.5 em.) 
Two Ming-ware sherds were noted: the base of a bowl (UNEX-K-
35/77, 10x 4.5 em), and the mouthrim of a bowl with a floral scroll 
design (UNEX-K-29/77, 7.1 x ll.5 em.) 
The Ming specimen in figure 16 is covered with a dull blue-green 
glaze with a wide crackle. The decoration on the outer cavetto is a 
flower design framed in double rings. A decorative band ornaments the 
inside mouthrim (fig. 17), while distinct scrolls adorn the inner cavetto 
and a floral pattern adds disttnction to the center. On the base are 
traces of adhered sand arid wheel lines. (UNEX-K-30/77, ht 6.4 em.) 
Sherds of Ming ware with Chinese characters (fig. 18) include 
two blue-and-white fragments. One is very small, and the characters 
unfortunately have become illegible. The other specimen, however, 
offers interesting information: four of the characters can be identified 
and interpreted. (UNEX -K-79/77, d 4 .5x 7.5 em; UNEX-K-34/77, d 
8x 7 em.) 
Discu ssion and analysi s 
Although explorat ion was short-termed and the excavation not 
exhaustive, the collected finds are quite unique, reveal some interesting 
data and stimulate many unanswered questions. 
TWO ANCIENT SHIPWRECKS IN THE GULF OF THAILAND II 
Why is the wreck located in shallow water not far from a rift? 
How did it arrive there? Did a storm take the ship off-course, or was 
the captain unfamiliar with the particular area? Possibly be was lured 
there by pirates, or became lost in fog, or perhaps he was looking for 
fresh supplies on the island. One can think of many explanations, but 
clearly something catastrophic happened to the ship. It would appear 
that the ship broke apart on the rocks and sank, spreading cargo and 
wood debris over a large area. 
Perhaps the most unusual find at the Koh Kradad site is the 
granite ~tones . Their presence also begs many questions: were they the 
main cargo? If so, what was the ship's destination? From where did 
the stones come, and what was to be their final use? 
At present there is no evidence available to answer those questions. 
There are some areas in Thailand, however, where granite is to be found 
such as Nakhon Sawan, Tak, and the mountainous areas ofChanthaburi 
(60 kilometers from the site). This type of stone has been used in 
Thailand to construct stone walls and pedestals, and for garden 
decoration. Tbe stones could have come from Chanthaburi and been 
loaded on the ship for an unknown destination and purpose. Future 
investigations will hopefully shed more light on this intriguing find. 
Metal objec ts have yet to be discovered at the Koh Kradad site, 
although lead is a common find in other sunken vessels located in the 
• Gulf of Thailand. Around the peg boles small traces of oxidized metal 
were found, but as yet there is not enough evidence to justify the belief 
th at iron nails were used. 
The sugar pots are more crude and primative than those of the 
same type found in othe r sunken ships explored to date, their shapes 
resembling a miniature European wash basin . They were used for 
transporting palm sugar, a n important commerci al product for over 500 
years . Pots of this type are in use for the same purpose in some parts 
of present-day Thailand. 
12 Pensak Cbagsucbinda Howitz 
Distinctions between the Koh Kradad sugar pots and those found 
in other wrecks are easily observed. The former were shaped by hand 
from a very crude baked clay and unglazed. The paste was mixed with 
coarse sand, and all pots are of a reddish-yellow color. Pots from the 
Sattahip wreck are, for example, dark grey in color, and the paste made 
with fine sand. 
At present it would be presumptuous to make any statements 
about their age based only on form and design. This type of earthenware 
does not bear patterns, decorations, incising or stamping from which to 
determine age and type by either relative or paralleled dating technique s. 
Thermoluminescence is perhaps the only reliable technique for calcula­
ting the time when the pots were last heated. 
All present evidence supports the conclusion that the wreck under 
study is an ancient cargo vessel. That is firmly supported by the 
ceramic wares, especially the blue-and-white pieces with Chinese 
characters. The decorative designs on the small, long-necked vase 
establish the identity of Sukbothai-period products contained in the 
wreck. The distinctive "blush-stroke" pattern on the vase is typically 
found on the inner cavetto of fishbowls produced during the Sukhothai 
periodtt . The fruit-shaped, glazed boxes with dark-brown, bandpainted , 
decorative patterns are another indicator of the ship's aget 2• Many 
varieties of such covered boxes were made at the Sawankbalok kilnst3 
from the fourteenth to the early fifteenth centuries A.D. 
Apart from the two vases, no other traces of typical Sukhothai or 
Sawankhalok celadon and decorated ware have been discovered-neither 
dishes with underglazed floral patterns, nor decorative fish designs . 
The typical double-looped jarlets commonly found in ancient graves in 
Calagatan 14 have not been discovered here. One might surmise that the 
II. Charles Nelson Spinks, Th e Ceramic W ares of Siam (Bangkok, The Siam 
Society, 1965), p. 23. 
12. Ibid. , pp. 66, 160-161, plate 27. 
13. Ibid ., p. 69. 
14. Leandro and Cecilia Locsin, Oriental Ceramics Discovered in the Philippin es 
(Tokyo, 1967); Robert B. Fox, "The Calagatan excavations", repri nt from PS, 
TWO ANCI8NT SHJP\VHE CKS JN THE GULF OF T JJ AJLAN D 13 
celadon ware was lost to pirate diggers and souvenir hunters, though 
some of the less valuable broken sherds should be still on site. However, 
to date no celadon fragments have been discovered. 
Possibly tbe most interesting observations concern the blue-and­
white sherds, which were examined by several specialists, including one 
from the Bangkok National Museum and reputable antique dealers, 
who provided much useful information. These sherds are identical to 
those of decorated Chinese ware of the Wan Li period (1573-1619) 
centuries A.D. Generally the designs are birds, geese and flowering 
plants, all typical of Ming-ware decorationl 5 • The characters themselves 
are painted on the outer cavetto of the bowl. 
Of the four legible characters, the first two are: /A' signifying 
a 
the year and date. Tbe second is open to interpretation: -fi meaning 
"to be" or "to stay". The last word: >j- carries a dictionary meaningl 6 
of "hall", "room" or "section". This~ord is classified in the "ball­
mark" group of Ming dynasty (1368-1644) in inscriptions, marks and 
charactersi 7 • 
Most of the Chinese marks or characters which occur on the cavetto 
or center of the bowl are of a poetic natureis. One possible interpre­
tation is that they indicate the time and place the poetry was composed. 
While that may not be a correct assumption, the characters bear evidence 
of the late Ming period and thus provide strong indicators establishing 
their identity as Ming ware. 
VII no. 3, 1959; Robert B. Fox, "The prehis tor y of the Philippines", Hemi­
sphere, 1968, pp. 1 0-16; M. Joseph Adrian, Chinese and Annamese Ceram ics 
Found in the Philippines and Indonesia (London, 1973), p. 10 (cj. grave of mo­
ther and child: excavation at Santa Ana, 1968). 
15. K..L. Hobson, The Wares of the Ming Dynasty (Tokyo , 1975), p. 120 . 
16. W.F. Mayers, The Chinese Reader's Manual (Shanghai, 1974) . 
1 7. Burton and Hobson, Handbook of Marks on Pottery and Porcelain (London, 
1912); R.L. Hobson , op . cit . 
18) S.W. Bushell, Description of Chinese Pottery and Porcelain: Being a transla tion 
of the T'ao Sh uo (Oxfor d, 1910); M. Joseph Adrian , Ming Porcelains (London, 
1971). 
14 Pensak Chagsuchinda Howitz 
The Koh Kradad shipwreck was evidently a sea adventurer during 
the early period of Ayuttbaya, and was wrecked no later than the 
mid-seventeenth century A.D. 
The Pattaya shipwreck 
Discovery 
For several years treasure-hunters and souvenir-seekers have been 
combing most of the sunken shipwrecks off the coast of Pattaya, 
Thailand's best-known seaside resort located in the southeastern province 
of Chon Buri. These shipwrecks are continuously passed by numerous 
boats taking tourists to and from the islands off the Pattaya coast. 
The official diving team found a local diver who knew of some 
underwater pottery finds, and who divulged much information about 
sunken vessels not only in Pattaya and the surrounding area, but also 
wrecks lying along the eastern coast of the Gulf of Thailand. This man 
fortunately was interested in the antiquity of his country, and was not 
simply bent on making quick profits from antique-trading and treasure­
hunting. He confirmed that off the coast of Pattaya there were at least 
three cargo vessels which carried pottery, and he took the official divin g 
team to the ship to be described. 
The site and excava tion 
The ancient shipwreck reported here lies at a position betwee n 
Pattaya hill and Koh Larn at a depth of 28 to 30 metters. The investi­
gation of this wreck took place during February and March 1977, and 
discovered that to a very large extent treasure-hunters had already 
looted valuable and good-quality items, and had as well seriously 
damaged the remains of the ship itself. There is evidence that they had 
used explosives to enter the cargo compartments, and an airlift to blow 
away mud and sand. Careless use of such methods compounded the • 
damage from deterioration to both the wooden structure of the ship and 
its cargo. 
TWO ANCIENT SII IPIVR EGKS JN THE CULF OF THAJLAND 15 
A fairly strong current flows from the north carrying seaweed, 
coral and stone fragments that circulate around the vessel and degrade 
visibi lity. The wreck was covered by a mound of sand and mud, the 
top of which inclined 25 • N indicating that the wreck lay on its side . 
Portions of the wreck protruded from the mound at an angle of 45 ·. 
The wreckage and broken pottery were scattered over an area measuring 
33.32 x 17.40 meters . Judging from the results of an exploratory 
excavation by Lieutenant Nakorn, the Pattaya wreck seems to have 
bee n a cargo ship. Seven cargo compartments have been found to date . 
The divers clearly discerned nine wooden planks projecting at regul ar 
in terv als, which were probably parts of the cargo compartments. 
At the northern end of the excavation area, a rectangular shape 
meas uring 30 x 100 em was found . Co vered with coral , it appea red to 
be rusted iron, and from it s pedestal-li ke shape was assumed to be a steel 
plat e used as ballast. Traces presumably of explosives used by treasure­
bunters were noted along the sides of the object. A test trench was dug 
along one side of the plat e, and a number of stor age jars was found 
ben eath the plate itself . Planks, iron, lead, potteries and sherds were 
salvaged from the area for further study. 
Finds 
The finds obtain ed from the Pattaya site can be divid ed into three 
ca tego ries: wooden objects, metal items and potteries . 
(a) Wood en objects 
Planks , wooden pole, bamboo fragments. The plank salvaged (fig. 
19), meas uring 60 x 80 em, was found under the iron Jump mentioned 
abo ve, and appeared to be part of a wooden wall in one of the carg o 
compa rt ments . Lumps of iron, lead and strips of bamboo were stuck to 
the plank. Rattan strips bound a wooden pole to the plank, and the 
specimen was entirely covered with what appeared to be iron rust . 
(UNEX-P-18/77, UNEX-P-19/77, UNEX -P-20/77 .) 
Leave s. Palm leav es, resembling those growing in fresh-water 
swamps, were found adher .ing to the specimen in figure 19. Samples of 
wooden objects and lea ves were sent to Mr. Pong at the Division of 
Wood Anal ysis, and to Dr. Cbyagrit at the Institute of Atoms for Peace, 
for an alysis and c1 4 datin g. 
16 Pensak Chagsuchinda Howitz 
(b) Metallic items 
Lead. It has been known for several years that tons of lead were 
salvaged from the wreck and sold by treasure-hunters. The pieces found 
so far are of a pyramidal shape (fig. 20}, commonly found in sunken 
vessels in the Gulf of Tha ilan d. They average 6.5 x 5.5 em in size, and 
all bear traces of sand adhering to the ir surfaces. 
Aside from the iron lumps fused to the planks, a small lump of 
iron measuring about 25.5 x 12.5 em was found near the trench in a 
crater cause by pirate diggers' explosives. This lump, rust-covered and 
with pieces of wood adhering to the surface, was sent to Professor Kaset 
at the Geological Survey Division for analysis. (UNEX-K-18/77.) 
(c) Pottery 
Earthenware rice or curry pots1 9• Of unglazed, thin grey paste, the 
pot in figure 21 bears a decorative design on its shoulder of wavy strokes 
alternating with stamped, straight lines. The body of the pot is 
decorated with a group of short, incised lines. (UNEX-P-1 / 77, d 29 em, 
ht 15.5 em.) 
The pot in figure 22 is of unglazed, soft-burned clay. The vessel 
is impressed with a corded pattern, alternating with geometric lines on 
its shoulder and incised stroke lines on the body. (UNEX-P-2/77, d 46 
em, bt 11 em.) 
Three large sherds of rice pots were found, decorated with corded 
patterns and incised lines as in figure 22. 
19. Ho Ching Hin and Bobby Ng, " Sha Tsui, High Island", Journa l of t he Hong 
Kong Archaeological Society, vol. V, 1974. The Hong Kong Museum and the 
Hong Kong Archaeological Society discovered an ancient ship in the bed of 
the High I sland Reservoir, near Sba Tsu i Villa ge, in 1974 . Descriptio n of 
the finds together with photographs bas given str ong hints of a resemblance 
between the Sha Tsui junk and a few ancient vessels found in the Gulf of 
Thailand. Beside the celadon glazed-ware of Sawankhalok, the unglazed 
earthenwar e sherds found at the site with stamped patterns were described as 
follows: " . .. such designs have not been seen locally, but the method of 
manufacture, stamp ing and paste resemble in many ways pottery from prehis­
toric sites in Hong Kong .. " (ibid. , p. 31 ). The wares in question are 
actually a type of earthenware manufactured in Thailand since ancient times. 
TWO ANCIENT SI!IP\VRECKS IN THE GOLF OF TIIAILAND 17 
Storage jars. Three large, stoneware, Sawankhalok storage jars 
were collected from the Pattaya wreck. Many such jars are reported to 
have been lost to pirate digging. 
The large Sawankhalok jar in figure 23 (d 42 em, ht 5.2 em), 
with four loops, has an everted mouthrim. The shoulder is seperated 
from the neck by a moulded rib, and the loops are attached to 
the shoulder. Three circular bands decorate the shoulder and neck. 
The upper body is done in a chocolate-brown glaze down to the waist, 
with the base unglazed permitting the fine beige paste to be observed. 
The large, four-looped Sawankbalok jar m figure 24 (d 21 em, bt 
30 em) has the same shape and form as the pr eceding specimen, 
although it is a bit smaller. Decorative circular bands ornament the 
shoulder alone; the whole jar, with the exception of the waist and wide 
base, is covered with a brown-monochrome glaze. There is a grooved 
inner rim to accommodate a lid. 
The upper part of one small Sawankhalok jar (fi g. 25; d 18 em, ht 
35 em) perhaps the most interesting find, was di scovered -with its lid in 
place, buried in dark brown soil similar to a laterite-clay mixture. 
Judging from the shape of the jar it must have been about 35 em high. 
Traces of brown-monochrome glaze remain on the side s. The lid bas a 
lo tus-bud handle upside do wn on the mouthrim of the ja r. Traces 
of rice were found inside but, as the bottom bad split apart allowing the 
rice to wa sh away, not enough remained for analysi s. 
Part of a kendi. Resembling a teapo t spout, the kend i fragment 
is o f unglazed, dark grey paste, and about I 0 em long. · 
Jar lids. Seven ungl azed stoneware lid s wer e collected (fig. 26), 
each with a lotus-bud handl e rising sharply from the center. Their size s 
range from 15 em wide and 4.5 em high, to 8 em wide and 2.5 em high. 
They are undoubtedly lids for brown-monochrome Sa wankbalok storage 
jar s. 
Box lid. The lid is d ome-shaped with a pyr amid top forming a 
handl e, and is an exampl e o f Sawankh alok ware of unglazed, dark grey 
pas tez o (d 7 em, h t 4 em). 
20. Fo r an example , see Willetts , of' · cit., p. 159 , fig. 244. 
18 Pensak Cbagsucbinda Howitz 
Covered box. Octagonal and decorated in a blue underglaze , the 
box in figure 27 (d 8 em, ht 4 em) has alternating designs of leaf- spray 
and wave patterns. The inside of the box is wipe d with a tr anslucent 
glaze, with the curved footrim and base ung lazed and oatmeal in color. 
The painted decorations are in the Annamese style, wh ile the leaf-spray 
an d wave patt erns confirm the A nname se origin of the box 2 I . 
Sherd. One bowl-bottom (d 18 em) was discovered, its glaze much 
deteriorated and dirty. 
Discussion and analysis 
According to information obtained from local fishermen and for­
t une-hunters, the Pattaya ship originally carried tons of lead, mostly 
pyramid-shaped ingots, each piece measuring 6 em in diameter and about 
2.5 em high. All specimens seem to contain sand, probably from the 
moulding process. 
The presence of the lead raises many questions. Where was its 
origin, and where was it bound ? Why the particular pyramidal shape? 
Why did almost all of the shipwrecks found so far in the Gulf of Thailand 
carry lead-as ballast, or export cargo? 
Historical records show that lead bas been mined in Kanchanaburi 
Province since ancient times in the remote areas of Si Sawat and Sang­
khla Buri District, about 130 kilometers west-northwest of Bangkok22. 
Two groups of crucibles were used to melt the lead, and samples were 
taken to the laboratories at the Bandesa nstadt fur Bodenfarschun g, in 
21. Cheng Lammers, Annamese Ceram ics in th e 2\l!useurn Pusat Jakarta (Jakarta, The 
Ceramic Society of Indonesia, 1974); see vegetal forms and geometric designs, 
pp. 108-109, figs. IV-V. For another example, see Adrian, Chinese and 
A nnam ese . .. , op . cit. , p. 1 71 , fig. 1 OS. 
22. The area between the Kwae Yai and Kwae Noi rivers has long been exploited 
for its minerals. Numerous sites with abundant Pb-slag remains are evidence 
of such activities. C14 dating analysis bas shown that ancient mining took 
place during the "late medieval" period between 1310 and 1480 A.D ., 
in Si Sawat, and 1480-1640 A.D. in Sangkhla Buri. 
T\\0 ANCIENT Sti! PWRECKS IN THE GULF OF THAI LAND 19 
Hanover, Germany 23 • Carbon 14 dating revealed that one group dates 
between 667 and 337 years ago, the other from 497 to 337 years24. 
Professor K as et, while con d uct ing independent investigation s, 
found o ver 10,000 piece s of sla g bu ried in the are a25 • From the lead 
mines at Songtbaw and Si Saw at he recovered three sherd s. One is a 
fragment of a base of cel adon ware , from the Sawankbalok kilns; the 
other two are blue-and-white Ming ware. 
Inhabitants of Kanchan aburi forests curr ently mould lead ingots by 
making small holes in sand with conical ends of sticks or paddles, 
pouring the melted lead into the holes . The sand grains adhering to the 
surface of the ingots recovered from the Pattaya wreck could indicat e 
this technique is several hundred years old. 
If the lead works were located near waterways, the most convenient 
method of transporting the finished ingots to nearby towns would 
have been by boat or raft. Another possibility is that the pyramids of 
lead were packed in bamboo baskets and taken by cart through the 
dense forest to their destinations. The small pyramids also lend them­
selves to transport by litter where necessary. 
Lead was found in other shapes at the Pattaya site: cylindrical, 
bowl-shaped, and hat-shaped (fig. 28). They differ in size, but on 
average they do not exceed 12.5 em in diameter and 8 em in height. 
Thailand bas a long history of trade in lead, perhaps earlier than 
the fourteenth century A.D.26 Records on the relations between Thai­
land and foreign countries from the late sixteenth to early eighteenth 
centuries clearly indicate that Thailand's main exports included elephant 
23 . M.A. Geyh, Ko mmentar Zu d en Er gebrissen der Padiokohlensto ff A rwly sen aus 
T hailand (Hanover, NLFB, 1971 ). 
24. Department of Mineral Resources, M inera l Prospection of German Geological 
M ission in Thailand (Bangkok, 1971). 
25. Kaset Pitakpaivan, "Report on iron specimens from sunken junks in the Gulf 
of Siam" (Bangkok, Department of Mineral Resources, 1977). 
26. F. Hirth and Rockhill, 'Chan .Tu-Kna': His Work on the Chin ese and Arab Tra de 
in the T welfth and Th irteenth Centuries, Entitled ' Chu Fan Chi' (St. Petersburg, 
1912). 
20 Pensak Chagsuchinda Howitz 
tusks, rice, hides, wood and Jead27. Historicaliy, lead trading was active 
in Malacca, Indonesia and the Philippines. Records confirm that 
Western ships transported lead and other cargo from Siam to many 
countries. 
Du ring the sixteenth century A.D. lead was used abroad for many 
purposes, including roofing material and in alloys, Japan was dem anding 
lead from Thailand duri ng her civil war for use in bullets 28 , as baliast 
in ships, and for measuring sea depth . However, the amount of lead 
found at the Pattaya site is too great to be simp ly ballast , leading one 
to conclude tha t it was the main cargo of the vessel. 
Regarding the iron samples from the vessel, Professor Kaset in 
co-operation with Dr. Othorn Sukhato has come up with the following 
ana lysis29. 
Tbe AGL magnetic property can be divided into three cat egories:-
1. First is light magnetic part. This is magnetite. 
2. Second is that pa rt with good magnetic susceptibilit y. 
This is metallic iron. 
3. Third is non -magneti c or with very weak mag~eti c 
susceptibility. · This is slag mate rial, lead and organic 
materi al. 
The AGL was cut for internal viewing, and from the cut pieces 
two thin sections were made for microscopic study. 
The specimen was washe d and soaked in plain warm water for 
half an hour, and the surface cleaned with a toothbru sh. Afte r excess 
water on the surface was removed by cloth, the specimen was left at 
room temperature for two weeks. 
After two weeks, various newly formed oxides of iron showed up 
ver y well, for example: 
u .. A u u ~~ A I ~ " .I 
27 . Pairote Kesmaenk it, 1JWYl nL7!l~ t'llJWUli UJ~77Zt.l'l1,'1tl7~t'Ylfl ~'Yl!lnllU1'!-11lJ7Zt'Ylfl 
28. 
29. 
["Translated from the records of the relations bet ween Siam and foreign 
countries in the seventeenth century"], (Bangkok, 1970) . 
I ~::!it. .c:l A \1 .. I \l .,.dtl 
t.l!lt'llJ~I.I. t.l"'lf1'il tl;::'lflJVm!1'l~ 11 111fl'Yll!!o L 7!l"'Yl1"~~•::• 1 'lf ~ l.Jm7Zt.l'l1" ~ 'Yl!lnlltyll'l-1 
• • • 
(Bangkok, 1964). 
Kaset , ojJ. cit. 
TWO ANCIENT SHIPWRECKS JN THE GULF OF THAILAND 21 
Large and rusty brown oxide of ir<~n on the surface where there 
is metallic iron. In a few places are bright yellow limonite and red. 
haematite. 
A section of the AGL shows, megascopically, numerous pores and 
vugs of various sizes in the massive matrix with inclusions of small and 
large fragments up to a centimeter long; green slag; rounded grainy and 
sandy materials. Flow structures can be seen both in the matrix and in 
the embedded fragments. 
Thin section under polarizing microscope revealed magnetite, 
haematite, limonite, quartz, feldspar, calcite, biotite, muscovite and 
plenty of zircon. 
The green slaggy material revealed itself to be a glass material 
under polarizing microscope. 
Conclusions: 
1. The specimen AGL is an incomplete smelting of iron ores, 
which consists of magnetite and haematite. 
2. Apparently the ores were crushed before smelting, and 
smelting was carried out to a stage in which metallic 
iron was partially obtained. 
A piece of bamboo is apparently embedded in the iron. The wood 
might be dumped with the iron and slag, and was later firmly attached to 
iron by the aid of iron oxide formation and marine organism, with 
carbonate shell growing on iron and wood. 
Careful study of the bamboo and wood specimens by Mr. Pong 
show that the bamboo is Gigantochloa sp.3o , which is only f-ound in 
southeast Asia. The long spaces between the joints make it too weak 
for use as weight-bearing uprights, such as those used for the foundation 
poles of traditional Thai houses, but is very good for walls and baskets. 
The bamboo from the cargo compartment seems to be fragments 
of a wall, as its ends show traces of iron oxide which is found on the 
planks. Some of the bamboo bears strips of rattan similar to that which 
30. Pong, op. cit. 
22 Pensak Chagsuchioda Howitz 
fastened the pole to the plank mentioned in discussion of figure 19, and 
other fragments belonged to the baskets where lead or foodstuffs were 
sto red. Dr. Chyagrit states that from the result of C 14 dating, the 
bam boo was cut from its roots 350 years ago31. This seems to be the 
chief evidence for dating the vessels . 
As for the strips of leaves adhering to the surface of the iron lumps , 
Mr. Pong has iden tified them as Nipa fruticans ( Palma e family ) which is 
commonly found in south east Asia and Austra lia, and grows in tidal 
mud, rivermouths, and mangrove areas32. In Thailand and the Mala y 
Peninsula, Nipa fruticans grows mainly on the coasta l areas. The leaves 
a re used for that chin g houses and packing purposes. It is justifiable to 
presume that th e cargo compartment, where the leaves were fou nd, 
co ntained iron lumps and lead covered by the leaves , forming a bed for 
rice , meat or other foodstuffs . This method of packing is used in 
present-day Thailand. 
By contra st, neither the official diving team nor local fishermen and 
robbers have found any Sukhoth ai -peri od products at the site. 
There seems no doubt that we are dealing with a ca rgo vessel, but 
the unanswered question is what exactly was the main cargo? The 
prese nce of large quantities of lead hint at a known principal export ite m 
of Thai land . The composition of the pottery type s permits little 
doubt that pottery was not meant for export. The various sizes of 
storage jars indicate tha t the ship was provisioned for a long voyage. 
Evidently the Pat taya ca rgo-carrier was active during the mid­
seventeenth century A.D. , but the cause of its sinking still remains a 
mystery. 
0 I ,. A.c:l. ~ T .., 
31. Chyagri t Siri-Upathu m, 11 ~~ 1 '1tn17 nl \-l'a~fl1B1~ ~ ~!J 1 1Hl1711 fl'\.L 14 ":liB~ ~1111t1L1 q]U 
., . . 
L m'l::t~ (Bangkok, Institut e of Atoms fo r Peace, 1977). 
3 2. Bur kill , op. cit . 
Figw·e 1. Wooden pegs (not drawn to scale). 
F igure 2 . Granite stone. 
Figur e 3 . Sugar - palm pots. 
Fig ure 4. Earthenware basin . 
Figur e 5 . Vase with 'blush-stroke' pattern. 
Figu re 6 . Pear- shaped vase. 
•' 
Figure 7 . Four 'boxes' of Sawankh alok ware decor ated with typical designs. 
"' ... 
Figure 8 . Lids of covered boxes with a lotus-bud handle. 
Figure 9. Lids of covered boxes with a four-sepalled 'mangosteen' handle . 
.... 
Figure 10. Earthenware lid of a jar. 
Figure 1 1. Sawankhalok jar with four ring-handles. 
Figu re 12 . Part of a blue-and-white Ming bowl. 
•' "' 'f.; 
<$) • ( 
" - ' " -:w ... .J ~ 
~ • 
. .... 
\, 
. 
~;t 
Figur e 13 . Part of a blue-and-white Ming bowl. 
Figure 14 . Part of a blue-and-white Ming bowl. 
Fig w·e 15 . The desi gn on the outer cavetto of a blue-and-white Ming bowl , 
with geese swimming beside lotus clumps . 
\ 
\ 
\ 
, 
1 
Fig w·e 16. Part of a blue- and-white Ming bowl with a wide crackle. 
j 
t<f 
\ 
Figw·e 17 . Decorative design on the innez cartto of a Ming-ware bowl. 
Figure 18. Sherd with Chinese characters, late Ming period. 
Figure 19 . Wooden plank under an iron lump, with lead and a fragment of 
bamboo stuck to it. 
Figure 20. Pyramid-shaped lead lumps. 
Figure 21. Earthenware rice pot with a pattern of stamped and incised lines . 
Figure 22 . Rice or cur ry pot, of unglazed clay with corded pattern . 
F igure 23. Sawankhalok storage jar (d 42 em, ht 52 em). 
Figur e 2 4. Sawankhalok jar with four looped handles (d 21 em, ht 30). 
.. . 
Figur e 25, Jar with traces of rice inside (d 18 e m). 
Fig ure 26. Stoneware jar lids with lotus-bud handles. 
Figu re 27 . Octagonal covered box, Annamese ware, with leaf-spray and wave patterns. 
(a) Cylindrical shape. 
Figure 28. Formed lead found in the Sattahip ship. 
(b) Hat shape . 
~ •• 1J 
,.\ .~:< ~ 
... ' l'•O.\t> ...... ..l"<" 
~ ·~~. 
~~;.;<~ .... i:JI'SIIii 
(c) Ball shape. 