THE DATING OF 
SUKHOTHAI AND SAWANKHALOK CERAMICS: 
SOME CONSIDERATIONS 
by 
HIRAM W. WOODWARD, JR.* 
Conclusions about the dates of Sukhothai and Sawankhalok ceramics can only be reached 
through the analysis of evidence that often seems peripheral. No piece yet discovered has 
written on it "made in the year ... " There are no historical records describing production 
or export. There is instead archeological evidence- examples of Sukhothai and Sawankhalok 
ware, by and large, discovered in association with other artifacts, these too frequently being 
other ceramics which are equally insecurely dated. Historical records do exist which do not 
mention ceramics, but which do provide informat -:on which enables us to draw conclusions 
about when potters might have moved from one place to another, or when an event of immense 
and still insufficiently appreciated economic dimensions- the export of great quantities 
of bowls, dishes, and covered boxes to the islands of soul!icast Asia- might best be situated. 
Finally, there is stylistic evidence , evidence which allows us to reach conclusions on the basis 
of stylistic similarities with more securely dated works in other media or ceramics from 
other places, most notably VietNam. 
In the winter of 1974 the problem of the chronology of Thai and Vietnamese ceramics was 
the subject of a graduate seminar at the University of Michigan I. Most of us agreed at the 
end of the term that Thai ceramics have generally been given dates that are too early, and that 
it is the fifteenth (and perhaps early sixteenth) century A.D. which was the crucial period of 
manufacture. But the evidence is overwhelmingly circumstantial and consists of many small 
bits of data that provide only shadows of a total picture. Since 1974, others, who have either 
learned of our conclusions or had independently begun to have doubts of their own, have 
embraced less and less heartily the viewpoint proposed by Charles Nelson Spinks . In The 
Ceramic Wares of Siam (1965), Dr. Spinks wrote, "The inescapable fact remains , however , 
that Chinese potters, or at the very least Chinese ceramic techniques and traditions, made their 
appearance at Sukhodaya [Sukhothai] around the close of the 13th century, and inaugurated 
the production of fine glazed wares utterly unlike any that had heretofore been made in that 
area." 2 Then, "Production at the Sukhodaya and Svargaloka [Sawankhalok] kilns no doubt 
came to an abrupt and violent end in the middle of the 15th century as a result of the conflict 
between Ayudhya and Chiel)mai."3 In an important 1971 catalogue, William Willetts made 
numerous valuable observations about the relationships among the different Thai wares, but 
* Department of the History of Art, University of Michigan , Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. 
I I wish to thank the students, Betty Gosling, Forrest McGill , Steven D. Owyoung , and Barbara Wagner , 
for their contrib ution s, and Kamer Aga-Oglu and James B. Griffin, now Curator Emeritus and Director 
Emeritus, respectively, for making the collections of the University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology 
accessible to us. This article is based on a paper presented at the Asia Society in New York on 30 October 
1976. 
2 Charles Nelson Spinks, The Ceramic Wares of Siam (Bangkok: The Siam Society, 1965), p. 15. • 
3 Ibid., p. 115. 
2 Hiram W. Woodward, Jr. 
his chronological perimeters were the same. He accepted a mid-sixteenth -century cut-off, and 
about the time of initiation he wrote, "Yet it is certain that within that decade [of the 1290s] 
or the next, Chinese ceramic artists, artisans, and technicians began to arrive in Thailand and 
to set up factories there. The result was an unprecedented burst of creativity and output, 
first at Sukhothai , then, after a more or less brief interval, at Sawankhalok." 4 Dean F. 
Frasche, however, in his catalogue for the exhibition that opened at the Asia House Gallery 
in the fall of 1976, wisely noted that "it should be mentioned that the absence of adequate 
supporting archaeological and historical data on the ceramic sites preclude their being assigned 
accurate dates for the periods of their activities. ' •s And Roxanna Brown wrote in the catalogue 
of a 1977 Cologne exhibition, "The exact dates of the Sukhothai kiln centers [i.e. those both 
at Sukhothai itself and at the 'Sawankhalok' centers outside the city of Si Satchanalai] are 
not known , though archeological data suggests from the fourteenth to the beginning of the 
sixteenth centuries. "6 
Barbara Wagner is publishing an article in Oriental Art on the stylistic evidence for the 
dating of Sawankhalok covered boxes. There follows here a presentation of some of the other 
evidence that leads to the conclusion that the bulk of production occurred in the fifteenth 
century- evidel)_ce that at the same time leaves unsettled problems regarding the development 
of production within that century . 
Foreign archeological and historical evidence 
The results of two important Philippine excavations have been published. Only a prelimi­
nary report, however, has appeared of the "Calatagan'' excavations of burial sites in southern 
Luzon?. The Santa Ana excavations in Manila are well known through Leandro and Cecilia 
Locsin's book Oriental Ceramics Discovered in the Philippines 8. These Santa Ana burials, 
as the Locsins have demonstrated , span two periods . In the first-period graves there are 
Chinese ceramics that have been assigned to the time of the Yiian dynasty (1271-1368) and 
even before. The second-period graves have yielded Ming dynasty wares like those at Calata ­
gan. The Locsins appear to be correct in maintaining that the Santa Ana cemetery grew toward 
the perimeters of the excavated area. Blue-and-white jarlets characterize many first-period 
graves but are not found in the earliest burials, at the center of the site. 
At the northern edge of the cemetery are the wares, from only 15 graves (in a total of 
202), that belong to a second period9. These wares include one Sawankhalok covered box 
and one Chinese blue-and-white recessed-base saucer. This second period is the period of the 
Calatagan graves, where many similar objects have been found . The Chinese wares at Calata­
gan were once assigned a fourteenth to fifteenth century date, but they have recently, and 
4 William Willetts, Ceramic Art of Southeast Asia (Singapore: The Southeast Asian Ceramic Society, 
1971), P- 16. 
5 Dean F. Frasche, South east Asian Ceramics: Ninth Through Sevent eenth Centuries (New York : The 
Asia Society, 1976), p. 43. 
6 Roxanna Brown eta! ., Legend and Reality : Early Ceramics from South-East Asia (Cologne : Museum 
ftir Ostasiatische Kunst, 1977), p. 44. 
7 Robert B. Fox, "The Cal atagan excavations ", Philippine Studi es 7, no. 3 (August 1959). 
8 Rutland, Vermont, and Tokyo, Japan: Charles E. Tuttle, 1967. 
9 L. and C. Locsin, Oriental Ceramics, pp. 105-11. 
DATING SUKHOTHAI AND SAWANKHALOK CERAMICS 3 
convincingly, been argued by John Addis to belong more properly to the late fifteenth and first 
half of the sixteenth centuryl 0. Sawankhalok wares are common in the Calatagan burials. 
The placement of the second-period graves, on the northern edge of the Santa Ana 
cemetery, appears to demonstrate that the cemetery remained in continuous use, by the same 
body of people. All that changed was the character of the available grave goods. What 
brought an end to the first period was the end of the availability of blue-and-white jarlets 
of fourteenth-century type, among other waresll. Can this date be specified? 
In 1404, the Yung-lo emperor, realizing that earlier Ming bans on private trade had been 
ineffective, ordered that all ocean-going ships should be adapted so that they could no longer 
sail the seas; henceforth all trade with the countries to the south would be by state monop ·>ly12 . 
For this purpose Yung-lo constructed a great navy of 3,800 ships, of which 1,350 \Vere patrol 
vessels that would assure that no private trading could take placel3. The first of the admiral 
Cheng Ho's great series of official "treasure ship" expeditions to the South Seas occurred in 
1405; they continued, combining diplomacy with t::ade, until the 1420sl4. But none of these 
expeditions ever reached the Philit:-~inests . After the 1420s the navy declined. There was a 
shift in Chinese policy. "Abandon the barren lands abroad ," pleaded a minister in 1426, 
"and give the people of China a respite so that they could devote themselves to husbandry 
and to the schools ." 16 VietNam, occupied since 1407; was evacuated in 1428. In southeast 
Asia, Muslim traders filled much of the vacuum left in the wake of the last of the treasure ship 
expeditions!?. Eventually- surely by the third quarter of the century- the powerful 
families of the southern Chinese coastal provinces, Fukien and Chekiang, were once again 
free to engage in private tradel8. And Chinese ceramit::s again flowed into the Philippines. 
The absence in the Philippines of Chinese wares dating from the first half of the fifteenth 
century 19 and the division, as well, of Santa Ana into first and second periods, are thus 
explained by imperial Chinese economic policy; Chinese ceramics, it must be assumed, reached 
10 J. M. Addis, "Chinese porcelain found in the Philippines", Transactions of the Oriental Ceramic So­
ciety 1967-68,1968-69; J. M. Addis, "The dating of Chinese porcelain found in the Philippines: A historical 
retrospect", Philippine Studies 16, no. 2 (April 1968). Kamer Aga-Oglu has questioned the later dating of 
lien-tzu bowls in "Ming blue-and-white bowls of Lien-Tzu type", Ars Orienta/is 9 (1973): 15-20. 
11 On the lifespan of the jarlets see Margaret Medley, Yiian Porcelain and Stoneware (London: Faber and 
Faber, 1974), p.61: "If these small pieces fulfilled an essential function, as they must surely have done, the 
potters would have been economically short-sighted not to have kept the market going for as long as it would 
stand it." 
12 0. W. Wolters, The Fall of SrYvijaya in Malay History (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1970), p. 156. 
13 Joseph Needham, Science and Civilization in China, vol. 4, pt. 3 (Cambridge: University Press, 1971), 
p. 484. . 
14 Wang Gungwu, "China and south-east Asia 1402-1424", in Studies in the Social History of China 
and South-East Asia: Essays in Memory of Victor Purcell (Cambridge: University Press, 1970), pp. 375-401. 
15 Ma Huan, Ying-yai sheng-lan 'The Overall Survey of the Ocean's Shores', trans . J. V. G. Mills, Hak-
luyt Society Extra Series No. 42 (Cambridge: University Press, 1970), p. 21. 
16 Jung-pang Lo, "The decline of the early Ming navy", Oriens Extremus 5 (1958): 167. 
17 An important theme in Wolters, The Fall of S;lvijaya. 
18 Lo, "The decline", p. 156n. On the resurgence of private trade see also Shunzo Sakamaki, "Ryukyu 
and southeast Asia", Journal of Asian Studies 23 (1963-64) :383-89. Charles W. MacSherry, "Impairment of the 
Ming tributary system as exhibited in trade involving Fukien" (Ph .D. dissertation, University of California, 
Berkeley, 1956), deals with a later period. I have not seen Bodo Wiethoff, Die chinesische Seeverbotspolitik und 
der private Uberseehandel von 1368 bis 1567 (Hamburg, 1963). 
19 Addis, "Chinese porcelain", p. 20. 
4 Hiram W. Woodward, Jr. 
Luzon only through private trading. The first period at Santa Ana consists of wares imported 
until about 140520. Sukhothai and Sawankhalok ceramics are absent in first-period graves . 
Perhaps Thai wares belonged to another trade network altogether; perhaps they were made 
but not exported. Or, perhaps no Thai wares of export type had yet been produced. 
So let us assume that , as far as Sukhothai and Sawankhalok wares are concerned, it is 
_ the period after 1405 which must be focused on. Let us furthermore assume, again on the 
basis of negative evidence, that the early sixteenth century is the cut-off at the other end ; for 
surely, if ceramics were being exported in any quantity from Siam at that time, they would 
have been mentioned in the early European accounts. Tome Pires writes: "From Siam comes 
lac, benzoin, brazil , lead, tin, silver, gold , ivory, cassia fistula; they bring vessels of cast copper 
and gold, ruby and diamond rings; they bring a large quantity of cheap , coarse Siamese cloth 
for the poor people."21 
The evidence suggests that the production of wares for export was a response to an 
opportunity in international trade . At w!::at point was this opportunity first appreciated in 
Siam, and what kind of economic alliance made it possible t~:.~ take advantage of it? Presumably 
a ceramic dearth was felt in the Philippines soon after 1405 or so; one may not have been felt 
in the islands of Indonesia until after the last of the treasure ship expeditions in the 1420s. 
Muslim entrepreneurs could have encouraged the development of ceramic production in the 
second quarter of the century . If, on the other hand , private Chinese traders were a moving 
force in the promotion of the ceramic industries of VietNam and Siam, their development may 
not have occurred until these traders became active along the coast of China itself. 
Domestic historical evidence 
The notion that there was an influx of Chinese potters or of Chinese influences into Sukho­
thai in the late thirteenth or early fourteenth century is due primarily to the literal interpreta­
tion of a Thai legend included in the 1807 anthology Phongstiwadtin Nua22 (and also in the 
Culayuddhakiiravaf11sa23). It says that Phraya Ruang returned from a trip to China with 
500 Chinese who henceforth produced pottery . If this Phra Ruang is identified with King 
Ram Khamhaeng, then the historical event behind the legend would have occurred in 
the late thirteenth or early fourteenth century . Otto Karow has recently sought to preserve 
the historical value of the legend by suggesting that the Phra Ruang in question is not Ram 
Khamhaeng but one of his fourteenth-century successors24. But it is questionable whether 
even that degree of accuracy must be accorded a tradition that was evidently long preserved 
only orally. 
20 Professor Wolters , on the other hand, sees the earlier Ming t;a_ns as being partially effective and depends 
on other interpretations of the archeological evidence (The Fall of Srivijaya , p. 189). 
21 Armando Cortesiio , trans., The Suma Oriental of Tome Pires, vol.l, The Hakluyt Society, 2nd ser., no. 
89 (London,1944), p. 108. 
22 Phra rlitchaphongsliwadlin niia, in Prachum phongsliwadlin, vol. 1 (Bangkok : Khurusapha, 1963), p. 13 ; 
Camille Notton, trans ., Legendes sur /e Siam et le Cambodge (Bangkok: Imprimerie de l'Assomption, 1937), 
p. 23. 
23 Chunlayutthaklirawong, in Prachumphongsliwadlin, vol. 66 (Bangkok , 1937), pp. 63, 65-66. 
24 Otto Karow, "Thai ceramics : The historical and cultural background", in Brown et al.f Legend and 
Reality , p. 22. 
DATING SUKHOTHAI AND SAWA NKHALOK CERAMICS 5 
About the wars between the kingdoms of Ayutthaya and Chiang Mai in the mid-fifteenth 
cent ury, when Sukhothai was no longer an independent state , we now have a clearer under­
standing, thanks to a recent article by A.B. Griswold and Prasert !)a Nagara 25_ In 1451 there 
was an invasion of the cities of north-central Siam- Kamphaeng Phet, Sukhothai , and 
Phitsanulok- oy the kingdom of Chiang Mai 26. This invasion was repu lsed, and the cities 
remained under the control of the kingdom of Ayutthaya. Then, in 1460, there arose a 
situation which led to Chiang Mai control ofSukhothai for two years and of Si Satchanalai for 
fourteen years , until 147427_ In 1474, Ayutthaya's King Paramatrailoka carried out an in­
vasion which recovered Si Satch analai . Was this city which the king recovered one whose 
artisans had all been swept up by Chiang Mai between 1460 and 1474 and resettled in the 
northern provinces? There is no certain answer to this question , but the Yuan phai, an histori­
cal poem written from an Ayutthay an point of view not long after these events , suggests that 
Si Satchanalai was in 1474 a wealthy, flouri shing town. The decisive battle took place outside 
the walls. Then , the poem exclaims, in the translation by Mr. Griswold and Dr. Prasert: 
See ho w our men follow the enemy everywhere to surround them: 
[See how] they pounce forward to attack the city and destroy it : 
[Se.e how] they carry off a profusion of silver and gold on their shoulders, 
and take the glorious ladies of the city, the horses and elephants, to present to His Majesty!28 
The city , in other words , was a prize. Surely there were the customary ravages of an 
invasion , but the proper conclusions seem to be these : that Si Satchanalai was in 1474 
a wealth -producing city, and that its wealth-producing capacity was not destroyed by 
Paramatrailoka's invasion . There were Chiang Mai raids on the north-central cities several 
decades later- in 1507, 1513, 1514, and 151529 . Later in 1515 Ayutthaya invaded the north30 _ 
So the north-central cities remained import ant for both kingdoms·, and if it indeed was the 
upheavals of war which brought an end to ceramic production , the raids and invasions of the 
first two decades of the sixteenth century might well have been the significant ones . 
25 A. B. Griswold and Prasert rya Nagara, "A fifteenth -century Siamese historical poem", in Southeast 
Asian History and Historiography: Essays Presellted to D. G.£. Hall, ed. C. D. Cowan and O.W . Wolters (Ithaca 
and London : Cornell University Press, 1976), pp . 123-63. 
26 The three primary sources for this period are the Phra rdtchaphongsdwaddn Krung Si'Ayutthaya chabap 
Luang Prasdt (LP), th ~ oldest and most accu rate Ayutthaya chronicle, man y times reprinted; the Chiang Mai 
chronicle (Tamndn phiin miiang Chiang Mai, ed. Khanakammakiin chatphim 'ekkasan th iing prawatsiit Samnak 
Nayok Ratmontri [Bangkok: Samnak thamniap Niiyok Ratmontri, 1971]: Camille Notton, trans ., Chronique 
de Xi eng Miii, Annales du Siam, vol. 3 [Paris : Paul Geuthner , 1932]); and the Yuan phai, a long narrative poem 
(Yuan phai khl6ng dan, ed. Chant hit Kras aes in [Bangkok, 1970]). For an analysis of these sources and a prose 
translation of the historically significant portions of the Yuan phai, see Griswold and Prasert, "A fifteenth­
century historical poem ". I follow Mr. Griswold and Dr. Prasert in believing the poem to represent historical 
events acc urately . They say (p. 123) the poem "was probably composed around 1475 at Ayudhya , or perhaps 
Bi~ryuloJsa [Phitsanulok]." For the 1451 invasions : Notton, Chronique, p. 113; Yuan phai, verses 66 - 68~ 83-92; 
LP, C. S. 813 (the source which provides the date); Griswold and Prasert, " A fifteenth -century h1stoncal 
poem ", pp. 134-35. 
27 Events of 1460 (which mention "Chaliang", which seems to include Si Satchanalai; about Sukhothlli 
we must necessarily surmise [Griswold and Prasert , "A fifteenth-century historical poem" , p. 137J); LP, C.S. 
822, 823; Notton, Chronique, pp . 122-23; Yuan phai,. verses 69-72, 93-9§. Events of 1462: LP, C. S. 836; Yuan 
phai, verses, 73 and 99-!00. Events of 1474: LP, C.S . 836; Tamndn phiin miiang Chiang Mai, p. 65; Yuan phai, 
verses I 08-end. 
28 Griswold and Prasert, "A fifteenth-century historical poem", p. !52 (Yuan phai, verse 284). 
29 Notton .. Chronique, pp . 146-47. 
30 LP, C. S. 877; Notton, Chronique, p. 148. There was an earlier invasion of Phrae in 1510 (Notton, 
Chronique, p. 146). • 
6 Hiram W. Woodward, Jr. 
The Si Satchanalai recovered by King Paramatrailoka was not an empty city. Neverthe­
less, if Si Satchanalai was under Chiang Mai control between 1460 and 1474, as the chronicles 
and the Yuan phai indicate, what would be the relationship between this fourteen-year period 
and the export of great quantities of ceramics? No matter what sort of hypothesis is proposed, 
the dominant figure in the whole enterprise has to have been King Paramatrailoka. From the 
Luang Prasot version of the annals of Ayutthaya, it appears that his father named him viceroy 
in 1438 and that as Prince Ramesvara he ruled from the city of Phitsanulok. Therefore he was 
involved in the affairs of the north-central cities before his accession to the throne , which 
occurred in 1448. In 1463 he decided to move back from Ayutthaya to Phitsanulok, and a 
man evidently his son became king at Ayutthaya. Paramatrailoka lived on in Phitsanulok 
until14883I. 
The discovery in recent years of good quantities of Sawankhalok ceramics in the river at 
Ayutthaya suggests that massive export depended on secure and easy trade between Ayutthaya 
and the kilns near Si Satchanalai. There are various possibilities regarding Paramatrailoka's 
role. It may be that production for export was inaugmated when he was still viceroy at 
Phitsanulok, before 1448. Or, perhaps export didn't really get into gear until later, perhaps 
not until the year 1463, when Paramatrailoka moved from Ayutthaya back to Phitsanulok. In 
that case, it may be necessary to suppose that Chiang Mai control of Si Satchanalai between 
1460 and 1474 brought intensive production at the Sawankhalok kilns and shipment south; 
it was, from Paramatrailoka's point of view, just a matter of a large part of the revenues 
going into the wrong pockets. The last alternative would have significant production at the 
Sawankhalok kilns occurring only after Paramatrailoka regained Si Satchanalai in 1474. 
Domestic stylistic evidence 
The Sawankhalok kilns produced glazed architectural ornaments. At WatTon Makham 
and Wat Kamphaeng Laeng in Sukhothai have been found dragons- creatures which combine 
characteristics of makaras , nagas, and lions (some Thai archeologists just call them lions)32. 
But it may not be possible at these sites to recover the archeological evidence necessary to fix 
the dragons' chronological position within the history of the monasteries. Stylistic evidence. 
on the other hand, can be used now, for stucco decor and ceramic ornament frequently share 
motifs; the only problem is that too little research has been done on the buildings of the period . 
One fixed point appears to be the stucco decor on the prting at Wat Cu!af!1ani near Phitsanulok. 
which can be dated to 1464 (fig. 1)33. The glazed tiles in figure 2, which evidently originally 
served as fascias or eaves boards rising from rafter ends , were found at Wat Suan Kaeo Uthayan 
N(>i in Si Satchanalai , where fragments of Sawankhalok dragons and about 400 other whole 
31 LP, C. S. 800, 810, 825, 850. On the problems o' reconciling Paramatrailoka 's supposed age with the 
date of his viceroyship, see Prince Damrong's comments in Phra rdtchaphongsdwaddn chabap phra rdtchahatlekhd 
(R<tngkok, 1968), pp. 262-63. 
32 Khanakammakfm prapprungburana b6ransath an Changwat Sukh6thai lae Changwat Kamphaeng 
Phet, Rdi-ngiin kdnsamruat khullaengbilrana b6rdnsathiin miiang kao Sukh 6thai (Bangkok , 1969), til us. pp. 46, 
88. 
33 LP, C. S. 826; J. Y. Claeys, "L'Archeologie du Siam", Bulletin de I' Ecole Fran(:aise tt' Extreme-Orient 
31 (1931) : pis. LXV-LXVII, figs. 50-52. See also Michael Vickery, "The Khmer inscriptions of,Tenasserim: A 
reinterpretation", JSS 61 , no. I (January 1973), pp. 51-70. 
Figure I. Detail of stucco decor ation at Wat CctJamaq l, Phits anulok, probably 1464 A.D . 
Figure 2. Glazed tiles, Sawankhalok ware, from Wat Suan Kaeo Uthay l'm N9 i, Si Satchanalai~ 
Length of complete examp le, 19.7 em. Rest house, Si Satchanalai (1970). 
Figure 3. Dish, Sankamphaeng ware, diameter 27 em . (After Kraisri Nimmanahaeminda, Sankampa en$ 
Glazed Pottery, fig. 7). 
Figure 4. Fragments of dish, Sukhothai ware, from Sucgan Cave, near Loay, island of Bohol, Philippines. 
Original diameter about 28.5 em . University of Michigan Philippine Expedition, The University 
of Michigan Museum of Anthropology (33978). 
Figure 5. Dish , Sawankhalok ware, from burial site near the haml et of Bo-od, Tubigon, island of Bohol, 
Philippin es. Diameter 26.5 em. U niversity of Michigan Philippin e Exped ition , The University 
of Michigan Museum of Anthr opo logy (19364). 
DATING SUKHOTHAI AND SAWANKHALOK CERAMICS 7 
glazed tiles have also been discovered 34. The vocabulary in figures I and 2 is comparable; 
both the stucco and the ceramic plaque are characterized by the presence of grooved frames and 
central elements from which spout symmetrical volutes with striated outer edges . But it is 
not possible to say at this point whether the roof ornaments date from before or after 1464. 
There are no fixed points in the wares of Lan Na, nor is there a satisfying relative 
chronology for either the northern wares or those of Sukhothai and Si Satchanalai. Therefore 
isolating a group of closely related pieces from Sankamphaeng (one of the Lan Na sites), 
Sukhothai, and Sawankhalok leads only to highly tentative conclusions . The examples seen 
in figures 3, 4, and 5 demonstr ate how similarly wares from the three sites could be organized. 
One possibility- of many- is that the period of significant artistic exchange between the two 
regions should be placed in the years between 1460 and 1474, when Chiang Mai was occupying 
Si Satchanalai. But would the exported Sukhothai and Sawankhalok dishes of figures 4 and 
5 be later or earlier than the Sankamphaeng dish of figure 3? If these dishes represent different 
modes or traditions of decor , then it is impossible to say . If, however , one dish is the parent 
of the others , then most art historians would tend to think the Sankamphaeng dish (figure 
3) the older, as it is easier to see figures 4 and 5 as stylized variants of it than it is to see it as 
being a later , elaborate version of either figure 4 or 5. One way to read the evidence , therefore, 
is as suggesting a period of artistic intercourse in the years between 1460 and 1474 and a 
subsequent movement in individual directions in Lan Na and at the Sukhothai and Si Sat­
chanalai centers. The association proposed between the Sankamphaeng potters and an inscrip 
tion of 1488 would be vaJid35, but fig-ure 3 itself would perhaps have been made before 1488. 
Conclusions 
Others will have to judge the merits of the case . Or, rather, the merits of the cases. The 
one for the fifteenth century is strong. The one for export primarily after 1474 is an hypothesis 
that must be tested. The Calatagan excavations, the slow resurgence of private Chinese trade, 
the 1474 regaining of Si Satchanalai, King Paramatr ailoka's Phitsanulok seat, the stylistic 
connections between ceramic plaques and stuccowork, and between Sankamphaeng and 
Sukhothai and Sawankhalok dishes, all help make such an hypothesis seem plausible. But 
much other evidence- that provided by the ceramics of Viet Nam, for one, and eventually 
that provided by scientific excavation- will have to be analyzed before dates can be proposed 
with assurance36. 
34 Khanakammakan prapprungbiirana b6ransathan Changwat Sukh6thai lae Changwat K.amphaeng­
phet, Rai-ngan kansamruat lae khuttaengbtlrana btiransathdn miiang Kamphaeng Phet miiang Sisatchanalai 
(Bangkok, 1971), p. 37. I thank Mr. Mali Khoksantiya for showing the tiles to me in 1970. 
35 Kraisri Nimmanahaeminda, Sankampaeng Glazed Pottery (Chiang Mai: The Konmuang Publishing 
Company, 1960), pp. 3-6. 
36 (March 1978.) In 1974 and 1975, a Thai-Danish expedition recovered quantities of Sukhothai 
and Sawankhalok ceramics from a ship sunk off Sattahip. I did not mention it, the evidence bea­
ring on the date of the wreck seeming inconclusive. I n ow discover that I had overlooked (no doubt 
among other materials) Dr. Samran Wangpha, "PUn yai .::hak sombat tai thale" ("Cannon from the un-
dersea treasure"), Art and Archaeology in Thailand, vol. 2 fh~tJ::Luidum\Lfl~Lt4t.h::LYJfllrw L~lJ 2 (Bangkok: 
Fine Arts Department, 1975). Dr. Samran states (p. 57) that the finds "are sufficient to prove a date 
of about the end of the 20th century (B.E.) or the beginning of the 21st." The year 2000 B.E. fell in 
1457. See also Roxanna M. Brown, "Preliminary report on the Koh Khram s1,1nken ship", Oriental 
Art, winter 1975; Watcharin fhumphongphaet, "Rai-ngan kansamruat b6rankhadi tai samut nai 'ao 
Sattahip kh<?ng nakb6rankhadi", Sinlapak{m 19, no. 3 (September 1975): 74-107. 