Ceramic T rade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya, 
1644–1767
Pimpraphai Bisalputra1
 
Since the fall of 
Ayutthaya in 1767, the remains of a huge amount of pottery and 
ceramics have been found around the city and the surrounding waterways. These include 
coarse everyday tableware, fine blue and white, and polychrome wares, including 
Bencharong, which is unique to Thailand. Many fine examples can be seen in museums 
and private collections, while shards are still being fished out of the earth and rivers. 
These ceramics are a valuable source material from the Ayutthaya era. Tracing how 
they came to be there throws light on ceramic technology, China-Siam relations, trading 
practices, Ayutthaya’s Chinese community, and the prosperity of the Siamese capital 
before its fall. 
This article is divided into three main sections. The first looks at the evolution of the 
ceramics industry in Early Qing China. In 1644 the Ming Dynasty fell, and the Manchu 
Qing dynasty came to power. This violent transition initially disrupted the ceramics 
industry and the China-Siam trade. Before long, however, the ceramics industry began 
to develop and prosper because of the personal interest and promotion of three early 
Qing emperors and strong demand from abroad. Technical changes, including a wider 
range of colors and capacity to produce shapes and designs for the tastes of different 
markets, made Qing ceramics popular in the rapidly expanding international trade of 
the era.
The second section surveys the evolution of China-Siam trade from the early 17th 
century to the late 18th century. The Ming-Qing transition and subsequent ban on 
maritime trade had an adverse impact on commerce between China and Siam which, at 
that time, was reduced to occasional tribute missions; while Ming Loyalists supported 
by the pirate network of Zheng Chenggong (Koxinga) gained maritime control of 
the South China Sea, thereby denying Manchu forces control of large swathes of 
1 This article is adapted from an earlier Thai version, “Kan kha khrueang krabueang rawang jin 
samai ratchawong qing kap krung si ayutthaya samai ratchawong ban phlu luang pho so 2187–2310” 
[Ceramic trade between Qing China and Ayutthaya in the Ban Phlu Luang dynasty, 1644–1767], 
in Sunait Chutintaranond, ed., Nai yuk awasan krung si mai khoei soem [No decline in Ayutthaya’s 
final period], Bangkok: Sinlapa Watthanatham, 2015, 103-68. The author thanks Chris Baker for 
help with the translation, and Dhiravat na Pombejra, Sresthabongsa Chongsanguan, Jeffery Sng 
and Prapod Assavavirulhakarn, who read and criticized early drafts; Thamsook Numnonda, who 
suggested changes in the original draft; Pairin Kankaew, who took the photographs; and Praphaisith 
Tankeyura and Chanchai Supanichvoraparch, who kindly gave permission to photograph their 
Bencharong pieces and shards of Chinese pottery found in Siam. Their collections, amassed over 
several decades, made the writing of this article possible. 
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   1 4/18/17   10:09 AM
2 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
the coast and offshore ports. After the ban was lifted in 1684, the junk trade rapidly 
expanded. After Siam became a valuable supplier of rice to China’s famine-prone 
southeast, commercial relations became closer and warmer. Fine ceramics sent as gifts 
from the Chinese emperor to the Siamese king may have been the inspiration for the 
development of Siam’s distinctive Bencharong. Initially this was made in China to 
Siamese specifications, drawing on the Chinese industry’s ability to respond to such 
made-to-order demands.
The third section examines the remains of early Qing ceramics found in Siam, 
especially at Ayutthaya, and discusses where and when they may have been made, 
and how they were imported and distributed in Siam. As the evidence is sometimes as 
fragmentary as the pottery shards, the answers are not always firm, but hopefully point 
the way for future study.
Early Qing ceramics: Imperial taste and technological change
The Early Qing era is considered a golden age of porcelain production. The three 
emperors who reigned from 1662 to 1795 all appreciated ceramics. The artifacts produced 
in each reign have distinct characteristics reflecting the taste and personality of each 
emperor—unlike in times where rulers have no interest in ceramic art, and production of 
porcelain follows tradition. The surviving early Qing imperial wares are mostly products 
from two long reigns, namely those of Kangxi and his grandson, Qianlong.
Emperor Kangxi (1662–1722)
The Kangxi reign extended over sixty-one years. At his accession to the dragon throne 
in 1662, the emperor was only seven years old. He began to rule the vast empire himself 
at age fifteen. His reign lasted across four reigns in Siam, namely Narai, Phetracha, Sua, 
and Thaisa. Early in the reign, the harsh pacification campaign in the South and the 
fighting between Qing forces and Ming loyalists caused widespread damage in 1675 to 
the kilns at Jingdezhen, the porcelain capital of China. According to Barbara Harrisson, 
a former Director of the Princessehof Museum, “the entire pottery district was pillaged 
and burnt, and remained in upheaval for four years. Workmen dispersed, disease spread, 
transport broke down, and taxation fell short.” At this point the emperor, still in his 
twenties, intervened and appointed an able man with local knowledge, Cang Xingyuan, 
as imperial supervisor, to rebuild and modernize China’s porcelain industry.
2 Following 
Kangxi’s personal intervention, the production of ceramic wares resumed during the 
1680s; decorative schemes of all kinds, most notably those based on historical subjects 
that emphasized loyalty to the reigning ruler began to appear as common narratives on 
porcelains made for domestic and export markets.
3 Trade routes were opened up: one 
by waterway through Nanjing to ports at the mouth of the Yangtse (Yangxi) River; and 
another by land to Canton (Guangzhou) via Poyang Lake, two rivers, and portage over 
2 Harrisson, Later Ceramics in South-East Asia, 46.
3 Johnson, “Narrative Themes on Kangxi Porcelains in the Taft Museum,” 328-33.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   2 4/18/17   10:09 AM
3Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
the Meiling Pass.4 During this reign, Jingdezhen resumed production of high quality and 
beautiful ceramics that again delighted the world. The emperor opened customs stations 
in Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang and Jiangsu provinces and foreign traders received 
permission to enter these Chinese ports in 1685.
Collectors all over the world value Kangxi blue and white as some of the most 
beautiful ever produced. In this era, Chinese craftsmen developed the ability to separate 
the tone of the underglaze blue pigment, made from domestic cobalt from Zhejiang 
province, into five shades, an advance on the two shades (light and dark) of the Ming 
era.
5 In addition, the skill in selecting good-quality clay improved, resulting in a pure 
white porcelain6 which partook of a thin, smooth, and clear glaze; this resulted in items 
that were light and delicate. 
The Kangxi emperor was interested in learning, as is evident from records of 
conservations with his sons in his Ting xun ge yan (庭訓格言): “Since my childhood 
I have always tried to find things out for myself and not to pretend to have knowledge 
when I was ignorant… Keep an open mind, and you’ll learn things; you will miss other 
people’s good qualities if you just concentrate on your own abilities.”
7 He invited several 
advisors to the imperial court and favored the Jesuits, who came to teach many branches 
of knowledge, including astronomy, geometry, medicine and Western technology. 
Among the gifts brought by European envoys, the emperor admired enamel work 
on copper of the Limoges type with opaque pink shades and painted with perspective, 
which were different from Chinese brushwork. In March 1716 Matteo Ripa wrote: “His 
Majesty was captivated by our European painted enamels and has gone to every length 
to introduce them into the Imperial workshops that he has set up within the palace.”
8 
He had the Jesuits bring experts and pigments from Europe to experiment with the 
European palette on Chinese ceramics.
9 Such items made with colors from the West 
were known as 珐琅彩 falangcai, meaning “foreign colors.”10
Jean-Baptiste Gravereau, an expert French enameler, travelled to China in 1719 
to collaborate with Jesuits already working in the Beijing court including Giuseppe 
Castiglione and Matteo Ripa.
11 They experimented at painting porcelain bowls  sent  
from Jingdezhen with pigments imported from Europe. Initially the colors were dull. 
4 Harrisson, Later Ceramics in South-East Asia, 47. 
5 Fang, Chinese Ceramics, 84.
6 Porcelain means a ceramic made of fine white clay, fired at a temperature of 1280-1400 Celsius, 
with a high-gloss glaze. Porcelain wares are durable and easy to clean, resulting in high market 
demand.
7 Spence, Emperor of China: Self-Portrait of K’ang-Hsi, 65.
8 Thompson, “The Palette of Famille-rose,” 28.
9 Fang, Chinese Ceramics, 105.
10 Color designs on Chinese ceramics have a long history. A technique was developed in the Ming 
dynasty called wucai, literally five colors: namely red, yellow, pale green, deep green, and deep 
purple. In the Kangxi era, a further two colors were developed, black and translucent blue as well 
as multiple shades of translucent green, showing the texture of the porcelain. Western collectors 
call Kangxi wucai with a prominent green glaze “famille verte” and use the term “famille rose” for 
falangcai and fencai works in which the prominent color is pink along with opaque white.
11 Scott, “Jesuit Missionaries and the Porcelains of Jingdezhen,” 237-9.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   3 4/18/17   10:09 AM
4 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Only in 1721, almost at the end of the reign, were they able to produce a high quality 
European-style famille-rose palette. 
Emperor Yongzheng (1723–1735)
The Yongzheng emperor loved the arts, and even knew the names of his master 
craftsmen. This was the first reign when a registry of palace craftsmen was compiled. 
Those whose work won royal favor were rewarded. The Italian Jesuit Giuseppe 
Castiglione drew designs in both traditional and contemporary styles that won him 
imperial favor.
12 At that time, apart from nine imported colors, the Beijing palace 
craftsmen succeeded in developing an additional nine shades.13 Chinese academics use 
the term 粉彩fencai for the famille-rose palette, such as the decoration on the dish in 
Figure 1. The term includes the falangcai work of the previous era.
12 Krahl, China: The Three Emperors.
13 Fang, Chinese Ceramics, 108.
Figure 1. Dish painted in fencai polychrome enamels with flowers of magnolia and apricot blossoms, Yongzheng reign, 
1723-1735. Courtesy of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   4 4/18/17   10:09 AM
5Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
A new Yongzheng style soon emerged: the decorations on porcelain looked more 
like a painting than a brocade. As a result of the emperor’s fondness for ceramics, when 
Siam sent tribute in 1724, the second year of the reign, the emperor commanded that 
the return gifts should include jade and ceramics in addition to the traditional items 
of dragon-patterned satin and various other silks.
14 From then on, imperial porcelain 
figured on almost every occasion among the list of items that Chinese emperors sent as 
return gifts to the Siamese king. 
In the Yongzheng reign, French, Dutch, Danish, and Swedish merchants were 
permitted to open factories in Canton, following the English in the previous reign. This 
quarter in Canton become known as the “Thirteen Factories.”
Emperor Qianlong (1736–1795)
The Qianlong emperor was a strong ruler who expanded the nation’s territory with 
the conquest of Xinjiang. Chinese history describes him as an avid collector of artifacts 
who brought Chinese antiquities from the empire’s far-flung regions to conserve within 
the imperial palace, especially Chinese brush painting. The artifacts that he collected, 
including brassware, paintings, ceramics, jade, enamelware, and clocks, can be seen 
today in the world’s leading museums in China, Taiwan, Paris, and London. 
The imperial ceramics of the Qianlong reign differ from the delicately attractive 
products of the brief Yongzheng period, as they were influenced by Qianlong’s personal 
fondness for very elaborately decorated objects as well as Western artifacts. His 
predilection for European subjects combined with extremely ornate scrollwork is amply 
illustrated in the magnificent double-walled vase in Figure 2.
Meanwhile, private craftsmen developed colors to suit the taste of a new era. As 
pink and opaque pastel shades became more popular, ceramic design followed suit, 
embodied in famille-rose porcelain. But private craftsmen who had limited capital 
were unable to afford expensive pigments from Europe and hence sought alternatives. 
Historians believe that around 1720–1725 private craftsmen began to produce pastel 
designs, such as a plate with designs of pink lotus petals which was exported to Batavia 
(Jakarta) (Figure 3).
15 In the early examples of the famille-rose palette taken to Southeast 
Asia, the enamel tends to stand out in relief much like the impasto of oil colors on 
canvas, but unlike the finer enamels on imperial wares.
16 Later in the reign, the imperial 
workshop in Beijing ceased to operate. The decoration of imperial wares was transferred 
to Jingdezhen, and the Beijing workshop became obsolete.
17
In the 18th century, over eighty percent of all Chinese porcelain was produced at the 
kilns of Jingdezhen. The majority was exported to Europe, India, Southeast Asia, Persia, 
and the Ottoman Empire. Like tea and coffee, porcelain became a fashionable status 
symbol in Europe. Fine porcelain for tea services as well as dinner sets was de rigueur in 
well-to-do households. Traders arrived in China to order millions of pieces of porcelain. 
14 Thongthae and Udom, “Prawatisat kan thut rawang thai-jin,” 247.
15 Harrisson, Later Ceramics in South-East Asia, color plates 35a, 35b.
16 Harrisson, Later Ceramics in South-East Asia, 69.
17 Thompson, “The Palette of Famille-rose,” 38-9.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   5 4/18/17   10:09 AM
6 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Figure 2. Double-walled vase painted with flowers and gold floral scrolls on 
blue ground, Qianlong reign 1736-1795. Courtesy of the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, London.
Figure 3. A polychrome dish, the interior decorated with a lotus flower in semi-
relief rose enamels, from a private collection in Sumatra. Picture from Harrisson, 
Later Ceramics in South-East Asia.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   6 4/18/17   10:09 AM
7Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
In an effort to control trade with the West, the Chinese government confined trade to a 
single port under the “Canton System” (1757-1842). An edict in 1757 restricted Western 
merchants to Canton during the junk trading season when the port was invariably packed. 
This became the only window between China and the outside world. Enamel workshops 
for painting undecorated porcelain from Jingdezhen according to Western requirements 
proliferated in Canton where the traders could oversee samples and promptly correct 
any mistakes. These workshops were situated on the southern bank of the Pearl River 
(Zhujiang).
An American traveler, who surveyed the ceramic workshops in 1769, recorded that 
“In a workshop with a long span of space, about 300 artisans were painting images on 
porcelain wares… There were old-aged workers, as well as child laborers of around 
six or seven in age. It was most surprising that there were at least 100 of this type of 
workshops around.” The Chinese called these 廣彩 guangcai ware (literally Guangzhou 
colors).
18 By this time, private craftsmen succeeded in making fencai products of high 
quality, but the quality of export wares was lower than imperial wares.
In summary, the Chinese ceramics industry flourished in the early Qing period 
because of imperial patronage as well as strong demand from abroad. With color 
pigments from the West, the imperial workshop in Beijing developed the ability to 
decorate porcelain with a wider range of colors, as well as Western-influenced designs. 
Private kilns in Jingdezhen and the enameling workshops in Canton were soon capable 
of copying these innovations in soft colors. The new famille-rose palette was also 
favored on armorial wares for Western markets. From 1724, during the Thaisa reign 
in Siam, the Yongzheng emperor added imperial porcelain to the return gifts sent to 
the Siamese king. These developments in China set the stage for the appearance of 
Bencharong (Figure 4).
China-Siam trade 1629–1767: government policies and private enterprise
Along with other Asian polities, Ayutthaya traded with China during the Ming 
and Qing dynasties under the tribute system. Siam sent envoys via Canton carrying a 
khamhap,
19 and a royal missive on a suphannabat (golden sheet) along with articles of 
tribute to present to the emperor in Beijing every three years.20 Each time the emperor 
presented the envoys with return gifts, usually bolts of silk and satin and other articles 
of value. The Siamese fleet of up to three junks, while on such tribute missions, also 
18 Fang, Chinese Ceramics, 120.
19 Khamhap, according to Sresthabongsa Chongsanguan, was the identification pass (known as 勘
合 Kanhe
 in 
Chinese) used since 1383 to identify tribute missions. Phra ratchasan khamhap was 
the accompanying document sent by Ayutthaya which inscribed the name of the king, name of the 
envoy, detailed description of the tribute and date of departure from Ayutthaya. Chinese officials 
checked to authenticate the khamhap pass given to the Siamese by the Chinese government, before 
permitting the envoys to proceed to the capital. This was to prevent foreign traders entering by 
falsely claiming to be a tributary mission. 
20 The Siamese were very erratic in sending tribute missions; in some years two missions were sent, 
but sometimes there was a gap of over twenty years between missions.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   7 4/18/17   10:09 AM
8 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
carried trade goods to sell at a profit in Canton and bought Chinese goods to carry back 
to Siam. These goods enjoyed reductions or exemptions from customs duties. Ceramics 
were one of the products taken back to Siam because they served as apchao (ballast)21 
that would not be damaged by seawater. According to Jörg, porcelain was regarded by 
the Dutch and other East India Companies as an ideal item for the lowest layer of cargo 
as it gave off no smell or taste to taint the aromatic tea cargo, while also helping to check 
any seepage of seawater during the journey.
22 
The China-Siam trade was influenced by the politics of the era, including the 
dynastic struggles in China, and the personalities in the Siamese phrakhlang, 23 the 
department that oversaw all overseas trade.
The junk trade under the Prasat Thong dynasty, 1629–1688
In the 17th century the junk trade between China and Ayutthaya was beset with 
many restrictions arising from politics on both sides. The Manchus captured Beijing in 
1644 but did not immediately gain control of the south. Battles against Ming loyalists 
continued over many years. The Qing ruled indirectly through Chinese warlords who 
21 Apchao derived from the word pronounced in Hokkien dialect as apchang 壓艙 (yacang in pinyin, 
translated as ballast). Ballast provides weight to counter the ship rolling during rough waves on the 
high seas. Captains preferred to use ballast goods that could be sold at their destination, including 
tin, lead, various timbers, cane, crockery, and stone sculptures. The term apchao included goods 
that were disguised as ballast in order to avoid customs duties.
22 Jörg, Porcelain and the Dutch China Trade, 113.
23 This term is used for both the ministry and its head. In this article, “phrakhlang” is used for the 
ministry and “Phrakhlang” for the minister at its head.
Figure 4. Ayutthaya Bencharong bowl, decorated with flower motif in predominantly pink palette. Courtesy of Mr. 
Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   8 4/18/17   10:09 AM
9Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
threw in their lot with Beijing in exchange for local power. The government could not 
control trade in the South China Sea. From 1625 to 1681, control of the seas fell into the 
hands of a pirate network operated by the Zheng clan, headed successively by Zheng 
Zhilong,
24 his son Zheng Chenggong, better known as Koxinga, and his grandson Zheng 
Jing.
Once the Qing achieved some level of stability, King Prasat Thong sent tribute 
to Shunzhi, the first Qing emperor, at Beijing in 1652. The mission requested a new 
khamhap token, which was granted, and the Siamese tribute ships were allowed to trade 
at Canton.
25 Four years later in 1656 an imperial edict banned Chinese from traveling 
on the seas—a measure aimed at Ming diehard loyalists. 26 The ban remained in place 
for twenty-eight years, almost to the end of the Narai reign. This ban effectively placed 
Chinese private junk traders outside the law. Meanwhile Zheng Chenggong drove the 
Dutch East India Company (VOC) out of Taiwan and set up a base there. Later Zheng 
Jing expanded the clan’s territorial influence on the mainland during the period 1674–80. 
At that time, the attempt by the Qing government to reduce the influence of the 
Han warlords in the south sparked a widespread war, known as the Revolt of the Three 
Feudatories (Yunnan, Fujian, and Guangdong). In the campaigns against the forces 
“opposing Qing to restore Ming” and the forces unwilling to submit to Qing authority, 
the government depopulated coastal villages to cut off support to the enemy. The coastal 
seaboard was thrown into chaos and many millions died.
In the history of Chinese ceramics, the period of disorder—from the death of the 
Ming emperor Wanli in 1620 until the Qing emperor Kangxi captured and reopened 
the southern sea ports in 1684—is known as the “Transitional Period.” During this 
time, Western merchants could not acquire Chinese ceramics as easily as before. They 
consequently turned to the Zheng pirate network on the mainland to carry ceramics out 
to the market, as well as ships to deliver them to various ports around the South China 
Sea including Ayutthaya. For instance, in 1665 Zheng Jing sent ten junks to Ayutthaya.
27 
While the Qing ban on overseas travel remained in force legal junk trade came to a halt. 
During this Transitional Period, Siamese junks, including both tribute and private ships, 
made good profits because there was no competition, especially when the influence of 
the Zheng clan waned and eventually collapsed in the wake of Qing victories.
During the Narai reign (1656–1688), Siam had many skilled Chinese junk traders. 
According to the English merchant George White, “This place’s merchants who are 
keepers and traders for the king are all Chinese. Among the king’s merchants, the 
highest ranking and most capable is Okphra Sivepott.”
28 Chinese sources from the same 
period confirm the skills of officials in the Port Department manned by ethnic Chinese. 
24 Zheng Zhilong was the head of a wealthy pirate gang. He had been appointed as navy commander 
by the Ming court, and defeated a Dutch fleet in battle in 1633. He opposed the Qing until 1646, 
but then switched sides and fell in with them. Zheng Zhilong died in Beijing in 1661 as a result of 
his son Zheng Chenggong’s role in opposing the Qing.
25 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 31.
26 Ng, Trade and Society, 52.
27 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 45.
28 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 41.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   9 4/18/17   10:09 AM
10 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
For instance, when a Siamese junk was detained at Boca Tigris (Humen)29 and the cargo 
seized by Chinese officials deteriorated, a missive sent from Siam resulted in the Kangxi 
emperor issuing an edict to Guangdong officials, decreeing that thereafter Siamese ships 
reporting at Boca Tigris could proceed to Canton to sell their goods.
30 However, the 
Siamese took advantage of loopholes in Chinese regulations. Narai sent several support 
ships to accompany the three permitted tribute ships. While these three had to remain 
at the Chinese port while the envoys traveled overland to Beijing, the support ships 
were allowed at Narai’s request to travel to-and-from Siam for “reconditioning,” thus 
achieving two duty-free trading trips within one tribute mission.
31
By the early 1680s the Qing had suppressed their opponents, and retaken the port of 
Amoy (Xiamen) in Fujian Province. South China was stabilized. The government lifted 
the ban on private overseas traders, and maritime customs administrations were set up 
in 1684 in Guangdong, Fujian, and the Jiangnan region (comprising parts of Jiangsu, 
Anhui, Jiangxi and Zhejiang provinces). However, prohibitions against immigration 
and trade to Southeast Asia were occasionally enacted in succeeding years, but the 
institutionalization of maritime trade under the haiguan (海關) system after 1684 
marked a change to a more permissive outlook.
32 
Fujian traders, in particular, streamed out to ports in Southeast Asia. As Fujian was 
a mountainous region, with only a third of the territory available for agriculture, most 
of the population made a living from the sea. The junk trade of the seafaring Hokkiens 
made Amoy a flourishing port in the early Qing era. After the reopening of Chinese ports, 
the French cleric Nicolas Gervaise recorded in 1685 that fifteen to twenty Chinese junks 
visited Ayutthaya each year laden with the finest goods of China and Japan, compared 
to seven to eight illegal junks before the lifting of the ban.
33
Throughout the Prasat Thong dynasty a large quantity of quality Chinese ceramics 
was imported into Siam. The Jesuit Guy Tachard described the house prepared to 
accommodate the French envoys in 1685 as “the fairest and most commodious House 
of the Town, which belonged to a great Mandarin, a Persian by Nation ... splendidly 
furnished ... Which way soever one cast his Eyes, there was nothing to be seen but fine 
China of all sizes, placed in niches; in a word, every thing lookt cool and pleasant.”
34 
Among the gifts from Narai to Louis XIV which the French envoy, the Chevalier 
de Chaumont, carried back to Paris in 1685 were 1,500 to 1,550 pieces of Chinese 
ceramics, all of high quality and great beauty, reckoned “the best and most curious of 
all the Indies.”
35 
Today in Ayutthaya remnants of 18th century Chinese ceramics from the Kangxi 
era can still be seen in the decoration of several wat. For example, shards are used to 
fashion the scales of the naga framing the staircases at the prang of Wat Phutthaisawan 
29 A strait at the entry of the Pearl River leading to Guangdong province.
30 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 37.
31 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 32-4.
32 Cushman, Fields From the Sea, 128.
33 Gervaise, Natural and Political History of the Kingdom of Siam, 49.
34 Tachard, Voyage to Siam, 148.
35 Smithies, Aspects of the Embassy to Siam 1685, 140.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   10 4/18/17   10:09 AM
11Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
(Figure 5). The dating of these pieces shows that this prang was built or renovated in 
the late Narai or early Ban Phlu Luang era. Chinese porcelain shards are also used in 
the decoration of Wat Mahathat as seen on an image of Hanuman kept in the Chao 
Samphraya National Museum (Figure 6). Most of the shards used in such decorations 
are blue and white, while a small amount is polychrome ware. This stands in contrast to 
Figure 5. Porcelain shards decorating the naga staircases at Wat Phutthaisawan. Author’s 
photo.
Figure 6. Hanuman decorated with 18th century Chinese porcelain shards, Chao Sam 
Phraya National Museum. Author’s photo.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   11 4/18/17   10:09 AM
12 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Wat Arun in Bangkok constructed during the early Rattanakosin era where almost all of 
the shards are colored wares.
The Chinese junk trade during the Ban Phlu Luang dynasty 1688–1767
The transition from King Narai to King Phetracha in 1688 meant that the pattern 
of trade with China changed. With the withdrawal of the French and the British from 
Ayutthaya and the according reduction in the activity of the Dutch, Siam’s trade was 
concentrated more than before on China. Yet there was no tribute mission for twenty-
four years after 1684. Why should this have been?
Siam did not lack people with ability and experience in the tribute trade. The 
nobles overseeing the phrakhlang, such as Okya Kosa Pan, were experienced in foreign 
relations. After the death of Kosa Pan, the Port Department came under the care of Okya 
Sombathiban, an ethnic Chinese and a royal favorite,
36 who had been a subordinate of 
Constantine Phaulkon37 and was well-versed in the workings of the Port Department. 
The post of Phraya Yommarat was held by a learned Chinese.38 There were over 3,000 
people of Chinese ethnicity in Ayutthaya. 39 Hence the lack of tribute missions was 
clearly not due to lack of personnel. The change of dynasty in Siam was a complicating 
factor though. The Chinese imperial court valued continuity in the ruling families of its 
tributary states.
40 The fact that King Phetracha was an in-law of King Narai should have 
made it easier to explain the succession. Whether the dynastic break was the reason for 
the gap in tribute missions awaits further research. 
Perhaps the method of trading with China changed in this era because so many 
Chinese junks came to trade in Siam that preparing tribute missions was no longer 
necessary for selling the products that phrakhlang collected. Ayutthaya could buy goods 
from China, as well as earning good revenues from customs duties, without sending 
tribute missions which were complicated to organize and risky to undertake. A parallel 
development can be seen at Batavia. In 1689 Hoge Regering, director of the VOC at 
Batavia, stopped sending ships from Batavia to China, and instead bought goods or 
commissioned goods from Chinese junk merchants calling at Batavia because the goods 
were cheaper.
41
Allowing merchants from Guangdong, Fujian, and the Jiangnan region to trade 
36 Okya Sombathiban had formerly helped Phaulkon in the Port Department, and was jailed after 
the succcession of King Phetracha. Through the intercession of Prince Sorasak’s mother, he was 
released and was re-employed in a rather lowly post in the bureaucracy. After bringing the king 
information about the revolt at Nakhon Ratchasima, he returned to favor and was appointed to the 
post of Okya Sombathiban as well as the overseer of the Port Department. King Phetracha trusted 
him to look after Prince Khwan, which led to his execution under King Sua. See Dhiravat, “Dutch 
and French Evidence Concerning Court Conflicts at the end of King Phetracha’s Reign, 1699-1703.
37 Dhiravat, “Western Evidence Concerning the Role of the Chinese at the Siamese Court,” 4.
38 Kaempfer, Description of the Kingdom of Siam, 38.
39 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 46.
40 After the fall of Ayutthaya in 1767, King Taksin waited fourteen years before gaining recognition, 
and the news did not reach his capital at Thonburi until after he had been overthrown.
41 Jörg, Porcelain and the Dutch China Trade, 19.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   12 4/18/17   10:09 AM
13Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
overseas from 1684 allowed Chinese goods to flow out to the world market, and 
especially to Batavia. In 1694 Chinese junks carried over two million pieces of Chinese 
ceramics to Batavia. Of these, 1.2 million pieces were for local and regional markets, 
400,000 taken to Europe by the VOC, and around 400,000 bought by private merchants 
and VOC employees to sell in Europe.
42 There were around thirty shops in Batavia 
selling Chinese ceramics. European merchants could order ceramics with the designs 
they required including the requisite family coat of arms. At the National Archives in 
Jakarta there is a contract dated May 1706 between a German officer of the VOC and a 
Chinese junk merchant to buy a large garniture consisting of three jars with covers and 
two beakers with the coat of arms of Frederick the Great, King of Prussia (1701–1713).
43
Kangxi-era ceramics found in Siam are mostly bowls produced for export similar 
to those carried by Chinese junks to Batavia. Some, such as the underglaze blue plates 
found in Ayutthaya and a bowl found in Lopburi with a design of a young boy with a 
flower (Figure 7), may have arrived in Siam via Batavia. Similar patterns have been 
found in the Vung Tau wreck, a junk that sunk off the coast of Vietnam while en route to 
Batavia in the Phetracha reign.
44
King Sua (1703–1708)
Aernout Cleur, the VOC director (or Chief Factor) in Ayutthaya, heard from Thai 
nobles that after King Sua ascended the throne, Okya Sombathiban, who oversaw the 
phrakhlang late in the Phetracha reign, had been arrested as part of the rival faction of 
Phra Khwan, stripped of his property, and executed. The Department of Trade fell under 
the responsibility of another Chinese individual who was awarded the title of Okphra 
42 Jörg, “Chinese Porcelain for the Dutch in the Seventeenth Century,” 197.
43 Jörg, “Chinese Porcelain for the Dutch in the Seventeenth Century,” 201-2.
44 Jörg and Flecker Porcelain from the Vung Tau Wreck: The Hallstrom Excavation, Fig. 14.
Figure 7. Bowl and plates decorated with boys holding a flower, found in Lopburi and Ayutthaya respectively. Courtesy of 
Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   13 4/18/17   10:09 AM
14 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Sombathiban, and presented by the king with the property seized from his predecessor.45
King Sua was acquainted with trade. Since the Phetracha reign, he had been 
regularly sending junks to trade on the Coromandel coast, in Japan, and at Batavia. The 
new Sombathiban had risen in the bureaucracy due to his cleverness, and probably still 
held the post six years later when the VOC reported that Ayutthaya had sent a junk with 
a missive to Batavia in 1709-1710.
46 He could also be the man who organized a tribute 
mission to China in 1708 after the gap of 24 years.
King Thaisa (1709–1732)
In 1711 Okya Sombathiban, who was in charge of royal trade was promoted by King 
Thaisa, to head the phrakhlang. According to Monseigneur Louis-Armand Champion 
de Cicé, writing in 1714, the phrakhlang minister was much loved and esteemed by 
Thaisa, as he had been by the king’s father, King Sua.47 The Chinese Phrakhlang was 
ordered to command a fleet with 10,000 men to attack Cambodia. Though he was skilled 
in trading, he had no talent for warfare. The Ayutthaya army won the war, but the navy 
led by the Chinese Phrakhlang was defeated by the Vietnamese at the Phutthaimat 
estuary. King Thaisa imposed only a light punishment for this failure, namely a fine of 
guns, ammunition, gunpowder and boats.
48 A British document from the Fort St. George 
Diary in Madras (Chennai) mentioned that the Chinese Phrakhlang had relatives in the 
Amoy government; most likely he was a Hokkien.
49 De Cicé, a French cleric resident in  
Ayutthaya, reported: 
The new king [Thaisa] being young and pleasure-loving, discharging the greater 
part of the burden of the government of his realm to his Barcalon [Phraklang], 
this mandarin, knowing the ways of the court, has taken all possible measures 
to strengthen his position, and render himself formidable to his enemies…. He 
has put Chinese into the most eminent posts, above all those which have some 
connection with trade, so that at present it is the Chinese who do all the trading in 
this kingdom.
50
With the reopening of private trade, more Chinese joined those who had fled during 
the Ming–Qing transition. In Ayutthaya and Ligor (Nakhon Si Thammarat), an important 
tin center, new arrivals were assisted by the older settlers to find work or to bid for tax 
farms.
In the early Ban Phlu Luang era, tea drinking began to catch on in Europe. Once 
tea drinking became a part of the everyday life of the middle class, tea became China’s 
45 Dhiravat, “Western Evidence Concerning the Role of the Chinese at the Siamese Court,” 5; 
Dhiravat, “Dutch and French Evidence Concerning Court Conflicts at the End of King Phetracha’s 
Reign.”
46 Dhiravat, “Western Evidence Concerning the Role of the Chinese at the Siamese Court,” 5.
47 Dhiravat, “Princes, Pretenders, and the Chinese Phrakhlang,” 117.
48 Phraratchaphongsawadan krung si ayutthaya chabap Moh Bradley, 391.
49 Dhiravat, “Princes, Pretenders, and the Chinese Phrakhlang,” 117.
50 Dhiravat, “Western Evidence Concerning the Role of the Chinese at the Siamese Court,” 14.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   14 4/18/17   10:09 AM
15Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
leading export. As a result, tin which was used to line tea chests as well as to make spirit 
money for worshipping ancestors and gods, was in great demand in China. According 
to Imel Christiaen Cock, Chief Factor (or director) of the VOC in Ayutthaya from 1726 
to 1727, in both Khao Daeng and “Dinlemo” districts of Ligor, supervision over the tin 
deposits and the collection of the tin to be sent as tribute (suai) to Ayutthaya changed 
hands. The Chinese paid large sums to obtain these positions. A Chinese tax farmer 
who controlled tin production in Dinlemo was appointed Okluang Chaiphakdi. At Khao 
Daeng the amount of tin due to the king was increased from 15 bahar to 42 bahar. The 
Dutch, who had been granted a monopoly on the purchase of tin at Ligor since the Narai 
reign, were not able to buy enough for their needs.
51 In the second decade of the 18th 
century, when China had an almost insatiable demand for tin, Chinese traders as well 
as Siamese crown junks manned largely by Chinese sailors, exported large amounts. 
Imports of Chinese porcelain back to Siam increased accordingly. 
In 1717 the Kangxi emperor again
 imposed a new maritime restriction forbidding
 
junks from Guangdong, Fujian, and Zhejiang to trade with Southeast Asia (usually 
referred to as Nanyang, literally “Southern Ocean”). But on this occasion the policy was 
not enforced as strictly as during dynastic transition. The domestic commercial network 
was allowed to function, and in the following year trade with Japan, Ryukyu (Okinawa), 
and Annam (central-southern Vietnam) was allowed to resume. Hence Fujianese, or 
more specifically Hokkien (because the sailors spoke Hokkien, the Minnan dialiect), 
junks sailed to Siam or Batavia under the pretext that they were heading for Macao or 
Annam. Meanwhile foreign ships could still go to trade at Chinese ports in the usual 
way.
52 The renewed ban thus increased the business for Siamese junks, and the Siamese 
kings sent tribute missions more frequently.
The flow of Chinese settlers into Siam was related to political disorder in China, 
resulting in a number of Ming loyalists settling in Siam during the dynastic transition.53 
During the overseas trading bans in the early 18th century, several Hokkien who made 
their living from marine trade relocated their business to Siam because they received 
protection there. For instance, one royal missive requested a pardon for Chinese crews 
working on the King of Siam’s tribute ships. The missive asks Chinese officials not 
to punish them as well as granting them permission to sail back to Siam. The Chinese 
Phrakhlang was considered to be the patron of the Chinese junk crews, and his influence 
may have played a part in the “Nai Kai Uprising” (see below).
Apart from the Chinese Phrakhlang, the names of several other rich merchants appear 
in the records, including Chen Zhaoka 陳昭誇 (born in Amoy, moved to Siam, titled 
Luang Jinjulisamutphakdi);
54 Phraya Lauja, described by Wijbrand Blom as the most 
51 Dhiravat, “Princes, Pretenders, and the Chinese Phrakhlang,” 118.
52 Ng, Trade and Society; The Amoy Network on the China Coast, 57.
53 In 1660, Li Tin Gua, the last descendant of the Ming, escaped to Burma (Myanmar), where 
several loyalist mandarins joined him. Chinese sources state that an old mandarin named Kan Kua 
Tai escaped to Ayutthaya and later marrried a member of the Ayutthaya royal family. At the same 
time the ancestors of another Ming loyalist, Jao Khrua Ngoen sae Tan, the maternal grandfather of 
King Mongkut (Rama IV), took refuge and lived around the Sugarpalm Road Canal in Ayutthaya.
54 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 61.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   15 4/18/17   10:09 AM
16 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
eminent private merchant in the country;55 and Luang Sisombat, or Wang Xingquan 王
興全 (from Amoy), who later became the Phrakhlang.56 In this era, Ayutthaya prospered 
from trade and there was a rich community of Chinese immigrants.
An important change in China-Siam relations occured in 1722, the last year of the 
Kangxi reign, when rice was in short supply and increasingly expensive in southeastern 
China. Siam sent an envoy to inform the Chinese court that rice in Siam was cheaply 
available. As a result, the emperor gave permission for Siamese junks to import 300,000 
picul of rice duty-free for sale in China’s coastal provinces to ameliorate conditions 
there.
57 Over the following years, the import of Siamese rice became steadily more 
frequent. Understanding the importance of these imports to well-being and political 
stability, the imperial court granted more and more concessions to the junks carrying 
rice, including waiver of taxes on other goods carried, and rewards to the captains.
58
As noted above, when Siam sent tribute to the Yongzheng emperor in 1724, two 
years after the start of the rice imports, jade and imperial ceramics were included for 
the first time in the return gifts to King Thaisa.
59 This practice was repeated on the 
occasion of another tribute mission in 1729. Imperial ceramics were considered articles 
of high value and prestige, reserved as gifts to those who rendered special services to the 
emperor, such as generals victorious in war, or tributary kings considered of importance 
to China.
 Siam’s rice surplus thus seems to have played a part in the history of Thai 
ceramics.
In this period, Siam sent orders for large amounts of Chinese ceramics, including 
not only blue and white but also polychrome ware decorated in fencai pastel shades with 
Thai designs—the style that would become known as Bencharong.
The Borommakot (1732–1758) and Ekathat reigns (1758–1767)
The royal transition at the end of the Thaisa reign was violent and disruptive. When 
the king fell fatally ill, he appointed one of his sons, Prince Aphai as his successor, and 
the Chinese Phrakhlang threw his support behind Prince Aphai. In the struggle over 
the succession, however, Aphai was defeated, and the Chinese Phrakhlang took refuge 
in the monkhood.
60 According to Aumond, the new king sent some thirty Malays to 
seize him, and he was later executed while still in his robe.61 King Borommakot, who 
55 Dhiravat, “Western Evidence Concerning the Role of the Chinese at the Siamese Court,” 9.
56 Kulap, Mahamukhamattayanukulawong, 275-89.
57 Cushman, Fields from the Sea, 129.
58 Sarasin, Tribute and Profit, 42-90.
59 Thongthae and Udom, “Prawatisat kan thut rawang thai-jin,” 247.
60 The Phan Janthanumat chronicle states, “Sang, the Racha Bòriban, fled to be ordained as a 
senior monk. He was able to be caught at a district of the Municipality of Bò Chum. [The King] 
had both of Their Holy Lordships executed with sandalwood sections. Khæk and Chams stabbed 
Sem, the Phichai Racha, and Phun, the Yommarat, to death outside the gates of the Monastery 
of Sappanwood. Sang, the Racha Bòriban, was defrocked and taken to be done away with at 
the execution grounds.” Cushman, Royal Chronicles, 419; Phraratchaphongsawadan krung si 
ayutthaya chabap Moh Bradley, 401-2.
61 Dhiravat, “Princes, Pretenders, and the Chinese Phrakhlang,” 121. Unfortunately, the personal 
name of this Chinese Phrakhlang has been lost, probably as a result of his unfortunate demise.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   16 4/18/17   10:09 AM
17Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
succeeded to the throne, appointed Phraya Chamnan Borirak (Uu) from a Brahman 
lineage as Phrakhlang. But the matter did not end there. Over a year later in 1734, some 
in the Chinese community in Ayutthaya rose in revolt and invaded the royal palace in 
the hope of replacing the king. The reasons behind the revolt are not reported in the 
chronicles, but possibly the supporters of the former Chinese Phrakhlang were behind 
it because they had lost benefits in the succession and wished to take revenge for their 
masters and colleagues who had lost their lives in the conflict.
62 This event is known as 
the Nai Kai Uprising, taking the name from the largest Hokkien quarter in Ayutthaya at 
that time.
63
The fall of the Chinese Phrakhlang and the Nai Kai Uprising, however, did not do 
any lasting damage to the position of the Chinese at Ayutthaya. Chaophraya Chamnan 
Borirak (Uu) held the post of Phrakhlang for several years, and was succeeded by 
Chaophraya Phrakhlang (Chim),
64 who was related to him by marriage.65 A third holder 
of the Phrakhlang post in the Borommakot reign was Wang Xingquan 王興全. Although 
he became Phrakhlang only late in the reign, his influence had been significant much 
earlier. In his study of the great households, K. S. R. Kulap relates that Wang Xingquan 
was a Hokkien merchant who came to Ayutthaya during the Thaisa reign, bringing 
goods to exchange against forest and other goods (aromatic woods, ivory, rhino horn, 
lac, tin, dried meat, dried fish, rice, salt) for export to China. Later he was appointed as 
Thong Sua, interpreter of the Siamese tribute mission to China, and rose to the title of 
Luang Sisombat before the end of the reign. During the Nai Kai Uprising in 1734 he 
had many followers whom “he mobilized to suppress the villainous Chinese, killing 
some and arresting many hundreds of them. Of those arrested, the king ordered the 
execution of 53 ... jailed 164 ... and had the remaining 700 cut off their queues to become 
Thai, and demoted all of them to be royal phrai, with tattoos on the faces, looking 
after the boatyard for the royal navy war boats at the mouth of Ironwood Canal.”
66 
As a result of the royal favor won in this incident, Wang Xingquan was promoted to 
62 The Phan Janthanumat chronicle states that officials “seized two hundred and eighty-one 
persons.... The ten people constituting the instigators of the incident were ordered to be executed. 
Their accomplices in that incident were ordered to be incarcerated in prison.” Cushman, Royal 
Chronicles, 427; Phraratchaphongsawadan krung si ayutthaya chabap Moh Bradley; “two 
hundred Chinese rebels were arrested, forty leaders were executed,” 404.
63 Thavorn Sikkhakoson states that nai kai is Hokkien meaning “inner street,” meaning a market 
on the inner city road. 
64 Some sources say he was Phrakhlang under King Thaisa; see the history of Phraya 
Mahintharasakdithamrong (Pheng), the founder of the Phenkun family. 
65 Kulap’s information is inconsistent. Page 176 states that Phraya Thepworakhun, the son of Phraya 
Phrakhlang (Chim) married the daughter of Chaophraya Chamnan Borirak, while Page 215 states that 
Chim was a son-in-law of Chaophraya Chamnan Borirak (Kulap, Mahamukhamattayanukulawong, 
176, 215). The first is consistent with the history of Phraya Mahintharasakdithamrong which states 
that Chim was working in the phrakhlang in the Thaisa reign. The second reference is supported 
by a genealogical chart of the family tree of Chaophraya Chamnan Borirak published by the Fine 
Arts Department. David Wyatt has also given credence to this interpretation. Given the confusion 
in the sources of reference it is difficult to reconcile the conflicting statements. At best we can show 
that there are two contradictory stories about the man.
66 Kulap, Mahamukhamattayanukulawong, 280.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   17 4/18/17   10:09 AM
18 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
be Okphra Chodukratchasetthi, and many years later, “Okphra Chodukratchasetthi 
(Wang Xingquan) was made Chaophraya Phrakhlang, one of the four-pillar ministers, 
as the office was then vacant, and he was called jao khun phrakhlang jin (the Honorable 
Chinese Minister of Phrakhlang) because he had not cut off his queue.”
67
Before coming to Siam, Wang Xingquan had a family at Guangnan 廣南, possibly 
meaning Quang Nam province in Vietnam where Hoi An port was located. Many Chinese 
merchants had settled there because one year after the Kangxi emperor reimposed the 
maritime ban in 1717, an exception was made allowing Chinese ocean junks to visit 
Japan, Ryukyu, and Annam. Fujianese junks that were covertly trading with Siam and 
Batavia had to call in at Vietnam or Macao.
68 As a result, a small community of Chinese 
seafarers settled in Vietnam during the maritime ban which lasted about ten years. 
Consequently, we find that some Chinese who eventually settled in Siam came from 
Vietnam, like Wang Xingquan. 
Although the followers of the old Chinese Phrakhlang lost out in the succession 
at the end of the Thaisa reign, a new group of Chinese merchants was promoted in the 
Borommakot reign with scarcely a break. The need for Chinese to man the junks and 
trade with China, East Asia, and Southeast Asia, under the Phrakhlang continued until 
the early Rattanakosin era.
When Qianlong ascended the throne, as a result of his liking of porcelain, Siam 
continued to receive royal gifts of ceramics. According to the Chinese records, these 
included:
1749: imperial ceramics, 146 pieces.
1753: imperial ceramics, 140 pieces; falangcai, 6 pieces.
1757: imperial ceramics, 140 pieces; falangcai, 13 pieces.
1762: imperial ceramics, 140 pieces; falangcai, 13 pieces.
1766: imperial ceramics, 140 pieces; falangcai, 13 pieces.
69
In summary, the China-Siam trade was severely disrupted by the Ming–Qing 
transition in the mid-17th century and by the maritime trading ban that followed. 
Commerce continued through the tributary trade as well as pirate networks, and 
ceramics figured prominently in the imports to Siam. In the early 18th century, several 
factors combined to boost the trade of ceramics from China to Siam: Chinese private 
trade boomed after the maritime ban was lifted; the Chinese immigrant community 
in Ayutthaya grew large and wealthy; many ethnic Chinese became prominent in the 
administration of the trade with China; and the need of China for Siamese rice resulted in 
trading concessions and warm relations, resulting in the emperor including fine imperial 
ceramics among the gifts to the Siamese king.
67 Kulap, Mahamukhamattayanukulawong, 281.
68 Ng, Trade and Society: The Amoy Network on the China Coast, 57.
69 Thongthae and Udom, “Prawatisat kan thut rawang thai-jin,” 248-53.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   18 4/18/17   10:09 AM
19Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
Chinese porcelain found in Siam
At the fall of Ayutthaya in 1767, many valuable ceramics were lost. Hundreds 
of items of fine ceramics disappeared from the royal palace. Today not a single piece 
remains that can be identifed as part of the return gifts brought back from Beijing by 
the Siamese envoys. However, there remains a considerable quantity of ceramics from 
China. These fall into two categories: first, Thai-style pieces that Ayutthaya ordered to be 
produced in China; and second, Chinese commercial wares that were imported for sale 
in the markets and neighborhoods where ethnic Chinese had shops. The shards found 
scattered around Ayutthaya suggest that Chinese commercial wares far outnumbered the 
articles commissioned from Ayutthaya in Siamese style.
Sources of Chinese ceramics found in Siam
A majority of the Chinese shards found in Ayutthaya were underglaze blue porcelain. 
Blue and white ware was the main production in Jingdezhen 景德鎮, Jiangxi province, 
which had become China’s main porcelain producing center. In Thai the products of 
Jingdezhen are known as kangsai ware (based on the Chaozhou (Teochew) pronunciation 
of Jiangxi). Among the shards found at Ayutthaya are also pieces from several kilns in 
Fujian and Guangdong provinces and from Longquan 龍泉 in Zhejiang province. 
Figure 8. A Kraak bowl from Jingdezhen recovered from the Gulf of Thailand. Author’s collection.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   19 4/18/17   10:09 AM
20 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Jingdezhen is situated in an area endowed with the raw materials needed for fine 
porcelain production, and has a tradition of craftsmanship stretching back to the Yuan 
dynasty (1271-1368).70 Porcelain used in imperial ceremonies as well as the return gifts 
presented to tributary rulers, both blue and white and polychrome ware, were almost 
all produced there. Jingdezhen ware also enjoyed strong demand in overseas markets. 
Porcelain exports to European markets were almost exclusively from Jingdezhen, 
as is evident from museum holdings all over Europe and the Middle East, and is 
further testified by shipwreck finds during the past few decades. According to Pariwat 
Thammapreechakorn, chief curator of the Southeast Asian Ceramics Museum, the 
majority of Ming underglaze blue shards found in Siam were products of Jingdezhen. 
70 Royal kilns from the Northern Song (960–1127) were in Kaifeng and those of the Southern Song 
(1127–1279) in Hangzhou. Throughout the Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties, Jingdezhen produced 
ceramics for the imperial court.
Figure 9. Shards of Jingdezhen underglaze blue found in Ayutthaya. The bird piece on top was picked up by the author near 
Khlong Tho (คลองท่อ) just outside the palace wall. Author’s collection.
Figure 10. A late Ming Fujian bowl on the right compared with a Jingdezhen bowl on the left. Author’s collection
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   20 4/18/17   10:10 AM
21Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
From the 16th century onward, however, Dehua 德化, Anxi 安溪, Pinghe 平和, 
Zhangzhou漳州and other kilns in southern Fujian, along with the Raoping and Dapu 
kilns in Guangdong, started to produce ceramics for export. In Fujian province, kiln 
sites were scattered across many villages (see Figure 11). The products of these Ming-
Qing non-official kilns in coastal Southeast China were inferior in quality to Jingdezhen 
wares, as the clay had more impurities. The Jingdezhen clay was not only finer but also 
was better prepared, washed, and immersed for a longer time. These factors contribute 
to fine potting.
71 Although the products from provincial kilns were lower in quality than 
those from Jingdezhen, they were popular because of their cheaper price and ready 
availability. These kilns lay closer to the major ports, namely Quanzhou 泉州, Yuegang 
月港, Fuzhou 福州, Zhangzhou, and Xiamen 廈門 in Fujian Province, and Canton 
(Guangzhou 廣州) in Guangdong Province. 
In Ayutthaya, many shards of Fujianese ceramics have been found, originating from 
several production centers in the Zhangzhou region of Fujian,
72 which had a long history 
of trading with Siam.73 Fujian wares are mostly everyday bowls of low quality painted 
simply in underglaze blue. The kilns there were severely damaged during the warfare 
that raged in the coastal region for over thirty years during the Ming-Qing transition. 
Many of the kilns ceased production, and the local industry never really recovered, 
unlike in Jingdezhen.
71 Tan, Zhangzhou Ware Found in the Philippines, 19.
72 Formerly this was known in the West as Swatow ware, but recent excavation in China over the 
past two decades shows these were made in Fujian province in several villages around Zhangzhou, 
not around Swatow (Shantou) in northern Guangdong province, which was only a small fishing 
village and not a maritime port until the 19th century.
73 Several Thai-Chinese families hail from here. In the Ayutthaya period Zhangzhou was called 
“Zhiangzhiu” and Quanzhou to the north was called “Zhazhiu” which derived from the Hokkien 
pronounciation of the names. Interview with Thavorn Sikhakoson, who noted that the Ayutthaya-
era poem, Klon suat subinkuman, mentioned people from “Zhazhiu” operating puppets.
Figure 11. Kiln sites and ports of Fujian; from Tan, Zhangzhou Ware Found in the Philippines, 18
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   21 4/18/17   10:10 AM
22 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Another important center in Fujian was Dehua, some eighty kilometers to the 
north in the mountains where there was a good supply of fine clay. This center was 
known to the Portuguese and Dutch in the late Ming era. It had a reputation for making 
Figure 12. Commercial ceramics for everyday use found in Ayutthaya. This pattern was produced both in Anxi, Fujian and 
Jingdezhen during the Ming to Qing transition. Courtesy of Mr. Chanchai Supanichvoraparch.
Figure 13. White glazed figurines found in Bang Kaja, Ayutthaya, probably from Dehua, Fujian. Author’s collection.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   22 4/18/17   10:10 AM
23Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
porcelain figurines in the style known as blanc de chine. As it was distant from the coast, 
Dehua was not greatly affected by the dynastic transitional warfare. As at Jingdezhen, 
production has continued to the present day. In the late Ming and early Qing period, 
Dehua also produced a great amount of blue and white ware, distinguished by a greyish 
blue color, which was not popular in Europe, but sold to port cities from Batavia to Cape 
Town as part of the intra-Asian trade.
74 
Exported Fujianese wares have been found at many places in Siam, 75 testifying 
to the long-standing relations between Siam and Fujian ports, especially in the late 
Ming and early Qing period. Apart from these two provinces, other local kilns also 
produced ceramics found in Siam. Many shards are remnants of ceramic containers 
for Chinese products such as pickled garlic, medicine and gunpowder. According to 
Pariwat Thammapreechakorn, shards of gunpowder jars were found at Pomphet, the fort 
at the southeast corner of Ayutthaya, and at Wat Nakhon Kosa and Phaulkon’s House in 
Lopburi. Such small glazed jars with a narrow mouth, wide shoulders and no decoration 
originated from the Shaowu kiln in Guangdong and have been found throughout 
Southeast Asia. Other finds include blue and white bowls from the Chaozhou kilns in 
Guangdong province, teapots from Yixing in Jiangsu province, and green-glazed bowls 
from the Longquan kilns in Zhejiang province.
76
Made-to-order Thai-style ceramics
After inspecting the pottery excavated in the old capital by Phraya Boranratchathanin 
and kept at the Front Palace (Chandra Kasem) Museum, Prince Damrong Rajanuphap 
categorised the various Ayutthaya made-to-order ware as follows:
The items which were made in China in the Ayutthaya era according to designs 
sent from Siam, and which have been found in great quantity, are three in number: 
bowls, stem-plates, and covered jars (โถ, toh). There are also two other forms: 
small bowls (ถ้วย, thuai) for chili sauce (nam phrik), fish sauce, and medicine; and 
spittoons for disposing of betel nut residue (nam mak).
 The 
bowls found in the old capital have two common shapes. The first type, 
song bua, sports a characteristic everted lip, while the other type is shaped like 
a lime cut in half. Characteristically both are Chinese shapes; consequently, the 
distinguishing feature is the Siamese motifs decorating the surface. Another 
distinguishing Thai feature is the lid or cover, which is almost never found on 
Chinese (rice) bowls. In terms of decorations of these kangsai bowls, there are three 
types found: underglaze blue; polychrome enameled on white background such as 
a broken piece with dancing kinnari motif with a remnant of some gilding which 
was found near Wihan Somdet Palace and is now kept at Ayutthaya Museum; and 
Bencharong meaning the polychrome ware with color applied to the background 
74 Kerr and Mengoni, Chinese Export Ceramics, 130.
75 Pirawat, Khrueang thuai jin.
76 For details of Chinese ceramics found in Thailand, see Natthapatra Chandavij, Khrueang thuai 
jin thi phop; Pirawat, Khrueang thuai jin; and Paothong Thongchua, Kan sueksa khwam samphan 
thang kan kha.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   23 4/18/17   10:10 AM
24 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
as well as the motifs. There are more Bencharong types of glaze found compared 
to those with color motifs on white background.
 Stem-plates by their very shape are characteristically 
Thai. They were imported 
to order for Thai-style entertaining. The large stem-plates are used for serving yam, 
fresh vegetables and fish (phak pla), and individual servings of rice. Small stem-
plates are used for serving Thai dishes, condiments and sweets. Stem-plates are 
often arranged on low portable tables with decorative legs….
 A
yutthaya also ordered dishes with pink lotus decorations. A similar motif is 
found on a large holy water jar. Not many pieces with this red lotus decoration 
have survived.
 
Numerous toh (โถ, covered jars) were ordered in different shapes and sizes. 
The largest found are around five spans (kam), followed by the medium-sized ones 
used for food and perfumery. Smaller ones are used for serving curry dishes and 
desserts in syrup as part of the Siamese dinner service. The smallest jars are used as 
cosmetics containers. The large and medium ones are usually melon-shaped topped 
with a plain knob lid. Those used for curry and sweets are sometimes gourd-shaped 
or urn-shaped, with lotus-bud knob covers. Those for cosmetics, perfume, powder 
and toiletries tend to be more attractive; the knob on the lid is often set with gold 
decoration. These are called toh prik.
77
The ceramics that were “made-to-order” in Siamese style, such as have been 
found, were manufactured no earlier than the mid-17th century as they are mostly Qing 
porcelain.
77 Damrong Rajanuphap, Tamnan khrueang to lae thuai pan, 233.
Figure 14. An 18th-century tea bowl with half-lime shape decorated with Siamese motif. 
Author’s collection.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   24 4/18/17   10:10 AM
25Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
Figure 15. Bencharong bowls with everted lip called song bua by Prince Damrong. Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Figure 16. Ayutthaya stem plates. Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Figure 17. Bencharong covered jars with thepphanom motif, Ayutthaya period. Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   25 4/18/17   10:10 AM
26 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Figure 18. Small toiletery jarlets. Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Figure 19. Tea caddy with Ayutthaya motif. Courtesy 
of the National Museum Bangkok.
Figure 20. Covered box and various containers such 
as lime pots similar to those found in abundance 
buried in the Ayutthaya palace. Courtesy of Mr. 
Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   26 4/18/17   10:10 AM
27Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
Blue and white with Thai designs
In the early Qing era, the ordering of blue-and-white made in shapes and designs 
specified by a foreign purchaser took a long time. Underglaze blue decoration has to 
be drawn directly on the biscuit before glazing. Unglazed pottery is fragile and cannot 
be transported over a long distance. Foreign motifs had to be painted in Jingdezhen, 
located far from the coast, and overland travel was slow. The time taken to send the 
specifications to the kilns in Jingdezhen for production and transport the goods back 
to Canton was several months, often longer than the sailing season determined by the 
monsoon. An agent was needed to store the goods at the port until the next year’s sailing 
season. If a ship wanted to complete its business within a single season, it had to be 
content with the overglazed decoration done in Canton on ready-made glazed wares 
available for sale in the market at the port. Ceramics were the first goods that had to be 
loaded in the hold.
78
Items with underglaze decoration had to be ordered in one season for shipping in 
the next. The fact that so much Chinese blue and white with Thai designs produced in 
the 18th century has been found in Siam shows that the marine trade between China and 
Siam was regular and constant. Whether these goods were carried in Chinese junks or 
Siamese junks is unknown.
Some features of the made-to-order ceramics in the Ban Phlu Luang era can be 
easily traced to Ayutthaya art. For instance, the knob on the lids of a covered jars found 
in Ratchaburi (Figure 21) is the same shape as the capping on columns in the walls at 
Wat Tha (now Wat Tha Ka Rong) in Ayutthaya (Figure 22).
78 Jörg, Porcelain and the Dutch China Trade, 97.
Figure 21. Ayutthaya period toh jar found in Ratchaburi. Courtesy 
of Mr. Chanchai Supanichvoraparch.
Figure 22. The wall at Wat Tha, Ayutthaya.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   27 4/18/17   10:10 AM
28 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Bencharong made to order
Bencharong is the name given to overglaze polychrome porcelain with Thai designs. 
In the Ayutthaya era, none was made in Siam. All was ordered from China.
Bencharong is translated from the Chinese wucai using the Pali words, pañca ranga, 
meaning five colors. Wucai porcelain was first known in the Jiajing reign (1522–1566) of 
the Ming dynasty. Although the name literally translates as five colors, it really implied 
a multitude of colors.79 Wucai was the combination of overglaze colors combined with 
underglaze blue. It was in the Kangxi reign of the Qing dynasty that wucai porcelain 
reached its pinnacle, with a range of enchanting translucent green tones. Kangxi wucai 
was called “ famille verte” by European collectors. Although the term “Bencharong” 
derived from wucai, most Bencharong pieces are not famille verte, but famille rose, 
namely fencai in Chinese. This is a later technique using pastel colors developed during 
the early 18th century. Examples of Bencharong made with wucai technique are rare 
and difficult to find. Some fragmentary, but very beautiful, examples can be seen on the 
prang of Wat Phutthaisawan in Ayutthaya (Figure 23).
It is possible that Qing imperial wares in fencai style, which the Yongzheng 
and Qianlong emperors sent to Ayutthaya as return tribute gifts, influenced the types 
of ceramics which Siam commissioned from China. It seems that the Siamese court 
from the Ban Phlu Luang era until King Rama III of the Rattanakosin era preferred 
polychrome ware, and ordered more Bencharong than blue and white. 
Chanchai Supanichvoraparch, an expert on ceramics, suggests that the painting on 
Bencharong commissioned in the Ayutthaya era obtrudes the surface, as if color was 
79 Feng, Chinese Ceramics, 92.
Figure 23. Remnant of a Chinese polychrome plate with a Thai motif on the stair wall at Wat Phutthaisawan, Ayutthaya. 
Author’s photo.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   28 4/18/17   10:10 AM
29Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
Figure 24. Items with designs of thepphanom and norasingh, the most popular Thai motif. 
Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Figure 25. 18th-century Chinese overglaze colorware of various shapes found in Siam. Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith 
Tankeyura.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   29 4/18/17   10:10 AM
30 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
applied over the opaque white slip/glaze. Interestingly this might be the same technique 
initially used to make pastel fencai wares in private kilns in China. Fencai wares with 
pale pink and opaque white were produced in China only from 1720 onwards. Previously 
color shades tended to be transparent rather than opaque. Opaque famille rose is an 18th 
century innovation. The fact that most Ayutthaya-era Bencharong objects have this pink 
and opaque white in the style of fencai suggests that they originate between the Thaisa 
reign and the Rattanakosin era, not from an earlier period.
A large number of Bencharong objects are decorated with the design of votive 
deities, thepphanom and norasingh (Figure 24). Examples were found in a shipwreck in 
the Gulf of Thailand from around 1728 during the Thaisa reign and are now kept in the 
Princessehof Museum at Leeuwarden in the Netherlands.
80 This design was repeatedly 
ordered by Siamese customers from the Thaisa reign to the early 20th century. Prince 
Damrong explained:
During the Ayutthaya days bowls with the thepphanom and norasingh design were 
very popular. These are found in various old towns, even in remote cities. In old 
houses, and in places as far flung as Kamphaeng Phet and Ban Hua Wiang in 
Chaiya, such bowls are still found. When royalty visited such places, the dining 
sets which locals brought to serve them consisted of Ayutthaya-era thepphanom 
and norasingh bowls which were still in use. These must have been imported in 
large quantitites for them to have spread to such far-off places.
81
Most designs from the Ban Phlu Luang era featured foliage, flowers, and Himaphan 
creatures such as kinnari and norasingh. These items have traditional Thai shapes and 
motifs, with no suggestion of influence from the West, unlike the late 19th century when 
the Thai elite wished to be “international”. The lotus figured prominently because of its 
Buddhist symbolism. 
Ayutthaya-era Bencharong drew inspiration from the city and landscape of 
Ayutthaya. The blooming lotus design painted on the inside of many Bencharong bowls 
(Figure 26) is the same as the design on the wooden door handles of Wat Thammaram 
in Ayutthaya (Figure 27). The Bencharong plate at the National Museum in Bangkok 
(Figure 28) is decorated with a kan kot cho hang to (
ก้านขดช่อหางโต), a popular motif in 
the Ban Phlu Luang era. The same motif appears in woodcarvings on doors of several 
wat including those of the teaching hall which King Sua moved from Ayutthaya to Wat 
Yai Suwannaram in Phetchaburi as a gift to his teacher.
One aspect that has been widely debated is where these Ayutthaya-era Bencharong 
with Thai designs were produced. Although most agree that the biscuits were usually 
produced in Jingdezhen, the location of the enameling center or centers that decorated 
the Bencharong remains to be confirmed. There are several speculative possibilities: 
first, at Jingdezhen; second at Canton, the enameling center for porcelain exports to 
Western markets; third, at Amoy and other ports of entry for rice imported from Siam; 
80 Harrisson, Later Ceramics in South-East Asia, color plate 41.
81 Damrong Rajanuphap, Tamnan khrueang to lae thuai pan, 234.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   30 4/18/17   10:10 AM
31Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
Figure 26 (left). Shard of Bencharong bowl with lotus painted on the interior. Courtesy of Mr. Chanchai Supanichvoraparch.
Figure 27 (right). Door carving at Wat Thammaram, Ayutthaya.
Figure 28. A polychrome plate decorated with kan kot cho hang to design. Courtesy of the National Museum Bangkok.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   31 4/18/17   10:10 AM
32 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
and fourth, in Siam itself. The first two possibilities are more likely than the last two. 
As Charnchai points out, the process of decorating porcelain is not difficult once the 
technique is known, although control of colors and shades remains a closely guarded 
trade secret.
Dawn Rooney, a leading authority on Southeast Asian ceramics, has found from 
recent excavations in China that early 19th century shards of Bencharong have been 
found in Jingdezhen. Rooney is expected to discuss these findings and their implications 
on the history of Bencharong in a forthcoming book. In a recent paper, Luisa E. Mengoni 
argued that 19th century enameled copperwares with Thai design were made in Canton 
and its surrounding districts.
82
According to Prince Damrong, the commissioning of Ayutthaya-style ceramics 
from China continued well into the 19th century:
82 Mengoni, “Adapting to Foreign Demands: Chinese Enameled Copperwares for the Thai Market,” 
107-23.
Figure 29. Late 18th or early 19th century jarlet ordered from China for Siam. 
Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   32 4/18/17   10:10 AM
33Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
In the early Rattanakosin period, King Rama I was determined to restore Thai arts 
and crafts lost in the fall of Ayutthaya.... He commanded court artists to draw the 
valuable old Ayutthaya crockery … such as the polychrome bowl with Thai foliage 
kan kot motif, garuda, lion and thepphanom motifs and commissioned the Chinese 
to copy the old porcelain. These royal commissioned pieces are few in number and 
are not commonly known. The workmanship of the porcelains ordered from China 
during the King Rama I reign are superior to those of Ayutthaya.
83
The ceramics that Siam ordered from China are testament to the prosperity of the 
economy during the Thaisa and Borommakot reigns, probably as a result of the profits 
made on the export of rice to China, as well as to the existence of the trading networks 
needed for acquiring made-to-order ceramics. In the early Qing dynasty, the ceramic 
industry in China developed the ability to meet the demands of international customers 
better than in the Ming era. As a result, Siam in the Ban Phlu Luang era could acquire 
ceramics produced with Thai designs in bright and innovative colors, manufactured with 
technology that was modern for that era. These ceramics are evidence of the prosperity 
of the late Ayutthaya era.
Method of ordering and ships used for made-to-order ceramics in the late Ayutthaya 
period
After the Kangxi emperor permited Chinese seagoing junks to trade overseas in 
1684, Chinese junks flooded the South China Sea. In March 1733, Wybrand Blom 
recorded that on average eighteen Chinese junks called at Ayutthaya each year, while 
another four to five Chinese junks visited Chaiya, Ligor, Pattani and Trengganu.
84 All 
sorts of Chinese products including made-to-order ceramics became widely available 
in major ports such as Batavia. The appearance of many made-to-order underglaze blue 
and Bencharong wares with Thai motifs dating back to the same period indicates that a 
similar service was available in Ayutthaya. Although the majority of Thai-style porcelain 
is Jingdezhen ware, there were also blue and white covered jars with thepphanom motifs 
as well as everday utensils which are Fujian ware. These were probably transported via 
ports in Fujian such as Zhangzhou, Fuzhou, Quanzhou or Xiamen. The ships importing 
the made-to-order ceramics were most likely Chinese junks because of their ease of 
dealing with upland trading networks in China. 
Seven decades later the Qianlong emperor restricted foreign trade to Canton. 
Foreign merchants purchased ceramics there in two ways: first, from the Cohong, the 
guild of Chinese merchants licensed to facilitate trade with foreign merchants; second, 
from the specialist porcelain shops in the streets just in front of the walls of Canton. 
Ceramics were the first item for which traders placed orders after their ship arrived 
because of the long lead time for delivery and because ceramics had to be loaded first. 
Western merchant ships calling at Ayutthaya probably carried the types of Chinese 
ceramics that were easy to buy and sell at port cities such as Batavia, Surat, and Malacca 
83 Damrong Rajanuphap, Tamnan khrueang to lae thuai pan, 234.
84 Dhiravat, “Princes, Pretenders, and the Chinese Phrakhlang,” 119.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   33 4/18/17   10:10 AM
34 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
(Melaka) which were centers for intra-Asian trade as well as places for assembling 
cargoes to be sent onward to Europe. These items were most likely to have been off-the-
shelf trade ceramics rather than customized made-to-order ceramics like Bencharong. 
There are no records of Western ships carrying Bencharong or made-to-order blue and 
white with Thai motifs and design.
There are almost no records to show whether the Chinese dealt with Siamese junks 
in the same way as they dealt with Westerners. If the same laws were applied, then 
the Siamese would have had to purchase through the Cohong or the shops in Canton. 
By the 18th century, Siam had been trading with China for almost 400 years and their 
vessels were manned by Chinese sailors. They might thus have had some advantages 
in evading the strictures imposed on the Westerners. By the early 19th century, Western 
observers noted that Sino-Siamese junks called at ports scattered along the entire coast 
of China from Hainan to Tianjin.
85 A partial list of the Siamese junks sailing to China in 
1813, while the Canton system was still in place, shows that two-thirds called at ports 
other than Canton.
86 There are no records showing whether or not the tribute vessels 
from Siam placed orders for ceramics in Canton during the Ayutthaya period but in the 
Bangkok period there are better records for orders from Siam of porcelain with Thai 
designs.
87
Shops and markets in late Ayutthaya
Shards of Chinese porcelain have been found in various quarters of Ayutthaya, both 
within the walled city as well as in the suburbs and small islets surrounding the city. 
Much has been fished out of the waterways around Bang Kaja–Pomphet, where the 
Pasak and Chaophraya Rivers meet.
In the Ayutthaya era, the markets became busier in the junk season when the 
monsoon brought vessels of various nationalities. Junks from China would arrive before 
Chinese New Year, as in this description:
In the monsoon season when the wind blows junks to the city, Chinese junk traders, 
Khaek sloop merchants, Farang clipper traders, Gujarati Khaek traders, Surat 
Khaek, Khaek from Java and Malayu, Khaek thet, French, Farang Losong, Dutch, 
Spanish, English, black Farang, Langkuni Farang, and island Khaek, merchants 
in charge of junks, sloops, and clippers sail up and drop anchor at the end of the 
canal. They carry goods up to deposit in buildings that they have bought or rented 
inside the walls of Ayutthaya, and open shops to sell goods according to type and 
language.
88
Chinese ceramics must have been distributed to the market areas where the Chinese 
traded in Ayutthaya. The largest and densest of these was in the southeast corner of the 
walled island near the junction of the Pasak and Chaophraya Rivers. Here there were 
85 Sng and Bisalputra, A History of the Thai-Chinese, 160.
86 Cushman, Fields from the Sea, 18.
87 Damrong Rajanuphap, Tamnan khrueang to lae thuai pan. 
88 Baker, “Markets and production,” 58, translated from Athibhai phaen thi.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   34 4/18/17   10:10 AM
35Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
three brick-paved roads stretching between Chinese Gate Canal and Nai Kai Canal. One 
of these is called “Chinese Street” on the map by John Andrews from 1771 (Figure 30), 
and “Chinese Market Street” (thanon talat jin) on the map of the old city drawn in the 
early Bangkok era (Figure 31). 
Generally this area was known by its Hokkien name as the Nai Kai quarter (see note 
62 above). Within this quarter there were four Chinese-sponsored temples, namely Wat 
Sam Jin, Wat Thanon Jin, Wat Jin and Wat Jek Chi. Fujianese porcelain (Figure 32) as 
Figure 30. The Nai Kai quarter is marked as China Street on the 1771 map by John Andrews.
Figure 31. The southeast corner of Ayutthaya on the map drawn in the mid-19th century (south is at the top).
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   35 4/18/17   10:10 AM
36 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
well as several stone Buddha images in Chinese style (Figure 33) have been recovered 
from the area and are now kept at the Chao Sam Phraya National Museum. 
The Description of Ayutthaya portayed this “main market” (which was probably 
like Bangkok’s Sampheng) as follows:
There are Chinese brick shops on both sides of the main road. Thai and Chinese sit 
at shops selling goods from junks—brassware, white gold, tiles, pots, bowls, phrae 
silk of various colors of Chinese type, and silk of various colors, and metal tools. 
All kind of goods from China, including food and fruit, are displayed for sale in 
shops in the market. There is also a fresh market selling pork, duck, chicken, sea 
fish, freshwater fish, crab, and various shellfish of many types and descriptions. It 
is the biggest market in the city, called the Great Market of the Tail of the City, in 
the Nai Kai Quarter.
89
This Nai Kai Quarter and the nearby Three Horses Quarter were very busy and 
congested. At the south end of the Nai Kai Canal, there were five “tunnel gates”90 in the 
walls, compared to only one or two at other locations. On the early Bangkok map, at the 
mouth of the Chinese Gate Canal is Phraya Ratchawangsan Wharf on the bank of the 
Chaophraya, probably the site of a government unit overseeing the comings and goings 
89 Ibid., 63.
90 ประตูช่องกุต, pratu chong kut, a slit in the wall large enough for someone to walk through.
Figure 32. A small bowl from Dehua, Fujian. The small shard on the right was found by the author near Wat Sam Jin, Nai 
Kai Market. Author’s collection.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   36 4/18/17   10:10 AM
37Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
of seagoing ships and royal junks. 91 In the Phetracha reign, this area of the city was 
occupied by wealthy people and foreign merchants, as described by Kaempfer in 1690:
The first Street upon entering the City is that which runs Westward along the 
turning of the Wall: it hath the best Houses, amongst which are those, that formaly 
belonged to the English, Dutch, and French, as also that in which Faulcon resided.
92
Usually when junks or Western vessels arrived, they would moor or anchor near 
their warehouses or stores. Around these places were shops and markets servicing 
the private trade of the ships’ crews. Another Chinese market outside the city wall is 
described amongst those near the trading company warehouses, in the Description of 
Ayutthaya: 
91 Phraya Ratchawangsan headed a department in charge of seagoing war craft, including a boathouse 
for thirty large junk-sterned craft in the mouth of the Ironwood (takhian ) Canal. Rivergoing war 
craft came under Phraya Maha-Amat.
92 Kaempfer, Description of the Kingdom of Siam, 44.
Figure 33. Torso of a Chinese stone Buddha image found at Wat Sam Jin, 
Nai Kai quarter, now kept at Chao Sam Phraya National Museum, Ayutthaya. 
Author’s photo.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   37 4/18/17   10:10 AM
38 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
the market at the ferry landing of Wat Nangchi in front of the Portuguese settlement 
... the market behind the Dutch emporium beside Wat Mu; the market at Wat Sing 
in front of the Japanese building ... the market at Wat Tha Rap in front of the house 
of Jaosua Chi—here there is a long row of sixteen two-storey brick houses with 
shops in the lower storey and living quarters above; at the entrance to this market 
is an iron forge, a shoe workshop, and a maker of red pipe tobacco.
93 
After junks arrived carrying plates, bowls, jars, tea, sweets, silk of various colors 
and other goods from China, female vendors from the great Nai Kai Market would take 
these to sell to the people of the palace. In the south of the palace, there was a
large brick lodge with outer walls painted red, known as Khoha Sawan Lodge 
which was formerly for Somdet Phra Phanwasa, the queen of King Narai, and later 
became the Inner Treasury in the care of Thao Song Kandan. In the wall around the 
lodge, there is a gate called Sawan Phirom which leads out to Sanam Jan, and there 
turns onto a road beside the wall around a brick building of five rooms where royal 
lady-cooks prepare food for royalty. On this road, women from Nai Kai Village 
come to sit at shops to sell goods from Chinese junks.
94
Another way to sell goods into the palace was through the departments of the 
phrakhlang ministry, overseen by Okya Kosathibodi, to present to the king and the 
royal ladies. There is no firsthand description but there are hints such as the missionary 
de Cicé’s account from 1714 (in the Thaisa reign):
93 Baker, “Markets and production,” 51. Wat Tha Rap is between Wat Phutthaisawan and the Cham 
Moat Canal. The Jaosua Chi mentioned here might be Chi sae Ong, the third son of Ong Eng Chuan 
(Wang Xingquan), said by K. S. R. Kulap to have fled to Nakhon Ratchasima when Ayutthaya fell 
in 1767. Kulap, Mahamukhamattayanukulawong, 284
 
94 Baker, “Grand Palace,” 97-8 from Athibhai phaen thi.
Figure 34. Mural painting of a Chinese shop at Wat Pradu Songtham, Ayutthaya.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   38 4/18/17   10:10 AM
39Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
Barcalon (Phrakhlang), this mandarin, knowing the ways of the court, has taken all 
possible measures to strengthen his position, and render himself formidable to his 
enemies. He has found the means of introducing into the Palace Chinese women 
and girls to be near the queens and princesses continually. 
95
Uusally palace officials would present goods to the king, or take them into the palace 
for the royals to make their selection of silk, crystal, ceramics used as tableware and 
cosmetic holders, and other imported goods of value. The Phrakhlang who oversaw the 
importation of goods had female staff constantly coming and going to service the ladies 
in the palace. Many varieties of ceramics were imported, and the royals could order 
plates, bowls, and jars in whatever design they required, both shape and decoration, just 
the same as in the early Bangkok era.
The variety of ceramics imported to Ayutthaya is testament to the sophistication 
of the junk trading networks between China and Siam. Junks went back and forth 
constantly throughout the Prasat Thong reign and the Ban Phlu Luang dynasty. Blue 
and white and Bencharong wares could be ordered with Thai designs. In addition there 
was commercial import of coarser pottery for everyday use by the general population.
95 Dhiravat, “Western Evidence Concerning the Role of the Chinese at the Siamese Court,” 14.
Figure 35. A small 18th-century underglaze blue covered bowl. A shard of the same design was 
found in the grand palace of Ayutthaya. Courtesy of Mr. Praphaisith Tankeyura.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   39 4/18/17   10:10 AM
40 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
Conclusion
The early Qing ceramics found in Siam offer insight into the social and political 
relations between Siam, which commissioned and purchased these items, and China, 
which produced and exported them. Several factors influenced the types and quantitites 
of ceramic goods that entered into the China-Siam trade: on the China side, dynastic 
change, opening and closing of trade, and technical advancements; on the Siamese side, 
court taste, the growth of the Chinese immigrant community, and the level of prosperity. 
Several conclusions arise from this study. First, the transition from Ming to 
Qing, and the maritime ban forbidding Chinese from trading to Southeast Asia, had a 
substantial impact on Siamese trade, especially on the policy of sending tribute missions 
to the Chinese imperial court.
Second, Bencharong wares started to arrive in quantity from the Thaisa reign until 
the end of the 19th century. Bencharong is a characteristic art form developed during the 
Ban Phlu Luang dynasty. The color glaze of Bencharong in late Ayutthaya was similar 
to ceramics that China exported to Batavia. Possibly Bencharong came from the same 
kilns or shared the same trade networks that fed the Indonesian market.
Third, large quantities of Bencharong were imported in the Thaisa and Borommakot 
reigns, reflecting the prosperity of Ayutthaya and the purchasing power of the settled 
Chinese community. This large surge in imports was partly made possible by a 
convergence of several factors: the boom of Thai rice exports to alleviate severe famine 
conditions in Fujian and Guangdong; the reopening of Chinese ports and the entry of 
Chinese junks into the market; and the cumulative impact of technological developments 
in China’s ceramics sector which allowed the industry to respond to the preferences of 
consumers in the international market better than had been possible earlier.
Fourth, from the Ban Phlu Luang era to early Bangkok, the Hokkien merchant 
network was dominant in the trade to Siam, Malacca, and Batavia. This is evident 
from the prominence of Zhangzhou ceramics among imports, the role of Amoy in the 
import of Siamese rice, the name transliterated into Hokkien dialect of the main market 
place in Ayutthaya, and the presence of Hokkien natives as officials in the Siamese port 
department overseeing the Siam-China trade.
Chronology of Chinese and Siamese reigns
Ayutthaya: Prasat Thong dynasty
 Prasat 
Thong, 1629–1655
 Narai, 1656–1688
A
yutthaya: Ban Phlu Luang dynasty
 Phra Phetracha, 1688–1703
 Sua, 1703–1708
 Thaisa, 1709–1732
 Borommakot, 1732–1758
 Uthumphon, 1758
 Ekkathat, 1758–1767
China: Qing dynasty
 Shunzhi, 1644–1661
 Kangxi, 1662–1722
 
 Y
ongzheng, 1723–1735
 Qianlong, 1735–1796
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   40 4/18/17   10:10 AM
41Ceramic Trade Between Early Qing China and Late Ayutthaya
Bibliography
Baker, Chris. 2011. “Markets and production in the city of Ayutthaya before 1767: translation 
and analysis of part of the Description of Ayutthaya,” Journal of the Siam Society 99, 
38–71.
Baker, Chris. 2013. “The Grand Palace in the Description of Ayutthaya: translation and commen-
tary,” Journal of the Siam Society, 101, 69–112.
Cushman, Janet Wayne. 1993. Fields from the Sea: Chinese Junk Trade with Siam in the Late 
Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries. Ithaca NY: Cornell SEAP.
Cushman, Richard D. (tr.) 2000. The Royal Chronicles of Ayutthaya, Bangkok: Siam Society.
Damrong Rajanuphap, HRH. 1917. Tamnan khrueang to lae thuai pan [History of tableware and 
pottery]. Reprinted in Ceramics of Wat Pho. Bangkok BE 2545
Dhiravat na Pombejra. 1994. “Western Evidence Concerning the Role of the Chinese at the 
Siamese Court, 1699-1734.” Paper presented to the 13th IAHA Conference, Sophia Univer-
sity, Tokyo.
Dhiravat na Pombejra. 1998. “Princes, Pretenders, and the Chinese Phrakhlang: An Analysis 
of the Dutch Evidence Concerning Siamese Court Politics, 1699–1734.” In L. Blussé and 
F. Gaastra (ed.), On the eighteenth century as a category of Asian history: Van Leur in 
retrospect, Aldershot: Ashgate, 107–30. 
Dhiravat na Pombejra. 2002. “Dutch and French Evidence Concerning Court Conflicts at the 
End of King Phetracha’s Reign, c. 1699-1703.” Silpakorn University International Journal 
2, (January-June).
Fang Lili. 2005. Chinese Ceramics, trans. William W. Wang. Beijing: China Intercontinental 
Press.
Gervaise, Nicolas. 1998 [1688]. The Natural and Political History of the Kingdom of Siam. 
Bangkok: White Lotus.
Harrisson, Barbara. 1995. Later Ceramics in South-East Asia: Sixteenth to Twentieth Centuries. 
Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press. 
Howard, David and John Ayers. 1980. Masterpieces of Chinese Export Porcelain from the 
Mottahedeh Collection in the Virginia Museum. London: Sotheby Parke Bernet.
Johnson, David T. 1999. “Narrative Themes on Kangxi Porcelains in the Taft Museum” In 
Chinese Ceramics Selected articles from Orientations 1982-1998. Hong Kong: Orienta-
tions.
Jörg, Christiaan J.A. 1982. Porcelain and the Dutch China Trade. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Jörg, Christiaan J.A. 1993. “Chinese Porcelain for the Dutch in the Seventeenth Century: Trading 
Networks and Private Enterprise.” In The Porcelains of Jingdezhen: Colloquies on Art 
and Archaeology in Asia No. 16, ed. Rosemary E. Scott. London: School of Oriental and 
African Studies.
Jörg and Flecker 2001. Porcelain from the Vung Tau Wreck: The Hallstrom Excavation. Singa-
pore: Sun Tree Publishing.
Kaempfer, Engelbert. 1998 [1727]. A Description of the Kingdom of Siam 1690. Bangkok: 
Orchid Press.
Kerr, Rose and Luisa E. Mengoni. 2011. Chinese Export Ceramics. London: V&A and Albert 
Publishing.
Krahl, Regina. 2006. China: The Three Emperors, 1662-1795. London: Royal Academy of Arts 
12 November 2005-17 April 2006.
Kulap, K. S. R. Mahamukhamattayanukulawong [Great noble lineages]. V ol. 1. Bangkok: n.p.
Mengoni, Luisa E. 2013 “Adapting to Foreign Demands: Chinese Enameled Copperwares for 
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   41 4/18/17   10:10 AM
42 Pimpraphai Bisalputra
the Thai Market,” Royal Porcelain from Siam: Unpacking the Ring Collection, eds. Anne 
Håbu and Dawn Rooney. Oslo: Hermes Publishing.
Natthapatra Chandavij, Khrueang thuai jin thi phop jak laeng borannakhadi nai prathet thai  
[Chinese ceramics from archaeological sites in Thailand]. 1986. Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department.
Ng Chin-keong. 1983. Trade and Society: The Amoy Network on the China Coast 1683-1735. 
Singapore: Singapore University Press. 
Phraratchaphongsawadan krung si ayutthaya chabap Moh Bradley [Royal chronicle of Ayut-
thaya-Reverend Phonnarat edition, printed in 1864 by D. B. Bradley], reprinted 2003. 
Bangkok: Kosit
Paothong Thongchua. 1986. Kan sueksa khwam samphan thang kan kha nai samai ayutthaya 
rawang jin kap ayutthaya asai khomun jak khrueang thuai jin thi ngom dai rop ko ayut-
thaya [Study of Thai-China trading relations in the Ayutthaya era using data from Chinese 
pottery retrieved from waterways around Ayutthaya island]. N.p.
Pirawat Thammaprichakon. 2014. Khrueang thuai jin: roi samphantaphap rawang thai kap jin 
[Chinese ceramics: traces of Thai-Chinese relations]. Bangkok: Bangkok University.
Sarasin Viraphol. 2014 [1977]. Tribute and Profit: Sino-Siamese Trade 1652–1853. Revised 
edition, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Scott, Rosemary E. 1993. “Jesuit Missionaries and the Porcelains of Jingdezhen.” In The Porce-
lains of Jingdezhen: Colloquies on Art and Archaeology in Asia No. 16, ed. Rosemary E. 
Scott. London: School of Oriental and African Studies.
Smithies, Michael, ed. 1997. Aspects of the Embassy to Siam 1685. Chiang Mai: Silkworm 
Books.
Sng, Jeffrey and Pimpraphai Bisalputra, 2015. A History of the Thai- Chinese. Singapore: 
Editions Didier Millet.
Spence, Jonathan D. 1988. Emperor of China: Self-portrait of K’ang-hsi. New York: Vintage.
Suebsaeng Phromboon. 1971. Khwam samphan nai rabop bannakan rawang jin kap thai kho so 
1282–1853 [China-Thai relations under the tribute system, 1281–1853]. Ann Arbor, Mi: 
University Microfilms (PhD thesis, University of Wisconsin).
Sunait Chutintaranond, ed. 2015. Nai yuk awasan krung si mai khoei sueam [No decline in Ayut-
thaya’s final period], Bangkok: Sinlapa Watthanatham.
Tachard, Guy. 1981 [1688]. Voyage to Siam Performed by Six Jesuits Sent by the French King to 
the Indies and China in the Year 1685, Bangkok: White Orchid.
Thompson, Julian, 1998 “The Palette of Famille-rose,” The Oriental Ceramic Society of Hong 
Kong Bulletin Number Eleven 1994-97. Hong Kong
Tan, Rita C. 2007. Zhangzhou Ware Found in the Philippines: “Swatow” Export Ceramics from 
Fujian 16
th-17th Century. Manila: ArtPostAsia.
Thongthae Rojanasan and Udom Pramuanwitthaya. 1963. “Prawatisat kan thut rawang thai-jin” 
[History of Thai-Chinese diplomatic relations]. In Prawati kan to su khong banphaburut 
thai [Contesting history of Thai ancestors]. Bangkok: Khlang Witthaya.
Journal of the Siam Society, V ol. 105, 2017
60-04-027_001-042 new18-04 siam p_coated.indd   42 4/18/17   10:10 AM