A HISTORY 

OF INDIAN LITERATURE 


K. R. NORMAN 


PALI LITERATURE 

INCLUDING THE CANONICAL LITERATURE IN 
PRAKRIT AND SANSKRIT 
OF ALL THE HINAYANA SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


OTTO HARRASSOWITZ • WIESBADEN 


UrheborrechU 


A HISTORY 

OF INDIAN LITERATURE 


K. R. NORMAN 


PALI LITERATURE 

INCLUDING THE CANONICAL LITERATURE IN 
PRAKRIT AND SANSKRIT 
OF ALL THE HINAYANA SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


OTTO HARRASSOWITZ 


WIESBADEN 




A HISTORY 

OF INDIAN LITERATURE 

EDITED BY JAN GONDA 


VOLUME VII 

Fasc. 2 


1983 

OTTO HARRASSOWITZ . WIESBADEN 




K. R. NORMAN 


PALI LITERATURE 

INCLUDING THE CANONICAL LITERATURE IN 
PRAKRIT AND SANSKRIT 
OF ALL THE HINAYANA SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


1983 

OTTO HARRASSOWITZ 


WIESBADEN 



A HISTORY OF INDIAN LITERATURE 


Contents of Vol. VII 


Vol. VII: Buddhist and Jaina Literature 


Fasc. I : 
Fasc. 2: 


D. Seyfort Ruegg 
K. R. Norman 


The Literature of the Madhyamaka School 
of Philosophy in India 
Pali Literature 


CIP-KurztiteTaufnahme der Deutschen Bibliothek 
A history of Indian literature / ed. by Jan Gonda. - 
Wiesbaden : Harrassowitz. 

NE: Gonda, Jan [Hrsg.] 

Vol. 7. Buddhist and Jaina literature. Fasc. 2. -> Norman, Kenneth Boy : Pali literature 

Norman, Kenneth Roy: 

Pali literature : incl. the canon, literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of all the Hinayana schools of Buddhism / 
Kenneth Roy Norman. - Wiesbaden : Harrassowitz, 1983. 

(A history of Indian literature ; Vol. 7, Fasc. 2) 

ISBN 3-447-02285- X 


© Orto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 1983. Alle Rechte vorbehalten. Photographische und photomeehanisehe 
Wiedergabe nur mit ausdriicklicher Genehmigung des Verlages. Gesamthersteliung: Allgauer Zeitungsverlag 
•GmbH. Kempten. Printed in Germany. Sigel: HIL 



CONTENTS 


Foreword IX 

Chapter I The Pali language and the Theravddin tradition 

1. The name “Pali” 1 

2. The history and development of the Pah language . . 2 

3. The history of the Thera vadin tradition 7 

Chapter II The Pali Canon 

1. The divisions of the canon 15 

2. The Vinaya-pitaka 18 

2.1. The Suttavibhanga 18 

2.2. The Khandhaka 22 

2.3. The Parivara 26 

3. The Sutta-pitaka 30 

3.1. The Digha-nikaya 32 

3.1.1. The Silakkhandhavagga . . . . 32 

3.1.2. The Mahavagga 36 

3.1.3. The Patikavagga 41 

3.2. The Majjhima-nikaya 44 

3.2.1. The Mulapannasa 45 

3.2.2. The Majjhimapannasa 46 

3.2.3. The Uparipannasa 48 

3.3. The Samyutta-nikaya 49 

3.3.1. The Sagathavagga 50 

3.3.2. The Nidanavagga . . 52 

3.3.3. The Khandhavagga 52 

3.3.4. The Salayatanavagga 53 

3.3.5. The Mahavagga 53 

3.4. The Anguttara-nikaya 54 

3.5. The Khuddaka-nikaya 57 

3.5.1. Khuddakapatha 57 

3.5.2. Dhammapada 58 



VI 


Contents 


3.5.3. Udana 60 

3.5.4. Itivuttaka 62 

3.5.5. Suttanipata 63 

3.5.6. Vimanavatthu 70 

3.5.7. Petavatthu 71 

3.5.8. Theragatha 7 2 

3.5.9. Therigatha 75 

3.5.10. Jataka 77 

3.5.11. Niddesa 84 

3.5.12. Patisambhidamagga 87 

3.5.13. Apadana 89 

3.5.14. Buddhavamsa 92 

3.5.15. Cariyapitaka 94 

4. The Abhidhamma-pitaka 96 

4.1. Dham masarigani 99 

4.2. Vibhanga 100 

4.3. Dhatukatha 101 

4.4. Puggalapannatti 102 

4.5. Kathavatthu 103 

4.6. Yamaka 105 

4.7. Patthana 106 

4.8. The Abhidharma in Sanskrit 107 

Chapter III Early post-canonical texts 

1 . Early prose texts 108 

2. The early chronicles 114 

3. The early commentators 118 

3.1. Buddhaghosa 120 

3.2. Buddhadatta 130 

3.3. Mahanama 132 

3.4. Upasena 133 

3.5. Dhammapala 133 

Chapter IV Later post-canonical texts 

1. The later chronicles 138 

2. The later commentators 145 

2.1. Atthakathas 145 

2.2. Tlkas 148 

3. Later Abhidhamma texts 151 

4. Collections of edifying tales 153 



Contents 


VII 


5. Kavya works 156 

6. Prophetic texts 160 

7. Medical texts 162 

8. Grammatical and lexicographical works 163 

9. Poetics and prosody 167 

10. Books on discipline 168 

11. Boundary texts 171 

12. Anthologies 172 

13. Cosmology 174 

14. Wisdom texts 175 

15. Jataka collections 177 

16. Bibliographical works 179 

Abbreviations 185 

Glossary 190 

Index of Authors 198 

Index of Works 199 


General Index 


206 



FOREWORD 


Despite the attempts made by A. K. Warder in his survey of Indian kdvya 
literature, and by various editors and translators in the introductions to their 
books, to assess the literary merit of certain Pali works, it is nevertheless still 
true to say that for the Indologist Pali literature means everything that is 
written in Pali, irrespective of literary value in the accepted European sense 
of the word. In the space and time at my disposal, however, it was not practi- 
cable to include a mention of everything that has been published, much less 
include unpublished works which are at present only names in library cata- 
logues and similar reference books. I have therefore omitted references to much 
of the later commentarial literature, but the biggest deficiency is in the field 
of South-East Asian Pali literature. Comparatively little work has been done 
in this field, and although it would have been possible to extract names of 
works and authors secondhand from the studies that have been made, I have 
in general refrained from doing so. The resultant gaps in my work will need to 
be filled by specialist publications in due course. 

Except where there is good reason to the contrary, I have dealt only with 
those texts which have been edited in the Roman script or been translated into 
a European language. I was asked to include Hinayana Buddhist canonical 
texts in Sanskrit and Prakrit, and here too I have dealt only with the works which 
have been published. Rather than deal with them separately, I have mentioned 
them under the relevant Pali headings, since the Hinayana canons follow closely 
the pattern of the Thera vadin canon, with the exception of the Abhidharma. 

The bibliographical material included in the footnotes is intended only as a 
sample of the editions and translations which are available. With very few 
exceptions there is no mention of oriental editions, and it is sufficient to state 
here that all the Pah canonical texts and some para-canonical ones, together 
with the atthakathds and most of the tlkas, have been published in the Chattha- 
sangayana series which began to appear in Burma from 1956 onwards, while 
most of the same texts have also been published in Ceylon. The complete canon 
and most of the commentaries have been published in Thailand, and editions 
in the ndgarl script have appeared in India from Nalanda and elsewhere. The 
bibliographical information I have given can be augmented by reference to the 
other sources mentioned in the notes, and especially to the Epilegomena to 
Vol. I of the Critical Pali Dictionary (Copenhagen 1948). Additional and up-to- 
date information will be available in the new bibliography which is planned 
for the Epilegomena to Vol. II of that dictionary. 

My debt to all others who have worked in this field will be obvious to readers 
of this book. When Geiger, Winternitz and Law have dealt so ably with the 



X 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


whole field of Pali literature, and Malalasekera and Bode with Sinhalese and Bur- 
mese Pah literature respectively, it is very difficult to write about the subject with- 
out repeating what one or other of these authorities has already said. Rather than 
do so, and to save space, I have on many occasions referred the reader to their 
books. In particular, Winternitz is to be recommended for the many quotations 
he includes, while Law r gives lengthy summaries of the contents of many texts. 

Although I have occasionally given information about the formation of in- 
dividual texts, I have not done this consistently throughout, nor have I dealt 
with any one text at great length. Those who are interested in this aspect of 
Pah literature will find references in the footnotes to Pande’s book, in which 
he deals with the first four nikdyas and some of the Khuddaka-nikaya. The 
discussion of chronological stratification is a complicated matter, and needs 
more space than I have at my disposal. It is also, in the absence of better 
criteria than we have at present, a very subjective matter, and while I would 
agree with much that Pande says, I cannot agree with him in everything. 


Cambridge, 1 February 1982 


K. R. Norman 



Chapter I 


THE PALI LANGUAGE AND THE THERAVADIN TRADITION 


1. THE NAME “PALI” 


The dialect of Middle Indo-Aryan which is found in the texts of the Thera- 
vadin Buddhists and usually called “Pali” by European scholars 1 is nowhere 
so called in the Theravadin canon. The word pdli is found in the chronicles and 
the commentaries upon the canon, but there it has the meaning “canon” and 
is used in the sense of a canonical text or phrase as opposed to the commentary 
( atthakathd ) upon it. 2 This usage is made clear by the fact that the word pdli 
sometimes alternates with tanti . 3 

It would seem that the name “Pali” is based upon a misunderstanding of 
the compound pali-bhasa “language of the canon,” where the word pdli was 
taken to stand for the name of a particular bhasa, as a result of which the word 
was applied to the language of both canon and commentaries. There is evidence 
that this misunderstanding occurred several centuries ago. Childers stated 4 
that the English usage was taken from the Sinhalese, 5 6 who used the word in 
the same way. This probably accounts for Clough’s adoption of the name 
when he published his grammar in 1824.® Burnouf and Lassen also used the 
name “Pali” in their essay on Pali grammar which was published in 1826, 7 but 
in the survey of Pali studies up to that year included in that work Burnouf 
pointed out that the first person to mention Pali was Simon de La Loubere 


1 For a survey of earlier views about the name “Pali,” see O. von Hinuber, 
“Zur Geschichte des Sprachnamens Pali,” in Beitrage zur Indienforschung : Ernst 
Waldschmidt zum 80. Geburtstag gewidmet, Berlin 1977, pp. 237—46. 

2 E.g. Palimattam idh' anitam, n' atthi atthakathd idha (Mhv XXXVII 227); 
sabbdkarena n’ eva Paliyam na atthakathdyam agatam (Vism 107, 15 — 16). 

3 Cf. imam, pdlinaydnurupam samvannanam ddni samdrabhissam (Sp 2, 11—12) 
with manoramam bhdsam tantinaydnucchavikam aropento (Sv 1, 19 — 20). 

4 R. C. Childers, A dictionary of the Pali language, London 1875, p.vii n. 1. 

5 The earliest example quotable seems to be from the Sangharajasadhucariyava 
( saka 1701 = A.D. 1779), according to C. H. B. Reynolds (quoted by Bechert, 
BCSRS, p. 16). 

6 B. Clough, A compendious Pali grammar with a copious vocabulary in the 
same language, Colombo 1824. 

7 E. Burnouf et Chr. Lassen, Essai sur le Pali ou langue sacree de la presqu’ile 
au-dela du Gange, Paris 1826. 



2 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


who visited Siam in 1687—88, and published a description of the kingdom of 
Siam in 1691, which was translated into English in 1693. 8 

It is clear from this account that in Thailand in the late seventeenth century 
the name “Pah” was already being used of the language of the Theravadin 
texts. La Loub^re noted that in contrast to Thai, which was a monosyllabic 
language, “Balie” (or “Baly”) was inflected just like the languages of Europe. 9 
He also drew attention to the fact that the names for the days of the week were 
similar in Pah and Sanskrit, 10 and reported that he had been told that there 
were similarities between Pali and the languages spoken near Coromandel. He 
commented that this was not surprising in view of the fact that the Buddha 
was reported to have been the son of a king of Ceylon. 11 

The Sasanavamsa, written in Burma in 1861, uses the word pdli in a context 
where it seems to be the name of a language. 12 Since the Sasanavamsa is based 
upon an earlier Burmese text, 13 the usage of the name “Pali” in Burma is prob- 
ably earher than would appear. It seems unlikely that the usage arose inde- 
pendently in all three countries, but in the present state of our knowledge it 
does not seem possible to determine where the misunderstanding first occurred. 


2. THE HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE PALI LANGUAGE 


The commentaries state that the language spoken by the Buddha, which is 
the language of the canon, is MagadhT. 14 This is referred to as the mula-bhdsd, lb 
the root language of all languages, and the language which a child would speak 
naturally if it heard no other language spoken. 16 

An examination of the Pali canon shows clearly that portions, at least, of it 
were either composed or transmitted through one or more other dialects of 
Middle Indo-Aryan, before being turned into the version which exists at pre- 
sent. It can be shown that these dialects included those where the voicing of 

8 Simon de La Lotibere, The kingdom of Siam, London 1693 (repr. 1969). 

8 Ibid. p. 9. 

10 Ibid. p. 168. 

11 Ibid. p. 11. 

12 [ Buddhaghoso ] icc evarn pdlibhdsdya pariyattim parivattitvd pacchd . . . jina- 
cakkam ... atidibbati (Sas 31, 31); cf. parivattesi sabbd pi Sihalatthakathd tadd 
sabbesam mulabhdsdya Mdgadhdya niruttiyd (Mhv XXXVII 244). 

13 See V. B. Liebermann, “A new look at the Sasanavamsa,” in BSOAS 39 
(1976), pp. 137—49. 

14 sammasambuddho pi tepitakam Buddhavacanam tantim dropento Magadhabha- 
sdya eva dropesi (Vibh-a 388, 7 • — 8). 

15 Buddhaghosa says: Magadhikaya sabba-sattdnam mulabhdsdya (Vism 441, 34) ; 
cf. so66esam mulabhdsdya Mdgadhdya niruttiyd (Mhv XXXVII 244). 

16 ubhinnam pi pana katham asunanto Mdgadhabhasam bhasissati (Vibh-a 387, 
32-33). 



The Pali language and the Theravadin tradition 


3 


intervocalic consonants took place, or their reduction to -y-, or -r- became 4-. 17 
Some of the Pali material came from or through dialects where the absolutive 
was in - ttd , 18 the no mi native singular in -e, or the locative plural in -ehi. 19 It 
is clear, therefore, that the statement that the canon is in one dialect, whether 
Magadhi or anything else, cannot be true of all of it. What we know of Magadhi 
as described by the grammarians in later times, however, enables us to say that 
Pah is not Magadhi, and although we have no direct evidence about the char- 
acteristics of Magadhi in the centuries before Asoka, we can deduce with some 
certainty that Pali does not agree with that either. 20 

It would seem likely that, because the texts tell of the Buddha at times 
preaching in Magadha, although none of the scenes of the great events in his 
life was situated within the boundaries of Magadha as we know it in historical 
times, 21 the tradition arose that all his sermons were preached in the dialect 
of that region of North India. It is also possible that the prestige attaching to 
Magadha, and by implication to Magadhi, during the time of the Mauryan 
kings, and also the way in which the Magadhi 22 of the original Asokan edicts 
was everywhere in India “translated” into the local dialect or language, led to 
the taking over by the Buddhists, at about the time of the council which the 
Theravadin tradition reports was held during the reign of Asoka, of the idea 
that their “ruler” too employed such a language. 

Although there is some doubt about the interpretation of the phrase the 
Buddha used when asked if it was permissible to translate his sermons, 23 it is 
generally agreed that he did not preach in Sanskrit, but employed the dialect 
or language of the area where he was preaching. We must assume that his 
sermons and utterances were remembered by his followers and his audiences 
as they heard them. In the course of time, during his lifetime and after his 
death, collections must have been made of his words, and translations or 


17 See Luders, BSU, §§ 58—86, 88—115. 

18 See O. von Hinuber, “Pali as an artificial language,” to appear in IT 10 (1982), 
and K. R. Norman, “Four etymologies from the Sabhiya-sutta,” in Balasooriya, 
BSWR, p. 183 n. 21. 

19 See Luders, BSU, §§ 1—21, 220—25. 

20 See K. R. Norman, “The dialects in which the Buddha preached,” in Bechert, 
LEBT, pp. 69—71. 

21 F. Edgerton (BHS Grammar, New Haven 1953, p. 3 n. 8) has pointed out 
that neither the Buddha’s home (Kapilavastu), nor one of his favourite dwelling 
places (Sravasti), nor the scene of his first sermon (Benares), nor the place of his 
death (Kusinagari, Pali Kusinara) was in Magadha. 

22 I use “Magadhi” here in the sense of the language of Magadha at the time of 
Asoka, without thereby implying that it necessarily had the same features as the 
grammarians’ Magadhi. 

23 When asked if his words could be translated chandaso, the Buddha forbade it, 
but added: anujanami bhikkhave safcdya niruttiyd buddhavacanam pariydpuniturn 
(Vin II 139, 14 — 16). For a discussion, with references to earlier views, of the words 
chandaso and sakdya niruttiyd, see J. Brough, “Sakaya niruttiya: Cauld kale het,” 
in Bechert, LEBT, pp. 35—42. 



4 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


redactions of these must have been made as the need arose, either because the 
collections were being taken into an area where a different dialect or language 
was spoken, or because as time went by his words became less intelligible as 
their language became more archaic. 

As Buddhism became established in various parts of North India, there must 
have been an attempt made to render all the holdings of any particular vihdra, 
which were probably still in various dialects as they had been remembered, 
roughly homogeneous in language, although we must bear in mind the fact 
that, as the dialects of North India had probably not diverged greatly from 
each other in the fourth and third centuries B. C., absolute perfection of “trans- 
lation” was not essential. The anomalous forms in Pah mentioned above prob- 
ably represent the remnants of recensions in other dialects, which had not 
been completely translated. 

The Thera vadin tradition tells of councils ( sangltis ) being held to recite the 
canon, of which the third was held in the time of Asoka , 24 and although the 
discrepancies with the Northern tradition cast doubt upon this, there must have 
been gatherings of some sort where recitations took place, and the “imprimatur” 
of the Sangha was bestowed. Such councils would inevitably have led to a 
normalisation of the language of the canon to a greater or less extent. 

Since this normalised language was an “ecclesiastical” one, being recited by 
monks who probably spoke a variety of languages or dialects, there is no 
necessity to assume that it coincided exactly with any one particular spoken 
language. It has been claimed in the case of Pali that as there are resemblances 
between it and the Girnar dialect of the Asokan inscriptions , 25 and also between 
it and the language of the Hathigumpha inscriptions , 26 Pali must have been 
the language of one or other of these two areas. A careful examination of the 
language of these inscriptions shows that Pali is not identical with either of 
them, and there is, moreover, some doubt about the language of the Girnar 
version of the Asokan inscriptions, since it is possible that it represents, in part 
at least, the scribe’s attempt to convert the Eastern dialect he must have 
received from Pataliputra into what he thought was appropriate to the region 
in which the edict was being promulgated, rather than the actual dialect of 
that region . 27 The language of the Hathigumpha inscription, although it agrees 


24 If the Northern tradition that the second council took place in Asoka’s reign 
is correct (see Thomas, HBT, p. 34), then it is possible that the Thera vadins held a 
third council later in the same reign, after ridding themselves of heretics. Perhaps 
the figure of 118 years connected with this third council refers to the number of 
years after the Buddha’s parinibbdna, not after the second council. 

25 J. Bloch, states: “Girnar fournit la langue la plus proche du pali des livres 
bouddhiques singhalais, qui nous servira de repere : c’est du reste en raison de cette 
ressemblance qu’on suppose le pali originaire d’uno region voisine” (Les inscriptions 
d’ Asoka, Paris 1950, pp. 44 — 45). 

26 See Oldenberg, Vin I, p. liv. 

27 See K. R. Norman, “The dialects in which the Buddha preached,” in Bechert, 
LEBT, p. 69. 



The Pali language and the Theravadin tradition 


5 


with Pali in the retention of most intervocalic consonants and in the 
nominative singular in -o, nevertheless differs in that the absolutive ending 
is -(t)td, and with two doubtful exceptions there are no consonant groups 
containing -r-. 28 

While it is not impossible that there existed in India in the third century B. C. 
an unattested dialect of Middle Indo-Aryan which had all the features of Pali, 
the fact that some of the consonant clusters found in Pali are unhistoric and 
must therefore represent incorrect attempts at backformation, e.g. disva 
(which cannot be from drstvd) and atraja (which cannot be from atmaja), makes 
it more likely that by the third century B.C. the dialect of the canonical texts 
of the Theravadins conformed to the general pattern of Middle Indo-Aryan 
dialects of that time, and all consonant clusters had either been assimilated or 
resolved. It is probable that this represented the form of the language of the 
Theravadin canon at the time of the reign of Asoka, which was perhaps the 
lingua franca of the Buddhists of Eastern India, and not very different from 
the language of the Hathigumpha inscriptions. 

At some unknown date, probably around the end of Asoka’s reign (c. 235 
B. C.), the importance of Sanskrit which had been in eclipse began to rise again, 
and as we can see from the progressive Sanskritisation of the Mathura inscrip- 
tions 29 and the non-Pali schools of Buddhism, an attempt was made to trans- 
late from the Middle Indo-Aryan dialects into Sanskrit. It is probable that this 
would have been done in a haphazard way at first, in the same way as the early 
texts had been remembered and translated from dialect to dialect. With the 
crystallisation of sects and schools, and with the increased use of writing from 
the time of Asoka onwards, it is probable that the use of Sanskritised forms by 
the Theravadins became more standardised. 

The tradition recorded in the Sinhalese chronicles states that the Theravadin 
canon was written down 30 during the first century B.C. as a result of threats 
to the Saiigha from famine, war, and the growing power of the Abhayagiri 
vihdra, to which the king was more favourably disposed. There is no reason to 
reject this tradition, because there are indications that texts were already being 
written down before this date. 31 It seems probable that the Sanskritisation of 
Pali was virtually fixed at the stage it had reached by the time of the commis- 
sion to writing, and except for any changes made later by the scribes for the 
sake of consistency, no further progress was made with the restoration of con- 
sonant groups. Those changes which had been made, in a haphazard way as 
already stated, had probably occurred for specific religious or cultural reasons. 
It is, for example, probable that the authentic Middle Indo-Aryan form bam- 

28 In his revised edition of the inscription, B. M. Barua read brahmandnam in 
line 8a and -prdci- in line 9 (“Hathigumpha inscription of Kharavela,” in IHQ 14, 
p. 466). 

29 See Th. Damsteegt, Epigraphical Hybrid Sanskrit, Leiden 1978, p. 265. 

30 See p. 10 below. 

31 See Brough, G Dhp, p. 218. 



6 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


hana “brahman” had been replaced by the Sanskrit form brdhmana because of 
the strongly anti-brahmanical flavour of the Buddha’s teaching. It was perhaps 
of little value to condemn the brahmans or to maintain that a Buddhist “brah- 
man” was better than a true-born brahman if the recipients of the attack did 
not recognise their name in its Middle Indo-Aryan guise. Once the br- group had 
been restored 32 in brdhmana, then the way was open for its “restoration” in 
other words, e.g. bruheti, even if it were not historically justified. On the other 
hand, there was no specific need to restore pr-, even though one might have 
expected the treatment of voiced and unvoiced labials in conjunction with -r- 
to have been identical. 

Although the chances of major changes being made to the language of the 
canon must have diminished once the texts had been written down, never- 
theless there was room for a certain amount of minor emendation to take place 
in the course of the centuries-long scribal tradition. Once the Pah grammarians 
had begun to classify and categorise the features of Pali, it was inevitable that 
their writings would have some effect upon scribes. It is clear from some of the 
later commentaries that the commentators had a knowledge of Sanskrit . 33 
There is evidence that the opinions of the commentators sometimes had a 
bearing upon the readings which the scribes handed down , 34 and it seems likely 
that their knowledge might well also affect the phonology and morphology they 
transmitted. It has been said, with some justification, that the Pali of the canon 
as we have it now is a reflection of the Pali of the twelfth century , 35 when the 
influence of the Pali grammarians was at its highest. 

It was to be expected that Pali would show the influence of Sanskrit, because 
it was copied by scribes who were influenced by the grammarians, who were 
themselves influenced by Sanskrit, but we must also recognise the fact that as 
Pali became the religious language of Buddhism in Ceylon and South-East 
Asia, it was used by a variety of persons as a second language. This led in- 
evitably to the introduction into Pali of features of their first language, more 
particularly of vocabulary, but also of syntax. Studies of Pali texts written in 
Ceylon show clearly the influence of Sinhalese Prakrit and Sinhalese, and 
also Dravidian , 36 probably through the medium of Sinhalese. In the same way 


32 It would be possible to argue that the form brdhmana had been retained 
unchanged from the very oldest stage of MIA for this same reason. It can, however, 
be shown that in certain contexts, at least, the expected MIA form of the word 
occurred. The etymologies which connect brdhmana with the root bah-, e.g. bahita- 
papo ti brdhmano (Dhp 388), make sense only in a dialect where initial hr- had 
become b-. 

33 See de Silva, DAT, I, pp. lvi— lviii. 

34 See O. von Hinuber, “On the tradition of Pali texts in India, Ceylon and 
Burma,” in Bechert, BCSBS, pp. 55—57. 

35 Helmer Smith (Sadd, p. vi) writes of “la conviction que notro pali est une 
fonction de celui du 12 me siecle.” 

36 See K. de Vreese, “Dravidian idioms in later Pali,” in Orientalia Lovaniensia 
Periodica 11, pp. 179 — 222. 



The Pali language and the Theravadin tradition 7 

texts written in Burma 37 or Thailand 38 may reveal features of Burmese or 
Thai. 

All Hinayana canonical texts show evidence of being translated from a 
dialect of Middle Indo- Aryan. The North-Western Prakrit of the Gandhari 
Dharmapada has features, e.g. dental -s- where retroflex -s- is expected, which 
prove that it has been translated from some other Prakrit. 39 The Sanskrit of 
the Sarvastivadin texts from Chinese Turkestan and the Mula-sarvastivadin 
texts from Gilgit shows, in general, less Prakrit features than the language of 
the Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin texts, 40 although the latter, mostly known 
only from a single manuscript, are not consistent in their degree of Sanskriti- 
sation. Their version of the Dharmapada, 41 for example, has restored some re- 
troflex and palatal sibilants, many long vowels before consonant groups, and 
some consonant clusters containing -r-, but very few containing -v-, 42 e.g. 
absolutives have the ending -tta. The nominative singular ending is -o. In the 
Bhiksuni-Vinaya, 43 on the other hand, the absolutive ending is -tvd, and the 
nominative ending -ah occurs. 


3. THE HISTORY OF THE THERAVADIN TRADITION 


All the schools of Buddhism agree that there was a council held soon after 
the death of the Buddha. According to the earliest version found in Pali, 44 
there was a meeting of 500 bhikkhus, where Mahakassapa asked Upali about 
the vinaya, questioning him about the rules of the Pdtimokkha, where the of- 
fence was laid down, with respect to whom, on what subject, etc. He then 
questioned Ananda about the dhamma, starting with the Brahmajala-sutta of 
the Digha-nikaya, and then the Samannaphala-sutta, and so on through the 
five nikdyas. As the two experts expounded these matters, the other theras 

37 See Victor B. Liebermaist, “A new look at the Sasanavamsa,” in BSOAS 39 
(1976), p. 146. 

38 See N. A. Jayawickrama, The sheaf of garlands of the epochs of the conqueror, 
PTS London, 1968, pp. xxxvii — xxxix, and G. Terral, “Samuddaghosajataka,” 
in BEFEO 48 (1956), pp. 263—65. 

39 See Brough, G Dhp, § 50. 

40 See F. Edgerton, BHS Grammar, New Haven 1953, p. xxv. Edgerton class- 
es the Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin Mahavastu as being the oldest BHS text we 
have. 

41 Ed. G. Roth, in “The language of the Arya-Mahasahghika-Lokottaravadins,” 
in Bechert, LEBT, pp. 78—135, and also by N. S. Shukla, The Buddhist Hybrid 
Sanskrit Dharmapada, Patna 1979. 

42 From the Pkt form dittha the redactor produced drstd instead of drstva. 

43 Ed. G. Roth, Bhiksuni- vinaya: manual of discipline for Buddhist nuns, Patna 
1970. 

44 Vin II 285, 9—287, 28. 



8 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


repeated their words after them. Buddhaghosa, in his account of the same 
council , 45 states that the fifth nikaya, the Khuddaka-nikaya, included what- 
ever sayings of the Buddha were not included in the first four nikdyas. The Pali 
account does not mention the Abhidhamma specifically, although Buddha - 
ghosa’s interpretation of nikaya does not preclude the inclusion of the Abhi- 
dhamma in the Khuddaka-nikaya. The versions of the story included in the 
Dlpavamsa and the Mahavamsa 46 state that Ananda repeated the dhamma, 
which could be taken to include the Abhidhamma. Some of the Northern 
schools, however, do specifically include the Abhidhamma, and state that this 
was expounded by Kassapa himself . 47 

The version in the Dlpavamsa 48 states that the theras divided up the nine- 
fold dhamma into chapters, etc. This seems to be an attempt to reconcile the 
old nine-fold division with the arrangement of the canon as we have it now. 
Buddhaghosa attributes to the theras all the uddana verses, noting of repeti- 
tions, etc., which exist in the canon . 49 There are in commentaries by Buddha- 
ghosa and others not infrequently statements that a portion of the text is due 
to the sangitikaras, and it is probable that these ascriptions are taken over 
from the earlier Sihala atthakathas. Although there is no reason to doubt that 
these portions are indeed later additions to the canon, and were made by 
sangitikaras, there is no certainty that they were added at the time of the first 
council. 

Although we may have reservations about the texts which were dealt with 
at the first council, there is no reason to doubt the general way in which it was 
held. The chosen expert in each section of the Buddha’s teachings expounded 
what he could remember, and when it had been approved as a genuine utter- 
ance of the Buddha the assembly as a whole confirmed their approval by re- 
peating it together. The commentaries explain that the words “Thus have I 
heard” at the beginning of the suttas are the words which Ananda used to intro- 
duce his recitation . 50 

Buddhaghosa tells us that after the council the Vinaya was entrusted to 
IJpali and his pupils. Similarly the Digha-, Majjhima-, Samyutta- and Angut- 
tara-nikayas were entrusted to Ananda, Sariputta, Mahakassapa and Anu- 
ruddha, respectively, and their pupils . 51 This was probably the beginning of 
the system of the bhdnakas (“reciters”), who shared out the recitation of the 
dhamma among themselves. We find in the commentaries references to bhdnakas 
of the first four nikdyas, and to Jataka -bhdnakas and D h am m ap ada -bhdnakas . 5 2 

45 Sp 16, 14-15. 

46 Dip IY 1 1 ; Mhv III 35. 

47 See Thomas, HBT, p. 28 n. 1. 

48 Dip IV 18—20. See p. 16 below. 

49 Sp 30, 1-5. 

50 Brahmajalassapi “ evam me sutan" ti adikam dyasmata Anandena pathama- 
mahasamgiti-kdle vuttam niddnam adi (Sv 2, 14 — 15). 

51 Sv'l3, 23-24; 15, 2— 13. 

52 See Adikaram, EHBC, pp. 24—32. 



The Pali language and the Theravadin tradition 


9 


Although there seems to be only one reference to Khuddaka-Mcma&as, 53 we 
may assume that there were bhdnakas of the other texts of the Khuddaka- 
nikaya. We may deduce from the fact that versions of one and the same sutta 
or utterance in different parts of the canon sometimes differ, that the bhdnakas 
responsible for the transmission of each text were quite independent, and were 
not influenced by the traditions of the bhdnakas of other nikayas. This would 
explain why the versions of Vanglsa’s stanzas in the Samyutta-nikaya and the 
Theragatha do not entirely agree. 54 

The views of the bhdnakas were not confined to the texts for whose recitation 
they were responsible. They also had views about the books which were to be 
regarded as canonical. We read that the Dlgha-bhanakas put the Khuddaka- 
gantha into the Abhidhammapitaka, classifying the texts in the following 
order: Jataka Mahaniddesa Culaniddesa Patisambhidamagga Suttanipata 
Dhammapada Udana Itivuttaka Vimanavatthu Petavatthu Theragatha Theri- 
gatha. The Maj j hima-bhdnakas , however, put them in the Suttanta-pitaka 
together with the Cariyapitaka, the Apadana and the Buddhavamsa. 55 They 
thus omitted the Khuddakapatha from the canon. We must assume that the 
T)igha-bhdnakas closed their list of the Khuddaka-nikaya before these texts 
were added to it, while the Majjhima-6Mwa&a.s closed their list before the 
Khuddakapatha was reckoned as being canonical. 

The schools of bhdnakas also had their own views about the history of early 
Buddhism, e.g. the Dlgha -bhdnakas said that the Bodhisatta saw all four 
nimittas on the same day, 56 while other bhdnakas had other views ; the Majjhima- 
bhdnakas gave a different reason from the Digha -bhdnakas for Ananda’s late 
arrival at the Council. 57 To judge from the way that Buddhaghosa speaks about 
them, the bhdnakas were still active in his day, but they seem not to exist 
today, at least not in Ceylon. 58 It is likely that the growth of the practice of 
writing, and the increasing use of MSS, made it unnecessary to keep up the 
schools which were dedicated to the recitation of the complete nikayas entrusted 
to their care. 

The Pah Vinaya-pitaka goes on to relate how, following a dispute over 
certain points of discipline 100 years after the death of the Buddha, a second 
council was held. In the presence of 700 bhikkhus, Revata asked the thera 
Sabbakamin about the discipline. This council is described in the Vinaya as a 
vinaya-sangiti , 59 The Dlpavamsa calls it a dhammasahgaha, and is followed in 
this by the Mahavamsa. 60 The latter source adds that the 700 were tipitakatta- 


53 Mil 342, 1. 

54 Compare especially Th 1253—62 with S I 196, 11 — 21. 

55 Sv 15, 22—29. 

58 Ja I 59, 31—32. 

57 Sv 11, 3. 

58 See Adikaeam, EHBC, p. 32. 

59 Vin II 307, 35. 

60 Dip V 28 ; Mhv IV 63. 



10 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


yadharins . 61 Buddhaghosa expands the story, and says that 700 tipitakadharas 
were chosen to rehearse the dhamma and the vinaya, which they recited in their 
entireties. 62 

At some time after the second council, the dissident monies split off from the 
Thera vadins and held their own “great council” (mahasangiti) . They con- 
sequently became known as Mahasangitikas 63 or Mahasanghikas. 64 During the 
following centuries further splits occurred, from both the Theravadins and the 
Mahasanghikas, until by the time of the early chronicles eighteen sects were 
known and named. 65 

The earliest Pali source for the account of the third council, held during the 
reign of Asoka and not mentioned as such in the Northern Buddhist sources, 
is the Dipavamsa. 66 There we read that the council was held after the expulsion 
of certain heretics from the Order. Moggahputta presided over 1,000 bhikkhus, 
and during the course of the sangiti he recited the Kathavatthu. The Maha- 
vamsa 67 adds the detail that the bhikkhus were all tepitakas. Buddhaghosa 
states 68 that they recited both the dhamma and the vinaya. 

Buddhaghosa gives an account 69 of an assembly held in Ceylon, soon after 
the introduction of Buddhism there, when the elder Maha-arittha preached 
the vinaya. The Mahavamsa does not mention this assembly, but in the account 
of it given in the Saddhammasangaha, 70 the recitation is said to have included 
both the vinaya and the dhamma, and the assembly is specifically called the 
fourth assembly, and verses attributed to the pordnas are quoted which include 
the words catuttham sangaham katva. 71 The Jinakalamall 72 follows Buddha- 
ghosa in stating that Maha-arittha recited the vinaya only. The verse found in 
the Saddhammasangaha is quoted by Buddhaghosa, 73 without attribution to 
the pordnas, but the words of the pdda in question are different, and make no 
mention of the catutthasangaha. 

The Dipavamsa states 74 that during the reign of Yattagamanl Abhaya 
(29—17 B.C.) the monks who had previously remembered the Tipitaka and its 
commentary orally now wrote them down in books, because of the threat posed 
by famine, war, and the growing power of the newly established Abhayagiri 


61 Mhv IY 62. 

62 Sp 34, 16-22. 

83 Dip V 32. 

64 Mhv Y 4. 

65 Dip V 51 ; Mhv V 10. 

68 Dip VII 39—40; 57—59. 

67 Mhv V 275. 

68 Sp 61, 19. 

69 Sp 102, 23—103, 22. 

70 Saddhamma-s 43, 29—44, 29. 

71 Saddhamma-s 45, 11. 

72 Jinak 50, 17. 

73 Sp 104, 5—6. 

74 Dip XX 20-21. 



The Pali language and the Theravadin tradition 


11 


vihara, which enjoyed the king’s favour. The Mahavamsa 75 also refers briefly 
to the writing down of the canon and the commentaries at this time. The 
Pujavaliya and Nikayasangraha, 76 however, written in Ceylon in the 13th and 
14th centuries respectively, state that the writing down was a result of the 
holding of a council of 500 bhikkhus at the Aluvihara (Aloka- vihara), although 
neither source gives a number to the council. 77 The Jinakalamall, 78 however, 
entitles this section of its narrative Catutthasangitikatha, and quotes a state- 
ment from the Sara-sangaha, written in the 13th or 14th century, that the 
sanglti was catutthadhammasahgitisadisa . The Saddhammasarigaha does not 
specifically call this the fifth council, as it might have been expected to do, but 
states : pancamam dhammasangitisadisam eva akdsi , 79 Of the writing down of 
the Tipitaka and commentaries in the time of Vattagamanl, the Sasanavamsa, 
written in Burma in 1861 by Pannasami, but following earlier sources, states 80 
that “this should be called even by the name of the fourth council.” It quotes as 
an authority for this statement the Vinaya-tika called Saratthadipanl, written by 
Sariputta 81 probably in the 12th century, which states “The council for writing 
the books was indeed the fourth council.” The Sasanavamsa also states 82 that the 
list of elders down to Siva which is found in the Vinaya 83 is the “succession of 
elders down to those who assembled in the fourth council as recorded in books.” 

The Dipavamsa, followed by Buddhaghosa and the Mahavamsa, 84 tells how 
one of the missions sent out by Moggaliputta after the third council consisted 
of Sona(ka) and Uttara who went to Suvaimabhumi, which is usually identified 
as Burma. The Burmese tradition, however, has it that Buddhism was estab- 
lished in Burma even earlier than that. The Sasanavamsa 85 tells of the Buddha 
actually visiting that country, a story doubtless invented to match his alleged 
visits to Ceylon. The later Burmese tradition even claims Buddhaghosa as a 
native of Thaton. 86 

There is evidence for the existence of Buddhism in both Burma and Siam by 
the seventh century A.D., and a number of Buddhist texts were certainly 
~ 75 Mhv XXXIII 100-101. 

76 “During his reign 500 Rahats resided in the Alulena cave and rehearsed the 
[sacred] books” (Pujavaliya, tr. B. Gunasekera, Colombo 1895, ch. 34). “At that 
time 500 Rahats who assembled at Alulena in the country of Matale, under the 
patronage of a certain chief, recited and reduced to writing the text of the Three 
Pitakas” (Nikayasangraha, tr. C. M. Fernando, Colombo 1908). 

77 As I am informed by Mr C. H. B. Reynolds, Lecturer in Sinhalese at the School 
of Oriental and African Studies in the University of London. 

78 Jinak 61, 11—12. 

79 Saddhamma-s 49, 5 — 6. 

80 Sas 23, 26-27. 

81 Gv 61, 30—31. 

82 Sas 20, 5—6. 

83 Yin Y 3, 1-28. 

84 Dip VIII 12; Sp 64, 3—4; Mhv XII 6. 

85 Sas 36, 33-37, 3. 

86 See Pe Mating Tin and G. H. Ltjce (tr.), The Glass Palace Chronicle of the 
Kings of Burma, London 1923, pp. 46 — 50. 



12 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


known in Burma in the eighth century, 87 although it is not certain whether 
the whole Tipitaka was known there at that time. The Sasanavamsa 88 refers to 
inscriptions stating that King Anuruddha established the religion c. A. D. 1057 
after conquering the town of Sudhamma (Thaton). He had the Tipitaka brought 
from Ceylon and compared with that from Sudhamma. Communication with 
Ceylon at this time is confirmed by a report in the Mahavamsa 89 that King 
Vijayabahu, finding that there were not enough ordained monks in Ceylon to 
hold the upasampada ceremony, asked Anuruddha to send monks to hold the 
ceremony, and to recite the Tipitaka. 

In the following century, when Parakkamabahu I became king, he found 
that Buddhism in Ceylon was still rent by heresy. He accordingly called a 
council under Mahakassapa and had them settle the points in dispute, and thus 
managed to reconcile the three main sects in Ceylon at that time. 90 

We read in the Jinakalamali 91 that in A.D. 1430 the Sihalasasana was 
brought to Siam, and not long after, in 1475—77, a council was held in Siam 92 
at which the three Pitakas were “cleansed of scribes’ errors” by great elders 
appointed for the task, who were well versed in the Tipitaka. As in the case of 
Burma, the traffic was not all one way. In 1756 Buddhism had declined to such 
a state in Ceylon that it became necessary to re-establish the upasampada, and 
monks were invited from Siam to do this. 93 They brought with them books of 
various sorts, on the dhamma and the vinaya, which were not extant in Ceylon. 
In 1802 Burmese monks were invited to Ceylon to introduce the Burmese 
upasampada . 9i Subsequently Sinhalese monks went to Burma and studied the 
Abhidhamma, and on their return they brought back Pali books written by 
Burmese monks. 

Towards the end of the 19th century King Min-d5n-min, whose tutor 
Pannasami had written the Sasanavamsa only a few years before, convened a 
fifth council (1868—71), where under the presidency of the king eminent monks 
and teachers read or recited the sacred texts to restore the best readings. The 
complete text of the Tipitaka was engraved on 729 stone slabs around the 
Kuthodaw Pagoda in Mandalay. The dates on the slabs indicate that the texts 
had probably already been carved before the council was held, and were then 
corrected in the light of any discussion. 95 


87 See G. H. Luce, “The advent of Buddhism to Burma,” in Cousins, BSIBH, 
pp. 119-38. 

88 silalehhanesu vuttam (Sas 64, 1 — 2). 

89 Mhv LX 5—7. 

90 Mhv LXXVIII 16-27. 

91 Jinak 93, 17—20. 

92 Jinak 115, 5—6. 

93 Mhv C 152—53. 

91 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 309 and Bode, PLB, pp. 77—78 and 83—84. 

95 See W. B. Bollee, “Some lesser known Burmese Pali texts,” in Heesterman, 
Pratid, pp. 493—99. 



The Pali language and the Theravadin tradition 


13 


The Mandalay slabs were re-inked and copied for the sixth council which 
was held in Rangoon in 1954—56, to mark the 2,500th anniversary of the 
Buddha’s birth (according to the oriental tradition of chronology). We are 
informed 96 that a draft edition of the Tipitaka, commentaries and sub-com- 
mentaries, based upon the fifth council edition which had been revised after 
comparison with texts from other countries, was prepared by a body of scholars. 
This was then checked and re-edited by a large number of Burmese mahdtheras, 
and simultaneously by a smaller number of Sinhalese monks. The final version 
was decided upon (not without argument) by boards of reviewers composed of 
Burmese, Sinhalese, and Thai monks. The new editions were then ready for 
printing. The task of the council, spread over two years, was the ceremonial 
recitation and formal confirmation of the new editions. Although invited, no 
representative of Cambodia or Laos was able to attend the meetings for scru- 
tinising the new editions, but the Cambodians and Laotians are reported to have 
given their assent to the decisions arrived at by the representatives of the other 
countries. While the vast majority of monks present at the sixth council were 
Burmese, recognition was given to the other countries by appointing their 
representatives as chairmen for the various sessions. 

It is not inappropriate to talk of a Burmese or Siamese or Sinhalese tradition 
for the transmission of a particular text, and the differences which we find be- 
tween the readings of the MSS belonging to the various traditions must go 
back to the councils which have been held from time to time in the different 
countries. The value of each tradition will depend upon the care with which 
evidence for variant readings was sifted, and the criteria which were adopted 
as the basis of the decisions which were made. We have, of course, no way of 
discovering this for the earlier councils. The way in which the preliminary work 
for the sixth council was carried out should have resulted in an eclectic edition 
of the canon and the commentaries, incorporating the best readings from all 
the oriental editions. It is probable, however, that the Chatthasangdyana edition 
is based predominantly upon the Burmese tradition, but it is not possible to be 
certain about this without carrying out a detailed comparison between that 
edition and the one inscribed after the fifth council. 

The way in which the upasampadd was re-introduced from one Buddhist 
country into another, and books were brought by visiting monks, has led to a 
situation where the traditions of each country have become to some extent 
interwoven. It is sometimes possible to detect the effect which this has had. 
When, for example, variant readings in a Sinhalese MS depend upon the simi- 
larity in shape of two ahsaras which resemble each other in the Burmese script, 
but not in the Sinhalese syllabary, then we have a clear indication that at some 
time a Burmese MS has been transliterated into Sinhalese characters. 97 The 

96 See D. E. Smith, Religion and Politics in Burma, Princeton 1965, pp. 160—63. 

97 The anusvdra and the i-mdtrd are similar in the Burmese script, but not in the 
Sinhalese, so that any Sinhalese manuscript which shows -am as a mistake for -i 
must be based upon a transcript from a Burmese manuscript. 



14 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


export of MSS sometimes results in the fact that a text which has been lost in 
the country of its origin may be found, safely preserved for centuries, in another 
country. 98 

In more modern times the ease of communication has led to a situation where 
it can become very easy for cross-fertilisation of traditions to take place. The 
editors of the second European edition of the Sutta-nipata draw attention to 
the fact that they have ignored the Siamese edition of that text because it has 
been influenced by the first European edition. 99 It is nevertheless possible that 
MSS are still extant in libraries in Ceylon, Burma, and Thailand which are 
based upon a tradition which pre-dates, and therefore perhaps preserves 
readings older than and rejected by, more recent councils and editions. 

Although not so well documented as the Theravadin tradition, it must be 
assumed that the other traditions followed a similar pattern of recitation and 
validation as canonical by assemblies of monks. The council held by the Maha- 
sanghikas after the schism which followed the second council has already been 
mentioned. The alternative name of the sect suggests that the story of their 
holding a council is correct, although it is possible that its occurrence was 
merely deduced by the Theravadins, who observing differences between the 
canons of the two sects assumed that their rivals would, like themselves, need 
the authority of a council to authenticate their canon. 

Hsiian-tsang records a story that under Kaniska 500 elders subjected the 
Buddhist texts to a revision and wrote commentaries upon them. 100 These com- 
mentaries were then deposited in a stupa. This is designated in the Kanjur as 
the third council. 101 If the story is true, it presumably refers to the Sarvastiva- 
dins, who were strong in Kashmir, where the council was held. It is, however, 
possible that the story was an invention, made up as a direct imitation of the 
accounts of the earlier councils. The fact that one of the commentaries alleged 
to have been composed at that council actually exists 102 does not prove the 
existence of the council. 


93 Nanamoli suggests (Pet tr., p. xiii) that an original manuscript of the Peta- 
kopadesa may have been imported into Burma from Ceylon or South India at an 
early date, and all other Indian and Sinhalese manuscripts have been subsequently 
destroyed by time and neglect, so that the text is now entirely dependent upon a 
single Burmese manuscript, now lost. 

99 See D. Andersen and H. Smith, Sn, p. vi n. 1. 

190 See S. Beal (tr.), Buddhist record of the western world, London 1884, I, 
pp. 152 — 56. 

mi See Thomas, HBT, p. 175. 

102 See ibid., p. 176. 



Chapter II 


THE PALI CANON 


1. THE DIVISIONS OF THE CANON 


Buddhaghosa gives several ways of classifying the Canon. He states 1 that it 
is uniform in sentiment, twofold as regards the dhamma and the vinaya, three- 
fold as regards the first, middle and last words, and also as regards the pitakas, 
fivefold as regards the nikayas, ninefold as regards the angas, and forming 
84,000 divisions according to the units of the dhamma. 

Except for two references to the five nikayas in later passages in the Vinaya- 
pitaka, 2 the usual classification of the canon found in canonical texts is that 
of nine angas, viz. suttam gey yam, veyydkaranam gdtham udanarn itivuttakam 
jatakam abbhutadhammam vedallam . 3 Buddhaghosa explains these terms as 
follows : 4 

Herein, the twofold Vibhanga, the Niddesas, the Khandhaka, the Parivara, 
Mangala, Ratana, Nalaka, and Tuvataka Suttas of the Sutta Nipata and other 
sayings of the Tathagata bearing the name sutta should be known as Sutta 
(Discourses). 

All the suttas containing stanzas should be known as Geyya (Recitation), par- 
ticularly the entire Sagatha-vagga in the Samyutta. 

The whole of the Abhidhamma Pitaka, suttas which contain no stanzas and 
any other (sayings from the) word of the Buddha not included in the other eight 
Angas should be known as the Veyyakarana (Expositions). 

The Dhammapada, Theragatha, Therigatha, and sections entirely in verse in 
the Sutta nipata which are not designated as suttas should be known as Gatha 
(Stanzas). 

The eighty-two suttantas containing stanzas which were prompted by an 
awareness of joy should be known as Udana (Utterances of Joy). 

The 112 suttantas which have been handed down prefixed with the statement, 
“For this has been said by the Exalted One,” should be known as Itivuttaka 
(Thus Saids). 

The 550 Birth Stories commencing with Apannaka should be known as J ataka 
(Birth Stories) . 

All the suttantas connected with wonderful and marvellous phenomena handed 
down with words to such effect as, “O monks, these four wonderful and marvellous 


1 Sp 16, 18-22. 

8 panca nikaye pucchi (Vin II 287, 27 — 28); nikdye panca vdcesum (Vin V 3,5). 

3 E.g. M I 133, 24-25. 

4 Ps II 106, 8—28 = Sp 28, 8—29, 3. 



16 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


qualities are seen in Ananda,” should be known as Abbhutadhamma (Marvellous 
Phenomena) . 

All the suttantas requested to be preached as a result of repeated attainment 
of wisdom and delight, such as Culla-vedalla, Maha-vedalla, Sammaditthi, 
Sakkapanha, Sankharabhajaniya, and Mahapunnama Suttas and others should 
be known as Vedalla (Analyses). 5 

It is clear that all Buddhaghosa knew about some of these terms was the fact 
that there were in his time a number of texts which happened to have the same 
name as an anga. Despite the fact that books called Jataka, Udana and Iti- 
vuttaka actually exist in Pah, it is probable that the list of nine angas did not 
originally refer to specific works in the canon, but was a description of various 
types of text. 6 Some Sanskrit sources mention twelve angas , 7 adding nidana , 
avaddna (which under the form apaddna is the name of a specific text in Pah) 
and upadesa 8 to the list. The Mahavastu speaks of nine angas* and the occur- 
rence of a list of nine in the Saddharmapundarlka shows that the smaller num- 
ber was not confined to the Hlnayana schools. The list in the latter text differs 
somewhat from that found in Pah : sutra gdthd itivrttaka jataka adbhuta nidana 
aupamya gey a and upadesa. 10 

According to the Dlpavamsa, 11 the change from the old ninefold classification 
into the later one took place at the first council. In its account of that council 
it states that the 500 theras who held it divided up the Buddha’s ninefold 
teachings into chapter (vagga), collection of 50 (pannasaka), connected collec- 
tion ( samyutta ) , and section ( nipataka ) . “Thus they made the basket of dgamas 
(agama-pitaka) which is known by the name of sutta (sutta-sammata) ” 

The division of the canon as it exists today is that into pitakas. The only 
reference to someone knowing the three pitakas which we find in the canon is 
in the later Parivara section of the Vinaya-pitaka, 12 but the occurrence of the 
word petakin “knowing the pitaka(s)” in inscriptions at Bharhut 13 indicates 
that in the centuries immediately after the time of Asoka the word pitaka had 

5 Tr. N. A. Jayawickrama, The inception of discipline and the Vinayanidana, 
London 1962, pp. 25 — 26. 

6 So veyydkarana is commonly used of an exposition in a sermon, e.g. veyydka- 
ranasmim bhannamane (D I 46, 27—28). 

7 See Thomas, HBT, pp. 276—78. 

8 This word too seems to be used of a type of text. Hsiian-tsang states that the 
commentary which was composed on the Sutra-pitaka was called Upadesa -sastra 
(S. Beal, Buddhist record of the western world, London 1884, I, p. 155). The 
equivalent of Pali vedalla in the Sanskrit lists is vaipulya. This word seems in other 
contexts to be the equivalent of Pali vetulla, which suggests a derivation from a pair 
of Prakrit words vevulla and veyulla, showing the -v-j-y- alternation. It is not clear 
whether these words are in fact connected with vedalla. 

9 Mvu I 300, 21. 

10 Saddharmap (ed. P. L. Vaidya, Darbhanga 1960), II. 45. 

11 Dip IV 18-20. 

12 Vin V 3, 14. 

13 See E. Hultzsch, “Uber eine Sammlung indischer Handschriften und In- 
schriften,” in ZDMG 40, p. 58. 



The Pali Canon 


17 


gained sufficiently wide usage for it to be used in this public way. Although 
Buddhaghosa, as stated above, uses the word nikaya in such a way that the 
term panca nikaya can be used to include the whole canon, the word is used in 
modern times only of the five nikayas of the Sutta-pitaka. 

The Sarvastivadins also divided their canon into three pitakas. They had 
certainly done this by the time of Kaniska, for Hsiian-tsang reports 14 that at 
the council held during his reign commentaries were composed upon the three 
pitakas. Their adoption of this division, however, must go back to an even 
earlier time, when the Sarvastivadins and Theravadins were in close contact, 
for both give the pitakas the same names, even though the texts comprised in 
the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma-pitaka do not agree with those in the Thera- 
vadin Abhidhamma . 15 


14 See S. Beau (tr.), Buddhist record of the western world, London 1884, I, 
p. 155. 

16 See J. Takakusu, “On the Abhidharma literature of the Sarvastivadins,” in 
JPTS 1904—1905, p. 73. 



2. THE VINAYA-PITAKA 


The Pali Vinaya-pitaka 1 falls into three sections : the Suttavibhanga, which 
consists of the Mahavibhahga (= Bhikkhuvibhanga) giving the regulations for 
the monks, and the Bhikkhunivibhanga which gives the regulations for the 
nuns; the Khandhaka, which consists of the Mahavagga and the Cullavagga; 
and the Pari vara. 

In the oldest account which we possess of the first council, it is said that 
Mahakassapa asked Upali about the twofold vinaya . 2 This suggests that he 
asked him only about the Patimokkha rules for bhiJcJchus and bhikkhunls. In 
the account which Buddhaghosa gives of that council, 3 he states that the 
theras classified the Mahavibhahga, the Bhikkhunivibhanga, the Khandhaka 
and the Parivaras, but he concedes that the Vinayapitaka as he knew it con- 
tained material which had not been recited at the first council. 4 It is obvious, 
and presumably Buddhaghosa realised, that the final two sections of the 
Khandhaka, which deal with the first council and the second council which 
occurred 100 years later, could not have been recited on that occasion, but there 
is no indication of the portions of the Vinaya-pitaka he had in mind when he 
wrote of texts not being recited. 


2.1. The Suttavibhanga 

The core of the Suttavibhanga is the Patimokkha. This is a set of 227 rules 
for bhikkhus and 311 for bhikkhunls. In the Pali canon the Patimokkha has no 
independent existence, as it does in the traditions of other Buddhist schools, 
but is imbedded in the Suttavibhanga. The rules fall into eight sections: 
Pdrajika “Defeat” (4), Sahghddisesa “Formal meeting” (13), Aniyata “Un- 
determined” (2), Nissaggiya “Forfeiture” (30), Pdcittiya “Expiation” (92), 
Pdtidesanlya “Confession” (4), Sekhiya “Training” (75), Adhikaranasamathd 
dhammd “Legal questions” (7), giving a total of 227 rules for bhikkhus. The 
sections of rules for the bhikkhunls follow the same pattern except that they 

1 Ed. H. Oldenberg, The Vinaya Pitaka, 5 vols, London 1879—83. Tr. I. B. 
Horner, The book of the discipline, 6 vols, London 1938 — 66. The order in which 
Buddhaghosa comments upon the sections of the Vinaya-pitaka makes it clear 
that the Suttavibhanga precedes the Khandhaka, i.e. Oldenberg’s Vols III— IV 
should rightly come before his Vols I — II. 

2 eten' eva updyena ubhato-vinaye pucchi (Vin II 289, 8 — 9). 

3 Sp 14, 19—15, 3. 

4 tattha pathamasamgUiyam samgitan c a asamgltan ca sabbam pi samodhdnetvd 
(Sp 18, 3 — 4) .' 



The Pali Canon 


19 


have no Aniyata class. The numbers are: (8), (17), (— ), (30), (166), (8), (75), (7) 
making a total of 311. 

Each section of the Suttavibhanga follows the same pattern, 5 except for the 
eighth section ( Adhikaranasamatha dhamma) which, since it has no explana- 
tory stories and no Old Commentary as do the other sections, would seem to 
be an addition to the list. 6 The standard pattern consists of (a) a story which 
leads up to the formulation of the rule. Sometimes two stories can be placed 
in a chronological order, indicating that one rule was made after another. 7 These 
stories sometimes occur elsewhere in the canon, which raises the question of 
which was the earlier position. 8 It is possible that some of the stories were 
invented or borrowed from other sources to explain rules which already ex- 
isted; 9 (b) a Pdtimoklcha rule, which always states the penalty for breaking it. 
The nature of the Pacittiya rules suggests that this group as a whole was a later 
addition to the code. 10 Although by far the greater number of rules are said to 
have been enunciated by the Buddha himself, many sub-rules are laid down 
without reference to him. 11 This perhaps means that they were promulgated 
by some of his chief followers, or even added after his death; (c) the Old Com- 
mentary, which is really an analysis of words ( Pada-bhajamya) . This defines 
the Pdtimolckha rule word by word, 12 giving, for the most part, an explanation 
in the form of a list of synonyms. The similarity between this method and that 
found in the Niddesa suggests that both belong to the same period ; (d) more 
stories, telling of deviations from the rules, which were either not so grave as 
to entail the maximum penalty, or reasonable enough to warrant modification 
or relaxation of the rule. Occasionally they were of such a kind that they were 
not to be rendered permissible by any extenuating circumstances. Sometimes 


5 I follow the analysis given in Horner, BD I, p. xi. 

6 The section cannot, however, be a very late addition, as it occurs in the Prati- 
moksas of the other schools. 

7 At Vin III 158, 24 — 26 Dabba, the Mallian, is appointed to the task of assigning 
lodgings and distributing meals. At Vin IV 38, 3 — 4 he is accused of acting out of 
favouritism, suggesting that Pacittiya rule XIV, which is associated with the latter 
incident, is later than Samghadisesa rule VIII, which is associated with the former. 
See Horner, BD II, p. xxxvii and also p. xl. 

8 E.g. the story of Moggallana at Vin III 104 — 108 has a parallel at S II 254 — 62, 
where, however, there is no reference to Moggallana being held by other bhikkhus 
to be claiming “a state of further-men” ( uttar imanussadhamma) , which seems to be 
the pivot of the Vinaya passage (see Horner, BD I, pp. xxv — xxvi). See also 
O. von Hinuber, “Sprachliche Beobachtungen zum Aufbau des Pali-Kanons,” 
in StII 2, pp. 35 — 37, where he points out that a linguistic feature in the Sudinna/ 
Ratthapala episode in Vin III 11, 34—21, 17 is older than the corresponding feature 
in M II 55, 24-65, 6. 

8 See Horner, BD I, p. xxxiv. 

10 As suggested by Horner, BD II, p. xxxix. 

11 E.g. Samghadisesa rules IX, X, and XI (see Horner, BD I, p. xvi). 

12 Or almost word by word. Horner, BD II, pp. xxv — xxvi, points out a few 
omissions. 



20 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


(c) and (d) are reversed in order. Sometimes there is no (d). The stories in (d) 
are comparable to those in (a). 13 

In the form in which the stories are told, it appears that every rule was made 
to fit a particular set of circumstances, and it seems likely that some, at least, 
of the stories are afterthoughts, added to explain the origin of the rule. 14 Some- 
times the stories are grouped together to form a set, with each story showing 
no more than a minute variation from the others. It seems very unlikely that 
the complete set of rules was formulated at once, 15 so some were undoubtedly 
proclaimed as the need arose. On the other hand, it is not unlikely that a ge- 
neral code of conduct for mendicant orders already existed in the time of the 
Buddha, from which some borrowing could take place. This view is supported 
by the general agreement between the basic rules of the Jain and Buddhist 
orders. We may conclude that it is most unlikely that the historical order of 
promulgation was as in the present form of the Vinaya-pitaka. For the most 
part, the stories are told in the context of the biography of the Buddha, but a 
few stories of the Jataka or Apadana type are included. 16 It has been suggested 
that such inclusions are a sign of lateness of composition, and can be used as an 
indication of the relative dating of different versions of the Suttavibhanga. 17 

The Bhikkhunivibhanga is somewhat misleading in appearance, in that it 
includes, in its present form, only those rules which are not already included 
in the rules for bhikkhus. Since the Sekhiya rules are the same for both, only the 
first and last of the 75 are given. At the end of the Pdcittiya section, the number 
is said to be 166, 18 but only 96 have been recorded. Of the bhikkhus’ Pdcittiya 
rules, however, 70 also apply to the bhikkhunis, making up the total of 166. The 
Old Commentary is included for those rules which are given, showing that the 
promulgation of the rules for bhikkhunis was early enough to pre-date the com- 
position of that commentary. 

Although the Pdtimokkha does not have a separate existence as a literary 
text in Pali, an independent Prdtimoksa is found in the canons of other Hlna- 
yana schools. The Bhiksu-pratimoksa of the Mulasarvastivadins was dis- 
covered in Gilgit, and has been published, 19 as has the comparable text of the 


13 See Horner, BD I, p. xxxiv. 

14 See Horner, BD I, p. xxxiv. 

15 The slight variations of order and number found in the Pratimoksas of other 
schools would suggest an independent origin for some of the rules. 

16 E.g. the story of the ox Nandivisala at Vin IV 5, 11 — 38 = Ja I 191 — 93 
(Nandivisalajataka). See also the comparison of the versions of the story about the 
impious brahman found at Vin IV 203 — 204 — Ja III 27 — 30 (Chavaka -jataka) 
made by L. Alsdorf (“The impious brahman and the pious canda-la,” in Cousins, 
BSIBH, pp. 9-13). 

17 See A. Hibakawa, A study of the Vinaya-pitaka, Tokyo 1960 (English sum- 
mary), p. 14. 

18 uddittha kho ayydyo chasatthisata pdcittiya dhammd (Vin IV 345, 24). 

19 Ankul Chandra Banerjee, Pratimoksa-sutram [Mfilasarvastivadin], Cal- 
cutta 1954. 



The Pali Canon 


21 


Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin school which was found in Tibet . 20 Portions of 
the Bhiksupratimoksa of the Sarvastivadins have been found in Turkestan , 21 
and also fragments of their Bhiksunipratimoksa . 22 There are also fragments 
extant of a Dharmaguptaka Bhiksupratimoksa, also found in Turkestan . 23 

For the most part, these Prdtimoksas of other schools do not differ greatly 
from the Pali Pdtimokkha. The main differences are in the Pacittiya and 
Sekhiya rules . 24 Of the Pacittiya rules, the difference concerns rules which are 
similar to other rules, and might be considered unnecessary. Of the Sekhiya 
rules, it is probable that different monastic and lay conditions called for varia- 
tions. The Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin Prdtimoksa includes in some cases, 
e.g. the Pdrdjika rules , 25 brief statements about the time and place at which 
the Buddha promulgated the rule. These are very similar to the stories included 
in the Pali Suttavibhanga. 

The other Hinayana schools also possessed texts equivalent to the Sutta- 
vibhanga. Fragments from Turkestan of the Sarvastivadin Vinayavibhanga to 
both the Bhiksu - 26 and Bhiksunipratimoksas 27 have been published, while 
fragments of manuscript found in Gilgit have been identified as coming from 
the Mulasarvastivadin Vinayavibhanga to the Bhiksupratimoksa . 28 The Maha- 
sanghika-Lokottaravadin Bhiksuni-vinaya 29 includes the vibhanga to the 
Bhiksunl-pratimoksa as well as the astau guru-dharnidh, which in the Pali 
Vinaya-pitaka are found in the Bhikkhunl-kkhandhaka of the Cullavagga , 30 
and also the Bhiksuni-prakirnaka and the udddna to the Bhiksu-prakirnaka. 
The latter text has also been published, under the title Abhisamacarika . 31 The 
Bhiksuni-vinaya gives all the rules for bhiksunis, even those which duplicate 
the rules for bhiksus. It gives stories to explain the promulgation of the rules, 
but they are not identical with those found in Pali. There is also a word com- 
mentary included, but it is not the same as the Pah pada-bhdjamya. There are 
more stories of the avaddna type in it than in the Pali Bhikkhunlvibhanga , 32 

20 W. Pachow and Ramakanta Mishra, “The Pratimoksa sutra of the Maha- 
samghikas,” in Journal of the Ganganath Jha Research Institute, 9, pp. 239 — 60; 
10, App. pp. 1—48 ; 1 1 — 12, pp. 243—48, andN. Tatia, Pratimok$asutram, Patna 1976. 

21 For references see Yu yam a, VT, p. 1. 

22 See Yuyama, VT, pp. 3—4. 

23 See Waldschmidt, CASF, pp. 164—67. 

24 See the concordance table given by Charles S. Prebish, in Buddhist Monastic 
Discipline, Pennsylvania State University Press 1975, pp. 140 — 48. 

25 See Prebish, ibid., pp. 50—52. 

26 See Yuyama, VT pp. 6—7. 

27 See Yuyama, VT p. 9. 

28 See Yuyama, VT pp. 19—20. 

29 Gustav Roth (ed.), Bhiksunl-Vinaya, Patna 1970. 

30 Vin II 253-57. 

31 B. Jinananda (ed.), Abhisamacarika (Bhiksuprakirnaka), Patna 1969. Rev. 
J. W. de Jong, II J 16, pp. 150—52. 

32 The only Apadana-type insertion in the Bhikkhunlvibhanga is at Vin IV 
258 — 59. There are seven in the Bhiksunl-Vinaya, according to Roth, BV, p. 
xxxviii. 



22 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


which possibly indicates that the Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin text in its 
present form is later than the Pah equivalent. 


2.2. The Khandhaka 

The Khandhaka, in two portions (the Mahavagga and the Cullavagga), is 
based upon the rules of conduct for the Buddhist Saiigha, set in the framework 
of the biography of the Buddha. It comprises 22 33 sections : (a) a portion of a 
biography of the Buddha (Mahakhandhaka), starting from the enlightenment 
and extending as far as the entry of Sariputta and Moggallana into the Order. 
It includes an account of the first sermon and the four Noble Truths; (b) 
various rules for bhikkhus in 18 sections: 34 “Observance” (Uposathakkhan- 
dhaka); “The rains” (Vassupanayikakkhandhaka) ; “Invitation” (Pavarana- 
kkhandhaka); “On hides” (Cammakkhandhaka) ; “On medicines” (Bhesajja- 
kkhandhaka); “On kathina” (Kathinakkhandhaka) ; “On robe-material” (Civa- 
rakkhandhaka) ; “On (the monks at) Campa” (Campeyyakkhandhaka) ; “On 
(the monks of) Kosambi” (Kosambakkhandhaka) ; “Formal acts” (Kammak- 
khandhaka); “Probation” (Parivasikakkhandhaka) ; “Accumulation (of offen- 
ces)” (Samuccayakkhandhaka) ; “Settlement” (Samathakkhandhaka) ; “Minor 
matters” (Khuddakavatthukkhandhaka) ; “Lodgings” (Senasanakkhandhaka) ; 
“Schism” (Samghabhedakkhandhaka) ; “Observances” (Vattakkhandhaka) ; 
“Suspending the Patimokkha” (Patimokkhathapanakkhandhaka) ; (c) rules 
for nuns (Bhikkhunlkkhandhaka), (d) two supplements giving the history of 
the first 35 and second councils ; (e) the introduction to the Patimokkha, with a 
portion of the Old Commentary upon it, which has become detached from the 
rest of the Patimokkha rules and inserted in an appropriate place in the Upo- 
sathakkhandhaka . 3 6 

As in the case of the Suttavibhanga, stories are told to illustrate the circum- 
stances in which the rules were first promulgated. 37 They are set in the context 
of a biography of the Buddha, but not in any chronological order, 38 for they 

33 The number 22 agrees with Buddhaghosa’s statement (Sp 18, 5) about the 
contents of the Vinaya-pitaka. The Chinese translation of Sp, however, states that 
there were 23 khandhakas. This may be a mistake, as the translator suggests (see 
P. V. Bapat and A. Hirakawa (tr.), Shan-Chien-P’i-P’o-Sha, Poona 1970, p. 10 
n. 16), but it may indicate dependence upon a slightly different recension of Sp. 
The list of Sutta-pitaka texts in the same translation (p. 11) does not include the 
Khuddaka-patha (see p. 57 below). 

34 I follow the translations given in Horner, BD IV, p. xxvii and V, p. xxiii. 

35 This account seems to be a continuation of the Mahaparinibbanasutta, and in 
the canon of some schools is found in conjunction with it (see p. 37 below). 

36 Vin I 103, 12-104, 20. 

37 As in the case of the Suttavibhanga, the rules are not all promulgated by the 
Buddha, which allows the possibility that some were made by his disciples, perhaps 
even after his death. See Horner, BD IV, p. xxiii. 

38 Horner, BD IV, p. xiii. 



The Pali Canon 


23 


represent an attempt to classify the rules by subject matter, so that all the rules 
on any one subject, e.g. medicines, have been grouped together. Scattered 
throughout the JchandhaJcas are various rules which were enunciated to the 
group of five. These must be the first five bhikkhus , in which case all these 
stories should have been together, if the material had been presented in chrono- 
logical order. The arrangement by subject matter, so that the stories had to 
be inserted into the appropriate khandhakas, has led to their becoming sepa- 
rated . 39 

The stories are sometimes found in other texts , 40 and it can sometimes be 
shown whether the Vinaya-pitaka is the borrower or the lender . 41 Sometimes 
the same story is told to illustrate different rules. Sometimes the same rule is 
promulgated in both the Khandhaka and the Vibhanga . 42 In this case, the same 
story is told on both occasions. There is the occasional Apadana story , 43 which 
as we have seen is held to be a feature of lateness. 

In the Uposathakkhandhaka, the Buddha’s permission to recite the Pati- 
mokkha is followed by an exhortation to be used when beginning the recitation. 
This is, in fact, the exhortation from the Patimokkha itself, as is shown by the 
fact that it is followed by the appropriate portion of the Old Commentary upon 
the Patimokkha . 44 Comparison with the Khandhaka section of the Vinaya- 
pitaka of other sects shows that there are gaps in the Pali version. There is, for 
example, no equivalent to the passages found in the Ksudraka-vastu of 

the Vinaya of the Mulasarvastivadins. The reason is probably because the 
compilers of the Pali canon thought that stupas were the province of laymen, 
not of bhikkhus.** The Kathinakkhandhaka is very unclear, and seems to have 


39 Frauwailnee concludes (EV, p. 135) that the author of the Skandhaka work 
had available to him an old account of the way in which the Buddha gave funda- 
mental instruction to his first followers. 

40 E.g. the uddissaka rule about meat eating (= Vin I 233 — 38) has the same 
story about the sendpati called Siha as is found at A IV 179 — 88, but in the latter 
text there is no reference to the promulgation of the rule. See Chandra Shekhar 
Prasad, “Meat-eating and the rule of tikotiparisuddha ,” in Narain, SPB, pp. 
289—95. 

41 Frauwallner (EV, pp. 146—48) suggests that the account of the eight 
marvellous qualities in the sea (attha mahasamudde acchariyd abbhutd dhammd) at 
Vin II 236—40 is derived from A IV 200—204. 

42 At Vin III 248 — 51 and Vin I 206 — 209 we find the same story about the drama 
attendant, leading up to the promulgation of the same rule. In the former context 
it is Nissaggiya (“Forfeiture”) rule XXIII, and in the latter context it is one of the 
rules concerning permissible medicines. Oldenberg has pointed out (Vin I, p. 
xxiii n. 1) that the disciplinary proceedings enunciated in connection with the story 
of the bhikkhus who are followers of Assaji and Punabbasu have a later form at 
Vin II 9 — 14 than they do at Vin III 179—84. See also Horner, BD V, p. vi. 

43 E.g. Vin II 201, 12—28. 

44 Vin I 103, 12—104, 20. 

46 As suggested by G. Roth in “Symbolism of the Buddhist stupa,” in A. L. 
Dallapiccola (ed.), The stupa: its religious, historical and architectural signifi- 
cance, Wiesbaden 1980, p. 186. 



24 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


been corrupted to the state where it is barely intelligible without recourse to 
other versions or to the Parivara. 46 

The section of rules for bhikkhunis (Bhikkhuni-kkhandhaka) is probably an 
addition, made after the rules for bhikkhus, and was therefore at one time the 
last section of the Khandhaka. As, however, it is now followed by the accounts 
of the two councils, and has parallels in the Khandhakas of other sects, it must 
be presumed that the Bhikkhuni-kkhandhaka predates the schism between 
the schools. The inclusion of the accounts of the councils at Rajagaha (after the 
Buddha’s death) and at Vesali (100 years after) shows that the Vinaya-pitaka 
in its present form is at least 100 years later than the death of the Buddha. 
Since these accounts are included in all versions of the Vinaya, it can be con- 
cluded that all sects had (approximately) the same Vinaya until the second 
council 47 and the schism that followed it. The fact that part of the Vinaya is 
late does not, however, mean that all of it is late. The different arrangement of 
the khandhakas and the material in the various vastus shows that there was 
already the beginning of divergency before the time of the second council. 

The greater part of the Mulasarvastivadin Skandhaka has been discovered 
in Gilgit and published. 48 It lacks some of the khandhakas in the Pah version, 
and some of the material is arranged differently, e.g. the historical information 
found in the Pah Mahakhandhaka appears in the Samghabhedavastu. 49 Frag- 
ments of the Sarvastivadin Skandhaka have been found in Turkestan, 50 and a 
fragment of the Mahasanghika Skandhaka has been found in Afghanistan at 
Bamiyan. 51 The Mahavastu 52 is based upon a recension of the Vinaya belonging 
to the Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadins. 53 It corresponds roughly to the Maha- 
vagga portion of the Pah Khandhaka, but it contains very few monastic rules, 54 
and has many later additions of the Jataka and Avadana type. 

The inclusion of many stories of the Avadana type accounts for the fact that 
the work is frequently styled the Mahavastu- Avadana in the colophons to 
many of the chapters. The use of the word Avadana in this context resembles 
that found in the Mahapadanasutta (Sanskrit Mahavadanasutra) of the Digha- 
nikaya, 55 where it is used of the Buddha, instead of theras and theris as in the 
late canonical Apadana. These narrative legends are introduced, not as in the 

48 See Fbauwallner, EV p. 185, and p. 28 below. 

47 See Feauwallneb, EV pp. 150—53. 

48 See Yuyama, VT pp. 24—28. 

49 See Yuyama, VT p. 52. In the Sarvastivadin canon it is found in the Dlrgha- 
gama (see p. 44 below). 

50 See Yuyama, VT pp. 9—11. 

51 See Yuyama, VT p. 39. S. Levi (JA 1932, p. 5) identified it as dealing with the 
pralisdraniya karma (cf. Vin II 15 — 19). 

62 Ed. E. Senabt, Le Mahavastu, 3 vols., Paris, 1882, 1890, 1897. Tr. J. J. Jones, 
The Mahavastu, 3 vols., SBB London, 1949, 1952, 1956. 

63 dryamahdsamghikdndm lokottaravadindrn madhyadeSikandm pathena vinaya - 
pitakasya Mahavastuye (Mvu I 2, 13 — 14). 

84 Jones, Mvu tr., I, pp. xi — xii. 

ss See p. 36 below. 



The Pali Canon 


25 


Mahavagga to illustrate the promulgation of a rule but to illustrate the Buddha’s 
virtues in his ear her lives. To the material which is given in the Pah Mahavagga 
is added much which is found in the Nidanakatha of the Pah Jataka, so that 
the Mahavastu gives an account of incidents in the remote past of the Buddha’s 
career, as well as his birth and childhood, his enhghtenment and his activities 
as a teacher . 56 Although the Mahasanghika^Lokottaravadins beheved that the 
personahty of the Buddha was docetic and he was really supramundane 
(lokottara) , there is in fact only one short passage which deals with his trans- 
cendental nature . 87 

Not only are there close parallels between the Mahavastu and the Pah 
Mahavagga, which suggest that both texts were dependent upon the same 
source material , 58 but there are many other parallels too, sometimes so close 
verbally that one version may be corrected with the help of the other. Among 
the Pali texts to which comparison can be made are the Jataka, Suttani- 
pata, the Dhammapada, the Dlghanikaya, the Vimanavatthu and the Buddha- 
vamsa. Even when all these insertions, which probably represent additions to 
the Mahavastu, are disregarded, it can be shown that the Mahavastu contains 
different strata , 59 which differ in the language employed in them . 60 

It is not easy to understand why there is, except for a reference to the four 
types of ordination, an almost complete lack of monastic rules. It has already 
been noted 61 that the Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin Bhiksuni-Vibhanga in- 
cludes a section which in the Pah Vinaya-pitaka occurs in the Bhikkhuni- 
kkhandhaka, and it is possible that other Skandhaka material was transferred 
to texts, now lost. 

When some of the formulae included in the Khandhaka came to be used for 
the transaction of business at meetings of the Sangha, e. g. for the ordination 
of bhikkhus, they gained an existence as independent texts. Although these 
usually follow the pattern laid down in the Vinaya-pitaka, the fact that they 
have been used in different places and circumstances has led to changes in 
detail . 62 A number of these separate kammavdcds have been published . 63 

66 See Jones, Mvu tr., I, p. xiv. 

57 Mvu I 167—68. 

58 See Jones, Mvu tr., I, p. xii. 

69 Jones (Mvu tr., I, p. xvii) points out that there are often two or more versions 
of the same story, usually one in prose followed by one in verse, suggesting a 
difference in date of composition. 

60 See H. Oldenberg, Studien zum Mahavastu, Nachrichten von der k. Gesell- 
schaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, Philol.-Hist. Klasse, 1912 and G. Roth, 
“Particle dani in the Vinaya texts of the Mahasamghika-Lokottaravadin and the 
inscriptions of Asoka,” in Studies in Indo- Asian Art and Culture (Acharya Raghu 
Vira Commemoration Volume), 1973, pp. 211 — 18. 

61 See p. 21 above. 

62 See T. W. Rhys Davids, “A new Kammavaca,” in JPTS 1906—1907, pp. 1—3. 

63 See T. W. Rhys Davids and H. Oldenberg (tr.), Vinaya Texts Part I, Ox- 
ford 1881, p. xx n. 1, and G. L. M. Clauson, “A new Kammavaca,” in JPTS 1906 — 
1907, pp. 4-7. 



26 


K. R. Norman * Pali Literature 


They also existed in the other Hinayana schools, and karmavakyas or kar- 
mavacanas for bhiksus or bhiksums have been discovered, belonging to the 
Sarvastivadin and Mulasarvastivadin schools. 64 


2.3. The Parivdra 

In Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit 65 the word parivdra is normally taken to mean 
“accessory, appendix, addendum,” 66 and such a meaning would suit the Pali 
Pari vara, since it seems to be a supplement to the Vinaya. The place and time 
of its composition are not known, and some scholars favour the view that it was 
composed in Ceylon. 67 There is evidence for believing that portions of it, at 
least, were added in Ceylon, for it includes a long list of teachers who were 
responsible for teaching the Vinaya in Jambudipa, and then in Tambapanni 
(Ceylon), ending with Sivatthera. It has been claimed, 68 on the basis of these 
names, that the present form of the Pari vara must have been fixed in the first 
century A.D., for the list contains no thera later than that century. The Sasana- 
vamsa, however, states 69 that the list which is found in the Vinaya is the suc- 
cession of elders down to those who assembled in the fourth council. If that is 
correct, then we should date Siva to the first century B.C. 

The possibility of Siva being connected with the writing down of the canon 
is perhaps supported by the fact that there are two references to writing in the 
Parivara. At the end of the first eight (of 16) sections of the first chapter, there 
is a statement that “these eight sections are written in a manner for recita- 
tion,” 70 while at the end of the book, after the words Parivaro nitthito, there is 
a statement that Dipanama, having asked various questions about the ways of 
former teachers, thinking out this epitome of the details for the middle way of 
study, had it written down for the bringing of happiness to disciples. 71 It seems, 
however, unlikely that if the whole of the Parivara had been composed at the 
time it was written down, it would have had the references to writing inserted 
in the way they are, and there seems to be no good reason for doubting that 
these two statements are interpolations, 72 added when the Parivara, together 

64 See Yuyama, VT pp. 4—5, 17—18. 

66 See F. Edgerton, BHS Dictionary, New Haven 1953, s. v. 'parivara. 

66 In the Mvu (II 397, 7) it is used of the colophon to the second version of the 
Avalokita Sutra, and Jones comments that “in the present instance the supple- 
ment is foisted into the middle of the work” (Jones, Mvu tr., II, p. 35 n. 1). 

67 Including Rhys Davids, who noted that the Parivara is not quoted in the 
Milindapanha (T. W. Rhys Davids (tr.), The questions of King Milinda, Oxford 
1890, p. xxxix). See also Warder, PM, p. 4. 

88 See Adikaram, EHBC, pp. 86—87. 

69 Sas 20, 5—6. 

70 I me attha vara sajjhdyamaggena likhitd (Vin V 48, 29). 

71 Imam vittharasamkhepam sajjhamaggena majjhime 
cintayitvd likhapesi sissakanam sukhdvaham (Vin V 226, 6 — 7). 

72 As suggested by N. A. Jayawickrama, The inception of discipline, London 
1962, p. 107. 



The Pali Canon 


27 


with the rest of the canon, was written down in the first century B.C. They 
have, therefore, some bearing upon the present form of the Pari vara, but tell us 
little about the composition of the various chapters. 

Since some of the chapters of the Parivara are summaries of various sections 
of the Vinaya, it has been suggested 73 that the Parivara is, in fact, older than 
the Vinaya and originally performed the same function towards it as do the 
Matikas for the Abhidhamma texts. While it is not impossible that the Parivara 
contains a very early portion of this type which was later enlarged, it never- 
theless shows all the signs of being an addition to the Vinaya. The Dlpavamsa 
states 74 that it was one of the texts which was not accepted by the Mahasan- 
ghikas, which suggests either that it did not exist at the time of the schism, or 
if it existed it had not yet gained canonical status at that time. It seems more 
likely that a collection was made up of ancillary works of various dates which 
sprang up around the Vinaya, and this happened early enough for the collection 
to have attained canonical status, just as the Niddesa did, although neither 
claims to be Buddhavacana , 75 

As we have it, the Parivara contains 19 chapters, whereas in his account of 
the first council Buddhaghosa states 78 that the Parivara has 16 sections. After 
Chapter XIV, which deals with the Kathina regulations, the words parivaram 
nitthitam occur, 77 which suggests that at one time the Parivara ended at that 
point, and the following chapters were added later. It seems possible to divide 
two of the earlier chapters into halves, which would give a total of 16, and this 
may be the answer to the problem. 78 In his commentary upon the Vinaya- 
pitaka, however, Buddhaghosa comments upon all 19 chapters, 79 without any 
reference to the apparent inconsistency in his statement about the number of 
chapters, although he is sufficiently aware of some types of inconsistency to 
find it necessary to comment upon them. 80 

In the first chapter of the Parivara (Mahavibhanga), every rule in the Maha- 
vibhanga section of the Suttavibhanga is examined in the exact order in which 
it was laid down there, with special reference to the place in which it was 
promulgated. It is a kind of catechism, 81 containing bare or condensed outlines 
of questions to be asked and answered, in the study of the sikkhapadas . It 
makes a clear contribution to the task of learning and mastering the Vinaya, 82 
and by extracting material from the vast mass of the Vinaya it reduces it to 

78 By Malaeasekera, DPPN, II, p. 162. 

74 Dip V 37. 

76 Horner, BD VI, p. ix. 

74 Solasa Parivara (Sp 18, 5 — 6). 

77 Vin V 179, 19. 

78 As suggested by Horner, BD VI, p. xiii. 

78 Sp 1301-1414. 

80 E.g. tattha bhaddako te ummango ti bhaddaka te panhd (Sp 1348, 6). 

81 See Horner, BD VI, pp. vii — xi. 

82 “I believe that in some Buddhist countries the monastic disciple has to learn 
it before he studies these other parts” (Horner, BD VI, p. vii). 



28 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


manageable proportions. The next chapter (Bhikkhunivibhahga) does the same 
for the bhikkhunis ’ rules. Other chapters are similarly devoted to questions and 
statements about the types and numbers of offences detailed in the Vinaya. 
The sixth chapter (Ekuttaraka) is arranged in the same way as the Sangiti- 
sutta and Dasuttara-sutta of the Dlgha-nikaya and the Anguttara-nikaya as 
a whole, with topics listed numerically, each section being one more than its 
predecessor. Although classifications of this type may be thought to be rela- 
tively late, the presence of the system in several places in the canon, and also 
in the canons of other sects , 83 shows that it had nevertheless been established in 
Buddhism before the time of the schisms. The Ekuttaraka differs from the 
other texts of its type in that its enumerations are almost entirely restricted to 
items found in the Vinaya . 84 It resembles the Anguttara-nikaya in that it lists 
items in groups up to the number eleven. 

In common with the first two chapters, Chapter XIII “the great collection” 
(Mahasamgama) consists almost entirely of a commentary upon the phrases 
at the beginning of the chapter, which closely resembles the style of the Old 
Commentary found in the Sutta-vibhanga. Chapter XIV on the Kathina also 
consists of a commentary upon the opening phrases, and gives information 
about the proper way of making the kathina cloth. As already noted , 85 the 
relevant section of the Khandhaka is not entirely satisfactory, and it is to be 
observed that this section of the Parivara is not merely a synopsis of what the 
Vinaya says, but includes material not found there. This must be old, since it 
corresponds with what is stated in other traditions about the kathina.™ 

The fifteenth chapter (Upalipancaka) consists of a number of questions put 
by Upali to the Buddha about the Vinaya, the answers to which were all in the 
form of sets of five. It is to be compared with the earlier chapter entitled Ekut- 
taraka, and even more with the section of the Anguttara-nikaya entitled 
Upali vagga , 87 where, however, the Buddha’s answers are all in sets of ten. The 
eighteenth chapter (Sedamocakagatha) is aptly named “Sweat-inducing,” for 
it consists of sets of puzzles, based upon apparent contradictions in the Vinaya, 
the answers to which call for a great deal of mental exertion. The style is re- 
miniscent of the sets of dilemmas in the Milinda-panha , 88 but in the Parivara 
the problems are all drawn from the Vinaya. 

The Vinaya-pitakas of other sects also have supplements. In its Chinese 
translation, the Sarvastivadin Vinaya is followed by the Vinayaksudraka and 
the Uttaragrantha , 89 which includes an Upalipariprccha, a series of questions 

83 Pande points out that this system is also used in non-Buddhist writings, e. g. 
the Jaina Thanamga and Samavayamga (Pande, SOB, p. 26 n. 44). 

84 Horner, BD VI, pp. xxi— xxii. 

85 See p. 23 above. 

86 See H. Bechert, “Some remarks on the kathina rite,” in JBRS 54 (1968), 
pp. 323 and 328. 

87 A V 70-79. 

88 See p. 112 below. 

89 See Thomas, HBT, p. 268 and Frauwallner, EV, p. 46. 



The Pali Canon 


29 


on Vinaya put to the Buddha by Upali. This would seem to correspond to the 
Pali Upali-pancaka, but a Sanskrit portion of this found in Turkestan does not 
agree with the Pali Pari vara . 90 One Chinese version of the Upalipariprccha is 
said to be very similar to the Pali Pari vara, although there seem to be abridge- 
ments and changes of order in the treatment of the various rules, and there is 
doubt about the sect to which this text belonged . 91 There also exists in Chinese 
an Ekottara section in the appendices to the shortened version of the Sar- 
vastivadin Vinaya called Da^adhyaya Vinaya . 92 The Dharmaguptaka Vinaya 
also has a section called Ekottara , 93 while the Mulasarvastivadins too had a 
supplement to their Vinaya called Uttara-grantha . 94 Without more investiga- 
tion it is not possible to say what resemblances there are between these various 
works, but it is worthwhile referring to them here, despite the lack of Sanskrit 
versions of them, because the fact that other schools found it necessary to have 
supplements to their Vinayas supports the view that some, at least, of the Pali 
Pari vara was composed in India before the introduction of Buddhism to Ceylon. 


90 See Yttyama, VT, p. 11 and Valentina Stache -Rosen, “The Upalipariprccha- 
sutra,” in Buddhism and Jainism, Cuttack (Orissa) 1976, p. 27. 

91 Taisho 1466. Stache-Rosen (ibid., p. 30) states: “The possibility that the 
Upalipariprcchasutra originated in any of these centres in India, where Pali was 
used, cannot be ruled out. It is, however, more likely that the text originated in 
Ceylon. If this is the case, the text cannot have belonged to the Mahavihara 
monastery, as the order of the rules is different. The Upalipariprcchasutra might 
have belonged to the Abhayagirivihara.” It is difficult to follow this argument. 
It seems impossible to conclude that because certain passages in Chinese agree in 
form with certain Pali passages, although not in order, the Chinese must have been 
translated from Pali. Since the Pratimok^as of all the Hinayana schools are very 
similar, it is not unreasonable to guess that their auxiliary texts were also similar, 
in which case the Chinese might have been translated from Sanskrit or Prakrit. 

92 See Stache-Rosen, ibid., p. 27. 

93 See Frauwallner, EV, p. 46. 

94 See Yuyama, VT, pp. 32-33. 



3. THE SUTTA-PITAKA 


Buddhaghosa states 1 that the Sutta- or Suttanta-pitaka consists of the five 
nikayas: Dlgha-, Majjhima-, Samyutta-, Anguttara-, and Khuddaka-nikaya, 
and this is the classification generally accepted now although, as already noted, 
Buddhaghosa also uses 2 the term “five nikayas ” of the canon as a whole. 

The first four nikayas consist of discourses (suttas ) 3 ascribed to the Buddha, 
or (rarely) to a disciple. These suttas are for the most part in prose, with some 
verse included. They usually have a short introduction giving the circum- 
stances in which the sutta was delivered. In the case of the Dlgha- and Majjhi- 
ma-nikayas, the names seem to reflect the length of the suttas, with the long 
suttas in the Dlgha- and those of middle length in the Majjhima-nikaya , 4 
although there is evidence that the size of some suttas has been increased by 
interpolation, so that their present length is not necessarily a guide to their 
original size, and we cannot be certain that the shortest sutta in the Dlgha- was 
longer than the longest sutta in the Majjhima-nikaya in the early collections. 
We can in any case deduce from the fact that the contents of the nikayas do not 
agree exactly in the canons of the various sects that the division of suttas by 
length was, at best, a somewhat rough and ready method of classification. 

By implication, the contents of the Samyutta- and Anguttara-nikayas must 
be the short suttas. The name Samyutta- indicates that the suttas have been 
arranged together according to their contents, while the Anguttara-nikaya is 
made up numerically, with each nipdta exceeding its predecessor by one. There 
is inevitably an overlap between the contents of these two nikayas, because 
some of the connected suttas deal with numerical matters. 

In the Sanskrit canons the nikayas are called agamas , 5 and the word agama 
is occasionally used in Pali in this sense. It is, however, more commonly used in 
Pali in a general sense , 6 and Buddhaghosa defines the word as the study of the 


1 Sp 16, 12-14. 

8 See p. 8 above. 

8 Since the Buddhist usage of the word sutta differs so greatly from the brahmani- 
cal use of sutra, it has been suggested that Pali sutta is to be derived from Sanskrit 
siikta, not from sutra. If this is so, then the use of the word sutra in BHS would be 
the result of an incorrect back-formation. The word sutta is frequently interchanged 
with suttanta. 

* Kasma pan ’ esa Digha-nikdyo ti vuccati ? dighappamdndnam suttanam samuhato 
nivasato ca (Sp 26, 26 — 27). katamo Majjhima-nikayo? majjhimappamdnani pan- 
cadasavaggasamgahani Mulapariyayasuttadini diyaddhasatam dve ca suttdni (Sp 27, 

6-8). 

6 See Thomas, HBT, p. 268. 

9 See PED, s.v. agama. 



The Pali Canon 


31 


Buddha’s words . 7 Hence a thera can be described as agatdgama or svdgama. It 
seems to be used in the Vinaya of the Patimokkha, 8 but it is sometimes used by 
Buddhaghosa in the sense of nikdya , and in his commentaries upon the Digha-, 
Samyutta- and Anguttara-nikayas he writes of the Dlghagama, the Samyutta- 
gama and the Anguttaragama respectively . 9 In the introductory verses to his 
commentaries upon the first four nikayas he states that the Visuddhimagga is 
in the middle of the four dgamas . 10 

In the Sanskrit canons the dgamas are named Dlrgha-, Madhyama-, Sam- 
yukta- and Ekottarika-, and the close similarity to the Pali names indicates 
that the collections had begun to be formed while the schools were still in con- 
tact, i.e. before the schisms which started after the second council. The fact 
that one and the same sutta is sometimes found in more than one nikdya in the 
Pali canon would seem to indicate that the bhanakas of the various nikayas 
could not always agree about the allocation of suttas. The fact that the sutras 
in each Sanskrit dgama do not coincide with their Pali equivalents would seem 
to indicate that each school had its own bhanakas who, while all agreeing in 
general with the other bhanakas of their own and other sects, nevertheless pre- 
ferred to differ over the placing of some sutras. This suggests that there was in 
early times a large collection of suttas which were remembered by heart, and 
the task of allocating them to the various nikayas /dgamas had not been finished, 
or the allocation completely agreed, by the time the schools began to separate. 
The reference in the Vinaya-pitaka to an updsaka inviting the bhikkhus to come 
and learn a sutta from him before it is lost 11 would seem to indicate that the 
collection of suttas had not yet been completed. The methods of authentication 
of suttas which are given in the Mahaparinibbanasutta 12 would also seem to 
apply to the time when the collection of suttas was still going on. 

The list usually followed for the fifth nikdya, the Khuddaka-nikaya, is that 
given by Buddhaghosa : 13 Khuddakapatha, Dhammapada, Udana, Itivuttaka, 
Suttanipata, Vimanavatthu, Petavatthu, Theragatha, Therigatha, Jataka, 
Niddesa, Patisambhidamagga, Apadana, Buddhavamsa, Cariyapitaka. In 
Burma the Petakopadesa, Nettippakarana, Suttasangaha, and Milindapanha 
are also regarded as belonging to the Khuddaka-nikaya . 14 

Buddhaghosa informs us 15 that the Dlgha-bhanakas did not accept the first 
and the last three in this list, but believed that the theras at the first council 

7 Agamo ndma antamaso opamma-vagga-mattassa pi buddhavacanassa pariyd- 
punanam (Vism 442, 30 — 31). 

8 E.g’. Vin II 249, 16. 

9 Sv 2, 10; Spk I 2, 22; Mp I 3, 4. 

10 Majjhe V isuddhimaggo esa catunnam pi agamanam hi (Sv 2, 6 = Ps I 2, 10 = 
Spk I 2, 18 = Mp I 2, 24). 

11 Agacchantu bhaddanta imam suttantam pariyapunissanti pur ay am, suttanto 
palujjatl ti (Yin I 140, 37 — 141, 1). 

18 For the four maha-padesas see D II 123, 30—126, 5 = A II 167, 33—170, 19. 

18 Sp 18, 12-15. 

14 See Bode, PLB, pp. 4—5. 

15 Sv 15, 22—29. 



32 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


recited the other twelve (dividing the Niddesa into Maha- and Cula-niddesa), 
and calling them the Khuddakagantha included them in the Abhidhamma- 
pitaka. He goes on to state, however, that the Majjhima-&Mwa&a<s added the 
Cariyapitaka, Apadana and Buddhavamsa to the Tii^xsi-bhanakas’ list, also 
called the collection the Khuddakagantha, but included it in the Suttanta- 
pitaka. This presumably means that the Ilighsi-bhdnakas closed their list of 
the Khuddaka-nikaya before these four texts were regarded as canonical, while 
the Majjhima-&Mwa&us closed their list before the Khuddakapatha was 
accepted. 

The Chinese translation of the Samantapasadika omits the Khuddakapatha 
from the Khuddaka-nikaya, and varies the order of the other 14 texts. 16 This 
suggests that either the Khuddakapatha was not included in the version of 
Buddhaghosa’s commentary which was being translated, or the translators 
were in contact with and influenced by someone who knew that a section of the 
Theravadin school did not accept it as canonical. 


3.1. The Digha-nikdya 

The Digha-nikaya 17 contains 34 suttas, in three groups : the Sllakkhandhavag- 
ga (1—13) dealing with virtue (sila); the Mahavagga (14—23) containing suttas 
which mostly have the word Maha- in their title; and the Patikavagga (24—34), 
which gains its name from the fact that its first sutta is the Patikasutta. The 
vaggas (chapters) differ in content and character, but they all contain a mixture 
of older and later material. 18 The earliest stratum is found mainly in the first 
vagga, and the latest in the last, while the longest suttas are in the second vagga. 
The form of the suttas varies. Those in the first vagga are in prose, as are some 
in the second and third. Many in the second and third vaggas are in prose inter- 
spersed with verse. Some (e.g. suttas 20 and 32) are almost entirely in verse. 


3.1.1. The Silakkhandha vagga 

Each of the suttas in this vagga has incorporated in it a list of the moral rules 
(silas). Most of the suttas describe the training of a bhikkhu in three stages, 
beginning with the silas, then proceeding to the practice of concentration 


16 See P. V. Bap at and A. Hirakawa (tr.), Shan-Chien-P’i-P’o-Sha, Poona 1970, 

p. 11. 

17 Ed. T. W. Rhys Davids and J. Esylin Carpenter, PTS London, "Vol. I, 1890; 
Vol. II, 1903; J. Estlin Carpenter, Vol. Ill, 1911. Tr. T. W. Rhys Davids, 
Dialogues of the Buddha, SBB London, Vol. I, 1899; T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys 
Davids, Vol. II, 1910; Vol. Ill, 1921; (German) K. E. Neumann, Reden Gotamo 
Buddho’s aus der langeren Sammlung Digha-nikayo des Pali-Kanons ubers., 
Vols. I, II, III, Miinchen 1907, 1912, 1918. For an analysis of the text see Pande, 
SOB, pp. 77— 115. 

18 See Pande, SOB, pp. 77—115. 



The Pali Canon 


33 


(samadhi), and ending with the full knowledge (panhd) of the arahant. The 
list occurs in its most complete form in the Samannaphalasutta, from which 
portions of it are quoted in the other suttas, which suggests that either the 
Samannaphalasutta existed before the other suttas were composed, or the list 
existed at first as an independent composition, 19 from which all the suttas, in- 
cluding the Samannaphalasutta, borrowed it. Several of the suttas discuss the 
views of the brahmans on sacrifice and sacred knowledge, the doctrines of 
various religious schools, the value of caste and self-mortification, and expound 
important doctrines. The Buddha’s method of discussion in the suttas of the 
Silakkhandhavagga is much the same in each case. He takes as the starting 
point of the discussion the object put forward as desirable by his opponent, e.g. 
sacrifice, caste, or asceticism, and by inserting a higher meaning into the words 
being discussed, or by concentrating upon the ethical concepts involved, he 
leads his opponent up to his own conclusion, viz. the goal of arahant -ship. 

The Brahmajalasutta (1) tells how the Buddha knows, like a good fisherman, 
how to catch in his net of views 20 all sophists and philosophers, and to prove 
their doctrines and speculations to be worthless and obstacles to true salvation. 
In the course of this, he enumerates 62 different philosophical views, from 
which the follower of the Buddha is to keep away. The sutta is important, not 
only for the information it gives about Buddhism, but also for the contribution 
it makes to the history of early religion and philosophy in India. There is also 
much dealing with social conditions, for as part of his rules for his followers the 
Buddha lists many activities and professions which they must avoid. 

The Samannaphalasutta (2) tells how King Ajatasattu of Magadha, after 
failing to get answers to his questions from other religious leaders, visits the 
Buddha and asks whether members of the Sangha who have given up the world 
gain any benefit from their action. The Buddha justifies the formation of the 
Sangha and the enunciation of the Vinaya rules, and gives a list of the advan- 
tages to be gained by his followers. The introduction to the sutta gives informa- 
tion about non- Buddhist sects at the time of the Buddha, and since some of it 
is in a non-Pali dialect of MIA 21 it is likely that it is taken from the actual 
scriptures of the leaders being described. The advantages which his followers 
will gain are given in an ascending order of merit, starting with the honour and 
respect which are shown to those following the life of a samana, and continuing 
through a series which is not necessarily restricted to Buddhists, until the final 
stages, when the four noble truths are attained, the dsavas are destroyed, and 
arahant- ship is Avon. 

In the Ambatthasutta (3) the young brahman Ambattha visits the Buddha 
to see if he carries the 32 marks of a great man ( mahd-purisa ) , and becomes 

19 Rhys Davids, DB, Yol. I, p. 3 n. 1. 

90 Tr. (with commentaries) by Bhikkhtj Bodhi, The Discourse on the all- 
embracing net of views, Kandy 1978. 

21 See K. R. Norman, “Pali and the language of the heretics,” in AO 37 (1976), 
pp. 117-26. 



34 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


involved in a discussion about caste, in which the Buddha proves that the 
khattiya Sakyas are superior to the brahmans. The sutta was clearly composed 
at a time when the 32 marks were already in existence. There is also mention 
of super-normal powers being employed to enable Ambattha to see the two 
marks which are not normally visible. 

The Sonadandasutta (4) is also concerned with the question of caste, and 
deals with the problem of what constitutes the essential quality which makes 
a man a brahman. The brahmanical view is that a man is a brahman only if 
he is born of brahmans on both his father’s and his mother’s side back through 
seven generations. 22 By the Buddha’s argument, however, Sonadanda is led 
to accept that the one who attains arahant- ship is not only called a brahman in 
Buddhist terms, but is in fact declared to be the only true brahman. 

The Kutadantasutta (5) is also anti-brahmanieal, and tells of a brahman who 
is desirous of holding a great sacrifice, and comes to the Buddha to seek advice 
about the best way of doing it, and to enquire about the requisite utensils. In 
the guise of a legend about King Mahavijita, the Buddha tells of the Buddhist 
form of sacrifice, where nothing, whether animal or vegetable, is harmed, and 
the sacrifice consists of the largesse of food, offered not on behalf of the king 
himself, but of all good people. 

The Mahalisutta (6) falls into two quite separate parts. In the first the ques- 
tion of the ability to attain the supernormal eye and ear power is discussed, 
and the questioner is told that it is not to attain such powers that people join 
the Sangha. He is led on to consider arahant- ship as the aim, following the eight- 
fold path. In the second part the questioner is told about Jaliya, who believed 
that the soul and the body were the same thing, but was led through the 
discussion set out in the Samannaphalasutta up to the attainment of arahant- 
ship. 

The Jaliyasutta (7) then follows as a separate sutta in its own right. It can be 
deduced that its inclusion in the Mahalisutta was early, and predated the for- 
mation of the Digha-nikaya as we have it, because the discussion of sila occurs 
only in the Jaliya portion. Without it, the Mahalisutta would not have merited 
inclusion in the Silakkhandhavagga. 

The Kassapaslhanadasutta (8) tells of the Buddha’s discussion with a naked 
ascetic about asceticism, and includes a general account of the practices adopted 
by various groups of ascetics. The Buddha refutes the charge of condemning 
all asceticism, which probably arises from his own rejection of such practices 
(although no reference is made to this in the sutta ), 23 and maintains that the 
practices laid down in the eight-fold path and the discipline laid down for 
bhikkhus are more difficult to perform than mere tapas. As in the Mahalisutta 
(6), there is a quotation from elsewhere in the Digha-nikaya, but it is not quoted 

22 Ubhato sujdto mdtito ca pitito ca samsuddhagahaniko ydva sattama pitamahayuga 
akkhitto anupakkuttho jativadena (D I 113, 25 — 27). 

23 They are mentioned in the Mahasaecakasutta = Majjhima-nikaya (36). See 
p. 45 below. 



The Pali Canon 


35 


in full here. The Buddha tells of a visit from a co-religionist named Nigodha, 
which is the subject of the Udumbarikasihanadasutta (25). 

The Potthapadasutta (9) begins with a discussion on the nature of the 
cessation of consciousness which occurs in trance. Through the path of training 
mentioned in the Samannaphalasutta the discussion passes on to the jhdnas, 
and in what is probably an addition to the sutta, to the first three arupa-vimok- 
khas, which are not included in the Samannaphalasutta. The idea of conscious- 
ness leads to a discussion of the question of soul, which Potthapada regards as 
being a physical thing. The Buddha explains that there are certain things upon 
which he has expressed no opinion, viz. the ten indeterminates. 24 What he has 
expressed are the four noble truths . 

In what appears to be an addition, the sutta goes on to tell how Potthapada, 
having been abused by the other mendicants, went back to the Buddha and 
told him of the mendicants’ actions. The Buddha’s reply is based upon two 
metaphors: the first is that of the man who loves a “beauty queen” 25 without 
knowing anything about her (which illustrates the folly of saying more than 
the evidence allows), and that of the transformation of milk into curds, etc. 
(which illustrates the existence of an unchanging identity behind changing 
appearances). 

The Subhasutta (10) is attributed to Ananda, and is specifically stated to 
have been delivered after the death of the Buddha. 26 It is almost identical with 
the Samannaphalasutta, except that Ananda arranges the states of mind 
enumerated there as the fruits of the life of a samana under the three headings 
of sila, samadhi, and pannd. 

In the Kevaddhasutta (11) the householder Kevaddha comes to the Buddha 
and asks him to tell one of his followers to perform a miracle. As in other suttas, 
the Buddha accepts the interviewer’s point of view. He accepts that miracles 
are possible, but says that it is not his practice to ask his followers to perform 
them. He states that of the three wonders which he himself has realised, 27 the 
wonder of education is the greatest, and he gives this in the words of the 
Samannaphalasutta. To this is added a second, probably later, portion of the 
sutta which deals with the problem of the disappearance of the four elements. 
The answer is that they disappear in the state of arahant- ship, when all intelli- 
gence comes to an end. To this conclusion is prefixed a mythological preface 
which describes an ascending hierarchy of fourteen classes of gods. Its purpose 


24 The ten avydkatas are dealt with separately in the Avyakata-samyutta (S IV 
374-403). 

88 Aharn yd imasmim janapade janapada-kalyani tam icchami tam kamemi (D I 
193, 4-6)’. 

26 Ekarn samayam ayasmd Anando Sdvatthiyam viharati . . . acira-parinibbute 
Bhagavati (D I 204, 2—4). 

27 Tini kho imdni Kevaddha patihdriyani mayd sayarn abhinna sacchikatvd 
paveditani. katamdni tini? iddhi-pdtihdriyam adesand-pdtihdriyam anusdsani- 
pdtihdriyarn (D I 212, 16 — 18). 



36 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


is to make the gods confess their own inferiority to the Buddha, and to state 
the folly of seeking refuge in anyone but him. 

In the Lohiccasutta (12) some points about the ethics of teaching are dis- 
cussed, and blameworthy and blameless teachers are enumerated. This leads 
to a re-iteration of the exposition set out in the Samannaphalasutta up to the 
state of arahant- ship. 

In the Tevijjasutta (13) the Buddha criticises the position of the brahmans 
who base their religious life on the system of the three Vedas. This is the only 
sutta in the Silakkhandhavagga which does not lead up to a discussion of 
arahant-ship. It goes only as far as the four brahmavihdras — the four states of 
mind which lead to rebirth in the heaven of Brahma. The Buddha rejects the 
brahmanical idea of the three Vedas in favour of his own three vijjas. The 
brahmans with whom the Buddha was conversing had their own idea about 
union with Brahma, and here, as commonly, the Buddha was using the brah- 
manical term Brahma in a specifically Buddhist sense. 


3.1.2. The Maha vagga 

A number of the suttas in this vagga include the word Maha- in their title, 
and it is possible that they have been expanded from shorter suttas, but the 
corresponding suttas with the word Cula- in their titles no longer exist. 28 It is, 
however, possible to deduce that in some cases addition or interpolation has 
occurred. Most of the suttas in this vagga are legends rather than discourses, and 
they have features which show them to be later than the suttas of the first vagga, 
where the Buddha is only a man, alive or recently dead. 

In the Mahapadanasutta (14) the lives of the seven Buddhas, i.e. Gotama 
and his six predecessors, are given as a preliminary to laying down the general 
conditions necessary for the arising of a Buddha, so that their whole course of 
actions is in accordance with the reign of law in the world ( dharmnata ) . The life 
of Vipassin, the first of the Buddhas, is given in detail, including all the miracles 
of the conception and birth of a Buddha, and the 32 marks of a great man, 
which have already been mentioned in the Ambatthasutta (3). Although the 
inclusion of seven Buddhas and the other features suggest a late origin for this 
sutta, 29 it is noteworthy that the paticcasamuppdda which Vipassin realises has 
only ten finks instead of the more usual twelve in the form which Gotama re- 
alised, 30 since it omits the two ultimate links avijjd and sankhdra. The use of 
the word apaddna in the title of this sutta differs from that found in the late 
canonical text called by that name, 31 where it is used not of the Buddha but 
only of theras and theris. 

28 The same seems to be true of the Majjhima-nikaya. See p. 44 below. 

29 The six previous Buddhas are, however, already mentioned by name at Vin 
III 7, 34—37. 

30 As described at Vin I 1, 10 — 16. 

31 See p. 89 below. 



The Pali Canon 


37 


The Sarvastivadin version of this sutta, entitled Mahavadanasutra, has been 
found in Turkestan and published. 32 

The Mahanidanasutta (15) gives the fullest exposition of the paticcasamup- 
pada given in the pitakas, although in the Paccayakaravibhanga of the Vi- 
bhanga in the Abhidhamma-pitaka the formula is re-iterated and analysed with 
greater variety of presentation. 33 The exposition is given as a rebuff to Ananda, 
who describes the paticcasamuppada as “simple.” 34 As in the Mahapadanasutta 
(14), the two final links, viz. avijja and sankhdrd, are omitted, and it is possible 
that this represents the traditional view of the T)igh.8b-bkanakas who were 
responsible for preserving the Digha-nikaya. 

Fragments of the Sarvastivadin Sanskrit version of this sutta have been 
discovered in Turkestan, and published. 35 

The Mahaparinibbanasutta (16) contains the story of the wanderings of the 
Buddha during the last few months of his life, his death, and the distribution of 
the relics after his cremation. It fits together so closely with the story, related 
in the Cullavagga of the Vinaya-pitaka, of the first council held immediately 
after his death, that it seems clear that both stories are based upon what was 
originally one connected narrative. 36 

There are clear indications of additions to the sutta, and detailed analyses 
have been made to distinguish older elements from later ones. 37 It has been 
shown that many of the episodes in the sutta occur in other canonical texts, 38 
and the presence of the word Maha- in the title implies that there existed at 
one time a Culaparinibbanasutta which lacked many of the later additions. 39 
In some cases it can be shown how additions occurred. The earthquake which 
took place at the end of the speech in which the Buddha renounces his life 
occasions a statement about the eight causes of earthquakes, 40 which leads to 
the inclusion of a list of eight assemblies, eight positions of mastery, and eight 
stages of release, all of which also find their place in the Anguttara-nikaya. 41 A 
misunderstanding of a verse which seems to include a reference to crossing a 
river leads to an unnecessary insertion of a story about the Buddha crossing 
the Ganges by supernormal power. 42 There is a reference to the future greatness 

32 Ernst Waldschmidt, Das Mahavadanasutra, Teil I— II, Berlin 1953, 1956 
(AD AW 1952 Nr. 8, 1954 Nr. 8). 

33 Yibh 135-92. 

34 Atha ca pana me uttdnakuttanako viya khayati (D I 55, 11). 

35 See Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 138 n. 9. 

38 See Feauwallner, EY, p. 43. 

37 See Pande, SOB, pp. 98—106. See also A. Bareau, “La composition et les 
Stapes de la formation progressive du Mahaparinirvanasutra ancien,” in BEFEO 
LXVI (1979), pp. 45-103. 

38 See Rhys Davids, DB, Vol. II, p. 72. 

39 See Winternitz, HIL, p. 39. 

40 See Frauwallner, EV, pp. 157—59. 

41 Cf. D II 107-12 with A IV 305-313. 

42 See Pande, SOB, p. 102. The error may be connected with the insertion of the 
words setum katvdna at D II 89, 26. As Rhys Davids pointed out (Buddhist Suttas, 



38 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


of Pataliputra which is almost certainly a prophecy made with the benefit of 
hindsight, and so must date from the second half of the 4th century B.C. 43 

The Sarvastivadin version of this sutta has been published. 44 This too con- 
tains some of the additions, including the list of eight earthquakes, which shows 
that the expansion of the original shorter form of the story must predate the 
schism between the Sarvastivadins and the Theravadins. A fragment of a 
Dharmaguptaka version has also been published. 45 

In the course of the wanderings leading up to the Buddha’s death recounted in 
the Mahaparinibbanasutta (16), the Buddha tells Ananda of the former great- 
ness of the city of Kusinara, which the latter had said was an unworthy place 
for the Buddha to die in, and the story is told of King Sudassana, who had in- 
habited Kusinara when it was a great city. The Mahasudassanasutta (17) starts 
with the same words as are given at that point in the previous sutta, but goes 
on to tell the full story. It seems to be aimed towards the laity rather than the 
bhikkhus when it tells of the king’s greatness being due to generosity ( dana ) , 
self- conquest (dama), and self-control ( samyama ). iB 

The Sanskrit version of this story is included in the Mahaparinirvanasutra 
in the place where Ananda first referred to the city. In both the Sanskrit and 
the Pali versions it has the character of a Jataka story, for the Buddha identi- 
fies himself with King Sudassana in a previous birth. 

The Janavasabhasutta (18) is also an expansion of a portion of the Mahapari- 
nibbanasutta (16), and deals with the rebirths of the Nadikas which are 
mentioned in the latter sutta. Like the Mahasudassanasutta (17), which was 
probably an addition intended to explain the reference to Kusinara, this sutta 
shows signs of being a later insertion, because it not only contains miraculous 
and mythical elements, but also treats doctrinal matters in a numerical way, 
e.g. the four ways to supernormal power ( iddhipadd ) and the four inceptions 
of mindfulness (satipatthdnd) . Both features are typical of later texts. 

The Mahagovindasutta (19) also contains such miraculous elements, and 
tells of the joy in heaven at the appearance of new gods, who have arisen as such 
because of the good kamma performed by Gotama’s followers. Brahma praises 
Gotama and gives his view of the ideal brahman. The inclusion of some mne- 


SBE XI, Oxford 1881, p. 22 n. 1), this is a gloss upon taranti annavam sararn which 
has crept into the text, as the metre shows. The mistake must be an old one, as 
the words setum krtva occur in the corresponding verse at Divy 56, 8 and MBS 7. 9. 

43 There is some doubt about the date when Pataliputra became the capital of 
Magadha, but it seems certain that it was after the time of the Buddha. See 
Malalasekera, DPPN, Vol. II, p. 178. 

44 Ernst Waldschmidt, Das Parinirvanasutra, Teil I— III, Berlin 1950—51 
(ADAW 1949 Nr. 1, 1950 Nr. 2 and 3). 

45 Ernst Waldschmidt, Drei Fragmente buddhistischer Sutras, in NGAW 1948, 
pp. 49 — 91. The discovery of this fragment is of great interest, since the Chinese 
translation of the Dirghagama was made from the Dharmaguptaka version (see 
Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 136). 

46 D II 186, 4-5. 



The Pali Canon 


39 


monic verses suggests that an older story has been adapted for Buddhist pur- 
poses, and the basis of the sutta seems to be the preaching of karuna-jhdna as 
a means of gaining direct realisation of Brahma. The idea of realisation of 
Brahma leads, as in the Tevijjasutta (13), to the enunciation of the four 
brahma-viharas . 

A Sanskrit version of this story, with some differences, is found in the 
Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin Mahavastu. 47 

As in the case of the two previous suttas, the Mahasamayasutta (20) is con- 
cerned with the gods, this time the minor ones, who express their support for 
Buddhism. The greater part of the sutta is a list (in verse) of names of gods, of 
which a portion seems to be a reworking of a list which occurs in the Atanatiya- 
suttanta (32). The way in which it occurs seems clumsy, which suggests that it 
is an insertion, and had an independent existence before the sutta was com- 
posed. There is a prologue containing verses uttered by the four gods of the pure 
abode ( Suddhavdsakayika deva). There is also a framework, put into the mouth 
of the Buddha at the beginning (after the prologue) and the end. This has a 
separate existence elsewhere in the canon, 48 and confirms that the sutta is made 
up from parts that were originally independent. 

There is a Sanskrit version of this sutta extant, which has the name Maha- 
samajasutra. 49 Since, according to the dictionaries, samaya and samaja can 
both mean “assembly,” 50 this may simply be a variation of vocabulary. It is, 
however, noteworthy that samaja occurs with the spelling samaya in the 
Shahbazgarhl version 51 of the Asokan inscriptions, and the possibility remains 
that the Sanskrit name is an incorrect back-formation from a Prakrit form. 52 

The differences between the Sanskrit and the Pali versions of this sutta are 
not great. 53 In the Sanskrit sutra the gods in the prologue belong to the Brahma- 
kayika class, not the Suddhavasakayika ; the Buddha is said to be preaching to 
his disciples about nirvana, while no sermon is mentioned in the Pali ; moreover, 
the Pali version lacks the list of attributes conferred upon the arhats who make 
up the Buddha’s audience. These differences are precisely those which might be 

47 Mahagovindiya -sutra = Mvu III 197—224. Rhys Davids, DB, Vol. II, 
pp. 256 — 58 comments on some of the differences. Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 136 n. 3 
refers to Klaus Hahlweg, Das Mahagovinda-Sutra. Eine vergleichende Analyse 
der indischen und chinesischen Versionen, diss. Munich 1954. Jones (Mvu tr., 
Ill, p. 219 n. 1 ) points out that the purpose of the Sanskrit version is to emphasise and 
illustrate an incident in the Buddha’s career. In both versions the story has the 
character of a Jataka, for the Buddha identifies himself with Govinda in a previous 
birth. 

48 It occurs at S I 27—28. 

49 Ed. and tr. by Waldschmidt, CASF, pp. 149—62. 

80 See MW, s. vv. samaya and samaja. 

61 See E. Hultzsch, Inscriptions of Asoka, Oxford 1925, p. 51. 

52 The alternative suggestion, that Pali samaya is to be derived from Sanskrit 
samaja seems less likely, since it could only have been transmitted through a 
written North-Western Prakrit form. 

53 They are discussed by Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 149. 



40 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


expected to arise in the course of an oral tradition, when a thera preaching a 
sermon might well change a number of unimportant matters each time he 
recited a sutta. 

The Sakkapanhasutta (21) is the last of the series of mythological suttas, and 
culminates in the conversion of Sakka, the king of the gods, to Buddhism. It 
would seem to have been intended as a piece of propaganda, to persuade non- 
Buddhists not to be afraid of the new religion since even the gods of their own 
religion accepted it. The sutta tells how Sakka visits the Buddha, is allowed to 
ask him certain questions about ethics and psychology, and is so persuaded by 
his answers that he is converted. The sutta calls itself a veyyakarana (explana- 
tion) at the end, 34 although Buddhaghosa includes it among the texts which he 
calls vedalla bb This perhaps means that in the early period of Buddhism it was 
included in that category of text in the nine -fold canon. It would seem to be an 
early sutta, since it is quoted by name in the Samyutta-nikaya. 56 

Fragments of the Sarvastivadin version have been discovered and published. 57 

The doctrine expounded in the Mahasatipatthanasutta (22) is perhaps the 
most important after the Aryan Path in early Buddhism, and this sutta is the 
oldest authoritative statement of the doctrine. The sutta is in two parts. The 
first part concerns mindfulness, and is the same as the Satipatthanasutta (10) 
of the Majjhima-nikaya. The second part is a term by term account of the four 
noble truths, and the addition of this second part perhaps explains why the 
sutta is called Maha-, the other sutta in the Majjhima-nikaya being by implica- 
tion the Cula- sutta. The addition uses a style of definition which is similar to 
that found in the Abhidhamma-pitaka, and its unusually detailed character 
has led to the suggestion that it is perhaps a fragment from an early commentary 
which has crept into the canon. 58 

The Payasisutta (23) refers to matters which took place after the death of 
the Buddha. It tells how the chieftain Payasi visited the Buddha’s disciple 
Kassapa to question him about rebirth and kamma, neither of which Payasi 
believed in. There is no mention of the Buddha, as either alive or dead, but in 
his commentary upon the Vimana-vatthu Dhammapala states that the sutta 
was recited after the erection of the thupas over the relics. 59 During the course 
of the discussion, Payasi’s arguments are all refuted, and he is converted to 
Buddhism. The climax of the sutta comes when a messenger arrives from the 
gods to teach the doctrine of generosity (dana) by laymen. It is possible that 
the death of the Buddha had led to a falling-off in the gifts made to the Sangha, 
and the gods were employed as a fit means of reminding those who had followed 


54 D II 289, 3. 

55 See Sp 28, 27. 

56 Vuttam idam bhante Bhagavata Sakkapanhe (S III 13, 5). 

57 See Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 138 n. 10. 

68 See Rhys Davids, DB, Vol. II, p. 337 n. 1. 

68 Bhagavati parinibbute dhdtuvibhdge ca kate tattha tattha thupesu patitthap- 
iyamdnesu (Vv-a 297, 16 — 17). 



The Pali Canon 


41 


them, before both gods and laymen became Buddhists, of the need to be 
generous. 

3.1.3. The Patikavagga 

The third vagga is the most miscellaneous section, and its contents indicate 
that definite doctrinal beliefs about the nature of a Buddha had become much 
developed by the time it was collected together. This suggests a comparatively 60 
late origin for some, at least, of the suttas it contains. 

The Patikasutta (24) falls into two parts. In the first, the Buddha discusses 
mystic wonders, while in the second he deals with the origin of things. Both 
subjects are treated elsewhere— the wonders in the Kevaddhasutta (11) and the 
origin of things in the Aggannasutta (27). The sutta begins with the mention 
of Sunakkhatta Licchaviputta, who had left the Buddha because he would not 
perform miracles or discuss origins, but the emphasis changes, and the Buddha 
becomes eager to show that he has worked wonders. He then begins to discuss 
origins, but suddenly with an abrupt change of subject he makes a comment 
upon the stage of release called “beautiful.” 61 

The Udumbarikaslhanadasutta (25) deals with the same subject as the 
Kassapasihanadasutta (8), i.e. the nature of asceticism both true and false, but 
it treats it in a more elaborate way. The Buddha discusses the different kinds 
of asceticism and their evil effects, and explains the fife of a real liver of the 
the holy fife (brahmacdrin ) . 

The Cakkavattislhanadasutta (26) tells the story of the righteous monarch, 
of the corrupt conditions which followed after his time and led to a shortening 
of the human lifespan, and then a general improvement in morals which will 
lead to a lengthening of the lifespan again. When the lifespan of humans has 
growrn to 80,000 years, the Cakkavattin Sankha and the future Buddha Met- 
teyya will arise. Such an idea as future Buddhas would seem to represent a later 
stratum of Buddhist thought, 62 which suggests that this is a later text. 

The Aggannasutta (27) represents another rejection of the brahmanical claim 
to be the best caste. To make this rejection, the Buddha tells a story about the 
beginning of the world, although his reluctance to talk about origins is made 
clear in the Patikasutta (24). The Buddha gives etymological explanations for 
the arising of King Mahasammata, the khattiyas, the raja, brahmanas, jhdya- 
kas, ajjhdyakas, vessas and suddas , 63 The sutta shows that righteousness is above 

60 The word “comparatively” must be emphasised. The fact that versions of the 
suttas of the Digha-nikaya are found in the canons of other sects shows that the 
nikaya, as a whole, must have been composed within a century or so of the Buddha’s 
death. 

61 Yasmim samaye subham vimoklcham upasampajja viharati, subhan V eva 
tasmim samaye sahjandti (D III 34, 20—21). 

62 See p. 161 below. 

63 For a discussion of these etymologies see U. Schneider, “Acht Etymologien 
aus dem Agganna- Sutta,” in Asiatica (Festschrift Weller), Leipzig 1954, pp. 575—83. 



42 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


lineage, although of those who do put their trust in lineage the khattiya is best. 
The mythological content of this sutta suggests that it is not early. 

The Sampasadaniyasutta (28) is an elaboration of a passage in the Mahapari- 
nibbanasutta (16), where Sariputta is rebuked for saying that the Buddha was 
the best of all Buddhas. In this sutta , Sariputta goes on to enumerate the various 
excellences (dnuttariyas) of the Buddha’s teaching. The sutta mentions in the 
main only such dogmata as relate to spiritual practice. Since no claim is made 
for the completeness of such beliefs, it would probably be unwise to try to draw 
conclusions from any omissions. The sutta ends with the Buddha telling 
Sariputta to repeat his discourse frequently in the presence of any persons who 
may have doubts about him. Such a sentiment seems late, and suggests that the 
sutta is a late one. 

The Pasadikasutta (29) is said to have been delivered soon after the death of 
Nathaputta, the Jain leader, as a result of the quarrelling which his death 
caused among his followers. In contrast to this turmoil, the Buddha tells of the 
conditions of a perfect religion, and gives information about the characteristics 
of a Tathagata and his powers. The sutta contains a collection of already ex- 
isting doctrinal points, and seems to suggest nothing new. 

The Lakkhanasutta (30) is an elaborate piece of Buddhology, describing in 
detail the 32 physical characteristics of the Buddha. In the history of Buddhism 
this iconographic development has often been supposed to be a late pheno- 
menon and one which rather tends to Mahay ana ideas. The lateness of the 
doctrine in this sutta is matched by the lateness of the metre of its verses. It 
shows a greater variety of metres 64 than any other canonical text, all of them 
being, moreover, either new classical types of metre or classical forms of old 
metres. 65 

The orthodox tradition records that the verses are not as late and authentic 
as the bulk of the canon, and in his commentary Buddhaghosa attributes them 
to Ananda. 66 

The Sigalovadasutta (31) is really a poem with a prose commentary, and 
Buddhaghosa calls it a gihivinaya , 67 It tells of the duties of the Buddhist lay- 
man. The sutta relates how Sigala practises the worship of the six directions 
(disas) as a result of his father’s death-bed wish. The Buddha sees him doing 
this, and interprets the six quarters in a Buddhist manner, in a way in which 
his doctrine of love and goodwill between man and man is set forth with more 
detail than elsewhere in the canon. 

See also K. R. Norman, “Four etymologies from the Sabhiya-sutta,” in Bala- 
sooriya, BSWR, p. 183 n. 23. 

84 The metres include V amSastha, Puspitdgrd, Rathoddhata, Upasthitapracupita, 
Rucird, TJdgata, and Pramitdksard. 

85 See Warder, PM, § 135. 

88 Eta pana gdthd pordnaka-thera Ananda-therena thapitd vannagdthd ti vatvd gata 
(Sv 922. 35-36). 

87 See Sv 959, 5. 



The Pali Canon 


43 


The Atanatiyasutta (32) is a saving chant (rakkha-manta) to get rid of evil 
spirits, and is included among the list of protective utterances (partitas) , 68 It 
deals with the sending away of gods, gandhabbas and yakkhas if they attack 
laymen and lay women. It contains two lists of supernormal beings, one long 
and one short. As has already been noticed, 69 a reworking of a portion of the 
longer list, which begins with an invocation to the seven Buddhas, and then 
the gods of the four quarters, is found in the Mahasamayasutta (20). Fragments 
of a Sarvastivadin Sanskrit Atanatikasutra have been found in Turkestan and 
published. 70 

The occasion for the Sangltisutta (33) was the feuding that took place among 
the Jains after the death of their leader Nathaputta at Pava, just as was the 
case for the Pasadikasutta (29). The name of the sutta suggests that it re- 
presents a recitation of doctrinal matters, perhaps as an attempt to provide a 
summary of the doctrine as a precaution against a comparable confusion arising 
in the Buddhist Sangha. The title, the fact that the authorship is attributed to 
Sariputta, and the nature of the text, which is numerical on the lines of the 
Anguttara-nikaya, all suggest that the sutta is a late one. 

The nature of the text is reminiscent of the matikas of the Abhidhamma- 
pitaka and it is noteworthy that the Sarvastivadins have in their Abhidharma- 
pitaka a text called Sangitiparyaya, 71 which seems to be a commentary upon 
the Sangitisutra, of which fragments have been found in Turkestan. 72 The 
arrangement of the material in the Sangltisutta seems to be entirely haphazard. 
The aim appears to be the collection of all points of doctrine, and no account 
is taken of the fact that there is overlap and duplication, e.g. in the case of the 
five khandhas and the five updda na - khandhas . 7 3 

The Dasuttarasutta (34) is also ascribed to Sariputta, and seems to be a 
systematic selection from the previous suttati 1 Some of the wording is identical 
with the Sangltisutta. It follows the same pattern of sections dealing with sub- 
jects from one to ten, but has ten in each section, thus giving a total of one 
hundred. Fragments of the Sanskrit Dasottarasutra have been found and pub- 
lished. 75 

68 See p. 173 below. 

49 See p. 39 above. 

70 Helmuth Hoffmann, Bruchstiicke des Atanatikasutra, Leipzig 1939 (KST, V). 

71 See p. 107 below. 

72 See Valentina Stache -Rosen, Das Sangitisutra und sein Kommentar 
Sangitiparyaya, Berlin 1968 (STT, IX). 

73 See D III 233, 23-234, 2. 

74 Rhys Davids (DB, Vol. Ill, p. viii) writes of an “appendix” at the end of 
each nikdya, but Pande (SOB, p. 113) points out that although suttas 33 and 34 
are also together in the Chinese translation of the Dirghagama, they are not the 
last suttas there. The Chinese version is based upon the Dharmaguptaka version, 
as Waldschmidt (CASF, p. 136) notes. 

75 See Kustjm Mittal, Dogmatische Begriffsreihen im alteren Buddhismus, I: 
Fragmente des Dasottarasutra, Berlin 1957 (STT IV) ; D. Schlingloff, Dogmatische 
Begriffsreihen im alteren Buddhismus, la; Dasottarasutra IX — X, Berlin 1962 



44 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


A comparison with the Chinese translation of the dgamas shows that all the 
suttas of the Pali Digha-nikaya have a parallel, although not necessarily a close 
parallel, in the dgamas. 1 6 They are not, however, all found in the Dirghagama, 
and their presence elsewhere, usually in the Madhyamagama, 77 shows that the 
distinction between the two dgamas was not yet closely delineated at the time 
when the various sects of Buddhism separated. The reverse also holds true, and 
not all the sutras in the Dirghagama are found in the Pali Digha-nikaya. The 
Sarvastivadin version of the Dirghagama includes the Catusparisatsutra, 
although this is found in the Mahakhandhaka of the Vinaya-pitaka in the Pali 
canon. 78 


3.2. The Majjhima-nikaya 

The Majjhima-nikaya 79 contains 152 suttas arranged in three groups of fifty 
(pannasa). The panndsas (1—50, 51—100, 101—52) are further divided into 
vaggas of ten suttas each, except for the last vagga but one, which has twelve 
suttas. 

There is no obvious order followed in the arrangement of suttas, except that 
suttas with a similar name are sometimes grouped together. There are seventeen 
pairs of suttas with the same name, distinguished by the prefixes Maha- amd 
Cula-. 80 In most cases these pairs are together, with Maha- sometimes coming 
first, and sometimes Cula-, although in one case the pair are far apart in differ- 
ent vaggas , 81 One vagga (Mahayamaka vagga) consists of five such pairs, while 
the Culayamaka vagga, on the other hand, contains only two pairs. There are 
several suttas entitled Maha- to which there is no Cula- counterpart. 

Of such a pair, the Maha- version is usually longer than the Cula-, but not 
always. The Culahatthipadopamasutta (27) is longer than the Mahahatthipado- 
pamasutta (28), and the Culamalunkyasutta (63) is longer than the Mahama- 
lunkyasutta (64). Sometimes such linked suttas have nothing in common but 
the reason for the name, e.g. the two Hatthipadopamasuttas (27 and 28) both 

(STT IV a) ; B. Pauly, Fragments Sanskrits de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot), Paris 
1958. See also Ch. TripathI, “Die Einleitung des Dasottarasutra,” in Indianisme et 
Bouddhisme (Festschrift Lamotte), Louvain 1980, pp. 353 — 58. 

76 See Pande, SOB, p. 78. 

77 See ibid., p. 116 n. 1. 

78 It occurs in the Samghabhedavastu of the Mula- Sarvastivadin canon, as noted 
above (p. 24). 

79 Ed. V. Trenckner, PTS London, Vol. I, 1888; R. Chalmers, Vol. II, 1896; 
Yol. Ill, 1899. Tr. Lord Chalmers, Further Dialogues of the Buddha, SBB Lon- 
don, 1926 — 27; I. B. Horner, Middle Length Sayings, PTS London, Vol. I, 1954; 
Vol. II, 1957; Vol. Ill, 1959; (German) K. E. Neumann, Reden Gotamo Buddho’s 
aus der mittleren Sammlung (Majjhimanikayo) des Pali-Kanons iibers., 3 vols., 
Leipzig 1896, 1900, 1902. For an analysis of the text see Pande, SOB, pp. 116—79. 

80 See Horner, MLS, I, pp. x-xv, 

81 Maha-Rahulovadasutta (62) and Cula-Rahulovadasutta (147). 



The Pali Canon 


45 


make use of the simile of the elephant’s footprint, but do not have the same 
subject matter. On the other hand, the two Dhammasamadanasuttas (45 and 
46) have much in common. Similarly, of the two Gopalakasuttas the Cula- 
version (34) makes use of one simile deriving from “cowherd” (gopdlaka) , 
while the Maha- (33) version puts forward eleven. 

The names of the vaggas to some extent reflects their contents, some being 
called after the first sutta in the vagga. The Gahapativagga consists of suttas in 
each of which, except for one sutta (57), the Buddha addresses householders. 
The third vagga surprisingly has no title. Since six of the ten suttas have the 
word upama in their titles, it would have been appropriate to call it Opamma- 
vagga. 82 


3.2.1. The Mulapannasa 

A number of the suttas in this group are autobiographical, and give informa- 
tion about the Buddha’s career which is lacking elsewhere in the canon. The 
Ariyapariyesanasutta (26) contains an account of the Buddha’s activities be- 
tween the time he left home and the conversion of the group of five bhikJchus, 
including his visits to the teachers Alara Kalama and Uddaka Ramaputta. 83 
The Mahasaccakasutta (36) gives an account of the Buddha’s attempts to gain 
enlightenment by means of asceticism, and of his decision to give up such 
methods when they failed to gain the goal he desired. The Mahasihanadasutta 
(12) contains similar details. 

Of the two Saropamasuttas, the Cula- version (30) is longer than the Maha- 
form (29). Both deal with the same subject (the simile of the pith) and both 
have the same summary at the end. It is possible that one is not an elaboration 
of the other, but that both are different versions of the same sutta. M An im- 
portant addition in the Cula- version of the sutta is an attempt to enumerate 
the states which are higher than knowledge and vision ( nanadassana ) . These 
are set out as the jhanas and vimoJcJchas. 

The Satipatthanasutta (10) contains word for word the first part of the 
Mahasatipatthanasutta of the Digha-nikaya (22), 85 and is possibly to be re- 
garded as the Cula- version of that sutta because it lacks the second portion 
dealing with the four truths. This has a separate existence in the Majjhima- 
nikaya (141). 88 

The Alagaddupamasutta (22) takes its title from the simile of the water- 
snake which if handled properly is unable to harm the person who holds it. It 
also contains the parable of the raft, which is invaluable for crossing a river, 

82 As suggested by Horner (MLS, I, p. xi) following Chalmers. 

83 A comparable account of Gotama’s visits to Arada Kalama and Udraka 
Ramaputra is found at Mvu II 118, 1 — 120, 16. 

84 See Pande, SOB, p. 122. 

85 See p. 40 above. 

89 Saccavibhangasutta (M III 248 — 252). 



46 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


but must be abandoned when it has served its purpose. In the sutta the Buddha 
attacks the view held by some that the world and the self ( atta ) are the same 
thing. This seems to be a reflection of the Upanisadic view of a W or Id - Atman , 8 7 

Some of the suttas include ideas which have already been noted as compara- 
tively late when they occurred in the Digha-nikaya. The Mahaslhanadasutta 
(12) gives an account of the ten powers of a Tathagata, while in the Culatan- 
hasankhayasutta (37) Moggallana visits Sakka’s heaven and shakes the Veja- 
yanta Palace with his big toe by means of supernormal power. The Brahmani- 
mantanikasutta (49) shows the Buddha challenging a Brahma, and proving 
that the Brahma’s supernormal powers are inferior to his own. 

A number of the suttas enumerate ascetic practices, e.g. the Mahaslhanada- 
sutta (12), or give information about the Jains, e.g. the Culadukkhakkhandha- 
sutta (14), while the Mahadukkhakkhandhasutta (13) in a series of similes 
explaining the consequences of the pleasures of sense gives a long list of punish- 
ments and tortures. 


3.2.2. The Majjhimapannasa 

In this vagga too there are suttas dealing with other religious groups. The 
Upalisutta (56) tells how the householder Upali, a Jain layman, visited the 
Buddha to refute him but became converted to Buddhism, and resisted an 
attempt by Nataputta the Jain leader to persuade him to recant. The Kuk- 
kuravatikasutta (57) tells of bovine and canine ascetics whose future existence 
as cattle, dogs, or hell-dwellers is foretold. The uselessness and cruelty of 
asceticism are also dealt with in the Kandarakasutta (51), and the Apannaka- 
sutta (60). 

Two suttas in this panndsa tell of discussions which took place after the death 
of the Buddha. In the Madhurasutta (84) and the Ghotamukhasutta (94) an 
enquiry about the present whereabouts of the Buddha meets the reply that the 
Buddha has now attained final nibbana ( parinibbuto ) . 88 There are other in- 
dications that some suttas are later than others, even among those which are 
attributed to the Buddha himself. The Bhaddalisutta (65) discusses the reason 
for the growth of rules of training ( sikkhapadani ) , and the Buddha points out 
that the need for an increase in rules only arises when the Sangha is great and 
of long standing. 

In several suttas the Buddha continues his attack upon the brahmans. In the 
Assalayanasutta (93) he examines the brahmans’ claim to be the best caste, and 
in the Madhurasutta (84) his disciple Mahakaccana does the same. A number of 
the suttas in this section are narrative stories. The Ratthapalasutta (82) tells 
of the young prince who became a wanderer, and of his father’s attempts to 

87 See K. R. Norman, “A note on atta in the Alagaddupama-sutta,” in Studies 
in Indian Philosophy, Ahmedabad 1981, pp. 19—29. 

88 parinibbuto kho ... etarahi so Bhagava araham sammasambuddho (M II 90, 16— 
17 = 162, 24-25). 



The Pali Canon ft 


47 


entice him away from religion when he visits the palace to beg years later. The 
verses with which he describes the uselessness of wealth and position also ap- 
pear in the Theragatha. 89 The Makhadevasutta (83) relates the story, also found 
in the Jataka collection, 90 of the king who regards his first grey hairs as messen- 
gers of death, and so abandons his kingdom and becomes a wanderer. The 
Angulimalasutta (86) tells the story of the robber who attempted to kill the 
Buddha but was instead converted by him. His verses also appear in the Thera- 
gatha. 91 

The Brahmayusutta (91) resembles the Ambatthasutta of the Digha-nikaya 
(3), in that it tells of a brahman visiting the Buddha to see if he really possessed 
the 32 marks of a great man. As in the case of Ambattha, supernormal powers 
are employed to enable him to see the two marks which are not normally 
visible. The brahman Brahmayu then asks the Buddha how one becomes a 
possessor of the three Vedas (tevijja), and he is given a Buddhist interpretation 
of the brahmanical term. 92 

Two suttas are of great interest because they are occasions for the Buddha to 
be questioned about the existence of devas and adhidevas, i.e. beings superior 
to the devas (gods). In the Sangaravasutta (100), the Buddha is asked if devas 
exist, and replies that adhidevas, i.e. super-gods, certainly do, so that by 
implication the existence of devas can be deduced. 93 

“But now, Gotama, do devas exist ?” “I certainly know for a fact, Bharadvaja, 
that super-deras exist.” “But why, Gotama, when asked if devas exist, do you say 
that you know certainly for a fact that super-dems exist ? Even if this were so, 
is your answer not useless and misleading ?” “If anyone, when asked if devas exist, 
replies that super-dems exist, then someone with sense can deduce that devas 
must exist.” “Then why, Gotama, did you not say in the first place that devas 
exist ?” “It is firmly accepted in the world, Bharadvaia, that devas exist.” 
(II 212-13) 

In the Kannakatthalasutta (90) he is asked if adhidevas exist. He concedes 
that they do, but his follower Ananda makes it clear that the pre-eminent 
position of such adhidevas was of no importance. Elsewhere in the canon, how- 
ever, the word atideva is used of the Buddha, and since this and adhideva are 
synonymous it seems likely that in the Sangaravasutta the Buddha was re- 
ferring to himself as being superior to the devas, and in the Kann akatthalasutta 
it was the brahmanical adhidevas which were being disparaged. 94 

89 Th 769—88. 

90 Ja (9) I 137—39. 

91 Th 866—91. 

92 See M I 144, 18-22. 

93 See K. R. Norman, “The Buddha’s view of devas,” in Beitrage zur Indien- 
forschung: Ernst Waldschmidt zum 80. Geburtstag gewidmet, Berlin 1977, pp. 329— 
36. 

94 See K. R. Norman, “Devas and Adhidevas in Buddhism,” in JPTS 1981, 
pp. 145—00. The corruptions which have led to the loss of the word adhideva in both 
the Sangaravasutta and the Kannakatthalasutta must be very old. 



48 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


3.2.3. The Uparipannasa 

As already noted, this pannasa, despite its name, contains 52 suttas, since 
there are twelve suttas in the fourth vagga. It has been suggested that suttas 
(132), (133) and (134), which are all three by followers of the Buddha, and are 
based upon (131), should perhaps be regarded as forming one sutta, which would 
make the number correct. 95 On the other hand, since the Saccavibhangasutta 
(141) seems to be no more than an early commentary on the Buddha’s first 
sermon about the four noble truths, and the Dakkhinavibhangasutta (142) 
repeats Ananda’s pleading of Mahapajapati’s cause found in the Vinaya," it 
is possible that both suttas are interpolations. 97 

It has been pointed out that this section contains more suttas for which a late 
origin can be postulated than the other two panndsas . 98 In particular, the 
suttas in the Vibhangavagga (131—42) foreshadow the method of analysis and 
classification found in the Vibhanga in the Abhidhamma-pitaka. The Isigili- 
sutta (116) gives a list of paccekabuddhas in prose and then a longer list in verse. 
The concept of the paccekabuddha seems to be a late borrowing into Buddhism 
from some other religion. 99 The Acchariyabbhutadhammasutta (123) describes 
the conception and birth of a Buddha in words very similar to those found in 
the Mahapadanasutta of the Digha-nikaya (14), where they are applied to the 
Buddha Vipassin, and in the Nidana-katha of the Jataka. 100 

The Gopakamoggallanasutta (108) is said to have been delivered not long 
after the Buddha’s parinibbdna 101 by Ananda, who was asked whether the 
Buddha had designated any of his followers as a support ( patisarana ) to the 
Sangha after his death. Ananda replied that no-one had been designated, but 
the Sangha was nevertheless united because the dhamma was the support. 102 
The Samagamasutta (104) tells of the quarrelling which took place among the 
Jains after the death of their leader Nataputta. As in the case of the Sangiti- 
sutta of the Digha-nikaya (33), this led to the Buddha promulgating some sets 
of numerical categories. 

A number of suttas show disciples preaching. In suttas (132) and (133) 
Ananda and Mahakaccana repeat and explain the Buddha’s words in the 
Bhaddekarattasutta (131). In the Dantabhumisutta (125) and the Bhumija- 
sutta (126) prince Jayasena approaches the novice Aciravata and the venerable 
Bhumija respectively, and asks to hear the dhamma. Both preachers sub- 


96 By Horner, MLS, I, p. ix n. 1. 

98 Cf. Vin II 254—55. 

97 As suggested by Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids in her review of M II in JRAS 
1902, p. 475. 

98 Pande, SOB, p. 117. 

98 See K. R. Norman, “The pratyeka-buddha in Buddhism and Jainism,” in 
Papers on Buddhology, Curzon Press, London 1982. 

100 Cf. Ja I 52—53. 

101 acira-parinibbute Bhagavati (M III 7, 14 — 15). 

ioa sappatisarand mayam ... dhammapatisarand (M III 9, 23 — 24). 



The Pali Canon 


49 


sequently visit the Buddha and are told how they could have improved their 
teaching. 

The Culakammavibhahgasutta (135) and the Mahakammavibhangasutta 
(136) both give an account of the working of kamma including a description o- 
the suffering in hell (niraya) which awaits a wrong-doer. Another account of 
hell, with even greater detail, is found in the Balapanditasutta (129). Comf 
parable descriptions of suffering in hell are found in Jain texts, 103 and pre- 
sumably represent a more popular conception of the doctrine of kamma. 

Most of the suttas in the Vibhangavagga (131—42) follow a distinctive pat- 
tern. The subject is first presented as a brief statement (uddesa) and is then 
followed by an exegesis (vibhanga), supplied in four suttas by leading theras, a 
detail which perhaps correctly reflects the Buddha’s way of teaching. 104 The 
Saccavibhangasutta (141), however, after an initial statement about the setting 
of the wheel of the Dhamma in motion, provides the same exegesis of the four 
noble truths as is found in the Mahasatipatthanasutta in the Digha-nikaya 
(22). 105 

It has been established that the Chinese translation of the Madhyamagama 
is based upon a Sarvastivadin original. 106 An examination of the contents of 
the Chinese version shows that, of its 222 siitras, 98 correspond to suttas in the 
Pali Majjhima-nikaya, 79 in the Anguttara-nikaya, 10 in the Samyutta-nikaya, 
and 9 in the Digha-nikaya. 107 Since the majority of texts found in Turkestan 
belong to the Sarvastivadin school, it is remarkable that comparatively few 
portions of Madhyamagama texts from that area have as yet been published. 108 

3.3. The Samyutta-nikaya 

The Samyutta-nikaya 109 gains its title from the fact that its suttas are 
grouped together (samyutta) according to their contents. There are 56 sam- 

loMDfTutt XIX 47-72. 

in* See Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, rev. of R. Chalmebs, Majjhima-nikaya, Yols 
II and III, in JR AS 1902, p. 475. 

105 See p. 40 above. 

io« See Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 136. 

107 See P. Y. Bap at (ed.), The Majjhima Nikaya (1. Mula-parniasakam), Nalanda 
1958, P- xxiv. 

los For the Bimbasarasutra, represented in the Chinese Madhyamagama, see 
Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 138. See also E. Waldschmidt, “The Rastrapalasutra in 
Sanskrit remnants from Central Asia,” in Indianisme et Bouddhisme (Festschrift 
Lamotte), Louvain 1980, pp. 359 — 74, and The Varnasatam: an eulogy of one 
hundred epithets of Lord Buddha spoken by the Grhapati Upali(n), in NO AW 
1979 Nr. 1. A number of other Sarvastivadin Madhyamagama texts are listed in 
E. Waldschmidt, Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turf anfunden, IV, 1980, pp. 20-73. 

109 Ed. L. Feek, 5 vols., PTS London, 1884—98. Tr. C. A. F. Rhys Davtds, 
Kindred Sayings, PTS London, Vol. I, 1917; Vol. II, 1922; F. L. Woodwabd, 
Vols. Ill— V, 1925, 1927, 1930; (German) W. Geigeb, Samyutta-Nikaya, Vol. I, 
Munich 1930; Vol. II, Munich 1925. For an analysis of the text see Pande, SOB, 
pp. 180—229. 



50 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


yuttas, arranged in five vaggas. They contain 2,889 suttas in all, in the European 
edition, although Buddhaghosa states that there are 7,762 suttas. 110 

The arrangement is made by (1) subject or doctrine, (2) class of god, demon, 
or man, (3) some prominent person as speaker or hero, 111 e.g. the Sakkasam- 
yutta (11) contains suttas where Sakka plays a part, while the Bojjhangasam- 
yutta (46) is composed of those suttas in which the seven elements of enlighten- 
ment are discussed. This method does, however, lead to a great deal of repe- 
tition, e.g. the Salayatanasamyutta (35) contains 207 suttas about the six 
senses. It is possible that the repetition arises from the fact that there were in 
existence many suttas on the subject, collected from various individuals, diffe- 
rent vihdras, etc., all of which were of equal religious merit, and all of which de- 
served to be included in the collection. 112 This method of arrangement does 
mean that the Samyutta-nikaya contains some of the most important Buddhist 
teaching, e.g. the Saccasamyutta (56) contains 131 suttas dealing with different 
aspects of the four truths. 

The arrangement by samyuttas represents an obvious editorial practice, and 
the existence of a number of the suttas elsewhere in the canon probably indicates 
a conscious selection of material to group together in this way. There is in- 
evitably an overlap with the Anguttara-nikaya, because some of the samyuttas 
deal with numerical subjects. Sometimes a comparison with the version of a 
sutta which occurs elsewhere shows quite substantial differences. A version of 
the Parinibbdna story is included in the Brahmasamyutta (6), because Brahma 
gives a eulogy over the dead Buddha just as in the Mahaparinibbanasutta of 
the Digha-nikaya (16), but it reverses the order of the utterances by Ananda 
and Anuruddha, omits the attainment of sanndvedayitanirodhasamdpatti, and 
also Ananda’s mistaking of this for 'parinibbdna , 113 These differences show that 
changes have been introduced into one or other, or both, of the narratives at 
some time, but the tradition has not changed since then, doubtlessly because 
the Digha -bhdnaJcas and Samyutta -bhdnaJcas preserved their texts independ- 
ently. 

3.3.1. The Sagathavagga 

This vagga contains the great majority, but by no means all, of the suttas 
which contain verses. 114 The layout indicates that a certain amount of editorial 
work had already been carried out before the vagga was fixed in its present form. 

no Sp 18, 9—10. 

in See Winternitz, HIL, p. 56. 

iia Winternitz, HIL, p. 57 n. 1, quoting Mrs Rhys Davids. 

no See M. Przylcski, “Le Parinirvana et les funerailles du Buddha,” in JA 
1918, PP- 485—526, quoted by Pande, SOB, p. 189. 

ii* Despite Feer’s statement (S I, p. xv) that all the verses have been gathered 
together in the Sagathavagga, there are some in other vaggas. He later (S IV, p. 9) 
comments on the inconvenience of having another Sagathavagga in the Vedana- 
samyutta (36). 



The Pali Canon 


51 


The first sutta of the Devatasamyutta (1) has a short introduction describing 
how a devata visited the Buddha and asked a question. The second sutta has an 
abbreviated introduction, while the third and subsequent suttas in the vagga 118 
merely state that a devata uttered the verse. Similarly, the first sutta of the 
second vagga has an introduction, while the second and third suttas have only 
a single sentence. The remainder of the vagga consists simply of verses, which, 
because they are in the Devatasamyutta, must be presumed to have been 
originally uttered by a devata. A similar pattern can be seen in later vaggas. 

The subject matter of the Sagathavagga is predominantly ethical, and most 
of the suttas deal with the Buddhist ideal of life. Many of the verses are of a 
question and answer nature. Some are riddles, while others are puns, e.g. sutta 
1.2.2. depends upon the two meanings, religious and secular, of upadhi: a man 
does not rejoice who is without upadhi (material possessions), but a man does 
not lament who is without upadhi (the clinging to existence which results from 
having material possessions). Sometimes both a religious and secular answer 
is given to the same question, e.g. in sutta 1.8.4 there are two answers to the 
question of what is the best of things that rise and things that fall : seed and 
rain, and also knowledge and ignorance. In a number of suttas where only a 
religious answer to a question is given, it would seem probable that the secular 
answer has been omitted and forgotten, leaving only the paradoxical religious 
answer. The fact that some of the verses are also found in Jain literature prove 
their non-Buddhist nature. 116 

The Bhikkhunlsamyutta (5) collects together stories about bhikkhunis who 
were tempted by Mara. Many of the verses are also found in the Therlgatha, 117 
but some do not occur there, and others are ascribed to different therls. 118 Once 
again, the solution to the problem probably lies in the fact that the early 
tradition was doubtful about the form of the verses and the speakers, and the 
Samyutta-Mana&as and Khuddaka-Mcma&as transmitted independently a 
differing tradition. The udddna to a Sanskrit version of this samyutta has been 
discovered in Turkestan. 119 It agrees with the Pah Bhikkhunlsamyutta in its 
contents, showing that the differentiation of the bhdnaka tradition pre-dates 
the schism between the Theravadins and Sarvastivadins. 

It is debatable whether the prose of the introductions to the verses in the 
Sagathavagga is as old as the verses themselves, or whether it represents the 
work of the sangitikdras at the first or a subsequent council. Since only the 
verses of the Bhikkhunlsamyutta are found in the Therigatha, it is clear that 
the prose did not have canonical status for the Khuddaka-&Mwa&as. The same 
is true of Vanglsa’s verses, found in the Vangisatherasamyutta with prose intro- 

115 The five vaggas are divided into samyuttas, which are in turn divided into 
vaggas . Feer (S I, p. viii) comments upon the inconvenience of this system. 

n« E.g. S I 40, 4 and 40, 6 have parallels at Utt XIV 22 — 23. 

ii7 Thi 182—203. 

us See Norman, EV II, pp. xxvi— xxvii. 

ii9 See Waedschmidt, CASF, pp. 144—47. 



52 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


ductions, but without them, and with some differences, in the Theragatha. 120 
A fragment of the Vangisasamyukta has been found in Turkestan, 121 and 
portions of the Dhvajagrasutra 122 and Candrasutra 123 have been discovered and 
published. 


3.3.2. The Nidana vagga 

The suttas in this and the subsequent vaggas of the Samyutta-nikaya deal 
mainly with epistemology, metaphysics and psychology. The vagga takes its 
name from its first samyutta, the Nidanasamyutta (12), which in 93 suttas deals 
with the subject of the twelve niddnas, i. e. the twelve links of the chain of cause 
and effect (paticcasam,uppada) . A number of sutras from the Nidanasamyukta 
have been found in Turkestan and published. 124 

The Anamataggasamyutta (15) in the same vagga contains 20 suttas which 
include the words “endless 125 is this samsdra,” with the exception of suttas 
(15.16—18), which are so abbreviated in the European edition that the words 
do not appear therein. 126 


3.3.3. The Khandha vagga 

This vagga takes its name from the Khandhasamyutta (22), which is its 
first samyutta. Despite its division into three groups of 50 (pahhasa), the Sam- 
yutta actually contains 158 suttas. In them the subject of the khandhas is 
examined with great repetition, and the impression is given that every sutta 
which mentions the khandhas, and a few which do not, 127 has been collected 
together. Many can be found elsewhere in the canon. The Sariputtasamyutta 
(28) contains 10 suttas which record ten sayings of Sariputta, some of them a 
single sentence presented in a stereotyped setting. The Nagasamyutta (29) 
contains 50 suttas, of which the last 30 are merely sketched out in a very 
abbreviated form, dealing with the different sorts of snake (ndga) and explain- 
ing the reasons for their birth and practices. 


120 Th 1209-79. 

121 Waldschmidt, CASF, pp. 147—48. 

122 = S I 218—20. See Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 138. 

123 = s x so. See Ernst Waldschmidt, “Buddha frees the disc of the moon 
(Candrasutra),” in BSOAS 33, pp. 179—83. 

121 See S. Levi, “Textes sanscrits de Touen-houang,” in JA 1910, pp. 438—40 
(tr. J. M. Cooper, “A fragment of the Nidanasutra,” in PBR, 5, 3 (1980), pp. 53— 
58); E. Waldschmidt, “Sutra 25 of the Nidanasamyukta,” in BSOAS 20, 1957, 
pp. 569—79; Chandrabhal TripIth! (ed.), Funfundzwanzig Sutras des Nidana- 
samyukta, Berlin 1962 (STT, VIII). 

125 For the meaning “endless” for anamatagga see T. Burrow, The problem of 
shwa m Sanskrit, Oxford 1979, p. 42. 

126 S II 189-90. 

127 As noted by Feer, S III, p. vii. 



The Pali Canon 


53 


3.3.4. The Salayatanavagga 

The first samyutta of this vagga is the Salayatanasamyutta (35), which de- 
spite the fact that it is divided into four groups of 50 ( pahhdsakas ) seems to 
contain 207 suttas. Many of the suttas differ from their neighbours in one word 
only, e.g. sutta (33) explains that everything is subject to birth (jdti-dhamma), 
while suttas (34—42) replace jdti by jard, vyddhi, mar ana etc. The Upasenasutta 
(69) tells of Upasena being bitten by a snake, but remaining unchanged in 
appearance because he had no ideas about the eye or the tongue or the mind 
being “mine.” Fragments of the Sanskrit Upasenasutra, used as a charm 
against snake-bite, have been found in Turkestan and published. 128 The Avas- 
sutasutta (202) of the same Samyutta tells of Moggallana preaching to his 
fellow bhikkhus, at the request of the Buddha who was indisposed. Moggallana 
chose for his subject the letting in (avassuta) and not letting in (anavassuta) of 
harmful influences through the eyes, etc. Two fragments of a Sanskrit version 
of this sutta have been found and published. 129 

The Asankhatasamyutta (43) deals with the uncompounded (asahkhata), 
i.e. nibbdna , 130 and the path leading to it. Each synonym for nibbdna, and each 
means of attaining it, is the subject of a separate sutta, and the whole is ab- 
breviated by an instruction to treat each of the synonyms under the same 45 
heads as asankhata. 131 

3.3.5. The Mahavagga 

A number of the Samyuttas in this vagga deal with matters of vital importance 
to Buddhism, including the Maggasamyutta (45) which deals with the eightfold 
path, the Bojjhangasamyutta (46), which treats the seven elements of enlighten- 
ment, the Satipatthanasamyutta (47), dealing with the bases of mindfulness, 
and the Jhanasamyutta (53), which deals with trance, but in so abbreviated a 
way that several of the vaggas consist of nothing more than uddana verses with 
instructions to expand them. 132 

The final samyutta of the fifth vagga is the Saccasamyutta (56). Here among 
a number of very abbreviated suttas is found the Dhammacakkappavattana- 
sutta (56.11), which also occurs in the Vinaya-pitaka. 133 Several suttas tell of 
the difficulty of hearing the truth, including the Chiggalasuttas (56.45, 47—48), 


128 = S IV 40—41. See Ernst Waldschmidt, Das Upasenasutra, Ein Zauber 
gegen SchlangenbiB aus dem Samyuktagama, NGAW 1957, pp. 27 — 44. 

1 29 E. Waldschmidt, “Mahamaudgalyayana’s sermon on the letting— in and not 
letting — in (of sensitive influences),” in JIABS, 1, 1978, pp. 25 — 33. 

180 In the rubric to the first vagga it is called Nibbanasamyutta (S IV 361, 25). 

131 Yathd asankhatam tatha vittharetabbam, (S IV 368, 26 — 27 = 373, 18). 

132 E.g. vittharetabbam (S V 308, 27 = 309, 13); yad api satipatthdnam tad api 
vittharetabbam (308, 13); yathd Maggasamyuttam evarn Jhdnasamyuttam vittharetab- 
bam (310, 7 — 8). 

138 Yin I 10, 10—12, 18. 



54 K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 

% 

in which comparison is made with shooting an arrow through a keyhole, or the 
possibility of a blind turtle pushing his head through the hole in a yoke drifting 
in the sea. 

As already noted, there is an overlap between the Samyutta-nikaya and the 
Anguttara-nikaya in the Pah canon, which arises from the possibility of 
classifying suttas in two different ways. An examination of the contents of the 
Chinese translation of the Samyuktagama, which is based upon the Sarvasti- 
vadin version, 134 shows that it includes a number of sutras which in the Pali 
canon appear in the Anguttara-nikaya. 135 This would seem to indicate that at 
the time when the dgamas were collected the distinction between the “connect- 
ed” and “numerical” classifications was not very clearly drawn. 

3.4. The Anguttara-nikaya 

The name of the nikaya 136 means literally “the by-one-limb-more collection,” 
and the text is of the type already seen in the Dasuttarasutta of the Digha- 
nikaya (34). Buddhaghosa mentions 9,557 suttas, 137 but the number in the text 
as we have it is approximately 2,308 (or 2, 363). 138 It is difficult to decide the 
number accurately because the text and the commentary do not always agree 
on the way in which the suttas are to be divided. 139 The suttas are divided into 
eleven sections (nipatas), arranged in about 160 vaggas. Each vagga contains 
as a rule ten suttas, although the highest number in any one vagga is 262 and 
the lowest seven. 

The Anguttara-nikaya is called the Ekuttara-nikaya in the Milindapanha, 140 
and the Sanskrit version is called the Ekottarikagama. Each nipata contains 
suttas dealing with subjects in some way connected with the number of the 
section, e.g. the eka-nipdta begins with the single form which enslaves a man’s 
heart, i.e. that of a woman, while the ekadasaka-nipata ends with the eleven 
qualities which must be cultivated to ensure the comprehension and destruction 
of lust. 


131 See Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 136. 

135 Bunyiu Nanjio, Catalogue of the Chinese translation of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka, Oxford 1883, p. 135, quoted by Pande, SOB, p. 181. 

136 Ed. R. Morris, The Ariguttara -Nikaya, PTS London, Vol. I, 1885 (Second 
edition, revised by A. K. Warder, 1961); Vol. II, 1888; E. Hardy, PTS London, 
Vols. Ill— V, 1897, 1899, 1900; M. Hunt, Vol. VI (Indexes), 1910. Tr. F. L. Wood- 
ward, The Gradual Sayings, PTS London, Vol. I, 1932; Vol. II, 1933; Vol. V, 1936; 
E. M. Hare, Vol. Ill, 1934; Vol. IV, 1935; (German) Bhikkhu ^anatiloka, Reden 
des Buddha aus dem Anguttar a -Nikaya iibers., 5 vols., Munich 1911 — 23. For an 
analysis of the text see Pande, SOB, pp. 230—47. 

i 3 ’ Sp 18, 10—12. 

i38 “There are, in fact, at most about 2,344 suttas in the Anguttara” according 
to Hardy (A V, p. vi). 

i38 See Hardy’s comment at A IV, p. iii. 

uo Mil 362, 17; 392, 2. 



The Pali Canon 


55 


In some of the higher-numbered nipdtas, i.e. from the chakka-nipdta onwards, 
combinations of smaller numbers are sometimes resorted to to get the higher 
designations, e.g. sutta (9.28) 141 contains the five bhayas and the four sotd- 
pattiyangas, while sutta (ll.ll) 142 contains three different sets of three dhammas 
and a set of two dhammas. With a few exceptions, however, the component 
parts of such composite suttas are not mere repetitions of the material found in 
the appropriate places in earlier nipdtas. 143 Sometimes the complements have 
no obvious connection. Sometimes some connection can be deduced, e.g. the 
five cetokhilas and the four satipatthdnas in sutta (9. 71), 144 where the latter are 
to be practised for the destruction of the former. Sometimes the component 
parts are opposites, e.g. the five dukkhas and the five sukhas in sutta (10. 65). 145 

Many of the suttas occur elsewhere in the canon, and it seems reasonable to 
assume that in part, at least, the Anguttara-nikaya consists of compilations of 
such numerical matters as already existed. Sometimes, however, it is impossible 
to be certain whether the Anguttara-nikaya is the borrower, or has been bor- 
rowed from, e.g. the eight cardinal rules for bhikkhunis occur as an independent 
sutta in the Anguttara-nikaya, 148 but occur as part of the Bhikkhunl-kkhan- 
dhaka in the Vinaya-pitaka 147 in an entirely appropriate place. On the other 
hand, the eight earthquakes which occur in the atthaka-nipdta liS seem to be an 
insertion in the Mahaparinibbanasutta of the Digha-nikaya (16). 149 It is note- 
worthy that, while many of the enumerations in the Anguttara-nikaya occur 
without any introduction, in the case of the eight earthquakes the narrative 
story which leads up to their enumeration in the Mahaparinibbanasutta is also 
given in the Anguttara-nikaya, which seems to indicate that borrowing took 
place in both directions. The statement about eight types of assemblies which 
also occurs in the Mahaparinibbanasutta is extracted from there and given in 
the previous sutta in the Anguttara-nikaya. 150 

There are certain noteworthy omissions in the Anguttara-nikaya, e.g. the 
three refuges ( saranas ) and the three characteristic properties (lakkhanas ) are 
not found as such, nor are the four noble truths 151 nor the eight-fold path. 152 

444 A IV 407. 

442 A V 326. 

443 See Hardy’s comment at A V, p. vii, and his list of composite suttas at 
A V 421—22. 

1 44 A IV 460. 

m A V 120-21. 

140 A IV 274-79. 

l 4 ? Vin II 253 — 56. 

us A IV 308-13. 

i4» D II 107—109. 

no Cf. D II 109—110 and A IV 307—308. 

151 Mrs Rhys Davids points out that the four truths occur in the catukka-nipdta, 
but under the titles of dukkha and loka, not of ariya, as elsewhere. See A VI, p. viii 

n. 2. 

152 The eight-fold path, with the addition of sammdndnam and sammdvimutti, 
occurs in the dasaka-nipata (A V 223). 



56 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


With reference to the saranas and the lakkhanas it has been suggested that the 
omission arises from the fact that these doctrines had not yet become impor- 
tant by the time the tika-nipdta was closed. 153 Such an explanation would not 
suit the four truths and the eight-fold path, and it seems likely that these 
doctrines were omitted because they were so important and so well-known that 
they were remembered in their original settings, and did not need to be trans- 
planted to the Anguttara-nikaya. The fact that they had been included in the 
Samyutta-nikaya was perhaps also a factor contributing to their omission, 
although as has already been noted a certain amount of duplication has taken 
place. The fact that there is not more perhaps implies that there was a conscious 
“sharing” of suttas between the two bhdnaka traditions, i.e. the Samyutta- and 
Anguttara-nikayas are not entirely independent compilations. 154 

One reason for the blurring of distinction between the Samyutta-nikaya and 
the Anguttara-nikaya can be seen in the way in which some vaggas contain 
suttas which all deal with one and the same subject, so that they resemble a 
samyutta. The ten suttas of vagga (1.1) deal with the relationship between hus- 
band and wife; vagga (1.14) has 80 suttas giving the names of the most promin- 
ent male and female disciples and their virtues; vagga (1.20) contains 262 
suttas on different kinds of meditation leading to nibbdna; vagga (5.18) has ten 
suttas about updsakas. There seem to be certain inconsistencies in the way in 
which the suttas and vaggas have been constituted. The first two suttas of vagga 
(1.6) are a continuation of vagga (1.5) and should have belonged to it. 155 

Many of the suttas in the Anguttara-nikaya are of a non-narrative type, 
following a stereotyped formulaic presentation. This allows for interpolation 
into the appropriate nipdta at any time up to the final fixing of the canon. Some 
of the suttas at the end of the tenth nipdta seem to be additions, since they 
include groups of 20, 30 and 40. 156 It is probable that the whole of the eleventh 
nipdta is an addition. 157 It has hardly anything original in it, 158 and its three 
vaggas represent the smallest number of any nipdta. The Abhidharmakosa- 
vyakhya states that the Ekottarikagama has only ten sections, 159 and the same 
seems to be true of the Chinese translation. 160 It seems possible that some of the 
suttas at the very end of the tenth nipdta are, in fact, based upon the added 
eleventh nipata. After the suttas dealing with 20, 30 and 40, there are three 


153 See Pande, SOB, p. 232. 

154 As suggested by Mrs Rhys Davids (A VI, p. viii). 

155 The vagga is entitled “Finger-snap” (acchara-sanghdta), but this applies from 
the third sutta onwards. The first two suttas deal with the luminous mind (pabhas- 
sararn cittam), which is the subject of the last two suttas of the previous vagga. 
The mechanical division of suttas into vaggas of ten has led to connected suttas 
becoming separated. 

is® See A V 304—308. 

i57 See Pande, SOB, p. 231. 

as As noted by Hardy (A V, p. vii n. 1). 

iso Quoted (from Minayeff) by Pande, SOB, p. 231. 

i6o Pande, SOB. p. 231. 



The Pali Canon 


57 


suttas listing groups of ten. 161 These are, however, the ten qualities required to 
destroy lust, and are parallel to the eleven qualities which are found in the 
eleventh nipdta , 162 It is likely that the compiler of the ekddasaka-nipdta realised 
that his material could easily be adapted to fit the earlier nipdta, and therefore 
compiled appropriate suttas and inserted them there. 

It is likely that the Chinese version of the Ekottarikagama belongs to the 
school of the Mahasanghikas, and was translated not from Sanskrit but from 
some dialect of MIA or a mixed dialect of Prakrit with Sanskrit elements. 183 
An extract from the Saptamaithunasamyuktasutra, quoted by Santideva in 
his Siksasamuccaya, is in all probability to be traced to a Sanskrit counterpart 
to the Prakrit original of the Chinese translation. 164 

Sanskrit fragments of the Ekottarikagama have been found in Turkestan 
and published. 165 They all belong to the eka-nipdta, and correspond to the 
Nlvaranapahanavagga of the Anguttara-nikaya. A comparison with the Chinese 
version of the same sutra shows a certain amount of deviation. Portions of a 
Sanskrit Ekottarikagama, belonging to the first and second nipatas, have been 
found in Gilgit and published. 166 By chance there is an overlap with some of the 
Turkestan fragments, which makes it possible to state that there is a verbal 
correspondence between the two versions. This is perhaps not surprising, since 
they belong to the Sarvastivadin (Turkestan) and Mula-Sarvastivadin (Gilgit) 
schools. 


3.5. The Khuddaka-nikaya 
3.5.1. Khuddakapatha 167 

As has already been noted, 168 both the Digh a - bhdnakas and the Majjhima- 
bhdnakas excluded this work from their lists of canonical texts, which probably 
means that it had not yet attained canonical status at the time when their lists 
were closed. The Khuddakapatha is also omitted from the Chinese translation 169 
of Buddhaghosa’s Samantapasadika, which implies that either a recension of his 
work existed in which the Khuddakapatha was excluded, or the Chinese trans- 


it A V 309—10. 
i«2 A V 360-61. 

i 63 See Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 137. 
is* See Waldschmidt, CASF, p. 169. 

165 Discussed by Waldschmidt, CASF, pp. 169—74. 

166 Chandeabhai Tripathi, Ekottaragama-Fragmente der Gilgit -Handschrift, 
Reinbek 1981. 

1 67 Ed. H. Smith, PTS London, 1915. Tr. Bhikkhu Kanamoli, The Minor 
Readings, PTS London, 1960. 

168 See p. 9 above. 

i6» P. V. Bapat and A. Hirakawa (tr.), Shan-Chien-P’i-P’o-Sha, Poona 1970, 
p. ii n. 22. 



58 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


lators were influenced by someone who knew that some schools did not accept 
the work as canonical. If we can be certain of our assumption that it had not yet 
gained canonical status when the schools of bhanakas closed their lists, then 
we can conclude that it is the latest text in the nikdya. 

It consists of nine short texts. The first is the Buddhist confession of faith 
(the three refuges), the second a list of ten commandments for bhikJchus 
( veramani-sikkhdpaddni), the third a list of 32 parts of the body, and the fourth 
a list of ten novice’s questions set out in numerical order— “What is one, etc. ?”— 
including some of the most important Buddhist terms, such as the four noble 
truths and the eight-fold path. The other five pieces are short sutlas, used for 
liturgical purposes: Mangalasutta, Ratanasutta, Tirokuddasutta, Nidhikanda- 
sutta, and Mettasutta. The first two and the last also occur in the Suttanipata, 170 
while the Tirokuddasutta occurs in the Petavatthu. 171 The first four compila- 
tions have parallels in the Vinaya-pitaka, so that in effect all but the Nidhi- 
kandasutta are found elsewhere in the canon, and the wdiole work was probably 
compiled as an extract from the canon to serve as a handbook for novices. 172 It 
probably owes its canonical nature to the fact that it is (nearly) all from the 
canon. 


3.5.2. Dhammapada 

The Dhammapada 173 is a collection of 423 verses arranged in 26 vaggas, each 
containing between ten and 26 verses, except for the last, entitled Brahmana- 
vagga, which has 41 verses. The titles for the most part reflect the subject 
matter of the verses, e.g. the Pupphavagga (4) contains verses which with only 
two exceptions contain either the word pwpjiha or the names of individual 
flowers, or include the key-word in a refrain, e.g. the Brahmanavagga (26) in- 
cludes the word brahmana in every verse except one (394), and has the refrain 
tam aharn brumi brdhmanam in 32 verses. 

More than half the verses occur elsewhere in the canon, 174 although it is 
difficult to be certain whether they were collected together from those sources, 
or whether both took them from a third source. The existence of some of these 
verses in Jain or brahmanical texts 175 suggests that they were taken from the 


170 = Sn pp. 46-47; vv. 222-38; vv. 143-52. 

171 p v u_25 (= I. 5). 

172 Some of the texts are used as partitas. See p. 174 below. 

173 Ed. V. Fausboll, Hauniae (Copenhagen) 1855; second ed., London 1900; 
S. Sumangala Thera, PTS London, 1914; ed. and tr. S. Radhakrishnan, London 
1950. Tr. F. Max Muller, London 1881 (SBE X. 1) ; (Latin) V. Fausboll, Hauniae 
1855; (German) L. von Schroeder, Worte der Wahrheit, Leipzig 1892; K. E. 
Neumann, Der Wahrheitpfad, Leipzig 1893; R. O. Franke, Dhamma-Worte, 
Jena 1923. 

l7 « Winternitz, HIL, p. 83. 

175 Cf. Dhp 404 with Utt XXV 28; and Dhp 223 with MBh V 39. 58. 



The Pali Canon 


59 


general store of floating verses which seems to have existed in Northern India 
in early times. The metres included in the Dhammapada are Tristubh (with 
some Jagatl), Vaitdllya (with some Aupacchandasaka) , and Anustubh. Although 
small groups of verses, linked together by refrain, structure, or metre, clearly 
make small poems whose pre-existence is shown by the fact that they occur in 
the same form in other traditions as well, 176 for the most part the arrangement 
of verses, including their presence in particular vaggas, can be seen, by com- 
parison with other texts, to be the choice of the compiler. In many cases verses 
are, by their content, appropriate to more than one vagga 111 which accounts 
for the differences which can be observed between various recensions. 

Although there are differences of opinion about the poetic quality of the 
verses in the Dhammapada, 178 the number of different versions we have of it are 
evidence for the popularity of this type of literature. From Turkestan there is 
a Sarvastivadin version entitled Udanavarga, 179 which includes about 1050 
verses, including uddanas, in 33 vargas. There is also an incomplete version in 
Gandhari Prakrit 180 which was acquired in Khotan. This perhaps belonged to 
the Dharmaguptaka school. 181 It contains, in its incomplete form, 342 verses 
of which many are fragmentary, and probably had 26 vargas , of which (4—5), 
(9), and (23—26) are lost. It is probable that both the Udanavarga and the 
Gandhari Dharmapada had originally about 360 verses in common with the 
Pali Dhammapada, 192 but although there are close parallels between these 
various texts, there are also considerable differences, e.g. the Sila varga of the 
Udanavarga (6) contains none of the verses found in the varga which probably 
had the same name in the Prakrit version, and the verses which the two texts 
have in common are spread over eight other vargas. The Pali Dhammapada 
has no vagga entitled SUa, and the verses it has in common with the (presumed) 
Sllavarga of the Gandhari version are found in seven vaggas. 1 * 3 Nevertheless, 
there is presumably some significance in the fact that the first three vargas of 
the Gandhari Dharmapada occur, in reversed order, as the last three of the 
Pali version. 184 


”• E.g. Dhp 228-30 = Udana-v XXIX 46-48 = G Dhp 240-42. 

177 As Dhp 158 contains both the word attanam and the word pandito, it is 
appropriate to the Attavagga in the Dhp and to the Panditavarga in the G Dhp 
(227)- 

178 See the assessment by Brough, G Dhp, p. xvii. 

179 F. Bernhard (ed.), Udanavarga, Yol. I, Gottingen 1965. See also L. Schmit- 
hauSEN, ,,Zu den Rezensionen des Udanavargah“, in WZKSO 14, pp. 47-124. 

iso J. Brough (ed.), The Gandhari Dharmapada, London 1962. 

181 Brough (G Dhp, p. 45) considers the Dharmaguptakas and the Kasyapiyas 
as eligible claimants to the text. 

1 82 See Brough, G Dhp, p. 23. 

183 See ibid., p. 25. 

184 See ibid., p. 28. This does not necessarily imply that either text was known 
to th© redactors of the other, 



60 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


The Mahasanghika-Lokottaravadin Mahavastu contains two vargas, one 
called the Sahasra varga, 185 the other unnamed but probably the Bhiksuvarga, 186 
and a few sporadic verses ascribed to the Dharmapada. 187 There has recently 
been published a complete Dharmapada belonging to the same school, which 
was found in Tibet. 188 It is in Prakrit, with some attempts made at Sanskriti- 
sation, and contains 415 verses in 22 vargas, of which only 13 have titles found 
in the Pali version. 189 The relationship between these various versions and the 
four translations of the Dharmapada which exist in Chinese is not clear, al- 
though the oldest of these, dating from A.D. 244, seems to have some affinity 
with the Pali Dhammapada, since it includes in its 39 sections all 26 of the Pali 
version (9—32, 34—35), with corresponding titles in the same order. The re- 
maining verses seem to have come partly from the Udanavarga, and partly 
from another text or texts. Although the verses in the sections which corre- 
spond are not exactly the same as those in Pali, the changes, additions, and 
omissions seem to be no greater than are usual in normal manuscript trans- 
mission. 190 


3.5.3. Udana 

* 

The Udana 191 consists of eight vaggas, each containing ten suttas which end 
with a solemn utterance (udana). This is usually a single verse, but it is oc- 
casionally more, and in a few cases is in prose. 

To some extent, as in the case of other collections, some reasons can be seen 
for certain of the arrangements of suttas into vaggas, e.g, in vagga (1) all the 
verses contain the word brahmana. In vagga (2) the uddnas of nine of the ten 
suttas contain the word sukha, and the exception has the compound piyarupam 
in common with the sutta following it, and is doubtless placed there by asso- 
ciation of ideas. The same association of ideas probably accounts for other 
connections which can be seen in vaggas which do not have as obvious a theme, 
e.g. suttas (3.2) and (3.3) have a refrain in common; suttas (3.3) and (3.4) have 
the words pabbata and vedhati in common; suttas (3.8) and (3.9) have padas in 
common. 


is 8 Mvu III 434-36. 
i86 Mvu III 421-23. 
is? Mvu II 212, 19—20; III 156, 16-17. 

188 Ed. N. S. Shtjkla, The Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dharmapada, Patna 1979: 
G. Roth, “Particular features of the language of the Arya-Mahasamghika-Lokot- 
taravadins and their importance for early Buddhist tradition,” in Bechert, 
LEBT, pp. 78—135. 

189 See Shtjkla, op. cit. (in n. 188), p. vi. 

190 See Brough, G Dhp, pp. 35—38. 

191 Ed. P. Steinthal, PTS London, 1885. Tr. D. M. Strong, London 1902; 
F. L. Woodward, Verses of Uplift, SBB London, 1948; (German) K. Seiden- 
STUCKEr, Augsberg 1920, 



The Pali Canon 


61 


The term uddna is one of the categories found in the nine -fold classification 
of the canon. Although Buddhaghosa states that in that classification the term 
actually refers to this text, 192 it is more likely that it refers to a general type of 
literature, of which the Udana is an example. In this connection it is of interest 
to note that Dhammapala states 193 that the majority of the Buddha’s uddnas 
are in the Dhammapada. As has just been noted, the Sarvastivadin version of 
the Dhammapada is entitled Udanavarga. 

The commentator also states 194 that the verses of theras and therls in the 
Theragatha and the Therlgatha are not uddnas, but sihanddas. This is probably 
an attempt to explain why the collection contains only 80 uddnas. It is never- 
theless clear that there are many other uddnas in the canon, and it is uncertain 
why this collection should be so small. Some of the uddnas which are found 
here occur elsewhere in the canon, with and without the narrative story which 
introduces them, e.g. the first four suttas of the first vagga occur at the begin- 
ning of the Mahakhandhaka of the Vinaya-pitaka. 195 Sometimes the narrative 
portion of the sutta occurs elsewhere without the uddna, e.g. the first sutta of 
the fourth vagga. 196 As is usual, it is not always easy to see which text has 
borrowed from which, and in some cases it may be that both texts took the 
suttas directly from the great body of oral material which must have existed in 
the early days of Buddhism. 

Although some of the uddnas are in what was probably their true historical 
setting, it seems clear that some of the suttas have either been adapted, or even 
invented, to provide an occasion for the utterance. The first four suttas of the 
eighth vagga have the same story, which is merely a brief statement that the 
Buddha was preaching a sermon concerned with nibbana. The fifth and sixth 
suttas of the sixth vagga also share an introductory story. It did not escape the 
commentator’s notice that the verses and narrative portions are separate, and 
he ascribes the narrative portion to Ananda, 197 who at the first council intro- 
duced each of the suttas with the words evam me sutam. 

The metres found in the uddnas include Tristubh (and Jagati), Vaitaliya 
(and AupacchandasaJca ) , Anustubh, and Old Anjd 198 Some of them are prose, 
e.g. suttas (6.6—8, 10) and (8.1, 3-^4). The uddna in sutta (3.10), which is found 
elsewhere, 199 is a mixture of prose and verse, some of the latter being prose 
which has been forced into verse form. 


m Sp 28, 18-19. 

193 XJd-a 3, 23-28. 

194 Ud-a 3, 12. 

195 Vin I 1 — 3. 

196 It occurs at A IV 354 — 58. 

197 Ud-a 5, 16 — 17. 

198 Ud 15, 1—5. See Alsdorf, AS, pp. 18—19. 

199 = Pet 26, 9—27, 4 = Nett 156, 22—157, 14. For the better readings of these 
versions see Bhikkhu Nanamolj, The Guide, PTS London, 1962, p. 207 n, 843/1—6, 



62 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


3.5.4. Itivuttaka 200 

The Itivuttaka presumably takes its name from the opening words of each 
sutta: vuttam h’ etarn Bhagavatd , 201 The text is stated by Buddhaghosa to be the 
work of that name included in the nine-fold classification of the canon. 202 It is, 
however, likely that as in the case of the Udana, itivuttaka is simply a general 
term, and the text we possess is only one example of the type. The name appears 
in the form Itivrttaka in the Sanskrit lists, but this would appear to be an in- 
correct back-formation. 203 

The Itivuttaka consists of 112 suttas arranged in four nipatas , sub-divided 
into vaggas, and is written in a mixture of prose and verse. The prose is not 
intended as a narrative, giving the circumstances in which the verse was 
uttered, as in the case of the Udana, but the prose and verse complement one 
another, so that the same idea, whether in the form of doctrine or admonition, 
is presented partly in prose and partly in verse. It seems likely that the prose 
passages are, in fact, explanations of the verses, despite the fact that they 
precede them. Sometimes only a single verse of a set has a prose counterpart, 
with nothing in the prose corresponding to the other verses. In many cases the 
prose acid verse treat the same subject, but one is a supplement to the other. 
Occasionally the link between the two is very weak, e.g. in sutta (92 = 3.5.3) 
the verse states that the man who is full of lust ( ejd ) is far removed from one 
free from lust, whereas the prose tells of a man who might be near to the Buddha 
physically but far removed morally, and vice versa. The reason for the juxta- 
position of prose and verse seems to be nothing more than the verbal similarity 
based upon “near” and “far.” 204 The prose of sutta (93 — 3.5.4) consists of the 
statement that there are three fires, i. e. those of lust, hate and delusion. The 
seven verses of the sutta constitute a short poem about those who by extin- 
guishing the fires gain release from rebirth. 

Like the Anguttara-nikaya, the Itivuttaka is arranged on the nipdta system, 
with items arranged numerically from one to four. It is not surprising that 
there are some parallels with both the Anguttara-nikaya and the Puggala- 
pannatti, which is also arranged on the same system. This is particularly so of 
the short fourth nipdta, which has only 13 suttas of which seven are identical 
with suttas in the catuttha-nipdta of the Anguttara-nikaya, 205 and one is similar 

200 Ed. E. Windisch, PTS London, 1889. Tr. J. H. Moore, Iti-vuttaka or 
Sayings of Buddha, New York 1908; F. L. Woodward, Itivuttaka: as it was said, 
SBB London, 1948; (German) K. Seidenstucker, Leipzig 1922. 

201 The phrase appears at the beginning and end of every sutta until 79 ( = 3.3.10). 
Thereafter it appears only intermittently. That not all sayings were uttered by the 
Buddha can be deduced from the fact that the last sutta (112 = 4.13) refers to the 
Buddha in both the third and second persons. 

202 Sp 28, 20—21. 

20 s See p. 16 above, and BHS Dictionary, s.v. itivrttaka. 

2<u Such phenomena imply the work of a redactor, and not a very clever one. 

205 4.2 = A II 27; 4.6 = A II 10; 4.7 = A I 132 = II 70; 4.9 = A II 26; 4.11 
— A II 13; 4.12 = A II 15; 4.13 = A II 24. 



The Pali Canon 


63 


to a section of the Puggalapannatti. 200 Some of the sultas do not really fit into 
the nipdta pattern, e.g. the verse in sutta (78 = 3.3.9) tells of the danger of 
the energetic consorting with the slothful, and has no reference to the number 
three. The prose is somewhat inappropriate, since it tells of like meeting with 
like, but its position in the tika-nipata is justified by the inclusion of the triad 
past, present, and future. The first sutta of the catukka-nipdta (100 = 4.1) 
lists four groups of two (dandni, samvibhdgd, anuggaha, and yaga). The verse 
includes a mention of the dhamma-yaga. 

The fact that a large proportion of the fourth nipdta seems to have been 
borrowed from elsewhere in the canon has led to the suggestion 207 that the 
nipdta as a whole is a later addition to the text. This suggestion is supported 
by the Chinese version 208 of the Itivuttaka, which was presumably translated 
from a Sanskrit or Prakrit original. 200 In this, the fourth nipdta is completely 
lacking, while a number of suttas found in the third nipdta of the Pali version 
do not occur. The origin of the Chinese version would seem to belong to the 
Sarvastivadin school. 210 


3.5.5. Suttanipata 

The Suttanipata 211 consists of 1,149 verses, with some prose passages, ar- 
ranged in five vaggas. There is evidence for believing that the text is a com- 
pilation of material from different sources, and some of its contents can claim 
to be among the oldest Buddhist poetry known to us. 212 The last two vaggas , 
the Atthakavagga and the Parayanavagga, are mentioned by name in other 
Pali canonical texts 213 and in Sanskrit texts, and the quotations which are given 
from them coincide with the text as we have it now. This does not, of course, 
prove that the whole text existed in its present form at the time of the Buddha. 
The great age of the two vaggas is also supported by the fact that a commentary 
upon them, the Niddesa, was composed at a sufficiently early date for it to be 


206 With 4.5 cf. Pp 54. 

*0? See F. L. Woodward, It tr., p. ix. 

208 See K. Wat an abe, “A Chinese collection of Itivuttakas,” in JPTS 1906 — 
1907, pp. 44—49. 

209 Watanabe states, op. cit. (in n. 208), p. 45, that the original of the Chinese 
translation was a Sanskrit text, because the texts brought to China were alleged to 
be “in the Fan language.” “Fan,” however, means “Indian (language)” and may 
refer either to Sanskrit or Prakrit. See K. R. Norman, “The role of Pali in early 
Sinhalese Buddhism,” in Bechert, BCSRS, p. 39. 

210 See Watanabe, op. cit. (in n. 208), p. 49. 

211 Ed. V. Fattsboll, PTS London, 1884; Dines Andersen and Helmer Smith, 
PTS London, 1913. Tr. V. Fausboll, The Sutta-nipata, London 1881 (SBE 10.2) ; 
Lord Chalmers, Buddha’s Teachings, Harvard 1932; E. M. Hare, Woven Cadences 
of early Buddhists, SBB London, 1945; (German) Nyanaponika, Konstanz 1955. 

2 1 2 See Warder, PM, § 303. 

See pp. 67 and 69 below. 



64 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


included in the canon. A number of individual suttas from other vaggas are 
found in Sanskrit texts of other traditions, suggesting that the suttas are old 
enough to pre-date the schisms between the sects. 

The fact that the Niddesa deals with two vaggas and one independent sutta, 
and the separate existence of individual suttas in other traditions, suggest that 
at the time of the compilation of the Niddesa, and even later, not only were 
the vaggas still regarded as independent works, but so too were the suttas. It is, 
however, unwise to press this too far. At the time of the composition of the 
Chinese translations, which must have been long after the formation of the 
Theravadin canon, the vaggas were still separate in the tradition from which 
the Chinese made their translation, since it seems that only the Atthakavagga 
has a Chinese counterpart. 214 

The Uragavagga begins with the Uragasutta, a short poem in the Aupacchan- 
dasaka metre, in which a bhikkhu ridding himself of worldly emotions is likened 
to a snake casting its slough, a simile which serves as a recurring refrain. 215 
That this was originally a separate text is shown by the fact that in other tradi- 
tions it is found as a part of the equivalent of the Dhammapada. 216 Linguistic 
differences between it and the other suttas of the vagga can also be seen. 217 The 
second sutta is a conversation between the herdsman Dhaniya and the Buddha, 
in which the two speakers, in alternate Vaitdliyal Aupacchandasaka verses, 218 
contrast the domestic and ascetic life. Of considerable interest are hypermetric 
insertions into each verse (iti Dhaniyo gopo, iti Bhagava) which make the 
identity of each speaker clear. These are probably to be regarded as reciter’s 
remarks, which have been incorporated into the text. Their age is shown by 
the fact that comparable instructions in the Atthakavagga and Parayanavagga 
are commented upon in the Niddesa, and must therefore pre-date the com- 
position of that text. The later commentary upon the Suttanipata, the Para- 
matthajotika II, states that these insertions are due to the sangltikdras . 219 

The third sutta of the vagga is the Khaggavisanasutta, a set of 41 verses 
extolling the life of a wanderer, of which all but one have the refrain “He should 
wander alone, like a rhinoceros horn.” 220 The sutta itself gives no indication of 

214 See M. Aitesaki, “Sutta-nipata in Chinese,” in JPTS 1906—1907, pp. 50—51. 
Winternitz (HIL, p. 92 n. 3) states that the Parayanavagga also occurs in the 
Chinese Tipitaka, whereas Anesaki mentions only quotations from it there. 

218 So bhikkhu jahdti orapdram urago jirmam iva tacam puranam (Sn 1—17). 

216 It, or much of it, occurs as a separate varga in Udana-v, G Dhp (in Bhiksu- 
varga), and P Dhp (in an unnamed varga which is not the Bhiksuvarga). In Udana-v, 
part is in the Bhiksuvarga, but the flower verses are in the Puspavarga. 

217 Brough has pointed out (G Dhp, p. 200) that the Uragasutta contains nine 
compound verbs forming their absolutives in -tvd. In the other eleven suttas of the 
vagga there is only one further example, viz. virajetvd in 139 and 171. 

*1® The verses fall into pairs, with the Buddha making a punning reply to Dhaniya 
in the second verse of each pair. The fact that verses 20 and 21 seem unconnected 
suggests that two verses have been lost from the sutta. 

219 “ iti Satdgiro” ti ddi sangttikdrehi [vuttam] (Pj II 193, 27 — 28). 

220 Eko care Tchaggavisdnalcappo (Sn 35 — 44, 46 — 75). The Niddesa makes it clear 



The Pali Canon 


65 


the speaker(s) of these verses, but the Niddesa, which also comments upon this 
sutta as well as the last two vaggas, states that they were uttered by pacceka- 
buddhas , 221 and when the verses recur in the later canonical Apadana they are 
attributed to the same class of speaker. 222 Although the idea of the paccelca- 
buddha is probably a late introduction into Buddhism, 223 the early date of the 
composition of these verses is shown by the inclusion of a commentary upon 
them in the Niddesa, and by the fact that a version of them appears in the 
Mahavastu, where they are said to have been uttered by pratyekabuddhas . 224 

A number of suttas in this and other vaggas contain passages of prose, often 
as an introduction to the verses, setting the scene in which they were first 
spoken, but sometimes they are interspersed with the verses, and sometimes 
serve as a conclusion to the sutta. For the most part these prose passages give 
the impression of being later additions, 225 although in some cases the addition 
must have been made at an early date, for the Niddesa comments upon the 
portion of prose in the Parayanavagga. The Paramatthajotika ascribes it to 
the sangltikaras. 226 In a few cases, however, some of the verses are scarely in- 
telligible without the help given by the prose passages, and we may assume 
that from the very earliest days of Buddhism such verses had to be explained 
by their reciters, and the prose which we have now is doubtless a refinement of 
the impromptu comments which were made to audiences who needed help to 
understand them. 

A number of the suttas in this vagga are dialogues in which someone questions 
the Buddha and is converted as a result of his replies. The Parabhavasutta (6) 
tells of a devdta asking about the things by which a man loses and by which he 
gains in the world; the Hemavatasutta (9) tells of two yakkhas who talk to- 
gether about the qualities of the Buddha, and then visit him to put their 
questions personally; in the Alavakasutta (10) another yakkha is converted as 
a result of the Buddha’s answers. In the Mettasutta (8) the virtues of a peaceful 
mind and goodwill are set forth in the Old Aryd metre, 227 which is a clear sign 
of antiquity. As already seen, this sutta is part of the Khuddakapatha. 228 


that the comparison is with the horn of the rhinoceros: yathd khaggassa namci 
visanam ekam hoti adutiyam, evam eva so paccelcasambuddho takkappo tassadiso 
tappatibhago (Nidd II [Ne] 248, 6 — 8). Doubtlessly the singularity of the fact that 
the Indian rhinoceros, of all the horned animals known to the Indians, had only 
one horn, impressed them and resulted in its use as an example of “one-ness.” 

221 Ten' aha so paccekasambuddho (Nidd II [Ne] 248, 15). 

222 Paccekabuddhehi jinehi vutta gdtha (Ap 14, 1—2). 

222 See p. 48 above. 

22 <i Sarvd khadgavisanagatha vistarena kartavya. pamcandm pratyekabuddha- 
§atan& m eka-eka gatha (Mvu I 359, 16 — 17). 

22 & See the discussion of the prose passages in Pande, SOB, pp. 52—53. 

22 6 Ito param sangitikdra desanam thomenta “ idam avoca Bhagava,” ti adim ahamsu 
(Pj II 603, 28—29 ad Sn p. 218). 

in See Alsdorf, AS, pp. 15—16. 

22 s See p. 58 above. 



66 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


The first sutta of the Culavagga is the Ratanasutta, which explains that sal- 
vation is to he obtained only through the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the 
Sangha. It too is in the Khuddakapatha, as is also the Mahamangalasutta 
(2.4). 229 A number of suttas are attacks upon the brahman caste. The Brah- 
manadhammikasutta (2.7) tells of an ideal society, along Buddhist lines, with- 
out wealth and sacrifices, and wins brahmans over to Buddhism by explaining 
that this ideal state once existed in the past, and was peopled by brahmans who 
followed the practices which the Buddha advocates. A number of suttas are 
composed in the Tristubh or mixed Tristubh l Jagati metre, which is found pre- 
dominantly in the oldest stratum of Pali verse. 230 Among these suttas is the 
Navasutta (2.8), in which the good teacher is likened to a skilful man who is 
able to help people across the stream (of samsara) in his boat. 

A man should honour one from whom he can learn the doctrine, just as the 
devatds honour Inda. Being well-disposed and learned, he reveals the doctrine 
when he is honoured. 

If anyone cultivates such a man carefully, making it his aim and listening 
attentively, entering upon the doctrine and what conforms with the doctrine, 
he becomes wise, understanding, intelligent, and subtle. 

But consorting with a poor fool, who has not learned the truth and is envious, 
one goes to one’s death, having failed to understand the doctrine clearly in this 
world, and not having overcome doubt. 

How can a man who has gone down into a river, a swift -flowing stream in 
spate, and is carried along by the stream, help others to cross ? 

In the same way, how can one who has not learned the doctrine, and has not 
listened to the explanation given by the learned ones, who is ignorant of it 
himself and has not overcome doubt, help others to realize it ? 

Just as one embarking on a stout boat, provided with oar and rudder, could 
bring many others across there, being skilful, thoughtful, and knowing the means 
thereof, 

In the same way, one who has knowledge and has developed himself, who is 
learned and unshakable, understanding it himself could make others realize it, 
if they have the ability to listen attentively. 

Therefore one should cultivate a good man who is wise and learned. Understand- 
ing the meaning, and following (the path), knowing the doctrine, one attains 
happiness. (316—23) 

The Mahavagga includes a number of suttas which contain biographical data 
about the Buddha. The Pabbajjasutta (3.1) praises the ascetic’s life, and 
gives a description of the way in which King Bimbisara of Magadha tried to 
tempt the Buddha with wealth. The Padhanasutta (3.2) tells of the exertion 
which was needed to gain enlightenment on the banks of the Neranjara, and 
leads into a dialogue with Mara. Both of these suttas occur in Sanskrit in the 
Mahavastu, 231 as does the Sabhiyasutta (3.6) in which the wanderer Sabhiya 
visits the Buddha 232 and asks him to explain the meaning of a number of terms, 

229 See p. 58 above. 

2 so See Wardee, IKL, II, pp. 28 — 29. 

231 Mvu II 198 — 99; II 238 — 40. 

282 Mvu 111,394 — 401. 



The Pali Canon 


67 


including brdhmana, samana, nhataka and bhikkhu. The Buddha answers his 
questions, in some cases by making use of “folk” etymologies. 233 The Selasutta 
(3.7) relates the story of the brahman Sela who visited the Buddha to see if he 
possessed the 32 marks of a great man. In the way in which we have already 
seen in other texts, 234 the Buddha’s supernormal power permits Sela to see the 
two marks which are normally hidden. This sutta also occurs in the Majjhima- 
nikaya 235 and, without the prose introduction, in the Theragatha, 236 which 
suggests that in this example, at least, the prose is not an original part of the 
sutta. The prose introduction of the Kokaliyasutta (3.10), however, makes the 
meaning of some of the verses clear, and it is probable that some such com- 
mentarial passage was needed, and therefore probably existed, from the time 
of the composition of the sutta™ 

The Nalakasutta (3.11) tells of the descent of the sage Asita from the Tusita 
heaven to see the newly-born Buddha. He takes the child in his arms and pro- 
phesies its future greatness. This portion of the sutta is entitled the vatthu- 
gdthd . 238 The remainder of the sutta consists of a description of the highest 
state, that of wisdom, given by the Buddha to Nalaka, Asita’s nephew. As it 
stands, the sutta is a combination of two separate parts, and this view is sup- 
ported by the fact that the episodes of Asita meeting the young Gotama and 
Nalaka questioning the Buddha are quite separate in the Mahavastu. 239 The 
vatthugdthds in this sutta are composed partly in the TristubhlJagati metre and 
partly in an extended version of the Tristubh with a redundant long syllable 
resolved into two short syllables. 240 This metre occurs in the Mahavastu, but 
not in the Asita episode, which suggests that these biographical details are 
taken from a common store of history and legend concerning the Buddha, but 
are not closely related. The Dvayatanupassanasutta (3.12) deals with a series 
of pairs ( dvayatds), of which dukkha is always the second, and explains how the 
pairs are causally linked, the second element arising from the first. It has been 
suggested that the paticcasamuppdda system is only a recast of this “primitive 
fragment of Abhidhamma ,” 241 

The fourth vagga is the Atthakavagga. The fact that it is an early text is 
shown by its mention by name in other Pali canonical texts, and in Sanskrit 

233 See K. R. Norman, “Four etymologies from the Sabhiya-sutta,” in Bala- 
sooriya, BSWR, pp. 173—84. 

234 See pp. 34 and 47 above. 

233 M II 146, where the Ee merely refers to Sn. 

233 Th 818—41. 

237 It is interesting to note that there appears to be an interpolation in the 
verses, for the commentator notes that there was no old commentary upon Sn 
677—78 : avasdne gathadvayam eva pana Mahd-atthakaihdyam vinicchitapdthe n’ atthi 
(Pj II 477, 13-14). 

asa Sn 679 — 98. 

239 Mvu II 31—43; III 382—89. 

24 <) See Warder, PM, p. 213 n. 2. 

mi See L. de La Valeee Poussin, rev. of Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Dukap, I, 
in JRAS 1907, p. 453. 



68 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


texts belonging to other traditions. 242 The name is Sanskritised as either Artha- 
vargiya or Asta varga, 243 and although arguments can be produced for following 
either form, the existence of four suttas in the vagga with the term atthakasutta 
in their titles (3.2—5), each containing eight verses, suggests that the vagga was 
called after the suttas, as frequently happens, 244 and is correctly Sanskritised 
as Astaka varga. In view of the fact that many of the suttas in other vaggas are 
found elsewhere in the canon, it is perhaps remarkable that none of the suttas 
in the Atthakavagga is found elsewhere in Pali. The reason is, perhaps, that 
the vagga was regarded as a closed body of suttas very early in the history of 
Buddhism, as is shown by the fact that it is already in the Udana 245 described as 
having sixteen suttas, which led to its obtaining a status of being original and 
indivisible. It seems that it is the only vagga to have been translated into 
Chinese, 246 which presumably means that it was the only vagga found in the 
canon from which the Chinese translation was made. The only fragments which 
have been published from Turkestan corresponding to any portion of the 
Suttanipata also belong to this vagga. 2i 7 They presumably belong to the Sar- 
vastivadin canon. 

There are other indications that the vagga is old. As already noted, 248 a com- 
mentary upon it, entitled the Niddesa, is regarded as canonical. The Tuvataka- 
sutta (4.14) is in the Old Aryd metre, 249 which is found only in a few very old 
texts. From the number of variant readings which are mentioned and com- 
mented upon in the Niddesa 250 it would seem that the vagga had already had a 
long history of tradition and development by the time of the Niddesa’s com- 
position. The suttas have no prose introductions, although they are found in 
the Sanskrit and Chinese versions. 251 Those found there do not, however, agree 
with the uppattis which are given in the Paramatthajotika, which indicates 


242 Sabbdn ’ eva atthakavaggikdni sarena abhdsi (V in I 196, 36); solasa atthaka- 
vaggikdni sabbdn' eva sarena abhani (Ud 59, 23). It is referred to by name at S III 
9, 19 = 12, 20, where Sn 844 is quoted from the Magandiyasutta. See also Kogen 
MizuNO, “Dharmapadas of various Buddhist schools,” in Narain, SPB, pp. 261 — 62. 

243 gee Pande, SOB, pp. 53—54. 

24i Just as the Uraga vagga is called after its first sutta, the Uragasutta. 

245 Ud 59, 23. 

24« See p. 64 above. 

247 See A. F. Rudolf Hoernle, “The Sutta Nipata in a Sanskrit version from 
Eastern Turkestan,” in JRAS 1916, pp. 709 — 32 and JRAS 1917, p. 134. Frag- 
ments from the Sanskrit Parayanasutra are, however, listed in E. Waldschmidt, 
Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden, IV, 1980, pp. 236-38. Verses 
from a Sanskrit equivalent of the Suttanipata are quoted in the Abhidharmakosa 
and the Bodhisattvabhumi, as noted by S. Levi, “Sur la recitation primitive des 
textes bouddhiques,” in JA 1915, p. 414. 

248 See p. 63 above. 

249 See Alsdorf, AS, pp. 16—18. 

250 See p. 85 below. 

251 See Hoernle, JRAS 1916, pp. 718—19 and P. V. Bapat, The Arthapada 
Sutra, Santiniketan 1951. 



The Pali Canon 


69 


that such introductory stories are of later, independent, composition. Neither 
the Niddesa nor the Paramatthajotika includes any comment upon verse 836, 
which suggests that it is a later interpolation. 

Several suttas in the vagga warn the bhikkhu against sensual pleasures. The 
uselessness of philosophical systems is pointed out, and it is emphasised that 
purity is not gained by disputation. The ideal muni is described, 252 and the 
duties of a bhikkhu are enumerated. The Tissametteyyasutta (4.7) warns of the 
dangers of sexual intercourse, and the Magandiyasutta (4.9) tells how the Bud- 
dha rejected Magandiya’s daughter when she was offered as his wife. The 
philosophical speculation which is attacked seems to be of a very general 
nature, and there is an absence of deep philosophical concepts, which tends to 
confirm the early date of the vagga. 

The Parayana vagga begins with 56 vatthugathas 253 which tell of the brahman 
Bavari sending his sixteen followers to the Buddha. There follow the sixteen 
questions they put to the Buddha, and the final section of the vagga tells how 
the sixteen resolved to stay with the Buddha. The vatthugathas are not com- 
mented upon by the Niddesa, which means that either they did not exist when 
the Niddesa was composed or, if they did exist, they were not yet regarded as 
canonical. The Paramatthajotika ascribes them to Ananda. 254 The concluding 
section, including a prose passage, is commented upon by the Niddesa. The 
Paramatthajotika attributes it to the sahgitikaras 2bb 

The sixteen questions ( pucchas ) are of a more metaphysical nature than the 
suttas of the Atthaka vagga, and are concerned with the crossing of the stream, 
and the escape from birth and death, which accounts for the title of the vagga , 256 
It is not surprising, considering the nature of the vagga, that individual portions 
of it do not occur elsewhere in the canon. Its antiquity is shown by the fact 
that five verses are quoted from the Parayanavagga in the Pah canon, each 
time being specifically attributed to a particular question (pahha) in the 
vagga . 257 Despite its age, there are indications that it has been made up from 
earlier sections. If it had been composed as a single entity, one might have 
expected the metre to be standard throughout, but this is not so. Some sec- 
tions are in the TristubhjJagati metre, and some are written entirely in the 
Anustubh metre. Some are in a mixture of the two, and in the case of the Punna- 
kamanavapuccha (5.4) interpolations have crept in to such an extent that it is 

252 Th e Munisutta (Sn 207 — 21) is probably the Munigatha recommended for 
study by Asoka. See Winternitz, HIL, p. 607. 

253 Sn 976—1031. 

254 Tam attham gahetvd dyasma Anando sahgitikdle Pdrdyanavaggassa niddnam 
dropento imd gdthdyo abhdsi (Pj II 580, 29—30). 

255 Ito param sangitikara desanam thomenta “ idam avoca Bhagava ” ti ddi dhamsu 
(Pj II 603, 28—29). 

256 Mag go so parang amandy a, tasma Pdrdyanam (Sn 1130). 

257 Sn 1038 (Ajitapanha) at S II 47, 1 1 ; 1042 (Metteyyapanlia) at A III 399, 22 = 
401, 24; 1048 (Punnakapanha) at A I 133, 6 = II 45, 35; 1106 — 7 (Udayapanha) 
at A I 134, 9. 



70 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


not easy to decide what the original readings might have been. 258 The “reciter’s 
remarks” which have been inserted in each puccha to make the identity of the 
speakers clear are commented upon by the Niddesa, which means that they 
must have been added at an early date. 

Even in the vaggas and suttas which are not commented upon in the Niddesa 
there are metrical and linguistic features which are generally reckoned to be 
old. 259 Although it is not easy to date such phenomena, there seems little doubt 
that the Suttanipata contains some of the oldest Pah verse which we possess. 


3.5.6. Vimanavatthu 

The Vimanavatthu 26 ' 0 consists of 83 stories in seven vaggas, describing the 
grandeur of the heavenly abodes (vimanas) enjoyed by those who have been 
reborn as devas as a reward for meritorious actions done during their births as 
human beings. The stories all follow the same pattern, in which a deva is asked 
by Moggallana the reason for his enjoying the vimana in which he dwells, and 
the deva thereupon relates his previous good conduct. The stories are doubtless 
intended for laymen, to induce them to live a good life by promising rebirth as 
a deva as a reward. The text is probably a late addition to the canon, and re- 
presents a period when the doctrine of kamma had come to be represented as a 
simple deed-and-reward mechanism. 

The metre 261 and style of these stories, in general, merit little attention, and 
most scholars agree that as we have it the Vimanavatthu must be one of the 
latest texts to be admitted to the canon. There is, however, no reason to doubt 
that the style of story is old. The existence of the Kanthakasya vyakarana in 
the Mahavastu 262 which corresponds closely with the Kanthakavimanavatthu 
(7.7) indicates a date of origin prior to the split between the sects. There was 
also in the Sarvastivadin Ksudrakagama a text known as the Vimana vadana, 
which may, on the strength of the fragment of that text which has been 
published, 263 be assumed to have been a collection of the same character as the 
Vimanavatthu, and also based upon the same concept of punishment and re- 
ward, which must therefore have been older than the two works. 


ass yy. B. Bollee, The padas of the Suttanipata (Studien zur Indologie und 
Iranistik, Monographie 7), Reinbeck 1980, p. 33, queries whether khattiya brahmana 
devatdnam yannam at Sn 1043 — 45 is metrical. 

259 See N. A. Jayawickbama, A critical analysis of the Pali Sutta Nipata illustrat- 
ing its gradual growth, Ph.D. dissertation London, published in parts in the Uni- 
versity of Ceylon Review, January 1948— April 1951 (Vol. VI No. 1— Vol. IX No. 2). 

2 «» Ed. E. R. Gooneratne, PTS London 1886; N. A. Jayawickrama, PTS Lon- 
don, 1977 ; tr. J. Kennedy, SBB London, 1942; I. B. Horner, SBB London, 1974. 

There are no verses in ganacchandas metres, and those in matracchandas 
metres are probably late. See Warder, PM, § 193. 

262 Mvu II 191—95. 

268 See H. Bechert, “On a fragment of Vimanavadana, a canonical Buddhist 
Sanskrit work,” in Cousins, BSIBH, pp. 19—25. 



The Pali Canon 


71 


Despite the fact that the stories in their present form are not likely to be 
very old, there are nevertheless signs that some of the stories may be older 
than the rest, for three of them contain verses in the Aryd metre. 264 The fact 
that this metre went out of use in Pali literature at an early date means that 
anything composed in it must be presumed to be comparatively early. There 
are, moreover, indications that the Vimanavatthu has been subject to a long 
history of development, during which time it was enlarged by late additions 
and the re-arrangement of material from other texts, especially the Jataka 
collection, from which a number of verses have been borrowed. 265 

3.5.7. Petavatthu 

The Petavatthu 266 consists of 51 stories in four vaggas, which tell the stories 
of the departed ones ( petas ) who are suffering because of the bad actions they 
have committed during their previous existence. As in the case of the Vimana- 
vatthu, the work seems to have been intended for laymen, to warn them against 
bad behaviour. 

The pattern of most stories is similar. A bhikkhu sees someone suffering in some 
way and asks the reason, and the pda explains the wicked deed which has led 
to the present predicament. Some of the verses, however, seem to have been 
included in the collection simply because they include the word pda. The first 
vatthu (story) is the “Field-simile” (Khettupamapetavatthu), which states that 
honouring arahants and petas is like planting seeds in a field. In due course one 
will receive the due reward (phala). The Samsaramocakapetavatthu (2.1) 
seems to be a mixture of a pda story with a vimana story. A woman who was 
suffering because of her evil deeds then received the reward of a generous 
action by the thera Sariputta which was transferred to her. She was thereby 
released from her suffering. 

There can be little doubt that in its present form the Petavatthu is a late 
composition. The Nandakapeta vatthu (4.3) mentions Pingalaka as the name 
of a king of Surattha. Dhammapala informs us 267 that Pingala lived during the 
reign of Dhammasoka 200 years after the Buddha’s nibbdna. The date of com- 
position would, therefore, be comparable to that of some of the gdthas in the 
Theragatha and Therigatha collections, whose authors were also said to have 
lived at that time. 


264 See Alsdorf, AS, pp. 80—88. 

265 E.g. Guttilavimana (33) includes the two verses of the Guttilajataka (Ja II 
252), which in turn refers to the Vv in its prose story and quotes from it. The 
Agariyavimanavatthu (65), the Dutiya-agariyavimanavatthu (66), and the Seris- 
saka vimanavatthu (84) include verses which occur in the Vidhurapanditajataka. 

2 <*« Ed. J. Minayeff, PTS London, 1888; N. A. Jayawickrama, PTS London, 
1977 ; tr. H. S. Gehman, SBB London, 1942. 

2 « 7 Satthu parinibbdnato vassasatadvayassa accayena Suratthavisaye Pingalo ndma 
raja ahosi (Pv-a 244, 15 — 16). 



72 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


As in the case of the Vimanavatthu, there are parallels with the Jataka col- 
lection, 268 and there must have been a period of development, during which 
time enlargement of some of the stories took place. The existence of a text 
named Pretavadana in the Ksudrakagama of the Sarvastivadin canon sug- 
gests that that sect had a text comparable to the Petavatthu, and fragments 
of it have been discovered. 269 

As already noted, the Tirokuddapetavatthu (1.5) has been borrowed by the 
Khuddakapatha . 


3.5.8. Theragatha 

The Theragatha 270 is a collection of 1279 verses, arranged in poems, ascribed 
to 264 theras who, for the most part, lived during the lifetime of the Buddha or 
shortly afterwards. The poems are arranged in nipatas according to the number 
of verses which they contain, e.g. all the poems of one verse are in the eka- 
nipdta and so on. For the visati-nipata and thereafter the nipdta number gives 
only a rough guide to the number of verses which the poems contain. 

Within the nipatas there is no obvious arrangement, but certain patterns are 
apparent, 271 as verses are linked together by subject, or refrain, or by “catch- 
word,” e.g. Th 55—60 have the common theme of kuti(kd). Sometimes verses 
are placed together because of some relationship between the authors, either of 
name or family, e.g. Th 11 is by Cula-gavaccha and Th 12 by Maha-gavaccha ; 
Th 107 by Dhammasava and Th 108 by his father. Doubtless this is a reflection 
of the way in which the collection was made. Verses were recited by the 
sahgitikdras as they remembered them, and the recitation of one verse prompted 
the memory of another. 

Not all verses were in fact recited by the thera to whom they are attributed. 
Sometimes they were addressed to him, or are about him, but they became 
“his” by virtue of the fact that they were connected with his name in the 
tradition. Sometimes verses ascribed to one and the same thera occur in two 
places; 272 sometimes verses under his own name are in one place, and those ut- 

298 The first and last half-verses of the Kutavinicchayikapetavatthu (34 = 
III. 9) are to be compared with verses 28 and 32 of the Kimchandajataka (511 = 
Ja V 9—10). The Kanhapetavatthu (18 = II. 6) closely resembles the Ghatajataka 
(454 = Ja IV 84 — 87). The verses of the Uraga petavatthu (12 = 1.12) are the same 
as those of the Uragajataka (354 = Ja III 164—67). The verses of the Gonapeta- 
vatthu (1.8) closely resemble those of the Sujatajataka (352 = Ja III 156 — 57). 

299 See H. Bechert, op. cit. (in n. 263), pp. 19—20 and E. Waldschmidt, 
Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden, IV, 1980, pp. 227-33. 

270 Ed. H. Oldenberg, PTS London, 1883; 2nd edition with appendices by 
K. R. Norman and L. Alsdorf, PTS London, 1966. Tr. C. A. F. Rhys Davids, 
Psalms of the Brethren, PTS London, 1913; K. R. Norman, Elders’ Verses I, PTS 
London, 1969; (German) K. E. Neumann, Die Lieder der Monche und Nonnen 
Gotamo Buddhos, Berlin 1899. 

See Norman, EV I, pp. xxiii — xxv. 

272 E.g. there are verses ascribed to Kimbila at Th 118 and 155 — 56. 



The Pali Canon 


73 


tered under a nickname are elsewhere. 273 Sometimes the verses are collections 
in themselves, e.g. Ananda’s verses are said by the commentator 274 to have been 
uttered on several occasions, and include verses spoken to him as well as verses 
recited by him. Some verses in the poems are clearly additions, in that they 
explain the circumstances in which the verses were uttered, or link various 
parts of the poems together. This fact was recognised by the commentator, 
who explains that these verses were added by the sangltikaras , 275 Certain de- 
fects in the collection are also probably to be attributed to the sangltikaras . It 
would seem that Sumahgala’s verse (43) should not have been in the eka-nipdta, 
since it is really two ganacchandas verses, 276 but the compilers seem not to have 
recognised this. Vaddha’s verses (335—39) seem at one time to have been a 
whole with his mother’s verses in the Therlgatha, 277 and the compilers would 
appear to have divided what was originally a single poem into two parts in an 
entirely arbitrary way. 

There are also, as in the Suttanipata, certain hyper -metrical phrases inserted 
into some narrative-style poems, e.g. iti Selo brahmano , 278 which are perhaps 
also to be ascribed to the sangltikaras, or perhaps to early reciters, as remarks 
intended to make the identity of the characters in the narrative clear to the 
audience. It is possible, and Dhammapala asserts in his commentary, 279 that the 
sangltikaras concerned were those at the first council, immediately after the 
death of the Buddha. The same commentator, however, states that Sambhuta 
uttered his verses at the time of the second council, 280 while Tekiccakani’s 
verses were recited at the third council. 281 If Vitasoka and Ekavihariya 
were Asoka’s brothers, as Dhammapala states, 282 then their verses must also 
be dated to the time of the third council. 

Some of the verses found in the Theragatha occur elsewhere, attributed to 
the same thera, e.g. Vahglsa, 283 but in a slightly different form. This is perhaps 
due to the fact that the same thera might possibly utter his verses, in slightly 

273 E.g. Revata’s verses are at Th 645—58; Th 42 is also ascribed to him under 
his nickname of Khadiravaniya. 

274 Tattha tattha bhikkhunam ovada-dana-vasena attano patipatti-dipanadi-vasena 
ca bhdsita-gathd ekajjham katvd, anukkamena Khuddaka-nikdyam sahgayana-kdle 
Theragdthdsu sahgitim dropento (Th-a III 113, 7 — 10). 

273 Ayam sahgitikdrehi vuttagdtha (Th-a III 14, 6 ad Th 720). 

27 « See Norman, EY I, p. 132. 

« 77 Thi 204—12. See Norman, EV I, p. 183. 

273 Th 825. 

272 Ayam pathama-mahdsahgiti-kale dyasmatd Anandena tesam theranam thoma- 
nattham bhdsitd gathd adi (Th-a I 4, 18 — 19). 

280 Vassa-sata-parinibbute Bhagavati, Vesalikesu V ajji-puttakesu dasa-vatthuni 
paggayha thitesu . . . thero . . . imd gatha bhananto ahharn vydkdsi (Th-a II 123, 5 — 19). 

2 »i Ettha ca Bindusdrarahho kale imassa therassa uppannattd tatiya-sahgltiyam 
imd gdthd sahgltd ti veditabbam (Th-a II 165, 32 — 33). 

232 [Vitasoka] Dhammasoka-rahho kanittha-bhatd hutvd nibbatti (Th-a II 45, 9) ; 
[Ekavihariya] Dhammasoka-rahho kanittha-bhatd hutvd nibbatti (Th-a II 227, 27 — 
28). See Norman, EV I, p. xxvii. 

283 With Th 1209—79 cf. S I 185—96. 



74 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


different ways, on a number of occasions. Different schools of bhdnakas might 
remember different versions of the verses, and the independence of the schools 
prevented one version being “corrected” in the light of another version. A 
number of the verses occur elsewhere in Pali literature as the verses of other 
theras. This shows nothing more than the absence in ancient times of a law of 
copyright, and anyone could repeat any verse, which then became “his” verse 
if it was remembered in connection with his name. Even in the Theragatha 
there are identical verses ascribed to two different theras , while the number of 
padas, or even lines, which are held in common merely emphasises that anyone 
who wanted to become a poet could do so simply by stringing together verses 
from the storehouse of floating padas. There are also verses found elsewhere, 
particularly in the Milindapanha, which are not included in the Theragatha 
collection. 284 This shows that the original collectors were quite capable of 
failing to remember all the verses which existed, and also that, once the collec- 
tion had been closed, no new additions w r ere made to it. There is, however, a 
certain amount of confusion about the number of verses which the collection 
should contain, for the uddana at the end of the text states that it contains 
1,360 verses, 285 while the total obtained by adding together the numbers in the 
uddanas to each nipdta is 1,294. The total in the text as w e have it is, as already 
stated, 1,279. Whether these uddana figures are based upon a different recension 
from that which we possess, or whether they are simply incorrect, is not yet 
clear. In favour of the latter suggestion is the fact that the uddana to the catuk- 
ka-nipata states that there are 13 theras ’ verses in the nipdta, while in fact there 
are only 12 names listed in the uddana , 286 unless one counts the word bhavati 
as a name, which agree completely with the 12 names given at the end of the 
12 sets of verses in the nipdta. 

There is a wide range of metres included in the collection, the majority being 
Anustubh and Tristubh j.Jagati, but there is also a number of mdtracchandas and 
ganacchandas metres, 287 some of the latter being the Old Aryd type which went 
out of use early on in the history of Buddhism. Not only does the metre support 
the commentarial tradition in telling us that the composition of the Theragatha 
covered a long period of time, perhaps three centuries, but there are also re- 
ferences to beliefs and practices of the type which in other texts has seemed to 
point to lateness. There are references to miracles, to great congregations of 
gods, and to great rewards coming from worshipping the Buddha with a single 
lotus flower, 288 which are all reminiscent of the later Mahayana. 

Many of the verses in the Theragatha are descriptions of the thera's attempts 
to attain, and his attainment of, the peace of nibbana. Some are merely sermons 

284 See C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Psalms of the Brethren, PTS London 1913, pp. 
423 — 24. 

285 Sahassam honti td gdthd tlni safthisatdni ca (Th p. 115). 

286 Th p. 36. 

287 For a survey of the metres in Th see Norman, EV I, pp. xxxiii — xxxiv. 

288 See Th 96. 



The Pali Canon 


75 


of a general nature, while in others the description of the attainment of peace 
is coupled with a statement of personal conditions and surroundings, frequently 
giving a poetic account of the scenery in the midst of which the them is medi- 
tating. Quite often the poem consists of a secular portion, in which such de- 
scriptions of nature are given, followed by a religious section in which we learn 
of the them’s attainment of his goal. The first part of the verse is similar to 
the style found in the later Mdhdrdstri Prakrit collection attributed to Hala, 289 
although Hala’s material undoubtedly goes back to an earlier period. It seems 
likely that the genre was known to the theras who composed the verses found in 
the Theragatha, but whereas the examples found in the Sattasai have a de- 
scription of some natural phenomenon, e.g. the beginning of the rains, which 
is then linked to a secular occurrence, e.g. the absence of the traveller, the 
Theragatha verses begin with the natural phenomenon which is then linked 
with a religious experience. 290 

Spread with garlands of kareri flowers, the regions of the earth are delightful. 
Resounding with elephants those lovely rocks delight me. 

Those rocks delight me, the colour of blue clouds, beautiful, cool with water, 
having pure streams, covered with Indagopaka insects. 

Like the ridge of a blue cloud, like an excellent gabled house, resounding with 
elephants those lovely rocks delight me. 

The lovely surfaces are rained upon; the mountains are resorted to by seers. 
Made to resound by peacocks, those rocks delight me. 

It is enough for me, desiring to meditate, resolute, mindful. It is enough for me, 
a resolute bhikkhu desirous of the goal. (1062 — 66) 

Although it is probably true to say that the authors of these verses were not 
trying to be poets, but were merely aiming to give an account of their religious 
experiences in the way in which they felt was most appropriate for such a 
statement, i.e. in verse, nevertheless it is noteworthy that, together with some 
of the verse of the Dhammapada and the Suttanipata, the Theragatha and its 
companion collection the Therigatha form some of the more poetical, as opposed 
to more Buddhist, parts of the Pali canon. 

Fragments of the Sarvastivadin Sthaviragatha have been discovered in 
Turkestan and published. 291 


3.5.9. Therigatha 

The Therigatha 292 consists of 522 verses forming 73 poems, arranged in 
nipdtas. As with the Theragatha, the final udddna verse causes problems, since 

289 A. Weber (ed.), Uber das Saptasatakam des Hala, Leipzig 1881. 

290 See S. Lienhard, “Sur la structure poetique des Theratherigatha,” in JA 263, 
1975, pp. 375-96. 

291 H. Bechert, Bruchstiicke buddhistischer Yerssammlungen: 1. Die Ana- 
vataptagatha und die Sthaviragatha, Berlin 1961 (STT VI). 

292 Ed. R. Pischel, PTS London, 1883; 2nd edition with appendices by K. R. 
Norman and L. Alsdorf, PTS London, 1966. Tr, C. A. F, Rhys Davids, Psalms 



76 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


it refers to 494 verses 293 uttered by 101 therls. Since one poem is said to be by 
a group of 30 therls, it would be possible to obtain a total of about 100 therls, 
but this ignores the fact that another poem is said to have been uttered by 
500 therls. 

The nipdta system is the same as in the Theragatha, and the method of 
collection by association of ideas seems to have been very similar. 294 There are 
similar problems concerning the omission of verses and the attribution of some 
to other therls in other texts. There is also the difficulty, already mentioned, 
of the verses found in the Bhikkhunisamyutta of the Samyutta-nikaya (5), of 
which some do not appear in the Therigatha, and others are ascribed to different 
therls. We may assume that there was uncertainty in early times about the 
authors and the circumstances in which they uttered their verses, 295 with the 
result that different bhanaka-schools followed different traditions about this. 

Although some of the verses are of such a nature that it is impossible to 
tell the sex of the authors, many are indubitably by women. We read of 
mothers who are led to the Sahgha by the death of a child or husband, and of 
courtesans who give up their way of life and become bhikkhunls. One of the 
most beautiful poems in the whole collection is the lament, in Bathoddhatd 
metre, by the former courtesan Ambapali for her lost beauty. 296 

My hair was black, like the colour of bees, with curly ends ; because of old age 
it is like bark-fibres of hemp ; not otherwise is the utterance of the speaker of 
truth. 

Covered with flowers my head was fragrant like a perfumed box ; now because 
of old age it smells like a dog’s fur ; not otherwise . . . 

Formerly my breasts looked beautiful, swelling, round, close together, lofty; 
now they hang down like empty water-bags ; not otherwise . . . 

Formerly my body looked beautiful, like a well -polished sheet of gold; now it 
is covered with fine wrinkles ; not otherwise . . . 

Formerly my thighs looked beautiful, like an elephant’s trunk; because of old 
age they are like stalks of bamboo ; not otherwise . . . 

Formerly my calves looked beautiful, possessing delicate anklets, decorated 
with gold ; because of old age they are like sticks of sesame ; not otherwise . . . 

Formerly my feet looked beautiful, like (shoes) full of cotton-wool ; because of 
old age they are cracked, and wrinkled ; not otherwise . . . 

Such was this body; now it is decrepit, the abode of many pains; an old house, 
with its plaster fallen off ; not otherwise is the utterance of the speaker of truth. 
(252-53, 265-70) 

The last two poems of the collection are long compositions in the Aryd 
metre. 297 Although they contain features which might be regarded as late, the 

of the Sisters, PTS London, 1909; K. R. Norman, Elders’ Verses II, PTS London, 
1971; (German) K. E. Neumann, Die Lieder der Monche und Nonnen Gotamo 
Buddhos, Berlin 1899. 

293 Gathd satdni cattdri aslti puna cuddasa (Thi, p. 174). 

294 See Norman, EV II, p. xxiv. 

295 See p. 51 above and Norman, EV II, pp. xxvi— xxvii. 

296 Thi 252—70. 

297 S©e Alsdorf, Thi (Appendix II), pp. 233—50. 



The Pali Canon 


77 


fact that they are both in this metre, which went out of use quite early on in 
the history of Pali literature, shows that they cannot be very late. 

In the first of these two poems, 298 IsidasI tells of unhappy marriages as a 
result of wdiich she leaves home and becomes a wanderer. She gains the three 
knowledges and is able to relate the details of her last seven births and to 
explain how her unhappiness is the result of previous misconduct. Such ex- 
planations are a feature found more frequently in the Petavatthu and the 
Apadana. A similar feature appears in the second of this pair, 299 in which 
Sumedha renounces the world and goes forth on her wedding day. It is note- 
worthy that the similes she employs to illustrate the endlessness of samsdra are 
taken from a canonical text. 300 She too describes her former births, including 
one at the time of the former Buddha Konagamana, which implies the growth 
of the cult of former Buddhas by the time when this poem was composed. 
This does not, however, necessarily imply a late date of composition. As we 
have already seen, the six Buddhas who lived before Gotama are mentioned 
in both the Vinaya-pitaka and the Digha-nikaya, 301 and since Asoka records 
that he enlarged an earlier stupa dedicated to that same Buddha, 302 there is 
nothing in the poem which seems to put it outside the limit of about three 
centuries after the time of the Buddha which has already been established for 
the Theragatha. 

As in the case of the Theragatha, the quality of the poetry found in these 
poems varies greatly. Some are complete literary compositions, while others 
are merely compilations of the same types as Ananda’s verses in the Thera- 
gatha. Uppalavanna’s poem is made up of four separate episodes, as the com- 
mentary tells us, 303 and no attempt has been made to make an organic whole 
of verses uttered at different times. 


3.5.10. The Jatakas 

The Jataka 304 stories are a set of Indian fables which, as adapted by the 
Buddhists, purport to tell the previous births of Gotama Buddha before the 
final birth in which he gained enlightenment, i.e. while he was still a Bodhisatta 
(a being destined for enlightenment). In their Pali version, the Jataka stories 
consist of verses set in a prose setting. With a very few exceptions, only the 
verses are regarded as canonical. The stories are arranged in nipatas, according 
to the number of verses they contain, so that in the eka-nipdta the stories contain 

298 Thi 400—47. 

299 Thi 448—522. 

soo With Thi 496—99 cf. S II 178—93. 

301 See pp. 36 and 43 above. 

302 See E. Hultzsch, Inscriptions of Asoka, Oxford 1925, p. 165. 

3os See C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Psalms of the Sisters, PTS London, 1909, p. 115 n. 

304 Ed. V. Fatjsboll, 6 vols. London, 1877—96. Tr. T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist 
Birth Stories, London 1880; E. B. Cowell et al., The Jataka, 6 vols., London, 
1895—1907; (German) J. Dutoit, Leipzig, 1908—21, 



78 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


only one verse. In higher-numbered nipdtas the number of verses does not 
always agree with the nipdta number, while the last nipdta contains ten very 
long verse stories, and is known merely as the maha-nipdta. 

The general form in which the Jataka stories have come down to us is that 
of an incident in the present (paccuppannavatthu) which gives rise to the 
Buddha telling of an event from one of his previous births (atitavatthu) ; the 
gathds are usually embedded in the atitavatthu, but are sometimes found in the 
paccuppannavatthu; then follows the word commentary to the verses (veyya- 
karana ) , and finally the samodhdna, where the characters in the atitavatthu are 
identified with those in the circle of the Buddha’s acquaintances (Buddha- 
parisd). The samodhdna therefore properly belongs to the paccuppannavatthu . 305 
The story of the present is often all but omitted, with the words “This story 
was told about . . or with a reference to another story to be told later. 

It has been shown that the word commentary, the prose of the framework, 
and the prose of the stories are all the work of the same author, 306 and the 
question of his identity will be discussed later. Jataka, however, is one of the 
classes in the nine-fold classification 307 of the early Buddhist canon, and the 
presence elsewhere in the canon of a number of stories of the Jataka type, 
some of them almost identical with stories found in the Jataka collection, 308 
shows that the stories in which the verses are placed are sometimes of great 
antiquity. We may therefore assume that, for the most part, the commentator 
upon the Jataka collection was making use of older material, some of it already 
associated with particular verses, when he composed his stories. This view is 
supported by the fact that Jataka stories, some of them almost word for word 
identical with the Pali version, are also found in Buddhist Sanskrit texts. 309 
The background story into which the Jataka verses are inserted sometimes 
agrees with, and sometimes differs from, the corresponding Pali story, showing 
that the association of verse and prose sometimes, but not always, pre-dates 
the schism between the sects. Although the prose stories in their present form 
are so much later than the verses, it is nevertheless convenient to deal with 
both verse and prose together. 

To the Jataka collection proper is prefixed the Nidanakatha, which gives 
what is in effect a biography of the Buddha. It is in three sections: 1. The 
story of the beginning in the remote past (dureniddna) , 310 which tells the 
history of the Buddha-to-be from his existence as Sumedha during the time 
of the Buddha Dlpankara down to his re-birth in the heaven of the Tusita 


305 See Boulee, KJ, pp. v— vi. 

306 See H. Luders, Bharhut und die buddhistische Literatur, Leipzig 1941, 
p. 144. 

307 See p. 15 above. 

308 See L. Alsdorf, “The impious brahman and the pious candala,” in Cousins, 
BSIBH, pp. 9—13. 

309 See Jones, Mvu tr., II, pp. x — xi. 

8io Ja I 2 — 47. 



The Pali Canon 


79 


gods; 2. The story of the beginning in the not very remote past (avidureni- 
dana), 311 beginning with the descent from the Tusita heaven, and ending with 
the attainment of enlightenment (bodhi); 3. The story of the beginning in the 
present ( santikenidana) 3X2 relating the story from the enlightenment down to 
the donation of the Jetavanarama by the merchant Anathapindika. 

The first section is directly connected with the Buddha vamsa and Cariya- 
pitaka, from which many verses are quoted, and it is in effect a commentary 
upon extracts from these two texts. The story of Sumedha is taken directly 
from the Buddhavamsa, 313 and the striving for perfection in each birth is 
described in the Cariyapitaka, which is quoted in what seems to be a different 
recension from the text we possess. 314 The miracles which occur at the birth of 
the Buddha are those which are described as occurring at the birth of the 
Buddha Vipassin in the Mahapadanasutta of the Digha-nikaya (14) and of all 
Buddhas in the Acchariyabbhutadhammasutta of the Majjhima-nikaya (123). 
The agreement between the Nidanakatha and Buddhist Sanskrit sources 315 
about these and other details suggests that both the Pali and the Sanskrit 
traditions are based upon a common body of biographical material, both 
legendary and historical, which was in existence in North India before the 
time of the schisms. 

An analysis of the more than 500 316 Jataka stories of the Pali collection as 
we have it shows that it contains a wide variety of different types of verse 
composition. Many of them seem to be un-Buddhist in origin, and whatever 
Buddhist qualities they possess are found in the (later) prose story, and arise 
from the fact that the hero is the Bodhisatta. A number of verses, particularly 
those in the early nipatas, are intended to teach worldly wisdom (nlti) and 
refer to animal fables and fairy stories of the type found in the Sanskrit 
Pancatantra and Hitopadesa. Some of these stories are also found in Aesop’s 
fables and other European literature and the problem of their inter-dependence 
has been much discussed. 317 Representations of some of them are found in the 

m Ja I 47—77. 

Ja I 77—94. 

sis Cf. Bv II 1-188. 

3ii See Winternitz, HIL, p. 164. 

sis See Lai 83—87. 

3i6 Fausboll’s edition contains 547 Jatakas, but some of those in the Mahanipata 
contain more than one narrative, and the total number of Jataka stories is difficult 
to establish. The reference to 500 Jatakas in the Culla-niddesa is probably nothing 
more than a “round number,” and should not be taken as evidence that at the time 
of the composition of that text the Jataka collection was smaller than that we 
possess now: Bhagava panca jatakasatani bhdsanto attano ca paresam ca atltarn 
adisati (Nidd II [Ne] 173, 23). There is, however, evidence that a collection of 550 
Jatakas was known in Burma, and the names and order of the Jatakas found in 
some traditions differ from Fausboll’s edition. See G. H. Luce, “550 jataka in 
old Burma,” in Artibus Asiae, 19, 3—4, pp. 291—307, and G. Martini, “Les titres 
des jataka dans les manuscrits pali de la Bibliotheque nationale de Paris,” in 
BEFEO 51 (1963), pp. 79-93. 

817 See Winternttz, HIL, p. 126. 



80 


K. B. (Norman • Pali Literature 


reliefs on the Bharhut stupa, 318 showing that they had already become popular 
by the second century B.C. 

Other sets of Jataka verses are ballads where the verses provide a dialogue 
and the prose identifies the speakers. Some are narrative stories, where the 
action may either be supplied in the verses or supplemented by prose insertions. 
A number of the longer Jatakas in the Mahanipata are divided up into shorter 
sections (khandas), which suggests that they were at one time independent 
texts. If this was not so, then it is difficult to understand why the khandas of 
the Bhuridatta jataka (543) or the Vidhurapandita jataka (545) are not re- 
garded as separate Jatakas. 

Certain observations may be made about the relationship between the verses 
and the prose stories. The fact that the verse in the Bilara jataka (128) 
includes a mention of a cat (bilara), whereas the prose story is about a jackal 
(sigala), indicates that the prose is a later, and somewhat careless, addition. 
In the Vessantara jataka (547) the use of the word paccaya in an unusual sense 
of “proper” in connection with an elephant has led to the word being misinter- 
preted as the elephant’s name by the prose writer. 319 On the other hand, some 
of the verses are very difficult to understand without a prose introduction. 

One Jataka presents a problem which from the commentator’s remark 
about it can be assumed to be very old. The Mahasupina jataka (77) has only 
one verse, as is to be expected as it is in the eka-nipata. It seems to consist 
of seven padas. The pratika at the beginning of the Jataka, 320 however, begins 
with the fourth pdda. Since the verse narrates the sixteen dreams dreamed by 
the King of Kosala, it is strange that the pratika seems to begin with the 
eleventh. The seven padas are given in full in the course of the prose of the 
paccuppannavatthu. They are then repeated, in an abbreviated form, in the 
atitavatthu, but it is clear that, in a very unusual way, they are canonical in 
the story of the present because the commentary (upon the one word hi) 321 
is there. With them, when repeated, is an eighth pdda 323 which is commented 
upon in the atitavatthu. The commentator adds an explanatory note after the 
samodhana, stating that the sangltikdrakas after the death of the Buddha put 
the first three padas into the commentary, 323 presumably because they did 
not accept them as canonical, and made a gathd of the remaining five padas 321 

818 See H. Ltjders, Bharhut und die buddhistische Literatur, Leipzig 1941. 

319 See M. Cone and R. F. Gombrich, The perfect generosity of Prince Vessantara, 
Oxford 1977, pp. xxxiii — xxxiv. 

320 Ja I 334, 27. 

321 Hi-kdro pan ’ ettha nipdta-mattam eva (Ja I 342, 17). This seems to be a com- 
ment upon the strange form bhayahi (336, 17), but is omitted by Be and Ne. 

322 V ipariydso vattati, na idha-m-atthi (344, 23 — 24). This has been overlooked by 
Fausboll, who includes it in the prose. 

323 Parinibbute pana Bhagavati samgltikdrakd usabhdrukkhddlni tini paddni attha- 
katharn aropetva labunl ti adini panca paddni ekarn gdtham katvd eka-nipata -palirri 
aropesum (345, 14-16). 

224 See L. Aesdorf, “The akhyana theory reconsidered,” in J OI(B) 13, p. 200 n. 2. 



The Pali Canon 


81 


It has been suggested that the solution to this problem lies in the fact that the 
first three pddas are in fact prose, and could therefore not be included in a 
pratlka in a verse text. Although there is actually canonical prose in the Jata- 
kas, it is possible that what seems to be a prose pratlka in the Kunalajataka 
was thought to be verse. 325 

Although many Jatakas can be regarded as being non- Buddhist, or even 
pre-Buddhist, there are some which are certainly Buddhist. The verses of the 
Kalingabodhi jataka (479) tell of King Kalinga visiting the bodhi tree and 
honouring with 60,000 cartloads of flowers the place where the Buddha had 
gained enlightenment. The whole poem is purely and devoutly Buddhist. The 
fact that it is composed in the Arya metre, 326 which went out of general use in 
Pali literature at an early date, indicates that it is not particularly young. This 
shows clearly that the Buddhists added material of their own to the Jataka 
collection. 

The Kunalajataka (536) 327 is unique in the Jataka collection in that it alone 
contains prose which is regarded as canonical, as is shown by the fact that 
there is a word commentary upon it. 328 This canonical prose is of two types: 
there is both narrative prose and also a few descriptive passages characterised 
by strings of compounds, some of them extremely long. 329 These latter passages 
are unique in that they are the only places in Pali literature where we find the 
type of rhythmical prose called vedha . 33 ° This in itself would reveal the anti- 
quity of the prose, even if we did not know it to be canonical, because this type 
of prose is elsewhere found only in the very oldest Jain and Buddhist Sanskrit 
texts. 331 It was doubtless the presence of this prose, which was at the same time 
verse, which confused the Jataka -bhanakas who were responsible for the Jataka 
tradition, so that they accepted the words evam akkhdyati, which are the first 
words of the canonical prose, as a pratlka, although as has just been suggested 
they rejected the prose “pddas” of the Mahasupinajataka. 

The Kunalajataka is a collection of stories and verses which deal with the 
wickedness of women. Many of the verses found in it are not Buddhist, but are 
common to the whole range of misogynous literature which is widespread in 
India. Such sentiments are found elsewhere in the Jataka collection. Some of 
the verses and pddas of the Kunalajataka are also found in the seventh vagga 

aas Evam akkhdyati ti (Ja V 412, 14). 

See Axsdorf, AS, pp. 25—28. 

327 W. B. Boll&e (ed. and tr.), Kunalajataka, SBB London, 1970. 

328 There are also prose passages at Ja II 147, 2—3** and 147, 10—11**, as 
Bolide (KJ, p. vi n.) points out, which are commented upon. These two short 
passage 3 are, however, taken from elsewhere in the canon (Vin II 110, 16 — 18 = 
A II 73, 6—8), and were therefore canonical prose before they were included in the 
Jataka. 

329 As pointed out by Alsdorf, JOI(B) 13, p. 200 n. 2. 

3so See Boll&e, KJ, pp. 166—72. 

331 See A. Mette, “Vedhas in Lalitavistara und Divyavadana,” in WZKS 17, 

1973, PP- 21-42. 



82 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


of the ekanipdta, which is entitled Itthivagga 332 and contains a set of Jataka 
stories which show how women are so iniquitous that they will stop at nothing 
to deceive their husbands. 

Several Jataka stories can be shown to be old because they have counter- 
parts in Jain canonical texts, and sometimes the similarity between them is so 
close that one version can be used to restore the text of the other. The Matanga- 
jataka (497) and the Cittasambhuta. jataka (498) both belong to the class of 
what has been called “ascetic poetry” 333 , in which the piety and self-control of 
the wandering ascetic is contrasted with the formal ceremonialism of the 
brahmans. These two Jatakas have direct parallels in Jain literature. 334 The 
Kumbhakara jataka (408) also has parallels in Jain texts. The verses contain a 
memorial gdthd which gives the names and home cities of the four paccekabuddhas 
and four other gathds 335 which describe the signs which led them to enlighten- 
ment. The verses do not state that they were paccekabuddhas, although the 
prose story makes this clear. The situation in Jain literature is the same. One 
verse gives the four kings and their cities; another gives the four signs. 336 The 
verses do not state that they were patteyabuddhas , but the (later) prose stories 
do. As in the case of the Matanga jataka ancTthe Cittasambhutajataka, although 
the resemblances are great, there are sufficient differences to make it clear 
that, while it is obvious that the Buddhist and Jain texts must go back ulti- 
mately to a common ancestor, they had been so worked over by the redactors 
of the two traditions that it is not possible to restore in full whatever original 
lay beneath all the changes they had introduced. 

In some cases it is possible to distinguish such insertions from the older 
material by means of metrical analysis. In the oldest stratum of Buddhist 
literature the Tristubh/ Jagati metre was used for narrative verse, while at a 
later date the Anustubh ( ftloka ) metre replaced it for this purpose. A Jataka 
story which in its present form consists of a mixture of Tristubh and Anustubh 
verses can sometimes be restored to something nearer its original form by 
removing the verses in the latter metre. The Sivijataka (499) tells the story of 
King Sivi who gave his eyes away as an act of extreme generosity. It consists 
of a mixture of Tristubh/ Jagati and Anustubh verses. It has been shown that the 
removal of the latter leaves a poem which is complete in itself. 337 

The Bhuridattajataka (543) is an anti-brahmanical Jataka. In a long and 
complicated story it tells how the Bodhisatta was reborn as a ndga prince. He 
was captured by a treacherous brahman, who kept him in a basket and made 


332 Ja I 285—315. 

333 See Winternitz, HIL, p. 145 n. 2. 

334 See Utt XII and XIII. 

335 Ja III 381, 16 — 18 and 380, 6 — 21. 

336 See H. Jacobi, Ausgewahlte Erzahlungen in Maharastri, Leipzig 1886, p. 34. 

337 See L. Alsdorf, “Das Sivijataka (499) : Ein Beitrag zu seiner Textgeschiehte,” 
in HEESterman, Pratid., pp. 478 — 83. 



The Pali Canon 


83 


him dance before audiences. The climax of the story is a long denunciation of the 
brahman caste and a rejection of their claim to be superior because of their 
knowledge of the Vedas and sacrificial ritual. It is written in a mixture of 
Tristubh and Anustubh verses, and by removing the latter it is possible to 
restore an earlier version of the Ndga- story in Tristubh metre. 338 

In the Dasabrahmana jataka (495) a minister named Vidhura tells King 
Yudhitthila of the ten classes of those who are brahman by name alone, having 
by their evil conduct forfeited their right to be so called. He then describes the 
only true brahmans and when instructed to show these genuine brahmans 
invites 500 paccekabuddhas to a meal. The Vidhurapandita jataka (545) ) tells of 
the same minister being won in a game of dice by a yakkha and taken to the 
ndga world. There he delighted the ndga king by the answers he gave to questions 
put to him, and was released. An analysis of the metre shows that over half of 
the Jataka is in the Anustubh metre. The removal of the verses in this metre 
leaves a narrative poem (akhydna) consisting of about 150 verses in the 
Tristubh and Vaitaliya metres. 339 

The Vessantara jataka (547) 340 is the last, longest, and most important of the 
whole Pali Jataka collection. It tells of the Buddha’s earlier birth as Prince 
Vessantara, a man so generous that he gave away everything he possessed, 
including his two children and, finally, his wife. Because of the emphasis upon 
generosity, one of the greatest Buddhist virtues, this Jataka story seems ob- 
viously Buddhist in character, and it has been regarded as a purely Buddhist 
legend, where the hero is already the Bodhisatta of the later dogma. 341 It has, 
however, been shown that when a small number of verses borrowed from the 
later Cariyapitaka are removed from the text, the remaining verses are entirely 
un-Buddhist — in the sense that generosity might be expected to be a virtue in 
many Indian religions — and its hero is made a Bodhisatta only in the commen- 
tarial prose story. 342 

The text consists of over 700 Sloka (Anustubh) verses. There are clear signs 
that the author of the later prose story did not understand some of the details 
in the verses, and has consequently invented features to fit in with what he 
thought the verses meant. The way in which Vessantara’s elephant has acquired 
the name Paccaya has already been explained. 343 Other misunderstandings have 
arisen from the fact that verses have been somehow transposed during the 


338 See L. Alsdorf, “Das Bhiiridatta- Jataka. Ein antibrahmanischer Naga- 
Roman,” in WZKS 21, 1977, pp. 25-55. 

339 See L. Alsdorf, “Das Jataka vom weisen Vidhura,” in WZKS 15, 1971, 
pp. 23—56. 

340 M. Cone and R. F. Gombrich (tr.), The perfect generosity of Prince Vessan- 
tara, Oxford 1977. 

341 Winternitz, HIL, p. 152. 

342 See L. Alsdorf, “Bemerkungen zum Vessantara -Jataka,” in WZKSO 1, 
1957, pp. 1—70. 

343 See p. 80 above. 



84 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


transmission of the story, and the author of the prose version has invented 
details to fit in with, and explain, the confusion which has resulted. 344 

Despite the large number of stories found in the Jataka collection, it is clear 
that it by no means includes all the Jataka stories which existed in North 
India in the early days of Buddhism. There are stories found elsewhere in the 
Pali canon which are technically Jataka stories because they purport to tell of 
the Buddha in an earlier birth, and conclude with an identification of the 
characters, and are nevertheless not found in the collection. 345 There are also 
several Jataka stories in the Mahavastu which do not have a parallel in the 
Pali collection. 346 The Dipavamsa tells of the Mahasanghikas making changes 
in the canon after their separation from the Thera vadins, and states that they 
rejected a portion of the Jataka. 347 This presumably means that the contents 
of the Jataka collections of the two sects differed, doubtless because they both 
added to their collections after the schism. 


3.5.11. Niddesa 

The Niddesa consists of two parts. The Maha-niddesa 348 is a commentary 
upon the Atthakavagga of the Suttanipata, while the Culla-niddesa 349 is a 
commentary upon the Parayanavagga and the Khaggavisanasutta of the 
Uragavagga of the same text. The fact that these two commentaries are 
considered to be canonical shows that they must be very old, for the Thera- 
vadin tradition states that the last addition to the canon was the Kathavatthu, 
which was recited at the time of the third council during the reign of Asoka. 350 
The Niddesa must therefore be earlier than this. On the other hand, the 
Dipavamsa states that the Niddesa was one of the texts rejected by the 
Mahasanghikas after the second council. 351 This is perhaps not to be taken 
literally, but means that the Niddesa was not included in the Mahasanghika 
canon, either because it did not exist at the time of the schism, or because it 
had not yet attained canonical status. 

According to the Saddhammappajotika, 352 the Niddesa was composed by the 
Buddha’s disciple Sariputta, but it has been pointed out 353 that if this was so, 

344 See Cone and Gombrich, op. cit. (in n. 340), pp. xxxi— xxxii. 

345 At the end of the Ghatikarasutta of the Majjhima-nikaya (81), the Buddha 
identifies himself with the young brahman Jotipala ( aham tena samayena Jotipdlo 
manavo ahosirn [M II 54, 18—19]) in the story of past time (bhutapubbam) he had 
told. This makes the story technically a Jataka. 

346 E.g. the Punyavantajataka (Mvu III 33 — 41). 

34 ? Dip V 37. 

343 L. de La Vallee Poussin and E. J. Thomas (ed.), Mahaniddesa, PTS Lon- 
don, Part I 1916, Part II 1917. 

3 «9 W. Stede (ed.), Cullaniddesa, PTS London, 1918. 

85o Dip VII 41 ; Mhv V 278. 

351 Dip V 37. 

362 Nidd-a I 1, 14—15. 

363 By A. P. Buddhadatta, Nidd-a I, p. vii. 



The Pali Canon 


85 


then it is surprising that he should give three different explanations of his own 
words as recorded in the Suttanipata . 354 Although it is possible that some of 
the explanations given in the Niddesa go back to the time of the Buddha, and 
were perhaps compiled by Sariputta, the whole work in its present form must 
have been produced at some later time. The attribution was probably made 
because the Niddesa is of the same type as the exegetical explanations attri- 
buted to Mahakaccana and Sariputta in various canonical texts . 355 

As has already been noted , 356 the three texts on which the Niddesa comments 
can justly claim to be among the very oldest of Buddhist texts. The Atthaka- 
vagga and Parayanavagga are quoted from by name in other canonical texts, 
w r hile the Khaggavisanasutta is not only taken over into another canonical 
Pali text , 357 but is also found in the Mahavastu . 358 It is therefore perhaps not 
surprising that commentaries should have been compiled upon these texts 
sufficiently early for the commentaries themselves to be accorded canonical 
status. Nevertheless there must have been a not inconsiderable period of time 
between the compilation of the texts and the commentaries upon them, for 
variant readings had already arisen which necessitated mention with alternative 
explanations . 359 That other commentarial traditions either existed at the time 
of the composition of the Niddesa, but were not employed, or were developed 
later, is shown by the fact that the Paramatthajotika mentions explanations 
not included in the Niddesa . 360 

The type of comment made in the Niddesa is very similar to that found in 
the Old Commentary in the Vinaya-pitaka , 361 in that it consists of long lists of 
synonyms or near synonyms. It does, however, also include exegetical passages, 
which presumably means that it represents a slightly later type of commentary. 
There is no attempt made at abbreviation, and passages are given in full every 
time they are repeated. The beginning of stereotyped explanation can be seen, 
e.g. every time the word kappa, or a verb based upon the root kapp-, occurs, 
the Niddesa states that there are two types of kappa, i.e. tanhd-kappa and 
ditthi-kappa , 362 This happens even if the words occur in successive verses. The 
result is not an organic structure of exegesis, but a series of disconnected phrases 


354 Nidd I 446, 29-447, 6 {ad Sn 955). 

355 E.g. MI 111, 31—113, 7 and S III 7, 1-9, 8 . 

356 See pp. 63 and 65 above. 

357 Ap 8—13. 

ass Mvu I 357—59. 

859 E.g. givanto ti givanto kujjanto nadanto saddam karonto. athava kivanto kati 
kitthaka kivataka kivabahukd (Nidd I 467, 5 — 7 ad Sn 959: givanto tattha bherava). 

36o Pj II 572, 12—14 ad Sn 959 reads kivanto in the lemma and explains it as 
kittakd. It quotes khivanto (glossed as kujanto) as a variant reading, but dismisses 
this as inappropriate in the context (na pana pubbendparam sandhiyati ) . 

3«i As noted by M. H. Bode, rev. of Mahaniddesa Part I, in JRAS 1918, p. 575. 

382 Cf. Nidd I 97, 1—3 ad Sn 793 (vikappayeyya ) with 97, 28—30 ad Sn 794 
(kappayanti) . 



86 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


which serve as explanations of the individual words, not in the particular 
setting of the Suttanipata, hut in any setting. This state of affairs led the editor 
of the European edition of the Culla-niddesa to adopt a modified form of pre- 
sentation instead of editing the text in the usual way. As a result of this 
arrangement, he hoped to facilitate the tracing of such expository material 
back to its source. 363 

Sometimes, however, the exposition is improved by giving explanations, 
e.g. kathamkathd “doubt” is explained as vicikicchd, 36i and examples are then 
given of the ways in which doubt can arise. 365 References to the Nikayas are 
frequent, e.g. when explaining Sn 844, which is quoted at S III 9,19 as occurring 
in the Magandiyapanha of the Atthakavagga, the author of the Niddesa 
quotes S III 9,14 — 12,27 verbatim. 366 

A comparison of the Niddesa with the portions of the Suttanipata upon which 
it comments enables us to deduce certain information about the relative dating 
of both texts. The presence in the Niddesa of comments upon the reciters’ 
remarks 367 and the prose passages 368 enables us to state that these features, 
although assumed to be late, are nevertheless not as late as the vatthugathds of 
the Parayanavagga which are not commented upon. These gdthds, however, are 
commented upon by the Paramatthajotika, where they are attributed to 
Ananda. 369 This presumably means that the author of the Paramatthajotika 
found commentarial material upon the gdthds in the Maha-atthakatha of the 
Mahavihara, or he would have made a comment to that effect as he did for 
other verses which lacked comment in the Sinhalese tradition. 370 The fact that 
neither the Niddesa nor the Paramatthajotika comments upon Sn 836 pre- 
sumably means that this verse is a very late interpolation. 

The presence of certain geographical data, e. g. the mention of Java, Suvanna- 
bhumi, Takkola, etc., 371 in the Niddesa has led to the suggestion of dates as late 
as the second century A.D. for its compilation. 372 It is true that the inclusion 
of the name Allasanda in the lists of places means that that particular portion 
of the lists is post -Alexander, but leaving aside the possibility of a name or 
names being inserted into an already-existing list, the beginning of the third 
century B.C. would seem to be quite suitable as the date of its composition. 


363 Nidd II, p. x. 

364 Nidd I 268, 1 ad Sn 868 . 
ass Nidd I 268, 10—24. 

366 Nidd I 197, 1—201, 2. 

367 E.g. Nidd I 139, 26 — 140, 7 ad Sn 814 (icc ayasma Tisso Metteyyo ) . 

368 See Nidd II (Ne) 206 — 208 ad Sn p. 218. 

389 Tam attham gahetva ayasma Anando sangltikdle Parayanavaggassa niddnam 
dropento imd gathdyo abhdsi (Pj II 580, 29 — 30). 

370 Avasdne gdthadvayam eva pana Mahd-atthakathayam vinicchitapdthe n ’ atthi 
(Pj II 477, 13—14 ad Sn 677—78). 

371 Nidd I 154—55 = 415. 

372 See S. Levi, “Ptolemee, le Niddesa et la Brhatkatha,” in Etudes asiatiques, 
Vol. II, Paris 1925, pp. 1—55. 



The Pali Canon 


87 


Recent archaeological evidence 373 has shown that there was trade between 
India and the East before the time of Asoka, so there is no reason to doubt that 
these names could have been known in India at a sufficiently early date for 
such geographical lists to have been compiled before the date of the third 
council. 

Those who suggest late dates for the compilation of the Niddesa forget 
that the Sinhalese tradition recorded the fact, related to us by Buddhaghosa, 
that the Niddesa existed before the first century B.C., and had by that time 
been forgotten by all bhikkhus except one. From fear of its disappearing 
altogether the them Maharakkhita was persuaded to learn the Niddesa from 
this one bhikkhu, and others learned it from Maharakkhita. 374 It was the realisa- 
tion that canonical texts could easily disappear if the oral tradition died out 
which precipitated the writing down of the canon during the reign of Vatta- 
gamani. 


3.5.12. Patisambhidamagga 

The Patisambhidamagga 375 consists of three vaggas, each containing ten 
topics (kathas). It is intended to teach the path of discrimination (patisam- 
bhida ) , and tries to show how understanding of the truth taught by the Buddha 
occurs. It is attributed by the SaddhammappakasinI 376 to the Buddha’s 
disciple Sariputta, just as is the Niddesa. The reason for this may be that there 
seems to be a close relationship between the Patisambhidamagga and the 
Dasuttarasutta of the Dlgha-nikaya (34), 377 which is also attributed to Sari- 
putta. 

The form of the text suggests that it is late, and this view is supported by 
the fact that the term patisambhida does not seem to occur in the older 
parts of the Vinaya-pitaka or the first three Nikayas. It occurs in some Abhi- 
dhamma texts, and in the Niddesa, Apadana and Buddhavamsa of the Khudda- 
kanikaya. 378 That the text is later than much of the canon is shown by the 
quotation of whole passages from the Vinaya-pitaka and portions of the Sutta- 
pitaka. Nearly every section is given a sutta basis in this way. A general 
acquaintance with early Buddhist legends is assumed, e.g. in the section on 


373 See Himanstj Bhttsan Sarkar, “The date of the Pali Niddesa and its im- 
plication for the history of South-East Asia,” in JAS(B), 19, 1977, pp. 44—45. 

374 Sp 695—96. 

375 A. C. Taylor (ed.), PTS London, Vol. I 1905, Vol. II 1907. Tr. Bhikkhu 
Nanamoli, The path of discrimination, PTS London, 1982. There is an introduction 
to this translation by A. K. Warder which deals at length with the problems of the 
composition and dating of this text. 

376 Patis-a 1, 18. 

377 See Warder, Patis tr., p. xxxiii. 

378 See ibid., pp. vii— viii. 



88 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


supernormal power (iddhi ) 379 the names of ardhants who possessed such powers 
are given without any further comment, as if their stories were well known. 

There is a list of contents (matika) at the beginning of the text, 380 but this 
gives only a list of the 73 knowledges discussed in the first section (Sanakatha), 
and does not apply to the whole work. Such a matika seems to be an Abhi- 
dhamma-type feature, and the various topics are treated in the form of questions 
and answers, as in the Abhidhamma, but in form it is a sutta text, since it 
includes the standard opening evarn me sutam in some sections, and the voca- 
tive bhikkhave also occurs. 381 It is, however, possible that these words occur as 
parts of quotations from sutta texts, and are not fundamental features of the 
Patisambhidamagga itself. 382 

The text is included among the list of those which the Dlpavamsa states 
were rejected by the Mahasanghikas, 383 which probably means that, 
if it existed in any form at the time of the schism, it had not yet been accepted 
as canonical. The existence, however, of the technical term pratisamvid in 
Buddhist Sanskrit 384 shows that the concept was not an invention of the 
Theravadins but was in existence when the other sects separated from them. 
The Patisambhidamagga is not included among those texts which Buddhaghosa 
informs us were not accepted by the Digha-JMraifcas, 385 so it may be deduced 
that it was recognised as canonical before the composition of the Apadana, 
Buddhavamsa, Cariyapitaka and Khuddakapatha. 

The text presents a systematic exposition of certain important topics of 
Buddhism, and describes how insight is to be obtained. The way begins with 
proper knowledge, and the first kathd, amounting to almost a third of the whole 
text, 386 is consequently devoted to ndna, which includes knowledge of the great 
pity of a Tathdgata. Other important topics to which kathds are devoted 
include the regulation of breathing (dndpdna) as an aid to mindfulness (1.3); 
kamma (1.7); the noble truths (2.2); the factors (bojjhangas) of enlightenment 
(2.3); loving-kindness (mettd) towards creatures (2.4); the discriminations 
( patisambhidds ) which give their name to the entire text (2.6); emptiness 
(suhha), i.e. the fact that all dhammas are devoid of self (2.10); supernormal 
powers (iddhi) (3.2); the foundation of mindfulness (satipatthdna) (3.8); and 
insight (vipassana) (3.9) which together with serenity (samatha) is also treated 
in the section on the couple (yuganandha) (2.1). 

Although the Patisambhidamagga is not an Abhidhamma text, in the sense 
that it does not appear in the Abhidhamma-pitaka, it has been suggested that 


379 Patis I 205—214. See Arnold, Patis II, p. iv. 

380 Patis I 1—3. 

381 Patis II p. iv. 

382 See Warder, Patis tr., p. xxxiii. 

383 Dip V 37. 

384 See BHS Dictionary, s.v. pratisamvid. 
ass See p. 9 above. 

38« Patis I 4 — 134. 



The Pali Canon 


89 


at some early date it was in fact classed among the Abhidhamma texts. 387 It 
seems to have certain features in common with the Vibhanga, e.g. nearly a 
half of the section titles of the Vibhanga appear in it, and like the Vibhanga it 
contains an interwoven exegetical atthakatha. To some extent it seems to imply 
knowledge of the Vibhanga, e.g. when discussing the four satipatthdnas the 
Patisambhidamagga comments only upon bhdvand , winch is not included in 
the comment upon satipatthana in the Vibhanga. 388 Sometimes the Patisam- 
bhidamagga seems to go beyond what is found in Abhidhamma texts, 
e.g. in place of the seven powers ( baldni ) of an arahant ten are given; 389 
similarly ten iddhis are listed in place of the usual four, 390 and ten disapharanas Z9X 
as well as the usual four disas. 

3.5.13. Apadana 

The Apadana 392 is a collection of legends in verse, in which the noble deeds 
( apadanas ) done by Buddhist theras and therls in earlier existences are glorified. 
It contains in 55 vaggas the biographies of 547 theras and in four vaggas the 
biographies of 40 therls, all of whom lived at the time of the Buddha. Each of 
these stories gives first of all the life of the hero or heroine in one or more 
previous births. They all contain a story of the past and a story of the present, 
but they differ from a Jataka story in that in the Jataka collection the stories 
of the past and the present always refer to the Buddha, whereas the Apadana 
deals usually, although not always, with an arahant. The stories generally 
follow the same pattern. The author tells of the adoration made to an earlier 
Buddha, and the prophecy made by that Buddha that the doctrine of Gotama 
Buddha would be heard. The story goes on to say how this came true, and how 
the author became an arahant. The purpose is to show that even the smallest 
meritorious act has the potentiality to give great results even after the passage 
of immense periods of time. 

The Apadana is almost an appendix to the Theragatha and Therigatha, 
since it connects together the past and present lives of the theras and therls. 
The last two poems in the Therigatha are, in fact, of an Apadana nature. 393 
Many of the authors of Apadanas are also mentioned in the Theragatha and 
Therigatha collections, and in his commentaries upon those texts Dhamma- 
pala 394 includes the Apadana section relevant to the hero or heroine. There are, 
however, certain discrepancies in his ascriptions, 395 and one of the Apadanas 

387 See Warder, Patis tr., p. xxxiii, and Arnold, Patis II, p. iv. 

388 See Arnold, Patis I, p. viii, and Mrs Rhys Davids’ rev. of Patis I, in JRAS 
1908, p. 591. 

388 Patis II 168, 12. 

390 Patis II 205, 6. Cf. As 91 — 92, where the ten-fold iddhi is also found. 

391 Patis II 130, 17. 

392 Ed. M. E. Lilley, PTS London, Yol. I 1925, Yol. II 1927. 

393 See p. 77 above. 

39i See p. 135 below. 

395 See Muller, Thi-a p. ix. 



90 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


he includes does not occur in the Apadana collection in its present form. 396 The 
collection, however, includes many theras who do not appear in the Theragatha, 
and does not include all the therls who are in the Therlgatha. On the other hand, 
there is an Apadana for Yasodhara, 397 although there is no poem for her in the 
Therlgatha. A large number of the theras are not identifiable since they have 
names made up from the deed which is related in their Apadana, e.g. “Mango- 
giver.” 

Many of the stories which are told have a mythological nature, which suggests 
that the Apadana is one of the latest books in the canon. 398 The type of act 
which is glorified also implies lateness, for there is mention of the worship of 
thuyas, shrines and relics, and there is an emphasis upon generosity and hu- 
manitarian deeds. Nevertheless, there is already mention of some of these 
activities in the Theragatha and Therlgatha, which can be dated with fair 
probability to the period between the fifth and the third centuries B.C. One of 
the Apadanas, however, refers to the Kathavatthu as an Abhidhamma com- 
pilation, 399 which proves that that particular Apadana must be later than the 
third council. The nature of the Apadana collection is such that it was simple 
for more and more Apadanas to be added until the time when it was fixed as 
canonical, which was perhaps at the time of writing down, after which addi- 
tions were probably not made. 

A few Apadanas depart from the usual pattern. The first section of the text 
is entitled Buddhapadana, 400 and the use of the word apadana in connection 
with the Buddha is reminiscent of its usage in the Mahapadana of the Digha- 
nikaya (14). 401 In this section 402 the Buddha himself tells of the Buddhakhettas, 
ideal lands of beauty where the Buddhas live. A picture is painted of Buddhas 
questioning each other, and there is mention of disciples questioning the 
Buddhas and vice versa. The whole idea would seem to be late, and it has been 
regarded as foreshadowing Mahayanic beliefs. It has even been called a com- 
pletely Mahayanic passage, 403 but it does not seem to be necessary to go as far 


396 See Woodward, Th-a I p. vii. 

397 Ap 584—90. 

398 It is one of the texts rejected by the Dlgha -bhdnakas (see p. 9 above). 
Mal ALASEK era reports (DPPN, I, p. 116) that the Apadana contains the names of 
35 Buddhas. 

399 Abhidhammanayahho ’ ham Kathdvatthuvisuddhiyd 
sabbesam vihhapetvdna vihardmi andsavo (Ap 37, 1). 

400 Ap 1 — 6 . 

401 See p. 36 above. 

402 It has been translated by Dwijendralal Bartta. See “ ‘Buddhakhetta’ in 
the Apadana,” in D. R. Bhandarkar et al. (ed.), B.C. Law Volume, Part II, 
Poona 1946, pp. 183—90. 

403 See H. Bechert, “Buddha-Feld und Verdi enstiibertragung: Mahayana-Ideen 
im Thoravada-Buddhismus Coylons,” in Academie royal© de Belgique, Bulletin de 
la Classe des Lettres et des Sciences morales et politiques, 5e serie. Vol. 52, 1976, 
pp. 27—51. 



The Pali Canon 


91 


as that. A simpler and doubtless earlier idea of the Buddhakhettas is found 
elsewhere in the Apadana, 404 and also in the Theragatha and the Milindapanha. 405 
A more elaborate form of the idea is found in the Mahavastu, 406 also a Hinayana 
text, although not free from some Mahayanic influence. The form of classifica- 
tion which Buddhaghosa adopts for the Buddhalchettas 407 shows that the 
concept was widespread by his time, although he gives no indication of the 
nature of these Buddha fields. Whether any Mahayanic influence should be 
seen in the idea is doubtful. It has been rightly pointed out that many ideas in 
Buddhism follow from the dynamics of early Buddhist thought, which lead to 
the existence of one and the same idea in two forms in two different traditions. 
Linguistic evidence suggests an unusual origin for this Apadana, as will be 
seen, but there is no reason to see here anything more than an idea which was 
carried further in this text than in any other Theravadin text, but which 
nevertheless follows on from the concept of a miraculous Buddha which occurs 
as early as the Digha-nikaya. 

The second section of the Apadana is the Paccekabuddhapadana, in which 
the Buddha is asked by Ananda about the paccekabuddhas. In the course of 
his reply, the Buddha includes the verses in Tristubh metre which occur in the 
Khaggavisanasutta of the Suttanipata. 408 As has already been noticed, 409 the 
Suttanipata says nothing about the speakers of these verses, although the 
Niddesa attributes them to the paccekabuddhas, and so does the Mahavastu. 

In the Pubbakammapiloti-apadana (387), 410 the Buddha tells of his bad 
deeds, as a result of which he suffered numerous rebirths in hells. The remains 
of these deeds caused him many unpleasant experiences even in his last exist- 
ence. This Apadana is called Buddhapadana in the rubric, 411 and the latter part 
of it is given and commented upon by the commentator at the end of the 
Buddhapadana. 412 It is possible that in an earlier form of the tradition the two 
apadanas were combined in some way. This would explain why the Buddha- 
padana in its present lacks the essential feature of an apadana: it says nothing 
about the Buddha’s previous existences, and seems more like an uddna than 
an apadana. 

The text seems to be composed entirely in the §loka metre, except for the 
Paccekabuddhapadana which is in the Tristubh metre. Somewhat surprisingly, 
the Apadana shows traces of features which are known in mainland Prakrits, 
but are not common, if found at all, in Pali, e.g. masculine plural forms in -ani 

404 The word is used in a less extravagant way at Ap 44, 27, and in a different 
meaning at Ap 444, 19. 

«5 Th 1087; Mil 176, 28. 

400 Por references see BHS Dictionary, s.v. buddha-ksetra. 

407 See Vism 414, 19 — 27. 

408 Sn 35—75. 

409 See p. 64 above. 

410 Ap 299—301. 

4u Ap 301, 18-20. 

412 Ap-a 120—27. 



92 


K. R. Norman ■ Pali Literature 


and aorists in -e (the so-called optative used as an aorist). 413 The majority of 
the latter occur in the Buddhapadana. Since there is no reason to assume that 
these features arose in Ceylon independently, we have to suppose that they are 
indeed old mainland features. This does not necessarily mean that the verses 
containing these features were all composed on the mainland of India at an 
early date, for we cannot rule out conscious archaising in some cases. What is, 
however, important is the fact that, whether genuine features or archaisms, 
they indicate knowledge of phenomena not common in Pali. If they were at 
one time more common in Pali, then they have been edited out of our texts, 
and their existence in the Apadana presumably indicates that this text 
or portions of it, did not undergo the usual editing procedure. An alternative 
explanation demands that the composers of the verses containing the anomalous 
features had knowledge of them through a source no longer available to us, 
from which they borrowed them into Pali. 

The word apadana occurs in Sanskrit 414 in the sense of a great or noble deed, 
but the more common spelling is avaddna, and this, as was noted 415 in the case 
of the Sanskrit equivalent of the Mahapadana of the Dlgha-nikaya (14), is the 
usual form of the word in Buddhist Sanskrit texts. Just as the Apadana goes 
with the Theragatha and Therlgatha, similarly in Sanskrit there are texts of a 
comparable type which go together. The Sanskrit Anavataptagatha 416 is a col- 
lection of Avadanas which goes with the Sthaviragatha, and fragments found 
in Turkestan indicate that there are parallels with a number of the Pali Apada- 
nas. There are also parallels in the Vinaya-pitaka 417 of the Mula-Sarvastivadins, 
found in Gilgit, and it seems that the Anavataptagatha has been transferred to 
that text in the canon belonging to that sect. The fact that a portion of the 
Avadana corresponding to the Pubbakammapiloti-apadana has been discovered 
in Turkestan, and its existence in Tibetan and Chinese versions, indicate that 
the Apadana was the common property of both Theravadins and Sarvasti- 
vadins, and is therefore likely to be quite early. 


3.5.14. Buddhavamsa 418 

As has been noted, 419 in the Vinaya-pitaka and the Dlgha-nikaya there is 
mention of the six Buddhas who preceded Gotama. The Buddha doctrine 

413 See H. Bechert, “Grammatisches aus dem Apadanabuch,” in ZDMG 108, 
1958, pp. 308—16. 

414 See MW, s.vv. apadana and avaddna, and BHS Dictionary, s.v. avaddna. 

443 See p. 37 above. 

446 H. Bechert, Bruchstucke buddhistischer Verssammlungen: I. Die Ana- 
vataptagatha und die Sthaviragatha, Berlin 1961 (STT VI). 

44 ? See Yuyama, VT, p. 51. 

443 Ed. R. Morris, PTS London, 1882; N. A. Jayawickrama, PTS London, 
1974. Tr. B. C. Law, The Lineage of the Buddhas, SBB London, 1 938 ; I. B. Horner, 
Chronicle of Buddhas, SBB London, 1975. 

443 See p. 77 above. 



The Pali Canon 


93 


developed, and by the time that the canon was closed the number of Buddhas 
before Gotama had reached twenty-four. 

The Buddhavamsa opens with the description of an exquisite Jewel Walk 
(ratana-cankama) which Gotama, just after he had become a Buddha, con- 
structed in the sky and paced upon. He was visited by Sariputta with 500 
arahants, who asked him about the resolve and aspiration he had made for 
Buddhahood. In reply, Gotama relates the lives of 24 previous Buddhas, and 
tells what he, as a Bodhisatta, did under each Buddha. The account he gives 
of himself as the ascetic Sumedha in the first of these former births is the 
longest and most detailed. 

The 24 chapters devoted to the previous Buddhas chronicle certain features, 
always substantially the same, although the details vary, 420 in their life on 
earth both as Bodhisatta and Buddha. As well as being a chronicle of those 
Buddhas, it is also a history of Gotama through the times of all the Buddhas 
who preceded him. 

The Buddha doctrine shows in fact an even later development, because after 
the 26th chapter, in which the Buddha gives, very briefly, the details about 
himself, which probably served as a model for the history of the other Buddhas, 
he mentions in the 27th chapter three Buddhas earlier than Dipankara. 421 
These three were perhaps not thought to be so important because tradition did 
not tell of Gotama making a resolve and aspiration under them. The commen- 
tator states that the 18 verses of this chapter were established by the sanglti- 
kdras and should be regarded as the envoi ( nigamanagathd) . A 22 It would seem 
that the Buddhavamsa, even as added to by the sangitikaras, should have 
ended there, but in the text as we have it there are two further verses, in which 
the Buddha refers to himself and to Metteyya, 423 who, as has been noted, 424 is 
referred to in the Cakkavattisihanadasutta of the Digha-nikaya (26). A further 
chapter (28) gives an account of the distribution of the relics of the Buddha , 
which is related to and based upon that at the end of the Mahaparinibbana- 
sutta of the Digha-nikaya (16). The commentary makes no mention of this 
chapter. 

The reason for the production of the Buddhavamsa would seem to be the 
fact that the history of the one Bodhisatta who would become the Buddha 
Gotama needed an account of previous Buddhas to show that he did not suffer 
from the abnormality of uniqueness, and that his enlightenment was gained 


420 See I. B. Horner, Bv tr., pp. xix — xlvi. 

421 Tanhankara, Medhankara and Saranankara (Bv XXVII 1). 

422 Aparimeyye ito kappe caturo dsutn vinayakd ti ddikd attharasagatha sangUi- 
karakehi thapitd nigamanagdthd veditabbd (Bv-a 295, 31 — 32). 

422 Aham etarahi sambuddho Metteyyo capi hessati 
ete p ’ ime panca buddhd dhlrd lokdnukampakd. 
etesam dhammardjunam annesam nekakotinam 
dcikkhitvdna tarn maggam nibbutd te sasdvakd (Bv XXVII 19 — 20). 

424 See p. 41 above. 



94 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


only after striving through many births for the fulfilment of the ten perfec- 
tions. 425 To complete them all is a necessary self-preparation for enlightenment. 
The Buddhavamsa is therefore a developed Bodhisatta doctrine, but it was 
not developed further, even in the Abhidhamma. Whether the Buddhavamsa 
with the idea in it was borrowed from another sect, as has been suggested, 426 
or whether it was an idea old enough to be common to both the Theravadins 
and the Sarvastivadins, who developed it much further, is impossible to 
decide. 

The whole text is composed in the Sloka metre, which shows no particularly 
early features, and in view of the state of development of both the Buddha and 
the Bodhisatta doctrines, it would seem that the Buddhavamsa is a relatively 
late addition to the canon. As has been noted, it was not accepted as canonical 
by the Dlgha,-bhdnakas . i27 It has been pointed out, however, that there is no 
reference to a tooth of the Buddha having been taken to Ceylon in the account 
of the distribution of the relics, although there is alleged to be a Sinhalese 
version with such a reference. This therefore implies that the text was in its 
present form including the additions at the end, before the arrival of the tooth 
in Ceylon. 428 

3.5.15. Cariyapitaka 

The Cariyapitaka 429 is the fifteenth and last book of the Khuddaka-nikaya. It 
consists of 35 Jataka-type stories arranged in three vaggas, intended to illustrate 
the fcen perfections ( paramis). At the end it is called Buddhapadaniya, 430 which 
again shows the unusual use of the word apaddna instead of Jataka in connec- 
tion with the Buddha. 431 

According to the commentary, the Cariyapitaka was related by the Buddha 
at the request of Sariputta. Each story is told in the first person, of a rebirth 
in earlier time, in which the Buddha followed his set aim of obtaining enlighten- 
ment by mastering the ten perfections. These are mentioned in the Buddha- 
vamsa, 432 and the Buddha expressed his wish to bring them to fulfilment. The 
first vagga has ten cariyas (lit. “proper conduct”), all concerning the ddna- 
pdrami. The second also has ten, concerning the sila-pdrami. The third vagga 
has fifteen cariyas, five for the nekkhamma-, one for the adhitthana-, six for the 
sacca-, two for the mettd-, and one for the upekkhd-pdrami. One of the niga- 

4 2 5 See Horner, Bv tr., p..xiii. 

420 See Thomas, HBT, p. 204. 

42? See p. 9 above. 

428 See Rahula, HBC, p. 128. 

429 Ed. R. Morris, PTS London, 1882; N. A. Jayawickrama, PTS London, 
1974. Tr. B. C. Law, The collection of the ways of Conduct, SBB London, 1938; 
I. B. Horner, Basket of conduct, SBB London, 1975. 

430 Buddhapadaniyam nama dhammapariyayam abhasittha (Cp 103, 11 — 12). 

431 See p. 36 above. 

432 Bv I 76. 



The Pali Canon. 


95 


mana-gdthds at the end of the text implies that the other three paramis have 
also been attained. 433 There are terms in various cariyds which can be inter- 
preted as implying the three missing paramis , 434 and it is perhaps not necessary 
to follow those scholars who believe that part of the text must be missing. 

The Cariyapitaka is largely based upon the Jataka collection, from which 
stories illustrating the perfections have been adapted. Of the 35 cariyds 32 can 
be directly related to the Jataka collection. Another can be related to the 
Digha-nikaya, 435 and one to the Majjhima-nikaya. 436 The remaining story 
consists of a single verse, and is too short for identification. 437 In the Nidana- 
katha of the Jataka, the ten paramitas are mentioned, with examples of each 
extracted from the Jatakas. 438 Reference is made to the Cariyapitaka for a 
longer account. 439 There are only 21 Jatakas in common between the two, 
which has led to the suggestion that the reference may be to a different recen- 
sion of the Cariyapitaka from that available now. 440 

The metre is §loka throughout, except for two Tristubh verses taken over 
from the Jataka. 441 Although the stories are, with the exceptions already 
noted, borrowed from the Jataka, there is in some cases not a single verse in 
common with the Jataka. The longest poem in the Cariyapitaka is devoted to 
the story of Vessantara, and there are about 20 verses common to it and the 
Vessantarajataka. Rather than these being borrowed from the Jataka, how- 
ever, it has been shown that the reverse is true. 442 The verses have been taken 
over into the prose story which amplifies the verse of the Vessantarajataka, 
and are usually introduced with the words tena vuttam. Compared with the 
Jataka verses those in the Cariyapitaka are mediocre, and introduce sentimen- 
tal and supernatural features lacking in the Jataka. The form of presentation 
and the metre, and the fact that the Cariyapitaka serves in effect as a supple- 
ment to the Buddha vamsa, all suggest that it is a late text. As already noted, 
it was not accepted as canonical by the Digh.a,-bhdnakas . ii3 


433 Pandite paripucchitvd viriyam katvdna uttamam 

khantiya pdratnim gantvd patto sambodhim uttamam (Cp 368). 

434 See Horner, Cp tr., p. vi. 

435 With Mahagovindacariya (Cp 1.5) cf. Mahagovindasutta of Digha-nikaya (19). 

436 With Mahalomahamsacariya (Cp III. 15) cf. Mahaslhanadasutta (also entitled 
Lomahamsapariyaya) of Majjhima-nikaya (12). See Horner, Cp tr., pp. viii — ix. 

43 7 Saccasavhayapanditacariya (Cp III. 8). 

438 Ja I 45—47. 

439 Ayam ettha samkhepo, vittharato pan ’ esa attho Cariydpitakato gahetabbo (Ja 
I 47 , 16-17). 

440 WlNTERNITZ, HIL, p. 164. 

441 Cp 343—44 = Ja IV 31, 9—15. 

44a See L. Alsdqrf, “Bemerkungen zum Vessantara -jataka,” in WZKSO 1, 
1957, PP- 2-14. 

443 See p. 9 above. 



4. THE ABHIDHAMMA-PITAKA 


It is clear that the Abhidhamma is later than the rest of the canon. There is 
no mention in the chronicles of reciting the Abhidhamma at the first or second 
councils, although the Mahavamsa states that the arahants who held the 
second council knew the tipitaka . 1 The Mahasanghikas who split from the 
Theravadins after the second council are said to have rejected the Abhidhamma . 2 
This presumably means that there was nothing corresponding exactly to the 
Pali Abhidhamma in their canon, from which it may be deduced that the 
Abhidhamma did not exist at that time, or at least was not recognised as 
canonical. 

In a number of places in the canon we find the triad Dhamma-dhara Vinaya- 
dhara Mdtikd-dhara , 3 from which it appears that Mdtikd and Abhidhamma are 
synonymous. The commentaries, however, explain that in this context Mdtikd 
means Patimokkha , 4 and this interpretation probably arises from the fact that 
mdtikd means “summary,” and can therefore be used both of a summary of 
the Patimokkha rules and of the type of summary of contents which is found 
at the beginning of the Patisambhidamagga , 5 and in the majority of the texts 
of the Abhidhamma-pitaka. Matikds occur in two places in the Dhamma- 
sangani (one at the beginning, and one later ), 6 in the Vibhanga (in four places, 
not at the beginning ), 7 the Dhatukatha, Puggala-pannatti, Yamaka , 8 and 
Patthana. Although there is no mdtikd for the Kathavatthu, nevertheless 
Buddhaghosa uses the word 9 when he maintains that the Buddha laid down 
the outline to be followed by Tissa when he recited that text at the third 
council. The Mohavicchedani is a commentary upon the rndtikas of all seven 
Abhidhamma texts : in the case of the Kathavatthu the mdtikd is simply the 
index of contents . 10 

It seems likely that by the time of the third council the matikds w*ere already 
in existence, with perhaps a certain amount of elaboration to show bhikkhus 

1 Mhv IV 62. Buddhaghosa, however, says (As 27, 36) that it was recited. 

2 Dip Y 37. 

3 See PTC, s.v. dhamma-dhara. 

4 Matikddhard ti dvematikddhara (Mp II 189, 23 ad A I 117, 29); matikddhard ti 
dvepdtimokkhadhara (Mp III 382, 11 ad A III 361, 25). See p. 126 below*. 

5 Patis I 1 — 3. 

6 Dhs 1—8; 124—33. 

7 Vibh 138—43; 244—45; 306—18; 345—49. See p. 100 below. 

8 There is no mdtikd as such printed at the beginning of the text. See p. 105 
below. 

9 Tathdgatena thapita-mdtikam vibhajanto (Kv-a 7, 2 — 3). 

10 Moh 257-77. 



The Pali Canon 


97 


how each term of the matilca should be expanded. In the case of the Dhamma- 
sangani it can be assumed that the text was already available at greater length, 
since the existence of what Buddhaghosa calls an atthakatha 11 in the body of 
the text as we have it would seem to indicate that the chapter upon which it 
comments must be very old. The Buddhavamsa states that the Buddha Kona- 
gamana preached seven treatises , 12 and the commentary states that these 
were the seven texts of the Abhidhamma-pitaka . 13 Although this is clearly an 
anachronism, it suggests that the Abhidhamma-pitaka was in its present form 
by the time the Buddhavamsa was composed. 

The word abhidhamma is found in the Vinaya-pitaka and the Sutta-pitaka, 
and seems in origin to be the preposition abhi together with the word dhamme, 
with the meaning “as regards the dhamma .” 14 We find in the Majjhima-nikaya 
the phrase siyamsu dve bhikkhu abhidhamme nanavada , 15 and the word also 
occurs in a context with abhivinaye in the Vinaya-pitaka : abhidhamme vinetum 
abhivinaye vinetum,}* These were then taken as being the locative of abhidhamma 
and abhivinaya and were given a separate existence, e.g. ko tattha vinayo, ko 
tattha abhivinayo . 17 

So the compound abhidhammakatha must have meant “discourse about 
dhamma” at first, and then “discourse about abhidhamma .” 19 When it is said 
of a bhikkhu that abhidhamme kho pana abhivinaye panham puttho samsadeti no 
vissajjeti } 9 probably an elaboration and analysis of the doctrinal principles is 
intended, just as abhivinaye would mean a casuistic discussion of the rules of 
discipline. There is, however, no separate Abhivinaya, for the elaboration of 
the rules of discipline exists in the Vinaya-pitaka itself . 20 

The codification of such principles which require exposition would give rise 
to the mdtikd lists which form the basis of the Abhidhamma books, and now 
serve as tables of contents. The elaboration of these principles, their definition, 
and their proof by adding sutta passages would form the Abhidhamma proper. 
This is what we find in the Abhidhamma-pitaka collection as we have it. These 
matters must have been discussed before the separation of the Sarvastivadins 


11 As 6, 38. 

12 Bv XXIV 6. 

13 Pakarane satta desento ti tattha devdnam sattappakaranasahkhata?n Abhidhamma- 
pitakam desento vasi (Bv-a 259, 25 — 26). 

14 See CPD, s.v. abhidhamma. 

15 M II 239, 4 ( = abhivisitthe dhamme, imesu sattatimsabodhapakkhiyadhammesu 
[Ps IV 29, 3]). 

16 Vin I 64, 28 ( = namarupaparicchede vinetum na patibalo . . . sakale V inayapitake 
vinetum na patibalo [Sp 990, 3 — 4]). See I. B. Horner, “Abhidhamma Abhivinaya,” 
in IHQ, 17, 3 (1941), pp. 291—310. See also Terry C. Muck, “The meaning of 
‘Abhidhamma’ in the Pali canon”, in PBR 5, pp. 12 — 21. 

17 Vin V 1, 17. Cf. vinayo vibhatti abhivinayo (Vin V 2, 19). 

18 E.g. abhidhammakatham kathento (M I 214, 24). 

19 A IV 398, 1. 

20 Abhivinayo ti Khandhaka-Parivara (Mp V 7, 2—3 ad A IV 398, 1). 



98 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


from the Thera vadins, but not long before. The two sects agree closely in their 
Vinaya-pitakas and Sutta-pitakas, but beyond agreeing about the number of 
Abhidhamma texts, and the title of one book, there is little agreement in their 
Abhidhamma-pitakas . 21 The two collections are two sets of texts compiled by 
two sects who independently examined and elaborated the same subject matter. 

Once the word abhidhamma had lost its original meaning, the commentaries 
interpreted it as “higher, special dhamma.” At the beginning of the Atthasalini 
Buddhaghosa asks himself what abhidhamma is, and answers the question as 
follows : 

“Herein what is meant by ‘Abhidhamma’ ? That which exceeds and is distin- 
guished from the Dhamma (the Suttas). The prefix abhi, like ati, is used in the 
sense of preponderance and distinction, as in such passages as, ‘Severe pains 
overwhelm ( abhikkamanti ) me, brother, and do not abate;’ and ‘of eminent 
(abhikkanta) beauty.’ Again: Hence when many sunshades and flags are up- 
lifted, the sunshade which excels the rest in size and is of distinguished colour 
and form is called aticchattam ‘the pre-eminent sunshade,’ and the flag which 
is the largest and is replete with various distinguished paints and colours is 
called atidhaja ‘the pre-eminent flag’ ... Even so this ‘dhamma’ is called Abhi- 
dhamma, because it excels and is distinguished by several qualities from the 
other Dhamma. In the Suttanta, the five aggregates are classified partially and 
not fully. In the Abhidhamma they are classified fully by the methods of Suttanta- 
classification, Abhidhamma-classification, and catechism ... In the Suttantas 
the four applications in mindfulness are partially classified, not fully. But in the 
Abhidhamma they are classified in detail under the three methods ... In the 
Suttantas knowledge is partially classified, not fully . . . But in the Abhidhamma 
there is a detailed classification of knowledge after the table of contents [mdtika ] 
has been thus laid down : ‘Under the unitary method the basis of knowledge is . . .’ 
and so forth . . . Thus it is to be understood that the Abhidhamma exceeds and is 
distinguished from the Dhamma.” 22 

The order of texts in the Abhidhamma-pitaka is, according to Buddha- 
ghosa : 23 Dhammasangani, Vibhanga, Dhatukatha, Puggala-pannatti, Katha- 
vatthu, Yamaka, and Patthana, but in the Chinese translation of the Samanta- 
pasadika 24 the Puggala-pannatti and Kathavatthu come after Yamaka and 
Patthana. Buddhaghosa states 25 that the textual order of the Abhidhamma 
originated with Sariputta, who also determined the numerical order in the 
Patthana. He is reported to have done this to make it easy to learn, remember, 
study and teach the dhamma. To guard against accusations that this would 
mean that the Abhidhamma was not Buddha-vacana , Buddhaghosa goes on 
to say that Sariputta was not the first to understand the Abhidhamma, for 
the Buddha was the first abhidhammiJca. 


21 See Warder, IB, p. 219. 

22 As 2, 13—3, 20. 

23 As 3, 21-23. 

24 P. V. Bapat and A. Hirakawa (tr.), Shan-Chien-P’i-P’o-Sha, Poona 1970, 

p. 11. 

25 As 17, 12—14. 



The Pali Canon 


99 


4.1. Dhammasangani 

The matika of the Dhammasangani 26 consists of a list of 22 triplets ( tikas ) , 
beginning with states that are good, bad, and indeterminate, and 100 couplets 
(dukas), beginning with states that are moral roots and not moral roots. 27 
These various states (dhamma) comprise all mental material conditions, and 
the matika is an outline of a universal system of classification comprising the 
whole analytical teaching of the Buddha. 

The Dhammasangani is a “Compilation of States”, dealing with the enumera- 
tion and definition under particular group headings of these states, in accord- 
ance with the Buddha’s different modes of analysis. The term dhamma is used 
in a broader sense than the word “state” in English, and comprises not only 
the discrete states of consciousness whose individual classification depends 
upon appropriately associated mental concomitants (cetasikd) , but also those 
mental concomitants themselves. Material quality (rupa), the four great 
essentials ( mahabhuta ) , the dependent material qualities (updddya rupa ) , and 
even nibbdna (asankhata dhamma) are included within this term. 28 

The greater part of the Dhammasangani is an expansion of the matika in 
accordance with the system of analysis. So, to the question “What are good 
states ?,” the answer is given that when a good thought concerning the pheno- 
menal world has arisen there is contact (phassa), feeling (vedand), and 54 
other states. These are then defined in detail, and then subjected to further 
analysis, with summaries given of the psychological functions involved in 
each. The whole analysis is then repeated for different types of thought, and 
then for the jhdnas. The answer to the question consequently takes 66 pages. 29 
The question “What are the bad states ?” is answered more briefly, since it is 
discussed only in connection with twelve bad thoughts. 30 

The final section of the Dhammasangani 31 serves as a commentary upon the 
text, although in the Dhammasangani itself no reference is made to it being 
anything other than a genuine portion of the work. 32 Buddhaghosa, however, 
calls it atthakathdkanda , 33 and gives it the name atthuddhdra , 34 He ascribes it to 
Sariputta, and states that he uttered it for a pupil who was unable to remember 
the elucidation of the Dhammasangani. He gives, however, an alternati- 
ve story, informing us that the Maha-atthakatha rejects Sariputta’s 
authorship and ascribes it to the Buddha himself. 35 It is stated in the 

26 Ed. E. Muxler, PTS London, 1885. Tr. Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Buddhist 
Psychological Ethics, London 1900. 

27 Dhs 1-8. 

28 See Iggleden, Vibh tr., p. xvii. 

29 Dhs 9—75. 

30 Dhs 75—87. 

31 Dhs 234—64. 

32 See Mrs Rhys Davids, Dhs tr., p. 334. 

33 As 409, 22. 

34 As 6, 38. 

35 As 410, 1—10. 



100 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Dipavamsa 36 that the Atthuddhara was one of the texts rejected by the 
Mahasanghikas when they split from the Theravadins. This may mean that this 
portion of commentary did not exist at the time of the schism, or was not yet 
accepted as canonical. If the Sinhalese eommentarial tradition accepted it as 
Buddhavacana, it is probable that it had already been included in the 
Dhammasangani by the time of the third council. 37 

4.2. Vibhanga 

There were a number of topics to which the Buddha devoted particular 
attention in some of his discourses, to which a special degree of further analysis 
could be afforded, to show that not only could a general statement be made 
about the subject, but further enquiry would show that the statement of general 
truth could also be a statement of particular truth. 38 These topics included the 
five khandhas, the ayatanas, the dhatus, the four truths, the indriyas, etc. The 
beginnings of this type of analysis can be found in a number of vibhangasuttas 
in the Majjhima-nikaya. 39 

The Vibhanga 40 has eighteen chapters, most of which have three sections : 
Suttanta-bhajanlya, Abbidhamma-bhajamya, and Panhapucchaka (catechism). 
In the Suttanta-bhajanlya portion the method of analysis and the definitions 
used by the Buddha in general discourses are shown, and some of these analyses 
are found elsewhere in the canon, e.g. that of the Saccavibhanga is found in 
the Saccavibharigasutta of the Majjhima-nikaya (141), 41 with the difference 
that there it is a discourse put in the mouth of Sariputta, whereas in the 
Vibhanga it is an impersonal set of questions and answers. In the Abhidhamma- 
bhajanlya we find the technical analysis and the definitions employed when the 
same matter is discussed from a strictly philosophical point of view. In the 
chapters which have a Panhapucchaka section there is an explanation in detail 
of how each of the special terms used are to be defined within the framework 
of triplets and couplets which is enumerated in the Dhammasangani. 

The Vibhanga does not have a mdtika at the beginning, although the Moha- 
vicchedani, which is a commentary upon the mdtikds, takes the titles of the 
titles of the sections as forming a mdtika.* 2 There are, hoAvever, separate 
mdtikds occurring in four of the vibhangas , 43 

36 Dip V 37. 

37 See K. R. Norman, “Four etymologies from the Sabhiya-sutta,” in Bala- 
sooriya, BSWR, p. 184 n. 33. 

38 See Iggleden, Vibh tr., p. xviii. 

39 See M III 187 — 257 ( Vibhanga- vagga). 

40 Ed. Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, PTS London, 1904. Tr. U Thittila, The Book 
of Analysis, PTS London, 1969, with a long introduction by R. E. Iggleden. 

41 M III 249—52. 

42 Moh 116—230. 

43 Paccayakaravibhanga (138—43); Jhanavibhanga (244 — 45); Nanavibhanga 
(306—18); Khuddakavatthu vibhanga (345—49). 



The Pali Canon 


101 


The last three vibhangas merit comment. The 16th and 17th differ from the 
earlier vibhangas in that they are numerical. The 16th deals with hana , and 
collects together the very many groupings into which this subject may be 
classified in connection with the Buddha’s purpose. 44 The classification varies 
in extent from a single to a tenfold system of grouping. The first, second, and 
third depend very largely upon the triplet and couplet sections of the Dhamma- 
sangani, and are therefore similar in construction to the Panhapucehaka section 
of many other vibhangas. The 17th vibhanga deals with small items (Khuddaka- 
vatthu vibhanga), and approaches the matter of the bad states in a numerical 
system of classification similar to that found in the 16th vibhanga. The change 
of style found in these two vibhangas perhaps indicates that they are later 
than the first fifteen. 

The same suggestion has been made about the 18th vibhanga (Dhamma- 
hadaya vibhanga), 45 for it does not contain the three divisions found in most 
other vibhangas. Instead of dealing with a single topic, 46 it concerns itself with 
an analysis in terms of certain of the triplets and couplets of the Dhamma- 
sangani of twelve of the most important matters of the Buddha’s teaching, 
e.g. khandhas, ayatanas, dhatus, and truths. The first five to be discussed have 
already been examined in the first five chapters of the Vibhanga, but the 
method of approach is somewhat different. It seems to be intended not as a 
substitute or summary of what has already been given, but as a necessary 
supplement to it. 

4.3. Dhatukatha 

Although the Vibhanga devotes a whole chapter to the analysis of the ele- 
ments ( dhatus), the subject itself is of such an intricate and far-reaching nature 
that particular and detailed attention to its technicalities is required. 47 This 
great expansion of the analysis of the elements forms the contents of the 
Dhatukatha, 48 which forms the third volume of the Abhidhamma-pitaka, and 
also the third volume, with the Dhammasangani and the Vibhanga, of what 
may be regarded as a sort of trilogy. 

It is a short text of 14 chapters, in the form of questions and answers about 
the elements of psychical phenomena and their mutual relations. The matika * 9 
gives the 14 methods, viz. classification and unclassification (samgaho asam- 
gaho), classified and unclassified ( samgahitena asamgahitena), etc., under which 


44 Iggleden, Vibh tr., p. lxiv. 

45 See H. Nakamura, Indian Buddhism: a survey with bibliographical notes, 
KIJFS Publication Japan, 1980, p. 104 n. 10. 

48 Iggleden, Vibh tr., p. lxviii. 

47 Iggleden, Vibh tr., p. xxi. 

48 Ed. E. R. Gooneratne, PTS London, 1892. Tr. U Narada, Discourse on 
Elements, PTS London, 1962, with a preface by Thein Nyun. 

49 Dhatuk 1. 



102 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


the internal and external states will be considered, and then lists the 105 
internal states, viz. the five khandhas, the twelve dyatanas , etc., and states that 
the external states are the 22 triplets and 100 couplets of the Dhammasahgani 
mdtikd. It also gives the principles of the methods and their characteristics. 

The text itself is a working out of the mdtikd, whereby all the states are 
classified under the aggregates (khandhas) , bases (dyatanas) and elements 
( dhatus ) . Although the elements are also dealt with in the Dhatuvibhanga of 
the Vibhanga, and in the Dhatuyamaka of the Yamaka, the treatment there 
is in much less detail. The system employed in the Dhatukatha has been 
described as a most beautiful piece of work in the mathematical sense, a work 
of precision and analytical exactness. 50 

The text was expounded in order to dispel wrong ideas about individuality 
(atta). 51 It deals with the states (dhammas), which are the only things to be 
found, under the categories of khandhas, dyatanas, and dhatus, which are all 
anattd (non-self). Therefore there is no atta, but only the rising and passing 
away of states which are either aggregates, bases, or elements. 

4.4. Pugg ala- pahhatti 

Despite its presence in the Abhidhamma-pitaka, the Puggala-pannatti 52 
owes much, in both form and content, to the Sutta-pitaka. The non-meta- 
physical nature of the book is emphasised by the fact that in it puggala is not 
used in the sense of “underlying personality” (that is almost synonymous with 
atta), which is found in the Kathavatthu and the Milindapanha, but simply in 
the sense of “person, individual”. This possibly supports the view that the 
Puggala-pannatti is the earliest of the Abhidhamma texts. 53 

The text shows signs of having been earlier a work of the Vibhanga type, 
for the mdtikd 51 begins with the statement that there are six pahhattis, viz. 
those of the khandhas, the dyatanas, the dhatus, the saccas, the indriyas and 
the puggalas. It then goes on to list the five khandhas, the 12 dyatanas, the 
18 dhatus, the four truths, the 26 indriyas, and all the puggalas in classes from 
one to ten. The text itself, however, goes on to explain only the puggalas in 
detail. The form is very similar to that of the Sangltisutta of the Digha- 
nikaya (33), and a portion of the cattdro puggala section is identical with the 
cattdro puggala section of the Sangltisutta. 55 Similarly there are parallels with 
the satta and attha puggala sections. 56 

50 See rev. of Dhatuk tr., by R. E. Iggleden, JRAS 1964, pp. 78—79. 

51 See Thein Nyttn, Dhatuk tr., pp. xxviii— xxix. 

52 Ed. R. Morris, PTS London, 1883. Tr. B. C. Law, Designation of Human 
Types, PTS London, 1924; (German) Nyanatiloka, Das Buch der Charaktere, 
Breslau 1911. 

53 See T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, London 1903, p. 188. 

51 Pp 1—10. 

55 D III 232-33. 

56 See Morris, Pp, pp- ix— x. 



The Pali Canon 


103 


In the text itself of the Puggala-pannatti there are repetitions, inasmuch as 
the groups of nine and ten merely repeat a list of nine or ten already found in 
the list of ones. Much of the content of the text is taken from elsewhere, e.g. 
the tayo, cattdro and panca puggald sections are almost the same as passages 
which occur in the tika - , catukka-, and pancaka-nipdtas of the Anguttara- 
nikaya. 57 The text gives the impression of being a collection of most of the 
statements made about “person” in the Sutta-pitaka. 58 

The book probably represents the results of the disputes which took place in 
early Buddhism about the nature of the “person”, and which are referred to 
in the first section of the Kathavatthu. The Theravadins came to the conclu- 
sion that the puggala had no reality, was not one of the dhammas, but was a 
mere concept ( pannatti ) . It was therefore not correct for it to be included in 
the Vibhahga, which dealt with the real dhammas which existed, but it was 
made into a text by itself. The title “the concept of a person” shows that to 
the Theravadins the subject was unreal. 

4.5. Kathavatthu 

The Kathavatthu 59 is unique among canonical Pali texts in that it is the 
only one for which tradition gives us both an author and a date of composition, 
because the early chronicles state 60 that at the time of the third council the 
elder Tissa set forth the Kathavatthuppakarana, to refute the heretical doc- 
trines. 

This led to a situation where not all the Theravadin schools accepted the 
text as part of the canon, and Buddhaghosa is at pains to assert its canonical 
nature in reply to the Vitandins’ objections 61 that it was uttered by Tissa. He 
asserts that the table of contents was drawn up by the Buddha, foreseeing 
that it would be elaborated by Tissa. Consequently Tissa expounded the book 
not by his own knowledge, but according to the table of contents laid down, 
and the method given, by the Buddha. Hence the whole book became the 
word of the Buddha ( Buddha-hhdsita) , 62 The justification is exactly the same 
as that given for the Madhupindakasutta of the Majjhima-nikaya (18) and 
other suttas, namely that (in that particular case) Mahakaccana had answered 
in exactly the same way as the Buddha would have done, had he been asked. 
It is possible that Tissa made use of a structure employed by the Buddha and 
perhaps arguments put forward by him, e.g. in the first statement entitled 
Puggalakatha. 


57 See Morris, Pp, pp. x— xii. 

58 Warder, IB, p. 302. 

59 Ed. A. C. Taylor, PTS London, Yol. I, 1894; Vol. II, 1897. Tr. S. Z. Aung 
and Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Points of Controversy, PTS London, 1915. 

60 Dip VII 41; Mhv V 278. 

61 Vitandavadi pan ’ aha: Kathavatthum kasmd gahitam? (As 3, 25 — 26). 

63 As 5, 32. 



104 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


The Kathavatthu consists of a discussion of certain statements, of which 500 
were orthodox and 500 were unorthodox, according to Buddhaghosa, 63 although 
a modern authority states 64 that it contains the refutation of 252 heretical 
statements. The work is set out in 23 sections, each dealing with between five 
and twelve questions. The discussion is set in a framework of question and 
answer, although it is not always possible to be certain whether the protagonist 
in each discussion is the Thera vadin opponent or the heretic. The commentary 
usually, but not always, indicates who is speaking. 

There is no indication in the Kathavatthu itself of the names of the propa- 
gators of the heresies which are being refuted. These are supplied by Buddha- 
ghosa in his commentary, 65 and it has often been pointed out 66 that some of the 
heresies being confuted are ascribed by him to sects whose origins are usually 
dated many centuries later than Asoka. There is, however, no need in principle 
to assume that some of the heresies cannot be as early as the date normally 
given for the composition of the Kathavatthu, simply because the schools to 
which they are attributed did not exist before the first century B.G. Very few 
of the heresies seem to be anything more than obvious quibbles, which the 
audience to any sermon could have raised. The date of their adoption by a 
recognised sect could ivell have been much later. 

The framework of the dialogue is stereotyped and abbreviated, which means 
that it would have been a simple matter to add refutations of new heresies as 
they arose, merely by following the pattern of dialogue employed. The latest 
date for the addition of such refutations was probably the first century B.C., 
when the canon was written down, or the time of the closing of the commentary 
upon the Kathavatthu, i.e. the Sinhalese commentary upon which Buddha- 
ghosa’s was based, after which time any insertions would be obvious. There is, 
however, no need to doubt that the structure itself, and the first few heresies which 
are refuted, are old. The first section (Puggalakatha) deals 67 with the non- 
existence of a permanent individuality (pugg ala), which was one of the 
Buddha’s most important teachings. The second section 68 deals with the re- 
futation of a number of points about the nature of an arahant which so closely 
resemble what is stated in other traditions to have been the cause of the 
schism 69 which followed the second council that there can be no doubt that 
they are datable to a century or more before the time of Asoka. 

The Kathavatthu is noteworthy for the number of so-called “Magadhisms” 
it contains, especially the nominative singular masculine form in -e. An ana- 

63 SaJcavdde panca suttasatani paravade panca (As 6, 4). 

64 Geiger, PLL, p. 6. 

65 See p. 125 below. 

66 See Mrs Rhys Davids, Kv tr., p. xxxiii. 

67 For the methodology of Kv and the method of debate, see Jayawickrama, 
Kv-a, pp. xvii— xxi. 

68 Kv 163—204. 

69 See L. de La Vallee Poussin, “The ‘five points’ of Mahadeva and the 
Kathavatthu,” in JRAS 1910, pp. 413 — 23. 



The Pali Canon 


105 


lysis 70 of these forms indicates that except for repeated occurrences of one stock 
phrase, all the statements, heretical and otherwise, are in Pali. The -e forms 
are in the framework, where there is a consistent pattern of both -o and -e 
forms. This gives the impression that there must have been at an earlier time 
a structure in which the two dialects, viz. Pali and Magadhl, were completely 
differentiated, doubtless to make a clear distinction between the two speakers. 
This probably means that Tissa was using a structure which was already 
stereotyped in his time, and perhaps did in fact go back to the time of the 
Buddha, or at least to the second council. 

The Kathavatthu includes more canonical quotations than any other Pali 
canonical text. It quotes from the Vinaya and the Sutta-pitaka, including nine 
texts of the Khuddaka-nikaya. It also quotes from the Dhammasangani and 
the Vibhanga of the Abhidhamma-pitaka. 71 There are, however, a few discre- 
pancies in these quotations from the texts as they exist today, 72 which perhaps 
means that they were being quoted from another recension, or that the author 
was quoting from memory. 


4.6. Yamaha 

The Yamaka 73 is a hook on applied logic, and the name “book of pairs” is 
derived from the fact that all phenomena are considered in the light of a parti- 
cular thesis and its opposite antithesis. It enables a student to check whether 
all examples of a phenomenon are covered by a statement, or only some of 
them, e.g. does the statement “All X is Y” mean that all Y is X ? 

The text is in ten chapters called Yamakas. Although the printed edition 
does not have a mdtika as such, the commentary treats the chapter titles as 
though they formed a matika™ and the Mohavicchedanl confirms that this is 
a ten-fold matika.™ The title of each Yamaka explains the subjects to be 
discussed in it : Mula, dealing with the roots of kusala and akusala dhammas; 
Khandha with the five khandhas; Ayatana with the twelve ayatanas; Dhatu 
with the 18 elements; Sacca with the four noble truths; Samkhara with the 
three samkhdras (kdya-, vaci- and citta- samkhara) ; Anusaya with the inclina- 
tions; Citta with the mind and mental states; Dhamma with kusala and 
akusala dhammas; and Indriya with the 22 indriyas. 

With the exception of the Mula-yamaka and the Anusaya-yamaka, the 
method of treatment in each chapter is threefold. 76 There is first a Pannattivara, 


70 See K. R. Norman, “Magadhisms in the Kathavatthu,” in Narain, SPB, 
pp. 279—87. 

71 See Aung and Rhys Davids, Kv tr., pp. 401—404. 

72 See ibid., p. xxx n. 3, and cf. Kv 351, 18 — 21 with Khp IX 9. 

73 Ed. Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, PTS London, Yol. I, 1911; Vol. II, 1913. 

74 Yam-a 52, 9—13. 

75 Moh 278, 2—4. 

73 Yam I, pp. xix — xxi. 



106 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


in which the term and its concept are delimited, with a division into the 
uddesavara, which states only the questions, and the niddesavara, which repeats 
the questions with their various answers. The main part of the chapter is 
called in the commentary the Pavattivara. This seems to refer not to procedure 
generally, but to living process, and considers the problem of where and as 
what the individual will be reborn. The Parinnavara deals with the extent to 
which a given individual, i.e. a class of beings, understands the category under 
consideration. 

It has been suggested 77 that such a text, which seems to be intended for 
someone who has already studied the system, bvt wishes to become fully 
competent in it, is perhaps the latest of the books in the Abhidhamma-pitaka. 


4.7. Patthana 

The Patthana 78 is the last and longest book of the Abhidhamma-pitaka. It 
deals with the 22 triplets (tikas) and 100 couplets (dukas) of the Dhamma- 
sahgani, i.e. all the realities, with reference to the 24 conditions (paccayas). It 
aims to show how the causes and their results are related. In the Patthana, 
the dhammas in the form of triplets, couplets, couplet-triplet combinations, 
triplet- couplet combinations, triplet-triplet combinations, and couplet- couplet 
combinations are treated by four methods: positive, negative, positive-negative 
and negative-positive. The triplets, etc., are dealt with under seven headings: 
dependent, co-nascent, conditional, supported, conjoined, associated, and in- 
vestigation. Under each heading the relations between the conditioning states 
and the conditioned states of the conditions involved in each state are treated. 

The text consists of a mdtikd, 1 9 listing the 24 conditions, viz. hetu, drammana, 
adhipati, etc. ; a questions chapter ; and then the triplets followed by the 
couplets, etc. In the questions chapter, the questions are asked taking the con- 
ditions singly, and then by twos, by threes, etc., up to the maximum combina- 
tion of 24, referring to each of the seven ways of taking the triplet (i.e. the 
seven combinations of each), in relation to each way of taking the triplet, by 
the four methods, viz. positive, negative, etc., and under the seven headings, 
viz. dependent, co-nascent, etc. If all the possible combinations were taken, 
there would be about half a billion questions, 80 but not all can be answered, 
e.g. for the 49 questions obtained by combining the first ( = hetu ) condition 
with dependent heading, in the positive, only nine answers are obtained. In 


77 See Warder, IB, p. 302. 

78 Ed. Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Dukapatthana, PTS London, 1906; Tika- 
patthana, PTS London, Vol. I, 1921; Vol. II, 1922; Vol. Ill, 1923. Tr. U Narada, 
Conditional Relations, PTS London, Vol. I, 1969 ; Vol. II, 1981. See also U Narada, 
Guide to Conditional Relations, PTS London, Part I, 1979. 

79 See U Narada, Patth tr., Vol. I, p. 1. 

80 See ibid., p. xv. 



The Pali Canon 


107 


the classification ( vibhahga ) section these are dealt with at length, but in the 
enumeration ( sahkhyd ) section only the numbers are given. 

The text does not give all the questions and answers, but only those necessary 
for illustrating the types of the questions. So, only the 49 questions for the 
first condition, taken singly, are given in full, the remainder being abbreviated, 
although the numbers are given in the enumeration chapter. These chapters 
are very difficult to understand, since they consist mostly of numerals. Since 
the enumeration chapters of the Patthana list arithmetically the numbers of 
answers to each question, the exposition of this subject is very susceptible to 
presentation by charts. 81 

4.8. The Abhidharma in Sanskrit 

As already noted, 82 the Sarvastivadins possessed an Abhidharma-pitaka, 
which like the Theravadin Abhidhamma-pitaka contained seven texts. An 
examination of the titles of these texts, 83 however, shows that only one, viz. 
the Dhatukaya, resembles any of the Theravadin texts, and we must either 
assume that the number seven in each collection is a coincidence, or deduce 
that the Sarvastivadins were aware of the number of texts in the Theravadin 
Abhidhamma-pitaka and deliberately rejected their texts and replaced them 
by new ones after the schism. 84 

One of the Sarvastivadin texts is entitled Sangrti-paryaya, and is attributed 
to Sariputra in the Chinese translations, but to Maha-kausthila in Sanskrit and 
Tibetan sources. 85 This text seems to be a commentary upon the Sangitisutta 
of the Digha-nikaya (33), which is also attributed to Sariputta. 86 A fragment 
has been found at Bamiyan and published, 87 and more fragments have been 
discovered in Turkestan. 88 


81 See ibid., between pp. lxiv and lxv. 

82 See p. 17 above. 

83 See J. Takakusd, “On the Abhidharma literature of the Sarvastivadins,’’ in 
JPTS 1904—1905, pp. 66—146. 

84 See Warder, IB, p. 219. 

85 See Takakustj, JPTS 1904—1905, between pp. 74 and 75. 

86 See Warder, IB, p. 219. 

87 See S. Levi, “Note sur des manuscrits sanscrits provenant de Bamiyan 
(Afghanistan), et de Gilgit (Cachemire),” in JA 1932, pp. 1—45. 

88 See Valentina Stache -Rosen, Das Sangitisutra und sein Kommentar 
Sangltiparyaya, Berlin 1968 (STT, IX). 



Chapter III 


EARLY POST-CANONICAL TEXTS 


1. EARLY PROSE TEXTS 


It seems clear that early in the history of Buddhism a need was felt for 
guidance on how to interpret suttas, so that those bhikkhus who wished to 
teach and explain the Dhamma to their followers might be able to do so. The 
result of this need was the production of two works which are in effect treatises 
upon hermeneutics, offering instructions for analysing, construing, investigat- 
ing, and identifying common themes in the Dhamma, so that anyone wishing 
to interpret could derive from the texts a correct understanding of the meaning 
of the Dhamma. 1 

The Petakopadesa 2 seems to be the earlier of these two works. Its name 
presupposes a pitaka of which it is the upadesa. 3 As already noted, 4 the word 
pitaka occurs very rarely in the canon in the metaphorical sense of “a basket 
of scriptures,” but it is not applied to the Buddha’s teachings. Since the word 
petakin occurs in inscriptions of the second century B.C., there would be no 
objection to dating the Petakopadesa to that century, or even earlier. There is 
nothing in the text to suggest any connection with Ceylon, and it was probably 
composed in India. 5 

The work is ascribed to Kaccana, 6 but if it was in fact composed by an 
author of that name, then the need to date the work some time after the 
completion of the canon means that it cannot be the Kaccana who was a 
disciple of the Buddha. Since that Kaccana was renowned for his analytical 
powers, 7 it is perhaps not surprising that a book entirely devoted to analysis 
should be attributed to him. It is probably this attribution which has led to the 
Petakopadesa being regarded as canonical in Burma. 8 

1 See G. D. Bond, “The nature and meaning of the Netti-Pakarana,” in Narain, 
SPB, p. 30. 

2 Ed. Arabinda Bartta, PTS London, 1949. Tr. Bhikkhtj Nanamoli, The 
Pitaka-Disclosure, PTS London, 1964. 

* Nanamoli, Pet tr., p. xi. 

4 See p. 16 above. 

6 Nanamoli, Pet tr., p. xi. 

6 See Pet, p. ii. 

7 Etad aggam bhikkhave mama savakdnam bhikkhunam . . . sankhittena bhasitaasa 
vitthdrena attham vibhajantanam yadidam Mahd-Kaccdno (A I 23, 27—29). 

8 See Bode, PLB, p. 5. 



Early post -canonical texts 


109 


Little is known about the history of the text . Buddhaghosa quotes a passage 
from a text he calls Petaka , 9 but the quotation he gives is not in our modern 
editions. He was perhaps quoting from a different text, with a similar name, or 
from a different recension of our text , 10 or it is possible that the sentence he 
quotes occurred in a passage which is now missing. The commentator Dhamma- 
pala states that he has collated the Petakopadesa with the Nettippakarana 11 
before writing his commentary upon the latter text, but at some later date the 
Petakopadesa must have fallen into disuse, doubtless as a result of being 
eclipsed by its successor, and the manuscript tradition must have been very 
close to extinction. All available editions of the work must go back to a single 
manuscript, for they all show the same corruption, arising from the inclusion 
of a portion of the Sumangalavilasini, from which a page of a manuscript must 
have intruded at some time without being noticed . 12 

The method the Petakopadesa teaches is conceived simply for the purpose of 
the correct rewording of known ideas. It is intended to help those who already 
know intellectually the Buddha’s word and the ideas it promulgates. It is 
not intended to discover anything new, or to prove any conclusion at all. It 
is aimed at those who, knowing the Buddha’s Dhamma, wish to explain it and 
expand it for the benefit of those who do not know but wish to learn. Its 
purpose is to avoid wrong exegesis, which may lead to contradictions and 
departures from the teaching. 

The method follows the following pattern . 13 Since any individual ‘ Thread” 
(sutta) of the Buddha’s teaching must, when reworded in explanation of it, be 
reworded in agreement with the teaching as a whole, and not in conflict with it, 
and since the teaching as a whole is enormously bulky, sixteen modes (haras) 
of conveying a communication are set up, so as to represent the teaching as a 
whole. When an individual thread is expanded and explained in accordance 
with these sixteen haras, the resulting new material should thereby avoid 
conflict with the teaching as a whole. The haras deal only with phrasing. For 
guiding the phrases, when established in this acceptable way, to the meaning- 
as-aim, viz. liberation from suffering, which is prescribed by the teaching as a 
whole, five guide lines ( nayas ) are set out to guide the tested phrasing to the 
verbal expression of its meaning-as-aim. 

Although early Western scholars thought that the Nettippakarana was 
merely a commentary, it is clear that it is, like the Petakopadesa, a guide to 
those who wished to write commentaries, or give explanations of canonical 
texts . 14 A close comparison of the two texts shows that they are very similar 


9 Vism 141, 13 = As 165, 32 = Sp 143, 29. See Nanamoli, Pet tr,, p. 400. 

10 See Nanamoli, Nett tr., p. xiii n. 18 and p. xv n, 22. 

11 Petakenapi samsandetva (Nett-a quoted at Nett, p. x). 

12 See Nanamoli, Nett tr., pp. xiv — xvi. 

13 See ibid., p. viii. 

14 See ibid., p. vii. 



110 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


in content . 15 The material which is found in the Petakopadesa, but not in the 
Nettippakarana, seems sufficiently unimportant to the method for its omission 
to be justified. The material found in both seems to be in an improved form in 
the Nettippakarana. It therefore seems correct to conclude that neither text 
is a continuation of the other, but that the Nettippakarana is a rewritten version 
of the Petakopadesa. Its superiority would explain why it has a commentary 
by Dhammapala, while the Petakopadesa has no commentary. It seems in- 
conceivable that anyone who has read the Nettippakarana could then go on to 
write the Petakopadesa, while the converse seems quite reasonable. 

The fact that the Nettippakarana 16 contains verses composed in the Aryd 
metre 17 implies that these portions, at least, of the text were composed in 
North India 18 at some time prior to the introduction of the text into Ceylon, 
for it is clear that the knowledge of the Arya metre was lost in Ceylon . 19 Since 
the use of the metre was lost in Pali at an early date, it is likely that the verses 
must have been composed at some time before the beginning of the Christian 
era. This, of course, implies a date earlier than this for the composition of the 
Petakopadesa. Like the Petakopadesa, the Nettippakarana is regarded as 
canonical in Burma . 20 It is ascribed to Kaecana , 21 who is identified with the 
Buddha’s disciple by the commentator Dhammapala. 

The influence of the Nettippakarana and, through it, of the Petakopadesa is 
great. Buddhaghosa makes use of its method, and many of the technical terms 
and normative details employed by him and other commentators are borrowed 
from it . 22 Buddhaghosa, on occasion, quotes from it . 23 

Another early prose text for which an Indian provenance has been surmised 
is the Milindapanha , 24 which gives an account of a dialogue between the Greek 
king Milinda (= Menander) and the them Nagasena. Nothing is known cer- 
tainly about the origin of this text. An earlier limit for its date of composition 
is given by the fact that Menander ruled in the middle of the second century 
B.C ., 25 while it must have been completed by the fifth century A.D., since 

15 See ibid., pp. xvii — xviii. 

16 Ed. E. Hardy, PTS London, 1902. Tr. Bhikkhu Nanamoli, The Guide, 
PTS London, 1962. 

17 Nett 1, 4—13. 

18 A North Indian origin is also suggested by the number of unidentified verses 
it contains. See Horner, Mil tr., I, p. xv. 

19 See Alsdorf, Thi (Appendix II), p. 233. 

20 See Bode, PLB, p. 5. 

21 See Nett, pp. viii — ix, and Nanamoli, Nett tr., pp. x — xii. 

22 See Nanamoli, Nett tr., pp. liii— liv. 

23 E.g. Ps'l 31, 8. 

24 Ed. Y. Trenckner, London, 1880. Tr. T. W. Rhys Davids, The questions of 
King Milinda, London, Vol. I, 1890; Vol. II 1894 (= SBE Vols XXXV, XXXVI); 
I. B. Horner, Milinda’s Questions, SBB London, Vol. I, 1963; Vol. II, 1964; 
(French) L. Finot, (Books I— III), Paris 1923; (German) F. O. Schrader, (Books 
I-III), Berlin 1905; Nyanatiloka, Munehen 1919. 

25 For suggestions about the date of Menander see Horner, Mil tr., I, pp. xxii — 



Early post-canonical texts 


111 


Buddhaghosa quotes from it, 26 and clearly regards it as authoritative. Since 
the words he quotes do not agree entirely with the text as we have it, it is not 
absolutely certain that the text he had available to him was identical with 
ours. 

From the facts that Menander’s kingdom was in North-West India, 27 his 
ministers have names which can in some cases be related to genuine Greek 
names, 28 some knowledge of a typical Greek city is shown, 29 all geographical 
details relate to North India, 30 and there are one or two words and phrases in 
the text which do not follow the usual pattern of Pali, 31 it has been assumed 
that the Milindapanha is a Pali translation from a Sanskrit or Prakrit original 
composed in North India about the beginning of the Christian era. 32 There is 
also a Chinese version, which can be dated to a time earlier than the fourth 
century A.D. 33 Since it differs somewhat from the Pali version, it has been 
thought to be based upon the (hypothetical) Sanskrit version. It has also been 
suggested that the original of the Milindapanha was in fact written in 
Greek. 34 

It is clear that the text is made up of material composed at different times. 
From the fact that the words Milindapanhanam pucchdvissajjand samatta 
occur at the end of Book III, 35 it has been deduced that this was the end of the 
original portion of the Milindapanha, but it is possible to see that even in this 
short portion there are insertions. There is a reference to the six teachers 36 
which is entirely anachronistic, since it refers to conditions at the time of the 
Buddha, and is based upon the Samannaphalasutta of the Digha-nikaya (2). 
There are also sections 37 dealing with the earlier births of Milinda and Naga- 
sena, and a biography of Nagasena from his conception to the attainment of 
ardhant- ship. 


xxiv. W. W. Tarn, The Greeks in Bactria and India, Cambridge 1938, pp. 225 — 26, 
suggests that he reigned c. 161 — 150/145 B.C. 

26 See the list of correspondences given by Horner, Mil tr., I, p. xx. 

27 Milinda is said to have approached Nagasena at Sagala, which is perhaps the 
modern Sialkot. See Horner, Mil tr., I, p. 1 n. 3. 

28 See Rhys Davids, Mil tr., I, p. xix, and Tarn, op. cit. (in n. 25), pp. 422—23. 

29 See Tarn, op. cit. (in n. 25), pp. 419 — 20. 

30 There is mention of Alasanda, Kasmira and the village of Kalasi (Mil 82 — 83). 

31 Trenckner points out (Mil, p. vii) that the opening phrase tamyathd ’ nusuyate 
is found in no other Pali writing, and it is only in Mil that quotations are introduced 
by bhavatiha. The word datta “sickle” (Mil 33, 3) with an unexpected long vowel 
before a geminate consonant must also be a borrowing from a non-Pali dialect. See 
R. L. Turner, Collected Papers: 1912—1973, pp. 432 — 34. 

32 See Rhys Davids, Mil tr., I, p. xi. 

33 See P. Demieviule, “Les versions cbinoises du Milindapanha,” in BEFEO, 24 
(1924), pp. 1-258. 

34 See Tarn, op. cit. (in n. 25), pp. 414—36. 

35 Mil 89, 17. See Winternitz, HIL, p. 176. 

38 Mil 4, 15—5, 30. 

37 See Winternitz, HIL, p. 178 n. 1. 



112 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


In the remaining sections of this older part, the king puts forward problems 
about human identity 38 and the continuity of human existence, and Nagasena 
solves them. Books IV— VII 39 are different in style, and are clearly later than 
the first portion and probably by a different author. Since Buddhaghosa quotes 
from this later part, it must have been composed before the fifth century A.D., 
but there is no way of telling how much before. This portion of the Milindapanha 
deals with the solution of puzzles which arise from apparently contradictory 
statements made by the Buddha. These are presented in the form of 82 dilem- 
mas put to Nagasena by Milinda. The texts from which extracts are quoted in 
these puzzles include the greater part of the canon, 40 and reveal the wide 
breadth of knowledge of the author of this portion of the text. 

There are other indications in the Milindapanha that the tradition which lies 
behind it differs somewhat from that of other Pali texts. One problem which it 
raises is that of the presence in it of a number of verses which are attributed 
to theras, and yet are not found in the Thera- or Therlgatha, or elsewhere in the 
canon. 41 These are quoted by the author of the Milindapanha with as much or 
as little authority as the other theras ’ verses he quotes. It seems likely that 
they were transmitted in some non-Thera vadin, or at least some non-canonical 
Theravadin source, 42 perhaps in North India, which is no longer available to 
us. In support of the first suggestion is the fact that one feature included in the 
Milindapanha is very likely due to Sarvastivadin influence. 43 

Although, as already noted, Buddhaghosa sometimes quotes from the 
Milindapanha by name, there are some verses in the Visuddhimagga and other 
commentaries which are identical with verses in the Milindapanha, but the 
latter text is not quoted as the source. On one occasion the verse is ascribed to 
the poranas , 44 and this perhaps indicates that both the Milindapanha and 
Buddhaghosa took it from the mass of floating verses in the commentarial 
tradition. The author of the Milindapanha was also acquainted with a school 
of Khuddaka-6Mwa£a.s, 45 which seem not to be mentioned by any other source. 46 

38 Nagasena’s statement na h' ettha puggalo upalabbhati (Mil 25, 12 — 13) is rem- 
iniscent of the first question of the Kathavatthu: puggalo upalabbhati saccikattha- 
paramatthend ti (Kv 1, 4). 

39 Mil 90— 420. 

40 See Rhys Davids, Mil tr., I, pp. xxvii— xxxvi, and Horner, Mil tr., p. xi. 

41 These are discussed by Horner, Mil tr., pp. xii — xv. 

42 See Horner, Mil tr., p. xv. 

43 Nagasena states (Mil 268 and 271) that both nibbana and dkdsa are akammaja. 
The usual Theravadin teaching is that nibbana alone is asamkhata (see Horner, 
Mil tr., p. xviii). Horner (p. xlii) comments on the fact that this particular tenet 
was allowed to remain in Mil, and was not expunged as being contrary to orthodox 
teaching. The Milindapanha is, in fact, regarded as canonical in Burma (see Bode, 
PLB, p. 4). 

44 Buddhaghosa attributes Vism 270, 16—18 to the poranas, while the same verse 
at Mil 369, 22 — 24 is said to have been uttered by the theras who made a recension 
of the Dhamma (bhdsitam ... therehi dhammasangahakehi ) . 

45 Mil 342, 1. 

46 See Adikaram, EHBC, p. 25, and Horner, Mil tr., I, p. xxii. 



Early post -canonical texts 


113 


The relationship between these bhanakas and the Jataka -bhanakas, whom he 
mentions at the same time, is not clear. 

The fourth of these early prose texts which were probably composed in 
North India is the Vimuttimagga, and as will be noted below there is some 
doubt as to whether this work is still extant. Its importance lies in the fact that 
it was made use of by Buddhaghosa when he wrote the Visuddhimagga. Bud- 
dhaghosa does not quote the Vimuttimagga by name, but the author of the 
tika upon the Visuddhimagga states that the word ekacce (at Vism 102, 31) 
refers to the thera Upatissa who was responsible for proposing a refuted method 
of classifying temperaments in the Vimuttimagga. 47 A Chinese translation of 
this text, made in A. D. 505, exists, 48 and it includes the refuted suggestion. It 
also includes other points rejected by Buddhaghosa, which Dhammapala 
ascribes to the Abhayagiri vihara . 49 This has led to a belief that the Vimutti- 
magga was an Abhayagiri text, 50 which was regarded as lost with almost all 
other Abhayagiri texts when the Mahavihara finally triumphed over its main 
opponent. It has, however, been pointed out that all the points which Buddha- 
ghosa refutes are non-Mahayana, and are well within the Hinayana field. 51 The 
Vimuttimagga has, therefore, been identified as a Theravada text. 52 

It has been suggested 53 that the author Upatissa was the same as the Upa- 
tissa who is mentioned in the lists of theras in the Parivara of the Vinaya-pitaka. 
If this suggestion is correct, then the text would date from about the first 
century A.D., but there is no other evidence to support this suggestion. All 
that can be said is that, if Dhammapala is correct, Buddhaghosa knew of the 
Vimuttimagga, which must therefore be earlier than the fifth century A.D., 
but not necessarily much earlier. 

A comparison of the Visuddhimagga with the Vimuttimagga, in its Chinese 
form, shows that the latter is much shorter than the former. 54 It follows the 
same three general divisions of slla, samadhi, and pahhd, but does not super- 
impose the pattern of the seven visuddhis. Less space is devoted to the pahhd 
portions and there are no illustrative stories. Although the appearance in both 
works of what appear to be several nearly identical passages suggests that they 
both drew much from the same sources, the general style differs. The main 
differences between the two texts arise from the way of handling the four 


47 Ekacce ti Upatissattheram sandhay ’ aha: tena hi Vimuttimagge tathd vuttam 
(Vism-mht [Ne 1969] I 221, 22). 

48 There is an English translation by N. R. M. Ehara, Soma Thera, and Khe- 
minda Thera, The path of freedom, Colombo 1961. 

49 See Nanamoli, Vism tr., p. xxvii, and Bap at, VV, pp. xli— xlii. 

50 See Bap at, W, p. xlix, and P. C. Bagchi, “On the original Buddhism, its 
canon and language,” in Sino-Indian Studies, II (1946—47), p. 113. 

51 See Nanamoli, Vism tr., p. xxvii. 

52 See A. Bareaxj, Les sectes bouddhiques du petit vehicule, Saigon 1955, p. 242. 

53 By M. Nagai, “The Vimutti-magga: the ‘way to deliverance,’” in JPTS 
1917—1919, pp. 69—80. 

54 See Nanamoli, Vism tr., p. xxvii. 



114 


K. R. Norman ■ Pali Literature 


measureless states and the four immaterial states, while the way in which the 
Vimuttimagga describes the thirteen ascetic practices ( dhutahgas ) is quite differ- 
ent too. It has been suggested 55 that the Vimuttimagga was composed in North 
India, and the existence of a Tibetan version of the portion dealing with the dhu- 
tangas possibly supports this view, 56 for translations from Pali into Tibetan are 
very rare. 57 Another view, however, concludes that it was the product of either 
the Abhayagiri vihara or the Jetavana vihara™ The presence in it of some points 
accepted by the Abhayagiri vihara does not, however, prove that it was a 
product of that centre. It could well have been composed elsewhere and then 
adopted by the Abhayagiri viharins. 

An edition of a text entitled Vimuttimagga 59 was published in Ceylon in 
1963. A reviewer of this edition has stated that in his opinion 60 it is a modern 
work, based upon a critical analysis of the Visuddhimagga and the Chinese 
translation of the Vimuttimagga, which he himself had published some years 
earlier. 


2. THE EARLY CHRONICLES 


Tradition, as recorded by Buddhaghosa, 61 states that the commentaries were 
brought to Ceylon by Mahinda. It can be deduced that included in this com- 
mentarial material was information about the early history of Buddhism in 
North India. To this in the course of time was added material concerning the 
introduction of Buddhism to Ceylon, and its subsequent progress there. 

Nothing is known about the language or languages in which this historical 
material was composed. It seems probable that, like the canon itself, it was 
originally in a number of dialects, but it is uncertain whether it was reduced to 
a single dialect when the canon was rendered into Pali. It is also probable that 
the additions made in Ceylon were in the current Sinhalese Prakrit. From the 
form of later texts which were based upon this historical tradition it has been 
deduced that it consisted of a mixture of prose and verse, and it has been claimed 
that the prose was in Sinhalese Prakrit while the verses were in Pali. 62 The main 
reason for this belief appears to be the fact that later classical Sinhalese prose 
is often interspersed with Pali and Sanskrit verse, but almost never with Sin- 


55 By Bapat, W, p. liv. 

5G P. V. Bapat, Vimuktimarga Dhutagunanirdesa, Delhi, 1964. 

57 They do, however, occur. See Ehara, op. cit. (in n. 48), pp. xl — xli. 

58 See Bareatj, op. cit. (in n. 52), p. 242. 

59 Ed. Shri Ratana.joti and Shri Ratanapala, printed at Government Press, 
Ceylon 1963. 

60 Rev. by P. V. Bapat, Journal of Vidyalankara University of Ceylon, pp. 172 — 
90. 

61 Sv 1, 17 = Ps I 1, 23 = Spk I 1, 19 = Mp I 1, 20. 

62 See Geiger, DM, p. 45, and Oldenberg, Dip, p. 4. 



Early post-canonical texts 


115 


halese verse. 63 As will be seen, there is some evidence that some, at least, of the 
verses were in a non-Pali dialect of Middle Indo-Aryan. 64 

The first extant attempt to put together history and legend in verse and to 
make a continuous chronicle (vamsa) about Ceylon is the Dipavamsa. 65 This 
tells in 22 chapters the history of the island from the time of the Buddha, who 
is reported to have visited Ceylon three times, down to the end of the reign of 
Mahasena in the fourth century A. D. 66 It must therefore have been written 
after the time of that king. The fact that it is quoted by name several times by 
Buddhaghosa 67 suggests that it is to be dated to the period between Mahasena 
and Buddhaghosa, but some doubt remains because there are minor differences 
between Buddhaghosa’s quotations and the text which we possess, which may 
mean that Buddhaghosa was following a different recension of the text, 68 or 
that he was quoting from an earlier version of the text than the one we have, 
perhaps even a Dipavamsa-a//Aa&a(M upon which our Dipavamsa is based. 

Before beginning the account of the history of Ceylon, the early history of 
Buddhism in India is related, down to the time of Asoka and the sending out of 
the missionaries, and including accounts of the three councils. The story of 
Ceylon proper begins in chapter nine. The text shows signs of being made up 
from a collection of material which frequently overlaps. The author makes no 
attempt to assimilate his material, but is content to place different versions of 
the same occurrence side by side. So we find two slightly divergent names of 
the same individual, 69 two descriptions of the first council 70 and of the second 
council, 71 with some verses identical in the two versions. There are also two 
versions of the third council, 72 while the story of the presents sent to Ceylon by 
Asoka is treated three times. 73 

Many verses in the Dipavamsa are so sketchy that they are unintelligible 
without help. Where the relevant stories recur in the later Mahavamsa the 
essential details are added, and we are able to use the later text as a commentary 
upon the earlier one. 74 There are also verses which were clearly intended to be 

63 See Bechert, BCSRS, p. 15. 

64 See p. 1 18 below. 

65 Ed. and tr. H. Oldenberg, London 1879; B. C. Law, in Ceylon Historical 
Journal, 7 (1957—58), pp. 1—266. 

66 Mahasena is dated A.D. 277—304 by Geiger in DM, p. 34, but A.D. 325—52 
by the same scholar in Mhv tr., p. xxxviii. 

87 See p. 116 below. 

68 See Oldenberg, Dip, p. 9 n. 1. 

69 E.g. Bhatutissa at XXII 18, but Bhatikatissa at XXII 30. 

70 At IV 1—26 and V 1—15. 

71 At IV 47—53 and V 16—38. 

72 At VII 34—43 and VII 44—59. 

73 At XI 32-40, XII 1-4, and XVII 83-86. 

74 Oldenberg draws attention to the story of the conversion of Moggallana at 
Dip V 55—68 and Mhv V 95—153. Cf. also Dip II 17 — 18 with Mhv I 52 — 57 ; Dip 
II 29 with Mhv I 48—51; Dip VI 13 with Mhv V 89 — 97; Dip VII 49 with Mhv 
V 238-42. 



116 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


memory verses . 75 In the form in which they occur in the Dipavamsa they are 
sometimes meaningless, and it is only the fact that they are elaborated in the 
Mahavamsa which enables us to understand them . 76 These facts are consistent 
with a belief that the Dipavamsa was dependent upon a written tradition which 
was in turn based upon an oral tradition, in which memory verses were ess- 
ential. 

The author’s name is unknown. His command of Pali seems to have been 
poor. The syntax of some of his sentences is very difficult, and he is capable of 
producing grammatical monstrosities . 77 The metre is Sloka and Jagatl, except 
for a few passages which seem to be in prose , 78 although it has been claimed 79 
that these are really verses in irregular metres. 

Although the introductory Bahiranidana which Buddhaghosa prefixes to 
the Samantapasadika 80 is not a vamsa, it is convenient to deal with it here 
because it is to a large extent based upon the same materials as the Dipavamsa. 
Buddhaghosa wrote this introduction to explain the Nidana, the “inception” 
or “origin” of the Vinaya, with the aim of establishing the authenticity of the 
Vinaya before starting to comment upon it . 81 To this end he gives an account 
of the history of Buddhism down to the proclamation of the Vinaya-pitaka by 
Maha-arittha in the presence of Devanampiyatissa, under the presidency of 
Mahinda, after the introduction of Buddhism to the island. 

In his account of the first three councils Buddhaghosa is dependent upon the 
historical material collected at the Mahavihara. As we have seen, it is clear 
from the use made of the same material by the author of the Dipavamsa that it 
consisted of two or three versions of some of the events, which had been trans- 
mitted in a quite disjointed fashion. Whereas these versions are simply included 
side by side in the Dipavamsa, Buddhaghosa makes a very successful attempt 
to integrate them. 

Buddhaghosa twice quotes 82 the Dipavamsa by name when quoting verses, 
but the fact that there are slight variations from the text of the Dipavamsa 
which we possess perhaps means that he was quoting from a different recen- 
sion, or that he was quoting directly from the Slhala version of the Dipavamsa, 
upon which the text we have was based. Since some of the verses are memory 
verses, it is likely that they are old ones from the Slhala-atthakatha. On a 

75 E.g. Dip XVII 3 — 4, expanded at 5 — 25. 

76 E.g. Dip XIX 2 — 3 is expanded at Mhv XIX 2 — 12. 

77 E.g. theranam occurs as an accusative singular form at Dip XII 83 — 84 and 
XIV 60, doubtless by analogy with rajanam. 

78 Dip IV 47 and XII 30 — 33. 

79 By N. A. Jayawickrama, “Literary activity in Pali,” in PBR 5 (1980), p. 80 
n. 12. 

80 Ed. and tr. N. A. Jayawickrama, Inception of Discipline and Vinayanidana, 
SBB London, 1962. 

81 Jayawickrama, ibid., p. xi. 

82 Dip XI 15—17 quoted at Sp 74, 19 — 22 and Dip XII 1 — 6 quoted at Sp 75, 15 — 
76, 11. 



Early post -canonical texts 


117 


further occasion Buddhaghosa quotes a verse found in the Dipavamsa, but he 
merely introduces it with the words yathaha , 83 Another verse is given without 
any reference to the source, 84 and two further verses, almost identical with two 
in the Dipavamsa, are quoted on the authority of the pordnas , 85 which would 
suggest that Buddhaghosa was indeed quoting the sources from which the 
Dipavamsa itself drew its material. On the other hand, in his commentary upon 
the Kathavatthu Buddhaghosa quotes a long passage from the Dipavamsa 86 
which agrees so closely with the text which we have that it is certain that, for 
that portion at least, Buddhaghosa had access to a text virtually identical with 
ours. 

The second of the great vamsa texts is the Mahavamsa. 87 The commentary 
upon the text states that the author’s name was Mahanama. 88 He gives as his 
reason for writing the Mahavamsa the fact that the earlier work compiled by 
the pordnas was sometimes too lengthy and sometimes too abbreviated, and 
contained many repetitions. 89 This is so clearly a description of the Dipavamsa 
that it has been thought to apply to it, 90 and it was assumed that the Maha- 
vamsa was intended simply as a replacement of the Dipavamsa. The author of 
the commentary upon the Mahavamsa, however, states that the author of the 
Mahavamsa was referring to a Sihalatthakatha-Mahavamsa, 91 which was full 
of faults. This was presumably a historical text, or an introduction to a work. 
The commentary further states that the Mahavamsa is a translation of the 
poranatthakathd from the Sihala language into MdgacLhiJca-bhdsd, i.e. Pali, and 
calls the text Padyapadoru vamsa because it is written in verse. 92 

The Mahavamsa begins and ends where the Dipavamsa does, 93 but it both 
adds and subtracts. It omits, for example, the description of the changes made 
to the canon by the Mahasanghikas after they had split from the Theravadins, 94 
but whereas the Dipavamsa devotes only 13 verses to Dutthagamani, 95 the 
Mahavamsa inserts what was doubtless in origin an independent poem about 
him, comprising eleven chapters. 96 

83 Dip XII 52 quoted at Sp 76, 19 — 20. 

84 Dip IY 50—54 quoted at Sp 34, 27 — 35, 6. 

85 Dip XII 35—37 quoted at Sp 71, 18—23; Dip XII 38—39 quoted at Sp 70, 24 — 
71, 1. 

86 Dip Y 30 — 53 quoted at Kv-a 3, 10 — 5, 9. 

87 Ed. and tr. G. Tuenovb, Ceylon 1837; Ed. W. Geiger, PTS London, 1908; 
Tr. W. Geiger, PTS London, 1912. 

88 Mhv-t 687, 4. 

89 Mhv I 2. 

90 See Geiger, DM, p. 17. 

91 Mhv-t 36, 5—7. 

92 Mhv-t, p. lvii. Cf. padyapadagathdbandhena kathesi (Mhv-t 42, 8). 

93 Doubtless because both works were based upon the same body of commentarial 
material. 

94 Dip V 32—38. 

95 Dip XVIII 53 — XIX 11. 

96 Mhv XXII-XXXII. See Geiger, DM, pp. 19—20. 



118 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Mahanama may be said to have succeeded in his aim of writing a work which 
is free from faults. 97 The reason for the fact that the Mahavamsa is so superior 
to the Dipavamsa is perhaps to be seen in Buddhaghosa’s work. It has been 
suggested that Mahanama educated himself for the task of writing his great 
chronicle by reading Buddhaghosa’s introduction to the Samantapasadika. 98 
The text has many claims to be regarded as a kavya ." The metre throughout 
is $loka, apart from a prose quotation from the Yamaka, 100 except that the final 
verse of each chapter is in an ornate metre, e.g. Sragdhara (I), Rucird (II), 
V asantatilakd (III), etc. 

Although the Mahavamsa we possess is a very long work, taking the history 
of Ceylon right down to the nineteenth century, the older original composition, 
of which alone the commentary gives an explanation, ends in the middle of 
chapter XXXVII, where we find after verse 50 the words Mahavamso nitthito. 
Verse 50 is in the tfloka metre, which indicates that it was not the original 
ending to the chapter, for which an ornate metre would have been expected. 
Presumably the original ending was removed when the chapter was coni iaued, 101 

It would seem that the Dipavamsa, Buddhaghosa’s Bahiranidana, and the 
Mahavamsa are all based on the Sihala atthakathd material which was kept at 
the Mahavihara, and the differences between these three works are due to the 
various authors making use of different strands of the material, and laying 
different emphasis upon the material which they have in common. It has been 
suggested 102 that some of the differences between the Bahiranidana and the 
Mahavamsa arise from the fact that the former was translated directly from 
Sinhalese Prakrit prose into Pali prose, while the author of the latter was 
under the restriction of metrical considerations. The differences between verses 
in the Dipavamsa and the Bahiranidana have been put down to recension varia- 
tion, 103 but such differences could equally well be explained as arising from 
alternative interpretations of verses in non-Pali dialects. 104 


3. THE EARLY COMMENTARIES 


At the beginning of several of his commentaries Buddhaghosa states 105 that 
he is basing his explanations upon the atthakathas which were first recited by 
the 500 theras, i.e. at the first council, and afterwards brought to Ceylon by 

97 See Mhv I 3. 

98 By Geiger, DM, p. 74. If this is so, then Mahanama is later than Buddhaghosa. 

99 See Geiger, DM, pp. 16—17. 

100 Mhv V 145. 

101 See Geiger, DM, pp. 18—19. 

10 2 See Jayawickrama, Sp tr., p. xxxv. 

103 See p. 115 above. 

104 See K. R. Norman, “The role of Pali in early Sinhalese Buddhism,” in 
Bec 0 ekt > BCSRS, p. 36. 

105 Sv 1, 15-18 = Ps I 1, 21-24 = Spk I 1, 17-20 = Mp I 1, 18-21. 



Early post-canonical texts 


119 


Mahinda and translated into the Sinhalese language for the sake of the in- 
habitants of the island. From the many references to events and personages in 
Ceylon which we find in Buddhaghosa’s commentaries, and which were pre- 
sumably taken from the Sihala atthakathds, we can be certain that additions 
were made to those atthakathds after their arrival in Ceylon. A critical exa- 
mination of the commentaries suggests that no additions were made to them 
after the first century A. D ., 106 but since it is said that the Sihala atthakathds 
were committed to writing at the same time as the canon in the first century 
B.C., it may be possible that little exegetical material was added after the 
latter date. 

There is no direct evidence that any commentarial material was in fact 
recited at the first council, but there is clear evidence that some parts of the 
commentaries are very old, perhaps even going back to the time of the Buddha, 
because they afford parallels with texts which are regarded as canonical by 
other sects, and must therefore pre-date the schisms between the sects . 107 As 
has already been noted , 108 some canonical texts include commentarial passages, 
while the existence of the Old Commentary in the Vinaya-pitaka and the 
canonical status of the Niddesa prove that some sort of exegesis was felt to be 
needed at a very early stage of Buddhism. 

We cannot be certain whether Buddhaghosa was correct in stating that the 
early missionaries translated the commentaries they brought with them into 
Sinhalese Prakrit, but what we know of the development of that dialect be- 
tween the first century B.C., when the commentaries were allegedly written 
down, and the fifth century A.D., when Buddhaghosa is believed to have 
written his commentaries, suggests that he was quite correct when he stated 
that the atthakathds in the Sihalabhdsd were no longer intelligible outside Cey- 
lon . 109 It may be suspected that they were only intelligible to a very small 
number of bhikkhus inside the island. 

The fact that the Dlpavamsa sometimes gives two or three versions of the 
same event suggests that the tradition of the Mahavihara was based upon a 
mass of disjointed chronicle material, and there is no reason to doubt that the 
situation with regard to exegetical material was exactly the same, with com- 
ments gathered together from a number of sources. This would explain why we 
sometimes find commentators giving two or more, sometimes contradictory, 
explanations of the same word or phrase. Some commentators, especially 
Buddhaghosa , 110 give information about the commentaries they are following, 
and from the way in which some views are brought forward only to be rejected 


106 See Adikabam, EHBC, p. 87. 

107 See K. R. Nobman, “The dialects in which the Buddha preached,” in Bechebt, 
LEBT, pp. 72—73. 

See pp. 89 and 99 above. 

Sp 2, 7—10. 
no See p. 121 below. 



120 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


it is clear that those living at the Mahavihara also had access to the records of 
others sects which were regarded as hostile, if not actually heretical. 

3.1. Buddhaghosa 

The Mahavamsa states 111 that after his conversion to Buddhism in North 
India Buddhaghosa wrote a book entitled Sanodaya and then a commentary 
upon the Dhammasangani called the Atthasalini. He then began to compile a 
commentary upon the Paritta, but was advised to go to Ceylon, for only there 
was the commentarial tradition preserved. In Ceylon he went to the Maha- 
vihara, learned the commentaries, and wrote the Visuddhimagga, described as 
a summary of the Tipitaka, to persuade the Sangha that he was a fit person to 
be entrusted with their books. 

The story in the Mahavamsa states that to test his ability the theras of the 
Mahavihara gave him two verses to comment upon, and the account given at 
the beginning of the Visuddhimagga does not contradict this. 112 He begins by 
quoting two verses from the Samyutta-nikaya, 113 and the whole of the Visud- 
dhimagga is in effect a commentary upon the first of these. He states that the 
book was written at the request of the them Sanghapala, who is named as his 
teacher in the Mahavamsa. 114 

The Visuddhimagga 115 is not so much a commentary as a sort of encyclo- 
paedia, a compendium of Buddhist doctrine and metaphysics presented in a 
logical and systematic manner under the three heads of sila, samddhi, and 
pannci, as Buddhaghosa himself states. 116 These three headings have already 
been noted 117 in the Vimuttimagga, and there seems no doubt that Buddha- 
ghosa made use of this earlier text when writing his own work, although it is 
going too far to say that the Visuddhimagga and Vimuttimagga are one and 
the same work appearing in different attires. 118 

The Visuddhimagga extracts from the Pitakas all the central doctrines which 
pivot upon the four truths, and presents them as a coherent systematic whole 
by way of quotation and explanation, interspersed with treatises on subjects of 
more or less relative importance. It illustrates by means of a large number of 
stories, set in either India or Ceylon, the whole being assimilated into an ela- 

iii^Mhv XXXVII 225-37. 

112 Vism 2, 15 — 24. 

ns S I 13, 20-21 and 13, 18-19. 

in Vism 711, 25; Mhv XXXVII 232. 

ns Ed. C. A. F. Rhys Davids, PTS London, Vol. I, 1920; Vol. II, 1921; H. C. 
Wabben and D. Kosambi, Cambridge Mass., 1950. Tr. Pe Maung Tin, The path 
of purity, PTS London, Part I, 1923; Part II, 1929; Part III, 1931; Bhikkiiu 
Nanamodi, The path of purification, Colombo 1956; (German) N yanatlloka, Der 
Weg zur Reinheit, Konstanz 1952. 

116 SUa-samddhi-panna-?nuJchena desiteVisuddhimagge (Vism 372, 21 = 7 10, 27 — 28) . 

117 See p. 113 above. 

118 As is claimed by M. Nagai, “The Vimutti-magga: the ‘way to deliverance,’” 
in JPTS 1917—1919, p. 80. 



Early post-canonical texts 


121 


borate edifice. An examination of the stories shows that those referring to India 
are, where a date can be assigned, none of them later than the third century 
B.C., i.e. the date when Mahinda brought Buddhism to Ceylon . 119 None of the 
events in Ceylon can be dated later than the latest datable them, and this, as 
has been noted , 120 is either the first century B.C. or the first century A. D. 

The Visuddhimagga is a masterly summary of Buddhist teaching, and can be 
regarded as an exposition of the ninefold teaching of the Buddha. It is best re- 
garded as a detailed manual for meditation masters, and as a work of reference. 
As such, it can stand alone, but since many of the passages Buddhaghosa 
quotes occur in texts upon which he has written independent commentaries, 
there is some overlap, and many passages commenting upon identical material 
occur word for word the same in each commentary. 

The Gandhavamsa states 121 that Buddhaghosa was the author of twelve 
commentaries in addition to the Visuddhimagga : those on the Vinaya-pitaka, 
the first four nikayas, the Abhidhamma-pitaka, the Patimokkha, and the 
Dhammapada, the Jataka, the Khuddakapatha, the Suttanipata 122 and the 
Apadana. Although there is some doubt about the last five, the remainder are 
generally accepted as being by Buddhaghosa. 

At the beginning of the Samantapasadika 123 Buddhaghosa states 124 that he 
is basing his commentary upon the Maha-atthakatha, the Mahapaccariya and 
the Kurundl commentaries, and he is embodying the tradition of the elders 
(theravada) in it . 125 He also refers to the opinions of individual elders, and 
clearly holds Mahapaduma and Mahasumma in high regard . 126 He also refers 
to the Sankhepa, an abridged form of the Mahapaccari, and to the Paccar! com- 
mentary, which is perhaps also an abridged version . 127 He also mentions the 
Andhaka-atthakatha , 128 although almost always to reject its views . 129 The fact 
that the Andhaka country in South India was a Dra vidian- speaking area has 
led to the suggestion that this commentary came from that area and was in a 
Dravidian language . 130 There is no evidence for this belief, either as a specific 

119 See Nanamoli, Yism tr., p. xx. 

120 See p. 119 above. 

i“ Gv 59, 18—30. 

122 Gv 59, 18 — 30 does not include Paramatthajotika, but at 68, 34 it is stated 
that Buddhaghosa wrote the atthakatha on the Suttanipata without being requested 
(attano maliyd). 

i 22 Ed. J. Takakustj and M. Nagai, PTS London; Vol. I, 1924; Vol. II, 1927; 
Vol. Ill, 1930; Vol. IV, 1934; Vol. V, 1938; Vol. VI, 1947; Vol. VII, 1947; Vol. 
VIII (Indexes, compiled by H. Kopp), 1977. 

I 2 * Sp 2, 16—18. 

125 Sp 2, 21. 

126 See Adikaram, EHBC, p. 81. 

127 See ibid., pp. 12—13. 

128 See ibid., p. 12. 

i 28 Another authority, usually mentioned only to reject, is keci “some.” See 
I. B. Horner, “Keci, ‘some’ in the Pali commentaries,” in JPTS 1981, pp. 87 — 95. 

iso See Adikaram, EHBG, p. 12. 



122 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


statement from Buddhaghosa or as a deduction from the views quoted from 
the Andhaka commentary. Although there are one or two references in other 
commentaries by Buddhaghosa to a Vinaya-atthakatha , 131 there are no re- 
ferences to it by name in the Samantapasadika. The references to it do not fit 
in well with the Samantapasadika itself, and it seems likely that it is a Sihala 
atthakatha. 

To the commentary upon the Vinaya-pitaka proper, Buddhaghosa prefixes 
a Bahiranidana which has already been mentioned . 132 Besides the chronicle 
portions which can be compared with the other chronicles, there is a great deal 
of material about the classification and content of the canonical texts. 

The SumahgalavilasinI , 133 PapancasudanI , 134 Saratthappakasini , 135 and Ma- 
norathapuranl 136 are Buddhaghosa’s commentaries upon the Digha-, Majjhima-, 
Samyutta-, and Anguttara-nikayas respectively. He states at the beginning of 
each of these that since certain things have already been dealt with in the 
Visuddhimagga, he will not deal with them again, for the Visuddhimagga 
stands between and in the midst of all four collections . 137 In the Samyutta 
commentary he inserts a stanza referring to the two previous collections , 138 i.e. 
the Digha-nikaya and the Majjhima-nikaya, for the explanation of the names 
of towns and illustrative stories. The Ahguttara commentary replaces this by 
another stanza referring to the Digha and the Majjhima by name for the same 
purposes . 139 Since the Visuddhimagga is referred to in this way at the beginning 
of each of these four commentaries, we must assume that when he refers in the 
Visuddhimagga to the atthakathds upon the Ahguttara-, Majjhima-, and Sam- 
yutta-nikayas , 140 he is not referring to his own commentaries upon these texts, 
but to the Sihala atthakathds thereon. 

Buddhaghosa’s commentaries upon the Dhammasangani and the Vibhanga 
are individually named as the AtthasalinI 141 and the SammohavinodanI , 142 


131 E.g. Vism 72, 23 and 272, 2. See Jayawickrama, Sp tr., pp. xxii — xxiv. 

1 32 See p. 116 above. 

1 33 Ed. T. W. Rhys Davids and J. E. Carpenter, PTS London, Vol. I, 1886; 
W. Stede, Vol. II, 1931; Vol. Ill, 1932. 

134 Ed. J. H. Woods and D. Kosambi, PTS London, Vol. I, 1922; Vol. II, 1928; 
I. B. Horner, Vol. Ill, 1933; Vol. IV, 1937; Vol. V, 1938. 

i 33 Ed. F. L. Woodward, PTS London, Vol. I, 1929; Vol. II, 1932; Vol. Ill, 1937. 
i 3 « Ed. M. Walleser, PTS London, Vol. I, 1924; M. Walleser and H. Kopp, 
Vol. II, 1930; H. Kopp, Vol. Ill, 1936; Vol. IV, 1940; Vol. V, 1957. 

137 Majjhe Visuddhimaqqo esa catunnam pi aqamdnam hi (Sv 2, 6 = Ps I 2, 10 = 
Spk I 2, 18 = Mp I 2 , 24). 

138 Spk I 2, 3 — 4. 

139 Mp I 2 , 9—10. 

1 4 0 E.g. Vism 315, 24; 72, 24; 387, 8 . 

141 Ed. E. Muller, PTS London, 1897; revised edition with indexes by L. S. 
Cousins, 1979. Tr. Pe Maung Tin and Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, The Expositor, 
PTS London, Vol. I, 1920; Vol. II, 1921. 

142 Ed. A. P. Buddhadatta, PTS London, 1923. Tr. Bhikkhu STanamoli, The 
Dispeller of Delusion, PTS London, to appear in 1983. 



Early post -canonical texts 


123 


whereas unlike them the commentaries upon the remaining five Abhidhamma 
texts are taken together under the title Pancappakaranatthakatha or Para- 
matthadipani . 143 The Gandhavamsa uses the name Paramatthakatha 144 for the 
commentary upon all seven Abhidhamma works. The name Paramatthadxpani 
is little used, perhaps because of the possible confusion with Dhammapala’s 
commentary 145 upon certain texts in the Khuddaka-nikaya. 

For the most part, in the Abhidhamma commentaries their author avoids 
discussion of matters which have already been dealt with in the nikdya com- 
mentaries and the Yisuddhimagga. That this is a definite policy, and not over- 
sight, is clear from the fact that readers are referred specifically to the Visud- 
dhimagga 146 or the nikdya commentaries, although he seems not to claim that 
these are his own work, whereas in the nikdya commentaries he does state that 
the Visuddhimagga is his own work . 147 There can, however, be no doubt that all 
the Abhidhamma commentaries are by one author, for at the end of the com- 
mentary upon the Patthana he states that he has now concluded the com- 
mentary to the whole Abhidhamma -pitaka . 148 The Atthasalini, Sammohavino- 
danl, and the Pancappakaranatthakatha all include the name Buddhaghosa in 
the epilogue , 149 but other than that there is no evidence that they were written 
by him. In fact, the first two state that they were written at the request of 
Buddhaghosa , 150 which has led to the suggestion that they were both written 
by a pupil of Buddhaghosa . 151 Examples of references to the Visuddhimagga 
and the nikdya commentaries can be found in all three works, where they are 
treated as authorative, but not as the author’s own work. 

It has been suggested 152 that the Atthasalini is not by the same author as the 
Visuddhimagga, for there are a number of points where the interpretation of the 
two texts differ somewhat, while authorities quoted in one text are not always 

113 See Jayawickrama, Kv-a, p. vii. 
i** Gv 59, 25—26. 
i* 6 See p. 134 below. 

i*« E.g. sabbam atthakathdnayena gahetvd Visuddhimagge vitthdritam (As 168, 
21—22). 

Contrast iti pana sabbam yasmd Visuddhimagge maya suparisuddham vuttam 
(Sv 2, 3—5) with Visuddhimagge pan ’ idam yasmd sabbam pakdsitam (As 2, 8). 

i*8 Buddhaghoso ti guruhi gahitandmadheyyena therena kata ayarn sakalassa pi 
Abhidhammapitakassa atthakathd (Ppk-a [Ne] III 245, 18—20). 

i*a As 430, 19—21 *£ Vibh-a 524, 7—8 Ppk-a [Ne] III 245, 18—20). 
iso Visuddhacdrasilena nipunamalabuddhind bhikkhund Buddhaghosena sakkaccam 
abhiydcito (As 1, 17—18); tassaham ydcito thitagunena yatina adandha-gatind 
subuddhina Buddhaghosena (Vibh-a 523, 9 — 10). The work bhikkhund suggests 
rather that the acariya Buddhaghosa was asked by a pupil to compose these works. 
This clearly is the view of the author of the Gandhavamsa : sattdnam abhidhamma- 
gandhdnam atthakathagandho Culla-Buddhaghosandmabhikkhuna dydcitena Buddha- 
ghosdcariyena kato (Gv 68, 24—26). 

151 See Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, A manual of Buddhism for advanced students, 
London 1932, p. 30. 

1 5 ' 2 See P. V. Bap at and R. D. Vadekar, Atthasalini, Poona 1942 (Bhandarkar 
Oriental Series, 3), pp. xxxv— xl. 



124 


K. R. Norman. • Pali Literature 


included in the other, and on other occasions the views given in the Visuddhi- 
magga are merely listed as alternatives. It seems strange that someone like 
Buddhaghosa should give his own interpretations as alternatives, and if he were 
really revising an earlier opinion it might have been expected that he would 
mention his change of mind. Strong though these arguments may be, they are 
not conclusive. The answer perhaps lies in the relative dating of the Visuddhi- 
magga and the Atthasalinl. The Mahavamsa states 153 that Buddhaghosa wrote 
the Atthasalinl in India, before going to Ceylon. If this was so, then he must 
have re-written it there, because he refers to commentarial material from the 
Mahavihara . 154 If we accept that the Atthasalinl was an early work which was 
later re-written , 155 then it does not seem unlikely that Buddhaghosa should in- 
corporate later views from the Visuddhimagga while still retaining earlier views 
expressed in the “first edition” of the Atthasalini. There are several references 
in the Sammohavinodam to the Atthasalini as the commentary which should 
take preference over it , 156 and since Buddhaghosa ’s authorship of the former 
work has never been disputed it would seem reasonable to suppose that he 
wrote the latter work too. The suggestion that the Atthasalinl was written by 
a pupil of Buddhaghosa need not perhaps be taken very seriously. A study of 
Buddhadatta’s Abhidhammavatara shows parallels with the Atthasalinl , 157 
and although dependence upon the same traditional commentarial material 
cannot be ruled out as the cause of this, the tradition 158 that Buddhadatta 
summarized Buddhaghosa’s commentaries suggests that the Abhidhammava- 
tara is indeed based upon the Atthasalinl. Buddhadatta is not likely to have 
summarized something written by a pupil of Buddhaghosa. 

Another possible solution for the problem of Buddhaghosa seemingly re- 
jecting the views he had put forward in the Visuddhimagga is that these views 
may have been his own , 159 as opposed to traditional ones taken over from the 

153 Mhv XXXVII 225. 

154 As 2, 4. One passage (As 82 — 106), entitled Dvarakatha, is specifically at- 
tributed to the Maha-atthakatha, while another, entitled Vipakuddharakatha (As 
267—87), seems to have been taken over almost verbatim or perhaps slightly 
condensed from a rather formalised earlier source, almost certainly a Sihala. 
atthakcithd. It starts with what it calls a mdtikd, in effect a table of contents, and 
gives a reference to the Ussadakittana, which is referred to at Vism 103—104 as an 
authorative decision in accordance with the views of the teachers of the atthakathd. 
See L. S. Cousins, “The Patthana and the development of the Theravadin Abhi- 
dhamma,” in JPTS 1981, pp. 22—46. 

155 Re-writing is perhaps indicated by the fact that the Saddhammasangaha 
quotes Mhv XXXVII 225 — 41 (54, 5 — 55, 4) but later (56, 22) states that Buddha- 
ghosa wrote the Atthasalini in Ceylon after composing his commentaries upon the 
nikdyas. 

156 See Vibh-a 43, 14—15; 396, 14-15; 410, 4—5; 479, 13—14. 

157 Cf. Abhidh-av 2, 33—3, 14 with As 62, 1—17. 

is* See p. 130 below. The alternative explanation, that the Atthasalini is based 
upon the Abhidhammavatara, seems untenable, because some of the latter is almost 
unintelligible without reference to the former. 

159 See U. Dhammaratana (ed.), Sammohavinodam, Nalanda 1961, p. xxxix. 



Later post-canonical texts 


125 


Sihala atthalcathas . Although the implication is that Buddhaghosa is at all times 
following the Mahavihara tradition, he, and other commentators, 160 do some- 
times state that they are giving their own opinion about something, perhaps 
because their predecessors had given no information about it. It is possible that 
this happened more frequently than would appear. It is clear that on occasion 
the views put forward by the commentators lacked authority, since readers are 
sometimes allowed a choice about accepting the view or rejecting it. 161 

Although, as stated, the Sammohavinodam several times refers to the At- 
thasalinl, we also find in the Atthasalini the statement, repeated, 162 that a point 
will be clarified in the Vibhanga-atthakatha. This presumably means that 
Buddhaghosa was carefully planning ahead for one commentary while he was 
writing another, and was already making decisions about the proper place to 
deal with the traditional material he was sorting through. It may be assumed 
that a similar practice accounts for other cross-references which are found in 
his commentaries, 163 although extensive reworking and rewriting of his 
commentaries occurred, which would have enabled him to incorporate later 
views in books written earlier. 

The five commentaries included in the Paneappakaranatthakatha 164 are much 
shorter than the Atthasalini and Sammohavinodam. The most interesting of 
the set is the commentary upon the Kathavatthu, 165 which makes a consid- 
erable contribution to the study of the history of early Buddhism by identifying 
the greater part of the heretical views put forward in the Kathavatthu as being 
the views of particular sects. It starts with a brief account of the origin of the 
18 schools which arose before the third council, and then the six more which 
arose after the end of the second century of Buddhism. 

The author of the commentary is clearly aware that some of the views re- 
ferred to could not have arisen in Tissa’s time. He explains this by stating that 
Tissa spoke to prevent views which were going to arise, by analysing the topics 
of discourse ( mdtikds ) established by the Tathdgata , 166 When identifying the 

160 E.g. ayam ettha amhakam, khanti (Vism 434, 2); avicdritam etam pordnehi. 
ayam pana me attano mati (Ps I 28, 30—31); amhakam khanti (Pj I 19, 34); ayam 
amhakam khanti (Pj II 387, 27—28) ; amhakam pan ’ etam na kkhamati (Pj II 394, 6). 
Similarly Dhammapala: ayam amhakam, khanti (It-a II 126, 1). 

161 E.g. yatha ruccati tathd pathitabbam (Pj I 78, 19); yatha vd tathd vd hoti 
(Pj I 165, 17); yam ruccati tarn gahetabbam (Pj II 23, 2, 17; 43, 25; 136, 1; 378, 11). 

1 62 Vibhahgatthakathdyam avibhavissati (As 368, 2 — 3 — 407, 16—17). 

!63 See Bap at and Vadekar, op. cit. (in n. 152), p. xxxiv. 

lei Dhatuk-a ed. E. R. Goonaratne (with Dhatiik), PTS London, 1892; Pp-a 
ed. G ■ Landsbekg and Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, in JPTS 1913—14, pp. 170—254 
(reprinted with Pp, PTS London, 1972); Yam-a ed. Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids, 
in JPTS 1910—12, pp. 52—107 ; Patth-a ed. Mrs C. A. F. Rhys Davids (with Dukap 
1906, and Tikap 1921, 1922, 1923).' 

165 Ed. J. P. Minayeff, in JPTS 1889, pp. 1—199; new ed. N. A. Jayawickkama, 
PTS London, 1979. Tr. B. C. Law, The Debates Commentary, PTS London, 1940. 

166 Satthdrd dinnanayavasen’ eva Tathdgatena thapitamdtikam vibhajanto (Kv-a 
7,2-3). 



126 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


holders of the views the commentator sometimes uses the word “now” ( etarahi ), 
implying that the schools still existed in his time and still had that view . 167 It 
is, however, possible that Buddhaghosa took over the word etarahi from the 
Slhala atthakathds he was following, and “now” refers to the time when the latter 
were compiled . 168 

Although, as already noted , 169 the Patimokkha does not have a separate 
existence in the Pali canon, being embedded in the Vinaya-pitaka, Buddha- 
ghosa wrote a commentary upon it, including the introductory portion which 
has become detached from the rest and is found, together with the Old Com- 
mentary, in the Uposathakkhandhaka . 170 He comments upon the Old Commen- 
tary as well as upon the Patimokkha itself. He states that he is doing it briefly 
( sankhepato ) , and he refers to the Samantapasadika for a more detailed 
■ account . 171 

The Kankhavitaranl 172 calls itself a mdtikd - attha kathd , 17 3 where mdtikd means 
the text of the Patimokkha extracted from the Suttavibhanga and, in the case 
of the introductory portion, the Mahavagga. This use of mdtikd is found else- 
where in works by Buddhaghosa. It has already been noted 174 that he explains 
the word mdtikd-dhard as dvepatimokkadhara, and in the Kankhavitaranl we 
find the Mahavibhahga referred to as mdtikd , 175 and also a distinction drawn 
between the mdtikd and the Padabhdjana . 176 In the Visuddhimagga mdtikd 
seems to be used of the Patimokkha , 177 and in the Atthasalinl it refers to a part 
of the Vinaya-pitaka . 178 

The word mdtikd in this sense must be old, for the Sihala atthakathd is called 
the Sihala-matikd -atthakathd} 1 9 Besides this, Buddhaghosa presumably also 
made use of the same commentaries he employed when writing the Samanta- 
pasadika, for he mentions the Kurundi and the Mahapaccari commentaries . 180 
These authorities did not always agree, and Buddhaghosa notes that the Sihala 
atthakathd differs from the explanation given at one point in the Samantapasa- 
dika . 181 References to the Samantapasadika are frequent, and there are more 

167 See Aijng and Rhys Davids, Kv tr., pp. xxxiii— xxxiv. 

168 Just as yava ajjatana at Sp 62, 10 probably refers to a date in the first century 
A.D. See Adikaram, EHBC, p. 87. 

i« 9 See p. 18 above. 

no Vin I 102, 33—103, 11; 103, 12—104, 20. 

m E.g. Kkh 84, 37—38. 

Ed. Mrs D. Maskehl, PTS London, 1956. 

173 Kankhavitaranl nama Matikatthakatha (Kkh 1, 1 — 3). 

174 See p. 96 above. 

ns Kkh 153, 40. 

176 N’ eva matikdya na padabhajane vuttam (Kkh 95, 23). 

177 Dve mdtikd pagunam katva (Vism 312, 29). See Nanamoli, Vism tr., p. 17 
n. 1L 

178 As 19, 5. 

179 Ayam eva hi attho Sihalamatikatthakathayam vutto (Kkh 159, 24 — 25). 

iso See Kkh 138, 11 and 110, 26. 

i8i Samantapasadikaya pan' assa vicaranakatha (Kkh 159, 25). 



Early post -canonical texts 


127 


than a dozen passages which are very similar in content, 182 although it is im- 
possible to say whether the Kahkhavitaranl is actually quoting from the 
Samantapasadika, or whether both texts are quoting from the Sihala atthakatha. 

The exegesis given for all 227 rules of the Bhikkhu-patimokkha 183 follows 
the same pattern. 184 There is a parsing of the words of the rule (sikkhdpada ) , 
followed by a quasi- judicial estimation of defaults against it. Extenuating 
circumstances are then mentioned, and cases of guiltlessness, including wrong 
actions due to misconception or errors of judgment. A unique feature of the 
exegesis is the inclusion of a catechetic and hermeneutic summary of the main 
points at the end of each rule. These are called angas because they form the 
links of the secondary rule ( anuppahhatti) which follows from the main rule. 
They are probably intended to serve as aids to the memory for the trainee bhikkhu. 

Of the other commentaries attributed to Buddhaghosa in the Gandhavamsa 
it is generally agreed that the Apadana commentary was not written by him. 185 
It is sometimes argued that the commentaries on the Dhammapada and the 
Jataka may have been written by another Buddhaghosa because their style is 
so different from his other commentaries. 188 The commentary upon the Dham- 
mapada 187 is said to have been written at the request of a them named Kumara- 
kassapa, 188 and to be based upon commentarial material in the language of the 
island (dlpa-bhasaya santhitti) , 189 At the end it is said that the work was com- 
posed by Buddhaghosa while residing in a residence built by king Sirikuta. 190 
The reason for the difference in style could be the difference in subject matter, 
for the work consists mainly of popular stories which play only a minor role in 
Buddhaghosa’s other works. 191 There seems, however, to be no great objection 
to believing that Buddhaghosa collected together a set of traditional stories 
from commentarial sources and served as little more than an editor for this part 
of the work. His main commentarial duties were confined to the word for word 
commentary. In this connection it has been pointed out that while in his other 
commentaries Buddhaghosa is entirely consistent in his explanations of Dham- 
ma, he is not always so consistent when giving different versions of the same 
story, e.g. the stories which he tells of the theras Tissabhuti 192 and Maha- 

182 See Maskell, Kkh, p. x. 

183 The exegesis for the Bhikkhuni-patimokkha is not given in full because of 
overlap with the Bhikkhu-patimokkha. 

184 See Maskell, Kkh, pp. viii— ix. 

is® See p. 146 below. 

i8« See Burlingame, Buddhist Legends (see n. 187), Vol. I, pp. 59—60. 

is? Ed. H. C. Norman, PTS London, Yol. I, Part 1, 1906; Part 2, 1909; Vol. II, 
1911; Vol. Ill, 1912; Vol. IV, 1914; Vol. V (Index) compiled by L. S. Tailang, 
1915 ; H. Smith, Vol. I, 1925. Tr. E. W. Burlingame, Buddhist Legends, Cambridge, 
Mass., Vols. I— III, 1921. 

188 Dhp-a I 1, 18. 

189 Dhp-a I 1, 14. 

iso Dhp-a IV 235, 6. 

191 See ^anamoli, Vism tr., p. xvii. 

192 Cf. Ps I 66 with Mp I 39—40. 



128 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


tissa. 193 It is possible that there was felt to be less need for strictness in such 
story material, although shortcomings would be much more obvious in a text 
consisting almost entirely of stories. 194 

The same would apply to the commentary upon the Jatakas. 195 At the be- 
ginning the author states that he will give the commentary in accordance with 
the tradition of the Mahaviharins, at the request of the three theras Atthadassin, 
Buddhamitta, and Ruddhadeva, 196 the last of whom is said to belong to the 
Mahimsasaka sect. 197 There is no mention of the author’s name at the end. As 
has already been noted, 198 the stories, the framework, and the word for word 
commentary have been shown to be composed by the same person, but we may 
be certain that in the case of the greater part of the stories the author’s work, 
as in the case of the Dhammapada-a//Aafca(/m, consisted mainly of an editorial 
function, whereby a previously existing story was adapted, not always skilfully, 
for a new purpose. 

Something can be seen of the way in which the editorial work was carried 
out. Although the story of the present is given in full for the first few Jatakas, 
it is thereafter very often all but omitted, being replaced by the statement that 
the Buddha told this story of the past. 199 Sometimes the incident which causes 
the telling of the story is omitted, with a statement that it is the same as one 
already told or, in many cases, one which is to be told. 200 

Among the commentarial sources which the author states he is following is a 
Jatakatthakatha, which was presumably a Sihala atthakatha. Its disagreement 
with the remainder of the atthakathds is noted on one occasion. 201 He also refers 
to the Anguttaratthakatha 202 and the Samyuttatthakatha, 203 but we cannot 
be certain whether the commentaries by Buddhaghosa or the Sihala atthaka- 

193 Cf. Ps I 185 with Mp I 42. See Sanamoli, Vism tr., pp. xvii— xviii. 

194 It is not impossible that Buddhaghosa entrusted some of the less important 
parts of his commentaries to assistants, and he was responsible only for their 
supervision. See Dhammaratana, op. cit. (in n. 159), pp. xxxviii — xxxix. 

195 Ed. V. Fausboll, London, Yols. I — VI, 1877 — 96; Vol. VII (Indexes, compiled 
by D. Andersen), 1897. Tr. E. B. Cowebl et al., Yols. I— VI, 1895—1907 ; Vol. VII 
(Indexes), 1913. 

i" Ja I 1, 15—23. 

197 This suggests that the Theravadins and Mahimsasakas had texts, especially 
the Jatakas, in common. Bareau suggests that the Mahimsasakas were the main- 
land Theravadins. See Bareau, op. cit. (in n. 53), p. 183. 

198 See p. 78 above. 

499 Itoparam <pana bhikkhunam ydcanam bhavantarapaticchannatah ca avatvd 
“ atltarn dhari ti ” ettakam eva vakkhdma (Ja I 153, 28 — 154, 2). 

200 E.g. tarn hetthd N iddnakathdyarn kathitam eva (Ja I 137, 15 — 16); vatthum 
Dvddasanipdte Bhaddasdlajatake dvibhavissati (Ja I 133, 23 — 24). 

201 Yam pana Jdtakatthakathdya ... vuttam tarn sesatthakathasu n' atthi (Ja I 
62,20-22). 

202 Tesarn vitthdro Ahguttaratthakathdya vutto (Ja I 131, 23'). 

203 Sa myuttalth akathdya pana idani vattamdnasampatti yeva Icathitd (Ja V 38, 4). 
Although this reference is found at Spk I 281, we cannot rule out the possibility 
that both Ja and Spk are following a Sihala atthakatha here. 



Early post-canonical texts 


129 


thas are intended. On a number of occasions he draws attention to the fact that 
a reading in the books ( potthakesu ) is not found in the atthakatha , 204 or that the 
atthakatha has a different reading . 205 He sometimes quotes, tacitly, material 
from an earlier commentary . 206 

To Buddhaghosa are also ascribed commentaries upon the Khuddakapatha 
and the Suttanipata, both called Paramatthajotika. Despite the fact that 
Buddhaghosa’s name appears at the end of both, doubt has been expressed 
about their authorship, and it has been suggested that the two works are per- 
haps by different authors . 207 There is no reference in the Khuddakapatha com- 
mentary 208 to an earlier Sihala commentary, but there are references to former 
teachers (pubbacariyas) and teachers of the commentary (atthakathacariyas) 
as well as poranas and theriyas , 209 The author shows some acquaintance with 
Sanskrit and the Sanskrit grammarians , 210 which would be in keeping with the 
traditional view that Buddhaghosa was a brahman before he became a Bud- 
dhist, although it is easy to show from other commentaries attributed to Bud- 
dhaghosa that at times he showed ignorance of Sanskrit . 211 It seems on balance, 
however, that there are no very compelling reasons for believing that the 
Khuddakapatha commentary is not by the same author as the Visuddhi- 
magga . 212 

The commentary upon the Suttanipata 213 also shows some knowledge of 
Sanskrit grammar, but no more than Buddhaghosa shows in the Visuddhi- 
magga , 214 and this seems to be no reason for denying his authorship. The repe- 
tition which is found with the commentary upon the Khuddakapatha, e.g. the 
full commentaries in both texts upon the three suttas which the Khuddakapa- 
tha and the Suttanipata have in common , 215 is certainly strange when his habit 
of referring from one commentary to another, as already noted in the case of 
his Sutta-pitaka and Abhidhamma-pitaka commentaries, is considered, but the 
fact that these repetitions are word for word the same can hardly be taken to 
prove that they are by different authors. 

204 E.g. potthakesu pana ‘ Hatha mam saccam pdleti ” ti likhitam tarn atthakathayan 
n ’ atthi (Ja V 95, 6 — 7). 

205 E.g. atthakathayam pana ll kasma tuvan ” ti patho (Ja II 241, 17'). 

206 E.g. there is an exegesis on kantdra in the prose story of the Apannakajataka 
at Ja I 99, 14-22. 

207 See Adikaram, EHBC, pp. 7—8, and S’anamoli, Pj I tr., pp. x-xv. 

208 Ed. H. Smith, PTS London, 1915. Tr. Bhikkhu Nanamoli, Minor Readings 
and Illustrator, PTS London, 1960. 

zoo See ^anamoli, Pj I tr., pp. viii— ix. 

210 See S'anamoli, Pj I tr., p. 310 s.v. “Panini” and p. 311 s.v. “Sanskrit 

allusions.” 

an See Warren and Kosambi, op. cit. (in n. 115), pp. xii— xiv. 

2 1 2 See JJanamoli, Pj I tr., p. xv. 

213 Ed. H. Smith, PTS London, Vol. I, 1916; Vol. II, 1917; Vol. Ill (Indexes), 
1918. 

21 4 See K. R. Norman, “The role of Pali in early Sinhalese Buddhism,” in 
Bechert, BCSRS, p. 42. 

215 See p. 58 above. 



130 


K. R. Norman ■ Pali Literature 


The Maliavamsa states that Buddhaghosa went to Ceylon in the reign of king 
Mahanama. 216 While there is some doubt about the precise dating of Sinhalese 
kings, it is generally accepted that Mahanama lived in the first half of the fifth 
century A.D. 217 If the letter which is reported to have been sent to the Chinese 
emperor in A.D. 428 by Ma-ho-nan 218 was sent by the same Mahanama, then 
the date is confirmed. At the end of the Samantapasadika Buddhaghosa states 
that he wrote the commentary between the 20th and 21st years of king Sirini- 
vasa. 219 It is assumed that the names Mahanama and Sirinivasa refer to the 
same person. If this is the same king who is called Sirikuta at the end of the 
commentary upon the Dhammapada, 220 then that commentary, whether or not 
by Buddhaghosa, can be dated to the same period. A lower limit to the possible 
date for Buddhaghosa is given by the fact that the Chinese translation of the 
Samantapasadika was made in A.D. 489. 221 

It is worth nothing that, although we are informed by Buddhaghosa himself 
that he translated his commentaries from the Slhala language (and from Dra- 
vidian too, if we are wrong to reject this suggestion), there is no trace of this 
translation process to be seen. Although attention has been drawn to a few 
passages in Buddhaghosa’s commentaries where nominative singular forms in 
-e, which is a characteristic of early Sinhalese Prakrit, 222 are to be found, a close 
examination shows that these forms are rather to be regarded as Magadhisms, 
or at least traces of some North Indian Prakrit. 223 There seems to be no evidence 
for the existence of untranslated Sinhalese Prakrit forms in any of Buddha- 
ghosa’s commentaries. 

3.2. Buddhadatta 

There is a tradition, recorded in the VinayasaratthadipanT, 224 a twelfth 
century commentary on the Vinayavinicchaya written by Vacissara, that 
Buddhadatta made summaries of Buddhaghosa’s works after the latter had 
translated them from the Sinhalese Prakrit atthakathds. The later Buddha- 
ghosuppatti tells a different story. 225 


ai« Mahanama’s accession is recorded at Mhv XXXVII 210 and his death at 
XXXVII 247. 

217 According to Geiger (Cul tr., II, p. vi) Mahanama reigned A.D. 409—31. 

218 See Geiger, Cul tr., II, pp. v — vi. 

219 Sp 1415, 18—20. 

220 See p. 127 above. 

221 See P. V. Bap at and A. Hirakawa (tr.), Shan-Chien-P’i-P’o-Sha, Poona 
1970, P- xiii - 

222 See CPD, Vol. I, p. 471, s.v. avitakka 2 . 

223 See K. R. Norman, “Pali and the language of the heretics,” in AO 37 (1976), 

pp. l!7 1 26. 

til See Buddhadatta, Corr., pp. 158 — 59. 

225 Bu-up 50, 6 — 8 tells only of Buddhadatta encouraging Buddhaghosa with his 

translation work. 



Early post -canonical texts 


131 


The Gandhavamsa states 226 that Buddhadatta wrote the Vinayaviniechaya, 
the Uttaravinicchaya, the Abhidhammavatara and a commentary upon the 
Buddhavamsa entitled Madhuratthavilasini. The Ruparupavibhaga is also 
ascribed to Buddhadatta by the Sasanavamsa , 227 although the Gandhavamsa 
states that this was composed by Vacissara . 228 Of these texts, the Vinaya- 
vinicchaya and the Uttaravinicchaya 229 are summaries of the Vinaya-pitaka, 
and the Abhidhammavatara and Ruparupavibhaga 230 are summaries of the 
Abhidhamma. The reason for making such summaries would seem to be simply 
the need to make it easier for students to learn and remember, since verse is 
much more convenient than prose for such purposes. 

Although there are verbal similarities with some of Buddhaghosa’s works, in 
particular the Atthasalini , 231 it is by no means certain that Buddhadatta did, 
in fact, summarize Buddhaghosa’s works. He nowhere mentions Buddhaghosa’s 
name, but states that he wrote the Vinayaviniechaya at the request of his pupil 
Buddhasiha , 232 the Uttaravinicchaya at the request of Mahathera Sanghapala 233 
(perhaps the same elder at whose request Buddhaghosa wrote the Visuddhi- 
magga), and the Abhidhammavatara at the request of Sumati . 234 It is possible 
that the similarities between the two authors’ works led to the belief that one 
was dependent upon the other, and it is also likely that the name of Buddha- 
ghosa was connected with that of Buddhadatta at a later date to give added 
authority to his works . 235 

The similarities can, however, probably be explained by assuming that both 
authors based their works upon the same atthalcathas in the Mahavihara. The 
fact that in his summaries of the Vinaya-pitaka Buddhadatta frequently refers 
to the Kurundatthakatha, the Kurundl, the Maha-atthakatha, and the Maha- 
paccarl , 236 which were also used by Buddhaghosa, suggests that both authors 
referred to the same original Slhala commentaries. 

In the colophon to the Vinayaviniechaya 237 Buddhadatta states that the 
text was composed during the reign of Acyutavikrama of the Kalamba (or 


228 Gv 59, 31—60, 2. 

22 ? Sas 33, 36—37. 

228 Gv 62, 14—15. 

229 Ed. A. P. Buddhadatta, Buddhadatta’s Manuals, Part II, PTS London, 
1928: Vin-vn, pp. 1 — 230; Utt-vn, pp. 231 — 304. 

229 Ed. A. P. Buddhadatta, Buddhadatta’s Manuals, Part I, PTS London, 1915: 
Abhidh-av, pp. 1—138; Rupar, pp. 149—59. R. Webb (PBR, 5, 3, 1980, p. 88) 
reports a tr. of Rupar: R. Exeel, “The classification of forms and formless things,” 
in Yisakha Puja, Bangkok 1964. 

231 See p. 124 above. 

232 Vin-vn 3177. 

233 Utt-vn 965. 

234 Abhidh-av 137, 12. 

235 See Winternitz, HIL, p. 220. 

236 See Index to Buddhadatta’s Manuals, Part II, s.vv. Kurundatthakatha, etc. 

237 Vin-vn 3179. 



132 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Kalabbha or Kalambha) clan, said to be king of the Cola country. 238 If, at some 
future date, it proves possible to give a firm date to this king on archaeological 
grounds, then we should be afforded a firm basis for the chronology of both 
Buddhadatta and Buddhaghosa and the contemporary kings of Ceylon. 

An examination of the commentary to the Buddhavamsa, 239 which is also 
ascribed to Buddhadatta, shows that it must have been compiled at a later date, 
presumably by another Buddhadatta. 

3.3. Mahdndma 

There is a commentary 240 upon the Patisambhidamagga ascribed to Maha- 
nama, 241 and entitled Saddhammappakasinl. The Gandhavamsa states that it 
was written at the request of the updsaka Mahanama. 242 The colophon to the 
text says that it was written in the Mahavihara in the third year after the death 
of king Moggallana, 243 who is generally dated to the first half of the sixth 
century A.D. 244 

There is no evidence that a Sihala atthakatha upon the Patisambhidamagga 
existed, which perhaps explains why Buddhaghosa did not write a commentary 
upon it. Buddhaghosa, however, quotes extensively from the Patisambhida- 
magga in the Visuddhimagga, 245 and in turn Mahanama borrows extensively 
from the Visuddhimagga in his explanations of the Patisambhidamagga. 246 
Buddhaghosa’s commentaries upon the four nikdyas all refer to the Visuddhi- 
magga in their opening verses, implying that study of the latter was essential 
for understanding the nikdyas. It has been suggested that Mahanama was 
doing much the same for the Khuddaka-nikaya, and by quoting where neces- 
sary from the Visuddhimagga, instead of merely referring to it, he was providing 
a basic commentary for the Khuddaka -bhdnakas to refer to. 247 

The commentary begins with the statement that Sariputta explained the 
Dhammacakkapavattanasutta by composing the Patisambhidamagga, 248 thus 
indicating the main theme of the attainment of enlightenment by understand- 
ing the four truths. It continues by seeking to present the Patisambhidamagga 
as a systematic and orderly exposition of the way to arahant- ship, with each 


23 * See Buddhadatta’s Manuals, Part I, p. xvi, and Buddhadatta, Corr., pp. 
163-64. 

239 See p. 145 below. 

240 Ed. C. V. Joshi, PTS London, Vol. I, 1933; Vol. II, 1941; Vol. Ill, 1947. 

241 Gv 61, 3. 

242 Gv 70, 16. 

243 Patis-a 704, 2. 

244 The probable date for Moggallana I is A.D. 496 — 513, which gives A.D. 516 
as the date of completion for Patis-a. See Warder, Patis tr., p. xliv. 

246 See Vism, pp. 758 — 59. 

246 Warder, Patis tr., p. xlv. 

247 Warder, Patis tr., pp. xlii — xliii. 

248 Patis-a 1 — 2. 



Early post-canonical texts 


133 


topic leading necessarily to the next. This is done by supplying lengthy ex- 
positions in the commentary to smooth out the rough statements and extend 
them with elaborations. 

3.4. Upasena 

There is a commentary upon the Niddesa entitled Saddhammappajotika, 249 
although the Gandhavamsa also calls it Saddhammatthitika. 250 It is ascribed 
to Upasena, both in the Gandhavamsa 251 and in the colophon to the commen- 
tary itself. 252 It is said to have been written at the request of a thera named 
Deva. 253 Upasena himself states that he wrote the work at Anuradhapura in 
the 26th year of the reign of king Siri-Sanghabodhi, 254 whose dates are dis- 
puted. He probably lived about the middle of the sixth century A.D. 255 

Included in the commentary upon the Niddesa is comment where necessary 
on the relevant verses of the Suttanipata about which the Niddesa comments. 
For this purpose the author has sometimes borrowed passages, without altera- 
tion, from the Paramatthajotika. 256 It has been pointed out that he sometimes 
does this very carelessly, borrowing the later part of a story, without men- 
tioning its beginning, 257 so that it is unintelligible without reference to the Sut- 
tanipata commentary. 

Other explanatory material, e.g. on the paticcasamuppada and the noble 
truths, is borrowed from the Visuddhimagga and the Sammohavinodani. Such 
wholesale borrowing from Buddhaghosa’s commentaries provides an upper 
limit for Upasena’s date. 

3.5. Dhammapala 

The Gandhavamsa states 258 that Dhammapala wrote commentaries upon 
the Nettippakarana, the Itivuttaka, the Udana, the Cariyapitaka, the Thera- 
gatha, the Vimanavatthu and Petavatthu, and a tiled upon the Visuddhimagga, 
as well as a number of other tllcds which are usually assumed to be by another 
Dhammapala. 259 

a* 9 Ed. A. P. Btjddhadatta, PTS London, Vol. I, 1931; Vol. II, 1939; Vol. Ill, 
1940. 

25° At Gv 61, 11, although at Gv 70, 23 it is called Saddhammappajotika. 

251 Gv 61, 11 and 70, 24. 

252 Nidd-a II 150, 25. The editor’s reference to Upatissa (I, pp. viii— x) is an 
error, as he later points out (II, p. v). 

253 Gv 70, 24. 

254 Nidd-a II 152, 1-3. 

255 Btjddhadatta (Nidd-a I, p. ix) concludes that Siri-Sanghabodhi is Agga- 
bodhi I> who came to the throne c. A.D. 554. This would give a date around A.D. 580 
for the completion of Nidd-a. 

256 See Nidd-a I, pp. vii — viii, where the editor ascribes Pj II to Dhammapala. 

257 See ibid., p. viii. 

258 Gv 60, 5—17. 

259 See p. 148 below. 



134 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


It seems likely that by the time he came to write his commentaries, those on 
the Khuddakapatha, Suttanipata, Niddesa, and Patisambhidamagga already 
existed as well as the D ham iimptida-atthakathd and the Jataika-atthakathd. He 
seems therefore to have set himself the task of completing the commentaries 
upon the Khuddaka-nikaya. His commentaries are called Paramatthadipam, 260 
and comprise atthakathas upon (1) Udana, (2) Itivuttaka, (3) Petavatthu, (4) 
Vimanavatthu, (5) Theragatha, (6) Therigatha, and (7) Cariyapitaka. At the 
end of each part of the Paramatthadipam, Dhammapala states that he wrote 
it at Badaratitthavihara, 261 which was in South India, after the style of the old 
commentaries ( pordnatthakathdnayam ). 262 The commentary upon the Nettippa- 
karana also has a reference to Badaratitthavihara. 263 

Dhammapala states that the exposition he is going to give is in accordance 
with the views of those dwelling at the Mahavihara, 264 from which it can be 
assumed that he visited Ceylon, and received help there with the writing of his 
commentaries. There is, however, no specific statement that he made use of 
Slhala atthakathas in his work, nor does he refer by name to Buddhaghosa even 
when he quotes his commentaries, 265 but there are not infrequently identical 
explanations of certain words and phrases, 266 which suggests that Dhammapala 
is either following Buddhaghosa tacitly, or he is dependent upon the same 
Mahavihara tradition which Buddhaghosa followed. It is clear that there were 
variant readings in the material available to him, for he sometimes states an 
alternative reading in his commentary, and gives alternative interpretations of 
the relevant verse. 267 Sometimes in ambiguous circutastances the tradition was 
not certain of the correct interpretation, and Dhammapala accordingly gives 
two explanations. 268 

The style of the two commentaries upon the Petavatthu 269 and the Vimana- 
vatthu 270 is similar. Each vatthu in the canonical texts is afforded a separate 
section. Each section falls into three parts, comprising an introductory story 

260 The title Paramatthavibhavini also occurs at It-a 95, 24 and 180, 33. 

261 Ud-a 436, 32 = It-a 194, 5 (Padara-) = Pv-a 287, 18 (Vada-) = Vv-a 355, 13 
— Th-a III 210, 23 == Thi-a 301, 3 (Padara-) — Cp-a 336, 7. 

262 Mrs Rhys Davids’ interpretation of this as “three commentaries” (ThI tr., 
p. 178) is based upon a misreading of -n- as -t-. See Mrs Rhys Davids, Th tr., 
p. xxi v n. 1- 

2«3 See Nett 249, 33. 

264 E.g. at Ud-a 2, 6. 

265 E.g. he refers to Vism at Th-a II 206, 1 ; III 54, 17 ; 198, 9. See also Mrs Rhys 
Davids, Th tr., pp. 426—27. 

266 Cf. the explanation of the word tathagata given at Ps I 45, 10 — 15 with that 
at Th-a I 36, 7—12. 

267 E.g. besides the reading uppacca at Pv 236 ( = II 7.17) Dhammapala records 
the v.l. upecca, and explains both (Pv-a 103, 29—104, 1). 

ass E.g. two explanations are given for the word subhe (Pv 348) : subhe ti suddhe, 
subhe ti vd tassa alapanam (Pv-a 158, 2). See Masefield, Pv-a tr., p. ix. 

269 Ed. E. Hardy, PTS London, 1894; Tr. U Ba Kyaw and P. Masefield, Peta 
Stories, PTS London, 1980. 

27 ° Ed. E. Hardy, PTS London 1901. 



Early post -canonical texts 


135 


which explains the circumstances in which the verses which follow came to be 
delivered, then the verses, and finally a commentary upon the verses. Dhamma- 
pala attributes the first two of these sections to the Buddha who, when ex- 
plaining how it was that the verses came to be uttered, himself repeated the 
relevant verses. From this point of view, then, only the third section forms the 
commentary proper. The purpose of the commentary is to clarify the identity 
of the speakers of the verses, and to explain the meanings of the words which 
occur in the verses, by way of a series of linguistic equivalents and synonyms. 
There is little exposition of the doctrine supposedly lying behind the verses, 
and Dhammapala is relatively silent on matters of doctrinal importance. 

The situation with regard to the commentaries upon the Thera - 271 and 
Therigatha 272 is not greatly different. Dhammapala gives an introduction to 
each set of verses, usually based upon the Apadana tradition, although it is not 
always clear how the various Apadanas were linked with the various elders . In the 
case of the “great” elders, the stories given in the Manorathapurani and the 
Dhammapada-a/jf/ia&aifM are closely followed, with some compression and 
omission of marvels. In each case the elder is stated to have attained arahant - 
ship, and the appropriate Apadana is then quoted, with a small number of 
exceptions. Sometimes, however, the Apadana insertion is made awkwardly; 
often it is attributed to the wrong elder ; and once a non-existent Apadana 
is quoted. It seems probable that Dhammapala did not, in fact, include them in 
his commentary, but they have been added during the course of the scribal 
tradition . 273 

Although many of the stories which Dhammapala gives agree with informa- 
tion which we have about the elders from other sources, some of the stories 
seem to be deduced from the information given in the verses, or are pure in- 
vention, sometimes based upon misunderstanding of the verses . 274 In some 
cases he mentions conflicting traditions about the elders . 275 It is clear that the 
text of some of the verses had already been corrupted by the time that Dham- 
mapala wrote his commentary, and while some of the stories make the meaning 
of obscure verses clearer, in others it seems that the meaning had already been 
lost. 

Even where no corruption has taken place, it is obvious that Dhammapala, 
or the tradition 276 he was following, did not understand the meaning of some of 

an Ed. F. L. Woodward, PTS London, Vol. I, 1940; Vol. II, 1952; Vol. Ill, 1959. 

272 Ed. E. Muller, PTS London, 1893. 

273 See Woodward, Th-a I pp. vi— vii. 

274 See Norman, EV I, pp. xxix— xxx, and EV II, pp. xxxi— xxxii. 

275 See Thi-a 128, 26—29, where he draws attention to the difference between the 
details about Khema (ThI 139 — 44) in the atlhakathas and the Apadana. Similarly, 
two traditions are recorded about Sopaka (Th 480 — 86). See Norman, EV I, p. 199. 

276 There seems to be no evidence for the existence of a Sihala atthakathd upon 
Th and Th!, as such, although information about the elders would be available in 
the atthakathds upon the Anguttara- and other nikdyas. In many ways the Apadana 
seems to be intended as a commentary upon Th and Thi. 



136 


K. R. Norman * Pali Literature 


the words he commented upon . 277 Sometimes he contradicts himself, or gives 
different explanations of the same verse when it occurs twice , 278 perhaps by 
oversight, or perhaps because there was a different tradition of explanation for 
the two occurrences. On the other hand, some of the explanations seem to be 
very old, and some of them seem to be based upon forms in dialects other than 
Pali , 279 which probably means that they were brought from North India cen- 
turies earlier. 

As in the case of the commentaries upon the Petavatthu and Vimanavatthu, 
there are sometimes alternative readings and explanations , 280 which suggests 
that there were already in the Mahavihara tradition collections of commentarial 
material from various sources with conflicting exegesis. 

Since the Cariyapitaka consists almost entirely of Jataka stories in verse, the 
greater part of the commentary 281 is devoted to the narration of the birth 
stories in prose. The source for the commentary is several times stated to be the 
atthakatha or the Jataka tthakatha , 282 but whether this means the Jatakattha- 
vannana which we possess today, or the atthakathas upon which that text is 
based, cannot be determined. The latter part of the commentary, however, con- 
sists of an explanation of the Nigamanagatha of the Cariyapitaka. This enables 
Dhammapala to discuss the ten paramitas at length. He points out that some 
Buddhists recognise only six paramitas in place of the ten recognised by the 
Theravadins. As is well known, most schools except the Thera vadins accept the 
smaller number, but it would seem more likely that ten represents an increase 
from six rather than that the rest reduced the number from ten to six, as 
Dhammapala suggests . 283 

While it has never been doubted that these commentaries, and those upon 
the Udana 284 and the Itivuttaka , 285 are to be ascribed to Dhammapala, there 


277 E.g. he did not realise that phalesin (Th 527 and 1121) is a future active 
participle. 

278 E.g. he gives different explanations for Th 909 and 1181, although they are 
identical. 

279 Commenting upon cola (Th 170), Dhammapala gives an explanation which 
must have been given originally in a dialect where the word for “thief” was pro- 
nounced as cola (Th-a II 46, 4 — 8). The gloss tosana given for abhibhasana (Th 613) 
is more suitable for abhihdsana, and presumably goes back to a dialect where both 
words were pronounced in the same way (Th-a II 260, 2 — 3). 

E.g. three explanations are given for the word indagopaka (Th 13) at Th-a 
I 62, 13-17. 

28 1 Ed. D. L. Barua, PTS London, 1939; 2nd edition (with indexes by H. Kopp), 
1979. 

282 E.g. Cp-a 206, 32; 229, 13; 3, 12; 16, 13. 

283 Keci pana chabbidhd ti vadanti. tarn etdsam sangahavasena vuttarn (Cp-a 278, 
4-5). 

284 Ed. F. L. Woodward, PTS London, 1926. 

285 Ed. M. M. Bose, PTS London, Yol. I, 1934; Vol. II, 1936; Vol. Ill (Indexes, 
compiled by H. Kopp), 1977. 



Early post -canonical texts 


137 


has been doubt expressed 286 about the commentary upon the Nettippakarana , 287 
despite the fact that it too is said to have been composed by Dhammapala, 
resident in the Badaratitthavihara. Nevertheless it has been pointed out 288 that 
from the point of view of style and language the commentary is very similar to 
Dhammapala’s other works. Like Dhammapala, the author of the commentary 
upon the Nettippakarana refers to Buddhaghosa’s works without naming 
him . 289 

Nothing is known about the date of Dhammapala, except that he must be 
later than Buddhaghosa. There has not, as yet, been found any trace of inter- 
dependence between Dhammapala and Upasena or Mahanama, which probably 
means that all three were writing at about the same time. We shall perhaps not 
be far out if we assume that Dhammapala composed his works about the middle 
of the sixth century A.D. 


286 See H. C. Ray, University of Ceylon History of Ceylon, Vol. I, Colombo 1959 , 
p. 391- 

287 The PTS ed. of Nett includes extracts from Nett-a (= Nett 194—249). 

288 See Nett, p. xv. 

289 Atthasaliniyam (Nett 215, 17; 240, 30). 



Chapter IV 


LATER POST-CANONICAL TEXTS 


1. THE LATER CHRONICLES 


The Buddhaghosuppatti states 1 that the commentaries brought by Mahinda 
and the additions which had been made thereto were burned in a great bonfire 
when Buddhaghosa had finished his commentaries. It has long been recognised 
that this is merely an exaggerated way of accounting for the fact that the Sihala 
atthakathas fell into disuse after Buddhaghosa’s time. That they did not dis- 
appear immediately can be seen from the fact that they were available to the 
author of the Mahavamsa, who probably wrote after Buddhaghosa’s time, 2 and 
to the authors of other chronicles, and also to later commentators. 

They were certainly still in existence when an unnamed 3 author wrote a 
commentary upon the Mahavamsa. 4 It is classified as a tlka in Burma, where 
manuscripts of the text were first discovered, but the author’s own name for it 
is the Vamsatthappakasinl, 5 and the work is stated to be the Padya-(or Pajja-) 
padoruvamsavannana. 6 The name Padyapadoruvamsa for the Mahavamsa has 
already been noted. 7 

The tlka adds little to the accounts of the councils, the rise of the sects, and 
the sending out of the missions. This perhaps indicates that the author of the 
Mahavamsa had already extracted all the information which was available on 
these subjects from the Sihala atthakathas. The author of the tlka, names a 
number of sources 8 for the information he gives, of which the atthakathd, pre- 
sumably the Sihala atthakathd, is the one most frequently mentioned. He also 
refers to a Vinayatthakatha, a Dipavamsatthakatha, and a Cetiyavamsattha- 
katha, and quotes the pordnas a number of times. It is noteworthy that he 
never quobes the Dlpavamsa by name, 9 and when he quotes verses which 

1 Bu-up 60, 24—26. 

2 See p. 118 above. 

3 There is a tradition in Ceylon that he was called Mahanama. See Malalase - 
kera, Mhv-t, p. civ. 

4 Ed. G. P. Malalasekera, Vamsatthappakasinl, PTS London, 2 Vols., 1935. 

5 Mhv-t 687, 12. 

6 Mhv-t 689, 5. 

7 See p. 117 above. 

8 See Malalasekera, Mhv-t, pp. lvi-lxxii. 

9 To conclude from this that the Dlpavamsa was written by nuns seems rather 
farfetched. See Malalasekera, PLC, pp. 135 — 37. 



Later post -canonical texts 


139 


actually occur in that text he attributes them to the poranas. This perhaps 
means that he is quoting them from the same source as the author of the 
Dipavamsa, rather than from the Dipavamsa itself. Very slight variations 
which occur would perhaps support this suggestion . 10 

It is very interesting to note that the tika also quotes the U ttaraviharavasi- 
nam attliakathd 11 as a source, for the Uttaravihara is also known as the Abhaya- 
girivihara , 12 and the inhabitants of that vihdra were hostile to the Mahaviha- 
rins. This presumably means that at the time of the separation of the two viha- 
ras the Abhayagiriviharins had taken the Sihala atthakathas with them, and had 
added to them material not found in the Mahaviharin tradition. The fact that 
the author of the tika, was able to refer to their atthakathd would seem to mean 
that the division between the two vihdras was not absolute. He does, however, 
make it clear that he is incorporating only such material as is not in conflict with 
orthodox tradition . 13 From this source he takes legends about Candagutta and 
Canakka , 14 the nine Nandas who succeeded the sons of Kalasoka , 15 and the story 
of Susunaga . 16 

There seems to be no doubt that Buddhaghosa’s commentaries eventually 
made all others unnecessary, which led to their ultimate disappearance. Any 
text which shows acquaintance with the Sihala atthakathas is unlikely, there- 
fore, to be more than two or three centuries later than Buddhaghosa. The same 
is also likely to be true of the chronicles, especially since, as already noted, the 
Mahavamsa seems to have made use of almost all the information available. It 
has consequently been suggested that the Vamsatthappakasim should be dated 
to the eighth or ninth century A. I ). 17 

The quality of the commentary afforded by the tikd is good. The author 
shows an excellent knowledge of his subject, and while respecting his authorities 
is not afraid to point out errors . 18 He even points out a mistake in the Maha- 
vamsa itself . 19 He is not afraid to give his own opinion, although he makes it 
clear that it is his opinion . 20 


10 Cf. Dip I 1 with Mhv-t 36, 1 — 3. 

11 E.g. at Mhv-t 125, 7—8. 

12 See Malalasekera, DPPN, I, p. 360. 

13 Mayam pi sahkhepena tesam uppattimattam samaydvirodhamattam kathaydma 
(Mhv-t 177, 31—32). 

14 Mhv-t 187, 6—7. 

15 Mhv-t 177, 30-31. 

16 Mhv-t 155, 15—16. 

17 See Malalasekera, Mhv-t, p. cix. 

18 E.g. katthaci “ duve satani purise ” likhanti; tam pamadalekham (Mhv-t 284, 
20 — 21 ad Mhv X 27); see also 423, 24 — 424, 1; 659, 4 — 5. 

19 Mhv XXIX 44 states that the poranas did not mention the number of monks 
of Ceylon who had come to the ceremony. The tika points out that the total number 
was given: samagatanam sabbesam bhikkhunam visuddhippatta khindsava eva chan- 
navutikotiyo ti pordnehi bhdsitd ti vutiam hoti (Mhv-t 521, 5 — 7). 

20 Ayam amhakam khanti (Mhv-t 208, 20—21). 



140 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


There exists a Cambodian version of the Mahavamsa 21 which is almost twice 
its length. 22 The redactor has enlarged the text by making a number of addi- 
tions. 23 At the beginning he has inserted a poem of 677 verses about the earlier 
Buddhas, and a history of Gotama which has been added seems to be a versified 
version of the Mahavagga of the Vinaya-pitaka. Other insertions are passages 
from the Vamsatthappakasini turned into verse. One insertion concerns Asoka’s 
queen Asandhimitta. 24 The story is not known from other Sinhalese sources, 
and seems to be dependent upon a fund of stories about Asoka which were 
current in South-East Asia. 

The author calls himself Moggallana, 25 and since there are signs 26 that the 
text was copied from an earlier Sinhalese original, he may have been the Mog- 
gallana mentioned in the Mahavamsa as living in Ceylon in the twelfth cen- 
tury. 27 

As already noted, 28 the Mahavamsa, in its original form, seems to come to an 
end halfway through a chapter. Its continuation is traditionally called Cula- 
vamsa. 29 The first two verses of the continuation are identical with the last two 
verses of the Dipavamsa, 30 which presumably represents a conscious effort to 
link the newer part to the old. The first addition 31 covers the period from the 
death of Mahasena to Parakkamabahu I (A.D. 1153—86), and is traditionally 
ascribed to a them named Dhammakitti. 32 To the portion attributed to him is 
added a summarising verse and then a verse in an ornate metre, signifying the 
end of the chapter. 33 The second section 34 covers the period between Vijaya- 
bahu II, the successor to Parakkamabahu I, and Parakkamabahu IV (c. A. D. 
1300). This too ends with a summarising verse and a verse in an ornate metre. 35 
The third portion 36 continues to the reign of Kittisirirajasiha (A.D. 1746—81). 
It is stated 37 that this king obtained copies of the Mahavamsa from Siam in 
order to check the deficient version available in Ceylon, and the section is prob- 

21 Ed. G. P. Malaeasekera, Extended Mahavamsa, Colombo 1937 (Aluvihara 
Series, Vol. III). 

22 Geiger, DM, p. 27. 

23 See Maealasekera, K Mhv, pp. xl— 1. 

24 See Geiger, Mhv tr., p. 34 n. 3. 

25 K Mhv XXXVIII 24. 

26 See Geiger, DM, p. 31. 

27 Mhv LXXVIII 9. 

28 See p. 118 above. 

29 Ed. W. Geiger, Culavamsa, PTS London, Vol. I, 1925; Vol. II, 1927. Tr. 
W. Geiger, Culavamsa, PTS London, 2 Vols. 1929. 

30 Mhv XXXVII 51-52 = Dip XXII 75-76. 

31 Mhv XXXVII 51 — LXXIX 84. 

32 According to Mhv LXXXIV 12 he came to Ceylon from Burma in the reign 
of Parakkamabahu II. 

33 Mhv LXXIX 85-86. 

34 Mhv LXXX 1— XC 102. 

35 Mhv XC 103-104. 

36 Mhv XCI— C. 

37 Mhv IC 76—80. 



Later post -canonical texts 


141 


ably the work of Mahanayaka Tibbatuvava, who was entrusted with the task 
of comparing the two versions. 38 The style of this portion differs considerably 
from that of earlier sections, with verses in ornate metres found within the 
chapters, and not just at the ends. The very last portion of the text as found in 
the European edition does not seem to occur in the manuscripts, and is taken 
from a Sinhalese printed edition. 39 The final chapter is a supplement added by 
the editors of the Sinhalese edition. 40 It carries the story down to the arrival of 
the English (Ingirlsi) in A.D. 1815. 

The Mahabodhivamsa 41 or Bodhivamsa is written mainly in prose, with 
verses at the end of each chapter, taken from the Mahavamsa, 42 and also at the 
end of the work. It begins with the Buddha Dipankara, then tells the story of 
Gotama and his enlightenment at the foot of the bodhi tree. It then relates the 
story of the three councils, Mahinda’s mission and the introduction of Buddhism 
into Ceylon, and the introduction of relics there and of a branch of the bodhi 
tree, followed by a description of the planting of the tree and the institution of 
the bodhipuja, ceremonies. 

It is said in the introduction to be a translation from Sinhalese into Pali. 43 
The style of the Pali is rather artificial and affected, with long compounds and 
use of Sanskrit, or Sanskrit-derived, words or words in a Sanskritised sense. 
The work has been described as signifying the beginning of Sanskritised Pali, 44 
although it has been pointed out 45 that some of these features can be found in 
the Middle Indo- Aryan languages before they were adopted into Sanskrit. 

The Mahabodhivamsa is greatly dependent upon the Samantapasadika, 
Mahavamsa, and the Jataka-nidana (or the atthakatha upon which this is based) 
for its material. The Gandhavamsa and the Sasanavamsa 46 do not name the 
author, but tradition 47 ascribes it to Upatissa, who wrote at the request of 
Dathanaga. If this is the same person as the Dathanaga named in the Maha- 
vamsa, 48 then the text can be dated to the last quarter of the tenth century 
A.D. 


38 See Geiger, Cul tr., II, p. 263 n. 1. 

39 Geiger stated (Cul, p. v), that he had seen no manuscript which went beyond 
C 292, and the remainder of C and the whole of Cl were taken from the Colombo 
edition. 

40 H. Sumangala and DAdS. Batuwantudawa (ed.), The Mahawansa from the 
Thirty-seventh Chapter, Colombo 1877. 

41 Ed. S. A. Strong, PTS London, 1891. 

42 See Geiger, DM, p. 77. 

43 Mhbv 1, 7 — 8. 

44 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 159. 

45 See A. K. Warder, “Some problems of the later Pali literature,” in JPTS 
1981, pp. 203-205. 

46 Gv 61, 5; 70, 18; Sas 34, 29. 

47 Quoted from the Sasanavamsadipa by B. C. Law, On the chronicles of Ceylon, 
Calcutta 1947, p. 39. 

48 Mhv LIV 36. A. K. Warder (JPTS 1981, p. 198) points out that there is no 
certainty that the two Dathanagas are the same person. 



142 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


The Dathavamsa 49 is also a translation from Sinhalese according to the intro- 
duction to the text. 50 The work covers the story of early Buddhism from the 
time of Dipankara onwards, and proceeds to the distribution of the relics after 
the Buddha’s parinibbana. This begins the portion of the story dealing with the 
tooth relic. Its history is told until it eventually reaches Ceylon in the ninth 
year of the reign of Sirimeghavanna (A.D. 304—32). The work is also known as 
Dantadhatu. 51 

The text is a work of no small literary merit. It has six chapters. The first 
is written in the Jagati metre, the second in Slokas, the third in Tristubhs, the 
fourth in the Malini metre, the fifth and sixth in the V asantatilaka metre, with 
the exception of the last verse or two of some of the chapters which are in such 
metres as Sragdhard, Mandakranta, Sikharini and Sardulavikridita. 

The author is named as Dhammakitti, 52 and he states that he wrote his work 
at the request of the general Parakkama who placed Lilavati, widow of Parak- 
kamabahu (called Parakkantibhuja), on the throne. 53 This incident is referred 
to in the Mahavamsa, 54 and can be dated to A.D. 1211, so the work must have 
been composed shortly after this. 

The Thupavamsa 55 states that it was written by the them Vacissara, 56 who 
translated it from Sinhalese because an earlier Thupavamsa in Pali was not 
satisfactory. 57 If this Vacissara is the them of that name mentioned in the Maha- 
vamsa, 58 then he lived between A.D. 1230 and 1276. 

The central theme of the work is the building of the Mahathupa by Duttha- 
gamanl, who was ruler of Ceylon 101—77 B.C. The work follows the accepted 
pattern for such texts by beginning with the resolve to become a Buddha which 
Gotama made in the time of Dipankara. It recounts Gotama’s births under 
successive Buddhas, and then his life and parinibbana in this era. The history 
of the relics in India and Ceylon is then related down to the time of the con- 
struction of the Mahathupa. The text ends with the death of Dutthagamani. 

The material in the Thupavamsa is taken, with only little change, from earl- 
ier works, 59 including the Buddhavamsa and its commentary, the Jataka- 
nidana, the Digha-nikaya and its commentary, the Samantapasadika, the 
Dlpavamsa and the Mahavamsa with its tiled. Some material, untraceable in 
earlier works available to us now, e.g. the story of Asoka obtaining relics for 

49 T. W. Rhys Davids and R. Mobbis (ed.), JPTS 1884, p. 109—51. Ed. and tr. 
B. C. Law, Lahore, 1925. 

50 Dath I 10. 

51 Gv 72, 5. 

52 Dath VI 6. 

53 Dath I 6. 

54 Mhv LXXX 49-50. 

55 Ed. B. C. Law, PTS London, 1935. Tr. B. C. Law, The legend of the topes, 
Calcutta 1945. Ed. and tr. N. A. Jayawickbama, SBB London, 1971. 

56 Thup 105, 19—20. 

57 Thup 1, 17—20. 

58 Mhv LXXXI 18. See Geigeb, DM, p. 84. 

59 See Geigeb, DM, p. 85. 



Later post-canonical texts 


143 


his thupas from Ajatasattu’s underground thuya, is presumably taken from 
atthakathas not utilised by other chronicle writers, and perhaps preserved only 
in South-East Asia. 

Other vamsa (chronicle) texts deal with the history of a relic or a place of 
veneration. The Hatthavanagalla-vihara- vamsa 60 tells the history of the temple 
of Attanagalla, which marked the spot where Sirisahghabodhi, after abdicating 
the kingship, gave his head (on which there was a price) to a poor man so that 
he could gain the money. It tells the history of the vihdra down to the time of 
Parakkamabahu II (A. D. 1234—69), but is quoted in the Pujavaliya, which 
was written in A.D. 1266, so its date of composition must lie between the two. 61 

The author is not named, but he states that he wrote his work at the request 
of Anomadassi. 62 The work is in eleven chapters and is written in a very ornate 
style of Pali. The text is a campu, a kdvya in mixed prose and verse. The metres 
employed in the verses include Mdlini, Vasantatilakd, and Tristuhh. 

The continuing popularity of this type of chronicle text is shown by the 
existence of the Cha-kesa-dhatu-vamsa, 63 a modern Burmese work, which tells 
the history of the six hair-relic shrines ( thupas ) . It is in prose, with a few verses 
interspersed in it. The name and date of the author are unknown. 64 

Although the Jinakalamall 65 is not called a vamsa, it is a work very much in 
the vamsa tradition. It was written in Thailand by a them called Ratanapanna, 
and the author states that he wrote it in a year corresponding to A.D. 1516, 66 
although it seems clear that events occurring up to A.D. 1527 are included. 67 
The text is a study of the epochs of Buddhism, as it originated in India, spread 
to Ceylon, and thence to South-East Asia. 

It falls into six parts : events up to the time of the parinibbdna of Gotama 
Buddha ; the three councils ; the history of Buddhism in Ceylon ; the history of 
Haripunjaya (Lampoon) until A.D. 1292; an account of the Lanna kingdom, 
and the introduction of the Sinhalese form of Buddhism into Thailand; the 
spread and influence of this, an account of recent events known to the author, 
and a eulogy of King Tilok and his great-grandson. It has been pointed out 


60 Ed. C. E. Godakumbtjra, PTS London, 1956. 

61 See Godakumbura, Att, p. x. 

82 Att 1, 13—14. For Anomadassi, see Malaeasekera, DPPN, I, p. 102. 

63 Ed. J. P. Minayeff, JPTS 1885, pp. 5—16. 

64 JPTS 1885, p. 5. 

65 Ed. A. P. Btjddhadatta, PTS London, 1962. Tr. N. A. Jayawickrama, 
Epochs of the conqueror, PTS London, 1968. 

66 Satthu nibbdnato vassanam satthiadhike dvisahassaparimane, atthasattatiadhike ca 
atthasata-Sakaraje Musikasannite samvacchare (Jinak 129, 9—11). The designation 
of years by animal names (musika) is borrowed from the Chinese “rat”, etc. See 
Jayawickrama, Jinak tr., pp. xii — xiii. 

67 It seems probable that the author himself made these additions, either because 
important events occurred after the completion of the work which he thought 
should be recorded, or as the beginning of a supplement, on the lines of the Cfila- 
vamsa. See Jayawickrama, Jinak tr., pp. xxviii — xxix. 



144 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


that the later chapters which are devoted to the exaltation of the royal family 
are more a prasasti than a vamsa text. 68 

The sources of this work include Pali canonical and non- canonical texts, some 
written in Ceylon as late as the thirteenth century. 69 The text is important for 
the information it gives about the relationship between Ceylon and Thailand in 
medieval times. 70 The information it gives about religious buildings and shrines 
in the Lanna and neighbouring kingdoms seems to be verified by archaeological 
evidence, 71 which suggests that the work is also trustworthy when it deals with 
less verifiable events, such as the council which, as already noted, 72 is reported 
to have been held in A.D. 1475—77 to cleanse the tipitaka of scribal errors. 73 

The language in which the Jinakalamall is written shows some interesting 
features, e.g. the unhistorical gemination of consonants and the converse, 
unusual retroflexion of dentals, and unusual spellings. These were regarded as 
errors and removed from the European edition, 74 but it is possible that they 
are genuine characteristics of Pali as it was spoken in Northern Thailand in the 
sixteenth century, or actual features of the writing system used by the Thais 
when they gave up using the Sinhalese script for writing Pali. 75 

Another text dealing with the history of Thailand is the Sangltivamsa, 76 of 
which one chapter has been published in a European edition. It is attributed to 
Vimaladhamma, and was composed in the eighteenth century. 77 

The Sandesakatha 78 is another late historical text, written mainly in prose 
with a few verses inserted. It gives information about the writing of a number 
of texts, including Anuruddha’s Abhidhammatthasangaha, 79 and throws some 
light on the relationship between Ceylon and Burma in medieval times. The 
editor gives no information about it, but it is clearly modern since it includes a 
date 2345 years after the parinibbdna of the Buddha, 80 which is equivalent to 
A.D. 1801. 


68 See ibid., p. xv. 

69 See ibid., pp. xix — xxi. 

70 E.g. the visit of Thai monks to Ceylon, their ordination there in A.D. 1424, 
and the subsequent introduction of the Sihala dispensation into Thailand (Jinak 
92-95). 

71 See Jayawickeama, Jinak tr., p. xvii. 

72 See p. 12 above. 

73 Although some of the dates the author gives seem to be doubtful. See Jaya- 
wickrama, Jinak tr., p. xiii. 

74 The editor says nothing about this, but see Jayawickrama, Jinak tr., pp. 
187—210. 

75 See Jayawickrama, Jinak tr., pp. viii— ix. 

76 See G. C cedes, “Une recension Palie des Annales d’Ayuthya,” in BEFEO 14 
(1914), 3, pp. 1 — 31, where an ed. and tr. (French) of ch. 7 is given. 

77 See ibid., p. 2. See also H. Saddhatissa, “Pali literature of Thailand,” n 
Cousins, BSIBH, pp. 219—20. 

78 Ed. J. P. Minayeff, JPTS 1885, pp. 17—28. 

79 Sandes 28, 27 — 28. 

80 Sammasambuddhaparinibbanato pancacattalisatisatadvisahasse jinasasanavasse 
(Sandes 28, 20—21). 



Later post-canonical texts 


145 


Another text which it is appropriate to deal with here, although it is a 
historical romance rather than a chronicle, is the Buddhaghosuppatti . 81 It was 
written by Mahamangala, who lived in the fourteenth century in Burma, if he 
is the same person as the grammarian Mahgala . 82 Although he states that he 
has made use of material left by the former teachers , 83 much of the information 
he gives differs from that available to us from other sources, as the author of 
the Sasanavamsa has pointed out . 84 The Mahavamsa 85 informs us that Buddha- 
ghosa translated the commentaries into MagadhI, i.e. Pali, but the Buddha- 
ghosuppatti states 86 that he translated the scriptures themselves. It has already 
been noted 87 that the statement that Mahinda’s commentaries were burned 
when Buddhaghosa completed his task is clearly falsified by the fact that those 
commentaries were available to authors writing centuries later than Buddha- 
ghosa. 


2. THE LATER COMMENTARIES 


2.1. Atthakathas 

The task of writing commentaries upon the canonical texts for which none 
had as yet been made continued in the centuries after Dhammapala. The fact 
that Dhammapala wrote a commentary upon the Cariyapitaka but not the 
Buddhavamsa suggests that there was already a commentary upon the latter 
text in existence, but it is strange that he never refers to it . 88 As has been noted , 89 
the Gandhavamsa attributes such a commentary to Buddhadatta. A com- 
mentary ascribed to Buddhadatta exists , 90 but although it states that it was 
written at the request of Buddhasiha , 91 as was the Yinaya-vinicchaya , 92 at 

81 Ed. and tr. J. Gray, London 1892. 

82 See Geiger, PLL, 40. 3. Gray (Bu-up tr., pp. 32—33) suggests that the author 
is to be identified with the tutor of the Yedeha who wrote the Rasavahini, in which 
case he lived in the thirteenth or fourteenth century. 

83 Pubbdcariydnam santikd yathapariyattim (Bu-up 67, 2 — 3). 

84 Sas 30, 17—21 points out that in Vism (711, 5) it is stated that the work was 
composed at the request of Sanghapala, whereas in Bu-up (55, 4 — 5) the thera is 
named Sangharaja. 

85 Mhv XXXYII 244. 

86 Dhaqavato sdsanam dipabhasato parivattetva Mdqadhabhdsaya divase divase likhi 
(Bu-up 59, 16— 17). 

87 See p. 138 above. 

88 Not even in Cp-a, where, as B. M. Barua points out (Buddhadatta, Corr., 
pp. 177 — 78), he might have been expected to do so. 

89 See p. 131 above. 

90 Ed. I. B. Horner, Madhuratthavilasini, PTS London, 1946. Tr. I. B. 
Horner, The clarifier of the sweet meaning, SBB London, 1978. 

91 Bv-a 1, 26—27. 

92 Yin-vn 3177. 



146 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Kavirapattana , 93 which is where the Abhidhammavatara was written , 94 there 
are doubts about this attribution. 

First, unlike the other commentaries attributed to Buddhadatta, the Ma- 
dhuratthavilasini includes a reference to one of Buddhaghosa’s works , 95 without 
naming the author. More important is the fact that it states 96 that the story 
about Kanaka’s rebirth as a devaputta is to be taken from the commentary upon 
the Vimanavatthu named Vimalatthavilasini. The story is to be found in 
Dhammapala’s commentary upon the Vimanavatthu 97 but, as already noted , 98 
this is entitled Paramatthadipani. The Gandhavamsa, however, calls the same 
commentary Vimalavilasini," and it seems very likely that the reference is 
indeed to Dhammapala’s commentary. If this is so, then it is clear that the 
Madhuratthavilasini is not by the Buddhadatta who was a contemporary of 
Buddhaghosa. An alternative explanation is that there was an early commen- 
tary upon the Vimanavatthu, entitled Vimalatthavilasini, from which both 
Buddhadatta and Dhammapala drew their material. This would have become 
redundant after Dhammapala wrote his Paramatthadipani, and then dis- 
appeared. 

Although this second suggestion is quite possible, the style of the four 
summaries attributed to Buddhadatta is so different from that of the com- 
mentary upon the Buddha vamsa that, although this may be duo in part to the 
difference in character of the works, it seems quite reasonable to suppose that 
there were, in fact, two Buddhadattas. 

The last canonical text to gain a commentary was the Apadana . 100 Although 
the Gandhavamsa ascribes a commentary upon this text to Buddhaghosa , 101 
the fact that its stories are sometimes borrowed from the commentary upon 
the Theragatha, and reference is specifically made to this on one occasion , 102 
shows that the work is later than Dhammapala. No author’s name is given 
either at the beginning or at the end. 

Besides the commentary upon the Theragatha, material is also taken from 
the Dhammapada-a^atoM. The Nidanakatha at the beginning is based upon 
the Jatakanidana and the corresponding portions of the Buddhavamsa- 
atthakatha . The stories in the commentary upon the Buddhapadana are taken 
from the Dhammapada-aW^afca^M, the Jatakatthavannana, and the Culla- 

93 Bv-a 299, 16. 

94 Abhidh-av 138, 4. 

95 Ayam gatha Aithasaliniya Dhammasangani-atthakathaniddnavannanaya Dl- 
pankarabuddhavamse likhitd (Bv-a 126, 29 — 30). 

96 Bv-a 284, 27. 

97 Vv-a 314. 

98 See p. 134 above. 

99 Gv 60, 8. 

100 C. E. Godakumbuea (ed.), Visuddhajanavilasini, PTS London, 1954. 

101 See p. 121 above. 

102 Gamanavannandgdthdnam altho Theragathatthakathdyam vutto yeva (Ap-a 540, 
20 - 21 ). 



Later post-canonical texts 


147 


vagga of the Vinaya-pitaka. The greater part of the comment upon the Paece- 
kabuddhapadana is taken from the commentary upon the Khaggavisanasutta 
of the Suttanipata found in the Paramatthajotika. 103 

Although the text comments upon the Buddhapadana, the Paccekabuddha- 
padana and the Therapadana portions, there is no comment upon the Therl- 
apadana portion, and no commentary seems to exist upon that section of the 
canon. 104 

When a full commentary is given to an Apadana, there is an introductory 
story, and the verses are then commented upon separately. The usual method 
of commenting 105 is to explain a word with a (later) synonym, e.g. absolutive 
forms in -tvdna are explained by -tvd forms. Some of these explanations are 
repeated over and over again, but as the commentary continues, only words 
which seem obscure are explained. After the commentary upon Apadana No. 
181, the stories are not repeated but the author merely states that they are the 
same as those already given, with some differences of merit done, the locality, 
names etc. Thereafter stories are only related in the case of well-known theras, 
or when there is some special significance. 

The suggestion that the commentary is late 106 is confirmed by the fact that 
the author shows some knowledge of Sanskrit and Sanskrit grammarians and 
grammatical terms, e.g. veyydkarana ti Canda-Paniniya-KaldpadibydJcarane 
cheka , 107 He mentions the Kaccayanappakarana 108 and quotes a sutta from the 
Kaccayana-vutti. 109 He also includes a Pali version of a Sanskrit stanza setting 
out five rules of nirutti. 110 

There is a commentary upon the mdtikds of the seven texts of the Abhidham- 
ma-pitaka entitled Mohavicchedani. 111 Despite the fact that it is called a mdti- 
katthavannand, it is not usually regarded as an atthakathd, but as an Abhidham- 
ma work. 112 It was written by the them Kassapa who lived in the Cola country 
in South India between A.D. 1160 and 1230. 113 He states that he is following 
the tradition of the Mahavihara, 114 but this probably does not mean that he 
studied there, but only that he was following the teachings of Buddhaghosa and 
others. 115 


103 See Godakumbura, Ap-a, p. xv. There are also references to the Atthasalini 
at Ap-a 194,17 and 201, 10 — 11. 

loi See Godakumbura, Ap-a, pp. xiv— xv. 

105 See ibid., pp. xvii— xviii. 

loo See L. S. Cousins, rev. of de Silva DAT, in Religion, II, p. 162. 

107 Ap-a 220, 2 — 3. 
los Ap-a 491, 19. 

109 Ap-a 102, 19. 
no Ap-a 102, 17—18. 

in Ed. A. P. Buddhadatta and A. K. Warder, PTS London, 1961. 
ns See Buddhadatta, Moh, p. viii. 

113 See ibid., p. xi. 

114 Moh 1, 21. 

ns See Warder, Moh, p. xvii. 



148 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


He does not restrict himself to explaining the matikas , 116 which in the case of 
the Kathavatthu means a list of the topics treated in that text, but uses the 
commentary upon the matikas as a framework upon which to expound the 
whole of the Abhidhamma system as current in his day. He succeeds in doing 
this in a very scholarly and comprehensive way. 


2.2. Tikas 

A tika is a secondary commentary, i.e. a commentary upon a commentary. 117 
The word is, however, also used occasionally of a commentary upon a non- 
canonical text. 118 The Saddhammasahgaha tells 119 how the tikas came to be 
written after a conference held under the presidency of the thera Maha-Kassapa, 
with Parakkamabahu I (A.D. 1153—86) as patron, but there is evidence for 
the existence of tikas at a much earlier date than this. In his commentary upon 
the Udana Dhammapala refers to a tika upon the Kathavatthu, 120 and since 
the Sasanavamsa states that Ananda was the first to write tikas, 121 this has 
been understood 122 as a reference to Ananda’s Mula-tika 123 upon the Abhi- 
dhamma-pitaka. The fact that certain portions of the same commentary are 
very similar to passages in other tikas may mean that they existed in Dhamma- 
pala’s time and he was borrowing material from them, 124 but the possibility of 
later writers of tikas borrowing from Dhammapala, or the sources he was 
following, cannot be ruled out. 125 

The Gandhavamsa states 126 that Dhammapala was the author of the tikas 
upon the Visuddhimagga, the atthakathds upon the Digha-nikaya and three 
other nikayas, the atthakathds on the Jataka, the Nettippakarana, and the 
Buddha vamsa. The Sasanavamsa states 127 that he was responsible for the tikas 

118 A detailed investigation into the matikas is made by Warder (Moh, pp. 
xix — xxvii) . 

117 See Malalasekera, PLC, pp. 192—93. A supplement to a tika is called an 

anutikd. 

ns E.g. Mahavamsa-tika (see p. 138 above) and Milinda-tika (see p. 150 below). 

119 Saddhamma-s 58, 27 — 60, 24. 

120 Vitthdro pana . . . antardbhavavicdro Kathavatthupakaranassa tikaya gahetabbo 
(Ud-a 94, 7—9). 

1 2 1 Abhidhammatikam pana Anandathero akdsi. sa ca sabbdsam tikanam adibhu- 
tattd Mulatikd ti pakata (Sas 33, 16—17). Cf. Anando ndmdcariyo sattabhidhamma- 
gandha-atthakathdya Mulatikam ndma tikam akdsi (Gv 60, 3—4). 

122 See Cousins, op. cit. (in n. 106), p. 161. 

123 No Ee yet published. 

124 E.g. Ud-a 22, 22-23, 16 ^ Sv-pt I 59, 10—60, 6; Ud-a 250, 22 = Sp-t (Be) 
HI i960 360, 29; Cp-a 276-332 = Sv-pt I 86-130. CPD (Vol. I, p. xxviii) seems 
to imply that Dhammapala was making use of tikas, although de Silva (DAT I, 
pp. xlh — xliii) seems to regard these parallels as evidence for common authorship. 

i2s See A. K. Warder, “Some problems of the later Pali literature,” in JPTS 

1981, PP- 201. 

126 Gv 60, 10-15. 

127 Sas 33, 18-21. 



Later post -canonical texts 


149 


upon the Visuddhimagga, and on the atthakathds upon the Digha-, Majjhima-, 
and Samyutta-nikayas, and ascribes the other tlkds to other theras , 128 Scholars 
have long recognised that there are difficulties in assuming that the Dhamma- 
pala who wrote the tlkds was the same as the author of the atthakathds, par- 
ticularly as, in the case of the Netti, this would involve him in writing a tlkd 
upon his own atthakatha , 129 The colophon to the tlkd upon the Visuddhimagga 
states that it was written at the request of the thera Dathanaga who was 
residing at the Siddhagama parivena. 130 Since the Mahavamsa states 131 that 
this parivena was built by Sena IV, who ruled A. D. 973—76, and refers 132 to a 
thera called Dathanaga preaching the Ahhidhamma during the reign of Sena’s 
successor Mahinda IV, it would seem very likely that this tlkd was written to- 
wards the end of the tenth century A. D. Since the Gandhavamsa lists four 
authors with the name Dhammapala, 133 it seems very probable that the 
atthakathds and this tlkd are by different Dhammapalas. There seems to be no 
good reason for identifying the tlkd- author with the Dharmapala who lived at 
Nalanda in the seventh century A.D., and is mentioned by the Chinese pil- 
grims. 134 

In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it seems reasonable to assume 
that the Gandhavamsa is correct in stating that the tlkds to the Visuddhimagga 
and the four nikdyas are by the same person. An examination of the tlkd upon 
the Digha-nikaya-atthakatha 135 shows that the author was acquainted with 
Sanskrit and the Sanskrit grammarians, and knew something about the main 
systems of Indian philosophy. He quotes Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya and the 
Amarakosa, and seems especially interested in grammar and syntax. 136 

It is particularly interesting to note that the author of this tlkd sometimes 
identifies the holders of views attributed to “some” (keci) by Buddhaghosa in 
the Sumangalavilasinl. These are occasionally said to be the Uttaraviharava- 
sins or the Abhayagirivasins, 137 although the difference between the two is not 
entirely clear, 138 since the terms are elsewhere regarded as synonymous. This 
would seem to indicate that intercourse between the two vihdras, which has 

1 2 8 It attributes the tlkd on the Aiiguttara-atthakatha to Sariputta. 

129 See Hardy, Nett, p. ix n. 6. 

130 Vism-mht (Ne) III, 1691, 9 — 10. 

1 3 1 Mhv LIV 6 . 

132 Mhv LIV 36. 

133 Gv 66 — 67. 

1 34 The suggestion was rejected by E. Hardy (“Ein Beitrag zur Frage, ob 
Dhainmapala im Nalandasangharama seine Kommentare geschrieben”, in ZDMG 
51, 1897 , pp. 105 — 27), but has recently been revived by de Silva (DAT I, p. 1). 

135 Ed. L. de Silva, Dighanikayatthakathatika Linatthavannana, PTS London, 
3 vols., 1970. 

136 See de Silva, DAT, pp. 1 — lviii. 

i 3 v See ibid., pp. lix— lxiii. 

i38 It has been suggested that Abhayagirivasin means all non-Mahaviharavasins, 
whereas Uttaraviharin means only the headquarters of the Abhayagirivasins at the 
Uttaravihara. See de Silva, DAT, p. lxi. 



150 


K. R. Norman ■ Pali Literature 


already been noted in the discussion about the sources of the Mahavamsa-tika, 139 
was still going on. 

A tiled upon the Jatakatthavannana exists, and has been utilised by the 
editors of the Critical Pali Dictionary 140 and by the editor of the European 
edition of the Kunala-jataka. It seems never to have been published, even in 
Burma, and it is consequently not possible to state whether or not it is the tiled 
attributed to Dhammapala in the Gandhavamsa. 141 

The Gandhavamsa mentions a Milindapanhavannana, 142 but gives no author’s 
name. An edition of a text entitled Milinda-tika, 143 also called Madhuratthapa- 
kasinl, has been published. It is based upon a single manuscript in Cambodian 
characters. According to the colophon it was written by Mahatipitaka-Culabha- 
yatthera, 144 and is probably to be dated to A.D. 1474. 145 

The text starts with a detailed description of the six-fold way of commenting 
upon the meaning of a word, and then proceeds to comment upon difficult words 
and phrases, drawing upon information in the Abhidhanappadlpika and a num- 
ber of, as yet unpublished, tileds. 116 Amidst the information it gives is the com- 
plete list of the Buddha’s 80 anuvyanjanas (minor characteristics). 147 It deals, 
however, with only a small number of the problems which occur in the Milinda- 
panha, and much of the text is devoted to tracing the sources of the Jataka 
stories mentioned therein. One portion of the tiled is devoted to a collection of 
all the verses which occur in the Milindapanha, but since the list does not agree 
with the contents of the edition as we know it, this raises questions about the 
date and form of our modern editions. 148 In this connection it is to be noted 
that the author of the tiled states that the five introductory verses of the Milin- 
dapanha, and other sentences in the prologue and epilogue, were composed by 
Buddhaghosa. 149 This presumably shows the existence of a tradition that the 
Milindapanha was revised or recast by Buddhaghosa, or during the time of 
Buddhaghosa, and this may account for some of the interpolations which have 
already been noted in this work. 150 The last part of the tiled is called Samkhya- 
sarupa. Like the Sangitisutta of the Digha-nikaya (33), it collects together a 
number of miscellaneous items and presents them in a numerical way. 


139 See p. 139 above. 

no See CPD, Vol. I, p. xxviii. 

141 See Bollee, KJ, p. xii, where it is accepted that it is Dhammapala’s tiled. 

143 Gv 65, 29. 

ns Ed. P. S. Jaini, PTS London, 1961. 
in Mil-t 71, 23—24. 

145 See Jaini, Mil-t, p. xiv. 
us See ibid., p. vii. 

147 Mil-t 17, 12—18, 11. 

148 See Jaini, Mil-t, p. xi. 

149 Bhadanta-Buddhaghosdcariyena leata, ti parihdro. na kevalam panca gathd va, 
Thera - Raj avacane pi annam pubhdparavacanam pi tena vuttam (Mil-t 3, 16—18). 

iso See p. 1 1 1 above. 



Later post-canonical texts 


151 


Besides the early ( purana ) tikas, produced between the seventh and twelfth 
centuries, commentators continued in the following centuries to compile later 
(nava) tikas, and anutikas in turn upon the tikas 151 


3. LATER ABHIDHAMMA TEXTS 


The study of the Abhidhamma, based at first upon atthakathas and summaries 
written in India and Ceylon, was continued in a number of manuals attributed 
to Sinhalese and Burmese authors. One of the most famous of these is the 
Abhidhammatthasangaha, 152 which is attributed to Anuruddha, who is said to 
have been a native of Ceylon. 153 The fact that a paraphrase of this work was 
compiled by Sariputta, who lived during the reign of Parakkamabahu I (A. D . 
1153 — 86), 154 gives a lower limit for its date, and we shall probably not be far 
wrong if we assume that Anuruddha lived at the end of the eleventh century 
or the beginning of the twelfth. 

The text does not aim to give a summary of the seven books of the Abhi- 
dhamma-pitaka, and in fact mentions only one book by name, 155 but covers 
the whole field of Abhidhamma in a very condensed way, with mnemonic sum- 
maries inserted after every section. It begins with an analysis of mind and 
consciousness and the objects of consciousness in the world of phenomena, and 
continues with a discussion of the planes of existence and a classification of 
kamma. It deals with dependent origination (paticca-samuppdda) and causal 
relations ( patthdna-naya ) , and finishes with a statement about subjects for 
mental culture (kammatthdna ) , the path of purity, and the attainment of 
release. 

The same author wrote the Namarupapariccheda, 156 containing 1845 verses 
in thirteen sections. He states that he is following the tradition of the Mahavi- 
hara, 157 and he mentions Ceylon 158 in the colophon. The work does not aim to 
be as comprehensive as the Abhidhammatthasangaha, and as its name suggests, 
it deals with general subjects such as nama and rupa, kamma, mindfulness 


151 It is not practicable to try to list them all. For details see Gv 60—66 and 
CPD, Vol. I, Epilegomena pp. 37*— 60*. 

152 Ed. T. W. Rhys Davids, JPTS 1884, pp. 1—46. Tr. S. Z. Aung and Mrs. 
C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Compendium of philosophy, PTS London, 1910. 

ns Gv 67, 2. 

154 See Malalasekera, PLC, pp. 168—69. For other commentaries upon 
Abhidh-s, see H. Saddhatissa, “The Abhidhammatthasangaha and its tlka,” in 
Studies in Indian Philosophy, Ahmedabad 1981, pp. 315—23. 

155 Paccaya nama Patthdne catuvisati sabbathd (Abhidh-s 39, 11). 

156 Ed. A. P. Buddhadatta, JPTS 1913—14, pp. 5—113. 

157 Namar-p 2. 

is* Namar-p 1854. 



152 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


( anussati ) , and insight ( vipassand ) . The work is composed for the most part in 
the &loka metre, with verses in other metres at the end of each section. Some of 
these verses show an elegance and feeling for style 159 which shows that Anu- 
ruddha was quite an accomplished poet. 

The Paramatthavinicchaya 160 is also ascribed to Anuruddha. It contains 1142 
$loka verses arranged in 29 sections, and in the colophon states that it was 
written in accordance with the views of the Mahavihara by someone born in the 
town called Kavlra in the state of Kancipura, while dwelling in the town of 
Tanja in the Tamba kingdom. Since Kancipura is in South India, this has led 
to the suggestion 161 that the author of the Paramatthavinicchaya is not the 
same Anuruddha who wrote the Abhidhammatthasahgaha and the Namarupa- 
pariccheda. The subjects treated include mind, consciousness, form, and 
nihbana. 

The Saccasankhepa 162 consists of 387 verses arranged in five chapters. The 
colophon states that it was written by Dhammapala while dwelling at the Maha- 
vihara at Badaratittha, 163 which doubtless accounts for the Sasanavamsa 
ascribing it to the thera Dhammapala, 164 but the Gandhavamsa attributes it to 
a Culladhammapala. 163 The Saddhammasangaha states 166 that the author was 
Ananda, but this is probably a mistake, arising from the fact that Dhammapala 
was Ananda’s pupil. 167 If this is the Ananda who wrote the Mula-tika which is 
referred to by Dhammapala in the atthakathd upon the Udana, 168 then Culla- 
dhammapala would, in any case, be approximately contemporary with the 
commentator Dhammapala. The five chapters deal with rupa, sensations 
(vedand), mind, miscellaneous subjects, e.g. pride and sloth, and nibbdna. 

The Namarupasamasa, 169 also known as the Khemappakarana, is a short 
prose work, with a few verses interspersed in it, and a final section of 28 mne- 
monic verses. The Gandhavamsa attributes it to the thera Khema of Ceylon. 170 
There is a commentary upon it by Vacissara, 171 written in the twelfth century, 
which suggests that the work is to be assigned to the tenth or eleventh century. 
It consists of short descriptions of mind, and kusala and akusala cetasikas. The 
mnemonic verses include lists of the four elements, etc. 


i59 E.g. Namar-p 120; 208; and 478. 

iso There is as yet no Ee of this, but the typescript of an edition by A. P. Bun- 
dhadatta is in the possession of the PTS London, awaiting publication. 

161 By Buddhadatta in the typescript mentioned in the previous note. 

162 Ed. P. Dhammarama, JPTS 1917—19, pp. 3—25. 
i«3 Sacc 25, 15 — 19. 

is* Sas 34, 2—3. 

165 Gv 60, 30 — 31. 

166 Saddhamma-s IX 16. 

167 Ananddcariyassa jetthasisso Culladhammupalo (Gv 60, 30). 

168 See p. 148 above. 

169 Ed. P. Dhammarama, JPTS 1915—16, pp. 3—19. 

17 ° Gv 61, 28—29; 67, 2—3. 

i71 See Aung, Abhidh-s tr., p. ix n. 1. 



Later post -canonical texts 


153 


These five works, together with Buddhadatta’s Abhidhammavatara and 
Rupariipavibhaga, 172 Ivassapa’s Mohavicchedani, 173 and the Namacaradlpika 174 
by Saddhammajotipala, form a group known in Burma as the Little-finger 
Manuals ( Let -than ) . 175 Saddhammajotipala, also known as Chapata, was a 
native of Pagan in Burma. The Sasanavamsa does not include the Namaca- 
radipika among the texts attributed to Saddhammajotipala, which perhaps 
supports the suggestion that he introduced it into Burma, rather than being the 
author. 176 It is, however, reported 177 that the colophon to the work, which con- 
sists of 299 verses, contains the information that it was written while its author 
was residing in an drama near the shrine named Tilokanayana-sabbannudhatu- 
unhisacetiya, to the east of Arimaddana. 


4. COLLECTIONS OF EDIFYING TALES 


It is not surprising that in a situation where the well-being of the Sangha 
depended upon the generosity of laymen, a literature evolved which stressed 
the value of giving (ddna). 

The Dasavatthuppakarana 178 belongs to this type of literature. The name is 
shortened from Dasadanavatthuppakarana, by which title it is sometimes 
known. The longer title better describes its nature, for it consists of 37 stories in 
mixed prose and verse, each relating the advantages of making offerings to the 
Sangha, Buddhas, Paccekabuddhas, and thupas. To the collection are prefixed 
16 Tristubh verses setting out the ten ddnavatthus, the ten objects suitable as 
gifts. The stories are arranged in ten groups, each extolling one of the ddna- 
vatthus. 

All the stories except one can be traced to accounts of ddna found in attha- 
Icathds to the canon, or in the Mahavamsa. 179 The one exception is a story 
referring to Asoka’s queen Asandhimitta, 180 which probably indicates an origin 
in South-East Asia, where a collection of stories about Asoka not available to 
us now seems to have been current in medieval times. Nothing is known about 
the date of the compilation of the work, except that, as it is mentioned in an 
inscription of A.D. 1442 found at Pagan, 181 it must be earlier than that date. 

172 See p. 131 above. 

17 » See p. 147 above. 

17* No Ee has as yet been published. 

i75 See Aung, Abhidh-s tr., p. ix. 

i7« See Bode, PLB, p. 18. 

177 See Buddhadatta, Corr., pp. 208—9. 

178 Ed. and tr. (French) J. Ver Eecke, EFEO Paris, 1976. 

179 See Ver Eecke, Dvp, p. xiv. 

iso See ibid., p. ix. 

lei See Bode, PLB, p. 104. 



164 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


The stories are written in a simple narrative style of Pali, in some eases word 
for word the same as the sources from which they are borrowed. 

The Sihalavatthuppakarana 182 is another set of edifying stories, aimed at 
glorifying the act of giving by recounting the benefits gained by donors in the 
past. The majority of the 77 stories it contains are set in Ceylon, which probably 
accounts for its title. The first 45 stories (the colophons to the various sections 
show that a further five are missing) 183 are in mixed prose and verse. The last 
32 are very short, almost entirely in prose, and seem to be intended as notes for 
reciters to use as the basis of further stories. 

Some of the stories are not recorded elsewhere, but those which are have 
parallels with stories found in the Dipavamsa, the Mahavamsa and atthakathas 
upon the canon. The resemblances are not close enough to be able to say 
whether they are direct borrowings from those texts, or whether they are all 
based upon some third source, e.g. the Sihala atthakathas . 184 The presence of 
hitherto unknown material in the Sihalavatthuppakarana probably means that 
the compiler or compilers had access to materials current in South-East Asia. 185 

The Burmese Pitakattamain states that the work was composed in Ceylon, 186 
but does not name the author. In the colophons he is called Dhammanandi or 
Dhammadinna. His vihara and town are variously spelled, 187 and have been 
doubtfully identified with a place in Andhra. 188 No information is available 
about the date of composition, but the fact that the work is mentioned at Pagan 
in the inscription of A.D. 1442 gives a lower limit. 189 Some of the characters 
mentioned in the stories can be dated to early times, but this seems to have no 
bearing upon the date of compilation, and the dates of second century B. C. and 
fourth century A.D. which have been suggested for the first and second parts 
respectively seem quite unjustified. 190 

Despite its name, the Sahassavatthuppakarana 191 contains 95 stories, and it 
has been very plausibly suggested that the title means not “1000 stories,” but 
“delightful stories.” 192 There is little system in its arrangement of material, and 
stories about India and about Ceylon are mixed up together. The language 


182 Ed. and tr. (French) J. Ver Eecke, EFEO Paris, 1980. 

183 See Ver Eecke, Sih, pp. iv— vii. 

* 84 See ibid., p. ix. 

is® See p. 140 above. 

is® See Bode, PLB, p. 104 n. 9. 

is’ The vihara is called Pattakotti, Handakonda or Sandakonti. The town is 
called Kantakasolapattana or Kondakasolapattana. 

is 8 See Ver Eecke, Sih, p. iii. 

i 88 See Bode, PLB, p. 105. 

iso By Sodi Mori, “A Japanese translation and notes on the Sihajavatthupa- 
karana (II), Chapter 1, Stories 3 — 5,” in Studies in the Humanities of Josai Uni- 
versity, Saitama, Japan, 1 (December 1973), p. 99. 

19 1 Ed. A. P. Btjddhadatta, Ambalangoda 1959. 

192 By Malalasekera, quoted by Rahula, HBC, p. xxxiv. 



Later post -canonical texts 


155 


shows signs that the work is a translation from Sinhalese, since it abounds in 
direct translations of Sinhalese idioms and usages. 193 

Nothing is known certainly about the date of compilation, although it must 
be earlier than A.D. 1442 since the Pagan inscription of that year mentions the 
Sahassavatthu. 194 If the text is identical with the Sahassavatthatthakatha 
mentioned three times in the Mahavamsa-tika, 195 then we should be able to 
date it earlier than the ninth century, but it seems unlikely that it can be, at 
least in its present form. The Mahavamsa-tika states 196 that the story about 
Prince Sali is to be found in the Sahassavatthatthakatha, but at this point in its 
narrative the Sahassavatthuppakarana gives only a single line, referring readers 
to the Mahavamsa for the story. 197 It seems more likely that the text referred to 
in the Mahavamsa-tika was a Sihala atthakatha, which is now lost, but upon 
which the Sahassavatthuppakarana was itself based. 

The Rasavahinl 198 is the fourth of this collection of edifying tales. It is 
divided into two parts : the first ( Jambudipuppattivatthu) contains 40 stories 
originating in India, and the second (Sihaladipuppattivatthu) consists of 63 
stories originating in Ceylon. Each part is divided into vaggas, with four in the 
first part and six in the second. Each vagga contains ten stories, and the tenth 
vagga is followed by three extra stories and the colophon. Each story concerns 
some aspect of the layman’s ethics, and the moral of each tale is clearly ex- 
pressed in the concluding verse, giving (dana) being the one which is most 
frequently extolled. 

The colophon names the author as the same Vedeha who wrote the Samanta- 
kutavannana, 199 and the work can be dated to the thirteenth or fourteenth 
century. It is stated in the introduction that it is a revision of an earlier text, 
composed by the them Ratthapala, which was found to be corrupt throughout 
with repetitions and other defects. 200 There is some doubt about this earlier 
text. The Gandhavamsa states that Ratthapala’s work was entitled Madhura- 
savahinl, 201 but no authority is known for this statement. Surprisingly, the 
Gandhavamsa does not mention Vedeha or the Rasavahinl. Some verses in the 
Rasavahinl agree almost exactly with those in the Sahassavatthuppakarana, 

193 See Buddhadatta, Svp, p. xxv and Rahul a, HBC, pp. xxx— xxxi. 

1®* See Bode, PLB, p. 105. 

i»5 At Mhv-t 451, 19; 452, 28; and 607, 8—9. 

we Mhv-t 607, 8—9. 

1 97 Sdlirdjakumaravatthum Mahavamse vuttanayena veditabham (Sah 108, 5 — 6). 

1 93 It is surprising that although F. Spiegel edited and translated selected stories 
in 1845 (Rasavahinl eine buddhistische Legendensammlung. 1—4. Anecdota Palica 
I, Leipzig 1845), no complete Ee has yet appeared. See also M. and W. Geiger (ed. 
and tr.), Die zweite Dekade der Rasavahinl, Munich 1918. The sections (vaggas) 
and stories (vatthus) are analysed with the corresponding pages of a Ce (ed. Sara- 
natissa Thera, Colombo 1928) by Godakumbura, Cat. pp. 56—59. 

ioe Yo ca Samantakutassa vannanam vannayi subham 
tena Vedehatherena katdyam Rasavahinl. 

See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 225. 

Gv 63, 8. 



156 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


which has led to the suggestion that Ratthapala’s work was the latter, but it 
seems more likely that Ratthapala was the author of the Sahassavatthattha- 
katha mentioned in the Mahavamsa-tika. If both the RasavahinI and the 
Sahassavatthuppakarana were based upon this atthakathd, it would account 
for the similarities between them. 

Among the other sources named by the RasavahinI are the Mahavamsa and 
the pordnas , 202 It is noteworthy that the story of Prince Sali which does not ap- 
pear in the Sahassavatthuppakarana does occur in the RasavahinI. 203 


5. KAVYA WORKS 


As has already been noted, 204 the Mahavamsa can in many ways be regarded 
as a kavya work, but the beginning of the medieval period of kdvya literature, 
showing the influence of Sanskrit literature upon Ceylon, can be seen in the 
Mahabodhivamsa and the Telakatahagatha. The former, as has been seen, 205 is 
assigned to the last quarter of the tenth century A. D. The latter 206 is of unknown 
date and authorship, but must be earlier than the RasavahinI, where it is ap- 
parently referred to. The poem is an expansion of an incident referred to in the 
Mahavamsa, 207 where a them was killed and thrown into the sea for intriguing 
with the king’s wife. In the RasavahinI the details are somewhat changed, and 
the them is punished by being thrown into a cauldron of boiling oil. 208 He be- 
comes an arahant and recites 100 verses. The Telakatahagatha purports to be 
the verses he uttered, although it contains only 98 209 stanzas, divided into nine 
sections, each dealing with a fundamental doctrine of Buddhism, beginning 
with the three refuges and ending with dependent causation ( paticcasamup- 
pada). The cause of suffering and death can be traced back to ignorance 
(avijjd). Escape from worldly misery can be obtained by following the noble 
path of the dhamma. 

292 See Rahtxla, HBC, p. xxxix. 

293 See ibid., p. xxix. 

204 See p. 118 above. 

2 «5 See p. 141 above. 

299 Ed. E. R. Gooneratne, JPTS 1884, pp. 49—68. In PBR 2, 3 (1977), pp. 
127 — 40, R. Webb draws attention to a translation by B. C. Law in Indian Culture, 
5 (1938—39), p. 25, and republishes one by C. Samaresingha ; in PBR 5, 3 (1980), 
p. 88, he notes a third translation by S. K. Ramachandra Rao in the Quarterly 
Journal of the Mythic Society (Bangalore), 1957, pp. 214-27 and 260 — 81. 

2 <u Mhv XXII 13-20. 

2( > 8 See Gooneratne, JPTS 1884, p. 49. 

209 The word sata is often not to be taken literally, but in the sense of “a large 
number” (see MW, s.v. sata). It is perhaps being used in Ras merely as a “round 
number” (see Malalasekera, PLC, p. 163). The fact that Tel has only 98 verses 
would seem to prove that it is earlier than Ras, otherwise the author would certainly 
have composed 100 verses. 



Later post-canonical texts 


157 


The Gandhavamsa states 210 that the Jinalankara 211 was written by Buddha- 
datta at the request of the them Sanghapala. The same text states that a tiled 
on the Jinalankara, 212 with the same name, was written by Buddharakkhita, 
and also mentions a navatika on the Jinalankara, written by an unnamed Sin- 
halese scholar. 213 The Saddhammasahgaha 214 ascribes the Jinalankara to 
Buddharakkhita. The colophon to the text, omitted in the European edition, 
attributes the text to Buddharakkhita and states that it was composed 1700 
years after the time of the Buddha. 215 The editor, however, has misunderstood 
the compound saitarasasate, and by giving it the meaning “117” instead of 
“1700” has dated the author’s birth to 426 B.C., 216 instead of dating the com- 
position of the text to A.D. 1156. 217 The statement in the colophon is quoted in 
the Jinakalamall, 218 'where it is said to occur in the Jinalankaravannana, and 
this suggests a solution to the problem. It is likely that Buddhadatta, whether 
the author of the summaries of the Vinaya and the Abhidhamma, or the author 
of the Madhuratthavilasini, or another Buddhadatta, wrote a work entitled 
Jinalankara. The work we possess is an embellishment (vannand) of this, writ- 
ten by Buddharakkhita in the twelfth century. 219 

Even if the colophon had not included a date, it would have been possible to 
deduce that the Jinalankara is a late work, for it is written in a very developed 
kdvya style. 220 Some verses are palindromes, 221 while others show rhyme. 222 
One verse has four identical padas , 223 each to be interpreted in a different way; 
another verse begins and ends each pada with the syllables rav(bh)e rave. 221 
Other verses consist entirely of velar sounds, 225 or the consonant n. 226 Such 
tricks are reminiscent of Dandin’s achievement of omitting all labial sounds in 


210 Gv 69,15. 

211 Ed. and tr. J. Gray, London 1894; repr. PTS London, 1981. 

212 Gv 72, 9. 

213 Gv 65, 19. Gray states (Jinal, p. 15) that he made use of a tiled and a text 
entitled GulatthadipanI when making his edition. 

214 Saddhamma-s 63, 9. 

2 15 Sattarasasate vasse gate. 

2 i« See Gray, Jinal, p. 7. 

217 See Geiger, PLL, 34.3. 

2 1 8 Jinak 71, 19 — 24. 

219 Godakumbura, however, quotes (Samantak, p. 81) a passage from a Jina- 
lankaravannana which, since it is in prose, must be a different text of the same 
name, perhaps a commentary upon the Jinalankara. See also Godakumbura, Cat. 
pp. 50 — 52. 

220 Some of the sections have headings which signify the particular feature to be 
exemplified in it, e.g. XIII. “Distributed rhyme in two padas ” (Dvipadavyasa- 
yamakagatha) . 

221 Jinal 99—100. 

222 E.g. Jinal 173, where each successive pair of words rhyme. 

223 Jinal 97, where each pada is salcamadata vinayamanantagu. 

224 Jinal 98. 

225 Jinal 101. 

226 Jinal 105. 



158 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


the seventh chapter of the Dasakumaracarita because the narrator, having 
been bitten on the lip, was unable to pronounce them. 227 

The poem, without the colophon, consists of 250 verses in a number of metres, 
some of them highly ornate. 228 Divided into 30 sections, it tells the story of the 
Buddha from his first aspiration at the time of the Buddha Dlpankara to his 
parinibbana. It ends with an exhortation to worship the Buddha’s relics as a 
means of attaining nibbana, and a hope that the author will become a Buddha 
at some future time. 

The Jinacarita 229 is also a poem on the life of the Buddha. The colophon to 
the text ascribes it to the them Medhankara, 230 and this is confirmed by the 
Gandhavamsa 231 and the Saddhammasangaha. 232 It is said to have been written 
in the parivena founded by Vijayabahu 233 (probably Vijayabahu III, who 
reigned A.D. 1232—36), and Medhankara is believed to have flourished under 
Bhuvanekabahu I (A.D. 1273—84). He was also the author of a grammatical 
work entitled Payogasiddhi. 234 

The poem consists of 472 verses, and begins with the aspiration made by 
Gotama in his birth as Sumedha at the time of Dlpankara. It omits the rebirths 
under the subsequent Buddhas, and referring only briefly to the attainment of 
the perfections, it proceeds to the birth as Gotama. The description of the con- 
test with Mara and the enlightenment is full of poetic exaggeration, and the 
poem ends with a recitation of the places which the Buddha frequented during 
his 45 years as a wandering teacher. Like Buddharakkhita, Medhankara con- 
cludes with a wish to be reborn as a Buddha. 

Estimations of the value of the work vary. Although it has been dismissed 
as a very mediocre poem, with clumsy versification, 235 others have put Medhan- 
kara in the foremost rank among poets when he writes from the depths of his 
own inspiration 236 instead of slavishly imitating other works, especially the 
Nidanakatha of the Jataka, which seems to be the main source followed. 

The Pajjamadhu 237 consists of 104 artistic stanzas in what is described as 
partly Sanskritised Pali. 238 The first 69 verses describe the beauties of the 
Buddha’s person, and the remainder are in praise of his wisdom, concluding 
with a eulogy of the Sangha and nibbana. The style is laboured and artificial, 
and some of the verses are intricate puzzles. 

227 See A. B. Keith, A history of Sanskrit literature, London 1928, p. 306. 

228 See Gray, Jinal, pp. 69—72. 

229 Ed. and tr. W. H. D. Rouse, JPTS 1904—1905, pp. 1—65; Ch. Duroiselee, 
Rangoon, 1906. 

230 Jina-c 471. 

231 Gv 62, 24—25. 

232 Saddhamma-s 63, 11—12. 

233 Jina-c 469 — 70. 

23i See Maeaeasekera, PLC, p. 230, and p. 165 below. 

235 See Winternitz, HIL, p. 224. 

236 Law, HPL, p. 614, quoting Duroiseele. 

237 Ed. E. R. Gooneratne, JPTS 1887, pp. 1—16. 

ass Gooneratne, JPTS 1887, p. 1. 



Later post-canonical texts 


159 


The author names himself as Buddhappiya, and states that he is a pupil of 
Ananda . 239 If this is the same Ananda who was the teacher of Vedehathera, then 
Buddhappiya and Vedeha were contemporaries and probably lived at the end 
of the thirteenth or beginning of the fourteenth century. Buddhappiya was also 
the author of the grammar entitled Rupasiddhi. 240 

Vedeha was the author of a poem entitled Samantakutavannana, 241 as well 
as the Rasavahini. 242 He lived in Ceylon in the late thirteenth or early four- 
teenth century, and belonged to the Arannayatana fraternity of forest -dwelling 
monks. 243 The work is a life-story of the Bodhisatta Siddhattha up to the 
enlightenment, and thereafter the life of the Buddha up to the point which is 
the climax of the poem, the imprinting of his footprint on the Samanola rock. 
It is possible that both Vedeha and Rahula, at whose request he wrote the 
work, could actually see the mountain from their cells, if they resided at 
Putabhattasela in the vicinity of Samanola, as tradition records. 244 

The story of the Buddha’s three visits to Ceylon and the planting of his foot- 
print on Sumanakuta is found in the Mahavamsa, 245 and this is followed closely 
for the account of the visits to Ceylon. Other material is based upon the Nidana- 
katha of the Jataka, with some borrowings from the Samyutta- and Majjhima- 
nikayas and the Dhammapada, with occasional verses being borrowed ver- 
batim. 246 With a few exceptions the language is correct and easy-flowing. In the 
narrative portions, which are mainly in Sloka metre, the style follows that of 
the epics and ballads. In the more ornate portions there are lengthy compounds, 
and other kdvya features, e.g. puns, repetitions, alliteration, and assonance. 
Over half of the text’s 802 verses are Slokas, and nearly a quarter are Tristubhs. 
Vasantatilaka and Mdlinl are next in order of frequency, with a handful of 
other ornate metres. 247 

There are a number of examples of passages where the grammar is faulty by 
the normal standards of Pali, and here the influence of the author’s own Sin- 
halese language is clearly to be seen. The work also includes several new words 
coined from Sanskrit, which indicates the prevalence of Sanskrit learning in 
Ceylon at this time. 248 

The Saddhammopayana 249 deals in 621 verses, and eight closing verses, with 
the fundamental doctrines of Buddhism in general and the ethical doctrines in 
particular. It has 19 chapters and begins with a description of the eight akkha- 

239 Pajj 103. 

240 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 220 and p. 164 below. 

241 Ed. C. E. Godakumbura, PTS London, 1958. 

243 See p. 155 above. 

243 See Godakumbura, Samantak, p. ix. 

244 See ibid., p. xi. 

245 Mhv I 77. 

246 See Godakumbura, Samantak, pp. xiv — xv. 

247 See ibid., p. xx. 

248 See ibid., pp. xx — xxiv. 

249 Ed. R. Morris, JPTS 1887, pp. 35—98. 



160 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


nas, the miseries of the ten akusalas, and the sufferings of the petas and animals, 
and the terrible evils (pdpddinavas), and then deals with the results of merito- 
rious deeds and the benefits of generosity and virtuous conduct, etc., ending 
with appamada. In one of the concluding verses, the author expresses the wish 
that he may himself, one day, become a Buddha. 

The text itself says nothing about the author, but states that it is to be sent 
to a friend called Buddhasoma. 250 A commentary upon it, entitled Saddhammo- 
payana-viggaha states that the author is called Abhayagiri Kavicakravarti 
Ananda Mahathera. 251 On the strength of this, the text has been identified as 
a work of the Abhayagirivasins, 252 but there seems to be no evidence for this 
other than the author’s name. There is nothing in the contents which seems to 
depart in any way from standard Thera vadin doctrine. 253 

The language is simple and straightforward, and with very few exceptions the 
metre is &loka throughout. The work probably dates from the thirteenth cen- 
tury. 254 

The Pancagatidipana 255 is a poem in 114 verses, which describes the five con- 
ditions in which beings may be born: gods, men, petas, animals and hell-dwel- 
lers. It describes the actions which may lead to rebirth in these various cate- 
gories, and goes into details about the various hells and the tortures to be 
suffered there. Nothing is known about the author or the date of its composition, 
but it has been regarded as a product of the fourteenth century. 256 The greater 
part of the text is based upon descriptions such as are found in the commentary 
upon the Petavatthu, and little can be considered as new or original. What 
literary merit it has has been attributed to its simple style of diction. 257 


6. PROPHETIC TEXTS 


In a prophecy about the future made by the Buddha in the Cakkavattisiha- 
nadasutta of the Dlgha-nikaya (26), 258 there is mention of increased length of 
life, greater prosperity, a cakkavattin called Sankha and a future Buddha called 

250 Saddh 3. Gv 75, 15 says nothing about the author or the sponsor. 

251 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 212. 

252 See H. Bechert, “Notes on the formation of Buddhist sects and the origins 
of Mahayana,” in German Scholars on India: contributions to Indian Studies, 
Varanasi 1973, Vol. I, p. 11. 

253 Which presumably accounts for its survival, if it is an Abhayagiri text. See 
N. A. Jayawickrama, “Literary activity in Pali,” in PBR, 5, 3 (1980), p. 85. 

254 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 212. 

255 Ed. L. Feer, JPTS 1884, pp. 152—56. 

256 See Geiger, PLL, 40.2. It is included in the list of Pali texts originating in 
Cambodia by H. Saddhatissa, “Pali literature in Cambodia,” in JPTS 1981, pp. 
186-87. 

257 See Law, HPL, p. 629. 

258 See p. 41 above. 



Later post -canonical texts 


161 


Metteyya. This is the only future Buddha mentioned in the Pali canon. He is 
also mentioned at the end of the Buddhavamsa 259 as the fifth Buddha of this 
kappa. 

Sankha and Metteyya are also dealt with in a poem of 142 verses entitled 
Anagatavamsa, 260 which the Gandhavamsa 261 ascribes to the Kassapa who was 
the author of the Mohavicchedani. 262 The poem begins with an account of how 
Sariputta approached the Buddha and asked about the future Buddha, where- 
upon Gotama told him when and where Metteyya would be born. The Eu- 
ropean edition of this poem is accompanied by information about other recen- 
sions of the poem, some of which have prose interludes inserted. One of these 
gives a picture of the gradual decline of Buddhism, 263 with the scriptures 
disappearing piecemeal, beginning with the Patthana, 264 the last book of the 
Abhidhamma-pitaka. This version ends with a list of ten persons who will be 
future Buddhas, beginning with Mette 3 ?ya. 265 It is interesting to note that in 
the Mohavicchedani Kassapa includes a short statement about the disappear- 
ance of the canon, 266 beginning with the Patthana. 267 

The Dasabodhisattuppattikatha 268 tells of the arising of ten future Buddhas, 
although the details do not agree entirely with the list just mentioned at the 
end of the Anagatavamsa. The story of Metteyya is told in detail, and the stories 
of the other nine are then presented in a shorter form. A number of the stories 
have incidents involving bodily sacrifice, self-cremation, self-mutilation, and 
the offering of children. 269 Although such deeds are very rarely recorded in 
Theravadin literature, they seem to be more common in Mahayana works. 270 
This has led to the suggestion that the Dasabodhisattuppattikatha, for which 
no author or date of composition is known, is probably a product of the late 
fourteenth century, 271 when Hindu and Mahayana influence in Ceylon was 
strong. The growth in the number of future Buddhas probably represents a result 
of the same influence, although except for Metteyya the ten Sinhalese Buddhas 
have nothing in common with their Mahayana counterparts. 272 

Bv XXVII 19. 

2 «o Ed. J. P. Minayeff, JPTS 1886, pp. 33—53; E. Leumann, Maitreya-samiti, 

Strassburg 1919, pp. 184 — 226. 

261 GrV 61, 1. 

a® 2 Although Buddhaghosa mentions the names of Metteyya’s father and mother 
(Visro 434, 28—30 — As 415, 9—12), he does not quote Anag 96, as Mrs Rhys Da- 
vids (Vism. p. 761) seems to imply, and Anag is not, therefore, earlier than Buddha- 
ghosa. 

263 See Minayeff, JPTS 1886, p. 35. 

264 Which is called Mahapakarana. 

265 See Minayeff, JPTS 1886, p. 37. 

266 See Moh 202, 3 — 22. 

267 Again called Mahapakarana. 

268 Ed. H. Saddhatissa, SBB London, 1975. 

26 « See Saddhatissa, Dbk, p. 9. 

270 See ibid., p. 103. 

271 See ibid., p. 19. 

272 See ibid., p. 19. 



162 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Another text of the same type is the Dasabodhisattuddesa. 273 The author 
and the date of composition are unknown. There is a commentary upon the 
Anagatavamsa called Samantabhaddika, of which some extracts have been 
published. 274 If this is the atthakatha mentioned in the Gandhavamsa, 275 then it 
was written by Upatissa of Ceylon, possibly the author of the Mahabodhivam- 
sa. 276 A short text, or portion of a longer text, called Dasabodhisattavidhi has 
also been published. 277 Some of the names given in this differ from those found 
in the Dasabodhisattuppattikatha, but it is clear that it belongs to the same 
category of text. 


7. MEDICAL TEXTS 


The beginnings of Pali texts dealing with medicine can be seen in the Bhe- 
sajjakkhandaka 278 of the Vinaya-pitaka, where various rules promulgated by 
the Buddha about proper diet, hygiene, and medical treatment including the 
use of herbs and surgical instruments are collected together. Although the 
Buddha forbade bhikkhus to practise medicine as a livelihood, 279 it is clear from 
the respect shown to physicians such as Jivaka-Komarabhacca that medical 
knowledge was highly thought of, and medicine for the sick was one of a 
bhikkhu’s four necessities. 280 

The chronicles give a certain amount of information about kings providing 
supplies of medicines to both bhikkhus and lay people, and the account of 
Asoka doing so 281 is confirmed by his own inscriptions. 282 The Mahavamsa 
reports 283 that Buddhadasa (late fourth century A.D.) made a summary of all 
the medical text books, although it is doubtful whether this is the work men- 
tioned in the Pagan inscription of A.D. 1442. 284 The Mahavamsa also gives 

273 Ed. and tr. (French) F. Martini, BEFEO 36, 2 (1936), pp. 287—390. The 
work named Dasabodhisattuppattikatha which is added in an appendix (pp. 391 — 
413) would seem to be the text labelled “D” by Minayeff (JPTS 1886, pp. 39—40). 
It would appear that Saddhatissa did not know of this publication, for he states 
(Dbk, pp. 3 — 4) that despite a search he was unable to find this manuscript. 

a? 4 See Minayeff, JPTS 1886, pp. 38—39. 

275 Gv 72, 11. 

27« See Malalasekera, DPPN, I, p. 66. 

277 See Saddhatissa, Dbk, pp. 4—5. 

278 Vin I 199—252. 

279 See D I 12, 1 — 12. 

280 Cf. civara-pindapdta-sendsana-gildnapaccayabhesajja-parikkhdrd (Vin III 132, 
10 — 11 )- 

28 1 Mhv V 224—25. 

283 Cikichd kata manusacikichd ca pasucikichd ca (Rock Edict II (A)). 

283 Mhv XXXVII 146. See also J. Joley, Medicin, Strassburg 1901, p. 15. 

284 As Bode (PLB, p. 108 n. 7) suggests, following Titrnour’s suggestion that 
sdratthasangaha is the title of a book. Geiger (Cul tr., I, p. 13 n. 7) rejects the sug- 
gestion. The Saratthasangaha mentioned at Pagan is probably that by Buddhappiya 
or Siddhatthathera (see Malalasekera, DPPN, II, p. 1106). 



Later post-canonical texts 


163 


information about Parakkamabahu I (A.D. 1153—86) and his keen interest in 
medicine, 285 but it was under his namesake Parakkamabahu II (A.D. 1236—71) 
that the only extant Pali medical text was composed, for there is a statement 
that during the reign of Narindasiha (A.D. 1707—39) Saranamkara 286 composed 
a commentary upon the Bhesajjamanjusa, which had been written in the time 
of Parakkamabahu. 

The Mahavamsa does not name the author, and he is referred to only as the 
Panca-parivena-adhipati, but the Yogaratnakara, a Sinhalese work of the late 
fourteenth century, mentions 287 a medical text called Manjusa, written by 
Atthadassi c. A.D. 1267, and this is presumably the Bhesajjamanjusa. A lower 
date for its composition is afforded by the fact that it is mentioned in the Pagan 
inscription of A.D. 1442. 288 The author’s reason for composing the work was 
that “those who have devoted themselves to the spiritual life should be spared 
illness.” 289 


8. GRAMMATICAL AND LEXICOGRAPHICAL WORKS 


The grammatical terminology used by Buddhaghosa and Dhammapala in- 
dicates that there was already before their time a fixed grammatical system, 
although there is not enough evidence to decide whether they were referring to 
an actual grammar, now lost. There are indications, as has already been 
seen, 290 that Buddhaghosa was acquainted with parts, at least, of Panini’s 
grammar. 

The earliest Pali grammar known to us is that of Kaccayana, 291 who must be 
later than Buddhaghosa, since the latter does not refer to him. Kaccayana may 
have used the Kasika, in which case he is later than the seventh century, 292 
but the evidence for this is disputed. 293 Nothing is known about him except his 
name, and he seems to be unconnected with any other Kaccayana known to us 
from Sanskrit or Pali. His work is known as Kaccayana-vyakarana or Kaccaya- 
nagandha, 294 and has been shown to owe much to Panini and to the Katantra. 295 


sss Mhv LXXIII 34-54. 

ass Mhv XCVII 58. Saranamkara is also reported to have extended the Bhesajja- 
manjusa. See Malalasekera, PLC, pp. 215—16. 

287 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 215. 

288 See Bode, PLB, p. 108. 

289 Mhv XCVII 60. 

290 See p. 129 above. 

291 Ed. E. Senart, JA 1871, pp. 193—544. 

292 See Franke, Gramm, pp. 17 — 19. 

293 See H. Scharfe, Grammatical Literature, History of Indian Literature, V, 2, 
Wiesbaden 1977, p. 194 n. 8. 

294 See Geiger, PLL, 30 . 

295 See Franke, Gramm, pp. 14—20. 



164 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


The earliest commentary extant upon Kaccayana is Vimalabuddhi’s Nyasa, 
or Mukhamattadipani. 296 This is probably a work of the eleventh century, for 
it was itself commented upon by Chapata at the end of the twelfth century in a 
work entitled Suttaniddesa or Nyasapradipa. 297 Chapata or Saddhammajoti- 
pala has already been mentioned as the author of the Namaearadipika. 298 There 
is an abridgement of Kaccayana, called Kaccayana-sara, which was written by 
Dhammananda, according to the Gandhavamsa, 299 and a tiled upon it written 
by the Burmese grammarian Mahayasa. 300 

The Rupasiddhi or Padarupasiddhi 301 is a re-arrangement of Kaccayana’s 
grammar. The author’s name is given as Buddhappiya, or Dlpankara. 302 If this 
is the same person as the author of the Pajjamadhu, 303 then the text belongs to 
the second half of the thirteenth century. The Balavatara, 304 which is much 
used in Ceylon and Burma, is also a re-arrangement of Kaccayana, giving the 
contents in a different, slightly more concise, form. The work is attributed to 
the same Dhammakitti 305 who composed the Saddhammasangaha 306 towards 
the end of the fourteenth century, although the Gandhavamsa 307 attributes it 
to Vacissara. It is possible that Dhammakitti was only responsible for com- 
posing the Mahasannaya upon the Balavatara. 308 If Vacissara is the author, 
then the work is datable to the thirteenth century. 309 

The greatest of extant Pali grammars is the Saddaniti, 310 written by Agga- 
vamsa from Arimaddana in Burma in A.D. 11 54. 311 A copy of it was taken to 
Ceylon soon after. 312 On the whole it follows Kaccayana, but Aggavamsa also 
made use of Panini. It is said to be based upon the writings of the acariyas as 
well as on canonical material. 313 The work consists of 28 chapters, 19 being called 
Mahasaddanlti, and the last nine Cullasaddaniti. It is in three sections: the 
Padamala (1—14) gives a complete morphology of Pali, interspersed with nayas 
from the Buddhavacana, and criticisms of the precepts of Kaccayana and var- 


296 See Malalasekera, PLC, pp. 179—80. 

297 See Bode, PLB, pp. 17—18, and Franke, Gramm, p. 23. 

298 See p. 153 above. 

299 Gv 74, 1—3. 

309 See Bode, PLB, p. 36, although Gv 74, 1—2 states that Dhammananda wrote 
the tika on the Kaccayana-sara. 

am See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 221. 

302 In the colophon to the text, quoted by Malalasekera, PLC, p. 220. 

303 See p. 159 above. 

304 Ed. and tr. L. Lee, The Orientalist, 2, 1892. 

393 See Malalasekera, PLC, pp. 243—44. 

398 See p. 179 below. 

397 Gv 62, 9 and 71, 6. 

398 See Godakumbura, Cat, p. 69. 

399 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 109 for the date of Vacissara. 

319 Ed. H. Smith, 5 vols., Lund 1928 — 66. 

See Bode, PLB, p. 16. 

342 See ibid., p. 17. 

313 Sadd 926, 9. 



Later post -canonical texts 


165 


ious Sanskritisms found in Pali from the works of Buddhaghosa down to the 
Mahabodhivamsa ; the Dhatumala is a Dhatupatha in eight ganas (chapters 
15—19), with a commentary made up from canonical citations and lexicograph- 
ical kdrihds) the Suttamala (chapters 20—28) resumes the “complete course” 
under the traditional form of a sutrapdtha, adding an important chapter on 
upasargas and nipdtas. 

The them Moggallana or Moggallayana was the founder of a new school of 
grammar. He wrote the Moggallayanavyakarana, which is also known as 
Saddalakkhana, together with the vutti upon it, and his own commentary upon 
it, entitled Moggallayanapancika. 314 He is reported to have lived in the Thupa- 
rama vihdra at Anuradhapura, and the colophon to the work states that it was 
written during the reign of Parakkamabahu, after the king had purged the 
Sangha of all heretical bhiJckhus, an event datable to A.D. 1165. 315 Moggallana 
deals with the linguistic material more exhaustively and with greater under- 
standing of the essence and character of Pali, which with the influx of both 
Sanskrit and Sinhalese influence had changed somewhat since the earlier gram- 
marians had written their works. As a result, there are considerable differences 
in the arrangement and grouping of the rules, as well as in the terminology, and 
he draws attention to such overlooked matters as the existence of short e and o. 
Despite his innovations, he draws heavily upon earlier Pali grammars, and also 
the Katantra, Panini, and especially Candragomin. 316 

Moggallana too had his followers, and one of them was the Medhankara 317 
who wrote the Jinacarita. 318 His Payogasiddhi bears the same relationship to 
the Moggallayanavyakarana as does Buddhappiya’s Rupasiddhi to Kaccay ana’s 
Vyakarana, and he makes good some of the deficiencies in Moggallana’s work 
to which his opponents had drawn attention. 

The writings of the grammarians at his period had a profound effect upon 
Pali, and, as has already been noted, 319 it has been suggested that the Pali of 
the texts which we now possess has been greatly influenced by their theories. 
It is not overstating the case to say that a knowledge of the Burmese and Sin- 
halese philology of the period 320 is essential if we wish to go past the recensions 
of Buddhaghosa and Dhammapala and return to a Pali of real linguistic interest. 
It seems very likely that the manuscripts consulted by Europeans editors go 
back to originals which have been revised in the spirit of Aggavamsa and his 
contemporaries. Although the grammarians were well acquainted with Sanskrit, 

314 See Geiger, PLL 48, who states that the Moggallayana-pancika is lost. He is 
followed in this statement by Scharfe (op. cit. [in n. 293], p. 195), but CPD, I, 
Epilegomena p. 55* lists an edition of it, as does Scharfe himself (p. 208). 

315 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 186. 

316 See Franke, Gramm, pp. 34—43. 

317 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 231. 

318 See p. 158 above. 

sis See p. 6 above. 

320 For a more detailed account of the Pali grammarians, see Franke, Gramm, 
pp. 1—64, and for a bibliography see D. L. Barua, in IC 15, pp. 194 — 202. 



166 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


they did not teach that Pali was simply a derivation of Sanskrit, as the Prakrit 
grammarians did. 321 Nevertheless we are probably to see their influence in the 
occasional Sanskritised form found in Pali texts. 

The two schools of Kaccayana and Moggallana both had lists of roots, to 
match Aggavamsa’s Dhatumala. The Dhatumanjusa, 322 which is also called 
Kaccayana-mahjusa, 323 belongs to the Kaccayana school. It is planned on the 
lines of Vopadeva’s Kavikalpadruma, and was compiled by Sllavamsa about 
the fourteenth century. The arrangement of root classes follows Kaccayana, 
and the author makes use of the Paninian Dhatupatha. 324 It is also possible 
that he made use of the Dhatupatha, 325 which belongs to the Moggallana school. 
Although its author and date are unknown, it seems probable that it is older 
than the Dhatumanjusa. It follows the Moggallana order of root classes, and is 
shorter than the other list. It differs from it in being in prose, not verse. 326 

The beginnings of Pali lexicography probably lie in the system of explanation 
by means of synonyms which we find in the Padabhdjamya section of the Old 
Commentary upon the Pdtimokkha in the Vinaya-pitaka, and in the Niddesa. 327 
This tradition was carried on in the lists of words and glosses known as ganthi - 
padas, which existed early enough to be used by the author of the Mahavamsa- 
tlka. 328 The system was also developed in the Vevacana-ham sections of the 
Petakopadesa and the Nettippakarana. 329 

The earliest Pali dictionary we possess is the Abhidhanappadlpika, 330 which 
seems to have been conceived upon the same lines as the Sanskrit Amarakosa. 
It is a dictionary of synonyms, and does not follow an alphabetical order. It is 
ascribed to Moggallana, but since the Gandhavamsa 331 calls the author Nava- 
moggallana it is assumed that this Moggallana was not the grammarian. The 
Abhidhanappadlpika refers to Parakkamabahu, which dates it to the late 
twelfth century, and therefore makes the two Moggallanas roughly contem- 
porary. 332 

The work consists of 1203 verses, and is in three sections: celestial (sagga), 
terrestrial (bhumma), and miscellaneous (sdmannakanda) . Each section is 
divided into sub-sections, and there are frequent overlaps between one division 
and another. The greater part of the work is devoted to synonyms, but the last 
two divisions deal with homonyms and indeclinables. 

a 21 See Scharfe, op. cit. (in n. 293), p. 195. 

322 Ed. (with the Dhatupatha) D. Andersen and H. Smith, Copenhagen 1921. 

323 Dhatum 52, 11. 

324 See Geiger, PLL, 50. 

325 Ed. (with Dhatumanjusa) D. Andersen and H. Smith, Copenhagen 1921. 

326 See Geiger, PLL, 52. 

327 See pp. 19 and 85 above. 

328 Cf. evam pi so gate ti Ganthipadatthavannandyam vuttam (Mhv-t 148, 5). 

329 See Pet 96, 4 — 23 and Nett 53, 1 — 56, 24. 

330 Ed. W. Stjbhtjti, Colombo (2nd ed.) 1883. Index compiled by W. Subhuti, 
Abhidhanappadipikasuci, Colombo 1893. 

331 Gv 62, 3. 

332 See Geiger, PLL, 51, and Malalasekera, PLC, p. 188. 



Later post-canonical texts 


167 


Large portions, particularly in the portion on synonyms, are taken in toto 
from the AmarakoSa, and not infrequently the words listed are taken straight 
from Sanskrit and converted into Pali according to the normal rules of phono- 
logical development. 333 A proportion of the vocabulary in the Abhidhanappa- 
dipika is therefore artificial, in the sense that it had no existence in Pali until 
it had been specially coined for inclusion in the dictionary. This fact, however, 
hardly justifies its exclusion from modern dictionaries 334 of Pali, for subsequent 
poets mined much material from the Abhidhanappadipika, as did their Sanskrit 
counterparts from the Amarakosa, as a result of which these artificial words 
acquired a life and existence in their own right. 335 

A tlka upon the work was composed about the middle of the fourteenth 
century, 333 and a commentary (samvannand) was written on it in Burma 
during the reign of Kittislhasura in the same century. 337 

A Burmese monk named Saddhammakitti wrote a work entitled Ekakkhara- 
kosa 338 in A.D. 1465. It is a metrical list of monosyllabic words on the lines of 
similar works in Sanskrit. 339 His purpose was to ensure that Buddhism sur- 
vived during the difficult period of persecution in the fifteenth century, and in 
the belief that survival depended upon correct understanding of the texts his 
dictionary was intended to help with the proper understanding of Pali. 


9. POETICS AND PROSODY 


In the latter half of the twelfth century the thera Sangharakkhita, writing 
in Ceylon, composed a number of works on grammar, prosody, and rhetoric. 340 
He speaks of himself as a pupil of Moggallana, whom he calls Silathera. 341 

The Subodhalankara 342 is a work on poetics, and deals with the art of poetry 
under five heads: faults in composition; their avoidance; verbal ornamenta- 
tion ; rhetorical figures ; elegance of sound ( rasa ) and the art of making verse 
sound pleasant. It consists of 370 verses, and the author states that his reason 
for writing 343 is that the earlier works by Ramasamma and others are not 


33® See Geiger, PLL, 51. 

334 See W. Stede, PED, Afterword, p. 734. 

335 See A. K. Warder, “Some problems of the later Pali literature,” in JPTS 
1981, pp. 204—205. 

336 See Geiger, PLL, 51. 

337 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 189. 

338 Ed. W. Subhuti, as an appendix to his ed. of Abh (see n. 330). 

339 See Geiger, PLL, 51. 

340 Gv 61, 15—19, although the author of the Yuttodaya is called Vuttodayakara. 

341 Vutt 134. 

342 Ed. and tr. G. E. Fryer, JAS 44 (1875), pp. 91-125. 

343 Subodh 2. 



168 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


suitable for MagadhI, i.e. Pali. Sangharakkhita seems to be dependent upon 
Sanskrit models, from which the technical terms are borrowed and adapted. 

There is a tiled upon the Subodhalankara, ascribed to Vacissara. 344 

Sangharakkhita also wrote a book upon Pali metre, entitled Vuttodaya. 345 
He states specifically 346 that the books by Pingala and others were not suitable 
for those studying pure MagadhI, i. e. Pali, and he accordingly gives rules for 
writing Pali verses. The Vuttodaya seems to be the only original work on Pali 
metre extant. 347 In 136 stanzas, or portions of stanzas, arranged in six chapters, 
it deals first with general definitions and symbols, and then with all the metres 
known to Sangharakkita, including mattachandas , ganacchandas , and all the 
varieties of akkharacchandas , although he seems not to have been aware of the 
Old Aryd metre. 

His work is based entirely upon Sanskrit prosody, from which terms are 
borrowed and adapted. There are occasionally sentences taken over from 
Pingala with only the minimum change made to adapt Sanskrit into Pali. 348 

There were several commentaries written upon the Vuttodaya, including a 
tika Zi9 by Vepullabuddhi, 350 who lived at Pagan. 351 

Sangharakkhita also wrote a work on the Pali verb and its use in syntax, 
entitled Sambandhacinta, 352 and a tikd upon the Khuddasikkha. 353 


10. BOOKS ON DISCIPLINE 


The need for bhikkhus to master the great mass of disciplinary rules contained 
in the Vinaya-pitaka led at an early date in the history of Buddhism to the 
production of summaries designed to make learning easier. The existence of the 
Parivara in the Vinaya-pitaka itself, and of the summaries made by Buddha- 
datta, has already been noted. 354 The same need led to the production of two 
other texts of the same type. 


344 See Maeaeasekera, PLC, p. 204, and Gv 62, 6 . 

345 Ed. and tr. G. E. Fryer, Calcutta 1877. See also R. Siddhartha, Sangharak- 
khita’s Vuttodaya: a study of Pali metre, Journal of the Department of Letters, 
University of Calcutta, Vol. 18 (1929), No. 7 (repr. Dehli 1981). 

343 Vutt 2—3. 

3*7 See Maeaeasekera, PLC, p. 198. 

343 See ibid., p. 198. 

349 Gv 64, 28. 

350 Gv 64, 27. 

351 See Fryer, Vutt, p. 4. The date given there for Vepulla (c. A.D. 1212) must 
be too early. 

352 Gv 61, 17—18. 

353 See p. 169 below. 

354 See pp. 27 and 131 above. 



Later post-canonical texts 


169 


The Gandhavamsa 355 states that the Khuddasikkha 356 was composed by 
Dhammasiri. This was doubtless taken from the text itself, where Dhammasiri 
is said to be “a banner to Tambapanni” ( Ta mbapann iyaketund ) . 3 5 7 No author 
is named for the Mulasikkha 358 by the Gandhavamsa or the text itself, but a 
Burmese tradition states that Dhammasiri had a colleague named Mahasami. 
The same tradition states that the two works were written about 920 years 
after the Buddha’s death, i.e. c. A.D. 375. 359 While some modern scholars have 
accepted this date, 360 others have suggested the sixth or seventh centuries 
A.D., 361 while one scholar has placed them as late as the eleventh century. 362 
They cannot be later than that because they are named in an inscription by 
Parakkamabahu I (A.D. 1153— -86), 363 and Sangharakkhita, the author of the 
Vuttodaya and the Subodhalankara, who lived about the same time, 364 wrote 
a tiled upon the Khuddasikkha. 365 

The two texts form a compendium of the Vinaya-pitaka. They are mostly in 
verse, with some prose passages. Some passages seem to be parallels to portions 
of the Samantapasadika and the Kankhavitarani, rather than the Vinaya- 
pitaka itself, 366 and if this were provable, then a date later than Buddhaghosa 
would be certain. It is, however, possible that the summaries and Buddhaghosa 
were both drawing upon the same commentarial tradition, and the same de- 
pendence may be the explanation for the passages which do not seem to have 
parallels in the Vinaya-pitaka. 367 Whether the differences between the sum- 
maries and the Vinaya-pitaka, which have been said to be of considerable 
interest for the history of the Buddhist Sangha in Ceylon, 368 are indicative of 
an early or a late date of composition is something which still awaits investiga- 
tion. 

The two texts contain some strange forms, which are probably due in part to 
unskilled authors trying to adapt technical terms of discipline into metre. It 
seems, however, not to include the artificial features and Sanskritisms which 
would have proved a late date of composition. 369 

355 Gv 61, 20—21. 

356 Ed. E. Muller, JPTS 1883, pp. 88-121. 

357 Khuddas L 5. 

358 Ed. E. Muller, JPTS 1883, pp. 122—30. 

359 Quoted by Muller (JPTS 1883, p. 87) where, perhaps by mistake, he re- 
verses the authors’ names. 

360 E.g. T. W. Rhys Davids in JPTS, 1883, p. xiv. 

361 See Muller, JPTS, 1883, p. 87. 

362 See Geiger, PLL, 27. 

363 See M a l a l a s e k e r a (PLC, p. 76) who, however, dates Parakkamabahu to 
A.D. 1065. 

36i See p. 167 above. 

365 Gv 61, 19. 

366 See Muller, JPTS 1883, pp. 131—32. 

367 See ibid., p. 87. 

368 See Rhys Davids, JPTS 1883, p. xiv. 

369 See Muller, JPTS 1883, p. 86. 



170 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Although it is reported that there are more than 40 Jain sravakdcdra texts, 
dealing with the proper conduct of a layman, 370 it appears that there is only 
one systematic Pali text dealing with this subject. This is the Upasakajanalan- 
kara, 371 also known as Upasakalankarana or Upasakalankara. 372 The author is 
stated in the colophon to be Ananda, who was a Sihalacariya, and it is probable 
that the work was written during the reign of Parakkamabahu I (A. D. 
1153— 86). 373 This suggestion is supported by the fact that the Pali employed by 
the author shows certain Sanskritised features, e.g. some words have been 
used in a Sanskrit sense and Sanskrit words have been used in their Pali forms. 
There are sometimes long compound words in the Sanskrit kdvya style, and the 
author shows himself to be a skilled poet in the verses he includes. 374 

The author has based his work on both the canon and the commentaries, and 
has also made use of later works. 373 He has surveyed all these works, collected 
together all the specific and general instructions to laymen which they contain, 
and then combined them into a single work. The first of its nine chapters deals 
with the three refuges, and Ananda ends the section with illustrations from 
the canon of the benefits which the ti-sarana brings. 

Subsequent chapters deal with the rules of morality (slla), ascetic practices 
{ dhutangas , of which only two of the usual list of thirteen are prescribed for a 
householder), the proper way of gaining one’s livelihood, ten types of merito- 
rious deed and various harmful actions, and happiness in this world and other 
worlds, leading ultimately to enlightenment. The final chapter deals with the 
question of the person or individual who performs meritorious deeds, and the 
Buddha’s teachings about self (attd) and individual (puggala) are re-iterated. 
Some of the statements made in this chapter seem to indicate a knowledge of 
Mahayana doctrines, and it seems likely that at the time when the text was 
'written Mahayana texts were being studied in Ceylon. 376 

The author states in the colophon that he wrote his book in accordance with 
the Mahavihara tradition, free from the views of other sects. 377 One text which 
he frequently quotes is the Saddhammopayana which, as has been noted 
above, 378 is sometimes thought to have been an Abhayagiri text. The fact that 
Ananda could quote from this text and at the same time state that he is follow- 
ing the Mahavihara tradition shows that there must have been very little 
fundamental difference between the views of the two vihdras , 379 


a™ See P. S. Jaini, The Jaina path of purification, Berkeley 1979, p. 160 n. 5. 

371 Ed. H. Saddhatissa, PTS London, 1965. 

372 See Saddhatissa, Upas, p. 1 n. 1, and Upas 123, 8. 

373 See Saddhatissa, Upas, p. 45. 

374 See ibid., p. 3. 

375 For a list of quotations and allusions, see Saddhatissa, Upas, pp. 115—22. 

376 See Saddhatissa, Upas, pp. 104—11. 

377 Upas 357, 3 — 4. 

378 See p. 160 above. 

379 See Saddhatissa, Upas, pp. 63 — 64. 



Later post -canonical texts 


171 


11. BOUNDARY TEXTS 


In the Uposathakkhandhaka of the Vinaya-pitaka 380 we read of a number of 
questions which arose early in the history of Buddhism about boundaries be- 
tween communities, and the Buddha gave various rules for establishing them. 
The relevant portion of the Samantapasadika is entitled Slmakatha. 381 

Although the original purpose of the slma was to limit the area of responsi- 
bility of a particular Buddhist community, in which they were allowed to per- 
form pabbajja, upasampadd, and other ceremonies, it is clear that before long 
the question of slma became an intensely legalistic matter, and texts were 
compiled to serve as the basis for settlement of any disputes which arose. The 
Mahavamsa-tika 382 states that the boundaries of the Mahavihara were fixed 
in the manner set forth in the Slmakatha, and it is possible that the information 
found in the Samantapasadika is based upon this, or some similar text. 383 The 
Sinhalese manuscripts of the Mahavamsa have an interpolation at this point 
which describes how the king himself guided the plough which was marking 
out the boundary. 384 It is likely that this passage is taken from a Slmakatha 
belonging to the Mahavihara. 385 

The Simalankara is attributed to Vacissara, 386 and a tiled upon this is ascribed 
to Chapata, also known as Saddhammajotipala. 387 A summary upon the Sima- 
lankara, called either Simasangaha or Slmalankarasangaha is also attributed 
to a Vacissara, 388 who lived in the thirteenth century in Ceylon. At the begin- 
ning of his work it is stated that it is so called because it is based upon the 
Simalankaraka. 389 It consists of 100 verses, including the colophon, in which 
the author states that he has also written a commentary ( vannand ) upon the 
Simalankara. 390 

It is clear that the proper determination and erection of a sanctified boundary 
to a vihdra came to be considered as an effective means of purification of the 
Sangha, 391 and Vacissara expressed the hope that the unorthodox views of the 
Coliyan bhikkhus of South India, who apparently had dissentient views on the 


380 Vin I 106 — 11. 

381 Sp 1035, 23—1056, 30. See also Kkh 59, 23—60, 24. 

38a Mhv-t 362, 6. 

383 See Malalasekera, Mhv-t, pp. lxviii — Ixix. 

384 See Mhv, App. B, pp. 331—33. 

385 See Geiger, Mhv tr., p. Ill n. 3. 

386 Gv 62, 13 — 14. 

387 See Bode, PLB, p. 18, although Geiger (PLL, 33) states that he wrote a 
tiled upon the Slmalankarasangaha. 

ass See J. Dhirasekera, “A historical introduction to the Slmalankarasangaha 
of Vacissara Thera”, in Buddhist Studies (Bukkyo Kenkyu), 1 (1970), pp. 73—76. 

389 Ibid., p. 74 n. 1. 

390 Ibid., p. 73 n. 11. 

391 See Bode, PLB, pp. 38—39. 



172 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


question of slmds, would be rejected by all those who desired the well-being of 
the sasana. 392 

The Simasankarachedani 393 is ascribed to Sri Rahula, who wrote in the fif- 
teenth century, while the fact that the Sima vivadavinicchayakatha, 394 like the 
Sandesakatha, 395 includes a date equivalent to the very beginning of the nine- 
teenth century 396 shows that it is a modern work, although it quotes extensively 
from canonical texts, atthakathds, and from later texts such as the Vimativino- 
danitika which is ascribed to the thera Kassapa. 397 The continuing importance 
of the subject is indicated by the production of a work entitled Slmalakkhana- 
dipanl, by the thera Vimalasara in Ceylon in the second half of the nineteenth 
century. 398 


12. ANTHOLOGIES 


In an edict addressed to the Sangha, 399 Asoka recommended to them for 
frequent study a list of seven suttas, i0 ° which doubtless represented his own 
selection of favourite sermons. Others too, no doubt, made selections of the 
suttas which seemed to them to contain the most important teachings of 
Buddhism, and certain manuals of this type exist. 

The earliest is probably the Suttasangaha, 401 which is regarded as canonical 
and forming part of the Khuddaka-nikaya in Burma. Nothing is known about 
its date or author, although the Burmese tradition states that it was compiled 
by a thera who lived in Ceylon at Anuradhapura. 402 That it is post-canonical, 
at least in its present form, is shown by the fact that it includes certain pas- 
sages from the atthakathds, including the atthakathd upon the Buddha vamsa, 
and in one case a tikd upon an atthakathd . 403 

The suttas are arranged under six headings. The first three consist of suttas 
concerned with accounts of giving (dana), moral conduct (sila), and heaven 

393 See Dhirasekera, op. cit. (in n. 388), pp. 74—75. 

393 See Maealasekera, PLC, p. 251. 

3»4 Ed. J. P. Minayeff, JPTS 1887, pp. 17—34. 

395 See p. 144 above. 

3»« Sammasambuddhassa parinibbdnato samvaccharagananena catucattalisadhikam 
tisatadvisahassam sampatte (Simav 18, 13 — 14) = A.D. 1800. 

397 At Sas 33, 24 — 25 this is ascribed to Damilaratthavasi Kassapathero. It is not 
clear whether this is the same Kassapa who wrote the MohavicchedanI, but since 
Gv 60, 33 — 61, 2 does not include it among the works of Kassapa, we are probably 
dealing with two authors of the same name. 

sas See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 311. 

ass See Huxtzsch, Inscriptions of Asoka, Oxford 1925, pp. 172 — 74. 

400 See Winternitz, HIL, pp. 606—609. 

401 Ed. R. P. Chatjdhuri and D. P. Guxa, Calcutta 1957. See Geiger, PLL, 19. 

402 See Bode, PLB, p. 5 n. 1. CPD Yol. I, Epilegomena p. 46* ascribes it to 
Ariya vamsa. 

403 Eor the list of contents see CPD Yol. I, Epilegomena pp. 95*— 96*. 



Later post -canonical texts 


173 


( sagga ). Included in the last-mentioned are the Dhammahadayavibhanga, 
which gives information about the life-spans of various classes of devas, and 
several vatthus from the Vimanavatthu. The fourth section includes suttas which 
tell of the dangers to be found in sensual pleasures (kamadinava) ; the fifth 
section contains suttas about householders or life as a human being; and the 
sixth section deals with ways of gaining thanks ( anumodana ). A number of 
the suttas, particularly those from the Vimanavatthu, are accompanied by their 
commentaries. 

The Sarasangaha 404 contains 40 chapters on various topics of Buddhist 
teaching, each illustrated by means of stories. 405 The colophon to the text states 
that the author’s name is Siddhattha, and he is a pupil of Buddhappiya, the 
chief of the Dakkhinarama at the end of the thirteenth and beginning of the 
fourteenth centuries. This was presumably the Buddhappiya who wrote the 
Rupasiddhi and Pajjamadhu. 406 

The first chapter deals with the aspiration (abhinihara) for Buddhahood 
made by Bodhisattas, the second with the marvels ( acchariyas ) which occur 
in a Tathagata’s life, and the third with the disappearance of the Buddha’s 
teaching. Many stories deal with the virtues of pious behaviour and generosity. 
There are also sections about nagas, supannas, petas, asuras and devas, about 
earthquakes, and storms. There is also a chapter on dreams, and the final sec- 
tion deals with cosmology (lokasanthiti ) . 

Although most of the stories which are included can be traced to the canon 
or the commentaries, some sources have not yet been identified. 407 The method 
of presentation is so uncritical that it would have been simple for additions to 
be made to the text during the centuries. 

Another anthology, but of a special nature, is the Paritta or Mahaparitta, 408 
a small collection of texts taken from the Suttapitaka. The word paritta means 
“protection, safeguard,” e.g. an amulet, 409 but it is then used of a protective 
text which can be chanted as a charm or exorcism. There are instances in the 
canon of the Buddha teaching or allowing the use of such charms. In the Vinaya- 
pitaka there is an instance where, after a bhikkhu had died of snake-bite, the 
Buddha taught a charm to protect beings from snakes, by suffusing them with 
loving kindness ( mettd). i 10 The Atanatiyasutta of the Dlgha-nikaya (32) 411 is 
also a paritta, which was recited in the presence of the Buddha, who by his 
silence gave consent for its recitation. 412 

404 See Geiger, PLL, 39. 1. Maxalasekera, PLC, p. 229 calls the text Sarattha- 

sangaha. 

405 For a list of contents see Godakumbura, Cat, pp. 60 — 61. 

4 oo See pp. 159 and 164 above. 

407 See Godakumbura, Cat, p. 61. 

408 See Maxalasekera, PLC, pp. 75—76, and Bode, PLB, pp. 3 — 4. 

409 E.g. parittasutta “protective thread” (Mhv VII 14). 

410 Vin II 109-10. 

411 D III 194—206. 

412 Adhivasesi Bhagava tunhi-bhavena (D III 195, 24). 



174 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


The Milindapanha states that parittas were appointed by the Buddha, 413 and 
six are named there: Ratana, Khandha, Mora, Dhajagga, Atanatiya, and 
Angulimala. Buddhaghosa mentions four of these in the Papancasudani 414 and 
five of them in the Visuddhimagga. 413 The story of the Ratanasutta being used 
by Ananda in a great exorcism is told several times in the commentaries, 4 ! 6 and 
the Mahavamsa tells of the same paritta being used during a famine and plague 
during the reign of Upatissa (early fourth century A.D.). 417 

The addition of the Mangalasutta, the Karaniyamettasutta, and the Bojjhan- 
gaparitta gives a set of nine parittas which is commonly found in Ceylon, 418 but 
a longer set, consisting of 28 parittas, and known as the Catubhanavara, also 
exists. 419 An examination of the list of 22 parittas quoted in the Critical Pali 
Dictionary 420 from the Catubhanavaratthakatha, which includes both the 
parittas and the commentaries upon them, shows that the set consists entirely 
of suttas from the canon, seven being from the Khuddaka-patha, five from the 
Anguttara-nikaya, six from the Samyutta-nikaya, including the Candasutta 421 
which is used as a spell against snakes, two from the Jataka, and one each from 
the Majjhima- and Dlgha-nikayas. 


13. COSMOLOGY 


As already noted, 422 the last section of the Sarasangaha deals with cosmology 
(lokasanthiti ) . The oldest extant Pali text we have which deals exclusively with 
the subject of cosmology is the Lokapannatti. 423 A lower limit to its date of 
compilation is provided by the fact that it was one of the sources employed by 
the author of the Traibhumikatha, which was composed in Siamese c. A.D. 
1345. 424 It seems probable that the Lokapannatti is the work of an unknown 
author, writing in Burma, probably at Thaton, in the eleventh or twelfth 
century A.D. 425 

Although the Northern Buddhists, writing in Sanskrit, produced descriptions 
of the world, the Thera vadins seem to have been too busy escaping from the 

413 Puna Bhagavata paritta ca uddittha (Mil 150, 27). 

414 Ps IV 114, 6— 7. 

415 Vism 414, 21—22. 

416 See Dhp-a III 441; Pj I 164; Pj II 278. 

417 Mhv XXXVII 195. 

418 See Godakumbuea, Cat, pp. 25—26. 

419 See Geiger, PLL, 17. For a paritta text from South-East Asia see Padmanabh 
S. Jaini, “Mahadibbamanta : a Paritta manuscript from Cambodia”, in BSOAS 
28 (1965), pp. 61—80. 

420 See CPD, Yol. I, Epilegomena pp. 93* — 95*. 

421 See p. 52 above. 

422 See p. 173 above. 

423 Ed. and tr. (French) E. Denis, La Lokapannatti et les idees cosmologiques 
du Bouddhisme ancien, 2 vols., Lille 1977. 

424 See Denis, Lp, I, p. vii. 

426 See ibid., p. ix. 



Later post-canonical texts 


175 


world to describe it. When they began to do so in medieval times, they were 
content to borrow from earlier writers on the subject. It is somewhat mis- 
leading to call the Lokapannatti a treatise on cosmology, since it is not a 
systematic study of the subject, but a compilation of information about the 
nature of the world, collected from many sources, and put together in a haphaz- 
ard way. Into the descriptions of the various parts of the world are inserted 
narrative stories, e.g. the section on the devaloJca includes a long story 426 about 
Asoka and robots (bhuta-vahana-yanta ) from the kingdom of Roma, which is 
doubtless drawn from the stock of stories about Asoka current in South-East 
Asia, but presumably of North Indian origin. 

The greater part of the Lokapannatti is based upon the Lokaprajnapti, of 
which the Sanskrit original has been lost but a Chinese translation dating from 
A.D. 558 427 is available. Presumably the Sanskrit original was still available in 
Burma in the twelfth century. It is also possible to deduce that a slightly 
different version of the Mahavastu was available at the time when the Loka- 
pannatti was being compiled, for the text of the latter enables certain lacunae 
in the former to be filled in the description of the hells, from which borrowings 
have been made. 

A passage on the origin of the world has also been taken from the Mahavastu, 
while the Divyavadana is the source for some of the other stories, especially 
details about Asoka. 428 There are also many borrowings from the Pali canon, 
the most important being from the description of the beginning of the world in 
the Aggannasutta of the Digha-nikaya (27), the judgment of wrong-doers and 
their condemnation to hell by Yama in the Devadutasutta of the Anguttara- 
nikaya, and the dialogue between the yakkhas Hemavata and Satagira and the 
Buddha in the Hemavatasutta of the Sutta-nipata. 429 

In A.D. 1520 a Thai mahdthera named Sirimangala, who lived in Chieng Mai, 
wrote a cosmological work entitled Cakkavaladipani, 430 in six chapters. Like 
the Lokapannatti, it is based upon material extracted from earlier texts. 


14. WISDOM TEXTS 


The learning of worldly wisdom (nlti) by means of collections of aphorisms 
is of great antiquity in India, and spread from there to all countries which were 
influenced by Indian culture. Although there is evidence that collections of 
subhasitas found their way to Ceylon they seem not to have been imitated by 

*26 Lp 157—59. 

427 See Denis, Lp, I, p. ii. 

428 See ibid., pp. xvi — xvii. 

42 9 See ibid., p. xvii. 

430 Ed. Bangkok, 1979. See also H. Saddhatissa, “Pali literature of Thailand,” 
in Cousins, BSIBH, p. 217. 



176 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Pali authors, whereas collections introduced into Burma, probably from North 
East India, 431 were widely imitated there. 

There is no mention of any Pali nlti text in the Pagan inscription of A.D. 
1442, 432 which suggests that the genre had either not been introduced by the 
fifteenth century, or, if it had, it had not yet gained wide acclaim. The longest 
and probably the earliest of the Pali nlti texts found in Burma is the Dham- 
maniti, 433 which probably dates from the late fourteenth or early fifteenth 
century. It contains 414 verses, while the later Lokaniti 434 and Maharahaniti 435 
contain 167 and 254 verses respectively. These three texts are closely related. 
The Rajanlti 436 follows a separate tradition, and could be as late as the eight- 
eenth century. 

The nlti texts of Burma are not independent works, in the sense of being 
made up from verses composed in Pali by Burmese authors. 437 They are simply 
compilations, i.e. collections and arrangements of verses which were already in 
existence in other Pali texts, or were adaptations of verses available in San- 
skrit, especially in the large corpus of Sanskrit verses attributed to Canakya. 438 
While Pali parallels to many of the verses in the Dhammanxti and its related 
texts can be identified, 439 all the verses in the Rajanlti are direct translations 
from Sanskrit. 440 The largest Pali source is the Jataka collection, while other 
verses can be traced to the Dhammapada. 

The Sutavaddhananlti or Panditalankaranlti 441 was composed in the latter 
half of the eighteenth century. Its sources are mainly Buddhist canonical texts, 
with some borrowings from Sanskrit sources. The Pali Canakyaniti 442 seems to 
be an exact translation into Pali of the Sanskrit Canakyanitisastra. It seems 
to have been made in the late nineteenth century to provide a Pali translation 
for Burmese readers. Another modern compilation is the Gihivinayasangaha- 
nlti, 443 composed in A.D. 1830. 


431 See L. Sternbach, Subhasita, gnomic and didactic literature, A history of 
Indian literature, IV, 1, Wiesbaden 1974, pp. 41 — 42. Nlti verses are, however, 
found in the Lokaneyya-pakarana, which probably orginated in North Thailand. 
See Padmanabh S. Jaini, “Some niti verses of the Lokaneyya-pakarana”, in 
Hammalava Saddhatissa Felicitation Volume (forthcoming). 

433 The Kamandaki which is mentioned at Pagan (see Bonn, PLB, p. 107) is the 
Sanskrit Kamandakiyanitisara. See Bechert, PNTB, p. lxvi. 

433 Ed. J. Gray, Rangoon 1883; Bechert, PNTB, pp. 3—71. Tr. Gray, Prov. 
pp. 37 — 118. 

434 Ed. Bechert, PNTB, pp. 72—98. Tr. Gray, Prov, pp. 1—36. 

435 Ed. Bechert, PNTB, pp. 99—131. 

436 Ed. ibid., pp. 132—60. Tr. Gray, Prov, pp. 119—41. 

437 See Bechert, PNTB, p. lxxxii. 

438 See ibid., p. lxxxiii. 

439 See ibid., pp. lxxiii — lxxiv. 

440 See ibid., p. lxxvii. 

441 Tr. Gray, Prov, pp. 142—57. 

442 See Bechert, PNTB, pp. lxv— lxvi. 

443 See ibid., pp. lxvi— lxvii. 



Later post-canonical texts 


177 


Even the oldest triad of Pali nlti texts in Burma show a number of forms 
which differ from classical Pali. 444 Many of these arise directly or indirectly 
from the fact that numerous verses are derived from Sanskrit originals, e.g. 
unassimilated consonant groups containing -r-, -y-, or -s- are reproduced in 
their Sanskrit forms on occasion, while the exigencies of metre and grammar 
have led to difficulties where Sanskrit and Pali case endings are not identical in 
metrical length, or the introduction of svarabhakti vowels has increased the 
number of syllables in a word. 

It has been pointed out 445 that since nlti literature is concerned with worldly 
wisdom, it is not surprising that the Burmese nlti texts do not contain a great 
deal of what could be regarded as essentially Buddhist thought. Many of the 
verses in the Jataka collection deal with mundane matters, which made their 
borrowing by the writers of nlti texts all the more appropriate. Specifically 
Buddhist vocabulary is rare, although the words Buddha, jina and nibbdna do 
occur a few times. 


15. JATAKA COLLECTIONS 


It has already been noted that the Pali Jataka collection is by no means 
complete, and stories not included in that collection can be found elsewhere in 
the Pali canon and also in Buddhist Sanskrit literature. There is also a collection 
of 50 Jataka stories current in South-East Asia, generally referred to as “apo- 
cryphal” because they are not canonical. 

The Pannasa- jataka exists in three recensions from Thailand, Cambodia and 
Burma, 446 although the last-named differs quite considerably in the selection 
and order of stories from the first two, which are very similar to each other. 447 
Although these Jataka stories are regarded as non- canonical, some of them are 
in fact based closely upon incidents and motifs found in the Pali collection. 
Several of them include an episode where, illustrating generosity (ddna), the 
chief character gives away some valuable possession, including even his wife. 
Such episodes are clearly based upon the Pali Vessantarajataka, from which 
almost verbatim quotations are given in several stories. 448 A number of stories 
include an episode of a ship-wreck, where help is given by the water-sprite 
Manimekhala, just as in the Pali Mahajanakajataka. 449 

Other stories have no Pali equivalent, but can be compared with various 
Buddhist Sanskrit texts, showing that the latter were known in South-East 


See ibid., p. lxxiv. 
as See ibid., p. lxxv. 

446 Ed. P. S. Jaini, PTS London, Yol. I, 1981; Vol. II, to appear in 1983. 

447 See Jaini, PJ, I, p. v. 

448 Cf. PJ I 48, 7—20 with Ja VI 494, 14—495, 19. 

449 Cf. PJ I 76 with Ja VI 35. 



178 


K. R. Norman • Pali Literature 


Asia in medieval times, when these non-canonical studies may be supposed to 
have been composed. The Sudhanukumara jataka has been shown to have a 
close relationship with stories related in the Mahavastu and Divyavadana , 450 
but the many differences of detail between the three versions show that the 
Pali Jataka is in no way a translation of the other two, which in many ways 
provide little more than a theme for the Pali redactor to elaborate. Some stories 
in the apocryphal collection seem to have no parallel in the extant Pali or 
Sanskrit literature, and their origins are presumably to be sought in the mass 
of folk literature which is known from other sources to have been in existence 
in the area at the relevant time. Even when a story can be shown to have an 
external origin, a number of minor details are frequently innovations. 

The Burmese recension of the apocryphal Jatakas is known as the Zimme 
Pannasa, where the word “Zimme” is a corruption of the place-name Chieng 
Mai , 451 a town in North Thailand. This suggests that the Burmese believed that 
the collection came from Thailand, and in view of this belief the difference be- 
tween the Burmese and the other recensions which has been mentioned above 
needs to be investigated carefully, for an examination of the parallel editions 
of the Samuddaghosa jataka shows quite extensive differences of detail , 452 and 
it is probable that other Jatakas show variations no less extensive. 

The language of these Jatakas 453 shows the same kind of unhistoric gemina- 
tion of consonants and the converse as has already been noted in the Jinakala- 
mali , 454 which helps to confirm the suggestion that these features are not merely 
scribal errors. There are also peculiarities of grammar and syntax, e.g. strange 
case usages and confusion of gender, which probably shows the influence of the 
local vernaculars. 

An original feature of Buddhist literature in South-East Asia is the type of 
text illustrating advantage (anisamsa) which belongs to the Jataka genre. The 
Brapamsukulanisamsa 455 tells of the merits to be gained by the gift of robes to 
the Sangha, while the Pitakattayakarakanisamsa 456 contains details of the life 
of the Buddha, either in his existence as Gotama or in a previous life. One of 
these episodes concerns the Buddha’s last meal, and shows clearly that in 
medieval times in Thailand it was believed that the mysterious sukaramaddava 
which Cunda gave to the Buddha was indeed pork, for in this version of the 
story the Buddha’s death was due to the fact that in an earlier existence he had 
killed a yakkha, who in the course of time was reborn as a pig which, in the form 

450 See P. S. Jaini, “The story of Sudhana and Manohara: an analysis of the 
texts and the Borobudur reliefs,” in BSOAS 29 (1966), pp. 533—58. 

See Jaini, PJ, I, p. v. 

452 See G. Terral( -Martini), “Samuddaghosajataka : conte pali tire du Pannasa- 
jataka”, in BEFEO 48 (1956), pp. 249—351. 

453 See ibid., pp. 310 — 38. 

454 See p. 144 above. 

455 See G. Martini, “Brapamsukulanisamsam, ” in BEFEO 60 (1973), pp. 55—78. 

456 See G. Martini, “Un jataka coneernant le dernier repas de Buddha,” in 
BEFEO 59 (1972), pp. 251—55. 



Later post-canonical texts 179 

of poisoned meat, served as an instrument to punish the Buddha for his wrong- 
doing. 

It is convenient to deal at this point with another text which, while not 
strictly a Jataka story, is nevertheless told in the form of a Jataka story. The 
Kosala-bimba-vannana 457 is a medieval work composed in Ceylon, probably 
during the thirteenth or fourteenth century since it is referred to by name in 
the fourteenth century Saddhammasangaha. 458 It is intended to justify the 
practice of making images of the Buddha, although it is not clear why justifica- 
tion was needed at that time. 

The story it tells is based upon an earlier story, preserved for us by the Chi- 
nese pilgrim Fa-hsien 459 who heard at SravastI at the beginning of the fifth 
century A. D. the legend that Prasenajit had had a sandalwood image of the 
Buddha made which, at the arrival of the Buddha, rose to meet him. In the 
Pali version of the story Pasenadi asks permission to make an image so that 
visitors arriving when the Buddha was absent could worship him in effigy. The 
image is made, and rises to greet the Buddha on arrival. Pasenadi asks the 
Buddha what merit he has acquired, and Ananda asks about the merit to be 
gained by one who copies a Buddhist text. The answer is given that both will 
be reborn in good families, free from disease, and will live in prosperity until 
they ultimately gain spiritual distinction. 

The quality of the Pali employed is poor, with mistakes in gender and case 
usage. The verses included in the prose narrative are of little literary merit, and 
the exception to this— a kavya style verse in elaborate metre— is possibly borrow- 
ed from elsewhere. 460 


16. BIBLIOGRAPHICAL WORKS 


It has already been noted that the chronicles give a certain amount of in- 
formation about the composition of literary works, e. g. the recitation of the 
Kathavatthu at the time of the third council, and Buddhaghosa’s translation of 
the Sinhalese atthaJcathds , 461 Other chronicles give much more information about 
books and authors, and it is not unreasonable to describe such books as biblio- 
graphical reference works. 

According to the colophon, the Saddhammasangaha 462 was written by Dham- 
makitti Mahasami, who came from India to Ceylon, was a pupil of Dhamma- 


«7 Ed. and tr. R. F. Gombrich, in Bechert, BCSRS, pp. 281—303. 

458 Saddhamma-s 66, 5. 

459 See J. Legge (tr.), A record of Buddhistic kingdoms, Oxford 1886, pp. 56 — 57. 

460 See Gombrich, op. cit. (in n. 457), p. 302 n. 44. 

46t See pp. 103 and 120 above. 

482 Ed. N. Saddhananda, JPTS 1890, pp. 21—90. Tr. B. C. Law, A manual of 
Buddhist historical traditions, Calcutta 1941. 



180 


K. R. Norman ■ Pali Literature 


kitti, and then returned to India and wrote the book. 463 The teacher Dhamma- 
kitti is probably one of the Sangharajas who lived towards the end of the four- 
teenth century. 464 The book contains an account of Buddhism in eleven chapters. 
The first three chapters give an account of the three councils, and include 
verses from the Samantapasadika and Mahavamsa. The narrative then con- 
tinues with an account of the introduction of Buddhism into Ceylon, and an 
assembly at which the elder Maha-arittha preached the vinaya is specifically 
called the fourth council, 465 and verses are quoted to this effect, on the author- 
ity of the pordnas. Subsequent chapters deal with the accession of Dutthaga- 
mani, the writing down of the tipitaka, Buddhaghosa’s work, and the compila- 
tion of the tikds under the presidency of Mahakassapa during the reign of 
Parakkamabahu I (A.D. 1153—86). 

The ninth chapter gives an account of the principal works known to the 
author, of which the latest is datable to the thirteenth century. 466 They are not 
listed in chronological order, and there are a number of errors and differences 
from other sources, 467 but on the whole the information which the Saddhamma- 
sangaha gives is very helpful for establishing the history of the Buddhist religion 
and Pali literature. 

The last two chapters give an account of the merit to be gained from writing 
down the tipitaka and listening to the doctrine respectively. In the tenth chapter 
there is a reference to the statement about the merits to be gained from making 
statues, which is attributed to the Buddha in the Kosalabimbavannana. 468 The 
last chapter contains a number of illustrative stories on the theme of merit to 
be gained (anisamsa), some concerning Ceylon. It has been described as 
a sort of anthology of odds and ends of old verses, of rare excellence and 
beauty. 469 

The Gandhavamsa 470 was written by Nandapanna, who describes himself in 
the colophon as a forest -dwelling elder ( arannavdsind) , 471 It was composed in 
Burma, probably in the seventeenth century. 472 It consists of five sections, each 
of which contains the words Cullagandhavamsa, which suggests that at one 
time there was a longer Mahagandhavamsa. 473 It aims to give a brief history 

*63 Saddhamma-s 90, 7 — 10. It has been suggested that Dhammakitti was a Thai. 
See G. Ccedes, “Note sur les ouvrages palis composes en pays Thai,” in BEFEO 
15, 3, p- 43. 

464 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 245. 

465 Catuttham samgaham katva (Saddhamma-s 45, 11). See p. 10 above. 

466 See Geiger, PLL, 39.2. 

467 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 246 n. 2. 

468 Saddhamma-s 66, 5 — 7. See p. 179 above. 

469 See Malalasekera, PLC, p. 246. 

470 Ed. J. P. Minayeef, JPTS 1886, pp. 54—80. Index compiled by M. Bode, 
JPTS 1896, pp. 53—86. 

471 Iti pamojjatthdydrannavasina Nandapanndcariyena koto Cullagandhavarnso 
(Gv 80, 5-6). 

472 See Winternitz, HIL, p. 190. 

473 See Malalasekera, DPPN, I, p. 748. It is, however, possible that cidla goes 



Later post -canonical texts 


181 


of the canon and post-canonical books in Ceylon and India (which includes 
Burma). 

The first section deals with the canon and its divisions, and the various ways 
of classifying it, e.g. as five nikdyas or nine angas. This seems to follow the 
classifications given by Buddhaghosa in the Samantapasadika. 474 The second 
section deals with the teachers who wrote books ( gandhakdrakacariyas ) , the 
pordndcariyas and the atthakathacariyas . The last two groups are the same, and 
are those who held the three councils. None of them is mentioned by name ex- 
cept for Mahakaccayana, w'ho is also included in the third category because the 
grammar and other works including the Netti and the Petakopadesa are at- 
tributed to him. 475 The list of authors then follows, in approximate chrono- 
logical order, beginning with the authors of the Kurundi and Mahapaccari com- 
mentaries, Buddhaghosa, Buddhadatta, Ananda, and Dhammapala. It is not 
known what sources of information the author of the Gandhavamsa used. In 
many cases he was merely taking information which was available in the colo- 
phons of manuscripts, but he often gives names even where the relevant text 
does not include its author’s name. Even when two works are attributed to the 
same author, he sometimes differentiates between two writers of the same 
name, e.g. he ascribes the Saccasamkhepa to Culladhammapala, 476 and the 
Abhidhanappadipika to Navamoggallana. 477 The list ends with Ariyavamsa and 
Udumbara. A number of anomymous works are then listed. 

The third section arranges the authors according to whether they wrote in 
India (including Further India) or Ceylon, and information is occasionally given 
about the country in which they lived, its king, and the position they held 
before becoming Buddhists. The fourth chapter then states whether the authors 
wrote their works by request, or of their own volition (attano matiyd). Once 
again, much of this information was doubtless taken from the introductions 
and colophons of the texts themselves. The fifth section tells of the advantages 
(anisamsas) which come from writing books. 

The Sasanavamsa 478 was written in Burma in A.D. 1861 by Pannasami, tutor 
of King Min-don-min who held the fifth council a few years later. 479 It consists 
for the most part of a translation from an earlier work written in Burmese in 
1831 with some details removed, and additions made to cover the period A.D. 

with gandha, not vamsa, and the work is intended to be a history of the “small books” 
as opposed to the mahagandhas, which would be the canonical texts. 

474 See p. 15 above. 

475 Katame tividhandmakdcariyd. Mahakaccayano tividhandmo. katame gandha 
Kaecdyanena kata. Kaccayanagandho Mahdniruttigandho Cullaniruttigandho Netti - 
qandho Petakopadesaqandho Vannanitiqandho ti ime cha qandhd Mahdkaccdyanena 
kata (Gv 59, 11—14). 

478 Gv 60, 30—31. 

477 Gv 62, 3 — 4. He thus separates this Moggallana from the author of the gram- 
mar (see p. 166 above). 

478 Ed. M. Bode, PTS London, 1897. Tr. B. C. Law, SBB London, 1952. 

479 Seep. 12 above. 



182 


K. It. Norman • Pali Literature 


1831— 60. 480 After a brief survey of the first three councils based on the ac- 
counts found in earlier chronicles, it deals with the history of the doctrine in 
the nine places where it was taken by Asoka’s missionaries. Most of the nine 
are dismissed in a page or two, but the history of the Dhamma in Slhala, 
Suvannabhumi, and especially Aparanta, which the author interprets not as 
the Western part of India but as part of Burma, are dealt with at greater length. 

The author includes in his account of the history of the doctrine in these 
places a list of authors and the works they wrote. He frequentfy states the texts 
from which he has gained the information he is giving, and on occasion he dis- 
cusses differences between them, e.g. the accounts about Buddhaghosa found 
in the Culavamsa and the Buddhaghosuppatti, and his own statements in the 
V isuddhimagga . 48 1 

The style of Pannasami’s language in very similar to that of Buddhaghosa 
for the earlier periods of his history, 482 and this doubtless reflects the fact that 
these portions of his work are largely based upon Pali originals. It seems likely 
however, that in the portions of his book which are based upon a Burmese 
source, some influence of the Burmese language remains. 483 In particular, the 
handling of Burmese personal and place names has been treated inconsistently. 
Some have been translated; some have been transliterated (with errors intro- 
duced by non-Burmese scribes) ; and some have been replaced by Pali designa- 
tions. 484 

A comparable work, but devoted to the authors and books of Ceylon, was 
produced in 1880 by Acariya Vimalasara them, who also wrote the Simalak- 
khanadlpanl. 485 This was the Sasanavamsadipa, 486 written in Pali verse, and 
covering the history of Buddhism in Ceylon down to the time of the intro- 
duction of the Burmese upasampcidd in A.D. 1802. 487 

Although these bibliographical texts sometimes disagree among themselves, 488 
and often give no information, or inadequate information, when we most need 
it, their importance lies in the fact that they are usually dependent upon tra- 
ditional material which is no longer available to us. 489 Their accounts frequently 
enable us to put authors and their works into a historical background in a way 
which would otherwise be difficult, if not impossible. Without these texts, any 
description of Pali literature, and especially the later post-canonical literature, 
would be little more than a list of works and authors, as culled from manuscripts 

480 See V. B. Liebermann, “A new look at the Sasanavamsa,” in BSOAS 39 
(1976), pp. 137—49. 

481 Sas 30—31. 

«B 2 See Bode, Sas, p. 10. 

•183 See ibid., p. 10. 

484 See Liebermann, op. cit. (in n. 480), pp. 148—49. 

485 See p. 172 above. 

48« See Malalasbkera, PLC, p. 311. 

487 See p. 12 above. 

488 See p. 180 above. 

489 See Geiger, PLL, 44.6. 



Later post-canonical texts 


183 


and printed editions, with a summary of their contents. This is, unfortunately, 
still the situation with regard to much of the Pali literature written in Cam- 
bodia, Laos, and Thailand. Although valuable work has been done in this field , 490 
much remains to be done before we know as much about Pali writers in these 
countries as we do about authors who worked in India, Ceylon, and Burma. 


490 See G. C cedes, “Note sur les ouvrages pali composes en pays Thai,” in BEFEO 
15, 3 (1915), pp. 39—46 and H. Saddhatissa, “Pali literature of Thailand,” in 
Cousins, BSIBH, pp. 211 — 25; “Pali literature in Cambodia”, in JPTS 1981, pp. 
178—97; and “Pali literature from Laos,” in Nabain, SPB, pp. 327—40. 




ABBREVIATIONS 


I. Texts (original sources ) 

A 

Anguttara-nikaya 

Att 

HatthavanagallavihlLravamsa 

Anag 

Anagatavamsa 

Ap 

Apadana 

Ap-a 

Apadana-atthakatha (= VisuddhajanavilasinI) 

Abh 

Abhidhanappadipika 

Abhidh-av 

Abhidh ammavatara 

Abhidh-s 

Abhidhammatthasangaha 

As 

Atthasalini 

It 

Itivuttaka 

It-a 

Itivuttaka-atthakatha (= P aramatthadipan!) 

Utt 

U ttara j j hay anasutta 

Utt-vn 

Uttaravinicchaya 

Ud 

Udana 

Ud-a 

Udana-atthakatha (= Paramatthadipajii) 

Udana-v 

Udana varga 

Upas 

Upasakaj analankara 

Kkh 

Kankhavitarani 

KJ 

Kunalajataka 

K Mhv 

Kambodian (Extended) Mahavamsa 

Kv 

Kathavatthu 

Kv-a 

Katha vatthu - atthakatha 

Khuddas 

Khuddasikkha 

Khp 

Khuddakapatha 

G Dhp 

Gandhari Dharmapada 

Gv 

Gandhavamsa 

Cul 

Culavamsa (= Mahavamsa XXXVII 51 — Cl 29) 

Cp 

Cariyapitaka 

Cp-a 

Cariyapitaka-atthakatha ( = Paramatthadipani) 

Ja 

Jataka and Jatakatthakatha 

Jinak 

Jinakalamali 

Jina-c 

Jinacarita 

Jinal 

Jinalankara 

Tikap 

Tikapat^hana 

Tikap-a 

Tikapatthana-atthakatha 

Tel 

Telakatahagatha 

Th 

Theragatha 

Th-a 

Theragatha-atthakatha (= Paramatthadipani) 

ThI 

Therigatha 

Thi-a 

Therigatha-atthakatha (— Paramatthadipani) 

Thup 

Thupavamsa 

D 

Digha-nikaya 

Dath 

Dathavamsa 

Divy 

Divyavadana 

Dip 

Dipavamsa 



186 


Abbreviations 


Dukap 

Dukapatthana 

Dukap-a 

Dukapatthana -atthakatha 

Dbk 

Dasabodhisattuppattikatha 

Dvp 

Dasavatthuppakarana 

Dhatuk 

Dhatukatha 

Dhatuk-a 

Dhatukatha-atthakatha 

Dhatup 

(Pali) Dhatupatha 

Dhatum 

Dhatumanj usa 

Dlip 

Dhammapada 

Dlip-a 

Dhammapada-atthakatha 

Dhs 

D1 lammasangani 

Namar-p 

N amarupapariccheda 

Nidd I 

Mahaniddesa 

Nidd II 

Cullaniddesa 

Nidd-a I 

Mahaniddesa-atthakatha (= Saddhammapajjotika) 

Nidd-a II 

Cullaniddesa-atthakatha ( = Saddhammapajjotika) 

Nett 

Nettipakarana 

Nett-a 

Nettipakarana-atthakatha 

Pajj 

Pajjamadhu 

Patis 

Patisambhidamagga 

Patis -a 

Patisambhidamagga-atthakatha ( = Saddhammapakasini) 

Patth 

Patthana (= Mahapakarana) 

Pet 

Petakopadesa 

Pj'l 

Paramatthajotika on Khuddakapatha 

Pj II 

Paramatthajotika on Suttanipata 

PJ 

Pannasa Jataka 

PDhp 

Patna Dharmapada 

Pp 

Puggalapannatti 

Pp-a 

Puggalapannatti-atthakatha 

Ppk-a 

Pancappakarana-atthakatha (= Dhatuk-a, Pp-a, Kv-a, 
Yam-a, Patth-a) 

Pv 

Petavatthu 

Pv-a 

Petavatthu-atthakatha ( — Paramatthadipani) 

Ps 

PapancasudanI 

Bu-up 

Buddhaghosuppatti 

Bv 

Buddha vamsa 

Bv-a 

Buddhavamsa-atthakatha (= Madhuravilasini) 

M 

Majjhima-nikaya 

Mil 

Milindapanha 

Mil-t 

Milinda-tika 

Mulas 

Mulasikkha 

Moh 

Mohavicchedani 

Mp 

Manorathapurani 

MPS 

Mahaparinirvanasutra 

MBh 

Mahabharata 

Mvu 

Mahavastu 

Mhbv 

Mahabodhivamsa 

Mhv 

Mahavamsa 

Mhv-t 

Mahavamsa-tika (= Yamsatthappakasini) 

Yam 

Yamaka-pakarana 

Yam-a 

Y amaka- atthakatha 

Ras 

Rasavahin! 

Rupar 

Ruparupavibhaga 



Abbreviations 


187 


Lai 

Lalitavistara 

Lp 

Lokappannatti 

Vin 

Vinay a -pitaka 

Vin-vn 

Vinayavinicchaya 

Vibh 

Vibhanga 

Vibh-a 

Vibhanga-atthakatha (= Sammohavinodani) 

Vism 

V isuddhimagga 

Vism-mht> 

Visuddhimagga-mahatika (= Paramatthamanjusa) 

Vutt 

Vuttodaya 

Vv 

Vimanavatthu 

Vv-a 

Vimanavatthu-atthakatha (= Paramatthadipani) 

S 

Samyutta-nikaya 

Sacc 

Saccasamkhepa 

Sadd 

Saddaniti 

Saddh 

Saddhammopayana 

Saddhamma-s 

S addhammasangaha 

Saddharmap 

Saddharmapundarika 

Sandes 

Sandesakatha 

Samantak 

Samantakutavannana 

Sah 

Sahassavatthuppakarana 

Sas 

Sasanavamsa 

Simav 

Simavivadavinicchayakatha 

Sih 

Sihajavatthuppakarana 

Subodh 

Subodhalankara 

Sn 

Suttanipata 

Sp 

Samantapasadika 

Spk 

Saratthappakasini 

Sp-t 

tika on Samantapasadika (— Saratthadipani) 

Sv 

Sumangalavilasini 

Sv-pt 

puranatlka on Sumangalavilasini (= LxnatthappakasinI) 


II. Abbreviated titles of books mentioned in the footnotes 

Adikaram, EHBC E. W. Adikaram, Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon, Mi- 
goda, Ceylon, 1946 

Alsdorf, AS L. Alsdorf, Die Arya-strophen des Pali-Kanons, Mainz 1968. 

Balasooriya, BSWR Somaratna Balasooriya et al. (ed.), Buddhist Studies in 
honour of Walpola Rahula, London 1980 

Bapat, VV P. V. Bapat, Vimuttimagga and Visuddhimagga : a compara- 

tive study, Poona 1937 

Bechert, BCSRS H. Beehert (ed.), Buddhism in Ceylon and Studies on Reli- 
gious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries, Gottingen 1978 

Bechert, LEBT H. Bechert (ed.), The language of the Earliest Buddhist Tra- 
dition, Gottingen 1980 

Bechert, PNTB H. Bechert and H. Braun, Pali Nlti Texts from Burma, PTS 
London, 1981 

Bode, PLB M. H. Bode, Pali Literature of Burma, London 1909 

Buddhadatta, Corr A. P. Buddhadatta, Corrections of Geiger’s Mahavamsa, etc., 
Ambalangoda 1957 

Cousins, BSIBH L. S. Cousins et al. (ed.), Buddhist Studies in honour of I. B. 
Horner, Dordrecht 1974 

Franke, Gramm R. Otto Franke, Geschichte und Kritik der einheimischen 
Pali-Grammatik und -Lexicographie, Strassburg 1902 



188 


Abbreviations 


Frauwallner, EV 

Geiger, DM 

Geiger, PLL 
Godakumbura, Cat 

Gray, Prov 

Heesterman, Pratid 
Horner, BD 

Horner, MLS 

Law, HPL 
Luders, BSTJ 

Malalasekera, DPPN 

Malalasekera, PLC 
Narain, SPB 
Norman, EV I 
Norman, EV II 
Pande, SOB 

Rahula, HBC 
Rhys Davids, DB 

Roth, BV 

de Silva, DAT 

Thomas, HBT 
Waldschmidt, CASF 

Warder, IB 
Warder, IKL 
Warder, PM 
Winternitz, HIL 

Yuyama, VT 


E. Frauwallner, The earliest Vinaya and the beginnings of 
Buddhist literature, Rome 1956 

W. Geiger, The Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa and their 
historical development in Ceylon, Colombo 1908 
W. Geiger, Pali Literature and Language, Calcutta 1956 
C. E. Godakumbura, Catalogue of Ceylonese Manuscripts , 
The Royal Library, Copenhagen 1980 

J. Gray, Ancient proverbs and maxims from Burmese sources, 
the Niti literature of Burma, London 1886 

J. C. Heesterman et al. (ed.), Pratidanam, den Haag 1969 

I. B. Horner, The Book of the Discipline, 6 Vols., SBB Lon- 
don, 1938-66 

I. B. Horner, Middle Length Sayings, 3 vols., PTS London, 
1954—59 

B. C. Law, History of Pali literature, 2 vols., London 1933 
H. Luders, Beobachtungen liber die Sprache des buddhisti- 
schen Urkanons, Berlin 1954 

G. P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, 2 vols., 
London 1937—38 

G. P. Malalasekera, Pali Literature of Ceylon, London 1928 
A. K. Narain, Studies in Pali and Buddhism, Delhi 1979 

K. R. Norman, Elders’ Verses I, PTS London 1969 

K. R. Norman, Elders’ Verses II, PTS London 1971 

G. C. Pande, Studies in the origins of Buddhism, Allahabad 
1957 

W. Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, Colombo 1956 
T. W. Rhys Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha, 3 vols., SBB 
London, 1899—1921 

G. Roth, Bhik§unl-Vinaya: manual of discipline for Buddhist 
nuns, Patna 1970 

L. de Silva, Dxghanikayatthakathatika Linatthavannana, 
3 vols., PTS London, 1970 

E. J. Thomas, History of Buddhist Thought, London 1933 
E. Waldschmidt, Central Asian Sutra Fragments, in Bechert, 
LEBT, pp. 136-74 

A. K. Warder, Indian Buddhism, Delhi 1970 

A. K. Warder, Indian Kavya Literature, Vol. II, Delhi 1974 

A. K. Warder, Pali Metre, PTS London, 1967 

M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, Vol. II, Calcutta 
1933 

A. Yuyama, Vinaya-Texte, Wiesbaden 1979 


III. Periodicals , etc. 


ADAW 

AGAW 

AO 

BEFEO 

BSOAS 

CPD 


Abhandlungen der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften 
zu Berlin, Klasse fur Sprachen, Literatur und Kunst 
Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottin- 
gen, Phil.-Hist. Kl. 

Acta Orientalia, Copenhagen 

Bulletin de 1’Fcole Frangaise d’Extreme Orient, Paris 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, London 
Critical Pali Dictionary, Copenhagen 



Abbreviations 


189 


IC 

IHQ 

IIJ 

IT 

JA 

JAS(B) 

JBRS 

JIABS 

JOI(B) 

JPTS 

JRAS 

KST 

MW 

NGAW 

PBR 

PED 

PTC 

PTS 

SBB 

SBE 

StII 

STT 

WZKS(O) 

ZDMG 


Indian Culture, Calcutta 
Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta 
Indo -Iranian Journal, Dordrecht 
Indologica Taurinensia, Turin 
Journal Asiatique, Paris 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 

Journal of the Bihar Research Society, Patna 

Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 

Madison 

Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda 
Journal of the Pali Text Society, London 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London 
Kleinere Sanskrit -Texte 

Sir Monier Monier -Williams, Sanskrit -English Dictionary, 
Oxford 

Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen, 
Phil.-Hist. Kl. 

Pali Buddhist Review, London 

T. W. Rhys Davids and W. Stede, Pali-English Dictionary, 
London 

Pali Tipitakam Concordance, London 
Pali Text Society 

Sacred Books of the Buddhists, London 
Sacred Books of the East, Oxford 
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, Reinbek 
Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfund 

Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde Siid(- und Ost)asiens, Vienna 
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, 
Wiesbaden 


IV. General 
Be 

Edition in Burmese characters 

BHS 

Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit 

Ce 

Edition in Sinhalese characters 

ch. 

chapter 

diss. 

dissertation 

ed. 

editor, edited by 

Ee 

Edition in Roman letters 

ibid. 

in same book/article as quoted in previous note 

MIA 

Middle Indo -Aryan 

He 

Edition in Ndgari characters 

n(n). 

note(s) 

op. cit. 

the work quoted (in the specified note) 

Pkt 

Prakrit 

P(P). 

page(s) 

repr. 

reprinted 

rev. 

reviewer, reviewed by 

Skt 

Sanskrit 

s.v(v). 

under the heading(s) 

tr. 

translator, translated by 

v(v). 

verse (s) 



GLOSSARY OF PALI, PRAKRIT AND SANSKRIT TERMS 


akusala 

unwholesome, not moral, evil 

akkharia 

inopportune time 

aksara 

syllable 

anga 

section, especially of nine -fold Canon 

acchariya 

marvellous; a marvel 

ajjhdyaka 

teacher 

attha 

eight 

atthakatha 

commentary 

atthaka-nipata 

section of eights 

atideva 

super -god 

atitavatthu 

a tale of the past 

atta 

self; individuality 

atthavannand 

commentary 

adbhuta 

= abbhuta 

adhikaranasamathd dhammd 

legal questions 

adhitthana 

resolution 

adhideva 

super-god 

adhipati 

predominance (condition) ; overlord 

anatta 

non -self 

anavassuta 

not letting in 

aniyata 

undetermined 

anuggaha 

kindness 

anutikd 

supplement to a tikd 

anuppahhatti 

secondary rule 

anomodana 

thanks 

anuvyanjana 

minor marks, characteristics 

anussati 

mindfulness 

apaddna 

noble deed 

appamdda 

lack of carelessness 

abbhutadhamma 

marvellous phenomenon 

abhi (prep.) 

regarding 

abhidhamma 

regarding the dhamma 

abhinihdra 

aspiration for Buddhahood 

abhivinaya 

regarding the vinaya 

arahna-vasin 

forest dweller 

arahant 

perfected one, one who has gained nibbdna 

arupa-vimokkha 

immaterial release 

arhat 

= arahant 

avaddna 

noble deed 

avassuta 

letting in 

avijjd 

ignorance 

avidure -niddna 

beginning in not remote past 

astau 

eight 

asankhata 

uncompounded 

asangaha 

unclassification 

asangahita 

unclassified 

asura 

opponent of the gods 



Glossary of Pali, Prakrit and Sanskrit Terras 


191 


akhyana 

narrative poem 

dgatdgama 

one who has mastered the dgamas 

agama 

= nikdya 

acariya 

teacher 

atman 

= attd 

dndpana 

breathing in and out 

dnisamsa 

benefit, merit, advantage 

dnuttariya 

excellence 

dbhidhammika 

one versed in the Abhidhamma 

dyatana 

base 

arammana 

object (condition) 

drama 

monastery 

asava 

influx 

itivuttaka 

one of the nine angas 

itivrttaka 

— itivuttaka 

iddhi 

supernormal power 

iddhi-pada 

base of iddhi 

indriya 

sense -faculty 

udana 

solemn utterance 

uddana 

summary verse 

uddesa 

statement, explanation 

upadesa 

one of the Sanskrit angas 

upadesa 

instruction, teaching 

upadhi 

material possessions ; desire for material posses- 
sions 

upasampada 

ordination 

upasarga 

prefix, preposition 

upaddna-kkhandha 

aggregates of grasping 

upddaya -rupa 

dependent form, quality 

updsaka 

lay-follower 

upekhd 

equanimity 

uppatti 

(story telling) the origin (of a sutta) 

ekacce 

some (authorities) 

eka-nipdta 

section of ones 

ekadasa-nipdta 

section of elevens 

ejd 

lust 

etarahi 

now 

aupamya 

one of the Sanskrit angas 

kathina 

cotton cloth (for robe) 

kathamkathd 

doubt 

kathd 

discourse, topic 

kappa 

mental figment; aeon 

kamma 

action 

kamma -tthdna 

subject for meditation 

kamma-vdcd 

official act of the sahgha 

karund 

pity, compassion 

karuna-jhdna 

meditation on compassion 

karma-vdkya, -vacand 

= kamma-vdcd 



192 

kamadlnava 

Jcaya 

karikd 

kdvya 

kuti(ka) 

kusala 

keci 

ksatriya 

khanda 

khaltiya 

khandha 

khandhaka 

gana 

ganthi-pada 

gandha-kdra 

gandhabba 

gathd 

gihi-vinaya 

guru 

geya 

geyya 

gopalaka 

cakkavattin 

catukka-nipdta 

catuttha 

cattaro 

campu 

cariyd 

citta 

cetasika 

ceto-khila 

chakka -nipdta 

chattha 

jar a 

jdtaka 

jdti 

jina 

jhdna 

j hay aka 

hdna 

tika 

tanhd 

Tathdgata 

tanti 

tapas 

(t)taya 

tika 

tika -nipdta 
tipitaka 


Glo ssa ry of Pali, Prakrit and Sanskrit Terms 

dangers in sensual pleasures 
body 

concise statement, especially in grammatical text 

ornate poetry 

hut 

wholesome, moral, good 
some (authorities) 

= khattiya 
section 

member of second (warrior) caste 

aggregate 

section, chapter 

group, section 
word -list 
book-writer 

heavenly musician, demi-god 
stanza 

householder’s discipline 

teacher 

= geyya 

recitation 

cowherd 

universal monarch 
section of fours 
fourth 
four 

a style of ornate poetry 
(story relating) conduct, action 
mind 

mental concomitant 
barrenness of mind 
section of sixes 
sixth 

old age 

birth story 

birth 

conqueror 

meditation 

meditator 

knowledge 

sub -commentary 

craving 

epithet of arahant 
canon 

ascetic practices 
triad, group of three 
triplet 

section of threes 

three baskets (of the Canon) 



ti-sarana 

tepitaka 

tevijja 

thupa 

thera 

thera-vada 

theriya 

therl 

dama 

dassana 

dana 

dana-vatthu 

ditthi 

disa 

disa-pharana 

dipa 

duka 

dukkha 

dure-nidana 

deva 

devata 

deva-putta 

deva-loka 

dvayatd 

dvepatimokkha 

dhamma 

dhammata 

dhamma -yaga 

-dhara 

-dharin 

dharma 

dhatu 

dhdtu-pcitha 

dhutahga 

naya 

nava 

nava-tika 

ndga 

ndgarl 

nama 

nikaya 

nigamana-gatha 

nitthita 

nidana 

niddesa 

nipdta 

nipataka 

nihbana 

nimitta 

niraya 

nirutti 


Glossary of Pali, Prakrit and Sanskrit Terms 193 

three refuges 

versed in the three baskets (of the Canon) 
possessor of the three vedas or vijjds 
shrine, tope 
elder (m.) 

tradition of the elders 

(one) belonging to the tradition of the elders 

elder (f.) 

self-conquest 
vision, insight 
giving, generosity 
object suitable as a gift 
(wrong) view 
direction 

pervasion of the directions 

island 

couplet 

misery 

beginning in the remote past 

god 

deity 

member of the divine race 

world of the gods 

pair 

two patimokkhas 

(sg.) doctrine; (pi.) states; (ifc.) subject to . . . 

natural law 

spiritual sacrifice 

carrier of = expert in 

= -dhara 

= dhamma 

element 

list of roots 

ascetic practice 

guide line ; style, method ; maxim 
new, modern, later 
modern tlka 
snake 

a North Indian script 
immaterial factor 

one of the five sections of the sutta-pitaka 

concluding stanzas, envoi 

finished 

inception, origin; one of the Sanskrit ahgas ; 
link in causal chain 
exposition, exegesis 

section (often numerical in nature) ; particle 
section 

extinction, quenching 

omen (especially the four seen by the Bodhisatta) 
hell 

etymological explanation 



194 


Glossary of Pali, Prakrit and Sanskrit Terms 


nirvana 

nissaggiya 

niti 

nekkhamma 

nhdtaka 


— nibbana 

forfeiture 

worldly wisdom 

renunciation 

one who has washed 


paccaya 

paccuppanna -vatthu 
pacceka-buddha 

pahca 

paflcaka-nipdta 

pancama 

pannatti 

pahhd 

pannasa 

pahhdsaka 

panha 

paticca -samuppdda 

patisambhida 

patisarana 

patthana-naya 

pannasa 

patteya-buddha 

pada-bhdjaniya 

pabbajjd 

parittd 

parinibbdna 

parinibbuta 

parivdra 

parivena 

pacittiya 

patidesaniya 

patimokkha 

pada 

papddinava 

pdramita 

pdrami 

pdrdjika 

pdli 

pdli-bhdsd 

pitaka 

piya-rupa 

puccha 

puggala 

puppha 

pubbdcariya 

purdna 

purdna-tikd 

petakin 

peta 

potthaka 

pordna 

pratisamvid 


(n.) condition; (adj.) proper, fitting 
tale of the present 

one enlightened for himself, a non -teaching 

Buddha 

five 

section of fives 

fifth 

concept 

knowledge 

fifty 

group of fifty (suttas) 
question 

dependent origination 
di scrimination 
support 

causal relations 
group of fifty (suttas) 

— pacceka-buddha 
word analysis 
initiation 

protection, safeguard; protective utterance 

final extinction, quenching 

finally extinct, quenched 

supplement 

monastery 

expiation 

confession 

rules of discipline 

foot (of verse) 

terrible evil 

perfection 

perfection 

defeat 

Canon 

language of the Canon 
basket (of texts) 
of pleasing appearance 
question 

person, individual 
flower 

former teacher 
early, ancient 
ancient tika 
versed in the pitakas 
departed spirit 
book 

ancient (authority) 

= patisambhida 



Glossary of Pali, Prakrit and Sanskrit Terms 


195 


pratika 

lemma (in commentary, or introduction) 

pratyeka-buddha 

= pacceka-buddha 

prasasti 

eulogy 

pratimoksa 

= patimokkha 

phala 

fruit, reward 

phassa 

contact 

bamhana 

= brahmana 

bala 

power 

bilara 

cat 

Buddha 

enlightened one 

Buddha -khetta 

Buddha field 

Buddha-parisa 

Buddha’s acquaintances 

Buddha-bhasita 

spoken by the Buddha 

Buddha -vacana 

Buddha’s word 

bojjhahga 

factor of enlightenment 

bodhi 

enlightenment; enlightenment tree 

bodhi-puja 

honouring the bodhi tree 

Bodhi-satta 

being destined for enlightenment 

brahma-carin 

one who lives the holy life 

brahma -vihara 

sublime state of mind 

brahmana 

brahman, member of first (priestly) caste 

bhaya 

fear 

bhanaka 

reciter 

bhavand 

meditative practice 

bhdsa 

speech, language 

bhikkhu 

monk 

bhikkhunl 

nun 

bhiksu 

= bhikkhu 

bhiksunl 

— bhikkhunl 

bhumma 

terrestrial 

bhuta -vdhana -yanta 

robot 

mati 

thought, volition 

marana 

death 

mahd-thera 

great i. e. chief elder 

maha-nipdta 

section of long poems 

mahdpadesa 

principal appeal to authority 

maha-purisa 

great man 

maha-bhuta 

great essential (element) 

maha-sahgiti 

great council 

Magadhika -bhdsa 

language of Magadha 

matika 

topics of discourse ; summary list of contents 

muni 

seer, sage 

mula-bhdsa 

root language 

mettd 

loving kindness 

yakkha 

supernormal being, demi-god 

yaga 

sacrifice 

yuga-nandha 

association, coupling 

rakkha-manta 

saving chant 

ratana-cahkama 

jewel walk 

rasa 

elegance of sound 



196 

raja 

rupa 

lakkhana 

loka-santhiti 

lokottara 

vatnsa 

vagga 

vaci 

vannand 

vatthu 

vatthu -gatha 

varga 

vastu 

vara 

vicikiccha 

vijjd 

vinaya 

vipassana 

vibhanga 

vimana 

vimokkha 

visuddhi 

vissajjand 

vihdra 

visati-nipdta 

vutti 

veda 

vedand 

vedalla 

veyydkarana 

veramani 

vessa 

vyddhi 

srdvakdcdra 

samyama 

samyutta 

samvannand 

samvibhdga 

samsara 

sagga 

sankhdra 

sankhepato 

sankhya 

sangaha 

sangahlta 

sahgdyana 

sangiti 

sangiti-kdra 

sangha 

sanghadisesa 

sacca 


Glossary of Pali, Prakrit and Sanskrit Terms 

king 

form, material quality 

characteristic property 

cosmology 

supra-mundane 

chronicle 
chapter of text 
speech, voice 

embellishment ; commentary 
subject matter; story; section 
introductory stanzas (of a sutta) 

= vagga 

= vatthu 

portion, section 

doubt 

knowledge 

discipline 

insight 

exegesis, classification 

heavenly abode 

release 

purity 

answering 

monastery 

section of twenties 

commentary 

knowledge; brahmanical text 

feeling, sensation 

analysis 

exposition, commentary; grammarian 
avoidance, abstinence 
member of the third caste 
disease 

conduct of a layman 

self-control 

connected collection 

commentary 

sharing together 

journeying on, transmigration 

heaven 

constituent element 

in brief 

enumeration 

collection ; classification 

classified 

council 

council 

one who holds a council 
Order of Buddhists 
formal meeting of the Order 
truth 



Glossary of Pali, Prakrit and Sanskrit Terms 


197 


safirldvedayitanvrodhasamdpatti 

sati-patthdna 

satta 

santike-niddna 

samana 

samatta 

samaya 

samaja 

samadhi 

samodhdna 

sarana 

samanna - kan da 

sasana 

sikkhapada 

sigdla 

slma, 

sila 

siha-ndda 

Sihala-bhasa 

Sihala-sdsana 

sukha 

sunna 

sutta 

suttanta 

sudda 

supanna 

subhasita 

sukara-maddava 

sutra 

sutra -pdtha 
sekhiya 
sotdpatti-anga 
stupa 

svarabhakti 

svdgama 


attainment of extinction of sensation 

of perception 

basis of mindfulness 

seven 

beginning in the present 

ascetic 

finished 

assembly 

assembly 

concentration 

identification 

refuge 

miscellaneous section 

teaching 

rules of training 

jackal 

boundary 

morality, moral conduct 

lion’s roar, shout of exultation 

language of Ceylon 

Sinhalese tradition of teaching 

happiness 

empty; emptiness 

thread; discourse 

discourse 

member of the fourth caste 
winged creature, the enemy of ndgas 
eloquent saying 
tender pig’s flesh 
= sutta 

text in aphorism form 
training 

phase of entry into the stream 
= thupa 

epenthesis, insertion of epenthetic vowel 
versed in the agamas 


Kara 

hetu 


mode 

root (condition) 



INDEX OF AUTHORS 


(authors of the same name are not separated; n after a page number = in the 

footnotes to that page) 


Aggavamsa 164 — 66 

Atthadassi 163 

Anuruddha 144, 151—52 

Ariyavamsa 172n, 181 

Ananda 148, 152, 159-60, 170, 181 

Udumbara 181 

Upatissa 113, 133n, 141, 162 

Upasena 133, 137 

Kaccana 108, 110 

Kaccayana 163 — 66 

Kassapa 147, 153, 161, 172 

Khema 152 

Canda 147 

Candragomin 165 

Canakya 176 

Culladhammapala 152, 181 
Cujabhaya(-tthera) 150 
Chapata 153, 164, 171 
Tibbatuvava 141 
Tissa 96, 103, 105, 125 
Dandin 157 
Dipankara 164 

Dhammakitti 140, 142, 164, 179 — 80 
Dhammadinna 154 
Dhammanandi 154 
Dhammananda 164 
Dhammapala 40, 61, 71, 73, 89, 109-10, 
113, 123, 133-37, 145—46, 148—50, 
152, 163, 165, 181 
Dhammasiri 169 
Dharmapala 149 
Nandapanna 180 
Navamoggallana 166, 181 
Pannasami 11 — 12, 181 — 82 
Panini 129n, 147, 163 — 66 
Pingala 168 

Buddhaghosa 8, 10 — 11, 15 — 18, 27, 30— 
32, 42, 50, 54, 57, 61-62, 87-88, 91, 
96-99, 103—4. 109-34, 137-39, 145- 
47, 149—50, 163, 165, 169, 179, 181—82 
Buddhadatta 124, 130 — 32, 145 — 46, 153, 
157, 168, 181 


Buddhadasa 162 

Buddhappiya 159, 162n, 164—65, 173 

Buddharakkhita 157 — 58 

Bhartrhari 149 

Mangala 1 45 

Mahakaccayana 181 

Mahakausthila 107 

Mahanama 117 — 18, 132, 137 

Mahamarigala 1 45 

Mahayasa 1 64 

Mahasami 169 

Medhahkara 158, 165 

Moggaliputta 10 (see Tissa) 

Moggallana 140, 165—67 
Moggallayana 165 
Ratthapala 155 — 56 
Ratanapanna 143 
Ramasamma 167 
Rahula 172 

Vacissara 130-31, 142, 152, 164, 168, 
171 

Vimaladhamma 144 
Vimalabuddhi 164 
Vimalasara 172, 182 
Vedeha 145n, 155, 159 
Vepullabuddhi 168 
Vopadeva 166 
Santideva 57 
Sariputra 107 
Saiigharakkhita 167—69 
Saddhammakitti 167 
Saddhammajotipala 153, 164, 171 
Saranamkara 163 

Sariputta 11, 43, 84—85, 87, 99, 107, 
132, 149n, 151 

Siddhattha(-thera) 162n, 173 
Sirimangala 175 
Silathera 167 
Silavarnsa 166 
Hala 75 



INDEX OF WORKS 


(Works of the same name are not separated. Abbreviations: -k = -katha; -kkh = 
-kkhandha(ka) ; -g = -gatha; -j = -jataka; -t = -taka; . n = -nikaya; -p-v = -peta- 
vatthu; -v = -vagga; -var = -varga; -v-v = -vimanavatthu ; -s = -sutta(nta) ; 
-samy = -samyutta; -su = -sutra; n after a page number = in the footnotes to 

that page) 


Agariya-v-v 71 n 
Aggahna-s 41, 175 

Anguttara-n 8, 28, 30—31, 37, 43, 49 — • 
50, 54—57, 62, 103, 122, 174—75; 
-atthakatha 128, 149n; -agama 31 
Angulimala-s 47, 174 
Acchariyabbhutadhamma-s 48, 79 
Ajitapanha 69 n 
Atthakathakanda 99 
Atthaka-v 63—64, 67—69, 84—86 
Atthaka-s 68 
Atta-v 59 n 

AtthasalinI 98, 120, 122—26, 131, 147n 
Atthuddhara 99—100 
Anamatagga-samy 52 
Anavatapta-g 92 
Anagata-vamsa 161—62 
Anusaya-yamaka 105 
Andhaka-atthakatha 121 
Apannaka-j 15, 129n 
Apannaka-s 46 

Apadana 9, 20, 23 — 24, 31—32, 65, 77, 
87-92, 121, 127, 135, 146—47 
Abhidhamma(-pitaka) 8—9, 15, 17, 27, 
32, 37, 40, 43, 48, 87—90, 94, 96-107, 
121, 123, 129, 131, 147-49, 151, 157, 
161; -bhajaniya 100 
Abhidhammatthasahgaha 144, 151—52 
Abhidhammavatara 124, 131, 146, 153 
Abhidharmakosa 68 n; -vyakhya 56 
Abhidharma-pitaka 17, 37, 43, 107 
Abhidhanappadlpika 150, 166—67, 181; 
-tlka 167; -samvannana 167; -suci 
166n 

Abhisamacarika 21 
Amarakosa 149, 166 — 457 
Ambattha-s 33, 36, 47 
Ariyapariyesana-s 45 
Arthapada-su 68n 
Arthavargiya 68 
Alagaddupama-s 45 


Avadana 24, 92 
Avalokita-su 26 n 
Avassuta-s 53 
Avyakata-samy 35 n 
Astaka-var 68 
Asta-var 68 
Asankhata-samy 53 
Assalavana-s 46 
Atanatika-su 43 
Atanatiya-s 39, 43, 173—74 
A]avaka-s 65 

Itivuttaka 9, 15-16, 31, 62-63, 133-34, 
136 

Itthi-v 82 
Isigili-s 48 

Uttaragrantha 28 — 29 
Uttaravinicchaya 131 
Udayapanha 69n 

Udana 9, 15-16, 31, 60—62, 68, 133—34, 
136, 148, 152 
Udana-var 59 — 61 
Udumbarikasihanada-s 35, 41 
Upadesa-sastra 16n 
Uparipannasa 48—49 
Upasena-s 53 
Upasena-su 53 
Upalipahcaka 28 — 29 
Upalipariprccha-su 28 — 29 
Upali-v 28 
Upali-s 46 

Upasakajanalankara 170 
U pasakalankarana 170 
Upasakalankara 170 
Uposatha-kkh 22—23, 126, 171 
Uraga-j 72 n 
Uraga-p-v 72 n 
Uraga-v 64, 84 
Uraga-s 64 
Ussadakittana 124n 
Ekakkharakosa 167 
Ekuttaraka 28 



200 


Index of Works 


Ekuttara-n 54 
Ekottara 29 
Ekottaragama 57 n 
Ekottarikagama 31, 54, 56 — 57 
*Opamma-v 45 

Kankhavitarani 126 — 27, 169 
Kaccayana-gandha 163, 181 n 
Kaccayana-ppakarana 147 
Kaccayana-manjusa 166 
Kaccayana-vutti 147 
Kaccayana-vyakarana 163, 165 
Kaccayana-sara 164; -tika 164n 
Kathina-kkh 22 — 23 
Kanthaka-v-v 70 
Kannakatthala-s 47 
Kanha-p-v 72 n 

Kathavatthu(-ppakarana) 10, 84, 90, 
96, 98, 102-5, 1 12n, il7, 125, 148, 179 
Kandaraka-s 46 
Kamma-kkh 22 
Kammavaea 25 
Karaniyametta-s 174 
Karmavakya 26 
Karma vacana 26 
Kalapa 147 
Kalingabodhi-j 81 
Kavikalpadruma 166 
Kassapasihanada-s 34, 41 
Katantra 163, 165 
Kamandaki(yanitisara) 176n 
Kasika 163 
Kimchanda-j 72 n 
Kukkuravatika-s 46 
Kunala-j 81, 150 
Kumbhakara-j 82 

Kurundi 121, 126, 131, 181 ; -atthakatha 

131 

Kutadanta-s 34 
Kutavinicchay ika -p - v 7 2 n 
Kevaddha-s 35, 41 
Kokaliya-s 67 
Kosamba-kkh 22 
Kosalabimbavannana 179—80 
Ksudraka-vastu 23 
K§udrakagama 70, 72 
Khaggavisana-s 64, 84 — 85, 91, 147 
Khandha 174 

Khandhaka 15, 18, 22 — 25, 28 
Khandha-v 52 
Khandha-samy 52 
Khuddaka-gantha 9, 32 
Khuddaka-n 8-9, 30—32, 57—95, 105, 
123, 132, 134, 172 


Khuddaka-patha 9, 22n, 31—32, 57—58, 
65-66, 72, 88, 121, 129, 134, 174 
Khuddaka-vatthu-kkh 22 
Khuddaka-vatthu-vibhanga lOOn, 101 
Khuddasikkha 168 — 69; -tika 168 — 69 
Khettupama-p-v 71 
Khema-ppakarana 152 

Ganthipada 166 

Gandhavamsa 121, 123, 127, 131 — 33, 
141, 145—46, 148—50, 152, 155, 157— 
58, 161-62, 164, 166, 169, 180-81 
Gahapati-v 45 
Gihivinayasangahanlti 176 
Guttila-j 71 n 
Guttila-v-v 71n 
Gulatthadipani 1 5 7 n 
Gona-p-v 72n 
Gopakamoggallana-s 48 
Gopalaka-s 45 
Ghata-j 72 n 
Ghatikara-s 84 n 
Ghotamukha-s 46 

Cakkavattisihanada-s 41, 93, 160 

Cakkavajadipani 175 

Catutthasangiti-k 11 

Catubhanavara 174; -atthakatha 174 

Catusparisat-su 44 

Canda-s 174 

Candra-su 52 

Campeyya-kkh 22 

Camma-kkh 22 

Cariya-pitaka 9, 31—32, 79, 83, 88, 94r— 
95, 133-34, 136, 145 
Canakya-nlti 176;-sastra 176 
Cittasambhuta-j 82 
Clvara-kkh 22 
Culla- gandhavamsa 180 
Culla-niddesa 79 n, 84, 86 
Culla -nirutti gandha 1 8 1 n 
Culla -v 18, 21-22, 37, 146 
Culla-vedalla-s 16 
Culla -saddaniti 164 
Cula-kammavibhanga-s 49 
Cula-gopalaka-s 45 
Cula-tanhasankhaya-s 46 
Cula-dukkha-kkh-s 46 
Cula-niddesa 9, 32 
*Cula-parinibbana-s 37 
Cula-malunkya-s 44 
Cula-yamaka-v 44 
Cula-rahulovada-s 44 n 
Cula-vamsa 140, 182 



Index of Works 


201 


Cula-v 66 

Cula-satipatthana-s 45 
Cula-saropama-s 45 
Cula-hatthipadopama-s 44 
Cetiya vamsatthakatha 138 
Chakesadhatuvamsa 143 
Chavaka-j 20 n 
Chiggala-s 53 

Janavasabha-s 38 
Jambudipuppattivatthu 155 
Jataka 9, 15—16, 20, 24—25, 31, 47—48, 
71—72, 77—84, 89, 94—96, 121, 127— 
28, 136, 148, 150, 158—59, 174, 176- 
79; -atthakatha 134, 136; -atthavan- 
nana 136, 146, 150; -nidana 141 — 42, 
i46, 148, 150 
Jaliya-s 34 

Jinakalamali 10-12, 143-44, 157, 178 
Jinacarita 158, 165 

Jinalankara 157; -tika 157; -navatika 
157 ; -v&nnana 157 
Jhana-vibhanga lOOn 
Jhana-samy 53 

Nana-k 88 
f^ana-vibhanga lOOn 
Nanodaya 120 

Thanamga 28 n 
Tika-patthana 106n 
Tirokudda-s 58; -p-v 72 
Tissametteyya-s 69 
Tuvataka-s 15, 68 
Telakataha-g 156 
Tevijja-s 36, 39 
Traibhumi-k 174 
Thupavamsa 142 

Thera-g 9, 15, 31, 47, 52, 61, 67, 71—77, 
89-92, 112, 133—35, 146 
Therapadana 147 
Theri-apadana 147 

Therl-g 9, 15, 31, 51, 61, 71, 73, 75—77, 
89-90, 92, 112, 134—35 

Dakkhinavibhanga-s 48 
Dantadhatu(-vamsa) 142 
Dantabhumi-s 48 
Dasakumaracarita 158 
Dasadhyaya-vinaya 29 
Dasottara-su 43 
Dasadanavatthuppakarana 153 
Dasabodhisattavidhi 162 
Dasabodhisattuddesa 162 


Dasabodhisattuppatti-k 161—62 
Dasabrahmana-j 83 
Dasavatthupp akarana 153 
Dasuttara-s 28, 43, 54, 87 
Dathavamsa 142 
Divyavadana 81 n, 175, 178 
D!gha-n 7—8, 2^-25, 28, 30—50, 5^-55, 
77, 79, 87, 90-93, 95, 102, 107, 111, 
122, 142, 148—50, 160, 173—75; -at- 
thakatha-tika 149; -agama 31 
Dipavamsa 8—11, 16, 27, 84, 88, 100, 
115—19, 138—40, 142, 154; -attha- 
katha 115, 138 

Dirghagama 24 n, 31, 38 n, 43 n, 44 
Duka-patthana 106n 
Dutiya-agariya-v-v 71 n 
Devata-samy 51 
Devaduta-s 175 
Dvayatanupassana-s 67 
Dvara-k 124n 

D vip adavy asayamaka -g 1 5 7 n 
Dhajagga-s 174 

Dhammacakkappavattana-s 53, 132 
Dhammaniti 176 

Dhammapada 9, 15, 25, 31, 58 — 61, 64, 
75, 121, 127-28, 130, 159, 176; -at- 
thakatha 134r-35, 146 
Dhammasaiigani 96 — 102, 105—6, 120, 
122 

Dhammasamadana-s 45 
Dhammahadayavibhanga 101, 173 
Dharmapada 7, 59—60 
Dhatu-k 96, 98, 101 — 2 
Dhatukaya 107 
Dhatupatha 165 — 66 
Dhatumanjusa 166 
Dhatumala 165 — 66 
Dhatuyamaka 102 
Dhatuvibhanga 102 
Dhutagunaniddesa 114n 
Dhvajagra-su 52 

Nandaka-p-v 71 
Nandi visala-j 20 n 
Naga-samy 52 

Namarupapariccheda 151—52 
Namarupasamasa 152 
Namacaradipika 153, 164 
Nalaka-s 15, 67 
Nava-s 66 
Nikaya-sangraha 11 
Nigamana-g 136 

Nidana-k 25, 48, 78—79, 95, 146, 158—59 
Nidana-v 52 



202 


Index of Works 


Nidana-samyukta 52 
Nidana-samy 52 

Niddesa 15, 19, 27, 31-32, 63-65, 68— 
70, 84-87, 91, 119, 133-34, 166 
Nidhikanda-s 58 
Nibbana-samy 53n 
Nivaranapahana-v 57 
Nettigandha 181 n 

Netti-ppakarana 31, 109—10, 133—34, 
137, 148—49, 166, 181; -atthakatha 
133-34, 137, 148 — 49 ; -tika ' 148-49 
Nyasa 164; -pradipa 164 

Paccayakaravibhanga 37, lOOn 
Paccar! 121 

Paccekabuddhapadana 91, 147 
Paijapadoruvamsa 117, 138; -vannana 
138 

Pajjamadhu 158, 164, 173 
Pancagatidipana 160 
Pancatantra 79 

Pancappakarana -atthakatha 123, 125 
Pannasa-j 177 
Panhapucchaka 100—1 
Patisambhidamagga 9, 31, 87—89, 96, 
132, 134 

Patthana 96, 98, 106 — 7, 123, 151n, 161 

Pandita-var 59 n 

Panditalankaraniti 176 

Pannattivara 105 

Pannasa 178 

Pada-bhajana 126 

Pada-bhajaniya 19, 21, 166 

Pada-mala 164 

Pada-rupasiddhi 164 

Padya- see Pajja- 

Padhana-s 66 

Papancasudani 122, 174 

Pabbajja-s 66 

Payogasiddhi 158, 165 

Paramattha-k 123 

Paramattha-jotika 64 — 65, 68 — 69, 85 — 
86, 121n, 129, 133, 147 
Paramattha-dipani 123, 134, 146 
Paramattha-vinicchaya 152 
Paramattha-vibhavini 134n 
Parabhava-s 65 
Parinhavara 106 
Paritta 120, 173—74 
Parivara 15 — 16, 18, 24, 26 — 29, 113, 168 
Pavattivara 106 
Pavarana-kkh 22 
Patika-v 32, 41—44 
Patika-s 32, 41 


Patimokkha 7, 18-23, 31, 96, 121, 126, 
166; -thapana-kkh 22 
Payasi-s 40 

Parayana-v 63—65, 69, 84 — 86 
Parayana-su 68 n 
Parivasika-kkh 22 
Pasadika-s 42—43 
Pitakattamain 154 
Pitakattay akarakanisamsa 178 
Puggala-k 103 — 4 

Puggala-pannatti 62—63, 96, 98, 102—3 
Punnakapanha 69 n 
Punnakamanavapuccha 69 
Punyavanta-j 84n 
Puppha-v 58 

Pubbakammapiloti-apadana 91—92 
Puspa-var 64n 
Pujavaliya 11, 143 
Petaka 109 

Petakopadesa(gandha) 14n, 31, 108—10, 

i 66, 181 

Petavatthu 9, 31, 58, 71-72, 77, 133- 
34, 136, 160 
Potthapada-s 35 
Pratimoksa-su 20—21 
Pretavadana 72 

Balapandita-s 49 
Balavatara 164 
Bahiranidana 116, 118, 122 
Bimbisara-su 49 n 
Bi|ara-j 80 

Buddhaghosuppatti 130, 138, 145, 182 
Buddhavamsa 9, 25, 31 — 32, 79, 87—88, 
92—95, 97, 131—32, 142, 145-46, 148, 
161, 172; -atthakatha 146 — 47 
Buddhapadana 90—92, 146—47 
Buddhapadaniya 94 
Brhat-k 86 n 
Bojjhahgaparitta 174 
Bojjhanga-samy 50, 53 
Bodhivamsa 141 
Bodhisattvabhumi 68 n 
B r apamsukulanisamsa 178 
Brahmajala-s 7, 33 
Brahmanimantanika-s 46 
Brahma-samy 50 
Brahmayu-s 47 
Brahmanadhammika-s 66 
Brahmana-v 58 
Bliaddali-s 46 
Bhaddekaratta-s 48 
Bhikkhunl-kkh 21 — 22, 24 — 25, 55 
Bhikkhunl-patimokkha 127n 



Index of Works 


203 


Bhikkhum-vibhanga 18, 20 — 21, 28 
Bhikkhuni -samy 51, 76 
Bhikkhu-patimokkha 127 
Bhikkhu-vibhanga 18 
Bhiksunl-praklrnaka 21 
Bhiksuni-pratimoksa 21 
Bhiksuni-vinaya 7, 21, 25 
Bhiksunl-vibhanga 25 
Bhiksu-praklrnaka 21 
Bhiksu-pratimoksa 20—21 
Bhiksu-var 60, 64 n 
Bhumija-s 48 
Bhuridatta-j 80, 82 
Bhesajja-kkh 22, 162 
Bhesajja-manjusa 163 

Makhadeva-s 47 
Magga-samy 53 
Mangala-s 15, 58, 174 
Majjhima-n 8, 30, 40, 44—49, 67, 79, 95, 
97, 100, 103, 122, 149, 159, 174; 
-pannasa 46—47 
Manjusa 163 
Madhupindaka-s 103 
Madhuratthappakasim 150 
Madhuratthavilasinl 131, 146, 157 
Madhurasavahini 155 
Madhura-s 46 
Madhyamagama 31, 44, 49 
Manorathapurani 122, 135 
Maha-atthakatha 86, 99, 121, 124n, 131 
Maha-kammavibhanga-s 49 
Maha-kkh 22, 24, 44, 61 
*Maha-gandhavamsa 180 
Maha-gopalaka-s 45 
Maha-govinda-cariya 95 n 
Maha-govinda-s 38, 95 n 
Maha-govinda-su 39 n 
Maha-govindlya-su 39 n 
Maha-janaka-j 177 
Maha-dibbamanta 174n 
Maha-dukkha-kkh-s 46 
Maha-nidana-s 37 
Maha-niddesa 9, 32, 84 
Maha-nipata 18, 80 
Maha -niruttigandha 1 8 1 n 
Maha-pakarana 161 n 
Maha-paccari 121, 126, 131, 181 
Mahapadana-s 24, 36—37, 48, 79, 90, 
92 

Maha-paritta 173 

Maha-parinibbana-s 31, 37—38, 42, 50, 
55, 93 

Maha-parinirvana-su 38 


Maha-punnama-s 16 
Maha-bodhivamsa 141 , 156 , 162 , 165 
Maha-marigala-s 66 
Maha-maluiikya-s 44 
Maha-yamaka-v 44 
Maharahanfti 176 
Maha-rahulovada-s 4 4n 
Mahali-s 34 

Maha-lomahamsacariya 95n 
Maha-vamsa 8 — 12, 96, 115 — 18, 120, 
124, 130, 138-42, 145, 149, 153—56, 
159, 162—63, 171, 174, 180; -tika 150, 
155-56, 166, 171 

Maha-v 18, 22, 24^-25, 32, 36-41, 53— 
54, 66, 126, 140 
Mahavadana-su 24, 37 
Maha-vastu(avadana) 16, 24—25, 39, 
60, 64r— 67, 70, 84^-85, 91, 175, 178 
Maha-vibhanga 18, 27, 126 
Maha-vedalla-s 16 
Maha-samgama 28 
Maha-saccaka-s 34n, 45 
Maha-satipatthana-s 40, 45, 49 
Maha-saddaniti 164 
Maha-sannaya 164 
Maha-samaya-s 39, 43 
Maha-samaja-su 39 
Maha-saropama-s 45 
Maha-slhanada-s 45—46, 95 n 
Maha-sudassana-s 38 
Maha-supina-j 80—81 
Maha-hatthipadopama-s 44 
Magandiya-panha 86 
Magandiya-s 68 n, 69 
Matanga-j 82 
Matika-atthakatha 126 
Milinda-tlka 150 

Milinda-panha 26 n, 28, 31, 54, 74, 91, 
102, 110—12, 150, 174; -vannana 150 
MukhamattadipanI 1 64 
Muni-g 69 n 
Muni-s 69n 
Mula-tika 148, 152 
Mula-pannasa 45 
Mula-yamaka 105 
Mula-sikkha 169 
Metta-s 58, 65 
Metteyya-panlia 69 n 
Maitreya-samiti 161 n 
Moggallayana-pancika 165 
Moggallayana-vyakarana 165 
Mora-s 174 

Mohavicchedani 96, 100, 105, 147, 153, 
161 



204 


Index of Works 


Yamaka 96, 98, 102, 105—6, 118 
Yogaratnakara 163 

Ratthapala-s 46 
Ratana-s 15, 58, 66, 174 
Rasavahini 145n, 155 — 56, 159 
Rajaniti 176 
Rastrapala-su 49 n 
Rupasiddhi 159, 164 — 65, 173 
Ruparupavibhaga 131, 153 

Lakkhana-s 42 
Lalitavistara 81 n 
Linatthavannana 149n 
Lokaniti 176 

Lokaneyyapakarana 176n 
Lokapannatti 174 — 75 
Lokaprajnapti 175 
Lomahamsapariyaya 95 n 
Lohicca-s 36 

Y amsatthappakasini 1 3 8 — 40 
Vangisathera-samy 51 
Vannanltigandha 181 n 
Vatta-kkh 22 
Varnasata 49 n 
Vassupanayika-kkh 22 
Vakyapadiya 149 
Vagisa-sarnyukta 52 
Vidhurapandita-j 7 In, 80, 83 
Vinaya(-pitaka) 8 — 9, 11, 15 — 16, 18, 
20-21, 23-28, 31, 37, 44, 48, 53, 55, 
58, 61, 77, 85, 87, 92, 97—98, 105, 113, 
116, 119, 121—22, 126, 131, 140, 147, 
157, 162, 166, 168-69, 171, 173; 
-atthakatha 122, 138 
Vinaya-ksudraka 28 
Vinaya-tika 11 
Vinaya-nidana 16n, 116n 
Yinaya-vinicchaya 130—31, 145 
Vinaya-vibhanga 21 
Vinaya-saratthadlpani 130 
Vipakuddhara-k 124n 
Vibhanga 15, 23, 37, 48, 89, 96, 98, 
100 — 3, 105, 122; -atthakatha 125; 
-v 48—49 

Vimativinodanl 172 
Vimalatthavilasini 146 
Vimalavilasi.nl 146 

Vimanavatthu 9, 25, 31, 40, 70 — 72, 
133-34, 136, 146, 173 
Vimanavadana 70 
V imuktimarga 1 1 4 n 
Vimuttimagga 113—14, 120 


Visuddhajanavilasini 146n 
Visuddhimagga 31, 112 — 14, 120 — 24, 
126, 129, 131-33, 148-49, 174, 182; 
-tlka 113, 133 

Vuttodaya 168 — 69; -tlka 168 
Vedana-samy 50 n 
Vedalla-s 16, 40 
Vevacanahara 166 
Vessantara-j 80, 83, 95, 177 
Vyakarana 165 

Siksasamuccaya 57 
^ila-var 59 

Samyuktagama 31, 54 
Samyutta-n 8 — 9, 15, 30 — 31, 40, 49—54, 
56, 76, 120, 122, 149, 159, 174; 
-atthakatha 128; -agama 31 
Samsaramocaka-p-v 71 
Sakkapanha-s 16, 40 
Saka-samy 50 
Sagatha-v 15, 50 — 52 
Sankharabhajaniya-s 16 
Sankhepa 121 
Sahkhyasarupa 150 
Sangarava-s 47 
Sangiti-paryaya 43, 107 
Sangiti-vamsa 144 
Sahglti-s 28, 43, 48, 102, 107, 150 
Sangiti-su 43, 102 
Sanghabheda-kkh 22 
Sanghabheda-vastu 24, 44 n 
Sangharajasadhucariyava In 
Saccavibhanga 100; -s 45n, 48 — 49, 100 
Sacca-samy 50, 53 
Saeca-sankhepa 152, 181 
Sacca-savhayapanditacariya 95 n 
Satipatthana-sarny 53 
Satipatthana-s 40, 45 
Sattasai 75 
Saddaniti 1 64 
Saddalakkhana 165 
Saddhamma-tthitika 133 
Saddhamma-ppakasini 87, 132 
Saddhamma-ppajotika 84, 133 
Saddhamma-sangaha 10 — 11, 124n, 148, 
152, 157—58, 164, 179-80 
Saddhammopayana 159, 170; -viggaha 
160 

Saddharma-pundarika 16 
Sandesa-k 144, i 72 
Saptamaithunasamyukta-su 57 
Sapta^ataka 75 n 
Sabhiya-s 66 
Samatha-kkh 22 



Index of Works 


205 


Samantakutavannana 155, 159 
Samantapasadika 32, 57, 98, 116, 118, 
121—22, 126—27, 130, 141-42, 169, 
171, 180-81 
Samantabhaddika 162 
Samavayamga 28 n 
Samuccaya-kkh 22 
Samuddaghosa-j 178 
Sampasadaniya-s 42 
Sambandhacinta 168 
Sammaditthi-s 16 
Sammohavinodani 122 — 25, 133 
Sajayatana-v 53 
Sajayatana-samy 50, 53 
Sahasra-var 60 

Sahassa-vatthu 155; -atthakatha 155 — 
56; -ppakarana 154 — 56 
Samagama-s 48 
Samannaphala-s 7, 33—36, 111 
Sarattha-dlpam 11 
Sarattha-ppakasini 122 
Sarattha-sangaha 162n, 173n 
Sarasangaha 11, 173—74 
Sariputta-samy 52 
Saropama-s 45 

Sasana-vamsa 2, 11—12, 26, 131, 141, 
145, 148, 152-53, 181; -dipa 141n, 
182 

Sigalovada-s 42 
Sivi-j 82 
Sima-k 171 

Sima-lakkhanadipanl 172, 182 
Simalankara(ka) 171; -sangaha 171 
Sirna-vivadavinicchaya-k 172 
Sima-sankaracchedani 172 


Slma-sangaha 171 
Sila-kkh-v 32—36 
Sihaladipuppatti-vatthu 155 
Sihalavatthuppakarana 154 
Sujata-j 72 n 
Sutavaddhananlti 176 
Sutta-niddesa 164 

Sutta-nipata 9, 14 — 15, 25, 31, 58, 63 — 
70, 73, 75, 84-86, 91, 121, 129, 133— 
34, 147, 175 

Suttanta-pitaka 9, 30, 32 
Suttanta-bhajanlya 100 
Sutta-pitaka 17, 30—95, 97—98, 102-3, 
105, 129, 173 
Sutta-mala 165 

Sutta-vibhanga 18, 20 — 22, 27 — 28, 126 
Sutta -sangaha 31, 172 
Sudhanukumara-j 178 
Subodhalankara 167—69; -tika 168 
Subha-s 35 

Sumangalavilasinl 109, 122, 149 
Sutra-pitaka 16 n 
Sedamocaka-g 28 
Senasana-kkh 22 
•Serissaka-v-v 71 n 
Sela-s 67 
Sonadanda-s 34 
Skandhaka 23n, 24 — 25 
Sthavira-g 75, 92 


Hatthavanagallaviharavamsa 143 
Hatthipadopama-s 44 
Hitopadesa 79 
Hemavata-s 65, 175 



GENERAL INDEX 

(Persons or places with the same name are not separated) 


Abhayagiri(-vihara) 5, 10, 29 n, 113 — 
14, 139, 149, 160, 170 
Aciravata 48 
Acyutavikrama 131 
Aesop 79 
Afghanistan 24 
Aggabodhi 133n 
Ajatasattu 33, 143 
Akkharacchandas 168 
Alara Kalama 45 
Alokavihara 11 
Alulena lln 
Aluvihara 11 
Ambapali 76 
Ambattha 33—34, 47 
Ananda 7—9, 35, 37—38, 42, 47—48, 50, 
61, 69, 73, 77, 86, 91, 159, 174, 179 
Anathapindika 79 
Andhaka 122 
Andhra 154 
Anomadassi 143 
Anuradhapura 133, 165, 172 
Anuruddha 8, 12, 50 
Anustubh 59, 61, 69, 74, 82 — 83 
Aparanta 182 
Arada Kalama 45 n 
arannayatana 159 
Arimaddana 153, 164 
Arya (includinq Old Arya) 61, 65, 68, 
71, 74, 76, 81, 110, 168 
Aryan Path 40 
Asandhimitta 140, 153 
Asita 67 

Asoka(n) 3—5, 10, 16, 39, 73, 77, 84, 87, 
104, 115, 140, 142, 153, 162, 172, 175, 
182 

Assaji 23 n 
Attanagalla 143 
Atthadassin 128 
Aupacchandasaka 59, 61, 64 
Ayuthya 144n 

Badaratittha(-vihara) 134, 137, 152 
Balie/Baly 2 
Bamiyan 24, 107 


Bavari 69 
Benares 3n 

bhanaka 8—9, 31 — 32, 50, 56, 74 — 76, 81, 
90 n, 94 — 95, 112—113, 132 
Bharhut 16, 80 
Bhatikatissa 1 1 5 n 
Bhatutissa 115n 
Bhumija 48 
Bhuvanekabahu 158 
Bimbisara 66 

Bodhisatta 9, 77, 79, 82-83, 93 — 94 , 
159, 173 

Brahma 36, 38 — 39, 46, 50 
Brahmakayika 39 
Brahmayu 47 

Buddha 2—3, 6-9, 11, 13, 19-25 et 
passim 

Buddhadeva 128 
Buddhamitta 128 
Buddhaslha 131, 145 
Buddhasoma 160 
Buddhism 4-7, 11-12, 48 
Buddhist(s) 1, 3, 5 — 6, 9 — 14, 18, 20 et 
passim 

Buddhist (Hybrid) Sanskrit 26, 30n, 
78-79, 81, 88, 92, 177 
Burma 2, 7, 11-12, 14, 79n, 108, 110, 
138, 140n, 153, 164, 167, 172, 174—77, 

180- 83 

Burmese 2, 7, 11 — 13, 14n, 143, 151, 
154, 164—65, 167, 169, 172, 176-78, 

181— 82 
Burnouf 1 

Cakkavattin 41, 160 
Cambodia 13, 160n, 177, 183 
Cambodian 13, 140, 150 
Canakka 139 
Candagutta 139 

Ceylon 2, 6, 10—12, 14, 26, 29, 92, 94, 
108, 110, 114—15, 118—21, 124, 130, 
132, 134, 136n, 140-44, 151—52, 
154—56, 159, 161-62, 164, 167, 169— 
72, 174—75, 179—83 
Chatthasangayana 13 



General Index 


207 


Chieng Mai 175 
Childers 1 

Chinese 7, 22 n, 29, 32, 43 n, 44, 49, 54, 
56—57, 60, 63—64, 68, 92, 98, 107, 111, 
113-14, 130, 143n, 149, 175 
Clough 1 
Cola 132 
Coliyan 171 
Coromandel 2 
Culagavaccha 72 
Cunda 178 

Dabba 19 n 
Dakkhinarama 173 
Dathanaga 141, 149 
Deva 133 

Devanampiyatissa 116 
Dhammakitti 180 
Dhammasava 72 
Dhammasoka 71 

Dharmaguptaka 21, 29, 38, 43 n, 59 
Dipankara 78, 93, 141—42, 158 
Dra vidian 6, 121, 130 
Dutthagamani 117, 142, 180 

Ekavihariya 73 
English 1, 141 

Fa-hsien 179 
Fan 63 n 

Ganacchandas 70n, 73—74, 168 
Gandharl 7, 59 
Ganges 37 

Gilgit 7, 20-21, 24, 57, 92 
Girnar 4 

Gotama 36, 38, 45n, 67, 77, 89, 93, 
140—43, 158, 161, 178 
Govinda 39 n 
Greek 110-11 

Handakonda 154n 
Haripuhjaya 143 
Hathigumpha 4 — 5 
Hemavata 175 

Hlnayana 7, 16, 20 — 21, 26, 29n, 91, 113 
Hindu 161 

Hsuan-tsang 14, 16n, 17 
Inda 66 

India(n) 3—5, 14n, 29, 59, 65n, 77, 79, 
81, 83-84, 87, 92, 108, 110-11, 113- 
14, 120—21, 124, 130, 134, 136, 142— 
43, 149, 151—52, 154-55, 171, 175—76, 
179, 181-83 


Ingirisi 141 
Isidasi 77 

Jagati 59, 61, 66 — 67, 69, 74, 82, 142 
Jain(s) 20, 28n, 42 — 43, 46, 48—49, 51, 
58, 81—82, 170 
Jaliya 34 
Jambudipa 26 
Java 86 
Jayasena 48 
Jetavana 79, 114 
Jivaka Komarabhacca 162 
Jotipala 84 n 

Kaccana 108, 110 
Kalabbha 132 
Kalamba 131 
Kalambha 132 
Kalasi 1 1 1 n 

Ka]asoka 139 
Kalinga 81 
Kanaka 146 
Kancipura 152 
Kaniska 14, 17 
Kanjur 14 

Kantakasolapattana 154n 
Kapilavastu 3n 
Kashmir 14 
Kasmira llln 
Kassapa 8, 40 
Kasyapiya 59 n 
Kavicakravarti 1 60 
Kavlra 152 
Kavirapattana 146 
Kevaddha 35 
Khadiravaniya 73 n 
Khema 135n 
Khotan 59 
Kimbila 72 n 
Kittisihasura 167 
Kittisirirajasiha 140 
Konagamana 77, 97 
Kondakasolapattana 154n 
Kosala 80 
Kumarakassapa 127 
Kusinagari 3n 
Kusinara 3n, 38 
Kuthodaw Pagoda 12 

La Loubere 1 — 2 
Lampoon 1 43 
Lanna 143—44 
Laos 13, 183 



208 


General Index 


Laotian 13 
Lassen 1 
Let -than 153 
Licchaviputta 41 
Lilavatl 142 

Lokottaravadin 7, 21 — 22, 24 — 25, 39, 60 

Magadha 3, 33, 38 n, 66 
Magadhi 2 — 3, 105, 145, 168 
Magadhisms 104, 130 
Magandiya 69 
Maha-arittha 10, 116, 180 
Mahadeva 104n 
Mahagavaccha 72 
Mahakaccana 46, 48, 85, 103 
Mahakassapa 7—8, 12, 18, 148, 180 
Mahamaudgalyayana 53 n 
Mahanama 130, 132 
Mahapaduma 121 
Mahapajapati 48 
Maharakkhita 87 
Maharastri 75 
Mahasammata 41 

Mahasanghika 7, 10, 14, 21 — 22, 24 — 25, 
27, 39, 57, 60, 84, 88, 96, 100, 117 
Mahasangiti 10 
Mahasangitika 10 
Mahasena 115, 140 
Mahasumma 121 
Mahathupa 142 
Mahatissa 127 

Mahavihara 29 n, 113, 116, 118 — 20, 124, 
128, 131—32, 134, 136, 139, 147, 149n, 
151—52, 170—71 
Mahavijita 34 

Mahayana 42, 74, 90 — 91, 113, 161, 170 
Mahimsasaka 128 

Mahinda 114, 116, 119, 121, 141, 145 

Ma-ho-nan 130, 149 

Malini 142-43, 159 

Mallian 19n 

Mandakranta 142 

Mandalay 12 — 13 

Manimekhala 117 

Mara 51, 66, 158 

Matale 1 1 n 

Mathura 5 

Matracchandas 70n, 74, 168 
Mauryan 3 
Medhankara 93 n 
Menander 1 1 0 — 1 1 
Metteyya 41, 93, 161 
Middle Indo-Aryan 1 — 2, 6 — 7, 33, 57, 
115, 141 


Milinda 110 — 12 
Min-don-min 12, 181 
Moggaliputta 10 — 11 
Moggallana 19n, 22, 46, 53, 70, 115n, 
132 

Mula-sarvastivadin 7, 20, 23 — 24, 26, 29, 
44n, 57, 92 

Nadikas 38 
nag a 83 

Nagasena 110 — 12 
Nalaka 67 
Nandas 139 
Nandivisala 20 n 
Narindasiha 163 
Nat(h)aputta 42 — 43, 46, 48 
Neranjara 66 
Nigodha 35 

Paccaya 80, 83 

Pagan 153—55, 162—63, 168, 176 
Pali 1—10, 12, 16, 18, 21 — 26 et passim 
Parakkama 142 

Parakkamabahu 12, 140, 142—43, 148, 
151, 163, 165-66, 169-70, 180 
Parakkantibhuja 142 
Pasenadi 179 
Pataliputra 4, 38 
Pattakotti 154n 
Pava 43 
Payasi 40 
Pihgala(ka) 71 
Potthapada 35 

Prakrit 7, 29n, 39, 67, 59—60, 63, 91, 
111, 130, 166 
Pramitaksara 42 n 
Prasenajit 179 
Punabbasu 23 n 
Puspitagra 42 n 
Putabhattasela 159 

Rahula 159 
Rajagaha 24 
Rangoon 1 3 
Rathoddhata 42n,76 
Ratthapala 19n 
Revata 9, 73 n 
Roma 175 
Rucira 42 n, 118 

Sabbakamin 9 
Sabhiya 66 
Sagala 11 In 
Sakka 40, 46, 50 
Sakya 34 



General Index 


209 


Sali 155—56 

Samanola 159 

Sambhuta 73 

Sandakonti 154n 

Sanghapala 120, 131, 145n, 157 

Sangharaja 145 n, 180 

Sankha 41, 160 — 61 

Sanskrit 2—3, 5—7, 16, 29—31, 38—39, 
43, 51, 53—54, 57, 60, 62—63, 66—68, 
79, 92, 107, 111, 114, 129, 141, 147, 
149, 156, 158-59, 163, 165—70, 174 — 
78 

Saranankara 93 n 
^ardulavikridita 142 
Sariputta 8, 22, 42—43, 52, 71, 84-85, 
87, 93—94, 98—100, 107, 132, 151, 161 
Sarvastivadin 7, 14, 17, 21, 24, 26, 28— 
29, 37-38, 40, 43—44, 49, 51, 54, 57, 
59, 61, 63, 68, 70, 72, 75, 92, 94, 97, 
107, 112 
Satagira 175 
Sela 67 
Sena 149 
Shahbazgarhi 39 
Sialkot 11 In 
Siam 2, 11-12, 140 
Siamese 13—14, 174 
Siddhagama 149 
Siddhattha 159 
Sigala 42 
Siha 23 n 

Sihala 8, 116—19, 122, 124n, 125—32, 
134, 135n, 138-39, 144n, 154-55, 182 
Sihalacariya 170 
Sikharini 142 

Sinhalese 1, 5 — 6, 12—13, 14n, 86 — 87, 
94, 100, 104, 114, 119, 130, 140—44, 

151, 155, 157, 161, 163, 165, 171, 179 
Sinhalese Prakrit 6, 114, 118 — 19, 130 
Sirikuta 127, 130 
Sirimeghavanna 142 

Sirinivasa 130 
Sirisanghabodhi 133, 143 
Siva 11, 26 
Sivi 82 

Sloka 82—83, 91, 94r-95, 116 , 118 , 142 , 

152, 159—60 
Sona(ka) 1 1 
Sonadanda 34 
Sopaka 135n 

South-East Asia 6, 140, 143, 153 — 54, 
175, 177—78 
Sragdhara 118, 142 
Sravasti 3n, 179 


Sudassana 38 
Suddhavasakayika 39 
Sudhamma 12 
Sudinna 19n 
Sumanakuta 159 
Sumangala 73 
Sumati 131 

Sumedha 78 — 79, 93 , 158 
Sumedha 77 
Sunakkhatta 41 
Surattha 71 
Susunaga 139 
Suvannabhumi 11, 86, 182 

Takkola 86 
Tamba 152 
Tambapanni 26, 169 
Tanhankara 93 n 
Tanja 152 
Tathagata 46, 173 
Tekiccakani 73 

Thai(s) 2, 7, 13, 144, 175, 180n 
Thailand 2, 7, 14, 143-44, 176n, 177— 
78, 183 

Thaton 11—12, 174 

Theravadin(s) 1—5, 10, 14, 17, 32, 38, 

51, 64, 84, 88, 91-92, 94, 96, 98, 100, 
103-4, 107, 112-13, 117, 128n, 136, 
160-61, 174 

Thuparama 165 
Tibet(an) 21, 60, 92, 107, 114 
Tilok 143 
Tilokanayana 153 
Tissabhuti 127 

Tristubh 59, 61, 66—67, 69, 74, 82—83, 
91, 95, 142—43, 153, 159 
Turkestan 7, 21, 24, 29, 37, 43, 49, 51 — 

52, 57, 59, 68, 75, 92, 107 
Tusita 67, 78 — 79 

Uddaka Ramaputta 45 
Udgata 42 n 
Udraka Ramaputra 45 n 
Upali 7-8, 18, 28-29, 46 
Upanisadic 46 
Upasena 53 

Upasthitapracupita 42 n 
Upatissa 113, 174 
Uppalavanna 77 
Uttara 1 1 

Uttaravihara 139, 149 
Vaddha 73 

Vaitallya 59, 61, 64, 83 



210 


General Index 


Vamsastha 42 n 

Vangisa 9, 51, 73 

Vasantatilaka 118, 142 — 43, 159 

Yatthagamani 10—11, 87 

vedha 81 

Vejayanta 46 

Vesall 24 

Vessantara 83, 95 

Vidhura 83 

Vijayabahu 12, 140, 158 


Yipassin 36, 48, 79 
Vitandins 103 
Vitasoka 73 

yakkha 83 
Yama 175 
Yasodhara 90 
Yudhitthila 83 

Zimme 178 



