Popularity and Representation of Zheng He’s Image 
Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020                  27 
 
 
Journal of Integrative International Relations, 5:1 (2020) 27-36 
Copyright © Department of International Relations UIN Sunan Ampel Surabaya  
ISSN 2477-3557 (Print) 
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.4792583 
 
Popularity and Representation of Zheng 
He’s Image: Pre-Eliminary Research 
 
Fitri Rofiyarti 
Universitas Narotama, Surabaya, Indonesia 
E-mail: fitri.rofiyarti@narotama.ac.id 
 
 
Abstract 
Zheng  He   (Cheng  ho)  Mosques  become  iconic  mosques  in  Indonesia  as  its 
architecture represents well Chinese culture. Even though, the legacy of the figure behind 
this name turned out to be a concern. Many people do not know that Zheng He is one of 
the figure who has contributed greatly to spread Islam in Indonesia. For this reason, the 
major objective of this study is investigating how Zheng He’s image and perception 
formed in the view of young Muslims, as the new generation who have big 
responsibilities r elated to the continuity and the development of Islam. The other 
purposes of this research is to find out how far Zheng He is known, as a diplomat and 
great explorer, become a role model in the process of young Muslim’s  character building. 
Furthermore,  reconstruction  is carried out to form a positive image and perception of 
Zheng He and reconstruct the representation of Chinese culture and its relation to Islam. 
Masjid Zheng He (Cheng ho) menjadi masjid ikonik di Indonesia karena arsitekturnya 
mewakili b udaya Tionghoa dengan baik. Padahal, warisan sosok di balik nama ini 
ternyata menjadi perhatian. Banyak yang tidak mengetahui bahwa Zheng He adalah 
salah satu sosok yang berjasa besar dalam menyebarkan Islam di Indonesia. Oleh karena 
itu, tujuan utama dari  penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui bagaimana citra dan 
persepsi Zheng He terbentuk dalam pandangan pemuda Muslim, sebagai generasi baru 
yang memiliki tanggung jawab besar terkait dengan kelangsungan dan perkembangan 
Islam. Tujuan lain dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui sejauh mana Cheng Ho 
yang dikenal sebagai diplomat dan penjelajah hebat menjadi panutan dalam proses 
pembentukan karakter pemuda Muslim. Selanjutnya, rekonstruksi dilakukan untuk 
membentuk citra dan persepsi positif terhadap Zhe ng He serta merekonstruksi 
representasi budaya Tionghoa dan hubungannya dengan Islam. 
Keywords: representation; image; zheng he; Islam; chinese 
 
 
Fitri Rofiyarti 
28                 Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020 
 
 
Introduction 
Zheng He,  who was interpreted  as  "Chinas' great maritime giant" has 
succeeded in completing extraordinary marine expeditions, even the 
expeditions he carried  out  w ere often  compared  to  Eu ropean  shipping 
expeditions  which marked the discovery of the modern era.1 Zheng began his 
first voyage in 1405, presiding over 300 ships containing nearly 28,000 people. 
More than 28 years, Zheng He managed to lead 7 trips to 37 countries, passing 
Southeast Asia, Africa, and Arabia. One of its main goals is to build Chinese trade 
relations. 
Unfortunately, Zheng He's expedition ended in  1433 where the new 
Emperor of China at that time assumed that the Zheng He expedition was too 
expensive. For the Emperor, the resources used in the expedition were far 
more needed to maintain security on land. For this reason, he gave orders to 
stop Zheng He's expedition. Even the government also limits information about 
the significance of the expeditions carried out by Zheng He. Only a few official 
publications discuss this. China started to acknowledged the great contribution 
of the  expedition  around  the  20th  century,2“Eventually,  by  the  20th century,  
the Chinese recognized the significance of Zheng He’s journeys and the role they 
played in developing relations between China and Islamic countries.” Another 
source also mentioned that immediately after Zheng He died, most of the 
footage about  Zheng He and  his  trip  had  been  destroyed.  In  addition,  after  
Emperor Yongle's death in 1424 no more expeditions were carried out during 
the next regime (Emperor Hongxi's regime). Zheng H e's last expedition w as 
carried out at the time of Emperor Xuande who was the grandson of Yongle. 
In contrast to what happened in China, on the contrary in Southeast Asian 
countries, especially in many Chinese communities, Zheng He is considered an 
honorable hero. Cited from Kristof3 “Curiously, it is not in China but in Indonesia 
where his memory has been most actively kept alive. Zheng He’s expeditions led 
directly to  the wave of  Chin ese immigration  to  South east  Asia,  and  in  
some countries he is regarded today as a deity.” Many notes and stories in 
Southeast Asian countries that show well that Zheng He has helped spread Islam 
in the region. This topic is one thing that cannot be separated from the talk of 
cultural exchanges between China and Southeast Asia.4 
In social discussions and various arts and cultural activities, people of 
Javanese descent are used to have a reunion  with  Chinese and  A rab  
people. Cultural acculturation is a representation and  mixture of immigrant 
and local cultures formed through a long journey of Javanese coastal cultural 
history since the 14th century.5 This is visualized in the  form of building 
architecture with a variety of forms of a combination of Javanese, Chinese, and 
Islam. For example, in the city of Semarang there was a large temple which was 
Popularity and Representation of Zheng He’s Image 
Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020                  29 
 
 
made to honor Zheng He, right where Zheng He used to take care of his sick 
friend. Until now, many prayed to Zheng He to ask for healing and luck. 
Although Zheng He and his fleet sailed through Southeast Asia and the 
Indian  Ocean  with  a  large  defense  force  compared  to  the  strength  of  the 
indigenous people, they did not intend to colonize. In contrast, Zheng He's fleet 
is known  to  be  very helpful  in  fighting  pirates.  For  example,  Zheng He's  
fleet defeated Chen Zuyi's pirate fleet in Palembang. Not only that, Zheng 
He6 also fought Alakeshvara's in Cylon (Sri Lanka) and Sekandar's (Indonesia) 
which was a reminder that the Chinese Ming Dynasty had great power in the 
maritime path. Nonetheless, there is no written evidence from existing sources 
where there is a form of monopoly or the tendency of the Zheng He expedition 
to control the sea trade. Dreyer as quoted from Wang Min-qin7 stated that the 
activities carried out were only trade exposures and promotions in the area of 
the South China Sea or Indian Ocean. 
 
Zheng He and the Spread of Islam: Forgotten History? 
When talking about the relationship between Zheng He and Islam in 
Southeast  Asia,  most  researchers  agreed  that  Zheng  He  expedition  was  
very h elpful in connecting between the East and North Sumatra via sea 
transportaton. In addition, another crucial role is to expand the network and 
strengthen relations b etween  Southeast  Asia  and  the  Islamic  world,  
especially  to  accelerate  the dissemination of Islam itself. Zheng He, as a 
Ming Dynasty envoy, supported independence from the Malacca Kingdom at 
that time and became a driving force in the spread of Islam. 
The discussion about Zheng He and the diffusion of Islam so far has been 
dominated by discussions about Zheng He activities in Nusantara, especially in 
Java Island. Many Indonesian scholars discussed this topic such as Liem Thian 
Jo, Benny G. Setiono, Buya Ha mka, Mangaradja Onggang Parlindungan, Usman 
Effendi, Agus  Sujudi, Hartono  Kasmadi,  Wiyono  and  Heru  Christiyono. The 
spread of Chinese Muslims on Java and parts of Southeast Asia was during the 
Zheng He expedition involving thousands of people from va rious professions, 
including elite figures such as Ma Huan, Ha -san, Wang Ching -hung, Kung Wu 
Ping, and Fei Hsin are adherents of Islam. In each kingdom and the sultanate 
they visited, Zheng He built and placed ambassadors and consulates like Bong 
Swie Ho i n the Majapahit kingdom. The aim was to build diplomacy both 
economically and culturally between China and the local government at that 
time. 
Quoting  an  explanation  from Yuanzhi,  "Tuanku  Rao"  as  one  source, 
contains a section entitled "The Role of Chinese Hanafiyah Believers in 
Spreading Islam on Java (1411-1564)" who explained in detail about Zheng He's 
Fitri Rofiyarti 
30                 Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020 
 
 
activities at that time. These activities can be divided into two major activities.   
The first activity is the construction of mosques in Java, where Zheng He praying 
in these places, as written by Mangaradja Onggang Parlindungan in 1413. From 
1411-1416 Zheng managed to build a Chinese Muslim community (Hanafiyah) 
and several mosques located in Jakarta, Sembung, Lasem, Tuban, Gresik, 
Cirebon (Joratan), and Mojokerto (Cangki). 
Zheng He's second activity was building a Muslim community in the area of 
Sumatra. Zheng He successfully built for the first time in Kukang, and in the same 
year a Muslim community in Sambas, Kalimantar also established. In 1416 , 
Zheng He built a third community in West Sumatra in the Batanggadis area. This 
was also conveyed by Slamet Muljana in the book, “Runtuhnja Keradjaan - 
Keradjaan Hindu Djawa Dan Timbulnja Negara-Negara Islam Di Nusantara.” 
Unfortunately, Zheng He's contributions and the Muslim community in  
Javanese   history   and   the   formation   of   culture   itself   have   long   been 
hidden. Qurtuby uses the term "mummified" and borrows Adam Smith's 
term "Invisible Hand" to describe this irony.8 During this time, the existence 
of Islam in Indonesia by Muslim communities was believed to be spread by Arab 
and Guj arat (Indian) traders and Sufis from Persia. So far, only a small 
number of researchers, historians, and academics have known the existence 
and major contribution of the Chinese Muslim community in the process of 
Islamization in Indonesia. In fact, mentioning that many people still find it 
difficult to accept that the Chinese Muslim community plays an important role 
in the development of Islam in Indonesia, including Zheng He's own Islam as one 
of the figures in the Islamization process is still debated, subjects of History in 
Indonesian’s schools did not teach about it. 
In the research carried out, the author did not find any History or Islamic 
Religion  Education books in  schools,  both  from  the  Elementary School  (SD), 
Middle School (SMP), and High School (SMA) levels that alluded to  Zheng 
He figure. Similarly, public schools, in  the  curriculum  of  History  of  Islamic 
Civilization  in  Indonesia  at  the  level  of  Madrasah  Tsanawiyah  (Mts)  and 
Madrasah  Aliyah  (MA)  is  also  no  mention  of  the  presence  of  the  figure  
of Zheng He, especially in the topic of the spread of Islam in Indonesia, though 
this topic  entered in the curriculum set by the  government for the level of 
Senior High School (SMA) and Madrasah Aliyah (MA). 
Discussions about the history of the entry of Islam in these textbooks are 
still focused on th ree major theories such as those developed by Ahmad 
Mansur Suryanegara related to the origin and time of arrival. First, the Gujarat 
theory in which Islam is believed to come from the territory of Gujarat (India) 
through the role of  Muslim Indian merchants around the 1 3th century. 
Secondly, the Mecca theory in which Islam is believed to arrive in Indonesia 
directly from the Middle E ast through the services of Muslim Arab traders 
Popularity and Representation of Zheng He’s Image 
Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020                  31 
 
 
around the 7th century. Third, the Persian theory in  which Islam arrived in 
Indonesia through the role of Persian traders who on their way to Gujarat 
before going to the archipelago around the 13th century. 
In the book “Pendidikan Agama Islam dan Budi Pekerti”   for class XII 
SMA/MA/SMK/MAK which was published by the Ministry of  Education and 
Culture in  2015 based on the 2013 Curriculum, actually has mentioned little 
about China's contribution to the  Islamization process in Indonesia, as quoted 
from the following explanation. 
In the early st ages, the channel used in the process of Islamization in 
Indonesia was trade. This can be known through the existence of busy trade 
traffic in the 7th century AD  until the 16th century. This trading activity 
involved many nations in the world, including Arabs, Persians, Indians, and 
Chinese. T hey took part in trade in the Western, Southeast and E astern 
countries of the Asian Continent. 
 
However,    the    explanation    contained    is    only    limited    to    that 
paragraph. There   are   no   other   supporting   explanations,   especially   those 
concerning Zheng He expeditions or Chinese Muslims. Qurtuby9  explained that no 
mention of the contribution of Chinese Muslims in these theories was potential for 
disruption of national stability. Since 1960s several books that have elevated the 
role of Chinese (Chinese Muslims) in the Islamization of the Archipelago were 
banned from circulating by the New Order government. Since then efforts have 
been made to always reduce all major contributions of Chinese Muslims to various 
forms of Indonesian Islamic culture. This situation improved after the fall of the 
New Order regime in 1998. The reform movement  became the point where 
Indonesia began to recognize the contribution and change the rules that referred 
to anti -China, even to be able to celebrate and implement Chinese cultural 
traditions. 
 
Zheng He, Our not so Famous Idol 
The failure to discuss Zheng He and his contribution to Islamization in 
Indonesia was one of the factors that made Zheng He a less popular figure. 
Zheng He in Indonesia has not been known to many people. From the research 
conducted by the author, out of a total of 109 respondents only 30% knew or 
had heard of “Zheng He”. More than 70% said they did not know or had heard 
of “Zheng He”. In different questions, as many as 86 % knew Zheng He's figure 
with “Cheng Ho”, 14% did not know “Cheng Ho” at all. 
The better known name of Cheng Ho compared to Zheng He cannot be 
denied is the result of the great contribution of the existence of the H aji 
Muhammad Cheng Ho mosque, as found in Surabaya and Pandaan (Pasuruan 
Regency). Nevertheless,  Zheng  He,  through  Cheng  Ho's  name,  who  is  more 
Fitri Rofiyarti 
32                 Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020 
 
 
familiar to the public, was only known as a name. Who is the figure of Zheng He 
and what his contribution is still unknown to many circles, even the Muslim 
community itself. 
 
Figure 1. Popularity of Zheng He or Cheng Ho 
 
 
From the research conducted by the author, out of a total of 109 
respondents only 30% knew or had heard of “Zheng He”. More than 70% said 
they did not know or had heard of “Zheng He”. In different questions, as many 
as 86 % knew Zheng He's figure with “Cheng Ho”, 14% did not know “Cheng Ho” 
at all. 
The better known name of Cheng Ho compared to Zheng He cannot be 
denied is the result of the great contribution of the existence of the Haji 
Muhammad Cheng Ho mosque, as found in Surabaya and Pandaan (Pasuruan 
Regency). Nevertheless,  Zheng  He,  through  Cheng  Ho's  name,  who  is  more 
familiar to the public, was only known as a name. Who is the figure of Zheng He 
and what his contribution is still unknown to many circles, even the Muslim 
community itself. When given questions about who is Zheng He or Cheng Ho, 
as many as 68% have answered correctly, 22% consider Zheng He as Emperor, 
6% consider king, and there are 4% who consider Zheng He as an artist as shown 
in the following diagram. 
 
 
 
 

Popularity and Representation of Zheng He’s Image 
Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020                  33 
 
 
 
Figure 2. "Who is Zheng He or Cheng Ho?" 
 
There are still many wrong perceptions of Zheng He's figure (as many as 
32%) supporting the statement that Zheng He is still not popular compared 
to other explorer figures such as Ibn Batutta and Christopher Columbus. Of 
those same data showed that many who do not know the contributions of 
Zheng He or Ch eng Ho in sp reading Islam in Indonesia, on ly 46% of 
respondents who know about it. M any respondents showed surprise when 
they learned this fact. On the contrary, most of the respondents considered 
that after his arrival in Indonesia it w as Zheng He who converted to Islam. 
There were even some respondents who answered that Zheng He's 
contribution was expel the Dutch from Indonesia. The hi gh misperception 
about who Zheng He is and his contribution in Indonesia shows that there 
is still a stereotype that there is no common thread between China and 
Islam. As constructed in society: China is non-Muslim, even though the  
existence of Zheng He with his legacy managed to break this proposition. 
 
Image and Representation of Zheng He Image 
The failure to discuss Zheng He and his contribution to Islamization in 
Indonesia was one of the factors that made Zheng He a less popular figure. 
Zheng He in Indonesia has not been known to many people. From the research 
conducted by the resemblance, or even a constructed portrait. These 
representations can be individuals, social groups, ideas, or events. Quoting from 
Hall,10 "The word representation or representation does sort of carry with it the 

Fitri Rofiyarti 
34                 Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020 
 
 
notion that som ething w as there already and, through the media, has been 
represented." This representation can trigger st ereotypes that often lead to 
misrepresentations and misconstructions. 
Related to Zheng He, each media has a different representation of the 
portrait of the figure, both physical and character depictions of Zheng He. The 
physical portraits of Zheng He figures represented by the media are shown in 
the following table. 
Table 1. Zheng He’s Portrait Description 
 
 
From    the data    that    the    researchers    got,  some of    Zheng    He's 
figure images formed among them are shown in the following table. 
Table 2. Representation of Zheng He’s Characters 
 
Zheng He’s Portrait Description Positive 
Representation 
Negative 
Representation 
“His eyebrows were like swords and his 
forehead wide, like a tiger’s. When he gave an 
order, his sailors obeyed immediately.” 
Forceful - 
“From his deck, Zheng saw his ships 
spread behind him as far as he could see. 
He loo ked with pride at  the vessels that  
followed his out of the  harbor of Luijia, n ear 
Nanjing, China’s capital.” 
Charismatic - 
“He showed a talent for strategy, and 
commanded the respect and obedience of  
others. He also won Chenzu’s complete trust.” 
Intelligent - 
“We know the emperor’s exact words 
because Zheng He carved reports about the  
expeditions  into  stone  tablets  that still exist.” 
Diligent - 
Representation of Zheng He’s Character 
Positive Representation Negative Representation 
Assertive - 
Firm and have extensive insight - 
Wise, smart, obedient Muslims - 
Firm, kind, generous, wise, smart - 
Role model 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
Popularity and Representation of Zheng He’s Image 
Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020                  35 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
Zheng He or Cheng Ho figures can be said to be still less popular in 
Indonesia. The unpopularity of Zheng He and his contribution is either due to 
the lack of material content or the non-mention of Zheng He in the history of 
the spread of Islam in Indonesia, especially in history learning books. This 
is an important factor because historical knowledge is mostly obtained from 
teaching and learning in schools. In addition, the strong stereotype of "China is 
not Muslim" or  the absence of a relationship between China and Islam also 
became a barrier to the popularity of Zheng He. 
 
Endnotes 
1 Maritime Asia,  “Admiral Zheng He’s Voyages to the ‘West Oceans’ (2014). 
2 PBS  Learning  Media,  https://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/marco -polo-ibn-
battuta- zheng-he/lesson-plan/ 
3 Nicholas D  Kristof, 1492: The Prequel, (New York  Times Magazine, 6  June: 1999). Kristof, 
Nicholas D, 1492: The Prequel, (New York Times Magazine, 6 June: 1999). 
4 Khong  Yuanzhi,  “On  the  Relationship  between  Cheng  Ho  and  Islam  in  Southeast  
Asia”, (Southeast Asian Studies in China: Kyoto Review of Southeast Asia Issue 10 August 2008). 
5 Diah Ayuningrum, “Akulturasi Budaya Cina Dan Islam Dalam Arsitektur Tempat Ibadah Di 
Kota Lasem Jawa Tengah”, (Sabda : Jurnal Kajian Kebudayaan 12 (2) : 1999),122. 
https://doi.org/10.14710/sabda.12.2.122-135. 
6 Edward L Dreyer. Zheng He -China and the Oceans in the Early Min g Dynasty, 1405-1433. 
(Pearson Education, Inc., 2007) 
Representation of Zheng He’s Character 
Positive Representation Negative Representation 
Smart,    businessman,    adept    at 
preaching  with  Chinese  Muslim 
culture 
- 
A true adventurer, wise, heard by 
many people, friendly 
- 
A strict and influential admiral - 
Firm,     authoritative,     respected, 
smart 
- 
Gentle, wise - 
Strong - 
obedient, firm - 
Wise - 
Firm,     role     model,     strategic, 
charismatic 
- 
Firmly authoritative - 
Fitri Rofiyarti 
36                 Volume 5, Nomor 1, Mei 2020 
 
 
7 Wang Min-qin. 2018. What Are Reflected by the Navigations of Zheng He and Christopher 
Columbus. (International Relations and Diplomacy 6 (2), 2018), 110 –21. 
https://doi.org/10.17265/2328-2134/2018.02.005. 
8 Sumanto Al Qurtuby, The Imprint of Zheng He and Chinese Muslims in Indonesia ’ s Past 1, 
2018. 
9 Sumanto Al Qurtuby, The Tao of Islam :  Cheng Ho and the Legacy of Chinese Muslims in 
Pre - Modern Java, (2018). 
10 Stuart Hall, Representation and The Media, (Media Education Foundation Transcript: 
1997). 
 
References 
Ayuningrum, Diah. Akulturasi Budaya Cina Dan Islam Dalam Arsitektur 
Tempat Ibadah Di Kota Lasem, Jawa Tengah,  (Sabda : Jurnal Kajian 
Kebudayaan 12 (2) : 1999),122. https://doi.org/10.14710/sabda.12.2.122-
135. 
Dreyer, Edward L. Zheng He-China and the Oceans in the Early Ming 
Dynasty, 1405-1433. (Pearson Education, Inc., 2007) 
Hall,  Stuart,  Representation  and  The  Media,  (Media  Education  
Foundation Transcript: 1997). 
Khong Yuanzhi, On the Relationship between Cheng Ho and Islam in Southeast 
Asia, ( Southeast Asian Studies in Chin a: Kyoto Review of Southeast Asia 
Issue 10 August 2008). 
Kristof, Nicholas D, 1492: The Prequel, (New York Times Magazine, 6 
June:1999). 
Maritime Asia, “Admiral Zheng He’s Voyages to the ‘West Oceans’ (2014). 
Min-qin, Wang. 2018. What Are Reflected by the Navigations of Zheng He 
and Christopher Columbus. (International Relations and Diplomacy 6 (2), 
2018), 110–21. https://doi.org/10.17265/2328-2134/2018.02.005. 
PBS  Learning  Media,  https://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/marco-
polo- ibn-battuta-zheng-he/lesson-plan/ 
Qurtuby, Sumanto Al, The Imprint of Zheng He and Chinese Muslims in 
Indonesia ’ s Past 1, 2018. 
Qurtuby, Sumanto Al, The Tao of Islam : Cheng Ho and the Legacy of 
Chinese Muslims in Pre-Modern Java, (2018) 
Yuanzhi, Khong, On the Relationship between Cheng Ho and Islam in Southeast 
Asia, (Southeast Asian Studies in China: Kyoto Review of Southeast Asia 
Issue 10 August 2008).Sumanto Al Qurtuby, The Imprint of Zheng He and 
Chinese Muslims in Indonesia ’ s Past 1, 2018. 