Islam Nusantara: Jurnal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 07 (1), 2026: 27-47 
E-ISSN: 2722-8975 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.47776/islamnusantara.v7i1  
 
Author correspondence email: squrtuby@gmail.com   
Available online at:  
Copyright (c) 2026 by Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture 
 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures: 
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese 
Muslims in Nusantara 
 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
Universitas Kristen Satya Wacana, Salatiga, Indonesia 
 email: squrtuby@gmail.com  
 
*correspondence author 
 
 Article history: Received: November 16, 2025, Accepted: November 29, 2025, Published: January 1, 
2026 
 
Abstract 
This study re -examines the formation of Muslim communities in the 
Malay–Indonesian world through the presence of Zheng He, with 
particular attention to the role of Chinese Muslim networks in the early 
history of Islam in Indonesia. Employing a qualitative approach 
grounded in historical and library-based research, the study focuses its 
analysis on Javanese historical evidence related to diplomacy, maritime 
networks, and religious life prior to the period of European expansion. 
The findings demonstrate that Chinese Muslim networks were deeply 
embedded in  diplomatic relations, maritime trade, and religious 
practices in the archipelago from an early period. Chinese Muslim 
influences contributed to the shaping of local Islamic practices while 
also broadening the cultural horizons of early Muslim communities in 
the region. A reassessment of several dominant Islamization theories 
further suggests that Sino -Indonesian Muslim interactions provide 
strong grounds for recognizing the “Chinese theory” as an important 
perspective alongside Arab, Persian, and Indian th eories. This article 
makes a significant contribution to scholarship on Islamization and the 
history of Islam in the Malay–Indonesian world by affirming the plural 
genealogies of Indonesian Islam and enriching analytical frameworks 
on diaspora, mobility, a nd intercultural exchange in the making of 
Muslim societies in Nusantara. 
Keywords: 
Cheng Ho, China, Chinese Muslim, Indonesian Islam, Java, Nusantara  
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
28     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
Abstrak 
Studi ini meneliti kembali pembentukan komunitas Muslim di dunia 
Melayu-Indonesia melalui kehadiran Zheng He, dengan perhatian 
khusus pada peran jaringan Muslim Tionghoa dalam sejarah awal Islam 
di Indonesia. Dengan menggunakan pendekatan kualitatif yang 
berlandaskan penelitian historis dan berbasis pustaka, studi ini 
memfokuskan analisisnya pada bukti sejarah Jawa yang berkaitan 
dengan diplomasi, jaringan maritim, dan kehidupan keagamaan 
sebelum periode ekspansi Eropa. Temuan menunjukkan bahwa jaringan 
Muslim Tionghoa tertanam kuat dalam hubungan diplomatik, 
perdagangan maritim, dan praktik keagamaan di kepulauan tersebut 
sejak awal. Pengaruh Muslim Tionghoa berkontribusi pada 
pembentukan praktik Islam lokal sekaligus memperluas cakrawala 
budaya komunitas Muslim awal di wilayah tersebut. Penilaian ulang 
beberapa teori Is lamisasi dominan lebih lanjut menunjukkan bahwa 
interaksi Muslim Tionghoa-Indonesia memberikan landasan yang kuat 
untuk mengakui "teori Tionghoa" sebagai perspektif penting di 
samping teori Arab, Persia, dan India. Artikel ini memberikan 
kontribusi signifi kan terhadap kajian tentang Islamisasi dan sejarah 
Islam di dunia Melayu -Indonesia dengan menegaskan genealogi 
pluralistik Islam Indonesia dan memperkaya kerangka analitis tentang 
diaspora, mobilitas, dan pertukaran antarbudaya dalam pembentukan 
masyarakat Muslim di Nusantara. 
Kata Kunci: 
Cheng Ho, Jawa, Kepulauan, Muslim Indonesia, Muslim Tionghoa, 
Tiongkok 
Introduction  
In a conversation with me more than two decades ago, the late Abdurrahman 
Wahid (1940-2009), a renowned scholar of Islam and the fourth President of 
Indonesia, who once claimed to have Chinese blood, said as follows:   
“Chinese Muslims had indeed played an important role in 
introducing and spreading Islam in Java and other places in 
Nusantara. They introduced rationalistic Hanafi Islam and 
philosophical Sufism (tasawuf falsafi). At first, they resided on 
the northern coast of Java before moving and spreading to other 
places. Chinese role and contributions to the spread of Islam 
can be seen from the presence of Sampotoalang Mosque in 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  29 
 
Semarang and a grave named Shaikh Abdul Qodir Al -Shini in 
Trowulan, a former capital city of the Majapahit Kingdom. The 
word “ al-shini” indicates that he was a Chinese Muslim. 
Indeed, he was a Chinese Muslim whose original name was Tan 
Kim Han.” (Al Qurtuby, 2003) 
 
As Wahid said, Chinese Muslims have indeed played a significant role 
in introducing Islam in Java or Nusanta ra. One of the legendary Chinese 
Muslim figures, directly or indirectly, who contributed to the spread of Islam 
in Java and other locations in Nusantara, was Zheng He or Cheng Ho (1371 -
1433), whose legacy can still be witnessed today, and his presence in 
Nusantara in the fifteenth century has inspired the birth of multiple literary 
works (books or poetry) and creative arts (including movies, dramas, and 
dances) in contemporary Indonesia.  
For example, on Friday, June 25, 2004, a new dance combining 
Javanese traditions and Chinese cultural expressions was performed at the 
Sono Seni Studio in the Kemlayan area of Solo, Central Java. This dance is 
called Bedhaya Layar Cheng Ho (Bedhaya on Sail  to Cheng Ho) . The new 
work is rooted in the Bedhaya dance form, a distinctive ancient dance form, 
and combines it with Beijing Opera -style dance movements . As its name 
suggests, this dance refers to the legendary voyages of the great Chinese 
admiral and navigator Cheng Ho or Zheng He in the early 15th century. 
This work was conducted by several experts, not only from Indonesia 
but also from Singapore and Taiwan. Among them are Peter Sau Jia Liang 
from Singapore (as scriptwriter, dramaturg, and dance assist ant), Themis Lin 
Pei Ann from Taiwan (as researcher), Thio Tiong Gie from Indonesia, and a 
puppeteer Poo Tay Hie from Semarang and, certainly, Bambang Besur 
Suryono, a dance artist who was educated in Javanese dance and deepened his 
knowledge of arts and culture at the Indonesian Arts College in Surakarta. 
What makes this performance interesting is that it involves various 
artistic elements: the gamelan orchestra accompanying the dance is paired with 
Islamic vocals and lyrics as well as Javanese sindhenan (traditional singing). 
In addition, there is also a performance of the Poo Tay Hie puppet show, 
Chinese poetry recitations, and Pat Im music (a form of Chinese music played 
by Javanese people living in the Balong area of Solo). The costumes chosen 
also represent a blend of Chinese and Javanese cultures. The “cross -cultural” 
atmosphere between China and Java is clearly reflected throughout the 
production, from the initial research and creative process of Bedhaya Layar 
Cheng Ho to the performance and the costu mes of the dancers, to illustrate a 
truly fitting depiction of the cultural acculturation among Chinese, Islamic, and 
Javanese traditions. 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
30     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
The voyages of Cheng Ho themselves have left an extraordinary 
historical legacy across the regions he visited, includ ing Nusantara and other 
parts of Southeast Asia (Adi Ignatius, 2001). These maritime expeditions have 
inspired hundreds of scholarly and literary works, both fictional and non -
fictional, as well as technological innovations in European maritime and 
shipbuilding sciences following the age of exploration he helped inaugurate. 
The popular legend of “Sinbad the Sailor” ( Sindibadu al -Bahri) from the 
Middle East, a fictional mariner and the hero of a story -cycle, is also said to 
have drawn inspiration from Cheng Ho’s legendary journeys (Seagrave, 2004). 
In Indonesia, especially on the island of Java, one can still find undeniable 
historical traces of cultural and social encounters that emerged as a side effect 
of Cheng Ho’s “diplomatic” and goodwill missions. 
In addition, several literary works tell stories about Cheng Ho/Sam Po 
Kong, including those by S ylado (2004). The oral tale of Dampu Awang, 
deeply rooted among communities along Java’s northern coast, is also believed 
to have been influenced by the legend of Cheng Ho. For this reason, a series 
of international conferences by various organizations in Indonesia, Singapore, 
Malaysia, and other places to commemorate Cheng Ho’s monumental voyages 
is an appropriate and insightful initiative. Cheng Ho is, w ithout doubt, a 
historical figure who deserves remembrance. 
This article studies the history of Cheng Ho in Nusantara (modern-day 
Indonesia), especially Java, one of Nusantara’s vibrant and cosmopolitan 
maritime areas before the European colonial era, as a  window into 
investigating the legacy of Chinese Muslims in their roles of introducing and 
developing Islam in Indonesia’s past. The presence of Cheng Ho, along with 
his Chinese Muslim fellows (e.g., Ma Huan, Fei Shin, Heo Shien, and others), 
as well as th e existence of Sino -Indo Muslim cultures, mirrors the 
contributions of Chinese Muslims in the introduction and spread of Islam on 
the Malay-Indonesian archipelago. 
 
Methods  
This study adopts a qualitative, interdisciplinary methodology that integrates 
historical inquiry, textual analysis, and cultural comparison. Primary sources , 
such as babad, hagiographies, classical travel accounts, and early records of 
Chinese and Persianate presence in the Indonesian archipelago , were closely 
examined to identify narr ative patterns of mobility, conversion, and 
intercultural encounter. These materials were triangulated with secondary 
scholarship on maritime trade, diaspora communities, and Islamic cultural 
formations along the Javanese coast. In addition, archival field  notes and 
documentation from earlier observations of performance traditions were 
revisited to analyze iconographic motifs, ritual functions, and embodied 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  31 
 
practices that reflect long-term cultural exchange. This combination of textual, 
historical, and perf ormative analysis enables the study to interpret Javanese 
coastal arts as dynamic repositories of Sino –Indo Muslim interactions, 
revealing how aesthetic forms preserve complex layers of religious, political, 
and diasporic memory. 
 
Result and Discussion 
A Brief History of Cheng Ho 
Who was Cheng Ho, and why was his influence so profound? Cheng Ho was 
the name given by Cheng Tzu or Chu Teh, who was better known as Emperor 
Yung Lo, the third emperor of the Ming Dynasty, reigning from 1403 to 1424. 
His original name was Ma Ho (born in 1370 CE), who came from a poor Hui 
ethnic family in Yunnan. The Hui are a Chinese Muslim community of mixed 
Mongol-Turkic descent. Because he served to help overthrow Emperor Kien 
Wen, Cheng Ho was eventually granted a n important position by Emperor 
Yung Lo as commander of thousands of palace servants in the Imperial 
Household Department, serving the emperor as secret police (Seagrave, 2004). 
This was a highly influential position, unlike the appointment of a new head 
of Opus Dei by the Pope in the Vatican. 
As a mark of imperial trust, Cheng Ho was later granted command of 
a grand maritime expedition through an Imperial Decree, designating him as 
Commander in Chief. Meanwhile, the positions of deputy and secretary were 
held respectively by Vice Admiral Heo Sh ien (Husain) and by Ma Huan and 
Fei Shin (Faisal). Serving as interpreters of the Arabic language, in addition to 
Ma Huan—who was indeed fluent in Arabic—was Hassan, an imam from the 
former capital city of Sin An (Chang’an).  In carrying out this “maritime 
diplomacy policy,” Emperor Yung Lo deployed a fleet consisting of 62 large 
ships accompanied by 225 junks (smaller vessels) and 27,550 officers and 
soldiers, including astronomers, politicians, cartographers, linguists, 
geographers, physicians, scribes, an d religious scholars. This story was later 
recorded, among others, in the Ming Shi (“History of the Ming Dynasty”). 
Since 1405, from the beginning of Cheng Ho’s voyages until he died 
in 1433, he had undertaken seven voyages and visited more than 37 countri es 
— from various ports in Nusantara and the Indian Ocean to Sri Lanka, Quilon 
(Ceylon), Cochin, Calicut, Hormuz, Jeddah, Mogadishu, and Malindi. From 
Champa to India, and from along the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea to the coast 
of Kenya. In terms of both scale and duration, Cheng Ho’s expeditions far 
surpassed those of any European explorers, such as Christopher Columbus, 
Vasco da Gama, Ferdinand Magellan, Francis Drake, and others. 
Because of his extraordinary achievements, Cheng Ho became 
increasingly mythologized and was given the imperial title Ma San Bao (“Ma, 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
32     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
the Three Jewels”). This title is a play on a type of Chinese affectionate 
expression. In today’s Chinese communities in some areas of Indonesia, Cheng 
Ho has become a revered mythological figure . He is not only admired and 
honored as a “Great Navigator,” but also worshiped as a “deity” in various 
temples under the name Sam Po Kong, particularly by followers of traditional 
Chinese ancestral religions. Over time, Cheng Ho has been known by various 
honorific names, including Sam Poo Tay Djin, Sam Poo Tay Kam, and Sam 
Poo Toa Lang. 
The phenomenon of “deifying” and worshiping Cheng Ho in temples 
is a form of historical anachronis m, mainly because Cheng Ho was a mere 
human being and (let us not forget) a Muslim. Even more regrettably, the 
history of Cheng Ho is often written in a hagiographic manner, exaggerated, 
and tending to “go beyond the human realm” rather than through a crit ical 
historical approach. As a result, Cheng Ho is often portrayed as an almost 
perfect human being, belonging more to the world of myth than to that of 
history. In reality, however, Cheng Ho was an ordinary Chinese Muslim like 
many others, with his own hi storical limitations. Perhaps his greatest 
contribution was in establishing friendships and relationships between China 
and other nations or kingdoms around the world that were strengthened 
through cultural exchange, which remains visible in Java and other  locations 
in Indonesia. Nevertheless, it is a fact that Indonesians, including the Chinese, 
tend to see and treat Cheng Ho in a different way. Some view Cheng Ho as an 
ordinary person with extraordinary achievement, while others treat him as a 
“superhuman” or “distinctive ancestor” who deserves to be venerated.  
In Java, there has indeed emerged what I refer to as the “Sino–Javanese 
Muslim Cultures,” stretching from Banten, Jakarta, Cirebon, Semarang, 
Demak, Jepara, Lasem, to Gresik and Surabaya, resulting from the encounters 
between Cheng Ho and other Chinese Muslims with the Javanese world. The 
manifestations of the Sino –Javanese Muslim cultures are evident not only in 
various Islamic religious architectures (mosques) that exhibit Javanese, 
Islamic, and Chinese elements, but also in artistic and literary traditions, such 
as batik motifs, woodcarving, and other cultural forms.  
 
The Chinese Influences in the Islamization of Nusantara 
Between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries, Islam was no longer appearing 
as a sporadic community but had become a well -structured society with an 
organized system. During this time, an important historical turning point also 
occurred in Java: the fall of the Majapahit Kingdom (1293-1527), followed by 
the establishment of Islamic kingdoms (vorstendommen) along Java’s northern 
coast, which were centered in Demak (Toer, 1925-2006). Since the political 
revolution of 1478, which marked the fall of the Majapahit Kingdom and the 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  33 
 
founding of the Demak Sultanate (also known as Demak Bintara), the coastal 
regions that had once been the backbone of the kingdom’s economy, with their 
ports serving as centers of international trade, gradually separated themselves, 
and some even became “no man’s lands”, such as Gresik.  
Raden Patah (1 455-1518), as the first ruler of the Demak sultanate, 
was a foreigner (a Chinese Muslim named Jin Bun or Jin Wen) with a strong 
obsession with building a maritime Islamic state on the northern coast of Java. 
However, his ambition came to an end after Treng gana (Malay Annals: Tung 
Ka Lo) died in 1546 during a battle against Panarukan, which had allied itself 
with the Portuguese. Meanwhile, his successors lacked the qualifications of 
capable leaders; even among Raden Patah’s descendants, long and bloody 
conflicts broke out until finally Senapati (Sutawijaya, 1537 -1601) succeeded 
in overthrowing Jaka Tingkir or Hadiwijaya, the ruler of the Pajang sultanate 
(r. 1549-1582) and establishing the Islamic Mataram Empire in the Javanese 
inland. 
Ascending to the throne in 1475, Patah remained a vassal of Majapahit 
until 1478. After legitimizing the Demak sultanate as the successor state to the 
Majapahit kingdom, with Walisongo appointing him the Sultan of Demak, 
Raden Patah took the title Panembahan Jimbun, meaning a “s trong person, 
(Muljana, 1968)” who was able to defeat and reach victory over the giant 
Hindu-Buddhist kingdom of Majapahit. Thus, the meaning of Jin Bun is 
synonymous with the Arabic “Fatah” or “Patah” (a Javanized Arabic).  
According to Abdurrahman Wahid (in a conversation with me in 
2002), besides Jin Bun, the actors contributing to the fall of Majapahit 
(thereby, the founding of the Demak kingdom) were Maulana Ishak (the father 
of Sunan Giri), Sunan Ngudung (the father of Sunan Kudus), and Tan Kim 
Han, an eminent Chinese Muslim leader, mentioned in the opening paragraph 
of this article.     
In the meantime, the Walisongo Supreme Council (Dewan Wali) had 
not yet established its authority because its presence was still in infancy. It was 
only during the Sultan Trenggana era (r. 1505 -1513 & 1521-1546), Demak’s 
greatest sultan, that the kingdom's political territory became clear. Trenggana’s 
political policy, unlike his predecessors (Patah and Pate Unus), was more 
focused on building a land power with caval ry forces than establishing a 
maritime power. In so doing, Trenggana allied with the Chinese community, 
represented by their prominent leader, Babah Liem Mo Han (also known as 
Babah Liem), who was also a Muslim. The target of this Javanese -Chinese 
secret alliance was to destroy the Portuguese, but it failed.  Babah Liem not 
only mobilized Chinese forces to fight against the Portuguese but also is 
credited as the architect of the Mantingan Mosque in Jepara, Central Java. 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
34     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
Therefore, it is not surprising that t his mosque has Chinese elements and 
ornaments (Toer, 1925-2006). 
Babah Liem was a leader and prominent figure of Nan Lung 
(“Southern Dragon”), an overseas Chinese organization, seeking to preserve 
the civilization and culture of their ancestral land, which was highly respected 
by Chinese communities along the northern coast of Java  (Toer, 1925-2006). 
Nan Lung was established after the legendary expedition of Cheng Ho. It is 
unclear whether Cheng Ho himself instructed his followers to build Nan Lung 
or his l oyalists, who voluntarily established this Chinese organization as a 
medium to channel and build a network with Chinese communities in 
Nusantara and/or mainland China.   
Through Nan Lung  and the Chinese community, Babah Liem was 
appointed as a liaison between Lao Sam (Lasem) and Toa-lang (Semarang), 
besides serving as a representative of the Chinese community to Demak. Liem 
Mo Han, it should be noted, was not the only eminent Chinese Musl im figure 
at the time (fifteenth and sixteenth centuries). Other important Chinese Muslim 
figures included Coa Mie An and Gouw Eng Cu, the latter being the leader and 
elder of the Chinese community in Lasem. The presence of Chinese Muslims 
was not only recorded by local accounts but also by foreign ones.   
For example, Portuguese traveler Tome Pires  (Pires, 1944), Chinese 
chronicler Ma Huan  (Huan, 1970 ), and Dutch observer Loedewicks  (Al 
Qurtuby, 2003) all recorded the presence of Chinese Muslims in these coastal 
regions. Furthermore, some Indonesian scholars, such as Slamet Muljana, S. 
Wardi, and Pangeran Hadiwidjaja, also identified several Chinese Muslim 
figures in pre-colonial Nusantara, such as Sunan Kalijaga (Gan Si Cang or Oei 
Sam Ik), Ki Ageng  Gribig (Siauw Dji Bik), Ki Ageng Pengging (Heng Pa 
Hing), Sunan Bonang (Bo Bing Nang), and Sultan Pajang (Na Pao Tjing)  
(Graaf, 1981). The Chinese Muslims who settled in Java were the  side 
effect (or byproduct) of the long -standing relationship between  Java and 
China, which had long been established since ancient times. 
 
Sino-Nusantara Relations: A Historical Retrospect 
The relations between Nusantara, especially Java (in Chinese texts: She-po, 
Zhao-wa) and China, both in terms of “diplomatic” (political) relations 
between the two countries/kingdoms and trade contacts, have existed since 
classical times, long before Islam arrived in the region. Some historians have 
acknowledged this issue  (Vlekke, 1943. The Sino -Nusantara relationship 
continued and was more intensive, particularly when China was ruled by the 
Ming Dynasty (c. 1368 –1644 AD), which showed considerable appreciation 
for the Muslim community there.  
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  35 
 
The Ming Shi (“History of the Ming Dynasty”), on one hand, and the 
accounts compiled during Cheng Ho’s voyages, especially the Ying-yai Sheng-
lan written by Ma Huan (around 1416), on the other, clearly show that trade 
activities between China and Nusantara, particularly Java and Sumatra, during 
that period (around the fifteenth century) increased significantly (Huan, 1970), 
and within Java itself, the role of the Chinese community in commerce and 
maritime affairs also grew over time (Lombard, 1996) & (Reid, 1992).  
At the diplomatic level, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, 
political relations between Java and China were also stable. Around 1410, the 
Chinese government (Ming Dynasty) officially took Java’s (i.e., Majapahit’s) 
side against Malacca (Melaka), which was claiming sovereignty over 
Palembang (in Chinese texts: Kukang), and  sent a letter containing this 
decision to the ruler of Majapahit. This meant that Java’s supremacy over 
Srivijaya (c. 671-1025), a Buddhist kingdom based on the island of Sumatra, 
was formally recognized and legitimized, a matter that had been disputed an d 
unresolved since the expedition of Kertanegara (r. 1268 -1292), the greatest 
king of the Singasari kingdom, in 1275 against the Malay kingdom. 
Among the various pieces of information gathered from Chinese 
sources, perhaps the most interesting is what is r eported in the  Ming 
Shi and Ying-yai Sheng-lan regarding the Chinese communities from Canton 
(Kwangchou), Zhangzhou (Chang-chou), Quanzhou (Chuan-chou), and other 
regions of southern China who had left China and settled in the eastern coastal 
ports, especially Tuban, Gresik, and Surabaya, all in East Java. According to 
these texts, most of the Chinese inhabitants along Java’s northern coast in the 
early fifteenth century lived in relative prosperity, and most interestingly, some 
had already embraced  Islam and were devout in their religious observance  
(Groendeveldt, 1960). 
The testimony of Ma Huan (courtesy name Zongdao, 1380 -1460), a 
Chinese Muslim explorer, translator, and travel writer who accompanied 
several of Cheng Ho’s expeditions, regarding the Chinese from Canton, 
Zhangzhou, Quanzhou, and other southern coastal regi ons of China who had 
embraced Islam, is, in fact, not surprising. These regions were historically 
known as centers of Muslim communities in China, formed through centuries 
of interaction between the Chinese and the Arabs. Lo Hsiang Lin, in his study 
“Islam in Canton in the Sung Period,”  notes that the Chinese had already 
encountered Islam during its earliest centuries, as far back as the 7th century 
CE (Eberhard, 1967). The Chinese Annals from the Tang Dynasty (618 –960) 
also record the presence of Muslim se ttlements in Canton, Zhangzhou, 
Quanzhou, and other ports along the southern coast of China. 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
36     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
One of the most compelling historical proofs of Muslim existence in 
this region is the presence of two ancient mosques in Canton: Kwang Tah Se 
(“The Great Minaret Mosque”) and Chee Lin Se (“The Mosque of the Single 
Horn”), which several historians consider to be among the oldest mosques in 
the world, second only to the Prophet’s Mosque (Masjid Nabawi) built by the 
Prophet Muhammad in Madinah  (Ma, 1979). Thus, Ma Hua n’s firsthand 
account of Muslim Chinese communities from Canton, Zhangzhou, and 
Quanzhou residing and trading in the ports of Gresik, Tuban, and Surabaya in 
the early fifteenth century appears entirely plausible and historically 
consistent. 
The existence o f Chinese Muslims in Java during the late medieval 
period (particularly the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries) was not limited to 
East Java, as observed by Ma Huan, but was widespread along the entire 
northern coast of the island. The Dutch traveler Loedew icks, who visited 
Banten in the sixteenth century, as recorded by Stutterheim in his scholarly 
account of the Majapahit court, also witnessed the existence of this Chinese 
Muslim community, which in VOC (the Dutch East Indies Company) 
documents was referre d to as  geschoren Chineezen  (“shaven Chinese”)  
(Stutterheim, 1948). Evidence of the existence of Chinese Muslims in Java and 
even in Southeast Asia during these centuries was also provided by Ibn Battuta, 
the traveler from the Maghreb, who in the mid -fifteenth century journeyed 
around the world, exploring coastal regions from Arabia to China and 
Southeast Asia, as described in his book Rihlah ibn Battutah, edited by Thalal 
Harb (Battuta, 1964). 
 
The Chinese Traces in Javanese Chronicles and Local Traditions 
The information obtained from the direct observations above strongly supports 
Javanese traditions regarding the origins of the spread of Islam in Java. These 
traditions were generally preserved in the babad (chronicles) texts composed 
later (during the Isl amic Mataram period, particularly during the reign of 
Sultan Agung, r. 1613 -1645). Although wrapped in myth, the information 
described in the babad reflects the cosmopolitan atmosphere that once existed 
in the coastal ports of Java. The emerging new vibran t communities in these 
northern coastal areas ( pesisiran) later managed to challenge and overthrow 
the agrarian power of Majapahit in the interior or inland of Java (pedalaman). 
In fact, several local texts explicitly mention the presence of Chinese Muslims 
during the early development of Islam in Java, as shown in the Babad Tanah 
Djawi, Serat Kandaning Ringgit Purwa, Carita (Sejarah) Lasem, Babad 
Cerbon, Hikayat Hasanuddin, and others. 
Interestingly, almost all local Javanese historiographies tell that Raden 
Patah, the first ruler of Demak, was a Chinese Muslim. The only difference 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  37 
 
lies in Raden Patah’s genealogy. While local West Javanese texts link the 
legendary king’s origins to Mongol China (for instance, Hikayat Hasanuddin 
mentions his ancestor as Cek Ko Po from “Munggul” [Mongolia], while 
Sadjarah Banten refers to him as Cu-Cu), several local Central Javanese texts, 
such as the Babad Tanah Djawi , Serat Kanda, and Tembang Babad Demak,  
relate him to King Brawijaya of the Majapahit kingdom (perhaps, Brawi jaya 
V), who married a Chinese princess (some accounts name this Chinese 
princess Sio Ban Chi, the daughter of Shaikh Bentong or Kyai Bantong, who 
was also a Chinese Muslim). If Raden Patah were a Chinese Muslim, the 
Demak sultanate could be considered a Chinese regime. 
Furthermore, folktales from various coastal regions of Java also 
mention Chinese Muslim figures who played significant roles in the process of 
Islamization in these areas, such as the story of Cie Gwie Wan, the “right-hand 
man” of Sultan Had lirin and the founder of the woodcarving tradition in 
Jepara, who was popularly known as Sungging Badar Duwung for his mastery 
in the art of carving. The tomb of Cie Gwie Wan is in the Astana Sultan 
Hadlirin graveyard complex in Jepara, Central Java. 
In fact, according to the northern Javanese coastal local text, Serat 
Kandaning Ringgit Purwa , Sultan Hadlirin (the husband of Queen 
Kalinyamat) himself was a Chinese Muslim named Win -tang or Tjie Bin 
Thang. According to this local text, Hadlirin was originally a wealthy merchant 
whose ship was wrecked in a storm, and he was stranded in a place which later 
called Jung Mara (Jepara). The name “ jung” refers to the name of a Chinese 
ship, while “mara” or “moro” means “coming” in Javanese. It is said that he 
was converted to Islam by Sunan Kudus through the guidance of another 
Chinese Muslim, Rakim, and was given the new name Hadlirin, meaning 
“comer” or “newcomer.” 
Another notable Chinese Muslim figure, according to Java’s local 
traditions, is Kyai Telingsing o r “Mbah Sing” (Tan Ling Sing or The Ling 
Sing), who was a dakwah (proselytizing) partner of Sunan Kudus or Ja‘far 
Shadiq in Kudus. Muslims from various regions, not only Kudus but also other 
locations, venerate his grave in Kudus and continue to preserve h is teachings 
to this day. One of Telingsing’s teachings, still alive and remembered by local 
Muslims, is “solat sacolo saloho dongo sampurno,” which means “salat serves 
as a perfect prayer or supplication.” In Salatiga (still in Central Java), 
furthermore, especially in the Kalibening area, local Muslim traditions trace 
their origins to another Chinese Muslim, Lie Beng Ing (Al Qurtuby, 2003). 
Not only in Central and East Java, but narratives of Chinese Muslims 
also exist in West Java. For example, Cirebon’s local traditions and texts 
mention several prominent Chinese Muslim figures, such as Tan Eng Hoat (his 
title is Maulana Ifdhil Hanafi), Tan  Sam Cai or Muhammad Syafi‘i (an early 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
38     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
monetary expert in the Cirebon Sultanate), Kung Sam Pak or Muhammad 
Murjani (a descendant of Kung Wu Ping, the builder of a lighthouse in 
Sembung, Cirebon), and Tan Hong Tien Nio —better known as Putri Ong 
Tien—the Chinese Muslim wife of Sunan Gunung Jati (also known as Sayyid 
al-Kamil or Syarif Hidayatullah). Together with the sunan, these Chinese 
Muslim figures contributed both to the spread of Islam and the territorial 
expansion of the Cirebon Sultanate across West Java. 
Interestingly, local oral traditions of Chinese Muslims are found not 
only in Java but also in Bali. In the local Islamic tradition of Bali, one of the 
Wali Tujuh or “Seven Saints” (a group analogous to Java’s Walisongo) was a 
Chinese Muslim named Shaikh Abdul Qodir Muhammad, also known as The 
Kwan Pao Lie. His tomb lies in the village of Temukus (Labuan Aji), Banjar 
District, Buleleng Regency, Singaraja, and is locally revered as Keramat 
Karangrupit (Zen, 1998).  
Tan Yeok Seong, in his study of Nyai G ede Pinatih, a powerful and 
wealthy female merchant of Gresik of East Java, known in local tradition as 
the foster mother of Sunan Giri (Raden Paku), said that she was a Chinese 
Muslim woman descended from Shih Chin Ching (Shi Jinqing), an overlord 
(Yang Dipertuan Besar) and a wealthy businessman of Palembang during the 
Majapahit era. The name Pinatih is believed to be a localized adaptation 
(verbastering) of the Chinese term Pi Na Ti or Shi Da-jie (Seong, 1983). After 
the death of her father, Cheng Ho deci ded to choose his older brother to be a 
Chinese representative (“ambassador”) in Palembang. Due to an internal 
tension or a family conflict, Shi Da -jie (born as Shishi Daniangzi) went or 
migrated to Gresik. Later, because of her talent in business and mana gement, 
a Majapahit ruler appointed her as a “ syahbandar” (harbourmaster) of Gresik 
(Reid, 2017) (c. 1458-1483). Nyai Gede Pinatih is said to have been the main 
financial supporter behind the rise of Giri Kedaton, the Islamic kingdom 
founded by Sunan Giri. 
The Dutch historian de Graaf also noted that Sunan Giri (Raden Paku), 
though not Chinese himself, employed many Chinese Muslims as civil and 
military officers to administer his mini-kingdom, the Giri Kedaton. In his work 
Soerabaja in de XVII Eeuw van Koninkrijk tot Regentschap (“Surabaya in the 
17th Century: From Kingdom to Regency”), De Graaf recorded that around 
forty Chinese Muslims served under Sunan Dalem (Prabu Satmata), the second 
ruler of Giri Kedaton. 
The Babad Tanah Djawi (Balai Pustaka edition, IX: 67–68) recounts 
that during Giri’s war against Prince Pekik of Surabaya (Sultan Agung’s son -
in-law), its forces included not only modin, santri, ketib, and penghulu, but 
also about 200 Chinese Muslim soldiers. According to several well -
acknowledged accounts, the last war commander of Giri in its battle against 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  39 
 
Mataram was a Chinese Muslim named Endrasena, the adopted son of 
Panembahan Kawistuwa (also known as Mas Wetan), successor to Sunan 
Prapen. This figure remains recognized to this day in the a nnals of Javanese 
history (Budiman, 1979).  
 
Historical and Archeological Footprints of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims 
It is important to note that the existence of Chinese Muslims during the early 
spread of Islam in Java is evidenced not only by testimonies of foreign 
travelers, Chinese sources, Javanese local texts, and oral traditions, but also by 
numerous Islamic histo rical and archaeological remains that reveal a strong 
Chinese influence. These findings suggest the emergence, during the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries, of what may be called Sino-Indo Muslim Culture, an 
acculturation of Chinese, Islamic, and Nusantara/Indonesian civilizations. 
The stone carvings on the ancient Mantingan Mosque in Jepara, the 
mosque tower in Banten’s Pecinan quarter, the carved doors of Sunan Giri’s 
tomb in Gresik, the architecture of the Cirebon Palace and Sunyaragi Garden, 
the unique construction of Demak Mosque —particularly its saka tatal (pillar 
made of wood fragments) and turtle emblem—and the old Sekayu Mosque in 
Semarang, all demonstrate a strong infusion of Chinese aesthetic and structural 
influence. The most concrete historical legacies of the Chinese Muslim 
community, however, are the two ancient mosques in Jakarta: the Kali Angke 
Mosque, associated with Gouw Tjay, and the Kebon Jeruk Mosque, 
established by Tamien Dosol Seeng and Madam Cai. 
In the Sekayu Mosque, the oldest mosqu e in Semarang, Central Java 
(referred to as Masjid Pekayuan by Aboebakar Atjeh) (Atjeh, 1955), Chinese 
inscriptions and decorative motifs can still be seen along the roof beams. These 
are compelling archaeological signs of a historical intermingling of fai th 
(religion) and culture. Beyond these, several controversial ancient temples 
(kelenteng) are believed by some historians to have originally been mosques 
built by Chinese Muslims in the fifteenth or sixteenth centuries. These include 
the Ancol Temple in J akarta (also known as Kelenteng Nyai Ronggeng  or 
Bahtera Bhakti Temple ), the Talang Temple in Cirebon, the Gedung Batu 
(Sampokong) Temple in Simongan –Semarang, the Sampo Kong Temple in 
Tuban, and the Mbah Ratu Temple in Surabaya (Al Qurtuby, 2003). 
The Kelenteng Nyai Ronggeng (or Bahtera Bhakti Temple) in Ancol—
located about twenty-five meters from the Ancol Circuit—is linked to the story 
of Sam Po Swie Soe, a Chinese Muslim cook (chef) who accompanied Admiral 
Cheng Ho during his naval expeditions across th e world. According to oral 
legend, during Cheng Ho’s voyage to Sunda Kelapa (now Jakarta), his cook 
fell in love with a local ronggeng dancer named Sitiwati. The two eventually 
married, lived together until their deaths, and were buried at the temple 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
40     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
complex alongside Sitiwati’s father, Said Areli  (Choy, 1977) . French 
historians Denys Lombard and Claudine Salmon, who conducted extensive 
research on temples (kelenteng) in Jakarta and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara, 
suggested that the construction of the Ancol Temple in its current form, which 
is a relatively luxurious one, took place only around the 18th century; earlier, 
its structure had been much simpler (Salmon, 1993). In Surabaya’s Kelenteng 
Mbah Ratu, located in a slum area not far from Tanjung Perak Harbor, there is 
a tomb that is almost always adorned with flowers, incense, prayer beads, and 
the Qur’an, suggesting continuing veneration by both Muslim and Chinese 
communities to commemorate Cheng Ho’s visits.  
The Kelenteng Gedung Batu  (or Sampokong Temple) in Simongan, 
Semarang, also houses several revered tombs of Chinese Muslims, including 
Ong King Hong (Wang Ching -Hung), a close associate of Cheng Ho. The 
scholar Amen Budiman identifies him as a hist orical figure behind the 
legendary Kyai Dampo Awang (Budiman, 1979). The temple also contains the 
graves of Kyai and Nyai Tumpeng, believed to have been Cheng Ho’s cooks, 
and the tomb of Kyai Cundrik Bumi, thought to have served as his guard. In 
that templ e, there is also a  bedug (drum) inscribed with Chinese characters 
containing a proverb:  mo’len lan ing , which means “silently affirming the 
Qur’an with sound.” (Ambary, 2001) The temple later became as magnificent 
as it appears today after the land of the Simongan complex —the site of the 
Sam Po Kong Temple —was purchased around 1879 by Oei Tjie Sien, the 
father of Oei Tiong Ham, the wealthy merchant famously known as the 
“Nusantara Sugar King,” from a Jewish landowner named Yohanes (Zhi, 1996).  
Later, the site was converted into a  Confucian place of worship  (that 
is, transformed into a temple) by a wealthy Chinese man from Cirebon 
named Mayor Tan Tjie Kie  (1853–1920), who at the time was the head of 
the Kong Ju Kwan Association, based on a decree from the  Governor of the 
Dutch East Indies, Besluit dated July 22, 1898, No. 3. Eventually, a Confucian 
altar table was added to the site in the 1960s by Kho Sin Soan. 
Some artefacts showing the imprints of Cheng Ho and other Chinese 
Muslims in the past century of Nusantara were kept and well -preserved in 
several museums and cultural centers in Indonesia, Singapore, and Malaysia, 
including the LIEM Heritage Museum (Remba ng, Central Java), Taman 
Budaya Tionghoa -Indonesia (Sino -Indonesian Cultural Center), Museum 
Laksamana Cheng Ho dan Hakka (Admiral Cheng Ho and Hakka Museum), 
Museum Banda Aceh, or Cheng Ho Cultural Museum (in Melaka), among 
many others.  
 
 
 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  41 
 
Cheng Ho and the Flow of Early Chinese Migration to Nusantara 
Several of the controversial ancient temples mentioned earlier were very likely 
once mosques (in the simplest form), built by Chinese Muslim immigrants in 
Java and other places in Nusantara. These Chinese Muslim immigrants, along 
with those of non -Muslim Chinese, chose to settle on the archipelago rather 
than return to China for various reasons, including business opportunities, 
travel and leisure, political security, and even the desire to spread Islam among 
Chinese Muslims. Probably, the early Chinese Muslim communities inhabiting 
the northern coastal regions of Java consisted of independent merchants or 
political refugees fleeing the unstable sociopolitical climate in mainland China 
at that time. History notes that China experienced several political upheavals, 
leading to large -scale migrations of Chinese communities to coastal areas 
across Southeast Asia, including Java or Nusantara in general. 
One of the earliest political chaos was the rebellion of Muslims i n 
Canton and other Islamic centers in China around the eighth century. This 
“insurrection,” as it was called, was brutally suppressed by Huang Chou, who 
devastated Canton and other Islamic settlements in China  (Lann, 1967). 
Another major political event th at triggered a massive migration occurred at 
the end of the fourteenth century when the first emperor of the Ming Dynasty, 
Hung Wu, persecuted the middle class, entrepreneurs, and successful 
merchants who resisted paying taxes to the state. This resulted in a large-scale 
flight of capital and people abroad, transforming temporary travelers into 
permanent expatriates in new lands (Seagrave, 1999).  
In addition to these two major events, another possible cause for the 
presence of Chinese Muslims in Nusantara before the seventeenth century was 
the China–Mongol political expedition to the Singasari kingdom in East Java, 
in the late thirteenth century (c. 1293). This military expedition of 20,000 
Chinese–Mongol troops, intended as revenge against King Kertanegara , who 
had previously humiliated the Mongol ambassadors (Ming Qi) during the reign 
of Kublai Khan of the Yuan Dynasty (r. 1271 -1294). Kertanegara did so 
because he refused Kublai Khan’s request and demand for Kertanegara to 
“bow down” and be loyal to Khan’s  authority and power by paying “loyalty 
taxes” (upeti). Ultimately, the expedition failed after they were outwitted by 
Raden Wijaya, who later established the Majapahit kingdom.  
The connection between early Chinese Islam in Java and remnants of 
these Chinese–Mongol soldiers is not without basis. Jitsuo Kuwabara’s study 
shows that Muslim elites held significant influence during the Yuan (Mongol) 
Dynasty in China, and a substantial number of them held high -ranking 
positions (Kuwabara, 1928). According to Kuwabara, these Muslim elites 
influenced China–Mongol expansionist policies, not only to Java or Nusantara 
but also to Japan, Korea, and Champa. Some historians even record that the 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
42     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
deputy commander of the Chinese –Mongol army was a Muslim na med 
Alaudin Musafari (Ma, 1967).This has led to a strong assumption that part of 
the China–Mongol army that invaded Java consisted of Chinese Muslims. The 
theory gains further support from later Javanese traditions along the island’s 
northern coast, which associate early Chinese Muslims with a land called 
“Munggul” (clearly referring to “Mongol”). 
Furthermore, the most historically significant and monumental 
political event was certainly the  expedition of Cheng Ho  during the reign 
of Emperor Yung Lo  (r. 140 2-1424) of the  Ming Dynasty, which involved 
thousands of Chinese participants, many of whom were Muslims. In addition 
to the legendary  Cheng Ho, several high -ranking figures of the expedition —
such as Ma Huan, Ha San, Wang Ching-hung, Kung Wu Ping,  Fei Hsin, and 
others—were also known to be devout Muslims (Zhi, 1996). 
The expedition led by the great navigator Cheng Ho was not merely 
political and economic in nature but also carried a sort of “hidden agenda” of 
Islamization, as indicated by the placement of M uslim Chinese consuls and 
emissaries in every region he visited (Muljana, 1969). It is possible that some 
of the Chinese Muslims who joined Cheng Ho’s entourage were unwilling to 
return to their homeland —either due to business opportunities in new, more 
promising regions, political comfort, or religious motivation to spread the 
message of Islam in “non -Muslim lands.” The historical footprints left by 
Cheng Ho are strongly felt in the life of Javanese society, not only appearing 
through oral traditions in th e mythical figure of Kyai Dampuawang, but also 
through several historical relics such as the lighthouse in Cirebon and various 
ancient temples along the northern coast of Java associated with Cheng Ho. 
These Chinese immigrants, most of whom were men, then married 
local women—either noblewomen from the royal courts or commoners—as in 
the case of a Chinese Muslim who, according to local tradition, became known 
as “Babah China” and married a ronggeng dancer in Sunda Kelapa. From these 
intermarriages, the term China Peranakan emerged as a counterpart to China 
Totok. The fact that most Chinese migrants were men was due to the custom 
and imperial prohibition at the time that prevented women from traveling far, 
especially overseas. The term “nyonya China,” which appeared in Java during 
the medieval period, actually referred to native women who married Chinese 
men. The word “nyonya” itself comes from the Hokkien word nio’a or niowa, 
meaning “woman”  (Joe, 1933 ). This tradition of intermarriage between 
Chinese and Javanese in the precolonial era was so common that Javanese 
people once felt proud to identify themselves as descendants of the Chinese. 
Many early observers testified to the  strong Chinese identity among 
the Javanese, as noted by early foreign commentators and scholars, such 
as Diogo de Couto,  Edmund Scott, William Methold, Schouten, and Abbé de 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  43 
 
Raynal (Lombard, 1996). The famous Portuguese traveler, Tome Pires, also 
could not hide the fact of the harmonious relations between the Javanese (or 
people in Nusantara, more broadly) and the Chinese. In fact, Pires said that 
several Chinese rulers willingly sent one of their daughters to a Javanese vassal 
to be married, accompanied by many followers  and a ship full of kepeng 
(coins) (Pires, 1944).  
This tradition of intermarriage between the Chinese and the “native 
people” of Nusantara continued when Dutch colonialism arrived. Danys 
Lombard and Claudine Salmon have clearly shown several Chinese -
Muslim Peranakan figures during the colonial period in Java.  
 
Proposing “Chinese Theory” in the Islamization of Nusantara 
The previous description provides a strong basis to state that the Chinese 
Muslim community also played a role in the historical process of Islamization 
in Nusantara, thus justifying the “Chinese Theory” in the history of the arrival 
and development of Isl am in this archipelago. So far, discussions on the 
Islamization of the Malay–Indonesian world have largely revolved around two 
established paradigms: the Middle Eastern (Arab/Persian) theory and the 
Indian theory —both of which have become conventional, if not somewhat 
clichéd.  
Proponents of the Arab/Middle Eastern theory include Crawfurd, 
Keijzer, Naimann, de Hollander, and several Indonesian –Malay historians, 
such as Hasjmi, al-Attas, HAMKA, Djajadiningrat, and Mukti Ali. Meanwhile, 
advocates of the India n theory include Pijnapel, Hurgronje, Morison, Kern, 
Winstedt, Fatimi, Vlekke, Gonda, and Schrieke  (Azra, 1999). Notably, almost 
no historian has explicitly argued that Islamization in Nusantara originated 
from China. Yet both the Indian and the Middle Eastern (especially Hadrami–
Arab) theories are not without their weaknesses. 
Supporters of the Indian theory often rely on speculative arguments—
for example, the claim that the multi-tiered roofs of classical Javanese mosques 
resemble the meru structure of Hi ndu temples, suggesting an Indian 
architectural influence. The Arab –Hadramaut theory, however, is even less 
convincing. In his study Le Hadhramout et les Colonies Arabes dans 
l’Archipel Indien  (“Hadramaut and the Arab Colonies in the Indonesian 
Archipelago”), van den Berg argued that the sayyid, sharif, and other Hadrami 
Arabs only began to establish a visible presence in Java toward the late 
eighteenth century—long after the process of Islamization had begun in the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries or even  before this period. Arab settlements 
in Java only became permanent after 1820, and large-scale Hadrami migration 
to the archipelago occurred after 1870, facilitated by steamship technology  
(Berg, 1989; 1955). 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
44     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
This timeline contrasts sharply with the historical evidence of Chinese 
Muslim communities that had already inhabited coastal areas of Java, Sumatra, 
Bali, and other regions in Nusantara long before the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries. Therefore, the history of Islamization in Nusantara must be 
reconstructed, and the Chinese role in introducing Islam cannot be simply 
ignored. Political and ideological biases should not obscure or erase the 
contribution of Chinese Muslims to historical memory.  
 
Conclusion 
Although anti -Chinese sentiments first emerged during the Dutch colonial 
rule, the dark side of Chinese communities in Indonesia reached its peak during 
the Suharto era. Suharto proclaimed China as the “mastermind” behind the 
Indonesian Communist Party, fo llowed by killings, massacres, and 
exterminations of anything related to the Chinese. During Suharto’s reign (r. 
1966-1998), all forms of cultural production associated with China were 
dissolved, including intellectual works that discussed the historicity of China 
and its various contributions, such as Muljana’s book Runtuhnja Keradjaan 
Hindu-Djawa dan Timbulnja Negara-negara Islam di Nusantara (“the Decline 
of Javanese -Hindu Kingdom and the Emergence of Islamic States in 
Nusantara”), banned by the Attorney  General’s Decree No. Kep. 
043/DA/1971.  
In conclusion, history must be revealed truthfully, including the 
history of Islamization in Nusantara. Hatred toward the Chinese and China 
must not lead to the erasure of the historical, cultural, and archeological  
legacies they, including Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims, once inscribed. It 
must be acknowledged that China does not solely bear the faces of Buddhism 
or Confucianism, but also that of Islam. Indeed, long before the Arabs reached 
Nusantara, Chinese Muslims had already established themselves as an 
influential middle class and played a central role in introducing Islam in the 
archipelago. This deserves to be appreciated with honesty, and the truth about 
the legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims cannot be denied. After all, isn’t 
that a great nation is nation that dares to acknowledge the full existence of its 
own history? 
 
  
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  45 
 
Bibliography  
Al Qurtuby, S. (2003). Arus China Islam Jawa: Membongkar sejarah peranan 
Tionghoa dalam proses Islamisasi di Nusantara pada abad ke-15 dan 
16. Inspeal Press. 
Ambary, H. M. (2001). Menemukan peradaban: Jejak arkeologis dan historis 
Islam Indonesia. Logos Wacana Ilmu. 
Anonym. (1997). Laporan akhir penelitian tentang menelusuri jejak -jejak 
sejarah Islam di Kotamadya Semarang. Semarang. 
Atjeh, A. (1955). Sedjarah Mesdjid. n.p. 
Atmodarminto, R. (2000). Babad Demak dalam tafsir sosial politik. 
Millennium Publisher. 
Azra, A. (n.d.). Jaringan ulama Timur Tengah dan Kepulauan Nusantara abad 
XVII dan XVIII. Mizan. 
Babad Tanah Djawi. (1939-1941). Babad Tanah Djawi. Balai Pustaka. 
Berg, C. C. (1955). The Islamization of Java. Studia Islamica, 4, 111 -142. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/1595054 
Broomhall, M. (1905). Islam in China: A neglected problem. Morgan & Scott 
Limited. 
Budiman, A. (1979). Masyarakat Islam Tionghoa di Indonesia. Penerbit 
Tanjung Sari. 
Choy, L. K. (1977). Indonesia between myth and reality. Federal Publication. 
De Graaf, H. J., & Pigeaud, T. G. Th. (1984). Ch inese Muslims in Java in the 
15th & 16th centuries: The Malay Annals of Semarang and Cerbon. 
Monash University. 
De Graaf, H. J., & Pigeaud, T. G. Th. (1976). Islamic state in Java 1500-1700: 
A summary, bibliography and index. KITLV.  
https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004287006 
De Graaf, H. J., & Pigeaud, T. G. Th. (1981). Surabaya dalam abad ke XVII: 
Dari kerajaan sampai kabupaten. Jarahnitra. 
Djajadiningrat, H. (1983). Tinjauan kritis tentang sejarah Banten. Djambatan. 
Drewes, G. J. W. (1985). New light on the coming of Islam to Indonesia? In 
A. Ibrahim, S. Siddique, & Y. Husein (Eds.), Reading Islam in 
Southeast Asia. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. 
Edel, J. (1938). Hikayat Hasanuddin. Ten Brink. 
Groeneveldt, W. P. (1960). Historical notes on Indonesia and Malaya compiled 
from Chinese sources. Bhratara. 
Huan, M. (1970). Ying-yai Sheng-lan: The overall survey of the ocean's shores 
(Original work published 1433). Hakluyt Society. 
Ibn Battuta. (1964). The travels of Ibn Battuta (T. Harb, Ed.). Dar Beirut. 
Sumanto Al Qurtuby 
46     Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47 
Ignatius, A. (2001, August 20 -27). The Asian voyage: In the wake of the 
admiral. Time Magazine. https://time.com/archive/6955555/the-
asian-voyage-in-the-wake-of-the-admiral-2/ 
Israeli, R. (1980). Muslims in China: A study in cultural confrontation. Curzon 
Press. 
Joe, L. T. (1931). Riwayat Semarang: Dari zamannya Sam Poo sampai 
terhapusnya Kongkoan. Boekhandel Ho Kim Yoe. 
Ju-Kua, C. (1965). Chau Ju Kua: His works on the Chinese and Arab trade in 
the 12th & 13th centuries. Cheng Wen Publishing Company. 
Kuwabara, J. (1928). On P'u Shou Keng: A man of the Western regions... Toyo 
Bunko. 
Lan, N. J. (1952). Tiongkok sepanjang abad. Balai Pustaka. 
Lin, L. H. (1967). Islam in Canton in the Sung period: Some fragmentary 
records. In F. S. Drake & Wolfram (Eds.), Symposium on historical 
archeological and linguistics: Studies on Southern China, Southeast 
Asia and the Hong Kong region. Hong Kong University Press. 
Lombard, D. (1996). Nusa Jawa silang budaya. Gramedia. 
Lombard, D., & Salmon, C. (1993). Islam and Chineseness. Indonesia, 57, 
115-131. https://doi.org/10.2307/3351244 
Ma, I. T. Y. (1979). Perkembangan Islam di Tiongkok. Bulan Bintang. 
Marsono. (1988). Serat Kandaning Ringgit Purwa menurut naskah tangan LOr 
6379 Perpustakaan Universitas Leiden, Jilid 9. Djambatan. 
Muljana, S. (1968). Runtuhnja keradjaan Hindu-Djawa dan timbulnja negara-
negara Islam di Nusantara. Bhratara. 
Palindungan, M. O. (1969). Tuanku Rao. Penerbit Tandjung Pengharapan. 
Pires, T. (1944). Suma Oriental (A. Cortesao, Ed.; 2 vols.). The Hakluyt 
Society. 
Reid, A. (2017). Female roles in pre-colonial Southeast Asia. In M. MacLeod 
& E. Rawski (Eds.), European intruders and changes in behavior and 
customs in Africa, America, and Asia before 1800. Routledge.  
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315255934-18 
Seagrave, S. (1999). Para pendekar pesisir: Sepak terjang gurita bisnis Cina 
rantau. Alvabet. 
Seong, T. Y. (1963). Chinese element in the Islamization of Southeast Asia: A 
study of the strange story of Njai Gede Pinatih, the grand lady of 
Gresik. Taiwan Provincial Museum. 
Silado, R. (2004). Sam Po Kong: Perjalanan pertama. Gramedia. 
Schrieke, B. (1957). Ruler and realm in early Java. W. van Hoeve. 
Stutterheim, W. F. (1948). De Kraton van Majapahit. Brill.  
https://doi.org/10.26530/OAPEN_613414 
Sino-Indo Muslim Cultures:  
Tracing the History and Legacy of Cheng Ho and Chinese Muslims in Nusantara 
Islam Nusantara: Journal for the Study of Islamic History and Culture, 7 (1), 2026: 27-47  47 
 
Toer, P. A. (2001). Arus balik: Sebuah epos pasca kejayaan Nusantara di awal 
abad ke-16. Hasta Mitra. 
Van Leur, J. C. (1955). Indonesian trade and society. W. van Hoeve. 
Van den Berg, L. W. C. (1989). Had ramaut dan koloni Arab di Nusantara. 
KITLV. 
Vlekke, B. H. M. (1943). Nusantara: A history of the East Indian Archipelago. 
Harvard University Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/2263037 
Wardi, S. (1950). Koempoelan cerita lama dari Kota Wali. Wahju. 
Zen, T. (1998). Manaqib Wali Tujuh di Bali dan raja -raja Islam di Indonesia. 
n.p. 
Zhi, K. Y. (1996). Sam Po Kong dan Indonesia. Haji Masagung. 
 