Migration Letters  
V olume: 20, No: S4(2023), pp. 123-142 
ISSN: 1741-8984 (Print) ISSN: 1741-8992 (Online) 
www.migrationletters.com 
 
 
The Impact of Sino -Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’s 
Visual Culture  
Aniendya Christianna1, Acep Iwan Saidi 2, Riama Maslan Sihombing 3, Nuning Yanti 
Damayanti4 
 
Abstract 
This study investigates the historical topic of the immigration of Chinese Muslims to 
Indonesia, which holds significance for artists, cultural scholars, historians, migration 
specialists and scholars of international relations. It sheds light on how the Chinese 
Muslim migration altered and transformed the artistic practices and institutions of the 
Javanese community in Gresik. This article presents a historical and textual analysis of 
the development of Islamic -Chinese-Javanese culture in Gresik. V erbal and visual data 
are collected and analyzed using Max Weber's V erstehen ethical approach to thoroughly 
interpret and understand the social facts. The paper demonstrates that visual culture in 
Gresik, such as Damar Kurung lanterns and Qur'an manuscripts, represent 
manifestations of Sino -Javanese Muslim culture. The historical journey of Chinese 
immigrants and its impact on socio -cultural aspects demonstrate that the Chinese in 
Indonesia are not 'newcomers' or 'foreigners', but an integral part of the Republic of 
Indonesia.  
 
Keywords: Chinese, Gresik, Migration, Sino-Javanese Muslim, Visual Culture. 
 
Introduction 
“The Chinese people's greatest gift to Indonesia was the Islamic religion”. 
This statement was delivered by BJ Habibie (third President of the Republic of Indonesia) 
in an oration at the Lautze Mosque in Pasar Baru, Central Jakarta on Friday, 29 August 
2013 (Sasongko, 2013). BJ Habibie did not state this carelessly, he offered a spirit of 
historical deconstruction to dispel stereotypes and prejudice against groups of Chinese 
descent, which have long existed in Indonesian society. This was caused by Sinophobia 
(phobia towards ethnic Chinese) which was created by President Soeharto through the 
publication of Presidential Instruction No. 14 dated 6 December 1967 to the Minister of 
Religion, the Minister of Home Affairs, as well as all government agencies and 
instruments, from central to regional, to implement basic policies regarding Chinese 
religion, beliefs and customs (Raditya, 2018). Soeharto said that the manifestation of 
Chinese religion, beliefs and customs centered on his ancestral country (Beijing) could 
have an unnatural psychological, mental and moral influence on Indonesian citizens (Sai 
 
1 Doctoral Program of Fine Art and Design, Faculty of Fine Art and Design, Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia. 
ORCID: 0000-0001-9478-3402. E-mail: 37020004@mahasiswa.itb.ac.id  
2 Doctoral Program of Fine Art and Design, Faculty of Fine Art and Design, Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia. 
ORCID: 0000-0003-3413-7139. E-mail: acepiwan@fsrd.itb.ac.id  
3 Doctoral Program of Fine Art and Design, Faculty of Fine Art and Design, Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia. 
ORCID: 0000-0003-0949-7677. E-mail: riama.maslan@fsrd.itb.ac.id  
4 Doctoral Program of Fine Art and Design, Faculty of Fine Art and Design, Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia. 
ORCID: 0000-0002-3951-8152. E-mail: nuning@fsrd.itb.ac.id  
Aniendya Christianna et al. 124 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
& Hoon, 2013). The New Order's anti -Communist policies, which were initially aimed at 
Beijing, were the main cause of the nation's disproportionate historical representation of 
Chinese (Peranakan) people in Indonesia's national historical narrative. The Suharto 
regime, hostile to Beijing, ignored the importance of Chinese history, resulting in the 
exclusion of people of Chinese descent from Indonesian historical discourse. The peak 
occurred in violence and sexual harassment targeting the Chinese community in 
Indonesia in 1965 and May 1998. In fact, based on historical evidence, ethnic Chinese 
have lived in Indonesia for centuries and have become part of Indonesian society, just like 
people of Arab descent. and the Middle East, or India. There are quite a few Chinese 
Peranakan figures (from the Majapahit era until the birth of the Republic of Indonesia) 
who took part in the struggle to form identity and realize the sovereignty of the Republic 
of Indonesia. 
The statement made by BJ Habibie regarding the role of Chinese immigrants in the 
process of Islamization of Indonesia in the pre -modern era has been written by several 
researchers, and the results of this writing were even banned by the New Order 
government because they were considered to be disturbing national stability. In this case, 
immigrants/migrants have the meaning of people who choose to move not because of a 
direct threat of persecution, but to improve their lives by looking for work (Tewolde, 
2020). In 1968, historian Slamet Muljana wrote his doctoral dissertation entitled 
“Runtuhnja Keradjaan Hindu Djawa dan Timbulnja Negara -Negara Islam di Nusantara” 
(The downfall of Hindu -Javanese kingdom and the rise of Islamic states in Indonesia) 
which formulated the hypothesis that historically the spread of Islam in Java was 
practiced by people/scholars from China. In agreement with Muljana, in 2003 Sumanto 
Al Qurtuby also wrote something similar: through a historical approach, both textual and 
oral, Qurtuby explored the role of Chinese traders in spreading Islam in Java in the 15th 
and 16th centuries. This research supports the China -Islam theory which states that the 
role of Chinese Muslim immigrants was very important in the Islamization process in 
Indonesia, especially in Java in pre -modern times. Instead of promoting Arab and Indian 
theories, Muljana and Qurtuby reveal that Chinese Muslim networks contributed to the 
conversion of local people to Islam. These Chinese Muslim figures collaborated with 
several prominent preachers known as wali songo (nine Islamic scholars who played a 
major role in the spread of Islam in Java) (Anita, 2014). Using a variety of sources such 
as diaries of European and Arab travelers, Chinese sources, local chronicles, and local 
stories, Qurtuby shows what he calls Muslim Sino -Javanese culture in the 15th and 16th 
centuries and its impact on Islamization of Java, as well as showing evidence of its 
legacy. Other evidence also comes from local and oral traditions collected in babad 
(Javanese chronicles) at the end of the 16th century and the first decades of the 17th 
century which describe the condition of the Javanese Muslim community on the north 
coast who made their living as traders. The Javanese chronicles include: Babad Tanah 
Jawi, Serat Kandha Ringgit Purwa, Carita (History) Lasem, Babad Cerbon, and Hikayat 
Hasanuddin (Fanani & Kahfi, 2019). The presence of Chinese Muslims in Java, 
especially in the pre -colonial period (before the 1600s), was not only written about in 
local records and Javanese oral traditions, but was also acknowledged by early travelers 
such as Tom Pires (Portuguese), Ma Huan (Chinese) , Edmund Scott (England), Cornelis 
de Houtman (Netherland), Ibn Battuta (Maghrib) and John Jourdian (who visited Banten 
in 1674). Tom Pires said that the Javanese used to have a close relationship with the 
Chinese and that the religion of Muhammad (Islam) was widespread among the 
population on the north coast of Java which consisted of Chinese, Arabs, Gujaratis, 
Bengalis and othe r nations (Cortesão, 2017) . This Portuguese traveler witnessed the 
harmony of Chinese immigrants and Javanese people in the pre-Dutch colonial period.  
125 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
 
Figure 1. A map of the spread of Islam in Indonesia 
(source: https://www.dosenpendidikan.co.id/penyebaran-islam-di-indonesia/) 
Port cities along the north coast of Java Island (see Fig. 1) include Gresik (Ce -cun), 
Tuban (Tu -fan), Surabaya (SuJu -mai), Lasem (Lao Sam), Semarang (Toa -lang), and 
Jepara (Ju Mara) was originally the territory of the Majapahit Kingdom: a Hindu -
Buddhist kingdom that has survived for more than three hundred years (Kurniawan, 
2017). However, since the 14th century, when Islamic influence increasingly dominated, 
these areas were controlled by the Demak Kingdom under the leadership of Raden Patah 
(who was a Ch inese Muslim named Jimbun) (Berg, 1955). Among these places, Gresik 
was the most important port during and before the existence of the Majapahit Kingdom. 
Gresik, located in East Java, was used by King Darmawangsa of Daha as a barracks for 
the royal navy long before the Majapahit Kingdom existed, and in the eleventh century, 
King Erlangga used this place as a garrison for military purposes and as a port for trade 
with Java, Bali , Nusa Tenggara, Maluku and Sulawesi (Qurtuby, 2009). As time went by, 
immigrants from China stopped by Gresik and turned it into an international port. At that 
time there was a Chinese Muslim historical figure named Nyai Gede Pinatih whose real 
name was Shih Ta Niang Pi Na Ti, a rich woman who became the adoptive mother of 
Sunan Giri: one of the important figures among the wali songo (nine Muslim saints in 
Java who played an important role in the spread of Islam on the island of Java) as well as 
the founder of the Giri palace (Giri Kedaton) in Gresik, East Java, which in the 15th to 
17th centuries was a Chinese Town (Wain, 2017). The birth of Gresik as a trading city 
was due to Gresik's strategic position. As a port city, Gresik is supported by its strategic 
position geographically on the north coast of the Java Sea which is the main shipping 
route for domestic and international trade. The geological conditions and land structure 
on the Gresik coast are mostly rocky, ensuring that there is no silting process on the 
shore, making it easier for merchant ships to come to anchor. Gresik as  a regional trade 
system node connects the interior of Java Island with outside Java. The Bengawan Solo 
River is used as a river transportation route carrying goods produced from the interior of 
Central Java (Government of Gresik District Level II, 1991). On the east side there is a 
tributary of the Brantas River which is used as a river transportation route connecting the 
inland areas of East Java with Gresik. From here the commodity exchange process was 
born. Inland commodities flow via river transportati on routes towards the coast where 
they will then be exchanged for other commodities from outside Java. This geographical 
factor is what encourages the people of Gresik to work as traders, craftsmen and 
fishermen. The condition of the Gresik coast allows quite large ships to moor, thereby 

Aniendya Christianna et al. 126 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
facilitating the growth of Gresik as a busy trading port city (Hall, 1985). Moreover, the 
geological characteristics of Gresik, which have limestone rocks, are not suitable for 
agricultural land. So the people of Gresik tend to rely on industry and trade for their 
livelihoods, rather than as farmers. 
The geographical and ecological development of Gresik, of course, has had an impact on 
its socio -cultural development. Several royal central cities and port cities that are 
equivalent to the port of Gresik include Samudera Pasai, Aceh, Malacca, Demak, Banten, 
Jepara, Surabaya, Ternate, Banda, Gowa -Makassar, Banjarmasin and Palembang 
(Mustakim, 2019). These ports are visited by many large and small traders from various 
foreign countries and also from kingdoms in the archipelago. Many traders from various 
regions stayed for some time in the port area to wait for good winds to return to sailing. 
In fact, these foreign traders created overseas villages in areas close to the port. The 
implication of these traders' activities is that port cities have specific villages according to 
ethnicity based on the approval of the port authority/harbourmaster. There are times when 
a market is formed in the village on a smaller scale than the main market at the main port. 
A busy port allows various meetings to take place which have an impact on the exchange 
of information and technology, including in terms of arts and culture.  
The fact of the existence of Chinese Muslims in Java in pre -modern times is the result of 
long relations between Java and China that have lasted for centuries. Every long -standing 
racial and cultural interaction opens up opportunities for immigrants and local people to 
negotiate their identities (Lin & Sung, 2020). This long-standing relationship has resulted 
in a derivative culture that combines various elements of the original culture. This is what 
is meant by Sino -Javanese Muslim culture: a cultural combination of Chinese, Islamic 
and Javanese that spread along the north coast of Java Island from West Java to East Java 
(coastal) (Qurtuby, 2009). A number of artifacts and archaeological remains show a 
strong influence from the Chinese, such as mosque architecture, temple architecture, 
calligraphy, interior elements, crafts, sculpture, tombstones, paintings, chronicles, 
folklore, culinary, clothing, and so on. So, this article aims to describe the historiography 
of the migration process of the Sino -Javanese Muslim community to Java, especially to 
Gresik along with its impacts on the visual culture. This article attempts to identify the 
acculturation of elements of Chinese, Javanese and Islamic visual culture which met and 
combined to create a unique Gresik artifact, which still exists today. 
 
Research Methods 
This article conducts a historical and textual analysis to explore the history and 
progression of Islamic -Chinese-Javanese culture in Gresik, with the aim of enhancing 
comprehension of the migration chronology of the Sino-Javanese Muslim community and 
its influence on local communities in Java. The data collected consists of verbal data from 
a literature review and visual data obtained by tracing artefacts of past heritage in Gresik. 
Visual data sources were obtained through literature review, collectors, observation, and 
documentation. The collected data was analysed using an ethical approach based on Max 
Weber's V erstehen to interpret, analyse, and comprehend the data and social facts 
thoroughly. The goal of this article is to bridge the gap between previous and current 
literature on the Sino -Javanese Muslim community's migration impact in Gresik and to 
comprehend the visual representations of their heritage. 
 
Result and Discussion 
History of Chinese Culture and Islam in Java: Migration of the Sino -Javanese Muslim 
Community 
127 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
Since the time of the Majapahit Kingdom, Gresik has been said to be one of the 
prototypes of an old city. Its role as a trading city began to develop since the mid -14th 
century, in line with the dynamics of other trading cities in the archipelago which are also 
connected to the world trade network. The archipelago region is the easternmost region 
which is used as a node for international trade, especially from European and Central 
Asian nations. From Maluku, trade routes crossed the Flores Strait, Java Sea, Malacca 
Strait, Bay of Bengal, Coromandel Coast and Malabar in India, Gujarat, Persia, and 
continued to Europe through other trade nodes (Zainuddin, 2010: 7). It was on this route 
that Gresik became a very important trade node.   
Gresik as a port city has been known since the Majapahit Kingdom period because it was 
one of the doors to the Majapahit Kingdom as evidenced by the historical relics found, 
namely the Karang Bogem inscription and the Dwarapala statue, the Biluluk inscription, 
the Gosari site and the grave of  Walisongo figure Maulana Malik Ibrahim (Widodo, 
2004). During the Majapahit kingdom, Gresik was part of the kingdom's power. The 
inscription on the cave wall in Gosari Village, Ujungpangkah, Gresik shows ancient 
Javanese script written in 1298 Saka or 1376. Based on the year number, the inscription is 
most likely a relic of the Majapahit Kingdom (Mustakim 2017). At the beginning of the 
15th century there were two trading ports that were well known regionally and 
internationally, namely Jaratan Harbor and Gresik Harbor. These two twin ports are 
located opposite each other at the mouth of the river. It is estimated that Gresik Harbor at 
that time was located in the present Karang Kiring Village facing the Lamong River, 
while Jaratan Harbor was located in Mengare Village, facing the Bengawan Solo Lawas 
River (Mustakim 2005).  
 
Figure 2. Chinese Migration to Indonesia 
(Source: https://jakartaglobe.id/lifestyle/tracing-the-roots-a-journey-of-chinese-migration-
to-indonesia) 
Gresik has been an important port since the time of the Majapahit Kingdom, allowing the 
arrival of various immigrants from all over the world, including China. Relations between 
Java and China have been established for a long time in diplomatic and trade relations, 
Islam came to the archipelago (Suryadinata, 2007). Research shows that the Chinese 
migration to the Indonesian Archipelago was one of the earliest in human history. A study 
conducted by Hugh McColl found that Chinese farmers began migrating south  during the 

Aniendya Christianna et al. 128 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
Neolithic transition period, namely between 9000 -5500 BC, when rice began to be 
domesticated (Zhou, 2019). These immigrants were divided into two groups, namely 
those who migrated by land and those who migrated by sea (see Fig. 2). Since then, 
China-Indonesia (especially Java-China) relations have been quite intensive, as described 
in the book History of the Ming Dynasty and the report compiled by Ma Huan in 1416 
(Qurtuby, 2003). Based on historical records, it is shown that trade activities between 
Java and China in the 15th century increased quite rapidly. The role of the Chinese 
community in the trade and maritime sectors in Java is also increasing (Lombard, 2018). 
Until the 17th century, commercial relations continued to link the nations of Southeast 
Asia more closely to each other. The fact that Chinese influence reached most of 
Southeast Asia (mainly Java) through maritime trade, not through conquest or 
colonization, meant that local uniqueness and culture were still able to be maintained or 
simply adapted due to encounters with other nations (Reid, 2014: 17).   
 
Figure 3. Cheng Ho/Zheng He’s Fourth V oyage 1413-1415 
(Source: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 2023) 
This relationship continued when China was under the rule of the Ming Dynasty (1368 -
1644 AD) when Cheng Ho's cultural and trade expeditions took place. The story of Cheng 
Ho's voyage left many amazing historical traces in every country he passed through 
(Folch, 2020). In Indonesia, including Java, there are historical traces of Cheng -Ho's 
arrival. Cheng-Ho, who was born with the maiden name Ma Sanbao, who later became 
Ma He from the Hui ethnicity in Yunnan, was born into a Chinese Muslim community of 
mixed Mongol -Turkish blood. Cheng -Ho was appointed as the highest commander in 
charge of thousands of servants in the Palace Household Service (Suryadinata, 2007). 
Cheng Ho also served the emperor as a secret policeman. Then the emperor gave Cheng 
Ho a mandate to lead a sea expedition as Commander in Chief through a royal decree, 
along with several other envoys, such as secretary/scribe Ma Huan who was fluent in 
Arabic to carry out maritime diplomacy politics. The story of Cheng Ho's journey is 
contained in Ming Shi (history of the Ming Dynasty). Cheng Ho carried out seven sea 
expeditions from 1405 to 1433. More than 37 countries were visited on these voyages: 
from various ports in the archipelago and the Indian Ocean to Sri Lanka, Quilon 
(Ceylon), Kocin, Calicut, Ormuz, Jeddah, Magadisco, and Malindi (Suryadinata, 2007). 
From Champa to India. Along the Persian Gulf and Red Sea to the coast of Kenya. See 
Fig. 3. 
Trading cities such as Ayutthaya, Malacca, Pasai, Brunei, Gresik and Demak all gained 
their prosperity because they were used as bases for trading activities by the Chinese in 
the early 15th century. The sudden change in Ming Dynasty policy left behind a number 

129 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
of important communities of Chinese traders (often Muslim) in the developing region 
(Reid, 2014). Emperor Ming banned foreign trade, Chinese communities who were 
already trading were stranded in the South. The number and status were further increased 
by those who could not return home after Zheng He's massive expedition in 1405 -1435. 
In the end, this community formed a trading fleet in port cities, such as Gresik and 
Demak, Palembang, Malacca, Patani and Ayutthaya, organizing trade based on tribute to 
China and forming a trade network throughout the region (Reid, 2014). The port area, 
including Gresik, gradually took over the political and cultural leadership in Java from 
the Hindu-Buddhist centers in the interior of Java. 
In relation to Cheng Ho's transnational voyage, Sumanto Al Qurtuby mentioned the term 
"Sino-Javanese Muslim Cultures" as a form of culture that stretched from Banten, 
Jakarta, Cirebon, Semarang, Demak, Jepara, Lasem to Gresik and Surabaya as a result of 
Cheng Ho (and other Chinese Muslims) visit in Java. The form of Sino -Javanese Muslim 
Cultures is not only visible in various Islamic worship buildings which show a 
combination of Javanese, Islamic and Chinese elements but also includes various arts and 
literature. Qurtuby stated that the peak of the Javanese Islamization process occurred in 
the 14th to 16th centuries (2003). In Java, this period of centuries is very important 
because it was during this period that the process of strengthening the bases of Islam took 
place. Islam no longer appears as a sporadic community but has become a structured 
society with a fairly neat system. At that time, an important historical milestone appeared 
in Java: the Majapahit Kingdom collapsed, followed by the establishment of Islamic 
kingdoms on the north coast of Java, centered in Demak. In the span of this year, Sunan 
Giri to Sunan Prapen ruled in Giri Kedaton, Gresik. 
Ming Shi and Ying -yai Sheng-lan's historical notes report that the Chinese people who 
settled in Java were people from Canton, Zhangzou, Quanzhou and southern China who 
left China and settled in several ports on the north coast of eastern Java, especially Tuban, 
Gresik, and Surabaya (Mills 1970). According to these two texts, most of the Chinese 
who inhabited the northern coast of eastern Java at the beginning of the 15th century lived 
a very decent life, embraced Islam and were devout in worship. The existence of Muslim 
Chinese along the north coast of Java was also witnessed and written about by the Dutch 
traveler Loedewicks as recorded by Stutterheim and Ibnu Batutta as written by Thalal 
Harb (Suryadinata, 2007). De Graaf, a Dutch historian writing Soerabaja in de China as 
civil and military employees to manage Giri Kedaton (2011). 
The long-standing interaction between China and Java has opened up opportunities for 
changes in various things, not only in the economic aspect, local arts and culture have 
also been affected. Mutual exchange and influence between Chinese and native people 
encouraged the emergence of variants of trade commodities. The manufacturing centers 
of north coast Java in the 15th century were centered in Gresik and Surabaya (bronze), 
Tuban and Sidayu (gold), and Jepara (household furniture) (Reid, 2014). Reid continued 
that the concentration of craftsmen who actively sell their products through a networked 
market system tends to occur in the former capitals where the previous patron kings were 
seated.  
The large role of foreigners and rulers in trade in most Southeast Asian cities ensured that 
the majority of traders and ship owners were men (Kumar, 1987). However, there are a 
significant number of local women who join these circles and occupy important positions. 
In the history of socio -cultural development in Gresik, there are also female figures who 
have important positions in the advancement of trade as well as the process of 
Islamization in Java. Namely, Shishi Daniangzi or Si Dae -Jie who moved to Ja va from 
Palembang (Sriwijaya) and became harbormaster in Gresik. Tan Yeok Seong provides 
good evidence of how Si Dae -Jie embraced Islam in the 15th century and raised a child 
who would later become one of the guardians, Sunan Giri. Si Da -Jie alias Shishi 
Daniangzi was the eldest daughter of an elite non -Muslim Chinese merchant in 
Palembang, Shi Jinqing (a Ming Peace Official who was based in Palembang in 1407). Si 
Aniendya Christianna et al. 130 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
Da-Jie left Palembang for Java in the 1440s and was appointed Harbor Master of Gresik 
port by the Majapahit rulers from 1458 to 1483. Since then Si Dae -Jie embraced Islam 
and changed his name to Nyai Pinateh, or also known as Nyai Gede Pinatih to date. The 
appearance of the name Pinatih describes the religious, economic and political forces that 
influenced each other within the Hindu -Javanese Majapahit court. Around the 1500s, 
Nyai Gede Pinatih held the position of harbormaster of Gresik, reportedly sending trading 
boats as far as Bali, Maluku and Cambodia (Reid, 2014: 190).  
During the 16th century, a remarkable cultural transformation occurred in the port cities 
of northern Java, which at that time were centers of wealth and ideas that attracted 
talented Javanese. Mosques and holy tombs were built with a mixture of brick and 
Majapahit decorative art and giant wooden pillars imitated Javanese pavilions for Islamic 
ritual purposes. The creativity of Javanese stage art was changed or created as a form of 
replacing the human form with a puppet shadow which was adapted so as not to disturb 
devout Muslims. (Reid, 2014). 
One Chinese manuscript mentions writing materials compiled around the 1200s, 
admitting that there were only 2 countries outside China that also made paper, namely 
Korea and Java. Javanese paper is thick and durable with a length of about 8 meters. 
Javanese paper attracted Chinese attention because of its use in conveying stories 
depicted on scrolls and sung by a storyteller (wayang beber). What must have been 
witnessed was Javanese dluwang, which is rough paper made by beating and soaking 
mulberry tree fibers. The same fiber material is also used in China (Reid, 2014). Large 
amounts of paper from China were imported into Southeast Asia around the 1500s, used 
in Malacca, Java, Siam and Cambodia. 
Light Tradition: Sino-Javanese Muslim Belief Made Visual 
When two cultures or civilizations interact, there are at least three possibilities: conflict, 
peaceful coexistence, or the emergence of a new culture. However, if you look at history, 
especially the history of relations between China and surrounding countries, such as 
Indonesia, the third possibility is the one that occurs most often. The influence of Chinese 
culture in Indonesia is very strong and has resulted in cultural developments which are a 
combination of local and Chinese elements. One of them is the light/lantern tradition. 
The discovery of fire is one of the important innovations in the history of human 
civilization. For humans, fire is a useful energy and has been used in life rites for 
hundreds of years. The control of fire by ancient humans was a turning point in the 
evolution of human culture. When ancient humans discovered how to make fire, their 
lives changed significantly: they began to gather together, socialize, and ultimately led to 
the birth of a cultural revolution in the civilization of living creatures on earth. 
Fire is often considered a powerful symbol in many religions around the world, and has 
varying meanings and significance depending on the cultural and religious context. Fire 
also often has ritualistic meaning in the practices of religious traditions. In the context of 
the Southeast Asian region, fire is almost inseparable from people's daily lives. In 
particular, fire is present in religious ceremonies and cultural activities to commemorate 
certain moments, from human birth to death ceremonies. In Hindu religious beliefs, fire is 
considered sacred which involves offerings made to the Fire God as a means of 
purification, seeking blessings, and communicating with the divine. Fire is also associated 
with Agni, who is considered the god of fire and an intermediary between humans and the 
gods. In Buddhism, fire is often seen as a symbol of transformation and purification. In 
some Buddhist traditions, fire is used in rituals to burn offerings and purify negative 
energy. The concept of "inner fire" or "inner light" may also represent the intrinsic nature 
of enlightenment and spiritual awakening. In Islam, fire is mentioned in the Qur’ran and 
is often associated with punishment in the afterlife for those who disobey Allah (Ghehi, 
2012). Fire also symbolizes purification and is used in the ritual of aarti: the ceremony of 
waving a burning lamp in Sufi practice. Fire means purification, renewal of life, energy, 
131 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
protection, visibility, destruction, a medium for conveying messages. Fire can symbolize 
spiritual power, transcendence, illumination, manifestation of holiness, breath of life, 
inspiration, and enlightenment (Muhammad, 2021: 107). 
Historographic records regarding the encounter of Chinese people in maritime trade 
routes and migration to the Southeast Asia region from 1413 to 1436 are recorded in 
detail in W.P Groeneveldt's research entitled Archipelago in Chinese Notes (Ubaedillah, 
2023). Indirectly, this meeting left behind a legacy of knowledge, both in social, 
economic, religious, cultural contexts, and of course the introduction of lantern -making 
craft technology in the Southeast Asian region. Meanwhile, the use of visual elements in 
paintings shows that the perspective of the Southeast Asian region has a strong basis and 
unique potential compared to the West. One of the impressive Chinese inventions that 
was spread throughout the world was the invention of paper and lighting devices 
(lanterns). According to the Cambridge Dictionary, the word 'lantern' refers to a portable 
lighting device, which functions as a lamp or light source. The Big Indonesian Dictionary 
defines a lantern as a lamp or small lamp with a glass cover. In the beginning, lanterns 
served as a source of light when electric lights were not as easily accessible as they are 
today. Traditional lanterns in the early phase used simple technology in the form of wax 
or oily wicks. This light source is capable of providing weak light, therefore it must be 
protected with a cover to avoid wind blowing which prevents the fire as a light source 
from dimming and going out. Lanterns have long historical roots. It is estimated that the 
tradition of installing lanterns has existed in mainland China since the Xi Han Dynasty, 
around the 3rd century AD. The emergence of lanterns almost coincided with the 
introduction of paper-making techniques. Rachel Deason in "A Brief History of Chinese 
Lanterns" said that lanterns originally had a simple purpose, namely as a source of light 
(Zhang, 2018).  
 
Figure 4. Various ancient lanterns from China 
(Source: British Library) 
The emergence of lanterns almost coincided with the emergence of paper -making 
techniques, so many lanterns use paper as their raw material. Traditional Chinese lanterns 
are divided into three types, namely Palace Lantern (royal lantern), Gauze Lantern (paper 
lantern), and Shadow -picture Lantern (shadow -picture lantern) (The CLI team, 2022.). 
Chinese lanterns are a traditional craft that dates back thousands of years and have been 
used to light up the night. Throughout history, lanterns in China have come in a variety of 
styles, types, and functions and have been used in a variety of ways. Lanterns can be 
flown into the sky, hung in front of doors, placed indoors, floated on rivers, or installed in 
religious places. In general, lanterns function as lighting, a medium for prayer, 

Aniendya Christianna et al. 132 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
celebrations, status symbols, guiding spirits, as decoration, as a medium for education or 
religious learning as well as purely for entertainment (Zhang, 2022). People from the 
Eastern Han Dynasty (25 -220 AD) made lantern frames from bamboo, wood, or wheat 
straw. Then put a candle in the middle and stretch silk or paper over it so that the flame 
will not be blown away by the wind. In later times, Buddhist monks adopted lanterns as 
part of their worship ritual on the 15th day of the first month of the lunar calendar (The 
editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica., 2023). On the emperor's orders, people joined in the 
ritual and lit lanterns in honor of the Buddha and carried them to the palace in Luoyang. 
During the Tang Dynasty (618 -907), the practice turned into a festival, which is still 
celebrated every year. So, Chinese lantern and lantern festivals basically originated in the 
Han dynasty and then soon spread throughout the world. 
Part of the Gresik area consists of barren, arid land and hard limestone hills, making it 
impossible for the Gresik population to become an agrarian society. Rice and vegetable 
farming which require sufficient soil and water will not grow in Gresik. Field farmers 
cultivate dry crops. This is what encourages the residents of Gresik to make a living as 
craftsmen and traders. At the end of the 19th century, some Gresik people had grown into 
small capitalists relying on home industry and trade which were never replaced by other 
professions. Even Sunan Giri and Nyi Ageng Pinatih, one of the important figures from 
Gresik, set an example as religious figures as well as successful traders (Zainuddin, 
2010). As a charismatic figure, Sunan Giri is able to become a role model among the 
surrounding community. So the tenacity of the struggle for life of the people of Sunan 
Giri's era still continues to this day. Entrepreneurship and religiosity color the character of 
the Gresik people. Entrepreneurship remains widespread not only in terms of cultivating 
pond products such as the milkfish market, but also includes other businesses, such as 
pottery, leather, metal, woven pandan, sarongs, mats, skullcaps, udheng (a kind of 
traditional headband), and Damar Kurung lantern crafts (SeeFig. 5). 
 
Figure 5. Damar Kurung Lantern 
(Source: Damar Kurung Institute, Gresik 2017) 
In Gresik, Damar Kurung lanterns developed in the 16th century, during the Southeast 
Asian maritime trade route, where Gresik was a leading port city at that time. The Damar 
Kurung lantern from Gresik is made from cut bamboo strips and covered with paper, 
shaped like a block with a triangular crown at the top. Meanwhile, each side is equipped 
with illustrations that divide the story into 4 -12 chapters. These illustrations generally 
convey stories and messages about community activities. Damar Kurung has bec ome a 
cultural tradition for Muslim residents in Gresik to welcome 'Lailatul Qadar' by hanging 

133 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
Damar Kurung in front of the house. 'Lailatul Qadar' is a very special night in the Islamic 
religion. This night is considered a night full of blessings, where Allah SWT sends down 
His angels and determines all matters of this world and the hereafter. The night of Lailatul 
Qadar only occurs in the month of Ramadan, so there will be many who want to hunt to 
get rewards from this blessed night. The scholars observe the night of Lailatul Qadar on 
the odd night of the last 10th day of the holy month of Ramadan such as the 21st, 23rd, 
25th, 27th and 29th. 
Compared with the lantern variants from China, there is nothing really similar to the 
Damar Kurung lantern. However, art and visual culture can still be traced from other 
artifacts that contain cultural elements from China and Islam. As in the design of the 
Qur'an manuscript. Qur'anic manuscripts have been faithfully copied for centuries, 
displaying diverse styles in calligraphy and illumination, often reflecting their place of 
origin and time of production (Baker, 2007). Beautifying the manuscripts of the Qur'an 
can be considered an act of religious devotion. Every effort to copy and beautify the Al -
Qur'an manuscript is also meaningful as an effort to build cultural identity. A research 
project funded by the British Academy entitled Islam, Trade and Politics in the Indian 
Ocean, which ran from 2009 to 2012, aimed to investigate all aspects of relations between 
the largest power in the Middle East, namely the Ottoman empire, and the Muslim states 
of the Malay archipelago in Southeast Asia in the last five centuries. This research project 
produced two books, one of which discusses culture and intellectuals in producing Al -
Qur'an manuscripts. It discusses and displays very beautiful ancient manuscripts of the 
Qur'an, as well as describing the differences in each design style based on the region 
where the manuscript was produced. There are four main categories of Al -Quran in 
Southeast Asia: East Coast of the Malay Peninsula, Aceh, Java and the Philippines -
Mindanao Region (Gallop, 2021). The main characteristics of manuscripts from Aceh 
include: (1) Rectangular outlines that extend above and below the boundaries of the text 
blocks, (2) Arches above and below the text blocks in the form of hollow ogival domes, 
(3) Use of red, black and white, and (4) The main decorative features are left white to 
contrast the colored background (Gallop, 2021). See Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6. Illuminated frames at the start of a Qur’an from Aceh, ca. 1820s. 
(Source: British Library) 
This is different from the Javanese manuscripts, which have their own stylistic 
characteristics. The main features of the Javanese Qur'an are: (1) The design of one side 
of the page is exactly symmetrical to the other side of the page, (2) The decoration is 
along all four sides of the page, not three sides as in other Southeast Asian manuscripts , 
(3) The use of indigo (a trade commodity cultivated by the Dutch in the 1800s to meet 
European demand), and (4) The ayn sign on the edge, which was used as an indication for 
prostration (Gallop, 2006). As shown in Fig. 7. There is one material aspect that indicates 
a manuscript of the Qur'an originates from Java, namely the use of locally produced 

Aniendya Christianna et al. 134 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
Javanese paper or dluwang, which is made from the bark of the mulberry tree, 
Broussonetia papyrifera. Dluwang is technically classified as bark cloth or tapa, not 
paper, because it is not made from the dry residue of a water -based solution. There are 
indications that in earlier periods, before the 18th century, dluwang had been exported 
from Java throughout the archipelago or even made locally on other islands, because the 
Qur'an written on dluwang has been found as far away as Ternate (Gallop, 2021). 
However, with the increasing availability through the European trade of higher quality 
paper, the use of dluwang outside Java appears to have waned. Therefore, the use of 
dluwang in the Qur'an can be considered a reliable indicator of Javanese origins. 
 
Figure 7. Decorated double frames in red and black ink, at the start of a Qur’an from 
Java, 18th-early 19th century. 
(Source: British Library) 
The Chinese also produced Al-Qur'an manuscripts with unique characteristics through the 
use of calligraphy. Islamic art began to appear in China during the Tang Dynasty in the 
7th century and then during the Yuan and Ming Dynasties (Al -Mannai, 2021). Sino -
Islamic art is displayed in many decorative styles, which is due to the growing relations 
between the two worlds as part of the cultural exchange between East and West. The 
Chinese Qur'an was produced in several different volumes. The script used is a vari ation 
of mu ḥaqqaq and is written in a way that suggests the pen strokes are influenced by 
Chinese calligraphy (Welch, 1979). It is often referred to as Sīnī ('Chinese') Arabic. 
Illumination and decoration have the same function in all Qur'ans, namely to beautify 
them, but in Chinese Qur'an manuscripts the influence of local style and culture is clearly 
visible, without violating Islamic practices in sacred art (Sims -Williams, 2017) . The 
adaptation of symbols that are common in everyday life in Chinese art and culture is very 
striking in the appearance of the Al -Qur'an manuscript. As seen at the opening of the end 
of the 17th century Al-Qur'an, the lantern motif becomes a visual emphasis for the text of 
the Al-Qur'an. As shown in Fig. 8, 9 and 10. The lantern structure is outlined in gold and 
arranged in a rectangle drawn with double red lines. The impression of a Chinese lantern 
is further enhanced by hanging tassels attached to hooks on the outside of the structure. 
Islamic teachings prohibit the worship of  idols and forbid depictions of humans and 
animals, especially in religious contexts. Therefore, when illustrating nature, Islamic 
artists turned to flowers or other shapes/symbols, as shown in this lantern painting. 
Calligraphy art also decorates many Al-Qur'an manuscripts. This is not surprising because 
initially China was the first to discover high quality paper and pens with fine hairs, so that 

135 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
the art of Chinese calligraphy was much liked by other nations, including forms of 
Islamic calligraphy in the Qur'an. 
 
Figure 8. The decorated final text opening with lantern motif from a seventeenth -century 
Qur'an. 
(Source: British Library) 
 
Figure 9. Holy Quran in Islamic Chinese Calligraphy by Ming Dinasty (1368 - 1644). 
(Source: fotografia.islamoriente.com) 

Aniendya Christianna et al. 136 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
 
Figure 10. Holy Quran in Islamic Chinese Calligraphy 1138/1725-26 AD 
(Source: https://www.christies.com/en/lot/lot-5881382) 
Based on the previous explanation of the design of the Al -Qur'an manuscript, it can be 
observed that the Damar Kurung lantern has similarities (especially in the cross -sectional 
structure of the lantern) with the design of the Al -Qur'an manuscripts from Java and 
China (especially on the edge/border of the text). It is rectangular in shape with the top 
(or bottom) equipped with a triangular shape. So, it does not rule out the possibility that 
Damar Kurung is an artistic and cultural artifact resulting from meetings and 
acculturation between Chinese immigrants and Javanese people. According to the oral 
tradition of the Gresik people, Damar Kurung is believed to have existed since the 16th 
century when Sunan Prapen (the next generation of Sunan Giri) reigned at Giri Kedaton. 
Traditional paintings from the 1800s depicting the figure of Prince Diponegoro show the 
presence of a lantern similar to Damar Kurung. See Fig. 11. 
 
Figure 11. Prince Diponegoro Painting by anonymous Javanese artist 
(Source: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/18DQw0wkbUdwzfFrLRuQbZ1Ks3k5F69XL/view) 
Damar Kurung is one of the traditional artistic relics of the ancestors of the Gresik people 
in the form of decorative lanterns. The paintings that decorate Damar Kurung depict the 
civilization and life of the Gresik people. Koeshandari (2009: 58) defines Damar Kurung 

137 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
as 'damar' is a lamp/light and 'kurung' is a frame. So Damar Kurung is a lighting device 
that is framed in such a way as to become a lantern, which is usually lit when the sun 
begins to set or just before the Maghrib prayer. Damar Kurung crafts are made to 
entertain children who are waiting for the arrival of tarawih prayers during the month of 
Ramadan. Damar Kurung as part of the East Javanese traditional fine arts is a syncretic 
result of various ethnicities and cultures between Chinese, Islamic and Javanese culture. 
Often the paintings contain mythological meanings, sagas or moral messages through 
metaphors, aesthetic language and the form of symbols that decorate each side of the 
lantern.  
Damar Kurung is generally used by the Gresik people in the process of cleaning their 
family's ancestral graves, which is called the padusan tradition or megengan or nyadran or 
ruwahan. Padusan or megengan or nyadran or ruwahan is a traditional slametan ceremony 
held every year during the month of Ramadan to honor the spirits of ancestors who have 
passed away (Mibtadin, 2023). The Gresik people believe that Damar Kurung functions 
as a light for people who have died and their spirits are still considered alive and living 
temporarily in the grave or, as a temporary realm before entering the afterlife. According 
to Javanese understanding, the spirits of those who have died wander around their homes, 
they still have contact with their living family. From here, the tradition of cleaning the 
village emerged, including cleaning the graves, accompanied by giving offerings. For 
padusan purposes, the light of Damar Kurung is considered to be the personification of 
the deceased. So that the fire does not die, the fire is contained/protected in a lantern. 
 
Figure 12. Masmundari and Damar Kurung 
(Source: Damar Kurung Institute) 
 
The artist was Masmundari (1904 -2005). She was very old when she actively made 
Damar Kurung, but her persistence in making this visual art led to Damar Kurung 
becoming the national intangible heritage of the Republic of Indonesia in 2017. The 
beauty and uniqueness of Damar Kurung lies in the paintings that decorate each side of 
the lantern. On the cover there are various pictures. The images consist of flat human 
figures like puppet shadow (wayang kulit) visuals with the theme of the daily activities of 
the Gresik people. The visual forms that Masmundari paints do not recognize perspective 
(Koehandari, 2009). All the objects in the picture are painted in a row to the side or 
shifted upwards using dividing lines as dividers between scenes. Masmundari uses food 
coloring (sumbo) to color each object in her paintings. The color characteristics are 
bright, even and without gradation. On the empty image area, arrow symbols, zig zag 

Aniendya Christianna et al. 138 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
lines and three dots are painted which indicate moving objects in the image. Rhythm and 
movement in painting can be identified through expressive images, such as zig zag lines, 
three dots and arrows. The zig zag line at the top of the picture area/on the roof indicates 
that the scene takes place in the evening/night. Point three is a visualization of the sound 
echo (noise) produced from the contents. Meanwhile, the arrows are a visualization of the 
movement of air/wind circulation, usually also indicating that the scene occurs 
outdoors/exterior (Damar Kurung Institute, 2016). The human figures that Masmundari 
draws are human figures carrying out various daily activities with a stylized style like that 
of wayang kulit or wayang beber. Masmundari also often draws objects in the form of 
animals, but this is limited to poultry (chickens or birds) and occasionally horses (for 
pulling carriages/palanquins). Plants, especially trees, are often drawn as symbols that 
limit the dimensions of space. The images of trees and plants in the Damar Kurung 
painting indicate that the scene in the painting takes place in an open/exterior space.  
In her creative process, Masmundari has a drawing style that is related to the desired 
format lines. There are two types of formats, namely fields and formlines. The field 
defines a different time and space in each sequence, with a top -down viewing direction 
for sacred themes and bottom -up viewing for profane story themes. Meanwhile, the 
formline determines the characteristics of each image object, by displaying the 
characteristics of each sequence so that it can be told. For stories with sacred themes, 
each sequence has a viewing direction from left to right (prasavya), whereas for profane 
story themes you can start from any direction, with any viewing direction, because each 
sequence at one time contains several events (Koeshandari, 2009 ). The principles and 
organization of the format in Damar Kurung paintings are absolute so that every image 
object in the painting can be told. Each Damar Kurung painting with an area of 
approximately 40 x 30 cm is usually divided into 3 -4 sequences. Painting techniques like 
those used by Masmundari are believed to be traditional knowledge that has been passed 
down from generation to generation. Where the characteristics of the paintings are typical 
of the visual arts found in Eastern civilization (including China). 
Both Masmundari and Muslim painters or designers of Qur'ānic texts have something in 
common in producing art: they do not ignore the dimension of emptiness even though it 
could be used wonderfully, nor do they ignore the basis of three -dimensional perspective 
(Okasha, 1977: 469). They use virtual representations and rely on the intellectual truth of 
things without being bound to time, space, or visual reality. They have a tendency to rely 
on a two-dimensional vacuum to create flatness throughout their designs. But at the same 
time it also combines with emptiness (Al -Anin, 2000: 17). Damar Kurung paintings and 
Al-Qur'ani manuscript designs both avoid the rules of three -dimensional perspective, and 
are devoid of light and shadow. They use a distinctive strategy to create a sense of depth, 
namely by enlarging the represented character, meaning the more important the character 
is. The figures are represented in a two -dimensional vacuum without considering the 
principles of perspective. Another way is by shifting the objects behind evenly over the 
design plane. This results in a complex and unique visual organisation of a flat scene, 
which distinguishes it from the characteristics of Western visual art works (Alam, 1982: 
241). 
Because of the beauty and uniqueness of Masmundari's Damar Kurung, in 2020, Roger 
Nelson through the National Gallery Singapore published a book entitled 'Modern Art of 
Southeast Asia: Introductions from A to Z' and included Masmundari's name in it. The 
book attempts to record the first modern works of art in the Southeast Asia region with a 
transnational approach to narrating the history of the region through 60 key ideas 
involving more than 200 examples of works of art. Nelson includes the name 
Masmundari, maestro artist Damar Kurung from Gresik district as one of the artists who 
represents craft techniques as well as painting with visual narratives in art practice (2020: 
50). 
 
139 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
Conclusion 
Art not only functions as a creative expression for the artist, but art is also able to capture 
the collective memory of a society and reflect its changing values and culture. Art can be 
a language shared between different individuals, nations and cultures. Art has the ability 
to make immigrant voices heard. The arts help people to articulate their own values and 
beliefs while better understanding the values and beliefs of others. The phenomenon of 
Sino-Javanese Muslim Cultures through visual arts shows that Chinese immigrants and 
local residents (Javanese) once lived side by side peacefully in Indonesia before their 
harmonious relationship was finally destroyed by the Dutch and the New Order regime. 
More than that, their harmony was not only demonstrated by the transformation of 
Javanese-Chinese culture, but also penetrated the world of artistic practice. Damar 
Kurung lanterns and Al -Qur'an manuscripts with a calligraphic approach are 
manifestations of Sino -Javanese Muslim Cultures that occurred in Gresik. Chinese 
immigrants came with their invention, knowledge and technology regarding paper 
(dluwang) giving Indonesia the opportunity to develop written art and culture, which was 
initially limited to oral culture. The historical journey of Chinese immigrants and their 
impact in socio -cultural aspects shows that Chinese people in Indonesia are not 'new 
people' or 'foreigners', but are part of the Republic of Indonesia. 
Conflict in Interest: There is no Conflict in Interest 
Acknowledgements 
Aniendya Christianna, the author, would like to thank Petra Christian University 
Surabaya for funding her dissertation until this article was written. Thank you also to 
Petra Christian University's Visual Communication Design Study Program, Faculty of 
Humanities and Creative Industries, for their assistance with this research. The author 
would also like to express gratitude to the Doctoral Program of Fine Art and Design, 
Faculty of Fine Art and Design, Bandung Institute of Technology, which provided 
research during the mentoring process with the promoters. The author is also very 
grateful to the founder of Damar Kurung Institute: Novan Effendy, Rokayah Family 
(Masmundari's daughter), and Gresik art activist Bapak Kris Adji. 
 
References 
Abu-al-anin, M. (2000). The Cognitive Connotations of Space in Selected of Two Dimensional 
Contemporary Artworks as Input to Enrich the Decorative Designs. Unpublished Doctoral 
Dissertations, Cairo: Faculty of Art Education, Helwan University. 
Alam, N. (1982). Middle East Art in Islamic Era (34rd ed.). Cairo: Dare Alfiker Publisher. 
Al-Mannai, Maryam Mohammed. (2021). “Islamic Chinese Art: Islamic anthology of Chinese 
calligraphy”. QScience Connect, V olume 2021, Issue Issue 1, Apr 2021. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.5339/connect.2021.3 
Anita, Dewi Evi. (2014).  “WALISONGO: Islamising the Land A Literature Review”. Wahana 
Akademika V ol. 1 No. 2, Oktober 2014, 243 –266. DOI: 10.21580/wa.v1i2.815 
Baker, Colin. (2007). Qur'an manuscripts: calligraphy, illumination, design. British Library. 
https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/full/10.3366/E1465359109000631 
Berg, C.C. (1955). “The Islamitation of Java”. Brill. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/1595054 
Cortesão, Armando. (2017). The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires. Hakluyt Society. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315552439 
Fanani, Ahwaan & Kahfi, Ashabul. (2019). “Portrayal of Walisongo Figures in Babad Tanah 
Jawi”. Sabda V olume 15, Nomor 2, Desember 2019. DOI: 10.14710/sabda.14.2.158-175 
Folch, Dolors. (2020, May 5). “China’s greatest naval explorer sailed his treasure fleets as far as 
East Africa”. National Geographic Magazine. 
Aniendya Christianna et al. 140 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/history/history-magazine/article/china-zheng-he-naval-
explorer-sailed-treasure-fleet-east-africa 
Gallop, Annabel Teh. (2004). “An Acehnese Style of Manuscript Illumination”. Archipel Year 
2004  Number 68,  pp. 193 -240. https://www.persee.fr/doc/arch_0044 -
8613_2004_num_68_1_3834 
Gallop, Annabel Teh & Akbar, Ali. (2006). “The Art of the Qur'an in Banten: Calligraphy and 
Illumination”. Archipel Year 2006  Number 72,  pp. 95 -156. 
https://www.persee.fr/doc/arch_0044-8613_2006_num_72_1_4028 
Gallop, Annabel Teh. (2021, June 14). Three Qur’an manuscripts from Aceh in the British Library. 
British Library Asian and Africa Studies Blog. https://blogs.bl.uk/asian -and-
african/2021/06/three-quran-manuscripts-from-aceh-in-the-british-library.html 
Gallop, Annabel Teh. (2021, February 4). Qur’an manuscripts from Southeast Asia in the British 
Library. https://blogs.bl.uk/asian -and-african/2021/02/quran-manuscripts-from-southeast-asia-
in-the-british-library.html 
Government of Gresik District Level II. (1991). Gresik City a Historical Perspective and 
Anniversary. PT. Semen Gresik (Persero).  
Graaf, HJ dan Pigeaud. (2011). “Chinese Muslims in Jawa in the 15th and 16th Centuries: The 
Malay Annals of Semarang and Ceribon”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies September 2011 
18(02): 340-341. DOI:10.1017/S0022463400020658 
Ghehi, Nameh Somayeh & Ramezanmahi, Hasan Bolkhari. “The Manifestation of Fire and 
Lightin the Icons of Mir -Heidar’s Miraj”. International Journal of Arts 2012;  2(4): 16 -25 
doi:10.5923/j.arts.20120204.01  
Hall, Kenneth R. (1985). “Maritime Trade and State Development”. Wellington Allen and Unwin. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv9zckps 
Koeshandari, Ika Ismoerdijahwati. (2009). Damar Kurung dari Masa ke Masa. Dewan Kesenian 
Jawa Timur. 
Kumar, Ann L. (1987). “Review: Islam, the Chinese, and Indonesian Historiography --A Review 
Article”. The Journal of Asian Studies V ol. 46, No. 3 (Aug., 1987), pp. 603 -616 (14 pages). 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/2056901 
Kurniawan, Hendra. (2017). “The Role of Chinese in Coming of Islam to Indonesia: Teaching 
Materials Development Based on Multiculturalism”. Paramita: Historical Studies Journal, 27 
(2), 2017: 238-248. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15294/paramita.v27i2.8660 
Lin, Hsien -Ming &Sung, Yu -Hsien. (2020). “Negotiating  Multi -layered  Cultural  Identities:A  
Study  of  Pan -Chinese Immigrant Descendants in Belgium”. Migration Letters November 
2020 V olume: 17, No: 6, pp. 765–780. DOI: https://doi.org/10.33182/ml.v17i6.1087 
Lombard, Dennis. (2018). Nusa Java Cultural Crossroads. Penerbit Gramedia Pustaka. 
https://www.gramedia.com/products/nusa-jawa-silang-budaya-1-batas-batas-pembaratan 
Mibtadin & Rosidin. (2023). “Ruwahan Tradition, Spiritual Balance, and Religious Expression of 
Javanese People”. Migration Letters May 2023 V olume: 20, No: 3, pp. 534 -550. DOI: 
10.47059/ml.v20i3.2936 
Mills, J. V . G. (1970). Ma Huan: Ying -yai sheng -lan ‘The overall survey of the ocean's shores’ 
(1433), translated from the Chinese text edited by Feng Ch'eng -chün. (Hakluyt Society Extra 
Series, No. XLII.) xix, 393 pp., map [in end-pocket]. University Press for the Hakluyt Society. 
Muljana, Slamet. (1968). The downfall of Hindu -Javanese kingdom and the rise of Islamic states 
in Indonesia. [Doctoral dissertation, Louvain University]. 
Muhammad, Sardar. (2021). “Fire Symbolism in The Holy Qur’ón Analysis of Contrary 
Connotation”. Hamdard Islamicus V ol. 44 No. 1 (2021). DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.57144/hi.v44i1.197 
Mustakim. (2019). A Study of Maritime Social and Economic History of the 14th -18th Century. 
Penerbit Pagan. https://opac.perpusnas.go.id/DetailOpac.aspx?id=1203352 
141 The Impact of Sino-Javanese Muslim Migration on Gresik’ s Visual Culture 
 
Nelson, Roger. 2019. Modern Art of Southeast Asia Introductions from A to Z. Penn State 
University Press for National Gallery Singapore.  
Okasha, Th. (1977). Islamic Painting (V olume 4). Beirut: Arab Institute for Research & Publishing. 
Qurtuby, Sumanto. (2003). “The Chinese Current of Javanese Islam: Uncovering the History of the 
Chinese Role in the Islamisation Process in the Archipelago in the 15th -16th Century”. 
Perhimpunan Penulis Tionghoa Indonesia. 
https://opac.perpusnas.go.id/DetailOpac.aspx?id=1251815  
Qurtuby, Sumanto. (2009). “The Tao of of Islam: Cheng Ho and The Legacy of Chinese Muslims 
in Pre-Modern Java”. Studia Islamika V ol. 16, Number 1, 2009. DOI: 10.15408/sdi.v16i1.489 
Raditya, Iswara N. (2018, February 20). Soeharto's Political Intrigue that Banned and Perverted 
the Meaning of Chinese New Year. Tirto. https://tirto.id/intrik-politik-soeharto-yang-melarang-
dan-membelokkan-makna-imlek-cENG 
Reid, Anthony. (2014). Southeast Asia in the Period 1450 -1680 V olumes I and II. Yayasan Obor 
Indonesia. https://books.google.co.id/books?id= -
dtBDAAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover&hl=id#v=onepage&q&f=false  
Sai, Siew -Min & Hoon, Chang -Yau. (2013). Chinese Indonesians Reassessed History, Religion 
and Belonging. Routledge. https://www.routledge.com/Chinese -Indonesians-Reassessed-
History-Religion-and-Belonging/Sai-Hoon/p/book/9781138815612 
Sasongko, Agung. (2013, September 27).  Habibie: China's Greatest Gift to Indonesia is Islam. 
Republika.  https://khazanah.republika.co.id/berita/mtrx43/habibie -hadiah-terbesar-bangsa-
cina-ke-indonesia-adalah-islam 
Sims-Williams, Ursula. (2017, August 17). Illumination and decoration in Chinese Qur'ans. British 
Library Asian and Africa Studies Blog. https://blogs.bl.uk/asian -and-
african/2017/08/illumination-and-decoration-in-chinese-qurans.html 
Suryadinata, Leo. (2007). The Admiral Cheng Ho and Southeast Asia. Pustaka LP3ES Indonesia. 
https://opac.perpusnas.go.id/DetailOpac.aspx?id=292455 
Tewolde, Amanuel Isak. (2020). “Reframing Xenophobia in South Africa as Colour -Blind: The 
Limits of the Afro Phobia”. Migration Letters May 2020 V olume: 17, No: 3, pp. 433–444. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.33182/ml.v17i3.789  
The CLI Team. (2022, February 15). Chinese Lanterns: Their History and Modern Uses. Study 
CLI. https://studycli.org/chinese-culture/chinese-lanterns/ 
The editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2023, August 4). Lantern Festival. Britannica. 
https://www.britannica.com/topic/Lantern-Festival 
Ubaedillah, Achmad. (2023). “The Minority and The State Chinese Muslims in the Modern 
History of Indonesia”. Al -Jāmi‘ah: Journal of Islamic Studies V ol. 61, no. 1 (2023), pp. 107 -
136. DOI: 10.14421/ajis.2023.611.107-136 
Wain, Alexander. (2017). China and the Rise of Islam on Java. Edinburgh University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.3366/edinburgh/9781474417129.003.0021 
Welch, Anthony. (1979). Calligraphy in the Arts of the Muslim World. University of Texas Press. 
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/review-of-middle-east-studies/article/abs/anthony-
welch-calligraphy-in-the-arts-of-the-muslim-world-catalogue-of-exhibition-shown-at-asia-
house-gallery-1979-austin-university-of-texas-press-1979-216-pp-numerous-illustrations-12-
color-plates/22BC89A5F49967841D3E24326511C543 
Widodo, Dukut Imam. (2004). Grissee Tempo Doeloe. Pemerintah Kabupaten Gresik. 
https://opac.perpusnas.go.id/DetailOpac.aspx?id=943352 
Zainuddin, Oemar. (2010). Gresik 1896 -1916 a Social, Cultural and Economic History. Penerbit 
Bambu. https://komunitasbambu.id/product/kota -gresik-1896-1916-sejarah-sosial-budaya-dan-
ekonomi/ 
Zhang, Tao. (2018). “Study on the Lantern Culture of the Hakka Ancestral Land Ninghua”. 
Proceeding Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research (ASSEHR), 
volume 252 3rd International Conference on Judicial, Administrative and Humanitarian 
Aniendya Christianna et al. 142 
 
 
Migration Letters 
 
Problems of State Structures and Economic Subjects (JAHP 2018). DOI: 10.2991/jahp -
18.2018.2 
Zhou, Taomo. (2019). Migration in the Time of Revolution: China, Indonesia, and the Cold War. 
Cornell University Press. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7591/j.ctvfc51sh 
Zhang, Donia. (2022). “Pingyao Historic City and Qiao Family Courtyard”. Journal of Chinese 
Architecture and Urbanism 2022 V olume 4 Issue 1: 1 -19 . DOI: 47. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.36922/jcau.v4i1.47 