Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_07\documents\2021-Islahuddin-DiplomaticStrategiesPatani.pdf
Total Pages: 10
Statistics: Chars=38824, ThaiWords=7764.8, EnglishWords=7292

--- Page 1 of 10 ---
BAHASTRA Vol. 41 No. 2 Tahun 2021 | 172 – 181 
 
UNIVERSITAS AHMAD DAHLAN 
BAHASTRA 
http://journal.uad.ac.id/index.php/BAHASTRA 
 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.26555/bahastra email: bahastra@pbsi.uad.ac.id 
 
Diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom in Hikayat Patani : a 
sociology of literature study 
Islahuddina1*, Ku-Ares Tawandorlohb 2, Sumaiyah Menjaminc3 
Malay Department, Fatoni University, Thailand a,b,c,d 
islahuddin@fu.ac.th 1*; kuares.t@ftu.ac.th3, sumaiyah@ftu.ac.th 3 
Informasi artikel ABSTRAK 
Sejarah artikel: 
Diterima: 
Revisi: 
Dipublikasikan: 
 
Kata kunci: 
strategi 
diplomasi 
Kerajaan Patani 
Hikayat Patani 
sosiologi sastra 
 
 
 
 
8 oktober 2021 
25 oktober 2021 
30 oktober 2021 
 
 
 
Hikayat Patani adalah hikayat yang mengisahkan kerajaan Patani dan berbagai 
strategi diplomasi yang terdapat dalam kerajaan Patani. Tujuan penelitian ini 
adalah untuk memaparkan berbagai teks yang membahas tentang strategi 
diplomasi kerajaan Patani dalam Hikayat Patani dengan memakai pendekatan 
sosiologi sastra . Penelitian ini bersumber data Hikayat Patani . Teknik 
pengumpulan data menggunakan teknik pembacaan dan pencatatan . Teknik 
analisis data menggunakan teknik deskriptif kualitatif disertai teori sosiologi 
sastra. Hasil penelitian menyatakan bahwa strategi diplomasi kerajaan Patani 
yang terdapat dalam Hikayat Patani, yaitu: 1) diplomasi politik dengan Siam; 
2) diplomasi perang dengan Siam dan Palembang; 3 ) diplomasi perkawinan 
dengan Pahang dan Johor; 4 ) diplomasi perdagangan dengan Cina dan 
Malacca; 5 ) diplomasi kekuasaan dengan Kelantan; dan 6 ) diplomasi 
keagamaan dengan Pasai. Tambahan pula, hasil penelitian menyatakan bahwa 
strategi diplomasi kerajaan Patani yang terdapat dalam Hikayat Patani 
bertujuan untuk mempertahankan dan menjaga kehormatan kerajaan sebagai 
sebuah kerajaan yang berdaulat serta merupakan cermin masyarakat Patani 
pada waktu teks tersebut diciptakan. 
 ABSTRACT 
Key word: 
Strategy 
Diplomatic 
Patani kingdom 
Hikayat Patani 
Literary of sociology 
 
the Hikayat Patani is a saga that tells of the Patani kingdom and its various 
diplomatic strategies . This research aims to describe various excerpts 
discussing the diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom in the Hikayat 
Patani by using a literary sociology approach. The data source of this research 
was Hikayat Patani. The data collection techniques were reading and noting 
techniques. The data analysis technique used a qualitative descriptive technique 
accompanied by a theory of literature of sociology . The results of the study 
show that diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom in Hikayat Patani were: 
1) political diplomacy with Siam; 2) war diplomacy with Siam and Palembang; 
3) marital diplomacy with Pahang and Johor; 4 ) trade diplomacy with China 
and Malacca; 5) power diplomacy with Kelantan; and 6 ) religious diplomacy 
with Pasai . Moreover, the results of the research show that the diplomatic 
strategies of the Patani kingdom contained in Hikayat Patani aim to maintain 
and maintain the honor of the kingdom as a sovereign kingdom and a mirror 
of Patani society at the time the text was created. 
Copyright © 2018 Universitas Ahmad Dahlan. All Right Reserved 
 
Introduction 
Hikayat Patani is a saga about the Patani kingdom. A long time ago, the Patani kingdom was a kingdom in 
a small city in the Southern region of Thailand. The Patani kingdom was also a Malay sultanate, which had full 
authority, had a big harbor, and was actively engaged in international trade (Yock Fang, 2011:503). On the other 
hand, Hikayat Patani is a classic Malay literary work about history, hence, called historical literature . Historical 
literature mainly focuses on what happened in the palace, the fate of the kingdom, and its legacy, and was printed 
in the palace’s society (Yock Fang, 2011:433). 
It is estimated that Hikayat Patani was written around the 17t h century and the early 18 th century, 16901730 M. (Bradley, 2009:268). Hikayat Patani is also considered work with literary value, arranged in clarity and 
harmony in its narrative style (Braginsky, 1998:342). However, Braginsky (1998:342) emphasizes that Hikayat 
Patani is different from other Malay sagas in that it barely narrates myths, but it explains the establishment of the 
Patani kingdom, how the king of Patani converted to Islam, and the relationship with other neighboring kingdoms.

--- Page 2 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA |173 
 
The relationship between the Patani kingdom and its neighboring kingdoms was peaks and valleys. Various 
diplomatic strategies were conducted by the Patani kingdom to preserve its existence . ‘Strategy’ refers to the 
knowledge used to implement national policies of a country related to war and peace (KBBI, 2008). On the other 
hand, the official relation management between countries is called diplomacy. Thus, diplomatic strategy is a science 
and a strategy used by the Patani kingdom to manage the relationships with other countries or kingdoms. 
The diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom can be studied using the literary sociology approach. The 
study of society, institutions, and social processes is called sociology (Swingewood (1972) in Wiyatmi, 2013:56). Human in society is the object of both sociology and literature study. Meanwhile, how people subjectively and 
individually appreciate the social life in the society which is observable differentiates both studies. In addition, it 
is emphasized by Damono (1979:1) that literature research that concerns the social life of the society is called the 
sociology of literature approach. 
Conversely, there are two types of sociology of literature, namely: 1) a study concerning the factors beyond 
the literary work itself which is called the sociology of literature; 2) a study concerning the structure of a literary 
work and a particular society is called literary of sociology (Swingewood (1972) in Wiyatmi (2013:7-8). 
Three categories of sociology of literature are 1) the sociology of authors which concerns authorship; 2) 
the sociology of literature works which concerns the literary works; and 3) the sociology of the readers which 
concerns the impact of a literary work on its readers (Wellek and Warren (1994) in Damono, 1979:3). 
There is three sociology of literature approaches, they are: 1) sociology of literature on the relationship 
between the author and the reader; 2) sociology of literature discussing how literary works reflect the condition of 
the society; 3) sociology of literature on the relationship between literary works and social values (Ian Watt (1946) 
in Damono (1979:3). However, this present study focuses on the sociology of literature that becomes the reflection 
of Patani society in Hikayat Patani. 
Previously, Hikayat Patani has been studied using various paradigms, such as 1) structural paradigm by A. 
Teeuw and D.K. Wyatt (1970); Haji Salleh (2010); 2) historical paradigm by Francis R. Bradley (2009); and 
inter-structural paradigm by Islahuddin and Tawandorloh (2018). Furthermore, is/was chosen because 1) Hikayat 
Patani contains the diplomatic strategy of the Patani Kingdom; 2) Hikayat Patani contains the information from 
the past which may also be relevant in the present time/condition (Baroroh-Baried, et.al., 1994:2). Therefore, the 
research question of this study/research is: How are the diplomatic strategies of the Patani Kingdom in Hikayat 
Patani? This research aims to describe the diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom in Hikayat Patani. 
 
Methodology 
This research employed the descriptive qualitative method. Descriptive in that the illustration is systematic, 
and the relationship among the phenomena studied is revealed in the said method (Nasir, 2011). Moreo ver, the 
description is systematic, factual, and accurate, based on the fact, the characteristics of a particular population, and 
the comprehensive description which is the main aim of a descriptive method (Yusuf, 2007:53). The researcher is 
the primary instrument of the research (Sugiyono, 2013). 
The data source of this research is Hikayat Patani text by A. Teeuw and D.K. Wyatt (1970), published by 
Martinus Nijhoff (The Hague) and another Hikayat Patani text by Siti Hawa Haji Salleh (2010), published by 
Balai Bahasa dan Pustaka. The data collection techniques were reading and taking notes. The data were analyzed 
using the qualitative descriptive technique. The data collected were categorized and analyzed using the sociology 
of literature. The steps in analy zing the data were 1) finding the data; 2) classifying the data; 3) describing the 
data; 4) concluding the data, and 5) presenting the data descriptively. 
 
Result and discussion 
This part of the article discusses the result of the research and the discussion which is the answer to the 
formulation of the problem, and describes the diplomatic strategy of the Patani kingdom in Hikayat Patani. A 
timeline has been made before continuing the discussion as follows:

--- Page 3 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA | 174 
 
 
Table 1. The timeline of Hikayat Patani 
No. The name of 
the event 
Reign HP Teeuw 
& Wyatt 
HP Haji 
Salleh 
1. Political 
diplomacy with 
Siam 
-Sultan 
Mudaffar Syah 
-Sultan 
Manzur Syah 
-pg. 16-17, 
21. 
-pg. 33-34 
-pg.10-11, 
13. 
-pg. 22 
2. War 
diplomacy with 
Siam and 
Palembang 
- Sultan 
Mudaffar Syah 
- Raja Ungu 
- Sultan 
Manzur Syah 
-pg.23, 
-pg.55, 
-pg.58, 28, 
28-29 
-pg.15, 
-pg.37, 
-pg.38-39, 
18, 19 
3. Marriage 
diplomacy with 
Pahang and Johor 
-Raja Ijau 
 
-Raja Ungu 
-pg.51-52. 
 
-pg.55, 66 -
67, 67 
-pg.34 
 
-pg.36-37, 
45, 45 
4. Trade 
diplomacy with 
China and Malacca 
-Sultan 
Ismail Syah 
 
-pg.12, 13, 
84 
-pg.7, 8, 57 
5. Religion 
diplomacy with 
Pasai 
-Sultan 
Ismail Syah 
-pg.10-11, 
15 
-pg.6-7, 10 
6. Power 
diplomacy with 
Kelantan 
-Raja 
Kuning 
-Raja Bakal 
-pg.75 -pg.50-51 
Political Diplomacy with Siam 
 The first diplomatic strategy of the Patani kingdom is political diplomacy with the Siam kingdom 
(Ayutia). This strategy was conducted when Sultan Mudaffar Syah visited Siam (Ayutia). The visitation was done 
to keep a good relationship between both kingdoms, as written in the excerpt below. 
 
Setelah berapa hari baginda berlayar itu maka baginda pun sampailah Ayutia. Arakian maka orang kuala 
pun segera bersembahkan pada bakelang mengatakan, “Raja Patani datang hendak mengadap Duli Bercau Yang 
Maha Mulia.” Maka bakelang pun dengan segeranya masuk bersembahkan ke bawah Duli Bercau. Setelah Bercau 
mendengar sembah bakelang itu, maka Bercau pun terlalu sukacita, lalu menitahkan segala apya opra’ menyambut 
Sultan Mudaffar Syah itu . Syahadan maka baginda pun naiklah mengadap Bercau dengan persembahannya yang 
indah-indah (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:16-17; Haji Salleh, 2010:10-11). 
 The excerpt above explains the Patani kingdom’s first visit to Siam (Ayutia) under the reign of Sultan 
Mudaffar Syah . Giving gorgeous presents during the visit was one of the diplomacy strategies of the Patani 
kingdom to keep a good relationship with the Siam kingdom(Ayutia). 
 Moreover, there was Sultan Mudaffar Syah’s second visit to the Siam kingdom. The Siam kingdom gave 
a warm welcome upon the visit of the Patani kingdom troupe. Read the excerpt below. 
Hatta antara berapa hari baginda di laut maka baginda pun sampailah ke Siam. Setelah keesokan harinya 
maka segala apya opra pun datanglah, dititahkan oleh Bercau menyambut baginda . Arakian maka baginda pun 
naiklah mengadap Bercau dengan persembah pun terlalu banyak seperti adat segala raja-raja yang meminang. Maka 
Bercau pun terlalu sukacita melihat baginda datang itu serta dengan kasih mesranya seperti mana putera Bercau 
yang benar, demikianlah laku Bercau itu dan diberi duduk pun hampir dengan pintu Kota Wang (Teeuw & Wyatt, 
1970:21; Haji Salleh, 2010:13). 
 The excerpt explains that the Patani kingdom was under the governance of Sultan Mudaffar Syah when 
they visited Siam, giving gorgeous presents and in turn, the Siam kingdom welcomed them happily and gave their 
trope a place to sleep in an area close to the throne of Siam kingdom. 
 In addition, the third visit of the Patani kingdom was done by their representative, Seri Agar. The 
diplomatic strategy of the Patani kingdom in their third visit aimed to rebuild the relationship between the Patani 
kingdom and the Siam kingdom that had been tense after a war between the two kingdoms broke out. It is 
illustrated in the excerpt below.

--- Page 4 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA |175 
 
Hatta berapa hari di laut maka Seri Agar pun sampailah ke Siam . Maka dipersembahkan orang kepada 
bakelang. Maka bakelang pun segera masuk mengadap Bercau persembahkan utusan dari Patani datang hendak 
mengadap Duli Yang Maha Mulia . Maka Bercau pun terlalu s ukacita mendengar sembah bakelang mengatakan 
utusan Patani datang itu . Maka titah baginda Bercau kepada bakelang, “Suruhlah pergi sambut perahu utusan 
Patani itu, bawa mudik dengan segeranya.” (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:33-34; Haji Salleh, 2010:22). 
 The excerpt explains that the Patani kingdom did a diplomacy strategy for the third time to build a good 
relationship between the two kingdoms because before their relationship became tense, they had had a war for the 
first time. Thus, their visit was welcomed warmly by the Siam kingdom. 
 The diplomatic relationship between the Patani kingdom and the Siam kingdom is a mirror of what 
happened to the Patani kingdom. Their diplomatic relationship went through hot and cold, harmonious at times 
and tense at the other times. The diplomatic relationship between the two kingdoms begun since Sultan Mudaffar 
Syah made a visit to Siam (Ayutia ). During that time, Sultan Mudaffar Syah was dissatisfied with how the Siam 
kingdom welcomed them . After that, Sultan Mahmud Syah continue d the diplomatic relationship to keep the 
good relationship between the two kingdoms (Abd. Rahman, 2018:9). 
 However, the Patani Kingdom had formed political diplomacy with the Siam kingdom since a long time 
ago, proved by their visit to the Siam kingdom. Moreover, the Patani kingdom attacked Siam for the first time in 
1563 when the Siam kingdom was not yet stable after losing in the war with another kingdom (Hayimasae, 2009). 
 According to the results of the analysis of several texts, it can be concluded t hat the political diplomacy 
strategy of the Patani kingdom was in the form of visits to the Siam kingdom, as written in Hikayat Patani, to set 
up a more harmonious relationship among them. The statement is supported with data saying that the relationship 
between two countries is always dynamic and that strategies are needed to stabilize it, by the Patani kingdom’s visit 
to the Siam kingdom. Moreover, the political diplomacy strategy is also a reflection and reality of the Patani 
kingdom in establishing a harmonious relationship with the Siam Kingdom. 
War diplomacy with Siam and Palembang 
 The second diplomatic strategy of the Patani kingdom is war diplomacy with Siam and Palembang. The 
first war diplomacy was carried through when Sultan Mudaffar Syah was in Siam (Ayutia) and was not satisfied 
with how the Siam kingdom welcomed them, and saw a chance in taking over Siam (Ayutia) when the Siam 
kingdom was in conflict. The war diplomacy strategies are presented in the excerpt below. 
Setelah didengar oleh segala menteri hulubalang Bercau dengan segala rakyatnya bunyi gendang raya itu, 
maka segala isi negeri itu pun berhimpunlah kesemuanya; kepada sangkanya Bercau itu ada lagi dalam mahligai itu, 
lalu dilanggarnya Kota Wang itu berkeliling . Maka segala menteri hulubalang dan rakyat Patani pun keluar dari 
dalam Kota Wang itu lalu bertikam dengan rakyat Siam terlalu ramai . Maka segala rakyat Patani pun patah 
perangnya, lalu undur masuk ke dalam Kota Wang pula . Maka pintu kota itu pun ditutupnya (Teeuw & Wyatt, 
1970:23; Haji Salleh, 2010:15). 
 The excerpt explains when Sultan Mudaffar Syah visited the Siam (Ayutia) kingdom and was not satisfied 
with how they were welcomed, and saw a big conflict in the said kingdom, Sultan Mudaffar Syah initiated to attack 
the Siam (Ayutia) kingdom, thus, a big war broke out between the two kingdoms. The war lasted several days until 
the Patani troupe was cornered and resulting in the death of Sultan Mudaffar Syah and a loss for the Patani 
kingdom. 
 On the other hand, the war diplomacy with Siam was done when Apya Deca (Patthalung) was angry and 
disappointed because his engagement with Putri Kuning was called off by the Patani kingdom . Apya Deca asked 
for the Siam kingdom’s help to attack the Patani kingdom. Read the excerpt below: 
Arakian maka khabar itu pun dipersembahkan orang kepada Apya Deca . Maka Apya Deca pun terlalu 
marah lalu pergi minta tolong kepada bakelang menyembah Bercau hendak menyerang Patani. Arakian maka Apya 
Deca pun dibawa bakelang masuk mengadap Be rcau. Syahadan maka bakelang pun berdatang sembah kepada 
Bercau seperti kehendak Apya Deca itu. Maka Bercau pun memberi titah kepada bakelang suruh berlengkap rakyat 
dan senjata dan apya opra dan segala akun awamin mengantarkan Apya Deca ke Patani . Dan suatu cetera rakyat 
Siam itu seketi banyaknya dan suatu kaul pula delapan laksa . Syahadan pada masa itu Siam belum lagi tahu 
berperahu di laut, jikalau berapa banyak pun berjalan itulah (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:55; Haji Salleh, 2010:37). 
 The excerpt explains tha t another war between the Patani kingdom and the Siam kingdom broke out 
when Apya Deca (Patthalung) was furious and asked for the Siam kingdom’s help to attack the Patani kingdom. 
The Patani people got ready to put up a defense after Apya Deca (Patthalung) and the Siam kingdom’s attack. 
 The war continued, and the Patani kingdom formulated an effective war strategy in which they took away 
the food supplies of both Apya Deca (Patthalung) and the Siam kingdom’s army resulting in those soldiers died 
of hunger, as written in the excerpt below.

--- Page 5 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA | 176 
 
Hatta dengan demikian tujuh hari juga Apya Deca duduk di Patani itu, maka segala hulubalang Siam pun 
kembalilah dengan sebab kelaparan segala rakyatnya itu, dari kerana pada masa itu banyak orang Patani masuk 
makan nasi bersama-sama dengan Siam itu tiada dilihatnya (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:58; Haji Salleh, 2010: 38-39). 
 The excerpt above tells how the war strategies of the Patani kingdom were quite effective during the war 
that lasted for 7 days. They took away the food supplies of both Apya Deca (Patthalung) and the Siam kingdom’s 
army, so that they got starved and, thus, lead to the victory of the Patani kingdom. 
 The second war diplomacy was used against Palembang when the Palembang kingdom attacked the Patani 
kingdom. The Palembang kingdom assumed that the Patani kingdom, which had no male king at that time, was a 
weak kingdom. Accordingly, they sent Kiai Badarto to attack the Patani kingdom. Read the excerpt below. 
Hatta maka khabar itu pun sampailah ke Palembang . Maka sultan Palembang pun menyuruhkan 
penggawanya yang bernama Kiai Badar itu menjarah ke Patani membawa rakyat ada seleksa banyaknya . Setelah 
Kiai Badar sampai ke bandar Patani, maka Kiai Badar pun peranglah dengan orang Patani, ada lima hari lima malam 
Kiai Badar perang itu, tiada juga dapat naik ke darat . Berapa-berapa dikuatnya hendak naik ke pantai banda r itu, 
tidak dapat juga. Maka Kiai Badar pun kembalilah (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:28; Haji Salleh, 2010:18). 
 The excerpt illustrates when the Palembang kingdom heard the news about the Patani kingdom that had 
lost their king, they asked Kiai Badar to attack them. However, the war was countered by the Patani kingdom, and 
Kiai Badar failed in taking over Patani and had to go back to Palembang with nothing. 
 After the failure of Kiai Badar in conquering the Patani kingdom, the Palembang kingdom was in a rage 
and sent Kiai Kelasang to carry out another attack on Patani as explained in the excerpt below. 
Arakian maka Kiai Kesalang pun dititahkan sultan Palembang menyerang Patani membawa rakyat ada seketi 
banyaknya. Setelah Kiai Kelasang sampai ke Patani maka Kiai Ke lasang pun peranglah dengan orang Patani lari 
naik menjarah ke bandar . Maka segala rakyat Patani pun patahlah perangnya lalu undur masuk ke dalam kota . 
Maka diturut oleh orang Palembang hingga sampai ke padang di hadapan pintu gerbang itu . Maka dilawan oleh 
orang Patani dari dalam kota (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:28-29; Haji Salleh, 2010:19). 
 The excerpt tells that even though the Palembang kingdom sent Kiai Kelasang to attack for the second 
time to conquer the Patani kingdom, they were, again, countered by the Patani kingdom. Therefore, Kiai Kelasang 
failed in conquering the Patani kingdom and had to go back to Palembang with nothing. 
 The war diplomacy strategy of the Patani kingdom illustrates the mirror and the reality of the Patani 
Kingdom. Moreover, the war diplomacy strategy was carried out to defend the sovereignty of the kingdom. The 
first war of the Patani kingdom was against the Siam kingdom due to Sultan Mudaffar Syah’s dissatisfaction when 
he visited the Siam (Ayutia) kingdom so that Sultan Mudaffar Syah attacked them in the next visit to seek revenge 
in 1534 M (Abd. Rahman, 2018:9). 
 The war continued until the Patani kingdom was ruled by Raja -Raja Pelangi and the next one (Abdul 
Aziz, 2015:2). After the fourth time the Siam kingdom failed in con quering the Patani kingdom, they finally 
succeeded in the reign of Sultan Muhammad (1774-1785 M.). The army from Siam defeated and conquered the 
Patani kingdom so that the Patani kingdom was ruled by the governance of Siam-Thai in Bangkok (Abd. Rahman, 
2018:10; Abdul Aziz, 2015:2). 
 Along these lines, Hayimasae (2009) states that the war between Patani and Siam broke out 12 times. In 
the first war, Patani attacked Siam in 1563. After that, the Siam kingdom attacked Patani seven times in 1603, 
1632, 1634, 1678, 1709, and 1786, until finally, they succeeded in conquering the Patani kingdom. Next, Patani 
attacked the Siam kingdom five times in 1789, 1808, 1832, 1838, and 1848. However, the attacks were 
successfully countered by the Siam kingdom resultin g in Patani kingdom becoming a part of the Siam kingdom. 
Moreover, Aziz Yaacob (2012) states that the Siam kingdom attacked Patani in the reign of governance of Raja 
Hijau (1603), Raja Ungu (1632, 1633), and Raja Kuning (1638). After the death of Raja Kuning, in 1786, the 
Siam kingdom attacked the Patani kingdom again and succeeded in conquering the Patani kingdom under their 
reign. 
 According to the analysis result of several texts, it can be concluded that the war diplomatic strategy of 
the Patani kingdom implemented to Siam and Palembang was written in Hikayat Patani and aimed to protect the 
sovereignty and honor of the Patani kingdom. Additionally, data were saying that the war diplomatic strategy was 
carried out by the Patani kingdom to protect the sovereignty and honor of the Patani kingdom. On the other hand, 
the war's diplomatic strategy was a reflection and reality of Patani kingdom’s people in countering the war with 
the Siam kingdom. 
Marriage diplomacy with Pahang and Johor 
 The third diplomatic strategy employed by the Patani kingdom was marriage diplomacy with Pahang and 
Johor. The first marriage diplomacy with Pahang was conducted when Raja Ungu married the king of Pahang.

--- Page 6 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA |177 
 
The marriage aimed to support a good relationship between the two kingdoms, as well as becoming a token of the 
equal relationship with other Malay kingdoms, especially the Pahang kingdom . After the passing of the king of 
Pahang, Raja Ungu came back to Patani as mentioned in the excerpt below. 
Syahadan maka khabar raja Pahang pun sudah mati maka Phra Cau pun menyuruhkan laksmana dengan 
pegawai hulubalang berlengkap pergi menyambut adinda baginda yang di Pahang itu. Setelah sudah lengkap maka 
laksamana pun masuk persembahkan Phra Cau, lalu bermohon turun ke perahu dan surat pun diarak orang turun 
ke perahu. Setelah sudah laksamana menerima surat itu maka laksamana dengan segala hulubalang yang dititahkan 
itu pun belayarlah (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:51-52; Haji Salleh, 2010:34). 
 The excerpt explains that the marriage diplomacy employed by the Patani kingdom was carried through 
by marrying off Raja Ungu to the king of Pahang to maintain a good relationship between the two kingdoms. 
However, when the king of Pahang passed away, Raja Biru ordered an admiral to pick Raja Ungu up and br ing 
her back to the Patani kingdom. 
 The second marriage diplomacy of the Patani kingdom was with the Johor kingdom. When Raja Ungu 
was bestowed with the Malay title, Syah Alam, she married off her daughter, Putri Kuning, to Yang Dipertuan 
Johor. The marriage was not without conflict as Putri Kuning was previously engaged to Apya Deca (Patthalung). 
However, Raja Ungu continued the marriage to improve the relationship between the Patani kingdom and the 
Johor kingdom which used to be disharmonious as written in the excerpt below. 
Hatta antara berapa bulan maka Raja Kuning pun dipersuamikan oleh Syah Alam dengan Yang Dipertuan 
Johor (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:55; Haji Salleh, 2010:36-37). 
 The excerpt tells that one of the diplomacy strategies of the Patani kingdom was marriage diplomacy, 
which is the marriage between Yang Dipertuan Johor and Raja Kuning. This marriage was the diplomatic strategy 
employed by Raja Ungu to improve the relationship between the Patani kingdom and the Johor kingdom that 
used to be enemies. 
 The marriage relationship between Raja Kuning and Yang Dipertuan Johor did not last long because had 
an affair. After Raja Kuning knew about the affair, Yang Dipertuan Johor went back to Johor but left her mother 
in Patani as written in the excerpt below. 
Hatta maka Yang Dipertuan pun sampailah ke Sai, maka bendahara Sai pun persembahkan perahu dua 
buah dengan beras bekalan. Maka Yang Dipertuan pun turunlah ke perahu lalu belayar kembali ke Johor dan 
bondanya tinggal di Patani kerana Yang Dipertuan tiada dapat masuk ke dalam negeri itu (Teeuw & Wyatt, 
1970:66-67; Haji Salleh, 2010:45). 
 The excerpt shows that after the affair of Yang Dipertuan Johor was known to Raja Kuning, Yang 
Dipertuan Johor departed from Patani to Johor and left her mother who was still in Patani. 
 The betrayal of Yang Dipertuan Johor towards Raja Kuning angered her, yet she was still gentle by asking 
Raja Lela to go to Johor, to take the mother of Yang Dipertuan Johor back to her homeland, as stated in the 
excerpt below. 
Hatta antara berapa bulan maka Phra Cau pun berbicara hendak menyuruh mengantarkan bonda Yang 
Dipertuan itu, maka seorang pun tiada bercakap . Arakian maka Phra Cau pun menitahkan memanggil Raja Lela 
di Kandang Kerbau (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:67; Haji Salleh, 2010:45). 
 The excerpt explains that when the mother of Yang Dipertuan Johor lived in Patani, Raja Kuning still 
treated her kindly by ordering Raja Lela to send her back to Johor to keep a good relationship be tween the two 
kingdoms. 
 The marriage diplomacy strategy of the Patani kingdom aimed to establish a good relationship and show 
the sovereignty between the two kingdoms as the mirror and reality happened in the Patani kingdom. Similarly, 
there were data men tioning that the marriage diplomacy strategy between the Patani kingdom and the Pahang 
kingdom aimed to set up a good relationship between the two kingdoms. Meanwhile, the marriage diplomacy 
strategy between the Patani kingdom and the Johor kingdom aimed to improve the relationship between the two 
countries which used to be enemies (Shahul Hamid dan Yaapar, 2015:47). 
 Moreover, Hayimasae (2009) adds that the marriage diplomacy strategy of the Patani kingdom was 
carried out by marrying Raja Ungu (1624-1635) to Sultan Pahang, Sultan Abdul Ghafur. After that, in 1636 they 
did the marriage diplomacy by marrying off Raja Kuning to Putera Johor to help them during the war with the 
Siam kingdom. 
 According to the analysis of several excerpts, it can be concluded th at the marriage diplomacy of Patani 
kingdom with the kingdoms of Pahang and Johor in Hikayat Patani aimed to keep a good relationship between 
two Malay kingdoms. Moreover, there is another data saying that the marriage diplomacy carried through in the 
Malay land was the strategy of the Patani kingdom to set up a good relationship with another Malay kingdom

--- Page 7 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA | 178 
 
that used to be enemies. On the other hand, the marriage diplomacy strategy was a reflection and reality of the 
people of the Patani kingdom in strengthening the sovereignty of their kingdom. 
Trade Diplomacy with China and Malacca 
 The fourth diplomatic strategy of the Patani kingdom is trade diplomacy with China and Malacca. The 
first one, the trade diplomacy with China was carried out when Patani became one of the international harbors 
for/and trading which was brimming with traders coming from various countries, one of which is China. Read 
the following excerpt. 
Hatta antara berapa tahun lamanya maka datang sebuah wangkang Cina , lain daripada adat purbakala 
persembahnya itu, ada sebuah peluru batu, besarnya ada seperti bakul muat delapan gantang (Teeuw & Wyatt, 
1970:12; Haji Salleh, 2010:7). 
 The excerpt explains that one of the diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom was international trade, 
in which they opened a path for international trade, including for Chinese traders who brought various 
commodities to the Patani kingdom. 
 Aside from the trade diplomacy with China, the Patani kingdom also set up the second trade diplomacy 
with Malacca traders, as written in the excerpt below. 
Syahadan dalam tiga tahun itu datanglah sebuah selub dari Melaka berniaga membawa dagangan terlalu 
indah (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:13; Haji Salleh, 2010:8). 
 The excerpt explains that the second trade diplomacy, with Malacca, happened when the Patani kingdom 
opened international trade diplomacy, and traders from various countries came to the kingdom, including those 
from Malacca. The traders from Malacca brought in various exquisite commodities for the Patani people. The 
traders, then, bought various corps from the people of the Patani kingdom. 
 Since the Patani kingdom became an international harbor, the Patani kingdom became a prosperous 
kingdom in which people live safely and healthily. Furthermore, the illustration of the kingdom’s prosperity was 
clear from how no one wanted to take the golds and silvers put all over the place, as illustrated in the excerpt 
below. 
Kepada masa itulah dalam daerah negeri Patani sangat senang dan sentosanya segala rakyat. Jikalau (tiada) 
datang daripada berlayar, tatkala sampai perahu itu ke labuhan bandar Patani ini tiadalah lagi ditunggu perahu di 
labuhan itu. Jikalau jenis emas perak sekalipun tiadalah siapa-siapa yang mengambil dia (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:84; 
Haji Salleh, 2010:57). 
 The excerpt tells that the Patani kingdom became one of the most prosperous kingdoms in Malay because 
they had an international harbor raising the economy of the Patani people. This condition was illustrated as even 
if anyone put golds and silvers on any place, no one would take them. 
 The international trade diplomacy strategy of the Patani kingdom was the mirror and reality that 
happened in the Patani kingdom under the reign of Raja Ijau (Hijau). On the other hand, the fall of Malacca to 
Portugal in 1511 M forced some Islamic traders to move to the Patani harbor. Consequently, Raja Ijau was being 
careful not to let Patani harbor experience the same thing as the Malaka harbor (Shahul Hamid dan Yaapar, 
2015:41). 
 Similarly, the peak of success of the Patani kingdom happened in the 17th century. The Patani kingdom 
ruled the harbors and could compete with other countries, such as Pahang, Johor, and other kingdoms in the 
nation. The Patani kingdom also ruled the gulf of Siam and the South China sea, hence, they become a well-known 
center of trades in South East Asia. (Razak Mahmud and Fathy al -Fatani, 2018:151-152). Abdul Aziz (2015) 
adds that the Patani kingdom had established international trade relationships with various countries in the world, 
including China and Malacca. 
 Based on the analysis of those excerpts, it can be concluded that the strategies for trade diplomacy 
employed by the Patani kingdom on China and Malacca were written Hikayat Patani and aimed to improve the 
economy of the Patani kingdom and their people. Similarly, there was data saying that the trade diplomacy strategy 
employed by the Patani kingdom aimed to improve the economy of the kingdom as well as the people. Trade 
diplomacy strategy was the reflection and reality of the Patani kingdom in setting up international trades. 
Religious Diplomacy with Pasai 
 The fifth diplomatic strategy of the Patani kingdom is religious diplomacy with Pasai. This diplomacy 
was conducted when the first Patani king, Sultan Ismail Syah, converted to Islam under the teaching of a man from 
Pasai, Syekh Said. Read this excerpt. 
Setelah Syekh Said itu datang, maka raja pun sangatlah memuliakan Syekh Said itu . Maka titah baginda, 
“Adapun hamba memanggil tuan hamba ini, kerana janji hamba dengan tuan hamba ini hendak masuk agama Islam 
itulah.” Setelah Syekh Said mendengar titah raja demikian itu, maka Syekh Said pun segera mengucup tangan raja

--- Page 8 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA |179 
 
itu, lalu dijunjungnya . Sudah itu diajarkanlah kalimat syahadat oleh Syekh demikian bunyinya, “Asyhadu an la 
ilaha illaLlah waasyhadu anna Muhammadan rasululLah.” Maka raja pun kararlah membawa agama Islam. Setelah 
sudah raja mengucap kalimat syahadat itu, maka Syekh Said pun men gajarkan kalimat syahadat kepada segala 
menteri hulubalang dan rakyat yang ada hadir itu pula (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:10-11; Haji Salleh, 2010:6-7). 
 The excerpt above explains that the religious diplomacy with Pasai was conducted when the first Patani 
king had to keep a promise to change his religion to Islam after his illness was cured by a Pasai man, Syekh Said. 
The process for the Patani kingdom to change their religion to Islam was not easy. The king had to fall sick three 
times until he finally changed his religion into Islam by professing his faith (shahada) under the teaching of Syekh 
Said. 
 Moreover, religious diplomacy with the Pasai kingdom was conducted when discussing with another man 
from Pasai, Syekh Safiuddin related to the condition and development of Islam in Patani, and the strategy to be a 
good Muslim, which is by building a mosque, as written in the excerpt below. 
Hatta antara berapa lama maka datang pula seorang Pasai bernama Syekh Safiuddin. Maka Syekh Safiuddin 
pun berbuat rumah di pada ng di luar pintu gerbang itu . Arakian maka Syekh Safiuddin pun dipanggil raja 
bertanyakan perintah agama Islam. Maka sembah Syekh Safiuddin, “Adapun negeri Islam itu mahulah ada sebuah 
masjid tempat segala rakyat menyembah Allah Taala, maka nyatalah agama Islam; dan jikalau tiada masjid itu jua 
tiadalah kenyataan agama Islam itu.” (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:15; Haji Salleh, 2010:10). 
 The excerpt of the text recounts that the religious diplomatic strategy was conducted by the Patani 
kingdom through embracing Pasai preachers in the Patani kingdom related to the development of Islam. The man 
from Pasai, Syekh Safiuddin, suggested building a mosque as the center of Islamic events and education in Patani. 
 The religious diplomacy conducted by the Patani kingdom was the reflection and the reality of what 
happened in Patani during the reign of Sultan Ismail Syah, the first king of Patani to convert to Islam. Thus, the 
Patani kingdom supported to build of the mosque as the center of the development of Islam. After that, in the 
reign of Raja Ijau Kerisek mosque, was built using red bricks, different from the other mosques which were 
generally built using woods (Shahul Hamid dan Yaapar, 2015:46). Patani became the center for Islamic education 
marked by the vast amount of people from various countries who came to learn Islam and by the establishments 
of Pondok (traditional Islamic boarding school) in Patani (Shahul Hamid dan Yaapar, 2015:46). 
 The establishment of Islamic schools got full supports from the Patan i kingdom that it brought rapid 
development in the said area of concern. One among the first established Islamic school was Pondok Pauh Bok 
built by al-Syeikh Muhammad Jailani al-Jarimi al-Fatani. The school was in Narathiwat province, close to Teluk 
Manok village where Masjid Wadi Husin, the oldest mosque in Thailand, was built (Abd. Rahman, 2018:11). 
Additionally, there was a preacher in Pattani province named Faqih Wan Musa Bin Muhammad Saleh al -Laqihi 
who opened another Islamic school or Pondok in Sena village, Patani which was the first Islamic school in Patani 
(Fathy al-Fatani, 2013:5). 
 Meanwhile, Suryadi (2017) states that Islam in Patani was brought in in 1457 by a preacher from Pasai, 
proved by the similarity of tombstones of the king of Patani and Pasai which was the Aceh Darussalam tombstone, 
influenced by the Pasai kingdom. On the other hand, Hayimasae (2009) adds that the spread of Islam in Patani 
was brought in by a Syeikh of Arab descent named Syeikh Ali Abdullah, who also spread Islam to Kelantan. 
 Based on the analysis of the excerpts, it can be concluded that the religious diplomacy strategy was 
conducted by the Patani kingdom towards Pasai people as written in the Hikayat Patani aimed to guide the Patani 
king to embrace and make advancement in the spread of Islam in Patani. Similarly, there was data illustrating that 
the religious diplomacy strategy of the Patani kingdom aimed to aid the spread of Islam in Patani by involving 
people from Pasai as their preachers in the Patani kingdom. The strategy was the reflection and reality of the 
people of the Patani kingdom in spreading Islam in their areas. 
Power diplomacy with Kelantan 
 The sixth diplomatic strategy of the Patani kingdom was power diplomacy with the Kelantan kingdom. 
This diplomacy was conducted after Raja Kuning had passed away and they had no one to continue the reign of 
the Patani kingdom as illustrated in the excerpt below. 
Setelah berapa lamanya Phra Cau di atas takhta kerajaan maka Phra Cau pun gering lalu mangkat . Maka 
mayat Phra Cau pun dikuburkan oranglah . Dan Phra Cau itulah dipanggil orang Marhum Besar sebab kerana 
bersuamikan Yang Dipertuan Besar Johor. 
Maka sekalian menteri pun berhimpunlah berbicara kerana tiadalah lagi salasilah raja yang hilir dari hulu 
itu (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:75; Haji Salleh, 2010:50).

--- Page 9 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA | 180 
 
 The excerpt explains that the power diplomacy was conducted by the Patani kingdom towards the 
Kelantan kingdom after Raja Kuning had passed away without having any heirs. Hence, the ministers discussed 
doing power diplomacy to avoid power vacuum in the sovereignty of the Patani kingdom. 
 The power diplomacy was conducted by handing over the power of Patani kingdom to the Kelantan 
kingdom. Raja Bakal, the king of Kelantan, was asked to fill in the vacant position in the Patani kingdom as written 
in the excerpt below. 
Sebermula ada seorang asal anak raja Kelantan duduk di Teluk, Raja Bakal namanya . Maka Raja Bakal 
itulah ditabalkan orang. Itulah asal anak-anak raja Kelantan yang kerajaan di Patani ini (Teeuw & Wyatt, 1970:75; 
Haji Salleh, 2010: 51). 
 The excerpt illustrates that there was a power vacuum in the Patani kingdom after the passing of Raja 
Kuning, which led to the ministers asking for Raja Bakal, the king of Kelantan, to fill in the position and lead the 
Patani kingdom alongside the Kelantan kingdom. 
 The power diplomacy carried out by the Patani kingdom was the reflection and the reality of what 
happened in the Patani kingdom when they faced a power vacuum. The Patani kingdom was led by the Kelantan 
kingdom in 1651 M after the passing of Raja Kuning (Razak Mahmud and Fathy al-Fatani, 2018:158). Kelantan 
was previously an area colonized by the Patani kingdom was ordained to rule the Patani kingdom to avoid a power 
vacuum (Syukri, 1985:36). Hence, without a king who can lead the government well, and barrages of attack from 
the Siam kingdom caused the fall of the Patani kingdom to the rule of the Siam kingdom (Fathy al -Fatani, 
1994:71-72). 
 Hayimasae (2009), however, states that Patani and Kelantan were an area that was merged for 131 years. 
The merging of the two areas aimed to counter the attack from the Siam kingdom. Similarly, Abd Rahmad and 
Mohamad Shukri (2011) add that in the 17th century, Patani, Kelantan, and Terengganu belonged to the same 
area under the same political governance named the Patani Besar country. 
 Based on the analysis of the texts, it can be concluded that the power diplomacy was conducted by the 
Patani kingdom to the Kelantan kingdom written in Hikayat Patani aimed to avoid power vacuum and to defend 
the Patani kingdom. Therefore, the war diplomacy was a reflection and reality of the people of the Patani kingdom 
in defending their sovereignty. 
 
Conclusion 
 The diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom in Hikayat Patani, were: 1) political diplomacy with 
Siam aimed to establish a harmonious relationship between the two kingdoms; 2) war diplomacy with Siam and 
Palembang aimed to defend their sovereignty and honor; 3) marriage diplomacy with Pahang and Johor aimed to 
establish a good relationship with other Malay kingdoms that used to be enemies; 4) trade diplomacy with China 
and Malacca aimed to improve their economy and their people’s prosperity; 5) religiou s diplomacy with Pasai 
aimed to support the spread of Islam in Patani by involving Pasai people as the preachers in their kingdom, and 
6) power diplomacy with Kelantan aimed to avoid power vacuum and maintain their reign. 
 Furthermore, the result of this research shows that the diplomatic strategies of the Patani kingdom written 
in Hikayat Patani aimed to defend and keep the honor of the Patani kingdom as a sovereign kingdom and as a 
reflection of the people of the Patani kingdom during the time of the writing of the text. 
 
Acknowledgment 
The researchers thanked the lecturers of the Bahasa Melayu department of Fatoni University (FTU), 
Thailand as their affiliated institution. The researchers also thanked the redaction of Bahastra for their suggestion 
and input in the writing of this article draft. 
 
References 
Abd Rahman, N . N., & Mohamad Shukri, M . N. ( 2011). Hubungan Rentas Sempadan dan Pengaruhnya 
Terhadap Pembentukan Pemikiran Hukum Islam di Kelantan (Cross-Border Relations and Its Influence 
on Formation of Islamic Legal Thoughts in Kelantan ). Journal of Al -Tamaddun. Vol. 6 (1), 51 –73. 
Retrieved from https://ejournal.um.edu.my/index.php/JAT/article/view/8545. 
Abd. Rahman, Hamdan. ( 2018). Penggunaan Bahasa Melayu dalam Naskhah Melayu Patani . Kuala Lumpur: 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 
Abdul Aziz, Sohaimi. (2015). Malay Pattani Conflicts with Thailand Authority: A Rhetoric Strategic Review of 
Web Sites . Melayu: Jurnal Antarabangsa Dunia Melayu , [S.l.], v . 8, n . 2, p . 257-287. Available at : 
<http://jurnal.dbp.my/index.php/Melayu/article/view/4491.

--- Page 10 of 10 ---
Islahuddin, et al.| Diplomatic strategies of … 
 
BAHASTRA |181 
 
Aziz Yaacob, Che Mohd. (2012). Asimilasi Bangsa Melayu di Patani : Keberkesanan Dasar dan Survival Budaya 
Minoriti. Jebat: Malaysian Journal of History, Politics & Strategic Studies. Vol. 39 (1), 98-125. 
Baroroh-Baried, Siti et.al. (1994). Pengantar Teori Filologi. Yogyakarta: Badan Penelitian dan Publikasi Fakultas 
(BPPF) Seksi Filologi, Fakultas Sastra UGM. 
Bradley, F. (2009). Moral Order in a Time of Damnation: The "Hikayat Patani" in Historical Context. Journal 
of Southeast Asian Studies, 40(2), 267 -293. Retrieved March 14, 2021, from 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/27751564. 
Braginsky, V. I. (1998). Yang Indah, Berfaedah, dan Kamal : Sejarah Sastra Melayu dalam Abad 7 -19. Jakarta: 
Indonesian-Netherlands Cooperation in Islamic Studies (INIS). 
Damono, Sapardi Djoko . ( 1979). Sosiologi Sastra: Sebuah Pengantar Singkat . Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan 
Pengembangan Bahasa. 
Departemen Pendidikan Nasional. (2008). Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia. Jakarta: Pusat Bahasa. 
Fathy al-Fatani, Ahmad. (1994). Pengantar Sejarah Patani. Alor Setar: Pustaka Darussalam. 
Haji Salleh, Siti Hawa. (2010). Hikayat Patani. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 
Hayimasae, Numan. (2009). Jaringan 'Ulama Patani Dengan Utara Semenanjung Tanah Melayu Abad Ke-18 dan 
Ke-19. Persatuan Sejarah Malaysia.. http://myrepositori.pnm.gov.my/handle/123456789/3654. 
Islahuddin & Ku -Ares Tawandorloh . ( 2018). Transformasi dalam Hikayat Patani : Kajian Intertekstual Julia 
Kristeva. Prosiding Seminar Antarabangsa Memartabatkan Bahasa Melayu /Indonesia ASEAN ke -4. 
Pattani: 24-25 November 2018. 
Nasir, Moh. (2011). Metode Penelitian. Jakarta: Ghalia Indonesia. 
Razak Mahmud, Abdul dan Ahmad Fathy Al-Fatani. (2018). Kelantan-Patani: Ulama’ dan Intelektualisme Melayu 
Wilayah Timur. Kelantan: Majlis Agama Islam dan Adat Istiadat Melayu Kelantan. 
Shahul Hamid, Mohamed Nazreen Bin dan Md . Salleh Yaapar. (2015). Sejarah Kehebatan Pemerintahan Raja 
Perempuan Patani dalam Novel Ratu-ratu Patani. Prosiding Diskusi Karya Patani . 28 Mei 2015, Bilik 
Persidangan Bangunan C23, Pusat Pengajian Sains Kemasyarakatan. Penang: Universiti Sains Malaysia. 
Sugiyono. ( 2010). Metode Penelitian Pendidikan Pendekatan Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, dan R&D . Bandung: 
Alfabeta. 
Suryadi, S. (2017). Islam in South Thailand: Acculturation of Islam in the Malay Culture. Falasifa : Jurnal Studi 
Keislaman. Vol. 8 (1), 179-194. https://doi.org/10.36835/falasifa.v8i1.46. 
Syukri, Ibrahim. (1985). History of the Malay Kingdom of Patani (translated by Conner Bailey and Jhon N . 
Miksic). Athens: Ohio University Press. 
Teeuw, A and D.K. Wyatt. (1970). Hikayat Patani. Bibliotheca Indonesia 5. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Wiyatmi. (2013). Sosiologi Sastra. Yogyakarta: Kanwa Publisher. 
Yock Fang, Liaw. (2011). Sejarah Kesusastraan Melayu Klasik. Jakarta: Yayasan Pustaka Obor Indonesia. 
Yusuf, A.Muri. (2007). Metodologi Penelitian. Padang: UNP Press.