REVIEW ARTICLES 
A PERSIAN MISSION TO SIAM IN THE REIGN. OF KING NAR 
'b M I d AI 1 n . U)ammu lbrahim, The Ship of Sulaiman, Translated from the 
~ers1~n by John O'Kane (Persian Heritage Series, No. 11; London: 
out edge & Kcgan Paul, and New York: Columbia University Press 
1972). X, 250 pp. ' 
Some years ago, intrigued by comments I had made about the 
origins of the Bunnag family, one of my students suggested she might 
study the Persian language and investigate Thai relations with Persia in 
the seventeenth century. My response must have carried with it a hint 
of ridicule, for she never mentioned the subject again. 1 am now embar­
rassed to have to tell her that the study of Persian would have repaid 
her efforts, for John O'Kane has brought to light a previously-unsuspected, 
major source for the history of Siam with his translation of The Ship of 
Su/aiman, published in the impressive series of English, French, and 
Italian translations in the "Persian Heritage Series" edited by Ehsan 
Yar-Shater of Columbia University. 
The Safina'i Sulaimani was written by ibn Mu~ammad Ibrahim, 
secretary of a mission sent by Shah Sulaiman the Safavid (1666-94) to 
King Narai in 1685. The work must have been written shortly after the 
mission's return to Persia in May, 1688. O'Kane says virtually nothing 
about the original manuscript bearing on its provenance, save that "it 
bas been sitting in the British Museum for many years now." In a 
fourteen-page Translator's Preface be presents the work primarily as an 
example of Persian literature. Although written as an official report, it 
is a work of considerable imagination, contrived and stylized, and littered 
with cliche. This Preface succeeds remarkably well at conveying to the 
reader some understanding of a style that might easily be taken as 
eccentric, but which in fact is fairly typical of the official style of a 
cultivated man of the author's day. 
The work is divided into four main parts or "jewels," preceded by 
an introduction in which the author praises God and his ruler and outlines 
the background to the mission. Here he explains tha: King Narai se~t a 
certain l;Hi:ji Salim Mazandarani as an envoy to Iran m 1682, to which 
the 1685 mission was the Persian response. 
Part I, the "First Jewel," describes the early portion of the mission's 
journey, from Bandar 'Abbas on the Persian Gulf on27 June 1685 through 
152 REVIEW ARTICLES 
their short stay in India. Of some interest here are the author's comments 
on his contacts with Europeans in India. 
Part II, the "Second Jewel," begins with the mission's departure 
from India on 16 September 1685. The mission then traversed the Bay 
of Bengal to Siamese Tenasserim, where they landed at Mergui and 
travelled by way of Tenasserim town, Jalang (in the headwaters of the 
Tenasserim River?), Paj Puri (Phetburi), Suhan (Suphanburi ?), and 
Shahr Nav (Ayudhya) to Lubii (Lopburi), where the mission was received 
by King Narai. Tbe mission was entertained in Lopburi for some time, 
hunting elephant and tiger, and then followed the king back to Ayudhya. 
Remaining quite a considerable space of time there, the envoys finally 
took their leave of the king in formal audience and sailed for their return 
home on 18 January 1687. 
Part III, the "Third Jewel," is an extremely interesting attempt at 
"recording some facts about the local conditions." In particular, the 
author recounts what had been related to him as recent Siamese history. 
He gives a brief account of "The war between Siam. and Paigii [Pegu]," 
and writes at some length about the role of the Iranian community in 
Siam in the seventeenth century. He ascribes to them a major role in 
bringing King Narai to the throne on a date he gives equivalent to 17 
October 1657.1 Two Persians are mentioned as having held the office 
of"prime minister" subsequently filled by Constantine Phaulkon: 'Abdu'r­
Razzaq of Gilan and Aqa Mul}ammad Astarabadi. The latter, long in 
favor with King Narai, introduced into the court an Iranian Guard of 
200 men apparently similar to the Japanese Guard of Ekatbotsarot's 
reign and the French of 1688. After discussing briefly the rise of 
Phaulkon, he moves through a long series of desultory comments about 
life in Siam, and particularly on Buddhist religious belief and practice, 
the legal system, the character and religious faith of King Narai, 
marriage, debt bondage, and various festivals. He includes nearly four 
pages on the Macassarese and their revolt of 1686, and has an even 
longer section on court administ~ative procedure, the income and 
expenses of the Crown, and trade in various commodities. 
Part IV, the "Fourth Jewel," bas very little to do with Siam or the 
Iranian mission. It is a miscellaneous collection of information on winds 
1) The dates given by the Royal c'lutograph Chronicle of Ayudhya for Narai's 
"victory over his enemies" and invitation to become king are, respectively, 
equivalent to 29 October and 4 November I 657, 
ttnd tides, various forms of animal life, notes on Ceylon At· h h 
A d d N' b ' Je • t e n. ~~an an tco ar Islan~s, Spanish Manila, Japan and Dutch 
act!Vlttes there, Pegu, and Chma The last portion of th' · 
h . d ·r .1 . . , · . 1s sectwn, owevet, etm s t 1e rmsston s return JOurney from Siam beg' · · h · b · _ ' , mmng wrt 
th~tr. em ~rcatt~n aboa~d a Sura t vessel on 21 December 1686. The 
mtsswn sailed vta Patam and Malacca to Cochin, and eventually returned 
to Bandar 'Abbas on 14 May 1688. 
A short final section entitled "The Case of Abti'l-Hasan and the 
Fall of f:laidarabad" briefly recounts "The latest news fr~m India" 
The ~u?ience for ~hich The Ship of Sulaiman was intended may 
have read tt 111 several dtfferent ways. Although formally written as an 
official report of the mission, it is little more useful in that regard than 
John Crawfurd's Journal of an Embassy from the Governoi·-General of 
India to the Courts of Siam and Cochin China, for the author's account of 
official business takes second place to his description of unfamiliar 
peoples and places. His account is written more as an expression and 
affirmation of his own society's Islamic religious beliefs and values. 
Most of all, however, it must have been read for its style, for its 
inventive metaphor,' for its learned borrowings from Islamic, Persian, 
and Indian literature, and for its incessant cleverness. It is not, perhaps, 
a style with which most English readers will at first be comfortable, but 
as one proceeds through the book it assumes a weight and form that 
bring its author alive. 
The importance of The Ship of Sulaiman to those interested in Thai 
history is considerable. Its evidence bears on three main themes: the 
foreign policy of King Narai, the Persian community in Siam, and the 
rise and fortunes of the Bunnag family in the seveqteenth century. 
The connection with Persia is treated only in passing in the 
conventional accounts of King Narai's reign, and much of its significance 
often is lost in general references to "the Moors." The Ship of Sulaiman 
expands upon, and renders more concrete, vague references in such 
accounts as that of Pere de Beze, which mentions Pbaulkon's supervision 
of a mission to Persia at some unspecified date, 2 which on the evidence 
of the Persian account must have taken place in 1682. Even cursory 
examination of the history of the Persian mission of 1685-87 suggests 
that it might be useful to consider Narai's foreign policy within an inter-
2) E. W. Hutchinson, 1688 Revolution in Siam: The Memo£r of Father de Bclze, s.j. 
(Hong Kong, 1968), pp. 11-12. 
i54 
national framework much broader than the Thai-French-Dutch-English 
pattern within which it usually is viewed. 
MuJ:lammad Ibrahim's frequent references to the Persian community 
in old Siam are a real eye-opener in many ways. He mentions the 
presence of Persians wherever he went in Siam, beginning with high 
public officials in the Tenasserim province, Phetburi, and Suphanburi, 
and including numerous merchants and officials including the highest 
officials in the kingdom. He explains that ''From the time merchants 
first arrived until just before the present king came to power, about 
thirty Iranians had settled in Siam due to the great profits to be made in 
trade" (p. 94), and later notes that 200 Iranians were recruited in India 
for service in the royal bodyguard. The community subsequently was 
racked with dissension and lost permanently its grip on public affairs 
when Phaulkon succeeded to the office of prime minister previously held 
by three successive Iranians. The significance of Mul;ammad Ibrahim's 
numerous references to the Iranian community in Siam is that they 
enable one to begin to see better, in ways not previously possible; some 
of the details of Ayudhya's social and economic structure, particularly 
as that structure incorporated immigrant communities. His account is 
the first we have had from within any Muslim community of Ayudhya, 
and is of assistance not least in enabling us to see how Dutch and 
English traders of the time were treated like other Asian traders. 
Finally, material contained in The Ship of Sulaiman provides 
important information that goes a long way towards solving the mystery 
of the origins and early history of the Bunnag family, a noble family 
powerful in the affairs of the kingdom of Siam for more than three 
ce.nturies,3 At the same time, it provides startling confirmation of the 
validity of some of the historical work of the much-maligned K. S. R. 
Kulap.4 
Of the. Persians specifically mentioned by Mu~ammad Ibrahim, 
there are the following individuals: 
( 1) J;Iaji Salim Mazandrani, Siamese king's envoy to Persia ( 1682), 
pp.2~ 4~46, 53,104-5 
3) See O.K. Wyatt; "Family Politics in Nineteenth Century Thailand," Journal of 
Southeast Asian History IX: 2 (September 1968), esp. pp. 211-12, 214. 
4) See Craig J. Reynolds, "The Case of K.S.R. Kulap : A Challenge to' Royal 
Historical Writing in Late Nineteenth Century Thailand" Journal of th.e Siam 
Society 61 : 2 (July 1973), pp. 63-90. 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
fll!:VlEW ARTICLES 
155 
(unnamed), former governor of Tenasserim or Mergui (?), p. 46 
Mu\mmmad ~adiq, son of (2), pp, 46-47 
Sayyid Mazandarani, governor of Phetburi, p. 50 
~ajah Chelebi, "from among the people of Rum" (i.e., Ana to­
Ita), rajah of Suphanburi, pp. 50-51 
Khwaja J;Iasan 'Ali, from Khurasan, "presently holds the 
ministerial post which Aqa Mu~ammad held and as such is 
the head of the Iranian community in Siam," pp. 55, 69, 74-75, 
144 (?) 
(7) A~ a. Mul.1ammad Astarabadi, [see quotation above under (6)]: 
ongmally from Astarabad, settled in Siam to trade, became 
minister (ca. 1660 ?), fell out of favor; "has been dead for a 
while now" (p. 101); Pbaulkon was hired when he was still in 
office (p. 103); cf. pp. 55, 58, 59, 77, 98, 100-103, 126, 151,218 
(8) 'Abdu'r-Razzaq, "whose family is from Gilan," made prime 
minister by King Narai in 1657, continued in office several 
years, then was imprisoned and died; pp. 97-98 
(9) Chu Chi, and (10) ChiT Kia, sons of (8), sent into exile; pp. 
101-102 
(11) (unnamed) prime minister, originally from Shush tar, lineage 
traced to the MulHi I;Iasan 'Ali of Shush tar, assassinated, shor­
tly after appointment as premier; pp. 102-103 
( 12) Sayyid Dardmandi, poet from Khurasan, commissioned by 
Narai to present a written summary of the Sbahnama; p. 127. 
The conventional accounts of Bunnag genealogy mention none of these 
individuals.s The only detailed information on Bunnag genealogy in 
this period is provided in a rare book compiled by K.S.R. Kulap in the 
early years of the current century.6 On the basis of this, the following 
genealogical chart may be constructed : 
5. Vl1ttJ1'ilW1:i1'll~llllli, 'ilfilfJJWfi!WV'J::fJJJ'NflntJJ.J,till?'fl (Vilthlfll, 2482)j L'illWn:tl1 
~w1m;~~ flntltfWfJHJtw ( ci'1~:1JIYfll111l1lJ1~!l'nt~ tl1fl 3; l'J'H:um, 2473). 
, t ; r I.SI 0 IV tf' 1::~' 
6. n.fi.1. nm11 u, JJ11?JJ'/JJJ7Plf111Jfiti'Nfl lti3J 1 17fi'Jlffl??llf'Nfftn1::~ti~U11HlneJnviW 
1 7 ttl 
7uur/u~Ut1CJ?JJ (m::mfll, 'l'.l'l. fftnlJU~ZLiln, 1.1'1. 124, Vl.l'l. 2448). 
156 
EARLY ANCESTORS OF THE BUNNAG FAMILY 
A. Sheik Ahmad 
( 1543-1631) 
arrived Ayudhya 1602, 
v 
acting Phraya Chula, 
acting Pbrakhlang, 
Samuhanaiyok, 
retired in 1630 
I 
Merchant family of 
Ma-ngon Muslims, 
of Mtiang Kuni 
I 
I 
B. Mu~ammad Said 
C. chaophraya Aphairacha (Chtin) D. Aka Muhammad 
phraya SI Naowarat of Cen t:ral 
Phrakhlang Department (lcrorn 
thii klang) in reign of Narai 
(? 1600-1670) acting phraya 
Chula 1624-30 under title phraya 
Worachetphakdi; Samubanaiyok 
fr~m 1630 
I 
E. chaophraya Chamnan­
pbakdi (Sombun, 1630-
c. 1683); palace official 
under Narai; Samuha­
naiyok 1670-1683 
F. chaoplzraya Si Chaiban- . G. 
narong (Yi); phra Anu­
rakracha in Narai's 
reign; ca. 1689 made 
'C!zaoplzraya and gover-
nor of Tenasserim; rebelled 
I v 
phraya Chula: (F'.aeo) 
in reign of Narai 
REVIEW ARTICLES 
151 
!he only firm correspondence between the list. of individuals mentioned 
m The Ship of Sulaim(m and the genealogy provided by K.S.R. Kulap is 
between the former's· (7) and the latter's (D)-Aqa Muhamm d ( h' 1 
K 1- 11 ~ . a w 1c1 ~ ap spe s as t:~1fl1lJ:JH:J11lJI'l). Several other tentative identifications 
might also be put forward : 
(2) the former governor of Mergui or Tenasserim may be Kulap's 
~), although we might expect that individual's descent from 
Aqa Mul)ammad would have been mentioned; 
(6) apparently refers to the position of phraya Chularatehamontri 
head of the Right-hand Department of the Phrakhlang (kro~ 
tha klzwa), a post consistently held by Bunnags in the nine­
teenth century. This might be Kulap's (G); and 
(8) might be identified with Kulap's (C), although the latter's dates 
are suspicious. 
Even if only the identification of Aqa Mu~ammad holds, this is sufficient 
cause for us to take most seriously the enormous quantity of genealogical 
and historical information published around the turn of the century by 
K.S.R. Kulap which, among other things, includes extensive discussion· 
of Chinese commercial families in Ayudhya early in the eighteenth 
century. 
There are many small points on which O'Kane's translation of The 
Ship of Sulaiman might be criticized. Notes on Siamese aspects of the 
book are wholly inadequate, especially in the failure to id~ntify relatively 
simple toponyms and Thai words (e.g., mahalak lJl1Hlllln, ~alah Iakiin 
fl1f11f10'IJU Kurum Kan nnJm1, Kawam m1lJ, Yam Pra ,~mm~). The v , ' . 
index is incomplete : it lists, for example, only four of the mne or ten 
references to Aqa Mul1ammad. And a fuller account of the origins and 
provenance of the British Museum manuscript would have been apprecia. 
ted. Thes~. are, however, only minor faults. 
The Ship of Sulaiman deserves to be included amon~ the m~st 
important· primary sources for the history of Siam in the re1gn of Kmg 
Narai. It is particularly welcome because it sbo~ld serve to open up 
new avenues of inquiry that have previously been neglected. 
/)avid K. W)l(ltt 
Carn(!ll Uni'f)ersity 