Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_20\documents\2003-Lingweb-Morphosyntactic_simplification_in_Tengger_Javanese.pdf
Total Pages: 2
Statistics: Chars=3151, ThaiWords=630.2, EnglishWords=574

--- Page 1 of 2 ---
Morphosyntactic simplification in Tengger Javanese 
 
Thomas J. Conners 
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology 
 
 
Tengger Javanese is a small dialect of Javanese spoken in the isolated highland region in and 
around the Bromo-Semeru-Tengger National Park in East Java. For centuries the Tengger 
generally adhered to traditional Hindu-Javanese syncretic religious and cultural practices, and 
until recently remained relatively isolated from the Muslim Javanese populations in the 
lowlands. The past 50 years, however, have seen increasing contact with the lowland Javanese, 
and with that pressure on the Tengger, both intern al and external, to conform with both lowland 
religious and linguistic norms. A survey of Te ngger villages conducted in the 70’s showed 50 
villages, with a total population of roughly 50,0 00, self-identified as Tengger, all following the 
traditional Hindu-Javanese ways. When I conduc ted my fieldwork in 2003-4, that number had 
fallen to roughly 20 villages, with a total population of no more than 20,000. In this paper, I 
describe the diachronic devel opment of verbal morphology in Tengger, which has undergone 
significant simplification both from the attested patterns of Middle Javanese, and shows signs of 
further reduction within the past 30 years. 
Based on a comparison with a brief gram matical sketch of Tengger done by SmithHefner (1978), it is clear that in the past 30 years or so, a number of salient verbal markers have 
undergone significant reduction in so me cases (the propositive pref ix), and complete loss in 
others (the intransitive marker mer- and the first and second person passive constructions). 
These developments are the result of contact between Tengger Javanese and surrounding 
lowland dialects, demonstrated by the pattern in Malang Javanese, for example. 
Proto-Malayo-Polynesian had a basic verbal system of four voices , (or two under some 
analyses) with various derivational affixes were used to mark different semantic relationships 
between the verb and the subject (Wolff 1973, Ross 2004). In many languages of western 
Indonesia, this was reduced to a system of two voices, and various verbal suffixes were 
innovated to compensate for this reduction. Most Javanese dialects foll owed this pattern, and 
subsequently developed a full paradigm of verbal suffixes based on mood, voice, and applicative 
suffix, i.e. neutral, benefactive or locative. Th is pattern is attested variously in Old and Middle 
Javanese, and in the modern dialects of Central Java. It is unclear wh ether the Tengger dialect 
ever underwent this change. In modern Tengger, there are only three verb al affixes attested. 
Based on evidence from a number of other Java nese dialects, I argue that the elaborated 
paradigm was an innovation that took place in so me Central Javanese di alects, but that Tengger 
(and other dialects) simply continued to reduce and simplify the PMP patterns.

--- Page 2 of 2 ---
Central Javanese Tengger 
indicative active/passive Ø Ø 
subjunctive active -a / / -a /a/ 
neutral 
subjunctive passive -en /ən/ -en /ən/, -a 
indicative active/passive -ake -na benefactive 
subjunctive active/passive -na /n / -na 
indicative Active/passive -i -i locative 
Subjunctive active/passive -ana / n / -i 
 
Ross, Malcolm. 1995. Reconstructing Proto Aust ronesian verbal morphology: evidence from 
 Taiwan. In Paul Jen-kuei Li, Dah-an Ho, Ying-kuei Hua ng and Cheng-hwa Tsang, eds. 
 Austronesian studies relating to Taiwan, 727-791. Taipei: Institute of History and 
 Philology, Academia Sinica. 
Wolff, John. 1973. Verbal inflection in Proto-Austronesian. In Andrew Gonzalez, ed. Parangal 
 kay Cecilio Lopez, 71-91. Quezon City: Linguistic Society of the Philippines.