Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_20\documents\2019-Huda-Vol_3_No_2_Oct_2019.pdf
Total Pages: 13
Statistics: Chars=37240, ThaiWords=7448.0, EnglishWords=7098

--- Page 1 of 13 ---
284 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. 3 No. 2 October 2019 
 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN RELIGIOUS TRIBES IN TENGGER 
(HINDU, ISLAM AND BUDHA) 
 
By: 
M. Thoriqul Huda, Irma Khasanah 
Institut Pesantren KH Abdul Chalim Mojokerto, UIN Sunan Ampel Surabaya 
E-mail : huda90.ikhac@gmail.com, Irmakhasanahlmj16@gmail.com 
 
Received: August 09, 2019 Accepted: September 19, 2019 Published: October 31, 2019 
 
Abstract 
 
Indonesia including State that has a diversity of tribes, ethnicities, races, languages, 
religions, and cultures. However, with this diversity is able to cause conflict both internal and 
external. As with many cases going on in Indonesia. Religion is itself a foothold, beliefs, and 
guidelines for living, even too often scapegoats the incidence of conflict in society. However, 
the other by the tenggerese is located in Lumajang, Malang, Pasuruan Regency Probolingg o 
Regency here and there are three religions living side by side in one village i.e. Islam, 
Hinduism, and Buddhism. In the middle of kemajemukan different communities understand and 
belief turns out to be able to have an attitude of tolerance and mutual re spect between each 
other. Keberanekaragaman religion is not an issue of community agrosari to interact in 
everyday activities. Regarding religious tolerance have lately become a very good sticking 
issues among academics as well as the community. Local wis dom and culture be the solution 
to resolve the issue. Local wisdom on the tenggerese community of Javanese cultural values, 
as well as the cultural heritage of the Majapahit Empire which is still developing with mutual 
interlocking appreciate attitude, tolerance, and respect in the spirit of the ancestors and there 
is no tribal differences are striking in addition to differences of religious belief. The 
togetherness that is manifested in the form of the ritual customs such as the ceremony of the 
unan-unan, Bari'an (celebrate). Each religion has its own demands tolerance on the tenggerese 
is already deeply ingrained, tenggerese community also upholds the values of equality and 
democracy in the life of society as well as more respectful of religious leaders an d shaman 
(spiritual teacher) than leader administrativ. Since all are brothers, all families, remain 
peaceful and trustful that became the pillars as well as ancestral heritage. 
 
Keywords: Relationship Between Religion, Rituals, Tengger

--- Page 2 of 13 ---
285 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Indonesia strongly holds fast to the 
legacy of ancestral messages i.e. motto 
"Bhineka Tunggal Ika" which means that 
even though there is a difference, however, 
remains a jua, Concord was a most important 
pillars as the Foundation of the society in 
maintaining the integrity of a nation unity. 
The Founda tion of the unity both of the 
strong, the tribe, religion, language, race and 
religion, then this will be easy Indonesia 
nation pitted the sheep as well as threatened 
will experience Division. Religious diversity 
is potentially extremely strong against the 
identity of each religion that will potentially 
cause a conflict. Own compactness is 
understood as the condition of a life that is 
created in a sunny, peaceful, mutually 
appreciative between fellow, mutual respect, 
and mutual. Harmony between religious 
created in order not to conflict, as well as 
hostility from both the intern and the religious 
believers to another. Religious unity itself can 
be interpreted with the social conditions in 
which all religions can live side by side in one 
place without prejudice to the obligations and 
rights of their respective religions. Concord is 
a requirement that cannot be postponed any 
longer. 
Achievement of a harmonious 
atmosphere in the life of the community. This 
is manifest in a sense of mutual respect 
between religi ons. Freedom in embracing 
religion and worship in accordance with the 
beliefs of each and not impose beliefs against 
other religions by mutual trust between both 
the internal as well as external fellow 
religions by the Government for the sake of 
the realization of a harmonious society and is 
responsible for maintaining the religion and 
the nation.1 As already described in the Qur'an 
that humanity was created to know each other, 
 
يَََٰٰٓأَيُّهَا ٱلنَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنََٰكُم م ِن ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَىَٰ وَجَعَلْنََٰكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَآَٰئِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوَٰٓا۟ ۚ إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِندَ ٱللََِّّ أَتْقَىَٰكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ ٱللَََّّ عَلِمم 
خَبِمر 
 
People, we created you from a male and a female, and made you bersuku -suku that you 
berbangsa-bangsa an d kenal -mengenal each other. Indeed, the most honourable among you 
thee a God is the most Religious among you. Surely, Allah is all-knowing and most Recognise 
".2 
The text shows that there is harmony in life, 
unity becomes the handle of each religious 
group so that it is easier to build social and 
religious interactions. If a religious group has 
been in touch with the other then the 
interaction easier in developing working 
relationships, mutual and mutually 
particularly in the preservatio n of the 
traditions of the societies to build social 
relationships and a country. 3 Departing from 
description above can be an interesting thing 
to be reviewed and examined related religious 
 
1 H.R. Djatiwijono, Dinamika Kerukunan Hidup Beragama 
Di Daerah (Jakarta: Maret, 1983), 5 
2 Al-Quran, Surat Al Hujurat Ayat 13 
harmony in the Tenggerese (Tribe who live 
and reside under the slopes of Mount Semeru, 
the species is present in four counties 
including: Regency Pasuruan, Probolinggo, 
Regency Lumajang and Malang). Tenggerese 
community strongly uphold notability and 
have great respect for customary and 
traditional birth attendants (lead er of the 
Faithful) from a Government Chief. 
 Realization of maintaining religious 
harmony in the tenggerese to do preservation 
of existing local wisdom tradition in the area 
3 Said Aqil Al- Munawar, Fiqh Hubungan Antar Agama, ( 
Jakarta: Ciputat Press, 2005), 22

--- Page 3 of 13 ---
286 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
according to the tenggerese shaman there 
local wisdom of this ancestral heritage during 
the majapahit Empire that still held until now. 
Like the ceremony of Unan -Unan, Karo -
Karo, funerals, wedding ceremony, Kasada. 
On discussion of the tenggerese discusses 
related harmony which is often done by 
Hindus and Muslims, namely the ceremony 
unan-unan and bari'an. Unan -unan 
ceremonies in Hindu calendar implemented 
sewindu once does not mean 8 years but 5 
years in Hindu calendar. 4 So is the ceremony 
Bari'an done tenggerese Muslims once a year 
as a form of speech of gratitude to God the 
result the abundant earth.5 The traditions that 
often they do together as customary as well as 
existing Norms on the tenggerese to keep each 
other keeping harmony and social with people 
of different beliefs though tenggerese.6 
 
The Relationship Between Religions 
 Indonesia is the anniversary according 
to the diverse richness of every different 
regions both in terms of tribe, race, language, 
religion and culture. This diversity as a nation 
a pioneer in creating religious harmony for 
easy partnership,7 on the other ha nd, religion 
has two impacts i.e. Centripetal (as he is) and 
centrifugal (Solvers). 8 Two of these impacts 
that trigger theory posited on religious 
relations. Maintaining religious unity need not 
be marked with the emergence of different 
religions that is such that already looks every 
religion has a different complexion from both 
the system kelolah kelembagaannya, beliefs, 
laws that set. 
 
4 Robert W. Hefner, Hindu Javanes And Tradition Islam 
(Princeton: Princeton University Perss, 1985), 17 
5 Mohammad Ali Hisyam, Harmonisasi Lintas Agama 
Masyarakat Tengger, Vol 10, N0 01, September 2015 
6 Joko Tri Haryonto, Kearifan Lokal Pendukung Kerukunan 
Beragama Pada Komunitas Tengger Malang Jatim, Vol 21, No 
2 Tahun 2004. 
7 Mursid Ali, Plularitas Sosial Dan Hubungan Antar Agama 
Bingkai Kulturall Dan Theologi, Kerukunan Hidup Umat 
 Mukti Ali expressed his thoughts 
about "agree in at segrement". That assumes 
that this is through the concept of can 
maintain religious harmony. By the way have 
to believe that religion is the truest 
dipeluknya, and other religions were invited 
to trust religion that dipeluknya is also the 
most correct. The concept of mutual trust 
between this fellow can take country 
Indonesia into one unified whole is not easily 
torn asunder.9 
 The harmony between the first 
believers were located on the attitude of 
tolerance to be built for addressing the 
existing harmony. For this country of 
tolerance is extremely necessary in 
maintaining r eligious frame views of 
bermacam-macamnya religion that developed 
in Indonesia is not only a recognized Islamic 
State in Indonesia, but there are also five other 
religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, 
Christian, Catholic, and Confucianism. 10 We 
ought to be p roud of your own tolerance but 
on the other hand, there is the saturation of the 
religions because indirectly tolerance alone 
can bring up the existence of the attitude of 
the Apologists (an attitude which is used for 
the defence of the faith). 11 Religions say that 
religion in the most yakinilah have a strong 
attitude of tolerance of other religions on the 
teachings, from here will be new tensions 
arise which are Textual (written), and 
contextual (Anthropology, sociology, and 
History). 
 The theologian and politician claimed 
the blessing of the existence of the pancasila 
Beragama, (Jakarta: Badan Peneliti Pengembangan 
Agama Depag RI, 1999), 11 
8 M. Mundar Soelaeman, Ilmu Sosial Dasar Teori Dan 
Konsep Ilmu Sosial, (Bandung: ERSCO,1987), 229 
9 Mukti Ali, Ilmu Perbandingan Agama, Dialog, Dakwah 
Dan Misi, (Jakarta: Inis, 1997), 227-229 
10 Lathifatul Izza, “Melihat Potret Harmonisasi 
Hubungan Antar Umat Beragama Di Indonesia”, Religi, 
Vol IX, No. 1, Januari 2013: 4 
11 Ibid, 5

--- Page 4 of 13 ---
287 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
Indonesia become a peaceful country full of 
harmony and tolerance so high. On the other 
hand the religions also voiced, Muslims when 
she first met say "Assalamualaikum" this 
reflects that Islam peace loving, so too with 
Christians is a religion of salvation, Hindu 
who cling to His Dharma, Buddhism also 
claims his religion is the way to release the 
suffering, and Confucianism is also claimed 
as a religion of love. 12 See the abundance o f 
the discourse meaning of tolerance needs to 
be held to its own unity because the renewal 
getting out is not an influential internal to the 
Concord community itself not intern into his 
religion.13 
 The Government in this case does not 
serve as Arbitrators (the dominant factor that 
became the benchmark of the existence of 
religious harmony), 14 This proves religion is 
not brought government power. Therefore, 
the relationship of believers in Indonesia is 
because the family relationships of the State 
in Indonesi a was created not as a State 
religion. So many religious pattern found 
among social communities appear some idea 
to awake the harmony between different 
religious, one of which is to conduct a 
dialogue between religions it is who got 
special attention from their religions. 
 
Dialogue Between Religions 
 Amid the religious diversity that exists 
in Indonesia with the presence of such a high 
tolerance, mutual respect between religions is 
not enough then the need for the existence of 
a dialogue between religions t hat provide an 
understanding of the related understanding of 
religious teachings one with other religions. 
 
12 Ibid, 6 
13 Kuntojiwo, Dari Kerukunan Ke Kerjasama, Dari Toleransi 
Ke Kooperasi, (Jakarta: Pustaka Hidayat, 1998), 359 
14 Nurcholis Majid, Fiqih Lintas Agama Membangun 
Masyarakat Inklusif Pluralis (Jakarta: Yayasan Wakaf 
Paramadina , 2004), 199 
Not that makes everyone else so convinced of 
his religion and switch the view to switch 
religions, the dialogue is needed in order to be 
able to understand other religions teachings of 
each religion seeds from this attitude of 
tolerance will the stronger the building intact. 
 Dialogue between religions is aimed 
at providing an understanding of the related 
teaching in the life of each religion, not a 
religious Academy study let alone discussing 
all religions and bring forth the new religion 
and also are you met arguments so that gave 
birth to the who who wins and who loses, and 
the loser is obligated to follow his teachings.15 
Therefore, intercultural dia logue is itself a 
religious meeting between the heart and mind 
of the different religions. The dialogue should 
be applied as one form of religious interaction 
in keeping unity, togetherness and harmony of 
different layers that are either religious diera 
global nor plural. 
 Leonard Swidle argued there are ten 
principles that should be held while being 
religious customs, intercultural dialogue. 16 
First, make the reality of the changes and 
development in accordance with their 
respective beliefs. Secondly, the dialogue has 
to be attended by adherents of different 
religions and religious adherents intern either 
different religions. Third, each participant 
should have a dialog in dialogue and make 
earnest honesty. Fourth, each participant of 
the dialogue should be able to describe his 
beliefs. Fifth, a dialogue without the 
assumption that firm footing and rush upon 
conviction that cannot be received . Six, the 
dialogue undertaken by the party that can 
absolutely respect and understanding. Seven, 
15 Burhanuddin Daya, Herman Leonard Beck, Ilmu 
Perbandingan Agama Di Indonesia Dan Belanda, (Jakarta: 
Inis, 1992), 208 
16 Leonard Swidler, The Dialogue, Ground Rules For 
Interreligious Dialogue, (Davao City: Tp, 1990), 95- 98

--- Page 5 of 13 ---
288 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
the dialogue is condu cted on the basis of 
mutual trust. Eight, the dialogue should be 
followed by people who are critical of that 
question is can answer all questions and 
reinforce the confidence of her religion. Nine, 
dialogue, participants must understand the 
religious keber agamaan partners either from 
religion itself or an external call religion. Ten, 
in customs, the dialogue should not be 
comparing the teachings of his religion with 
religious teachings. 
 Harmonization between different 
forms of religious people to maintain 
harmony between different religious, one of 
which is to establish a dialogue, for mutual 
trust and respect is not enough should be 
needed a mature understanding of his 
religious related own or other religions. 
 
The Three Religions Of The Tenggers 
 Tenggerese are the people living in the 
settlement area of the foothills of Mount 
Semeru and around the slopes of Mount 
Bromo, located in the Regency of 
Probolinggo Regency Pasuruan, Lumajang 
and Malang. 17 Tengger Tenggiring Budhi is 
defined as the mean of sublime nature and 
Budhi Sublime who is still attached and 
practiced until now as the ancestral heritage 
and customary law, according to the society 
of tengger crater is derived from the word 
myth in circulation comes from the story of a 
pair of Roro Anteng and wi fe husband Joko 
Seger who first occupied the region of 
tengger. In the legend, a pair of husband and 
wife the descendant of 25 children, one of his 
sons named Kusuma sacrificed being with the 
Tumbal thrown into the crater of Mount 
 
17 M. Dangun, Kamus Besar Ilmu Pengetahuan, (Jakarta: 
Lembaga Pengkajian Kebudayaan Nusantara, 1997), 
1111 
18 Samandhi Widyaprakoso, Masyarakat Tengger: Latar 
Belakang Daerah Taman Nasional Bromo ( Jakarta: 
Kanisius, 1994) 28-27 
bromo for the sake of the salvation of his 
brothers. Tengger of Teng (Anteng) and Ger 
(Seger) which means a society which not 
many fad and not easily disturbed.18 The term 
was born from the fusion of tengger Roro 
Anteng and Joko Seger that became the 
forerunner to the beginning of granting small 
areas. 
 The meaning of the term reflected the 
community's social condition of tenggerese 
are living in a peaceful, serene setting, mutual 
mutual, were tolerated despite differing 
beliefs, understand and obey custom 
regulations against which are already in force. 
So don't be surprised if the community is still 
Small, traditional as well as maintain its 
cultural order and dutifully against the leaders 
(Sabda Pandhita Ratu). Obey to preserve 
traditions such as: traditional ce remony, 
celebration of holidays, believes the objects 
invisible, honoring deceased ancestors, and 
always wearing their distinctive clothing 
namely gloves that tied at the neck.19 
 Basically this is a small community a 
community that always communal living 
simultaneously in realizing a harmonious 
family is seen from such a high tolerance 
when doing a ritual customs, building a House 
simultaneously, farm, attended the 
celebration fairly is very closely in 
maintaining religious harmony. Since, the 
community has a small norm if they don't 
want to live the tenets will be called as Wong 
Sing Ora Lumrah or Wong Ora Lumrah. 20 
With such specificity was called by the 
nickname Wong Tengger (residents 
perched).21 
19 Ibid, 29 
20 Bambang Subandrijo, Keselamatan Bagi Orang Jawa, 
(Jakarta: Bpk Gunung Mulia, 2000), 28 
21 Neng Darol Afia, Tradisi dan Kepercayaan Lokal Bagi 
Beberapa Suku Yang Ada di Indonseia, (Badan Litbang 
Agama Departemen Ri, 1999),

--- Page 6 of 13 ---
289 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
 Most of the communities perched their 
descendants considered that the original of the 
Majapahit Kingdom as evidenced by the 
inscriptions found in the area called the stele 
of Muncan 22. This inscription tells about the 
history of the beginning of the existence of the 
tenggerese etched with subtle use of old 
Javanese Script writing on a rock as high as 
142.5 cm with a width of 22 cm and 102 cm 
long while the mount Bromo is a testament to 
the place their devotion to perform Yajna 
rituals (dedicated to the gods of the Earth 
results). In the customs of tenggerese knows 
no distinction of caste since there is no strong 
leaders in organizing everything there is only 
the Dukun (indigenous leader). This is 
causing a growing spiritual values over time 
increasingly experiencing life -threatening 
pemerosotan loss of spirit ual and ceremonial 
life. The year 1945 tenggerese community 
start digging again trust the spirit began to 
disappear to apply again in depth.23 
 Wong tengger also have Ordinances in 
life as listed in Sesanti Panca setya (five clues 
loyalty) that must be adhe red to all walks of 
life tenggerese because there is no distinction 
of caste which flourished. 24 to wit: Satya 
Wacana (the word must be equal to the deed), 
Satya culture (kept the custom), Satya 
Laksana (responsible in tasks run), Satya 
Semaya (keep a promi se), satya Mitra 
(faithful friend). To achieve happiness life 
Wong Tengger also steer clear of attitude Mo 
Lima, Maling (steals), Madon (women's 
Skeleton), Madat (sucking Opium), Main 
 
22 Inscriptions made during muncang Majapahit Empire, 
at that time a small community named Hila-Hila which 
means a place that is inhabited by a hermit or holy men 
to serve God or gods according to the beliefs of 
Hinduism. 
23 Samandhi Widyaprakoso, Masyarakat Tengger: Latar 
Belakang Daerah Taman Nasional Bromo, 86 
24 Ayu Sutarto, Kamus Budaya Dan Religious (Jember: 
Lembaga Penelitian Universitas Jember, 2008) 62 
25 Samandhi Widyaprakoso, “Masyarakat Tengger: Latar 
Belakang Daerah Taman Nasional Bromo”, 9 
(gambling), Minum (Consuming Liquor), and 
is obliged to maintain Wa Limo: Wasra (quite 
sandanf), Wasis ( Enough science), Wisma 
(has appropriate place), Waras (healthy 
physical and spiritual), Wareg (sufficient 
clothing). 
 After the independence of Indonesia 
religion embraced tenggerese community still 
unclear the identity of their existing adhered 
only carry out the ritual customs such as: 
Karo-karo Ceremony, Unan -Unan, 
ceremonial Entas -Entas, Kasodo, and other 
ritual customs others. New range of years 
1973 along with the development of the times, 
social advancement, technolog y and norms 
that was born from the experience of the 
community itself,25 religious coaching related 
extension began in earnest. According to the 
statutes, the Parisada community perched 
including Mahayana Buddhists in accordance 
with Decree No. 00/PHB Jatim /Kept/III/73, 
on March 6, 1973, after having reviewed the 
associated ritual is often done how to worship 
and trust -a trust that is believed to contain 
many turns of the teachings contained in the 
in Hinduism, this is confirmed with the 
discovery of inscrip tions Walandati. 26 
Located in the village of Walandit is situated 
in the mountains Perched place Hulun Hyang 
(Abdhi Dewa-Dewi Hindu). 
 Animism (believe in Supernatural 
things, spirits, and Life) is also often done 
community perched like doing Selametan as a 
form of homage to the ancestors who have 
important positions in any event,27 and also as 
26 Walandit inscription is an inscription that tells the 
story of two events, namely the prohibition of charge 
Titiloman (dues in performing a ritual ceremony) sacred 
didesa/Village Walandit around the year 1303 saka or 
1381 CE, the second, this inscription as well as symbol 
its designation orders from Bhatara Wekas Ing Suka 
(posthumous title King Hayaman Wuruk on years of 
1327 month Asada). 
27 Neng Darol Afia, Tradisi dan Kepercayaan Lokal Bagi 
Beberapa Suku yang ada di Indonseia, 46

--- Page 7 of 13 ---
290 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
a form of gratitude for natural results that are 
already given as an offering to the gods so that 
the God-given no wrath.28 When doing a ritual 
worship community perched also read Japa 
Mantras (prayers) are up to at the moment still 
held by Small Quacks, for Small Quacks 
Mantra is the most sacred treasure as a form 
of approach with sang Hyang Widhi and also 
as a Shield so that the exclusion from the evil 
spirits which harass the tranquillity of life.29 
 From this early have a civilization that 
does not recognize a difference in the life of 
society, although religions islam came much 
after the Hindu and Buddha flourished in a 
society there is no pre -existing crater can 
break they bring Division because the 
community perched very high regard and 
respect between fellow and gave everyone 
freedom over seeks to embrace religious 
teachings and underneath. Seen from a 
religion that devel oped in the area of 
tenggerese not only one religion adopted the 
local community but many religions that 
flourished there like Hinduism, Buddhism, 
and Islam. Beliefs may be different but 
related, customs and laws there is no 
difference. A benchmark that is used that is 
the attitude of the family in accordance with 
the norms established by the ancestors. 
 
The Hindu Religion 
Hinduism in Indonesia around the 4th 
century Ad with some evidence of his legacy 
as a former Kingdom of kutai Yupa 
Inscription that exists in East Kalimantan, the 
seven fruits of the yupa found this illustrates 
that at that time the King of Mulawarman are 
implement both adoration to the God Shiva. 
While in the region of tengger's own Hindu 
religious teachings about 17th -century under 
 
28 Cart. R.P. Suyono, Mitisisme Tengger, (Yogyakarta: 
LKiS, 2009), 5 
29 Ayu sutarto, Saya Orang Tengger, Saya Punya Agama: 
Kisah Orang Tengger Menemukan Agamanya, (Jember: 
Kompyawisda, 2007), 58 
Hindu ascetic hermit -by settling in the area 
around Mount Bromo, Hinduism teaches the 
meaning of life tenets of good between fellow 
religions or religions who others who have 
been described in the Vedic Scriptures like 
Yajur Vedic Wedha and Atara. Beginning in 
a small society trust about the homage to 
ancestral spirits, when entered in the tengger 
Hindus then adapts to the conditions of the 
time, a small community so intertwined 
existence of cultural contact and the teachings 
of the Hindu religion. Therefore the existence 
of the Hindu religion is not generally accepted 
by the community -ripe mature crater but 
mingled with local culture either of the 
structure of language, Culture, beliefs, and 
knowledge development system 
organizations that are still are traditional.30 
Existence of the language itself is 
visible from the language used daily are still 
using Java language manners, even welcome 
different pronunciation with Hindu, if Hindu 
use the word "OM Swastiatsu" tengger Hindu 
use the word "Hong Ulun Bhasuki Langgeng" 
meaning (Hopefully Sang Hyang Widhi Wasa 
always provide Peace, prosperity, and health 
to all of us). Hinduism in tengger also still 
thick with customs and culture that develops 
according to their ancestral heritage preserved 
mandatory and do taste as a form of homage 
to the ancestors. The teachings of Hinduism is 
also not much different from the teachings of 
the Hindu religion in General in accordance 
with the described in the Weda. 
 
The Religion of Islam and Budhism 
 The teachings of the Islamic religi on 
entered and widespread in the region since the 
collapse of the crater under the rule of the 
30 Muslimin, “Alkuturasi Agama Hindu Di Indonesia, Al- 
Adyan, Vol 7 No. 2, Desember 2012: 67

--- Page 8 of 13 ---
291 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
majapahit Kingdom of demak, Islam in the 
crater have little difference with Islam as the 
religion of Islam residing in Tengger still 
thick with custom and Javane se culture. 
Already visible from its religious practise 
there are a number of different things like still 
involves shamans when people are put on a 
great day of celebration of Islam, indigenous 
ceremonies such as karo -karo, unan -unan, 
kasada and others still followed by the Islamic 
society, it also customary ceremonies is still 
used as the media claims by islam. Reverence 
for ancestor spirits are still retained by the 
small Islamic community. Islam does not 
have to be placed in the context of the Shariah, 
but also about the substance of Islam itself, in 
the teachings of Sufism that rests on the 
Quran, the Hadith. The Prophet Muhammad's 
life practice setra. In harfiyah Sufism believes 
that the Messenger in teaching Islam always 
respecting the ancestral cultur al legacy 
without having to remove it rather adapts to 
existing conditions. 31 Issues fixed in 
accordance with the Shari'a Islamic teachings 
such as carry out prayers, fasting, and the 
teachings of Islam. Islam in the crater include 
Islamic syncretic religio us practices in 
teaching because there is a fusion of several 
familiar customs, culture and beliefs of other 
religions. 
 In addition to the religion of Islam and 
Hinduism in the region there is also the 
tenggerese teachings of Buddhism, however 
when the new order teachings of Buddhism in 
tengger examined in 1973 by the Ministry of 
religious affairs through the Hindu -Buddhist 
Bimas Director General. It turns out that once 
researched communities perched entered into 
the religion of Mahayana Buddhism, the 
 
31 Aki Maksum, “Politik Identitas Masyarakat Tengger 
Dalam Mempertahankan Sistem Kebudayaan Dalam 
Hegemoni Islam Dan Kekuasaan”, El- Haraq, Vol 17, 
N0. 1 , Tahun 2015: 33 
32 Sutarto, 1998 
decision is still not final because the leaders 
of Buddhism tengger remained decided they 
were Buddhists (Crater). And the 
dikeluarkanlah Decree No. 00/PHB -
Jatim/Kept/III/73 tertanggalkan March 6, 
1973. 
 
The interaction of the relationships 
between religions in the Tenggerese 
 Tenggerese community that is still 
fairly agrarian yet work directly with 
konsumeristik, and materialist culture. They 
will persist amid the globalization age 
hanging from the Dukun (Indigenous Leader) 
who holds the most important share as heirs 
of the tradition and culture of sustainability in 
the Tengger. 32 Although they get a good 
influence in terms of religious, economic, 
social, and culture on a small quacks still 
plays an active role as the heir to the throne of 
Majapahit and Walandit. Despite the belief 
that embraced each citizen is not the same but 
when doing a ritual customs retains the 
tradition that developed in the region of 
Tengger. The ceremony is performed Hindu 
rituals like smell still: Kropak, Prapen (place 
of fire and Incense), Genta, and Sampet (the 
yellow scarves usually used by Hindu priest at 
the time of Majapahit). 33 The spirit of 
pluralism are embodied by loving the culture 
and religion that makes them prone to the 
appearance of a conflict as well as social 
inequality or ethnic prolific religious 
diversity. 
 Technological developments that 
increasingly rapid exciting tengger residents 
drove to try new things, but not affected 0leh 
trend and lifestyle that many posts in the 
media most of them positioned itself be Wong 
33 Wimmy Halim, “Identitas Wong Tengger Masyarakat 
Desa Ngandas: Refleksi Kebangsaan Atas Degradasi 
Identitas Dan Persatuan Nasional”, Vol 2, No 2, Tahun 
2006

--- Page 9 of 13 ---
292 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
mountain (mountain citizens) than be Wong 
Ngare (lowland residents living in urban 
areas). According to their urban communities 
very different from mountain communities 
like her own life and seldom gathe r together 
unless there is activity which is important. 
 
Pillars of cultural Tolerance and 
Tenggerese 
 The pillars have become the hallmark 
of a society in tengger interact, making this 
community is rukunnya values of tolerance as 
a foothold to live bersosial as well as religion. 
The meaning of tolerance itself an effort in 
creating a harmonious society by way of 
respect between fellow, mutual trust, mutual 
cooperation in order to achieve one of the 
community in the absence of social 
inequality.34 Attitudes inherited the ancestral 
pillars embodying the order conditions of 
society a peaceful perched even hardly finds 
social or religious conflict it reflects the 
existence of difference is not a barrier to 
strengthen the brotherhood.35 The elite society 
teaches t hat Jesus taught compassion and 
love, Prophet Muhammad exemplifies the 
gratitude for the favors of Allah almighty, 
Buddhism teaches man to take the Middle 
Road, and the gods taught humans to fight 
falsehood and uphold the truth. 36 According 
to the residents of a small "better a lot of 
brothers on many treasures". 37 Saying this is 
what makes Concord residents. Fostering 
these values with proven good views from the 
model of their life that is full of warmth and 
harmony. 
 
34 Muhammad yasir, makna toleransi dalam al- qur’an, vol 
22,no 2, tahun 2014 
35 Fatmawati 2013 
36 Nyoman S. Pendit, Nyepi: Kebangkitan, toleransi dan 
Kerukunan, (Jakarta: Gramedia Utama, 2001), 59 
37 Wawancara, dengan dukun suku tengger 
38 Harry Waluyo, Sistem Pemerintahan Tradisional di Tengger 
Jawa Timur. (Jakarta: Proyek Pengkajian dan Pembinaan 
 A small community also knows of the 
Welas Asih Pitu 38 (seven-love affection) 
including: Welas Asih Marang Bapa Kuasa 
(God), Welas Asih Marang Bapa Biyung 
(parents), Welas Asih Marang Ibu Pertiwi 
(Motherland), Welas Asih Marang Jiwa 
(sense of soul), Welas Asih Marang Sepadane 
Urip (Fellow Humans), Welas Asih Marang 
Sato Kewan (Animals), Welas Asih Marang 
Tandur Tetuwuh (Vegetation). In this small 
community adage emphasized to do good to 
your fellow man in spite of different beliefs 
not only of human beings, nature, plants, and 
animals also must also remain guarded this 
cause with a small community cancord. 
 The realization of the values of 
diversity not only Prime this historical 
evidence has recorded values of harmony has 
been there always used to be in this tribe. 
Especially when many Traveler s 
(newcomers) that berbondong -bondong 
present to this area, concerns and convenience 
have appeared, so as to unify this society the 
shamans of the initiative made the Ceremony 
as a unifying customs the Community element 
of the tengger layer both Hindu, Bud dhism, 
and Islam.39 Like the ceremony of Unan-Unan 
i.e. the largest ceremony for the community of 
tengger which is done in sewindu once 
sewindu, the calculation is different from the 
calculation of the saka calendar tengger, 
according to sewindu it's not ei ght years but 
five years appropriate with the calculation of 
the sun rising every day even thirty days. A 
small calendar mentioning that no months of 
twenty-nine days or thirty -one days. This is 
almost the same as the calendar system is that 
Nilai-Nilai budaya, Direktorat Sejarah dan Nilai 
Tradisional, Direktorat JenderalKebudayaan, 
Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, 1997), 86 
39 Sudiro, Legenda dan Religi Sebagai Media integritas bangsa, 
Vo 8, No 1, Sebtember 2001, halaman 19-30

--- Page 10 of 13 ---
293 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
there are only 5 days: Pon, Wage, Keliwon, 
Pahing, Legi , so one week there have only 
been five days and sewindu only for a period 
of five years. 40 Mbah sindek (Elders of the 
village Shaman Agrosari) say unan -unan 
comes from the word Nyaur which means 
Hunan Banggi (a promise to pay), described 
in Makekat Jungring Saloko as follows: 
 “Leluhur kawula paringi pitedah 
wewarah kados ingkang kasebat wonten 
mekakat junggring saloka. Bilih Wong agung 
kiko dakso, dawuhaken Prabu Anom Sangge 
menyan kebak pelambung. Ki Ageng Ardi 
Anas Nambi Meru. Nyampuhaken putra 
wayah giri kusmo pikantuk nyi buring mbok 
wulanjar ingkang wonten sanggar ratu anom 
pemancil, ingkang nemurunaken yugo putu 
wonten saidenge poten tetenggere tanah pulo 
jawi”. 
 
 There are several requirements that 
must be pr ovided in a ceremony such as: 
Gedang Ayu, Suruh Ayu, Jambe Ayu , and the 
most important of the White Buffalo. Ritual 
ceremony began with Rawa Tangkang (the 
reading of sacred mantras with the intention 
of asking permission To Bahu Rekso (the 
term's leader at the time of the Kingdom) and 
also the spirit of the ancestors of the 
membabat of the base region of tengger. 
Second, Mapek (Ceremonial Opening 
attended by Councilor and the ranks of the 
Government). Third, Unan -Unan (ritual 
slaughtering is done by White Buffalo are 
devoted to God as a gratitude for the favors of 
nature that have been given so that the living 
can would be sure and also as a form of 
petition in order for exclusion of things that 
effect is negative). The most interesting thing 
here is when the ceremony of the slaughter of 
Buffalo skin and bones left intact only taken 
 
40 Wawancara dengan bapak budiono (Dukun Suku 
Tengger), di desa Agrosari pada: 25 November 2018 
part meat punctured and decorated over the 
past tengkurap Buffalo body decorated with 
produce such as gedhang ayu, vegetable, and 
fruits more then paraded from the scene of the 
slaughter toward Penden Desa in Pure (where 
the first establishment of buildings in an area). 
The evening held a ceremony with an already 
prepared to enjoy the rest of the community 
attend mandatory either tengger Hindus, 
Buddhists and Muslims. In this sense of 
family banquet feels real they feel both have 
stories of history and public order that are 
parallel. Because all blend into one without 
restrictions in the frame of family although it 
is this trust and understand different forms o f 
a togetherness in the frame of keberagam 
religious but still family. 
 In addition to the ceremonial unan -
unan there is also a tradition of Karo -Karo 
ceremony that is the tradition of the great 
ceremonies conducted by the public good of 
Islam, a small Hin du, or Buddhist. The 
celebration ceremony was not much different 
from the feast of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, 
where Karo -karo was performed for two 
weeks in the second month of the lunar crater 
or the crater will call it Moon Karo. Just in 
today society tengger bermaaf -maafan each 
other and also visited every house in the local 
community, the most memorable in the 
ceremony there is slaughtering all cattle 
results both from the Chickens, goats, pigs, 
cows and Buffaloes for enjoyed his flesh. This 
celebration for the community perched very 
highly because of hard work as a reward for a 
year of good farming, farming or berternak. 
All walks of life good old -young, large and 
small, Hindu, Islam, Buddha blend into one 
joyous celebration in karo. The celebration of 
this increasingly impressed karo complete and 
lively if yields abundant.41 
41 Sutarto, Komunitas Lokal Dalam Persefektif Perubahan 
Sosial Budaya: Suku Tengger, (Jember: Universitas Jember, 
1997), 211- 212

--- Page 11 of 13 ---
294 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
 And the last Rites or Kasodoan i.e. 
Kasada ceremony conducted on 14, 15, 16 
instead of kasodo to coincide with the full 
moon was being radiated and looks at 
Lazuardi feast now known as Yadnya Kasada. 
Yajna Kasodo rather like the well of feast of 
sacrifice and also produce animal sacrifice as 
a form of preservation of progenitors mandate 
tenggerese Raden Kusuma aka Patni Kusuma 
aka Kusuma Deity who was the youngest son 
of Rara Anteng and Jaka Seger. Kosodoan this 
as a form of communication between the 
tenggerese with God and the ancestor spirits 
guarding the area of tengger, this interaction 
is done as the heir to a tradition in the active 
crater. Not only does this ritual followed 
Hindu religion but also Islam, Buddhism and 
Christianity through several stages as 42: first, 
the taking of the eyes (holy water holy water 
is taken from the mountain Widodaren as 
complements the first before doing Yadnya 
Kasada, which made Ngelukat people (t he 
purification of the Soul Society Tengger). 43 
Second, the opening of the Yajna (opened by 
the Parisada Hindu and Juge whole the 
shaman tenggerese either from Lumajang, 
Probolinggo and Pasuruan, Malang, held at 
Ponten (Sand Sea mount Bromo).44 Third, this 
ritual (Kasada Ceremony starts at 02.00 Pm -
07.00 pm EST with a variety of events such as 
the preparation of the event, Reciting chants, 
Ngelukat people (purifying People, places of 
worship and place of the gods), the reading of 
the Vedic Scriptures, The his tory of the 
Kasada, Muspa (persembayangan), the prayer 
after Worship, Election Candidates, the 
Shaman Lelebuhan (Enter) offerings into the 
crater of Mount Bromo,) in the core kasodo is 
widely followed by Hindus because if 
 
42 Juli Astutik, Makna Ritual Upaca Kasada Dalam 
Persefektif Antropogi, Dalam Agama Tradisional, 
(Yogyakarta: Lkis, 2003), 128- 131 
43 Mohammad Anas, “Telaah Metafisik Upacara Kasada, 
Mitos Dan Kearifan Hidup Dalam Masyarakat Tengger”, 
analyzed in terms of ritual many c ontain 
elements of Hinduism, so when the ritual of 
progresses people other than Hindus is only 
present to witness. Recently the last end of the 
event, namely Pepujaan (Selametan) this 
event do Poten each with enjoying the natural 
results led by the local v illage elders and 
Shamans).45 
 This is a manifestation of religious 
harmony in the formation of the Tenggerese, 
where the Customs and culture of the 
ancestral heritage which makes the third 
religious in the Tengger into one unit in the 
frame to build a reli gious tenets and peace. 
Social identity is strengthened by developing 
the values of tolerance that automatically 
binds the existing cultures in Indonesia into a 
unity. When the tenggerese could unite, and 
only a small part of the State in Indonesia who 
are capable of practising sila 3rd in pancasila 
Indonesia Unity i.e.Where unity is progress, 
and unity not achieved without any process. 
With the Union, though separated on a 
Regional basis, not an easy integral values 
such as masayarakat evolved from this cr ater 
to uphold the existence of religious harmony. 
Attitudes like this should be emulated all 
walks of life to maintain the unity of 
Indonesia Indonesia making customs and 
culture as a unifying religious. 
 
II. CONCLUSION 
 A small community known as strong 
Community Customs and culture. In the 
middle of the process of civilization that is so 
long it is very evident that the community 
does not falter for the tengger always hold fast 
to the ancestral heritage handed down the 
hereditary, based on exposure above p rove 
Kalam : Jurnal Studi Agama Dan Pemikiran Islam, Vol 7, No 
1, Juni 2013: 26 
43 Ibid, 27 
44 Ibid, 32 
45 Ibid, 32

--- Page 12 of 13 ---
295 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
though religions good Religion Hindu, 
Buddhist, and Muslim occupied the crater did 
not shake the slightest sense of family that 
there are precisely religious diversity which 
further strengthened religious based interfaith 
harmony as well by holding fast to the mores 
and cultures developed for maintaining 
harmony. Realization of the harmony itself 
were carried out in the presence of customs 
and culture like Karo, ceremony Ceremony 
Unan-Unan, Kasada Ceremony, ceremony of 
the birth and death rituals. Ther e is no caste 
differences that bind because on the 
tenggerese caste distinction does not teach 
that there is only a small Wong (Tenggerese 
Community). 
 Concord-based model of culture 
contained in the tenggerese lies in Lumajang, 
Malang, Probolinggo Regency , and Regency 
Pasuruan, whose inhabitants converted to 
Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam. This happens 
because the local wisdom preserved well 
beyond the religious bonds, for their respect 
for ancestors and adhere to the most important 
Shaman in order to obtain a harmonious and 
peaceful life. The condition of this harmony 
embodied in the social practices of the 
tenggerese community, relations between the 
communities is also entwined with either 
because of the attitude of tolerance in the 
society with good which is based on the 
values of culture Tengger. 
 
REFERENCE 
Ali Hisyam. Mohammad. 2015. Harmonisasi 
Lintas Agama Masyarakat Tengger. 
Vol 10. N0 01. September 
Ali. Mukti. 1997. Ilmu Perbandingan Agama, 
Dialog, Dakwah Dan Misi. Jakarta: 
Inis. 
Ali. Mursid . 1999. Plularitas Sosial Dan 
Hubungan Antar Agama Bingkai 
Kulturall Dan Theologi, Kerukunan 
Hidup Umat Beragama. Jakarta: Badan 
Peneliti Pengembangan Agama Depag 
RI 
Anas. Mohammad. 2013. “Telaah Metafisik 
Upacara Kasada, Mitos Dan Kearifan 
Hidup Dalam Mas yarakat Tengger”. 
Kalam : Jurnal Studi Agama Dan 
Pemikiran Islam. Vol 7. No 1. Juni 
Aqil Al - Munawar. Said. 2005. Fiqh 
Hubungan Antar Agama. Jakarta: 
Ciputat Press 
Astutik. Juli. 2003. Makna Ritual Upaca 
Kasada Dalam Persefektif Antropogi, 
Dalam Agama T radisional. 
Yogyakarta: Lkis 
Dangun. M. 1997. Kamus Besar Ilmu 
Pengetahuan. Jakarta: Lembaga 
Pengkajian Kebudayaan Nusantara 
Darol Afia. Neng. 1999. Tradisi Dan 
Kepercayaan Lokal Bagi Beberapa 
Suku Yang Ada Di Indonseia.. Badan 
Litbang Agama Departemen RI 
Daya. Burhanuddin, Leonard Beck. Herman. 
1992. Ilmu Perbandingan Agama Di 
Indonesia Dan Belanda. Jakarta: Inis 
Djatiwijono.H.R. 1983. Dinamika Kerukunan 
Hidup Beragama Di Daerah . Jakarta: 
Maret 
Halim.Wimmy. 2006. “Identitas Wong 
Tengger Masyarakat Desa Ng andas: 
Refleksi Kebangsaan Atas Degradasi 
Identitas Dan Persatuan Nasional”. Vol 
2. No 2. 
Izza. Lathifatul. 2013 “Melihat Potret 
Harmonisasi Hubungan Antar Umat 
Beragama Di Indonesia”. Religi. Vol 
IX. No. 1. Januari 
Kuntojiwo. 1998. Dari Kerukunan Ke 
Kerjasama, Dari Toleransi Ke 
Kooperasi. Jakarta: Pustaka Hidaya 
Majid. Nurcholis. 2004. Fiqih Lintas Agama 
Membangun Masyarakat Inklusif 
Pluralis. Jakarta: Yayasan Wakaf 
Paramadina

--- Page 13 of 13 ---
296 
 Vol. 3 No. 2 Oct. 2019 
Masum. Ali. 2015. “Politik Identitas 
Masyarakat Tengger Dalam 
Mempertahankan Sistem Kebudayaan 
Dalam Hegemoni Islam Dan 
Kekuasaan”. El- Haraq. Vol 17. N0. 1 
Mundar Soelaeman. M. 1987. Ilmu Sosial 
Dasar Teori Dan Konsep Ilmu Sosial. 
Bandung: ERSCO. 
Muslimin. 2012. “Alkuturasi Agama Hindu 
Di Indonesia, Al- Adyan. Vol 7 No. 2. 
Desember 
S. Pendit. Nyoman. 2001. Nyepi: 
Kebangkitan, Toleransi Dan 
Kerukunan. Jakarta: Gramedia Utama 
Subandrijo. Bambang. 2000. Keselamatan 
Bagi Orang Jawa. Jakarta: Bpk 
Gunung Mulia 
Sudiro. 2018. Legenda Dan Religi Sebagai 
Media Integritas Bangsa . Vo 8. No 1. 
Sebtember 2001 
Sutarto. 1997. Komunitas Lokal Dalam 
Persefektif Perubahan Sosial Budaya: 
Suku Tengger. Jember: Universitas 
Jember 
Sutarto. Ayu. 2007. Saya Orang Tengger, 
Saya Punya Agama : Kisah Orang 
Tengger Menemukan Agamanya . 
Jember: Kompyawisda 
Sutarto. Ayu. 2008. Kamus Budaya Dan 
Religious. Jember: Lembaga Penelitian 
Universitas Jember 
Suyono. Cart. R.P. 2009. Mitisisme Tengger. 
Yogyakarta: Lkis 
Swidler. Leonard. 1990. The Dialogue, 
Ground Rules For Interreligious 
Dialogue. Davao City: Tp 
Tri Haryonto. Joko. 2004. Kearifan Lokal 
Pendukung Kerukunan Beragama 
Pada Komunitas Tengger Malang 
Jatim. Vol 21. No. 2 
W. Hefner. Robert. 1985. Hindu Javanes And 
Tradition Islam . Princeton: Princeton 
University Perss 
Waluyo. Harry. 1997. Sistem Pemerintahan 
Tradisional Di Tengger Jawa Timur . 
Jakarta: Proyek Pengkajian Dan 
Pembinaan Nilai -Nilai Budaya, 
Direktorat Sejarah Dan Nilai 
Tradisional, Direktorat 
Jenderalkebudayaan, Departemen 
Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan. 
Widyaprakoso. Samandhi. 1994. Masyarakat 
Tengger: Latar Belakang Daerah 
Taman Nasional Bromo. Jakarta: 
Kanisius 
Yasi. Muhammad. 2014. Makna Toleransi 
Dalam Al- Qur’an. Vol 22. No 2 
 
Other Sources 
 
Al-Quran, Surat Al Hujurat Ayat 13 
Wawancara Dengan Bapak Budiono (Dukun 
Suku Tengger), Di Desa Agrosari 
Pada: 25 November 2018