--- Page 1 ---
THE CURRICULAR Introduction: What defines a
CANON IN NORTHERN canon?
THAILAND AND LAOS
In 1983 Charles Keyes wrote:
Justin McDaniel*
"the evidence from monastery libraries
in Laos and Thailand ... reveals that what
Abstract constitutes the Theravadin dhamma for
people in these areas includes only a
small portion oft he total Tipi~aka, some
Nissaya texts are idiosyncratic vernacu
semi-canonical commentaries such as
lar notes composed and used by Bud
Buddhaghosa's Visuddhimagga, a large
dhist monks in Northern Thailand and
number of pseudo-jataka and other
Laos between the 16th and early 20th
pseudo-canonical works, histories of
centuries. They evince a particular rela
shrines and other sacred histories.
tionship of the authors with the classi
Liturgical works, and popular commen
cal (i.e., originally composed in Pali)
taries. Moreover, for any particular
scripture of Theravada Buddhism as
temple-monastery in Thailand and Laos
well as with their intended audie~ce.
the collection of texts available to th~
They reflect certain understandings of
people in the associated community are
the notions of authorship, textual au
not exactly the same as those found in
thenticity, the possibility of translation,
another temple-monastery." 1
and homiletics. A comprehensive study
reveals the early development of Bud
Steven Collins used this statement and
dhist curricula in the region and a de
the research that supported it to develop
tailed study pedagogical methods used
his notion of a "ritual canon." The
in these texts affords us a way to de
"ritual canon[s]" are the collections of
scribe the nature of Buddhist belief and
texts used at any particular monastery
practice with much greater precision. In
in the "actual ritual life in the area con
this paper, I will demonstrate how the
cerned." 2 The term "practical canon,"
choice of source texts by nissaya trans
inspired by the work of Collins, was
lators and the commentarial services
coined by Blackburne in her 1996 dis
they employ reveal the contours of the
sertation on the Saratthadipani from Sri
pre-modem Northern Thai and Lao Bud
Lanka and shows how the choice of texts
dhist curricula. By focusing on the de
to copy, translate, teach and preserve,
velopment of curricula in the region be
both canonical and non-canonical Pali
fore the middle of the 19th century, we '
can avoid the vagaries that come with
1 Collins (1990: 103).
the application of normative notions of
2 Ibid.: 104; David Carpenter comes to simi
the Theravada Buddhist canon to a re
lar conclusions in his study of the canonic
gion of diverse textual production and ity of the Veda. He states that the Veda was
disparate intellectual expression. "largely a symbolic source for the legitima
tion of current practice." The Vedas can only
* As st.s tant Professor of Philosophy and be understood as a canon for ritual action
and "orthopraxy," not "orthodoxy." The
Southeast Asian Studies at Ohio University
Vedas as a canon and as texts, at least for its
Doctoral Candidate in the Department of
commentators like Bhaltfhari, were insepa
Sanskrit and Indian Studies at Harvard
rable from "the conditions of their practical
University
employment." Carpenter (1992: 24-28).

--- Page 2 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
and vernacular, in any given Theravada stories or the ritual instructions them
community actually must be seen as selves. They also contain linguistic,
defining the particular canon of that re material, and rhetorical features that
gion and time period. Derris, providing serve pedagogical purposes. While cer
a succinct overview of this modem trend tain canonical texts written in Pali are
in Theravada Studies, demonstrates that found, and sometimes in large numbers
texts like the Jatakas, the Dhammapada and wide-spread across a region, the
aqhakatha, the Buddhavarpsa and the texts that were translated (i.e. nissayas)
Mailgaladipan1 dominate Southeast seemed to have formed a practical ver
Asian monastic libraries and archives. nacular canon which dominated lan
guage instruction and were the subjects
Although, I do not want to simply of sermons at rituals and other commu
create a canon that did not actually exist nity events. The nissayas may be the
historically in Northern Thailand or evidence of, what I call, multiple "cur
Laos, I want to add to this current ricular canons." By focusing on what
discussion in Theravada Studies by texts were actually taught, copied, and
emphasizing a new way to define a translated, we can break away from the
"canon" by focusing specifically on scholarly tendency to study Pali texts
what Pali texts were most commonly and not their, often quite different, ver
translated and were used in educational nacular translations. These curricular
settings.3 I want to expand this idea of canons were not well-copied and beau
a practical canon by, first, looking at tifully illustrated for royalty and wealthy
nissaya texts in Laos and Northern Thai patrons. They did not remain unread and
land. Nissayas reveal their pedagogical neglected in the royal libraries or large
purpose by the choice of the texts the monastic libraries of Thailand and Laos,
authors chose to translate and comment nor were they strictly collections ofPali
upon, and the semantic content of the liturgical prayers, protective chants or
blessings. Instead, they were individu
ally fashioned lenses through which in
dividual scholars read, translated and
31 thank Oskar von Hiniiber for his personal
commented on Pali texts in the vernacu
comments on the danger of inventing
lar and the individually forged mega
canons that never existed historically or
phones by which they taught.
conceptually.
4 See the Raicheunangseuporiinliinna
What Charles Keyes observed in 1983
ekasiinmaigrofilm kong stiipanwijai
chiengmai: 2521-2533 (CatalogueofPalm can be confirmed today with even the
Leaf Texts on Microfilm at the Social Re most cursory inventory of the major
search Institute, Chiang Mai University: monastic, royal and governmental
1978-1990) (1991); Panchi Maigrofilm manuscript libraries of Laos and North
Kwang Luang Pahang, Haw Papitapa em Thailand.4 Moreover, it was previ
Kwang Luang Pahang, Hongsamut Haeng ously noted (although not extensively
St Lao (Catalogues of Palm Leaf Texts on commented on) by Louis Finot in 1917,
Microfilm from Luang Pahang, the Museum George Coedes from 1911 to 1935 and
of Luang Pahang and from the National
Pierre LaFont in 1982.5
Library of Laos) ( 1999). Vernacular
narratives and histories or translations and
5 See Finot (1917: 1-218); Coedes (1966);
summaries of Pali texts in the vernacular
LaFont (1965: 429-545).
dominate these collections.
21

--- Page 3 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
Generally, the most popular texts were a "common assumption that a closed
the anisarp.sas (blessings used in ritual canon had a rigid and inviolable force. "9
and magical ceremonies), parittas (in Therefore, there is often a distinction
cantations for protection), chalongs (c er made between canonical and apocryphal
emonial instructions for both lay and texts that exists in the mind of the
religious ceremonies), aprocryphal scholar, but not the members of
jatakas (non-canonical birth-stories of individual Theravada communities.
the Buddha), kamavacas (ritual instruc Therefore, following Collins, he notes
tions and rules), local folktales, and that:
tarnnans (relic, image and temple histo
ries).6 The first three categories of texts "an awareness oft he special problems
have clear reasons for being the domi which the Theravada faced in
nant texts preserved in the region due transmitting a systematic, but complex
to their everyday usage in house, buf doctrine abstracted from a large and
falo, temple and bodily blessings or for diffuse literary tradition is important
their usefulness in cases ofr evenge, fear, for understanding the continuing
and lust (love potions and incantations
are included here). The tarnnans are 6 For paritta literature in Southeast Asia see
mostly, but certainly not exclusively, Skilling (1992: 109-82); for tamnans see my
brief overview in the forthcoming "Trans
vernacular histories that have political,
formative History: Nih on Ry6 iki and
economic, social, aesthetic and educa
Jinaki:ilami:ilipakaral}am," Journal oft he In
tional reasons for being popular, which
ternational Association ofB uddhist Studies
I have discussed in another article, but
and references cited at the end of this paper.
which is largely beyond the scope oft his
7 For example, I recently made a trip to the
paper. I will discuss the aprocryphal rural temple in Baan Nawm Lam Jan of
jatakas, folktales and kamavacas below. Savaanakhet Province in Southern Laos. In
What is important for my purposes is this temple's rather large collection of manu
scripts I found only one canonical text in Pi:ili
that untranslated Pali canonical texts are
- the Dhammapada. Although a few of this
often in the minority in these collec
temple's manuscripts had been removed for
tions.7 Therefore, in 1990 Steven Collins
microfilming by the National Library of
wrote:
Laos, the catalogue of the temple's collec
"we need empirical research into each
tion held by the library had very few canoni
individual case, not a simple deduction cal texts and very few in Pi:ili. It also may be
from the existence oft he closed tripi!aka noted that the Pali Dhammapada held by the
produced by the Mahavihara. We need temple was not complete and clearly, by its
more research, for example, historical placement in the closet (ru) and the dust on
and ethnographic, on the actual posses its cover had not been untied or read in years
(probably since the National Library's sur
sion and use of texts, in monastery li
vey in 1993, since the label had been tied to
braries and elsewhere, and on the con
the binding cord and neither seemed as if
tent of sermons and festival presenta
they had been tampered with). Furthermore,
tions to the laity, to establish more
the abbot, Luang Pii Pommi:i, was unaware
clearly than we currently can;just what
that he had a Pali Dhammapada manuscript
role has been played by the works ex in the collection, but did call many attention
cluded in the canonical list. " 8 to the several manuscripts of Lao folktales.
8Collins (1990: 104).
Charles Hallisey surmises that modem 9 Hallisey ( 1990: 161) .
scholars of Theravada Buddhism have
22

--- Page 4 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
literary activities ofB uddhists in Sri (canon-near) defined by "praxis" and the
Lanka and Southeast Asia. This
awareness above all allows us to
acknowledge the conditions under and do not claim to be the words of the Bud
which new suttas ... could have been dha. Therefore, other parameters for can
onicity, whether they be chronological, topi
composed and accepted in the
cal or other must be examined. (Norman,
Theraviida; it is easy to see that the
1983: 140). Even the canon was considered
very idea ofa closed canon might well
closed before the common era, there are texts
have functioned more as a rhetorical
like the Milindapmiha, Petakopadesa and
marker than as a strictly closed list in the Nettipakara~Ja which have been included
contexts where the canon circulated in some Pali canon collections and not in
and was known in parts rather than as others. Origen used the term canon as an
a whole."10 adjective with the phrase scriptuae
canonicae, but the first nominative use was
We will see below that the canon was not until the fourth century. (Childs, 1979:
50). In the Jewish tradition, the definition
not only transmitted, chanted and held
of canon was simply "sacred writings" that
in parts rather than as a whole in pre
would not "defile the hands." However, ex
modem Southeast Asia, but it was trans
amining the philological evidence, we see
lated and taught in even smaller vernacu
that the canon meant simply a collection of
lar parts alongside numerous non-ca
texts written in a fixed historical period.
nonical narratives, ritual texts, blessings These texts were decided as sacred by con
and grammatical treasties. sensus and usually were determined as ca
nonical by their status of being taught as the
John Cort's study of the "canon-near" divinely inspired words of God. Marvin
Pope, in his translation and historical study
and "canon-far" of the Svemtambar
of the Song of Songs, elucidates the diffi
Jaina Communities of Gujarat echoes
culty in defining canonical and non-canoni
Collins' and Hallisey's call for scholars
cal works. He gives detailed comparative
to pay more attention to what type of
philological evidence (by connecting to
collection they are referring to when
Egyptian love poems or extracting its secu
they use the term" canon." Cort, follow lar topics) to show that it could be consid
ing Folkert's separation of Jaina scrip ered non-canonical in the basis of date,
ture into two types of canon 11 Canon I literary integrity, authorship, language style
-
and topic. (Pope, 1977: 18, 29-33, 41-49,
66-67, 72 and 85). In scriptural traditions
10Hallisey(1993: 105). throughout the world and across history, can
11 The academic interest in defining the term onicity is often defined, not necessarily
canon has gained momentum in the last arbitrarily, but defmitely eclectically based
twenty-five years. K.R. Norman believes that on multiple and over-determined factors.
a canon of religious texts can either be closed Childs writes:
or open. By closed, "he means that it con The term canon has both a histori
sists of a fixed number of texts or utterances cal and theological dimension. The
to which all additions would be considered formation of the canon ofHebrew
the work of theologians, but not the work Scriptures developed in a histori
cal process, some lines of which
ofthe prophet or first promoter of the faith.
can be accurately described by the
Norman's study of the canonical tradition of
historian. Semler was certainly
Theravadan Buddhists shows that even
right in contesting an exclusively
though they claim to have a closed canon,
theological definition of canon in
many of the works contained therein are not
which the element of development
23

--- Page 5 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
resultant contextualized understanding; tion of the Prakrit Jaina canon, but
Canon II (canon-far) defined by "author plays a primary role in the ritual life of
ity" and "some intrinsic ontological Svemtambar Jains. Moreover, most
value of the texts themselves." 12 Cort Jains conflate the Sanskrit and vernacu
employs the example oft he Kalpa Sutra lar commentaries with the Kalpa Siitra
to illustrate his point. The Kalpa Siitra proper and consider the sculpted and
is a relative "minor"text in terms of its illustrated representations and vernacu
placement in the recognized critical edi- lar folktales based on these commentar
ies as part of the canonical sutra. From
this study Cort submits that the Jaina
was subsumed under the category canon is more "fluid" than Western
of divine Providence or scholars have previously understood.
Heilsgeschichte ofs ome sort. Con
The Theravada canon of Southeast Asia
versely, the formation of the canon
is also more fluid. Prapod Assavavirul
involved a process of theological
hakarn drew my attention to the fact
reflection within Israel arising from
that Thais use the term Tipi?aka (i.e.,the
the impact which certain writings
continued to exert upon the com canon) to refer to all types of religious
munity through their religious use. books, not simply the three baskets col
To seek to explain the historical lected and arranged in Sri Lanka over
process leading towards the forma 1,500 years ago. The monk who holds
tion of the canon solely through a printed copy of a vernacular commen
sociological, political, or economic
tary on a non-canonical text while he
forces prejudices the investigation
gives a sermon is considered to be read
from the start.(Childs. Introduction:
ing the Phra tripi?ok (Tipi?aka). Lao
58)
monks refer to nissayas as gampz tipidok
(canonical scripture). One of the better
This shows us that the canonical process is
selling books in the
not on-going and limitless as maintained by
Mahamakurarajawidyalai Bookstore
James Saunders, but restrictive. However,
the restrictions come under shifting rubrics (the largest religious bookstore in
ofhistorical, literary, etc. Jonathan Z. Smith Bangkok) is titled the Phra tripifok
believes that the necessarily limiting func chapap sam rap brachii chon (The
tion of the word canon that separates Tripifaka, (Common) People's Edition)
canonfrom commentary is a "radical and which claims to be an abbreviated col
arbitrary reduction."(Smith, Jonathan Z.
lection (yo kwiim) of the 45-volume
Imagining Religion: From Bablyon to
Mahamaku~arajawidyalai Edition of the
Jonestown. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
Pali Tipi!aka, but includes non-canoni
Press, 1982: 43) He states that the only for
cal materia1.13 A monastic student's text
mal element that truly defines a canon is
book from Rong Phim Kansasana, a
"closure."(Ibid.: 48) The reduction "repre
sented by the notion of canon and the inge
nuity represented by the rule-governed ex
egetical enterprise of applying canon to ev 12Cort (1992: 175).
ery dimension of human life is that most 13 Sucliip Bufiiianuphap (1996). Studies of
characteristic, persistent, and obsessive re what constituted the Tipi~aka in Burma are
ligious activity. "(ibid.) That the making of also rare. The Royal Orders of Burma re
the canon was a natural development of a port that on April 4th AD 1638 the king or
religious people who seek to define their dered the copying of "new sets" of the
religion. Tipi~aka and.assigned twenty learned monks
as editors-in-chief,thirty as editors and ten
24

--- Page 6 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
popular press for religious textbooks in cal and non-canonical sources without
Bangkok, publishes a book titled distinction.
Bramuan dhamma nai phra Tripifok
(Dhammic Lessons in the Tipifaka) by There are some modem books like the
Suddhipong Tontyaphisalasut, which Phra tripifok sangkhep (The Tipifaka
draws from a mixture of canonical and Abridged) which contains only descrip
non-canonical sources. 14 There is no re tions of canonical texts and monastic
ligious bookstore in the country of Laos Pali exams are separated into canonical
which sells the Tipi~aka (either the Pali and non-canonical sections (Although
Text Society Edition or any of the sev the most difficult exams and the ones
eral Thai editions). Wat Ong Teu, the that, if passed, give the highest respect
central monastic university in Wiengjan, are the non-canonical ones.). Moreover,
has a copy of the Burmese Script edi Peter Skilling brought to my attention
tion that is dusty and apparently unused. the Tamnii.n Ho Phrasamut (The History
Their Thai edition remains unopened of the Monastic Library), which pro
with some volumes still in plastic wrap. vides a detailed history of the copying
Pali grammars and readers in Thailand and/or printing of various Thai editions
generally contain passages from canoni of the Tipi~aka from the mid-nineteenth
century to the early twentieth century
sub-editors to work at Maha Myal Muni Pa and which that generally follows the pa
goda. He also had scribes and clerks work rameters of the Sri Lankan canon (Al
under them with thirty Shan guards to pro
though many editions also include the
tect them. Later that month he ordered the
major commentaries, expanding the
production of 10,008 ivory plaques, 10,008
canon from approximately 45 to 91 vol
gold plaques, 10,008 silver plaques from the
umes.). Still, what is important is that
Ministry of the Interior and food from the
the idea of the canon for most South
Office ofGraneries to support the monks and
scribes. We have no idea though if these east Asian Buddhists is simply wider
sets of the Tipi~aka were similar to the PTS than is commonly understood in the
canon, what texts they included or left out West or to largely Western educated
and if these texts were similar to the long Buddhist studies scholars at Asian Uni
list of texts found on the mid-15th century versities.15 Evidence from monastic
inscription from Pagan, which is our best
holdings, translation practices, and, as
source for information on texts held and
we will see below, nissaya texts, leads
considered important in pre-colonial Burma.
us to believe that this fluid and more
See Than Tun (1983: April, 1638); Luce and
comprehensive sense of the term
Tin Htway (1976).
14 Suddhiphong Tontyaphisalasut (no date). Tripi~aka was even more prevalent be
15 Amnuay Sukhurnanan (1989). I thank Pe fore the introduction of the printing
ter Skilling for providing me with a copy of press (1830's) and foreign notions of
16
this source (as well asdozens of others over what constituted the Theravada canon.
the past three years).
16
Peter Skilling also gave me a quick descrip The common Thai and Lao notions of
tion of the Chiang Mai Pi!akamiila manu the canon and the research of Court,
script which is a long list (60 folios) of texts
Collins and others show the difficulty
in the Tripi~aka. This text, although as yet
of defming what constitutes a canon and
unedited and scrutinized, seems to change
the more insidious problem of allowing
the order of many texts and expand the pa
a "defined" canon to lead a scholar into
rameters of the Sri Lankan canon.
assuming that the canon is universally
25

--- Page 7 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
read, understood, held, preserved and and Northern Thailand often composed
unaltered by the religious community nissaya texts on non-canonical texts
that ideally adheres to it. In addition, written in Pali or on local Pali narratives
Collins pointed out a general problem that cannot be traced back to an origi
in the study ofTheravada Buddhism that nal Pali version from Sri Lanka or In
I hope to address. To truly address this dia. These bilingual translations and/or
general problem, as he points out, we commentaries vary from narratives,
need targeted and specific research of strict word commentaries, ritual instruc
certain regionally important texts. tions, and socio-ethical directives, and
Therefore, the first part oft his paper will represent a singular creative endeavor
look in detail at nissaya texts. I chose in the emerging pre-modern states of
nissaya texts, at the suggestion of both Thailand and Laos. They also reveal a
Oskar von Hinuber and Charles diverse and creative Buddhist scholarly
Hallisey, because they are extremely atmosphere, which before now has been
common throughout manuscript collec largely characterized as uniform and in
tions in Northern Thailand and Laos and tellectually stagnant.
have never been studied by scholars lo
cally or internationally. There is a seri Nissayas reflect a stage of local Bud
ous lack of study of nissayas as a genre dhist literature in which composing texts
of Buddhist commentaries and early in Pali was being largely replaced by
vernacular translations and more gen vernacular translations, commentaries,
erally a total absence of previous stud summaries, ritual instructions and nar
ies that focus on the nature of Thai and ratives. These vernacular texts either
Lao translations ofPali texts, of which drew directly from the Pali canon
nissayas are the best example.
17 In Thailand and Laos there are several
The nissaya genre is unique to Laos, designations for translations: nissaya, nissai,
Burma and Northern Thailand.17 Begin nisai sab, khan, nisrai, and wohiin. I am as
ning as early as the 15th century, but of yet unsure as to why authors choose to
use one term over another or why some
becoming much more prevalent between
scribes use two or three titles for their manu
1720 and 1880, monks began to trans
script. For example, the Hii Sip Jiit Nissaya
late Pali texts in local vernacular lan
found at Wat Sung Men is entitled: "Wohiin
guages using a variety of scripts. These
Hii Sip Chiit Nisrai Hii Sip Chat." While I
nissaya (or "support") texts quickly be surmise that these titles are synonymous, I
came a popular medium to express doc have yet to determine whether certain titles
trinal teachings, ritual practices, and are used more in one region or at one time
daily monastic and lay obligations. period more than another. In the Critical
Nissaya texts consist of Pali words or Study of the Northern Thai Version of the
Panyasa Jataka published by the Dept. of
phrases followed by vernacular transla
Thai at Chiang Mai University, it is men
tions, usually with numerous comment
tion that no one has found a manuscript of
aria! additions by the translator. Many
the Panyasa Jataka in Pali in Northern Thai
nissaya texts were based on canonical
land. However, they state that the only dif
Buddhist scriptures originally composed
ference between nissayas and voharas
in Sri Lanka in Pali. However, in many (wohan) is the amount of Pali used in the
cases the original Pali text is not cited, text. This is oversimplified. Bhiikwijiibhiisii
or if cited, the Pali phrase used in the Thai (1978).
nissaya cannot be located in the classi
cal text. Furthermore, scholars in Laos
26

--- Page 8 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
and its commentaries or created new to both the lay and the ordained. The
texts reflecting a creative engagement following two sections will provide evi
between local literary tropes and themes dence for this pedagogical thesis and dis
and Buddhist characters and Pali liter cuss its relevance to the idea of the cur
ary structures.18 What is particularly ricular canon in Northern Thailand and
interesting about nissayas is that their Laos.
physical features, rhetorical style and
choice oft exts translated (object! source What follows is a very brief overview
texts) demonstrate that they were most of examples drawn from a wide variety
likely employed as teaching aids for of nissaya manuscripts collected in
monks and novices who were learning Northern Thailand and Laos. These are
to read/listen to and write both Pali and merely representative examples and are
the vernacular and guides to explaining part of a more comprehensive study of
Pali words and passages for sermon nissaya texts in progress. The examples
will suffice for the purposes of this pa
per and will show the need to determine
18 McDaniel (2002) what texts were most commonly used
19 I recently went to the two major monastic
in educational contexts, thus helping to
universities ofT hailand and Laos to inquire
identify a curricular canon of a region
about which texts they used to instruct Pali.
or individual temple. Still, the larger
At Wat Ong Teu in Laos they do not use a
pedagogical thesis which they support
standard Pali grammar text, but instead, the
remains tentative and awaits examina
instmctor reads Pali passages and translated
them into Lao for his students. Translation tion of a wider collection of texts, a com
is more at the level of memorization than parison of nissaya texts with other
detailed explanations ofg rammar or linguis genres of vernacular commentaries and
tic issues. The text he was using for the translation like vohii.ras, sii.bs, desanii.s
lesson on the day I interviewed him was an and vernacular ayhakathas and !fktis
excerpt from the Dhammapada. At Wat
from the region, as well as a compari
Borworniwet (Mahamakutarajawidyalai) in
son of nissayas with the most common
Bangkok, instruction generally takes the
Pali grammars used by monks in pre
form of memorization as well; however,
modem Northern Thailand and Laos.19
there is a series of short paper-back Pali
grammars for novices. I am still unlcear on
how they are incorporated in a Pali lesson Object Texts
and need to investigate further. It may be
noted that these grammars were hard to Nissaya manuscripts generally range
locate at the Wat Borworniwet bookstore and from one fascicle (phuk) with approxi
when I asked about what texts novices and
mately nine folios to 12 fascicles with
monks used for Pali study I was given a few
over 250 folios. The choice of what
bi-lingual liturgical texts with Pali and Thai
texts the composers of the nissayas
in two columns. These books are very preva
translated and commented on (object
lent at the bookstore and would be too
texts) is wide-ranging, but Pali narra
numerous to list here. However the most
common ones would certainly be: tives from the Pafifiii.sajii.taka and
Phrakhrurunatharnrangs1. Monpl.t! bliie Dhammapada-a_t!hakatha and vernacu
samrap Phrabhiksusiimanen liie lar stories like the Madhurii.sachampu
Phutthasii.sanikachon tua bai. Bangkok: Wat and ritual texts such as the sattaparitta
Arunrachawararm, 2534 [ 1991] and the and various kammavii.cii.s tend to domi
Suatrnon chabub lu'ang.
nate the different collections. A list of
27

--- Page 9 ---
MANUSYA :Journal ofH umanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
some of the most prevalent extant dessaniis (sermons) from the 17th to
nissayas that I have had the opportunity 19th century that I have had the oppor
to acquire and read are: tunity to examine employ a similar
method.20 Nissayas, like dessanas, con
Channaburi Dhammapada Nissaya Mak sist of lists of vernacular synonyms for
Cet, Chiang Mai Kathii Dhammapada Pali terms or translations and illustra
Nissaya, Chiang Mai Siitmon Nissaya, tive explanations of the object text in
Chiang Mai Kit Nissaya, Chiang Mai question. I will offer a more detailed ex
Atthasiilinf Nissaya mak bhaet, planation of these methods below, but
Lampang Kammaviica Nissaya, Lii'ang for now, what is important to note is that
Pabiing Kammavaca Nissaya, Lii'ang the choice of what canonical and non
Pabiing Uposatha Khan Nissaya, canonical Pali texts from Sri Lanka, as
Lii'ang Pabiing Xai Noi Nissaya, Lii'ang well as Pali and vernacular texts from
Pabiing Saman Nissaya Mak Ton, Phrae Thailand and Laos, to translate was in
Madhurasachambu Nissaya, Phrae Ha part an act in service of creating the lo
Sip Chat Nissaya, Wiangchan cal culture and provides insight into
(Vientiene) Panchakanipiit Nissaya, what texts were considered particularly
Wiangchan Malai Bodhisat Nissaya, efficacious for pedagogical purposes. In
Wiangchan Phrakaeo Nissaya . deed, by the time the nissaya was com
posed, the Northern Thai and the Lao
There are several other nissayas less had centuries of familiarity and belief
common which I have not examined in in Theravada Buddhism. The nissayas
any detail as of yet. Still, this list is a may be seen as articulations of a par
representative one and I am confident ticular understanding of the Theravada
that it is large enough to allow us to in an attempt to make sense of a world
make some generalities regarding the in which the religion oft he Buddha con
genre. stituted the overarching and dominant
system of belief and practice. The Lao
The choice ofw hat texts and what words and Northern Thai people used a for
from a particular text to comment on and eign, translocalliterary practice and plot
translate in nissaya form can tell us a structure to express their local practices,
great deal about the needs of the com beliefs, values, social and historical con
munities that composed them and what cerns, and vernacular language. These
aspects ofBuddhism were deemed more texts are negotiations between the clas
important and most necessary to teach, sical and vernacular, the translocal and
especially in the vernacular. Narratives the local. The nissayas incorporate
and ritual texts are chanted or drawn local religious, cultural and linguistic
from for instructions at ceremonies such elements into a non-native literary struc
as house-blessings,.o rdinations, the be ture. Further research along these lines
ginning and end of the rains retreats, etc. might lead us far in determining the
Therefore, they provide the perfect sub
ject for sermons by a teacher for the 20 "There are a few manuscripts from North
benefit of his fellow monks, nuns and em Thailand and Laos which have the titles
'desananissai' or 'voharanaissai'. There was
lay followers at these occasions. Trans
clearly a link between these two genres.
lations ofPali terms found in these texts
However, a full comparison between pre
is a common subject for sermons in
modern des~nas and nissayas would require
present- day Thailand and Laos. The few
a separate study."
28

--- Page 10 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
different modes of interaction between of the most common and public of
classical, translocalliterature, and local, Buddhist rituals- the ordination. The
vernacular literature, among the various ordination ceremony is a time of great
peoples of Southeast Asia. By looking celebration and interaction between
closely at nissaya texts we can see the monks and lay people. Could the
evolution of Pali and vernacular, local Kammaviicii Nissaya (on the
Buddhist literature as processual and upasampada) have been used to train
dynamic, reflecting strong ties to the monks who would give a sermon to the
past and engagement with the present. lay people who were in attendance at
the ordination? The Sattaparitta
Shll, aside from these lofty reflections, (Sutmon Nissaya) is a collection of man
there may be a very simple reason au tras chanted for protective purposes at
thors of the nissayas chose to translate a number of Buddhist ceremonies.
the object texts they did. The narrative Therefore, would it not provide a logi
nissayas are simply entertaining stories. cal subject for a sermon following the
They may not systematically layout ceremony? These questions are basic
Buddhist ethics or doctrine or provide and difficult to confirm without histori
an accurate history of the Buddha's life, cal descriptions of sermons, of which
but they are funny, frightening, and there are few, and the ones we have are
memorable stories of magic, family usually embedded in dramas, epic
crisis, wealth and love. Donald Swearer poems or narratives involving monks.
and Ranjani Obeyesekere have noted the However, a comprehensive study of
prevalence of narratives as teaching these descriptions, as is so often the case
tools in Theravada Buddhist societies, in Theravada studies, remains a
and Bosaenggam Wongtala notes that desideratum.
stories from the Pafiniisajiitaka collec
tion and other stories are often requested Besides narratives and ritual texts, there
by lay people to be told at religious are three nissaya manuscripts that I have
ceremonies and family events read that are drawn from the
(weddings,funerals, house-blessings, Abhidhamma, seemingly for the pur
tonsure ceremonies, etc.).21Therefore, pose of teaching Pali grammar (as we
monks have to be taught, as I was when saw in a few examples given above),
I was a monk, to learn these stories and which was one of the main activities of
be able to chant them in Pali. Excerpts any large monastic school. The
from these stories are often the basis for A!!hakathiimiitikii Nissaya is a partial
sermons on these occasions. Could this translation of the miitikii of the
have been the reason these narratives
were translated as nissayas? It is well
known that mon~s in Thailand are 21 Bosaenggam Wongtala (1987: 208); note
judged on their ability to relate a good also that vernacular epic poems which do
story.22 not have any particular religious themes like
the Thao Hung Thao Cheung and Xin Xai
are also often chanted at Buddhist ceremo
Besides Jataka style narratives, ritual
nies in Laos. See Khongdeuan Bunyawong
texts are also common object texts for
(2000: introduction).
nissayas, and there are clear reasons
22 Prija Jangkbwanyeun, Dhammavacana
why. The Kammaviicii Nissaya explains
Wohan Thai~ Bangkok: Chulalongkom
the meaning of the Pali chanted at one
University Press, 2540 [ 1997]: introduction.
29

--- Page 11 ---
MANUSYA : Journal ofH umanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
Dhammasaliga!J.f that seems to also only are the definitions and expansions
draw from explanations, in a non-sys of the classifications of this matika the
tematic way, given in the miitika section material used in the states of the
of the Atthasiilin!. However, this is not Dhammasarigaf!.[ itself, but they form
simply a vernacular sub-commentary or the basis on which a large proportion of
a straightforward translation of the subsequent discussion is built in the re
Atthasiilini-atthayojana written by maining books oft he Pi!aka ."24 He goes
Na.Ifkitti of Wat Panasarama in Chiang on to show that the terminology pre
Mai in the late 15th century, although it sented in the miitikii is fundamental to
has certainly been influenced by the understanding how these terms, which
methods of grammatical instruction in generally refer to states of conscious
the latter and helps the "reader" ness, are used throughout the whole
identify grammatical compounds in the Abhidhamma. The miitika is "used to
Dhammasaliga~J.fY While the isolate and establish the make-up of the
A!!hasiilin"i and the Matika (on the khandhas ... and [the terms in the miitikii]
doublets or the triplets in the acts as a series of focal points."25 For
Dhammasanga!J.l) are not specifically these reasons we can see why the au
grammatical texts, the nissaya uses these thor of the nissaya would have wanted
texts as a matrix on which grammatical to emphasize the terms in the miitika
lessons are based. These lessons were through repetition, rather than transla
important to teach the audience how to tion, because they were technical terms
identify terms (They are term-based his students would have had to be fa
grammatical lessons that provide miliar with ifa ny teaching based on ma
lexicographies of related terms with terial from the Abhidhamma was to be
alternate grammatical suffixes, as the comprehended.
syntax of sentences and long explana
tions of grammatical rules were usually The Saccasarikhepa Nissaya, another
not the concern of Southeast Asian nissaya based on a grammatical text, is
authors). The identification of terms one of the few nissayas that generally
was important for chanting (to identify follows its source text, but again it is
the first words of texts as pneumonic incomplete and there seems to be no
triggers) and for sermons that were particular logic behind the author's de
based on the explanation and expansion cision to translate certain passages from
of certain key Pali terms. Furthermore, its source text versus others, unless slhe
the miitikii of the Dhammasaliga!J.f has was using the passages in question for
played an important role in the history the purpose of grammatical instruction
of Buddhism. In 1900, R.E. Iggleden unrelated to the source text's purported
noted that the miitikii 's influence was content. I have not as yet been able to
"felt strongly throughout the whole of identify the source text (if there is in
deed only one) of the Nama Nissaya
the Abhidhamma-Tipifaka. Not
from Chiang Mai;' however, its purpose
is clearly to provide a Pali grammar les
23 I have not been able to obtain a copy of son in Northern Thai. The text is badly
A.K. Warder's (1961) PTS edition of the broken and difficult to read, but, as far
Mohavicchedanf or a manuscript copy
which may have also been a source text for 24Iggeden ( 1974: ix).
this nissaya. 25Ibid.: xi-xii
30

--- Page 12 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
as I can tell, it is unrelated to the independent of the others by different
Niimariipasamiisa or the Niimaciira local scholars at different times in
dipaka cited by Oskar von Hini.iber in different places. I have collected numer
his Handbook of Pali Literature.26 It is ous maks, but not all 16 and not
interesting to note that nissayas used for different "recensions" of an individual
the instruction ofPali grammar or trans mak, except for one - mak 7. I am
lation ofPali grammar texts are largely attempting to collect and translate as
not found in Laos (Although a full many as possible, but from my experi
investigation of grammatical manu ence, I am quite sure many oft hese maks
scripts that may be nissaya-like, will be mislabeled, have numerous
although not containing the word in their missing or severely damaged leaves or
title, might reveal otherwise.). simply be lost. In addition, one
manuscript can have several pecia.
The choice ofw hat texts to translate and Regardless, I believe that any attempt
comment on in the vernacular was, ac to collect "all" of the maks, place them
cording to the latest manuscript inven in sequential order, and translate them
tories, in no way standardized across the as one text would be misleading, as to
region or even from one temple to the how they were composed and collected
next. While narratives and ritual texts in their original context. It would
tend to be the most prevalent, there are create a false sense of"completeness."28
occasionally nissayas on abbreviated I am confident that these maks were not
Pali verses from the Abhidhamma and composed in order, by one author at one
the Vinaya. Moreover, two manuscripts place, or ever bound together as one
with the same title copied around the large manuscript. There is simply no
same period are often completely dif evidence of this for this nissaya or for
ferent. For example, Dhammapada nissayas in general. Instead, they are
Nissaya manuscripts (the most prevalent translations of individual P~Hi narratives
by far) reflect the fragmented nature of and word commentaries of the
the process of composing nissayas. One Dhammapada-ayhakatha from Sri
Dhammapada Nissaya (mak 7) manu Lanka. The Lii'ang Pabang mak 7, for
script from Chiang Mai does not seem example, is a Lao translation of the
to have any direct connection to another 252nd verse and commentary of the Pali
Dhammapada Nissaya (mak 7) manu Dhammapada-a!fhakathii with numer
script from Lii'ang Pabang. Further ous additions and running sub-commen-
more, from an examination of different
manuscript collections in the region 27The best, although somewhat misleading,
there are sixteen sections of the English equivalent for this term would be
"quire" or a several bi-folios sewn together.
Dhammapada Nissaya. Each section is
For a good description of manuscript
called a "mak. "27 Each mak is of differ
codicology in Southeast Asia see Schuyler
ent length, ranging from 12-34 leaves.
(1908: 281-83); see also the National Library
These mak do not correspond to the Pali
of Thailand's guide to manuscript materials
Dhammapada's 26 vaggas (chapters) or
and production (Btieprfen nangseu
423 verses. Moreover , there is not one bhasiiboriin. Bangkok: Hosamut haeng chat,
monastic library that constains all 16. 2543 [1999]; and, their older Kiintham
Each mak seems to have been composed Samutthai lae Kiintr!em Biiiliin. Bangkok:
Hosamut haeng chat, 2530 [1988].
26 Von Hinuber (1996: 164-175). 28 I thank Charles Hallisey for enlightening
conversations with me about this issue.
31

--- Page 13 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
See Hundius (1990: 35-36).
tary or paraphrase. The Lampun mak 4 Nissaya, and the Dibbamon Nissaya, are
is a northern Thai translation of another all incomplete translations ofPali source
story from the Dhammapada texts and parts of their commentaries
a!{hakathii. These vernacular narratives and sub-commentaries( if available).
and word commentaries seemed to have The Sutmon Nissaya is a commentary
circulated independently and were on selected passages of the Thai
considered complete texts in and of Sattaparitta (Cet Tamnan), which is it
themselves and never read as a "com self a non-canonical collection of paritta
plete" (i.e., all 16 maks) text. I have only texts. There is apparently no extant Pali
found 16 maks in different places, this source text for the Madhuriisachampil.
in no way means that 16 was the total Nissaya, the Nama Nissaya, the Saman
number of maks of the Dhammapada Nissaya, the Lokabhfisii Nissaya, and the
Nissaya in any of these regions. Finally, Kit Nissaya.
there is only one mak that mentions the
name of the author of the manuscript, The last point I will mention as regards
but the colophon does not indicate to object texts is that the choice of what
whether the monk was the copyist or the texts to translate and comment on in the
original translator and does not mention vernacular was, according to the latest
the date of the work. Determining manuscript inventories, in no way
authorship is often a problem in South standardized across the region or even
east Asian manuscript studies.29 from one temple to the next. While
narratives and ritual texts tend to be the
Unlike modem English translations of most prevalent, there are occasionally
Pali texts published by the Pali Text nissayas on abbreviated Pali verses from
Society, Nissayas were rarely (if ever) the Abhidhamma and the Viniiya.
translated as "complete" Pali texts. The Moreover, two manuscripts with the
sections of Pali source texts that are same title copied around the same time
translated are manipulated for pedagogi period are often completely different.
cal purposes. When the source text can
be identified it is usually a summary of Rhetorical Style
that source text that lifts out Pali words
or phrases and then translates them While reading numerous nissaya manu
while leaving many words, phrases, sec scripts slowly, I soon became aware of
tions, etc. untranslated. Furthermore, certain repetitive syntactical structures,
narratives are occasionally left incom which actually taught me how to read
plete, passages seemingly vital to the the text. There was gradual lexical
plot are missing, and certain characters replacement at strategic intervals in
are emphasized, while others go unmen these structures that allowed me to
tioned. At_thakathainiitikii Nissaya, the memorize Pali vocabulary and their
AtthasiilinT Nissaya, the Kamaviica vernacular glosses without a concerted
effort, very much like children's songs
29Many of the manuscripts I have collected which slowly add new words within
or plan to examine this coming year are from
familiar syntactical structures. Three
Wat Sung Men in Phrae Province, Northern
examples may suffice to illustrate my
Thailand. There is better evidence for com
point. First, a Kammaviicii Nissaya from
posers ofPlili manuscripts at this temple than
Lil.'ang Pab.iing (KNLP-1f 6.3-f7v.l)
at temples in Laos or even in Chiang Mai.
32

--- Page 14 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
reads: of using the indigenous alphabetical system.
"Pucchi ko thcim nci ko yang nan this." This phrase is repeated again on
vaccanena duai khcim wa gandii ko fi the next line and then the definition for
dang nee II niik dura niik abadha rz ganda is repeated again in an abbrevi
phrayadhi thang lcii evarupa an mz ated form. Therefore, the reader reads
sahiiwa pan dang nz II tile tha gu' wii the gloss ofg anda twice as well as read
pen duma pen bao pen nap () santi mz ing the gloss of iibadha twice. What is
siilile nai kayya nu'a ton te hiieng than interesting is that abadha had already
wu' an seun nago rz nak sammanen II been glossed in the manuscript several
papijiintP0 gaw papiniin khan rap times before. Although not adding any
iiclzariyam soeng phrci achcin thing to the gloss of ganda, the gloss of
vaccanena duai khiim wii natthi bhante abadha reminds the reader of the gloss
bhante khii wai phrii achiin II abadha of iibadha (which this entire section of
rz phrayadhi thang lai evarupa an mz the manuscript is about), while adding
sabhava biin dang nz II gandii gil' wii a gloss ofa new Pali word, ganda, which
pen tUm pen bao pen nap natthi gaw bim is a type of abadha. Moreover, when
sarire nai kayya nu'a ton [sic} "31 the glosses of both ganda and abadha
are repeated alternate spellings ef salile,
There is a gloss of the Pali word ganda. sahava,pan, and tuma are used siirire,
First the novice asks what ganda means sabhiiva, biin and tum (we will return
and receives the answer in bold "it is a to the issue of orthography and phonetic
boil, it is something swollen, it is a nap spelling below). Finally, inserted within
( ); namely, these things are in the body these glosses are glosses ofc ommon Pali
(salile) in the body, (which is) the flesh words like te and evariipa and sarire,
of you (te) of you that spreads over that had already been glossed several
(you). Notice that in this gloss of the times before, and are simply reinforced
Pali word ganda there are two additional here. We will return to this issue of
Pali glosses of the words salile (sarire) reinforcement below.
and te. Furthermore, between the ques
tion, what does gandii mean and the an The second example comes from a
swer, it is a boil, etc. there is another Dhammapada Nissaya (mak 7) from
phrase which reads "abadha (disease/ Channiibuli (f.khai.3-f.kham.v.l). This
mistake) means diseases in general; example reflects another type of repeti
namely, that have characteristics like tive glossing. On these three and one
half leaves alone, although not limited
300skar von Hiniiber believes this is more to these leaves, the Pali words me1J4aka
likely pa~ijanati~ and/or sef!hi are mentioned 47 times.
31! have typed all Pali words that are drawn
Mel}rjaka is the name ofo ne of the char
from the nissaya texts in italics and bold
acters in this narrative and se{{hi is a
throughout to clearly s~parate them from the
treasurer or a wealthy person. Almost
vernacular words. If a vernacular word is a
every time Me!r1aka is mentioned, he
cognate of a Pali word and it is clear from
is called a se{{hi. While this in itself is
the script and the syntax that the word was
read as if a vernacular word then it will not not surprising, what is interesting is how
appear in bold face. When the edges of the many times melJrJaka is mentioned and
ms. are broken (which is quite common) or the fact that his name is glossed in Lao
the alphabetical ordering of the folios are nearly every time he is mentioned. For
missing I have numbered the folios instead example, al~hough mel}rjaka had been
33

--- Page 15 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
introduced and re-introduced dozens of In the ninth and tenth folios of the
times in the story on folio khao.4-5 we Sutmon Nissaya from Chiang Mai, the
find: terms marigala (auspicious) and
uttamam are translated five times in
"tasmim cii. samaye nai kii.la mii'a nan exactly the same way. The passage reads
mel}rjakagahapatti ri mel}rjaka se!fhi "matigala pen maligala uttamaf!t an
m"i bun sampan an prasoet kwa kon udom ying nak" ("matigala is auspi
thang lai hii kon an m"i bun milk hai ciousness, uttama'!l(means) ultimate").
katam yang sr"i sampatti pen se{{hi ( ) After reading or hearing this definition
phii pen kon an iiai nai wiang thi nan five times within two leaves, one surely
Zae paiica diiai thang lai hii kon an m"i would not forget it. matigala in P~ili is
pUf,lf,la milk nak mel}rjakonii.ma ku' ton spelled the same way in Pali and
mel}rjaka se{{hi phii nu 'ng [sic}" Northern Thai, but is pronounced
differently (mon-kon)32 and since these
"and at that time at that time when manuscripts were most likely were
mel}rjaka the householder who is known written by a scribe listening to a teacher
as mel}rjaka the Wealthy One, the one rather than copied from a written text (a
who has excellent and important merit point that will be discussed below), the
in greater amounts than all five others difference would have been obvious.
who also have ample amounts of merit, The Northern Thai word udom is
(he) obtained the (position) of a wealthy phonetically and semantically cognate
person; namely, a person who is impor to utta11za'!l. I use the term "ultimate"
tant within that city among the five
people who have great amounts of merit. 32For more information on how script and
His is known as mef.lrfaka, that is pronunciation relate in Northern Thai see
Mel,lrjaka the Wealthy One." Hundius (1990: esp. 101, 127-139).
Depending on how the ligature is written and
the status of the fmal consonant in Northern
This is very repetitive and by reading or
Thai or Lao, two words spelt in identical
listening to line after line of glosses
ways can be pronounced differently. These
embedded in the narrative, the reader/
differences can often be emphasized when
audience would surely not forget the reading a text out loud, but would be diffi
name Mertjaka or the fact that he was a cult to discern if read silently without the
wealthy person/treasurer. The repetition aid of a teacher familiar with the phonetic
of phrases and words at frequent inter paramenters ofboth Pali/Sanskrit and North
vals allows the audience and scribe to ern Thai/Lao. While modern Thai script
retains the spellings of words that are
memorize certain important words like
derived from Pali!Sanskrit even though their
aham, nii.ma, satthii, buddha, se{{hi,
vocalization does not follow their spelling,
dhamma, etc., as well as remember the
the Lao government have changed the Lao
main characters of the text. Any other
script three times in the past century. These
reader (listener) or·s cribe (I was both,
changes have effectively dropped all letters
since I read, translated into English, and from the alphabet which exist for the
transliterated each manuscript into mod purpose of transliterating Pali and Sanskrit.
em Thai or modem Lao.) would be able So, whereas the Thai alphabet has three
to remember numerous Pali words, different letters for the palatal, lingual and
many specific to the story in question, dental sibilants, in order to be able to write
the three sibilants in Sanskrit. The Lao
and relate the main themes and charac
alphabet has dropped all but the dental
ters of the story without reference to the
text.
34

--- Page 16 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
to translate uttama'!'l versus other pos seem strange to devote an entire nissaya
sible definitions like "great," "north" or to translate the table of contents of one
"important" because it takes into con book of the Abhidhamma, there is a long
sideration the words that follow it ying tradition of composing commentaries
nak (literally "great and heavy"), be and sub-commentaries and grammatical
cause when they follow a noun they treatises on the miitika (see section I.C .).
make it superlative. Therefore, the This nissaya continues that tradition, but
repetitive definition teaches that instead ofe xplaining the contents of the
mangala is cognate with Northern Thai table, it uses the words in the miitikii as
(mon-kon), that uttamaf[l and udom are a matrix for a Pali grammatical lesson
cognate, even if spelt differently. The in the vernacular. For example, the first
definition also employs alliteration. three folios (six lines per folio) are dedi
cated to explaining methods for read
One of the most excessive cases of rep ing compounds involving the compound
etition is found in the vipiikiidhammii found in the third verse
AyhakathiimiitikaNissaya from Chiang of the miitika. The first verse is barely
Mai. Here the nissaya translates the mentioned and there is no mention of
miitika, or "table of contents", of the the second verse, but the third verse
Dhammasa~Jganf (the first book of the found itself the subject of a lengthy and
Abhidhamma).33 Now Why it would repetitive translation/commentary. A
section of it reads:
"vipiika iti mak wii ni adhivacana pen
sibilant where the Thai alphabet has two let ki5 arupadhamma ( ) niimadhamma
ters for the retroflexed and non-retroflexed thang !iii ... saddo reu sapdii34 vipiika
"1" in Plili, Lao has dropped to just one, since
dhammiidhammii iti dang ni attho
there is no phonetic equivalent to a retrof
atthassaviicar:to bok yang
lexed "1" in spoken Lao, etc. One of the most
atthavipii kadham m adhamm ii n ii ti
notable characteristics of epigraphy in
Southeast Asia is the unusually large num
ber of scripts employed to write both classi
cal and vernacular languages. In the numer
33 Again I thank Oskar von Hinuber for point
ous Buddhist kingdoms that occupied what
ing out that Frauwallner is a better edition
is now Thailand and Laos between the 13'h
of this text than Rhys Davids and that "table
and lS'h centuries there often seems to be no
of contents" really obscures the meaning of
rigid one-to-one correspondence between
the term; however, I was unable to obtain a
certain scripts and certain languages. More
copy of this edition before submission. The
over, multiple scripts remained actively em
mlitikli is a list of terms useful for memoriz
ployed in every region up until the 17'h and
ing a text.
18th centuries, even though certain languages
fell out of usage. Strangely, there has been
no serious attention paid to the question of
34Sabda is the Sanskrit equivalent for the Plili
why so many scripts were used and why a
termsadda. However, speakers ofNorthen
scribe would choose one script over another.
Thai, Lao and Central Thai use the Sanskrit
I addressed this problem as it relates to
form for this word instead ofsadda (sapda).
scripts used on inscriptions at the 1999 Na
In other passages of this manuscript the more
tional Conference of the American Oriental
common and indigenous Thai term gam is
Society in Portland, Oregon.
used.
35

--- Page 17 ---
MANUSYA :Journal ofH umanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
padassa haeng bot wa (it ought to be known by the wise one)
vipiikadhammadhammiini paJJditanaf!Z [that is] the [meaning] of [this] word,
an II veditabbo () nayava dadacchedo dhamma(state) or all the dhammas
reu tang bot (states), namely, vipiika
vipiikadhammadhammiinati dang ni dhammiivipaccanasabhiiva (those
vipiikadhammadhammiiti II padassa things that have the essence ofr esultant
haeng pa~tditena an veditabbo II quality and those states that have result
dhammii reu dhamma dang lai ant quality) II attho (the meaning) or
vipiikadhammiivipaccanasabhiivii lae I yathii (that which is so) I I pe31 I I
I attho reu yathii llpll dhammii iti tang dhammii iti [means] like this, the word
ni vipiikadhammiiti padassa haeng pot padassa (of the word) of the word
wa vipiikadhammii paJJditena an vipiikadhamma, (those states that are
veditabbo. .. vipiikadhammadhammii nz results) paJJditena veditabbo (ought to
pen kammadhiireya ching () vakya mii be known by the wise) ... vipiika
dai pot samiisa wa dhammadhamma, (those states that
vipiikii dhammiidhammii nT II have resultant quality) this [compound]
vipacanaf!Z vipiiko vipacanam .. [sic]" 35 is a kammadhiireya [a compound in
which the first member modifies the
"vipiika (result) tends to have this second as an attributive adjective or as
adhivacana (designation), it is [related a modifying noun or as an adverb], that
to] arupadhamma () niimadhamma is ( ) vakya (a word) [in sanskrit] that
(the class of abstract concepts) ...s addo can come, a word (that refers to a type)
(word) or word [in sanskrit] of compound, namely this
vipiikadhammiidhammii (states that vipiikadhammiidhamma II vipacanani
have resultant quality)36 this means attho (a result), vipiiko (a result), vipacanam
(the meaning), atthassaviicaJJo(the ver (a result) ... "
bal expression of the meaning), that
which is said, atthavipiikadhamma Clearly, anyone who would listen to or
dhammiiniiti (the states that have re read this passage would not forget the
sultant quality with reference to the term vipiikadhammii or one of the
meaning), padassa (of the word), that
IS of the word
vipiikadhammadhammiinati (the states 36 The English translation of this word was
that have resultant quality), paJJditena drawn from Rhys Davids (1974: 2).
veditabbo (it ought to be known by the
37 Not only is the compound, either in larger
wise one), the chapter/section or all the
compounds or alone, repeated several times,
words vipiika-dhammadhammiinati
the translator/commentator uses the termpe
like this vipiika-dhammadhammiiti II
which signals to the reader (usually not
chanted outloud) that s/he should repeat the
section that had been repeated several times
before here. Since, the section I am trans
35There are numerous omissions of the long lating comes from the beginning oft he manu
"a" in this section and the extra "n" on the script, it is unclear what section we are sup
end of vipakadhammiinati seems to be su posed to repeat here. The termpe is found
perfluous. The failure to write the throughout the manuscript (f.gha.5 for ex
retroflexed "<;!" after the retroflexed "I)." in ample) (which is quite rare in other nissayas)
the word pa~Jditena is also common in and it is similarily unclear which section
Northern Thai manuscripts. should be repeated in those instances as well.
36

--- Page 18 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
compounds that incorporates this word. ing, but to learn how to read Pali com
They would know how to read the pounds. We will see further examples
compound since the translator/commen of this type of grammatical commenta
tator explicitly defines it as a rial service in the next section.
kammadharaya (later on folio gha.3.
the reader is told to read the compound Repetition is a well-known feature of
vipakadhamma as a bahubbihi type of Pali texts, especially mantra texts like
compound). The importance oft he word the maligala sutta (which is one of the
is emphasized not only by its repetition, texts partially translated in the Sutmon
but also by the clause pa1J.ditena Nissya). However, nissayas employ
veditabbo ("It ought to be known by the repetition in different ways. First, repeti
wise".) which is repeated several times tive phrases in nissayas do not mimic
throughout this section. Furthermore, the Pali passages of the source texts
when the commentator/translator moves being translated (if the source text is
on to comment/translate other sections known or even exists). Second, repeti
of the miitikii slhe continually returns to tion is not for the purposes of ritual
the compound vipiikadhamma or praise, does not involve metre, and
compunds like vipakasapda (f.gha.S) rarely is associated with litanies ofq uali
vipiikajana (f.gha.3) or ties or directives. Finally, because they
lokiyavipakaka{hattarupa (f. gho. v. 3- are vernacular translations that often, but
4)[sic]. This method is repeated with certainly not always, lift Pali words and
other words drawn from the matika of phrases from the source texts, they do
the Dhammasaiigm;zz, like kusala and not simply provide vernacular glosses
upiidif}f}a. The section ends with the for the Pali words, but actually write the
translator/commentator giving a syn Pali words followed by their vernacular
onym for vipaka and then repeating the glosses and then often repeat this gloss
synonym lest the reader/listerner forgets. within the context oft he narrative, ritual,
What is strange about this section and or ethical instruction. This repetition of
several others like it in the both Pali and vernacular words is seen
A[!hakathamiitikli Nissaya is that the se clearly by focusing on what I call "re
mantic meaning of the term under dis inforcement." Certain Pali words are
cussion is not translated into the ver consistently glossed in nissayas, even
nacular. Instead, the term is repeated, though their gloss must have been com
divided, combined with other words, monly known. For example, in the
and given alternate grammatical end Pafifiiisajiitaka Nissaya, the first person
ings, but never actually translated. The nominative pronoun ahaf!l is glossed
vernacular is only used in this section dozens, if not hundreds, of times with
to divide Pali words and indicate how the Northern Thai word kha (I). One
to read their suffi?'es. For example, would assume that once the word has
haeng means "of'' and indicates that the been glossed once it would be remem
Pali word that preceeds it should be read bered by the reader/audience or would
in the genitive. I included the Pali terms only have to be re-translated occasion
in the English translation of this pas ally; however, even in the last fascicle
sages to demonstrate to the non-Pali (lOth) of the nissaya we read the phrase
reader how a non-Pali reader in pre ahaf!l reu kha (I means I) numerous
modern Northern Thailand may have times. In the Madhurasachambii
read it, i.e., not for the semantic mean- Nissaya, the Pali second person nomi-
37

--- Page 19 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
native (and often accusative) plural pro many of the services most commonly
noun tumlze (you all) is one of the many associated with commentaries. There
relatively simple words glossed dozens fore, this section will look at the
of times, with identical vernacular trans commentarial services of nissayas.
lations over fifteen fascicles. In the Conversations with Charles Hallisey,
Saccasa1ikhepa Nissaya, the word Louis Gabaude, Donald Swearer,
llavaka (ninefold) is repeated seven Prapod Assavavirulkaharn and Peter
times in less than two lines of one folio Skilling, and Lily de Silva's introduc
(f.gu.l-2). Other common words, like tion to her edition of the Dfgha nikaya
puggala (person), aha (slhe said), evaf!Z a!(hakatha-!fkiilfnattha va~u;.ana, Paul
(thus), sutvii (having heard), are given Griffiths' Religious Reading and John
the same verncaular gloss ad nauseum Henderson's Scripture, Canon and Com
in many nissaya texts. mentary have helped me isolate these
commentarial services.
While there are clear pedagogical
reasons for these rhetorical features, The first service of the nissaya is the
what is important now is to note that glossing of individual words. As we saw
these narrative, ethical, grammatical, above, this glossing is repetitive and
and ritual translations cannot be read as runs throughout the translation. For
connected texts. The vernacular text is example, the Madhurasachambii
constantly interupted by glosses ofPali Nissaya from Wat Sung Men of Phrae
words and phrases, and the excessive province provides glosses of the most
repetition serves to teach vocabulary and basic Pali words, like ahaf!l and
to display methods of rendering Pali dhamma, as well as less commonly
words within the bounds of vernacular known words like parasuddha
phonetic parameters and syntactic [parisudha](pure). The glosses range
patterns, rather than provide a simple from simple synonyms in the vernacu
and accurate vernacular translation of a lar to long explanations incorporating
source text. other Pali words (which may or may not
be glossed). The Dibbamon
Commentarial Services (Dibbamanta) Nissaya from Wat Mai
SuvaQIJabhiimaram in Lii'ang Pahang,
From the brief overview of the rhetori Laos operates more like a bi-lingual dic
cal features of nissaya texts we could tionary than a textual translation. This
argue that nissayas should be placed is the function usually associated with
under the rubric of a vernacular wohara or sab texts, but some nissayas
commentary, instead of a translation. provide this service, and indeed some
Before providing an "accurate" transla nissayas are titled nisrai wohan or nisai
tion of nissaya, some examples of the sab in their colophons.38 For example,
commentarial services the texts provide one passage reads:
is required.
"siddhi man gong ko eli kammOf!Z an ko
Nissayas are translations of canonical geu wa kiim ko eli dha11znzaf!l an ko
and non-canonical Pali texts and, in geuwa dhamma ko eli saccaf!l an ko geu
some cases, vernacular narratives with wii sacca ko eli nibbiillaf!l an geu wa
no extant or known Pali source text.
However, these translations encompass 38 A study of these types of texts remains a
desideratum
38

--- Page 20 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
nirabbiin ... " A~ fasahas rikapraj fiparamitasiitra
(A~fa), examined by Lewis Lancaster in
"siddhi (means) powerful, kammaf!l is his 1968 dissertation.40 Lancaster notes
action, dhamma'!l is dhamma (law, that Chinese translators often inserted
truth, saccaf!l is sacca (truth), nibbiina'!l their own interpretations and additions
is nibbiina. .. "(f.l.v.l-2) into the A~fa when translating lists or
litanies. This litany expansion is seen
This passage is a clear example of the in the nissaya of the Dhammapada
many ways Pali words can be rendered a!fhakatha #252. There is a list that men
in Lao. First, siddhi is given the Lao tions beautiful garments, jewels, etc. re
gloss of man gong (strong/powerful). moved magically from a ram's mouth.
Second, kammatrzis glossed with its Lao In the nissaya translation, these items
derivitive kiim. Third, the glosses for are specified and expanded to include
dhammaf!l and saccaf!l suggest that local terms for specific fabrics and the
there is no Lao lexical equivalent (al mention of silver as well as gold. Still,
though there are several for sacca'!l and the list of foods taken from the ram's
dhammar.n is usually written dam in mouth is shortened, and ghee and
Lao) and simply removes the ending sesame are not mentioned. This may
(accusative singular masculine) of the account for the general lack of sesame
Pali word (dhammaf!l is dhamma (and) and ghee in a Lao diet (although there
sacca't! is sacca). However, the last are Lao words for these foods), and
word (nibbiina'!l) is translated with an therefore a lack of understanding of their
apparent hybrid Sanskrit and Pali value by the author or audience. The
lexeme (nirabbiin).39 same explanation can be given for the
addition of specific fabrics, since silk
Several pecia (maks) of the DhPNusu and cotton production and the artistic
ally only provide brief glosses for indi skill associated with it have been
vidual Pali words in the Dhammapada extremely important to the Lao economy
a[!hakatha, consisting mostly of syn and symbols of its local identity for
onyms in Lao or Northern Thai; how centuries.
ever, there are occasionally different
glosses for the same word and/or The second commentarial service
providing a definition for the Pali word is grammatical explanation.41 A
in question that makes sense only in the Kammaviicii Nissaya manuscript from
context of the particular story. For Wat Pichai, Lampang Province, North
example, in the Dhammapada Nissaya ern Thailand reads: "sammiipetvii ko
(mak 7), there is a gloss for the word hai pati ao diiai di lae hai m! chai-ya an
disvii, that reads: ko hen yang khao dip
kao ngiim soem chum ("this means 39 These hybrid Sanskrit and Plili lexemes are
(s/he) sees/saw new (and) excessively very common in Thai, Northern Thai and
Lao and Nissayas often gives both the Pali
beautiful rice").
and the Sanskrit spelling or a hybrid of the
two when they gloss words from Pali.
These extended glosses which move
40Lancaster (1968).
many nissaya texts out of the realm of
41 Oskar von Hini.iber has written extensively
translation and into the realm of
on the subject of the Pali grammar of
commentary are similar to the early Northern Thai manuscripts. See especially
Chinese translations of the (1983):75-88; (1987): 111-119; (1988a);
and, (1988b): 173-74.
39

--- Page 21 ---
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
loem sza ying di [sic]"("sammapetvii "corato wa chon thang lai ko dT
means that he caused the pati (lord) to manusato wa tae chon ki5 di amanusato
hand (it) over (it immediately) and he wa tae pai haeng pz iti (??) aggito wa
caused (him) to have a complete and tae fai iti uddakato wa tae nam iti
successful victory")(f.kai.v.2). The word pisacato wa tae pz wisat iti khanukato
hai indicates the causative in Nmihern lak tam iti kaiJ.tjakato ... "[sic]
Thai. In the Dhammapada Nissaya
(mak 7) (f.kae.v.S), there is a passage "corato means all those who are thieves,
that reads: alamkaritva ki5 bradap yang manusato means from people,
diiai khrii'ang bradap thang mii'an laeo amanusato means from the danger(??)
c~alamkaritvli means (she) adorned of ghosts, aggito means from fire,
(herself) with all types of ornaments"). uddakato means from water, pisacato
The word laeo is a word that, if placed means from demons, khanukato means
at the end of a phrase, indicates that the from an underground (??) root,
verb (s) in the phrase must be read in kaiJ.tjakato means ... "
the past tense. Most grammatical
explanations are of the locative, Although this section of the Sutmon
ablative or nominative plural, using the Nissaya claims to be a translation of the
words nai (in), chak (from) or xak (Lao) Mangalasutta, these words are not
and thang lai (all/many) respectively. found in the MaJ;~galasutta. Moreover,
Furthermore, the imperative is consis the "-ato" (from -atas) ending usually
tently indicated with the word chu'ng or signifies the ablative.42 However, read
chong (Lao). However, there are doz ing the Pali words in the ablative leads
ens of examples of Pali words, not in us to wonder why corato (the first word
the nominative singular present, that are of the list) is translated as a nominative
never grammatically indicated in the plural. However, the scribe could have
vernacular. This could indicate a poor accidentally omitted the tae following
knowledge ofPali grammar, but in most corato, which would solve the inconsis
cases the grammatical form of the Pali tency. I am genuinely perplexed by this
word seems to be understood by the passage's meaning, especially since it is
translator and simply not indicated supposed to be part of a translation of
because it can be understood in context. the Ma~Jgalasutta, and these words with
This follows Lao and Northern Thai these endings are not found in any addi
grammar, which only indicate tenses and tion of the sutta of which I am familiar.
modals ifn ot apparent from the context. Still, what is important for the purposes
Words like cha (will/shall) and laeo of this paper is that the author seems to
(already/in the past) are often consid be presenting us with a lesson on a par
ered superfluous. ticular grammatical form and seems to
be more concerned with that grammar
Although most grammatical
explanations are relatively simple, there 42 K.R. Norman was one of the first to note
are often efforts to provide more exten the particularities of Northern Thai Pali;
namely: "unhistorical gemination of conso
sive explanations. One passage from the
nants and the converse, unusual retroflex
Sutmon Nissaya is particularly lengthy.
ion ofd entals, and unusual spellings." They
I have translated a section of it as
are genuine characteristics of Pali as it was
follows:
spoken in Northern Thailand in the sixteenth
century" Norman (1983: 144).
40

--- Page 22 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
lesson than in providing an accurate tion, re-orders the words so as to make
translation of a source text. Certainly, the translation easier to understand to a
reading passages like this would ingrain local audience (see: f.l.l-3). Through
the association of the "-ato" suffix with out nissayas, this manipulation of Pali
the ablative marker in Northern Thai tae. word order is commonplace. However,
If we look at the manuscript pedagogi in order to identify where a nissaya is
cally, we may seriously suggest that this changing the word order of the source
passage was designed to be an audience text, that source text needs to be identi
centered grammar lesson, drawing fied, which is (as we will see below)
material from a source text. In this way, often difficult if not impossible. More
the' source text becomes the servant of over, when the source text can be iden
the translation and reverses the general tified, the translation is often simply a
notion oft he superiority and inviolabil translation of some selected passages or
ity of the "original" or source text. As words, or a summary of the source text
we saw in section I.B., the that is not extant in Pali or perhaps was
A!!hakathamatika Nissaya, the source written by the translator himself. The
text is employed to teach the reader/ au A,t!hasalin"i Nissaya is a good example
dience how to read compounds and the of the former and the Nama Nissaya, the
translator only gives the semantic mean Madhurasachampii Nissaya, and
ing of the Pali terms in the vernacular Lokabhasa Nissaya are good examples
when it serves this grammatical end. of the latter.
The third commentarial service is the The fourth commentarial service is as a
clarification of word order. The begin thesaurus of Lao or Northern Thai vo
ning of the Dhammapada Nissaya (mak cabulary. Often times throughout
7) re-orders the words of the initial sen nissayas a Pali word is given several
tence of a verse in the Dhammapada definitions or at least a list of synonyms.
affhakatha. The sentence reads: The A!fhasalin"i Nissaya (mak 8) from
"sudassan ti imam dhamma desanam Chiang Mai, for example, gives numer
Satthii. Bhaddiyam nissiiya Jiitiyiival}e ous different definitions for the word
viharanto Mel}f/aka setthim iirabbha dhamma. In the Dhammapada Nissaya
kathesi" (" 'Sudassan 'the teacher gave (mak 7) we find a translation oft he word
this dhamma-sermon while living in the bhariyii (wife)(f.l v.l). This is followed
Jatiya forest near the town ofBhaddiya in Lao with nang an pen mahes"i su' wa
about meQc:Iaka the Wealthy Man"). The nang chandapadumti iti ("an older,
nissaya translates these words in an en upper-class female, that is a mahes"'i,
tirely different order (Just as I just did whose name is Madame
in rendering the passage into English!). Candapaduma") Here, the Lao provides
As in Lao syntax, the time and the place a simple synonym for bhariyii with
are usually the first things mentioned nang, which does not specifically mean
when relating an event in the past. a married woman or wife, but often is a
Therefore, the nissaya begins by trans title only given to married women.
lating viharanto (living/residing) and There are several words for wife in Lao,
the last part it translates are the words mia, pariya (from bhariyii) andfoen to
kathesi and dhammadesana. This in name a few, but this author decided to
no way takes away from the meaning of refer to this wife by her title and a very
the Pali sentence, but like any transla- important title at that. Nang is followed
41

--- Page 23 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
by mahesi. Mahesi comes from the I am unsure, the passage that follows the
Sanslcrit word for female buffalo and is list of "woman, daughter, nun" seems
often translated as queen. It is uncom to be the translator's note of how the
mon in Lao, but would be spelled and words can be spelled differently (i.e.,
pronounced the same way in Lao. This replace "tth" of itthi with "dh"). Still,
would seem a strange choice as a defi the fact that "tth" is in itthi and "dh" is
nition for bhariya (kalatta is also in vadhu and "i" is in bhikkhuni might
common in Southeast Asian texts) but suggest that these were abbreviations for
could indicate an effort on the part of these words. There are dozens of other
the writer to teach more vocabulary to examples of these synonyms that
the ·audience or the scribe or student demonstrate how a nissaya could have
monk who may have been taking dicta worked as a thesaurus or a dictionary
tion. Furthermore, mahes""i, being a for students learning how to listen
Sanslcrit word might have also added a to,read, and/or write in Pali and the
sense of importance (as Madame does vernacular.
in English). Mahesi is not mentioned
in the Dhammapada-Ayhakathii, from As we saw in the Atthakathiimiitikii
00
which this nissaya has been translated Nissaya, the word vipiika was given the
(i.e., the manuscript that the PTS used synonym vipaccanaf!l. Later in this
to assemble this critical edition of the manuscript, (f.Ji.l) in another long and
DhPA). Finally, the Lao specifies the repetitive passage explaining how to
name of this woman as she relates read different types of compounds, we
directly to this story; namely, niing fmd the term sahiiviciira [sic] translated
chandapadummii. with the synonymsavitakka. The trans
lators and/or commentators ofPali texts
In the Nissaya Niima from Wat Phra added new Pali words to the source texts
Dhat Chomgiri in Chiang Mai we find on which they were commenting.
other lists of vocabulary that blurr the
line between a theasurus and a dictio There is another commentarial service
nary. One example reads: "itthi reu pii that I have only found in the manuscript
ying II vadhu reu liik saphai II bhikkuni of the Madhurasajambii Nissaya.43
reu bhTkkhuni tang itthivadhu There, several Pali sentences are given,
bltikkhuni long sichii (??) hiiengpubba followed by Northern Thai translations.
iio tth iio dh iio long wai iio i wai ... " What is interesting is that the Pali
("itthi (means) woman, vadhu (means) sentence given seems to be abbreviated
daughter, bhikkhuni (means) nun, all of with the endings of individual words
these, the itthi, the vadhu (and) the dropped off and a system of sandhi,
bhikkhuni come(??) previously (one) developed solely for this text. Although
took 'tth' (and) took dh (and) placed them I do not have, and actually doubt there
(??) (and) took 'i' (and) placed exists, an "original" Pali text for this
it. .. ").(f.1.3) This example (which is nissaya, 44 what source the author of the
unclear and haphazardly written) not
only demonstrates that some nissayas 43 In the A.tfhakathiimiitika Nissaya, we find
provide lists of semantically related a similar type ofc omrnentarial service which
lexical items, but also that they offer instructs the reader/listener how to under
stand sandhi rules in Pali. Folio gha, line
instructions in how to write or, more
four explicitly mentions the reason the long
likely, pronounce the words. Although
"a" is found in a compound.
42

--- Page 24 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
nissaya was drawing on was either from translation can be given that reads:
a very poorly written PiHi text, was "khemaf!Z maggaf!l' means the way that
written by the author of the nissaya him/ is excellent. 'Siddhaf!Z' means com
herself to demonstrate his talent in pleted. 'yaf!l' means 'tends to.' 'That
clarifying garbled Pali, or was a peda dhamma' is known as any dhamma
gogical technique designed to demon whatsoever. 'Kiippaya rukkha ruci
strate several ways ofw riting Pali words dadiima' means a forest that is brilliant
or how to manipulate Pali sandhi rules. that gave ( ), he concentrates his own
For example, one Pali sentence reads: (mind)(??) on that light. 'I' means I. 'I
"khemimaggayaf!l kampiya honor" means "to bow to the dhamma,
rukkha rucei diimana that 'dhamma which is known as the
manipabhiibhidhammiigga samaf!Z highest', that which is excellent, 'that
ma!lamiinicca" (MRChNP-1-f.ka. v.l). which is incomparable' [meaning] [one]
This verse makes little, if any, sense as is unable to find another dhamma which
it is, although individual words like is better. 'Permanent' [means] all the time
rukkha, magga, abhidhamma, etc. can and peaceful. ( ) 'for that one which is
be isolated. But without grammatical well-joined, excellent, (and) pure."'
endings, it would render this passage a Clearly, this passage was not meant to
litany devoid of syntax. Still, the au be read as a connected or coherent nar
thor of the nissaya divided the words and rative, but rather provides translations
provided endings. Her/his translation of rather disjointed Pali phrases. What
reads: is important here though is not the se
mantic resonance of the Pali or the
"khemaf!Z maggaf!l yang hon thiing an Northern Thai translation, but instead
brasi5et siddhaf!l an siimret II yaf!l mak the way the author of the nissaya pro
wii yodhammo ree dhamma an dai vides declension markers for Pali words
kiippaya rukkha ruci dadiima ld bhii without markers, most often placing
/{i45an rung ri5en an hai liieo yang () them in the accusative singular mascu
dang chai mak pen dang ton kiirabbi dip line. Furthermore, he "corrects" or pro
nan ahaf!l r"i khaa namiimi kaw wai vides alternate spellings for certain Pali
dhammaf!Z yang dhammii aggaf!l an words, like writing khemaf!Z for
asamaf!Z an hii dhamma an ii'n cha sem khemif!Z, pavara for pabhiibhidhamma,
bi5 dai niccaf!l thang mu'a liie sallti ni and ruci for rucei. The clarification of
() yam samgatatall( )f!l pavaraf!l sandhi is also interesting, because
visuddhaf!l ... "(Phfik l.f.ka.v.3-f.ka.v.5) pabhiibhidhamma is divided into two
unrelated wordspavara and visuddhif!Z.
This passage is unclear due to damage Manamiinicca is simply rendered as
to the manuscript, but a provisional niccam. This second example shows
how important sandhi is in understand
44 The folktale is described by Dr. Balee ing this passage, because the author of
Buddharaksa and the Encyclopedia ofN orth the nissaya seems to translate the Pali
ern Thai Culture (Saranukrom watanadham to say that dhamma is permanent, which
thai phiik neua) native to Northern Thailand
defies one of the most important teach
and existing only in the vernacular, it is re-
ings of canonical Theravada Buddhism
lated to the Lao story of Om Lorn Daeng -- the dhamma is impermanent. This
Khieo, which has no extant nissaya. Pali passage and its translation would
45 Ki is a common (mis)spelling for ko is this
make any good Sri Lankan or British
manuscript.
43

--- Page 25 ---
MANUSYA : Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
Pali scholar shudder because both the rhetorical style of many Nissaya manu
Pali sentence and its translation butcher scripts, we can tell immediately that they
canonical Pali grammar and spelling. incorporate many of the features of what
We could simply relegate this manu Buddhist Studies scholars include un
script to the dust-bin as an example of der the rubric of "commentary." For the
the poor Pali training in medieval last twenty years there has been a grow
Northern Thailand or designate it as the ing interest in the study ofc ommentarial
product of an exhausted and amateur practices in Religious Studies. In 1978,
ish scribe. This I believe would over Jonathan Z. Smith noted that all reli
look some of the most significant facts gious writing was in someway
about the languages of Northern Thai commentarial, but there had been no
and Pali in Northern Thailand and the serious study of what features were com
creative and pedagogical aspects of mon to commentaries across religious
translations in the region in the pre-mod traditions, how commentary defined a
ern period. Moreover, since we have canon and what assumptions the writ
dozens of examples of "good," norma ers of commentary make about the
tive Pali in this very nissaya and in other "original" text.46 Paul Griffiths, Jeffrey
nissayas and in other manuscripts from Timm, Laurie Patton, Steve Collins,
the same temple written around the same Charlie Hallisey, Karen Derris, Anne
period, we cannot simply say that the Balckburne, John Henderson and oth
training of this particular author was ers have taken J.Z. Smith's call for a
poor or that the author was completely more in-depth study of commentaries
unaware of his unorthodox translation. seriously, but the study of commentary
In the process of dividing words, the au in religious studies, and especially in
thor does not simply add endings and Theravada Buddhist Studies, is still an
split up the Pali words and provide ver underdeveloped field of inquiry. Paul
nacular translations. He adds Pali words Griffiths sees commentary as the quint
that are not found in the P~Ui sentence essential way to read "religiously."
he is translating. Moreover, he not only Commentary is an active process, or
adds Pali words and ignores others, he what John Dagenais calls "lecturature."
provides vernacular glosses for those Commentary is done for the purpose of
Pali additions. Therefore, as he trans "altering the course of the reader's cog
lates, he is composing a new Pali text. nitive, affective, and active lives by the
This is more than a translation. It is a ingestion, digestion, rumination, andre
commentary on his own translation and statement of what has been read. "47
not one of any "original" Pali source Reading "specialists" in many traditions,
text. These "notes" oft he translator pro especially Buddhist India, guided read
vide access into the largely unknown ers through their own particular inter
world of pedagogical methods, manu pretation of a "canonical" through com
script production and hermeneutics in mentary. Commentary is thus a "belief
medieval Southeast Asia. forming practice. "48 Therefore, in order
to understand the particular epistemol
From Commentary to Canon to ogy of an individual religious commur-
Curricula
46 Smith (1978: 299-300); and, (1982: 45).
47 Griffiths (1999: 54).
From our brief examination of the
48 Ibid.: 74.
source texts, commentarial services and
44

--- Page 26 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
nity, we must look at their commentarial facts, combined with the fact that
methods to understand how a text was nissayas are most often written on non
understood at different times by differ canonical and even non-Pali texts,
ent communities. Griffiths also provides shows that if nissayas are to be consid
his own definition for what constitutes ered commentaries, then they do not re
a commentary, that being: 1) apparent inforce the closure and boundaries of the
and direct relation to some other work Pali canon, but actually work to expand
through direct quotation, paraphrase, or the canon. Furthermore, nissayas ex
what Michael Fishbane calls "multiple pand the purposes of a commentary as:
and sustained lexical linkages;" and, 2) explaining a text, justifying its impor
these linkages should "quantatively" tance in the tradition, and absorbing and
dominate the text, such that, if they were replacing the original text.
removed, the work becomes incompre
hensible. From the brief examples I Three other recent works on commen
have given above, it should be clear that tary are also important to the study of
nissayas are a form of commentary ac nissayas. Laurie Patton wrote an inten
cording to Griffiths definition.49 How sive study of the Brhaddevata and its
ever, Griffiths is generally writing about multiple comrnentarial services. By
commentaries written in the same lan looking at the nirukta, anukramani and
guage as the object text (i.e., Hebrew miimaf!LSa traditions of ancient India,
commentary on the Hebrew Bible, or she shows how the Brhaddevata was a
Sanskrit Commentary on Sanskrit Bud creative act that emphasized certain
dhist texts). However, a commentary in parts and aspects of the ~g Veda over
one language on a source text of a dif others.50 It also reinforced the sacred and
ferent language does not necessary canonical status of the ~g Veda. Patton,
change the style or purpose of the com following Bruce Lincoln, J.Z. Smith and
mentary. Furthermore, some of the Brian K. Smith, shows how the
nissayas we have seem to be written on Brhaddevata formulated taxonomies of
Pali texts that never actually existed important words and ideas, and thus can
prior to the nissaya. They often have be seen as developing the categories of
multiple and sustained linkages to a ordering information, and helps us un
source text, but that source text is either derstand the epistemology of a particu
unidentifiable or almost completely di lar community. 51 By emphasizing cer
vergent from any extant version of the tain parts of the ~g Veda and setting
source text. Or the nissaya follows a them out in lists, the Brhadddevata was
known source text at able to keep the ~g Veda relevant and
points and then makes long detours viable in a different historical period.
away from the source or makes a con Drawing on work done by Gananath
glomerate vernacular commentary on an Obeyesekere and Lee Yearly, she shows
idiosyncratic, ad hoc anthology of ex how the composers of the Brhaddevata
cerpts from various source texts. These used and manipulated the ~g Veda to
serve the social and intellectual needs
49 Griffiths takes many of his ideas about of their time. Numerous points in
what constitutes a commentary and differ Patton's work are helpful for the study
ent commentarial strategies from John
Henderson's comparative study of Confu
50 Patton (1996: chp. 2).
cian, Midrashic, Sufi, Greek and Sanslait
51 Ibid.: 27-28.
commentaries. See especially chapter five
of Henderson (1991).
45

--- Page 27 ---
MANUSYA : Journal ofH umanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
of nissaya as a type of commentary, es aspects ofBuddhism were deemed more
pecially her thesis regarding the manipu important and most necessary to teach,
lation of a canonical text for different especially in the vernacular. If commen
historical circumstances. Looking at taries define what is considered "canon"
nissayas allows us to expand this thesis by a particular community, then nissayas
in two ways. First, the evidence of re define a set of texts that were consid
petitive glossing, the introduction of ered "canonical" for the sake of Bud
new vocabulary as additions to stock dhist education.
phrases of the nissaya texts shows that
the composers of the nissayas wanted Nissayas are evidence of what we can
to use the commentary as ways to teach call a type of curricular canon operat
language and help scribes or the audi ing in pre-modem Northern Thailand
ence remember stories. This defined and Laos. This canon did not exist in
what was important to know as a Bud the minds of the writers and audience,
dhist in that community. Second, and but these texts were the ones taught and
more importantly here, by seeing the copied in the vernacular. They can be
nissayas as primarily educational, we called vernacular commentaries on an
can see how the very choice of what ad hoc canon composed ofPali canoni
texts to translate and comment on was a cal material, Pali commentaries, ver
way of serving the intellectual and so nacular folktales, apocryphal Jatakas,
cial needs of medieval Laos and North locally- assembled anthologies or col
em Thailand. For example, why would lections of prayers. This certainly
the composers of the Dhammapada stretches and qualifies our understand
Nissaya choose the stories to translate ing ofc ommentaries. Since certain types
and comment upon? Why do most sto oft exts were used for different purposes
ries chosen by the Dhammapada (i.e., parittas for life-cycle rituals and
Nissaya writers involve stories of warding off bad spirits; jatakas for
wealthy people finding magic stones or calendrical rituals such as New Year
bowls, miraculously becoming rich or festivals, weekly sermons, calling for
controlling famines and wild animals? rain, visakha puja, etc.; kammaviiciis for
Why do other nissayas, like the ordination ceremonies, the establishing
Kammaviidi Nissayas, emphasize the of a new monastery, etc.) we can say that
status of certain Southeast Asian tribes there were multiple overlapping canons
or social groups over others, or teach of texts. Nissayas !believed formed one
how ordination cures epilepsy? Why of these "practical canons." Since
was the apocryphal Paiiiiiisa Jiitaka col nissayas clearly incorporate pedagogi
lection a subject of a nissaya and not cal methods and may have been em
canonical Jiitakas, and why did they ployed to teach both vernacular and clas
only organize the stories the way they sical vocabulary, syntax, phonetics, etc.,
did? Why does the Madhuriisachambu I would venture to call them a type of
Nissaya have long lists of animals in curricular canon. Still, I do not want to
serted in the middle of the story? The suggest that nissayas were the only texts
choice of what texts and what words used in the day-to-day education at a
from a particular text to comment on and monastery. There are other types ofPali
translate in nissaya form can tell us a and vernacular texts similar to the
great deal about the needs of the com nissayas, like sabs and wohiins, that
munities that composed them and what need to be looked at to determine ift hey
46

--- Page 28 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
incorporate similar pedagogical meth explain Pali texts to an audience. The
ods. Furthermore, many of the manu choice of the object text depended on
scripts in regional archives and monas its popularity for use in sermons and
tic libraries have P~ili canonical titles, ceremonial chanting, while the purpose
but on further investigation many are for writing it was to instruct its readers/
actually vernacular summaries or ver audience on the meanings ofPali words
nacular commentaries. I merely want to and phrases. I doubt any nissaya was
suggest that nissayas could have served read outloud verbatim as a sermon or as
as notes and guides for sermons and a narrative, but instead was a reader's!
grammar lessons (either to fellow monks teacher's guide to consult when explain
ot to a lay audience). The examples ing the meaning of words and phrases
given in the section on rhetorical style in a popular narrative. Since collections
and object texts support this understand of manuscript. have vernacular transla
ing. Nissaya traditionally means "sup tions of texts, like the Dhammapada,
port." It is, of course, an old term mean Kammaviicii, Sattaparitta, etc., as well
ing, on the one hand, the relationship as Pali and vernacular commentaries,
between a young monk or novice and there is no reason to have a separate
his teacher (iichiirya or upiidhiiya), or genre of manuscript called nissayas
on the other hand, the period of train unless they served a separate purpose. 3
5
ing, support or dependence of a newly I contend that while translating a Pali
ordained monk, usually lasting between text a student read alongside the object
five and ten years (Mahiivagga !.32, 1; text as a running commentary and trans
!.54,4; 1.1,36; V. 1,5; V.4,2). Nissayas lation. But since the nissayas often di
were just that--supports or guides writ verge widely from any source text that
ten by a teacher for one or a small group scholars have come across, they may
of students to guide their translation and have been merely inspired or influenced
study ofPali texts, and thus enable them by the structure, ideas and lexicon of a
to not only learn how to read and write particular source text. The reason for
Pali and the vernacular, but also enable having a middle-stage oft ranslation be
them to explain Pali concepts for the tween a Pali object text and a straight
purpose of a sermon to fellow monastics vernacular translation was to be able to
or to a lay audience. 2 Nissayas are not explain the Pali text to yourself and to
5
condusive to reading as a connected an audience -- a student's guide and a
narrative, because they are interspersed teacher's handbook. Nissayas (or at least
with Pali words and because of their the wide selection of nissayas I have
definitions and short explanations of examined) most likely served two peda
their grammatical forms. They are dis gogical functions. First, they were
jointed texts, and to read them straight assignments given orally in monaster
through would be like reading the "Anna ies so the student monks could learn
Livia Plurabelle" ·episode of Joyce's Pali vocabulary in a slow, repetitive way
Finnegan's Wake, if every third word while learning how to use those new
was followed by its dictionary defini words in context and within a
tion in Italian. They do not read like
sermons, stories or instructions, but as 52 Oskar von Hiniiber suggested to me that
notes for telling stories, giving sermons, nissaya could perhaps be derived from the
fact that they "lean on" Pali texts.
or explaining instructions. They are
53 I thank Prof. Michel Lorrillard for a par
supports for those who have to read and
ticularly insi'ghtful discussion of this issue.
47

--- Page 29 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
vernacular syntactic structure. Second, manuals for giving sermons and lan
they were used as guides on how to ex guage "textbooks" or "readers." For ex
plain certain Pali texts, perhaps for the ample, two of the most well-known and
purposes of a sermon (this is how monks oft-printed Pali prayers in Thailand and
in Laos use them today and how sermons Laos are the Sambuddhe and the
in Central, Northeastern and Northern Buddhiibhig"iti verses. 54 Both of these
Thailand operate). This educational are found in virtually every version of
purpose might account for the relatively standard chanting books in Thailand and
poor quality of the manuscripts (they Laos and both have repetitive phrases
lack illustrations, carved and orna that frame new information with every
mented wooden covers, and elegant let verse. Dozens ofe xamples of other Pali
tering, and numerous interlinear and prayers in verse could be cited, and
marginal corrections written by the theirs style could have influenced the
original scribe of the manuscripts in prose structure of nissayas. Still, while
question). It also might provide an ex interesting, this "similarity" is too gen
planation of the lack of multiple copies eral to be useful.
of any individual nissaya manuscript.
Indeed, these manuscripts might not There are many other possible sources
have been intended as texts to be pre for the pedagogical, repetitive, and re
sented to royalty or other temples or as inforcing style of nissayas, and some
items of display at a monastery, but in modem teaching methods that mimic
stead are the remnants of the "home nissayas, that can be more systemati
work," lecture notes, and marginalia of cally examined. For example, the gen
teachers teaching how to translate, or as eral style of sermons in present day
notes for or recordings of sermons dic Thailand and Laos supports the conten
tated by a teacher to a student. tion that nissayas were primarily peda
gogical and that nissayas could have
Could nissayas be the result of a long been inspired by oral sermons. We have
period of experimentation to develop few examples of sermons in Northern
superior pedagogical techniques or the Thailand and Laos from before the late
result of an unconscious internalization 19th and early 20th centuries. From my
of the best methods to format a Pali or cursory reading of a number of des ana
vernacular text so as to be easily learned (sermon) manuscripts, it seems that they
and remembered by the student, whether are very similar with the nissayas, at
it be a single monastic scribe or a lay least in the manner of "lifting" individual
audience? Nissayas may have been con Pali words from a particular text and
sciously planned in order to be an ef employing several methods to explain
fective pedagogical technique for pre the word in the vernacular. Furthermore,
senting new information and teaching one manuscript from Laos is titled a
language. Or, perhaps, the pedagogical "nisai-desana."55 Still, the study of
methods found in nissayas are the re desana as a genre of manuscripts re
sult of influences of traditional mains a desideratum.
commentarial styles in Sanskrit and Pali
from South Asia combined with local The "Phra Dhammadesana
literary experiments with alliteration,
repetitive patterns, etc. which served as 54 See for example the Suat mon chabap
a model for composing instructional LU'ang (197~); and the Suatmon Mii'ang
Nii'a chapab sombiin (1994).
48

--- Page 30 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
PiyakaraJ!akatha" by Phra KaWi.waranan lating them in different ways and relat
and Phra Priyatth1rakhun's "Phra ing this idiom to certain practices oft he
Dharnmadesana Dharnmacankatha" are Thai government. The next day, I asked
transcripts of two modem sermons that people in my Bangkok neighbourhood
are based on the repetitive and meticu what they remembered about the speech
lous (but often fanciful) translations of and, besides the humorous story about
individual Pali words and phrases. It also the dogs, they all could recall the
may be noted that audiocassettes of English term "double standard." There
sermons or nightly radio and television were numerous newspaper articles that
broadcasts of sermons in Thailand
g~nerally have the style of repetitive 56 These cassettes can be purchased at many
lessons based on the creative and mul temples and at any religious bookstore in
Thailand. This style of giving sermons can
tiple translation of Pali words. Taped
also be observed by attending most sermons
sermons by the late Lu'ang Pu To of
on full and half moon days in Thailand or
Bangkok and Lu'ang Pu Cha from Ubon
Laos. As a side note, I recently went to the
Rachatarii Province are very common
two major monastic universities ofT hailand
and particularly good examples of this
and Laos to inquire about which texts they
style. The infamous disrobed monk, used to instruct Pali. At Wat Ong Teu in
Phra Yantra ofKanchanaburi Province, Laos, they do not use a standard Pali gram
now living in exile in California, would mar text, but instead, the instructor reads Pali
often base whole sermons on the trans passages and translates them into Lao for his
lation of one Pali term like "tanha ."56 students. Translation is more at the level of
memorization than detailed explanations of
This repetitive style of translating one
grammar or linguistic issues. The text he
term in slightly different is not limited
was using for the lesson on the day I inter
to sermons by monks. On the eve of his
viewed him was an excerpt from the
74th birthday, the King ofThailand gave
Dhammapada. At Wat Borworniwet
a speech, lasting approximately one (Mahamakutarajawidyalai) in Bangkok, in
hour, on various subjects including a de struction generally takes the form of memo
velopment project in Prachuap Khiri rization as well; however, there is a series of
Khan Province and about taking care of short paper-back Pali grammars for novices.
dogs. When lecturing the government I am still unclear on how they are incorpo
rated in a Pali lesson and need to investi
on the subject of cooperation and equal
gate further. It may be noted that these gram
ity among its members, he translated the
mars were hard to locate at the Wat
English idiom "double standard." He
Borwomiwet book store and when I ask
spent almost 25 minutes breaking down
about what texts novices and monks use for
the word into its components and trans-
Pali study I was given a few bi-lingual
liturgical texts with Pali and Thai in two
55 See the nisai-itipiso-clesana (ms. 06 01 columns. These books are very prevalent at
85 05 003 05) from the Luang Pabang Mu the bookstore and would be too numerous
seum in Laos composed in CS 1199 [AD to list here. However, the most common ones
183 7]. The early date of this des ana and its would certainly be:
rare title in comparison with other desana Phrakhriirunathamrangs1' MonpUi blae
could suggest that this is evidence of a tran samrap Phrabhiksusamanen lae
sition of texts titled nissayas and texts titled Phutthasasanikachon tua bai (Bangkok:
desana since nissayas declined in produc Wat Arunararachawararam, 2534 [1991])
tion after the 1840's and desana increased. and the Suatmon chabub lu 'ang blae (Royal
Investigating the differences between des ana
Chanting Book Text and Translation).
and nissaya would require a separate study.
49

--- Page 31 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
discussed the King's use of the term and similar folk etymological method by
two weeks later it was the subject of a breaking individual terms into their
panel discussion at Chulalongkorn Uni component syllables), the repetitive
versity, with four speakers discussing the style and focus on individual terms
practice of "double standards" in Thai might have been a source for nissaya
society. Clearly, the term was repeated methods of commentary, which could
hundreds of times, and given multiple have subsequently influenced transla
translations and interpretations. This is tion methods.
not to say that basing a lecture, sermon
or meeting on the translation of a term Still, this feature of the nissayas is also
is'Ll11ique to Thailand, but that it is a stan closely akin to a little-studied linguistic
dard way of structuring a sermon or feature of Lao and Thai poetry and ver
speech, and this gives us a clue as to nacular religious texts known as "roi
how to read and explain the excessively (hoi) gO.eo." Lao linguist and literary
repetitive rhetorical style of nissayas. historian, Mahasila Wirawong, is the
Whether sermons in Thailand and Laos only scholar I am familiar with that has
were constructed in this way and in turn seriously discussed this textual prac
were a source for the methods found in tice.58 He shows that it was common
nissayas or vice versa is impossible to for local writers to string an alternating
say, but the similarities are striking. and repetitive series of vernacular and
Pali words together like "jewels on a
The repetitive style ofc ommentaries and necklace" (i.e. hOi gO.eo) for reasons of
sub-commentaries, like the AyhasO.linl. education and aesthetic appeal. The hOi
and the A!!hasalanl. Atthayojana that gaeo method of composing bi-lingual
were mentioned above, also are a pos texts in the region is most likely the re
sible source of the nissaya rhetorical sult of the mixing of traditional Lao and
style. For example, a passage from the Northern Thai poetry (that works on the
latter reads: scheme of a repetitive pattern of allit
"vii aparo nayo ye akusalii kucchitena eration, tone alternation and rhyming)
iikiirena sabhiivena sayanti pavattanti with Pali word commentaries. There
iti te akusalii kusii kupubba si saye" sult is a unique linguistic feature that
allows the reader/audience to easily re
"Another method [for reading the word member certain Pali and vernacular lexi
akusala in the sentence]: 'those things cal items through repetition, alliteration
that are supported by and sustained with and rhyming. Moreover, the hoi gO.eo
a disposition [characterized] by vile
modes of acting;' [in this example]
akusala is formulated from 'ku' as the 57 A.tfhaasiilinl.Atthayojanii. (Phumipala Edi
tion. Bangkok): 111. I thank Prapod
first member and with the root 'si' in the
57 Assavavirulkaham for helping me read this
sense of'saye' (to sleep)."
passage.
58 Wirawong, Mahasila (1995: 4-5). In mod
This passage goes on to give several
ern Thai the meaning of roi gaeo has changed
methods for reading the words kusala
and now simply means prose. This is prob
and akusala. Although more systematic ably because the earliest non-verse vernacu
in its explanation of the word akusala lar literature, of which nissayas are evidence
than most nissayas would be (except for of, was distinct from Pali and early vernacu
the Nama Nissaya which employs a lar epic poems and verse dramas.
50

--- Page 32 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
system combined with the type of ex stores (besides Buddhist comic books
cessive glossing shown above reflects with stories drawn from Jiitakas) are
one of the pedagogical functions of bi-lingual, word-for-word, translations
nissayas: to tell entertaining, melodious ofPali liturgies and parittas. While there
stories or give ritual instructions or are too many examples to list and any
ethical sermons while teaching Pali and number of these texts can be bought
vernacular vocabulary and certain easily in any major urban center in
important Buddhist concepts. We can Thailand, a few examples would be:
see that they were most likely intended Nangseu rT en klum
to be and employed as language and wijiibhrapariwatdham, published by
religious teaching texts and, if so, give Mahachulalongkomraja-withyalai (vol
us a rare glimpse into the world of umes one through six), 2534 [1991],
pre-modem Theravada education in another six volume series of the same
Southeast Asia. title published by Rongbimsasana
under the auspices of the Department of
The method of translation and commen Education, Piili wiiiyiikorn (six volumes
tary found in nissayas is also similar to with additional volumes on selected
that used in Pali textbooks at the major subjects like verbs and compounds)
monastic schools in Thailand. A survey published by Mahamaku!araj awithyalai,
of the published Pali textbooks popular 2538 [1995], and, under the same title,
in Thai monastic schools shows that no a series published by
matter the level of the text (beginning Krombhrayawajirayan-worarot, 2538
with Madhyom seuksa pi thi neung [1995]. For bi-lingual translations of
(approximately 7th grade in the Ameri liturgies see these same publishers. I was
can sytem or 12-13 years old) up until told by two different bookstore owners
Madhyom seuksa p1 th1 hok (12th grade) that the Mahamaku!a editions are the
Pali grammar is taught by a series ofPali best sellers, but have conducted no
words displaying a certain grammatical independent research.59
suffix or a type of compound followed
by its translation in modem Thai. There From the textual evidence we can see
is rarely any explanation and textbook that nissayas incorporate many of the
that consists of repetitive drills where features of commentaries, or at least
students must translate single words or commentaries as they are understood in
short clauses from Pali into Thai. As South and Southeast Asia. However, it
the student advances the passages to would be overly reductive and pre-ma
translate gets slightly longer and what ture to simply label nissayas commen
little introduction and explanation there taries, place them back in the archives
was completely disappears. Moreover, and monastic libraries, and forget about
what is interesting is that the lessons are them. Nissayas diverge from definitions
drawn randomly from both canonical
and non-canonical texts, and the most 59 It is interesting to note that there is also a
popular selections seem to be from series of English textbooks for religious
paritta prayers that would be familiar students published by Mahamaku~a
Monastic University which uses a very simi
to novices, monks, nuns and lay people
Jar method to teach English words and
from chanting during liturgies. In fact,
phrases through examples drawn from Bud
the most common translations of Pali
dhist stories translated into English that
texts available in Thai religious book-
asks the students to translate them into Thai.
51

--- Page 33 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
of commentary offered by Griffiths, Our stroll through the linguistic and
J.Z.Smith, Henderson among others. codicological world of nissayas, guided
First, commentaries in the P~ili tradition by the work by Collins, Hallisey, Cort,
are usually understood as being in the J.Z. Smith, Patton and others, have
same language as the source text. Still, shown us that there are many ways to
it would be overly reductive to call them define a canon. I have hoped to empha
vernacular commentaries. Second, size the importance of seeing how texts
nissayas often diverge widely from their were used in an educational context, so
particular source text, often to the point as to reflect upon what could have been
that they seem to be re-writing the the unstandardized and particular
source text, inventing entire sections or curricular "canon" of a certain region
writing a commentary on a source text and certain time. Between the 16th and
that may have never existed as a sepa 19th centuries in Northern Thailand and
rate text in Pali or a vernacular. Third, Laos there was a concerted effort to
nissayas often contain internal sub-com translate and comment on Pali texts,
mentaries on their own commentaries of both canonical and non-canonical. This
a source text, and it is occasionally dif constant referral to and manipulation of
ficult to determine whether the author Indic textual methods, rhetorical styles,
was attempting to teach the meaning of tropes, and themes of the past in order
a passage from a source text or comment to comment on the present was part of
on her/his own explanation of the source the general commentarial and transla
text. Fourth, the source text, as was most tion (oral, textual, architectural, and
apparent in the A[{hakathiimiitikii artisitc) culture of Southeast Asia.
Nissaya, is employed as a platform from Nissayas were prevalent types of
which to teach grammar, vocabulary, translations and commentaries that
and concepts almost completely manipulated, obfuscated, and elucidated
divorced from the semantic meaning or source texts with inventive method of
original purpose for which the source teaching vocabulary, grammar, and
text seemed to be composed. In this way, occasionally meanings of a seemingly
the source text plays the role of a random co11ection of Pali texts. These
canvas that only serves to provide a were texts that not only gave the defini
space for the author of the nissaya to tions ofPali words and phrases, but also
paint his own picture and to widen our taught their readers/audience how to
understanding of a commentary. The incorporate Pali terms into Lao or Yuan
source text no longer guides the syntax. The pedagogical methods and
sequence, structure, or subject of the physical features of the manuscripts
commentary. It could be compared to a show that these texts were listened to,
tourist who strolls through a Bangkok read, collected, and handled. I surmise
monastery inspired by its architecture, that from this evidence we can begin to
images, and residents to compose, in no identify, or at least define, the param
particular order, a long journal entry on eters of the general curricula and
all and sundry subjects. Finally, if com pedagogical methods for and ofm onks,
mentaries, as J.Z. Smith and Laurie nuns and novices (and devoted lay
Patton emphasize, define a canon, then people) of the region and period. This
the nissayas define a canon wholly would help us to develop new ways to
different from that of the Pali Tipi~aka. define what a canon can be.
52

--- Page 34 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
References Timm. Albany: SUNY Press,
1992.
Archaimbault, Charles. Contribution a Cham Tongkamwan, "Kam An
L'Etude D'Un Cycle de Silajareuk Wat Phra Yeun
Legendes Lau. Paris: Ecole Jangwat Lampun,"
Francaise D'Extreme-Orient, Sinlapakorn 1 (1957): 61-69
1980. Chemiack, Susan, "Book of Culture in
Arunsak Kingmanee, "Suvanna-Jataka Sung China," Harvard
on the Bai Serna ofWat Journal ofA siatic Studies,
Nonsila-atwararam," Muang vol.54, no.1( 1994).
Baran 22.2 (1996): 138-161. Childs, Brevard. Introduction to the
Bassnett, Susan and Andre Lefevere. Old Testament as Scripture.
Eds. Constructing Cultures: Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
Essays on Literary 1979.
Translation. Philadelphia: Clough, B, "The Ritual of the
Multilingual Matters, 1998. Buddhist Priesthood translated
Bassnett, Susan and Harish Trivedi. from the original Pali work
Eds. Post-Colonial entitled Karmavakya."
Translation: Theory and Londres: 1834.
Practice. London: Routledge, Coedes, George, "Documents Sur
1999. L'Histoire Politique et
Baynes, H, "A Collection of Religieuse Du Laos
Kammavaca's," Journal of the Occidental," BEFEO XXV,
Royal Asiatic Society 26 nos. 1-2 (1925): 4-8.
(1892): 53-75. ______. Catalogue des
Bizot, Francois. La Purete par les manuscrits en Pali, Laotien et
mots. Paris: Ecole Francaise Siamois provenant de Ia
d'Extreme-Orient, 1996. Thailande. Edited by Kaare
Blackburne, Ann. The Play oft he Gronbech. Vol. 2, part 2,
Teaching in the Life of the Catalogue of Oriental
Sasana: Sararthadipanz in Manuscripts, Xylographs etc.
Eighteenth Century Sri Lanka. in Danish Collections.
Ph.D. dissertation. University Copenhague: Biblioteque
ofChicago, 1996. Royale de Copenhague, 1966.
Bosaenggam Wongtala. Wannakhafi Collins, Steven, "On the Very Idea of
Lao. Wiangchan: Sathapan the Pali Canon," Journal of
kongwa Witayasat Sangkhom, the Pali Text Society XV
1987 (1990): 102-117.
Brown, Marvin. From Ancient Thai to Cort, John, "Svemtambar Murtipujak
Modern Dialects. Bangkok: Jain Scripture in a
White Lotus Press, 1985. Performative Context," in
Buddhadatta, A.P. Jinakalamali. Texts in Context: traditional
London: PTS, 1962. Hermeneutics in South Asia.
Carpenter, David, "Bhartrhari and the Ed. by Jeffrey Timm. Albany:
Veda," in Texts in Context: SUNY Press, 1992.
Traditional Hermeneutics in Bhakvija Bhasa Thai.Paiiiiasajataka
South Asia. Ed. by Jeffrey ch,abub pariwatj ak aksorn
53

--- Page 35 ---
MANUSYA :Journal ofH umanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
dham. Chiang Mai: Chiang litterature laotienne," BEFEO
Mai University, 2521 ( 1978). 17,5 (1917): 1-218.
Dagenais, John. The Ethics of Fishbane, Michael. The Exegetical
Reading in Manuscript Imagination. Cambridge:
Culture: Glossing the Libro Harvard Univ. Press, 1998.
De Buen Amor. Princeton: Frankfurter, 0. "A Handbook ofPali."
Princeton University Press, Londres: 1883.
1994. Gamier, Francis. Further Travels in
Danks, Joseph and Jennifer Griffin, Laos and in Yunnan. Bangkok:
"Reading and Translation: A White Lotus, 1996.
Psycho linguistic Perspective," Gething, Thomas, Jimmy Harris, and
Cognitive Processes in Pranee Kullavanijaya. Eds.
Translation and Interpreting. Tai Linguistics: in Honor of
Ed. by Gregory Shreve and Fang-Kuei Li. Bangkok:
Joseph Danks. Thousand Chulalongkom Univ. Press,
Oaks, CA: Sage Pub., 1997. 1976.
Dickson, J.F, "The Griffiths, Paul. Religious Reading.
Upasampadakammavaca," New York: Oxford Univ.
Journal oft he Royal Asiatic Press, 1999.
Society 8 (1874): 53-71. Hallisey Charles, "Tm.H;lilovada: an
Ellis, Roger. Ed. The Medieval Allegedly Non-canonical
Translator: The Theory and Sutta," Journal of the Pali
Practice ofTranslation in the Text Society XV (1990):
Middle Ages. London: D.S. 155-195.
Brewer, 1987. , "Nibbanasutta: an
----- -
Filliozat, Jacqueline, "Documents allegedly non-Canonial Sutta
useful for the Identification of on Nibbana as a Great City,"
Pali Manuscripts of Journal oft he Pali Text
Cambodia, Laos and Society (1993):97-130.
Thailand," Journal oft he Pali Harris, Jimmy and James
Text Society XVI (1992): Chamberlain. Eds. Studies in
13-54. Tai Linguistics in Honor of
_______, "Catalogue of the William Gedney. Bangkok:
Pali Manuscript Collection in Office of State Universities,
Burmese and Siamese 1975.
Characters .kept in the Library Henderson, John. Scripture, Canon
of Vij ayasundararamaya and Commentary: A
Asgiriya," Journal oft he Pali Comparison of Confucian and
Text Society XXI (1995): Western Exegesis. Princeton:
153-91. . Princeton Univ. Press, 1991.
_______ ,"A Survey of the
Burmese and Siamese Pali Hiniiber, Oscar von, "Pali Manuscripts
Manuscript Collections in the of Canonical Texts from
Well come Institute," Journal Northern Thailand," Journal
oft he Pali Text Society XIX oft he Siam Society 71 (1983):
(1993): 1-41.
75-88.
Finot, Louis, "Researches sur la
_______, "The Oldest
54

--- Page 36 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
Dated Manuscript of the London, 1991: 231-52.
Milindapanha," Journal oft he Hundius, Harold, "Colophons from
Pali Text Society, XI (1987): thirty Pali Manuscripts from
111-119. Northern Thailand," Journal
________, "Die oft he Pali Text Society XIV
Sprachgeschichte des P~ili im (1990): 1-179.
Spiegel der si.idostasiatischen ______, Phonologie und
Handschriftenuberlieferung," Scrift des Nordthai.
Untersuchungen zur Abhandlungen ftir die Kunde
Sprachgeschichte und des Morprgenlandes.
Handschriftenkunde des Ptili Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1990.
I. Stuggart, 1988. Jaini, Padmanabh. Ed. Pafifiiisajiitaka
--------, "An or Zimme Pw:p;:iisa, Vols.I &
Additional Note on the Oldest ll. London: Pali Text Society,
Dated Manuscript of the 1983.
Milindapanha," Journal oft he _ _ _ _ ___, "The Apocryphal
Piili Text Society Xll (1988): Jatakas of Southeast Asian
173-74. Buddhism," Indian Journal of
________, "Chips from Buddhist Studies I, part 1
Buddhist Workshops: Scribes (1989): 22-37.
and Manuscripts from Jakobson, Roman, "On Linguistic
Northern Thailand," Journal Aspects ofTranslation."
of the Piili Text Society XXll Brower, Reuben. Ed. On
(1996): 35-57. Translation. Cambridge:
- --------, on Some Harvard Univ. Press, 1959:
Colophones of Old Lanna Pali 232-40.
Manuscripts," Proceeding of Jayaywickrama, N.A. Trans. The
the 4'h International Sheafo f Garlands oft he
Conference of Thai Studies, Epochs oft he Conquerer.
Vol. IV. London: PTS, 1968.
_ _ _ ___ _ _ _ ,A Handbook Kiinthiim Samutthai lae Kiintr1em
ofP iili Literature. Berlin: Biiiliin. Bangkok: Hosamut
Walter de Gruyter, 1996. haeng chat, 2530 [1988].
Hodges, Ian, "Time in Transition: Katannyu Chucheun. Aksornboran ti
King Narai and the Luang chai bantuek wanakamm thai.
Prasoet Chronicle of Bangkok:Ganakammkan
Ayutthaya," Journal of the wichai haeng chat, 1987.
Siam Society 87, 1&2 (1999): Khongdeuan Bunyawong. Ed. Thao
33-44. Hung Thao Cheung [based on
Hosington, Brenda, "Partonopeu de MahaSila Wirawong's 1942
Blois and its Fifteenth prose translation]. Vientiene:
Century English Translation: Toyota Foundation Edition,
A Medieval Translator at 2000.
Work," The Medieval LaFont, Pierre Bernard, "Inventaire
Translator. Ed. by Roger Ellis. des manuscripts des pagodes
London: Centre for Medieval du Laos," BEFEO 52 (1965):
Studies, University of 42~-545.
55

--- Page 37 ---
MANUSYA :Journal of Humanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
Lancaster, Lewis. "An Analysis of the 97-111.
A~tasahiisrikaprajiili­ Natwipha Chalitanon. Prawatisat
pliramitlisutra from the Nipon Thai. Bangkok:
ChineseTranslations." Ph.D. Thanunasat University Press,
dissertation, University of 1984.
Wisconsin, 1968. Niyada Lausunthom. Paiiiilisajlitaka:
Luce, G.H. and Tin Htway, "A 15th prawat lae kwlim slimglin fi mz
Century Inscription and to wanakam roi krong khong
Library at Pagan, Burma," Thai. Bangkok: Mae Gam
Maslasekara Commemoration Phang Pub., 1997.
Volume. Ed. by O.H. de Notton, Camille. Trans. Annales du
A.Wijesekara. Columbo: Siam, Vol. II. Paris, 1930.
Malasekara Commemoration Norman, K.R., "Pali Literature," A
Volume Editorial Committee, History ofI ndian Literature,
1976. vol. 7, pt. 2. Ed. by Jan
McDaniel, Justin, "Creative Gonda. Wiesbaden: Otto
Engagement: the Sujavanna Harrassowitz, 1983.
Wua Luang and its O'Keefe, Katherine, "Editing and the
Contribution to Buddhist Material Text," The Editing of
Literature,"Journal oft he Old English: Papers from the
Siam Society 88.1 & 2(2000): 1990 Manchester Conference.
156-177. Ed. by D.G. Scragg and Paul
_______, " Transformative Szarmach. New York: D.S.
History: Nihon Ryoki and Brewer, 1991: 148-151.
Jinaklilamlilipakaranam, " Plieprze nangseu bhiisliporlin.
Journal oft he International Bangkok: Hosamut haeng
Association ofB uddhist chat,2543[1999).
Studies (forthcoming). Panchi Maigrofilm Kwang Lu'ang
Merrill, James. Into the American Fabling, Ho Papitapan Kwang
Woods: Negotiators on the Lu'ang Fabling, Hongsamut
Pennsylvania Frontier. Haeng Chiit Lao (Catalogues
New York: Norton & Co., ofP alm Leaf Texts on
2000. Microfilm from Luang
Mookerji, Radha Kumud. Ancient Pahang, the Museum ofL uang
Indian Education: Pahang and from the National
Brahmanical and Buddhist. Library ofL aos). Vientiene:
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, K.rongganpotpakhaksa
1947. Neungseu pailan Lao, 1999.
Charlotte Morse et al. The Uses of Pannasami. The History oft he
Manuscripts in Literary Buddha's Religion. Trans. By
Studies. Kalamazoo, MI: B.C. Law. London: PTS,
Medieval Institute 1952.
Publications, 1992. Patton, Laurie. Myth as Argument:
Nabokov, Vladimir, "The Servile The Brhaddevatli as
Path," On Translation. Ed. by Canonical Commentary.
Reuben Brower. Cambridge: Berlin: De Gruyter Press,
Harvard Univ. Press, 1959: 1996.
56

--- Page 38 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
Penth, Hans, "Buddhist Literature of Prawetsanthonhom. Vientiane: Sun
Lan Na on the History of Lan gan kon kwa, 1993.
Na's Buddhism," Journal of Pruitt, William, "Un Nissaya Birman
the Pali Text Society XXIII de la Bibliotheque Nationale,
(1997): 43-81. le Patimikkha. .btude
Peters, Anne, "Die birmanischen linguistique: premiere partie,
Kammavadi-Sammlungen mit Cahiers de l'Asie du Sud-Est
nem Abschnitten," 19 (1986): 84-119.
Untersuchungen zur , "Un Nissaya Birman
------
buddhistischen Literatur II. de la Bibliotheque Nationale,
Ed. by Heinz Bechert, Sven le Patimikkha. Etude
Bretfeld and Petra Kieffer linguistique: deuxieme partie,
Pulz. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck Cahiers de l'Asie du Sud-Est
and Ruprecht, 1997: 275-283. 21 (1987): 7-45.
Pope, Marvin, trans. and commentary, , ""Un Nissaya Birman
------:-
The Anchor Bible: Song of de la Bibliotheque Natiojnale,
Songs. Garden City,
le Patimikkha. .btude
New York: Doubleday & Co.,
linguistique: troisieme partie,
1977.
Cahiers de l'Asie du Sud-Est
Phra kaw1warafian, "Phra
22 (1987): 35-57.
Dhammadesana
. Etude linguistique de
------
PiyakaraiJakatha," Phra
nissaya Birmans: traduction
Dhammadesana Song Phra
commentee de Textes
Karu'Ja Brat Klao.
Bouddhiques. Paris: Ecole
Bangkok,2528[ 1985].
francaise d'extreme-orient,
Phra Khrii Runathamarangs1' Monplfi
1994.
blaesamrap
Raichii' nangsii' poran Ianna ekasan
Phrabhiksusamanen lae
maigrofilm kong satapan wijai
Phutthasasanikachon tua bai
chiangmai: 25 21-25 3 3
( Bangkok: Wat
(Catalogue of Palm Leaf Texts
Arunararachawararam,25 34
on Microfilm at the Social
[1991].
Research Institute, Chiang
Phra Priyatth1rakhun, "Phra
Mai University: 1978-1990).
Dhammadesana
Chiang Mai: SRI, 1991.
Dhammacafikatha," Phra
Robinson, Fred. The Editing of old
Dhammadesana Song Phra
English.Oxford; Blackwell
Karuna Brat Klao. Bangkok,
Press, 1982: chapter one.
0
2528 [1985].
, "Pali Literature from
- ----
Pratt, Karen, "Medieval Attitudes on
Laos," Narain, A.K. and L.
Translation and Adaption: the
Zwilling. Eds., Studies in Pali
Phetorical Theory and the
and Buddhism. Delhi: B.R.
Poetic Practice," The
Pub., 1979.
Medieval Translator. Ed. by
Sanguan Chotsukrat. Tamnan Muang
Roger Ellis. London: Centre
Nua. Krung Thep:
for Medieval Studies,
Odiansdon,1965.
University ofLondon, 1991:
. Prachum Tamnan
- -----=-=--
1-27.
Lanna Thai, Vols. I &2.
57

--- Page 39 ---
MANUSYA : Journal ofH umanities (Special Issue No.4 2002)
Krung Thep: Odiansadon, _______. Imagining
1972. Religion: From Babylon to
Prasert na Nagara. T Jonestown. Chicago: Univ. of
Chiang Mai Chiang Tung. Chicago Press, 1982.
Krung Thep: Ekasanwichagan Somrnai Premcit. "Palm Leaf
Samakhom Phrawattisat, Manuscripts and Traditional
1994. Sermon." Buddhism in
Sap Phrakopsuk, Wanakhadichadok Northern Thailand. Ed. by
Bangkok: Wat Porohit, 1984 Saeng Chandranngaam.
Satien Goset, "Wicha Brawattisat." Chiang Mai: Proceedings of
Silapakorn 1, no. 3 (1957): the 13th Conference of the
70-74. World Fellowship of
Prince Savang Phouvong, et al., sous Buddhists, 1980.
la direction d' Henri Deydier, Speigel, F. "Kamrnavakya: Liber
"Un Fragment lnconnu du Officis sacerdotum
Pafifiasajataka Laotien," ed. buddhicorurn, palice et latine
by Jacqueline Filliozat and primus edidit atque
Anatole Peltier. Chiang Mai adnotationes adjecit." Bonn:
Paris-Vientiane: Ecole 1841.
francaise d'Extreme-orient, Stock, Brian. The Implications of
1995-97. Literacy: Written Language
Schweisguth, P. Etude Sur La and Models oflnterpretation
Litterature Siamoise. Paris: in the Eleventh and Twefth
lmprimerie Nationale, 1951: Centuries. Princeton
43-44. University Press, 1983.
Shore, Lys Ann, "The Continuum of Stuart-Fox, Martin. The Lao Kingdom
Translation as Seen in Three of Lan Xang: Rise and
Middle French Treatises on Decline. Bangkok: White
Comets," Translation and the Lotus, 1998.
Transmission of Culture Suatmon chabab iii 'ang bliie ( Royal
between 1300-1600. Ed. by Chanting Book Text and
Jennette Beer and Kenneth Traslation), 12th edition
Lloyd-Jones. Kalamazoo, Bangkok:
Michigan: Studies in Mahamakutrachaw ithayala i:
Medieval Culture, Western 2518[1975].
Michigan Univ., 1995: 1-31. Suatmon chabab Iii 'ang ( Royal
Schuyler, M, "Notes on the making of Chanting Book Text and
Palm-LeafManuscripts in Traslation), 12th edition
Siam," Journal of the Bangkok:
American Oriental Society, 29 Mahamakutrachawithayalai:
(1908): 281-83 2518[1975].
Skilling, Peter, "The Ra~sa Literature Suatmon Mil 'ang Nil 'a chabab
of Sravakayana," Journal of sombiln, Chiang Mai:
the Pcili Text Society XVI Dharathong Kanbim, 2537
(1992): 109-82. [1994].
Smith, Jonathan Z. Map is not Suchita Wongtet. "Kamnamsaneur."
Territory. Leiden, 1978. Mahagap Kong Usakanae Tao
58

--- Page 40 ---
The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos
Hung Kun Cheung for Southeast Asian Studies,
Wirburussongfangkong. Ed. Kyoto Univ., 1983.
by Suchita Wongtet. Bangkok: Viravongsa, Mahasila. Wannakhadi
Singhakom, 1985. Lao. Wiangchan: Mahasila
Swearer, Donald and Sommai Viravongsa, 1995.
Premchit, "A Translation of Wade, Geoffrey, "The Ming shi-lu as a
Tamnan Mulasasana Wat Pa Source for Thai History:
Daeng: The Chronicle of the Fourteenth to Seventeenth
founding ofBuddhism of the Centuries," Journal of
Wat Pa Daeng Tradition." Southeast Asian Studies 31, 2
Journal oft he Siam Society (2000): 249-294.
65, part II (1977). Richard White. Middleground:
Indians, Empires and
"The Relationship between Republics in the Great Lakes
the Religious and Political Region (1650-1815).
Orders in Northern Thailand Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
(14th to 16th centuries)." Press, 1991.
Religion and Legitimation of Wichienkeeo, Arronrut and David
Power in Thailand, Laos and Wyatt. The Chiang Mai
Burma. Ed. Bardwell Smith. Chronicle. Chiang Mai:
Chambersburg, PA: Anima Silkworm Books, 1998.
Books, 1978. Wollin, Lars, "The Monastery of
Vadstena: Investigating the
The Legend ofQ ueen Cama: Great Translation Workshop
Bodhiramsi's Camadevivamsa in Medieval Scandinavia,"
a Translation and The Medieval Translator, ed.
Commentary. Albany: SUNY, by Roger Ellis. London:
1998. Centre for Medieval Studies,
Sweller, J. and Cooper, G.A., "The University of London, 1991.
Use of Worked Examples as a Worth-Stylianou, Valerie, "Reading
Substitute for Problem Monolingual and Bilingual
Solving in Learning Algebra," Editions ofTranslations in
Cognition and Instruction 2 Renaissance France,
(1985): 59-89. " Translation and the
Tanselle G. Thomas," The varieties of Transmission of Culture
Scholarly Editing," in between 1300-1600. Ed. by
Scholarly Editing: A Guide to Jennette Beer and Kenneth
Research.ed. byD.C. Lloyd-Jones. Kalamazoo,
Greetham. New York: The Michigan: Studies in
Modem Language Medieval Culture, Western
Association of America, 1995. Michigan Univ., 1995:
Timm, Jeffrey. Ed. Texts in Context: 331-58.
Traditional Hermeneutics in Wray, Elizabeth Clare Rosenfield and
South Asia. Albany: SUNY Dorothy Baily's Ten Lives of
Press, 1992. the Buddha: Siamese Temple
Tin Tun. ed. The Royal Orders of Painting and Jataka Tales.
Burma. Vol. !.Kyoto: Center New York: Weatherhill, 1972.
59