THE COLOPHONS OF THIRTY PALI MANUSCRIPTS 


FROM NORTHERN THAILAND 


CONTENTS 
PREFACE isssssseeisescnessescse tea cdoszesqsvsnscsaens suisse inateais esasege cased acasee oeeds aadde 
Note On Transcriptions.........ccccccceseessssescssesscecsseseesccesssaseeees RTT 
List of Abbreviations and Signs... ceeecsesssessesseesssecsscessecsessaeseenees 
MEAD? © sesece Peedi caccessenteven cthdecatesetiavatasadstsaneduevvediadecesanesecagunsbysvuseiatnanyeny 


PART A: INTRODUCTION 


Background : The Sources .........essssscsseeeesesscccneceeseceeeseneeesseeess 
1.1 The Pali Tradition of Northern Thailand in an Historical 
PELSPOCtiVe cesshitscccticsseatiecasid cad cachuseasessececatosse ieaes teehee tbenvecdedeecesous 
1.2 Surveys of Manuscripts and Relevant Research.............:ce 
2: Subject, Aims and Scope of the Study wu. eeeseeeeceeceeeeees 
3. They Colophon. 3521.25. cisecesceteis dacsuetdcassceascugctiaseactsesicueetorcatsetatente 
3.1 The Collection of the Thirty Pali Manuscripts .........scsseeeee 
3.2 Content of the Colophon 0.0... ecsssesseeeseeeseeeeseeserseeseserencees 
3.2.1 The Purpose and Organization of Making Dhamma 
ManuSCripts: scsisiss< cocseteecenrersvtacesvaronie atdensutdesseatgeleacssedocasea tite 
3.2.2, Making Manuscripts as a Means of Acquiring Merit............. 
3.2.3 Aspirations for Results of Merit... ceecsessssserseereesseeseeses 
3.2.4 Social Aspects of the Making of Manuscripts.............cceesee 
3.2.5 The Colophons as Media of Communication and 
Personal Expression sicsciiceaisdevecsessteedheatisevecattuevestidieestecletnivads 
3.2.6 | Remarks Pertaining to the Quality of the Copying Work....... 
3.2.7 Evidence on Historical Personalities and Places.............:cc008 
3.2.7.1 The Venerable Gruu Paa Kajficana from Phrae ............ cess 
S.2eT2: “Dad "SOOY. sssscezsiantevssocgecabitechsscuatesdestsivasdenesniziboeueaesdunepetseeseettnse 
3.3 Composition of Variant Colophons — an Example................ 


PART B: THE TEXTS 


1, Technical Remarks 
1.1 

1.1. 
1.1. 


Journal of the Pali Text Society, XIV, 1-173 


The Transliteration............ccccscscsscssssseessscsseeeessscuesessrerssessssaeees 
DP COMSOM ANS 22) chk Oe ee ececiceds Asitasties ttaetiodene vie edleediacoeee 
LE General Principles. cisissitessisssscccresszigstisonecese caverta at lecdi epi tacinsecades 


2 Harald Hundius 
Lid 82: Rationales ciictics.ciscesctecvecesccsshb hesate tes tlaceece ce ci seonte tov ectiacnsuasdvecedeiceed 43 
1.1.1.3 Specific Information......... cc ccsesesessseenetsesteereenscsscnseescneereeseneries 44 
VV MO WEIS svcsdescdszcersss tis teues oi nteaieee ee A enatihi alae 45 
PAD General: Principles... s:ccccs..c5 ee eocbansssesseuessevessea vontadecscesceevesietenceess tl 45 
E15 2.25 Rationale ies ciscceccsececttesstebedh capcccenceeniteedetevelusdensdcceetsdasesieesecsssatdese 46 
1.1.2.3 Specific Information... cecsereeseesesceceeeeesenscsssaesessesaseaees 47 
LAS CTOMOS sisctecect sets ectecceveaca ta ceesteceacends escantne dei eabiee A Sibecesscoeeetoierneeees 48 
1.2 Note on the Phonematic Notation... .ccccsssccessecessscsssessssceceees 49 
1.3 Note on the Pronunciation ...........cccscsssecsscesssesssecsscscscsecesceseeceee 49 
1.3.1  Gemeral Remarks... cccssscssesssscsesscescscseescesesssassccscectecacccaeecees 49 
1.3.2 Tonal Quality and Phonological Affiliation of the Tones........... 49 
1.3.3. Ambiguities of Pronunciation. .........cccccsscssscescececccscesessecescesssens 50 
1.3.3.1 Loss of /-7/ in connected Speech. .......s.s.scscccccsssssvseecersessscassvsceceens 50 
1.3.3.2: Fimal particles sieisiscs.:cicccscscosdoevs scot becosceeacadecdeasrebesiascoedseladacecslatineon: 52 
1.3.3.3 Tonal quality of certain syllables ending with /-am/. ................... 52 
1.4 The Pagination of Palm-leaf Manuscripts .........c.ccceccceseeseseeeee 53 
1.5 Glossary of Special Words......ccccccccsssssceccssscccsssecesecscstseescaececees 53 
1.6 Remarks on Dates and Calendrical Systems .0.....c.c.cccccssesssseseeeeee 55 
1.7 Note on the Description of the Manuscripts and the 
Presentation of the Colophons.........cccssssessssssesesceseassescscsessesvens 56 

2. The Manuscripts and their Colophons 
O01. DHAMMAPADA-ATTHAKATHA  ouu.esccsccsccscssessesssssecsteceesersascsses 59 
02, DHAMMAPADA-ATTHAKATHA  o..ceccscsscssssssssssssessesssesesseceseesees 60 
03. JATAKA: Mahosathajataka ...ccccsssccsssecseccssessseecsecsssecssssvecsssesessees 62 
O04 MILINDA PANHIAS. &..ssnsjaiehaitsnceasitnsaieinsacthe coved dauatvancindtaseiuon aac: 63 
05. JATAKA: Panndsanipata ......cccsccssssssssssseecsssessnsesssseecsscecessuecesssseessen 64 
06. JATAKA: Tinsanipata ......ccccccccssssssssecsssecsseesssecssecesecesseccsssesssseesssaes 67 
O7. JATAKA: Sattatimiplta..........ccsssssscssssssssssssseescssssssscecseececcesseesssesees 68 
08. SAMYUTTANIKAYA: SagGathavagga......scscscccsccscsseeccsesessveseees 70 
09. PATTHANA-MAHAPAKARANA-ATTHAKATHA _ ou..ceecssseeeeee a5 
10. ABHIDHAMMA-GULHATTHA-DIPANI  o..cssesseecssesssesssseessseeen 76 
11. DIGHANIKAYA; Samaififiaphalasutta .....0..ccccscccsssccssesssssessseeeeneees 78 
12s. SATII AINEDD «2:5: tossdsercasurtsasccoc rianneslieet aici Moaasaeduceanatcise 79 
13. JATAKA: Vessantarajataka-[Atthavannana-] tika 

("TIKA MAHAVESSANTARA") o.cssssscsssssssssssssssesssesecessesttttesssnss 85 
14. JATAKA: Vessantarajataka-Atthakathd oo...ceccccccccccssesesesteseeee 86 
152° CAKKA VALADIPAND \ sisciscs scsesesicscesacsesenncsschnazevsssssdescoveriseorereeces 88 
16: CAKKAVALADIPANE assccsncrstior-ctatsacoeseaealosssiGixesstsacteenads 94 
Bie “CAMADEVIVANS A eisns Sisesiuticicnsatealnnplostanuadoannidnies 101 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 3 


18. CAMADEVIVANSA oouviccsccssccceseccsscesecscscsescesessessteecassecsesseaesesases 105 
19. JATAKA: Vessantaradipami o..c.cccsscsscscsscsesscsssssesesssecssesssesesesseees 108 
90). TEORADIPAs = ccaceascticcascst cidestseatiee Rati les SO cd os 113 
91S GLOKADIPA siecetice tactics aes Pelee a ett ase. eves 117 
22. LOKASANTHANA (-JOTARATANAGANTHI) | o....cccsescesescsceseees 119 
23. MANIPADIPA .u..cccccccccssscsssssssscsssscscssssssssssssesssssssssessssssssssessscssaceees 121 
24. BUDDHASIHINGA-NIDANA  ouuuciccccccscsessscssessescescsesscsecsevscreeees 128 
25. VANSAMALINI oc. ccccsccccccecsscecssccscsecsscecsucevsvsvsscecacecscacacecessaveneeees 130 
26. WUTTODAYA wiicccccccccecsccccssscscecsescssscscscssacscssessacscssescsecaceacnevseseeers 132 
27. SIVIJAYAPANHA (MAHA-SIVIJAYAJATAKA) ......cccceceees 133 
28. SIVIJAYAPANHA (MAHA-SIVIJAYAJATAKA) .....ccceeseeees 136 
29. PARAMATTHAVIBHUSANT .....ccccccsssessssessesscsessssssescscssetenseesessees 144 
30. PARAMATTHAVIBHUSANT ........ccscsssecssssessssssssesssesstsessesessesseseees 150 
INDEX 
A. Pali Manuscripts in Chronological Order (Christian Era).............. 157 
B. Repositories of the Manuscripts (1974).........cssessssscesssccsssessseeeneeees 158 
GC... “Texts and -Althorsasiiia sd sia snciis ccitseseistonetelidleedhcsivevaditeetedesias 158 
D. Donors, Scribes, and Other Persons Mentioned in the 

COLOPHON sss savaivadatedteacavi vs va caen eotaase cs actcscgascted scabatacieainiariscstensaaons 159 
E.- — Names Of Places: icissecceseccessescocseuesissscensadec ecboaiea ete ete canst Hbeuiweans 164 
F. Names of Monasteries ...........cscccsssssessssscssscsssesssscssccessscsscesserseaceenees 165 
BIBLIOGRAPHY® os:tisececteictasdeltvvhictidatehededin nieces Mao: 167 


PREFACE 


It was in the spring of 1972 that I first visited a Northern Thai 


monastery: a rural wat, some 3km from Lamphun Municipality. I was 
surprised by what I saw: a good dozen elderly men clad in faded and worn- 
out blue cotton shirts, their sunburnt faces laughing, some puffing sweet- 
smelling clouds out of their long green khiifioo cigars, sitting on mats 

surrounded by hundreds of palm-leaf manuscripts, undoing their 
wrappings, reading a little bit of this, a little bit of that, chatting and 
exchanging views about their favourite stories: Northern Thai literature, 
at that time almost unknown outside the region, appeared to be still pretty 
much alive among the Lan Na people — at least, in the hearts of the older 
generation. To see so many "simple folk" reading Northern Thai script at 
ease, and discussing literary works was surprising; what made me feel 


4 Harald Hundius 


perplexed, was the contradiction lying in the fact that most of these 
manuscripts had been left untouched, as I came to learn, for years, in half 
a dozen partly rotten, wooden caskets — a prey for termites, mice and 
mould. 

These elderly lay-men were, by the way, volunteers from the community 
of Wat San Rim Ping who had been asked the previous day, by Acharn 
Singkha Wannasai (1920-1980), my teacher and project advisor, to lend a 
helping hand to a "Farang" wanting to study and record valuable examples 
of the Northern Thai literary tradition on microfilm, in order to preserve 
them and make them known abroad. 

At that time, not only the manuscripts, but also the language and 
literature of Northern Thailand seemed doomed to slip into oblivion. The 
following years, however, witnessed considerable change; today, Northern 
Thai language and literature, arts and culture are enjoying growing 
attention. Scholars from Thailand and abroad, but above all, the people of 
Northern Thailand themselves, including folk artists and members of the 
Buddhist Sangha, have joined in the task of preserving Lan Na's literary 
heritage. 

The present study grew out of an involvement in these endeavours. 
Having evaluated a considerable number of manuscripts in the course of 
previous research, preservation work, and teaching responsibilities, the 
idea of making an in-depth study of colophons was sparked by discussions 
with Professor Dr. Oskar von Hintiber (Universitit Freiburg) who had for 
several years been tracing the ancient Pali tradition of Lan Na. His 
articles, published in various journals since 1983, were especially 
stimulating for this study. He also took it upon himself to check my Pali 
transliterations, and verify the beginnings and endings of the thirty 
manuscripts introduced here, in the standard editions. So now that the 
study has been completed, my sincerest thanks go first to him for his 
encouragement and personal interest in the progress of the work. 

I am further indebted to Professor Dr. Udom Roongruangsri, my 
colleague at the M.A. Program "Lanna Language and Literature". Chiang 
Mai University, who shared generously his time and expertise in 
discussions of the contents and the wording of some of the older 
colophons. 

Thoughts also go back to Professor Dr. Bernhard Kélver (Universitit 
Kiel) who spent, some ten years ago, many an afternoon discussing the 
problems of how to come to grips with the abundance of variants in 
Northern Thai manuscripts from different historical epochs and various 
geographical origins. The transliteration system which evolved out of this 
cooperation proved useful again for preserving the linguistic evidence 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 5 


contained in the colophons. 

This article would not have taken its present shape without the 
continuous contributions — practical, intellectual, and emotional —- made 
by my wife, Ingrid, during every phase of the work. 

I am further obliged to John Cadet (Chiang Mai) for going through an 
early draft of the translation of several colophons. In the final stages of 
writing Laurie Maund (Chiang Mai University) took great pains in 
polishing the English, at the same time adding valuable suggestions. 

The map was prepared by Bordin Wongjunpong under the supervision 
of Asst. Professor Dr. Nuansiri Wongtangswad (Chiang Mai University). 
Chuanpit Lilit proved herself reliable and circumspect as ever, when 
helping in preparing the manuscript, and assisting in computer work. The 
special characters and signs were designed by Phichak Limprasutr, 
Chiang Mai; the retyping of the data section (Part B) as well as the 
rearrangement of the Introduction which had to be transferred from a 
different word-processing system, was done by myself. All errors or 
misprints are therefore entirely mine. 

Other persons have, knowingly or unknowingly, also contributed to 
the completion of the present study: the colleagues involved in the 
"Preservation of Northern Thai Manuscripts" Project, who had to 
compensate for my absence during field trips and meetings; likewise those 
from the Department of Thai, and the M.A. students who showed 
understanding and patience when I had to absent myself from “Riian 
Doem", our common workstation at the Faculty of Humanities, for longer 
periods during past semester breaks. 

I should also like to take this opportunity to express again my deep 
appreciation for the continuous support extended by the National 
Research Council of Thailand as well as the National Library, Bangkok. I 
am especially obliged to Professors Maenmas Chavalit and Kulasap 
Gesmankit for their personal interest in the work and their readiness to 
help with its progress in every respect. Special thanks are due for the 
permission to go through preliminary hand-lists of the holdings of 
Northern and Northeastern Thai manuscripts at the National Library, and 
to have microfilm copies made of a considerable number of relevant texts. 

As may be inferred from the foregoing acknowledgments, the present 
study could be pursued due to a combination of favourable conditions; the 
most exceptional being the privilege of a continuous stay in Northern 
Thailand, made possible through the seconding of a lecturership for the 
M.A. Program "Lan Na Language and Literature" at the Department of 
Thai, Faculty of Humanities, Chiang Mai University, by the German 
Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) since 1983. Furthermore, the work 


6 Harald Hundius 


was greatly enhanced by the results of previous research projects 
conducted by the author with the support of the German Research 
Association (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft [DFG], Bonn) between 
1971-1983. The texts under study were easily accessible, since a copy of a 
microfilm collection including the texts presented here, set up in 1972- 
1974 in the course of the Project "Dokumentarische Erfassung literarischer 
Materialien in den Nordprovinzen Thailands", had been donated to 
Chiang Mai University (Department of Thai) by the German Foreign 
Office, in 1977/78. Thanks to a grant given to the above-mentioned M.A. 
Program by the Volkswagen-Stiftung, Hannover, in which were included 
two high-quality microfilm readers, these microfilms could be 
conveniently made use of for the present study. 

Finally, I should like to express my gratitude to the Pali Text Society 
for publishing the study in the Society's Journal, and for providing a grant 
to be used for expenses that occurred in the course of producing camera- 
ready copy. I am especially obliged to the editor of the PTS Journal, 
Professor K.R. Norman, for taking it upon himself to make the editorial 
changes needed for publication. 

Last but not least, mention must be made of the authors and the 
scribes, as well as the donors and supporters of the past who joined hands 
in the making of the manuscripts presented here. It is through their efforts 
that we can study Lan Na's literary heritage and witness the pre-eminent 
role Buddhism and literature formerly enjoyed in the hearts of the people. 


Chiang Mai, April 1990 Harald Hundius 
Note on Transcriptions. 


1. For the edition of the Colophons the Transliteration System as 
introduced in HUNDIUS 1990 (pp. 215 foll) is used. Its main features are 
explained in Part B, 1.1, below. 

2. For phonematic transcriptions the system introduced by Mary R. Haas 
(see HAAS 1964 [for Central Thai], 1958 [for Northern Thai]; see 
Bibliography) is used, with some minor modifications stated in Part 
B, 1.2. 

3. Names of persons, places and monasteries etc., as well as official titles 
and ranks mentioned in the colophons, when referred to in the 
translation or in the main text, are generally given in transliteration, 
however, in a simplified version of the system mentioned above (1.; for 
details see B, 1.1.2., § 18). 

4. Commonly known names of persons, monasteries, towns or other 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 7 


geographical places are referred to in a broad phonetically oriented 
transcription known as "General System" (s. JSS, 33, 1941, pp. 49 foll). 
Official or widely used orthography in forms like Luang Prabang, 
Vientiane, Chulalongkorn, etc. is maintained. (When deemed helpful 
for verification, phonematic notation in accordance with the 
pronunciation in modern Central as well as Northern Thai has been 
added). Likewise, Romanized spellings of personal names are, if 
known, given in the form used or preferred by their holders. 

5. A number of Pali and Sanskrit words and specia! terms, e.g. 
Buddhasasana ("Buddha's Teachings"), Nibbana (Skt: "“Nirvana"), 
peta ("hungry ghost"), aksara (“character, letter") etc. are written in 
accordance with commonly used Romanization. 


List of Abbreviations* and Signs 


AD Anno Domini (Christian Era) 

BE Buddhist Era (Christian Era + 543) 

C. century (Christian Era) 

clf classifier 

CPD A Critical Pali Dictionary (begun by V. Trenckner, 1924-48) 

CS Cilasakaraja ("Little Era" = Christian Era minus 638) 

CT Central Thai (Siamese, Standard Thai) 

Deno Documentation number, i.e. Item-Number in: Hundius (1976b; 
Verzeichnis der auf Mikrofilm erfaBten literarischen Dokumente 
aus Nordthailand [1972—1974}). 

don donor (of a manuscript) 

foll following 

ms no manuscript number (as recorded on microfilm) 


n.d. no date 
nono. no number (i.e. palm-leaf folio without pagination on the 
microfilm) 


NT North(ern) Thai (Tai Yuan, Kam Miiang, Lan Na Thai) 
P Pali 


p number of palm-leaf page(s) as recorded on microfilm 
p. page 

r recto 

Tr. reigned 

Skt Sanskrit 

spp sponsor or supporter (of the making of a manuscript) 
Vv verso 


Luang Prabang 





THAILAND 


NORTHERN 


LEGEND 
Repositories of the Manuscripts 


Harald Hundius 


A 


Provincial Capitals. 


District Towns, 


Places Mentioned in the 


Colophons 


—---—— Boundary between States 


SCALE 


1 2500000 


50 in 


100 kn. 


50 




















102° 





NB: 


# ne Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 9 


Abbreviations of names of Pali works are those used in the CPD, 
as are the numbers attached to the Pali titles which refer to the 
categorization used in that work. If those numbers are put in square 
brackets, the respective text is not mentioned in the CPD. 


a number (usually 1-5) following a palm-leaf page no. refers to the 
line, an attached "a", "b", "c" to the section thereof. 


The following signs have been used: 


transliteration 

phonematic transcription 

illegible or difficult to read (on the microfilm) 

supplements by me 

deletions suggested by me; also used with parts of proper names 
which appear to be used merely or predominantly as epitheta 


omantia and may therefore not be taken as parts of the genuine 
names. 


10 Haraia Hundius 


PART A: INTRODUCTION 
1. Background: The Sources. 


1.1 The Pali Tradition of Northern Thailand in an 
Historical Perspective. 


The subject of this study is "colophons", short paragraphs written by 
the scribes in their native language, Northern Thai, as an accompaniment 
to the main text which is written in Pali. Engraved on palm-leaves, they 
have survived the tide of the times, sometimes under preciously gilded 
wooden covers and wrapped in faded silk, hidden in huge wooden caskets, 
in well over 3,000 monastic libraries scattered throughout the eight 
northernmost provinces of Thailand. 

Taken from a selection of Pali manuscripts, the "Holy Scriptures" or 
“Dhamma Texts" of the Theravada School of Buddhism, among these 
some of the oldest known manuscripts from Southeast Asia that have 
come down to us, the colophons offer glimpses of a distant past, dating 
back to half a millennium ago. 

It was a time of religious zest: Lan Na, the Tai Yuan kingdom 
established by King Mangrai in the 13th c., had been consolidated and 
reached a high level of prosperity and cultural blossoming. After a time of 
intensive scholarly exchange with Singhalese-reform Buddhism, in the 
15th—16th c. a number of learned Lan Na monks had emerged as masters 
of Pali, the holy language of the Southern Buddhist tradition. Such was 
their mastery that they were not only able to translate the huge corpus of 
Buddhist Scriptures from Pali into the vernacular language, Northern 
Thai, but were also able to produce scholarly as well as literary works of 
their own. 

During this period, while numerous texts belonging to the Theravada 
tradition were copied from foreign sources, the script that had come to be 
used for Pali texts was adapted to be used for writing Northern Thai 
(NT), as well.! It is this type of script, the "Lan Na Dhamma Script" or 
/tia muan/, as it is generally called by its users, which came to be the 


1 The earliest dated evidence of the Lan Na Dhamma Script used for writing a 


vernacular Northern Thai text that has been identified to date, inscribed on the base 
of a Buddha Image kept at Wat Chiang Man (NT |Wad Jiian "Hman|, /wat ciag 
man/), Chiang Mai, dates from AD 1465 (CS 827). It comprises two short lines 
(mentioning the names of Buddhist dignitaries who supported the casting of the 
Buddha Image, and the name of the laywoman-sponsor) which are preceded by two 
lines written in Pali. Cf. Penth 1976:55 foll. 


SMC UU UF LEE Y £ UE FLOM SCT EAS FRU INGEINCH £ AGUNG ad 


main media of written communication from the 16th-17th century until 
well into the middle of the 20th century.? 

Through this script, the promulgation of the Buddhadhamma was 
greatly enhanced: the canonical works were disseminated in bilingual 
(Pali-NT) versions called |woohaar| (/woohdan/)", and this in turn gave 
rise to a huge literary production, drawing upon local as well as foreign 
themes and plots. In fact, the bulk of the Lan Na literary heritage, 
religious as well as secular, has come down to us through the "Lan Na 
Dhamma script". 

A certain part of the Lan Na literary tradition, however, continued to 
be copied in the original monolingual Pali versions. These were mainly 
canonical texts or those connected indirectly with the Tipitaka, as well as 
a number of scholarly works used for study purposes. Furthermore, Pali 
was chosen as the medium of several works composed by Lan Na scholars: 
among these commentaries and subcommentaries on canonical and post- 
canonical texts, treatises on cosmology, religious chronicles and treatises 
on Pali grammar.4 

It is to this Pali tradition of Lan Na that the thirty manuscripts 
included in the present study belong. They cover a period in history of 
well over four centuries: the earliest dating back to the turn of the 15th— 
16th century, the "Golden Age” of Pali Literature, when Lan Na, as an 


2 Two other scripts have been used for Northern Thai in the past. The first, called |Fak 


Khaam| ("Tamarind-Pod"), a derivation of a contemporary Sukhothai script, which 
appears to have been used solely for epigraphy, is documented in inscriptions dating 
mostly from the 15th-16th c. The second type, previously called |Khogm Miitian| 
(/kh3om muan/) by such scholars as Singkha Wannasai and which is nowadays 
mostly referred to as |Daiy Nidees| (/thaj nfthéet/), has been used for transmitting a 
number of works of "classical" Lan Na poetry. Only a good dozen (palm-leaf) 
manuscripts written in this script have survived, the majority of which date from 
the first four decades of the 19th c. A facsimile of this alphabet can be found in 
Notton 1925: plates 21-24. 


Cf. P: vohara "expression, speech". 


A detailed description can be found in: Hundius 1990:119 foll. This script was also 
the subject of a study completed in 1981 by Kong Kaeo Wirapracak and Niyada 
Thasukhon (see Bibliography). 

4 CE. Coedés 1915. A list of thirty Pali works (not including the Pafifiadsa-Jataka or 
"Fifty Apocryphal Jatakas" also generally ascribed to the Pali School of Chiang 
Mai) known or believed to have been written by scholars of the Lan Na tradition is 
given in: Likhitanonta 1980:71 foll. The Pajifiasa-Jataka has recently been re-edited 
— on the basis of texts belonging to the Burmese tradition — by the Pali Text 
Society. See Jaini 1981, 1983. 


1 HITS PUaADS 


independent kingdom, was enjoying a peak of cultural blossoming under 
King Miiang Kao (r. 1495-1526). 

The colophons in four of the eleven holographs originating from this 
period, state that they were written in 'Daa "Sggy (NT /taa s3oj/, CT /thaa 
s5oj/; written according to the "General System": Ta Soi), once apparently 
a centre of Buddhist learning and Pali studies, the location of which has, 
up to the present time, withstood scholarly endeavours.* 

It can be taken as a reflection of the political history of Lan Na during 
the following two centuries, rather than an accident, that only very few of 
the thirty manuscripts under study date from the 17th—18th c.: subjugated 
under Burmese suzerainty, the population was subjected to incessant 
warfare, foreign exploitation, and internal rivalries to such an extent that 
’ material and psychological preconditions for cultural and_ literary 
productivity must have been severely impaired.5 

The majority of the remaining holographs stem from the early 19th c. 
when, after throwing off the Burmese yoke through an alliance with 
Siam, the five principalities of Lamphun, Lampang, Phrae, Nan, and 
after its reconstruction, Chiang Mai, enjoyed, as vassal states under 
Siamese suzerainty, far-reaching internal independence and _ relative 
prosperity. 

An individual to whom special recognition is due for his important 
part in the quest for literary reconstruction during this time, is a monk 
named Kaficana Mahathera, mostly called |Gruu Paa Kaficana| among 
Northerners, who was probably a native of Phrae. The colophons taken 
from manuscripts made under Kaficana's aegis, while representing only a 
tiny part of his heritage, still do convey a glimpse of the political and 
socio-economic conditions under which this charismatic religious leader 
exercised his influence far beyond the boundaries of his home principality, 
over the entire region of Lan Na, and even into the kingdom of Luang 
Prabang. 

The most recent holograph of the collection under study here was 


* See, however, Part B, Post-script to 05, Remarks, below. 


This conclusion may be drawn from the conspicuous scarcity of manuscripts of that 
period to have so far come to light. The discovery, in 1968, of several caskets of 
palm-leaf manuscripts hidden in a cave in the present district of Mae Sarieng, the 
majority dating from the 17th c., also hints in this direction: obviously, the 
manuscripts had been brought into safety when the Tai Yuan population living in 
that area became caught in the crossroads of warring Burmese and Tai Yuan troups. 
Cf. Keyes 1970:232. In fact, 'Daa "Soggy may also have fallen victim to the turmoils 
during the Burmese subjugation of Lan Na (cf. v. Hiniiber 1988:23). 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 13 


written in 1869, by the initiative of another important reconstructor of 
cultural, and especially literary, traditions of the North, viz. 
Anantaworaritthidet who ruled over the principality of Nan from 1853 
until 1893. This manuscript may be regarded as one of the last witnesses 
of the living Pali tradition of Lan Na before it gradually came to an end in 
the first half of the 20th century. 6 

Several factors contributed to the decline of Pali studies in what was 
once the home of the famous Pali School of Chiang Mai. Perhaps the 
most far-reaching were the successful efforts of the Central Government in 
Bangkok to establish administrative control over the whole country, 
including the principalities of the North which had become increasingly 
threatened by British and French Imperialism. These reforms which 
changed an administrative system that had been in practice since the 15th 
c., were started during the reign of King Chulalongkorn (r. 1868-1910), 
and paved the way for the country's development into a modern Nation- 
State.” 

As far as religious education, and especially Pali studies, were 
concerned, basic changes were introduced as well, culminating, in the first 
decade of this century, in the reorganization of the Buddhist clergy, and 
the introduction of a centralized, national monastic education. 
Consequently, monks from the North were required to study Pali on the 
basis of texts belonging to the Siamese tradition, written in a different 
script, i.e. either Khmer (|Khgom|) or Siamese (Central Thai), and 
advancement in the Sangha, as well as admission to the Buddhist 
Universities which had been established in the capital, Bangkok, became 
tied up with the passing of centralized examinations based on those 


6 The last major effort to keep alive the scholarly Pali tradition of the North was 
undertaken, as it seems, in the twenties and thirties under the leadership of |Gruu 
Paa Siiwijeeyy| (/khuu baa sfiwicaj/) [AD 1878-1938], a charismatic Northem Thai 
monk scholar and fervent preserver of Lan Na literary and cultural traditions who 
copied a number of Pali manuscripts by himself, e.g. the | Khuddakanikaya 
comprising 16 phuuk, dating from AD 1926. On the gilded "mai hlaap of this neatly 
written manuscript a colophon is engraved similar to those found on the manuscripts 
made under |Gruu Paa Kajicanal| in the previous century. This manuscript which 
belongs to the holdings of |Gruu Paa Siiwijeeyya's| home monastery at a village 
called /baiin paap/ (Amphoe Li, Lamphun), was one of those used by Singkha 
Wannasai (1920-1980) for his part in the preparations for the first printed edition 
of the Lan Na Tipitaka completed recently (see below). 


A detailed account of the politics of reform as pursued in the field of education, is 
contained in: Wyatt 1969. For the initiatives to expand secular as well as religious 
education into the provinces, including the North, see especially pp. 234 foll. 


14 Harald Hundius 


texts.8 

While Northern Thai, despite the gradual introduction since the early 
twenties of a centralized secular school system based entirely on Central 
Thai, still remained the common medium of oral, and, at least in the 
religious sphere, written communication up to the period of World War II, 
an aggressive "National Unification Policy" enforced during the first 
years of the war, practically penalizing the study and teaching of 
Northern Thai language and script, dealt a severe blow to the monasteries 
of the North in their function as guardians of the literary tradition.? 

Since that period, an ever decreasing number of people have learned to 
read and write the Northern Thai script during their customary stay in a 
monastery. This contrasts with the generations of the previous five or six 
centuries who had received monastic elementary education based on the 
study of Northern Thai. Consequently, today it is, above all, the members 
of the older generation who are still able to read Northern Thai. Among 
these, only very few can be found who are familiar with ancient 
manuscripts such as those belonging to the Pali tradition of Lan Na, 
which thus have ceased to be copied. 

Nowadays, while Northern Thai is still being used in everyday 
communication by some four million people living in the North, the 
general trend towards modernization and secular education, together with 
the overwhelming impact of the centralized national mass media — a 
process which accelerated tremendously with the implementation of the 
First National Economic and Social Development Plan in the early 
sixties — have contributed to its decreasing status in modern society, 
especially since the written tradition no longer seems to have any 
relevance for the majority of the younger generation. 

Counter-acting this process of decline, however, is an increasing 
awareness, particularly wide-spread among culturally minded academics 
and members of the Northern Sangha, of the value of the cultural 
traditions of Lan Na, which are felt to be threatened by the impact of 
rapid social and economic change brought about during the past two or 
three decades. The feeling that the heritage of the past is seriously 


8 See also Gosling 1983:92 foll. 
9 An impression of the atmosphere of intimidation prevailing in monasteries in 
Lamphun province can be obtained by reading the brief account given by Singkha 
Wannasai (cf. Wannasai 1980:7-9) who relates the occurrence of the burning of Lan 
Na palm-leaf manuscripts in a number of monasteries in Lamphun and Phrae 
provinces, as well as the resistance among devout adherents of the Northern tradition 
against the attempts to enforce the usage of Siamese or "Central Thai" (CT) instead 
of Lan Na scriptures in the monasteries. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 15 


endangered, is increasingly shared by the central authorities. 

The constitution of Chiang Mai University, founded in 1964 as the 
first University outside Bangkok, explicitly states that one of her four 
basic duties is "to promote and enhance the study and preservation of the 
cultural heritage of the region". The introduction, in the following years, 
of teaching courses and research in Northern Thai language and literature, 
a trend later to be followed by provincial Teachers' Training Colleges, and 
Cultural Centres, heralds this new attitude. 

Concerns about the growing negligence of the regional literary tradition 
led, again beginning in the early sixties, to increased efforts to preserve 
this part of the cultural heritage of Lan Na for future generations. A 
noteworthy example, initiated by the Northern Sangha, is the edition of a 
printed version of the complete Lan Na Tipitaka, which was recently 
accomplished after an effort of 15 years, and with remarkable public 
support, under the leadership of a Chiang Mai Monastery, in 1988. 


1.2 Surveys of Manuscripts and Relevant Research. 


1966 saw the completion of a survey of manuscripts in the possession of 
Northern monastic libraries, focussing on Lamphun province, which had 
been supported for several years by the Siam Society, Bangkok. The 
leading scholar responsible for this survey, Acharn Singkha Wannasai, 
Lamphun, later contributed substantially to another Project which, funded 
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), aimed at setting up a 
microfilm collection of manuscripts representative of the indigenous 
literary tradition. It is from this collection, set up between 1972 and 1974 
from manuscripts in some 95 monastic, as well as private, libraries that 
the thirty manuscripts under study have been drawn.!0 

Fortunately, the microfilming of important manuscripts of the Lan Na 
tradition was to be continued, a few years later, by another project, jointly 
supported this time by two Japanese organizations, viz. the Toyota 


10 The microfilms, comprising about one thousand titles, are available both in the 
National Library, Bangkok (since 1974), and at Chulalongkorn University 
(Department of History, as a donation from the German Foreign Office in 1978/9), 
Bangkok; Chiang Mai University (Department of Thai, also a donation from the 
German Government), as well as at the Universities of Kiel and Gottingen, Federal 
Republic of Germany. A preliminary handlist of the texts contained in the microfilm 
collection, which include a large number of parallel versions, exists in the form of a 
computer print-out (see Hundius 1976b) and is available upon request from the 
author. 


16 Harald Hundius 


Foundation and the National Museum of Ethnology, Osaka. This led to 
the establishment of microfilm documentations which, taken over in 1981 
by the newly established Social Research Institute of Chiang Mai 
University, comprises by now some 4,000 texts, the majority belonging to 
secular fields of knowledge such as traditional law, customs, astrology, 
history, medicine, etc. A selection of about a hundred texts written 
entirely in Pali is also included.!! 

Since 1987, another project, aiming at the preservation of manuscripts 
in situ, that is at local monastic libraries, was started by Chiang Mai 
University's newly founded "Center for the Promotion of Arts and 
Culture", with support from the German Foreign Office's Cultural 
Assistance Program. This project, which has been supplemented by a 
microfilming unit to record valuable manuscripts, will further enrich the 
source basis for Northern Thai, as well as Pali, studies in the future.12 

By making the manuscripts more easily accessible, and also by 
drawing the attention of scholars from abroad to the rich literary heritage 
of Northern Thailand, the microfilm projects appear to have motivated 
Western Pali scholars once again to turn their interest to the Pali tradition 
of this region, thus reviving a field of study which had been left 
unattended for more than half a century. For it was as early as 1915 that 
the great French scholar of Southeast Asian Studies, George Coedés, had 
given proof of the existence of a significant Pali tradition in the area of 
the former Kingdom of Lan Na. His "Note sur les ouvrages palis composés 





11 Part of this microfilm documentation consists of manuscripts first recorded during 
1972-1974 (DFG-Collection), which were re-microfilmed because of their special 
value (nos. 17, 18, 20, 21, 25, and perhaps also 24 of the present study). In addition, 
the SRI surveys brought to light several previously unknown holographs. Included in 
the SRI collection is the oldest dated manuscript discovered to date in the North. 
This manuscript (a copy of parts of the Jataka-atthakatha-vannana), written in AD 
1471 (CS 833), is also the second oldest known in Thailand (the oldest one, a copy of 
the Saratthapakasini, dates from AD 1440; see v. Hintiber 1985:3). According to 
figures mentioned in the printed catalogue of 1986a (Foreword, without pagination), 
a total of 13,726 phuuk comprising 3,694 texts, including an unknown number of 
parallel versions, had been photographed, as of March, 1986, on 145 reels of 
microfilm. In the meantime, they have increased, as Acham Phanphen Khruathai 
(M.A.) kindly informs me (May, 1989), by an additional twenty reels. The titles of 
the texts recorded, together with some basic additional data covering the contents of 
145 reels, have been published in successive inventory lists or short catalogues (see 
Social Research Institute [ed.] 1986a-b). 

12 Since recording work began, in November 1987, some 200 reels have been 

microfilmed (as of May, 1989). In this project, which is scheduled to continue until 

September 1991, Northern Thai and Pali manuscripts are classified and microfilmed 

separately, which will considerably facilitate working with the texts. 


ine Cotopnons of thirty Fait manuscripts from Northern Thailand 17 


en pays thai", despite being outdated now in some respects, has remained 
a basic source for the study of this subject until today.!3 

Ten years thereafter, Coedés edited and translated parts of two 
important works mentioned in his earlier article, viz. the Camadevivarsa 
and the Jinakalamali, two religious chronicles compiled by Northern Thai 
monk-scholars in the 15th and 16th centuries, respectively. 

When reading the editor's notes today, one is left wondering why 
Coedés, who undoubtedly had access to Northern Thai, based his edition 
solely on "Southern", i.e. Siamese, sources without even mentioning the 
existence (or non-existence) of a single Northern Thai manuscript. His 
main sources in fact were versions printed in Siamese script which were 
checked with one manuscript each. These, as may be assumed, were 
written in "Khoom", ie. a variant of the Khmer, script which was 
customarily used for the transmission of Pali texts in Siam until the end of 
the 19th c.14 

The question will probably never be answered; yet in the light of 
evidence gained in the early 70s, the assumption may be not too far- 
fetched that Coedés did not at all deliberately discard Northern Thai 
manuscripts, but that this omission rather reflects the unavailability at 
that time of Northern Thai manuscripts at the National Library in 
Bangkok, or its predecessor, the Wachirayan (Vajirafiana) Library. This 
assumption at least would fit in with observations made in 1971/72, 
when, during preparations for the Project “Documentary Collection of 
Northern Thai Manuscripts", a survey was made at the National Library, 
Bangkok, on Pali works known or believed to have originated in Northern 
Thailand. The survey led to the conclusion that a considerable number of 
such titles could be located. What was striking, however, was the 
discovery that only versions written in "Khoom" script could be found, but 
not a single one in Northern Thai script. 

In this context, it may be worth mentioning that, according to 





13° See Caedés 1915. 
14 See Caedés 1925. According to remarks made by the editor, a lot of misprints and 
other errors had to be corrected, a task which benefitted substantially from the 
collation with the manuscripts mentioned above, thereby giving early proof of the 
fact to be observed ever since, that printed editions of Pali texts in Thailand have to 
be used with considerable reservation and care. Coedés, in 1966, made yet another 
important contribution to Pali studies by writing a catalogue of Pali (and Northern 

Thai) manuscripts in the possession of the Royal Library of Copenhagen (for details, 
see Bibliography). 


18 Harald Hundius 


Northern Thai oral history, several boat-loads of Northern Thai 
manuscripts were taken to Bangkok from monasteries in Lamphun in 
the late 18th or early 19th c. It was presumed that they were to be used 
for the restoration of the Buddhist scriptures which had been lost 
since the devastation of Ayutthaya, the former capital of Siam, by 
Burmese armies in 1767.15 
No enquiries have been made about this event up to the present time; 
the whereabouts of the manuscripts remain an enigma, but it can at least 
be surmised, judging from the existence of numerous copies of Northern 
Thai works written exclusively in "Khogm" script, that they at least 
served their purpose before being allowed to pass into oblivion.!6 
It thus seems justified to draw the conclusion that factors related to 
cultural policy may have been decisive in preventing Coedés, who worked 
in the archives of the capital during a time of "Nationbuilding", from 
getting hold of any direct witnesses of the Pali texts of Northern Thai 
origin he studied and edited. Incidentally, this situation has remained 
basically unchanged, as it seems, until today: conspicuously, not a single 
one of a good dozen studies on, or editions of, Pali texts from the 
Northern Thai tradition undertaken by Thai scholars during the past few 
decades made use of a Northern Thai manuscript.17 
It seems that factors related to politics were decisive in preventing the 
"discovery" of the Northern Thai literary heritage including its Pali 
components, in yet another instance in history, when it was at the brink 
of arousing the attention of European scholars, once again in the second 
decade of this century. 
It was a compatriot of George Coedés, namely Louis Finot, who, in 


15° Verbal communication by Singkha Wannasai in February 1972 who referred to 
information handed down through generations by the monk community of Wat San 
Ton Thong (NT /w4t san tdn thop/), Lamphun (situated some 2km to the SW of the 
present city of Lamphun, on the way to Pasang). In 1786, a Council was convened in 
Bangkok with the aim of reassembling and reestablishing the Pali canon. It took a 
whole century until the first printed version of the canon could appear. For details 
see v. Hintiber 1983:75. 


16 Prof. v. Hiniiber has drawn my attention to the fact that a certain number of 
Northern Thai manuscripts found their way to Japan in the 19th c. as a gift by King 
Chulalongkorn; possibly at least some of these might belong to the above-mentioned 
ones which are not traceable at present. 


17 For details see v. Hintiber 1987a. The studies referred to are predominantly 
unpublished Master's degree theses. Written in Thai, they have remained 
unaccessible to scholars of Pali in the West. As far as texts included in our collection 
of 30 are concemed, hints about studies and editions of Pali literature undertaken by 
Thai scholars are given in the “Remarks” to the colophons. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 19 


1917, published a monograph entitled "Recherches sur la littérature 
laotienne". In this study mention is made and comments given on a 
considerable number of texts, the titles of which were, during the DFG 
Research Project, discovered to belong, in fact, to the literary tradition of 
Lan Na. Enquiries and surveys pursued in the Bibliothéque Nationale, 
Vientiane, and the Bibliothéque Royale, Luang Prabang, in 1974, pointed 
to the fact that Finot, in his study of 1917, had actually included genuine 
Lan Na manuscripts (examples of which, due to centuries of cultural 
exchange and co-operation, had been kept at those libraries) without, 
however, identifying them as such.!8 

The Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand thus had to wait for 
another 6S years until a German Pali scholar, Professor Oskar von 
Hiniiber, drew attention to them. O. v. Hiniiber was able to give proof of 
the pre-eminent importance of the Pali tradition of Northern Thailand for 
Pali studies by showing, to mention one example, that ancient 
manuscripts from this region have preserved grammatical forms which, in 
the traditions of Ceylon, Burma, and Siam, have been lost due to later 
recensions by learned monks whose alterations have created puzzles and 
problems unexplainable from the point of view of historical linguistics.19 
Yet the fact that a certain number of Pali texts known to have been 
recorded on microfilm for over a decade, such as those included in this 
study, have not been classified until today, clearly reflects the present 
state of research. 

However, in view of the increasingly accessible number of Pali 
manuscripts belonging to the Lan Na tradition, and the increase in 
scholarly interest, prospects are certainly encouraging. The present study, 
by editing, translating, and commenting on colophons, written in the 
vernacular language, of Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand, will 


hopefully contribute to paving the way for further studies on these 
important sources. 





18 My earlier assumption that Finot's sources might have been Laotian versions, or 
adaptations, of these texts could be refuted when it was found that a number of the 
texts in question bore inventory numbers of the Ecole Francaise d'Extréme Orient 
identical with the numbers given in Finot's study. (For details see Hundius 1976b). 

19 For details on the results of research done during the past six years, emphasizing 

the importance of the Lan Na tradition for the study of canonical texts and our 

knowledge of Pali, see various articles written by O. v. Hiniiber since 1983; for 
instance an article concerning the oldest known manuscript of the Milindapafiha (= 

04 of the present article), and the history of the Pali language as reflected in the 

manuscript tradition of Southeast Asia. Cf. v. Hintiber 1987a, 1988. 


20 Harald Hundius 


2. Subject, Aims and Scope of the Study. 


The thirty Pali manuscripts under study here are, as indicated above, 
all taken from the microfilm collection “Literature from Northem 
Thailand" set up during research undertaken in 1972-1974 (DFG- 
collection; see HUNDIUS [1976b]). As implied by the title, this project 
focussed on indigenous Northern Thai literature; nevertheless, a total of 
forty-eight texts written entirely in Pali were included in the 
documentation as well, due to their exceptional importance. 

First of all, some of these texts represent the oldest manuscripts that 
have survived, not only in the North, but in the whole of Thailand and 
Southeast Asia. Others represent works of Southeast Asian origin, 
including several that have been composed by scholars from Lan Na. 
Finally, a number of manuscripts were microfilmed because of their rarity 
or because they contained previously unknown texts. 

Eighteen titles out of the total of forty-eight Pali texts were identified, 
during a survey of the microfilms in 1976-1977, as belonging to a special 
category of texts used in Buddhist rituals and ceremonies, including 
"magic chantings". These texts, called |suut mon| in Northern Thai, have 
been in use for everyday religious practice through the centuries and can 
be found at virtually each and every monastery in the North. Since they 
constitute a group of their own, often consisting of rather short texts with 
equally brief colophons, it was decided to exclude them from the 
present study.20 

The texts called |suut mon| and |gaathaa aagom|("magic chantings") 
left apart, the thirty Pali manuscripts under study here represent the 
complete sub-group of Pali works included in the DFG collection of 1972- 
74 (See, however, Remarks to no. 26, Part B, below). It may be of interest 
here to take a brief look at the composition, with regard to their origin 
and content, of this sample of the Pali tradition of Lan Na. Included are 


(1) ancient specimens of canonical or semi-canonical texts (e.g. nos. 
08, 11; 04), as well as 

(2) texts which are either directly or indirectly connected with the 
Tipitaka (e.g. 01, 02, 03, 05, 06, 07). 

(3) Works of the Southeast Asian Pali tradition are represented by nos. 





20 This category of texts, the majority of which can be affiliated with the “Paritta” 
genre, should be made the subject of a special study. For some relevant 
bibliographical data, see v. Hintiber 1987a:13. 


ine Cotopnons of thirty Patt manuscripts from Northern T hatiand 21 


12, 20 and 21, 23, possibly including nos. 09, 10. 

(4) Works composed by scholars from Lan Na or those generally 
ascribed to this tradition, are represented by 15 and 16, 17 and 18, 
19, 24, 27 and 28. 

(5) Three works are of as yet unknown origin: nos. 22 (Lokasanthana), 
25 (Varisamalini), as well as 29 and 30 (Paramatthavibhisani), 
but may also be surmised to be of Southeast Asian origin, especially 
no. 25, 


As far as their content is concerned, the thirty Pali manuscripts under 
study here include 


(1) Scholarly works (e.g. 09, 10, 12, 26, 29 and 30), among these an 
ancient copy of a famous Pali grammar written by a Burmese scholar 
in the 12th c. (Saddaniti {12]), as well as a treatise on Pali metre 
written by a Singhalese monk, which exerted a strong influence on 
the poetic tradition of Thailand and neighbouring countries 
(Sangharakkhita's Vuttodaya [26]). 

(2) Lan Na's contribution to cosmological Pali literature is exemplified 
by Sirimangala’s Cakkavaladipani (Nos. 15 and 16; possibly also by 
no. 22 [Lokasanthana) which is of as yet unknown origin). 

(3) Literature pertaining to the political and religious history of the 
region is represented by two works composed in the 15th c. by 
Bodhiramsi, probably a native of Lamphun, viz. Camadevivarisa, 
the "Chronicle of Naan Caamadeewii", the legendary founder of the 
ancient kingdom of Haripufijaya (nos. 17 and 18), and the 
Buddhasihinga-Nidana, the chronicle of a highly revered Buddha 
Image called Buddha-Sihinga, believed to have been brought to 
Chiang Mai from Ceylon and enshrined at Wat Phra Singh, Chiang 
Mai. 

(4) Last, but not least, the most popular literary genre among Buddhist 
Thai peoples is also represented, i.e. narrative literature, above all 
the Jatakas (nos. 03, 05, 06, 07), including the most popular of 
these, the Vessantarajataka (13, 14, 19), and also including an 
example of the non-canonical Jataka tradition, the Maha- 
Sivijayajataka (nos. 27, 28), and the Dhammapada-Atthakatha 
(01, 02).22 


21 Cf Remarks to 25, below. 


22 It may be worth mentioning here that the non-canonical Jataka tradition of Lan Na 


22 Haraid Hunats 


It thus may be said that the thirty manuscripts included in our study 
can be regarded as a representative cross-section of the Pali tradition of 
Northern Thailand both with regard to their origin, and their content. It 
is hoped that the present study will contribute to attracting more interest 
in the Pali tradition of Northern Thailand by making accessible the 
vernacular colophons of the thirty selected manuscripts. 

The original purpose of the present study was to make available the 
information contained in the vernacular colophons of important Pali 
manuscripts from the Lan Na tradition to scholars of the Pali language 
and Southeast Asian Buddhism, who may not be able to read Northern 
Thai. 

Apart from this original purpose, however, when working with the 
colophons, it soon became clear that these texts also deserve considerable 
interest as historical sources in their own right.23 Covering a period of 
almost four centuries, the oldest dating from the same period (late 15th 
century) from which the earliest known epigraphical sources written in 
Northern Thai have come down to us, they contain valuable data for 
future studies of the development of the Northern Thai language and 
script. As written messages from the scribes to the reader, the colophons 
also contain valuable material for the study of social and religious history; 
not only concerning Buddhism and the beliefs associated with the making 
of manuscripts, and the aspirations attached to "meritorious deeds” of 
this kind, but also concerning social, and, to a certain extent, economic 
relations between those involved. 

In view of the above-mentioned situation, where Northern Thai 
studies are still in their initial stage, and hardly any primary sources are 
available in the form of editions, it seems advisable to present the 
material in such a way that it will be of benefit to different groups of 
readers. Therefore, the colophons are presented in three different forms: 

(1) in transliteration, 


has remained productive up to the present time. Most of the recent creations, written 
in Northern Thai, are adaptations from works written in the Shan States. About 
twenty examples which include works written by Singkha Wannasai in the 
seventies, have been included in the microfilm collection. 
23 Incidentally, it was an Indologist, as it seems, who first drew attention to this fact, 
when searching for vestiges of the ancient Pali tradition of Thailand. Cf. v. Hintiber 
1987a, 1988. Also, the first transliterations of Northern Thai colophons are to be 
found in his "Short catalogue of Pali manuscripts kept at the Siam Society, 
Bangkok” (1987a). 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 23 


(2) in phonematic transcription, 
(3) in transiation. 

A few remarks are necessary to explain the reasons for rendering the 
texts in both transliteration and phonematic transcription. Transliteration 
and phonematic transcription serve two different groups of potential users: 
the first is for those who focus on the written text, the second is directed 
at those whose point of departure is the spoken language. 


ad 1: 

The transliteration system used here was developed on the basis of a 
detailed study of the phonological and the writing system of Northern 
Thai.24 It has been specifically designed to cope with the particular 
problems posed by this kind of source material. 

The basic situation is characterized by the fact that a structurally 
monosyllabic, tonal language is written by means of a script designed for 
the transmission of texts composed in an Indo-European language (Pali) 
with a widely different phoneme inventory. While Lan Na scholars of the 
past succeeded in finding practical solutions to problems arising from 
these discrepancies, it is difficult to "“Romanize" Northern Thai 
graphemes in a functionally equivalent way. 

In addition to this structural problem, the task of transliterating 
Northern Thai manuscripts is further complicated by the occurrence of 
numerous allographic writings and inconsistencies. The number of poly- 
and homographies sometimes leaves the reader in perplexion, and causes 
problems not only for the transliterator, but also for the editor of texts in 
Northern Thai (or Central Thai) script, as well as for lexicographic 


24 Cf. Hundius 1990. Out of a variety of introductions into the Northem Thai script 
that exist, the following may be recommended for beginners: Davis 1970, 
Phayomyong 1968, Roongruangsri 1984, Wannasai 1975 (unfortunately out of print) 
and, in printed Northern (and Central) Thai letters, Watcharasat 1985. (For details, 
see Bibliography). 

25 An area particularly illustrative of the difficulties inherent, is the notation of vowels. 

Northern Thai has more vowel sounds than Pali, including a number of diphthongs. 

To represent these additional vocalic sounds, synthetic writings were created by 

combining graphic elements from the available sign inventory. Grouped around the 

initial "carrier" consonants, these three-dimensional configurations cannot be 

Romanized in a corresponding way, but have to be rearranged into linear sequences 

of symbols. Such an approach is used by scholars who are basing their 

transliteration of Northern Thai vowels, analogically to that of the consonants, on 
the Pali value of each individual element (cf., for instance, Father Schmitt, in: Pavie 

1898, H. Penth 1973, O. v. Hintiber 1987a foll); certain Northern Thai vowels are 

thus represented in the transliteration by a series of up to six letters. For more 

details, see PART B, 1.1.2.1, § 13, below. 


24 Harald Hundius 


work.26 

On the basis of studies of manuscripts from different areas and 
different periods, done over the past fifteen years, it can be concluded that 
this phenomenon is caused by different factors which need to be 
understood in order to deal with the texts in a suitable way. 


(1) Northern Thai orthography does not seem to have ever been fixed 
into a definite and obligatory, generally accepted system; 
inconsistencies are rather the rule, since the earliest times from 
which written documents have survived. In view of the complexity 
of the writing system, especially where the rendering of vowels and 
tones is concerned, it can also be surmised that many scribes were 
not sufficiently competent to understand and maintain a given 
orthographical standard — which, at any rate, was never explained 
in an analytical way — and it is a truism to be witnessed all over the 
world that by mere copying, errors and mistakes are generated. 


(2) Part of the variations in orthographic usage seems to be related to 
different "schools" or local writing traditions which, like similar 
conventions elsewhere, are subject to change in the course of time. 


(3) Another category of allographic writings appear to reflect phonetic 
instability, or indicate an ongoing process of sound change.27 


(4) Furthermore, one has to reckon with exogene interference, as 
numerous Northern Thai manuscripts were written by Tai speaking 
people from the Shan States (Khiin and Lii from the region of 
Chiang Tung) or Sip Song Pan Na (Chiang Rung) who had migrated 
into what is present Northern Thailand during centuries of constant 


26 The awareness in Thailand of these problems has grown in recent years, as could be 


observed during a conference on the transliteration of Northem Thai texts into 
Central Thai script which was held in Chiang Mai, in November 1987, under the 
auspices of the newly founded Center for the Promotion of Arts and Culture and 
which was attended by some sixty scholars from all parts of the country. 
27 This holds true, for instance, for the “waxing and waning" of vowel length (most 
affected are the high vowels (i, ii/, and /u, uu/) which can be observed in Northem 
Thai up to the present and is obviously reflected in an abundance of manuscripts. 
This is an example where the findings of synchronic linguistics may lead to 
explanations of patterns of inconsistencies observed in the manuscripts. For more 
details, see Part B, 1.1, below. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 25 


contacts and exchange.28 


In view of the complexity of the situation briefly outlined here, it 
seems advisable, when editing Northern Thai primary sources by means of 
a transliteration, not to eliminate any evidence, but to keep it available for 
further analysis; for this evidence can yield valuable information in several 
areas, namely : 

(1) Information on the strains and schools of the literary tradition will, 
by helping to identify the writing usage of different times and 
different places, make it possible, for example, to trace transmission 
lines of important texts, or to determine the age and origin of literary 
works, 

(2) Material may be found for studies on the historical development of 
the language, and the interaction between dialects. 

(3) Historians might find the data helpful when trying to trace 
demographic migration patterns. 

(4) When the principles of textual criticism are to be applied in editing 
manuscripts, the allographic evidence found in the witnesses must 
be thoroughly analyzed in order to be able to identify the 
“Leitfehler", i.e. significant errors or variant readings which are 
instrumental for the tracing of transmission lines of codices, their 
status and their mutual affiliation. 

(5) Last, but not least, the details of the original writings are 
indispensable for any re-examination of interpretations and 
translations of the texts. In a situation where considerable numbers 
of ambiguous writings and inconsistencies must be coped with, and 
numerous homographies must be interpreted and differentiated in 
order to identify the semantic substance contained in the text, it is 
only by ensuring access to the original writing that the 
interpretation of a given lexeme by the translator can remain open for 
reconsideration. 

The transliteration system used in the present study meets the 
requirement to preserve evidence contained in the written sources in an 
economical way (by using index numbers), while making an effort to 





28 It is worth mentioning, for example, that the inconsistency in writing and the failure 
to differentiate between the diphthong /ua/ and its phonetically related monophthong 
/a0/ is of significantly higher frequency in manuscripts from areas with large numbers 
of people from Khiin and Lii descent (such as large areas in Lamphun, Phayao or 
Chiang Rai provinces) than in those from districts with predominantly Tai Yuan 
population: in Khiin and Lii ancient /ia, wa, ua/ were monophthongized to /ee, 29, 
o00/, respectively. 


26 Harald Hundius 


assist the reader in identifying the lexemes.?9 


ad 2: 

As for the phonematic transcription, the system developed by Mary R. 
HAAS — the one most widely used in Thai Studies — is used in a form 
adapted to Northern Thai. This will help in making the texts accessible to 
those who are familiar with the spoken language, especially 
anthropologists and social scientists.30 Those who do not know Kam 
Miiang, will still be able to identify lexemes which are cognate to Central 
Thai. 

Scholars whose interests rest solely with the written texts, such as 
Pali scholars who have no knowledge of Thai, may still appreciate 
the opportunity to learn how the written forms should be pronounced. 


ad 3: 

As for the translations, these endeavour to stay as close as possible to 
the original. In cases where words have had to be supplemented in order 
to convey the meaning of the original, square brackets are used, so that 
translations and originals can be easily compared. 

Thus the study will hopefully offer some help and serve as an incentive 
for those wishing to become involved with written Northern Thai sources 
in the future. 


3. The Colophons. 
3.1 The Collection of the Thirty Pali Manuscripts. 


Pali — extensively used in Buddhist ritual — has always remained a 
language for scholars in the Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia. The 
scribe of one of our manuscripts, dating from 1759 (28 [7]), gives 
expression to this situation in a humorously coloured |galoon| - verse: 


"... Pali words are deep and subtle ... 

elusive is their meaning and often difficult to grasp ... 

if words are dropped, no hint is given — only Enlightened Ones will 
know ...”. 





29 For details, see Part B, 1.1, below. 


30 A useful introduction into spoken Northem Thai is given by Purnell (1962) 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 27 


It is easy to imagine that the majority of people who volunteered or 
who were assigned the task of copying Pali manuscripts did not know 
Pali sufficiently well to know exactly what they were writing about. To 
an even lesser degree were they able to use Pali as a means of 
communication. 

In Lan Na, it thus became customary to add information pertinent at 
the time when the manuscript was copied, in the vernacular language, 
Northern Thai. In a paragraph of one to three lines, sometimes up to one 
page, the name of the text was given together with information on the 
time and place where the holograph was written; the identity of the 
writer, and those who initiated or sponsored the making of it, specific 
circumstances and motives related to this pious deed, and on the wishes 
that those involved hoped to see fulfilment as a result of the 'merit' (NT 
/oun/ < Pali: pufifia) gained. They may also contain information of a 
technical kind, for the benefit of future readers of the holograph. Finally, 
there may be passages of a kind that suggest the scribes were giving 
expression to their own situation, including their emotional state — a 
feature rather unique to the Northern Thai tradition. These are the 
‘colophons' on which this study is focussing. 

It appears that early scholars of Pali literature generally dismissed the 
colophons written in the vernacular languages as inessential. Coedés 
(1966), to quote an eminent example, in his catalogue of Pali, Northern 
Thai and Siamese (Central Thai) Manuscripts kept at the Royal Library, 
Copenhagen, gives translations only of the concluding Pali words which 
are used to ‘seal off the text proper, contenting himself with giving a 
summary description of different areas of content that may be expected to 
be covered in the vernacular colophons, without hinting at the 
informational value contained in many of them. 

Nowadays, however, awareness has grown of the fact that the 
information contained in colophons can be of considerable importance. 
This holds true, for example, when manuscripts are evaluated for the 
editing of texts, especially so when the principles of textual criticism are 
to be applied.3! 

Furthermore, as far as manuscripts from Northern Thailand are 
concerned, the colophons also deserve attention as historical sources in 
their own right. In this respect, the Pali manuscripts from which the 


31 See for instance v. Hiniiber (1988: 7) who quotes an example where the editor of the 


Samyuttanikaya (L. Feer in his PTS edition of 1884), by not taking into 
consideration the information contained in the colophons of a manuscript that he 
used, overlooked a clear indication of the special importance of this source. 


28 Harald Hundius 


colophons presented in this study are taken, emerge as a special group due 
to their age and quality. 

About half of them are dated from or can, in the case of four torsi, be 
attributed with a high degree of certainty to the 15th—-16th centuries, an 
historical epoch when Lan Na — at that time still an independent 
kingdom — enjoyed a period of religious zest and cultural blossoming. The 
oldest among them thus bear witness to an important stage of Lan Na 
history, a period, however, from which written documents are rare and 
were, until not too long ago, understood to have survived exclusively in 
the form of epigraphy.32 The majority of the remaining manuscripts date 
from the middle of the 19th century, a time when, after more than two and 
a half centuries of war and internal unrest under Burmese domination, 
conditions once again became more conducive to cultural concerns, and 
literary traditions were revived with renewed zest. 


3.2 Content of the Colophons. 


In the following section, cultural and historical evidence contained in 
the colophons of the thirty Pali manuscripts under study, will be 
considered. 


3.2.1 The Purpose and Organization of Making Dhamma 
Manuscripts. 


In the colophons the impression is conveyed that the Dhamma 
scriptures are, indeed, accorded a central place in Northern Thai Buddhist 
tradition and ritual. The belief is illustrated that, if Buddhism is to be 
kept alive, the basic texts must be copied continually. 


"Written ... in support of the Excellent Teachings of Buddha 
so that they may stay for five thousand years ..." (15 [6]) 


is a motive which is, in one form or another, mentioned in most of the 
manuscripts. 

In the case of our Pali texts, the making of a holograph is very often 
initiated by a senior member of the Sangha. The manuscript is made 
either by using monastic funds (cf. 03; 05) or by joining with a lay-person 
wishing to make a donation. As the colophons show, in the early 19th 


32 See A 1, p. 1, footnote 1, supra. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 29 


century, the making of a manuscript was often a huge cooperative effort 
involving a monastic initiator (|muulasaddhaa, pathamamuulasaddhaa| 
or |"gau saddhaa|)*, a "leading lay supporter’ (NT/Pali: |upathambhaka| or 
|paccayadaayaka, °daayikaa|) from the lay community, often a dignitary 
(up to the Rulers of Nan and Phrae, as well as the King of Luang 
Prabang), and ‘all the members of the lay community’. Women donors, 
however, aS is interesting to note, are usually identified in reference to 
their husbands, uncles, or — in one case — to their father. 

The colophons do not give details on the preparation of the palm-leaves 
used for manuscripts.33 Writing, or to be more precise, the engraving of 
manuscripts, was usually organized in such away that individual members 
of the monastery or the lay community, in general former monks or 
novices, were asked to copy a ‘phuuk’ (fasciculus), or several 'phuuk', each. 

Obviously, it was a great honour — but at the same time an onerous 
task, and some degree of persuasion, or "social pressure" seem to have 
been applied. There is also evidence showing that a remuneration has been 
paid to the scribes.4 In some cases, an individual monk or abbot explicitly 
states that he did the writing all by himself; such statements convey the 
feeling of special responsibility on the part of the scribe, and, at the same 
time, may be taken as an indication of the importance, and the quality of 
the work. 

Evidence contained in the colophons thus leads to the conclusion that 
certain individuals played a special role in initiating and organizing the 
task, in motivating both the monastic and lay communities to cooperate 
in the making of manuscripts. 


3.2.2 Making Manuscripts as a Means to Acquiring Merit. 
There are constant references in the colophons showing that those 


involved in the making of 'Dhamma scriptures' — as initiator, sponsor, or 
scribe — could expect certain benefits in terms of their own balance of 





Cf. the Pali term 4dikammasadhaka 


33° For the technique of preparing palm-leaves, see Schuyler, in: JAOS, 29, 1908, pp. 
281-283, 

34 In our sources, a monetary reward |'gaa miiti|, is mentioned in two manuscripts only 
(29, 30), both written in AD 1869. The earliest evidence of a remuneration paid for 
the copying of manuscripts known up to now have been found in several colophons 
from the 16th c., published by v. Hiniiber 1987a. For details, see below, p. 44, 
foomote 42. See also v. Hiniiber (forthcoming) for more data on financial and 
economical aspects of the making of palm-leaf manuscripts. 


30 Harald Hundius 


‘bun’ (< P pufifia) and ‘kam’ (< P kamma), merit and demerit.35 


“May the writing of this Dhamma [manuscript] help to give 
support to myself until I eventually reach Nibbana" (28 [12]) 


is how one of our scribes expresses his hopes. In many cases these wishes 
are extended to cover close relatives: parents, brothers and sisters and — 
in one case — even teachers (15 [8]). One of the colophons written in 
Luang Prabang illustrates, in an imaginative way, the belief, also 
common in Northern Thailand, that merit can be transferred to the 
deceased as well (19 [4]). 


3.2.3 Aspirations for Results of Merit 


The wish most often mentioned in the colophons is for the "Three Kinds 
of Happiness, the ultimate goal being Nibbana" (see, for instance, 26 [1]) 
which means that the scribe asks for happiness during his present, and 
future lives in the World of Man (|miiiian gon|), in the Heavenly Worlds 
({miiiian "faa|), as well as during his eventual stay in the ‘World of 
Nibbana’ (|miiiian nibbaan|), the ‘Place of Immortality’, which is 
perceived as the ultimate goal.36 

Apart from this, many scribes also make wishes further specified. 
These often include progress on the path of moral development as denoted 
by Buddhist terms like attaining the Magga-phala (27 [2]) or "Path- 
Fruition"; being reborn with the consciousness of the "Three Noble Root 
Conditions" (27, [1]); or to be rewarded with the "Mundane" and 
Supermundane States" (08 [5]). Intelligence and wisdom — both in 
worldly and spiritual contexts — are also among the aspirations stated in 
several instances. Wishes for good health and "not to be reborn as a poor 
man" (27 [1], dating from AD 1759) rather represent an exception. 

What strikes the contemporary reader is the preponderance of spiritual 
and intellectual over material wishes that find expression in the 


35 Two particular texts, copies of which abound in the monasteries of the North, 


called|aanisonh "saan dhamm| ("The Benefits of Making [or Donating] Dhamma 
Manuscripts”), and |aanison khiiar dhammj ("The Benefits of Writing Dhamma 
Manuscripts”) illustrate in detail the rewards which can be expected in future lives, 
by actively contributing to the making of Dhamma manuscripts. 
36 1 am indebted to Hnaan Buntha Siphimchai, a longtime monk of a Chiang Mai 
monastery, for this information which is well confirmed also in literary sources such 
as |Gaddhanaama-Jaataka| (longer version). 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 31 


colophons: this seems to hold true for both lay-men and members of the 
Sangha, for men and women alike. Any distinction on the basis of the 
wishes expressed appears to be impossible, judging from our sources. 

One factor accounting for this remarkable degree of consensus may be 
that the majority, if not all, of the scribes shared the same educational 
background, and had undergone a period of life in a monastery. Those 
among them who were not members of the Sangha at the time of writing 
the manuscripts can usually be identified, by the terms |hnaan| or |"nooy| 
preceding their names, as being former monks or novices.37 They may not 
have renounced material aspirations altogether, but may have curbed them 
and in any case, may have come to understand that they belong to a 
different plane.38 


3.2.4 Social Aspects of the Making of Manuscripts. 


With regard to the distribution of work, on the one hand, and benefits, 
on the other, the colophons reveal an interesting pattern: in the making of 
manuscripts, lay-men and members of the Sangha, commoners and 
members of the nobility co-operate closely for a common cause. They may 
contribute in various ways, by helping to prepare or provide the writing 
material, by being a full-fledged ‘sponsor’, which included the procuring of 
payment (/k&e kaa muu/) for the scribes, by doing the writing itself, or by 
initiating and helping to organize the task, like the ‘leading monastic 
supporters’ as they are called in the colophons — yet there is no indication 
to be found of any tendency to differentiate the value of these different 
contributions in correlation to the merit acquired. 

Focussing on the manual task of engraving the letters into the palm- 
leaves, the custom of dividing up each work into separate ‘phuuk' or 
fasciculi to be written by different people deserves attention, since it is a 
way of sharing both the burden and the benefits, in terms of 'merit' and 





37 Correspondingly, Northern Thai has a special expression to denote male grown-ups 
who have never received ordination, as a Bhikkhu or a Samanera, and spent some 
time in a monastery, as "raw men" (/khon dip/). 

38 In an anthropological study of present-day Thai society, the suggestion is made that 

everyday concerns, like securing "good fortune" and "protection", are generally dealt 

with on the plane of spirits (cf. Mulder 2.1985:40, and passim). In fact, numerous 
indications can be found in Thai literature which appear to be in line with such an 
interpretation; see for instance Sunthgn Phu's travel poems, in particular his Nirat 

Miiang Kling, composed in 1807. Cf. Hundius 1976a: 50 (stanza 5); 51 (stanza 17); 

54 (stanza 54), and passim. 


32 Harald Hundius 


social recognition. It appears as a remarkable way of giving members of 
all social strata, including the farming population (but with the exception 
of the slaves, as may be assumed) an opportunity to cooperate directly in 
the most noble task of preserving the second part of the Triple Gem, the 
Dhamma, and thereby relate to it in a most intimate way — even though 
most of the scribes may not have understood the meaning of the words 
they were copying. 


3.2.5 The Colophons as Media of Communication and 
Personal Expression. 


It is one of the conspicuous features of the Lan Na tradition and, 
needless to say, extremely helpful for research — that the vast majority of 
the manuscripts are precisely dated, as well as marked with their place of 
origin. This can not be taken for granted: an exactly and reliably dated 
manuscript is not at all common, for example, in Northeast Thailand, 
Laos, or the Shan States. Obviously, the Northern Thai custom of adding 
such personal notes in Northern Thai language to the Dhamma texts 
contributed directly to the high frequency with which such information 
about time and origin of a manuscript have been recorded by the scribes 
since ancient times. 

Reading the colophons, with their often meticulous way of rendering 
the day and time when the writing was completed, often in accordance to 
three different calendrical systems (see, for instance, the colophons of our 
manuscript nos. 29, 30, written in Nan) one cannot help feeling that this 
was considered an historical moment by the writer. The wording 
frequently conveys a feeling of elevation the scribe may have experienced 
for having part in their production. In the simple style of colloquial 
Northern Thai, or in humorously elaborated verse form (cf. 28 [7, 8]), 
many of our colophons manage to preserve the mood which prevailed at 
the moment when their writers' task was accomplished: be it the joyous 
mood of "spreading loving-kindness among the villagers", the happiness 
of having spent Lent with a meritorious task in a monastery of special 
charm, or the solitary feeling in a remote area, inundated by the August 
rains which inspired one of our scribes to compose a poetical line: they 
definitely invest the holographs with a personal dimension. We can 
virtually see the farmer in his bamboo hut, in the light of a small oil lamp, 
engraving the letters on to the palm-leaf pages (cf. 30 [1]); and even 
though this is only mentioned to explain why the writing is not as neat 
and regular as it should be, the scribe, through his association with the 
Dhamma text, nevertheless manages to transcend the narrow limits of his 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 33 


own life. 

Obviously, the opportunity to leave a personal mark in the Dhamma 
text and to link one’s own name to it and thus save it from the law of 
impermanence "as long as palm-leaves last”, must have functioned as an 
emotional reward, or compensation, for the painstaking effort of writing 
it.39 At the same time, this phenomenon might be seen as just another 
strain of the well-known tendency in Northern Thai culture favouring 
personal expression, for which courting dialogues in narrative literature, 
as well as the former custom of /28w sdaw/ with its extemporizing 
exchange of witty courting verses between the younger people of either 
sex, bear ample evidence.40 


3.2.6 Remarks Pertaining to the Quality of the Copying 
Work. 


The colophons, which reflect the specific situation at the time the 
writing of a manuscript was accomplished, naturally were the most 
suitable medium to carry information for the use of the prospective reader 
of the holograph. 

In the present context, remarks pertaining to the quality of the 
manuscript deserve special attention. Scribes who were not very familiar 
with the Pali language or the system of writing Pali texts were of course 
aware of possible mistakes and errors in their copying work and, 
therefore, frequently admonish the reader that the text should be used 
attentively and with a critical attitude since there might be inaccuracies 
due to the writer's limited knowledge. 

Although some of the latter remarks may be motivated by a tendency 
to make understatements, which is a common feature of traditional 
politeness in Thailand, it would certainly not be wise to discard all of 
them as mere 'polite formulas’. For there are also a number of scribes who 





39 This may also explain why this custom has survived to the present: most notebook 
copies of Northern Thai manuscripts, made in 1972-1974, were closed with the 
exact time (hour, day, month, year, etc) when the copy of any one phuuk was 
completed, and by such small personal notes. Examples can also be found in 
contemporary printed editions of Northern Thai literature; see, for instance Singkha 
Wannasai's epilogue in his edition of the classical Lan Na poem |Mandharaa maa 
rop Jiian ‘Hmai] (Wannasai 1979). 

40 Examples can be found in Roongruangsri 3.1981. In this context, it may also be 

recalled that the genre of the travel poetry (nirat ) which is unique in classical Thai 

literature for its personal character, is believed to have originated in Lan Na, where 
it has remained highly popular as a literary genre until today. 


A1ATQiG ATUNGLUS 


imply that their text may be used with confidence since "Monk X wrote it 
all by himself", and in quite a few colophons it is explicitly stated that the 
text had been thoroughly checked with the original (see, for instance, 15 
[5]; 23 [5]; [10)]). In some cases, even details of the time and place of 
origin of the original are given. In a number of manuscripts stemming 
obviously from one and the same scribe (05, 07, 08), after finishing the 
laborious work of copying a phuuk of a Pali work, rather harsh 
exhortations are given to future users: 


",... whoever takes [this manuscript out for] worship, ... do not 
add any writing on it, do not [try to] make any corrections; if [you 
do] not follow [my advice, you will] be [reborn as] a peta (“hungry 
ghost"). After worship, see to it that it is brought back again 
quickly, [for] hard work it was, indeed, to make it; so do take good 
care!" (05 [2}). 


3.2.7 Evidence on Historical Personalities and Places. 
3.2.7.1 The Venerable Gruu Paa Kaficana from Phrae. 


Eight of the most valuable and rare Pali manuscripts under study here 
refer to a senior monk, the Venerable Gruu Paa Kaficana, probably a 
native of Phrae. Belonging to the "Forest-dwelling" (Arafifiavasin) group 
of the Theravadins whose members follow stricter rules of monastic 
discipline, this monk-scholar became, in the course of time, a highly 
charismatic religious leader whose fame spread throughout the entire Lan 
Na region, and well beyond into the Laotian Kingdom of Luang Prabang. 

By his initiative and under his leadership, his home monastery, 
|Aaraam 'Suun "Hmeer} (today: Wat Sung Men), rose to become a centre 
of Pali and Buddhist studies. Manuscripts were systematically collected 
and numerous copying campaigns covering Phrae, Nan, Chiang Mai, 
Chiang Saen, Rahaeng, and Luang Prabang were pursued. As the 
colophons translated in the present monograph testify, Gruu Paa Kaficana 
succeeded in mobilizing large numbers of people, from ordinary villagers to 
members of the ruling Royalty in his own and in neighbouring countries, 
to join in the meritorious endeavors of |"saan dhamm|, i.e. producing 
manuscript copies of Buddhist scriptures. 

As can be inferred from the colophons of the manuscripts, the peak of 
the copying efforts lay in the 1830s. In 1835-36 no less than 242 palm-leaf 
manuscripts comprising 2,825 phuuk were copied in Luang Prabang 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 35 


alone,4! for the better part scholarly texts like (sub-) commentaries on 
canonical and post-canonical Pali literature, Pali Grammar, a great many 
of which are in bilingual (Pali/ NT or /Lao) versions, including numerous 
works of the indigenous learned tradition, for instance a complete Nissaya 
version of the Pafiffasa-Jataka.42 The charisma of Gruu Paa Kaficana 
was so extraordinary indeed that the manuscripts collected under his 
aegis have been so well preserved by successive generations that they have 
been able to survive to the present day in a well-kept condition. 
Comprising well over 15,000 phuuk, this collection represents the largest 
one known to exist in a single place in Northern Thailand.43 

Although still very much alive in the memory of the people of Sung 
Men, this eminent monk-scholar of the North has remained virtually 
unknown outside the region. While little is known about his life up to 
now, references in the manuscripts suggest that he will emerge as one of 
the most important rebuilders and preservers of Northern Thai culture and 
literary tradition since the expulsion of the Burmese. His influence may 
well have reached even further: it is tempting to speculate that there may 
have been a political dimension behind the efforts of restoring the Lan Na 
literary tradition, jointly undertaken by the Rulers of the Northern Thai 
principalities, and the King of Luang Prabang and one of his sons, the 


41 These figures are mentioned in a stone inscription set up at Wad Wijuur (mostly 
written as Vat Visoun or Vixun), Luang Prabang, in CS 1198, Year of the Monkey 
|pii rwaay san| (AD 1836) to commemorate the accomplishment of his historic 99- 
manuscript copying endeavour. In the inscription which has been published, in 
facsimile, transliteration and French translation, by Father Schmitt in: Mission 
PAVIE, II, 1898:357-363, it is stated in detail how much money was spent, and by 
whom, for the making of the manuscripts: the King of Luang Prabang (i.e. 
Mangthathurat, r. 1817-1836, called |Mandhaa| in the inscription) is said to have 
contributed 85 |"tan| of silver, the |"Cau Raajjawon| spent purified silver (jnéén 
"laan|) weighing 18,202 Baht, = 7 |'kaa|, 2 |daan|; and the lay people of Phrae 
centributed silver weighing 1 |'jan|, 10 |taamltin|, 10 {sliim|. For the gilding of the 
palm-leaves 2,800 gold leaves were used. The King of Luang Prabang sponsored the 
making of 34 bundles, the Prince Raajjawon 177, and 31 were made through 
contributions from the people of Phrae. (Father Schmitt's transliteration and 
translation, admirable as they remain after almost a century, need a few corrections). 
42 Among the palm-leaf manuscripts kept up to the present in the library of Wat Sung 
Men, there is also a list of the works (NT |"seen dhamm|) which were copied in 
Luang Prabang. An edition of the Lan Na version of the "Fifty Apocryphal Jatakas" 
is presently in preparation by a research team of the Department of Thai, Chiang 
Mai University, supported by a grant from the Toyota Foundation, Japan. 
43 The holdings of Wat Sung Men have recently been recorded on microfilm under the 
"Preservation of Northern Thai Manuscripts Project" mentioned above. 


36 Harald Hundius 


"Cau Raajjawon, under the aegis of a highly revered Lan Na monk.“4 
3.2.7.2 ‘Daa "Sooy. 


Another historic centre of Pali Buddhist literature, mentioned in the 
colophons of the oldest manuscripts under study, is a place called |'Daa 
"Sooy| (NT /taa s59j/). This township has not yet been located; one may 
only surmise that it must have been a settlement situated on the banks of a 
river, probably the Ping River.* ‘Daa "Sooy, according to what can be 
inferred from the colophons of a number of manuscripts dating from the 
end of the 15th to the second half of the 16th c., appears to have 
developed into a prosperous township, possessing a number of monasteries 
where many important Pali manuscripts were made through monetary 
donations provided by apparently well-to-do citizens.45 The highest 
ranking Buddhist dignitary of this township bore, according to ancient 
Northern tradition, the title Mahasangharaja.46 

No archaeological vestiges or any historical evidence referring to 'Daa 
"Seoy have as yet been found.47 In addition, a considerable number of 
villages and monasteries is mentioned in the colophons, only a few of 





44 Cf. for instance the joint sponsoring of manuscript 19 (see below) by the Ruler of 
Phrae, the King of Luang Prabang, and his son, the "Cau Raajjawon of Luang 


Prabang in which the Venerable Gruu Paa Kajicana may have played a mediating 
role. 


* See 05 (Post-script to Remarks), Part B, below. 


45 This may be inferred from what is indicated in the colophons of a number of 


manuscripts from 'Daa "Sgoy presently kept at the Siam Society, Bangkok, and 
described by O. v. Hiniiber (in: JSS, 75, 1987, pp. 49 foll); mention is made, for 
instance, of amounts of money spent for their making: in one (no. 55, CS 893 [AD 
1531]) the sum of “one hundred |Adén|" (/pén phatcaj 1S0j n&p/) is mentioned; on 
several phuuk of another holograph (no. 61.), a split-up sum is given, viz. fifty /baat/ 
for the writing (/kaa laaj muv/), one /féan/ for the palm-leaves (/kaa laan/). In another 
colophon (front cover of no. 54., dated CS 923 [AD 1561}), the scribe speaks of 
gilded manuscript caskets /hiit kham/ made for a monastery named /wit paa maj/; 
the common tenor in all colophons of manuscripts from ‘Daa "Soggy is clearly that of 
a rather prosperous community. 
46 As far as the ecclesiastical status and authority of a “Mahasangharaja" in the 
context of 16th century Norther Thai rural society is concerned, this position cannot 
be compared, of course, with that of the "Supreme Patriarch", the highest-ranking 
Buddhist dignitary, of present-day Thailand; it may, perhaps, have been comparable 
to that of a /ciw khand? tambon/ of today. 


47 For more details, see Part B, Remarks to 04, 05, below. 


ine Cotopnons of thirty Pait manuscripts from Northern Thailand 37 


which can be identified on the basis of sources available today. (See 
Index D and E, where places not yet identified are marked with *). 

Monastic and administrative titles and ranks, as well as names of 
historic personalities referred to in the colophons (and listed in Index C), 
will be of interest for further studies into the regional history of Northern 
Thailand. 

Future research will certainly have to take into account the wealth of 
data contained in the colophons of thousands of manuscripts which have 
been made or will soon become available through microfilm recordings 
being undertaken by various institutions. 


3.3. Composition of Variant Colophons — an Example. 


Unlike manuscripts in neighbouring areas, such as Northeastern 
Thailand or Laos, for example, manuscripts of the Lan Na tradition 
usually contain several colophons; often each phuuk of a respective set will 
be furnished with one. This practice, apart from providing space for 
communication and personal expression, also offers advantages of a 
technical kind. Since palm-leaf manuscripts, unlike medieval books in the 
West, are not firmly fixed to their cover, but the seperate phuuk or 
fasciculi can be removed individually — for recitation or reading out to 
the lay people during Buddhist congregations, for worship, as well as for 
study — a separate colophon for each phuuk must therefore have proved 
very practical for the purpose of identification. 

Colophons belonging to the same holograph may differ with regard to 
contents, but in many cases they are very similar, if not almost identical, 
especially when written by the same scribe. Notwithstanding, they may 
convey important clues for a correct interpretation of texts written in 
archaic style or idiomatic language. 

Sometimes, the exact meaning of a particular phrase becomes fully 
clear only when other variants are available which express the same idea, 
but use a different wording. The following short analysis, based on the 
text of six closely related colophons taken from four manuscripts that were 
written by a certain scribe in the 16th century for two monasteries in 'Daa 
"Sooy, May serve as an example: 


1. 05 Jataka (Pannasanipata) AD 1550, colophon (2) 

2. O7 Jataka (Sattatinipata), same year, (1) 

3. 08 Samyuttanikaya (Sagathavagga) AD 1549, (2), (5), (6) 

4. Samantapasadika (54, Collection of the Siam Society) AD 1561, 
Front Cover (see v. Hiniiber 1987:48). 


38 Harald Hundius 


The colophons may be broken down into the following components: 


(1) ( The Pali text of +) title 
a. Pannasanipata 
b. Sattatinipata 
c. Sagathavagga 
d. Samantapasadika 


(2) (clf + } demonstrative 
a. an “nii “this” 
b. “ni " 


(3) Subject (title or name of spp/don) + Predicate "to make" 
a. mahaasangharaajaa "cau + "saan 
(b..., C..., d..., etc.) 


(4) Date: "in the Year of (name of Cyclical Year)" 
a. nai pii kod sed 
(b..., C..., etc.) 


(5) Cilasakaraja + "dai + (number) + numerative ( + 144) 
a. culasakraaja "dai 912 tuua 14a 
(b..., C..., di.., ete.) 


Translation of (la) -— (5a): 
"This [manuscript of the] Panndsanipata was made at the behest of the 
Venerable Mahasangharaja in the Year of the Dog, CS 912". 


(6) a. “phuu dai “Whoever ..." 
b. kullaputt ton dai “Whoever {among you], sons of good 
family..." 
c. puggala ton dai "Whoever..." 
(7) a.au___ bai prason “takes out for worship ..." 
b. au prason “takes [out for] worship ..." 
c.au bai prason "ldaw “having taken out for worhip ..." 


d. yiitim bai prason "daw “having borrowed out for worship ..." 


(8) a. ‘po “ruu attha 144 sapdaa "céan "daa “not truly knowing the 
meaning and wording ..." 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 39 


(9) 


(10) 


(11) 


(12) 


(13) 


(14) 


(15) 


{16) 


(17) 


b. ‘po "ruu attha 144 sapdaa “caan “not clearly knowing 
the meaning and wording.” 


‘yaa nap pldan siia "do not make corrections ..." 
‘yaa nap plaan siia ‘daa 
‘yaa plaan siia ‘daa " 

"go 'yaa plaan siia ‘daa , 


eo TP 


‘yaa nap khiian 'sai thaam "do not add any writing on it..." 
‘gQ ‘yaa nap khiian ‘sai thaiim ‘daa : 
c. ‘yaa khiian ‘sai théam 


o:.2 


a. ‘po dii "(that is an] evil [deed]...” 
b.'poau "Lif you] do not follow [my advice]..." 


. peen phreet "[you will be reborn] as a peta ("hungry ghost ...") 
. peen phreet jaam 


of 


a. prason "léiw “after worship ..." 

b. 'miitia prason “laaw . 

a. yia blan au maa ‘son ‘dan ‘kau ‘daa "see to it that it is 
brought back again quickly ..." 

b. yia blan au maa ‘son "wai ‘dan ‘kau (= a.) 

c. yia blan maa ‘son (= a.) 

a. "saan yaak nak ‘kaa "it was very hard to make it ...” 

b. "saan yaak nak ‘kaa naa jlaa " (= a.) 

c. "saan yaak nak ‘kaa laa " (= a.) 

a. jaan “duuay diiiin "do take good care!" 

b. 'gooy jaan "duuay diitin " 


a 


.'gooy jaan “duuay ‘daa " 


a. “hiili pufi caamréén ‘ka4d “phuu peen daayaka "nan ‘tog “dau 
nibbaan diitin 


"may the merit [acquired by sponsoring the making of this 
manuscript] contribute to the donor's eventual attainment of 
Nibbana.” 


40 


Put 


Harald Hundius 


b. ‘cun peen pracaiy “gaam juu daayaka “phuu "saan “nan ‘too 
"dau th66n amatanibbaan d66n 


"may [this meritorious deed] contribute to the donor's eventual 
attainment of Nibbana, the place of Immortality." 


c. ‘cun "hii peen pracaiy ‘kéa an "dai lookiya aa 
lookuttarasampatti ‘kaa upaasikaa “phuu "saan "nii diiiin rau ‘go 
anumoodanaa "duuay 1aa 


“may [the merit acquired by sponsoring the making of this 
manuscript] contribute to the laywoman-donor's attainment of the 
Mundane as well as Supermundane states. May I also express my 
sympathetic joyfulness [for this meritorious deed]!" 


into formulas, the composition of the variant colophons may be 


seen clearly: 


05 (2): 


la + (3 - 5) + 6a + 7b + 8a + 10a + 9c + 11b + 12a + 13b + 14a + 15b4+ 


16a 


07 (1): 


(1b - 5) + 6a + 7a + 10a + 9b + 11a + 12b + 13a + 14a + 15a+ 16b 


08 (2): 


(1c - 5) + 6b + 7d +14a + 15c + 16a +4 17a 


08 (5): 


(lc [+ SN] - 5) + 6b + 7a + 9a + 10b + 11a + 12b + 13a + 14b + 15a + 
16b + 17c 


08 (6): 


(lc -5) + 6a + 7b + 8b + 9a + 10c + 11a + 12b + 16b + 17b 


Samantapasadika , AD 1561, Front Cover: 


1d+3 


+ (...) + 6c + 7d + 14c + 1l6c. 


As may be seen from the above analysis — to cite but two examples — 
the identification of components (7a,b) or (lla,b) as condensed 
conditional clauses (no conjunction is used!) would have been much more 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 


41 


difficult, or, at least, remained doubtful, had the general idea not been 


expressed several times and in various wordings.“8 


48 


Apart from a particularly condensed style which is characteristic for many of the 


older colophons, further problems arise from obsolete words or expressions, in our 


example, for instance, the following ones: 


|prason| "to worship"; |jaam| "to try"; |nap| (lit.:) "to count"; |yia] (lit.:) "to make" 
(cf. German:"mach, daB du sie [die Handschrift] schleunigst wieder zuriickbringst!"); 
|sapdaa| < Skt/P sabda, sadda "sound, word, grammar": a form up to now only found 
in a number of colophons from ‘Daa "Sogy; here translated as "wording" (as 


suggested by O. v. Hiniiber who also identified the form as such). 


42 Harald Hundius 


PART B: THE TEXTS 
1. Technical Remarks. 
1.1 The Transliteration. 


The transliteration system used for the edition of the colophons is 
introduced and explained in detail in HUNDIUS 199049, where a collection 
of variant writings and allographs comprising some 250 forms is given to 
be used as a reference for further research. The Romanization introduced 
there and applied in the present study is not conceived as a definite or 
codified, fixed system, but rather as a practical tool for handling the 
multitude of primary sources written in Northern Thai and related 
languages and scripts that are becoming accessible at present. 

The way of differentiating between variant writings found in the 
manuscripts, elaborate as it may seem, is considered of paramount 
importance, in order to maintain direct access to the original writings, so 
as to avoid evidence of linguistic or historical relevance being eliminated 
or blurred before research on the texts has even begun. The allograph 
inventory as set up in the above-mentioned study is, of course, incomplete 
and open for expansion. Hopefully others will find it useful and develop it 
further. 

Basically, the transliteration used here is an extension or rather an 
elaborated version of the system used by G. C@DES in his Recueil des 
Inscriptions du Siam (vol. I, Bangkok, 1924) which has been adopted and 
slightly altered by subsequent scholars, for instance A.B. Griswold, and 
D.K. WYATT (in his edition of the Crystal Sands Chronicle of Nakhon Si 
Thammarat, 1975), as well as S. EGEROD (1961) who, by making further 
adaptations, used it for  historical-comparative studies in Tai 
Dialectology, including CT and NT. 

Since these systems were not adequate enough to come to grips with 
the specific problems involved in Romanizing Northern Thai sources (as 
outlined in PART A 2, supra), the system used in the present study was 
developed. It is designed to meet the double requirement 





49 This study of the phonological and writing system of Northern Thai, entitled 
"Phonologie und Schrift des Nordthai", resulted from a research project aiming at 
establishing foundations for the study of Northern Thai Literature ("Grundlagen zur 
Erschlies-sung der Literatur Nordthailands"). Research work was conducted, with 
the support of Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), from 1977 to 1980, at Kiel 
University (Seminar fiir Orientalistik, Abteilung fiir Indologie; Director: Professor 
Dr. Bernhard K6lver). 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 43 


(1) to preserve the evidence contained in the originals, 
and, at the same time, 
(2) to facilitate the identification of the written words. 


In order to achieve the most functional solution for the structurally 
different subsystems of consonants, vowels, and tone markation, these are 
treated differently. 


1.1.1 Consonants. 


1.1.1.1 General Principles. 


§ 1 Conforming with common usage, the consonant symbols of the 
Northern Thai script are transliterated according to their value in 
Pali or Sanskrit.5° 


§ 2 Additional symbols created for the representation of consonant 
phonemes particular for Northern Thai are generally differentiated 
against the symbols from which they are derived by underlining.5! 


§ 3. Allographic rendering of word-final consonants, as well as 
significant form variants, are marked by index numbers. 


1.1.1.2 Rationale. 


§ 4 The practical advantage of basing the transliteration on the Pali 
values is that they are reflecting an historical stage of sound 
development which is surmised to have been common to all or the 
majority of Tai languages and dialects.52 





50 There are a number of symbols, however, which perform double functions: they are 


used for (1) representing consonants, and (2) for the representation of NT vowels (viz. 
lya|, |wal, and the "vowel carrier" [the equivalent of CT /?o0 ?dan/]; for details, see 
below). When used in their second function, those symbols are rendered as part of the 
vowel transliteration. 
31 Including the NT equivalent of CT /to0 taw/, since |t| is reserved for the equivalent of 
CT /doo dék/ which is not represented in the Dhamma Script (where jd| is used 
instead), but is in others, e.g. the |Fak Khaam| and the |Daiy Nidees| scripts as well 
as in the traditional secular Laotian (and Northeastern Thai) alphabets often called 
|Daiy “Nogy| Script. 


52 Cf. Brown 2.1985, Gedney 1967, and especially Li 1977. 


44 Harald Hundius 


§ 5 The symbols used in the transliteration, since they reflect an 
historical sound stage, contain a clear distinction between 
consonants belonging to what is called, in Thai linguistics, the 
“high", "middle", and "low" consonants. 

These groups, of which the high and low have now coalesced 
phonetically, were obviously, at a time in distant history, once 
distinct, the "high" being used to represent voiceless aspirated, the 
"middle" pre-glottalized, and the "low" voiced consonant sounds. 
The distinction between symbols belonging to these three classes, 
which is needed for the identification of the tones, is thus implicitly 
given in the transliteration. 


§ 6 Basing the transliteration of the consonants on the Pali value offers 
the advantage of providing a common base of reference for a broad 
variety of Tai languages and dialects whose subsequent sound 
developments led into different directions. Against this background, 
it is an unambiguous, and at the same time, the most functional way 
of handling them. 


1.1.1.3. Specific Information. 


§ 7 The aksara |va| of the Pali alphabet which is maintained when 
transcribing Pali texts, is rendered as |wa| when it is used for 
writing NT /w/. 


§ 8 The “vowel carrier" symbol (equivalent to CT /f00 ?aap/) is 
represented by |zero|, for in the Romanized text it is implicitly 
indicated by the spaces between words: any transliterated word 
beginning with a vowel symbol can therefore be understood to be 
written with the "vowel carrier" symbol in the NT text.°3 


§ 9 Final (i.e. syllable closing) consonants are, in the script under study 
here, regularly written as subscripts, either in their regular form or 
as simplified secondary graphs (ligatures). This device, indicating 
word boundaries by the use of positional variants, is matched in the 
transliteration implicitly by the spacing of words; therefore basic 





53 In (loan) words written with a Pali initial, the Romanized vowels are underlined; see 
§ 26, below. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 45 


and secondary graphs are rendered by a single symbol. 


§10 Deviations from this rule (for example the use of regular linear 
symbols [with or without the NT equivalent of the Skt virama], 
superscripts or diacritica instead of subscripts) which may render 
the writing ambiguous, are marked by index numbers. 


1.1.2 Vowels. 
1.1.2.1 General Principles. 


The major innovation of the Romanization system introduced here 
concerns the treatment of the vowels, which, as stated by D.K. WYATT 
(1975:xi) "have never been provided for to the full satisfaction of all" in 
the framework of existing transliteration systems. 


§11 NT vowel writings, whether consisting of a single symbol or of a 
configuration of elements, are generally rendered according to their 
phonological value according to the present spoken language.>4 


§12 For Romanization symbols are used, as far as possible, that are not 
identical with those of the phonematic notation, but may allow for 
an association with the sound represented (a suggestion made by S. 
Egerod), e.g. |ii, iiti| for /u, ua/, |6, 66] for /e, 90/, |a, 44| for /e, ee/, 
10, 0Q| for /2, 99/ etc. 


§13 The requirement to differentiate between allographic forms, which 
abound in Northern Thai manuscripts, is met by the use of index 
numbers. Basic writings which were identified as quasi-standard in 
a sample of representative documents of different periods and 
locations are set up as "graphemes” and Romanized accordingly, i.e. 
without number, while variant writings or “allographic forms" are 
marked with an index number starting from .2 upwards, relating to a 
reference list of allographic writings collected in HUNDIUS 1990: 215 
foll.55 To give an example, the adhortative particle /t8?/ which would 


54 While the phonological subsystems of consonants and vowels are more or less 
identical among Northern Thai (sub)dialects, minor differences do exist between the 
tones (see 1.3, below). The present study is geared to the Nan dialect. As far as 
vowels in closed live syllables are concerned, see § 24, below. 


55 The graphemes were established after an evaluation of a broad cross-section of data 


46 Harald Hundius 


tum as |deidah, deidah, deid, deid, deiddah, deiddah| etc., if 
transliterated according to the Pali (or Sanskrit) value of each of its 
graphic elements, will be rendered as |d6, d62, dés, dd., d&,, dés| etc. 
in the present system.°6 


1.1.2.2 Rationale. 


§14 Using a phonological basis for the Romanization appears to be the 
most appropriate way of dealing with NT vowel writings, especially 
in view of the complex graphemes with their multifunctional use of 
certain symbols and graphic elements. 


§15 This approach offers the advantage of Romanizations which are 
close to present (and, one may add, past) language reality, and 
consequently, relatively easy to read.5? 


§16 In Romanizing NT vowel graphemes, the use of index numbers 
appears to be the most economical way of differentiating between 
allographic writings which include mutual overlappings between 
forms which should have been differentiated and used consistently, 





material, including manuscripts from the 15th to the 20th centuries, epigraphical 
documents, several traditional primers as well as more recent textbooks. Since the 
system has been set up for a practical purpose, i.e. as a tool for future editing of 
important primary sources, the graphemes are generally those writings which occur 
most frequently in a fair majority of carefully written manuscripts, most of which 
date from the 19th century. 
56 The "atomistic" approach of transliterating Tai vowels, introduced, as it appears, 
by Father Schmitt at the end of the 19th century, though logically consistent in 
itself, has a number of serious drawbacks. As the above example illustrates, the 
transliterations are sometimes difficult to read; furthermore, diacritica which are 
mostly used multifunctionally in Northern Thai manuscripts (cf. Hundius 1990: 154- 
5) cannot be rendered adequately; essential and insignificant graphic elements are 
treated equally, to name but a few. Its basic weakness, however, lies in the fact that 
the transliterated graphs have no relationship to Tai phonology. 
57 The advantage gained seems not to be counterweighed by historical considerations: 
according to the present state of knowledge in the field of historical phonology (see, 
for instance, Brown 2.1985, Li 1977, Egerod 1961), it may be safely assumed that 
the vowel system of Norther Thai has undergone only limited change during the 
past five to six centuries from which written sources have come down to us. This 
change has been mainly confined to the "waxing and waning" of vowel length and 
the monophthongization of /ia, ua, ua/ to /e(e), a(2), o(0)/ respectively. For details see 
Hundius 1990:21foll; cf. also Hartmann 1976. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 47 


if "text-book" rules were to be applied, so as to avoid ambiguity. 


§17 An additional advantage of using index numbers is the fact that the 
list of allographic variants can be expanded ad libitum, so as to 
accommodate additional forms that may be identified in the future. 


§18 Another advantage lies in the possibility that in circumstances 
where the need to preserve, or record, details of the original writing 
does not exist, the use of index numbers can be reduced or totally 
disposed of without affecting the identification of the phoneme, or 
lexeme, respectively. Such a "broad" Romanization is used, for 
instance, in the present study (Part A, and in the translations and 
"Remarks" of Part B) for proper names mentioned in the colophons 
(which are transliterated in Part B according to the "narrow" 
system). Titles of literary works, names of historical persons etc. are 
treated in the same way. 


1.1.2.3. Specific Information. 


§19 By analogy to the phonematic notation, vowels interpreted as long 
are transliterated by double symbols; including, for the sake of 
convenience — and by analogy to the NT writing system where long 
diphthongs are separated from short ones — the first parts of the 
(phonetically long) diphthongs, viz. iia] representing NT /ia/, |iiiia| 
(faa/), and |uua| (/ua/) whose short variants are accordingly rendered 
as |ia| (/ia?/), |iia| (/ea?/), Jua| (/ua?/). 


§20 Written long vowels in closed “live syllables", ie. those ending in a 
continuant (some of which have been shortened secondarily under 
conditions determined by tonal influences), are maintained as long, 
e.g. |peen| /pén/ "to be", {nddn| /nen/ silver", |"togn| /t5p/ “must”, 
etc., as well as |-aam| representing /-am/. 


§21 |wa| (in Pali texts: |va|), when used for representing NT /ua/, is 
written |uual. 


§22 Correspondingly, Skt/ Pali |ya| is rendered |iia| when representing 
fia/. 


§23 The NT equivalent of CT /aj md4j muan/ which is occasionally used 
in ancient manuscripts, is rendered |aii|. 


48 Harald Hundius 


§24 Complementarily used allographs (positional variants), like the ones 
used for syllable final, and for interconsonantal position, 
respectively, are indicated implicitly, by word boundaries (cf. § 9, 
supra). 


§25 In the case of “dead syllables", i.e. those ending in /-p, -t, -k /, and 
/-2/, where short and long vowels are crosswisely correlated with 
different tones, vowels are consistently differentiated as to their 
length, so as to allow for a correct identification of the tone. An 
ambiguous form like written |k66d|, for example, must be interpreted 
either as /kdot/ “to be born" or as /kat/ “to intercept" etc. If the 
context leaves no doubt that the first is meant, it would be rendered 
|k66d|, if the second one is meant, it would be written |k6,d| (here 
the index number is used to indicate that in the original the symbol 
normally representing a long vowel is written). 


§26 Underlining of certain vowels (especially syllable final |-a|, but also 
word initial |i-|, |u-| etc.) is used to indicate that the vowel writing 
as found in the original manuscript is following the rules for Pali, 
instead of those for NT. The same applies for opposite cases, i.e. 
when, for example, the NT graph |oo| is used for writing |o| in a 
Pali text. 


1.1.3 Tones. 


Since tone indication in Northern Thai orthography, as found in the 
manuscripts, is marked by the same degree of inconsistency as in the case 
of vowels, a similar, though simpler treatment is applied. 


§27 The principle of preserving the evidence of the original is adhered to, 
while, at the same time, an interpretation of the tonal phoneme is 
given. Such an interpretation is often necessary for an identification 
of the lexeme. 


§28 The tonal phoneme considered to be the correct one in the context 
of a given word (or syllable) is marked by the respective tone marker 
before the lexeme, whereas the actual tone markation found in the 
manuscript, if different, is written after the transliterated word. 


§29 Symbols used are, in accordance with Thai usage, |'|, |"|, and 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 49 


|zero|, or an elevated |°|, respectively; |zero| before a given lexeme 
indicates that no tone mark should be written for correct realization; 
an elevated dot or |°| after the lexeme is used to convey to the reader 
that in the original, contrary to the rules of orthography, no tone 
mark was written. 


NB: {zero| after a given lexeme indicates, in accordance with § 28, that 
the writing found in the original is identical with the writing 
considered as correct by the editor (and noted before the 
transliterated word). 


1.2 Note on the Phonematic Notation. 


The phonematic transcription used in the present study is a slightly 
modified version of the system introduced for NT by S. EGEROD (1957) 
and Mary R. HAAS (1958) which has been used, for instance, by S. 
EGEROD (1971) and V. BRUN (1976) in their editions of Northern Thai 
texts (s. Bibliography). 

Unlike the HAAS-System, syllable final occlusives are interpreted as 
/-p, -t, -k/ ( instead of /-b, -d, -g/), and the high back unrounded vowels 
are written /a/, /au/ instead of /y/, /yy/. The corresponding diphthong is 
written /aa/ instead of /ya/. 


1.3. Note on the Pronunciation. 
1.3.1 General Remarks. 


Consonants and vowels are generally pronounced similar to their CT 
cognates; with most speakers, however, /kh-/, sounds more like the 
fricative [x]. Some vowels, especially /e, ee/ tend to be nasalized. While 
the phonological structure of the tone systems of Tai Yuan (sub-) dialects 
is basically identical, slight differences are to be observed in the 
pronunciation between major subdialects like those of Nan, Phrae, Chiang 
Mai, Lamphun. The following table shows the variations. 


1.3.2 Tonal Quality and Phonological Affiliation of the 
Tones. 


Live Syllables* 


* Syllables ending with a long vowel or /-m, -n, -p, -w, -j/. 


50 Harald Hundius 

Nan (Phrae ) Chiang Mai Lamphun 
1.A2 /zero/ (35] m-r (33] m-e [33] m-e 
2.Bl // {33-22] m-e [22] I-e [22] le 
3.B2 /*/ (21] m-f [31] m-f [31] m-f 
4.Cl // [447] h-e (447) h-e [447] h-e 
5.C2 /7/ [5°3]  h-f {45°3] h-f (5°2] h-f 
6.Al /“/ [13] l-r [13] lr (13) I+ 





Dead Syllables** 





Nan (Phrae) Chiang Mai Lamphun 
DS1 /zerof hr [45] ml-r [34 - 23] / / m-r [34] // 
DS2 /7/ h-e [55] h-e [55] / h-e [55] f/ 
DL1 /‘/ ml-e {33 - 22] l-e = [22] I*/ l-e [22] I/ 
DL2 /*/ l-f [21] m-f [31] */ m-f [31] /*/ 





Abbreviations: 

A, B, C = historical tone classes; 1 = ancient voiceless, 2 = ancient voiced 
consonants; DS = dead syllable with short vowel, DL = dead syllable with 
long vowel (for details, see Li 1977). Tonal quality: m = mid, | = low, h = 
high; e = even, r = rising, f = falling; ? = concomitant glottal constriction. 
1.3.3. Ambiguities of Pronunciation. 


1.3.3.1 Loss of /-?/ in connected speech. 


In connected speech, unstressed DS syllables ending with /-?/ 





+e 


Syllables ending with /-p, -t, -k, -?/. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 51 


generally lose their final glottal component, as well as their tonal quality 
to be heard in isolative (syllable-per-syllable) speech style. Such syllables 
will be transcribed accordingly, i.e. /aunmarked/ without /-?/. Since the 
loosening of glottal striction is a gradual process depending mainly on the 
accuracy of pronunciation and the speed of speaking, consequently a 
certain degree of ambiguity persists. 

Similar variations can be observed in the pronunciation of a number of 
mostly Indic loanwords which are read in slightly different ways such as 
the examples given below: 


(Pali/ Skt.) (a) (b) (c) 
tika > /ti? kaa/ /tikaa/ /tikkaa/ 
dipani > Ai? pa? nii/ /tipanii/ /tippanii/ 
Jjotaka > /coo ta? ka?/ /cootaka?/ /cootakka?/ 
Sakaraja > /sa? ka? laa ca?/ /sakalaaca?/ /sakkalaaca?/ 
likhita > Ai? khi? ta?/ Nikhita?/ 
Nikkhitta?/sobhati) — /sdo pha? ti?/ /sdophati?/ 
/séophatti?/sthita) /sa? thit/ /sathit/ 
/satthit/ 
etc. 


Column (a) shows the pronunciation when syllables are read one by 
one, while forms in columns (b) and (c) are to be heard in normal 
connected speech. 

As can be seen, the change occurring in all these cases runs down to the 
loss of a syllable-closing glottal stop which is then substituted by the 
following consonant in a phonetical process of "regressive assimilation" 
caused by the universal tendency towards using the least possible amount 
of energy in sound production.58 

Forms listed in column (b) may be regarded as examples of "learned" 
pronunciation, whereas allomorphs listed under (c) which represent the 
most commonly heard forms among present speakers, may be interpreted 
as belonging to the colloquial style of speech. 

As for the phonematic transcription of such words, the written forms 
as found in the originals have been used as the basis of the notation: 
those that are found to conform with or be more closely related to 
etymology are transcribed according to the more learned style illustrated in 
column (b), whereas allomorphs which are written in conformance with 


58 As to the tonal change of dead syllables in connected speech, see Hundius 1990: 74 
foll. 


52 Harald Hundius 


colloquial pronunciation, are notated correspondingly. 
1.3.3.2 Final particles. 


In the colophons a number of expressive final particles and 
exclamations are used, the tonal quality of which may vary, e.g. 


/dée, d&e, dee/; 
/hdej, hoaj, hd(a)j/; 
/naa/ 
/nda,"ndo/; 
/ndo, "n3o, n35, n3/ 
/3, lo, 135/ 
/?20/ 

etc. 


Such forms have been notated in accordance with present common 
usage.59 


1.3.3.3. Tonal quality of certain syllables ending with /-am/. 


In a number of mostly disyllabic loanwords, if the first syllable ends 
with /-am/, its tone will change from tone class "A" to tone class "B" (in a 
few cases: "C"), e.g. 


/camloon/> /camloon/ "to prosper" 
/kamlay/ > /kamlan/ "strength" 
/kampeen/ > /kampeen/ "wall" 
/kampii/ > /kampii/ “holy scripture" (< Pali gambhira) 
/samlaan/ > /samlaan/ “to be well, happy" 
/tamnaan/ > /tamnaan/ "chronicle" 
/*pampen/ > /pampen/ “to perform, pursue" 
/*lampeon/> /ampeen/ "to contemplate" 
/lambaak/ > /lémbaak/ "to be hard, troublesome" 
etc. 


However, since some of such words are still pronounced with "A" tones 
by some speakers, in the present study words belonging to this category 
are transcribed as members of tone class "A", except when a tone marker 





59 On the tonal quality of final particles, see Hundius op. cit., pp. 100 foll. 


The Colophons of thirty P@li manuscripts from Northern Thailand 53 


in the original indicates a change of tone class. 
1.4 The Pagination of Palm-leaf Manuscripts. 


The pagination of palm-leaf manuscripts is traditionally done by a 
combination of a consonant and a vowel written on the reverse side of 
each folio in accordance with the alphabetical order, the first phuuk 
starting with the first consonant of the alphabet, viz. ka, ka, ki, ki, 
ku, ki, ke, kai, ko, kau, kam, kah; kha, kha, khi, khi, khu, kha 
etc. ...3 24, 24, gi, gi, gu, gil etc., providing a pagination for a total of 
33x12 (= 396) folios or 792 pages. In cases of still longer manuscripts, the 
pagination may be further extended by adding a |-ya| to the consonants, 
viz. kya, kya, kyi, kyi, kyu, kya, etc., followed by khya, khya, khyi, 
khyi, khyu, khya; gya, gya, gyi, gyi, etc., and so on. Ideally, one phuuk 
would consist of 12 folios or 24 pages. In reality, however, variations and 
inconsistencies abound, especially in more recent manuscripts. (See, for 
example, the manuscript descriptions in Hundius [forthcoming], a critical 
edition of a Northern Thai Jataka text [Balasankhya-Jataka]). To 
facilitate location of, as well as quotation from text passages recorded on 
microfilm, Arabic numbers have been added. Since this has been done in 
general only for pages containing the main text, there are quite a number 
of palm-leaf pages to be found on the microfilm which have no 
pagination. These are, in the present study, referred to by (1) the 
abbreviation “no no.", and (2) by stating the number of the palm-leaf page 
they are preceded by, or they are preceding on the microfilm. 


1.5 Glossary of Special Words. 


‘vee ook lay sponsor or supporter of a monk or 
novice 

“original manuscript" (lit.: “old ms") 
from which a copy is made 


capap (chapap) ‘kau 


capap hniitia ditto (lit.: “upper manuscript") 
"cau mahaajiiwit “Lord of Life” 
"cau miiiian chief, ruler (lit.: "Lord") of a miiiian 


(q.v.); also used to designate the rulers 
of states and principalities under 


At any rate, phonetical quality of A and B tones on the above-mentioned syllables 
(words like /pampen/, /lampeen/ or /lambaak/ left apart) is very much alike, due to a 
tonal reduction process effective in connected speech. For details, see Hundius op. 
cit., pp. 70 foll. 


54 


‘doon, dhaan 
‘daa 

dii-hlii 

dé 

dii-hlii dé 


"gau saddhaa 
or muulasaddhaa, 
pathamamuulasaddhaa 


gruu paa “cau 


“hnaa dap (rap, dhap) "g(l)au 
“hnaa dap (rap, dhap) p(I)aay 
hnaan 

mad 

mad “ton 

mad k(aan 

mad plaay 

"mai hlaap 


miitian 


muulasaddhaa 


"ngoy 
phuuk 


phuuk "ton 
phuuk plaay (paay) 
Rassabhikkhu 


* 


Harald Hundius 


Siamese supremacy 

to make a thorough check 

final particle; emphasiser 

lit.: "good, good; splendid!" 
adhortative particle 

emphasising formula at the end of a 
wish; mostly translated: "may this 
come true” 


initial or leading supporter of the 
making of a new manuscript (cf. Pali 
adikammasadhaka) 

highly respected senior learned monk 
mostly of high age 

front cover folio 

back cover folio 

former monk 

bundle (of palm-leaf fasciculi) 

first bundle 

second bundle [of a set of three] 

last bundle 

wooden wedge of a palm-leaf 
manuscript, mostly indicating title(s), 
no. of phuuk, date of writing, name of 


monastery to which the ms belongs etc. 


(fortified) settlement or township, 
urban living-place, city, city state, 
principality, kingdom, land* 

same as "gau saddhaa (q.v.) 

former novice 

fasciculus 

first (lit. "beginning") fasciculus 

last fasciculus 

junior monk, i.e. a Bhikkhu who has 
received ordination a short time, 
possibly only one year or up to five (?) 


For a discussion-of the various meanings of |miitian|, cf. Wyatt 1984:7-8. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 55 


years ago. This, however, is only a 
guess. 
saddhaa (1) faith, confidence (in Buddha's 
teachings), (2) (member{s] of a) lay 
community 
"internal", i.e. monastic supporter(s) of 
the making of a new manuscript or 
other common religious efforts 


saddhaa baay nai 


saddhaa baay nook “external”, i.e. lay supporter(s) or 
sponsor(s) of common religious efforts 

sissa follower(s) of a senior or learned monk 
(Pali: pupil, student) 

wiian area within city walls or fortification; 


sometimes synonymous with miitian 
7.30-9.00; translated as “at the time of 
the morning drum" 


yaam koon naay 


yaam trad (thad) "k(lai 

‘diian 9.00-10.30; "at the time of the 
forenoon horn" 

10.30-12.00; “at noon" 
12.00-13.30; "in the afternoon" 
13.30-15.00; "at the time of the 
sunset drum" 


yaam. ‘diian 
yaam tuud "jaay 
yaam koon lan 


yaam. trad (thaa) "k(I)ai 
‘gaam 15.00-16.30; “at the time of the 
evening horn" 


NB: For a more complete list of the divisions of the time according to 
the Northern Thai tradition, see TUIKEO 1986:107. 


1.6 Remarks on Dates and Calendrical Systems. 


All dates and calendrical references made in the colophons are rendered 
as such, ie. no attempt has been made to make any calculations, e.g. of 
the days of the lunar calendar. As for the CS (Cillasakaraja) Era, the dates 
can be converted into the Buddhasakaraja era or into the Christian era by 
adding 1181 or 638 years respectively. The correctness of the cyclical year 
can be checked with the help of SAO SAIMONG (1981) and 
SWANGPANYANGKUN (1988). A survey of Southeast Asian chronology as 
found in dated manuscripts is given in: BECHERT et al. (1979: xix foll). For 
further bibliographical data relating to Southeast Asian calendrical 


56 Harald Hundius 


systems, see v. HINUBER 1987b:15. 

As for the animal names of the twelve branches, or "children" of the 
cyclical year (NT |luuk piil), as these are called in Northern Thai 
tradition, there are some variations within the Chinese and the Southeast 
Asian traditions. The 12th "child" (NT ["gail), elsewhere representing 
the Pig, is called "Year of the Elephant" in the Lan Na tradition (cf. 
DAVIS 1976:12) and is translated accordingly in the present study (cf. also 
the chart contained in SWANGPANYANGKUN (op. cit., p. 6) where both 
pig and elephant are placed together). 


1.7 Note on the Description of the Manuscripts and the 
Presentation of the Colophons. 


The following information is given: 


1. A running number used for reference to the manuscripts under study. 
The name of the text, as found in the CPD. 

3. The categorization of the text as mentioned in the CPD. If no 
mention is made, but a classification according to the CPD system 
appears to be unproblematic, a categorization is added in square 
brackets. 

4, The name of the author. 

5. The number of the microfilm roll referring to the DFG-Collection, 
followed by the location of the respective text on the roll, given in 
inches. 

6. Number of the text within the DFG-Collection (as laid down in 
HUNDIUS 1976b). Abbreviation: "Dc no”. 

7. Manuscript number, i.e. a preliminary inventory no. used within the 
Project "Dokumentarische Erfassung literarischer Materialien in den 
Nordprovinzen Thailands", 1972-1974. This number appears on the 
cover folios of the fasciculi (phuuk) recorded on microfilm. 
Abbreviation: "ms no". 

8. Number of fasciculi (phuuk) recorded on microfilm. 

9. Number of lines written on the palm-leaf manuscript. 

10. Information as to whether the text recorded may be considered as 
complete or not. In several cases a thorough check of the entire text 
would be necessary to make a definite statement about completeness. 
This is beyond the scope of the present study. Therefore, the 
information given is, to a certain extent, to be taken as preliminary. 

11. The year when the holograph was written (given in Cilasakaraja 
era). 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand = 57 


12. 


NB: 


13. 
14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 
18. 


19. 
20. 
21. 


NB: 


The year according to the Christian era (AD); obtained by adding 
638 to the Culasakaraja year. 


If no date is mentioned, the abbreviation "n.d." together with an 
estimate of the probable date is added. This estimate rests upon 
the physical appearance, the style of the script and the orthography 
used. 


Name of the monastery where the original was found (in 1974). 
Location of the repository, i.e. district (Amphoe /?amphoo/) and 
province (/canwat/). 

Beginnings of the Pali texts, preceded by information concerning the 
location on the microfilm (if necessary). 

Location of the respective text in the generally used editions (as far 
as traceable). (This information is kindly provided by Professor O. 

von Hintiber). 

Ends of the Pali texts and their location on the microfilm. 
Transliteration of the Northern Thai Colophons, preceded by their 
location on the microfilm. 


: Shorter Pali passages interspersed in the vernacular text are also 


transliterated. In some cases where lengthy portions written in Pali 
(mostly wishes expressed by the scribes) are included in a NT 
colophon, these Pali passages have not been transcribed, however. 
Any such case is identified. 


Phonematic transcription of the transliterated texts. 

Translation. 

Remarks, containing information on special terms, comments on the 
translation, bibliographic data, etc. 


In accordance with the aim of the present study which is meant as 
an introduction into NT colophons, every NT colophon to be found 
on the microfilmed manuscripts is identified and treated in the way 
outlined above. Their presentation is done according to the order of 
their appearance in the manuscripts. In order to avoid unnecessary 
repetitions, identical colophons are identified as such and rendered 
only once. Those with only minor alterations from others previously 
presented, are given only in transliteration, while reference is given 
where the phonematic transcription and translation of the previous 
specimen can be found. In one case (no. 12, Sadd), due to particular 


rere) 


Harald Hundius 


repetitiveness, the above-mentioned presentation according to the 
order of appearance of the colophons, had to be abandoned. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 59 


2. The Manuscripts and their Colophons 
01. DHAMMAPADA-ATTHAKATHA 2.5.2.1 


Roll 8, 035". Dc no 0227, ms no 693. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete. CS 883 
= AD 1521. Wat Lai Hin (NT /wat 1aj hin/; see Remarks). Amphoe Ko 
Kha (NT /ko? khaa/), Lampang. 


Begins: 
...]fifia dassanakaram akasiti jighacchati, Dhp-a WI 261,19 


Ends: phuuk 1.48 = khah v, line 5 
bhante vimanam me nattham na dani kim karissami ‘ti vutte 
alam devadhite, Dhp-a III 301,29 


Colophon. 
Front Cover Folio. 
|pii, "ruuan; “sai’ sakraaja 883 tuwua dhammapada "nii; mahaatheen 


suuar,; prahyaa "cauj, "saan "wai peen muulasaasnaa bra gootama “catio 
5 ban pii, (...)| 


/pii Ian s&j sakalaac?* péet lSoj péet sip sdam tia thamma?pata? nfi 
mahdathéen stian phdnfida ciw sdan wdj pén muulasdasanaa pha? 
kootama? caw haa pan pii (...)/ 

* Possibly the form |sakraaja| may have been read /sakhaatc4?/. To my 
knowledge, this particular writing has been found up to now only in 
manuscripts written in ‘Daa "Sooy; cf. 04 (1); 05 (2): cula®; 06 (1); 
07 (1), 08 (2, 5): cula°®, below. It could therefore be useful for the 
tracing of the place of origin of ancient holographs. 


Translation. 
In the Year of the Snake, [C] S 883, the Venerable Mahaatheen Suuar 
Prahyaa had this [manuscript of the] Dhammapada [-Atthakatha] made 


Harald Hundius 


as a foundation for the Teachings of Lord Gotama [so that they may last 
for] five thousand years. 


Remarks. 

The same colophon appears on the back cover folio (preceded by p 48 = 
khah v).- |suuar prahyaa| is obviously not a personal name, but an official 
title or rank of a scholar; cf. Inscription no. 9 (Sukhothai, Wat Pa Daeng 
[CT /wat paa deen/], probably AD 1388, plate 3, lines 9-10) where a |naay 
suuar prajfiaa| is mentioned as the first of a number of scholars (CT /ndk 
praat/); for the text of the inscription see C@DES 2.1983:153. A  |theer 
suuar| is mentioned in Inscription no. 95, line 10; cf. KHANA 
KAMMAKAN ... [ed.] 1970:61. As for the toponym /1aj hin/ "stone shoulder" 
(!?) from which the monastery draws its present name, this seems to stem 
from a rather recent CT distortion of the former NT appellation /laaj hin/ 
NT "stone side, bank" still well-known by the older people of this 
community, which is also testified in the colophons of numerous 
manuscripts to be found in this unique rural treasure-trove of ancient NT 
manuscripts. Yet another name of this village, however, appears in the 
colophons of older manuscripts written in this monastery: for instance, in 
the colophon of a copy of the Samacittasuut, Chapter 6, written by 
Khattiyarafifiawaasii Bhikkhu in CS 1164 (the actual given date is CS 
1167, but this would not fit with the Cyclical Year mentioned), Year of 
the Tiger (|pii ‘tau yii|) = AD 1802, the place is called |ra hrin| (read: 
Na? hin/ “deserted rock/ stone", or: "a stone left behind"). 


02. DHAMMAPADA-ATTHAKATHA _ 2.5.2.1 


Roll 8, 042". De no 0232, ms no 587. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete; n.d., 
probably 16th c. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: p 1 = ha r, line 1 
tena me tvam pakkosapito 'ti aha maharaja kim te saddo suto ‘ti, 
Dhp-a II 6,8 


Ends: p 46 = Jah v, line 5 
so kasahi talif[yamano, Dhp-a II 39,3 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 61 


Colophons. 
(1) p 3 = 4a rf, on left margin 


|dhammapada 144 sundarapaiifioo “saary | 
/thammapata? lee stintala?paniioo sdap/ 


Translation. 
Dhammapada [-Atthakatha] - Made at the behest of Sundarapafifioo. 


(2) p 5 =hi r, on left margin 


|"wai’ kap bra dhaad "caujo lambaan 144| 
/w4j kap pha thaat caw lampaan/ 


Translation. 
{Made] for [the worship of] the Great Relic of Lambaan. 


(3) p 9 = hu fr, on left margin 


|dhammapada_ sundara “saat “wai? kap bra, dhaad "cauj, laambaan\| 
/thammapata? stintala? say w4j kap pha thaat caw lampaay/ 


Translation. 
Dhammapada [-atthakatha] - Made at the behest of Sundara [pafifioo] for 
the [worship of the] Great Relic of Lambaan. 


Remarks. 

According to colophons (2) and (3), the manuscript was meant as a 
Dhammadana (a gift; offering) for worship of the Great Relic of Lampang 
which is enshrined in the great stupa of Wat Phra That Lampang Luang 
(NT /wat phi thaat lampaan ltan/), situated in the present 
district(Amphoe) of Ko Kha, about 15km to the West of Lampang (and 
some 3km from Ban Lai Hin). 


62 Harald Hundius 


03. JATAKA  2.5.10.1; |Mahosathajataka 


Roll 8, 040". Dc no 0231, ms no 1123. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete; n.d., 
probably 16th/ 17th c. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: no no. = ka _ v, preceding p 2, 4, 6, etc. 
namo tass' atthu. paficalo sabbasenayati, Ja VI 329,20 


Ends: p 46, line 5 
gamavasino pokkharanim pe[sentu, Ja VI 341,29 


Colophon. 
Front Cover Folio (in very small characters). 


|mahoosatha mahaatheen (p)aa "cauj, (riian) suun; "wai’ kap wad (un?) 
miiiian; nai wiian| 


/mahdosatha? mahdathéen baa(?) caw lian(?) stun w4j kap wat (?in?) 
muap naj wian/ 


Translation. 

Mahosatha[-Jataka]. The Venerable Mahaatheen Paa (?)* Riian Suun 
{had this manuscript made] for Wad (..) Miiiian in the city [of 'Daa 
"Sooy?]. 

i The written form |paa| found in this ancient manuscript might 
alternatively be interpreted as representing /paa/ (lit.: “wood, forest") 
which would then indicate that this monk-scholar belonged to the 
school of the "Forest-dwellers". 


Remarks. 

In Thai and Lao tradition, if not generally in Southeast Asia, the Pali 
word for “medicine” is spelled osatha (regular form: osadha). This holds 
true also for the Pafifiasa-Jataka manuscript M (Mandalay) used in the 
PTS edition of the Burmese version of the "Fifty Jatakas". Cf. JAINI 1981, 


83:passim. The style of the script and the manuscript itself are very 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 63 


similar in appearance to the oldest palm-leaf manuscripts found in Wat 
Lai Hin which originally belonged to monasteries in ‘Daa "Soggy. See also 
Remarks to 04. 


04. MILINDAPANHA 2.6 


Roll 8, beginning. Dc no 0224, ms no 685. 9 phuuk, 5 lines. CS 857 = AD 
1495. Incomplete (s. Remarks). Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 15, p 58 


|sakraaja "dai; 857 t,uua naii, pii dap "hmau;, milindapanhaa naay sin 
prahyaa "saan "wai; kap hog, pitaka ‘daa’ "sogy’ 14a] 
/sakalaac&?* daj ptet 1Soj hia sip cet tia naj pii dap maw milint&?panhda 
naaj sin phanfida sday wdj kap h3o pitaka? taa s5oj lee/ 


* This writing which is to be found in several other colophons of the 16th 
century (see below) might also have been read as /sakhaatca?/. 


Translation. 

[C] S 857 - In the Year of the Hare - [this manuscript of] the 
Milindapafihaa was made at the behest of Naay Sin Prahyaa for the 
library of [a / the Monastery in] 'Daa "Soy. 


(2) phuuk 2.1 = ghah r; 2.48 = khah v; phuuk 7.28 = chah v, on left 
margin 


{milindapafihaa naay sin prahyaa "saan "wai; kap hog; pitaka ‘daa’ 
"seoy' | 


/milinta?panhaa naaj sin phanfida sdan wdj kap h5o pitaka? taa s3oj/ 


64 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 
Milindapafihaa - Made at the behest of Naay Sin Prahyaa for the library 
of [a / the Monastery in] "Daa "Sooy. 


Remarks. 

The phuuk of this manuscript are microfilmed in the following order: 1, 2, 
10, 7, 5, 4, 11, 6, 15. The text of phuuk 2 and 11 is photographed 
beginning with the end. This manuscript which originally consisted of 15 
phuuk, has been described by O. v. HINUBER (1987a). In August 1987, 
two more phuuk which are probably complete (8, 14) and some stray 
leaves (belonging to 9) were discovered in the course of works carried out 
at Wat Lai Hin under the "Preservation of Northern Thai Manuscripts 
Project". Thus, at present, only phuuk 3, 12, and 13 of this invaluable 
manuscript which is the third oldest dated manuscript in Thailand known 
up to now, seem to be entirely lost. Cf. v. HINUBER 1988b:173. The 
colophons represent one of the earliest documents of NT language written 
in the type of script that came to be known as "the" Northern Thai script 
par excellence, despite the existence of at least two other types of scripts. 
For details, see HUNDIUS 1990:119 foll; PENTH (1976). This is the earliest 
mention of 'Daa Soggy to have so far come to light. See 05, below. 


05. JATAKA 2.5.10.1; Panndsanipata 


Roll 8, 037". Dc no 0229, ms no 692. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete. CS 912 
= AD 1550. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: no no. = ka v, preceded by Front Cover Leaf with colophon (1) 
udayhate (!) janapado 'ti, Ja V 193,3 


Ends: p 46, line 5 
datva piyam ummadanti adittha 
addha piya mayham janinda esa, Ja V 219,7* 


Colophons. 
(1) Front Cover Folio, on left margin. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 65 


|kap was srii ‘usr; miuiian, [3] yoossa "daujo "faa nai miitian, [3] ‘daa’ 
“sooy’ 14a] 


/kap wat salii ?in muag fiGtsa? tdw fda naj muap tda s5oj lee/ 


Translation. 
[Made] for Wad Srii ‘Ur Miitian {Yossa "Dau “Faa} in Milian ‘Daa 


"Sooy. 
(2) ibid., in the middle of the page 


|pannaasanipaata jaataka mahaasangharaajaa “cauj, "saafi’ nai, pii kod 
se, culasakraaja [2] "dai’ 912 tuua laa “phuu’ dai au praso,f ‘pg’ “ruu’ 
attha 144 sapdaa "cain? "daa ‘yaa’ nap khiian [3] ‘sai’ théam ‘go’ ‘yaa’ 
plan siia, ‘dia ‘po’ au peen phreed, (‘miliiia;) praso.n "ladw’ yia, blan au 
[4] maa ‘sof’ ‘dan’ ‘kau’ 'dai° "saan [yaak] nak ‘kad’ naa jlad jaan 


"duuay’ (diiiin)| 


/pannaasa? nipdata? caataka? mahdasankha?laacaa caw saan naj pii kot 
set clnlasakalaaca? daj kaw lSoj sip ?et tila lee phiiu daj ?aw phasdn bd 
hfu ?attha? Ié? saptaa c&en tée jada nap khian saj thtem k5 jaa péey sia dée 
b3 ?aw pén phéet mia phasdp léew fila? pan ?aw maa son day kaw dée 
saan fidak nak kée naa calee ceey dOj tuun/ 


Translation. 

Panndasanipata-Jataka [this manuscript was] made at the behest of the 
Venerable Mahaasangharaajaa in the Year of the Dog, CS 912.- Whoever 
[among you] takes [this manuscript out for] worship, [if you do] not 
clearly know the meaning and the wording, do not add any writing on [it]: 
do not [try to] make any corrections; if [you do] not follow [my advice], 
{you will] be [reborn as] a peta. After worship, see to it that it is brought 
back again quickly, [for] hard work it was, indeed, to make it, so do take 
good care! 


66 Harald Hundius 


NB: the wording is partly obsolete today (see Part A, 3.3, supra, 
foomote 48). |prason|: < Skt pragams “to praise”; |'po aul: cf. the 
idiomatic expression: /thda b3 ?aw kam .../ "if you don't listen ...". 


Remarks. 
This phuuk obviously belongs to the same manuscript as 07. For a similar 
colophon, see v. Hintiber 1987b:48. The toponym ‘Daa "Sooy is mentioned 
in the colophons of a number of manuscripts dating from the end of the 
15th c. to the second half of the 16th c., most of which are presently kept 
at Wat Lai Hin, while some are kept at the Siam Society, Bangkok; see 
ibid., p. 49 foll (nos. 54-57, 60, 61). As mentioned above, the location of 
‘Daa “Sogy has not yet been established (see, however, Post-script, 
below). Professor Dr. Prasert Na Nagara kindly informed me in 1987 that 
the late Professor Saeng Monwithun, a well-known scholar in Pali and 
Northern Thai history, identified a place situated on the Yom River, to 
the NW of Sukhothai, named Lakhapuri in a Sukhothai Inscription 
written in Pali in AD 1399, with a Thai settlement called Miiiian Sain 
which, according to Professor Saeng, was being called Miiiian "Srooy ‘at 
the present time’; cf. KHANA KAMMAKAN ... [ed.] 1970:55. This 
(uncommented) suggestion seems to have met with little response. 
Associate Prof. Aroonrut Wichienkeeo (Chiang Mai Teachers Training 
College), who is presently engaged in the identification and localisation of 
ancient settlements in the North of Thailand, has yet to come across any 
mention of "Daa "Sooy in the 20 NT chronicles so far checked [October 
1988], as her sister, Lamoon Janhorm (M.A.), kindly informs me. As O. v. 
Hintiber has observed, the marked difference between the text of the 
colophons in 04 (Mil, AD 1495), where neither the name of the 
monastery to which the manuscript was donated is given nor the word 
|mtitian| or |wiian| is used when referring to ‘Daa Soggy, and the 
colophons in 05, 06 (as well as a number of other manuscripts from this 
place, which have been described by O. v. Hiniiber in his above-mentioned 
catalogue) written a few decades later, might be no accident, and the 
assumption could be induced that at the time that the Milindapafiha 
manuscript was donated, 'Daa "Sgoy had just been established as a 
settlement, possessing, in AD 1495, just one monastery. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 67 


Post-script. 

A few days before sending this monograph to England for printing, the 
question of the location of "Daa "Soggy seems to have found an answer. On 
a hand-drawn, yet detailed and scaled (1:200,000) map, showing the route 
along which King Chulalongkorn’s Chiang Mai bom Royal Consort, 
Queen Dararasmee (/phrd? rdaatchachaajaa caw  daaraardtsamii/), 
travelled by boat up the River Ping to Chiang Mai, in AD 1908, the name 
|wiian "srogy| (NT /wiay s50j/) is placed at an ancient site on the west 
bank of the /mée pin/, opposite to a once well-known rapid called /ktp 
s30j/, in a distance of about 22kms to the NW of the present Bhumibol 
Dam, Tak province; an area which has been inundated since the early 
sixties (see Map, p. 9, supra). Thus, it may be concluded that the 
archaeological remains of ancient 'Daa "Sooy now lie buried beneath some 
50-60 m of water belonging to this artificial lake. For the above- 
mentioned map, and some old photographs of the /kén s3oj/ rapids, see 
SATTARAPHAI (2.1989, I, p. 132, 143; map on inside back cover). 


06. JATAKA  2.5.10.1; Tihsanipata 


Roll 8, 033". Dc no 0226, ms no 540. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete. CS 876 
= AD 1514. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: 2 = ka v, line 1 
namo tassa bha[ga]vato arahato sammasambuddhassa. kimchando 
kimadhippayo, Ja V 1,3 


Ends: 46 = kham vy, line 5 
deva eko yakkho dissamanaripena, Ja V 22,11 


Colophon. 
Front and Back Cover Folio. 


[pii; kaap sed {8} sakraaja “dai’ 876  tinsanipaata mahaa upaasaka 
buua gaam ‘taan’ miitiasi "saan’ “wai’ kap wad suuar, khuua "nan’ (?)| 


68 Harald Hundius 


/pii kaap set sakalaacd? daj péet ldoj cet sip hok [tua] tinsa?nipdata? 
mahaia ?ubaasaka? pua kham taan muag saan wdj kap wat stian khua 
ndn/ 


Translation. 

Year of the Dog - [C] S 876. [This manuscript of the] Tinsanipata was 
made for Wad Suuar Khuua at the behest of the Great Layman Buua 
Gaam ‘Taan Miiiian. 


Remarks. 

|buua|: cf. present NT /piia?/ "garland, string"; |'taan| "to represent"; |‘taan 
miitian| "foreigner": this epithet might be used to indicate that the holder 
of the name Buua Gaam or his forefathers did not belong to the Tai Yuan 
ethnic group (7). |suuar khuua|: in the Sukhothai Inscription No. 9, 
among monastic dignitaries, a |paa suuar deeb| is mentioned, which, at 
least as far as |suuar| is concerned, appears to refer to a highly qualified 
official (cf. also Remarks to 01, supra). |wad suuar khuua| may perhaps 
be reminiscent of its founder who held the title of |suuar khuua| ("Bridge- 
Inspector"?). 


07. JATAKA  2.5.10.1; Sattatinipata 


Roll 8, 036". Dc no 0228, ms no 691. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete. CS 912 
= AD 1550. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: p 1 = kar, line 1 
devatanusi gandhabbo ‘ti, Ja V 312,15 


Ends: p 41, line 5b - p 42, line la 
Sonananda-jatakam dutiyam. iti jatakatthakathayavijataka- 
patimanditassa Sattatinipatassa [42.1]tthavannana nitthita, Ja V 332,26 


Colophons. 
(1) Front Cover Folio, reverse side, in the middle of the page. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 69 


jsattatinipaata jaataka an "nii; mahaasangharaajaa "“cau’ "saan’ nai, pii 
kod se3s [2] culasakraaja “dai 912 tuua 144 "“phuu" dai, au bai praso.n 
‘yaa’ nap khiian 's[3Jai’ thaam ‘yaa’ plaan, siia, ‘daa ‘po’ dii. peen 


phreed jaam praso.n “laadw’ [4] yia, blan au maa ‘so.’ ‘dam’ ‘kaujy ‘daa’ 
“saan” yaak nak ‘kaa’ ‘gooy’ jaan "duuay’ diitin| 


NB: For phonematic transcription and translation, see O05 (2); sole 
difference: |'po dii| "[that is an] evil [deed]" is used instead of 
I'p au]. 


(2) Front Cover Folio, reverse side, on left margin. 


|ga ka ka kha kap was srii, ‘ur; miiiiasih yo.s "dauj, “faa” nai miitian, 
‘daa’ "sooy” "hnii; 144| 


(For phonematic transcription and translation, cf. 05 (1); |"hnii] "here") 
(3) phuuk 3, p 23, on left margin 


|mahaasangharaajaa “cau” "saan’ 144| 
/mahadasankhalaacaa caw saan lee/ 


Translation. 
Made at the behest of the Venerable Mahaasangharaajaa. 


(4) p2 = ka v; p 22, on left margin. 


|kap was mahaasrozhmanna srii, ‘ur; miiiiagd yo.s "“dauj, "faa’ ‘daa’ 
"sooy’ “hnii’ 144| 


/kap wat mahdasal6mmana? salii ?tn muay fidt tdw fda taa sdoj nii lee/ 
Translation. 


[Made] for Wad {Mahaasrohmana} Srii 'Ur Miitian {Yo.s "Dau "Faa}, 
here in ‘Daa "Sooy. 


70 Harald Hundius 


Remarks. 

The words in {} constitute epitheta ornantia; the first, "Great Noble" 
(< Skt Sramana), only found in this manuscript, may very well (according 
to a suggestion made to me by Prof. Udom Roongruangsri) refer to the 
Mahaasangharaajaa which could be taken as a hint that it was this 
monastery where the highest-ranking Buddhist dignitary of ‘Daa "“Sooy 
resided. The second, "renowned up to the Heavens", is used in the 
colophons of several other manuscripts from this monastery (cf. OS [2]; 
08 [1, 4, 7]). 


08. SAMYUTTANIKAYA 2.3; Sagathavagga 


Roll 8, 100". Dc no 0265, ms no 582. 2 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete: phuuk 3 
and 4 of a set of 4 phuuk (see Remarks). CS 911 = AD 1549. Wat Lai Hin. 
Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: 1 [= phuuk 3], p 1 = na r, line 1 
pavi]vitto bhante ayasma sariputto, SN I 63,28 


Ends: 2 [= phuuk 4], p 36 = jah v, line 5 
sandasseti samadape[ti], SN I 113,3 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 3, Front Cover Folio, reverse side, preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc. 


|"saat’ “wai? kap was srii 'un; miitian,; yo.ssa "daujo “faa” nai miiiian, 
‘daa’ "sooy’ “hnii’ 144| 


/sian wa4j kap wat salii ?in muan fidtsa? tdw fda naj muay t4a s5oj nii lee/ 


Translation. 
Made for Wad Srii 'Un Miitian {Yossa "Dau "Faa}, here in Miiiian ‘Daa 
"Sey. 


(2) phuuk 3, Front Cover Folio, reverse side, in the middle of the 


oon 


page|paalii sagaathawagga an “nii’ naan gaam baa miia, ‘hmiilin’ "nooy 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 71 


traa “saan nai pii kad “rau, culasakraaja "dai’ 911 tuua 144 [2b] kulaputt 
toon dai au bai praso.n "lddw" yia, blan au maa 'so,n “wai’ ‘dan’ ‘kau’, 
‘daa’ “saan” yaak nak ‘kaa’ [3b] jl4a jaan “duuay’ diiiin “hii” pufi, 
caamré6n 'kéa "phuu peen daayaka "nan’ ‘tog’ "dauj, nibbaan diitin| 


/oaalii sakaatha? wakka? ?an nfi naay kham paa mia mun ndoj thalda 
sda naj pii kat l4w ctnlasakalaacd? daj kaw ldsoj sip ?et tia lee 
kunlabut tén daj 2aw paj phasdp léew fila? pan aw maa son waj dan kaw 
dée saan fidak nak kée calee ceen d6j taun hau bun cdmlaon kée philu pén 
taafiaka? ndn t50 tdw nippaan teen/ 


Translation. 

This [copy of the] Pali [text of the] Sagathavagga was made at the behest 
of Naan Gaam Baa, the wife of 'Hmiiiin "Nogy Traa, in the Year of the 
Cock, CS 911. Whoever [among you], sons of good family, takes [this 
manuscript out for] worship, see to it that it is brought back again 
quickly, [for] hard work it was, indeed, to make it, so do take good care! - 
May the merit [acquired by sponsoring the making of this manuscript] 
contribute to the donors eventual attainment of Nibbana. 


NB: |kulaputt ton dai|: the use of the clf /ton/ (which is common in NT 
when referring to members of the Sangha, including holy objects like 
Buddha statues etc., and the Royalty can be taken as an indication 
that it is specifically (younger) monks and novices who are 


addressed. 
(See also OS [2], above). 


(3) Front Cover Folio, reverse side, on left margin 


|"wai’ kap was srii ‘un’ miiiiayi ‘daa’ "sogy” 14a] 
/wAj kap wat salii ?in muan t&a s39j lee/ 


Translation. 
[Made] for Wad Srii 'Un Miitian, ‘Daa "Sooy. 


(4) phuuk 3, last folio, no no., preceded by p 48, on left margin 


72 Harald Hundius 


|"wai’ kap was srii ‘un; miiiian, yo.ssa [2] “daujo “faa” nai miiiian, ‘daa’ 
"sooy’ "hnii; 144] 


/w4j kap wat salii ?n muay fidtsa? tdw fda naj muan taa s5o9j nii lee/ 


Translation. 
[Made] for Wad Srii 'Un Miiiian {Yossa "Dau "Faa}, here in Miitian "Daa 
"Seey- 


(5) ibid., in the middle of the page 


|paalii sagaathawagga samyuttanikaay an “nii; naan gaam baa miia, 
‘hmiiiin’ "ngoy’ traa “saan” nai pii kad "raujo cula[2]sakraaja "dai’ 911 
tuua 144 kulaputt ton dai au bai praso.n ‘yaa’ nap plaan; siia, ‘go’ [3] 
‘yaa’ nap khiian 'sai’ théam ‘daa° ‘po’ dii; peen phreed jaam praso,h 
"ldaw’ yia, blan au maa ‘son’ "wai" [4] ‘dan’ ‘kaujo ‘dda “saan” yaak nak 
‘kaa ‘gooy’ jaan "duuay” diiiin ‘cun; "hiiii’ peen pracaiy 'kéa an “dai 


yan lookiya 144 lookuttara sampatti ‘kaa upaasikaa “phuu’ “saan” “nii’ 
diitin rau,» 'gQ’ anumoo[6]danaa "duuay’ 144| 


/oaalii sakaatha?wakka? sapjfiiitta?nikdaj ?an nfi naay kham paa mia 
mun ndoj thaléa saan naj pii kat l4w cunlasakalaaca? daj kaw 1doj sip vet 
tia lee kunlabut tén daj ?aw paj phasén jaa nap péen sia k5 jaa nap 
khian saj théem dée bd dii pén phéet caam phasdp Iéew fiia? pan ?7aw 
maa son wdj dan kaw dée saan fidak nak kée k5j ceen dOj taun cu hae 
pén phatcdj kte ?an daj fiag lookifia? [é? lookuttal@?sampatti? kée 
?ubaasikaa phiu saan nfi taun law k5 ?aniimootanaa d6j lee/ 


Translation. 

This [copy of the] Pali [text of the] Sagathavagga, [being part of the] 
Samyuttanikaya, was made at the behest of Naan Gaam Baa, the wife of 
‘Hmiiiin "Nogy Traa, in the Year of the Cock ({pii kad "rau|), CS 911. 
Whoever [among you], sons of good family, takes [this manuscript out 
for] worship, do not [try to] make any corrections; do not add any writing 
on [it]; [that is an] evil [deed; you will] be [reborn as a] peta! After 
worship, see to it that it is brought back again quickly, [for] hard work it 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 73 


was, indeed, to make it, so do take good care! - May [the merit acquired 
by sponsoring the making of this manuscript] contribute to the 
laywoman-donor's attainment of the Mundane as well as Supermundane 
states.* May I also express my sympathetic joyfulness [for this 
meritorious deed]. 


* Lokiya (P) : "Mundane", [...] all those states of consciousness and 
mental factors [...] which are not associated with the supermundane 
paths and fruitions of Sotapatti etc.; 

Lokuttara (P): "Supermundane", [...] the 4 paths and 4 fruitions of 
Sotapatti etc., with Nibbana as ninth; see Nyanatiloka 1972:91. 


(6) phuuk 4, Front Cover Folio, reverse side, in the middle of the page 


[same as (2), above, until ---] |911 tuua 144 "phuu’ dai au praso.n ‘po’ 
“ruu’ attha laa sapdaa “cain” ‘yaa’ nap plain siia, ‘yaa’ khiian 'sai° 

thiam ‘pg’ dii peen phreed jaam ... ‘gogy’ jaan "duuay’ diitin ‘cun; peen 
pracaiy "gaam juu daayaka “phuu’ "saan’ “nan” ‘too’ "“dauj) thodn 
amatani[S]bbaan déén| 


/... kaw 150j sip Pet tia lee phitu daj ?aw phasdp bd hfu ?attha? Ié? saptaa 
c&en jaa nap péen sia jaa khian saj théem bd dii pén phéet caam ... k4j 
ceey dOj taun cup pén phatcaj kdm cuu taafidka? phiu sdap ndn 
t5o tdw thén ?amatanippaan toon/ 


Translation. 

{For the beginning, see (2), above] ..., CS 911. Whoever takes [this 
manuscript out for] worship, [if you do] not clearly know the meaning and 
the wording, do not [try to] make any corrections, do not add any writing 
on [it; that is an] evil [deed; you will] be [reborn as] a peta ..., so do take 
good care! - May [this meritorious deed] contribute to the donor's eventual 
attainment of Nibbana, the place of Immortality! 


NB. The written form transliterated here as |attha| /?attha?/ (< P attha 
"meaning, sense") is ambiguous: it allows for another reading, ie. 
latth| /?at/ “id." Both forms are found in NT literature. The first 


74 Harald Hundius 


may be considered as the more learned variant prevailing in literary 
style, the second one, representing an old loanword in NT, is 
predominantly used in everyday speech. 


(7) ibid., on left margin 


\"saan’ kap was srii ‘un; miitian,; yo.ssa "dauj, “faa’ nai miiiian, ‘daa’ 
“sooy’ "hnii’ 144| 


/sian kap wat salii ?im muan fidtsa? tdw fda naj mean taa s59j nii lee/ 


Translation. 
[Made] for Wad Srii 'Un Miiiian (Yossa "Dau "Faa}, here in Miiiian 'Daa 


"SQoy. 


Remarks. 

On the contents of this manuscript, see O. v. HinUBER 1983:80.- 

|gaam baa|: /kham/ "gold, golden"; /paa/ (prima facie): "to lead, take 
somebody to some place personally". This would make, semantically, a 
rather strange name. A different interpretation, suggested by Prof. Udom 
Roongruangsri, seems more convincing. As is well known, words like 
/k€ew/ "jewel" or /kham/ "gold" are widely used in NT names as decorative 
expressions of affection and should not be taken as part of the genuine 
name. Cf. names like /kham ?4aj/ etc. where only the second element can be 
considered as the real personal name. Taking into account the Thai habit 
of affectionately, or out of familiarity, calling people by only the last 
syllable of their full names, the real given name of |Naan Gaam Baa| may 
have been |Bimbaa| "mould, moulded" (< Skt/P bimba) which would make 
a very common girl's name. For a similar case, see |Saan Gaam Daa| in 
20, phuuk 12. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 75 


09. PATTHANA-MAHAPAKARANA-ATTHAKATHA 
[3.3.7] 


Roll 9, 104". De no 0266, ms no 580. 1 phuuk (= phuuk 57), 6 lines. 
Incomplete, CS 945 = AD 1583. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, 
Lampang. 


Begins: p 1 = jha r, line 1 

sahajatapa]jccaya va na_ honti  sahajatadhammavasena pana 
nissayapaccayadihi pavattisabbavato tasmi vare patikkhitteso varo 
parihayati evam idha ‘pi afifiamafifiapaccayadhammavasena sahajatadihi 
pavattisabbhavato tasmim pati[2]kkhitte so (v)aro parihayati, Tikap-a 
(N° 1972) 213,5=(B® 1956) 471,21. 


Ends: p 37 = ne v, line 6 

vipulavisuddhabuddhinaé Buddhaghoso ‘ti garihi gahitandmadheyyena 
therena kata sakalassa ‘pi abhidhammapitakassa atthakathd maha 
anantafianavisayassa patthanamahapakaranassa atthakathd anantaiia, 

Tikap-a [end of text] 


Colophons. 
(1) Front Cover Folio. 


"3 Patthanamahapakaranatthakatha " 
(2) Back Cover, reverse side, preceded by p 37 


|na 5 sa{a}kraaja 945 ma-maichnam, p° upaasikaa ‘maa ciiam peen 
pratyayadaayikaa| 


fnda — sakalaacd? kaw 15oj sii sip haa ma&?mee sanim patthdani? 
mahdapakalana?  ?atthakathaa fubaasikéa mée ciam  pén 
phatiaiia? taafiik3a/ 


16 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 
[phuuk] 5 - [C] S 945, Year of the Goat.- [The making of this manuscript 
of the] P° was supported by the lay-woman named Ciiam.* 


* |'m44 ciiam| lit.: "Mother Ciiam". 


Remarks. 

This text has been edited in Tikap, Dukap, cf. CPD, Epilegomena 3.7,1; 
further: The Paficappakarana-Atthakatha, vol. III Yamaka- 
Patthdna-Atthakatha, ed. by M. Tiwary. Nalanda 1972 (N°). 

(O. v. Hiniiber). Note the Sanskrit form pratyayadayika (instead of the 

Pali word paccayadayika also used in the colophons) which appears to be 

rather unique. 


10. ABHIDHAMMA-GULHATTHA-DIPANI 3.9.3 


Roll 8, 039". De no 0230, ms no 588. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete; n.d. 
(16th c.?). Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: 
Jlena balena ca ‘ti adhippayo. jaramaranasambandha [commentary 
on Vibh-a 188,20 ] ‘ti jardmaranahetuka anabhisambandha ‘ti bhobye ... 


Ends: p 47, line 4b-5 

atthakathacariyassa hi nama katta Buddhaghosena 'ti vuttam. samattan 
ti dhammasamma[S]tam  paticcasamuppadadhammattam pati 
vijjhati’ ‘ti attho majjhimam va patipadam ariyam atthamgikamaggam. 
sammohavinodaniya vibhangatthakathaya gulhaditthadipa[48.1] na(!) 
nitthita 


Colophons. 
(1) Front Cover, r 


\nak pufi, tjuuanjat "tiim’ “saan” laa 
mahaa fiaanasamuddamangala- meedhaawii “cau; peen upathambhaka 
"saan| 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 77 


/nak bun (cuanca? ?) t&em san lee 
mahda fiaanasamitta?mankala?meethaawii ciw pén ?upathimphaka? 
sdan/ 


Translation. 


Written by the pious Juuanja (?) - supported by the Venerable 
Mahaa Naanasamuddamangalameedhaawii. 


NB: Added by another hand (of apparently recent date) is the word 
Guladipani. 


(2) ibid., rear side 


|Sammohavinodaniya CGulhatthakatha a4 "saat’ “wai’ ‘biiiiaS "hiiti’ 
jootaka buddhasaasanaa traap; ‘tog; "dau; jaraa 1da| 


/sammooha? winootanifia? kunhatthakathda lee saan w4j pda hie 
cootaka? piittha?saasanaa thalaap t3o tdw calaa lee/ 


Translation. 


[The Pali text of] the G° - Made to support Buddha's Teachings so that 
they may survive as long as the palm-leaves last. 


(3) p 48, line 1 


|mahaa flaanasamuddamangala "cau; uppathambhaka "saan 
Sammohavinodaniya Vibhangatthakathaya GuJhatthadipana(!) nitthita | 


/mahda fiaandsamiittimankala? ciw ?uppathimphaka? san .../ 


Translation. 


[The making of this manuscript was] supported by the Venerable Mahaa 
Naanasamuddamangala. 


(4) Back Cover, r 


78 Harald Hundius 


|guihadiipanii 144  "saa’ “wai’ ‘biiiia; “hilt” jootaka buddhasaasanaa 
14a| 
/kunhatiipanii lee s&ay w4j paa h&e cootaka? piittha?sdasanaa lee/ 


Translation. 
[The Pali text of the] G° - Made to support Buddha's Teachings. 


Remarks. 
This text, a subcommentary on Vibh-a, was previously unknown. 


11. DIGHANIKAYA 2.1; Samaififaphalasutta 


Roll 8, 031". Dc no 0225, ms no 699. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete; n.d., 
probably 1st half of 16th c. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: Front Cover [no no.] r, preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc. 
evam me sutam. ekam samayam bhagava, DN I 47,2 


Ends: p 75, line Sa 

Jkam dhammakajanam (jfijvitina vo rope(ss)atha imasmim ye 
vassabh(e)sane virajam (vi)tamalam dhammacakkhum _ upaijjissa(t)ati. 
idam avoca bhagava attama[, DN I 86,7 


Colophon [in Pali}. 
p 76, line la 


[SamafifiaphaJ]lasuttam dutiyam 


Translation. 
[Samaiifiapha]Jla-suttam - 2nd (sutta of the DN). 


Remarks. 
The unusal high number of folios is due to the fact that this phuuk 
contains the complete text of the Samafifiaphalasutta. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 79 
12. SADDANITI 5.2; Author: Aggavamsa (AD 1154) 


Roll 8, 171". Dc no. 0241, ms no 843. 18 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete; 
phuuk 8, 21-26, 28, 29, 32-40. Last bundle (?). CS 923 or 953 = AD 1561 
or 1591, respectively (see Remarks). Wat Phumin (NT /wat phuumin/). 
Amphoe Muang, Nan. 


Begins: phuuk 8, p 1, line la 
iti nipaccate [E° nipphajjate] tvafi ca uttama sattavo sattava sattavanti, 
Sadd 648,14 


Ends: phuuk 40, p 60 = jhi_v, line 4c-5 

ari[5 Jmaddanapuravasina aggavamsdcariyena katam 
Saddanitippakaranam(!) nitthitam. pamanato idam pakaranam sattatiya 
bhanavatehi sattatumthehi [read:  sattuttarehi] gathasatehi ca 
nitthangatam, Sadd 928,21 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 8, Front Cover Folio, r 


|culasankraaja “dai; 9°(2)3 tuua  sre,jh nati pii, rakaa daiya bhaasaa 
‘waa’ pii, “ruuan; “rau, saddanitti phuuk, 8 luu;k, naan khaaw srii, 
‘yuu’ "paan ‘daa’ huua riitian (sic!) ban “hii” “saan” kap 
buddhasaasnaa 144| 


/ciinlasankhaatca? daj kaw ldoj saaw (2) sdam tia salet naj pli lakaa 
tajfid?phaasda waa pii luay ldw  sattanitti? phduk péet luk naap khiaw 
salii juu baan téa hia Iwan pan h@e saan kap piitthd?sdasanaa lee/ 


Translation. 

CS 9(27)3 - Completed in the Year of the Goat (|pii rakaa|), [which 
corresponds to] the year called |"ruuanh "rau| in the Dai tradition. [This 
copy of] the 8th phuuk of the Saddaniti was made in support of Lord 
Buddha's Teachings at the behest of the son/ daughter* of Naan Khaaw 
Srii who lives in "Paan ‘Daa Huua Riiiian Ban. 


80 Harald Hundius 


* By the term |luuk| no indication is given as to the sex of the "child"; 
|luuk| may also be plural: “sons and/or daughters, children". Native 
speakers however feel that in this context, the scribe is referring to a 
single donor. 


NB: identical colophons are engraved on the Front Cover Folios (recto 
side) of phuuk 26, 29, 36, 37, 38. Only a few words are added in the 
following colophons (2) and (3). 


(2) phuuk 24, Front Cover Folio, r 


|phuuk, 24 culasankraajja “dai 9(2)3 tuua sre,jh nati pii; rakaa dai,ya 
bhaasaa ‘waa’ pii; "ruuan; “rau, saddaniti luuk, naan, khaaw sriis mii 


‘yquu’ ‘daa" huua riiiian ban mii kusalachan “hati” "saan’ "wai; kap 
saasnaa bra buddha "cau" ‘tog; "dau" 5000 wassaa_phuuk, 24| 


/phiuk saaw sii ctinlasankhdatcd? dij kaw 1doj saaw (?) séam tia salet 

naj pii lakda_ tajiia?phaasda w4a pii hian ldw  sattaniti? Miuk naan khaaw 
salii mii jlu taéa hija lan pan mii kutsala?sin haj saan wd4j kap 
saasanaa pha? pitthd caw t3o tdw haa pan watsda_phuuk saaw sii/ 


Translation. 

phuuk 24 -... [This copy of] the Sadd was made out of the meritorious 
intention of the son/ daughter of Naan Khaaw Srii who lives in "Paan 
‘Daa Huua Riiiian Ban, in support of Lord Buddha's Teachings (Pali: 
Buddhasasana) for the entire 5,000 years.* 


* It may be worth mentioning that the Pali loanword |wassaa| (Pali: 
vassa ), which is used here as a synonym of |pii| "year" conveys the 
connotation of the rainy season, the time of the year when the 
monks and novices are expected to stay at their home monastery, 
and devote their time to studying and giving sermons to the lay 
community. 


(3) phuuk 33, Front Cover Folio, r 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 81 
|... "hiiii’ “saan” mii mahaa wajirapafifioo "cau; peen upathambhaka : 33] 


/... hf siay mii mahda watcila?pdnfioo ciaw pén ?uppathamphika? 
sdam sip sdam/ 


Translation (last part). 
.. Made at the behest of ... , the Venerable Mahaa Wajirapaiifioo being 
{the leading monastic] supporter. [phuuk] 33. 


NB: Identical colophons are engraved on the Front Cover Folios (recto 
side) of phuuk 34 and 35. A different wording is to be found at the 
end of the following colophon (in this partly illegible colophon only 
the date [but not the name of the Cyclical Year] is mentioned). 


(4) phuuk 22, Front Cover Folio, r 


|namatthu jina(v)arapavara tcuua waadt culasankraaj “dai*° 9°53 tuua 
sre,jh (written: srajhee) saddanitti phuuk, 22 luuk, naan khaaw srii, 
‘yuu’ “paan’ ‘daa’ huua riiiian ban "hiiii” "saafi’ peen praccaya ‘kaa’ 
fiaana(...)| 


/namatthu? cina?walapawala ... ciinlasapkhaat daj kaw ISoj haa sip si’am 
tia salet sattanitti? phiuk saaw s3op liuk naay khaaw salii jiu baan 
taa hia Iwan pan héw sdan pén phatcafia? kee fiaana(...)/ 


Translation (last part). 

CS 953 - completed. Sadd - phuuk 22: made at the behest of the 
son/daughter of Naan Khaaw Srii who lives in "Paan ‘Daa Huua Riiiian 
Ban... as a contribution to [the attainment of] (...) knowledge (...). 


NB: The following colophon (5) represents a shorter version (containing 
no dates, years etc.): 


(5) phuuk 8, Front Cover Folio, v (preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc.) 


82 Harald Hundius 


|saddaniti mad plaay saddanitti phuuk, 8 luuk, naan, khaaw srii; 


‘y,uu’ ‘daa huua rijiian ban "hii? "saan’ kap buddhasaasnaa| 


/satt@niti? mat pdaj satt@nitti? phiuk péet Iduk naay khdaw salii jiu 
baan taa htia luan pan hfe san kap piittha?sdasanaa/ 


Translation. 

Sadd - last bundle [See Remarks]. Sadd - phuuk 8. Made at the behest of 
the son/ daughter of Naan Khaaw Srii who lives in "Paan ‘Daa Huua 
Riiiian Ban, in support of Lord Buddha's Teachings. 


NB: Identical colophons are engraved on the verso sides of the Front 
Cover Folios of phuuk 8, 29, 36, as well as on the verso sides of the 
Back Cover Folios of phuuk 22, 25, 26, 35, 37, 38, and on the Front 
Cover Folio, recto side, of phuuk 40. 


(6) phuuk 21, Front Cover Folio, r 


|sakkaraaja 953 pii; tho, daiyabhaasaa ‘waa’ piis “ruuan; "hmau’ 
gimhantaraduu diiiiasn 7 "khiin’ 15 'gaam” (sic!) saddanitipakarana mad 
plaay mahaa aggasaamii; "cau, wad candamooliis srii; saddhammakitti 
“saaty ka kha ko | 


/sakkalaaca? kaw lSoj hada sip sdam pii tho? _tajfiarphaaséa waa pili 
hiay maw kimhanta?laduu duan cet khén sip haa kham 
sattaniti?pakalana? mat pdaj mahda ?akkasdamii caw wat canta?moolii 
salii satthammakitti? s&an/ 


Translation. 

[C] S 953 - In the Year of the Hare (|pii tho|) called |pii "ruuan “hmau| 
in the Dai tradition, in the Hot Season, in the 7th [lunar] month, on the 
15th day of the waxing moon. Sadd - last bundle; made at the behest of 
Mahaa-Aggasaamii the Venerable Lord Abbot [of this monastery (7), i.e. 
Wat Phumin?] Candamoolii Srii Saddhammakitti. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 83 


NB: The words following |"cau wad| obviously refer to the holder of an 
ecclesiastical title (cf. [7] phuuk 32, below, where the double 
appearance of the word |"cau| leaves no doubt about this), and not 
the name of a monastery which one would normally expect to find at 
this position. Therefore, the name of the monastery can only be 
surmised. Virtually an identical colophon (only the words |7| "7th" 
and |"khiin| "waxing" do not appear) is engraved on the recto side 
of the Front Cover Folio of phuuk 23. Similar colophons (however, 
without year, name of Cyclical Year, month, day, etc.) are to be 
found in phuuk 21, Front Cover Folio v, as well as in: 


(7) phuuk 32, Front Cover Folio, r 


|saddanitipakarana somde,cch "cau; wad candamuuliis _ sriis 


saddhammakitti "cau; "saan°’ phuuk, 32| 


/sattaniti? pakalana? somdet caw swat cantamuulii salii 
satthammakitti?caw sfay  phtuk sdam sip s3op/ 


Translation. 

Saddaniti-Pakarana_ - Made at the behest of the Venerable Lord Abbot 
Candamoolii (here written: Candamuulii) Srii Saddhammakitti. - 
phuuk 32. 


(8) phuuk 40, Back Cover Folio v (preceded by p 60), on right margin: 


jsaddanittipakarana “dai” (... ... ‘hmaii’) hnansiiii hniiiia capap ‘niin’ 
‘daan” khiian pii sakkaraaja 855 (tuua)| 


/daj ... maj naysde na cabap niin taan khian pii sakkalaaca? péet lSoj haa 
sip hia tua/ 


Translation. 
(...) the previous holograph [ i.e. the one from which this manuscript was 
copied?] was written in [C] S 855 (= AD 1493). 


84 Harald Hundius 


NB: On the front cover folio, recto side, of phuuk 40, the title Sadd is 
written additionally in Khmer script, accompanied by some further 
notes in Khmer script, the last three words seemingly to be read /cop 
paj looj/ "... has come to the end”. 


Remarks. 
The mention of the date of writing the original manuscript, from which 
the present one was copied, is very rare. As for the date of the manuscript 
found at Wat Phumin, two conflicting years are given: CS 9(2)3, Year of 
the Goat |pii rakaa|, and CS 9(5)3, Year of the Hare |pii thg| (the latter 
date appears on phuuk 21 and 23 only). In fact, the middle of the 3-digit- 
numbers, as they appear in the colophons, can be interpreted as both 
either "2" or "5". It could be tempting then to assume that some of the 
phuuk were actually written at different times, i.e. one part in CS 923, the 
other one 30 years later? The puzzle centering around the correct date of 
this manuscript has, indeed, a few more components. One is the fact that 
all colophons were quite obviously written by the same scribe, in an 
orthography of undoubtedly very ancient style; how can it then be 
explained that two different cyclical years are mentioned (Year of the Hare 
vs. Year of the Goat) which match with CS 923 and 953, respectively? 
Another strange fact is the mention, on the Front Cover colophon of 
phuuk 8, that this phuuk belongs to the same "last bundle" of the Sadd 
like all the other fasciculi: this would mean that the last bundle of this 
text must have consisted of 40 phuuk — a number fairly exceeding the 
normal size of palm-leaf bundles the largest ones of which generally 
comprise not more than 20-24 phuuk. Although it would be tempting 
to think of possible answers to the problems, it is preferred here to wait 
for a more detailed study of the manuscript which is about 300 years older 
than the one used by Helmer Smith for his edition of this important Pali 
grammar. For a study of old NT orthography, the colophons of this 
manuscript offer some interesting pieces of evidence one of which is the 
consistent differentiation between the equivalents of |ai| (/?aj mdj maalaj/) 
and jaii| (/?aj md4j mifan/), a characteristic which is also found in the 
colophons of other early Pali manuscripts of this collection, for instance 
in 04 (Mil). Another peculiarity is the shape of the character |y,| used 
for representing ancient /*?j/ (or /*?f/, resp.): a digraphic combination of 


The Colophons of thirty PGli manuscripts from Northern Thailand 85 


the NT equivalent of the CT /?09 ?aan/ plus |-y|, ie. a true equivalent of 
the CT digraph /?09 ?aan/ plus /joo jdk/, a form which is widely used in 
ancient Northern Thai manuscripts of the 16th c. (as for the shape of this 
character, see HUNDIUS 1990: 176, allograph no. 144, variant no. 4). 


13. JATAKA 2.5.10.11 [2]; Vessantarajataka- 
{atthavannand-] tiki ("TIKA MAHAVESSANTARA") 


Roll 9, 042". Dc no 0250, ms no 974 (previously no. 758 [2]). 1 phuuk, 6 
lines. Incomplete. CS 940 = AD 1578. Wat Bun Yuen (NT /wat bun fiuun/). 
Amphoe Sa (/sda/), Nan. 


Begins: p 1 = jha v, line 6 

]va Agantva imam braharafiam pattomhi tayo bede ca janami mahallako 
ca homi na taruno tvam eva r[ii]passa mayham puttasankhata dhanam 
datva saggam gamissase va{2] [sa]ce tvam jpajficubho, [commentary on 
Ja VI 544,20*] 


Ends: p 46 = fiah v, line 6 


] naya pana mando 'ti afifianiti vuttatta ca. mando bhogavinase cadhake 
muj(j)4 patusva ‘pi abhidhanappakarane vuttatta ca. kim nu jhayasi 
kim karanama yasi (ada?) [commentary on Ja VI 565,5*] 


Colophons. 
(1) p 26 = na _v, left margin 


|kap was paak, nuua| 
/kap wat paak gua/ 


Translation. 
[Made for] Wad Paak Nuua. 


(2) no no., preceded by p 46 [= fiah v] 


86 Harald Hundius 
|tikaa mahaaweessantarajaataka an "“nii’ “saan; nai pii; plOdk; yii 
culasakraaj "dai’ 940 tuua 144i 


/tik’a mahdawéetsantala? caataka? ?an nfi saan naj pili pdok fii 
cunlasakhaat daj kaw 1d9j sii sip tia lee/ 


Translation. 
{This copy of the] tika* on the Mahavessantarajataka was made in the 
Year of the Tiger |pii pék yii], CS 940. 


* tika (P): 'subcommentary' 
NB: This and the following text belong to the same manuscript. 


Remarks. 

This text is different from the Linatthappakasini, on which see v. 
HINUBER 1985:15-20; its relation to the Mahavessantaravivarana 
preserved in the National Library, Bangkok (cf. v. HINUBER 1983:83), has 
still to be investigated. (O. v. Hiniiber). 


14. JATAKA  2.5.10.1;  Vessantarajataka-Atthakatha 


Roll 9, 043". Dc no 0251, ms no 758 (previously no. 758 [3]). 1 phuuk (= 
phuuk 3), 6 lines. Incomplete. CS 940 = AD 1578. Wat Bun Yuen. Amphoe 
Sa, Nan. 


Begins: p 1 = tha r 

puritatta evam tam bhavantam majiamano ahan tam putte yacitum 
agami dasatthaya putte me yacito dehi tvanti yojand. evam Adito 
patthaya paficannafi ca mahanadinam upatti veditabba, [commentary on 
Ja VI 543,6*] 


Ends: p 48 = cah v, line 6 

pakampitva nirantaram anekasataravam anekasahassaravam nadanti 
ravanti uccarenti ahosi. saddo te tidivam gato ‘ti sadhukarasaddo tava 
da, [commentary on Ja VI 571,9*] 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 87 


Colophons. 
(1) The following Pali colophon is written on the reverse side of the Front 


Cover Folio (preceding p 2, 4, 6, etc.): 


|fa ca phuuk; 3. idam atthakatthad Mahavessantarajatakam mahatherena 
Sujatanacakena pafinavisesam nama antevasi(...)[2] tva arame 
Sippikamukhe nama thapitam | (23, 


Translation. 

From aksara ato aksara ca, 3rd phuuk.- This [copy of the] 
Atthakathd (commentary) on the Mahavessantarajataka, [a work of] 
excellent insight, was made at the behest of the Mahathera 
Sujatanacaka, while staying (...) at a Monastery called "Sippikamukha".* 


* Sippika (P) “artisan”; sippikaé "pearl oyster". The second meaning 
would make a much better NT name: Wad Paak Hooy (the change 
from |a| to |4| occurs much too frequently as to be deemed an 
important feature) although one would have expected the Pali 
equivalent of the Monastery's NT name (|Wad Paak Nuua| 
“Monastery of the Oxen's Mouth" as mentioned in the NT 
colophons (see below, 14 [2)). 


(2) p 1 = tha r, on left margin 


|"saan’ "wai? kap was paak, nuua| 
/siay waj kap wat paak nua/ 


Translation. 
Made for Wad Paak Nuua. 


NB: Another colophon which is identical with (2) is engraved on the left 
margin of p 3; there is only one difference: instead of |nuua| “bull, 
ox", the morphonological variant |wuua| is used. 


88 Harald Hundius 


Remarks. 
This text is not identical with the Jataka-Atthavannana. (O. v. Hiniiber). 


15. CAKKAVALADIPANI [2.9] Author: Sirimangala 
(AD 1520) 


Roll 8, 75". De no 0235, ms no 721. 10 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete. CS 
1195 = AD 1833. Wat Sung Men (NT /wat stuy mén/; CT /wdt stun mén/). 
Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. 


‘Begins: 

namass’ atthu. anantaka cakkavalam ve yena gatam asamsayam natva 
saddhammasanghan tam lokavidum anantagum nanaganthesu saratham 
gahetabbam samadiya karissa ‘ham subodhattam cakkavdlakadipanim 
anusuyya nisametha api labheta chekata{2]nti. tattha cakkavalam nama 

lokadhatum 


Ends: phuuk 10, p 47, line 2c-4 

yam manussakam vassa[3]sattam t[@]vatimsanam eso eko rattindivo 
(pe; tena samvaccharena dibbavassasahassa tesam ayuppamanam. 
manussaganana[4]ya _tisso _—tisso. ca vassakotiyo satthifi ca 
vassasatasahassani. yani manussakani dve vassasatani. yamanam eso 
eko, Cakkav(S* 1980) 188,20. 


Colophons. 
(1) Front Side of "mai hlaap. 


|tuua paalii cakkawaaladipanii mii sip phuuk, 144  gruu paa "cau 
kaficana arafifiawaa[2]sii miiiia,n ‘brad peen "glau’ saddhaa 144 sissa "cau 


muuar, “brogm kan “saan yan akkhradhamm,; kambii an "“nii "waiy 
joodhaka (!) buddhasaasnaa 5 ban bra wassaa 144 “saan nai miitia,n 
‘naan’ aa] 


mahaaraaj "cau" miiiiazi ‘naan peen “glau” [3] 14% pajaanaarattha dan 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 89 


/iia baalii cakkawaalatipanii mii sip phiuk lee khuu baa caw 
kincana? ?alanfiawaasii muan phée pén kdw satthaa Ié? sitsa? caw tay 
muan  satthaa paaj n5ok mii mahdalaat caw muay phée le? mahdalaat 
caw muap n4an pén kd4w [é? pacaanaalattha? tay muan phdom kan sap 
fiay ?akkhalatham kAmpii ?an nfi wd4j coothdka? piitthd?sdasanaa haa 
pan pha? watsda lee saan naj muap naan lee/ 


Translation. 

The Pali text of C° - consisting of 10 phuuk. The Venerable Forest- 

dweller Gruu Paa Kajicana, Miiiian ‘Brad, as initiating monastic supporter 
together with his followers, and the Royal Ruler of Miitian "Brad as well as 
the Royal Ruler of Miiiian 'Naan as leading lay supporters, and all the 
common people {of both states] joined in sponsoring the making of this 
Dhamma manuscript, wishing thereby to ensure that the Teachings of 
Buddha (Pali: Buddhasasana) will last for 5,000 years. Made in 

Miiiian "Naan. 


(2) Front Cover Folio (preceding p 1, 3), line 1-3 


|paalii cakkawaaladipanii phuuk, “ton dan muuar; mii sip phuuk, [2] 
culasakraaj “dai 1195 tuua plii ‘kaa "sail [3] (s. line 1) 


/baalii cakkawaalatipanii phduk tén tay muan mii sip phtuk 
ciinlasakhaat daj pan nép Idoj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa saj/ 


Translation. 
[The] Pali [text of the] C°- First phuuk; [altogether] consisting of ten 
phuuk. CS 1195 - Year of the Snake (|pii ‘kaa "sail). 


(3) “mai hlaap, reverse side. 


|"saan 'miitia; sakraaj “dai 1195 tuua plii ‘klaa "sai 14a 
/siay méa sakhaat d&j pan nay 1Soj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa sj lee/ 


Translation. 
Made in [C] S 1195, Year of the Snake. 


90 Harald Hundius 


(4) Front Cover Folio, reverse side (preceding p 2 = ka v) 


|tuua paalii c° phuuk, “ton 144 somde,ch mahaaraaj miitia,n 'naan "saan 


“gaam juu gruu paa kaficana arafifiawaasii miitian, ‘braa nibbana paccayo 
hotu | 


/tia baalii cakkawaalatipanii phiuk t6n lee sdmdet mahdaldat muan 
naan sday kdm cuu khuu baa kancana? ?alanfidwaasii muan phée.../ 


Translation. 

The Pali text of C° - His Majesty the Great Royal Ruler of Miiiian 'Naan 
{sponsored] the making [of this manuscript] in support of the Venerable 
Forest-dweller Gruu Paa Kaficana, Miiiian ‘Brad. 


(5) phuuk 2, Front Cover Folio, recto side. 


|paalii c° phuuk, "thuuar, soon; culasakhraaj ... (s. above, colophon [2], 
line 2) “saan nai miitian, ‘naan’ 144 'thoon, dhaan (sic!) "laaw’ taam capap 
‘klaw’ | 


/oaalii cakkawaalatipanii phiuk thilan sSop ctinlasakhaat daj pan nép 
lSoj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa s@j saan naj muan naan lee thdp thaan 
léew taam cabap kaw/ 


Translation. 
[The] Pali [text of the] C° - Second phuuk, ... made in Miitian "Naan. 
Thoroughly checked with the original. 


(6) no no., preceded by p 50 = ga "ton, v 
|{mahaawan bhikkhu -rikkhitta  “waiy “gaam juu warabuddhasaasanaa 


bra goodom "cau, ‘tog "dau, paficasahassa wassaa traap 
phootthakapatta aayu pamaana "daa ‘cin’ 144| 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 91 


/mahdawan phikkhu? likkhitta? wdj kdm cuu wala?piittha?sdasanaa 
pha? koodom caw t5o tdw panca?sahatsa? w&tsda thalaap 
phootthakapatta? ?aafiti? pamaana? tée cin lee/ 


Translation. 

Written by Mahaawan Bhikkhu in support of the Excellent Teachings of 
Buddha so that they may stay for 5,000 years - as long as the palm-leaves 
last. 


(7) no no., preceded by p 49 = ga "ton, r 


\paripunna "lddw’ yaam ‘diian, ‘kad "khaa "nooy 144 na sobhati sak 
yaad 144 [2] mahaawan bhikkhu khiiar, paan ‘miitia ‘yuu wad “ton hnu.r; 


"naam saa 144 'po{o}° ‘jaan hlaay 144| 


/paliptinna? léew fiaam tian kée khda ndoj lee na? sdophati? sak jaat lee 
mahdawan phikkhu? khian paay méa jiu wat tdn niin ndm sda lee bd 
caan laaj lee/ 


Translation. 

Accomplished at noon time; my writing is not beautiful at all. Written by 
myself, Mahaawan Bhikkhu, while staying at Wad "Ton Hour, 
"Naam (?) Saa. I am [a] very unskilful [scribe]! 


(8) phuuk 3, no no., preceded by p 44 = cha v 

|80000 4000 "kKhaa khoo "hii naa pufi, "gaam juu tuua "khaa peen "glau’ 
144 guu paa aacaan ‘bog ‘maa 'bii “ngon; ‘juu" gon "daa dii-hlii dé [2] pugla 
“phuu dai "dai ‘lau, ‘gogy” biccaranaa bai" dé tuua ‘po naam heet cai ‘po 
“tan 144] 


/péet mon sii pan khia kh3o héw naa bun kdm cuu tia khaa pén kdw 
lg? khuu baa ?aacdan p39 mée pii ndop ctu khon tée dii Iii t8? ~~ pukk la? 
phitu daj daj law k5j pitcalanaa paj t3? tia b3 naam héet cj bd tin lee/ 


92 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

84,000 - may the merit acquired [by writing this phuuk] support me first, 
as well as all of my revered teachers, my parent and my brothers and 
sisters, for ever and ever! Whoever makes use of this manuscript for 
recitation, do pay attention; my writing did not turn out beautiful, because 
my mind was not strong enough. 


(9) phuuk 5, no no., preceded by p 42 


|culasakkaraaja "dai 1195 tuua plii ‘kaa "sai rikkhitta paan ‘miiiia; 
sathi[t] saamraar was nuua dan ‘daan “tai wiian; (written: wiiar,) "nan* 
144 paarii, cakkawaaladipanii, phuuk, (.) 144 diitiayn 12 ook; 6 'gaam 
‘braam’ ‘waa "dai wan meen-'maan’ deey, (sic!) 144] 


/ctinlasakkalaaca? daj pan nay 1Soj kaw sip hia tila pii kia s3j 
likkhitta? péay méa sathit simlaan wat nua deeg dan t3j wiay ndn lee 
baalii cakkawaalatipanii phiuk (?) lee duan sip soy 250k hok kham 
phaém waa daj wan men mfan taj lee/ 


Translation. 
CS 1195 - Year of the Snake. Written while I was staying happily at 


Wad Nuua Daan* {situated to the} South of the city [of Miiiianh 'Naan]. 


The Pali text of the C°, phuuk (5?) - on the 6th day of the waxing 
moon,in the 12th [lunar] month, corresponding to the day [...??...] of the 
Mon Burmese-Dai calendar. 


* This monastery still exists today. 
(10) phuuk 9, Front Cover Folio (in the middle of the page) 


jsakkaraaja "dai 1195 tuua plii ‘klaa "sai somde,cc ma[2]haaraaj 
anantaraya raajaadhiraaj “cau dron raaja[3]saddhaa ton sw6dy nai 
nandapurii "dai "saan yan dhamm tuua paa[4]lii c° an "nii’ "waiy 
jootakka warabuddhasaa[S]ssnaa 5 ban wassaa nibb{aJnapac[c]ayo hotu 


me| 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 93 


/sakkalaaca? d&j pan néy |5oj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa s&j sdmdet 
mahdalaat ?anantalifia? Jaacaathila@at caw halon  laacdsatthaa tdn 
saw59j naj nantapulii dj saan flan tham tia baalii cakkawaalatipanii 
?an nii wdj cootakka? walapiitthd?sdasanaa hada pan watsda nippaana? 
patcafioo hdotu? mee/ 


Translation. 

CS 1195 - Year of the Snake. His Majesty Anantaraya Raajaadhiraaj 
{"Cau}*, Great Royal Ruler of Nandapurii [Miiiian ‘Naan], faithfully 
sponsored the making of this manuscript of the Pali text of the C°, 
wishing thereby to ensure that Buddha's Excellent Teachings will last for 
5,000 years. - May this [meritorious deed] contribute to my attainment of 
Nibbana! 


*NB: This and similar mentions in the colophons of phuuk 9 and 10, as 
well as those to be found in 23, 29, and 30, are referring to "Cau 
Mahaayassaraaja (CT name /ciw mahdajot/ who ruled over the 
Siamese vassal state of Nan from AD 1825 to 1835. (The same 
colophon is to be found on the 2nd cover folio of phuuk 10). 


(11) phuuk 9, no no., preceded by p 45 


|sakkaraaja “dai 1195 tuua plii ‘klaa “saiy somde,cc parammapobbitt 
sihaa anantaraya raajaaddhiraaf "cau dron raajasaddhaa jootakka 
buddhasaassnaa nibbanapac[cJayo hotu nic[cJam [2] dhuvam dhuvam| 


/sakkalaacd? daj pan niin Idoj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa s&j sdmdet 


palammabspit sihda ?anantalifia? laacaathilaat ciw thalon laacdsatthaa 
cootakka? piittha?sdasanaa .../ 


Translation. 

CS 1195 - Year of the Snake. His Majesty Somdec Parammapobbit Sihaa 
Anantaraya Raajaadhiraaj*, [Royal Ruler of Miiiian ‘Naan], faithfully 
supported Buddha's Teachings ... 


*see NB to (10).- Virtually the same text is to be found in: 


94 Harald Hundius 


(12) phuuk 10, 3rd Cover Folio 


|somde,cc parammapoobbitt anantaraya raajaaddhiraas “cau dron 
raajas°...| 


(For phonematic transcription and translation, see [11]) 


Remarks. 

This cosmographical treatise written, according to the Pali colophon at 
the end of the 10th phuuk, in CS 882 (AD 1520) by Sirimangala, a native 
of Chiang Mai, has been edited in Siamese script, and translated into 
Standard Thai, by the National Library, Bangkok, in 1980 (ISBN 974- 
7920-17-4). [For the colophon, see pp. 228-30 of the above-mentioned 
edition]. The text of this edition is based on some 15 manuscripts, all 
written in Khmer script, kept at the National Library. Although no dates 
are given, it may be assumed that none of these dates back to the pre- 
Ratanakosin period, i.e. the time before AD 1782. In the library of Wat 
Phra Singh, Chiang Mai, there is kept a palm-leaf manuscript written in 
Lan Na script which is dated CS 900 (|pii pddk sed|), ie. only 18 years 
after the original work was completed by its author! This manuscript 
(made at the behest of the Sangharaajaa Candaramsii Arafifiawaasii) 
which is regrettably not complete, will soon be available on microfilm; a 
photograph of its first phuuk Cover Folio can be found in PENTH 1983:88.- 
The Cakkavaladipani is not mentioned in C@EDES (1915) and in the CPD. 


16. CAKKAVALADIPANI [2.9] Author: Sirimangala 
(AD 1520) 


Roll 8, 90". Dc no 0236, ms no 709. 10 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete. CS 
1231 = AD 1869. Wat Chang Kham (/wat cdan kdm/; present official CT 
name: /wét chday khdm woordwifhdan/). Amphoe Muang, Nan. 


Begins: 
namo tass' atthu. anantaka cakkavalam ve yena gatam asamsayam natva 
sadhammasanghan tam lokavidum anantagum nanaganthesu saratham (!) 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 95 


gahetabbam samadiya () karissaham subodhattham 
cakkavala{la}dipani a[2]nusuyya nissametha ... 


Ends: phuuk 10, p 47, line 2b 

eso eko rattindivo tayaratti[3}yo m&aso tena masena dvadasamasiyo 
samvaccharo (bhii)tena samvaccharena dibbanipaficavassasatani tesam 
ayuppamanam. manussaganana yanavuti [4] vassasatasahassani. yam 
manussakam vassasatam tavatimsanam eso eko rattindivo |pe; tenu 
samvaccharena dibbavassasahassa tesam ayuppamanam. 
manussagananaya tisso tisso ca vassakotiyo satthifi ca 
vassasatasahassani. yani manussakani dve vassasatani. yamanam eso 
eko, Cakkav (S° 1980) 188,20 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 2, no no., preceded by p 53 


\(...) "sai srade,jh "khau maa nai diiiiar, 11 "khiin’ 'gaam 1 ‘braam 'waa 
"daiy wan 1 daiy “ruuan, me,g (...) "daiy 11 tuua paripunna "lddw’ 
yaam (...) teeja phla pur, an "khaa “daiy "téim dhammadaan an” ‘jiiti’- 
‘waa paa[2] (...) "waiy “gaam juu saasnaa gootama "cau traap ‘tog "dau 
5000 bra wassaa “nii "d4a dii-hlii nibbanaf{m] paramam  su{k}kham 
nic{c}am dhuvam dhuvam (...) phla pur; an "khaa "dai tam dhammadaan 
an "nii 'cun; "hiiii peen (...) pattha uppa[3](...) tuua "khaa 144 ‘bog’ ‘maa 
‘bii "noon, ‘juu gon "hiiii "daiy "hwaay rood; ceed, miitiasn neerabbaan nai 
anaagatakaan an" cak, maa baay “hnaa "nan ‘cun, cak, mii "daa dii-hlii 
nic{c]am dhuvam dhuvam ‘city dé| 


((...) sij saladet khdw maa naj duan sip ?et khin khém néy pham waa dij 
wan nay taj lian mét (...) daj sip ?et tia paliptinna? lew fiaam (...) 
téec? phala? bun ?an khaa daj téem thammataan ?an cau waa baallii 
cakkawaalatipanii] wd4j kdm cuu sdasanaa kootam@? caw thalaap t3o 
tdw haa pan pha? watsda nii tée dii Iii (...) phala? bun ?an khaa daj téem 
thammataan ?an nfi cin héw pén (...) pattha? ?uppa(...) ta khaa lé? po 
mée pii ndon cfu khon hiv daj waaj l5ot cdot mua neel&ppaan naj 
?anaakatakdan ?an cak maa paaj naéa ndn cin cak mii tée dii Ii nitcay 
thitwan thilwan cin t5?/ 


96 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

(...), at the beginning of the 11th [lunar] month, on the Ist day of the 
waxing moon, corresponding to the day [named] |"ruuan med| [in the) Dai 
[tradition] (...) [this copy of the 2nd phuuk of the C°] was completed at 
(...) time. [May the] power of the merit* that I have earned by writing this 
Dhamma gift which bears the name "[The] Pali [text of] C°" support the 
Teachings of Lord Gotama throughout the five thousand years - may this 
come true, indeed, [and may] the power of the merit* that I [have earned] 
by writing this Dhamma gift [support] me and my parents as well as 
each of my brothers and sisters so that they all may safely swim across 
[the ocean of Samsara] and reach the realm of Nibbana in future times 

that lie ahead - may this wish come true! 


* lit: "May the power of the fruit of the merit ... ". 
(2) no no. , preceded by p 41 (2 lines): 


|culasakkaraaja "dai 1231 tuua plii kad "sai diiiiasn sraawann giiii-'waa’ 
diitiasn 10 hooraa réim 2 ‘gaam”’ ‘braam ‘waa "dai wan kufi(ja)waala 
thnai daiy 'waa wan angaan yaam cak, koon,; l4dn ‘klad "khaa 144 
dhammajeey, bhikkhu rikkhitta wiggaha “téim_ khiiar, plaan 'miiiia; 
‘yuu meettaa peen "cau aaraammadhi[2]patti wad ‘daa’ mahimsaa ‘dii’ 
"nan ‘cin’ cak, rap raajani,mon ‘haan mahaaraaj rikkhitta paalii dhamm, 
an” ‘jiiii’-'waa’ cakkawaaladipanii an" "nii "waiy “hii” peen ‘dii’ "hwai 
saa sakkara puujaa “waiy kap saasnaa bra gootama traap 5,000 bra 
wassaa ]44| 


/cinlasakkalaaca? daj pan s3on ISoj sam sip fet tia pii kat s&j duan 
salaawan kwu waa duan sip hdolaa 1dim s3op kham phim wéa dij wan 
kiinca?waala? thanaj taj waa wan ?ankaan fiaam cak k3on leen kte kha 
lee thammacaj phikkhu? likkhitta? wikkaha? téem khian pday 
mia jiu méettia pén caw ?aalaammathippati? wat taa mahinsda tii ndn 
cin cak lap laacZnimon héy mahdalaat likkhitta? baalii tham ?an cau 
waa cakkawaalatipanii ?an nfi wdj hae pén tii waj sda sakkala? 
puucaa w4j kap sdasanaa pha? kootama? thaldap haa pan pha? watsda 
lee/ 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 97 


Translation. 

CS 1231 - Year of the Snake, in the month [called] |sraawana| [according 
to the Khmer tradition], i.e. the 10th lunar month, on the 2nd day of the 
waning moon, i.e. the day called |kufijawaara| [in the Khmer tradition], 
|wan angaar| [in the Mon tradition, and ...??.... in the] Dai [tradition], 
just before the time of the sunset drum.- Written by Dhammajaiy 
Bhikkhu. The writing was done while I was staying, spreading Loving- 
Kindness [among the lay community] as Abbot of the monastery called 
Wad 'Daa Mahimsaa, after having received the Royal invitation of His 
Majesty the Great Ruler [of Miiiian 'Naan] to join in making a manuscript 
of the Pali work named C°, in order to enable people to pay their worship 
to it, and enhance the Teachings of Lord Gotama throughout the 5,000 
years of [their predicted duration]. 


(3) phuuk 5, p 41, line 4 


|srade,jh “laéaiw° yaam tuud; "jaay ‘kad “khaa 144 bindaa bhikkhu 144 


wou 


khiiar, "duuay ton een diiaw3 "cau 1éa-naa| 
/saladet léew fiaam thut cdaj kee khaa lee pintaa phikkhu? lee khian d6j 
ton ?een diaw caw lee naa/ 


Translation. 
Accomplished shortly after noon-time - Bindaa Bhikkhu did the writing 
all by himself, my dear! 


(4) phuuk 5 , p 42, line 1-2 


|"khaa khiiar, "gaam juu du 'bii’ hluuan "cau dhammajeeyy, wad "paan 
‘daa mahimsaa ‘kéa "khaa 144 “khaa khiiar, paan ‘miiiia; 'yuu" meettaa 
saddhaa "paan hnaad tuua ‘po naam sak glaay khau, ‘daan giid yaak, ja 
(!) ‘aan teem dhii (!) ‘hlo” ‘noo" 66; 66; [2] cundasakkabda "dai 1231 tuua 
plii kad "sai "khii “gaan "téim haa"| 


/khda khian k4m cuu ti? pii lian caw thammacaj wat baan téa mahinsdia 
kée kh@a lee khda khian pday méa jiu méettda satthaa baan niat tila b3 


98 Harald Hundius 


yaam sak kaaj khaw t@an két fidak ca ?aan tém thii 15 "ndo* 79a 209 [2] 
clinda?sakkapta? d@j pan s3on 1d0j sadam sip et tila pii kat saj khii khdan 
téem haa/ 


* The use of the tone marker 2 in the manuscript (transliterated as 
|'‘ngQ"|) is obviously used to indicate the tonal quality "high-falling" 
on a particle normally associated with // (“low-falling"). This tonal 
change is not a matter of "word tone", but rather a manifestation of 
expressive intonation carried by a special class of sentence particles 
like /noo/, /nae/, /naa/ etc. As for the tonal notation of expressive 
sentence particles such as /"n5o/ in the above text, see HUNDIUS 
1990:113. 


Translation. 

T have written this in support of my Elder Monk-Brother Dhammajaiy of 
Wad "Paan 'Daa Mahimsaa. I did the writing while spreading Loving- 
Kindness among the lay community of "Paan Hnaad. My writing does not 
look beautiful at all. Senior people are worried that it will be very difficult 
to read; oh yes, there is no doubt about that. CS 1231 - Year of the Snake; 
I was not keen on writing at all! 


(5) phuuk 7, no no., preceded by p 45 


|dibbawon saamaneer| 
/tippawoy sdamaneen/ 


Translation. 
[Written by] Dibbawon Saamaneer (Novice D®°)* 


*dibbawon: < P dibbavamsa 
(6) phuuk 8 , p 47, line 4 — p 48, line 1 


|culasakkaraaja "dai 1231 tuua plii kad "sai diitian 11 ook, 10 ‘gaam 


‘braam’ ‘waa’ "dai meen wan 4 daiy” p6dk; san ‘kaa “khaa 144 ‘jiiii "khaa 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 99 


‘waa’ ariya bhikkhu _ paan ‘miiiia; ‘yuu [48.1] meettaa saddhaa wad "paan 

khoor,; miitian, buua wan "nan 144| 

/cinlasakkalaaca? daj pan s3on lJoj séam sip ?et tia pii kat sij duan sip 
fet 250k sip kham phim w4a daj men wan sii taj pdok sin kée khija lee 

cia waa ?alifad? phikkhu? pdan méa jiu méettda satthaa wat baan 

kh3on muay pua wan ndn lee/ 


Translation. 

CS 1231 - Year of the Snake ({pii kad “sai|); [accomplished] on the 10th 
day of the waxing moon, in the 11th [lunar] month, corresponding to the 
4th day [in the] Mon [tradition called] |[p6dk san| [in the] Dai [tradition]. 
My name is Ariya-Bhikkhu. [Written] while I was spreading Loving- 
Kindness among the lay community of Wad "Paan Khoor, Miiian Buua, 
on that very day. 


(7) phuuk 9, p 49.4 - 50.3 


|culasakkaraaja "dai 1231 tuua maroon snaam kambooja khrgom, bhisai 
waa[50.1]la thnai dai bhaasaa ‘waa plii kat “sai(...) sudhamma bhikkhu 
likkhitta jootaka mahaaraaja miiiiash ‘naan wan "nan 144 "ldaw’ [2] diiiiar, 
10 "khiin’ 14 'gaam ‘braam ‘waa’ dai wan 7 dai ‘klaa mest yaam kogon; 
haay srade,jh yaam “nan 144 haan miiiiah, buua huua miiiian, naan, ‘don’ 


"han ‘dii’ 'plaa ma"hyaa 'kogr; tuua ‘po naam (...) ee ‘po naam ee ee 'g0° 


‘pe naam [3] hlaay huua faay “naam “loom, "naam waad "oom; teem dhii 
144 naay hddy'| 


/ciintasakkalaac&? daj pan s3op ISoj siam sip ?et tia maloop sanim 
kampooca? kh3om phisaj waala? thandj taj phaas’a w4a pii kat sAj(...) 
suthamma? phikkhu? likkhitta? cootaka? mahdalaacd? mwan naan wan 

nén lee léew duan sip khén sip sii kham phim waa daj wan cet taj kaa 

mét flaam ndn lee haan muan pua hia mway peeg ton hdp tii pda maida 
k5n_ tia b5 naam (...) ?ee b3 naam ?ee 7ee k5 b3S naam laj_hiia fiaj ndém 
l3om_ ndm wéet ?30m tém thii lee naaj haoj/ 


100 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

CS 1231 - In the Year called |maroon| in the Khmer tradition, and 
|pii kad “sail [in the] Dai tradition. - Written by Sudhamma-Bhikkhu in 
support of the Great Royal Ruler of Miiiiam ‘Naan, in the 10th [lunar] 
month, on the 14th day of the waxing moon which corresponds to the 7th 
day {of the Mon calendar], [called] |'kaa med] [in the] Dai [tradition], at 
the time of the morning drum; accomplished at that time, [when I was 
staying in a remote village] between the last settlements of Miitian Buua, 
and the first settlements of Miiiian Naan, far out in the abandoned fields 
where love-grass abounds. My writing does not look beautiful, indeed; the 
‘head of the weir surrounded by water, water all around: dreadful, oh dear! 


NB: love-grass: Chrysopogon aciculatus (NT /mafida k3n/; CT /jaa 
caw chifu/, lit: "Don Juan-Grass"), a grass with seeds that adhere 
to objects passing by. By pressing on the skin, these seeds may cause 
pain. Cf. McFARLAND (3.1956:900). The mention of "the weir 
surrounded by water ... " probably not only conveys the rainy 
season's mood of desolation in a remote village, but is also meant as 
an allusion to the "inundated" look of the handwriting. 


(8) phuuk 10, nono., preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc. 


|sakraaj 1231 diiiiayn 9 dutiya "ld4aw’ 144 bhikkhu leekkhamatti 144 


"cau hddy' swaad swaad “hnaa dhap plaay c°| 


/sakhaat pan sSon 1d0j sdam sip ?et tia dwan kaw titifiar Iéew lee 
phikkhu? léekkhamatti? lee caw heej swaat swaat naa thap paaj 
cakkawaalatipanii/ 


Translation. 

[CJS 1231 - In the 9th [lunar] month, on the 2nd [day of the waxing/ 
waning moon?], this copy of the last phuuk of the C° was} completed. 
The writing was done by a Bhikkhu himself ... Back Cover Folio of C°. 


(9) phuuk 10, p 48, line 1c-2a 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 101 


|paripunna srlade,jh "lddw" yaam koon; [2] haay ‘kai "khaa 144 tuua ‘po’ 
naam hlaay| 


/palipinna? saladet léew fiaam k3on naaj kée kha lee tia b3 naam ldaj/ 


Translation. 
Accomplished at the time of the morning drum. The writing does not look 
beautiful at all. 


17. CAMADEVIVANSA [4.2] Author: Bodhiramsi 
(probably 15th c.) 


Roll 9, 52". Dc no 0253, ms no 926. 5 phuuk, 5 lines. Complete. CS 1195 = 
AD 1833. Wat Sung Men. Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. 


Begins: 

namatthu. adiccavamso pavaro jino yo manussajato dipadanam indo 
byamappabhaso asipamaro [read: abhipamaro] manipajoto jina[m] tam 
namami gambhiram attham punam  sududdasam sa __ sappabi 
jil2]vajasinero (?) (h)ettham nananayanam munisevitan tam sukhumam 
dhammam pavaram namami 


Ends: phuuk 5, p 38 = ff v, line 3b 

evam dhatupatihariyaniddeso[4] ca puna patham vamyam nimutta (!) 
ca Bodhiramsina nama mahatherena lankato paficadasamo vatto[5] 
nitthito Camadevivanssa(!) nitthita 


Colophons. 
(1) “mai hlaap: 


|tuua paalii deewantasuut mii saam phuuk, 144  tuua paalii 
caamadeewiiwansa mii “haa phuuk, 144 gruu paa kaficana arafifiawaasii 


miiiian "brad peen "glau” saddhaa “broom, kap sissa "cau’ dah muuar, 
“saan yan dhamm kambii "nii 144 "saan nai miiiiasi ‘naan| 


102 Harald Hundius 


/tia baalii teewantasdut mii sadam phiuk Iee tua _ baalii 
cdamateewiiwansa? mii hia phiuk lee khuu baa kancan4? ?alanfiawaasti 
muay phée pén kdw satthaa phdom kap sitsa? ciw tay muan saan flan 
tham kampii nifi lee say naj mean naan/ 

Translation. 

The Pali text of Deewantasuut, comprising 3 phuuk; the Pali text of C°, 
comprising 5 phuuk.- The Venerable Forest-dweller Gruu Paa Kajficana, 
Miiiian ‘Bréa, as initiating monastic supporter, together with all his 


followers joined in the making of this Dhamma manuscript.- Made in 
Miitian ‘Naan. 


(2) Front Cover Folio: 


|phuuk, "ton caamadeewiiwansa paalii c° lia phuuk, “ton” 'dgon; dhaan 
"ldaw’* taam capap ‘klau"| 


/phiuk t6n c4amiteewiiwansa? _baalii cdamateewiiwansa? lee phuuk 
tOn 5p thaan léew tiam cabap kaw/ 


Translation. 
First phuuk [of the] C° - Pali text ... Thoroughly checked with the 
original. 


(3) "mai hlaap, reverse side (preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc.) 


|"saan 'miiiia; sakraaj "dai 1195 tuua plii ‘klaa "sai 144] 
/séay méa sakhaat daj pan nép ISoj kaw sip hia tia pii kaa sj lee/ 


Translation, see (4) 
(4) phuuk 1, no no., preceded by p 46 
|cudassakabda 1195 tuua plii kaa "sai’ diitia;fi 10 huuraa réim 1 {hok} 


‘gaam wan angaan daiy kod yii yaam trad ‘suu [?] paripunna 144 
nibbanapaccayo hotu metteyya santike anagate nicam dhuvam 1aa| 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 103 


/cuda?sakapt&? pan nag IS5oj kaw sip hia tia pili kaa saj = dwan sip 
hiulaa naéy kham wan ?ankaan taj kot fii flaam thée stu [?] paliptinna? lee 
nippaana? patcafioo hootu? méettdjfia? sAntikée ?anaakatée nitcdy thiwan 

lee/ 


Translation. 

CS 1195 - Year of the Snake, in the 10th lunar month, accomplished on 
the 1st day of the waning moon, [corresponding to the day called] | wan 
angaar| [in the Mon tradition, and] |kod yii| [in the] Dai [tradition], at 
the time of the [morning/ evening] horn (...). 


(5) phuuk 2, Front Cover Folio: 

|paalii c° phuuk, 2 ‘dooms dhaan "ld4w’ taam capap ‘klau’| 

(for phonematic transcription and translation, see above, colophon (2). 
(6) phuuk 2, p50 = ghu v 


|culasakkabda "dai 1195 tuua_plii ‘klaa “sai” diitiasfi 11 daiy dap pol (!?) 
meen wan can paripunna "lédw’ yaam koon; hnaay (sic!) ("kaa] "khaa laa 


arahantamaggayanam nibbanapaccayo hontu me J4a| 


/ctinla?sakkapta? dj pan n&p lJoj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa saj dwan 
sip Zet taj dap bon (?) meg wan can palipiinna? léew fiaam k5op yaaj 
[kée] kha lee.../ 


Translation. 

CS 1195 - Year of the Snake, in the 11th [lunar] month, accomplished on 
a day [called] |dap...| [in the] Dai [tradition, and] |wan can| ("Monday") 
[in the] Mon [tradition], at the time of the morning drum. 


(7) phuuk 3, p 54 = cai v, line 1 


|Sihinganidinam nitthitam atthaparicchedavannand nitthita sakkaraaja 
1195 tuua plii ‘'klaa “sai diitiagn 11 Qok, (..) ‘'gaam daiy rwaay s"haa’ 


104 Harald Hundius 


meen wan 5 likhita paripunna pegramuuar, “phuu “khaa ‘puu" hnaan 
deebiszn likhita “gaam juu saasanaa nibbanapaccaya [3] hontu 
metteyyasantike (...) | 


/sakkalaac4? daj pan nay ldoj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa sj duan sip ?et 
?30k (..) khdm taj lwaaj sanda men wan hada likhita? paliptinna? 
boolamuan phiju kh@a piu naan teepin likhita? kdm cuu sdasanaa .../ 


Translation. 
.. completed on the (..) day of the 11th [lunar] month, [called] {rwaay 
s"faa| [in the] Dai [tradition, corresponding to] the 5th day [of the] Mon 
[tradition]. Written by Old Hnaan Deebin, in support of [Buddha's] 
Teachings ... 


(8) phuuk 4, no no., preceded by p 45 


\(...) diitiagn 11 99k, 12 'gaam ‘braam ‘waa wan 5 daiy kod se,d_ srade,cc, 
"léaw’ yaam kgon; hnaay" (!) kaa" "khaa 144 khog suumaa dé, "cau’ ‘dii’ 
“hwai h,ddy | 


K...) daan sip Pet 230k sip sdop kham pham waa wan hia taj kot set 
saladet léew fiaam k50p yaaj kée khaa lee kh3o siumaa t3? caw thi waj 
hoej/ 


Translation. 

(CS 1195 - Year of the Snake), in the 11th [lunar] month, on the 12th day 
of the waxing moon, corresponding to the 5th day [in the Mon tradition, 
called] |kod sed| [in the] Dai [tradition]. Accomplished at the time of the 
morning drum. To you, respected [reader of this phuuk], I should like to 
apologize {for the bad handwriting]. 


(9) phuuk 5, Cover Folio, no no., preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc. 
(microfilmed upside-down) 


|cudassaraaja 1195 tuua plii ‘klaa “sai diitia,fi 11 ook, 4 ‘gaam meen 
[wan] aadid daiy" ' 


tau" s"naa’ paripunna "laaw* yaam ‘diian, ['kda] "khaa 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 105 


144 sudinnam vatta me danam nibbanapaccayo hotu me nicam dhuvam 
dhuvam | 


/cudatsalaac? pan nay 15oj kaw sip hia tia pii kaa sj dwan sip ?et 259k 
sii kham men [wan] ?aatit taj tw sanda palipinna? léew fiaam tiap wan 
[kée] kha lee .../ 


Translation. 

CS 1195 - Year of the Snake, in the 11th [lunar] month, on the 4th day of 
the waxing moon, a [day called |wan}|] |aadid| ("Sunday") [in the] Mon 
[tradition, and] |'tau sa"fhaa| [in the] Dai [tradition]. Accomplished at 
noon-time ... (For Remarks see 18). 


18. CAMADEVIVANSA [4.2] Author: Bodhiramsi 
(probably: 15th c.) 


Roll 10, 127. Dc no 0314, ms no 722. 5 phuuk, 4 lines. Complete. CS 1204 
= AD 1842. Wat Sung Men. Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. 


Begins: 

namo tass' atthu. namatthu adiccavamso pavaro jino yo manussajato 
dipadinam indo byamappabhaso abhipamaro manipajoto jina[m] tam 
namami. gambhiram attham punam (!) sududdasam sa _ sappabi 
jivajasinero hettham nanana(y)anam [2] munisevitan tam sukhumam 
dhammam pavaram namami 


Ends: phuuk 5, p 38 = nd _v, line Ic 

evam dhatupati[2]hariyaniddeso ca puna patham vamyam nimutta ca 
Bodhiramsina nama mahatherena lankato paficadasamo vatto nitthito(!). 
Camadevivanssa nitthita. 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 1, p 46 = 23 v, line 3b 


106 Harald Hundius 


|... phuttakam tasma so srade,s "ldaw" yaam 144n réam 14 ‘gaam’ ‘braam* 
‘waa’ “dai wan 6 'kda" "khaa 144 [4] nibbanapa[cca]yo hotu me niccam 
dhuvam dhuvam dii-hlii kai" "khaa ‘d4a" dé,| 


/... saladet léew fiaam leen leem sip sii kham phim waa daj wan hok kée 
khaa lee ... dii Iti kee khaa de t3?/ 


Translation. 
Accomplished at the time of the sunset [drum], on the 14th day of the 
waning moon, corresponding to the 6th day [in the Mon tradition] (...) 


(2) phuuk 3, p 50 = tai plaay v, line Ic 


| Sihinga[2Jnidanam nitthitam(!) attham paricchedavannana nitthita 
srade,jh "I4aw* [yaam] kgon; (written: koor;) haay wan bud; 'kda "khaa 


144 Qok, 4 'gaam ‘kaa’ "khaa 144| 


/... Saladet lew [fiaam] k5on naaj wan pit kte kha lee ?30k sii kham kte 
khia lee/ 


Translation. 
Accomplished at the time of the morning drum, [on a day called] 


|wan budh| ("Wednesday") [in the Mon tradition], on the 4th day of the 
waxing moon. 


(3) phuuk 4, no no., preceded by p 55, line 1 


|culasakraaj "dai 1204 tuua plii ‘tlau"(!) yii srade;cc, "khau maa nai 
diitiar, 11 QQk, 9 'gaam” ‘braam’ ‘waa’ “dai wan 2 daiy" [2] srade,jh 
"ldiw°’ yaam kon; 14am 'kda" “khaa 144 nibbanapaccayo hotu me nicam 
dhuvam dhuvam [2] ‘kaa "khaa dii-hlii dé "khaa khiiar, paan ‘miitia, 
"khaa yuu” patipad was buu "kddw srii pur, riitia, miitia.n "baa" ‘daan’ 
“tai wan “nan 144 tuua ‘po’ naam sak "hnogy” ‘gogy’ bi,ccaranaa ‘ci,m” 
dé; ‘dii’ "hwai hddy| 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 107 


/cinlasakhaat d&j pan s3op I5oj sii ta pii taw flii saladet khiw maa naj 
duan sip ?et 230k kiw kham pham wa daj wan s5on taj (?] saladet léew 
fiaam k3on leen kte khia lee ... kee kha dii li t8? ~khda khian pdap méa 
kha jiu patibat wat puu kéew salii bun lvay muay pée daan taj wan 
nén lee tia bd paam sak n350j_k4j pitcalanaa cim t3? tii waj heej/ 


Translation. 

CS 1204 - Year of the Tiger, in the 11th [lunar] month, on the 9th day of 
the waxing moon, corresponding to the 2nd day [in the Mon tradition, 
called ...2?.... in the] Dai [tradition]. Accomplished at the time of the 
sunset drum ... I wrote this phuuk while I was staying at Wad Buu "Kaéaiw 
Srii Pufi Riiiian, Miiiiah ‘Bad, [situated to the] South [of the city of 
Miiiian 'Baa], on that very day. My writing does not look beautiful at all. 
Please, respected [reader], use careful consideration! 


(4) phuuk 5, p 38 = ni vy, line 3 


|paalii caamadeewiiwamsa “siian’ “hnii’ 144 phuuk, plaay 'g9° ‘waa’ laa 
caamadeewii phuuk, 5 144| 


/vaalii cAamateewiiwansa? sian nii lee phuuk pdaj k5 wa lee 
cdamateewii phiuk hia lee/ 


Translation. 
Here ends the Pali text of C°; in other words: this is the final phuuk. 


Remarks. 

The Camadevivamsa ("Chronicle of [Naan] Caamadeewii") written in 
prose with interspersed verses, relates the history of Haripufijaya, 
presently Lamphun, the ancient Mon kingdom founded according to the 
local tradition by Naan Caamadeewii (in Northern Thai mostly 
written|cammadeewii| and pronounced /cammiateewii/), the legendary 
Princess of Lavo (presently Lopburi), in the 7th century. The narration 
ends with the reign of King Adittaraja (Pali name: Adiccar@ja), in the 
middle of the 12th century. 


108 Harald Hundius 


This chronicle was written by Bodhiramsi, at the beginning of the 15th 
century (cf. Ca:DES 1925:13). The author, perhaps a native of either 
Chiang Mai or Lamphun, states that he used indigenous sources, i.e. 
accounts written in NT, for his work. The incorrectness of the Pali in 
which this text has come down to us, has stunned Pali scholars like G. 
Ccedés, who, in 1925, edited Chapters XII to XIV (of altogether 15) in 
Roman characters, together with a translation into French, by reprinting 
the text of a bilingual (Pali-Thai) edition in Siamese script published 
under the auspices of the National Vajirafiana Library, Bangkok, in 1920, 
which was however thoroughly collated with a manuscript kept at the 
same place; see ibid., p. 14-15; as for the Pali text, see pp. 141-155, for 
the Translation, pp. 156-171. According to Coedés (ibid., p. 14) there is a 
lacuna in all known manuscripts of the C° comprising the text from the 
end of the IVth to the beginning of the VIIth pariccheda (chapter), 
corresponding to one phuuk. In manuscript 18, (and, likewise, in another 
manuscript of the C°, 17, presented above), this part is occupied by the 
Buddhasihinga-Nidana, written by the same author. Since later reprints 
of the C° in Thailand do not include the Pali text, a new edition making 
use also of Lan Na manuscripts like the ones included in the present 
microfilm collection, would be desirable. 


NB: Possibly this manuscript was directly copied from the preceding one, 
ie. 17. 


19. JATAKA:  Vessantaradipani 2.5.10.[16?] Author: 
Sirimahgala (AD 1517) 


Roll 8, 105". Dc no 0237, ms no 840. 11 phuuk, 5 lines. First bundle; 
comprising the first 6 [of 13] kandas. Complete. CS 1198 = AD 1836. Text 
(not colophons) written in Laotian Dhamma script. Wat Sung Men. 
Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. 


Begins: 

anekajati(!) jano yo patto sambodhim uttamam atikkamesajatake 
dakkham natvana nayakam. nekajati atikkamma na yo sutonava adhigato 
tam pa{m)}varam dhammam natva lokahita[2]kkaram. nekajatim ... 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 109 


Ends: phuuk 11, p 51, line 2a 

iti culavanapabbe paficapannasa gathayo honti ‘ti sujanapamojjatthaya 
kataya Vessantaradipa[3]niyam culavanapabbaparicchedo sattho jha, 
corresponds to Ja VI 532,10 


Colophons. 
(1) “mai hlaap. 


|paalii; dipanii mahaaweessantara mad "ton mii sip e.d phuuk, bra 
mahaatheera "cau" ton ‘jiiii” kaficana arafifiawaasii miiiiajn ‘brad’ [2] peen 
mullasaddhaa 144 sissa dan muuar, saddhaa baay nook; mii "cau’ 
miiiian, [3] "brad 144 “cau” raajawon miiiian; hluuan bra paan peen “glau’ 


144 "saan nai miitia,;n hluuan bra paan| 


/baalii tipanii mahdawéetsantala? mat tin mii sip ?et phduk pha? 
mahdathéela? caw t6n cau kancana? ?alanfidwaasii mean phée [2] pén 
munlasatthaa Ié? sitsa? tay muan_ satthaa paaj n5ok mii caw muap [3] 
phée lé? caw laatciwon muan lian phd baan pén kdw_ I€? satthaa nak sin 
nak bun tay muan phdom kan say lee sday naj may way phd baan/ 


Translation. 

The] Pali [text of] Dipani Mahavessantara - First Bundle; comprising 11 
phuuk. The Venerable Forest-dwelling Mahaatheera named Kaficana from 
Miiiian 'Bréa as leading monastic supporter, and his followers, the Ruler of 
Miiiian ‘Bréaé and the "Cau Raajjawon* of Miiiiai Hluuan Bra 
Paan as leading lay supporters, together with all the pious lay-men and 
lay-women [of both states] joined in the making [of this manuscript]. 
Made in Miiiian Hluuan Bra Paan. 


* |raajjawon| is an official title for one of the three highest 
administrative functions under the King or Ruler (|"cau miitian|) of a 
Siamese vassal state or principality. According to Laotian and 
Northern Thai custom, only members of the Royal family (|"cau| or 
|"daaw|), are eligible for these positions. Cf. JONES 1971: 122. 

(See Remarks for further details). 


110 Harald Hundius 


(2) phuuk 1, no no., preceded by p 49 


[bra mahaatheera "cau’ ton ‘jiiti’ kaficana arafifiawaasii miiiia,si ‘brid 
peen "glau 144 sissa dan muuar, saddhaa baay nook, mii raajjawon 
mijuan, hluuan bra paan peen “glau’ “broom, kan “saan 144| 


/pha? mahdathéela? ciw ton cv kincan4? ?alanfidwaasii muan phée pén 
kaw I€? sitsa? tay muan _ satthaa paaj ndok mii latcawon mean Ilan phd 
baay pén kdw phdom kan saan lee/ 


Translation. 

The Venerable Forest-dwelling Mahaatheera Kaficana from Miitian ‘Brad 
as initiator (i.e. leading monastic supporter) together with his followers, 
and the Raajjawon of Miiiiah Hluuan Bra Paan as leading lay supporter, 
joined in having made [this manuscript]. 


(3) phuuk 2, no no., preceding p 1 


|sakraaj “dai 1198 tuua plii; rwaay san paalii mahaaweessantara 144 
phuuk, 2 24 paii 48 "hnaa [2] dhamm hluuan 144 porammapubbitt 


bra pean "cau" "laan’ "jaan ‘rom’ khaaw 144 [3] paalii dipanii 
mahaaweessantara phuuk, 2| 


/sakhaat da@j pan nig |doj kaw sip péet tia pii lwaaj sin _ baalii 
mahdawéetsantala? lee phtuk s5on saaw sii baj sii sip pet naa{2] tham 
lian lee bolammabuppit pha? pén caw Idan cdan 16m khaaw lee[3] baalii 
tipanii mahdawéetsantala? phiuk s3op/ 


Translation. 

CS 1198 - Year of the Monkey. [The] Pali [text called] Dipani 
Mahavessantara, phuuk 2, [comprising] 24 folios, 48 pages.- Royal 
manuscript - [the making having been sponsored by] His Majesty the 
Ruler of “Laan "Jaan 'Rom Khaaw*. Pali [text of] Dipani M°- phuuk 2. 

* "Millions of Elephants and the White Parasol" (mostly written Lan 
Chang, Lan Sang or Lanxang Homkhao resp.) is the traditional 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 111 


name of the Lao kingdom of Luang Prabang/Vientiane. The mention 
refers to King Mangthathurat who ruled over Luang Prabang from 
1817 to 1836. For further details, see Remarks. 


(4) phuuk 11, no no., preceded by p 51 (written in Lao, in very small 
characters; partly unreadable on the microfilm) 


{pa subham as{a}tu bra mahaa sa(fkyu!?) “dai 1198 tuua_plii; rwaay 
san diiiiasn (...) wan (...) yaam (..) luu.k, somde,cc porammapubbitt bra 
pen "cau; “laan’ “jaan” 'rom’ khaaw porommaseetthakhattiya suriya bra 
raajawonsaa bra mahaa uttama oorassaa raajaadhiraas "cau; mii bra 
raajasaddhaa poromma(.)i(.)aa sati naii bra raaja[2]horadai "hliitiam’  saii 
wora ba buddhasa[a]ssnaa ‘haan’ bra mahaakrunnaadhigur, "cau; an 'yi,A 
‘cin’ “dai mnimantana bra worajimnaputtaa sanghasamaggaa “hail” 
"boom; kap kan "“laéiw’ ‘cin’ “dai (...) “haii’ (...) rikkhittaa “saan 
yan bra saddhammaa gambhiruttamaa nanthaadigur, “cau, duuan 
yuuad,[3] 'yi,()” k66t thaawara jootanaa "wai" pe,n mullasaassnaa siilip 
siiiip pai baay "hnaa” 144 (jiiiin) danavatthu daan duuan "nii’ bra on 
jaambo, “duuay° puttasaneehaa kho[o] uddhisa naa pur; pai thdd6n 
yah woraraajaputtii mii bra naamapaiifiatti ‘jiii’-'waa’ naan gaam tan 
suwannaraajakalyaa (...) [4] (...) cutti pai ‘suu” poralook baay “hnaa’ 
kho[o] teeja pufiaa(..)sandara (...) ‘yiiiiayi’ "nii’ con “hati” pe.n yaan 
"kddw’ yaa[n] gaam naam pai rood; "khau; bai(!) cogds (...) con “hati” 
pe2n watthaa balanaa aahaan dibb an bi,seed" con "haii’ pai thoon 
‘kaa’ bra kasattii on "nan con “haii’ “dai’ “bon” caak, heed" 


gaam “yaan” con "haii’ pen sra{S]baan gaam ‘son’ "khiin’ théén ‘haan’ 
“hoon "taii (...) dda "dau; wan prakaan 1 khog teeja bra raaja(k)ooson 
(written: °som) phalla naa pur; gunn wi,seed" an "nii’ (... ... ) [5b] an “nii’ 
kho[o] con “haii (...) naam on bra pen “cau, "hati’ "dai’ “hwai’ ‘yaan’ 
“naam” "kwaan’ giiii-'waa’ ooghasonsaan kho[o] “haii’ "dai swédéy yan 
sampatti suk, 3 ‘si’ giiii-'waa’ “hoon "jan “faa” (yin’) pe.n bra int suk, 


dai manussalookaa| 


NB: This colophon is given only in transliteration and translation. 


112 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

In CS 1198 - Year of the Monkey (|pii rwaay san|), in the (...) month, on 
the (...) day (...), at the time of (....), His Royal Highness the Most Exalted 
Son of His Majesty the King of “Laan Jaan 'Rom Khaaw, his heart filled 
with faith in the Excellent Buddhasasana, invited a chapter of Noble 
Elders to participate in the making of this excellent holy Dhamma 
manuscript, laying thereby an enduring foundation for the Noble 
Teachings of the Buddha. As for the merit to be obtained for this pious 
gift, His Royal Highness, his heart imbued with parental love, should 
like to dedicate it especially to his excellent Princess-daughter, named 
Naan Gaam Tan Suwannaraajakalyaa who ... has passed away to the 
other world lying ahead. May the power of the merit [obtained by this 
pious deed] serve as a golden vehicle taking her up to [Nibbana] ... May 
{the merit aquired] also provide her with celestial clothes, jewels and 
special food. May the Princess be free from causes of fear. May [the merit 
acquired] become a golden bridge leading her up to [the heavenly worlds] 
... Finally, may the fruit of this Royal pious deed ... help Her Highness 
swim safely across the broad ocean of Samsara. May she enjoy the Three 
Kinds of Happiness: the heavens being [the abode of?] Indra (are better?) 
than any of the Worlds of Man (?).* 


* The last part of the sentence is difficult to read on the microfilm; the 
text, as transliterated above, does not conform with regular 
grammatical structure. The exact meaning remains therefore 
doubtful. 


Remarks. 
This work, written by Sirimangala of Chiang Mai in 1517 (see Ca@:DES 
1915:41), has not yet been edited. 

As for the making of this manuscript, two supporters from the ruling 
Royalty of Luang Prabang appear to have joined in the meritorious action. 
The first is called |"Cau Raajjawon| in colophon (1), and |Raajjawon| in 
colophon (2). In (4), although part of the text is difficult to read, 
reference is doubtless made to a son of the King of Luang Prabang as 
being the leader of the huge manuscript copying campaign on the side of 
the host country. Since it is known from the inscription of Wad Wijuur 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 113 


mentioned above (see Part A, footnote 41) that the better part of the 
manuscripts copied for Gruu Paa Kaficana in Luang Prabang in AD 1836 
(177 out of a total of 242 bundles) were made through financial support 
from the "Cau Raajjawon, it seems safe to assume that the »Most Exalted 
Son of His Majesty the King of "Laan "Jaan "Rom Khaaw< mentioned in 
(4) and the ("Cau) Raajjawon mentioned in (1) and (2) as well as in the 
inscription of Wad Wijuur are in fact one and the same person. Since the 
wording of colophon (3) obviously refers to the King of Luang Prabang as 
(another) supporter, it has to be concluded that on the Laotian side both 
the King and his son, the "Cau Raajjawon of Luang Prabang, sponsored 
the making of this manuscript. The same holds tre for another 
manuscript presented here, no. 22. What remains to be explained is how 
the neatly separated contributions recorded in the Wad Wijuur Inscription 
(34 bundles sponsored by the King against 177 bundles sponsored by the 
"Cau Raajjawon) can fit with the fact of joint sponsoring of certain 
manuscripts. - 

No further evidence of the "Cau Raajjawon and the princess-daughter 
named Kham Tan (|Gaam Tan|) could be found in the available Laotian 
chronicles and other historical sources. 


20. LOKADIPA 2.9.17 Author: Nava-Medhamkara 


Roll 8, 043. Dc no 0233, ms no 357. 12 phuuk, 5 lines. Complete. CS 943 = 
AD 1581. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


NB: the manuscript is microfilmed in the following order: phuuk 10, 4, 3, 
5, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 1, 11, 12. 


Begins: 

namo tassa_ bhaga[va]to arahato sammasambuddhassa  settham 
setthadadam buddham loke lokagganayakam lokabandhum mahaviram 
lokanatham namamy aham lokanathena tena 'pi lokakacariyena yo pijito 
tafi ca saddhammam vande gambhiram uttamam ... 


Ends: phuuk 12, p 55, line Sb - p 56, line 1 


114 Harald Hundius 


tena sihadipe (!) arafifavasinam pasatthamahatheranam 
vamsalamkarabhitena medhamka[1l]ra mahatherakhyappati tena 
sa(n]gharafi{fija kato yam loka{m}ppadipakasaro ‘ti rattand namena 
lokadipakaro saro ca. 


(For the following colophon in Northern Thai, see colophon [4], below). 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 1 (not 10), no no., preceded by p 46 = Khah v 


|pii, "ruuan; “sai” diiiiayn ciiah ok, 5 'gaam” wan 5 culasakraaj “dai” 

943 tuua ‘daan’ naay pufi; wadhana naan "kadw’ miia, gaa(m) "la4aw’ 
"saan "wai peen muulasaasnaa bra “cau’ ‘too; "daujo 5 ban wassaa gaam 
(written: gaam) prathnaa ‘cun’ somriddhii,[2] ka kha phuuk, ‘niin’ |* 


/pii lian saj dwan ciay ?50k haa kham wan hia cinlasakhaat daj kadw 
1Soj sii sip sdam tia taan naaj bun watthand? naan kéew mia kham 
léew sfian waj pén muulasdasanaa pha cw t5o t4w haa pan watsia kam 
phdathanaa ci sOmlitthii ka? kha? phwuk nép/ 

* The vowel is written as |i], the velar final as a subscribed |n| plus a 
Niggahita placed besides the superscribed |i|. 


NB: Throughout the colophons of this manuscript only one graph, viz. 
lil is used to represent the vowels /i/, /a/, /au/, and mostly also /ii/ 
(transliterated as |ii,|). Since the homography between the vowels /i/ 
and /a/ (and their long variants, respectively) only occurs in rare 
cases, it is not provided for in the allograph inventory to be found in 
HUNDIUS 1990, 


Translation. 

Year of the Snake - In the first [lunar] month, on the Sth day of the 
waxing moon, CS 943, donated by Naay Pufi Wadhana and Naan "Kdaw, 
his beloved (lit.: golden") wife. The manuscript was made as a foundation 
for the Teachings of Buddha so that they will last for 5,000 years. May 
these wishes be fulfilled! 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailana 11) 


(2) phuuk 2 (not 5), no no., preceded by p 48 = ghah v 


|pii "ruuan’ “sai” diiiiasn cian gk, 5 gaam wan 5 culasakraaj "dai 943 
tuua ‘daan’ naay pufi; wadhana jaayaa naan "kddw’ miia, gaam (written: 
gaam) "laaw’ ‘kau’(!) "saan "wai peen muulasaasnaa (written: “lasnaa) 
bra “cau” ‘tog; "dau; 5 ban wassaa gaam praathnaa "cun’ somriddhii, 


duk, an| 


/pii Wan s4j duan ciay 230k hia kham wan haa ciinlasakhaat daj kaw 
15oj sii sip siam tia t@an naaj bun watthand? caafiaa naan kéew mia 
kham léew kaw (= k30?) saan w4j pén muuldsdasanaa pha ciw t3o tdw 
hia pan watsia kam phdathanaa clin somlitthii t0k ?an/ 


(For translation, see [1)). 
(3) phuuk 12, no no., preceded by p 5 


|pii, "ruuan; "sai sakraaj “dai’ [9]44 tuua hnan,siiii (written: °si) 
‘daan° pufi; wadhana jaayaa ‘jiili’-'‘waa" (written: ji-waa) "kddjw’ miia, 
(written, only this time, as what could be interpreted as ‘maa") gaam 


"laaw? "saan? "wai’ kap [wad] srii, 'un3 miiiiayh ‘daa’ “soggy” peen pracai 
“gaam’ (written: gaam) tog; “daujo 5 ban wassaa| 


/pii iay saj sakhaat daj [kaw 15oj] sii sip sii tha napstiy taan bun 
wiatthand? caafiaa cfu w4a kéew mia kham léew saan waj kap [wat] 
sal¥i 7 muag ta s3oj pén phatcdj kdm to taw h&a pan watsda/ 


Translation. 

CS 944 - Year of the Snake. This book was made at the behest of Naay 
Pufi Wadhana - Made for [Wad] Srii 'Un Milian, "Daa “Sooy, as a 
contribution to give support [to Buddha's Teachings] so that they may 
last for 5,000 years. 


(4) phuuk 12, p 56, line Ic 


116 Harald Hundius 


|a[n] “nii” ‘daan’ saddhaa ‘ji? ‘waa°(2] puff; wadhana jaayaa ‘jiiii’ ‘waa’ 
Kammaraanan, “cau” ‘hmiiiin; liiap ‘ji’ ‘waa’ {‘jiiii’-'waa’} saan gaam daa 
“saan” “wai peen muulasaasnaa (written °lasnaa) bra buddha "“cau’[3] 
“hii dap duk, da muuan; siia, ‘po’ seed sala diiiin 144| 


ftan nfi tan satthaa céa waa bun wéatthind? caafiaa cau wia 
kammalaanan caw méun Iiap civ waa {cfa waa} s€en kham taa saan 
waj pén muulasdasanaa pha? piitthd cdiw haw dap tik tay muan sia 
bd séet sala? tuun lee/ 


Translation. 

This manuscript was made at the behest of the lay supporter Pui 
Wadhana and his spouse, named Kammalaanan, as well as "Cau ‘'Hmiiiin 
Liiap, named Sain {Gaam} Daa, in order to build a foundation for the 


Teachings of Lord Buddha so that all suffering be extinguished 
completely. 


Remarks. 

The text of colophons (1) and (2) is repeated at the end of every other 
phuuk except the last (phuuk 12). This leads to the assumption that these 
colophons were written on the same day. As for the date given in (3), this 
is marked by a double inconsistency: not only is the number 9 omitted, but 
the last number is also changed from 3 to 4, which would not fit in with 
the Cyclical Year |"ruuan "sail. For a description of another very old 
manuscript of the L° in Northern Thai script, see v. HINUBER 1987:25-27. 
The Pali text of the L° which is also known as Lokadipakasara_ or 
Lokappadipakasarapakarana, has been transcribed from Khmer 
manuscripts in a number of (unpublished) M.A. theses written by students 
of the Chulalongkorn University between 1979-1983. Separately, in 1986, 
an edition of the whole Pali text based on 12 manuscripts written in 
Khmer and one written in Mon script, the oldest of which dates from AD 
1771, has been published together with a translation into Central Thai by 
the National Library, Bangkok (Fine Arts Department). For more details, 
see v. HINUBER (op. cit.). 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 117 


21. LOKADIPA 2.5.17 Author: Nava-Medhamkara 


Roll 8, 061". Dc no 0234, ms no 720. 10 phuuk, 5 lines. Complete. CS ahs 
= AD 1836. Wat Sung Men. Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. Written in 
Laotian Dhamma script. Colophons in Northern Thai. 


Begins: 

namo tassa bhagavato arhato samm[a|sambuddhassa  settham 
setthandadam buddham loke lokattandyakam lokabandham mahaviram 
lokanatham namamy aham. lokanathena tenapi lokekacariyena [2] yo 
pijito tattha (!) saddhammam vande gambhiram uttamam ... 


Ends: phuuk 10, p 53 = pi r, line 4 
[a]ntarayam vinasaro yatha nittha upagato tatha nittha susamkappa 
sattanam dhammanissita sabba[5]fi[fiJutafianasa(!)paccayo _hotu 
sivavatthum lokappadipakasaram pakaranam §mahdasangharajena 
lida[54.1 ]yarajassa taruna (read: karuna) vifrajcitam samattam 
nibbanam paramam su{k}kham lokadipaka paripunna nitthita(!). 


Colophons. 
(1) "mai hlaap: | 


|paalii lookadiispa mii sip phuuk,; bra mahaatheera “cau” ton ‘jiiii’ 
kaficana arafifiawaasii miiiian, ‘brad’ peen mullasaddhaa 14a sissa dan[2] 
muar saddhaa baay nook; mii "cau" miiiian, ‘brad’ 14a "cau 
raajjawonmiiiian, hluuan bra paan peen “glau’ [3] laa saddhaa nak nak 
pufi, dan muuar,; "broom, kan "saan l44 "saan nai miiiian, hluuan bra 


paan| 
Jlookadiipa? mii sip phuuk .../ 


Translation. 
Lokadipa - comprising 10 phuuk ... 


(the text which follows is identical with 19 [1}). 


118 Harald Hundius 
(2) phuuk 1, Title Folio 


|paalii lookadii,pa (= °dipa) phuuk, “ton sakraaj "dai 1198 tuua_plii 
rwaay san paalii lookadii,pa (= °dipa) phuuk, "ton| 


/vaalii lookatipa? phiuk t6n  sakhaat daj pan np Idoj kaw sip péet tia 
pii lwaaj san baalii lookatipa? phauk t6n/ 


Translation. 


[The] Pali [text of] Lokadipa - First phuuk. CS 1198 - Year of the 
Monkey. 


(3) phuuk 1, no no., preceded by p 46 


|saddhaa baay nai mii bra mahaatheera "cau ton ‘jiili’ kajicana 
arannawaasii miiiiasn ‘bréa peen "glau J44 sissa "cau’ dah muuar; 
saddhaa baay nook, mii raajjawon miiiiayi hluuan bra paan peen "glau 
Ww 2 
breom, kan "saan | 


/satthaa paaj naj mii pha? mahdathéeli? ciw tén caw  kancanaz 
Palanfiawaasii muay phée pén kdw Ié? sitsa? cdw tay muan_ satthaa paaj 
nook mii laatcawon muag lian phd baay pén kdw phdom kn sdan/ 


Translation. 


The Venerable Forest-dweller named Mahaatheera Kaficana, Miiiian ‘Braa, 
as the leading monastic supporter, and his followers, together with the 
Raajjawon of Miiian Hluuah Bra Paani as the leading lay supporter, 
joined in having made [this manuscript]. 


NB: Virtually identical colophons are inscribed at the end of the other 
phuuk. (For Remarks, see 20; as for the supporter, see Remarks to 
19, supra). 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thattand 112 


22. LOKASANTHANA (-JOTARATANAGANTHI) 


ROLL 8, 200". De no 0242, ms no 1050. 5 phuuk, 5 lines. Complete. CS 
1198 = AD 1836. Wat Sung Men. Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. Written in 
Laotian Dhamma script (colophons 1, 2 and 4 in Northern Thai). 


Begins: phuuk 1, p 4 = ka v (in the middle of the page) 

yo tilokantapajoto natho = lokapadipo = dhammo lokavadhano 
ariya[2]sangho attha tafi ca lokapakasakam gammafi ca loka[3]niyatam 
sangham lokaparagum vanditva sirasa lo[4]kajotikam bhasisam tatrayam 
matikdasamkheyya{5 ]|katha kappakatha kappavinaso 
samvattavivadhakatha — sattasuriyacakkavalakatha[1.5.1a] sinerukatha 
catumahadipakatha himavantakatha candimasuriyagatikatha 
saggakatha niri{2]yakathapetavisayai ca tiracchanakatha 
pakinnakakatha 'ti[3] tattha asamkheyya ‘ti na samkheyyana ganetabbo 
'ti asam[4]kheyyo. ekadivasena anekavidha yavapama[5]na tato tava 
asamkheyyo nama. tato param lakkhanam va pamanam va akatva ... 


Ends: phuuk 5, p 71, line 3a 

buddhasasane] sattanam rufifiam danam yathdsati yathabalam evam 
bhave metta ca patthayanta apattakam tassa vadigamo payo katabbo[4] 
vififund sada. (!?) iti Jotaratanasatthavannana nitthita. 


Colophons. 
(1) “mai hlaap: 


|paalii lookasanthaana jootaratanaganthii mii 5 phuuk, bra mahaatheera 
"cau’ ton ‘jiili kaficana(2] arafifiawaasii miitiasn ‘praa’ = peen 
muula[3]saddhaa 1d4 sissa dan muuar, “cau” miiiiash hluuan bra paan peen 


saddhaa baay nggk; “saan” nai miiiia;i hluuan bra paan| 


/oaalii looka?santhiana? coota?lattand?kanthii mii haa phtuk pha? 
mahdathéela? ciw ton cae kancand? ?alanf@waasii muay phée pén 
muulasatthaa I&? sitsa? tay muan cw muag wag phd baay pén satthaa 
paaj nok saan naj muay Iwan pha baan/ 


120 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

[The] Pali [text of] Lokasanthana Jotaratanaganthi consisting of five 
phuuk. The Venerable Forest-dweller Mahaatheera Kaficana, Miiiian 
‘Brad, was the leading [monastic] supporter together with his followers. 
The Ruler of Miiiah Hluuan Bra Paan was the lay supporter. - Made in 
Miiiian Hluuan Bra Paan. 


(2) Front Cover Folio, recto side 


|paalii 1° j° phuuk, “ton[2] culasakraaj "dai 1198 tuua plii, rwaay san 
144|[3] (s. line 1) 

/oaalii .... phtuk t6n cinlasakhdat daj pan nip 1oj kaw sip péet tila _pii 
lwaaj san lee/ 


Translation. 
(First line: s. above). CS 1198 - Year of the Monkey. 


(3) phuuk 1, p 1. 

(identical* with 19, colophon (4), supra) 
* Sole difference: instead of the enigmatic |*sankyu| here the word 
buddhasakkaraaja| is used. 


(4) phuuk 1, Back Cover Folio, no no., preceded by p 50 


bra mahaatheera "cau ton ‘ji’ kaficana arafifiawaasii ‘yuu miiiia,n 
‘préa peen “glau 144 sissa dan muuar,; saddhaa baay nook, mii raajjawon 
miitiayn hluuan bra paaf peen "glau’ "brggm; kan "saan| 


/pha? mahdathéela? cdw ton cfu k&ncana? ?alanidwaasii jiu muay phée 
pen kaw Ie? sitsa? tay muan__ satthaa paaj nSok mii Iaatciwoy muan Mian 
pha baayn pén kfw phdom kan sdan/ 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 121 


Translation. 

The Venerable Forest-dweller Mahaatheera Kaficana, living in Miitian 
"Braid, as initiator, together with his followers, the Raajjawon of Miitian 
Hluuan Bra Paan being the leading lay supporter, joined in the making [of 
this manuscript]. 


NB: On the front cover folios of phuuk 2-5 colophons are engraved which 
are identical with (2). In another colophon written in Laotian 
language and (Dhamma) script, identical with the one transcribed 
and translated above (19 [4]), this time an exact date is given: 
|bra buddhasakkaraaja 1198 tuua pii rwaay san diiiiazn 10 6 (hok) 
‘'gaam wan (6?) "miiii’ m6on “gail” yaam kQQn, naay ...| 


Translation. 

BE. [i.e. CS] 1198 - Year of the Monkey, in the 10th [lunar] month, 
on the 6th day [in the Mon tradition], called |m66n "gaii| (?) [in the 
Dai tradition], at the time of the morning drum ... 


Remarks. 

In the introduction, this work is called Lokajotakam. According to the 
Pali colophon (see above), this manuscript not only comprises the main 
text, but also a commentary thereon. This work (as well as its 
commentary) was previously unknown and has yet to be edited. 

For details on the supporters, see Remarks to 19, supra. 


23. MANIPADIPA 3.1.13 Author: Ariyavamsa 


Roll 8, 122". De no 0238, ms no 1052. 5 lines. Middle bundle; ie 2nd 
bundle of a set of 3. 16 phuuk. Complete. CS 1195 = AD 1833. Wat Sung 
Men. Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. 


Begins: 

keci pana idam pubbavacanena ekasambandham katva. neva napajjati ‘ti 
iti evam (a)ttha ca saddonam yam anattho hoti 'ti yojanam karoti. sa na 
yutta iti saddassa vamettha yojana katabbati [2] imina sampajjato. ayafi 


122 Harald Hundius 


(ca a)tthayojanakaranidassanattho ‘ti. yadi pana kassa iti saddassa 
lopesati purimo. iti saddo yojanakaranidassanattho [3] ... 


Ends: phuuk 16, p 50 = vam v, line 1a - 3b 

idam vuttam hoti sotapattimagge sot&pattimaggatthass’ ev' ass' eva 
sekkhassa dharako nfajfiassa  sotapattitthalatthassa sekkha[2]ssa 
sotapattitthalam sotapattat thalatthass' eva sekkhassa 
sddharananafiesam sakadag{g}amitalattham anagamittha[3]lathanam 
sekkhanam paggeva arahattatthalatthassa asekhassa. 


Colophons. 
(1) "mai hlaap: 


|tuua paalii maniispadip (Manipadipa) mii; sip hok phuuk, l4a_ gruu paa 
“cau’ kaficana arafifia[2}waasii miiiia,n ‘brad peen "glau” saddhaa 144 sissa 
"cau’ dai muuar, saddhaa baay nook, mii mahaaraaj “cau” miitiay ‘brad 
144 mahaaraaj “cau” miiiiash ‘naan’ peen(3] “glau’ 144 pajaanaarattha dan 
muuar, “broom; kan "saan yan akkharadhamm kambii, an '‘nii; "waiy 
jootaka buddhasaasnaa 5 ban wassaa 144 "saan nai miliiia,n ‘naan’ 144| 


/ttia baalii maniipatip mii sip hok phuuk lee .../ 


(the following text is literally identical with the corresponding text in 15, 
colophon [1], supra) 


Translation. 
Pali text of Manipadipa - consisting of 16 phuuk ... 


(For the translation of the following text, see 15 [1], supra). 
(2) phuuk 1, Front Cover Folio, preceding p 1 


|{b}bhikkhu ri[khiJt{a] attanoo ‘doom; dhaan (...) taam capap ‘klau 1aa 


mad klaan phuuk, "ton 144 uppanaamoo rikkhita “gaam juu 'bo93 092k, 
mahaaraas {144} hluuan 144] 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailana 125 


/phikkhu? likhita? ?attanoo 5p thaan (...) tam cabap kaw lee méat 
kian phiuk ton lee ?uppanaamoo likkhita? kém cuu p59 ?59k mahiaalaat 
lian lee/ 


Translation. 

Written by (...) Bhikkhu himself. Thoroughly checked with the original. 
Middle bundle, ist phuuk. Written by Uppanaamoo [-Bhikkhu?] in 
support of his Great Royal ‘Bee Ogk* [, the Ruler of Miiiian ‘Naan]. 


* |'bog gok| "Foster-Father; Benefactor"; in Northern Thai tradition 
needy monks or novices are materially supported by voluntary sponsors 
or “foster-fathers" (or "-mothers", resp.) who take over burdens which 
normally would be borne by one's parents or relatives. 


(3) "mai hlaap, reverse side 


|"saan ‘miiiia; sakraaj "dai 1195 tuua plii ‘klaa "sai 1aa| 
/stay m@a sakhiat daj pan néy 1doj kaw sip haa tia pii kaa s@j lee/ 


Translation. 
Made in CS 1195 - Year of the Snake. 


(4) phuuk 1, Front Cover Folio, reverse side, preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc 


|pathamamuu,lasaddhaa naamapafifiatti ‘jiiti’-'waa’  mahaa_ kaficana 
theera arafifiawaasii aaraam ‘suun “hmeer' miitian, 'bréa ‘daan “tai "saan 
“waiy "gaam juu buddhasaasnaa traap ‘tog’ "dau’ 5 ban bra wassaa ld [2]} 
culasakraaj "dai 1195 tuua plii, ‘klaa "sai mahaaraaj hluuan miitian, 


‘naan “saan” "gaam juu mahaa kaficana theera| 


/pathama? muulasatthaa naama?paniiatti? cu waa mahda kdncana? 
théela? ?alanidwaasii ?aalaam stug mén muay phée daan taj saan wdj 
kdm cuu pitthd?sdasanaa thaldap t5o téw hada pan pha? watsda lee 
ciinlasakhaat daj pan nap Idoj kaw sip haa tila pii kaa saj mahdalaat 
lia muag naan sday kdm cuu mah’a kancana? théela?/ 


124 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

Being the initial monastic supporter, the Venerable Forest-dweller named 
Mahaa Kaficana Theera of ‘Suun "Hmeer Monastery, which is situated to 
the south [of Miiiian ‘Bré4], had [this manuscript] made wishing thereby 
to ensure that Lord Buddha's Teachings will last for 5,000 years.- CS 
1195 - Year of the Snake. Donated by the Great Royal Ruler of Miiiian 
‘Naan in support of Mahaa Kajficana Theera. 


(5) phuuk 5, Front Cover Folio 


[1] s. colophon (1), supra 

|{2] sankraas 1195 tuua plii ‘klaa “saiy 144 arahantamaggafianam 
dinnam nibbanapaccayo hotu [3] me nicam dhuvam dhuvam ‘doon; dhaan 
"ldaw’ taam capap ‘klau’ | 


/... sagkhaat pan nép Idoj kaw sip haa tia pti kaa sdij lee ... t5n thaan 
léew taam cabap kaw/ 


Translation. 
[C] S$ 1195 - Year of the Snake ... Thoroughly checked with the original. 


(6) phuuk 5, p 38 


|bhikkhu jeeyyanaam khiiar, paan ‘miiiia; ‘yuu’ meettaa was “paar® 
diitinsy (!) miiiian, jlaan, "bol 144 "yoor} tuua ‘po’ ‘haay” sak yaad" 144[2] 
"dai khiiar, "dia dhamm 4 phuuk, 'po” daay ‘gooy’ biccaranaa duu dé 
saadhu “cau” ton “dai riiar; "dai ‘aan" 'go’-dii biccaranaa “hiiii’ ‘thi’ 
"YQOrs ‘pe’ sm66, kan hnai 14a| 


/phikkhu? cajfianaam khian pday mé@a jiu méettia wat ban teun muay 
caleey pon lee fidon tila bd naaj sak jaat lee[2] aj khYan tée tham sii 
phuuk b3 daaj k4j pitcalanaa duu t3? — sXathi? caw ton daj lian daj ?aan 
k5 dii pitcalanaa hie thi fiSon bd sam3o kin n§j lee/ 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 125 


Translation. 

Written by Bhikkhu Jeeyyanaam while he stayed spreading Loving- 
Kindness at Wad "Paan Diiiin, in a village that is part of remote Miitian 
Jlaan, far away. Because it was not an easy task at all to read the script 
fof the original], I only wrote four of the phuuk. Therefore, [respected 
reader], do read with careful consideration. Whoever among you, dear 
Monk-Brothers, uses this manuscript for his studies or as his reading, 
please do use thorough consideration, because the handwriting has turned 
out extremely uneven. 


(7) phuuk 6, no no., preceded by p 37 


|paripunna “laaw’ yaam koon, naay ‘kad "khaa 144 sakkabd{d}a "dai 
1195 tuua plii ‘klaa "saiy diitiasn sip 2 99k, 3 gaam ‘braam ‘waa “dai 
wan 2 daiy "ruuan, “pau” 144 [2] imind dhammarikkhittadanena yatha 
yatha bhave jato m[a] roga ma dalado bhavami ‘ham sansare sansaran 

iC Reereeee metteyyasanti[38.1]ke anagate nic{c]am dhuvam ha| 


/paliptinna? léew fiaam k3on paaj kée kha lee sakkapta? daj pan nay 159j 
kaw sip haa tia pii kaa saj dwan sip sdon ?30k sdam kham phim waa 
daj wan s3on taj ay paw lee[2] ?i2?mi?naa .../ 


Translation. 

Accomplished at the time of the morning drum. CS 1195 - Year of the 
Snake, in the 12th [lunar] month, on the 3rd day of the waxing moon, 
corresponding to the 2nd day [of the Mon tradition called] |"ruuan "pau| 
{in the] Dai [tradition]. (Followed by a lengthy wish written in Pali, at 
the beginning of which the hope is expressed that the scribe may, in his 
future lives, not be reborn as a man struck with sickness and poverty 
[daliddo is miswritten as dalado] while at the end, the common wish is 

uttered to be reborn during the life time of the future Buddha Metteyya 
[Skt: Maitreya]). 


(8) phuuk 7, p 47, line 3-4 


|culassakabadd “dai 1195 tuua_ plii maseen snaam (written: smaam) 


126 Harald Hundius 


kamboojjha khoom; bhisaiy daiy b[hJaasaa ‘waa plii ‘klaa "saiy “khau 
maa nai wasaana utu "khau maa nai sraawann _ giiii-'waa’ diiiian[4] 11 
huulwaa 90k, 13 ‘'gaam meen {wan] 1 daiy “ruuan; "saiy yaam koon,; 


haay 144 'geoy’ bidcaranaa “hiiii’ ‘thi’? dé ‘po’ "ruu’ cak, tuua "ton ‘thii’| 


/ciinlasakkapat daj pan néy ISoj kaw sip haa tia pili maséy sandm 
kampooca? kh3om phis4j taj phaasda waa pii kaa saj khdw maa naj 
watsdand? ?utu? khaw maa naj salaawan kya waa duan sip ?et 
hiulwaa ?59k sip siam kham men [wan] nép taj Ivan s4j fiaam k3op naaj 
lee k5j pitcalaanaa h@e thii t3? _-b3 hfu cak tia ton thii/ 


Translation. 

CS 1195 - Year of the Snake, in the Khmer tradition called |pii maseen|, 
in the Dai tradition called |pii ‘kaa “sail, at the beginning of the Rainy 
Season, at the beginning of [the month called] |sraawana| [in the Khmer 
tradition], ie. the 11th lunar month [according to the Dai tradition], on 
the 13th day of the waxing moon, [corresponding to] the Ist [day of the] 
Mon [tradition, called] |"ruuan "sai| [in the] Dai [tradition], at the time 
of the morning drum [accomplished]! Use thorough consideration: I have 
not been very familiar with [the style of] the script in the original! 


(9) phuuk 8, p 44 


|culassakkabadd 1195 tuua plii; maseen snaam (written: smaam) 

kaamboojjha khgom; bhisai daiy b[h]aasaa ‘waa’ 'klaa "sai sraawann 
daiy rau ‘waa” diliiayn (11) huulwaa ook, (.) [2] ‘gaam meen wan 5 daiy 
rwaay "cai yaam koon; l4an 144 _likkhitta paan ‘mitiia; 'yuu meestaa 

miiiiasn jaan nai cakkhawaar miiiiasih nandapurii, srii, militias ‘naan" 
"buur' laa... (Pali)| - 


/cinlasakkapat pan niin Idoj kaw sip hia tia -pii maséy sanim 
kampooca? kh3om phis4j taj phaas’a waa kia s@j salaawan taj law 
waa duan sip ?et(?) htulwaa ?3ok [.] kham men wan haa taj Iwaaj caj 
flaam k5op leen lee likkhitta? pay m@a jiu méettia muan cee naj 
cakkhawaan muan nantapulii salii muan ndan puun lee/ 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 127 


Translation. 

[As for the first part, see (8)] ... called 11th (?) lunar month [according to] 
our Dai [tradition], on the (.) day of the waxing moon, [corresponding to] 
the Sth day [of the] Mon [tradition, called] |rwaay "cai| [in the] Dai 
[tradition], at the time of the sunset drum. Written while I was staying, 
spreading Loving-Kindness at Miiiian Jaan, far away in the prosperous 
realm of Nandapurii* Miitian ‘Naan. 


* Nandapurii (P): "City of Joy". 
(10) phuuk 11, no no., preceded by p 47 


|sankraas 1195 plii ‘klaa "saiy meen wan 6 daiy" pddk (written: podk) 
sii diitiazn ram 13 'gaam’ _ paalii manii;padip (Manipadipa) phuuk 12 
'doon; dhaan "laaw* taam capap ‘klau| 


/sigkhaat pan néy 1Soj kaw sip haa pii kaa sj meg wan hok taj pdok sii 
duan leem sip siam khim _ baalii maniipatip phiuk sip sSop t5p thaan 
léew tdam cabap kaw/ 


Translation. 

[C] S 1195 - Year of the Snake, on the 6th day [of the] Mon [tradition, 
called] |p66k sii] [in the] Dai [tradition], in the (...) month, on the 13th 
day of the waning moon. Thoroughly checked with the original. 


Remarks. 

Colophons virtually identical with the ones transcribed and translated 
above are found in several other phuuk. In the second part of colophon (9) 
which is not included here, viz. on p 44, line 5b, the scribe reveals his 
name as |sii,wijeey bhikkhu| /siiwicaj phikkhu?/ (Pali Name: Sivijaya- 
Bh’). To my knowledge, this work has not yet been edited. - 


128 Harald Hundius 


24. BUDDHASIHINGA-NIDANA  [4.2.] Author: 
Bodhiramsi (15th c.) 


Roll 9, 094". De no 0262, ms no 801. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete (7). CS 
1199 = AD 1837. Wat Sung Men. Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. 


Begins: p 1 = ghi r, line 1a-2b 

namo tass' atthu. mnamassitvana sambuddham dhammam sanghaii ca 
uttamam ariyavaso namaham suvannasuvibuddhassa vatthunidanam 
ravissam yatha balam samdsato tam sunatha sa(2]dhukan ‘i. 

amhaka{m] pana bhagavato parinibbdnato sattasatasasanasankarajakile 


Ends: p 30 = jhi v, line 3b-4 

iti sisatanaganahuttamahanagare patitthitassa agatassa 
su[4]vanna suvibuddharupassa tatiyavatthu nidana[m] ssamattam. (!) [in 
Northern Thai:] tuua paalii Nidanam Buddhassa lai haa 


Colophons. 
(1) Cover Folio, preceding p 1, 3, 5 etc. 


|tuua paalii nidaana buddhassa phuuk, diiaw, haa[2] culasakraaj "dai 
1199 tuua plii m66n "rau diitiar; ciian,; rdam ‘gaam 1 meen wan aadit 
daiy "ruuan, "hmau yaam kgon,; réam paripunna 14a “ld4aw’ haa |[3] 
(s. line 1) 


/tua baalii nitaana? piitthdtsa? phiuk diaw — ciinlasakhiat daj pan nép 
150] kaw sip kaw tia pii moon lw duan ciag leem khim nféy men wan 
Paatit taj luay maw fiaam k5oy leen palipiinna? lee léew hia/ 


Translation. 

The Pali text of Nidana Buddhassa - One phuuk. CS 1199 - Year of the 
Cock, in the Ist [lunar] month, one the 1st day of the waning moon, on a 
|wan aadit| ("Sunday") [according to the] Mon [tradition, called] 
"ruuan “hmau| [in the] Dai [tradition,] at the time of the sunset drum: 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 129 


accomplished! 
(2) Cover Folio, reverse side, preceding p 2, 4, 6 etc 


|bra mahaatheera “cau ton ‘jiiii’ kaficana arafifiawaasii ‘suun, "hmeer 
peen "glau 144 sissa “cau dan muuar; "broom, kan "saan nai miitian, ‘brid 
lid addharassabhikkhu khiiar,[2] plaan ‘miiiia satthitt ‘saamraan wat 
hluuan srii jum; wan “nan |44 arahattamaggafianam nibbanam paramam 
sukkham | 


/pha? mahdathéela? ciw ton caw kancana? ?alaniiawaasii stug mén pén 
kéw_ 18? sitsa?. caw tay muan phdom kan sdan naj muan phée lee 
?atthalatsa?phikkhu? khian pdag méa satthit samlaan wat Ivan salii cum 
wan ndn lee ?aldhatta?makkafiaanay nippaanan palamay sukkhap/ 


Translation. 

The Venerable Forest-dweller Mahaatheera Kaficana, 'Suum "Hmeer, as 
leading [monastic] supporter, and his followers, joined in the making of 
[this manuscript] in Miiiai ‘Brad. Written by Addha-Rassabhikkhu, 
while staying happily in Wad Hluuan Srii Jum, on that very day ... 


Remarks. 

Judging from the Pali colophon (cf. the end of the text), this manuscript 
does not seem to be complete. The "Legend of the Buddha Image called 
{Bra Buddhasihin|" is another work by the Monk Bodhiramsi, the author 
of the Camadevivansa (cf. supra, 17, 18), and was probably written 
about the same time, i.e. at the beginning of the 15th c. (Cf. C@EDES 
1925:13). A copy of the S° is included in the list of manuscripts which 
were sent from Siam to Ceylon in the 18th c. (Cf. v. HINUBER 1988c:176). 
There are another two copies of this text included in the present microfilm 
collection of manuscripts from Northern Thailand: see Remarks to 17, 18. 
This text has not yet been edited. 


130 Harald Hundius 
25. VANSAMALINI 


Roll 8, 209". Dc no 0243, ms no 1051. 10 phuuk, 5 lines. Complete. CS 
1198 = AD 1836. Text written in Laotian Dhamma Script (colophons in 
NT). Wat Sung Men. Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae. 


Begins: 

vase pi tajje pi avadinatho fiatva hi te te pavisesato yo desesi 
moghavataraya tesam vandami natham tam anantafianam dhammafi ca 
sangham sirasa ‘bhivande vamse ‘pi fate n[Ajta[2]re ca fata (read: 
ataro ca fiata ?) tasma hi vamsavariyanufiatam (read: vamsacariy°) 
sankhepam vakkhami ... [4] imamhi kappe pathamo ‘va raja 
mahadinamo ahu tassa vamsaparampara-m-aga tato asinna tato sisabye 
vararajavamso ... 


Ends: phuuk 10, p 24 = dhah v, line 3a-5Sc 

so hi tava paficakam va kammatthanam va bhaveyam 
tilakkhanupatthapetva buddhassa samane tathd pasddenacalen' eva 

sampanno yeva ce siya laddhupasampado hutva. [4] Buddhaghoso catusu 

pi patisambhidasv' apatihatafiano va ce siya gotamabuddhasavako | 
Buddhaghoso tada siya idam ‘pi vacanam yeva vicdretvana kavina 
sakarucikhantiya va gahetabbam [5] yathiritam (?!). niddane 
Buddhaghosassa_ pathitattham yatharaham sadhippayam pi nissaya 
Buddhaghosa-Niddanakam viladsakaranam yeva navaniddan' idam maya 
racitam adaren' eva paripunnam va nitthitanti. 


Colophons. 
(1) "mai hlaap: 


|paalii wansamaalinii sip phuuk, bra mahaatheera "cau" ton ‘jiiii’ 


kaficana arafifiawaasii miitian, ‘brid peen mulla[2]saddhaa 144 sissa dan 


muuar; saddhaa baay nook; mii "cau" miitian, ‘brad 144 "cau raajja[3]won 


miitian, hluuah bra paan 144 saddhaa nak pufi, da muuar, “broom, kan 


“saan "saan nai miiiias hluuan bra paan| 


/baalii wansa?maalinii sip phwuk .../ 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 131 


Translation. 
[The] Pali [text of the] Vansam@lini - 10 phuuk ... 


NB: The following text is virtually identical with the inscriptions on 
the "mai hlaap of 19 and 21. For phonematic transcription and 
translation, see 19 (1). 


(2) Front Cover Folio 


|culasakraaj "dai 1198 tuua plii rwaay san 144 tuua paalii 
wansamaalinii, phuuk, "ton [da] 


/ctnlasakhaat dj pan ny 1Soj kiw sip haa tia pii lwaaj san lee tia baalii 
wansa?maalinii phiuk t6n lee/ 


Translation. 


CS - 1198 Year of the Monkey. The Pali text of Vanisamialini - First 
phuuk. 


NB: The same text is engraved on the cover folios of phuuk 2-10; at the 
end of phuuk 10, the colophon inscribed on the "mai hlaap (see 


[1], above) is repeated, except that the Royal Ruler of Phrae is 
not mentioned as supporter. 


Remarks. 

This text, allegedly composed by Buddhaghosa, was previously unknown; 
its existence, however, had already been indicated by L. FINOT (1917:15 1). 
It still awaits scholarly attention and edition. However, a Nissaya 
(Pali-Northern Thai) version of the second, and concluding part of this 
legendary chronicle called “Dutiyavansamalini" or |Taamnaan Bryaa 
Ciitian| relating events which are said to have taken place in the Lan Na 
region during the first half of the 12th century AD, has been published, 
meanwhile, in Central Thai transliteration, from a manuscript also micro- 
filmed in this collection: see GANJANAPAN; WICHIENKEEO [ed.] 1981. 


132 Harald Hundius 


26. VUTTODAYA (with a commentary) 5.7.1 Author: 
Sangharakkhita (13th c.) 


Roll 16, 021". Dc no 0572, ms no 837a (= phuuk 13 of ms no 837). 1 
phuuk, 5 lines. Complete. CS 1236 = AD 1874. Wat Chang Kham (NT 
/wat cdan kdm/). Amphoe Muang, Nan. 


Begins: 
namo tass' atthu. namatthujanasananatamamassantanabhedino ... 
(Vutt 1,3* ) 


Ends: p 32 = 16 v, line 2b-3 

dvigunata ekenata ekena akkharenan unabhuta vittharayamasambhavo 'ti 
pujulena ca dighena ca sambhi[3]to vuttayassa bhatthapavesanto 
anantonafi ca  garulamhunam agu bhavati. iti | vuttodaye 
chatthamaparicchedavannatthakatha nitthita. 


Colophon: p 32, line 4-5 
|sade,d "ldiw’ ‘dau" "nii; 'koor; 144 culasakkalaaj (written: °sakkajlaa) 

“dai ban 2°°3° 6 wan deey, m66n sii, meen [wan] 3 yaam tajaa (?!) 
sra{a}de.d (!) "khau maa 'suu” utugimhaa [kam]bhoojja khogm,  "khaa 
"dai khiiar, dhammadeesnaa phuuk,[5] "“nii; "waiy “gaam° juu joottaka 
walabuddhasaasnaa (ee yam !?) bra goodom "cau’ taap ‘too’ “dai 5 ban 
bra wassaa khoo suk, 3 prakaan mii nibbaan peen 'dii’ "l4aw’ dan pittaa 


maadaa yaatikaa 'bii’ "ngon, ‘haan rau" [‘juu] gon dé sudinnam vada me 


tanam aha hanta makafifia (!)| 


/sadet léew taw nii kan lee ctinlasakkalaat daj pan s3on Idoj s4am sip hok 
wan taj moon sii men wan séam  fiaam (...) saladet khdw maa stu 
?utu?kimhaa kimphooca? kh3om  khida dj khian thammateesanaa phtuk 
nii w4j kdm cuu cootaka? wala?pitthd?sdasanaa héy pha? koodom caw 
taap t3o daj hda pan pha? watsia kh3o suk sdam phakaéan mii nippaan 
pén tii léew tan pittia maadaa fiaatikda pii ndop hég law [cfu] khon 
t3?..../ 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 133 


Translation. 

The end [of the book called V°] CS 1236 = AD 1874, on a day [called] 
|m66n sii] [in the] Dai [tradition, corresponding to] the 3rd day [in the] 
Mon [tradition], at the beginning of the Hot Season [, as the] Khmer 
{would say?]. I wrote this Dhammadesana manuscript with the wish to 
lend support to the Excellent Teachings of Lord Gotama so that they may 
stay for five thousand years. May I [by virtue of the merit acquired 
through this pious deed] ask for the Three Kinds of Happiness, the 
ultimate goal being Nibbana, for myself, as well as for my parents, my 
brothers and sisters, and my relatives. 


NB: On p 33 some further remarks are added by the scribe concerning his 
uneven handwriting. There is another copy of this well-known 
treatise about Pali metre included in the microfilm collection; it is 
recorded on Roll 9, 069". Dc no 0255, ms no. 719. 1 phuuk, 5 lines. 
Complete. CS 1198 = AD 1836. Wat Sung Men. Amphoe Sung Men, 
Phrae. 


Remarks. 

As the Burmese editions of commentaries on Vutt listed by Ichiro 
KATAYAMA in: Buddhist Studies (Bukkyo kenkyii) III, Hanamatsu 1973, 
p. 142, are inaccessible, it is not clear which commentary is contained in 
the present manuscript. (O. v. Hiniiber). 


27. SIVJAYAPANHA (MAHA-SIVIJAYAJATAKA) 


Roll 9, 059". Dc no 0254, ms no 430. 7 phuuk, 5 lines. Complete. CS 942 = 
AD 1580. Siam Society No. 159/SSLP. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, 
Lampang. 


Begins: 

namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammiasambuddhassa. devarajanamo ‘ty 
atthu ‘ti. idam sattha jetavane viharanto danaparami arabbha kathesi. 
ath’ [2] ekadivassam bhikkhudhammasabhayam katham 
samutthapesum ... 


134 Harald Hundius 


Ends: phuuk 7, p 53 = ni r, line 5b — p 54 = ni v, line | 

yo rajasettho sivijayandmo so daninafifio varalokanatho tumhe 
bhavanta[54.1] amatam pathenta dharetha varavarajatakan titi. Maha- 
Sivijayajatakam pathamam nitthitam. 


Colophons. 
(1) Cover Folio, recto side 


|sii;wijayyapafihaa 1 "“cau’ aananda peen “gau’ saddhaa ran "saaiY 
“wai peen muu[la]saasnaa 'biiiia; peen pracai ‘kaa sabbafifiuta- flaanam 
traap; dai 144 ‘pai’ “dai” ‘yaa’(!) peen gon hruu hnuuak taa pood; [rear 
jaati “hii? “dai’ triheetukapatisandhipafifiaa yavanto bbhabbapuggala 
‘yaa’ peen gon duk, "rai’ kheen cai sak jaad ‘yaa’ "hai’ “dai’ prahmaad 
bra buddh bra dhamm bra sangha “cau‘, sak jaati ‘daa°| 


/siiwicajfia?panhaa [phiuk] néy caw ?aanant? pén kdw satthaa lay 
saan wdj pén muula?sdasanaa péa pén phatcdj kee sappanfiiittafiaanan 
thalaap daj lee paj daj jaa pén khon hiu ndak taa bSot Ié? khon phajfidat 
sak cdat he pén philu thalon thalajpitaka? ciu caati? hf daj thali? 
héettukka?pati?santhi?paniiaa fidwantdo phappa?pukkala? jaa pén khon 
tik l4j khén caj sak cat jaa haj dij phamaat pha? pit pha? tham pha? 
sagkha caw sak caati? dée/ 


Translation. 

Siiwijaiyapafihaa - phuuk one. "Cau Aananda as leading supporter had 
{this manuscript] made in order to give a foundation to the Teachings of 
Buddha, so that it may contribute to [my] attainment of Omniscience. As 
long as [this] is not achieved, may I not be [reborn as] deaf, blind or as a 
man struck with sickness; [may I be reborn] as a man upholding the Three 
Baskets in each of his existences; may I be reborn with the consciousness 
of the Three Noble Root-Conditions (i.e. selflessness, kindness, 
intelligence); may I above all not be reborn as a poor man; may I not be 
negligent of Lord Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, in any of my 
future births. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 135 
(2) phuuk 1, no no., preceded by p 47 


|kap “cauig guu dan hlaay peen “ton” ‘waa’ bra mahaa swaamii “cau’ 
door, jai 14a bra mahaa swaa[mii] “cau” raajamo,.ndiian 144 hlaan 


mahaath[ee]n "cau" ‘maa ki ‘maa kii paansok "paan’ (‘hmai’) ‘juuay’ 
kan “saan” “wai peen muulasaasnaa peen pracai 'k4d maggaphala| 


/kap ciw kuu tap ldaj pén ton waa pha? mah3a sawdamii cw doon caj 
le? pha? mahda sawaamii caw laacimontian [&? lian mahathéen ciw 
mée ki? mée kii baansok baan maj (?) céj kin saan wéj pén 
muula?sdasanaa pén phatcdj kte makkaphala?/ 


Translation. 

To all the Venerables, like Bra Swaamii "Cau [residing at Wad] Door Jai, 
and Bra Swaamii "Cau [residing at Wad] Raajamondiian.- The nieces of 
the Venerable Mahaatheera(s), ‘Maa Ki and 'Maa Kii, and the villagers of 
"Paan 'Hmai helped each other in having made [this manuscript] wishing 
thereby to give a foundation to the Teachings of Buddha, and [hoping 
that this meritorious act may] contribute to the attainment of Path- 
Result.* 


* For an explanation of the Pali term magga-phala, s. NYANATILOKA 


1972:141 (s.v. phala). 
(3) phuuk 2, Cover Folio 
|sii,wijayapafihaa phuuk, 2 sakraaj 942 nai plii; dap “raujy 144] 


/stiwicajita? panhda phiuk sSon sakhaat kaw Idoj sii sip s3on naj pii dap 
law lee/ 

Translation. 

Siiwijaiyapafihaa - phuuk two. [C] S 942 (= AD 1580), in the Year of the 
Cock. 


(4) phuuk 1, no no., preceded by p 48 


136 Harald Hundius 


|sii,wijayapafihaa phuuk, 1 pii; dap “raujo diiiian; 7 ggk; 11 ‘gaam wan 
3 dai “ruuan; “sai sakraaj "dai 942‘ riiiik 9 tuua_ "cau" aananda peen 
“gauio Saddhaa nak j66,n; paanso,k paansikaa dan hlaay peen “ton ‘waa 
ratana “paan’ yaam “nii;| 


/siiwicajiia?panhaa phiuk n#g pii dap !dw dean cet ?30k sip ?et kham 
wan sdam taj lian saj sakhat da@j kaw |5oj sii sip son = @uk_- kaw 

tia § cdw ?aananta? pén kdw satthaa nak coon baansok baansikda tay 
l4aj pén ton waa lattana? baan flaam nfi/ 


Translation. 

Siiwijaiyapafthaa - phuuk 1; Year of the Cock, in the 7th [lunar] month, 
on the 11th day of the waxing moon, [corresponding to] the third day [of 
the Mon tradition, called] ["ruuan “sai| [in the Dai tradition], in [C] S 
942, at fksa 9. - "Cau Aananda was the leading lay supporter and the 
initiator who invited all the lay-men and lay-women, including the people 
of this splendid village named "Paan Yaam (?) [to join in the meritorious 
act of having made this manuscript]. 


NB: Another short colophon, found at the end of phuuk 2 (no no., 
preceded by p 46 = ghah v) which is almost identical with (3), 
above, confirms the date as given in (4). 


(For Remarks, see 28, below) 
28. SIVIJAYAPANHA (MAHA-SIVIJAYAJATAKA) 


Roll 3, 088". De no 0052, ms no 344. 7 phuuk, 5 lines. [1st bundle?]. 
Complete. CS 1201 (or 1141?) = AD 1839 (or 17797). Siam Society No. 
38/2508 SSLP. Wat Lai Hin. Amphoe Ko Kha, Lampang. 


Begins: 

namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammasambuddhassa. devarajanamo ‘ty 
atthu. idam sattha jetavane viharanto danaparami drabbha kathesi. ath’ 
ekadivassam bhikkhudhammasabhayam katham samuttha[2]pesum ... 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 137 


Ends: phuuk 7, p 52 = bha v, line 4c — p 53, line 1 (upside down; 
preceded by p51) 

so nama nago varapali[5]leyyo sabbe sivirajajana ca sebhaparissabhita 

tathagatassa yo rajasettho sivijayanamo so danin@fifio varavarajatakan 

fi[53.1]ti. Maha-Sivijayajatakam pathamam nitthitam. 


Colophons. 
(1) Front Cover Folio, recto side 


|"hnaa rap "glau sii,wijeeyyapanhaa phuuk, "ton 144| 
/naa lap kdw_ siiwicajfia?panhaa phiuk ton lee/ 


Translation. 
Front Cover Folio - Siiwijeeyyapanhaa (Sivijayapaftha), first phuuk. 


(2) phuuk 1, p 37 = Khe r, line 3 


|paalii sii,wijeeyyapanhaa phuuk, "ton 144  "khaa "tidim plii kad "gai 
dittiar, 10 dutiya réaim 11 'gaam ‘braam ‘waa “dai wan 2 srade,jh "laaiw’ 
yaam tréa 'gaam sakraaj "dai 1201 (?) tua 144 imina@ sabbavatthudanena 
sabbaparivare danekatapufifie a[4]nagatakare arahanta rabheyyam 
ariyah metteyyasantike ehi bhikkhupaccayabhavayam paccayo hotu 
samsale samsarato ‘pi tikhapafiia visarada suriipatta bhyagyah vanna 
mahateja mahapafifia mahabbala mahasattaratanasa  samlanan 
bha[38.1]va majatiloratthi sattasahasesu ma darida bhavami ham ‘dat 
"nii "duuay” teeja kusla naa pun, an "khaa "dai “téam "dai khiiar! yan 
paalii sii,wijeeyyapanhaa “nii; khog ‘cui "hiiii udom somriddhii dan’ 
gaam praathnaa ‘haan’ tuua "khaa ju yiiiiayi ju prakaan ‘daa° d6| 


/oaalii siiwicajif@?panh’a phiuk t6n lee kha téem pii kat k4j duan sip 
tutifa? leem sip ?et khim pham waa da@j wan s3on  saladet Iéew fiaam 
thalée khdm sakhaat da@j pan s3op Idoj ?et tia lee ?imi?naa ... ... 
phawaami? han dap nfi dj téecd? kutsala? naa bun ?an kha daj tem 
daj khian fiay baalii stiwicajffa?pinhda nifi kh3o cin haa ?udom 
sOmlitthii dag kam phdathanaa hg tia kha cil? fif@ay cil? phakian 
dée t3?/ 


138 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

[The] Pali [text of] Siiwijeeyyapafthaa - First phuuk. I wrote this in the 
Year of the Elephant (|pii kad "gai|), in the 10th [lunar] month, on the 
11th day of the waning moon, corresponding to the 2nd day [of the Mon 
tradition], accomplished at the time of the evening horn, in [C] S 1201 ... 
- May the power of the merit I have gained by writing this Pali text of S° 
lead to the fulfilment of each and every wish I have expressed! 


(3) phuuk 2, p 37 = ghe r, line 3b-4 


|s° phuuk, 2 ‘"khaa "téim plii kad “gai’ diiiiar, 11 Qok, 2 ‘gaam’ 
‘braam’ ‘waa’ "dai wan 2 yaam tréa baad (?) sakraaj "dai 1201 (?) tuua 
srade,jh “laaw’ 144 'gooy’ biccaranaa (!) duu dé [4] “duuay teeja kusla 

‘suuar, pun, an "khaa "dai “téaim’ yan paalii s° "nii’ khoo "hiiti "khaa mii 

pryaa pafifiaa an sliiaw; slaad wiseet sak swaad aad "ruu yan 8 ‘hmiitir, 4 
ban khan “cau” ju duuan, dhamm ‘guu” bhawa jaad traap ‘too’ “dau, 
"khau’ ‘suu neerabbaan "duuay “miiar; sonsaan siia “hiiii khaad ‘diian; 
"daa dii hlii do| 


/s... phduk s3on khia t&em pii kat kdj duan sip ?et 230k sSon kham phim 
waa daj wan s3on fiaam thalée paat sakhaat daj pan s3on Idoj ?et 
tua saladet léew lee kj pitcalanaa duu t8? Oj téec&? kutsala? stan 
bun?an khaa daj téem fian baalii s... nfi kh3o hi khaa mii phanjiaa 
paniiaa ?an saliaw salaat wiséet sak swaat ?aat liu fian péet mun sii pan 
khan ciw ci? duay tham kiu phawa? cat thalaap t5o téw khaw stu 
neelappaan d6j mian sOnsdan sia hiv khaat tian tée dii Iii t3?/ 


Translation. 

S° - phuuk two. I wrote this in the Year of the Elephant, in the 11th 
{lunar} month, on the 2nd day of the waxing moon, corresponding to the 
second day [of the Mon tradition], at the time of the late evening horn;* 
accomplished in [C] S 1201.- May I, by virtue of the merit I have earned 
by writing this Pali text of S°, be bestowed with an intelligent mind, 
wisdom, and mental acuteness, and utmost capability so that I may know 
all the 84,000 khandhas in every [future] life until, after the definite 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 139 


disruption of Samsara, I may enter Nibbana. Oh, may this wish come 
true! 


* /ffiaam thalée pdaat/; the time designated by this expression is not 
entirely clear. Probably, it corresponds to the time from 4.30 p.m. to 6 
p.m. See TUIKEO 1986: 107, footnote. Cf. also the Laotian equivalent 
»gnaam phat lan« mentioned in PHETSARATH 1959:99, 


(4) phuuk 3, p 48 = ce v, line 4 


|sade,c “lédw* diiiian 10 réaim 15 'gaam’ diitiazn dap wan 7 lai "khaa 
khog an suk, 3 prakaan mii neerabbaan peen yood; "daa dé dha “nii; 
hédy 14a 


/sadet léew dvan sip leem sip hada kham dwvan dap wan cet lee khia 
kh35o ?an suk sdam phakdéan mii neelappaan pén fidot dée t8? = tha? nfi 
hooj lee/ 


Translation. 

Accomplished in the tenth [lunar] month, on the 15th day of the waning 
moon, on the seventh day [in the Mon tradition]. May I [by virtue of the 
merit acquired] just ask for the Three Kinds of Happiness with Nibbana 
as the ultimate goal! 


(5) phuuk 4, Cover Folio, no no., preceding p 1 


|paalii s° phuuk, “thuuar, 'thii’ 4 144 'né6” naay hédy "“hnaa rap "glau’ 
paarii sii,wijaiyyapanhaa phuuk, “thuuar, 4 "khaa "dai khiiar; dhamm 
phuuk, “nii "khaa khgg an suk 3 prakaan mii nibbaan peen yood; ‘daii" 
do 'nd6° naay[2] naay “hwai’ dan hlaay hddy| 


/oaalii siiwicajifa?panhada phuuk thilan thii sii lee naaj hdej naa lap 
kdw  baalii siiwicajfia?panhda phtuk thiian sii khaa daj khian tham 
phiuk nfi kha khSo ?an suk sdam phakdan mii nippaan pén fi3ot dte 
t3? nde naaj naaj waj tan ldaj hdoj/ 


140 Harald Hundius 


Translation. 

(The] Pali [text of] S° - 4th phuuk. Cover Folio of the Pali text of S° - 
phuuk no. 4. Having written this phuuk, I should like to ask for the Three 
Kinds of Happiness with Nibbana as the ultimate goal, dear respected 
readers! 


(6) phuuk 4, Back Cover Folio (no no., preceded by p 40 = ji v) 


paalii s° 144 'n66” naay ‘dii "hwai ton dai liiap len ‘go° ‘gooy" biccaranaa 


“hii? ‘thi? dé "khaa ‘po’ ‘kw4ar; hlaay 144| 


foaalii stiwicajfia?panhaa phiuk sii lee ndo naaj h3oj nda lap paaj baalii 
s... lee nda naaj tti waj ton daj daj Itap len k5 k5j pitcalanaa hée thii t3? 
kha b3 kwén 1daj lee/ 


Translation. 

[The] Pali [text of] S°, phuuk 4, my dear! Back Cover Folio of the Pali 
text of S°, my respected, dear! Whoever among you, my fellow Monk- 
Brothers, casts his eyes on it, may you please use thorough consideration; 
T am not [a] skillful [scribe] at all. 


(7) phuuk 5, Front Cover Folio 


|s° phuuk, 5 

paalii 16 réap  "luuar,; ‘yaa’ luuar; dan 'bog" 
peen ‘klaa’ kgor; gaam guuar, waad “waiy 

tuua ad ook, bog “huuar; "huuar; haa yaak nak 1a 


tok ‘dii’ dai" ‘po’ "cain “waiy 
yaiyadhamm 144 naay h,ddy| 


‘cim’ “cau ton trad 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 141 


/oaalii 15k léep  Ifan 


pén kaa k3on kam kuan jaa Ian tan p39 

tila ?at 250k poo hijan hifan waat wdj 

tok tii daj b3 c&en wdj haa fidak nak lee 
fiajfidtham lee naaj hoaj/ cim caw t6n thalat 

Translation. 


Pali words are deep and subtle, do not pass them over fast, 
composed they are as poetry which deserves to be engraved for ever. 
Elusive is their meaning and often difficult to grasp; 
if words are dropped, no hint is given — only Enlightened Ones will 
know. 

Dhammas they present which should be known. 


(8) phuuk 5, p 43 


|naarada cak, ri ran “thgoy’ snuk, cai kgor; 1éa 


‘yuu" waty, waad srii paan pai k66t "han’ 

naa “iian’ "kaéaw’ raad liiii jaiy liiti raad mii, 144 
khiiar, 144 'n66° naay ‘dii “hwai bra ‘moors; ‘yaa’ grnin| 
/naalata? cak li? lay th3oj sanuk caj k3on lee 

juu wat waat salii baan baj kdat han 

naa Pian kéew dat lwe caj luv laat mii lee 


khian lee ndo naaj tii waj pha? min jaa khanip/ 


Translation. 

Naarada [-Bhikkhu] will tell you some heart-warming words, 

while staying at Wad Srii Paan Pai, in the village of his birth, 

in a splendid place well-known by all, called Naa "Tian; 

it's there that these words were written, respected reader — do not doubt! 


142 Harald Hundius 


(9) phuuk 5, p 44 


|S° phuuk, 5 [2] culasakkaraaj "dai 1121 tuua plii kad "glai srade,jh 
"|diw’ yaam tuud, “jaay meen wan 2 daiy m6é6n "rau’ “khau nai 


+0 


wassa[a]na giiti ‘waa’ diitiazn 11 Qok, 2 ‘gaam "lddw’ ‘kaa “khaa’ laa 


nibbanam paramam sukkham ‘cun" cak, mii ‘diian” "daa dii-hlii d6,| 


/s... phduk haa — ctinlasakhaat d@j pan Idoj saaw et tia pii kat kdj 
saladet léew fiaam tiut cdaj men wan s30on taj moog ldw khaw naj 
watsdana? ka waa duan sip ?et 230k sdon khim léew kée khiaa lee 
nippaanay palamay sukkhan cin cak mii tian tée dii Iii t5?/ 


Translation. 

S°, phuuk 5. CS 1121 - Year of the Elephant. Accomplished at the time of 
the afternoon hor, on the 2nd day [according to the] Mon [tradition, 
called] |m66n "rau| [in the] Dai [tradition], at the beginning of the Rainy 
Season, that is in the eleventh [lunar] month, on the 2nd day of the 
waxing moon. Nibbana is the utmost happiness — may this definitely 
come true [for me]! 


(10) phuuk 6, p 50 = pah v, line 5 


|vanakandam nitthitam [5] culasakkaraaja "dai 1121 tuua_plii kad 
"glai’ diiiiar; 10 dutiya daiy kaap sestth meen wan 2 "khaa khiiar, 
“ladw’ diitiar, 10 dutiya ook, 9 ‘gaam ‘braam’ “dai wan soon risnaa 
khiiar, "ldiw’ yaam wan ‘diian; sudinnarm vata me danam dhammajinati| 
/... cimlasakkalaaca? daj pan |doj saaw ?et tia pili kat kdj duan sip 
titifia? taj kaap set men wan sdon kha khian léew duan sip titifia? 
?50k kiw khém pham waa wan son litsanda khian léew fiaam wan 
tian.../ 


Translation. 

CS 1121 - Year of the Elephant, in the 10th [lunar] month, on the second 
day [according to the Mon tradition, called] |kaap sed] [in the] Dai 
[tradition].- I completed my writing in the 10th [lunar] month, on the 9th 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 143 


day of the waxing moon, corresponding to the second day [of the Mon 
tradition]. The writing was completed at noon-time. 


(11) phuuk 7, p 54 (upside down) 


|culasSakaraaja "dai 1121 tuua plii kad “glai' diiiiar, sraawana daiy"[3] 
‘tau sii; meen wan 6 "“khaa risnaa khiiar, “lddw’[4] khiiar, “waiy 
“gaam' juu buddhasaassnaa (written °buddhassnaa) traap ‘too’ an aayu 
laan peen pradhaar ‘cinm(!) 'daa| 


/... (S. above) ... daan salaawan taj taw sii men wan hok  khia khian 
\éew fiaam wan tiay _khiia litsanda khian Iéew khian wdj kdm cuu 
pittha?sdasanaa thalaap t3o ?an ?aafid? laan pén phathaan cin dée/ 


Translation. 

CS 1121 - Year of the Elephant, in the month |sraawana|*, [on a day 
called] |'tau sii] [in the] Dai [tradition], [corresponding to] the sixth day 
{in the] Mon [tradition]. I completed my writing at noon time. I have now 
completed my writing. I wrote this in order to support Buddha's Teachings 
for as long as the palm-leaves may endure. 


* < Skt sravana 
NB: for the last sentence, cf. no. 15 (6), above! 
(12) ibid., on left margin 


|"khaa "dai khiiar, dhamm, "nii} khoo "hiiti peen uppanisai pracaiy 
“gaam juu' ton[4] tuua ‘haan "khaa’ traap ‘too’ “dau' th66n nibbaan dé] 


/kh&a daj khian tham nfi kh3o hfe pén ?uppanis4j phatcdj kdm cuu ton 
tia hép kha thalaap t5o t4w th3n nippaan t3?/ 


Translation. 


May the writing of this Dhamma [manuscript] help to give support to 
myself until I eventually reach Nibbana. 


144 Harald Hundius 


Remarks. 

From what is indicated in the Pali colophons at the end of the last phuuk 
of both manuscripts 27 and 28, it may be assumed that their 7 phuuk in 
fact constitute the first bundle of a set of at least two. No. 27 represents, 
as it seems, the oldest dated specimen of a monolingual Pali version of 
any non-canonical Southeast Asian Jataka known up to the present. A 
copy of this very popular Jataka, well-known also in neighbouring 
countries, was brought to Europe as early as the 17th/18th century; it 
appears in FOURMONT's catalogue of 1739 (see Bibliography), and, as G. 
CEDES (1966:43) notes, is mentioned also in an essay on Pali written in 
1826 by E. Burnouf and Ch. Lassen. A brief synopsis of the story, based 
on a manuscript written in Lampang in AD 1838, can be found in C@DES 
(ibid.). As for no. 28, there are two conflicting dates given in the 
colophons, viz. CS 1121 (phuuk 1, 2), and CS 1201 (phuuk 5, 6, 7). Of 
these two dates, only 1201, however, fits with the name of the Cyclical 
Year |pii kad “gai| mentioned in the colophons. A thorough check on the 
orthography could perhaps reveal some clues about the factual age of the 
copy. Meanwhile, the later date is given the credit as the more probable 
one. According to C@EDES (ibid.) there is a printed edition in Central Thai 
script of the Pali text — represented by various manuscripts kept at the 
libraries of Paris, Bangkok, etc. — of the Maha-Sivijayajataka 
(published in Bangkok, Dharmabhakti Press). 


29. PARAMATTHAVIBHUSANI 


Roll 8, 144”. De no 0239, ms no 704. 12 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete (?). CS 
1223 = AD1861. Wat Chang Kham (NT /wat cdan kdm/). Amphoe 
Muang, Nan. 


Begins: 

namo tassa. karuna vissasatte sapafifiayassa mahesino fieyyadhammesu 
sabbesu pavittittha yatha rucillajtassa pade namassitva sammaddhassa 
(read: sambuddhassa) sirimatto saddhamma[2]fic' assapuretva katva 
ssanghassa saficalinti. iti h' idam vihitam kim attham vihitanti ... 


Ends: phuuk 12, p 22 (difficult to read on the microfilm) 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 145 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 1, Front Cover Folio (preceded by p 1, 3, 5 etc.) 


|paalii paramatthawibhuusanii (Paramatthavibhisani) phuuk, “ton 
dan muuar; mii 12 phuuk; 144 “hnaa dhap "glau tuua paalii p° 
phuuk; “ton 144 phuuk; “ton wad huua faay" rikkhitta "gaam juu 
mahaajiiwid 1ad-naa] 


(on left margin:) |p° phuuk, "ton akkhara "tan /kJa rood; kha | 


/baalii p .... phduk tén tay muan mii sip s3op phduk lee na thap kdw 
tia baalii p .... phduk t@n lee phduk ton wat hia faaj likkhittar? kim cun 
mahdaciiwit lee naa/ 


(on left margin:) /p... phuk tén ?akkhala? tap ka? 15ot khia/ 


Translation. 

[The] Pali [text of the] P°, first phuuk. Altogether there are 12 phuuk.- 
Front Cover Folio of the Pali text of P°, first phuuk.- The first phuuk 
was written by [a monk or a novice from] Wad Huua Faay in support of 
[the meritorious efforts pursued by] the "Lord of Life".* 


* This and other similar mentions in the colophons of 29 and 30 refer 
to Anantaworaritthidet who ruled over Nan from AD 1855 to 1893. 
(For more details, see Remarks to 30, below). 


(On left margin:) P° , first phuuk; from aksara ka to aksara kha 
(2) phuuk 2, p 38 = kra (1) v, line 1b-3a 


|paripunna "l4iw’ yaam koon, laa (?) 144 tuua "khaa ‘jut’ (written: ji) 
hnaan" abhijaiy" hnii ruk, miiiiash baa maa ‘yuu kap grou p{r}aa "cau 
was "paan "kéim” was "paan nook, “gaam juu gruu p{rjaa "cau “waily 
“gaam juu' saasnaa (written: snaa) 5 ban bha was[s]aa ‘klid "khaa 14a 
dhamm somde,jh bra "cau jii,wis 144[3] dii-hlii d6| 


146 Harald Hundius 


/palipiinna? léew fiaam k3on leen(?) lee tila kha céw ndan ?apphicaj nii 
lik muan pée maa jiu kap khuu baa ciw wat baan kéem wat baan n5ok 
kdém cuu khuu baa cdw w4j kdm cuu sdasanaa haa pan pha? watsda kte 
khia lee tham sOmdet pha caw ciiwit lee dii Ili t3?/ 


Translation. 

Accomplished at the time of the sunset drum. My name is Hnaan 
Abhijaiy. I came over from Miiiian ‘Baa to stay with the Venerable Gruu 
Paa "Cau at Wad "Paan "Kiiim, a rural monastery, wishing to help the 
Venerable Gruu Paa "Cau supporting [Buddha's] Teachings throughout 
five thousand years.- A Dhamma manuscript made with the support of 
His Majesty the Lord of Life. 


(3) phuuk 7, p 39, line 2 


|culabaddasakkaraaja(!) "dai 1223 tuua_ plii "ruuaf’ "raujo diiiiar, 4 
huulaa 99k, 12 'gaam meen [wan] 4 daiy kas "gaiy yaam léan riiti,kt, [?] 
paripunna “léaw’ yaam “nan 144 [2] |pa; dhammajinasuttinam vatta me 
dinam nibbanam paramam sukkham nicam dhuvam dhuvam  paan(!) 
‘miiiia; ‘yuu satthi(t] saamlaan wad loon miiiiasjh buua wan "nan 144 
saadhu "cau jeeyyaseen 144| 

/ctinlapatta? sakkalaacd? daj pan s3on Idoj saaw saam tia pii luay ldw 
duan sii httulaa ?30k sip son khdm =meyg [wan] sii taj kat kaj flaam 
leey l@uk [2] paliptinna? léew fiaam rian lee ... pday mia juu satthit 
samlaan wat loon man pua wan nén lee sdathi? caw cajiaséen lee/ 


Translation. 

CS 1223 - Year of the Cock, in the 4th lunar month, on the 12th day of 
the waxing moon, on the 4th day [according to the] Mon [tradition, 
called] |kad "gai! [in the] Dai [tradition], at the time of the sunset 
[drum], at 7ksa [?], accomplished in this very moment. [Written] while I 
stayed happily at Wad Loon, Miiiian Buua, on that very day. [Written by] 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 147 
the Venerable Jeeyyaseen.* 
* (Pali Name: Jayasena). 
(4) phuuk 8, p 32 = 16 v, line 2b-4c 


|paripunna “l4aw* {yaam} yaam thda [?] 'kaa" "khaa 144 culasakkaraaja 
“dai 1223 tuua plii kad “rau ‘kda" “khaa 144 —_kattiyos(!) bhikkhu “dai 
khiiar; dhamm phuuk, "nii’  "“waiy “hiii’ peen pracai bai "hnaa[3] _ giiti 
mitiia “faa” 144 nibbaan ‘k4i" "khaa “dda dii-hlii 144 "khaa_ khiiar, 
“gaam’ juu yan “cau mahaajiiwid 144  "khaa khiiar, "saan 'miiiia; 'yuu 
meettaa sa{d]dhaa "paan "kéém wiian, buua wat peensakad wan “nan 
laa na sobhati ‘gQ’-'po’ duu naam hnai 144 du "cau bra naay ton dai 
‘aan" 'go 'gooy’ bicca[4]ranaa duu ‘thi’ dé; boo ‘yaa’ ti, tuua "khaa 'dia" 
dé; "khaa ‘po’ ‘jaan’ "téaim’ ‘po peen "mai peen tuua hnai 144 du "paan 
nook, man ‘pg’ ‘jaai’ 14a arahantamagafiannam nicam dhuvam dhuvam 


"daa dii-hlii 144 dhamm "cau mahaajiiwit 144 'n663; naay ‘dii’ “hwail 


/paliptinna? léew fiaam thée [?] kée khda lee ctinldsakkalaaca? d&j pan 
s3oy 1Soj saaw sdam tla pili kat ldw ke khaa lee katti?fidt phikkhu? daj 
khian tham phiuk nfi wdj hia pén phatc4j paj naa(3] kee mua fda le? 
nippaan kée khia tée dii Iii kh@a khian kdm juu fiay caw mahdaciiwit 
lee khda khian sfay méa juu méettda satthaa baan kéem wian pua wat 
bepsakat wan ndn lee na? sdophati? k5 b3 duu naam ndj lee tii? caw 
pha? naaj ton daj ?4an_k5 k3j pitcalanaa duu thii t8? poo jaa ti? tia khaa 
dée t3? khaa bd can téem bd pén mdj pén tia nj lee ti? baan ndok man 
bs caay lee ?alahdntéa makk@fiaanay nitcdy thitwap thiwan tée dii Iii lee 
tham caw mahdaciiwit lee n3a naaj tii waj/ 


Translation. 

Accomplished at the time of the [forenoon?] horn. CS 1223 - Year of the 
Cock. Kattiyos-Bhikkhu* wrote this phuuk as a contribution to future 
results, i.e. my ascension to the heavenly worlds, and Nibbana; oh, may 
this wish come true! I wrote this in support of [the meritorious efforts 
pursued by] His Majesty the Lord of Life. I did the writing while I stayed, 
spreading Loving-Kindness among the lay community of [the village 


148 Harald Hundius 


called] "Paan "Kéaém, in Wiian Buua, at Wad Peensakad, on that very 
day.- [My writing] does not look beautiful at all. Whoever will read this, 
may he be a monk or a novice, should use thorough consideration; do not 
put blame on me, for I cannot write well, my characters do not take the 
shape of vowels and consonants. Village monks just don't have the skill. - 
May I [by virtue of the merit gained through writing this manuscript] 
attain the knowledge of the way leading to Arahantship; oh, may this 
wish come true, indeed! - A Dhamma manuscript [written at the behest] 
of His Majesty the Lord of Life, dear respected readers! 


* <P Kittiyasa? 
(5) phuuk 11, p 44 = khai_v, line 3b - p 45, line 3c 


|sradeyjh "laaw* yaam 7 ‘kaa "khaa gilli ‘waa’ yaam ‘diiah, wan jarin 
cin (!) "duuay teeja naa pur, an "khaa "dai[4] khiiar, dhamm phuuk, “nii; 
khog "hii? “dai thé6h wiiah, “kaéiw yood; neerabbaan an ‘po’ 
"ruu’ "thau ‘pg’ “ruu’ taay sak ‘diiiia, "daa dii-hlii prakaan 1 khgo “hiiii’ 
mii pryaa pafifiaa “ruu’ hlwak, swak swaad aad “ruu’ "kad peessnaa 
panhaa an" yaak 144 aad[45.1] “hiiii’ "ruu” dhamm bra buddha “cau 8 
‘hmiiiir; 4 ban khan "nan’ 'cun} cak, mii ‘diian’ "daa° dii-hlii ‘daa d6,[2] 
culasakkaraaja "dai 1223  tuua plii "ruuan; "rau peen pili; 
yaacaadhi{ka]maad meen wan 4 dai p06k "caiy diiiian 9 dutiya ('po’?} 
hon ook, ‘gaam | boodhisammaneen likkhitta 14a ‘miitia; ‘yuu meettaa 

saddhaa[3] guu paa riia(n) miiiiayi gwaanh wan “nan "kii(!) 14a khiiar, 
"gaam juu "cau mahaajiiwid ton sa-hw6dy miiiiayi nandapurii; nagoor, 
ton "thuuar; 5 144 "cau hddy| 

/saladet léew fiaam cet kte khda ku wda flaam tian wan calin cin dj 
téecA? naa bun ?an khaa daj khian tham phiuk nfi_ kh3o hie daj thdy 
wian kéew fi5ot neelappaan ?an bd Iuu thiw bd Iu taaj sak tHa tée dii Iii 
phakaan néy kh3o haw mii phanfida panfiaa Iu Iwak swak swhat ?2at 
liu kée petsanda panhda ?an fi@ak I? ?aAat[45.1] hiw hiu tham pha? 
pitthd caw péet mtun sii pan khan nén cin cak mii tian té dii Ii dee 

t8?[2] cuinlasakkalaac&? daj pan s3on 1Soj saaw sam tila pii lian dw pén 
pii fiaacdathi{ka]maat men wan sii taj pdok c3j duan kaw titifta? (bd?) 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 149 


hoon 239k kham nép poothi?7simmaneen likkhitta? lee mia jiu méettéa 
satthaa[3] khuu baa lian (?) maay khwaan wan ndn kii (?) lee khian 
kdm cuu caw mahdaciiwit t6n saw3oj mua nanta?pulii ndkoon t6n thifan 
haa lee caw hdaj/ 


Translation. 

Accomplished at the time of the 7th watch, that is, at noon, exactly.* 
May I, by virtue of the merit acquired by writing this manuscript, reach 
the splendid City of Nibbana, the peak [of Happiness] where age and 
death are unknown for ever. Furthermore, I should like [in my future lives] 
to be bestowed with intelligence, wisdom, and acuteness of mind so that I 
may know how to solve riddles and answer difficult questions, and will be 
able to know all the 84,000 khandhas of Lord Buddha's Teachings - oh, 
may this wish come true! [2] CS 1223 - Year of the Cock, which happens 
to be a year with a supplementary month, on the 4th day [according to 
the] Mon [tradition, called] |p66k "cai] [in the] Dai [tradition], in the 9th 
[lunar] month — the second one** — on the Ist day of the waxing moon. 
- Written by Boodhi-Sammaneen (Bodhi-Samanera), while he stayed, 
spreading Loving-Kindness among the lay community, with the Venerable 
Gruu Paa Riian (?) in Miitian Gwaan, on that very day.- Written in 
support of [the meritorious efforts pursued by] His Majesty the Fifth Lord 
of Life*** who reigns over Miitian Nandapurii! 


* Counting from 6 a.m. (as is done also in Laos), one would have 
expected the 4th, not the 7th ‘watch’ (|yaam|) to be mentioned as 
equivalent with noon time. Cf. PHETSARAT 1959:99, 

** P adhikamasa ; cf. ibid., p. 102. 

*** See Remarks to 30, below. 


(6) phuuk 12, p 22, line 3a-c 


|sakkabda “dai 1223 tuua plii; “ruuan, "rau diiiiasn 11 hooraa 9gk, 4 (?) 
‘gaam meen wan 1 daiy kot san yaam wan ‘diian, paripunna 144| 


150 Harald Hundius 


/sakkapt&? d&j pan s3op ld0j saaw sadam tia pii hian ldw duan sip ?et 
hdolaa ?39k sii (?) khim men wan nyp taj kot sin fiaam wan tian 
palipunna? lee/ 


Translation. 

CS 1223 - Year of the Cock, in the 11th lunar month; completed on the 
4th day of the waxing moon, on the Ist day [according to the] Mon 
[tradition, called] |kod san| [in the] Dai [tradition], at noon-time. 


(For Remarks, see no. 30) 
30. PARAMATTHAVIBHUSANI 


Roll 8, 155". De no 0240, ms no. 1306. 12 phuuk, 5 lines. Incomplete (?). 
CS 1231 = AD 1869. Wat Chang Kham (NT /wat cdan kdm/). Amphoe 
Muang, Nan. 


Begins: 

namo tass' atthu. karuna  vvissasatte = supafifidyassa § mahesino 
fieyyadhammesu sabbesu pavattittha yathd rucitassa pade namasitva 
sambuddhassa sirimato sadhammajfic’ a[2][s]sapuretva katva sanghassa 
cafi(c)alinti. iti h’ idam vihitam kim attham vihitanti ... 


Ends: phuuk 12, p 23, line 2b-3c 

ime dhamma  nivaranavippayutta nideso dissati ‘ti [3] katva 
orambhagiyuddhamhagiyabhavena (!) samagahita ricchana 
orambha(giyuddha)nivarana gocchakam (!) 


Colophons. 
(1) phuuk 2, p 34 = 17 v, line 4b-5 


|sradesd "Idaw’ wan 7 yaam {t}thdd cak "klai ‘diian’ na sobhati ‘go°-'po’ 
haam 144 ‘gogy” yaan" bai taam 'yiiiiasi’ dhamm, dé tuua ‘go’-‘po” sm6d 
kan [5] kusla "khaa “dai "tdéam dhamm phuuk; "nii’ khog "hiiii’ mii phla 
anison(!) maak, hlaay "dé4 dé "tdim_ 'miitia; giitin {'miitia; wan} 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 151 


‘pheo” ‘po’ [han] sak gaay heetu ‘waa con “duuay dhamm, (!) naa laa 
"tim ‘miitia, wan ‘po’ “dai lad ‘di’ "hwai hddy"| 

/saladet few wan cet fiaam th€e cak kaj tian na? sdophati? k3 bd paam 
lee k5j fieep paj tiam fiGan tham t3?_ tia k5 bd samdo kan [5] _ kutsala? 
khia daj tem tham phiuk nfi_ kh3o hw mii phala? ?aaniséy maak 14aj 
tée 8? + tem méa khaen ph3o bd [han] sak kaaj héet waa con d6j tham 
naa lee tem ma wan bd daj lee tii waj hdoj/ 


Translation. 

Completed on the seventh day [according to the Mon tradition], at the 
time of the forenoon horn.- My handwriting is not beautiful. So you 
should look very carefully by adhering to the meaning of the Dhamma 
[text]. The characters are uneven. [5] May the good deed I accomplished 
by writing this phuuk bear ample fruit! I did the writing at night-time 
and therefore could not see well, because during the day I had to do my 
farmer's work; that is why I could not write at day-time, respected reader. 


(2) phuuk 5, p 35, line 5c - p 36, line 2 


|paripunna "laiw’ yaam koon; haay[36.1] (not readable on the 
microfilm)(2] 144 bhari,yaa raajapu.ttaaputtii “cauj, ju ton ‘yuu pacanta 


' ° 


Pe 


‘jaan’ "téaim  tuua paalii (...)| 


/paliptinna? léew fiaam k3on aaj (...) lé? phalifiaa laacdputtdaputtli caw 
ci? t6n juu pacanta? bd c@an tem tia baalii (...)/ 


Translation. 

Completed at the time of the morning drum (...) [2] and [by his] spouse, 
as well as his Royal sons and daughters. - Living out in the countryside, I 
lack the skill of writing.- The Pali text [of the P°?] ... 


(3) phuuk 7, p 38, line 5b 


152 Harald Hundius 


|culasakkaraaja "dai 1231 tuua plii kad "sai “dai (...) — ‘jiiii"-'waa’ 
paramatthawi,bhuu,sanii, jootaka kap sommde,jh  {kap} "cau 
mahaajiiwid blog ‘cun’ peen phla dii-hlii nicam dhuvam dhuvam| 


/ctnlasakkalaaca? daj pan sSop 1Soj sdam sip ?et tia pii kat sij aj (...) 
cit waa palamattha?wiphuusanii cootaka? kap sOmdet mahdaciiwit poo 
cin pén phala? dii Iii nitc&n thitwan thitwan/ 


Translation. 

CS 1231 - Year of the Snake (...) named P°, in support of [the meritorious 
efforts pursued by] His Majesty the Lord of Life. May [this pious deed of 
mine] bear excellent fruit for ever and ever! 


(4) phuuk 9, p 44, line 1b-2c 


|srade,jh “ldiw’ yaam thad cak, "klai’ ‘diian’ piian, (?) kin ‘doon,-‘diian; 
‘kaa "khaa "nogy "té4m ma giitin bai nak 144 biccaranaa au dé tuua 
“hyeg teem dhii sakhaad "dai [2] 1230(!) tuua plii (kad) “sai? diitiar, 
10 ook, 12 'gaam ‘braam’ 'waa “dai wan 2 ‘kad “khaa hnaar indasoor; 
"tdam’ tuua ‘po’ sm66 kan siia "daw? "tdam "gaam juu som(baan) "cau; 


° 


mahaajiiwid ‘daan’ "hiili’ "kaa' 'gaa miiii "tam "“pii; 1 jalaa| 


/saladet léew fiaam thée cak kaj tian pian (?) kin t5p tian kte khda ndoj 
téem ma khuun paj nak lee pitcalanaa ?aw t3? tia fid0 tém thii sakhaat 
daj [2] pan sSon ISoj sdéam sip tia pili kat s@j duan sip ?3ok sip 
sSop kham pham waa daj wan s3on kée khda lee naan ?int&?s3on teem 
tla bd sam3e kan sia léew t&em kdm cuu sOmpaan cdw mahiaciiwit 
taan hiv kée kéa muz t&em bii nay calee/ 


Translation. 

Accomplished at the time of the forenoon horn, right in time for lunch. A 
lot was written at night-time; so make use of your own consideration! The 
characters are badly contracted.- CS 1230 (!) Year of the Snake, in the 
10th [lunar] month, on the 12th day of the waxing moon, corresponding 
to the 2nd day [of the Mon tradition]. Written by Hnaan Indasgor. The 
characters have become increasingly uneven. Written in support of the 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 153 


merit [accumulated by] His Majesty the Lord of Life. He provided the 
remuneration of one |"piil* for the writing. 


* —-|"pii] (/bTi): an ancient money unit equivalent to 12 satang (100 
satang = 1 Baht), according to information provided by Acharn Indr 
Suchai (/?in su?caj/), Chiang Rai, for the forthcoming Northern 
Thai—Central Thai Dictionary presently being compiled by Professor 
Dr. Udom Roongruangsri. 


(5) phuuk 10, p 33, line 5b-c 


|paripun(nja "ldiw’ yaam kgon; haay "“khaa “nooy’ 144 naama 
‘ji’ -'waa” bhyaa manglasilaa “hn66, "dai “téim "gaam juu sombaan 
somde,jh "cau’ mahaajiiwid ‘daan’ "dai "kaa ‘gaa’ miiii "téim "“pii; 1 
[34.1] imina dhammarikkhittadanam attano yattha bhave jato ca 
matapita sambandha sahayati kuru uppasaya ca ti ehi bhikkhu vasam 
padam antamano ca(..)tta sassane ariyametteyyasantike anagate k[a]le 
attabhave[2] kayajivha sotagandhana saddha ramma piyamanusassadda 
manoramma vattha jata ri[pa] suvannaherafifia bahu honti pacupana 
anagate pacupanne attayanam mayam evam nicam dhuvam dhuvam 
'kaa[3] me ‘haan "khaa dé| 


/paliptinna? léew fiaam k30n naaj khaa ndoj lee naama? cia waa phafiaa 
mapkala?silaa nde daj téem kim cuu sOmpaan sOmdet caw mahaaciiwit 
taan daj kée kda muz téem bii ni ... ... kée mee hép khia lee/ 


Translation. 

Accomplished at the time of the morning drum. My name is Bhyaa 
Mangalasilaa. I wrote this in support of the merit [being accumulated by] 
His Majesty, the Lord of Life. He provided the remuneration of one |"piil 
for the writing. 


(6) phuuk 11, Front Cover Folio, no no., preceded by p 37 


|"hnaa dapp, "“glau paalii paramatthawibhuusanii phuuk, 11 144 saan 


154 Harald Hundius 


raajjasompas miitiai, hrin ‘haan’ ‘daar “tai(!) khiiar,(2] bra nagoors 
miiiian, ‘naan 144 “cau hddy} 


/nda tip kdw baalii palamattha?wiphuusanii phiuk sip fet séen 
laatc3s6mbat muay hin haag daan taj khian pha? ndkoon muay naan lee 
caw h3aj/ 


Translation. 

Front Cover Folio of the Pali text of the P°, phuuk 11. Written by Sadan 
Raajjasompat, [living in] Miiiian Hin ‘Haan, to the South of Miitian 
“Naan, my dear! 


(7) phuuk 11, p 38, line 4b-5 


|culasakka "dai 1231 tuua plii kad "sai diiiiar, 12 "khiin 14 'gaam 
'braam’ ‘waa’ "dai wan 1 "“khaa “dai “tdam[5] dhamm phuuk, "nii’ 
"saam hnur; sombaar "cau, mahaajiiwis nagoor, miiiian, ‘naan’ wan 
"nan 144 ‘daan’ "dai "klda 'gaa klaamde,s miiii "pii; 1 144 saan raajjasompat 
khiiar; 144] 


/cinlisakka? daj pan s3op ISoj s’am sip 7et tla pii kat saj dan sip son 
khén sip sii khdm phaém waa da@j wan nég khia daj t&em[5] tham 
phiuk nfi kfm niin sOmpaan caw mahiaciiwit nakoon muan naan wan 
nén lee tian daj kée kaa kamdet muu bii nép lee séen laatc&isdmbat 
khian lee/ 


Translation. 

CS 1231 - Year of the Snake, in the 12th [lunar] month, on the 14th day 
of the waxing moon, corresponding to the first day [of the Mon tradition). 
I wrote this phuuk in support of the merit [accumulated by] His Majesty 
the Lord of Life of Miiiian 'Naan, on that very day. His Majesty provided 
a remuneration of one |"pii| for writing.- Written by Sain Raajjasompat. 


(8) phuuk 12, p 23, line 3c-4 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 155 


|sdan rattana "tdim “gaam juu sombaar[4] “cau mahaajiiwis miitian, 
nandapulii bra naggor; miitian; "hnaan(!) 144 "cau" naay hédy "“khaa 


“nogy ‘yuu’ "paan (...)| [not readable on the microfilm]. 


/séen lattanad? t&em kdm cuu sOmpaan caw mahdaciiwit muap nant&pulii 
pha? nakoon muan n@an lee caw naaj h3ej kha n3oj jiu baan (...) 


Translation. 

Written by Sadan Rattana in support of the merit [accumulated by] His 
Majesty the Lord of Life of Miitian Nandapurii Bra Nagogr Miiian 
‘Naan.- I am living in the village of (...). 


Remarks. 

The appellation "Lord of Life" etc., repeatedly mentioned in the colophons, 
refers to Anantaworaritthidet who reigned over the Siamese vassal state 
of Nan from AD 1855 to AD 1893. The appellation "Fifth" Lord of Life 
as found in 29 (5) is not clear; in the line of Rulers over 
Miiiian ‘Naan since the founding of Bangkok as the new capital of Siam in 
1782, Anantaworaritthidet (previous name "Anantayot") would be the 
seventh. Perhaps "Fifth Lord of Life" might refer to the fact that he was, 
according to an indication given in Phraya  Prachakitkoracak's 
"Phongsawadan Yonok", the fifth child of Atthawarapanyo (r. 1786- 
1810), the first great monarch of Nan since the foundation of the Chakri 
Dynasty who, in 1788, went to Bangkok to offer his allegiance to King 
Rama I (r. 1782-1809); cf. SISAM-ANG in: KROM SILPAKORN [ed.] 
1987:58-9;70, and PRACHAKITKORACAK 3.1961:584. This ruler is known 
as a fervent supporter of Buddhism and the revival of the literary tradition 
of Lan Na. He is known to have pursued, and financed, no less than seven 
huge manuscript copying campaigns in his home territory, the last one, in 
1886, amounting to 38 bundles comprising altogether 292 phuuk (cf. 
KROM SILPAKORN fed.] 1974:21) and must be regarded as one of the great 
trebuilders of Lan Na culture and literature in the 19th century, alongside 
the Venerable Gruu Paa Kaficana of Miiiian 'Braéa, by whose successful 
efforts he may have been inspired. The "Nan Chronicle", a history of Nan 
up to the reign of King Chulalongkorn in an English translation, is 
published in: WYATT [ED.] (1966). The Paramatthavibhisani is another 


156 Harald Hundius 


text which had been previously unheard of; there is no mention of such a 
work in Pali and Buddhist studies up to the present. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 157 


INDEX 


A. Pali Manuscripts in Chronological Order (Christian Era) 


1495 
1514 
1521 
1549 
1550 
1550 
1550 
1578 
1578 
1580 
1581 
1591 
1759 
1833 
1833 
1833 
1836 
1836 
1836 
1836 
1837 
1842 
1861 
1869 
1869 
1874 


MILINDAPANHA 04 

JATAKA: Tinsanipata 06 
DHAMMAPADA-ATTHAKATHA 01 
SAMYUTTANIKAYA: Sagathavagga 08 
JATAKA: Pannasanipata 05 

JATAKA: Sattatinipata 07 
PATTHANA-MAHAPAKARANA-ATTHAKATHA 09 
JATAKA: Vessantarajataka-Atthakatha 14 
JATAKA: Vessantarajataka-Atthavannana-tika 13 
SIVIIAYAPANHA (MAHA-SIVIJAYAJATAKA) 27 
LOKADIPA 20 

SADDANITI 12 

SIVITAYAPANHA (MAHA-SIVIIAYAJATAKA) 28 
CAMADEVIVANSA 17 

CAKKAVALADIPANI 15 

MANIPADIPA 23 

JATAKA: Vessantaradipani (Dipani Mahavessantara) 19 
LOKADIPA 21 

LOKASANTHANA 22 

VANSAMALINI 25 

BUDDHASIHINGA-NIDANA 24 
CAMADEVIVANSA 18 
PARAMATTHAVIBHUSANI 29 
CAKKAVALADIPANI 16 
PARAMATTHAVIBHUSANI 30 

VUTTODAYA 26 


[n.d.; 16th c.2] DIGHANIKAYA: Samafifiaphalasuttam 11 
[n.d.; 16th c.2] DHAMMAPADA-ATTHAKATHA 02 

[n.d.; 16th c.?] ABHIDHAMMA-GULHATTHA-DIPANI 10 
[n.d.; 16/ 17th c.] JATAKA: Mahosathajataka 03 


158 Harald Hundius 


B. Repositories of the Manuscripts (1974) 


Wat Bun Yuen (NT /wat bun fivun/), Tambon Wiang Sa, Amphoe Sa, Nan 
(Nos. 13,14) 
Wat Chang Kham [Worawihan] (NT /wat cdan kdm/; CT /wat chdan 
khd4m woordwihdan/), Tambon Nai Wiang, 
Amphoe Muang, Nan (Nos. 16, 26, 29, 30) 
Wat Lai Hin (NT /wat 1aj hin/), Tambon Lai Hin, Amphoe Ko Kha, 
Lampang (Nos. 01-11, 20, 27, 28) 
Wat Phumin (NT /wat phuumin/), Tambon Nai Wiang, Amphoe Muang, 
Nan (No. 12) 
Wat Sung Men (NT /wat stun mén/; CT /wat stup mén/), Tambon Sung 
, Men, Amphoe Sung Men, Phrae (Nos. 15, 17, 18, 
19, 21-25). 


C. Texts and Authors 
(No. in this article, date) 


ABHIDHAMMA-GULHATTHA-DIPANI 10 (n.d.; 16th c.?) 
Aggavamsa, s. SADDANITI 

Ariyavamsa, s. MANIPADIPA 

Bodhiramsi, s. BUDDHASIHINGA-NIDANA ; CAMADEVIVANSA 
BUDDHASIHINGA-NIDANA 24 (AD 1837) 
CAKKAVALADIPANI 15 (AD 1833) same place; 16 (AD 1869) 
CAMADEVIVANSA 17 (AD 1833); 18 (1842) 
DHAMMAPADA-ATTHAKATHA 01 (1521); 02 (n.d.; 16th c.?) 
DIGHANIKAYA: Samafifiaphalasuttam 11 (n.d.; 16th c.?) 
DIPANI MAHAVESSANTARA, s. JATAKA: Vessantaradipani 
JATAKA: Mahosathajataka 03 (n.d.;16/17th c.?) 

JATAKA: Pannasanipata 05 (AD 1550) 

JATAKA: Sattatinipata 07 (AD 1550) 

JATAKA: Tinsanipata 06 (AD 1514) 

JATAKA: Vessantaradipani 19 (AD 1836) 

JATAKA: Vessantarajataka-Atthakatha 14 (AD 1578) 

JATAKA: Vessantarajataka-Atthavannana-tika 13 (AD 1578) 
LOKADIPA ( LOKADIPAKASARA) 20 (1581); 21 (AD 1836) 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 159 


LOKASANTHANA 22 (AD 1836) 

MAHA-SIVIJAYAJATAKA, s. SIVIJAYAPANHA 

MANIPADIPA 23 (AD 1833) 

MILINDAPANHA 04 (AD 1495) 

Nava-Medhamkara, s. LOKADIPA 

PARAMATTHAVIBHUSANI 29 (AD 1861); 30 (AD 1869) 

PATTHANA-MAHAPAKARANA-ATTHAKATHA 09 (AD 1550) 

SADDANITI 12 (AD 1591) 

SAMYUTTANIKAYA: Sagathavagga 08 (AD 1549) 

Sangharakkhita, s. WUTTODAYA 

Sirimangala, s. CAKKAVALADIPANI and JATAKA: Vessantaradipani 

SIVIJAYAPANHA (MAHA-SIVISAYAJATAKA) 27 (1580); 
28 (AD 1759) 

TIKA MAHA-VESSANTARA, s. JATAKA: Vessantarajataka- 
Atthavannana-tika 

VANSAMALINI 25 (AD 1836) 

VUTTODAYA 26 (AD 1874) 


D. Donors, Scribes, and Other Persons Mentioned in the 
Colophons 


Aananda, "Cau [spp] 27 (AD 1580) (1) phuuk 1, cover folio 

Abhijaiy, Hnaan [scr] 29 (AD 1861) (2) phuuk 2 

Addha-Rassabhikkhu [scr] 24 (AD 1837) (2) cover folio 

Anantaraya Raajaadhiraaj "Cau, Somdecc Mahaaraaj, s. "Cau 
Mahaayassaraajaa 

Anantaworaritthidet (Ruler of Nan), s. "Cau Anantaworariddhiideej 

Ariya-Bhikkhu [scr] 16 (AD 1869) (6) phuuk 8 

Bhyaa ... : a title preceding the name proper; s. under the following word 

Bindaa-Bhikkhu [scr] 16 (AD 1869) (3) phuuk 5 

Boodhi-Sammaneer [scr] 29 (AD 1861) (5) phuuk 11 

Bra Mahaaswaamii "Cau [Wad] Door Jai [spp] 27 (AD 1580) (2) 
phuuk 1 

Bra Mahaaswaamii "Cau [Wad] Raajamondiian [spp] 27 (AD 1580) 

(2) phuuk 1 
Bra Mahaatheera “Cau Kaficana Arafifiawaasii [spp], s. Kajficana ... 


160 Harald Hundius 


Buua Gaam 'Taan Miitian, Mahaa-Upaasaka [spp, don] 06 (AD 1514) 
Front and Back Cover Folio 

Candamoolii Srii Saddhammakitti, s. Mahaa-Aggasaamii "Cav ... 

Candamuulii ... s. Mahaa-Aggasaamiii "Cau ... 

"Cau Anantaworariddhiideej (Ruler of Miiiian 'Naan; r. 1853-93) 
16 (AD 1869) (2) phuuk 2: Mahaaraaj; (7) phuuk 9 
Mahaaraaja Miiiian ‘Naan 29 (AD 1861) (1) phuuk 1: 
Mahaajiiwid; (2) phuuk 2: Somdejh Bra "Cau Jiiwis (4) 
phuuk 8, (5) phuuk 11, 30 (AD 1869) (4) phuuk 9, (7) 
phuuk 11, (8) phuuk 12: "Cau Mahaajiiwid 30 (AD 1869) (2) 
phuuk 5: (unreadable on the microfilm); (3) phuuk 7, (5) 
phuuk 10: Somdejh "Cau Mahaajiiwid 

"Cau ‘Hmiiiin Liiap Sain {Gaam} Daa, s. {Gaam} Daa, Sian ... 

“Cau Mahaayassaraajaa (Ruler of Miiiian ‘Naan; 1825-35) 
15 (AD1833) (1) "mai hlaap, 23 (AD 1833) (1) "mai hlaap: 
Mahaaraaj “Cau Militian ‘Naan; (2) (‘Bog Qok) Mahaaraas 
15 (4) phuuk 1, front cover folio v: Somdech Mahaaraaj 
Miiiian "Naan ; (10) phuuk 9, front cover folio: Somdecc 
Mahaaraaj Anantaraya Raajaadhiraaj “Cau; (11) phuuk 9, 
preceded by p 45: Somdecc Parammapobbitt Sihaa Anantaraya 
Raajaadhiraas "Cau (12) phuuk 10, 3rd cover folio: Somdecc 
Parammapobbitt Anantaraya Raajaadhiraas "Cau 

“Cau Mahaajiiwid, s. "Cau Anantaworariddhiideej 

"Cau Miiiian "Brad [spp] 19 (AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap, 21 (AD 1836) 
(1) "mai hlaap, 25 (AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap : "Cau Miiiian 
‘Bréa 23 (AD 1833) (1) "mai hlaap: Mahaaraaj “Cau Miiiian 
‘Brad 

"Cau Miitiah Hluuan Bra Paan, s. King of Luang Prabang 

"Cau Raajjawon Miiian Hluuan Bra Paan, Prince of Luang Prabang [spp] 
19 (AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap: "Cau Raajjawon (2) phuuk 1, 
preceded by p 49: Raajjawon (4) phuuk 11: 
Porommaseetthakhattiya Suriya Bra Raajawonsaa Bra Mahaa 
Uttama Oorassaa Raajaadhiraas" "Cau; 21 (AD 1836) (1) 
"mai hlaap: "Cau Raajjawon (3) phuuk 1, preceded by p 46: 
Raajjawon 22 (AD 1836) (3) phuuk 1, p 1 = 19 (4) (4) phuuk 
1, Back Cover Folio, preceded by p 50: Raajjawon 25 (AD 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 161 


1836) (1) "mai hlaap and colophon at the end of phuuk 10: 
"Cau Raajjawon 

Ciiam, Upaasikaa, 'M4a [spp,don] 09 (AD 1550) (2) back cover, v 

Deebin, Hnaan [scr] 17 (AD 1833) (7) phuuk 3 

Dhammajaiy-Bhikkhu {scr} 16 (AD 1869) (2) phuuk 4 

Door Jai, s. Bra Mahaaswaamii "Cau [Wad] Door Jai 

{Gaam} Baa, Naan (wife of 'Hmiiiin "Nogy Traa) [don] 08 (AD 1549) 
(2) phuuk 3, front cover folio; (5) phuuk 3, last folio; 
(6) phuuk 4, front cover folio, v 

{Gaam} Daa, Sadan, "Cau ‘Hmiiiin Liiap [spp, don] 20 (AD 1582) 
(4) phuuk 12 

Gaam Tan Suwannaraajakalyaa, Naan, late Princess of Luang Prabang 
19 (AD 1836) (4) phuuk 11; 22 (AD 1836) (3) phuuk 1, p 1 

Gruu Paa ("Cau) Kaficana Arafifiawaasii, s. Kaficana Arafifiawaasii 

‘Hmiiiin Liiap, "Cau, s. {Gaam} Daa, San [spp, don] 

‘Hmiitin Nogy Traa, s. {Gaam} Baa, Naan [don] 

Hnaan ... s. under the following word 

Indasger, Hnaan [scr] 30 (AD 1869) (4) phuuk 9 

[Jayanama-Bhikkhu], s. Jeeyyanaam-Bhikkhu 

[Jayasena-Bhikkhu], s. Jeeyyaseen-Bhikkhu 

Jeeyyanaam-Bhikkhu (< Pali: Jayanama) [scr] 23 (AD 1833) 
(6) phuuk 5 

Jeeyyaseen-Bhikkhu (< Pali: Jayasena) [scr] 29 (AD 1861) (3) phuuk 7 

Juuanja (?), Nak Puii [scr] 10 (n.d.; 16th c.?), front cover folio, r 

Kaaw, Naan (wife of Naay Pufi Wadhana) [spp, don] 20 (AD 1582) (1) 
phuuk 1, (2) phuuk 2, (3) phuuk 12, preceded by p 56; (4) 
ib., p 56: Kammaraanan (= Kamalaananda?) 

[Kamalaananda?], s. "Kaaiw, Naan [spp, don] 

Kammaraanan, s. "Kaéaw, Naan [spp, don] 

Kaficana Arafifiawaasii, Gruu Paa "Cau [spp] 15 (AD 1833) (1) "mai 
hlaap (4) front cover folio, v; 17 (AD 1833) (1) "mai hlaap 
19 (AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap (2) phuuk 1, preceded by p 49 
21 (AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap (3) phuuk 1, preceded by p 46; 
22 (AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap (4) phuuk 1, back cover folio; 
23 (AD 1833) (1) “mai hlaap (4) phuuk 1, front cover folio; 


162 Harald Hundius 


24 (AD 1837) (2) cover folio, v: Bra Mahaatheera "Cau ... 25 
(AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap and end of phuuk 10 

Kattiyos-Bhikkhu [scr] 29 (1861) (4) phuuk 8 

Khaaw Srii, Naan (son{s]/ daughter[s] of) [spp] 12 (AD 1591) (1) phuuk 
8, front cover folio, r (2) phuuk 24 (4) phuuk 22 (5) phuuk 8, 
front cover folio, v; also on phuuk 26, 29, 34-38 

Khamtan Suvannarajakalya, Nang (Princess of Luang Prabang), 
s. Gaam Tan Suwannaraajjakalyaa 

Ki, 'Maa ; Kii, ‘Maa [spp, don; lay-women of “Paan ‘Hmai] 27 (AD 1580) 
(2) phuuk 1, preceded by p 47 

King of Luang Prabang (Mangthathurat, r. 1817-36)[spp] 19 (AD 1836) 
(3) phuuk 2, preceding p 1: Porammapubbitt Bra Pen "Cau 
"Laan "Jaan; 22 (AD 1836) (1) "mai hlaap: "Cau Miiiian 
Hluuan Bra Paan; see also 19 (AD 1836) (4). 

Luang Prabang, Ruler of, s. King of Luang Prabang 

"Mia ... , s. under the following word 

Mahaa-Aggasaamii "Cau Wad Candamoolii Srii Saddhammakitti 
[spp] 12 (AD 1591) (6) phuuk 21 (7) phuuk 32: °muulii; also 
on phuuk 23, front cover folio 

Mahaajiiwid, see "Cau Anantaworariddhideej 

Mahaa Naanasamuddamangalameedhaawii “Cau [spp] 10 
(n.d.; 16th c.?) (1) front cover folio (3) p 48 

Mahaaraaj "Cau Miiiian ‘Brad, s. "Cau Miitian ‘Brad 

Mahaaraaj ("Cau) Miiiian 'Naan, s. "Cau , s. "Cau 

Mahaayassaraajaa 

Mahaasangharaajaa "Cau [spp] 05 (AD 1550) (2) front cover folio 
07 (AD 1550) (1) front cover folio (3) phuuk 3 

Mahaatheen Paa Riian(?) Suun [spp] 03 (n.d.; 16th/17th c.?) 

Mahaatheen Suuar Prahyaa [spp, don], s. Suuar Prahyaa 

Mahaatheera "Cau Kaficana Arafifiawaasii, s. Kaficana ... 

Mahaa Wajirapafifioo "Cau [spp] 12 (1591?) (3) phuuk 33, front cover 

folio, also on phuuk 34-35 

Mahaawan-Bhikkhu (Pali: Mahavana-Bh.)[scr] 15 (AD 1833) (6) 
phuuk 2, preceded by p 50, (7) ibid., preceded by p 49 

Manglasiilaa, Bhyaa [scr] 30 (AD 1869) (5) phuuk 10 

Mangthathurat, s. King of Luang Prabang 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 163 


Miitian "Brad, Ruler of, s. “Cau Miiiian ‘Brad 
Miiiian Hluuan Bra Paan, Ruler of, s. King of Luang Prabang 
Miiiian ‘Naan, Ruler of, s. “Cau Anantaworariddhideej, s. “Cau 
Mahaayassaraajaa 
Naan ... , s. under the following word 
Naarada [{-Bhikkhu?] (scr) 28 (AD 1759) (8) phuuk 5 
Naay ... , s. under the following word 
Nak Pufi Juuanija (?), s. Juuanja 
Nan, Ruler of, s. "Cau Anantaworariddhideej, s. "Cau Mahaayassaraajaa 
Naanasamuddamangalameedhaawii, Mahaa, s. Mahaa Naana... 
Phrae, Ruler of, s. "Cau Miiiian "Brad 
Prince of Luang Prabang, s. "Cau Raajjawon Miiiian Hluuan... 
Pufi Wadhana, Naay; "Kaadw, Naan [spp, don} 20 (AD 1582) (1) 
phuuk 1, (2) phuuk 2, (3) phuuk 12; also on phuuk 3-11 
Raajamondiian, s. Bra Mahaaswaamii "Cau [Wad] Raaja... 
Raajjasompas, Sain [scr] 30 (1869) (6) phuuk 11 
Raajjawon Miiiian Hluuan Bra Paan, s. "Cau Raajjawon ... 
Rattana, Sadan [scr] 30 (1869) (8) phuuk 12 
Riian(?) Suun, s. Mahaatheen Paa ... 
Sain ... , (a title preceding the name proper) s. under the following word 
Sangharaja, s. Mahaasangharaajaa "Cau 
Sihaa Anantaraya Raajaadhiraas "Cau, Somdecc (Parammapgbbitt), s. 
"Cau Mahaayassaraajaa 
Siiwijeey-Bhikkhu [scr] (< Pali: Sivijaya-Bh.) 23 (1833) (9) 
phuuk 8, p 44 
Sin Prahyaa, Naay [spp, don] 04 (AD 1495) (1) phuuk 15, p 58 
(2) phuuk 2, line 1 on left margin; also on phuuk 2, line 48, 
phuuk 7, line 28 
{Sivijaya-Bhikkhu], s. Siiwijeey-Bhikkhu 
Somdejh Bra "Cau Jiiwis, s. "Cau Anantaworariddhiideej 
Somdejh "Cau Mahaajiiwid, s. "Cau Anantaworariddhiideej 
Somdecch "Cau Wad Candamoolii (Candamuulii), 
s. Mahaa-Aggasaamii ... 
Somdecc Paramapobbitt Sihaa Anantaraya Raajaadhiraas "Cau, 
s. "Cau Mahaayassaraajaa 
Sudhamma-Bhikkhu [scr] 16 (AD 1869) (7) phuuk 9 


164 Harald Hundius 


Sundarapafifioo [don] 02 (n.d.; 16th c.?) (1) p 3 (3) p 9 (Sundara) 

Suuar Prahyaa, Mahaatheen [spp, don] 01 (AD 1495), front cover folio 
Traa, 'Hmiiiin "Nogy, s. {Gaam} Baa, Naan [don] 
Uppanaama-Bhikkhu [scr] 23 (AD 1833) (2) phuuk 1, front cover folio 
Wajirapafifioo "Cau, Mahaa, s. Mahaa Wajirapafifioo ... 


E. Names of Places 


Bra Nagoor Miiiian ‘Naan, s. Miitian ‘Naan 

Buua, Miitian, s. Miiian Buua 

‘Daa "Sooy*, s. Miiiian "Daa "Sooy 

Hin (or Hrin) 'Haan*, Miiiian s. Miiiian Hrin 'Haan* 

Jaan, Miiiian*, s. Miiiian Jaan*, Miiiian Jlaan* 

Jlaan, Mitiian*, s. Miiian Jlaan* Miiiian Jaan* 

"Laan "Jaan ‘Rom Khaaw 19 (3) phuuk 2, (4) phuuk 11 

Lambaan, s. Index F: [Wad] Bra Dhaad "Cau Lambaan 

Lampang, s. Index F: [Wad] Bra Dhaad "Cau Lambaan 

Lan Chang (Lanchang, Lanxang, Lanxang Homkhao, Lan Sang), s. 
“Laan "Jaan ‘Rom Khaaw 

Lan Sang, s. "Laan "Jaan ‘Rom Khaaw 

Luang Prabang, s. Miitian Hluuan Bra Paan 

Miiiian "Baa 18 (3) 29 (2); s. also Miiiian ‘Brad 

Miiiian ‘Brad 17 (1); 19 (1), (2) 21 (1), (3) 22 (1), (4) 23 (1), (4) 
24 (2) 25 (1), also at the end of phuuk 10 

Miiiian Buua (Pua) 16 (6), (7) 29 (3) 

Miitian 'Daa "Soggy 04 (1), (2); OS (1); 07 (2), (4); 08 (1), (3), (4), (7) 
(probably also nos. 01, 02, 03, 06, 09, 10, and 11) 

Miiiian Gwaan* (Nan) 29 (5) 

Miitian Hluuan Bra Paan 19 (1), (2) 21 (1), (3) 22 (1), (3) 25 (1) 

Miiiian Hrin 'Haan* (Nan) 30 (6) 

Miiiian Jaan* 23 (9); s. also Miiiian Jlaain* 

Miitian Jlain* 23 (6); s. also Miitian Jaain* 

Miiiian 'Naan 17 (1) 23 (1) 16 (7); 30 (6): Bra Nagoor Miiiian ‘Naan 
(7): Nagoor Mitiian ‘Naan (8): Miiiian Nandapulii Bra Nagoor 
Miiiian "Hnaan 23 (9): Miitian Nandapurii Srii Miiian 'Naan 
29 (5): Miitiah Nandapurii Naggor 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 165 


Miitian Nandapulii Bra Nagoor Milian "Hnaan, s. Miiiian ‘Naan 
Miitian Naan 16 (7) 

Nan, s. Miiiian "Naan 

Nandapurii Nagoor, s. Miiiian ‘Naan 

Nandapurii Srii Miiian ‘Naan, s. Miiiian 'Naan 
Naan, Miiiian, s. Miiiian Naan 

“Paan 'Daa Huua Riiiian Ban* (Nan) 12, passim 
“Paan 'Hmai* (Lampang?) 27 (2) 

"Paan Hnaad (Nan) 16 (4) 

"Paan "Kaiaim* (Nan) 29 (4) 

“Paan Yaam (?)* (Lampang) 27 (4) 

Phrae, s. Miiiian "Baa, s. Miiiian Brad 

Pua, s. Miiiian Buua 

Sungmen, Sung Men, s. following entry 

‘Suun Hmeer (Phrae) 24 (2) 

Ta Soi (or Tha Soi), s. Miitian "Daa "Sooy 
Wiang Pua, s. Miiiian Buua 

Wiang Soi, s. Miiiian "Daa "Sooy 

Wiian Buua (Pua), s. Miiiian Buua 

Wiian (‘Daa) “Sooy, s. Miiiian "Daa "Sooy 


F. Names of Monasteries 


Aaraam ‘Suun "Hmeer (Phrae) 23 (4) 

[Wad] Bra Dhaad "Cau Lambaan (Lampang) 02 (2), (3) 

Wad {Buu "Kadw} Srii Pur Riiiian (Phrae) 18 (3) 

Wad 'Daa Mahimsaa* (Nan) 16 (2), (4) 

[Wad] Door Jai* (Lampang?) 27 (2) 

Wad Hiuuan Srii Jum (Phrae) 24 (2) 

Wad Huua Faay* (Nan) 29 (1) 

Wad Loon* (Nan) 29 (3) 

Wad {Mahaasrohmana}Srii ‘Un Miitian* (‘Daa "Sooy) 07 (4); s. also 
Wad Srii ‘Un Miitian* 

Wad Naa "lian* (Lampang) 28 (8) 

Wad Nuua Daan (Nan) 15 (9) 

Wad Paak Nuua* (Lampang) 13 (1) 14 (2); also ibid., on p 3 


166 Harald Hundius 


Wad "Paan Diiiin* (Phrae) 23 (6) 

Wad "Paan "Kaim* (Nan) 29 (2) 

Wad "Paan Khoor* (Nan) 16 (6) 

Wad Peensakad (Nan) 29 (4) 

[Wad] Raajamondiian* (Lampang?) 27 (2) 

Wad Srii 'Un (or 'Ur) Miiiian* (Yossa "Dau "Faa} (‘Daa "Sogy) 05 (1) 
07 (2), (4) 08, (1), (3), (4), (7) 20 (3); probably also colophon 
in 03 

Wad ‘Suun "Hmeer, s. Aaraam 'Suun “Hmeer 

Wad Suuar Khuua* (‘Daa "Sooy [?]) 06 

Wad "Ton Hnur {"Naam Saa} (Nan) 15 (7) 

Wad 'Un (?) Miiian* 03, s. Wad Srii 'Un Miiiian* 


NB: Monasteries marked with * could not be located to date. They are 
not mentioned in the list published by the Social Research Insti- 
tute [n.d.; 1984?] either. (See Bibliography). 


es 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 167 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abbreviations: 


AKM Abhandlungen fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes 

BEFEO Bulletin de I'Ecole Francaise d'Extréme Orient 

BIHP Bulletin of the Institute of History and Philology, 
Academia Sinica, Taipei 


JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society 
JPTS Journal of the Pali Text Society 
JSS Journal of the Siam Society 


VOHD Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland 


BECHERT, H. et al. 

1979: Burmese Manuscripts, Part I, Wiesbaden (VOHD XXIII, 1). 

BROWN, J. M. 

2.1985: From Ancient Thai to Modern Dialects — And Other Writings on 
Historical Thai Linguistics, Bangkok (White Lotus Co.). 

BRUN, V. 

1976; Sug, the Trickster who Fooled the Monk, 
Lund (SIAS Monograph Series). 

CCEDES, G. 

1915: "Note sur les ouvrages palis composés en pays thai", 
in: BEFEO, XV, 3, pp. 39-46. 

1924: Recueil des Inscriptions du Siam, vol. I, Bangkok. 

1925: Documents sur l'histoire politique et religieuse du Laos 
Occidental, BEFEO, XXV, pp. 1-206. 

1966: Catalogue des manuscrits en pili, laotien et siamois, provenant de 
la Thailande, Copenhagen. 

2.1983 prachum silaacaardk ph@ak thii 1, 
Bangkok (samndkphim banndkit; reprint of the Thai version of 
Recueil des Inscriptions du Siam, vol. I), B.E. 2526. 

DAVIS, R. 

1970: A Northern Thai Reader, Bangkok (The Siam Society). 


168 Harald Hundius 


1976: "The Northern Thai Calendar and Its Uses", 
in: Anthropos, 71, 1976, pp. 3~32. 
EGEROD, S. 
1957: "The Eighth Earthly Branch in Archaic Chinese and Tai", 
in: Oriens, 10.2, pp. 296-299. 
1961: “Studies in Thai Dialectology", 
in: Acta Orientalia, 26. 1-2, pp. 43-91. 
1971: Phayaphrom: The Poem in Four Songs, Lund. 
FINOT, L. 
1917: Recherches sur la littérature laotienne, 
in: BEFEO, XVII, 5, pp. 1-219. 
1956: "Les écritures lao", in: France-Asie 118-119 (pp. 981-998); 
English Translation: "Laotian Writings", in: Kingdom of Laos, 
ed. by René de Berval, Limoges 1959, pp. 307-327. 
FOURMONT, Stephanus; DE VILLEFROY, Guihilmus 
1739: Catalogus Codicum Manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Regiae, 
Tomus Primus, Parisiis e Typographia Regiae MDCCCXXXIX. 
GANJANAPAN, Anan; WICHIENKEEO, Aroonrut [ed.] 
(/2aanan kaancandphan; ?arunrdt wichiankhiaw/) 
1981: tamnaan phafiaa c#an, 2 vols., Chiang Mai 
(khang? sdnkhommasaat mahdawitthajaalaj chiangmaj 
I? stun sdnsdom [é? stksda watthandtham Idannaa thaj 
witthajaalaj khruu chiangmaj), B.E. 2524. 
GEDNEY, W.]J. 
1967: "Thailand and Laos", in: Current Trends in Linguistics, 2: 
Linguistics in East and Southeast Asia, 
ed. by Thomas A. Sebeok, The Hague, pp. 782-818. 
GOSLING, D.L. 
1983: "Redefining the Sangha's Role in Northern Thailand: 
An Investigation of Monastic Careers at Five Chiang Mai Wats", 
in: JSS, 71, pp. 89-120. 
GRISWOLD, A.B. 
1960:  “Afterthoughts on the Romanization of Siamese", 
in: JSS, 48.1, pp. 29-68. 
HAAS, MLR. 
1958: “The Tones of Four Thai Dialects", in: BIHP, 29, pp. 817-826. 





i en nner nA 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 169 


1964:  Thai-English Student's Dictionary, Stanford. 

HARTMANN, J. F. 

1976: “The Waxing and Waning of Vowel Length in Tai Dialects", 
in: Tai Linguistics in Honor of Fang-Kuei Li, 
ed. by Th. W. Gething, J.G. Harris, Pranee Kullavanijaya, 
Bangkok (Chulalongkorn University Press), pp. 142-159. 

HINUBER, O. von 

1983: "Pali Manuscripts of Canonical Texts from North Thailand", 
in: JSS, 71, pp. 75-88. 

1985: “Two Jataka Manuscripts from the National Library in 
Bangkok", in: JPTS, X, pp. 1-22. 

1987a: "The Oldest Dated Manuscript of the Milindapafiha", 
in: JPTS, XI, pp. 111-119 (with an additional note in: JPTS, XII, 
1988, pp. 173-174). 

1987b: "The Pali Manuscripts Kept at the Siam Society, Bangkok. 
A Short Catalogue”, in: JSS, 75, pp. 9-74. 

1988: "Die Sprachgeschichte des Pali im Spiegel der siidostasiatischen 
Handschrifteniiberlieferung" 
(Untersuchungen zur Sprachgeschichte und Handschriftenkunde 
des Pali I) Stuttgart (Fr. Steiner). 

1988b: "An Additional Note on the Oldest Dated Manuscript of the 
Milindapafiha", in: JPTS, XII, pp. 173-174. 

1988c: "Remarks on a List of Books Sent to Ceylon from Siam in the 
18th Century”, in: JPTS, XII, pp. 175-183. 

HUNDIUS, H. 

1976a: Das Nirat Miiang Klang von Sunthgn Phi, 
Analyse und Ubersetzung eines thailindischen Reisegedichts, 
Wiesbaden (Harrassowitz). 

1976b: Verzeichnis der auf Mikrofilm erfaBten literarischen Dokumente 
aus Nordthailand, Frankfurt [unpublished computer print-out]. 

1990: Phonologie und Schrift des Nordthai, 
Stuttgart (Fr. Steiner; AKM 48, 3). 

JAINI, P.S. 

1981/1983 Pafifiasa-Jataka or Zimmé Pafifiasa, 

London (Pali Text Society Series No. 172, 173). 
JINAKALAMAL]I (Author: Ratanapafifia) [ed. by A. A. P. Buddhadatta] 


170 Harald Hundius 


1962 London (Luzac & Co.). 
KEYES, Ch. F. 
1970: “New Evidence on Northern Thai Frontier History", 
in: In Memoriam Phya Anuman Rajadhon, 
ed. by T. Bunnag; M. Smithies, Bangkok, pp. 222-250. 
JONES, R. B. 
1971: Thai Titles and Ranks, 
Ithaca, New York (Data Paper No. 81, Southeast Asia Program, 
Department of Asian Studies, Cornell University). 
KHANA KAMMAKAN CAT PHIM EKKASAN THANG 
PRAWATTISAT [ed.] 
(/khénd? kammakaan cat phim ?éekkasdan thaan prawattisdat/) 
1965: Prachum Silacariik (/prachum silaacaardk/), III, Bangkok. 
1970: Prachum Silacariik (/prachum silaacaardk/), IV, Bangkok. 
LI, F.-K. 
1977: A Handbook of Comparative Tai, 
Honolulu (University Press of Hawaii). 
LIKHITANONTA, | Likhit 
1980: "The Golden Age of Buddhist Literature in Lanna Thai", in: 
Buddhism in Northern Thailand, 
edited by Saeng Chandrangaam and Narujohn Iddhichiracharas, 
Chiang Mai (published in commemoration of the 13th General 
Conference of the World Fellowship of Buddhists, Chiang Mai, 
24-29 November 1980), pp. 64-80. 
KROM SILPAKORN (/krom sinldppaakoon/, Fine Arts Department) [ed.] 
1974: prawat wat chdan khdm woordwihdan, 
Bangkok (roonphim kaansaatsanda). 
McFARLAND, G. B. 
3.1956: Thai-English Dictionary, Stanford. 
MULDER, N. 
2.1985: Everyday Life in Thailand. An Interpretation, 
Bangkok (D.K. Bookhouse). 
NYANATILOKA 
3.1972: Buddhist Dictionary (ed. by Nyanaponika), Colombo. 
NOTTON, C. 
1925: Annales du Siam, I, Paris. 





sneer enna te ene ge A tN 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 171 


ONGSAKUL, Saraswadee (saratsawadii ?3ysakun) 

1986: prawattisaat ldannaa, Chiang Mai (khroonkaan khdo sdnthéet 
Idannaakhadiistksaa, khroopkaan stun sépsdem sinldppa? 
watthanatham mahdawitthajaalaj chianmaj), B.E. 2529. 

PAVIE, A. [ed.] 

1898: Etudes diverses II: Recherches sur l'histoire du Cambodge, du 
Laos et du Siam (Mission Pavie), Paris. 

PENTH, H. 

1976: khamcaardk thii thdan phrd phutthardup naj nakhoon chiapméaj, 
Bangkok (roopphim naajdék rdétthamontrii), B.E. 2519. 

1983: prawat khwaampenmaa kh3op Idannaa thaj, Chiang Mai 
(Chiang Mai University, Social Research Institute), B.E. 2526. 

PHAYOMYONG, Manee (/ménii phdjoomjop/) 

1968: tamraa rian naysdeu laannaa thaj, 

Chiang Mai (prathuan witthajaa), B.E. 2511. 

PHETSARATH, Tiao Maha Upahat 

1959; “The Laotian Calendar", 
in: Kingdom of Laos, ed. by René de Berval, Limoges, 
pp. 97-125. 

PRACHAKITKORACAK, Phraya (Chaem Bunnag) 

(/phrdjaa prachaakitkoordcak; chém bunnaak/) 

3.1961: phoysdawadaan joondk (chabap h3o samit hén chaat), 
Bangkok, B.E. 2504. 

PRACHUM SILACARUK, s. KHANA KAMMAKAN ... 

PURNELL, H.C. 

1962: A Colorful Colloquial, Chiang Mai (Overseas Missionary 
Fellowship). 

ROONGRUANGSRI, Udom (/?udom ripreansii/) 

3.1981: woohdan laannaa: kham ?iu baaw ?iu sdaw, pritsanda 
khamthaaj, siphaasit, 

Chiang Mai (Department of Thai, Faculty of Humanities, 
Chiang Mai University; Mimeograph), B.E. 2524. 

1984: rdbdop kaankhian ?4ks3on Idannaa, 

Chiang Mai (Department of Thai, Faculty of Humanities, 
Chiang Mai University; Mimeograph), B.E. 2527. 
[forthcoming] /phétcanaanikrom phaasda Ifannaa — thaj/. 


172 Harald Hundius 


SAO SAIMONG 
1981: “Cillasakaraja and the Sixty Cyclical Year Names", 
in: JSS, 69, pp. 4-12. 
SATTARAPHAI, Boonserm (/buns3om sdattaraphaj/) 
2.1989: sadét laannaa, 2 vols., 
Bangkok (?aksaraaphiphdt; I: 184 pp, II:174 pp.), B.E. 2532. 
SCHUYLER, M. 
1908: “Notes on the making of palm-leaf manuscripts in Siam", 
in: JAOS, 29, pp. 281-283. 
SI SAM-ANG, Surasak (/surdsak slisim?aan/) 
1987: "prawattisaat 1é? sinldppa?”", 
in: mway naan; booraandkhadii, prawattisdat lé? sinldppa? 
(edited by the Fine Arts Department [Krom Silpakorn]), 
Bangkok, B.E. 2530, pp. 39-242. 
SMITH, H. 
1948: A Critical Pali Dictionary (begun by V. Trenckner), 
Epilegomena to Vol. I, Copenhagen (E. Munksgaard). 
SOCIAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (Chiang Mai University) [ed.] 
[n.d.; 19842]: raajch@u wat phutthasaatsanda naj khéet 8 caynwat phaak 
nia, Chiang Mai (SRI-CMU-23-3-027; Mimeograph). 
1986a: raajch@u nanstiw booraan ldannaa: ?éekkasdan majkhroofiim 
kh3op sathdaban wicaj sankhom mahdawitthajaalaj chiaymaj, 
Chiang Mai (Mimeograph), B.E. 2526. 
1986b: Lan Na Literature. Catalogue of Palm-leaf Texts on Microfilm 
at the SRI, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 
Bangkok (Chulalongkorn University Bookstore), B.E. 2526. 
SWANGPANYANGKUN, Thawee (/thawii sawaanpanjaankuun/) 
1988:  sakkaraat thiap h6n thaj, Chiang Mai (YMCA), B.E. 2531. 
TUIKEO, Puang Kham (/puan kham tijj khiaw/) 
1986:  "wian booraan, jan caardk céy hua lin, kaanbén weelaa samaj 
booraan", 
in: Wichaikhatthakha, Thiw [ed.], kampheey muan chianméaj, 
Chiang Mai (thipphanéet kaanphim), B.E. 2529, pp. 96-109. 
WANNASAI, Singkha (/sinkhd? wanndsij/) 
1975: tamraa rian ?akkhara? laannaa thaj, 
Lamphun (lamphuun kaanphim), B.E. 2518. 


The Colophons of thirty Pali manuscripts from Northern Thailand 173 


1979: khloop réay mantharaa rdp chiangmaj, 
Chiang Mai (Chiang Mai Bookcenter), B.E. 2522. 

1980: parithdt wannakhadii laannaa thaj, 
Chiang Mai (Chiang Mai University, Faculty of Humanities), 
B.E. 2523. 

WATCHARASAT, Bunkhit (/bunkhit wdtchardsaat/) 

1985: béep rian phaasda muan nua, 
(6th, enlarged and partly revised edition) Chiang Mai 
(thaaraathoon kaanphim), B.E. 2528. 

WIRAPRACAK, Kongkaeo; THASUKHON, Niyada 
(/k5p kéew wiirdpracak; nfjadaa thaasukhon/) 

1981: raajnaan kaanwicaj ray kaanwiwdt kh3on ?4ks3on tham 
laannaa, Bangkok, B.E. 2524 [unpublished]. 

WIRAPRACAK, Kongkaeo; UNNATHARAWARANGKUN, Wirat 
(/k5y kéew wiirdpracak; wirdt ?unnaathdrd? wdéraankuun/) 

1984:  khamphii bajlaan chabap lian naj samaj rdttandkoosin, 
Bangkok (National Library), B.E. 2527. 

WYATT, D. K. [ed.] 

1966: The Nan Chronicle. Translated by Prasert Churatana, 
Ithaca (New York). 

WYATT, D.K. 

1969: The Politics of Reform in Thailand, 
Bangkok (Thai Watana Panich), B.E. 2512. 

1975: The Crystal Sands. The Chronicles of Nagara Sri Dharrmariaja, 
Data Paper: No. 98, Southeast Asia Program, 
Department of Asian Studies, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York. 

1984: Thailand. A Short History, Bangkok (Thai Watana Panich). 


