--- Page 1 ---
This is the author manuscript of the article.
For the final version, see brill.com/abstract/journals/saih/3/2/saih.3.issue-2.xml
Wonders in margine – Mapping the Madhyamaka Network of Gyamarwa Jangchupdrak
* The material presented in this paper was in great part collected in the framework of the joint
project on Gyamarwa’s Analysis of the Essence of Madhyamaka conducted by Kevin Vose
and me. An earlier version of this paper was presented in the panel “Mapping intellectual
networks of Tibetan scholasticism” we organized at the 15th Seminar of the International
Association of Tibetan Studies in Paris (July 2019). I thank my co-panelists for their
comments and M. Arturo Silva for correcting my English.
Pascale Hugon, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Institute for the Cultural and Intellectual History of
Asia, Hollandstrasse 11–13, 1020 Vienna, pascale.hugon@oeaw.ac.at
Abstract
The twelfth-century Tibetan scholar Gyamarwa Jangchupdrak (rgya dmar ba byang chub grags) is an
important link in the Madhyamaka tradition that stemmed from Ngok Loden Shérap (rngog blo ldan
shes rab, 1059–1109). His recently recovered Analysis of the Essence of Madhyamaka offers
significant insight into the diverse positions of numerous scholars who took part in the discussion
before and around his time, but who are only identified in interlinear notes. In this paper I discuss the
identity of these thinkers and the contribution of this text-cum-marginalia to the mapping of early
Tibetan Madhyamaka scholars and ideas.
Keywords
rGya dmar ba Byang chub grags, Tibet, Buddhism, Madhyamaka, marginalia
Introduction
Our access in recent years to an expanding pool of manuscript reproductions of Tibetan philosophical
works places us in a better position to shed light on the developments of Tibetan scholasticism, and in
1

--- Page 2 ---
particular on the rich intellectual environment of the 11th to 13th centuries. However, in spite of this
sudden abundance of textual goods, the corpus of research remains far from exhaustive. The material
available today is just the tip of an iceberg of texts that may still be extant, and that iceberg is just a
fragment of the ice floe of Tibetan compositions.1 Thus the issue of “missing links” remains actual.
The scholastic treatises from the early period that have surfaced directly contribute to the mapping of
the authors concerned and of their particular views. They are, in addition, a rich source of information
about other scholars and other views on account of the high degree of intertextuality they display:
Scholars engage in their works with their peers, and they discuss alternative positions, which are
subject to refutation or further refinement. This offers us the opportunity of corroborating as well as
enhancing the networks of texts and authors that are already known. However, intertextuality in these
treatises is often concomitant with anonymization. That is, the other scholars and texts are left
unidentified. Silent re-use of previous material represents an extreme case, where other scholars’ ideas,
and even their very words, are not even marked as such, but simply integrated within a later text. Such
loans, along with the identity of the scholars in anonymous debates, cannot be checked against
primary sources in the case of missing links. There are, nonetheless, palliatives to anonymization.
Fresh information about the identity of interconnected scholars and their views can be found in
marginal notes on manuscripts, in commentaries, in other works discussing the same positions, or in
the works of later Tibetan scholars who had access to nowadays no longer extant texts or relayed
orally transmitted information. This paper offers a case-study that illustrates the benefits of a certain
set of marginal notes for the study of Tibetan Madhyamaka views in the twelfth century and of the
1 This fact is well illustrated in the catalogue of the collection of texts preserved in the Néchu temple (gnas bcu
lha khang) of Drepung (’bras spungs) monastery (which is said to have been the Fifth Dalai Lama’s private
collection), which is the most extensive source of new materials for the study of early Tibetan scholasticism. The
Néchu temple collection contains, altogether, 24,295 texts.* In the category of texts brought to the collection
from outside the monastery (bearing the mark “phyi” in the signature on the cover page), 23,135 texts from 1833
bundles were on location at the time of cataloging in 2002, but the bundle numbers found in the signatures
suggest that the original library counted at least 4417 bundles. See Drepung catalogue (Beijing: Mi rigs dpe
skrun khang, 2004), vol. 1, 14–15 and Ducher 2020: 127–129. *The catalogue numbers of the texts from outside
run from 1 to 22,694, but numbers 10,000 to 11,600 are used twice (this mistake, first pointed out by Jörg
Heimbel, is reported in Ducher 2020: 127).
2

--- Page 3 ---
intellectual networks in which their partisans participated. I attempt in the conclusion to unveil the
identity of the person who wrote the notes, and to address the overarching question of the value one
can ascribe to information from such a source in making up for missing links and thereby uncovering
the intellectual relation between scholars that were instrumental in the development of Tibetan
scholasticism.
1. Gyamarwa and the Analysis of the Essence of Madhyamaka
1.1 The Analysis of the Essence of Madhyamaka
The 31-folio manuscript under consideration (codex unicus) contains an independent Madhyamaka
work authored by the twelfth-century scholar Gyamarwa Jangchupdrak (rgya dmar ba byang chub
grags), entitled Analysis of the Essence of Madhyamaka (dbu ma de kho na nyid rnam par spyod pa,
hereafter referred to as the Analysis).2 The manuscript was part of the Néchu temple collection in
Drepung monastery (Drepung catalogue, No. 015397).3 It was published in 2007 in the Collected
Works of the Kadampas (bka’ gdams gsung ’bum).4 Two other works by Gyamarwa have also become
available: a commentary on Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra, and a commentary on Jñānagarbha’s
Satyadvayavibhaṅga.5
2 In the colophon, the title of the text is given as “dbu ma de kho na nyid rnam par spyod [for dpyod] pa,” that is:
The Analysis of the Essence of Madhyamaka. On the cover page, it is reported as “dbu ma’i de kho na nyid gtan
la dbab pa,” The Establishment of the Essence of Madhyamaka.
3 On this collection, see n. 1.
4 Collected Works of the Kadampas (Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang), vol. 31, 7–67. This text is the
object of a joint project carried out by Kevin Vose and myself. More information on the manuscript and the text
of the Analysis, as well as the latest version of our edition and translation in progress, can be found on the
project’s website, currently hosted at: https://www.oeaw.ac.at/ikga/forschung/tibetologie/materialien/the-dbu-
ma-de-kho-na-nyid-of-rgya-dmar-ba-byang-chub-grags-12th-c/ (accessed 13.1.2021).
5 See respectively Collected Works, vol. 6, 11–174 and vol. 19, 247–316.
3

--- Page 4 ---
1.2 Gyamarwa in context
Limited information pertaining to Gyamarwa’s life and works is available.6 He seems to have been a
quite popular teacher in the twelfth century: In the Blue Annals (deb ther sngon po) of Gö Lotsawa
Zhönnupel (’gos lo tsā ba gzhon nu dpal, 1392–1481) alone, fifteen scholars that were his students are
named, among them the famous Chapa Chökyi Senggé (phya pa chos kyi seng ge, 1109–1169),
Düsumkhyen (dus gsum mkhyen, 1110–1193), and Pakmodrupa Dorjé Gyelpo (phag mo gru pa rdo rje
rgyal po, 1110–1170).7 A number of them studied with Gyamarwa in Tölung (stod lung) – Gyamarwa
is often also referred to as Tölung Gyamarwa – in the fields of Madhyamaka (dbu ma), logic and
epistemology (tshad ma), and Perfection of Wisdom (sher phyin). Gyamarwa’s teachers included
Könchokpel (dkon mchog dpal) of Lho for the study of mental training (sems byong) and, for the study
of Madhyamaka, Gangpa Sheu Lodrö Jangchup (gangs pa she’u blo gros byang chub) and Khyung
Rinchendrak (khyung rin chen grags).8 These latter two were disciples of Ngok Lotsawa Loden
Shérap (rngog lo tsā ba blo ldan shes rab, 1059–1109), the renowned abbot of Sangpu Neutok (gsang
6 A compilation of information on Gyamarwa in Tibetan sources is found in Per K. Sørensen and Guntram
Hazod, in cooperation with Tsering Gyalbo, Rulers on the Celestial Plain: Ecclesiastic and Secular Hegemony in
Medieval Tibet. A Study of Tshal Gung-thang (Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, 2007), 420, n. 25. See also Leonard W.J. van der Kuijp, “Phya-pa Chos-kyi Seng-ge’s Impact on
Tibetan Epistemological Theory,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 5 (1978), 355, Leonard W.J. van der Kuijp,
Contributions to the Development of Tibetan Buddhist Epistemology (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1983),
60, David Seyfort Ruegg, Studies in Indian and Tibetan Madhyamaka Thought, Part 1 — Three Studies in the
History of Indian and Tibetan Madhyamaka Philosophy (Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische
Studien, 2000): 36 and n. 63, and Ritsu Akahane, “Three Tibetan Commentaries on dBu ma bden gnyis,” Report
of the Japanese Association for Tibetan Studies 56 (2010), 78.
7 See notably Blue Annals 283, 290, 404, 527, 528, 655, 1077, 1177.
8 See in this regard especially Serdok Penchen Shakya Chokden (gser mdog paṇ chen shākya mchog ldan, 1428–
1507), History of Ngok’s Teachings (rngog lo tstsha ba chen pos bstan pa ji ltar bskyangs pa’i tshul mdo tsam du
bya ba ngo mtshar gtam gyi rol mo) 4b5 (’dis {=Phya pa} dang po khyung gi slob ma / rgya dmar ba byang chub
grags la dbu tshad gsan) and Origin of Madhyamaka (dbu ma’i byung tshul rnam par bshad pa’i gtam yid bzhin
lhun po) 12b4–5 (de {=rNgog Blo ldan shes rab}’i bshad srol ’dzin pa mang po dag las gtso bo ni khyung rin
chen grags / de’i slob ma rgya dmar byang chub grags pa dang / gangs pa she’u sogs su grags pa). See also the
passage of the religious history by Padma Karpo (padma dkar po, b. 1527) cited in van der Kuijp, “Phya-pa
Chos-kyi Seng-ge’s Impact,” 366, n. 4 (khyad par gangs pa she’u dang khyung gnyis ka’i dngos slob stod lungs
rgya dmar pa byang chub grags / dbu tshad la de’i slob ma mang yang phywa pa chos kyi seng ge gtso bo).
4

--- Page 5 ---
phu ne’u thog) monastery, translator and pioneer exegete in many areas of Buddhist learning,
including Madhyamaka.9
In view of his learning and teaching activities, Gyamarwa belonged to (at least) two
overlapping networks: Madhyamaka and epistemology. In particular, according to Butön Rinchendrup
(bu ston rin chen grub, 1290–1364), Gyamarwa figures in the transmission lineage of Dharmakīrti’s
Pramāṇaviniścaya, whose Tibetan transmission starts with Ngok Lotsawa and then goes on to Khyung
→ Gyamarwa → Chapa.10 Gyamarwa is himself credited with a lost commentary on the
Pramāṇaviniścaya.11 He is also the link between Ngok Lotsawa and Chapa in the Ngok Madhyamaka
lineage, in which Gyamarwa again follows Khyung, who is presented as the main (among many)
lineage holder after Ngok Lotsawa.12 As no works of Madhyamaka by Ngok Lotsawa or Khyung have
survived, Gyamarwa’s Analysis is an important piece of direct evidence for the early phase of the
Ngok tradition. The only other extensive evidence pre-dating Chapa’s independent work on
Madhyamaka (his Heart Essence of Madhyamaka [dbu ma de kho na nyid kyi snying po]) in the Ngok
tradition is the excursus on the Two Truths in the monumental Stages of the Teachings (bstan rim chen
mo) by Ngok Lotsawa’s devoted student Drolungpa Lodrö Jungné (gro lung pa blo gros ’byung gnas,
ca. 1040–ca. 1120).13
9 On this figure see van der Kuijp, Contributions, Chap. 1, Ralf Kramer, The Great Tibetan Translator: Life and
Works of rNgog Blo ldan shes rab (1059–1109) (München: Indus Verlag, 2007), and Kazuo Kano, Buddha-
Nature and Emptiness: rNgog Blo-ldan-shes-rab and the Transmission of the Ratnagotravibhāga from India to
Tibet (Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien, 2016).
10 See Leonard W.J. van der Kuijp, “Fourteenth Century Tibetan Cultural History VI: The transmission of Indian
Buddhist pramāṇavāda according to early Tibetan gsan yig-s,” Etudes Asiatiques 49, no. 4 (1995), 928 and 939.
11 See van der Kuijp, Contributions, 60.
12 See Serdok Penchen, Origin of Madhyamaka 12b4–6, translated in Iaroslav Komarovski, Three Texts on
Madhyamaka by Shakya Chokden (Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works & Archives, 2000).
13 On the latter see José I. Cabezón, “The Madhyamaka in Gro lung pa’s Bstan Rim chen mo,” in Studies in the
Philosophy and History of Tibet, ed. by Maret Kark and Horst Lasic (Bonn: International Institute for Tibetan
and Buddhist Studies, 2010), 11–58.
5

--- Page 6 ---
2. The “others” in the Analysis of the Essence of Madhyamaka
2.1 Input from the main text
The Analysis not only provides direct access to Gyamarwa’s ideas, it also offers us significant insight
into the diverse views of a number of Tibetan scholars who took part in the discussion before and
around the author’s time. But this aspect of the text would be greatly overlooked were it not for the
abundant notes that appear on the manuscript.
2.1.1 Markers
Various syntactic markers in the main text indicate when Gyamarwa is introducing the view of another
scholar:
• Markers of an actual view: zhes brjod do, zhes bya ba bshad do, zhes bzhed do, zhes brjod
pa, zhes ’chad do, zhes ’dod pa ni, zer na ni, zer ba ni, zhes bya’o
• Markers of an actual view that is not accepted by the author: ’chad pa ni mi bzang ste, zhes
bya ba legs par mi sems so, zhes bzhed pa’i phyogs kyang gzhag par shing du dka’ ste,
mi ’dod do, ’di la brtsad pa ni
• Markers of an actual view that is accepted by the author: ’chad pa ni legs so
• Markers of an actual view (or presentation of some point), usually of some length, which is
subjected to analysis (and often partially refuted):14 ’di snyam du, ’di snyam du dpyad
pa/de/te, ’di snyam du bshad
• Markers of a position statement, question, suggestion, or argument, which may be that of a
hypothetical opponent or an actual opponent: zhe na, rtog na
14 The analysis that follows this marker is not necessarily that of Gyamarwa; it may be by yet another scholar. In
such a case, the transition to the author’s own view is sometimes indicated by the expression des na, but the
latter is also often used for other purposes.
6

--- Page 7 ---
2.1.2 Anonymous references
The main text also contains 46 explicit references to other scholars (often in connection with the above
markers), but these references all employ anonymous phrases: “someone” (kha cig, 15 times); “others”
(gzhan dag, 5 times); “the teacher” (slob dpon, once); “the teachers” (slob dpon dag, 10 times); “other
teachers” (slob dpon gzhan, once; slob dpon gzhan dag, 3 times); “teachers and spiritual friends” (slob
dpon dge bshes dag, once); “former (scholars)” (snga rabs pa dag, once; snga rabs dag, once); “the
learned ones” (mkhas pa dag, 3 times; mkhas, once); “the venerable excellent learned ones” (rje btsun
dam pa mkhas rnams, once); “the reverend ones” (rje btsun dag, once); “the reverend lamas” (rje
btsun bla ma dag, once); “the reverend learned one” (rje btsun mkhas pa, once).
2.1.3 Identification by name
While Indian scholars are often referred to by name in the main text,15 the only identification of
another Tibetan scholar by name is found in the verse invocation at the beginning of the treatise (f.
1b1), though even here it lies somewhat hidden (in an artifice that gets lost in translation):16
yon tan dpag myed rin cen dang lhan ’gro na nyi bzhin gsal byed rab grags pa //
rnam ’byed blo gros dri myed byang chub sems dpa’ rje btsun dag la rab tu ’dud //
I salute the reverend,17 the bodhisattva of stainless discriminative intellect, who has the treasure
of boundless virtues, known in the world to be like the sun, an illuminator.
15 Gyamarwa names in the Analysis Asaṅga (thogs med, f. 4a2), Atiśa (ti pang ka ra, f. 15a3), Candrakīrti (zla
ba’i grags pa, f. 15a3), Dharmakīrti (chos kyi grags pa, f. 15a3, 25a1), Dharmottara (chos mchog, f. 18a8),
Dignāga (phyogs kyi glang po, f. 2a2, 3b5, 4a4), Jñānagarbha (ye shes snying po, f. 5a8, 10b5, 12a5, 15a3),
Sthiramati (blo brtan, f. 9b6), Śaṅkaranandana (bram ze shag ka ra, f. 16a4, 29a3), Śāntideva (shan ta de ba, f.
5a8), Śrīgupta (dpal sbas, f. 29a3), Vasubandhu (dbyig gnyen, f. 4a2, 15a2, 15a6), and Vinītadeva (dul lha, f.
10b3).
16 Gyamarwa also mentions his own name (Jangchupdrak) in a hidden way in a “signed verse” at the end of the
treatise, in the line reading “bla med byang chub grags pa thog par shog” (“May they obtain the famous [grags],
supreme enlightenment [byang chub]”). As demonstrated by Akahane (“Three Tibetan Commentaries,” 78), this
verse is parallel to the closing verse of Jñānagarbha’s Satyadvayavibhaṅga, in which the author wishes for all
beings to “generate the ‘embryo of wisdom’ (Tib. ye shes snying po, which translates the Sanskrit
jñānagarbha).”
17 I take the indication of the plural (dag) to represent the honorific.
7

--- Page 8 ---
The combination of the expressions blo gros (“intellect”) and byang chub (“enlightenment” – in the
verse, part of the expression byang chub sems dpa’ [Skt. bodhisattva], which refers to a being aspiring
to enlightenment) spells out Gangpa Sheu’s religious name: Lodrö Jangchup (blo gros byang chub).
The identification of the addressee of the invocation is confirmed by an interlinear note that reads:
gangs pa blo gros byang chub. As indicated above, Gangpa is reported to have been one of
Gyamarwa’s teachers of Madhyamaka. From this verse we can determine that he was probably his
most important Madhyamaka teacher. Given that the expression Jangchup (byang chub) in Gangpa’s
name is also part of Gyamarwa’s religious name, Jangchupdrak (byang chub grags), it is also possible
that Gangpa had been involved in Gyamarwa’s ordination.
Given the way that Gyamarwa presents the views of his Tibetan peers, if one attempts to read
the Analysis without the notes on the manuscript, not only do the multiple voices remain unidentified,
it is also difficult to ascertain which view or argument belongs to whom, and where someone’s view
stops and another’s begins. It is also not always obvious which position Gyamarwa himself subscribes
to within the constellation of entangled arguments and counterarguments, and which part of the text
represents his original contribution rather than being a mere repetition of a previous position.18
2.2 Identifications in the notes
There is no commentary on the Analysis that could clarify these matters, but the marginal and
interlinear notes on the extant manuscript are especially useful for sorting out the relationships
between the scholars involved: the notes provide the names of the thinkers whose views are mentioned
in the main text and they make clear the structure and divisions of the discussion. Further, they help us
to understand the many individual positions via the addition of words and particles, paraphrases, and
additional explanations, all of which make the often sibylline reading of the main text more accessible.
18 The kind of complex interaction between several scholars that is found in this text and is only understandable
with the help of the notes is well illustrated by the discussion concerning the divisions of Madhyamaka, which I
deal with in a another article (Pascale Hugon, “Vaibhāṣika-Madhyamaka: A Fleeting Episode in the History of
Tibetan Madhyamaka,” in Archaeologies of the Written: Indian, Tibetan, and Buddhist Studies in Honour of
Cristina Scherrer-Schaub, ed. by Vincent Tournier, Vincent Eltschinger, and Marta Sernesi (Naples: Università
degli Studi di Napoli L’Orientale, 2020).
8

--- Page 9 ---
The most “hotly debated” topics of these days can also be identified by the number of
protagonists referred to in the notes. Notably, a range of opposing views are attested regarding the
nature of the distinction between the Two Truths; the identification of the object of negation when
proving emptiness; the object of a reasoning consciousness; and the divisions of Madhyamaka
pertaining to the conventional level.19 Other topics only involve one or two other scholars. The debates
do not concern only Madhyamaka. Disputes on subtle points of logic are also found.
The following identifications of the proponents of these views appear in the interlinear and
marginal notes:
(a) gangs pa (58)
gangs pa she’u (2)
gangs pa blo gros byang chub (1) } 64 (unmarked: 36)
she’u (1)
dge bshes gangs pa (2)
(b) jo btsun (38)
jo btsun pa (3)
} 43 (unmarked: 34)
jo btsun pa dag (1)
zangs pa jo btsun (1)
(c) lo tsa (26)
} 40 (unmarked: 27)
lo tsa ba (14)
(d) dge bshes (1)
} 7 (unmarked: 2)
dge bshes pa (6)
(e) me tig pa (1)
me tig (1)
} 4 (unmarked: 1)
me (1)
me st[o]n? (1)
(f) khyung (2)
} 3 (unmarked: 2)
rin grags (1)
(g) stag pa } 1
(h) ’phur ston } 1
Total
163 (unmarked: 102)
The number referred to as “unmarked” in the parentheses in the right column is the number of times a
given scholar is identified in a note without the main text using a syntactic marker indicating that the
author presents someone else’s view (cf. §2.1.1) and also without making explicit (but anonymous)
reference to another scholar (§2.1.2). In all of these cases – more than half of the total – the fact that
19 See Kevin Vose’s article in the present volume on the debated question of whether emptiness constitutes an
elimination and its realization would amount to the positive determination of the absence of nature.
9

--- Page 10 ---
the view of another scholar is involved would have simply gone unnoticed were one to read the main
text without access to the notes.
Among the nominal references found in the notes, the identification is unproblematic for (a),
(c), and (f). “Lo tsa” (“the translator”) (c) refers to Ngok Lotsawa. The expressions in (a) and (f) refer,
respectively, to Gangpa and Khyung, who were, as mentioned above (§1.2), students of Ngok Lotsawa
and Gyamarwa’s teachers.
The references (e) denote the lesser known Métikpa (me tig pa, also spelled elsewhere me dig
pa or me dik pa).20 This scholar is reported by Martön Chökyi Gyelpo (dmar ston chos kyi rgyal po,
ca. 1197–ca. 1258) to have been an assistant teacher (zur chos) of Khyung in Nyangtö (nyang stod) at
the time that Sachen Künga Nyingpo (sa chen kun dga’ snying po, 1092–1158) was studying logic and
epistemology.21 According to a note to Sachen’s biography, this Métikpa was from Tsang (rtsang). It is
in question whether he is the same person as Shampo Métikpa (sham po me dig pa), whose name is
listed in the Blue Annals (395) among the teachers who follow Ngok’s “four principal sons,”22 along
with Gangpa, Gongbu Rachen/Gongburchen (gong bu ra can/gong bur can), Mélhangtser (me/mes
lhang tsher) and others.
The referent of (g) can be identified as Takpa Khachewa (stag pa [/rtag pa] kha che ba). This
scholar is mentioned alongside Gyamarwa in several sources.23 He was a student of Ra Lotsawa
20 Van der Kuijp notes that he is frequently mentioned in the manuscript of a commentary on the
Pramāṇaviniścaya by the early-thirteenth-century scholar Darma Könchok (dar ma dkon mchog). See Leonard
W.J. van der Kuijp, “A Treatise on Buddhist Epistemology and Logic Attributed to Klong chen Rab ʼbyams pa
(1308-1364) and Its Place in Indo-Tibetan Intellectual History,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 31 (2003), 417.
Métikpa’s name also appears at least six times in interlinear notes identifying the proponents in Darma
Könchok’s Summary of Epistemology (Buddhist Digital Resource Center, Work W26453).
21 See Cyrus Stearns, Luminous Lives: The Story of the Early Masters of the Lam ʼbras Tradition in Tibet
(Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2001), 134–137.
22 The four “principal sons” of Ngok Lotsawa are Khyung, Drolungpa, Zhang Tsépong Chökyi Lama (zhang
tshes spong chos kyi bla ma), and Dré Shérapbar (’bre shes rab ’bar). Cf. Blue Annals 394–395 and van der
Kuijp, Contribution, 47.
23 The mention of “the pair, rGya and sTag” (rgya stag gnyis) is found for instance in the Blue Annals (163), and
the sources mentioned in Roberto Vitali, “The Book of Names of Nyang stod bla ma-s: Masters and Events of the
Years 997–1354,” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 31 (2015), 543 and n. 56.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Dorjédrak (rwa lo tsā ba rdo rje grags) and one of the most important disciples of Khyung, and taught
epistemology and Madhyamaka in Nyangtö, as did Métikpa.24 Among his students one finds Lharjé
Gyanak (lha rje rgya nag) and Meugongdzö Ritröchenpo (rme’u dgongs mdzod ri khrod chen po)
(1038–1096).25
The reading of the note for (h) is uncertain and I am unable at this point to offer any
hypothesis as to the identity of this “Teacher from Phur (’phur [?]).”26
The identifications (b) and (d) are not strictly speaking names, but rather honorific
expressions: “the Venerable” (jo btsun) and “the Spiritual Friend” (dge bshes pa). The “Venerable,”
Jotsün (jo btsun), in particular stands out here as an important figure of Gyamarwa’s Madhyamaka
background, as he is identified 43 times (more often than Ngok Lotsawa) as the proponent of views
discussed in the Analysis.27 A relative chronology emerges from of the discussions in which he is
involved: In them Jotsün criticizes Ngok Lotsawa, and is in turn criticized by Gangpa.
Along with the prominence of this mysterious Jotsün, we note that an important member of the
scholarly network that external sources allow us to reconstruct (see §1.2) is close to missing from the
picture: Khyung Rinchendrak is only identified three times in the notes. Besides being one of
Gyamarwa’s teachers of Madhyamaka – even if, in view of the invocation verse (see §2.1.3)
Gyamarwa seems to have been more attached to Gangpa – Khyung is known as one of the “four
principal sons” of Ngok (see n. 22) and was also for a long time Ngok Lotsawa’s assistant teacher.28
24 See Gianpaolo Vetturini, The bKa’ gdams pa School of Tibetan Buddhism,
http://himalaya.socanth.cam.ac.uk/collections/rarebooks/downloads/Gianpaolo_Vetturini_PhD.pdf (accessed
August 1, 2019), 333, Bryan J. Cuevas, “Rva lo tsā ba and His Biographers,” in The Illuminating Mirror:
Tibetan Studies in Honour of Per K. Sørensen on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday, ed. by Olaf Czaja and
Guntram Hazod (Wiesbaden: Reichert Verlag, 2015), 61, n. 25, and the Blue Annals 456.
25 See Per Kvӕrne, “Bonpo Studies: The A Khrid System of Meditation,” Kailash 1 (1973), 31 and the Blue
Annals 163.
26 While the note in the Analysis reads ’phur ston (the reading itself is somewhat unclear), one can note a
reference in Butön’s religious chronicle to a specialist in monastic discipline named sTon phur. See van der
Kuijp, “The Lives of Bu ston Rin chen grub,” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 35 (2016), 271.
27 On one occasion, the note reads “zangs pa jo btsun” (f. 15b6). I take zangs pa (“Zangpa”) to be an addition –
most likely referring to Jotsün’s place of origin – rather than a reference to another thinker.
28 Serdok Penchen, History of Ngok’s Teachings 6b7: lo chen gyi zur chos yun ring du mdzad.
11

--- Page 12 ---
As seen above, Khyung directly follows Ngok Lotsawa in the epistemological and the Madhyamaka
lineages, and taught these two topics to Gangpa. Thus Khyung’s quasi-absence from the discussion in
the Analysis is odd.
2.2.1. Evidence supporting the equation of Jotsün (b) and Khyung (f)
Internal evidence
Internal evidence, however, supports the hypothesis that the scholar identified as Jotsün, “the
Venerable,” is none other than Khyung himself. This evidence is provided by the passages containing
the three identifications that clearly refer to Khyung Rinchendrak (f). Indeed, in each of these
passages, the view ascribed to Khyung is also ascribed (directly or indirectly) to Jotsün:
(α)
In Analysis 18b5ff., Gyamarwa discusses the nature of the logical reason in the neither-one-nor-many
argument, and in particular the question of the means of establishing the characteristics of the logical
reason, namely, its qualification of the subject of the inference and entailment of the property to be
proven. The first section of the discussion (f. 18b6–19a8) is introduced by a note identifying the view
under discussion as that of Khyung (f. 18b6), while in the concluding summarizing section (f. 19a8)
this view is said to have been that of Jotsün.29 Jotsün is further identified twice in the course of the
discussion (f. 18b7, 19a5), where his view is opposed to that of Gangpa.
(β)
In Analysis 8b4–9b3 (slob dpon dag gi bzhed pa rnam par bshad pa), Gyamarwa discusses the
definition of the Two Truths according to other scholars. This section is structured as follows:
(1) presentation and refutation of a first definition (identified in a note as that of Gangpa),
(2) statement of the position of scholars referred to as “the teacher(s), spiritual friend(s)” (slob
dpon dge bshes dag),
(3) rejection of objections against this position,
(4) analysis of the rejection of objections (in which the objections presented in (3) are refuted).
29 The note “Khyung” is written in a larger script than the other interlinear notes, which might indicate that it was
added by another hand to clarify the identity of the proponent of that view.
12

--- Page 13 ---
In (2) (f. 8b7), a first note reading “khyung lo tsa” identifies the “teachers, spiritual friends” as Khyung
and Ngok Lotsawa, while a second note at the beginning of the statement of the position proper reads
“setting forth Jotsün’s system” (jo btsun pa’i lugs dgod pa).
(γ)
In Analysis 16a3–17b2, Gyamarwa deals with the identification of the object of negation (dgag bya) in
the proof of emptiness via the following points:
(1) presentation of the position that the object of negation is imputed (brtags pa),
(2) rejection of objections against this view,
(3) analysis refuting by seven arguments the view that the object of negation is imputed.
The proponent of the view presented in (1) is identified as Khyung Rinchendrak in a note reading “rin
grags” (f. 16a3), while (2) is introduced in a note as the “rejection of objections against Jotsün
himself” (f. 16a5: jo btsun nyid la brtsad pa spang ba). (3) is introduced in a note as the “refutation of
Jotsün” (jo btsun kyi dgag pa).
External evidence
The extent of Madhyamaka views ascribed to Khyung in Madhyamaka works of the classical period is
limited.30 Nonetheless, one can note that the view presented in γ(1) is also reported by Serdok Penchen
Shakya Chokden (gser mdog paṇ chen shākya mchog ldan, 1428–1507) in his Ascertainment of
Madhyamaka (theg pa chen po dbu ma rnam par nges pa’i bang mdzod lung rigs rgya mtsho), where
he ascribes it to Ngok Lotsawa and Khyung.31 Further, a definition of the Two Truths that Gorampa
Sönam Senggé (go rams pa bsod nams seng ge, 1429–1489) ascribes to Khyung in his Clarification of
the Definite Meaning (nges don rab gsal) corresponds to the definition identified as that of Jotsün in a
30 The two passages mentioned below were already pointed out in Seyfort Ruegg, Studies, 35–36, n. 61. Earlier
works published in the Collected Works of the Kadampas, which remain to be explored, might offer additional
insights into Khyung’s views.
31 Ascertainment of Madhyamaka 36b5: rngog lo chen po dang khyung rin chen grags ni / don dam bden pa’i
mtshan nyid / blo’i yul du bya rung ba ma yin pa dang / cig shos kyi mtshan nyid der rung ba’o zhes ’chad /.
Compare with Analysis 8b7–8: slob dpon dge bshes dag ’di ltar bzhed de / don dam
[khyung lo tsa] [jo btsun pa’i lugs dgod pa]
pa’i bden pa’i mtshan nyid ni / shes bya tsaM las kyang ’das pas stong pa dang mi stong ba lasogs pa ci ltar
yang blo’i yul ma yin bas na / don dam blo’i spyod yul min zhes gsungs pa yin no //
[8b8]
13

--- Page 14 ---
note in the Analysis (β[2]).32 The value of this external evidence, however, should be subject to
caution. Indeed, we do not know what the sources for Serdok Penchen and Gorampa’s identifications
were. These fifteenth-century scholars might not have had access to a written work by Khyung. Their
awareness of the position they mention might be based on works reporting earlier views or on oral
teachings. These indirect sources might not even have identified the proponent of these views as
Khyung. In other words, Gorampa and Serdok Penchen might have found themselves in a situation not
so different from our own.
The name of Khyung comes up more often in later sources in connection with issues of logic
and epistemology, and in particular with the theory of definition.33 The positions in the Analysis
ascribed to Jotsün are, however, not concerned with technical issues of logic, thus providing no
occasion for comparison. Interestingly, the identification “Jotsün” figures prominently in an early
epistemological work (probably late twelfth/early thirteenth c.), the Summary of the Essence of
Epistemology (tshad ma’i de kho na nyid bsdus pa), whose colophon wrongly ascribes it to Longchen
Rapjampa (klong chen rabs ’byams pa, 1308–1364).34 This text includes a large panorama of views by
32 Clarification of the Definite Meaning 73b1–2: khyung rin chen grags kyis / kun rdzob bden pa’i mtshan nyid /
shes bya’am / gzhal bya’am / brjod bya tsam yin la / don dam bden pa’i mtshan nyid shes brjod gzhal bya thams
cad las ’das pa’o // zhes bzhed la /. Compare with Analysis 8a7: blo’i yul te
[shes bya tsaM kun rdzob kyi mtshan nyid du byas na]
shes bya tsaM yang kun rdzob las chos tha dad pa’i phyir dang / don
[jo btsun bzhed pa] [shes bya] [don ldog] [zhes bya ba ’aM]
dam pa la khyab ches pas mtshan nyid du mi ’dod do //
[shes bya tsaM kun rdzob kyi]
33 His name appears for instance in the interlinear notes of the manuscript of the Lamp of Wisdom (tshad ma shes
rab sgron ma) by Tsurtön Zhönnu Senggé (mtshur ston gzhon nu seng ge, ca. 1150–1210), and in the
epistemological works of Serdok Penchen (see van der Kuijp, Contributions, 59 and n. 202 and 203). He is also
frequently mentioned (as khyung or as khyung rin chen grags) by Yaktön Sanggyépel (g.yag ston sangs rgyal
dpal), Rongtön Mawé Senggé (rong ston smra ba’i seng ge) and Lowo Khenchen Sönam Lhündrup (glo bo
mkhan chen bsod nams lhun grub) in their commentaries on the Treasure of Reasoning (rigs gter) of Sakya
Pandita Künga Gyeltsen (sa skya paṇḍita kun dga’ rgyal mtshan, 1182–1251).
34 The title given in the colophon is: tshad ma’i de kho na nyid bsdus pa. In the introduction, the work is
described as a “memorandum that summarizes the essence of epistemology contained in the faultless works of
the authors of the Sūtra (i.e., Dignāga) and of the Vārttika (i.e., Dharmakīrti)” (Summary 1,2–3: mdo’ dang
rnam ’grel mdzad pa’i dri med gzhung rnams las // tshad ma’i de nyid rab tu bsdus pa’i brjed byang bri). The
ascription of the text to Longchen Rapjampa is contested in van der Kuijp, “A Treatise on Buddhist
Epistemology and Logic.” A viable hypothesis for its authorship has been proposed in Jonathan Stoltz, “On the
Authorship of the Tshad ma’i de kho na nyid bsdus pa,” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 56 (2020), namely that the
14

--- Page 15 ---
Tibetan scholars of the twelfth century and earlier, who are identified in the body of the text and in
interlinear notes.35 There is an impressive overlap between the names found in the Summary and the
names found in the notes of Gyamarwa’s Analysis.
Analysis Summary
(a) gangs pa she’u 64 19
(b) jo btsun 43 34
(c) lo tsa ba 40 49
(d) dge bshes pa 7 -
(e) me tig pa / me dig pa 4 6
(f) khyung rin chen grags 3 -
(g) stag pa 1 4
(h) ’phur ston 1 -
The Summary is obviously a composition of later date than the Analysis, as it contains the names of
scholars intellectually post-dating Gyamarwa (such as Chapa and Jangchupkyab). Its author and the
person who wrote the identifications were quite familiar with the views of Gyamarwa, who is
identified a total of 70 times. Moreover, a three-line verse from Gyamarwa’s Analysis is added in the
margin in the Summary (11,2–3) to the presentation of an answer ascribed to Gyamarwa (referred to as
“rgya”).36 The Summary includes the views of yet additional scholars not identified in the Analysis:
Patsap Nyimadrak (pa tshab nyi ma grags), Zhang Tsépong (one of Ngok Lotsawa’s spiritual sons),
author was Jépa Zhönnu Jangchup (’jad pa gzhon nu byang chub, c. 1150–1210), a student of Jangchupkyap
(byang chub skyabs), himself a direct student of Chapa.
35 The manuscript of this text is not accessible and in the printed edition the identifications by name appear in the
body of the text. Some could have been part of the main text (in particular those where the scholar’s name is
followed by the particle “ni”), but I surmise that most of them were written as interlinear notes. These
identifications were listed in the introduction to this work by van der Kuijp (van der Kuijp, “A Treatise on
Buddhist Epistemology and Logic,” 415–416).
36 This adds to the evidence I have presented elsewhere that the person referred to as “rgya” in the Summary is
Gyamarwa and not Gyadrak Sönam (rgya grags bsod nams), as van der Kuijp has suggested (“A Treatise on
Buddhist Epistemology and Logic,” 417). Gyadrak Sönam is only referred to once in the Summary as “rgya
grags bsod” (166,14).
15

--- Page 16 ---
Gongbu,37 Yoknyen (g.yog gnyan, a teaching assistant of Gyamarwa), Nyak (gnyags), and Nachung
Tönpa (sna chung ston pa).
The Summary includes the views of someone identified as “Jotsün” 34 times, but never refers
to a “Khyung” or a “Rin(chen)grak.” The overlap of the scholars whose views are involved in both
texts supports the hypothesis that this Jotsün is the same Jotsün as the one identified in the notes of the
Analysis. Here too there is some external supportive evidence in that one view regarding the theory of
definition ascribed to Jotsün in the Summary (65,5–8) corresponds to a view ascribed to Khyung by
Serdok Penchen.38 There are certainly more such cases. Note that Serdok Penchen also uses the
appellation “Jotsün” (and not Khyung) for another position ascribed to Jotsün in the Summary of the
Essence of Epistemology.39
Let us recall finally that, as noted by Apple, the Blue Annals speak of “Jotsün Khyung” (“the
Venerable Khyung,” jo btsun khyung) (459), and that Léchen Künga Gyeltsen (las chen kun dga’ rgyal
mtshan, 1432–1506) uses the appellation “Khenpo Jotsün Khyung” (“the Preceptor, the Venerable
Khyung,” mkhan po jo btsun khyung rin chen grags).40
37 See above for the occurrence of his name in the Blue Annals (395) in the list of teachers following Ngok
Lotsawa’s “four principal sons” (these are listed in n. 22). Serdok Penchen similarly mentions his name in his
History of Ngok’s Teachings (6b7) among the principal students of Khyung in Nyangtö Möndro (nyang stod
smon gro) and Taktsel (stag tshal), etc., along with Gangpa, Mélhangtser, Ngok Kyao (rngog skya’o) and others.
Serdok Penchen adds that it is reported that these had studied with Nogk Lotsawa in their youth (’di dag gis
gzhun nu ma’i dus su lo chen la thug ces kyang zer ro //).
38 See van der Kuijp, Contributions, 59 and 85, and James Apple, “Khu lo tsā ba’s Treatise: Distinguishing the
Svātantrika/*Prāsaṅgika Difference in Early Twelfth Century Tibet,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 46, no. 5
(2018), 940. The same view pertaining to the theory of definition is ascribed to a certain “slang pa” in a
Madhyamaka work that may have been authored by Khu lo tsā ba. Apple takes slang pa to be a regionalism for
glang pa/glang pha ba, thus referring to the place where Khyung was born and the monastery where he resided
(glang pa ’phang thang).
39 See the reference to “lo tsa ba dang jo btsun rgya” in Summary 231,20 and compare with Serdok Penchen,
Defeater, vol. 9, 250 (f. 125b6): lo tsā ba chen po dang jo btsun la sogs pa ni / rtags yang dag yin pa la tshul
gsum nges rung tsam gyis chog pa yin no zhes gsung). Another instance of Serdok Penchen’s mentioning Jotsün
is in Defeater, vol. 9, 266 (f. 133b1): jo btsun na re / sgrub ngag yang dag rnams ni tshad ma skyed pa’i gzhan
don rjes dpag yin la / thal ’gyur yang dag rnams ni log rtog sel ba’i gzhan don rjes dpag yin pas khyad par yod
do zhes gsung la /
40 See Apple, “Khu lo tsā ba’s Treatise,” 940–1.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Considering the three passages of the Analysis presented above and applying the principle of
Occam’s Razor, one can consider Jotsün to be the same person as Khyung, and not an otherwise
unknown scholar who would have held the same views as Khyung, but would have been more active
than him in the Madhyamaka and epistemological networks of the twelfth century. Counting “Jotsün”
as an alternative way of referring to Khyung, one arrives at 46 references to his views in the Analysis,
which better reflects his importance in the Madhyamaka lineage of which Gyamarwa is a part.
Interestingly, in spite of Gangpa’s seemingly primary status for Gyamarwa (cf. §2.1.3), the expression
“the teacher(s)” (slob dpon dag) in the main text most often refers to Khyung,41 whereas the three
occurrences of the expression “other teachers” (slob dpon gzhan dag) are said to refer to Gangpa. But
too, Gyamarwa’s choice of expression might simply be a matter of chronology rather than
predominance.
2.2.2 Who is Géshépa (dge bshes pa)?
There are seven references to Géshé(pa) (dge bshes [pa]) in the notes.42 Two of these are found in the
passages discussed in §2.2.1: In both (β) and (γ), the author of the rejection of the objections against
the position under discussion (i.e., β.4 and γ.2) – that of Jotsün(/Khyung) – is said to be Géshépa (see
f. 9a2 and 16a6). One possibility is that the person rejecting the objections against Jotsün’s view is
himself the proponent of the view under discussion. But one may also want to argue that Géshépa is
not Jotsün himself, but a faithful disciple of Jotsün taking up his defense against subsequent arguments
41 It also refers once to Ngok Lotsawa (f. 13b7).
42 I take dge bshes gangs pa in the note on f. 15b6 to refer to Gangpa, rather than to two persons, dge bshes and
gangs pa. The expression “Géshé(pa)” itself does not help in the identification of this scholar, as it is a title often
attached to religious scholars. Van der Kuijp (“A Treatise on Buddhist Epistemology and Logic,” 417) mentions
for instance a Géshé Tagétong (dge bshes mtha’ dge mthong) who was a senior contemporary of Ngok Lotsawa,
active at the time Atiśa was staying in Ü (dbus) province. The title is also attached to the name of Gangpa in
Summary of the Essence of Epistemology 128 (dge bshes gangs pa). Gyamarwa’s teaching assistant Yornyen is
also sometimes referred to as Géshé Yornyen (dge bshes g.yor gnyan) (ibid., 417).
The first option (Géshé Tagéton) can be excluded, as the arguments in the Analysis put Géshépa at the
same time as or after Jotsün, and hence after Ngok Lotsawa. I also think it unlikely that a junior contemporary of
Gyamarwa would be involved in discussions reporting the positions of previous teachers. As for Gangpa, he is
seen in the Analysis to frequently oppose Jotsün, including in (β), where Géshépa defends Jotsün’s view.
17

--- Page 18 ---
– faithful because there is no evidence in the other passages involving the reference to “Géshépa” that
this scholar holds a position different from that of Jotsün/Khyung.43
Arguing against this second option would be the consideration that at least one of the passages
identifying “Géshépa” hints at this scholar’s being an important participant in the Madhyamaka
network rather than one of a lower standing. Indeed, Géshépa is identified as the proponent of the
position that the Two Truths are distinct properties of a unique nature (f. 2b2–2b7), 44 a position that
will be adopted by Chapa (and many Tibetan scholars after him), but is refuted by Gyamarwa. I thus
provisionally consider “Géshé(pa)” to be an alternative way of referring to Khyung. This would then
bring the references to Khyung in the Analysis to a total of 53.
Gyamarwa himself is named 19 times in the notes.45 Also found in the notes are the
anonymous references to “previous (scholars)” (snga rabs pa dag) and to “previous Tibetan
(scholars)” (bod snga rabs pa dag) (once each), and to a number of “someone[s]” (kha cig). Not all of
the other thinkers referred to anonymously in the main text are identified in the notes. Out of the 46
references in the main text (see §2.1.2), 29 are left unidentified.46
3. Gyamarwa’s intellectual network
The information from external sources (§1.2) allows us to sketch a group of scholars around
Gyamarwa that constitutes a personal network in which the links between them express a teacher-
student relationship. Ideally, each of these links should be characterized according to the topic taught,
the place and time where the teaching took place, and like matters. But such information is often
missing. From the Analysis, and with the help of the marginalia, we can map another type of network,
one that I will call the “intellectual network.” In such a network, the link between two scholars – A
43 The position ascribed to Géshépa on f. 4a7 corresponds to that of Jotsün. Another reference to “dge bshes pa”
(f. 26a5) in the discussion as to whether the subject of inference appears (supported by Jotsün) or does not
appear (supported by Gangpa) is linked, in my present understanding, to an argument also made earlier by Jotsün
(f. 25b7).
44 He supports this position indirectly, in that he argues that the faults listed in the Sandhinirmocanasūtra do not
apply to it, but that they apply to the view that the Two Truths are distinct natures.
45 His name appears in the forms rgya (15 times), rgya dmar (2), rgya dmar ba (1), rgya pa (1).
46 See f. 8b2, 16b6, 17a2, 17a4, 17b4, 20b1, 20b6, 22a7, 23b5, 25a3, 25a8, 26a2, 26b1, 26b3, 29a1, 29b7.
18

--- Page 19 ---
and B, let’s say – represents A’s awareness of a view held by B. The intellectual network goes beyond
the connections of a personal network. Indeed, the link between A and B does not presuppose
chronological overlapping or any personal acquaintance between the two scholars. Since B may not
have authored any written text – but still have held views known to A – such a network is better
established between scholars than between texts, even though it is attested through the phenomenon I
referred to in the introduction as “intertextuality.” The source of A’s awareness of B’s view may be
textual (a text by B, or a text referring to B’s view) or oral (teaching by B, or account of B’s view by
some other teacher) and can accommodate a number of intermediates.47 An intellectual link does not
entail that A’s knowledge of B’s views is profound, exhaustive, or even accurate. Ideally, each link
should be characterized by indications such as which is the specific view held by B that A is aware of,
its mode of presentation (literal citation, paraphrase), and A’s attitude toward this view (neutral
mention, endorsement, refutation). With such specifications, one could discern, within the “global
intellectual background” of the scholars involved, the actual path taken by individual ideas in their
diffusion and development. The mapping of known scholars and missing links in such intellectual
networks would thus not end up with a static map of related nodes, but contribute to the understanding
47 In the notes of the Analysis, all identifications to Tibetan views refer to persons, with the exception of three
mentions of a work by Ngok Lotsawa: the Small Commentary on the Two Truths (bden 2 tig chung). Ngok
Lotsawa’s biographers ascribe to him two commentaries on Jñānagarbha’s Satyadvayavibhaṅga – referred to as
bDen gnyis kyi don bsdus and bDen gnyis kyi rnam bshad (Serdok Penchen calls the second Ye shes snying po’i
bden gnyis kyi bsdus don) – and a commentary on Atiśa’s Satyadvayāvatāra, referred to as the bDen chung (gi)
bsdus don (Serdok Penchen calls it the Jo bo’i bden gnyis kyi bsdus don). See Kano, Buddha-Nature and
Emptiness, 204. Note in connection to the commentary on Atiśa’s work the existence of a Tangut text entitled
The Exposition of the Two Truths According to Ngok Lotsawa (see Kirill Solonin, “Local Literatures:
Tangut/Xixia,” in Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Vol. I: Literature and Languages, ed. by Jonathan Silk,
Oskar Von Hinüber, and Vincent Eltschinger [Leiden: Brill, 2015], 854). The bden gnyis tig chung referred to in
the note is more likely to be a commentary on the Satyadvayavibhaṅga. The author of the Summary also refers to
a view, this time on logic, “written by Ngok Lotsawa in the Small Commentary” (lo tsa bas… zhes tig chung
bris) (see van der Kuijp, “A Treatise on Buddhist Epistemology and Logic,” 418). Five other statements of Ngok
Lotsawa are reported in this work with the verb “written” (bris), three of which are attested to in his
Commentary on the Difficult Points of the Pramāṇaviniścaya (tshad ma rnam nges kyi dka’ ba’i gnas rnam par
bshad pa).
19

--- Page 20 ---
of the dynamics at play in the circulation of ideas in the obviously active intellectual environment of
the 11th through 13th centuries.
TABLE: PERSONAL AND INTELLECTUAL NETWORKS AROUND GYAMARWA48
Epilogue – Who can we trust?
Reading the Analysis without the marginalia is a challenge – an insurmountable one in some portions
of the text – for a twenty-first-century reader, even one well acquainted with the topic as well as with
the language and the form of twelfth-century debates. One may deplore the lack of a systematic
structure and the often abstruse phrasing, but at the core of the problem is our lack of background
knowledge due to the absence of extant works by the very scholars Gyamarwa involves in his
discussion – while we are confronted with a work which presupposes it, at least to some degree.
Indeed, unless the author did not intend his work to be read independently, its very style of
composition only makes sense if its target was a readership who had in mind a panorama (or at least a
48 This table is limited to the personal network of teacher-student relationships discussed in this paper and the
intellectual network revealed in the Analysis.
20

--- Page 21 ---
sketch) of the most famous views held on these matters, and could be expected to recognize, from the
first lines of a section, that the view being reported was not that of Gyamarwa himself but that, let us
say, of Gangpa. It is difficult to say whether readers outside of Gyamarwa’s circle and readers in
subsequent centuries would have had such competence, and would have been able to make sense of
the text without extra guidance. As modern readers, we can greatly benefit from the input provided by
the annotations in the manuscript of the Analysis. I have not so far expressed any doubt about the
accuracy of the information provided in these notes. But what supports putting one’s trust in
information from such a source? Regarding the identification of the scholars involved in the
discussion, not to speak of the views ascribed to them, there is indeed no possibility of directly
assessing whether these are correct, because the works of these scholars are not extant. The amount of
contributing evidence from other texts citing the same views is at this point limited, and subject to the
same question of reliability as the notes on the manuscript.
Listed below are characteristics which, taken together, lead me to consider these notes as
accurate:
i. In terms of the explanations of the contents of the text, they are abundant, detailed, and coherent
overall.
ii. In terms of identifying the scholars involved, there is a variety and degree of precision that
suggest that the identifications are well informed rather than random or approximate.
iii. Information is not limited to the first degree (i.e., “X said…”), but also includes second-degree
references (i.e., “X said that Y said…”).
iv. Information includes the name of at least one written source.
v. There is no evidence of the informant pushing forward his own views against that of the author
or of other scholars represented in the text. In other words, there is no evidence of a “personal
agenda” that might entail a bias.
I surmise that the informant lived in personal and/or chronological proximity with the author and his
milieu at a time when there was vivid familiarity with the scholars involved in the discussion and with
21

--- Page 22 ---
their views.49 This situation would support an awareness of Gyamarwa’s intellectual background that
is direct, precise, and accurate. I do not want to imply that proximity is either a sufficient or necessary
condition for reliability. For instance, scholars living centuries after a text was composed but having
access to written sources might be better informed than some contemporaries of an author who are
merely aware of his views through hearsay. However, in the case of the notes contained in the
Analysis, I doubt that a scholar of a later generation would still have been privy to such an extent of
detailed information, be it by way of oral transmission or based on written sources. A few centuries
after Gyamarwa, the names of the thinkers involved are mainly mentioned by “historians” who recall
the role of these thinkers in teaching or in the transmission of texts, as, for instance, Serdok Penchen
does in his History of Ngok’s Teachings and his Origin of Madhyamaka. Awareness of these named
individuals as proponents of specific views seems to have faded away rather quickly after the twelfth
century. The widespread and majoritarian adoption of the prāsaṅgika interpretation of Madhyamaka
(and the connected classification, in retrospect, of the Ngok tradition as svātantrika) that took place
one or two generations after Gyamarwa probably contributed to this process.
One may refer here, in comparison, to the fate of the early thinkers involved in
epistemological discussions. These, as previously mentioned, involved in Gyamarwa’s time a large
portion of the very same scholars who were active in the domain of Madhyamaka. In strong contrast to
the panorama of views attested to in the Summary of the Essence of Epistemology, epistemological
literature from the end of the twelfth century already testifies to the clear predominance of “next-
generation scholars.” For instance, in a work by Tsangdrukpa Dorjé Özer (gtsang drug pa rdo rje ’od
zer) published in the Collected Works of the Kadampas (vol. 47, pp. 11–165), aside from Chapa
(mentioned 15 times), the only Tibetan scholar of previous generations who is still frequently
identified is Ngok Lotsawa (13 times). Gyamarwa (mentioned 70 times in the Summary) is mentioned
49 The notes are all by the same hand, with a few likely exceptions (notes in bigger cursive script), such as sentences
added on top of f. 3a, f. 11b (repeated in dbu can, with the addition of interlinear notes, on the last folio) and f.
19b – the last two are corrections for passages omitted by the copyist due to eye-skip – as well as at the bottom of
f. 9a, and possibly the identification referred to in n. 29 and the identifications “rgya” on f. 20a8 and “rgya dmar
ba” on f. 31a2 and “rgya dmar bas…mdzad pa” on f. 31a3.
22

--- Page 23 ---
here only four times, Gangpa and Khyung twice, and Métikpa once. The most frequent references are
now to the views of Chapa’s students.50
Going back to the notes in the Analysis and their author, a number of notes also consist of the
addition of particles or the identification of the referents of pronouns, which help the reader
understand sentences and their connections. I am consequently inclined to think that the person writing
the notes was recording information received at the occasion of a teaching session of the text, by
Gyamarwa himself, one of his teaching assistants, or some other knowledgeable instructor who was
part of Gyamarwa’s intellectual environment.
Why it is that about two-thirds of the “others” introduced by the author remain unidentified is
an open question. It is not likely due to an occasional lack of attentiveness by the student taking the
notes. Could it be an indication of ignorance of his informant, or simply of a voluntary withholding of
information (for whatever reason)? It may be of significance here that a number of those unidentified
references are found in arguments against Gangpa’s position.51
At this stage of my investigation of the manuscript, I have found no additional elements that
would contribute to identifying the author of the notes, except that he uses the expressions “bu ta” and
“bu ta pa” to refer to Buddhists and “tir ti ka” to gloss the Tibetan pha rol (f. 16a1) – these are loan
50 My thanks to Jonathan Stoltz for kindly sharing with me a list of the names mentioned in the notes to this text.
51 In connection to this lack of identification, one should mention that while the number of notes is consistent
throughout the whole text, there is a surprising complete lack of notes (except for those indicating subsection-
breaks) in the section pertaining to the refutation of the prāsaṅgika model of argumentation – by this expression,
I refer to the espousal of refutation by means of consequence only (f. 27b5–28a7) – whereas they are still
abundant in the section that precedes and that which follows.
I doubt that the lack of identification of other positions can be explained by the fact that their identity
would have been obvious to Gyamarwa’s readers at the time the notes were written. Indeed, there are many other
places in the text that would qualify as “obvious” but are nevertheless glossed (see for instances, the notes “ye
shes snying po” [Skt. Jñānagarbha]) appended to passages of the Satyadvayavibhaṅga, or the identification of the
first person pronoun as referring to Gyamarwa). Similarly, the lack of notes in the section on prāsangika
argumentation almost certainly does not indicate that this passage was so easy to understand that it did not
require any additional input. On the lack of identification of opposing viewpoints and lack of notes in the
abovementioned section, see also Kevin Vose’s discussion in the concluding section of his paper in the present
volume.
23

--- Page 24 ---
words from the Sanskrit (bauddha, tīrthika), a phenomenon that is frequent in twelfth-century works,
and thus speaks in favor of the antiquity of the notes. The person who wrote the notes employs a
reasonable amount of contractions and abbreviations (more than are found in the main text).
Unsurprisingly, the notes contain expressions more current in colloquial Tibetan than in the language
of treatises, such as the verb ’dug pa.
The informant probably was the owner of the manuscript copy. Because producing a copy
required time and money, it is unlikely that every student of Gyamarwa (or of Gyamarwa’s ideas)
would have owned a personal exemplar of the text, and also unlikely that someone would annotate a
manuscript that they did not own personally to the extent that we witness in the available copy of the
Analysis.
The industrious scribbler may remain anonymous at this stage, but his diligence and
assiduousness make it possible to access Gyamarwa’s thought – presumably in a way analogous to
how a twelfth-century student would have received oral teaching on this text in Tölung – and to
uncover a broad panorama of missing links in the early Madhyamaka tradition.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Bibliographical references
Tibetan sources
Collected Works of the Kadampas
bKa’ gdams gsung ’bum phyogs bsgrigs thengs dang po/gnyis pa/gsum pa/bzhi pa, ed. by dPal
brtsegs, Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2006 (vols. 1–30), 2007 (vols. 31–60),
2009 (61–90), 2015 (91–120).
Drepung Catalogue
’Bras spungs dgon du bzhugs su gsol ba’i dpe rnying dkar chag, 2 Vols. Beijing: Mi rigs dpe
skrun khang, 2004.
Summary of the Essence of Epistemology
Anonymous (wrongly ascribed to Klong chen rab ’byams pa; possibly authored by ’Jad pa
gZhon nu byang chub). Tshad ma’i de kho na nyid bsdus pa. Xinning: Si khron mi rigs dpe
skrun khang, 2000.
Chapa Chökyi Senggé’s Heart Essence of Madhyamaka
Phya pa Chos kyi seng ge. dBu ma de kho na nyid kyi snying po. Ed. by Helmut Tauscher in Phya
pa Chos kyi seng ge: dBu ma shar gsum gyi stong thun. Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und
buddhistische Studien, 1999.
Gö Lotsawa Zhönnupel’s Blue Annals
’Gos lo tsā ba gZhon nu dpal. Bod gangs can yul du chos dang chos smra ji ltar byung ba’i rim
pa bstan pa’i deb ther sngon po. Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1984.
Gorampa Sönam Senggé’s Clarification of the Definite Meaning
Go rams pa bSod nams seng ge. rGyal ba thams cad kyi thugs kyi dgongs pa zab mo dbu ma’i
de kho na nyid spyi’i ngag gis stong pa nges don rab gsal. In Kun-mkhyen Go-bo Rab-’byams-
pa Bsod-nams-sen-ge’i bka’ ’bum. Dehra Dun: Sakya College, 1979, vol. ca, 1–415.
Ngok Lotsawa Loden Shérap’s Commentary on the Difficult Points of the Pramāṇaviniścaya
rNgog Lo tsā ba Blo ldan shes rab. Tshad ma rnam nges kyi dkaʼ baʼi gnas rnam par bshad pa.
Ed. by Sun Wenjing. Xining, Qinghai: Krung go’i bod kyi shes rig dpe skrun khang, 1994.
Serdok Penchen Shakya Chokden’s Ascertainment of Madhyamaka
gSer mdog Paṇ chen Śākya mchog ldan. Theg pa chen po dbu ma rnam par nges pa’i bang
mdzod lung rigs rgya mtsho. In The Complete Works (gSung ’bum) of gSer mdog paṇ chen
Śākya mchog ldan. Ed. By Kunzang Tobgey, Timphu, 1975, vols.14–15.
Serdok Penchen Shakya Chokden’s Defeater of Bad Systems
25

--- Page 26 ---
gSer mdog Paṇ chen Śākya mchog ldan. Tshad ma rigs gter gyi dgongs rgyan rigs pa’i ’khor los
lugs ngan pham byed. In The Complete Works (gSung ’bum) of gSer mdog paṇ chen Śākya
mchog ldan. Ed. by Kunzang Tobgey. Timphu, 1975, vols. 9 and 10.
Serdok Penchen Shakya Chokden’s History of Ngok’s Teachings
gSer mdog Paṇ chen Śākya mchog ldan. rNgog lo tstsha ba chen pos bstan pa ji ltar bskyangs
pa’i tshul mdo tsam du bya ba ngo mtshar gtam gyi rol mo. In The Complete Works
(gSung ’bum) of gSer mdog paṇ chen Śākya mchog ldan. Ed. by Kunzang Tobgey. Timphu,
1975, vol. 16, 443–456.
Serdok Penchen Shakya Chokden’s Origin of Madhyamaka
gSer mdog Paṇ chen Śākya mchog ldan. dBu ma’i byung tshul rnam par bshad pa’i gtam yid
bzhin lhun po. In The Complete Works (gSung ’bum) of Gser mdog pan chen Śākya mchog ldan.
Thimphu: Kunzang Tobgey, 1975, vol. 4, 209–248.
Tsurtön Zhönnu Senggé’s Lamp of Wisdom
mTshur ston gZhon nu seng ge. Tshad ma shes rab sgron ma. Ed. by Pascale Hugon. Wien:
Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien, 2004.
Modern studies
Akahane, Ritsu. “Three Tibetan Commentaries on dBu ma bden gnyis” (in Japanese). Report of the
Japanese Association for Tibetan Studies 56 (2010): 77–85.
Apple, James. “Khu lo tsā ba’s Treatise: Distinguishing the Svātantrika/*Prāsaṅgika Difference in
Early Twelfth Century Tibet.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 46, no. 5 (2018): 935–81.
Cabezón, José I. “The Madhyamaka in Gro lung pa’s Bstan Rim chen mo.” In Studies in the
Philosophy and History of Tibet. Ed. by Maret Kark and Horst Lasic. Bonn: International
Institute for Tibetan and Buddhist Studies, 2010, 11–58.
Cuevas, Bryan J. “Rva lo tsā ba and His Biographers.” In The Illuminating Mirror: Tibetan Studies in
Honour of Per K. Sørensen on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday. Ed. by Olaf Czaja and Guntram
Hazod. Wiesbaden: Reichert Verlag, 2015, 57–79.
Ducher, Cécile. “Goldmine of Knowledge: The Collections of the Gnas bcu lha khang in ’Bras spungs
Monastery.” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 55 (2020): 121–139.
Hugon, Pascale. Trésors du raisonnement. Sa skya Paṇḍita et ses prédécesseurs tibétains sur les modes
de fonctionnement de la pensée et le fondement de lʼinférence: Edition et traduction annotée du
quatrième chapitre et d’une section du dixième chapitre du Tshad ma rigs pa’i gter. Wien:
Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien, 2008.
Hugon, Pascale. “Vaibhāṣika-Madhyamaka: A Fleeting Episode in the History of Tibetan
Madhyamaka.” In Archaeologies of the Written: Indian, Tibetan, and Buddhist Studies in
26

--- Page 27 ---
Honour of Cristina Scherrer-Schaub. Ed. by Vincent Tournier, Vincent Eltschinger, and Marta
Sernesi. Naples: Università degli Studi di Napoli “L’Orientale” (Series Minor, LXXXIX), 2020,
323–371.
Kano, Kazuo. Buddha-Nature and Emptiness: rNgog Blo-ldan-shes-rab and the Transmission of the
Ratnagotravibhāga from India to Tibet. Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische
Studien, 2016.
Komarovski, Iaroslav. Three Texts on Madhyamaka by Shakya Chokden. Dharamsala: Library of
Tibetan Works & Archives, 2000.
Kramer, Ralf. The Great Tibetan Translator: Life and Works of rNgog Blo ldan shes rab (1059–1109).
München: Indus Verlag (Collectanea Himalayica 1), 2007.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W.J. “Phya-pa Chos-kyi Seng-ge’s Impact on Tibetan Epistemological
Theory.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 5 (1978): 355–69.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W.J. Contributions to the Development of Tibetan Buddhist Epistemology.
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1983.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W.J. “Fourteenth Century Tibetan Cultural History VI: The transmission of
Indian Buddhist pramāṇavāda according to early Tibetan gsan yig-s.” Etudes Asiatiques 49, no.
4 (1995): 919–41.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W.J. “A Treatise on Buddhist Epistemology and Logic Attributed to Klong chen
Rab ʼbyams pa (1308-1364) and Its Place in Indo-Tibetan Intellectual History.” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 31 (2003): 381–437.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W.J. “The Lives of Bu ston Rin chen grub and the Date and Sources of His Chos
’byung, a Chronicle of Buddhism in India and Tibet.” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 35 (2016): 203–
308.
Kvӕrne, Per. “Bonpo Studies: The A Khrid System of Meditation.” Kailash 1 (1973): 19–50.
Seyfort Ruegg, David. Studies in Indian and Tibetan Madhyamaka Thought, Part 1 — Three Studies in
the History of Indian and Tibetan Madhyamaka Philosophy. Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische
und buddhistische Studien, 2000.
Solonin, Kirill. “Local Literatures: Tangut/Xixia.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Vol. I:
Literature and Languages. Ed. by Jonathan Silk, Oskar Von Hinüber, and Vincent Eltschinger.
Leiden: Brill, 2015, 844–59.
Sørensen, Per K. and Guntram Hazod, in cooperation with Tsering Gyalbo. Rulers on the Celestial
Plain: Ecclesiastic and Secular Hegemony in Medieval Tibet. A Study of Tshal Gung-thang.
Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2007.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Stearns, Cyrus. Luminous Lives: The Story of the Early Masters of the Lam ʼbras Tradition in Tibet.
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2001.
Stoltz, Jonathan. “On the Authorship of the Tshad ma’i de kho na nyid bsdus pa.” Revue d’Etudes
Tibétaines 56 (2020): 48–69.
Vetturini, Gianpaolo. The bKa’ gdams pa School of Tibetan Buddhism (revised PhD dissertation,
University of London, 2007).
http://himalaya.socanth.cam.ac.uk/collections/rarebooks/downloads/Gianpaolo_Vetturini_PhD.p
df. Accessed 1.8.2019.
Vitali, Roberto. “The Book of Names of Nyang stod bla ma-s: Masters and Events of the Years 997–
1354.” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 31 (2015): 511–76.
28