# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 1879-buhler-sacred-laws-aryas-apastamba-gautama-sbe2.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:00
# Total Pages: 378
# File Size: 12.41 MB
# Text Layer Status: SCANNED_IMAGE (avg 82.8 chars/page in sample)
# NOTE (Rule 10): Likely scanned facsimile/manuscript. Pages contain image plates or low-quality OCR.
# Use Vision/Image models on specific pages when detailed textual analysis is needed.
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
00055860

--- PAGE 2 ---
THE
ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY
Town Hall, Bombay.
Digitized with financial assistance from the
on 18 July, 2018
Government of Maharashtra

--- PAGE 3 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 4 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 5 ---
THE
M E D H A S t i T R A S ,

--- PAGE 6 ---
A b h a iid .lv in .s r e n
fiir die
K u n d e . d e s M o r g e n
herausgegeben von der
Deutschen Morgenlandischen Ge^(j
X. Band.
No. 3.

--- PAGE 7 ---
T H E
SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST
T R A N S L A T E D
BY various oriental SCHOLARS
A N D E D IT E D BY
'■J-
F. MAX MULLER
A T 
T H E 
C L A R E N D O N . P R E S S 
1 8 7 9
[A// rijhls reserved]

--- PAGE 8 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 9 ---
THE
SACRED LAWS OF' THE ARYAS
AS T A U G H T IN T H E SCH O O LS O F
APASTAMBA, 
GAUTAMA, V A S IS .Ii™, 
AND BAUDIIAYANA
S . P
TRANSLATED BY
GEORG 
BUHLER
555860
P A R T 
I
Ap a s t a mb a 
and 
gautaaia
/><■'
0 ^’ to vtj
A T 
T H E 
C L A R E N D O N 
P R E S S 
1879
[All righ/s reserved]

--- PAGE 10 ---
o
l X
5
^ 'S f c o
00055860
00055860

--- PAGE 11 ---
C O N T E N T S .
I n t r o d u c t io n t o A p a st a m b a
IX
I n t r o d u c t io n t o G a u t a m a
.
xlv
APASTAMBA’S A p h o r is m s o n t h e 
General Rules.............................................
S a c r e d L a w .
I
I n i t i a t i o n .............................................
2
S tu d en tsh ip .............................................
7
A Student who has returned Home
29
The Study of the Veda .
.
.
.
33
A Student who has returned Plome
48
Saluting......................................................
5 ‘
Purification 
.
.
.
.
.
.
5 4
Eating, and Forbidden Food .
57
Lawful Livelihood 
.
.
.
.
.
71
Penance . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.
75
Rules for a Snataka 
.
.
.
.
92
The Duties of a Householder .
99
Inheritance 
.
.
.
.
.
.
129
Funeral O blations....................................
136
The Four Orders
151
The King 
.
.
.
.
.
.
159
GAUTAMA’S I n s t it u t e s o f t h e S a c r e d L a w .
Initiation .
.
.
.
.
Purification 
.
.
.
.
Studentship 
.
.
.
.
The Ascetic 
.
.
.
.
The Hermit 
.
.
.
.
The Householder
173
177
180
190
192
194

--- PAGE 12 ---
VIll
C O N TE N TS, 
'
Saluting......................................................
Times of D istress....................................
A King and Brahmawa versed in the Vedas 
The Duties of a Snataka 
Lawful Occupations and Livelihood 
The Duties of a King 
Civil and Crfininal Law .
Witnesses 
.
.
.
.
Impurity.....................................
Funeral Oblations 
The Study of the Veda 
. 
^ .
Eating, and Forbidden Food 
.
W o m e n ....................................
Penances .....................................
Inheritance 
.
.
.
.
PAGE
205 
209- 
211 
216 
224 
231 
236
243
246
252
256
262
267
271
299
Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans­
lations of the Sacred Books of the East
309

--- PAGE 13 ---
I N T R O D U C T I O N
TO
A P A S T A M B A .
F o r all students of Sanskrit philology and Indian history 
Apastamba’s aphorisms on the sacred law of the Aryan 
Hindus possess a special interest beyond that 'attaching to 
other works of the same class. 
Their discovery enabled 
Professor Max Muller, nearly thirty years ago, to dispose 
finally, of the Brahmanical legend according to which 
Hindu society was supposed to be governed by the co’des 
of ancient sages, compiled for the express purpose of tying 
down each individual to his station, and of strictly regu­
lating even the smallest acts of his daily life ^ > It enabled
* Max Muller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 133 seq.
The following letter, addressed to the late W. H. Morley, and published 
by him in his Digest of Indian Cases, 1850, may be of interest as connected 
with the first discovery of the Apastamba-sQtras :—
9; Parh Place, Oxford, Jtdy 29, 1849.
My dear M orley,— I have been looking again at the law literature, in 
order to write you a note on the sources of Manu. 
I have treated the subject 
fully in my introduction to the Veda, where I have given an outline of the dif­
ferent periods of Vaidik literature, and analyzed the peculiarities in the style 
and language of each class of Vaidik works. What I consider to be the sources 
of the Manava-dharma-sastra, the so-called Laws of Manu, are the Sfltras. These 
are works which presuppose the development of the prose literature of the 
Brahmanas (like the Aitareya-brShmana, Taittirlya-brahmana, &c.) 
These 
Brahmanas, again, presuppose, not only the existence, but the collection and 
arrangement of the old hymns of the four Sawhitas. The Siltras are therefore 
later than both these classes of Vaidik works, but they must be considered as 
belonging to the Vaidik period of literature, not only on account of their inti­
mate connexion with Vaidik subjects, but also because they still exhibit the irre­
gularities of the old Vaidik language. They form indeed the last branch of Vaidik 
literature; and it will perhaps be possible to fix some of these works chronologi­
cally, as they are contemporary with the first spreading of Buddhism in India, 
Again, in the whole of Vaidik literature there is no work written (like the 
Manava-dharma-sastra) in the regular epic -Sloka, and the continuous employ­
ment of this metre is a characteristic mark of post-Vaidik writings.
One of the principaT classes of Sfitras is known by the name of K a l p a -

--- PAGE 14 ---
X
A P ^ T A M B A .
him not only to arrive at this negative result, but also 
to substitute a sounder theory the truth of which sub­
sequent investigations have further confirmed, and to show 
that the sacred law of the Hindus has its source in the 
teaching of the Vedic schools, and that the so-called re­
vealed law codes are, in most cases, but improved metrical
sutras, or rules of ceremonies. 
These are avowedly composed by human 
authors, while, according to Indian orthodox theology, both the hymns and Brah- 
maaas are to be considered as revelation. The Sutras generally bear the name of 
their authors, like the Shtras of Asvalayana, Katyayana, &c., or the name o f the 
family to which the Sutras belonged. 
The great number of these writings is to 
be accounted for by the fact that there was not one body o f Kalpa-shtras bind­
ing on all Brahmanic families, but that different old families had each their o^vn 
Kalpa-sOtras. 
These works are still very frequent in our libraries, yet there is 
no doubt that many o f them have been lost. 
Sutras are quoted which do not 
exist in Europe, and the loss of some is acknowledged by the Brahmans them­
selves. 
There are, however, lists of the old Brahmanic families which were in 
possession of their own redaction ofVaidik hymns (Sa/nhitas), of Brahmanas, and 
of Sutras. Some of these families followed the Rig-veda, some the Yagur-veda, the 
Sama-veda, and Atharva-veda; and thus the whole Vaidik literature becomes 
divided into four great classes of BrMimaaas and Sfttras, belonging to one or 
the other of the four principal Vedas.
Now one of the families following the Yagur-veda was that of the Manavas (cf. 
iTaranavyiiha). There can be no doubt that that family, too, had its own Sfltras. 
Quotations from Manava-sdtras are to be met with in commentaries on other 
Sutras; and I have found,.not long ago, a MS.^which contains the text of the 
Manava-srauta-sutras, though in a very fragmentary state. 
But these Sdtras, 
the 5rauta-sutras, treat only o f a certain branch of ceremonies connected with the 
great sacrifices. 
Complete Sfitra works are divided into three parts: l. the 
first (5rauta), treating on the great sacrifices; 2. the second (Grihya), treating 
on the Sanzskaras, or the purificatory sacraments; 3. the third (Samayaiarika 
or Dharma-rsutras), treating on temporal duties, customs, and punishments. 
The last two classes o f Sfitras seem to be lost in the Manava-sfitra. This loss is, 
however, not so great with regard to tracing the sources of the Manava-dharma- 
sastra, because whenever we have an opportunity of comparing Sutras belonging 
to different families, but following the same Veda, and treating on the same 
subjects, the differences appear to be very slight, and only refer to less important 
niceties of the ceremonial. In the absence, therefore, of the Manava-samaya^arika- 
sfftras, I have taken another collection of Sutras, equally belonging to the Yagur- 
veda, the Sfitras of Apastamba. 
In his family we have not only a Brahmana, 
but also Apastamba Srauta, Gnhya, and Samaya^arika-sfitras. 
Now it is, of 
course, the third class of Sutras, on temporal duties, which are most likely to 
contain the sources of the later metrical Codes of Law, written in the classical 
■Sloka. 
On a comparison of different subjects, such as the duties of a Brahma- 
^arin, a Gr/hastha, laws of inheritance, duties of a king, forbidden fruit, &c., 
I find that the Sutras contain generally almost the same words which have been 
brought into verse by the compiler of the Manava-dharma-.vastra. 
I consider, 
therefore, the Sfitras as the principal source of the metrical Smn'tis, such as the

--- PAGE 15 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
XI
editions of older prose works which, in the first instance, 
were destined to be committed to memory by the young 
Aryan students, and to -teach them their duties. 
This 
circumstance, as well as the fact that Apastamba’s work 
1 is free from any suspicion of having been tampered with 
by sectarians or modern editors, and that its intimate con­
nexion with the manuals teaching the performance of the 
1 great and small sacrifices, the .Srauta and Gnhya-sutras, 
which are attributed to the same author, is perfectly clear 
and , indisputable, entitle it, in spite of its comparatively 
late origin, to the first place in a collection of Dharma- 
sfitras.
The Apastambiya Dharma-sutra forms part of an enor­
mous Kalpa-sutra or body of aphorisms, which digests the 
teaching of the Veda and of the ancient i?fshis regarding 
the performance. of sacrifices and the duties of twice-born 
men, Brahma«as, Kshatriyas, and Vai^yas, and which, being 
chiefly based on the second of the four Vedas, the Ya^ur- 
iveda in, the Taittiriya recension, is primarily intended 
for the benefit of the Adhvaryu priests in whose families 
the study of the Ya^ur-veda is hereditary.
The entire Kalpa-sutra of Apastaniba is divided into 
thirty sections, called Prajnas, literally questions *. 
The
Manava-(lharma-;astra, Ya^navalkya-dhanna-sastra, &c., though there are also 
many other verses in these works which may be traced to different sources. 
They are paraplirases of verses of the Samhitas, or of passages of the Brahmanas, 
often retaining the same old words and archaic constructions which were in the 
original. 
This is indeed acknowledged by the author of the Manava-dharma- 
sastra, when he says ,(B. II, v. 6), ‘ The roots of the Law are the whole Veda 
(SaTTjhitas and Brdhmanas), the customs and traditions of those who knew A e 
Veda (as laid down in the Sfitras), the conduct of good men, and one's own 
satisfaction.’ 
The Manava-dharma-sastra may thus be considered as the last 
redaction of the laws of the Manavas. 
Quite different, is the question as to the 
old Manu from whom the family probably derived its origin, and who is said 
to have been the author of some very characteristic hymns in the Rig-veda- 
sawhila. He certainly cannot be considered as the author of a Manava-dharma- 
sastra, nor is there even any reason to suppose the author of this work to have 
had the same name. 
It is evident that the author of the metrical Code of Laws 
speaks of the old Manu as of a person different from himself, when he says' 
(B. X , V. 63I, ‘ Not to kill, not to lie, not to steal, to keep the body clean, and 
to restrain the senses, this was. the short law which Manu proclaimed amongst 
the four castes.’— Yours truly, M. M. 
t BurnsO, Indian Antiquary, I, 5 seq.

--- PAGE 16 ---
X U
A P A ST A M B A .
first twenty-four of these teach the performance of the 
so-called 6'rauta or Vaitanika sacrifices, for which several 
sacred fires are required, beginning with the simplest 
rites, the new and full moon offerings, and ending with 
the complicated Sattras or sacrificial sessions, which last a 
whole year or even longer. 
The twenty-fifth PraJ'na con­
tains the Paribhashas or general rules of interpretation, 
which are valid for the whole Kalpa-sfitra, the Pravara- 
kha«i/a, the chapter enumerating the patriarchs of the 
various Brahmanical tribes, and. finally the Hautraka, 
prayers to be recited by the Hotraka priests. 
The 
twenty-sixth section gives the Mantras or Vedic prayers t 
and formulas for the Gr/hya rites, the ceremonies for which 
the sacred domestic or Grfhya fire is required, and the 
twenty-seventh the rules for the performance of the latter. 
The aphorisms on the sacred law fill the next two Pramas; 
and the 5 ulva-sfitra^ teaching the geometrical principles, 
according to which the altars necessary for the 5 rauta 
sacrifices must be constructed, concludes the work with 
the thirtieth Prajna.
The position of the Dharma-sutra in the middle of the 
collection a f once raises the presumption that it originally 
formed an integral portion of the body of Sfitras and that 
it is not a later addition. Had it been added later, it would 
either stand at the end of the thirty Prajnas or altogether 
outside the collection, as is the case with some other 
treatises attributed to Apastamba 
The Hindus are, no 
doubt, unscrupulous in adding to the works of famous 
teachers. 
But such additions, if of considerable extent, 
lire usually not embodied in the works themselves which 
they are intended to supplement. 
They are mostly given 
as Jeshas or parijish/as, tacked on at the end, and generally 
marked as such in the MSS.
In the case of the Apastamba Dharma-sutra it is, 
however, not necessary to rely on its position alone, in 
order to ascertain its genuineness. There are unmistakable 
indications that it is the work of the same author who
* On the Sulva-sfitras see G. Thibaut in ‘ the Pandit,’ 1875, p. 292.
* Bumell loc, cit.

--- PAGE 17 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
Xlll
■wrote the remainder of the Kalpa-shtra. 
One Important 
argument in favour of this vievv is furnished by the fact 
that Prajna XXVII, the section on the Grfhya cere­
monies, has evidently been made very short and concise 
with the intention of saving matter for the subsequent 
sections on the sacred law. TJhe Apastambiya Gr/hya-shtra 
j contains nothing beyond a bare outline of the domestic 
ceremonies, while 
most of the other 
Gr/hya-shtras, 
e.g. those of ^JvalSyana, .SSnkhSyana, Gobliila, and P^ra- 
skara,' include a great many rules which _bear indirectly 
only on the performance of the offerings in the sacred 
domestic fire. 
Thus on the occasion of the description 
of the initiation of Aryan students, Awaldyana inserts 
directions regarding the dress and girdle to be worn, the 
length of the studentship, the manner of begging, the 
disposal of the alms collected, and other similar questionsh 
The exclusion of such incidental remarks on subjects that 
are not immediately connected with the chief aim of the 
work, is almost complete in Apastamba’s G;»Vhya-shtra, 
and reduces its size to less than one half of the extent of 
the shorter ones among the works enumerated above. 
It 
seems impossible to explain this restriction of. the scope 
of Prama X X V II otherwise than by assuming that Apa- 
stamba wished to reserve all rules bearing rather on the 
duties of men than on the performance of the domestic 
offerings, for his sections on the sacred law.
A second and no less important argument for the unity 
of the whole Kalpa-shtra may be drawn from the cross- 
references which occur in several Pramas. In the Dharma- 
shtra we find on various occasions, where the performance 
of ^ ceremony is prescribed, the expression yathopau^jain, 
according tcf the injunction, added. 
In two of these 
passages, Dh. I, i, 4, 16, and II, 7, 17, i 5, the Gr/hya- 
sCitra is doubtlessly referred to, and the commentator 
Haradatta has pointed out this fact. 
On the other hand, 
the G^^-zhya-sfitra refers to the Dharma-sfitra, employ­
ing the same expression which has been quoted from
‘ Asvalayana GWhya-sutra I, 19, ed. Stenzler.

--- PAGE 18 ---
X IV
A P A ST A M B A .
the latter. 
Thus we read ia the beginning of the chapter 
on funeral oblations, Gr/hya-sfitra, Pa/'ala 4, Kha;ida ai, ma- 
sijrdddhasyaparapakshe yathopadeJa;« kala/i, ‘ the times for 
the monthly funeral sacrifice (fall) in the latter (dark) half 
of the month according to the injunction.’ 
Now 
as neither the Grzhya-sfitra itself nor any preceding 
portion of the Kalpa-sfitra contains any injunction on this 
point, it follows that the long passage on this subject 
which occurs in the Dharma-sutra II, 7, 16, 4-2,2 is referred 
to. The expression yathopade^am is also found in other 
passages of the Gnhya-sfitra, e. g. towards the end of 
Kha«^a 7 and in the beginning of Kha/tda 8, and must 
be explained there in a like manner. 
There are further 
a certain number of Sfitras which occur in the same words 
both in the Pra^na on domestic rites, and in that on the 
sacred law, e.g. Dh. I, l, i, 18; I, i, 2, 38; I', i, 4, 14. 
It 
seems that the author wished to call special attention to 
these rules by repeating them. 
Their recurrence and 
literal agreement may be considered an additional proof 
of the intimate connexion of the two sections.
Through a similar repetition of, at least, one Sfitra it 
is possible to trace the connexion of the Dharma-sfitra 
with the 5‘rauta-sfitra. 
The rule ritve vd ^dydm upeydt, 
‘ or he may have conjugal intercourse with his’ wife in the 
proper season,’ is given, Dh. II, 3, 5, 17, with reference to 
a householder who teaches the Veda. 
In the chapter on 
the A'dturmdsya sacrifices it occurs also, as Haradatta has 
stated, and applies there to the sacrifice/. 
In this case 
the repetition of the same words cannot be accidental, 
for the Sutra contains an irregular grammatical form, ntve 
for ritvye. 
If the Dharma-sutra were the production of 
a different author and a later addition, the*Pseudo-Apa- 
stamba would most probably not have hit on this peculiar 
irregular fornl. 
The repetition of the Sfitra, under these 
circumstances, may be taken to show that the S'rauta-sfitra 
and the Dharma-sutra belong to the same author.
Who this author really was, is a problem which cannot 
be solved for the present, and which probably will always 
remain unsolved, because we know his family name only.

--- PAGE 19 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
X V
For the form of the word itself shows that the name 
Apastamba, just like those of most founders of Vedic 
schools, e. g. Baudhdyana, Bhiradva^a, Ajvalayana, Gau­
tama, is a patronymic. 
This circumstance is, of course, 
fatal to all attempts at an identification of the individual 
who holds so prominent a place among the teachers of the 
Black Ya^ur-veda.
But we are placed in a somewhat better position with 
respect to the history of the school which has been named 
after Apastamba and of the works ascribed to him. 
Re­
garding both, some information has been preserved by 
tradition, and’ a little more can be obtained from inscrip­
tions and later works, while some interesting details regard­
ing the time when, and the place where the Sutras were 
composed, may be elicited from the latter themselves. 
The data, obtainable from these sources, it is true, do not 
enable us to determine with certainty the year when the 
Apastambiya school was founded, and when its Sfitras 
were composed. 
But they make it possible to ascertain 
the position of the school and of its SOtras in Vedic lite- 
rature, their relative priority or posteriority as compared 
with other Vedic schools and works, to show with some 
amount of probability in what part of India they had 
their origin, and to venture, at least, a not altogether 
unsupported conjecture as to their probable antiquity.
As regards the first point, the A'ara«avyuha, a supple­
ment of the White Ya^ur-veda which gives the lists of the 
• Vedic schools, informs us that the Apastambiya school 
! formed one of the five branches of the Khawrt'ikiya school,
1 which in its turn was a subdivision of the Taittiriyas, one 
of the ancient sections of Brahmawas who study the Black 
'Ya^ur-veda. 
Owing to the very unsatisfactory condition 
of the text of the iTara«avyuha it is unfortunately npt 
possible to ascertain what place that work really assigns 
to the Apastambiyas among the five branches of the 
Khii«^/ikiyas. 
Some MSS., name them first, and others 
last. 
They give either the following list, i. Kdleyas 
(Kdletas), 2. 5 aryayanins, 3. Hirawyake^ins, 4. Bharadv^ins, 
3. Apastambins, or, i, Apastambins, 2. Baudhdyanins,

--- PAGE 20 ---
X VI
A P A ST A M B A .
3. Saty^sha^f/nns, 4. Hirawyakexins, 5. Aukheyask 
But 
this defect is remedied to a certain extent by the now 
■generally current tradition that the Apastambiyas are 
younger than the school of Baudhayana, and older than 
that of Satyash^/ia Hira«yakejin. 
Baudhayana, it is ■ 
alleged, composed the first set of Shtras connected with the 
Black Ya^ur-veda, and was succeeded by Bharadv^a, 
Apastamba, and Satyisha<//za Hirawyake^in, who all founded 
schools which bear their names 
This tradition has preserved two important pieces of 
information. 
Firstly, the Apastamba school is what Pro­
fessor Max Muller appropriately calls a SCltra^ara«a, i. e. a 
school whose founder did not pretend to have received 
; a revelation of Vedic Mantras or of a Brahmawa text, but 
1 merely gave a new systematic arrangement of the precepts 
regarding sacrifices and the sacred law. 
Secondly, the 
Sfitras of Apastamba occupy an intermediate position be- 
'■ tween the works of Baudhayana and Hirawyakerin. 
Both 
these statements are perfectly true, and capable of bping 
supported by proofs, drawn from Apastamba’s owrf and 
from other works.
As regards the first point. Professor Max Muller has 
already pointed ® out that, though we sometimes find a 
Br^hma«a of the Apastambiyas mentioned, the title Apa- 
stamba-br^ihmawa is nothing but another name of the 
Taittiriya-brahmawa, and that this Brahmawa, in reality, 
is always attributed to Tittiri or to the pupils of Vaijam- 
piyana, who picked up the Black Ya^ur-veda in the shape 
of partridges (tittiri). 
The same remark applies to the 
collection of the Mantras of the Black Ya^ur-veda, which, 
likewise, is sometimes named Apastamba-sawhitA. 
The 
isTarawavylaha states explicitly that the five branches of
* Max Muller, Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 371. 
A MS. of the XaranavyCha 
with an anonymous commentary, in my possession, .has the following passage :
ipifsW n 
^
 
I
’ Max Muller loc. cit.,p. 194. These statements occur in M ahideva’s commen­
tary on the Hiranyakesi-s&tras; see'Weber, Hist. Sansk. Lit., p. Jio, and ed.
* Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 195.

--- PAGE 21 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
X V ll
the Khaw^/ikiya school, to which the Apastambiyas be­
long, possess one and the sarfie recension of the revealed 
texts, consisting of 7 K^«^/as, 44 Praxnas, 651 Anuvakas, 
2198 Pannasis, 19290 Padas^, and 253,868 syllables, and 
indicates thereby that all these five schools were Sfitra- 
^arawas.
If we now turn to Apastamba’s own works, we find still 
clearer proof that he laid no claim to the title i?/shi, or 
inspired seer of Vedic texts.-’ For (Dharma-shtra I, 2,5,4-5) 
he says distinctly that on account of the prevalent trans­
gression of the rules of studentship no i?/shis are born 
among the Avaras, the men of later ages or of modern 
times, but that some, by virtue of a residue of the merit 
which they acquired in former lives, become sim ilar to 
i??shis by their knowledge of the Veda. 
A man who 
speaks in this manner, shows that he considers the > holy 
ages during which the great saints saw with their mind’s 
eye the uncreated and eternal texts of the Veda to be past, 
and that all he claims is a thorough acquaintance with the 
scriptures which had been handed down to him. The same 
spirit which dictated this passage is also observable in other 
portions of the Dharma-sdtra. For Apastamba repeatedly 
contrasts the weakness and sinfulness of the Avaras, the 
men of his own times, with the holiness of the ancient 
sages, who, owing to the greatness of their ‘ lustre,’ were 
able to commit various forbidden acts without diminishing 
their spiritual merits 
These utterances prove that Apa­
stamba considered himself a child of the Kali Yuga, the 
age of sin, during which, according to Hindu notions, no 
^fshis can be born. 
If, therefore, in spite of this explicit 
disclaimer, the Saw^hit^ and the Brahmawa of the Black 
Ya^r-veda are sometimes called Apastamba or Apastam- 
biya, i. e. belonging to Apastamba, the meaning of this 
expression can only be, that they were and are studied 
and handed down by the school, not that its founder was 
their author, or, as the Hindus would say, saw them.
C-]
‘ See also Weber, Ind. Lit., p. 98, 2nd ed.
“ Dhanna-sdtra II, 6, 13, 8-10; II, 10, 27, 4.
b

--- PAGE 22 ---
X V lll
A P A ST A M B A .
The fact that Apastamba confined his activity to the 
I composition of Sfltras is highly important for the deter­
mination of the period to which he belonged. 
It clearly 
} shows that in his time the tertiary or Sfitra period of the 
Ya^ur-veda had begun. Whether we assume, with Professor 
Max Muller, that the Sfitra period was one and the same 
for all the four Vedas, and fix its limits with him between 
600-200 B .C ., or whether we believe, as I am inclined to 
do, that the date of the Slitra period differed for each 
Veda, still the incontestable conclusion is that the origin 
of the Apastambiya school cannot be placed in the early 
times of the Vedic period, and probably falls in the last 
five centuries before the beginning of the Christian era. j 
The correctness of the traditional statement that Apa­
stamba is younger than Baudhdyana may be made very 
probable by the following considerations. 
Firstly, Bau- 
dhayana^s and Apastamba’s works on Dharma have a 
considerable number of S6tras in common. 
Thus at the 
end of the chapter on Penances no less than seven con­
secutive S6tras (Ap. Dh. I, 10, 29, 8—14), prescribing the 
manner in which outcasts are to live and to obtain read­
mission into the Brahma«ical community for their c^iildren, 
occur in both treatises. 
Besides this passage, there are 
a number of single Sutras ^ which agree literally. 
Taken 
by itself this agreement does not prove much, as it may 
be explained in various ways. 
It may show either that 
Baudh^yana is older than Apastamba, and that the latter 
borrowed from the former, or that the reverse was the case. 
It may also indicate that both authors drew from one 
common source. 
But if it is taken together with two other 
facts, it gains a considerable importance. 
Firstly, Apa­
stamba holds in several cases doctrines which are of a later 
origin than those held by Baudhayana. 
With respect to 
this point the puritan opinions which Apastamba puts 
forward regarding the substitutes for legitimate sons and
■ E .g. Ap. Dh. I, I, 2, 30; I, I, 3, 6 ; 1, 2, 6, 8-9; I, 5. iS- 8 are found in 
iha Baudh. Dh., Prasna I, Adhyciya 2i

--- PAGE 23 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
X IX
regarding the appointment of widows (niyoga), and his 
restriction of the number of marriage-rites, may be adduced 
as examples. 
Like many other ancient teachers, BaudhS.- 
yana permits childless Aryans to satisfy their craving for 
representatives bearing their name, and to allay their fears 
of falling after death into the regions of torment through 
a failure of the funeral oblations, by the affiliation of 
eleven kinds of substitutes for a legitimate son. 
Illegiti­
mate sons, the illegitimate sons of wives, the legitimate and 
illegitimate offspring of daughters, and the children of rela­
tives, or even of strangers who may be solemnly adopted, 
or received as members of the family without any ceremony, 
or be acquired by purchase, are all allowed to take the 
■place and the rights of legitimate sons^. 
Apastamba 
declares his dissent from this doctrine. 
He allows legiti­
mate sons alone to inherit their father’s estate and to follow 
the occupations of his caste, and he explicitly forbids the 
sale and gift of children ^
In like manner he protests against the custom of making 
over childless widows to brothers-in-Iaw or other near rela­
tives in order to obtain sons who are to offer the funeral obla­
tions to the deceased husband’s manes, while Baudh^yana 
has as yet no scruple on the subject®. 
Finally, he omits 
from his list of the marriage-rites the Pai^a^a viv^ha, where 
the bride is obtained by fraud 
though it is reluctantly 
admitted by Baudhayana and other ancient teachers. There 
can be no doubt that the law which placed the regular 
continuance of the funeral oblations above all other con­
siderations, and which allowed, in order to secure this 
object, even a violation of the sanctity of the marriage-tie 
and other breaches of the principles of morality, belongs 
fo an older order of ideas than the stricter views of Apa­
stamba. 
It is true, that, according to Baudhdyana’s own 
statement 
before his time an ancient sage named Aupa-
«> West and Biihler, Digest of Hindu Law Cases, p. 310, 1st ed. 
» Ap. Dh. II, 5 ,13 ,1 -3 ,1 1. 
s Ap. Dh. II, 10, 27, 2-7.
* Ap. Dh. II, 5, II and 12.
® West and Biihler, loc. cit., p. 31 li Sutra 24.
b 2

--- PAGE 24 ---
X X
A P A ST A M B A .
^ndhani, who is also mentioned in the 5 atapatha-br^hma«a, 
had opposed the old practice of taking substitutes for a 
legitimate son. 
It is also very probable that for a long 
time the opinions of the Brahmawa teachers, who lived in 
different parts of India and belonged to different schools, 
may have been divided on this subject. 
Still it seems very' 
improbable that of two authors who both belong to the 
same Veda and to the same school, the earlier one should 
hold the later doctrine, and the later one the earlier opinion. 
The contrary appears the more probable assumption. The 
same remarks apply to the cases of the Niyoga and of the 
Paird/^a marriage.
The second fact, which bears on the question how the 
identity of so many Shtras in the two Dharma-sutras is to 
be explained, affords a still stronger proof of Apastamba’s . 
posteriority to Baudhayana. 
For on several occasions, it 
appears, Apastamba controverts opinions which Baudha- 
J yana holds, or which may be defended with the help of 
the latter’s Sutras. 
The clearest case of this kind occurs 
in the chapter on Inheritance, where the treatment of the 
eldest son on the division of the estate by the father is 
discussed. 
There Apastamba gives it as his own opinion 
that the father should make an equal division of his pro­
perty ‘ after having gladdened the eldest son by some 
(choice portion of his) wealth,’ i. e. after making him a 
present which should have some value, but should not be 
so valuable as to materially affect the equality of the 
shares^. 
Further on he notices the opinions of other 
teachers on this subject, and states that the practice advo­
cated by some, of allowing the eldest alone to inherit, as 
well as the custom prevailing in some countries, of allotting 
to the eldest all the father’s gold, or the black cows, or the 
black iron and grain, is not in accordance with the pre­
cepts of the Vedas. 
In order to prove the latter assertion 
he quotes a passage of the Taittiriya Sawzhiti, in which it 
is declared that ‘ Manu divided his wealth among his sons,’ 
and no difference in the treatment of the eldest son is pre-
'■ Ap. Dh. II, 6, 13, 13, and II, 6,14, i.

--- PAGE 25 ---
IN TR O D U C T IO N .
X X I
scribed. 
He adds that a second passage occurs in the 
same Veda, which declares that ' they distinguish the eldest 
son by (a larger portion of) the heritage,’ and which thus 
apparently countenances the partiality for the first-born. 
But this second^ passage, he contends, appealing to the 
opinion of the Mimdw^sists, is, like many similar ones, 
merely a statement of a fact which has not the autho­
rity of an injunction^. 
If we now turn to Baudh^yana, 
we find that he allows of three different methods for the 
distribution of the paternal estate. 
According to him, 
either an equal share may be given to each son, or the 
eldest may receive the best part of the wealth, or, also, 
a preferential share.of one tenth of the whole property. 
He further alleges that the cows, horses, goats, and sheep 
alsa go to the eldest son. 
As authority for the equal 
division he gives the first of the two Vedic passages quoted 
above'; and for the doctrine that the eldest is to receive the 
best part of the estate, he quotes the second passage which 
Apastamba considers to be without the force of an injunc­
tion®. 
The fact that the two authors’ opinions clash is 
manifest, and the manner in which Apastamba tries to 
show that the second Vedic passage possesses no authority, 
clearly indicates that before his time it had been held to con­
tain an injunction. 
As no other author of a Dharma-shtra 
but Baudhayana is known to have quoted it, the conclusion 
is that Apastamba’s remarks are directed against him. 
If 
Apastamba does not mention Baudhdyana by name, the 
reason probably is that in olden times, just as in the present 
day, the Brahmanical etiquette forbad a direct opposition 
against doctrines propounded by an older teacher who be­
longs to the same spiritual family (vidyclva7«ja) as oneself.
A similar case occurs in the chapter on Studentship 
where Apastamba, again appealing to the Mima7;^sists, 
combats the doctrine that pupils may eat forbidden food, 
suc^ as honey, meat, and pungent condiments, if it is given 
to them as leavings by their teacher. 
Baudhdyana gives
’ Ap. Dh, II, 6, 14, 6-13,
’ A p. Dh. I, I, 4, 5- 7.
West and Biihler, loc, cit., p. 309-

--- PAGE 26 ---
X X ll
APASTAxM BA.
no explicit rule on this point, but the wording of his 
Shtras is not opposed to the doctrine and practice, to 
which Apastamba objects. Baudhayana says that students 
shall avoid honey, meat, pungent condiments, & c.; he fur­
ther enjoins that pupils are to obey their teachers except 
when ordered to commit crimes which cause loss of caste 
(pataniya); and he finally directs them to eat the fragments 
of food given to them by their teachers. 
As the eating of 
honey and other forbidden substances is not a crime 
causihg loss of caste, it is possible that Baudhayana himself 
may have considered it the duty of a pupil to eat any kind 
of food given by the teacher, even honey and meat. A t all 
events the practice and doctrine which Apastamba blames, 
may have been defended by the wording of Baudhayana’s 
rules.
The three points which have been just discussed, viz. the 
identity of a number of Sutras in the works of the two 
authors, the fact that Apastamba advocates on some points 
more refined or puritan opinions, and that he labours to con­
trovert doctrines contained in Baudhiyana’s Shtras, give a 
powerful support to the traditional statement that he is 
younger than that teacher. 
It is, however, difficult to say 
how great the distance between the two really is. 
Mahd- 
deva, as stated above, places between them only Bhara- 
dvi^a, the author of a set of Sfitras, which as yet have not 
been completely recovered. 
But it .seems to me not likely 
that the latter was his immediate predecessor in the vidya- 
vama or spiritual family to which both belonged. 
For it 
cannot be expected that two successive heads of the school 
should each have composed a Shtra and thus founded a 
new branch-school. 
It is more probable that Baudhayana 
and Bhiradvi^a, as well as the latter and Apastamba, were 
separated by several intervening generations of teachers, 
who contented themselves with explaining the works of 
their predecessors. The distance in years between the first 
and the last of the three Sfitrakdras must, therefore, I 
think, be measured rather by centuries than by decades
The subjoined pedigree of the Sdtrakaras of the Black Ya^ur-veda w ill

--- PAGE 27 ---
IN TR O D U C T IO N .
X X lll
As regards the priority of Apastamba to the school of 
Satyashaa%a Hira«yakejin, there can be no doubt about 
the correctness of this statement. 
For either Hirawyake^in 
himself, or, at least, his immediate successors have appro­
priated Apastamba’s Dharma-slitra and have inserted it 
with slight modifications in their own collection. 
The 
1 alterations consist chiefly in some not very important addi­
tions, and in the substitution of more intelligible and 
^ more modern expressions for difficult and antiquated 
words ^ 
But they do not extend so far as to make the 
language of the Dharma-sfitra fully agree with that of the 
other sections of the collection, especially with the Gr?'hya- 
sfitra. 
Numerous discrepancies between these two parts 
are observable. Thus we read in the Hirawyakei^i Grfhya- 
sfitra that a Brahmawa must, ordinarily, be initiated in his 
seventh year, while the rule of the Dharma-sfltra, which 
is identical with Ap. Dh. I, i, i, i8, prescribes that the 
ceremony shall take place in the eighth year after con­
ception. 
The commentators, Mdtr/datta on the G^z'hya- 
sOtra and Mahadeva on the Dharma-shtra, both state that 
the rule of the Gr^'hya-siatra refers to the seventh year 
after birth, and, therefore, in substance agrees with the 
Dharma-sCitra. 
They a're no doubt right. 
But the dif-
perhaps make the above remarks and my interpretation of the statements of the 
Jfaraaavyflha and of Mahadeva more intelligible:—
K h an iika, taught the Taittirlya recension of the Black Ya^r-veda.
(Successors of Kh^ndlka, number unknown, down to)
BaudhS.yana, ist Sfitrakira, and founder of Baudhayana-iara«a.
(Successors of Baudhdyana down to fellow-pupil of Bharadvr^a, number unknown-)
(Successors of Baudhayana af^r the schism down to the present day.) 
Bh8.radva^a, 2nd Sfttrakara, and founder of Bharadva^a-X*ara«a.
(Successors of BhSradvS^ down to fellow-pupil of Apastamba, number unknown.)
(Successors after the schism down to the present day.)
Apastam ba, 3rd Sdtrakara, and founder of Apastamba-^araria.
(Successors of Apastamba down to fellow-pupil of SatySsh^Aa Hira/ryakejin, number 
unknown.)
(Successors of Apastamba down to the present day.)
SatyftsbftrfAa Hira/iyakesin, 4th Sdtrakara, and founder of Hirawyakesi- 
iarawa.
(Successors of Saty^hS<//ta Hir^yakeyin down to the present day.)
After the schism of SatyAshai/ia Hirawyaketin the pedigree has not been con­
tinued, though Mahadeva asserts that several other Sdlrakaras arose. 
But to 
work it out further would be useless.
^ See the notes to my edition of the text of the Ap. Dh. passim.

--- PAGE 28 ---
X X IV
A P A ST A M B A .
ference in the wording shows that the two sections do not 
belong to the same author'. 
The 'same inference may be 
drawn from the fact that the Hirawyake^i Grfhya-shtra, 
which is much longer than Apastamba’s, includes a con­
siderable amount of matter which refers to the sacred law, 
and which is repeated in the Dharma-shtra. According to 
a statement which I have heard from several learned Brah- 
ma«as, the followers of Hirawyake^in, when pronouncing 
the sawkalpa or solemn pledge to perform a ceremony, 
declare themselves to be members of the Hirawyake^i 
school that forms a subdivision of Apastamba’s (apastam- 
bantargatahirawyakeji^akhadhyayi , . . aham). 
But I have 
not been able to find these words in the books treating of 
the ritual of the Hira«yakejins, such as the Mahejabha/A 
If this assertion could be further corroborated, it would be 
an additional strong proof of the priority of Apastamba, 
which, however, even without it may be accepted as a fact. 
The distance in time between the two teachers is probably 
not as great as that between Apastamba and Baudhayana, 
as Mahadeva mentions no intermediate Sfltrakdra between 
them. 
Still it is probably not less than loo or 150 years.
The results of the above investigation which show that the 
. origin of the Apastamba school falls in the middle of the Sdtra 
•period of the Black Ya^r-veda, and that its Shtras belong 
to the later, though not to the latest products of Vedic litera­
ture, are fully confirmed by an examination of the quotations 
from and references to Vedic and other books contained in 
Apastamba’s Sfitras, and especiaHyin the Dharma-shtra. We 
find that all the four Vedas are quoted or referred to. 
The 
three old ones, the Rik, Ya^us, and Saman, are mentioned 
both separately and collectively by the name trayi vidyd, 
i. e. threefold sacred science, and the fourth is called not 
Atharv&ngirasa/i, as is done in most ancient Sutras, but 
Atharva-veda 
The quotations from the R ik and Saman 
are not very numerous. 
But a passage from the ninth 
Maw^fala of the former, which is referred to Dh. I, i, a, a, is 
of some extent, and shows that the recension which Apa-
' A p. Dh. II, II, 39, i^.‘

--- PAGE 29 ---
IN TR O D U C TIO N .
X X V
stamba knew, did not differ from that which still exists. 
As Apastamba was an adherent of the Black Ya^r-veda, 
he quotes it, especially in the .Srauta-sutra, very frequentl)'-, 
and he adduces not only texts from the Mantra-sawhita, 
but also from the Taittidya-br^hmawa and Arawyaka. The 
most important quotations from the latter work occur Dh. 
II, 2, 3, 16-II, 2, 4, 9, where all the Mantras to be recited 
during the performance of the Bali-offerings are enumerated. 
Their order agrees exactly with that in which they stand 
in the sixty-seventh Anuvika of the tenth PrapS///aka of 
the recension of the Arawyaka which is current among the 
Andlira-brahmawas 
This last point is of considerable 
importance, both for the history of the text of that book 
and, as we shall' see further on, for the history of the Apa- 
stambtya school.
The White Ya^ur-veda, too, is quoted frequently in the 
6'rauta-sfitra and once in the section on Dharma by the 
title Va^asaneyaka, while twice its Brihmawa, the 
saneyi-brdhmawa, is cited. The longer of the two passages, 
taken from the latter work, Dh. I, 4, 12, 3, does, however, 
not fully agree with the published text of the Madhyandina 
recension. Its wording possesses just sufficient resemblance 
to allow us to identify the passage which Apastaniba 
meant, but differs from the Aatapatha-brahmawa in many 
details. 
As it is known that the Brahma;»a of the Va^a- 
saneyins existed in several recensions, among which the 
Ka«va jdkha was thet oldest ^ and as a teacher of that 
name is quoted by Apastamba as an authority on the 
sacred law, it is not improbable that Apastamba’s quota­
tion is taken from the Ka«va recension, and that the now 
more cornmon MAdhyandina ^akha was unknown to him. 
As regards the Atharva-veda, Apastamba gives, besides the 
reference mentioned above and a second to the Angirasa- 
pavitra®, an abstract of a long passage from Atharva-veda 
XV,i(?-i3, regarding the treatment of'aVratya, i.e. a learned
^ The Taittirtya Aranyaka exists in three recensions, the Diavirfa, Karna/a, 
and the Andhra, the first of which has been commented on by Sayana.
® See the passage from th^/Taranavyfihabhashya given below, ver. 10.
» Ap. Dh. I. 3, 2, 2.

--- PAGE 30 ---
X X V I
A P A ST A M B A .
mendicant BrShmawa, who really deserves the title of atithi, 
or guest 
It is true that Apastamba, in the passage re­
ferred to, does not say that his rule is based on the Atharva- 
veda. 
He merely says that a Brahmawa is his‘authority. 
But it seems, nevertheless, certain that by the expression 
a Brahmawa, the Brahma«a-like fifteenth book of the 
Atharva-veda is meant, as the sentences to be addressed by 
the host to his guest agree literally with those which the 
Atharva-veda prescribes for the reception of a Vratya. 
Haradatta too, in his commentary,-expresses the same 
opinion. Actual quotations from the Atharva-veda are. not 
frequent in Vedic literature, and the fact that Apastamha’s 
Dharma-shtra contains one, is, therefore, of some interest..
Besides these Vedic texts, Apastamba mentions, also, 
the Angas or auxiliary works, and enumerates six; classes, 
viz. treatises on the ritual of the sacrifices, on grammar, 
astronomy, etymology, recitation of the Veda, and metrics^. 
The number is the same as that which is considered the 
correct one in our days^.
As the Dharma-shtra names no less than nine teachers in 
connexion with various topics of the sacred law, and fre­
quently appeals to the opinion of some (eke), it follows 
that a great many such auxiliary treatises must have 
existed in Apastamba’s time. 
The A/^aryas mentioned 
are Eka, Ka?iva, K^«va, • Kuwika, Kutsa, Kautsa, Push- 
karasadi, Virshyayam, .Svetaketu, and Harita^. 
Some of 
these persons, like Harita and Ka«va, are known to have 
composed Shtras on the sacred *law, and fragments or 
modified versions of their works are still in existence, 
while K 4«va, Kautsa, Pushkarasa,di or Paushkaras&di, as 
the correct form of the naihe is, and Varshy&ya«i are 
quoted in the Nirukta, the Prdtudkhyas, and the Varttikas- 
on Pdwini as authorities on phonetics, etymology, and 
grammar ®. 
K 4«va, finally, is considered the author of the 
still existing Kalpa-shtras of the Kdwva school, which has
‘ Ap. Bh. II, 3, 7, 12-17. 
“ Ap. Dh. II, 4. 8,10.
* See also Max Muller, Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. i i i .
‘ A p.m . I, 6,19, 3-8; 1 , 10, 28,1-2 ; i. 4 ,13, l o j j , 6,_i8, 2 ; I, 6, 19,12 ; 
I, 10, 28, 5, 16; I, 10, 29,12-16.
® Max Muller, loc. cit., p. 142.

--- PAGE 31 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
X X V l l
been mentioned above. It seems not improbable that most 
of these teachers were authors of complete sets of Angas. 
Their position in Vedic literature, however, except as far, 
as Kdwva, Hdrita, and .Svetaketu are concerned, is diffi­
cult to define, and the occurrence of their names throws 
less light on the antiquity of the Apastambiya school than 
might be expected. Regarding Harita it must, however, be 
noticed that he is one of the oldest authors of Sfltras, and 
that he is quoted by Baudhiyana, Apastamba’s predecessor. 
The bearing of the occurrence of 6'vetaketu’s name will be 
discussed below.
Of even greater interest than the names of the teachers 
are. the indications which Apastamba gives, that he knew 
two of the philosophical schools which still exist in India, 
viz. the Phrvd or Karma ^Mimd;«sa and the Vedanta. 
As 
regards the former, he mentions it by its ancient name, 
jNyaya, which in later times and at present is usually 
applied to the doctrine of Gautama Akshapcida. 
In two 
passages ^ he settles contested points on the authority of 
those who know the Nydya, i. e. the Pdrvd Mimaw/sa, and 
in several other cases he adopts a line of reasoning which 
fully agrees with that followed in Gaimini’s Mimdw^si-sdtras. 
Thus the arguments^ that ‘ a revealed text has greater 
weight than a custom from which a revealed text may be 
inferred,’ and that ‘ no text can be inferred from a custom 
for which a worldly motive is apparent,’ exactly correspond 
with the teaching of fPa’imini’s Mim^w/s4-shtras I, 3, 3-4. 
The wording of the passages in the two works does not 
agree so closely that the one could be called a quotation 
of the other. 
But it is evident, that if Apastamba did not 
know the Mimd?«sd-shtras of Gaimini, he must have pos­
sessed some pther very similar work. As to the Vedanta, 
Apastamba does not mention the name of the school. 
But Khawrths aa, 33 of the f^PTa/ala of the Dharma-sfitra 
unmistakably contain the chief tenets of the Vedantists, and 
recommend the acquisition of the knowledge of the Atman 
as the best means for purifying the souls of sinners.
‘ Ap. Dh.‘ II, 4, 8, 13 i II. 6, 14, 13. 
> Ap. Dh. I, I.X4, 8, 9-J0.

--- PAGE 32 ---
X X V llI
A P A ST A M B A .
Though these two Kha«^/as are chiefly filled with quota­
tions, which, as the commentator states, are taken from an 
Upanishad, still the manner of their selection, as well as 
Apastamba’s own words in the introductory and concluding 
Sfitras, indicates that he knew not merely the unsystematic 
speculations contained in the Upanishads and Ara7?yakas, 
.but a well-defined system of Veddntic philosophy identical 
with that of Badaraya«a’s Brahma-sfitras. The fact that 
Apastamba’s Dharma-sCltra contains indications of the ex­
istence of these two schools of philosophy, is significant 
as the PCirvi Mima;«si occurs in one other Dharma-sOtra 
only, that attributed to VcLsish///a, and as the name of the 
Vedanta is not found in any of the prose treatises on the 
sacred law.
Of non-Vedic works Apastan^ba mentions the Pura«a. 
The Dhartna-sfitra not only several times quotes passages 
from ‘ a Pura«a’ as authorities for its r u l e s b u t names in 
one case the Bhavishyat-purawa as the particular Purd?;a 
from which the .quotation is taken 
References to the 
Pura«a in general are not unfrequent in other Sfitras on 
the sacred law, and even in older Vedic works. 
But 
Apastamba, so far as I know, is the only Sfitrakdra who 
specifies the title of a particular Purd?za, and names one 
which is nearly identical with that of a work existing in 
the present day. 
For among the so-called Upa-pura«as 
we find one of considerable extent which bears the title 
Bhavishya-pur^;;a 
It is true that the passage quoted in 
the Dharma-sfttra from the Bhavishyat-purSwa is not to be 
found in the copy of the Bhavishya-purS«a which I have 
seen, and that the two titles differ by one letter. 
It is, 
therefore, not possible to assert positively that Apastamba 
knew the present Bhavishya-pura«a. Still considering the 
close resemblance of the two titles, and taking into account 
the generally admitted fact that most if not all Purawas 
have been remodelled and recast*, it seems to .me not
* Ap. Dh. 1, 6,19,13; 1, 10,29, 7. 
“ Ap. Dh. II, 9, 24, 6. ■
’ Aufrecht, Oxford Catalogue, p. 30.
‘ Max Muller, Hist. Anc. Sansk, Lit., pp. 40-42. 
Weber, Literaturgeschichte, 
pp. 206-208. 
Though I fully subscribe to the opiuion, held by the most illus-

--- PAGE 33 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
X X IX
unlikely that Apastamba’s authority was the original on 
which the existing Upa-purd«a is based. 
It is, of course, 
not admissible, at present, to found far-going speculations 
oh this hypothesis. 
But whether that hypothesis may 
prove tenable or not, the occurrence of a special Purawa 
title in our Dharma-shtra will remain of great interest both 
for the history of the Pura«as and of the Apastambiya- 
shtras.
There is yet another point on which Apastamba shows 
a remarkable agreement with a theory which is prevalent 
in later Sanskrit literature. 
He says (Dh. II, ii, 29, 
ii-ia ), ‘ The knowledge which 5 Cidras and women possess, 
is the completion of all study,’ and ‘ they declare that this 
knowledge is a supplement of the Atharva-veda.’ 
The 
commentator remarks with reference to these two Shtras, 
that ‘ the knowledge which 5 hdras and women possess,’ is 
the knowledge of dancing, acting, music, and other branches 
of the so-called Afthajastra, the science of useful arts and 
of trades, and that the object of the Shtras is to forbid 
the study of such subjects before the acquisition of sacred 
learning. 
His interpretation is, without doubt, correct, as 
similar sentiments are expressed byother teachers in parallel 
passages. But, if it is accepted, Apastamba’s remark that
trious Sanskritists, that, in general, the existing Pura/ias are not identical with 
the works designated by that title in Vedic works, still I cannot believe that 
they are altogether independent of the latter. 
Nor can I agree to the assertion 
that the Purdwas known to us, one and all, are not older than the tenth or 
eleventh century a. n. 
One important fact bearing on the latter point may be 
mentioned here, viz. that the poet Edna, who wrote shortly after 600 a. d., in 
the ^rihaisha^arita, orders his Paurauika to recite the Pavanaprokta-purana, i. e. 
the VSyu-pur^ia (Srlharshaiarita, p. 61, Calcutta ed.) Dr. Hall, the discoverer 
of the life of Srtharsha, read in his copy Yavanaprokta-purana, a title which, 
as he remarks, might suggest the idea that Bana knew the Greek epic poetry. 
But a comparison of the excellent Ahm'addbSd and Benares Devanagart MSS. 
and of the Kasmlr iSdrada copies shows that the correct reading is the one 
given above. 
The earlier history of the Purdnas, which as yet is a mystery, 
will only be cleared up when a real history of the orthodox Hindu sects, 
especially of the Sivites and Vishnuites, has been written. . It will, then, pro­
bably become apparent that the origin of these sects reaches back far beyond 
the rise of Buddhism and Jainism. 
It will also be proved that the orthodox 
sects used Puranas as text books for popular readings, the PuranapaiAana of 
our days, and that some, at least, of the now existing Purd/<as are the latest 
recensions of those mentioned jn Vedic books.

--- PAGE 34 ---
X X X
a p a s t a m b a .
‘ the knowledge of 5 (idras and women is a supplement 
of the Atharva-veda,’ proves that he knew the division of 
Hindu learning which is taught in Madhushdana Sarasvati’s 
Prasthinabheda \ For Madhushdana allots to each Veda 
an ■Upa-veda or supplementary Veda, and asserts that the 
Upa-veda of the Atharva-veda is the Artharastra. 
The 
agreement of Apastamba with the modern writers on this 
point, furnishes, I think, an additional argument that he 
•belongs to the later Vedic schoolmen.
In addition to this information regarding the relative 
position of the Apastambiya school in ancient Sanskrit 
literature, we possess some further statements as to the 
part of India to which it belongs, and these, as it happens, 
are of great importance for fixing approximately the period 
in which the school arose. 
According to the BrahmanicaL 
tradition, which is supported by a hint contained in the 
Dharma-sfitra and by information derivable from inscrip­
tions and the actual state of things in modern India, the 
Apastambiyas belong to Southern India, and their founder 
probably was a native of or resided in the A n d h ra country. 
The existence of this tradition, which to the present day 
prevails among the learned Brahmans of Western India 
and Benares, may be substantiated by^a passage from the 
above-mentioned commentary of the A^arawavyfiha^, which,
• Weber, Ind. Stud. I, 1-24.
^ Xaranavydhabhashya, fol. 15* 1. 4 seqq.:—
(?) I 
^ T W ftfW H T T T 
I 
^ 
I
mu
mn (sic) 
I
^ W R sn fw fT F i; iittii
:prraT[5n^]Tnft 
in^r i
’a 
ii^ii
^
 
intT 
\
II d II

--- PAGE 35 ---
IN TR O D U C T IO N .
X X X I
though written in barbarous Sanskrit, and of quite modern 
origin, possesses great interest, because its description of 
i the geographical distribution of the Vedas and Vedic 
schools is not mentioned elsewhere. 
The verses from 
a work entitled Maharwava, which are quoted there, 
state that the earth, i. e. India, is divided into two equal 
halves by the river Narmada (Nerbudda), and that the 
) school of Apastamba prevails in the southern half (ver. a). 
It is further alleged (ver. 6) that the Ya,fixr-veda of Tittiri 
and the Apastambiya school are established in the Andhra 
country and other parts of the south and south-east up to 
the mouth of the Godavari (godasagara-^vadhi). According 
to the Mahar«ava the latter river marks, therefore, the 
northern frontier of the territory occupied by the Apa- 
stambiyas, which comprises the MarA^/ia and Ki.uara dis­
tricts of the Bombay Presidency, the greater part of the 
Nizdm’s dominions, and the Madras Presidency, with the 
exception of the northern Sirkirs and the western coast. 
This allegation agrees, on the whole, with the actual facts 
which have fallen under my observation. A great number 
of the Dej-astha-brdhmawas in the NSsik, *Pu«a, Ahmad- 
nagar, Sdtfira, ShoMpur, and Kolhapur districts, and of the' 
K&«ard or Kar/i^taka-hrahma/ias in the Belgam, DhcLrv4</, 
Kald^/ghi, and Karv^d collectorates, as well as a smaller
[ftp] 'atwj 
%iTT UMU
(sic) i
KfiTiff 
v f if f m n?,u
(sic) i
(sic) 
«i9 ll
*qm 
nfwfffin iitu
[\) 
(sic) i
nfilfSTlT IKMl
inmi

--- PAGE 36 ---
XXXll
APASTAMBA.
number among the ^ittapdvanas of the Konkawa are Apa- 
stambiyas. 
Of the Nizam’s dominions and the Madras 
Presidency I possess no local knowledge. 
But I can say 
that I have met many followers of Apastamba among the 
Telingana-brahma«as settled in Bombay, and that the fre­
quent occurrence of MSS. containing the Shtras of the 
Apastambiya school in the Madras Presidency proves that 
the Kara.7ta there must count many adherents. On the other 
hand, I have never met with any Apastambiyas among the 
ancient indigenous subdivisions of the Brahmanical com­
munity dwelling north of the Maraf/ik country and north 
of the NarmadS,. 
A few Brdhmawas of this school, no 
doubt, are scattered over Gujarat and Central fndia, and 
others are found in the great places of pilgrimage in Hin­
dustan proper. The former mostly have immigrated during 
the last century, following the Marat/i^ chieftains who con­
quered large portions of those countries, or have been 
imported in the present century by the Mara^/<:a rulers 
of Gwalior, Indor, and Baroda. 
The settlers in Benares, 
Mathura, and other sacred cities also, have chiefly come in 
modern times, and not unfrequently live on the bounty of 
the Marat/ia princes. 
But all of them consider themselves 
and are considered by the Brahma«as, who are indigenous 
in those districts and towns, as aliens, with whom inter­
marriage and commensality are not permitted. 
The indi­
genous sections of the Br4hma«as of Gu^arS,t, such as the 
Nagaras, Khe^/avals, Bhargavas, Kapilas, and MotiHs, 
belong, if they are adherents of the Ya^ur-veda, to the_ 
Madhyandina or KA«va schools of the White Ya^ir-veda. 
The same is the case with the Br&hma^as of Rd^putdna, 
Hindustan, and thfe Pan^ab. 
In Central India, too, the 
White Ya^r-veda prevails; but, besides the two schools 
mentioned above, there are still some colonies of Maitraya- 
«iyas or M^navas^. 
It seems, also, that the restriction of 
the Apastambiya school to the south of India, or rather to 
those subdivisions of the Brahmanical community which
^ See BhaCi D%?, Journ. Bombay Br. Roy. As. Soc. X, 40. The Maitraya/tlyas 
in Gu^arSt, of whom the Xara«avyflha speaks, have died out.

--- PAGE 37 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
X X X l l l
for a. long time have been settled in the south and are 
generally considered as natives of the south, is not of 
recent date. 
For it is a significant fact that the numerous 
ancient landgrants which have been found all over India 
indicate exactly the same state of things. 
I am not aware 
that on any grant issued by a king of a northern dynasty 
•to Brihma«as who are natives of the northern half of 
India, an Apastambiya is mentioned as donee. But among 
the southern landgrants there are several on which the 
name of the school- appears. 
Thus in a jisana of king 
Harihara of Vidyanagara, dated 5 aka sa?«vat 1317 or 
.1395-9^ A.,D.,,one of the recipients of the royal bounty 
is ‘ the learned Ananta Dikshita, son of RS,mabha#?a, chief 
of the Apastambya (read Apastambiya) ^ikha, a scion of 
the Vasish^/za gotra k’ Again, on an ancient set of plates 
written in the characters which usually are called cave- 
characters, and issued by the Pallava king Sizzzhavarman II, 
we find among the donees five Apastambhiya ^ Brihmawas, 
who, together with a Hairazzyakesa, a Va^saneya, and 
a Sdma-vedi, received the village of Mangadur, in Vengo- 
rash/ra®. 
This inscription is, to judge from the characters, 
thirteen to fourteen hundred years old, and on this account 
a very important witness for the early existence of the 
Apastambiyas in Southern India.
Under the circumstances just mentioned, a casual remark 
made by Apastamba, in describing the S'r^ddhas or funeral 
oblations, acquires considerable importance. He says (Dh. 
II, 7, 17,17) that the custom of pouring water in the hands 
of Br^hmazzas invited to a S'rAddha prevails among the 
northerners, and he indicates thereby that he himself 
does not belong to the north of India. 
If this statement 
is taken together with the above-stated facts, which tend
* Colebrooke, Essays, II, p. 264, ver. 24 (Madrjis ed.)
“ Apastambhiya for Apastambiya may be a mistake. 
But it ought to be 
doted that Devapala’s commentary on the KaZ^aka Grihya-sutra has A pa- 
stambha for Apastamba.
* lad. Ant. V, 135. Mr. Fleet informs me that an unpublished grant of the 
Eastern Chalukya king Vinaydditya II (ninth century a. d.) mentions a number 
of A-pastamblyas as donees.
[2]

--- PAGE 38 ---
X X X IV
A P A S T A M B A .
to show that the Apastambiyas were and are restricted to 
} the south of India, the most probable construction which 
I can be put on it is that Apastamba declares himself to be 
a southerner. 
There is yet another indication to the same 
effect contained in the Dharma-sutra. 
It has been pointed 
out above that the recension of the Taittiriya Ara«yaka 
which Apastamba recognises is that called the A ndhra 
text or the version current in the Andhra country, by 
which term the districts in the south-east of India between 
the Godavari and the Krfshwi have to be understood^. 
Now it seems exceedingly improbable that a Vedic teacher 
would accept as authoritative any other version of a sacred 
work except that which was current in his native country. 
It would therefore follow, from the adoption of an Andhra 
text by Apastamba, that he was born in that country, or, 
at least, had resided there so long as to have become natu­
ralised in it. 
With respect to this conclusion it must also 
be kept in mind that the above-quoted passage from the 
M ahirw ava particularly specifies the A ndhra country 
(andhradi) as the seat of the Apastambiyas. 
It may be 
that this is due to an accident. 
But it seems to me more 
probable that the author of the Mahar«ava wished to mark 
the Andhra territory as the chief and perhaps as the ori­
ginal residence of the Apastambiyas.
This discovery has, also, a most important bearing on the 
question of the antiquity of the school of Apastamba. 
It 
fully confirms the result of the preceding enquiry, viz. that 
the Apastambiyas are one of the later A'araz/as. 
For the 
south of India and the nations inhabiting it, such as 
Kalingas, Dravi^/as, A ndhras, A’ olas, and Pa«a?yas, 
do not play any important part in the ancient Brahmanical 
traditions and in the ancient history of India, the centre of 
both of which lies in the north-west or at least north of the
I
Vindhya range. 
Hitherto it has not been shown that the 
south and the southern nations are mentioned in any of the ‘ 
Vedic Sa;«hit4s. 
In the Br&hmawas and in the Sfitras 
they do occur, though they are named rarely and in a not
* See Cunningham^ Geography, p. 527 seqq.; Burnell, South Ind. Pal., p. 14,

--- PAGE 39 ---
INTRODUCTION.
X X X V
complimentary manner. 
Thus the Aitareya-brahma«a 
gives the names of certain degraded, barbarous tribes, and 
among them, that of the Andhras^, in whose country, as 
has been shown, the Apastambiyas probably originated. 
'Again, Baudhayana, in his Dharma-sQtra I, i, quotes some 
verses in which it is said that he who visits the K-alingas 
must purify himself by the performance of certain sacrifices 
in order to become fitT for again associating with Aryans. 
The sarrie author, also, mentions distinctive forbidden 
practices (a^ara) prevailing in the south (loc. cit.) 
Further, 
P^wini’s grammatical Sfltras and Kityayana’s V&rttikas 
thereon contain rules regarding several words which pre­
suppose an acquaintance with the south and the kingdoms 
which flourished there. 
Thus Pfi«ini, IV, a, 98, teaches the 
formation of dakshiwatya in the sense of ‘ belonging to or 
living in the south or the Dekhan,’ and a Vdrttika of 
KSty^yana on Pawini, IV, 1, 175, states the words Kola. 
and Paw^/ya are used as names of the princes ruling over 
the Ko\a and Vandya countries, which, as is known from 
. history, were situated in the extreme south of India. 
The 
other southern nations and a fuller description of the south 
occur first in the Mahlibh^rata 
While an acquaintance 
with the south can thus be proved only by a few books 
belonging to the later stages of Vedic literature, several of 
the southern kingdoms are named already in the oldest 
historical documents. 
Ajoka in his edicts®, which date 
from the second half of the third century B. C., calls the 
A"olas, Vandyas, and the K etalaputra his pratyantas 
(pa>^antS} or neighbours. 
The same monarch informs us 
also that he conquered the province of K alin ga and an­
nexed it to his kingdom ^ 
The early civilisation of the 
same province is also attested by the Khawrt^giri inscrip­
tion of M ahira^a. A ira or Khdra®, which, if it is not
‘ Aitareya-brihma/ia VII, i8.
“ Lassen, Ind. Alterthumskunde, I, 684, 2nd ed.
“ Edict III, Cunningham, Corp. Inscr. Ind., vol. i, plate V ; Lassen, Ii)d, 
Alterthumskunde, II, 252, 2nd ed.
* Edict X III; -Lassen, loc. cit., II, 256.
® Cunningham, Corp. Inscr. Ind., vol. i, plate X V II.
C 2

--- PAGE 40 ---
X X X V l
A P A S T A M B A .
considerably older than Axoka’s edicts, is certainly not 
younger. 
Numerous inscriptions in the Buddhistic caves 
of Western India, as well as coins, prove the existence 
during the last century before and the first centuries after 
the beginning of our era of a powerful empire of the 
A ndhras, the capital of which was probably situated near 
the modern Amaravati on the lower 'K.rish.nk h 
The 
princes of the latter kingdom, though great patrons of the 
Buddhist monks, appear to have been Brahmanists or 
adherents of the ancient orthodox faith which is founded 
on the Vedas. For one of them is called V ed isiri (vedbri), 
‘ he whose glory is the Vedi,’ and another Y ah asiri (ya^na- 
jri), ‘ he whose glory is the sacrifice,’ and a very remark­
able inscription on the Nan^ghat^ contains a curious 
catalogue of sacrificial fees paid to priests (dakshi«d) for 
the performance of 5'rauta sacrifices. 
For the third and 
the later centuries of our era the information regarding 
Southern India becomes fuller and fuller. 
Very numerous’ 
inscriptions, the accounts of the Buddhist chroniclers of 
Ceylon, of the Greek geographers, and of the Chinese 
pilgrims, reveal the existence and give fragments, at least, 
of the history of many kingdoms in the south, and show 
that their civilisation was an advanced one, and did not 
differ materially from that of Northern India.
There can be no doubt that the south of India has been 
conquered by the Aryans, and has been brought within the 
pale of Brahmanical civilisation much later than India 
north of the Vindhya range. 
During which century pre­
cisely that conquest took place, cannot be determined for 
the present. 
But it would seem that it happened a con­
siderable time before the Vedic period came to an end, and 
it certainly was an accomplished fact, long before the 
authentic history of India begins at the end of the fourth
* See Bhdurfarkar, Report of Or. Cong., pp. 306-354, and especially p. 348 
seqq. 
The existence of the Andhra kingdom is also attested by Pliny, Hist. 
Nat. VI, 23.
^ The Ninaghat is the pass leading from the Konka»a through the Sahyadri 
range to the town of Gunlr. The inscription in question has as yet been neither 
published nor deciphered completely.

--- PAGE 41 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
XXX vn
century B .C . 
It may be added that a not inconsiderable 
period must have elapsed after the conquest of the south, 
before the Aryan civilisation had so far taken root in the 
conquered territory, that, in its turn, it could become a 
centre of Brahmanical activity, and that it could produce 
new Vedic schools.
These remarks will suffice to show that a Vedic Tarawa 
which had its origin in the south, cannot rival in antiquity 
those whose seat is in the north, and that all southern schools 
must belong to a comparatively recent period of Vedic his­
tory. For this reason, and because the name of Apastamba 
and of the Apastambiyas is not mentioned in any Vedic 
work, not even in a Kalpa-sutra, and its occurrence in the 
older grammatical books, written before the beginning of 
our era, is doubtful 
it might be thought advisable to fix 
the term inus a quo for the composition of the Apastam- 
biya-sutras about or shortly before the beginning of the era, 
when the Brahmanist A ndhra kings held the greater part 
of the south under their sway. 
It seems to me, however, 
that such a hypothesis is not tenable, as there are several 
points w h ic h indicate that the school and its writings 
possess a much higher antiquity. For, firstly, fhe Dharma- 
sfitra, contains a remarkable passage in which its author 
states that ^vetaketu, one of the Vedic teachers who is 
mentioned in the Aatapatha-brMima«a and in the KJikn- 
dogya Upanishad, belongs to the A varas, to the men of 
later, i.e. of his own times. 
The passage referred to, Dh. 
I, a, 5, 4-6, has been partly quoted above in order to show 
that Apastamba laid no claim to the title ^zshi,- or seer of 
revealed texts. 
It has been stated that according to Sfitra 
4, ‘ No 7?fshis are born among the A varas, the men of later 
ages, on account of the prevailing transgression of the rules 
of studentship;’ and that according to Sfitra 5, ‘ Some in 
their new birth become similar to 7?/shis by their know­
ledge of the Veda (jrutarshi) through a residue of merit
* The name Apastamba occurs only in the g a« a vidddi, which belongs to 
Pa«ini IV, 1, 104, and the text of this ga«a is certain only for the times of
the Kasika, about 800 a . d *

--- PAGE 42 ---
X X X V III
a p a s t a m b a .
acquired in former existences/ 
In order to give an illus­
tration of the latter case, the author adds in SOtra 6, ‘ Like 
^ vetaketu/ 
The natural and, in my opinion, the only 
admissible interpretation of these words is, that Apastamba 
considers 6'vetaketu to be one of the A varas, who by 
virtue of a residue of merit became a ,Srutarshi. 
This is 
also the view of the commentator Haradatta, who, in eluci­
dation of Sutra 6, quotes the following passage from the 
JCMndogya Upanishad (VI, i, j-2):
‘ I. Forsooth there lived 5 vetaketu, a descendant of 
Aruwa. 
His father spake unto him, “‘O S'vetaketu, dwell 
as a student (with a teacher); for, verily, dear child, no one 
in our family must neglect the study of the Veda and 
become, as it were, a Brahmawa in name only.”
‘ 2. Forsooth he (S'vetaketu) was initiated at the age of 
twelve years, and when twenty-four years old. he had 
learned all the Vedas ; he thought highly of himself and 
was vain of his learning and arrogant.’
There can be no doubt that this is the person and the 
story referred to in the Dharma-shtra. For the fact which 
the Upanishad mentions, that 5 vetaketu learned all the 
Vedas in twelve years, while the Smr/tis declare forty- 
eight years to be necessary for the accomplishment of 
that task, makes Apastamba’^ illustration intelligible and 
appropriate. 
A good deal more is told in the KM n- 
dogya Upanishad about this 5vetaketu, who is said to 
have been the son of Uddalaka and the grandson of Aruwa 
(aruweya). 
The same person is also frequently mentioned 
in the 5 atapatha-brahma«a. In one passage of the la.ttcr 
work, which has been translated by Professor Max Miiller^, 
it is alleged that he was a contemporary of Y a^ h avalkya, 
the promulgator of the White Ya^ur-veda, and of the learned 
;<king Uanaka of Videha, who asked him about the mean­
ing of the Agnihotra sacrifice. 
Now, as has been shown 
above, Apastamba knew and quotes the White Ya^ur-veda 
and the 5 atapatha-brahma?/a. 
The passage of the latter 
work, which he quotes, is even taken from the same book
‘ Hist. Anc. Sausk. Lit., p. .j2i se<j.

--- PAGE 43 ---
IN TR O D U C T IO N .
X X X IX
.in which the story about 5 vetaketu and (7anaka occurs. 
The fact, therefore, that Apastamba places a teacher whom 
he must have considered as a contemporary of the pro­
mulgator of the White Ya^ur-veda among the Avaras, 
is highly interesting and of some importance for the history 
of Vedic literature. 
On the one hand it indicates that 
Apastamba cannot have considered the White Ya.^ur-veda, 
such as it has been handed down in the schools of the 
KAwvas and MAdhyandinas, to belong to a remote 
antiquity. On the other hand it makes the inference which 
otherwise might be drawn from the southern origin of 
the Apastambiya school and from the non-occurrence of 
its name in the early grammatical writings, viz. that its 
founder lived at the beginning of, or in the first century B .C ., 
extremely improbable. 
For even if the term Avara is 
not interpreted very strictly and allowed to mean not 
exactly a contemporary, but a person of com paratively 
recent times, it will not be possible to place between 
^■vetaketu and Apastamba a longer interval than, at the 
utmost, two or three hundred years. 
.Svetaketu and 
Y A ^ S a v a lk y a w o u ld a c c o r d in g ly xfind their p la c e s in the 
third or fourth century B.C., and the 6'atapatha-brahma«a 
as well as all other Vedic works, which narrate incidents 
from their lives, must have been composed or at least 
edited still later. 
Though little is known regarding the 
history of the Vedic texts, still it happens that we possess 
some information regarding the texts in question. For we 
know from a statement made by Katyayana in a Varttika 
on Pawini IV, 3, 105, and from Patail^ali’s commentary on 
his words that the BrAhmawa proclaimed by Y A ^ h a v a lk y a , 
i. e. the 6'atapatha-brAhmawa of the White Ya^ur-veda, was 
considered to have been promulgated by one of the 
Ancients, in the times of these two writers, i.e. in the 
fourth and second centuries B.C.^
> This fampus Varttika has been interpreted in v.'irioiis w ays; see Max Miiller, 
Hist. Anc.Sansk.Lit., pp. 360-364; Goldstiicker, Pawini, pp. 132-140; ^Yebe^, 
Ind. Stud- V, 65-74; NJII, 443, 444. 
As regards the explanation of Katya- 
yana’s and Pataflgali’s words, I side with Kaiyata and Professor Goldstiicker, 
But I am unable to follow the latter in the inferences which he draws from the

--- PAGE 44 ---
xl
A p a s t a m b a .
These considerations will show that it is necessary to 
allow for Apastamba a much higher antiquity than the 
first century B .C .
The same inference may also be drawn from another 
series of facts, viz. the peculiarities of the language of his 
Sutras. The latter are very considerable and very I'emark- 
able. 
They may be classed under four heads. 
In the 
Apastambiya Dharma-sfltra we have, firstly, archaic words 
and forms either occurring in other Vedic writings or 
formed according to the analogy of Vedic usage ; secondly, 
-ancient forms and worSs specially prescribed by Pdwini, 
' which have not been traced except in Apastamba’s SCltras ; 
thirdly, words and forms which are both against Vedic 
usage and against Pd/zini’s rules, and which sometimes 
find their analogies in the ancient Prakrits; and fourthly, 
anomalies in the construction of sentences. 
To the first 
class belong, kravyddas, I, 7, 21, 15, carnivorous, formed 
according to-the analogy of r/^ddas; the frequent use 
of the singular ddra, e.g. II, i, i, 17-18, a wife, instead of 
the plural ddrd/z/ saldvrzkt, I, 3, 10, 17, for sdlavrzki ; 
the substitution of I for r in pleiikha, I, ii, 31, 16; occa­
sional offences against the rules of internal and external 
Sandhi, e.g. in agrzhyamanakdra«a/<!, I, 4^ 12, 8; in
fact, that Katyiyana and Patan^ali declare Yag-iiavalkya and other sages to be 
as ancient as those whose Bi ahmanas and Kalpas are designated by the plural 
of adjectives formed by the addition of the affix in to the names of the promul­
gators. 
Though Pawini asserts, IV , 3,105, that only those Brahmanas which 
are known under appellations like Bhallavinai, KaushitakinaA, &c., have been 
proclaimed by an cien t sages, and though Katyayana and the author of the 
Great Commentary add that this rule does not hold good in the case of 
the work called Yagnavalkani Brahmanani, it does not necessarily follow, as 
Professor Goldstiicker thinks, that an extraordinarily long interval lies between 
Panini and Kdtyayana— so long a period that what Pa/rini considered to be 
recent had become ancient in Katyayana’s time. 
Professor Weber has rightly 
objected to this reasoning. 
The difference between the statements of the two 
grammarians may have been caused by different traditfons prevailing in different 
schools, or by an oversight on the part of Pa^iini, which, as the scene of 
Yagilavalkya’s activity seems to have been Videha in eastern India, while Pa/dni 
belonged to the extreme north-west, is not at all improbable. A s regards the 
two dales, 1 place, following, with Professor Max Muller, the native tradition, 
K^ty^ana in the fourth century b.c., and Patafigali, with Professors Goldstiicker, 
Kern, and Bhdndarkar, between 178-140 B.c.

--- PAGE 45 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
xll'
skuptv^, I, I I , 31, 24, absolutive of skubh;. in piduna,
I, I, 2, 13; in adhajanajdyin, I, i, 2, 2,1; and in sarvato- 
' 
peta, I, 6, 19, 6 ; the neglect of the rule requiring v/-?ddhi
in the first syllable of the name Pushkarasadi, 1, 10, 28,1; 
the irregular instrumentals vidya, I, ii, 30, 3, for vidyaya, 
and ni/^jreyasa, II, 7, 16, 2, for ni/zireyasena; the 
nominative dual avam, I, 7, 20, 6, for dvam ; and the 
potentials in ita, such as prakshdiayita, I, i, 2, 28; abhi- 
prasdrayita, I, i, 2, 28, &c.
Among the words mentioned by Pawini, but not traced 
except in the Dharma-sutra, may be enumerated the verb 
str2h, to do damage, I, ii, 31, 9; the verb ^r/nkh, to 
sneeze, from which .rr/nkhanika, I, 5, 16, 4, and ni/«- 
jrznkhana, 1,2, 5» 9j are derived; and the'houn veda- 
dhyaya, I, 9, 24, 6; II, 4, 8, 5, in the sense of a student 
of the Veda. Words offending against rules given by Pawini, 
without being either archaic or Prakritic, are e. g. sar- 
vdnnin, I, 6, 18, 31^, one who eats anybody’s food, which, 
according to Piwini V, 2, 9, should be sarvannina; 
sarpajirshin, I, 5, 17, 39; annasaw/skartrz, a cook, II, 
3, 6, 16; dhdrmya, righteous, for dharm ya I, 2, 7, 21, 
and elsewhere; divitrz, a gambler, II, 10, 25, 13, for 
devitrf, the very remarkable form prajhAti, I, 1, 4, 1, for 
pr^^ndti, which finds an analogy in yi^ h a ; and the 
curious compounds avahgagra, I, i, 2, 38, paringfl- 
vritta, II, 3, 10, II, where the first parts show the forms 
of the nominative instead of the base, and pratisfirya- 
matsya/^, which as a copulative compound is without 
analogy. 
The irregular forms caused by the same ten­
dencies as those which effected the formation of the 
Prakrit languages, are, aviprakramiwa, II, 2, 5, 2, for 
aviprakrama?/a, where an a standing in thesi has been 
changed to i; skmvritWh, II, 3, 6, 14, sa;«vartete, 
II) 5) II, 20, and pary^nta, I, 3, 9, 21 (compare Mardf/ri 
a;;;t for anta/^), in each of which a standing before a 
nasal has been lengthened ; a;/ika, I, 6, 19, i, the initial 
a of which stands for ri, if it really has the meaning of 
r/«ika, as some commentators asserted; anulepa«a, I, 3,
I I , 13; I, iij 32, 5, with the Prakritic change of na to

--- PAGE 46 ---
xlii
A P A S T A M B A ,
«a; vyupa^dva, I, 2, 8, 15, with va for pa; rztve for 
rftv y e , where y sterns to have been absorbed by the 
following e; apa^^ayita, I, ii, 32^ 16, for a p ijray ita , 
and bh atrzvyatikram a,, I, 10, 28, 29> whete r has been 
assimilated to the preceding, or has b^en lost before the 
following consonant. 
The irregularities in the construction 
are less frequent. But in two Sutras, I, 3,10, 2, and 1,3 ,1 1, 
21, some words which ought to stand in the locative case 
have the terminations of the nominative, and it looks as 
if the author had changed, his mind about the construction 
which he meant to use. 
In a third passage, II, lo, 26, 20, 
j-ij-na^^/zedanaw sav^zshawasya, the adjective which 
is intended to qualify the noun jijn a has been placed in 
the genitive case, though the noun' has been made the 
first part of a compound.
The occurrence of so many irregularities^ in so small 
a treatise as .the Dharma-sfitra is, proves clearly that the 
author did not follow Pd;/ini’s grammar, and makes it v e r y 
unlikely that he knew it at all. 
If the anomalous forms 
used by Apastamba all agreed with the usage of the 
other Sutrakaras, known to us, it m.ight be contended that, 
though acquainted with the rules of the great grammarian, 
he had elected to adopt by preference the language of the 
Vedic schools. 
But this is by no means the case. 
The 
1 majority of the irregular forms are peculiar to Apastamba. 
As it is thus not probable that Apastamba employed his 
peculiar expressions in obedience to the tradition of the 
Vedic schools or of his particular school, he must have 
either been unacquainted with Pa;nni or have considered 
his teachings of no great importance. 
In other words, he • 
must either have lived earlier than Pa«ini or before P^wini’s , 
grammar had acquired general fame throughout In'dia^ and 
become the standard authority for Sanskrit authors. 
In 
either case so late.-a date as 100 B. C. or the first century 
B .C . would not fit. For Patan^ali’s Mahabhashya furnishes*
* Many more miyht be collected from the other divisions of the body of 
Sutras. 1 have noticed ttem especially in the Grihya-shtra, the only part, 
besides the Dharma-shtra, which 1 have read carefully. 
• 
*

--- PAGE 47 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
xliii
abundant proof that at the time of its coriiposition, in the 
. second century B. C., Pawini’s grammar occupied a position 
' similar to that which it holds now, and has held- since the 
beginning of our era in the estimation of the learned of 
India. 
On linguistic grounds it seems to me Apastamba 
I cannot be placed later than the third century B. C., and 
if his statement regarding .SVetaketu is taken into account, 
the lower limit for the composition of his SOtras must be 
put further back by 150-200 years.
But sufficient space ha? already been allotted to these 
attempts to assign a date to the founder of the Apastambiya 
school, the results of which, in the present state of our 
knowledge of the ancient -history of India, must remain,
I fear, less certain and less precise than is desirable. Xt. 
now is necessary to say, in conclusion, a few words about 
the history of the text of the Dharma-shtra, and about its 
commentary, the U^^vala V rftti of Haradatta. 
The 
oldest writer with a known date who quotes the Apastam- 
biya Dharma-shtra is Vi^udnejvara, who composed the 
Mitdkshard, the well-known commentary on YS^navalk^'a’s 
Dharma-jfistra during the reign of the .A'alukya king Vikra- 
maditya VI, of Kalyawa towards the end of the eleventh 
century. 
From that time downwards Apastamba is quoted 
by almost every writer on law. 
But the whole text, such 
as it is piven in my edition Vis vouched for only by the 
commentator Haradatta, who probably wrote his U.g^'^ala 
Vw'tti in the sixteenth century A .D . 
Haradatta is very 
reticent about himself and about his circumstances V 
But 
his date may be inferred from the fact that the oldest 
writer on law quoting his opinions is Mitramura, the author 
of the Viramitrodaya, who dedicated his learned treatise
* ApastambiyaDharma-sfltram, Part I, Bombay, 1868; Part II, Bombay, 1871.
’ It seems, he^wever, not doubtful that Haradatta, the author of the 'Ug'^vala, 
is the samejterson who wrote the A n a k u la V r i tti on the Apastambiya Gn'hya- 
sdtra, an explanation qf the Apastambiya Gn'hya-mantras (see Burnell, Ind. 
Ant. 1,61, which I have not seen, and (lie M ita k s h a r i V r it t i on the Dharma- 
sfltia of Gautama. 
From the occurrence in the latter work of Tam il words, 
added in explanation of Sanskrit expressions, it follows that Haradatta was a 
native'of the south of India. I am not in a position to decide if our author also 
wrote the Padarflail^ ari V r itti on the Kasika of Vamana and Gayaditya.

--- PAGE 48 ---
xliv
A P A ST A M U A ,
on law to the Bundeli chief Virasiw/ha of Orkhk, the 
murderer of Akbar’s friend Abul Fazl, and who wrote, 
therefore, in the beginning of the seventeenth century A . D. 
Haradatta was, however, not the first commentator of the 
Dharma-sutra. He frequently quotes the opinions of several 
predecessors whom he designates by the general expressions 
anya/i or apara/^, i. e. another (writer). 
The fact that the 
U^;^ala was preceded by earlier commentaries which pro­
tected the text from corruption, also speaks in favour of 
the authenticity of the latter, which is further attested by 
the close agreement of the Hirawyakeji Dharma-sutra, 
mentioned above.
As regards the value of the \j£'£ya\k for the explanation 
of Apastamba’s text, it certainly belongs to the best com­
mentaries existing. 
Haradatta possessed • in the older 
V r fttis abundant and good materials on which he could 
draw ; he himself apparently was well versed in Hindu law 
and in Sanskrit grammat, and distinguished by sobriety 
and freedom from that vanity which induces many Indian 
commentators to load their works with endless and useless 
quotations. 
His explanations, therefore, can mostly be 
followed without hesitation, and, even when they appear 
unacceptable, they deserve careful consideration.

--- PAGE 49 ---
I N T R O D U C T I O N
TO
G A U T A M A .
C o m p a r e d with the information collected above regard­
ing the origin and the history of Apastamba’s Dharma- 
sutra, the facts which can be brought to bear on Gautama’s 
Institutes are scanty and the conclusions deducible from 
them somewhat vague. 
There are only two points, which, ' 
it seems to me, can be proved' satisfactorily, viz! the con­
nexion of the work with the Sama-veda and a Gautama 
.^ara«a^and its priority to the other four Dharma-sutras 
which we still possess. 
To go.further appears for the' 
present impossible, because very little is known regard­
ing the history of the schools studying the Sama-veda, 
and because the Dharmaj'astra not only furnishes very few 
data regarding the works on which it is based, but seems 
also, though not to any great extent, to have been tampered 
with by interpolators.
As regards its origin, it was again Professor Max Muller, 
who, in the place of the fantastic statements of a fabri­
cated tradition, according to which the author of the 
Dharma^astra is the son or grandson of the sage Utathya, 
and the grandson or great-grandson of U^anas or .Sukra, the 
regent of the planet Venus, and the book possessed generally 
binding force in the second or Treti Yuga^, first put forward 
a rational explanation which, since, has been adopted by 
all other writers on Sanskrit literature. 
He says, Hist. 
Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 134, ‘ Another collection of Dharma- 
siltras, which, however, is liable to critical doubts, belongs
‘ Manu III. 16; Colebrooke, Digest of Hindu Law, Preface, p. xvii 
(Madras ed.); Anantayagwan in Dr. Burnell’s Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS., 
p. 57 ; Pdr^ara, Dharmasdstra I,’ 22 (Calcutta ed.)

--- PAGE 50 ---
xlvi
GAU TAM A,
I to the Gautamas, a K2X2lHZ, of the Sama-veda.’ 
The cor­
rectness of this assertion may be proved by the following 
arguments. {Gautama’s work, though called Dharma^astraoi 
or Institutes of the Sacred Law, closely resembles, both in 
form and contents, the Dharma-sutras or Aphorisms on the 
Sacred Law, which form part of the Kaipa-sutras of the 
Vedic schools of Baudhdyana, Apastamba,and Hirawyake^in. 
A s we know from the A'arawavyfiha, from the writings of 
the ancient grammarians, and from the numerous quotations 
in the Kaipa-sutras and other works on the Vedic ritual, 
that in ancient times the number of Vedic schools, most of 
which possessed S'rauta, Gr/hya, and Dharma-shtras, was 
exceedingly great, and that the books of many of them 
have either been lost or been disintegrated, the several 
parts being torn* out of their original connexion, it is not 
unreasonable to assume that the aphoristic law-book, 
usually attributed to the /?fshi Gautama, is in reality a 
manual belonging to a Gautama iiTarawa.l, This conjecture i 
gains considerably in probability, if the fact is taken into 
account that formerly a school of Sama-vedis, which bore 
the name of Gautama, actually existed.) It is mentioned 
in one of the redactions of the Aarawavyuha ^ as a sub­
division of the R 4«ayaniya school, t The Va7«ja-brihma«a 
of the Sama-veda, also, enumerates four members of the 
Gautama family among the teachers who handed down 
the third Veda, viz. G itrf Gautama, Sumjintra Bdbhrava 
Gautama, Sawkara Gautama, and Radha Gautama^, and 
the existing S’rauta and Grfhya-shtras frequently"appeal to 
the opinions of a Gautama and of a Sthavira Gautama 
It follows, therefore, that at least one, if not several Gau­
tama A'arawas, studied the S4ma-veda, and that, at the 
time when the existing SCitras of Ld^yAyana and Gobhila 
- were composed, Gautama 5 rauta and Grfhya-sfitras formed 
(part of the literature of the Sama-veda. 
The correctness-^
■ of the latter inference is further proved by Dr. Burnell’s
‘ Max Muller, Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 374.
’ See Burnell, Vamia-brahmana, pp. 7> 9<
* See the Petersburg Dictionary, s.v. Gautama; Weber, H ut. Ind. Lit., 
p. 77 (English ed.); Gobhila Grihya-sQtra III, lo, 6.

--- PAGE 51 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
xlvii
discovery of a Pitn'medha-sutra, which is ascribed to a 
teacher of the Sama-veda, called Gautama b 
’ 
The only link, therefore, which is wanting in order to 
I complete the chain of evidence regarding Gautama’s Apho­
risms on the sacred law, and to make their connexion with 
the Sama-veda perfectly clear, is the proof that they contain 
special references to the latter. 
As long as evidence on 
that point has not been furnished, it is always possible to l 
object, that, though the Gautama, Dharma^astra may have 
been the manual of a Vedic ^Tarawa, and though one or 
more Gautamas may have taught the ritual of the Sama- 
veda and have founded schools of Sama-vedis, still the 
Dharma^astra rmy have belonged to some other Veda,! 
because members of the Gautama family are also named as 
teachers in works belonging to other Vedas. It is, however 
not very difficult to show that the Gautama who composed 
our T)harmajastra was a S^ma-vedi. 
For, firstly, he has 
borrowed one entire chapter, the twenty-sixth, which con­
tains the description of the ’Krikk/ivas or difficult penances 
from the Sdmavidhana, one of the eight Brahmawas of the 
Sdma-veda 
The agreement of the two texts is complete 
except in the Mantras (Shtra 12) where invocations of 
several deities, which are not usually found in Vedic 
writings, have been introduced. Secondly, in the enumera­
tion of the purificatory texts, XIX, 12, Gautama shows a 
marked partiality for the Sama-veda. Among the eighteen 
special texts mentioned, we find no less than nine Samans. 
Some of the latter, like the Bn'hat, Rathantara, 6'yesh/'//a, 
and Mahddivakirtya chants, occur also in works belonging 
to the/?fg-veda and the Ya^ur-veda, and- are considered by 
BrdhmawaS of all schools to possess great efficacy. 
But 
others, such as the Purushagati, Rauhiwa, and MahdvairS^a 
Samans, have hitherto not been met with anywhere but 
in books belonging to the Sama-veda, and do not seem 
to have stood in general repute. 
Thirdly, in two pas­
sages, I, 50 and XXV, 8, the DharmaJastra prescribes the
* Weber, Hist. lud. Lit., p. 84, note 89 (English ed.) 
“ See below, pp, 292-296.

--- PAGE 52 ---
xlviii
GAUTAM A.
employment of five Vyahrftis, and mentions in the former 
Siitra, that the last Vyahriti is satyam, truth. 
Now in most 
Vedic works, three Vyihrftis only, bhu/i, bhuva//, sva/i, are 
mentioned ; sometimes, but rarely, four or seven occur. 
But in the Vyahn'ti Saman, as Haradatta points out 
five 
such interjections are used, and satyam is found am’ong 
them. 
It is, therefore, not doubtful, that Gautama in the 
above-mentioned passages directly borrows from the SS.ma- 
veda. 
These three facts, taken together, furnish, it seems 
to me, convincing proof that the author of our Dharmaj^stra 
was a Sama-vedi. 
If the only argument in favour of this, 
conclusion were, that Gautama appropriated a portion of 
the Samavidhana, it might be met by the fact that he has 
also taken some Shtras (XXV, i—6) from the Taittiriya 
^rawyaka. 
ButI his partiality for Samans as purificatory 
texts and the selection of the Vyahr/tis from the Vyahrfti 
Saman as part of the Mantras for the initiation (I, 50), one 
of the holiest and most important of the Brahmanical 
sacraments, cannot be explained on any other supposition 
than the one adopted above./
Though it thus appears that Professor Max Muller is 
right in declaring the Gautama Dharmaj'astra to belong to 
the Sama-veda, it is, for the present, not possible to posi­
tively assert, that it is the Dharma-sCitra of that Gautama 
Kz.xz.n2i, which according to the /Tarawavyhha, quoted in 
the S'abdakalpadruma of Radhdkanta, formed a sub­
division of the Rawaya/dyas. 
The enumeration of four' 
A/i’aryas, bearing the lamily-name Gautama, in the Yzmsz- 
brahmawa, and La^ayana’s quotations from two Gautamas, 
make it not unlikely, that ^several Gautama /tTarawas once 
existed among the Sama-vedi Brahma/^as, and we possess 
no means for ascertaining to which our Dharma^astra must 
be attributed. 
Further researches into the history of 4;he 
schools of the Sama-veda m.ust be awaited' until we can do 
more. 
Probably the living tradition of the Sdma-vedis of 
Southern India and new books from the South will clear up 
what at present remains uncertain.
‘ See Gautama I, 50, note.

--- PAGE 53 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
xlix
In concluding this subject I may state that Haradatta 
seems to have been aware of the connexion of Gautama’s 
law-book with the S&ma-veda, though he does not say it 
expressly. But he repeatedly and pointedly refers in his com­
mentary to the practices of the iiT^andogas^ a'nd quotes the 
Grzhya-shtra of the (JaiminiyasS who are a school of SSma- 
vedis, in explanation of several passages. Another southern 
author, Govindasv&min (if I understand the somewhat cor­
rupt passage correctly), states directly in his commentary 
on Baudhdyana I, i, ai, that the Gautamiya ’Dharma- 
.y^stra was originally studied by the iiT/iandogas alone 
In turning now to the second point, the priority of Gau­
tama to the other existing Dharma-sutras, I must premise 
that it is only necessary to take into account two of the 
latter, those of Baudhayana and Vasish^/^a. For, as has been 
shown above in the Introduction to Apastamba, the Sutras 
of the latter and those of Hirawyakeyin SatyS.sha^f//a are 
younger than Baudhayana’s. ^ The argurhents which allow 
us to place-Gautama before both Baudhdyana and Vasishif>^a 
are, that both" those authors quote Gautama as an authority 
on law, and that Baudhayana has transferred a whole 
chapter of the Dharmardstra to his work, which Vdsish/^a 
again has borrowed from him.V
As regards the case of Baudhayana, his references to 
Gautama are two, one of which can be traced in our 
Dharmajastra. 
In the discussion on the peculiar customs 
prevailing in the South and in the North of India (Baudh. 
Dh. I, I , 17-24) Baudhayana expresses himself as follows: [ c: 
‘ 17. There is a dispute regarding fivfe (practices) both in 
the South and in the North.
• 
‘ 18. We shall explain those (peculiar) to the South.
‘ 19. They are, to eat in the-company of an uninitiated
* A Grihya-sCitra of the Gaiminiyas has been discovered by Dr. Burnell with 
a commentary by S'rlnivasa. 
He thinks that the Gaiminiyas are a Sdtra-sakha 
of the Sa^yayana-Talavakaras.
® My transcript has been made from the MS. presented by D r. Burnell, the 
discoverer of the work, to the India Office Library. 
The passage runs as fol­
lows: Yatha va bodhayantyawi dharmasSstram kaisiid eva paTAyaraanam sar- 
vadhikaram bhavati tatha gautamiye gobhiliye (_?) iAandogair eva pa/Ayate || 
vasishrAam tu bahvn’Aair eya |1
W 
d

--- PAGE 54 ---
1
G A U T A M A .
person, to eat in the company of one's wife, to eat stale 
food, to marry the daughter of a maternal uncle or of a 
paternal aunt.
‘ 20. Now (the customs peculiar) to the North are, to 
deal in wool, to drink rum, to sell animals that have teeth 
in the upper and in the lower jaws, to follow tire trade of 
arms, and to go to sea.
‘ 31. He who follows (these practices) fn (any) other 
country than the one where they prevail commits sin.
‘ 33. Fer each of these practices (the rule of) the country 
should be (considered) the authority.
‘ 23. Gautam a declares that th at is false.
‘ 24. And one should not take heed of either (set of 
practices), because they are opposed to the tradition of 
those learned (in the sacred law ^),’
From this passage it appears that the Gautama Dharma- 
shtra, known to Baudhdyana, expressed an opinion adverse 
to the authoritativeness of local customs which might be 
opposed to the tradition of the .Sish^as, i. e. of those who 
really deserve to be called learned in the law. 
Our Gau­
tama teaches the same doctrine, as he says, XI, 30, ‘The 
laws of countries, castes, and families, which are not 
opposed to the (sacred) records, have also authority,’ 
-As clear as this reference, is the case in which BaudhS.- 
yana has borrowed a whole chapter of our Dharmaxastra. 
The chapter in question is the nineteenth, which in Gau­
tama’s work forms the introduction to the section on
infti 
mtii

--- PAGE 55 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
II
penances and expiation. 
It is reproduced with a nunaber 
of various readings ^ in the third Prajna of Baudhayana’s 
Dharma-sutra, where it forms the tenth and last Adhy^yaN 
/Its contents, and especially its first Shtra, which connects 
the section on penances with the preceding ones on the law 
of castes and orders, make it perfectly clear that its proper 
position can only be at the beginning of the rules on ex­
piation,, not in the middle of the discussion, as Baudhayana 
places it 
This circumstance alone would be sufficient to 
prove that Baudhdyana is the borrower, not Gautama, even 
if the name of the latter did not occur in Baudhayana’s 
Dharma-shtra. But the character of many of Baudh^yana’s 
Readings, especially of those in Sutras 2, lo, i i, 13, and 15, 
which, though supported by all the MSS. and Govindasva- 
min’s commentary, appear to have arisen chiefly through 
clerical mistakes or carelessness, furnishes even an additional 
argument in favour of the priority of Gautama’s text.
As regards Baudhayana’s second reference to Gautama, 
the opinion which it attributes to the latter is directly 
opposed to the teaching of our Dharmajastra. 
Baudh^-
’ Baudhdyana’s various readings are the fo llo w in g : G aut. X IX , i = 
Baudh, III, 1 0 ,1, 
Gaut. X IX , 2 = Baudh. I l l , 10, 2,
fhtniT 
^ 
HfiPI^TilRTT'nW
^ 
Gaut. XIX, 4 left out. 
Gaut. XIX,
6 = Baudh. Ill, 10, 5, 
Gaut. XIX, -7=Baudh. Ill, 5, 6,
left out. 
Gaut. XIX, 8 left out. 
Gaut. 
XIX. 9 = Baudh. HI. 5, 7, ^T<g^T^Trnr HUfil. Gaut. XIX, 10 = 
Baudh. Ill, S, 8, 
Gaut. XIX, 12 = Baudh. Ill, 5, 10,
^^Tnn:; 
Gaut. XIX, 13= Baudh. Ill, 5, ir.
' 
G aut. X IX , 14 = Baudh. I l l , 5, 12,
G aut. X IX , 1 5 = Baudh. I l l , g, 13,
Gaut. XIX, 17 = Baudh. Ill, 5,15, 
Gaut.
XIX, i8=Baudh. Ill, 5,16, 
left out. Gaut. XIX, 20=Baudh.
Ill, 5,18,
® Baudliayana’s treatment of the subject of penances is very un­
methodical. He devotes to them the following chapters, 1, 11 and II, 1; 
III, 5-10; and the greater part of Prasna IV,
d 2

--- PAGE 56 ---
lii
G A U T A M A .
yana gives II, 2, 70 the rule that a Brahmawa who is 
unable to maintain himself by teaching, sacrificing, and 
receiving gifts, may follow the profession of a Kshatriya, 
and then goes as follows ^;
‘ 71. Gautama declares that he shall not do it. 
For the 
duties of a Kshatriya are too cruel for a Brahmawa.’
As the commentator Govindasvamin also points, out, 
exactly the opposite doctrine is taught in our Dharma- 
j-istra, which (VII, 6) explicitly allows a Brahma;^a to 
follow, in times of distress, the occupations of a Kshatriya. 
Govindasvamin explains this contradiction by assuming 
that in this case Baudhayana cites the opinion, not of the 
author of our Dharmaj’astra, but of some other Gautama. 
According to what has been said above 
the existence of 
two or even more ancient Gautama Dharma-sfitras is not 
very improbable, and the commentator may possibly be 
right. 
But it seems to me more likely that the Sutra of 
Gautama (VII, 6) which causes the difficulty is an inter­
polation, though Haradatta takes it to be genuine. 
My 
reason for considering it to be spurious is that the permis­
sion to follow the trade of arms is opposed to the sense of 
two other rules of Gautama. 
For the author states at the 
end of the same chapter on times of distress, VII, 25j that 
‘ even a Brahmawa may take up arms when his life is in 
danger.’ 
The meaning of these words can only be, that a 
Brahmawa must not -fight under any other circumstances. 
But according to Sfitra 6 he is allowed to follow the occu­
pations of a Kshatriya, who lives by fighting. 
Again, in 
the chapter on funeral oblations, XV, 18, those Brahmawas 
‘ who live by the use of the bow’ are declared to defile 
the company at a funeral dinner. 
It seems to me that 
these two Sfitras, taken together with Baudhdyana’s asser­
tion that Gautama does not allow Brihmawas to become 
warriors, raise a strong suspicion against the genuineness 
of VII, 6, and I have the less hesitation in rejecting the
‘ Baudh, Dh. II, 2, 71:—
® See p. xlviii.

--- PAGE 57 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
1*”
lill
latter . Siitra, as there is at least one other iifterpolated 
passage in the text received by Haradatta^. 
I mean the 
Mantras in the chapter taken from the Samavidhdna, 
XXVI, 12, where the three invocations addressed to Siva. 
are. certainly modern additions, as the old Shtrakiras do 
not allow a place to that or any other Paurawic deity in 
their works.
The Vasish///a Dharma-sutra shows also two quotations 
from Gautama; and it is a curious coincidence that, just 
as in the case of Baudhayana’s references, one of them only 
can be traced in our Dharma^astra. 
Both the quotations 
occur in the section on impurity, Vds. IV, where we read 
as follows ^:
‘ 33. If an infant aged less than two years, dies, or in 
the case of a miscarriage, the impurity of the Sapi«</as 
(lasts) for three (days and) nights.
‘ 34. Gautam a declares that (they becom e) pure 
at once (after bathing).
‘ 35. If (a relative) dies in a foreign country and (his 
Sapiw^fas) hear (of his death) after the lapse of ten days, 
the impurity lasts for one (day and) night.
‘ 36. Gautama declares that if a person who has 
kindled the 
sacred fire dies *on a journey, (his 
Sapi«<fas) shall again 
celebrate his obsequies, 
(burning a dummy made of leaves or straw,) and 
remain impure (during ten days) as (if th ey had 
actually buried) the corpse.’
The first of these two quotations or references apparently 
points to Gautama Dh. XIV, 44, where it is said, that 
‘ if an infant dies, the relatives shall be pure at once.’ 
For, though V^sish/Z^a’s Shtra 34, strictly interpreted, 
would mean, that Gautama declares the relatives to be 
purified instantaneously, both if an infant dies and if a 
miscarriage happens, h is also possible to refer the excep-
* In some MSS. a whole chaptfer on the results of various sins in a second 
birth, is inserted after Adhyaya X IX . 
But Haradatta does not notice i t ; see 
Stenzler, Gautama, Preface, p. iii.
* In quoting the VasishrAa Dh. I always refer to the Benares edition, which is 
accompanied by the commentary of KrishKapanrfita Dharmadhikarin, called
Vidvanmodlnl.

--- PAGE 58 ---
llv
G A U T A M A .
tion to oifc of the two cases only, which are mentioned in 
Shtra 33. 
Similar instances do occur in the Sutra style, 
where brevity is estimated higher than' perspicuity, and 
the learned commentator of Vasishz'/^a docs not hesitate 
to adopt the same view. 
But, as regards the second 
quotation in Shtra 36, our Gautama contains no passage 
to which it could possibly refer. 
Govindasvamin, in his 
commentary on the second reference to Gautama in Bau- 
dhdyana’s Dharma^astra II, 2, 
expresses the opinion 
that this Sutra, too, is taken from the ‘ other ’ Gautama
t
Dharma-shtra, the former existence of which he infers 
from Baudhayana’s passage. 
To me it seems more pro­
bable that the quotation in Vas. Dh. IV, 36 is taken from 
the Gnhya-shtra which belonged to the Gautama TTarawa. 
For the rule refers quite as much to the chapter on burial, 
which properly belongs to and frequently is treated in the 
Gnbya-sutras ^ as to impurity.
Regarding Gautama’s nineteenth chapter, which appears 
in the V^sish///a Dharma^dstra as the twenty-second, I have 
already stated above that it is not taken directly from 
Gautama’s work, but from Baudhdyana’s. 
For it shows 
most of the characteristic readings of the latter. 
But a few 
new ones also occur, and some Sutras have been left out, 
while one new one, a well known verse regarding the efficacy 
of the Vai.rvdnara vratapati and of the Pavitreshd, has been 
added. 
Among the omissions peculiar to Vasish//^a, that 
of the first Sutra is the most -important, as it alters the 
whole character of the chapter, and removes one of the 
most convincing arguments as to its original position at 
the head of the section on penances. 
Vasish/^//a places it 
, in the beginning of the discussion on penances which are 
generally efficacious in removing guilt, and after the rules 
on the special penances for the classified offences.
These facts will, I think, suffice to show that the 
Gautama Dharma^astra may be safely declared to be the 
oldest of the existing works on the sacred law. 
This 
assertion must, however, not be taken to mean, that every
See e.g. Asvalayana GWhya-sfltra IV , i.

--- PAGE 59 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
Iv
single one of its Stitras is older than the other four -Dharma- 
shtras. 
Two interpolations have already been pointed out 
above \ and it is not unlikely that there may be more, 
especially such as refer to the wording of the Sutras. 
For 
it is a suspicious fact that Gautama’s language agrees closer 
with Pawini’s rules than that of Apastamba and BaudhS,- 
yana. 
If it is borne in mind that Gautama’s work has 
been torn out of its original connexion, and from a school­
book has become a work of general authority, and for 
a long time has been studied by Pandits who were 
brought up in the traditions of classical grammar, it 
seems hardly likely that it could retain much of its ancient 
peculiarities of language. 
But I do not think that the 
interpolations and alterations can have affected the general 
character of the book very much. 
It is too methodically 
planned and too carefully arranged to admit of any very^ 
great changes. 
The fact, too, that in the chapter borrowed 
by Baudhayana the majority of the variae lectiones are 
• corruptions, not better readings, favours this view. Regard­
ing the distance in time between Gautama on the one 
hand, and BaudhSyana and Vasish//^a on the other, I 
prefer not to hazard any conjecture, as long as the position 
of the Gautamas among.the schools of the Sama-veda has 
not been cleared up. 
So much only can be said that 
Gautama prpbably was less remote from Baudhayana than 
from V 4sish^//a. 
There are a few curious terms and rules 
in which the former two agree, while they, at the same time, 
differ from all other known writers on Dharma. 
Thus the 
term bhikshu, literally a beggar, which Gautama^ uses to 
denote an ascetic', instead of the more common yati or 
sannyasin, occurs once also in Baudhdyana‘’s Sutra. 
The 
same is the case with the rule. III, 13, which orders the 
ascetic not to change his residence during the rains. 
Both 
the name bhikshu and the rule must be very ancient, as the 
Buddhists have appropriated them, and have founded on 
the latter their practice of keeping the "Vasso, or residence 
in monasteries during the rainy season.
* See p. liii.
^ Gaut. Dh. I ll, 2, II ; see also Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., p. 32I (English ed.)

--- PAGE 60 ---
Ivi
G A U T A M A .
As the position of the Gautamas among the Saman 
schools is uncertain, it will, of course, be likewise inad­
visable to make any attempt at connecting them with the 
historical period of India. 
The necessity of caution in 
this respect is so obvious that I should not point it out, 
were it not that the Dharma^astra contains one word, the 
occurrence of which is sometimes considered to indicate the 
term inus a quo for the dates of Indian works. The word 
to which I refer is Yavana. 
Gautama quotes, IV, ai, an 
opinion of ‘ some,’ according to which a Yavana is the off­
spring of a 5 hdra male and a Kshatriya female. 
Now it is 
well known that this name is a corruption of the Greek 
’laFwv, an Ionian, and that in India it was applied, in ancient 
times, to the Greeks, and especially to Bactrian and Indo- 
Bactrian Greeks, who ruled in the second century B. C. over 
a portion of Northern India. 
A s there is no historical 
evidence to show that the Indians became acquainted with 
the Greeks before the invasion of Alexander in the fourth 
century B .C ., it has been held that works containing the 
word Yavana cannot have been composed before 300 B. C. 
But irrespective of the consideration that the text of our 
Dharmajistra is not trustworthy enough to allow its date to 
be ascertained by a single word, the reasoning itself on 
which the determinative power of the word Yavana is 
based, is not beyond doubt, as it is applied to a person who, 
to judge from his name, was not a Greek, in the ancient 
inscription of Rudraddman at Gunkgd.d/i\
The information regarding the state of theVedic litera­
ture, which the Dharmajastra furnishes, is not very ex­
tensive. ■ But some of the items are interesting, especially 
the proof that Gautama knew the Taittiriya Arawyaka, 
from which he took the first six Sutras of the twenty-fifth 
Adhyflya ; the Samavidhdna Brihma;ia,'. from which the 
twenty-sixth Adhyaya has been borrowed ; and the Athar- 
va^iras, which is mentioned XIX, 12. 
The latter word 
denotes, according to Haradatta, one of the Upanishads of
* The person alluded to is Asoka’s lieutenant, the Yavanara^a Tushaspa,' 
who appears to have been a Persian; for the inscription, see Ind. Ant. V II,
r> 11,7.

--- PAGE 61 ---
IN T R O D U C T IO N .
Ivii
the Atharva-veda, which usually are not considered to 
belong to a high antiquity. 
The fact that Gautama and 
Baudhiyana knew it, will probably modify this opinion. 
Another important fact is that Gautama, X X I, 7, quotes 
Manu, and asserts that the latter declared it to beampos- 
.sible to expiate the guilt incurred by-killing a Brih- 
ma«a, drinking spirituous liquor, or violating a Guru’s bed. 
From this statement it appears that Gautama knew an 
ancient work on law which was attributed to Manu. 
It 
probably was the foundation of the existing Manava Dhar- 
marastra. 
No other teacher oh law, besides Manu, is men­
tioned by name.. But the numerous references to the 
opinions of ‘ some ’ show that Gautama’s work was not the 
first Dharma-sutra.
In conclusion, I have to add a few words regarding the 
materials on which the subjoined translation is based. 
The text published by Professor Stenzier for the Sanskrit 
Text Society has been used as the basisk 
It has been 
collated with a rough edition, prepared from my own 
MSS. P. and C, a MS. belonging to the Collection of the 
Government of Bombay, bought at Belgam, and a MS. 
borrowed from a Pu«a S'istrt. 
But the readings given by 
Professor Stenzier and his division of the Shtras have 
always been followed in the body of the translation. 
In 
those cases, where the variae lectiones of my M SS. seemed 
preferable, they have been given and translated in the 
notes. 
The *reason which induced me to adopt this 
course was that I thought it more advisable to facilitate 
references to the printed Sanskrit text than to insist on the 
insertion of a few alterations in the translation, which would 
have disturbed the order of the Shtras. 
The notes have 
been taken from the above-mentioned rough edition and 
from my MSS. of Haradatta’s commentary, called Gau- 
tamiyi Mitikshari.
’ The Institutes of Gautama, edited with an index of words by A. F . Stenzier, 
London, 1876.

--- PAGE 62 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 63 ---
A P . A S T A M B A ,
APH O R ISM S’ ON TH E SACRED L A W 
OF TH E HINDUS.

--- PAGE 64 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 65 ---
A P A S T A M B A,
APHORISMS ON THE SACRED LAW 
OF THE HINDUS.
P r A S N A I , P a T A L A 1 , KUANDk 1 .
1. Now, therefore, we will declare the acts pro­
ductive of merit which form part of the customs of 
daily life, as they have been settled by the agree­
ment (of those who know the law).
2. T h e authority (for these duties) is the agree­
ment of those who know the law, (and the authorities 
for the latter are) the Vedas alone.
3. (There are) four castes— Br4hma«as, Kshatri- 
yas, VaLyas, and 6'udras.
4. Amongst these, each preceding (caste) is supe­
rior by birth to the one following.
5. (For all these), excepting kSAdras and those 
who have committed bad actions, (are ordained) the 
initiation, the study of the Veda, and the kindling of
1. I. 
Sam aya, ‘ agreem ent, decision,’ is threefold. 
It includes 
injunction, restriction, and prohibition.
Dharma, ‘ acts productive of merit,’ usually translated by ‘ duty 
or law,’ is more accurately explained as an act which produces 
the quality of the soul called aphrva, the cause of heavenly bliss 
and of final liberation.
2. Manu II, 6,12; YS^a. I, 7; Gautama I, i.
5. Manu II, 35.
[2] 
» 
. B

--- PAGE 66 ---
A P A ST A M B A .
I, I, I.
the sacred fire; and (their) works are productive of 
rewards (in this world and the next).
6. To serve the other (three) castes (is ordained) 
for the 6'tidra.
7. The higher the caste (which he serves) the 
greater is the merit.
8. The initiation is the consecration in accordance 
with the texts of the Veda, of a male who is desirous 
of (and can make use of) sacred knowledge.
9. A Brdhma^za declares that the Gdyatri is learnt 
for the sake of all the (three) Vedas.
10. (Coming) out of darkness, forsooth, he enters 
darkness, whom a man unlearned in the Vedas, 
initiates, and (so does he) who, without being learned 
in the Vedas, (performs the rite of initiation.) 
That: 
has been declared in a Brihmawa.
11. As performer of this rite of initiation he shall 
seek to obtain a man in whose family sacred learning 
is hereditary, who himself possesses it, and who is 
devout (in following the law).
12. And under him the sacred science must be
6. 
M an u I, 9 1, VIII, 410 , and IX, 3 3 4 ; Ya^fi. I, 120.
8. The use of the masculine in the text excludes women. For 
though women may have occasion to use such texts as ‘ O fire, 
lord of the dwelling,’ &c. at the Agnihotra, still it is specially 
ordained that they shall be taught this and similar verses only just 
before the rite is to be performed.
9. The object of the Sfitra is to remove a doubt whether the 
ceremony of initiation ought to be repeated for each Veda, in case 
a man desires to study more than one Veda. 
This repetition is 
declared to be unnecessary) except, as the commentator adds, in 
the case of the Atharva-veda, for which, according to a passage of 
a Brahma«a, a fresh initiation is necessary. The latter rule is given 
in the Vaitina-sfitra I, i, 5.
12. Haradatta: ‘ But this (latter rule regarding the taking of

--- PAGE 67 ---
I, I, r.
IN ITIATION .
S tu d ied u n til th e en d , p r o v id e d (th e te a c h e r ) d o e s n o t 
fall off from th e o r d in a n c e s of th e law.
13. He from whom (the pupil) gathers (di^inotl) 
(the knowledge of) his religious duties (dharmdn) (is 
called) the AMrya (teacher).
14. Him he should never offend.
15. For he causes him (the pupil) to be born (a 
second time) by (imparting to him) sacred learning.
16. This (second) birth is_the best.
17. The father and the mother produce the body 
only.
18. Let him initiate a Brahmawa in spring, a 
Kshatriya in summer, a Vai.rya in autumn, a Brah- 
ma;/a in the eighth year after his conception, a 
Kshatriya in the eleventh year after his conception, 
(and) a Vaiiya in the twelfth after his conception.
19. Now (follows the enumeration of the years
another teacher) does not hold good for those who have begun 
to study, solemnly binding themselves to their teacher. How so ? 
As he (the pupil) shall consider a person who initiates and 
instructs him his A^arya, and a pupil who has been once initiated 
cannot be initiated again, how can another man instruct him? For 
this reason it must be understood that the study begun with one 
teacher may not be completed with another, if the first die.’ Com­
pare also Haradatta on I, 2, 7, 26, and the rule given I, i, 4, 26. 
In our times also pupils, who have bound themselves to a teacher 
by paying their respects to him and presenting a cocoa-nut, in 
order to learn from him a particular branch of science, must not 
study the same branch of science under any other teacher.
13. Manu II, 69j Y%a. I, 15.
14. Manu II, 144.
15. Manu II, 146-148.
16. ‘ Because it procures heavenly bliss and final liberation.’— 
Haradatta.
17. Manu II, 147-
18. 
I, 14 ; Manu II, 36; A jvalS yan a Gri. Sfi. I, 19, i, 4 j 
Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 20 seq.
B 2

--- PAGE 68 ---
A P A S T A M B A .
I, I, I.
to be chosen) for the fulfilment of some (particular) 
wish.
20. (Let him initiate) a person desirous of excel­
lence in sacred learning in his seventh year, a person 
desirous of long life in his eighth year, a person 
desirous of manly vigour in his ninth year, a person 
desirous of food in his tenth year, a person desirous 
of strength in his eleventh year, a person desirous of 
cattle in his twelfth year.
21. There is no dereliction (of duty, if the initia­
tion takes place), in the case of a Brahma;za before 
the completion of the sixteenth year, in the case of a 
Kshatriya before the completion of the twenty-second 
year, in the case of a VaLya before the completion 
of the twenty-fourth year.
22. (Let him be initiated at such an age) that he 
may be able to perform the duties, which we shall 
declare below.
23. If the proper time for the initiation has 
passed, he shall observe for the space of two months
20. Manu II, 37.
2 1 . A jv. G n . Sft. I, 19 , 5, 7 ; W eb er, In d . Stud. X , 2 1.
22. The meaning of the Shtra is, that the initiation shall be 
performed as soon as the child is able to begin the study of the 
Veda. 
If it is so far developed at eight years, the ceremony must 
then be performed; and if it be then neglected, or, if it be 
neglected at any time when the capacity for learning exists, the 
expiation prescribed in the following Sfitras must be performed. 
The age of sixteen in the case of Br^hmawas is the latest terrn 
up to which the ceremony may be deferred, in case of incapacity 
for study only. After the lapse of the sixteenth year, the expiation 
becomes also necessary, Manu II, 38; Y%n. I, 37.
23. The meaning is, he shall keep all the restrictions imposed
upon a student, as chastity, &c., but that he shall not perform 
fire-worship or service to a teacher, nor study, Manu II, 391 
^9^;
Y%a. I, 38; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, loi.

--- PAGE 69 ---
I, I, 2.
i n i t i a t i o n .
5
the duties of a student, as observed by those.who 
are studying the three Vedas.
24. After that he may be initiated.
25. After that he shall bathe (daily) for one year.
26. After that he may be instructed.
27. He, whose father and grandfather have not 
been initiated, (and his two ancestors) are called 
‘ slayers of the Brahman.'^
28. Intercourse, eating, and intermarriage with 
them should be avoided.
29. If they wish it (they may perform the follow­
ing) expiation;
30. In the same manner as for the first neglect 
(of the initiation), (a penance of) two months (was) 
prescribed, so (they shall ^o-penance for) one year.
31. Afterwards they may be initiated, and then 
they must bathe (daily),
P r a s n a 
I , 
P a t a l a 1 , 
K
h a a 'd a 2 .
1. For as many years as there are uninitiated 
persons, reckoning (one year) for each ancestor (and 
the person to be initiated himself),
2. (They should bathe daily under the recitation) 
of the seven Pavamanis, beginning with ‘ If near or 
far’ of the Ya^shpavitra, (‘ May the waters, the 
mothers purify us,’ &c.) of the Sdmapavitra, (‘ With
25. 
‘If he is strong, he shall bathe three times a day— morning, 
midday, and evening.’— Haradatta.
27. Brahman, apparently,here means ‘Veda,’ and those who neg­
lect its study may metaphorically be called ‘slayers of the Veda.’
28. ManuII, 40; Arv.Grf.50.1,19,8,9; Weber, Ind. Stud. X,2i.
30. Compare above, I, i, i, 23.
2. 2. The seven Pivamdms are seven verses which occur 7?2g-veda 
IX,67,31-27. Ya^shpavitra=Taitt. Sa222h. 1,2,i;r. Samapavitrais 
found SSma-veda 1, 2, 2, 3, 5. Angirasapavitra=.Afg-veda IV, 40, 5.

--- PAGE 70 ---
A P A ST A M B A .
1} Ij 2-
what help assists,’ &c.), and of the Angirasapavitra 
(‘ A swan, dwelling in purity’),
3. Or also under the recitation of the Vyah^'/tis
(om, 
bhuva/5, suva/^).
4. A fter that (such a person) may be taught (the 
Veda).
5. But those whose great-grandfather’s (grand­
father’s and father’s) initiation is not remembered, 
are called ‘ burial-grounds.’
6. Intercourse, dining, and intermarriage with 
them should be avoided. 
For them, if they like, the 
(following) penance (is prescribed). 
(Such a man) 
shall keep for twelve years the rules prescribed for 
a student who is studying the three Vedas. 
After­
wards he may be initiated. 
Then he shall bathe 
under the recitation of the Pavamanis and of the 
other (texts mentioned above, I, i, 2, 2).
7. Then he may be instructed in the duties of a 
householder.
8. H e shall not be taught (the whole Veda), but 
only the sacred formulas required for the domestic 
ceremonies.
9. When he has finished this (study of the Grfhya- 
mantras), he may be initiated (after having per­
formed, the penance prescribed) for the first neglect 
(I, I. I, 23).
10. Afterwards (everything is performed) as in 
the case of a regular initiation.
11. He who has been initiated shall dwell, as a 
religious student in the house of his teacher,
10. The commentator observes that for those whose great-great­
grandfather or remoter ancestors were noft initiated, no penance is 
prescribed, and that it must be fixed by those w^o know the law.
1 1 . Manu II, 164.

--- PAGE 71 ---
I, 2.
ST U D E N T SH IP .
12. For forty-eight years (if he learns all the four 
V edas),
13. (Or) a quarter less (i. e. for thirty-six years),
14. (Or) less by half (i. e. for twenty-four years),
15. (Or) three quarters less (i. e. for eighteen 
years),
16. Twelve years (should be) the shortest time 
(for his residence with his teacher).
17. A student who studies the sacred science shall 
not dwell with anybody else (than his teacher).
18. Now (follow) the rules for the studentship.
19. He shall obey .his teacher, except (when 
ordered to commit) crimes which cause loss of 
caste.
20. He shall do what is serviceable to his teacher, 
he shall not contradict hiqi.
21. He shall always occupy a couch or seat lower 
(dian that of his teacher).
22. He shall not eat food offered (at a funeral 
oblation or at a sacrifice).
12. ]\Ianu III, I, and Ya^u. I, 36 ; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 125.
16. The commentator declares that Manu III, i, the expression 
‘ until he has learnt it,’ must be understood in this sense, that the 
pupil may leave his teacher, if he has learnt the Veda, after twelve 
years’ study, never before. But compare also A sv. G n , Sft. I, 22,3.
17. The commentator states that this rule refers only to a 
temporary, not to a professed student ,(naish//hka). He also gives 
an entirely different explanation to the Sfitra, which, according to 
some, means, ‘ A student who learns the sacred science shall 
not fast in order to obtain heaven.’ 
This rendering also is ad­
missible, as the word para may mean either a ‘ stranger ’ or 
‘ heaven,’ and upavSsa, ‘ dwelling ’ or ‘ fasting.’ .
19. Regarding the crimes tvhich cause loss of caste (patanlya), 
see below, I, 7, 21, 7.
20. Manu II, 108, and 
I, 27.
21. Manu II, 108, 198; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 123 and 124.

--- PAGE 72 ---
8
A P A ST A M B A .
I» I, 2.
23. Nor pungent condiments, salt, honey, or m^at
24. He shall not sleep in the day-time.
25. He shall not use perfumes.
26. He shall preserve chastity.
27. He shall not embellish himself (by using oint­
ments and the like).
28. He shall not wash his body (with hot water 
for pleasure).
29. But, if it is soiled by unclean things, he shall 
clean it (with earth or water), in a place where he is 
not seen by a Guru.
30. Let him not sport in the water whilst bathing; 
let him swim (motionless) like a stick.
31. He shall wear all his hair tied in one|knot.
32. Or let him-tie the lock on the crown of the 
head in a knot, and shave the rest of the hair.
33. The girdle of a Brahma;za shall be made of
23. Regarding the meaning of kshSra, ‘ pungent condiments,’ see 
Haradatta on II, 6, ig, 15. Other commentators explain the term 
differently.— Manu II, 177; Ya^n. I, 33; and Weber, Ind. Stud. 
X, 123. 
Aiv. G r i. Sh. I, 22, 2.
25. M an u II, 1 7 7 ; Y^ a. I, 33.
26. ManU II, 180.
27. M an u II, 1 7 8 ; Y a .fn . I, 33.
29. ‘Here, in the section on the teacher, the word guru desff- 
nates the father and the rest also.’— Haradatta.
30. Another version of the first portion of this Sfitra, propo^ 
by Haradatta, is, ‘ Let him not, whilst bathing, clean himself (\J 
bathing powder or the likfe).’ Another commentator takes Sfitral 
as a prohibition of the daily bath or washing generally ordainiI:iI 
for Brahmawas, and refers Sfitra 29 to the naimittika snSna
‘ bathing on certain occasions,’ and takes Sfitra 30 as a restncr 
of the latter.
3 1. M an u II, 219 . 
.
33. M an u II, 4 2 - 4 4 ; 
* 9 ; ^.^v. G n . Sfi. I, 19 . 1 2 ;
W eber, Ind. Stud. X , 23.

--- PAGE 73 ---
I, I, 2.
ST U D E N T SH IP .
Mun^ grass, and consist of three strings; if possible, 
(the strings) should be twisted to the right.
34. A bowstring (should be the girdle) of a 
Kshatriya,
35. Or a string of Muh^ grass in which pieces 
of iron have been tied.
36. A woo! thread (shall be the girdle) of a 
Vawya,
37. Or a rope used for yoking the oxen to the 
plough, or a string made of Tamila-bark.
38. The staff worn by a Brahmawa should be 
made of Pali^a wood, that of a Kshatriya of a 
branch of the Banian tree, which grows downwards, 
that of a VaiTya of Bidara or Udumbara wood. 
Some declare, without any reference to caste, that 
the staff of a student should be made of the wood of 
a tree (that is fit to be used at the sacrifice).
39" (H e shall wear) a cloth (to cover his naked­
ness).
40. (It shall be made) of hemp for a Brihma^^a, 
of flax (for a Kshatriya), of the skin of a (clean) 
animal (for a Vauya).
41. Some declare that the (upper) garment (of a 
ia??a) should be dyed with red Lodh,
^®»JlManu II, 45; Y 3^a. I, 29; A^v. G rt. Sii. I, 19, 13; 20, i; 
■^ ' 9 Ind. Stud. X, 23.
^wp»datta gives no commentary on this SQtra, but refers back 
^^PKfcr/hya-shtra, where the same words occur.
I The word forms a Sfitra by itself, in order to show that 
3ne must wear this cloth.
Manju II, 41. 
‘ Clean ’ means here and everywhere else, if
Kid to animals or things, ‘ fit to be used at the sacrifice.’
41. k s \ . G r i. Sii. I, 19, ii; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, a a,

--- PAGE 74 ---
lO
A P A ST A M B A .
Ij i> 3-
PrAiSna I, Pa^ala 1, K haaba 3.
1. And that of a Kshatnya dyed with madder,
2. And that of a Vaii’ya dyed with turmeric.
3. (The skin) worn by a Brahmawa shall be that 
of a common deer or of a black doe.
4. If he wears a black skin, let him not spread it 
(on the ground) to sit or. lie upon it.
5. (The skin worn) by a Kshatriya shall be that 
of a spotted deer.
6. (The skin worn) by a Vai^ya shall be that of a 
h e-goat.
7. The skin of a sheep is fit to be worn by all 
castes,
8. And a plaid made of wool.
9. He who wishes the increase of Brahma;«a 
power shall wear skins only; he who wishes the in­
crease of Kshatriya power shall wear cloth only; he 
who wishes the increase of both shall wear both 
(skin and cloth). 
Thus says a Brahma«a.
10. But (I, Apastamba, say), let him wear a skin 
only as his upper garment.
11. Let him not look at dancing.
12. Let him not go to assemblies (for gambling, 
&c.), nor to crowds (assembled at festivals).
3. 3. Manu II, 41; Yaffi. I, 29; Ajv. G r i. Sfl. I, 19, 10.*
9. See also Gopatha-brahmawa I, 2, 4.
10. According to I, i, 2, 39, I, i, 3, 10, the rule of dress for 
students is the following:— According to Apastamba, a student 
shall wear a piece of cloth to cover his nakedness (lango4), and . 
a skin as upper garment. Other teachers allow, besides, an upper 
dress of cloth, coloured differently for the different castes, with or 
without the addition of a deer-skin.
11. Manu II, 178.
12 -13 - M an u II , 1 7 9 ; 
I, 33.

--- PAGE 75 ---
h 3-
ST U D E N T SH IP .
11
13. Let him not be addicted to gossiping.
14. Let him be discreet.
15. Let him not do anything for his own pleasure 
in places which his teacher frequents.
16. Let him talk with women so much (only) as 
his purpose requires.
17. (Let him be) forgiving.
18. Let him ^restrain his organs from seeking 
illicit objects.
19. Let him be untiring in fulfilling his duties ;
20. Modest;
21. Possessed of self-command;
22 . Energetic;
23. Free from anger;
24. (And) free from envy.
25. Bringing all he obtains to his teacher, he §hall 
go begging with a vessel in the morning and in the 
evening, (and he may) beg (from everybody) except! 
low-caste people unfit for association (with Aryas)/ 
and Abhi^astas.
15. ‘ Anything for his own pleasure,’ i.e. keeping conversations 
with friends, making his toilet, &c.
19. The explanations of the last two terms, ^anta and danta, 
are different from those given usually. 
5'ama is usually explained 
as ‘the exclusive direction of the mind towards God,’ and dama 
as ‘ the restraining of the senses.’
2j. Manu II, 178.
25. Regarding the explanation of the term Abhhasta see below,
I, 7, 21, 7. Haradatta: ‘ Apap^tras are called those born from a 
high-caste mother and a low-caste father, such as washermen. For 
their cooking vessels &c. are unfit for the use of the four castes. . . . 
Since Apastamba says, “ In the evening and in the morning, food 
obtained in the evening must not be used for the morning meal, 
nor- food obtained in the morning for the evening meal.” ’ Manu
II, 182, 183, 185; Afv. Gn. Sff. I, 22, 4. 
See also Gopatha- 
brahmawa I, 2, 6.

--- PAGE 76 ---
12
A p a s t a m b a .
h h 3-
26. 
A Brilimawa declares : Since a devout stu­
dent takes away from women, who refuse (to give 
him alms, the merit gained) by (6rauta)-sacrifices, 
by gifts, (and) by burnt-offerings (offered in the 
domestic fire), as well as their offspring, their cattle, 
the sacred learning (of their families), therefore, for-. 
sooth, (a woman) should not refuse (alms) to the 
crowd of students ; for amongst those (who come to 
beg), there might be one of that (devout) kind, one 
who thus (conscientiously) keeps his vow.
2 7. Alms (shall) not (be considered) leavings (and 
be rejected) by inference (from their appearance), but 
on the strength of ocular or oral testimony (only).
28. A Brihma^za shall beg, prefacing (hjis request) 
by the word ‘ Lady;’
29. A Kshatriya (inserting the word) ‘ Lady ’ in 
the middle (between the words ‘ give alms’) ;
30. AVai.fya, adding the word ‘ Lady’ (at the end 
of the formula).
31. (The pupil) having taken those (alms) shall 
place them before his teacher and offer them to him.
32. He may eat (the food) after having been 
ordered to do so by his teacher.
27. T o eat the residue o f the m eal o f an y person excep t that 
left b y the teacher and oth er G urus, is n ot perm itted to a student ; 
see also below , I, i , 4, i seq .; M an u II, 5 6 ; Yaj^ii. I, 33.
28. The formula to be used by a Brahmawa is, ‘Lady, give alms; ’ 
that to be used by a Kshatriya, ‘ Give, lady, alms 
and that used 
by a Vaifya, ‘ Give alms, lady.’ 
Manu II, 49; Ya^. I, 30; A^v. 
G r i. Sh. I, 22, 8.
31, The words with which he announces the alms are, Idam 
ittham Shrz’tam, ‘ this much have I received.’ Manu II, 51; Y%-il. 
I, 27; k sv . G rt. SO. I, 22, 10.
32. The answer of the teacher is, Saumya tvameva bhuhkshva,
‘ friend, eat thou.’

--- PAGE 77 ---
h 3-
S T U D E N T S H IP .
13
33. If the teacher is absent, the pupil (shall offer 
the food) to (a member of) the teacher’s family.
34. If the (family of the teacher) is (also) absent, 
the pupil (may offer the food) to other learned 
Brahma;^as (6'rotriyas) also (and receive from them 
the permission to eat). ’
35. »He shall not beg for his own sake (alone).
36. After he has eaten, he himself shall clean his 
dish.
37. And he shall leave no residue (in his dish).
38. If he cannot (eat all that he has taken in 
his dish), he shall bury (the remainder) in the 
ground;
39. Or he may throw it into the water;
40. Or he may place (all that remains in a pot), 
and put it down near an (uninitiated) Arya;
41. Or (he may put it down) near a ^Slldra slave 
(belonging to his teacher).
42. If (the pupil) Is on a journey, he shall throw
34. Regarding the term ^rotriya, see below, II, 3, 6, 4.
35. ‘ The meaning of this Shtra is, that the rule given, Shtra 42 
(below), for a pupil who is on a journey, shall hold good also for 
a pupil who is at home, if (in the absence of his teacher) no 
5rotriyas are to be found (from whom he can receive the per­
mission to eat).’— Haradatta.
36. ‘ He commits no sin, if he has the alms-pot cleaned by 
somebody else. 
Some say that the Shtra refers to both vessels 
(the alms-pot and Tiis own dish).’
40. An Arya is a person belonging to one of the first three 
castes (see below). The Arya must be a boy who is not initiated, 
because children are kamabhahsha^, i. e. allowed to eat what they 
like, even leavings.
42. This rule holds good if no Arotriyas are near. If .Srotriyas 
are to be found, Sfitra 38 applies. Agni, the god of fire, is con­
sidered to be of the Brahminical caste, and hence he takes the

--- PAGE 78 ---
H
A P A S T A M B A .
I, I, 4.
a part of the alms into the fire and eat (the re­
mainder).
43, Alms are declared to be sacrificial food. 
In 
regard to them the teacher (holds the position 
which) a deity (holds in regard to food offered at a 
sacrifice).
44, And (the teacher holds also the place which)
the Ahavaniya fire occupies (at a sacrifice, because 
a portion of the alms is offered in the fire of his 
stomach). 
“
45, T o him (the teacher) the (student) shall offer 
(a portion of the alms),
' 
P ras'NA I, Patala 1, K haaba 4.
1. And (having done so) eat what is left.
2. For this (remnant of food) is certainly a rem­
nant of sacrificial food.
3. If he obtains other things (besides food, such 
as cattle or fuel, and gives them to his teacher) as 
he obtains them, then those (things hold the place 
of) rewards (given to priests for the performance of 
a sacrifice).
4. This is the sacrifice to be performed daily by 
a religious student.
5. And (the teacher) shall not give him anything 
that is forbidden by the revealed texts, (not even as) 
leavings,
6. Such as pungent condiments, salt, honey, or 
meat (and the like).
place of the teacher or of the .Jrotriyas. 
See also Manu II, 247, 
248, and the passages collected from the Brahmawas, by Prof. 
Weber, Ind. Stud, IX, 39.
44* Manu II, 231.
4. 6. See above, I, i» 2, 23,

--- PAGE 79 ---
I, I, 4.
S T U D E N T SH IP .
15
7. By this (last Shtra) (it is) explained (that) the 
other restrictions (imposed upon a student, such as 
abstinence from perfumes, ointments, &c., are like­
wise not to be broken).
8. For (explicit) revealed texts have greater force 
than custom from which (the existence of a permis­
sive passage of the revelation) may be inferred.
9. Besides (in this particular case) a (worldly) 
motive for the practice is apparent.
7. See above, I, 1,2, 24 seq.;— According to Haradatta, teachers 
were in the habit of giving ointments and the like forbidden sub­
stances to their pupils, and Apastamba gives this rule in order 
to show his dissent from the practice.
8. ‘ Anumanika means “ proper to be inferred from.” For the 
existence of a text of the revelation or tradition (Smrfti) is 
inferred from custom. A visible text of the revelation is- (hpw- 
ever) of greater weight than a custom from which the existence 
of a text may be inferred. 
It is impossible to infer (the existence 
of a text) which is opposed to such (a visible text), on account of 
the maxim “ an inference (can be made only, if it is) not opposed 
(by ocular proof).” (Apastamba), by speaking thus, (“ For revealed 
texts,” &c.,) shows that the rule forbidding a student to eat pun­
gent condiments, salt, &c. is based on the existing text of a 
Brahma?ia.’—Haradatta.
9. ‘ Though the text forbidding the use of pungent condiments, 
salt, and the like refers to such substances if they are not leavings, 
still it is improper to assert, on the ground of the custom from 
which a permissive text may be inferred, that it (the existing text), 
which is general, must be restricted (to those cases only) where the 
forbidden substances are not leavings given by the teacher. 
(If 
an opponent should answer that) certainly there are also texts 
which contradict each other, such as “ he takes” and “ he does 
not take,” and that therefore there is no reason why a text restricted 
(to the case in which forbidden substances are leavings of the 
teacher) should not be inferred. 
In order to answer (that plea), 
he (Apastamba) says (Shtra 9), “ True, that would be right if no 
motive whatever could be discovered for that custom (to eat for­
bidden food which is given by the teacher). 
But a reason for this 
course of action exists.” ’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 80 ---
i6
A P A ST A M B A .
I, I, 4.
10. For pleasure is obtained (by eating or using 
the forbidden substances).
11. A residue of food left by a father and an elder 
brother, may be eaten.
12. If they act contrary to the law, he must not 
eat (their leavings).
13. In the evening and in the morning he shall 
fetch water in a vessel (for the use of his teacher).
14. Daily he shall fetch fuel from the forest, and 
place it on the floor (in his teacher’s house).
15. He shall not go to fetch firewood after 
sunset.
16. After “having kindled the fire, and having
swept the ground around (the altar), he shall place
_________ ___________ _ ________
_ ____ ________________1_______
10. 
‘ What is that (reason)? [Shtra 10] For to eat pungent 
condiments, salt, &c. gives pleasure to the eater, and therefore 
• according to the maxim, I, 4, i2,-i2, “ That in case a custom has 
pleasure for its motive, there is no text of the holy law to authorise 
l^it,” no text restricting (the prohibition of forbidden substances to 
the case in which a Brahma^^in does not receive them as leavings 
from his teacher) can be inferred (from the practice of eating such 
leavings).’— Haradatta.
12. Another explanation of this Shtra is given by Haradatta :
‘ If by eating .their leavings he should commit a sin (because the 
food contains salt &c.), he shall not do it.’
13. Manu II, 182.
14. The reason for placing the fuel on the ground is, according 
to Haradatta, the fear lest, if placed on some shelf or the like, it 
should tumble down and injure the teacher’s children. 
Others, 
however, are of opinion that the wood which the pupil fetches 
daily, is not to be used by the teacher for cooking, but for the 
performance of the pupil’s daily fire-offering. 
The reason for this 
interpretation is, that in the Grzhya-sfitra (Pa/ala 4) the daily 
offering of fuel is enjoined with the same words. 
See Weber, 
Ind. Stud. X, 123; Manu II, 186.
16. Some explain, instead o f‘ after having swept the ground 
around the altar,’ &c., ‘ after having raked th'e scattered brands 
into a heap.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 81 ---
I, I, 4.
ST U D E N T SH IP .
17
the sacred fuel on the fire every morning and 
evening, according to the prescription (of the 
GWhya-shtra).
17. Some say that the fire is only to be wor­
shipped in the evening.
18. He shall sweep the place around the fire after 
it has been made to burn (by the addition of fuel), 
with his hand, and not (with the bundle of Kui'a 
grass called) Samhhant.'
19. But, before (adding the fuel, he is free to use 
the Samhhani) at his pleasure.
20. He shall not perform non-religious acts 
with the residue of the water employed for the 
fire-worship, nor sip it
21. He shall not sip water which has been stirred 
with the hand, nor such as has been received into 
one hand only.
22. And he shall avoid sleep (whilst his teacher 
is awake).
23. Then (after having risen) he shall assist his 
teacher daily by acts tending' to the acquisition of 
spiritual merit'and of wealth.
24. He having served (his teacher during the day 
in this manner he shall say when going to bed): I 
have protected the protector of the law (my teacher).
18. A.SV. G r i. Sfl. I, 22, S-
20. During the fire-worship water is wanted for sprinkling the 
altar in various ways.
23. Acts tending to the acquisition of merit are here— collecting 
sacred fuel, Kura grass, and flowers for sacrifices. 
Acts tending 
to the acquisition of wealth are—gathering fuel for cooking, &c. 
Manu II, 182 ; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 123 and 124.
24. Another explanation of the words spoken by the student is, 
‘ O law, I have protected him; protect thou me.’ See also Gopatha- 
brfihmawa h 2, 4.
[2] 
C

--- PAGE 82 ---
i8
a p a s t a m b a .
I> 2,5.
25. If the teacher transgresses the law through 
carelessness or knowingly, he shall point it out to 
him privately.
26. If (the teacher) does not cease (to transgress), 
he himself shall perform the religious acts (which 
ought to be performed by the former).;
27. Or he may return home.
28. Now of him who rises before (his teacher) 
and goes to rest after (him), they say that he does 
not sleep.
29. The student who thus entirely fixes his mind 
there (in the teacher’s family), has thereby performed 
all acts which yield rewards (such as the G^yotish- 
/oma), and also those which must be performed by 
a householder.
Pra^na I, Patala 2, KnAivnA 5.
1. The word ‘ devotion’ (must be understood to 
apply) to (the observance of) the rules (of student­
ship).
2. If they are transgressed, study drives out the 
knowledge of the Veda acquired already, froni the 
(offender) and from his children.
26. Compare above, T, i, i , 12.
29. Tbe Sfitra refers to a naish/'.^ika brahma^arin or professed 
student, •■who never leaves his teacher’s family, and never enters 
any other order; and it declares his merit to be equal to that of 
one who becomes a householder. 
Manu II, 243, 244; Y%ii. 
I, 49. 50-
5. I . Manu II, 164.
2. The meaning of the phrase, ‘ Study drives out the Veda, 
which has already been learnt from him who studies transgressing 
the rules prescribed for the^student,’ is, ‘ The Veda recited at the 
Brahmaya^fia (daily study), and other religious rites, produces no 
effect, i.e. gains no merit for the reciter.’ 
Manu II, 97. 
Hara-

--- PAGE 83 ---
S'
ST U D E N T S H IP .
19
3. Besides he will go to hell, and his life will be 
shortened.
4. On account of that (transgression of the rules 
of studentship) no i?/shis are born amongst the men 
of later ages.
5. But some in their hew birth, on account of a 
residue of the merit acquired by their actions (in 
former lives), become (similar to) 7?/shis by their 
knowledge (of the Veda),
6. Like vS*vetaketu.
7. And whatever else, besides the Veda, (a stu­
dent) who obeys the rules learns from his teacher, 
that brings the same reward as the Veda.
8. Also, if desirous to accomplish* something (be
datta gives also the following three explanations of this Shtra, 
adopted by other commentators :—
a. If these (rules) are transgressed, he loses his capacity for 
learning, because the Brahman forsakes him, &c.
b. If these rules are transgressed, the capacity for learning and 
the Brahman leave him, &c.
c. From him who studies whilst transgressing these rules, the 
Brahman goes out, &c.
4. ‘ Amongst the avaras means “ amongst the men of modern 
times, those who live in the Kaliyuga.” 
No i?fshis are born 
means “ there are none who see (receive the revelation of) Man­
tras, Vedic texts.” ’— Haradatta.
5. ‘ How is it then that men fn our days, though they trans­
gress the rules prescribed for students, learn the four Vedas with 
little trouble? 
(The answer is). By virtue of a residue of the 
reward (due) for the proper observance of those rules (of student­
ship) in a former Yuga. 
Therefore Apastamba says, Sfitra 6, 
“ But some,” &c. New existence means “ new birth '(life).” ’— 
Haradatta.
6. An example of this (follows, Sfitra 6): ‘ Like Avetaketu. 
For Avetaketu learned the four Vedas in a short time ; as we read 
in the ATi^andogya Upanishad (Prap^Aaka VI, i).’— Haradatta.
7. ‘ Whatever else besides the Veda, such as poison-charms 
and the like.’— Haradatta.
C 2

--- PAGE 84 ---
20
A P A ST A M B A .
2, 5#
it good or evil), he thinks it in his mind, or pro­
nounces it in words, or looks upon it with his 
eye, even so it will b e; thus teach (those who 
know the law).
9. (The duties of a student consist in) acts to 
please the spiritual teacher, the observance (of 
rules) conducive to his own welfare, and industry 
in studying.
10. Acts other than these need not be performed 
by a student.
. 
II, A religious student who retains what he has 
learned, who finds pleasure in the fulfilment of the 
law, who keeps the rules of studentship, who' is 
upright and forgiving, attains perfection.
12. Every day he ^hall rise in the last watch of 
the night, and stan'ding near his teacher, salute him 
with (this) salutation: I, N, N., ho! (salute thee.)
13. And (he shall salut^ also other very aged 
(learned Brdhma/?as) who may live in the same 
village, before the morning meal.,
14. If he has been-on a journey, (he shall salute
9. ‘ Acts to please the teacher are—washing his feet and the 
like; observance (of rules) conducive to welfare are— obedience 
to the prohibition to cross a river swimming, to eat pungent con­
diments, and obedience to the injunction to beg,’— Haradatta.
10. ‘ Actg other than these, such as pilgrimages and the like.’— 
Haradatta.
11. ‘What this “ perfection” is has been declared, Shtras 7,8.’— 
Haradatta.
12. IManu II, 122 and 124.
14. This salutation is to be performed only when the occasion 
requires it. 
The formerly-mentioned salutation (Shtras 12, 13) is 
to be performed daily. 
In the next Sfltra follows that by which 
the fulfilment of a wish may be obtained.— Haradatta. 
Manu II, 
121; Yig^a. I, 26.

--- PAGE 85 ---
2, 5*
ST U D E N T SH IP .
21
the persons mentioned) when he meets them on his 
return.
15. (He may also salute the persons mentioned 
at other times), if he is desirous of heaven and long 
life.
16. A Brdhmawa shall salute stretching forward 
his right arm on a level with his ear, a Kshatriya 
holding it on a level with the breast, a Vaii-ya 
holding it on a level with the waist, a K^hdra hold­
ing it low.
17. (He shall salute) stretching forward his joined 
hands.
18. And when returning the salute of (a man be­
longing) to the first (three) castes, the (last syllable 
of the) name (of the person addressed) is produced 
to the length of three moras.
19. But when he meets his teacher after sunrise 
(coming for his lesson), he shall embrace (his feet).
20. On all other occasions he shall salute (him in 
the manner described above).
21. But some declare that he ought to embrace 
the (feet of his) teacher (at every occasion instead of 
saluting him).
22. Having stroked the teacher’s right foot with 
his right hand below and above, he takes hold of it 
and of the ankle.
23. Some say, that he must press both-feet, each 
with both hands, and embrace them.
16. ‘ A Vaijya shall salute stretching forth his arm on a level 
with his middle, i. e. the stomach; others say, on a level with his 
thigh; the Audra stretching it forth low, i. e. on a level with his 
feet.’— Haradatta.
18. See also Manu II, 125.
19. Manu II, 71.
23. Manu II, 72-

--- PAGE 86 ---
22
A PA ST A M B A .
I, 2, 6.
24. He shall be very attentive the whole day 
long, never allowing his mind to wander from the 
lesson during the (time devoted to) studying.
25. And (at other times he shall be attentive) to 
the business of his teacher.
26. And during the time for rest (he shall give) 
his mind (to doubtful passages of the lesson learnt).
27. And he shall study after having been called 
by the teacher (and not request the teacher to begin 
the lesson).
P r A S N A I , 
P A r A L A 2 , 
K H A iV D A 6.
1. Every day he shall put his teacher to bed 
after having washed his (teacher’s) feet and after 
having rubbed him.
2. He shall retire to rest after having received 
(the teacher’s permission).
3. And he shall not stretch out his feet towards 
him.
■ 
4. Some say, that it is not (sinful) to stretch out
the feet (towards the teacher), if he be lying on a 
bed.
5. And he shall not address (the teacher), whilst 
he himself is in a reclining position.
6, But he may answer (the teacher) sitting (if the 
teacher himself is sitting or lying).
24. Manu II, 191.
27. YS^. I, 27; Manu II, 191.
6. 
I. Manu II, 209.
2. Manu II, 194.
4. ‘But, in Apastamba’s opinion, it is sinful even in this case.’—
Haradatta.
5- Manu II, 195. 
6. Manu II, 196.

--- PAGE 87 ---
1} 2
f 6*
S T U D E N T SH IP .
23
7. And if (the teacher) stands, (he shall answer 
him,) after having risen also.
8. He shall walk after him, if he walks.
9. He shall run after him, if he runs.
10. He shall not approach (his teacher) with shoes 
on his feet, or his head covered, or holding (imple­
ments) in his hand.
11. But on a journey .or occupied in work, he may 
approach him (with shoes on, with his head covered, 
or with implements in his hand),
12. Provided he does not sit down quite near (to 
his teacher).
13. He shall approach his teacher with the same 
reverence as a deity, without telling idle stories, 
attentive and listening eagerly to his words.
14. (He shall not sit near him) with his legs 
crossed.
15- If (on sitting down) the wind blows from the 
pupil towards the master, he shall change his place.
16. (He shall sit) without supporting himself with 
his hands (on the ground),
17. Without leaning against something (as a wall 
or the like).
18. If the pupil wears two garments, he shall 
wear the upper one after the fashion of the sacred 
thread at the sacrifices.
19. But, if he wears a (lower) garment only, he 
shall wrap it around the lower part of his body.
20. He shall turn his face towards his teacher 
though the latter does not turn his towards him.
15. Manu'II, 203.
18. 
At sacrifices the sacred thread passes over the left shoulder 
and under the right arm. Manu II, 63, and Taitt. Ar. II, i, 3.
20. Manu II, 197.

--- PAGE 88 ---
24
A P A S T A M B A .
1, 2, 6.
21. He shall sit neither too near to, nor too far 
(from the teacher),
22. (But) at such a distance, that (the teacher) 
may be able to reach him with his arms (without 
rising).
23. (He shall not sit in such a position) that the 
wind blows from the teacher, towards himself.
24. (If there is) only one pupil, he shall sit at the 
right hand (of the teacher).
25. (If there are) many, (they may sit) as it may 
be convenient.
26. If the master (is not honoured with a seat 
and) stands' the (pupil) shall not sit down.
27. (If the master is not honoured with a 
couch) and sits, the (pupil) shall not lie down on 
a couch.
28. And if the teacher tries (to do something), 
then (the pupil) shall offer to do it for him, if it is in 
his power.
■' 29. And, if his teacher is near, he shall not 
embrace (the feet of) another Guru who is inferior 
(in dignity);
'30. Nor shall he praise (such a person in the 
teacher’s presence) by (pronouncing the name of) 
his family.
31. 
Nor shall he rise to meet such an (inferior 
Guru) or rise after him, even if he be a Guru of his 
teacher.
23. See Siitra ig and Manu quoted there.
29. The term Guru includes a father, maternal uncle, &c. (see 
above), and these are inferior to the teacher. Manu II, 205.
31. ‘ The pupil is not to show the mentioned marks of respect 
to any of his own inferior Gurus, even if the person is the Guru, 
e. g. the maternal uncle, of his teacher.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 89 ---
I, 2, 7.
ST U D E N T S H IP .
25
32. But he shall leave his place and his seat, (in 
order to show him honour.)
33. Some say, that (he may address) a pupil of 
his teacher by (pronouncing) his name, if he is also 
one of his (the pupil’s) own Gurus.
34. But towards such a person who is generally 
revered for some other reason than being the teacher 
(e. g. for his learning), the (student) should behave as 
towards his teacher, though he be inferior in dignity 
to the latter.
35. After having eaten in his (teacher’s) presence, 
he shall not give away the remainder of the food 
without rising.
36. Nor shall he sip water (after having eaten in 
the presence of his teacher without rising).
37. (He shall rise) addressing him (with these 
words), ‘ What shall I do ? ’ 
*
P r A S N A I, P A r A L A 2 , KH AATiJA 7 .
1. Or he may rise silently.
2. Nor shall he (in going away) move around his 
teacher with his left hand turned towards him; he 
shall go away after having walked around him with 
his right side turned towards him.
3. He shall not look at a naked woman.
33. ‘ But Apastamba’s own opinion is that he ought not to 
address by name a (maternal uncle or other) Guru (who visits his 
teacher).’— Haradatta.
3g. According to I, i, 3, 40 seq., a student shall give what he 
is unable to eat to a child, or to a slave. 
If he has eaten in 
the presence of his teacher, he shall not give the food away 
without rising for the purpose.
7. 
3. Manu IV, 53; Y%fi. 1, 135.

--- PAGE 90 ---
26
A P A ST A M B A .
I, 2, 7.
4. He shall not cut the (leaves or flowers) of 
herbs or trees, in order to smell at them.
5. He shall avoid (the use of) shoes, of an 
umbrella, a chariot, and the like (luxuries).
6. He shall not smile.
7. If he smiles, he shall smile covering (the 
mouth with his hand); thus says a Brihma;2a.
8. He shall not touch a woman with his face, in 
order to inhale the fragrance of her body.
9. Nor shall he desire her in his heart.
10. Nor shall he touch (a woman at all) without 
a particular reason.
11. A Brdhmawa declares, ‘ He shall be dusty, he 
shall have dirty teeth, and speak the truth.’ 
,
12. Those teachers, who instructed his teacher in 
that science which he (the pupil) studies with him, 
(are to be considered as) spiritual teachers (by the 
pupil).
13. If (a teacher), before the eyes of his (pupil), 
embraces the feet of any other persons, he (the
4. Gopatha-brdhmawa I, 2, 2.
5. Manu II, 178.
10. Manu II, 179.
11. ‘ Though both (these first two precepts) have been given 
Sutra I, I, 2, 27, still they are repeated, in order to show that a 
-Srauta penance for the breach of them, is enjoined by a revealed 
text.’— Haradatta.
12. The term va/wfya, ‘ ancestor,’ for the teacher’s teacher is 
explained by the circumstance, that Hindus consider a ‘ school,’ 
consisting of a succession of teachers and pupils, as a spiritual 
family, and call it a vidyava/7«S, vidyaparampara. Manu II, 205.
13. ‘Another (commentator) says, “ He, the pupil, must embrace 
their feet (at every meeting) from that time (when he first saw 
his teacher do it).” Because the word “ but ” is used in the Sfitra, 
he must do so even after he has returned home (on completion of 
his studies).’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 91 ---
I, 2} 7'
ST U D E N T SH IP .
27
pupil) also must embrace their feet, (as long as he 
remains) in that (state of studentship).
14. If (a pupil) has more than one teacher, the 
alms (collected by him) are at the disposal of him to 
whom he is (just then) bound.
15. When (a student) has returned home (from 
his teacher), he shall give (whatever he may obtain 
by begging or otherwise) to his mother.
16. The mother shalfgive it to her husband;
17. (And) the husband to the (student’s) teacher.
18. Or he may use it for religious ceremonies.
19. After having studied as many (branches of) 
sacred learning as he can, he shall procure in a 
righteous manner the fee for (the teaching of) the 
Veda (to be given to his teacher), according to his 
power.
20. But, if the teacher has fallen into distress, he 
may take (the fee) from an Ugra or from a vyiidra.
14. 
‘ More than one teacher,' i. e. several, who have taught him 
the several Vedas. 
Each Brahman generally knowing one Veda 
only.
'This passage shows, that the young Brahmans in olden time, 
just as now, went from one teacher to the other, learning from 
each what he knew. 
The rules, which seemingly enjoin a pupil 
to stay with one and the same teacher, refer only to the principle, 
that the pupil must stay with his teacher, until he’ has learnt the 
subject which he began with him.
18. ‘ Religious ceremonies, i. e, the wedding and the like. 
For 
them he may use it optionally. 
He, i. e. on failure of the teacher; 
the father, on failure of the father; the mother, on failure of all 
(the pupil) himself.’— Haradatta.
19. Manu II, 245 and 246; Ya^a. I, 51; Weber, Ind. Stud. 
X, 125.
20. ‘ The word Ugra denotes either the offspring of aVauya 
and of a 6'Mra woman, or a twice-born man, who perpetrates 
dreadful deeds.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 92 ---
28
A P A ST A M B A .
I, 2, 7.
21. But some declare, that it is lawful at any 
time to take the money for the teacher from an 
Ugra or from a vyddra.
22. And having paid (the fee), he shall not boast 
of having done so.
23. And he shall not remember what he may 
have done (for his teacher).
24. He shall avoid self-praise, blaming others, 
and the like.
25. If he is ordered (by his teacher to do some­
thing), he shall do it at once.
26. On account of the incompetence of his 
teacher, (he may go) to another (and) study (there).
27. He shall behave, towards his teachei^’s wife 
as towards the teacher himself, but he shall not 
embrace her feet, nor eat the residue of her food.
28. So also (shall he behave) towards him who 
teaches him at (the teacher’s) command,
29. And also to a fellow-student who is superior 
(in learning and years).
30. He shall behave to his teacher’s son (who is
24. Manu II, 179.
26. See above, I, i, i, 12, and note. 
Here also Haradatta 
states that the permission to leave the teacher is to be restricted to 
those who have not solemnly bound themselves to their teacher by 
allowing him to perform the ceremony of initiation,
27. Manu II, 208-212.
28. ‘ The use of the present “ adhyapayati,” shows that this rule 
holds good only for the time during which he is taught by such 
a man.’— Haradatta.
29. ‘ Because (an, older fellow-student) is of use to him, accord­
ing to the verse : One-fourth (of his learning) a pupil receives 
from his teacher, one-fourth he acquires by his own intelligence, 
one-fourth from his fellow-students, one-fourth he is taught by 
time.’— Haradatta.
30. Manu II, 207-209.

--- PAGE 93 ---
I, 2 ,8 . 
A S T U D E N T W H O H A S R E T U R N E D H O M E.
29
superior to himself in learning or years) as to his 
teacher, but not eat the residue of his food.
31. 
Though he may have returned home, the 
behaviour towards his (teacher and the rest) which 
is prescribed by the rule of conduct settled by the 
agreement (of those who know the law), (must be 
observed by him to the end),
p R A 5N A I , 
P a T A L A 2, K H A W iJ A 8 .
1. Just as by a student (actually living with his 
teacher).
2. He may wear garlands, anoint his face (with 
sandal), oil his hair and moustaches, smear his eye­
lids (with collyrium), and (his body) with oil, wear a 
turban, a cloth round his loins, a coat, sandals, and 
wooden shoes.
3- Within the sight of his (teacher or teacher’s 
relations) he shall do none of those (actions, as 
putting on a garland), nor cause them to be done.
4. Nor (shall he wear garlands &c. whilst per­
forming) acts for his pleasure,
5. As, for instance, cleaning his teeth, shampoo­
ing, combing the hair„ and the like.
6. And the teacher shall not speak of the goods 
of the (pupil) with the intention to obtain them.
8. 
I. Haradatta does not connect this SQtra with the preced­
ing one. 
He explains it by itself: ‘ (We will now declare) how a 
student (who has left his teacher, but is not married) ought to 
behave.’
6. 
‘ If the teacher comes to the house of his (former) pupil (who 
has become a householder), he shall, for instance, not say, “ Oh, 
what a beautiful dishl” in such a manner, that his desire to obtain 
it becomes apparent.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 94 ---
30
a p a s t a m b a .
I, 2, 8.
7. But some declare, that, if a pupil who has 
bathed (after completing his studies) is called by his 
teacher or has gone to see-him, he shall not take off 
that (garland or other ornaments) which he wears 
according to the law at the time (of that ceremony).
8. He shall not sit on a seat higher (than that of 
his teacher),
9. Nor on a seat that has more legs (than that 
of his teacher),
10. Nor on a seat that stands more firmly fixed 
(on the ground than that of his teacher),
11. Nor shall he sit or lie on a couch or seat 
which is used (by his teacher).
12. If he is ordered (by his teacher), he sh^ll on 
a journey ascend a carriage after him.
13. (At his teacher’s command) he shall also enter 
an assembly, ascend a roller (which his teacher drags 
along), sit on a mat of fragrant grass or a couch of 
straw (together with his teacher).
14. If not addressed by a Guru, he shall not 
speak to him, except (in order to announce) good 
news.
7. 
This opinion is contrary to Apastamba’s view given in 
Shtras 2 and 3 above.
10. ‘ When he gives to his teacher a wooden seat (with legs), 
he shall not sit on a cane-seat (without legs), for the latter touches 
the ground on all sides.’— Haradatta.
11. ManuII, 119.
12. This rule is an exception to I, 2, 7, 5. 
Manu II, 204.
13. ‘ The roller is an implement used by husbandmen, with 
which the ploughed land is made even. 
If one person ascends it 
and another drags it along, the ground becomes even. 
If that is 
dragged by the teacher, the pupil shall ascend it at his command. 
He shall not disobey from fear of the unseemliness of the action.’— 
Haradattaf

--- PAGE 95 ---
1, 2, 8, 
A S T U D E N T W H O H A S R E T U R N E D H OM E. 
3T
15. He shall avoid to touch a Guru (with his 
finger), to whisper (into his ear), to laugh (into his 
face), to call out to him, to pronounce his name or to 
give him orders and the like (acts).
16. In time of need he may attract attention (by 
any of these acts),
17. If (a pupil) resides (in the same village) with 
(his teacher after the completion of his studies), he 
shall go to see him every morning and evening, 
without being called.
18. And if he returns from a journey, he shall 
(go to) see him on the same day.
19. If his teacher and his teacher’s teacher meet, 
he shall embrace the feet of his teacher’s teacher, 
and then show his desire to do the same to his 
teacher.
20. The other (the teacher) shall (then) forbid it.
21. And (other marks of) respect (due to the 
teacher) are omitted in the presence of the (teacher’s 
teacher),
22. And (if he does not live in the same village), 
he shall go frequently to his teacher’s residence, in 
order to see him, and bring him some (present), with 
his own hand, be it even only a stick for cleaning 
the teeth. 
Thus (the duties of a student have been 
explained).
23. He shall not approach empty-handed his 
mother, father, his teacher, the (sacred) fires, his 
house, or a king, if he has not known him (before).
15. Manu II, 199; regarding the term Guru, see above, 1,2,6, 29.
17. 
This and the following Shtras refer to a person who has 
finished his studentship, while the preceding ones-, from Sutra 8, 
apply to the time of studentship also.

--- PAGE 96 ---
32
A p a s t a m b a .
I) 2, 8.
24. (Now) the conduct of a teacher towards his 
pupil (will be explained).
25. Loving him like his own son, and full of 
attention, he shall teach him the sacred science, 
without hiding anything in the whole law.
26. And he shall not use him for his own pur­
poses to the detriment of his studies, except in times 
of distress.
2 7. That pupil who, attending to two (teachers), 
accuses his (principal and first) teacher of ignorance, 
remains no (longer) a pupil.
' 
28, A teacher also, who neglects the instruction
(of his pupil), does no (longer) remain a teacher.
29. If the' (pupil) commits faults, (the teacher) 
shall always reprove him.,
30. Frightening, fasting, bathing in (cold) water, 
and banishment from the teacher’s presence are the 
punishments (which are to be employed), according 
to the greatness (of the fault), until (the pupil) leaves 
olf (sinning).
31. He shall dismiss (the pupil), after he has 
performed the ceremony of the Samivartana and 
has finishecf his studentship, with these words,
‘ Apply thyself henceforth to other duties.’
25. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 126.
27. ‘ Another commentator says, “ That pupil who offends his 
teacher in word, thought, or deed, and directs his mind impro­
perly, i.e. does not properly obey, does not (any longer) remain a 
pupil.” ’— Haradatta.
30. 
But see also Manu VIII, egg, where corporal punishment 
is permitted.

--- PAGE 97 ---
1. 3. 9-
T H E ST U D Y O F T H E V E D A .
33
PRy>5NA I, P a T A L A 3, K
h AJVDA 9.
1. After having performed the Upikarma for 
studying the Veda on the full moon of the month 
K^rava^^a (July-August), he shall for one month not 
study in the evening.
2. On the full moon of the month Pausha 
(December-January), ,or under the constellation 
Rohi;d, he shall leave off reading the Veda.
3. Some declare, (diat he shall study) for four, 
months and a half.
4. He shall avoid to study the Veda on a market- 
road.
5. Or he may study it (on- a high-road), after 
having smeared (a space) with cowdung.
9. 
I. The UpS,karma is the ceremony which is performed every 
year at the beginning- of the course of study. 
It is in fact the 
solemn opening of the Brahmanic term. 
‘ Because Apastambd 
uses the word evening (i. e. first part of the night) it is not sinful to 
study later in the night.’— Haradatta. 
Manu IV, 95 ; Y^u. I, 142, 
143; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 130 and 134.
2. The term lasts therefore for five months; (i. e. latter half of 
■Srayawa, Bhadrapada, Ajvina,- Kartika, Margaiirsha, and the first 
half of Pausha.) 
The constellation Rohi«i comes in Pausha.
3. ‘ According to this latter opinion the Upakarma should be 
performed on the full moon of Bhadrapada, as has been taught in 
another work (IManu IV, 95); the (time of the) Utsar^ana, (the 
solemn closing of the term) should be advanced ; and after the 
Utsar^ana has been performed, one may study the Veda during 
the light nights of each month .until the full moon of Yravawa, 
in order to fix in one’s mind the part learned already; and in the 
dark fortnight of each month one may study the Vedangas, i. e. 
grammar and the rest (Manu IV, 98). 
On the full moon of Ariiva«a 
the Upakarma should be performed once more, and that part of 
the Veda should be studied which has not yet been learned.’— 
Haradatta.
[2]
D

--- PAGE 98 ---
34
A p a s t a m b a .
3» 9-
6. He shall never study in a burial-ground nor 
anywhere near it within the throw of a 6amya.
7. If a village has been built over (a burial- 
ground) or its surface has been cultivated as a field, 
the recitation of the Veda (in such a place) is not 
prohibited.
8. But if that place is known to have been (a 
burial-ground), he shall not study (there).
9. 
_ A 6’fidra and an outcast are (included by the 
term) burial-ground, (and the rule given, Srltra 6, 
applies to them.)
10. Some declare, that (one ought to avoid only, 
to study) in the same house (where they dwell).
11. But if (a student and) a vShdra womai[i merely 
look at each other, the recitation of the Veda must 
be interrupted,
12. Likewise, if (a student and) a woman, who 
has had connexion with a man of a lower caste, (look 
at each other.)
13. If he, who is about to study the Veda, wishes 
to talk to a woman during her courses, he shall first 
speak to a Brahmawa and then to her, then again 
speak to a Brihmawa, and afterwards study. Thereby 
the children (of that woman) will be blessed.
14. (He shall not study in a village) in which a
corpse lies; 
•
6. 
The 6'amyd is a round stick, about a foot and a half in 
length, which is used for the preparation of the Vedi. 
Manu IV, 
1163 Ya^a. I, 148.
8. ‘ Nor anywhere near it within the throw of a .Samya.’ 
This 
must be understood from Sutra 6.
9. YSj°-n. I, 148.
13. The last part of the Sfitra may also be interpreted : ‘ Thus 
she will be blessed with children.'— Haradatta.
14. Manu IV, io8; Ya^n. I, 148.

--- PAGE 99 ---
I. 3* 9-
T H E S T U D Y O F T H E V E D A .
35
15. Nor in such a one where K h id ^ ^ s live.
16. He shall not study whilst corpses are being 
carried to the boundary of the village,
17. Nor in a forest, if (a corpse or iif^wifala) is 
within sight.
18. And if outcasts have entered the village, he 
shall not study on that day,
19. Nor if good men (have come).
20. If it thunders^^n the evening, (he shall not 
study) during the night.
21. If lightning is seen (in the evening, he shall 
not study during that night), until he has slept.
22. If lightning is seen about the break of dawn, 
or at the time when he may distinguish at the dis­
tance of a vSamyi-throw, whether (a cow) is black or 
red, he shall not study during that day, nor in the 
following evening.
23. If it thunders in the second part of the third 
watch of the night, (he shall not study during the 
following day or evening.)
24. Some (declare, that this rule holds good, if it 
thunders), after the first half of the night has passed.
25. (Nor shall he study) whilst the cows are pre­
vented from, leaving (the village on account of thieves 
and the like).
18. Haradatta explains Bahya, ‘ outcasts,’ by ‘ robbers, such as 
Ugras and NishMas.’ But, I think, it means simply such outcasts 
who live in the forest or outside the village in the Y id i, as the 
Z>Aers, Mahdrs, Mangs of the present day. Most of these tribes, 
however, are or were given to thieving. See Kullflka on Manu X, 
28, and the Petersburg Diet. s. v.
19. Ya^fi. I, 150.
20. Manu IV, 106; Ya^fi. I, 145. 
‘ This rule refers to the 
rainy season. 
(For thunder) at other (seasons) he orders below 
a longer (cessation).’— Plaradatta.
D 2

--- PAGE 100 ---
■ 6
A P A ST A M B A .
I, 3. 10-
26. Nor whilst criminals, are being executed.
27. He shall not study whilst he rides on beasts 
(of burden).
28. At the new moon, (he shall not study) for 
two days and two nights.
P rasn a I, PArALA 3 , KHAivnA 10.
1. (Nor shall he study) on the days of the full 
moons of those months in which the A'iturmasya- 
sacrifice may be performed (nor on the days pre­
ceding them).
2. A t the time of the Vedotsarga, on the death of 
Gurus, at the Ash/akS,-6raddha, and at the time of 
the Up^karma, (he shall not study) for three days;
3. Likewise if near relations have died. ‘
4. (He shall not study) for twelve days, if his 
mother, father, or teacher have died.
27. Manu IV, 120; Y%a. I, 151.
28. ‘ “ For two days,” i. e. on the day of the new moon and the 
preceding one, the fourteenth of the half month.’— Haradatta. 
Manu IV, 113; Ya^n. I, 146.
10. 1. The three full-moon days are Phalguni (February-March), 
Ashai/^i (June-July)i Kartiki (October-November).
2. The- construction is very irregular, the first noun standing 
in the nominative and the rest in the locative. 
A similar irre­
gularity occurs below, I, 3, 11, 31. The Vedotsarga is the ceremony 
which is performed at the end of the Brahmanic term, in January. 
‘ In the case of the death of a Guru, the vacation begins with the 
iday on which the death occurs. 
On the other occasions men- 
‘ tioned he shall not study on the day preceding (the ceremony), on 
the day (of the ceremony), nor on the day following it.’— Haradatta. 
Manu IV, 119; Ya^ii. I, 144. 
‘ The Gurus’ intended here, are 
fathers-in-law, uncles, &c.
3. ‘ This rule applies to a student only. 
It is known from 
another work that those who have been infected by impurity (on 
the death of a relation), must not study whilst the impurity lasts.’-— 
Haradatta. YS^ft. I, 144.

--- PAGE 101 ---
I, 3> lo-
T H E S T U D Y OF T H E V E D A .
37
5. If these (have died), he must (also) bathe for 
the same number of days.
6. Persons who are younger (than the relation 
deceased), must shave (their hair and beard).
7. Some declare, that students who have returned 
home on completion of their studentship, shall never 
shave, except if engaged in the initiation to a .Srauta- 
sacrifice.
8. Now a Brahnrawa also declares, ‘ Forsooth an 
empty, uncovered (pot) is he, whose hair is shaved 
off entirely; the top-lock is his covering.’
9. But at sacrificial sessions the top-lock must be 
shaved off, because it is so enjoined in the Veda.
10. Some declare, that, upon the death of the 
teacher, (the reading should be interrupted) for three 
days and three nights.
IT. If (he hears of) the death of a learned Brah- 
ma?^a (6'rotu'iya) before a full year (since the death)
6. The word anubhavinaA, interpreted by Haradatta as ‘ persons 
who are younger than the deceased,’ is explained in different ways 
by others; firstly, as ‘ the mourners,’ and secondly, as ‘ Satnano- 
dakas or gentiles beyond the sixth degree.’ 
In the latter case the 
Sfitra ought to be translated thus: ‘On the death of gentiles beyond 
the sixth degree, (the head) ought to be shaved.’
7. Regarding the Diksha ‘ initiation,’ see Aitareya-brahmawa I, i, 
and Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 309 seq.
8. Hence it follows that the top-lock should not be shaved off, 
except in the case mentioned in the following Sfitra.
9. Sattras, ' sacrificial sessions,’ are sacrifices which last longer 
than twelve days.
I o. ‘ But in his opinion it should be twelve days, as declared 
above, Sutra 4.’— Haradatta. 
It appears, therefore, that this Sutra 
is to be connected with Sfitra 4.
II. ‘ Because the word “ death ” is used here, death only is the 
reason (for stopping the reading), in the case of Gurus and the 
rest (i.e. the word “ died” must be understood in Sutra 2 and 
the following ones).’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 102 ---
38
A P A ST A M B A ,
I> 3> lo*
has elapsed, (he shall interrupt his reading) for one 
night (and day).
12. Some declare, (that the deceased 6rotriya 
must have been) a fellow-student.
13. If a learned Br^hma;^a (6’rotriya) has arrived 
and he is desirous of studying or is actually study- 
ing, (or if he is desirous of teaching or is teaching,) 
he may study or teach after having received per­
mission (to do so from the 6rotriya).
14. He may likewise study or teach in the pre­
sence of his teacher, if (the latter) has addressed him 
(saying), ‘ Ho, study! (or. Ho, teach !)’
15. When a student desires to study or has 
finished his lesson, he shall at both occasions em­
brace the feet of his teacher.
16. Or if, whilst they study, another person comes 
in, he shall continue his recitation, after those words 
(‘ Ho, study!’) have been pronounced (by the new­
comer).
17. The barking of (many) dogs, the braying of 
(many) asses, the cry of a wolf or of a solitary jackal 
or of an owl, all sounds of musical instruments, of 
weeping, and of the Saman melodies (are reasons 
for discontinuing the study of the Veda).
14. Manu II, 73.
15. Manu II, 73.
16. Haradatta states rightly, that the plural (‘ they study’) is 
useless. 
According to him, the use of the verb in the singular 
may be excused thereby, that the advice is addressed to each of 
the persons engaged in study. Manu IV, 122.
17. The' ekasr/ka, ‘ solitary jackal,' is now called Balu or 
Pheough, and is considered to be the constant companion of a 
tiger or panther. Its unharmonious cry is, in the present day also, 
considered to be an evil omen. 
Yagn. I, 148; Manu IV, 108, 
11.5 and 123.

--- PAGE 103 ---
40
A P A ST A M B A ,
Ij 3) II-
28. 
But he shall (always) eat in addition (to the 
meal given in honour of a dead person), food which 
has not been given at a sacrifice to the Manes.
P r a ^ xMa I, PArALA 3, K
i i a a d a 1 1 .
1. (The recitation of the Veda shall be interrupted 
for a day and evening if he has eaten), on beginning 
a fresh K A u d a (of his Veda), food given by a mother­
less person,
2. And also if he has eaten, on the day of the com­
pletion of a 
food given by a fatherless person.
3. Some declare, that (the recitation shall be inter­
rupted for the same space of time), if he has eaten 
at a sacrifice offered in honour of gods who w'ere 
formerly men. 
i
4. Nor is the recitation interrupted, if he has 
eaten rice received the day before, or raw meat 
(though these things may have been offered in 
honour of the dead).
28. ‘ Because in this Shtra the "expression “ food not given at 
a .Sraddha ” occurs, some think that the preceding Shlra refers 
to “ food eaten at a .Sraddha.” ’— Haradatta. 
This explanation 
is not«t all improbable. 
At least I think that both the Shta- 
kanna and the Aaddhanna (Manu IV, 112) are intended by the 
term pretasa;«k/fpta.
11. I. The Black Ya^ur-veda, to which Apastamba belongs, is 
divided throughout into books called Ka«(fas.
3. Haradatta names as such gods, on the authority of the 
Brahma-purawa, i^uvera, Nandirvara, and Kumara. 
Other com­
mentators, however, explain Manushyaprakrr'ti by Rlanushyamukha, 
‘ possessing human faces.’ A similar rule occurs Gautama XVI, 34, 
where a Manushyaya^na is mentioned as a cause for discontinu­
ing the recitation of the Veda. In his commentary on Gautama, 
also, Haradatta is in doubt. 
He first refers the term to the sacra­
ments like the Simantonnayana, and then adds, that some explain 
it to mean ‘ a sacrifice to gods who formerly were men.’
4. This Sfitra is an exception to I, 3,10, 26.

--- PAGE 104 ---
I, 3> 10-
T H E S T U D Y OF T H E V E D A .
39
18. If another branch of the Veda (is being recited 
in the neighbcfurhood), the Siman melodies shall not 
be studied.
19. And whilst other noises (are being heard), 
(the recitation of the Veda shall be discontinued), if 
they mix (with the voice of the person studying).
20. After having vomited (he shall not study) 
until he has slept.
21. Or (he may study) having eaten clarified 
butter (after the attack of vomiting).
22. A foul smell (is a reason for the discon­
tinuance of study).
23. Food turned sour (by fermentation), which 
he has in his stomach, (is a reason for the dis­
continuance of the recitation, until the sour rising 
ceases.)
24. (Nor shall he study) after having eaten in the 
evening,
25. Nor as long as his hands are wet.
26. (And he shall discontinue studying) for a day 
and an evening, after having eaten food prepared in 
honour of a dead person (for whom the ^api«^?fi- 
kara«a has not yet been performed),
27. Or until the food (eaten on that occasion) is 
digested.
19. Manu IV, 121.
20. ManuIV, i2i.
22. IMaiiu IV, 107 ; Ya^fl. I, 150.
23. Manu IV, 121.
24., ‘ Therefore he shall sup, after having finished his study.’— 
Haradatta.
Manu IV, 121; Y%fi. I, 149.
26. ManuIV, 112; Yasgii. I, 146.
27. ‘ If that food has not been digested by the end of that 
time (i. e. in the evening), he shall not study until it has been 
digested.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 105 ---
1. 3. II-
T H E S T U D Y O F T H E V E D A .
41
5. Nor (if he has eaten at a funeral dinner) roots 
or fruits of herbs and trees.
6. When he performs the . ceremony for beginning 
a KS.«fl?a, or when he studies the index of the Anu- 
vikas of a (Ki;2flfa), he shall not study-that
on that day (nor in that night).
7. And if he performs the ceremonies prescribed 
on beginning or ending the recitation of one entire 
Veda, he shall not study that Veda (during that day).
8. If the wind roars, or if it whirls up the grass 
on the ground, or if it drives the rain-drops forward 
during a rain-shower, (then the recitation shall be 
interrupted for so long a time as the storm lasts.)
9. (Nor shall he study) on the boundary between 
a village and forest,
10. Nor on a highway.
11. If (some of his) fellow-students are on a
6. Haradatta’s commentary on this Sutra is very meagre, and 
he leaves the words ‘yasya .fdnuvakyawz kurvita’ unexplained. I 
am not certain that my explanation is correct. 
But it is coun­
tenanced by the statements of the Grfhya-sulras regarding the 
order of studying. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 132.
7. Y%n. I, 145. 
This Sutra is a Guapaka or ‘ such a one 
which indicates the existence of a rule not expressly mentioned.’ 
Above (I, 3, 9, i) the yearly performance of the Upakarma and 
Utsarga ceremonies for the beginning and end of the Brahmanic 
term has been prescribed. 
In this Sfilra the performance of the 
Upakarma and Utsarga at the beginning and completion of the 
Parayawa or the vow to go through a whole Veda is incidentally 
mentioned. Thence it may be inferred that these ceremonies mustj 
be likewise performed on the latter occasions, though no absolute] 
rule to this effect has been given. Such Gfiapakas are of frequenf 
occurrence in all Shtras, and constitute one of the chief difficulties 
of their interpretation.
8. Y%n. I, 149; Manu IV, 102, 122.
11. Others explain the Sutra thus : ‘ If he meets fellow-

--- PAGE 106 ---
42
A PA ST A M B A .
I. 3> ” •
journey, he shall not study, during that day, (the 
passage) which they learn together.
12. And whilst performing acts for his pleasure,
13. Such as washing his feet, shampooing or 
anointing himself,
14. He shall neither study nor teach, as long as 
he is thus occupied.
15. (He shall not study or teach) in the twilight,
16. Nor whilst sitting on a tree,
17. Nor whilst immersed in water,
18. Nor at night with open doors,
19. Nor in the day-time with shut doors.
20. During the spring festival and the festival (of 
Indra), in the month of Ashad/ia. (Juue-July), j the 
study of an Anuvaka is forbidden.
21. (The recitation) of the daily portion of the 
Veda (at the Brahmaya^na is likewise forbidden if 
done) in a manner differing from the rule (of the 
Veda).
22. (Now follows) the rule (for the dally recita­
tion) of that (Brahmaya^na).
students, after they have come home from a journey, he shall not 
study with them on that day.’
15. Y^^n. I, 145; Manu IV, 113.
16. Y%n. I, 151; Manu IV, 120.
20. According to Haradatta, Apastamba uses the word Anuvaka 
in order to indicate that smaller portions of the Veda may be 
studied. 
Others think, that by Anuvaka, the Sa/«hita and the 
BrShmawa are meant, and that the study of the Angas is per­
mitted. 
The Vasantotsava, or spring-festival, which, according to 
the Dramas, was, in olden times, kept all over India, falls, according 
to Haradatta, on the thirteenth of the first half of Aaitra, about 
the beginning of April.
21. ‘ Hence, if one has forgotten it and eaten one’s breakfast, a 
penance, not the Brahmaya^iia, must be performed.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 107 ---
I. 3. II-
T H E S T U D Y OF T H E V E D A .
4 3
23. Before taking his morning-meal, he shall go 
to the water-side, and having purified himself, he 
shall recite aloud (a portion of the Veda) in a pure 
place, leaving out according to (the order of the) 
texts (what he has read the day before),
24. If a stoppage of study is enjoined (for the 
day, he shall recite the daily portion) mentally.
25. 'If lightning flashes without interruption, or, 
thunder rolls continually, if a man has neglected to 
purify himself, if he has partaken of a meal in honour 
of a dead person, or if hoarfrost lies on the ground,. 
(in these cases) they forbid the mental recitation (of 
the daily portion of the Veda).
• 26. Some forbid it only in case one has eaten a 
funeral dinner.
27. Where lightning, thunder, and rain happen 
together out of season, the recitation shall be inter­
rupted for three days.
28. Some (declare, that the recitation shall stop) 
until the ground is dry,
29. If one or two (of the phenomena mentioned 
in Sutra 27 appear, the recitation shall be interrupted) 
from that hour until the same hour next day.
30. In the case of an eclipse of the sun or of the
23. See Taittiriya Arawyaka II, ii, i and n ; A sv. G rt. SA III, 
2, 1-2, In our days this rule is usually not observed. Brahmawas 
mostly recite at the daily Brahmaya^fia, ‘ Veda-offering,’ one par­
ticular formula, which symbolically comprises the whole Veda. 
A few learned Brahmawa friends, however, have assured me, that 
they still recite the whole of their Aakha every year according to 
this rule of Apastamba.
25. Ya^K. I, 149; ManuIV, 106,120, 127; Taitt. Ar. II, 15, i.
26. ManuIV, 109, 116.
27. Manu IV, 103 and 104.
30. Ya^u. I, 145; Manu IV, log, n8.

--- PAGE 108 ---
44
A P A S T A M B A .
I, 3. II-
moon, of an earthquake, of a whirlwind, of the fall of a 
meteor, or of a fire (in the village), at whatever time 
these events happen, the recitation of all the sacred 
sciences (Vedas and Angas) must be interrupted 
from that hour until the same hour next day.
31. If a cloud appears out of season, if the sun or 
the moon is surrpunded by a halo, if a rainbow, a 
parhelion or a comet appears, if a (high) wind (blows), 
a foul smell (is observed), or hoarfrost (lies on the 
ground), at all these occasions (the recitation of all 
.the sacred sciences must be interrupted) during the 
duration (of these phenomena).
32. After the wind has ceased, (the interruption 
of the recitation continues) for one muhfirta.
33. If (the howl of) a wolf or of a solitary jackal 
(has been heard, he shall stop the reading) until he 
has slept.
34. At night (he shall not study) in a wood, where 
there is no fire nor gold.
35. Out of term he shall not study any part of 
the Veda which he has not learnt before.
36. Nor (shall he study during term some new 
part of the Veda) in the evening.
37. That which has been studied before, must 
never be studied (during the vacation or in the
evening).
31. Manu IV, 104, and see above.
32, One muhurta=48 minutes.
36. Other commentators interpret the Sutra in a different sense. 
They take it to mean ; ‘ And during the night (from the twelfth 
to the thirteenth of each half of the month, he shall not study at 
all, be it in or out of term).’
37. ‘ What has been studied before, must not be studied (again) 
at any time in the vacation nor in the evening.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 109 ---
I, 4, 12.
T H E S T U D Y O F T H E V E D A .
45
38. 
Further particulars (regarding the interruption 
of the Veda-study may be learnt) from the (teaching 
and works of other) Vedic schools.
P r a j n a I, P a t a l a 4, K
h a w d a 12.
T. A Br^hmawa declares, ‘The daily recitation (of 
the Veda) is austerity.’
2. In the same (sacred text) it is also declared, 
‘ Whether he recites the daily portion of the Veda 
standing, or sitting, or dying down, he performs aus­
terity thereby; for the daily recitation is austerity.
3. Now the V4^asaneyi-brahma7^a declares also,
38. 
Haradatta thinks that by ‘ Parishad,’ Manu’s and other Dhar- 
ma-^astras are meant. 
This explanation is, however, not exact. 
Parishad, ‘ assemblage,’ means, in the language of the .Sastras, 
either a Pani, an assemblage of learned Brahmans called together 
to decide some knotty point of law, or a Brahminical school, which j 
studies a particular redaction of the Veda (see the Petersburg' 
Diet. s. V.) 
The latter meaning is that applicable to this Sdtra. 
By ‘ Parishada;^ ’ are here intended the Vedic schools, and their 
writings and teaching. 
Gautama also says, XVI, 49, Pratividya;« 
yan smaranti smaranti, ‘ (he shall observe the stoppages of the 
Veda-stud)') which they teach in (the writings Belonging to) each 
of the Vedas.’
12.1. ‘ It procures as much reward as penance.’— Haradatta. 
Manu II, 166; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 113. 
The phrase occurs 
frequently in the Brahmawas, e. g. Taitt. Ar. II, 14, 3.
2. Regarding the proper position at the ‘ Veda-offering,’ or 
daily recitation, see above, I, 3, 1, 23, and Taitt. Ar. II, it, 3. 
Passages similar to the first part of the sentence quoted in this 
Sfitra occur Taitt. Ar. II, 12, 3, and itj, 3. 
It ought to be observed, 
that the Taitt. Ar. in both places has the word ‘ vra^an,’ which is 
also read in the P. and P. U. hlSS. 
The second part is taker! 
apparently from the same work, II, I4, 2.
3. See Xatapatha-brfihmawa XI, 5, 6, 8, where a passage very 
similar to that quoted by Apastamba occurs. Vasha/ and the other 
exclamations, which are pronounced by the Hotrf-priest, serve as 
signals for the Adhvaryu to throw th? oblations into the fire.

--- PAGE 110 ---
46
A P A S T A M B A .
I) 4. »2.
‘ The daily recitation is a sacrifice at which the Veda 
is offered. When it thunders, when lightning flashes 
or thunderbolts fall, and when the wind blows vio­
lently, these sounds take the place of the exclama­
tions Vasha^ (Vausha/ and Svihi). , Therefore he 
shall recite the Veda whilst it thunders, whilst light­
ning flashes and thunderbolts fall, and whilst the 
wind blows violently, lest the Vasha/ (should be 
heard) in vain.’
4. The conclusion of the passage from that(Va>a- 
saneyi-brahma^za is found) in another 6akhi (of the 
Veda).
5. ‘ Now, if the wind blows, or if it thunders, or 
if lightning flashes, or thunderbolts fall, then he 
shall recite one ./?fk-verse (in case he stud,ies the
-i^zg-veda), or one Y a ^ s (in case he studies the 
Ya^ur-veda), or one Saman (in case he studies the 
Sama-veda), or (without having regard to his par­
ticular Veda, the following Ya^us), “ B h h /i Bhuva^, 
Suva^, in faith I offer true devotion.” Then, for­
sooth, his daily recitation is accomplished thereby 
for that day.’
6. If that is done, (if the passage of the Va^a- 
saneyi-brAlima;^a is combined with that quoted in 
Sfitra 5, the former stands) not in contradiction with 
the decision of the Aryas.
7. For they (who know the law) teach both the 
continuance and the interruption (of the daily re­
citation of the Veda). That would be meaningless.
5. ‘ Some suppose that the words Bhh/i Bhuva^ and Suva^ &c. 
(are to be used only) if one studies the Brahmawa portion of the 
Veda, not everywhere.’— Haradatta.
6. Haradatta explains Aryas by virish/a^, ‘ excellent ones,’ i. e. 
persons w)jo know the law, and he gives Mann as an instance.

--- PAGE 111 ---
4> 12.
T H E S T U D Y O F T H E V E D A .
47
if one paid attention to the (passage of the) V^^- 
saneyi-brihmawa (alone).
8. 
For no (worldly) motive for the decision of 
those Aryas is perceptible; (and hence it must have 
a religious motive and be founded on a passage of 
the Veda.)
g. (The proper interpretation therefore is, that) 
the prohibition to study (given above and by the 
Aryas generally) refers only to the repetition of the 
sacred texts in order to learn them, not to their 
application at sacrifices.
10. (But if you ask, why the decision of the Aryas 
presupposes , the existence of a Vedic passage, then I 
answer): All precepts were (originally) taught in the 
Brahma«as, (but) these texts have been lost.
11. Their (former existence) may, however, be 
inferred from usage.
12. But it is not (permissible to infer the former ' 
existence of) a (Vedic) passage in cases where plea­
sure is obtained (by following a rule of the Smreti 
or a custom).
13. He who follows such (usages) becomes fit 
fdr hell.
14. Now follow (some rites and) rules that have 
been declared in the Brihmawas.
8. See above, I, i, 4, 9 and 10, and notes.
11. How then is their existence known? 
‘ They are inferred 
from usage.’ 
‘ “ Usage ” means the teaching of the law-books 
and the practice. 
From that it is inferred that Manu and other 
(authors of law-books) knew such te.xts of the BrShma«as. 
For 
how could otherwise (i?fshis like Manu) teach in their works or 
practise (such customs) for which no authority is now found? 
And certainly they were intimately connected with the revealed 
texts (i. e. saw them).’— Haradatta.
12. Compare above, I, i, 4, 8 -10 .
14- The consequence of the introduction of these rules into a

--- PAGE 112 ---
4 8 .
AJPASTAMBA.
I) 4. J3-
15. By way of laudation they are called ‘ great 
sacrifices ’ or ‘ great sacrificial sessions.’
16. (These rites include): The daily Ball-offering 
to the (seven classes of) beings; the (daily) gift of 
(food) to men according to one’s power;
P r a s 'N A I, P A r A L A 4, K
h a a d a 13.
1. The oblation to the gods accompanied by the 
exclamation Svaha, which may consist even of a pieco 
of wood only; the offering to the Manes accompanied 
by the exclamation Svadhi, which may consist even 
of a vessel with water only; the daily recitation for 
the y?/shis.
2. Respect must be shown to those who are 
superior by caste,
3. And also to (persons of the same caste who are) 
venerable (on account of learning, virtue, and the like).
4. A man elated (with success) becomes proud, a 
proud man transgresses the law, but through the 
transgression of the law, forsooth, hell (becomes his 
portion).
SmrAi work is, that their omission must be expiated by a Smarta 
penanc.e and not by a 5'rauta one.
15. 
The commentator obsen-es, that, as these rites are called 
‘ great sacrifices,’ by way of laudation only, the particular laws 
binding on performers of real Soma-sacrifices cannot be transferred 
to the performers of these ceremonies. 
Regarding the term 
‘ great sacrifices,’ see also Taitt. Ar. II, ii, 10, i seq., and 5 ata-- 
patha-braiimawa XI, 5, 6, i.
13. 
I. Taitt. Ar. II, 10, 2 and 3, and Xatapatha-br. loc. cit. 2. 
Haradatta observes, ihat some consider the Devaya^^ua, mentioned 
in the Sfitra, to be different from the Vaiivadeva, but that he holds 
it to be the same. 
Further he mentions, that some prescribe this 
Vaiivadeva to be performed even if one has nothing to eat.
2. 
‘ Namely, by allowing them to walk in front on the road and 
by giving them- perfumed garlands and the like at festive occasions.’ 
-—Haradatta.

--- PAGE 113 ---
I, 4, 13. ■ 
A S T U D E N T W H O H AS R E T U R N E D H OM E. 
4 9
5. It has not been declared, that orders (may 
be addressed by the teacher) to a pupil who has 
returned home.
6. The syllable ‘ Om ’ is the door of heaven. 
Therefore he who is about to study the Veda, shall 
begin (his lesson) by (pronouncing) it.
7. If he has spoken anything else (than what 
refers to the lesson, he shall resume his reading by 
repeating the word ‘ Om ’). Thus the Veda is sepa­
rated from profane speech. 
And at sacrifices the 
orders (given to the priests) are headed by this word.
8. And in common life, at the occasion of cere­
monies performed for the' sake of welfare, the sen­
tences shall be headed by this word, as, for instance, 
‘ (Om) an auspicious day,’ ‘ (Om) welfare,’ ‘ (Om) 
prosperity.’
9- Without a vow of obedience (a pupil) shall not 
study (nor a teacher teach) a difficult (new book) 
with the exception of (the texts called) Tri/isr^vana. 
and Tri/^sahava^ana.
. 10. Hirita declares, that the (whole) Veda must
5. H aradatta g iv es as an exam p le the ord er to fetch w ater, and 
•adds that a volu ntary act on a form er p u p il’s part o u g h t n ot to be 
forbidden.
6 . C om p are also T a itt. A r. I, 2, 4, and M an u IT, 74.
8. The example given in the Sfltra is that of the PuMyShava/fana, 
which precedes every G/vhya ceremony, and at which the sacrificer 
requests a number of invited Brahma^/as to wish him success. The 
complete sentences are, The sacrificer: O m karma^/a.4 puwyaham 
bhavanto bruvantviti, ‘ Om, ■wish that the day may be auspicious 
for the performance of the ceremony.' 
The Brahma;/as: Om 
puwyahaw karmawa iti, ‘ Om, may the day be auspicious for the 
cerpmony.’ 
In the same manner the Brahmawas afterwards wish 
‘ welfare,’ svasti, ‘ prosperity,’ vrfddhi, to the sacrificer.
9. Manu II, 112.
iq . T h e m ean in g o f H d rita is, that the vo w o f ob ed ien ce is 
[2 ] 
E

--- PAGE 114 ---
50
A P A S T A M B A .
h 4> 13- ‘
be studied under a vow of obedience until there is 
no doubt (regarding it in the mind of the pupil).
11. No obedience is due (to the teacher for teach-, 
ing) works which do not belong to the Veda.
12. (A student) shall embrace the feet of a person, 
who teaches him at the request of his (regular 
teacher), as long as the instruction lasts.
13. Some (declare, that he shall do so) always, (if 
the substitute is) a worthy person.
14. But obedience (as towards the teacher) is not 
required (to be shown towards such a person).
15. And (pupils) older (than their teacher need 
not show him obedience).
16. If (two persons) teach each other mutually 
(different redactions of) the Veda, obedience (towards 
each other) is not ordained for them.
17. (For) the (wise) say, ‘ The Veda-knowledge 
(of either of them) grows.’
18. 6’vetaketu.declares, ‘ He who desires to study 
more, after having settled (as a householder), shall 
dwell two months every year, with collected mind, 
in the house of his teacher,’
ig. (And he adds), ‘ For by this means I studied 
a larger part of the Veda than before, (during my 
studentship.)’ 
’ 
»
required for the Tri^jravawa and Tri//sahava/4ana, which Apastamba 
exempted in the preceding Shtra. 
It follows from this rale that 
the Angas or works explanatory of the Veda need not be studied 
under a vow of obedience.
12. T h is rule is a supplem en t to I, 2, 7, 28.
13. ‘ “ A worthy person,” i.e. on account of his learning or 
character.'— Haradatta.
15. ‘ According to some, this rule refers only to the time after 
the instruction has been completed ; according to others, to the 
time of studentship.’— Haradatta. But see Manu II, 151 seq.

--- PAGE 115 ---
I, 
4 ,1 4 . 
A S T U D E N T W H O H A S R E T U R N E D HOM E.
51
20. That is forbidden by the 6'astras.
21. For after the student has settled as a house­
holder, he is ordered by the Veda, to perform the 
daily rites,
P r a j n a I, P a t a l a 4 , 
K
h a n d a 14.
1. (That is to say) the Agnihotra, hospitality,
2. And what else of this kind^s ordained^
3. He whom (a student) asks for instruction, shall 
certainly not refuse i t ;
4. Provided he does not see in him a fault, (which 
disqualifies him from being taught.)
5. If by chance (through the pupil’s stupidity the 
teaching) is not completed, obedience towards the 
(teacher is the pupil’s only refuge).
■6. Towards a mother (grandmother and great­
grandmother) and a father (grandfather and great­
grandfather) the same obedience must be shown as 
towards, a teacher.
7. The feet of all Gurus must be embraced (every 
day) by a student who has returned home ;
8. And also on meeting them, after returning 
from a journey.
9. The feet of (elder) brothers and sisters must be 
embraced, according to the order of their seniority.
14. 
I. T h e A gn ih o tra, i.e. certain daily ob lation s o f clarified butter.
3. Manu II, 109-115.
5. Manu II, 218.
6. Manu II, 228, 235.
7. The word Gurus, ‘ venerable persons,’ includes besides the 
teacher and persons mentioned in the preceding Sfitra, an elder 
brother, a maternal uncle, and all others who -are one’s betters 
or elders. See above, I, 2, 6, 29-34.
8. ‘That is to say, whether he himself or “ the venerable persons’’ 
undertook the journe}'.’—'Haradatta.
9. Manu II, 133.
E 2 '

--- PAGE 116 ---
52
A P A ST A M B A ,
I, 4. 14-
*io. And respect (must) always (be shown to one’s 
elders and betters), according to the injunction (given 
above and according to the order of their seniority).
II, 
He shall salute an officiating priest, a father- 
in-law, a father’s brother, and a mother’s brother, 
(though they may be) younger than he himself, and 
(when saluting) rise to meet them.
12. Or he may silently embrace their feet.
13. A friendship kept for ten years with fellow- 
citizens (is a reason for giving a salutation, and so 
is) a friendship, contracted at school, which lasted 
for five years. But a learned Brahmawa (known) for 
less than three years, must be saluted.
14. If the age (of several persons whom one 
meets) is exactly known, one- must salute the eldest 
(first).
15. He need not salute a person, who is not a 
Guru, and who stands in a lower or higher place 
than he himself,
16. Or he may descend or ascend (to the place 
where such a person stands) and salute him.
17. But every one (Gurus and others) he shall 
salute, after having risen (from his seat).
18. If he is impure, he shall not salute (anybody);
10. See above, I, 4, 13, 2.
11. ManuII, 130.
12. The commentator adds that the mode of salutation must 
depend on their learning and virtue.
13. Manu II, 134.
16. This Shtra, like the preceding, refers to those who are 
not ‘ Gurus.’
17. Manu II, 120.
18. ‘ Impure,’ i.e. unfit for associating with others on account 
of the death of relations or through other causes, see below, I, 5>
15. 7 seq.

--- PAGE 117 ---
*> 4, 14-
S A L U T IN G .
53
19. (Nor shall he salute) a person who is impure.
20. Nor shall he, being impure, return a saluta­
tion.
21. Married women (must be saluted) according 
to the (respective) ages of their husbands.
22. He shall not salute with his shoes on, or his 
head wrapped up, or his hands full.
23. In saluting women, a Kshatriya or a Vabya 
he shall use a pronoun, not his name.
24. Some (declare, that he shall salute in this 
manner even) his mother and the wife of his 
teacher.
25. Know that a Brahma;^a of ten years and a 
Kshatriya of a hundred years stand to each other in 
the relation of father and son. But between those 
two the Br^hma;za is the father.
26. A younger person or one of equal age he 
shall ask, about his well-being (employing the word 
kui’ala).
27. (He shall ask under the same conditions) 
a Kshatriya, about his health (employing the word 
anamaya);
28. A Vai.yya if he has lost anything (employing 
the word anash/a).
23. He shall say, ‘I salute,’ not ‘ I, N. N., salute.’ Manu II, 123.
24. Apastamba, of course, holds the contrary opinion. 
Manu 
II, 216.
25. This verse, which is found with slight variations in most 
Sm7'ftis, contains, according to Haradatta, an instruction given by 
a teacher to his pupil. Alanu II, 135.
26. Of course, in case the person addressed is a Brahman. 
Manu II, 127. 
Kullfika quotes under this verse the above and 
the following Sfitras. 
But his quotation has only a faint resem­
blance to our text.
28. That is to say in these terms: ‘ I hope you have not lost 
any cattle or other property]’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 118 ---
54
A P A ST A M B A .
I; 5> ^O-
29. A .S'udra, about his health (employing the 
word drogya).
30. He shall not pass a learned Brahmawa with­
out addressing him ; nor an (unprotected) woman in 
a forest (or any other lonely place).
Pra5xNTA I, Patala 5, K iiajvda 15.
1. When he shows his respect to Gurus or' aged 
persons or guests, when he offers a burnt-oblation 
(or other sacrifice), when he murmurs prayers at 
dinner, when sipping water and during the (daily) 
recitation of the Veda, his garment (or his sacrificial 
thread) shall pass over his left shoulder and under 
his right arm. 
'
2. By sipping (pure) water,^ that' has been col­
lected on the ground, he becomes pure.
3. Or he, whom a pure'person causes to sip water, 
(becomes also pure.)
4. He shall not sip rain-drops.
30. He shall address a woman in order to re-assure her, and 
do it in these terms: ‘ Mother, or sister, what can I do for you ? 
Don’t be afraid! ’ &c.— Haradatta.
15. I. Taitt. Ar. II, i, 2 seq.; Manu IV, 58.
2. Pure water is that which a cow will drink. Ya^il. I, 192; 
Manu V, 128.
3. The ceremony of ‘ sipping water ’ may be perfonned in two 
ways; either the ‘ person sipping ’ may take the water out of a 
river, pond, &c., or he'may get the water poured into his hand by 
another person. 
But, according to Apastamba, he must not take 
a pot or gourd in his left hand and pour the water into his right, 
as some Smrftis allow. 
The reason for this rule is, that Apa­
stamba considers it essential that both hands should be used in 
conveying the water to the mouth; see also above, I, r, 4, 21. 
This agrees with the custom now followed, which is to bend the 
right hand into the form of a cow’s ear, and to touch the right 
wrist with the left hand while drinking.
4. ‘ Some think, that this Shtra is intended to forbid also 
the drinking of rain-water. 
Other commentators declare that.

--- PAGE 119 ---
I) S>
P U R IF IC A T IO N .
55
5. (He shall not sip water) from a (natural) cleft 
in the ground.
6. He shall not sip water heated (at the fire) 
except for a particular reason (as sickness).
7. He who raises his empty hands (in order to 
scare) birds, (becomes impure and) shall wash (his 
hands).
8. If he can (find water to sip) he shall not remain 
impure (even) for a muhhrta.
9. Nor (shall he remain) naked (for a muhurta if 
he can help it).
10. Purification (by sipping water) shall not take 
place whilst he is (standing) in th^ water.
11. Also, when he has crossed a river, he shall 
purify himself by sipping water.
12. H e shall not place fuel on the fire, without 
having sprinkled it (with water).
13. (If he is seated in company with) other unclean
according to this Sdtra, it is allowed to use for “ sipping ” drops' 
of water which fall from a vessel suspended by ropes [because th^ 
Sfitra emphatically excludes “ rain-drops ” only].’— Haradatta.
6. Manu II, 61. ‘ Because the term “ heated by fire” is used, 
there is no objection to water heated by the rays of the sun. In 
the same manner the use of “ hot” water only is usually forbidden 
in the Smrftis.’— Haradatta.
7. ‘ Because the phrase “ with empty hands” is used, he commits 
no fault if he raises his hand, holding a stick or a clod. 
Some 
declare, that the term “ touching water ” (rendered by “ washing ”) 
means “ sipping water.” ’— Haradatta.
11. The translation given above is based on the interpretation 
of Haradatta, who considers that Apastamba holds ‘ crossing a 
river ’ to cause impurity. The natural and probably the right inter­
pretation, however, is that rejected by Haradatta, ‘ But he shall sip 
water after having come out (of the river or tank).’
12. ‘ “ On the fire used for Vedic or Smfirta sacrifices or for 
household purposes.” . . . Some declare, that (the fuel need not be 
sprinkled with water) if used for the kitchen fire.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 120 ---
56
A P A ST A M B A .
I) 5> ^5'
persons on a seat consisting of a confused heap 
of straw, and does not touch them, he may consider 
himself pure.
14. (The same rule applies, if he is seated) on 
grass or wood fixed in the ground.
15. He shall put on a dress, (even if it is clean,) 
only after having sprinkled it with water.
16. If he has been touched by a dog, he shall 
bathe, with his clothes on ;
17. Or he becomes pure, after having washed 
that part (of his body) and having touched it with 
fire and again washed it, as well as his feet, and 
having sipped water.
18. Unpurlfied, he shall not approach fire, (so 
near that he can feel the heat.)
19. - Some declare, that (he shall not approach 
nearer) than the length of an arrow.
20. Nor shall he blow on fire with his breath.
21. Nor shall he place fire under his bedstead.
22. It is lawful for a Brilima?^a to dwell in a
14. Haradatta’s commentary is oflittle use, and I am not quite 
certain that my translation is correct.
1 5. Manu V, n 8.
17. This second proceeding is adopted in case the dog has 
touched the hands or the lower parts of the body, as may be learnt 
by the comparison of a verse of Manu.
18. Manu IV, 14?; Ya^ii. I, 155.
20. Manu IV, 53. 
Haradatta mentions other explanations of 
this Sutra. 
Some say that the 6'rauta fire may be kindled by 
blowing, because that is ordained particularly in the Va^asaneyaka, 
but that the domestic fire is not to be treated so. 
Others again 
consider the rule absolute, and say, that a hollow reed or bellows 
must be used for kindling the fii'e, lest drops of saliva should fall 
upon it.
21. Manu IV, 54.
22. The last condition mentioned in the Siitra indicates, that

--- PAGE 121 ---
I) 5> i6.
P U R IF IC A T IO N .
57
village, where there is plenty of fuel and water, 
(and) where he may perform the rites of purification 
by himself.
23. 
When he has washed away the stains of urine 
and fieces after voiding ui'ine or feces, the stains of 
food (after dinner), the stains of the food eaten the 
day before (from his vessels), and the stains of 
semen, and has also washed his feet and afterwards 
has sipped water, he becomes pure.
Prasna I, Patala 5, KHAi^^nA 16.
1. He shall not drink water standing or bent 
forwards.
2. Sitting he shall sip water (for purification) 
thrice, the water penetrating to his heart.
3. He shall wipe his lips three times.
the place must have a river or tank, not wells only, as the purifi­
cation by sipping water cannot be performed without help, with 
water from wells.
23. Manu V, 138.
16. 
I. Haradatta takes aA’amhere to mean ‘ to drink water,’ and 
thinks that it is forbidden to do this standing or in a bent position. 
Others refer the prohibition to ‘ sipping water for the sake of 
purification,’ and translate, ‘ He shall not sip water standing or in 
a bent position (except in case of necessity),’ i. e. if the bank of the 
river is so high that he cannot reach the water sitting down,' and 
in this case he shall enter it up to his thighs or up to his navel.
2. 
Manu II, 60 and 62; V, 139; and Ya^fl. I, 20 and 27; 
Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 165. 
Haradatta observes, that the further 
particulars regarding purification by sipping water must be supplied 
from other Smrftis. 
The rule quoted by him is as follows; ‘ The 
performer should be sitting in a pure place, not on a seat, except 
when sipping water after dinner, and should sip thrice from his 
hand water which is free from bubbles and foam, and which he 
has attentively regarded, in such a quantity as would cover a hlasha- 
grain. 
The water sipped by a Brahman should reach his heart, 
that sipped by a Kshatriya the throat, and that sipped by a Vairya 
the palate, 
A 5 fidra sips once as much as to wet his tongue.’

--- PAGE 122 ---
58
A P A S T A M B A .
I, 5, i6.
4. Some (declare, that he shall do so) twice,
5. He shall then touch (his lips) once (with the 
three middle fingers).
6. Som e (declare, that he shall do so) twice.
7. Having sprinkled water on his left hand with 
his right, he shall touch both his feet, and his head 
and (the following three) organs, the eyes, the nose, 
and the ears.
8. Then he shall wash (his hands).
9. But if he is going to eat he shall, though pure, 
twice sip water, twice wipe (his mouth), and once 
touch (his lips).
10. He shall rub the gums and the inner part of 
his lips (with his finger or with a piece of wood) and 
then sip water.
11. He does not become impure by the hair (of 
his moustaches) getting into his mouth, as long as 
he does not touch them with his hand.
12. If (in talking), drops (of saliva) are perceived 
to fall from his mouth, then he shall sip water.
i 3. Some declare, that if (the saliva falls) on the 
ground, he need not sip water.
14, 
On touching during sleep or in sternutation 
the effluvia of the nose or of the eyes, on touching 
blood, hair, fire, kine, a Brihmawa, or a woman, and
7. The eyes are to be touched with the thumb and the fourth 
finger, either at once, or one after the other, the nostrils with the 
thumb and the second finger, the ears with the thumb and the 
small finger.
9. Manu V, 138.
n ; Haradatta observes that this Sutra shows, that every other 
foreign substance brought with the food inter the mouth, makes the 
food ‘ leavings ’ and the eater impure. 
Manu V, 141. ’
12. Manu V, 141 declares sipping to be unnecessary in this case.
14- Manu V, 145.

--- PAGE 123 ---
S. i6 .
P U R IF IC A T IO N ; E A TIN G ,
59
after having walked on the high road, and after 
having touched an unclean (thing or an impure man), 
and'after having put on his lower garment, he shall 
either bathe or sip or merely touch water (until he 
considers himself clean).
15. (Or he may touch) moist cowdung, wet herbs, 
or moist earth.
16. He shall not eat meat which has been cut 
with a sword (or knife) used for killing.
17. He shall not bite off with his teeth (pieces 
from) cakes (roots or fruits).
18. He shall not eat in the house of a (relation 
within six degrees) where a person has died, before 
the ten days (of impurity) have elapsed.
19. (Nor shall he eat iii a house) where a lying-in 
woman has not (yet) come out (of the lying-in 
chamber),
20. (Nor in a house) where a corpse lies.
21. Food touched by a (Brdhma//a or other high- 
caste person) who is impure, becomes impure, but 
not unfit for eating.
18. ‘ The term “ ten days” is used in order to indicate the time 
of impurity generally. 
In some cases, as that of a Kshatriya, this 
lasts longer. 
In other cases, where the impurity lasts thirty-six 
hours only, (the abstention from dining in such houses is 
shorter.)’— Haradatta. 
Manu IV, 217.
19. A lying-in woman is impure, and must not be touched 
during the first ten days after her confinement. 
During this time, 
she exclusively occupies the Sfitikagr»ha or lying-in chamber. 
Manu IV, 217.
20. Haradatta remarks that in the case of the death of a person 
who is not a relation, it is customary to place at the distance of 
‘ one hundred bows ’ a lamp and water-vessel, and to eat (beyond 
that distance).
21. ‘ Food which is simply impure„may be purified by putting 
it on the fire, sprinkling it with water, touching it with ashes or 
earth, and praising it.’— Ifaradatta.

--- PAGE 124 ---
6o
A P A S T A M B A .
o>
/
2 2. But what has been brought (be it touched or 
not) by an impure »Sudra, must not be eaten, •
23. Nor that food in which there is a hair,
24. Or any other unclean substance.
25., 
(Nor must that food be eaten) which has 
been touched with an unclean substance (such as 
garlic),
26j Nor that in which an insect living on impure 
substances is found,
27. Nor that in which excrements or limbs of a 
mouse are found, nor that which has been touched 
by the foot (even of a pure person),
28. Nor what has been (touched) with the hem 
of a garment,
29. Nor that whidi has been touched by a do^ 
or an Apapitra,
30. Nor what has been brought in the hem 
of a garment, (even though the garment may be) 
clean.
22. Others say, that the food becomes unfit for eating, only, if 
in bringing it, the .S'fidra has touched it.— Haradatta.
23. Manu IV, 207; 
I, 167. 
‘ But this rule holds good
only if the hair had been cooked with the food. 
If a hair falls into 
it at dinner, then if is to be purified by an addition of clarified 
butter, and may be eaten.’— Haradatta.
24. Haradatta quotes a passage from Baudhayana, which enu­
merates as ‘ unclean things ’ here intended, ‘ hair, worms or beetles, 
nail-parings, excrements of rats.’ 
The rule must be understood 
as the preceding, i. e. in case these things have been cooked with 
the food.
26. Manu IV, 207; Ya^ii. I, 167, 168. 
This Sfitra must be 
read with Sutra 23 above.
29. Manu IV, 208 ; Ya^fi. 1, 167. Apapatras are persons whom 
one must not allow to eat from one's dishes, e. g. A'aw^/alas, Patitas, 
a woman in her courses or during the ten days of impurity after
confinement. 
See also above, I, 
3» zfi-

--- PAGE 125 ---
I) s. ir-
E A T IN G A N D F O R B ID D E N FOOD.
6i
31. N or what has been brought'at night by a 
female slave.
32. If during his meal,
P rasna I, F atal A 5 , K haa^da 1 7 .
1. A 6'hdra touches him, (then he shall leave off
eating.) 
•
2. Nor shall he eat sitting in the same row with 
unworthy people.
3. N or shall he eat (sitting in the same row with 
persons) amongst whom one, whilst they eat, (leaves 
off) and without rising, gives his leavings to his 
pupils or sips w a ter;
4. N or (shall he eat) where they give him food, 
reviling him.
5. N or (shall he eat) what has been smelt at by 
men or other impure (beings, as cats).
6. H e shall not eat in a ship,
7. Nor on a wooden platform.
8. H e may eat sitting on ground which has been
------------ 
i 
j
31. 
Haradatta thinks, that as the Shtrahas the feminine gender, 
dast, it does not matter if a male slave brings the food. 
But 
others forbid also this.
*
17. 
I. ‘ Some say, that this Shtra indicates that the touch of a 
i'hdra does not defile at any other time but at dinner, Tj’hilst others 
hold that a Sfidra’s touch defiles always, and that the Sutra is 
intended to indicate an excess of impurity, if it happens at dinner­
time.’— Haradatta.
2. ‘ Unworthy people are those who are neither of good family, 
nor possess learning and virtue.’— Haradatta.
3. According to Haradatta a person who misbehaves thus, is 
called ‘ a dinner-thorn.’ 
This point of etiquette is strictly observed 
in our days also. 
Manu IV, 212.
4. Manu IV, 212; 
I, 167.
5. ‘ As the text has avaghrSta, “ smelt at,” it does not matter if 
they smell the food from a distance.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 126 ---
62
A P A ST A M B A .
I, 5> 17-
purified (by the application o f cowdung and the 
like).
9. (If he eats) out of an earthen vessel, he shall 
eat out of one that has not been used (for cooking).
10. (If he can get) a used vessel (only, he shall 
eat from it), after having heated it thoroughly.
11. A vessel made of ipetal becomes pure by 
being scoured with ashes and the like.
12. A wooden vessel becomes pure by being 
scraped.
13. A t a sacrifice (the vessels must be. cleaned) 
according to the precepts of the Veda.
14. H e shall not eat food which has been bought 
or obtained ready-prepared in the market.
15. Nor (shall he eat) flavoured food (bought in 
the market) excepting raw meat, honey, and salt, i
16. Oil and clarified butter (bought in the market) 
he may use, after having sprinkled them with water.
17. Prepared food which has stood for a night, 
must neither be eaten nor drunk.
18. 
N or (should prepared food) that lias turned 
sour (be used in any way).
19. (The preceding two rules do) not (hold good
11. ‘ It must be understood from other SmAtis, that brass is to 
be cleaned with ashes, copper yith acids, silver with cowdung, and 
gold with water.’— Haradatta. 
Manu V, 114.
12. Manu V, iig.
16. ‘ Having sprinkled them with water and purified them by 
boiling; or, according to others, mixing them with so much water 
as will not spoil them.’— Haradatta.
17. The Sanscrit has two terms for‘ eating;’ the first ‘ khSd’ 
applies to hard substances, the second ‘ ad ’ to soft substances. 
Manu IV, 2 11; Y^fl. I, 167.
18. Manu IV, 211 ; V, 9 ; YS^il. I, 167.
19- Manu V, 10, 24 and 25.

--- PAGE 127 ---
1, S> 17-
e a t i n g A N D FO R B ID D E N FOOD.
in regard to) the juice of sugar-cane, roasted rice- 
grains, porridge prepared with whey, roasted 'yava, 
gruel, vegetables, meat, flour, milk and preparations 
from it, roots and fruits of herbs and trees.
20. (Substances which have turned) sour with­
out being mixed with anything else (are to be 
avoided).
2 1. A ll intoxicating drinks are forbidden,
2 2. Likewise sheep’s milk,
'2-3. Likewise the milk _of camels, of does, of 
animals that give milk while big with young, of those 
that bear twins, and of (one-hOofed animals),
24. Likewise the milk of a cow (buffalo-cow or 
she-goat) during the (first) ten days (after their 
giving birth to young ones),
25. Likewise (food rhixed) with herbs which serve 
for preparing intoxicating liquors,
26. (Likewise) red garlic, onions, and leeks,
27. Likewise anything else which (those who are 
learned in the'law) forbid.
28. Mushrooms ought not to be eaten; that has 
been declared in a Brihmawa;
20. 
According to Haradatta, Apastamba returns once more to 
the question about sour food, in order to teach that dishes pre­
pared with curds and other sour substances may be eaten.
22. Manu V, 8; Y%-fi. I, 170.
23. Manu V, 8, 9; YS^ii. I, 170. 
‘ Sandhint, translated by
“ females that give milk while big with young,” means, according 
to others, “ female animals that give milk once a day.” ’— Haradatta.
24. Manu V, 8.
26. Manu V, 5; Ya^ii. I, 176.
27. Haradatta observes that Apastamba, finding the list of for­
bidden vegetables too long, refers his pupils to the advice of the 
•Sish/as. 
The force of this Sfitra is exactly the same as that of
I. 3. 
38-
28. Ya^fi. I,

--- PAGE 128 ---
64
A P A ST A M B A .
I. 3> IT-
29. (Nor the meat) of one-hoofed , animals, of’ 
camels, of the Gayal, of village pigs, of 6’arabhas, 
and of cattle.
30. (But the meat) of milch-cows and oxen may 
be eaten.
31. The Va^saneyaka declares ‘ bull’s flesh is fit 
for offerings.’
32. Amongst birds that scratch with their feet for 
food, the (tame) cock (must not be eaten).
33. Amongst birds that feed thrusting forward 
their beak, the (heron, called) Plava (or vSakai^abila, 
must not be eaten).
34. Carniyorous (birds are forbidden),
35. Likewise the Hawsa, the Bhdsa, the Brdh- 
ma;d duck, and the falcon.
36. Common cranes and Siras-cranes (are npt to 
be eaten) with the exception of the leather-nosed 
Lakshma^a.
37. Five-toed animals (ought not to be eaten) 
with the exception of the Iguana, the tortoise, the
29. 
The camel, Gayal, and .Jarabha are mentioned as ‘ forbidden 
animals,’ .Satapaiha-br. I, 2, i, 8; Aitareya-br. II, i, 8; see also 
Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 62 ; Manu V, ii, i8 ; Ya^fl. I, 172, 176.
32. Ya^n. I, 176.
33. Manu V,' 12 ; Y%a. I, 172,
34. Manu V, I I ; Ya^fi. I, 172.
35. Ya^fi. I, 172.
36. Other commentators take the whole Siitra as one compound, 
and explain it as an exception to Sfltra 34. 
In that case the 
translation runs thus ; (‘ Carnivorous birds are forbidden) except 
the Krun^a, KraufiAa, Vardhrawasa, and Lakshmawa.’— Haradatta. 
'This translation is objectionable, because both the KruftiJas, now 
called Kulam or Khu^’, and the KrauSia, the red-crested crane, now 
called Saras (Cyrus), feed on grain. 
Manu V, 12; Yaga. 1, 172'.
37. Manu V, 18 ; YagB. 1, 177. PfltiChasha is, aceording to Hara- 
^ datta, an animal resembling a hare, and found ii^^e Himalayas.

--- PAGE 129 ---
I. 6, i8.
E A T IN G A N D FO R BID D EN FOO D .
65
boar called Sv^vi/, the porcupine, the rhinoceros, 
the hare, and the Putikhasha.
38. 
Amongst fishes, the A 'e/a ought not to be 
eaten,
Q 
39. Nor the snake-headed fish, nor the alligator, 
nor those which live on flesh only, nor those which 
are misshaped (like) mermen.
Pra^na I, Patala 6, K handa 18.
1. Honey, uncooked (grain), venison, land, roots, 
fruits, (a promise of) safety, a pasture for cattle, a 
house, and fodder for a draught-ox may be accepted 
(even) from an Ugra.
2. Hirita declares, that even these (presents) are 
to be accepted only if .they have been obtained by 
a pupil.
3. Or they (Brihma/^a householders) may accept 
(from an Ugra) uncooked or (a little) unflavoured 
boiled food.
4. (Of such food) they shall not take a great 
quantity (but jonly so much as suffices to support 
life).
5. If (in times of distress) he is unable to keep 
himself, he may eat (food obtained from anybody).
39. Haradatta closes this chapter on flesh-eating by quoting 
Manu V, 56, which declares flesh-eating, drinking spirituous liquor, 
and promiscuous intercourse to be allowable, but the abstinence 
therefrom of greater merit. 
He states that the whole chapter must 
be understood in this sense.
18. 
I. Manu IV, 247. 
‘ Ugra denotes either a bad twice-born 
man or the offspring of a Vaijya and of a j ’fldra-woman. Other 
personSiof a similar character must be understood to be included 
by the term.’— Haradatta.
4 . Also this rule seems to belong to Hdrtta, on account of its 
close connexion with the preceding two.
[2] 
^ 
F

--- PAGE 130 ---
66
APAJ5T A M B A .
I, 6,18.
6.- After having, touched it (once) with gold,
7; Or (haying touched it with) fire.
8. He shall Hot'be too eager after (such a way of 
liying): 
He shall leave it when he has obtained a 
(lawful) livelihood.
g. (A student of the Brahmanic caste) who has 
Returned home shall not eat (in the house) of people, 
belonging to the three tribes, beginning with the 
Kshatriya (i. e. of Kshatriyas, Vai^yas, and vShdras).
10. He may (usually) eat (the food) of a Brih- 
ma«a on account of (the giver’s) character (as a 
Br&hma«a). 
It must be avoided for particular 
reasons only.
11. He shall not eat in a house where (the host)
performs a rite which is not a rite of penance, whilst 
he ought to perform a penance. 
i
12. But when the penance has been performed, 
he may eat (in that house).
8. Haradatta quotes, in support of the last Sfltras, a passage of 
the .Oandogya Upanishad, I, lo, i, and one from the i?/'g-veda, 
IV, i8, 13, according to which it would be lawful to eat even 
impure food, as a dog’s entrails, under such circumstances. Other 
commentators explain this and the preceding three Shtras differently. 
According to them the translation would run thus : ‘ If he himself 
does not find any livelihood (in times of distress, he may dwell even 
with low'Caste people who give him something to eat, and) he may 
eat (food given by them) paying for it with (some small gift in)jgold 
or with animals.’ 
This second explanation is perhaps preferable.
9. Manu IV, 218, 219, and 223.
11. ‘ If a Brahmawa who has been ordered to perform a penance, 
performs aVauvadeva or other rite without heeding the order of 
his spiritual teacher, then a student who has returned home ought 
not to eat in his house, until the enjoined penance has been per­
formed.’— Haradatta.
12. ‘ The use of the part. perf. pass. “ performed ” indicates that 
he must not eat there, whilst the penance is being performed.’— 
Haradatta.

--- PAGE 131 ---
I, 6, is .
E A TIN G A N D FO R B ID D E N EOOD.
67
13, According to some (food offered'by people) 
of any caste, who ‘follow the laws prescribed.'for 
them, except that of ^S’udras, may be eaten.
14. (In times of distress) even the food 'of a 
^hdra, who lives under one’s protection for the sake 
of spiritual merit, (may be eaten.)
-15. He may eat it, after having touched it (once) 
with gold or with fire. 
He shall, not be too eager 
after (such a way of living). 
He shall leave it when 
he obtains a (lawful) livelihood.
16. Food received from a multitude of givers 
must not be eaten,
17. Nor food offered by a general invitation (to 
all comers).
, 18., Food offered by an artisan must not be 
eaten,
19. Nor (that of men) who live by the use of 
arms (with the exception of Kshatriyas),
20. Nor (that of men) who live by letting lodgings 
or land.
21. A (pro'fessional) physician is a person whose 
food must not be 'eaten,
22. (Also) a usurer,
23. (Also) a Brihmawa who has performed the
14. Y^fi. I, 166.
15. Manu IV, 223.
16. Manu IV, 209.
17. Manu IV, 209 ; Yd^n. I, 168.
18. Manu IV, 210, 215; Yajg'ii. I, 162-164.
19. Ya^ii. I, 164.
21. Manu IV, 212 ; Y%n. I, 162.
22. Manu IV, 210; Y%'n. I, 161.
23. ‘ That is to say, one who has begun, but not finished a 
Soma-sacrifice.’— Ha'radatta. 
Manu IV, 210, and Gopatha-brah- 
ma«a III, 19.
F 2

--- PAGE 132 ---
68
A PA STA M B A .
I, 6, i8 .
Diksha;^iyesli/i (or initiatory ceremony of the Soma- 
sacrifice) before he has bought the king (Soma).
24. (The food given by a person who has per­
formed the Diksha/dyesh/i may be eaten^, when the 
victim, sacred to Agni and Soma has been slain,
25. Or after that the omentum of the victim 
(sacred to Agni and Soma) has been offered.
26. For a Brahma;^a declares, ‘ Or they may eat 
from the .remainder of the animal, after having set 
apart a portion for the offering.’
27. A eunuch (is a person whose food must not 
be eaten),
28. (Likewise) the (professional) messenger em­
ployed by a king (or others),
29. (Likewise a Brahmawa) who offers substances 
that are not fit for a sacrifice,
30. (Likewise) a spy,
31. (Also) a person who has become a hermit 
without (being authorized thereto by) the rules (of 
the law),
32. (Also) he Avho forsakes the' sacred fires 
(without performing the sacrifice necessary on that 
occasion),
25. Aitareya-brdhmawa II, i, 9.
27. Manu IV, 211; Ya^fi. I, 161.
28. The village or town messengers are always men of the 
lowest castes, such as the Mahars of Mahardsh/Z/ra.
29. ‘ For example, he who offers human blood in a magic 
rite.'— Haradatta.
30. Haradatta explains .iaii, translated by ‘ spy,’ to mean ‘ a 
secret adherent of the Yakta sect’ (gflif.^aZ’art, jakta4). 
The exist­
ence of this sect in early times has not hitherto been proved.
31. Haradatta gives the Aakyas or Bauddhas as an instance. 
But it is doubtful, whether Apastamba meant to refer to them, 
though it seems probable that heretics are intended.
32. Y3.^il. I, i6 o .

--- PAGE 133 ---
1, 6, 19-
E A T IN G A N D FO R B ID D E N FOOD.
69
33. 
Likewise a learned Brahmawa who avoids 
everybody, or eats the food of anybody, or neglects 
the (daily) recitation of the Veda, (and) he whose 
(only living) wife is of the .Sudra caste.
P rASNA I, P aTALA 6, KlIAiVDA 1 9 .
1. A drunken man, a madman, a prisoner, he who 
learns the Veda from his son, a creditor who sits 
with his debtor (hindering the fulfilment of his 
duties), a debtor who thus sits (with his creditor 
are persons whose food must not be eaten) as long 
as they are thus engaged or in. that state.
2. Who (then) are those whose food may be 
eaten ?
3. Ka«va declares, that it is he who wishes to 
give.
4. Kautsa declares, that it is he who is holy.
5. Varshy4ya7/i declares, that it is every giver (of
food). 
t
6. For if guilt remains fixed on the man (who 
committed a# crime, then food given by a sinner) may 
be eaten (because the guilt cannot leave the sinner).
33. 
‘ Who avoids everybody, i. e. who neither invites nor dines 
with an)body.’— Haradatta.
19. 1. Manu IV, 207 j Ya^ii. 1, 161, 163. Another commentator 
explains awika, translated above ‘ he who learns the Vedayfrom his 
son,’ by ‘ a money-lender,’ and combines pralyupavish/aA with 
this word, i. e. ‘ a money-lender who sits with his debtor hindering 
him from fulfilling his duties.’ This manner of forcing a debtor 
to pay, which is also called A^arita (see Manu VIIl, 49), is, though 
illegal, resorted to sometimes even now.
2. ‘ The object of this Sutra is to introduee the great variety of 
opinions quoted below.’— Haradatta.
4. 
‘ Holy’ means not only ‘ following his lawful occupations,’ 
but particularly ‘ practising austerities, reciting pr.ayers, and offering 
burnt- oblations.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 134 ---
70
A PA STA M B A .
I, 6, 19.
But if guilt can leave (the sinner at any time, then 
food given by the sinner may be eaten because) he 
becomes pure by the gift (which he makes).
7. Offered food, which is pure, may be eaten, 
according to Eka, Ku«ika, Ki;^va, Kutsa, and 
Pushkarasadi.
8. Vdrshyaya;zi’s opinion is, that (food) given 
unasked (may be accepted) from anybody.
9. (Food offered) willingly by a holy man may be 
eaten.
10. Food given, unwillingly by a holy man ought 
not to be eaten.
11. Food offered unasked by any person what­
soever may be eaten,
12. ‘ But not if it be given after an express pre­
vious announcementthus says Hdrita.
13. Now they quote also in a Pura?^a the follow­
ing two verses:
14. ‘ The Lord of creatures has declared, that 
food offered unasked and brought by the giver him­
self, may be eaten, though (the giver be) a sinner, 
provided the gift has not been announced before­
hand. The Manes of the ancestors of that man who 
spurns such food; do not eat (his oblations) for fifteen 
years, nor does the fire carry his offerings (to the' 
gods).’
15. (Another verse from a Pur4?2a declares) : ‘The 
food given by a physician, a hunter, a surgeon, a
10. 
Another commentator explains this Shtra thus: ‘ He need 
not eat the food offered by a righteous man, if he himself does not 
wish to do so.'— Haradatta.
14. See Manu IV, 248 and 249, where these identical verses 
occur,
\ / iS . Manu IV, 2ir, 212.

--- PAGE 135 ---
I, 7, 20. 
FO R B ID D E N F O O D ; L A W F U L LIV E LIH O O D . 
7 1
fowler, an unfaithful wife, or a eunuch must not be 
eaten.’
16. 
Now (in confirmation of this) they quote (the 
following’ verse): ‘ The murderer of a BrS.hma«a 
learned in the Veda heaps his guilt on his guest, an 
innocent man on his calumniator, a thief set at liberty 
on the king, and the petitioner on him who rnakes 
false promises.’
P rasna I, T atala 7 , K handa 2 0 .
1. He shall not fulfil his sacred duties merely in 
order to acquire these worldly objects (as fame, gain, 
and honour).
2. For when they ought to bring rewards, (duties 
thus fulfilled) become fruitless.
3. (Worldly benefits) are produced as accessories 
(to the fulfilment of the law), just as in the case of a 
mango tree, which is planted in order to obtain fruit, 
shade and fragrance (are accessory advantages).
4. But if (worldly advantages) are not produced, 
(then at least) the sacred duties have been fulfilled.
5. Let him not become irritated at, nor be de­
ceived by the speeches of hypocrites, of rogues, of 
infidels, and of fools.
6. For Virtue and Sin do not go about and say, 
‘ Here we are ;’ nor do Gods, Gandharvas, or Manes 
say (to men), ‘ This is virtue, that is sin.*
7. But that is virtue, the practice of which wise
16. Regarding the liberation of the thief, see Apastamba I, 9, 
25, 4. 
A similar verse occurs Manu VIII, 317, which has caused 
the confusion observable in many MSS., as has been stated in the 
critical notes to the text.
20. 
7. The 'SOtra is intended to show how the law should be 
ascertained in difficult cases. 
Haradatta quotes here the passage of

--- PAGE 136 ---
72
A PA STA M B A .
I, 7, 20.
men of the three twice-born castes^praise; what they 
blame, is sin.
8. He shall regulate his course of action according 
to the conduct which in all countries is unanimously 
approved of by men of the three twice-born castes, 
who have been properly obedient (to their teachers), 
who .are aged, of subdued senses, neither given to 
avarice, nor hypocrites.
9. Acting thus he will gain both worlds.
10. Trade is not lawful for a Brahma^a.
11. In times of distress he may trade in marketable 
goods, avoiding the following,- that are forbidden :
12. (Particularly) men, condiments and liquids, 
colours, perfumes, food, skins, heifers, substances 
used for glueing (such as lac), water, young corn­
stalks, substances from which spirituous liquor may 
be extracted, red and black pepper, corn, flesh, arms, 
and the hope of rewards for meritorious deeds.
13. Among (the various kinds of) grain he shall 
especially not sell sesamum or rice (except he have 
grown them himself).
14. The exchange of the one of these (above- 
mentioned goods) for the other is likewise unlawful.
15. But food’ (may be exchanged) for food, and
Ya^n. I, 9, on Parishads, and states that the plural arya^ shows 
that three or four must be employed to arrive at a decision. 
See 
also Manu XII, 108 seq.
8. Manu I, 6.
I r. This Sfitra, which specifies only one part of a Vaijya’s occu­
pations as permissible for Brahmawas in distress, implies, according 
I to Haradatta, that his other occupations also, as well as those of a 
Kshatriya, are permissible. 
Manu IV, 6; X, 82 ; Ya^fl. Ill, 35.
12. Manu X, 86-89 1 Ya^fl. Ill, 36-39.
13. The exception stated above, is given by Haradatta on the 
authority of Manu X, 90; Ya^B. Ill, 39.
15. ‘ From the permission to exchange learning for learning, it

--- PAGE 137 ---
I, 7, 21.
L A W F U L LIV E LIH O O D .
73
slaves for slaves, and condiments for condiments, and 
perfumes for perfumes, and learning for learning.
16. 
Let him traffic with lawful merchandise which 
he has not bought,
P rasna I, PArALA 7, K haivda 21.
«
1. With Mun^-grass, Balba^^-grass (and articles 
made of them), roots, and fruits,
2. And with (other kinds of) grass and wood which 
have not been worked up (into objects of use).
3. He shall not be too eager (after such a live­
lihood),
4. If he obtains (another lawful) livelihood, he 
shall leave off (trading).
5. Intercourse with fallen men is not ordained,
6. Nor with Apapatras.
7. Now (follows the enumeration of) the actions 
which cause loss of caste (Pataniya).
8. (These are) stealing (gold), crimes whereby one 
becomes an Abhijasta, homicide, neglect of the 
Vedas, causing abortion, incestuous connexion with 
relations born from the same womb as one’s mother
may be known that it is not lawful to sell it.’— Haradatta. 
Manu 
X, 94.
21. 
2. ‘ Since it is known that Mufi^a and Balba^ are kinds 
of grass, it may be inferred from their being especially mentioned 
(in Siltra r) that objects made of them (may be also sold).’— 
Haradatta.
4. Y%fl. Ill, 35.
5. iuanu XI, 180.
6. Regarding the definition of the word Apapatra, see above, I, 
5, 16, 29.
8. The crimes by which a person becomes Abhuasta are enu­
merated beloW) I, 9, 24, 6 seq., where an explanation of the term 
will be given.

--- PAGE 138 ---
74
a p a s t a m b a .
I, 7, 21.
or father, and with the offspring of such persons, 
drinking spirituous liquor, and intercourse with per­
sons the intercourse with whom is forbidden.
9. That man falls who has connej^ion with a female 
friend of a female Guru, or with a female friend of a. 
male Guru, or with any married woman.
10. Some (teachers declare),, that he does not fall 
by having connexion with any other married female 
except his teacher’s wife.
11. Constant commission of (other) sins (besides 
those enumerated above) also causes a man to lose 
his caste.
12. Now follows (the enumeration of) the-acts 
which make men impure (Ai'U/i’ikara).
13. (These are) the cohabitation of Aryan women 
with KS’tidras,
14. Eating the flesh of forbidden (creatures),
15. As of a dog, a man, village cocks or pigs, car­
nivorous animals,
16. Eating the excrements of men,
17. Eating what is left by a vS"udra, the cohabita­
tion of Aryans with Apapitra women.
18. Some declare, that these acts also cause a man 
to lose his caste.
19. Other acts besides those (enumerated) are 
causes of impurity. He who learns (that a man has) 
committed a sin, shall not be the first to make it 
known to others ; but he shall avoid the (sinner), 
when performing religious ceremonies.
9. Regarding the ‘ male Gurus’ see above. 
By ‘ female Gurus’ 
their wives are meant.
10. I. e. he need not perform so heavy a penance.
1 9. ‘That is to say, he is not to invite the sinner to dinners, 
given at the occasion of religious ceremonies.’—Haradatta,

--- PAGE 139 ---
1,-8, 22. 
p e n a n c e ; k n o w l e d g e o f t h e ATMAN.
75
P r a s n a I, PArALA 8, K
h a n d a 2 2 .
1. He shall employ the means which tend to the 
acquisition of (the knowledge of) the Atman, which 
are attended by the consequent (destruction of the 
passions, and) which prevent the wandering (of the 
mind from its object, and fix it on the contemplation 
of the Atman).
2. There is no higher (object) than the attain­
ment of (the knowledge of the) Atman.
3. We shall quote the verses (from the Veda) 
which refer to the attainment of (the knowledge 
of) the Atman.
4. All living creatures are the dwelling of him 
Avho lies enveloped in matter, who is immortal and 
who is spotless. Those become immortal who wor­
ship him who is immovable and lives in a movable 
dwelling.
5. Despising all that which in this world is called 
an object (of the senses) a wise man shall strive after 
the (knowledge of the) Atman.
22. 
I. The knowledge of the Vedanta and the means which pre­
pare men for the knowledge of the Atman, the ‘absolute, the universal 
soul,’ are placed in this Pa/ala at the head of the penances, because 
they are most efficacious for the removal of all sin. 
The means 
are absence of anger &c., which are enumerated I, 8, 23, 6.
2. Haradatta gives in his commentary a lengthy discussion on
the Atman, which corresponds nearly to iankara’s Introduction to 
and Commentary on the first Sfitra of Badariyawa. 
*-•
3. T h e follow ing verses, according to H aradatta, are taken 
from an U panishad.
4. The spotless one &c. is the Paramatman. 
The spots are 
merit and demerit which, residing in the Manas, the internal organ 
' of perception, are only falsely attributed to the Atman, ‘ the soul.’ 
To become immortal means ‘ to obtain final liberation.’
5. It seems to me that Haradatta’s explanation of the words

--- PAGE 140 ---
7 ^
A PA STA M B A .
I, 8, 22.
6. O pupil, I, who had not recognised in my own 
self the great self-luminous, universal, (absolutely) 
free Atman, which must be obtained without the 
mediation of anything else, desired (to find) it in 
others (the senses). , (But now as I have obtained 
the pure knowledge, I do so no more.) Therefore 
follow thou also this good road that leads to welfare 
(salvation), and not the one that leads into misfor­
tune (new births).
7. It is he who is the eternal part in all creatures, 
whose essence is wisdom, who is immortal, unchange­
able, destitute of limbs, of voice, of the (subtle) body, 
(even) of touch, exceedingly pure;' he is the uni­
verse, he is the highest goal; (he dwells in the 
middle 'of the body as) the Vishuvat.day is (the 
middle of a Sattra-sacrifice); he, forsooth, is (accessi­
ble to all) like a town intersected by many streets.
8. He who meditates on him, and everywhere 
and always lives according to his (commandments), 
and who, full of devotion, sees him who is difficult 
to be seen and subtle, will rejoice in (his) heaven.
‘ idam idi ha idi ha’ is wrong. 
They ought to be divided thus, 
‘ idamid, iha id, iha loke.’ 
The general sense remains the same, 
and there is no necessity to assume very curious and otherwise 
unknown Vedic forms.
6. The verse is addressed by a teacher to his pupil. 
My trans­
lation strictly follows Haradatta’s gloss. 
But his interpretation is 
open to many doubts. 
However, I am unable to suggest anything 
better.
7. The Sfltra contains a further descriptipn of the Paramatman.
8. Haradatta explains the word vish/ap, ‘ heaven,’ by ‘ pain- 
freed greatness,’ apparently misled by a bad etymology. 
The 
heaven of fhe Atman is, of course, liberation, that state where the 
individual soul becomes merged inThe Brahman or Paramatman, 
which is pure essence, intelligence and joy.

--- PAGE 141 ---
I, 8, 23. 
PEN AN CE ; K N O W LE D G E OF T H E A TM AN . 
77
P ras'NA I, P a ta la 8, K handa 2 3 .
1. That Brdhmawa, who is wise and recognises 
all creatures to be in the Atman, who pondering 
(thereon) does not become bewildered, and who re­
cognises the Atman in every (created).thing, shines, 
forsooth, in heaven.
2. He, who is intelligence itself and subtler than 
the thread of the lotus-fibre, pervades the universe, 
and who, unchangeable and larger tharr the earth, 
contains the universe; he, who is different from the 
knowledge of this world, which is obtained by the 
senses and which is identical with its objects, pos­
sesses the highest (form consisting of absolute know­
ledge). 
From him, who divides himself, spring all 
(created) bodies. 
He is the primary cause, he is 
eternal, he is unchangeable.
3. But the eradication of the faults is brought 
about in this life by the means (called Yoga). A wise, 
man who has eradicated the (faults) which destroy 
the creatures, obtains salvation.
4. Now we will enumerate the faults which tend 
to destroy the creatures.
5. (These are) anger, exultation, grumbling, cove­
tousness, perplexity, doing injury (to anybody), hypo­
crisy, lying, • gluttony, calumny, envy, lust, secret 
hatred, neglect to keep the senses in subjection, 
neglect to concentrate the mind. 
The eradication 
of these (faults) takes place through the means of 
(salvation called) Yoga.
6. Freedom from anger, from exultation, from
23. 
2. This Sutra again contains a description of the Para- 
niatman. 
The translation strictly follows the commentary, though 
hie explanation, given in the latter, is open to objections.

--- PAGE 142 ---
78
A PA STAM B A .
I, 9, 24.
grumbling, from covetousness, from perplexity, from 
hypocrisy (and) hurtfulness; truthfulness, moderation 
in eating, silencing slander, freedom from envy, self-. 
denying liberality, avoiding to accept gifts, upright­
ness, affability, extinction of the passions,, subjection 
of the senses’ peace with all created beings, con- 
•centration (of the mind on the contemplation of the 
Atman), regulation. of one’s conduct according to 
that of the Aryas, peacefulness and contentedness j 
— these (good qualities) have been settled by the 
agreement (of the wise) fOr all (the four) orders; he 
who, according to the precepts of the sacred law; 
practises these, enters the universal soul.
Prasna I, Pa^ala 9, K haaba, 24.
I. 
He who has killed a Kshatriya shall give a 
thousand cows (to Brahma«as) for the expiation of 
his sin.
24. I. Manu XI, 128; 
Ill, 266., Others explain the phrase
vairayitanSrtham, ‘ for the expiation of his sin,’ thus: ‘ He, who is 
slain by anybody, become'S, in d}’ing, an enemy of his slayer (and 
thinks), “ O that I might slay him in another life,” for the removal 
of this enmity 1
Haradatta. ' I am strongly inclined to agree with 
the other commentator, and to translate vairayatanartham, ‘ in order 
to remove the enmity.’ 
I recognise in this fine a remnant of the 
law permitting compositions for murder which was in force in 
ancient Greece and among the Teutonic nations. Under the expla­
nation adopted by Haradatta, it is impossible to find a reasonable 
interpretation for prdyaj.Jittartha.%, SOtra 4. 
Haradatta, seduced 
by the parallel passage of Manu, takes it to be identical with vai- 
raydtanartham. 
I'propose to translate onr Sfitra thus: ‘ He who 
has killed a Kshatriya shall give a thousand cows (to the relations 
of the murdered man) in Order to remove the enmity.’ 
According 
to Baudhayana, Pr. 1, Adhy. 10, the cows are to be given to the 
king: Kshatriyavadhe gosahasraw vrfshabhSdhikaw rag-ila utsrz^d 
vairayatandrtham.

--- PAGE 143 ---
I, 9, 24.
PEN AN CE. .
79
2. (He shall give) a hundred cows for a Vai^yai
3. Ten for a iShdra,
4. And in every one (of these cases) one bull 
(must be given) in excess (of the number of cows) 
for the sake of expiation.
5. And if women of the (three castes mentioned 
have been slain) the same (composition must be 
paid).
6. He who has slain a man belonging to the two 
(first-mentioned, castes) who had studied the Veda, 
or had been initiated for the performance of a Soma- 
sacrffice, becomes an Abhi^asta.
7. And (he is called an Abhwasta) who has slain, 
■ a man belonging merely to the Brdhmawa caste* 
(though he has not studied the Veda or been initi­
ated for a Soma-sacrifice),
8. Likewise he who has destroyed aii embryo 
-of a (Brihma«a, even though its sex be) undistin- 
guishable,
9. Or a woman .(of, the*Brahma;/a caste) during
her courses. 
*' .
10. (Now follows) the penance for him (who is an 
Abhi^asta).
11. He (himself) shall erect a hut in the forest,
2. Manu XI, 130; Yag^fl. Ill, 267.
3. Manu XI, 131; Y^fi. Ill, 267.
6. Manu XI, 87. Abhijasta means literally ‘ accused, accursed,’ 
and corresponds in Apastamba’s terminology to the mahapStakin of 
Manu and Y%:aavalkya, instead of which latter word Alanu uses it 
occasionally, e. g. II, 185.
9. 
‘ Others interpret atriyi," during her courses,” by “ belonging 
to the race of Atri.” ’— Haradatta.
II. 
Others say that he may carry the skull of any corpse. 
This Sfitra is to be construed with Sutra i4> Sfltras 12 and 13 
being inserted parenthetically.— Haradatta. 
Manu XI, 72- 7®j 
Y%a. Ill, 243.

--- PAGE 144 ---
8o
A p a s t a m b a .
I, 9, 2 4.
restrain his speech, carry (on his stick) the skull (of 
the person slain) like a flag, and cover the space 
from his navel to his knees with a quarter of a piece 
of hempen doth.
12. The path for him when he goes to a village, 
is the spac? between the tracks (of the wheels).
13. And if he sees another (Arya), he shall step 
out of the road (to the distance of two yards).
* 14. He shall go to the village, carrying a broken 
tray of metal of an inferior quality.
15. He may go to seven houses only, (crying,)
‘ Who will give alms to an Abhuasta ? ’
16. That is (the way in which he must gain) his 
livelihood.
17. If he does not obtain anything (at the seven 
houses), he must fast.
18. And (whilst performing this penance) he must 
tend cows.
19* When they leave and enter the village, that is 
the second occasion (on which he may enter) the 
village.
20. After having performed (thisi. penance) for 
twelve years, (he must perform) the ceremony known. 
(by custom), through which he is re-aditiitted into 
the society of the good.
21. Or (after having performed the twelve years’ 
penance), he may build a hut on the path of robbers, 
and live there, trying to take from them the Cow.«^^f 
Brihmawas. 
He is free (from his sin), when‘thrice
20. ‘ I. e. after having performed the penance, he shall take 
grass and offer it to a cow. 
If the cow approaches and confidingly 
eats, then one should.know that he has performed the penance 
properly, not otherwise.’—-.Haradatta. 
Manu XI, 195 and 196.
21. Manu Xl, 81.

--- PAGE 145 ---
I> 9> 25-
p e n A N C E .
8l
he has been defeated by them, or. thrice he has van­
quished them.
22. Or he is freed (from his sin), if (after the 
twelve years’ penance) he bathes (with the priests) 
at the end of a horse-sacrifice.
23. This very same (penance is ordained) for him 
who, when his duty and love of gain come into con­
flict, chooses the gain.
24. If he has slain a Guru or a Brihma«a, who
has studied the Veda and-finished the ceremonies of 
a Soma-sacrifice, he shall live according to this.very 
same rule until his last breath. 
. 
' . 
’
25. He cannot be purified in this life. 
But his 
sin is removed (after death).
PrAS'NA I, PArALA 9, KHAA^iJA 25.
I- He who has had connexion with a Guru’s wife 
shall cut off his organ together with the testicles, 
take them into his joined hands and walk towards 
the south without stopping, until he falls down dead.
2. 
Or he may die embracing* a heated metal 
image of a woman.
22. Manu XI, 83 ; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 67.
23. ‘ Or the Shtra may have reference to unrighteous gain 
acquired by false testitnony and the like.’— Haradatta.
24. ‘ Guru means “ the father and the rest.” ’— Haradatta.
25. ‘ His sin is removed after death. 
Hence the meaning it 
that his sons or other (relations) may perform the funeral cercr 
monies and the like. 
But others think that the first part of the • 
Shtra for^jds this, and that the meaning of pratydpatti^ (can be 
purified) is “ connexion by being received as a son or other rela­
tion.” ’— Haradatta. ’
25. 
I. Haradatta’s expll,nation of a ‘ Guru’s wife ’ by ‘ mother ’ 
rests on a comparison of similar passages from other Smrftis, where 
a different ‘ penance ’. is prescribed for incestuous intercourse with 
other near relations.^ Manu XI, 105; 
Ill, 259.
2. Manu XI, 104 ; Yd^. Ill, 259.
[2] 
G

--- PAGE 146 ---
82
A P A ST A M B A .
1. 9> 25-
3. A drinker of spirituous liquor shall drink ex­
ceedingly hot liquor so that he dies.
4. A thief shall go to the king with flying hair, 
carrying a club on his shoulder, and, tell him his 
deed. 
He (the king) shall give him a blow with 
that (club). 
If the thief dies, his- sin is expiated.
5. If he is forgiven (by the king), the guilt fafls 
upon him who forgives him,
6. Or he may throw himself into the fire, dr 
perform repeatedly severe* austerities,
7. Or he may kill himself by diminishing daily 
his portion of food,
8. O r he may perform a Krz/^’/^ra penance (un­
interruptedly) for one year,
9. Now they quote also (the following verse).:
10. Those who have committed a theft (of gold), 
drunk spirituous liquor, or had connexion with a 
Guru’s wife, but not those who have slain a Brah- 
ma«a, shall eat every fourth meal-time a little food, . 
bathe at the times of the three libations (morning, 
noonj and evening), passing the day standing and 
the night sitting. 
After the lapse of three years 
they throw off their guilt.
11. (A man of any caste) excepting the first, whoV'
3. Manu XI, 91, 92; Ya^fi. Ill, 253.
4. I. e. who has stolen the gold of a Brdhma«a. 
Manu VIII, 
314, 316; XI, 99-101; Ya^ri. Ill, 257.
5. Manu VIII, 317.
6. Manu XI, 102.
8. According to Haradatta this Shtra refers to all kinds of sins, 
and it must be understood that the 'Krikk/ixa. penances must be 
heavy for great crimes, and lighter for smaller faults; see also 
below, I, 9, 27, 7 and 8.
9. Haradatta states that the verse is taken from a PurS«a.
II. Manu XI, 74; Y%R- HI, 248.

--- PAGE 147 ---
I, 9, 26.
PEN ANCE.
83
has slain a man of the first caste, shall go on a 
battle-field and place himself (between the two 
hostile armies). 
There they shall kill him (and 
thereby he becomes pure).
12. Or such a^siiiner may tear from his body and 
make the priest offer as a bumt-bfifering his hair, 
skin, flesh, and the rest, and then throw himself into 
the fire.
13. 
- If a crow, a chameleon, a peacock, a Brahmawi 
duck, a Hawsa, the vulture called Bhasa, a frog, an 
ichneumon, a musk-rat, or a dog has been killed, 
then the same penance as for a .Shdra must be per­
formed,
PrASNA I, PAfALA 9, K haatja 26.
1. (The same penance must be performed),*!^ a 
milch-cow or a full-grown ox (has been slain), without 
a reason.
2. And for other animals (which have no bones), 
if an ox-load of them Kas been killed.
3. He who abuses a person who (on account of
12. The Mantras given in the commentary, and a parallel 
passage of VSsish/Aa XX, show that this terrible penance is not 
altogether a mere theory of Apastamba. 
Y^u. Ill, 247.
13. ‘ According to some, the penance must be performed if all 
these animals together have been slain; according to others, if only 
one of them has been killed.’— Haradatta. 
Manu XI, 132, 136; 
Y^a. Ill, 270-272.
26. 
I. ‘ A reason’ for hurting a cow is, according to Haradatta, 
anger, or the desire to obtain meat.
2. Manu XI, 1 4 1 ; Y^fi. Ill, 269. 
That ‘ animals without 
bones,’ i. e. insects or mollusks, are intended in the Sfilra is an 
inference, drawn by Haradatta from the parallel passages of Gau­
tama, Manu, and YS^avalkya.
3. ‘ A person who ought not to be abused, i. e. a father, a teacher, 
and the like.'— Haradatta.
G 2

--- PAGE 148 ---
84
apastamba.
1,9, 26.
his venerability) ought not to be ab^ed,- 6r».speaks 
an untruth (regarding any small matter) must ab­
stain for three days from milk, pungent condiments, 
and salt.
4. (If the same sins have been committed) by a 
6’udra, he must fast for seven days.
5. And the same (penances mpst also be per­
formed) by women, (but not those which follow.)
6. He who cuts off a limb of a person for whose 
murder he would become an Abhhasta (must per­
form the penance prescribed for killing a 6'hdra), 
if the life (of the person injured) has not been 
endangered.
7. He who has been guilty of conduct unworthy 
of an Aryan, of calumniating others^ of actions con­
trary to the rule of conduct, of eating or Idrinking 
things forbidden, of connexion with a woman of the 
6'hdra caste, of an unnatural crime, of performing 
magic rites with intent (to harm his enemies) or 
(of hurting others) unintentionally, shall bathe and 
sprinkle himself with water, reciting the (seven) 
verses addressed to the Waters, or the verses 
addressed to Varuwa, or (other verses chosen from 
the Anuvdka, called) Pavitra, in proportion to the 
frequency with which the crime has been committed.
5. The same penances, i. e. those prescribed 1, 9, 24-I, 9, 26, 4. 
Accordihg to Haradatta this Sfitra is intended to teach that women 
shall not perform the penances 'Vhich follow. 
Others, however, 
are of opinion that it is given in order to indicate that the pre­
ceding Sdtras apply to women by an atide^a, and that, according 
to a Smdrta principle, applicable to such cases, it may be inferred, 
that women are to perform one-half only of the penances pre­
scribed for men.
7. The Anuvaka intended is Taitt. Sawh. II, 5, 12.

--- PAGE 149 ---
I, 9, 26.
PE N AN C E .
85
8. A (student) who has broken the vow of chas­
tity, shall offer to Nirr^ti an ass, according to the 
manner of the Pakaya^na-rites.
9. A vShdra shall eat (the remainder) of'that 
(offering).
10. (Now follows) the penance for him who trans­
gresses the rules of studentship.
11. He shall for a year serve his teacher silently, 
emitting speech only during the daily study (of the 
Veda, in announcing necessary business to) his 
teacher or his teachers wife, and whilst collecting 
alms.
12. The following (penances) which we are going
to proclaim, may be performed for the same sin, and 
also for other sinful acts, which do not cause loss of 
caste. 
*
13. He may either offer oblations to Kdma and 
Manyu (with the following two Mantras), ‘ K^ma 
(passion) has done it; Manyu (anger) has done it.’ 
Or he may mutter (these Mantras).
14. Or, after having eaten sesamum or fasted on 
the days of the full and new moon he may, on the 
following day bathe, and stopping his breath, repeat 
the Giyatri one thousand times, or he may do so 
without stopping his breath.
8. 
Taitt. Ar. II, 18, and Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 102; Manu XI, 
119 seq.; and Y%a. Ill, 280. 
Regarding the Pakaya^fia-rites, 
see Asv. Q ri. Sft. I, i, 2, and IMilller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit 
Literature, p. 203.
12. Regarding the Pataniya-crimes which- cause loss of caste, 
see above, 1, 7, 2*, ^ seq.
13. Weber, Ind, Stud. X, 102. 
According to the greatness of 
the crime the number of the burnt-oblations must be increased and 
the prayers be repeated.

--- PAGE 150 ---
86
A PA STA M B A .
I) 9> 27-
P r a s n a I, P a t a l a 9, 
K n A i V i j A 27.
1. A fter having eaten sesamum or having fasted 
on the full moon day of the month vSravawa (J u ly- 
August), he may on* the following day bathe in the 
water of a great river and offer' (a burnt-oblation of) 
one thousand pieces of sacred fuel, whilst reciting 
the Gayatri, or he may mutter (the Q iyatri) as many 
times.
2. O r he may perform Ish^is and Soma-sacrifices 
for the sake of purifying himself (from his sins).
3. A fter having eaten forbidden food, he must 
fast, until his entrails are empty.
4. T h at is (generally) attained after seven days.
5. Or he may during winter and during the dewy
season (November-March) bathe in cold water both 
morning and evening, 
'
6. O r he may perform a Y^rikkhxd, penance, which 
lasts twelve days.
7. T he rule for the Y^rikkhx2L penance of twelve 
days (is the following): For three days he must not 
eat in the evening, and then for three days not in the
(morning; for three days he must live on food which 
has been given unasked, and three days he must not 
eat anything.
8. If he repeats this for a year, that is called a 
Y^rikkhx'A. penance, which lasts for a year.
2 7 . 
I. ‘ The oblations of sacred fuel (samiclh) are not to b e ' 
accompanied by the exclamation Svaha.’— Haradatta.
2. Ish/is are the simplest forms of the .Srauta-sacrifices, i. e. of 
those for which three fires are necessary.
3. For some particular kinds of forbidden food the same penance 
is prescribed, Manu X f, 153-154.
7. The same penance is described, under the name Pra^dpatya 
kr/^^'^ra, the Y^rikkhxz, invented by Pra^pati, Manu XI, 212, and 
m , 320.

--- PAGE 151 ---
I, 10, 28.
PENANCE.
87
9. iSlow follows another penance. 
H e who has 
committed even a great many sins which do not 
cause him to fall, becomes free from guilt, if, fasting, 
he recites the entire 6’akh4 .of his Veda three times 
consecutively.
10. H e who cohabits wjth a non-Aryan woman, 
he who lends money at interest, he who drinks 
(other) spirituous liquors (than Sura), he who praises 
everybody in a manner unworthy of a Brdhma«a, 
shall sit on grass, allowing his back to be scorched 
(by the sun),
11. A Brihma;za removes the sin which he com­
mitted by serving one day and night (a man of) the 
black race, if he bathes for three years at every 
fourth meal-time,
P r a s n a I, P a t a l a 1 0 , K
h a n ^zia 28.
1. H e who, under any conditions whatsoever, 
covets (and takes) another man’s possessions is a 
th ief; thus (teach) Kautsa and Harita as well as 
Ka?^va and Pushkarasadi.
2. Varshyiyam declares, that there are exceptions 
to this law, in regard to some possessions.
3. If seeds 
ripening in 
the pod, food for a 
draught-o.x (are taken), the owners ought not to 
forbid it.
9. Manu XI, 259.
II. The expression krzshwa var«a, ‘ the black race,’ is trul\ 
Vedic. 
In the i?/g-veda it usually denotes the aboriginal races, 
and sometimes the demons. 
Others explain the StUra thus: 
A Brahmawa removes the sin, which he committed by cohabiting 
for one night with a female of the ^Tidra caste, &c.— Haradatta. 
The latter explanation has been adopted by Kulluka on Manu 
Xl, 179.
2 8 . 
3. The same rule Manu emphatically ascribes to himself, 
' Manu V III, 339- 
see klso VIII, 331.

--- PAGE 152 ---
88
A P A ST A M B A .
1,10, 28.
4. T o take even these things in too great a quan­
tity is sinful.
5. Harita declares, that in every case the per­
mission (of the owner must be obtained) first.
6. H e shall not go to visit a fallen teacher or 
blood relation.
7. 
^ N or shall he accept the (means for procuring) 
. enjoyments from such a person.
8. I f he meets them accidentally he shall silently 
embrace (their feet) and pass on.
. 9. A mother does very many acts for her son, 
therefore, he must constantly serve her, though she 
be fallen.
I a. But (there shall be) no communion (with a 
fallen mother) in acts performed for the acquisition 
of spiritual merit.
11. Enjoyments taken unrighteously he shall give 
up; he shall say, ‘ I and sin (do not dwell together).’ 
Clothing himself with a garment reaching <from the 
navel down to the knee, bathing daily, morn, noon, 
and evening, eating food which contains neither milk 
nor pungent condiments, nor salt, he shall not enter a 
house for twelve years.
12. After that he (may be) purified.
13. Then he may have intercourse with Aryans.
14. T h is penance may also be employed in the 
case o f the other crimes which cause loss of caste 
(for which no penance has been ordained above).
• 15. But the violator o f a Guru’s bed shall enter a
7. Haradatta remarks, that this Shtra implicitly forbids to accept 
the heritage of an outcast.
II. A similar but easier penance is prescribed, Manu XI, 194.
15. ‘ (This penance, which had been prescribed above, I, 9, 25, i), 
is enjoined (once more), in order to show that it is not optional 
(as might be expected according to Shtra 14).'— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 153 ---
1 , 10, 29.
PENANCE.
89
hollow iron image and, having caused a fire to be lit 
on both sides, he shall burn himself.
16. According to 
Harita, this 
(last-mentioned 
penance must) not (be performed).
17. For he who takes his own or another’s life 
becomes an Abhi^asta.
18. H e (the violator o f a Guru’s bed) shall per­
form to his last breath (tlie penance) prescribed by 
that rule (Shtra ii). 
H e cannot be purified in this
■ world. 
But (after death) his sin is taken away.
19. H e who has unjustly forsaken his wife shall 
put on an ass’s skin, with the hair turned outside, 
and beg in seven houses, saying, ‘ G ive alms -to him 
who forsook his wife.’ 
T h at shall be his livelihood 
for six months.
20. But if a wife forsakes her husband, she shall 
perform the twelve-night Yi^rikklu^L penance for as 
long a time.
21. H e who has killed a man learned in the Vedas 
and Vedangas shall put on the skin of a dog or of an 
ass, with the hair turned outside, and take a human 
skull for his drinking-vessel,
P rasna I, PArALA 10, K hanka 29.
I. 
A nd he shall take the foot of a bed instead of 
a staff and, proclaiming the name of his deed, he 
shall go about (saying), ‘ W ho (gives) alms to the 
murderer of a Br^hma«a, learned in the Vedas and 
the A n gas?’ 
Obtaining thu^ his livelihood in the 
village, he shall dwell in an empty house or under a 
tree, (knowing that) he is not allowed to have inter­
course with Aryans. 
According to this rule he shall 
act until his last breath. 
H e cannot be purified in 
this world. 
But (after death) his sin is taken away.

--- PAGE 154 ---
90
A PA STA M B A .
I, 10, 29.
2. H e even who slays unintentionally, reaps never­
theless the result of his sin.
3. (His guilt is) greater, (if he slays) intentionally.
4. T h e same (principle applies) also to other sin­
ful actions,
5. And also to good works.
6. A Brihma^^a shall not take a weapon into his 
hand, though he be only desirous of examining it.
7. 
' In a Pura?^a/it has been declared), that he who 
slays an assailant does not sin, for (in that case) 
wrath meets wrath.
8. But Abhij'astas shall live together in dwellings 
(outside the village); considering this their lawful 
(mode of life), they shall sacrifice for each other, 
teach each other, and marry amongst each other.
9. I f they have begot sons, let them say to them :
‘ Go out from amongst us, for thus the Aryas, (throw- ^ 
ing the guilt) upon us, will receive you (amongst 
their number).
10. For the organs do not become impure together ’ 
with the man.
29. 
5. Haradatta gives, as an example, the case where a war­
rior saves the property of a traveller from thieves. 
If the traveller 
turns out to be a Brahmawa, and the warrior did not know his 
caste before rescuing his property, his merit will be less than if he 
had rescued knowingly the property of a Brahmawa.
9. It is impossible to agree with Haradatta’s explanation of the 
words to be addressed by Abhuastas to their children. 
No Vedic 
license can excuse the use of the second person plural instead of 
the third. 
I propose the following: ‘ Go out from among u s; for 
thus (leaving the guilt) to us, you will be received (as) Aryas.’ 
It 
is, however, not improbable that our text is disfigured by several 
very old corruptions. 
Baudhdyana, who (Prajna I, Adhy. 1 2) also 
gives the whole passage from Siitra 8 to Sfitra 14, reads: pravra- 
^atasmatta evam arydn sampratipatsyatha.

--- PAGE 155 ---
I, lO, 29.
PENANCE.
91
j I. (The truth of) that may be learned from-this 
(parallel case); a man deficient in limbs begets a son 
who possesses the full number of lirhbs..
12. Harlta declares that this is wrong.
13. A wife is similar to the vessel which contains 
the curds (for the sacrifice).
14. For if one makes impure milk curdle (by 
mixing it with whey and water) in a milk-vessel and 
stirs it, no sacrificial rite can be performed with (the 
curds produced from) that. 
Just so no intercourse 
can be allowed with the impure seed which comes 
(from an Abhijasta).
15. Sorcery and curses (employed against a Brah- 
ma«a) cause a man to become impure, but not loss 
of caste.
16. H irita declares that they cause loss of caste.
1 7. But crimes causing impurity must be ex­
piated, (when no particular penance is prescribed,) 
by performing the penance enjoined for crimes caus- 
in<y loss of caste durine twelve months, or twelve 
half months, 
or twelve twelve-nights, or twelve 
se’nnights, or twelve times three days, or twelve 
days, or seven days, or three days, or two days, or 
one day.
18. Thus acts causing impurity must be expiated 
according to the manner in which the (sinful) act 
has been committed (whether intentionally or un­
intentionally).
II. ‘ In like manner a man who has lost his rights, (can) beget 
a son, who possesses the rights (of his caste). 
For the wife is also 
a cause (of the birth of the son), and she is guiltless.’— Haradatta.
13. The Statements now following are those with which Apa- 
stamba agrees. 
Those contained in Sfltras 8 -1 1 are merely the 
pftrvapaksha.

--- PAGE 156 ---
9 2
A PA STA M B A .
I, I I , 30.
P r a 5 Na I, P a p a l a 1 1 , K h a ;vz)A 30.
I.. 
Some declare, that a student shall bathe after 
(haying acquired) the knowledge of the Veda, (how­
ever long or short the time of his studentship may- 
have been.)
2. (H e may) also (bathe) after having kept the 
student’s vow for forty-eight, (thirty-six or twenty- 
four) years, (though he may not have mastered the 
Veda.)
3. Some declare, that the student (shall bathe) 
after (having acquired) the knowledge o f the Veda 
and after (the expiration of) his vow.
4. T o all .those persons who have bathed (in 
accordance with any of the above rules- must b^ 
shown) the honour due to a Snitaka.
5. The reverence (shown to a Sndtaka) brings, 
however, different rewards according to the degree 
of devotion or of learning (possessed by the person 
honoured).
‘6. Now follow the observances (chiefly to be kept) 
by a Snataka.
7. H e shall usually enter the village and leave it 
by the eastern or the northern gate.
8. During the morning and evening twilights, he 
shall sit outside -the village, and not speak anything 
(referring to worldly matters).
9. (But an Agnihotri, who is occupied at home by 
oblations in the morning and evening, must not go
3 0 . 
I. The bath is taken at the end of the studentship, and forms 
part o f the Samdvartana-ceremony,. 
From this rite a student who 
has completed his course of study derives the name Snataka, ‘ one 
who has bathed.’ 
See also Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 125.

--- PAGE 157 ---
I, II, 30.
R U LE S F O R A SN A T A K A .
9 3
o u t; for) in the case of a conflict (of duties), that 
enjoined by the Veda is the more important.
10. H e shall avoid all dyed dresses,
11. And all naturally black cloth.
12. H e shall wear a dress that is neither shining,
13. Nor despicable, if he is able (to afford it). •
14. And in the day-time he shall avoid to wrap 
up his head, except when voiding excrements.
15. But when voiding excrenjents, he shall en­
velop his head and place some (grass or the like) 
on the ground.
16. H e shall not void excrements in the shade (of 
a tree, where travellers rest).
17. But he may -discharge urine on his own 
^shadow.
18. H e shall not void excrements with his shoes
on, nor on a ploughed field, nor on a path, nor in 
water. 
•
19. H e shall also avoid to spit into, or to have 
connexion with a woman in the water. _
20. H e shall not void excrements facing the fire, 
the sun, water, a Brahmawa, a cow, or (images of) 
the gods.
21. H e shall avoid to clean his body from ex­
crements with a stone, a clod of earth, or with 
(boughs of) herbs or trees which he has broken 
off, whilst they were on the tree and full of sap.
10. The rule to wear white 'garments is given Y ^ ii. I, 131 ; 
Manu IV , 35,
13. Manu IV, 34.
15. Manu IV, 49-
18. Manu IV, 45. 46; Ya^. I, 137.
1*9. Manu IV, 6^-
20. Manu IV, 4 ^> 5 z; Y ^ 3 .1 , i 3 4 -

--- PAGE 158 ---
94
A PA ST A M B A .
I, I I , 31. .
22. If possible, he shall not stretch out his feet 
towards a fire, water, a Brdhmawa, a cow, (images 
of) the gods, or a door.
23. Now they quote also (the following verse):
P rASN^ I, Pa^ALA 1 1 , KHAiViJA 3 1 .
1. H e shall eat facing the east, void fgeces facing 
the south, discharge urine facing the north, and 
wash his feet turned towards the west.
2. H e shall void excrements far from his house, 
having gone towards the south or south-west.
3. But after sunset he must not void excrements 
outside the village or far from his house.
4. A nd as long as he is impure he (shall avoid) 
to pronounce the names of the gods.
5. And he shall not speak evil of the gods or*of
the king. 
. 
* 
^ '
6. H e shall not touch with his foot a Brahmawa, 
a cow, nor any other (venerable beings).
7. (N or shall he touch them) with his hand, except 
for particular reasons.
8. H e shall not mention the blemishes of a cow, 
of sacrificial presents, or of a girl.
9. And he- shall not announce it (to the owner) 
if a cow does damage (by eating corn' or grass in 
a field).
3 2. The prohibition to stretch the feet towards a fire occurs also 
Manu IV , 53 ; Y^^a. I, 137.
3 1 . 2. Manu IV, 151 ; Ya^H. I, 16.
5. Manu IV , 163.
8. ‘ In the section on transcendental knowledge (I, 8, 23, 5), 
“ speaking evil ” has been forbidden, in connexion with the means 
of salvation. 
And below (Sfltra 25) the (author) will declare that 
the sins which destroy the creatures are to be avoided. 
But this 
precept (is given in order to indicate that) in the case of cows and 
the rest an extra penance must be performed.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 159 ---
I, ir, 31.
RULES FOR A SNATAKA.
95
10. (Nor sliall he call attention to it) if a cow is 
together with her calf, except for a particular reason.
11. A nd of a cow which is not a milch-cow he shall 
not say, ‘ She is not a milch-cow.’
12. H e must say, ‘This is a cow which will become 
a milch-cow.’
13. H e shall not call ‘ lucky’ that which is lucky.
14. H e shall call it ‘ a mercy, a blessing.’
15. H e shall not step over a rope to which a calf 
(or cow) is tied.
16. H e shall not pass between the posts from 
which a swing is suspended.
17. (In company) he shall not say, ‘ This person 
is my enemy.’ 
If he says, ‘ This person is my 
enemy,’ he will raise for himself an enemy, who 
will show his hatred.
*8. If he sees a rainbow,* he must not say to 
others, ‘ H ere is Indra’s bow.’
19. H e shall not count (a flock of) birds.
20. H e shall avoid to look at the sun when he 
rises or sets.
21. During the day the sun protects the crea­
tures, during the night the moon. 
Therefore let 
him eagerly strive to protect himself on the night
13. Manu IV, 139.
15. Manu IV, 38.
16. ‘ Or according to others, “ He shall not pass between pillars 
supporting an arch.” ’— Haradatta.
18. Manu IV, 59.
19. ‘ Others explain (the Sfitra thus) : He shall not announce it 
to others, if he sees (the souls of) good men falling from heaven on 
account of the expenditure of their merit, (i. e.) he shall not call 
attention to shooting-stars.’— Haradatta.
20. Manu IV, 37.
21. Manu IV, 153.

--- PAGE 160 ---
A PA STA M B A .
I, 11.32-
o f . the new moon by purity, continence, and rites 
adapted for the season.
2 2. F or during that night the sun and the moon 
dwell together.
23. H e shall not enter the village by a by-path. 
If he enters it thus, he shall mutter this i?/k-verse, 
‘ Praise be to Rudra, the lord of the dwelling,’ or 
some other (verse) addressed to Rudra.
24. H e shall not (ordinarily) give the residue of 
his food to a. person who is not a Brihma^a. Wheri 
he gives it (to such a one), he shall clean his teeth 
and give (the food) after having placed in it (the 
dirt from his teeth).
25. And let him avoid the faults that destroy the 
creatures, such as angePand the like.
P r AS-NA I, P a ^ A L A 1 1 , K H A iV Z iA 3 2.
1. L et him who teaches, avoid connubial inter­
course during the rainy season and in autumn.
2. A nd if he has had connexion (with his wife), 
he shall not lie with her during the whole night.
3. H e shall not teach whilst he is lying on a bed.
4. N or shall he teach (sitting) on that couch on 
which he lies (at night with his wife).
5. H e shall not show himself adorned with a 
garland, or anointed with ointments.
23. Manu IV , 73; 
1, 140.
^ 
24. Manu IV ,^80. 
‘ This prohibition (given in the first part of
the Sfitra) refers to 5 'fidras who are not dependents; to dependents 
the following (exception applies).’— Haradatta.
25. See above, I, 8, 23, 4 and 5, and Manu IV , 163,
3 2 . 
I. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 42.
2. Manu IV , 40.
5 - Manu IV, 72.

--- PAGE 161 ---
I, I I , 32.
R U LE S FO R A SK A T A K A .
97
6. A t night he shall always adorn himself for his 
wife.
7. Let him not submerge his head together with 
his body (in bathing),
8. And (let him avoid) to bathe after sunset.
9. L et him avoid to use a seat, clogs, sticks for 
cleaning the teeth, (and other utensils) made of 
Paldja-wood.
10. Let him avoid to praise (himself) before his 
teacher, saying, ‘ I have properly bathed or the like.’
11. L et him be awake from midnight.
12. Let him not study (or teach) in the middle of 
the night; but (he may point out) their duties to his 
pupils.
13. O r (he may) by himself mentally (repeat the 
sacred texts).
14. A fter midnight he may study (and teach).
15. When he has risen (at midnight, and taught) 
during the third watch of the night, let him not lie 
down again (saying), ‘ Studying is forbidden.’
16. A t his pleasure he may (sleep) leaning (against 
a post or the like).
17. O r he may mentally repeat (the sacred texts).
18. Let him not visit inferior men (such as Nisha- 
das), nor countries which are inhabited by them,
19. Nor assemblies and crowds.
20. If he has entered a crowd, he shall leave it, 
turning his right hand towards the crowd.
21. Nor shall he enter towns frequently.
22. Let him not answer directly a question (that 
is difficult to decide).
15. I.e. if the following day is a forbidden day, e.g. an Ash/aml. 
See also Manu IV, 99.
18. M an u IV , 60 and 6 i.
[2] 
H

--- PAGE 162 ---
98
A PA STAM B A ,
I, I I , 32.
23, Now they quote also (the following verse):
24, (The foolish decision) of a person who decides' 
wrongly destroys his ancestors and his future hap­
piness, it harms his children, cattle, and house, 
‘ Oh 
Dharmaprahrddana, (this deed belongs- not) to Ku- 
m dlana!’ thus decided Death, weeping, the question 
(addressed to him by the 7 ?fshi).
25, Let him not ascend a carriage yoked with 
asses; and let him avoid to ascend or to descend 
from vehicles in difficult places,
26, And (let him avoid) to cross a river swimming,
27, And (let him avoid) ships of doubtful (solidity),
28, H e shall avoid cutting grass, crushing clods 
of earth, and spitting, without a particular reason,
29, And whatever else they forbid.
24, Haradatta tells the story to which the second half of the 
verse alludes, in the following manner: ‘ A certain i?/shi had two 
pupils, called Dharmaprahradana and Kumalana. 
Once they 
brought from the forest two great bundles of firewood and threw 
them negligently into their teacher’s house, without looking. One 
of the bundles struck the teacher’s little son so that he died. Then 
the teacher asked his two pupils, "Which of you two has killed 
him ? ” 
Both answered, “ Not I, not I.” 
Hereupon the teacher, 
being unable to (come \o a decision in order to) send away the 
sinner and to keep the innocent one, called Death, and asked him, 
“ Which of the’ two has killed the boy ? ” 
Then Death, finding 
himself involved in a difficult law-question, began to weep, and 
giving his decision, said, “ Oh Dharmaprahradana to Kumdlana 
(the dative has the sense of the genitive), this sin is none of 
KumSlana’s ! ” 
Instead of declaring, “ Dharmaprahradana, thou 
hast done this,’’ he said, “ The other did not do it.” 
Still from 
the circumstances of the case it appeared that the meaning of the 
answer was, “ The other has done it.” 
“ This was the decision 
.which he gave crying.” ’
26. Manu I'V’, 77.
28.- Manu I’V, 70 and 71.

--- PAGE 163 ---
II, X, I.
T H E D U T IE S OF A H O USEH OLDER.
9 9
PRAi'NA I I , F a t a l A 1 , K h a a^d a 1 .
1. A fter marriage the rites prescribed for a house­
holder and his wife (must be performed).
2. H e shall eat at the two (appointed) times, 
(morning and evening.)
3. And he shall not eat to repletion.
4. And both (the householder and his wife) shall 
fast on (the days of) the new and full moon.
5. T o eat once (on ihose days in the morning), 
that also is called fasting.
6. A nd they may eat (at that meal) until they 
are quite satisfied.
7. And on (the anniversary of) that (wedding)-day 
they may eat that food of which they are fond.
■ l.'i. According to Haradatta, this rule is intended to refute the 
opiiiion of those who hold that the sacred household-fire may be 
kept, and the prescribed offerings therein may be performed, 
either from the time of the iriarriage, or after the division of the 
family estate. 
He also states that' the use of the dual gr/hame- 
dhino/5 indicates that husband and wife must perform the rites 
conjointly. Manu III, 67.
2. 
Haradatta thinks that this Sfftra is intended to prevent 
householders from having more than two meals a day, and to keep 
them from gluttony. Others are of opinion that its object is to 
keep householders from excessive fasting, and to make them 
perform the Pran%nihotra at either meal. At the Prawag#ihotra 
the sacrificer eats five mouthfuls invoking successively, whilst he 
eats, the five, vital airs. At the first mouthful he says, ‘ To Pra«a 
svahfi;’ at the second, ‘ To Apdna svahd,’ &c.
5. A-sv. G rt. Sfl. I, 10, 2.
7. Haradatta holds that the words ‘ on that day ’ do not refer to 
the days of the new and full moon, the Parva-daj’s, mentioned in • 
Sfitra 4. His reasons are, firstly, that the permission to eat food, 
of which the householder may be particularly fond, has already 
been given in Sfitra 6, by the term trfpti^, ‘ satisfaction;’ and, 
secondly, that the singular ‘ on this day' does not agree with the 
plural ‘ on the Parva-days.' Hence’ he comes to the conclusion
H 2

--- PAGE 164 ---
lOO
A PA STA M B A ,
II, r, r.
8. And (on the night of that day) they shall sleep 
on the ground (on a raised heap of earth),
9. A nd they shall avoid connubial intercourse.
10. And on the' day after (that day) a Sthalipaka 
must be offered.
11. T h e manner in which that offering must be 
performed has been declared by (the description of 
the Sthalipika) to be performed on the days of the 
new and full moon (the Parya;^a).
12. A nd they declare (that this rite which is 
known) amongst the people (must be performed) 
every (year).
that the words ‘ on that day’ must refer to the wedding-day, 
mentioned in Shtra i, as well as to its anniversary- Haradatta is, 
probably, right in his explanation, though the reasqns adduced 
here are very weak. 
A stronger reason for detaching this Shtra 
from Shtra 4 will be brought forward below, under SQtra 11. Mahd- 
deva, the commentator of the Hirawyakeridharma, adopts the view 
rejected by Haradatta.
8. Ajv. Grf. SB. I, 3, 10.
10. A Sthalipaka is an offering at which rice cooked in a pot, 
sthali, is offered in the fire. A full description of this kind of 
sacrifice occurs, A sv. G ri. Sfi.-I, 10, i seq.
11. The Parvawa Sthalipfika has been described by Apastamba 
in the Gr^hya-sfitra, Pa/ala 3. 
Again, Haradatta returns to the 
question whether the words on that day (Sutra 7) refer to the 
Parva-days, or the marriage-day and its anniversaries. 
He now 
adds, in favour of the latter view, that the word Parva;/ena, ‘ by 
the rite to be performed on Parva-days,’ by which the Sthalipaka 
on Parva-days is intended, dearly proves the impossibility to refer 
the preceding rules to the Parva-days. 
He adds that some, 
nevertheless, adopt the explanation rejected by himself.
12. They, i.e. the .Sish/as, those learned in the law. ‘ Another 
commentator says, the rite which will be taught (in the following 
Sutra), and which is known from the usage of the learned, is 
constant, i. e. must be performed in every case. 
That it is what 
the “ learned ” declare.’— Haradatta. 
The latter explanation of 
the Sfitra is adopted by MahMeva.

--- PAGE 165 ---
I I, I, I . 
TH E D U T IE S OF A H OU SEH OLDER.
lOI
13. A t every (burnt-offering), when he wishes to 
place the fire on the altar (called Stha;Mfila), let him 
draw on that (altar) three lines from west to east 
and three lines from south to north, and sprinkle 
(the altar) with water, turning the palm of the hand 
downwards, and let him then make the fire burn 
brightly by adding (fuel).
14. H e shall pour out (the remainder of) this water 
used for sprinkling, to the north or to the east (of 
the altar), and take other (water into .the vessel).
15. The water-vessels in the house shall never 
be empty; that is the duty to be observed by the 
householder and his wife.
16. Let him not have connubial intercourse (with 
his wife) in the day-time.
1 7. But let him have connexion with his wife at 
the proper time, according to the rules (of the law).
18. Let him have connubial intercourse in the 
interval also, if his wife (desires it, observing the 
restrictions imposed by the law).
19. (The duty of) connubial intercourse (follows 
from) the passage of a Br4hma«a, (‘ Let us dwell 
together until a son be born.’)
13. A sv. G n . Sfi. I, 3, 1-3.
15. Haradatta states that the object of the repetition of the 
words ‘ the householder and his wife ’ is to show that they 
themselves must fill the. water-vessels, and not employ others for 
this purpose. 
He adds that, according to another commentator, 
the object of the repetition is to show that Sfitras 13 and 14 apply 
not only to householders, but also to students, and that hence 
students, when they offer the daily oblations of sacred fuel (above, 
I, I, 4, 14 seq.), should also perform the rites taught in the pre­
ceding Sfitras.
17. See Manu III, 46-48; Ya^fi. I, 79, 80.
18. Manu III, 45; Yag'fi. I, 81.
19. See Taittirtya Sawhita II, 5, i, S-
55860

--- PAGE 166 ---
102
a p a s t a a ; b a .
II, r, 2.
20. But during intercourse he shall be dressed in 
a particular dress kept for this purpose.
21. And during intercourse only they shall lie 
together,
22. Afterwards separate.
23. Then they both shall bathe ;
P ra5Na II, Pa^ala 1, K haat/)A 2.
1. Or they shall remove the stains with earth or 
water, sip water, and sprinkle the body with water.
. 2. Men of all castes, if they fulfil their (assigned) 
duties, enjoy (in heaven) the highest, imperishable 
bliss.
3. Afterwards when (a man who has fulfilled his 
duties) returns to this world, he obtains, by virtue of 
a remainder of merit, birth in a distinguished family, 
beauty of form, beauty of complexion, strength, apti­
tude for learning, wisdom, wealth, and the gift of 
fulfilling the laws of his (caste and order). 
There­
fore in .both worlds he dwells in happiness, (rolling) 
like a wheel (from the one to the other).
4. A s the seed of herbs (and) trees, (sown) in 
good and well-cultivated soil, gives manifold returns 
of fruit (even so it is with men who have received 
the various sacraments).
5. T he increase of the results of sins has been 
explained hereby.
6. Thus after having undergone a long punish­
ment in the next world, a person who has stolen 
(the gold of a Brdhmawa) or killed a (Brahmawa) is ^ 
born again, in case he was a Brdhmawa as a K^n-
2. 6. Manu XII, 55; Ya^fi. Ill, 206, 207. 
A Paulkasa is said 
to be the offspring of a Nishdda and a Kshatriya woman. See the 
Pet. Diet. s. V. A Vai«a is a rope-dancer, or equilibrist.

--- PAGE 167 ---
II, 2, 3- 
t h e d u t i e s o f a h o u s e h o l d e r .
103
^/ala, in case he was a Kshatriya as a Paulkasa, in \ 
case he was a Vai^ya as a Vaiwa.
7. In the same manner other (sinners) who have 
become outcasts in consequence of their sinful actions y 
are born again, on account of (these) sins, losing their 
caste, in the wombs (of various animals).
8. A s it is sinful to touch a A'iwai'ala, (so it is also 
sinful) to speak to him or to look at him. 
T h e ‘ 
penance for these (offences will be declared).
9. (The penance) for touching him is to bathe, 
submerging the whole body; for speaking to him to 
speak to a Brahmawa; for looking at him to look at 
the lights (of heaven).
pR A S'N A II, P a t a l a 2, K
h a v d a 3.
1. Pure men of the first three castes shall prepare 
the food (of a householder which is used) at the 
Vaii'vadeva ceremony.
2. The (cook) shall not speak, nor cough, nor spit, 
while his face is turned towards the food.
3. H e shall purify himself by touching water if he 
has touched his hair, his limbs, or his garment.
4. Or 6’udras may prepare the food, under the ^ 
superintendence of men of the first three castes.
5. For them is prescribed the same rule of sip­
ping water (as for their masters).
6. Besides, the (6'hdra cooks) daily shall cause to v'
7. Manu XII, 52.
3. 
1. ‘ The food which is used at the Vaijvadeva, i. e. the food 
prepared for the meals of the householder and of his wife.’— 
Haradatta.
5. This Sutra is a (rilapaka, as it indicates that Apastamba als- 
recognises the different rules which are usually prescribed in th 
Smmis for Bri.hma«as, Kshatriyas, Vai^yas, and Afldras. See above, 
I, 5, 16, 2.

--- PAGE 168 ---
10 4
A PA ST A M B A .
II, 2, 3.
be cut the hair of their heads, their beards, the hair 
on their bodies, and their nails.
7. And they shall bathe, keeping their clothes on.
8. Or they may trim (their hair and nails) on the 
eighth day (of each half-month), or on the days of 
the full and new moon.
-9. H e (the householder himself) shall place on the 
fire that food which has been prepared (by .5’fidras) 
without supervision, and shall sprinkle it with water. 
Such food also they state to be fit for the gods.
10. W hen the food is ready, (the cook) shall place 
himself before his master and announce it to him 
(saying), ‘ It is ready.’
11. T he answer (of the master) shall be, ‘ That 
well-prepared food is the means to obtain splendour ; 
may it never fa il!’
12. T he burnt-oblations and Bali-offerings made 
with the food which the husband and his wife are to 
eat, bring (as their reward) prosperity, (and the enjoy­
ment of) heaven.
13. W hilst learning the sacred formulas (to be 
recited during the performance) of those (burnt- 
oblations and Bali-offerings, a householder) shall 
sleep on the ground, abstain from connubial inter­
course and from eating pungent condiments and 
salt, during twelve days.
/
7. Usually in bathing both Aryas and .Sfidras wear no dress 
except the langoA.
11. Manu II, 54.
12. Balls are portions of food which are thrown before the door, 
or on the floor of the house. 
See below, Sfltra 16 seq.
13. Others explain this Sfltra thus ; ‘ After having used for the 
first time these sacred formulas (which are to be recited in offering 
the burnt-oblation and the Balis, the householder and his wife) 
shall sleep,’ &c.

--- PAGE 169 ---
II, 2, 3- 
t h e d u t i e s o f a h o u s e h o l d e r .
105
14. (When he studies the Mantras) for the last 
(Bali offered to the goblins), he shall fast for one 
(day and) night.
15. For each Bali-offering the ground must be 
prepared separately. 
(The performer) sweeps (the 
ground) with his (right) hand, sprinkles it with water, 
turning the palm downwards, throws down (the offer­
ing), and afterwards sprinkles water around it.
16. (A t the Vaii'vadeva sacrifice) he shall offer 
the oblations with his hand, (throwing them) into 
the kitchen-fire or into the sacred (Gr/hya)-fire, and 
reciting (each time one of) the first six Mantras 
(prescribed in the Nariya^d Upanishad).
17. H e shall sprinkle water all around both times 
(before and after the- oblations), as (has been de­
clared) above.
14. Regarding the use of ekaratra in the sense of ‘ a (day and a) 
night,’ see above. 
The ‘ last ’ Bali-pflFering is that described below,
II, 2, 4- 5-
15. ‘ They say that the word “ afterwards’* is used in order to 
indicate that perfumes, garlands, and other (UpaA’aras) must be 
offered between (the last two acts).’— Haradatta.
16. It is a disputed point with the commentators whether every 
Brdhma?ra may offer the Vairvadeva in the common kitchen-fire, or , 
those persons only who do not keep a sacred domestic fire. The 
six Mantras, which are given Taitt. Ar. X, 67, i, are: i. Agnaye 
svahfi, ‘ to Agni svaha;’ 2. Somaya svaha, ‘ to Soma svaha;’
3. Vuvebhyo devebhya^ svSha, ‘ to all the gods s v a h a 4. Dhruvaya 
bhfimaya svaha, ‘to Dhruva Bhuma svaha;’ 5. Dhruvakshitaye svaha,
‘ to Dhruvakshiii svaha 
6. A/tyutakshitaye svdhS, ‘ to A^yutakshiti 
svfiha.’ 
Haradatta adds that some add a seventh formula, addressed 
to Agni svish/akr/t, ‘ to the fire which causes the proper perform­
ance of the sacrifice,’ while others leave out the second Mantra and 
give that addressed to Agni svish/akn't the sixth place. 
This 
latter is the order given in the Calcutta edition of the Taittiriya 
Ara«yaka.
17. 
‘ A bove, i. e. G^fhya-sfitra, Pa/ala 2.’— Haradatta. The Man­
tras recited are: i. at the first sprinkling, Adite'numanyasva, ‘Aditi

--- PAGE 170 ---
io6
A PA STA M B A .
n, 2,3.
18. 
In like manner water is sprinkled around once 
only after the performance of those Bali-offerings 
that are performed in one place.
ig. (If a seasoning) has been prepared, (the 
Bali-offering should consist of rice) mixed with that 
seasoning.
20. W ith the seventh and eighth Mantras (Balis 
must be offered to Dharma and Adharma) behind 
the fire, and must be placed the one to the north of 
the other.
21. W ith the ninth (Mantra a Bali offered to the 
waters must be placed) near the water-vessel (in 
which the water for domestic purposes is kept).
22. W ith the tenth and eleventh (Mantras, Balis, 
offered to the herbs and trees and to Rakshodeva- 
^ana, must be placed) in the centre of the house, 
and the one to the east of the other.
23. W ith the following four (Mantras, Balis must 
be placed) in the north-eastern part of the house 
(and. the one to the east of the other).
permit;’ Anumate’numanyasva, ‘ Anumati permit;’ Sarasvaty anu- 
manyasva, ‘Sarasvati permit;’ Deva Savita^ prasuva, ‘ Divine Savitr/ 
permit;’ 2. at the second sprinkling-, the same as above, anva- 
mawsthaA and prasavi//, ‘ thou hast permitted,’ being substituted 
for anumanyasva and prasuva.
18; I'his Sdtra is a restriction of Sutra ig.
20’. The first six offerings constitute the Devaya.g'ila or Vakva- 
deva, which is offered in the fire. 
Now follow the Bali-offerings, 
which are merely placed on the ground. 
‘ Behind the fire ’ means 
‘ to the east of the fire ;’ for the sacrificer must face the east.
21. The Mantra is, Adbh)'aA svaha, ‘ to the Waters svdhd.’
22. The Mantras are, OshadhivanaspatibhyaA svaha, ‘ to the 
herbs and trees svahS;’ Rakshodevajg-anebhyaii svahS, ‘ to the 
Rdkshasas and the servants of the gods svahd.’
23. These four Balis are sacred to the Crzlias, to the Avasanas, 
to the Avasanapatis, and to all creatures.

--- PAGE 171 ---
II, 2, 4.
T H E D U T IE S OF A H O U SEH OLD ER.
107
P ra^na II, Patala 2, K hajvda 4 .
1. Near the bed (a Bali must be offered) with 
(a Mantra) addressed to K im a (Cupid). •
2. On the door-sill (a Bali must be placed) with 
(a Mantra) addressed to Antariksha (the air).
3. W ith (the Mantra) that follows (in the Upani- 
shad, he offers a Bali) near the door.
4. W ith the following (ten Mantras, addressed to 
Earth, Air, Heaven, Sun, Moon, the Constellations, 
Indra, Brfhaspati, Pra^pati, and Brahman, he offers 
ten Balis, each following one to the east of the pre­
ceding one), in (the part of the house called) the 
seat of Brahman.
5. H e shall offer to the south (of the Balls offered 
before, a Bali) with a Mantra addressed to the M anes; 
his sacrificial cord shall be suspended over the right 
shoulder, and the (palm of his right hand shall be 
turned upwards and) inclined to tlie right.
6. T o the north (of the Bali given to the Manes,
4. 
2. ‘ Others explain dehall, “ the door-sill,” to mean “ the 
door-case.' 
Haradatta.
3. ‘ Others explain apidhana, “ the panels of the door,” to mean 
“ the bolt of the door.” ’— Haradatta. 
The offering is made to 
Kama, ‘ the name, or essence of things.’
4. Haradatta gives two explanations of the word Brahmasadana,
‘ the seat of Brahman.’ 
According to some, it is an architectural 
term, designating the centre of the house ; according to others, it 
denotes the place where, at the time of the burnt-oblations, the 
Brahman or superintending priest is seated, i. e. a spot to the south 
of the sacred fire.
5. Balis and water for the Manes are placed or poured into the 
palm of the hand and thrown out between the thumb and fore­
finger. 
That part of the palm is, therefore, sometimes called ‘ the 
ttrtha sacred to the Manes.’ 
See Manu II, 39.
6. ‘ That is to say, the sacrificial cord shall not be suspended 
over the right shoulder, nor shall the Bali be thrown out between 
the thumb and forefinger.’—Haradatta.

--- PAGE 172 ---
io8
A PA STA M B A .
II, 2. 4.
a Bali shall be offered) to Rudra, in the same manner 
as to the (other) gods,
7. T h e sprinkling with water (which precedes and 
follows the oblation) of these two (Balis’, takes place) 
separately, on account of the difference of the rule 
(for each case).
8. A t night only he shall offer (the Bali to the
goblins), throwing it into the air and reciting the last 
(Mantra), 
*
9. H e who. devoutly offefs those (above-described 
Balis and Homas), according to the rules, (obtains) 
eternal bliss in heaven and prosperity.
10. And (after the Balis have been performed, a 
portion of the food) must first be given as alms.
IT, H e shall give food to his guests first,
12, And to infants, old or sick people, female 
(relations, and) pregnant women.
13. The master (of the house) and his wife shall 
not refuse a man who asks for food at the time (when 
the Vai^vadeva offering has been performed).
7. In sprinkling around an offering to the gods, the sacrificer 
turns his right hand towards the oblation and pours out the water, 
beginning in the south,and ending in the east. In sprinkling around 
an offering to the Manes, exactly the opposite order is to be followed.
8. At night, i. e. before the evening meal. 
The Mantra is, ‘ To 
those beings which, being servants of Vituda, roam about day and 
night, desiring a Bali-offering, I offer this Bali, desirous of pros­
perity. 
May the Lord of prosperity grant me prosperity, svahS.’ 
Haradatta adds, that according to another commentator, no other 
Bali but this is to be offered in the evening, and that some modify 
the Mantra for each occasion, offering the Bali in the morning to 
‘ the Bhiuas that roam about during the day,’ and in the evening 
‘ to the night-walkers.’ 
Compare for the whole section Manu III, 
90-92 ; Ydg-fi. I, 102-104.
10. Manu III, 94 seq.
IT. Manu III, 115: Ya,fii. I, 105.
12. Manu III, 114; Yaj^ft. I, 105.

--- PAGE 173 ---
II, 2, 4- 
t h e 
d u t i e s 
o f 
a 
h o u s e h o l d e r .
109
14. If there is no food, earth, water, grass, and 
a kind word, forsooth, never fail in the house o f a 
good man. 
Thus (say those who know the law).
15. Endless worlds are the portion (of those 
householders and wives) who act thus.
16. T o a Brihmawa who has not studied the 
Veda, a seat, water, and food must be given. 
But 
(the giver) shall not rise (to do him honour).
1 7. But if (such a man) is worthy of a salutation 
(for other reasons), he shall rise to salute him.
18. Nor (shall a Brahma^a rise to receive) a 
Kshatriya or Vai^ya (though they may be learned).
,19. If a .Shdra comes as a guest (to a Brahmawa),
_ he shall give him some work to do. 
H e may feed 
him, after (that has been performed).
20. Or the slaves (of the Brihmaf^a householder) 
shall fetch (rice) from the royal stores, and honour 
the 6'hdra as a guest.
21. (A householder) must always wear his garment 
' over (his left shoulder and under hi* right arm).
22. Or he may use a cord only, slung over his 
left shoulder and passed under his right arm, instead
' of the garment.
14. Manu III, lo i ; 
I, 107. 
As read in the text, the
first line of the verse has one S3'llable in excess. 
This irregularity 
would disappear if trf«a, the Vedic form of the nom. acc. plural, 
were read for trmani, and it seems to me not improbable that 
trrwani is a correction made by a Pandit who valued grammatical 
correctness higher than correctness of metre.
16. Manu III, 99.
18. IManu III, 110-112; Y^n. I, 107.
19. Manu loc. cit.
20. ‘ Hence it is known that the king ought to keep stores of 
rice and the like in every village, in order to show hospitality to 
•Sudra guests.’— Haradatta,

--- PAGE 174 ---
n o
A PA STA M B A .
n, 2.5-
23. H e shall sweep together (the crumbs) on the 
place where he has eaten, and take therri away. 
H e shall sprinkle water on that place, turning the 
palm downwards, and remove the stains (of food 
from the cooking-vessels with a stick), wasla them 
with water, and take their contents to a clean place 
to the north (of the hquse, offering them) to Rudra. 
In this manner his house will become prosperous.
24. It is declared in the Sm^^ftis that a Brah- 
ma«a alone should be chosen as teacher (or spiritual 
guide).
25. In times of distress a Brihmawa may study 
under a Kshatriya or Vahya.
26. And (during his pupilship) he must walk
behind (such a teacher). 
'
27. Afterwards the Brahma«a shall take prece­
dence before (his Kshatriya or Vai^ya teacher).
P r a s n a 
I I , 
P a ^ a l a 2 , 
K n A i v n A 5.
I-. On the day on which, beginning the study of 
the whole sacred science, the Upanishads (and the 
rest, he performs the U pikarm a in the morning), 
he shall not study (at night).
24. 
Manu II, 241, 242. 
From here down to II, 3,6, 2, Apa- 
stamba again treats of the duties of students and teachers, a subject 
which appears to have in his eyes a greater importance than any 
other. 
The rules given now apply chiefly to householders. 
It 
would seem that they have been inserted in this particular place, 
because the reception of a former teacher is to be described from 
II) 3) 3) 4“ it) and that of a ‘ learned guest’ from II, 3, 6, 3.
5. 
I. This rule refers to the Upakarma, to be performed yearly 
by householders. In our days, too, the custom is observed, and the 
whole Brahminical community change on this occasion their Genvls 
or sacrificial cords in the month of ^’ravawa. 
The adherents of 
the various ,5akh^s of the Vedas, however, perform the ceremony

--- PAGE 175 ---
II, 2, 5-
T H E D U T IE S O F A H O USEH OLDER.
I l l
2. And he shall not leave his teacher at once after 
having studied (the Veda and having returned home),
3. If he is in a hurry to go, he shall perform the 
daily recitation of the Veda in the presence of his 
teacher, and then go at his pleasure. In this manner 
good fortune will attend both of them.
4. If the (former) teacher visits him after he has 
returned home, he shall go out to meet him, embrace 
his (feet), and he shall not wash himself (after that 
act), showing disgust. 
H e then shall let him pass 
first into the house, fetch (the materials necessary for 
a hospitable reception), and honour him according to 
the rule,
5. If (his former teacher is) present, he himself 
shall use a seat, a bed, food, and garments inferior 
to, and lower (than those offered to the teacher).
6. Standing (with his body bent), he shall place 
his left hand (under the water-vessel, and bending 
with his other hand its mouth downwards), he shall 
offer to his teacher water for sipping.
on different days. 
According to Haradatta, the Upanishads are 
named, in order to show that they are of the highest importance. 
See also 5 atapatha-brahma«a X, 3, 5, 12.
2. 
Others consider that this Sfttra refers to the annual Upakarma 
of the householder. In that case the translation would be, ‘ And 
after having performed the Upakarma,’ &c. 
Probably Apastamba 
means to give a general rule, applicable both to householders and 
to students who have returned home.
4. 
‘ Though he may suspect that the teacher had been defiled by 
the touch of a A’’a«</ala or the like, still he shall not show disgust 
nor wash himself.’— Haradatta. 
Regarding the rule of receiving 
guests, see below, II, 4, 8, 6 seq.
6. 
According to Haradatta, the repetition of the word ^'aryam, 
‘ the teacher,’ in this Sutra, indicates that the rule holds good not 
only-when the teacher comes as a guest to his former pupil, but on 
every occasion when he receives water for sipping.

--- PAGE 176 ---
I I 2
A P A ST A M B A .
II, 2, 5.
7. A nd (he shall offer water for sipping in this 
manner) to other guests also who possess all (good 
qualities) together.
8. H e shall imitate (his teacher) in'rising, sitting, 
walking about, and smiling.
9. In the presence (of his teacher) he shall not 
void excrements, discharge wind, speak aloud, laugh, 
.spit, clean his teeth, blow his nose, frown, flap his 
hands, nor snap his fingers.
10. N or shall he tenderly embrace or address 
caressing words to his wife or children.
11. H e shall not contradict his teacher,
12. Nor any of his betters.
13. (H e shall not) blame or revile any creature,
14. (H e shall not revile one branch of) sacred 
learning by (invidiously comparing it with) another.
15. If he is not well versed in a (branch of) sacred 
learning (which he studied formerly), he shall again 
go to the (same) teacher and master it, observing 
the (same) rules as (during his. first studentship).
16. T h e restrictions (to be kept) by the teacher
7. ‘ He is called samudeta, “ possessed of all (good qualities) 
together,” who is endowed with (good) birth, disposition, behaviour, 
(great) learning, and a (venerable) age.’— Haradatta.
8. The w'ord syat is to be understood from Sfitra g.
13. Haradatta states that ‘ speaking evil’ is forbidden here once 
more in order that it should be particularly avoided.
14. ‘ For example, he shall not say, “ The /?fg-veda is sweet to 
the ear, the other Vedas grate on the ear,” or “ the Taittiriya-veda 
is a 5 akha consisting of leavings,” or “ the Brahmawa proclaimed 
by Y^uavalkya is of modern origin.’” — Haradatta. 
The second 
sentence refers to the story that YS^fiavalkya vomited the Black 
Ya^r-veda, and his fellow-students, becoming partridges, picked it 
up. 
Regarding the third sentence, see Varttika on Pawini IV, 3, 
105, and Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 363.
i6. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 42.

--- PAGE 177 ---
11, 3, 6. 
T H E D U T IE S OF A H OUSEH OLDER.
II3
from the beginning of the course of teaching to its 
end are, to avoid cutting the hair on the body, par­
taking of meat or of oblations to the Manes, and 
connexion (with a woman).
17. Or (he may have conjugal intercourse) with 
his wife at the proper season.
18. H e shall be attentive in instructing his pupils 
in the sacred learning, in such a manner that they 
master it, in observing the- restrictions (imposed 
upon householders during their teaching). > He who 
acts thus, gains heavenly bliss for Tiimself, his 
descendants and ancestors.
19. He who entirely avoids with mind, word, 
nose, eye, and ear the sensual objects (such as are) 
enjoyed by the touch, the organ, or the stomach, 
gains immortality.
P r a ,s n a I I , 
P A r A L A 3, 
K
h / atz>a 6 .
1. If he has any doubts regarding the caste and 
conduct of a person who has come to him in order 
to fulfil his duty (of learning the Veda), he shall 
kindle a fire (with the ceremonies prescribed for 
kindling the sacrificial fire) and ask him about his 
caste and conduct.
2. If he declares himself to be (of) good (family 
and conduct, the teacher elect) shall say, ‘Agni who 
sees, V iy u who hears, Aditya who brings to light.
6. 
I. The person desirous to study addresses his teacher elect with 
the following Mantra: Bhagavan maitrewa /fakshushd parya rivena 
manasanugr/ha»a prasida mSm adhySpaya, ‘ venerable Sir, look on 
me with a friendly eye, receive with a favourable mind, be kind and 
teach me.’ 
The teacher elect then asks: Kiwgotrossi saumya, 
kimaMra^, ‘ friend, of what family art thou ? what is thy rule of 
conduct ?’
[3] 
I

--- PAGE 178 ---
114
A PA STA M B A .
n, 3. 6.
vouch for his goodness; may it be well with this 
person ! 
H e is free from sin.’ 
Then h e , shall 
begin to teach him.
3. A guest comes to the house resembling a 
burning fire.
4. H e is called a ►S'rotriya who, observing the law 
(of studentship), has learned one recension of the 
Veda (which may be current in his family).
5- H e is called a guest (who, being a ^’rotriya), 
approaches solely for the fulfilment of his religious 
duties, and with no other object, a householder who 
lives intent on the fulfilment of his duties.
6. T h e reward for honouring (such a guest) is 
immunity from misfortunes, and heavenly bliss.
7. H e shall go to meet such (a guest), honour hftn 
according to his age (by the formulas of salutation 
prescribed), and cause a seat to be given to him.
8. Some declare that, if possible, the seat should 
have many feet.
. 9. T h e (householder himself) shall wash the feet 
o f that (guest); according to some, two 6’fidras shall 
do it.
3. The object of this Sfltra is to show the absolute necessity of 
feeding a guest. For, if offended, he might burn the house with 
the flames of his anger.
4. The object of this Sfitra is to complete the definition of the 
' term ‘ guest' to be given in the following Sfitra. 
In my translation
I have followed Haradatta’s gloss. 
The literal sense of Apa- 
stamba’s words is, ‘ He who, observing the law, has studied one 
recension of each (of the four) Vedas, becomes a .Srotriya.’ 
Hara- 
datta says this definition would be contrary to the current accepta­
tion of the term. 
That argument proves, however, nothing for 
Apastamba’s times.
5. Manu III, 102, 103; Y%n. I, in .
6. Ya^^’fl. I, 109; Manu III, loi.
8. Haradatta states that this is also Apastamba’s opinion.

--- PAGE 179 ---
11, 3. 6.
T H E D U TIE S OF A H O USEH OLDER.
II5
10. One of them shall be employed in pouring 
water (over the guest, the other in washing his feet).
11. Some declare that the water for the (guest) 
shall be brought in an earthen vessel.
12. But (a guest) who has not yet returned home 
from his teacher shall not be a cause for fetching 
water.
13. In case a (student comes, the host) shall 
repeat the Veda (together with him) for a longer 
time (than with other guests).
14. H e shall converse kindly (with his guest), 
and gladden him with milk or other (drinks), with 
eatables, or at least with water.
15. H e shall offer to his guest a room, a bed, a 
mattress, a pillow with a cover, and ointment, and 
what else (may be necessary).
16. (If the dinner has been finished before the 
arrival of the guest), he shall call his cook and give 
him rice or yava for (preparing a fresh meal for) the 
guest
17. (If dinner is ready at the arrival of the guest), 
he himself shall portion out the food and look at it, 
saying (to himself), ‘ Is this (portion) greater, or 
this ? ’
18. H e shall say, ‘ Take out a larger (portion for 
the guest).’
I r. According to Haradatta, Apastamba is of opinion that it 
should be brought in a pot made of metal.
12. 
I.e. it is unnecessary to offer water for washing the feet to 
a student. 
This translation follows the corrected reading given in 
the additions to Critical Notes.
15. ‘ Ointment, (i. e.) oil or clarified butter for anointing the 
feet.’— Haradatta. 
Manu III, 107.
16. Manu III, 108.
I 2

--- PAGE 180 ---
116
A PA ST A M B A .
If. 3. 7-
19. A guest who is at enmity (with his host) shall 
not eat his food, nor (shall he eat the food of a host) 
who hates him or accuses him of a crime, or of one 
who is suspected of a crime.
20. For it is declared in the Veda that he (who 
eats the food o f such a person) eats his guilt.
P rajn a II, Patiala. 3, K haa^da 7.
1. This reception o f guests is an everlasting 
(6rauta)-sacrifice 
offered by the householder to 
Pra^apati.
2. T h e fire in the stomach of the guest (repre­
sents) the Ahavaniya, (the sacred fire) in the house 
of the host represents the G^rhapatya, the fire at 
which the food for the guest is cooked (represents) 
the fire used for cooking the sacrificial viands (the 
Dakshi;iigni).
3. H e who eats before his guest consumes the 
food, the prosperity, the issue, the cattle, the merit 
which his family acquired by sacrifices and charitable 
works.
4. Food (offered to guests) which is mixed with 
milk procures the reward of an Agnish/oma-sacrifice, 
food mixed with clarified butter procures the reward
19. Manu IV, 213 ; YS^u. I, 162.
7. 
I. ‘ Pr%-apatya may mean either “ created by Pra^fapati" or 
“ sacred to Prag'Spati.” ’— Haradatta.
2. 
In the first Sfitra the reception of guests had been compared 
to an everlasting Vedic sacrifice. 
This analogy is traced further 
in detail in this Sfitra. 
One of the chief characteristics of a Vedic 
sacrifice is the vitdna, or the use of three sacred fires. 
Hence 
Apastamba shows that three fires also are used in offering hospi­
tality to guests.
4. Regarding the Agnish/oma and the other sacrifices men­
tioned, see Aitareya-brahma«a III, 8 ; IV, i; IV, 4.

--- PAGE 181 ---
n ,3. ^
THE DUTIES OF A HOUSEHOLDER.
II7
of an Ukthya, food mixed with honey the reward of 
an Atiritra, food accompanied by meat the reward 
of a Dvada5-aha, (food and) water numerous offspring 
and long life.
5. It is declared in the Veda, ‘ Both welcome and 
indifferent guests procure heaven (for their host).’
6. When he gives food in the morning, at noon, 
and in the evening, (these gifts) are the Savanas (of 
that sacrifice offered to Pra^pati).
7. When he rises after his guest has risen (to 
depart), that act represents the Udavasdnlyi ishd 
(of a Vedic sacrifice).
8. When he addresses (the guest) kindly, that 
kind address (represents) the Dakshi?«a.
9. When he follows (his departing guest, his steps 
represent) the steps of Vishwu.
10. When he returns (after having accompanied 
his guest), that (act represents) the Avabhr/tha, 
(the final bath performed after the completion o f a 
sacrifice.)
11. Thus (a Brahma^/a shall treat) a Brahma?m, 
(and a Kshatriya and a Vai^ya their caste-fellows.)
6. The morning, midday, and evening offerings offered at the 
great Vedic sacrifices are called Savan^. 
The object of this 
Sfitra is to prescribe the hospitable reception of guests at all times 
of the day, and to further describe the similarity of a guest-offering 
to a Vedic sacrifice.
7. Regarding the Udavasaniyd ishd, see Aitareya-brdhma/;a 
VIII, 5. It is the ‘ concluding ish/i.'
8. Dakshi«a is the reward given to priests who officiate at a 
sacrifice.
9. ‘ The steps of Vish«u’ are three steps which the sacrificer 
has to make between the Vedi and the Ahavantya-fire. See Pet. 
Diet. s. V.

--- PAGE 182 ---
ii8
A PA STA M B A .
n, 3t 7'
12. If a gTjest comes to a king, he shall make (his 
Purohita) honour him more.than himself.
13. If a guest comes to an Agnihotrin, he himself 
shall go to meet him and say to him : ‘ O faithful 
fulfiller of thy vows, where didst thou ^tay (last 
night) ? ’ (Then he offers water, saying): ‘ O faithful 
fulfiller of thy vows, here is water.’ 
(N ext he offers 
milk or the like,* saying); ‘ O faithful fulfiller of thy 
vows, refresh thyself.’
14. (If the guest stays at the time of the Agni- 
hotra, he shall make him sit down to the north of 
the fire and) murmur in a low voice, before offering 
the oblations : ‘ O faithful fulfiller of thy vows, may 
it be as thy heart d e s i r e s ‘ O faithful fulfiller of 
thy vows, may it be as thy will is;’ “'O faithfid 
fulfiller of thy vows, may it be as thy wish is ;’
‘ O faithful fulfiller of thy vows, may it be as thy 
desire is.’
15. If a guest comes, after the fires have been 
placed (on the altar), but before the oblations have 
been offered, (the host) himself shall approach him 
and say to h im ; ‘ O faithful fulfiller of thy vows, 
give me permission; I wish to sacrifice,’ 
Then he 
shall sacrifice, after having received permission. 
A 
Brahmawa declares that he commits a sin if he sacri­
fices without permission.
12. ‘ A guest,' i.e. such a one as described above, II, 3, 6, 4 
and 5.
13. An Agnihotrin is a Brahma»a who offers certain daily burnt- 
offerings called Agnihotra.
14. According to some, all these sentences must be pronounced; 
according to Haradatta, one only, which may be selected optionally.
15. Haradatta states that the Brahmawa mentioned in the text 
is the Atharvawa-brahmawa. 
See Atharva-veda XV, ri-12.

--- PAGE 183 ---
ir, 4, 8. 
THE DUTIES OF A HOUSEHOLDER.
II9
16. H e who 
entertains guests for one night 
obtains earthly happiness, a second night gains the 
middle air, a third heavenly bliss, a fourth the world 
of unsurpassable bliss; many nights procure endless 
M'^orlds. 
T hat has been declared in the Veda.
17. If an unlearned person who pretends to be 
(worthy of the appellation) ‘ guest ’ comes to him, he 
shall give him a seat, water, and food, (thinking) ‘ I 
give it to a learned Brihma«a.’ 
Thus (the merit) of 
his (gift) becomes (as) great (as if a learned Brih- 
ma«a had received it).
Pra5Na II, Patala 4 , K haa^da 8.
1. 
On the second and following days of the 
guest’s stay, the host shall not rise or descend 
(from his couch) in order to salute his (guest), if 
he has been saluted before (on the first day).
2. H e shall eat after his guests.
3. H e shall not consume all the flavoured liquids 
in the house, so as to leave nothing for guests.
4. H e shall not cause sweetmeats to be prepared 
for his own sake.
5. (A guest) who can repeat the (whole) Veda 
(together with the supplementary books) is worthy 
to receive a cow and the Madhuparka,
6. (And also) the teacher, an officiating priest, a
Snitaka, and a just king (though not learned in the 
Veda). 
‘ 
•
8. 2. Manu III, 117; YS^fi. I, 105.
3. Flavoured liquids, i. e. milk, whey, &c.
4. Manu III, 106.
5. Manu III, 119 and 120; Y^n.I, no; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 
125. A guest is also called goghna, ‘ cow-killer,’ because formerly 
a cow lisedTo Ue kille'd on the arrival of a distinguished guest. 
The rite is described by A.rvalayana Grrhya-sdtra I, 24, 31-33.

--- PAGE 184 ---
120
APASTAMBA.
II, 4, 8.
7- A cow and the Madhuparka (shall be offered) 
to the teacher, to an officiating priest, to a father- 
in-law, and to a king, if they come after a year has 
elapsed (since their former visit).
8. T he Madhuparka shall consist of curds mixed 
with honey, or of milk mixed with honey.
9. On failure (of these substances) water (mixed 
with honey may be used).
10. T h e Veda has six Angas (auxiliary works).
11. (The six auxiliary works are) the Kalpa 
(teaching the ritual) of the Veda, the treatises on 
grammar, astronomy, 
etymology, 
phonetics, 
and 
metrics.
12. (If any one should contend that) the term 
Veda (on account of its etymology, implying Thpt 
which teaches duty or whereby one obtains spiritual 
merit) applies to the complete collection of (works 
which contain) rules, for rites which are to be per­
formed on the authority of'precepts, (that,'conse­
quently, the Kalpa-shtras form part of the Veda, and 
that thereby) the number (fixed above) for those 
(Angas) is proved to be wrong,
13. (Then we answer). A ll those who are learned 
in Mlmdwsd are agreed that (the terms Veda, Brdh- 
ma«a, and the- like, which are applied to) the principal 
(works), do not include the Angas (the Kalpa-sfitras 
and the rest).
8. AfvalSyana Grrliya-sfitra I, 24, 5 and 6.
10. 
This Sfitra explains the term vedadhyiya, ‘ (a guest) who 
can repeat the (whole) Veda,’ which occurs above, Sfitra 5.— 
Haradatta. Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. in .
12. This Sfitra and the following one are directed against those 
who consider the Kalpa-sfitras to be a part of the Veda, the re­
vealed texts. 
See also Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit 
Literature, p 95 seq.

--- PAGE 185 ---
n, 4,9.
THE DUTIES OF A HOUSEHOLDER.
121
14. 
If he remembers at any time during dinner, 
that he has refused a guest, he shall at once leave 
off eating and fast on that day,
P ra^na II, Patala 4 , K haa^da 9 .
1. And on the following day (he shall search for 
him), feast him to his heart’s content, and accompany 
him (on his departure).
2. (If the guest) possesses a carriage, (he shall 
accompany him) as far as that.
3. A ny other (guest he must accompany), until 
permission to return is given.
4. If (the guest) forgets (to give leave to depart), 
the (host) may return on reaching the boundary of 
his village.
5. T o all (those who come for food) at (the end 
of) the Vaii-vadeva he shall give a portion, even to 
dogs'and iTawif^las.
6. Some declare that he shall not give anything 
to unworthy people (such as Aa^^/alas).
7. A person who has been initiated shall not eat 
the leavings of women or of an uninitiated jierson.
8. A ll gifts are to be preceded by (pouring out) 
water.
9. (But gifts offered to priests) at sacrifices (are to 
be given) in the manner prescribed by the Veda.
10. T he division of the food must be made in
9. I. Ya^n. I, 113.
•j. After a long discussion on the object of this Sfitra, Haradatta 
comes to the conclusion that it is given ' against the improper 
custom to dine out of the same vessel with one’s wife and uninitiated 
children, which prevails in some countries.’
8. ‘ Consequently a gift of food also.’ The custom is to pour 
water, usually with the spoon called Darvi (Palli), into the extended 
palm of the recipient’s right hand.

--- PAGE 186 ---
122
APASTAMBA.
II, 5, to.
such a manner that those who receive daily portions 
(slaves) do not suffer by it.
11. A t his pleasure, he may stint himself, his wife, 
or his children, but by no means a slave who does 
his work.
12. And he must not stint himself so much that 
he becomes unable to perform his duties.
13. Now they quote also (the following two 
verses):
‘ A n ascetic may eat eight mouthfuls, a hermit 
living in the woods sixteen, a householder thirty-two, 
and a student as much as he likes. 
A n Agnihotrin, 
a draught-ox, and a student, those three can do their 
work only if they e a t; without eating (much), they 
cannot do it.’
P rajna II, PArALA 5, K hajvda 10 .
1. The reasons for (which) begging(is permissible 
are), (the desire to collect the fee for) the teacher, 
(the celebration of) a wedding, (or of) a 6rauta-sacri- 
■fice, the desire to keep one’s' father and mother, and 
the (impending) interruption of ceremonies performed 
by a worthy man.
2. (The person asked for alms) must examine the 
qualities (of the petitioner) and give according to his 
power.
3. But if persons ask for alms for the sake of 
sensual gratification, that is improper; he shall not 
take heed of that.
4. T he lawful occupations of a Brdhmawa are, y
13. Manu VI, 28; Ya^ii. Ill, 55.
10. I. Manu IV, 251; XI, i seq.; 
I, 216. 
By the term
arhat, ‘ a worthy person,’ a Brahmawa is here designated who has 
studied the Veda and performs an Agnihotra.
4. Manu I, 88; X, 75 ; Ya^^-fi. I, 118.

--- PAGE 187 ---
II, 5, 10. 
THE DUTIES OF A HOUSEHOLDER.
123
Studying, teaching, sacrificing for himself, officiating 
as priest for others, giving alms, receiving alms, inhe­
riting, and gleaning corn in the fields;
5. And (he may live by taking) other things which 
belong to nobody.
6. (The lawful occupations) of a Kshatriya are 
the same, with the exception of teaching, officiating 
as priest, and receiving alms. 
(But) governing and 
fighting must be added.
7. (The lawful occupatrohs) of a V a h y a are the 
same as those of a Kshatriya, with the exception of 
governing and fighting. (But in his case) agriculture, 
the tending of cattle, and trade must be added.
8. H e (shall) not choose (for the performance of 
a 6rauta-sacrifice) a priest who is unlearned in the 
Veda, nor one who haggles (about his fee).
9. (A priest) shall not officiate for a person 
unlearned in the Veda.
10. 
In war (Kshatriyas) shall act in such a 
manner as those order, who are learned in that 
(art of war).
11. The Aryas forbid the slaughter of those who 
have laid down their arms, of those who (beg for
"mercy) with flying hair or joined hands, and of 
fugitives.
12. The spiritual guide shall order those who,
5. I. e. wild roots and fruits.
6. Manu I, 89; X, 77, 79; Y%a. I, n8, 119.
7. Manu I, 90; X, 78, 79 ; Y%n. loc. cit.
11. Manu VII, 91 seq.; YS^fL I, 325.
12. Haradatta explains the word Ydstrairadhigatanam, 'who 
whilst participating, according to the sacred law, (in the rights of 
their caste,) ’ by ‘ who have been sanctified according to the law 
by the sacraments, such as the Garbhadhana, and are entitled (to 
the rights and occupations of tlieir caste).’

--- PAGE 188 ---
124
APASTAM BA.
1 1 ,5 , I I .
(whilst) participating according to sacred law (in the 
rights o f their caste), have gone astray through the 
weakness of their senses, to perform penances pro­
portionate to (the greatness of) their sins, according 
to the precepts (of the Smrfti).
13. If (such persons) transgress their (AM rya’s) 
order, he shall take them before the king.
14. T h e king shall (send them) to his domestic 
priest, who should be learned in the law and the 
science of governing.
15. H e shall order (them to perform the proper 
penances if they are) Brahma«as.
16. H e shall reduce them (to reason) by forcible 
means, excepting corporal punishment and servitude.
P ra5Na II, Patala 5, K haada 11.
1. In the cases of (men of) other castes, the king, 
after having examined their actions, may punish 
them even by death.
2. And the king shall not punish on suspicion.
3. But having carefully investigated (the case) by 
the help of ordeals and of questions (addressed to 
witnesses), the king may proceed to punish.
4. A king who acts thus, gains both (this and the 
next) world.
5. T he road belongs to the king except if he./ 
meets a Brahmawa.
16. Probably this SBtra is meant to give a general rule, and to 
exempt Brahmawas in every case from corporal punishment and 
servitude. Manu VIII, 379-380.
11. 3. See also below, II, ii, 29, 6.
5. Manu II, 139; 
I, 117. 
According to Haradatta this
Sfitra is given, though the precedence among the various castes 
has been already settled, in order to show that common Kshapiyas 
haust make way for an anointed king.

--- PAGE 189 ---
II, 5, I I . 
.T H E DUTIES OF A HOUSEHOLDER.
125
6. But if he meets a Brihma;^a, the road belongs 
to the latter,
7. A ll must make way for a (laden) vehicle, for a 
person who carries a burden, for a sick man, for a 
woman and others (such as old men and infants),
8. And (way must be made), by the other castes, 
for those men who are superior by caste.
9. F or their own welfare all men must make way 
for fools, outcasts, drunkards, and madmen.
V" 
10. In successive births men of the lower castes 
are born in the next higher one, if they have fulfilled 
their duties.
11. In successive births men of the higher castes 
are born in the next lower one, if they neglect their 
duties,
12. If he has a wife who (is willing and able) to 
perform (her share of) the religious duties and who 
bears sons, he shall not take a second.
13, If a wife is deficient in one o f these two 
(qualities), he shall take another, (but) before he 
kindles the fires (of the Agnihotra).
14, For a wife who assists at the kindling of the 
fires, becomes connected with those religious rites of 
which that (fire-kindling) forms a part,
6. Manu II, 138; Ya^n. I, 117.
10. Manu X, 64, 65 ; Yd^il. I, 96.
12. Manu IX, 95; Yd;ff!. I, ’j6 .
13. Manu IX, 80, 81; Y^ii. I,' 73,
14. A wife who assists at the kindling o f the fires for any 
• sacrificial rite, becomes connected with that rite like any priest,
and in that rite no other woman can take her place. Hence in 
the case of an Agnihotra, which lasts during the performer’s 
lifetime, or at least as long as he is a hou.seholder, the performer 
cannot take another principal wife after he once has begun his 
sacrifice. 
If the wife of an Agnihotrin dies, he must marry again, 
and also kindle his fires afresh. Manu V, 167, 168; Yagn. I, 89.

--- PAGE 190 ---
126
A p a s t a m b a .
n
, 5 , I I .
15. H e shall not give his daughter to a man 
belonging to the same family (Gotra),
16. N or to one related (within six degrees) on 
the mother’s or (the father’s) side.
17. A t the wedding called Brihma, he ^ shall give 
away his daughter for performing (with her husband) 
the rites that must be performed together (by a hus­
band and his wife), after having enquired regarding 
the bridegroom’s family, character, learning, and 
health, and after having given (to the bride) orna­
ments according to his power.
18. A t the wedding called Arsha, the bridegroom 
shall present to the father of the bride a bull and a cow.
ig. A t the wedding called Daiva, (the father) 
shall give her to an officiating priest, who is per­
forming a 6'rauta-sacrifice.
15. The term Gotra corresponds to the Latin Gens. 
It may
be of two kinds, Vaidika for Brahma«as and Laukika, ‘ worldly,’ 
for men of other castes. Jn the first case it denotes ‘ persons 
descended from tTie same i?*'shi; ’ in the second, ‘ persons dis­
tinguished by the same family name, or known to be descended 
from the same ancestor.’ In our days Brahmawas also have Lau­
kika Gotras, which form subdivisions of the very large Vedic 
Gotras. 
Regarding the Vaidika Gotras, see Muller’s History of 
Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 379-390, and particularly p. 387. 
Manu III, 5; 
I, 53; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 75 seq.
16. The term yonisambandha, ‘ related (within six degrees),’ 
corresponds to the more common Sapi«</a of Manu, Ya^flavalkya, 
and others j see the definitions given below, II, 7, 15, 2. 
In' 
Apastamba’s terminology Sapi«<fa has probably a more restricted 
sense. It seems very doubtful whether Haradatta’s explanation of 
^a, translated by ‘ or,’ is correct, and whether his interpolation of 
‘ the fathers’ ought to be admitted. 
Probably Sfltra 15 refers to 
the father’s side, and Sfitra 16 to the mother’s side.
17. Manu III, 27; YS^fi. I, 58.
18. Manu III, 29 ; Y%a. I, 59.
19. Manu III, 28; Y^a. I, 59.

--- PAGE 191 ---
II, 5, 12. 
TH E DUTIES OF A HOUSEHOLDER.
127
20. 
If a maiden and a lover unite themselves 
through love, that is called the Gandharva-rite.
P r a ^-n a II, P a t a l a 5 , K h aivd a 1 2 .
1. If the suitor pays money (for his bride) accord­
ing to his ability, and marries her (afterwards), that 
(marriage is called) the Asura-rite.
2. If the (bridegroom and his friends) take away 
(the bride), after having overcome (by force) her father 
(or relations), that is called the Rikshasa-rite.
3. T h e first three amongst these (marriage-rites 
are considered) praiseworthy; each preceding one 
better than the one following.
4. T he quality of the offspring is according to the 
■quality of the marriage-rite.
5. H e shall not step on a spot which has been 
touched by the hand of a Brihrna«a, without having 
sprinkled it with water.
6. He shall n o t ' pass between a fire and a 
BrShma«a,
7. Nor between Brihmawas.
8. Or he may pass between them after having 
received permission to do so.
9. He shall not carry fire and water at the same 
time.
20. Manu III, 32; Y ig fi. I, 61.
12. 
t. Manu III, 31; Y^fl. I, 61. It must be understood that, 
at this ritci a regular sale of the bride must take place. If a suitor 
merely gives presents to the bride, that is not an Asura-marriage.
2. Manu III, 33; YS^g'fi. I, 61. 
Haradatta points out that the 
other law-books enumerate two additional marriage-rites, the Pra^- 
patya or Kdya and the PabaXa. 
But VSsishMa, like Apastamba, 
gives six rites only.
3. Manu III, 24, 25; Yd^a. I, 58-60.
4. I. e. from praiseworthy marriages virtuous children are born, 
and from, blamable marriages bad ones. Manu III, 42.

--- PAGE 192 ---
128
APASTAM BA.
II, S. 12.
JO . H e shall not carry fires (burning in) separate 
(places) to one (spot),
11. 
If, whilst he walks, fire is being carried 
towards him, he shall not walk around it with his 
right hand turned towards it, except after it has 
been placed on the ground.
12. H e shall not join his hands on his back.
13. If the sun sets whilst he sleeps, he shall sit 
up, fasting and silent, for that night. 
On the follow­
ing morning he shall bathe and then raise his voice 
(in prayer).
14. If the sun rises .whilst he is asleep, he shall 
stand during that day fasting and silent.
15. Some declare that he .shall restrain his breath 
until he is tired.
16. And (he shall restrain his breath until Ihe is 
tired) if he has had a bad dream,
1 7. O r if he desires to accomplish some object,
18. O r if he has transgressed some other rule.
19. (If he is) doubtful (whether) the result (of an 
action will be good or evil), he shall not do it.
20. (H e shall follow) the same principle (if he is 
in doubt whether he ought) to study or not.
21. H e shall not talk of a doubtful matter as if it 
were clear.
22. In the case of a person who slept at sunset, of
ib. Another commentator says,‘ tie shall not throw (brands 
taken from) one fire into another fire.’— Haradatta.
II. The Sfitra implies that under other circumstances he must 
show this respect to a fire.
13. Manu II, 220.
18. Manu XI, 200.
21. See above, I, ii, 32, 22.
22. These sinners are enumerated in nearly the same order.

--- PAGE 193 ---
II, 6, 13- 
t h e 
d u t i e s 
o f 
a 
h o u s e h o l d e r .
1 2 9
one who slept at sunrise, of one who has black nails, 
or black teeth, of one who married a younger sister 
before the elder one was married,- of one who mar­
ried an elder sister whose younger sister had been 
married already, (of a younger brother who has 
kindled the sacred GWhya-fire before his elder bro­
ther,) of one whose younger brother has kindled the 
sacred fire first, (of a younger brother who offers a 
Soma-sacrifice before his elder brother,)-of an elder 
brother whose younger brother offered ;,a Soma- 
sacrifice first, of an elder T^rother who' marries or 
receives his portion of the inheritance after his 
younger brother, and of a younger brothef'who 
takes a wife or receives his portion of the inherit­
ance before his elder brother,— penances ordained 
for crimes causing impurity, a heavier one for each 
succeeding case, must be performed.
23. 
Some declare, that after having performed 
that penance, he shall remove its cause.
P r A S N A 
I I , , P A T A L A ’ fi, 
K
h AIVDA 13.
I . 
Sons begotten by a man who approaches in 
the proper season a woman of equal caste; who has 
not belonged to another man, and who has been
Taittirtya-brihmawa III, 2,8, ii and 12. See also Manu XI, 44-49, 
Regarcling the crimes causing impurity, see above, I, 7, 21,12-19.
23. 
‘ Its cause, i. e. the black nails, &c. According to another 
Smrz'tl, one shall not put away a wife or extinguish a fire, for the 
taking or kindling of which the penance had to be performed.’— 
Haradatta.
13. 
r. ‘5'Sstravihita (translated by “ who has been married to him 
legally ’’) means either “ married according to the rites prescribed 
in the Aastras,’’ or “ possessed of the qualities (which have been 
described) by (the rule of) the 5 astras, He shall not give his 
daughter to a man of the.same Gotra,” and in similar (passages),’—• 
Haradatta. See also Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Jext cxcix.
[2] 
K

--- PAGE 194 ---
130
A PA STA M B A .
II, 
13.
married 
legally, have a right to (follow) the' 
occupations (of their castes),
2. And to (inherit the) estate,
3. If they do not sin against either (of their 
parents).
4. If a man approaches a woman who had been 
married before, or was not legally married to him, or 
belongs to a different caste, they both commit a sin.
5. Through their (sin) their son also becomes 
sinful.
6. A Br^hmawa (says), ‘ The son belongs to the 
begetter.’
7. Now they quote also (the following GithS, from 
the Veda); ‘ (Having considered myself) formerly a 
father, I shall not now allow (any longer) my wives 
(to be approached by other men), since they have 
declared that a son belongs to the begetter in the 
world of Yama. The giver of the seed carries off the 
son after Beath inYama’s world; therefore they guard 
their wives, fearing the seed of strangers. Carefully
3. 
Another (commentator.) says, ‘ Neither of the parents shall 
pass them over at (the distribution of) the heritage. Both (parents) 
must leave their property to them.’— Haradatta. The text of the 
Sfitra admits of either explanation.
6. See also Manu IX, 48 seq., where the opposite doctrine is 
taught.
7. According to Haradatta this Gathd gives the sentiments -of a 
husband who neglected to watch his wives, and who had heird 
from those learned in the law that the sons of his unfaithful wives 
would in the next world belong to their natural fathers, and that 
he would not derive any spiritual benefit from their oblations. He 
adds that this verse does not refer to or prevent the appointment 
of a eunuch’s wife or of a childless widow to a relaltion. He also 
quotes a passage from the .Srauta-sfitra I, 9, in which the dvipitfi, 
‘ the son of two fathers,’ is mentioned. 
But Haradatta’s view 
cannot be reconciled with the statements made below, II, 10, 27,

--- PAGE 195 ---
Ii,6,i3.
H O U SEH O LD ER ; 
IN H ER ITA N CE.
131
watch over (the procreation of) your children, lest 
stranger seed be sown on your soil. 
In, the next 
world the spn belongs to the begetter, an (impru­
dent) husband makes the (begetting of) children 
vain (for himself).’
8. Transgression of the law and violence are 
found amongst the ancient (sages).
9. They committed no sin on account of the 
greatness of their lustre.
10. A man of later times who seeing their (deeds) 
follows them, falls.
11. The gift (or acceptance of a child) and the 
right to sell (or buy) a child are not recognised.
12. It is declared in the Veda that at the time of 
marriage a gift, for (the fulfilment of) his wishes, 
should be made (by the bridegroom) to the fatherj 
of the bride, in order to fulfil the law. 
‘ Therefore 
he should give a hundred (cows) besides a chariot;
2-7, where the Niyoga is plainly forbidden. 
BaudhSyana, who 
(II, 2, 34) quotes the same GathS, reads in the first line the 
vocative ‘^anaka’ instead of the nominative ‘^anakaA,’ and in 
the fifth line ‘ pare bt^ni’ instead of ‘ parabt^ani.’ The com­
mentator Govindasvamin adds that the* verses are addressed by 
the i?fshi Aupa^andhani tqJdng_G:anaka of Videha. The trans­
lation of the first line must therefore run thus : ‘O Ganaka, now 
I am jealous of my wives, (though I was) not so formerly,' &c. 
Baudhayana’s readings are probably the older ones, and Govin- 
dasvSmin’s explanation the right one. See also Colebrooke, Digest 
Book V, Text ccli.
II. Haradatta thinks that, as most other Smrftis enumerate the 
adopted son, and ‘ the son bought ’ in their lists of substitutes for 
lawful sons of the body, Apastamba’s rule can refer only to the 
gift or sale of an eldest son, or to the gift or sale of a child 
effected by a woman. Though it is possible that he may be right 
in his interpretation, it remains a remarkable fact that Apastamba 
does not mention the ‘ twelve kinds of sons,’ which are known to 
other Smrftis.
K 2

--- PAGE 196 ---
132
. A PA STA M B A .
II, 6 ,14,
that (gift) he should make bootless (by returning it 
to the giver).’ In reference to those (marriage-rites), 
the word ‘ sale ’ (which occurs ^n some Smr2tis is 
only used as) a metaphorical expression; for the 
union (of the husband and wife) is effected through 
the law.
13. 
After having gladdened the eldest son by 
some (choice portion of his) wealth,
P R A ifN A II, P A r A L A 6, K H A iV iJA 14.
1. He should, during his lifetime, divide his 
wealth equally amongst his sons, excepting the 
eunuch, the mad man, and the outcast.
2. On failure of sons the nearest Sapiwafa (takes 
the inheritance).
14. 1. 
The last Sdtra ofKha«(/a 13 and the first of Kha«</a 14 are 
quoted by Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text xlii, and Colebrooke, 
Mitakshara, Chap. I, Sect, iii. Par. 6. Colebrooke translates giva-n, 
‘ during his lifetime,’ by ‘who makes a partition during his lifetime.’ 
I think that this is not quite correct, and that Apastamba intends 
to exhort householders to make a division during their lifetime, as 
later they ought to become ascetics or hermits. 
Haradatta intro­
duces into his commentary on this Sfitra the whole chapter on the 
division of a father’s estate amongst his sons, supplementing 
Apastamba’s short rule by the texts of other lawyers. No doubt, 
Apastamba means to lay down, in these and the following Sfitras, 
only the leading principles of the law of inheritance, and he intends 
that the remaining particulars should be supplied from the law of 
custom or other Smrftis.
2. 
Haradatta gives in his commentary a full summary of the 
rules on the succession of rem.oter relations. 
One point only 
deserves special mention. 
He declares that it is the opinion of 
Apastamba, that widows cannot inherit. 
In this he is prpbably 
right, as Apastamba does not mention them, and the use of the 
masculine singular ‘ sapiw</aA ’ in the text precludes the possibility 
of including them under that collective term. 
It seems to me 
certain, that Apastamba, like Baudhayana, considered women, 
especially widows, unfit to inherit.

--- PAGE 197 ---
n, 6.14.
H O U SEH O LD ER ; IN H E R IT A N C E .
133
3. On failure of them the spiritual teacher (in­
herits) ; on failure of the spiritual teacher a pupil 
shall take (the deceased’s wealth), and use it for 
religious works for the (deceased’s) benefit, or (he 
himself may enjoy it);
4. Or the daughter (may take the inheritance).
5. On failure of all (relations) let the king take 
the inheritance.
6. Some declare, that the eldest son alone inherits.
7. In some countries gold, (or) black cattle, (or) 
black produce of the earth is the share of the eldest.
8. The chariot and the furniture in the house are
♦
the father’s (share).
4. ‘ Some say “ on failure of sons,” others that the rule refers 
to the preceding Sfltra (i. e. that the daughter inherits on failuie' 
of pupils only).’— Haradatta. The latter seems to be the correct 
interpretation.
5. ‘ Because the word “ all ” is used, (the king shall take the 
estate) only on failure of Bandhus and Sagotras, i. e. gentiles 
within twelve degrees.’— Haradatta.
6". ‘ The other sons shall live under his protection.’— Haradatta. 
Colebrooke, Mitakshard, Chap. I, Sect iii. Par. 6.
>j. ‘ “Black produce of the earth,” i. e. black grain, or according 
to others’ black iron.’— Haradatta. 
Compare for this and the 
following Sdtras Colebrooke, MitaksharS, Chap. I, Sect, iii, Par. 6, 
and Digest, Book 
Text xlviii.
8. 
The translation given above agrees with what I now recognise 
to be Plaradatta’s explanation, and with Colebrooke, MitdksharS, 
Chap. I, Sect, iii, Par. 6. Both the P. U. and Mr. U. MSS. of the 
Pfe?vaH read ratbag pituraw/jo gr«he yatparibhdwi/am upakarawam 
plMadi tadapi, ‘ the chariot (is) the father’s share; the furniture 
which (is) in the house, that also.’ 
To this reading Mahadeva’s 
U^^al^ on the Hirawyakeri Shtra points likewise, which gives 
pitur antaA. 
The N. U. MS. of the \Jggvi\k, according to which 
I made the translation given in the Appendix to West and Biihler’s 
Digest, leaves out the word ■^ms2^h, and therefore makes it necessary 
to combine this Shtra with the preceding one, and to translate,
‘ The father’s chariot and the furniture in the house (are) also (the

--- PAGE 198 ---
13 4
A PA STA M B A .
II. 6,14.
9. According to some, the share of the wife con­
sists of her ornaments, and the wealth (which she 
may have received) from her relations.
10. That (preference of the eldest son) is for­
bidden by the 6”astras.
11. For it is declared in the Veda, without 
(marking) a difference (in the treatment of the 
sons): Manu divided his wealth amongst his sons.
12. Now the Veda declares also in conformity 
with (the rule in favour of the eldest son) alone : 
They distinguish the eldest by (a larger share of) 
the heritage.
13. (But to this plea in favour of the eldest I
share of the eldest).' 
This latter translation agrees nearly with 
that given by Colebrooke, Digest, Book V, Text xlviii, where this 
and the preceding Sutra have been joined; but the chariot is not 
mentioned. 
A further variation in the interpretation of this Sfttra 
occurs in Colebrooke’s Digest, Book V, Text Ixxxix, and MitS- 
kshara, loc. cit., where the words ‘ the furniture in the house' are 
joined with Sutra 9, and the furniture is declared to be the wife’s 
share. Considering that Shtra 9 is again quoted in Colebrooke’s 
Digest, Book V, Text cccclxxii, and is not joined with the latter 
part of Shtra 8, it is not too much to say that Gagannatha has not 
shown any greater accuracy than his brethren usually doi
9. The Mitakshara, loc. cit., apparently takes the words ‘ ac­
cording to some' as referring only to property received from 
relations. I follow Haradatta. The former interpretation is, how­
ever, admissible, if the Sutra is split into two.
10. The Gastras are, according to Haradatta, the Vedas.
11. TaittiriyS Sawhiti III, i, 9, 4.
12. ‘ Athapi (now also) means “ and certainly.” 
They dis­
tinguish, they set apart the eldest son by wealth;' this has been 
declared in the Veda in conformity with (the rule regarding) one 
(heir, Shtfa 6). 
He denies (Sfitra 13) that a passage also, which 
agrees with the statement that the eldest son alone inherits, is 
found in the Veda.’— Haradatta. See Taittiriyi Sawthita II, 5, 2, 7.
13. Those who are acquainted with the interpretation of the 
law are the Mimawsakas. 
The translation of the second Vedic

--- PAGE 199 ---
II, 6,14.
H O U S E H O L D E R ; 
IN H E R ITA N C E .
135
answer): Now those who are acquainted with the 
interpretation of the law declare a statement of facts 
not to be a rule, as for instance (the following); 
‘ Therefore amongst cattle, goats and sheep walk 
together; ’ (or the following), ‘ Therefore the face 
of a learned Brdhmawa (a Snitaka) is, as it were, 
resplendent(or), ‘ A Brahmawa who has studied 
the Vedas (a 6rotriya) and a he-goat evince the 
strongest sexual desires.’
14. Therefore all (sons) who are virtuous inherit.
15. But him who expends money unrighteously, 
he shall disinherit, though he be the eldest son.
16. No division takes place between husband and 
wife; for, from the time of marriage, they are united 
in religious ceremonies,
17. Likewise also as regards the rewards for 
works by which spiritual merit is acquired, and the 
acquisition of property.
18. For they declare that it is not a theft if a
passage is by no means certain, as the root ribh, translated by ‘ to 
be resplendent,’ usually means ‘ to give a sound.’ 
Haradatta 
thinks that Apastamba means to show that the passage ‘ Manu 
divided his wealth among his sons ’ is likewise merely a statement 
of facts, and cannot be considered a rule. 
This is probably 
erroneous, as Shtras 10 and 1 1 distinctly state, that the practice 
to allow the eldest alone to inherit, is forbidden by the above- 
mentioned passage of the Veda.
15. Compare for this Sfttra and the following one Colebrooke’s
Digest, Book V, Text cccxv. 
The translation of pratipSdayati, 
‘ expends,’ by ‘ gains,’ which is also proposed by GagapnStha, is 
against Apastamba’s usage, see II, 5, ii, 17, and below, II, 8, 
20, 16. 
.
16. According to Haradatta, this Sfltra gives the reason why, 
in Sbtra i, no share has been set apart for the wife. 
Compare 
Colebrooke’s Digest, Book V, Text Ixxxix, for this Shtra and the 
following two.
18. See below, II, ii, 29, 3.

--- PAGE 200 ---
136
A PA STAM B A .
II, 6,15.
wife expends money on occasions (of necessity) 
during her husband’s absence.
Prasna II, Patala 6, KnAiViJA 15.
1. By this (discussion) the law of custom, which 
is observed in (particular) countries or families,, has 
been disposed of.
2. On account of the blood relations of his 
* mother and (on account of those) of his father
witi^in six degrees,
3. Or, as far as the relationship is traceable,
4. H e shall bathe if they die,
5. Excepting children that have not completed 
their first year.
6. On account of the death of the latter the 
parents alone bathe,
7. And those who bury them.
8. If a wife or one of the chief Gurus (a father or 
A/^arya) die, besides, fasting (is ordained from the 
time at which they die) up to the same time (on the 
following day).
9. (In that case) they shall also show the (follow- 
ing) signs of mourning ;
10. Dishevelling their, hair and covering them­
selves with dust (they go outside the village), and, 
clothed with one garment, their faces turned to the
15. 1. 
Customs are to be followed only if they are not opposed 
to the teaching of the Vedas and Smrftis.
2. Manu V, 6o ; Y^fi. I, S3-
3. Manu V, 60.
4. Manu V, 58 ; Y^fl. Ill, 3.
7. Manu V, 69 and 70.
8. Manu V, 80.
10. Y a ^ . I l l , 5, 7 seq. 
T h e M antra to be spoken in throw ing 
the water is, ‘ I give this w ater to you N . N . o f the fam ily o f N . N .’

--- PAGE 201 ---
II, 6, ig.
H O U SEH O LD ER ; 
IN H E R ITA N CE .
137
south, stepping into the river they throw up water 
for the dead once, and then,' ascending (the bank), 
they sit down. 
This (they repeat) thrice. 
They 
pour out Water consecrated in such a manner that 
the dead will know it (to be given to them). 
Then 
they return to the village without looking back, and 
perform those rites for the dead which (pious) women 
declare to be necessary.
11. Some declare, that these same (observances) 
shall also be kept in the case (of the death) of other 
(SapiwoTas).
12. At all religious ceremonies, he shall feed 
Brihmawas who are pure and who have (studied 
and remember) the Veda.
13. He shall distribute his gifts at the proper 
places, at the proper times, at the occasion of purifi­
catory rites, and to proper recipients.
14. That food must not be eaten of which (no 
portion) .is offered in the fire, and of which no por­
tion is first given (to guests)'.
15. No food mixed with pungent condiments or 
salt can be offered as a burnt-offering.
16. Nor (can food) mixed with bad food (be used 
for a burnt-oblation).
The water ought to be mixed with sesamum. According to Hara- 
datta those who know the correct interpretation, declare that the 
word ‘women’ denotes in this SUtra ‘ the Smr/tis.’ But I fear these 
learned interpreters will find few adherents among those who pay 
attention to the last Sfltra of this work.
12. Manu III, 128.
13. Manu III, 98.
ig. ‘ That (substance) is called kshara, “ of pungent or alkaline 
taste,” the eating of which makes the saliva flow.’— Haradatta.
16. Avarfinna, *bad food,’ is explained by ‘ kulittha and the 
like.' 
Kulittha, a kind of vetch, is considered low food, and eaten 
by the lower castes only. The meaning of the Sfitra, therefore, is,

--- PAGE 202 ---
138
A PA STA M B A .
II, 7 . 1 6.
17. If (he is obliged to offer) a burnt-offering of 
food unfit for that purpose, he shall take hot ashes 
from the northern part of his fire and offer the food 
in that 
That oblation is no oblation in the fire.
18. A female shall not offer any burnt-oblatipn,
19. N or a child, that has not been initiated.
20. Infants do not become impure before they 
receive the sacrament called Annapri^ana (the first 
feeding).
21. Some (declare, that they cannot become im­
pure) until they have completed their first year,
22. Or, as long as they cannot distinguish the 
points of the horizon.
■ 23. Another (opinion is, that they cannot be 
defiled) until the initiation has been performed.
24. For at that (time a child) according to the 
rules of the Veda obtains the right (to perform the 
various religious ceremonies).
25. That ceremony is the limit (from which the 
capacity to fulfil the law begins).
26. And the SmrAi (agrees with this opinion).
P ras^na II, P at ALA -7 , KnAivnA 1 6 .
I. 
Formerly men and gods lived together in this 
world. 
Then the gods in reward of their sacrifices
‘ If anybody has been forced by poverty to mix his rice or i 7al 
with kulittha or similar bad food, he cannot offer a burnt-oblation 
at the Vairvadeva ceremony with that. He must observe the rule, 
given in the following Shtra.
18. Manu V, 155; XI, 36.
19. Manu II, 171.
26. Haradatta quotes Gautama II, 1-3, on this point, and is 
apparently of opinion that Apastamba alludes to the same passage. 
But he is probably wrong, as all Smrftis are agreed on the point 
mentioned by Apastamba.
16. 1. ‘ Intending to give the rules regarding the monthly 5'rSddha,

--- PAGE 203 ---
II, 7, i6.
HOUSEHOLDER ; INHERITANCE.
139
went to heaven, but men were left behind. 
Those 
men who perform sacrifices In the same manner as 
the gods did, dwell (after death) with the gods and 
Brahma in heaven. 
N ow (seeing men left behind), 
Manu revealed this ceremony, which is designated 
by the word .S'rdddha (a funeral-oblation).
2. And (thus this rite has been revealed) for the 
salvation of mankind.
3. A t that (rite) the Manes (of one’s father, grand­
father, and great-grandfather) are the deities (to 
whom the sacrifice is offered). 
But the Brihma«as, 
(who are fed,) represent the Ahavaniya-fire.
4. T hat rite must .be performed in the latter half 
of every month.
5. T h e afternoon is preferable (for it).
6. T h e last days of the latter half (of the month) 
likewise are (preferable to the first days).
7. (A funeral-oblation) offered on any day of the 
latter half of the month gladdens the Manes. 
But it 
procures different rewards for the sacrificer according 
to the time observed.
8. If it be performed on the first day of the half­
month, the issue (of the sacrificer) will chiefly consist 
of females.
he premises this explanatory statement in order to praise that 
sacrifice.'— Haradatta.
2. The reading ‘ ni/;rreyasd ks.’ apparently has given great trouble 
to the commentators. 
Their explanations are, however, gram­
matically impossible. 
The right one is. to take ni>5rreyasS as a 
Vedic instrumental, for ni^^reyasena, which may designate the 
‘ reason.’ If the dative is read, the sense remains the same.
3. ‘The comparison of theBrahmawas with theAhavanfya indicates 
that to feed Brahmawas is the chief act at a 6'raddha.’— Haradatta.
4. Manu III, 122, 123; Y%a. I, 217.
5. Manu III, 25s, 278.
7. Manu III, 277; Y%ii. I, 264, 265.

--- PAGE 204 ---
140
APASTAMBA.
II, 7. i6-
9. (Performed on the second day it procures) 
children who are free from thievish propensities.
10. (If it be performed) on the third day children 
will be born to him who will fulfil the various vows 
for studying (portions of the Veda).
11. (The sacrificer who performs it) on the fourth 
day becomes rich in small domestic animals.
12. (If he performs it) on the fifth day, sons (will 
be born to him). 
H e will have numerous and dis­
tinguished offspring, and he will not die childless.
13. (If he performs it) on the sixth day, he will 
become a great traveller and gambler.
14. (The reward of a funeral-oblation performed) 
on the seventh day is success in agriculture.
15. (Its reward when performed) on the eighth 
day is prosperity,
16. (Its reward when performed) on the ninth 
day is one-hoofed animals,
17. (Its reward when offered) on the tenth day 
is success in trade,
18. (Its reward when offered) on the eleventh day 
is black iron, tin, and lead,
19. (If he performs a funeral-oblation) on the 
twelfth day, he will become rich in cattle.
20. (If he performs a funeral-oblation) on the 
thirteenth day, he will have many sons (and) many 
friends, (and) his offspring will be beautiful. 
But his 
(sons) will die young.
12. The translation follows the corrected reading given in the 
Addenda to the Critical Notes,
20. 
Others read the last part of the Sfitra, ayuvamarinas-tu 
bhavanti, ‘ they will not die young.’— Haradatta. 
If the two 
halves of the Shtra are joined and DarjaniyapatyoyuvamariwaA is 
read, the Sandhi may be dissolved in either manner.

--- PAGE 205 ---
IIj 7« 17-
h o u s e h o l d e r ; INHERITANCE.
I4I
21. (Its reward when performed) on the four­
teenth day is success in battle.
22. (Its reward when performed) on the fifteenth 
day is prosperity.
23. T h e substances (to be offered) at these (sacri­
fices) are sesamum, masha, rice, yava, water, roots, 
and fruits.
24. But the satisfaction of the Manes, if food 
mixed with fat (is offered), is greater, and (lasts) a 
longer time,
25. Likewise, if money, lawfully acquired, is given 
to worthy (persons).
26. Beef satisfies (the Manes) for a year,
27. Buffalo’s (meat) for a longer (time) than that.
28. B y this (permission of the use of buffalo’s' 
meat) it has been declared that the meat o f (other) 
tame and wild animals is fit to be offered.
P r a s n a I I , PArALA 7, K hawz>a 17 .
1. (If) rhinoceros’ meat (is given to Brdhma«as 
seated) on (seats covered with) the skin of a rhino­
ceros, (the Manes are satisfied) for a very long time.
2. (The same effect is obtained) by (offering the) 
flesh (of the fish called) 6'atabali,
3. And by (offering the) meat of the (crane called) 
Vdrdhri^asa.
21. 
Manu III, 276, and YS^a. I, 263, declare the fourteenth 
day to be unfit for a .Sraddha, and the latter adds that .SrSddhas 
for men killed in battle may be offered on that day. 
This latter 
statement explains why Apastamba declares its reward to be ‘success 
in battle.’ The nature of the reward shows that on that day Ksha- 
triyas, not Brahmawas, should offer their 5'rdddhas.
23. Manu III, 267; 
I, 257.
26. Manu III, 271.
17. 1. Manu III, 272; Yfi^n. I, 259.
2. 
Manu V, 16, where Rohita is explained by A'atabali.

--- PAGE 206 ---
142
APASTAMBA.
11, 7. 17-
4. Pure, with composed mind and full of ardour, 
he shall feed Brihma^as who know the Vedas, and 
who are not connected with him by marriage, blood 
relationship, by the relationship of sacrificial priest 
and sacrificer, or by the relationship, of (teacher and) 
pupil.
5. If strangers are deficient in the (requisite) 
good qualities, even a full brother who possesses 
them, may be fed (at a 6rdddha).
6. (The admissibility of) pupils (and the rest) has 
been declared hereby.
7. Now they quote also (in regard to this matter 
the following verse) :
8. T h e food eaten (at a sacrifice) by persons 
related to the giver is, indeed, a gift offered to the 
goblins. 
It reache*s neither the Manes nor the 
gods. 
Losing its power (to procure heaven), it errs 
about in this w orld. as a cow that has lost its calf 
runs into a strange stable.
9. T h e meaning l(of the verse) is, that gifts which 
are eaten (and offered) mutually by relations, (and 
thus go) from one house to the other, perish in this 
world.
10. If the good qualities (of several persons who 
might be invited) are equal, old men and (amongst 
these) poor ones, who wish to come, have the 
preference.
n . On the day before (the ceremony) the (first) 
invitation (must be issued).
4. Manu III, 128-138, and 149, 188; Yd^S. I, 225.
8. See Manu III, 141, where this Trish/ubh has been turned 
into an AnushAibh.
11. Manu III, 187; 
I, 225. 
According to Haradatta
the formula of invitation is, SvzA jr^ddham bhavitS, tatrdhavani-
’ ytrthe bhavadbhiA prasadaA kartavya iti, ‘ to-morrow a .Sraddha

--- PAGE 207 ---
11 ,7 ,1 7 - 
h o u s e h o l d e r ; f u n e r a l -o b l a t i o n s .
143
12. On the following day the second invitation 
takes place.
13. (On the same day also takes place) the third 
invitation (which consists in the call, to dinner).
14. Some declare, that every act at a funeral- 
sacrifice must be repeated three times.
15. A s (the acts are performed) the first time, 
(so they must be repeated).the second and the third 
times.
16. W hen all (the three oblations) have been 
offered, he shall take a portion of the food of 
all (three), and shall eat a small mouthful of the 
remainder in the manner described (in the G^ehya- 
sfitra).
^ 17. But the custom of the Northerners is to pour 
into the hands of the Brihma^^as, when they are 
seated qn their seats, (water which has been taken 
from the water-vessel.)
18. (A t the time o f the burnt-offering- which is 
offered at the beginning of the dinner) he addresses 
the Brihma;?as with this M antra: ‘ Let it be taken 
out, and let it be offered in the fire.’
19. (They shall give their permission with this 
M antra): ‘ L et it be taken out at thy pleasure, let
will take place. 
Do me the favour to take at that the place of 
the Ahavantya-fire.’
12. The formula is, Adya jrSddham, ‘ to-day the 5 raddha. takes 
place.’
13. The call to dinner is, Siddham igamyatSm, ‘ the food is 
ready; come.’
16. Apastamba Grehya-sfltra IV, 21. 
‘ He shall eat it pro- 
nouneing the Mantra, “ Prd«e nirish/osmntaOT ^hom i.” ’ Taitt.
X, 33.
17. The North of India begins to the north of the river ^ardvatt 
The rule alluded to is given by 
I, 226, 229; Manu III, 210,
18. Yd^a. I, 235.

--- PAGE 208 ---
1 4 4
A PA STAM B A .
II, 7. 17-
it be offered in the fire at thy pleasure.' 
Having 
received this permission, he shall take out (some of 
the prepared food) and offer it.
20. T h ey blame it, if dogs and Apapitras are 
allowed to see the performance of a funeral-sacrifice.
21. T h e following persons defile the company if 
they are invited to a funeral-sacrifice, viz. a leper, 
a bald man, the violator of another man's bed, the 
son of a Brihmawa who follows the profession of 
a Kshatriya, and the son of (a Brihma«a who by 
marrying first a .Shdra wife had himself become) a 
iShdra, born from a Brdhma«a woman.
22. T h e following persons sanctify the company 
if they eat at a funeral-sacrifice, viz. one who has 
studied the three verses of the Veda containing the 
word ‘ Madhu,' each three tim es; one who has studied
20. Manu III, 239.
21. Manu III, 152-166, and particularly 153 and 154; Yi^a. 
I, 222-^24. 
Haradatta’s explanation of the word ‘ i'fldra’ by'a 
Brahmawa who has become a 5'ildra ’ is probably right, because 
the son of a real 5 ildra and of a Brahmawa female is a .ffaWala^ 
and has been disposed of by the preceding Sfitra,
22. CompareManuin, 185,186; Y%a.I, 219-221. The three
verses to be known by a Trimadhu are, Madhu vatS rit&yate, &c., 
which occur both in theTaitt.Sawh, and in the Taitt. Ar. The expla­
nation of Trisupar«a is not certain. 
Haradatta thinks that it may 
mean either a person who knows the three verses j^atushkapardS 
yuvatiA superb, &c., Taittiriya-brahmawa I, 2, i, 27, &c., of one who 
knows the three Anuvakas from the Taittiriya Arawyaka X, 48-50,. 
beginning, Brahma me tu mSm, &c. The word ‘ TriwSiiketa' has 
three explanations:— a. A person who knows the Na>fiketa-fire 
according to the Taittiriyaka, Ka/Aavallt, and the 5 atapatha, i.e. has 
studied the portions on the NS^iketa-fire in these three books.
3. A person who has thrice kindled the Nd^iketa-fire. 
c. A person 
who has studied the AnuvSka, called Vira,gas, 
Aaturmedha may 
also mean ‘ one who has performed the four sacrifices ’ enumerated 
above. 
.

--- PAGE 209 ---
11, 8 , i8 . 
h o u s e h o l d e r ; f u n e r a l -o b l a t i o n s .
145
the part of the Veda containing the word ‘ Suparwa ’ 
three tim es; a T riw ^ iketa; one who has studied 
the Mantras required for the four sacrifices (called 
Aivamedha, Purushamedha, Sarvamedha, and Pitn- 
ifledha); one who keeps five fires; one who knows 
the Sdman called ^ryesh//^a; one who fulfils the 
duty of daily study; the son of one who has studied 
and is able to teach the whoje Veda with its Angas, 
and a 6rotriya,
23. H e shall not perform (any part of) a funeral- 
sacrifice at night.
24. After- having begun (a funeral-sacrifice), he 
shall not eat until he has finished it,
25. (H e shall not perform a funeral-sacrifice ^t 
night), except if an eclipse of the moon takes place.
P r a ^n a I I , 
P a t a l a 8 , K
h a w ^j a 18.-
1. H e shall avoid butter, butter-milk, oil-cake, 
honey, meat;
2. And black grain (such as kulittha), food given 
by .5'hdras, or by other persons, whose food is not 
considered fit to be eaten,
3. And food unfit for oblations, speaking an un­
truth, anger, and (acts or words) by which he might
23. Manu III, 280.
24. ‘ The 3’raddha is stated to begin with the first invitation to 
the Brahm ans.’— H aradatta.
25. ‘ T h e Northerners do not generally receive this SAtra, and 
therefore former commentators have not explained it.’— Haradatta.
18. 
I. Sfitras 1-4 contain rules for a vow to be kept for the special 
objects mentioned in Sfitras 3 and 4 for one year only. Haradatta 
(on Sfltras) says that another commentator thinks that Shtras 1-3 
prescribe one v6w, and SUtra 4 another, and that the latter applies 
both to householders and students. A passage from Baudhayana 
is quoted in support of this latter view.
[2] 
L

--- PAGE 210 ---
146
APASTAM BA.
II, 8,18.
excite anger. 
H e who desires a (good) memory, 
fame, wisdom, heavenly bliss, and prosperity, shall 
avoid these twelve (things and act§);
4. Wearing a dress that reaches from the navel 
to the knees, bathing morning, noon, and evening, 
living on food that has not been cooked at a fire, 
never seeking the shade, standing (during the day), 
and sitting (during the night), he shall keep this vow 
for one year. T h ey declare, that (its merit) is equal to 
that of a studentship continued for forty-eight years.
5. (Now follows) the daily funeral-oblation.
6. Outside the village pure (men shall) prepare 
(the food for that rite) in a pure place.
7. Nine vessels are used for that,
8. In which the food is prepared, and out of 
which it is eaten.
9. And those (vessels) he shall present to the 
(Brahma^^as) who have been fed.
10. And he shall feed (Brdhmawas) possessed of 
all (good qualities).
11. And he shall not give, the residue (of that 
funeral-dinner) to one who is inferior to them in 
good qualities.
12. Thus (he shall act every day) during a year.
13. T h e last of these (funeral-oblations) he shall 
perform, offering a red goat.
5. Manu III, 82 seq.
6. The tenn ‘ pure (men)’ is used in order to indicate that they 
must be so particularly, because, by Ilj 2, 3, r, purity has already 
been prescribed for cooks.
7. For the unusual meaning of dravya, ‘ vessel,’ compare the 
term sitadravyS«i, ‘ implements of husbandry,’ Manu IX, 293, and 
the Petersburg Diet. s. v.
13. 
The red goat is mentioned as particularly fit for a .Sr^ddha, 
Ya^. I, 259, and Manu III, 272.

--- PAGE 211 ---
11,8,19. 
h o u s e h o l d e r ; f u n e r a l -o b l a t io n s .
147
14. And let him cause an altar to be built, con­
cealed (by a covering and outside the village).
15. Let him feed the Br4hma«as on the northern 
half o f that.
16. T h ey declare, that (then) he sees both the 
Brihma«as who eat and the Manes sitting on the 
altar.
1 7. After that he may offer- (a funeral-sacrifice 
once a month) or stop altogether.
18. For (by appearing on the last day on the 
altar) the Manes signify that they are satisfied by 
the funeral-offering.
19. Under the constellation Tishya he who de­
sires prosperity,
PRAi'NA I I , P a t a l a 8, K h a a z >a 1 9 .
1. Shall cause to be prepared powder o f white 
mustard-seeds, cause his hands, feet, ears, and mouth 
to be rubbed over with that, and shall eat (the' 
remainder). If the wind does not blow too violently, 
he shall eat sitting, silent and his face turned towards 
the south, on, a seat (facing the) same (direction)— 
the first alternative is the skin of a he-goat.
2. But they declare, that the life o f the mother 
of that person who eats at this ceremony, his face 
turned in that direction, will be shortened.
3. The vessel used at this occasion shall be made 
of brass.
19. 
I. The ceremony which is here described, may also be per­
formed daily. 
If the reading prSsya is adopted, the translation 
must run thus: ‘and he shall scatter (the remainder of the powder). 
If the wind,' &c.
2. 
‘ Therefore those whose mothers are alive should not per­
form this ceremony.’— Haradatta.
L 2

--- PAGE 212 ---
148
A PA STA M B A .
II, 8,19.
4. And its centre shall be adorned with gold.
5. (Such a one) is the best.
6. And nobody else shall eat out of that vessel.
7. H e shall make a lump of as much (food) as he 
can swallow (at once).
(And he shall) not scatter anything (on the 
ground).
9. H e shall not let go the vessel (with his left 
hand);
10. O r he may let it go.
11. H e shall swallow the whole mouthful at once, 
introducing it, together with the thumb, (into the 
mouth.)
12. H e shall make no noise with his mouth (whilst 
eating).
13. And he shall not shake his right hand (whilst 
eating).
14. After he (has eaten and) sipped water, he 
shall raise his hands, until the water has run off (and 
they have become dry).
4. 
If, as I have done, the words suvarwanabhaA and prajastaA 
are taken as separate Shtras, the meaning is, ' The vessel used 
should be of brass; if not of brass, it should at least have a golden 
ornament in the centre; and" a vessel possessing both qualities is 
the best.' 
If 3, 4, 5 are taken as one Sfitra, as is done in P. U. 
and Mr. U., the sense is, ‘ It is best to use a brass vessel, &c., but 
another may be used in its stead.’
6. I f the masculine bhoktavya^ is used instead of bhoktavyam, 
the participle must be construed with ^amasa^.
7. The verbum fin itu m , which according to the Sanskrit text 
ought to be taken with the participle sawnayan, is grasita, Sfitra 11.
10. 
‘ W hy is this second alternative mentioned, as (the first 
Sutra) suffices? 
True. 
But according to the maxim that “ re­
strictions are made on account of the continuance of an action 
once begun,” the meaning of this second Sutra is that he shall 
continue to the end to handle the vessel (in that manner in which) 
he has handled it when eating for the first time.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 213 ---
I I ,i s ,20. 
h o u s e h o l d e r ; 
f u n e r a l - o b l a t i o n s .
149
15. After that he shall touch fire.
16. And (during this ceremony) he shall not eat 
in the day-time anything but roots and fruits.
17. And let him avoid Sthdlipaka-offerings, and 
food offered to the Manes or to the Gods.
18. H e shall eat wearing his upper garment over 
his left shoulder and under his right arm.
19. A t the (monthly) ^Sriddha which must neces­
sarily be performed, he must use (food) mixed with 
fat.
20. T he first (and preferable) alternative (is to 
employ) clarified butter and meat.
21. On failure (of these), oil of sesamum, Vegeta­
bles, and (similar materials may be used).
22. And under the asterism M aghi he shall feed 
the Brahmawas more (than at other times) with (food 
mixed with) clarified butter, according to the rule of 
the 6'rdddha.
P r a s n a II, P a u a l a * 8, K
h a v i j a 20.
1. A t every monthly iSr^ddha he shall use, in 
whatever manner he may be able, one drowa. of 
sesamum.
2. And he shall feed Brahma^^as endowed witlTall 
(good qualities), and they shall not give the fragments V 
(of the food) to a person who does not possess the 
same good qualities (as the Br^hmawas).
3. H e who desires prosperity shall fast in the
■ 18. Haradatta remarks that some allow, according to II, 2, 4,
22, the sacred thread to be substituted, and others think that both 
the thread and the garment should be worn over the left shoulder 
and under the right arm.
20. 
I. ,A dro«a equals 128 seers or feras. The latter is variously 
reckoned at 1-3 lbs.
3. The reason why the constellation Tishya has been chosen

--- PAGE 214 ---
150
APASTAMBA,
II, 8, 20.
half of the year when the sun goes to the north, 
under the constellation Tishya, in the first half of 
the month, for (a day and) a night at least, prepare a 
SthMlpika-offering, offer burnt-oblations to Kuvera 
(the god of riches), feed a Brihmawa with that (food 
prepared for the Sthilipaka) mixed with clarified 
butter, and make him wish prosperity with (a 
Mantra) implying prosperity.
4. This (rite he shall repeat) daily until the next 
Taisha-month.
5. On the second (Tishya-day and during the 
second month he shall feed) two (Brihma«as).
6. On the third (Tishya-day and during the third 
month he shall feed) three (Brdhma^^as).
7. In this manner (the Tishya-rite is to be per­
formed) for a year, with a (monthly) increase (of the 
number of Brahma;zas fed).
8. (Thus) he obtains great-prosperity.
9. But the fasting takes place on the first 
(Tishya-day) only.
10. H e shall avoid to eat those things which 
have acquired strength (as butter-milk, curds, and 
whey).
11. H e shall avoid to tread on ashes or husks of 
grain, to wash one foot with the other, or to place 
one foot on the other,
12. And to swing his feet, and to place one leg 
crosswise over the knee (of the pther).
for this rite seems to be that Tishya has another name, Pushya,
i. e. ‘ prosperous.’ This sacrifice is to begin on the Tishya-day of 
the month called Taisha or Pausha (December-January), and to 
continue for one year. The Tishya or Pushya-day is the ninth 
day of each solar month.'
II. Manu IV, 78.

--- PAGE 215 ---
II, 9, 21.
T H E F O U R ORDERS.
I51
13. And to make his nails or (his finger-joints) 
crack without a (good) reason,
14. And all other acts which they blame.
15. A nd let him acquire money in all ways that 
are lawful.
16. And let him spend money on worthy (persons 
or objects).
1 7. And let him not give anything to an unworthy 
(person), of whom he does not stand in fear.
18. And let him conciliate men (by gifts or 
kindness).
19. And he may enjoy the pleasures which are 
not forbidden by the holy law.
20. (Acting) thus he conquers both worlds.
Prajna II, Fatal A 9, KnAivnA 21.
1. There are four orders, viz. the householder- 
ship, the studentship, the order of ascetics, and the 
order of hermits in the woods.
2. If he lives in all these four according to the 
rules (of the law), without allowing himself to be 
disturbed (by anything), he will obtain salvation.
3. The duty to live in the teacher’s house after 
the initiation is common to all of them.
4. N ot to abandon sacred learning (is a duty 
common) to all.
13. ‘ Good reasons for cracking the joints are fatigue or rheu­
matism.’—Haradatta.
16. Manu XI, 6, and passim.
21. I. ‘Though four (orders) are enumerated, he uses the word
“ four,” lest, in the absence of a distinct rule of the venerable | 
teacher, one order only, that of the householder, should be allow ed, 1 
as has been taught in other Smr-ftis.'—Haradatta. Manu VI, 87.
2. Manu VI, 88.
3. Manu II, 247-249, and above.

--- PAGE 216 ---
^52
A PA STA M B A ,
II, 9, 21.
5. H aving learnt the rites (that are to be per­
formed in each order), he may perform what he 
wishes.
6. Worshipping until death (and living) according 
to the rule of a (temporary) student, a (professed) 
student may leave his body in the house of his 
teacher.
7. Now (follow the rilles) regarding the ascetic 
(Sa^myasin).
8. Only after (having fulfilled) the duties of that 
(order of students) he shall go forth (as an ascetic), 
remaining chaste,
9. For him (the Sa;;«nydsin) they prescribe (the 
following rules):
TO. H e shall live without a fire, without a house, 
without pleasures, without protection. 
Remaining 
silent and uttering speech only on the occasion of 
the daily recitation of the Veda, begging so much 
food only in the village as will sustain his life, he 
shall wander about neither caring for this world nor 
for heaven.
11, It is ordained that he shall wear clothes 
thrown away (by others as useless),
12. Some declare that he shall go naked.
8. 
The meaning of the Sfitra is, that the studentship is a 
necessary preliminary for the Saranyasin. 
If a man considers 
himself sufficiently purified by his life in that order, he may be­
come a Sawnyasin immediately after its completion. Otherwise he 
may first become a householder, or a hermit, and enter the last 
order, when his passions are entirely extinct. 
See also Manu VI, 
36; Ya^. Ill, 56-57.
10. Manu VI, 33, 42-45; Y^n. Ill, 58 seq.
12. 
f Another (commentator) says, “ Some declare that he is 
free from all injunctions and prohibitions, i. e. he need neither 
perform nor avoid any (particular actions).” ’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 217 ---
II. 9, 2 1.
T H E H E R M IT.
153
13. Abandoning truth and falsehood, pleasure 
and pain, the Vedas, tliis world and the next, he 
shall seek the universal soul,
14. (Some say that) he obtains salvation if he 
knows (the universal soul).
15. (But) that (opinion) is opposed to the J5astras,
id. (For) if salvation were obtained by the know­
ledge o f the universal soul alone, then he ought 
not to feel any pain even in this (world).
17. Thereby that which follows has been declared.
18. Now (follow the rules regarding) the hermit 
living in the woods.
19. Only after (completing) that (studentship) he 
shall go forth, remaining chaste.
20. For him they give (the following rules):
21. H e shall keep one fire only, have no house, 
enjoy no pleasures, have no protector, observe 
silence, uttering speech on the occasion of the daily 
recitation of the Veda only.
13. 
‘ He shall seek, i. e. worship, the soul, which has been 
described in the section on transcendental knowledge (I, 8).’— 
Haradatta.
15. Haradatta apparently takes the word 6'asti’as to mean ‘Dhar- 
marastras.’
17. ‘That which follows’ are the Yogas, which must be employed ' 
in order to cause the annihilation of pain, after the knowledge of 
the universal soul has been obtained.
21. ‘ But which is that one fire? Certainly not the Gr;hya-fire, , 
because he must remaiii chaste. Therefore the meaning intended 
is, “ He shall offer a Samidh morn and evening in the common” 
fire, just as formerly, (during his studentship.)” Another com­
mentator says, “ Gautama declares that he shall kindle a fire 
according to the rule of the Af^mawaka Sfitra. The ArSmawaka 
Sfitra is the VaikhS.nasa Sfitra. 
Havings kindled a fire in the 
manner prescribed, there, he shall sacrifice in it every morning 
and every evening.” ’— Haradatta. 
See also IManu VI, 4 5 Ya^H.

--- PAGE 218 ---
154
a p a s t a m b a .
II, 9, 22.
PrA5NA II, Pa^ALA 9, KHAiV-DA 22.
1. A dress of materials procured in the woods 
(skins or bark) is ordained for him.
2. Then he shall wander about, sustaining his 
life by roots, fruits, leaves, and grass.
3. In the end (he shall live on) what he may 
obtain by chance.
4. N ext he shall live on water, (then) on air, then 
on ether.
5. Each following one of these modes of subsist­
ence is distinguished by a (greater) reward.
6. Now some (teachers) enjoin for the hermit the 
successive performance (of the acts prescribed for 
the four orders).
7. A fter having finished the study of the Veda, 
having taken a wife and kindled the sacred fires, 
he shall begin the rites, which end with the Soma- 
sacrifices, (performing) as many as are ptescribed in 
the revealed texts.
8. (Afterwards) he shall build a dwelling, and 
dwell outside the village with his wife, his children, 
and his fires,
9. O r (he may live) alone.
Ill, 45. The VaikhSnasa Siltra is in existence, and procurable in 
Gujarat.
22. I. Mann VI, 6.
2. Manu VI, 5, 21; Y%P!. Ill, 46.
4. 
‘ Then he shall live on ether, i. e. eat nothing at all.’— 
Haradatta. Manu VI, 31; Ytlg'fi. Ill, 55.
6. ‘ The word atha, “ now,” Introduces a different opinion. 
Above, it had been declared that the life in the woods (may be 
begun) after the studentship only. 
But some teachers enjoin just 
for that hermit a successive performance of the acts (prescribed 
for all four orders).’
8. Manu VI, 3 seq.; YS^Pi. Ill, 45.

--- PAGE 219 ---
II, g, 22.
T H E H ERM IT.
155
10. H e shall support himself by gleaning corn.
11. And after that he shall not any longer take 
presents.
12. And he shall sacrifice (only) after having 
bathed (in the following manner):
13. H e shall enter the water slowly, and bathe 
without beating it (with his, hand), his face turned 
towards the sun.
14. This rule of bathing is valid for all (castes 
and orders).
15. Some enjoin (that he shall prepare) two sets 
of utensils for cooking and eating, (and) of choppers, 
hatchets, sickles, and mallets.
16. H e shall take one of each pair (of instru­
ments), give the others (to his wife), and (then) go 
into the forest.
17. After that time (he shall perform) the burnt- 
oblations, {sustain) his life, (feed) his guests, and 
(prepare) his clothes with materials produced in the 
forest.
18. Rice must be used for those sacrifices for
which cakes mixed with meat (are employed by the 
householder). 
” 
' ’
19. And all (the Mantras), as well as the daily 
portion of the Veda, (must be recited) ioaudibly.
20. H e shall not make the inhabitants of the 
forest hear (his recitation).
lo, Haradatta thinks that this rule refers both to the hermit 
who lives with his family and to him who lives alone. 
Others 
refer it to the latter only.
15. According to Haradatta, the word 
appears to designate 
‘a mallet;’ in the passage from the Ramayawa quoted in the Peters­
burg Diet, the commentator explains it by pe/aka, ‘ basket.’
ly. Yd^n. Ill, 46.
20. This Sfitra explains the word updwru, ‘ inaudibly.’

--- PAGE 220 ---
1 5 6 ’
A PASTAM BA.
II, 9> 23-
(H e shall have) a house for his fire (only).
H e himself (shall live) in the open air.
H is court and seat must not be covered (with
21.
22.
2 3 -
mats).
24. 
If he obtains fresh grain, he shall throwaway 
the old (store).
P rASNA II, PArALA 9, KHA.Vi>A 2 3 .
1. If he desires (to perform) very great austerities, 
he (shall not make a hoard of grain, but) collect food 
every day only, morning and evening, in his vessel.
2. Afterwards he shall wander about, sustaining 
his life with roots, fruits, leaves, and grass (which he 
collects). 
Finally (he shall content himself with) 
what comes into his hand accidentally. 
Then he 
shall live on water, then on air^ (and finally) upon 
ether. 
Each succeeding mode of subsistence pro­
cures greater rewards.
3. Now they quote (the following) two verses 
from a Purdwa :
4. Those eighty thousand sages who desired 
offspring passed to the south by Aryam an’s road 
and obtained burial-grounds.
5. Those eighty thousand sages who desired no
24. Manu Vr, 15; Ya^n. Ill, 47.
23. I. The following rules apply to a solitary hermit.
2. These Shtras are repeated in order to show that, according 
to the opinion of those who allow hermits to live with their families, 
the end should be the same.
3. ‘ The “ orders ” have been described. 
Now, giving conflict­
ing opinions, he discusses which of them is the most important.’— 
Haradatta.
4. This verse and the next are intended to disparage the order 
of householders. 
Haradatta explains ‘ burial-grounds ’ by ‘ fresh 
births;’ but see below, Sfltra 10. See also Y%a. Ill, 186-187.

--- PAGE 221 ---
JI, 9, 23. 
COM PARISON OF T H E FO U R ORDERS.
157
offspring passed by Aryam an’s road to the north 
and obtained immortality.
6. Thus are praised those who keep the vow of 
chastity. 
Now they accomplish also their wishes 
merely by conceiving them,
7. For instance, (the desire to procure) rain, to 
bestow children, second-sight, to move quick as 
thought, and other (desires) of this description.^
8. Therefore on account of (passages) of the re­
vealed texts, and on account of the visible results, 
some declare these orders (of men keeping the vow 
of chastity to be) the most excellent.
9. But (to this we answer); It is the firm opinion 
of those who are well versed in the threefold sacred 
learning, that the Vedas are the highest authority. 
T h ey consider that the (rites) which are ordered 
there to be performed with rice, yava, animals, clari­
fied butter, milk, potsherds, (in conjunction) with a 
wife, (and accompanied) by loud or muttered (Man­
tras), must be performed, and that (hence) a rule o f 
conduct which is opposed to these (rites) is of no 
authority.
10. But by the term burial-ground (in the text 
above given) it is intended to ordain the last rites 
for those who have performed many sacrifices, (and 
not to mean that dead householders become demons 
and haunt burial-grounds.)
11. T h e revealed texts declare that after (the 
burial follows) a reward without end, which is desig­
nated by the term ‘ heavenly bliss.’
10. The Shtra is intended to remove the blame thrown on the 
order of householders by the verse quoted. Haradatta seems to 
have forgotten his former explanation of AnardnSni.

--- PAGE 222 ---
158
A PA STA M B A .
II, 9> 24.
P ra5na II, Patala 9, K hajvda 2 4 .
1. N ow the Veda declares also one’s offspring to 
be immortality (in this verse) : ‘ In thy offspring thou 
art born again, ,that, mortal, is thy immortality.’
2. N ow it can also be perceived by the senses 
that the (father) has been reproduced separately (in 
the son); for the likeness (of a father and o f a son) 
is even visible, only (their) bodies are different.
3. ‘ These (sons) who live, fulfilling the rites 
taught (in the Veda), increase the fame and heavenly 
bliss of their departed ancestors.’
4. -‘ In this manner each succeeding (generation 
increases the fame and heavenly bliss) of the pre.- 
ceding ones.’
5. ‘ T h ey (the ancestors) live in heaven until the 
(next) general destruction of created things.’
6. ‘ (After the destruction o f the world, they stay) 
again in heaven, being the seed (of the new creation).’ 
T hat has been declared in the Bhavishyatpuri«a.
7. Now Pra^ipati also says,
8. ‘ Those dwell with us who fulfil the following 
(duties): the study of the three Vedas, the student­
ship, the procreation of children, faith, religious aus­
terities, sacrifices, and the giving of gifts. 
H e who 
praises other (-duties), becomes dust and perishes.’
9. Those among these (sons) who commit sin, 
perish alone, (but not their ancestors,)
10. Just as the leaf of a tree (Which has been
24. 
3. According to the reading of P. U. and Mr. U. the four 
Sfitras, 3-6, must be joined into one, and the whole is a quotation 
from the Purdwa. The reading of P. U. seems now to me preferable.
8. 
‘ Other (duties), i.e. the order of ascetics and the like.’— 
Haradatta.

--- PAGE 223 ---
II, 10, 2g.
T H E K IN G .
159
attacked by worms falls without injuring its branch 
or tree).
11. (For) the (ancestor) has no connexion with
the acts committed (by his descendant) in this world,
nor with their results in the next
_ 
• 
*
12. (The truth of) that may be known by the
following (reason) ;
13. This creation (is the work) of Pra^pati and 
of the sages.
14. The bodies of those (sages) who stay there 
(in heaven) on account of their merits appear visibly 
most excellent and brilliant (as, for instance, the 
.constellation of the seven .^/shis).
15. But even though some (ascetic) may gain 
heaven through a portion of (the merit acquired by 
his former) works or through austerities, whilst he 
is still in the body, and though he may accomplish 
(his objects) by his mere wishf^still this is no reason 
to place one order before the other.
Pras’na II, Patala 10, K haivda 25.
1. The general and special duties of all castes 
have been explained. But we will now declare those 
of a king in particular.
2. H e shall cause to be built a town and a palace, 
the gates of both of which (must look) towards the 
south.
3. T he palace (shall stand) in the heart of the town.
14. As the jRzshis have not lost heaven through the sins of their 
sons, the dogma according to which ancestors lose heaven through 
the sins of their sons, must be false.
15. Apastamba’s own opinion is apparently against pure as­
ceticism.
2 5 . 
3. ‘ In the heart of the town, i. e. in that town which is sur­
rounded by all the walls.’— Haradatta. Compare IManu VII, >j6.

--- PAGE 224 ---
i6o
a p a s t a m b a .
II, lO, 25.
4. In front of that (there shall be) a hall. 
T hat 
is called the hall of invitation.
5. (A t a little distance) from the town to the 
south, (he shall cause to be built) an assembly-house 
with 'doors on the south and on the north sides, so 
that one can.see what passes inside and outside.
6. In all (these three places) fires shall burn 
constantly. '•
7. And oblations must be offered in these fires 
daily, just as at the daily sacrifice of a househol^r.
8. In the hall he shall put up his guests, at least 
those who are learned in the Vedas.
9. Rooms, a couch, meat and drink should be 
given to them according to their good q u aliti^
10. Let him not live better than his Gurus or
. . 
I
ministers.
11. And in his realm no (Brahma^^a) should suffer 
hunger, sickness, cold, or heat, be it through want, 
or intentionally.
12. In the midst of the assembly-house, (the 
superintendent o f the house) shall raise a play-table 
and sprinkle it with water, turning his hand down­
wards, and place on it dice.in even numbers, made 
of Vibhitaka (wood), as many as are wanted.
6. According to Haradatta, the fires are to be common, not 
consecrated ones.
7. Manu VII, 78; Yd^.S. I, 313.
8. Manu VII, 82 seq.
10. ‘ The Gurus are the father and other (venerable rela­
tions).’— Haradatta.
11. Manu VII, 134. 
‘ Or intentionally; with reference to 
that the following example may be given. 
If anybody is to be 
made to pay his debts or taxes, then he is to be exposed to cold 
or heat, or to be made to fast (until he pays). 
The king shall 
punish (every one) who acts thus.’— Haradatta,

--- PAGE 225 ---
II, 10, 26.
T H E K IN G .
i6 i
13. Men of the first three castes, who are pure 
and truthful, may be allowed to play there.
14. Assaults of arms, dancing, singing, music, and 
the like (performances) shall be held only (in the 
houses) of the king's servants.
1 5. T hat king only takes care o f the welfare of 
his subjects in whose dominions, be it in villages 
or forests, there is no danger from thieves.
P ra^'NA II, P atala 10, K hajvda 26.
1. A (king) who, without detriment to his servants, 
gives land arid money to Br^hmawas according to ‘ 
their deserts gains endless worlds.
2. T h ey say (that) a king, who is slain in at­
tempting to recover the property of Brdhmawas, 
(performs) a sacrifice where his body takes the place 
o f the sacrificial post, and at which an unlimited fee 
is given.
3. Hereby have been declared (the rewards of) 
other heroes, who fall fighting for a (worthy) cause.
4. He shall appoint men of the first three castes,
13. ‘ Having played there, they shall give a fixed sum to the 
gambling-house keeper and go away. The latter shall, every day 
or every month or every year, give that gain to the king. And 
the king shall punish those who play elsewhere or quarrel in the 
assembly-house.’— Haradatta.
14. ‘ At festivals and the like occasions (these performances) 
take place also elsewhere, that is the custom.’— Haradatta.
15. Manu VII, 143, and passim; Y^fi. I, 335.
26. I. Manu VII, 83, 84, 88; Y%fi. I, 314.
2. According to Haradatta the king’s body represents the post 
(yfipa), his soul the .sacrificial animal, the recovered property the 
reward for the priests or fee.
3. Manu VII, 89; Ya^fi. I, 323, 324.
4. Manu VII, 115-124 ; Y ig a . I, 321.
[3] 
M

--- PAGE 226 ---
i 6 2
A PA ST A M B A .
II, lo , 26.
who are pure and truthful, over villages and towns 
for the protection of the people.
5. T heir servants shall possess the same qualities.
6. T h ey must protect a town from thieves' in 
every direction to the distance of one yo^ana.
7. (T hey must protect the country to the distance 
of) one kroia from each village.
8. T h ey must be made lo repay what is stolen 
within these (boundaries).
9. T h e (king) shall make them collect the lawful 
taxes (i’ulka).
10. A learned Brihmawa is free from taxes,
: 
II. And the women of all castes,
f 
12. And male children 
before the marks (of 
puberty appear),
^13. And those who live (with a teacher) in order 
to study,
14.' And ascetics, who are intent on fulfilling the 
sacred law.
6. Ya^. II, 271-272. A yo^ana is a distance of 4 krora, kos.
7. A kro^a, kos, or gau, literally ‘ the lowing of a cow,’ is 
variously reckoned at 1^-4 miles^
8. Ya^. I, 272. 
This law is, with certain modifications, still in 
force. 
See Bombay Regulations, XII, . 2 7 par.
9. According to Haradatta’s commentary as given in P. U. and 
Mr. U. and pnnted in the Sanskrit notes, the julka is the -^th 
part of a merchant's gains. 
On account of the Sfitras immediately 
following, it is, however, more probable that the term is here used 
as a synonym of ‘ kara,’ and includes all taxes. 
‘ Lawful ’ taxes 
are, of course, those sanctioned. by custom and approved of by 
the Smrz'tis.
10. Manu VII, 133.
11. Haradatta thinks that the rule applies to women of the 
Anuloma, the pure castes, only.
14. ‘ Why does he say “ intent on fulfilling the holy law?” 
Those shall not be free from taxes who perform austerities in order

--- PAGE 227 ---
II, lO, 26.
C IV IL A N D CR IM IN AL LAW .
163
15. And a 6’6dra who lives by washing the feet,
16. Also blind, dumb, deaf, and diseased persons 
(as long as their infirmities last),
1 7. And those to whom the acquisition o f property 
is forbidden (as Sannyisins).
18. A young man who, decked with ornaments, 
enters unintentionally (a place where) a married
' woman or a (marriageable) damsel (sits), must be 
reprimanded.
19. But if he does it intentionally with a bad 
purpose, he must be fined.
20. If he has actually committed adultery,- the 
organ shall be cut off together with the testicles.
21. But (if he has had intercourse) with a (mar­
riageable) girl, his property shall be confiscated and 
he shall be banished.
22. Afterwards the king must support (such 
women and damsels), _
23. And protect them from defilement.
24. If they agree to undergo the (prescribed) 
penance, he shall make them over to their (lawful) 
guardians.
to make their magic charms efficacious.’— Haradatta. 
Probably, 
however, Apastamba means to exclude all heretical hermits, of 
whom India has had plenty at all times.
18. The ornaments would indicate that he was bent on mis­
chief. 
Compare above, I, 11, 32, 6.
19, ‘ The punishment must be proportionate to his property and 
the greatness of his offence. 
The term “ with a bad purpose ” is 
added, because he who has been sent by his teacher (to such a 
place) should not be punished.’— Haradatta. 
Manu VIII, 354;
II, 284.
24. 
‘ I. e. a married woman to her husband or father-in-law, an 
unmarried damsel to her father or to her brother.’— Haradatta.
M 2

--- PAGE 228 ---
164
A PA STA M B A .
II, 10, 27.
-4-
P r a s n a H i P a t a l a 10, K
u a n d a 27.
1. If (adulteresses) have performed (the pre­
scribed penance), they are to be treated as before 
(their fault). 
F or the connexion (of husband and 
wife) takes place through-the law,
2. (A husband) shall not make over his (wife),, 
who occupies the position of a ‘ gentilis,’ to others 
(than to his ‘ gentiles’), in order to cause children to 
be begot for himself.
3. For they declare, that a bride is given to the 
“family (of .her husband, and not to the husband
alone),
4. T h at is (at present) forbidden on account of
the weakness of. (men’s) senses.,^ 
' 
•
■5. T he hand (of a gentilis is considered in law to 
be) that of a stranger, as well as (that of ahy other 
person except the husband). . 
'
6. If the (marriage vow) is transgressed, both 
(husband and wife) certainly go to hell.
7. T h e reward (in the next world) resulting from 
observing the restrictions of the law is preferable 
to offspring obtained in this- manner (by means of 
Niyoga).
8. A man o f one of the first three castes (who 
commits adultery) w ith^ woman of the xSlldra caste 
shall be banished.
27. 
2. This Sfitra refers to the begetting of a Kshetra^a son, 
and gives the usual rule, that only the Sagotras in the order of the 
grade of relationship, a brother-in-law, a Sapi«</a, &c., shall be 
employed for this purpose.
4. 
‘ For now-a-days the senses of men are weak, and therefore 
the peculiar (law formerly) in force regarding gentiles is so no 
longer, lest husbands should be set aside under the pretended 
sanction of the 6'astras.’—Haradatta.

--- PAGE 229 ---
II, 10, 27.
C IV IL A N D c r i m i n a l LAW .
165
9.. A vyildra (who commits adultery) with a
woman of one of the first three castes shall suffer 
capital punishment. • 
■
10. 
- And he shall emaciate a woman who has 
committed adultery With a (KShdra, by making her 
undergo' penances. and . fasts, in case she had no 
child)..
11. T hey declare, that (a Brdhmawa) who has 
once Committed adultery with a.rnarried woman of' 
equal class, shall perform one-fourth of the, penance 
prescribed for an outcast,'
12. In like nianner, for every repetition (of the. 
crime), one-fburth- of the penance; (must be added).
13., (If the offence b e ' committed) for the fourth’ 
.tirne, the whole (penalnee of twelve years must be 
performed).’
1 4 . ' T h e tongue o f a KShdra who speaks evil of
a virtuous person, belonging to-one of the first three 
castes, shall be cut out. • 
■ 
. •
15. A ;S'fidra who assumes' a position equal (to 
that o f a member of one of the first three castes), 
in conversation, on the road, on a couch, in sitting 
(and on similar occasions), shall be flogged.
16. In case (a 6'fidra) commits homicide or^Jbeft. 
appropriates land (or commits similar heinous crimes), 
his property shall be confiscated and he himself 
shall suffer capital punishment.
9. Manu VIII, 374; 
II, 286. 
According to Haradatta,
this refers to a Nftdra servant who seduces a woman committed to 
his charge. 
In other cases the punishment prescribed, II, 10,
10, is to take effect. 
The same opinion is expressed by Gautama.
11. 
This refers to the wife of a .Srotriya, as Haradatta states 
according to Gautama. 
The penance is three years’ chastity.
15. In conversation, i. e. addressing Aryas familiarly, with tvam 
‘ thou,’ &c.

--- PAGE 230 ---
i66
A PA STA M B A .
II, II, 28.
17. But if these (offences be committecl) by a 
Br^hma;2a, he shall be made blind (by tying a cloth 
over his eyes).
18. H e shall keep in secret confinement him who 
violates the rules (of his caste or order), or any 
other sinner, until (he promises) amendment.
19. If he does not amend, he shall be banished.
20. A spiritual teacher, an officiating priest, a 
Snataka, and a prince shall be able to protect (a 
criminal from punishment by their intercession), 
except in case of a capital offence.
PRAiSNA II, P a TALA 1 1 , KHAiVnA 28.
1. If a person who has taken (a lease of) land 
(for cultivation) does not exert himself, and .hence 
(the land) bears no crop, he shall, if hfi is rich, be 
made to pay (to the owner of the land the value of 
the crop) that ought to have grown.
2. A servant in tillage who abandons his work 
shall be flogged.
17. Haradatta states expressly that the eyes of a BrShmawa 
must not be put out by any sharp instrument. 
He should be kept 
blindfold all his life.
20. 
‘ The intercession is to take effect in this manner: that 
mutilation is commuted to a fine, a fine to a flogging, a flogging 
to a reprimand.'— Haradatta.
28. 
I. This Sfitra shows that the system of leasing land against 
a certain share of the crops, which now prevails generally in Native 
States, and is not uncommon in private contracts on British terri­
tory, was in force in Apastamba’s times.
2. See Colebrooke, Digest, Book III, Text Ixvjii, for this Sfitra 
and the following two. 
Another commentator, quoted by Hara­
datta, connects this Sfltra with the preceding, and refers it to a 
poor lessee of land, who cannot pay the value of the crop which 
was lost through his negligence. 
A third explanation refers the

--- PAGE 231 ---
II, II, 28.
C IV IL AN D CR IM IN AL LAW .
167
3. T he same (punishment shall be awarded) to a 
herdsman (who leaves his w ork);
4. And the. flock (entrusted) to him shall be taken 
away (and be given to some other herdsmaTi).
5. If cattle, leaving their stable,> eat (the crops of 
other persons, then the owner of the crops, or the 
king’s servants), may make them lean (by impound­
ing them ); 
(but) he shall 
not exceed (in such 
punishment).
6. If (a herdsman) who has taken cattle under 
his care, allows them to perish, or loses (them by 
theft, through his negligence), he shall replace them 
(or pay their value) to the owners.
7. If (the king’s forester) sees cattle that have 
been sent into the forest through negligence (with­
out a herdsman), he shall lead them bacTc to the 
village and make them over to the owners.
8. If the same negligence (occur) again, he shall
once impound them (and afterwards give them 
back). 
'
9. (If the same fault be committed again) after 
that (second time), he shall not take care (of them).
10. H e who has taken unintentionally the pro­
perty of another shall be reprimanded,^ in case (the 
property be) fuel, water, roots, flowers, fruits, per­
fumes, fodder, or vegetables.
11. (If he takes the above-mentioned kinds of 
property) intentionally, his garment shall be taken 
away.
Sfitra to a cultivator who neglects to till his land. 
(Jagannlitha's 
authorities, the A!intdma«i and Ratnakara, agree with Haradatta’s 
first explanation.
5. Manu VIII, 240; YS^a. II, 159-161.
6. Manu VIII, 232; YS^a. II, 164.

--- PAGE 232 ---
t68
A PA STAM B A .
II, II, 29.
12. H e who takes intentionally food when he is 
in danger of his life shall not be punished.
13. If the king does not punish a punishable 
offence, the guilt falls upon him.
P ra5NA II, P atala 1 1 , KnAwnA 2 9 .
1. H e who instigates to, he who assists in, and 
he who commits (an act, these three) share its 
rewards in heaven and its punishments in hell.
2. H e amongst these who contributes most to 
the accomplishment (of the act obtains) a greater 
share of the result.
3. Both the wife and the husband have power 
over (their) common property.
‘4.. By their permission, others also may act for 
their good (in this and the next world, even by 
spending money).
5. Men o f learning and pure descent, who are 
aged, clever in reasoning, and careful-in fulfilling 
the duties (of their daste and order, shall be the 
judges) in lawsuits.
6. In doubtful cases (they shall give their deci­
sion) after having ascertained (the truth) by infer­
ence, ordeals, and the like (means).
13. Manu VIII, 18, 308 ; Ya^fl. I, 336.
29. 
3. ‘ Though this is so, still the wife cannot spend (money) 
without the permission of her husband, but the husband can do 
(so without the consent of his wife). 
That may be known by 
Sfltra II, 6, 14, II, “ They do not declare it to be a theft if the 
wife spends money for a good reason during the absence of her 
husband.” ’— Haradatta.
4. ‘ Others, i. e. the sons and the rest.’— Haradatta.
5. Yi^a. II, 3v
6. ‘And the like, i. e. by cross-examination, &c.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 233 ---
II, I I , 29.
C IV IL A N D CR IM IN AL LAW .
169
7. A person who is possessed of good qualities 
(may be called as a witness, and) shall answer the 
questions put to him according to the truth on an 
auspicious day, in the morning, before a kindled fire, 
standing near (a jar full of) water, in the presence of 
the king, and with the consent of all (of both parties 
and of the assessors), after having been exhorted (by • 
the judge) to be fair to both sides.,
8. If (he is found out speaking) an untruth, the 
king shall punish him.
9. Besides, in that case, after death, hell (will be 
his punishment).
10. If he speaks the truth, (his reward will be) 
heaven and the approbation of all created beings.
11. T h e knowledge which v^hdras and women 
possess is the completion (of all study).
12. T h ey declare, that (this knowledge) is a 
supplement of the Atharva-veda.
13. It is difficult to learn the sacred law from 
(the letter of) the Vedas (only); but by following 
the indications it is easily accomplished.
14. T he indications for these (doubtful cases are),
‘ H e shall regulate his course of action according to 
the conduct which is unanimously recognised in all v/ 
countries by men of the three twice-born castes, who
7. Manu VIII, 87 seq.; Y%n. II, 68-75.
8. Manu Vlli, 119 seq.
9. Manu VIII, 89 seq.
10. Manu VIII, 81 seq.
11. The meaning of the Sfitra is, that men ought not to study 
solely or at first such 6'astras as women or 5'fldras also learn, but 
that at first they must study the Veda. 
See Manu II, 168. 
The 
knowledge which women and .Sfidras possess, is dancing, music, 
and other branches of the Arthajastra. 
'
14. See above, I, 7, 20, 8 and 9.

--- PAGE 234 ---
170
A PA ST A M B A .
II, II, 29.
have been properly obedient (to their teachers), 
who are aged, of subdued senses, neither given to 
avarice, nor hypocrites. 
Acting thus he will gain 
both worlds.’
15. 
Some declare, 
that 
the remaining duties 
(which have not been taught here) must be learnt 
from women and men of all castes.

--- PAGE 235 ---
G A U T A M A .
IN S T IT U T E S O F T H E S A C R E D L A W .

--- PAGE 236 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 237 ---
G A U T A M A ,
INSTITUTES OF TH E SACRED LAW.
C hapter I.
I.' 'T he Veda is the source of the sacred law,
2r And the tradition and practice of those who 
know the (Veda).
3. Transgression of the law and violence are ob­
served (in the case) of (those) great (men); but both 
are without force (as precedents) on account of the 
weakness of the men of later ages.
4. If (authorities) of equal force are conflicting, 
(either may be followed at) pleasure.
5. T he initiation of a Brdhmawa (shall ordinarily 
•take place) in his eighth y ea r;
6. (It may also be performed) in the ninth or
I. 1-2. Apastamba I, 1, i, 1-2.
3. Apastamba II, 6, 13, 8-10. 
Instances of transgressions of 
the law are the adultery of Kataka and Bharadv^a, Vasish/zia’s 
marriage with the K ^ n d ^ AkshamalS, R3ma Gdmadagnya’s murder 
of his mother. 
Haradatta explains the term ‘ avara,’ translated by 
‘ men of later ages,’ to mean ‘ men like ourselves’ (asmadadi). In 
his comment on the parallel passage of Apastamba he renders 
it by idSntntana, ‘ belonging to our times;’ and in his notes 
on Apastamba 1, 2, 5, 4, he substitutes arvaitna kaliyugavartin,
‘ men of modem times living in the Kaliyuga.’ 
The last explana­
tion seems to me the most accurate, if it is distinctly kept in mind 
that in the times of Gautama the Kaliyuga was not a definite period 
of calculated duration, but the Iron Age of sin as opposed to the 
happier times when justice still dwelt on earth.
6. Apastamba I, r, i, 19-20.

--- PAGE 238 ---
1 7 4
G A U TA M A .
I> 7-
fifth (years) for the fulfilment of (some particular) 
wish.
7. T h e number of years (is to be calculated) from 
conception.
8. T hat (initiation) is the second birth.
9. T h e (person) from whom he receives that 
(sacrament is called) the A-^arya (teacher).
10. A nd (the same title is also bestowed) in con­
sequence of the teaching of the Veda.
11. (The initiation) of a Kshatriya (shall ordi­
narily take place) in the eleventh (year after con-' 
ception), and that of a Vai^ya in the twelfth.
12. U p to the sixteenth year the time for the 
S^lvitri of a Brihmawa has not passed,
13. N or (for the initiation) of a Kshatriya up to 
the twentieth (year).
14. (And the limit for that) of a Va^ya (extends) 
two years beyond (the latter term). 
•
15. T h e girdles (worn by students) shall be strings 
of Mun^a grass, a bow-string, or a (wool) thread, 
according to the order (of the castes).
16. (Their upper garments shall be) the skins of 
black-bucks, spotted deer, (or) he-goats.
17. * Hempen or linen cloth, the (inner) bark (of
7.. Ipastamba I, i, i, 18. 
8. Apastamba I, i, i, 16-17.
9. Apastamba 1, 1,1,13. 
10. Manu II, 140; Ya^fiavalkyal,34.
11. Apastamba I, i, i, i8.
12. Apastamba I, r, I, 21. 
SSvitri, literally the R ik sacred to 
Savitrz, is here used as an equivalent for upanayana, initiation, 
because one of the chief objects of the ceremony is to impart to 
the neophyte the Mantra sacred to Savitrf, Rig-veda III, 62, lo.
13-14. Apastamba I, I, I, 21.
15. Apastamba I, I, 2, 33-36. 
16. Apastamba I, i, 3, 3-6.
17. Haradatta explains ^ira, the inner bark of a tree, by ‘ made 
of Kuja grass and the like.' 
Regarding dresses made of Kuja

--- PAGE 239 ---
I> 27.
IN IT IA T IO N .
175
trees), and woollen plaids (may be worn as lower 
garments by sftidents) of all (castes),
18. And undyed cotton cloth.
19. Some (declare that it) even (may be dyed) red.
20. (In that case the garment) of a Br4hma«a 
(shall be dyed with a red dye) produced from a tree,
21. (And those of students) o f the other two 
(castes shall be) dyed with madder or turmeric.
22. T h e staff (carried by a student) of the Brah- 
ma;?a (caste shall be) made of Bilva or Palaja wood.
23. Staves made of A^vattha or Pilu wood (are 
fit) for (students of) the remaining (two castes).
24. O r (a staff cut from a tree) that is fit to be 
used at a sacrifice (may be carried by students) of all 
(castes).
25. (The staves must be) unblemished, bent (at the 
top) like a sacrificial post, and covered by their bark.
26. T hey shall reach the crown of the head, the 
forehead, (or) the tip of the nose (according to the 
caste of the wearer).
27. (It is) optional (for students) to shave (their 
heads), to wear the hair tied in a knot, (or) to keep
grass, see the Petersburg Diet. s.v. Kuja^lra. K ixz. may also mean 
‘ rags,’ such as were worn by SannySsins (see below, III, 19) and 
Bauddha ascetics.
19-21. Apastamba I, i, 2, 41-!, i, 3, 2.
22. Apastamba I, i, 2, 38.
24. ‘ Because the term “ fit to be used at a sacrifice” is em­
ployed, the Vibhttaka and the like (unclean trees) are excluded.’— 
Haradatta. 
Regarding the Vibhttaka, see Report of Tour in 
Kajmir, Journal Bombay Br. Roy. As. Soc. XXXIV A, p. 8.
25. Manu II, 47. 
‘ Unblemished means uninjured by worms 
and the like.’— Haradatta.
26. Manu II, 46.
2'j. Apastamba I, i, 2, 31-32. 
The above translation follows 
the reading of my MSS. mu«(/£iga/ila4 kh%'a/S va, which seems more

--- PAGE 240 ---
176
G A U T A M A .
I, 28.
(merely) a lock on the crown of the head tied in a 
knot (shaving the other portions of A e head).
28. 
I f he becomes impure while holding things 
in his hands, he shall (purify himself) by sipping 
water without laying (them on the ground).
in accordance with the Sfitra style. 
It must, however, be under­
stood that the arrangement of the hair is not regulated by the 
individual choice of the student, but by the custom of his family, 
school, or country. 
In the commentary, as given by one of my 
MSS., it is stated the custom of shaving the whole head prevailed 
among the .Oandogas. Max Muller, History of Ancient Sanskrit 
Literature, p. 53; Weber, Indische Studien, X, 95.
28. The above translation agrees with Professor Stenzler’s text 
and ManuV, 143. But according to Haradatta the meaning of 
the Sutra is not so simple. 
His explanation is as follows: ‘ If 
while holding things in his hands he becomes impure, i. e. -he is 
defiled by urine, feces, leavings of food, and the like (impurities) 
which are causes for sipping water, then he shall sip water after 
placing those things on' the ground. 
This refers to uncooked 
food, intended to be eaten. And thus Vasish/-4a (III, 4, 3, Benares 
edition) declares: “ If he who is occupied with eatables touches 
any impure substance, then he shall place that thing on the ground, 
sip water, and afterwards again use it.” 
But the following text of 
another Smrfti, “A substance becomes pure by being sprinkled 
with water after having been placed on the ground,” refers to cooked 
food, such as boiled rice and the like 
Or (the above Sutra may 
mean), “ If he becomes impure while holding things in his hands, 
then he shall sip water without laying them on the ground.” 
And 
thus Manu (V, 143) says : “ He who- carries in any manner any­
thing in his hands and is touched by an impure substance shall 
cleanse himself by sipping water without laying his burden down.” 
This rule refers to things not destined to be eaten, such as gar­
ments. 
And in the (above) Shtra the words, “ He who becomes 
impure shall sip water,” must be taken as one sentence, and (the 
whole), “ If while holding things in his hands he becomes impure, 
he shall sip water without laying' (them) down,” must be taken as 
a second,’
Though it may be doubted if the yogavibhaga, or ‘ division of the 
construction,’ proposed by Haradatta, is admissible, still it seems 
to me not improbable that Gautama intended his Siitra to be

--- PAGE 241 ---
1> 32-
PU R IFIC A T IO N .
177
29. (A s regards) the purification of things, (objects) 
made of metal -must be scoured, those made of clay 
should be thoroughly heated by fire, those made of 
wood must be planed, and (cloth) made of thread 
should be washed.
30. (Objects made of) stone, jewels, shells, (or) 
mother-of-pearl (must be treated) like those made o f 
metal.
31. (Objects made of) bone and mud (must be 
treated) like wood.
32. And scattering (earth taken from a pure spot 
is another method of purifying defiled) earth.
taken in two different ways. 
For, if according to the ancient 
custom it is written without an Avagraha and without separating 
the words joined by Sandhi, dravyahasta u^^Aish/onidhSyS- 
^^met, the latter group may either stand for u^i.4ish/o nidhiya 
t.4Smet or for u^/i.4ish/o anidhSya S<4amet. 
As the Siltra- 
karas aim before all things at brevity, the Siitra may have to be 
read both ways. 
If that had to be done, the correct translation 
■would be: ‘ If while holding things in his hands, he becomes 
impure, he shall (purify himself by) sipping water, either laying 
(his burden) down (or) not laying it down, (as the case may 
require.]!'
29. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 10-12; Manu V, 115, 122.
30. Manu V, iii- iia .
31. ‘ Bone, i.e. ivory and the like. 
Mud, i.e. (the mud Poor 
of) a house and the like. The purification of these two is the 
same as that of wood, i. e. by scraping (or planing). How is 
it proper that, since the author has declared (Sfitra 29) that 
objects made of wood shall be purified by planing, the ex­
pression “ like wood” should be substituted (in this Sfitra)? (The 
answer is that), as the author uses the expression “ like wood,” 
when he ought to have said “ like objects made of wood,” 
he indicates thereby that the manner of purification is the same 
for the material as for the object made thereof.’— Haradatta. The 
Sfttra is, therefore, a so-called Guapaka, intended to reveal the 
existence of a general rule or paribh^sh^ which has not been 
explicitly given.
32. ‘ Scattering over, i.e. heaping on (earth) after bringing it
[2] 
N

--- PAGE 242 ---
178
G A U T A M A .
I. 33-
33. Ropes, chips (of bamboo), and leather (must 
be treated) like garments.
34. O r (objects) that have been defiled very 
much may be thrown away.
35. Turning his face to the east or to the north, 
he shall purify himself from personal defilement,
36. Seated in a pure place, placing his right arm 
between his knees, arranging his dress (or his sacri­
ficial cord) in the manner required for a sacrifice to 
the gods, he shall, after washing his hands up to 
the wrist, three or four times, silently, sip water that 
reaches his heart; twice wipe (his* lips); sprinkle his
from another spot is an additional method of purifying earth. 
With regard to this matter Vasish/Aa (III, 57) says : “ Earth 
is purified by these four (methods, viz.) by digging, burning, 
rain, being trodden on by cows, and, fifthly, by being smeared 
with cowdung.” '— Haradatta.
What Haradatta and probably Gautama mean, is that the mud 
floors of houses, verandahs, and spots of ground selected for 
sitting on, if defiled, should be scraped, and that afterwards fresh 
earth should be scattered over the spot thus cleansed. 
See, 
however, iManu V, 125, who recommends earth for the purification 
of other things also. 
The Sfitra may also be interpreted so as 
to agree with his rule.
33. ‘ Chips (vidala), i. e._ something made of chips of ratan-cane 
or bamboo, or, according to others, something made of feathers.’— 
Haradatta.
34. ‘ The word “ or” is used in order to exclude the alternative 
(i. e. the methods of purification described above).’— Haradatta. 
For the explanation of the expression ‘very much’ Haradatta refers 
to Vasiih/Aa HI, 58, with which Manu V, 123 may be compared.
35. ‘ The alternative (position) depends on the pleasure of the 
performer.’— Haradatta.
36. My MSS. more conveniently make five Sfltras of Professor 
Stenzler’s one Sfitra. 
The divisions have been marked in the 
translation by semicolons.
a. 
‘ How many times ? 
Three times or four times; the alter­
native depends upon the pleasure of the performer. 
Another 
(commentator says): When, according to a special rule of the

--- PAGE 243 ---
I> 41-
PU R IFIC A T IO N .
179
feet and (his head); touch the cavities in the head 
(severally) with (certain fingers of his) right hand; 
(and finally) place (all the fingers) on the crown of 
his head and (on the navel).
3 7. A fter sleeping, dining, and sneezing (he shall) 
again (sip water though he may have done so before).
38. (Remnants of food) adhering to the teeth (do 
not make the eater impure as little) as his teeth, 
except if he touches them with hfs'tongue.*
39. Some (declare, that such remnants do not 
defile) before they fall (from their place).
40. If they do become detached, he should know 
that he is purified by merely swallowing them, as 
(in the case of) saliva.
41. Drops (of saliva) falling from the mouth do
Vedas the sipping must be accompanied by the recitation of 
sacred texts, then the act shall be repeated four times, else three 
times.’— Haradatta.
b. The custom of touchjpg the lips twice is noted as the 
opinion of some, by Apastamba I, 5, 16, 4.
c. 
Sprinkle his feet and." On account of the word “ and” 
he shall sprinkle his head also.’— ^Haradatta.
d. ‘ ‘‘ Touch the cavities,” &c. Here the word “ and” indicates 
that each organ is to be touched separately.’—Haradatta. Regard­
ing the manner of touching, see Apastamba I, 5, 6, 5 and y note.
e. 
‘ “(And finally) place,” &c. Because the word “and” is used, 
he shall touch the navel and the head with all the fingers.’— 
Haradatta. Regarding the whole A,iamanakalpa, see Apastamba 
I, 5. 16, I seq.
37. ManuV, 145. 
38. Manu V, 141.
39. Vasish/i5a III, 41.
40. ‘ As the author ought to have said, “ If they become de­
tached, he is purified by merely swallowing them,” the addition of 
the words “ he should know ” and “ as in the case of saliva ” is 
intended to indicate that in the case of saliva, too, he becomes 
pure by swallowing it, and that purification by sipping need not be 
considered necessary."— Haradatta.
41. Apastamba I, 6,16, iz.
N 2

--- PAGE 244 ---
i8o
G A U T A M A .
I, 42.
not cause impurity, except if they fall on a limb of 
the body.
42. Purification (from defilement) by unclean sub­
stances (has been effected) when the stains and the 
(bad) smell have been removed.
43. T h at (should be done) by first (using) water 
and (afterwards) earth,
44. W hen urine, faeces, or semen fall on a (limb) 
and when*(a limb) is stained (by food) during meals 
(water should be sipped).
45. And in case the Veda ordains (a particular 
manner of purification, it must be performed accord­
ing to the precept).
46. Taking hold with (his right) hand of the left 
hand (of his teacher), but leaving the thumb free, 
(the pupil) shall address his teacher, (saying); 
‘Venerable Sir, recite! ’
47. He shall fix his eyes and his mind on the 
(teacher).
48. H e shall touch with Ku5a grass the (seat of 
the) vital airs.
42. In explanation of the term amedhya, ‘ unclean substances,’ 
Haradatta quotes Manu V, 135.'
43. Manu V, 134; see also Apastamba I, 5,16,15.
44. Apastamba I, 5,16,14.
45. ‘ If the Veda ordains any particular manner of purification 
for any particular purpose, that alone must be adopted. 
Thus the 
sacrificial vessels called ^amasa, which have been stained by rem­
nants of offerings, must be washed with water on the heap of earth 
called mfir^filiya.’— Haradatta.
46. This and the following rules refer chiefly to the teaching 
of the Savitri, which forms part of the initiation. 
According to 
Gobhila Gr/hya-siltra II, 10, 38, the complete sentence addressed 
to the teacher is, ‘ Venerable Sir, recite 1 
May the worshipful one 
teach me the Savitri.’
47. Apastamba I, 2, fi, 24 ; I, 2, 6, 20; Manu II, 192.
48. ‘ The (seat of the) vital airs are the organs of sense located

--- PAGE 245 ---
I, 56.
STUDENTSHIP.
181
49. H e shall thrice restrain his breath for (the 
space of) fifteen moments;
50. A n d he shall seat himself on (blades of K m a 
grass) the tops of which are turned toward the east.
51. T he five Vydh^'z'tis must (each) be preceded 
by (the syllable) Om and end with Satya.
52. (Every) morning the feet of the teacher must 
be embraced (by the pupil),
53. 
'/ And both at the beginning and at the end of 
a lesson in the Veda.
54. After having received permission, the pupil 
shall sit down to the right (of his teacher), turning 
his face towards the east or towards the north,
55. And-the S^vitri must be recited;
56. {A ll these acts rhust be performed) at the 
beginning of the instruction in the Veda.
in the head. The pupil shall touch these, his own (organs o f sense) 
located in the head, in the order prescribed for the A-famana (see 
Apastamba I, 5, 16, 7 note).’— Haradatta. 
See also Manu II, 75.
49. ‘ Passing one’s hand along the side of the knee, one will fill 
the space of one Tru/ikd. 
That is one moment (matra).’— Hara­
datta. 
Manu II, 75.
50. Manu II, 75,
51. ‘ In the Vydhnti-samans (see Burnell, Arsheya-br., Index
s. V.) five Vyahr/tis are mentioned, viz. Bhfi^, BhuvaA, Sva^, Satyam, 
Purusha^. Each of these i^ to be preceded by the syllable Om. But 
they are to end with 
which (in the above enumeration)
occupies the fourth place.’— Haradatta. See also Manu II, 75 seq.
52-53. Apastamba I, 2, 5 ,19 -2 1.
54. Apastamba I, 2, 6, 24; Manu II, 193. 
‘ “ Turning his face
towards the east or towards’ the north.” 
This alternative depends 
upon (the nature of) the business.’— Haradatta.
55. Manu II, 77.
56. ‘ All those acts beginning with the touching of the organs 
of sense with Kura grass and ending with the recitation of the 
Sdvitrt, which have been prescribed (Sfitras 48-57), must be per­
formed before the pupil begins to study the Veda with his-teacher, but 
should not be repeated daily. After the initiation follows the stud}’ of

--- PAGE 246 ---
t82
GAUTAMA.
I. 57-
57. T h e syllable Om (must precede the recitation 
of) other (parts of the Veda) also.
58. If (any one) passes between (the teacher and 
the pupil) the worship (of the teacher must be 
performed) once more. 
- 
'
59. If a dog, an ichneumon, a snake, a frog, (or) 
a cat (pass between the teacher and the pupil) a 
three days’ fast and a journey (are necessary).
60. (In case the same event happens) with other 
(animals, the pupil) must thrice restrain his breath 
and eat clarified butter,
6 1. And (the same expiation must be performed), 
if (unwittingly) a lesson in the Veda has been given 
on the site of a burial-ground.
the Savitri. 
The touching of the organs of sense and the other 
(acts mentioned) form part of this (study). But the rules prescribed 
in the three Shtras, the first o f which is Sfitra 52, and the rule to 
direct the eye and mind towards the teacher (Sfitra 47), must be 
constantly kept in mind. 
This decision is confirmed by the rules 
of other Smrftis and of the Gribya-sfitras.’— Haradatta.
57. Apastamba I, 4, 13, 6-7.
58. ‘ The worship of the teacher (upasadana) consists in the per­
formance of the acts prescribed in Sfitras 46-57, with the exception 
o f the study of the Savitri and. the acts belonging to that. 
The 
meaning of the Sfitra is that, though the worship of the teacher may 
have already been performed in the morning of that day, it must, 
nevertheless, be repeated for the reason stated.’— Haradatta.
59. ‘ A journey (vipravasa) means residence in some other place 
than the teacher’s house.’— Haradatta. 
The commentator adds 
that the somewhat different rule, given by Manu IV, 126, may be 
reconciled with the above, by referring the former to the study for 
the sake of remembering texts recited by the teacher (dharawadhya- 
yana), and the latter to the first instruction in the sacred texts.
60. ‘ This penance must be performed by the pupil, not by the 
teacher. 
Others declare that both shall perform it.’— Haradatta.
61. See also Apastamba I, 3, 9, 6-8. 
The last clauses of this 
and all succeeding chapters are repeated in order to indicate that 
the chapter is finished.

--- PAGE 247 ---
I I , 2.
U N IN IT IA T E D PERSONS.
183
C h a p t e r I I ,
1. Before 
initiation (a child) may follow its 
inclinations in behaviour, speech, and eating. 
(It 
shall) not partake of offerings. 
(It shall remain) 
chaste. 
It may void urine and faeces according to 
its convenience.
2, No rule of (purification by^. sipping water is 
prescribed for it. 
But (the stains of impure sub-
II. 
I. In concluding the explanation of this Shtra, Haradatta 
states that its last clause is intended to give an instance of the 
freedom of behaviour permitted to a child. In his opinion Gautama 
indicates thereby that a person who, before initiation, drinks 
spirituous liquor, commits murder or other mortal sins, becomes 
an outcast, and is liable to perform the penances prescribed for 
initiated sinners. In support of this view he quotes a ptfssage, 
taken from an unnamed Smrfti, according to which the parents 
or other relatives of children between five and eleven years are 
to perform penances vicariously for the latter, while children 
between eleven and fifteen years are declared to be liable to half 
the penances prescribed for initiated adults. 
Hence he infers that 
though the above text of Gautama speaks of uninitiated persons 
in general, its provisions really apply to children under five years 
of age only. Though it would seem that some of Gautamk’s rules 
refer to half-grown persons rather than to infants or very young 
boys, it is impossible to assume that Gautama meant to give full 
license of behaviour, speech, and eating to Brahmawas who were not 
initiated before their sixteenth year, or to Kshatriyas and Vairyas 
up to the age of twenty and twenty-two. 
It seems more likely | 
that, as Haradatta thinks, his rules are meant in the first instance 
for infants and very young children only, and that he intended ' 
the special cases of half-grown or nearly grown up boys to be 
dealt with according to the custom of the family or of the 
country.
2. Haradatta points out that the Sfitra does not forbid unini­
tiated persons to sip water, but that it merely denies the appli­
cability of the rules (kalpa) given above, I, 36. Uninitiated persons 
may, therefore, sip water in the manner practised by women and 
■Sfidras.

--- PAGE 248 ---
184
G A U T A M A .
II, 3-
stances) shall be removed by wiping, by washing, 
or b y sprinkling water.
3. (Other persons) cannot be defiled by the touch 
of such (a child).
4. But one must not employ a (child) to perform 
oblations in the fire or Bali-offerings;
5. N or must one make it recite Vedic texts, 
except in pronouncing Svadhd.
6. T h e restrictive rules, (which will be enumerated 
hereafter,, must be obeyed) after initiation,
7. A nd (for a student the duty of) chastityw hich 
has been prescribed (above for a child is likewise 
obligatory),
8. (Also) to offer (daily) sacred fuel in the fire, 
and to beg, to speak the truth, (and) to bathe 
(daily).
9. Some (declare, that the duty) to bathe (exists) 
after (the performance of) the Godana (only).
10. A nd the morning and evening devotions 
(Sandhyd must be performed) outside (the village).
11. Silent he shall stand during the former, and
4. Apastamba II, 6, 15, 19 ; Manu XI, 36.
5. ‘ The expression “ pronouncing Svadha” includes by impli­
cation the performance of all funeral rites.’— Haradatta.
7. Apastamba I, i, 2, 26.
8. Apastamba I, i, 4, 14-17 i h 
3> ^5 > k 
2, 28-30; 
Manu II, 176.
9. Regarding the sacrament called Godana, see Gobhila Grfhya- 
sfitra I, 9, 26.
10. Apastamba I, 11, 30, 8.*
11. ‘ From (the time when one) light (is still visible,’ &c.), i. e. in’ 
the morning from the time when the stars are still visible until 
the sun rises, and in the evening from the time when the sun. 
still stands above the horizon until the stars appear. Haradatta 
observes that, as Manu II, 102 prescribes the recitation of the 
Gayatrt during the morning and evening devotions, either his or

--- PAGE 249 ---
II. 11.
ST U D E N T SH IP .
i «5
sit during the latter, from (the time when one) light 
(is still visible) until (the other) light (appears).
12. H e shall not look at the sun.
13. H e shall avoid honey, meat, perfumes, gar­
lands, sleep in the day-time, ointments, collyrium, a 
carriage, shoes, a parasol, love, anger, covetousness, 
perplexity, garrulity, playing musical instruments, 
bathing (for pleasure), cleaning the teeth, elation, 
dancing, singing, calumny, (and) tSror,
14. (And) in the presence of his Gurus,, covering 
his throat, crossing his legs, leaning (against a wall 
or the like, and) stretching out his feet,
15. (As well as) 
spitting, laughing, yawning, 
cracking the joints of the fingers,
16. T o gaze at and to touch women, if there is 
danger of a breach of chastity,
17. Gambling, low service, to take things not 
offered, to injure animate beings.
Gautama’s rule may be followed. 
He adds that another com­
mentator refers the injunction to keep silence to conversations 
on worldly matters only. 
He himself has adopted this View in 
his commentary on Apastamba I, ii, 30, 8.
12. Apastamba I, ii, 31, 20.
13. Apastamba I, i, 2, 23-28; I, i, 3, 11-14, 20-24; h 2,
7, 5 - 
^
14. Apastamba I, 2, 6, 3, 14,17-18. The term Guru includes, 
besides the teacher, the parents and other venerable persons.
15. Apastamba I, 2, 7, 6-7 ; II, 2, 5, 9. 
Haradatta observes 
that this Shtra again contains a general rule, and does not merely 
refer to the presence of Gurus. 
,
16. Apastamba I, 2, 7, 3, 8-ro.
17. Apastamba II, 1,3,12. “ ‘Low service,” i.e. service by wiping 
off urine, feces, and the like. . . . That is not even to be performed 
fof the teacher. 
Or the expression may mean that he shall not 
serve a teacher deficient in learning and virtue. 
The sam e 
opinion is expressed by Apastamba I, i, i, n .’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 250 ---
i86
G A U T A M A .
II, i8 .
18. T o pronounce the names of the teacher, of 
the (teacher’s) sons and wives, and of a person 
who has performed the Dikshawtyesh^i of a Soma- 
sacrifice,
19. T o make bitter speeches.
20. A Brahma«a (shall) always (abstain froni) 
spirituous liquor.
21. (A student) shall occupy a seat and a couch 
lower (than those o f his teacher), shall rise before 
(him) and retire to rest after (him).
22. H e shall keep his tongue, his arms, and his 
stomach in subjection.
23. (If it is absolutely necessary to pronounce) 
his teacher’s name and family-name, he ought to 
indicate it by (using) a synonymous term.
24. (H e must speak) in the same (respectful) 
manner o f a man who is (generally) revered and 
of his betters.
25. (If the teacher speaks to him), he shall answer 
after having risen from his couch or seat (in case 
he was lying down or sitting).
18. Manu II, 199. 
19. Apastamba I, 2, 7, 24.
20. ‘ A Brahmana sbail avoid it always, i. e. even as a house­
holder ; Kshatriyas and Vai^yas need do it only as long as they 
are students. 
But in their case, too, they forbid the use of 
liquor distilled from bruised rice, under all circumstances.’— 
Haradatta.
21. Apastamba I, i, 2, 21 ; I, i, 4, 23, 28.
22. Apastamba I, i , 3, 13. 
‘ Keeping his arms in subjection 
means that he shall not (without a cause) break clods of earth 
and the like. 
Keeping his stomach in subjection, i. e. eating with 
moderation.’— Haradatta.
23. ‘ He shall indicate it by another synonymous word, 
e. g. instead of saying, “ Haradatta (given by Hara),” he shall say, 
“ the venerable Bhavarata (given by Bhava).” ’— Haradatta.
25. Apastamba I, 2, 6, 5-7.

--- PAGE 251 ---
n, 33-
STU D E N TSH IP .
187
26. A t the command (of his teacher) he shall 
approach, though he may not be visible.
27. And if he sees his teacher standing in a 
lower place or to the leeward or to the windward, 
he shall rise (and change his position).
28. I f (his teacher) is walking, he shall walk 
after him, informing him of the work (which he 
is going to do and) telling (him what he has done).
29. H e shall study after having been called (by 
the teacher, and not request the latter to begin 
the lesson).
30. H e shall be intent on (doing) what is pleasing 
and serviceable (to the teacher);
31. And (he shall behave) towards (the teacher’s) 
wives and sons just as (towards the teacher),
32. But not eat their leavings, attend them while 
bathing, assist them at their toilet, wash their feet, 
shampoo them nor embrace their feet.
33. On returning from a journey he shall embrace 
the feet of the wives of his teacher.
26. He must not think that, as the teacher cannot see him, 
he need not obey the summons.
27. Apastamba I, 2, 6,15, 23.
28. ‘ Work (karma) means performance. The meaning is that 
the pupil shall announce to his teacher the performance of all 
he is going to do. But what is useful for the teacher, as fetching 
water and the like, he shall inform him of the performance of 
that, i. e. knowing himself (without being told)t-that such work is 
necessary at a particular time (and acting on this knowledge). 
Any other explanation of this Sutra does not please me.’— Hara- 
datta. 
See also Apastamba I, 2, 6, 8. My MSS. divide this SQtra 
into two, beginning the second with ‘ Informing ’ &c. Haradatta’s 
final remark, quoted above, seems to indicate that the division 
was intended by him.
29. Apastamba I, 2, 5, 27. 
30. Apastamba I, i, 4, 23.
31. Apastamba I, 2, 7, 30; hlanu II, 207-212,

--- PAGE 252 ---
i88
G A U T A M A .
n. 34-
34. 
Some declare, that (a pupil) who has attained 
his majority is not (to act thus) towards young 
(wives of his teacher).-
' 
35. Alm s may be accepted from men of all castes,
excepting Abhkastas and outcasts.
36. (In begging) the word Bhavat must be pro­
nounced in the beginning, in the middle, or at the 
end (of the request), according to the order of the 
castes.
37. (H e may beg in the houses) of the teacher, 
o f blood relations, (or) of Gurus, and in his own, if 
he obtains no (alms) elsewhere.
38. Am ong these he shall avoid each preceding 
one (more carefully than those named later).
39. A fter having announced to the teacher (what
34. ‘ One who has attained his majority, i. e. one who has com­
pleted his sixteenth year and is (already) a youth.’— Haradatta.
35. Haradatta explains abhijasta by upapatakin, ‘ one who has 
committed a minor offence,’ apparently forgetting Apastamba I, 7, 
2r, 7. 
See also Apastamba I, r, 3, 25.
36. Apastamba I, i, 3, 28-30, where the formulas have been 
given in the notes. Haradatta remarks that the Gaimini Grfhya- 
sfitra forbids the lengthening or drawling pronunciation of the 
syllables ksh^OT and hi in -begging. 
Baudhayana, on the other 
hand, expressly prescribes this. 
In the text read varwinupflr- 
vyewa.
37. Manu II, 184. 
It is just possible that the translation 
ought to be ‘ in the houses of his teacher’s blood relations,’ 
instead of ‘ in the houses of his teacher (and) of blood relations.’
38. The meaning of the Shtra is, that if a student does not 
obtain anything from strangers, he shall first go to his own 
family, next to the houses of Gurus, i. e. paternal and maternal 
uncles and other venerable relatives, then to his other blood 
relations, i. e. Sapi«<ias, and in case of extreme necessity only 
apply to the teacher’s wife.
39. Apastamba I, i, 3, 31-32*

--- PAGE 253 ---
II, 5 1 .
STU D E N TSH IP .
189
he has received) and having received his permission, 
the (student) may eat (the collected food).
40. If (the teacher) is not present, (he shall seek 
the permission to eat) from his (teacher’s) wives or 
sons, from fellow-students or virtuous (strangers).
41. H aving placed water by his side, (he shall 
eat) in silence, contented, (and) without greed.
42. (As a rule) a pupil shall not be punished 
corporally;.
43. If no (other course) is possible, (he may be 
corrected) with a thin rope or a thin cane.
44. If (the teacher) strikes him with any other 
(instrument), he shall be punished by the king.
45. He shall remain a student for twelve years 
in order (to study) one (recension of the Veda),
46. Or, if (he studies) all (the Vedas) twelve 
years for each,
47. O r during (as long a period as he requires 
for) learning (them).
48. On completion of the instruction the teacher 
must be offered a fee.
49. After (the pupil) has paid (that) and has 
been dismissed, he may, at his pleasure, bathe (as 
is customary on completion of the studentship).
50. The teacher is chief among all Gurus.
51. Some (say) that the mother (holds that 
place).
40. Apastamba I, i, 3, 33-34. 
41. Manu II, 53- 54-
42. Apastamba I, 2, 8, 30; Macnaghten, Mitakshar^ IV, i, 9.
43. Manu VIII, 299. 
45" 47- Apastamba I, i, 2, 12-16.
48. Apastamba I, 2, 7,19. 
49. Apastamba I, 2, 8, 31.
50. Manu II, 225-237.

--- PAGE 254 ---
ig o
G A U T A M A .
I ll, 1,
C h a p t e r I I I .
1. Some (declare, that) he (who has studied the 
Veda) may make his choice (which) among the 
orders (he is going to enter).
2. (T he four orders are, that of) the student, 
(that of) the 
householder, (that of) the ascetic 
(bhikshu), (and that of) the hermit in the woods 
(vaikhinasa).
3. T h e householder is the source of these, because 
the others do not produce offspring.
4. Am ong them a (professed) student (must follow 
the rules) given (in the preceding chapters).
III. 
I. Other Smmikaras maintain that a Brahma«a must pass 
through all the four orders. 
Compare Apastamba II, 9, 21, 5; 
Manu VI, 34-38 j and the long discussion on the comparative 
excellence of the orders of householders and of ascetics. Apa­
stamba II, 9, 23, 3; II, 9, 24, 15.
2. ‘ Though the order of studentship has already been described 
above, still in the following chapter the rules for a professed 
(naish/Aika) student will be given (and it had therefore again to 
be mentioned). 
Bhikshu has generally been translated by ascetic 
(sannyasin). Vaikhanasa, literally, he who lives according to the 
rule promulgated by Vikhanas, means hermit. 
For that (sage) has 
chiefly taught that order. In all other Aastras (the order of) hermits 
is the third, and (the order of) ascetics the fourth. Here a different 
arrangement is adopted. 
The reason of the displacement of the 
hermit is that the author considers the first-named three orders 
preferable. 
Hence if a man chooses to pass through all four, 
the sequence is that prescribed in other Aastras.’— Haradatta. 
In making these statements the commentator has apparently 
forgotten that Apastamba (II, 9, 21, i) agrees exactly with Gau­
tama. 
It is, however, very probable that Haradatta has given 
correctly the reason why the hermit is placed last by our author 
and by Apastamba!
3. Manu VI, 87. 
4. Apastamba I, i, 4, 29.

--- PAGE 255 ---
Ill, 17.
A SC E T IC .
I9I
5. H e shall remain obedient to his teacher until 
(his) end,
6. In (the time) remaining after (he has attended 
to) the business of his Guru, he shall recite (the 
Veda).
7. If the Guru dies, he shall serve his son,
8. (Or) if there is nt> (son o f the teacher), an 
older fellow-student, or the fire.
9. H e who lives thus, gains the heaven of Brah- 
many ^and (of him it is said that) he has subdued 
his organs (of sense and action).
10. And these (restrictions imposed on students 
must also be observed by men) of other (orders, 
provided they are) not opposed (to their particular 
duties).
11. A n ascetic shall not possess (any) store.
T2. (H e must be) chaste,
1-3, H e must not change his residence durjng the 
rainy season.
14. H e shall enter a village (only) in order to beg.
15. H e shall beg late (after people have finished 
their meals), without returning (twice),
16. Abandoning (all) desire (for sweet food).
17. H e shall restrain his speech, his eyes, (and) 
his actions.
A
5. Apastamba II, 9, 21, 6.
6. According to Haradatta the term Guru here includes the father. 
But see the next Shtra, where Guru can only mean the teacher.
10. Apastamba II, 9, 31, 3-4. My MSS. have uttaresham, ‘ of. 
the later named,’ instead of itaresham, ‘ of the other' (orders), both 
in the Sfttra and in subsequent quotations of the same.
11. Apastamba II, 9, 21, 8-10; Manu VI, 41- 4 3 1 Colebrooke, 
Mitakshar^ II, 8, 7.
13. This rule shows that the Vasso of the Bauddhas and Gainas 
is also derived from a Brahmanical source,
15. Manu VI, 55-56.

--- PAGE 256 ---
1 9 2
G A U T A M A .
Ill, i8.
18. H e shall wear a cloth to cover his naked­
ness.
19. Some (declare, that he shall wear) an old rag, 
after having washed it.
20. H e shall not take parts of plants and trees, 
except such as have become detached (spontane­
ously).
21. Out o f season he shall not dwell a second 
night in (the same) village. •
22. H e may either shave or wear a lock on the 
crown of the head.
23. H e shall avoid the destruction of seeds.
.24. (H e shall be) indifferent towards (all) crea­
tures, (whether they do him) an injury or a kindness.
25. H e shall not undertake (anything for his 
temporal qr spiritual welfare).
26. A hermit (shall live) in the forest subsisting 
on roots and fruits, practising austerities.
27. Kindling the fire according’ to the (rule of 
the) Srama^mka (Sfitra, he shall offer oblations in 
the morning and evening).
19. Apastamba II, 9, 21, ii.
20. ‘ He shall not appropriate, i.e. take parts of these, i.e. fruits, 
leaves, and the like, which have not been detached, i.e. have not 
fallen off. 
But he may take what has become detached spon­
taneously.’—Haradatta.
21. Out of season, i.e. except in the rainy season, during which, 
according to Shtra 13, an ascetic must not wander about.
23. ‘ He shall avoid, i.e. neither himself nor by the agency of 
others cause the destruction, i.e. the pounding by means of a pestle 
or the like, of seeds, i.e. rice and the like. 
Hence he shall accept 
as alms cooked food only, not rice and the like.’— Haradatta.
26. Apastamba II, 9, 21, 18-II, 9, 23, 2. 
‘ Austerities (tapas) 
means emaciating his body.’— Haradatta.
27. ‘ He shall offer oblations in the morning and evening,’ 
(these words), though not expressed, are understood.

--- PAGE 257 ---
Ill, 36.
H ER M IT.
193
28. H e shall eat wild-growing (vegetables only).
29. H e shall worship gods, manes, men, goblins, 
and /?/shis.
30. H e shall receive hospitably (men 
of) all 
(castes) except those (with whom intercourse is) 
forbidden.
31. H e may even use the flesh of animals killed 
by carnivorous beasts.
32. 
H e shall not step on ploughed (land),
33. And he.shall not enter a village.
34. H e shall wear (his hair in) braids, and dress 
in (garments made of) bark and skins.
35. H e shall not eat anything that has been 
hoarded for more than a year.
36. But the venerable teacher (prescribes) one 
order only, because the order of householders is 
explicitly prescribed (in the Vedas).
29. I.e. he shall perform the five MahSya§-nas, just like a house­
holder, only using wild-growing fruits, roots, &c. for the oblations.
31. ‘ They declare, that baishka means the flesh of an animal, 
slain by a tiger or the like. 
He may use even that. 
The word 
“ even” implies blame. 
Hence this is a rule for times of distress, 
and it must be understood that such food is to be eaten only 
on failure of roots and fruits and the like.’— Haradatta. 
The 
' commentator adds that the flesh of forbidden animals must be 
avoided.
34. According to Haradatta the lower garment shall be made 
of iira, which he again explains as cloth made of Kura grass and 
the like, and the upper of a skin.
35. Haradatta reads atisawvatsaram, not atisaOTvatsaram, as in 
Professor Stenzler’s edition, though he notices the latter reading. 
iManuVl, 15.
36. ‘ The duties of a householder, the Agnihotra, and the like, 
are frequently prescribed and praised in all Vedas, Dharmarastras, 
and Itihasas. 
As, therefore, the order of householders is explicitly 
I rescribed, this alone is the order (obligatory on all men). But the 
^ther orders are prescribed only for those unfit for the (duties of
[2] 
O

--- PAGE 258 ---
194
G A U T A M A .
IV, I.
C h a p t e r IV.
1. A householder shall take a wife (of) equal 
(caste), who has not belonged to another man and 
is younger (than himself).
2. A marriage (may be contracted) between per­
sons who have not the same Pravaras,
3. (And) who are not related within six degrees 
on the father’s side,
4. O r on" the side of the begetter,
5. (Nor) within four degrees on the mother’s 
side.
6. (If the father) gives (his daughter) dressed 
(in two garments) and decked with ornaments to 
a person- possessing (sacred) learning, of virtuous
a householder). That is the opinion of many teachers.’— Haradatta. 
Haradatta’s explanation of afarya^, which he takes to mean ‘ many 
teachers,’ seems to me inadmissible. 
Eke, ‘ some (teachers),’ is 
used in that sense, and aiaryi.^ cannot possibly be a synonymous 
term. 
Further on (IV, 23) Haradatta himself admits that by 
Sj^arySA one teacher is meant. It must be translated ‘ the venerable 
teacher,’ because the Hindus are very fond of the use of the plu- 
ralis majestatis. 
I have no doubt that Gautama means his own 
teacher, whom, of course, etiquette forbids him to name. 
See also 
R. Garbe, Uebersetzung des Vaitana-sGtra, I, 3.
IV. I. Apastamba II, 6‘ 13, i; Manu III, 4,12 ; Y^K. I, 52.
2. Regarding the Pravaras, see Muller’s History of Ancient 
Sanskrit Literature, p. 386. 
Apastamha II, 5 ,11, 15.
3. Apastamba II, 5, r i, 16; Manu III, 5
I, 52.
4. This rule refers to the case where a husband has made over 
his wife to another man and the bridegroom stands in the relation 
of a son to the husband of his mother and to his natural father 
(dvipita). 
See Ya^S. I, 68.
5. Ya^a. I, 63.
6. Apastamba II, 5, ii, 17. ‘Virtuous conduct (Mritra), i.e. 
the performance of the acts prescribed (in the Vedas and Smn'tis), 
. . . . good disposition (jila), i. 
faith in the ordinances of the 
law.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 259 ---
IV, 17.
H O U SEH O LD ER .
195
conduct, who has relatives and a (good) disposition, 
(that is a) Brihm a (wedding).
7. A t the PrAc^patya (wedding) the marriage- 
formula is, ‘ Fulfil ye the law conjointly.’
8. A t the Arsha (wedding the bridegroom) shall 
present a cow and a bull to him who has (authority 
over) the maiden.
9. (If the bride) is given, decked with ornaments, 
to a priest at the altar, that is a D alva wedding.
10. The spontaneous union with a willing (maiden 
is called) a G^ndharva wedding.
11. If those who have (authority over) a female 
are propitiated by money, (that is) an Asura wedding.
12. (If the bride) is taken by force, (that is) a 
R^kshasa wedding.
13. If (a man) embraces a female deprived of 
consciousness, (that is) a Pai^^a Avedding.
14. T he first four (rites) are law ful;
15. Some say, (the first) six.
16. (Children) born 
in 
the 
regular order of 
wives of the next, second or third lower castes 
(become) Savarwas, Ambash^f/^as, Ugras, Nishidas, 
Daushyantas or Pllra^avas.
17. (Children born) in the inverted order (of
7. Manu III, 30; 
I, 60.
8. Apastamba II, 5, i i , 18.
10. Apastamba II, 5 ,11, 20. 
12, Apastamba II, 5 ,12, 2.
14. Manu III, 24, 39.
9. Apastamba II, 5, II, 19. 
II. Apastamba II, 5,12, i. 
13. Manu III, 34; Y^ffi.1, 
15. Manu III, 23.
16. I. e. from a Brahmawa and a KshatriyS springs a Savarwa, 
from a Brdhmawa and aVairyS a Nishada, from a Brahmawa and 
a Aiidri a Para^ava, from a Kshatriya and a Vaijya an Ambash/ia, 
and from a Kshatriya and a AudrS a Daushyanta, from a Vaijya 
and a Afidr^ an Ugra. 
Compare for this and the follov .ng five 
Sfitras Manu X, 6-18 ; Ya^B. I, 91-95.
17. I. e. from a Kshatriya and a Brcihmawi springs a Sfita, from
O 2

--- PAGE 260 ---
ig6
G AU TAM A .
IV, i8 .
w ives of higher castes become) SAtas, M igadhas, 
Ayogavas, Kshatt^'es, Vaidehakas or Aa.i'^^/alas.
18. Some declare, that a woman of the Brdhmam 
caste has born successively to (husbands of) the (four) 
castes, sons (who are) Brdhma^^as, Sdtas, Mdgadhas 
or J^andtlsis;
19. (And that) a woman of the Kshatriya ■ caste 
(has born) to the same, Mdrdhdvasiktas, Kshatriyas, 
Dhiyaras, Pulkasas;
20. Further, a woman o f the Vai^'ya caste to 
the same, Bhrz^aka«^/«as, Mahishyas, Vai^yas, and 
V aideh as;
21. (And) a woman of the 6’ddra caste to the 
same, Pdra^avas, Yavanas, Karawas, and 6’ddras.
22. In the seventh (generation men obtain) a 
change of caste, either being raised to a higher 
one or being degraded to a lower one.
a Vauya and a KshatriyS a Migadha, from a 6’ddra and a Vaijyd 
an Ayogava, from a Vairya and a Brahma«i a Kshattrf, from a 
Addra and a Kshatriya a Vaidehaka, from a Addra and a BrShmawt 
a Aawifala.
18. 
The words ‘ Some declare' stand only at the end of Sdtra 
21. 
But Haradatta rightly declares that they refer to all the four 
Sdtras. 
The proof for the correctness of his interpretation lies in 
the use of the form a^J^anat, which refers’ to each of the Sdtras.
22. 
Apastamba II, 5, i i , l o - i i . 
‘ That is as follows: If a 
SavarwS ftmale,T)orn of the Kshatriya wife of a Brahmawa, is 
married to a Brahmawa, and her female descendants down to the 
seventh likewise, then the offspring which that seventh female 
descendant bears to her Brdhmawa husband is equal in caste to 
a Brdhmawa. 
In like manner, if a Savarwa male, the son of a 
BrShmawa and of his Kshatriya wife, again marries a Kshatriya 
wife and his male descendants down to the seventh likewise, then 
the offspring of that seventh male descendant is equal in caste to 
a Kshatriya. 
The same principle must be applied to the offspring 
of Kshatriyas and wives of the Vaijya caste as well as to Valryas 
and wives of the Addra caste.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 261 ---
IV , 30-
h o u s e h o l d e r .
197
/ 23. The venerable teacher declares (that this 
happens) in the fifth (generation).
24. And (the same rule applies) to those born 
(from parents o f different classes that are) inter­
mediate between (two o f the 
castes 
originally) 
created (by Brahman).
25. Those born 
in 
the 
inverse order (from 
fathers of a lower and mothers of a higher caste 
stand) outside (the pale of) the sacred law,
26. A s well as (those born irT the regulaip order) 
from a female of the 6iidra caste.
27. But he whom a ^Sudra (begets) on a female 
of unequal caste shall be treated like an outcast.
28. T he last (named, the A!'a«flfala), is the foulest.
29. Virtuous sons (born of wives of equal caste) 
and wedded according to approved rites sanctify 
(their father’s family).
30. (A son born of a wife married) according
23. ‘ (The venerable) teacher opines that the change of caste 
takes place in the fifth generation. 
They declare that the plural 
may be used to denote one teacher. 
This Sfitra refers to (cases 
of extraordinary merit acquired through) virtuous conduct and study 
of the Veda.’— Haradatta. 
It is clear that in this case Haradatta, 
too, has seen that the word ^k^xykh has another force than the 
more common eke; see above, note to III,36.
24. ‘ That is as follows: If the daughter of a Savarwa, born 
of a wife of the Ambash/y^a caste, is married again to a Savarwa, 
and her female descendants down to the seventh likewise, then the 
offspring of that seventh female descendant, begotten by a Savarwa 
husband, is equal in caste to a Savarwa.’— Haradatta. 
Regarding 
the birth of the four castes from Brahman, see Rig-veda X, 90,12.
25. Manu X, 41, 67-68.
26. Manu X, 68.
27. 
Shall be treated like an outcast,” i. e. one must avoid to 
look at him, &c., just as in the case of an outcast.’— Haradatta.
28. Manu X, 51-56.
30. Manu III, 38; Y a^ . I, 59.

--- PAGE 262 ---
198
G AU TAM A .
IV, 3 1-
to the A rsha rite (saves) three ancestors (from 
hell),
31. (A son born of a wife married) according to 
the D aiva rite ten,
32. (A son born o f a wife married) according to 
the Praj^dpatya rite, also ten.
33. (But) the son of a wife married according to 
the Brihm a rite (saves) ten ancestors, ten descend­
ants, and himself.
C h a p t e r V.
1. (A householder) shall approach (his wife) in 
the proper season,
2. O r (he may do so) at any time except on 
the forbidden (days).
3. H e shall worship gods, manes, men, goblins, 
(and) i?/shis.
4. E very day he shall recite privately (a portion 
of the Veda),
5. A nd the (daily) libation of water to the manes 
(is obligatory on him).
6. Other (rites than' these he may perform) ac­
cording to his ability.
31. Manu II I, 38; Y^fi. I, 59- '
32. Manu III, 38; 
I, 60.
33. Manu III, 37 ; Ya^3. I, 58.
V. 
I. Apastamba II, 1, i, 17.
2. Apastamba II, i, i, 18.
3. Apastamba I, 4, 12, 1 6 ; I, 4, 13, i j Manu III, 69-72; IV, 
29, 21; Ya^fi. I, 99, 102-104.
4. Manu III, 81; Yd^a. I, 104.
5. Manu III, 82; Y 3^a. I, 104. 
‘ The word “ and” indicates 
that water must be offered to the gods and i?zshis also.’— Hara- 
datta.
6. "‘ (Rites) other than those prescribed in Sfitras 3-5 he may 
perform according to his energy, i. e. according to his ability. But

--- PAGE 263 ---
V, II.
H O U SEH O LD ER .
199
7. 
T he (sacred) fire (must be kindled) on his 
marriage or on the division of the family estate.
8. T he domestic (ceremonies must be performed) 
with (the aid of) that (fire).
9. (Also) the sacrifices to the gods, manes, (and) 
men, and the private recitation (and) the 
Bali- 
offerings.
ib. T he oblations (which are thrown) into the 
(sacred) fire (at the Vaiivadeva-sacrifice are offered)
■ to Agni, to Dhanvantari, to all the gods, to Pra^a- • 
pati, (and to Agni) Svish/akrft;
II. And (Bali-offerings must be given) to the
those he should zealously perform. 
As the oblations to the gods 
and the other (Mahaya^nas) are mentioned before the kindling of 
the domestic fire, they must be performed by a person who has not 
yet kindled the domestic fire with the aid of the common (kitchen)- 
fire.’— Haradatta.
7. As long as the family remains united, its head offers the 
oblations for all its members.
8. ‘ The domestic rites, i. e. the PuA>isavana and the rest. . . . 
Now with the aid of which fire must a man, who has not yet kindled 
the domestic fire, perform the Puwsavana, &c. ? Some answer that 
he shall use a common fire. But the opinion of the teacher (Gau­
tama) is that he shall use the sacred fire which has been kindled on 
that occasion.’— Haradatta.
9. 
V Haradatta states that the Mahfiya^as are again enumerated 
in order to show that a person who has kindled the sacred fire 
shall use this for them, not a common fire. 
He also states that 
a passage of Uranas, according to which some teachers prescribe 
the performance of the daily recitation near the sacred fire, shows 
that this rite too has a connexion with the sacred fire.
10. Apastamba II, 2, 3, 16, where, however, as in alt other 
works, the order of the offerings differs. Haradatta adds that the 
word ‘ oblations ’ is used in the Sfitra in order to indicate that 
the word svShS must be pronounced at the end of each Mantra, 
and that the expression ‘ in the fire’ indicates that the Bali-offerings 
described in the following Sfitra must be thrown on the ground.
11. Compare Apastamba II, 2, 3, 20; II, 2, 4, 8 j Manu HI, 
87-90, where, as elsewhere, the order of the offerings differs.

--- PAGE 264 ---
200
G A U T A M A .
V , 12.
deities presiding over the (eight) points of the 
horizon, in their respective places,
12. A t the doors (of the house) to the Maruts,
13. T o the deities of the dwelling inside (the 
house),
14. T o Brahman in the centre (of the house),
15. T o the W aters near the water-pot,
16. T o the Ether in the air,
17. A nd to the Beings walking about at night 
in the evening.
1_________________________________________
According to Haradatta the deities intended are, Indra, Agni, Yama, 
NirrAi, Vaniwaj Vayu, Soma, and tf^na. Xhe first offering must be 
placed to the east, the next to the south-east, south, &c.
12. At all the doors, as many as there are, a Bali must be 
offered with the Mantra, ‘ To the Maruts, svahd.’— Haradatta.
13. ‘ As he says “ inside” (pravijya, literally entering) he must 
stand outside while offering the Balis at the doors. . . . At this 
occasion some require the following Mantra, “ To the deities of 
the dwelling, svdha,” because that is found in the Arvalayana 
(Grzhya-sfftra I, 2, 4). 
Others consider it necessary to mention 
the deities by name, and to present as many offerings as there are 
deities, while pronouncing the required words.’— Haradatta. 
The 
commentator then goes on to quote a passage from Ujanas, which 
he considers applicable, because it contains the names of the 
Grzhadevatas. 
1 doubt, however, if the ‘ others’ are right, and 
still more if, in case they should be right, it would be advisable 
to supply the names of the Gnhadevat^s from Ufanas.
14. ‘ Because the word “ and ” occurs in Sfitra 11 after the word 
“ to the deities presiding over the points of the horizon ” a Bali- 
offering must be presented to the deities mentioned by the author 
in Sfitra 10, viz. to the earth, wind, Pra^dpati, and to all the gods, 
after a Bali has been offered to Brahman.’— Haradatta.
16. ‘ The Bali presented to Akara, “ the ether,” must be thrown 
up into the air, as hlanu says, III, 90.’— Haradatta.
17. ‘ Because of the word “ and,” he must, also, present Balis to 
the deities mentioned above.’— Haradatta. The commentator.means 
to say that in the evening not only the ‘ Beings walking about 
at night ’ (naktaw^ara) are to receive a portion, but all the other 
deities too, and that the Balikarma must be offered twice a day.

--- PAGE 265 ---
V.23-
H O U SEH O LD ER .
201
18. A gift of food shall be preceded by a libation 
of water and (it shall be presented^ after (the re­
cipient) has been made to say, ‘ M ay welfare attend 
thee/
19. And the same (rule applies) to all gifts pre­
sented for the sake of spiritual merit.
20. T he reward of a gift (offered) to a person 
who is not a Brahma«a is equal (to the value of 
the gift), those (of presents given) to a Brdhma^za 
•twofold, to a 6rotriya thousandfold, to one who 
knows the whole Veda (vedapdraga) endless. 
'
21. Presents of money (must be given) outside 
the Vedi to persons begging for their Gurus, (or) in 
order to defray the expenses of their wedding, (or 
to procure) medicine for the sick, to those who 
are without means of subsistence, to those who are 
going- to offer a sacrifice, to those engaged in. study, 
to travellers, (and) to those who have performed 
the Vijva_^t-sacrifice.
22. Prepared food (must be given) to 
other 
beggars.
23. For an unlawful purpose he shall not give 
(anything), though he may have promised it.
18-19. Apastamba II, 4, 9, 8.
20. According to Haradatta the term Arotriya here denotes one 
who has studied one Veda, (but see also Apastamba II, 3, 6, 4; 
II, 4, 8, 5.) 
Vedaparaga is a man who has studied one Veda, 
together with the Angas, Kalpa-sfitras, and Upanishads.
21. Apastamba II, 5, 10, 1-2. 
‘ Now he promulgates a Sfltra 
which refers to those cases where one must necessarily make gifts, 
and where one incurs guilt by a refusal. . . . As the expression 
“ outside the Vedi ” 'is used, presents must be given to others also 
“ inside the Vedi ” (i. e. fees to priests, &c.) ’— Haradatta.
22; Apastamba II, 2, 4, 14.
23. Apastamba II, 5,10, 3 j ColebrookeII,DigestIV, 47; Mayd-

--- PAGE 266 ---
202
GAUTAMA,
V, 24.
24. A n untruth spoken by people under the influ­
ence of anger, excessive joy, fear, pain (or) greed, 
by infants, very old men, persons labouring under 
a delusion, those being under the influence of drink 
(or) by mad men does not cause (the speaker) to 
fall.
25. Before (a householder eats) he shall feed his 
guests, the infants, the sick people, the pregnant 
women, the females under his protection, the very 
aged men, and those of low condition (who may 
be in his house).
26. But (when) his teacher, parents (or intimate) 
friends (visit his house), he shall proceed to the 
preparation of the dinner after asking them (for 
orders).
27. W hen an ofiflciating priest, his teacher, his 
father-in-law, paternal or maternal uncles visit (him), 
a Madhuparka (or honey-mixture must be offered 
to them).
28. (If they have been once honoured in this 
manner the ceremony need be) repeated (only) after 
a year.
29. (But) on (the occasion of) a sacrifice and
kha IX, 5". 
‘As he says “for an unlawful purpose,” what has been 
promised must in other cases necessarily be given.’— Haradatta.
24. Colebrooke II, Digest IV, 56. 
‘ “ Does not cause (the
speaker) to fall,” i. e. produces no guilt. 
Hence such persons 
need not even give a promised present.’— Haradatta.
25. Apastamba II, 2, 4, 11-13; II, 4, 9, 10; Manu III, 116.
‘ Females under his protection (suv^inya/z), i. e. daughters and 
sisters . . . , those of low condition (^aghanya/z), i. e. servants, 
slaves, and the like. . . . The term “ men of low condition” is 
made a separate word in the text in order to show that they 
come after the others.’— Haradatta.
26. Manu III, 113.
27. Apastamba II, 4, 8, 5-9.

--- PAGE 267 ---
V, 36.
H O U SEH O LD ER .
203
of the wedding (a Madhuparka must be offered, 
though) less than a year (has passed since the last 
visit of the persons thus honoured).
30. And to a king wbo is a 6rotrIya (a Madhu­
parka must be offered as often as he comes),
31. (But to a king) who is not a 6rotriya a seat 
and water.
32. But for a 6rotriya he shall cause to be pre­
pared a foot-bath, an Arghya, and food of a superior 
quality,
33. O r his usual food distinguished by a (par­
ticularly careful) preparation.
34. T o a (Brahma^za) who is not learned in the 
Vedas, (but) of good conduct, food of a middling 
(quality) shall be given,
35. T o one who is the reverse (of virtuous) grass 
and water,
36. (Or) at least a welcome. 
-
30. ‘ And to a king a Madhuparka must be offered on his 
arrival. 
If he is a .Srotriya (this must be done) on each visit.'— 
Haradatta.
31. ‘ A king who is not a Srotriya shall be honoured with a 
seat and water, not with a Madhuparka.’— Haradatta.
32. A.pastamba II, 3, 6, 7-10, 14-15. 
‘ This Shtra may be 
optionally taken as referring to a Brahmawa, because the word 
.Srotriya is repeated. 
For a 6'rotriya who has come as a guest, 
a foot-bath, i. e. water for washing the feet, an Arghya, i. e. water 
mixed with Dftrv^ grass, flowers, &c., and food of a superior 
quality, i. e. milk and rice ; cakes and the like shall be particularly- 
prepared, if the host is able to afford it.’— Haradatta.
33. ‘ But if (the host is) not able (to afford dainties), he shall 
prepare that same food which is daily used in his house, dis­
tinguished in the preparation, i. e. by adding pepper and the like 
condiments, by frying it, and so forth.’— Haradatta.
34. Apastamba II, 2, 4, 16; II, 3, 6, 12. Haradatta points out 
that in this case nothing but a simple dinner shall be given.
36. Apastamba II, 2, 4> ^4 - 
‘ O n failure of grass and the rest,

--- PAGE 268 ---
204
GAUTAMA.
V ,37^
37. Honour (must be shown to a guest, and the 
host must) not dine better (than his guest).
38. A couch, a seat, (and) a lodging (of the) 
same (quality as the host uses must be given) to 
(a guest) of equal condition and to one’s betters; 
they must be accompanied (on departure) and re­
spectfully attended to (during their stay).
39. (The host shall show similar) though less 
(attention) to (a guest) who is inferipr (to himself).
40. H e is called a g^est who, belonging to a 
different village (and) intending to stay for one 
night only, arrives when the sun’s beams pass over 
the trees.
41. According (to his caste a guest) must be asked 
about his well-being (kui'ala), about his being free 
from hurt (anamaya), or about his health (arogya).
42. The last (formula must also be used in ad­
dressing) a 6'ddra..
43. A man o f a lower caste (is) not (to be con-
a welcome, i.e. (the host shall say), “ Thou art tired, sit down 
here.” ’— Haradatta.
37. Manu III, 106-107/ ‘ This Shtra refers solely to such a 
guest, as is described below, Sfitra 40.’— Haradatta.
38. ‘ Accompanying, i. e. walking after him; respectfully attend­
ing to, i. e. sitting with him and so forth. 
As it is not possible 
that these two acts can be performed by the host in the same 
manner as for himself, the meaning of the Sfitra must be taken to 
be merely that they are to be performed.’—Haradatta.
39. Haradatta says that some explain this 'Sfitra to mean, 
‘(The host shall show the same attention) even to a man who is a 
little inferior (to himself in learning, &c.),’ but that he disapproves 
of their opinion.
40. Apastamba II, 3,. 6, 5. Haradatta states, that by ‘ the time 
when the sun’s rays pass over the trees,’ either the middle of the 
day or the late afternoon may be meant.
41. Apastamba I, 4, 14, 26-29.
43. Apastamba II, 2, 4, 18-19.

--- PAGE 269 ---
VI, s-
SALUTING.
205
sidered) a guest by a Br&hmawa, except if he has 
approached on (the occasion of) a sacrifice.
44. But a Kshatriya must be fed after the Brah- 
mawa (guests).
45. . (Men of) other (castes he shall feed) with his 
servants for mercy’s sake.
C h a p t e r VI.
1. (To salute) every day on meeting (by) an 
embrace of the feet,
2. And (particularly) on return from a journey,
3. (Is prescribed in the case) of parents, of their 
blood relations, of elder (brothers), of persons venera­
ble on account of their learning, and o f the Gurus of 
the latter.
4. On meeting (several persons, to whom such 
a salutation is due), together, the most venerable 
(must be saluted first).
5. On meeting persons who understan^^ (the rule 
of returning salutes) one shall salute (them) pro­
nouncing one’s name, and (saying), ‘ I N. N. (ho! 
salute thee).’
VI. I. Apastamba I, 4, 14, 7-9; I, 2, 5, 19; I, 2, 8, 17-18.
3. ‘ Their blood relations, i. e. paternal and maternal uncles and 
the rest; elders, i.e. elder brothers; persons venerable on account 
of their learning, i. e. the teacher who has initiated him (a.f'arya), 
the teacher who has instructed him (upddhyaya), and the rest.’— 
Haradatta.
4. Apastamba I, 2, 6, 29; I, 2, 8,19. ‘ On meeting his mother 
and other persons whose feet must be embraced, he shall first 
embrace the highest, i. e. the most excellent, afterwards the others. 
Who the most excellent is has been declared above, II,
5. Apastamba I, 2, 5, 12-15. 
Professor Stenzler reads a^ua- 
samavaye, while my copies and their commentary show that 
g'nasamavaye has to be read. 
Besides, it seems impossible to

--- PAGE 270 ---
2o6
G A U T A M A .
VI, 6.
6. Som e (declare that) there is no restrictive rule 
for salutations between man and wife.
7. (T he feet of) other female (relations) than the 
mother, a paternal uncle’s wife and (elder) sisters 
(need) not (be embraced, nor need they be sfiluted) 
except on return from a journey.
8. T h e feet of wives of brothers and the mother- 
in-law (need) not be embraced (on any occasion).
9. But (on the arrival of an) officiating priest, 
a father-in-law, paternal and maternal uncles who 
are younger (than oneself), one must rise ; they 
need not be saluted (as prescribed above, Sdtra 5).
10. In like manner (any) other aged fellow-citizen, 
even a .Shdra of eighty years and more, (must be 
honoured) by one young enough to be his son,
make any sense out of the former reading without assuming 
that the construction is strongly elliptical. ‘ On meeting, i. e. on 
coming together with him who knows the rule of returning a 
salute,' he shall utter, i. e. loudly pronounce his name, i. e. the 
name which he has received on the tenth day (after his birth), and 
which is to be employed in saluting, and speak the word “ I ” as 
well as the word “ this.” 
They declare that instead of the word 
“ this,” which here is explicitly prescribed, the word “ I am ” must 
be used. 
Some salute thus, “ I Haradatta byname;’ others, “ I 
Haradattararman;” and the common usage is to say, “I Haradatta- 
rarman.by name.” Thus the salutation must be made. Salutation 
means saluting. 
The affix 
is added to causatives and the rest. 
With reference to this matter the rule for returning salutes has 
been described by Manu II, 126. . . . As (in the above Sfltra) 
the expression “ on meeting persons knowing ” is used, those 
who are unacquainted with the manner of returning a salute must 
not be saluted in this manner. How is it then to be done ? It is 
described by Manu III, 123.’— Haradatta.
6. 
' As Gautama says, “ Some declare,” the restrictive rule must, 
in his opinion, be followed.’— Haradatta.
*7. Manu II, 132 ; Apastamba I, 4, 14, 6, 9.
9. Apastamba I, 4>
10. ‘ Old (pfirva), i. e. of greater age. . . . A Afidra even, who

--- PAGE 271 ---
VI, i6.
SA LU TIN G .
207
11. (And) an Arya, though (he be) younger, by 
a 6iidra;
12. And he shall avoid (to pronounce) the name 
of that (person who is worthy of a salutation).
13. A nd an official who (is) not (able to) recite 
(the Veda shall avoid to pronounce the name) of 
the king.
14. A contemporary who is born on the same day 
(shall be addressed with the terms) hhoA or bhavan 
(your honour),
15. (Likewise) a fellow-citizen who is ten years 
older (than oneself),
16. (Also) an artist who is five years (older),
answers this description, must be honoured by rising, not, however, 
be saluted by one young enough to be his son, i. e. by a Brah- 
mana. who is very much younger. 
The A.9(Idra is mentioned as 
an instance of a man of inferior caste. 
Hence a .Sddra must 
(under these circumstances) be honoured by rising, not be saluted 
by men of the three higher castes, a Vairya by those of the two 
higher castes, and a Kshatriya by a Brahmana.’— Haradatta.
11. ‘ An Arya, i. e. a man of the three twice-born castes, though 
he be inferior, i. e. younger, must be honoured by rising, not be 
saluted by a ^ildra. The Afldra is mentioned in order to give an 
instance of (a man of) inferior caste.’— Haradatta.
12. ‘ An inferior shall avoid to take his name, i.e. that of a 
superior.’— Haradatta.
14. Haradatta says that samSnehani, ‘ on the same day,’ means 
‘ in the same year.’ 
He is probably right in^tliipking that the 
expression must not be interpreted too strictly. 
But his assertion 
that ahah means also ‘ year ’ cannot be proved by hiS quotation 
from the Nighaw/uka, abde sa»zvatsaram ahar^ram.
15. ‘ A person aged by ten years, i. e. at least ten years older, 
who lives in the same town as oneself, is to be addressed as 
bhoA, bhavan, though he may be deficient in good qualities.’— 
Haradatta.
16. ‘ The words “ years older” must be understood. 
He who 
lives by the fine arts (kal^), i. e. the knowledge of music, painting.

--- PAGE 272 ---
2o8
G A U T A M A .
VI, 17.
17. A nd a 6’rotriya belonging to one’s own Yedic 
school who is three years older,
18. (Further), BrAhma«as destitute of learning 
and those who follow the occupations of Kshatriyas 
or Vaijyas,
19. A nd (a contemporary) who has performed the 
Diksha?dyesh^i of a Soma-sacrifice before he buys 
the Soma.
20. W ealth, relations, occupation, birth, learning, 
and age must be honoured;' (but) each later named 
(quality) is more important (than the preceding 
ones).
21. But sacred learning is more important than 
all (other good qualities),
22. Because that is the root of the sacred law,
23. And because the Veda (expressly declares it).
24. W ay must be made for a man seated in a 
carriage, for one who is. in his tenth (decade), for
leaf-cutting, and the like, and is at least five years older than 
oneself, must be addressed as bho^ or bhavan.'— Haradatta.
17. Haradatta notes that Apastamba II, 4, 14,13 gives a some­
what different rule.
18. Haradatta adds that a person destitute of learning, be he 
ever so old, may still be treated as an equal, and addressed as 
bho/5, bhavan, by a more learned man.
20. Manu II, 136. 
‘ As wealth and the rest cannot be directly 
honoured, the persons possessing them are to be honoured. . . . 
Respect (mana) means honour shown by saluting and the like.’— 
Haradatta.
21. Manu II, 154.
23. Haradatta says that a passage to this effect occurs in the 
Ar.4findogya-brfihma«a. He also refers to Manu II, igi.
24. Apastamba II, 5, ir, 5, 7-9. 
‘ A person requiring con­
sideration, i. e. one afflicted by disease. 
A, woman, i. e. a bride 
or a pregnant woman. 
A Sndtaka, i. e. a person who has bathed 
after completing his studies and after having kept the vow of 
studentship.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 273 ---
VII, 7.
TIM E S O F D ISTR ESS.
20.9
one /equiring consideration, for a woman, for a 
Snataka, and for a king.
25. But a king (must make way) for a 6'rotriya.
C h a p t e r V II.
1. T h e rule for (times of) distress (is) that a 
Brihmawa may study under a teacher who is not 
a Brdhma«a.
2. (A student is bound) to walk behind and to 
obey (his non-Brahmanical teacher).
3. (But) when (the course of study) has been 
finished, the Brahma;^a (pupil is more) venerable 
(than his teacher).
4. (In times of distress it is permissible) to offer 
sacrifices for (men of) all (castes), to teach (them), 
and to accept (presents from them).
5. Each preceding (mode of living is) preferable 
(to those named later).
6. On failure of the (occupations lawful for a 
Brihmawa) he may live by the occupations o f a 
Kshatriya.
7. On failure of those, he may live by the 
occupations of a Vai.yy4.
25. Apastamba II, 5, 11, 6.
VII. I. Apastamba II, 2, 4, 25.
2. Apastamba II, 2, 4, 26. 
3. Apastamba II, 2, 4, 27.
4. Haradatta quotes Manu X, 103 in support of the above 
explanation, and adds that another commentator interprets the 
Sfitra to mean, that in times of distress men of all castes may 
support themselves by sacrificing for others, teaching, and the 
acceptance of gifts, though in ordinary times these modes of 
living are reserved for Brahma^tas.
g. The use of the mascpline in the text, ‘ pfirva^ pfirvo guru^,’ 
may, I think, be 'explained by the fact that the compound in the 
preceding Sfitra end? "with a noun of the masculine gender.
6. Manu X, 8 1; Ya^gfl. I ll, 35. 
7. Apastamba I, 7, 20, n .
[2] 
P

--- PAGE 274 ---
210
G A U T A M A .
VII, 8.
8. 
(Goods) that may not be sold by a (Brdhma^za 
are),
g. Perfumes, 
substances 
(used for) flavouring 
(food), prepared food, sesamum, hempen and linen 
cloth, skins,
10. Garments dyed red or washed,
11. M ilk and preparations from it,
12. Roots, fruits, flowers, medicines, honey, flesh, 
grass, water, poison,
13. N or animals for slaughter,
14. Nor, under any circumstances, human beings, 
heifers, female calves, cows big with young.
15. Some (declare, that the traffic in) land, rice, 
barley, goats, sheep, horses, bulls, milch-cdws, and * 
draught-oxen (is) likewise (forbidden).
16. But (it is permissible) to barter,
17. One kind o f substances used for flavouring 
others.
9. 
'Apastamba I, 7, 20,12-13. ‘ Substances used for flavouring 
(rasa), i. e. oil, sugar, clarified butter, salt, and the like.’— Hara- 
datta. From Sfltra 19 it is clear that ‘ rasa’ does not simply mean 
‘ liquids.’ 
y
I o. My MSS. read nirwikte for nikte, and nir;ziktam is explained 
by ‘ washed by a washerman or the like person.’ It is possible’to 
translate Professor Stenzler’s reading in accordance with Manu X, 
87, ‘ pairs of (i.e. upper and lower) garments dyed red.’
11. ‘ Preparations from it, i. e. sour milk and the like.’— 
Haradatta.
12. This rule contradicts Apastamba I, 7, 21, 12, but agrees 
with Manu X, 87. ‘ Under any circumstances (nityam, literally 
“ always”) means even when they are not sold for slaughter. 
Another (commentator) says, that, as the expression “ under*any 
circumstances’” is used here, the prohibition regarding the above- 
mentioned things, i. e, sesamum and the like, does not hold good 
under all circumstances, and that hence self-grown sesamum and 
other grain may be sold, see Manu X, 90.’— Haradatta.
15. Manu X, 88. 
Haradatta explains ‘ land’ by ‘ houses.’

--- PAGE 275 ---
V III, 
I. 
KIN G AN D BRAHMAiVA VERSED IN VEDAS. 
2 1 1 ^
18. A nd animals (for animals).
19. Salt 
and 
prepared food 
(must) not (be 
bartered),
20. Nor sesamum.
21. But for present use an equal (quantity of) un­
cooked (food may be exchanged) for cooked (food).
22. But if no (other course is) possible (a Brah- 
ma;^a) may support himself in' any way except by 
(following the occupations) of a ^S^hdra.
23. Some (permit) even this in case his life is 
in danger.
24. But to mix with that (caste) and forbidden 
food must be avoided (even in times of distress).
25. If his life is threatened, even a Brihmawa 
may use arms.
26. (In times of distress) a Kskatriya (may follow) 
the occupations of a Vai^ya.
C h a p t e r V III.
I. 
A king, and a Brahmawa, deeply ’versed in 
the Vedas, these two, uphold the moral order in 
the world.
19. 
‘ The sale of salt and prepared food has been forbidden by 
Siltra 9, but their barter has been permitted (by Shtra 17).’— Hara- 
datta.
22. Regarding the i'fidra’s occupations, see below, X, 57-60.
24. ‘ Restriction (niyama), i. e. avoiding. 
That Brahmawa 
even who lives the life of a ^’hdra must not mix with that 
5 udra caste, i. e. he must not sit among .Sfidras and so forth.’— 
Haradatta.
25. Apastamba I, 10, 29, 7; ManuVIII, 348.
26. Haradatta adds, that in accordance with the principle 
exemplified by the rule of this Sfitra in times of distress a 
Vauy* may follow the occupations of a .Sfldra.
6'atapatha-brahmawa V, 4, 4, 5; Weber, Ind. Stud. X,
29. 
Haradatta explains vrata, ‘ moral order,’ by karmawi,the
P 2 
•

--- PAGE 276 ---
212
GAUTAM A.
VIII, 2.
2. On them depends the existence of the fourfold 
human race, of internally conscious beings, of those 
which move on feet and on wings, and of those 
which creep,
3. (As well as) the protection of offspring, the 
prevention of the confusion (of the castes and) the 
sacred law.
4. H e is (called) deeply versed in the Vedas,
5. W ho is acquainted with the (ways o f the) 
world, 
the Vedas 
(and their) 
Angas 
(auxiliary 
sciences),
6. W ho is skilled in disputations (and), in (recit­
ing) legends and the Purdwa,
rites and occupations,’ and loka, ‘ world,’ by rash/ra, ‘ kingdom.’ 
Ultimately my translation and his explanation come to the same 
thing. 
He adds that the king upholds order by punishing, and 
a learned Brahmar/a by teaching. 
Regarding the excellence of 
these two, see also Manu IV, 135.
2. ‘ Internally conscious beings, i. e. trees and the like, which 
are immovable, but grow and decay. 
For such possess internal 
consciousness only, no corresponding external faculty of acting... . 
The existence of these, i. e. of men and the rest, depends upon, 
i, e. is subordinate to the king and to a Brahmawa deeply versed 
in the Vedas. 
How is that? As regards the Brahmawa, an 
offering which has been properly thrown into the fire reaches the 
sun; from the sun comes rain; from rain food is produced and 
thereon live the creatures. 
By this reasoning he is shown to 
be the cause of their existence. But the king is (also) the cause 
of their existence; for he punishes robbers and the like.’— 
Haradatta.
3. Haradatta takes prasfitiraksha«am, ‘ the protection of their 
offspring,’ as a copulative compound, and explains it by ‘ their 
prosperity (abhivrfddhi) and their protection.’ 
But a samahara- 
dvandva is here out of place.
4. Macnaghten, Mitdkshari I, 2, 27. 'By the word loka, “ the 
world,’’ are intended the laws of countries and the like, which may 
be learnt from the practice of the world.’— Haradatta. Regarding 
the Angas, see Apastamba II, 4, 8,10.

--- PAGE 277 ---
V III, 14. 
KIN G AND BRAHM ANA VERSED IN VEDAS. 
2 1 3
7. W ho looks to these (alone), and lives according 
to these,
8. W ho has been sanctified by the forty sacra­
ments (sawskira),
9. W ho is constantly engaged in the three occu­
pations '(prescribed for all twice-born men),
10. O r in the six (occupations prescribed specially 
for a Brdhmawa),
11. (And) who is well versed in the duties of 
daily life settled by the agreement (of those who 
know the law).
12. (Such a Brahma;^a) must be allowed by the 
king immunity from (the following) six (kinds of 
opprobrious treatm ent):
13. (I.e.) he must not be subjected to corporal 
punishment, he must not be imprisoned, he must 
not be fined, he must not be exiled, he must not be 
reviled, nor be excluded.
14. T he Garbhadhdna (or ceremony to cause 
conception), the Pu;;^savana (or ceremony to cause 
the birth of a male child), the Simantonnayana (or 
arranging the parting of the pregnant wife’s hair), 
the 6^atakarman (or ceremony on the birth of the
8. Regarding the forty sacraments, see below, Shtras 14-20.
9. Regarding the three occupations, common to all twice-born 
men, see below, X, I.
10. See below, X, 2.
11. The SamayaA’arika or SmSrta duties, are those taught in 
the Dharma-shtras and Smr/tis, see Apastamba I, i, i, i> and 
Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. loi.
12. See Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 41, 60, 66; Macnaghten, MitS- 
kshara I, 2, 27.
14. Regarding the Sawsk^ras mentioned in this Siltra, see 
Ajvalayana Gr/hya-sutra I, 13-23; 5'rihkhayana Gnhya-sHtra I, 
19-II, 5; PSraskara Gr/hya-sutra I, 13-II, 2.

--- PAGE 278 ---
214
GAUTAMA.
VIII, 15.
child), the ceremony of naming ‘the child, the first 
feeding, the iiTaula (or tonsure of the head of the 
child), the initiation,
15. T h e four vows (undertaken) for the study 
of the Veda,
16. T h e bath (on completion of the studentship), 
the taking o f a help-mate for the fulfilment of the 
religious duties, the performance of the five sacrifices 
to gods, manes, men, goblins, and Brahman,
17. A n d 
(the 
performance) 
of the following 
(sacrifices):
18. T h e seven kinds of PiLkaya^nas (or small 
sacrifices), viz. the Ash/aki, the Pdrva^^a (Sthili- 
paka, offered on the new and full moon days), the 
funeral oblations, the 6’rava«i, the Agrahdya^^i, the 
A'aitrl, and the A s v a y u ^ ;
ig. The four vows, as Haradatta states, are, according to 
AjvalSyana, the MahSndmntvrata, the Mahavrata, the Upanishad- 
vrata, and the Goddna; see Afvalayana 5 rauta-sfitra VIII, 14, 
where the first three are described in detail, and GnTiya-sfitra 
I, 22, 3, with the commentary thereon. 
Other Gr«hya-sfitras give 
more and different names, see H. Oldenberg, ^ankhSyana Grfhya- 
sfitra II, 11-12 (in Weber’s Ind. Stud. vol. XV), and Gobhila 
Grfhya-sutra III, i, 28—III, 2, 62.
16. Haradatta explains snana, ‘ the bath,’ by samSvartana, ‘ the 
ceremony on completion of the studentship.’ Regarding the five 
sacrifices, asually called the great sacrifices, see above, VII, 9 seq.
18. The various Pakaya^as, named here, are fully described by 
Ajvalayana Grfhya-sfitra II, i, i-II,’io, 8; Gobhila III, 10 seq.; 
Paraskara III, 3 seq. See also Max Muller, History of Ancient 
.Sanskrit Literature, p. 203. The AshMkfis are sacrifices offered on 
the eighth day of the dark halves of the winter months, and of ^hose 
of the dewy season, i. e. Kartika, Mfirgariras, Pausha, and Magha. 
The .Srfivawt is offered on the full moon day of the month of 
Aravawa, the Agrahfiyawi on the fourteenth, or on the full moon day 
of Mdrgariras, the A"aitri on the full moon day of the Aaitra, and 
the Afvayu.gi on the full moon day of the month Ajvayu^a or 
Afvina.

--- PAGE 279 ---
V III, 2g. 
KIN G AN D BRAHM ANA VERSED IN VEDAS. 
2 1 5
19. T h e seven kinds of Havirya/nas, viz. the 
Agny^dheya, the Agnihotra, the Dar^apaurwamisas, 
the Agrayawa, the ATiturmasyas, the Nirhof/zapa^u- 
bandha, and the Sautrdma^i;
20. T h e seven kinds of Soma-sacrifices, viz. the 
AgnisWoma, the Atyagnish/oma, the Ukt^ya, the 
Sho^ajin, the Atiratra, and the Aptorydm a; *
2 1. These are the forty sacraments.
Now (follow) the eight good qualities of the
22,
soul,
23
anqe,
(Viz.) compassion on all creatures, forbear- 
freedom from anger, purity, quietism, aus­
piciousness, freedom from avarice, and freedom from 
covetousness.
24. H e who is sanctified by these forty sacra­
ments, but whose soul is*destitute o f the eight good 
qualities, will not be united with Brahman, nor does 
he reach his heayen.
25. But he, forsooth, who is sanctified by a few 
only of these forty sacraments, and whose soul is 
endowed with the eight excellent qualities, will be 
united with Brahman, and will dwell in his heaven.
19-20. The Havirya^nas and Soma-sacrifices are described in 
the Brahmawas and .Jratita-sfitras. Havis denotes any kind of food 
used for oblations, such as clarified butter, milk, rice, meat, &c.
22. Apastam ba I, 8, 23, 6.
23. Haradatta explains mangalya, ‘ auspiciousness,’ to mean 
‘ always doing what is praised (by good men) and avoiding what 
is blamed by them.’ Anayasa, ‘quietism,’ means, according to him, 
‘ avoiding to undertake that which causes pain to oneself, even 
though it be a duty.’

--- PAGE 280 ---
2 I 6
GAUTAM A,
IX, I.
C h apter IX .
1. Such (a man) shall bathe, after (having ful­
filled) the law (regarding studentship), take unto 
him a wife, and, fulfilling the duties of a householder 
which have been declared above, in addition obey 
the following ordinances :
2. (H e shall be) always pure (and) sweet-smelling 
(and) bathe frequently.
IX. I. Apastamba I, ii, 30,1-4. 
Haradatta says that the ex­
pression sa, ‘ such (a man),’ refers to the king and to the Brahma«a 
deeply versed in the Vedas, who have been described in the pre­
ceding chapter. 
My MSS. insert between this and the following 
one another Shtra, which has been left out in Professor Stenzler’s 
edition. It seems to me that it is absolutely required, and I there­
fore insert it here, together with Haradatta’s comment, according 
to my best copy, P.
Gautama: ‘ (And) a Snataka (i. e. a person who has completed 
his studentship, but has not yet taken a wife, shall act thus).’ Hara­
datta : ‘ It must be understood that the word “ and ” has been left 
out. (The meaning is) : “ And a Snataka shall obey the following 
ordinances.” 
If this Shtra were not given, those ordinances would 
have to be obeyed after marriage only ; and if the preceding Shtra 
(i) had not been given, before marriage only, because the term 
Snataka is usually employed in that (sense) only. For this reason 
both (Shtras) have been given. Hence, though a man may not enter 
another order, he shall, after taking the bath (on completion of his 
studentship), obey these ordinances during his whole life. As here 
(Shtra i) the word sa, “ such a man,” is used, a Kshatriya and 
a Br^hmawa only must necessarily obey the rules prescribed for 
a Snataka and perform a penance for breaking them; and the 
penance for breaking the rules prescribed for a Snataka is fasting.
■ This is (the object of the insertion of the word sa, “ such (a man).” 
But, if a Vairya follows them, (his reward will be) prosperity; if 
he breaks them, he need not perform a penance. 
With respect to 
this matter another Smn’ti says; “ The penance which is prescribed 
for a breach of the Snataka laws, must be performed by a Kshatriya 
and a Brahmawa alone, never by (men of) the other (caste).” ’
2. Manu IV, 35.

--- PAGE 281 ---
IX, 12.
TH E DUTIES OF A SNATAKA.
217
3. If he possesses wealth, he shall not be dressed 
in old or dirty clothes;
4. N or shall he wear dyed or sumptuous gar­
ments, nor such as have been worn (before) by 
others,
5. N or a garland and shoes (that have been worn 
by others).
6. (H e may wear a cast-off garment) which has 
been washed, if he is unable (to afford a new one).
7. H e shall not allow his beard to grow without 
a (sufficient) reason.
8. H e shall not carry water and fire at the same 
time.
9. H e shall not drink out of his joined hands.
10. H e shall not sip water standing, nor (shall he 
sip) water drawn up (from a well),
11. N or (water) that is offered by a .Sddra or 
an impure man, or that has been taken up with 
one hand.
12. Facing or within sight of wind, fire, Brdh- 
mawas, the sun, water, (images of the) gods, and
3-4. Apastamba I, ii, 30,10-13. 
5. Manu IV, 66.
6. According to Haradatta the Same rule applies to garlands 
and shoes.
7. Manu IV, 35. 
‘ The expression “ his beard” includes by
implication the nails and the rest......... As he says “ without a suf­
ficient reason,” he shall allow his beard to grow during the preg­
nancy of his wife and on other occasions. 
With respect to this 
matter they quote the following verse : “ In the sixth year and in 
the sixteenth year, likewise in the year of his marriage and during 
the pregnancy of his wife, he shall avoid the use of a razor.” ’— 
Haradatta.
8. Apastamba II, 5, 12, 9. 
9. Manu IV, 63.
10. Apastamba I, 5,16, i.
11. Apastamba I, I, 4, 21; 1,5,16,3.
12. Apastamba I, II, 30,18-20.

--- PAGE 282 ---
2 i 8
bAlfTAMA,
IX, 13.
• 
• 
*
COWS he shall not eject urine or f^ces or other 
impurities. 
*,
13. H e shall not stretch out his feet towards 
those divine beings.
14. 'H e shall not remove urine or faeces with 
leaves, clods of earth, or stones.
15. H e shall not stand upon ashes, hair, nail, 
(parings), husks (of grain), pot-sherds, or impure 
substances.
id. H e shall not converse with barbarians, im-. 
pure or wicked men. 
^
. 17. If he has conversed (with such persons), he 
shall meditate bn virtuous (m en);
18. O r he may speak with a Brdhma«a.
‘19, H e shall call (a cow that is) not a milch-cow, 
a coV, that will become a milch-cow.
20. 
(A n event) that is not lucky (he shall call) 
lucky.
2 1 ..(In speaking of) a skull (he shall use the 
word) bhagala instead of kapila,
22. 
(And in speaking of) a rainbow, mawidhanus. 
(the jewelled bow).instead o f indradhanus (Indra’s 
bow).
13. Apastamba I, ii, 30, 22.
14. Apastamba I, ii, 30, 21. 
Haradatta remarks that some 
explain losh/^a, ‘ a clod of earth,’ by kapSla, ‘ a pot-sherd.’
ig. Apastamba II, 8, 20, 11. Kapala, ‘pot-sherds,’ niay also 
mean ‘skull-bones.’
16. Manu IV, 57. 
Haradatta says that only a conversation, 
properly so called, is forbidden, not to ask barbarians &c. about 
the road and similar matters.
18. Compare the analogous case, mentioned Apastamba I, 3,
9. 13- 
^
19. Apastamba I; II, 3 1,1 i - i 2.
22. Apastamba I, ii, 31, 18.

--- PAGE 283 ---
IX, 32.
T H E D U T IE S O F A SN A T A K A .
219
23. L et him not announce it to others, if a cow 
suckles (her calf),
24. Nor let him prevent her (from doing it).
'25. A fter conjugal intercourse he shall at once 
clean himself.
26. 
Let him not recite the daily portion o f the 
Veda (lying) on that couch (on which he lies with 
: his wife). 
*
2 7. And when he has studied during, the third 
watch of the night, He shall not again retire to r,est.
28. Let him not have intercourse with his wife 
when she is* ill,
29. N or during her courses;
30. Nor let him embrace her (during that period)*,
31. N or an unmarried female.
32. H e shall avoid to blow the fire witlv his 
mouth, to contend with words, to show himself 
covered with perfumed ointments or wearing gar­
lands, to scratch himself with any impure (imple­
ment), to tak^ his meals 'with his wife, to look at 
(a woman) who is anointing herself, to enter (his 
village) by a back-gate, to wash one foot with the
23. Apastamba I, ii, 30, 10. 
Haradatta remarks that the pro­
hibition does not extend to those cases where the Vedic ritual 
requires' the fact to be pointed out. 
He is, of course, right in 
making ‘this statement, as an express injunction of the Aruti always 
overrides .the rules of the Smrfti.
24. Haradatta adds that this and the preceding Shtras include
by implication the cases where a cow does damage in a field; see 
Apastamba 1, 11, 31, 9. 
<
25. Apastamba II, I, I, 2i-II, I, 2,1.
26. Apastamba I, II, 32, 3. 
27. Apastamba I, ii, 32,15.
29-30. Manu IV, 40. 
^
32. Apastamba I, 5, 15, 20; I, i i, 32- 51 Manu IV, 43; Apa­
stamba I, II, 3 1 , 23; Manu IV, 7 4 ; Apastamba I, i i, 32, 2 6 ; 
1,11,32,25.

--- PAGE 284 ---
220
G A U T A M A .
IX, 33-
Other, to eat food deposited on a chair, to cross 
a river swimming, to ascend trees and dangerous 
(places), or to descend therefrom, and to imperil 
his life (in any other manner).
33. Let him not ascend a ship (of) doubtful 
(solidity).
34. H e shall protect himself by all (possible) 
means.
35. In the day-time he shall not wrap up his 
head while walking ab o u t;
36. But at night he shall cover it,
37. And while voiding urine and faeces.
38. (Let him) not (ease nature) without (first) 
covering the ground (with grass or the like),
39. N or close to his dwelling,
40. N or on ashes, on cow-dung, in a ploughed 
field, in the shade (of a tree), on a road, in beautiful 
(spots).
41. L et him eject both urine and faeces, facing 
the north in the day-time,
42. A nd in the twilight,
43. But at night, facing the south.
44. L et him avoid to use a seat, clogs, a stick 
for cleaning the teeth (and other implements) made 
o f PalaLa-wood.
45. W ith shoes on (his feet), he shall not eat, 
sit down, salute, or worship (the gods).
33. Apastamba I, ii, 31, 27.
35. 
Apastamba I, ii, 30,14. Haradatta adds that he may wrap 
up his head while sitting down and in walking when the sun or 
rain annoys him.
38. Apastamba I, IX, 30,15. 
39. Apastamba I, ii, 31, 2.
40. Apastamba I, II, 30,16-18. 
41, Apastamba I, ii, 31, i.
43. 
Apastamba I, I I , 31, 3, 
44. Apastamba I, ii, 32, 9.
45- 
Apastamba I, 4, i4> 22.

--- PAGE 285 ---
IX, 53.
T H E D U T IE S OF A SN A T A K A .
221
46. Let him not pass idly (any part of the day, 
be it) morning, midday, or evening; but according 
to his ability (he shall make each useful) by the 
acquisition of spiritual merit or of wealth, and by 
taking his pleasure.
47. But among those (three aims of human life). 
he shall chiefly attend to the acquisition o f spiritual 
merit. 
•
48. Let him not look at a naked woman wedded 
to another man.
49. Let him not draw a seat towards himself with 
his foot.
50. H e shall keep his organ, his stomach, his 
hands, his feet, his .tongue, and his eyes under due 
restraint.
51. Let him avoid to cut, to break, to scratch, 
and to crush (anything), or to make (his joints) 
crack, without a (sufficient) reason.
52. Let him not step over a rope (to which) a 
calf (is tied).
53. Let him not be a stay-at-home.
54. Let him not go to (perform) a sacrifice with­
out being chosen (to officiate as priest).
55. But at his pleasure (he may go) to see it.
46. Colebrooke, MitaksharS II, i, 22. 
‘ He shall use the 
morning, according to his ability, for acts tending to the* acquisi­
tion of spiritual merit, such as reciting the Vedas; the middle part 
of the ’day for the acquisition of wealth; and the evening for 
scenting himself) adorning himself with garlands and the like acts 
giving pleasure.’— Haradatta.
47. Apastamba I, 7, 20,1-4.
48. Manu IV, 53.
50. Apastamba II, 2, 5, 19 ; Manu IV, 175, 177.
51. Apastamba I, ii, 32, 28; II, 8, 20, 13.
52. Apastamba I, IT, 3 1,15 . Haradatta remarks that the word 
‘ calf’ is used to designate any animal of the bovine species.

--- PAGE 286 ---
222
•
G A U T A M A .
IX, 56.
I 56. Let. him not eat food (that he has placed) in 
his lap,
57. N or what has been brought at night by a 
servant.
58. H e shall not eat (substances) that have ac­
quired strength (by standing), such as milk from 
which 
the cream has separated, butter, oil-cake, 
buttermilk, and the like.
' 59, But he shall take his meals in the morning 
and in the evening, blessing his food, not grumbling 
at it.
60. H e shall never sleep naked at n igh t;
■ ll 5 i. N or shall bathe (naked);
62. A nd he shall' perform whatever (else) aged 
(Brahma;/as), of subdued senses, who 
been pro­
perly obedient (to their teachers), who are free from 
deceit, covetousness, and error, and who know the 
Vedas, declare (to be right).
63. In order to acquire wealth and for the sake 
of security he may go to a ruling (king),
56. Manu IV, 63. 
57. Apastamba I, 5, 16, 31.
58. Apastamba II, 8, 18, i; II, 8, 20, 10. Haradatta adds that 
this rule has been inserted here instead of in the chapter on for­
bidden food in order to indicate that its breach must be expiated 
hy the penance prescribed for a breach of the Snataka’s vow, 
not by that prescribed for eating forbiddenfood.
59. Apastamba II, i, i, 2; II, 2, 3, ii.
60. Manu IV, 75. 
61. Manu IV, 6r.
62. Apastamba I, n , 32, -29 ; I, 7, 20, 8. Haradatta adds that 
the plural is used in the above Sdtra in order to indicate that many 
Brahmawas must be unanimous regarding the practices to be 
followed.
63. Manu IV, 33; X, 113. 
‘ For the sake of these objects 
he may go to a ruler, i. e. a king, without cringing, because the 
preposition adhi is used (in the text, and) adhi denotes mastership 
(Pawini I, 4, 97). 
The meaning that he shall go (as becomes) 
an independent man.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 287 ---
IX, 73-
T H E D U T IE S OF A S N A T A K A .
223
64. (But) to no other (being) except the gods, his 
Gurus, and righteous (Brahma?;as).
65. H e shall seek to dwell in a place where fire­
wood, water, fodder, Ku^a grass, 
(materials for 
making) garlands and roads exist in abundance, 
which is chiefly inhabited by Aryans, which is rich 
in industrious (men), and which is governed by a 
righteous (ruler).
66. H e shall pass excellent (beings and things), 
auspicious (objects), temples of the gods, cross-roads, 
and the like with his right turned towards them.
67. T h e rule for times of distress (is, that) he 
shall mentally perform all (that is required by the 
rule of) conduct.
68. H e shall always speak the truth.
69. H e shall conduct himself (as becomes) an 
Aryan.
70. 
H e shall instruct virtuous (men only).
71. H e shall follow the rules 
o f purification 
taught (in the 6’dstras).
72. H e shall take pleasure in the (study of the) 
Veda.
73. He shall never hurt (any being), he shall be
65. Apastamba I, 5, 15, 2a ; I, ii, 32, 18. 
Aryans, i. e. Brah- 
mawas, Kshatriyas, and Vaijyas. .
66. Mann IV, 39. 
‘ A cow, a Brahmawa, a well-known tree, 
and the like are called excellent (beings or things). An auspicious 
(object), i. e. a filled jar and the like.’-^Haradatta.
67. Haradatta observes that this rule refers to cases where, 
being in a huny, one cannot show one’s reverence in the manner 
described in the preceding Sfitra.
68. Manu IV, 138, 173, 236.
70. hlanu IV, 80-81.
71. Purification is here again mentioned in order (to indicate 
that Sndtaka must pay) particular attention to it.
72. Manu IV, 147-149- 
73- 
IV, 2, 238, 246.

--- PAGE 288 ---
224 ‘
G A U T A M A .
IX, 7 4 -
gentle, (yet) firm, ever restrain his senses, and be 
liberal.
74. 
A Sndtaka who 
conducts 
himself in this 
manner 'will liberate his parents, his ancestors, and 
descendants from evil, and never fall from Brah­
man’s heaven.
C h apter X .
1. (The lawful 
occupations 
common) 
to (all) 
twice-born men are studying the (Veda), offering 
sacrifices* (for their own sake), and giving (alms).
2. Teaching, performing sacrifices for others, and 
receiving alms (are) the additional (occupations) of a 
Brahmawa..
3. But the former (three) are obligatory (on him).
4. Instruction in the Veda (may be given) with­
out the above-mentioned (vows and ceremonies) in 
case a teacher, blood relations, friends or Gurus 
(receive it), and in case (the Veda) is exchanged for 
money or learning.
74. Manu II, 260.
X. I. Twice-boramen, i.e. Brdhmawas, Kshatriyas, and Vaijyas. 
Haradatta says that some believe the term ‘ twice-born ’ to have 
been used in order to indicate that the three occupations may be 
lawfully followed after the second birth, i.e. the initiation only. 
But he declares that alms may be given even by an uninitiated 
/ ryan, while studying the Veda and sacrificing are specially for- 
1-' Hen to him.
2. Apastamba II, g, 10, 4.
3. Manu X, 76. 
‘ The former, i.e.- the three beginning with 
studying (Sutra i), must necessarily be followed. 
If he neglects 
them, he commits sin; if he follows them, he will be exalted. 
But the other occupations, teaching, &c., shall be followed if 
there is occasion for them. 
No sin is committed by neglecting 
them, nor any greatness gained by following them. 
They are 
merely means of livelihood.’— Haradatta.
4. Apastamba I, 4, 13, 14-17. 
The expression ‘ above-men-

--- PAGE 289 ---
X, 12. 
L A W F U L O CCU PATIO N S A N D LIV E LIH O O D . 
225
5. Agriculture and trade (are) also (lawful for 
a Brdhmawa) provided he does not do the work 
himself,
6. Likewise lending money at interest.
7. T o protect all created beings is the additional 
(occupation) of a king,
8. And to inflict lawful punishments.
9. H e shall support (those) KSrotriyas, (who are) 
BrShmawas,
10. And people unable to work, (even if they are) 
not Br^hma;^as,
11. A nd those who are free from taxes,
12. And (needy) temporary students.
tioned ’ refers to the whole of the rules regarding a pupil’s conduct 
given above, I, 52-II, 51. 
It is difficult to understand what is 
intended by ‘ the exchange of the Veda for wealth or money,’ if 
it is- not the bhr/takidhySpana or teaching for money which Manu 
III, 156 blames so severely. 
It seems to me unlikely that Gau­
tama means simply to sanction this practice. It is more probable 
that his rule refers to the case of Brahmawas in distress, who 
avail themselves of the permission given above, VII, 4.
5-6. These rules which allow Brahmawas to be gentlemen 
farmers and sleeping partners in mercantile or banking firms, 
managed by Vaijyas, do not occur in other Smrftis. But they 
agree with the practice follow'ed at present in many parts of India, 
and the praise bestowed in Vedic works on those who present land 
to Br&hma«as as well as the numerous ancient land grants show 
that from early times many Erahmaz/as were holders of land, which 
as a rule, was cultivated by Vfidras.
7-8. Apastamba II, 5, 10, 6 ; Manu VII, 27.
9. Apastamba II, 10, 25, 11 ; Manu VII, 135.
IT. Haradatta takes this Sfitra differently. 
He says: ‘ The 
immunity from taxes which has been granted to" Brahmawas and 
others by former kings he shall maintain in the same manner 
as formerly.’ 
But I think that ‘ akara ’ must be taken as a Bahu- 
vrihi compound, and is used to designate widows, orphans, 
ascetics, &c.; ^ee Apastamba II, 10, 26, 10-17.
12. Haradatta observes that others explain upakurva«a, ‘ tem- 
[2] 
Q

--- PAGE 290 ---
226
G A U T A M A .
X, 13.
13. A nd (to take) measures for ensuring victory 
(is another duty of a king),
14. Especially when danger (from foes threatens 
the kingdom );
15. And (to learn) the management of chariots and 
the use of the bow (is a further duty of the king),
16. A s well as to stand firm in battle and not to 
turn back,
1-7, No sin (is committed) by injuring or slaying 
(foes) in battle,
18. 
Excepting those who have lost their horses, 
charioteers, or arms, those who join th'eir hands (in 
supplication), those who flee with flying hair, those 
who sit down with averted faces, those who have 
climbed (in flight) on eminences or trees, messen­
gers, and those who declare themselves to be cows 
or Brahma^zas.
^ 
19. If another K shatriya is supported by (the 
king), he shall follow the same occupations as'his 
(master).
20. T h e victor shall receive the booty gained in 
battle.
2 1. But chariots and animals used for riding (be­
long) to the king.
porary students,’ opposed to naish//nka, ‘ permatient students,’ to 
mean ‘ men who benefit the people,’ i. e. physicians and the like. 
13. Manu VII, 103-110, 160-200; X^iip.
16. Manu VII, 87-89; X, 119; YS^fiavalkya I, 233.
17-18. Apastamba II, 5, 10, ii. 
Persons who declare them­
selves to be cows or Br4htna«as become inviolable on account 
of the sacred character of the beings they personate. 
Historical 
instances are narrated where conquered kings were forced to 
appear before their victors, holding grass in their mouths or 
dancing like peacocks in order to save their live^
20. 
Manu VII, 96.

--- PAGE 291 ---
X, 30- 
L A W F U L O CCU PA TIO N S A N D LIV E LIH O O D . 
1 2 ']
22. And a preferential share, except when .the 
booty has been gained in single-combat.
23. But the king shall equitably divide (all) other 
(spoils).
24. Cultivators (must) pay to the king a tax 
(amounting to) one tenth, one eighth, or one sixth 
(of the produce).
25. Some declare, that (the tax) on cattle and 
gold (amounts to) one fiftieth (of the stock),
26. In the case of merchandise one twentieth 
(must be paid by the seller) as duty,
2 7. (And) of roots, fruits, flowers, medicinal herbs, 
honey, meat, grass, and firewood one sixtieth.
28. For it is the duty (of the king) to protect the 
(tax-payers).
29. But to (the collection of) these (taxes) he 
shall always pay particular attention.
30. H e shall live on the surplus.
22-23. Manu VII, py.
24. ]\Ianu VII, 130. 
The amount depends on the nature of 
the soil and the manner of cultivation.
25. Manu V II, 130. 
T h e above translation follows Haradatta’s 
explanation, while Sir W . Jones’ rendering of Manu gives a dif­
ferent meaning to the identical words..
26. Manu VII, 127. 
27. Manu X, 120.
28. Manu VII, 128. 
29. Manu VII, 128, 139.
30. Haradatta takes this Sfitra differently. 
He says, ‘ Adhika, 
“ additional,” means the money which is paid on account of (the 
additional occupations) which have been explained above (Shtra 
7 seq.) 
“ To protect all created beings,” &c. 
Thereon shall he 
live, he himself, his servants, his elephants, horses, and his other 
(animals).’ If this explanation is adopted, the Shtra ought to be 
translated thus, ‘ He shall live on (the taxes paid for his) additional 
(occupations).’ 
It seems, however, more probable that Gautama 
means to sayjthat the king shall live on the surplus which remains 
after providing for the external and internal security of the kingdom,
Q 2

--- PAGE 292 ---
228
G A U T A M A .
X,.3r.
' 
31. Each artizan shall monthly do one (day’s)
work (for the king).
32. H ereby (the taxes payable by) those who 
support themselves by personal labour have been 
explained,
33. A nd (those payable by) owners of ships and 
carts.
• 
34. H e must feed these (persons while they work
for him).
35. T h e merchants shall (each) give (every month 
one) article of merchandise for less than the market 
value.
36. Those who find' lost (property) the owner pf 
which is not (known), shall announce it to the king.
37. T h e king shall cause it to be proclaimed (by 
the public crier), and (if the owner does not appear) 
hold it in his custody for a year.
38. Afterwards one fourth (of the value goes) to 
the finder (and) the remainder to the king.
39. A (man becomes) owner by inheritance, pur­
chase, partition, seizure, or finding.
and that his object is to forbid the application of the whole revenue 
to the personal expenses of the ruler.
31. Manu VII, 131.
32. Haradatta says that wood-carriers, dancers, and the like are 
intended.
36-38. Manu VIII, 30-36; Ya^Savalkya II, 33, 173; Mac- 
naghten, Mitakshara V, i, 6.
39. Manu X, 115; Mayfikha IV, i, 2; Colebrooke, Mitakshara 
I, I, 8; III, Digest IV, 22. 
‘ Partition, i. e. the division (of 
the estate) between brothers and other (coparceners); seizure,
i. e. the appropriation before (others) of forest trees and other 
tilings which have no owner; finding, i. e. the appropriation of 
lost property the owner of which is unknown, such as ti-easure- 
trove.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 293 ---
X, 50. 
L A W F U L ,O C C U P A T IO N S A N D LIV E LIH O O D . 
2 2 9
40. Acceptance is for a Brdhmawa an additional 
(mode o f acquisition) ;
41. Conquest for a Kshatriya;
42. Gain (by labour) for a Vai^ya or vSlldra.
43. Treasure-trove is the property o f .the king,
( 44. Excepting (such as is found) by a Br^hma«a 
who lives according to (the law).
45. ,Some declare, that a finder of a non-Brih- 
manical caste even, wjho announces (his find to the 
king), shall obtain one sixth (of the value).
46. H aving recovered property stolen by thieves, 
he shall return it to the ow ner;
47. O r (if the stolen property is not recovered) 
he shall pay (its value) out of his treasury.
48. T he property o f infants must be protected 
until they attain their majority or complete their 
studentship.
49. T he additional (occupations) o f a Vai^-ya are, 
agriculture, trade, tending cattle, and lending money 
at interest.
50. T he 6’udra (belongs to) the fourth caste, 
which has one birth (only).
43. Manu VIII, 38 j Ya^fiavalkya II, 34; Macnaghten, Mitd- 
ksharS, V, i, 10.
44. Manu V m , 37 ; Ya^Savalkya II, 34 ; Macnaghten loc. cit.
46. Manu VIII, 40; Y^>-fiavalkya II, 36 j Macnaghten, MitS- 
kshar^ V, i, 14.
47. Apastamba II, 10, 26, 8; Macnaghten loc. cit.
48. Manu VIII, 27.
49. Apastamba II, 5, 10, 7.
50. Apastamba I, i, i, 5; Manu X, 4. Between this Shtra and 
the next, my MSS. insert an additional one, not found in Professor 
Stenzler’s edition, .Shdrasyapi nishekapu/wsavanfisimantonnayana^a- 
takarmaniinakara n opanishkramawannapr^ana k aulanyamantraka« i 
3'athakdlam• upadish/ani/i, ‘ for the Afidra also the Nisheka (or 
impregnation), the Puwsavana (or rite for securing male offspring).

--- PAGE 294 ---
2.;0
G A U T A M A ,
X, 51-
t 
51. F o r him also (are prescribed) truthfulness, 
meekness, and purity,
52. Some (declare), that instead o^ sipping water, 
he shall wash his hands and feet.
53. (H e shall also offer) the funeral oblations,
54. Maintain those depending upon him,
55. L ive with his wife (only),
56. A n d serve the higher (castes).
57. From them he shall seek to obtain his liveli­
hood,
58. (H e shall use their) cast-off shoes, umbrellas, 
garments, and mats (for sitting on),
59. (And) eat the remnants of their food ;
60. A n d (he may) live by (practising) mechanical 
a rts;
61. A n d the A rya under whose protection he 
places himself, must support him even if he (be­
comes) unable to work.
the Simantonnayana (or arranging the parting of a pregnant 
wife), the Gatakarman (or ceremony on the birth of the child), 
the name-giving, the first walk in the open air, the first feeding, 
and the ^aula (or tpnsure of the child's head) are prescribed 
to be performed at the proper periods, but without the recita­
tion of sacred texts.’ 
But I am inclined to consider it spurious: 
firstly, because there is no proper commentary; secondly, because 
the enumeration of the Sawskaras given here does not agree with 
that given above, V III, 14; and thirdly, because, according to the 
practice of Gautama, this Sfitra should begin with ‘ tasyapi’ instead 
o f with ‘ ^■fidrasyapi,’ and the ‘ tasySpi’ in the next would become 
superfluous. 
The rule agrees however with Manu X, 63, 127.
51. Manu IX , 335. 
53. Manu X, 127-128.
55. ‘ Another commentator explains the Sutra to mean that 
he shall live with his wife only, and never enter another order 
(i.e. never become » student, hermit, or ascetic).’— Haradatta.
56. Apastamba I, i, i, 6 -7 ; Manu X, 121-123.
57- Manu X, 124. 
58-59, Manu X, 125.
60. Manu X, 99.

--- PAGE 295 ---
XI, 3-
T H E D U T IE S OF A K IN G .
231
62. And a man of higher caste (who is his master 
and has fallen into distress must be maintained) by 
him.
63. His hoard' shall serve this purpose.
64. If .permission has been given to him, he 
may use the exclamation na.ma.A (adoration) as his 
Mantra.
65. Some (declare), that he himself may offer the/ 
Pakaya^has.
66. And all men must serve those who belong to 
higher castes.
67.. 
If Aryans and non-Aryans interchange their 
occupations and conduct (the one taking that of the 
other, there is) equality (between them).
C h a p t e r X I.
1. T h e king is master of all, with the exception 
of Brahmams.
2. (H e shall be) holy in acts and speech,
3. Fully instructed in the threefold (sacred science) 
and in logic,
65. Manu X, 127. 
Regarding the Pakaya^ias, see above, 
V III, 18.
67. ‘ There is equality between them, i.e. the one need not 
serve the other. A Audra need not serve even a Brahma/n, (much 
less) any other (twice-born man) who lives the life of a non-Aryan 
(5'fidra). 
A 5 hdra, even, who conducts himself like an Aryan 
must not be despised by men of other castes, who follow the 
occupations of non-Aryans, on account of his -inferior birth.’— 
Haradatta.
X L I. M acnaghten, M itakshar^ I, i , a y ; - M anu IX , 3 13 -3 2 2 ; 
Weber, Ind. Stud. X , 29, 60.
2. Manq V I I , 26. ‘ Holy in acts,’ i.e. constantly acting in con­
formity with the Adstras; ‘ holy in speech,’ i. e. when administering 
justice he shall not speak partially.
3. Manu VII, 43; Y^fiavalkya I, 310. 
Haradatta thinks that

--- PAGE 296 ---
232
“Ga u t a m a .
XI, 4.
4. Pure, of subdued senses, surrounded by com­
panions possessing excellent qualities and by the 
means (for upholding his rule),
5. H e shall be impartial towards his subjects;
6. A nd he shall do (what is) good for them.
7. A ll, excepting Brahma;«as, shall worship him 
who is seated on a higher seat, (while they them­
selves sit on a) lower (one).
8. T h e (Brihmawas), also, shall honour him.
9. H e shall protect the castes and orders in ac­
cordance with ju stice;
10. A nd those who leave (the path of) duty, he
shall lead back (to it). 
i
11. F or it is declared (in the Veda) that he ob­
tains a share o f the spiritual merit (gained by his 
subjects).
I, 
2. A nd he shall select as his domestic priest 
(purohit'a) a Brdhma^^^a who is learned (in the Vedas),
the term ‘ the threefolcf sacred science includes the fourth Veda 
also, because it consists chiefly of i?«)4as and Ya^us formulas.’
4. Manu VII, 30-31; Y%«avalkya I, 354 ; Apastamba II, 11, 
27, 18. 
‘ Of subdued senses, i.e. free from the (seven) vices 
(common among kings), i. e. sensuality, gambling, hunting, drink­
ing, &c.’— Haradatta. 
The means (upS.ya) are those mentioned 
by Ya^Ravalkya I, 345~346.
5. Manu VII, 80 ; Ya^avalkya I, 333-
6. ‘ And he shall do what is good, i. e. dig tanks, build embank­
ments and bridges &c. for them, i. e. his subjects.’— Haradatta.
7. ‘ (On a) lower (one), i. e. on the ground only.’— Haradatta.' 
This is still the custom in native courts, where, however, Brah- 
mawas, as a rule, must also sit on the floor.
8. ‘ Honour him,’ i. e. worship him by invoking blessings on 
him and the like.
9. Manu VII, 35. 
10. Ya^ilavalkya I, 360.
II. Manu VIII, 304; Y^avalkya I, 334.
12. 
ManuVir, 78; Yd^fiavalkya 1,312. 
Haradatta e.xplains 
vaksampanna, ‘eloquent,’ by ‘one who knows Sanskrit.’ According

--- PAGE 297 ---
XI, i8.
T H E D U T IE S OF A KIN G.
233
of noble family, eloquent, handsome, of (a suitable) 
age, and of a virtuous disposition, who lives right­
eously and who is austere.
13. W ith his assistance he shall fulfil his religious 
duties.
14. F or it is declared (in the V ed a ): ‘ Kshatriyas, 
who are assisted by Brahma/^as, prosper and do not 
fall into distress.’
15. H e shall, also, take heed of that which astro­
logers and interpreters of omens tell (him).
16. 'F o r some (declare), that the acquisition of 
wealth and security depend upon that.
17. H e shall perform in the fire of the hall the 
rites ensuring prosperity which are connected with 
expiations (^^.nti), festivals, a prosperous march, long 
life, and auspiciousness; as well as those that are 
intended to cause enmity, to subdue (enemies), to 
destroy (them) by incantations, and to cause their 
misfortune.
18. Officiating priests (shall perform) the other 
(sacrifices) according to the precepts (of the Veda).
to the same, ‘ the (suitable) age ’ is the prime of life, when men 
are neither too young nor too o ld 
‘ Austere’ is interpreted to 
mean ‘ not given to sensual enjoyments.’
13. Manu VII, 78. 
14. i'atapatha-brfihmawa IV, i, 4, 4-6.
17. Apastamba II, 10, 25, 4, 7. 
Aantis, ‘ expiations,’ are rites 
intended to avert an impending misfortune which is announced by an 
evil omen. 
‘ Festivals ’ are, according to Haradatta, wedding-days 
and the like; ‘ rites connected with auspiciousness' are, according 
to the same, rites on entering a new dwelling and the like. Hara­
datta further remarks that, though, according to the text, the king 
must perform these.rites, he is, in reality, only to give the neces­
sary orders, and to furnish the means for their performance, white 
the Purohita is to officiate as priest. 
He adds, that another com­
mentator asserts that ‘ the Purohita,’ not ‘ the king,' must be taken 
as the subject of the sentence.
18. Manu VII, 78-79; Y a^ fiavalkya I, 313. 
Haradatta says

--- PAGE 298 ---
234
G A U T A M A ,
XI, 19.
19. H is administration o f justice (shall be regu­
lated by) the Veda, the Institutes of the Sacred Law, 
the Ahgas, and the Pura;za,
20. T h e laws of countries, castes, and families, 
which are not opposed to the (sacred) records, (have) 
also authority.
.21, Cultivators, traders, herdsmen, money-lenders, 
and artizans (have authority to lay down rules) for 
their respective classes.
22. H aving learned the (state of) affairs from
those who * (in each class) have authority (to' speak 
he shall give) the legal decision. 
,
23. Reasoning is a means for arriving at the 
truth.
24. Coming to a conclusion through that, he shalL 
decide properly.
that by the ‘ other ’ sacrifices, both Grzbya and .Srauta rites 
are meant. 
I think that the latter are chiefly intended, as the 
Sawiskaras are included under the rites o f festive days, mentioned- 
in the preceding Sutra.
19. The Angas, i. e. the six auxiliary branches of learning 
mentioned above, VIII, 5. My best copy inserts ‘ the Upavedas’ 
after the Ahgas. But the words upaveda.^ and dharma-fastrawi, ‘ the 
institutes of law,' are probably interpolations. 
For the latter are 
already included by the term Ahga, as part of the Kalpa.
20. Apastamba II, 6, ifi, i; Manu VII, 203; VIII, 41, 46; 
Ya^Bavalkya I, 342. ‘ The (sacred) records, i. e. the Vedas and the 
rest.’— Haradatta.
2 3 . ‘ Having learned, i, e. having heard and considered, from 
them, i. e. from men of those classes, according to their authority,
i. e. from those who in each class are authorised to give decisions, 
the (state of) affairs, i. e. the peculiar customs, the legal decision 
must be given in accordance with that which they declare to be 
the rule in their community.’— Haradatta.
23. Manu ,VIII, 44; XII, 105-106; Macnaghten, Mitakshard 
II, 8, 8. 
Haradatta remarks, that this Sfitra refers to the case 
where the spokesmen of a guild may be suspected of partiality.

--- PAGE 299 ---
XI, 32-
T rIE D U T IE S OF A K IN G .
235
25. IF (the evidence) is conflicting, he shall learn 
(the truth) from (BrMima«as) who are well versed in 
the threefold sacred 
lore, and give his decision 
(accordingly).
26. For, (if he acts) thus, blessings will attend 
him (in this world and the next).
27. It has been declared in the V eda: ‘ Brdhma«as, 
United with Kshatriyas, uphold gods, manes, and 
men.’
28. T h ey declare, that (the word) da«^/a (rule or 
punishment) is derived from (the verb) damayati (he 
restrains); therefore )ie shall restrain those who do 
not restrain themselves.
29. (Men of) the (several) castes and orders who 
•always 
live according to their duty enjoy after 
death the rewards of their works, and by virtue of a 
remnant of their (merit) they are born again in ex­
cellent countries, castes, and families, (endowed) with 
beauty, long life, learning in the Vedas, (virtuous) 
conduct, wealth, happiness, and wisdom.
30. Those who act in a contrary manner perish, 
being born again in various (evil conditions).
31. T he advice of the spiritual teacher and the 
punishment (inflicted by the king) guard them.
32. Therefore a king and a spiritual teacher must 
not be reviled.
25. Manu XII, 108-113. 
According to Haradatta this Sfitra 
refers to particularly difficult cases.
26. Apastamba II, 5, ii, 4.
29. Apastamba II, 5, ii, 10.
30. Apastamba II, 5, ii, ii. ‘ Perish, i. e. fall from one mis­
fortune into the other.’— Haradatta.
31. Apastamba II, 5, 10, 12-16.
32. Manu VII, 8.

--- PAGE 300 ---
236
G A U T A M A .
XII, r-
C h a p t e r X II.
1. A vSildra who intentionally reviles twice-born 
men by criminal abuse, or criminally assaults them 
with blows, shall be deprived of the limb with which 
he offends.
2. If he has criminal intercourse with an Aryan 
woman, his organ shall be cut off, and all his property 
be confiscated.
3. If (the woman had) a protector, lie shall be
executed after (having undergone the punishments 
prescribed above). 
. 
.
4. N ow if he listens intentionally to (a recitation 
o f) the Veda, his ears shall be filled with (molten) 
tin or lac.
5. If he recites (Vedic texts), his tongue shall be 
cut ou t
, 6 . If he remembers them, his body shall be split 
in twain.
7. 
I f he assumes a position equal (to that of 
twice-born men) in sitting, in lying down, in conver­
sation or on the road, he shall undergo (corporal) 
punishment.
XII. r. Apastamba II, 10, 27, 14; Manu VIII, 270, 279-283 ; 
Ya^fiavalkya II, 215. 
Haradatta adds that an abusive word or a 
blow given in jest must not be punished in the manner prescribed 
above, as the word ‘ parushya ’ presupposes criminal intent.
2. Apastamba II, 10, 26, 20; Mayfikha XIX, 7, where, however, 
drya has been altered to SHrya. 
Haradatta adds that the two 
punishments are cumulative in the case of a BrAhmawt only. If 
the offence is committed with a KshatriyS, the offender is liable to 
the first only; if he sins with aVairya, to the second.
3. Apastamba II, 10, 27, 9; Manu VIII, 359; Yd^fiavalkya 
II, 286.
7. Apastamba II, 10, 27, 15; Manu VIII, 281.

--- PAGE 301 ---
XII, 17.
C R IM IN A L A N D C IV IL LAW .
237
8. A Kshatriya (shall 
be fined) one hundred 
(Kdrshdpa;eas) if he abuses a Brahma;^a,
9. In case of an assault, twice as much.
10. A V akya (who abuses a Brahmawa, shall pay), 
one and a half (times as much as a Kshatriya).
11. But a Brahmawa (who abuses) a Kshatriya 
(shall pay) fifty (Kdrsh^pawas),
12. One half o f that (amount if he abuses) a 
Vabya,
13. (And if he abuses) a 6"udra, nothing.
14. A Kshatriya and a Vai.rya (who abuse one 
another shall pay the same fines) as a Brahmawa 
and a Kshatriya.
15. (The value of) property which a 6”udra un­
righteously acquires by theft, must be repaid eight­
fold.
16. For each of the other castes (the fines must 
be) doubled.
17. If a learned man offends, the punishment 
shall be very much increased.
8. ManuVIII, 267; Ya^avalkyalll, 204-20'/. ManuVlII, 136 
states one Karshapana or copper Pa«a contains 80 Raktikas, which 
would correspond to 9'/.60 grammes of the metrical system.
10. Manu VIII, 267. 
ii. Manu VIII, 268.
12. Manu VIII, 268.
13. Manu VIII, 268. 
Haradatta adds that, as a Brahmawa is 
declared to pay nothing for abusing a ^hdra, a Kshatriya and a 
Vaijya are liable to be fined for that offence, and that according 
to Uranas a Kshatriya shall pay twenty-four Pa«as, and a Vairya 
thirty-six.
14. I. e. a Vahya shall pay one hundred Pawas for abusing 
a Kshatriya, and a Kshatriya fifty for abusing a Vairya.
15. Manu VIII, 337.
16. Manu VIII, 337-338. 
I. e. a Vairya is to pay sixteen 
times the value of the stolen property, a Kshatriya thirty-two 
times, and a Brfihmawa sixty-four times.
17. Manu VIII, 338.

--- PAGE 302 ---
238
G A U T A M A .
XII, 18.
18. If fruits, green corn, and vegetables are ap­
propriated in small amounts, (the fine is) five Kr/sh- 
walas (of copper).
19. If damage is done by cattle, the responsibility 
falls on the owner.
20. But if (the cattle) were attended by a herds­
man, (it falls) on the latter.
21. (If the damage was done) in an unenclosed 
field near the road, (the* responsibility falls) on the 
herdsman and on the owner of the field,
22. F ive M ishas (are the fine to be paid) for
(damage done by) a cow, 
i
23. Six for a camel or a donkey,
24. T en for a horse or a buffalo,
25. Tw o for each goat or sheep,
26. If all is destroyed, (the value of) the whole 
crop (must be paid and a fine in addition).
. 
27. 
If (a man) always neglects the prescribed 
(duties) and does that which is forbidden; his pro­
perty beyond (the amount required for) raiment and 
food shall be taken from him (until he amends).
28. H e may take, as his own, grass for a cow, 
and fuel for his fire, as well as the flowers of 
creepers and trees and their fruit, if they be un­
enclosed.
29. T h e legal interest for money lent (is at the
18. 
Manu VIII, 330. 
Knshwala is another name for RaktikS, 
used also by Ya^lavalkya I, 562. It equals 0.122 grammes of 
the metrical system, Prinsep, Useful Tables, p. 97.
20—21. Manu VIII, 240; YS^navalkya II, 162.
22—26. Manu VIII, 241; YS^navalkya II, 159-161; Colebrooke 
III, Digest IV, 40. 
Haradatta, relying on Uranas everyivhere, 
reckons twenty Mashas to the Karsh^pawa.
27. Apastamba II, ir, 27, 18.
28. Apastamba I, 10, 28, 3 ; Colebrooke III, Digest IV, 22.
29- Manu VIII, 140; Ya,g^navalkya II, 37; 
Colebrooke I,

--- PAGE 303 ---
XII, 35-
c r i m i n a l AND CIVIL LAW .
239<yl
--- (J\
rate of) five M ishas a month for twenty (K irshi- 
pawas).
30. Some (declare, that this rate should not be 
paid) longer than a year.
31. If (the loan) remains outstanding for a long 
time, the principal m ay-be doubled (after which 
interest ceases).
32. A loan secured by a pledge that is used (by 
the creditor) bears no interest;
33. N or money tendered, nor (a debt due by a 
debtor) who is forcibly prevented (from paying).
34. (Special forms of interest are) compound in­
terest, periodical interest,
35. Stipulated interest, corporal interest, daily 
interest, and the use of a pledge.
D igest 25. 
Haradatta states that a Kdrshdpa«a contains twenty 
Mashas. 
T h us the monthly interest for 400 INIashas being five 
Mashas, the rate is 
per cent for the month, or 15 per cent 
per annum.
30. Colebrooke I, Digest 40; Manu VIII, 153..
31. Manu VIII, 151 ; Colebrooke I, Digest 59.
32. Manu VIII, 143; Colebrooke I, Digest 79.
33. Colebrooke I, Digest 79. 
‘ Likewise the debt of a debtor 
who, being desirous to pay, is imprisoned by the king or others 
in a prison or the like, and who is thus unable to pay, does not 
increase from that day.’— Haradatta.
34. For this and the next Sfitra, see also Colebrooke I, Digest 
35“45> iu the notes on which latter text the various explana­
tions of these terms, found here, have been fully discussed. 
‘ If 
a large or a small interest is taken on condition that the loan 
is to be repaid on a certain date, and that, in case of non-payment, 
it is to be trebled or quadrupled, that is called periodical interest.’— 
Haradatta.
35. ‘ Where the lender and the borrower, having regard to 
the country, the time, the object, and the condition (of the bor­
rower), agree between themselves (on a certain rate), e. g. of ten 
per cent per mensem, that is called stipulated interest. 
Corporal 
interest is that which is payable by bodily labour. 
Thus Br^■ha-

--- PAGE 304 ---
240
G A U T A M A .
XII, 36.
36. T h e interest on products of animals, on wool, 
on the produce of a field, and on beasts of burden 
(shall) not (increase) more than the fivefold (value 
of the object lent).
37. T h e property of (a person who is) neither an 
idiot nor a minor, having been used by strangers 
before his eyes for ten years, (belongs) to him who 
uses it,
38. (But) not (if it is used) by 6’rotriyas, ascetics, 
or royal officials.
39. Animals, land, and females are not lost (to
the owner) by (another’s) possession. 
;
spati says, “ Corporal interest is that connected.with work.” But 
VySsa explains it thus, “ Corporal interest is that which arises 
from the work (or use) of a (pledged female quadruped) to be 
milked, or of (a male) to carry burdens.” 
KatySyana explains 
the daily interest (lit. the interest resembling the growth of the 
lock on the head), “ That which is taken daily is called daily 
interest.” . . . E. g. for a Prastha of grain lent a handful of grain 
is taken daily.’— Haradatta.
36. Colebrooke I, Digest 62. Haradatta mentions also another 
explanation of the Sfitra; ‘ Another (commentator) says, “ If pro­
ducts of animals and. the rest have been bought, and the price 
is not paid at once, that may increase fivefold by the addition 
of interest, but not to a greater sum.” ’
37. Manu VIII, 147-148; Yag^fiavalkya II, 24.
38. Haradatta adds that in the case of a ^'rotriya and of an 
ascetic, the owner may allow the use of his property for a long 
time, desiring to acquire merit by doing so, and that fear may 
prevent him from opposing the king’s servants. 
Hence, pro­
longed possession by such persons does not necessitate the con­
clusion that the owner had given up his rights. As ascetics cannot 
possess any property, the Sfitra must refer to their occupying an 
empty house which has an owner.
39. Manu VIII, 149; Yd^flavalkya II, 25. 
The translation 
given above agrees with an explanation of the Sfitra which Hara­
datta mentions, but rejects. 
He himself prefers the following: 
‘ Animals, i. e. quadrupeds; land, i. e. a field, a garden, and the 
like; females, i. e. female slaves and the like. 
No long possession

--- PAGE 305 ---
XII, 43-
C R IM IN A L A N D C IV IL LA W .
V24I/
40. T h e heirs shall pay the debts (of a deceased 
person).
41. M oney due by a surety, a commercial debt, a 
fee (due to the parents o f the bride), debts con­
tracted for spirituous liquor or in gambling, and a 
fine shall not involve the-sons (of the debtor).
42. A n (open) deposit, a sealed deposit, an object 
lent for use, an object bought (but not paid), and a 
pledge, being lost without the ‘fault of the holder, 
(shall not involve) any blameless person.
43. A man who has stolen (gold) shall approach
of animals and the rest is necessary in order to acquire the rights of 
ownership over them. 
Even after a short period they become the 
property of the possessor. For how (would it be possible that) a 
person, who himself wants buttermilk and the like, should allow a 
cow which he himself has bought, and which gives daily a Drowa 
of milk, to be milked in the house of another person ? ’ &c. &c.
40. M anu V III, 162 ; Y%"fiavalkya II, 5r.
41. Manu-VIII, 159-160; 
Y^navalkya II, 47, 54; Cole- 
brooke I, Digest 202. Taking into account the parallel passages 
of Manu and Ya^navalkya, Haradatta very properly restricts this 
rule to a bail for the personal appearance of an offender. 
In 
explanation of the expression ‘ a commercial debt’ he gives the 
following” instance ; T f a person has borrowed money from some­
body on the condition that he is to repay the principal together 
with the gain thereon, and if he dies in a foreign country, while 
travelling in order to trade, then that money shall not be repaid 
by the son.’ 
The instance explaining the term ‘ fee ’ (rulka) is 
as follows : ‘ If a person has promised a fee (to the parents of 
a woman) and dies after the wedding, then that fee does not 
involve his son, i. e. need not be paid by him.’ The word mlka 
is, however, ambiguous, and may also mean ‘ a tax or toll.’
42. Manu VIII,' 189 ; Ya^navalkya II, 59, 66 ; Colebrooke II, 
Digest I, 29. 
Haradatta declares the meaning to be, that in case 
the bailee was guilty of no negligence and took the same care 
of the deposits &c. as of his own property, neither he nor his 
heirs need make good the value of those which were lost or 
destroyed.
43. Apastamba I, 9, 25. 4-
f
t
' 
R
[2]

--- PAGE 306 ---
242
G A U T A M A .
.X I I , 44.
the king, with flying hair, holding a, club in his hand, 
and proclaim his deed.
44. W hether he be slain or be pardoned, he is 
purified (of his guilt).
45. I f the king does not strike, the guilt falls on 
him.
46. Corporal punishment (must) not (be resorted 
to in the case) o f a Brihma/za.
47. 
Preventing (a repetition of) the deed, pub­
licly proclaiming his crime, banishment, and branding 
(are the punishments to which a Brahma;?a may be 
subjected). 
1
48. T h at (king) who .does not do his duty (by 
inflicting punishment) becomes liable to perform a 
penance.
49. (A man who) knowingly (becomes) the servant 
(of a thief shall be treated) like a thief,
50. Likewise he who (knowingly) receives (goods) 
from (a thief or) an unrighteous man.
51. T h e award o f the.punishm ent (must be regu­
lated) by a consideration (of the status) of the criminal, 
of his (bodily) strength, of.(the nature of) the crime, 
and whether the offence has been repeated.
52. O r a pardon (may be given) in accordance 
with the opinion of an assemblage of persons learned 
in the Vedas.
45. Apastamba I, 9, 25, 5.
46. Manu VIII, 124; Macnaghten, Mitdkshara III, 4, 9.
47. Manu IX, 239, 241; Apastamba II, 10, 27, 8, 17-19; 
Macnaghten loc.- cit. Karmaviyoga, ‘ preventing (a repetition of) the 
deed,’ may also mean ‘suspension from (his priestly) functions.’
48. Apastamba II, ii, 28, 13.
49-50. Manu IX, 278 ; Yd^navalkya II, 276.
51. Manu VII, 16; VIII, 126 ; Yd^navalkya I, 367.

--- PAGE 307 ---
XIII, 7.
W ITN ESSES.
243
C h a p t e r X III.
1. In disputed cases the truth shall be established 
by means of witnesses.
2. T h e (latter) shall be many, faultless as regards 
the performance of their duties, worthy to be trusted 
by the king, and free from affection for, or hatred 
against either (party).
3. (T hey may be) .Shdras even.
4. But a Br^hmawa must not be forced (to give 
evidence) at the word of a non-Brihmaj^a, except if 
he is mentioned (in the plaint).
5. (Witnesses) shall not speak singly or without 
being asked,
6. A nd if, (being asked,) they do not answer, they 
are guilty of a crime.
7. H eaven is their reward, if they speak the 
truth; in 
the 
contrary case 
hell (will be their 
portion).
---------------------------------------- ---• --------------------
- ----
XIII. I. Manu VIII, 45; Y%11avalkya II, 22.
2. Apastamba II, ii, 29, 7. ‘ Many means at least three.’— 
Haradatta.
3. Manu VIII, 63. 
I.e. ^hdras endowed with the qualities 
mentioned above.
4» Manu VIII, 65. ‘ A Brahma«a means here a 5 rotriya. If a 
man other than a Brihrria«a says: “ This BrSUmawa is a witness of 
this fact,” then the (.^rotriya).shall not be forced to become, i.e. not 
be taken as a witness, provided he-has not been mentioned, i. e. he 
has not been entered in the written plaint (as one of the witnesses). 
But if he has been entered in the plaint, he certainly becomes 
a witness.’— Haradatta.
5. Manu VIII, 79; Macnaghten, MitSksharS VI, i, 21. In the 
MitiksharS the Sutra is read ndsamavetS/% pr/sh/dA prabrfjyu^, 
‘ witnesses need not answer if they are examined singly.’ Mitra- 
mirra in the. Vtramitrodaya says that Haradatta’s reading of the 
text is the same, and that his explanation does not agree with it.
6. Manu VIII, 1073 Ya.g'fiavalkya II, 76- 77-
7. Apastamba II, ii, 29, 9-10.
R 2

--- PAGE 308 ---
244
G A U T A M A .
XIII, 8.
8. (Persons) not mentioned (in the plaint), must 
also give evidence.
9. N o objection (can be raised against witnesses) 
in a case of (criminal) hurt,
10. N or if they have spoken inadvertently.
11. If the sacred law or the rules (referring to 
worldly matters) are violated, the guilt (falls) on the 
witnesses, the assessors, the king, 
and 
qn 
the 
offender.
12. Some (declare, that the witnesses) shall be 
charged, on oath to speak the truth.
13. In the case of others than Brahmawas that 
(oath shall be sworn) in the presence of the gods, of 
the king, and of Brihma??as.
14. B y false evidence concerning small cattle a 
witness kills ten,
15. (B y false evidence) regarding cows, horses, 
.men, or land, in each succeeding case ten times as 
many (as in the one^ entioned before),
16. O r (by false evidence) regarding land the 
whole (human race).
17. H ell (is the punishment) for a theft of land.
9. Manu VIII, 72; Y%aavalkya II, 72.
10. ‘ Negligence, i. e. inadvertence. If anything has been spoken 
at random by a witness in a conversation referring to something else 
(than the case), no blame must be thrown on him for that reason.’— 
Haradatta.
11. Manu VIII, 18. The translation follows Haradatta. Perhaps 
it would, however, be as well to take dharmatantra, ‘ the sacred law 
and the rules referring to worldly matters,’ as a Tatpurusha, and to 
translate, ‘ If there is a miscarriage of justice, the guilt,’ &c.
12-13. Apastamba II, 11-29, 7.
14-22. Manu VIII, 98-100. ‘By speaking an untruth regarding 
them, the witness kills ten. Ten what? Even ten (of that kind) 
regarding which he has lied. His guilt is as great as if he actually 
killed ten of them, and the punishment (is the same). 
Equal 
penances must also be prescribed for both cases.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 309 ---
XIII, 27.
WITNESSES.
245
18. (By false 
evidence) 
concerning water (he 
incurs) the same (guilt) as (for an untruth) about 
land,
19. Likewise (by false evidence) regarding (crimi­
nal) intercourse.
20. (By false evidence) regarding honey or clari­
fied butter (he incurs) the same (guilt) as (by an 
untruth) about small cattle,
21. (By false evidence) about clothes, gold, grain, 
and the Veda, the same as (by an untruth) about 
kine,
22. (And by false evidence) regarding a carriage 
(or a beast of burden) the same as (by an untruth) 
about horses.
23. A witness must be reprimanded and punished 
for speaking an untruth.
24. iSlo guilt is incurred by giving false evidence, 
in case the life (of a man) depends thereon.
25. But (this rule does) npt (hold good) if the 
life' of a very wicked (man depends on the evidence 
of a witness).
26. The king, or the judge, or a Brahmawa learned 
in the *Sastras (shall examine the witnesses).
2 7. (The litigant) shall humbly go to seek the 
judge.
23. Manu VIII, 119-123; YS^Havalkya II, 81. 
‘YSpyaA 
(literally “ must be turned out ”) means “ must be reprimanded ’’ 
in the presence of the whole audience, lest anybody have inter­
course with him.'—Haradatta.
24-25. Manu VIII, 104-105; Y%navalkya II, 83.
26. Manu VIII, 8-9, 79; Ya,§iiavalkya II, i, 3, 73'
27. Manu VIII, 43. 
The meaning of the Sfitra is that the 
judge shall not promote litigation, and incite people to institute 
suits. 
If litigants do not humbly appear before him, he. is not 
to send for them.

--- PAGE 310 ---
246
G A U T A M A .
X III, 28.
28. I f (the defendant) is unable to answer (the 
plaint) at once, (the judge) may wait for a year.
29. But (in an action) concerning kine, draught- 
oxen, Avomen, or the procreation (of offspring), the 
defendant (shall answer) immediately,
30. Likewise in a case that will suffer by delay.
31. T o speak the truth before the judge is more 
important than all (other) duties.
C h a p t e r X IV .
1. T h e Sapiw^fas become impure by the death (of 
a relative) during ten (days and) nights, except thbse 
who officiate as priests, who have performed the 
Diksha»iyesh/fi (or initiatory ceremony of a 6rauta 
sacrifice), and those who are students.
2. (The impurity) of a Kshatriya lasts for eleven 
(days and) nights,
. 3. (That) o f a V aL ya twelve (days and) nights,
4. (Or), according to some, half a month,
5. (And that) of a ^Sfidra a whole month.
6. 'If during- (a period of impurity) another (death) 
happens, the (relatives) shall be pure after (the 
lapse o f) the remainder o f that (first period).
7. (But) if one night (only of the period of impu­
rity) remains (and another death happens, they shall
28. See also Nirada I, 38, 41.
29. Y^Savalkya II, 12. 
Haradatta explains pra^nana, ‘ the 
procreation (of offspring),’ to mean ‘ marriage.’
XIV. I. Manu V, 59, 83, 93; YS^avalkya III, 18, 28; see 
also Apastamba.I, 5> 
^8. Regarding the meaning of the term
Sapi«</a, see below, Sfitra 13. 
This Sutra refers, of course, to 
Brahmawas only.
2-r3. Manu V, 83; YS^g-Savalkya III, 22.
5. Manu and Y^fiavalkya 1. 1. cit.
6. Manu V, 79.

--- PAGE 311 ---
XIV, 14.
IM P U R IT Y .
247
become pure) after (the lapse of) two (days and 
nights).
8. (If the second death happens) on the morning 
(after the completion of the period of impurity, they 
shall be purified) after three (days and nights).
9. (The relatives) of those Ti^ho are slain for the 
sake of cows and Brihmawas (become pure) imme­
diately after the burial,
10. A nd (those of men destroyed) by the anger 
of the king,
11. (Further, those of men killed) in battle,
1 2. Likewise (those) of men who voluntarily seek 
death by abstaining from food, by weapons, fire, 
poison, or water, by hanging themselves, or by 
jum ping (from a precipice). .
13. Sapi«flh-relationship ceases with the fifth or- 
fhe seventh (ancestor).
14. (The rules regarding impurity caused by the 
death of a relative apply) to the birth (of a child) 
also.
9. Y%navalkya III, 27. 
The Shtra taay, however, also be 
translated ‘ the relatives of those who have been killed by a cow, 
or by a Brahmawa, &c., as the latter case, too, is mentioned by 
Y^navalkya III, 21. 
The word anvaksham, translated by 
‘ immediately after burial,’ is explained by Haradatta as follows:
‘ The corpse is seen, i. e. is visible, so long; the meaning is that 
they will be pure after having bathed at the end of the burial.’
10. YS^flavalkya III, 21.
12. Manu V, 89; Y^navalkya III, 21.
13. Apastamba II, 6, tg, 2. Haradatta states that the Sapi»a'a- 
relationship extends to four degrees in the case of the son of an 
appointed daughter (see below, XXVIII, i^), while it includes the 
relatives within six degrees in the case of a legitimate son of the 
body. 
In either case the term refers to Sagotra-sapi«</as, or 
SapiK<fas who bear the same family name only. The case of the 
Bhinnagotra-sapi«(/as will be discussed below, Shtra ao.
14-16. Manu V, 62 ; Y%navalkya III, 18-19.

--- PAGE 312 ---
248
G A U T A M A ,
XIV, 13.
15. (In), that (case • the impurity falls) on the 
parents,
16. O r on the mother (alone).
1 7. (The impurity) for a miscarriage (lasts for a 
number of days and) nights equal to (the number of) 
months from conception, 
. •
18. O r three days,
19. A nd if he hears (of the death o f a Sapi^zfl?a) 
after (the lapse of) ten (days and nights, the impu­
rity lasts for) one night together with the preceding 
and following days,
20. Likewise when a relative who is not a Sapi;z<j/a, 
a relative by marriage, or a fellow-s'tudent (has 
died).
21. F or a man who studies the same recension 
of the Veda (the impurity lasts) one day,
17. Manu V, 66; Ya^navalkya III, 20. ‘
' 19, Manu V, 75-77.
20. ManuV, 8r. Haradatta explains asapi«</a,‘a kinsman who 
is not a Sapi«rfa,' by SamSnodaka, i.e. ‘ a kinsman bearing the same 
family name, but more than six degrees removed,’ and yomsam- 
bandha, ‘ a relative by marriage,’ by ‘ the maternal grandfather, a 
maternal aunt’s sons, and their sons, &c., the fathers of wives and 
the rest.’ 
The latter term, for which ‘ a person related through a 
female’ would be a more exact rendering than the one given 
above, includes, therefore, those persons who, according to the 
terminology of Manu and Ya^navalkya, are called Bhinnagotra- 
sapi«ifas, Bandhavas, or Bandhus (see Colebrooke, MitdksharS II, 
53; 11,^6). 
Gautama’s terminology agrees in this respect with 
that of Apastamba, see note on II, 5, ii, 6.
21. Haradatta explains sabrahmaMrin by suhn't, ‘ a friend.’ 
But the term which elsewhere means ‘ a fellow-student ’ cannot 
have that sense in our Shtra, as the fellow-student (sahadhydyin) 
has been mentioned already. 
The translation given above is 
supported by the manner in which it is used in the ancient land- 
grants, where expressions like bahvrzXasabrahma^arin are of 
common occurrence.

--- PAGE 313 ---
xrv, 28.
IM P U R IT Y .
249
2 2. Likewise for a 6'rotriya who dwells in the 
same house,
23. On touching (i. e. on carrying out) a corpse 
from an interested motive, the impurity lasts for ten 
days.
24. (The duration of the impurity) of a V aLya and 
o f a iShdra (in the same case) has been declared (by 
Shtras 3-5).
25. O r (it shall last for these two) as many nights 
as there are seasons (in the year);
26. And (the same rule may be made applicable) 
to the two higher (castes).
2 7. O r (the impurity lasts) three days.
28. A nd if the teacher, his son or wife, a person 
for whom (a Brahmawa) sacrifices or a pupil (has 
been carried out, the duration of the impurity is) the 
same.
22. Manu V, 8r.
23. ‘ The word upasparjana (literally touching) does not denote 
here simple touching. 
For below, Sfltra 30, bathing with the 
clothes on, will be prescribed for that. 
What does upasparjana 
then mean? 
It means carrying out a corpse. 
For that an 
impurity lasting ten days falls on the performer, provided that 
carrying out be done for an object, i.e. with the intention of 
gaining a fee or the like, not for the sake of doing one’s duty. 
The word impurity is here repeated in order to indicate that the 
impurity, here intended, differs from that described above. Hence 
the rules given below, Sfitra 37, which prescribe sleeping and 
sitting on the ground and so forth, do not apply. 
CThe word 
Impurity) indicates (here) merely that (the performer of the act) 
must not be touched, and has no right (to perform sacred 
ceremonies).’— Haradatta.
25. Haradatta states that Gautama does not simply say ‘ six 
days,’ because five seasons only are to be reckorfed in the case 
of a Vauya, and six in the case of a .Sfidra.
28. Haradatta asserts that mrfteshu, ‘ have died,’ must be under­
stood. But as both the preceding and the following Sfttras refer to

--- PAGE 314 ---
'5°
G A U T A M A .
X IV , 29.
29. A nd if a man of lower cast;e carries out (the 
corpse o f) one of higher caste, or a man of higher 
caste (carries out the body of) one of lower caste, 
(the duration o f) the impurity in these (cases) is 
determined by (the caste o f) the dead man.
30. On touching an outcast, a K^nd^-a., a woman 
impure on account o f her confinement, a woman in 
her courses, or a corpse, and on touching persons 
who have touched them, he shall purify himself by 
bathing dressed in his clothes,
31. Likewise if he has followed a corpse (that
was being carried out), 
,
32. A nd (if he has come into contact) with a dog.
33. Some (declare), that (the limb) which (a dog) 
m ay touch (must be washed).
34. T h e Sapi^rt^as shall offer (libations o f) water 
for (a deceased relative) whose Aaula-karman (or 
tofisure) has been performed,
35. A s well as for the wives and daughters of 
such (a person).
36. Some (declare, that it must be done in the 
case) of married female relatives (also).
37. (During 
the period of impurity) all (the
the carrying out of corpses, it is impossible to agree with him. 
It seems to me that Gautama’s rule means, that, if a man has 
carried out the corpse of a teacher, &c., he becomes impure for ten, 
eleven, or twelve days, or for three days only. 
See also Mahu V, 
91, 103; Yd^avalkya III, 15.
30. Apastamba II, 2, 2,8-9; Manu V, 85; Y^^ftavalkyaIII, 30.
31. Manu V, 103; Y^-iiavalkya III, 26.
32-33. Apastamba I, 5> i 5. i 6- i 7-
34. Apastamba II, 6, rg, 10; Manu V, 70. Haradatta observes 
that most Gnhya-shtras prescribe the performance of the ATaula- 
karman in the third year.
36. Y^avalkya III, 4.
37- Manu V, 73; Yd^fiavalkya III, 16.

--- PAGE 315 ---
XIV, 46.
IM PU R IT Y.
251'
mourners) shall sleep and sit on the ground and 
remain chaste.
38. T h ey shall not clean (them selves);
39. N or shall they eat meat until (the funeral 
oblation) has been offered.
40. On the first, third, fifth, seventh, and ninth 
(days after the death) water (mixed with sesamum) 
must be offered;
41. A nd the garments (worn during that cere­
mony) must be changed,
42. But on the last (day they must be given) to 
men of the lowest castes.
43. T h e parents (shall offer water for a son who 
dies) after he has teethed.
44. I f infants, (relatives) who live in a distant 
country, those who have renounced domestic life, 
and those who are not Sapi««hs, (die), the purifica­
tion is instantaneous.
45. Kings (remain always pure), lest their busi­
ness be impeded,
46. And a Brihmawa, lest his daily study of the 
Veda be interrupted.
39. Manu V, 73. 
43. Manu V, 70.
44. Yaf^avalkya III, 23. 
Haradatta remarks that the rule 
refers to those Sapi«</as residing in foreign countries only, of 
whose death one may hear a year after their decease, and to 
remoter relations of whose death one hears after the lapse of 
ten days; see ManuV, 75-76.
45. Manu V, 93-94; YS^fiavalkya III, 27. 
Haradatta adds 
that the plural ‘ kings’ is used in order to include all rulers and 
governors, and such persons as the king wishes to be pure.
46. Y^giiavalkya III, 28.

--- PAGE 316 ---
252
G A U T A M A ,
X V , I.
C h a p t e r X V .
1. N ow (follow the rules regarding) funeral obla­
tions (^rdddha).
2. H e shall offer (them) to the M anes'on the day 
of the new moon,
3. O r in the dark half (of the month) after the 
fourth (lunar day),
4. O r on any day (of the dark half) according to 
(the results he may) desire ;
5. O r if (particularly appropriate) materials or 
(particularly holy) Brahmawas are at hand, or (the 
sacrificer is) near a (particularly sacred) place, ho 
restriction as to time (need be observed) :
6. L et him select as good food as he can afford, 
and have it prepared as well as possible.
7. H e shall feed an uneven number (of Brah- 
ma«as), at least nine,
- 8. O r as many as he is able (to entertain).
9. (L^t him feed such as are) vSrotriyas and
X V . I. ‘ T he word “ now ” indicates that a new topic begins.’— 
Haradatta. 
The rules now following refer in the first instance to • 
the Parva«a or monthly 5 rS,ddha, but most of them serve also as 
general rules for all the numerous varieties of funeral sacrifices.
2. Manu III, 122; Y^ navalkya I, 217.
3. Apastamba II, 7, i6, 6.
4. Apastamba II, 7, 16, 6-22.
5. Some o f the most famous among the places where the per­
formance of a 5 rMdha is particularly elficacious and meritorious 
are Gaya in BihSr, Pushkara or Pokhar near A ^ i r , the Kuru- 
k^ etra near Dehli, Nasika on the Godavari. 
Pilgrims or persons 
passing through such place’s may and must perform a Ardddha 
on any day o f the month.
7. YS^navalkya I, 227. 
8. See also below, Sfitra 21.
9. Apastamba II, 7, 17, 4. Haradatta explains vak, ‘eloquence,’ 
by ‘ ability to speak Sanskrit,’ rfipa, ‘beauty,’ by ‘ the proper number 
of limbs,’ and vaya/4sampanna,‘of (suitable) age,’ by ‘not too young.’

--- PAGE 317 ---
XV, i6.
F U N E R A L O BLATIO N S.
253
endowed with eloquence and beauty, of a (suitable) 
age, and of a virtuous disposition.
10. It is preferable to give (food at a .Sraddha) to 
young (men in the prime o f life).
1 1 . Some (declare, that the age o f the guests 
shall be) proportionate^ to (that of) the Manes.
12. A nd he shall "not try to contract a friendship 
by an (invitation to a v^rdddha).
13. On failure of sons (the deceased person’s) 
Sapi«^/as, the Sapiw^fas of his mother, or a pupil 
shall offer (the funeral oblations),
14. On failure of these an officiating priest or the 
teacher.
/ 
15. T h e Manes are satisfied for a month by 
gifts of sesamum, Misha-beans, rice, barley, and 
water,
For (three) years by fish and the flesh o f common 
deer, spotted deer, hares, turtles, boars, and sheep.
For twelve years by cows milk and messes made 
of milk.
For a very long time by the flesh of (the crane 
called) Virdhriwasa, by Ocymum sanctum (sacred 
Basil), and by the flesh of goats, (especially) of a red 
(he-goat), and of a rhinoceros, (if these dishes are) 
mixed with honey.
16. 
Let him not feed a thief, a eunuch, an out­
cast, an atheist, a person who lives like an atheist, 
the destroyer of the sacred fire, (the husband of) a
11. I. e. in honour of the father a young man is to be invited, 
in honour of the grandfather an old man, and in honour of the 
great-grandfather a very old man.
12. Apastamba II, 7, 17, 4, 8; Manu III, 140.
15. Ipastamba II, 7, 16, 23-II, 7, 17, 3 ; II, 8,18, 13.
16. Apastamba II, 7, 17, 21. ‘A destroyer of the sacred fire 
(v irahan), i. e. one who extinguishes intentionally the (domestic) fire

--- PAGE 318 ---
254
G A U TA M A .
XV, 17.
younger sister married before the elder, the hus­
band o f an elder sister whose youngest sister was 
married first, a person who sacrifices for women or 
for a multitude o f men, a man who tends goats, 
who has given up the fire-worship, who drinks 
spirituous liquor, whose conduct is blamable, who is 
a false witness, who lives as a door-keeper;
17. 
W hoso lives with another man’s wife, and 
the (husband) who allows that (must not be in­
vited) ;
t8. (N or shall he feed) a man who eats the food 
of a person born from adulterous intercourse, a 
seller of Soma, an incendiary, a poisoner, a ,man who 
during studentship has broken the vow of chastity, 
who is the servant of a guild, who has intercourse 
with females who must not be touched, who de­
lights in doing hurt, a younger brother married 
before the elder brother, an elder brother married 
after his younger brother, an elder brother whose
out of hatred against' his wife, and for the Jike reasons.’— Haradatta. 
He also remarks that some- read agredidhishu instead of agredi- 
dhishh, and he proposes to explain the former, on the authority of 
Vyaghra and of the Naigha?i/ukas, as ‘ a BrShmawa whose wife has 
been wedded before to another man.’
17. My MvSS. make two Sfltras out of Professor Stenzler’s one, 
and read upapati^ 1 yasya ^a sa^. The sense remains the same, 
but the latter version of the text is, I think, the correct one.
18. Haradatta says that ku««/arin may also mean ' he who eats 
out of a vessel called kuwifa,’ as the people have in some countries 
the habit of preparing their food and afterwards eating out of the 
ku«(/a. 
Haradatta explains tyaktatman, ‘ one who ‘despairs of 
himself,' b y‘ one who has made an attempt on his own life, and 
has tried to tang himself, and the like.’ He remarks that some 
explain dur-vSla, ‘ a bald man,’ by nirveshdtajepha. 
He who 
neglects the recitation of the sacred texts, i. e. of those texts which, 
like the Gayatri, ought to be recited.

--- PAGE 319 ---
X V , 23.
F U N E R A L O B LA TIO N S.
255
junior has kindled the sacred fire first, a younger 
brother who has done that, a person who despairs 
o f himself, a bald man, a man who has deformed 
nails, or black teeth, who suffers from white leprosy, 
the son of a twice-married woman, a gambler, a 
man who neglects the recitation (of the sacred 
texts), a servant of the king, any one who uses 
false weights and measures, whose only wife is a 
kSfidra female, who neglects the daily study, who 
suffers from spotted leprosy, a usurer, a person who 
lives by trade or handicrafts, by the use of the bow, 
by. playing musical instruments, or, by beating time, 
by dancing, and by.singing;
19. Nor, (sons) who have enforced a division of 
the farnily estate against the wish of their father..
20. Some (allow) pupils and kinsmen (to be in­
vited),
21. L et him feed upwards of three (or) one 
(guest) endowed with (particularly) excellent qua­
lities.
22. If he enters the bed of a 6'fidra female im- 
media*ely after partaking of a funeral repast, his 
ancestors will lie for a month in her ordure.
23. Therefore he shall remain chaste on that day.
19. Below, XXVIII, 2, it will be prescribed that the division of 
the family estate may take place during the lifetime of the father 
with his consent. 
From this Shtra it would appear that sons 
could enforce a division of the ancestral estate against his will, 
as Ya^navaHcya also allows (see Colebrooke, Mitdkshara I, 6, 
5-11), and that this practice, though legal, was held to be contra 
bonos mores.
20. Apastamba II, 7, 17, 5-6.
21. This Sfitra, according to Haradatta, is intended as a modi­
fication of Sfitra 8.
22. Manu III, 250. 
23- ManuIII, 188.

--- PAGE 320 ---
256
G A U T A M A .
X V , 24-
24. I f (a funeral offering) is looked at by dogs, 
K2.nci^zs, or outcasts, it is blemished.
25. Therefore he shall-offer it in an enclosed 
(place),
26. O r he shall scatter grains o f sesamum over it,
27. O r a man who sanctifies the company shall 
remove the blemish.
28. Persons who sanctify the company are, any 
one who knows the six Aiigas, who sings the 6^ye- 
sh/^a-s4 mans, who knows the three texts regarding 
the Naiiketa-fire, who knows the text which con­
tains thrice the word Madhu, who knows the text 
which thrice contains the word Supar«a, who keeps 
five fires, a Snitaka, any one who knows the Man­
tras and Brahmawas, who knows the sacred law, 
and in whose family the study and teaching o f the 
V eda-are hereditary.
29. (T he same rule applies) to sacrifices.offered 
to gods and men.
30. Som e (forbid the invitation of) bald men and 
the rest to a funeral repast only.
C h a p t e r X V I.
I. 
T h e annual (term for studying the Veda) be­
gins on the full moon o f the month SrAva.ua. (J u ly- 
A ugust); or let him perform the Upakarman on
24. Apastamba II, 7, 17, 20.
28. Apastamba II, 7,17, 2*2.
29-30. Manu 111,-132-137, 148-149.
XVI. I. Apastamba 1 , 3, 9, i. The Upakarman is the ceremony 
which is annually performed at the beginning of the course of 
study, and it is obligatory on householders also; see Apastamba 
II, 2, 5, I. 
J^M ndam si, ‘ the Vedic texts,' i.e. the Mantras and 
Brahmawas. The Ahgas may be studied out of term; see Apa­
stamba I, 3, 9, 3 note.

--- PAGE 321 ---
X V I, 13-
T H E S T U D Y O F T H E V E D A .
257
(the full moon of) Bhadrapada (August-Septem ber) 
and study the Vedic texts,
2. During four months and a half, or during five 
months, or as long as the sun moves towards the 
south.
3. L et him remain chaste, let him not shave, nor 
eat flesh (during that period);
4. O r (this) restrictive rule may (be observed) 
during two months.
5. H e sliall hot recite the Veda, if the wind 
whirls up the dust in the day-time,
6. N or if it is audible at night,
7. N or if th e sound of a Va;za, of a large or a 
small drum, the noise of a chariot, and the wail of 
a person in pain (are heard),
8. N or if the barking o f many dogs and jackals, 
or the braying o f many donkeys (is heard),.
9. N or if (the sky appears flaming) red, a rainbow 
(is seen), or hoar-frost (lies on the ground),
10. N or if clouds rise out o f season.
11. (Let him not study) when he feels the neces­
sity to void urine or excrements,
12. 'N or at midnight, in the twilight, and (while 
standing) in the water,
13. N or while rain falls.
2. Apastamba I, 3, 9, 2-3.
3. This Shtra and the following one refer to a teacher ol to a 
householder who again goes through the Veda; see Apastamba II, 
2, 5 , 15 ,
5-6. Apastamba I, 3, ii, 8.
7-8. Apastamba I, 3,10,17. AV’^iwa is a kind of lute, or harp, 
with , a hundred strings.
9. Apastamba I, 3, ii, 25, 31.
10. Apastamba I, 3, II, 31. 
n- Manu IV, 109.
12. Apastamba I, 3, ii, 15, 17; Manu IV, 109.
13. Manu IV, 103.
[2] 
S

--- PAGE 322 ---
258
G A U T A M A .
XVI, 14.
14. Som e (declare, that the recitation of the Veda 
must be interrupted only) when (the rain) is dripping 
from the edge o f the roof.
15. (N or shall he study) when the teachers (of 
the gods and Asuras, i. e. the planets J upiter and 
Venus) are surrounded by a halo,
16. N or (when this happens)'to the two (great) 
lights (the sun and the moon),
17. (Nor) while he is in fear, riding in a carriage 
or on beasts of burden, or lying down, nor while his 
feet are raised,
18. (Nor) in a burial-ground, at the extrem ity of 
a village, on a high-road, nor during impurity,
19. 
N or while a foul smell (is perceptible), while 
a corpse or a Aa^zflfila (is) in (the village), nor in the 
neighbourhood o f a 6’tadra, ,
20. -Nor while (he suffers from) sour eructations.
21. The i?/g-veda and the Ya^ur-veda (shall not be 
studied) while the sound of the Samans (is heard).
22. T h e fall o f a- thunderbolt, an earthquake, an 
eclipse, and (the fall o f) meteors (are reasons for 
discontinuing the reading of the Veda) until the 
same time (next day),
23. Likewise when it thunders and rains and
15. ‘ Another (commentator says): “ Pariveshawa, being sur­
rounded by a halo, means bringing food.” . . . (The Sutra means, 
therefore). He shall not study while his teacher eats.’— Haradatta.
16. Apastamba I, 3, ri, 31.
17. Apastamba I, 3, 9, 27; I, 3, n , 12; IManu IV, 112; 
Ya_§TiavaIkya I, 150.
18. Apastamba I, 3, 9, 4, 6; I, 3, 10, 2, 4; I, 3, ii, 9.
19- Apastamba I, 3, 10, 22; I, 3, 9, 6, 14-15.
20. Apastamba I, 3, to, 23. 
21. Apastamba I,-3, to, 17.
22- 
Pastamba I, 3, II, 30.
Pastamba I 3, ti, 29; Manu IV, 29.

--- PAGE 323 ---
X V I , 29-
T H E S T U D Y OF T H E V E D A .
259
when lightning (flashes out o f season) after the fires 
have become visible (in the twilight).
24. (If these 
phenomena appear) during the 
(rainy) season, (the reading must b e interrupted) 
for a day (or a night),
25. A nd if ligljtning (is observed) during the 
night, (the recitation of the V eda shall be inter­
rupted) until the third watch.
26. If (lightning) flashes during the third part 
o f the day or later, (the V eda must not be read) 
during the entire (following night).
27. 
(According to the opinion) of some, a fiery 
meteor (has the same effect) as lightning,
28. • Likewise thunder (which is heard) during the 
last part of the d a y ,'
29. (Or) also in the twilight.
24. Apastamba I, 3, 9, 22. The above translation follows the 
reading of my MSS., which differ very much from Professor 
Stenzler’s edition. 
According to them the commentary on the 
latter part of Sfitra 23 and on Shtra 24 runs as follows: . . . pra- 
tyekam dkalikd anadhySyahetava^ \ apartav idam \ rftav aha II
A h a a;/ t a u 11 2 4 n
VarsHartav ete yadi bhaveyu// sandhyayawt tadaharmatram ana- 
dhydya/i i prataj>5et | saya/« tu ratrav anadhydya ityarthasiddhatvad 
anuktam 11 . . . ‘ are each reasons for discontinuing the recita­
tion until the same time next day. 
This (rule) refers to other 
times than the rainy season. 
He now declares (the rule) for the 
rainy season:
24. “ During the (rainy) season for a day.”
‘ If these (phenomena) happen in the twilight during the rainy 
season, the interruption of the study lasts for that day only, pro­
vided (they happen) in the morning. 
But if they happen in the 
eveniifg, study is forbidden during the night. 
As this is clear 
from the context, it has not been declared specially.’— Haradatta. 
I suspect that Professor Stenzler’s reading apartau is a correction, 
made by an ingenious Pandit, of an old varia lectio ‘ ahartau ’ for 
aha n'tau, .which is found in one of my MSS. (C) also.
25. Apastamba I, 3, 9, 21.
S 2

--- PAGE 324 ---
2 6 o
G A U T A M A .
X V I, 30.
30. 
(If thunder is heard before midnight, the 
study o f the V eda must be interrupted) during the 
whole night.
31. (If it is heard) during the (early part of the) 
day, (the interruption must continue) as long as the 
sun shines,
32. 
Likewise if the king of the country has died.
33. 
If one (pupil) has gone on a journey (and) 
another (stays) with (the teacher, the study of the 
V eda shall be interrupted until the absentee re­
turns).
34. 
W hen an attack (is made on the village), 
or a fire (breaks out), when one V eda has been 
completed, after (an attack of)' vomiting, when he 
has partaken o f a funeral repast or of a dinner on 
the occasion o f a sacrifice offered to men, (the study 
of the V eda shall be interrupted) for a day and a 
night,
35. 
Likewise on the day o f the new moon.
36. 
(On the latter occasion it m ay also be inter­
rupted) for two days.
37. (T h e V ed a shall not be studied for a day 
and a night) on the full moon days of the months 
Kdrtika, Philguwa, and Ashi(2%a.
30. Apastamba I, 3, 9, 23.
33. Apastamba I, 3, ii, u . 
Haradatta adds that others 
enjoin a stoppage of the Veda-study from the hour of the de­
parture until the same hour on the following day, while another 
commentator gives the following explanation: ‘ All, indeed, the 
teacher and the rest, shall, on that day, not even recite the Veda 
in order to remember it.’
34. Apastamba I, 3, 9, 25; I, 3,10 , 20, 26-28; I, 3, i i , 6, 30; 
Manu IV , 118. 
Haradatta is in doubt whether ‘ a sacrifice offered 
in honour o f men ’ means a Sawskara, or a sacrifice to gods, like 
Kum^ra, who formerly were men; see Apastamba I, 3, i i , 3.
36, Apastamba I, 3, 9, 28. 
37- Apastamba I, 3, ro, i.

--- PAGE 325 ---
X V I, 46.
T H E S T U D Y O F T H E V E P A j
261
38. 
O n the three Ash/akds (the V ed a shall not 
be studied) for three (days and) nights.
39. Some (declare, that the rule applies) to the 
last A sh/aki (only).
40. (On the occasion of) the annual (Up^karman 
and Utsarga the reading shall be interrupted) on 
the day (of the ceremony) and those preceding and 
following it.
4 1'. A ll (teachers ,declare, that the reading shall 
be interrupted for three days) when rain, thunder, 
and lightning (are observed) simultaneously,
42. W hen the rain is very heavy, (the reading 
shall be interrupted as long as it lasts.)
43. On a festive 
day (the 
reading shall be 
stopped) after the (morning) meal,
44. A nd he who has begun to study (after the 
Upikarm an 
shall 
not 
read) at 
night 
for four 
Muhhrtas.
45. Some (declare, that the recitation o f the Veda 
is) always (forbidden) in a town.
46. W hile he is impure (he shall) not even (recite 
the Veda) mentally.
A
38. Apastamba I, 3,10, 2. Regarding the ineaning of the word 
Ash/akS, see above, VIII, 18 note.
40. Apastamba I, 3, 10, 3. 
41. Apastamba I, 3, ii, 27.
42. Apastamba I, 3, ii, 28.
43. Haradatta explains ‘ a festive day ’ to mean the day of the 
initiation and the like, but see Apastamba I, 3, ii, 20.
44. Haradatta explains this Shtra as equivalent to Apastamba I, 
3, 9, I. He adds that' another commentator reads pradhitasya 
ka. as a separate Shtra, interpreting it to mean, ‘ And a person 
who has performed the Upakarman (shall not study after dinner),’ 
and refers the words ‘ at night for four Muhfirtas’ to the pro­
hibition to read on the evening of the thirteenth day of the dark 
half of the month.
45. ManuIV, 116. 
46. Apastamba I, 3, 
25

--- PAGE 326 ---
262
G A U T A M A .
X V I, 47-
47. 
(T h e study) of those who offer a funeral 
sacrifice (must be interrupted) until the same time 
next day,
48. 
E ven if uncooked grain is offered at the 
funeral sacrifice.
49. A n d (those rules regarding the stoppage of 
the reading must be observed), which they teach in 
the several schools.
C h a p t e r XVII.
1. A Brcihmawa may eat the food given by twice- 
born men, who are praised for (the faithful perform­
ance of their) duties,
2. A n d he may accept (other gifts from them).
3. Fire-wood, water, grass, roots, fruits, honey, 
(a promise of) safety, food brought unsolicited, a 
couch, a seat, shelter, a carriage, milk, sour milk, 
(roasted) grain, small fish, millet, a garland, venison, 
and vegetables, (spontaneously offered by a man) o f 
any (caste) must not be refused,
4. N or anything else (that may be required for 
providing for (the worship o f the) Manes and gods, 
for G urus and dependents.
5. If the means for sustaining life cannot (be 
procured) otherwise, (they may be accepted) from a 
6'hdra.
6. A herdsman, a husbandman, an acquaintance
47. 
Apastamba ibidem.
49. Apastamba I, 3, II, 38.
'X V II. I. Apastamba I, 6, 18 ,13 .
3. Apastamba I, 6, 18, i ; I, 6, i^, 14; Manu IV , 247-250.'
4. Manu IV , 251. 
Gurus, i. e. parents and other venerable 
persons.
5- Apastamba I, 6, 18, 14.
6. 
Manu IV , 253 ; YS^iiavalkya I, 166.

--- PAGE 327 ---
X V II, 
i6 . 
E A T IN G A N D F O R B ID D E N FOO D .
263
o f the family, a barber, and a servant are persons 
whose food may be eaten,
7. A nd a trader, who is not (at the same time) 
an artisan.
8. (A householder) shall, not eat every day (the 
food of strangers).
9. Food into which a hair or an insect has fallen 
(must not be eaten),
10. (Nor) what has been touched by a woman 
during her courses, by a black bird, or with the 
foot,
11. (Nor) what has been looked at by the.m urr 
derer of a learned BrMima;^a,
12. (Nor) what has been smelt at by a cow,
13. (Nor) what is naturally bad,
14. N or (food) that (has turned) sour by itself, 
excepting sour milk,
15. (Nor) what has been cooked twice,
16. (Nor) what (has become) stale (by being
7. 
Eig. a man who sells pots, but does not make them.
'8. Manu III, 104; Y% 3avalkya I, 112.
9. Apastamba I, 5, 16, 23, 26. 
,
10. Apastamba I, 5, 16, 27, 29. 
Haradatta explains ‘ a black 
bird ’ by ‘ a crow,’ and no doubt the crow, as the K^nd3\3. among 
birds, is intended in the first instance.
11. Manu IV, 208 ; Y^navalkya I, 167.
12. Manu IV, 209; YSg'navalkya I, 168.
13. ‘ What has been given in a contemptuous manner by the 
host, or what is not pleasing to the eater, that is called bhava- 
dush/a, “ naturally bad.” ’— Haradatta. 
The second seems to be 
the right explanation, as food falling under the first is mentioned 
below, Sfitra 21.
14. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 28, 20.
15. Haradatta states that this rule does not refer to dishes 
the preparation of which requires a double cooking, but to those 
which ordinarily are cooked once only.
16. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 17. Haradatta says that food prepared

--- PAGE 328 ---
264
G A U T A M A ,
X V I I, 17.
kept), except vegetables, food that requires m asti­
cation, fatty and oily substances, meat and honey.
17. (Food given) by a person who has been cast 
off (by his parents), by a woman of bad character, 
an Abhij-asta, a hermaphrodite, a police-ofificef, a 
carpenter, a miser, a jailer, a surgeon, one who 
hunts without using the bow, a man who eats the 
leavings (of others), by a multitude (of men), and by 
an enem y (must not be eaten),
18. N or what is given by such men who defile 
the company at a funeral dinner, as have been 
enumerated before bald m en;
19. (A dinner) which is prepared for no (holy) 
purpose or where (the guests) sip water or rise 
against the rule,
20. O r where (one’s) equals are honoured in a 
different manner, and persons who are not (one’s)
for the morning meal and kept until supper is also called paryushite, 
‘ stale.’
17. For this and the following Siltras, see Apastaraba I, 6, 18, 
16-I, 6, ig, i-I, 7, 20, 16; Manu IV, 205-217; Ya^iiavalkya I, 
i 6i-:-i 65. 
An Abhuasta is a person who is wrongly or falsely 
accused of a heinous crime, see Apastamba I, 9, 24, 6-9. 
Hara- 
datta adduces the explanation ‘ hermaphrodite ’ for anapadejya as 
the opinion of others. 
He himself thinks that it means ‘ a person 
not worthy to be described or named.’ ‘ One who hunts without 
using the bow ’ is a poacher who snares animals. Snaring animals 
is a favourite pccupatio'n of the non-Aryan tribes, such aS V%hrts, 
Bhils, and Kolis.
18. See above, XV, 15-18, where ‘ bald men ’ occupy the four­
teenth place.in Siltra 18.
19. Apastamba I, 5, i 7> 3J Manu IV, 212. That is called ‘food 
(prepared) for no (sacred) purpose ’ which a man' cooks only for 
himself, not for guests and the rest, see Apastamba II, 4. 8, 4; 
Manu V, 7.
20. l.pastam ba I, 5 »

--- PAGE 329 ---
XVII, 28. 
E A T IN G A N D F O R B ID D E N FO O D .
265
equals are honoured in the same manner (as oneself, 
must not be eaten),
21. N or (food that is given) in a. disrespectful 
manner.
22. A nd the milk which a cow gives during the 
first ten days after calving (must not be drunk),
23. N or (that) o f goats and buffalo-cows (under 
the same conditions).
.24. (The milk) of sheep, camels, and of one- 
hoofed animals must not be drunk under any cir­
cumstances,
25. N or (that) of animals from whose udders the 
milk flows spontaneously, of those that bring forth 
twins, and of those giving milk while big with 3] 
young,
26. N or the milk of a cow whose calf is dead 
or separated from her.
27. A nd five-toed animals (must) not (be eaten) 
excepting the porcupine, the hare, the (boar called) 
KS’vdvidh, the iguana, the rhinoceros, and the tor­
toise,
28. N or animals which have a double row of 
teeth, those which are covered with an excessive 
quantity of ,hair, those which have no hair, one- 
hoofed animals, sparrows, the (heron called) Plava, 
Brahmawi ducks, and Hawsas,
21. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 4.
22-23. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 24.
24. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 23. 
25. Apastamba I, 6, 17, 23-
26. ManiiV, 8; YS^fiavalkya 1, 170.
27. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 37.
28. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 29, 33, 35. 
Haradatta gives as an 
example o f‘ animals covered with an excessive quantity of hair’ 
the Yak or Bos grunniens, and of ‘ those that have no hair ’ snakes 
and the like.

--- PAGE 330 ---
266
G A U T A M A .
X V II, 29.
29. (Nor) crows, herons, vultures, and falcons, 
(birds) born in the water, (birds) with red feet and 
beaks, tame pigs and cocks,
30. (Nor) milch-cows and draught-oxen,
31. N or the flesh o f animals whose milk-teeth 
have not fallen out, which are diseased, nor the 
meat o f those (which have been killed) for no 
(sacred) purpose,
32. N or young sprouts, mushrooms, garlic, and 
substances exuding (from trees),
33. Nor- red (juices) which issue from incisions.
34. W oodpeckers, egrets, 
cranes, parrots, cor­
morants, peewits, and M indhilas, (as well as birds) 
flying at night, (ought not to be eaten.)
35. Birds that feed striking with their beaks, 
or scratching with their feet, and are not web­
footed m ay be eaten,
36. A nd fishes that are not misshapen.
29. Ipastam ba I, 5, 17, 29, 32, 3 4 . 3 5 ; Y d^ avalkya I, 173.
30. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 29-30.
31. Aitareya-brihmawa VII, 14. For the explanation of vn'tha- 
miwsa, ‘ the flesh (of animals killed) for no (sacred) purpose,’ 
Haradatta refers back to Sfitra 19, but see also the Petersburg 
Diet. s. V. v n ih L
32. Apastamba I, 5, 17, 28; Manu V, 5, 6 ,19 .
34. Manu V, 12 ; Apastamba I, 5. ^7. 3^ i YS^flavalkya I, 17^3. 
Haradatta explains mandhila by vagvada, which seems to be the 
same as the bird vagguda (Manu XII, 64). 
Mandhala is not 
found in our dictionaries, but it apparently is a vicarious form for 
manthala, which occurs in the VS^asaneyi-sawhit^, and is said to 
be the name of a kind of mouse or rat. 
It seems to me that 
the large herbivorous bat, usually called the flying fox (in Gu^a- 
r^tt vagud or vagul) is really meant, which, by an inaccurate 
observer, might be described both as a bird and as a kind of rat.
35. Apastamba I, 5, 17. 3 2 - 3 3 -
36. Apastamba I, 5. ^7. 38- 39-

--- PAGE 331 ---
XVIII, s.
W O M EN .
267
37, A nd (animals) that must be slain for (the 
fulfilment of) the sacred law.
38. Let him eat (the flesh o f animals) killed by 
beasts of prey, after having washed it, if no blemish 
is visible, and if it is declared to be fit for use by 
the word (of a Brihmawa).
C h a p t e r XVIII.
I , 
A wife is not independent with respect to (the 
fulfilment of) the sacred law.
'2. L et her not violate her duty towards her 
husband.
3. L et her restrain her tongue, eyes, and (organs 
of) action.
4. A woman whose husband is dead and who de­
sires offspring (may bear a son) to her brother-in-law.
5. L et her obtain the permission o f her Gurus,
37. I. e. animals offered at Aaddhas and lyrauta-sacrifices, 
tliough under other circumstances forbidden, may be eaten both 
by the priests and other Brahmawas.
38. Haradatta takes vyala, ‘ beasts of prey,’ to mean sporting 
dogs, which no doubt are also inteiTded.
XVIII. 
I. Manu V, 155. This Shtra refers in the first instance 
to the inability of wives to offer on their own account .Srauta or 
Gnhya-sacrifices, or to perform vows and religious ceremonies 
prescribed in the Pura«as, without the permission of their husbands. 
As the word stri means both wife and woman, its ulterior meaning 
is, that women in general are never independent; see Manu V, 148; 
IX, 3 ; Yd^fiavalkya I, 85.
2. Apastamba II, 10, 27, 6; Manu IX, 102.
3. Manu V, 166; YS^navalkya I, 87.
4. Apastamba II, 20, 27, 2-3; Manu IX, 59-60; YS^flavalkya 
I, 68. 
Apati, ‘ she whose husband is dead,’ means literally, ‘ she 
who has no husband.’ But as the case of a woman whose husband 
has gone abroad, is discussed below, it follows that the former 
translation alone is admissible. It must, of course, be understood 
that the widow has no children,
5. The Gurus are here the husband’s relatives, under whose 
protection the widow lives.

--- PAGE 332 ---
268
GAUTAMA.
XVIII, 6.
and let her have intercourse during the proper 
season only.
6. (On failure o f a brother-in-law she may obfciin 
offspring) by (cohabiting with) a Sa.pmda., a Sagotra, 
a Samanapravara, or one who belongs to the,sam e 
caste.
7. Some (declare, that she shall cohabit) with 
nobody but a brother-in-law.
8. (She shall) not (bear) more than two (sons).
9. T h e child belongs to him who begat it,
10. E xcept if an agreement (to the contrary has 
been made).
11. (And .the child begotten at) a living husband’s 
(request) on his wife (belongs to the husband).
12. (But if it was begotten) by a stranger (it 
belongs) to the latter,
13. -Or to both (the 
natural 
father and 
the 
husband of the mother).
14. But being reared by the husband,* (it belongs 
to him.)
15. (A wife must) .w ait for six years, if her
6. 
Regarding the term Sapiw</a, see above, XIV, 13 ; a Sagotra 
is a relative bearing the same family name (laukika gotra) removed 
seven to thirteen degrees, or still further. 
A Samanapravara is 
one who is descended from the same i?fshi (vaidika gotra).
8. Colebrooke V, Digest 265. Haradatta explains atidvitlya, ‘not 
more than two (sons),’ to mean ‘not more than one son' (pratharaam 
apatyam atitya dvitiyam na^nayed iti). But see Manu IX, 61.
9. Apastamba II, 6, 13, 6-7. 
10. Manu IX, 52.
11. Manu IX, 145. 
Such a son is called Kshetra^a, see below, 
XXVIII, 32.
12. Manu IX, 144.
13. Y^'Savalkya II, 127. 
Such a son is called dvipitn or 
dvySmushySyawa.
15. Manu IX, 76. ‘When the husband has disappeared, i. e. has 
gone to a foreign country, his wife, though childless, shall wait

--- PAGE 333 ---
XVIII, 23.
W OM EN .
269
husband has disappeared. 
If he is heard of, she 
shall go to him.
16. But if (the husband) has renounced domestic 
life, (his wife must refrain) from intercourse (with 
other men).
1 7. (The wife) of a Brahmawa (who has gone to 
a foreign country) for the purpose of studying (must 
wait) twelve years.
18. A nd in like manner if an elder brother (has 
gone to a foreign country) his younger brother (must 
wait twelve years) before he takes a wife or kindles 
the domestic fire.
19. Some (declare, that he shall wait) six years.
20. A (marriageable) maiden (who is not given 
in marriage) shall allow three monthly periods to 
pass, and afterwards unite herself, o f her own will, 
to a blameless man, giving up the ornaments received 
from her father (or her family).
21. A girl should Be given in marriage before 
(she attains the age of) puberty.
22. H e who neglects it, commits sin.
23. Some (declare, that a girl shall be given in 
marriage) before she wears clothes.
for six years. 
After (the lapse of) that (period) she may, if she 
desires it, produce a child (by cohabiting with a Sapi«</a), after 
having been authorised thereto by her Gurus. 
If the husband 
is heard of, i. e. that he dwells in such and such a country, she 
shall' go to him.’—Haradatta. Kshapawa, ‘ waiting,’ is ambiguous, 
and may also mean being continent or emaciating herself.
17. 
I. e. before she goes to live with a Sapi«<fa, or tries to 
follow her husband, in case his residence is known.
20. Manu IX, 90-92; Y%-fiavalkya I, 64.
21. Manu IX, 88. 
♦
22. Manii IX, 4; YS"fiavalkya I, 64. ‘ He who,’ i.e. the father- 
or guardian.

--- PAGE 334 ---
270
GAUTAMA.
XVIII, 24.
24. In order to defray the expenses of a wedding, 
and when engaged in a rite (enjoined by) the sacred 
law, he may take money (by fraud or force) from 
a 6"hdra,
25. O r from a man rich in small cattle, \yho 
/ neglects -his religious duties, though he does not
belong to the ^'hdra caste,
26. O r from the possessor o f a hundred cows, 
who does not kindle the sacred fire,
27. O r from the possessor o f a thousand cows, 
who does not drink Soma,
28. A n d when he has not eaten (at the time of 
six meals he m ay take) at the time o f the seventh 
meal* (as much as will sustain life), not (such a 
quantity as will serve) to make a hoard,
29. E ven from men who do not neglect their 
duties. ■
30. 
If he is examined by the king (regarding 
his deed), he shall confess (it and his condition).
31. F or if he possesses sacred learning and a good 
character, he must be maintained by the (king).
32. If the sacred law is violated and the (king) 
does not do (his duty), he commits sin.
24. 
Manu XI, n , 13. Haradatta explains dharmatantra, ‘ a rite 
prescribed by the sacred law,’ here, as well as Shtra 32, by ‘ the 
means,’ i. e. a sacrificial animal and the like required by one who 
is engaged in performing a sacred duty, i.e. a Parubandha-sacrifice 
and the like.
2fi* Manu XI, 12. 
26-27. Manu XI, 14.
28. Manu XI, 16 ; Ya^navalkya III, 43.
30. Manu XI, 17; Yd^ilavalkya III, 43-44-
31. Manu XI, 21-22. Haradatta adds that a Brdhmawa who 
acts thus, must, of course, not be punished.
32. Haradatta refers this Sfitra to the case where a sacrificial 
animal or other requisites for a sacrifice are stolen from a Brah- 
ma«a. It seems, however, more probable that it refers to the duty

--- PAGE 335 ---
XIX, 6.
PE N A N C E S.
271
C h a p t e r X I X .
1. T h e law of castes and of orders has been 
declared.
2. Now, indeed, man (in) this (world) is polluted 
by a vile action, such as sacrificing for men unworthy 
to offer a sacrifice, eating forbidden food, speaking 
what ought not to be spoken, neglecting what is 
prescribed, practising what is forbidden.
3. T h ey are in doubt if he 
shall 
perform a 
penance for such (a deed) or if he shall not do it.
4. (Some) declare, that he shall not do it,
5. Because the deed does not perish.
6. 
T h e most excellent (opinion is), that he shall 
perform (a penance),
of the king to prevent, by all means in his power, a violation of 
the sacred duty to perform .Srauta-sacrifices, and that it is intended 
to prescribe that he is to assist a man who is engaged in them 
and too poor to finish them.
XIX. 
I. Haradatta thinks that the object of this Sfitra is to 
assert that in the following chapter the laws given above for castes 
and orders must be kept in mind. 
Thus penances like offering 
a Punastoma are not intended for ^fidras, who have no business 
with Vedic rites, but other penances are. He also states that another 
commentator believes that the Sfitra is meant to indicate that the 
following rules refer not merely to those men who belong to castes 
and orders, but to the Pratilomas also, who have been declared 
to stand outside the pale of the sacred law. Plaradatta’s opinion 
appears to be preferable.
2. ‘ Ayam purusha^, “ man (in) this (world),” indicates the 
universal soul which is dwelling in the body. 
Yapya, “ vile,”
i. e. despicable (kutsita).’— Haradatta.
3. ‘They, i. e. the.theologians (brahmavfidina/;).’— Haradatta.
5. I.e. the guilt (adlianna) contracted by the deed is not effaced 
before it has produced its result in the shape of punishment in 
hell and in other births, see also Manu XI, 45.
6. ‘Apara, “ most excellent,” means that which nothing sur­
passes, i. e. the settled doctrine.’— Haradatta.

--- PAGE 336 ---
2/2
GAUTAMA.
XIX, 7.
7. F o r it is declared in the Veda, that he who 
has offered a Punastorrfa (may) again come to (par­
take of) the libations of Soma,
8. Likewise he who has offered a Vrityastom a.
9. (The Veda says) further; ‘ H e who offers a 
horse-sacrifice, conquers all 
sin, he destroys the 
guilt o f the murder o f a Brahma^za;
10. M oreover: 
‘ H e shall make an AbhLasta 
perform an Agnish/ut sacrifice.’
11. Reciting the Veda, 
austerity, a sacrifice, 
fasting, giving gifts are the means for expiating 
such a (blamable act).
12. T h e purificatory (texts are), the Upanishads, 
the V edintas, the Saw hita-text of all the Vedas, 
the 
(A nuvikas 
called) 
Madhu, 
the 
(hymn 
of) 
Aghamarsha;?a, the Atharva^iras, the (Anuvakas 
called the) Rudras, the 
Purusha-hymn, the 
two 
Samans (called) R a ^ n a and Rauhiweya, the B n h a t 
(Sim an) and the Rathantara, the Purushagati (Sa- 
man), the M ahanimnis, the M ahivaira^a (Saman), 
the M ahidivakirtya (Sdman), any of the 6^yesh//^a 
Sim ans, the Bahishpavamdna (Sim an), the Kfish- 
ma?zi/as, the Pivam ants, and the Sivitri.
7. The Punastoma is one of the .S'rauta-sacrifices belonging 
to the class called EkSha. Regarding its efficacy, see also L% a- 
yana 5rauta-shtra IX, 4, 5.
8. The Vratyastoma is another Ekaha-sacrifice. Regarding its » 
efficacy,see Ya^Kavalkya I, 38; L^/ydyana Aautra-sfitra VIII, 6, 29.
9. .Satapatha-brahmawa XIII, 3, i, i. 
^
10. The Agnish/ut is an Ekaha-sacrifice. Regarding its efficacy,""* 
see Manu XI, 75.
11. Manu XI, 46, 228; Apastamba I, 9, 26, 12-I, 9, 27, ii.
12. ‘ Those parts of the Arawyakas which are not (Upanishads) 
are called Vedantas. In all the Vedas (^^andas), i. e. in all .Vakhas 
(prava^ana), the SawhitS-text, not the Pada-text, nor the Krama- 
text. 
Another commentator says, “ One Samhita is to be made

--- PAGE 337 ---
XIX, Ig.
PE N A N C E S.
273
13. T o live on milk alone, to eat vegetables only, 
to eat fruits only, (to live on) barley-gruel prepared 
of a handful of grain, to eat gold, to eat clarified 
butter, and to drink Soma (are modes of living 
which) purify.
14. A ll mountains, all rivers, holy lakes, places 
of pilgrimage, the dwellings of i?/shis, cow-pens, and 
temples of the gods (are) places (wWch destroy 
sin).
15. Continence, speaking the truth, bathing morn­
ing, noon, and evening, standing in wet clothes, 
sleejping on the ground, and abstaining from food 
(are the various kinds of) austerity.
with all the metres, i.e. the Gayatri and the rest, and to be recited ac­
cording to the manner of the PrStaranuvdka.” ’— Haradatta. Accord­
ing to the same, the Madhus are found Taittiriya Arawyaka X, 38, 
the hymn of Aghamarshawa Rig-veda X, 190, the Rudras Taittiriya- 
sawhitd IV, g, i- ir , and in the corresponding' eleven chapters of 
all other Ya^us-rakhas, the Purushashkta Rig-veda X, 90, the Kush- 
maw^fas Taittiriya Ara«yaka X, 3-5, the Pavamanis Rig-veda IX, 
while by Atharvariras the Upanishad, known by that name, is meant. 
As regards the Sdmans mentioned in the Sfltra it suffices to refer 
to Professor Benfey’s Index, Ind. Stud. Ill, 199, and to Dr. Bur­
nell’s Index of the Arsheya-brahma/^a.
13. According to Haradatta the word iti, which appears in 
the text at the end of the enumeration, is inten led to include 
other similar kinds of food, as ‘the five products of the cow.’ 
Eating gold means eating small particles of gold which have been 
thrown into clarified butter and the like.
14. The word iti used in the text is, according to Haradatta, 
again to be taken in the sense of ‘ and so forth.’ 
The translation 
of parishkanda, ‘a temple,’ not parishkandha, as Professor Stenzier 
reads, is based on Haradatta’s explanation. 
Et3'mologicalIy it 
seems to mean ‘ a place for circumambulation,’ and to denote 
the platform on which the temples usually stand, and which is 
used for the Pradakshiwa ceremony.
ig. The word iti in the text is explained as in the preceding 
Sfitras.
[2] 
■ 
T

--- PAGE 338 ---
7 4
G A U T A M A .
X IX ,i6.
16. Gold, a cow, a dress, a horse, land, sesamum, 
clarified butter, and food are the gifts (which destroy 
sin).
17. A year, six months, four (months), three 
(months), two (months), one (month), twenty-four 
days, twelve days, six days, three days, a day and 
a night are the periods (for penances).
18. ThelSe (acts) may be optionally performed 
when no (particular penance) has been prescribed,
19. (Viz.) for. great sins difficult (penances), and 
for trivial faults easy ones.
20. T h e 
Y^rikkhxdL 
and the 
Atikrf^/f’/^ra, (as 
well 
as) the AT4ndriya«a, 
are 
penances for all 
(offences).
C h a p t e r X X .
1. 
L et him cast off a father who assassinates a 
king, who sacrifices for ^SAdras, who sacrifices for 
his own sake (accepting) money from 6’fidras, who 
divulges the V eda .(to persons not authorised to 
study it), who kills a learned Brdhmawa, who dwells 
with men o f the lowest castes, or (cohabits) with a 
fem ale of one of the lowest castes.
2. H aving assembled the (sinner’s) spiritual Gurus
18. 
These (acts), i. e. the recitation of the Veda and so forth, 
which have been enumerated above, Sutras 11-16.
20. Regarding these penances, see chapters XXVI and XXVII. 
Haradatta again takes the word iti, which occurs in the text, to 
include other difficult penances.
XX. 
I. Haradatta remarks that the father is mentioned here, 
in order to indicate that other less venerable relatives must certainly 
also be abandoned. He also states that bhruwahan, ‘ he who slays 
a learned Brahmawa,’ includes sinners who have committed other 
mortal sins (mahapdtakas), see XXI, r.
2. 
Manu XI, 183-185; Yd^iiavalkya III, 295. 
The spiritual

--- PAGE 339 ---
XX, 10.
PE N AN C E S.
275
and the relatives by marriage, (the sons and other 
kinsmen) shall perform (for him) all the funeral 
rites, the first o f which is the libation of water,
3. A nd (afterwards), they shall overturn his water- 
vessel (in the following manner) :
4. A slave or a hired servant shall fetch an
impure vessel from a 
(with water
taken) from the pot of a female slave ahd, his face 
turned towards the south, upset it with his foot, 
pronouncing (the sinner's) name (and sayin g): ‘ I 
deprive N. N. o f water.'
5. A ll (the kinsmen) shall touch him (the slave) 
passing their sacrificial cords over the right shoulder 
and under the left arm, and untying the locks on 
their heads.
6. T h e spiritual Gurus and the 
relatives by 
marriage shall look on.
7. H aving bathed, they (all 
shall) enter 
the 
village.
8. H e who afterwards unintentionally speaks to 
the (outcast sinner) shall stand, during one night, 
reciting the S^vitri.
9. If he intentionally (converses with the out­
cast, he must perform the same penance) for three 
nights.
10. But if an (outcast sinner) is purified by 
(performing) a penance, (his kinsmen) shall, after 
he has become pure, fill a golden vessel (with water) 
from a very holy lake or a river, and make him 
bathe in water (taken) from that (vessel).
Gurus, i. e. the teacher who initiated him (aHrya) and those who 
instructed him in the Veda (upSdhyaya).
8. Manu XI, 185.
10. Manu XI, 187-188; Y^^Havalkya III, 296.
T 2

--- PAGE 340 ---
2 7 6
G A U T A M A .
X X , II.
11. Th'en they shall give him. that vessel and he, 
after taking it, shall mutter (the following liiantras): 
‘ Cleansed is the sky, cleansed is the earth, cleansed 
and auspicious is the middle sphere; I here take 
that which is brilliant.’
12. Let him offer clarified butter, (reciting) these 
Y a ^ s formulas, the Pdvamanis, the Taratsamandis, 
and the Ktishmd;^i/as.
13. Let him present gold or a cow to a Brah- 
ma^^a,
14. A nd to his teacher.
15. But he, whose penance lasts for his (whole) 
lifetime, is purified after death.
16. 
L et (his kinsmen) perform for him all the 
funeral rites, the first of which is the libation of 
water.
1 7. - T his same (ceremony o f bathing in) water 
consecrated for the sake of purification (must be 
performed) in the case of all minor offences (upapi- 
takas).
C h a p t e r X X I.
I . 
T h e murderer of a Brdhmawa, he who drinks 
spirituous liquor, the violator of a G uru’s bed, he
11. As appears from Gobhila G?7’hya-sfitra III, 4, 16, the noun 
to be understood is apam afi^ali/4, ‘ a handful of water.’
12. Haradatta refers the term Pavamanis here to Taittiriya- 
brahma/za I, 4, 8. The Taratsamandis are found Rig-veda IX, 58.
17. ‘ “ Water (consecrated) for the sake of purification” means 
water consecrated by the formulas, “ Cleansed is the earth,” &c.’— 
Haradatta.
XXI. 
I. Apastamba I, 7, 21, 7-9, n ; I, 9, 24, 6-9 ; Manu XI, 
35 ; Y^navalkya III, 227. Guru, i. e. a father or spiritual teacher. 
The term yonisambandha, ‘sisters and their female offspring,’ seems 
to be used here in a sense different from that which it has HI, 3 ;

--- PAGE 341 ---
XXI, 9-
PE N AN C E S.
277
who has connexion with the female relatives of his 
mother and of his father (within six degrees) or with 
sisters and their female offspring, he who steals (the 
gold of a Brahma;^a), an atheist, he who constantly 
repeats blamable acts, he ^vho does not cast off 
persons guilty of a crime causing loss of caste, and 
he who forsakes blameless (relatives), become out­
casts,
2. Likewise those who instigate others to acts y 
causing loss of caste,
3. And he who for a (whole) year associates 
with outcasts.
4. T o be an outcast means to be deprived of 
the right to follow the lawful- occupations of twice- 
born men,
5. A nd to be deprived after death of the rewards 
of meritorious deeds.
6. Some call (this condition) hell.
7. Manu (declares, that) the first three (crimes, 
named above) cannot be expiated.
8. Some (declare, that a man) does not become 
an outcast (by having connexion) with female (rela­
tives), except (when he violates) a Guru’s bed.
9. A woman becomes an outcast by procuring
XIV, 20; and XIX, 20. It may possibly include also daughters- 
in-law.
2. Apastamba II, ii, 29, i.
3. Manu IX, 181 j Y%fiavalkya III, 261.
7. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 24-25; I, 9, 25, 1-3; Manu XI, 90-92, 
104-105. 
The ‘ penances’ prescribed are equal to a sentence of 
death.
8. Apastamba I, 7, 21, 10.
9. Y%ilavalkya III, 298. 
‘ On account of the word “ and,” 
by slaying a Brahmawa and similar crimes also. 
Another (com­
mentator) says, “ A woman who serves the slayer of a learned

--- PAGE 342 ---
2/8
G A U T A M A .
XXI, 10.
abortion, b y connexion with a (man of)*lower (caste) 
and (the like heinous crimes).
10. 
G iving false evidence, calumnies which will 
reach (the ears of) the king, an untrue accusation 
brought against a Guru (are acts) equal to mortal 
sins (mahapataka).
11. (The guilt of a) minor offence (upapitaka) 
rests on those who (have been declared to) defile 
the company (at a funeral dinner and have been 
named above) before the bald man, killers of kine, 
those who forget the Veda, those who pronounce 
Vedic texts for the (last-mentioned sinners), students 
who break the vow of chastity, and those who allow 
the time for the initiation to pass.
12. A n officiating priest must be forsaken, if he 
is ignorant (of the rules of the sacrifice), a teacher, 
if he does not impart instruction, and (both) if they 
commit crimes causing loss of caste.
13. 
H e who forsakes (them) under any other 
ckcumstances, becomes an outcast.
14. 
Som e declare, that he, also, who receives, (a
Brahmawa or a man of lower caste, i. e. becomes his wife, loses 
her caste. 
On account of the word ‘ and’ the same happens, 
in case she kills a Brahmawa or commits a similarly heinous crime. 
The slayer of a Brahmawa is mentioned in order to include (all) 
outcasts.” ’— Haradatta.
10. Manu XI, 56-57; Ya^g'uavalkya III, 228-229.
ir. Manu XI, 60-67 ; Y^^navalkya III, 234-242; Apastamba 
I, 7, 21, 12-17, 19. 
The persons who defile the company are 
enumerated above, XV, 16-18.
12. Apastaraba I, 2, 4, 26; I, 2, 7, 26; I, 2, 8, 28. 
Haradatta 
asserts that, as the desertion of sinners has been prescribed above, 
XX, I, the expression pataniyasevaydm must here mean ‘ if they 
associate with outcasts.’ The former rule refers, however, to blood 
relations only, and our Shtra may be intended to extend it to 
spiritual relations.

--- PAGE 343 ---
XXI, 22.
PEN AN C ES.
279
person who has unjustly forsaken his priest or 
teacher, becomes an outcast).
15. T h e mother and the father must not be 
treated improperly under any circumstances.
16. 
But (the sons) shall not take their property.
T 7. By accusing a Br^hmawa of a crime (the ac­
cuser commits) a sin equal (to that of the accused).
18. If (the accused is) innocent, (the accuser’s 
guilt is) twice (as great as that of the crime which 
he imputed to the other).
19. A nd he who, though able to rescue a weak 
man from injury, (does) not (do it, incurs as much 
guilt as he who injures the other).
20. H e who in anger raises (his hand or a weapon) 
against a BrS.hma«a, will be banished from heaven ^ 
for a hundred yeafs.
21. 
If he strikes, (he will lose heaven) for a 
thousand (years).
22. 
If blood flows, (he will lose heaven) for a 
number of years equal to (that of the particles of) 
dust which the spilt (blood) binds together.
15. Apastamba I, 10, 28, 9-10. The meaning is that parents, 
though they have become outcasts, must be provided with the 
necessaries of life.
16. Haradatta adds that their property goes to the king.
17. Apastamba I, 7, 21, 19.
18. Ya^avalkya III, 285.
20-21. Manu XI, 207; Ya^iiavalkya III, 293. 
According to 
Haradatta the word asvargyam, ‘ will be banished from or lose 
heaven,’ may either mean that a hundred years’ residence in heaven 
will be deducted from the rewards for his meritorious deeds, or 
that he will reside in hell for the period specified.
22. Manu XI, 208; Ya^navalkya III, 293.

--- PAGE 344 ---
2 8 o
G A U T A M A .
X X II, I.
C h a p t e r X X II.
1. (N ow follows the description of the) penances.
2. H e who has (intentionally) slain a Brahma«a 
shall emaciate himself, and thrice throw himself into 
a fire,
3. O r he may become in battle a target for 
armed men,
4. Or, remaining chaste, he may, during twelve 
years, enter the village (only) for the purpose of 
begging, carrying the' foot o f a bedstead and a 
skull in his hand and proclaiming his deed.
5. If he meets an A rya, he shall step out of the 
road.
6. Standing by day, sitting at' night, and bathing 
in the morning, at noon, and in the evening, he may 
be purified (after twelve years),
7. O r by saving the life of a Brihma;^a,
8. O r if he is, at least, thrice vanquished in 
(trying to recover) the property (of a BrMima^a) 
stolen (by robbers),
9. O r by bathing (with "the priests) at (the end 
o f) a Horse-sacrifice,
XXII. 
I. The text of the Sfltra consists of the single word 
‘ penance’ in the singular, which, being the adhikara or heading, 
must be taken with'each of the following Shtras down to the end 
of chapter XXIII.
2. Manu XI, 74.
3. Apastamba I, 9, 25,11.
4. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 11-20. 
Haradatta says, ‘ the foot of a 
bedstead ’ (kha/vanga) is known in the case of the Pajupatas, and 
indicates thereby that he interprets the term to mean ‘ a club 
shaped like the foot of a bedstead,’ which the P^upatas wear.
5. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 13. 
6. Apastamba I, 9, 25, 10.
7- Manu XI, 80; Yti^-navalkya III, 244-245.
8- Apastamba I, 9, 25, 21. 
9. Apastamba I, 9, 25, 22.

--- PAGE 345 ---
XXII, 17-
PE N A N C E S.
281
10. Or at (the end of) any other (Vedic) sacrifice, 
provided that an Agnish/ut (sacrifice) forms part 
o f it.
11. (The same penances must be performed) 
even if he has attempted the life of a Brihma?/a, 
but failed to kill him,
12. Likewise if he has killed a female (of the 
Brihm a«a caste) who had bathed after temporary 
uncleanness,
13. A lso for (destroying) the embryo of a Brah- 
ma;^a, though (its sex) may be not distinguishable.
14. For (intentionally) killing a Kshatriya the 
normal vow of continence (must be kept) for six 
years; and he shall give one thousand cows and 
one bull.
15. For (killing) a V aL ya (the same penance 
must be perform ed). during three years ; and he 
shall give one hundred cows and one bull.
16. For (killing) a ^Shdra (the same penance must 
be performed) during one y e a r; and he shall give 
ten cows and one bull.
17. And the same (rule applies) if a female (has.
10. Haradatta names the PaMaratra sacrifice as an instance of 
a Aauta ya.^fia, of which an Agnish/ut forms part. 
He adds that 
another commentator explains the Sutra to mean, ‘ or at any other 
sacrifice, provided that an AgnishAit sacrifice be its final ceremony. 
Regarding the Agnish/ut sacrifice see also above, XIX, 10.
11. Yaj^fiavalkya III, 252.
12. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 9'; Manu XI, 88; Y^g-fiavalkya III,
251-
A
13. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 8; Manu, Y^flavalkya, loc. cit.
14. Apastamba I, 9, 24, i. * ‘ Prakma (normal) means natural 
(svabhavika), i: e. not accompanied by the carrying of the foot of 
a bedstead and the rest.’— Haradatta.
A
15. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 2, 4.
16. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 3, 4.
17. Apastamba I, 9, 24, 5; Ya^'Bavalkya III, 269. 
Haradatta

--- PAGE 346 ---
282
G A U T A M A .
X X II, i8.
been killed) who was not in the condition (described 
in Shtra 12).
18.. 
(T he penance for killing) a cow is the same 
as for (the murder of) a Vabya,
19. A nd for injuring a frog, an ichneumon, a 
crow, a chameleon, a musk-rat, a mouse, and a dog,
20. A nd for killing one thousand (small animals) 
that have bones,
21. A lso for (killing) an ox-load o f (animals) that 
have no bones;
22. O r he may also give something for (the de­
struction o f) each animal that has bones.
■ 23. F or (killing) a eunuch (he shall give) a load ' 
o f straw and a m^sha of lead ;
24. F or (killing) a boar, a pot of clarified butter;
25. F or (killing) a snake, a bar of iron ;
26. F or 
(killing) an unchaste woman, who is 
m erely in name a Brahma;d, a leather bag;
says that this rule refers to-the expiation of the murder of a virtuous 
Brahmawi.
18. Apastamba I, 9, 26, i; Manu XI, 109-116; Yd^uavalkyalll, 
263. 
Haradatta thinks that the Sutra refers to the cow of a vir­
tuous 5 rotriya or of a poor Brahmawa who has many children.
19. Apastamba I, 9, 25,13. Haradatta explains dahara to mean 
a small mouse, but gives the meaning assigned to it in the transla­
tion as the opinion of others. He states that all the animals named 
must have been intentionally injured and together.
20. Manu XI, 142 ; Y^^fiavalkya III, 275.
21. Apastamba I, 9, 26, 2.
22. Haradatta quotes a verse showing that ‘ something’ means 
eight handfuls (mushd) of grain.
23. Manu XI, 134; Ya^fiavalkya III, 273.
24. Manu XI, 135.
25. Manu XI, 34; Ya^fiavalkya III, 273. Possibly dawali, a ^ar, 
denotes here a particular measure, as a dzfida, is said to be equal 
to four hastas or ninety-six angulis.
26. Manu XI, 139.

--- PAGE 347 ---
XXII, 36.
PE N AN C E S.
283
27. (For killing a woman wlio subsists) by har­
lotry, nothing at all.
28. F or preventing that (a Brahmai»^a) obtains a 
wife, food, or money, (he must) in each! case (remain 
chaste) during a year,
29. F or adultery two years,
30. (For adultery with the wife) o f a .S'rotriya 
three years.
31. A nd if he has received a present (from the 
woman), he shall throw it away,
32. O r restore it to the giver.
33. If he has employed Vedic texts for people 
'(with whom such intercourse is) forbidden, (he shall 
remain chaste for a year), provided (the portion of 
the Veda thus employed) contained one thousand 
words.
34. A nd the same (penance must be performed) 
by him who extinguishes the (sacred) fires, who 
neglects the daily recitation of the Veda, or (who is 
guilty) of a minor offence (upapataka),
35. A lso by a wife who violates her duty (to 
her husband); but, being guarded, she shall receive 
food.
36. F or committing a bestial crime, excepting 
(the case of) a cow, (he shall offer) an oblation of 
clarified butter, (reciting) the Kfishmd«^/a texts.
29-30. Apastamba II, 10, 27, ii.
33. 
Haradatla says that by the employment of Vedic texts, 
teaching or, sacrificing is meant, but that others refer the Sutra 
to the performance of these acts in the company of, not for 
unworthy people.
35. Manu XI, 189; Yd^uavalkya III, 297.
36. Manu XI, 174. Regarding the Kftshmd«(/as, see XIX, 12.

--- PAGE 348 ---
284
G A U T A M A .
X X I II, I.
C h a p t e r X X I I I .
1. T h ey shall pour hot spirituous liquor into the 
mouth o f a Br^hmawa who has drunk such liquor; 
he will be purified after death.
2. If he has drunk it unintentionally, (he shall 
drink) for three days hot milk, clarified butter, and 
water, and (inhale hot) air. 
T h at (penance is called 
the Tapta-)krz/(’/^/^ra. 
Afterwards he shall be again 
initiated.
3. A nd (the same penance must be performed.) 
for swallowing urine, excrements, or semen,
4. A nd (for eating) any part of a carnivorous, 
beast, of a camel or of an ass,
5. A nd of tame cocks or tame pigs.
6. If he smells the fume (exhaled) by a man who 
has drunk spirituous liquor, (he shall) thrice restrain 
his breath and eat clarified butter,
7. Also, if he has been bitten by (one o f the 
animals mentioned) above (Shtras 4-5).
8. H e who has defiled the bed of his Guru shall 
extend him self on a heated iron bed,
9. O r he shall embrace the red-hot iron image of 
a woman.
XXIII. 
I. Apastamba I, 9, 25,3. 
Haradatta remarks that (^her 
twice-born men also must perform the same penance in case they 
drink liquor forbidden to them, see above, II, 20 note. 
He also 
states that the offence must have been committed intentionally and 
repeatedly in order to justify so severe an expiation. 
Regarding 
the effect of the purification after death, see above, XX, 16.
2-3. Manu XI, 151 ; Y%-iiavalkya III, 255; see also Apastamba 
I, 9. 25,10.
4-5. Manu XI, 157. 
6. Manu XI, 150.
7. Manu XI, 200; Ya^navalkya III, 277.
8-10. Apastamba I, 9, 25, 1-2. 
Haradatta asserts that Guru 
denotes here the father alone.

--- PAGE 349 ---
XXIII, 15.
PE N A N C E S.
285
10. O r he shall tear out his organ and testi­
cles and, holding them in his hands, walk straight 
towards the south-west, until he falls down dead.
11. 
H e will be purified after death.
12. (The guilt of him who has intercourse) with 
the wife of a friend, a sister; a female belonging to 
the same family, the wife o f a pupil, a daughter- 
in-law, or with a cow, is as great as that of (him 
who violates his Guru’s) bed.
13. Some (declare, that the guilt of such a sinner 
is equal to) that o f a student who breaks the vow of 
chastity*
14. A woman who commits adultery with a man 
of lower caste the king shall cause to be devoured 
by dogs in a public place.
15. H e shall cause the adulterer to be killed 
(also).
12. Manu XI, 171-172; Y^ilavalkya III, 232-233.
13. ‘ The penance also consists in the performance of the rites 
obligatory on an unchaste student (see Sfitras 17-19), and that for 
the violation of a Guru’s bed need not be performed.’— Haradatta.
14. Manu VIII, 371.
15. Manu VIII, 372 ; Yd^ilavalkya II, 286; Apastamba II, 10, 
27, 9. 
]\Iy best hiss, read ghStayet, ‘ shall cause to be killed,’ 
instead of Professor Stenzler’s kh^dayet, ‘ shall cause to be de­
voured.’ 
C. has khSdayet, but its commentary, as well as that 
given in the other MSS., shows that ghatayet is the correct read­
ing. 
The text of the commentary runs as follows: Anantarokta- 
vishaye gata^ pumSn ra^a ghatayitvyo [khadayitavyo C.] vadha- 
prakaraji^anantaram eva vasish/^ava>fane darjita^. 
The 
passages of Vasish//;a, which Haradatta has quoted in explana­
tion of Sdtra 14, prescribe that the adulterer is to be burnt. 
Another objection to the reading khadayet is that the word would 
be superfluous. If Gautama had Intended to prescribe the same 
punishment for the adulterer as for the woman, he would simply 
have said pumd?«sam.

--- PAGE 350 ---
286
GAUTAMA.
XXIII, i6.
16. (Or he shall punish him in the manner) which 
has been declared (above).
1 7. A student who has broken the vow of chastity 
shall offer an ass to N irrfti on a cross-road.
18. Putting on the skin o f that (ass), with the 
hair turned outside, and holding a red (earthen) 
vessel in his hands, he shall beg in seven houses, 
proclaiming his deed.
19. H e will be purified after a year.
20. F or an involuntary discharge caused by fear 
or sickness, or happening during sleep, and if for 
seven days the fire-oblations and begging have been 
neglected, (a student) shall make an offering of clari­
fied butter or (place) two pieces of fuel (in the fire) 
reciting the two (verses called) Retasya.
21. L et him who was asleep when the sun rose 
rem aia standing during the day, continent and fast­
ing, and him who was asleep when the sun, set 
(remain in the same position) during the night, 
reciting the Giyatri-.
22. H e who has looked at an impure (person), 
shall look at the sun and restrain his breath (once).
23. L et him who has eaten forbidden food [or 
swallowed impure substances], (fast until) his entrails 
are empty.
16. 
Above, i. e. XII, 2, where the mutilation of the offender has 
been prescribed. 
See also Apastamba II, 10, 26, 20.
17-19. Apastamba I, 9, 26, 8-9.
20. Manu II, 181, 187; Ya^iiavalkya III, 278, 281. 
The 
Retasyas are found LTaittiriya Arawyaka I, 30.
21. Apastamba II, 5,12, 22 ; Manu II, 220.
22. ManuV, 86. 
‘ An impure person, i . q. z K in d ^ lz and the 
like. 
This rule refers to a student (who sees such a person) while 
he recites the Veda.’— Haradatta.
23-24. Apastamba I, 9, 27, 3-4. 
My copies omit amedhya-

--- PAGE 351 ---
XXIII, 31-
PEN AN C ES.
287
24. (In order to attain that), he must entirely ab­
stain from food at least for three (days and) nights.
25. O r (he becomes pure) after eating during 
seven (days and) nights fruits that have become 
detached spontaneously, avoiding (all other food).
26. (If he has eaten forbidden food mentioned 
above) before five-toed animals, he must throw it 
up and eat clarified butter.
27. F or abuse, speaking an untruth, and doing 
injury, (he shall practise) austerities for no longer 
period than three (days and) nights.
28. If (the abuse) was merited, (he shall offer) 
burnt-oblations, reciting (the Mantras) addressed to 
Varu?/a and (the hymns) revealed by Manu.
29. Some (declare, that) an untruth (spoken) at 
the time o f marriage, during dalliance, in jest or 
while (one suffers severe) pain is venial.
30. But (that is) certainly not (the case) when 
(the untruth) concerns a Guru.
31. For if he lies in his heart only to a Guru re­
garding small matters even, he destroys (himself), 
seven descendants, and seven ancestors.
prdjane vi, or has swallowed impure substances, and the words are 
not required, as another penance has been prescribed for the case 
above, Shtra 3. 
But see also SamavidhSna I, 5, 13.
26. Manu XI, 161. 
The Shtras referred to are XVII, 9-26.
27. Apastamba I, 9, 26, 3. 
My copies read triratraparamam 
instead of tririitram paramam. 
This reading, which seems pre­
ferable, is also confirmed by the commentary, where the words are 
explained, triratraparataya parewa triratram.
28. According to Haradatta the texts addressed toVaruwa are 
yatki?« /tedam, Taitt. Sawh. Ill, 4, ii, 6 ; imam me varu«a, tattvfi 
yami, Taitt. Sa»ih. II, i, ii, 6; and ava te he/o, Taitt. Sawh. I, 
g, II, 3. 
The hymns seen by Manu are Rig-veda VIII, 27-31,
29. Manu VII, 112.

--- PAGE 352 ---
288
G A U T A M A .
XXIII, 32.
32. F o r intercourse with a female (of one) of the 
lowest castes, he shall perform a Y^rikkhxz. penance 
during one year.
33. (F or committing the same sin) undesignedly, 
(he shall perform the same penance) during twelve- 
(days and) nights.
34. F or connexion with a woman during her 
courses, (he shall perform the same penance) for 
three (days and) nights.
C h apter X X I V .
1. A seci'et penance (must be performed) by him 
whose sin is not publicly known.
2. H e who desires to accept or has accepted (a 
gift) which ought not to be accepted, shall recite 
the four i?zk-verses (IX , 58, 1-4), (beginning) T arat 
sa mandi, (standing) in water,
3. H e who desires to eat forbidden food, shall
scatter earth ‘ (on it). 
'
4. Som e (declare, that) he who has connexion
J-------------------------- - ---- - --------------------------------------
32. Apastamba I, 10, 28, lo -ii. 
Regarding the Y^rikkhx'i. 
penance; see below, chapter XXVI.
34. IVIanu XI, i ‘74 ; Ya^iiavalkya III, 288.
XXIV. I. ManuXI, 248; Y^uavalkya III, 301.
2. ]\Ianu XI, 254. 
‘ H e who has accepted or desires to accept,
i. e. because no other course is possible, (a present) offered by a 
man that is blamable on account of the caste of the giver or 
on account of his deeds, or (a present) that in itself is blamable, 
e. g. the skin of a black-buck and the like . . . in water, i. e. 
according to some, standing in water that reaches to his navel; 
according to others, entirely immersed in water.’— Haradatta,
3. IManu loc. cit. ‘ Forbidden food has been described above, 
XVII, 8, 9. 
If, being unable to act otherwise, he desires to eat 
that, he shall throw earth, i. e. a piece of earth, (into it) and then 
eat it.’— Haradatta.
4. Haradatta adds that he shall bathe, dressed in his garments.

--- PAGE 353 ---
X X IV , 9-
PE N AN C E S.
289
with a woman during her courses becomes pure by 
bathing.
5. Som e (declare, that this rule holds good) in the 
case o f (one’s own) wives (only).
6. T h e (secret) penance for killing a learned 
Br4hma;za (is as follows): Living during ten days 
on milk (alone) or (on food fit for offerings), during 
a second (period of ten days) on clarified butter, and 
during a third (period of ten days) on water, par­
taking o f (such food) once only each day, in the 
morning,- and keeping his garments constantly wet, 
he- shall (daily) offer (eight) oblations, (representing) 
the hair, the nails, the skin, the flesh, the blood, the 
sinews, the bones, (and) the marrow. 
T h e end of 
each (Mantra) shall be, ‘ I offer in the mouth of the 
Atm an (the soul), in the jaws o f Death.’
7. Now another (penance for the murder o f a 
Brihmawa will be described):
8. T h e rule (as to eating and so forth), which has 
been declared (above, Shtra 6, must be observed),
9. (Arid) he shall offer clarified butter, reciting 
(the sacred text Rig-veda I, 189, 2), ‘ 0 fire, do 
thou ferry over,’ the M ahivydhrftis, and the Kvish- 
ma«fl!as;
5. Haradatta adds that another commentator reads ekestrishu,
i. e. eke astrfshu, and explains the Shtra to mean, ‘ Some (declare 
the above rule to refer also) to a bestial crime.’
6. YS^iiavalkya III, 303. According to Haradatta the complete 
Mantras are as follows: LomSnyatmano mukhe mrftyorasye^homi 
syaha, nakhanyd. m. m. a. ^uhomi svahS, Sec. This secret penance 
is apparently a milder form of that prescribed Apastamba I, 9,
25, 12;
9. 
The MahSvyahr/tis are, bhllA, bhuva^, sva^. 
Regarding the 
KfishmSWas, see above, XIX, 12.
[2] 
U

--- PAGE 354 ---
2 go
Ga u t a m a .
X X I V , lo :
10. Or, for the murder o f a Br4hma«a, for drinking, 
spirituous liquor, for stealing (gold), and for the vio­
lation o f a Guru’s bed, he may perform that (same 
vow), tire himself by repeatedly stopping his breath, 
and recite (the hymn seen by) Aghamarshawa. T hat 
is equal (in efficacy) to the final bath at a horse- 
sacrifice ;
11. 
Or, repeating the G iyatrl a thousand times, 
he, forsooth, purifies him self;
12. Or, thrice repeating (the hymn o f) Agha- 
marsha/^a while immersed in water, he is freed from 
all sins.
C h a p t e r X X V .
1. N ow they say: ‘ H ow many (gods) does a 
student enter who violates the vow of ch astity?’
2. (And they answer): ‘ H is vital spirits (go to) 
the M aruts (winds), his strength tp Indra, his emi­
nence in sacred learning to Brfhaspati, all the re­
maining parts to Agni.
3. He kindles the fire in the night of the new 
moon, and offers, by way of penance, two oblations 
of clarified butter,
10. Manu XI, 260-261; Y%fiavalkya III, 302. 
The vow 
intended is that prescribed above, Shtras 6, 8.
11, Ipastamba I, 9, 26, 14-I, 9 > 27. i- 
Haradatta remarks 
that the performer of the penance shall live on milk and stop his 
breath, repeatedly stopping his breath.
XXV. 
I. For this and the following five Sfitras, see Taittiriya 
Ara«yaka II, 18, i seq.
2. ‘ All the remaining parts, i. e. his sight and the other organs 
of sense, go to Agni. Thus a student who has broken the vow of 
chastity becomes short-lived, weak, destitute of eminence in sacred 
learning, and destitute of sight, and so forth. Therefore a penance 
must be performed.'— Haradatta. 
It must, of course, be under­
stood that the penance prescribed here, is a ‘ secret penance.’
3. ‘ He, i. e. the unchaste student, shall kindle the fire in the

--- PAGE 355 ---
XXV, 7-
PENANCES.
291
4. (Reciting these two sacred texts), ‘ Defiled by 
lust am I, defiled am I, oh L u st; to Lust s v i h i; ’ 
‘ Injured by lust am I, injured am I, oh. Lust; to 
Lust s v ih i.’ 
(N ext) he (silently) places one piece of 
sacred fuel (on the fire), sprinkles water round the 
fire, offers the Y a/n avistu (oblation), and approaching 
(the fire) worships it, thrice (reciting the text), ‘ M ay 
the waters sprinkle me.’
5. T hese worlds are th ree; in order to conquer 
these worlds, in order to gain mastership over these 
worlds, (this rite must be performed.)
6. According to some, the above (described) rite 
is a penance (for all hidden offences) in general, (and 
they say) regarding it, ‘ H e who m aybe impure, as it 
were, shall offer burnt-oblations in this manner, and 
shall recite sacred texts in this m anner; the fee (of 
the officiating- priest shall be) whatever he m ay 
choose.’
7. H e who has been guilty o f cheating, o f calum­
niating, o f acting contrary to the rule of conduct, 
o f eating or drinking things forbidden, o f con­
nexion with a woman of the .SCidra caste, of an un­
natural crime, and even of performing magic rites 
with intent (to harm his enemies), shall bathe and
night of the new moon, i. e. at midnight, in the manner declared in 
the Grihya-shtra,’— Haradatta.
4. 
Haradatta says that while sprinkling water the performer 
shall recite the texts ‘Aditi, thou hast permitted,’ see Apastamba II, 
2, 3, 17 note. 
The Ya,^flav^stu oblation, which follows after the 
Svish/akrft offering, is described Gobhila Gnhya-s^tra I, 8, 26-29.
7. 
Apastamba I, 9, 26, 7.. The verses addressed to the Waters 
are, Rv. X, 9, i-3=Taitt. Sa»2h. IV, i, 5, ‘i, and Taitt. Sa»2h. V, 
6, I. Regarding those addressed to Varuwa, see above, XXIII, 28. 
As an instance of ‘ other purificatory texts’ Haradatta quotes 
Taittiriya-brahma«a I, 4, 8, i.
U 2

--- PAGE 356 ---
2Q2
G A U T A M A ;
XXV, 8.
sprinkle him self with water, reciting the texts ad­
dressed to 
the W aters, or 
those addressed 
to 
Varu;«a, or other purificatory texts.
8. F or offences committed by speaking or think­
ing o f forbidden things, the five Vydhrftis (must be 
recited).
9. O r for all (offences) he may sip water, (reciting) 
in the morning (the text), ‘ M ay the day and the sun 
purify m e ;’ and in the evening, ‘ T h e night and 
Varuwa.’
10. O r he may offer eight pieces o f sacred fuel, 
(reciting the texts beginning) ‘ D evakrftasya.’ 
B y 
m erely offering them he becomes free from all sin.
C h a p t e r X X V I .
1. Now, therefore, we will describe three Y^rik- 
khx2iS (or difficult penances).
2. (D uring three days) he shall eat at the morning- 
meal food fit for offerings, and fast in the evening.
8. Regarding the five Vyahrztis, see above, I, 51.
^ 1 0 . Haradatta gives the following four Mantras: Devakrfta- 
syainasovaya^anam asi svahd, ‘ thou art the expiation for sin com­
mitted by the gods,' svahEl.pitrfkritasyainaso . . . svahS, manushya- 
krftasyainaso . . . svaha, asmatkr/tasyainaso . . . svdh^. 
But see 
Va^asaneyi-sawhita V III, 13, where eight Mantras are given, and 
below, X X V II, 7.
X X V I. 
I. SSmavidhanaI, 2, i ; Apastamba I, 9, 2 7 ,7 - Haradatta 
states that 2X2J1, ‘ therefore,’ means ‘because the KnM ^ras cannot be 
performed if they have not been described,’ while Saya//a, on the 
S^mavidhana, asserts that it means ‘ because unpurified persons 
who are unable to oifer sacrifices cannot gain heavenly bliss 
without performing austerities such as Y^rikhhx^'S,! It is a remark­
able fact that Haradatta does not seem to have been aware that 
the twenty-sixth chapter o f Ggutama is taken bodily from the 
Samavidhana.
2. 
samavidhana I, 2, 2. 
‘ Food fit for offerings, i.e. such as 
is not mixed with salt or pungent condiments.’
V

--- PAGE 357 ---
X X V I , 12.
PE N AN C E S.
293
3. Next, he shall eat (food fit for offerings),
during another period of three days, in the even­
ing (only). 
^ 
.
4. N ext, during another period of three days, he 
shall not , ask anybody (for food).
5. Next, he shall fast during another period of 
three days.
6. H e who desires (to be purified) quickly, shall 
stand during the day, and sit during the night.
7. H e shall speak the truth.
8. H e shall not converse with 
anybody but 
Aryans.
9. H e shall daily sing the two (Samans called) 
Raurava and Y a u d h i^ y a .
10. H e shall bathe in the morning, at noon, and 
in the evening, reciting the three (verses which 
begin) ‘ For ye waters are,’ and he shall dry himself 
reciting the eight purificatory (verses which begin) 
‘ T h e golden-coloured.’
11. N ext (he shall offer) libations of water.
12. Adoration to him who creates self-conscious­
ness, who creates matter, who gives gifts, who de­
stroys (sin), who performs penance, to Punarvasu, 
adoration.
3-5. Samavidhana I, 2, 3.
6. Samavidhana I, 2, 4.
7 -11. Samavidhana I, 2, 5. 
Aryans, i. e. Brahma«as, Ksha- 
triyas, and Vauyas, Regarding the Samans and Mantras, see notes 
to Burnell’s edition of the Samavidhana, and above, XXV, 7. 
Haradatta remarks that in the Taitt. Sawzh. (V, 6, i) the Mantras 
beginning ‘ The golden-coloured’ are ten in number, and adds that 
‘ if in some other Aakh^ eight are found, those must be taken.’
12. 
S3.mavidhana I, 2, 5, where, however, only four Mantras are 
given instead of our thirteen. 
The epithets given to the deity in 
the Samavidhana can all be referred to the Sun, provided he is

--- PAGE 358 ---
294
GAUTAM A.
X X V I, 12.
Adoration to him who is worthy of (offerings) 
consisting o f Muh^a grass, who is worthy of (offer­
ings o f) water, who conquers wealth, to him “who 
conquers the universe, adoration.
Adoration to him who gives success, who gives 
full success, who gives great success, to him who car­
ries (all undertakings) to a successful issue, adoration.
Adoration to Rudra, the lord o f cattle, the great 
god, the triocular, solitary, supreme lord Hari, to 
dread .5arva, to l^ina who carries the thunderbolt, 
to the fierce wearer of matted locks, adoration.
Adoration to the Sun, to A d iti’s offspring, adora­
tion.
Adoration to him whose neck is blue, to him 
whose throat is dark-blue, adoration.
Adoration to the black one, to the brown one, 
adoration.
Adoration to Indra, the first-born, the best, the 
ancient, to chaste H arikej’a, adoration.
Adoration to the truthful purifier, to fire-coloured 
Kdma, who changes his form at pleasure, adoration.
Adoration to the brilliant one, to* him whose 
form is brilliant, adoration.
identified with the universal soul, while in the above Sfitra, Rudra 
and Indra have been introduced. 
It cannot be doubtful that the 
S^mavidh^na gives an older and more authentic form of the prayer. 
My translation of the epithets, which are found in the Samavidhana 
also, follows Saya«a’s gloss. 
Haradatta does not explain them. 
About Sobhya in the twelfth Mantra, which possibly might mean, 
‘ he who dwells in a mirage, i.e. the Samsara,’ I feel doubtful. 
My MSS. read somya, and the Samavidhana has saumya in the 
second Mantra. But I am unwilling to alter the word, as Professor 
Stenzler’s reading may have been derived from a South-Indian 
MS., where bhya and mya do not resemble each other so much as 
in the Devanagarl characters.

--- PAGE 359 ---
X X V I, 21.
PEN AN CES.
295
Adoration to the fierce one, to him whose form 
is fierce, adoration.
Adoration to Sobhya, the beautiful, the great 
male, the middle male, the highest male, to the 
student of the Veda, adoration.
Adoration to him who wears the moon on his 
forehead, to him whose garment is a skin, adoration,
13. 
T h e worship o f Aditya (the sun) must be 
performed with the same (texts).
14. Offerings of clarified butter (must be made 
with the help o f) the same (texts).
15. A t the end of the period of twelve days he 
shall boil rice and make offerings to the following 
deities,
16. (Viz.) to A gn i svahi, to Soma svaha, to Agni 
and Soma (conjointly), to Indra and A gni (con­
jointly), to Indra, to all the gods, to Brahman, to 
Pra^pati, (and) to A gni Svish/akrft.
1 7. Afterwards (he must feed) Br4hma?zas.
18. B y the above (rules) the KXAkrikkkxdi (or 
exceedingly difficult) penance has been explained.
19. (But when he performs that), he shall eat 
(only) as much as he can take at one (mouthful).
20. T h e third (Krf/iW^ra) is that where water 
is 
the (only) food, and 
it is called Kr/Z’/'/^rdti- 
hrikk/ira. (or the most difficult penance).
21. H e who has performed the first of these 
(three) becomes pure, sanctified, and worthy (to 
follow) the occupations (of his caste).
13-17. Samavidh^na I, 2, 5.
18. Samavidhana I, 2, 6. 
^
19. Samavidhana I, 2, 7; Manu XI, 214; Ya^navalkya III, 320.
20. Sdmavidhdna I, 2, 8 ;
21-23. Samavidhana I, 2, 9.

--- PAGE 360 ---
296
G A U T A M A .
X X V I, 22.
22. H e who has performed the second is freed 
from all sins which he commits, excepting mortal 
sins (mahapitaka).
23. H e who has performed the third, removes all 
guilt.
24. N ow he who performs these three Y>.rikkhx2iS 
becomes perfect in all the Vedas, and known to all 
the gods;
25. Likewise he who knows this.
C h a p t e r X X V I I .
1. Now, therefore, the isfdndriyawa 
(or lunar 
penance will be described).
2. T h e (general) rules prescribed for a 'K^rikkhxz. 
(are applicable) to that.
3. (T he hair must be) shaved, in case it (is per­
formed as) a penance.
4. H e shall fast on the day preceding the full 
moon.
5. A nd (he shall offer) libations (of water), obla­
tions o f clarified butter, consecrate the sacrificial 
viands, and worship the moon, reciting these (rikz.^,, 
‘ Increase’ (R ig-veda I, 91, 17)1 ‘ M ay milk be joined 
with th e e ’ (Rig-veda I, 91, 18, and) ‘ E ver n ew ’ 
(Rig-veda X , 85, 19).
24-25. SamavidMna I, 2,10. Sarveshu vedeshu snata^, ‘perfect 
in all theVedas,’ means, literally, equal to a student who has bathed 
after completing the study of all the four Vedas. 
^ 
*
XXVII. 
2. 
The rules meant particularly are those given 
XXVI, 6 -n .
3. ‘ He calls penance vrata.’— Haradatta.
5. ‘ The four religious acts, the first of which is the offering of 
libations, are to be performed with the help of the three sacred 
texts, the first of which begins “ Increase.” As the number (of the 
acts and of the verses) does not agree, the fire-oblations and the

--- PAGE 361 ---
X X V I I, 9-
PEN AN C ES.
297
6. H e shall offer (clarified butter), reciting the 
four {rik'a.s beginning) ‘ Y a d dev^ devaheflfanam,’
7. A n d at the end (of the offering of clarified 
butter he shall offer) pieces of sacred fuel, reciting 
(the texts beginning) ‘ D eyakrftasya.’
8. Each mouthful o f food must be consecrated 
by the mental recitations (of one) of the following 
(words) : 
Om, hhd/i, bhuva^, 
sva^, truth, fame, 
prosperity, 
vigour, 
refreshment, 
strength, lustre, 
soul, law, Yiva.
■9. O r (he may consecrate) all (of them at once, 
saying). Adoration svdhi.
libations of water must be performed severally, each with one text, 
and the consecration (of the offerings) and the worship (of the 
moon must be performed with all of them) together.’— Haradatta.
6. ‘ He shall offer— as nothing is specified— clarified butter, 
with the first four ri^as of the Anuvaka ‘Yad deva devahe</anam.’ 
Counting the three mentioned above (Sfltra 5), altogether seven 
oblations of clarified butter must be made.’— Haradatta.
7. ‘ On completion of the oblations of clarified butter, he 
shall of(er pieces of sacred fuel, reciting the eight sacred texts, 
which begin “ Devakn'tasya,” and have been mentioned above 
(XXV, 10). 
The word “ completion” (anta) is merely a con­
firmation of something established, because (the place of the 
offering) is already fixed by the place of the rule. 
But others 
explain the word “ ante ” ,to mean “ at the end of the A’andra- 
ya«a.” 
The word “ and ” does not agree with their (opinion).’— 
Haradatta.
8. Haradatta observes that on the days when the performer eats 
less than fifteen mouthfuls, the later mentioned texts must be left 
qut, and that, while eating, the performer must employ the Pra«ahuti 
Mantras (Apastamba II, 1,1, 2 note). He concludes by giving the 
following prayoga for the performance of the ceremony: ‘ He 
places all the food in his dish, and consecrates it by the texts 
“ Increase," &c. Next he divides it into mouthfuls, and consecrates 
each successively with the word Om and the rest, and eats them, 
reciting the texts for the Prawdhutis.’
9. Haradatta states that either of the two words may be used

--- PAGE 362 ---
298
G A U T A M A .
XXVII, 10.
10. T h e size of a mouthful (shall be such) as not 
to cause a distortion o f the mouth (in swallowing it).
1 1 . T h e sacrificial viands are, boiled rice, food 
obtained by begging, groimd barley, grain separated 
from the husk, barley-griiel, vegetables, milk, sour 
milk, clarified butt& , roots, fruits, and water; (among 
these) each succeeding one is preferable (to those 
enumerated earlier).
12. 
H e shall eat on the day of the full moon 
fifteen mouthfuls, and during the dark half (of the 
month) daily diminish his portion b y one (mouthful).
13. H e shall fast on the day o f the new moon, 
and during the bright half (of the month) daily in­
crease (his portion) .by one (mouthful).
14. According to some (the order shall be) in­
verted.
15. T h at (is called) a month, occupied by the 
A'dndraya^a penance.
16. H e who has completed that, becomes free 
from sin and free from crime, and destroys all guilt.
17. H e who has completed a second (month, 
living according to that rule), sanctifies himself, ten
in consecrating all the mouthfuls, but that others think, both should 
be used.
10. Ya^flavalkya III, 324.
11. The term ‘ sacrificial viands' denotes here, according to 
Haradatta, the food eaten by the performer, w'hich, like that eaten 
by the performer of a Yirikkhxz., must be havishya, ‘fit for an offering,’ 
see above, XXVI, 2. Haradatta adds that, as a Gr?hastha must not 
beg, the food obtained by “begging must have been collected by his 
pupils, and that liquid food must be used for the expiation of the 
more serious offences.
12. Manu XI, 217-218; Ya^navalkya III, 324-325.
14. I. e. the performer may begin with the fast on the day of 
the new moon.

--- PAGE 363 ---
X X V III, 5-
IN H E R IT A N C E .
299
ancestors, and ten descendants, as well as (any) 
company (to which he may be invited);
18. 
A nd he who has lived for a year (according 
' to that rule), dwells (after death) in the world of the 
moon.
C h a p t e r X X V I I I .
1. A fter the father’s death let the sons divide 
his estate,
2. Or, during his lifetime, when the mother is 
past child-bearing, if he desires it,
3. O r the whole (estate may go) to the first-born; 
(and) he shall support (the rest) as a father.
4. But in partition there is an increase of spiritual 
merit.
5. (The additional share) o f the eldest (son con­
sists of) a twentieth part (of the estate), a male and
18. Manu XI, 221; Y^fiavalkya III, 327.
XXVIII. 
I. Colebrooke, Dayabhdga II, 4; Mitdkshard I, 2, 7; 
V, Digest 20; Mayfikha IV, 4, 3. Haradatta remarks that, accord­
ing to Gautama, the sons alone shall divide the estate, and that the 
mother is not to receive a share, as other teachers, e.g. Y^uavalkya 
II, 123, prescribe. Apastamba II, 6,13, 2; Manu IX, 104; Ya^a- 
valkya II, 1 17.
2. Colebrooke and Mayhkha loc. cit. ‘ Or the sons may divide 
the estate even during the lifetime of the father; when 
desires 
it, i. e. by his permission. 
The time for such a (division is) when 
the mother is past child-bearing.’— Haradatta. The correctness”^ of 
this interpretation of our Shtra is corroborated by the exclusion of 
sons who have divided the family estate against the father’s will 
(XV, 19) from the ArSddha dinner. 
Apastamba II, 6, 14, i.
3. Colebrooke, Dayabh%a III, i, 15; Manu IX, 105.
4. Colebrooke, Ddyabhaga III, i, 14; V, Digest 47. 
After 
division each brother has to perform the Vairvadeva and the other 
domestic ceremonies separately, while in a united family they are 
performed by the eldest brother. 
Thus a division of the family 
estate causes an increase of spiritual merit; see also Manu IX, i n .
5. Colebrooke,DSyabhdgaII,37; ^;Dtoest47J ManuIX, 112.

--- PAGE 364 ---
300
G AtTTAM A.
X X V III, 6.
a female (of animals with one row of front teeth, 
such as cows), a carriage yoked with animals that 
have two rows o f front teeth, (and) a bull.
6. (T he additional share) of the middlemost (con­
sists of) the one-eyed, old, hornless, and tailless 
animals, if there are several.
7. (T he additional share) o f the youngest (con­
sists o f) the sheep, grain, the iron (utensils), a house, 
a cart yoked (with oxen), and one of each' kind of 
(other) animals.
8. A ll the remaining (property shall be divided) 
equally.
/ 9. O r let the eldest have two shares, 
j| 10. A n d the rest one each.
II. 
O r let them each take one kind o f property, 
(selecting), according to seniority, what they desire.
6, Colebrooke 11. cit. 
‘ And that (additional share is given), if 
of the one-eyed and the rest there are several, i. e. if the others also 
get (some).’
7. Colebrooke 11. cit 
‘ Avi^ (a sheep), i. e. an animal having 
a fleece. 
The singular number (is used to denote) the species, 
(and the explanation is), “As many sheep as there are.” For (the 
possession of) one would follow already from the phrase, “ And 
one of each kind of animals.” 
Another (commentator says), 
“ Though the father may possess one sheep only, still it belongs to 
the youngest, and the phrase ‘ one of each kind of animals’ refers 
to the case when there are many.” . . . This (additional share is 
that) belonging to the youngest, . (If there are more than three 
sons) the others obtain the share of the middlemost.’— Haradatta.
8. Colebrooke 11. cit.
9. Colebrooke, Dayabhaga II, 37; V, Digest 51. My best copy 
P. leaves out this Sfltra and the next. The others read dvyawtrl vS. 
pArva^^aA (not pArva^gasya, as Professor Stenzler reads), and explain 
the former word as follows, ‘ dvdvawrau dvyamsam tadasyastiti 
dvyami.’ 
Manu IX, 117.
10. Colebrooke 11. cit.
11. Colebrooke V, Digest 68.

--- PAGE 365 ---
X X V III, 19-
i n h e r i t a n c e .
301
12. T en head of cattle.
13. (But) no (one brother shall) take (ten) one- 
hoofed beasts or (ten) slaves.
14. (If a man has several wives) the additional 
share of the eldest son is one bull (in case he be 
born of a later-married wife) ;
15. (But the 
eldest son) being born o f the
first-married wife (shall have) fifteen cows and one 
b u ll; 
■
16. O r (let the eldest son) who is born of a later- 
married wife (share the estate) equally with his 
younger (brethren born of the first-married wife).
17. O r let the special shares (be adjusted) in 
each class (of sons) according to their mothers.
18. A father who has ho (male) issue may appoint 
his daughter (to raise up a son for him), presenting 
burnt offerings to A gni (fire) and to Pra^ipati (the 
lord of creatures), and addressing (the bridegroom 
with these words), ‘ F or me be (thy male) offspring.’
19. Some declare, that (a daughter becomes) an
12. Colebrooke loc. cit. The meaning appears to be that no 
brother is to select more than ten head of cattle.
13. Colebrooke V, Digest 69. ‘ But, as has been declared above 
(Shtra ii), one of each kind only. In the case of the v. 1. dvipa- 
dan&m, the word pada (step) is used in the sense of the word pSda 
(foot).’— Haradatta.
14. Colebrooke V, Digest 58; Manu IX, 123,
15. Colebrooke loc. cit.; Manu IX, 124.
16. Colebrooke loc. cit.
17. Colebrooke V, Digest 59. ‘ After having divided the estate 
into as many portions as there are wives who possess sons, and 
having united as many shares as there are sons (of each mother), 
let the eldest in each class (of uterine brothers) receive the special 
share of one-twentieth and so forth.’— Haradatta.
18-19. Colebrooke V, Digest 225; Manu IX, 130-140.

--- PAGE 366 ---
302
G A U T A M A .
X X V I II, 20.
appointed daughter solely by the intention (of the 
father).
20. Through fear of that (a man) should not 
m arry a girl who has no brothers.
21. Sapiw^as (blood relations within six degrees), 
Sagotras (relations bearing a common fam ily name), 
(or) those connected by descent from the same i?z’shi 
(vaidika gotra), and the wife shall share (the estate) 
o f a person deceased without (male) issue (or an 
appointed daughter).
22. O r (the widow) may seek to raise up offspring 
(to her deceased husband).
23. (A son) begotten on a (widow) whose hus­
band’s brother lives, b y another (relative), is e x ­
cluded from inheritance.
24. A woman’s separate property (goes) to her 
unmarried daughters, and (on failure o f such) to poor 
(married daughters).
20. ManuIII, ri; Ya^fiavalkya I, 53.
21. Colebrooke, Dayabh^a XI, 6, 25; Mitakshara II, i, 18; 
V, Digest 440. 
My copies as well as (Jimfitavahana and Vi^S^- 
nesvara read in the text stri vS, ‘or the wife,’ instead of stri 
‘ and the wife.’ 
Still the latter seems to be the reading recog­
nised by Haradatta, as he says, ‘ But the wife is joined together 
(samu^^iyate) with all the Sagotras and the rest. 
When the Sago­
tras and the rest inherit, then the wife shall inherit one share with 
them,’ &c. 
Apastamba II, 6, 14, 2; Manu IX, 187; YS^avalkya
II, 135-136-
22. Colebrooke, Mitakshard II, i, 8, where this Sfltra has, how­
ever, been combined with the preceding. 
See also above, XVIII, 
4-8; Manu IX, 145-146,190.
23. Colebrooke V, Digest 341; Manu IX, 144.
24. Colebrooke, Dayabh^a IV, 2, 13; Mitakshari I, 3, i i ; 
II) 2, 4; V, Digest 490; Mayhkha IV, 8, 12. See also Manu IX, 
192; YS^g-fiavalkya II, 145.

--- PAGE 367 ---
X X V III, 32.
IN H E R IT A N C E .
303
25. T h e sister’s fee belongs to her uterine bro­
thers, if her mother be dead.
26. Some (declare, that it belongs to them) even 
while the mother lives.
27. T h e heritage of not reunited (brothers) de­
ceased (without male issue goes) to the 
eldest 
(brother).
28. If a reunited coparcener dies (without male 
issue) his reunited coparcener takes the heritage.
29. A son born after partition takes exclusively 
(the wealth) of his father.-
30. W hat a learned (coparcener) has acquired by 
his own efforts, he may (at his pleasure)' withhold 
from his unlearned (coparceners).
31. 
Unlearned (coparceners) shall divide (their 
acquisitions) equally.
32. A legitimate son, a son begotten on the wife
25. Colebrooke, DSyabhaga IV, 3, 27; V, Digest 511; Mayfikha 
-IV, 10, 32. 
‘ The fee, i.e. the money which at an Asura, or an
Arsha wedding, the father has taken for giving the sister away. 
That goes after his (the father’s) death to the uterine brothers of 
that sister; and that (happens) after the mother’s death. 
But 
if the mother is alive (it goes) to her.’— Haradatta.
26. Colebrooke V, Digest 511.
27. Colebrooke V, Digest 424. 
‘ The word “ eldest” is used 
to give an example. 
(The property) goes to the brothers, not 
to the widow, nor to the parents. 
That is the opinion of the 
venerable teacher.’— Haradatta. YS^avalkya II, 134.
28. Mayhkha IV, 9, 15; Manu IX, 212; 
Y^ffiavalkya 
II, 138.
29. Colebrooke, D^yabhSga VII, 3; Manu IX, 216.
30. Colebrooke, DSyabhaga VI, i, i 7 J 
Digest 355 ; Mayh- 
kha IV, 7, 10 ; Manu IX, 206; Y^^Aavalkya II, 119.
31. Colebrooke V, Digest 137; Manu IX, 205.
32-33. Colebrooke V, Digest 184; Manu IX, 166-178; Y%-fla- 
valkya II, 128-132. My best copy P. inserts another Sfttra between

--- PAGE 368 ---
304
G A U T A M A .
XXVIII, 33.
(by a kinsman), an adopted son, a son made, a son 
born secretly, and a son abandoned (by his natural 
parents) inherit the estate (of their fathers).
33. T h e son o f an unmarried damsej, the son of 
a pregnant bride, the son o f a twice-married woman, 
the son of an appointed daughter, a son self-given, 
and a son bought belong to the family (of their 
fathers).
34. O n failure o f a legitimate son or (of the) 
other (five heirs) they receive a fourth (of the 
estate).
35. T h e son o f a Brdhma^a by a Kshatriya wife, 
being the eldest and endowed with good qualities, 
shares equally ,(with a younger brother, born o f a 
Brdhm a«t);
36. (But he shall) not (obtain) the additional 
share o f an eldest son.
this and the following one, ete tu gotrabhS^g'a^, ‘ but these (latter 
six) belong to the family (only, and do not inherit).’
34. Colebrooke V, Digest 184. 
‘ The residue of the estate 
goes to the Sapiw^fas. 
If it is here stated that the son of an 
appointed daughter receives, even on failure of a legitimate son, 
a fourth part of the estate only, that refers to the son of an ap­
pointed daughter of lower caste, i. e. to a son who is bom, when 
somebody makes the daughter of a wife of Tower caste his ap­
pointed daughter, and does that by intent only.’— Haradatta.
35. Colebrooke V, Digest 158 ; Manu IX, 149-153; Ya^fia- 
valkya II, 125. 
‘ If the son of a Br^hmawa by a Kshatriya wife 
is endowed with good qualities and the eldest, then he shares 
equally with a younger son by a Brahma«i. For the one possesses 
seniority by age and the other by caste.’— Haradatta.
36. Colebrooke loc. cit. 
‘ What is exclusive of the additional 
share of the eldest, which has been declared above, Sfltra 5, (that) 
other (part) he shall obtain. 
The verb must be understood 
from the context. 
Regarding a son by a Kshatriya wife who is 
the eldest, but destitute of good qualities, the Manava Dharma-

--- PAGE 369 ---
to
o
l-H
H
<
CO
-<
k;
H
H
P! Eh 
O w 
pCi <
o
S w
Eh 
It ;
o
Q
f-H
w «
K ^
•5 o 
s
3 0 
< §
12;fii
v>/
ko
c
■ K-
H
<.•
r-*
i-
H-
H-< •
1-1
CO-
Iz;
<
CO
w
wEh
pc<
O
TR AN SLITER ATIO N OF O RIEN TAL ALPH ABETS.
3°9
r ^
I-z<zowZoV
JS
m n 
n-
D
D
‘O
^ 
*I0v|
«'»^3 8^ o-./
|5 (5 K"
FT as c JA c
" — u <lJ U
» — UoJ-U
Ki 
lit'
E£)
Qy
k)-<Lv
U <yy
i l ;
lir icr lET M!" 1^
«> M
fee
c
J3 J3
03O
. 1
c3“ca .2
03 m S 
CSh *“*
3
S 
CO
Oc3
"S0 '
1o
d ^ 
a ^
c8
t ^
Eh 
§ 
O
r -« 
(M 
CO
ca
O h
CO
0 0 
0 5 
5
QQ
0
*3
1
pS
c5
c
oT
o
'3
"3
3
Pt
.2
ci ^ ca
CO
Gh ca
COea
c
03
H
CO
Vi '3
03
lO
V

--- PAGE 370 ---
304
GAUTAMA.
XXVIII, 33.
(by a kinsman), an adopted son, a son made, a son 
born secretly, and a son abandoned (by his natural 
parents) inherit the estate (of their fathers).
33. T h e son o f an unmarried damsej, the son of 
a pregnant bride, the son of a twice-married woman, 
the son o f an appointed daughter, a son self-given, 
and a son bought belong to the family (of their 
fathers).
34. O n failure o f a legitim ate son or (of the) 
other (five heirs) they receive a fourth (of the 
estate).
35. T h e son o f a Br4hnia/^a by a K shatriya wife, 
being the eldest and endowed with good qualities, 
shares equally ,(with a younger brother, born of a 
Brihm a;d) ;
36. (But he shall) not (obtain) the additional 
share o f an eldest son.
this and the following one, ete tu gotrabhS^g^a^, ‘ but these (latter 
six) belong to the family (only, and do not inherit).’
34. Colebrooke V , Digest 184. 
‘ T h e residue o f the estate 
goes to the Sapi«<fas. 
If it is here stated that the son of an 
appointed daughter receives, even on failure o f a legitimate son, 
a fourth part o f the estate only, that refers to the son of an ap­
pointed daughter o f lower caste, i. e. to a son who is bom, when 
somebody makes the daughter o f a wife o f 'lower caste his ap­
pointed daughter, and does that by intent only.’— Haradatta.
35. Colebrooke V , Digest 15 8 ; Manu IX , 14 9 -15 3 ; Y ^ 3 a- 
valkya II, 125. 
‘ I f the son of a BrShmawa by a Kshatriya wife 
is endowed with good qualities and the eldest, then he shares 
equally with a younger son by a Brahmawt. 
For the one possesses 
seniority by age and the other by caste.’— Haradatta.
36. Colebrooke loc. cit. 
‘ What is exclusive o f the additional 
share of the eldest, which has been declared above, SHtra g, (that) 
other (part) he shall obtain. 
T h e verb must be understood 
from the context. 
Regarding a son by a Kshatriya wife who is 
the eldest, but destitute of good qualities, the MSnava Dhanna-

--- PAGE 371 ---
TR A N SLITER A TIO N OF O R IE N TA L ALPH ABETS.
309
O
H
Wl
<
Pi
H
w
Pi H 
O w 
h <
ow w
H H
Ato
Q
<
c/i
H
W
K
<A P3
l i
■1 L)
'i^ CO 
iz; H
• 
H
O
A
O
C
<.
r-'
uHH-<
C/}*
12;
<CiJ
H
H
Z<iz
o
Vi55
Ou
^ 
. 
. 
.
n n
D
D
: \ ) 
.' -
^ A o o j
< I ^ '\3 gy* O sl
If 15 K- P-
f: 5£ C ?A c
U oJ D
» — UoJ-U
Ki 
lu/
\d
<Zy
:
z6 ■
17
fee '
fee
c
- r£i -C
7}
o
CO 
C4
o 
§ 
<M CO
■S .2
-2 
A ^
• M 2
. 
=2
<U 
CD 
53 
OT
C. -r
3
"S
Ph ‘2
s 
S
a 
3
" 3
o
»n
52;
a,
02
CO C5 O
ocd
-*-»
cd
■'3 ^
o ^
a CQ 
O
pH
05 ^
'3 .3
3 3
•«-!>
O
5 "5
a
&i Cj 
CO V 
c3 <2,
^ 
s
^ »c
f^]
V

--- PAGE 372 ---
310
TR A N SLITE R A TIO N OF O RIEN TAL A LPH ABETS
o 
>1
‘b
0 O 
• •'I
‘ b 
D
<3 o 
• -n 3 ~r)
^ 'b ’b
P <J 
2,
? -S 
e -^
1 <ir
'o
K-
tc p- . hr 5T • P IS f8
s
• 
#<o * '0
03
• 
N 
N -
‘'>1 
«c tj
X>
r3
C — .
wH .
§1 
i/i 3 
Z 8 
Ou
-*->ri
O>
e0>
C/3
00
cu
COcd
Sh
W
05 O
1-H (M
CU
cned
CQO
'3
do
P
^ 
c3 
c3
•- :2
^ .-I
.53 X5 
Ci4 ’53
CS
oi
a
03
CO
CO
r 
5
‘5
c
1 3
CO
u
H
•t
4)
,- ( 
(M
CO
CO
00
0 5
(M 
<N
(M
(N
(N
(M
(M
CVl
13uO>
(M
<M
CO
03
3
*06
r-<
(U
C l
t l
<u
CO
a
* S
O)
a .
a
’B
03
o .
CO
c3 00
c3
c3
§
03
a
4
4 J
O ,
C /J
<M
CO
rt<
» o
t o
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO

--- PAGE 373 ---
FO R T H E SA CR E D BO OKS OF T H E EAST.
■ I'
311

--- PAGE 374 ---
313
TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.
\1
'I AJ |> y,
.'i.
cci .S q
— q
:? 3 - 'T-
,-2 /
sS O
* 
to ^
p ^ 
t£? le* r p?' 
p • IV
_
‘5
■ S J , 
•
'5
<3
W '3 '
>0
'3' 
^ 
0 1
 J e
)0
<a>
ci
'o
0 
s
0
O >0) >0 
eS <rt
^ <;3 «
09
09
(6
• 
•
'S
'>
be .S 
d
09
c3
n
09
0
> 
b o
‘ >
b o
13
,0
0
« 
0
*4 
0
09»4
0
04
07
pO -2
rO
0
09
■3
3
1
§)
1
13S4
3
-4J
09
'0
09
13
"S
09
k
3
09
:2i
I-]
0
Ph
Q
03 CO
ID CD
0 0
0
c3
3
o 
S •:? S) 2 - s
.2> tc 2
" 5 
^
^ ° 2
m
13
e3 
't J 
be ^
S ^
p2
” 
Io
3t£)
tc0
•1 i -5
3fcO
co
,3
3be
co
3O
3o
04
3o
C ^ C O T f < » o O t ^ C O O O » - < C M 01 03 to CD • 
03 01 01
S> O f:- y .

--- PAGE 375 ---
00055860
00055860

--- PAGE 376 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 377 ---
Digitized with financial assistance from the
on 18 July, 2018
Government of Maharashtra

--- PAGE 378 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

