sment inscriptions 


CEYLON 


' COLLECTED AND PUULISHED FOR THE GOVERNMENT 


DR. EDWARD MULLER. 



TRU3NER i' CO, TiUDGATE HILL 


1883 .* 



The object of the present work is to give a collection of the 
inscriptions in Ceylon very much in the same way as the Coi-pus. 
Inscriptionum Indicarum by General Cunningham, of which the 
ilrst volwrae has appeared three years ago. TTnfortunately the 
man to whom the work was entrusted from the beginning and 
who was particularly able to accomplish it has been compelled 
to interrupt it at a time when he 6rst saw the fruits of his long 
and disinterested labour. Dr. Goldschmidt was ai>pointed 
Archreological Commissioner to the Government of Ceylon in 
IST-i, and began to work in the colony from the beginning of 
1875.' He visited first the district of AnurXdhapur.r, which is the 
oldest and most celebrated in Ceylon, and published his first 
Report on the 2nd September 1875. This Report, wluch has 
been reprinted in the Indian Antiquary’, Y. 18D, contains an 
account Qf those iuscriptions which are in the town of Anura- 
dhapura and in the immediate neiglibourbood, especially 
Mihintalc. Dr. Goldschmidt bad made Anuradlmpnra his head- 
quarters, and visited from there successively tlie whole Nortli ^ 
Central province. His second Report is dated from ilihinlale, 
Cth Hay 187C, and deals on the whole with the same inscriptions • 
as the first, but in a ’moie careful and accurate manner. The 
author very soon learned to distinguish between the ancient ami 
modem inscriptions, especially from palmogiMphical reasons, he 
found out that the characters used by' the kings xip to the fourth j 
century A.D. are very much like the A^oka character used 
in India, and that apccuHar Sinhalese character did notoiiginate 
until the 8th or 9tli century’. About the intermediate period he 
was unable to judge, as there are no inscriptions in the Anura- 
dhapurn district which clearly belong to this time. At 
Polonnaruwa Dr. Goldschmidt found a large field for his activity', 

I as this place had been recently cleared at the time when the 
Prince of Wales visited the island.; a great number of inscriptions 
was discovered there, amongst wliicli the most important is that 
of Parrilcratnabahu I. at the Galwiliara (No. 187). 'ilic r*'st of 
. 'QC038. Wt. r.44. 2 



4 


the inscriptions at the second capital belong chiefly to King 
Kigejanka Malla and liia successors, but a great part of the town 
is even at the present moment covered with jiinglo and remains 
for a later generation, from Polonnaruwa Dr. Goldschmidt 
turned towards Tiincomalce. where, however,he did not discover 
any antiquities of importance, and thcnco tlirougU Batticaloa to 
Hambantota on the south coast of the island At that time he 
■was already buffering from the illnes-s which afterwards caused 
his death, but he refused the opportunity that was offered 
him to proceed to a more healthy district. The inecriptious in 
the Hambantota district are nearly as old as those in the North 
Central province, but they are not so well preserved on account 
of the quality of the stone, and also because they are generally 
inoie exposed to the weather. Dr. Qoldsclimidt spent 10 months in 
this dibtiict, and visited all the places of importance down to Yah 
svhich is about GO miles from Hambantota. He had to undergo 
great hardsliips, as the roads were in a inberable state and no 
bridges to cross the numerous rivers. The chief place of interest 
(is the ruined city of Tissamaliarama, about 20 miles from 
Hambantota in the interior, where the immense dugoba, ei-ected 
by King Mahanaga, was just undergoing repair at the time when 
'Dr. Goldschmidt visited the place. He climbed up tbc dSgoba 
and copied the iosetipUon which is inside (Ko. 4'), and has become 
invisible since the repair is completed. Subsequently, he went 
to Kirimle, Situlpawihara, and Katragam, and afterwards along 
the south coast to Mataraand Akurcssn. Here he %Trote his last 
Beporr (dated 11th September 1870), printed as Sessional Paper 
No. XI.. and reprinted in the Indian Antiquary, VI., 818, which 
gives a siirveyof all the important inscriptions in tlieAnuradhapura 
and Hambantota district5,arTanged in chronological order. Some 
of them he published in Ukot whole extent with a translation, as 
that at Habarane (No. 61), the slab from Tissamaharama (No. C7), 
the llahakalattaewaandAbhayawaewa pillars (Nos. 110 and lii7), 
of others he gave only exti-acts, as they were too long to be pub- 
lished in their whole extent, like the two tablets of Mallindo III. 
at Mibintale (No. 121), the large inscription of Parakramabahu T. 
at the Galwihara, Polonnaruwa (No. 137), and the Galpola of 
Niggamka llalla at the same place (No. 148). The chief 
interest of the Report is the chronological -arrangement of the 



inscription, .and the attempt- that is made here for the first time 
-to-i^nm;^Hhe names of the longs ns given on the stones with 
^^^tbeUalmwansa. The inscription atMihintale especially 
'fSfo.^121), which was known to Tumour (Ceylon Almanac, 
.1834)^ but ascribed by him to-KingSirisangaboI. (246-248 A.D.), 
and which is of peculiar interest for different reasons, ha-s been 
correctly dated here for the first time, and in the same way all 
the numerous inscriptions of the 10th and lltli centuries. Dr. 
Goldschmidt visited a number of temples also in the ilatara and 
Galle’ districts without, finding any important inscriptions, then 
he returned to Galle suffering heavily from fever, but not giving 
up the hope to recover in a better climate. Ho went on trans- 
lating the inscriptions and writing notes on Sinhalese grammar 
(which were printed in the Journal of tlie Ceylon Asiatic Society 
for 1870), until his strength failed, and he died the 7th May 1877, 
much lamented by hi^ numerous friends and all those of the 
inlmbilants of Cejlon who took a real interest in the history 
of their country. 

“With Dr. Goldschmidt's death a sudden stop was put to the 
archffiological work which had been undertaken and earned on 
80 well during more than two j^ears. The reports published by him 
and reprinted some time later in the Indian Antiquary had ronsed 
the interest of most of the European scholars for the inscriptions 
of Ceylon. Unfortunately his papers wera in great disorder, and it 
was impossible to send auytliingof tliem to be printed in the form 
they had at the time. Consequently I was appointed Archmological 
Commissioner in the beginning of the year 1878, and began my 
work in Ceylon in the month of May of the same year. I was 
engaged nearly three months in arran^ng Dr. Goldschmidt’s 
papers, and in learning the Sinhalese language, before I could go 
out to travel in the ancient districts. My first trip was to Hani- 
' bantota where I took up the work left unfinished by my 
predecessor. I subs^uently visited the districts of Anuradbapura, 
Kunmaegala, Puttalarn, and all those parts of the island of which 
I could get reliable information that they contained antiquities of 
historical interest Especially the district of Kunmaegala, which 
bad- never been visited by Dr. Goldschmidt, proved to be very 
. rich in ruins and inscriptions from the earliest times down to the 
'l3th century, but here also tiie -influence of the weather had 


c 


destroyed a great many valaablomomtmcnts. As for tlio district 
of Antirndliapuro,! could coni.ider tlio vorU c! my predecessor as 
nearly perfect; I compared liis transcripts with the originals 
svlicnevcr I tlionglit it necessarj', but found only vciy little to 
correct. The inscriptiom at Polaniiaruwa have nearly all been 
pliotographed, as they aro either on perpendicular rocks or on 
slabs and pillars; of the ancient inscriptions (before the 4th 
century A D.), a groat number are on flat rocks and could llicro- 
foro not bo reproduced by photography ; of these I have made 
transcripts as carefully ns possible and nnne.scd lithograph copies 
to the collection. As for squeezes, those which I found nniongst 
l)r. Goldsclimiclt’a papers were neatly all spoiled, and also those 
which I made tnj'self did not lost long on account of tha con- 
tinual humidity they were exposed to, so that I had to abandon 
this way of reproduction altogether; besides, it could bo applictl 
it\ tv cemparatWcly small number of instatvccs only, viz,, where 
the rock was perfectly smooth and without any irregularities. 

In the following collection 1 have tried to arrange the inscrip- 
tions chronologically, but ibis purpose conld only be carried out to 
a certain extent. The oldest inscriptions, altliovigh they are com- 
paratively beat preserved, arc Roinetimcs very dillicult to dale, n.s 
the naino of tlic king is cither not given at all, or not In 
full, 60 that several persons might como in question. Noiiu 
of the inscriptions, down to the 12lli century, is dated from the 
year of Buddhas nirv.ana or from some other knomi era, but 
only fiom the reign of the respective king, which in most 
instances gives us no help at all. We are therefore reduced 
to the use of palajographical aiguments, and these, of course, 
allow only an approximate conclusion, in wliicU a century' 
more or les.s is generiilly of no moment. The greater number of 
insciiptions (Nos. 25-96) belong fo this cla'ss, especially all the 
cave inscriptions, which arc scattered all over the ishand, just 
like tlie inscriptions on our modem tombstones. I very soon 
gave up tlie idea of dating any of these, as the same names con- 
tinually occur on them, and also the style seems to have been 
stereotypic during many centuries. Some of the rock inscrlp- 
tions, as the one at Habaraoe (No. Cl), and also the slab from 
Tissamaharama, have been datedhy Dr. Goldschmidt in his last 
report, but he evidently was not satisfied himself with the lesults 



'7 


of bis calculations, and tbercfbre I preferred to include ,tbese 
also amongst the inscriptions of uncertain date. ’ A still longer 
space of time is that between tho 6th and 9fh centuries, which 
is filled up by a comparatively small number of inscriptions 
(Nos, 97-109). These also are of uncertain date, as none of them 
bears the name of a king, and the form of the characters only 
shows that they belong to these centuries. With the inscriptions 
of the 10th and 11 th centuries we get on safer groimd ; although 
not even these ate dated from a known event, they bear the ntimc 
of a king, and it is only the question whether we adopt for tliis 
king the date ^ven by Tournour in his Epitome or that given by 
the new editors of the llahavansa. Down from Parukramabahu 
tlie inscriptions are dated from Buddhas nirwana and in a few 
instances from the C^aka era. As the date of the nirwana I have 
adopted the year 543 according to the Simhalese chronology, as I 
consider the question not at all settled. 

Tlio lime down to which I have tried to ho as complete as 
possible in my collection is the beginning of the ICtb century, 
to which the inscription at Eoelani (No. 162) and the second 
Dondra inscription (No. 103) belong. I am, however, aware that 
one or the other iuseription of the 15th century may have escaped 
tiiy attention, as I could not get proiwrinformation with regard to 
some districts in the Central province where this kind of inscrip- 
tions are mostly to befound. Myattention was chiefly directed upon 
the' ancient inscriptioDS down to the 13th century, which ofier n 
philological as well as a historical interest ; In the more modem 
ones the language is very much alike the conversational tongue 
of our days, and the historical interest which they offer is con^ 
fined to their own country, so that I was glad to leave this part 
of th6 work to the few native scholars who aro able to do it; 
besides, all these modem inscriptions are of such enormous length 
that the printing of them would have taken away more space 
than I could possibly :^are. 

In the translations I have been as literal as possible, however, 
-not so literal as Dr. Goldschmidt was, forinstance, in bis translation 
of theiTabak. inscription (No. 110). In the later inscriptions I liave 
often adopted expressions of JBr, Davids and of Mr. Armour when 
they id not differ too much from the sense of the original 
words. I also have tried toimitato tho style of orientalmagnificence, 



especially in the irTscriplions of Nig^ainha Malla, Tvhicb, hO'wever, 
are not intended to be read ono after tbe other, as in this case 
the monotony becomes ridicnlotis. I have inserted the tests and 
translations of the cave and smaller rock inscriptions in the first 
part and reserved the Bwond and third parts for the langet ones, 
as I thought that these short inscriptions would not interrupt the 
contest too much. The se«>nd part contains the tests of all the 
longer rock inscriptions as well as those of tbe pillars and slabs ; 
here I have been as complete os possible, and even, given trans- 
cripts of inscriptions of which no sense can be made out when 
a certain number of lines was legible (so, for instance, the large 
inscription at IJihintale, No. 20, and those from the RuanwaeU 
Dagoba, Anar. No. 21). The third part contains the translations 
of the tests in the second part, excepting those which aie too 
much defaced and weatherworn, in some inscriptions also, 
which are comparatively well preserved, like tbe Galwihara 
at Polonnaruwa, I was obliged to leave untranslated certain 
passages, as tbe language is very obscure, and no parallel is to 
be found for a great number of words. 

The index of words which I have added at the end was 
intended to serve also as index for my article “ Contributions to 
Simhaleso grammar'’ (printed as Sessional Paper No. XZI., for 
1880). This is the reason why it contains a great number of 
words from the Sidat Saogarawa, the Namawaliya, and from the 
Eln poetry, which do not occur in inscriptions, but are other- 
wbo of philological interest It was my intention to add the 
references to the pages of the Indian Antiquary, where my 
aiticle is going to be reprinted, but as no proof has reached me 
yet, I have been unable to do so up lo tbe present. In the mean- 
while I may say beio a few words about the language of the 
inscriptions, 

j The Elu, or ancient Siinlialese, is a language that bears a close 
connexion to the so-called Magadbi of the A 5 oka inscriptions.’ 
originally it kuowfe only short vowels and single consonants, 
the as-similation is never exju-essed by doubling as in Pali. Tlio 
numlwir of consonants » not the aame in Elu as in Magadbi, as 
tlicre are no aspirates and uo palatals (except in the oldest 
inscriptions). A farther pecoUarily of the Elu is the elision of 



9 


tlio nasals in a nexus, as, for instance, Alxatala Amtasthaln, 
catla = candrtv, and many otljcrs ; later on the inclination of tUc 
language changed totally, and nasals were inserted in great 
number where they have no right, as in maenda = madliya, 
mundu =s raartlhii, Avejenda ~ vanij. &'c. Of the palatal®, c is , 
changed to s, and further to h, or dropped altogether, and j to d, 
ns in a few instances also in Pali and Jainapiakfit. 

Concerning the declension, wc must first of all consider the 
termination of the plural t«i?,-Avluch has been made use of by 
Cbildei-s, in order to prove the Saaskritic origin of the Sinlialesr 
language. Ho derives this n'ol from Sanskrit vana, a derivation 
which from a phonetical point of view is quite inobjectiouable. 
.However, iranti or uveZ is not \i3cd in common Sinhalese at 
present, and seems never to have been so o.tccpt in compound®, ns 
wnl\vacflsar5wannwrisin(mscriptiou of the 12th ccntuiy). Again, 
the idea of using “ a forest ” indiscriminately for n multitude, a 
plurality, though fumiliac to poets, would it suggest itself a^ 
readily to the iwpular mind, from which the actuni language 
sprung? The termination uxdh not of recent origin, as had 
been Latiniated by Jlr. James Alwis, but in the form Avar appears 
already in pretty ancient inscriptions, and Avas fonnorly oven 
more exlensiA’ely employed than at present. In the famous 
stone tablets at MUuntale, AA-hIch belong to tlio 11th century, avc 
find dilwar, ganianAvar, and in Sabasa ilalla’s inscription at 
Polonnarua'a ganiAA'jir, Later on, as other expedients prcj>cnted 
themselves to distinguish the plural from tlio Bingular, this 
termination lost its place as a genera! termination, and, on the 
supposition that it OAA-ed its origin to Skt A-ara, " best, excellent,” 
it was retained by the Pianditsfor the plural of words designating 
revered persons, such as pandita, guru, and others. Tliat this 
was actually the case is shovrn by the occasional con\'ersion of 
Avar in wErayau in tho S inskritizlng language of tlie 12tli 
century.* If avc Avant to derive tho plural termination Avar, 
Aval, from a Sanskrit root, I think it Avouhl be more natural to 
derive it from vriddhi, “increase,” AA'hich in Sinhalese appeal's as 
Avaedi, Avaeda (as A\ell as in u'ada, “tnoro^’), and if shortened 

• AVc have in Sinh. a word wara, “time” Ski. vbw nnotber oiipears in 
meheniwam «= Pali iamaniupsssajo. The latter coincides with Pralii, wara 
" house,” Hala. 


10 


conformably to the tendency of raedtmval Sinlialese, could 
assume no other form but war or wal. It is, however, to bo 
remembered that in Tamil Uio plural suffix for neuters is kal, 
and by the uneducated people this i$ vciy commonly pronounced 
■wal; considering further the increasing apathy of the Sinlialcso 
people in every respect, I think it by no means unlikely that 
they adopted a suffix like this from ft foreign tongue. 

The termination in or en of the instrumental and ablative is 
rightly explained by Childers, Notes, I., p. 0 ; wd also find the 
termination, gen for both cases, which is composed from the go 
of the genitive and en of tl»e instmmeatal, for instance, gamgen 
Mabak. and besides, in a few instances, keren for the ablative, 
and ka and wiain for the instrumental, os janakukereu, Amb. 
A 28.rusiyanba, Arab. A. 7, pilibadun wisin, Amb. A. 18, Mabin- 
dohu wasin Mayil. 

The dative termination ta, or in its older form hata, is com- 
posed from ha = sya of the genitive and artlnvya. It occurs for 
the first time in tho iuscrlption at Kaikuwa (No. 13), where 
wo find both forms, tho older one wadhacetabata, and tho modem 
one bikasagata. In the plural wo have the same formation in 
liamm^ai^ataya «= ^ramananam artliaya Hab. In tho inscrip- 
tions of the 11th century we have hat end at instead, as 
inaharojhat, Amb. A, 1, himiyanat, A. 12, so alsomelat Hahak. 

The terminations of the genitive and locative, which are the 
same in modern Sinhalese, are distinguished in the inscriptions. 
For the genitive we find down to the 4th century sa or ha = sya" 
for the singular, and na:=n^ for the plural, as hamiyana Ti®., and 
for the locative hi =s si, which most probably corresponds to the 
pionominal suffix smin. This termination hi still exists in the 
1 Itb century in a few instances, but besides, and more frequently, 
we find a new suffix ae, as, for instance, weherhi and ■weberac, 
both in the Ambasthala inscription, urebi=utasl, llayil. In the 
plural we Lave chi = ebbis, for instance, bawuruduyehi. Ell. P. 
The genitive is universally expressed in later times by the suffix 
ge = Sanskrit griha, “house.’.’ In the inscription at Jlahaka- 
lattaewa we find besides the locative in ao used as genitive, for 
instance Nawayac, naw'a turae. 



11 


Besides this, we find already in the inscriptions of the 11th 
century tho so-called indefinite d^lension both for the singular 
and plural, as sat dcnakhat, ** to seven pei'sons,” Jlahak., dasa 
yahalak, “ ten yalas,” Anib. Also the modem denek, connected 
with nnraerals (Childers’ notes, Ik, 12) in its older form 
janak, is used frequently, for instance, kaebili doles janakbat 
Amb. B. 49. 

AVe now pass to tho numerals. For eka wo find ek in tho 
inscriptions at iinhakalattaewa and Galwihara. For two the 
oldest form is do, Hab., later on de in the inscription-s of the 1 1th 
century, and still later the modem form deka, as in dokin, 
P. P. 3G., dekata S. if. B. 3. I do not think with Childers 
(Notes H., 2) that tliis exactly corresponds to Sanskrit dvika, 
.but most probably it is the identical formation. The ancient 
suffix ka, well known in Sanskrit, more frequently employed in 
Pali, found its widest sphere of action in ancient Sinhalese, not 
'only in nouns and adjectives, but even in participles, as likitaka, 
dinaka, niyataka. Later on this ka freqnently changes into ya 
(more correctly ka is lost and y interposed to avoid hiatus 
analogous to the ya^ruti in Jainaprilkrit), with which we find it 
•fctruggliog in tho inscriptions of tho 4th century A.D. In deka 
ka was piobahly retaitied by the analogy of eka, ** ono.” 

Tho other numerals have the following forms 

3, tawaka, on the slab from Tissam. (No. G7), later on tun= 
trlni'andtunakaj the ordinal tunwan. 

4, catarii, catari, catiri, frequently found in inscriptions do^vn 

to the 4th century ; from this is derived satar Mahak., sataraka, 
Gp. A. 17, the ordinal satarawanna and the modern hatara. 
Besides wc have another corrupted in the inscriptions 

of Ni^^amka llalla, and a contraction from this, sit, in composi- 
tions, .as su-icisi, 24, supanaes, 54. The form catu, P. P. 24, aflects 
an old style of language. 

5, paca, Tiss., later on pag, from which the modem paha 
deriyes, 

G, caka, Hab., later sa, Amb.-B. 3S, sakak, Wand. 14, saka, 
D. 1. 8, hence saya, haya. 

7, sala, Hahak. Satak, F, P. 24 {?). 

8, a^a. 



9, naw.i, Mall. mod. namaj*a.* 

10, dasa, mod. daba. 

The number-sbctwoen U and 19 are in tbo in«!criptioiis of tlic 
nth century, as follows: 11, ckojos; 12, ilo|os; 13, tejcs; 10, 
solos; 19th dasanawawanno. 

20, wsiti, Hnb. inod.whi; 40, catalisa, Ilab. This numeral is 
■vratten with 1, not 1, and so is one of Iho few exceptions to tho 
rule generally observed in Sinhalese down to a pretty Inlc 
period that the Cerebrals r, t, d,or Dentals influenced by r, 
change into 1. In composition salb, for instance, pansalls, 45. 

50. panaes or panes, or wanaos in the 12th centuty. - 

60, baetae, for instance, llaetaedage, “the CO days house " at 
Polonnarawa. 

80, asuway, in compound.s osQ. 

90, anuwa, in compounds nnu. 

1,000, eahasa, sahasi, wihasaka. The present fomv dasa, con- 
tracted from dahasa, i3=da5a9uta. If wc were to derive it, with 
Childers (notes, II., 4), from saliasra, it would bo tho only- 
instance of the change of s to d. 

Of the old form of the ordinals I found only two instances : 
(luti, ” second,” in tlie inscription at Kaibawa (18), and tatiya in 
It[egliawani;ia’s inscription at the Buonwacli Dagoha. In the 
11th century we find throughout a form terminating in wanna, 
n.s tunwanna, satarawanuo. I cannot account for the origin of 
this form, but most probably it is the same as the modem weni, 
wliich Childers (Notes, 11., 4) identifies with Slct gunn. Tlio 
chief objection to this expbnation is that we never find it 
written with n in inscriplions, and n and n are very seldom 
confounded in older times, though hardly distinguished in the 
present language. Perhaps wanna may be identical 'Vith 
ganana, which we meet in the form gannak at AtnK, B. 6. In 
this case we should have here a second instance for tho change of 
g to \V’, which we assumed in explaining the Plural termination 
waL 


Tlie adjectives are uninflected in Sinhalese just as in Eu<Tlish. 
It is difficult to say whether Childers (Notes, II., 6) is right 


• Mr. Childers (Notes, 11 ,3 note},UDODg other instancesof the cLancefrom yr ic 
n auotes Pall bhainu = bliravtt. I Mierc TcitU blioEvaa, Zend Imivat inake il 
aniinesuonable that bliamu b sn inTCi^ of Ihuma. The Sinhalese has baenui. 



13 


in a-wuming that thU custom is derived from the karmadharaya 
corapoiinds in Sanskrit, or -whetber the adjective lost its in- 
flexion as being unncMssary in connexion with a substantive. 
There is, however, one point rctnarkable in Sinhalese, viz., the 
fact that it contains a great number of adjectives which in reality 
aro substantives, JU5, for instance, narakayi, “this is bad’’ (so 
already narakudi in the inscription of Lag Vijaya Singa, 
(No. 157), lahliayi, *' this is cheap,” meka yasayi,* “ it is glory,” 
liVe have analogies to this way of expression in common speech, 
forinstance, “ slic is a beauty,” '* this Ls perfection," but not to such 
extent as in Sinhalese. I think it is a truly Oriental expression, 
an instance of that exaggeration which the Oriental always is 
inclined to put in hU apeech. Compare Pali insltugilmo niima 
papo, “ womankind is sin,” and many expressions from the Bible, ns 
nnathcTna sit In Sinhalese the substantive not only was used 
so in the position of a predicate, but from this very usage camo 
to be a real adjeciivc aUo in connexion with other substantives, 
hence yasa deya, “a nice thing.” . 

Pronouns:— Tlic nominative singular of all pronouiw in Sinha- 
lese is originally a genitive: mamn=Ski. mama, toastavn, ohus 
asya. I do not think it necessary to resort to Cldlders’ explanation 
according to which mama became to be a nominative from being 
used in such relative coostructions as mama giya ge, “ the house 
to which I went,” mama karana deya, " what I am doing.” I 
cannot persuade myself that the relative construction via-n 
frequent enough to work such a change. This construction, 
though exceedingly common in Pali, owes its origin to the later 
Pali style, which was certainly vciy much influenced by Siix- 
halese, though probably not to such a degree ns mediioval 
Latin was by the Romance vcrnacnlars. In Sinhalese the genitive 
has in many cases assumed the position of the accusative, 
and there is only one step further from the accusative to the 
nominative. 

• yasa ia probably genuine Sinhalese, but in later times the Sinhalese ha\c also 
adopted the L-itsamas yasasa, tejasa (for this is the form in which Skt. neuters 
terminating in g are ioti^uced into later Siahalesc), hence the notion arose that sa 
signiGed the gubstantive while the word without th^ addition was employed acljec- 
tively. There is a word weaass. "change, ^fference,” which I believe to derived 
from vijesheiya through theintenuediste stages wesesana, wchesana, iTe-sana, wcoaaa; 
now this word, plough also used adjeeUvely in predicative position (moboboma wena- 
sayi, “ this is very different was still felt us n substaiitii t, and on the analog) of 
yasa, yasasa, and adjective wena, "different, other,” was formed to replace the lost 
adjective un (anyu) which now in the form uolk, anit, is used for " the other.” 



14 


Tor the possessive pronoua of the first person plural Tve have 
the form apa in the inscription from Tissamaliar. (No. 67) and 
Badagiriya (68), and the same also in the 12th century. For the 
personal pronoun we have the cddet form aep in the 11th. Both 
these forms owe their origin to the rustic pronunciation of 
amhe as amhhe (comp. Oriya ambhe Beames), ahe, &c. In- 
stances are not wanting in Sinhalese of a sonans being hardened 
into a surd. Thus we find yaku = Skt yavagu, Jlekawana 
= Meghavarna, Naka = Niiga, podu = hindu, watura = wadura 
from Skt. avajjhara.* 

For the second person we have no ancient form, except to 
Gp. A. 10. For the third person we have the regular form .of 
the Plural in inscriptions down from the 11th century. 

For the demonstrative pronoun me, we have the older form 
ima in the second inscription at Tooigala (No. iB), and for e the 
older ela at Hahartne (Childers, U., 7). 

For the reflexive pronoun w© find the form tama in inscrip- 
tions down from the 11th century, and be, sides a form tumalia 
gen., at Habarane, tuma. Ell. F., d;c. 

For the interrogative pronoun we find an older form kumak 
5n Ni^^aipka Malla’a inscription alDambnlla. • This leads ns to the 
conclusion that tbe modern form mokada is not, ^as Childora 
suggests (Notes, II., 8), a demonstrative which requires the 
particle da to complete its interrogative sense. Kumak is Skt. 
kim with the suffix ka ; da is originally the same as the copu- 
lative patiiclo da = ca, and, therefore, could never be used to 
turn a deinonstr.'itive into an interrogative, ilokada is kumak 
da with loss of the first syllable ; the dative kumata, "to what 
end,” exists in literature. For Pali kiva, we liave kipa, 
S. 1.1. A. 14. 


For eyin we have the older form eheyin, P. P. P. B. 3, which 
shows that it is to be derived from ehetuua. Thoforms cse, mese, 
kese, also occur in inscriptions, but not before tlie end of the 
12th century. 


_ t Dr. Goldschmidt consiilered the word parniaaka Terf frequent iu ancient inscrip- 
lions as identical with hrshmaka, and trtoalated it nccordmsly in lia reports TL« 
resigns why 1 did not follow Urn in Uns ixspcct are, firsily, heciuse we find the 
word brahmapa io the form bunans la the inscriptions of Oalwihara (No. St) and 
J.sBinVanila(So. 9,, ancient name Itamano^rinya) , and secondly, because in later 
inscriptions parumaki or parnmkB,PI pummiiwan, always sicaifies “kin"” w 
nara*?(m) SUy.hgistola (X,. 120), lng:uimi;iya (n3),‘'rolon- 



15 ' 


As regards tbo derivaiivea koceara, occara (Childers^ II., 9), 
\j-e have a form witara, Hab. 7, vliich shovrs that they are com- 
posed, not Trith rieara, but with'visfcara, “extent.’' The change 
of st to'cc is rather unusual and cannot even be explained 
by the influence of an i, as in i^wiccl = pravritti. 

Verb. 

- The verbal forms which we find in the older inscriptions are 
comparatively few. In the cave insoiptions w’e only meet with 
the participles, dine and niyate. In the older rock inscriptions 
we find, besides, the first person singular, dinarai, and pluial, 
dinamaba, which both are clearly compounds of the participle 
dinna with the respective persons of the verb as “to be." TJie 
forms of the aorist are dakibi = adrakshit, kabi and kavihi 
rs akarshit, Jikihi ‘'he wrote,” besides a passive form savoyi{lia 
Kottar. Of partidples we have nitbala, most probably a mistake 
for nithila s: ni^thita, (abiyass stbapita, ka]a ss krits, samata 
=s sanaapta, of Absolutives, ko^a = kritva. 

In the 11th cenlm^* also the verlxil forms are not niunerous. 
The long inscription on the two tablets at Mihintale (No. 121) 
knows only infinitives and participles (comp, my article, J, 0. A. 
S. 1880, p. 11), the others have a few inflected forms, as denamo, 
“we give, "evidently derived from diu.'unaba, dunaraaha, "we gave,” 
derived from the participle dunu^dinna ; ^vada]a and wadaleyi, 
from wadaranawa, " to declare,” in the inscription from ITaliakn- 
lattaewa (No. 110), are participles (comp. J. C. A. S. 1879, p. 27), 
and denu ladi, ib., although it may be derived from the aorist 
aladdhi, can just as well bo a participle for lacldbam. 

All these forms are clearly made after the analogy of the 
Sanskrit flexion. Also later on we find a few of the same kind, 
as kerem, P. P. 9,ss:karomi, ganit, kaenditi, nasiti, E. D., demi 
Thup., danayi=jajiasi, Gp.A. 11, dakulusadrishtva.Gp. B. 7, the 
latter, however^ foimed after a false an.alogy. These forms, how- 
ever, become more and more rare, and at present they are quite 
out of use. Tbe new forms which we find instead arc all formed 
after difierent principles, thus, for instance, at P. P. P. 35, 30, we 
have three third persons plural, kalaliu, kaewo, and nasiti, which 
ore all formed differently. A new mode of expression wliicli we 
find from the 12tb century down to onr time is the Ko-c.'illed 



16 


honorific terminating in seyek or maenaewi, as, for instance, 
wadaranaseyek, dakwana seyek, &c- Dr, Goldschmidt, J. C. A. 
S. 1879, p. 29, believed to have found this way of expression 
in a somewhat different form already in the 11 th century, but 
the question is not quite settled. A form of the new future wo 
have in karannaha, P. P. P. B. 24. About tbe origin of the same 
I am doubtful, and also I see no reason why nt present it is 
always written with a palatal fi. 

Tbe participles are generally only slight modifications of the 
Sandtrit and Pali forms, thus bat=bhrashta, kala=krita, mala 
= mrita, dina, din=dmna, giya=gata, gat=grihita, dutu = 
drishta, un= 8 anna, atula=astfita, upan, upaeni^utpanna, bun 
=bhmna, tet=Pali tinta, lat=:Iabdha, &c. 

The gerunds terminate in a or fl, as, for instance, maeru, Abhay., 
naengQ, pa]a, taba, Amb. A. 67, tubfl, ib., kiyu, kaepu, sisara, 
namwa, dewa, enwfi, durula, &c. The infinitives generally 
terminate in ae, as raekae, genae, kiyae, dekae, kaerae, bat also 
sometimes in as ganna, wadna, &c. 

The alphabet of the cave inscriptions is the oldest form 
^ of the A^oka character without any modifications, except the 
angular form of the a. Dr. Goldschmidt (Academy, XI,, p. ISO) 
believed this to bo a peculiarity of the Sinhalese, and to repre* 
sent the palatal s ( 9 ), hut this is not very likely, as the sign is 
used in ancient inscriptions indiscriminately for both kinds of s, 
and besides Dr. Burnell (South Indian Paleography, pp. 27, 28) 
has pointed out that it occurs also in Indian and Javanese 
iiiscriptions. This sign, as well as the round one generally in 
use for B, are both derived from the Phoenician sign (w). This 
oldest form of the alphabet is used also in the oldest rock 
inscriptions, as that at Ton^rahi (No. 1), Eriyawa (42//), Dam- 
bulla (3), and generally as lar down as the beginning of the 
4tU centurj' AD. An exception is only to be stated with regard 
to tlie ra, which has the round form of the A 9 oka chai acter only 
in cuve inscriptions, and in all others the more angular one, as' 
given in Buvncirs S. I. P., Plate XIII. In some inscriptions of 
the 'Uli or 5th century belonging to the Hambaiitota district, as, 
for jnstnnce, tlie Naygalwibara (No. 75), we find already a 
beginning of tlio new round character, inasmuch as the vowel i 
.above the consonants is not expressed by an angular line, but by 



17 


a curve. Generally, however, the square character must have 
been in use down to about the 8th century. Unfortunately wo 
have only very few inscriptions between the 5tU and 9tU 
centuries, and tlicso are all >Tritten in a kind of square character 
•with occasional curves only; in tho 10th century tlie round 
character is firmly wtablished, and from thence it has undergone 
very little change down to the present day, so that the in.scrip- 
tious of the middle ago are legible to any educated native. 
Some characters, like a, k, m, li.ivo still a more ancient form on 
the stones of tho 11th century than th.afc which is in use now, 
and show tho gradual change U»e alphabet has undergone. 

An alphabet altogether different from the others is nsed in 
one inscription only (No. 103), and here I am doubtful not only 
with regard to tho alphabet, but also with regard to the language 
of the inscription. 

With regard to the contents of tho inscriptions, I am bound 
to state that I have been greatly disappointed. Most of them 
'nro religious, they contain grants to different temples, but no * 
historical information. The construction of tanks and other 
irrigation works is a subject continually repeated in the ancient 
inscriptions down to tho 4th centui^*, excepting only the cave 
inscriptions, which contain almost nothing but names, and a few 
others like those at Batgallaegama 'wihara, Mediyawa (No. 64), 
and Rajangane (05). Later on we find more interesting subjects 
and the iMcaiptions on the whole become longer and longer. In 
tbc ,10th and lltli centuries wc also meet with grauts, but not 
ill the short and abrupt form which was usual in earlier times. 
-The pillar .inscriptions are very mneh like those of the Indian 1 
kings which have been published in the Indian Antiquary. 

An especial interest Is attached to tlie two inscriptions at Miliin- 
iale, that on the plinth course and that on the two tablets 
(Nos. 114 and 121). They give a very detailed description of 
the life in the large Buddhist monasteries of the 11th century, 
and show how little then remained of tho ancient simplicity of 
the -order as it was instituted by Buddha. The wihai-a at 
, Mihintale had a large properly of its own which reached to tlie 
south as far as Mineri and to the north a.s far ns Padiwil (if tho 
identification of the names is correct), free from taxation, and 


Q6038. 



19 


well with what the Maba,v<unsa relates about Parakramabahu. 
Thu?, for instance, the same feats we ineet'\7ith at the beginning 
of the Galpota (No. 148 A., 8-10) are related cooceming Para- 
kramabahu at Mab. C7, 41-48. As Nig^mka llalla’s reign is 
dealt with very shortly in the Mahavansa (cap. 80, 20-26), and 
as, on the other hand, Parakramabahu tells us nothing aboxit 
his campaigns in his inscriptions, it is possible that some of 
Ni^ 9 amka Malla’s deeds may have been put on Parakramabahu’s 
account in the hlahavansa. Unless we assume this, we woxUd 
bo compelled to believe that all what Ni 59 amka Slalla teUs, and 
continually repeats, about himself in the inscriptions is nothing 
but 'lies from beginning to end. Such a supposition would be 
rather hard in the face of other facts which he relates, and which 
certainly are true, as for instance his birth at Simbapura, his 
parentage, and arrival in Ceylon, &c. It is, however, probable 
that his campaigns in India were not so glorious ns he pretends, 
and that, therefore, he appropriated to himself part of the 
splendour which his predecessor had won in that country, 

It is very likely that some years hence, when tho ruins of 
Polounaruwa will be cleared a little more, some new inscriptions 
will be found which may settle this question. Those that arc 
known at present, and which are scattered all over the island, 
offer continual repetitions of the same subject, mostly with the 
same words. ” The pillar of Kacligatta (No. 152a), wliich alone is 
original in its contents, is unfortunately veiy much defaced, so 
that only a part of the inscription can be read with ceiiainty. - 
The later inscriptions which I give here have nearly all been 
published before by Mr. Davids and by L. do Zoysa, and so I 
could confine mj’self to correct the transcript and the translation 
in a few places, without entering into the contents more 
especially. The respective articles aro in the journal of the 
Ceylon branch of the Boyal Asiatic Society, which is now 
accessible also to European readers. 

Before concluding, I beg to express my thanks to the Governor 
of Ceylon, Sir James Longden, for the assistance he gave mo in 
tho pursuit of my work, when in the colony, to Dr. R. Rost of 
the India Office, who supplied me liberally with all tho literature 


B 


2 



so 


from Kuropo nwvnry fur iny |'urjK**<?, 1-^ ilr. T. W. lUiy* 

D.iviil-', l>y liis iulvli^ iMpitortvl J'n-J ftic*;nr9;;n.l i-t" iiji !■> 
the of jiiy l.i'k* 

Ucnjc, OcloU'r IhSl. 


i:. 



21 


PART I. 


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF TOE INSCRIPTIONS. 

Tbe' early liistory of Ceylon, as given in the old chronicles 
Jlnlmvansa, Dlpa^'iinsa, Rajuwaliya, ele , cannot he considered as 
history in. that sense of the word in which It is now generally 
used.' -Jlalianama and the author of the Dlpavansa, although 
being natives of Ceylon, did not iateud to ^T^ite a history of 
their country, but a history of Buddhism, and therefore the 
conquest of Ceylon and all the events np to the time of 
Deviinam Piya Tissa were to them merely a sort of an introduc- 
tion, The author of the Rajawaliya, although his intention 
certainly was to write a chronicle of the Sinhalese kings, is not 
• at all satisfactory in his account of the two first centuries, and 
seems very anxious to leave this territory in which history and 
mythology are so easily confonaded. The JIahavansa and the 
DTnavansa have • been made tis© of by several scholars in 
order to fix the date of the Niiwana, which, according to the’ 
Sinhalese tradition occurred in the same year, when Wijaya 
landed in Ceylon. Tlie whole stor^ of Wijaya, however, is so I 
fabulous that very little importance can be attached to this 
coincidence from a chronolc^cal point of view. Besides the ' 
history of Buddhism is not so closely connected with the object 
of the present work that I should think it necessary to enter 
especially upon the question of Nirvana, which has been dis- 
cus.scd so much during the last years. 

niore is, however, one point in the tradition about "VTijaya, 
to which especial attention must he called here, as it is of great 
importance for the early liblory of Ceylon, viz., the name of the 
place where "NVijaya is said to have landed. This place is 
universally c.alled Tam bapanm or Tammnna Nu war a, and whether 
it was reaiVy ?rjjaya tfiat fand’ea’ there or some otAer prince, ft 
seems out of doubt that this was the name of the fimt settlement 
of the Gahgetic imniigrauts in Ceylon. The question arises, in 
which part of the island we have to look for this settlement. 
The general belief in Ceylon up to a recent date was, that it is 
about seven miles to the east of Puttalam,* not far from the 
river SIToya, where some mins have been discovered in 1850 
(Casio Chitty Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, VI, 242 fT.) 
The place is neither on the seaside nor on the border of the river, 
and this makes it very unlikely that it could have been a first 
s'ettlement. The ruins consist of a set of pilLars which formed a 


* The place is ^ren vrong on Fni.<cr'* map; it is to the north of the Anurad- 
hapiira road, about four tnile^ from the sesr bridge orer the lUToja. 1 ma} mention 
here a curious etjmology of the nnmcl’attalaiii.gtren'bjPrid^nill., 045, who sa^x, 
that it Uterallj’ laeacs n society of young meu, and derives this name from Wijaya’s 
ba\ log landed here. * 


building 30 feet long find 20 broad, and a lai^'c stone slab 
originally covered with an ioscription which is now almost 
totally effaced. The only legible characters on it belong to tho 
11th century. In 1878 tho place has been visited again, and a 
dagoba was excavated and opened, wliich, however, contained 
nothing but two chanka. The settlement may be an old one ns 
most of tbc settlements in the district between Puttalam and 
Anuradhapura, but there is no evidence that goes liack beyond tbc 
11th century, and the name Tainmana Nuwnra may have been 
brought from somo other part of tho island. 

Another view, about the site of Tammana Nuwara is that 
given in the Rajawaliyn (Uphnm. Sacred and Historical Books 
of Ceylon, II, 1C8. and III, 3G3, where tho words between 
brackets should be c.incellctl). There it is stated tliat when 
Wijaya and his followers were sailing towards Rnna Rata 
(Rohana, tho southern part of Ceylon), they perceived tho 
SauiantakfitaParvata (the Adam’s Peak) and they concluded that 
it was a good country for them to reside In, and they landed at 
Tammana Tota. To tliis tho translator remarks in a note that 
it is a ferry in Wanny, but this is evidently a mistake, ns Wnnny 
is in tho northern part of Ceylon, and, besides, in the interior, 
not on the sea coast. Bnrnouf, in his Rcchercbes sur hv 
g^ogrnplne ancicnne de Ceylan (Parts, 1857), p. 52 ff., bos 
already pointed otit that the passage of tho Rajuwaliya can only 
refer to the month of tho river Wellawe (about seven miles to 
the west of Hambantota), and that the following events given 
in the books, especially tho foundation of Upatissanuwnm, in 
the northern part of the island, -forbid us to assume that 
Tammana Nuwara could have been on the south coast. 

Bumoufs own opinion, which he substitutes to that of the 
Rajawaliya (L 1. p. 4U) is that Tammana Nuwara is tlie same as the 
modern Tamblagam,* in the Bay of Triucomalee. His principal 
argument for assuming this opinion is, besides the similnritv of 
names, the fact th.it, according to tho Maliavansa (Tiirnour 
p. 54) Panduwasadewa, the nephew of "Wijaya, in coming from 
India landed at Gonagaraakatittha, at the mouth of the Jlaha- 
kandata river. • Ho identifies the Mahakandara-f with the 
Maliawaeliganga (or, as lie incorrectly writes, Mahavilaganf'a, 
•' The River of the Gre.at Valley ”), which runs into the B-iy^of 
Trincomalee. This identification, based on the similarity of 
names, is not worth more than that with the Kantalai tank 
given some pages before. TJie Jlahakandarn is the present 
Aripo River, or Halwattaoya, which runs into the sea near 
Silavaturei, on the west coast. The ilahawaeliganga (in Pali 
Mahavalukaganga, “ The Great Sandy River ’’) is simply called 
Ganga in the Mahavaosa, as f. i pp. 1C6, 254, and therefore 
Ptolemy calls it Ganges (Emerson Tennent I., 41). 

If the second colony trader Panduwasadewa landed at the 
mouth of the Uahakandara river, it is very lilcely that the first 

* Tamblagain is Tunbulagrtma, "tlie betd Yillsge.” 

t There is another rirer ^ppnkandam in Kohan .1 (llah. 146,197). 


23 


one' may also have landed somewhere in that ‘neighbourhood, 
and that the •■first settlements, viz,, Tammana Nuwara' and 
-Upatiesagalna, must have been on the west coast of the island. 
Tn assuming this, of course, we mnst give up the idea that they 
came from Bengal with the north-east monsoon, as in this case 
they never could have reached the west coast. But I think it 
much more likely that they c ame from the south of In dia, as a 
sea voyage from Bengal to C’eylon without a fixed destination 
would suppose a much more enterprising spirit than the Indians 
ever had. Besides, Lassen (de Taprobane insula veteribus cognita, 
p. 6), and after him Caldwell (Comparative Grammar of rbe 
Dravidian Languages, p. 121), have pointed out the fact that 
Tambapannl was originally the name of n river in Tinncvelly, • 
which the immigx'ants- brought with themselves to Ceylon, and 
Bumouf (Journal Aeiatique, 1828, p. 267) goes so far to say that 
the name of Tinnevelly or 'Kruncvely is o^y a mutilation of the 
T amil Tamhii-apanni.* 

If the immigrants came over from the south of India, it. is 
clear that they must have landed on the west coast of the island, • 
most probably at the mouth of one of the rivers. For the second 
immigration under Panduw.asadcwa we have the testimony of 
the llahavansat (see above) that it was the mouth of the 
Jlahakandara river where they landed, and it is also proved by 
the site of Upatisaa Nuwara, the modem Tantrimolei, on the 
road from lladawacchi to Manaar, not far from the Aripo river; 
it was a station they had to pass on their way from the*^ 
coast to AnuT.adhanuTa, their iinal settlement. 

Concerning the landing of the first expedition Yalentyn give^ 
besides the places* already mentioned, viz. the month of the 
Wellawe river and Tamblagam, two more : Alanaar and ilantota 
wliieh are close together on tbe_west wast. There is no direct 
proof for either of the two']^aces,~and I. do cot bcliere that 
Mantota is an abhreviaUon of Tammanatofa, hut I think it very 
likely that the immigration took place somewhere on this port 
of the const, .and proceeded from here along the Aripo river 
towards Anuradhapura. There are ruins at Tantrimslei and in 
some other parts of the Mannar district, •which prove that there 
was an ancient drilhation in this pirt of the LZand, although it 
is difficult ht ‘present to say exactly ho'w accent it was. 

If we have come to the conclurion tist the Aryan immf<irrants 
came over tO Ceylon from the south of Jhdis, it still remains to 
decide what their original h«ae ws«, fez tlelr langua'^e, the 
Sinhalese, shows clearly that ih^ coal! not be natives^of tlie 
Deccan. Accordii^ to their own badlthm in the XlaJiavansa 
(p. 43 ff.) and ri5jaw.iliys (Dpism IT, JC4) thev descend from 
the kingdom 'of lilla "or RkdLa, tie part of Bergd 

(Bumouf, hip. Cl), next fro Garjapwdririr is the Bengal prej^- 



24 


We have no reason to doubt this statement, but as a proper 
historical proof is -wanting, the matter can only be decided by 
comparing the languages of the two countries, and this I have 
tried to do in my Contributions to Sinhalese grammar, p. 1 ffl 
Perliaj )3 that it may be possible hereafter to find the exact way 
tlie emigration took in coming from Bengal if wo succeed to 
identify the names of the places Wijaya is said to haVo 
touched, in the story, at Maliavansa, p. 4C, viz., Naggadlpa 
llahindadlpa and SupparakiL* His marriage with the PrinMss 
of Pantlu (Maliav. p. 52) also shows that ho had connexion 
with tiio south of India. 

Whatever we may think about Wijaya and his journey, there 
can be no doubt that the immigration of tho Qangetic tribes 
into Ceylon must have taken plSco at least a century or two 
before A^oka, for at that time we find them already occupying 
the whole of the island do^vn to Alagama.f excepting only the 
west coast, which most probably was a jungle. The art of 
•writing, however, seems not to have been known in Ceylon as 
early as in India, for we have not only no inscriptions from tho 
time of A^oka, but nothing even older that the first century n. c. 
Those inscriptions, which I have placed at the head of my 
collection, belong most probably to the reign of WaUagamini 
(88-70 B. C.). but none of them are dated, and the facts related in 
them do not point with necessity to a particular king, so that 
my identification rests on the coincidence of names and on 
paleographical reasons. 

The oldest iaseciptions are all either rock or cave inscrip- 
tions; only two slabs are known to me, wluch arc both in the 
Colombo Museum, viz. one from the Ruanwaeli Bagob.i, 
Anuradbapura, and one from Tissamnharama in Hambnntot.a. 
Pillar inscriptions we find in great number down from tho ninth 
century, The cave inscriptions are nearly all in the same style ; 
first the name of the donor, generally preceded by the epithet 
-Parumaka, then the name of his father with tho same epithet, 
and, to wind up, -with the typical form; lene agnta anagata 
catudisa sagasa. Similar inscriptions I have found, liundrcds 
and hundreds all over the island, with a very limited variety of 
names employed in them ; especially favourite are the names 
Tisz,, AUli8,ya, I esvly z. email wambet o? 

those that have a peculiar Interest atbuched to them. 

The rock inscriptions are of various t^e and character. Tho 
oldest are certainly as old as the cave inscriptions, and also ver 5 ' 
'iinich like them, as, for instance, those from Tonigala (No. 1.) 
and Eriyawa (No. 42a). They are generally found near tanks, 
and lelate the construction of the tank and the dedication of the 
same to a temple. There is, however, a greater variety of names 


• Bnrnouf 1. 1 p. C9 haa identified KagR*dipa with Nagadlpa -wlicre Baddhil paid 
a trisit (Hah-kT. 4, 5) and -with the NagadtU of Ptolemy, but this does not lielp ns 
mucb (comp. Sir Coomara Swimi’s Dathivamsa, p. 91.) 

■f The of «-»* ^»ded by Mahanaga, brother of Dewinamplya 

Tuna about SCO D. c. (Uah., p. 130.) ‘ . 



26 


and also of grammatical forms whidi allow us to form' an idea 
about the language of that lime what form tbc cave inscriptions 
alone would be impossible. On the whole Vc can establish the 
rule that the older these inscriptions arc, the better they are 
preserved ; they are generally on the flat rock, exposed to all the 
influences of the weather, and still the greater part of them have 
not been damaged in the least, the letters being cut in some 
places almost an inch deej>. The more modem ones, on the con- 
trarjr, have been defaced to a great extent by the weather and 
also by the carelessness of llie natives, who arc in the habit of 
burning straw and chaff on these rocks ; in a few instances even 
I have heard of inscriptions being destroyed wilfully by the 
natives, cither in hope to find a treasure buried underneath, or 
in consequence of the mysterious charm attributed by them to 
tlie ancient Nagari character. 

The inscription I liave .place<l as No. 1 is fiom Tonigala (Toni 
in Tamil “a boat”) li miles from Pnttidam on the road to 
Kurunaegala* and a quarter mile to the cast of the road. A 
transcript of it, not free fi-om mistakes has been published by 
A. 0. Brodie, in the Journal of the Ceylon Asiatic Society, 1853, 
p. 81. There are two different versions of this inscription, one 
((t) is engraved on a shelving face of rock about 20 feet above 
the level of the tank Kudawaewa ; the other (b), more perfect, 
on a flat rock which is nlmo.st totally overgrown with jungle, 
a quarter mile from a. Tlio leltem of both are about a foot 
long and nearly an inch deep. The persons mentioned in the 
• inscription are two : Tisa, son of Abhayn and Garaini Abhaya. 
On account of the form ot the cluaracter, which is the oldest wo 
meet in Ceylon, I take this G.amini Abhaya to bo cither 
Dutthagamini, 101-137 n. o., or Wattngamini, S8-7C B. c. ; but 
the title Dewanapiya, beloved of the gods, rather points to the 
latter; he was tbo youngest of three sons of King Laddbatis-sa, 
the brother and successor of Dutthagainini (ilah. p. 202). The 
names of the localities, Acagirika,t Acanagara, and Tawirikiya 
nagara cannot be identified ; the tank mentioned is most pro- 
hnidy the lliir8ij.ssa fank in Jlnlmut- (AlaJx 70, 

2. Gallena wihara. Tliis is a large rock temple, about four 
miles to the west of M.shag.alka(lawala, a village on the road 
from Padeniya to Anuradhapnm, not far finm the Kalaoya 
river. There arc five inscriptions at this temple, three of them 
cave inscriptions, two on the perpendicular rock ; the contents 
of the five are almost to ihe word the same, but one of them is 
at le.ast two centuries older Oian the others ; it is on tho rock 
left hand from the entrance to the small temple, about 12 feet 
from the ground. The contents are the same as those of most 


* Tbb place also is given wrong bn Fraser's mapj it must bo on the other side of 
the road. 

f Acagirika is formed like Aeebagsihika Mah. 127, 205 ; accha generally menns 
“ bear,” but i think here it is to be taken as “ open, unfortified.” Tawirikij^, then, 
would be the Sinhalese tawura “ solid, firm,” The opposite of Acchagallaka ot ilah. 
p. 127 is Rahagallaka, “ the hidden rock.” 



26 


of tiic cave inscriptions (except tl«c title Dovvrinajjiya^ wliicli we 
generally do not find in tbem) nnd its chief interest lies in the 
fact that it still uses the long vowel a nnd the aspirate hh, 
which shortly afterwards disappeared torn the language j in the 
^ur other inscriptions we find a and b instead. 

3. DambuUa wibara. This is the celebrated rock temple 
which, according to tradition, was founded by King Wattagriminit 
and afterwards repaired by Ni^^anka MaUa, at an expense of 
600,000 pieces of gold, from whence it derives the naiuc 
Suvaniagiri guhaya ''the cave of the golden rock.” Tlie in- 
scription is on the overhanging rock, above the entrance to the 
first temple, not very high from the ground, and in a place 
entirely protected from the weather. It was published by 
T. Vt. Khys Davids, in the Indian Antiquary, 1876, p. 248, but 
he ascribed it to a son or brother of the great Dewunampiya Tissa, 
which for two reasons I think impossible : (1) no inscriptions are 
known in Ceylon as old as Dewanampiya Tissa: (2) the temple 
at Dambool is not kno^vn to have existed before tho time of 
Datthagamini or Wattagamini. The combination Gamini TisaJ 
does not occur in any other inscription, and therefore I hcliovo 
that wo have to correct Gamini putasa Tisasa, and that it fefers 
to tho same Tisa as No 2. 

4. Tissamaharama. This place was comparatively little 
Imoivn before Dr. Goldschmidt visited it for tho first lime, I 
think, in 1870. It is described in Forbes IT, 1877 in 
Prulham’s Ceylon and its Dependencies, IT, 584, hut Emerson 
Tennent does not even mention tho name. I was greatly dis- 
appointed when I visited the place, as 1 had been told that tho 
ruins were verj- extensive. All I found at tho time were two 
octagonal inscribed pillars, one at the Sandngiri wiliaro, and tlio 
other the so called Aetahaendiiwa, about half mile from the 
temple near the tank (about tbeso sec later on"). Dr. Gold- 
schmidt found besides a large slab which has since been taken 
to Colombo, and the inscription of King Ila Naga, which is 
inside the dagoba, and was only visible as long as the dagoba 
was being repaired ; this inscription is the oldest and most 
interesting amongst those at Tissamaharama. The Nfi'^amaha 
wiliara, which is mentioned here, was built, nccordinf' to 
lAaVi. p. ISO, by ■KLabanaga,ttio second brother o£ Dewanampiya 
tissa, who founded the kingdom of Mugama. It is the largest 
and most celebrated dagoba at Tissamaharama, Besides there 
is the Yafthala ^viha^a where King Tatthalaka Tissa was horn 
(llah , p. 130), the Tiss^ahawihara, founded by Kakawaiina 
Tissa, father of Dufthagamini, (Mah.. i\ 131), and the Sandagi’ri 
dagoba, all three in ruins now. The Nagamahawihitra was 


• Tbe mentioned is ilaMeula Usa, the eon of KhaUitanjga. -who was 
adopted bj Wattap^mini. ° ' 

t Hajarntnukari in Upham, Sacred and Ilistorieal Books IL, 43 i but according lo 
Man., p. 200, it was constructed bjr Dottha^nuiii. Forbes I., 370, “ 

tTbe GiminitiBsa tank was bestow*’ — - ... . . .. 

accotdmg to Mab., p. 223, Dip. p. IM. 



repaired by lung Ila Naga (Mah., p. 217), who according to the 
Mall. . Avas not the eon but the grandson of Mahadathika 
Mabiinaga.' The name Golagama does not occur in this form 
in the Mahavansa, but at p. 148 we have Gondigivma, and at 
p. 143 there is mentioned a place Gawata (or Kapittha, according 
to the now edition by Sumangala and Batuwantudawa), near 
Cittalapabbata, which is called Godagamuwa in Sinhalese.* 

- 5. Ruanwaeli Dagoba, Anuradhapura. This is the oldest 
inscription that has been discovered at Anuradhapura, the otTi'ers 
near the. Ruanwaeli Dagoba arc from Meghavanna Abhaya 
(302-330) and the rest is still more modern. Karaya is to bo 
taken in the sense of ‘‘restored” just as /faTa/ti in the inscrip- 
tion of Nagamaha vobara. The Dakshina and Abhaya wiharas 
were built according to Mali., p. 20C, by King Wattagamini, 
B.C. 89. The reign of G ajabah u is dealt with very shortly in 
the Mahavansa (p. 223), a fact which is surprising Avith regard 
to the great number of inscriptions that he left-f This is the 
finest of all his inscriptions, the letlcra are very regular and 
dear on the stone, although not cut very deep. The form of the 
alphabet is the same as in the caves of Western India ; the s has 
already adopted tlie round form ( 2 ). 

G. IRaimalagala, near Ratmala tonki 2^ miles S.E. of Anurad- 
hapura, near the road to Runmaegala. There is a largo square, 
48 by 64 feet, beautifully smoothed, a bed to the east and a 
destroyed Dagoba to the south. Two kings are mentioned in 
the inscription, Gajabahu and his successor Mallaka J7Sga. In 
the Mahavansa Gajabahu is called Wankanasil;a Tissos* son, and 
so also in the inscription No. 5 from Ruanwaeli Dagoba. Here 
Avohave inarumanaka (the modem-munuburn-monorama) Avhich 
generally in inscription.^ means grandson, and I think that we 
have to state an exception here in the use of the word. There i&’ . 
anotiicr peculiarity in this inscription, viz., t he use of the Utle 
Dewan apiya for all three kings, Wankanasika Tissa, G^abalm, 
and Mallaka Naga, which title, as avc haA e .seen above (No.''2, 3), 
is only applied to the great Tissa and to Wattagamini in other 
inscriptions. A village, Wihirabija, is mentioned at JIah. p. 109, 
but not i<lentitied» and both WihirabTja and Mulagutika occur 
in Meghawanua Abhaya’s inscription at Mihintale (below. 
No. 20). ^ 

/ 7. Periyankulama, between Jayawaewa and JetaAvanarama, 
on a flat' rock by the side of a hollowed-out cave. There are 
many stone pillars near the place, which is N.W. of the Lanka- 
raraaya, and S.W. of the Tanguttara Piriwena, at which last 
cave Moggallana is supposed to have lived. The inscription is 

• The SInh. go<|a is penerallf derired from Stt. pirta. 

t GajalAbu'g expedition to India is not at ail mentioned in tiic 2Iaiiir., bat it ia 
related •with all patticolara in the TUjlwahya. Upham, 1. 1. II., 22!> ff. A part of the 
Sinhalese text of this pa-ssage of the Itajls^iya was pablished by James Alivia in his 
iutrodnetiou tu the Sldat Sangarawa, p. tXVI., comp , al'o Forbes II., 47 f. 

X Ratmal.a taalc was dammed by BhStika Tissa U., nccordinj to RajlratnSIcari 
(Upham IL. S9), bat ills also mentioned amon^ttbe ICtanlu formed by Kini; 
Maksena. Mah., p. 237. 



28 


on tlio wholo very •well preserved, Lut there arc sovcral clerical 
errors which I have corrected. The natno o£ the them hlajima 
or ITajiba occurs hero and in No. 8, and also in an inscription at 
Piduruwagala wihara near Sigiri (No. 43), but cannot Ix! identi- 
fied. A. village, Patanangola, exists at present about 38 miles 
from Hanibantota in the soutl>ern province, anti it is also men- 
tioned on the large slab from Tissainnlidriimn (No. G7). lino 7, 8, 
16, but I do not know whether it is the identical one. 

8. Periyakatlu wihara. This is a rock temple, four miles to the 
north of Dehelgomuwa, a village eight miles from Kurunaegala, 
on the D^rahulla road. The inscription is on n flat rock about 
100 yards from the temple. generaUy overgrown with jungle ; it 
is very well preserved, only in the Sod and Srd lino two or 
three letters arc missing. The Cakkadiiaraka wihara is men- 
tioned here, and in an inscription at Wihriragaln (No. II), but 
not knorni from the ilahiivansa 

9. Andarawaewa, near Elagamuwn. on the central road, 
11 miles from Damhulla; flat atone, formerly used as a pillar. 
About halt a mile off are extensive mins at Korasagala. The 
inscription is imperfect, and docs not allow of a translation, but 
the name of King Wahaba (66. — 110 A.D.) is clearly legible on 
the stone. 

10. Galwana, a stone in the bed of the spillwater stream of 
Llekiccaewa, about 120 yards from the high road at the 1 Dtli mile 
of -the AnurlLdhapura-Tiincoroalcc road. Tho inscription is 
tolerably well preserved, but the names of the two tank's contain 
clerical errors, so that they cannot he identified. 

11. Wibara^ala, 2^ mites we.st of Galenbindoru waewa, on the 
20th mile of the eastern minor roa<l, where it joins the Sipuku- 
lama road, Two inscriptions, ihc first bears the name of King 
Wasaba, of which, curiously enough, the first syllable is omitted ; 
the second that of OajaTOhu, with the usual genoalog}’. The 
tank mentioned in both inscriptions is the 'Dppala doniya tank, 
and there is also made allusion to the Pabbataramaya wihara 
(Mah., p. 207). 

12. Tamaragala, about two iuile.s from the 13th mile post, 
Anuradliaputa-Trincomalec road, Uddiyankulam Korle. In- 
scription imperfect, contmening the name of Gajabahu, with the 
usnal genealogy'. 

13. Kaika-wa wiliara, four m'lles from Balalla, close to the 
road to Yapahoo (north-western province). The inscription is 
near a small tank on the left from the footpath leadino- to the 
wihara. cpiite overgrown -with jungle, hut very' well preserved. 
The king is only called Aba here, without the usual genealogy, 
hut the form of the cliaracter jwmts to the time of Gajabdbu! 
There is another inscription on the top of the lock beyond the 

. wihTira, in the same character, but too much defaced to allow of 
a translation. 

14. Patahagawagala, at Niyadawane wihara, about 4 miles to 
the west of Polpitigaraa, a village 2G niiles from Kurunaegala, 
on the Anuradhapura road. The inscription is almost totally 



dcstvoyc'l by tbe people \ralfcin" iiboat on the rock; tlio 
clmrficteis ere tbe same as in Na 13, ami tbc ‘wortls Abaliajlta, 
“ (l.’uigliter o£ Abliayn," are clearlj' legible at tlio end of the first 
and the beginning of tlie second line. 

15. Dunuinajulalakanda, 2 miles cast from the Stb'inile 
po5>t on tbo ronii from Anuritdiinpttra to Rambaewn. There are 
two inscriptions on tlm top of tbe rock forming tbc cave temple, 
one of 15, tbe other of 7 lines, both in a bad state of preserva- 
tion. The first l)cars the name of King Batiya, the son of 
Ganiini Abba_)a (line 1 and 2). This must l>c Bbutiha Tissa II.; 
wlio according to ifabavanm, p. 224, was tlic son of llallaka 
Naga, not of Gajnludm. Tbo inscription, contains a grant of 
paddy field-, some of which can bo identified as tbc Kannkagama- 
kcla Mab., chap. 79, tbe Tiiladlinrawij'aketa, llab., p. 217, but 
we know nothing about their site; ’Katiigama may point to tbo 
modem Katragam, nltbough tins is in tbe southern district, as it 
was n celebrated jdacc since tbo earliest limes. Tbe second in- 
scription perfectly ngi-ccs in the style with the first, hut tbo 
name of tbc king on it Is cfiaccd. 

10. Situlpa wibatn. Thisis tbo celebrated rock temple Cittnla- 
pahUatn, constructed by Krtkawanna Tis.sa, according to Alab., 
p. ini, 22 miles from Kirindo. There are several inscriptioas at 
this temple, but only one is well enough preserved to allow of a 
Imnslatiou. Tbo king menltoncd here Is JCaDitil»a Tissa, brotlicr 
of libatika Tissa II. (sec No. 15), and son of Alallaka Nfiga 
(lo3-173, A.I>.) Tbo Mall., p. 225, reJatc.s that bo i-epaircd tbo 
edifice at Nfigadlpa, wbich refers cither to tins temple at Situl- 
pawibara, or to tbc caltya of King AlabriNriga atTissamabaruma 
{ecc above, No. 4). The Dakkhina tank is not known from tbo 
Mall, but tbe Tissa tank is most probably tbo one situated in 
Robana, which was extended by King Ila Naga, according to 
Slab., ]), 217. A distinction is made in this in^-cription ns well 
as ill others later on between Ibc nleynwawi, “ tlic channel tank,*' 
and. tbe kanawawi, “ tbo embankment tank,” but it is diflicult 
to say at present where tbe diflerenco He-s. 

17. Galgirikniula, eight miles from Madnwnccbi, near tbo road 
to Jafiha. This inscription bcors the name of King Batiya, but 
without any genealog)', so that wo cannot ascertain wbicli king 
of Ibis name is meant. Tlic clmrocters, however, arc those of tlie 
2nd century, and we cannot go far wrong in ascribing it to Kin" 
Bbutika Tissa II. Tlio subject of tbo inscription is a grant of 
paddy fields which cannot be identified. 

18. Demataniol wibura* at Okkampi{iya, in Buttala IVacdirata. 
This inscription also bc.ars the name of Oamini Abhayn, but I 
am doubtful whether it belongs to GajabSbu, as it was found in 
tbe soutbeni part of the island, while all the other inscriptions 
of this king are in the nortli. The temple, Dcmatamal wuhara 
is about four miles cast from Buttala, acroa tbe Kunibukanuru 


• Dewata is the Sinhalese name for the Gotta* (io lli: seranniU. Alha. 55‘). 

zitiiaxt II It irre a I'ili -erf f.C 

pcm3tthflp!idatlbaliTam.3fah..70,ll‘«tjrah.74, nj.iretoJ it ia hi 

form and orlhographjr Detn3t««L 



30 


river, and the inscription is on n perpendicular* rock, quite over- 
grown with jangle, one half mile b^ond the temple.^ It is very 
well preserved, but there are some clerical erron? in it which aro 
not quite easy to correct. 

IV. 

Inscriptions of Meghavanna Abhaya I. aiid II. (248-261 and 
*302-330> 

19. Debelgalpausala, andently Rangirileno, near Kahatagas- 
digiliya, on the 21 mile stone of the Anuradhapnra Trincomalee 
road. There is an old dagoba, a hole in the rock for a large 
patraya, six feet in circumference ; an iron chain supported on 
broken wooden posts along the steps leading up a cleft between 
two rocks to the dagoba and a small pond- The inscription is 
on a flat rock by the Pansala, tolerably well preserved ; the 
characters d'lEfervery little from those in Gajabahu's inscriptions. 
The king mentioned ia this inscription is the yoimgest amongst 
the three brothers from the Lambakanna race Sangbatlasa, 
Sanghabodlii, and Gothabhaya, whose history is related in the 
Attanagaluwarasa.* Unfortunately, we leam nothing from this 
inscription, nor from the others, neither about the way in which 
he Mcended the throne, (comp. Tumour in the Ceylon Almanac 
for 1834, p. 175, and Alwis Introduction to the Attanagaluwatpsa, 
p. 142), nor about the religions quarrels under bis reign (Unh., 
p. 281 f.). 

20. Uihintale. This beautiful inscription on the rock close 
to the entrance to the Ambasthala wi))ara (Emerson Tennent’s 
Ceylon, II., GOS), originally occupied a space 27 feet long and 
15 broad, but now the whole centre part of it is effaced, and only 
the beginning and end of each line can be made out. An account 
of the inscription was first published in 1850, by Captain 
Chapman, who gave a Htbograph copy of it, but no transcript. 
The reason why I attribute this inscription rather to Megha- 
w-anna than to Gajababu is this, that it is stated in line 13 that 
ho repaired the abode of Mahmdaand Itis companion Bhaddasala 
just as we find it related concerniug Meghawanna at Mah., 
p. 232. A great number of tanks and paddy fiel^ are men- 
tioned in the inscription, of which only a few can be identified, 
a.s, for instance, in line 12, the 'Wfliitabijaka and llulagutika, 
which we already met at Maba Ratmala (No. C). A translation 
of the svhoVo cannot be given on account of the imperfect state 
in wliich the inscription is, 

21. Ruanwaeli Dagoba, Amnadbapura. There are four in- 
Bcriptioas in one row on the pavement in fi*ont of the eastern 
altar, all four tnoro or less damaged by the people wall^o- 
about on them. Tho first in beginning from the left bears the 
name of TOeghawatjna] Abliaya, son of Dolakamataya, minister 
to King Slahasena, who is mentioned at Mahav. p. 235 (comp. 
J._C. A S., 1879, p. 0). Towards the end of the insenption 
(line 15) wc find again the name aickaw an-a Ab.a maharaja, but 



31 


this is most probably lleghawanim IL, the son and successor of 
Muhascna (302-330) ; after this follows the date of the inscrip- 
tion, viz^ tho tliinl day in the hriglit half of Majimodini (llarchr 
‘April) in the year Ataligita Tlie second inscription is in a 
much worse state than the first, and there is hardly anything 
legible except the name, Tisa> in the first line, which, of com-se, 
does not help ua in any "way. The third bears in full the name 
of the wife of Bhatiya Tissa, mother of lleghawanna Abhaya. 
Wo kno^v' nothing from the ilaliavama about this queen, nor 
is it related anywhere that Meghawanna was the son of Bhatiya 
Tissa. The whole remainder of the inscription (18 lines) is 
unfortunately too much damaged that we might draw any 
conclusion from there. In No. 4, Uno C, we find again the name 
of King Meglmwanna, but here with the addition Sirinaka 
llaharajahaputa “ son of King Siri Naga.” 

Now in'an inscription at Karamhagala, (21®) near Koggala 
(c-alled Bakagallnddhavapi at blah., 75, 127.) nine miles from 
the Ambalantota rest-house in Hambnntota district, where 
hardly anything is legible, we can read the name of the King 
Naka, Mahasena maharaja, and this shows that Jlahusetin was 
also called ^Siri] Naga, and that consequently the king mentioned 
here was his son Hcghawo^ipa U. 

22. Weherabaendigala, 100 .fathoms from the 20th milepost 
of the lladawaccbi-Horowapotana road,' there is a broken 
dlgoba about 30 yards in diameter, and on tho top of the rock 
an inscription in five lines of which only ono is legible ; it con- 
tains tho words Ababa Megha .... 

23. Sandagiri wihara at TissatoahaTama,* octagonal insciilicd 
pillar (eee above No. 4). , The greater part of tlio inscription is 
destroyed, but there is still clearly legible (on the side which is 
marked D) the name Tisa inahnrajaha marumanaka raja . . 
Abaha puti Rohinika Gamini*‘AbalmEohijiika Qamini Abhaya, 
son of Abhaya, grandson of King Tisa.” The genealogy, ns it is 
given here, would rather point to Rohinika'^ Gdmini being a son. 
of Gajabahu, but as lie is not mentioned in the lilah., and as the 
{traders arc rather more modern, be may as well be a sen of 
one of the .two Sleghawannas. There is also mentioned a queen, 
Siladewi (on the side marked B), in connexion with Wasabha 
(whose ■wife is called Chetta at llab., p. 220) and tho tauks of 
lluta and Tissa, both situated in Bohano. (Comp. No. 1), 

24. Rugam tank, 22 miles from Batticaloa on tho now. road to 
Badulla. This inscription was discovered by Ur. Holland, and 
described in tho Proceedings of the Ceylon Asiatic Society, 
1870-71, p. xxvi, where also a facsimile is given. It professes 
to bo very ancient as in tho first line we read the name Yatalaka 
Tissa, son of Mnhanaga, who was horn at Tissamaharama, when 
lus parents were on tho flight from Dcvannmpiya Tissa s queen 
(Slab., p. 130). The form of the character, however, shows with, 
certainty that it cannot bo so old, and that another Yatthalaka 

• Forbi-s II., 188. 

I Tli6 name Rohioimitru occurs in the inscription Ko. S, from Sshette Joumsl of 
the Bombay Bn»nch Boj-sl A.siatie Society, V., IS it 




32 . 


Thsa unkno^Ti in tlio looks must liavo existed aCtcrwards. -In 
tlic second line we rend Alamahamja, and tliis is the reason 
why I have placed tlio inscription here, nlthough there is no 
positive proof that it belongs to one of tlic two Mcghawniuias. 
The rest is unfortunately too much defaced to allow of a 
translation. 

V. 

Inscriptions of the firsl four Centuries, the exact date of ichidi 
cannot he ascertained. 

Here we lave to mention first of all the numerous cavo 
inscriptions of which I only give somo characteristic Kpccimcns. 

25. raramakatula, about one mile from Tonigain {see above, 
No. 1, and comj). J. C. A S., 1853, p. 181, If.), llierc are four 
inscriptions, two of them high up on the overhanging rock, one 
quite ilicgihlo, on a stone near the entrance to the priests house, 
and one on a perpendicular rock above a small natural tatik 
close to the wiharJt I only give hero the last onp, as the others 
offer no peculiar interest : 

Paruinaka Abaya pnta pnrumaka Tisaha Dutaka .... 

It is very tempting to identify the last fragment of a name 
with and the form of the character would not 

object to the identitication, but as thcro is no other inscription 
svhicli belongs with certainty to Ids time, I preferred not to put 
it in 60 prominent a place. It, beroafter, anytbing is found to 
confirm ray identification, tins inscription svill liavo to be placed 
at the head of the whole collection. 

20. 'Wirandagod.v Mukulana, a small temple about three miles 
to the north of tho 17th mile-post on the road from Puttalam to 
Anuradliapvira. There are four inscriptions in four eaves on 
different side.s of tho temple. The place is quite overgrown avith 
jungle, and the temple must have been deserted a long time 
ago. It was built according to tradition by Prince SAlikumura, 
tlio son of Dutthagamini (Mah. 199 f.) in 137 nc. (comp. i'orbe.s, 
I., 230), but tlio blunders in the inscriptions show dearly enough 
that they must be about two or three centuries later. 1 here 
give two_of them, putting in brackets the words that ore missing 
on the stone : — 

a. Jotiteiaha [putahaj mabasudasane upa.saka Tisaya teraha 
nagalene. "The Lar^ and hcautiliil rock cave of the thera Tisa, 
son of the thera ffoti." 

b. Parumaka Sumana putaha Cudasumana ea bata Tisagutiha 
ca [tudisa lene sagasa], “The cave of Tisaguta, son of the 
brahman Sumana, brother of Cudasumana [is given] to tho 
priesthood of the four quarters.” 

The names are all of very frequent occurrence, and it would 
be useless to try to identify any of them. In the translation of 
(a) I have left out upasaka “ lay devotee,” which is the contrary 
of thera, and cannot bo applied to the same person ; one of the 
two must stand by mistake. ' 

27. Wessagiri wihara, near Anutadhapuva. This, according to 
Mah, p. 1 23, is the place where the 600 vaivyaa that had been 


33 

'ordained by the cliief them, bojoumed, Tvbilo the 500 eminently 
ploiw persons sojourned at Issarasamanaka, the present Isuru- 
muniya, which -is dose by. The temple of Wessagiri must have 
' been deserted a long time ago, as at present there is nothing to 
he seen but empty caves and inscriptions. Of the latter I counted 
more than a dozen, each in a separate cave, but some of them ain 
almost illegible, as the rock rapidly decays under the in fluence of 
the humidity, , I only ^ve three of them in transcript : 

а. Parumakfi Palikadasa bariya parumaka Surakita jita upasika 
Citaya lene sagasa catudisa. “The cave of the lay-devotee 
Citra, wfe of the parumaka Palikada, daughter of the parumaka 
SuraHta [is given] to the priesthood of the four quai*ters.'’ 

б. Anikata Sona pitaha bariya [u] pasika gayalene. “ Cave of 
Anikata, fatlier of Sona [and] of his ime the lay-devotee.” 

c. Galadarunagaya puta dewaha lene agata anagata catudisa 
sagasa. “The cave of Dcwa,>the sou of Galadarunaga [is 
given] to the priesthood of the four quarters present and 
ab.sent.” 

28. Mihintale, Besides the large rock inscription of King 
Heghawanna Abhaya, described in No. 20, there is a great 
number of smaller inscriptions on tbo rocks around the Amba- 
athala Dagoba and on the way up to the Aetwihura : 

(t. Inscription on, the brow of the cave east of the broad flight 
of steps Ica^g to the Ambasthala: 

Tisasa Mauiya lene sagasa. “ The cave of Tisa ilaniya (?) [is 
given] to ^e priesthood.” 

h. Jotisana terasa atiwasika* Budasumanadata terasa lene 
sagasa, “ The cave of the thcra Buddhasomanndatta, pupil of 
the Ihera Jotisana is given to the priesthood.” 

c. Rajagirilena (on the opposite hill) : 

Parumaka Sena puta Badakajaka parumaka Senaba lene 
sagasa. “ The cave of the parumaka Sena, son of the panxraaica 
Sena Bhaddakacchaka [is givenj to the priesthood.” 

d. Badakajaka parumaka Tisa puta parumaka Saclagatalia 
lene. “ Cave of the parumaka Saddhagata, son of the parumaka 
Bhaddakacchaka Tisa.” 

c. Do [wa] napiya maharajaha Batiya ya bika . . . [u] 
pasika Wajakawaya lena “ Chve of the lay-devotee Wajakawaya 
(?),.. of the long beloved of the gods Batiya. 

It is impossible to decide whether this inscription belongs to 
the first or to the second Bhiitika The reign of tbo second is 
dealt with very shortly in tlio Alah., but concerning tbo fii-st 
tljero is a st.atemenfc at p. 213, that ho built a thCpa at Amba- 
sthala, and that ho remained there till it was completed. 

f. On an almost inaccessible rock half way down the east side 
of the Sola caitya hill ; 

Batiy.i llanalikaciya puta panimaka Asamanaha lene sagasa. 

“ The cave of the parumaka Asamana son of Bhatika Slana- 
likaccliiya [is given] to the priesthood.” 

- • ^\tiwasika = Piill anle'*»«5ka, n*, for io'tance, in on inscription from SaueW, 
near Bhilvi (No. 191 in Cunninghaia’s Sbilra tofcV) A^cliudasa dhamakalhaka 
nDtevasino Balainitasa dlnam. 

Q6038. , ’ * C 



g. On tlie road to the Sela caitjfu Three largo images of 
Buddha lie broken near the cave: 

Pamraakn Guta puta panimaka Sumanaha lone egata anagata 
catudisa sagasa. " The cave of the panimaka Sumana son of the 
panimaka Gntta [is ^ven] to the priesthood of tlie four quarters 
present and absent." 

h. On the flat rock close to the steps leading to the upper 
Dagoba. This inscription originally occupied eight or nine lines, 
but a great part of it iaefiaced now through the u'cather and the 
feet of tlie worshippers, so that a translation is impossible. 

29. Nettukanda, or Diulwaewa, 3 miles from Kahatagasdigiliya, 
which is 21 miles from Anuradhapura on the Trincomalee road. 
There is a number of inscriptions at this place, some of them 
cave inscriptions, others on the flat rock. We begin as usual 
with the cave inscriptions. 

rt. Panimaka Welu putanaleneagata anagata catudisa ^aga^a. 
" The cave of the sons of the panimaka Welu [U giv’en] to tlie 
pric-sthood in the four quarters, prc.sent and absent,” 
b Wamkapi gaoiika puta gamika Tisa pnti Utiya lenc agata 
anagata catudisa sagasa dine. "The cave of Utiya, son of thb 
lillagcr Tisa.son of Warakapi tbo villager, etc.” 

c. llie inscription In two Hoes on tlie flat rock on the right 
contains a grant of paddy fields to the Nagariya wiluvra, and tlicra 
is also mentioned at tlie end of line 1 the Nagariyawawi, which is 
most probably the modern Nuwara waewa near Anuradliapura. 
The Badlwawl, at the lieginoing of line 2, is the present Baen* 
diwaewa, eight miles from the temple. 

d. On the left side there arc two inscriptions, one of three and 
otic of two lines. They contain nothing but an ennraeration of 
tanks and corresponding paddyfields, which arc dedicated to the 
same Nngariyawihara. Similar inscriptionB concerning tank-s and 
paddyfields arc in good number in Ceylon, and they would he 
s'cry interesting for the ancient geography of tho country if there 
w.as a poasibility to identify at least part of the names contained 
in them. Unfortunately wc know notliing about tho Nagaiiya- 
wihara, except that there is at present a temple called Nagirikaiula, 
5 miles c.ast of tlie centml road at the 3 03rd milo' from Jaffna, the 
ancient tuinc of which, however, w.xs Bamaiiogiriya, and which 
eontiiiiH an inscription in eomewhat more modern, characters 
(ere hdoio Jio. 07). 

30. Galgamuwa.* This inscription Is on a perpendicular rock 
close to tlio bund of Galgammva tank, and about 1^ mile from 
the village Galgamuwa on the road from Padeniya to Anurrulha- 
pum (N'orth-W astern Province) : 

Ilaja Abayasa ]uit.a Wtulamana garaa iinhamabaja lia sagns.i 
wawi cn. " ll’mlillmmiina, the son of King Abbnyn [gave)°tho 
villnji' Mnliainalaja (?), and the tank to the priesthood.’' 

Wo do not know Mho this Waijilhamrina was, and thereforo 
cannot n«cerUln which amongst the different Abhayas wns his 
f-ither. The GalgamiiM'a tank was coivslnjctcd by King Jlah.V 
>‘'*na acfonliiig to the Rstjriratnukari (Upham, 1. I. II.TjO, III, 

• Camp. mdLam l.t, p. 6SI. " 


35 


237), and pcAaps the inscription may belong to him, as he was 
the son of llcghawanna Ahhaya I. In this case AVaddhaninna 
would only ho a title (comp. J. O. A- S. 187D, p. 7). 

31. Dunumandalakanda (see Na 15), over the entrance to the 
cave containing an 1 8 cubits image : 

Gamika Pacala puta garoika Dutaka Tisa puta gamika 
Abayaha lene agata anagata catndisa sagasa. “The ciivc of the 
villager Ahhaya, son of tlie villager Dutaka Tisa, eon of the villaga'r 
Pacala [is given] to the pri<»thood, etc.” 

We have here again the name Dutaka Tisa which we met 
before at No. 23, and which ns far I can see at present lias 
nothing to do with Dutthagiimini. 

- 32. Alaradankadawaia, half mile from the high road, at the 
13Gth mile post from Jaffna, Miiminia Korle. 

a. Upasaka Culusa lene s-ngasn. 

b. Dewateraha lene agata anagata catndisa sagasa. 

33. Gaetalagama in Allagala Korlc, Nuwara Kalawa, 15 milas 
from Anurfidhapura ; inscription on a rock near the Botree and 
wihara, about miles east of the 125th mile post on the central 
road: 

Upasaka Dahakaha Wetigopakasomaha npasika Mitadowalin. 
« Cave of the lay-devotee ilitadewa, wife of the lay-devotco 
Dahakawetigopasoma.” 

81. Aembulamba, within a mile or two from ilaenikdananu- 
wara,* turning of! from the lugh road between the 40th and 
list milestone from Kandy (Central Province). 

a. Pacina raja puta raja Abayaha puta Tisayaha lene agata 
anagata catndisa sagasa. “The cave of Tisa, son of King Abaya, 
son of the king of Praclna.” 

There are two more inscriptions at this place, wliich are only 
partially preserved. 

35. Panikkankulama Dagoba, about one mile from the ccnti'al 
road, and half a mile from the western minor road at Destraw.alli ja, 
Maminia Korle ; there are two inscriptions, a short one of two 
lines in a cave, with the usual contents, and one of ten lines 
on the Sat rock, which is toa iou(Si damaged to idJoTv of n 
translation. 

30. Giribawa* in ITagool Korle, five miles from Gallena 
wihara (se^ No. 2), North-Western Province: 

Gamini Abayasa puta Tisayaso lene Sihapane agata, etc. 
“ The cave of Tisa, son of Gamini Abhaya in Sihapana (?), etc.” 

37. Talpitiyawa, about one mile to the west of Keppitiyawa, 
a village 22 miles from Kimmaegala on the Anuriidhapura road 
(N.W.P) : 

a. Damarakita terasa lene sagasa. 

Upasika Nagulaha lene sagasa dina. 

38. Seruwawa, about foiu* miles north-west of Wellawe, a 
village six miles from Kurunaegala on the Anur.adhapura road 

• Maenjkdana Nuwara is about three miles from the GoTomment Agent’s rest- 
house at I,enadora midway between Nslsuda and Dambool. There are the mins of 
s pahee at the entrance of which is s stone bearing sn bscription in Sinhalese 
character. 

• A translation of a modem inscription Rt the same place was giren by A. O. 
Brodie in the J. C. A. S. 1848, p. 51. 


SG 


(N.W.P.) The wihata is on the top of an immense rock to which 
200 steps lead. > Tho inscriptions are 'on the rock forming the 
cave temple : — 

a. Parumaka Yasopalaha leno agata, etc. 
h. Parumaka Yasopalaha jayapa saraya lene. 

39. Ganekaiule wihara, 3 miles aE. o£ iJikawacwa, a village 
31 miles from Kurunaegala on the Anuradhapura road. The 
inscriptions are on the perpendicular rock over the wihara, which is 
totally covered with writing. The letters are very small, and become . 
only legible by climbing on tbe roof of the wihara ; the characters 
aro a little more modem than those in the preceding in.sctiptions. 

a. Sida Wiya pwkanalene catudisika sagasa. CudaTisajetaka 
Baranako anajiwi. 

“ Hail ! The tank cave of Wiya (7) [is^ven] to the priesthood in 
the four quarters. Cucla Tisa the chief and Bharana his bondsman." 

b. Parumaka Weluputaba parumaka Gilikanagaha lene sagasa 
dine. 

“ The cave of the parumaka GiHka naga son of the parumaka 
Welu is ^vetL to the priesthood.” 

c. Under this is an. inscription of throe lines in smaller charac- 
ters, which is not very weU preserved, and abounds in clerical 
errors, so that I do not attempt a translation, 

40. Kabaella lena atDagoma, 3 miles cast of Keppitiyawa (see 
No. 37). Inscription on an overhanging rock with the usual 
contents. 

41. Pct'iyagala, about a mile from No. 40. Inscription over 
tbo roof of the temple : 

Parumaka Sumana puta Somadalaha lene. 

42. Eana^ri ^vihara at Dewagiriya, about four miles north of 
Di)*atara, a village 17 miles from Kurunaegala, on the Trineo- 
malcc road. Several rock temples, of which one contains a cavo 
inscription svith the usoal contents 

42o. Kriyawa tank, 4 mile from Eriy.awa pansala, four miles 
from Mediyawa neat the toad from Kurunaegala to Anuradha- 
jmra (Upbam, 1.1. Ill, 23G.) The inscription is on the flat rock 
close to the tank ; tbo characters very ancient and cut very deep : 

Panr (ma] ya HipaJia pula . . , kaha dine. Ima wapi 
Dipigala* wiliaralii niyato sagasa. 

“ The son of the parumaka Hipa gave this to . . ’ . This 
tank is dedicated to the pricstboo*! of the Dipigala wihrira. 

Unfortunately none of the names in the inscription can bo 
identified, and tljo construction of Eriyawa tank is not related in 
the liahuvansa. A temple, Ernkavila, though, is mentioned at 
Mali., p. 237, which may bo identical witli the still existing 
Eriya%vapansala (about f mile from the tank on a high rock.) ° 

43. Plduriigala wihara near Sigirlf The temple is on the 
eastern side of the celebrated Sigiri rock where Kin^^ Kas-sana 
had hLs^ fortress, about two tnilea from the village '(Emerson 
Tennent’s Ceylon, L, 392), and the inscription is on the rock 
forming the cavo temple : 

• mpr in Pali Tncin« “k }MpanI’’Sinh.d]iri. 



37 


KoIagamasriwaputaMa.jiina 3 fnsajitayaTisa,dewiya lena sagasa. 

“ The ca\ e o£ Tisa dewi, daughter of ilajjhima, son of Kolaga- 
iruxsawa* [is given] to the priesthood.” 

There are two more inscriptions in smaller characters under- 
neath which cannot ho made out. 

44. Gone wihara, two miles west of Hiripitiya, a village 12 miles 
from Kurunaegala on the Anuradhapnra road. There arc three 
inscriptions, two Cave inscriptions on the rock over the temple 
with the usual contents, and one on the edge of a stone bed close 
to the wihara. I only give the last : 

Upasaka Wclnnalmha sihasanc. 

“ The Hon throne of the lay devotee Welunaga 

45. Patahamulla, one mile east of Hiripitiya. There are three 
rock temples and several caves containing inscriptions with the 
usual contents. I only give that in the cave at the back side of 
tbo lock which is now totally filled up with sand, and quite dark, 
so that it requires a candle light to see it : 

Gamika Malijita Sujataya lene, &c. 

“ The cave of Sujata, daughter of the villager MaH, &c. *' 

• There is also an inscription on a separate flat stone lying iu 
the temple ground at the bottom of the rock in somewhat more 
modem characters partially effaced. 

40. Kottarakjmbiyawa, an old and deserted rock temple, quite 
overgroirn with jungle, about ^ mile east of the 17th milestone 
on the Kurunacgala-Anuradbapiura ix>ad, and not far from the 
Hakwaetuna-oya. The inscription is on a perpendicular rock at 
‘the southern ostremity of the buildingwbich is now only a huge 
mass of ruins j it contains three lines and is very well preserved but 
full of clerical errors which render the translation rather difficult : 

Payati theraha lene savayitha . . . sadclhamasa (2) saga- 
hatbaya wXsawasika sapari [wa] taka tern samaka sata parisaja 
tu (3) ma bati gamaka wawiya wasakadata ha patiri me Icnahi 
nawanikatc. 

“This was called the cave of the tbera Payati ... an 
abode for the rainy season to the priesthood of the true religion 
together wish the robe f An assembly of a hundred tberas have 
restored for themselves the tank of Batigama belonging to 
Wasakadatta at this cave *’ 

47. Gallaewa wihara, deserted rock temple, about three miles 
from Mediyawa (N.W.F.). There are four inscriptions, three of 
them in caves which offer no peculiar interest, and one in three 
lines at the top of the rock north of the cave ; this is very difli- 
cult to read as the letters arc not cut deep and are almost totally 
washed away by the rain. In the first line I could only decipher 
with certainty the word mabawiharahi, Tlie characters arc 
rather more modern than those iu the cave inscriptions, and tlioi c 


• For JvobgMXjasiwa comp the aimc Coloado in the RSjiwalij'a (UpliJim 1. 1 , ii. 
22,) where Sooginja must bo eorreefed to Siginja. . 

^ Comp, line 3 of tho cave inscription No.lSat 2idsik(l'raQsacttoiis of tiic Second 
OrientaIi<( Coiigresa, p 331) where we hate wasavntMoam instead of wasnwariko, 
and ftTamam instead of panratakn 



38 


is especially one cliaracter I bavo not met nnywljcro else, consis- 
ting of a curve from the left to t!ie right with a dot in the 
middle. I do not know wliat this diameter moans, as also in 
BumeU’s South Indian Paleography no dotted letters arc given. 

48. Diyabacta, large rock temple about three miles from 
Gallaowa near the cro&s road that leads from Balalhv to Yapahoo 
and Rangaina. There are four cavcscontaininginscriptions, with 
the usual contents, and a largo rock outside of the temple ground 
across a little river. This rock must have been covered originally 
witli a long inscription, but now only some fragments are visible, 
tliat can give us no idea about the subject of the whole. 

40. PCijagala, 3 miles from Iliripiriya. Inscription in six lines 
on the top of a large rock, ratlier difficult to reach. No traces of 
any building in the ncigbourliood The inscription bears the 
name of the son of a minister Mahanaga, and there is also 
mentioned twice (li^*^** 1 -) ^ place Slaha Ataya or Malm 

Araya, but unfortunately too many letters are missing that we 
could attempt a translation. The subject is evidently here also 
as in most of the other inscriptions, the donation of some paddy 
fields, as can bo seen from Hues 4 and 5, where we read . . . 
kubari sagahata waya mahawi [ha] rabi. 

50 Qalwaowa, 3 miles from Wariyapola, a village 13 miles 
from Kurunacgala on the road to Puttalam. There are two 
inscriptions, one in a cave over the entrance to the temple, and 
one on the top of a steep rock about 50 yards from the pansala. 
The first Is easy to read : 

Upasaka je^akaha Hudahn putaha Umlahu Icne. 

“ 'Ike cave of Mu<la the son of Uluda, chief among the lay 
devotees." 

The second is mucK more difficult; it contains six lines, of 
which the first four are tolerably well preserved, but abound in 
clerical errors. I therefore somewhat hesitate in giving a trans- 
script from a photograph taken by me, and especially in attempting 
to translate the inscription : 

Siddham. Lohiyaha ma tera tabi madaha . . . madawayilu 
tumaha. 2. . . . dakapati bumi karihaka cetahapn dina Lolilym 
hata ma wijitaha^a tabi 3. cetanm ca mmlaha^a ba wawi ma tera 
majibaka butna . . . . ya saraya. 4, bamanaha gama wawi 
buna .... Habakncayaba parama paVi wiba 6. la^a ma layi 
' wawisariha .... 

" Hail ! The Alada temple (?) established by the Thera Lohiya 
at the Mada tank by himself .... after having seen the 
kamlias of land were given to the caitya. To Lohiya' and to 
Wijita [was given] the established caitya and the ilaila tank 
[constructed] by the Thera Majjbiina ; the land and . . V . the 
the tank of Bamanagama .... of Mabakaccayana the 
chief sage to the temple ; the tank of the ministel- 

Probably instead of Mada we have to read ITuda, as in the first 
inscription, and this may correspond either to lluta or to llunda. 
The names of Slajjluraa, Wijita, and Mabakaccayana are frequent 
enough, but it would be useless to identify them with any of tho 
historical personages known under these names ^ 



39 


51 Ridi Tfibara, about ^ tnilo sontli of the 12tli mile post on 
the road from Kurunoegala to Matale This temple is one of the 
most celebrated in Cej Ion bj its large collection ot olabooks {See 
L do Zoysa's Report on the inspection of the temple libiaries, 
p G) The ancient name of the place was Ambatthalcola lena 
(Mail p 1G7, Tumour’s reading is inconect) , the temple Rajata- 
lena* wihara ■was built by Amandagooiini, A.D 20 according to 
Mahivansa, p 215, but tlie tiadition current in the place is that 
it was founded by king Dutthagainmi There are several flag 
mtnts of inscriptions on the fiat rock neai to an old Digoba , but 
only one is well enough jireseived that at least a pait of it can be 
made out It begins Siddhisaddhannke siii After tins 

comes most pi obably the name of the king which is nob quite 
legible on the stone, and m the second lino I believe I have 
deciphered a part of the ancient name of the place Abaftha 
[kolalena ] 

j2 Alutgalu ih ira Nuwaragam Koile, small temple about 1 mile 
nortli of the western mmoi i oad (from Kekirawa to Timbii iw ae wa) 
leaimg the road two miles east of the place whero it is inter- 
sected by tlie Kuriinaegala Anuradliapiira road Another Galwi- 
hara is on tlic side of the road close by, where there is a beautiful 
hall but no inscriptions The Alutgalwilnra lusciiption is on the 
cdM of a cliff close to the pansala and is in perfect prescivation 

Siddha makarajaba hikawawiya cetakanhi sagawiyo cetakarihi 
tola tarawiketalu cctakanlii (2) uliwau i) a cetakanhi punagama- 
kawawija ceta karihi wihirakaketahi cetakanhi (3) pariwataka- 
ketaln cctnkanlu talawiyakctahi cetalcanhi (4) Iisa teraha 
kalahi hkitaka 

"We have here foui tanks and four corresponding paddy fields 
hikawawiya talatarawiketa 

8aga[wa]wiya -wihirakaketa 

uliwau lya panwatakaketa 

punagamakawawiya talawiyaketa 

Kanin is evidently the Pali kanslia and ceta is a numeral that 
indicates the number of kailshas over winch each of these tanks 
and paddy fields extends, I suppose that it must bo catvar 
although 1 can gne no other instance of the change of a to e in 
the middle of a word TVo of the paddy fields mentioned here, 
M7, those of Wihiraka and Pariwataka ni-e already known from 
the inscription at RatmalagaK (No C) , the talatarawiketa 
corresponds to Pili tuladhara “ tlio jeweller’s field analogous to 
the tuhidharapahbata, Mali, p lt3, 2l7t Bikauauija and 
Ragauawiya require no explanation, idiwawiya is ish^ikai ipi 
“ tlie brick tank ’ puiiagaroakawnwi occure ako in ircghawanna s 
inscription at lliliintalc (No 20) but cannot be identified The 
concluding sentence in the fourth line means “ This was written 
m the time of tlic tliera Tissa, hut we do not I now who this 
tlie’a Tissa was just ns littlo ns we know the name of the maka- 
raja “great king ’ mentioned m the first Imo The form of tho 

* ConccrniDg tluH name eee the Icgcml niated at p 1C7 and In Zo >ra 
lUp , p c 

f A Tillage Taldilbara U mentioacd at Mali 46, 13 




40 


character however shows that the inscription belongs to the third 

or fourth century A.D. • 

63. Dewagiiiyawiliara, 3 miles east of the village Galgamuwa, 
on the road from Padeniya to Anuradhapura (sec No. 30). There 
are two inscriptions, one near & stuall tanlc at the entrance to the 
temple which is partially destroyed by the people walking about 
on the stone, and one on a rock behind tho temple ; I only give 
the first words of No. 1 which can he made out with certainty. 
Siddham Cetawaluka wiharahi yatakuhare nawa karahi, &e. • 
But No. 2 I give in its whole extent: 

Sisitawanaka -mharahi (2) nawaha gamaketahi (3) celahi 
karihi kubare. 

“ In the Sisitawanaka wihara on the nawahagama field tho 
paddy land [extends] over four (*) kaiishas.” 

54. Galwihara. This is about 8 miles north of the 14th mile- 
stone on the road from Anuradhapura. to Puttalam, The inscrip- 
tion is on a large rock near the temple, and is on the whole very 
well preserved, pnly the first ond last lines are somewhat damaged. 
This inscription also contains an enumeration of tanks and 
corresponding paddy fields, of which only a few can be identified 
as the talatarawiketa which we met at Alutgalwibara (No. 62); 
a.s for Acawiketa we can compare Acagiri and Acann^ra at 
Tonigala (No. 1), other names as Bamanawiketa and lajakawi- 
keta are easily explained. 

65. Tammanakaneja, Kenda Korle, 6 miles from lickiccaown, 
a village 16 miles from Anuradhapura on tlie Trincomalee road. 
Several flights of stone stejs, a pansalaand fine dagoba completely 
dug out. There are two inscriptions on the fiat rock, one of eight 
lines close to the summit, and one of 21 lines a little lower down, 
both of them only partially preserved. In both inscriptions we 
find the name Nnkapawata-wihara, which seems to have been the 
ancient namo of the place (also mentioned at Jlah. 70, 10) 
and several other names as Upalabijaka*, Pajalaka, Utarapura, 
&c., which cannot be identified. I give the transcripts of both 
inscriptions as there is a jjossibility that some of the places 
mentioned may he found out hereafter, hut I do not attempt a 
translation as the present state of the inscriptions is too imperfect. 

56. Aminlcciya near Komwaewa, one mile east of the 2Sth 
mile post of the eastern minor road (from Eekirawa to Dacci 
Ilalmillawa). Inscription tolerably well preserved (except the 
first lino and the end) but full of clerical errors. Tim characters 
arc a little more modern than those in the preceding inscription, 
and some of them are doubtful ’ 

■ 57. Kirindct, village on the fcouth coast 22 miles east of 

Ilainhantota. Inscription on a large perpendicular rock close 
to the seaside, about ^ mile from tho village. 

Siddham. Aparamito lokehi Buddha same nati nthfine 
panmandalo bo (2) Bavanyutopeto anutarc 


• UppaLiTutjtja is & name of V>s!vnB.%nih.,iv 47. \5ntnlnrn„nS .. «»«... 
cmi^nl nun wlio v, a* one of GniiUnia’ii a^wikaa, Dhamm 2 IS 

tTbc na.no in it* Sinhalese form «t Mah. 74, 97 i it’otldnallv i.olon.-s 

btl tbc mSBundX ' ink wa faS ^ 



41 


sa^e mahesarano lakicake Budha nimi (3) sayambliu mo 


galahi 'wihera nira . . • . , . . • « nama Biidha 

sarana^te niicij’'a ditika bimdiya ....... niyate. 


"Hail ! in the boundless universe there is no equal to Buddha, 
not bound by space, all covering, endowed with omniscience, 
unrivalled, the Teacher, the great refuge, the wheel of prosperity 
is Buddha the selE-cxistcnt. The wibara on this rock called 

is granted to who 

has put his trust into Buddha havdng reduced the heretics. 

The inscription is interesting for its contents, as it is the only 
one in Ceylon which contains a praise of Buddha as its principal 
matter, and the grant to the temple only as on appendix to it ; 
and also for its language, as I will show hereafter in an especial 
paragraph. The name of the temple and 'of the grantee are 
effaced, hut the inscription clearly belongs to the first or second 
century 

58. Weragala near Ka^t^™^uwa, 6 miles north of the 18th 
milestone on the road from Anurildliapurn to Puttalam. Two 
inscriptions on a large rock both imperfectly preserved, one of 
four and one of eight lines. In the first the w'ord kahawana 
Pilli kabnpana occurs three times, and this is the earliest instance 
of the word used in inacriptioos*. (As for the use in Pali books 
see Rhys Davids Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon, p. 15). 
In the second we have the names Kubaragama (twice, line 2 
and 7)i Sumanagam.a and the Maharuka tank, winch is identical 
with the present Rukadawaewa (in Eraser’s map) close by-j besides 
the word cetakaribi occurs frequently, and the whole inscription 
is very much like that of Alutgalwihara (No. 52). 

69. Hammillngnla between the road from .^uradhapura to 
Puttalam and the western minor road, not far from the place 
where they meet (Timbiriwaewa). The temple is on a largo rook 
and the inscription a little below ; it is very much damaged by 
the weather and the people walking about on it, especially the 
beginnings of the lines are totally destroyed, so that a translation 
is impossible. The subject is Jierc also as elsewhere tanks and 
paddyficlds. 

tib. Dttapuwa wihara on Vne western minor road,? milos irom 
where it joins the Puttalam road. The temple is close to the 
road and the inscription on the same rock near a small fank. 
This also, like No. 69, is in very bad preservation, and it seems 
that this is parti}' owing to the quality of the rock which is not 
so solid in this district as on the eastern side. 

Gl. Habarane, 16 miles &om Damhool on the road to Trin- 
comalee. The temple is about | mile from the rest house on the 
road to Kekirawa, and the inscription on an immense rock a 
little above the temple where there is a tanlc. This is the finest 
amongst the older inscriptions in Ceylon, and it was first of all 
made known in Europe by Prinsep, who published a fac simile 
in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, voL V. p. 554 
(comp._ Wilson Ariana Antiqna, p. 33). Prinsep deciphered a 


, * It also occurs in tlie inscriptioo Ko. 18 at KSsIk Fhicli ulij be about the same 
age os 0UX8. 



42 


few words, but did not give either a transcript or a translation 
o£ the whole. As a tTjmscripl it i? easy enough, as the letters 
are very well preserved from beriming to end, and a translation 
also can be given of the test excepting a few words only of 
which I do not know exactly whether they are proper names or 
not. Unfortunately we cannot give the exact date of the 
inscription as all the proper names are either unknown from 
elsewhere or too common to allow any conclusion. , Dr. .Gold- 
schmidt attributed the inseription to hteghawanna II., becau.se 
this king made great offerings at Ambftsthala, but this is no 
sufficient proof. The Abivadamanawawi mentioned in line 1 is 
most probably theone constructed by KingWasabha according to 
JIah. p. 222, the Atiwawiya, “ elephants tank,” is not known from 
anywhere else, the Wadiwasara, in line 3, is possibly a miatakc 
for Padi '‘the Padiwil tank” mentioned frequently in later 
incriptions* (see JIahinda’s inscr. at Ambasthala A. 40, ntid tbe 
four pillars at Rankot Dagobn, Polonnaruwa). The date of the 
inscription is given at the end as the seventh day in the bright half 
of Majimodiai in the year puwayasa Sawanakat. Hr. Burgess 
suggests that this may be called the Sravana year in tbe same 
way as we meet in Indian inscriptions a Pausha year and a 
Vai^aklia year (comp. Ind. Ait VI. pp. 22, 25, VIL, 35, Burgess 
Surya Siddhanta S.IX., 17^ 

G2. Thalagala, 4 miles south-west of Hamillngak, 14 miles 
from Anuradbapura on the Puttolam road. Big rock with 
Dagoba,on the top. Two inscriptions, both of three lines, the 
letters of tlie first are beautifully clear, those of the second 
rather indistinct ; both are only partially preserved, and there- 
fore 1 cannot give a translation. In the first line of tbe second 
at least one sentence is legible, which runs as follows: Lakaya 
uwaratuaya Atbayaha dini “ Tbe Lankat uwarama was given to 
Abhaya.” 

G3. Kumbukwacwapan.®ala, near AnaradhapuTa-Kakudbavapi 
•mentioned at Mah. p. 88. Not more than two lines legible. 

SIddham . yanakaparatawi wibaralii bikusagahata (2) ja 
kahawana dana jina patisj^iariya 

G4. Ratgallacgama wihiita near MciUyawa (N.WJ.) Two 
inscriptions on a flat rock, close to the temple both of six lines, 
of which the older one is almost totally destroyed by the natives 
who are accustomed to hum straw and cliaff on this rock after 
threshing their corn. The letters that are nob burnt away are 
easy to read, ns they are a foot long and nearly on inch deep, bo 
that the rain had no influence on them. In the first line we 
toad tlie name of a king Mahanaga, which is a frequent one in 
Ceylon, so that wc cannot make out the date of the inscription 
from this, and in the second Pahawilaka which is possibly a 
mistake for Pacliwilaka, tlie Padiwil tank (see above No. GI). 
Lines 3 and 4 are totally broken np, and in line 5 and G also 
nothing can be made out with certainty. 

• The niinje first occurs in the inseription at Ketlnkanda (No. 29). 

t This 1 hare correctM insicsil of aTanoka, srhicli It on the stone ' 



43 


The second inscnption is not burnt but is the letters are not 
so largo and not cut so deep, it has snflered se\erely from the 
rain The clnncters are mtlier more modem, and perhaps the 
inscription may belong to the subsequent period (5th-7th 
century) hut this cannot bo made out with certainty , bkc all 
the latei insenotions it abounds in dcncal errors The subject 
IS not as usual tanks and paddy fields, hut the construction of 
dming h ills (asana danisala comp ilali I p 248, and 
cliap 39, 19) and the presentation of water strainers (parissivina 
llah p 220) to the priests 

C5 Rajangane*, 3 miles west of Mahagalkadiwila a Mlhge 
on the road Irom Padenija to Anuradhnpura The inscription 
13 on a peqiendicular rock opposite to the temple and was partly 
underground when, I visited the place and had it dug out The 
chaiacters are the same as those m the second inscription at 
Mediyawa and also the subject seems to be the wme as in the 
second bne we meet witli the word danasala This inscription 
also IS full of clerical errors, and some of the characters are quite 
unkjiown so that I can only give a fic simile for the present 

GO Halambagala wih“ira MagulStata Korale Wanin hatPattu 
about 0 mifes from Nikaweratija a village 2o miles from 
Ivurunaegala on the road to Puttalam This rock temple 
contains three inscriptions two of them cavo inscnptions ^^lth 
Iho usual contents, and one on a fiat rock at the enti-^nce to 
the wihara which is now almost completely destroyed by a 
flight of stops that has been cut afterwards without minding the 
inscription On both sides of the steps a few letters are legible, 
which contain nothmg that can help us in hnding-out the date 
of the inscription. 

07 Slab from Tissamaharama, now in the Colombo Museum 
Tins was found some years ago at the Tissamaharama founded 
by Kukawanna Tissa (see above No 4), and kept in the Assistant 
Government Agent's quarters at Hambantota It is almost 
completely preserved and is the finest specimen we have of an 
inscription of the fourth century, A.D The names mentioned 
m the inscription Ruddhadasa Mahinda Mahasena Abhaya 
Jettlia Tissa are all common enough in the fourth century , but 
metther of tlio two kings mentioned m the Maha\ansa under the 
name of JeUha Tissa was succeeded by a son of the name of 
Abhaya, and besides we do not know if tlieso are kings of 
Cey Ion or only of Magama, Padanagala, now called Patanangala, 
13 a rock about 38 miles east of Hambantota, where there are 
fmgmcnts of an ancient inscnption 

07(1 Angulukolawihara, about 3 miles li-om Kinnde on a jungle 
path Inscription on a flat rock where there are the remains 
of a dagobaf Line 1 and 2 only partially preserved, lino 3 and 4 
completely , 

. . . maya pasara capahara karalii (2) 

atadasa knnbi ce lagimaka sarahi satn sakanlit 

* Tb« place u raent oned at Mah 90 6G 

I SiMt of the tricks haTC teen tikto aw»j for the constrncUOa of tt? new 1 gbt 
house about SO miles from Kirmde 



ca (3) do lio tauA ataialil cotaka korilii . . . mo yataka 
kubara kona ganaya lalio da satay'a (4) do patika raknta taya 

ko^u saldra pawarata mahawibonii dinaini . 

•• . . eighteen karlshas , . . . at tho village tank sixty- 

six karisbas in the interior four karUhas 

. , , . . in the lower paddyficld the embankment, a 

multitude of -water, after having made it for the preservation of 

. I give it to tl»e Mahawihara. 

08. Ba(lagiriya, about miles east of tho 9th mile post on 
the old road from Hainbantota to Badidla. Tins is a very long 
inscription on an inclining rock, on tho top of which nro tho 
remains of an old Dagoha (see Pridham I. I. p. 580), not far from 
it is an old tank wliidi is now only useful to the elephants. 
Tho inscription is in a very bad state of preservation, so that 
only a few words can bo made out ns in the fourth line nagariya- 
nagaiika (modern nuwaru) and wajeriyi, from Piili avadliaroti. 
Tho modern verb is a corrupted tatsanm waduranawa, tho noun 
waedaeruma (Sid. Sang.) In tlib old form wajeriyi the o seems 
to represent the sound ae, which at that time (3rd or ifli century) 
had not yet its proper character. In the same lino we find 
npayaha batiya, our brother, and is the fifth np.ayahft pute “ our 
son," this apa seems to be a peculiarity of the southern dialect 
at such an early period, as we find it only on tho slab from 
Tissamah5rama (No. GO) apa cud! and apayaha pali. Later on 
it was used all over the island, and in the 12th and 13lh century 
we find it frequently in inscriptions. 

From tbo same place a fragment of a pillar was taken to the' 
Colombo llueeum, which also bears an illegible inscription. 

CO. Wadigala, IJ miles from Rannc, on tho road to Tangalla. 
The inscription is on tho surface of a largo rock close to the road, 
and is in perfect preservation, there are no ruins in the 
noighbouihnod : 

Hnraarnketahi pahanakubare me wcherahi saga osati. 

“In the plain of Hamara'the stone (?) paddy field is given to 
tho priesthood in this wibora.” 

Pahana is most probably pashnna, but I am not sure about it. 
Asati is very difficult to explain. Dr. Goldschmidt (J. C. S. 
1879, p. 25) derived it from Vns, but I do not think that this 
fawW; cwretl’, pwhapa we bavo io read ayali instead, anti this 
would be an older form of the present ayiti. 

Another inscription in three lines is not quite so well pre- 
served as in the first and second lines about 10 characters are 
missing. 

Samayutngamake dasakarihi cetakuhare 

karihi ke katla mahanaka (?) dawika ’parn asati (2) 

patakie tali ka para ralliri’ (!) 

palaketahi kanbaka mahadiwi ceta asati (3) ha do kari. 

A third inscription in smaller characters is illegible. 

70. 'Wlgamuwa, 2 miles fiuin Banna, on the road to TJdukiriwil v 
and Kirama. There is a pansala and two inscriptions close to a 
tank, which however are too muchdefriced to allow of a transciint 
or translation. . ^ 



45 


71. Kahandagila, i mile from Kanno, in tbe jungle to the 
south of the high road Two partly offoced inscnptions on, the^ 
top of a rock, and the remains of a dagoho. 

72 Kahagalwihara, 2 miles from'Wigamuwa (No 70) Large 
temple on the left of the road, and some fragments of inscrip- 
tions on a flat rock dose to a small tank 

75 Naygalwihara 2 miles from Kahagalwihara on the nght 
The temple is on a hill about mile off the road, and the two 
inscriptions are on the flat rock behind the temple, both m an 
imperfect state of preservation 

74 llulgingala wiliara, on a steep rock*, 4 miles from 
TJdukinwila tank, there aie three cave inscnptions at this 
temple of which I give the transcripts on account of the proper 
names contamea in them, 

a At the bottom of tbe rock just behind the priest’s house 

. .... bail Cudatisaha lene Cave of Uudatisa brother 
of 

6 In the jungle on the left side from the steps that lead to the 
temple 

[Pam] makaha Banaka bati upasakaha lene agata an[agata] 
catudisa sagasa dme j 

‘ The cave of the lay devotee, the brother of the pammaka 
Banaka is given to the priesthood m the four quarters present 
and absent ” 

c Bisogala near Gowagala, i mile from the temple 

Pammaka Sumanaputa Pantmakaba Tisa lene Mahadasaka 
nuna agata anagata catudisa sagasa padi [ne] 

“The cave of the pammaka lisa son of tbe pammaka Sumana 
called Mahad*lsaka, is given to the priesthood of the four 
quarters, present and absent” 

There are two more inscriptions, one on the steps that lead to 
the temple about half way, and one at the bottom of a small 
tank close to the wih"vra, but they are so much effaced that I 
cannot attempt a translation 

75 Kattragam This is one of the richest and most celebrated 
temples in Ceylon, and tbe prmcxpal place for Hmdu worship 
It is called Kacharag ima m the Uahavansa, and is the place 
where King Tissa planted one o£ the eight shoots of the s vered 
Bo tree (Mali p 120) At present there are two temples, one 
Hindu and one Buddhist but the foimer is much more celebrated, 
and pilgrims from every part of India resort to worship it 
frequently, bringing with them pots of water from the Ganges 
It LS situated m the extreme south east comer of the Badulla 
district, hut IS easier to roach from the Hambantotaside, goiu" by 
the coast road ns far as Palatuplna from where a bridle patli 
branches off to Katagamuwa. 


• According to ForUs II , 131, and rndham <I 1 p 59-t) the rock Is about 
330 feet hi„h, the temple contains a eelcbmt^ collection of books (comp 
Upliam L L III 33) The Kijaratnitkan (Upham II , 6C) reLites tliat tbe temple 
wnsrebn It by Makalnn Jettba Tt an tbe eWerbrotherof aiahosens 




4a 


The only inscription tliat has been disco\'crc(l araon^ tlic ruins 
is one of five lines in the alphabet of the fourth century, but 
very much defaced, so that nothing can Ik) nwlc out of it I 
believe to have deciphered in the second line the svonl wnhana, 
and this may possibly he an allnsion to Skanda, the got! of war, 
to whom the temple is dedicated. 

76. Weheragal.i, three miles from Tanamalwili, a village 
20 miles from llamhantota, on the road to B.adulla. Inscriiitioii 
of three lines, in cliaraeter.s of the fourtli century, partly efiaced ; 
no names legible. 

77. Piligatna, one mile west of the old road from Hainbantota 
to Badulla, leaving near the UOlh mile post (about three miles 
from Tclulla rcsthousc). Inscription on a perpendicular rock 
above a small tank, very well preserved, although the letters arc 
uncommonly .small (only inches). No ruins in the neigh- 
bourhood The subject of this inscription is tho dedlcalioh of the 
four pratyayas to the priesthoo<l, as we bad H ih several inStaftccs 
before.and besides the usual matter of tanks and paddy fields. The 
village, llahagawa^a, in line 1, may be tho identical village near 
tho Cittalapahbata, mentioned at ihih , p. 143, where, however, 
tho new edition by SumangalaandBat^wahtudawn has Knpi(thn®, 

• 78. Hingurcgala, or Nayadagala, about 100 yards east of the 

4Gth mile post, on the old roa<l from Hambantopi to Badulla, three 
miles from 'Wellawc. Tlicrc Is a very lar^c rock totally covered 
witli an inscription in tho character of the fourth century, but 
very badly preserved. No ruins in the neighbourhood. Tliis is 
the longest inscription of this age in Ceylon, and 1 have spent a 
good time over it in order to get a fair copy. I also tried to 
make a transcript, but I had to give it up again after a certain 
while, as I could not find out a single clear sentence. In order to 
show how utterly careless the engravens were at that time I -will 
take out one scries of words which occurs five times in t!io in- 
scription, hut each time in a different form : Line 1. — wahara 
araba wasaha daya waya ivaya ca diibiya sapo w.acaya sas.ib.sla 
wa manaya nawakacaya arama wahiraba sakalimahabakasagaija 
sagalia kahawano. Line 5. — wahara araba .wasalia ya ca ya 
cada cada yano yuliawa sasabala mawata aa no wakacaya awama 

waharalia sakala mahabakosagana sata kahaweno. Line 8. 

wakara araba rasahaha najaya cada baya ye waya sa-sa bala 
watnawaja cadakajaya daka waya awama wahara sala maha 
bakasagasaya takahawano. Line 10. — araba rasalia ha wnja 
Tieiuiya va yaha wa sasabala c,a manaha kajaya nawakaya 

awama waha raha sakala tnahabakasaga. Line 12. sayaha 

c^ya-ya yalm ca sasabala wa maiiaya ujana kacaya awama wahara 
sakala roaiiabakasagaiia. It would be a useless attempt to brin" 
order into this confusion. ° 

79. Nllagama wihara. three miles north of Galuwela, a village 
10 miles from Dambool, on the road to Kurunaegala. There are 
several inscriptions at this place, some of them cave inscriptions, 
some on tlie large rock behind tlie temple, but only one is well 



47 

enough preserved to be pubhslied, viz., the one over the entrance 
to the \nhara ; 

Siddham Dubola gamakaha Upalakahi tera lene saga niyate. 

‘Had • The cave of the thera Upalaka from Dubalagama is 
giv en to the priesthood.” 

The form of the characters, and also the ternimology, shew s 
tbnt this cave inscription is i little more modern than the others 
Dubbalagima must Ix! identical with Dubbalawapitissa the old 
name of Dambool, Slab , p 220, 225 A person called XJppala 
IS mentioned at Mah , p IS3, and the name is found besides m 
inscriptions 

80 Binpokuna, three mdes east of Galgamuwa (eee No 30) 
Two inscriptions on t\\ o stones forming the bordei of the plat 
foim on which the wihara is situated The place is still m good 
Older, and often visded by pilgrims Both insciiptions begin 
with the same words, but the fii-st only yields a complete 
sentence, as in the second some letters of the second line are 
missing, which render it impossible to find out the sense of the 
w hole 

« Siddham Dahnaka ametaha cctahata do kanha ka 
kubare raja Daruka (2) cetaha wawije ca nithala eadawavnhi 
(S) ka 

"Had ’ Two karishaa and four paddyfields [shall be the pro 
perty] of the minister Dathanaga, and the same number the 
property of the caitj a of Iviug Dharaka at tlie Candra tank ” 

h Siddham Dilanaka amctiya raba (?) dataje nitlnli hidake 
ka (2) katilu , mana taba si caka. 

The character rendered by ka m both inscriptions is tho 
numeral which espre«se.s 4 (see Burnells South Indian Paleo- 
graphy, PI XXIII ) Nithala m a and ni^bdi m & are evidently 
tlie same , the correct reading would be nitbila = nitthita The 
name Dathanaga is found in JIahavansa 64, 3G At Hah 
p 254 we have Datli'l, and chap 3y, 44 Dathappablmli 
Dappula a frequent name amongst Sinhalese kingu, is contractfid 
from D"ithapala, ‘ the guardian of the [sacred] tooth ” 

81 Y '.pa.hwkanda, about six miles east of Balalla, a % illa^a on 
the road from Padeniya to Anuradhapura This was tho capital 
of Ceylon under Bhuwaueka Bahu 1, 1303-1314 acairding to 
Tumour, or 1270-1290 according to the new edition of the 
second part of the Mahavansa , but curiously enough very few 
rums are to be found at tbe place, and the best amongst them 
liave been removed to the Colombo Mu'seum The temple is 
situated to the north, at the bottom of the steep HU that formed 
the fortress, and seems to be of conside^ble a'^ 

The ancient name of tbe place was Snbhapura or Snbfcapabbata* 
(of which Yapahu is said to be a corruption), but I do not know 
where it occurs for tbe first tune The inscription is on tbe 
perpendicular rock close to the entrance to fl e wihSra, about 
15icct from the bottom It is cndenavonly a framnent bat 





48 


the letters that are missing ate so completely effaced that vro 
cannot even guess what they were. This is rather exceptional 
for an inscription on a perpendicular rock, which is not exposed 
so much to the weather, and it is not improhahle that a part of 
it has been destroyed ■wilfully: 

Bamaha makapu (?) wawi sagasa (2) yani bawira wawi ra 
gana. 

82. Lahugala in Kirimetiya Pattu, four miles east of Anama- 
diiwa,a village 10 miles from Puttalam, on the road toKurunae- 
gala. Cave inscription : 

Upasaka Sumana lene. 

83. Hulagama, about four miles east of Labugala, same 
Pattoo (comp. J. C. A. S., 1853, p. 82). Two inscriptions, one 
on the back aide of a rock in front of the temple, and one about 
200 yards from there on a steep rock, to which a flight of steps 
leads, and where there are the remains of an ancient wihara ; 

a. TJpasaka Abaya lene sa^isa. 

h. Bata Sawabutisa parumaka Sumana teraha ca Sawada[tajye 
lene. 

“ Cave of the thera Sawadatti, son of the parumaka Sumana, 
and of his brother SawabhuU.” 

84. Picchandiyawa,* about one mile north of llulagama. 
There are several rock temples on a hilh and remains of a 
Dagoba completely overgrown ■with jungle. Several fragments 
of cave inscriptions, of which one begins : Tisa Dewnnupiyasa 
Gamini. This reminds us very much of the inscription at 
Dambool (above No. 3), the author of which, however, I could 
not make out with certainty; and as this inscription is too 
badly preserved as to help us in any way 1 did not put it 
together with those which I b.avo arranged under classified 
headings, 

83. Diyagama, about four miles cast of Kalutara. This is the 
only instance 1 have met ■with of an old and genuine inscription 
in. the maritime district of the Western Provinco-t It is on 
the surface of a rock close to the river Kola Gangit, and svas 
discovered by the learned priest Subh'iiti, whose residence, 
Waskadrtwa, is not far from there. The inscription is, on tlie 
whole, very well preserved, but there are about three or four 
letters missing in each line, ■which are destroyed by the water 
running down the rode. About the names mentioned in tho 
inscjjption I cannot venturo to give an opinion, n.s tho ancient 
geography of this district is totally unknown. 

80. Yatnhalena in Kandapita Pattu, Bellgal Kotle,a quarter of 
a mile north of tho 42nd mile post, ou the road from Coloml>o to 
Kandy. This is a very picture^uc rock temple, and seems about 
as old as most of the temples in the Kurunaogala district, from 

• Thu flaw U pTcn in Frawrt map. The present •nUsf'c is 5a the Talley dose 
to tho tank. ■' 

t The InsFriptimj nl Ivorntot* iriliSBi, near IvB(Ja»fela, about 12 mile* from 
OI<Knlio,imtition.il |n the Oorcniment Areha'olof^cal llctums, p. I., is a faUifl- 
fation,ino.t probably made by the present iocuabeat of the temple. 



49 


Tvhicb it IS only separated by a fear miles TJus is tbc southern 
limit of the ancient kingdom, and I do not think that any places 
of anbquitywill over be found beyond this As to the name I 
am doubtful whether it has anything to do with Yatthalatissa 
as the tradition tells or wheUier it simply means the lower 
cave * There are several inscriptions in the caves <!urrounding 
the temple, with the usual contents of ivhich I give only one as 
it IS of some interest 

Ayaduhitaya puta Ajasuvasanapadika upaaaka ^Veluya lene 
agato &C. 

The cave of the lay -devotee "Weluya [son of] Ayasuvasana 
padika son of the noble daughter (?) Ac 

The word aya, so common m Pali does not occur again in 
inscnptions and this is why I translated it with some hesitation 
The name Ayasuvasanapadika 1 give exactly as it stands on the 
stone, although I am aware that it cannot be correct "Welu is 
common enough m inscriptions and books 

87 Hurugalaewatta gallcna on a rock forming the entrance 
to a cave at Amblekande village 1^1 mdes west of Armcka and 
near the bridle path to Naraogollo estates m Tunpalata Pattu, 
Kegalla district. Inscription partly effaced 

nuha tana iera puta pumaraka masi pa 

88 Alu wihan two miles to the north of llatale close to tlio 
road This is the temple where aC(.ordmg to Rijaratnakan 
p 43 the sacred Buddhist books were first reduced to avnting 
under the reign of King Wattagammi 

The present temple is quite modem and there is nothing to 
remind us that the place ns so ancient except the inscriptions 
which however unfortunately aie all more or less damaged 
so tl at I cannot give any transcripts They seem to be eaae 
inscriptions with the usual contents 

89 Hunapahuwihara two miles from Tatawatta a vdlage 
10 miles from Matalc on the road to Kurunaegola There is a 
large inclined rock close to the temple which originally must 
liave been covered with an inscription in the claracters of tlie 
cud of the fourth century but now tbe greater part of it is 
effaced and only a few hues remain wliioh do not allow any 
conclusion as to the contents of the whole 

00 Gane wihari about one mile from Hunapahuwihara 
Here are the remains of an old tempi® winch according to 
tradition w as constructed by King W attagamini and a short 
inscijption in the oldest characters m one of the caves 

Pjitala Sumanaha lene 

91 Sessoruyakanda (Emeraon Tennent II GOo), about four 
miles from Kalanci a Tillage 24 miles Fouth of Anuradhapura 
and half a mile east of tbc KuruiiacgaK road not far from the 
ancient Kalavvaewa tank which is now- out of repair There is 
an immense statue of Buddha carved in tbe livnng rock and two 


• ** adhastat, for lost jslgala '*lbe lower Lll” inscnption 

at Ambutbala A 34 * 

■ Q 6038 D 



60 


inscriptions, one on the cliff face over the wiha.ra.'and the other 
on the brow of the cave, south-east of the wihrutu None of 
them is of partiailar interest. The 6rst is in the oldest A^oka 
characters, tfie second in those of the fourth century. 

92. HainmariUa pansala, close to the jungle road that leads 
from Kalanci to Elagtunuwa on the central road (about 65 miles • 
from Kandy). Tlie temple is on a large rock, and close by there 
are tiie remains of au inscription now almost totally effaced, 
which originally must have covered a considerable part of the 
surface of the rock. 

93. Billagala in Wilacdri Korlo. Inscription in two lines 
on the brow of tho cave, facing westward. In the second lino 
M e rea/1 the words Naka roaha raja, but no genealogy is given, 
and so it is difficult to say which king of the name of Naga is 
meant. 

94. ronikiilam, near Galkulam, a viUago on the Central road, 
75 milc-s from Kandy ; 

Tisa Wndarannaka barumaka Tisaha leno sngnsa hajikaha. 

" The tiYc of the parumaka Tha, son of Tisa Wadamnnaka, 
is given to the priesthood” 

95. Konduk«kuhgama,nearElagamuwa, on the Contra) road, 
55 miles from Kandy. Inscription in four linos, partly effaced ; 

Sidlia Amctaya Alawaya 2 3. kara 

Celapariwci.iiya Jiiia jagana 4. kotu dine. 

91). llandagata pansala, near Wcwclkaetij'a, U miles from 
Madawncchi, on the lIoro^vapotaI)a road. Tlircc cave in- 
scriptions : 

1. Parumaka bakiniyawcsalia lene. 

2. Ahala puta parumaka dataha leno sagasa. 

0. Parumaka Digapujika Ti&iha lorro, &c. 


VI. 

Inffcrijytionn lcti''fcn the Fifth and Ninth Centuries, 

Onlj* a comparatively Mnall number of inscriptions liolong to 
the U'twfcn the fjJU) and ninth ccnluwt'^, and J think 

AYo do not go far svtong in a‘-siniung that the frequent invaMoits 
of tho Tamils during this time are the principal reason of thw 
wuircity. In the ciglith century Anurrulhapura was ghen up as 
capital for I’ulastipura, and the domination of the Tamils con- 
titiiKsJ there most proliaWy doss-n to the time of Pnr;T- 
kmmaU'diu 1. The hi-criplions I have placed here differ onl}’ 
little in the clmrarh-rs from tho^ of the fir^t i)crio<l, and as thej' 
l>car no «tn(e and no name that speaks in favour of a certain 
d.stc 1 ha\e Ks-n liirilaling sometimes as to sshicli period I 
riiould avMgn them. Another cliarncterKtic of these iascriiitions 
is this that the h tt<Ts arc not so large and not cut as deep as those 
of th.‘ anri< nt om-s. and that, tlurcforc, in many instances, they 
► are BO vrcatlu r-n om as to render a deciphering almost impoUihlo 



51 


97. Nngirikancla, hctiveen ITabadiulwacwa and Minhcttigama 
in Kadawat Korio Nuvrara Knlawa, 5 miles cast o£ the ccnlTal 
road at the 103rd mile post from Jaflna near the village Issem- 
bessaewa on a hilL 'Wibara dcstrcyetl. The old name of tbe 
place vras Bamanogiriya as can be seen from the inscription I. 
line 2, and II. line 3 and 5 ; it is not mentioned anywhere in the 
historical books. At I., line 1, wc Cnd mentioned the Enkkha- 
wandya {see above No. 58) and Welunaka, but, unfortunately, 
only two lines are legible. No. II. bn.s five lines of wliicli tlio 
last three are very wcU ptcscrvc<l ; the beginning of the inscrip- 
tion is destroy etL Tlio subject of the whole is as usual about 
tanks and we meet liere for the first time witli the expression 
wawisara, modern wacsara, a composition analogous to candra- 
nirisa. In the second lino we find mentioned the Bariyawawisara, 
tbe Cadagiriyawarrisara and the Bumawauisara, none of n Inch 
I can identify, and in the last line wc have the Karakata 
already known from Habaranc (No. GI). 

98. Galkowila, at Karagaswnctva, about 5 miles west of tho 
29th mile post on the road from Kiirunacgala to Anurudimpura. 
This inscription begins Nakamnharojaha put.a and then follows 
the name of the king, which is not quite legible on the stone. 
Tlie inscription is beautifully preserved and the form of tho 
characters leaves no doubt tliat it must be later than tho fourth 
century, althoxigh there is hardly any change in the language 5 
but this is quite natural if wc assume that a certain terminology 
was fixed for sucli inscriptions whicli remained in use for sc\ oral 
centuries 

90. Nayinnawella wihara, in Wacgampattu, Wellassa, miles 
South of Bibile, a village 30 mUes from BnduUa, on tlio new rood 
to Batticaloa The inscription is on a fiat rock about 50 yards 
from the temple, and appears very well wlien the sun shines on 
it. Some letters, however, are destroyed in tho last throe lines 
and the end is missing altogctlior. No king is mentioned in the 
inscription, but at line 4 the ancient name of tho place Nakala 
wibara is given, and this is most proliably identical with the 
N^a’ianagara menrioncA atlAuh., p. 

100. Gdmaduwa, at Ambogaswaewa, about 4 miles from 
Mediyawa (NWJ) Inscription on a large rock near to a 
small tank a little above the temple, tolerably well preserved 
but very incorrect, so that nothing can be made out of it. The 
subject seems to be a-s usual tanks and paddy fields. The end is 
evidently wibarahi sagasa dine but in these three words alone 
there are four mistakes, 

101 Nayindanawa wihara, 2 miles from lla Eliya, a village 
on the new cross road from Kepitiyawi to Dehelgomuwa 
(N.W.P.). There are two inscriptions, one in a cave in older 
characters and with the usual contents, and one on the cliff face 
over the wihara in characters of the fifth century. I give this 


* Tbe present Sinhalese name h Muhmaant or Slunara under which it is men- 
tioned at ilah 6?, 48. 

D2' 



for the sake of the names that it contains ; Nalalcka Mahanika- 
sagaha Jene sagasa. “The cave of llalianikasaga [son of] 
UalaToka is given to the priesthood.” As foi’ the name 
Jfalfanikasaga we find a tankilahanlkawitti (this is the reading 
of the new edition) mentioned at Mah., p, 221, and this is most 
prohahly tlm .same which is now called Jlahanlkawaewa, 

00 miles from K-urunaegala on the road to Anuradhapura (comp. 
No. 39). 

102. Wellangolla, 2 miles, west of the 20th tnilo post on the 
road from Kuriinaegala to Anuradhapura, and not far from the 
Hakwaetnnaoya. Inscription in four very long lines of large 
and beautiful characters on the smoothed surface of a rock a 
little above the temple. It was totally covered with moss and 
overgrown with jungle when I aime to see it; unfortunately, 
about 14 letters are missing in each line, and the last lino is 
almost completely destroyed. In spite of this I have attempted 
to give a transcript and a transiation which I am aware may he 
open to many objections. T)»c beginning and the end of the 
inscription which would contain the name of the king and of the 
temple are destroyed but the characters sIjow that it belongs to 
the otii century. 

103. Dcraalaraiina, about 4 miles N.W, from Hiripitiya and 

1 mile from Pujagala (Na 49). Inscriptiori on a huge rock not 
far from the village, no ruins of any kind are in the neighbour- 
hood. Tbo characters resemble very much those used in tlio 
inscriptions at Bltb.a (Cunninglwm Archaeological Survey of 
India III., 40), on the Delhi pi)lar(ih. v. 143) and at Buddbagaya, 
except a few which liave retaine<l their old .shape like the ip in 
lino 1, or adopted the new Sinhalese form like the g in line 3. 
I feel very much inclined to take this' for a Samskit inscription, 
and in tills ca.se it would bo the only one in Ceylon that can 
come into consideration, os the one on the perpendicular rock at 
Mihintalc (103 b) left-hand from the entrance to the Arabasthala 
Diigoba is too much weatherworn to be of any use. 

lOJ. Gaeracndigala, ^ mile from Gabigalpota a village 7 miles 
from DambuUa on the Korunacgala Koad. There are three 
inscriptions, two of them closo by each other at the bottom of a 
mass of rocks, and the third about 400 yards from this in a 
c.ave bricked up on three sides and containing six lodges appa- 
rently for lieds scraped in the rock ; it is only approariiable by 
a cleft l)ctween two rocks. All three insaiptionsaro in characters 
which already somewhat resemble the round form of tlie pillar 
inscriptions of the tenth century; they ate all fragments and 
only a few words are legible of each, so that wc ^nnot even 
ascertain anything about the contents. 

105. Siyaml-alawaewa, about a mile from Gacracndioala. 
Several rock temples on a hill ami an inscription near an°old 
dagoba of which only one line is prescrveih 

lOG. Acwiriynpattu, rock temple on the road from DambuUa to 
Kunmaegala, near the 8lh mile jMsl. Two fragments of inscrin- 
tiODS oa the surface of the rock closo to a small tank. * 



53 


107. UturupahuxTO, -wibara, 13 miles from ICuninacgala, on the 
road to Darahulla, and not far from the high road There are the 
remains of a dagoha and several fragments of inscriptions. 

108. Kucchawelli, 22 miles north of Trincomalee, on the sea 
side. There is a solitar}’ rock close to the sea which bears a 
fragment of an inscription in the characters of the seventh 
century. The country is now inhabited almost exclusively by 
Tamils, but at that time it must have been Sinhalese, as we 
can see not only from this inscription but also fram the remains 
of a buddliist temple found at Nattana kovil,* about three 
miles west of Nllawclli (8 miles fiom Trincomalee), and close to 
the bund of the Periyankulam tank. One or two other places 
noith of KncchawelH which are aUo said to contain buddhistical 
remains, I was unfortunately not able to visit 

109. Aetabaenduwa, at Tis^samaliAturoa, the pillar to which 
t\ie kings white tusker elephant was tied. The carved part of 
the top is broken and the characters at the bottom are only 
partly legible. The first ^rord on the side marked A. is Sida, in 
which the s has adopted the modem form which has been in use 
over since, I give a copy of thin inscription from a photo- 
graph taken by me for the sake of the characters, but no 
transcript and no translation. 


VU. 

Inscriptions of the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries 

The inscriptions of this period ,are, with a few exceptions, all 
on pillars or .slabs, the practice of engraving letters on the living 
rock seems to liaN e been given up almost entirely at a certain 
period and was only resumed at the time of ParalcramabaUu I. 
Some of these pillars which were protected by the overgrowing 
jungle are beautifully preserved, others that stood exposed are 
gener.ally damaged on one or two sides. Almost regularly these 
pillars bear engrasings of the sun and moon as symbols of 
eternity, and of the dog and crow as symbols of instability. 
According to the interpretation of the natives however this mean*, 
a curse, viz., wboe\ er shall violate tliis property of the priesthood 
shall be punished by behig rc-born in the low condition of ono 
of iliesc animals. 

• Before entering into the particulars alwut these inscriptions 1 
have to say a few voids in general as to the kings who aie 
mentioned in them. As a rule Uie kings arc not called by the 
same names in the inscriptions as in the llahavansa, and thence 
arises sometimes a difficulty in finding out the person whicli is 
meant. The kings wc have to take into consideration now, 
together vith their dales as gi\en in Tumour’s Epitome and in 


* KmersoB Tenacut II , 49r. 




54 


the list prefixed to the second pait of tho ITahavansa, axe the 
following : 

Kassapa V. 937-954 or 914-931. 

Kassapa VI. 954-964 or 931-941. 

Dappula V. 964-974 or 941-951. 

Mahindani. 997-1013 or 974-990. 

In the inscriptions these kings are called in the same succession 
by the following names : 

Siri sang bo. 

Abha (or Abhay) Siri sang bo, 

Abha Srdamewan Dapula, 
llihinda or Siri sang bo Abahay. 

Of tbe intermediate kings between Dappnla V. and Mahinda 
III. no inscriptions are known except the one at Polonnaiuwa, 
which most probably belongs to Wajiragga, the general of ’ 
Udaya III. mentioned at Mali 63, 46, although there is no 
positive proof for it. To king Kassapa V. belong the pillar 
inscriptions at Mahakalattaewa, Abhayawaewa, Kongolluewa, 
Inginimitiya (?), the broken slabs at Mihintale, to Kassapa VI. 
the pillar in the jungle near Mihintale, to Dappuja V. those at 
Ellawftowa pansala, Actaw'IragoUaewa, Aetakadapansala, and 
one at Polonnaruwa, to Mahinda IIL the pillar at Mayilagastota, 
the two tablets at Anibasthala, Mihintale, and most probaUy 
also the slab at Wewelkaetiya. 

The name Sir! sang bo, given to the two Kassapas and to 
Mahinda IIL has misled all tho.se that have dealt with lUeso 
inscriptions previously to Dr. Goldschmidt. Tumour (Ceylon 
Almanac for .1834, p. 137) fixed the date of the inscription on 
tho two tablets at Ambasthala to about 2C2 A.©., as ho took the 
king Siri sang bo mentioned In the third lino to he Siri 8,anga 
bo I. descendant of Laemi«itiss.a, who, according to tho Mali., 
reigned from 24G-243. He attributed the inscription to Makalan 
•Teta Ti-ssa, eon of Golu Ablmyannd nephew of Siri sanga bo I. 
Ilis argument is this : Makalan Jeta Tissa was a pious king, and 
as in this inscription in svliich lio grants a privilege to tlio 
pric.sthood of Mihintale he did not like to record the name of his 
impious father he omitted his osvii as well, and dated the in- 
scription from the accession to the throne of his undo, Siri 
Sanga bo. This date was adopted by James Alwis (introduc- 
tion to tbe Sidat Sangarawa XXXVI. and CXLVII.), Emerson 
Tcnnent (Ceylon, IL, 507), and Forbes (I. 189, 11. 327), but not 
to say anything about the characters and the language it would 
be impos-siblo lor the simple reason that in line 4 tho kin" is 
said to have been in the sixteenth year of his reign, sWiile 
ilakalan Je^a Ti-wa only reigned 10 years (2C1-271). Dr. 
Goldschmidt fii-st found out the historical name of the kinf» 
called Siri sang Bo by identifying ^the names of his parents 
Abhu Salamcwnn and queen Con, * with those given in the 
inscription from Mayilagastota as the parents of Mahinda III. 
He further took into consideration tho fact that Mahinda tells 



53 


us la tho mscription tliat ho was acp i or viceroy before bcinjj 
king as it 13 stated m Ifab chap 54 His fathei called simply 
Abnhij Sahine\\*an heie and m the inscription at Aetawira- 
gollaeira is called by his full name, Abhl fealamewan Dapuja at 
Lllawacwnpansaln The two latter inscriptions bcai as tlieir 
date tho tenth jear of hia reign and in both he alludes to a 
Mctonoiis campaign of his father, Abha Sin Sang bo in India, 
against the kingdom of Piuuli (comp Mali 52,70 78) 

In identifying tho name of Sin Sang bo in the inscnption at 
Malrvkalattaevra, Dr Goldsdimidt was guided bj the allusion 
made to the cbiet secretary Sen who is said to ha\o bmft a 
nunnerj on behalf of his moUier and is most probablj the one 
mentioned in Jlah ch 32,33 At Inginimitua wc have a chief 
hecretarj Arak,* a name vihicli occurs several tunes m the Mali 
under the form Ilakkbo Rat kliako or Rakkliaso At Mali 
a2 81 M e find a chief Rakkhako avbo built u wibara at Saw ira 
k igiima, nuder the reign of Kassapa V at Mali 50 84 oue 
RiilJ^haka is mentioned under the reign of Sen i Siliuntgli i , at 
Mah 53, 11 one Rakkbaka under Dappu]a V builds the 
Ilangoawasa Thus the positive proof fot the authorship of 
lui&apa IS wanting m tht« inscription 

110 Jlnhukalattaewtt a tank six miles from Anur'idhapurn, 
on the road to Galkulam, the ancient Kulatthawapi avhero no* 
cording to Mah, p 154 the dccisivo Kattlo bctu ten Lhra and 
DuUhagamini was fought Tho pillar is now in tho Colombo 
Musoum , the inscription is m perfect preservation not a single 
letter missing Gitelgamu is Gbntatelag ima, * the butter 
village.’ Kolpatri or Kolpatlra contains in its first pari tho 
Siubalcso koliu kidattha, the «tcond part is a Sanskrit 
tatsama. Nnl aram is cither an abbreviation of Nalikerlrama 
JIali 42 15, or a com position with the female name Nala which 
occurs Mah oO 9 

111 Abhajawnewa. Tins pillar was found on the bimd of the 
Abba^awacna tank at Anmadlmpura now called by its Tamil 
name Bassaaakulam , it is at present m the Colombo ilubeum I 
attribute this inscription to Kassapa V altliough I am aware 
that tho King is here in the lOtli jear of his reign which does 
not agree a\ith the Mali, according to whicli ho only reigned 
17 years! The subject is about fishing m the Abhaynwaewa 
tank, and is interesting as it is the onlj ordinance of tins kind 
that we have from such an earlj date £aUr on in the numerous 
inscriptions of Ni^^auka Alalia generally a paragraph is inchi kd 
m which the King states that lie give security to tho fish in so 
many tanks (see, for instance tlie pillars at Rankot Dagoba 
Polonnaruwa, below No 150) 

112 KongoUaewa about two miles norlb of Modawa/’ci on 
the central road The i lUar is now in tlic Colombo ifuseum , 

• A Tninil cl cf called Aruk was defeate«l b/ Kttls ••\hxn. 6e** 1 hr* Pav 1 < 
ConqDcst of South Ind a Bcug As Soc 41, p 197 

■{■Mistakes of one or two yean ocenr rerera] tine« !n I* • an 1 lattr on. 

even of five years and more as we ehall noti,^ hi lie p? flic* 



5G 


it 13 broken in two, and besides the inscription has suffered a 
good deal from the weather, however, as the contents are very 
much alike those at Mahakaiittaewa, we can restore it, excepting 
only the proper names. On the fourth side, which is the only 
one well preserved, we read that the king was accustomed 
to sit under a raadbuka tree (Bassia latifola) on the full moon 
day. 

113. Inginimitiya, eight miles east of Anamaduwa (on the 
Kurunaegala-Puttalam road) and not far from the newly repaired 
TJswaewa tank (Kirimetiya Pattu N. W. P.). The pillar stands in 
the jungle outside of the modern wiliara ground and there are 
also remains of a dagoba, stone pillars, and a stone well. The 
ancient name of the place was Hinginipitiya* as we see from 
the inscription, and it was most probably foimded by the chief 
secretary Arak, mentioned A 19. As I have already stated 
this name Arak may point to different persons, and it is impos- 
sible to date the inscription with certainty. The name llahinda 
at B 9, most probably refers to one of the two aepas, who governed 
Eohana under Udaya III and Kassapa V. 

114. Mihintale inscription on the plinth course of the build- 
ing at the top of the broad steps in 17 pieces. This inscription, 
which is one of the most interesting at Mihintale has never been 
noticed before ; it is very well preserved on the wliole, but in 
each line one or two words are missing. The subject is the 
payment of the workmen at the Ambnsthala wihara, and it 
agrees in some espres^ions with the inscription on the two 
tablets (see below Ko. 121). It contains no names except that 
of the King Siri Sang bo, which I take 'to be Kassapa V. 

116. Pillar in the jungle near Mihintale. This also is very 
well preserved, and one of the best specimens of pillar inscrip- 
tions. It contains a grant by King ICassapa III. to the Caitya- 
glri wiljara (Saegiri or Seygiri) at Mihintale. 

lie. 'Pillar at the spillwatcr of a tank, now called Ell.awaewa, 
two miles from the Anuradliapura Trincomalee road at Kam- 
patwila 17 miles ftom Anuradhapura. The first side of the pOlar 
is well preserved, on the second and third the last seven lines 
onlyaie legible, the fourth contains as usual sun, moon," dog, 
and crow. Tlie first side contains the name of the Kin" Abba 
Salamewan Dapulu and Ids father Abba Siri Sang bo, and the 
rest is a grant to a temple, the name of which is either not given 
or not legible on the stone. 

117. Aetawiragollaewa, 11 miles from Madawacci, noith 
of tlio road to Horowapolana. This ioscription on two sides of 
the pillar is belter preserved than No. IKJ, but at the beginnin" 
several lines are split away; the names and the subject are 
the same ns at EllaAvaewa Pansala. 

118. Aetakadapansala, one and a half miles fi-om Aetawlra- 
gollacwa ; pillar inscribed on four Bides, of which only tw’o are 
I>artly legible. No names are give n, but it is probable that 

• lllsgini, lattr iDgini, u tiie clearing nut. 



57 

the lasmption belongs to the same king as the t\70 preceding 
ones 

119 Topwaewa or Polonnoruwa*— Two pillars ivere dug 
out there lielongmg to this period one neir tl e J» tawanarama, 
inscribed on four ‘‘ides and one near Nj 99 anka Mall i a 
Audience Hall msciibed on three sides mtli sun and moon on 
the fourth 

a The top of the pillar is broken off, and the fir t line of 
each 8 de is missing, the rest is well preserved In tlie fint lino 
we read [Sala] mewan and at B 9 Wodurag and this induced 
Goldachmidt to ascribe the pillar to Wajira the mimstei of Sila 
megha mentioned Mah 50 84 But as Salamewan is a name 
given to different kings I think it la bettei to relie upon the 
name Wadurag, who miy be identical with Wajiragga the 
General of Iv^ssapa V mentioned Mali 51 lOi 118 12C or 
■with Widui-agga (translated back into Pah from tlie Sinhalese) 
the General of XJdaya III , Mah 53 46 The inscription con 
tains a grant to the village Gilutisa, situated in Girinie, a 
locality not known from elsewhere The place where it was 
found IS now called B rige wimanoja * The Palace of the Dtaf 
Woman, and it is possible that Binge is only connpted from 
Wajiragga 

l» The name Abhava Salamewan is given in full on the first 
Jme of the first side, therc-t also w avell preserved, excepting 
only the first two lines of the third side which are missing 
The contents are v eiy similar to those of the inscriptions from 
Alaliakalattaewa and Ingimmitiya (Nos 110 and 113) 

120 Mayilagastota eight miles from Tissamal irama in the 
Hambantota district The pillar is now in the Colombo 
JEuseum, it isinscnbcd on three sides but partly effaced It 
contains a giant to the Maha ■wihara and the uda Tisa pmwena 
given by the aep x Mahioda the son of Abba Salamewan and 
Queen Gon By tl e Mahawibara incst probably 'we have to 
understand the Na^amahawil ara at Tissamab vrama (a&oie 
No 4) and the Hdatisa pmwena is perhaps the Uddhakan 
daiawihara mentioned at Mali p 130 

121 The two tablets at Mihinlale, on a terrace about hilf 
waj up the steps to the Anibasthala This is the finest specimen 
of Sinhalese inscriptions m the middle age the carving is beauti 
fully clear and executed with the greatest regulaiity The 
inscription was known a long time ago and has been translate I 
by Mr Armour in the Appendix to Tumour b Epitome of the 
Histoiy of Ceylon (leprmted Forbes II 334) The donor is the 
same Maliinda as at Mayilagastota but here he is in the ICth 
j ear of his reign The grant concerns the two celebrated wiharas 
ofCailyagin at Miliintale and of Abhayagin at Anuradhapura 
these two aie well known enough but some other names in the 

* Only tlie former of tlio lui ucs 4 used by Uic oat res the latter is a com p 
t on of 1 ulastinagara, wh ch already occnis m the seco d part of the ilahnran a 
The nat vc ctjmolog} der ves it from polon imil na the poloa;^ and tl e hooded 
snake 



58 


test leave Sjjace to conjecture, as the Manuwjesaia A 39 and the 
Pahanfewik A 40, which are most likelj only fanciful names 
for the hlineri and Padiwil tanks in the North Central 
Province. 

122. Wewelbaetiya, 11 miles from Madawacci on the 
Horowapotana road. Inscription on both sides of a large slab, 
tolerably well preserved, but some letters are doubtful, and the 
whole is difEcult to trauslate, as it contains many words which 
are not known from elsewhere. Tlie king calls himself Sir! Sang 
bo Abahay, the son of Sir! sang bo; this does not agree exactly 
with any of the kings mentioned in the previous inscriptioDs, 
but as the language, and espedally the beginning, is exactly the 
same as at Ambasthala, I have ascribed this inscription also to 
Maliinda UI. 

123. Jlineri.* — This pillar is on the bund of the famous tank 
constructed by King Mahasena, the apostate, in order to con- 
ciliate bis outraged subjects > it is inscribed on two sides, but 
44 Hues of each side are completely effaced, and nine only left. 
The contents of tbeae nine lines resemble the inscription of 
Kassapa VI., in tbe jungle near Mihintale (No. 115), but as the 
names are effaced we cannot ascribe it to any king svith cer- 
tainly. At Mah. 49, 5, it is stated that King Dappuja H. 
(79 o- 800) went for a certain purpose to Maijiiiiraka, and at 
Hall. 61, 72, wo read that King Sena (8G8-003) constructed a 
canal to the tank. Possibly the latter may be the author of the 
inscription. 

124. Attanayala wihara not far from the road from Panne to 
Udulririwila in the Hambantota district. Only one side of the 
pillar is legible, and on this we read the name of the king's 
fatber, SIri saoga bo, but the name of the king himself Is 
effaced. 

125. EppTiwala, a village on the western minor road (from 
Kekirawa to Timbiriwaewa) about 10 miles fiom Anuradha- 
pura; the insciiption is at the doorway of n small Buddha 
wiltura, about 200 yards south of the high road. The wiliora 
roof wassuppoited on 12 monoliths, with only one entrance, 
facing tbe eiist. Tbe inscription is not very well presciamd, and 
also tbe pbotograpli I had taken of it does not help much in 
dcciiiliering the same. Tlie namo of the king is here also Sin 
Sang Bo (in lino 8), and the subject ccems to bo a gr.mt to a 
temple, tlie name of whiclj I could not find on the stone. 

12C. llaenik dana nuwaro, about three miles from the rest- 
house at Leimdora, on the central road, 37 miles from Kaudy. 
Thercarc the ruins of a palace, at the entrance of which is a 


• r*li XfanililraVa, the pearl nccWjce. There sro nl^o the rcmdn< of a liowila 
dolicaled in htab»»iQa, and Ib the rcbcUion of igl?, and some anefent 

»Uinr* of Ihnda deltle*. irlu'ch impr^* the nauvo mind nith itomuch nwe that no 
iohahiinni of the Mlla-e cno be jirtreiled nponto apprOich Uie wt Comn T’rE.i. 
|.nm ll„5t3f. The lUJiratiukari (Uphwnl.Lil., 55) attrjbntci the con-lnic- 
tioii of .Miniri tank to Caoda KuVla »»wb or Bsailapaeinunn (44>53 Ad ) the *on 
of 11a Naga. 


B9 

stone bearing an inscription. It is surrounded by a ditch iii 
•wludi arc the remains of \rhat were apparently locha or "watei- 
step^ The jungle is full of rain**^ at one place there are 24- 
monolith®, the remains of a \nhura * Of the in«cnption, on!} 
four Imes are preserved beginning and end destroyed , in tho 
remaining part mention is made of a temple called Jfulun 
gammvehera, which may be identical aiitli tbe Mulvnag’ima 
Mah 75, 10 

127 PiUar from Knolani, now m the Colombo i^Iu*eam , it is 
inscribed on four sides A, B, C, D, but B is quite illegible, 
and also the other aides, aro onlj partially preserved , the name 
of tho hing I could not read on the stone but the contents arc 
very similar to tliosc of the inscription at iNfahakalattacwa 

128 Anurldhnpura broken top of a pillar m the Agency 
Grounds , on the first side u o read the n ime of tin, Iving Abhl 
Silamewan, the other sides <lo not give anj ®cn®c 

129 Slab from Anuradhapura found in the Agencj Grounds 
now in the Colombo Museum , it is inscnbed on one side only, 
but the inscription is incomplete It does not contain a grant 
to a temple but some rules about the la) fntcrnitj No names 
are given on the inscription 

180 Makulana vwluira, two and a half miles tost of the 
seventh mile-post on tho load from Kurunaegnh to Knnd) Tho 
wilura IS on tho top of a large rock to which stens lead ami 
tho inscription is on the surface of tho rock near to a (rcbtored) 
Dvgoba, this, ami JCo 175 arc the onl) instances I know of 
inscriptions of the 10th or 11th century cut into the living rock 
The name of tho king here al»o is Sui Smg bo, but about the 
contents I cannot give an idea as the inscription is too much 
defaced 

131 Segclena wdrira about three miles east of Makulmn 
Tillar at the entrance to the wiirita with the top broken off, the 
name of the King is not on the stone, the contents aro similar to 
tha»o at Maha kalatlaewa. 

132 Ilukawtla about mne miles from Kuninaegala on tho 
road to Kami) Pragroent of a pill ir witJi top and bottom 
broken off in tho compound of one of the native hou-^es close to 
the high road No names legible , characters and contents like 
those in tho precedmg inscriptions 

137 Panduwas Nuwara near Hettipola 12 miles on the road 
from M anyapola to Cbilaw (N W P ) Fragment of a pillar in 
the corner of an opened Dlgoln. with an inscription in fiv o lines 
This phee is said to bear its name from PanduwH«s the nepliew 
of ^Ylja)a (Mall ch 9) but I doubt very much tliat the tradition 
IS correct in this point At any rate, there ate no remains of any 
land that pomt to such a remote period 

13k Kande wihara at Yakdessa gala, about two miles east of 
the sixth mile post on the toad from Kuninaegala to Puttalara 


• For the tradjlions about Ma«nik dana ntnrara comp Pndham 653 

Forbes II , 51 52 



GO 


Hcte also Itere ate two fragments of pillars ■with inscriptions 
partly eSaced, one in the temple ground and one about half a mile 
off in the jungle. 

135. Dewanagala, Galboda Korle, Maeda Pattu, three miles 
from Mawanella resthouse, on the road to Aelpitiya (Kegalla 
district, Western province). The temple is on the top of an 
immense rock to which steps lead ; the inscription is at the 
bottom o£ tberock, about a fjuarteTinile ofl’ the road in the jungle. 
Five lines are only preserved, -wbich contain the usual intro- 
duction of the inscriptions of the 11th century (see for instance 
Slayilagastota, Ambasthala), but unfortunately not the name of 
the King; the greater part of the inscription is completely 
effaced. 

13G. Fragment of a pillar on the bund of Nuwarawaewa* tank, 
near Anuradhapura, 11 lines are completely effaced and three 
only legible. No names are given on the stone. 

VIII. 

Liscripthns of ParUkramabUhtt, I. and hie successors. 

In the year 1023 the capital of Ceylon, Polonnaiuwa, ■sv'as 
overrun by the Tamils, who established a viceroy there and held 
possession of the island for nearly 30 years. Rohana, the 
southern district, was the only refuge for tlio royal family of the 
Sinhalese; four brothers, each assuming the title of kmg. con- 
tended together for supremacy, till at length, on the retirement 
of all other candidates, the mrlorn crown was assumed by tho 
rn'mistcT Lokissara, "wlio held his court at Kattragom, and died 
A.D. 1071, After him WijayalKilni succeeded to tho throne, 
who during his long reign of 55 years continually .struggled 
against tlie Tamils, and at last drove them out of the island, but 
no lised rule was established in Ceylon Tip to the coronation of 
I’.irukrain.'ihrihu I. in 11.53. No Sinhalese inscriptions record 
any of the incidents of this long protracted war, as might bo 
expected, and also no grants and privileges seem to liave been 
given during this lime to tho Buddhist temples. As for Tamil 
iiLscriptioDs I Lave dlscovcicd the following, which evidently 
belong to tills period : 

1. Buduenuttawe Tvilmra, half mile from Nikaweratiya, on the 
roa«l from Knrunacgala to Puttalam. Three Tamil iiucriptions 
on two pillars inside the temple and one large .slab l^ing outside. 
On ono of the pillatB TT’e read the words Kalinka makan, “Tho 
Kon of the KuHnga [King]” 

2. Naimana, an upright slab with a Tamil inscription 
standing in the jungle about two miles north of llatara 
(Southern Province). 

3. Tamil inscription on the walls of a Hindu temple, not far 
from the Tliiiprirrima at Polonnaruwa. 


Comp. Fotbe* I., SIO. 




Cl 


Of Pativkram'vb-thu L, only one inscription is known at Polo- 
nnaniwa but tins is casilj explained as the rums have onlj been 
clcired to a \crj small extent 

157 Galwil vm* Polonnaniwa Tins is tbc last of tlic build 
mgs m Polonnnruwa (we tbo sketch in Emerson Tennent II 58o) 
winch we reach aft“r havmg passed the Raiikot D igobi and tbo 
Kiriwilnra Tl o inscription is on tlit perpendicular rock winch 
forms tlie ca^o temple next to the standing statue of JBuddlia 
It docs not relate anything about the wars of Par ikramabaliu 
find his accession to the throne lufc is mere!} religions in its 
contents We know from the Sinhalese chronicles tlint during 
the long time of the Tamil domination Biiddlnsni was almost 
totally extinguished m Cejlon and when the kingdom was 
recovered bj Wijajn BiUii 1071, it was necessary to send an 
cinlnssy to Ikamaiina in order to request that a number of 
'leninn'inses might be sent to Ceylon (Alali GO, o) During the 
same time sclnsms and heresy had combined to undermine the 
national belief, and hence one of the first cares of Par ikramabUm 
was to weed out the peraerted sects, and to establish acouneilfor 
the settlement of the faith on dcHlable points At Jfnh 73, 4 
we read 

Yatha sukln bln\eyjatha sasananaa mabesino dnlladdhi sata 
imssatta ciram Tuilatam gatam nika^attajabhetlcna bhinnam 
nekclii blukUiiiln kucclnpuranakiccehi alajjiln samosatara pan 
cawsasahassesu anatitcsu jean ca irvnabli igiyatam yitiam 
jatbussaddhani jauti ca yam \tt inalwkulin“inum vmatthanain 
tainm tahini thapoti ua jathii thaoo j ath'i vidbi ca pdaiiHin 
jam va danamatiaNossam aasslpento nirantaram catuddiptka 
megho va poscyyam j aeake lica sudlientena may“i rajjnm kicchcna 
maliata sada etam sabbam phalantena sambblvitara anek idh v 
Mdbatua dam kalojam tarn yath ibhicchilam iti tliunantarv 
rah mam hi thnnantanm adasi so 

That the commandment of the grcit sage should be restored 
avliich had become stained for a long time , 

which was broken up by the separation of tho three nikajas 
avhich was polluted b^ seaeral sliamelBSs bhikkbu^ who 
c ired to fill their belly , that in future for more than 5 000 j cats 
they may go on the patli that leads to nirwana Setting aside tho 
protection of the noble families that are corrupted licre and 
tbcie, and pouring down contmuallj a shower of gifts like a 
cloud fiom the four continents beneficial to tho poor, this is tho 
time for me to establish the kingdom with groat tioublo und to 
dispose of all this that baa been arranged at diflerent places for 
the purpose So thinking he ga\e appointments to those that 
deserved it. 

llie same subject is treated again at Alah 78 5 

Ado sasanasuddhim va nikayattajabhiLkhunani kurctukamo 
samaggim jin'isasanavuddhiyalloggaliputta tissatn vaDhammi 
soko n inssaro nialmtl eram dliuram katva M il akassapasaha ayam 


Lmersoa Tenneiit II 59S S 



C2 


visaTavlam tepita^am vinayannuia vfeesato tlieravamsekapajjotam 
fsamaggini ciraciikkhitam Anuradhapiire ranapala theram sasi^sa- 
kamTaU^ecaBatlietebtikkliuPulatthipuramanayisaMoggalla^- 
theram ca theram Nagindapalliyam yuvarajassa ratthasmim aiine 
Rabbe ca bbikkbavo nanda theravatam selaatardyatanayasinam. 
Robane pamukbam katva nikayattayavasino mahavibaravaslnam 
bhikkhuaam dhatanipati atba ajjbeimara auuam afinasamaggiya, 
aka. 

" At tbe begmaiog, •witb the iivtentioti to purify the law of 
the mendicant's of the three nikayas, and to cause a reconciliation 
by the increase of the ea'cred religion, in the same way as the 
King Dliammasoka appointed Moggaliputta tissa the great thera 
and Mahakassapa esperienced in the three pitakas and knowing 
the Vinaya, the light amongst the thetas who had been initiated 
a long time, so Parakramabahu brought Nanapala with his 
disciples from Anuradhapura and some bhikkbus from other 
countries to Pulastipura. He placed Moggallana the thera and 
Nagindapalliya in the realm of his subkiiig and all the other 
hliikkhus and Nanda the chief amongst the theras living in the 
temple between the rocks at the head of the three Ni^yaa in’ 
Ilohajia, and they sent a command to the priests in the 
JIahawibara for a mutual reconciliation.” 

We see from these passages and similar ones how ^reat hU 
interest was for the huddhistical religion and t lie inscription a t 
the Galwih^ gives a still more detailed account of all tliat ho 
did for tlic progress of the faith and the benefit of the priesthood. 
A translation of the inscription has never been attempted yot, 
most proh.ih1y on account of the great difficulties that it presents. 
The language is very much the same as that of tlie S*mhaless 
commentaries of the beginning of the 13th century, and of such 
Avorks as Amawatura, Pradipikuwa, Tliu)>avarosa, Daladasirita, 
&C. } there is already considerably more Snnskj-t in it than in the in- 
Ecriptionson the tablets ntMiluntale, hut not yet so much a.sin the 
other inscriptions at Polonnaruwa, viz , Galpota and Thuparama ; 
besides there are alre.ady a few examples of the new form of 
conjugation after the Dravidian fashion Avhich Ava.s ado 2 )ted in 
Ceylon during the great Tamil invasion of the 11th and 12th 
centuries. Tliis is ttie first inscription wiiicii is not dated from 
the year of the King’s reign, hut from the death of Buddlia; the 
date is given in lines four and five ns the year 1254 after ’\Valagam 
Brihu, Avhen 454 years had elapsed .since the death of Buddha, this 
gives together 1708 A.B. or 11G5 A.i>. According to the editor 
of the second part of the Main rariikramabrdm’a rcimi bc'nvn in 
1G98, and so this inscription would have been written in liis 
loth ycar.^ It Is a proof for the high esteem in Avhich Walagam 
Br»hu or ‘Wattagutuini stood even at rq laic a period that the date 
of this inscription Is derived from his reign ond not from the death 
of Buddiia directly. 

133. GnlanO.lwfthi, four wiles from Tfila, Hnmlantota district. 
Pillar in'»crihed on two sides, only one bide legible, begins <^i 



63 


Siri Sanga bo Parllyrainali^u wat bimij an walnnse i-c No 
othei name and no date is given 

139 Pillar from Pooliankalam 10 miles east of Chilaw, now 
in front of the Go^ernment Agents house at Puttahm (corap 
J C A- S 1865, p 181) It 13 inscribed on two aides, but the 
second side is onl} partly legible At A 12 we read the name 
of the King Sin Sanga bo Parllwramabahii wat hamiyan "w ime, 
Ac, and B 18 again Sin Sanga bo Parakramabahu Lamkes 
warn Ac The contents as given m A lG-25, aud in the first 
part of B which is half effaced are about the remittance of the 
taxes imposed by former kings This is a favounte subject in 
inscriptions of the late Sinhalese kings and we shall have 
occasion henceforth to dwell upon it in more than one instance 
Almost every king boasts that he remitted the taxes of Ins 
predecessors and if we had to believe them we would be com 
polled to assume that within half a century all taxes were 
abolished The Mali says concerning the predecessors of Pira 
kramabahii (73 3) 

Ahaddhakaragahadi maha dokkhavidhayiln pubbariLjuhi loko 
yam pilito bahuso pura 

Tins world had been oppressed on many occasions by formei 
kings who imposed unlimited taxes and thereby committed great 
evil’ 

The truth is that P irakramaMhu was ten times worse than 
his predecessor, aud by bis continual wars against external 
enemies, as well as by the iromenso engineering works ho 
undertook in the mtetior, he so exhausted and impoverished the 
country tliat it was long before it began to recover from the 
effects of his daring ambition 

140 Pillar at Padiwil • in the huge embankment o£ the tank 
near where the oya has effected a breach through it Short 
inscription m. two parts of five lines each m which the king 
states that he finished the repair of the tanks and bunds for the 
use of the fields m the hope of increasing the happmess of the 
people in this and the next world Patbwil was one of the most 
important tanks in the north and la continually referred to m 
books and inscriptions It is called Padivapi at IMah 79, 34 , 
Paiulavapi at Mah I , p 204, ch 49 19 GO, o8 68, 39 , m the 
inscription at Ambastbala (No 121), at 40 it is called Pa 
banoewila and in the later inscnplions of Jvij^nka MnHa. 
Padiwiewa or PacUwila. 

141 Aelahaera 12 miles cast of Niiwula, a viilage on the 
central road J2 miles from Kandj (Forbca 11^33), imcription, 
m 15 lines of which 9 are legible beginning Srasti Lankad- 
hinatha Parakrama b ihu &a This is the enfian'oi to the large 
canal which was constructed 1^ Parakramafcahn, not only for 
eonvepng water from the nierAmbanjaGga into the tanks, 
but also for purposes of inland catigation, so that boats roi^ht 
pass from hero to Kantalai and Po’onnaniwa- 


Fai'Tra Tess^ IL, so* 


C4 


142. ilaeddaborrowa. Pandawsewa, Dewamedi Hat Pattu 
(N.W.P.) on the :oad from Wariyapola to Chilaw, not far from 
Panduwjw Nuwara (above Na 133). Inscription in four lines 
on a blab begins (^rimat Patakramabhuja, &c. 

We now go over to the reign of King Ni^^anka llalla (1187— 
1 19G), or as he is called in the Simhalesc books Klrti Ni 99 anka. 
His inscriptions are scattered all over the island, and are not 
only the most numerous but also the longest that exist. Tlic 
Uahavansa SO, 10-28, has nothing to record of him, hut 
that he erected temples and palaces, and by his zeal for Buddhism 
heaped up meiils from day to day. He himself tells ns of an 
expedition he undertook to India, but most of the other 
memorable actions he speaks of have regard to religion. He 
describes his whole life ; birth, parent.nge, Iiis arrival in Ceylon, 
his dignities there, the solemnity of his instalment as King, and 
the acts of his government. He visited all paits of the island 
and boasted that such was the security which he established that 
even a woman might pass through the land with a precious gem 
and not he asked, What is it”? He put down robbery by 
relieving through diffeient gifts the anxiety of the people who, 
impoverished by the sevcie taxations of Parakrnmabahu, lived 
by robber}’ ; he remitted entirely tlie tax upon hill paddy, which 
was felt as a particular hai-dshiji, and at the same time greatly 
improved internal comraunications by repairing the roads and 
putting up jeslliouses for the use of travellers. Jinny of tho 
buildings of Polonnaruwa, still extant in their ruins, aro indeed 
owing their origin to his magnificence; it was he, too, who 
repaired and emheliUhed the splendid cave temple at Dambull.i, 
often referred to in his inscriptions. 

143. Dambulla. This Inscription is close to tho entrance to the 
rock temple, not far from the one mentioned as No: 3 (Forbes I., 
371 ; Emerson Tennent II.. 578). It was translated by Mr. 
Armour in the Appendix to Tumour’s Epitome (reprinted at 
Forbes II., 350) ;• it is written in an nntiriuatcd style of lan- 
guage, especially the beginning, rcininding us very much of the 
iDscriptions of the lOlh and lllh centuries. In the lines 19-24 
some letters arc jnis.sing, but the rest is very well preserved. 

141. Galnsnc Jlala-saue, about .5 miles riQttli-we&t of Wellavre, 
a village six miles from Kuruhaegala, on the Anuradhapura road. 
There is a small temple built of stones close to the Daeduru oya, 
and iiirido asi^uarc .stone scat very similar to those at Kiriwihara 
and Thuparama, Polonnaruwa ; tho stone seat evidently was not 
always in the temple, which is rather a modern construction, but 
must have been exposed to the weather for a long time, as about 
half of the inscription is almost completely effaced; now also it 
Ls not in a favourable position for reading, as tho temple gets its 
light only from tlie door and lias no windows. The inscription 


• Mr. T. W. llhy* ia « note J. IL A.S.iii., p. ICC, refer* 

bf ihU in^eription «h1ch he pabli«be4 ia the J. C. A. b., lint tti fur 
Las BCTcr been pnDte<L 


to a tmaslatioa 
M 1 know thii 



C5 


in eight lines runs all around the stone seat, beginning at the 
upper end left from the door (at the place marked A) I am 
not quite sure that this inscription belongs to N359anka JIalla, 
as that part of it ■which should contain the name is effaced, but 
the woi-ds ■which immediately follow have induced me to ascribe 
it to him as they are identical "with those at the beginning of 
the inscription ot Dambulla (beginning in tlie corner maiked B). 
Kacta kula pacmiU kala 3’aksba pralaya kota Laiikawa nia 
nushyawiLsa kala "Wijaya lajayan (C) waliansege paramparilj’en 
&C. In the same waj* of the whole inscription only those lines 
that aie between B and C and between C and D are legible, and 
therefore a complete sense cannot be got out of it ; as far os we 
can judge from the fragments, however, the contents must have 
been \ery much alike those of the inscription of Dambulla 

14j. Ruanwaeli Dagoba, Anuradhapura. This is a fine slab 
standing near the eastern altar, with an inscription on both sides 
beautifully preserved. It was published and translated by 
T. W. Tlhys Da\ids in J. R. A. S, 1874, p SCO, but there are a 
number of mistakes iu his transcript. The language approaches 
very much the modem conversational form, so that the inscription, 
can be understood by any educated native, with the exception, 
perhaps, of a few words. After the usual introduction Ni99anka 
llalla relates the costly works he executed in the fourth year of 
his reign for the embellishment of the Bunnwaeli Dagoba, and 
for tbe restoration of tlio Starlcavatli and other wiharas It seems 
that Anurrwlhapura had been fora long time under the domination 
of the Tamils, who allowed the Buddhistic monuments to go to 
ruins, and that Ni99anka Kalla was the first king who undertook 
to r(maii’ them 

M’e now go over to Ki59anka Kalla's inscriptions at his 
capital Polonnaruwa 

146. Inscription on the great lion in the audience hall, which 
was removed to the Colombo Museum (comp T. W. Ehys Davids 
in the Indian Antiquary, 1878, p 248) This inscription is of 
great interest as it gives us the titles of the high officials in the 
Sinba^cse kingdom of VlieT'2'tb ccnriiiy.* Another similar Tist 
concerning the 17th centurj’ is given by A. de Silva Ekanayaka 
in his article, on the form of government under the native 
sovereigns of Ceylon, J. II. A. S. VIll. p 297 ff, and by Knox in 
his Hist Relation. The whole subject is dealt ■with at some length 

. hy T. W. Rhys Davids in the notes to his article '• on two old 
Sinhalese inscriptions," J. R. A. S. 1874, p. 3G0 ff 

147. Inscriptions on the broken frieze around the Tbupararaa ; 
there arc altogether eight fragments more or less well preserved. 
Tlio missing words can generally be supjilicd from other in- 
scriptions. Three of the fragments belong to the upper portion 
(k, III , IV.). and fi%e to Uie loner (II , III, IV., YJI., VIII.) 


, * K?ar tlic audience hall there arc two acnes of pinara desoting the order in which 
the difTcrent dignitaries were seated. 


Q C03S. 



00 


nliolo"raplis liftvo Im>cii taken of Upp. I’. J*0' I-i I/>'v. P . 

Jll., VJlI. 

148. GaljKitft, near tlia Thup.Ttntn.n ; tins it a hlnb 25 l<>ng. 
■i fuel broa'l and 2 tliick, Kka^tl like tlio leaf of a 811111.110*^0 
l»ook (Oalpota, stoiio-book), nn«l neatly ornanunt'd, llio wiitiii;; 
l>cin" fititTOun<lo(l by a mouldmg of binN. It contaiii'inn in- 
wn-iitlion in three each |»«jc of 2 4 linci rthlinj; the whole 
of Niv<;anka JIalla's liistojy. In tlio mnivin of the utone, on the 
left h.alid, wo read that this sl«no n-ai brou^'ht by the strong 
men of Ni^<;;»nka from Saepri (Mihiiitalo). 'lliis ctirioua 
pa«.'<a"e has found ita way into nil iholKx>k« on Ceylon ( For) xs, I., 
420, Pridham. II., .‘>5S, M!ucr.on Tennent, II, ''SOj. btil evidently 
there is a mistake m it, and it can easily l»o corrccti d. A»ii!rc.idy 
Forlts remarked it is a matter of suqiri'C tliat this weighty 
mass ahonlJ h«\olKeti thought worthy of lx.dn;; removed from 
Jfihintale, sshich is about 50 miles distant in a direct line; Imt 
if instead of Sae;;iri wo ri.ad Sl;»iri, it is ijuito natural ; FI;;iri is 
onl3* 10 miles disinnt from Toutwa'-w.a.andji is ttsily unilerslcxsl 
that the en;jTa\cr who knew Sie«iri to l>c a cilcbrotcd phicc of 
lluddliist Worship put this on tlio stone instead of SlRiri. 

Tlio inscription liaslccn translate by Armour, in tlif Api>eudix 
to Tuniour’a Kpiloinc of the History of Ceylou (r»']>nnted in 
Forbes IL. 343). TJio two lint pa^es are vciy wcil pn.‘»<TveJ, 
but in the thir«l a numberof words has teen wnslitslaw.ay.whicli 
cannot always bo replaced from other inscriptions, ko that tho 
translation is In soino places bxsol on conjecture. A photo^ninh 
was onlj' taken of a part of tho first pcijfo as a R|s-ciim'n, and tfiU 
waa diilicuU ('non;;h to obtain ns the Mono is almost in a hori> 
zontal |iosition and too he.ssy to l>o raised. 

149. Slab near tho DaUdn 3(niidir.*iwa (tho p.-vkico of tho tooth 
relic) ; 12 feet long hy 2 feet 9 inche.s broad, with an inscription 
on both sides. It was focmd completely buried near tho principal 
gate of the king’s n.alacc, hut it is now ]>ut U[>ri"ht again. Tim 
iicscriplion sr.\s published and Imnslnled by T. \V. Illiys Davlii 
in the J. R. Ji. 8. VII., lOO, who, however, mistook it to be an 
inscription of rarrikramabrdm I. After tho usual inlroiluctiou 
Nigejanka ifalla, himself a prince of Kfdiuga (*on of King Jn^-a- 
gopa ofSinitiapura), c-vliorl-Hliis people to ciioose for his successor 
one of his own family (most probably he allu’das to his sou 
■\Vlrabrihu), and not one of the non-Buddliistical princes of Cola 
or Kcrali ; if thero U no one who lia-s the olllco of clilef kiim the 
heir apparent or one of tho princes or one of tho queens must bo 
chosen to the kingdom, Tliis wish of Nl^^anka ilnlla's was 
fulfilled to a great extent, as after his eon ^Flralxalm who, 
according to JIah. 80, 2G, only reigned one night, his brother 
lrVIkramab."ihu II., and later on his step-brother Sahasa Jlnlla 
miccecded to the throne. 

150. Inscription on the four pillars at Rankot Da"ob.i, and on 
the stone seat at Kiriwibara (Rhy-a Davids, ib. p.iGi); these 
pillars originally surrounded a stone from which the kin^Mvas 



or* 

wont to worship towards the dHgoba, but now they are fallen 
do^TT and two of them arc broken ; the inscription is identical on 
each of the pillars and on the seat, but not equally well preserved ; 
the contents are very similar lo those of the DambuUa inscription 
(No. 143). 

151. Stone seats near Raokot Dagoha and at the Tliuprirfima ; 
\)oth contain the Eame inscription, one in six, the other in four 
lines running all round the scat ; the former was found in the 
jungle 200 yards from the Dagoba, the latter is still in its 
original place. 

15l«. Stone scat at Kantalai tank; this w.xs disco%'ered a 
short while ago in the ground below tho tank, which was cul- 
tivated in former times, hut afterwards allowed to fall back into 
jungle ; it is about three-quarters of a mile from the present rest- 
house, and near tho Tamil \jUages ; the contents are the same as 
those of No 151. 

152. Inner inscription on the stono scat at Kiriwihara (the 
outer one is identical with that on tho four pillars. No. 150); of 
this inner inscription only one line is well preserved, the second 
is partly and the third totally cflaccd ; tho contents of tho 
preserved parts are identical with those of Galpota J1 18-17. 

■\Ve now go over to the inscriptions of Ni^^auka Slalla in tho 
Bouthera part of tho island- 

152a. Pillar from Kacligatta, in Ilambantola, now in tho 
Colombo Museum ; it is inscribed on t^\o sides, but tho first lines 
of A are etkteed ; the name of the king is contained in tho last 
line of B, os it is often tho case in inscrijjtions of Ni^^ailka 
Malla. The introduction which fills the first side is interesting, 
as it gives some particulars about tbo king’s daily life. 

158. 'W’nndarupawihara*, It miles south of tho ^\inbalQntota 
reslhouso (7 miles from ITauibautota), on tho other side of tho 
"WalawG river; there arc tho leniains of an ancient wiluira, a 
pillar mth sun, moon, dqg, and crow, and an inscription on tho 
surface of a square stone In front of the wdhara ; 1C lines of it 
ixt. Vik tivc. wfi'i wri 

effaced. The contents offer no peculiar interest except the last 
three lines, where it is stated that the king fixed the tax for the 
first amunam at 1 arnunam 3 {Nxelas G mandaras; for tho iniddlo 
ono at 1 amunam 2 paclas 4 mandaras ; for the last at 1 amunam 
.... paelas, 3 mandaras. The same passage occurs in tho in- 
scription at DamhuUa, 1. 2, and in the Galpota, A 17. Tho 
earhest mention of any tax or contribution of tho people towards 
the support of a royaiperson in Ceylon is, according to Sir Jolm 
Phear (the Aryan village, p. 227, where, however, the P.'di is 
ill-treated in a most horrible way) in a pass.ago of tbo Sumangala 
'Vilasini; Mayam ekakossa khettoto nmraauam ammanam TvliaiL- 
tva, tuyham Balibhagam dassama, Wo shall give you at tbo rate 
of an ammanam of paddy from each field of ours.” In insciiptions 


Pndb&m n , &89, 591. 




68 


tbe -word tax (aya)* occurs first in the 10th century, but it ia not 
specified there to -what they amounted, and neither the Maha- 
■ransa nor any other historical book gives particulars about theso 
points. 

154. Rambha wihara, ‘about three miles north of the G3rd nulo 
post, on'lhe road from Galle to Harabantota, Several fragments 
of inscriptions scatte»«d in the jungle around tho ivihara. 

155. Katugabagalge, about four miles north of Buttala rc.st- 
house. The cave is 18 feet high and 50 feet broad, and in it 
there are three images of Buddlia carved out of the rock, and 
one of 12 cubits long, built of mud, in a reclining posture. The 
inscription is on two ades of a pillar lying at the entrance of 
the wihara, and is very well preserved ; the name of the king is 
here also at the end. The contents ate identical with those of 
the inscription at Kaeligatla (No. 152) only that here the words 
Pihitirajayehi Kael A. 14 are missing. 

There are several more pillars of Ni 9 ?anka ’8 in different places 
of the southern district, of which, however, 1 give no transcript, 
os their contents are identical with one or the other of tho 
inscriptions already mentiooed. One pillar, inscribed on four 
sides, was brought from Bintenne, and is now kept o])posite the 
Badulla rest-houso; another one bat Ilukapotana, in the jungle, 
two miles east of the Bihilc rest-house, and not far from the 
Ijigh road. Ono, very much effaced, at Potubandaaa wibara, five 
mUes south-west of the Bihilc rest-liouse in ^laedagampattn, and 
one at Kotaserapiyangalu wiliam in 'U^aegampattu, four miles 
from Bibile on the road to NUgala. 

150. Inscription of SiLhasa Malla (1200-1202) on the upright 
slab, north of the Hactad.ige, found whilst cutting the new 
• path to the Bankot. This inscription was translated by Armour, 
jn the Appendix to Tumour’s Epitome (reprinted in Forbes II., 
333), and afterwards edited, with a translation, by T. W. Rhvs 
Davids in the J. R. A. S. VII., p. 356, but unfortunately from* a 
native copy which is full of blunders. *It is the only inscription 
that.cxists of King Sahasa llalla’s, and is of high interest, a.s it 
gives us in the introduction the relationship of tho king (ho wa-s 
a brother of Nizzanka Hallo’s, but from a diflhrent jjuecn} and 
the events connected with bb aceesrion to the throne of Ceylon. 
Tlio subject is a grant made to the General Lag Wijaya Smf»a Kit 
who is mentioned several times in inscriptions of Ni^^Iika 
ilalLVs. According to Galpota, B 15, he was sent over with an 
army to India to invade the kingdom of Prmdt, and having 
dauTvted them by his energy he brought hack' a number (ff 
prisoners and a largo tribute. From thb inscription we see 
that ho also phayed a conspicuous part in the installation of 
Srdia'yimalla, whom he hronght over from India. As the date 
of tills event is given the year 1743 a.u. and this agrees with 


• TJio word uffu, In the lfi«crfp{fcn from Tiwnmalurimii (No. 67) la tnin»lsfcd 
(No.*58). ^ *“ ^“scrimion at Wihimgala 



09 


tlic (lat<? given liy Tumour, while the editors of the second part 
of the ^Inh have put 17 15 inatead 

157 Pillar of l^ag Wijaja StngA Kit, found on the bund of 
Abhayawaoiia tank at jVnurudliapun, now in the Colombo 
iluscmiL The jnsenber w the same Lag Wijaja Singa men- 
tioned m Ko 15G, but here he calls hunsclf chief minister to 
Lirivntls ro^a! consort Abba Salntnc wan Now, from the ilah 
(80, 30, 31) V.0 know onl^ of a Gtncral KTrtisena, uho marnoil 
Parikramabrihu’a TV idoiv Lilu\nU nn<l nigned three jears (17*17- 
1200) after winch time he was dcpo^c<l bv S ihasa Malla It is 
unhkcl) , allbough not jmpos.sible, that Lag IVija} a Smga should 
base licen first the minister of Kirtiscnn and then have installed 
las enem^, S'lliasi ilalla Lilnuati was restored twice to the 
throne bj- the Tamils m 1200 for one jtir and m 1211 for seven 
months onl^, but nowhere in the Mali she is connected with a 
prmce of the mme of Abhaja SaKmcwin so tins must remain 
undecidwl for the present. The inscription conUvias a grant to 
the pnests hv mg in the Kuwaup-ija, and resenible-s nl«o in the 
language 1 cry much the pillar in<mnptions of the lOlh and lllh 
centuries 

Following the chronological order, wo have to mention now 
two jn'scnptirns of a king who calls himself Sin Sanga bo 
Parakramab'hu One of them (15B) is on tlio pavement of the 
southern altar of the Kuanwacli D\goba, the other one (15D) 
wasfaund at Dondni,* near MaUrt(SP), and is now in the 
Colombo Muscuoi The latter vvis pubhshetl b^ T W Rhys 
Davitls first m the Indian Antiquary, 1 CID, and afterwards m 
the J C A S 1871-72, p 57, but he sKcnbed it to Sulu Sin 
Sanga bo (712-718 ad) In the proceedings hovvover.p WIV , 
lie slates that the chief mlcrcst of the inscription, lies m the 
simultaneous gift to Hindu and Cuddln^t tempiLS showing that 
as at the present daj so lu the jear a,t> 14U0, Buddhism vva-s 
corrupted with Hindu rites Ac As we haao seen m the pillar 
inscriptions of the 10th and lllli ccntuucs, the Sinhalese kings 
often call themselves by other names than thoio given in the 
Jfaft-Itansa and woj/iavu, dftcrefore, fo £aie mio coasrcfertiion 
chiefly the language and the contents of the jnscriptious Tlie 
language of llic iJondn inscription is evidently more modern, 
not odI^ than that of the pillars, but also than that of Ni^^itika 
Alalia, ns for the subjects, it is n dedication of coco mat trees to 
the temple of Wishnu at Dondm and therefore does not prove 
injtlimg for the date of the insciiption In fact, it would be 
diHicult to make out the age of this stone if the name of the 
king and the language did not ngiee so well with the other 
inscription at the Ruanw ach D igoba Uns latter is not men- 
tioned in any book and seems to have been quite unknown to 
the present It begins with Abhayac Salaniewnn, and tlien 
follows at the end of the first line tiie name of the King Sin 
bangabo Purakiamabihu, besides these there arc mentioned m 


Comp lotbes II I«8 



70 


the third line one Wijaya and Ids mother Sumedha. The con- 
tents of the inscription are rdigious ; the king relates how he 
worshipped the Rxianwaeli Dagoba, how he spent five yalas of 
rice, a large ocean of milk, and 2,000 kalandas of incense, how 
he recompensed the working people and their mothers with gold 
and clothes, how he listened to the Tliupawansa, and worshipped 
the Thuparama and the sacred Botree, &c. Among the kings 
that can come into consideration there is only Wijayahahu II., 
who was a zealous Buddhist; the story of his reign is thus 
introdneed in the llah. 81, 10 : 

Tada khalu Siri sanglia hodhi rajanv.ayagato raja Vijaya 
halm ti vissuto caruvikkamo. So there is no doubt about his 
name being Siri Sanghaho ; his relationship is not given in the 
Jlah., hut he claimed descendance from the unfortunate Siri 
Sanghaho I. (246-24S), a martyr of the Buddhist f.iith. As 
Sir. Davids pointed out in tlie passage already quoted, it is no 
matter of surprise to see that a king who profe.sses to be a 
zealous Buddhist at the same time bestows gifts upon a Hindu 
temple, as in the 13th century .Buddhism had .adopted the cult of 
Wishpu and other Hindu deities. Thetempleat Dondrato which 
the inscription refers is a Buddhist temple now, but there are still 
to bo seen the statues of Wishijiu, Gai.ie^, and the sacred bull of 
Tanjore, which evidently do not at all interfere witb_ the 
BuddliUtical woisUip. 

ICO. Inscription at tho Paepiliyaua temple near Kotta. This 
IS n grant by the first King of Kott* Parakramabahu VI., made 
in tho SOth year of his reign. As the date of his accession is 
given the year 1958 A.H., which agrees with that given in the 
foot note to p. XXII. of the list prefixed to the second part of 
tho Mahsivansa. Tlie stone which contained the inseriptioii is 
hioken now,* and the pieces have been used for the construction 
of the outer wall of the Paepiliyaoa* temple at the junction o 
the two I'oad'a from Pamankanda to Horana, and from to 

Galkissa. The priest, however, has got a copy which I used for 
making the transcript, after having compared it with the frag- 
ments. Apaitof it has been published with a translation by 
James Alwis in • tlje introduction to tho Sidat Saugorawa 
p. CXCIX. 

ICl. Inscription at the Gane wihara near "Wneligamn (S. P.) 
puhlWicdhy T.W.Bhys Davids in the J. C. A S. 1870-71, p. 21. 
tho king calls himself Siri Sanghaho Siri Bhuwancka halm, and 
is most probably the sixth of Ills name who reif'ned from 1404 
to 1471. 

1G2. Inscription at Kaekini (see No. 127) published hyL. de 
Zopa JTahamudaUyar in the J. C. A S. 1871-72, p. 36 ; this 
is on a stono slab near the ancient Kaeloni temple, on tlio 
left sboiu of the Kaelani ganga. while the now one Is on 
tho right. It records an account of the repairs osocuted in 
this temple by King Pharma rarak tamabalig of Kotta who 

• Tliw K-mpIu ,1 mcDtioncI in Die rorawi fiadcw, n poem by Cri Rabuta of 
Tojttgaiuuwa »ian*a S6 ‘ j r 



71 


reigned according to Turnonr from 160o to 1527 A.D The 
only historical book whicli records the reign of this king is the 
Rajawalija* ^vhde the Maba\aiis'i and Kajaratnakari onnt it 
altogether and make his brother and immediate successor "Wijaya 
B ihu supply his place , this has led Zoysa to the conclusion tl at 
the assumption of the soaereignty by Dhanna Parakramabahu 
must ha\e been disputed by his brother Wijaya Bahu as already 
Turnout had suppo&ed m his epitome The date given m the 
inscription as that in 17111011 lie ascended the throne is 20ol A.B 
= 1508 AH, and differs by three years from that given by 
Tumour (to which he arrned by adding the 14 years of Pamlita, 
Parakraniabahu Vn from an unknown source and tho 20 3 ears of 
WiraParakramabahufromBijawaliyap 274 to 2014, the last date 
gi\ en in the "Mah as the year in which Bhuwanekab vhu VI die 1) 

1C3 Second inscription from Dondraat present m the Colombo 
iluseum Tins too was published and translated ly T W Rhys 
Davids m the J C A. S 1870-71 p This and No 1G7 are 
the two only inscriptions known at present in Ceylon •which arc 
dated from the ^ka aera. It beats the name of Wijayab hu the 
brother and successor of Dharma Parakramabahu mentioned m 
1^0 1G2, but the date is the year lolO , this inACiiption confirms 
m some way the reauU to which wc just arrived nz that 
Dhanna Parakramabahu and Wyayabiihu struggled about the 
so% eroignty , and further it suggests the idea tliat "Wyayabahu 
must ha\ e been recognised in the extreme south of the island only 
anil unknown m the central part Tlie subject of this inscnpbon 
IS like tint of ^0 lo9 a grant to the temple of Wishnu at 
Don Ira 

164 Kudamirisa wibara 13 miles from Colombo on the road 
to Randy and half a mile to tl e north The inscription in 
42 lines Ls on an inclined rock close to the temple and is tolcrally 
w ell preser^ ed it begins Lankadhipati Par ikiani ibhuja 1 ut 
we cannot make out which kmg of this name it is The language 
is quite modem and the contents arc of no peculiar interest 

Of the inscriptions now following I only give the places where 
they are to be found and tl e dates if they can be made out 
they are all more or less modern and too lengthy to be repro 
duced here either in text or translation. Some of them haae 
been published by nati\ e scholars in the Colombo papers especially 
the Laknwikirana 

I 60 Galapata vrihara one mile cast of Bentota. There is a 
very long xnscnption on the surface of a rock at the bottom of 
tho stops that lead to the entrance of the wibara it gives an 
accountof the repairs which King Parakramalx hu of Darabadcma 
executed vt tl is temple, having beard that the dagoLa attached 
to it contained a relic of Hal i Kassapa tl c hrst hierarch of 
Buddhism 

ICC BaLalagodaluw a, one mile east of Delielgomuwa a vullar'O 
eight miles from Kuriinaegala on the road to Dambool There js 
an ancient tank stone pillars and a fragment of a stone bearing 
aninscription m tho character of the loth century Tlie place 


TTphsm LI jn 



70 


the third line one Wijaya and his mother Sumedha. The con- 
tents of the inscription are religious ; tlie king relates how he 
worshipped the Kuanwaeli Dagoha, how he spent five yalas of 
rice, a large ocean of milk, and 2,000 kalandas of incense, how 
he recompensed tlic working people and their mothers with gold 
and clothes, how he listened to the Thiipawansa, and worshipped 
the Thuparama and the sacred Botree, &c. Among the kings 
that can come into consideration there is only Wijayabahu II., 
who was a zealous Buddhist ; the story of his reign is thus 
introduced in the Mah. 81, 10 : 

Tada khaUi Siri sangha hodhi lajanvayagato raja Vijaya 
bahu ti vissnto caruvikkamo. So there is no doubt about his 
name being Siri Sanghabo , his relationship is not given in the 
Mah , but he claimed descendance from the unfortunate Siri 
Sanghabo I. (246-248), a martyr of the Buddhist faith. As 
Mr. Davids pointed out in the passage already quoted, it is no 
matter of surprise to see that a Icing who professes to be a 
zealous Buddhist at the same time bestows gifts upon a Hindu 
temple, as in the 13th contuiy .Buddhism had adopted the cult of 
Wislinu and other Hindu deities The temple at Dondra to wliich 
the inscription refers is a Buddhist temple now, but there are still 
to be seen the statues of Wishiju, Gane^a, and tlie sacred bull of 
Tanjore, which evidently do not at all interfere with the 
BuddbUtical worship. 

160. Inscription at tlie Paepiliyana temple near Kotta. This 
IS n grant hy the fiist King of Kotta Paifvkr.'imabahu VI., made 
in the 39th year of his reign. As the date of his accession is 
given the year 19.'8 A.B., which agrees with that given in the 
foot note to p. XXII. of the list prefixed to tho second part of 
the Mahuvansa. Tho stone which contained the inscription is 
broken now,“ and the pieces have been used for the construction 
of the outer wall of the Paepiliyana" temple at the junction o 
the two roads from Paraankanda to Horann, and from Kotta to 
Galkissa. The priest, however, has got a copy which I used for 
making the transcript, after having compared it with the frag- 
ments. A part of it has been published with a translation hy 
James Alwis in • the introduction- to the Sidat Sangarawa, 
p, CXCIX. 

161. Inscription at the Qanc wihara near IVaeligiima (S. P.) 
publishcdbyT.W.Bhys Davids inthe J.C.AS. 1870-71, p. 21. 
the king calls him<!clf Siri Sangliabo Siri Bbuwanoka balm, and 
is most probably the sixth of his name who reigned from 1464 
to 1471. 

1C2. Inscription at Kaolani (ecc No 127) published by L. do 
Znysa MalmmiulaUyar in tho J. C. A. S, 1871-72, p, S6; this 
is on a stono slab near the ancient Kaolani temple, on the 
loll (shore of Uio Kaclani ganga while the new one is on 
the right. It records an account of the repairs executed in 
this temple by King Pharma rarakra inab.lbTi of Kotta who 



71 


reigned according to Turaoiir from 1605 to 1527 A.D. The 
only historical book which records the reign of this king is tlie 
Eajawaliya* wbilo the Mahlivansa and Rajaratnakari omit it 
altogether and make his brother and immediate successor Wijaya 
Bahu supply his place ; tiiis has led Zojsa to the conclusion that 
the assumption of the sovereignty by Dharma Parakramabaliu 
must have been disputed by his brother Wijaya Bahu, as already 
Tumour had supposed in his epitome The date given in the 
inscription as that in which he ascended the throne is 2051 A.B. 
= 1508 AD, and differs by three years from that given by 
Tumour (to which he arrived by adding fbc 14 years of Paiulita 
Parakramabaliu VII , from an unknown source, and the 20 years of 
"Wlra Parakramabahu from Rajawaliyap.274, to 2014, the last date 
gi\ en in the 'Mah. as the year in which Bliuwanekaba.hu VI died). 

1G3. Second inscription from Doiwlraat presentin the Colombo 
Ituscum This, too, wa.s published and translated by T. TV. Rhys 
Davids in the J. C. A. S 1870-71, p 25. This and No 107 are 
the two only inscriptions known at present in Ceylon which arc 
date<l from the (^aka acra. It bears the name of Wijayabdhu, the 
brother and successor of Dharma Parakramabahu, mentioned in 
No 1G2, but the date is the year 1510 ; this inscription confirms 
in some way the result to which we just arrived, viz, that 
Dharma Parakramabahu and TVijayabahu struggled about the 
sovereignty, and further it suggests the idea tliat TVijayabahu 
must ha\ o been recognised in the extreme south of the island only 
and unknown in the central part Tlie subject of this inscription 
is like that of No 159, a grant to the temple of 'Wishim at 
Dondra. 

104. Kudamirisa wihara 13 miles from Colombo on the road 
to Kandy and half a mile to tl c nortli. The inscription in 
42 lines is on .an inclined rock close to the temple, and is tolerably 
well preseT\ed ; it begins Laiikadhipati Parakramabhuja but 
wc cannot make out which king of this name it is The language 
is quite modern and the contents are of no peculiar interest 

Of the inscriptions now following I only gi\ e the places wliere 
thej’" are to be iound and tiie dates il they can be made out ; 
they arc all more or less modem aud too lengthy to be repro- 
duced hero either in text or translation Some of them have 
been published by native scholars in the Colombo papers especially 
the Lakriwikirana. 

165. Galapata wihara, one mile east of Bontota. There is a 
very long inscription on the smfaco of a rock at the bottom of 
the steps that lead to the entrance of the ■wihara ; it gives .an 
account of the repairs -a’liich King Parakramabahu of Dambadcnta 
executed at this temple, having heard that the d.agoba attached 
to it contained a relic of Maha Kassapa the first hierarch of 
Buddliistn. 

ICC. Batalagodaluwa, one mile east of Deholgomuwa, a viUago 
eight miles from Kutunaegala on the road to Dambool. There is 
an ancient tank, stone pillars and a fragment of n stone bearin" . 
an inscription in the character of the l5th century. The place 


Upliain,!.! IL, S94. 



72 


is now totally overgrown with jangle and not even a footpath 
leads to tlie spot, which is only known to a few amongst the 
inhabitants of the village. 

1C7. Laukatilaka wihara, eight miles west of Kandy; the 
temple is on the top of an immense rock, to which a flight of 
steps leads, and there arc two very long inscriptions, one in 
Sinhalese and one in Grantha or old Tamil characters. The 
Sinhalese inscription records the erection of the temple and the 
grants of land made to it by King Bbuwaneka bahu IV. of 
Gampola. The date of the accession of this king as given by 
Tumour is A.D. 1347 ; but that given in the inscription is the 
year 12G(1 of the Qaka era, corresponding to A.D. 1342. 

1G8. Gadaladeni wihara. two miles west from LaHkatilaka, 
and not far from the high road ; here also there is a very long 
rock inscription in Sinhalese character, partially effaced, which 
is peculiarly interesting from the fact of its being alluded to by 
Robert Knox in his account of Ceylon ; it records the history of 
the construction of the temple and iU endowment by a king of 
Gampola. 

100. Akuruketupana at Ambagatnuwa, five miles from tho 
Kawalapitiya railway station; two incriptiona, one of 34 and 
one of 24 lines, in an ancient form of tlic Sinhalese character, both 
very much effaced and weatherworn. 

170. Kaera^la, Gangabada Pattu, Slyanae Korle, about ten 
miles from Colombo on tho Kaclani road and three miles to tlio 
south, not far from the Kaclani gan^ ; there are the ruins of a 
templo, stone pillars, a dagoha and an’ upright slab, covered on 
l«>th sides irith an inscription in modern Smlialese characU-rs. 
It* begins (Jlrl Sanghabo Patakramabalni, and belongs, most 
probably to the same Parakramabalm VI. of Koita, who in.scril>cd 
the stone at the PaopUiyana Icroplo (No. 160.) 

171. Alawala Ainuua at the Kospota oya anicut, aWut six 
miles from Ktirunacgala ; there is a long inscription in large .sized 
modern characters on a rock close to the river. It contains a 
grant to the temple of Slaeilngama, which is situated in the 
neighbourhood, by King Parukramalmhu of Dambadcniya. 

172. I here annex an inwption which, properly speaking, 
has no room at this phice, ns it is not on a stone but on a copper 
plate. It vas discovered &omo years ago in a cinnamon plan- 
tation near Xegombo, and publishcii by L. dc .Zoysa ilaliii 
Miulaliyar in the J. C. A, S., 1873, p. 73, It belongs cither to 
■\Vijaya lAhu VI., who reigned ftt Gampola, 1398-1400, or to 
■\Vijayabrih\i Vn. who rc5gne«l at KoRa 1327--1 533, and who is 
the author of the second inM:r!ptioii at Dondra (No. 163.) It is 
however more likely llmt it belongs to the former, as it is dated 
from the 9th year of the kin^s reign, while Wijayabalm VII. 
only rclgnixl eight years. It contains a second (or confirmatory) 
grant «iE a rice field to the llrnlimtui Venrasu Konda Peniinal 
and is interesting, as jt fchows the latest form of this hind of 
in-rf’rlptionsjuhicli, although written in a modern style of language, 
•still prcs.Tvcs a good many of the ancient traditional 
esprcs-slons. 



73 


PART ft. 


TE\T& 

(1) Tonigala. — (a) Pftrumaka Abija jmta partjmaka Ti^aba 
vrapi acagirika Tisa panatiln agata anngata catudiaa s gasa 
dine Dewana pi maliaraja Gamim Abajo ni^ate ncanagnraka 
ca [taaii] rikiya nagaraka ca. Parumaka Abaya puta paruiniika 
Tisa niyata pite mjalia agata anagata catudisa sagasa 

(6) Pariimaka Abaja puta paruinaka Tisa lujaU. Inia 
avapi acagirika Tisa pa>\atahi ogata anagata catudisa angtsa 
Dewana ptja maliarajc Gamini Aba\o nijate acanagaraka ca 
tauinkija nagarika c;i acagiiika Tisa'pawatahi agata anagata 
catudisa sagasa Paniinaka Aba^a puta parumaka Tiisalia 
avisari niyate pitc 

(2) Gallona ^Mliara — De^anapija mabaraja Gamini Abhajai 
sa puta Tisajasa niabrdcne agata [ajnagata catudisa sagasa 

(}) DambuHa wili'ra. — Ueavaiia piya malnrajasa Gamini 
Ttstisa mabalene agata anagata catudisa sagasa dine 

(4) Tissaraaliaruna— Stddliani Slabanaka rajalin pulo 
Alunaka raja Nnkamahawihcra karn[hi] GolagamaiNila ca Goja- 
gamakcta n aga gatna ca nama 

( ) ) Rnanwacli Digoba Anuiudbapum — Sidlia ^Yallala 
rnjalia manuinnrftka T[i]sa inubarajalia puti mabaraia (2) Oaja- 
biliu Gamim Abaje Uakim Abiya nraba wihcra kara^a Ma 
i-akawy a (3) bajika patisawanak tin kotu pnpatakarvlu} i jma 
pitisatara (4) kotu dmc dakapati bikusagaba ataja catan 
paceni paribujanak kotu dmc 

(0) ilatmalagalo,— -Sidha. Dcwmnpiya T[isa maba] rijalia 
maniinanaka Dewvna pija pula kii[na] Gimini (2) Abba^a 
ioahsc i/s J/rapf/’iS iemxhxttxje thtnbfj-xksJc-z Slala- 

gutika (8) saba pariwataku wiharabi bbikusagal a 

wisiti paroana nayo yaku ca batn ca (t) osawasiknlmta kate 
pa katu dine utmka raliata wanakn katu dine 

(7) Penyankulaina. — Siddham Wababa raabarajino ga 

sudasana patanagablu ja jinapahsatanya kama karana 
karotu tiragaina atanabi yam Iialauaka jeba (2) balmaka 
^ukawa^Tlya imi tera Hajibaka dim bada kariya bajiLa 

yaba puti nyasaja puta caka kaba patanagablu (S) dakapata 
(4) jma paksataraya Kama karana karotu Amaratcrahi keta 
calikawawiya dakapati tumaha patisatara kotu sabana patiya 
nahati Majiba nana (o) ntanam ma dakapatiyasa kotu salu 
caka kotu sapatisawana bora paliatawasa dim 

(8) Penyakatlu wibarv.— Qamani Aba rajaba (2) la 

, pui\ adara sau anaka wasa (3) ka [pa] raina 

tera Tusaba ka mabawaui (4) [para] ma tcia llajiba ka 



74 


ganaya Cakadarika welie (5) xahi cetaliata ca .^’A-ioolpath 
(C) dine Cakadaraka -wehera [lii] dinp^i wj'tf few amongst the 
(10.) Galwana — IfaharaH' — manu- 
maraka Tisa niabarajaha 5e«{»bfc_5n*Iiia,uSiaji Gamini Ahayata 
pala wibajakahi wana manaka wawi paca 6aha[6a] kabawana 
jaraya kanawaya ta baraba bukasagahataya catari paceni pari 

(11.) Wibaragald. — (a.)Siddham. [Wa] sabaraja Cakadaraka 
wiharabi papa (2) takara kara waya upala donika wawi paca 
sabasa (3) kiniya paca satebi ya pasu nawaya bikiisagalia- 
(aya (4) nawasa. 

(b ) Siddham. Wababa rajabi patagai)ara Tisa 

rajaha (2) puti Gamini Aba raji [Wa] saba rajaba dinikn Upala 
(3) donika wawi papatakara jina pahawaya para sagaba (4) ta 
padi dina 

(12.) Tamaragala. — Siddba Wahaba ra . . . . ba inaramanaka 

Tisa mabarajaba puta maharaja Gamini Abaya 

(13) Kaikawa wiliara. — Siddham. Patama teta Warasi 
ametaba jita Amaryawa ameti Ababa ca duti bati kara bu hawn 
karu . . . . ga wadhacetabata ja bikasagaba(a ja dina. 

(16) DunumaijcJalakai.ida — (6 ) Ulajakawapi bikasagalm (2) 
sitata wiyaketahi bujaba (3) bika anutava be bajana bala (4) 
ta kubara dupa kariha yagamaka (5) ketabi .sagakubari atn 
karibaka (0) tulatavawiyakctabi tanakaro (7) waye buka- 
sagabata kubare dinaka (8) rabi ka^ha] pana lia gamakarabt 
wirawa (9) Abaya bukasagabata kubara dina sata (10) innsakfu 
(1C.) SitulpaAvibara. — Siddham. Nakamabarajaba pnta 

Batiya Tisa mabarajaba roalu Ti[6a] (2) maharaja 

atasa ta Tisa kabawana*^ (alnya Citalapawata atina 

fiamaya dakini Ti (3) sa aleya wawi akala kotu kaija waya 

Nakamabarajaba [ce] taba . . . . ta Mujawatiyata ci (4) 

hata karadorabi tumaba akala ^o] (u karitakojaraljalatayi aa 

,dasa pahatatayi (3) jina [pali] satari kotu 

dini dakapata sakalasamata dini. 

(17.) Galgirikanda. — Sidha Batiya rajaba dinayanikaka'gal.a- 

kawiharabi kubara pahana wi (2) maduka 

kubara ccta lua waruta binagala awapataya nakawiraya ceta- 
kubara asirawu tabu (3) kclabi cctakara manikarawiya ceta 
kubara gauawi katij'aya cetakubara. 

(18.) Dematamal wihara. — Siddham. Gamaka Aba mjaba 
wiliare satab.a gamaka (2) S.arituri ba giriyi boja pali pati dak.a 

parihaka gapa (3) wiharahi dasa 

(19.) Dcbelgalpansala.— Mckawana 

Aba maharaja (2) catali ta bata maka Aba (3) cala- 

wada punimasaba inaba bahudawasa ga (4) naka sawasayaba 
jata .... labana lawa (6) mahawiharalu jiapatakarahlya kana 
M\ga wadawa (C) tara mahnpata wana mabapataka mabama- 

lasa (7) tosa jinahatn sapa 

(20) Jllhlntale.— Sidim. I>e«'Snapiya mabarujaba manima- 
naka manapaj-a Gamini Abhaya inaliarajaba Cetigiriya bbiklm.- 
sagaba (2) . . gara . gamanakarikabi pule- 



• 76 


54. Gahvibara.— Sidha. .. jn ... ta .... . karihake . . . 

batigamaketaln karihake gaBiwagamaketabikari ta^vi 

tula [da] rawiketabi karihake jala makulaketnbi karaluka . . . 
parawiketahi kariliaka pximanawiketabi karihaka mahabamnna 
wiketahi kariliaka tulatarawiketahi karabika mahamakalaketabi 

karihaka wanijakalia kctalii kaiibaka acawiketabi 

jnahawiketaln karihaka lajakawiketolii karihaka kubava jita 
gamaketa paka . . mapanaketahi karihaka nawawawiketahi 
karihaka kubai-awiketahi kariha paye pabaraketahi karihake 
^vajabutigalakawiketalii aperaka 

.)5. Tummanakanfla.— (6) Siddha. Upalabijakahi upajiniNaka 
(2) pawatawiharahi cetabi asata ka (3) watiwatapata gamakehi 
cetakubari wali (4) mahamudaketahi bojasa niniketa (5) halatale 

kubari karihi ((i) iiiyapilawi (7) nawagamaka (8) 

kupawaraga. 

68. Weragala. — (a) Sida bujiyakarawalaTisajahaja 

•wanikubare sa kaliawana tnahabhiktisaga . . bawini 

(2) wiaiti wale kuhawana wapi ta lema nia 

kahawane (3) hi ladhabi yo kai'i roana ya^a sadha . . . 

(4) wataha ina\ra dinakt maliabbiguaaga. 

(li.) Sikaha ga . . kabawana karihi (2) mahana mola ■warn 
batngainakahi (3) patagamakahi ceta karilii marata (4) mahani- 
kawawi kabi cetakari (S) Cudasuroana gacoahi cetakari (0) 
laabaka . . kabi cetiya (7) kubaragainabi cetakaribi (S) , . . . 
ta^a gamakalii patakavihi. 

01. Habarane — Siddham. Mujila gatnana kenyahi ameta 
Wasayaha puta agi walamnna wawiyu (2) atiwawiya [da] kilii 
gakiia katta atata wawiya keta OAvitakito eta eta gama earo 

(3) ata]i kopi we agiwalaniana wawJya mulasara ca pacawa 
diwasara ca (4) do karihi eabasa ca caka catalina karihi ca Sarima 
pammaka mabaraji me agiioakmana (5) wawiyabojiya patiSena 
pula Abalayalia ca m.abalaka balataka rakaiia Jeanakayaba 
jnanumaiaka Wesamanayaha ma (C) keta akapi (?) kiriya daka- 
patiya kala amaiia da . . kakapi sagasalahi liyawaya boji3’a 
p.ataya karakala waya Cetagiriwibarahi Abatalahi silacctahi 
tninaba aka]a kotu kari witara Gapacetihi tela Imta inalakotu ca 

(5) jisapaJisatsTj kawa karana karoju C!o]» (?) ialaj’B giaiya toe 
gapacetihi jaganana liamaiianataya paiawatabi (9) nawananako^u 
ca bojiya patiya Karakala wawiya dini. mo cetihi dina. bojiya 
pati sari . . ca karihi sabast wi wisitika(lO) do pata ea ametaha 

ca Wababayaha puta nakayaditi .... puwayasa sawanaka 
•wasabi majimodini puna niosi sata palcn (11) diwasa. 

G2. Thalagala. — (a) Siddha. Balahi bawaka -wasikn (2) 

upasaka citayaka ina pata (3) Damija baya mata 

bauaya. 

G7. Slab from Tis^amabaiaina. — Siddliain. Budadasa JIahida 
llaba (2) sena tawaka l^ya Abaya maharaja (3) mi apa ciidi 
purunuika Budadasa tai i pali (4) mahanamika Je|a Tisa maliaraja 
amya(5)hapali Todagamika kiri kiniyibi ugn awami (G) dinawa 
sabasaka kiri abatarilii Maliagaina (7) raja mabawiharalii tarn 
paliinabanami Pa (8) dana galidadimka paca sabasaka kiri ca 



77 


mi Padana (9) galida me wanhata pawatara na iiyuta kotu Ka 
(10) padinala catara saLasaka km ce me <li aca (11) nani nawa 
satasaka kin yaka ugu \iania (12) carita nijamma 

rajakoUhi bbanana (15) niim mewa tjika kan di catan 

amana beda (4) baka ca «e^ika tawa na 

(lo) Padana galiLi buka saga bami^ana ca [ta] (IG) ra pacay ida 
uwayutu karaavani kotu apaen (17) di puiuinukaba dina myamani 
me ca sail (IS) Jii awaj i dinamaba 

77 Pilig-vun — Siddbam Utarata Mabagawntagama ata 
sabasayata M'ara kaiia yama ratayalii ita tota 1 aivara ca 

(2) niabakajetabaha iwi awascsa balalia iwa caki ratapajabi 

abala ivatuka awaranaga ma tem karibi (3) baba jana 
avfliara atani semana nta arakata kotu cakakanba caka amaiiata 
kubara liana lana wiharabi ma (4) babikn'saganata 

catara pacahata dinamaba. 

8a Diyagama — Siddliam mahakadata mada wada 

[ra] (2) upasakuj a 1 ya pitanva wadara carakn pita i 

(3) jabu caraka nva lutu kubaro pain iwn na jabu 

daka iwa (4) caka koit dasa tiku kubara 

07 Nagiiikanda — (u) Sidhit tVelunaka rukawawiyn tana 
luehya kalo lejo jisa kotasabniika kotasaka Bimmoginja 
areherahi saga 

(6) ta mama parutnaka sikata puta ba 

Bainanoginya a\ ebera daj 0 kino ucnulaka dawoka nnhabanjo 
(2) •wawiaara kanuganj a waw isan. kabuba (^) \Ta\^i$<aTa katmakd- 
pulasara (3) wawa sama satara avawisara clakapati kanaya 
badipita Bnmanoginya Tnbara bikasangnbnta caka (4) paca y ifa 
dine saga baga kanj a kamaatan'i «amita v a avnw a nda sa\nNva 
gata awiwa kaba\7aaa (o) \ratak \ anwi daka pata bojapata 
Bamanoginja ^vlha^a bika'?aga dim pita karakatnicn saga 

san 

98 Galkowila — Siddbam Manaka mahaiajalia puta Bata 

Tisa ma (2) baraja inanana (?) kanbi paci caUaraka , , 

bamudata kcta (3) Wihirabiia waanja rukawawija ccta bi 
avana Abalayab i ceta kanbi (4) boji^ i pati karakata ya 

kubare aviliaraln tela mala ccti 

(o) jinapatisatnribi kofii dine 

102 "Wcllangolla— bikasaganata kabi 

nikaaraavi baka kubara avadari lava bikasiavi 

niyata lava (2) Bayiwawiya avi iwa 

maraduavaj a lava mabotatv i lava me ccta kub ire (3) 
karana kabi 

110 Malakalattaeava — A, Sin sang boy ma purrauka pass 
loswanne udwayae puia dasa avak daw as Pandi rad Dapiilu 
■\varao mekap par In kureli senim isa nawa turae saengim isT, 
mahale Dapnla arak '»imanaa 'waiae kudi saH dal siwim isa 
kolpatri saliga aetalu wae aep me tiiw ak denamo ek sewae aia^ 
dale} in Sen maba 

B 1 leinn tuman raaemyan naemm nam di kot karana lad Nal 
aratn mehem -waTlii tuman iubu wat eiritlii se davraspatv 
inabawebei'ae mahaboyae diy tvada n ae;b mehem wat haembu 



78 


wftl sat denaklmt salnr pam ■wayutn kflratm kot vr.'nlala kaorana 
liinhi a, wQ Gitelgiiniu gatnat ntlTml jiaenieljacr do rawamic go 
wadna kot isa do kamtacn no avara 

C. na ko? isa juailggiya piyajpya no wadnfi kot isa dimu- 
matidul melat nul kol kneiniyan no watlna ko^ isa waeriyan 
gamgcn gcri no gauna kot isa gad niiwnm no M'a<lna kot 
Tvadalcjnn a mo kap par ha kurcli facnim isa me kup par nawa 
tunic saengiin isa kuda sala da] shvim isTi kolpattra sailga aetalu 
Tvao ncp mo tuwak dena 

D. mo ck scwa awud mo Oilolgnma gamat attanl jjacraebacr 
demi ladi. 

111. Abhayawaewa. — A. Sin sang (2) boy ma ]mrmu (8) 
[k] a d.isana (4) wawanne macndi di (5) nae pura tc]cs (G) wak 
dawaa Ba (7) yao wacw mawa) (8) karwonukot wat (0) htmlyan 
wahan (10) se wadfdeyi (11) n waewne satar ka (12) inc satar 
pabanak (13) liinwa me ivacw (14) lu mas maeru (I.j) kenckun 
rackao (IG) genac no pao (17) ( wuwa nuwar (IS) ladda atln da 
(10) sa hanak ran ina (20) [lia webcr piri] (21) wnliana mrulae 
(22) biya tama no wo (23) bo [r] awru(d] miyan 

B. wn, (2) lawu go (3) nao me w&ovr (4) 

lii mebo [ka] (5) mwa ro (1) kasa ira (C) mo wacwld mas (7) 
marana ta rackao (8) Imt kewu) (0) usu. 

112. Kou^oliriewa. — A. Siri sa [Hg] bo ma purmuka 
doloswan[noj duruta pu[ra] (C) at svok dnwas mo k[r0p ^fi) pat 
vaedarumayen da (10) ro me kap pn(ll)rno svadna isa gu 

(13) tn\7nka isa ma\ia (14) bOycn (15) ..... mago 

na[La] (IG) k diw pcCdiw] (17) siri ailig [bo] (10) no 

Avadna ko( isa daniwaaopu 

B. ra dawas sva (2) ...... (3) ko (1) t giri^^’ 0 • 

beta (G) [dena] mo (7) pdiiii (8) na po da (0) riya 

pin (10) wen ma (11) si .... . (12) mi (13) kal .... 

(14) watunada (15) garaa isTv (16) mcbi da (17) yebi 

(18) ma [i] sa 

C. mo yat du (2) numandala (3) wa racla (4) sara si 

lad dan no wadna kot me[e] diw pediw rod kol samdaruwnn n[o] 
wadna kot wadivlcyi[n] (13) atOl (14) nt pae [roc] baer (15) 
donu la 

D. [di at] (2) tani kat (3) ko hinda (4) wii me ma (5) dijukao 
pabaela (C) siri sang boy (7) rad pabida (8) wasae binda (9) ^Tu 
ycya. 

113. Inginimitiya : — A. Swasti (2) Siri sanga bo (3) ma 
purmuka (4) sawanaga pu (5) ridase binia (6) ta puradisa (7) 
wak dawas (8) radol ma (9) ba|»nan (10) wabanso (11) 
wadaleyi (12) para 5 rlpala (13) paraparawen (14) me rata . . . .1 

(15) fiwu sirithi isa (17) wasara tun (18) ahnaya mn bnj 

(19) leka Arak (20) samanan wa (21) roe dana kucla (22) sala 
wadala (23) ...... ek (24) taen samlye ' ’7 

B. n rado (2) 1 pere Demcl (3) kalae pere (4) aixit ae (5) tula 
wae (6) me, tuwa (7) k denamo (8) giriwcho (9) ra Mibinden 

(If) • • (11) ......... (12) Hingini (13) piti 

sanga ae (14) tula wac aep (16) gam bimat (16) atsani pae (17) 


79 


rfloliaer dat (18) sirigalala (19) n me gama (20) t do raandala 
(21) n radol (22) waa mela (23) ttma mang (24) diw pediu. 

0 perana su (2) saraa me ga (3) m no wad (4) na kot I'xa (5) 
gael mi (b) "nim Nsaenja (7)ii gamgen (8) no ganna (9) koi i'>a 
(10) atanm (11) ncponna (12) kot m (13) gam himin (14) 
aetulata (15) singnlata (16) n piiidur (17) no nas (IS) nl i‘i\ 
..... (19) .... me (20) wehcrhi (21) attain (22) paeraebaer 
de (23) nu ladi 

114 Mitintale plinth course 

Uppey Portion A. 

1 ^rismsaiigbo ma pannukjl doloswanne Hilnlae anagim 

poho dawas satar ratae wel kaemi [ya]a woherat [w]e[l] . 

. . . . [we] be [ra] 1 wel kaemij 1 [d]i(j;ap] yutu ran isat 

kalandak ^ 

2 isa mo ratao me fileiakhu diyoo yutu ran kalandak isTi 
Bangiraeli upaeni kaerniyaku diyae yalu ran do kalandak isa 
kal ....... kalandak I'l me ratae me pin[na] In [una] 

ku diyae yutu ran pas 

3 kalandak isa mo ratae roc ran ladu kaebiU pinwahanna 
lan tun kalandak isa me ratao roe bilannakn diyae jutu ran de 

kalandak isa me rx^ae isa yon bac di^ao darae 

wol kaoraiyiv [diyae] yutu rindasa kalanda 

4 k isTi. me ratao roe pinwabonoaku diyae yutu inn de kalan 

dak isa me ra^ae me balannaku di)ao yutu ran kalandak isa. me 
ratao me ftlejaku di [ya© yutu] ... .. . diya dane 

uinla ae] texae wo [1] kaemi [ya diyae] yuUi rm pasalo 

C s kalandak isa me rata© me illovaku dijao yutu ran do 
kalandak isa me ratae me anki Icya [ku] diyae yutu ran de 
kalandak jsl me ratae me .... kalandak isa mo 

, . ... di aep] [we]l kaemiya diyae 

Loxvtn PorhOTi B 

1 yutu ran pas kalandak [isa me] rafae mo 

diyae joitu [ra]n . . . kalandak isa me ae] tene pas 

heeman. asikiley?!. diy-'A yu-tu (raisi ka-teaslak. is5. 
puiwaUannSdi^ae yutu rm tun kalandak isi [me] ael de kaebili 
detun diyae y utn ran do ka. 

2 landak isl me ael y jaku diyae yutu ra[n] 

kalandak isa mehi li pamanin unu nokaranu js'i me li tak ran 
...... , hawurudu pata wao , . . p'ira keremin si 

isa wanun agm ganmi isa kercmm si pi [ya] keremm hemo 
wadaran ra 

3 n kenekanat waepara, m de kalandak [ma] ngiil 

was go sang wao go ael lubu mama p[o]re apa, . . so pasnat 

isa dot wadi wehera kaemiya . . . daiuwan sanga l^annl 

mangtdat diyae yutu ran de kalindok kaliay de paelak s"il isl 
mehi 

4 waeparo karana tak dcnahat wcberat inji [ma] deka isa de 
kenekun kalandak kaelao pawanu is5. 

115 Pillar m the jungle near Mihintale — A Swast [19x1] (2) 
Abbay si (3) n sa[ng] boyi (4) ma putmuka na (4) wawanne Hi 



(C) mate maslu (7) dasa -wak da (8) was Sae (9) weheri (10) n 
peredununiatu) (11) Ian gannak[o] (12) t isa manga (13) raahawar 
is [a] (14) niplat no (15) >4'adna i (IG) sa mang (17) diwa pediwa 

B. no wadna (2) isa .... (3) .... ^[d] ko (4) 1 kaemi^'a 
(5) n no wadna (G) isi Sae (7)giri gal (8) •\va(latjlan_(9) pujapan 
mi (10) wan sioi (11) balan (12) no kapanu i (13) sli kaepiv (14) 

kamt.nen (15) gcmac da (16) t ganna (17) isa pawu (18) 

sang wael (19) U piriwcn (20) sang w.ael 

C. la kull maliawar (2) ndakkaUni (3) aeti no kiyae (4) 
wehenit ga (5) nna isa mo (C) luw^ nyat (7) rad kol.it I?*'’' (S) 
nmin si^iya (9) weherat me (10) wada]amhayi (11) arogya (12) 
sidlil. 

116. EUawaewiV p.ansala. — A. ^ri (2) sin bava kae (3) t kula 
kot (4) Okawag ni. (5) d par.ipnre(C) n Uit Lak (7) diw poloyon 
(8) parapuren (9)‘ himi wu A (10) bba siri sang (11) bo mabaind 
(12) Jiu turaii s.at (1.3) kengii na^raiva (14) n kawomdu (15) 
yelii Priiull ra (16) t paebaerae ja (17) ya kirUi lad (18) rupun 
dan (19) mal m.isu (20) lutae maliat (21) eksinna sivi (22) 
blioga ka]a (23) niaharr^lm (24) davu Abba Sa (25) lamewan 
IDa (20) pulu ro.ahara (27) d hu tuma sa 

B. tlacngu dasawa (2) n bawuraduye (3) lii (18) . . 

. . ta dan (19) gulabudim isa (20) . . . . ba Kalinga (21) .... 
(22) mabaleka muja (23) kaydu Wadmarak (24) samanan war 
da (23) na kudasala na (26) takac .... la a 

C. Illegible. 

117. AclawTragolfaSwa. — ^A.'. ... n bi . ..(£).,, pd i(sa] 
(3) , . . . [hiioi] ya [n] (4) [waban]se (3) . . , . [ba] % Oka[\va] 
(0) [a rad pa] rapure [n] (7) [bat I^] k diw p [o] (8) [loye] ii 
parapu (9) [ren Jil] mi wu AWhv [Si] (10) [ri sang] bo maba [ra] 
(U) d [b]u tuma sat 1 [ne] (12) ngQ nawawan bawu (13) [ru] 
dayebi Pancli rat (14) [p] aebere deye lad ma (15) [ba] rad Im' 
daruAbba(lC) Salamewon maba (17) [ra] d bu tuma sat lae 
(18) [ngu] da^vvan bawu 

11. nnbiyebi . . ... (2) pas biwa.. . . . (3) si bimae dena 
[ino] we (4) hcrac Siri [sang] ^5) bo rad piriwena (6) Iwida -weba 

fia (7) mac altani (8) hindawa dewa [wa] (0) dalao ek 

IflOJ) (30) samijen [mo] ka (33) p n’aed.=ier (3 2) ti)a arsk 
no wae (13) dneic mewan'jue [kap] (14) paratamba .... (15) 
muktim is [a me] (16) k.^p parati [mewo] (17) licni singe ina 
.... (18) no bini kilita .... (19) boy lini i>-[a] (20) mabalo 
wcliein tana (21) kusala nkasala (22) monat m , . . , (23) 
talasaliyae (24) aelailu ra ac [p me] (2.5) tuwrde dena (2G) 

kc^ewa (27) miia du .[mimnndu] (28) 1 melat cil 

ra[d] ko 

C. 1 knciniyan no [w] (2) dna kot isa (3) lawa duwo ana (4) 

prjya?ii no tvadn [a]i (G) rat Jadu pa (C) ddan no wad 

.(7) Iia isa isa de nnewa (8) nae dekamtaon no (9) wadna [i] sa 
arak (10) kand Siri LakiU (11) w no wndiia isa (12) duba lata 
dacn (1 3) no wadna isa (14) piyo wndara ana (15) n damlnatUini 
(IG) Kiwangnru liUuwa (17) n no wlna i (18) s.akiri gcri go (19) 
tn gen no gan (20) iiu isa gaelmi (21) wun waeriyan wac (22) ri 



81 


6al no gan (23) na isa tudi (24) wuwa hayx no (25) wadna 
isE n 

D lo (2) magama^ (3) na (4) 

ya wudi (5) . . [t] aen sa (6) a me tuw (7) [Skde] 

namo (8) (9) liSriya (10) [n] % putak% (ll) 

gama (12) mkanuwa (13) innan (14) 

na pada (15) ko^a isa a (1C) [t] tarn perae (17) laaer 
dcna ladi 

118 Aetakadapansala — A Lakala mi^an no fwa] (2) dnl 

kot 1ST. (3) la^rasu sidanatni (4) yan no wad (a) na iTvaladapa 
(0) la dan no (8) <Ie kamtaen no (9) wadna [i] sa 

arata (10) dunae T7anLaka(ll) (12) 

(18) wadna laa (10) danaewan Laka 

B (1) ruduya (2) pasUi (3) sibi maede (4) liaiae sira (5) 
baa la (0) badai7#*laTin (7) ma atta (8) (9) da|a ek 

(10) Bamirona (11) pa para waedae (12) tala durae sa (13) 
da rnana (14) paparataniTwa (15) muktim isa (16) 

kippa (17) berasihama (18) ni man ki (19) (20) 

maliate (21) kar la 

119 PolonnTruwa— (6) A. (2) mewan (3) purmuka 

tu (4) mvanne (5) nawayae pu (0) ra dasa "wa (7) k dawas (8) 
nadalen (9) a sene (10) vi rad ku (11) s«a (?) n-arac (12) 

tura 8 1. (13) da )0 nawu (14) tmne sal (lo) isa imba 

B (2) sainana (3) n ^arae ku (4) dasala (5) 

(6) Ian dena (7) mo ek (8) seuae Gin (9) nae bi (10) 
mae Wadora (11) g bona (12) wonge (13) Oalutisav (14) gainay 
de (15) kamtaen 

C (2) dara no (^) wadna i (4) i (5) 

(0) dan no (7) avadna i (8) sa gael (9) gen wae (10) 
ri^an bi (10) h mut si (12) 1 no ga (13) uiia isa (14) mang diw 
(15) [pe diw] 

D (2) DO wz. (3) dn V is V (4) ndalen (5) ^rirad 

ko (G) 1 samada (7) ruwamo (8) IVadung (9) bonawa (10) nge 
Ga (11) liitisao ga (12) maj me a (13) tani (14) paeraehaei (16) 
dunama'tix 

120 Sloydagastota — A. Sin mat apa da (2) lalatalm na 
'wu da (3) n ntural ■waena(t) n kaeta kola paeimli (5) kala 
OIvluas (C) parnpuren bat (7) rad purumuwanat (S) ag inehesu 
[n] (9) wu I^k dnv polo (10) yon parapuren (1 1) himi Gon 
(12) Ijlto raedua kua (13) bi upon. Abba Sa (14) lameuan 
maliarad hu (15) nrelii da kaeta (16) kula kot ^viyat (17) daliani 
myac gat (18) aepa Mibmdabu (19) wism kannd na (20) ^\ain 
utnmbi mabana (21) m uwanisi (22) eiribara mahawe (23) her 
nakabi (24) rad parapur wasnu (25) ivawastaij a kaene (20) 
TJdttTisa pmwa(27) n sabasi Las (28) pamao jaiiba(29) 
ina dajaa naka (30) orae (31) ta salia (32) Dan 

dunti (33) Irak mclat (34) rad kol [kae] roi 

B yan no (2) ovadn t i (J) sa gam (4) gon rada (5) hara bili 
(0) bun gael (7) imvrun avae (8) nyan no (9) ganca (10) is,i 
tnangi (11) vra pijagi (12) ora no vad (13) naisi da(14)wae3 
me 111 (lo) miya mabu (16) 1 iiniu oe (17) tula 1 1 sifn (IS) «atiao 
80 da (19) 3ae tu (20) no uasna (21) i* \ nic kuna (22) 



yo DO para (23) datra rada (24) kol samdani (25) -pran -wisin (2G) 

bisamwat (27) no takna (28) isannt (29) . . . . isa (30) 

wan (31) aepa Mi (32) bindahn 

121. Tablets atMihintale.— A. Siribar kaeta kula kotOkawas raj 
parapuren bat kaeta tisab Ababay Salamewan mahara (2) j bat 
ero© kulen saiiiajaey dew Gon bisew raejna kusae ipaedae aepa 
niabaya siri vrindae piliwelao (3) s&y raj wae turna sirin Iiakdivr 
pabayamin sitae Siri Sang Boy Ababay mabaraj bu tuma sat 
(4) laengu soloswana hawuruduyebi wap sand pun masbi 
dasapak dawas Seypriweberbi isa A (5) babay girlweberbi 
isa wasana maba biksang himiyan mabasenwa karay tuma 
bae wat himiya (6) n Scygiri weherbi pere tubu sirit nija 
Ababay girl weberbi sirit nija ruswa genae me we (7) herat 
me sirit tubuwa wati niaiyan ha sasaendae me weberae wasana 
mahabiksang bimiyauat isa (8) kaemiyanat isa dasnat isa katae 
yutu ha. labanu diyac yutu se isa wiwarunen ek se kot me 
(9) airit tabana ladi me weberbi wasana bik sang himiyan 
wisin bill paaos salhi naengi siyu ara (10) k menebi kot daehit 
kisae nimaway sika karanihi kiyu seyin siwur baeadae perewae 
Act weberae laba (11) g attud met pirit kot baesae hambu bat 
galae yutu gilan wae labag iyae no yabana himiyanat wedun 
(12) kiyfl saendae wasag diyac yutu me weherae wnesae 
vvanawala kiyana bik sang himiyanat kapdin pipejiu wasa (13) 
g p.'isak isa autat waja kiyana bik sang himiyanat waaag satak 
isa bldarn waja kiyana bik (14) sang Idmiyanat wasag dojosak 
isa dlyae yutu isa dayakayan pirikapa sangnat denu kaja pasa 
(15) no pirihela diyae yutu inc weherae awu tuwak awasae bad 

S t bim mebl me pasak di nihad wae waesae walandai mut 
awas ba ckkn.^a wae no waelacndiyao yutu sang saeraaengin 
kaemiyanat wajarat daiiawul (17) inut pugul wae no waojacri) aa 
yulti no daebaepiyac yutu me welierao wasana bik sang himiyan 
Act weherae (J8)bad tuwak tanlu kumbtir arub ney kawaru 
pariyaycn no waclaendiyae yutu tuman pijibadim u-isi (ID) n 
Aet weherae abaedi lak tanbi isirne no katac diyao yutu roe 
sirit ikut liimiyan me welierbi (20) no wisiyae yutu naka balana 
bimiy.in isa weber piriwabanu -wa isa niyam jetu isa ukaemiya 
isa (21) pasakkacmiy a isa welier ieyS isa karond Jpya isa karandu 
alsamu aeiuj wac me tuwuk jana Aba (22) baygiii nakaybi i)"c- 
mu|m Eabanuwat wacdi sangun sacmaengin Act weberbi Lindae 
kamtaen kot (23) tuj Lachacri aya wiya aey kam katae yutu 
aetu\ baebaeri ayawiyebi yut kacmiyan naesuwfik denu wat (24) 
nisi kudin acpac genae kamtaen sacmaengin tibiyae yutu mo 
welicrae wasana himiyan pilibadun nisid (25) hot mebeyae no 
tibiyae yutu bacriyac jnitu kacmiyan lekam kamna wu daeyak 
genae bacriyac yutu mundu kam (20) ndiikanitaeu kacmiyan 
basin has kot dugc kacmiyan pa-saekin dagebi tibiyae jutume 
weberbi yut (27) kaeraij*an keren weberat kacmiyan onolia glya 
Untkun mut kanae siti kacmiyan keren wat oua bicnne (28) i^a 
Mil pann'i laciiae isa perewaru liambu Ijat j^aban tacime isa tun 
j.m.'tku keren no unu wae pa (29) eackae sitiyae yutu Aet wcJier 
dago pilibad kawnii wabikud piruj no diyao yutu kacmiyan 
wikinij (30) no galac yutu inehej-ac bad minisun kacmiyan 



88 


raeha no gatao yutu anolxi melieyat no diyac yutu 
(31) Katu ATaliasaeyehi kam nawama} Damgamijeu dun pa\ala 
Aet weher kaomijan bala. genae dagaebbi (32) kara nawam 
kaeraevnyao yufcu ICirband pawn diigaeblii ainka{ Ael ganiijen 
dun de kinja di arak (33) Ijxcnevnjae yutu dagehi i®S, ilangul 
maha sala piUmagelii isa Maliaboygehi isa Naymdae isa IDninal 
(34^) dewdun gohi isS. Kata mahasaeyehv is“v iurband pawu 
dagaebbi isa udgalae yatgalae Aetwe (35) her pilibad dxigaebhi 
isa tne tuwak tanbi pijntwat isa Aet weiicnn ran cLsiyak kala 
(36) nd isa wi disa yahalak is~t me tuwak genae Lawurudu patl 
mo •vreherbi d"«.gab aey liaemae tanbi kam (37) nawam kaerac- 
wiyae jaitu dago pdimagcbi bad Giitic Karandac de gaenibi 
dum raalas samun gedand kodatid (38) kaerae pereliwar baelae 
weherat gatae jTitu Kirband pamiyelii Gasagaesi^en tunm ckak 
isa me (39) bi aanguaellcbigc kuU laaManuiriesaia isi Lalunija 
pamiyebi udaesi yataesi do watsara is*i jnclii sa (40) ng waella 
isa Fabanaewil natbi bim isa Porodeni pokuni watae biin isa 
me tuwak lanbi labanu (41) welierat gatac jutu weher dasun 
ha kaemiyan mut weher bimne bun kudingcn bim sowas nisi se 
(42) yin weberat gatae yutu kaba sinwnc gat wcsa^ no anuru 
kiya ivikiya aey kam Lanmuwana paniu i (43) kanmiu ana gal 
watae no wisiyao di) ae yutu sudisunwat weliei at niiit kaemi} an 
no gatae yutu me wchc (44) rae bad tuuak gam bim kacnejehi 
baendae salasat mut patt'i' nodiyaeyulu tun daw or mut pobo 
mangu (45) 1 aey scsuwar no gatoe jutu katmijan wober dasun 
jiwel kot dunuwak mut Aet weberae bad tuwak (40) tinbi ukas 
pammu patta kaeroc kumbur atub aCy no waehciuluao jutu 
weberat koemin giya kae(47)mtyan has kmiwan deiia pere 
Sint bill sal mut nitin waetum no gatae yutu kudmgen pandu 
(48) r no gatae yutu mekungen go gon genae kaemijan tumaiiat 
gowjkam no kaeracwiyae yutu liasCaru para (49) pnrcn w aetena 
kaerve kumbur no wactyae bet mul Imerao no gatae yutu 
watupaetat waedae aniyano kafae yutu (50) gas kol no J acpiyae 
yutu me weherae aivu tuwak gam bimbi talan roiwan aej pala 
ruk kamtaen sae (51) niaengm duna mut no kaepijae dijae 
yi^ji kJiduj- kakawaxe^ok. ankt wnk duud. kLc^ kuaifl^j/J. 
mmae aekae (52) awatae solos nyan gaembune n^an Kabul 
baegm genae waew mehe kaeraewiyae jUtu no kala kiru dand 
ga (63) tae yutu me wehcnic awu tuw ak gam bimbi labanuwanat 
jiwel kot dunuwak mut tubu tak tanbi (o 1) kamtaen sacmaengm 
pasak wana seym a kala tuwak pas pothi liyaewiyae jutu 
mabapawatat ua (55) bibanuwanat ii»a kam nawamat isa 
dawaspata wiyawu tuwak pas potbi liyawa kanitaen sae (50) 
maengm atwatu karay san otamana wun sanin wataway muudu 
karanduyehi taba mas maspata me (57) atwatu palo. ck atwatu 
kot bawuruduyehi doles atwatu yen bawurudu nwasmhi lekani 
(58) karay song maendaj enwa nimaewiyae yutu rae suit ikut 
kaemiyan ge dand genae meheyin hnertjae jnitu. 

B Naka balana bimiyanat dawaspata sal ek naelijak isa 
wasan banae ran ek kaland satar aka (2) k isa pawarun baenaed 

r 2 



84 


me tek me isa. niyam jet^^khaf jiwel pas kiriyak isa dawaspala 
sal (3) ek naeliyak isa haTTuruduwakat setuwamat mal milae 
pasalos kalandak isa akaemiya isa welie (4) rleya isa karapd 
Ie}a isa karancju atsamu isa pasakkaemij'u isa eknat pas kin 
Tjaegin isa (•)) piriwalianuwat kaemiyakha^ ek kiri de payak 
isa sal de admanak isa saeraeyin gannakha (0) t de payak isa 
sal ekadnianak isa mangul jetakbat ek kiriyak isa Damiyen 
•wasagak isa (7) hawuniduwalcat setuwamat mal milae tun 
kalaud de akak i*!^ watrika kaemiyakliat ek kiriyak (8) isa 
Damlyen wasagak isa soinoas mababo mangulehi piliyat ek 
kalandak isa raaetipatakbat (9) ck payak isa sfd de patak 
isa pitas sainakbat isa rajge iipaeoikaemiyakbat isa ekna (10) 
t ek kiri de pa baegiu isa eknat de admana baegin sal isa ol 
kaemiyakbat de payak isa (11) sal ekadmana de patak isa 
piyangalpeie waeliyakhat de payak isa Damiyen wasagak isa 
(12) Kuwanasun mababo mangulehi piliyat ek kalandak isa 
pawn pere waeliyakhat de payak isa Damiye (1 3) n wasagak isn aeli 
nawakhat de pajak isa efvl ekadmana ek patak isa aeli ekalosak 
isa (14) eknat de pa baegin isa Damlyen ek baegin wasag i'Ui 
watnawaeri salarak isa eknat eka (15) draana baegin sal isa 
eknat jiwel da pa baegin isa me weberln bik sang himiyanat 
wasaegi (16) n slwur saba ekkeneknat ladu siwur sabana 
kaemiyan beds gatae yutu isa weber atsam de ja (17) nakhat 
eknat de pPi baegin isa sal ekadmana ek pat baegin isa kota 
raekinawakliat do pa (18) yak i<v sal ekadmana de patak isa kota 
raekiyakbat de payak isa sal ekacjmanak isa je (19) to^awat ^ 
payak isa sal ekadmana de jatak isa batge laediyat ek payak 
isa sal ckad (2U) mana de patak isa mipdi waejaermakhat de 
payak isa wat mindi suwisi janaku isa eknat ek pa bae (21) gin 
isa bawni’uduwakat pillwaiat eknat ekkaland baegin isa sang- 
wali upaeoikaemiyakbat (22) ekkiriyak isa sal ekadmanak isa 
pisana sa^ayin dolos' janakbu isa eknat Talolagae (2S) min ek 
kiri de pa baegin isa salijetaklmt sal ekadmana ek patak isa 
dar nanga bat pak sa (24) layakhat sal' tunadmanilk isa no 
pisae dar iiaengu salayakhat isa gamanwai' giya salayakba (25) t 
isa ekrnit sal de admana baegin isa naengil darae bat pak salaya- 
kbat sal ek admanak isa (26) pahawaesijetakbat do payak isl 
sal ekadmana ek patak isa pahawaesi ekalosak isa ek (27) nat 
de pa baegin isa eknat sal ekadmana baegin isa dawaspata. yala- 
pasak dena kumbal pas (28) jaoakbat eknat ek kiri baegin isa 
mas maspata pa dasayak ba korobu dasayak dena pakumbakk 
(29) bat de kiriyak isa sal de aijmanak isa masakat paei-aebaenak 
dena paeraebaen diyakhat ek ki (30) il de payak isa wedakbat 
de tisae senen niya paejiyak isa Damlyen wasagak isa puhunda^ 
wedak (31) bat de payak isa Damiycn wasagak isa mandowu- 
wakbat ekkirl de payak isa Damlyen wasagak (32) isa naekaeti- 
yakbat do kiriyak isa Damlyen wasagak isa, naepiyakhat ek 
kiriyak isa Damiye (33) n wasagak is3 dage atsamakliat isa 
ganajeluwukhat karand leyafchat isa warjetu tun (34) 
janakhnt isa meknat jiwel karandaegam isa warae dum malas 



85 


pnmn'^t Dimijcn ■vrasn" entan (*15) k i“*i dlgebi \rnet tch^ me 
gacimn payal ik ]*a d'gehj hej mil onamtil 'o ar do jinakhat too 
gneim (36) n dc kinjak. isl Damijen ck. baegm "wasag i®a 
nia%aka( ek sl 3 a^rLSl bicgm inal clena malmnel (37)gowuTraklji^ 
Sapugami^endo kinjak m sittaraklintdekm^aki'rvdlgerakna 
nt lacluwik (38)lm( sTil ck naclijak isi tnahabudungclu duin malis 
sam sajinakhat jsa ban Avnjaranadaml(39)int is’inedura daminat 
m damin sijanakba^ i«~i mckna( Gulnigam i*"i inababudungela 
mal (40) uarakhat too gnemm de paaak u"i Diinyen avosigikisa 
megaemaeduin malas samna{ Diini^ en dc wa(41)‘vjgak isaman- 
gul ma!ias.il pilimagacln | uni kaerui^akliat j<l kama^ samakbat 
laa ekiint de pa (42) bacgm i«a ekna^ ckadmana de pit baegin sal 
I'idagcbi budi bisowat tol ganni ek pot tk(11)i<!l di}a | arabana 
ek tu]uhk isa pilimagclud me ttknie isl kamtaen Iwlaruu nklnt ek 
km (44) de pa} ak isa sll dc adman Ik isu wndu maba acdurakbat 
Bond ■u’oherae sciri\a iCi acdum uadu de ja (45) nafcbat jsa 
sirwadu at janakbat jsa uluxradu de jinakbat meknat 
1Vadudc\> aCgam jsl ka(lC) tuwadu de janaklm cknat ek 
kiri baegin i«a mmir nmlia aedur de jannkbii i««1 cknat tu (47) n 
kirl baegin i«a kainbur do jiuakliu isTi cknat ck kin batgiii i«a 
sumibo]nat Sunulwl dcu tc (48) gam i«a gacllan sa jnnakim j«1 
meknat Duumnugann i«i1 kam nauaCmao knebib jctakliat ck 
km (40) yak isa ‘wil okndraani ck patnk i<?1 kncbili dojos jana- 
kbat ek admaiiu baogm mI i«-a mtk (50) naf jiwcl de pi baegm 
isii Nawaguiia maliasaC}cbi j«a 2vacteui}a nmlia«it}cbi isl 
Aembulu dagaebbi isl (51) «1c gouuuan tun janakbat cknat do 
pa Hegin i«1 mo «cbcrao udgolne jatgalie Actucbtme pi(iba 
(52) d dagab aCy liacmaeudao dacgao nknanat I)aini}tn ek 
bao^in wasag di}ac jutuw.1 dagebi isl pijimage (*3) In isa 
latgcbt i«a niebekarana njtnisun is1 piji i 1 purona kasu i«1 
bi kol i^a npulana rada (54) uuu do janakbu ton meknat 
Mangulacivae tun kitija i<ia wc ueberao bad tuwiik gmi Iambi 
n ang \vabaua(55)r kub nicl it sime uolicrat luo nmcln kot gatao 
Mitu J5>a manggi aia j i}agi ua no wadna kot isa kaiino avaewae 
(5R) dnawan tak taiibi pert Demc] kalno pero smt dija 
beduin me uebent mo gatae axitu tsi me ■wclierlii (a7) bad 
tuwak gam bim kawani panjajen ukas pamanu no dijaa jutu 
I'-l gatu wan ranae no Inmi Kot webc (5S) rat me nawata gatao 
yutu isa dunuu an desyawanu Lot me ni} aeram tubu me smt no 
ikmae waetyacyulu 

122 Wcwelkaetija — em bara kn“tn kuJa Lot Okauas 
rajaparapure (2) n bat kaela usabunt ag mebesun wu Lak diw 
polo (3) jon parapuren Imui wu siii ^aiig boaga (4) piiLa siri aalig 
bo Abhay tnnbanybu sat laengu tunua (6) n bnwuniduyehi 
wap sand pero apa (6) wak dawas teru wasae am gam 
kuh}ebi kamanak (7) mcln Deinel welier pamnnijen da’sa 
(8) na}akajnn kibi gam aep denamo (9) 

namchi actujat tuk tatnae kulii pakama (10) kan 

dapal i so [ra] kam ka|a tlrao kot genae dasa gaemae a (11) 
kapana gani wa mam upan daeyat pagakusalija (12) tabi 
maera hamara patwanu kot Vanijapala soru (13) n gat a} a 



87 


(7) La]ri atarayaa bat no (8) genae csu walan kot (9) bit ganna 

disa . ... 

133 Downnagili — Sinwat aptnjat lo ikut guna mnlm 
utunt ivu Dimba (2) dn^nbi an kaot kula pacmiU bala Okiwaa 
pinpuren bi^ (3) kacta tisabnat agimeboaun ivu Lak dnvu 
po]ojogcn panpuren bimi (■^) tom“i sarana tisin sm riji 
muduu wtsosi wu sTibi lodm liiri (5) piji kelm iiuheiu radol 
dae^Mti daowini riji wnn . 

137 Galwibiln, Polonnituwa — Apa Bmlutv kalpa ^ala 
ailn'»r"idh:ki aituraii [m] khjipanmitakrilajen Rama tl^a 
pinm pura, Man Fallgr tmabliumi nC mibabodhi pi [r] \yam 
Lariidha wuo dunvwara sapa 

(2) rnvanilara pimjiyi kotio sarwwijnipila pripta imc 
pinsalw Iianuruddik davis citurtbi pik ciabi mtgba^akse^in 
■vvaedac Ritie ano 

(3) kakalpa kon ^ati silmsrayclu keleql^miti di 6M\cmin 
Rill fiityajin dharmnifimptawareirijcn inwan wi «akalt Biiddlii 
kfitji nimin-u Ivuimira nuttano abi^esla ifa 

(4) lla rlja^ange «lLin"anod} a [na] jclu nirnpidhi^cRba 
mnniana db'lluwcn diwj mwi s7m ■13a supannci bamirudJak 
giji ka’ae Wajigam Abba maba rija dairasao pilau ek"a 
dnlii? &u 

(5) piniea liiminiddik bbitina niku3a wic ^"i^ana)! 
pinTTcmm sin kallu Mib"i.i.iinnmlaih parampirajuta 8ur3- 
yaw im^odbbuta rijndlunji iiaika(ligibhi\T3ripta ynjomintin 
iiir iininana 

(G) Qit Samgbalwdhv Parikranxab’dm mabaraj'man Kakala 
Limkatclclu ekariij3'ibbi9beka3cn abhisbikta \iac njjnin 
bbitapunjarddlii aoti wae rlj3asukbanubluun koixe 

idiimwan 

(7) ojuani dui^uaiia mulikn nprntjpiUi dusbpntipatti 
ivishi «ega -niliita ivao apayauniwina ^Tsamlw icira kula 
putra3in daekao 6up3ri9uddba Buddba 9isiniyebi iirii\neDi 
ajnn ca 

kj:«.wi^U’.3aV. Ivi nwi. w. v.'ia6riV42. 

UTi^i hot Budu sisni nissi boho sit budii apaya bblg iveti 
pas iva daba^ik pawatnl Budu saanala ma wabal wuni 
mienacwae} i 

(9) piajua purassankarunaycn 8amcoditabrida3aieti w [ne] 
dosena warjjun kawurun 'nibalkola ap'igata kaliinki •i\ae pis 
w I daba';ik pawatna panddcn kcrcm do boyi 6it“i akliandacclu- 
dtaladt wiwi 

(10) dha gima gmliigi saiigita kolao raksbiti wirddluti 
posliita 9ila skandiruh laukikn guna ratnnlainl ‘iri3en saraa- 
limkrita i\u Udumbara gin nnvusi miba Klgjapa mali'i 
stbawiTR priraukUa mabrvwih'iradluwasi 

(11) bbikslm 6amgbi3"i daekac owuu waliil kolao Budun 
•wisin iiuijiiata Buddba kalpi Moggaliputtis mibaterun mbal 
kolao [apibbikslui nummala naya kolie dullabiji iiaedie 
9a5ina ma 



(12.) la wi^odhatritiya dharmniasfdlgayanakaeraewuDharm- 
raa(;okanialiaraja\iu’me [o] aneko^to papa bliikslmn ^aatra- 
(;asanayen apagata ko^ae filind abhijfiadyaneka guiia ganopeta 
mabaksbina 

(13.) ^rawayan aeti kalhi pawahaya rajayan wisin mabo^ 
Babayenudu Ramaiiga no ko^ac gatabunu tun naka saTnaugakirl* 
men ek naka kotae jetawana maliawiharadi no ek malm aegi m 
(14.) bara Lak di^vao taohi tanhl karawa ebi ealiasra 
Bamkhyatikranta maba sain [gba^ yS.wa«a kara^va nirantara 
pniwritta dbarmmamisba danayen upastbana kercmin samgha- 
dar 9 atia prabbawa priti pramodya rasa 

(15.) swadayehi lola wae kalanuknlayehi pausliatbatlga^ila 
satnapto wae •wibarayata elabne sannipatita samgha madljya 
gata wao tad dar^ana prasuba priti pramodya rasaswada kotae 
raa wisin mabotsa 

(IG.) bayen sakat wu me earngbama ^tiya paa wa dnbasak 
abbinna was paM'atna paridden matu wana sarngbaja da 
apramada wae widar^ana dhuralayebi yodi alepa cajatadi guncn 
yukta -wae -wadana paridden 

(17.) awawadanu 9 asana koiae ^asanaya raksh3. lca]a mae- 
nacwaeyi ynkta wyakta guijopeta tvaekarana aradbana da asa 
Maba Ivl 9 yapa maba sthawira pramukba Bthawirawarayan mae 
wisi 

(18.) n pramada wibarin awak&;a no labana sandaba dharm* 
mawinaya eandaha kotae Sedurol da no wibldae ka)a katikiwati 
, . . ga^iadetu terawarun wisin tamataroa nUa ^Tana antewasika 
saddhlwi 

(19.) barlkayan aturehi nisadennata nlsaycn mindennata 
yogya wae •vrasannawun pama no wiyae di grantba dburayehi 
yoda yaetat piriseyin winayen kudu sikba ba pamok da suttin 
da sauham suti atraya anumana 
(20.) sutra sada, wanapot piribeliyae no di gana earagani- 
kadln duru kota grantba dburayebi (yebi) yedennawun wisin 
udu satatayen wi weka wat piraewa maenaewaeyi wadala baewin 
tun welehi i 

(21.) riya eka raana siti pirisndu kotae kagiya hi adi wu 
kamata hanekhi yedi de tun palahak hunu ganwa dawasakada 
no kota wiweka wat purawa attanam ewa paclhama parirupc 
nivesaye yi wadala baewin tama 

(22.) taraa da mo ki gunangayehi wesesin yedI at waeda 
parawaeela eadhamin ki paridden grantbadhurayen waediyak 
kota gata no Lena antewasika saddhi-wiharikayau lawa mul 
sikba sekbiya wana 

(23) pot karawa sikba walanda winUa aswa samasin samasae 
ad 3 ’an^a kotae samana wicala iaenacka kiyannata pobosat 
karawa daeadbam satatayen mcnchikarawa yaeta ki wiwekawat 
udu . • 

pnrawa ^ak [ti] pamanak badara nimi kalae cari- 
tanukula kamata batak uganwa widar^ana dburayehi ma yoda 
catu sampajamku kathayehi wadala paridden dawas yawanu 
kotae paewaetwiyae yutu 



(25) herflnan udu heiana aikha aeklia da<‘a dham sutia 
wana fot kela &'■& no pmbela. panbarana karanu ko^aejeda 
T7iwekawafc udu purawa hikmaewiyae yutti inewun haeraae 
dena mae ge no baeminena wae 

(26) dae ma'w piya de dena hi, mese mae ek kusa bofc 
kanawaendabunaliganabuDun ba sabramsarun bamebekaruwan 
piiijsae ahara singayana gamanak ha me Liwaewun mae rogi 
'wuna bebedak ha aabum 

(27) earanpj, bebet pasa Bingayana gamanak ha pacwaeru 
taenakata pinta^ yana gamanak mut mejin meyin pitat kata 
yutte kata kala wikalayebi aetgainat samu no diyae yutu 
gilanadikatraye 

(28) n pitalata yannawunta samu det hot awyaktajanta 
samu dena upadyayanta dukula aewaet wad ala baewm hudu 
awjaktajanta mae samu no di poho pao^arunu ha apattyanapatti 
matra 

(29) yak danna Twyakta saiiga kenakua mula kota samu 
diyae yutu na ganayekin asaiiga kenakun taraa samipayelu 
avasawan hun taenae hamanera ne gen wat ki 

(30) no pae^di kenakun daekae mut no wae^aewi^ae yutu 
slhawirana wamawya maUa mae samghaya wism mae maendina 
jaeraae sati sati eampajakuyen yut nmdi senrumm siritu 

(31) satapa aluyaemae naeiigi kamata hanlii }edi bmdae 
sitae sakman kinmen dawas gewa puhunu gat pinnaha siwuru 
sakasa haendae perawae daehaeti kisa 

(32) mmawa dagab inambo aiiganawat udu aeduru'wat 
terawat gilauwat senasunwat ae kandawat udu sapaya da wana 
hot bojun hat elaebae kaenditi walanda 

(83 ) bojun balae watawat mmawa ekbiUcbi pat pot balanuwa 
getta inarajan namakaranu wana pasa bojunu wan. ao ikman 
kata j utu aetiyawmn mut sessa 

(3i) wun kacnditi waeloendu ikbittehi kamata banbi jedi 
dawaa yawa pas bathi duki niyayeu grautha widat^ana dlmra 
yelu yedi gihi minis paewijijan ha samsattha 

(35 ) no waewat wela dakwa dawasyawa donj a wa no poliona 
karunakaeta mut wat wirikata laebi raeswu wan wisin udu 
sannipatitanam vo bhikkhave dvayam Laraniyam. dlnmmi \a 
ka 

(36 ) thaanyo va tunbibhavojxivadala baewm dharramakatha 
mauaskara dekin pitat tira^ciua katha ha karoa witaiLkadi 
papa witarkkayen no yedi peyao jaemae da bana kiya na kiya 
wana asa 

(37 ) na dharaua dhariumakatlia kinm ae no bis piyewiu ha 
widar^ana dhurayen gewa maendmivaemae sapat sandae eali 
samapaja [m] kayen jutnmdt seniyae yutu pitatawiyae yutu 
kata yoittekm e 

(38) bena mangi paewijiyau wisin pasili pael pilimage ae 
kacpa taenekhi laegum gata yutu haemae welelu mae kipi sitin 
Tvat keli sitin wat no sarupa tepul kisi wak hu ha no biniyae yu 

(30) tu Tnawunudu wuw a wi bha^ayanbadp] malakudu 
wuwa (adaru balayaku ha daru hasa ga nobimyae yut[ i] wacdi 



90 


mahallawun no danwa roeho karuwanta daeliaewill no. wiyao 
yutu tama, ayati yakadaru bliallan anu no danwa an 
(40.) nata no diyac yutu gasan yan nak . . Im whin malialn 
Baligun genemi nasna^a Budusn prikarakara ...... athi aeta 

inut atureki waesi awaiawiya wigaranin mae no temen taen 
olaebiyao yutu ebandu pi 

’ (41.) rikaraka ^atasaruwan we ... la wiyekin maeyae 
vutu nawa y[u]t[u] o tuna gana tu [m] wewa niki da ta “watu 
" . . smi liasa nisa eaml mihita mattanta vaddhati yi wadala 
baewin sinawata nisi karanek ♦ 

(42) hi duhasa no wibidae muwa wasas satutu pamanak 
daekwiyae yutu tama \vti.na wehera sanliindena ayi karana 
baehaera no wahalakata yutu an weherao sanbindena ayi karana 
tama no ne sitiyac yutu ka 

(43 ) 1 lekha asamjantena apamattena bhikkhuna krippiye win 
kaeta ba amisatvaya lolata. y> wadala baewin kaepa passehi du 
lol baw no kata yutu dahagab mabarabo aS wandlmi 

(44.) n ganda dukha . . . . ao pudamin daewu^u walandamin 
pakassebi lamina no biniyae yutu aetgambi gibi minisun ba wa 
sa piilbada katba da wisabliagakatha da no kata }mtu idbekaao 
samghnga 

(45 ) to pi acittikara kata there bhikkhil gbatthayahto pi 
titthati sattbayanto pi nisidali dvijako (?) pi bbanati byahya- 
tike bapako pi bhai;tati kuniarossa p! eiruip paiamasati yi 
nnyata 

(4G.) ra nidesabi wadala baewin aaiiga maendata e)aebiya bti 
whin udu wetin ew siwuren ciwa no gbaetiyae yutu mahalu 
eangun ba bipuwa mana karuiiaka ata adaiu dakwa Ita no lawae 
nactnl sitae sa 

• (47.) t no wana biijiyae yutu ki<«i laenekbi du komarun werae 
at la no sacnaowiyae yutu ]>adhan gberelii wasanu wanata 
■wikbewa no kotao liadaeriy:ic yutu pabb^jeuta sodhoLva pabbaje 
(48.) tba sodietva upasampadetba sodbetva nissayam detlia 
, eko pi bi kulaputto pabbajauca upasampadailca labbitva 
salamati sasanain patittbapeti ju baewin piriksa paewiji kata 
yutu pirik 

(40.) ba upasampatti kata ymtu piriksa nisidiyae 3mlu karaaya 
ban pamanak duibhaiiga sampan wiyae yutu me^ tak "wntae 
no risin pawatuk udu ayunu no kijae yutu yam kenek me kala 
katika 

(50.) wathi no bikmae waradata pawatit nam tun yaelak 
dakwa waradata nisi dan^nwam karawa awawada kotae 
naewaetae da ese mac pawatit nam nisi no di masak dakwa 
binduwa winaytinukula paewae 

(51.) tmaknaeta hot iin kerebi no baendi haeraewiyae yutu 
ganadetu terawarun whin udu taman tamanta y'edu dhurayebi 
pania wae samgbaya hikmawa no lu lat hot mahaterawarnn 

yedu da[n]duwam kata ynln . . 51! 

138. Galanilawala 1 — ^ri siri saiigabo Pariikramaba (2) hu wat 
himh an walianse c (3) roe wata walamafa wadala galia (4) rim 
aaTita hengajeu maeta ta (5) . . rao waellen maetae ha nieki hi 



01 


(6) tu latae kutu kana bayao wflhala (7) Lae dangekae sorakamae 
yat (8) ta^ulra kala ekek (9) rajadrohiyaj e (10) 
kumbune 

143 DambuUa wil ira — Qn sinwat apiriyat lo ikut gana 
mulm uturat Datnbadi'wulii an kaet kula pamili ka^a jaTaba 
pralaja kotae Lamkawa (2) manusbyawasa kala Wijaja raja 
paiatnparayen a Lakdiw poloj on parapnren Inmi nomm guna 
gaemban toda tnsal (3) eomiguna panad udapa sat set 
kulanu (Ian j asa sinn yub wiraraja Ni^jamka Jlalla Lamkejwara 
Kahnga Parakramabahu (4) cakranrarttin Tralnnse udagal 
mundun pat riwi ni'idulu men saint andum dnrnla sin Laka ek 
saet kotae perae no (n) bada karawnwara di imila avu Lamka^a 
Bm{a pas hamiruddakata aj’a baerac diwel -wabal sarak pamuna 
parapnru ba hawuiudu (G) pala pas Inla bbarayak baegxn ran 
ru\ran mutu ridi aC no ek wastu ba di dustba Lamkanasm 
sn’astba karawS, iawa da main (7) nana raja (Jiruwan karaTtu 
•wara "wada genae Lamkawasm dnstbn no kala maenaearaej i sita 
utte nmuna^a aya ckamunu tu (8) u paela ba. inandaran saka ha 
inaende ekamunu do paCla ba mandaran eatarak ba paesse pas 
paela ha mandaran tunaka baewm a (9) ya ganna nijajcn ha 
Kaeti aja da katu kanab'i aya daku wajra jinika bejjn baemao 
kalata mae no ganna nija (t0)yen ba ■a^awastha kojae disa 
kata kalawunta dena hira sanda paronnu 'vreyon nuyan ■nism 
sopadrawa wu talpatae li>a di }0 bae (11) ndi bin so no Lotao 
nn unge n am 9 anuj ata n ae bobo kal pawatna niyaj en tamba- 
patae pamunu hasun liyawa di tambra (l 2) ^“isana pa\vat k iran a 
Lamkawa tun yalak paedakumi kotao gara niyam gam rajadbani 
da gindurgga wanaduTgga jala (13) durgga pamkadurgga da ab 
ammdu pakak so bala gaeniyak udti anaengr ru'wonak genae 
jana kalae kuraak dayi no kiya (14) na nijayen gaui wal 
nisbkantaka ko^ae me Lak diwn scmeln tabo. dvranda yuddha 
5 ayen Pandiralade -warak avacdae bbaya (15) pat -vm Pandja 
rajayan e^vai rijakanyawan lia bastya^wadi pandura ba genae 
Codi Gaudadi no ek de^ayelii guna kae (16) roaeti rajadaniwan 
ba gunen nntrasantbana ko^ae guna no kaemaetta-aainta taman 
TT^h^nse^e »}•}& eh (2?) ttS e e 

biso\v'aiain ba panduru genua mulu Dambadiwae da pratimalla 
rajayan nacti beym Rame^warvyebi u aedae bmdae ( 1 8) tulabbara 
-vrastu danayen ese no sala mulu dilindun sit pura e tanbi bolio 
kalak pawatna niyayen jay astam (19)bha kotae niga tala 

yen. dewalayak namwa siwuranga eenanga pirvwaia 
naewaebae Lak diwa waedae pitatae saturan naeti bae (20) 
■wi[n] di wamatae sasaturan aewa da yi gita 

Dambadiwae Lakdiu ae no ek tanUi eatra namwa niraturu wu 
dan watu (21) lu nd 

pura bolio kal bmnawa tnbu tun nakabi satuniwan saman^a 
J arawa tewala Buduu a danda wedae na (22) ka 

tu ra 9 ^tra da pawat karawa perae rajun dauasae dup 
paribanaycn naosi gij a webera maha sae (23) [Anuj 

rallnpura NuwaraDeuamiuara Kae’am Mijaguna no ek ucltcta 
Katau-a ananta wast[u] y ipa (24) kanu a 



. harayehi da gal . . noholliun aitipilima . w . . . padeka 
. . Sana ranmaya karaT^a sa {25) t lakskayak dliana wiyadam 
kotae malm puda karawa p[u] -wariina gitt guha yacyi nam taba 
karawa wadala 9:lalekhayayi. 

145. Ruanwaeli Dagoba, Anuradliapurn : — ^rlmafc 
tyagasatyasatya ^anvyyadiganaganaj'tn asadliarana 'wfi Okawas 
raja parapu (2) ren a KaJinga cakrawartti rajawaTp9ayata 
tilakayamana wae Simhapurayelii eajata wu Nig^amka (3) 
Malla Kalinga Parakramabahu raja]Ki walianse s-wawam^ayata 
pa (4) rampatayata Lamka dwipayehi ek sesat kotae Malu 
Pai'akiamabaliu T\'abanse pii (5) rwwa rajacarita ikmae kala ati 
dasa awinayen pTdita wu dilindu wae go3 so (6) rakam kotae 
jiwatwana bobo janaya baerae soiakam karanne yana 

(7) ^awen wedjieyi ran ricll masu ran mutu maenik wastra- 
blmranadi wu un un kaemaeti wastu ha (8) sarak gam bini di 
abhaya di aorakam harawa sesu bobo janaya da ee dukkbayen 
galawa me se (9) mae wiwidha wicitra wastu danayen sanatha 
kotae ma dun deya sthira kotae tawa da waecliyak samurdd- 
hawa 9ataraaua (10) wgdayi awurudu gapanakata aya baerae 
wadara tvm tajayehi mae haema kalata kaeti aya haeiae 
wadara ma da (ll) wa>aekat no sioga suwase ^vi5uwa maen- 
aewaeyi perae rajadaruwan no kala wiiulesekae tulabliara 
naengeml aita wadar (12) a urebi da Wirababu mabapapan 
wahansc ba agatncsun Kalinga Subhadia blsowun wabause (13) 
ha saba wotunu abarapin saedt taman waljanse ba lun dena 
wabanse tulabbara naengl sat luwan ba aelalu lidl tiram ha 
anantakotae (14) laja wltbiyebi ne swamin tnabadana wai-sba 
pawatwa tun raja) eht bobo kotae Nj^^amka namin satra namwa 
anna dana da niranta (15) rayen pawatwa eiynlu dilindu bhaya 
sorabbaya kaptakabbaya durukotae Lak diw wasin baema dena 
Buwapat kotae (IG) sanaycbi da du95nayan da utkaptbitayan 
da palmnowanne piatyaya lobbayen ba katayuktebi bbayin 
bawa dae (17) nae ^.^anaya kilutu no kotae siwuru lialawunta 
kata yutu dunaetae ran pilT yaka^la bat bijuwata sarak adi 
wu dae da (18) laebeyi sammata karawa wadara su^ilawabanse- 
warundaeta da palibodba no wnwamantt nedayi obage nae- 
wnedaeyanta no e (10) k wastuyen saiigraba ko{.Te siwu pasayen 
dana prawaba paturuwFi mcse lokaya da 9asinaya da semebi 
tabs, Pulastipura (20) yebi waeda wasana seyek Ruwanwaeli 
dagabwabanse da wandana pipisac siyuraliga senaiiga piriwara 
mabanubha-waycn (21) taman wabameta satarawannehi nikmae 
dagab walianse penena manayebi dunae walianaycn baesae 
9rTpadayen Ru (22) avanroaeU maluwata waedae maluwebi 
waeli ta^s■a^annJl se ananta mutu atutae waeli talapitanan 
kasum pudunna se ran (23) mal ridlmal sat ruwan sisara 
niraturu kotae puda anaengi pita kada patakayen dagabata 
atapanlwarap.iya kotae. sisa (24) ra niraturu kotae kapuragoda 
goda kotae palmn puda tiliyan tel auwandatel adiwu telin satiyak 
paban piida (25) mesc mao kaluwacl dumin siiwanda malin puda 
aiwu dae gandin sisara piribada genae satalis lakshayak masu 
ranm piija (2G) kotae nuwarata hSt pasin sat gawwak pamana 



93 


taen&e baenia satim no maenyo, haekkaeyi abhaya dx bera lawa 
doios (27) maha wae taenae masunja abhaya di Kambodinta 
ran pili adi xni kaemaeti wastxi di paksbm no badana mya^en 
sa (28) ramata kotae pakabmta abbaya di pritin da wxndana 
■welehi ehi Bauddha dewatTiwan saba mmlia bananna, diitu mi 
nisunge (29) pritighosbana a%a e wClehi npan Buddhiilanibana 
pritin Lak diw wa^inta naewaetao hawTiruddakata ajabaene 
ehi 81 (30) ti loke arak meniaan adlnkSn ko^ae utida i*uda 
Miruawi^i adi -vru wilioxa kataT^a^ayi ananta wostu la 

(31) siyiganan 3 ala di situwa nuwarv dewunuttirak se 
peraparidden saj^pta kotao wadala nijadatneta sitin pujt kala 

(32) na^a Bauddba dcwakiwangcn me mae lesae ainksha aeti 
bavra da daenae matuwana raja daruwimidu wism nuuaiae 
■wibara (33) wil aiawasin loka^asana sanutha kotae raksba kata 
jutu 

(^idb"imna ratnicaitje pacilini avjkaKir (34) yjena hksbair 
dhananlm 

catvarim^at pranianair nniraparaaracitam vikslija sandraili 
pr&modaih 

pratj aksbanye (35) \anaika8tutim aknta tatah pntacitlo 
yam abdam 

Lamkan Ni^^amkamallo ajacarayad akaram Qn Pii-akran 
tababu 

1456 Ruanwaeli Dagoba payement, eaat aide — (1) cakra 
wartti bu (2) ma opa me tnwak pa sudusu dasa 

81) a (8) lalesm tubd mabawatubu toululla bandabayen (4) 

Pai luama samudra bak (5) adi 'wu 

alut a\aS mana ek tenae mabawa palm (C) bo ara lac baeb 
bandaira Lak divrae muluUe (7) pano mabawibaraya 

adi rvfi no ek dabas (8) dagaba yae (*) Batn iwah 

dagabasaeti (9) maba dagap da ablllna^^a kotae 

rawa (10) kaepa layan adi mu dao karabi Anuiadha 
(11) saewabanse atu mu aneka (12) 

wadara. Demaluu baesa (I J) ^k diwata 

awut Demala ke 

140 Lion at Polonnaruwa — (^n M-ira durlja \7ira M’e 9 yabh 
ujaga Nissaiika Lamke^wan Kalmga cakiawartti suanun 
ivabanse ivnedae bun wira simbisanajiyi 

(2) Simbosanaje waedae bun kalae pot Marana aetulu m^u 
kayastbayanta stbanaynyi 

(3 ) SimbSsanaye Traedae bun kalae pradbana) niita sti ana) a) 1 

(4 ) Simbasanaye waedae bun kalae senewiradunta stbanayaj 1 

(5 ) Simbasana) e waedae bun kalae aepauaiun Inndina 
stbanayayj 

(G) Simbasanaye waedae bun kalae yuwaiaja vra siti 
n wabanse bindina etbanayayi 

(7 ) Simbasanaye -waedae ban kalae asampandi bharaka manda- 
bkawarunta sthanayayi 

(8) Simbasanaye waedae bun ka’ae kadagoshthi) ebi aetta 
wnnta stbanayayi 

147 Fneze around the Tfaupoiama — 



91 


Upper portion.— 1. 

(1.) ^ri Kalinga nripalj Parakrama\)liujo Ni 95 arnka Mallam- 
kriti vrittacaityagriham Polastinugare Lamkegvaratarayataua 

.... ra .... ca girim maka dubhuttama bha. 

(2.) 8 sarvvatba tat sa grama paricaya dana nripatiblus 
samrakshyatara bhavibhih. 

bkawas raja parapurehi [Suryya] Tvain 9 ayata tilakayamana 
vrae rajapiUw’elln rajja ladin 

(.^.) wotunu paclaendae maba raja tan pat wu Ni 99 ainka 
Malla Kaliiiga Parakramababu cakmwarttin rrabanse 
gopa maliarajayan wahanse ntsa Parwwati maba dewin walia 
(4.) nse kusen ckolos masm punu poLoyae upan kenebi sa 

.... lakuna mana nabat mobota dae tilakayak lat 

miyi piyanan wahanse wadala 

in.— (RunwiTii/ iwsi to left of cut upper tier.) 

(1.) karawuwara di inuju pas bawurnddakata aya ' 

liaerae wadara diwel wabal sarak pamu 

(2.) iju parapur[u] wastr.abbaranadi no ek wastu dl perao 
. . . liaeme to . . . wabal sarak adi wu sarwwa 

(8.) SAva . . radol kot&o wo ... . wa . \h nn un go da kamun 

wu ran hama deya tayaegi un un 

(4.) mae [dai-u dame] wadilri maltata da wyawastliu kotae 
kaoti a>a da ka^u kaixaba ayao dayao ca . . . wikmyac 
hacmac ka 

IV, 

(1.) Uta bacrao wadara no ck Avasln 
(2.) dl mabajanayu samurddha kofae eo 
(3.) runudu jlwiUwjrv bacrae sorafcam 
(4.) karaiinc dbanu 9 ayea wedayi 

Lower portion.— 11. 

(1.) miyi sitX wadaraDarabululenatawncdac. 

(2.) siti pilima ....... nakliamt gawa . . . Lak [dij^. 

(3 ) m webera detu ml warii 

(4.) ...... onanta -wa-st^j parityaga kotae. 

(5.) yuta siwu pasayendassa . . na kotae dliarmnm 

dbara 9 rmna 

III. 

^ (1.) [dba] ra wasana warnnata anurupa p[r] awfitti di wnd.ira 
pi d.i patmya tun wabanseta ta 

(2.) \\aban6o urebi di ymvaraja avae ki . . . . [Wjimbabii 
mabupTinan ava[l.aiise] ... pc ... un avnlianeo galawFi] 

(3.) na-wini bi aiiaciigi rowa ta jwiio phja kotae. 

(4) lAk Wijaya siHgaicncwi UwHruii[rn\nn] 

(5.) faininalayen nawora'ua di tatij'.ne tai.j\vun . . 



95 


IV. 

(1 ) B l-iksliayak 3 a 

(2 ) Tvedaya stuti kala tania dagabak Landawa ra 

(3 ) 'wotimna dewatawan eiiigaTrehi mae ta 

(4 ) mae taen raae ball, anatbajan sauivtba ko^ao 

VII 

(1 ) . dada no ek taenae dharmm^bikarana Ia^^ a so 
niwarana kotae lo waes 

(2) san anaeara kotao no nasna pinisae rajadw ara^ cln 
sadacara silale 

(3 ) kbe karawa ^]a^mn piyan se lo sasun rakna . . . 
Sakyaraja gunayata 

(4) . Bikbi Benaliga pakaha pita ^anraj an ka Inyl 

tun rajaj ehi 


vin 

(1 ) tan •n’ela gattaunin daekae munia sesu ^aJ‘^danl^^an lia 
saraasampat domi 31 ran ridi tralan muiu maenik adi no ck 
sampat di haemae dona euwapat 

(2) kotae Coda Gaudadi no ek de9ayebi raJadaTu^7an kane 
bbattayan 3awa dwandtra yuddha ilwa da no Jadm pitatae 
gaturan naeta me 'witae dinuwa mani kele 

(3 ) sa saturan ■wedajn sita iraedae ^asana Pulostipurayebi 
Ni^^amka saetraya} ae Brahmaoa saetray ayae baUujanu aatray- 
ayae yaoacU no ek dana ^ala karatra ridi ran 

(4) walan ridi kota da ndi %\aeta wil adi no ek wastuyen kap 
ruk so saraba maha perabaerin isbta bbojaiudi maba dan 
watura pawatwa Anuradhapurayayac <Jn 

148 Galpota, Polonnaruwa — 

Mai gin 

IJn'Koflmgaca'kraTrarUi ] 1 libatayin aflbi 

swomin wabanse 1 kara kota danuu mandi 

aeti kala Ni55amka [ | na^an Stegiiiycn 

genwa ^dalekba galayj 

A. (1) 9’’^ dbarmmassoyam sarbbalokaikamanya9 Qre} 0 dayi 
sarbbada rakshaijiyah 

bbupaleudran yacate kirtlihetor bbbuyo Ibuyo Vira Ni55amka 
5ralla[h'] 

(2 ) Criiuat anat utum guna genen biwi Okawas raja parapuren 
vu aka^acari Kalillga oakrawarttm walnnse 1 ulena Wijaya 
rajajan Budunge myo 

(1) gayeu dewiyaa "wism arag ganna ladu uae Lak diwu 
bae ae jal sba pralaya kotae manushj iwn«n ka^a ck dabas pat 
fcijakbawurudu ^130 LalLi Budu Bosat 



96 


(4.) Sakffittan upadana utum Dambadiwlii Kaliiigu rataa 
SimbaparaySbi roemae lajaparapurata tUakayak bandu CJrl 
Jayagoparajayan wabanse nisa Parbbatl 

(5.) mabadewiu -walianse kosen ipaedao raja peialiaria -waedi 
taman vona parapuren bJmi Iiakdiwae raja karanu maenaewaeyi 

Lak diwae kulaje ka maba^aittn a 

(C.) yadaioen main perabarin me Lakata baesae iiepa himiya 
tanaturu raja isura windirain ^astragastragamasakala kala 
widyayebi n'lpunu wae raja pi 

(7.) liwelm abhislieka ladin wotuou paelaendae maharaja tan 
pat wu -vro^unu mangulebi abas kus puramina maha me kae lada 
kipl baelu paminekin wi 

(8.) auru^’a. baewi lo waessan aesata tiymju anasak aeti 
dawanayehi idiriyata kakara pinu kuruiai saeda waelasinna diwu 
kaedi siya sat[u]aha eaeraaengae 

(9.) paT7ita6 helu maha tada teda -alti nirudaka katarehi da 
paen -wuwa maenaewaeyi situ kenehi mae akalameghayen maha* 
waturu pawat baewin kaemaeti taenia 

(10.) paenu ranaslinba laja wikraraa aeti samudra kridawata 
gona 'waedi tacnaa abbimukbayebi paemuiiu mahapolafigaku 
samipawfi sS napurayaeyi pahawae to mae tota 

(11.) tudussa danayi wadala basa^a tam^ mae tama daebae 
diwu pidu baewin alarnghaniya ade9a aeti dutu ke^iebi mae 
satutu wae koncaoada kotae maogulaetu tama mae pi^a du 
(12.) n baewin du^u maha rnabima aeti Siri saiiga bo E.&linga 
Parakramabahu Wlrarija Ni^^aipka MaUa Apratimallt^ mahara- 
japa wabaose Udagal mnndtin pa 

(13.) t binibu sS satur attuuru durula babu janaya muwa 
piyum pubudu kotae anat rajasirin <Jakra dewendraya se eomi- 
guncn pun sandabft ee dblra 

(14.) tayeii lleniwa so gacmburu baewin sagaraya so kebiln- 
tiguiien mobapojowa so lo wacssan pinin upan kap rukak Bo 
wac(iae sitae apage wam^ayata 

(15.) parapuru muLak diwuhi babu janaya aturckae samabara 
rajakenckungo dumnlti iTa^nyen kulacara dhanayen piribuim 
85 . . nuyi raaba karunaycn owu 

(IG.) nta kulacara tabE dt pas bawuruddekao nya haerao ket 
wat aya ganna kalao pcrao rajun dawasae watja ganna aya 
liacrac utto amunata ekamuna tun {Klela ba ma 

(17.) nclarau saka ba maendo atnunala ekamunu do pacja ba 
mandaran sataraka ba pacsso nmunata ckaraunu pTieja ha man- 
darin tunaka baegln ganut rout wada no ganna niya 

(18.) yen ba dukin hatana seben katussaw. aya baemao knla\a 
mae no ganna uiyaycn Iwi -wyaNTaslba kolae kabawunu tnmb.a 
lobo ran ridi mutu macnik wastrubbam 
(ID.) nivdi anOka dbana wrarahaycn dijimlu gim ninfi diwcl 
wabal s-arak p-nmonu parapuru ran ridl wajnn gobila udi boho 
mmbana tabu dl amutyadin aeti 

(20.) kotae tun rajayebi bobo knl apawat raaba waewu aej.i 
awunu biiulawa e 5 ratac subbiksba ko\ao ebv s.atwayana\a 
.abbaya duna dl piaamburuwa tada bacrae 



97 


(21 ) no ck janapadayeln dharmmn^hikarana la'wn, anyaya 
mwurana kotae sorun udu sonkam karaone dliana^ajcn 'wedayi 
un nn kaemaeti waatu di corabhaya 

(22 ) duru ko^ae wal 'waessan pad waessau kaemae taeaae maa 
sadha kantaka 9odhanaya ko^ae Budu siisnehi da naya winaya 
wu pandden du^gda kantaka paha kofae lo 

(23 ) ka^asana nis1ikan(aka ko^ae sugda niahasanganafa siwu 
pasa3en upasthana kotae bawnrodu ptia mahanuwam karaua 
katthma dona di dewadana darnkusdan mafgakusala 

(2-1') n pera pandden taba-di sasnata da boho wneda sadha di 
dlnrramadhara Qastradharayanata anump v wtitti dx dbarmnia- 
9'xstra da pawatwa mese losaaun waeda bobo kol 

B (1 ) pavratne nyawam^aya nisa yaevi ICilmga lata jTiwa 
Soma Sxiryya wam^a boho btsowanin gen^a urehx da yuwaraja 
tan pat Wirabahu inahapanan 

(2 ) xvahanse^a da raja kanyakiwan raja kulaj a nxahat 

vadvesji.’a, ‘Krvi.vc.'g^ ^MLblvviw. x^oabadawux. vgah a nae ba. 
Gailga ■wam^a kalyana maha 

(3 ) dexTitx •wabanso li“i saha arotunu rajabaranm saeda urelii 
d i dani mabapanan wabanae ba du Sarbbaiigasimdana walnnae 
hi. ekwao tul tbblra 

(4) nacHgi hawunidu pati p^9 txd’i bbarayak b[acgi]a di 
naxm ratna dana avarsba paaratwa no ek digin raeswu maluna 
baiminu kana pijuku ruktt dun adi wii di 

(5 ) nunatba janaj an sanatln kofoe roesc catms liiga x\ astuyen 
loka^asana sanah"v sit gat babu janaya T^enae wenae taman sifae 
octi sno 

(G ) ba piksba pata kotae diwi di gewarobayi ivela ganna 
pandden jananurxiijana gunayehi aga tan pat nne dawosao 
daw asaa dasa pm kinya wat pura 

(7 ) Pulostjpura namaeti Ealinga ka sa waetlac avasaba 

seyekavramandalapararaaiidalajacaxBcaksbusmsatatayen d ikufu 
du npa Lakdiwa so 

(8) xnebi tubu paridi oratyaksba kala maenaowaeyi 
nrafjijga senailga piriwara Tnsimbalajehi gam nigam gam 
rijadbani jaladurgga ginduxgga xvanndufggapam 

(9 ) kadurgga ha ek kotae knda bbatv^anaj akbi men aowidao 
baK avadaro pratyanta av[a}>i babujanayan da mabld ma 
■wnrabayen pinawl tun rajajehi bae 

(10) lumckxHiyarjgunu inaba'nera ba gama ma Kael 
[a] m adi wax jarT anbara xralanatakannnirinta karaavaDambulu 
leine hot bun siti pilima dagap ra 

(11) n giwa ia^hayak dhana Trxfya) dam kotao maba puja 
karaw”t Annrudhapuraye Buwantnaeh mabasae ■wabanstta satis 
Hksba^ak dhana wijadam kotae puja kara 

(12) -wao pujawata satutu dewata^a [d) . Sqir- 

bbadakala tacna gal dagabakkarawace tonhi sadfajeara 9ilalekba 
karawa mesC saerawu Budu sosun pi 

(13) hit! Lak diwa per[acj dawns [ae] sa , sba puraeyi 
dae bavrae DaTObndx'WudaiwyatiwaesijuraTigascnaTiga pinwara 
taman wabanse ^i99anika Mnlla jnna 

Q 603* a 



98 


(14.) ^vTTudu aeti bae^win kisi taeimkaet f>aekayak no kotae 
mahat raj[3.] n[u]bha'wayGJi nil xuini atuk Be nisal ■\vii malia 
mundu taera Damba diwn dwunda yuddha senS. yuddha 

(16.) ilwa dutayan bhatthayananalia, , . [yjuddhayata sarahunu 
kalhl Ln[k} vrijaya siij^u] Bene^vi tawnrunawan Dambadiwu 
sadha dennata mammae pamini pidanwa y vi > _ _ 

(16.) ddhayata nikmunii bawa [daekae bhaj’a] patwu Pandl 
rojjurawanba maen[i]yan wisin ata patnaiia gaman 

[ad]i lajyaya taman wabanse mae genae -wadala maenaewae 
(17.) yi kiya “wela geni mawii . . n aengUv ba taja[ka] nya 
kaAVci[n] . . . . ra no ek panduru ha Soli ratin mese mae . . . 'va 
boho pandura namaeti jai^atayen kopagni 

(18 ) mwa Karnnata Nellfiru Ganda Kaliiiga Ti iu ..... . 
no ek de<jaye guna kaemaeti rajadaruwan ha . . niitra satm} 
tbana kotae guna no kaemaettavmn^ taman wahansege 

(19.) ^nryyati^ayen bhaya elnwa. e e ra(in b[i]sowat[unb] a 
panduru genwa Bame^warayelu M lulabbara naengl no ek de^a 
■waainta ananta waat[u] tyaga ko^ae e 

(20.) tanhi bobo kal pawatna niyayen jayastambba kotae 
Ni 95 anike 9 wani yae yana dewalayak nam^a pratimallayak bu 
naeti b[ae]win apata abbaya di wada)a 

(21.) maenaewaeyi Dambadiwae rajun kala aradhanaycn da 
. . . . li genae e mae senaiiga piriwara Lak diwu ^aetjae ino 
lo>7ae saturan naeti baewia pa[ra] lowae saturon danamliayi _ 
(22.) eita swade^a parade^ayebi no ek taenae Ni 59 a[iii] ^dana 
[fia] traya aetu]a 770 no ck da,na satra karawa ran ridl walan 
adiwu aneka aaubhawa wastu 

(23.) yen kapnik se saraba maba clan pawatwa dan gab 
yncakayange eantoThotsawa balanu sandaba Kiggaipka dana 
mai.ujapayac yana mapctapayak udu ka 

(24.) rawa dalada patradbatun wabanseta pntanU77an 7vabans5 
•ha diyaniyan wabanse ba puda gbana ran dagabak netulu wu 
dbana puda galawa gllamay'a 

0. (1.) dalada geyaTvata geya Niggamka latamandapayadoratu 
pawuru baeluAvanta sit satutuwan 877argga moksba Tvana niyayen 
karawa ma ' 

-(2) ba ■wera dagabsa kotae npakara caityaya karawa rajageta 
uturu digae asu. at Rawanmaeli dagab wahanse karawa sisara 
doratu 

(3.) pawui-u Bamgharama katawii lokagasanaya- bobo kal 
pawatna se kotae tawa da Lamkawa tira tunakata piliiti ebeyin 
udu uttama bhumi 

(4.) yae eatwayo ut Biroa guna aettivba n'rawada kiya raksba 
ka]a raaenaewaeyi karunayeu awa77ada kiya na ee sa ka[raja] 
daruwan manushya rupaye 

(5.) n sitiya da nara dewata beyin dewiyan Be daekka yut [u] 

yae mcndahat rajun laeblni Budun laebini sS sa yae raja 

darawo 77arada 

(C.) ta eudusu nigraba karannSbu gariraycbi rogayakata 
wcdabu karana piliyaraak sehita wlin karann [aba] .... kata 
j-nktcn walaka 



99 


(7.) ftpa-yelii no luya dennaba ka^a yuktcbi yocln. saga mok 
da’genae clennalia rajun hiugi no ifocfcka] iitiDis lo iiirusawe 
(8.) yi ingi raekka down lo so woyi rajadatuwama ganna 

duk fiuwaya^a ^vawu rana bijuwatayae o ena guna sarawa 

. . bala 

(9.) taraa e e nu gunayen duru wiya j'utuyae lada sarapat 

ral^a \7u kulacara rael^a yutuyac pa ........ . 

dandu sS paksha. 

(10.) pata raaaT^faebiyae yntuyao tanaturen piriliuna da 
nae^iyen gilihunu phala so raja [da] mvranta raa . . ra . . 
pa^vatneyae 

(11.) kacndawa •n’adaja d.iogaeyi fct kallii niwamda •mnva 

twata kirud [ae] yi noboyaoa niy.aycn tama . . di kata 

k[ena] k\inge rabas de 

(12.) j’im marabn ennftta inat\i ran na y.ae yae i-ajunta cliwi 
deniij’o ya 5 a 5 9 arTrayen bohkal . . aitmcyae daenum na 

(13.) m kclebi guna dacnumae welanda katn[i]Dain gowi 

baenae Hastara-sa nam dabamae T[ae]kka yotu 

meki deya rajun ni 

(14.) 8a wannSyae ebeyin rajarakslwyebi no paitia \nyao yutu 
yae raja daruw) darpoddhata wand dana .... ha cheyin u 
(16.) ngen unm tanaturu sampat ladin darppoddhnta nowiyao 

ynUeyae idin gowl kulebasutaba raju yck tama lada 

na 

(10.) m tanaturo. no bala digae . . . b.ala [maycwan] sam 
knmakata slta nam lo wacssan ohu bH no bacnui.ia macnacwne 

obu kama pxtsbak situ wad.am 

(17.) jabamsadingo . . . . b-ao 

^abi! adin sc mabajanayan wisin apa ba sa . 

la sacpab bii ekwae mac 

(18.) kennoyae eb[ae]win esc ... . janala kala . . . 

, . . waessan ok Tvao mabuduru kotae .... wnyo rapi 

» . . . na nya dar^aoEt ynnu a 

(19.) pla vraTanayebi bijaya 

rajayan gedara aepE m.iliaprv w.ana b.Elawuw.T. da 

lokaawami raiyayata bala genae kula 

(20.) si rat ja , . . . saeka ...... kata yutu . , . nudu 

naeta eta bisowarunge ajuayehi paewactae rakBb[a] ...... 

utu xinudu naeta maharaja 

(21.) npayaelu wahan matrayak udu rajatanbi taba rajya 

raekka yut [u] ot ma ■wjsha ona so kap ruk pildta wao 

nae wisbaruk bLadawanna se Ka 

(22.) linga wam^ayata himi tafc diwao Buddha 9 asanayata 
pratipaksba nbanddha Coda Pandyadi rajun no pibitiwiyae 
yutteyae Wijaya raja kumarayan kero pata 

(23.) n Lak diwa bimi Kalinga wam^ayehi rajadaruwanta 
yae soya genaet wi nam un swami kotae lo sasun raksba karanu* 
acarayi. 

, (24,) Dabam name me muin lo sagamieyae sita de lo Scaepat 

adaran karaneyae roatu wano rajawirun mese aya da neyae 
Kalinga La[m]kindra Nisaka raja gonananda neyae. 

0 2 



100 


149. Slab near tbe Daladallandituwa, Polonnaruwa:— ‘A. (1) 
Laksbtulm varddhayitum •vyatha 9 ^amayitum tratum sva (2) 
vam 9 astbitira 

Kaulau dhariamam npaaitum. yaxli mana^ satn (3) raksliituu 
ca^ritan. • • 

Kshatreny eva kulfini vo ga (4) mayata svamitvam anyan punar 
yyaninan ena (3) ti nayan imaa bhajata bhn Ni^^mka- 
maUodi (6) tan. _ _ 

Okawas raja parapurelii suryya wam^aya (7) tilakayayi 
pianawaG raja piliwelin rajya la(8)dtn wotnnu paelacndae raalia 
laja tan pat Avii Ni95am(9)ka Malla Kalinga Prakamabidm 
Cakrawarttin waban (10) sc anat rajasirin Qakrayii so 
wirajaraana (11) wae tyagra satya ^auryyadi guna ganayen 
a.'jadlia (12) rai.ia wae Udagal nmndun pat biru sii satur an 
(13) dura duTula mvilw lAkdhva sejnebi taba lo waessan 
pi (14) nin upan kalpa wrikshayak so waedae isitac (15) lo 
waeda sasun wacda kotao da(^a rajadlmrromaycii rfi (10) jya 
kcremin Pulagtipura naemaeti Kalinga raja pu (17) rayelii 
■waeda -wagana seyek taman wabansc ran (18)ridi kahawuyn 
inutu maonik 'wastrabbaranlUli dana -wa (10) rsbriyen dijlndii 
gim niwu inaha janayange (20) eamnrddbi daekao satutu tvac 
apaga Kalinga ^\'•a^l 9 ayac^a (21) swabbawa dbarmnia ■\7fl 
lokopakara kalamba Urita ya (22) gayekae se apa me kotalil 
eamurddliaya kal (23) pantaya dakwa kcse stliira kotae gani 
(24) t dolioyi mala kanuirt prajRayen pa (25) riksba kota 
Nvadarana seyek lowata luawu (26) piya vfae naradewata Nvae 
siti raja damwaage (27) gu^ia niahima no dacnae unta nparncllm 
kaja uu (28) rjjanayange jnae .wargga bTi sainpatwa ba ni (29) 
rinm,ri]a ^ya^ 9 , daekao ese .da kisi kenakunta (30) wnaya 
mt mi mana xrcdayi sita ajnanayen (31) andha wfi lol^yaiiata. 
nes dcnna so ^atata (32) yen boho nivawada anu 5 asaTi.'i kotnc 
jii .(33) jadrobanam paiicanontaryya karroma se no kata (34). 
yutu deyekaeyi dliarminn niti dakwana seyek (35) praijatipiltaiU . 
du^carita kalaliu da lyisha. kaewo da (30) tumu matii iioslti 
rajadrobanam kalawun da unge (37) •waiggn da un ba ekivTi yvau . 

nasayi ebeyin ra 

B. (1) jjwlroliauam sitjn ut no Bitiytws (2) •yuttcyae arajakawon. 
da na wisi (3) ya yutt^ac rbeyin mabaraja ta (4) n pat wao 
bitiyawnn nacti taenekao (5) yiiwaraja mae sitiyawun bo un 
uclu (0) naeta liot riyakurorunivarun bo (7) un udu nacta bofc 
bisQwarun bo (8) rajyayata laekiya yutteyap.. Budii sasu (9) 
nata bimi Lakdiwata abaiiddha Cola (10) Keraladi raja daruwo 
daiio taekiya 5 Titlaba(n) unlia ek -waepereU kalaburaja drobi 
(12) nara •weti kakaya liamsagatiyala da kota (13) luwa sain 
dliawayanta da gaeiidaJinba naga’’ (14) rajayanta da. kajia 
maendiriya suryya prabha (1.5) -wayata da -watuwa bastinta ck 
kaei.mbila (IG) simhayoiita dabbawa karanna se goivl kule (17) 
bi ncttan rajalllawata no paetuwa maenae (18) u’ae kesc l*alawat 
wuwa da gowlkulebi (19) aetto Kyyaynta baUi no gata yuttalia 
(20) tama ha saraagaettan waenda puda rajasambhawana kalahu 
da ungcn nam tanaturu la (22) ddabu da raja drobi uam mao 



101 


•\vtti Me kiwan ha wargga sampat raja daru kenek paenunu 
(24) wi^ae mae nirmfila kanumaba Eheym Lak (25) diwa 
manushyaA^osa kala Wijaya rljayan pararapaTayen a Lakchwata 
binii ra (27) ja daru kenckun fioja genae da na (28) m ae^a 
ralusha karanna so lo waessan (20) rakshiijelii jedi swinu 
paksha ^\ae taman (30) warg^^a satnpat rakaba karanu maeimewi 

(31) Dbv“vnksho hamsagatim khoro baya ^varam (32) gandii- 
padam pannagam 

kbadyoto milura (33) m mrigcndnlahtam krosb^ba dvlpam 
%artta (34) kab 

Vamno’ njo’ nukaroti rajacan (35) tarn naivadritam 
ke\ ahm 

basyas sjiid (36)iti ^aktl mti ku^alo Ni^cjamka Mnllo nnpab 

150 Four pillars at Rankot Dagoba, I’olonnawuro A. (1) 
Sin Lakn. paedacku (2) nu ko^ae sisaru (3) gam niyain 
gam pa (4) gam i“i)adh“\m (o) da. Deavu (G) 3iu\vaTa(7) 
Kaelaeni (8) bambxdu (9) Aunrv (10) dbapura (11) muwara(l2) 
netulu(13)wu tun (14) raja [y]e (15) bi no (10) ek pra (17) 
siddba (18) stb'ma da [ja] Ja d[u]rgga (19) gindurgga ^\a [na} 
du (20) rgga pamkadurgga (21) at ambulu pakak (22) st 
nig^csha ko (23) tae bal i \radar\ Ran (24) Tisao Miniboru (25) 
GaligataU Padi ac (2C) tuju ovu tun rajaye (27) hi no ek 
inaUavrae 

B (1) taonac a^eslia (2) prnnin(a nbbaja (3) di no mamna 
(4) mjajen sammata (5) kotac pi (C) eambum (7) 'ra tyda (8) 
pohcn ko (9) tao gat (10) tcnata (11) di baema (12) da'rasa (13) 
ta mae kao (14) ti ada (15) haem(*[pu} (10) rwwa raja (17) jnn 
dawasae a (18) neka 'radlia bandlia (19) na Uidana^ en ^20) hil 
go raabisb'di (21)8arwTiaswahaninayc (22) nitadu (23) stlia or ao 
gija, ivu (24) loknwaamta (25) dandao^ldi no (2C) ck deya hae 

C (1) rao mutu macmk (2) pabalu aetulu (3) wu no ek ratna 
(4) di go main (5) sha dliana (6) dbanya (7) dasi dusa (8) ya (9) 
nda di (10) wel gam (11) pamu (12) nu ae(I3) tulu -wu (14) ane 
(15) ka pra (10) k uu ivastra (lY) [bbajranada ran wa (18) la [n] 
ndi walan (19 di sakala loka (20) avasin swastba (21) kotno 
Lomlva tala (22) ya msbkantaka (23) koiao seniehi (24) taba 
clwancla juddlil (25) ^Iwenliastya 

D (1) 5wa ratba pad[5}ti (2) caturaTigui[i] inalia (3) senaiiga 
piriwara (4) raaba Dnmba diwuhi (5) Paiidi ra (C) ta ■w[ae] dae 
(7) samana (8) piatima (9)llajan (10) no daekae (11) Cola 
Pandyivdy (12) anckade (14) ^ayeii (15) pandar[u] (1C) genae 
■\vadara i (18) k mja [ya]knla Wira(19)Kalinga Lamke^ua 
(20) ra[a] pra[ti] malJa N15 (21) 9aml a llalla Parikra (22) 
mabahu cak^a^^ a (23) rtti s^Tamm wa (24) hanse d i wae (25) nda 
■wadaranaku (20) damayi 

151 Stone seats at Rankot Dagoba and Tbuparama (1) 9’'! 
sin saiigabo IViraraja Ni^gamka Malla KaliHga cakrawarttin 
'vahanse Lak diu a msbkantaka kota sat set kota per^e 
no bada aya genae dustba Imla Lamka "wlsiDta pas 
dakata aya Laeiae hawuru (2) da pata pas tula bbM»y8^dmai». 
gaol wabal sarak pamunu parapuru ran ruwan ^s^aKbaranadi 
bobo avastu di suv^apat kara'wakoeii ada bae^^^^alata mae 



102 


Laerae wal maba wao taenae praninia abbaya (3) dl swade 5 a 
para de^ayehi boho satra namwa maba dan pa'watwa tun rajaya 
paedakuim kota siyalu dnr^a harata bim bala lokagasana 
samviddha kota yuddba^ayen siyurafiga se (4) naii^ piriwara 
Dambudhvu ^raedae dwaoda yuddhaxii ilwa no ladin Co^a 
Pandyadi rajadaruwan wchela genae ewii ranae aengili ha 
rajakanyakawan ha pandura dackac jaya (5) stambha karawa 
Lak diwu waedae datja raja dliarmniayen rajya kereudn 
Ruwanwaeli dagaba, kaia^wa -wadarana kalao karmmanta bala 
•\vadara (G) waedae Imn mulu galin kala asanayayi. 

152. Inner inscription on the stone seat at Kiriwihara ; — 

A. (1.) Q!ri Wlraraja Nig^amka Malta Apratimalla Ka 

(2.) linga Lamke^wara ParaktamalAlm cakywartti swa 

(3.) inin -wahanse Ni^gamka Malta gana \drudu wata su 

(4.) dusu wae kisi tenekaet saekayak naeti wae ca[tur]anga. 

B. (1 ) senaiiga piriwara PandT ra^a de rekae waedae tamaii- 

waiiansego asadharana balawat ka 

(2.) dasa wana luyat^' autiu 

hi Lak Wijaya singu senewi tawurunawan Dambadiwii 

sadba . , . 

(3.) na^a mama inae .... mTayuddhayatfi nikmu[nn] kalhi 
5 asTi bliayapat wil Prii.uli mjadaruwan bu maeniyan dhana wa 

(4.) sin a^a jlwatwana pamaiia gaouik dl me rajjaya taman 
pallatise inae genae wadaja maenaewaoyi kiya ewu wa se 
parno 

C. illegible. 

1526. Kaeligatta jV. (7) maba dbana (8) yanU' 

desa (9) dasayan ana (10) wajjan .... (11) nna kaema . . . 
(12) ta maha Maya (13) rajayehi Pi (14) ti rajayehi (16) aotta- 
arun (1C) atin ni (17) nda paribliawa (18) kala • . , , (19) hi 
yra . . . nna (20) gaeta .... (21) kotae (22) batak bul.a 
(23) t kaeinatata (24) uddbata no w (25) na gen wd. ca (2G) 
woyi swami (27) paksha pata sa (28) ntosayi (29) kiyawinva 
ma (30) nushya at (31) ira laebi raadu (32) 11a bbayae du (33) 
kin latae 

B. — (1) k mao ... an (2) . . gionsana (3) wel paya . . . na 
(4) wey su-wasc (5) n . . . mat wanna (6) kaemaettamba (7) yi 
me awa ivae (8) dao kiya Pandi (9) raja de warek (10) gos tula 
(11) bhara nacugl Pu (12) ndl rajjuru (13) wange bi (14) 
sowarun ae (15) tun asun (10) adl wu aya (17) genae So]I (18) 
ratin panduru (19) gen Lak diwa (20) taamit tu(21) n rajayehi 
(22) kotae Samano (23) la adiwu du (24) rgga bala wa (25) dala 
ICiili (20) liga cakrawart (ST) tin waban (28) b 5 tanim ka (29) 
la Ni<;<;amka (SO) gavniwayi. 

163. IVandarupavribura: Kalinga cakrawarttlu wa- 

hanso raja (2) siri paemini dewana Lavmrudduychi 

patan Lanikawa sisata gam niyam ga (3) [m] udi -wii no ek 
]>m.si(ldlia sthrma Ija jaladur^a pamka durgga wanadurgga 
(4) Satiianola adi wu giridnigga at ambulu pakaksG balil 
•wndrirn das-a dignntarayclii (5) tun rajayehi no ek satm 

namwu nncka yucakayanta ran ^ralan rid! wa]an di (C) 

.... honda nada]! wadariv bUowanin wahanso nctuja wu pas 



103 


den'v walianse tulabhara iiaengx (7) bawutadu patTi pas tula 
bliarvyak baegin di dukpatun suwapafc kotie suwapatun 
(8) kotae tan rajaj eUi no ek bhe ya naniwa tun 

naka earaanga ko^ae tewala ya (0) kotae liyawosa 

nntahpurastxmBuwanmaeli wahasae wahanse da •wandana knran 
kaeiuae (10) ta baegae kiyae ga[n]it ne semae laja darukenakun 
kawaewu ye •wehedayi Tvadara (11) ananta wasa daewiya 
dura kotae mebo karnwan ananda karawa Pihiturajayata pi (12) 
yumak se wu Ruwanmaeli dabagab wahanse karawa antahpn 
rastnn d i wandawa po (13) ra aya genae dustlia kali 

Lamkawasinta ran Avalan ridi walan adi wu bobo siepa (14) t 
dewa wadara utte am[u]nakata aya ekamunu tun paelak h i 
mandaran sakak ba (15) maende amunakata ekamunu de paelak 
b t mandaran hataraakabapaeaseamunakat3'(ld) . ekamunu 
ba[manda] ran tunaka baegm aya ganna my lyeu 
wvawastba kota wadara 

154 Eambha wihara A (2) sri 

I^mkawa manuahj awii3a kala Wijaya rilja paramparayen (3) 
lamkahimi (Jn Wiraraja llalla Kab[n]ga Parakm 

(4) mabahu cakrawartti swamm wabanse Lak diw e (5) k sat 
kotae peiae raja daruwan no bada aya genae (C) dug bita kala 
Lakdiwae Ruim rajayelu gam myam ga (7) m waewu aela awunu 
rvjadbani praaiddba sthaoa wi (8) , naga no 

baeki pa 

B —(1) me tana me (2) nddcn nasa. puwa e e tae 

(8) adi wu dae karawa sat hawu . (4) wel wabal sarak 

pamunu (5) ndi walan mntu macnik wastrabba 

(C) tu di bawnrudu pata pas tulabbara (7) wa samur 

ddlia kotae boho telu (lab (8) maga idura tab i lo waeda 
sasun (9) ja daruwan bobo kal sa (10) ssan 

nirmmala kotae (11) taoa Dambadiwu wae (13) na 
da puja 

16G Sabasa Mallae inscription at Polonnaruwa A (1) 
(^rimat Saliasa Mallah Simbalapalih Kaliilga aam 9 agra (2) lur 
aniyatra ICabngato rppitavate Lamkadbira (3) jj a griyam 
ayuslimat pntanadhipaja roahatlm grama (4) dikam sampa- 
dam 

dat^alvam kptavau s\ajam kntavida (5) mekadhirijjc 
padam 

sirjsara Okawas parapuro (0) hi roulu sakwaja ek sat kala 
Kalmga cakrawartti (7) paramporayata 9 ri goporyayan wa- 
hanse [Ba] (8) bidaloka moliadewm wabanse kusm Bim 
bapur (9) lu prasutawii asama sahasayen S ibasa Malla jaeji 

(10) inrudu lada Sin saiiga bo Kahnga Wijajabihu rajapa 

(11) wabanse palamu Lamkajehi rajasin paemina siti Ni (12) 
9 (;amka llalla nam baemn wabanse ewarggastha wu (13) pasu 
biru nsta^ata gi>a cmae tarugananak se (14) kJpa raja ke 
nakuu gih giya tanbi Lamkawa aswa (16) mika \rac sanda udT, 
no lat nejak se nnduruwae tnbu sa(lG) nda Lamkadhiklra 
Lolnpaclac kulu duttaewi nbonawa (17) n tamau 9 fita ^Ja kula 
ciradi mantri guneu je(18)di mti para wae wana heyin ta* 
manta parama mitra >yu Lam (19) kldhikSra LolupaelaC kulu 



budalnawan La ekwae ra (20) jahu naeti rajaya nara niyamuwa 
naeti naewak se no pa (21) •watneyao Liru naeti dawasa se no 
Lobaneyae Buddha (22) Kinaya da anasak naetiwae nira* 
lamba wanneyae tawa da (23) I^ik diwa Wijaya rajayan-Yakslia 
prala 3 ra kotae ka (24) nii inul ba tienfi wiyalak se pawat kala 
beyia (25) ema ■warpijayehi Tajun boho rakaha ka^a tenaeyae 
(20) e baewin melii raja kaja Ni^^aipka Malla swamin (27) ge 
inalaimwan -wahanse Kalingnratayawa wada (28) awut lo sasun 
jakumha yi Laenae ni^caya (2D) kotae swarai paksiia pata dhlra 
Sara gunen yukta (30) erata waesi MalUkarjjuna nam pradhani 
ICalingu rata (31) yawa ia^dliana kotae malia pcraharin gemva 
So (32) ll ratae Kabakonda pattar^ mae wada liinduwd rat- 
nabba 

B. — (I) tana wastnulin matu wana tajya qrlyata anu (2) rflpa 
grin satkara karana kathi e bawa asa (3) anugraba parigraba 
tlekata pobosat lo sa (4) sun rakna rajawarayan no kaemaeti 
lama taina(5) ge taae adhipatyaya pata svighna karana 
dnrmraa (0) ntrin de bawuruddekin sadha pun sancla naengae 
(7) pana so ^ubba nakat mobotbi muhundu pitae (8) manga 

! )etae nirupadrawa kotae wada awut Trbt:n (9) halaya ekatapaira 
cotae Buddba warsha ck dabas (10) sat eiya tesaUs bawurudu 
tun mas sat (11) wisi dawosak gtya ienae Bioera puia do]os 
(12) wak Uda Bada dawas^ubba n^at mobotin a (13)bbisbeka 
kae^ac^7u me ananyasadb^na daskamata (14) taman wa> 
lianseta palammraanobi senewi rat (15) papa bandawa agra’ 
mantii kotae situwa inewaeni »laru (IC) '\\an lada mawunta- 
wae()i satkara kaja maua wedayi (17) mowun niaeniyanta Latn- 
katUaka mohadewiyaeyi (18) imm dl bacjae rao pata bandawa 
boho sammana cU (19) Lira eanda paraunu kotae Lak Wijaya 
Singu sene (20) wl abonawanta di wadala gamwaraba pariwfira 
(21) ha siyalu-sarapattijata matu wana raja darawa (22) n. udu 
taman tamanta das kam kajawun raksha (23) kinma raja 
dhannma heyin •^vilopayak no ko (24) tae memae paridden taba 
di owua wamga raksha ka (25) ranu maenaewaeyi ^ila lekha 
karawa wadaja seye (26) kae me balabala raja walJabba wae siti 
amatyadi (27) bu da balatkarayen me ki deya gatlm nam (2S) 
■wewayi rajaslba ta!\al\u nam wevvayv tajarja macku (29) wa nam 
weti kulen binayau ba da kawudu ballan (30) ba da samanam 
weti eheyin swami pakshapala (31) paksba kararina kaemaetta- 
wun wisi (32) n mowunta dun haeraae sampat raksha karanu 
■ maenaewi. 

Dewa (33) Sabasa Slallo eslia jagatam roanyas swayam ya 
(30) cate j j . j 

tranam yad drhlbapaksliapata dhurinam ksbatro Li (35) dbar- 
mmali param 

ayusbmat pritanapateb kritavatah (30) Kalingavam^odayau 
candrarkah vadhi sampada (37) saha tato raksbantu vamcyan 
nripal. 1 . 

' * n Wijaya Singu Kit at Abbayawaewa : A. — 

grlmat Okawns raja parapunm a Abba Salamewan Lilawatl 
Bwaminge agramatyu wu Lag Wijaya Siilgu Kit senewiyan tun- 



105 


Tvanne AnuradhapureUi pataabhumiyc taman kaeraewu ruM an 
payelii waedao bun saTigu 

B — ruwanta siwu pasayen wana pisii pimsae tamanta bat 
ginuwa jaewin ya]ab. ba mebi inae caitjajata yalak lia pij- 
imaf'eta yalak ba bhumi tlana ko^ae bira saiidapaniana v’ae pidu 
pasayen pinnaemn me Hbhaja antaraya kalawun 

C— 'Windina narakidi duk data lia matu nntu Moina nu 
wanaetiyan lobba dwesha mana duni kotae labba antaiaja no 
kotae nu'tt’unaettan kala anumowanu maenaewi 

158 Inscription it the soutbem Altai, Ruinwaeli Dagobn, 
Annradhapura — 

(1) Abbayne Salimewan kala ranaw ala sinvamin walianse 

pra dewanu Aesala puia ekolos wak tin Sin saiiga 

1)0 Prakramababu 

(2) cakkrawartti suwamm wan^^e actuluwu iija damwinge 
bbandara panpalanaya koti ratnatuayeUi adlnkiprapala aeti 
busagune 

(3 ) n Sima citaiajapa prasadarasm wir yama.ua wu bhandara 
potae pin'waln bim \\ ijayayanna wanna, mekn^? am wu Some 

(4 ) dha dcwmba mekuoge baen X<anka odhikara kota danata 
dcwal n5 panba tun denae aga wisarata ek ' 

(5) paso ta'VTarayangen Rnwanmaeli suwanunta Dutugae 
munu rajjuruwan adi wu no ek 

(C) rtyadaniwan wjsm karana lada puja ni^esba a^a prosadft 
parawa^awa anun ha a«adliarana pu 
(7 ) ja wigesba} ak kala maeonewaeyt nanlwidbawu ati dls 
nta Sly a asuwak paraana na&ira^en ^150 

(8 ) sba "wu kotu kayak webawu^ a mam ciitya pratibiniba} ak 
se iTi^esba kota sanba pas } alak pa 

(9 ) mana salin solos mahala andana gandhapasbpa sugindba 
paven wicitra kotae p«no ge 

(10 ) nae dbaja pataka kadali toranadm will saraba anoka 
awaggayeka na daeyiti ba. kshirapayasa 

(11) jen ha in^odbayak se palamuwana maluwehi niran* 
tara^en satiyak puja kotae kapura dc dosak 

(12) kalandm patae tunwaua piya wnda ive njana nynno 
kan el walae kapuru pan puda ac 

(13 ) gae aetulu wu no ek wastu piadipa wu puja da karawa 
no ek knmmanta ka]a mebe kara 

(14) wanta atata ^al ebu mundu ha ran piU hii tin ambu- 
wanta da bandana pih di nn da satutu karawa 

(15 ) wib”v (?) raksba wc Mti lijannawfm samadaruwan wan- 
natun anm bamunan jiasakun sittorun 

(16) nawannan gikiyannan beragasannan eakun jarasan 
padayan paweniyc pani nabana g~ .e 

(17 ) nun dami, le baelu mou^ mindiyan malaka tin osan"t 
watun an wada jay en raoin ea 

(18) tutu koran "v Eun amnach malune dl me Tliupawam^a 
nsl dhomina katlukayanta sudusu pujawa kota du 

(19) tbupfirima s^yammtat 511 maba bodhinwabansetat ka* 
wuru paban pata kapu ba awiwu no ek 



107 


wacta wi (lo) 1 tiainba kotaU anwita aola i (IG) piya mane- 
Imn ko^ta ma (17) pata haenda aeti nja nik^ba (18) ma 
mulu adiwu me samghika pi (19) u Kira ma aeti kaH 
Bhuwanaika ( 20 ) baba rajjnrowan wabanseta ( 21 ) ipia pimsae 
kaeraeiru me sakmana (22) n njakulawadana iviharaya (23) 
[paivatma] tek kal idinye ae (24i) [wena sat purusa] jan 

•wism nirairul ( 2 o) katae pawatwa swargga [moksha] ( 20 ) sampat 
saedhiya yutu 

162 Slab at Kaelan: — Sirasti dhannmadhiraja tribbuwana 
nondakara Sikyakulatilaka sakala loka diwakara amnta maba 
nirwana dayaki, Gautamasanrajnarajottamay man wahanseta dc 
das ek panas •wanuira LamkH rajya^nj ata paermm tnsimbal i 
dbi 9 irara pararajaraje^wara samantarajakritarntuamapali seintn 
padambnja sisirSkiraiiayainana kirttibandha bandhura suprairira 
gunaratnalamkritaiviauddbabuddhankura ^rimat 9 nsanghabodlii 
^uparaknimabahu cakrairartti ewamm wahanseta dasanawana 
nairasa puri ekolosirak raja maba Kaelam inharayeUi Budun 
waedaUmdairalandadharmmadesana kalawu uttaraostbanayaka 
ebi me dairasairata jarawasairi tibena pimkam kawaiedaeyi 
niyama daena eaityavebiiru siyalu taen jirnawa tibenaeyi osv 
rajagen nediyek iriyadamut di kamwauta aya gan nlyaka 
taena(a ha Parakramababn Wijayakkonara amatyayanta bbara 
kala pasu caitrayebi sunn pm>am adi sunbun kanomantat 
kanwa uturudiga sae(a nyan kalugal pairurak ha. naegena hira 
aindakada pabanakm ynkta galpadiyakut bandair*l lamadbi 
pilimageja napi\tmageya mema wiharayebi purwadjga ir^aln 
mema taena galpadiya kuda tnwaokaya tel katara geya saraghika 
waesikiliya basna bira irosala aetulu mi taen mul pisakarawT 
pas mobsd paya Baelapilimagey i sumru dageya yanaduru me ki 
taen Latukobol karaira anikufc wilnnyebi noyek sunbun kar 
mantat pinmasira saronddbakanwu pasu ^nnamayenme kiyana 
miiarayehi apage wiridu namayak pawatmta uwamaenairaeji 
genehi nayakataena^a Ua 911 r\ja ratna piriwan terat aswa 
ivihara santakayen aettola ossala ,innlutaenge}a ulupaeugeya 
adiwu noyek dhumwe ayataba Demala Sunhala aya aiiru 
noyek dena^a mdayata sitx senba aya praireniyata puiyen 
bijuirata amunaka irapata eatara mieliya ganna lasenwi de 
paelak ajadenairat polgas dasayata pamonak baegin panduru 
dcnairat niyama kota hirasanda pawatnl tekjiawatma le^ata pim 
kamn mudunpat karawu heyin ena dawasa paemmena rija raja 
mabamatyadmirLsin diimnakwa orarddbana karawa pmi purawa 
ganna lesata salasi^a silalekhyayafc karaiva pibituwana niyaj en 
Jayaivarddhanakottayebi grimakgaire Simbasanaycbi ivaeda 
Innda mudalniarun maeda oridala meheivann me silalekbaj aya 
lij V dunbawata Sanlias timtraraban perutoalumba rajaroabakne 
Inmyata bim irattala mnlsantotaji godarabala galpottayi 
urubomira Iiyadda aetuluivu gonsCn taembayi, rammudu aelaju 
kessaketngalayi watagalayi aesalapaluwayi raasurutotC aetulayi 
diwiyamulle aetulayi imtaembaji mabagaogayi 

163 Dondra II — (1) Swasti 911 snddba saka vnTusba (2) 
ekdabas sara siya de (3) tis 'wannebi raja paemini (4) swasti 91 ! 



108 


mahasammata (5) paramparaniiyata suriya (6) wam^abhijata sri 
LarnUMbipa (7) ti sriroat wri Sanga Bo (8) sri “WyayabAhu cakra- 
■watti (9) swamiQ wahanset* Rata (10) rawannen matu awuruddu 
(ll)posona awawiseniya (12) Dewinu-warehi nagarisanlla (13) 
kowilata palamu paen jKtevvaet (14) tea parawa^ara kumburu 
(15) mul bijuwata wiai amanak (IG) ba iiavradunne piitegama 
(17) na kumburu bijuwata pas amuna (18) kha atapattu aracca 
(19) wea sarasa kotae petumalun (20) Batgania pasada salasmen 
(21) Agayata aeragana daen parawa®ara (22) aetulu wu tan 
dewiyanta puja (23) puna sakara akliandliawa pawat (24) Tvana 
lesata salaswa raja raja (25) maliamatyadinta sana^’aka (2(5) taen 

dhammakata taen aetulu (27) wange 

172. Copper plate inscription ; — Swasti ^ri 'Waiwassnta manu 
Bamkhyata uiaha Sammataparamparanuyata surj’a waip^odbbiita 
Sumitra rajaputra pawitra gotrabhijata Trisimlialadhi^wara 
nawaratnadhipatl ^rlmat SirL sailgabo §ri Wijayabahu cakrn- 
wartti swaminwabanflela atawanen matu awurndu posona awa 
pasaloswakae Alutkuru korajaye inelii bada Utlugauipala santakin 
Dombawala sal de paele nilayata aetu|atwu Walala yima palle 
Rerawila Lindora Icumbura akata diwel kaekujan owila melii 
bada gam mudal gaaakoja walwil kumburu owiti pajamu 
Kuruijaegnl dl lat dana patraya niyawata dewaniwat sQryyag- 
rjhaija dinayo bamunu W€n(Jara 9 u Koi 3 <laperumalata yaruppawS 
uvva danaksbetra ko^a site, wadara cakm. araka sapaya Bwasti* 
rawa pawatina niyayen Udu gampaja aluttnajlgawe waeclalunda 
kuriyataniyukta aemadeuamaenda wadala mchewarin inctambra 
patraya liya dun bawnta sanbasmakuta wcrun Wanapa Porum 
ulumba. Sudano anun bajapin bat da no makati ballo 5 bat kil 
nacguwat naewata kati un so lopi me eujanan dun aynti 
rnekadnna sujanayeul de lowata ma pin acti. 



109 


PART III. 


TRANSLATIONS 

(1 ) Tomgala — (« ) The IotiL of the pirumakaTisn, son of tho 
pammaka Abha} a at the anountam ot Acagirika Tisa isgi\en 
to the priesthood of the four qunrteis present and absent The 
great king beloved of the gods G-innni Abhayi, ordered 
Amnagara and Twinkiyanagan which hiNo been established 
by my f ither King Tisa son of King Abhaya, [are given] to tho 
puesthood of the four quarters present and absent 

(6) KmgTisa,sonof KingAbhaya ordered —Tins tank at the 
Ac-igvnka Tisa monntam is given to the priesthood of tho foui 
quarters present and absent Tho great king beloved of the 
gods Gamini Abhaya ordered Acanagam and Tawiiikija 
nagara [are given] to the jiriesthood in the four quarters present 
and absent The tank of King Tisa> son of King Abhaya, w 
established by mj father 

(2 ) Gallena n ihara — The great cave of Tisa the son of tho 
gi-eat king beloved of the gods Ganimi Abhayn [is giacn] to tho 
priesthood of the four quarters present and absent 

(3 ) Dambulla inliara — Tl o great cave of the great king 
Gamim Tisa beloved of the gods, is given to the priesthood of 
the four quarters present and absent 

(4 ) Tissamaliaiaraa — Hail I King Alonaka sou of King 
■Mahanaga built (or enlarg<»d^ the Nagnmal amlmra, the tank 
and the field at Golagama 

{o)Ruanwaeh Dagoba Anuradliapura — Hail' The great 
kyig Gajabahu Giiniiu Abhaya grandson of King Wahaba, son 
of King Tisa having built (or restored) the Lakshma Abhaya and 
otlerwiharas and having protected t! cm made tl em ml abited 
having strengthened tl c faitli having lepaired the dilapidated 
budding'* after havmg given [the avdiaras] he gave to tho 
I riesthood the enjoyment of the iour pratyay as 

(0 ) Ratinalagala — Hail ’ Tl o grandson of the great king 
Icloved of the gods Tissa tho younger son of tlie great king 
Gnmini Abhaya tho great king beloved of the gods Ni^a 
[ga\e] the Wilurabijaka the Mulagutika and the Pariwataka 
wih iras to the priesthood and twenty measures of gruel and 
rice and [a robe] for the rainy season 

(7) Penyanl ulama — Hail* 1 he great King Wa=abha 

at Patanangala 1 aamg restored, the decayed buddmgs at 
Thiragama he gave the Rukkhawawiya to 

the thera Majjhitna havio^ made the son of Bajika 

and the son of Ayasa six karshapanas (?) at Patanagala having 
seen having restored the decay ^ buildings at the field of the 
thera Amara, the Cahka tank, liaving seen, having restored for 



*110 


Mnijltlma ....... li.lvjnff inn'Ifs six (0 

togetlicr with a water atraincr Jio gave it. 

(8.) Tcriyakaflu wilirtm:— From King G.'imitii Abliaya [an 
order]: In tlio year I’uwadnm S-awanakn ....... ifio four 

groat tanks of the cliief them Tuw anil tljo four gnnai of tJie 
cliiof tiiera Mnjjliima arc given to lliecailya in tiio Cakkadhiiraka 
wilianvnnd to tlio enngrogation of the priests, To tlioCnkkndli- 


Sraka wilinra llicy are given. 

(10.) Oniwana;— To thegrivndwn of the gTe.at king ^Vn.<>At«lia, 
llio son of the great king Tiss.n. The great king (Srnnmi Abhaya 

lie distributed a tank 5,000 knrshapnijas (in trir- 

cutufcrcnce) ..... having dug it out [lie gave] to the priest- 


hood the four pmly.ayaa. 

(11.) Wiliumgala (ft.) IT-ail! King Wnsabha repaired Iho 
dilapiiLated buildings at the fakkadharaka svih.“ini and at the 
Uppala (iotiiya tank; fisc thous.and karislias and fiS'ft hundred 
[he g.avc] to tlio priesthocxl 

(t.) Ilaii ■ [The grandson] of King Wn.sabha 

.... Ibo son of King Tiva, King (Januni Aldi.aya, repaired tbo 
ITppala doj.iiya tank which "'as bestowed [on the temple] by 
lung Wnsabba, and gave it to the pricsthoo<J. 

(13.) Kaikrvwft wibara: — Amarj-awa, the daughter of 
the chief thcra minister Warns: (0, and the aceonfl brother of the 

minister Abliaya, gave . to Ibe Wndlia caitya 

and to the priesthood. 

(10.) Situlpawilium:— Ilaill Tlio son of Kin"[Mal!.aka]IS*rtga, 

the brother of King IJatiya Tiasa, King [KaniUha] TKsa 

rejwircd tlio Cittalai)abli.ata established by Kfikawaiji.ia Tissa and 
tbo tanks of D.akkhina and Tlssa ........ and iho caitya of 

King Nuga; having remitted the taxes ..... and liaving j>cr- 

fonued deeds not (formerly) done (even) by liimsclf ..... 

having repaired the decayed buildings after havitig 

seen ho gave it over altogether. 

(18.) Bematamal avilmm:— Ilaill King Gnmaka (mistake for 
Gamini) Abhaya, having mode inhabited the wihara and u . 
hundred villages and Sari(urigiri, liaving seen .... tho Qapa- 
’wilmra ten . 


(01.) IXabarano : — Hail I On account of tho iniuidatcd villagc-s 
Abhaya, son of Ibo minister Wnsablm.saw tho Agiwalainana lank 
and tlie elephant’s tank; liaving built sevcml villages near lakes 
svitliout fumisliiug the fields with a lank between emlxankmcnts 
for tho flowing down (of tlie water), he constructed the Agiwa- 
[auiana tank out of tho Slola lake and tho Pacawadi lake. Ilis 
Hajesty, tho great king, aOer having made serve this Agima- 
lamana t.ink 104G karIshas,having^ivon it in cha^e to Abalaya, 
son of Sena, an aged overseer, to -witch the embankment, and to 
his grandson WcsaiDana [to svntch] tho field, having seen the 
now (?) karlshas and the ammanas, liaving caused this to ho 
■written on a stono belonging to tho priesthood, after assigning 
the Karakala tank, ^and having performed deeds not (formerly) 



Ill 


done (e\en) by bunse^f at tbe-vahara of Caityagin and at the 
rock temple of Ambastliala, having made offerings of oil and 
floTvem at the Gapa caitya which extends over a kaxisha having 
repaired the decayed buildings at the Copatalaya Gmija, and 
Gapicaitya ho handed them over to the monks of the Lord of the 
world and after having assigned he gave them the Karakala tank 
At this caitya he^ve it, after having assigned 1020 

karishas and to the eons of the minister Wahabaya in the 
Puwayasa Sawanaka year on tlie seventh day m the bright half 
of the month ITajimodmi 

(67) Slab from Tissamabarama — Had I We Buddhadosa 
Hahinda, Mahasena, three brothers the great king Abhaya and 
OUT uncle the parumaka Buddliadasa a venerable reverend there, 
[dedare] King Jettbn Tissa, our sire bought the karishos 
belonging to the vdlager Toda and remitted the taxes , 9 000 
kanshas from Padanagala were given to the reverend the 
venerable tbera in the great mbara called king of Magama, 
and 5 000 kanshas from this Padanagala, furnished with 
. have been given over and 4 000 kanshas shall be 

, the taxes of the 9000 kanshas shall be remitted , the 
rules shall be kept in the royal fiiindy preaching shall be 
this portion of the kanshas now is given four amunas , 

and the remaining portion , the lords of the Bhikshn 

congregation shall be caused to be furnished with the four 
pntyayas having done this in order that what is given to our 
uncle tho pamraaka may be kept causing it to be written on this 
stone slab wo have it given. 

(77 ) Plligama — Hail 1 To the vilbges TJtara and ilahagaii aja 
eight thousand the embankment in the kingdom 
this ferry great and venerable, the rest having 

seen six kingdoms he protected the veak having 

mode a paddy field six karlshas and six ammanas m circum 
ference, we give to the priesthood in the rana wihara 

tho four pratyayas 

(8j ) Diyagama — Hail I Hahakadaka spake 

A lay devotee his father spake and Carakas father 

Tambncaraka the ferry and the paddy field one pata 

(in circumference) and Tarabudaika six kanshas and thirteen 
paddy fields 

(97) Naginkanda —(a) Haill Welunaga the Eukan aewa 

splendour and gloJ> - to the priesthood in the 
Bamanoginya wihara. 

(6) I the parumaka and his (?) son the 

Bamanoginya temple the tank of the great 

queen and the Kannganya tank and tho Kabuba tank and the 
Ka^maka tank altogether four tanks having seen the embank 
ments to the pnesthood of the Bamanoginya wihara six and five 
(!) he gave the karshapanas at the 

Wataka tank, liaviog seen after having assigned be gave 

the Bamanoginya wihara to the pnesthood 



112 


(QS.) Galkowila:— Haiti The great king Batlya Tisa, son of 

the great king Manaka . five karlsbas ...... the 

field at the sea, the Wihirabija tank .... and the Ruka tank 

Ahala four korlshas .... having assigned the 

Karnkata field .... at the temple ... oil and flowers 

having made repairs ho gave it over. 

(102.) Wcllangolla;— to the congregation of 

the priesthood ho made . . . the Ruka tank 

six paddy fields .... he spake the Baya tank 

the great forest four (1) karlshas he made 

(110.) Mahakalattaewa: — His Majesty Siri saiig boy, in the 
15th year (of his reign), on the lOtb day in the bright half of 
Nawaya, has been pleased to declare witii regard to the monas- 
tery (called) Dapuju, King of Pandl : as long as in this kalpa and 
in fiuhsequent ones the birds shall build [their nests] and the 
nine planeU shall exist and in the monasteiy (called after) the 
chief secretary Dapula Ar.ik the dining liall shall stand, for so 
long do we in agreement with the Kolpatrl community of priests 
bestow a ^ift ; and tints he declared : to the village Gitelgamuwa 
which is situated on the ground assigned — according to the rulo 
which the chief secretary Sena himself lias established in the 
nunnery Nnlurama, built after he had named it by the name of 
his mother— -for daily incre.asing tho (supply of) water at tho 
great wiliura and at the great Bo tree (and) for furnishing daily 

tho four pratyaya.s to seven pcisoas, nuns or novices 

a privilege, viz., that two shall enter, that two 

karmasthunas slialt not hinder, that travellers and pilgrim.? shall 
not enter, that the officers of the royal family shall not enter 
the ajacinbly of tho priests that enemies shall not take cattlo 
from the village, that the cart buffaloes sh.all not enter, a.s long 
ns in this kalpa and in snliscqucnl ones the birds shall build 
[their nests], Its 'long 'as in this kal|)a and in sulficqueist ones 
the nine planets sliall exist and tho dining hall shall stand, for 
HO long do wo in agreement with tho Kolpattra coimmmity of 
priests bestow a gift (on the temple) ; having been pleased to 

come (here), to this vintage Gitelgnmuwa .4 a 

privilege is granted. 

(111.) Abiia>awacwn:— llis Majesty Siri wfig boy, in the 
19lhycar (of Ids reign), on the 13th day in tlio bright half of 

Muondindiim, nt the Abhaya -tank, having made the 

lord having onlcrotl to put at the four corners of the tank four 
jiillars, that whoever might kill fish in this tank may bo taken 
into cuslcxly, not to bo concealed, but to bo taken to the town 

by tho overseer of the Mahilwiharn, may bo 

maile to work at this lank 

(112.) Kongollacwa: — ^HLs Majesty Siri aafig ho, in tho twelfth 
year (of his reign), on the Stli day in tho bright lialf of Huruta, 

na-s declared that in this kalpa and in Biiljfiequcnt ones 

“ball not enter that travellers and pilgrims shall 



113 


not enter (C) that the officers of the Roj al 

family shall not enter the assembly of the priests so Iiaving 
declared a privilege has been gnn^ (D) the 

king Siri sang hoy "was pleased to sit under a madhuka tree on 
tlie full moon day 

(113 ) Inginimitiya — Hhil 1 Hia Majesty Sin sailg bo m the 
Saivanaka (or sixth ?) year of liis reign on the 10th day in the 
bright half of the month Hunata the great 

sage declared According to the rule made by former kings in 
their hereditary succession in this kingdom in three 

dajs at this temple (called after) the chief secretary Arak, a 
great privilege has been granted In one place the headmen 
shall come together and m this monastery ac 

cording to the rule formerly fixed bj the Tamils thej shall 
di\ade it between themsdves All this v, e gi\ e to the Ginwihara 
so it was sanotionod by Mahinda. Including the 

villages and lands that belong to the priesthood of Hmginipitiya 
a privilege is granted AH the anllagcs beginning from Sirigala 
and the villages of the headmen of the two mamlalas traaellera 
and pilgrims shall not enter the officer? and noblemen shall not 
enter enemies shall not tal e awaj their cart buffaloes and they 
shall be made dependent upon themselves. In all the Milages 
hogmmng from Singala the j lopcrty shall not be destroyed 
Thus a privilege is giantcd to the temple 

(114 ) Mibmtale plinth course — Sail > His M'yesty Sin 
Sang Bo in the 12th j ear of his reign on the daik poja day of 
Eihila ordered the workmen m the four kingdoms for the 
will tras It 13 right for the wil ans to give to 

the workmen, seaen kalandas of gold shall be giien to the chief 
writer one kalanda of gol 1 shall be given to a woikman bom 
on the ground of the priesthood two kalandas of gold to 

kalandas in this kmgdom to the sweeper five 
kalandas of gold in tins kingdom to the man who 1 aving leceived 
this gold divides the shires three kalandas of gold in tl is 
kingdom to the superintendent two kalandas of gold in this 
country shall be giien to ihe worl men 

for water and fuel, ten kalandas of gold m tins countiy shall be 
given to the sweeper two kalandas of gold m this country shall 
lo giien to the supeimtendenf one kalanda of gold m this 
kingdom shall be given to the chief writer 
s! all be given to labourers for watei and fuel on slu ces [?] 
channels and banks of a mer fifteen kalandas of gold m tins 
country shall be given to the accountant of tl is tw o kalandas 
of gold in this countiy shall be giren to the chief avriter of 
this two kalandas of gold m tins country (si all be given) to 
tlio of this kalandas [of gold^ shall 

be gi\cn to the labourere on d ai ucis and 

bank* h\ c kalandas of gold m this country si all be gi\ on to 
two kalandas of gold shall be gn cu to the 
on the bank of this channel [hve kalandas of gold sliall be given 
Q C038 u 



114 


to Ivira who [divides] llic aliarcs] tlirco kalandas of gold to the 
overseers on.tho two banks of the cliouncl : two Jcalandas of gold 

shall he given to on the bank of this channel, 

one kaland.i of gold to him who only 

yearly for making a road to the tank 

shall the workmen of the wiluira. and their children give to the 
distributor of the priesthood, two kalandas and two paelas of rice 
to the accountant, and for two atntnea to the temple . 

(115) Pillar in the jungle near Mihintalo : — nailI[We] King 
Ahliaya Sirl sang boy, in the Otli year of [our] reign on the 
lOkli day of Ilimanta, onler that the former priests shall ho 
lemovcd from the C.utyagiri wiliara, that roads and high-roads 

(shall bo made) that travellers and pilgrims shall not 

enter, that the ofTicers of tI>o royal family shall not enter, that 
palmyi-as, and coeoanuts, and fenis, and tamarinds shall not be 
cut, and if cut, they shall l*o given to the owners, that the priest 
from the mountain and the priest from the temple, if judging 
half a kalanda not suHlcient as wages for the (upkeep of the) 
high load, shall take tlie rest from the temple, and unto that 

from the taxes of the royal family thus having declared 

(we wish) good prosperity. 

(IIG.) Ellawaowa Pausala: — Hail! llis llajesty King Siri 
Sang boy, who, descended from an uninterrupted lino of kings 
of the Ikehwaku family, which is the pinnacle of the glorious 
Kshatrlya caste, had bwome Lord by (hereditary) succession on 
the ground of the Island of Lanka, who in tho Oth year after lie 
had raised the royal umbrella ransacked tlic kingdom ofPru.nll, 
and, having obtained victory and glory, enjoyed his splondour . . 
.... flowcw which woic the gift of fees — the son of that king, 
llis Majesty King Abha Salamewan Dupula, in the 10th year 

after he raised tlic royal umbrella 

(117.) Aetawiragollacwa: — His Majesty King Abba. 

fiiri fialigbo, who, descended ficm au uiuiilcri'upted line of kings 
from the Ikshiv.aku family, had become Lord on Lalika’s ground 
by (hcreditaiy) succession, who, in the OtU year after he had 
raised the i-oyal umbrella, ransacked * the kingdom of Pandl and 
obtained victory — the son of that king, JHis Majesty King Ablui 
Salamewan, in tho 10th year after he raised the royul umbrella . 


(119.) Polonnaniwa : — (it) the king, in the third year 

of llis leigc, on the 10th day, in the bright half of Nawaya, 
ordered: In the monastciy cMled after the general of King . . . 

we give it; and thna in Uic land of Girinae belonging 

to the minister Wadutag at the village Galutisa, two karmas- 

thanas that the officers of the royal family shall not 

enter, that enemies shall not take away the cart 'buffaloes, that 
nothing but lawrice shall be given [as taxes], that travellers 
and pilgrims shall not enter : Thus we, the royal family, order ; 
We give a pi-ivilego to GalnUsa, the village of Uie minister 
"Wadui ag. 



115 


(120) — MayilagaslotT. — Tlie aepilil'ilimtlT who Tvisliom in 
the wornh of tlio anointed qneen Gon c’nef queen to Ins ilijcsty 
the km" descended from the unbroken line of the Ikshwlkit 
ftinily, reigniu" on Lanhis gioiind bj hcrtclitary sjcce'^sion — 
the son of Kmg Ab\ \ Sa! imew an — ^Ihe pinnacle of the kshatn} i 
caste, the sage a\ lio has comprehended the doctrine — having made 
the necc'^aty repairings at the Mah vwil ara caused priests to he 
ordained fortlie nikajas at the U<H lisa monastery and 

Qi-dered that the ofheers of tlio 103 al familj shall not 
enter the phvco belonging to the priesthood, that enemies shall 
not take away the Milages, the cattle the royal taxe^ the 
re\enue the cart bulTilocs, that daily the priests luclnding tlio 
high priest, «hall not destroy life , that the ofhceis of the rojal 
family together with the queens shall not protect (’) 

All this was oidcred by the iCpI Malimd i 

(121) Tablets at Mihintale — 

Text A 

Hev.hohaMng been born unto King Abhaya Sviamew an an 
eminent Kshatri) a who is descended from an unbroken lino of 
lings of the Ikshw ikti famili, which is the pinnacle of the 
glorious Kshatr^a caste, m the womb of the Queen Gon do 
scended from tbe aimo caatc liaaing enjoyed the power of acp i 
with great glory, and baaing according to succession bccomo 
King irradiates lie island of Lank i by his sjlcndour, llis 
jlajesty Siri Sang Hoy Abhaya in the sixteenth jiai aflei he 
raised the royal umbiclla on the tenth day in tlio biight Ii ilf of 
the month ap, h w mg assembled the loials of the great Bhikshu 
congregation dwtlling m the wiblras of Caityagiii and A1 haya- 
gill, being pleased witb those xwles whicli his royal brother 
formerly estabh Iicd at Coityaginwil ira as well ns with tho 
rules of AbhajaginwihaiJt, m order to establish the same niK 
for this wibara m concurrence with those concerned in the 
matter, this rule together witli a comraent has been estahhshed 
for the lords cf the great Bhikshu congicgation who dwell in 
this wihara as well as for the officers and for the slaies for their 
duties as well as for receipts and expcndicuicb. 

The priests residing in this temple haamg risen early m the 
Taommg having reflected on the four presen atne jinnciples, 
having cleaned their teeth having coiered thenisehes witli the 
cloth accoramg to the presoaptju the SikakaranJ haling come 
to the dining hall of the Aetwiliara having olr«en td J/ct and 
1^11 It shall partake of gniel and nee They shall gi\e-xt the 
proper time presenbed by the physicians the lood to tho^opnoats 
which are sick and cannot attend at th“ dinm" I all Those 
priests of this wiham which read tfaeltinayapitaka shall receive 
fi\o farms together with food and raiment, those who read the 
Suttapitaka seien farms, those who read the AbhidharamapUaka 
twelvo farms ^ 


n 2 



lie 


When donations are made to the priesthood as a whole they 
shall not he appropiiated to single individuals. 

All the villages and lands belonging to the temple, except 
those which ar^ given as a living to a private individual, shall 
not be enjoyed (by the priesthood) separately.^ 

The workmen if not reprimanded or dismissed by the whole 
priesthood shall not be reprimanded or dismissed by a single 
priest. 

The priests living in this wUiara shall not enjo3' except* in a 
proper way paddy fields and orchards belonging to the Aetwihara 
In a place not belonging to the Aetwiliara they shall not expend 
them. The priests who transgress these rules shall not live in 
the temple. The priests who supervise the nikayas, and the 
superintendents of the wihiira, and the eldest of the villages, the 
ukaemiya and pas.akkaemiya, the writcre of the wihara and the 
writers of the accounts, induding the receiver of revenue, all 
these persons shall be under the control of the Abhayagiri com- 
mvmity residing at Aetwibara, according to the rule established 
by the Tamils, and who will conduct the internal and external 
services in unity aud concoid ; workmen who are fit for internal 
and external revenues and expenses sh.all be appointed by the 
whole body of the karmasthilnas having taken in bail house 

holders tlmt are able to give The priests residing in 

this temple shall not be taken to work in dependency, but shall 
he left free, the working people shall also be left free after what 
was due from them has been recovered, the workmen of tlm 
principal karai.ida and of the karmasthaua shall be put to ilie 
field*work and the workmen of the dagoba to the dagoba. 

The working people belonging to thb wihara except those 
■which have gone on wihara service to a distance, those who 
have to work on the embankment at their respective places, 
those who have to attend at the place where lice is issued 
and at the place where rice and gruel is prepared in the 
morning, slinJl not be less than three at each place. 

Anything belonging to the Actwihara dagoba shall not 
he given away, nor shall anything be purchased from the 
servants. 

The people bound to work shall not undertake "work on 
their own acconnt and shall not be given away to work. 

Tlie officers of the Actwihara shall take care of the payala 
(?) given fiom Damgaraiya for the repair of the Katmna- 
hasaeya and shall execute the repair of the dagoba ; they shall 
Lake care of the two kiriyas gi%cn from Aelgamiya for the 
preservation of the Kitbapd pawn dagoba. 

Hie dagoba and the bouse of the great stone imago and the 
MalAboge and the Nayinda, the bouse of tbe princess hlininfil, 
the Kalumnb7iRaoyn, the KirbaiK) pawn dagoba, tbe dagoba of 
Aetwiliara situated on tlio upper bill and on the lower liill, the 


1 «ab«tilate mat after prrljifa. 




117 


offeiings collected at all tbe«o places together •vnth one hundred 
knlandas of gold from the Aetwihnra and ten yahs padd} shall 
be annuaUj expended for repairing the dagobas of this temple 
nnd tbe other edifices. 

Those who supply rosm and incense to the two villages 
Gutae and Knrand le attached to the dage and the jnlxmage 
having estabhsl ed a. fine and having seized ( ? ) the rebellious 
shall take these to the wilui'a 

One third of Gasagacsiya at kirband pawu and the income 
of the pnesthood in this place (?) the tank of Minen the 
upper and lower lank at Lahmiya pawu and the income of the 
pnesthood there tho groond around the tank of Pahanaewila 
and Porodeni pokuna what is denved from these places may 
be appropriated to the wihaci 

Land fees shall he taken as a matter of course from the 
people living on wihara ground except tho \vihan slaves and 
the working people 

Those who having got the jellow robes as a sign do scUmg 
and other things not proper to their dress and destroy life 
si all not he permitted to dwell lound the mount 

Lone but proper servants shall be employed for the vnh iro. 

Villages and lands belonging to this temple shall not be given 
for except to those wl o work at tl c upkeep of tl o 

same 

No extra labour «hall be exacted on tbe poya and other 
ftstivals beyond three days 

Except the dunuwak given as living to the working people 
and to the slaves no paddy fields or orchaids belonging to tho 
Actwil ira shall be given away as a j ledge oi 

Except the raw nee which the dependents of the wilnra 
must furnish according to the ancient custom no victuals shall 
letak«»n from the inhabitants, fees si all not be exacted from 
11 c cultivators nor shall their cattle be seized by tie domestics 
to labour their own fields. 

Lands belonging to tie cultiv itors by the light of inhen 
tance should not be seized vntlout a leasou Damage shall 
not be done to the gardens trees and shrubs sbnll not be cut 
down 

In all the villages and lands belonging to this temple 
neither palm trees nor tamarmds noi auy other fruit tree 
‘1 all be felled except with the tonsenl of the tenants If any 
fault be committed by any of tl e cultivatois the a lequate fine 
shall be assessed according to the usage and instead thereof 
the delinquent shall be directed to work at tho tank in making 
an excavation sixteen cubits m circumference and one cubit 
deep If be refuses to work the assessed fine shall be levied 

In the villages and lands belonging to tius wihara, after 
1 avn g paid tbo wages to thoao who have to receive them the 
rest shall be entered m five books with the consent of the 
tfnauts so that they may be under inspection 



118 


The daily ospendituve on account of the mahapa^va and tl^e 
hired servants and the repairs sliaU be written in books and 
accounts kept at the store room with the consent of the owner. 
Every month these accounts shall he collected into one account 
and at the end of each year the twelve months accounts shall 
be formed into one register to he produced before the assembled 
priests and there disposed of. Servants who infringe these rules 
shall be fined and dismissed the service. 

Text R 

To the priests who have the superintendence of the nikayas 
daily one naell of ricej to that who preaches the bana at the 
wa-ss season one kalanda and four akas of gold, and for the 
bana at the conclusion of the wass a like quantity. 

For the eldest of the village five kiriyas as wages and daily 
one naeliya of rice, fifteen k.alandas yearly for whitewashing 
and supplying flowers. The cook, the wibara writer, the revenue 
writer, the receiver of revenue and theprinelpal attendant, shall 
have five kiriyas each, the chief workman one kiriya two payas 
and two atjmanas of rice, a number of watchmen (*? ) two payas 
a\id one admana of rice, the manager of the festivals onelciriya 
and a farm in Damiya, yearly three kalatulas and two alms for 
whitewashing and supplying flowers. 

Ono who prepares medicine one kiriya and n farm in Damiya, 
one kalanda for clothes at the great Buddliist festival called 
Somnas. To a plaisterer one paya ond two patas of rice, to dno 
wlio throws away dead flowers and to a worlcman born on the 
ground of the king one kiriya and two padas each and l\vo 
admanas of rice, to a masker two payas nnd one admana two 
patas of rice, to one who spreads cloth to the coiling two payas 
and a farm fi-om Damiya, for cloUies at the gicat Buddhist 
festival Bu\vana.sut one Kalanda, for one who spreads cloth to 
the walls two payas and a farm from Damiya, for a white- 
washer two payas and one adinnna one pata of rice, for twelve 
painters two pad.is each and a farm from Damiya, to four gold- 
smiths (?) one admana each nnd two padas of rice as wages, 

TVie priests residing in tins temple iiaving procuind garments, 
each who has receiveil garments should distribute such to the 
•workrag people who arc in want of them. 

To eacli of the two receivers of revenue two p.T,j as with one 
admnua, ono pata of rice, to a warder of the granary two 
payas and one admana, two patas of rice, to a watchman of 
the gmnarj’ two payas and one admana of rice, to the jelmawa 
. one pa3’a and one admana, two patas of rice, to the superin- 
tendent of the dining hall one paya and one admana, two 
patas of rice, to an Qverseer of slaves two paj-as, to twenty- 
four slave.s one prul.a each and yearly' one kalanda for cloths; 
to a workman horn on the ground of the priests one kiriya 
nnd ono julmana of rice, to twelve cooking servants ono kiriya, 
two pu-las each from the village Balolagaraa, to the principal 



119 


cook one 'idmntm. One paK of ric? to a servant who bnngs 
tii-ewood arid cooks three admanas of nee to those wlio do 
not cook hut bring firewood and go on emnds two adtnanas 
each, to one who cooks On thO supplied fiieuood one admana 
of nee to the chief thatcher two payas and one admana, one 
pata of nee, to eleven thatchers each two padas and one 
adtnana of nee, to five potters who furnish dailj five 
chatties (’) one kinya each, to a patra manufacturer who 
supplies e\ ery month ten patios and ten ivatcrpots two kinyas 
and tuo admams of rice, to the person who furnishes a water- 
strnner inont\il;> onekinja two payas to a physician one paehya 
and a faioa from Damij a to a surgeon two payas 
andafarmfromDamiya,toaflowergardner one kinya two pajas 
and a fai*m fiom Damiya, to an astrologer two kiri^ os and a faim 
from Damy’O to a barber one kinya and a farm fiom Dtmiya 
to the receiver of dues of the dTige to the o\ erseei of the tenantry 
to the wriier of the revenue and to the three supenntendents of 
works the village of Karandaegam as wages to tho^e who supply 
rosiu and incenso four farms from Damiya, to those wlio supply 
wiclo and oil to the dTge a pa^ala from this village to the two 
persons who supply white lotus and flowers for offerings to tho 
digo two kiuyas from this Milage and a firm from Damiya 
each to a keeper of lotus flowers who supplies monthly 120 
flowers two kinjasfioin Sapugamiya, to a painter two kinjas, 
to a wnrdei of tho d'go one nielija 

To the MX persons who supply rosin and incense to the 
Jlnliabuduge, to the preacher of bina, to tho schoolmaster and 
si\ devotees the village GutCgam to the one who supplies 
flowei’S to the llahabuduge two pa^as from this villige and a 
farm from Datnija, to those who supplj rosin to this village 
two farms from Damiya, to the peison ofbciating at tho shnne 
of tl at great stone image rnd to one who supplies 1 aroas two 
pldas each and one admana two patas of rice 

To the person who supplies oil to the d ige at the Biulibisowa 
one pota to tho person who strains water one tulula and tho 
5vmc for the pilimage to the writer of the karmastlrtua one 
kinya two paj a'» and two admnoas of rice To tho chief carjienter 
at the lioiulwil am to tho two master carpciitcra to eight stone 
cutters and two bTazicr> the village 'W^ndudcwaCgam to the two 
wood cutters one kinya each to tho two goldsmiths three I in^as 
each to the two blacksmiths one kinja each to the hniebumcrs 
the village SumiboldewaCgam to the si\ cailcrs tho 'ilIa^jL 
Duminnigam, to the superintendent of the repairs one kiuj a and 
one admana one pata of rice to twelve labourers one admana 
of nee and two p"«Ks as w agfa. 

To the w arders of thoNawa^una Jlahn'Cioja the Nactewi^a 
MahnsaCya and Acmbulud igoba two |•~«hs each to the warders 
of the diflcrcnt d'lgobos beloi^ug to the Actwiblm on the 
upper ami on the lower hill a farm from Damva eaci Tiio 
people working at the d"igc,at the pilima^jo and at the dmmg 



120 


hall, the two -washeTTBen that wash the clothes, the vestments, 
and tiie hed-llnen, shall get three kiriyas from llagulwaewa. 
In the villages and lands belonging to this temple the roads and 

high roads shall he taken, wanderers and 

piltrrims shall not enter. So much water as is in the tank shall 
he distributed to the wihata lands in the manner formerly regu- 
lated by the Tamils None of tlie lands belonging to this 
temple shall bo given away as a pledge, those who have thus 
gotten any thereof shall give it back to tbo temple. To ensure 
prosperity to the institution these regulations shall be strictly 
obeyed. 

(123 ) Mineri : the workmen on tbo fields, if there 

is any work a fine of 500 kalandas of gold . . 

.... the noblemen shall take in this kingdom, cocoanuts and 

tamarinds shall not be cut inside the three kingdoms 

shall not stand the warder of the granary with one 

hand five the fifth 

(124.) Attanayala : The glorious endless . who was 

an object of respect to the fehatriya tribe, being descended from 
the unbroken line of Iksbwaku, being born in the womb of tlie 
chief queen to His Jlajesty the King, son of King Sivi sanga bo, 
the pinnacle of the Ksliatrija castle, the sage who learned the 
doctrine 

(120.) Slab flora Anumdhapuia: The lay devotees to the lords 

of the world of gold two lianas and a half, ono ailmana 

at tlie two corners flowers sick people shall not take 

rice, having made bracelets for them, to take rice 

(135.) Dewanagala: The glorious cndles.s, whoso renown ex- 
tended over the whole world, who was an object of veneration 
to the other royal dynasties of Dambadiwa, descended from the 
uninterrupted line of thelkshw.Hku family, au eminent Ksliatriya, 
bom in the womb of the chief queen, wlio had become Lord of 

Lanka by (hereditary) succession , 

(137.) Galwihiira, Polonnaruwa : 1254 years from the time of 
King IValagam Abh.H, when 454 years bad elapsed since our 
Buddha, having, in a time extending over four asankhya's 
100,000 kalpa’s, fultiJled all the thirty perfections, and having, 
on the Mara battle-ground, mormted on the divan of thorough 
enlightenment, conquered the irresistible Mara, together with 
his retinue, attained the state of omniscience, and forty-five 
years (after that), on the fourth day, having accomplished by 

quenching as a large cloud does by rain, so he, in 

many hundred thousands of crorcs of kalpas. by the nectar of 
tljc law [having thus accomplished] all the duties of a Buddha, 
extinguished (his) life by means of the sacred ninipadhi 5 e.sha 
nirvana near the city of Ku^inagara, in the grove of Sal trees of 
the king of the Malla's ...... wlien, tlic congregations being 

broken up, mligion w-as fading away. His Majesty King Cri 
SamghaWhi PaTakramabMiu, descended from the unbroken line 
of Maluvamtnnta and the others, born of the Solar race, the king 



121 


over kmf^ resplendent through the rays of his glory -wliicb 1 as 
penetrated many regions anointed bv the anointment of para 
mount dominion on Lamk%s ground enjoying the delight of 
dominion "with the tieasure of his merits made patent he the 
very wise one having reinoved the poweiful poison of non obser 
vance and false observance of religious ordinances (which arc) 
tl e loot of Ignorance and false knowledge having seen young 
gentlemen practising religion (thinking) if, 

sctin^ a spot on of in emperor like me m the religion 

of the pure Bnddba they might bpcoin<> indifferent, then Buddhas 
religion will be destroyed and many beings go to hell ftherefore) 
it is right that I shall support the religion of Buddha in order 
thatitmaj last file thousand (years) like Bhammisoka iilio 
Ins heart instigated by compassion preceded by intelligence 
having supported tbe tlunking I will make that 

it lasts spotless for five thousand (yeais) having combined a 
number of \irtues as unbrokenness and freeness from hole's. 


having seen the congregation of priests living in the great 
wihara under the leadership of the great Sthavira Hal akii9japa 
who lived on TJdumbara gin, omated with the jewel ornament 
of wordly qualities as preservation increase and cultivation of 
the aggregates of virtues Laving supported them haviDg, 
supported the great them Tissa sou of Moggali wlio n is gianted 
1 Bnddhakalpa by Buddha baaing made the witkeU Bhiksl us 
behave spotlessly having crushed what resisted having cleansed 
from dirt the religion bad caused the thud council — remoaed 
many hundred wicked Bhihshus from the teaching and religion 
havmg n ade one nika^ ft by umtiog the three niLaya b wl ich 
even at tl e time when there were great Arhats endowed with 
a number of qualities as the six supernatural faculties Ac., not 
being united even with gieat effort by former kings were 

having built the great wih ira of Jetawana and many other 
costly u il aras in a inoiis places in tbe wland of LamLa, having 
made there residences for more than tl ousand of the great pnest 
hood making support by the gift of the food of th* religion 
uninterruptedly continued being desiroLa of the enjoy 

ment of the taste of the Lanpine«s rising from the sight of the 
priesthood — laving from time to time adopW th® row of 
fasting having approached the wil ira and gon® amon" tl e 
pneste assembled — having eojojed th® tas*e of th® happiness 
of the joy produced by this sight (thiakm^ it nght tliat 
bj me with great effort in order that the glc-a of this samkhv a 
may last five thousand (ycar») undis‘urled m cAjer t!;at m fature 
also the priesthood without lentr e«iabj_®d in the dutv of 
knowledge of the (sacred) eenpbifes. ecdo— with the qcal 
of alepa and eajata maypr-ep-r fcsniL'F f-vea alvicp^d i~ 
struction Eehgxon shaU b® bejig endowed wi*i 

proper and patent^ Mrtofe, fcarii^ i.«ard rsqu&j* c 2*. 

'”‘=*1 from tb® grea*^ 

-!v Elal] n t t 


haa mg stated ll at by tl® 

Hal ak 91 apa those who Iitf t 



122 


having rnaclo a sancla of tlioVinaya of the law and with tlio 
intention that the chief thera? Bliould give among the faithful 
of the disciples who aro with each of them the katikawa 
■which the aedurol made without expanding them, being Ct 

for not allo’wing those who dwell to become 

careless, but uniting them to tbe burden of study, not allowing 
them to despise in the lower assembly the Vinaja, the Kliudda- 
sikkha, the Patimokkha, the suttas, tlio Dasadlmmma sutta, and 
the three Anumaua suttas, together with tlio Vinaya books, 
putting far away the conversation with the multitude, he ordered 
that those who were engaged .in study should bo continually 

kept in seclusion Having purified himself tliroe times 

having set himself assiduously to 

and other work, having taken two or three and 

h<aving interrupted the seclusion not even for n single day, ho 
ordered that each man shoold direct himself first to wliat is 
proper. And having applied himself to these above-mentioned 
virtues, accomplishing his own and other people’s work (?), 
having organised the burden of study in the above-mentioned 

way having made tho pupils and fellow-priestu 

leain the Hula sikkha, the Sekluya and the Vinaya book, having 
heard the Sikkha waland\ winisa (comp. Zoysa’s Report on tlio 

Temple libraries, p. C), having made an abndgement 

he disposed of tho ascetics. Having obscia’cd the fasting 

Iiaving reflected on the Dasadhamniasutta, having 

observed the above-mentioned seclusion, basing phown his 
abilUy, having leai-ned, in a limited time, the duties of pcifonu- 
anco, Iiaving applied himself to the burden of spiritual insight 
(Dhamm., p, 80), having spent his days according to tho prescript 
of tho four sampajanha’s (Dhamm., p.v3S9), he said : It is right 
to teach the novices tho Heranasikkha, tho Sekhlya, tho Dasa- 
dliammasutta, the Vinay, shook and the play (?), to exercise the 
paribarana without dcsjiising it, and to observe the seclusion 

iijotber and f.ither, two peroons, 

and those which ai e from the same womb (brothers and sisters), 
widows and >'irgln.s and fellow students (shall take) their food 
and go begging in the manner 'indicated above. Medicines 
for the sick and for the fellow students, and the five ways of 
collecting alms in forbidden places, except going to the pirit, 
must be avoided. At n wrong time leave to go to the village 
must not be given. If- leave is given to those -who go in order 
to visit firk people, it is a dukka^a apatti for the teachers to givo 
leave to the avyaktas ; if the avj’aktas have got no leave to go 
to the uposatlia pawaracam (Kliuddasikkh^ vs S), knowing the 
degree of apatti and anapatti (guilt and innocence) and maklim 
any one of the vyakta saiigha responsible (?). leave should be given 


to them if any one of the priesthood lives in the 

neighbourhood except having seen it is not 


allowed to make him dwell (there) T .... for tho 

pricstliood in tho middle of the night sitting down cross-legged, 



123 


if IS fit to enjoy sleep and to recreate their bodies , in the early 
morning, having risen, 'ind having set themsehcq lo work vith 
to spend their ^ays sitting standing and valking 
about to learn pulumu(?), to put on clotlics, to clean their teeth 
the dagoba the botree and the templeground , the teachers and 
the theras md the sick should receiae their couches and their 
food and other requisites , aftei-words the priests should descend 
into the dining hall and, having taken tlicir gruel and done the 
duties of the dining hall they should inspect the account books 
. . the dming, etc, should be done qmclly 

Having taken the gruel they should set 
themselves to work with and pass their dajs, 

having applied thomselvas to the burden of stuclj with the 
nj~iya (?) the householaers and the ascetics should without 
becoming samsa^tha (?) up to a certain time spend their dajs 
not veoithy except by compassion (alms) 

Having receiaed ard being pleased , when jou come together, o 
bhikkhns you should do two things — religious conversation oi 
noble silence Besides these two things religious conversation 
and silent aUeatiou (there is) the unprofitable talk (Brahmaj via 
sutta p 10) and love thoughts and evil thoughts (which) they 
should avoid, in the beginning of the night the^ should not (?) 
preach bana listening to the lehgious conver 

sation etc., not m the succes ion of the disciples spending (tlieir 
time) in tlio acquisition of spiritual insight , at midnight, at a 
lucky moment sitting cross leijged it is fit to enjoy sleep after- 
wards to pilgrims and ascetics shall rest 

at the watchliuts, the , the image house, or at some other 

plate, at all occasions cither lu cainestor in joke unbecoming 
talk shall not be used by nnjon® , towards virgins and 

little children no harsh or laughing words shall be used, the 
overseers shall not be angry with the working people who do uot 
know then work, those who only know their own jokaduni 
and no othere shall not give them to others torn tom 
beating by the elders of the priesthood aud other utensils 
except wliat is at hand for obtaining ram 
at a place which is not migated is good to apply , such utensils 


“ the laughter alone increases (1) thusl aving sj pken on aci^oiuit 
of the laughter, itis fit not to expand the sorrow, but to b! ov/ ifc 
alone by woid of mouth those that have then own tcmf/lea 
destroyed shall not subduo othcis, and those tint Jiavr d^^'royed 
otliei temples shall not st ly in their cw it , ‘ by a bbikHiti 

who does not know writing and is careful . ihrou di 

temptation eagerness thus havingspoken it »» not r,J,* Ut nh^w 
eagerness on anj occasion , saluting tli da^o* t 2 A'th^ b itrco 
etc., worihipping , • I'y 1),.. Wolli' 

cleaner it is not allowr 1 tot,?/' J v?, ih„ Iiou»^ 

holders m tl 0 villages shall not uv V;^*''5orvMjblia'^ 



124 


katha : Hero is a bhikkhu who either alone or in the middle of 
the priesthood by inconsiderate talk stands A^exing the theros 

and sits down annojnng .them and preaches . . 

. . and strokes the head of a young man 

thus having spoken, appearing in the middle of the priesthood, 
yoAi should not touch the body with the robe,; and tlio elders of 

the priesthood with compassion up to this moment 

shall preach; in no place whatever young 

men touching (?) with their bodies shall j 

those that live away from their houses shall not cause pcrplcsion ; 
after having purified [them] from sin, you should ordain [them] ; 
after having purified (them) you should admit them to the order ; 
after having purified them you should give them the nissaya ; one 
son of a noble family having received the ordination and the ad- 
mission to the priesthood establishes the order ; (the 

same in Sinhalese) after having pxirified (them) yon should 
ordain them, after having purified tliem you should admit them 
to the order, after having purified them you should give them the 

nissaya In this above-mentioned way you 

should not object to anybody’s wishes ; anything that has been 
ordered in this katikawa shall not be disobeyed; if anybody' 
commits a mistake a fine is assessed up to the third time, hut if 
be commits the mistake again without paying the fine up to a 
month’s time he shall be made a prisoner nccording to the rule 

in the Vinaya (I) The elders of the gai.ms 

and the thera shall apply themselves to tlie burden (of study) 
and shall not be careless and shall notdel the priesthood trans- 
gress these rules ; it is right that by the great theras a fine 
shall he established. Hail ! 

(140.) PadhvU ; ParSkram.alwh», tljc cakrawai tti sovereign fif 
happy Lamka, descending fiom ancient princes, has finished (the 
repairs) of the tanks and ponds for the use of the fields whicli he 
made in every part, finding many streams and ponds useless and 
broken, in the hope of increasing the happiness in this and the 
next world. 

(143.) Damhulla: The sovereign lord of Lomka Patakxaina- 
Kvhu, cakrawartti of the dynasty of Kalinga^ (sumamed) the 
heroic and •invincible royal warrior, gloriously endued with 
might, majesty, and Avisdoro, and, like the placid moon', radiant 
Avitli cheering and benignant qualities ; the liege lord of Lakdiwa 
by right of birth, deriving descent from the race of King Wijayn, 
uho extirpated the demons and peopled Ceylon, and Avas an 
object of veneration to the other royal dynasties ot Dambadiwa, 
whose renown extended over the whole world ; having dispersed 
his enemies as the brilliant orb of the sun over the summit of 
tlie mountain of the mom dispelleth darkness ; and liaving 
extended the evnopy of his dominion over tlie whole island; 
enriched the inhabitants who had become impoverished by 
inordinate taxes, and made them opulent by gifts of lands, cattle, 
and slaves, by rolinquisbing tho revenues for five years, and 



125 


restonng inlientances and by annoal donations of five balanced 
•weights consisting of gold, precious stones pearls, silver, Lc , , 
and from an earnest Tvisb that succeeding kings should not 
again impoverish the inhabitants of Ceylon by levjing excessive 
imposts, he ordained that the revenue should be foi the first 
amuna one amuna three paelaa six mandaras for the middle one 
amuna two paelas four mandaras, for the last five paelas three 
mandaras , and considermg that those who laboured •with the 
billhook in clearing thorny jungles earned their livelihood 
distressfully, he ordained that they should be alwajs exempt 
from the titx. He also made it a rule that when permanent 
grants of land may be made to those who had perfonned 
meritorious services such bequests should not be e\ anescent like 
lines drawn upon water, by being inscribed on leav es a material 
whicb IS subject to he destroyed by rats and white ants, but 
that such patents shall be engraved on plates of copper, so as to 
endure long unto tlieir respective posterities 

Thnce did he rake the circuit of the island, and having 
visited the villages the towns and the cities and having explored 
the places difhculfc of access, the fostnes es surrounded with 
uater, the strongholds m the midst of forests and those upon 
sleep bills he had as pieci«e a view of the whole as if it were a 
ripe neli'fruit in his hand , and sucli wns the security which he 
established os well m the wilderness os in the inhabited places, 
that oven a woman might traverse the country with a piecions 
jewel, and not be asked, What is it 7 When he had thus insured 
safety m this island he longed to engage in vrar and twice dis 
mayed the kings of Pindi, and having accepted the royal 
maidens and also the elcphanls and liorse« with othei tnbutes of 
homage which the;y sent him he formed friendly alliances with 
such of tlie princes of Codi, Giuda and of many other countries 
as duly appreciated his good will but by lus personal valour 
struck terror into those who esteemed not Ins friendship , and he 
caused princesses to be brought unto him from each of those 
countries, with other tributes of homage and as then tlieie 
remained no hostile kings tbioughout Damladiwa to wage war 
against him, he tamed at Raraeqwara where he made donations 
ot balanced weights consisting of valuables and thus ennehed 
the poor and satisfied the needy He then caused obelisks of 
victory, formed of stone to be set up as lasting monuments and 
having built a . dewale departevl thence with a four 

fold armj , and returned to Ceylon Then reflecting that, as he 
had no enemies left bohmd he might conquer euemie'' 

lie caused almshouses to he erected at many places in Dambadiwa 
and Ceylon, and caused alms to be distributed constantly 
i He united the three nikayas that had 

been separated for a long time recited the three pitakas and 
other Buddlusi books and rratored the temples and d igobas 
whicli were destroyed m consequtnc® of the calamities which had 
befallen the land during former reigns be rebuilt 



127 


li\ e ifc Pulastipur'i ha\ing in order to worship the relics of tlie 
sacrod Ruan'w aeli D tgoba suirounded bj a fourfold arm j gone 
out with great splendour in the fourth jear of his xeign hiving 
uhen being at the distincc where the Digoba appeared in sight 
abghted from the carriage, Iming on his royal teet entcied the 
terrace of the Ruanwadi having os if spiinklmg sand on the 
terrace, scattered countless pearls and having as if flowe’'S weie 
blossoming while going round, offered uninter 

ruptedlj gold llowers silver flowers the sev en gems, having male 
protection from the sun to the Dagoba bj a flvg of ptice^e'>s 
silken cloth, having aftei having peipetudJy heaped up hcapo 
of camphor thus mide offcnnga of inccnae aud Invnng made 
seven offerings of incense with lahyan oil, perfumed od, and 
other oil , likewase liaving offered with kaluwaci incense and 
sweet scented flow er« having gone round with the four kinds of 
odours, and having swept it himself liavnng made an offering 
with 40 lakshas of masuians having (by oidciiug) in a distance 
of seven gavyutis from the city no living being shall be killed 
given Bceurity, having hal the tom tom beaten, having given 
security to fishes m 12 gieat tanks, having given gold clothes 
and other things they liked to the Kimbodyans havang ordered | 
not to kill birds having giver security to birds having heard tbe ' 
joyful shouts of the people who saw him. speaking in rjupstioning 
the Bttddhisit gods there when m lus devotion he w ortluppcd 
the relics having, in his jojful inclination towards Buddha which 
then arose lemitted the taxes again for a jear to tbe irhabitauts 
of the island of Lamka having given ovei tl e roj d insignia to 
the Loke arak men iwan thcie present and liav mg worshipped 
them, having built up the Ilancawatti and other wmara'* having 
given countless wealth and several hundred yalas of paddy and 
handed it over, having been pleased to decorate the citj like a 
cit^ of gods — mav future pnnees also perceiving that to those who 
worship in then hearts protection will be m like 

maimei from the Buddlust gods, protect and presene the 
wil was and tbe inhabitants of the wiharas in the cit^ tie 
people, a d the rehgioir 

(140 ) Inscription on the great lion fiom Polonnaiaiwa 

(1 ) His Majesty Ni^jankaMalla Kaliuga cakrawartti, oveilord 
of Lamk i, used to sit upon this throne 

(J ) ’^\ hen he sat upon lus throne this was the place for the 
secretaries 

(S ) When ne sat upon lus throne this was the place foi the 
cliief nnnislcrs 

(4) ^Vlien he sat upon his throne tiiswas the place for the 
generals. 

(o ) W h s u h th , this was the place foi tbe sub Icmg® 

(G) W h s u b th , this was the place for the Clown piince 

(7 ) W b s u b th , tins was the jdace for the gov ernora of 

provinces 

(8) AV h s u b th , this, was the place for the bazar council 



(147.) Inscriptions on tl»o friczo round tlio TJiupriraran: — 
jporlion — I. 

The overlord of Krdingft Pnriilcramabliuja Niijijainkn JIalla 
tlie round relic house at Pulastinngnrn 


lie who comes of the royal race of Ikslvwuku like a filar on the 
fiirehend o! the family of the sun, who, receiving^ the kingdom hy 
royal succo.ssion and putting on the c^o^v^l, ohtained the onico of 
chief king, Ills Jlajesty Nii^?ainkii Malla KiTlinga Ihirakrainabrihu, 
descended from the great king Jnyngopn and his queen Pfirwatl 
in llio nth Jnonth on a foil moon day in a lucky nioineut . . . 
having received the crown hh father spake 

III. 

in five years having remitted the taxes, giving 

food, lands, onttlo, slaves, clothes, etc. having tliO'^e 

that worked with the billdiook exempted from tiie tax, giving 
for sale always (IV.) many things, making people happy, and 
considering that robbers committed robberies through hunger for 
wealth, 


XotfO* 2 )ort/on— VII. 

at many places putting guardians of the law , . . 

. . . . preventing the imiabitaiits of the world from bad conduct, 
putting an in9crii)tion at the royal door not to be destroyed, 

to protect tlio law of the |rarcnts in the 

three kingdoms (VIII.), having ficen those who took away . . . . 
. . . . saying I give luck to them and to the other princes, 
having given gold and silver bracelets and pearls and other riches, 
and Laving made happy all tho people, having established princes 
in Coda, Gaueja, and other countries, having sent soldiers, 
longing (t) after battle, not finding enemies behind, li.aving con* 
quered tlie enemies pride and haticd, having built at Pulnstipura 
the Ni^^amka lestLouse and the Brnhmana resthouse and 
many other resthouses and dining halls, giving gold ami silver 
biacclets, w’eapons, and lamps, hrilliant like a wishing tree, with 
a great retinue pouring down a rain of gifts at Aimradhapura. . 

(148.) Galpota: — He who gmned endless glory tluough tlic 
number of his qualities, the Lord descended from tho unbroken 
line of King Ikshwaku, tho Krdinga cakiawartti, passing through 
the air 1700 years after the period when King Wijaya landed on 
the island of Lainkh, whidi by tbc command of Buddha was 
placed under tho tutelary care <rf tho gods, aud liaving extirpated 
the Yakshas, made it an abode of mankind — in the kingdom of 
Krding.'i, on the continent of Dambadiwa, which is the birth- 
place of Buddhas, Bodliisattwas, and Cakrawavttis, conceived in 



1S9 


tlie Avomb of tlio qnoon P \nritl Kubldcwl unto tlie km" 
Jn^'agopa tlie glon of the iljTuisty wl«ch rcjgned m tho city of 
Simlmpura imitcJ by tho king -who ^vas his •senior kinsman to 
come and reign over lus hcretLtniy kingtlom of Lakdi\ia ^\lra 
Isn,%anika "Math hnded with a grcit rctinno on Lamku and 
having been installed in the oflico of nepaenjoicl the luxunes 
ofreg^it^ and having been accomplished m the art of war as 
vicllas jnidl tho other branches of knowledge which form the 
circle of tho arts and «ciences, he m due order of regal succession 
received tlie sacred unction and Wiog tlien crowned was m 
stalled as king At the festival of his coronation ho was invested 
with a glorj which filled tho lirmament and overpowered all 
beholdere and with such danng courage that wlien ho vias 
bunting m a forest a furious sbo near havung rushed towards 
him he laid her and her whelps dead at his feet When ho 
traversed a di^ dasert and wished for vintcr an uncxjicctcd 
tloud instantly poured down an abundant shower His rojnl 
I rowess was such that like the spring of tho noble lion nothing 
could withstand it \Mien he went to enjo) tho bath ami % 
huge polonga approached Inm there, he lumcu aside and said 
‘ Jhou knowest what thou dcsencst whercui on tlio snake 
stung itself and sacnGccd its life His irresisbbic ma)est> vins 
sucli that tho state elepl ant no sooner saw him than he roared 
the shout of tnumpU and took the king on lus back Hus 
Majesty Sin safgo bo Ridioga Pnrukroinabidm Wlranija 
^i(;<;amka Malta Apratimalta dispersed his enemies ns tlio sun 
over tho summit of the mountain of tho dawn (dispellcth 
darkness) and causing the smiles of tho countenances of his 
jieople to expand with gladness, exercising power and en- 
joying regal delights like another Sakra ])cwendnv in 
bcnignitj resembling tl c full moon in iirroncss tho Ifoimt 
Meni in profunebty tho great Ocean m patience tho earth 
and occupying lus station like a wishing tree produced by 
the merits of his subjects he considered Uius Tho maheo of 
some people and tho nnxiclj of others to maintain the rights of 
their respective families hnv o been heretofore and may prov o 
1 ereaftcr, the source of danger to our djTinstj and being moved 
w ith benevolence towards the people lie confinned to them tic 
privileges appropriate to tho diflerent families and relinquished 
tie revenues of five years. IIo reduced tho rate of taxes on 
arable lands imposed by formei kings and fixed tho tax for tho 
first amuna at one amuna three packs six maiuloras for tlie 
middle amuna at one amuna, two paelas four mandaras for 
the last at ono amuna one paelo three mandoras. Ho 
relinquished tho tax on the dry gmm pnxiuced on chenas the 
cultivation of which is attended wiUi disticss and ordained 
that Bucli tax should cease for evermore Ho quenched tho fire 
of indigence with showers of nches consisting of gold coin 
copper bell metal gold silver pearls, precious stones, vestments 
and jewels. Ho ajipointed ministers and others whom he pro 
vided with lands slaves, cattle houses, and vanous other riches 
Q 6038 I 



ISO 


in abundance ; be reconslrutfted the cmban^ents of great lakes, 
■watercourses, and "weira, which had remained neglected many 
years in the three kingdoms, all -which he restored to prosperity 
and granted to the inbabitauts thereof the boon of security, and 
other gifts. He appointed judges in many provinces to remove 
injustice, and, considering that robbers committed robberies 
through hunger for wealth, he gave them whatever riches tliey . 
desired and thus relieved the country from the dread of thieves, 
and by establishing order amongst the dwellers in forests and 
the dwellers in villages he removed the thorns (of annoyance). 
According to the sacred injunctions of the doctrine of Buddha 
he also expelled the unrighteous from the religious communities, 
and thus freed the country in general of the thorns (of evil- 
doers). He provided the four requisites for the comfortable 
maintenance of the holy priesthood, and every year caused 
priests to be ordained and bestowed gifts of yellow robes, and 
as in former times assigned extensive estates and lands of lesser 
extent (to the wiharas). Having greatly promoted the interests 
of the doctrine, and advan<Jed the same as well as the sciences 
by bestowing suitable gifts on professors of the religion and on 
professors of the sciences ; and considering that the continuance 
of the religion and of the sciences (B) depended on the royal 
dynasty, he sent to the country of Kalinga and caused many 
princesses of the Soma and Surya races to be brought hither, 
married the royal virgins to his son the exalted "Wlrabahu and 
increased the royal family. 

His Majesty, wearing the crown, and being decorated with 
the royal ornaments, caused lumself, as well as the chief queens, 
KaliCga Subhadra Mahadewi, and Gangawamga Kalyana 
Mahiidewl, and his son the great sage, and his daughter Sarwan- 
gasundarl to be weighed in a balance every year; and by 
bestowing five times their weight on the priests and brahmans, 
the blind, the lame, the dwarfish, and the deformed, and otlier 
destitute and friendless people who thronged from the ten 
regions, made them happy, and caused a constant supply of 
rain. 

All the people who were Interested in the cause of the 
religion and in the welfare of the country w’ere therefore afi’ected 
with the most submissive fidelity, and devoted their lives to bis 
SInjesty, who, having atb*ined the acme of virtue, daily per- 
formed acts of merit, and -was pleased to live in the city named 
Palnstipura . , . Kaliuga. He observed with the eyes of a 
Bjiy continually his kingdom and other kingdoms, and having 
put OUT ishind of Lanika in peace he was pleased to look for-, 
ward (to other countries) ; surrounded by a fourfold army, he 
visited in Trisimhala, the villages, towns, and cities, and explored 
the fortresses and the strongholds and secure places on moun- 
tains, and in forests, and in marsh, and gUddened the people 
Hying there with showers of ^riches; looking .about in the three 
kingdoms he repaired tho Miynnguna 



131 


KaolanJ and other ancient wiharas, and liaving caused the 
reclining, sitting, and standing images in the cave of Dambulla 
' to be gilt at an expense of a lak, and having made ofleringa of 
valuables -wortb a sum of 3C laks to the great Roamvtcli caitya 
at Anurudliapura, he made a stone dagoba as worship-place for 
the gods who rejoiced at the said pujtt, and caused an inscription 
to be engraved. Ha\dng thus restored to its ancient condition 
the island of Lakdiwa, the receptacle of* tlie efficacious doctrines 

of Buddha ho proceeded to 

Dambadiwa, surrounded by a fourfold array, and consistently 
with his cognomen of the dauntless and irresistible warrior, not 
hesitating in any place witli great splendour, unmovcable like 
the blue sapphire he crossed the grc.at ocean, and being in 
Dambadiwa longing for battle, sent out champions to go and 

challenge battle when it was time 

to diess for the battle the general Lag Wijaya siuga having 

conquered Dambadiwa, knowing . 

going down to battle, having seen them in fear, the mother of 
the king of PaiidT fsaid) “let only our lives be spared, the king- 
dom shall be thine'’ royal 

princesses and a laigo tribute from the 

Soli country and having formed 

friendly alliances avith the peaceably disposed princes of the 
countries of KntTjnata, Nelluru, Gauda, Ealinga, having driven 
those who were not |)eaccably disposed into fear by his proweas, 
having received princesses and tribute from every I^gdom, 
lie brought them to Hatncfwara; ho caused himself to be 
weighed in a balance, and gave to the |>eople living in different 
countries endless riches ; at this place, as a lasting memorial, he 
built a dewale to which be- gave the name Ni59arnke^wara; os 
he saw no mote adversaries, in compliance with the Bupplications 
of the kings of Dambadiwa to relieve them from fear, he re- 
turned with the said army to Lakdiw.a, and making this rcGee- 
tion ; *‘In this world I have no enemies, therefore I sliall apply 
myself to the Conquering of enemies of the next world ” ; he 
■m'dwri'm'ma ttiA in oWuct- wtnA,Tn» -fEdiureift p’iace* ^ms- 
houses, including the '(so-called) N!99araka almshoopo, end gave 
gold and ^ver bracelets and other presents like a wishing tree, 
and in order to witness in person the rejoicings of the* Een<li- 
cants who received presents, be built another iilm«hoa*o whicli 
he called Ni^amka dana mantlapo. He dedicated Lis son his 
daughter to the Dajada and patm relics, and afienrards re- 
deemed them by offering in th^ stea/1 a dSgohs cf solid gold 
. and other valuables He caused to be baili cf stone (C> a 
Dalada temple, with a covered terrace arersed it called (after 
him) the Nifoamka lata mandapa, and aa cr^n hall decorated 
with wreaths and festoons so that beiclders should be delighted 
and thereby merit swaigga and msksha. He tUm causal 
another structure to be formed to the?^ it-- roof 

dagoba and the principal temple. He also causal a 

I 2 



133 


Dagoba to be constructed on the north side of tho royal dwel- 
liog, of 80 cubits in height, and surrounded it "with walls 
having gateways, and with cells for the residence of priests ; 
thus he ensiu-ed the prosperity of the religion and the country. 
Moreover, Lamka being sacred ground and posscf-sing sacred 
qualities beneficial to sentient beings, he enjoined the preserva- 
tion of those qualities, and in his mercy was pleased to publish 

an edict that princes in their human form and 

appearance should be considered as gods standing 

between the kings and the Buddhas (?)j and further con- 
sideiing that when princes award penalties for offences 
they only act as physicians who prescribe remedies for 
diseaies of tbe body, and exercise their power in order to re- 
strain from crime and so prevent falling into hell and give 
swargga and moksha; kings who cannot protect the world of 

mankind protect the world of gods ; princes to 

obtain luck and misfortune by his 

virtue should keep afar and protect the obtained happiness and 

the rang of tbe family being fallen from 

their office and decayed like fruits the princes . 

at the time being faultless . . in order not to awake , . 

that some people should go to death 

give life to the kings, glory in their bodies (?) for a long time to 

last meichuots from the Gow! tribe should 

protect Hastasara ........... you should not be careless 

m order to protect the kmgdom tbe princes 

exalted by pride , . in order to obtain 

happiness from their offices they should not be proud ; from tho 

Gowi tribe . . , . having not seen the offices 

obtained by themselves the inhabitants of the 

world not overcome by them a question : tbe swan and 

the lion the jackal and others by eminent people 

tbe happiness of the world together 

from seeing . . . with suitable words 

princes and aepas and great kings having seen -the lords of the 

world it is proper to do . . . , if there 

are none by order of the queens to protect if there 

ate none it is proper to conserve tbe kingdom even by placing 
in the seat of royalty the sandals worn by a former sovereign . . 

^ Enemies to the doctrines of Buddha ought not to bo 

installed in the island of Latnkn which is appropriate to the 
Kalinga dynasty, for that would bo like substituting a poison- 
tree for a wishing-treo ; but if princes of tho Kalinga race 
to whom tho island' of Latnka lias been peculiarly appropriate 
since the reign of Wijaya be sought for and brought hither, 
they will prove worthy rulers and preserve the religion and 
tho country. Aspire to attain the felicities of both worlds 
rcllccting that virtue doth conquer tho universe. Future 
sovereigns are thus affectionately exhorted by Kalinga Niccamka 
king of Ceylon. 



133 


In iKe margin 

This cngra\ od stone is the one which the chief minister 

caused the strong men of Nj^^amka to bring fiora the 
niouniam Sacgiu m the time of the lord (^il Kalinga Cakrawartti 
149 Slab at the Dalada Mniuliiawo, Polonnaruwa If it is 
jour wish to increase yoiu piosjieuty and allay jour feam to 
picserve the position of jour family to respect the customs of 
your tribe and to protect subjects chose jou families of 
kshatiijas to sovereignty and not the other castes embrace 
these maxims spoken bj Nij^amka Malla 

He who comes of the rojalraceof Iksliwvku like a star on 
the forehead of the family of tho sun who receiving the king- 
dom by royal succeMion and putting on tho crown obtained tlio 
office of chief kmg, His Majesty Ni 99 amka Malla Kahnga 
Piunkramahahu, illustnous as ^1 ra the king of gods with 
endless royal splendour incomparable by the number of Ins 
virtues generosity, truth heroism and others like them he 
dissipated the darkness of his enemies like the sun. when he rises 
over the mountain of tho dawn and made peace throughout 
Ceylon living in the city of the Kahnga kings called Pulastipura 
reigning with the ten kingly virtue and increasing religion and 
tlio prosperity of the woild like a wishing tree produced by the 
merit of tho inhabitants of tho earth 
His Majesty relieved the exliaustion of the poor by the rainfall 
of his gifts ornaments and dres% jewels pearls coins silver and 
gold and being pleased when he beheld the prosperity of the 
people deeply considered in Ins great mercy and wisdom, 
thinking We have done the benefiting of the world which is 
the law inherent in our family of Kalmga how having made 
firm to the end of tins kalpa this prosperity which we said we 
lia^ e made inav they take it as a kntajaiga and perceiving that 
the prosperity and the very race of the wicked were rooted out 
Avho not knowing the greatness and virtue of kings, tl e gods of 
men and parents of the world offended agamst them he thought 
iW ng'.W ihsi joiat .dmals? Aicfptav is- s>s s,vs .* ” 

always giving much advice and instruction as if to give eyes to 
the world blind m its ignorance h ivmg been pleased to show 
tho rule of the law Treason is a thing which must be avoided 
like tho five great unpardonable sma , those who commit tl o 
five sms rauider and the rest and those wl o take poison destioy 
only themselves hut the very race of those who commit treason 
and all who are with them is destroyed Treason tlieiefore must 
note\enbe imagined in the heait neither is it right toli\o 
without a king Therefore when there i*? no one who has tli i 
office of chief king either he who is tho heir apparent or if tin 
be nonesuch then one of the pnnees or if there aiononoof 
them one of the queens must bo chosen to the kingdom 

Over oui island of Ceylon which belongs to tho religion o( 
Buddha non buddhistical prmces fixim Cola or Kerall or otlnr 



134 


couiitiitts must not be chosen; those who join them and make 
distmbances shall be called traitors. 

As the crow should not be compared to the swan nor the 
donkey to the Arab, nor the worm to the cobra, nor the firefly 
to the sunshine, nor the snipe to the elephant, nor the jackal to 
the lion, so should no man of the Gorvi tribe be greedy after the 
sovereignty ; however powerful they may be the men of the 
Gowl tribe should not obtain the kingdom. 

Those wlio honour as a king servants like themselves with 
salutations and presents, or receive offices and titles from them, 
shall be called traitors ; whenever a prince of wealth and family 
joins with such people he destroy.s himself. Therefore, if you 
look for and find a prince who has a right to Ceylon and is 
descended from the race of King Wijaya who first peopled 
Ceylon, take sides with such a ruler who will take care of 
religion and the prosperity of the world as if they were lus two 
eyes ; and so protect your own families and fortunes. 

As the crow may imitate the gait of the swan and the donkey 
the Arab steed, as the worm may imitate the cobra and tbe 
firefly the sunshine, as the jackal may imitate the lion and the 
snipe the elephant, so some other caste may emulate the conduct 
of kings; yet it ceiiaioly will not meet with respect bxit only 
with ridicule ; thus speaks the wise and good l^g Ni 5 $ainka 
Malla. 

160. Pillars at Hankot Dagoba : — He who went round and 
over all Ceylon, and having seen the villages and fortified ami 
market towns and cities, and several celebrated places in the 
three kingdoms, including Anuradhapura, DambuHa, Krelani and 
Dondra, and the strongholds in water, and on bills, and in forest 
and marsh, and could distinguish them like a neli-fruit in hi? 
hand ; — lie who in several difficult places in the three kingdoms, 
viz. Ban, Tisa, Mineri, Kantalai, Padi, and others, gave security to 
all living things, and commanded that they should not be killed ; 
— he who for ever remitted the royal dues on places reclaimed by 

cleatiug,and on. ; — hewho saved from fines, flogging, and 

other things of that kind, the'inhabiUints of the world become 
very poor in cattle, buffaloes, and all other means of support, 
through oppvcsMon, imprisonment, and torture, in the time of 
former kings ; — he who gave pearls, and precious stones, and 
beads, and other jewelry, and slaves, and slave-^ls, and corn, 
and wealtli, and buffaloes, and cattle, aud different kinds of 

clothes, and ornaments, besides fields and -vTllages, and 

and thus made all men self-dependent he who secured and 
pacified the realm of Lanka;— he who longing for battle, and 
attended by a great army with four divisions of elephant-riders, 
aivalry, cliarioteera, and infantry, went to Pandl on the continent 
of India, and finding no equal nor opponent, accepted presents 
from Cola ond several countries near Puiull, and was victorious 
on every side (bo who' did aU thia),’ His EsceUency the 
iHuitnous overlord "W'lra Kalinga Iduikepwara Apratimalla 



135 


Ni 5 ?anka llalla Pamkrxma-baho, \ras pleased to salute the relic 
from this house 

151 Stone seat at Rankot Dagoba His Excellency, the 
illustrious overlord Sangabo Wiraraja Ni^gankn klalla of Kalinga , 
— who restored peace to Ceylon, and brought it under one 
sceptre (umbrella), — ^who remitted five years’ taxes for the 
people of Lanka afflicted bj the unbounded taxation of former 
kings, and by yearly giving five times his own weight in metah, 
and much property, including titles, ^^lIages, slaves, cattle 

and gold, and jeuels, and clothes, and ornaments, made 
them happy , — who for ever remitted royal dues ; — who even in 
the woo^ and difficult places rendered living things secure , — 
who at home and abroad built many resthouses and gave great 
higesses , — vho travelled through the three kingdoms, and 
inspected all macce*sible and despised districts and lands , — who 
mcreosed religion , — who from the lust of war w ent with lus 
four fold army to Dambudiwa, and demanded soldiers, and 
when he did not receive the arm}' harassed the pnnees of Coda 
and Paiidi and other places, and having looked at tho rings and 
virgins they sent as gifts and put up pilhi-s of victor}, returned 
In Lakdiwa, and reigned with the ten king!} \nrtues — (He) 
used to sit on this throne mode of a single stone, and was 
pleased to watch the work when he was building the Iluwan« 
wall Da^ba. 

152 Liner inscnpbon on the stone seat of Kiriwihara, — His 
Majesty the lord Wiramja Ni^ 9 amka MoLa Kalinga Lamke 9 wara 
Parakramabahu cakrawartti Ni^^amka Malla in his glory, not 
hesitating in any way, surrounded by n four-fold army, went 
twice over to the kingdom of Pandl 

the general Lag Wijaj a Smgha having conquered Dimbadiwa 
going down to battle, at this lime the mother of the King of 
PaiiiU being seized by terror (said) Let onl} our lives be spared, 
the kingdom shall be thine, eta 

162a Kaeligatta in tho kmgdoms-of 

Maya and Pihiti blame and disrespect , 

being satisfied with nee and betel, not proud . the lord 

enjojmg lus share said People having got their own circle (?) in 
fear of misfortune (B) we like , thus 

havnng spoken he went twice over to the kingdom of Pandi, 
raised the balance, look the queens, elephants, and horses of tho 
king of Pandi as tribute, went over to the kingdom of Soli for 
spoil and then back to the island of Lamka made the three 
kingdoms happy, visited the Adam’s peak and other strongholds, 
His Majesty the lord of Kalmga Ni 99 amka Malla 

163 "Wandanipawibara Tlie king born from the 

Kalmga race, who went since two years round Ceylon, vv ho saw 
towns and villages and several fortresses, strongholds in water, 
in marsh, and in forest, Adam's Peak and other fortified raoun- 
tams like a ripe neli fruit in his hand, in ten directions, who 
established different resthouses in the three kingdoms, who 



136 


gave gold and fiilvev ornaments to many poor people 
together "with his queen’s five people raising the balance, giving 
yearly five times hia own weight, making unhappy people happy, 

happy people raising in the three kingdoms, 

uniting the three nikayas into one, and made still rnore^ * 

made the women of the harem salute the Ruwanwmli Dagoba 

Having pleased the ^vo^king people, having made the 

kinf'dom of Pihiti like a lotus, having built the Hnsvanwscll 
Dagoba, having made the women of the harem salute the relic, 
having given to the people of Lamka that wero unhappy through 
the taxes of former kings, gold and silver ornaments and much 
wealth, he gave orders to fix the tax for the first araunam at 

1 amunam 3 paelas 6 mandaras, for the middle one at 1 amimain 

2 paelas 4 mandaras, for the last at 1 anmnam paelas 

3 mandaras. 

15G. Sahasa Mafia’s inscription at Polonnatnwa. — ^The glorious 
Sahasamalla, lord of the Simhalas, the head of the Kalinga" 
dynasty, having come here from KaUnga, gave to the aged general 
who obtained for him the splendour of sovereignty over Lamka 
a great fortune, viz., villages, etc., and so fulfilled the parts of 
grateful men in sovereignty. 

Descended from the unbroken line of Kalinga emperors who 
in the glorious line of tlie Ikshwaku family bod reduced aU' 
tnk.taw&aa under one umhreUa, whom Oopara^a had 
generated from the worab of Uie great queen Bahidaloka at 
Sitnhapura, celebrated under the name of Sahasa Mniln on 
account of his incomparable valour, His Majesty Siri sfingabo 
KuHnga Wijayabahu after his royal brother called Nig^arnka 
Mafia, who formerly bad gained royal power in Lamka had 
become an inhabitant of swarga, when lixe a number of stars 
after sunset, some kings had sunk and gone, when Larnku being 
without a ruler was placed in darkness like a night which has 
not obtained tbe rising of the moon, the iidigar of Lamka Lolu- 
pnelaekulu abonuwan being himself endowed with excellent 
virtue, the qualities of a minister, ns kulacarn, etc., together with 
the adigar of Lamka Lolupaelackulu biulalnawan who, by lih 
being intent on mti had become his host friond (having said) a 
kingdom without a king like a ship -without a steersman cannot 
last, like the day without the sun cannot flouri.sh and Buddba's 
law without the wheel of order will become unsupported, more- 
over because king Wijaya having destroyed the Yakshas estab- 
lished Lamka like a field made by rooting out the stumps, it is a 
place much protected by kings from this very family; therefore 
the younger brother of king Niy^rpka Malla who reigned hei-e, 
liaving sent loKTifingn, (having said) : "Let us protect the world 
and the religion," liaving persuaded his brother, liaving sent to 
Krdinga the chief MallikSrJnna who lived in that country, 
endowed with firmness in his loyally, having invited (the 
prince), having fetched him with great pomp, having established 
him in Soli, in Kahakoycla pM^anam (B), when tliey entertained 



107 


(him) with splendour becoming llio future dignity of ro^nlt^ 
haMugo\erthronn m two yeirs the bad counsellors ^\lIO In\ing 
heirtl this thing not liking kings who powerful both for rcunrd 
and punishment would protect world ami religion desiring eicli 
their own government, lundc obstacles sliming like the full 
moon when she hns risen under a luck^ constellation eeking 
their wa} on the ocean without obstacles having come having 
united Insimliala under one umbrella, when 1743 }cirs tl rce 
months 27 da} s had gone since Buddha on the 12th in tl c bi ight 
half of Bmcra on luesda} having been crowned under a lucky 
constellation having for this Rcrvicc unequalled bj others invested 
him with the rang of a ^eral and tl inking To mothers wl o 
have got such children it is tight to give superlative honour 
liav mg given the name Lamkatilakamah idewl to their mother, 
having girded her with a golden girdle having given much 
honour (thinking) it is right tliat to all the fortune vvitlivilingei 
and retinue which I have given to General Lag ^\^Ja}a Singa 
1 aving made it last as long ns sun and moon exist future f nnccs 
also (shall stick) because it is a duly of tlie kings to protect 
those who to cverj one do a service, not making obstniction, 
having it established m this w a} shall protect their famil} he 
was pleased to put up an inscription Tf seeing this kings 
fricnu« ministers etc. should take by violence this said 
propert} they will become like low c.asto man 

crows and dogs Therefore such people as wish to j rotccl 
loyalt} shall protect all the j ropert} given to these 

King Sihasa Malla revered m the world prc}s lumself as 
protection of stout adherents, is the first law for kings tlicreforc 
may the kings j rotect the fnmilj of the aged general who aaused 
the ascendency of the Kalmga family together w lUi the foiiunc 
lo7 Pillar of Lag "W ijaj a Singu lut — Geneml Lag ija} a 
siilgu Kit chief mmistcr to LlUvatls iO}nl consort Abhi 
Salamcwan, who comes from the ro}al race of tie glorious 
Ikaliwaku family — m the third year (of the kings reign) 
1 aving made a donation of land one jala for nco 
barley (?) to the priests themselves living in the Buwanpija 
(ratnapriisada ‘palace of jewels’; which he himself built on 
ground frem Anuradlmpura for their case that it may serve 
for the four prut} aj as and one jula to the cait}a 1 tre and 
one yuja to tie image hou«c — the pam m hell which tho o 
shall suffer who obstruct this meut acquired from the olTcreJ 
which shall last as long as sun and moon endure 
(literally sun and moon being the measure ), shall be now 
and m all future (but) wise men who, 1 nving renounce I 
covetousness hatred pride and not obstructing the mciit, do 
may be pleased to sliaro (the merit) 

158 Ruanwaeli Dagoba pavement Southern Altar — 

Abba} a Salaraewan the lord in the eleventh 

day m tl e second half of Acsala llis Slajesty bin 

sangabo Parakramabahu cakrawarttl the lord including tlie 



13S 


princes protecting ■witli Ujo three gems . 

.... resplendent tlie heap of prosperity in the bhan<lara look . 
surrounding tiio earth Wijaya ..... and his mother Sumedha, 
the goddess, and having made their brother lord of liaipka for 

givin" things three people l>eginning 

\vith'*tlie King Dutugaemunu, lord of the Ruanwfcli having 
heard of the exquisite honour done to it by many princes he was 

pleased to favour in an extraordinary way in 

dift'erent mannem 8880 measures, by (giving) clothes 

. . . having made an imago of the caitya and having decorated 

it five yiilas of rice, sixteen having 

decorated it mth sweet smelling flowers, having adorned it with 
flags, banners, and arches, having oflcied, without interruidion, a 

hundred garlands like the great ocean _ two 

thousand kalandas of camphor, having offered from cubit to 
cubit kaluwael and camphor iocense, including this, having 
offered many lamps, having given lo the working people that did 

much work gold (1) clotlies and to their wives 

clothes for wearing, and having made them satisfied, having . . . 

.... to the writers staying in the wjhara, to the • . 

the bxabtaana, the pasakos, llie painters, the goldsmiths, the 

musicians, the tom tom beaters, tJ*® 

servants of the feast garlands having made 

them satisfied with gold, having given it lo the terrace of the 
Ruanwaeli, having heard the Thupawa!p9a, having saluted 
those who recited the dhamma, having ofTerod incense to tlie 
Thuiurama and to the sacred bo-tree, having made Iho tberas 
propitious by seven gapas (J) 

159. Dondra I. — In the lOtli year of His Majesty Siri Sanga 
Bo Parakramababu a cocoanul tope bought for a tumba (?) of 
gold to the Bhiimi roaha wibara and to the image house, and 
200 cocoanut trees to the Lord Dewaraji Let those who increase 
these ^fts and uphold their continual inbcrilauco, enjoy the bliss 
of release in heaven, Tlioso who enjoy the fruit of these trees 

ought, from time to time, to plant seedlings. People . 

who join into the same purpose should hold office. 

ICO. Pae|iifiyana wibara. — ^Parakramabhuja, the lord of Lamka, 
the ornament of the family of the sim (says) ; I ask you, hear 
my word, the word of a future lord of the world (?). .This law 
.similar in the whole world is to be fcq)t by you ; this, the reason 
of my happiness, may produce the good in a merciful mind (?). 

Parakramahhuja, the lord of Xamka, erects the celebrated 

•v^ara called by hia name ’ . . . having given to the ' 

pious people tanks and gardens and lodgings [and records this 
fact] by a Btone-inscriplion. 

^ In the year of Buddha one thousand nine hundred and fifty- 
eight, in the 39th year of the great king ^rl Samghabodhi 
Parakraxoababu, bom of the Solar race, and a descendant of 
lung Mahasammata on the 15th day in the bright half of Maen- 
dindina, in the fffiief city of Jayawardliana, on his throne which 



139 


was’ erected m the adorned hall opposite to the palace called 
Sumangala, <a\3wned with his crotm and attired in his four and 
sixty ornaments, surroxanded by Idngs, sub-icings, and ministers, 
sitting like the god Indra all the time, giving orders in respect 
of the affairs of the ■whole state in pursuance of the orders unto 
Sikuru Mudal one of the chiefs of the king’s household, directing 
him to erect a new temple with a view to impart merit unto the 
queen, the king’s mother, who had gone to heaven, an expense 
of 25,000 has been incurred at Paepiliyana in the district of 
Paiiabunu, to build ramparts, towers, image houses, balls, Bo 
trees, houses for the priests, dewales, resthouses, book repositories, 
flower gardens and orchards, with a "view to its stability and 
prosperity. And this Paepiliyana temple with all that belongs 
to it, with flowers, and trees, and ground grain, with terraces 

and troughs ten amunas in extent, including the ferries 

. . and the gardens, the tanks, behind the five yojanas 


IGl. "Waeligama wihara. — In the sixth year of the reign of 
His ITajesty Siri Sangabo Siri Bhuwaneka bahu, the minister 
named Kaju 'Parakrama having given wages to the workmen, 
having distributed the duties of the priests, having given in 
perpetuation the four pratyayas to the priests in the wihara, and 
m order that the pratyayas might bo given for a day to the 
reverend priesthood coming from the four directions, having 
given ten amunas (?) sowing extent of paddy field bought for 
gold, and a fruit-bearing cocoanut garden and ten slaves, and a 

yoke of oxen and lamps vcbscIs with sprouts . . . , 

.... palankeens, pillows, large beds together 

\ritli other things of this kind proper for tlie priesthood, it is 
proper for all good men who in future shall be, to maintain 
without dispute this wihara improved by the king’s family, 
which has been made to add merit to tlio revered King Bhu- 
waneka bahu who brought me up, and thus to obtain the bliss 
of release in heaven. 

162. Slab ac Kaelanl. — On the eleventh day in the bright half 
of Nawjy'a in the IQthyear of his reijjn Majes^ pri San- 
ghabodhi ^rl Parakramalfehu the paramount lord of the three 
Sinhalas, sovereign lord of other kings, on whose lotus-feet rested 
bees of gems in the crowns of kings of the surrounding countries ; 
whose fame was serenely bright a.s the beams of the moon, who 
was adorned by many noble and heroic qualities xesembliDg so 
many gems, who was an immaculate cmbiyo Buddha, and who 
ascended the tlu-one of Lamka in the 2051®* year of the era of the 
omniscient Gautama, the pro.sperous, majestic, sovereign lord of 
the law, who gladdens the three worlds, who is a forehead orna- 
ment to the royal race of Sakyas, and who is the sun of the 
universe and the giver of the undying Nirwana. 

■The king having considered that the wihara at Rajamaha 
Ivaelaniya was a holy spot where Buddha had vouchsafed to sit, 
to partake of food and preach his doctrines, inquired what works 



140 


of merit by way of repairs there were to be executed there, aud 
having ascertained that the caitya and all other edifices were in 
ruins, incurred much expenses from the royal palace and assigned 
the task of accomplishing the work to the chief officer of tlie 
royal revenue and the minister Parakratnabahu Wijayakkonara, 
who caused the execution of the plastering of the caitya and 
other necessary repairs and works ; built a parapet wall of granite 
sixty cubits in length on the north, constructed a flight of steps 
■with a stepping stone on the erwt ; thoroughly rebuilt the 
Samadhi image house, the house of the snake image and tlio 
eastern gate of the samo monastery and its flights of stone steps, 
the minor Triwanka house, the Telkatnrageya, the latrine common 
to the priesthood and the east gate ; repaired breaches and 
injuries, &c., of the Pasmahalpaya, the Saelapilimageya, the 
Siwurudageya, &c., and repaired various other breaches and other 
works in the wibaTa. And after having accomplished this work 
thoroughly, (the king) tbloklng it desirable that HU Majesty’s 
royal name should be perpetuated in this wihara conferred on 
the chief priest of the monastery tbo title Qrl raja ratna piriwan 
tern, and ordained that all who occupied the lands of the temples, 
those who served in the elephant stables, the horse stables, the 
kitchen, bath rooms, and persons emploj'ed in various other 
occupations, the Tamil and the Siiphalese and those who paid 
rent and who owned land, should give (to the temple) two poelas 
of paddy (measured) by a laha which contains four naelU for 
every amuna of sowing extent, and money payment at the rate 
of one panama for every ten coconut trees, and thus accomplished 
this meritorious work that it may last as long os sun and moon 
exist. 

In obedience -to Uie command delivered by His Majesty, sitting 
on the throne at the royal palace of Jayawarddhana Kotta in 
the midst of the nobles that a writing on stone should be made 
in order that kings and niinisters in future .ages might acquire 
merit by preserving and improving this work, I, Sanhas 
Tiruwaraliau PerumS, have written and guarded this inscription. 

The boundaries to Rajamaha Kaelaniya are Wattala,Malsantota, 
Godarabala, Galpotta, the stono pillar at Gonasena including the 
UruboTUwa Liyadda,tUe canal Rammuda aela,thBKessaketugala, 
the Watagala, Aes;dapaluwa, the inside of Masurutota of 
Diwiyamulla, the boundary stone and the great river. 

163. Dondra II. — In the year 1432 of the auspicious, revered, 
and correct Saka, in the fourth year of the auspicious Lord of 
Ceylon, the fortunate Siri Sangaba Sri Wijayahahu boni in the 
family of the sun, descended from the line of the royal, auspicious, 
and fortunate Mahasammata, on the fifth day of the dark half of 
t!ic month Poson, granting to the Nagatlsa temple in Dondra 
20 amunas so%ring extent of ilie fields in Nawadunne and 
Pategama, and the produce of Eatgama where the Atupattoo 
Aracci mndo the dam, having granted nil this so that it should 
remain for ever in the same manner as the places bought for 



141 


iiionc} nnd no^^ included in Pftnwsnsira were ofTcred to llic god 
Let nil kings and cliicfs and otlicr iniiustcp-, imd cliicf pncits 
nnd piiests 

lot Cojtpcr phti inscription —On lito fifteenth da\ of tho 
dark half ot tho month of IV son in tlie Otli jear of the reign of 
tic illustrious Emperor Sirmngabo bn Mija^nlihu, lincnll^ 
dcM^cndcd from tho hnppa illustnous progeny of ^\al\^nssuln 
Al mu, liorn of the solar race descen Innt Of King Sumitn of pure 
race lonl of the three Smhnlas ami of tl c nine gems (IIis 
Jlajcst^) by Ills ro^al command dclisered while scaled at the 
new palace at Uilugam|X)la in the midst of all cogaged in state 
nffairs, has granted a second time on the daj of an eclipse of tho 
sun hy way of a second (or confirmatory) grant on the terms of 
a preanoua grant received from the court of Kuninncgala the 
field ^\ alala Pallc Poraw iH situated closu to it tho field Linilom 
Akata Eiwela Kackulan owita together with xillagca money 
trees jungles niarifiy fanda ticWa ownaa hefonging to the 
ml ly a (?) of the tw o pael is of luisketl nee of Eomhaw ala belong 
ing to Udugampola in Alntkuni Koric to the hrohman AVtmlanisu 
Kondn Perumul making armngcmcnLs for its protection so that 
the grant may endure iitrmanenlly In proof whereof I feanlias 
Makuta A\ eruiia Wunapa rcnimal lia\c written nnd granted this 
copper Sannas. 

Good men do not cat rico left m cl nrity hy goo<l men , dogs 
eat such ncc, and nfthoUali Ihcy xomit they cat it again Like 
tluin if ye protect this grant given by good men you will 
acquire merit in both tho worlds 



142 


1>ATIT IV. 

ALPHABETICAL LIST OF WORDS. 


Aka Amk. B. 17. Wandr. 15. KU: Akkim, tbo seed of the 
Teiminalia Bellerica, used as a weight, corap. Rhys Davids 
ancient coins and measures of Ceylon, 14. 

Akala Hab. 7 Situlp. 3. 

Akura = Akshara Maled. Akuni CJir. 59. 

Akural = Saklsliaralaya, Mali. II. 209- 
Akus = Ankusa, Ab. 53. 

Akussa = AnkuQa, Ab. 367. 

Akrosa Her. 

Akman = Akramanara, Gutt 28. 

Akliandhawa, Dond. I. 23. 

Aga, S. S., I. 14. Gp. B. 2, 6. 

Aga = Agrahya, Gutt. 216. 

Agana, " Excellent,” Mih. 10. 

Again s agama, S. S. IT., 22. 

Agi s gini, K. J. GO : S il. B. 2. 

Agll Nam. 182 Ab. 802 s agaru. 

Afiga " bom ” » jrilBa, comp. B. I. ICl. 

Angula, Afiguli, llkla. igli Gray 20, Canoe, 

Acanani — acatani, corap. acanagara or atanani Periyankulnm 
atana and attani, TIss. 10. 

A\a “ eight, ’’ A. 10. Amb.B. 45, aiwak Kong. A G. 

Athana, Kir. 1, 

Ada F, P. 9 , adakkalara " I kalandaj” K, M. B. 12. kalam Is 
the Tamil and Malayalim for Sinh. Kalanda, corap. Gundett's 
Dictionary s. v, 

Ada "less/’ S. S. 1. 16. 

Admana, Arab. B. 5, 129, 3, measure of capacity, Rhys Davids 
coins and measures of Ceylon, p. 20. 

Ana-sak, S. IL A. 22. = ajuacakra. 

Aiulu =s sandasa tongs. 

Anduwa = ana “ Govemment." 

At = hasta, P. P. 10, S. S. I. IG. D. I. IS, Gp. C. 2, Wandr. ' 
At ss 9 akta, Kavy, X l70. 

At = atma own, P. P. 22. 

Alntagal, 158, 14. 

Ataiawu (?) Katugaha A 2. 

Atarana, ^h. (20) 6. 

Atarahi Angul (G7a). 

Atiwasika Mih. (20), modern Atawaesi = Antevasi, Gutt 177, 
S. S. 60. comp, utivosini^ inscr. at Kuda No. 25, Buigcss 
CaveTemplcs, p. 18. ' 



143 


Atah = Antara, Hab 3, comp Aetii]ti 
Atm? Abba}, A. 18, Min A. 47, 53, B 10, Kacbg A 10, Katu- 
goha, A 11 

Atina = Antima Situlp 2 
Atimagiri, Mib (20) 10 
Atuk, Gp B 14 

Aturchi, P P 19, 40, Aturckac, Gp A 15 
Atula = Ruanxv D 22 

Alla, 'the palm of the hand,’ P P 47, Mnlcd ailili, Cln 50 

(acooiiiit) Amh A Sfi, I)<tndn (IG3) IS, conipo<:c<l fcam 
at = Insta and ^\at^ =: nnatu, comi) atapittu Itkaiii m 
0 Do> ly sketch of the constitution of the Kandyan kmgdom 
iVsjatic Researches III , 202. 

Alwacda, Profit, P P 22 
Atsamu, Amb jL 21, R. 4, 1C, 33 
Attana = Sattapannl, Ab 555, 577, Mali 178, Nam 129 
AttTuu, Mah B Kong C 13, AV P I) 11, C A S , 1870, p 31 , 
Ing C 21, ntamn Ing C 10, atfam lag B 10, Miun. B 49, 

J ierhips nntormi, sec Cliilders, s.^ sani. 
a = lifida, K. J 50 
Ada = Adia, SSI,22 
Adan as udunn, Her 
Ad-\ra,S S, II, 21 
Adawana, Gp, C 24 
Adahai, S S 1 , 22 s ndh\5$a. 

Adma^^a, S S 1,22. 

Adn am, S S 1,21 
Ados. S S 1 , 22 

An = nn>a P P 42 1) I 1 , Donanag 2 
iVmjlwi Oanekaiula (39) 

Anat = ananta, P P Gp A, 11, 13 
Anaijuwnk, Alw LX VI 
Anas.ak, S M A, 22 ajuacakra. 

AnTi = Aniigata Kiu j , Mil , 70 
Ana, ^ Anatha, K. J 42 
Atudda = Arut:*-jd5. 

Anij a, a. T aninawa, Amb A 49 

Amyam, S S 1, 19 

Anu, P P , 39 , Annatn, ib 

Anutara, Ivir , 2 

Anun, 1 58, 0 

Anumowanu L. V K C 

Anuru = anurupa, Amb , A 42 

Anurut = anvartha, S S II , 21 

Anutas = AnifamsTi, Ab 105 

Anusuruu im, S S 1 , 9 

Anuwa, “ 90,” Alw 74 

Anoba = iin+oba Arab A, 27, 80 

Anaengi, D 1, 13 

Antaraya, L. V K. B 



144 


Andawa, 158, 9. 

Atiduu = Anjana, S. S. I., 22. 

Andiin = Arjuna the kalwok Nam., 120; Ab., 5G2. 

Anduru, D. 1. 4 ; S. M. A., 15; Op., A. 12 = Andliakara, Maetl 
anditi Clw., 54 ; Giay, 15. 

Apa, “our,” P. P., 1 ; Gp., B. 7. 

Apawat, “ Neglected," Gp., A. 20. 

Apiriyat = aparyaata Attaoayala (124) ; D. 1. 1 ; Dewanagala 
(1S5). 

Apulana, Amb., B. 53. 

Aba = Sarahapa. 

Abatara = abhyantara, Tias, 6 ; K. J,, 52. 

Abarana = abharana, Ruaaw, D. A., 13. 

Abiya estinction, Nam. 55 ; K. J., 228. 

Abiyasa, “Near,” Nam. 240; K. J, 164; Abiyes* Neighbour- 
hood, P.P.3. 

Abaeua, not connected, Amb., A, 19. 

Abramsara = abrahmacarya. Her. 

Abhinna, P. P, 10. 

Am = amba " mother,” 158, 3. 

Anmna = ammaiia, Wandr., passim. 

Amaija » atntnaiia, Hab, 6. 

Amisha, P. P., 14. 

Amula Kotta (lOG). 

Amulii, Astonishment, Nam., 09 ; Kavy Xf,, 29 ; AIw. XXXI. 
AmutUl, Strange, Sub., 125. 

Ameta, Hab., 1 ; comp, aemati. 

Amctiya, R. H. 1.(21). 

Ambulu, D. I., 13; Wandr.,4; F.P.A.21. 

Ambuvra, vrile, 158, 14, Mated, abi Cbr. 71. 

Ambhayacala, Mali. II., 75- 

Aya taxe.s, Amb , A. 62 ; D. I., 7 ; K. M. C. j Wandr., 13 ; Her. 
Aya = Samahara Gutt. 122; Gp. A., 10. 

Ayagannaynka Kacl (167). 

Ayati, P. P., 39, Wewelk, 13. 

Ayit = Adatta, S. S., 35. 

Ayiti, “ Slave,” Ab., 870 = Ayatta, ayikaraTia (mist, for nviti 
knmna),P.r.;42. .r . v ^ / 

Ayadama, Gp. A. 5 comp., ayadaroaDawa, " to win." and ayndum, 
Natn. 181. _ 

Ayadina = Ayucana, IC. J., 79. 

Ayal := acala, Nam., 107. 

Ayin = admna. Her. 

Ajmnu = Aguna, S.S. 1, 10; P.P.,49, Her. 

Aynm = Aknra, S. S. I., 5. 

Arak, Malu A. ; Act R., 12 , Amb. A., 32 ; Rnanw. D. 30. 

Anig, 0p._, A. 2 ; ArakkactniyTi, cook Abb., 4G4. 

Araba GajabTihu (5). 
fAriv £= - tuijha, S.S. I., 22. 

\Aranawu =b urub, Malcd. araog Clir., 05. 



145 


Aramuna =s Alambhaaam, Plli Arammanam Kavy, XIII, 47. 
Sub. 127 

Ariki, S B M. A , 5, B 1 
Arunu, S S , II 21 = Arutlba. 

Aruinikarae, S S , I 1 
Arub = Arama Amb A. 18, 46 
Ala = Sal‘Aa,Ab,94? 

Alu = daemu Gutt, 121 

Alut = Anukta, S S . I 22 5 

Aluyama, Morning. Abh., 12, Nnm,45, Kivy, XIII , P P.Sl 

Aluwa — Aloka, S S 1, 22 

Aleya^vawI, Situlp, 3 

Alepa, P P , 16, Comp Avalcpa or Alopa 

Alwagena, Alw , LX'W , Nitmigb , 10 

A^wa, Dondr 

Awagun, S B M A , 1 

A^amidi Tiss 5 

A^^ltahoIe Amb A, 52, Pah awato., Pi ado. Hem 1,271 

Aivan Ingin, B 22 , Gp , A, 20 

Awaya Ruinw 

Aivayawa, “ limb,” Sub 

AivaTTada P P P, A, 32 

Awasa dwelling Amb A, 15, Her 

Awawi'icniya, ‘tlio dork half,” Dondn (1C3) 11 

Awasan, end Amb , A, 67 

Awalawija, P P , 40 cf lawac 

Av,iss ApSya, Gatt 9 

Awiya =s Avj aya, SSI 207 

Awisilu = Ayudha9ikh3, Gutt, 106 

Awut.Kaelig.B 20, Katugaba-lB 11, 145'>, 13, A^md Mob D 
Amb A, 11, from apta comp avido Hocmle 63 and aewidao 
Awunu Apana, "Market,* Gp, A, 20, Bamblia W A, 7 
Gutt, 117 

Awuru, “ embankment,” S S , 23 
Awurudu " year/’ Rank D , cf hawurudu. 

Awul = Aggals, Ablj , 08 
Awuwa = Atapa, 

As “ horse,” Nam , 195 , K.J,187, Kaelig, B,15, Katugaha 
B , 6 , Maled as Chr 57 
Asati l^^i^Ia (69), Sandag, C , 2 
Asa = A^a, S S X, 14 
Asapuwa = XTpassaya. 

Asam = a«ama, L. P , 7. 

Asanaka Sandag C 
Asal = Asanna 

Asala = a^rayoladdba ParaTT, 149 = Acarila, S S , 22 
Asawal = Asuka, Mah IT 320, corap sog a?tm MjkJ , V, 9 
Asa " having heard,” S M B 2, Ruan 20 r 158, 0 
AsTva, Kael, P P, 23 
Asin = Agcarya, K. J , 68 ; J P aceb'ra. 

Q 6038 K 



146 ' 


Asu eighty, Gp., C. 2 ; 168, 7. 

Asu =: Spaxga, Gutt , 9G. 

Aseki = j^ankbya, Gutt. 46. 

Asna = Asana, Her, K. J., 70 ; Guti, 75. 

Asalehi Katugaba, A. 13; assala, "horso^table,” Kael. 

Abara, P.P., 26, “food.” 

Abas = Alva 9 a, Gp., A., 7. 

Alb Sandagivi, B. 1, 2, (23). 

Alu, Ashes, S. S. I., 22 ; ratded. luilu, “blaze,” Clir. 48. 

A = Ayus, S S I 1. 

A = adi, Amb. A 15, ov ayiti A 50. 

A Hah. B. comp, akappa for akcpa corrected by Senart in the 
edict of Dhauli IV., Joum. as. XVI., 228. 

A Partic. of enawa, P. P. 29 G) 

Akacmiya = adikarmika Milindapanha 59, principal workjnan 
Amb. A*20, B. 3. 

Ata, P. P. 40. 

Aturay.an, 129, 7. 

Adi, Wandr. 4. ; 

Abonawan, S. II. B. 20, comp. Bonawan, WP. B. 11, 

Ami SB Ayomi, Gutt. 104. 

.^oyak =5 adilclcbalai, S. B. M. A. 4, 5, B. 1. 

Ajogya, K. M. 0. 11. 

Awiwu, 168, 19. 

Awu, belonging Amb. A. 16, 50, 63. 

Asawa, " hope,” R. D. 07. 

Ikut, Amb. A. 19. Dewanagabo, 2. D. 1. 1 ss allkrunta. 
Ikbittebi, “ Aftenvards,” P. P. 34. 

Ikman =5 nlikramana, P. P. 33. 

Ikmae, R. D. 5 ; S. S. 1. 1, Rank. D ; IVoTvolk. 39 ; Amb. B. 68. 
luga, desire, S. S. I. 1. ' 

Iilga, ■waist, Nam. 101. Ab. 27J. 

Ifigi, sign, Gp. C.-8. * 

Ingini = Hingiiii, the clearing nut, S. S. I. 22. 
liiguru =: ^ringavera, ancient hioguru. Maid, inguru Clir. 50. 
Puli siugivera, Ab. 459, 

kvu -= ^ytiVk-wui, ur -Ki’aVua, Wo. Vb'*, Tivitvy. 'A. "iVh. 

Ita, P. P. 40, Ch. 11. 10. 

Iti = strl, S. S. 59. 

Itin, "tben,” K. J. 120. 

Itiri = Atirikta. 

Idin, Gp. A 15. 

Idimenawa = uddbraa, Pali uddhuroayati. 

Idiriya = Avidure, Gp. A 8. Wocligaran (101). 

Iduwnel, sugar-cane, Nam. 128. Ab. 656. 

Idubu = ruldld, S. S. I., 22. 

Idura. Gp. B. 7. 

Idda Jasmin, Ab,, 574, 676. 

Indi, straight, S. S. I.. £2. 

Indi = kbarjum, the date tree, Nam., 137 ; Kav}'. X., 188. 



147 


Indu^ai-a, “ blue lotus," Nam , 91 , K J , 200 

Ipau — utpaona, S S 1 , 14 

Ipilenawii or ilipenawa utpla, “ to float " 

Ipaedae, Gp A*, 3 , Amb A. 2 

Ima = Sitnan, comp sTma, Amb B 55 

Imbinawl v'cumb 

Imbul = Salmab, Nam 122, Ab 505, J P Sambila. 

Ij no, “ to go," Amb A. 11 

Ira Suu iru, Cbr , 64 Sutya 

In^a, P P 20, 21 = itya. 

H = ^i^ira corap hilula. 

Ilakkiya = Hkklia, Ab 60 
Ilu forest, Gutt , lOG , Nam , 110 
Ilwa, Gp B, 15 

Iliandanat = ullap, to ask, Wewclk., 40 
Iwada ss Ativisa, Ab , 580 
luasanawa, to bear 

Imini border, K- J 87 , Kavy X-, 107, cf anuru 
Isa bair. Maid istin Gray, 20, cC bxsa 
IsO, Mall, A , J 0 A S 1879, 25 

Isirao ss utsrij Amb A, 19 later ilurcDiwa, "to &pjll,'’ comp 
J P aosirarm Bbag, 299 
Isurana ss IsnT, Gutt, 240 
Isuru, Gp A, C 
Isba = Uflabba, Abb., 190 
Isbewli, S S , 52 
IbinawG, v' 61C 
Imata = ennata, K, J, 71 
lya =s <;ita, arrow, Nam , 205 

^am, lead, P.'ib .tipu 2 = trapu Jit II , 290 , Mod Sin tumbu. 
IrT, sow,” fern of huru = ^ukaro. 

TJk s= Ikslm, sugar, Hem I ‘I 5 , Sub, 128 , ugu Parawis. 107 
Ukas = utkaralia pledge, Amb A 40 , B , 57 , Nam , 231 
Ukuna = yuka, Kavj XIII , 40 , P vh Uk.u Slalcd ukuuu 
Chr , 69 , comp the other forms Pi^chel Beitr III , 241 
TJkula lap = ITkkuta 1 
Ukkautluta, R D , 16 
Ukkusa = Ukkosa, Ab, 637 
Uganawa, S S L, 14 , P. P, 24 
TJgaba, S S 1 , 22 
TJgu, “ Taxes," Tiss , 6 

Udanga height, Nam, 241, Kavy XIII, 51, corop Maled. 
udu, " sl^," Chr , 07 

TJdaesi, Arab A, 39 := -adwaesi, "the upper lank” 

IJdgalu, "the upper lull," Amb A, 34 
TJt,P P P,38 
TJtmka, Mah R , (0) 

Utu = ntu, Mayii A , 20 , Hem I > 131 
Utum, Gp A, 2, 4, S L. 10 s= Uttann 

K 2 



148 


TJturat, D. I., 1 } Dfc-wanagaltv. 

Utm*u = uttara, Gp. 0., 2. 

Utulen, Gutt., C6. 

'Utsima, Gp. 0., 4. 

Utta, “first?” D. I., 7; Gp. A., 16; Wamlr., 14. 

Udapa, D. I., 3. 

Uclaw, “ asslstaiice.” \a!\v 3S 

Udahas, “ displeasure,” Nam., 70 ; Kavy. XHL, 60J 
Uda = udaya, S. H. A., 15 ; Gutt, 118 ; K- J., 303. 

TJdagal, P. P. 12 ; Gp. A., 12. 

Udu. S. M. B . 22 ; R. D., 38 ; Her. 

Udaella = Kxittala, intermediate form liudali Coui. to JIah. 75, 


10 . 

Un un, Gp. A., 12. 

IJnu slight = Pali uua less S- S. I., 1 , Amb. A., 28; S. L., 11. 
Unu hot, ilaled. hung fever Cbr., 54. 

Undun =s Pali TJddhanam furnace, Ab, 04, 455 = Uddlimana 
Unnimu = XJjmatnha, Gutt., 145. 

Upadawa, '• to produce,” 158, 22. 

Upan, Hayil. A. 13 ; Gp. A, 14 = utpanna. 

Upaeni, Amb. B., 21 ; S. B. IT. A, 2 a= Upani, Amb. B., 9, see 
the foregoing. 

Upurapa a= utpa^anaya, S. S., 69. 

Uyuta, Tiss., 10. 

XJra^a, S. B. U. A, 4. 

Uririi » Budbira, K. J., 90 ; ruhira, Jilt. II., 276. 

Urelii loc. of uras, Qp. B., 1 ; R. D. I, 2 ; ilayil.- A, 15 ; Thup. 
L. P. HI. 

Ulatu, Natn., 237 = udaxa, PlU ulara. 

Ulindu, Nam., 37 ; K2vy. XI., 13. 

UliwawL Alutg. 

Ulu, star, K. J., 93 • Natn. 39. Pali ulu Mil. 178. 

TJlupaenge, bathroom, Kaelaiii (1C2). 

Ulurilu, K. J., 93. 

Ulaengi, K. J., 68. 

Uwadana, 0. P. (172). 

UwaduTu = upadravya, danger. Quit,, IQG ; Nam.. 201 ; Kavy. 

XII., 7. . » . » ^ 

Uwanisi, Mayil A, 21 ; old Aorist firom upani^ri (?). 

Gwam = upama comparison, Nam., 229 ; Kavy. XIL, 22. 
Gwamaenwaeyi Kaelani (162). 

Uwasa s= Gpadesana, Kavy. X, 135. 

.Gwasu = Gpasakn, S. S,, 67. 

Gwarana, S. S. I., 16. 

Gs high = ucca, Her. 

Gt^b = PaUusabha, “ bull," Amb. A. 1. Dewanag. 3; IVewelb., 

Gsu Abhay, B., 9, comp, pura uain, NitimVb. 6- 
Gsuranawa, S. S. I., 1. ** 

Ulu = Isitika, S. S. I, 22 ; An*. B,, 45, 



‘14a 


Uluwaduwa, bnekkyer 
"Cra = gukara 

Ul, spring of watei , S S 1,1 
E.S S 1,6,14 
ELMahak D,P P 4. 13, 26 
Eka, S S I, 5,13, II. 21 
Ekunsaliswana Ko^ta.. 

Ekolos, 158, 1 

ELkasa = Skt Eka^as, “ one by one/’ Amb A. 16 
Ekbittebi, P P, 33, cf ikbittehi 
Ekwae, S M. A., 19 

Eksewae, Maha D cf J C A S , 1879, p 27 

Eda, S S 1,1, S L,13 

Ennata, Gp C, 12 

Enwa a verbo enawa, Amb A , 58 

Ebacdu, P P, 40 

Ebu a verbo obanawa, to press, 158, 14 , S L, 14 , cf obanawa 
Ebana (to peep), P P , 37 , emae, S M A , 13 
Ercna'wa, o S 1 , 22 , "to sink.” 

Eladena, “ cow,” Cb II , 14 
Elipata, " tbresbold,” Ab , 33 
Ehbaesa, K. J, 69. 

Eliya ss Aloka, light, Ch II, 15, Sub, 127, Maid Ali Gray 


Elwan a verbo ellawanawa, Wew , 14 

Ew, like P P, 50, 46 

Ewa,P P,21 

Ewu, I) 1,15 

Ese, P P, 50 

Ehi,S S I.G, 11,21, P P 14 
Eheym. P P P B , 3 

Elabae, P P 15, 40 1 * t u 

— . = Avalamb 


•5, 40 \ _ 

Elaebae, P. P , 32, 40 J ■“ 


Elawa, D 1 , 16 , Gp B , 19 A verbo elawenawa Maled 
eluwang, Cbr, 57 

Eln “goat,” = edaka 1,22, Kavy Xln, 41 , "Wewelk , 25, 30 
E,S S 1,13, S L,13 
El = ela cardamon S S 1, 1 

Oklwas = Iksbvakuvam^a Amb A , 1 , Dewanag 2 
O^unna, Nam , 48 , Ab , 283 , K J , 134 , comp wopmu 
Otpilima = ^ayanapilima, Paraw, 140 , comp hot 
Otap, sname, Gult, 200, Nam, 71, Kuvj XIII, 50, Pali 
ottapi Mabaparinibbanas 7 
Otnmanawun, Amb A 56 
Oda = Ojas, & S 1 , 22 

On"i (taenae) = apana (?) Amb A 27 , Nitmigli 6 

Ou% Amb B 23, Gp C 21 , llin A. 54 

Opa = ^obba, S L 14, Gutt. 18 

Obanawa, to press, K J 73 cf Ebu 

Obala = durbala, S S 63 



160 


Oya = Srotas Alw. 78. 

Oruwa = TJ^upa, Haled, odi Ctr. 48. 

Olu bead, S. S. I., 22, S. L. 14. 

Owa = Avavada, Kavy. X. 118. 

Owun. P. P. 11. , „ . 

Osap coixrse, Ab. 238 comp, oaa = ava^ya Piscbel Beitr. III., 238. 
Osu s= osbadhi, Natn. 157* Kavy. XIII. 78. 

Olxya, Nitinigb. G. , . . , 

Olkaemiya, Amb. B, 10 comp. Upliam, Sacred and historical 
books of Geylon, III., 350. 

Ona, S. S. 1. 

Owita, J. C. A. S. 1873, p. 78. 

Aekaya = Auka, Ab. 41. 

Aekili = Sankucita cbam Kavy. X. 153, Nam., lOG. 

AekeW, 129, 5. 

Aekma ■=; Akramana Kavy. X, 120. 

Aegae, 158, 12. 

AeagiU sss anguU, Gp. B. 17. 161, 4. 

Aeijiya = Aiiutara, S. S. II. 53. 

Aet interior P P. 27, 44. 

Aeta elephant Kaeligatta, B. 14, Katugalia B. 6. Haled. cddaJa 
ivory Cbr., 58. 

Aeti, Gp. A 10, B. 5, C. 4, K. M. 0., 3 ; O.-P. 

Aetiyawun, P. P. 33. 

Aetili, K. J., ISS. 

Aetirili Nam. 174 s astarana, Kavy. X., 175. 

Aetulu, Amb. A 21, 22, L. P. 1, Nitinigb 4, Wewolk, 45 ; 158, 
2, 16, Hold, eteie Chr. 67. 

Aetwebera = Haltbiwibara, Amb. A. 10, comp. Aetkni and 
Aetkanda Mab. II., 38, 82. • • ' 

Aelta, owner Ab., 495, Aetlawunta L. P., 8. 

Aettawun Kaeligatta, 15, Katugaha, 11. 

Aettala, elephant stable, Kaelnni (102). 

Aeda, crooked, Ab. 97. 

Aedagana = akarabana, K&vy XL, 6. 

Aedaliiti, confidence, S. S. 33. 

Aedaliili =* aujali Gutt, 478. Kavy XI., 13. S. S. 31. 

Acduru rock = adri Nam. 107. 

Aeduru = acarya, Amb. B., 39, 44. P. P. 32. Haled, eduru. 

Chr., 05. 

Acdurima, Her. 

Aedaerum = Ajjliayana, S. S, 22. 

Aenda = cayana, Nam. 176. Ab., 308. Haled, edu Olir. CO. 
Aep = nmne IVewclk. 8 ; Ing, B., 14. 

Aepa, Security, Amb. A, 24. Ab. 632. IVewelk. 30. 

Aema, 0. F., cf. Hacmac. 

Aemati Kot^a (ICO) s= aioatya. 

Aemaduma sweeping, Nairn 233, ct haemaendae. 

Acmbarini = avrittawj, Guti, C9. 

Aemburaolla = Ambataka, Ab. 654. 



151 


Aembul = Ambilla, llnL, II , 49 
Aera = tyagakota, Gutfc, 20, cf haera. 

Ael, for 'll cold, S S, 15 

Ael = 9ab, K“ivy XII , 08, Rice 

Aela^a = Alingann kofi Kavj X, 138 

Aelrnn desire, , 73 Kavy XIEL, 5 

Aelup ^vord, Nam, 69 Kavy XTT T , 67 

Aelena'wa = alL 

Aewidae, Gp B 9, cf a^nid 

Aewila s= pnjvabta Kavy X., 122 

Aewaet, P P 28 =: apatU 

Acsa Gp A 8, comp Haled, aespiya Gray, 20 

Aesala the fig tieo Nam, 110 , Ab 552 

Aesala = ashldha, 158 1 Ab 75 

Aesi = Aksbiti Kavy X, 158 

Aesu 158, 21 cC asa. 

Ae|a s= alaya Paraw, 184 

Ael, Channel Rambbaw, A 7 , Gp A , 20 , S M B 3 , cf 
digacl ss dlghabkri Mah. II, 212, Nam, 91, ibnsaroda- 
kabbaga (moiety of the abundant Tvatcr of the canal of 
imgntion) Mab. L, 221, and II , 193 , Jib 1 , 330 , S S 22 
comp aleyawam 
Aeb Painter, Amb B 13 

Aepa, Op A, 0 , C , 19 , Amb A, 2 , Mab 50, 25 , L P 4 
Kaknra, Gp A , 8 

Knkaluwa J P Kakkbada = karka^a, Pjscbel Beitr III, 261 
Kaga = Khadga, Gutt 105 , comp kaeja. 

KatigawCorv ss KbaggaMsana, Ab 84 

Kata (eea Katayuta) P P 33, 43, &,c , cf katae 

Kata^uta duty R D 1, 18 bis, 29, P P 27, 37 

Katu = kutbari Amb B , 40 

Katu = Kantaka, “ thorn ”D I 9, Ab, 300 

Katukaranda Ab 5Gfj, 579 

Katukohol Kael (102) 

Katudoraavata, Mah II 245 =kontakadvaravata 

Ka^ussa = Kakantaka Ab 80 

Katae later Kata, Gp C 7, 11, 20 , Amb A , 8 

Kadn, R D 23 

Kadala = Kaluya Ab 451 

Kadagoshtbi bazar council Jx P 8 

Kana, Blind, Gp B , 4, 7 

Kana, Thup III , 4 , D 1,9, Galandawala (138) 

Kanawaya Gahvana (10) 

Kanaava to eat, comp khana Haia *, 604 , Kbaa, IIoiii IV,, 22 
Kanaka = ganaka Hab 5 
Kanamaendiriya, P P P 51 , Nam , 145 
Kanawaenda P. P , 2G (widow 1) 

Kanu (kanu S S CLVII) S M A 24 s= kbanu 
Kanae, ‘ embankment ” Amb B 55 Hab 2 cf Kawa 
Kantaka, E I) I 15, Gp A 22, Haled kan/g //j 
Kanda gruel Amb A 12, cf kaendo 



152 


Kandapa^a, We'welk, 10, 12. 

Kandu, “ itch,” Sub. 129. 

Katara, rough road, Wel\felk, 36; Op. A., 9; Nam., 98 — 
Kantara. 

Kata = Katha, K. J., 74. 

Kati, pL, of kanawa, 0. P. (172). 

Katikawa. P. P. 18, 49, 50. 

Katu = Kratu, Amb. A. 31. 

Katutu = Kartar Nam, 281 ; Mnled. Katuru Cbr, 65. 

Katthina, Gp. A. 23. 

Kada]l, “Flag,” 1S8, 10. 

Kadima = KauUmat. 

Kaduru, “ Dates " Maid. id. Gray, 17. 

Kaduragain » Kaddaragatna, Mab. II., 19.5. 

ICado = Kh.T.jjota, Mah. II., 345 ; Nam., 145. 

Kan = Kania, S. S. I., 6. 

Kana, “ embankment,” Amb. A. 27, cf. Kajiae. 
liana, Abhay,, A 11 sb Korta. 

Kanatal, Mah. II., 209. 

Kana, gold, S. L., 1C ; Naia., 79, 83. 

Kanda, " food,” P. P. 32. 

Kanda s Kshai;ia, cf. Kc^ebi. 

Kanda, body, S. S. I., 10. 

Knnda^TTira =s Klmndhavara. Ab. 198; Sub. 127. 

Kanda|a, “Team,” Nira., 2C3 ; Kavy. VIII., 70 ; K. J., 133. 
Kopami, K. M. B., 12 ; Min. A., 50 ; Kaepiy.ae, Amb. A SO j cf 
J. C. A S., 1879, 21. 

Kapu as Kappasa, Ab. 797 ; M. Q. Kapusa, 0. kapiv, Beamcs I., 
318. 

Kopuru, S. L., 10 ; E. D., 24 ; 158, 12. 

Kopruk = Kalpavfiksha, Gp. B. 23 ; C. 21. 

Kanpil = KamUipil, S. S, 

Kaou] Arab. A, 52. 

Kam = Skt. Karma, Amb. A., 23, 31 ; P, P., 21, 24, Szc. 

Kamas Amb. B., 41. 

Karniinak IVewelk, 0. 

Kamtaon = Kaimastbana, Mah. B, Amb. A, 22, 24, 60. 

Kambur = Kammilra, goldsmith, Amb. B., 4 ; Mali. II., 258. 
Karamlinta, 158, 13. 

Kammul.i := liarnamula, Ab., 3G3. 

Komiida, covered box, Arab. A, 21 ; B., 4 ; Mayil A., 19; S. L-, 
5G. 

Karaydukatn, Amb. A. 2.5. 

Karaiwileya, Amb. B., 4. 

Karan, Wnndr., D. 

Karana, Jlalia. B., P. P. 17 ; Gp. A., 18 ; 0., C. 

Knmnuwana, Amb. A., 42, 43. 

Karanuwaemiya, barber Alt, 508 
Karaneyae, Op. C., 24. 

KnrannC, Op. A., 21. 

Karanda = karaiija Sub., 129. 



153 


Karatma P P P. B , 16 
Karannahu, Gp C5., G 
Karaya Gaj 2 
Karay Arab A. 5 
Karawani, Tiss, 16 
Karawawayi, Ruan I) ^ SO 
Karawanta 158 13 

Earawa Wandr, 11 , P P, 14, Gp A., 23 , B, 10, 11 C, 12 
13, 158 13 

Karawu Waeligama (161) 

Karawuvrara, royal re\enue, Ab 356 , D L, 4 , Thup III 

Kan, Hab , 4 , cf Eanya 

Karihi Angu] (67a) , Sandag D , 3 

Karuna = Karana, S S 1 , 3, 8 Amb A., 25 , P P 35 41, 46 , 
Katiigaha A 3 

Kannn, Amb A. 47 , Wand ,11 = Karaka 
Karo^u flab 8, Pen^ ankulam 4, comp dakuiu 
Karwanu kot, Abhay, A , 8 , Aca PI of karuwa whicli see 
KalGp A,24, B 10, 20, P P 24,42 
Kala = KAH, S S I, 14, Amb B, 56, Gp A, 10, 18, 
We\v^lk, 1 7, 18, 22 , L P passim 
Kalapanata, S S IT, 21 

Kalamba s Kalapa multitude, Nam , 14S , Gutt 63 
ICalamba = Kalabbra, Quit, 8 
KalaTTa, tbigh, Nam , 159 , Ab , 276 
Kalah mat = Kaf^ 

Kalu, blueness, Nam, 56 , K J,2D3, cf kalu 
Kaluga!, Kael 

Kaluwaela, Nam , 132 , Ab 302 = agini Ru'in D , 25 
Kaw = Kavya, S S 1 , 1 

Ka^vaii Amb A, 18, mod kawuru, P P 9, 158,19 
Kawaiayat, Her 
Ka^vasa, K J, 51 

Iva^clu = kapu{a, S il B, 29 Nam 142 
Ka\mlu = Kapata Nam, 104, Ab, 218 
Kawel lotus 158, 12 

Knsa Arab B , 63, and kaba Amb A, 42, = kasbaj a 3 cllow 
Kasawa = kasaya ‘ sin’ Abhay B 5, comp S S , 32 
K'vha\vTinu, P P P A., 18 , Hoemle, CC 
Kaliawana, WiharagaK (11), Galwana ICumbulnvacwa, (63) 
Kabay.S B H B,3 

Kahi he made Nett (29), Ruan D , 11 (21) 

Knla = kfta Amb A-, 14, 51 , E P, (IIG) A., 22 158 7 22 
Wewelb, 31, P. P, 17, 18, Gp A- 3, G, B 21 0 *12 * 
A 40 * ^ 

Kalanka, P P , 9. 

Kalanda (jewtllers weight), Pali Xalanda iW 292, Tamil 
kalam Amb A- 35, B 1, 158, 12, W'cwelk 17 38 22 
K. II C , 2 , Min A^ 48 ’ 


154 


Kalamha, P. P. P., 26. 

Kajavmnta, D. I., JO ; P. P. P., 36 j Dond. II. ’ 

P. P. P. A., 65. 

Kaju, Black, S. S. II., 21 ; cf. kalu. 

Kakaya, P. P. P. B.. 12. 

Kap =s kalp.a, llah. A., Kong. A. 8, cf. wikap Hitinigli., 0. 

Ktipu, 158, 19. 

Kaya.'iUja, L. P., 2. 

KarikaW, Gaj, Mib. (20), comp. J. C. A. S., 1879, 7. 

Kuriya, C. P. (172). ^ _ 

Kala “ eaten ” a vbo kanawa, comp. East Hindi klijill, liar khrda, 
Hoemle, XXXIX. 

Kiu^^a = nikata. 

Kiniyihi, be bought, Tiss. 6. 

Kit, 61 ; cf. kiti Cunn. I., 80 ; kinti, 84. 

KU.iyuga, the golden age, K, J., Co. 

Kitul ss liintala, Mab. II., 12, 50. 

KiijiUiri = kaijikuta, MaU. II., ISO. 

Kindaj’um, Outt., 230. 

Kindnra t= kitpnara, S. L. 18. 

Kindhraela, Num., 130; Ab., 581. 

Kipi, Gp. A, 7 ; P. P. 33 (in earnest). 

Kill, Wcwclk, 8. 

Kimidinawa, to dive ; comp.kumntu and majita and kibidinnwfi, 
to awake. 

Kimbul SI Knnvbblla, Mab. 11., 18C. 

Kiya deed, Amb. A-, 42 j Gp. 0. 4 ; kiyno K. JL C. 3 ; P. P., 49. ' 
KiyaU = knknea, Ab., 628. 

Kiyanawu, v' katb., Amb. A. 12. ; S. S., 57 ; llnle<l. ki}*awnng, 
Ciir., G4. 

Kiyannnn, 168, 10. 

Kiynmbu, liair j Nara., 167 ; K. J., 108. 

Kiyawuwa, Kaeligatta, A. 29 ; Kntugalm, A.- 23. 

Kiy."i, Gp. B., 17 j Kaeligatta (152 *•) B. 8 ; Kntugalia, A. 33. 

Kiyfi (com. klrtan.a) Amb. A., 10, 12 ; Gerund from kath. P. P*, 
23, SG; S.S.,57. 

Kiyaf , K. 31. 0., 3. ' 

Kinikiru, Amb. A., 51, 52. 

Kiri milk =s Ksblm. 

Kiri>Ti = Knyi\ S. S. 1. 8, 21 ; Arab. A., 32 ; B., 2 ; On. B., C. 
Kirlma. S. S, I.. 10 ; S. 5L B., 23 ; P, P,. 13. 31, 37. 

Klnda = Krita K. J., 41; l«utn, 168. 

Klrbajiil pa\vu, AtiiK A., 82, 34 ; i>crliaps s= Oiril<hnii(la, Jlali. 11., 

79 ; Lns^cn II., 001 note. 

Kilil s= Kallrn, AU 549. 

Kilupi. K. D. I.. 17; P. r.,8. 

Iv^iViri, impure, Cult, C. 

Kiwn, V. 1’., 26 ; Her. 

Kiwi s= Lawi Knitt, 140. 



155 


Kis kacclia, Nam, 1G2, Kavy, XIII, 39 • ef Kaesa 
Kisa = kntya P P > 31, 47; Amb A, 10, S S I,C,SL,19, 
P P P A., 29, Wael, 7 
Kisiwak, P P , 38 
Kisum = Kusuma S S, 14 
Kihirael = Klaadirlh, llab II , 65 
Xihiri = JJiadira, Ab 567 
Ki, S M. B, 27 , P P. 22, 23, 49 
Xipa, S M A, 14 = ki\a(?) 

Kiwau, P P P , B 22 = Katbitavau 
KukuSj doubt, ^ J, 129 
Kudamayi, F P D 

Kudasala, Mah A, d'lnakudasala Ingi A, 21 , cf kuduhael 
Nitmigb, 4, kathinoaala Citllavagga VII , 11, kutagarasala, 
ib V, 13 

XudI =s kutumbi family, Amb A 24 4l 

Kudu, small, P P, 19 , Nam 238, 15, Maled kudi, Chi 59 

Kunu = kunapa, Kuvy IX , 71 

Kudu s= Kubja Ab 46 

{ Kubuloraewa ss kakndhavapi Mah ll, 188 
Kuinbuk, Ab 602 
Kumak, D 1 , 1 3 
Kumata ss kimarthaya. 

Kumarayan, Gp C, 22 

Kumutu, di7er S S 57 cf Kimidioawa. 

Kumbu pot Gutt , 116, S S,II 21, S L, 19, Amb B, 28 
Kumbal » kumbhakara Amb B , 27, 28 comp Pischol zu Hem 
11 . 8 , Bcitr rn , 261 

Kumbura, "Padd^Geld, Amb A, 18 40 , Galanda 10 (138) 
Kura, dwarf Ab , 319 

Kuniru, Gp A 8 (mistake for kunru) = kharoru, Mali, 67, 41 
Kureb Mah A 
Kuh E P , Mayil 
Kulanu D 1 , 3 

Kuli irages, Amb A, 39, B,55, K.M C,l, Kuhyehi Waeli 
gama, WewelL, 6 , Maled knli Clir , 70 
Kuluua = Kanina, S S I, 13, S L, 19 
rKus=kuccbi, Gp A, 7 , ifa.yiL A, 12 , P P , 26, Beanies 218 
\Kiisa Thup 1 , 4 
Kusalija, Wewelk., 11 
Kusutn, Buan T) , 22 , comp Lisum. 

Kussa, (?) W P A. 10 

Kuhul = Kutuhala Abb , 26 , Kavy, XT , 40 
Ku]ala = kandlnri, ilnld , kadura Gray, 20 
Kuju = kuLo. S M A, 16, ID 
Kekfi, crest Nam., 146 , K5vy X, 210 
Keknmo, “ crane ’ Sub , 138 
Keugulla := kutvikulh, Mali. II., 180 
Kc^u, chip S. S , 67 



15G 


Keteriya = Ku^tniri, At., 66. 

Kenelii, instantly Gp. A., 9, 11 ; cf. Kando/ 

Keiuliya = KuiulikTi, AU, 63. 

Ket = Icslmtriya, Op. A., 10. 

Kenck P. P., 49. 

Kenekun Abli. A., 15 ; P. P. 29, 30. 

Kencra = karenu, fetoalo elcpbant Knm. l93. 

Kcngi Alw., 74. 

Kenncyao Gp. C., 18. 

Kcmioa = kuraina, Ab. 521. 

Keriyalii, Hab., 1 ; later kcrchi Katagaba A., 3. 

Kerem. " I make," P. P., 9. 

Keremin, P. P. 14 ; P. P. P. A, 1C ; S. B. M. B,, 2. 

Kerelii, P. P, 50; Her, cf. keriyalii. 

Kel.a, “ saliva” Sub., 142; Malcd., kujuj Cl**"./ 68, 

Kdawata., ctul S. L., 80 ; Ab. 33. 

Kele^-a = klc^a, P. P. 3. 

Kewul = kcvatta, Mali. 11., 55; Abliay. D-j 8. 

Kesi ss kanci, (t) Ab. 222. 

Kese. P. P. P. A.. 23. 

Kebel (H. kela, D. I., 202) = kadall, Hem. I., 167 5 Sob. 129; 

Mab. II., 42 ; Makd. kco, Clm, 03. 

Kela = ko;!, K. J., 42 ; P. P., 25. 

Keja = ku{a, in Samancla q.v. 

Keli, play P. P., 38 ; S. L., 20 *, Gp. C., l3 ; Kacligatta B., 16 ; 

Prakfit kliola, Pischcl Bcitr. III., 253 f. 

Kele. S. S. II.. 17. 

KoUmv, red lotus Nam., 93 *. K. J., 144. 

Kokum = kuiikuma Ab., 303. 

Koggalla = Bakagalluddhaviipi, cf. kos = koficTi Ab. 641 j 
Koswalibiniya, Kam., 124 ; Ab, 569. • 

Koccara s= kovitara, kinivistara. 

Kot = kritviv, Slab. B., Amb. A., 22. 

Kota, 168, 2, 4, 8. 

Koa = stoka Mab. 11., 180; Ab. 862. 

Kotaraekiya, warder of tho gianary Amb. B., 7. " 

Kol;alu, P. P. P. A, 22. 

Kotalu, “ donkey P. P. P. B , 12 ; Alw., 70 ; Ilem. II., 37. 
Kot.osa = kottbasa, limit Sub., 129, 

Kot.i, P. P., 3. 

Ko^u, Wewelk, 18. 

Kotae, Gp. A., 2, 12 ; B., 27, 18 ; 0., 23 ; L. V. K. B. 

Kot s= kimta, weapon ; MiA. B., Arab. A., 1 ; IVewelk, 1 ; Nam. 

280 ; K. J., 8 ; Hem. L, 116. 

Kota, spire, S. L., 21. 

Kotala, vessel with a spout Waell, (161), 

Kodanda, Amb. A., 37 ; comp. Kawi Oork. V. 45, 1. 

Konda = koyinda, K. J, 96. 

Kopamana =s kim praraa^a. 



157 


Kop’igni, Gp B, 17 

Eopul = kapola clieek Nam, IGJ K J , 133 
Komaru, P P , 47 

Komu, linen elotb Num , 172 , Ab , 297 
Koli =: kula liss., 12 , Kolpattn, llah C 
Kolia kulattlm, Subh 130 
Ko 3 = koucTv cf Koggila and Koan “ililiiniya 
Kosbuk i= Panasibuka, ilab JI, 139 

Koliala, secret tilings, Kla*} XIII, 15, Kaehni i^gtib, comp 
kiibbl m cava mscr , Gunn , 103 
Kob “ shrulis,' Amb A 50, ICM B,4, Mm A, 49 50 
Kol clothes Amb 53 , comp kola Nam, 137 
Ko]a = kut^ham Ab 303 
Kaekin = karkapkA 

Knekula, blossom Nam, 113, Ab 544 , Iv. J , 124 
Kaekula = kakkhaH, glare Mab 11,48, N“im,42 
Kaeti^al, sugar cand^, Nam 109, Sub, 144, cf galsmi, rock- 
sugar, and Maid lone akuiu, Graj, 17 
KaedI, Or A, 8, cf kaedQ, Nam 24 
Kacnalul jackal, Gp C, 17, Nam, 141 , P P P B, 15 
TKaet R P A, 2 , Dewanag, Nun , 187 , Iv. J , 192 
\Kacta = kshatnja, Mayil A, 1 , R D I, 15 , D T, 1, 9 , 
^Op A, 10, cf Ket 
Kaetta, bill hook 

Kaenda, nee gruel, Ab , 4C5 cf kanda 
Raendasvu Gp C,ll 

Kaendamima, jn\itatioa Nam, CO, EAvy X, 225 
fKacnditi, P P, 32, 34, « kamli 
(Kaendaetta Nam, 142, Ab,G11 
Kaepa, P P , 38, 43 , comp kapu, 158, 10 
Kaepu, K. IL B , 13 
Kaepi, quake, S S 57 
Kaepiyac, ecc knpanu 

Kaebili = kavala Am b B, 48 cf sakkaebili, S S, 35 
ICaemi.Ainb B,4, Mah C 
Kaeimkara, llin A , 4b 
Kaemaeti, Wand, 8 , = k^a asti 

Kaemaettawunta, D 1,10, Kaeligatta, 11,23, Katu'*al;a,9 18 
S M.B, 31, S I/,21 ° ' ' 

Kaemaettamha, Kaelig B, C, Katugaha, A, 32 
Kaerana, nassive of karanawit, Mah B , C A fe, 1879 31 
Kaerae Amb A, 33, 38, 44 ^ ' 

Kaerae Mayil, A, 25 

Kaeraevru Amb, A, 48, Wandr, 10; P, P j'* L V K A 
Wael 21 . 

Kacla jungle = kashta, 

Kaeli = Kapala Kavy X, 101 
Kaelum = Kanti, K. J , 07. 

Kaelae, S B M B , 4 


168 


Kacwo, P. P. P.> 85. 

Ktiesa = S. S., 63, comp- Ki«. 

Kacsumljti = k^l(Jyap.^ S. S., II., 21. 

Kaema food ilald. Kong. 

Kacla = kim^uka Mali. IL, 244 ; Ab., 653 ; Sub., 130 
Kridil'wa Gp. A., 8, 10. 

Gnni PI. of ganga Ku^-y. X3., 1. 

Ganga, Gp. B., 2. 

Gana doviil, ^ J., 47 5 Natn., 33. 

Gaiia = ghrSna Kavy XIIL, 37. 

Oauanak, S, M. A., 13 ; Ruati. D., 10; cf., gannnk. 

Gat, S. S. 1. 1 ; Mayil, A, 17 ; P. P-, 31 ; ^Vc^v•clk, 13. 

Gatae Amb. A, 3S. 

Gatakuru cocoa-nut'i S. S. I., 1. 

Gatabunu P. P., 14 ; Gatabena P. P., 22. 

GatWan = Gribllavun Amb. B., 57 } Donclr. II„ 7, 14. 
Gattawun Thilp. VIII. 

Gaaawa to sing S. S. IL, 21. 

Ganit P. P. P. A., 23 ; Op. A, 17 ; Wand. cf. KacnditL 
Gantota Hah. 11., 212. 

Ganda s gandha R. D., 25. 

Gandakili *= gandhakuti, S. S. L - 
Qandamba = Oandban^a Qatt, 131. 

Gandewi Gutt,, 103. 

Gauwa P. P.» 21. 

Ganna D. I, 9 ; Amb. A 28 ; B., 42 ; Gp. A., 10, 17, 18 ; 13., 0 
0. 8 } Wewelk., 8, K. M. C. 

Gannak Amb. B., 6. 

Ganmin K. M. C. 7. 

r Gam Hah. B,, Amb. A, 50 ; Wowelk. 8 ; Gaina( Mali. B. D. 
\Gaemin = grama village Amb. B., 28, Gp. B., 8. 

Oumana P. P., 26, 27, (bia) ; Gp. B,, 10, 10. 

Gamanv^.'ir errands Amb. B., 24. 

Gamara (perhaps ior gamarada) Dunum. II, (31). 

Gal roof Amb. B., 11, 

Gala = giri. 

Gals.pa.mvra. S. S. I., 2, ft, in •onlin cf. gaclwima. 

Qawa multitude Nam, 148 ; Kavy. X., 99. 

Gawara = Gavraya Ab. 616. 

Gawuwayi Kaelig. B., 30; Katugaha B. 20. 

Ga^vwa = Qavuta (Gavyuti) Ab., 30 ; Ran. D., 20. 

Gas Ph of gaceba trees, Amb. A, SO ; Haled- gas Chr., 70. 
Gasagaesiya Amb. A., 38. 

Gasannan, 158, 16. 

Galawa E. D., 8 ; Thup. L. P. m, 2 ; galaT^a Gp. B. 24. 

Gala = Gottham Abh., 2D. 

Gawa Gp. B. 11. 

Giju bird, Nam,, 272. 

Ginuwa L. V. K. B. 

Gini = agni Her. 



159 


Guna P P. P. A., 19 
Giya ~ gata. 

Giniva = kira parrot, S L , 23 

Gilan P P, 32, 37, Amb A., 11 = Skt glana 

GiliS IL A,14 

Gilinawa to swallow 

GUihuna Past P gilihenawa to drop, S L,24, Gp 0 10 

Gilemin = gaelemm K. J , 13 

Giwisi Nam, 250 , Kavy X., 81 

Giwulu = Kapittha Ab , 551 

Gihi = GrihinP P,34, 44 

Gunen S IL A., 29 

GuttasalaU JIah II , 97, 98, 139 (Butil i) 

Gum = gbosba S S , 24 K. J , 93 
GuruhS S 1,17 
Guwana = gagana 

Ge = Griha Amb A , 39 , K. J 84 , Mab B Moled, ge Cbi , 57 
Gedi fruits Alw, 77 Gutika. 

Genen Gp A., 2 
Genehi, 158, 20 , Kaelani 

Genae, liovmg got, Amb A. 38} J C A. S, 1879, p 21, genao 
Wewelk, 14, 30 

Geta = Grantba Kovy Xllt, 16 
Gettam, " weaving ” S S 23 , P P , 33 ? 

Gedand Amb A, 37 com gribadanda 
Gedas s= house slave, Wewelk, 22 
Genao Wewelk. 10, Waeligamo. 

Genemi Alw LXVI MaleA genang and gendang, Cbr , 69 
GenwlGp B,2 D 1,17 

Gen Mab C Abhid., 495, Wewelk, 25, Maled gen Clu,49, 
derived from v'gur, " to gronl,” comp Gipsy gutuv03i.raspati, 
Pischel Beitr lU, 237 
Gela, young leaf, Nam , 112 , Ab, 547 
Gela = Griva ^vy X 220 

fGewanawa = Khepeti, and tbis from ksbapayat: according 
•s to Trenckner Pah Miscellany, p 76 
hQewa, P P, 31, 37 , gewambayi, Gp B C 
Gesika, K. J, 47, "house peacQck.” 

Oehiln, Qp A, 19 
Go S B M. B, 3 

Goda, R D I, 27, S L, 24, comp gedija B I, 336, 
Hem n , 35 

Qodigamn, Ma h 1 , 248 , 11 , 47, 67. 

Qona, Gp A , 10, “ having gone ” 

Gotanawa, v^grath. 

Godura = gocara. 

Gon S S n, 21, Amb A 48; Wewelk, 25, 30 cf gono in 
Tnvikrama derived from v^gur "to growl,’* Pischel Beitr III , 
13C, n as in ukuna. 



160 


Gona = Gokania, elk. 

GopoUa herdsman Ab., 405. 

Gomu = GulminI Kavy. X., 99; gumba. 

Goyam = Godhutna “corn”Ab, 84; Beames I., 267. 

Goya = godha. Sub., 131. 

Goluwa, “dumb,” Ab. 320. 

Golla, " People," Alw., 69. 

Gowi, '■ husbandman,” Gp. C., 15. 

Gowlkam, Amb. A., 48. 

Gowikulebi, P. P P. 53. 

Gowu = gopaka Keeper, S. L., 28; Amb. B., 37. 

Gos = gatva, Ruan. D., 5; Kaelig B., 10; Katxigalia B,l; 

Childers Notes II., 20. 

Gosbthiya, L P., 8. 

Gomi Adorable, S. S I., 12. 

Gaeta = Grantlia. 

Gaetena =; Ghash^ana Kavy. XIII., 51. 

Gaencjahula “red worm," P. P. P., 50. 

Gaeni =t Grihiijl. D. I., 13; bulcf. Maid. Angbaioe, Gray, IS. 
Gaenun, 158, 1C. 


Oaenlma, gaenuma, gaenma, gcnilla. 

Gaep = galbha, Gutt., 200. 

Gaem Arab. A , 37 *1 r r» _ 

Gaema Wewelk., 32 /«.Gam. 

Gaembura, Gp. A., 14 ; Arab. A., 52ssgambbii'a mod .jaemburu. 
Gaerabiiji = Gribitjl Kavy. XI., 19. cf. gaeui. 

Qaerahum = Garhya, S. §., 35. 

Gael ss Oantrl Mali. C. Ab., 373 ; ActawJra 0., 20 ; Beames I., 
33G ; Gutt., 114 j Nam., 2C5. 

Oaclawlroa deliverance, Alw,, 84, from galaTvanawS. 

Gaellma from galawaoawa A/gaL 
G.'iellan carter, Anib. B , 48. 


Gaehae^u = Gharshana grinding, S. S., 57. 
Gbaetiyae, P. P., 40. 

Gherelii, P. P., 47 ; comp, ge = grilia. 
Caka = cakra Kii*. 2. 


Caka Six, Hab., 4. 

Cajata, P. P., 10. 

Catari “ four” Galwana, * 

Catalisa “ forty,” Hab., 4. 

Catu, P. P., 24. 

Cada = Candra, Hab. 10 ; B. D., 1C (21) : Situln. 1 : Maid badu ‘ 
Chr. CO. ' i > . 

Carita, Ruan. D., 5 ; P. P., 24. 

Ciwa, P. P., 40. 

Cudi Ties., 3. 

Ceta = caitya. 

Ceta = catvar (0 Wadigala, etc. 

Caurasi, L. P., 8. 

Ja =: ca Knikuwo, later da comp. ■* 



ICl 


Jagannna Hab , 8 

Jana Amb A., 28, B IG, Skt tatsami Sinh dena 

Janayan P P 44, Gp , B , 5 

Ja>a 158, 17 , E P A 16 

Jarasan, 158, 16 

Jara, Gp B , 10 

Jita daughter Kaikawa (13), Beng Jhi B L, 192 
Jini Hab , 7 , Situlp 6 , Penyank 1, 4 
Jiwel Wages Amb A., 45, 53, cf diwelfrom \^jiv 
Jtsa = ya9as, Naginkaiida (97) 

Jiwat^sana Ruan D C Gp B 1C 

Je^u Amb A., 20 , B , 2, 33 

Jeimawu Amb B 19 = Jyeshtbamatm 

JetaWana, P P, 13 

Jaemburu = gambhiia 

Tabiya, Situlp comp tabanawa and tibiyac 

fika = stoka Her 

Tnem s= Stamblia Kael (162; 

Thera s= Sthavira ICottarak. 

Dadiya perspiration, Kavy VI, 33 Maled dvChr 02 Hem I 
218 

Debara badara Mah, 194, Ab, 559 

Baehae having bitten Gp A., 11 , Hem I 218 

lakul, Nam, 128 , Kavy X,, 19o , Maid lakuarii Gray 17 

Ta^a, bank ’ S L 29 

laiuwa ss patatra 

Tana ‘‘grass” B I 160 

Tatiya = triti}Ti R D (21) 1C 

Tatu ss Tntwaya K J 111 

Tada hard = stabdha Gp A. 9 S L,29 Nam 242, Ab 711 
Haled tedu straight Chr G8 

Tana = Sthana S S II, 21 , Amb A 19, Maled tang Chr, 
C3 

Tanaturu P P P, 58 , Gp A-, C , C, 15, 10 = stlrmantam 
Tanpat RD 40.GpBl,PPP 8 
Tabana, Debelg, 4 
Tnbamin Paraavis 167 

Taba S M B 24, Rambbaw B 8. P P P A. 18, R D 19, 
WoTvelk , 12 

Tabanawa S S L 6, 13 16 18, cf tabija, Maled tibeng to 
stop 

Tabawa = tadbhavaS SIC 
Tamatama, P, P , 21. 

Taman L Y K B cf tuma 

Tama S S L,14, Mayil A 25, Gp A. 11, C 9, P P IS 

Tamba copper Gp A 18 

Tumbapatae copperplate I) I 11, Gp A 28 

Tamburu = Tammala Mali II 123 

Tnrara Kaeligatta B 28, Katugaln B 19 

Q C03S ^ 



1G2 


Tarawana = Atliarvana, Kuvy. V., 3. 

Tarabai; goldsmith, K. I7l, cf. tula^vam Nrim., 224, 
and talataxa. 

Tari s= tliera, Tiss., 3. 

Taru star, S. M. A., I3 ; cf. tume and tara Nam., 42 ; Maled. tari, 
Chr., CS. 

Tal palnitree, Amb. A., SO ; Nam , 130 ; D. I-, 10. 

Talatara = tuladhava, AJutg. (52) ; cf. Tanvbal. 

Tala, pond, R. D., 25 = Tarlaga. H. taiawa, B. I., 240. 
Talapitanan, R. D.. 22 ; cC tal. 

Taliyan, R. D , 24. 

Talolagama, Amb. B, 22, 23. 

Tawa, Gp., C., 3. 

Tawaka, " Three,” Tiss., 2. 

Tawana = Tapana, Ab , 751 
Tawara, '* daubing,” S. L, 57. 

Tawaranna Ruan. D., 22 ; K. J., C5. 

Tawaramin comp, tawara in Anoka’s edict IV. al KliUi 
Journ. as. XVI., 233. 

Tawarayangen, 158, 3 (?). 

Tasama, S. S, I., U =5 tats-ama. 

Tahavi'uru ss _SthaTira, S. S., 31. 

Ta]anawa, v' taij. 

Tak, Amb. A., S3 ; P. P., 40 ; TVcwelk, 0. 

Tawiirunawan TImp L. I?.. III., 4. Gp. B. 15. 

Tikn throe Diy. 

Tinnm to grievo, S. S., 41. 

Tibiy-ac, Amb. A., 24, 25 ; cf. t^biya. 

Timbiri s tlmbnru, Num, 120; Ab. 5G0. 

Tiyu ss Stuti S. L, 30; Kavy. XIII., 10; Nilm., 200. 

Tiyutju, Gp., A. 8. 

Tirrt = Tiraskarari.a Gutt 230 ; tiraya ecjcen. 
fTirap firm Wcwclk, 10, It, 10; tiram B. D., 13, 

|TiriGaj. (.5). 

Tiriugu ■>vlieat. 

Tirisana ss Tiraccliuna, Ab. 20 ; Tier. 

Tiri'juwa goal, Ab. 502. 

Tilak5yam.liia, Thun , I., 2. 

TiU ss A-starana, KTu’j'. 43. , , 

Tis.-^, tiha ss trim(jal, 1*. P. 1 ; Tis Gp ’* Bondr./ ’ < 

TiAc. Amb.B.. 30CO- i I 1 

Tiliiri, Silk,Ab..43. -i ' I I 

Till = tushtawi S. S., 71. i 

Tijiiia = Ty3ga, Kri\y., 19; Num. "L 
Tutu = tusht-S S. S. 1., 13. \ " 

Tuiiahnay.5, "in thiT'' * > ’'Jng., A.l ' 

Tunlu, P. P.. 3G./ ' P-\. 

Tuti = fituU, Gv\ g, 

Tutlu^-ia (1), Gp.! ^ — N. ' ’ 

Tun ss trlni, W’r^ 28. 

V 



Tunalva, Gp , A , 17. 

Timwan, L Y K A,, elt 4 
Tubu JIaha, B , 143b 3, cf tab! , tubu, S il xV , 15 
Tumil, E P (cf taman) = Pali 116111 x 11 
Tumabi, Hab , 7 

Tuiiml exaltation Nam, 236 , K. J, 34 

Tumbu s= Trnpn (Pali tipii) Ab. 69 , ilaletL timaru, ‘ neivter," 
Chr 63 

Turn tree, K 43 
Turn till, Oil IL, 3 0 

Turae =s tilro, Slab A , \V. P A , 13 j cf tarn 
Tiilablrira, IVantlr , 7 ; Ran D,2,Gp,B 19 
Tulula, “carpet,” Nam, 171, lulutc K~i\^ XI 30, Maled 
tlQla, Clir 50 

Tululi =: tirltika, Kuvy , XI , 30 
2’uwara I 08 , 15, Nam , 129 (f) 

Tuwanla, = tigara 

Tux\ak Slab, A B , Amb, A, Ij, IS, Aetattlra, D, G, 
1456, 2 

TusTvwaew a « Tusa\ apt, Mah , 95 
Tuhiua, GuU , 90 
Tu{ula, Amb , B , 43 
'J ck, Amb . B , 2 , Wad (ICl) 

TcMVet.S & 1.13; S L.,31, K J, IS, IClx) NIII 39, 
comp.Maled teinang Clir,71. 

Teda = tejos, i) 1 , 2 , Op, A, 0 , Dcwnti'ig' 4 
Tedija as tnjagat, S S 1 , 13 
Tenae, S Jf A, 25, B , 4, 1456, 5, ini$t.ike foi Ucaao 
Tcpili, K J, 54, v'jilp I’^pul "ot(b, P P, 3S, Mm 59, 
Kuvj X,113 

Icma = Stutikarma, Nuin, 25C, Kfwj JX,74, P r,40 
Terenaivl, v^dlnr, cf Gip-<j' tenlwa Mikl VIIJ,17 
Ten = tin, Nam, 279, K J, 196. S B M A, 4, Malcd 
atiri Cljr, 48 
Twa — BtbaMra, P F, 11 
Tcl Oil, Ruan, D , 24, ililed ten, Clir, 62 
Telclii, from tala, P P , 6 , 

Telka{"in Kad 
Tclba.“Ant,’'S S 11 , 21 
Tewajl, B 1,21 ss tripiiakn, comp Wa]! 

Tewmn prai'-o, Nuin , Cl , 1C. J , 210, cf temn 
Tesak = tn^aktija, K J, 40 
Telu p) Rainbliaa, B , 7 
Telcs = trajoda^a, Ablny.xV, 5 
To, “ thou,' Op , x\ , 10 

To^a = llrlln, Priki tnln, Hrda, 192; Item 1,104 
Toluwa = tittlu^a " Iicatheii,” S S 42 
Toilu = tlihnka Kfiay T,21 



1G2 


Tarawana = Atharvana, Kuvy. V., 3. 

Taraliali gold-imitb, K. 171, cf. tulawam Niim., 224, 
and talatara. 

Tari = tliera, TUs., 3. • • 

Taru star, S. JL A., 13 ; cf. lume and tara Nara., 42 ; IfalccL tari, 
Chr., G8. 

Tal palmtrec, Amb. A., 50 ; Nam , 130 ; D. L, 10. 

Talatara = tulfidljarn, Alutg. (52); cf. Tarabal. 

Tala, pond, R. D., 25 = Tad'iga. H. talawa, B. 1 , 240. 
TalapUanan, U. D.. 22 ; cC tal. 

Taliyan, It. D., 24. 

Talojagama, Amb. B , 22, 23. 

Tawa, Gp , C., 3. 

Tawaka, " Tlirce," Tiss., 2 
Tawana =; Tapana, Ab., 751. 

Tawara, “ cLiubing,” S. L., 57. 

Tawaranna Ruan. D., 22 ; K. J., 03. 

Tawaramin comp, tawara in A<joka’a edict IV. al Klihi . 

Journ, as. XVI , 233. 

Tawarayangen, 158, 5 (?). 

Tasania, S S I., 0 = tats.ama. 

Tabawuni ss^tliayifa, S. S., 31. 

Talanawa, */ tad. 

Tuk, Amb. A., 53 ; V. P.. 4D ; IVcwelk, 9. 

Tawurunawan Tliup h. P.. III., 4. Gp. B, 15. 

Tika three Diy. 

Tinmn to grieve, S. S., 41. 

Tibiyae, Amb. A., 24, 25; cf. tabiy.o. 

Tiinbiri s= timbani, Kam, 120; Ab. 500. 

Tiyu =c Stuti S L, 30; Kavy. XIIL, 10; Nam., 200. 

Tiyui.iu, Gp., A. 8. 

Tir.i s= Tini<<karana Gvitt 230 ; tiraya scieen. 

("Tirae firm "Wen-elk, 10, 14, 19; timm R. D., 13. 

^Tiri G.aj. (5). 

Tirliigu whc.at. 

Tiris.ana =: Tiniccliana, Ab. 20; Her. 

Tiro1,awa p,o!ii.> Ab. 502^ 

Tilaknymnrnia, Thup., I., 2. 

Till = A«t.arana, Kuvj*. "NX, 43. 

Ti<ei, lilia = trimijat, P P. 1 ; Tis Gp. B. 11 ; Dondr. I., 3. 
TKnc, Amb., B., 30 (f). 

Tihiri, Silk, Ab, 43. 

Ti)l = tusb^awl S. S., 71. 

Tiiina = T>riga, Kuvj'., 19; Num. IfiO; K. .1., 37. 

Ttuu = turi.^a, S. a I., 13. 

Tinnlinav.’v, “in three days," Jng., A., 17. 

Tuyhi, r’ P, 30. 

Tuli = BtuU. Gutt 239. 

Tudu\'<A (f), Gji. A. 11. cf. tudns = calnddnM. 

Tun ss trini. Wntidr. 5, Amb. A., S8. 



161 


Tanaka, Gp , A., 17. 

TunwanjL V K A., Wewelk 4 
Tubu Maha, B , l43b 3, cf tibl , tubu S M A , 15 
Tuma E P (cf taman) = atraa Pali rituma 
Tumaha, Hab , 7 

Tumul exaltation Nam, 216 , K, J, 34 

Tumbu = Trapn (P\li tipii) Ab 69 , Maled ttmaiu ‘ nevrter,” 
Clir C3 

Turn tiee, K J, 45 
Tam till, Cb IL, 10 

Tiirae = tara llab A , W. P A , 13 , cf tarn 
Tulabblra, Wandr, 7, Ran. D, 2, Gp, B 19 
Tulula, "carpet’ Nlm, 171, tuUite Kttvy SI 30, Mallei 
diila, Chr 50 

TulttU = tintaka Kavy , XI , 30 
Tuirara 158, 13 , Nam , 129 (?) 

Tuwarala = tigaia 

Tnnak Mali, A B , xkuib, A, 35, IS, Aetawira, D, G, 
1456, 2 

TusTiwaewa = Tusa\ api, ilah , 95 
Tnbica, Quit , 90 
Tulula, Amb , B , 45 
5 ck. Arab . B , 2 , Wad (101) 

TetWet.S S I 15, S L,3l, K J, 3S, KIn-j MIT 59, 
comp, Maled temang Clir,71 
Teda *= tejos I) 1,2, Gp, A., 9, Deiranog, 4 
Tedjya as tnjagat, S S 1 , 13 
Tenae S M. A, 2a, B, 4 , 1456, 5, niistike fo! ticnao 
Tepalj, K J, 54, V’jOp tepul nrorda, P P, 38, NTun 59, 
klry S , 113 

Tetna s= Stutikarma, N un , 256 , Kavy ]A,74, P r,40 
Tereoairn, 4/dhar, cf Gipsy teraira Mikl Till, 17 
Tera = tira Nam, 279 , K J,l96, SBMA 4, Maled 
atm Chr, 4S 
Tera = sthavira P P, 11 
Tel Oil, Ruan, D, 24, Maled teu, Clir, 02 
Telelii, from tala, P P , 6 . 

TelLfltara Kael 

Telba, “ Ant.,” S S 11,21 

Teirala, D 1 , 21 = tnpjtaka, comp W ill 

Tewun pi-aisc,Nam, G1 , K. J, 2X0, cf tema 

Tesak =s tn 5 aktiya, K- J , 40 

Te]u (’’) Rambbaw , B , 7 

Teles = trayoda 9 a Abbay , A, 5 

To, “ tbou,’ Gp , A , 10 

To^a = Tlrtln Praki tuba, Hila, 192 , Hem 1,104 
To^uwa = titthiya "lieatben," S S 42 
Todu = t itlaiika Kavy V 21 

r 2 



Totaoni, sheet of Trater Qutt, 19. 

Topi.e. r. ^ ^ 

Tol = lunila; Star, tomla, B. T., 227; Nam., 1C4; Kavy, 
XI., 22 ; Hem. I., IIG; Ma^ei Tungfai, Clir. 59; Illndi \or 
Iloemlc., 91. 

Taekij’a, P. P. P., 45, 47. a. v. lakntmwa, 

Tacgt = tyuga. 

Taet = utsaha Nam, 74 ; Kavy IX., 78., diligence. 

Taeta = tantrl, K. J., 117- 
Tacn, P. P., 40. 

Taeuakata, P. P., 27. 

Tacnakoet (?) Gp., B., 14. 

Taenaeka, P. P., 23. 

Taenckki, P. P, 38, 47. 

Tacnae, P. P., 29, Gp. A., 22; B., 22. 

Taenfi, S. II A., 24 

Tacpala = capala, Kuvy. X., 98 

Taembi!ito(a = S.annTratittlia, Mali. II., 7-5. 

Tncra, Op., B, 14. 

Tueli jar Nam. 213 ; Kavy. X., 144. 

Ta«wi taewj, Qutt, 207. 

Taenmli, taewnil, •* melting,*’ Nam, 23; Kuvy. X, 220. 

Taewili, Kavy. XIII., 53. 

Da = ca, P. P. P., B., 2, 10. 

D,..S. S, I..13. 14; Mayil.A. 1. 

Dnkapati, Hab., 0 ; Periyank, 3 ; Oaj. 4. 

Dakibi, Hab., 2. 

Baku, D. I, 9, cf. Maled.dakknngClir. CC ; J. P. ailakklm Ks. p. 

. 88 . 

Dakutu, having seen, Op., B. 7, comp. Karotu. 
rDakwana seyek, P. P. P. A., 34. 

\Dakwana Jada, Nitinigli, 14. 

D.nkwa,P. P. P., A. 23. 

Dagaeb, B., 60. 

Danga v^dnili, Maled. dogu. 

Danga = Jaiigba, S. S. I., 10. 

Danga = Caiica Kavy. II., 24. 

Data — Jyesbtha,, Kavy. I., 115; K. J., 08. 

, Dada, Quadruped, 'Wewelk, 19, 22. 

Dana = Janu, Ab., 742. 

• Dand Amb., A 51 ; Wewclk, 21, 24. 

Danduwama fining Her. S. S. 23 ; P. P., 50, 51, dandae, Min., A 47. 
Dnndu = datu, “-wood,” Gp., C, 9. 

Data = Jnatum, S. L, 33. 

Dada tooth, bird, brahman = dvija, Jlalcd. dai, Chr, 70 ; Nani., 
147, 165, l78 ; Kavy. XI., 18. 

Dada = daddu. 

Dada = dlivaja, Gutt., 181 ; Nam, 201, fla". 

Dan = dana, E. P. (110 ) ; Op., B., 23. ° 

Dana := Janu. 



1G5 


Dina XTin v'ji S S 1 , 6 
Danata 158,4 

Dinamhayi (let us conquer), Gp, B 21 
Dana^ala Med (64), Raj (Co), Thup VIIl 
Danawa, v'dah 

Dinu (Imp) S S I C , dan IL, 21 a v, dannawT. 

Dinwa, PP,39, Gp,B,15 
Dinwu, E. P A., 18 

Danna P P, 29 (a vbo danawil) Mnlctl dannang, Clir 38 
Dapana = dirpina Nnm, 177, Kavy XIX, 81 
Dim = dharma. Her 
Damn = dama, Ab 70 
Dhammakata Bond 1 , 2G (163) 

Damlna, Amb , B 38, 39, ‘ devotee * 

Daraora = damodara S S L, 18 

Damgamiya, Amb , A., 31 

Damba = Jumbuka, Nam , 141 

Dambadiwu, Gp, B, 15, 21, D I 1, Dcwiinagala. 

Dambadeni, Mali 11,320 
Dambukola Mah. II, 180 

Dar Amb , B 23, darae, Amb , B 24 , S B M A 4 
DarosTieja luncral pile, Ab, 58 

Dam = daraka, *' Son " child, Gp , B , 8 Rarabbaw, A , 5 Nam, 
163, E. P A., 24, Klvr XllT, 15, Aeta^\ , Maled. dann 
Chr,G7 

Dala, S S , 24, dalawaddhana Mali II, 244 
Dalabuwa womb = Jalabu Ab , 36 
Dahwittbi = dba%alavitthika, Mab 11,180 
Dab (?) Rambliair, B 7 
Daluwa ss J\ari, Sub, 125 
Da^vana (?) P P , 20, 32 

fDawnspata, Maha, D , Amb A,55,B 1,J CA S, 1879, 
J p 29 

1 Dawasjawa, diilj P P 34, 35, dwabal, K J , 65 
Daw'ijsftkicu, 'WewelL, 15 
Dasa, “ ten,” Amb , B , 28, Mali A. 

Dasa, “ hard," R. D , 5 

Dasa — dasa, “ slave,” Amb, A , 41, 45 , B M B, 22 , cf das 
Dasanawavranna, Abbay , A,, 3 
Disapabata, Situlp (10) 

Dasambul = dasabala, Kavy 1 , CO 

Dasawnn E P B , 1 

Diskam semce, S M B , 13 

Da'ina = danpina, Her 

Dossa = Dakslia, Klay. XII , 79 

Daliagab, Wandr, 12 , P P,43 

Dabm = dhjlna, K- J, 132, cf daehaenn. 

Dabam, Mayil, A., 17 , Gp , C, 23 
Dabam = Uhaia, S 5 L, 22 



ICG 


Cnhiiwul, S. S. CLX., AmU, A, 10 = jnljali, lo (li?raLn, cC 
dnclmt*. 

Dalms llionsand, S. il. li. 10., P. P. 4, h, 0, IG ; 145&, 7. 

D-ili-isa slavo fcm.DrielwJ.! p.^ssitn. 

Uain, “ ttisk,” P. (ladha, Skt. clamHlitrfi. 

D.-iia, Mnh A.. Kavy. X., 121. 

Dajadri, Gp, B., 21 ; C., 1, Muled. <Ini(lo]i jaw, Clir., 58. 
ll.ijlia =s (lri«llia,Mah 11,28. 

Dri = iluta, Tliiip. L. I’. HI., Mayil, A., 15. 
m = Jraaka. Kiivy. XHI., 33. 

B.'i = dhutii, S. S. 1., G j S. L., « 1 , Wnn'lr., 0. 

Da = (I.nninii, K J., 308 ; Malcd. d.i, Clif., GS. 

Drigal), P. P. 32; M.V*. 7 
D.'unsatra, Gp., B , 22. 

Drml, S. S , 57. 

Dama (V) 158, 17. 

Diwiir ihya, Anib. A., 41. 

Dawalu, clothes, Xiim., 173; Ab., 2i)4. 

Das, " Slave," \Vo\v«lk, 22; F. P. C., cf. d:i.sn, Katiigalio, A. 0. l 
Kaelig, A. 8. 

Dis. '* thousand,” 1 '»8, 7, II. 

Di Main B., ^Ve\\p\k., 14 ; 138,14; cf.Pl. 

Pik = illrglia, Ah. 2.0. 

Pigs, length, Xanv, 172; Ab. 205; Malcd. dign Chr..69. 
Dlgnntarayelu, Watnlr., 4. 

Dtgin 'NVaelignwa. 

Digaeli « Djghalika. 

DItaua =s AVdlnahtUuJia Kavy., 87. 

Didi, S. S. L, 13. 

Dioaka Tiss, 10 ; TlialagaU (C2), 

Dinanawu, S. S. I., 8. 

Pinainaha Tiss, 18. 

Dinami, Angul. 4 (C7a). 

Dinayc, C. P. (172). 

Diiii, Hah 9; Periyank. 5; Wilmnsg, Situlp, 5. 

Dhi'ilii, H.ab., 0. 

Dinuwamanri, “ to coonuer,” TIiup. VIII.; cf. dauamhayi, Gp., 
■ B. 21, 

Pimut “ splend'icl," K, 5., 51. 

Dimhili = Dliurai-.vlva, Kavy. If., 18. 

Dim\>u\ = UdximhaTa, Konn (ICO); ITah. I., 47 ; Ab. 7G. 

I* Diy Water, Mali. B., J. P, da^ordava; Maled. div'a piicc, 
4 Clu'., 58. / 

[Diya, S. S., 24; D. 1, 10.- 
Diyat = Jagat, Gutt., 47, 218; S.S.I., t3'(tedij:a)«^ 

Diyaniy’ao, d.uiglitcr, Gp. B, 24; Kain, lo4. 

Diyaluwa, = Ucldharaka Alx, 71. 

Di 3 -ae Ainh. A., 7; S. L, 35; P. p., 27; J. ' 
p 33. 



167 


Dlrana^ra, to decay. 

DJinda = Dan^ AK, 101 ; ct Dlluida Euan. D, 5, 15, 
Gp A,19 
Bdet, K. 44. 

Bitr s= Dvrpa Aetw^. A 7 , P E» lA 

Biira = Jihra, S. It, o5 ; 3^’d. du Chr, 70 

Biwatura = D.panLara, S S, 41 

Biwana = Bliavana Kavj-, I, 4 , K. J., 63 

Biwi = Jitendnya Kavy, XIII., 5S 

Ihirj hfe, Gp B 6-* P P., 4, Dtira Gp. A, 21 , Her. 

Birrija = B pi, leopard, AK 611. 

Biwiniaa OatL, Abb , 117 

BiTTcnsk Kael (162). 

Biwel, B L, 5 ; Gp. A., ID , cf Jiwel. 

Bisne, a S. L. 14 

Bi, P. P., 2S ; S It, 35 , J C A a, 1879. p. 2&; F^nk B, 2; 

15S, 21 ; Waeli. 

B 3^^) = Dadbi. 

Dais = caia Kan A, 9^ 

BlperaJidij^ ITier, Ah., 70 
Biaae, E D , 2A 

Bn (and) a S 1,1, G^ B, 7 (daughter). 

DuIm i^elig, aI, 32 ; Katugaha A, 25 
Bski, P, P, si; doliha Roan B 8 ; Buk E V K. C ; Gip«v 
dok MQA m, 47 

Bokula s dukkata, F P., 2S ; S L., SC 

Ikdgxjtim, TTandr., 7 

Buta, B D, 23 

Buna, Bimtnn, A 

DuteKaik. 

Bun, E B , 9 , Amb. A, 10 ; Gp A., 11 ; B A 
Banazcalia, W. P D., 14 

Bunu, Amb A., 45, 53 ; dun Amb A^ SI ; dona Amb A., 51 ; 

B2h dinna, given ; dnnuTnm Amlt B , 58 
Banukaea, moouligbt, S L, 50 

J^moraandul, 3fgb- C, E. H. A 10, Kong C, 2, Jl G A S., 
1870 p 32. 

Bunaetae, E D, 17. 

Bcnwat. S S., SC 
Banna = dhtinu. 


Boppanbanaja, B I, 21 
Bam, S It, SC 
Butnbara = dhumra. 

Bammala.-, rosin. Ah., 304; Amb A., 57 » B-, 54; ilalcd. tiong 
Cbr, 67 
Ban^, It P. L 

Bum = Jiraka Kaw, X, 99 ; AH., 6S. , 

Kdm, 21S 

Bum = dharanalada, S.S,57 

Bamko^ae = dunkritra, L V. K. G,P ^ 


dum curammg seed 



1C8 


Diirnln, Kon". A.» 1 (112). 

Diirulri = jlfirlkptva, P. P. P. A-, 13 ; Gp. A., 13 ; D. I., 4. 
Duniwlina, Her. 

Duln, K. J., 47 = Ujjvala, 

Dula := Jvalita Ka\y, 121. 

Dawotu = Jagluxaa. Nam., 159 ; K- J., 2S. 

Dtnvanawn, to run, S. S. II., 21 ; Cli. II., 17 ; SfnIcO. dius'nng, to 
sail, Clir. Co. 

Dviwnniya = duhila Kavy. X., 84 ; Wewclk., 3i ; cf. Du. 

Duwam, 158, 21. 

Dubanga = dhutanga Kavy. X., 129. 

Dnbasa, P. P., 42. 

Dnbunan = durjuana. 

Duliid = dukrda Nain., 172. 
f Bu, daughter, Amb. A., 31 ; Op. 15., 3; S. L., 30. 

IBun, Ab.37. 

Durawl, Knel. 

Du^ra s= dvina, “ Island, ** Ab., CC4. 

Duwilla as dhull. 

Dc. two. Ingini. B.. 20 ; W. P. B., 13 ; D. I.. 14 ; S. B. >!. B . 1 ; 

P. 4 ; S. S. I.. 0, 13 ; IT., 21, 

Dcknta, 8. M. B., 3. 

Dckin,P.P.,30.“ofbotb.’* 

Deja ss Jyeabtba, S. B. M, B, I. 

Det, V. P.. 28. 

Dcna != Jana WanJr., C; P. P., 25, 28; Penatn muUllude, S. S. 
57. 

Dona « diivnnUa lulvy., 52. 

Denamo, Slab. A. Actawirn. D,, 7 ; Ingi., B., 7 ; Wowelk., 8 ; 

J. C. A, S. 1879, p. 20. 

Dciiaw,!, S. S. I., S ; dcnni II., 21 ; dcna giving Anib. A-, 47 i 
B. 27 ; Haled, dennang Cbr., 56. 

Denu, 21ab. D., Ingi, C., 22; Wcwclk, 7 ; Amb. A., 24 ; K. J., * 
140 ; dennye, Gp. C., 12. 

Denna, P. P. P., 31 ; denruita, P. P., 19 ; Gp. B., 15. 

Debera = dvidlia kfita, S. S., 30. 

Deberabae = BadariWiafika iJab. If., 104. 

Demiita, "Mab, II., 185 ; Nnm., 131 ; Ab. 558. 

Dema]a, 1455, 12, 13. 

Demi Thup., VIII., L. P., 1. 

Deme] Amb., B,, 56; Demu]m AinU A.. 22 = Pali Damila 
Skt. Diiivida. 

Deya = dravya, B. D., 9 ; S. M. B., 27; Gp. C., 13. 

Deya = jaya Aetaw. (117) A, 14. 

Dcylm, Gp. C., 11. 

Deyekaeyi, P. P. P., 34. 

Derana = dharani, K. J., 57 ; Gutt., 61. 

Bela = Jata. Kavy., IH., 28. 

Bela rs: Dliura, K. J., 83. 

Delum = dabma Ab., 570; Nam., 126. 



169 


Dew = dhovana, K J , 49 

Dewaiia = dvitlya, K, J , 130 , Wandr, 2 , 158, 1 
Dewani, C P , (172) 

Dewal, 158, 4 

Dewa = dattva, Wandr , 14 

Dewanampiya Tomgala (1), Galwana (2) Mali R (6) 

Dewalaj a, Gp B , 20 , D. 1 , 19 

Dewinba, 158, 4 

Dewjjan, Gp 0,5, dewin 8 , 3 

Dewndat, S S II, 21 

Dewundara for dewunuwara, later Dondra 

Dewram = Jetavanarama, K. J , 43 

Desanawa, to preach, S D , 37 

Desum = disana, Gutt, 31. 

Desjawanu, Amh B , 58 
Do two, Hab , 4, comp dc 
Domba — punnaga 
Dora door ss: dvara 

Dorajuna a: dvSrakotthaka, Abb 31, IJain, 104, Gp 0, 3,2, 
Dewanagala 

Dola = daulinda, Kavy II , 31 , Nam , 80 , Kav j XI , 4 , K 
J,151 

Dolawa palancium 

Dolikuna Wachgama, J C A S , 1870-71, 24 
Dolugala * Dolhapabbata, Mali II , 45 
Dolha = dridba 
Dowinawa ■v/dab 
Dosi, P P , 9 

Doboji, PPP,24,PP,9,&S CLXXII 
DolaXamatay i, B D , 1 (21) 

Dolos, dolusa twelve Sandag C , Kong A , 1 
Dota = ABjili, Sub, 125 , cf daeta. 

Dae or Dae = jati, R D, 25, Nfini,127, daesanian, S S II, 
21 , Abh 57c , S L, 36, Maled Zai Clir, 58 
Daekae, P P P , 20 , P P , 7, fee. 

Diekwiyae, P P , 42 

Daekka Gp C, 5 , cf laekka ib, 7, 8 and dekkadi, together 

Daegae, Amb B , 52 , cf dage Amb A-, 20 

Daedi = canda, “barsb,’ Ab,7ll 

Daeta = hastiyugma, Kavy 1,15, comp dota. 

Daedaru = Jarjarita, Kavy X-, 118, dieduru = jajjara, Mib 
II, 180, comp dedduro ^ dardurah, PischelBeitr Y1 , 90 
Daena, P P P 27 , daenae R D, 16, daeua daena, Her 
Daenum, Gp C, 12, 13 
Daemi = dliarma, Guti, 193 

Daeja = drivja, Amb A, 25 , Wcwelk , 11, 39 , cf deya 
Dae^aejiko, Gp 0,11 



170 


Daela = Jala, net ; comp, dogga = yugma Pischel Beitr. Ill, 
241. 

Daeli = Rajovajallam, Nam., 275 ; Malei deli ink. Chr., 58. 

Daeli = Kajjala, Kavy. XI., 26, 

Daeli, beard, Kavy. V., 42 ; Nam, 166. 

Daella = Jvala, “flame." 

Daewiya (?), Wandr., 11. 

Daehit, Amb. A., 9, 10 ; daebaeti, P. P., 31 ; daewu^ii, P. P.4 4 ; 
Ab (32 ; Hod. daewitu. 

Daehae (= durukota Parawis, 51) yha. S. S. I., 22 ; cf. daha- . 

\7ut, daebaepiyae, Amb. A., 17. 

Daebaena = dhyana Kavy., XIII , 65 ; cf. daban. 

Daehaewili, P. P. 39 ; Nam , 70 great anger. 

Daeli = datbika, Kavj‘. XIII., 44 ; cf. daddbo Kacc., 333 ; Ind. 
Str.III,370. 

Dae = dravya, Ruan. D., 17 ; 1456., 10 ; Rambbaw. B., 3. 
Daekaetta Sickle, Ab, 443. 

Dacp, Bmvory, S. S., 55, 57. 

Daepa « Jalpana (charm) S. S., 57. 

Daewana, crystal, Nam., 220 ; Kavy. XII., 21. 

Dwanda (?) D. 1, 14 ; F. P., C. 24 ; Gp. B., 14 ; Rank. D., 4. 
Dbaja, 158, 10. 

Dham, P. P., 23, 25. 

Dhurayebi, P. P,, 20. 

Dhuraja, P, P,, 10. 

Nakapawata = NagaparvaUTammanakayda (55), 1. 

Nakat = naksbatra, S. M. B., 7. 

Naka = Nikaya, P. P., 13 ; Amb. A., 21) ; Uayil A-, 23 ; 
Wand. 8. 

Naguta, “ tail " =* langula. 

Natanawa, to dance, S. S. II., 31 ; cf iiasna(a. 

Natuwa = Napat, cf. nata, Cunniiigliam, 71 ; cf napa and 
naeya. 

Nat = Ananta, S. S. I., 9; K. J., 84. 

Nat = Niisti. • 

Nadali, Wandr., G. 

Nap.i, Nepben’, GalTvana, cf natuwa. 

Nripura, Gp. A, 10. 

Nam = Naman S. S. I., 25 ; P. P,, 50; Gp. C., 13, Szc. ; C. 23 ; 

Mall. B., cf. Naemin. 

Nainadinaw.5, “to bend,” S. S. IL, 21, 

Namaya, Nine. 

.Namacti, Gp. B , 7, 17. ■ 

Narabuwa = Namra. 

Namwa, D. I, 20 ; R. D., 14; Wandr., 5; Gp. B., 20; Haled. 

uagang Chr., 59 ; negi, upright, Chr., 70. 

Nnya = riia., “ debt,” P. P., 11. 

Nayinda = nagcndra, S. L., 40 ; Amb. A, 33. 

Narakadi, Hell, L. V.*K. 0. 

Naraturu s= Nirantara Nam., 27, Kavy. XIIL, 81. 



171 


Narana = Narendra, K J , 49. 

Narawenawa, “ to see, ’1,6 
Nariya, “ Jackal,” Alw , 72 
Naladaliatn, S S , 34 , Nam , 74. 

Nalala = lalata. Forehead, S L,40, Hem I, 47, Haled ni 
Chr, 5u 

Nawa nme, Hah A. 

Nawatinawa, “ to stop,” Ch II , 15, 8 
Nawanawa, S S 1 , 14 
Navranba, 158, 3 
Nawannan, 158, 16. * 

Na^aya, “ Fehruary-March,” Mali A 
NaNTOvran, ninth, E P A. 13 

Na^-am, Amb A,, 31, 32, 35, “repair" = navikarraa 
Nasiti,F. P P A., 10 , cf nasim Mayii, B , 20 , cf nassi, P P, 
8 , a V msana^i a 

Nasnata, "to dance,” S S, 63, cf natanaua 
Naslaauwa, " rein ” 

Naliana, 158, 1C 

Nahanu, Ointment, S. S, 57, cf sneha, sanaln, Nam, 215. 
Naliara = naharu, snayii Haled naru Cbr, Cl 
Nahasna = Spat^a Kavy X-, 174 
Na, 158, 4 

Na = nAga Ivacl (1C2) 

Naliya Natn , 12b, Ab , 589, Belle 
Na^vakAmb B 13 = snapaka, washer 
Nika Nam, 122 , Ab , 574 
Nikata, Chin, Ab, 2G2 
Nikain, ]^pty 

iNikaiiaeli s= Nigguncliivnluka, Mali II, 210, Ab, 574 
Nika^JiIa, K J,55 
Nikut, K J, C9 
Nikraunu, Gp B, IG 
Nikinae Runn 1) , 21 
Njgampa, Hah. II , 350 
Nigci s= Nigraba Gutt , 36 
Nija Amb , A , G 
fNidi, S L,42 

■\ Nmdi sleep, P P, 30, 37 ; Haled. Nidang Cbr 67, coivp Siudhi 
nimda Pisclicl Beitr YI, 90 
Kindae, Amb B , 55 , Kaeligatta, 16 , Katugaha, 12 
Nipan S S I, ti. 11,21, S L, 42, born 
Nipl = Niplta SSI, 17. 

Eipunu, Gp A., G 
Kibad, Amb A , 15. 

Nira, Ab, 373 

fNiinawanawa, nimeuawa, to finish, S L., 42 
Niinawa, P. P. 3, 32, 33 

tlsmiawaj , Amb A , 10 , mmacwijae, Amb A , 58 



172 


Nirai s= Noma Kir. 

Nimi = Nirmit.a, P. P., 2i. 

Nimmata = Nimawata, Gutt, 201. 

NimmoU infallible, Alw., 71. 

Niya, Amb. B. 30 ; cf. Puli niy.i = nija. 

Niya = Nakha Kam., 1G3. 

Nij'atakn Mill., 20 ; Kir, 3, Ton. 1, granted. 

Niyati, Op. B., 13; We\rellc.» 13; comp, Niyfitila in the 
Nfwik Inscr. Trans, of the 2d orient, congrc-s-s, 331 ; Pfili 
nlj’adita Ahv. Kacc., 97. 

Niyam S. S. I., 18 ; Amb. B , 2 ; Wandr., 2 ; Gp. B., 8, village. 
Niyamina Ti<i3., 12. 

Nij-amunra = Niyiimaka,S. St A., 20 ; Staled, Niyamcng, Clir., CO. 
Niyara, Embankment, Sub., 127. 

Kiyarj, S. S. I., 7, cf. nuwaru. 

Niyudameta, R D, 31. 

Niyuya, Ruan D., 27 ; Gp. A., 17 ; Wand., IG ; P. P., Si. 

Kiyae AttanayFila, 13 ; Stayil, A, 17 ; J. R. A., S, 1879, p. 36 ; 

S. S. II.. 21 ; Num.. 52. 

Niranrul ss Nin^ata, Ab, 717. 

NiriLvawa, Gp. C., 7. 

Ktriv s: Narnkn, Guti., 3S. 

Kirindu, S. S. I., 14. 

Nilaba = Nllablim X., 220. 

Nilaya. C. P. (172.) 

Kilattijiya, Gam. Abb. Stib. (20.) 

Xilupulaosi S. S. I., 5. 

Nilkat.i, pc.acock, Xura., 140. 

KilgcUj K. J., 107. 

Kilmini Sapphire, Gp. B., 14. 

Niwamin, P. P., 3. 

Nivvaradn, innocent, Gp. C., 11 = mraparadliin Cli. 11., 15. 
Is’iwa, Gp A., 10 ; B., 18. Slnlcd. imvang Clir., fli. 

Kiwurann, Gp. A., 21, Tlulp. VII. 

Xiwcs s= niwusft Ko\\a (160). 

Kwi.r. r.,4. 

NiwO, P. P. P. A. 10. 

Nina = ni^caya, P. P., 18, 19. 

Nmdl = nitya, continnally, S. !»., 44. 

Xiviru — nind.i, Gatl., 205. 

Ni*cvl s= Ni^calft, D. I., 2. 

NiCi S .S. I.. 8. II , 17 ; J. a A S. 1879, 25 ; Gp A. 4. 
NiCtynoyt, (.!p. B.. 1, 

Ki'i = r. I’., 40, 50; s= nbVita, Amb. A., 24, 41, C A 

.S. 1870, p. 30. 

Nisi = nitya. Oull., 177. 

Xi-sul srs riiH nicui.a NSm., 12G; Ab. .5fi3. 

M = N'ftdJH. R 1., IG 

Nu. Op C. 9. 14 



173 


Nuga =: nyagrodha, K GO 
Nugunakima, bLame, Abb , 19. 

Nunu^na = Moha Ignorance Kavy , 74 , Nam , 83, cf nuwana 
Nuba =a Nabbas. 

Numnsa, -unmixed, S S I , C 
Nnra = Anuriga Kavy X, 119 , Nam., 68 
Nuni^va = NupnraNam, 170, Ab, 288, Hera I, 123, cf Pah 
myura, Ab, 285 

Nuwana = Jnana, L. V. K C P P, C , S S I IG, S L 45 cf 
nanuwana and naena 
Nnwar Abhay, A,, 1 7 , P P , 3 
Nuwara = Naganka, Gutt, 120, cf myvra 
Neka = Aneka K J , 80 
Net Eye S S 1,13, S L,45 
Nediyek Kael 
Nepanna, Hig C, 11 
Neya, Gp 0 , 24 

Neralu = Nalikera, cocoi nut guz naliyer Ind Ant VllI, 114 

Ncl = nabna lotus, Arab B , ^6 , Abbid , G85 

Ndavram, to plough, Alvr , 77 

N5, S S L 5 . S L 45 

Ne as Jfiaya, Gutt, 37 

No, not, ^lah C 

Nomin multitude, D I, 2 

Naekaeti Astronomer, Arab B,40, S S 57, Ab,347, Mnled 
nakaiteiekang, Cbr, 47 

Naeguivat a vbo nagmawa, C P J C. A S , 1873, p 78 
Naegena Kael 

TNaengi Wandar, C, Gp B, 4, 17, 19, nacngae, S il B C 
4 Naefigu, Arab B , 24 25 
[_Naeiigemi, R D , 11 

Naetiyen, Gp C , 10, stem,” S L 44, “ tvrig, ’ Nrim , 110 
Naeta, P P 51 , Gp C , 20 
NaetijP P. Gp B,20, 21 
Naedimayila, ‘ iather m law ’ 

Naena = Jfiana, K J , 104, cf nuwana 

Naenda, *' Aunt,” Ab , 37 

Naepi^a = Snapita, “barber” Amb B , 32 

Naebala greatness, K. J , 32 , Nam , 237, S S 1,21 

Nacmati =s Namanasti, “ called " 

Naerai, P P, 46 

Naewata, again,” S L , 46, C P. (172) 

Naewaetae, 1) 1,19, P. P , 50, Ruan D , 29 

Naesum, “concealment,’’ Nam 35,60 

Naesu a vbo nasanawT Amb A., 23 

Naebae = Nasika Eivy XHI , 41 , Nam , 1 64 

Nadiya, Amb B , 23 = nali miled n’Ui, Clir, 00 

N'le, 158, 21 , R D , 18 = napiL 

Naena, “sister inlaw’ 



174 


Naemin, Mah. B., cf. nam. 

Nao^'a, " neplie'^," Sub. B. 3, cf. najuwa. 

Naewa, Ship S. II. A., 20 ; Pali naTU Hem, I„ 1C4. 

Naikn, P. P. 5, generally No ek. 

Pak or wak = pakaha/tho oitlinaty formative of ordinal num- 
bers, R. D , IG (21) 5 Amb. A., 4 ; P. P., 2. 

Pak, cooked, ripe, Amb. B , 23; maled fau, Clir., Cj, 

Pakak. Wandr., 4. 

Pallgul, Nam., 149 ; Kavy. XIII., 67. 

Pailguwii = bhjiga. 

Paca, “ five ” Tiss, 8. 

Pacaya = jiratyaya, Tiss , 16, comp, pasaya. 

Pacina Aenibulamba, comp. Lassen Indische Altertimmsk. II., 

1002. 

Paeeni (cf. ap.assena for apassaya), Gajab. (5), Gahv. (10), pajeni 
Nett. (29). 

Pajankaya, P. P., 37. 

PaiubatA,.Nett. (29). 

P.atan = prasthana, P. P., 4; L. V. K. A. Op. 0., 22 ; Wand. 2. 
Nam., 244. 

Pata, S, il. B., 15, 18. 

Patisatari Gajab. (5), cf. Palisatari and patisatharann itiscn of 
Na'ik Trans. Cong., 314. 

Pat'waiiu, Wewelk,, 12, 23, 26. 

Pa(taya, Nett. (29). 

Pacjiya, " flight of atep.V’ Kael. Wewelk., 31. 

Paim = Praiia, Gutt., 33. 

Pal)a^vanu = paunapanairi S. B. 11. B., 4. 

Paijlwa = prapatipati Amb. A, 42, cf. paniwaya Her. 

Pauuwa, worm. 

Panugaina Dunum. (1-3). 

Paiuloia, gift, Arab. A., 48, Ing C., 16 ; Kaellg, B., 38 ; Katu- 
gaha, B, 9 ; Nam., 191 ; Kavy. X., 185. 

Pat [pot], P. P., 33. 

Pat = prapta, Gp. A., 12. 

Patabandanawa, '* to givm a title." 

Pata = pattiia, naeliya, Amb. B , 9, 17 ; pataka Sandag, B. 
Patara, IL J., 42, “ greatness.” 

Pata, S. 11. B. 2, " desiring." 

Pata = pawata, J. C. A. S., 1879, 29 ; Gp. A., 23 j Wandr., 7 ; 
158, 19. 

Pati = pataj'a, Hab., 5, 0 ; J. C A S., 1879, p. 10. 

Patisawana Gajab. (5) ; Pcriyank, 6. 

Patisasana Situlp. 
rPaturuwanawa, “ to publisli.’*^ 
kPaturuwa, B. D., 19. 

Patwn, Gp, B., 1C. 

Padanagalida, Tiss., 8 ; J. 0. A S., 1879, 17. 

Padayan, 158, IG (?). 

Padhan, P. P., 47. 



175 • 


Pan!, 158, IG. 

Pandu^ra = Kanduka (?), Ab., 31G. 

fPanaa, fifty Wewelk,. 18; comp, panavanna Pischel Beitr. 
4 III., 245. 

[_Piinaes, P. P. 4, cf. wauaes. 

Pansalis, P,.P., 2; Wewelk., 15; Aetakada, A 1 comp. tPiili->a 
Pischel Beitr. IIL, 251. 

Panha, 158, 4. 

Papataka Gaj. (5)'Debelgalp. (19)Wiliarag. (11) of pappatakojaR}'. 
. Fabala, bnd S. L. 47. 

Paba]u, F. P., C. 2 ; Nam., 221. 

Parnanu, "measure," Mali. R. (G); L. V. K. B., Amb. A., 40; 

B., 57; Gp.B., IG. 

Pamanlyen, Wswelk, 7. 

Paina. = pramada, P. P., 19, 51 ; Gp. C., 14. 

Pamini, Gp. B , 15 ; cf. paemiiii. 

Paminekin, Gp. A., 7. 

Pamu SR pamangu (?), Kavy., 101. 

Pamuna, D. I., 5 ; Gp. A, 19; Thup. HI. 1 (cattle houses?) ; 

Rank. 2 ; Ratnbhaw. B., 4. 

Pambaya, K J., 134. 

Paya, a measxuro of extent, Rhys David’s Coins and Measures 
of Ceylon, p. 20. 

Paynlfl, Amb. A., 31 : B. 35 = paclayugnm; Kilvy. X., ICO. 
Payiya ‘= pasumbiya, Kavy. X., 160. 

Piv yaolu , Gp. 0., 21; cf. peyyala ^ pariyaya Oldenberg K.Z, 
XXV. 322. 


Parada'^'a Mayii, B., 22. 

Parapuren, E. P,, A 5., Amb. A., .1.48. 

Param s= paraml, P. P., 1. 

Fararaparayen, P, P. P., 62; comp, pjvrapnrawen, p-aramp-arawen 
Dondra (159). 

Taralabanaka Situlp. 

Pai-awatahi, Hab., 8. 

Parawafawa, 158, C. 

Panwacda, P. P., 22. 

Parasatu = parijata Nam. 21 ; IGlvj', XT., 38. 

Parasidn = prasiddba, Gutt, 239. 

Parahana " straining,” Amb. B., 29, 43 ; cf Paeraebaena. 
Paraparawen, lug. A 13., comp, paramparaycn. 
rPariji = parajika. Her. 

4 Paridi, Gp. B,, 8. 

LParidden, S. M. B., 24; Gp. A., 24; B. G; P. P., 9, 10; 
' Galasne, 4. 

Paribujaka Gaj. (5) ; Galwana (10). 

Paribhasa Her. 

Parimaiulala Kir. 1. 

Parij-aya, Amb. A., 18. 

I’ariyeya t= p^nipata. Ab., C3G. 



17G 


Pariwataka, Mali. R. (6) ; Alntgalwihara (62) = parivrajaka (?) 
Pariwara, S. M., B. 20. 

Pariweniya Konduk. (95); cf. Kriwen. 

Pariharana, P. P., 25. 

Parumaka = parama, cf. inscr. at Bintenzorg Ind. Aot IV. 
356 or s= Siri polemios the Andhrabhritya pudumawi, Weber 
Hala, p. XIII. Ind. Stud. III. 483 ; Ind. Str. II. 222 ; Lassen 
IV., 88. 

Pala = phasulika (?), Ab., 278. 

Palaruk “ Fruit tree,” Amb. A., 50. 

Palas Nam, 119 ; Ab. 555. 

Palaha, P. P., 21 (?). 

Palawntthu = sakavatthu, Mah, II, 135. 

Pali venerable, Tiss., 3, 7. 

Pallsatariya Periyank. 1, 4. 

Paliha = phalaka, shield, Ab., 56 ; J. P. phalata Nir., 29. 

Palu = pallava, K. J., 83. 

Palutupana Mali. II., 116. 

Palol = patali, the trumpet flower, Nam., 125. 

PaUawawSla (Burnell, S. I. P. 37), Mah. II, 219. 

Pawata = parvata Ton. Moled, farubada, Chr., 61. 

Pawat, S. il. A., 24 ; Nam., 60 ; S. L., 95 ; Gp. A., 9. cf. pimat 
Pawataia Tiss., 0. 

rPawatit, P. P., 50 ; cf. Ganit, Kaendit. 

I_Pawatinawa, to continue, S. L, 49 ; IVaeligama, C. P. 
Pawatuk = puiwataka ? P. P., 49 ; cf. pae^vaetae. 

Pawatna, P. P., 8, 9, 16 ; Gp. B., 20 ; C. 3. 

Pawatneyae, S. M. A, 20 Gp. C. 10 *, pavratnS, Gp. B. 1, 
pawatna, B. I., 18. 

Pawatwa, P. P. P. S. M., Rank D. 3; Ruan D. 14. pawatwana 
Dondra (163). 

Pawara, "conclusion,” Amb., B. 2. 

Pawarupu, P. P., 28. 

Pawasa, " thirst,” S. L., 24. 

Pawita = papishtha, c£. pawifae. 

Pawn =s parvata, Amb., A. 32; B. 12; K. M. B., 10. 

Pawura = pakara, “ Wall,” Gp. 0., 1 ; S. L , 49 ; Maid, fauru 
Gray, 22. 

Paweniya, 168, 16 cf. praweniya. 

Paa = paiica, Amb., A., 54 ; Wondr., 6 ; S. B. M, B., 3 ; Her. 
Pas.S. S,'24. 

Pasa s= paksha, Gutt, 231 ; Amb., A., 14. 

Paso, P. P.. 27, 33. 

Pasaya = pratyaya, comp, pacaya, L. V. K. B,, Gp. A. 23 ; 
Waeli. 

Pasak = pratyaya and par 9 va, Amb. A., 

Pjusaelcin, Amb. A,, 20 ; pasackae Amb. I 
Pasakkaemiya = pratyaksliakarmika A ’ ‘ 

Pas.'vk = pacceka, 158, 16. 



177 


Pasih (’), “ Ascetic,” P. P , 3S 
Pasu = p'\ 9 cat, S IL A., 13 
Paso, 158, 5 

Pasoa =: prafcjusha, Amb A , 9 
Pasmabalpaya Kael. 

Passebi, P P, 43, comp paessa = pa^cima 
Palia, Gp A, 10, PaiiakaraniWa, “to remove,” S L, 49, 
Nitiiugh , G ; Mab , 73, 40 
Pabata = pnsata, Situlp , 4 
Pahan = prasaima, Gatk, 39 
Pabanowanna, II D. 1C 

Paban, “lamp,” R. D,24, 158, 19, S L., 49; Nam, 170 
Kavj XII, 80, Wieli, cf Rin. 

Pahan, “stone,” = paahana Galgirik (17;, Wilcligala (GO) Abba 
A-, 12 , cf Panawaessa. 

Pahapeh s= pra'^adapankti, K J, 44, cf paja. 

Pabajamm (com prasannakeremm) = prabljayamlm, Amb A , 
3 

Pabasu = epar 9 u, Gutt, 15, 11 
Pahawaesi = pra^idawasi. Amb B , 2G 
Pabidaivasae, Kong (112) D 7. 

Pabala, 3L J, 54; Naro, 232, pabala, P P, 42, S L., 50, 
K O', 54, praka 9 xkamna. 

Pabaela, Koog D 5 
Pabura a paccan raft, Ab, 665 
Pal V, “having published,” Amb A^ 67, S S , 84 
Pnlamu « protbama, S M A., 11; DoQdro(lC3) 13, palamuwa 
IVe-w, 37 

Palnla = prithula, Moled, fulan, Chr, 49 
Palisatan, Hab , 7 , Penyankulam (7) , cf paUsatan 
P.V, Tvater (?), 158, 9 

Pa =s pStra, Arab B , 20, 28 ; cf Mobap Amb A 54 , Gp 
C, 19 

Pukassehi, P P , 44 

Patta, Amb A, 44 , cf pltba M.S, 138, 139, mod pie 
prabbS 

Patae, 158, 12 

Padona, “ water for tbe feet,” Ab , 425 

Pan = paban, lamps, 158, 12, Nam, 257, cf Paban Maled 
fannzu, “ lantern,” Clu , 68 
Pana, S M B , 7 

PinawaesBa, “bail,” Ab, 50; cf Paban 
Pamib, D. 1 , 1 , cf paemili. 

Pamok, P P, 19 = ppatimoksba. 

Paja = prasTida, L V K A, c£ ptdiapeh 
P iMitae, Gp A, 9 , cf pawi|a. 

Pisu, ease, L. V K B, mo<I Smh pabasu 
Pijnlwat = pujanT 3 a, Amb A, 35 

Q C038 M 



17C 


Pariwatalca, Mali. K. (6); Alutgalwihara (62) = parivTajata (?) 
Pariwara, S. M., B. 20. 

Pariweniya Konduk. (95) ; cf. Piriwcn. 

Pariliarana, P. P., 2a. 

Parumaka = parama, cf. inscr. at Buitenzorg Ind. Ant. IV. 
356 or Siri polemioa the Andhrabhritya pudumawj, Weber 
Hala, p. XIU. Ind. Stud. HI 483 ; lad. Str. 11. 222 ; Lassen 
IV., 88. 

Pala s= phasulika (?), Ab., 278. 

Palaruk " Fruit tree,” Amb. A., 50. 

Palas Nam, 119 ; Ab. 555. 

Palaha, P. P., 21_(?). 

Palawatthu = sakavatthu, Mah. II, 135. 

Pali venerable, Tiss., 3, 7. 

Palisatariya Periyank. 1, 4. 

Paliha = phalaka, shield, Ab., 56; J. P. phalata Nir., 29. 

Falu = pallava, K. J., 83. 

Palutupana Mah. II., 116. 

Palol = patali, the trumpet flower, Nara., 125. 

PalUwawala (Burnell, S. I. P. 37). Mah. II, 219. 

Pawata = parvata Ton. Maled. farubada, Chr., 61. 

Pawat, S. M. A., 24 ; Nam., 60 ; S. L., 95 ; Gp. A., 9. cf. puwat 
Pasrataia Tiss., 0. 

rPawatit, P. P., 50 ; cf. Ganit, Kaendit. 

\Pawatinawa, to continue, S. L, 49 ; Waeligama, C. P. 
Pawatuk = puivataka? P. P., 49; cf. paewaelae. 

Pawatna, P. P., 8, 0, 1C; Gp. B., 20; C. 8. 

Pawatneyae, S. M. A., 20 Gp. C. 10 ; pawatne, Gp. B. 1, 
p.iwatDa, D. 1 , 18. 

Pawatwa, P. P. P. S. M., Rank D. 3; Ruan D. 14, pawatwann 
Dondra (163). 

Pawara, “ conclusion,” Amb., B. 2. 

Pawarunu, P. P., 28. 

Pawasa, ” thirst,” S. L., 24. 

Pawita = papbh;ba, cf. pawitae. 

Pawn = parvata, Amb, A. 32; B. 12; K. M. B., 10. 

Pawivo. ■= " VTftill," Gp. G., 1; S.L., 49; Maid. faMtu 

Gray, 22. 

Paweniya, 168, 10 cf. praweny’x 

Pas = paiica, Amb, A,, 54 ; Wandr., 6 : S. B. M. B., 3 : Her. 
Pas, S. S., 24. 

Pjisa = p.akslia, Gutt., 231 ; Amb, A., 14. 

Pasn, P. P., 27, 33. 

Pasaya = prutyaya, comp, pacaya, L. V. K. B., Gp. A, 23 ; 
Waeli. 

Pasak = pratyaya and prir 9 va, Amb A., 15, 21, 54; B. 4; 

Piisackin, Amb, A,, 20 ; pasaekae Amb. A., 28. 

Pasakkaemiya = pratyakshakannika Amb. A., 21; B. 4 . 

Pasak = pacceka, 158, 16. 



177 


Pftsili 0), " Ascetic,” P. P., 38. 

Pasu = pa9<at, S M. A., 13 
Paso, 158, 5. 

Pasos = pratyusha, Amb. A , 9. 

Pasmahalpaya Kael. 

Passebi, P. P., 43 ; comp paessa = |ja<,ciraa 
Paha, Gp A, 10; Paiiak«araiiaw», “ to remove;” S L, 49, 
Nitmlgh , G ; Hah , 73, 40. 

Pahata = pasata, Situlp , 4 
Pahan = prasanna, Gatfc, 39 
Pahano^vanna, P D. IG 

Pahan, “lamp," E. D,24, 158, 19; S L., 4D; Nam, 170 
ICavy XII, 80 , IVaeli, cf Kin. 

Pahan, “stone," = pasliana Galgirik fl7^, Wacligala (09) Abha 
A, 12; cf Pamwaossa 

Pahapeli = piilsadapankti, K J,44; cf pa^a 
Pahayamin (com prasanoakeremm) = prablilyamana, Amb A, 
3 

Pahasu as spar^u, Gutt , 15, 11 
Pahawaesi = prasadaw asi, Amb B , 2G 
Pahidavrasae, Kong (112) D 7 

Pahala, K J, 54, Nam, 232, pahala, P P, 42; S L, 50, 
K. J,54; prakn^ ikarana 
Pahaela, Kong D 5 
Paliura = paccarl raft, Ab , C65 
Pali, “having published,” Amb A, 57, S S, 34 
Pnlamu sa pratliama, S H. A. 11 ; Dondra (1G3), 13 , palamuwi 
■SVew,37 

Palala = pnthula, Haled, fulan, Chr, 49 
Palisntari, Hab, 7 ; Penyankulam (7), cf patisatari 
PTi, water (I), 168, 9 

Pa = patra, Amb B , 20, 28 j cf llahapa, Amb. A 54 , Gp 
C,19 

Pakassehi, P. P , 44 

I^tta, Amb A, 44, cf patha MS, 138, 139, mod pTic -= 
Patae, 158, 12 

Padona, " water for the feet,” Ab , 425 

Pan = pahan, lamps, 158, 12, Nam, 257, cf Pahan Haled 
fannzu, “lantern,” Clu , 58 
Pana, S M B , 7 

Panawaessa, " hail,” Ab , 60 , cf Pahan 
Pamili, D. 1 , 1 ; cf paemili. 

Pamok, P P, 19 = pi-atimoksba. 

Paya = prasada, L V K A; cf pahapeli 
Pawitae, Gp A, 9 , cf pawita. 

Pasu, ease, L V K B, mod. Smh pahasu 
Pijnlwat = pujaniya, Amb A, 35 

Qfi038 



178 


rita back, T. P., 27, 28, 30, 33; Op. A., H ; Titfie, S. M. P., 7. 
Pitatao, Tliilp. VIII, D. 1, 19. 

ri(assauiak (com. pitast'ira), scavenger, Amb. B., 9 ; JIalcd. bun, 
Chr., 47. 

Piiii = priyiii, “dew,” pinibiniln, "dew chop," Her. dialed, fmi. 
Glir., 53. 

Pinisae, L. V. K. B , P. P., 26 ; K D., 20 ; Tliup. L. P. VII., 
2 ; comp pinaka Kcm Kawistud* p. 113. 

Piiuja, Amb. A., 12. 

Pidu v^pAj* sacrifice, Gp. A., 11 ; L. V. K. B., cf. puda. 

Piduru = palrda, straw. 

Pin = punya, P. P. P., 14 ; Gp. A.. 14 ; C. P. 

Pinawa, v'pri, " to rejoice Gp. B., 9. 

Piuu, Gp. A., 8. 

Pipi, denom. from pusbpa, " expanding," K. J., 140. 

Pimba, Giitt , 7G. 

Piya, “ father," P. P., 20 ; 158, 12 ; Tlmp, L. P. VII. 

Piya = pawada, Giitt 73 ; Hum , 159 

Piyagiya » padagata, llak C., Arab. B„ 0.5 ; comp, pediw. 

Piyan = pidhaoa, " cover,” Amb. B, 11. 

Piyali = Prakriti, Gutt , 285. 

Piyawnr, Min. A. 53. 

Piya«a = pradeeja, roof, Kuvj*. X, 1C2, NSm., 105. 

Piyanan, TliQp. I, 4. 

Piyuballa = pakahabilula 

Piyuma = padma Wandan, 11 ; Op. A., 13. 

Piyo Aetawira., C, 14 ; Her. 

Piyewin, P. P., 37. 

Piri = pariUIia, Gntt., 93. 

Pirikapa, Arab. A., 14. 

Piiikara, P. P., 40, 41 = parikkbura. 

Piriksa, P. P., 48, 49 (com. := sodlietvu) = parikslia ? 

Piiit =s paritta, "defence," P. P., 27 ; Amb. A., 11 ; Num., 2.'»2. 
Pivinaemu = parinumita, L. V. K. B. 

Piribacla. Aet., 6 ; Ruan. D. 25 ; cf. Klibad. 

Piriraa male, Alw., 38 ; Moled, iinmiha, " liiisband," Chr., 67. 
Piiimasa Waeli , Pirimaswa Kaek 
Piriwalu, 15S, 3. 

Piiiwan KaeL 
Piriwora, Hank D., 4. 

Piriwaba, P. P., 31 ; piriwabana Abhay., A. 20. 

Piriwabanna, Arab. A, 20 ; B , 5 ; S. B. M. A, 5. 

Piriwen, K IL B., 19 ; ITayil. A., 26 ; Kong. B., 9 ; cf. pariwe- 
niya. 

PIriwemin from piriwenawa or pirihenawa, " fading away,” 

Pirihuna, “ wasted away," Gp. A., 15 ; 0. 10 ; cf. pirihela. 

Tiris = parisbad, Kavy, 80. 

Pirisindu = pari^uddbi, K. J., 45. 

Pirisudu, P. P., 21. 



179 


Pin.sejiJ’, P P, 19, retinue 
Pinliima = imrihana, Gl Dli, 32, Painwis, 137 
Piriliola Nam, 02, P P, 20, 25, Amb A. 15, ‘ disgiacc," 
pinhelima. Her a \eibo pinhenaxva. 

Piru = puraiialada, S S , 57 
Piruna = puma, Kavj X, 128, Kotta. 

Pirul, Amb A., 29 

Pila = piiya, Kavy IV, 11 

PjU = spliatika, K J , 45 

{ Pibgannawa, Ch II, 15 
Piligaenima, Her 

Pihpan = pratipanna, K J , 50, Hter puluwar 
Pilibajakelu Tamanngala (55) 

Pihmmi, K J , 81 , Nam , 290 
Piliwisa = pratipuccba, ^vy V, 29, X 83 
Piliweta = pratipatti, K *J, 75 
Pilkalamba, “ tail,” Nlra , 140 , K. J, 197 
Piwisa =s praNishta, Gutt, ICO 
Pisana ^pac, cooking, Amb B, 22 
Pisamburuua, F P B 5, Gp A., 20 
Pihikulu, Gutt, lOG , Nam., 240 
Pjbita, "help,” S L, 32 

Piluti, * settled,” Gp B , 1 2 , C , 21 , Kong B , 7 , K J , 89 
Piintiwiyao, Gp C, 22 

Pilunaua = pus, proucli, Maled foheng Cln , 71 
Pill, Amb B,8,21 := patika, "clothes,’ Puau I>,17, 158, 14, 
Haled fell, Chr, 51 

Pihbad, Amb A , 18. 24. 20 , P P. 44 , cf piuliatH 
Pilimage, L V K B,Amb A., 33, 87 , B 41 = pitim'gbui 
Pjliyamak, Gp C, 0, MVi , 73 39 

PiUu ela = papplti, Amb A , 2 , P P P , A. 7, Thup , U P , I, 2 
Piluku = pitba«iapj)i, Gp B, 4 , Ab, 319 
Pinanaua, " to bwxm/ Maid finang, “ to di% c Clir,58 
Pukana = pu.«likanni Gaiiekanda (39), pukainiciic = vapi^akl 
kublu, inscr at Buddha G iju, Cuou , 135 
Pugul = pudgala, Amb A., 17 
PuHci = potako 
Putnpaja = pottliap Ida, Ab , 61 
Pututta = iil^ba 
PucUiwa = puto. 
fPuiia = puma R D , 16 (21) 

\runu, Tliup 17 P 1,4 
fPuta Wcuelk, 4 

4 Put, Pute,Puti = putra, Hab, 10, Makd fulu Chr 07 
l^Putaimuan, Gp B, 27 

X*uda adoration, 129, 4 , Nun, 181, I'^i\y NII,29, cf judu. 
Piuhraiu, P P 44 
Puda 158. 12 
Pudunnl, R D 22 

Pun = purim, Amb A , 4 , Gp A , 13] 


M 2 



180 


Punimasa Debelgalpansala, 3. 

Pabudinawa, to wake, Ch. IL, 15; pubudu, Gp. A., 13. 

Pura = purva, Mah. A ; 158, 1. 

Puramina, Gp. A, 7, filling. 

Purawa, P. P. P., 21, 24 and bo to read P. P. 20 instead of 
piraewa. 

Purassara, P. P., 9. 

Pura, “ having fulfilled,’* Gp. R, C ; P. P. 1. 

Puridasa Ine. A, 5 ; cf. puradasa, W. P , A. 5. opp. awawiseniya, 
the dark half ; cf puiausin on the new moon day, Niti. 5. 
Putuka = pani Pali plialu 
PuruiJa, purudu, Gl. Uh.. 27 = paricita. 

Purudda, acquaintance, Ab., 105. 

Pururauka Tiss , 3 ; Maha. A ; S. B. M. A, 1 ; IV. P. A , 1 ; Ing. 

A 3 ; comp pavumaka. 

Punimnwan Mayil, A., 7 ; see the foregoing. 

Puraeyi, Gp B., 13. 

Pulun, •' cotton," Ab, 494 

Piilupu ss nalikera Parawis, 60 ; Nara., ISO ; comp. puJapaiL 
Pulusa = plushtakara, S. S., 34. 

Puwa, Her 

Puwak = puga, Nam , 130 ; Ab., 564; Mah. II, 201. 

Puwaya = pauaha, Hab., 10; cf. Ind. Ant VIL, .37 ; Tiansact 
2d Orient Congr. p. 531. ' 

Puwrtiigu ss pi) angii, ITnh. II., 180; Nam., 12C; Ab. 671. 
Puwata = pravritti, K J., 71 ; Gutt, 86; Nnm. 60; ef. pawat 
Puwala = prau(Jlia, S S., 34 ; K. J., 90. 

'Pumak, Gp. C:, iO. 

Pnswaenim = paiihipani.iT, Ab, 584. 

Puhu = pritliak, Kavy., 52 ; cf. J. P., puhntta. " " 

Pubunu, P. P., 31. (le«on1) 

Pulnindaweda, Amb. B., 30. 

Pulapan, K. BL B., 9 ; piilnpu llinneii (123) A. 49 ; comp, 
pulupij. 

Puna, Amb. B., tl. 

Pekaniya, n.avel. 

Peti s= patlilna, Nilm, S.>; Kiivy. X., 100,111., 31. 

Peti = pankti, K. J., 83. 

Petac, S. JI. B. 8 ; cf netmngoe =i ranklimfiriTa P.aiawk. 77 
PeUiella = pottbalika, Ab , 623. 

Pediw(cf inangl paevv ijiyan, P, P., 38), Ing. B., 24; Koii". A-. 

10 ; K. BL A. 17 ; cf. tediya, pedcnped.t, Kavy. III. * 4 , 

Penena, Bunn D., 21. ’ 

Ponenawa, Cli. 11., 15 ; peninw, "giglit,’' Alw„ 75 • Jfaled . feiii 
Clir., 07. 

PenelliV, “ Cro-brand,” Sub., 120. 

P.ra = Purva K J., l.T, ; Amb. A , 17 ; Gjr. Al, ] C ; Wewellc, 
Pemna, Ing., C. 1.‘ 

Peraw.nri) = purvavara, mcrnuig, Amb, A 28. 



ISl 

Pei ittae, P P, 31, comp pomwanawa 

Perahara = panlnra, Op A, 5, 6 , S M, A„ 31, cf Paeraehaer 
Pcrum = pararait^i, Gutt, 2 

Pereh, Amb A 38 , J R A S , IST-l, p 1C3 (distuibancel 
Perewae Arab A- 10 fiom porawaiia>va 
Pexewi = purobita, Paiawis 4-t 

Perewaeliyak, Amb, B, 12, 11 = pehen, peskam, ‘comp 
Upham’s Sacred and Hist Books, I, 339 
Peraeyaemae, P P , 36 =r pubbayama 
Peraehaer, Aetawira D IG corap paeraehaer 
Pew = pita, Ab, 390 
Pewu, Gatt, 200 

Pokuna, Amb A, 40 , Hem 1, 116 cf pukaiia 
Pota Amb B 42 = pinda 
Potuwa, spill water 

Pot = pustaka Arab A 5, 4 , P P 23, 158, 3, Maled fo 
Chr 49 

Potuna, Kotta (IGO) 

Potw arana, L P , 2 
Poda = bmdu. 

Pom, “shaking,’ Nam , 242 , Kilvy. XUJ , 47 
Pobaya = prabodliako^a Gutt 23 

Porawanaw’l = parupati, poruwa Ab, 532, cf Percvsae and 
poronaj a. 

Porawa « para^u, Haled furo, Chr 47 

Porodda, ‘ leathern girth,’ Al> , 365 

Poronaya, cloth Amb B 53 , cf perewa and porawanawl 

Pola « phota, boil, Ab , 324 

Polamba s* praloblia, EAvy, 70 

Polowa, " earth,” Nara , 95 , Kavy XIII , 37 , cl poloi\ x 

Pol sa pliala cocoanut 

Polla = potaka, Kavj , VI, 13, cf Paetaw,! 

Polwatta, Dondr (169) 

Poson = prasuna, “ flower, ' S S,43, cf Pohona, Dondr (163), 
C F 

Pobo, P P, 28, 35, TJiup J 4, Amb A 44, SB M., A 1 = 
uposatha J P posaha 
Pohok. Wewclk, 19, 2> 

Pobota Sandagiri, D 3 (23) = prabhuta 
Poliona, P P , 35 = f o*on (?) 

Pohosat, S H B , 3 , P P 23 := pra9asta rich, cf P5 
Po]anga Gp A, 10 
Polanawd = splmrayati 

Poloira = p{-itlji>J, Gp A 14, E. P A 7 Act A 7 (117), 
poloya Dowanag , 3 , TVewelk, 2 , Hayil, A 9 
Po = pohosat, Kaa-y X , 89 
Poja s= uposatha s poho 
Paekulum = praskhalam, S. S , 41 
Pactaua = potaka, Ab , 53, cf Polla 
Paep, Kavy III,1G 



182 


Pactiya, hiding, Alw. XXXY.; Kara. 35. 

Pactwu, Ahhayaw, A., 1C. 

Pactuwa, P, P. P., 5+. 

Paetta, aide. 

Paedakuiui, Rank. D., 3 = pradaksliina. 

Paediitn = Megha, Kavy., 42; Nam. 33. 

Pacn = Paniyam, Gp A., 9 ; Haled, fong Chr. 71. 

Paeiia = praskandlianayakota, K. J., 03. 

Paenu (?), Gp. A. 10 , jumping, paennnu P. P. P. CO. 

Paena, Dondr (163), 13. 

P.'ienhala, shield 
Paepiliy.ana, Kotta. 

Pacinini = pi^ita, Parawisand, S, 17 ; Wandiii*. 2 ; Rank. D., 2 ; 

Dond. (163)0 ; cF. pamini and p.l,mUi. 

Paeniili, llayil. A., 4 ; Dewanagala 2 ; Galasric (144). 
Pneinilikaraiiawa, to complain. 

Paeradima =s parajnya, Ab., 402. 

PaerutnboiM Kavy XI., 25. 

Paeraedae = parajita. Parawis. 56. 

Paeraehaen = paris'avana, water stiaincr, Ainb. 13., 29 ; cf. 
parahana 

Paeraehaor=parihara, Malt B., W. P. D., 14 , Kong. (112), C. 13., 
(’f. panhartavj'o, Ind. Ant VII. 7 ; VI., 17, 302; cf. Peialiata. . 
Pad, watch hut, P. P. 38. 

Pael, shoot of plants, Nam, 2G0 ; Dondr. (150); C. P. (172); 
Kael (102). 

Paelandn = pilandhana, Gp., A. 7, Kavy. X., 1 80. 

Paelaen, Kotta. (160) 

Paelaeiulae/ P. P. P., 8 ; Thdp , U. P. I., 3. 

Paclu, split, S S., 57. 

Pncwati, current, Alw., 39. 

Paewas = piakaya, K. J., 74. 

Paewijiyan, P. P. 34, 38 ; paewiji, P. P., 48 ; cf. "WadnA 
Paewidi, P. P., 30; Her. 
fPaewactae, to continue Gp. C., 20. 

-( Paewaetiyae, P. P.. 24. 

[_Pae\raette'n, Dondr. (103), 13. ' 
rae\vnetina. custom, P. P., 50. 

Paowaervi, P. P., 27. 

Paestila = pa9e.at kaln, posteriority, Kavy. VI., 43 ; Nam., 244. 
Puessa = pn^cima, Wandr., 15 ; Gp. A, 17 ; D. I., S. 

Piiehcnawa, to ripen, v'pac. 

Pjicliaeri = praltarana, Knvy. XL, 9. 

Pllehae^a^ E P. (110) A 16; Aet. (117) A, 14. 

Paeli) a, Ainb. B , 30 ; Rliya Davids L 1., p. 18. 
r.'io = jtrasanna, Kavy. 127 ; Gutt, isk 
Prichi = prtU,\Vaiidar.,14; Ga]asne,o; S.B. 11.13. 3; Gp.,A17; 
KatL 

Paewana = rmka^awntia, GutL, 68. 



18S 


Prapala, 158, 2 

Praweniya, Kael (IG2), cf pawemya. 

Pralaja, D 1, 1, S M., A. 2, Gn A, 13, Galosne, 1 
Bala := bbaga Tiss , 14 
Bakamuna = Yabramtiklia. 

Bajikahi, Gaj-ib (o) 

Bat, Amb A. 1 , B. P A. 6 (116) , DeTyauag 2 j Majii A C 
Bada, laelly 
Badae, S iLB, 18 

Ban, Amb B 3S; Banae B 1, Baenaa B 2, Pamtns, 353 , 
S il. A., 28 = bhana 
Banannii, R D 28 cl Biniyae 
Bana, P P 36 

Bata, Hall E 3, Kaeliga(ta, 22, Katugabn, 17, Haled bate 
Cbr 60 

Batiya = bbrita. Bad (68), 4 
Batura = bbastra, Kavy X, 167. 

Batge, Amb B, 10 

Bateu ss bbattasupa. Hah 11, 248 

Bad = baddha, Amb A. 15, 44 , Rambhaw, A 5 

Badana, R D . 27. 

Badada = Buddbadirasa 

Badioawa, to fiy, v^Bhry 

Badula = Bballataka, Hah II, 13G 

Bandawa, having buiit, Gp A., 20; 1456, 6 

Bandw, Gp A , 4 

Batnana, GalwihSta (54) 

Bamil^Awiya, Nett (20) 

Bamu (j), 158, 4 

Bamunu, Gp B, 4, 158, 15 , C P, (172) 

Bamba = brahman, S S 1 , 1C 
Bamba = vj aina, Ab , 209 
Bambaaa = Brahmans 
Bambara = Bbratnara 
Ban-Mketa, Duatifn (15) 

Bahtala overseer, Hab, 5, cf Balannaka, S B 3[ A, 3 
Balanawa = Avalok, AinU A, 20, 31 , P P, 33 , Gp B, 22 , 
cf Baelu Haled balaog C3ir 06 

Bill, Wandar, 4 , Kaelig B 24, Katugaha, B, 15 , Gp pa'^ini 
BaK, crane, Nam 143, K. J, 31, Balatracla = bahlkliab 
flock of cranes, S S , 33 

Balia = bhashala, dog C P , Haled balu. Cbr , 03 

Ban a, Gp B, 10, baw = bliwa, P P, 43, C P, bcvien, 

S S, GO 

Basa = bbasha, Gp A., 11 , Haled Ins, Cbr 58 
Basna, Koek 

Balian, string, K.'ivy IX., 09 , Naro , 227 
Babasroa = bbagman, S S 22 



184 


Bahinawri, to descend, \''lihraiji 5 . 

Bak^a, cat = vidala, Maled. Olii., 50. 

Ba,' a vbo. babinawa, D. I. 9, S. M., A. 24, = J^ihkshepakota 
Kavy, XL, 21. 

Ba = bhaga, Nam., .51 ; K. J., 154, cf. Baka. 

Baya, “ brother,” Tiss., 2. 

Balaya, “child,” P. P., 39. 

Bikawawi Alutg. 

Bijabahi, Mib. (20), Uab. ft (6), cf. Bajikahi. 

Biji = bbrajitawl, K. J., 43. 

Biju, “seed," R. D., 17; Dondra, (1(53), 15, 17; Maled. bis 
Chr., 54. 

Bijurupa = bijapiira, Ab., 577. 

Bijuwata, Gp.. C , 8. 

Bidam, Amb., A. 13 “ abbidhamma. 

Binlma, Her, comp., ban. ! 

Biiju'wa, P. P., 46 5 Bini}'ae, ib , 47, cf. Bay 
Binera. Sept. Oct, S. M., B., 14. 

Binduwlma, Her. 

Binduru, " changed,” S. S., I., 9. 

Bim, earth, Mah. B. ; Aet, B. 3 ; 158, 5 ; Amb., A, 40 ; Maled. 

bing, Chr., 64. 

Bimdiya, v/bhid Kir., (57). 

Biyama = bhaya, S. S.. 14. 

Birem = bhitiya, Gutt., 2 ; Maled. blning, " to fear," Ohr., 64. 
Bill, Amb A.,' 19 s i)alika MUindapanha, 84; Grimblot, 8; 

comp bill, “ a powerful person,” S. S., 57. 

Bill, i-aw, Amb , A., 47 1 IV. P. C., 9 ; Comp, bilimas, Nani., 85. 
BiU Mayil, B. 5 ; Nam., 270 *, religious ofictings, cf. J. B. B. 

R A. S., VIII., 71, balivarddba, comp, bb.'vllan. 

BiliyS s= balisa, Ab., 674. 

Bisatu Kavy, X., 209. 

Bisam, PI. of biso fila^dl, B. 26. 

Bisawa, Kotta. 

rBisew = abhisheka, Amb., A., 2. 

4 Biso, “Queen,” Mayil, A., 12 ; Nam. 140; Kaelig, B. 13; 
!._Katugaba, B. 4 ; Abisew, K. J,, 205. 

Bisown, Amb. B., 42 ; “Inaiiguration." 

Buka = bbikshii, Tiss. 15; Galwana. 

Buki, Nett,(29) 

Budalnawan, S. M.A., 19, for mudalnawan from Tamil iniidal, 
“ money.” 

Budinawa, “ to sleep,” Alw., 64. 
fBudi, Amb. B , 42. 

"kBudii, P.P,1,11,18; Ifalcd. badu, " image,” Chr., 57. 

Bun, Mayil. B. C ; Nam., 27 ; Bunna = bbaf^aKael, S. S., 57. 
Buna, “sister,” P, P.,26 ; cf. bubuno, sister, 01. Dh., 43. 
Bunangana, P. P ; 20. 

Bulat = tumbrda Kneligattn, (1526), A. 22.; Katugaba, A 17; 

llodiya tebaU, J. G. A. S., 1855, p. ISO. 

Bulmti, “ ile.xtcrity,'’ Nam, 275 ; Ab, 7S1 ; Kuvy. X, 132. 



185 


Bull!, Kam 125, Ab, 56‘). 

Bedana^wa, " to distribute,” Amb , B. IG, 56. 

Bentota = Bhlmatittba, Slab II, 341 ; bem = bhlma, S S , 57 
Bera=bheri, 158,16, Ru'in I),26, iraled,beru CItr. 53 
Beligala = bhillasela, Mah 11,320 

Bella, “ pearl oj ster, ” Ab , 670 , Natu., 87 , ilaled boh Chr 
Behedak = bbeshaja, P. P , 26 , Ab , 330 , Haled, beskara, 
" medicine,” Chr , 60 
Bebern, Nam, 130 ; Ab. 585. 

Be = bheda, S S. 1 , 1, n., 21 

Bojija, Hab,5, 6; cf bhojyaka pati inscr at SaUette, XIU , 
line 11. 

Bond, Atnb , B , = Bbandika pariwena (*) Slab 52, 58 

Bodun, “eating,” SSI, 21, cf Bojun, P. P, 32, 33. 

Bonawa, “ to dnnb,” v'pa, Maled. bong Chr , 53. 

Boyana, Gp, C 11. 

Boruma = apamdba 

Bol s= bnsa, Pali bbuaa Ab, 453j Amb, B, 47 
Bohdi Kara . 127 ; Ab . 574, 576 
Bosat ss bodhisattva, Gp , A., 0. 

Bobo s= bahu, P. P. 8; Gp passim. Waiidar., 13, Slodem 
bohoma, contr bo Gl, Dh, 41. 

Baegia * bbagena, Amb, A, 62; B, 4; Wandar, 7; Malcd 
bae, “lot," Chr. 59 
Baegae, ‘Wandar, 10. 

Baetaluwa =s iledhra (?) 

Baeti « bliakti, Kavj% "v , 42; Fa^a^v^s, 70 

Baediyawa ^ bhrajjita, Ab , 463 

Baena, 158, 4 , S 31 A , 12 » bbrigioeya, cf Bae 

Baendae v'baudb, Amb, A, 44 

Baetnma “bond,” Nam , 245 ; Kavy, XL, 21. 

Baema, " eye brow,” hlaled. buma Gray, 20 
Bacrama = brahma Parawis, 145. 

Baelii, Gp , A., 7 , B,9,10,C 1, baehma.S L,59fronibalanaua, 
cf Daelae 

Bacwahara = \yavahara, Paraw 113 

Bacwi, Gp , A 8 , Baewin, S 31 , A , 26 ; Gp passim. 

Bacsae, a vbo babinawa, Amb, A 11, ILD, 21, Gp, A 3G , 
S L , 50 

Baehaen = bahira, ” external," Amb , A, 23, P. P,'42, Haled 
bera Chr, 63. 

Baelae, Amb , A , 38 , cf Baelu 

Bie, “ brother,” Amb , A , 5 , Gl. Dli., 43 

B^nac, S 31 , A, 28 , cf Ban. 

Baeya = Bbaga 

Bliattay an, Gp , B 15 , Tlmp , VIIT. 

Bbaiujura (mod bandara), “son of a chief,” 158, 2, comp 31aled, 
banifara, “ public,” Chr, C3 
Bhajac, Kaehg, A , 33, Kalngaha, A, 25 



186 


Bliallan, P. P., 39; comp, balikuraja, J. C. A. S., 1853, p. 74; 

1875, p. 12. 

BhSralmlapasu, Kael. 

Bhag, P. P., 8 = bliaga. 

Ma, JIaha. A., Gp. A, 16; 0., 10; cf, humidiyama, S. S., 
CLVII. 

llakalgama = makkala Uab. H., 202; Nam. 140. 

Slakula Galwiliara, (54). 

Makubamu = makshakudru^a, &tah. IL, 116. 
llaga = Miirga, Gutt., 153. 

Maga, “look," S.S.. 34. 

“ feast,” S. S. II., 21 ; Mangula, Amb., A., 33 ; Gp., A., 7. 
Majiinodina, "marcb,” Hab. 10; Ruanw. D, 16, (21); cf. 
Maendindina. 

Manga = marga, Gp , A, 23 ; S. M., B., 8. 

Manggiya, Mah. C. ; P. P., 38 ; Mayil. B. 10 ; mangdhva, K. M, A. 

17 ; H., mimg., B., I., 310. 

Mata. Gp., C, 11. 

Jlatla, “ mud," = Mala (?). 

Mafjula = mandala, D. I., 4; Waclig., tnudulla ICaeligatta, 
A, 31 ; Katugaba, A., 25. 

Maduwa = Mandapa. 

Maiidowuwa ss Maijdapaka, Amb., B., 53. 

Mat.il, 158, 8. 

Maii()apa, “almsliouse," Gp., B., 23., C, I. 

Mat.uj.'iran, Galasno, 3; B. 1., 8; Gp., A, 17 ; 'Attaongalu- 
wau9a, L 
Mat, P, P., 40. 

Slata ss Matril. 

Matu » Maataka, " only " ; L. V. K. C., P, P. P., 36 ; S. M. B., 1 ; 
Dondr., (163), I., 10; C.P., Gp.. C., 12; Mafcumatu.. J.C.A.S. 

1879, p. 44 ; MatUwana , Roan. D.,32; P.P., 10; Gp., C.24; 
Maled. mati " upper,’’ Clin, 70. 

JIattantii, P. P., 41. 

Mattaniatt.n, “drimk,”Ab., 101. 
ilada ^ Majjrv. 

Madnta = Mnjyc-sbtba, Nilm., 121 ; K. J., CG. 

Mailnka, Galgink, {l7); Mndhnka, Kong., (112) 11. 4; 
cf. Mlwaii. 

Maduta =s Matlabastiyn Guit, 42. 

Madura = Ma^aka Kiivy, II., 12. 

ManTi, P. P., 21, 46. 

Manupayn, Mih. (20). 
iranawedayi, P. 1’. P., 30; S. M. B, 16. 

Mmiikayn, Wncli. 

Mmiinawu, Cb., II., 18. 

Mnmiwricsam, Atnb., A., 39 ; Mnb. I., 237 ; II., 05 ; J. C. A. S., 

1880. p. 33. 

Maiiunmmkn, Gaj (5); Oniwana, 2. IlaU 5. 



187 


^lanwri, S S , 67 

Mammae, “ myself,” Gj) , B 15 

Jlayewan, Gp , C , IG, (^) 

Marana, Abliay B , 7 

Marahu, Gp , C , 12, death,” Sub 139 

Mara, We^elk, 26. 18 

Mara, S fa, 24 

Slarumauaka, Mab R, , Sandag D , comp, manuraaraka 
Mai, brother, P P, 22, malatmwau, S M A,, 27, cf GI 
Dh,43 

Mai, flower, Hab, 7 , Amb, B, 3 , 129, 6 
Mala.P P, 11, “dirt” 

Afalakuda, “virgin,” P P, 39, Gl Db , 152 
Malada, “sandal," S S 1, 14 
MaldWE = MaPaka, Ab , 458 
MaloB, Amb A 38 , B , 34 

Malrvar, Amb B,35, mod nnJnaru = mal'ikaiaja 
Mawnn, P P., 39 
llaMonta, S M B, IG 

Mawupiya, P. P P A, 20, P. P,2G, cf. matapitasa, Cunnmg- 
bam, 68 

Jhwu Gp B , 17 

Mas, “fish,” = mat^a Abhay. Anl4, B, C, Aetakada, A, 4, 
Ualcd Ma-sChr,65 

lias mouth, ss Masa Amb A, 4, 56, K J1 A , 7 
llasak.P P, 50 

Him, Ruan.D, 7,866 Davids Coins and ilcasmes of Ceylon, 
23, note Hardy Manual of Buddhism, 218 
Masuru « maccban} am, “jealousy,” Nam , 71 , Kavy XIII , 62 
Masulutae, E P (116) A , 19 
Masto^a = Macchatittln, Mab II, 68 
Mas-Jina, “ brother in-Iaw,” Ab , 244 

Malia aegi, P P , 13 , Mahaiigu, mabaru, precious = raaliaigha 
A.lm, 235, Kavj X, 194, cf malnengr J P Maharilia, 
E H Maliang Hoernlc, Si 

= ^runaria, Gp f?, 4 , Gf I?!f, 51 , Jag" A , Si? 
Mahanam, Maj il A , 20 = Mahnnakarnn, mahanuwarn, Gp A , 
23 

Malianami, Ijss, 4, 7 
JHlianel, “the blue lotiia” 
iKlianaewiyapokuna, Parawia, 8D 

Maliapannn = Mahapiajuv, Gp B,3, K D,12,Ing A, 8 
Maliapi, Gp C, 19 
Mahaboj a ilali B 
Malnniath, Tamanagnla (55) 
ilaliajun Katugaha, A , 5 
rMaliara]anan, P P, 6 
■< '\laharajahu, P P^ 12 
kSIaliarad, C P A. U 
Malnlaka, Ilab , 5. 



188 


MaLTile = malialeklia Aet. B., 20; Mahaleka, E. P. A., 22; Ing. 

A., 19 ; Malialaenan, Mah. A. ; Kavy. XIIL, 90. 
llalialusanga, P. P., 40, 46; Slahala, 158, 9. 

Mahallawun, P. P., 39 ; Pali maliallaka ; ilag. mabalaka, Burnouf, 
Lotus, 307, 749 ; Eern A^oka, 105. 

Maliawatura, Gp A., 9. 

JIaliawar = Mahapara, Amb. B , 54 ; K. 11. A IS. 

Itahasarana, Kir., 2. 

Mahambo = Maliabodbi, P. P., 43 ; Mainbo, P. P., 32. 
llahidi = mabarddlu, Gutt., 81. 
llahuduru, Gp. C, 18. 
llahodhaya, 158, 11. 

Mabaengi = mahargba, P. P., 13; K. J, 10.’). 

Mala, *' dead.” . 

ilaiu, " brother,” Situlp., 1 ; comp, mal. 

Maluwa = malaka, 158, 11, 18; Ruau. D, 22 ; cf. mala, Grioiblot 
Sept Sutta Palis., 1. 

Ma. P. P., 8. 15 ; R. D. 24. 

Magam. = matugama. Her. 

Magal = maliagalla, Mab., 180. 

Madao, Abbay. A, 21. 

Matraya, Gp. C.. 21, 

lladelgas a= mabalabujagaccba, Mab. II., 347. 

Madaet = mabadatbika, Mab. II., 136. 

Munaya, *' distance," R. ])., 21. 

Mama, “uncle” Ab., 245. . 

Malaka, 158, 17. 

Maliga^a, “palace,” C. A. S., 1873, p. 78. 

Mawal = Mahawila, Abbay. A., 7. 

Mawula, Waeligama 
JLawaenj, P. P., 7. 

Mahaengi = Mahargba, K. J,, 105; c£ mabaengi. 

Miciyaditika = mitbyadrisli^n, Kir. (o7) comix mi'-aditu. 

Mi^a = mutthi, “ fist,” S. M. 

Miiiinal, Amb. A , 33 ; comp. Nal Mab. 50, 9, 

Miiilr, “ goldsmith,” Amb. K, 47. 

V? % Tiiitdh, icahj. 

Mit = matsya S. S. II., 34; cf. mas. 

Midinawa, Tks., 5, 6 = midlma = mukti, cf. mudawa. 

Midin’aeli = muddika, Ab., 587. 

Midul, Kam., 105 ; Kavy. XII, 47 ; Ab., 218; J. P. Mijja. 

Midella = mucalinda, Ab., 563. 

Min, “ flail," Kam., 83 ; K. J., 200. 

Min, “ wKiloin,” Nam., 62; K. J., 125; Ab, 373; P. P., 19; - 
Jlindennata, cf. nlsadennata. 

Ruan. U. 28, Arab. A., 30 ; P. P.. 34 ; MXnba, “ mai)." R. D 
28 ; Maleil. ihlluing, Chr., 60. 

Miniya, “ corpse,” Ab., 58. 

Mmmatu, “afterwards,” AIw., 76; cC inatu. 



ISO 


Shyangunu, Gp B , 10 , Kiyunu = Jlahiyangaaa, llab II , 130 , 
cf Mipal 

Miyara, “ dam,” ICavy , 42 

Miyulaesi, S S 11,21 «, r 

llmligu = Marlm, Ab,G5» Nam, 41, G1 Dh,4G, cf meraj 
Mins, 'pepper := raanca, Maled Mims, CUr, 02 
MmsawitJ, B D , 30 

Jililae = raulya, “money,” Ab, 531 , Wewellv, IS , Amb B 3 , 
Qutt.134, Ab,471 
ilillanantota = maUtittlia, Mab 1, 146 

lliwan, K M B , 3 = madhxlka, comp nuwan ^ _ 

Miwa = mahisba, "buffalo,” Aetawli a C, 20, Mali C Mayil B 
7 , Ing C , 5 , Wewelk , 25, 29 , comp mi 
Misak = vma Kavy , 20 
Misaditu, Gutt . 5G , Her = mteiyadUika, q v 
Mihita = smita, P P . 40, cf Mabivagga, VI. So, 2 
Mihinga =: Mndanga 

Ml = Musluka.ratD I 10, MaW Mida Gray. IG 
Ml = Madlm , MTgoda, Mah II , 130 , Mimaessa bee 
Ml =s mrit}U “ death Gp B , 15 (») Nam , 207 
Ml = mabisba. Nam. 140, Klvy VIII, 30, Maled miguna 
Clii ,40 . - 

Mipal = Malupala, comp miwa, S S I, >, cf mijaugunu 
Mimuttu, “ great oraudlatber” 

Mirikuim « Marmla, Kavy IX , 72 
Miwan, Amb A, 50, Ab, 554 ^ Madbuko 
Muktim, Aet B, 15 , v'muc 
Mugatiia =s mungusa Ab, 622 

‘Jliigara =s mudgaia, Ab, 392 t » t 

Mujita v/majj, Hab, 1, cf kimulmaw-i, cf sumugga, J.ik 1 
205 

Mut. " besides ” Amb A , IC, 41 , P P . passim 
"Muti = Sninti * . mr , i >r 

Miitu = mukta, pearl, P P P A. 18, Gp A. IS , Maled Mm. 
Chr G2 

MutulacI = muttilaraba, Mali II , 55 
Muda = eamudra 0, Mih (20) , cf Muhundu 
Muda K J,47, cf Mundnn 
Mudala = Mudgaia. 

MudalaC P Kot^a (ICO), Mud iliw ar KaeJ 

Mudawa = Muktakaraw a, K J, 115 ^ 

Mudun = Murdhan, Hewanag 4, Nmi . ICG, Ab. oi- , ci 
muodun _ _ 

' Mun = Miidga, Kavy V, 5 = Pali Mufign, Btsmcs J . 2Sb 

Mundu, 158, 14 = Mudni ? rr n t x 

Mundun = Murdlnn or roadri, Amb A, -u, ob , U , , 

P.P P, 8, 12 , Gp A, 12 , Mudunjiatkarawa, Kae) , cl niuoa, 
mudun 

Mura = Amnta, Kav^ 7S 



192 


llaeriya, Ruan. D., 20. 

Maeru, Gerund of llaranawa, Abba, A-, 14. 

Maela = illana, S. L., 69. 

Maes, bed, Kara., 170 ; K. J., 139. 

Jlaesiri = JIasaragalla, Nam., 221. 

Jlaes^ikae, K. J., 137. 

Takada, “Iron," R. D., 19; Maled. ’dagadii, Clir., 58; comp. 

clali svarthe, Hem, 429; Pischel, Beitr. Ilf., 239. 

Yakadum, P. P., 39 (yakaduni), comp, bhallan. 

Yukaya, IVewelk, 8 (?). 

Ya^aka, “ loTrer,” Angul., 3 (67a) 

Y'a^alebi, klsx., 76. 

Yatae^i, “ lower tank," Amb., A. 39 ; cf. yaeta. 

Yatgalac, “ The lower hill,” Amb., A., 34 ; comp. Slaled. adi 
gailu, Clir., 60. 

Yadinawa, “ to pra}’, bcheecb " v'yae. 

Yana, “called," S. S. I. 3; P. P.27; Gp.. B. 13, 20. 
Yannawun^a, P. P., 28. 

Yala, Amb., B., 27 = Sala, Chatty. 

Tali = Naewala, K. J., 7S. 

Yawa, S. M., A, 31 ; P. P., 34, 35 ; Op , B., 1 ; dawas yawanii, 
P. P., 24 ; cf. dawaspaUl 
Ya«a as Yasasa, Kavy. XII., 26. 

Yaliana sa ^yana, Kara., 176; K. J., 55 ; P. P,, 32. 

Yaliaua ^''salt, Arab., A., 11. 

Yahnpat = subhapTSpt% = Yapat, Gtttt, 137 •, comp. Yupahu 
= Subhapabbata, AIw,, 72. 

Ynhala, Jelieli * Sahuya. 

Ynbala, Arab., A., 36 ; Yrda, a measure of extent, Rhys Davids 
J.I., p, 20. Ab., 484 5 cf.Vala. 

Yaku = yagu, Mali., H, 3. 

Yala (tun yfilak, 3 timc.s), cf. yal Kwm., 35 ; J. Alwis Lciisuro 
Hours, ir., 143; D. 1., 12; Ruon. D., 31; L. V. Iv. 11, 
158, 8 ; Wadi. • 

Yi = ill S. S. I., 1, 6 ; P. P., passim. 

Yi = nsti.S. S. 11.. 21. 

Yul. P. P., 37. 

Yutu = Yukla, Amb., A, 23; P. P., pa.ssjm, yutuim. Op., C., 9. 
Yuttxlha, P. P. P., .56. 

Y’uttcyao, Gp. 0.. 15, 22; P. P. P.,B.. 2. 

Yutli = Yukti, Kavy. XII., 79. 

Yuda = Yuddlia, GutL, 105. 

Yuwamja. Gp, B, 1. 

Yu.P. P..48. 

Ycla = Yamikalhi, K. J., 38. 
rY'ciU, P. P.. 25, ; S. L., 69. 

Yoili, P. P. P.. CO ; r. P., 21, &a 
^ Ye<lfl. P. P., .51. 

j YcK].*..“fn.stcned'*; ap.C..7; P. P. 10. 24; 

[Voili. V. P.. 10. 



103 


Tedi = Yilcita, S il., A., 17. 
fYedena, "Wewelk., 30 
\_Yederinawun, P. P., 20. 

Yehe, S S , 4 

Yeheka, “excellent,” K. J, 141 ; Paraw. 108. 

Yela = diy.iddha. 

Yon = Yom,S S I.G 
Tona, kinsman, Gp , A-, 5 
Yohombu, N.im , 120 ; Ab , 577 
Yae, Gp,C.12, 23 

Yaeta = adhastat P. P , 19, 23 ; cf Yataesi 
Yaeyi,S JIB, 17. 

Yaela = Yala, P. P., 50 ; cf Yala 
Yacwin, L V. K. B , from Yawa 
Pakana, Hab , 3 ; R D , 10 (21). 

Rakawiya, Gaj 2 
Rakinawa, “ to Tvatcb ’’ 

Ralaia, Amb , B , 37, S M B , 4 
Eakpankata. Mab , II , 110 
Raj = raja, L. V. K. A., Amb » A., 1 
Rajadamvia, P. P. P. A , 10; 158, C 
Rajaya, S II A., 20 ; Katugalia, A., 1. 

Rnjosinn, S 11 A., 11. 

Rajastha, S M. A., 28. 

Rajmi, “ queen,” Sandag , B , 3. 

Kaelig, B, 12, Katugaha, 

B,2 

Rata, Amb. A , 47 ; Gp. A , 4, 20. 

Ratl^nwa, Amb B , 37. 

Ranasimba, Gp. A., 10. , . /^u pt 

Rat 0 ), S. II. B , 14 (v. 1 ranpata) ; Ma ed. rai, Chr , 04. 

Rad, Alah A., cf. raja L. V. K. A-, raj Arab. A , 

Radawa = radaka, Arab B , 53. * 

Radabara, taxes, Mayil, B , 5 

Radii = raiadubita S S 1, 0. _ , -p o. , 

fRadoIa i rajakula, “beadman,” lYeyrelk, 17, * 

■< TMp U. P. III., 3 ; middle form lajiikolilu, Ties. 1- 
[,Radakol Mayil, B., 23. ni, kr 

fRan Gold, Amb. A., 35, B 1. Maled Chr., 60 
1 Ranae, Amb. B, 57 (mon«y?); ranm, 158. 

Randawa, Gutt, 216 ..n,, 

Rambukwaella = ramucchnvallika, Man ii, 

Raya, Nett. (29). , 

Rala, v-'ave, Kavy XI., 10 ; N5.m , 81 ; Ab , 00-. 

Rawatanawa, “ to cheat,” K J , 134. 

Eas =s ra^mi, Kavy X , 173. 

K&vy IX. 23, iotermedwe form rrdm 
Her. Maid, ra, Gray, 17. 

<1 6038. 



194 . 


Bahaja, Nett. (29). 

Babas, Gp. 0., 11 ; Nam, IDO. 

Bala = radala. 

Bik for ruk S. S. I.. 14. 

Bita = Arittbam. 

Bi^ = rajata Wandar., 5 \ MalwL rilii Gray, 17. 

Biyana s ratana (amtni) C3ttV)it, 158, 12 ; S. L., 72; Kael; 

Malcd. riyag, Cbr., 47. 

Biwi = ravi, D. 1., 4; Nain.> 40. 

BUi v'nic, P. P., 49, cf. risiwum, ‘ desire,' Nam., 71 ; ruswa Amb. 
A. G =s: rucitwa. 

Buk = vrikslia S, S I., C ; Gp. A., 14. 

Bukat, Nam, 118 ; Ab., 665. 

Buku, “ dwarfish,” Gp. B., 4 ; Maid. ni Gray, 17. 

Bukuranawii S. S. I., G, part. ruku]o I., 14. 

Buti = ruci, Kavy , passim. 

Eudu = Mabat Ktivy., 721 =s raudra Gutt., 219. 

Eupun =s fipri, R P. A., 18. 

Buwan s= ratna. 

BuwaDmaeli, Wandar., 9 ; comp. Ratanamal.’i Mali., 90, 93. 
Buwanasun, Arab. B., 12,mistakcforBu\vana5Ut = ratanasfitrn, 
Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism, p. 20 ; Mil 360, Kbad. VI, 
Buwaru S. S. I., 11. 

Busi = fishi, KavT'. III., 33. 

Beda = rajas, Gutt, 100. 

Bedutn ss rujana, S. S., 41 ; Mated, rcdu, '* crack,” Cbr., 52. 
B§mas =s robita, "rawfisb,” Nam., 85 ; X., ICC. 

Eoga, Gp. C., G. 

Boda reklm S. S. 11., 2C. 

Bon = re^u. 

Eol, P. P„ 18 (?). 

Bombu = roman. 

Bae = rStri, Malcd. re Cbr., 61, cf. raeya. 

Bae = ra^i, ^vy. XIII., 3G,ct raes. 

Bae = haera, Gutt., 114. 

Baekinawa = rakkhanayaka, Amb. B., 17; Mah. I, 269. 

Baekiya, Amb..B., 18 ; C. P- 

Baekaa s= xatsbakota, X. 3., 40 ; ABbay. A., 16. 

Baekka, Gp. C., 7, 8, 9, 13 ; Min. A, 52, c£ daekka Gp. 0., 5. 
Baeiigum, " dance,” Nam , 60 ; K. J., 25. 

Baedna, “ queen,” = rajuL 
Basya = ratri, S. iL A., 16, cf. rae. 

Baela = labarl, S. L , 73 ; Maled, laula, Cbr., 09. 

BaewatUla, “ deception,” Sab., 140. 

Baewu, sound, Nam., 04 ; Kavy. XII., 18. 

Baewnla — qraa^ru, Nam , ICG. 

Baes = ra9i, cf, rae. 

Baeswii, Gp. B., 44 ; raeswu, P. P., 35 ; comp. Tifaled. raeskuran". 
Cbr., 47. 

Baeblni = ruab^a, Kavy. XIL, 58. 



193 


Kaehnna = (1), Sfcniig Nvm, 2275 -A-b, 448, H rasa 

Beames 1,348. 

Raehaena s= rajju, ParaTTis, 102 
La m smhala -v/laHem IV, 238 
La heart S S 1 , 13, cf laya 

Lak = Lanka, E P A., G , Aetw, A., 7 , P P , 14 , Wowelk , 1 ; 
Dewamg, 3 

Lakada, “stick,” comp Piachel Beitr III, 249 
Lakahi, Nett (29) 

Laki = lakshmi, Kir (57) 

Lakuna S S II , 21 
Lakus = lakuja Nam., 124 
Lagana Her 

Lajaka, Galwihara (54), cf. Anoka’s PilHr Inscp III 
Lat = labdha, S M A,, 15 , kilae Kaelig, A, 33 , Katugaha, A, 
2G , lad, E P A , 17 , Aetakada, A, 7 
Ladi Mahak D 
Ladm Ruan, D Gp A , 7 
Ladu, Gp A, 3 , Amb B , 37 
Laddao, IVewelL, 24, 25 , Kong, C 4 
Ladda Abhaj, A 18 
Laddahu.P P P B,21 
Lanuwa = 

Landa s= laja in mlanda Nana , 261 
Landa “-woman,” K. J, 77, Nam, 150 
Lapa Mark Nam , 39 , Kavj XIH, 57 , K. J , 108 
Lapus = labuja or lakuja, Ab , 570 , N3m , 124 
LapnaramNam, 130, KTvvy 5, 163, Ab, 577 
rUbana, R D, 11 (21), P P, 18 
t^Labanu, Amb A, 8, 40 , B , 16, 37 , Her 
Labhaya, L T K. B 
Lamina, P P , 44 
Laya, “ heart ’ — hrdaya, 

Lawana, lip, Nam , 1G4 , K. J , 127 

Lawa Deheig, 4 , P P . 22 , R D , 20 , Gp A . 21 , Wacli cf 
jairae, comp Maled. Jannang to apply, Chr, 47 
Lasunu, lahunu = lacuna S & 1,22, mod. lunxt ^ 

Lahag = ^laka, Amb A, 10, Comp Alab., 43, 45, S S, 14 
La,P P,47 
La = laha KaeL 

La = laksha, K. J , 58 , Ab , 30 » , Nam , 175 
Lfikada =s JaUil, Ab , 305, cf above lalada. 

Likitaka Alutg (52) hyawa Tiss 18, Pali likhitika Aliv Kacc., 
72 , llahavagga IX., 4, 11 
Ian well, Nuin., 88 , K. J , 192 
Liya, S L. 10, C P 

Liyamiaw^, 158, 15, liydewijae, Amb A, 54 
labanawa, “ to lose ” 



197 


Wajra, D I, 9 

Wat, 24 , B , 14, 20 , = wastup, " wages ” 

Watageya, “ round house,” Gp C , 1 
Wntaway, Amb A., 50 

Watuwa = vartaka, P P P, 52 , 158, 17 (*) 

Wati = wataneyayi, Amb A., 7 
Watae, “ around Amb A^, 43 

Watuawaen, Amb B, 14 (— ■watupnEyaka viriyakara Com) 
Watln, Amb A., 40 
Wadana, P P, 16, Waeh, 1 

Wadanuwan, P P, C, comp Mar bat^a eta, Pischel Beitr III, 
257 f 

Waflamanaka Nett. (29) , Galgamuura, (30) , Ponikulam, (94) , 
comp Mah , 70 , Buruouf Lotus, 025 , Thomas, J R A S , N 
S, 1,484 

Wadatalan, K. M B , 8 , comp tal 
Wada awxit, S M A , 27 
Wada, Gp A., 17 

Wflda, Mah , B j J C A. S, 1879, p 30 
Wadagenae, D 1 , 7 
Wadala, Ing A, 11 

Wadu, carpenter, Amb B,44 cf wodhika, Trans 2Dd Orient. 

Congr , 342 , Maled , 'wadangkum tnilmng, Cbr , 60 
Wana = ^a^^a, S S. 1 , 2, 9, 10 
"Wana ss Yirahita S S,34 
Wannatuwara, 138, 15. 

Wat as vrata, Amb A, 5 
Wat, P P , passim. Her. 

Wat = vastu, Amb A, 43 , Mab B » J 0 A & , 1879, p 29 
Wata, Amb A, 29 
f Watala, K J , 47, ‘ large’ 

( Watala a= \ 13 t 1 ma Ktvvy, X , 122 
WaUma, Dunum , (15 ) 

Watnrata, Tamaiiagala, (35) 

Watup = lattliu, \ istu, Amb A, 49; ef -uatu := uramaja, 
Kavj A, 99 , Aramaratthu Maba^agga III, 5, 0 
Walura = ^^tuH, Gp A, 9, Tliup VIII 
Walsika = ■wassika, (Q Amb B , 7 
Watsunu = ■\‘isacunnain, Ab , 30C, powder 
IV attam, " clc> ernc«3, S S , 23 
’tthdakasa = ^5e•^ Sub, 142, cf , •wadawaln. 

Wnilawala = Tucavataka, Mah II , 202, cf , wadakasTu 



19C 


Lihil s= ^itliUa, Kavy. VII.| 63. 

Lt, S. B. ir. B., 2, a vbo liyanawa., cf. lu a vbo lanawa. 

Lllawa, “action,” P. P., 54. 

Lunu, “salt,” Malccl. lonu, C3ir., 05. 

Lumiwaraiia, Nam., 122 ; Al>, 663. 

Luhu := lagbu S. S. I., 1 ; S. B. II. B., 3 ; Nilra., 20. 

Lulml, Niim , 86; Kavy. X., 160. 

Lit = babanalaOa S. S., 57. 

Lo = loliita, Malcd. le Clir., 48. 

Lekam = lekhakarma, Amb. A., 25, 67 ; Nam., 250. 

Leda = Ivlish^a. ‘ sick,' Nam., 157 ; Kavy. XIII., 1. 

Lena. Gp. B., 10; K. J., 09. 

Lecla or Icnda, K. J., 35. 

Leila, Iv. J., 70. 

Lcdavuwak = lekhadliaraka, “examiner” 0 ), Amb. R, 43. 

Leya, “ writer," Amb. A., 21 ; S. B. M. A., 5, cf. Ifiennn. 

Leladena = lllopeta, K, J., 02; lOG. 

Lesa = Ilia, Gutt., 131. 

Lcsa. R. D., 32 ; 1456, 3 ; Donil (103). 24. 

Lo, "stroke," S. S , 23. 

Lo = loka Gp. A, 8, etc. 

Lob as lodlira, Ab., 650. 

Lopaim S. S. I., 13. 

Lomudaehae, horripilation, Knry. VI., 33. 

Lola, P. P., 15. 

Lowa, P. P. P. A., 2S ; Qp. B., 21. 

Ivowinawa, Vlib. 

LowaeOa or wacssa = lokawasl, P. P. P., 13 ;j * ..Tliup* 
L. P. VII., 1. 

Losasun, S. IL A, 28. 

Loho = loiilta, Gp. A., 18. 

Laekiyn = Alainkrita. 

Laegum, P. P., 38, a vcrbo InginaAva. 

Laeiigu a verbo nallgli, E. P. A, 13 ; Amb. 

J. C. A S., 187Q, p. 35. 

Laedi, Amb. B., 19. 

liaebl, P. P., 35 ; Kaeligatta, A, 31 ; Katng* 

Laebim, Gp. 0., 6 ; Uebeyi, R. D , 18. 

Laella, “ plank,” Alw., 77. 

Laenan, Mab. B. “ writer." 

Laesi, “ sloAV," Ab., 54. 

Wa, being, S. S. I., 1 ; P. P., 39. 

"Wak = palcsba, Mab, A., Amb. A, 45, 63 ; >V 
■\Vakagasala, Kavy. X., 220 ; comp. Piscbel zu • 

'Wnkasaliidaka, Situlp., (10). 

Wnga = vyagbia, leopard, Guti., 209 ; Gray, ^ 

Wagapul, " long pepper,” Nam., 218 ;.AU, 683. 

Wogala = galita, Kavy. X., 1 18 ; Nam., 247. ' 

Wajarana, Amb. B., 38 ; Wajarat, Amb. A, i 
A. 17, = avadhareti. 



197 


Wajra, D I, 9 

\Yat, Amb A , 24 , B , 14, 20 , == waetup, “ wages ” 

TYatageja, “round house," Qp C, 3 
Watanay, Amb A, CG 

Watm\a=vartakri,P P P,52, 158, 17 (1) 

Wati s= wataneyaji, Amb A, 7 
Watae, “ around Amb A, 43 

Watnawaerj, Amb B , 14 (= watupnayaka vlnyakiira Com ) 
"Wathi, Amb A, 40 
lYaflatia, P P, 10, Waeli, 1 

"Wadatiuwan, P P,0, comp Mar bada eta, Piscbel Beitr III, 
237 £ 

Wadnmanaka, Nett (29), Galgarouwa, (30), Ponikulara, (94) , 
comp JIalf , 70 , Bumouf Lotus, 023 , Tliomas, J B A S , N 
S, 1,484 

Wadatalan, K M B , 8 , comp tal 
lYada au ut, S M A , 27 
lYada, Gp A, 17 

lYad^ Mab , B , J C A S, 1879, p 30 
Wadlgenae, D 1 , 7. 

■\Yadlla, Tng A, 11 

IVadu, carpenter, Amb B,44 cf wndhika Trans 2nd Orient 
Congr , 342 , Haled , wajlangkuri mihnng, Cbr , 50 
"Wana =: >arna, S S. 1 , 2, 9, 10 
"WanX s virahita, S S, 34. 

Waniiatuwara, 158, 15 
Wat ss vrata, Amb A, 6 
Wat, P, P, passim, Her. 

Wat 5=5 ^astu, Amb A , 43 , Mob B , J C A S , 1879, p 20 
Wata, Amb A , 29 
( Watala K J , 47, ‘ large” 

\ AVatala = vistima. Kiivy, X , 122 
Watama, Dunum , (15) 

Waklwa, time, P P, 33 
Watjwata, Tamanagala, (55 ) 

Watup =s vattlm, vlstu, Amb A , 49 , cf watu = ur tmaya, 
Ktvj' X, 99, Aamavottbu MoLaragga III, 5 C 
Watura = vatula, Gp A., 9, Thup YIII 
Watsika = wassika, (J) Arab B , 7 
Watsunu = >as'icunnain Ab, 300, powder 
Wattam, “devemeSs,” S S, 23 
Wadakasa = vaca, Sub, 142, cf , wadawala 
Wadawala = -vacavataka, Mah II , 202 cf , wadakasTu 
Wadar'i, Wandar , 4 , Gp B , 9 , 0 P , comp waejaeriya 
Wadimna, P P P A , 25 
Wadalambayi, K M 0,10 

Wadaleyin, Mali A B , composed fiom wadala p p of wadura- 
nawd and beym =: betuna 



Luini, “salt/’ Haled, lonu, Chr., C5- 
Lumiwnraiia, Nilm , 122 ; Ab, 653. 

Lulm = hgliu S. S. I.. 1 ; S.B. M. B., 3 ; Num., 20. 

Luliul, Num., 86; Kfwy. X., 16C. 

Lii = bahannladft S. S., 57. 

Lo = loliitn, Slaloil le Chr., 43. 

Lekam = lekliakarmn, Arab. A., 25, 67 ; Nam., 230. 

Leda = KlUlita, ‘sick,’ Nam., 157 ; Kjivy. XIII., 1. 

Lciin, Op. B. 10; K. ,1.. CO. 

Leda or londa, K. J., 3.3. 

Lcd.a, K. J., 70 

Lodaruwak = lekbadliaraka, ■'examiner'’ (?), Amb. B., 4.3. 

Leya, “ writer,” Amb. A., 21 ; S. B. XL A., 5, cf. l."vennn. 

Leladena = Illopeta, K, J., 92 ; Gutt, 100. 

Lesn s Ilia, Gutt., I3I. 

Lcsa,R.D., 32; llSb, 3; Doml. (163), 24 
Lo, “ stroke," S S , 25, 

Lo SB loka Qp. A., 3, etc. 

Lot s lodhm, Ab., 550. 

Lopalla S. S. L. 13. 

Lomudaeliao, horripilation, Kavy. VI., 33. 

Lola, P, P., 15. 

Lown, P, P. P. A., 25 ; Gp. B., 21. 

LoTTioaira, v'lib, 

Lowacdft or araewa as lokarrast, P. P. P., 13 : Gp. A., 8 j Thup. 

L.p.vn„i. 

Losasun, S. XL A., 28. 

Loho sa loliita, Gp. A., 18. 

Laekiya = Alamkritn. 

Laegum, P. P., 38, a verbo l.agina-wru 

Laetigu a verbo naligli, E. P. A., 13 ; iVmb. A., 4 ; Wowelk., 4 ; 

J. 0. A. S., 1870, p. 35. 

Laedi, Amb. B., 19. 

Laebi, P, P., 35 ; Kaeligatta, /L, 31 ; Katugaha, A-, 24. 

Laebim, Gp. 0., 5 ; lacbeyi, R. I)., 18. 

Laella, “ plank," Alw., 77. 

Laenan, Jlali. B. “ writer." 

Laesi, "slow," Ab., 54. 

Wa, being, S. S. I., 1 ; P, P., 39. 

Wak = paksbaj Mab. A., Amb. A., 45, 53 ; 'Wcwclk, G. 
Wakagasala, Kavj’. X., 220; comp. Pischd zu Hem. L, 26. 
Wakasahidaka, Situlp., (10). 

XVaga = \yaghra, leopard. Gutt, 209 ; Gray, 16. 

XYagapul, long pepper,” Nam., 218 ; Ab., 583. 

Wagala = galita, j^vy. X., 118; Nam., 247. ' 

Wajar^a, Arab. B, 3S; Wajarat, Amb, A., 16 ; waejaeriyae, 
A 17, = avadhareti. • ' 



197 


■Wajra, D. 1 , 9. 

Wat, Amb A-, 24 ; B , 14, 20 ; = waetup, “ \7ages.” 

Watageya, "round house,” Op C, 1. 

Wafaway, Amb A., 56. 

Watmva = vartaka, P. P. P, 52 ; 158, 17. (^) 

Wap = -wataneyayi, Amb A., 7. 

Wa^ae, “around Amb A, 43- 

Watnawaeri, Amb. B , 14 (= vratupoayaka vlriyakaia Com ) 
Watlii, Amb. A , 40. 

Wadanl, P. P., 16; Waeli, 1. 

Wadanuwan, P. P , G ; comp liar, bada, etc., Piscbel Beitr. Ill , 
257 £ 

Wadamanaka, Nett (29); Galgamuwa, (30); Ponikulam, (94) ; 
comp llab , 70 ; Bumonf Lotus, C25 ; Tlioma.s, J R. A S , N 
S,I,484. 

Wadatalan, E. H B , 8 ; comp tab 
Wada awut, S IT, A , 27. 

Wada, Gp. A, 17. 

Wada, Hab , B ; J 0. A S, 1879, p 30. 

Wadagenae, D. 1 , 7. 

Wadala, Ing. A, 11. 

Wadu, carpenter, Amb B,44 cf. ■wodhika, Trans 2Dd Orient 
Congr , 342 , Moled , Tradangkura mihung, Chr , 50. 

Wano varna, S. S. I., 2, 9, 10. 

Wana ss vlralnta, S S , 34. 

WannatuTraro, 138, 15. 

Wat ss vrata, Amb. A, 5. 

Wat, P. P., passim, Her. 

Wat =1 %astu, Amb. A, 43 ; Mab. B ; J. C. A S., 1879, p. 29. 
Wata, Amb A, 29, 
f Watala, K, J , 47, " Jai^” 

( Watala = -vistirna. Kavy, X, 122 
Watama, Dunum , (15 ) 

Watawa, time, P. P , 33 
Watiwata, Tamanagala, (55) 

Watup = vatthu, vastu, Amb A, 49 ; cf watu = .Iramaja, 
Kavy. X , 99 , Aamavatthu Mabavagga HI, 5, C 
Watura = vatula, Gp A, 9; Thup, VIII 
Watsika = -wassika, (Q Amb B , 7, 

Watsunu = Tasacunnam, Ab, 30C, powder. 

Wattam, " cleverness,” S S , 23 
Wadakasa = v.a«i, Sob , 142, ct, wadawaln, 

Wadawala = vacavataka, Mali II , 202, cf , wadakasa. 

Wadara, Wandar., 4 ; Gp B., 9; C. P, comp waejaeriya. 
Wadarana, P. P. P A, 25. 

Wadalamhayi, K. AT. 0 , 10. 

Wadrijoyin, Mab. A B.; composed fiom wadala p p of wadara- 
nawa and heyin = hetuna. 



19S 


Wadahindiiwa, S. 11. A., 32. 

IVacUvla, cf. •wadalo, S. S. CLTII.; S. JI. B., 20 ; Mali. A, P. P., 
passim, C. P. 

Wadrijen, W. P. D., 4 ; cf. Kiyen a S. CLX. 

Wadna, Amb. B., 55 ; llah. R ; K. M. A 15., Aetawlra, passim ; 

cf waedae Amb A, 49 ; cf. paewijiya. 

IVana =: vinaya, Amb. A, 12; Parawisand, 41 ; P P., 20, 23, 2-5. 
Wana, a verbo, wenawa, L. V. K. B., P. P. P. A, 29 ; P« P-, 42. 
Wan (PI.). P. P., 35, 47. 

WanakaDe'ivagmya, (53). 

Wana = viralnta, Kavy., 63, cf. wana. 

Wanasa = vinasa, Gutt., 83 ; S. S., 59. 

Wanija, Galwibara, (54). 

Wanaes = panaes, IVewelk, 20, 21. 

Wanda = vangba, Sub., 142. 

Wandana, Wandar, 9. 

Wandimin, P. P, 43. 

Wandura = vanara. 

Wanneyae, S. M. A, 22 ; Qp C., 14. 

Wap Amb. A. 4 •, Wewelk, 5 ; J. C. A. S., 1879, p. 38. 

Wapin, 168, 21. 

Wami sa valmlka, Kavy. X., 209. 

Wayfl ss vapj, Situlp., 3. 

Wayanawa, " to play,” S. S. 11., 21 ; Her. 

Wayase = AwastbaTva, Gutt, 200. 

Wayira s= Wera, Gutt, 38. 

War, " work,” Amb. B., 33, 40 ; waijcta, “-workmaster.” 

Warn, monastery, MaU, A. B., Arab. B., 34. 

Waroja = aparadba, Amb. A, -51 ; cf warada. 

Warana, Mali. B. 

Warada, eubking, S. S. I., 9, 14 ; = yuvamja or xiparaja. 

Warada, Cb. II., 15 ; P. P. 50; cf waraja. 

Warada = viruddha, Kavy. X., 101. 

Warada, " pmj'ers,” Gp. C., 5. 

War in Stha^virawaraya, P. P., 17 = lerawarun. 

Woradaela, Ab., 620. 

Waral, bair, K J., 38 ; Naui., 1C7. 

Waraha, Tiss., 9. 

Wara = wnmlia Xilin., 139 ; Ab., GI2. 

Warck, Kaeligatta B., 9 ; Katiigaha A, 34. 

WalakTv, Gp. C., C ; a verbo, walakanawjl, to slop. 

Walanda, Wew., 33; Amb. A, 18, 40 ; cf ivaclaenda. 

Walabaga = wadabTigni, sobmarin Cro, Kuvy X., 205 ; cf Puli, 
vajabrinala. 

Walasa, "bear,” J. C. A. S., 1879, 40 ; comp. Maled. waji, “jungle," 
Chr., 58. 

Walaswacwa =s Taraccliavapi, Mali. I., 248. 

Wnla, clouds, Maled., vija, Gray, 16 ; cf. ^aclaeli. 

Walac, 168, 12. 

Wnlacmba, marc, Rijdiya bUend.*!, J. C. A. S., 1855, p. 170. 



"WaAvastatDa = vyavastia, Miyil. A-, 25 
^Va^\'l == \api, "tank/ frequent in inscriptions 
■Wavai, Gp C , 8 

IVas = V'in 9 a, Mayil A , 5 , Amb A., 1 , frequent m inscnp- 
tions. 

Wasa = vac, P P, 42 
Wasa, “jear/ Hab,10 
"Wasag, later avasanga, Amb A., 12 
"Wasana, Amb A-, 8 , P P , 47 , Gp B 7 
"Wasan, the avass season, Amb B , 1. 

Wasannawun, P P, 19 
IVtisamba, south west, S S, 67 
Vasara, (?) Ing A, 17 
Wasal = \i 9 ala S S 1, 14 
Wasa wan, P P , 29 

Wasawasika, llah P , (6), Kottarak (4C) corap inscr at NasiL 
trans Gong 331, Ime 3 
Wasm, later wisin Uayil A , 19 
WasaegiQ = sv assagraycn, Amb B, 25 
VVftsnu, MayiL A, 24 

Walnu SB UpUana, Gp 0,21, Haled flewang, Chr CO 
Walian = Yugadhara, Nam , 108 ; K\vy X , ICO 
Wahanso, frequent in later inscriptions, see J C A S . 1879. 
p 13 

Wahare, Nam , 34, 47 , Kavy XITI , 3l 
Wahal, "slave/ Nam 184, P P,42, Thup HI,!, Eavy X,142, 
Wa^, Rarabliaw B , 4 , 1> 1,5, mod. wal, Nitinich 
Wahah,weak,S S, 57 • 

Wahala, loosening, Nam, 247 , Kavy X , 118 
Wabalkotae, having supported, P P, 9, 11 
Wabasae, Wandar, 9 
Wahni, 158, 20 

Wnla, "hole, cavity, pit/'Maled, waju = ava^a Chr, 5C 
Wala lamp Sandagm, D 2 (23) later waet. 

Wajandat, a \ho, walondannwa = aaalafij ' to cat ’ 

Waja s: pitaka, Amb A, 12, comp tewala. 

Wall bracelet, 158, 12, Rambhaw, B, 5, P P C, 18, Gp 
A, 19 , B 22 , Nam , 1C9 , more modem, waela, Kavy XII , 
81 , ilnled oula , Gray, 23 
Wri,P P,4 

Wiidija, katchen, Malcd wadique, Gray, 22 
WudT, S B M.B,3 
Wasala, Kael 
Wasi, Gp B , 9 (?) 

Waslnta, Gp B , 19 
Wikal = vikala, Her 
Wikala "twilight,” P P, 27 

Wikija "trade,” Amb A, 42, Staled wikang Clir, CO 
Wikcta "nee field,” GalwiU. (54) 

Wikliowa = Yikshepa, P P, 47 



200 


Wigaraana, P. P., 40. 

Wigaliata, Ch. II., 10. 

Wicala, a vbo. vficarana'wa, P. P., 23. 

■\VijUa, Nett. (29). 

IVitae, P. P. P., 61. 

Witala “ he inquired,” Kary. X., 21. 

■Witaleya, Alwis. Contr. Or. Lit I., 122 ; comp. Pali vitaccika = 
vicaccika, Jat I., 15 ; ilahapaiinibl^Mas, 52. 

Wit cup, Nam., 214 ; Kavy. XIL, 70. 

Witai’a = vistara " so much," Hah., 7. 

Witarana “gift,” K. J., 37. 

Widinawa, Cli. II , 17 ; \riiiiwida piercing, K J., 98. 

Widu = vidyut S. S. I., 3; Prakr. vijju Hera. I., 16; Haled. 

■widani’Clir. 59. 

Widurat Indra, X J., 140. 

Winisa "certainly ” = vini^caya, P. P., 23 
Windinawa, to fenjoy S. S. I., 13 ; L. V. K. 0. ; S. L., 80. 
Windit,S..S,45. 

Windimin, Gp. A., 0. 

Wibajakahi Gal^ana(lO). 

Wihbaga, P. P., 39. 

Wiya sa vyaya, Arab. A. 23 ; comp. Awiya, S. S , 20. 

Wiya = wayasa, Kavy. II., 18 ; Nam., 264. 

Wiya = yuga. 

Wiyatana Nagirik. (97). 

Wiyat Hayil A, 10 ; Wiyata, S. L, 80. 

Wiyadam, expense, Kofta (ICO); Eael., H. I., 25 ; Gp. B., 11 ; 
ef. yadun prayer. 

Wiyau = vitana Canopy, K. 3 ., 48; Nam., 175 ; Ab., 299. 
Wiyoba Nettuk (29). 

Wiyoli dryland, Nam., 271 ; Ab., 280 ; Kavy. XHL. 42 ; S. H. A., 
24 ; cf. Tvelanaw^ 

Wiyowu Arab. A., 55 ; cf, "wiyadam. 

Wiyae, a vbo -wenaTva, P. P., 19. etc. ; Gp. C., 15. 

Wiruda, Strength, S. if., A, 10 ; ct wiridu namayak, Hi'? 
Majesty’s royal name, Kacl. Gp. B., 14 ; Nam., 273 ; wiruiiiwali 
Gutt, 237 ; •wiradu, L. P. 

Wirulesa, E. D., 11. 

WU Thup. VIIL 

Wil tank, Arab. A., 40 ; 0. P. Nam., 89, Skt viJa cave. 

WUanda, fried grain, Nam., 201 ; Ab., 4G3. 

Wilawun = vilepaua, Her. 

Wilina. K. J. 63. 

Wilimuwana Nam. 140. 

Wilumba “heel,” Ab., 277. 

Wiwaruna, Amb. A., 48. 

Wiweka^at, P. P., 20, 21, 23, 25. 

Wisata, direction S. S. I., 22. 

Wisadara Snake, Nam., 77 ; Kavy. XI,, 27.- 
Wisada " spread," S. S. I., 22 = wihida, & L., 81. 



201 


Wisabhaga, P. P,, 27. 

Wisara, Ton. (1) 

Wisarata ^), 168, 4. 

rWisi s= vin^ati, P. P. P,39; Wcwelk, 17, Gjps_j bislt 3Iikl 
A VII, 22 
LWisiti Hab , 0. 

T\'isitura = •vicitra. 

Wisin, P. P. P , 20 ; Wewolk., 45 ; comp ^ras^n 
Wisiyae, ’Amb A., 20, 43; P. P. P, 10 ; cf nnraesa = nh\risa, 
K. J, SI. 

Wisiya =; wasangana, Galt, 154 
"Wkiiniwa. having dispersed, Gp A., 8. 

TPisuwa 5= visnkha "Unhappy,” E. U, 11. 

Wisula = visuka, Her. 

"Wisesa, De^vanag, 4. 

"Wissam =s Vi^vakarman S. S. 1 , 1 2 
VTihita s=5 pitatkota, K J, 140. 

"Wilu'da = haera, K. J., 55. 

Wiluda, wihidi = Nam , 114 ; Kavy. IX, 71 ; Gutt , OC. 

VTihidenawa to open, P. P., 18, 42. 

Wihirabijaka, Mah R (6); Mih.(20); Mah I, 100, Alutg (52); 
cf. •wisiri, Nam , 177. 

"Wili =: VTldl, Nam , 71 ; Kuvy. XII , 74. 

Wi]i, bow, 158, 10 5 Thup VIII , Num , 204. 

Wl Amb A., 36 ; R, D , 3C ss vrihi 
IVaD, " borne," P. P. passim, S S , 57. 

"Wunara r= Aruna, Nam , 41. 

Wuwa, P. P. P., 55 ; P. P., 8, 27, 30 ; Gp A . 9 , C, 11 

Waw.amana, Ruan D , IS 

Wuhnta = vigislita "direction,” S S. I, 22 

Wu, ilab. B. P. P, 1, eta passim = bbuta. 

We = bliawanti, Her. 

Wed; “boat," Ab, GG8; cf petae 
Wena = wlna, Gutt, 89 , Nam , 65. 

Wendaru, fresh butter, Ab, 500 

Wet =: viyukta, Kavj'. X, 157 ; Nam., 240. 

Weti, P. P , a. vbo , v enawa. 

Weda =s Skt vaidya Pah vejja, Amb A., 11 , B, 30 
Wedayi, R. D , 10 , S M B , lb ; Gp A , 21 ; D J , 20 , Tlnlp VIIJ. 
Wen = Vishnu, Kavy. XII, 14 , cf Welu, Hetn I, 85 
Wena = Wenasa change, Kavy. X,, 82 , wenA others, S S I , C 
Wenu, S L , 82 

Wenasa = vi^eshena, cf Wesesa. 

Wenae, Gp B, 5 

Wemin, part from wenawa, P P , 3 
Weya = upacilm, D 1 , 10. 

Weyi (?), Gp C 8 

Wera = nanra, Kavy. VII , 17 j Parawis, C2 ; Nam , 158 ; werae, 
P. P., 40, 47 ; S. S. CU. 



202 


Wera = -wehera, Gp. B., 10. . . .• 

"Werala = 'welatota “sea-shore.” 

Werala = ilaryada, K. J., 37. 

Wer.vlu = Weluriya, AL., 491'; Niim., 221 ; J. P. veruliya. 

■\Vel "field;’ Ran. D., S. B. IL, A., 1 ; D. I, 13; Nam., 209; 

S. L., 82 ; RamWiaw. B., 4. 

Wela, tats. P. P.. 20. 35. 

Wela = •walabaia,, K. J., C4. 

Welam = we^liana, Ab., 745 ; cf. vrotunu. 

Welu = Vishnu, cf. Wen.. J. C. A. S., 1879, p. 4. 

Wclu entwined, S. S., 57 ; Nam., 245. 

Weludata see inscr. at Nasik No. 12. 

Welep = vitapa, Ab., 547; Num., 113; Kfvvy., X., 178; cf. 

velambo = vidambana Pischcl Beitr. III., 240. 

Welewi = vilambhita, quickness, Nam., 2G ; Kfivy. !X., 109. 
Welleu Kotta (ICO). 

Wewayi, S. II B , 28. 

Wowulanawa y^vep. 

Wesa "diess," Amb. A., 42. 

Wesamuni, J. P. Vcsamana, Bhag., 213 ss Vfti 9 rivvmia. 

Wesesa, P. P., 22 ; cf wenasa. 

WeUawuyS. (1) 158, 8, 

Wfehedayi Wandar., 10 ; wedayi, S. 11. B., 1C. 

Wehera Amb. A., 27; K. If. C., 4 ; P. P. 42. 

Wehela = wehesa, S. S., Ran. D., 4. 

Wo]a Gp. B., e,.17; Thup. VIII. 

Wejanawa " to wrap,” .^/vesbt, comp, welana. 

Weiamba =! wadawa, 

Wclanda =i ranij "Merchant,” Op. 0., 13. 

We‘ = bhavati S. S. I., 1. 

IVe =s vlthi Kavy. VI., 50. 

Welanawa, “ to dry,” cf. wiyali. 

Wotunu = veahtana, Gp. A., 7 ; B., 3 ; P. P. P. A„ 8 ; Tliiip. I., 
3 ; comp, otunna. 

Woraendl = virajamana Parawis, 39. 

Wae, Amb. A., 11 ; Mab, A., 11 ; P. P., 1, 2. 5, C ; Gp. A., C, 10 ; 
B.. 13. 

Waekarana = vyakarana, P. P., 17. 

Waegirenawa, “to sink,” K. J., 134. 

Waejambehi S. S. I., 8. 

Waejaeriya, Amb. A., 17 ; comp, wadani. 

Waejaerma, Amb. B., 20. 

Waet, Amb. A., 49 ; B., 35, Waeli. c£ w^la. 

Waeta = vfitta, Thup. VIIL Parawis' 100. Waeli. 

Waotiya = vartikS. 

Waetuna, Wewelk, S9. 

Waetup lamp, Parawis, C2. 

Waetum = waetup, “ wages” = vetana (?), Amb. A., 47rNain, 
209;'Gutt., 17C ; Ab. 455; Kavy. XIIT., 64; Mali. 73, 37. * 



20 ^ 


Waetena Amb A., 49, B, 58, v'pat cf niwadita Niray, 5 
Waeda and paia^vaeda, P P. 22, Gp A, 24 , "Wacdija ib 
Wiednirasana-uj todiroH, P P P, 14, 17 , cf wacdae 
"Waedi = A nddhi S S 11 , 13 , Gp A., 6 ; Amb A , 22 , ITaled 
•wettaDg Clir, 54 

Waedi (tacna) bnnting ground, Gp A., 10 
IVaedae, a vbo wadonawTi, comp Vadbita Anoka’s Ed IV, 
Journ. jw XVT, 222, D I. 17, L V K A., Gp A., 14, 
P P P A. 14, BaiuD 4, P P,2, J 0 A.S, 1879, p 41 
IVaedasipna Wacli 
Waedahinda, C P 
VTaetm = vistara Ka\’y X., 139 

Waedae, " having struck,^ Kaelig B,7, Katugaha A., 33 , PP 
25, (?) , Arab A , 40 
IVaedae, L V K A. D 1, 14 

‘Waedler Aetawira B, 11 , Wnetlarumaycn Kong (112) A., S 

IVaenan, ilayiL A., 3 

Waeni, ‘ similar,’ K. J , 39 , see IfCwacni 

IVaenenun, K, J„ 134 ss Kamplwcmin 

Waenna as varna, K J, 81 

Vacra ss Vira, K J, 02 

IVaera, “ diligence," N im , 74 , I^vy. XIII , C2 

VTaerada = Aparadlia 

Waenyan, Jlab C , ilayi! B , 7 , Ing C , 6 , Actawira 0 , 21 

Waeru, "distance,’ S &,57 

"Wneraeda ss \ urodha S S , 50 , Alw , 80 

Waela s= vvalli, Mah. 11, 213 

■Waela = walaUa, Krivj XU, 81 , cf Trail 

WaclandanawS, " to embrace,’ S L., 84 

VTaelapima = vvitapa, Ab, 123 , comp ivelep 

VTaelamita “ elbow,” Ab , 205 

Waelaya, Her 

IVaelasinno, she-bear, Gp A., 8, comp walTsa. 

"Waeli = waluka, Ruan, D, 22, Amb Au, 40 , Mali II, 188 , 
Haled wch Cbr, 65 
Waefidamfuwam, Her 
Waelaelj, “Cloudy,” Ab, 50, cf wala 

IVaew = Vapi, 'Amb A , 52 , B , 55 , Aetakada A-, 3 , Gp. A., 
20, R D , 27 , Haled weu Clir, 69 
Waewala s= vapivltaka, Mah IL, 186 
Waewastha ss vyavastlia, Kotta. (ICO) 
r Wacsi, Inbabitant, P P,40, S U A, 30 
i_Waessan, P P P A, 13, waesi, Gutt, 90 
Waesikiliya s vaccilcuti, "latxine,” Kael Ab , 212. 

"Wacsae, Amb A,, 12, 15 = waBayakota Com 

Waesaewiyae, P P , 30 

"Wacbaep = vrishabba S S 1 , 10 

■Waehyak, Amb B,ll,12 

Was = waewa, 1455, 6 ; Ran D , 2 

Waekonda s= Kunda Jeasamme 

"Waepara ss vyapara, S B M B , 3 



Waeya = va^L 

Waesara = -wawisara, Amb. A, 39; J. 0. A S., 1879, p. 8. 
WyawasthFi, D. I., 10; Gp. 18; Alw., C9; Waadar., 1C. 

Sa, “ Six,” Amb. B., 48. 

Sakab, Waad, 14. 

Sakasa, P. P., 31 = Samskrityo. 

Sakit, “ once,” S. S. I., 13. 

Saku = samskrita, S. S. I., C. 

Sakman = cankramanam, walking, Waalig. ; P. P., 31 ; Ab., 213 ; 

Haled, henggang Chr., 71. 

Sakwala S. S. I., 13, S. K. A., 6. 

Sakwa = cakravuka, Kavy. X., 95 ; Sakwa libiniya Nam. 143; 
Ab., C41. 

Sakwit = cakravartti, Gp. A, 4 ; Ab., 335. 

S.nga = Bvarga, Gp. C., 7 ; Maled. suwanige Chr., 57. 
Sagamaraketa, Diinum. (15). 

Sajjita, Ruan. D., 31. 

Sanga =s 9 ringa S. S. I., 22. 

Sanga = Sallcha, K. J., 72 ; Mah. A P. P., 40. 

Saiigaramin, Her. 

Saugala « aangba^a, ilab. II., 137 *, Sangala, a pair, S. L., 87. ’ 
Sailguruwa = saligharupa, L. V. K. A., Her. comp, budurinva 
and damaniwo, 

Saiigtraeli, Amb. B., 21 ; A, 38; 8. B. M. A, 2 ; K. M. B., 18. 
Sa^han, Hark s san(hiina Ab., 105. 

Sajhe = 9 astri, Km, 1. 

Sa^i]a, Her. 

Sat (?), P. P., 46 ; 158, 20. 

Sat = Sattva, P. P.. 8 ; R. D., 26 ; Her. 

Sab = sapta Hnb. B. 

Sat = Chattra, E. P. A, 12 ; Amb. A, .3. 

Satata, P. P., 20, 23. 

Satan = santama, Gutk, 224. , 

Satapi, P. P., 81 from Bactapenawa; from this liaetaepnm, • 
. corrupted Iiaetackma. 

J"Satar, four, Mali. B. 

^ Satarakn, Gp. A, 17. 

Satara wanna, the fourth, R. D., 20 j Bond. I. 

Satara = ^astri, S. S. CIjVII. 

Satalis, forty, Ruan. D., 25. 

Sail. P. P., 30, 37. 

Satiyak, a hundred, Ruan. D. 24; 168, 11. 

Satutu = Kintudita, P, P. P., 20; P. P., 42 ; Gp. A., 11 ; B, 12. 
Satun, Gp. A., 8. 

Saturn = ^atru, D. I., 4 ; Op. A., 13 ; B. 21. 

Saturuwa e= ^Tistra, D. I., 21. 

Satra, Wand.ir., 5 ; T). 1., 20 ; R. D., 14 j cf. Snetm TIiOp. Till,, 
L, P. 3 ; cf. drina<!tra Oalpota B., 22 ; Tamil ClialUrama. 

Sackv, moon, Ko^ta (ICO). 

Sadalu =s chadda roof, Ab, 208. 



205 


SadaTvana, P P,20, cans ofSadanawa 

Sadaliain, S S I, 22, Sadham, P P, 10 

Saddhxvnbarika P P , 18, 22 

■San = Saajna Ami A , 42 

San, “ Cover, ” S S , 22 , Amlj A-, 5C. 

Sanaln, Gp B, 5 = sucha 
Sanaha = snanal ota, Kavj IX., 57 
Sanahana = sansmdunnawa, Kav) 31 
Sanipa, "health ” 

Santaka KneL 

Sanda = candra Moon 1,2, Amh A ,4, Wewelk , 5 , L V K B 
Gp A , 13 , Haled hadn Chr, CO, comp Sindhi camdu Pischel 
Beitr, VI, 00 

Sandulu =r candnka K J 85 

Sanda = Kshana, P P, 37 , S M A , 15 , sacndae, Arab A, 
12 , cf sal Nam , 55 

Sandaya, Kavj XIII , 49 — chandayae Kilvv , 11 , 38 
.^andaes sa ehandas 

Sandahl, Gp A , 4 , B , 23 , P P , IS , Her Nitmigh, 12 
Sanhuidena, P P , 42 (to destroy) 

Sapat.PP 37, Nam. 272 

SipajSjP P 32, A vbosapayanawa Ch IJ, 35 

S ipugaroiya » caenpaka®, Amb B , 37 

SappSya, pleasure, Alxr , 81 

Saba loa, sebehi, S S 1 , 4 

Sabratjosaru, P P , 26 * sabrabmacTiri 

Sam, Amb B , 34, 38, 40, 41 

Samn (for Saroa), P P , 1 

Sama, leave, P P , 27 

fcaraaka Kotta. 

Samagaettan, P P P , 57 
Samajaeya = samjata, Amb A, 2 
Sanianan, Mab A 
Samata, Situlp , 5 

Samadaniwan, Mayil B 24, Kong C,0, W P -0,5, 168, 15, 
B’en’eBk, 45 , Minn A, 4S 
Samana, P P, 23 

Saraanola, Wandar, 4, Mab 68, C = Sarannakuta 
Saraanga = sainagra. Wand , 8 

Samanela = Samanasela, older Satnanala Parawisand, CO 
Samara s Sraarana, remembiancc, Kitry VI, 20, N.Tm, 75, 
Kaay XIII, 54, S S I,C 
Samawati = sanupatti, Gutt, 30 
Samas = Samasa, SSI, 35, PP, 23 
SatnXdatiwiyae, F P, 40 
Saro-m = Samagatna, S S 31 
Saimyen Act B , 10 , Ingin, A, 24 
Samu, P P , 27, 28 
Samudura = saraiidra 



206 


Sarauu = sammunjanl, Amb. A., 37; comp, musna. 

Samurddlii, P. P. P., 20. 

SampajaTiku (1), P. P. 24, 30, 37. 

Sampat, P. P. P. B, 30 ; Gp. a, 9, 16. 

Sampatvra, P. P. P. A., 28. 

Sampasumbiya, “ belloTT.” 

Sambana, Gp. A., 19. 

Sayambbu, Kir. 8. 

Sayura S. S. I., 16 = ^gara, "ocean.” 

Sarab, D. I., 5 ; Rank D., 2 ; Gp. A. 19 ; Waeligama. 

Sarana, Dewanag., 4. 

Sarata « ^ranta, Kavy. VII., 35. 

Sarasa, Bond (163), 19. 

Saraha. 158. 8 ; Gp. B.. 23. 

SarahanaTva, to decorate, Gp. B., 15. 

Sara = ^arad, K. J., 70, 

Sari, likeness, K J., 99 = sadri^a. 

Saro, " tanks,” Hab., 2. 

Sal, time, Nara., 35 ; Am b. A., 9. 

Sal, stone. Hab., 6 ; Mah. A. Amb. B., 41 ; ilaled- hila Cbr. 

Sala, tiee, S. S. I., 14 ; Nam., 113. 

Salamewan « <;ilamcgbavanja, E. P. A., 24 ; Amb. A., 1. 

Salaya, servant Amb. B., 22, 23 ; cf. Hali Nitmig, p. 6, 

Salasat, Amb. A., 44 ; c£ sala.swa NUinigh, 10 ; Bond. (1C3), 24 ; 
Saelaesae passim. 

Salasanawii, " to adorn,” S. L, 91., Salasmen Bond. (108), 20. 
Salasun ss ^ailasana, K J., 128. 

Sala « chativ; Gntt., 01. 

Salu = gataka, clothes, Nam., 173; Kavy. X., 92, 

Solelu =B Sallala, S. S., 59. 

Saw = Saiva, S. S. I., 20. 

Sawanaga, Hab. 10 ; R. B. IV., 7 (21) ; Ing. A, 4. Ind. Ant., VI., 
68;' IX., 271. 

.Sawanyutopeta, Kir., 1. 

Sawayitha, Kottarakimbiyawa (46). 

Sawiyaiii, Nett. (29). 

Sas = satya, Kavy., 128; S. L, 24. 

Sasnn = 9 asana, P. P. P., 15 ; Op. A., 24 ; B., 12; cf. Lasun. 
Sasna ~ ^asana, P. P., 8, 22. 

Sasna = taccbita, Ab., 670. 

Saba, Amb. A, 22, 28; B., IG. 

Saliaia = Sadri^a, Gutt, 01. 

Saja, B. I., 18, 

Sa = 9 akba, S. S. I., 1 ; Samnwa = sakbamiga, Nara, 139 ; Ab., 
G13. 

Saka, '* sis," Gp. A 17 ; B. I,, 8. 

Sada (?), W. P. A, 11. 

S.a<iha, having overthrown, S. M. B., G ; Gp. A., 22, 24 ; B,, 16 ; 

sadhamin, P. P., 22. 

Sapat =r ^akhapatta, Hah. II., 250. 



207 


Sarasiya, “ 400,” P P 4 , Wadigama. 

Sal. «nce,” Amb A. 28, 47, 158, 9 , J 0 A S, 1873, p 78 
Sa^va, “hare,* S S 1,22 
SabanuTvat =: iwasiua, Amb A , 22, 28 
Saba, “ having received,** Amb B , 10 
Sika = 9ushka S S 1 , 22 
Sikura = Qubra Kot^a 
Smgiyana, begging, Nifcimgh, 10, P P 26 
Siti, Wax S S 1 , 22 , Ab , 494 , Kavy X, 198 
Siti a vbo sitinaiva, Amb A , 27, 29 , P P , 5 21 , Bifae, Amb 
A, 3, PP,2, GpBjlO, IjP, 5, mod hitmavra, comp 
S S, 57 

Sitmeyae, Gp C, 12 

Sitiya.K M. 0 Gp 0, 5 

Sitiyae, P P , 42 

Sitiyamin, P P P, 41 

Silja = aettlu, Xavy , 42 

Situva, E D, 31 , Sitae, Gp A, 14, B, 5, 22 

Situwaewa Mah 11, 180 = Setthivapi 

Sit, mind, Gp B , 5 , 0,0, Nam , 52 , Her, D I 18 

Sita = citta, P P, 38 

Sita sa cintayitva, P P P, 30, P P 9 , Gp 0, 1C , C P 
Situ Gp A., 8 , C , 10 

{ Sitivaru = cittakara, “ pamter, * S S , 23 
Sittara, Amb B , 37 
Sidutu = chidra 
Sma = jala, K J, 72 

Sinawa, laugh,” Ab , 175 , P P, 41, Her Nam, 09, ilaled 
heng Clir, 59 

Sminda ^ Snigdba, Kavy , 125 

Smibala K M. B, 10 , cf stnidda and boliddo Nam, 127, Q1 
Dll , 54 

Sipa = Sparta, Kavy , VII , 27 

Sipatola, ilah II, 124 

Sim = Siman, S S I, 22 

Simbul, cotton S S 1 , 22 

S;ya = q&ta, Gp A., 3, Siyu, Weirelk, 27 

Siyakpalama, balance ’ 

Siyalu = sakala 158, 21, Bank D 

Siyum = sukslima, Gutt , 201 , Nam , 238 , Xivy XIII , 40 
Siyuianga, Gp B, 16 , B D, 22 
Siyo = Bamjoga, S S I 5 
Sin, ilah A E P A,, 2 
Smt, = cantra Hah B , Amb A, 0, 19 
Smja = cbunka,, dagger, Ab, 392, Nam, 200, mar sun, 
Beames, 218 

Sinyaru, carpenter, Nam , 224 
Sinwadu inferior carpenter, Amb B, 45 
Sirijal = baritalam, Ab, 493 



208 


Sirlwat, Dewanagala. 

Siriru = ^arlra, K. J., 61 j P. P., 30. 

Silalelcha, Gp. B., 12 ; S. M. B., 25. 

Sil = clla, Her. ? 

Silu = Sub , 1^7 ; Nam., 22 j Kavy.. X., 122 
Siluna = Siklianayafca. 

Siwat, " stitched," S. S. I., 22. 

Si\7alii = Singala, Nam, 141. i 

Siwi = chawi, Kfiv^'., 11., 4 
Siwi^uta, Kotta. 

Siwim, Hah. A., cf. hiwenawa, to cover. 

Siwiladdhara, Nett. 

SiiTO, “ four,” Wael. Thup. h. P., III., 2. 

Siwumaedurii. Nam., lOt ; K. J., 107. 

Siwumaeli = Sukumara, Nam., 243 ; Kavy-j XII., '• 
Si^ruranga, Gp. B., 8; Galasne, 5 ; Rank, P-, P. P. 
Siwuru = civara, Amb. B., 16 ; P, P., 3C, 46. 

Si? s 9lr3lia, S. S. I., 22. 

Sis « tuccha, Ab., 098; P. P., 37; cf. cucclia, 

E. H. diflch, Hoemle, 92. 

SUata a vbo. ai^aranawa =s saficar, Op. C., 2 ; 

D., 23; S. S. GLXI. 

Sisi = 9a9i, Gutt, 12C; K. J., 128; Nam., 37. 

Sisoa, ^'^sic, S. S. I., 22. 

Sihi = 9laksbna, cf. suiiga. 

Siluna, sleep, = svapna 

Sibiya = smriti, remembnmcc, Nam., 73 ; Kavy., >' » ' 
Si = simlia, “ lion,” S. S. I., 1 ; Nam., 273 ; Kn"^,, 
Hem., I., 29. , t 

Siraa, ''boundary,’' Gp. 0., 9,; Amb. B., 65, , 

Slru s= Cin, Ab., G4G. 

Siwaela, plough shaj'e, Ab., 44S; Sisaema f= Ka.?ik 
vation Ab., 445. 

Sunka = 9ullva, toll, Ab., 35G. 

Suiiga = 9lakahiio, cf. sibf. 

Siinamin, ‘ bearing/ S. S. 1., 22. 

Suta, Arab. A., IS = siitro. 

Sntta or sutata, P, P., 19, 23. 

Sudn = 9Veta, K. J., 05. 

Sudano = Sujana, C. P. 

Sudasa = sudaksba, Amb. A., 43 ; cf. siidosina, J, R. A 
203. 

Sudusu, P. P., 40 ; Gp. C., 6; 1456, 2 ; 158, 18. i 
San = cliinna, 'broken/ S. S., 57; SunturU, S. S., 30; 
Kacl. 

Siinu, ‘ lime/ Amb. B., 47 ; Haled, huni, Chr., 59. 


SU9 


Sumbulu, bark, Nam , 115 , Ab, 442 

Sura = gura, S S 1 , 22 

Sul « 5ula, S S I, 22 

Sulakula := svalankrita, Gutt, 233 

Sulaguna = Culangaai, llab 1 , 146 

Sulaiiga, Nam , 26 ; Kavy , XIII , 37 — calaka 

Sulu, « small/ K J, 136 

Sulu = 91I1, Kavy , II , 8 , G1 Dh , 109 

Suwa = Sukha 

Snwandatel, Ruan D, 24 = augandliatela 
Suwajiat, Wanddr, 7 

Suwase = 9ukha9as, R D 11 , Suwascn Kaebg, B , 4 , 
Katugaha, A , 30 

SuTvahasa = 9atasahasraya, K J , 46 

Suwamla = swamin, 158,5 

Susum, * breatb,’ 8u?ma, • breatlimg/ Kavy , XI , 27 

Susul, S L, 06 

SusO, Gu6b, 162 

Sulu. S S,I,22, 11.21 

Sudeta = supajyeshtha, S S 50 

Sii\n8i, Amb B , 20 

Se \7c\velk,, 24, Gp passim 

Sekbiya, V 1? , 22, 25 

Sogunen, S S 1 , 16 

Senen, Amb B,30, senaya, xb 44, from kshana ? cf saena 
Set as 9x011, Iv. J , 65 
Set.D 1,3 

Setuwam as 9V6t'\karma, Amb B, 3, 7 
Seda sa 9iglira, Kavy , X , 91 
Scdagaem ss eakndagatni, Kavy XIII , 80 
Sena as a9ani, Maled honu, Chr, 09 
Sena « siua, Kavy , XIII , 27 
Seuaoga, Gp B , 8 
Senasun, P. P, 32 = 9ayaDa3ana 
Semm (mod. scDlmal, Mah A. 

Senexn, L V X A. Gp B, 16 , Ii. P, 3 , Thup L P, III, 4 
Senehasa, ‘ to love/ Nam , 270 , Kavy , XIII , 29 
Scraa = 9lesbman, Ab , 41 

Semen, ‘ slowly/ S S I .roodemhemin = kslicmena 
Semera s= Camara, Gutt, 23 
Semehi, P P P, 13 , D 1 , 14 = Kshamv 
Scyek,P P P,34, Gp B,7 

Soym, P P , 2 , Amb A . 41 Instr of se = cbaya later beyin, 
comp Maled biyeni, ‘shadow/ Cbr, 06 
Soygjn = Caityagin, Amb A , 6 
Sora = corn, I^vy , X, 98 
Sollaraa, ‘play' 

Sexvomin, P P. 30, sexyiyae, P P, 35 

Sewel — Sewala, Ab , 690 

Ses = 9lraba, Kavy V , 26, cf bis 

Q 6038 0 



208 


Siriwat, Dcwanajrala. 

Siriru = ^arlro, K. J., Cl ; P. P., 30. 

Siliileklta, Gp. B., 12 ; S. M. B., 25. 

Sil = Ucr. 

Sllu — ^ikhu, Sub., 147 ; Xam., 22 ; Kavy., X., 1^2. 

Silunii = Siklianriyaka. 

Siwat, “stitclicil,” S. S. I., 22. 

SiValu = .Singfiifi, XSra, 141. 

Siwi =s clmwi, Kavy., II., 4, 

Shvi^uja, Koita. 

SzTrim, Slab. A, cf. biiVCTjaw.n, to cover. 

Siwilad<lha^*a, Nelt 

Sivnj, “ four,” Wad. TLup. L. P., HI., 2. 

Sitt'innaeduni, Nam., 104 ; K. J., 107. 

Siwuraneli = Sukumriro, Nmn., 243 ; Kfivy., XII., .'52. 
Si^rumn"-.!, Gp. B , 8 ; Galasnc, 5 ; Bank. l5., F. P. s: caturanga. 
Siwurn = clvarn, Amb. B.. 16 ; P. P., 36, 40. 

Sh = J . 22. 

SU s= tuecba, Ab., 098; P. P., 37; cf. tnccba, Item., L, 204; 
E. II. chOcb, llocnilc, 92. 

SisTifa a vln, aiviranawl s= saucar, Gp. C., 2 ; Wanclar.. 2 : Kuan. 
D.,23; S. S CLXI. 

SUi as Gull., 120 ; K. J., 128 ; Nam., 37. 

Sisna, ^''sic, S. S. I., 22. 

Silii as ^lakdiiia, cf. suTiga. 

Siluna, sleep, » svapna. 

Sihiya as smrlU, remembrance, Nam., 73 ; Kavj*., XIIT., 5 1. 

Sl « siniba, “ lion,” S. S. I., 1 ; Kant, 273 ; Krtty., XIII.. 33 j 
Hew., I., 29. , 

Sima, “boundnt^',’' Op. C, 0.; Amb. B., 55. 

Stni ss cTrl, Ab., 040. 

Siwada, plough sliarc, Ab., 44S; Sisacma = Ka-sikainrua, Culli* 
valion Ab., 445. 

Snuka = ^ulkn, toll, Ab., 356. 

Suuga = ^lak'iliiia, cf. fiili!. 

Sunamln, * lienriiig,' S. S. I., 22. 

Stila, Amb. A., 13 s= sfilra. 

Sulla or rutata, V. 1’., 19, 25. 

Suila = «;vcta, K. J., 05. 

SuJano = Sujaim, G P. 

Su.la*qi r= Btulaksba, Amb. A., 43 : cf. Bwladna. J. B. A. S., VIII.. 
203. 

Sudum, P. P., 40; Gp.C.,6; 14.'>b,2; 168,18. 

San = cblnna, * liroken.' S. S., 57 ; Sunturu, a S.. 30 ; Simbiin, 
Kftcl. 

Surm. ‘ Amb. B., -47 ; Maird. Imni, Chr., 59. 

Suiiujnriyam, Ka^L 
Soj>a!i3M, 54; P. P.,.4. 



2U9 


Surabulu, bark, Nam , 115, Ab, 442 

Suru = 9ura, S S L, 22 

Sul — 9ulSr, S S X, 22 

Sulakula = svalanknta, Quit , 233 

Sulaguija = Calangam, Jfah 1, 146 

Sulatiga, Nam , 25 ; Kavy , XIH , 37 = calaka 

Snlu, * small, ^ K J, 136 

Sxilu = 91I1, Elavy , II , 8 , G1 Dh., 109 

Saw'a = Sukba. 

Suwaudatel, Ruan D , 24 = sugandhatela 
Suwapat, "Wanddr, 7 

Suwaae = 9ukha9as, R. D 11 , Suwasen Kaebg, B , 4 , 
Eatagaha, A., 30 

Suwahasa = 9atasabasraya, K. J , 46 

Suwamm =s swamin, 158,5 

Susum, 'breath,* aa?ma, ‘ breathing,’ Eavy , XI , 27 

SuauJ, S L, 90 

Susu, Qutt, 162 

Sulu, S S.I,22, 11,21 

Sudeta == stipajyeshtlia, S S 50 

SQwisj, Amb. B, 20 

Sa Wewelk, 24, Gp passim 

Sekhiya, P P , 22, 25 

Sogunen, S S L, 16 

Senen, Amb B , 80 , senaya, ib 44, from ksbana ? cf saena 
Set ss 9lati, K J , 55 
Set,D 1,3 

Setuwam = 9velakanna, Amb B, 8, 7 
Seda ss 9lglira, Kavy , X , 91 
Sedagaem s= sakndagarai, Kavy XIII , 80 
Sena = agani, l^Ialed honu, Cbr , 09 
Sena s= sina, Kavy , Xllt, 27 
Senanga, Gp B , 8 ^ 

Senasun, P P , 32 = 9ayanasana. 

Senim (mod. senimal, Mab A. 

Senem,L. Y. K. A. Gp B, 15 , L. P, S , ThSp L P,II7,4 
Senehasa, * to love,’ Nam , 270 , Kavy , XIII , 29 
Serna = 9leshman, Ab, 41 

Semen, ‘ slowly,’ S S J , modern hemm = kshemena 
Semera = Camara, Gatt , 23 
Semehi, P P P, 13, D 1,14 = Kshama 
Seyek, P P P,34, Gp B,7 

Seym, P P, 2 , Amb A., 41 Instr of se =: cbaya, later hejin, 
comp ilaled hiyeni, 'shadow/ Chr, 66 
Seygin = Caitjmgin Amb A , 6 
Sera = cora, Xv\y , X, 98 
Sellama, ‘play* 

Sevrumin, P P,30, sewiyae, P P,35 

Sewel = Sevrala, Ab , 690 

Ses = 9TrHba, Kavy V , 26, cf sis 

Q 6038 ° 



210 


Sc.snwar, Amb. A., }5, “ tho rest** =s scsawrinuval. 

Scssawun, “ remaintler/’ P. P., 33. Alwis. Contr. or. Lit, I. 122. 
Seben, Gp. A, 18; F. P.B.8 = wsyen, comp. Iloni., I., 2 ID (h for y 
ill cliaya). 

Selu = Sarika, S. S. II., 21,cf. saclo. 

So fehade, I’arawis, 72, ilald. lilycna, cf. hevvana. 

SOya =s chayu, K. J., 297. 

SunuyO, sleeper, S. S. II., 21. 

Solw, S. S. 1., 22. 

Somnas, Anib. B., S = Somanass.i. 

Soramaru = carmakfim, “ shoemaker,” Ab.. .jOS ; comp. Pischel zu 
Hem., I., b. 
f Soynnawfi, to seek. 
tSoyu P. P. P., G4 ; Wewelk . 15, 10. 

Sora = com, Gp. A, 21 ; Wewelk, 12; Tliup., IV., Galriiul.i, 7 
(138). ■ ■ , 

Sowas, Amb. A. 41, land fees. 

Sohona = 8us."ina, “ a cemetery,” AI> , 105. 

So]o3\vnna, Ainb A, 4, “ the sixteciitii.” 

So s srotas, S. S. I., 22. 

Saeka, Gp. B., 14 ss ^afika. 

Sacta, "sixty," Kacl. 

Sacligim, Mali. A mod. Imefi'fim. 

SactlaUina, AU. 312, attendant* of tlic women. 

Sacija, stroop, Gp. A., 8, Nam., 242 = cai.idn. 

SacytjA, bni^lnvood, S. S. I., JO. 

&et> 1). I., 4 = chattm. 

Sflclt, Cluster., S. S. I.. 22, Nuin., 115. 

Sactra = aatra (above), Tliu|)., Vlll. 

Sneilahtll, S. S. 1., 22, " face.” 

SnodioaMn, to decorate. It D., 13 ; Wneh'pim.a, Dond , II. 

Sacdu Mtjita knlfiwu, K. J., 44 ; Suctla, Gj>, li, y (?). 

Sac<lol =• ^’irduln, Num., 1.38 ; Ab, 611. 

Baena = K*>liona, Kuvy’., VI., 57 ; cf. sonca. 

Saciiocwiyac, P. 1'., 47. 

S-icndae, Amb, A,, 12. 

S-sepal =r s.'unpattl. Gp. C’.. 17, 24 ; IVond.ir., 10. 

S.nci)U s= c.m-nun. S. S , 57. 

SaciMe = Minir.a (I). Ab. 127, truth. 

SacmaJa s= eanmurjann, sweejdng. S. S. I.. 22; comTi. 
baemaendac. 

S-ietti'i r: K\r»mi, B. S 1 , 22; Ab, SO. 

S.-ver«fU'n"lti, fniiu faniMi;p4, Amb, A., IC, 22. 54. 

Bf.etna» li, ** v>lilp.'' Gl. l»li, 141. 

Barra = KivU.Trn, .\K. 115; N.ain., Ibl. 

Ba'-rada = rininijoa,.^' I* I. 

.‘^arrn.-un, AmK K, 5, 

Kicrawil. G|>. 11, 12 

Sarnt. "edorned.-.^J .*^.57; AvWraraliananu 
Bterutna i: wrva r-jriip. haem.-;* 



211 


Saela, " publicity " 

Saela = ^asta. Sielasiya, a vbo sala<5anawri Dond (1G3), comp 
salamki'i m TinviLram t Piscliel Beitr , VI , 94 
Saeli . S S 1 , 22 = Khah (?), Ab , 456 
Saew = (upa Gutt , 240 
Saebaenawa “it is fit’ 

Saeliaesi = 9 akjasmiha, Gutt, 40 

Sae = caitya, Gp B , 11 and margin , Amb B , 51 , 145 h 11 

Saesi =s 9 "istrJ, S S , 12 

SaC'sisi ^ asimbarisbi, Parains, 140 

Hnka, crest, S S 1 , 14 

Hnkuru, sugar, S S 1,22, Malcd baburu Giay 17 
Handa = ^abda, sound, S L, 100, ICarj , VII , 27 
Hatak, P P 24 
Hadanwa, ^^sadh 

Hadaranarra s=; sajjbayani "to say, P P, 24 , see Incdaerum, 
haedaenjae, P P, 47 

{ Hanika=Pali sanikam, ‘ quickly,” Hem , I 149 , comp lianeki, 
Kem Kawi stud., 128 

Hanek, P P , 21 , Abbay, A , 19 , Hanbi, P P, 31, 34 , Nlm , 
20 , comp mod Sinb bamki ss Skt qanais 
Handana. = acliadana, 158, 14 , comp haenda 
Handiya =s sandhi 
Hftpakananra “ to bite,” V car 
Ham ss carman , Maid han Graj, 20 
Hamanawa “to blow,' a-' dbml 

Haiuara, Hab Wadig (09), Wewelk, 12, cf Hindi liamara ss 
asmakam, Hoerale, 50 
Hamala, breezo, S $,.67 

Haniana, Hab Jlab R (0) , Galwi (54) , Mill (20) 

Harauda Mill (20) \ 

Hamiya =s svamika Tj 3«, 15 
Hamuwa = aaiuraukba S S,35, Parai\is, 155 
Hambu = nclma, Arab A 11, 28 , Mali 205 
Haraka s= ^akaara S S , 57 
Hala, left behind, J B A S, 1873, p 78 
Hawasa, eaemng. Maid., baann, Graj, 15 
Havvurudu = samaatsara, Amb A, 4, 30 , Gp A , 8 , E P B,4, 
Maid aharu, Chr 
Has = sasya, Amb A , 20, 47. 

Hasa = hasa P P , 40, 41 
Hasala = agraya, K J , 104 
Haakaru = hastakara, Amb A , 48 
Hasan = gasana, H 1 , 11 
Haawunta, R D, 17, cf J P,hnda 
Ha also, S S II , 21 , P P , passim 
Hika =s gushka, S S , 22 
Hikmiya, Her 

Hikmun, S S , 22 , Hikroawa P P» 51, comp ikmuii 

Hikmae, P P , 25, 50 

Hmgaoawa = bbiksh, cf sin^jajnna 



212 


Hinguru, S. S. L, 22, comp^ inguru. 

Hindaw^ v^sad Aet. B., 8 ; S. iL A., 32 ; P. P., SO, comp, ianawa. 
Hidiwidina = ^ucivijjlianam, Ab. 528. 

Hinimagga, stairca.se, Ab., 216. 

Hinda'jTuyeya, Kong. D. & 

Hindina, P. P., 42 j L. P., 4,6 ; Wael. 8. 

Hindima, Her. 

Hindae, Amb. A., 22, 41 ; P. P., 3L _ - . . 

Hinwa, Gerund of tlie causative of binnawa mod. innawa. 

Hi = 9 ita, arrow. 

Himakaelun, Kavy. XII., 15. 

Himata, Nagirikanda (97). 

Himi, E. P. A., 9 ; Amb. A, 11 ; Galanda, 2 (138); Gp. A, 5 ; C. 23 ; 

s* swanii, old, bami J. C. A. S., 1879, p. 18. 

Himbul = ^alraali, S. S. I., 22. 

Hiya, Gp. G., 7. 

Hiyawura, quiver, Ab., 389. 

Hira = caraka, prison. 

Hiragena, Nltinigb, 0. 

Hirageya, Ab., 58. 

Hira as surya, sun, L. V. K. B. ; P. P. P., 12 ; Hirnwara, Nam., 
102 ; K. J., 185 ; bira Gp. A, 13. 

Hiri = rekha, D. 1 , 11 ; Kavy., II., 28; Niim., 250. 

Hila zs cludra. 

Hiwi ss uswu, Gutt, 207 ; Gp. A 2; Kavy. XI., 31. 

His K tuccha, cf. sis dialed, bus Cbr., 54. ' - . 

fHis ss 9 lraba. Amb. B., 53. 

1 Hisa, head, Nfira., 199 ; cf. isa. 
mhila = 9 i 9 ira, S. B. H. A., 1. 

Huna, = cun;a. 

Huna, bamboo, Sub., 144. 

Hunu, P. P., 13, 21. 

Huta, Hub , 7. 

Iluda, r. P., 8, 28. 

Hun (?), 129, 4, comp. ban. 

Hun s= sinna, D. I., 24; Gp. B. 10; P. P., 29 ; Arab. A, 41 
L. V. K. A. ; Kan. X?., iT. 

Hunu, sbarpncas, Nam., 245. 

Hunu, loosening, Nam., 247. 

Hunu, hearing, Nam. 248. 

Huinbalia =s tumb-asa. 

Huya s= sutm, thread, Ab., 523; Slaled. ui Clir., C9. 

Hula s= salJa, Ab., 393 ; Sob., 144. 

Hum = 9 ukara. S. S. I., 22. 

Heubumba s= Oettumba, Mali. II., 80. 

Hct Ami*. A, 49 s= beta reason! Heyin ss hetuna ib, 19; 

S. 11. A, 18 ; J. C. A S , 1870, p. 27. 

Hcna (v. 1. for yabana, Ainb. A, Ilk P. P., 22 ; Nam., 28 : 

Gl. l)b., 30 ; S. S.. CLX, S. B. M. a, 2 . 
llendarawaewa, Mab. I., 140 =» Bundaravaj)i 



21S 


Heptota = ^ubhatirfcba, S S , 23 , Nam , 88 
Hepwibara Mali II , 95 

Hemawab, Ruan. D (21) !4, comp Mab , 108 aod 202 , tbe correct 
reading IS Hematnah, comp Da^h IV, 9 (new edition), and it 
IS identical with Ratnavkli, the gold or pearl string, comp 
Mall Mil, 118, 2G0, 389, Ratna\7ali-(5ic) in an inscr at 
Ruanir Pagoba (145 b 8) 

Herana =a samauera, S S, 57, P P , 25 
Hela = Sinbala, Parawisand, 40. 

Helenawa, to shake, S L, 101 , Helu, dropped, S S , 67. 

Hell = phalika, Gutt, 42. 

Hewana = cblya, cf se 

Hela, Gp A 9 , cf belamm, Mab , 67, 7 , 88, 83 

Helmal (bela Parawis, 8^, Amb B, 35 ; tf helmaeb Nam , 91 

Hota, snout = ^unda, comp, Maled. Hoilii, proboscis, Clir, 63 

Honda, Wandr , 6 

Hof> P P passim, Gp, B, 10 

Hot (pilima) reclining, D I 24, comp ot 

Honawa, to repose, Ql , Db , 41,. 

Hobaneyae, S il, 21, v^^ubb 

Hopalu, Nam , 121, Ab , 573 

Holwanawa s= SoUanawa v^cal, Gutt, 157 

Hackilt ss sanbucita, Gutt, 42 

Haekkoe}!, Buan, D, 2G, Mated heki 

Haeta s shasbti 

Haettacua s saptati 

Haeda = 5raddlia, Kavy II , 38 

( Haedaei'um s sajjbayana. 

Hacdacriyac, P P , 47 See hadaranavra 
Haenuna, Gp, C, 16 

fHacnda — acbadana, K. J , 51, 61 , Amb , A , 10, cf , bandatu 
•< Haendae, P P, 31 
I Haendi, D 1,10, liaenda WaeL 
Ilaendinae, Wewelk, 30 

Hacmae, S M, Ran, D , P P, 25, 88, Gp, A, 18, 22; cf, 
Hucmae and nemo. 

♦Haemacndae, Amb, B, 52, Nam, 233, KaaT* X, 101 , comp 
saemada. 

Hacmbu, 'Mab , B 

Haemma, P. P , 23, “ to be killed,” (?), cf , bacmma, V'bandb 

Haerae, I) 1 , 6 , Ran , D , 2 , Gp , A , 16, Haeraemyae, P P , 6 1 

Eaonya, Amb , A , 25, 68 

Haeb, stream, S S CLX,conip aeli 

Haelwl a= vrlbi, iiiH paddy. 

Hacbya = cati 

Haemao s= saeruma, ic, satva, Amb, A, 36; Tbup, L P 
VITI , 1 later Aema, Kavj , IX , 70 , 

Ladaru, P P , 39 , Num , 150 , Maled , ladaring, Cbr , 47 
Lawae, P P , 46 , cC aTralawija 
Labanna, S B M B , 3 
l^abinua pawu, Amb , A, 39 



214 


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF INSCRIPTIONS. 


Almmketopatia, 169. 
AngnltAoIavribura, 67fl. 
Attanajalii, 124. 

Anuradbapura, broken top of a 
pillar, 128. 

Antiradhapura, slab, 129. 
Andarawaewn, 9. 

Abhayawaewa, HI. 

; 157. 

Aminiceija, 56. 

Ambastbal^ 121. 

Alu Tribara, 88. 

Alutgalwibaro, 52, 

InRinimitiyO} H3. 

Unkapotana, 48. 

Ilukawela, 132. 

Ulonipabuwa, 107. 

Eppawala, 125. 

Erij’dTa, i2a. 

dla\Taew.a pan&ala, IIG. 

Ottapnwa, 60. 

Aeta^4Ap3auila, 118. 
AetAbacnduwa, 109. 
Aetawlfn;roll»wa, 1 17. 
Acmbulamba, 34. 

Acinliaem, 141. 

Aewiriynpattii, lOG. 
llatug.alui"nlge,'155. 

Knltmgam, 76. 

Kantalai, l51a, 

Kan^c^ilinra, 134. 

Ivabaellalcno, 40. 

Knrambagala, 2la. 
TiuiaagdiwiVani.’Vi. 
luibandagala, 71. 

Kirinde, 57. 

Kiriwibum, 152. 

ITuccbawelii, 103. ' 

Kadumiriaa, 164. 
Kumbukwacwapansala, 63. 
KongollAcw.i, 1 12. 
Kottanvlcimbiyiiwa, 46. 
Kondukukubgonui, 95. 
3\c4a«acTapiyangal«, 48. 

Karkawo, 13. 

Ivaprngab, 170. 

Kaolani, pillar, 127. 

IvBctani, slab, 1 62. 

KaclIgalLn, 1525. 


Gft^aladcm wibara, 168. 
Ganekan^, 39. 

Gone trihara, 44. 

Ganc wihara, 90. 
Galandilwata, 138. 

Galapata, 165. 

Galasne, 144. 

Galkowila, 08. 

Galgamiiwfl, 30. 

Galpotfl, 148. 

Galmadu^fa, 100. 

Gallena, 2. 

Galwiharn. 54. 

Galwihara Polonnaruwn, 137. 
Gallaen-D, 47. 

Galwaewa, 50. 

Giribawa, 30. 

Gacta1agama> 33. 
Gaeracndigala, 104. 
Tanifflannkarida, 55. 
Tnlpilijfiwoj 37. 

Tiniaragttla. 12. 
Tlssaina!jar5ffia,^4. 

Tonignla, 1, 

Tlialagaln, 62.^ 

Tbiiparnma frieze, 151, 

I pillar, 147. 

Dambulla, 3. 

143. 

Dijagama, 85. 

Dijabacta, 48. 
Duoaraa^dalakan^a, 15. 

Pcbclgalpansala, 19. 
DcranlamabTibilra, 18. 

Dcnuilamunai 103. 
Dcwagirlya, 53. 

Pc^nagala, 135. 

Dondra, 159* 

163- 

J*ayinawcll8» 99. 
Kaytndana^a, 101. 
NaygaUviliira, “3. 
Nfigirikan^a, 97. 

Nn^jmn, 79. 

Nowamwaewn, 130. 
Nettiibanda, 29. 
Patnlngawagabi, 14. 
Patalunniillu. 45, 



Padiwil, 140, 

Pandoras Nuwara, 133. 
PaaiklanLulam, 35. 
Paramakanda, 25. 
Picchandiyawa, 84. 
'Pidurugab, 43. 
Piligama, 77. 

Pujagala, 49. 
P^yanknlam, 139. 
Petiyagala, 41. 
Penyanktilam, 7. 
Potubandana, 48. 
Ponikulam^ 
Polonnaru^va, 119. 

246. 

156. 

PaepUiyana, 160. 
Badagiriya, 68. 
Bataiagodalawa, 166. 
BadoUa, 48. 

Bmpokana, 80. 
BiUagala, 93. 

Makul&na, ISO. 
SlayiUgastota, 120. 
filarod.'takadawala, 32. 
Mahaknlattiewa, 110. 
3Xm«ti, 123. 

Mibintale, 20. 

28. 

114. 

115. 

Mulgirigala, 74. 
MQIagfimo, 83. 
SIneddaUorufvs, 142. 
I^aenikdaoanuwars, 126. 
'Ya^abalena, 86. 

Yapaha, 81. 
Batgallaegnma, 64. 


Batmalagala, 6. 
Racaginwihjra, 42. 
Bankot Bagoba, 150. 

151. 

Batabhawih^, 154. 
Bajangace, 65. 
BoaiiTTaeU Bagoba, 5. 

21 . 

145. 

1456. 

158. 

Lankatilaka, 167. 
Labugala, 82. 
WaD&upawibaro, 153. 
W.id/gaJfl, 69. 
IVirandagoda, 26. 
Wiharagalo, 11. 
Wfgamuwa, 70, 
Wfiragala, 58. 
WellangoUa, 102. 
Wewelkaetiya, 122. 
Wessagiriwibara, 27. 
Wtheragala, 76. 
Welierabaecdigolo, 22. 
SaadagiriTribSra, 23. 
Situlpawihara, 16. 
Siyambalawaew^a, 103. 
Scgelcsa, 131. 

ScrnwiTva, 38. 

Seasoruya, 91. 

Hecdn^a, 96. 

Habaraoe, 61. 
Hamarillapaosala, 92. 
Hamillagala, 59. 
Halambagalft, 66. 
Hioguregnl.1, 78. 
Hucapabu, 89. 
Burugalawatta, 87. 


NAMES OF PEBSONS. 


Abba Salamoiraa, 54, 56, 57, 59, 
69. 

Arab, 56. 

A9oka, 24. 

Amandflganiini, 39. 
llaNaga, 26, 27,29. 

Bdaya ni., 56. 

Clara, 55, 

K^a^^anna Tissa, 26, 29, 43. 
Kassapa I., 36. 

Kassapa V., 54, 55, 56 57. 


Kassapa VI., 51, 58. 
Kanit^ba Tissa, 29. 

Khallata Naga, 26. 

Kirtiscna, 60. 

Gajababu, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. 
G4ne9a, 70. 

Gamini, 25, 26, 29, 35. 

Gob, 54, 52. 

Gofbabbaya, 54. 

Cettha, 31. 

Jcl^ba Tissa, 13. 



216 ' 


Jjanipala, 62. 

Dappula II., 68. » 

Dappuja V., 47, Si. 

Dutth^amini, 25, 26, 32, 34, 56. 
Dathanagn, 47. 

Dathappablinti, 47. 

DcTOoampija Tisso, 21, 26, 31. 
DoLatomataya, 30. 
llhammj^oka, 62. 
Dliarroaparakrama, 70, 71. 
Nfiginilapalliya, 62. 

Ka\a, 55. 

Ki9(aii3ka Malla, 65, 67, 63, 64, 

65, 67, 69. 

Pan^uwasa, 22, 29, 59. 

Pan^Ita Pnrakramabalui, 71. 
Parakramabahu I., 63, 60, 61, 62, 

66, 69. 

Parakramabaliu VI., 70, 72. 
Bnddhadaan, 43. 

Bbaddaailla, 30. 

Bliatika TisaJi, 29, 31, 33. 
Bhawanckab&bu IV., 72. 
Bhawanokabahu VI., 70. 
Mabanaga, 24, 26, 29, 31, 38, 42. 
MahaculA Tissa, 26. 

Mabid^lbika Slahanilga, 27. 
MalhkflNaga, 27, 29..- 
lilaijbiffla, 28, 37, 38. 

Ala'lilndn, 30, 42, 43, 57. 
Mabakaccaynna, 38. ~ 
jHakalao Jclfba Tis^a, 45, 6 1. 
blabaksssapa, 71. 

MabaaCDa,27, 30, 31,34,43,45,58. 


Meglia'waiitia AbbaTa,27, 30, 81, 32. 

33, 39, 42. 

Moggallana, 27, 62. 

Moggallputta Ti«sa, 62. 

Yatthala, Tisaa, 62. 

Pakkhaka, 65, 

Ilohinika Gamini, 31. 

Lag wy-nya Singa Kit, 68, 69. 
La^dbatUsa, 25. 

L.ambakanna, 30, 54. 

Li]a\'ratt, 69. 

Waokanoalka TUsa, 27. 
Wattagamini, 24. 25, 26,27, 49, 62. 
IVndiirag, 57. 

Wahaba, 28, 31, 42. 

Wikramnbfibii IL, 66. 

Wijaya, 21, 22, 59, 70. 
Wijay.ibaliu, 60, 61, 70, 71. 
Wijayabahu VII., 72. 

Wisliriu, 69, 7l. 
Wlrapar5kramababii, 71. 
Wirababu, 66. 

Sangbatissa, 30, 64. 

SaDghabodbi, 30, 64. 

SiHkamSrn, 82. 

SiHuisv Malla, 66, 68. 

Siri Sanga bo, 64. 

Siladcwl, 31 (mother of Dunlin- 
g5mhii Slab, p. 150, cnllcd Sudd- 
hadevi Lassen IL, 435.) 
Soincdh&, 70. 

Sena, 58. 

Sena SUamegIm, 65. 

Skanda, 46. 


GEOGRAPHICAL IKDEX. 


Acngirika, 25, 40. 

Ac-anagnm, 25, 40. 

Acawikct-i, 40. 

Abhnjufpri, 69. 

Ablnya wibfirn, 27. 

Aripo rirer, 22, 23. 

AmWtbnl.i, 30, 42, 62, 61, 66, 57. 
Ambalantolft, 31. 
Atnlmtlbokolilcna, 39. 
AbiwB(Jamanftwawl, 42. 
AUwawiya, 42. 

AriUbn p.al)bita, 42. 

Aotmaduvra, 48, 56. 


lUngoaw&sa, 65. 
Isurtitnuniyo, 83. 
UpatisjanuTrarn, 22, 23. ' 
Upiwladonija, 28. 
Upalabljaka, 40. 
Utarapurn, 40. 
Udakirhrila, 44, 45, 
UawacwB, 66. 

Uda Tj*n piriwena, 67. 
Uddlinkandamwibira, 67. 
Erijan-a, 21, 36. 
Erokawila, 36. 
ElagamuiTa 60. 



217 


victaMcnflmri, 20 
Aelpi^ij a, GO 
Kappuknn laia, 3^ 

Kantalii, 22, 63, 67. 

Kand; , 35, 63 
Ivattrigara 29,45,60 
Kinnile, 29, 40, 43 
lv\mibwk'\n 29 
Kah'itaga’sdigiUga, 30, 34 

KoggaH, 3 1 

ICeppitiyitt *», 3o, 36, 51 
Ivpkir iwn, 10, 41, 58 
Kubi.i 41 
ILidiflrog'iin'i, 45 
Knlu Gangi, 43 
Kornlo^a '\Tihara, 48 
liegalh, 49 
Kilawaewa, 49 
Knlauci, 50 
Karnkttnwaewa, 51 
KuUttbarapi, 55 
IColpattra, i5 
Kalingti 66 
KiriTVib ira, 66 
GoQagnmaktitittho, 22 
Gnuda, 23 

Gamiiuh'sawac'fra, 36 
Golag imn, 27 
Gondtgunio, 27, 46 
Gawata, 27, 46 
Go^J^amuwn, 27 
GalenUnduTnw've^'a, 28 
Gnlgnmuwfl, 34, 40, 47 
Gitclgamu, 55 
GnlutiM, 57. 

Girma«, 57 

Cakkfldhanki wiliun, 24 
Jaffm, 34 3o, 51 
Jayawaewa, 27 

27. 

Caityagiri\\ihanJ, 56, 67. 

CIula^>, 63 

Ciltahpibbatn, 27, 46 
TnmTOaBa Ituwata, 21, 22, 23 
Tammana tota, 22, 23 
Tamblagam, 22, 23 
Tnncomalee, 22. 

TiBtic%el\j, 23 
Tnutrimalei, 23 
Toni^h, 24, 40 
Tavrinkiyanagara, 25 
Tanguitnrapirnveiia, 27 
Tissamabarama, 24, 28, 31,43,44, 
53, 68 

TuUdb irawiketa, 29, 39 
Timbinw aewa, 58 
Q e03S 


DuralJssinaeBa, 25, 31. 
Daksliijiawilian, 27 
DclielgornuBa, 24, 51, 71. 
I>e«ti"i.vralliyi, 35 
Dagoma, 36 
Dijntiin, 36 
Dacci Halmillawn, 40 

Dttbbdlawapi 47 

Doudra. 69,71,72 
Naggadipa, 24, 29 
^^ugam^b^ wilinra, 26, 27, 67. 
Nagaryaniinn, 31 
NaginkaxidJ, 34, 51 
Nunaraknlawa 5 35, 51 (J E A, 
S VIT , 191 ) 

Nalanda, 36, 58 
inkwaoviB, 36 
Ivakapawatawibara, 40 
jSikflTvcntiya, 43, 60 
Ixatt mi kovil, 53 
ISilattclh, 53 
rviiwajATvaewi, 60 
Pacina, 35 
Panda, 24, 68 
PAtaningala, 28, 23 
Pobbatunmainhara, 28 
Putnlam, 38, 40 
Pijalaka, 10 
Pvbnl, 42, 58, 63 
Pibitiipam lo 

ppnyankuhm, 53 
P'\Ufl^l^evn\'x, 58 
Polpil’gmn, 28 
Bnnianoginya, 84 
Buttal'i, 39 
Rnlnlla, 38 

Binge ^imnniya, 57. 
Mabawacligaugu, 22 
Blalnattn oya 22 
bbidiwiccKi, 23,29, 31, 50,55,58 
Mioaar, 23 
iirintotn, 23 
Mabind/ulipa, 24 
ilagaroB, 24, 43 
Mfllingnlkadwabi, 25, 43. 
Mulagutika, 27, 30, 39 
Hljouni i korle, 35 
Magool korie, 35 
Slneaikdana Nun an, 58, 59 
Rlcsdiyawa, 36, 37, 42, 43, 51 
ilekiccncwa, 40 
ilaliarukan’ae'vva, 41 
JI* Eliya, 51 
Jluhnnnaru, 51 
JlnhJnikanaen'a, 52 
ilanaivaesara, 53 

P 



218 


M'lnihJr'ikn, 68 
Mulungannweliera, 59 
Intawatta 49 
TatfhilwiJijr'i, 2G 
"1 apahukflT\da 28. S8, 57 
Rohann, 22, 25, 31 CG, GO, C- 
ix'ijatileD'i'wiham, 30 
Rataauua, 61 
Eatmala tank, 27 
Eahagallaka, 25 
Eanne, 44, 45 
Eul a^nwacwn, 35 51 
Lanka up iraraa 42 
^anka'n’ib^ra, 42 
Lank igiri, 42 
Lanl uraraa, 2" 

Lenadom, So, 5R 
Lila 23 

IVelWe, 23 35 64 
ihirabija 27, 30, 39 


Mihatagili, 2S 
big«i, 28, 36, 66 
StpuLubma, 28 
SehcaltjB, 33 
Sabliaj>ur'\, 47 
SaouiDflkutft pabbata, 2 
SiItTaturoi, 22 
Sopparaka, 24 
Sandagin d igoba, 26 
Hambantoti, 22, 24, 28, 31, 40, 
43, 44, 46, 67 
Hactadagt 68 
Ucttipola, 59 
Ilorownpotana, 31, 56, 58 
Hiiipitija, 37, 08, 52 
Ilal'waetuna oyn, 37. 

Hioginipitiyt 56 
Hnnupahuwvbara J U A S VII , 
229 


ABBREVIATIONS 

la -the Aiphabetical List of Words 


I — Bool 3 

Mat I s= Mall iran a cb 1 — 37 ctl by Tumour Colombo 1837 
jiabll s iIaliaTau«a 2iid jort, ed bj II Samnogala tmil BotUTvan 
tudawo, Colombo, 1877 

S S SB Sidat Sangaraara cd by James Alms Colombo, 1852 
Nam = Namavraliya, ed by Cornelia Alwi«, Colombo, 1858 
Ab ^ Abhidbannppadjpika, eJ by lVa«kadu‘n'a Subhuti, Colombo 
Gutt = Gnttila 
Kuvy s= Kavya^ekhara 
K J s= Ku«a J^tnka 

.Tat I , II = llie Jataka, ed by V Fau«boIl, Vols I II, Loudon, 
1875-79 

L M J E =IjCitrage2iir GranimalAdos Jaiunprukrit TonE Muller, 

Etrfin, mo 

3Iikl = Miklosicb tJber die Mundartcu u HonJerungen d 
Zigeuner Europas lVien>18T2 

Cbnsf js'VOcabnlary of tlie Malcdire language by Cbnstopber m 
Journal of the Eojal Asiatic Society, Vo! VI 
Gray = The Maldive I«Iand5 by A Gray, m Joumi of the Eoynl 
A«miic Socitta, new series vol s p 173 ff 
Bhag = Em Fragment desJJliagaaati aoa A Vebennden Abliand 
lungcn dci Beiliner Academic, 1865, s 369-444, 
1666,8 155-352 

Ilala = Snptnfatakam des Dala brag a Webei, Leipzig, 1870 
ATpeeb = Slficcliaka^ika brag TStenzIcr 

Kern Agoka s= Over do Jnartellmg dcr Zuidebjkc EucUhislea en 
do Gcdenkslukkcn aim A^oka tica IJnddbist door 
II Kent Amsterdam, 1823 



21D 


Bcamcs, I , II , HI = Compantne Grftminftr of the mod-.rn Aryan 
Lm»nngea, bj John Bcames 

K. S = Jlnlpi «utm of BhnlnAahu, el by 11 Jacol i, Leipzig, 1879 
Uem = Ilt.mac'imlr'i Gmmmatik dcr I’rikritsprachcn hr«g toq 
K ichartl 1 *icc!k 1 Halle, 1877, 1880 
Niray = Niravainlijicnltam, ed S arren, Anisferdain, 1879 
S L = Saela Lihinyn Sandcci, od by W C Macready, Colombo, 

T, 18(i:> 

Paraiv = Pann-T 

Her = IIcnm«:kkh » (m-cpt ) 

31 S s= 7Hub«ikkha {in«cpt) 

Mil =: Milmilapnnln, cd by V Trcn‘'Lncr, London, 1880 
NiUn = jSltmigli'indtma, trnn«l by C Le Mc«uncr and Panahokka, 
Colombo, IS^^O 

S»th = Namamal i, by 11 asf.'*dnwa Subhuti, Colombo, 187C 
GI Dll =: The Dlamimpila with Smlirdcse trmdatioii, by 
H Dc^amUta Colombo, 1879 

Dcitr = Bezzonberger Bcitrige zur Kunle dcr indogcrmam«chcn 
fapracl cn 

Alw = Contributions to Sinhalese Grammar, by James Aim'*, 
Colombo, 1863 


IL— /nac) iptions 


Kett ss Nettukanla 
Hob =r Ilabanno 
Ti« 3 = Ti««araalijrimo 
Kir as Kinadc 

Gaj as Gajalahu & in^cr at the Roannacb Dagoba, 

hPli It s IMali I Itntmnla 

Sand ss Sandagiriwihara 

ALh = Meghawinna « in«cr at Mihintale 

Mnhak = 31alukahl(acwn 

E P s= Lllaiv aen a Pim<ala 

Act = AetawirogoUacno 

Amb = !Mahin h HI in'cr at AmbaslUah, Alilnnta 
Mayil = MaTll^g^sto^a 
Ing cs Ingmuniti}! 

AT. P = 11 adurng s jn«cr at Polonnnruwa 
S B M = Sin Sanga Bo’s inscr at Mihintalc 
Att s= Attanayula 
Abliay — Abhayawaewa. 

K M s; Kn«sapa V , inscr at Mibintnle 

llin = Minncn 

Kong = Kongollaewft 

IVcnelk = H ewelkaetiyi 

IVand = lYandarupawiliara 

P P = Parakramabaha’s inscr at Polonnarawa 

Gp = Gnlpota 

L V. K = Log H yaya Singa a inscr at Abbaj awac 
D I = Ki{ 9 aiAa Molla’s inscr at DambuUa. 

B D = „ „ „ at the Ituanwioli Da 

P P P = ,, „ at Polonnaruwa 

S M — Sibasa Slallas in«cr atPolonnaruwa 



< LOKDONt 

1 rated bj GtonoE E Btkv aad WittuM SroTnswoorr, 
Pnatet* to tbe Qae«n’» raost FicelUat 
For Her Sutioaerf Office 

[P 44—200—5/8*3 



