--- PAGE 1 ---
TROBNER'S  oriental  seri^. 
<is  an  acquaintance  with  the  Latin  and  Gre^eh  ni 
ago.  Immense  strides  have  been  made  within  or  so 
branches  of  learning;  Sanskrit  has  these 
pMology,  and  its  invaluable  ancient  literature  tWon^'"-’"”®® 
language  and  sacred  books  of  tlio  Zoroastrians  Lvc  b» . 
 !   the 
Assyrian,  and  other  records  of  the  remote  past  have  *^''1  ®®"l»tinn, 
group  of  scholars  speak  of  still  more  reconditelt,  r 
 ‘‘"<1  a 
ments ;   but  the  results  of  all  the  scholarshin  th-if  monu- 
subjects  have  been  almost  inaooessible  to  the  mihbv'  h  *'^®r-oted  to  these 
tained  for  the  most  part  in  learned  or  exnenl*?  , 
 con- 
out  the  numbers  of  scientific  periodicals  Mes  ""m  ®°®ttered  through- 
of  enterprise  which  does  themlXStedB  hal^T^®®  *  ^ 
eonstantly-mcreasing  want,  and  to  give  in  a’populM°!!™?f 
bensive  form,  aU  this  mass  of  knowledge  to  the  worii 
^Uicidn  in  pr^raiion, 
Post  Svo,  with  Map, 
THE  mDIAH  EMPIRE  :  ITS  HISTORY  PROPEP 
and  products.  ’ 
Being  a   revised  form  of  the  article  “India  "   m   «t  . 
remodelled  into  chapters,  brought  up’to  date  ®a“tteer,” 
the  general  results  of  i! 
How.  W.  W.  HIIOTEE,  C.S.I  CIT’  tttv 
""  Dire  ■’ 
“The  io  tbe  Government  of  India. 
ft  P«ve, 
arid  the  CYideiice  from  the  SiSna?  fr^T 
examined  by  the  Jiulif-  nf  has  been  for  ^ 
 ap, 
engaged. 
local  .  research  in  ^Idch  tlio  authS 


--- PAGE 2 ---
TRUBNMR^S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
THE  FOLLOWING  WORKS  HAVE  ALREADY  APPEARED:-- 
Third  Edition,  post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xvl~-428,  price  i6s. 
ESSAYS  ON  THE  SACRED  LANOUAG-E,  WEITINGS, 
AND  RELIGION  OF  THE  FARSIS. 
By  martin  HAUG,  Ph.D,, 
Late  of  the  Universities  of  Tubingen,  Gottingen,  and  Bonn  ;   Superintendent 
of  Sanskrit  Studies,  and  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  Poona  College. 
'  Edited  and  Enlarged  by  Dr.  E.  W.  WEST. 
To  which  is  added  a   Biographical  Memoir  of  the  late  Dr.  Haug 
by  Prof.  E.  P.  Evans. 
I.  History  of  the  Researches  into  the  Sacred  Writings  and  Religion  of  the 
Parsis,  from  the  Earliest  Times  down  to  the  Present. 
II.  Languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures. 
IIL  The  Eeiid-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis.  ' 
IV.  The  Zoroastrian  Religion,  as  to  its  Origin  and  Development.  '  ”   - 
“   ‘Essays  on  the  Sacred  Language,  Writings,  and  Eeligion  of  the  Parsis,'  by  the 
late  Dr.  Martin  Haug,  edited  by  Dr.  E.  W.  West.  The  author  intended,  on  his  rettjrn 
from  India,  to  expand  the  materials  contained  in  this  -work  into  a   comprehensive 
account  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  but  the  design  was  frustrated  by  his  untimely 
death.  We  have,  however,  in  a   concise  and  readable  form,  a   history  of  the  researches 
Into  the  sacred  writings  and  religion  of  the  Parsis  from  the  earliest  times  down  ro 
the  presentr-a  dissertation  on  the  lantiuages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures,  a   translation 
of  the  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis,  and  a   dissertation  on  the  Zoroas- 
trian religion,  with  especial  reference  to  its  origin  and  development.’' — Times. 
Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  viii. — 176,  price  7s.  6d. 
TEXTS  FROM  THE  BUDDHIST  CANOH 
\   ' 
 COJIMONLY  KNOWN  AS  “DHAMMAPADA.” 
Wit?i  Accompanying  Narratives. 
TrL«J'‘^ted  from  the  Chinese  by  S.  BEAL,  B.A.,  Professor  of  Chinese, 
^   ^  University  College,  London, 
The  Dhamnm^3!aras  by  the  Pali  Text  Edition,  as  edited 
by  Faushdll,  by  Max  Miiller’s  English^  '"’.d  Albrecht  Weber’s  German 
translations,  consists  only  of  twenty-six  chapters  or  sections,  whilst  the 
Chinese  version,  or  rather  recension,  as  now  translated  by  Mr.  Beal,  con- 
sists of  thirty-nine  sections.  The  students  of  Pali  who  possess  EausbolPs 
text  or  either  of  the  above-named  translations,  will  therefore  needs  want 
Mr,  ^Beal’s  English  rendering  of  the  Chinese  version ;   the  thirteen  above-  " ' 
named  additional  sections  not  being  accessible  to  them  in  any  other  form  ; 
for  even  if  they  understand  Chinese,  the  Chinese  original  would  be  un- 
obtainable by  them. 
“Mr.  Beal’s  rendering  of  the  Chinese  translation  is  a   most  valuable  aid  to  the 
critical  study  of  the  work.  It  contains  authentic  texts  gathered  from  ancient 
canonical  books,  and  generally  connected  with  some  incident  in  the  history  of 
Buddha.  Their  great  interest,  however,  consists  in  the  light  which  they  throw  upon 
everyday  life  in  India  at  the  remote  period  at  which  they  were  written,  and  upou.— 
the  metihod  of  teaching  adopted  by  the  founder  of  the  religion.  The  method 
employed  was  principally  parable,  and  the  simplicity  of  the  tales  and  tiip-eScellence 
of  the  morals  inculcated,  as  well  as  the  strange  hold  which  they  haye-r'etained  upon 
the  minds  of  millions  of  people,  make  them  a   very  remarkable  study.”*— 
“Mr,  Beal,  by  making  it  accessible  in  an  Engilish  dress,  has  added  to  the  great  ser- 
vices he  has  already  rendered  to  the  comparative  study  of  religious  hi.story.  .<4  codemy. 
“   Valuable  as  exhibiting  the  doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  in  its  purest,  least  adul- 
terated form,  it  brings  the  modern  reader  face  to  face  with  that  simple  creed  and  rule 
of  conduct  which  won  its  way  over  the  minds  of  myriads,  and  which  is  now  nominally 
professed  by  14s  millions,  who  Imve  overlaid  its  austere  simplicity  with  innumerable 
ceremonies,  forgotten  its  maxims,  perverted  its  teaching,  and  so  inverted  its  loading 
principle  that  a   religion  whose  founder  denied  a   God,  now  worships  that  founder  as 
a   god  &nseIf."---jScoi3man. 
T 
f 


--- PAGE 3 ---
ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
Second  Edition,  post  SvOj  clotli,  pp,  xxiv.— 360,  price  xos,  6d. 
By  ALBRECHT  WEBER. 
Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  John  Mann,  M.A.,  and 
Theodor  Eachabiae,  Ph.D.,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Author. 
Dr.  Buhlee,  Inspector  of  Schools  in  India,  writes: — “'^Mien  I  was  Pro- 
fessor of  Onental  Languages  in  Elphinstone  College^  I  frequently  felt  the 
want  of  such  a   work  to  which  I  could  refer  the  students.” 
Professor  Cowell,  of  Cambridge,  writes  “It  will  he  especially  useful 
to  the  students  in  our  Indian  colleges  and  universities.  I  used  to  long  for 
such  a   book  when  I  wa.s  teaching  in  Calcutta.  Hindu  students  are  intensely 
interested  in  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  and  this  volume  will  sujiply 
them  "with  all  they  want  on  the  subject.*’ 
Professor  WfriTNEY,  Yale  College,  Hewhaven,  Conn.,  IT.S.A.,  writes  :~ 
“   I  was  one  of  the  class  to  whom  the  work  was  originally  given  in  tlie  form 
of  academic  lectures.  At  their  first  appearaxice  they  were  by  far  the  most 
leai'ned  and  able  treatment  of  their  subject ;   and  with  their  recent  additions 
they  still  maintain  decidedly  the  same  rank.” 
“Is  perhaps  the  most  comprehensive  and  lucid  survey  of  Sanskrit  liteniture 
extant.  ITie  essays  contained  in  the  volume  were  originally  delivered  as  academic 
lectures,  and  at  the  time  of  their  first  publication  were  acknowledged  to  be  by  far 
the  most  learned  and  able  treatment  of  the  subject.  They  have  now  been  Ifrougiit 
up  to  date  by  the  addition  of  all  the  most  important  results  of  recent  resoiirch.” — 
Times.  . 
 ,■      ■ 
   ■  '  '  ,  ■ 
 ■ 
.  Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xu.-~i98,  accompanied  by  Two  Language 
Maps,  price  12s. 
A   SKETCH  OF 
THE  MOBEEN  LANGUAGES  OF,  THE  EAST  INDIES, 
By  ROBERT  N.  CUST. 
The  Author  ha.s  attempted  to  fill  up  a   vacuum,  the  inconvenience  of 
which  pres.sed  itself  on  his  notice.  Much  had  been  written  about  the 
languages  of  the  East  Indies,  but  the  extent  of  our  present  knowledge  had 
not  even  been  brought  to  a   focus.  It  occurred  to  him  that  it  might  be  of 
use  to  others  to  publish  in  an  arranged  form  the  notes  which  he  had  collected 
for  his  own  edification. 
“   Supplies  a   deficiency  which  has  long  been  felt,’' — Tim^s. 
“The  book  before  us  is  then  a   valuable  contribxition  to  philological  science.  It 
passes  under  review  a   vast  number  of  langtiages,  and  it  gives,  or  professes  to  give,  in 
every  case  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  opinions  and  judgments  of  the  best-infoi-med 
writers.”— Na^urday  lievim. 
Second  Corrected  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 116,  cloth,  price  5s. 
THE  BIETH  OF  THE  WAE-GOD. 
A   Poem.  By  KALIDASA. 
Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  into  English  Terse  by 
Ralph  T.  H.  Gkiffith,  M.A. 
“   A   very  spirited  rendering  of  the  KumarasaTiibhava,  which  was  first  pnblishefl 
twenty-six  years  ago,  and  which  we  are  glad  to  see  made  once  more  accessible.^’ — 
Times. 
“   J!r,  Griffith’s  very  spirited  rendering  is  well  known  to  most  who  are  at  all 
interested  in  Indian  literature,  or  enjoy  the  tenderness  of  feeling  and  rich  creative 
imagination  of  its  author.” — Indian  Antiquary. 
“   We  are  vervglad  to  welcome  a   second  edition  of  Frofes.sor  Griffith's  admirable 
translation.  translations  deserve  a   second  edition  lictter.” — Atkencenml 


--- PAGE 4 ---
TEUBNER^S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  432,  clotli.  price  t6s. 
A   CLASSICAL  BICTIOHAEY  OF  HmDU  MYTHOLOGY 
AHD  EELIGION,  GEOGEAPHY,  HISTOEY,  AND 
LITEEATUEE. 
By  JOHN  DOWSON,  M.R.A.S., 
Late  Professor  of  Hhidnstaiii,  Staff  College. 
'^  This  not  only  forms  an  Indispensable  book  of  reference  to  students  of  Indian 
literature,  but  is  also  of  great  general  interest,  as  it  gives  in  a   concise  and  easily 
accessible  form  all  that  need  be  known  about  the  personages  of  Hindu  niytliology 
wliose  names  arc  so  familiar,  but  of  whom  so  little  is  known  outside  the  limited 
circle  of  mraais.’' — 7"imes, 
"   It  is  no  slight  gain  when  such  subjects  are  treated  fairly  and  fully  in  a   moderate 
space ;   and  we  need  only  add  that  the  few  wants  whicli  we  may  liope  to  sec  supplied 
in  new  editions  detract  but  little  from  the  general  excolience  of  Mr.  Htnvson’s  work.” 
— Saturday  Jkvmo.  :  .  ■  . 
'  '  '  ■' 
Post  8vo,  with  View  of  Mecca,  pp.  cxii.— 172,  cloth,  price  9s, 
SELECTIONS  FEOM  THE  KOEAK 
By  EDWARD  WILLIAM  LANE, 
Translator  of  ”   The  Thousand  and  One  Nights ;   
”   S:g.,  &c. 
A   New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  an  Introduction  by 
Stanley  Lane  Poole. 
“ .  .   .   Has  boon  long  esteemed  in  this  country  as  the  compilation  of  one  of  the 
greatest  Arabic  scholars  of  the  time,  the  late  Mr.  Lane,  the  well-known  translator  of 
,the  ‘Arabian  Nights.’  ...  The  present  editor  ha.s  enhanced  the  value  of  his 
relative’s  work  by  divesting  the  text  of  a   great  deal  of  extraneous  matter  introduced 
by  way  of  comment,  and  prefixing  an  introduction.” — 
“   Mr,  Poole  is  both  a   generous  and  a   learned  hiogi-apUer.  .   .  .  Mr.  Poole  tolls  us 
the  facts  ...  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  industry  and  criticism  ti)  ascertain  them, 
and  for  literary  skill  to  present^them  in  a   condensed  and  readable  form,”— 
maUi  Calcutta.  , 
 „   _____    
Post  8vo,  pp*  vi. — 368,  cloth,  price  14s. 
MOBEEN  INBIA  ANB  THE  INBIANS, 
BEING  A   SEPvIES  OF  IMPRESSIONS,  NOTES,  AND  ESSAYS. 
By  MONIER  williams,  D.C.L., 
Hon.  LL.D.  of  the  University  of  Calcutta,  Hon.  l\rcmber  of  the  Bombay  Asiatic 
Society,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  by  considerable  Additions, 
with  Illustrations  and  a   Map. 
“   In  this  volume  we  have  tlie  thoughtful  impressions  of  a   thoughtful  man  on  some 
of  the  most  important  questions  connected  with  our  Indian  Empire.  ...  An  en- 
lightened obsorvanr  man,  travelling  among  an  enliglitened  observant  pcoi'de,  Professor 
Monier  Williams  has  brought  before  the  ituldic  in  a   pleasant  form  more  of  the  rnrtnuers 
and  customs  of  the  Queen’s  Indian  subjects  than  wo  ever  remember  to  liavo  seen  in 
any  one  work.  He  not  only  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  EngUshnian  f<.n*  this  able 
coiatribution  to  the  study  of  Modem  India— a   subject  with  which  wo  should  be 
specially  familiar — but  he  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Indian,  Parsee  or  Hindu, 
Buddhist  and  Moslem,  for  his  clear  exposition  of  their  manners,  their  creeds,  and 
their  necessities.” — Thim,      
Post  8 VO,  pp.  xliv. — 376,  cloth,  price  14s. 
METEICAL  TEANSLATIONS  FEOM  SANSKEIT 
WEITEES. 
With  an  Introduction,  many  Prose  Versions,  and  Parallel  Passages  from 
Classical  Authors. 
By  J.  MUIE,  OJ.E,,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph.D. 
.  An  agreeable  introduction  to  Hindu  poetry,”— Tfmps. 
;  .A  volume  which  maybe  taken  as  a   fair  illustration  alik-spsof  the  religions 
and  moral  sentiments  and  of,  the  legendary  lore  of  the  best  Sanskrit  writers.”— 
Edinburgh  Daily  Rerim. 


--- PAGE 5 ---
TRt}BmR\S  ORIENTAL  SERIES, 
Second  Edition,  i)Ost  8vo,  pp,  xxvi— 244,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 
fHB  a   V   LIST  AH; 
Or,  BOSE  GABDEN  OF  SHEKH  MUSHLIU’D-DIN  SADI  OF  SHIBAZ. 
Translated  for  the  First  Time  into  Prose  and  Terse,  with  an.  Introductory 
Preface,  and  a   Life  of  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah, 
By  EDWARD  B.  EASTWIOK,  C.B.,  M.A.,  F.ILS.,  MJiA.S. 
It  is  a   very  fair  rendering  of  the  original.”— ITiaze.?. 
“   The  new  edition  has  long  been  desired,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  all  who  take 
any  interest  in  Oriental  poetry.  The  Gnlistan  is  a   typical  Persian  verse-book  of  the 
highest  order.  Mi*.  Eastwick’s  rhymed  translation  ,   . .  has  long  established  itself  in 
a   secure  x>osition  fis  the  best  version  of  Sadi’s  finest  -woi’k.” — Academy. 
“   It  is  both  faithfully  and  gracefully  executed.”— 
In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  i>p,  viii. — ^408  and  viii. — 348,  cloth,  price  28s. 
MISGELLAITEOUS  ESSAYS  EELATING  TO  mBIAK 
SUBJECTS. 
By  BRIAN  HOUGHTON  HODGSON,  Esq.,  F.B.S., 
Late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service ;   Corre‘?ponding  Member  of  tbe  lostihite ;   Giicvaiier 
of  the  Legion  of  Honour ;   late  British  Minister  at  tiie  Court  of  Nepal,  &o.,  A:c. 
CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  /. 
Section  I, — On  the  Koceh,  Bddd,  and  Dhimal  Tribes. — Part  I.  Vocabulaiy.— 
Part  II.  Grammar. — Part  HI.  Their  Origin,  Location,  Numbers,  Creed,  Customs, 
Character,  and  Condition,  with  a   General  Description  of  the  Climate  they  dwell  in. 
— Appendix.' 
Section  II.— On  Himalayan  Ethnology.— I.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Lan- 
guages of  the  Broken  Tribes  of  Ndpdl.— 11.  Vocabulai-y  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Kirand 
LangiiJige. — III.  Grammatical  Analysis  of  the  Vdyu  Language.  The  Vayu  Grammar. 
— IV.  Analysis  of  the  Bahing  Dialect  of  the  Kiranti  language.  The  Jidhing  Oram* 
mar.— V,  On  the  Vayu  or  Hdyu  Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya,— VI.  On  tue  Kiranti 
Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya. 
CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  11. 
Section  III. — On  the  Aborigines  of  North-Eastern  India.  Comparative  Vocabulary 
of  the  Tibetan,  BddeV,  and  Giro  Tongues. 
Section  IV. — Aborigines  of  the  North-Eastern  Frontier. 
Section  V. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Frontier. 
Section  VI,— The  Indo-Chinese  Borderers,  and  their  connection  with  the  Hima- 
layans  and  Tibetans.  Comparaiive  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Arakan. 
Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Ghinoso  Borderers  in  Tenasserim. 
Sec!TIon  VII. — The  Mongolian  Afiiuities  of  the  Caucasians. — Comparison  and  Ana- 
lysis of  Caucasian  and  Mongolian  Words. 
Section  VIII. — Physical  Typo  of  Tibetans.  * 
Section  IX,— The  Aborigines  of  Central  India. — Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the 
Aboriginal  Languages  of  Central  India. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Ghats. — Vocabu- 
lary of  some  of  the  Dialects  of  tho  Hill  and  Wandering  Tribes  in  the  Northeni  Sircars. 
— Aborigines  of  the  Nilgiris,  with  Remarks  on  their  Affinities. — Supplement  to  tho 
Nilgiriaii  Vocabularies.— The  Aborigines  of  Southern  India  and  Ceylon. 
Section  X. — Route  of  Nepalese  Mission  to  Pekin,  with  Remarks  on  the  Water- 
shed and  Plateau  of  Tibet. 
Section  XL — Route  from  EAthmdhdfi,  the  Capital  of  Nepal,  to  Darjeeling  in 
Sikim. — Memorandum  relative  to  the  Seven  Cosis  of  Nepdl. 
Section  XII. — Some  Accounts  of  the  Systems  of  Law  and  Police  as  recognised  in 
the  State  of  Nepal. 
Section  XIII. — ^The  Native  Method  of  making  the  Paper  denominated  Hindustan 
Nepalese.  , 
 ' 
Section  xlv. — Pre-eminence  of  the  Vernaculars ;   or,  the  Anglicists  Answered  ; 
Being  Letters  on  the  Education  of  the  People  of  Indhi. 
For  the  study  of  tho  less-known  races  of  India  Mr.  Brian  Hodgson’s  ^Mi.scohane- 
ous  Essays  bo  found  very  valuable  both  to  the  i^hilologist  and  the  ethnologist.” 
— Times. 
% 
% 


--- PAGE 6 ---
TRUSmWS  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
Third  Edition,  Two  Yols.,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii.~268  and  viii.— 326,  cloth, 
price  21S. 
TEE  LIFE  OE  LEaEED  OF  ^AEDAMA, 
THE  BUDDHA  OF  THE  BURMESE.  With  Annotations. 
The  Ways  to  Heibban,  and  FTotice  on  the  Phongyies  or  Burmese  Monks. 
Bi  THE  Right  Rev.  P.  BIGANDET, 
Bishop  of  Ramatha,  Vicar- Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu. 
“The  work  is  furnished  with  copious  notes,  which  not  only  illustrate  the  subject- 
matter,  but  form  a   perfect  encyclopaedia  of  Buddhist  lore.” — Times. 
“   A   work  which  will  furnish  European  students  of  Buddhism  with  a   most  valuable 
help  in  the  prosecution  of  their  investigations.”— 
Daily  Revieio. 
“   Bishop  Bigandet’s  invaluable  work.” — liidian  Antiquary. 
“   Viewed  in  this  light,  its  importance  is  sufficient  to  place  students  of  the  subject 
under  a   deep  obligation  to  its  Q.uth<>vT~--CalcuUa  Review. 
“   This  work  is  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  upon  Buddhism.”— 
Review. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  —420,  cloth,  price  i8s. 
CHINESE  BUDDHISM. 
A   VOLUME  OF  SKETCHES,  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL. 
By  J.  EDKINS,  D.D. 
Author  of  “China’s  Place  in  Philology,”  “Religion  in  China,”  &c.,  &c. 
“It  contains  a   vast  deal  of  important'  information  on  the  subject,  such  as  is  only 
to  be  gained  by  lotig-continued  study  on  the  spot.” — Atlmiceuni. 
“   Upon  the  whole,  we  know  of  no  work  comparable  to  it  for  the  extent  of  its 
original  research,  and  the  simplicity  with  which  this  complicated  system  of  pliUo- 
sophy,  religion,  literature,  and  ritual  is  set  forth. 
Quarterly  Review. 
“   The  whole  volume  is  replete  with  learning.  ...  It  deserves  most  careful' study 
from  all  interested  in  the  history  of  the  religions  of  the  world,  and  expressly  of  those 
who  are  concerned  in  the  propagation  of  Christianity.  Dr.  Edkins  notices  in  terms 
of  just  condemnation  the  exaggerated  praise  bestowed  upon  Buddhism  by  recent 
English  writers.  ” — Recwd. 
Post  8 VO,  pp.  496,  cloth,  price  i8s. 
LINUUISTIO  AND  ORIENTAL  ESSAYS. 
Written  eeom  the  Year  1846  to  1878. 
By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  OUST, 
Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty’s  Indian  Civil  Service  5   Hon.  Secretary  to 
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society; 
and  Author  of  “   The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies.” 
“   We  know  none  who  has  described  Indian  life,  especially  the  life  of  the  natives, 
with  so  much  learning,  sympathy,  and  literary  talent.”— ^4 c«(/c?k7/. 
“   They  seem  to  us  to  be  full  of  suggestive  and  original  remarks.”— /8if.  James's  Gazette. 
“   His  book  contains  a   vast  amount  of  information.  The  result  of  thirty-five  years 
of  inquiry,  reflection,  and  speculation,  and  that  on  subjects  as  full  of  fascination  as 
of  food  for  thought.”— 
Exhibit  such  a   thorough  acquaintance  with  the  history  and  antiquities  of  India 
as  to  entitle  him  to  speak  as  one  having  authority.”— 
Daily  Review. 
The  author  speaks  with  the  authority  of  personal  experience   It  is  this 
constant  association  with  the  country  and  the  people  which  gives  su<ffi  a   vividness 
to  many  of  the  pages.”  —Atkenceum. 
§ 
M 


--- PAGE 7 ---
Post  8 VO,  pp.  civ.— 348,  elotb,  price  i8s. 
BUDBHIBT  BIRTH  STOEIBS;  or,  Jataka  Tales. 
Tlie  Oldest  Collection  of  Folk-lore  Extant : 
BEING  THE  JATAHATTHA  VANN  ANA, 
For  the  first  time  Edited  in  the  original  Pali. 
^   , 
 By  T,  FAUSBOLB  ; 
And  Translated  by  T.  W.  Buys  Davids. 
Translation.  Volume  I. 
These  are  tales  supposed  to  have  been  told  by  the  Buddha  of  ’wliath®  Imd  seen 
and  heard  in  his  previous  births.  They  arc  probably  the  nearest  representatives 
of  the  original  Aryan  stories  from  which  sprang  the  lolk-Iore  of  Europe  as  well  as 
India.  The  introduction  contains  a   most  interesting  disquisition  on  the  migrations 
of  these  fables,  tracing  their  reappearance  in  the  various  groups  of  folk-lore  legends. 
Among  orhti*  old  friends,  we  meet  with  a   version  of  the  Judgment  of  Solomon,  ” — 2'imes. 
“   It  is  now  soma  years  since  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  asserted  his  riglit  to  be  heard  on 
tins  subject  by  his  able  article  on  Buddhism  in  the  new'  edition  of  the  *  Encyclopsedia 
Britamiica. '  "—Leeds  Mercnr^. 
“   All  who  are  interested  in  Buddhist  literature  ought  to  feel  deeply  indebted  to 
Mr.  Rhys  Davids.  His  well-establislied  reputation  as  a   Pali  scholar  is  a   sufficient 
guarantee  for  the  fidelity  of  Ids  version,. and  the  style  of  his  translations  is  deserving 
of  high  praise."’ — Academy. 
**  No  more  competent  expositor  of  Buddhism  could  be  found  than  Mr. 'Rhys  Davids. 
In  the  Jutaka  book  we  have,  then,  a   priceless  record  of  the  earliest  irnagiaativa 
literature  of  our  race ;   and  ...  it  presents  to  ns  a   nearly  complete  picture  of  the 
socijil  life  and  customs  and  popular  beliefs  of  the  common  people  of  Aryan  tribes, 
closely  rebated  to  ourselves,  just  as  they  were  ijassiag  through  the  first  stages  of 
civilisation.”— 
Gazette. 
Post  8  VO,  pp.  xxviii.— 362,  cloth,  price  14s. 
A   TALMUDIC  MISCELLANY; 
Ob,  a   thousand  AND  ONE  EXTEACTS  FBOM  THE  TALMUD, 
THE  MIDPvASHIM,  AND  THE  KABBALAH. 
*  Compiled  and  Translated  by  PAUL  ISAAC  HBRSHON, 
Author  of  “   Genesis  According  to  the  Talmud,”  &c. 
With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes. 
To  obtain  in  so  concise  and  handy  a   form  as  this  volume  a   general  idea  of  the 
Talmud  is  a   boon  to  Christians  at  least.” — Tivies. 
Tta  peculiar  and  popular  character  will  make  it  attractive  to  general  readers. 
Mr.  Hershon  is  a   very  competent  scholar.  .  .  .  Contains  samples  of  the  good,  bad, 
and  indifferent,  and  especially  extracts  that  throw  light  upon  the  Scriptures.”— 
Brituli  Quarterly  lievim. 
Will  convey  to  .English  readers  a   more  complete  and  truthful  notion  of  the 
Talmud  tlmn  any  otlier  work  that  has  yet  appeared.” — Daily  Nms. 
“   Without  overlooking  in  the  slightest  the  several  attractions  of  the  previous 
volumes  of  the  '  Oriental  ISeries.',  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  snrpaases 
them  all  in  interest.” — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 
“   Mr.  Hershon  has  .  .   .  thus  given  English  readers  what  is.  we  believe,  a   fair  set 
of  specimens  which  they  can  test  for  themselves.” — The  Record. 
“   This  book  is  by  far  the  best  fitted  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  to  enable  the- 
general  reader  to  gain  a   fair  and  unbiassed  conception  of  the  muUifarhsus  contents 
of  the  wonderful  miscellany  which  can  only  be  truly  understood — so  Jewish  pride 
asserts— by  the  life-long  devotion  of  scholars  of  the  Chosen  People.’ —/ngttirer. 
“   The  value  and  importance  of  this  volume  consist  in  the  fact  that  scarcely  a   single 
extract  is  given  in  its  pages  but  throws  some  light,  direct  or  refracted,  upon  those 
Scriptures  which,  are  the  common  heritage  of  Jew  and  Christian  alike.”— Jo&u 
“   It  is  <a  capital  specimen  of  Hebrew  schefiarship ;   a   monument  of  learned,  loving,, 
light-giving  Aakour."— 
Herald. 


--- PAGE 8 ---
TRUBNER^S  ORTENTAL  SERIES. 
Post  Svo,  pp*  clotli,  price  7s.  6d. 
THE  CLASSICAL  POETRy  OF  THE  JAPANESE. 
By  basil  hall  CHAMBEELAIN, 
Author  of  “Teigo  Hehkaku  Shiran.  ” 
“   A   very  curious  voluine.  The  author  has  manifestly  devoted  much  labour  to^  the 
task  of  studying  the  poetical  literature  of  the  Japanese,  and  rendering  characteristic 
speoimeiis  into  JEnglish  verse.’’ — Daily 
**  Mr.  Chamberlain’s  volume  is,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  the  -first  attempt  which  has 
been  made  to  interpret  the  litei-ature  of  the  Japanese  to  the  Western  world.  It  is  to 
the  classical  poetry  of  Old  Japan  that  we  must  turn  for  indigenous  Japanese  thought, 
and  in  the  volume  .before  us  we  have  a   selection  from  that  poetry  rendered  into 
graceful  English  verse.”-— 
**  It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  tire  best  translations  of  lyric  literature  which  has 
appeared  during  the  close  of  the  last  year.” — Celential  Rmjnre. 
“   Mr,  Chamberlain  set  himself  a   difficult  task  when  he  undertook  to  reproduce 
Japanese  poetiy  in  an  English  form.  But  he  has  evidently  laboured  con  amore,  and 
his  efforts  are  successful  to  a   degree.” — London  and  China  Expnss. 
Post  Svo,  pp.  xii, — 164,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 
THE  HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON  (Son  of  SennacLerib), 
RING  OF  ASSYRIA,  B.o.  681-668. 
Translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon  Cylinders  and  Tablets  in 
the  British  Museum  Collection ;   together  with  a   Grammatical  Analysis 
of  each  Word,  Explanations  of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the 
Bi-Lingual  Syllabaries,  and  List  of  Bponyms,  &c. 
By  ERNEST  a.  BUDGE,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S., 
Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ’s  College,  Cambridge. 
■  Students  of  scriptural  ai-chgeology  will  also  appreciate  the  '  History  of  Bsar- 
baddon.’ 
“   There  is  much  to  attract  the  scholar  in  this  volume.  It  does  not  pretend  to 
poxjularise  studies  which  are  yet  in  their  infancy.  Its  primary  object  is  to  translate, 
but  it  does  not  assume  to  be  more  than  tentative,  and  it  offers  both  to  the  professed 
Assyriologist  and  to  the  ordinary  non-Assyriological  Semitic  scholar  the  means  of 
controlling  its  TGmltsR^Aeadeniy, 
“Mr.  Budge’s  book  is,  of  course,  mainly  addressed  to  Assyrian  scholars  and 
students.  They  are  not,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a   very  numerous  class.  But  the  more 
thanlcs  are  due  to  him  on  tlmt  account  for  the  way  in  which  he  has  acquitted  himself 
in  his  laborious  task.”— 
Post  Svo,  pp.  448,  cloth,  price  21s. 
THE  MESNEVI 
(Usually  known  as  Thk  Mesneviyi  Sheeif,  or  Holy  Mesnevi) 
OF 
MEVLANA  (OUR  LORD)  JELALU  ’D-DIN  MUHAMMED  ER-RUMI. 
Book  the  First. 
Together  roith  some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author, 
of  his  Ancestors,  and  of  his  Descendants. 
'  Illustrated  by  a   Selection  of  Characteristic  Anecdotes,  as  Collected 
by  their  Historian, 
Mevlana  Shemse-’D^Din  Ahmed,  el  Eflaki,  el  ‘Abipi. 
,  Translated,  and  the  Poetry  Versified,  in  English, 
By  JAMES  W.  REDHOUSE,  M.R.A.a,  &c. 
“   A   complete  treasury  of  occult  Oriental  lore.”— /S'aiarday  Review. 
“This  bof>k  will  be  a   very  valuable  help  to  the  reader  Ignorant  of  Persia,  who  is 
desirous  of  obtaining  an  insight  into  a   very  important  department  ofthc  literature 
extant  in  that  language," — faJblet. 


--- PAGE 9 ---
OMJMNTAl  SMi^IES, 
Post  8vo,  x?P*  xvi*-*fflSo,  clotb^  jirico  68. 
EASTEEH  PEOYEEBS  AMD  EMBLEMS 
'  ILLUSTBATINO  OLD  TRUTHS. 
By  Kev.  tT.  LONG, 
Member  of  tbo  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.liG.S. 
“Wo  regard  the  hook  as  valuable,  and  wish  for  it  a   wide  circulation  and  attentive 
read  i   ng. 
iia’ord. 
“   Altogether,  it  is  quite  a   feast  of  good  things.”—fff^o6e. 
“   It  is  full  of  interesting  matter.  ” — Anii^uar^. 
Post  8vo,  x>i>.  viii. — ^270,  clotb,  jn-ice  7s.  6d, 
INDIAN  POETEY; 
Coiitaining  a   New  Edition  of  the  “Indian  Song  of  Songs,”  from  the  Sanscrit 
of  the  “Gita  Govinda”  of  Jayadeva;  Two  Books  from  “The  Iliad  of 
India”  (Mahabharata),  “ Proverbial  Wisdom  ”   from  the  Shiokas  of  the 
Bitoi)adesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems. 
By  EDWIN  ARNOLD,  C.S.I.,  Author  of  “The  Light  of  Asia.” 
In  this  new  voluine  of  Messrs.  Trlibner’e  Oriental  Series,  Mr.  Edwin  Arnold  does 
good  service  by  illustrating,  through  the  medium  of  liis  musical  Eiiglish  melodics, 
tlic  power  of  Indian  imctry  to  stir  Kurojjean  emotions.  The  ‘  Indian  Si>ng  of  Sotigs ' 
is  imt  unknown  to  scholars.  IVIr.  Arnold  will  have  introdtieed  it  among  popular 
English  poems.  Nothing  could  b©  more  graceful  and  delicate  th,an  the  shades  by 
wMeh  Krishna  is  iJortrayed  in  the  gradujd  process  of  being  weimed  by  the  love  of 
*  Beautiful  Radha,  jasmino-bosomed  Radha,* 
from  the  allurements  of  the  forest  nymphs,  in  whom  the  five  senses  are  typified.''— 
Times, 
“   No  other  English  poet  has  ever  throvm  his  genius  and  his  art  so  tlioroiiglily  into 
the  work  of  tratjslating  Eastern  ideas  as  Mr.  Arnold  has  done  in  his  splendid  piira* 
phrases  of  language  contained  in  these  mighty  — Daily  Tdegra'ph, 
“   The  ijoem  abounds  with  imagery  of  Eastern  luxuriou-sness  and  sensuoiisness ;   the 
air  seems  laden  wdth  the  spicy  odours  of  the  tropics,  and  the  verse  has  a   richness  and 
a   melody  sufficient  to  caiitivate  the  senses  of  the  dullest." — Standard, 
“   The  ternslator,  while  jwodxiciijg  a   veiy  enjoyable  poem,  has  adhered  with  toler- 
able fidelity  ±0  the  original  text."— 
Mail. 
“We  certainly  wish  Mr.  Arnold  success  in  liis  attempt  ‘to  popularise  Indian 
classics,’  that  being,  as  his  preface  tells  us,  the  goal  towards  which  he  bends  his 
effiorts/' — Allen’s  Indian  Mail, 
Post  8vo,  pp,  xvi.— 296,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 
THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS ; 
Or,  political  economy  founded  upon  moral 
PHILOSOPHY. 
A   Systematic  Digest  oe  the  Doctrines  of  the  Chinese  Philosopher 
Mencius. 
Translated  from  the  Original  Text  and  Classified,  with 
Comments  and  Explanations, 
By  the  Rev.  ERNST  FABER,  Rhenish  Mission  Society, 
Translated  from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes, 
By  the  Rev.  A.  B.  HUTCHINSON,  Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong. 
“   Mr.  Faber  is  already  well  known  in  the  field  of  Chinese  studies  by  bis  digest  of 
the  doctrines  of  Confucixis.  The  value  of  this  work  will  bo  perceived  when  it  is 
remembered  that  at  no  time  since  relations  commenced  between  China  and  the 
West  has  the  former  been  so  powerful— we  had  almost  said,  aggressive— as  now. 
For  those  who  will  give  it  careful  study,  Mr.  Faber’s  work  is  on©  of  the  most 
valuable  of  tl)*#KcolIcnt  series  to  which  it  belongs.”— NatwriS. 


--- PAGE 10 ---
mumER^S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
Post  8vo»  pp.  336,  cloth,  price  i6s. 
THE  EELiaiOHS  OF  INDIA. 
Bt  a.  babth. 
Translated  from  the  French  with  the  authority  and  assistance  of  the  Author. 
The  author  has,  at  the  request  of  the  publishers,  considerably  enlarged 
the 'work  for  tire  translator,  and  has  added  the  literature  of  the  subject  to 
date  ;   the  translation  may,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  an  equivalent  of  a 
new  and  imi^roved  edition  of  the  original. 
“   Is  not  only  a   valuable  manual  of  the  religions  of  India,  which  marks  a   distinct 
step  in  the  treatment  of  the  subject,  but  also  a   useful  work  of  reference.” — Acudemi/. 
“This  volume  is  a   reproduction,  with  corrections  and  additions,  of  an  article 
contributed  by  the  learned  author  two  years  ago  to  the  ‘  Encyclopedie  dcs  Sciences 
Religienses.'  It  attracted  much  notice  when  it  first  appeared,  and  is  generally 
admitted  to  present  the  best  summary  extant  of  the  vast  subject  with  which  it 
dcalsT-^Tablet, 
“   This  is  not  only  on  the  whole  the  best  but  the  only  manual  of  the  religions  of 
India,  apart  from  Buddhism,  wliieh  we  have  in  English.  The  present  work  .  .  . 
shows  not  only  great  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  power  of  clear  exposition,  but  also 
great  insight  into  the  inner  history  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  great  religion, 
for  it  is  in  reality  only  one,  which  it  proposes  to  describe.”— 
Review. 
“   The  merit  of  the  work  has  boon  emphatically  recognised  by  the  most  authoritativo 
Orientalists,  both  in  this  country  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  But  probably 
there  are  few  Indianists  (if  we  may  use  the  word)  wlio  would  not  derive  a   good  deal 
of  information  from  it,  and  especially  from  the  exterxsive  bibliography  provided  in 
the  notes.” — Dublin  Review. 
**  Such  a   sketch  M.  Barth  has  drawn  with  a   master-hand.”— 
{New  York). 
Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.— 152,  cloth,  price  6s. 
HINDU  PHILOSOPHY. 
The  SAl^KHYA  KAKIKA  op  IS'WAEA  KBISHNA. 
An  Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila,  with  an  Appendix  on  the 
Nyaya  and  Yais'eshika  Systems. 
By  JOHH  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.),  M.B.A.S. 
The  system  of  Kapila  contains  nearly  all  that  India  has  produced  in  the 
department  of  pure  philosophy. 
**The  non-Orientalist  .   .  .  finds  in  Mr.  Davies  a   patient  and  learned  guide  who 
leads  him  into  the  intricacies  of  the  philosophy  of  India,  and  supplies  him  with  a   clue, 
that  ho  may  not  be  lost  in  them.  In  the  preface  lie  states  that  the  system  of 
Kapila  is  the  ‘earliest  attempt  on  record  to  give  an  answer,  from  reason  alone, 
to  the  mysterious  questions  which  arise  in  every’thoughtfixl  mind  about  the  origin  of 
the  world,  the  nature  and  relations  of  man  and  his  future  destiny,’  and  in  his  learned 
and  able  notes  he  exhibits  *■  the  connection  of  the  Sankhya  system  with  the  philo- 
sophy of  Spinoza,’  and  ‘  the  connection  of  the  system  of  Kapila  with  that  of  Schopen- 
hauer and  Von  Hartmann,’  ’’—Foreign.  Church  Chronicle. 
“   Mr,  Davies’s  volume  on  Hindu  Philosophy  is  an  undoubted  gain  to  all  students 
of  the  development  of  thought.  The  system  of  Kapila,  which  is  here  given  in  a   trans- 
lation from  the  Silnkhya  Karika,  is  the  only  contribution  of  India  to  pure  philosophy, 
.   .   .  Presents  many  points  of  deep  interest  to  the  student  of  comparative  philo- 
sophy, and  withoxit  Mr.  Davies’s  lucid  interpretation  it  would  be  difficult  to  appre- 
ciate these  points  in  any  adequate  manner.”— Saiarday  Review. 
“We  welcome  Mr.  Davies’s  book  as  a   valuable  addition  to  our  philosophical 
library.”— 
and  Queries,  , 


--- PAGE 11 ---
mi/BMSrs  ORIENTAl  SERIES. 
Post;  8vo,  pp.  X. — 130,  clotb,  price  6s. 
A   MAH¥AL  OF  HIHDIX  PAHTHBISM.  ¥EI)iNTASAEA. 
Translateci,  with  copious  Aunotatious,  by  Majob  G.  A.  JACOB, 
Bombay  Staff  Corps ;   Inspector  of  Army  Schools. 
The  design  of  this  little  work  is  to  provide  for  missionaries,  and  for 
others  who,  like  them,  have  little  leisure  for  original  research,  an  accurate 
summary  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Vedanta, 
“   There  can  be  no  question  that  the  religious  doctrines  most  widely  held  by  the 
people  of  India  are  mainly  Pantheistic.  And  of  Hindu  Pantheism,  at  all  events  in 
its  most  modern  phases,  its  Ved^ntasfi.ra  presents  the  best  summary.  But  then  this 
work  is  a   mere  summary :   a   skeleton,  the  dry  bones  of  which  require  to  be  clothed 
with  skin  and  bones,  and  to  be  animated  by  vital  breath  before  the  ordinary  reader 
will  discern  in  'it  a   living  reality.  Major  Jacob,  therefore,  has  wisely  added  to  his 
translation  of  t   he  Vedantas4ra  copious  notes  from  the  writings  of  well-known  Oriental 
scliolars,  in  which  he  has,  we  think,  elucidated  all  that  required  elucidation.  So 
that  the  work,  as  here  presented  to  us,  presents  no  difi&culties  which  a   very  moderate 
am<nmt  of  application  will  not  overcome.” — Tablet. 
The  modest  title  of  Major  Jacob’s  work  conveys  but  an  inadequate  idea  of  the 
vast  amount  of  research  embodied  in  iiis  notes  to  the  text  of  the  Vedantasara.  So 
copious,  indeed,  are  these,  and  so  much  collateral  matter  do  they  bring  to  bear  on 
tlie  subject,  that  the  diligent  student  will  rise  from  their  perusal  with  a   fairly 
adequate  view  of  Hindu  philosojiliy  generally.  His  work  ...  is  one  of  the  best  of 
its  kind  that  we  have  seen.” — Calcutta  Review. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xu.~iS4,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 
TSUHI— 1 1   aOAM  : 
The  Supeeme  Being  of  the  Khoi-EIhoi. 
By  THEOPHILXJS  HAHl^-,  Ph.D., 
Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town ;   Corresponding  Member 
of  the  Geegr.  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the 
Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c.,  &c. 
*‘The  first  instalment  of  Hr.  Hahn’s  labours  will  bo  of  interest,  not  at  the  Cape 
only,  but  in  every  University  of  Europe.  It  is,  in  fact,  a   most  valuable  contribution 
to  the  comparative  study  of  religion  and  mythology.  Accounts  of  their  religion  and 
mythology  were  scattered  about  in  various  books ;   these  have  been  carefully  col- 
lected by  Hr.  Hahn  and  printed  in  his  second  chapter,  enriched  and  improved  by 
what  he  has  loeen  able  to  collect  himself.” — Prof.  Max  Muller  in  the  Mnetemih 
Century. 
“   Dr,  Hahn’s  book  is  that  of  a   man  who  is  both  a   philologist  and  believer  in 
philological  methods,  and  a   close  student  of  savage  manners  and  customs.”— *6'afar- 
datf  Review. 
it  is  full  of  good  things.”— 
/awes  &  Gazette. 
In  Four  Volumes.  Post  8vo,  Vol.  L,  pp.  xii.— 392,  cloth,  price  12s.  6d., 
Vol.  II.,  pp.  vi. — 408,  cloth,  price  12s.  6d-,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  viii.— 414, 
cloth,  price  12s.  6d. 
A   COMPEEHEITSIVE  OOMMENTABY  TO  THE  QXJEAH* 
To  WHICH  IS  PEEFIXED  SALE’S  PEELIMINAKT  DISCOURSE,  WITH 
Additional  Notes  and  Emendations. 
Together  with  a   Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary 
Discourse,  and  Notes. 
By  Rev.  E.  M.  -WHERRY,  M.A.,  Lodiana. 
As  Mr.  WheiTy’s  book  is  intended  for  miBsionaries  in  India,  it  is  no  doubt  well 
that  they  should  be  prepared  to  meet,  if  they  can,  the  ordinary  arguments  and  inter- 
pretations, and  this  puipiose  Mr.  Wherry’s  additions  will  prove  useful.”— 
Review. 


--- PAGE 12 ---
TRUBN’BR^S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
Post  8ro,  pp*  vi.— 208,  cloth,  price  Ss.  6d. 
THE  BHAGAYAD-aiTA. 
Translated,  with  Introduction  and  Notes 
By  JOHN  BAYIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.) 
“r.ct  ns  add  that  his  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  is,  as  wo  judge,  the  best 
that  has  as  yet  appeared  in  English,  and  that  his  Philological  Notes  are  of  quite 
peculiar  value.  ” — hvMin  Review, 
Post  8  VO,  pf).  96,  cloth,  price  53. 
THE  QUATEAIHS  OF  OMAE  KHAYYAM, 
Translated  by  E.  H.  'WHINFIELD,  M.A., 
Barrister-at-Law,  late  H.M.  Bengal  OivU  Service. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii. — 336,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 
THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM. 
The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Verse  Translation. 
By  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service. 
**Mr.  Whinfield  has  executed  a   difficult  task  with  considerable  success,  and  his 
version  eontiiins  much  that  will  be  new  to  those  who  only  know  Mr.  Fitzgerald’s 
delightful  selection.  ”-—.4  cadem^f. 
“There  are  several  editions  of  the  Quatrains,  varying  greatly  in  their  readings. 
Mr,  ’Whinfield  lias  used  three  of  these  for  his  excellent  translation.  The  most  pro- 
minent features  in  the  Quatrains  are  their  profound  agnosticism,  combined  with  a 
fatalism  based  more  on  philosophic  than  religious  gi-ounds,  their  .Epicureanism  and 
the  spirit  of  universal  tolerance  and  charity  which  animates  thomT—Oalcutta  Review. 
Post  8 VO,  pp.  xxiv. — 268,  cloth,  price  9s. 
THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UFANISHADS  AND 
ANCIENT  INDIAN  METAPHYSICS. 
As  exhibited  in  a   series  of  Articles  contributed  to  the  Calcutta  JRevim* 
By  ARCHIBALD  EDWARD  OOIJGH,  M.A.,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford ; 
Principal  of  the  Calcutta  Hadrasa. 
“For  practical  purposes  this  is  perhaps  the  most  important  of  the  works  that  have 
thus  far  ap)teured  in  ‘Triibner’s  Oriental  Series.’  .   .  .  We  cannot  doubt  that  for  all 
wbo  may  take  it  up  the  work  must  be  one  of  profound  interest." — Saturday  Meview, 
In  Two  Volumes.  VoL  I.,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.—- 230,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d, 
A   COMPARATIVE  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOTPTIAH  AND 
MESOPOTAMIAN  RELIGIONS. 
By  Dr.  C.  P,  TIELE. 
Vol.  I.— History  of  the  Egyptian  Religion. 
Translated  from  the  Dutch  with  the  Assistance  of  the  Author. 
,  By  JAMES  BALLINGAL. 
“   It  places  in  the  hands  of  the  English  readers  a   history  of  Egyi>tian  Religion 
which  is  very  complete,  which  is  based  on  the  best  materials,  and  which  has  been 
illustrated  by  the  latest  results  of  research.  In  this  volume  there  is  a   great  deal  of 
information,  as  well  as  independent  investigation,  for  the  trustworthiness  of  which 
Br.  Tide's  name  is-  in  itself  a   guarantee ;   and  the  doscr-iption  of  the  successive 
religions  under  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  the  New  ICingdom,  is 
given  in  a   manner  which  is  i^holarly  and  minute.  ’^-SeoUrnm, 


--- PAGE 13 ---
oRism^AL  sssrE, 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.— 302,  cloth,  price  8s.  6d. 
YUBUF  AHB  ZtJLAIKHA. 
A   Poem  by  JAMI. 
’Translated  from  the  Persian  into  English  Verse. 
Bv  KALPH  T,  H.  GKIFFITH. 
“   Mr.  Griffith,  who  has  done  already  good,  service  as  translator  into  verse  from  the 
Sanskrit,  has  done  farther  good  work  in  this  translation  from,  the  i’ersian,  and  he 
has  cvidontily  shown  not  a   little  skill  in  his  rendering  the  qnaiut  and  very  oriental 
style  of  his  atithor  into  our  more  prosaic,  less  figurative,  latiguage.  .  .   .  The  work, 
hosidos  its  intrinsic  merits,  is  of  importance  as  being  one  of  the  most  popular  and 
famous  pocn®  of  l^ersia,  ana  that  which  is  read  in  all  the  indopendeut  native  schools 
of  India  wliero  Persian  is  taught.’*-— 
Post  8vo,  pp.  viii, — 266,  cloth,  price  9s. 
LINGUISTIC  ESSAYS. 
By  cake  ABEL. 
“   A.U  these  essays  of  Dr.  Abel’s  are  so  thoughtful,  so  full  of  happy  illustrations, 
and  so  admirably  put  together,  that  we  hardly  know  to  which  we  should  specially 
earn  to  select  tor  our  readers  a   sample  of  his  workinanshi}).” — ToJ>lf:t. 
“   An  entirely  novel  method  of  dciding  with  philosophical  qu<^^tions  and  impart  a 
real  human  interest  to  tlie  otherwise  dry  tccljnicalitics  of  tlic  .science.” — Stainlartl. 
“Dr.  Abel  i.s  an  opponent  from  whom  it  i.s  pleasant  to  differ,  for  ho  writes  with 
enthusiasm  and  tenqier,  and  his  mastery  over  the  English  language  fits  him  to  bo  a 
champirm  of  unpopukir  doctrines.’’ — Athtna-ur,i. 
“Dr,  Abel  writes  very  good  English,  and  much  of  his  book  will  prove  entertaining 
to  the  general  reader.  It  may  give  some  useful  hiiips,  and  suggest,  some  subjects  for 
profitable  investigation,  oven  to  philologists.”— AYtiiow  {New  Yorki). 
Post  8vo,  pp.  ix.— 28X,  cloth,  i>nce  los.  6d. 
THE  S  AE  V   A   
-   D   AES  AN  A   
-   SAMGEAHA  ; 
Or,  EEVIEW  of  the  DIFFEBENT  systems  of  HINDU 
PHILOSOPHY. 
By  MADHAVA  ACHABYA. 
Translated  by  E.  B.  COWELL,  M.  A.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University 
of  Cambridge,  and- A.  E.  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Philosophy 
in  “  the  Presidency  College,  Calcutta. 
This  work  is  an  interesting  specimen  of  Hindu  critical  ability.  The 
author  successively  passes  in  review  the  sixteen  philosophical  systems 
current  in  the  fourteenth  century  in  the  South  of  India ;   and  he  gives  what 
appears  to  him  to  bo  their  most  important  tenets. 
“The  translation  is  trustworthy  throughout,  A   protracted  sojourn  in  India, 
^where  there  i.s  a   living  ti'ttdition,  has  familiarised  t:ie  translators  v^ith  Indian 
thought,”— J   t/iena'itm. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  Ixv, — 368,  cloth,  price  148. 
TIBETAN  TALES  DEEIYED  FEOM  INDIAN  SOUEGES. 
Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  the  Kah-Gyur. 
By  P.  ANTON  VON  SCHIEFNEB. 
Done  into  English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction, 
By  W.  B.  S.  KALSTON,  M.A. 
“Mr.  Ralston,  whose  name  is  so  familiar  to  all  lovers  of  Russian  folk-lore,  has 
supplied  some  interesting  Western  analogies  and  parallels,  drawn,  for  the  most  part, 
from  Slavonic  sources,  to  the  Eastern  folk-tales,  culled  from  the  Kahgyur,  one  of  the 
divisions  of  tlic  Tibetan  sacred  books.”— Jlcatfemy. 
“The  translation  .  .  .  could  scarcely  have'fallen  into  better  hands.  An  Introduc- 
tion .  ,   .   give.s  the  leading  facts  in  the  lives  of  those  scholars  who  have  given  their 
attention  to  gaining  a   knowledge  of  the  Tibetan  literature  and  language.”— 
Xieview. 
“Ought  to  interest  all  who  care  for  the  East,  for  amusing  stories,  or  for  comparative 
folk-lore.” — 
Mall  Gazette* 


--- PAGE 14 ---
ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
Post  Svo,  pp,  xvi— 224,  cloth,  price  9s. 
UDANAVABaA. 
A   Collection  of  Verses  proji  the  Buddhist  Canon. 
Compiled  by  DHAEMATKATA. 
Belng  the  northern  BUDDHIST  VERSION  of  DHABIMAPADA. 
Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkah-hgyur,  with  Notes,  and 
Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjnavarman, 
By  W.  WOODVILLE  EOCKHILL. 
Mr.  Rockhili’s  present  work  is  the  first  from  -which  assistance  will  be  gained 
fora  more  accurate  understanding  of  the  Pali  text;  it  is,  in  fact,  as  yet  ttic  only 
term  of  comparison  available  to  us.  The  ‘  Udauavarga,’  the  Thibetan  version,  was 
originally  discovered  by  tlie  late  M.  Schiefuer,  who  published  the  Tibetan  text,  and 
had  intended  adding  a   translation,  an  intention  frustrated  by  his  deatli,  but  which 
has  been  carried  out  by  Mr.  Rock  hill.  ,  .  .  Mr.  Rockhill  may  be  congratulated  for 
having  well  accomplished  a   difficult  taskT-Saiurday  Review. 
In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 566,  cloth,  accompanied  by  a 
Language  Map,  price  25s.  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 
A   SKETCH  OF  THE  MOBEEH  LANG-XJAOES  OF  AFEICA. 
Bt  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST, 
Barrister-at-Law,  aiid  late  of  Her  Majesty’s  Indian  Civil  Service. 
“Any  one  at  all  interested  in  African  languages  cannot  do  better  than  get  Mr. 
Cast’s  book.  It  is  encyclopaedic  in  its  scope,  and  the  reader  gets  a   start  clear  away 
in  any  particular  language,  and  is  left  free  to  add  to  the  initial  sum  of  knowledge 
there  oollected.”--‘Natal  Mercury. 
“   Mr.  Gust  has  contrived  to  produce  a   work  of  value  to  linguistic  students.” — 
Nature. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.—3i2,  with  Maps  and  Plan,  cloth,  price  14s, 
A   HISTOEY  OF  BUEMA. 
Including  Burma  Proper,  Pegu?  Taungu,  Tenasserim,  and  Arakan.  From 
the  Earliest  Time  to  the  End  of  the  First  War  with  British  India. 
By  Lieut.-Gen.  Sib  ARTHUR  P.  PHAYRE,  G.C.M.G.,  K.O.S.L,  and  C.B., 
Membre  Oorrespondant  de  la  S9ciete  Academique  lado-Chinoise 
de  France. 
“   Sir  Arthur  Phayre’s  contribution  to  Trlibner’s  Oriental  Series  supplies  a   recog- 
nised want,  and  its  appearance  has  been  looked  forward  to  for  many  years   
General  Phay  re  deserves  groat  credit  for  the  patience  and  industry  which  has  resulted 
in  this  History  of  Burma.”-— Natrtrday  Review. 
Third  Edition.  Post  8vo,  pp.  276,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 
EELIOION  IH  CHINA. 
By  JOSEPH  EDKINS,  D-D.,  Peking. 
Containing  a   Brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions  of  the  Chinese,  with 
Observations  on  the  Prbspecfcs  of  Christian  Conversion  amongst  that 
People. 
“   Dr.  Edkins  has  been  most  careful  in  noting  the  varied  and  often  complex  phases 
of  opinion,  so  as  to  give  an  account  of  considerable  value  of  the  subject.” — Scotsman. 
“   As  a   missionary,  it  has  been  part  of  Dr.  Edkins'  duty  to  study  the  existing 
religions  in  China,  and  his  long  residence  in  the  country  has  enabled  him  to  acquire 
an  intimate  knowledge  of  them  as  they  at  present  eyiisit.*’— Saturday  Review. 
“   Dr.  Edkins'  valuable  work,,  of  which  this  is  a   second  and  revised  edition,  has, 
from  the  time  that  it  was  published,  been  the  standard  authority  upon  tlie  subject 
of  which  it  treats/’— 'Nonconformist. 
Dr.  Edkins  .   .   .  may  now  be  fairly  regarded  as  among  the  first  authorities  on 
Chinese  religion  and  language.”— 
Quarteidi/  Review. 


--- PAGE 15 ---
TRCrBJV£M*S  ORIEiTBAL  SERIES. 
Third  Edition.  Post  Svo,  pp.  xv.*-25o,  cloth,  price  7s.  6(L 
OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTOET  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE 
BFREAB  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS. 
By  C.  F.  TIEBE. 
Doctor  of  Theology,  Professor  of  the  History  of  Ileligions  in  the 
University  of  Leyden. 
Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J.  Estlin  Cahpenter,  M.A. 
“   Few  books  of  its  size  contain  the  result  of  so  much  wide  thinking,  able  and  labo- 
rious study,  or  enable  the  reader  to  gain  a   better  bird’s-eye  view  of  the  latest  results 
of  investigations  into  the  religious  lii-.tory  of  nations.  As  Fnifessor  Tide  modestly 
says,  ‘  In  this  little  book  are  outlines — pencil  sketches,  I  might  say— -iiothing  more.' 
iiut  there  are  some  men  whose  sketches  from  a   thumb-nail  arc  of  far  more  worth 
than  an  enormous  canvas  covered  with  the  crude  painting  of  others,  and  it  is  easy  to 
see  that  these  pages,  full  of  information,  these  sentences,  cut  and  perhaps  also  dry, 
short  and  clear,  condense  the  fruits  of  long  and  thorough  research.,” — Scotsman. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  x.-~274,  cloth,  price  9s. 
THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA  AND  THE  EARLY 
HISTORY  OF  HIS  ORDER. 
Derived  from  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-hgyur  and  Estan-hgyur. 
Followed  by  notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoten. 
Translated  by  W.  W.  iiOCKHILL,  Second  Secretary  IT.  S.  Legation  in  China. 
*‘The  volume  boars  testiraony  to  the  diligence  and  fulness  with  wlitdi  the  author 
has  consulted  and  tested  the  ancient  documents  bearing  ux)on  his  remarkable  sub- 
ject.”—- Tames.  .  , 
Will  be  appreciated  by  those  who  devote  themselves  to  tiiose  Buddhist  studies 
which  have  of  late  years  taken  in  these  Western  regions  so  remarkable  a   develop- 
ment. Its  matter  possesses  a   sj^ecial  interest  as  being  derived  from  ancient  Tibetan 
works,  some  portions  of  which,  hero  analysed  and  translated,  have  not  yet  attracted 
the  attention  of  scholars.  The  volume  is  rich  in  ancient  stories  bearing  upon  the 
world’s  renovation  and  the  origin  of  castes,  as  recorded  in  these  venerable  autho- 
rities."— Daily  Mews. 
Third  Edition.  Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.-464,  cloth,  price  i6s. 
THE  SANKHYA  APHOEISMS  OF  KAPILA, 
With  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  Commentaries. 
Translated  by  J.  B.  BALLANTYNE,  LL.D.,  late  Principal  of  the  Benares 
College. 
Edited  by  FIT^JEDWABD  HALL. 
“The  work  displays  a   vast  expenditure  of  labour  and  scholarship,  for  which 
students  of  Hindoo  pliilosophy  have  every  reason  to  be  grateful  to  Dr.  Hall  and  the 
publishers." — Calcutta  Review. 
In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  cviii.-242,  and  viii.-370,  cloth,  price  24s. 
Dedicated  by  permission  to  H.B.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales. 
BUDDHIST  RECORDS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD, 
Translated  from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  Tsiang  (a.I).  629). 
By  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A., 
(Trin.  ColL,  Carnb.) ;   B.N.  (Betired  Chaplain  and K, I.) ;  Professor  of  Chinese, 
University  College,  London  ;   Bector  of  Wark,  Horfchumberlaud,  &c. 
An  eminent  Indian  authority  writes  respecting  this  work: — ‘‘Nothing 
more  can  he  <ione  in  elucidating  the  History  of  India  until  Mr.  Beal’s  tran.s- 
iation  of  the  ‘  Si-yu-ki’  appears.” 
“   It  is  a   strange  freak  of  historical  preservation  that  the  best  account  of  the  con- 
dition of  India  at  that  ancient  perioil  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  books  of  travel 
written  by  the  Chinese  pilgrims,  of  whom  Hwen  Thsang  is  the  best  known,” — Thnes. 
“   We  are  comx>ellcd  at  this  .stage  to  close  oiir  brief  and  inadequate  notice  of  a   botjk 
for  easy  access  to  which  Orientalists  will  be  deeply  grateful  to  the  able  traiislator.” — 
Literary  Werld.^^ 


--- PAGE 16 ---
TRUBNEtS  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xlviu.~398,  clotli,  price  12s. 
Translated  from  tlie  Sanskrit,  with  an  Introduction. 
By  tke  late  A.  0.  BURNEIiL,  Pb.D.,  C.I.E. 
Completed  and  Edited  by  E.  W.  HOPKINS,  Ph.D., 
of  Columbia  College,  N.Y. 
This  work  is  full  of  interest ;   while  for  the  student  of  sociology  and  the  science 
of  religion  it  is  full  of  importance.  Ic  is  a   great  boon  to  get  so  notable  a   work  in  so 
accessible  a   form,  admirably  edited,  and  competently  translated. 
“Few  men  were  more  competent  than  Burnell  to  give  us  a   really  good  translation 
of  this  well-known  law  book,  first  rendered  into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones, 
Burnell  was  tiot  only  an  independent  Sanskrit  scholar,  but  an  ex})crieiiccd  lawyer, 
and  he  joined  to  these  two  important  qualifications  the  rare  faculty  of  being  able  to 
express  his  thoughts  in  clear  and  trenchant  English.  ...  We  ought  to  feel  very 
grateful  to  Br.  Hopkins  for  having  given  us  all  that  could  be  imblished  of  the  trans- 
lation left  by  Burnell.'’— -P.  Max  MUllbr  in  the  AcaiUmj. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.“234,  cloth,  price  9s. 
THE  LIFE  AHD  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER 
CSOMA  DE  KOROS, 
Between  1819  and  1842.  With  a   Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  TTn- 
published  Works  and  Essays.  From  Original  and  for  most  part  Un- 
published Documents, 
By  THEODORE  DtTKA,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Sufgeon-Major 
Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c. 
“   Not  too  soon  have  Messrs.  Trubner  added  to  their  valuable  Oriental  Scries  a 
history  of  the  life  and  works  of  one  of  the  most  gifted  and  devoted  of  Oriental 
students,  Alexander  Gsoma  do  Koros,  It  is  forty-three  years  since  his  death,  and 
though  an  account  of  his  career  was  demanded  soon  after  Ids  decease,  it  has  only- 
now  appeared  in  the  important  memoir  of  his  compatriot,  Dr.  Duka.” — BooHdUr, 
In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xih-siS  and  310,  cloth,  imice  21s. 
MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS 
ON  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE 
MALAY  PENINSULA  AND  THE  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO. 
Reprinted  from  “Dalrymple’s  Oriental  Repertory,”  “   Asiatick  Researches,” 
and  the  “   Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.” 
“The  pa})ers  treat  of  almost  every  aspect  of  ludo-China— its  i>hilology,  economy, 
geography,  geology— and  constitute  a   very  material  and  important  contribution  to 
our  accessible  information  regarding  that  country  and  its  people.”— 
Post  8 VO,  p}>.  xii.~72,  cloth,  price  5s. 
THE  SATAKAS  OF  BHAETEIHAEI. 
Translated  from  the  Sanskrit 
By  the  Rev.  B.  HALE  WORTHAIH,  M.R.A.S., 
Rector  of  Eggesford,  North  Devon. 
“   A   very  interesting  addition  to  Trilhner’s  Oriental  Series.”  — 
Review. 
“   Many  of  the  Maxims  in  the  book  have  a   Biblical  ring  and  beauty  of  exi>ression.” 
— Bt.  James*  Gasette, 
LONDON :  TEUBNiB  &   CO,,  57  and  59  LUDGATE  HILL. 
500—20/3/86 — M. 


--- PAGE 17 ---
TRUBNER’S 
ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


--- PAGE 18 ---


--- PAGE 19 ---
AJfCIEJSfT 
PEOVERBS  AND  MAXIMS  |
f-;; 
3From  JSurmese  Sources ; 
 I
TEiiBMER  c%  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL. 
1886. 
[All  rights  reservcdS\ 


--- PAGE 20 ---


--- PAGE 21 ---
GONTEFTB. 
INTEODtrOTION 
I.  THE  LOKANITI— 
The  Wise  Man 
The  Good  Man 
The  Evil-Doee 
Friendship 
Woman  . 
Kings  •, 
Miscellaneous 
II.  THE  DHAMMANlTI— 
The'Fkeceftge'"  ■, 
.  . 
Schola  rs  HIP  .  » 
Wisdom  .  .  .  ' 
Knowledge  . 
Conversation  .  .  
'  , 
Wealth  .  .  *.-<  *•  , 
Eesidence  .   '  . 
Dependence  . 
Friendshh* 
The  Bad  Man 
.  The;  Good;  Man  ; : ; 
'  :■ \ 
The  Powerful 
WOMEN''  
'  ,   
' 
Sons 
:''':Sbrvants  '  ;■ 
'  Residencip 
What  should  be  Done 
vii 
I 
u 
i6 
19 
22 
26 
31 
37 
40 
43 
49 
53 
■55::" 
■S7^ 
59 
62 
67 
69 
73 
m: 
79 


--- PAGE 22 ---
CONl'ENTS. 
T! 
PAGE 
What  should  be  Avoided  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  85 
Ornamentation   
90 
Ktnos   
92 
Ministration    
  
96 
Things  Taken  by  Twos,  &c 
   102 
MtS€ELL.ANEOUS   
105 
III.  THERlJANlTI   
119 
IV.  THE  SXITTAVADDHANANiTI 
  
142 
APPENDIX;— 
A.  Old  Indian  Sayings      
i6z 
B.  Corresponding  Stanzas  IN  THE  Nitis  .  .  .  .175 
C.  Corresponding  Stanzas  in  the  Dhammaniti  .  .  *179 


--- PAGE 23 ---
INTRODUCTION. 
The  Sanskrit-Pali  word  Mti  is  equivalent  to  conduct '' 
in  its  abstract,  and  ''guide'’  in  its  concrete  signification. 
As  applied  to  books,  it  is  a   general  term  for  a   treatise 
wbich  includes  maxims,  pitliy  sayings,  and  didactic  stories, 
intended  as  a   guide  to  suck  matters  of  everyday  life  as 
form  the  character  of  an  individual  and  influence  him  in 
his  relations  to  his  fellow-men.  Treatises  of  this  kind 
have  been  popular  in  all  ages,  and  have  served  as  a   most 
effective  medium  of  instruction.  In  India  a   very  compre- 
hensive literature  sprang  up,  known  as  the  NUiidstrm, 
embracing  what  is  called  "   Beast-fable "   lore,  represented 
by  the  Pandatantra,  and  its  epitome  the  Eitopadeia  of 
Vishnusarman,  and  the  numerous  ethico-didactic  antho- 
logies which,  based  ciiiefly  on  the  Malidhhdrata  and  other 
ancient  poems,  gained  popularity  by  the  collected  apo- 
phthegms of  Bhartrihari  and  C'i-nakya.  Anthologieal  study 
at  length  became  so  inviting,  that  in  the  Bamgadliarapad- 
dliati,  a   compilation  of  the  fourteenth  century  A.D., 
find  about  6000  stanzas,  gathered  from  more  than  250 
sources. 
The  Buddhist  Jdtakcm,  containing  5  50  stories,  is  a   rich 
storehouse  of  fables,  and,  though  in  character  similar  to 
the  Pandatantra^  is  not  classed  as  a   Niti,  nor  does  the 
Dhammapada,  and  other  treatises  of  the  same  kind,  full 
of  maxims  of  morality  and  religious  reflections,  come 
under  th^designation.  The  term  NUi,  in  so  far  as  it 
describes  anthologieal  collections,  is,  in  Burma,  found 


--- PAGE 24 ---
INTRODUCTION. 
Y'iii 
connected  with  the  following  works — the  Lolmniti,  the 
Dliammaniti,  the  Mjaniti  and  the  SiiUamddhaiutnUi. 
Of  these,  the  first  three  are  original  recensions  in  the 
Magadhese  dialect,  adapted  from  Sanskrit  works;  while 
the  last  is  a   comparatively  recent  collection  of  useful 
maxims  from  the  Buddhist  canon  itself.  The  former  form 
a   group  in  themselves,  and  owe  their  importance  to  being 
of  Sanskritic  origin.  The  remarks  which  follow  are  in 
special  reference  to  them  alone. 
The  earliest  reference  in  Burmese  literature  to  the 
Lohaniti  and  RdjanUi  i^,  m   id.!:  as  I  have  been  able 
to  ascertain,  to  be  found  in  the  Arakan  Edzdivin^  or 
Chronicles  of  Arakan,”  in  connection  with  Prince  Kha 
Maung’s  visit  to  Pegu  early  in  the  seventeenth  century. 
Mention  of  the  Bhammaniti  m   mrdij  met  with,  as  it 
seems  never  to  have  become  a   handbook  for  study  like  the 
other  two.  The  exact  dates  of  these  collections  in  Burma 
are  not  recorded  anywhere,  nor  is  their  authorship  a 
matter  of  certainty.  That  they  were  compiled  between  the 
twelfth  and  fourteenth  centuries  is  not  unlikely,  judging 
from  the  progress  of  literature  under  the  patronage  of 
Burmese  kings.  King  Anoratha,  in  the  first  half  of  the 
eleventh  century,  organised  an  expedition  to  Thaton,  and 
obtained  thence  a   copy  of  the  Buddhist  Scriptures.  Their 
interpretation  was  then  only  possible  through  the  Mnn 
language.  The  Mun  alphabet  was  consequently  adopted 
by  the  Burmese,  and  the  learned  among  the  latter  made 
the  literature  written  in  it  an  important  study.  Wars 
between  the  Muns  and  Burmese  led  eventually  to  a   good 
deal  of  intercommunication  between  the  two  races.  Hindu 
colonists,  besides,  had  settled  on  the  lower  valleys  of  the 
Irawadi  and  Sittang  rivers,  and  a   religious  struggle  be- 
tween Brahmans  and  Buddhists  resulted  in  evoking  the 
erudition  of  the  learned  Punnas.  Their  services  were 
soon  utilised  by  the  Burmese  kings  in  furtherance  of  the 
cause  of  literature,  and  it  was  through  their^nvaluable 
assistance  that  the  study  of  Sanskrit  became  a   sine  gud  non 


--- PAGE 25 ---
INTRODUCTION, 
IX 
in  tlie  royal  monasteries.  Being  familiar  with  Milgadliese 
(then  the  literary  language  of  the  country),  and  also  ac- 
quainted with  the  local  vernacular,  they  were  of  great 
help  to  the  Buddhist  Eahans  in  the  interpretation  of  the 
Pitagat.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  when  that 
great  task  was  completed  attention  was  paid  to  secular 
literature,  the  outcome  of  which  was  the  compilation  of 
the  three  NiHs,  Similar,  or  perhaps  the  very  same 
treatises,  were  in  use  in  the  royal  courts  of  India,  and 
their  introduction  into  the  court  of  Ava  was  natural 
enough.  The  translation  of  Sanskrit  works  of  a   more 
erudite  character  was  a   work  of  later  date. 
That  Brah manic  influence  had  been  at  work  in  the 
compilation  of  the  Nitis  of  Burma  is  evident  from  the 
nature  of  certain  passages  found  in  them.  Evidence  is 
also  not  wanting  to  show  that  additions  have  been  made 
to  the  original  treatises  more  in  consonance  with  Bud- 
dhistic belief  and  idiosyncrasies.  Partial  emendations 
have  also  been  resorted  to,  and  can  he  discovered  as  the 
work  of  Eahans  anxious  to  replace  Hinduic  ideas  by  others 
more  congenial  to  their  orthodoxy. 
Sanskrit  editions  of  the  three  Mtis  are  to  he  found 
among  the  Manipurian  Punnas,  who,  driven  from  their 
native  abode  by  the  vicissitudes  of  war,  made  a   home 
for  themselves  in  Burma.  They  are  written  in  Bengali 
characters,  but  editions  in  Sanskritised  Burmese  are  also 
procurable.  The  Brnskvit  Zokantti  of  the  Manipurian 
Punnas  commences  with  the  same  stanza  as  the  Sitopa- 
desa  of  Vishnu^arman — 
Siddhis  sddhye  satdm  astn 
Pras4d4t  tasya  dharjates 
Jahnaviphenalekheva 
Yadmurdhni  ^aninali  kala.^ 
^  “For  the  good  may  there  be  success  in  achievements  through  the 
grace  of  Dh^ati  (Siva),  on  whose  head  there  is  the  moon’s  sixteenth 
part,  like  a   streak  of  the  Ganges’ foam.” 


--- PAGE 26 ---
■X 
INTRODUCTION. 
This  stanza  is  disregarded  in  the  Burmese  anthology, 
most  probably  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  its  adaptation 
to  Buddhistic  vie^^s.  The  Sanskrit  Lokaniti  originally 
contained  109  gSdhfis,  which,  in  the  Burmese  version,  have 
been  expanded  to  167. 
The  Lokaniti  and  DhammanUi  embrace  a   miscella- 
neous collection  of  subjects,  and  serve  as  suitable  hand- 
books for  the  general  reader  for  the  study  of  prudential 
rules  and  principles  of  morality.  The  former  is  taught 
in  almost  every  monastic  school  in  Burma,  and  printed 
editions  of  it  have  helped  considerably  to  extend  its 
popularity.  That  a   work  of  the  kind  should  have  charms 
for  the  Buddhist  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  He  firmly 
believes  that  his  future  happiness  depends  upon  his  be- 
haviour in  his  present  life,  and  relies  more  on  practical 
deeds  rather  than  on  the  faith  which  his  religion  demands  ; 
and  nothing  could  be  more  suitable  to  his  wants  than  a 
kind  of  literature  which  lays  down  for  him  in  pithy  stanzas, 
and  often  in  metaphoric  language,  a   number  of  simply- 
worded  apophthegms  which  are  to  shape  his  career  in  this 
world  and  fit  him  for  a   better  sphere  of  existence  when 
he  leaves  it. 
The  Edjaniti  is  an  anthology  originally  compiled  for  the 
use  of  kings  and  princes,  and  based  chiefly  on  the  ancient 
Dharmaiastras,  of  which  Manu’s  code  has  evidently  sup- 
plied the  greater  proportion  of  the  stanzas.  It  must  not 
he  confounded  with  the  Bajaniti  of  Lallu  Lala,  which  is 
nothing  more  than  an  adaptation  in. the  Braj  dialect  of  the 
Sanskrit  Eitoioachsa.  The  Burmese  NUi  seems  to  have 
for  its  prototype  the  BdjanUisdsto^a  of  CTulakya.  The 
JOhammaniti,  although  the  best  and  most  comprehensive 
of  the  Mtis,  is  very  little  studied — a   circumstance  that 
can  he  explained  by  its  being  more  extensive  in  its  scope 
than  the  Lokaniti,  and  therefore  proving  a   task  of  greater 
labour  to  the  copyist,  through  whom  chiefly  the  wide 
circulation  of  texts  could  have  been  carried  on  in  the 
absence  of  printing-presses.  The  Lokaniti,  "Sesides,  had 


--- PAGE 27 ---
INTRODUCTION. 
XI 
ail  Indian  reputation  which  was  never  extended  to  the 
Dhammmviti,  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  IlajawUL 
The  stanzas  of  the  Nitis  belong  chiefly  to  the  Vaita^  or 
heroic  measure;  corresponding  with  the  octosylla]>iG  ^lokas 
of  the  MalidhMraM  and  Rdmdyana^  but  the  exigencies  of 
expression  have,  as  in  those  poems,  necessitated  the  occa- 
sional use  of  longer-lined  verses.  The  Pfili  of  the  texts 
belongs  to  the  later  rather  than  to  the  earlier  style  as 
represented  in  the  Dlmnraapada  of  the  Buddhist  canon. 
On  the  whole,  the  translations  are  faithful  to  the  original 
Sanskrit  from  ivkich  they  have  been  adopted.  In  some 
cases  the  Pali  is  a   mere  transcript.  For  instance,  the 
Sanskrit— 
Mats,  ^atruh  pittl  vairi 
Yena  bitlo  na  pathitah 
Na  sobhate  sabhamadhye 
Hamsamadhye  vako  yatha 
is  rendered  in  Pi.li  by 
Matil  veri  pit:l  satm 
Kena  bitle  na  sikkhitd 
SabMmajjhe  na  sobhati 
Haihsamajjhe  bako  yathS.. 
Again,  in  Sanskrit  we  have— 
Edpayau  vanasampanna 
Visalakniasambhavah 
YidydhinO,  na  j^obhanto 
Nirgandh^  iva  kirp^ukah, 
and  in  Pdli — 
Rdpayobbanasampanna 
YMlakulasambhava 
Vijjahina  na  sobhanti 
Niggandhil  iva  kiihsufcl 
In  other  instances  some  material  modifications  have 
been  made  necessary,,  as  would  be  expected  in  a   para- 
phrastic translation,  in  which  the  rules  of  versification 
have  to  be  rigidly  enforced,  and  in  which  Brahmanic  sen- 
timents hat?  to  be  so  modified  as  not  to  wound  the  suscep- 


--- PAGE 28 ---
INTRODUCTION. 
xii 
tibilities  of  tlie  Buddhist  reader;  Some  passages  will  be 
found  revolting  to  our  intelligence,  but  they  may  be  of 
use  in  giving  iis  an  insight  into  the  superstitious  practices 
of  the  ancient  Indians,  and  furnishing  an  index  to  the 
state  of  society  at  the  period  to  which  they  refer. 
In  the  footnotes  to  the  English  translations  I  have 
made  some  passing  observations  and  given  parallel  pas™ 
sages.  These  might  have  been  largely  augmented,  but  I 
have  refrained  from  encumbering  the  pages  of  a   work 
intended  chiefly  for  the  general  reader.  The  Pflli  texts  of 
.  the  Burmese  MUis  are  in  preparation,  and  will  be,  it  is 
hoped,  useful  to  the  student  who  would  like  to  compare 
these  anthological  treatises  with  those  of  a   similar  nature 
which  were  at  one  time  highly  popular  in  India,  the 
cradle  of  proverbs,  parables,  and  folklore. 
..  In  conclusion,  I  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  my 
deep  gratitude  to  Dr.  Eost  for  the  kindly  encouragement 
he  has  given  me  in  the  publication  of  this  work,  and  for 
the  many  tokens  of  the  interest  he  has  taken  in  the 
literary  labours  on  which  I  am  engaged. 
Eangoon,  Januari/  i8S6. 
J.  G. 


--- PAGE 29 ---
THE 
MTI  literature  of  BURMA. 
I.— THE  LOKANtTIJ 
SECTION  I. 
THE  AVISE  MAN. 
I. 
Having  paid  homage  to  the  Three  Gems,^  I  recite  con- 
cisely in  hlilgadhese®  the  “Lokaniti,”  extracted  from 
various  treatises.^ 
^  I  have  selected  this  Niti  for  dhistic  compositions  frequently  begin 
translation  before  the  others  because  with  a   respectful  reference  to  these 
it  is  the  most  popular  in  Burma.  Its  thi'ee  objects  of  veneration  in  addi- 
popularity  during  recent  years  ha.s  tion  to  the  formula  addressed  to 
been  increased  by  printed  editions  Gotama  —   Namo  tanm  hhaijavato 
of  it  emanating  from  the  presses  of  amlmto sammdmmh'mldhcmaf  “'Hon- 
Kangoon.  It  foriri.s,  besides,  a   text-  our  to  him  the  Blessed,  the  Sancti- 
book  for  tlie  vernacular  schools  of  fied,  and  All-wise,” 
the  iu’ovince.  The  Puli  text  of  it  The  language  of  Alugadha.  This 
is  veiT  corrupt  in  man}"  places,  and  was  one  of  the  nine  tracts  into 
an  emended  edition  has  not  yet  which  India  of  the  Parana  period 
been  attempted.  The  Ldkuntti  was  known  to  be  divided.  Hiiriiig 
(“Worldly  Behaviour”)  is  divided  Gotama’s  time  it  uus  probably: 
into  .seven  sections,  viz.,  (l)  The  bounded  by  the  Ganges  on  the  north, 
IAml-Doer,  (2)  The  Good  AIan,  (3)  Hiranya  Parvata  (Monghyr)  on  the 
The  Evil-Doer,  (4)  Fiuendship,  (5)  east,  Kirana  Siivarna  on  the  south, 
WoiiAX,  (6)  Kings,  and,  (7‘)AIisoel-  and  the  Benares  district  on  the 
LANEOUS.  It  wa.s,  for  the  first  time,  west,,  making  in  all  a   circuit  of  about 
rendered  into  Burmese  in  A.D.  1S35,  miles.  Its  ancient  capital  was 
during  the  reign  of  Bhagidaw,  by  Ptoliputra,  established  in  the  reign 
the  guru  Cakkandabhisiri.  of  'Ajatasatru.  Alagadha  was  also 
-   The  Tirataihith^  viz.,  Buddha,  known  as  Paldia  or  Fardsa,  the 
his  Law  (i.e.,  Buddhist  Scrip-  land  of  the  Buteafrovdosa.  Hence 
tures),  and  the  Priesthood.  Bud-  Arrian,  Strabo,  and  Pliny  call  the 
A 


--- PAGE 30 ---
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
The  in  this  world,  is  a   maji’s  substance,  his 
father,  his  mother,  his  teacher,  his  friend :  a   person,  there- 
fore, knowing  theh^  Mti/’  is  a   wise  man,  both  excellent 
and  well-infoTiiied. 
3*  ■  • 
How  can  there  be  proficiency  for  one  wdio  is  indolent, 
wealth  for  one  without  proficiency,  friendship  for  one 
without  w^ealth,  happiness  for  the  friendless,  merit  for  the 
unhappy,  and  Mbban^  for  the  unmeritorious  person  ? 
4* 
Wealth  is  not  equal  in  value  to  learning.  Thieves  do 
not  take  aw\ay  learning:^  it  is  friendship  in  this  world, 
and  the  bearer  of  happiness  in  the  next. 
5-  
. 
One  should  not  despise  a   little ;   he  should  keep  in  his 
mind  wdiat  has  been  acquired;  drops  of  water  in  an  ant- 
hill will  fill  it  at  length.^ 
people  PrasiL  The  chief  places  of 
Buddhistic  interest  in  Magadha  were 
Buddha  Gayji,  Bajagriha,  Ndlanda, 
and  3viisagurapura,  the  original 
capital.  The  sacred  texts  written 
in  the  Magadha  dialect  are,  properly 
speaking,  tenned  Pali.  The  latter 
word  is  spelt  Pali  by  the  Burmese. 
^  Sanskrit  cliichy.  There  is  in- 
ternal evidence  to  show  that  pre- 
existing Buddhistic  compilations 
have  also  been  made  use  of  in  this 
anthology. 
®  This  word  has  the  form  niti  also 
in  Burmese  palm-Ieafs,  The  ortho- 
graphy 7iidhi,  signifying  a   “   reposi- 
tory,” is  met  with  occasionally,  but 
this,  no  doubt,  is  the  result  of  pho- 
netic similarity.  Por  remarks  on. 
NUl  literature,  see  the  Introduction 
to  this  work. 
®  This  is  the  form  which  the 
Sanskrit  Kirvaiia  takes  in  Burmese 
literature.  [Fibhdn  =   nihhdnu  =   w 
’\-vd-\-na  =   7iivvdna^  which,  accord- 
ing to  rule,  becomes  nibhdna^  “a 
going  out.”] 
^  The  idea  is  borrowed  from  d^n- 
akya 
“   With  knowledge  say  what  other 
wealth 
Can  vie,  which  neither  thieves  by 
stealth 
Can  take,  nor  kinsmen  make  their 
^prey  ; 
Which  lavish’d,  never  -ivastes 
away,” — Muir. 
Or,  more  literally,  “That  jewel  know- 
ledge, which  kinsmen  plunder  not, 
nor  thieves  carry  a-way,  which  de- 
creaseth  not  by  giving,  is  great 
wealth.” 
®  Compare  Eitopadem,  ii.  lo  : — 
“   By  drops  of  water  falling  one  by 
one, 
Little  by  little  may  a   
jar  be  filled  ; 
Such  is  the  law  of  ail  accumula- 
tions— 
Of  money,  kno  wl  '*ige,  and  religious 
merit.  ” — Indian  Wisdom, 


--- PAGE 31 ---
3 
THE  LOKANtTL 
6, 
One  slioiilcl  despise  neither  science  nor  art,  saying  to 
himself — ''It  is  of  little  consequence 
eyen  one  learnt 
to  perfection  is  a   suitable  means  of  livelihood* 
.  . 
 7^ 
There  is  not  a   gem  in  every  rock  nor  pearl  in  every 
elephant,^  not  sandal- wood  in  every  forest,  nor  erudition 
in  every  place. 
B. 
If  it  be  known  wdiere  a   wise  man,  full  of  learning,  is — 
one  ill  search  of  knowledge  should  eagerly  repair  to  that 
place. 
■  9‘ 
Learning  comes  by  degrees,  wealth  little  by  little, 
climbing  a   mountain  is  done  gradually,  love  comes  l)y 
degrees,  anger  little  by  little, — these  five  little  by  littled^ 
lO. 
General  knowledge, 
the  science  of  lawd"  calculation, 
Fiibnlously  pupposi-n  to  be  in 
the  head.  Tliere  is  a   similar  conceit 
concerning  the  snake  and  toad. 
Sine  {iin£=  “little  by  little.’* 
Sanskrit  “hear- 
ing*’) is  rendered  in  Burxnese  by 
“what  is  heard  and  seen,”  I  have 
translated  it  by  “general  know- 
ledge.” The  reference,  no  doubt, 
is  til  the  kn«)wledge  of  the  Vedas, 
or  at  least  of  the  ‘nmntraa  (hymns), 
and  hrdhtnaij<(fi  (expositions) — ^the 
books  obtained  by  llisbis  through 
divtne  re vedati* ?n. 
The  Pali  snmmuii  (an  adapta- 
tion of  shifltij  “lueinory”)  is  ren- 
dered by  “the  knowledge  of  the 
Uhaniiiiathfis/’  Samniuti,  strictly 
speaking,  signifies  “tradition,”  to 
which  heading  the  Sanskrit  Dhm^- 
makUiras  are  referred.  Srntl  is 
I 
  
what  is  heard  by  divine  revelation 
jin  contrast  wi%  aniriti — what  is 
I   received  from  memory  (tradition). 
With  regard  to  the  latter,  Monier 
Williams  remarks  : — “   This  is  be- 
lieved ■  to  be  founded  on  Sruti, 
‘direct  revelation,’  as  its  primary 
basis,  and  only  possesses  authority 
in  80  far  a»  it  is  in  harin<tny  with 
such  revealed  truth.  The  wry 
essence  of  Smriti^  however,  is  con- 
sidered to  be  that  it  was  delivered 
Tiiemorlter  by  human  authors  and 
put  into  the  fomi  of  hiimtin  c->inpr»si- 
tion.”  The  six  p>i'!ncipal  divisions  of 
Smriti  in  Sanskrit  literature  are  : — 
I,  The  VeddnyuB  (“Helps  to  tiie 
Vedas”),  comprising-— 
(a)  Kalpa  (Ceremonial  Direr  ■ 
tory). 
(5)  Sthdid  (Pronuneiation), 
(e)  Ohandan  (Motre).^ 
,  (d)  Ninibta  (Exposition). 
,  (e)  Vydkaram  (Graunuar). 
(/)  Jtfotuha  (Astronomy). 
II.  The  Smdrta  Sdtras  (Xoii-Vedic 
Ceremonies). 


--- PAGE 32 ---
4 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
ineclia-iiical  art ;   tlie  knowledge  of  tlie  Mti/'  the  Bya- 
kaiein,^^  and  music;  manual  dexterity,  archery,  antiqui- 
ties ; 
11. 
Science  of  medicine,  wit  and  humour,^®  astrology 
strategy,^®  versification;  diplomacy,  magic, 
and  grammar : 
these  are  tlie  eighteen  acquirements 
12. 
A   wise  man  who  is  not  questioned  is  like  a   drum ; 
one  who  is  questioned  is  like  a   violent  shower :  a   fool, 
whether  addressed  or  not,  speaks  much. 
The  knowledge  that  is  in  books,  and  the  w^ealth  that 
III.  The  Dharmamstras  (Law  of  the  Vedas  ;  yoga  may 
Books).  refer  to  the  2/0, r/ct  system  and  not  to 
IV.  The  ItUuUas  (Legendary  “   mechanical  art.” 
Poems).  . 
 Or  “   Old  Writings,”  f.c.,  the 
.  
TheP«/v?/2a.9(LegendaryTales).  eighte
.  
The  JS’Uiklstras  (Moral  Pre-  dary 
cepts).  The  Jtihdms  or  “Legendary 
The  ancient  collection  known  Poems”  are  referred  to.  Among 
as  the  Al'timatra  is  referred  to.  them  are  the  Rdmdyana  and  Mahd- 
I7tfrAYfIvns  so  translated  in  the  hhdrata. 
Bnrniese  9ilts,y/a,  and  “   gi’ainmatical  Joti  ijyoti&lia). 
analysis”  is  probably  referred  to.  Or ‘‘circumvention.”  Byyjidyd, 
“The  word  V ydlcarana  (Pali  Byd-  possibly  “mysticism,”  such  as  we 
karaiia^  Burmese  Bydlcarein)  means  read  of  in  connection  with  the 
literally  ‘  undoing,’  and  is  applied  Vedantist  and  Mimansa  systems,  is 
first  to  linguistic  analysis  and  then  the  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed  by 
generally  to  grammar,  but  especially  the  text. 
to  Pilnini's  Grammar.  It  is  oppo-  Or  “incantations,”  “the  use 
site  to  iSannkamna^  ‘putting  to-  of  spells.” 
gether,’ whence  the  formed  langiia,ge  The  following  is  the  Pali  text 
is  called  ‘constructed.’”  of  the  loth  and  iith  stanzas,  com- 
— Indian  Waidonu  As  there  seems  posed  in  the  Vatta  mbtvQ  i — 
to  be  a   great  deal  of  misconception  (lo)  8uti  sammnti  sahkhya  ca 
on  the  part  of  the  Burmese  trans-  yoga  niti  visesabl 
latur  in  several  of  the  renderings  of  gandliabba  ganikit  ce^'a- 
words  in  the  lOth  and  iith  stanzas,  dhanubbeda" ca  puraiia 
the  rendering  attached  to  tisesahd  (n)  tikiccha  itihasa  ca 
can  scarcely  be  looked  upon  as  the  j(»ti  mayil  ca  ciiandati 
right  one.  I  have  no  doubt  that  ketumantfi  ca  sadda,  ca 
there  is  a   reference  to  the  Vaiseshika  sippelttharasaka  ime. 
philosophy,  one  of  the  six  systems  sound  mCg  be  produced 
which  had  their  origin  in  the  I/pa-  from  it  whenever  it  is  necessary. 


--- PAGE 33 ---
THE  LOKANITL 
is  not  in  one's  lianclSj— the  one  is  not  knowledge,  and  the? 
other  not  w'ealtii,  when  occasion  arises.-^ 
14. 
The  criterion  of  water  is  the  water-lily;  of  a   race, 
discipline  and  discourse ;   of  wisdom,  the  words  that  are 
uttered;  and  of  the  ground,  the  fading  of  tlie  grass. 
A   man  of  little  learning  deems  that  little  a   great  deal; 
he  is  proud:  a   frog  not  seeing  the  w-ater  of  the  sea,-^ 
considers  it  as  much  as  the  water  in  a   well. 
Id 
One  who,  in  the  first  place,  has  not  acquired  knowledge, 
in  the  second,  has  not  obtained  'wealth,  and,  thirdly,  has 
not  acquired  the  ''  Law  ”   — what  will  he  do  in  the  fourth 
place? 
Children,  be  wise ;   wherefore  are  ye  idle  ?   One  without 
wisdom  is  the  bearer  of  another’s  burden.  A   wise  man 
is  honoured  in  the  world;  day  by  day  be  ye  wise,  0 
children. 
18. 
A   mother  is  an  enemy,  a   father  is  an  enemy.  Where- 
fore ?   Because  tlieir  offsxning,  being  uneducated  in  their 
youtli,  are  as  unbecoming  in  an  assembly  as  cranes  among 
swaxis.-^ 
19. 
Who  gives  the  point  to  a   mountain  thorn  ?  Who  gives 
Kicde  mmupaime,  ^Svhen  occa-  hue.  It  is  fjossible  that  the  flam- 
«ion  arises.'’  According  to  Ganak^^a,  ingo  {Phoenicopterus  7’uler)  is  re- 
‘‘the  time  of  action.”  '  ferred  to  by  Indian  writers.  The 
-•*  The  Japanese  proverb  says,  lower  eastern  part  of  the  delta 
“A  frog  in  a   well  sees  nothing  of  of  the  Irawadi  was  called  l/nnim- 
the  high  seas.”  (“  valley  of  Hiuen 
The  Buddhist  Scriptures — the  Tsiang,  the  Chinese  pil^qim,  refers 
Tipitaka — as  furnishing  the  rules  to  the  tract  as  being  included  in 
for  religious  dutSis,  &c.  Kdmaiankd, 
“   Brahmanic  ducks  ”   of  golden  ^ 


--- PAGE 34 ---
6 
 NITI  LITER  A   TUBE  OF  B   URMA . 
sight  to  the  eye  of  a   deer  or  fragrance  to  a   lily  in  the 
pond?  Who  gives  to  the  descendants  of  a   race  their 
disposition  ?  Each  comes  of  itself.^® 
■20,  ■ 
Flavourless  is  a   betel-leaf  without  lime  and  insipid 
the  adornments  of  one  without  wealth;  tasteless  is  a 
curry  devoid  of  salt;  senseless  the  exposition^®  of  one 
without  knowledge. 
21. 
One  observant  is  full  of  learning;  he  increases  his 
knowledge;  by  means  of  knowledge  he  understands  the 
meaning  the  comprehension  of  the  meaning  brings 
satisfaction. 
■  22.  ■' 
Food,  sexual  intercourse,  and  sleep  appertain  both  to 
oxen  and  men;  knowledge  is  peculiar®^  to  man:  one  of 
a   debased  intellect  is  on  a   level  with  oxen. 
23. 
Friendship  is  not  equal  in  value  to  knowledge;  there 
is  no  enemy  like  sickness ;   no  love  is  equal  to  self-love  ; 
no  power  equal  to  moral  merit.^^ 
Buddhism  does  not  accept  a   carminative,  a   destroyer  of  phlegm, 
god  as  creiitor.  Hence,  samciti  hhavo  a   vermifuge,  a   sweetener  of  the 
[hotl).  breath,  an  orna,ment  of  the  mouth, 
Ahotamhul aril  rr  “   betel  -   leaf  ,  a   remover  of  impurities,  and  a 
without  lime,”  where  7co  is  used  for  kindler  of  the  flame  of  love  !   O 
lime.  The  betel  (Malabar  heetla)  friend  !   these  thirteen  properties  of 
is  a   species  of  pepper,  the  leaves  of  betel  are  hard  to  be  met  with,  even 
which  are  chewed  in  the  East  with  in  heaven  !   ” 
a   little  areca-nut,  catechu,  and  shell-  Byakaranarh  (here  ecpiivalent 
lime.  To  improve  the  flavour  rose-  to  niruMa).  This  word  has  a   corn- 
water  and  spices,  such  as  cinnamon,  prehensive  application  in  Burmese 
clove,  &c. ,  are  added.  The  prepared  literature.  Not  only  is  the  term 
betel-leaf  acts  as  a   digestive  after  applied  to  Pjtnini’s  great  Grammar, 
meals,  and  serves  the  same  purpose  but  also  to  several  works,  astrologi- 
as  smoking  in  temporarily  staving  cal,  medical,  &c.,  translated  into  the 
off  hunger.  By  some  it  is  looked  vernacular  from  Sanskrit, 
upon  as  a   luxury,  and  one  of  the  Atthaiii. 
etiquettes  of  hospitality  is  to  offer  Qj.  a   distinguishes  man.”  Vijja 
it  to  a   visitor.  The  Jlitopadesa  posassa  viseso.  Vide  Jlitopadesa^ 
says:  “Betel  is  pungent,  bitter,  Introduction,  25.  ^ 
spicy,  sweet,  alkaline,  astringent  j   a 
 Kammmh  (Sanskrit  karma^ 


--- PAGE 35 ---
THE  LOKANlTL 
7 
24. 
A   swan  is  out  of  place  among  crows,  a   lion  aiiioiig 
bulls,  a   horse  in  the  midst  of  asses,  and  a   wise  man 
among  fools. 
25. 
If  a   fool  be  attached  to  a   wise  man  all  his  life  long, 
he  does  not  know  the  Law,”  just  as  a   spoon  does  not 
know  the  taste  of  a   curry  gravy. 
26.  
■ 
If,  however,  a   man  of  understanding  be  associated  for 
a   short  time  with  one  wiio  is  wise,^'^  he  perceives  the 
Law  ”   
just  as  the  tongue  the  flavour  of  the  curry  gravy. 
27. 
A   waxrrior  should  not  go  on  the  battle-field  without  his 
weapon, 
nor  a   wise  man  go  about  without  his  book:  a 
Burmese  Mn)  ~   moral  merit.” 
The  doctrine  of  hamma  is  bound 
up  with  that  of  transmigration,  and 
implies  that  the  present  condition 
of  every  sentient  being  is  deter- 
mined by  tiie  aggregate  of  its  ac- 
tions in  previous  states  of  existence. 
What  one  no’i.v  is  is  the  result  of 
his  previous  deeds  in  one  or  more 
past  existences.  What  one  sows 
that  he  must  reap.  We  have  a^s 
a   corollary  to  this  teaching  that 
the  cessation  of  existence  (or  the 
attaiinncnt  of  jSdbban)  is  dependent 
on  the  destruction  of  its  cause, 
Icamma.  This  is  effected  by  sancti- 
fication, oi’  the  entrance  into  the 
Four  [c<iitdro  maygd)., 
This  and  tlie  following  stanza 
are  verses  64  and  65  of  the  Dham- 
mapada^  the  former  having  been 
uttered  by  Gotama  in  reference  to 
XJdayithera.  The  idea  about  the 
spoon  and  curry  gravy  is  taken 
frmn  the  Mahuhhdrata,  In  Bh  it, 
1945  we  have  :  “   He  who  is  without 
undersfcauding,  but  merely  learned, 
learns  not  the  sense  of  books,  as  a 
spoon  does  i\i|t  ta.ste  the  flavour  of 
broth;”  and  in  x.  178 — “A  brave 
man,  if  stupid,  though  he  serves  a 
learned  man  for  a   long  time,  does 
not  know  what  is  duty,  as  a   spoon 
does  not  taste  the  davour  of  broth, 
but  an  intelligent  man  who  has 
served  a   learned  man  a   short  time 
only,  soon  knows  his  duty,  as  the 
tongue  tastes  the  flavour  of  broth.” 
“Law”  used  in  the  sense  of 
dut]/. 
Compare  HUopadda  (Introduc- 
tion, 41) : — 
“   A   piece  of  glass  may  like  a   
jewel 
glow, 
If  but  a   lump  of  gold  be  placed 
below ; 
So  even  fools  to  eminence  may 
rise 
By  close  association  wdth  the 
wise.” — Indian  Wiadom. 
There  is  a   play  here  on  the 
word  saitka-,  which  signifies  a 
“book,”  a   “   weapon,”  and  a   “com- 
panion.” The  stanza  runs  : — 
“   yinasatthaiii  na  gaccheyya 
Shro  sahgamabh  Cu niyani 
Pan  dita vaddliagu  va  n   i j   
o 
Videsagamaiio  tatha.” 
Here,  by  mndhi,  panditavad-- 
dhagu  z:^pandita  +   addhag  u. 


--- PAGE 36 ---
8 
 nItI  literature  of  BURMA. 
trayelling  merchant  and  one  going  to  another  land  should 
not  move  without  a   companion. 
,  ..28.; 
A   wise  man  should  not  proclaim  the  loss  of  his  wealth, 
the  anxiety  of  his  heart,  domestic  misdeeds,  and  his  de- 
ception and  disrespect  by  others.^® 
29. 
He  is  a   wise  man  who  knows  the  use  of  opportune 
language,  wdio  knows  of  one  worthy  of  Ms  love  and  what 
a   befitting  temper  is.^^ 
'■'/SO.;-;.."' 
One  without  wealth  consuming  Ms  substance,  a   weak 
person  engaging  in  fight,  and  one  without  wisdom  taking 
part  in  discussions — these  are  like  madmen. 
31- 
Going  to  a   place  uninvited,  sj)eaking  much  when  not 
questioned,  proclaiming  one’s  own  merits;  these  three 
things  are  the  characteristics  of  baseness. 
.  
■  -32.  . 
One  of  little  beauty  speaks  a   great  deal  (of  his  looks) ; 
one  of  little  understanding  shows  off  (a  great  deal);  a   
jar, 
not  full,  causes  the  water  in  it  to  shake ;   a   cow  with  little 
milk  kicks  about. 
33- 
A   frog,  sitting  on  its  haunches,  considers  itself  a   lion ; 
a   crow,  being  captured,  cries  out,  Dear  friend !   dear 
friend  r’  When  c^uestioned  by  the  wise,  an  ignorant 
man,  thinking  himself  wise,  exclaims,  ‘'My  master!  iny 
master !   
” 
36  Compare  Bitopade^a,  i.  138,  37  Compare  BitopacMa,  ii.  48, 
and  see  note  to  corresponding  stanza  and  see  note  to  corresponding  stanza 
iii  Bhammantti.  .  in  BlmmmanUL 


--- PAGE 37 ---
THE  LOKANlTL 
9 
34. 
Does  a   frog,  seated  on  its  haunches,  become  a   lion  ?•— a 
hog,  grunting,  become  a   leopard  ?   Does  a   cat,  by  its 
smiilaiitybo' U' ^   tiger?  Are  all  wise  iiien 
alike  in  knowledge  ? 
35* 
A   king  is  not  satisfied  with  his  wealth/^  a   -wise  inaii 
with  well-uttered  discourse ;   the  eye  in  seeing  a   lover,  aiiil 
the  sea  with  its  ivater. 
' 
36. 
They  wdio,  being  of  little  knowledge,  are  full  of  youth 
and  beauty  and  have  a   noble  lineage,  do  not  appear  to 
advantage;  like  the  Butea  frondosa^  they  are  without 
fragraiicer^^ 
^  M.alidl)Mmta,  xii.  6713,  ; 
“   Meri,  after  obtaining  riches,  desire 
royal  power  ;   after  getting  kingly 
power,  they  desire  godhe^ad ;   ob- 
taining that,  they  desire  the  rank 
of  Indra.  Thou  art  wealthy,  but 
neither  a   king  nor  a   god  ;  but  even 
slKUildst  thou  attain  to  godhead  and 
to  the  rank  of  Indra,  thou  wouldst 
not  be  content.” 
is  an  often-quoted  saying 
of  (Siiiiakya.  The  apothegm  has  re- 
ceived’ various  developments.  We 
quote  from  Long’s  Eastern  Em- 
blems and  IWuttoes  ”   : — 
“Men  are  foolish  in  cherishing 
the  gay  blossoms  of  the  x>alas  tree, 
fair  to  see,  but  without  scent.” — 
lllndii  BramafAd, 
“   A   bad  person,  though  decorated, 
remains  the  same  as  cow-dung,- 
which,  though  it  be  fertilising,  does 
not  become  }3leasmg.” — Brishtanta 
Shafak. 
“Outside  smooth  and  painted, 
inside  only  straw — like  Hindu  idols 
stuffed  with  straw.” — Bengal. 
“The  fruit  of  the  colocynth  is 
good  to  look  not  to  taste,”—- 
Urdu. 
“   Like  a   broom  bound  with  a   silk 
thread.” — Malay. 
“   Beauty  in  the  ignorant  as  a   
jewel 
in  a   swine’s  snout.” — Prov.  xi.  22. 
The  Iciihsuko  or  pah.iHo  is  the 
Butea  frondosa.  Southern  Be- 
har  was  formerly  called  Piilasa  on 
account  of  the  luxuriant  growth  of 
the  tree  from  wdiich  it  got  its 
name.  Behar  si<gni  ties  the  “   land  of 
monasteries  {mMras)^'*  of  which  a 
large  nubiber  wmre  erected  in  the 
reign  of  Asoka.  The  bright -re<I 
fiovvers  of  the  palAmt  have  furnished, 
many  an  imagery  to  Indian  poets 
and  prose  writers.  The  follo\^'ing  is 
from  the  Maltdbhlmta  {vide  IVtonier 
Willianis’  “   Indian  Wisdom,”  page 
406) 
“   Anon  the  clashing  iron  met,  and 
scattered  round 
A   fiei-y  shower  ;   then  fierce  as 
elephants 
Or  butting  bulls  they  battered 
each  the  other. 
Thick  fell  the  blows,  and  soon 
each  stalwart  frame, 
Spattered  with  gore,  giow'ed  like 
the  kinsuka, 
Bedeck’d  with  scarlet  blossoms.’’ 


--- PAGE 38 ---
10 
NITl  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
;■  37- 
The  son  of  a   man  of  low  origin  becomes  a   king's  min- 
ister, a   fool’s  son  a   learned  man,  a   pauper’s  son  a   million- 
aire: do  not,  therefore,  despise  men. 
38. 
A   pnpil  who,  by  a   desire  of  knowledge,  learns  off  a 
great  deal,  that  knowledge  he  is  unable  to  reproduce,  just 
as  a   dumb  person,  seeing  a   dream,  is  unable  to  give  utter- 
ance to  it. 
39.,  . 
A   
potter  does  notstrike  a   pot  to  break  it,  but  to  fashion 
it :   a   teacher  beats  Ms  pupils  to  increase  their  knowledge, 
not  to  throw  them  into  the  states  of  sutferiiig.-^^^ 
40. 
The  man  who  rolls  up  the  taggara^^  with  the  paldscc  leaf 
finds  that  a   fragrant  odour  is  emitted  from  the  leaf  itself : 
serving  the  wise  produces  a   similar  result. 
By  apdyesu,  the  catuhhhido  in  thickness,  and  their  brightness  so 
apdijalohr^  or  Pour  States  of  Suf-  overpowering  that  they  burst  the 
fering,”  are  referred  to.  They  are,  eyes  of  those  who  look  at  them. 
(1)  jS'araJca-loka,  (2)  tiraceJuina^T ,  The  Buddhist  hell  is  a   kind  of  pur- 
ii)  and  {^)  asum-T,  The  gatory  for ,  the  expiation  of  former 
Tsarahi-r,  or  “Hell  for  Human  sins.  It  is  a   temporary  state  lead- 
Beirigs,”  has  eight  subdivisions,  ing  to  re-birth  in  a   blissful  state. 
Each  hell  is  said  to  be  10,000  3^0-  TlhQ  Taheryiomontanacoronarui, 
janas  in  length,  breadth,  and  height,  It  is  a   shrub  from  which  a   fragrant 
and  is  situated  in  the  interior  of  the  powder  is  obtained, 
earth.  The  walls  are  nine  yojanas 


--- PAGE 39 ---
(   II  ) 
SECTIO^T  IL 
THE  GOOD  MAN. 
.  41.  . 
.Associate  witliAlie  .good,,  form  compamoiiship  with  the 
righteous:  it  is  good,  not  had,  Imowing  goodly  ways 
.  Gf  rigliteoiis  men. 
42. 
Spurn  compaiiionship  with  the  wicked,  cultivate  the 
society  of  the  virtuous ;   night  and  day  do  what  is  good ; 
remember  always  the  impermanence  of  worldly  things. 
43- 
Just  as  ripe  although  red  outside,  are  full  of 
worms  inside,  even  so  are  the  hearts  of  wicked  men. 
44*  . 
But  as  ripe  jacks,  although  thorny  outside,  are  full  of 
juice  inside,  even  so  are  the  hearts  of  righteous  men. 
,  :4Sv^■^^^  . 
The  sandal- tree,  being  dry,  does  not  part  with  its 
odour ;   an  elephant,  on  the  march,  ceases  not  to  display 
its  grace  in  the  eyes  of  men;  the  sugar-cane,  being 
brought  under  a   pressing-machine,  does  not  dissipate  its 
sweet  juice ;   a   wise  man  even  under  affliction  does  not 
abandon  his  virtuous  conduct. 
Aniccatai/i.  The  “   Imperma- 
nence of  'Worldly  Things  ”   is  one  of 
the  salient  doctrines  (jf  Buddhism. 
Vide  UiUypadem,  iii,  24,  in  con- 
nection with  the  gander,  crow,  and 
the  traveller,  &c. 
Udumhara  =   Ficus  glomerata* 
In  Bengali  li^'rature  a   hypocrite 
is  compared  to  the  maJchala  frnit, 
“beautiful  outside,  bitter  witb- 
^   The  idea  contained  in  the  fol- 
lowing couplet  is  from  the  Bubkdslii- 
tdmma : — 
**  The  sandal-tree,  most  sacred  tree 
of  aU, 
Perfumes  the  very  axe  w^hich  bids 
it  fall.” 


--- PAGE 40 ---
12 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
■  46., ■; 
The  lion,  being  hungry,  does  not  eat  leaves  and  the 
like;  even  emaciated,  he  does  not  eat  the  flesh  of  the 
ekphant. 
47*  ■■  . 
A   descendant,  belonging  to  a   good  family,  maintains 
well  the  family  lineage  ;   having  of  himself  fallen  into 
trouble,  he  should  not  commit  a   mean  action. 
48. 
Sandal- wood,  in  the  world,  is  pleasant;  pleasanter  is 
the  light  of  the  moon;  far  pleasanter  than  sandal- wood 
and  the  moon  is  the  well-uttered  discourse  of  the 
righteous. 
49. 
Should  the  sun  rise  in  the  west,^®  and  Meru,^^  king  of 
mountains,  bend, — should  the  fire  of  hell  grow  cold  and 
the  lily  grow  on  the  mountain-top,  yet  unchangeable  will 
be  a   good  maiTs  words. 
50. 
Pleasant  is  the  shadow  of  a   tree ;   pleasanter  that  of  a 
relative,  a   father,  or  a   mother;  more  pleasant  that  of  a 
teacher;  pleasanter  still  that  of  a   king;  and  still  more 
pleasant,  in  many  ways,  the  shadow  of  Buddha, 
■  ■ 
Bees  wish  for  flowers;  good  men  for  what  is  virtuous; 
flies  for  what  is  putrid;  bad  men  for  blemishes 
(in 
others). 
Comp.  HamLe%  act  it  sc.  2   : —   yojanas  in  height.  Immediately 
“   Doubt  thou  the  stars  are  fire,  above  it  is  the  Tdmti 
hetiven, 
Doubt  that  the  sun  doth  move  ;  over  which  Bakka  (Indra) '  holds 
Doubt  truth  to  be  a   liar,  sovereignty  ;   under  it  the  asura  hell. 
But  never  doubt  I  love.”  Around  Merit  are  four  kuldcalas  or 
Each  Cakkaz'dla,  or  “   World  concentric  circles  of  rock,  and  be- 
S^'stem  ”   of  the  Budhiist  cosmogony,  yond  these  the  four  Maliddtpas  or 
has  a   huge  and  high  mountain  in  its  Great  Continents, 
centre  called  Meru,  or  generally  A?  Compare  v.  1380: 
MaMineru.  It  is  said  to  be  168,000  “Evil  men  do  not  so  much  like  to 


--- PAGE 41 ---
THE  LOEANiTI, 
S2. 
Bad  is  the  speech  of  one  who  has  a   vile  mother,  had  the 
conduct  of  one  wlio  has  a   vile  father;  hut  lie  who  has  a 
father  and  mother  both  vile,  his  speech  as  w^ell  as  his  con- 
duct is  bad. 
53*";.  ; 
Good  is  the  speech  of  an  excellent  mother,  good  is  the 
conduct  of  one  wdio  lias  an  excellent  father ;   but  he  who 
has  a   mother  and  father  both  excellent,  his  speech  as  well 
as  his  conduct  is  good. 
54- 
In  battle  we  need  a   warrior,  in  a   commotion  a   coun- 
sellor, during  meals  a   loved  one,  a   wise  man  in  an  emer- 
gency. 
55* 
A   dog,  seeing  a   dog,  shows  its  teeth  to  harm ;   a   bad 
man,  being  irritable,  on  seeing  a   good  man,  wishes  to 
oppress  him. 
56. 
Do  not  perform  nor  cause  actions  to  be  performed 
hastily ;   a   deed  being  done  hastily,  a   foolish  man  suffers 
at  length. 
57f' 
A   person  grieves  not  at  all,  having  put  aside  anger; 
the  sages  praise  the  abandonment  of  hypocrisy ; 
bear 
with  the  harsh  language  of  all :  the  righteous  say  that  this 
forbearance  is  excellent. 
58. 
Living  in  a   place  dirty,  circumscribed,  and  crowded  is 
learn  the  gorid  qualities  of  others  as  ,  To  hear  of  others’  virtues  njakes 
their  want  of  virtues.”  xlnd  also  them  sad.” 
xii.  1 1014:  ‘‘Detractors  do  not  so  This  couplet  is  a   metrical  rendering 
much  like  to  sj>eak  of  a   man’s  good  by  Muir  of  the  sentiment  conveyed 
qualities  as  of  his  want  of  virtues.”  in  the  above  passages. 
“   Of  others’  iii"%o  hear  makes  bad  ^   Malckhajialidnaih  issayo  vanna- 
men  glad ; 
 yantL 


--- PAGE 42 ---
14  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
a   hardship;  a   greater  hardship  living  with  an  unloving 
foe ;   living  with  one  ungrateful  is  a   greater  hardship  still. 
59* 
A   man  should  admonish  in  what  requires  admonition  ; 
he  should  prevent  the  commission  of  an  evil  deed.  Such 
a   one  is  beloved  by  the  good,  but  disliked  by  tlie  wicked. 
6o. 
One  exalted  should  be  overcome  by  humility,  a   warrior 
by  dissension,  one  lower  in  position  by  the  bestowal  of  a 
small  gift,  ones  equal  by  industry. 
A   poison,  they  say,  is  not  a   poison  ;   the  w^ealth  of  the 
priesthood 
is  said  to  be  a   poison;  poison  kills  but  once ; 
the  wealth  of  the  priesthood  kills  entirely. 
, 
 62, 
They  know  a   horse's  worth  by  its  speed/^  the  value  of 
oxen  by  their  carrying  power,  the  worth  of  a   cow  by  its 
milk-giving  capacity,  that  of  a   wise  man  by  his  speech.^- 
63. 
The  wealth  of  the  virtuous/^  although  scant,  is  service- 
able like  the  water  in  a   well ;   that  of  the  bad,  though  con- 
siderable, is  like  the  water  in  the  ocean. 
64. 
Elvers  do  not  drink  up  their  water,  nor  trees  eat  up 
One  of  tlie  rnles  of  the  order 
strictly  forbids  the  amassing  of 
wealth. 
Through  every  transmigration. 
Compare  the  Bengali  apothegm; 
“One  knows  the  horse  by  his  ears ; 
the  generous  by  his  gifts ;   a   man  by 
laughing;  and  a   Jewel  by  its  bril- 
liancy.”, 
The  Chinese  say :  “   A   many's 
conversation  is  the  mirror  of  the 
heart.” 
A   Canarese proverb  says :   ‘‘The 
riches  of  the  good  are  like  water 
turned  off  into  a   rice-field.”  The 
RagJtuvama  has :  The  good,  like 
clouds,  receive  only#o  give  away.” 
— KdliMm* 


--- PAGE 43 ---
THE  LOKANtTL 
their  fruit ;   rain  does  not  fall  in  some  places  only :  the 
wealth  of  the  virtuous  is  for  others, 
65. 
One  should  not  long  for  what  should  not  be  desired, 
nor  think  of  what  should  not  be  thought ;   he  should  think 
only  of  what  his  duty  is ;   he  should  not  wish  for  unpro- 
fitable time. 
66. 
What  is  not  thought  of  happens;  what  is  thought  of 
comes  to  naught ;   riches  therefore,  for  man  or  woman,  are 
not  made  by  thinking.^^ 
67. 
He  who  has  an  endearment  for  a   bad  man  does  not  love 
a   virtuous  one ;   he  delights  in  the  ways  of  wdcked  men : 
that  delight  to  him  is  the  occasion  of  ruin. 
^   The  Sanskrit  version  is  :  “The  Nahi  cintitmaya  bhoga 
clouds  eat  nut  the  crops,”  ItthiyS.  piirisassa  va.” 
The  principle  of  fatality  or  In  the  Introduction  to  the  Uito- 
Karma  underlies  the  sentiment  ex-  padesa  we  find  :  “Deeds  are  accom- 
pressed  here.  The  stanza  runs  : —   plished  by  effort,  not  by  wishes  ; 
“   Acintitampi  bhavati  verily  deer  do  not  enter  into  the 
Cintitampi  vinassati  mouth  of  a   sleeping  lion.” 


--- PAGE 44 ---
SECTION  III 
THE  EVIL-DOER. 
68. 
A   WICKED  man  should  not  be  loved  much,  being  as 
unstable  as  a   jar  half-full  of  water  carried  along  on  the 
head. 
69. 
A   snake  is  harmful ;   a   wicked  man  is  harmful,  a   wicked 
man  being  more  harmful  than  a   snake :  a   snake  is  brought 
to  subjection  by  charms  and  drugs — how  can  a   wicked 
man  be  subdued  ? 
70. 
The  fool  who  knows  his  ignorance  is  a   ^yise  man  on 
that  very  account ;   a   fool  who  deems  himself  wise,  he  is 
called  a   fool  indeed ! 
71*  ■' 
So  long  as  his  sin  does  not  ripen, 
a   fool  considers  it  as 
sweet  as  honey ;   when  his  sin  ripens,  he  then  undergoes 
suffering. 
72. 
It  is  not  good  for  a   foolish  man  to  be  strong ;   he  obtains 
his  possessions  by  force :  on  the  dissolution  of  the  body 
he  goes  to  hell,  being  of  little  understanding. 
73. 
A   mouse  is  destructive  in  a   house,  a   monkey  in  the  forest ; 
injurious  among  birds  is  the  crow,  among  men  a   Brahman.^® 
This  is  stanza  63  of  the  Bkam-  At  the  time  of  Gotama  there 
mapada.  were  two  religious  parties  —   the 
Compare  Dhammapada,  69 ;  Samanas  and  Brahmanas.  Gotama 
“   Does  not  ripen,’'  ie.,  “   when  the  himself  belonged  to  the  former,  and 
consequence  has  not  been  developed,”  the  latter,  therefore,  were  considered 
The  verb  paeeati  is  used  in  this  as  heretical  by  him  ,^d  his  disciples, 
sense.  and  looked  .upon  with  contempt. 


--- PAGE 45 ---
THE  LOKANItL 
74- 
The  night  is  long  to  one  awake,  a   stage  to  one  who  is 
weary ;   to  fools  not  knowing  the  true  Law,^^  transmigra- 
tion, too,  is  long. 
75- 
One  of  vile  nature  notices  the  trivial  fault  of  others 
though  small  as  a   grain  of  sessamum,  but  his  own  fault, 
as  large  as  a   cocoa-nut,  he  does  not  see.®^ 
76. 
A   wise  man  should  not  make  known  his  fault  to  others ; 
he  should,  however,  notice  the  defects  of  another ;   as  a 
tortoise  conceals  the  members  of  its  body,  so  should  he 
conceal  his  own  blemishes,  but  discover  those  of  others.®^ 
77- 
Punishment  is  awarded  to  a   wise  man  when  praised  by  a 
fool ;   a   wise  man  praised  by  a   wise  man  is  well  praised. 
Hence  the  aspersion  against  them. 
"When  Buddhism  was  fully  estab- 
lished, the  word  hrahmaym  was 
employed  as  a   term  for  an  Arhat, 
or  one  who  has  obtained  final 
sanctification.” 
“   A   stage,”  /.jG.,  the  distance  of 
a   yojana  (eight  miles).  This  stanssa 
is  the  60th  of  the  Dliammapada. 
00  «   Xme  law,”  religious  duty. 
Compare  the  following  metrical 
translations  by  Muir  : — 
“   Thou  rnark’st  the  faults  of  other 
men, 
Although  as  mustard -seeds  mi- 
nute: 
Thine  own  escape  thy  partial  ken, 
Though  each  in  size  a   bilva  fruit.” 
— Mahdbhtrata,  i.  3069. 
“   Ail  men  are  very  quick  to  spy 
Their  neighbours’  faults,  but  very 
slow 
To  note  their  own  ;  when  these 
they  know, 
"With  self-deluding  art  they  eye.” 
---Mahthhdrata,  viii.  2116. 
The  following  is  adapted  from 
Sabhdshitdi'nava,  275  : — 
“Men  soon  the  faults  of  others 
learn ; 
A   few  their  virtues,  too,  find  out ; 
But  is  there  one  —   I  have  a 
doubt — 
Who  can  his  own  defects  discern?  ” 
Compare  also  Matthew  vii.  3  and 
4 :  “   And  why  beholdest  thou  the 
mote  that  is  in  thy  brother’s  eye, 
but  considerest  not  the  beam  that 
is  in  thine  owm  eye?”  &c.  The 
Burmese  version  makes  a   compari- 
son with  the  cocoa-nut  [ndUhera), 
the  Sanskrit  version  with  the  bilva 
or  Bengal  quince  {JEijU  Marnielos)^ 
"   which  is  sacred  to  Mahiideva. 
Compare  Mamt,  vii.  104  and 
105,  with  reference  to  a   king’s 
.  duties  ■.  ■■ 
He  should  indeed  act  guilelessly, 
never  by  guile  ;   but  he,  self-guarded, 
should  be  aware  of  the  framls  usecl 
by  his  enemy.  Let  anothfu*  know 
his  weak  point ;   like  a   tortoise,  he 
should  procect  his  mem’uers  and 
guard  his  own  defect.” 
Compare  Mahdhhdrafa,  xii. 


--- PAGE 46 ---
1 8 
 NITI  LITERA  TURE  OF  B   VRMA . 
78. 
One  should  win  over  an  avaricions  person  by  mo 
one  presumptuous  by  a   salutation,  an  ignorant  man  by 
giving  him  his  way,  and  a   wise  one  by  speaking  the 
tnith.®'^ 
Compare  Hitopadesa,  iv.  loS,  joining  the  hands,’’  the  Oriental 
where  we  find  “   the  haughty  by  method  of  showing  respect. 


--- PAGE 47 ---
(   19  ) 
SECTIOIT  IV. 
FRIENDSHIP. 
79* 
A   STRANGER,  being  a   benefactor,  is  a   (real)  relative;  a 
relative  not  conferring  a   benefit  is  a   stranger ;   a   disease, 
tlioiigli  arising  in  tlie  body,  is  not  beneficial ;   a   herb  from 
the  forest  is  a   boon.^^ 
80. 
A   man  who  injures  another’s  virtue  in  his  absence,  who 
speaks  lovingly  in  his  presence,  one  would  consider  such 
friendship  like  honey  in  a   pot  of  poison 
81. 
In  poverty  a   friend  forsakes  you ;   son,  and  wife,  and 
brothers  too  forsake  you ;   being  rich,  they  cling  to  you : 
wealth  in  this  world  is  a   great  friend.^^ 
82. 
One  can  know  a   
(good)  servant  by  his  taking  errands,  a 
relative  when  danger  comes ;   thus-  also  a   friend  in  times 
of  poverty,  and  a   wife  when  wealth  disappears. 
He  is  a   relative  who  in  prosperity  makes  you  cling  to 
him;  he  a   father  who  supports  you;  in  whom  there  is 
affection,  he  is  a   friend ;   she  a   wife  who  pacifi.es. 
65  This^  stanza  is  adopted  from  6^  There  are  some  very  fine  lines 
Hitoi^adesa^  iii.  loi.  in  the  Malidblidrata  on  the  subject 
66  ddnakya  “   As  a   bowl  of  of  riches  and  poverty.  Vide  xiL 
poison  with  milk  on  its  surface.’’  213  ff. 


--- PAGE 48 ---
20 
NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
84. 
One  should  confide  neither  in  an  enemy  nor  a   friend  ; 
when  a   friend  becomes  angry  he  makes  known  all  yoiir 
fanlts.^® 
85. 
He  who  once  becomes  angry  with  a   friend  and  wishes 
to  be  reconciled,  he  follows  him  even  unto  death,  like  a 
mare  pregnant  with  a   TarS,  colt.®® 
86. 
Until  the  time  (for  vengeance)  has  not  arrived,  one 
might  carry  his  enemy  on  his  shoulders ;   the  time  hav- 
ing come,  he  should  break  him  to  pieces  like  a   
jar  on  a 
rock.'^® 
87. 
A   debt  balance  as  well  as  a   remaining  fire  increases  re- 
peatedly; so  also  increases  remaining  enmity:  one  should, 
therefore.  Have  nothing  remaining.*^^ 
This  and  the  following  two 
stanzas  aretof  an  epigrammatic,  sati- 
rical character. 
TheTartljlike  theAjrmiyti  horses, 
are  fabulous  animals  with  supernatu- 
ral powers.  It  is  said  that  as  soon 
as  the  Taril  colt  is  born,  the  mother 
at  once  dies.  Hence  the  allusion. 
The  Tara  horses  are  also  called  assa- 
tard-  (fem.  assatart). 
The  idea  set  forth  here  is  of  a 
somewhat  repulsive  nature.  In  the 
Burmese  anthology  it  can  only  be 
construed  as  sarcastic.  The  advice, 
however,  appears  in  the  Mahdbhd- 
rata  as  a   Machiavelian  counsel,  and 
there  are  others  of  a   similar  nature 
in  the  poem  most  repugnant  to 
the  moral  sense.  Muir  has  col- 
lected several  in  his  supplement 
to  “   ‘Metrical  Translations  from 
Sanskrit  Writers.^'  The  following 
are  examples  “   Let  a   man  be  very 
humble  in  his  speech,  but  in  heart 
as  sharp  as  a   razor  ;   let  him  speak 
with  a   smile  when  bent  on  a   ter- 
rible act  ”   I21ahdbh.  i.  5606].  “   By 
kindling  fire,  by  sacrifice,  by  a 
beggar’s  saffron  garb,  by  braided 
hair,  and  clothing  of  skin,  let  a   man 
fill  his  enemy  with  confidence,  and 
then  seize  him  like  a   wolf  ”   
[i.  5560]. 
The  Sanskrit  version  {MaMhh.,  i. 
5563)  is  well  rendered  by  Muir : — 
“   Whilst  thou  dost  watcli  thy  chance, 
with  seeming  care 
Thy  mortal  foe  upon  thy  shoulder 
bear ; 
Then  down  to  earth  thy  hated 
burden  dash, 
As  men  against  a   rock  an  earthen 
vessel  smash.” 
Compare  Mahdbhdrata,  xii.  4167  : 
**  What  is  broken  is  with  difiiculty 
united,  and  what  is  whole  is  with 
difficulty  broken.  But  the  friend- 
ship which  has  been  broken  and 
again  cemented  does  not  continue  to 
be  affectionate.” 
<3anakya  says  :  “   To  pay  off 
debts,  to  quench  j^^'fire,  and  remove 
desire  is  good,  for  should  they  in- 


--- PAGE 49 ---
THE  LOKANtTI. 
21 
88, 
He  whose  face  is  like  the  lotus  lily  and  his  speech  as 
cold  as  sandal- wood,  one  should  not  associate  with  such 
a   person^  there  being  poison  in  his  intentions.^^ 
89. 
One  should  not  serve  a   severe  master,  nor  one  who  is 
niggardly ;   more  so  he  should  not  serve  one  who  does  not 
commend,  nor  one  who  is  an  oppressor. 
90. 
Horned  animals  should  be  avoided  at  a   distance  of 
fifty  cubits,  horses  at  a   hundred,  a   tusked  elephant  at 
a   thousand ;   a   bad  man  by  quitting  the  place  where  he 
resides. 
91- 
A   bad  place,  a   bad  friend,  a   bad  family,  a   bad  relative, 
a   bad  wife,  a   bad  servant — these  should  be  avoided  at  a 
distance. 
92. 
The  friends  who  stand  by  you  in  severe  ailment,  in 
time  of  scarcity,  or  in  misfortune,  when  captured  by  an 
enemy,  at  a   king’s  door,  or  in  the  charnel-house,  they 
indeed  are  good  friends.*^^ 
One  of  pleasant  speech  has  many  a   friend,  one  of  harsh 
speech  few  friends  :  in  this  place  the  illustration  concern- 
ing the  sun  and  moon*^^  should  be  remembered. 
crease,  they  cannot  be  stopped.’*  ^3  Bitopadesa,  i.  74,  75. 
One  passage  advises  that  love  alone  The  reference  is  to  the  respec- 
should  be  allowed  to  remain.  tive  heat  and  coldness  of  the  two 
In  Sanskrit  we  have  :  ‘'A  face  luminaries.  The  sim  is  said  to  be 
shaped  like  the  petals  of  the  lotus,  composed  of  coral  inside  and  gold 
a   voice  as  cool  as  sandal,  a   heart  outside,  thereby  giving  rise  to  in- 
like  a   pair  of  scissors,  and  excessive  tense  heat  ;   the  moon  of  crystal 
humility — these  are  the  signs  of  a   within  and  silver  on  the  surface, 
rogue.’* — Easton  Proverbs  and  thereby  producing  great  cold. 
Uems. 


--- PAGE 50 ---
SECTION  V. 
WOMAN. 
94. 
The  beaiity  of  the  cuckoo  is  its  voice ;   of  a   woman,  her 
devotedness  (to  her  husband) ;   the  beauty  of  the  uncomely 
is  knowledge;  that  of  hermits,  forbearance.'^^ 
.  'SS'O' 
Women’s  wealth  is  beauty,  learning  that  of  men;  the 
wealth  of  priests  is  virtue,  strength  that  of  kings. 
96. 
Hermits,  if  lean,  are  becoming;  becoming  are  quadru- 
peds if  corpulent ;   men,  being  learned,  are  becoming ; 
becoming  are  women  having  husbands. 
97- 
A   good  musician  is  ruined  in  five  days,  an  archer  in 
seven,  a   good  wife  in  a   month,  a   pupil  in  half  a   month. 
98. 
A   buffalo  delights  in  mud,  a   duck  in  a   pond ;   a   woman 
delights  in  a   husband,  a   priest  in  the  law. 
99‘ 
One  should  praise  food  after  digestion,  a   wife  when 
she  has  passed  her  prime,  a   warrior  on  his  return  from 
battle,  and  corn  when  it  is  brought  home. 
ICO. 
A   woman  who  has  had  two  or  three  husbands,  a   priest 
This  is  stanza  212  of  the  Mitral^bha  section  of  the  Hito'padcsa, 


--- PAGE 51 ---
THE  LOKANtri. 
wlcio  has  been  in  two  or  three  monasteries,  and  a   bird  two 
or  three  times  ensnared,  are  so  many  instances  of  practical 
deceit 
Subjugation  comes  by  beating  a   wicked  man/^  by  not 
speaking  to  a   bad  friend;  to  women  there  is  subjugation 
by  misfortune,  to  the  greedy  by  moderation  in  food. 
102. 
The  night  is  not  pleasing  without  the  moon,  nor  the 
ocean  without  waves,  a   pond  without  ducks,  nor  a   maiden 
without  a   husband, 
103. 
By  a   husband  is  wealth  produced ;   by  woman  is  its 
preservation ;   a   man  is,  therefore,  the  origin ;   a   woman 
like  thread  in  a   needle. 
104. 
All  rivers  are  crooked;  all  forests  are  made  of  wood; 
all  women,  going  into  solitude,  would  do  what  is  evil. 
105. 
A   woman  of  contentious  disposition  or  one  using  depre- 
ciatory language ;   one  who,  seeing  a   thing,  has  a   desire  to 
have  it,  who  cooks  and  eats  often,  who  eats  before  her 
husband,  who  lives  in  another*s  house — such  a   woman, 
even  if  she  have  a   hundred  sons,  is  shunned  by  men. 
106. 
The  woman  who,  during  meals  and  in  her  adornments, 
delights  like  a   mother,  who  in  things  that  should  be 
concealed  is  bashful  like  a   sister,  who  during  business 
and  when  approaching  her  husband  is  respectful  like  a 
The  following,  according  to  an  ^   The  Bito^pade^a,  iih  29,  says  : 
old  Sanskrit  proverb,  improve  their  “   A   husband  is  indeed  the  best  orna- 
good  qualities  by  beating  : — A   bad  ment  of  a   w^oman  without  other  or- 
man,  a   bad  w(^an,  gold,  a   drum,  naments^  She,  though  ornamented, 
sugar-cane,  and  sesainum  seed.  deprived  of  him  shines  not.” 


--- PAGE 52 ---
24 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
slave,  in  danger  is  deliberative,  in  sleep  afibrds  delight, 
in  appearance  is  becoming,  in  moments  of  anger  forbearing 
— such  a   woman,  say  the  wise,  is  most  excellent ;   such  a 
woman  on  the  dissolution  of  her  body  will  assuredly  have 
a   place  in  heavenJ® 
■  ■ 
 107.  . 
A   youthful  woman  who  is  blonde,  has  deer-like  eyes 
and  slender  parts,  fine  hair  and  even  teeth,  and  is  well- 
conducted— she,  though  she  be  in  a   wicked  family,  is 
sure  to  be  taken  to  wife. 
108. 
Of  all  seasons,  autumn  is  the  best ;   of  all  wives,  she 
who  is  beautiful ;   of  sons,  the  eldest  is  the  best ;   of  all 
directions,  the  north/^ 
109. 
Whatever  woman  should  wish  to  be  a   human  being 
repeatedly  in  every  existence,  she  should  cherish  her 
husband  as  P^ricMk^^^  cherished  Inda.^^ 
Or  “in  the  deva,  world”  (cZwe  of  disguise.  In  Vedic  times  he  is 
Uiavcyya).  Vide  Ilitojyadeia,  iii.  27,  represented  as  the  god  of  the  firma- 
2$.  ment,  and  stands  in  the  first  rank 
Because  the  north  face  of  Mount  among  deities.  He  was  of  a   ruddy 
Meru  and  the  oceans  and  lands  colour  and  capable  of  assuming  any 
which  lie  in  the  same  direction  are  shape.  His  weapon  was  the  thunder- 
of  a   golden  colour.  Silver  is  the  bolt,  which  he  carried  in  his  right 
prevailing  colour  on  the  east,  on  the  hand,  and  he  is  described  as  using 
south  sapphire,  and  on  the  west  arrows,  a   great  hook,  and  a   net,  in 
coral.  which  he  entangled  his  enemies. 
The  wife  of  Inda  (Indra),  also  The  soma  juice  was  his  favourite 
known  as  Sujatjt,  having  her  abode  drink,  and,  stimulated  by  it,  he  went 
with  her  husband  on  the  Tilvatimsa  forth  to  war  and  performed  his 
heaven  above  Mount  Meru.  numerous  duties.  In  later  Indian 
Inda  or  Sakka  was  deposed  mythology  Indra  lost  his  first  rank, 
from  his  godship  by  Gotama,  and  and  is  now  ranked  with  gods  of  the 
made  archangel  over  the  five  lowest  second  order’.  Among  Buddhists 
Kamadevalokas.  He  is  inferior  to  Inda  is  considered  as  a   recording 
Mara  and Mahabrahma.  Like  these,  angel,”  who,  “four  times  a   month, 
he  exercises  a   beneficent  influence  seated  in  his  Hall  of  Justice  called 
over  human  affairs,  and  Buddhist  ,Sudhamm4,  reads  ^   
aloud  from  a 
literature  is  full  with  instances  of  golden  book  a   recora  of  good  works 
his  descent  upon  earth  in  some  form  done  by  men  during  the  week.” 


--- PAGE 53 ---
THE  LOKANln, 
no. 
Whatever  man  should  wish  to  he  a   man  repeatedly  in 
every  existence,  he  should  shun  another’s  wife  just'  as 
one  washing  another’s  foot  shuns  the  filth  (that  comes 
from  it). 
III. 
An  old  man’  provides  himself  with  a   young  wife  with 
breasts  like  the  tinduka  fruit.  Her  desire  is  not  grati- 
fied: this  is  the  cause  of  ruin.^^ 
Diospjros  Embryopteris.  her  husband,  vide  MaMhhdrata^  i. 
Tor  duties  of  a   wife  towards  and  xii.,  and  chap.  ix. 


--- PAGE 54 ---
(   26  ) 
SECTION  VL 
KINGS. 
1 12. 
A   KING  should  sleep  during  the  period  of  one  watch, 
a   wise  man  two,  a   householder  three  watches,  a   beggar 
during  four. 
113- 
In  whatever  place  these  five— a   man  of  wealth,  a   man 
of  learning,  a   king,  a   river,  and  likewise  a   doctor — are 
not  to  be  found,  there  a   man  should  not  live  for  even 
a   day.^® 
114. 
Wherever  respect,  love,  relatives,  and  a  learned  man 
are  not  to  be  found,  there  a   man  should  not  reside  for 
even  a   day. 
115. 
Dreary  is  a   sonless  home;^®  dreary  a   kingdom  with- 
out a   king ;   dreary  the  utterance  of  an  illiterate  man  ; 
dreary,  altogether,  that  of  a   needy  one. 
1 16. 
A   man  should  trade  if  he  desire  wealth ;   if  he  desire 
knowledge,  he  should  serve  a   learned  man;  if  he  want 
a   child,  he  should  establish  a   young  woman  (in  his  house)  ; 
should  he  wish  to  be  a   king's  minister,  he  ought  to 
comply  with  the  king's  behests. 
YdmOi  a   watch  of  three  hours.  Ilitopadeki;  i.  135  :  ‘‘Empty  is 
The  period  from  6  P.M.  to  6  A.M.  was  a   childless  home,  empty  the  home 
divided  by  some  into  three,  and  by  of  a   friendless  person  ;   for  a   fool  the 
others  into  four  watches  or  vigils.  regions  of  space  are  empty  ;  poverty 
Vide  notes  to  stanza  78  of  is  altogether  dreaif^.” 
Dhammaniti  Bee  Bitopadesa,  iii.  2^  and  i  216. 


--- PAGE 55 ---
THE  LOKANtri. 
A   
priest  is  mined  if  discontented,  an  emperor  if  satis- 
fied; a   harlot  being  ashamed  is  ruined,  and  mined  is  a 
daughter  of  good  lineage  if  not  ashamed.®® 
1 18. 
The  strength  of  birds  lies  in  air,  that  of  fish  in  water; 
the  strength  of  the  helpless  is  in  a   king,  of  children  in 
tears. 
119- 
Patience,  vigilance,  and  industry,  liberality,  compassion, 
and  hope — these  are  the  qualities  of  a   leader ;   these  the 
qualities  that  should  be  wished  for  by  the  righteous. 
120. 
Kings  speak  but  once,  so  also  Samanas  and  Brah- 
manas.®®  Good  men,  in  the  world,  speak  but  once :  this 
is  a   constant  practice. 
121. 
A   householder  being  idle  is  not  good;  a   priest  being 
unrestrained  is  not  good ;   it  is  not  good  a   king  being 
inconsiderate,  or  a   wise  man  passionate, 
122. 
Where  chiefs  are  many,  all  consider  themselves  wise, 
all  wish  for  superiority;  their  work  (in  consequence) 
ends  in  ruin. 
123. 
A   king  should  of  himself  know  about  the  revenues 
as  well  as  the  expenditure ;   of  himself  should  he  know 
what  is  and  what  is  not  done  ;   he  should  punish  him 
who  deserves  punishment,  and  favour  him  who  deserves 
favour.^® 
Hitopadesa^  Hi,  Gj , 
 chapter  vii  of  the  ^‘Institutes  of 
Samanas  =   Buddhist  monks ;  Manu.’^  Also  the  MalidhMrata^ 
ArhUts.  Books  v.  and  xii. 
For  the  duties  of  a   king,  vide 


--- PAGE 56 ---
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
124. 
The  sun  should  be  approached  with  the  back  towards 
it,  fire  by  the  stomach  (facing  it) ;   a   lord  should  be 
approached  with  all  one’s  possessions,  the  next  world  with 
wisdom.^^ 
125. 
Tire,  water,  a   woman,  a   fool,  a   snake,  and  royal  families 
— these  should  be  passed  by  avoiding  them;  suddenly 
they  take  away  life. 
'126.  ■ 
One  living  wuth  a   wicked  wife,  one  sending  a   slave 
with  a   violent  temper,  one  living  in  a   house  having- 
snakes — this  is  death  itself. 
127. 
By  giving  instruction  to  a   stupid  pupil,  by  supporting 
a   wicked  wife,  and  by  attachment  to  a   person  who  is  bad, 
even  a   wise  man  deteriorates. 
128. 
A   son’s  evil  act  is  a   mother’s  deed,  a   pupil’s  that  of 
his  teacher  ;   a   people’s  act  is  the  king’s  doing,  a   king’s 
that  of  his  private  chaplain.^^ 
129. 
One  should  overcome  one  haughty  by  civility,  one  who 
is  bad  by  goodness ;   a   niggardly  person  by  liberality,  one 
mendacious  by  veracity.^^ 
130. 
Liberality  is  the  subjugation  of  one  who  is  not  sub- 
Eito}iadehi  a, '^2.  This  staiiza(  129)  accords  with  iJfaM- 
Purohlto.  A   private  spiritual  bhdrata,  v.  1518,  in  which  passage 
and  temporal  adviser  used  to  be  “   one  should  overcome  one  haughty 
retained  by  a   prince  or  grandee  to  by  civility  ”   appears  rather  as  “   one 
offer  advice  and  specify  lucky  and  should  conquer  anger  by  kindness.” 
unlucky  days.  Compare  also  mahCibkarata^  iii. 
See  Bhcmmapadai  verse  221.  13235. 


--- PAGE 57 ---
THE  LOKANtTL 
dued;  liberality  is  the  consummation  of  every  benefit; 
by  liberality  and  loving  speech  men  bow  themselves  and 
cause  others  too  to  bow. 
131- 
Liberality  is  the  medicine  of  love,  niggardliness  the 
medicine  of  hate,  generosity  the  medicine  that  brings 
attendants,  niggardliness  that  which  keeps  solitary. 
132. 
One  can  overcome  him  who  is  to  be  overcome  by  the 
concord  of  many,  though  individually  of  little  worth;  by 
grass  is  rope  made;  by  that  same  rope  is  an  elephant 
secured."^ 
133- 
What  can  one  incompetent  effect  by  his  poweiyeven  if 
he  have  an  ally  ?   fire  lighted  where  there  is  no  air  goes 
out  of  itself. 
134. 
Never  should  one  indulge  in  the  pleasures  of  sense 
that  appertain  to  a   king :  personal  appearance,  command, 
using  of  flowers  and  perfume,  dressing,  ornaments — all 
these,  in  so  far  as  a   king  indulges  in  them,  should  not 
be  imitated. 
135. 
The  king  is  not  my  friend ;   the  king  is  not  my  brother- 
Compare  the  following  transla- 
tions by  Muir  from  the  Malta- 
hhdraia : — 
“A  tree  which  stands  by  itself, 
though  lai-ge,  strong,  and  well  rooted, 
can  be  overthrown  by  the  wind,  and 
by  its  trunk  be  broken  down  in  a 
moment.  But  those  well-rooted 
trees,  which  stand  together  in  a 
clump,  resist  the  hei'cest  wunds, 
owing  to  their  mutual  support.  So, 
too,  the  enemies  of  a   single  man, 
though  he  be  possessed  of  good 
qualities,  regard  him  as  in  their 
power  to  over\iinielin,  as  the  wind 
can  overthrow  a   solitary  tree. 
Through  mutual  support  and  de- 
pendence kinsmen  flourish  as  lotuses 
in  a   pond”  (v.  1321).  Again: 
“Even  a   powerful  enemy  can  be 
destroyed  by  weak  foes  combined 
together,  as  a   honey-gatherer  Is  liy 
bees  ”   
(iii.  1333).  Also  :  “   Threads, 
though  long  and  thin,  if  many  and 
similar,  can,  from  tlieir  number, 
always  bear  many  strains ;  in  this 
is  found  an  emblem  of  the  good  ” 
{v.  1318).  The  following  is  like- 
wise a   good  metaphor  :  ‘  ‘  Kinsmen 
resemble  firebrands  :  .separated  they 
only, smoke;  united  they  blaze”  (v. 
1319)- 


--- PAGE 58 ---
30  Ntri  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
in-law ;   this  king  is  my  lord  ” — ^this  (idea)  one  should  hold 
very  carefully  in  his  mind  to  the  very  end, 
136. 
An  attendant  should  not  wait  upon  the  king  at  too 
great  a   distance;  he  should  not  serve  him  too  near  at 
hand;  he  should  not  he  in  the  way  of  the  wind,  nor 
directly  opposite ;   not  in  a   place  too  low  down,  nor  one  too 
high  up:  these  six  faults  he  should  avoid;  he  should 
remain  guarded  as  he  would  with  regard  to  fire. 
One  replete  with  excellence  like  the  Omniscient  One 
does  not  appear  to  advantage  without  a   patron:  a   gem, 
though  priceless,  looks  well  being  set  in  gold. 
SdbhaMutul^/Oy  ‘‘like  the  Omniscient  One,” 


--- PAGE 59 ---
SECTION  VIL 
MISCELLANEOUS. 
138- 
How  can  there  be  piety  in  a   priest  who  associates  with  a 
woman,  compassion  in  a   flesh-eater,^®  truth  in  a   drunkard, 
shame  in  one  greatly  covetous,  proficiency  in  one  who 
is  slothful,  and  wealth  in  one  with  a   bad  temper  ? 
139- 
A   drunkard,  and  one  who  goes  about  at  unseasonable 
moments;  one  who  frequents  a   public  assembly  (for 
amusement)  ;   a   gambler  ;   one  having  wicked  companions, 
and  one  who  is  an  idler — -these  are  persons  who  bring 
about  the  destruction  of  their  own  welfare. 
140. 
During  the  day  persons  should  not  be  spoken  of  with- 
out looking  around,  nor  at  night  without  inquiry  being 
made  (whether  any  one  is  near  or  not) ;   one  should  act 
like  a   hunter,  who^,  fearful  of  danger  in  a   forest,  looks 
this  side  and  that. 
141. 
Although  living,  four  persons  are  declared  to  be  dead 
by  the  NUi  teacher  Vyasa®^  — one  in  poverty,  one 
in  sickness,  a   fool,  one  in  debt,  and  one  who  serves  a 
king. 
That  is,  one  who  kills  animals  of  an  animal  when  life  leaves  it  in 
to  eat  their  flesh.  The  taking  of  the  natural  course, 
life  is  forbidden  by  a   Buddhist  com-  Vy4sa  is  looked  upon  by  the 
maudment.  The  ,jpurmese  are  very  Burmese  as  the  compiler  of  an 
strict  on  this  point,  and  eat  the  flesh  ancient  anthology. 


--- PAGE 60 ---
32 
NiTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
142. 
A   wise  man,  seeing  danger  not  at  liand,  avoids  it  at  a 
distance  ;   on  seeing  it  approach,  he  remains  undaunted. 
143* 
A   sleepy-headed  fellow  as  well  as  one  who  is  negligent, 
one  who  lives  comfortably  as  well  as  one  who  is  sick, 
a   sluggard,  one  covetous,  and  one  who  delights  in  action 
—these  seven  have  nothing  to  do  with  books. 
144- 
0   gainl  do  thou  go  to  one  in  poverty;  a   rich  man  is 
replete  with  wealth.  0   rain!  pour  thyself  on  dry  land; 
the  sea  is  full  of  water.  This,  however,  does  not  happen ; 
the  force  of  circumstance  reigns  paramount.^^ 
HS- 
When  what  should  be  done  is  done,  no  one  looks  upon 
the  doer  ;   all  that  should  be  done,  therefore,  should  be 
done  -without  being  brought  to  completion.®^^ 
146. 
Cotton  in  this  world  is  light;  lighter  is  one  of  a   fickle 
disposition;  lighter  still  one  who  does  not  suffer  the 
reprimand  of  his  elders ;   still  more  light  he  who  is  negli- 
gent of  the  teachings  of  Buddha, 
147- 
A   stone  umbrella  is  weighty ;   weightier  is  the  utterance 
of  the  gods ;   the  chiding  of  elders  is  weightier  still,  and 
still  more  -weighty  are  the  words  of  Buddha. 
148. 
The  right  hand  is  the  slave  of  the  body;  the  small 
finger  on  it  the  slave  of  the  ear,  nose,  and  eyes ;   the  left 
hand  is  the  slave  of  the  legs. 
Natth’idam,  kaminapatfeh^nam.  A   sarcasm  is  implied  here. 


--- PAGE 61 ---
THE  LOKANITL 
33 
149. 
Kuvera^®^  always  keeps  w^atch  in  ,  the  centre  of  the 
betel-leaf,  Eakkha  at  the  base,  and  K^lakanni  at  the 
tip.  One  should  eat  the  leaf  having  broken  off  the  upper 
and  lower  ends :  his  prosperity  increases  thereby. 
150. 
BrahmS,^^^  watches  the  slate,^®^  Bissano^^^the  wrapper; 
let  those  who  learn  worship  them.  Upon  him  who  does 
so  they  always  look  with  complacence. 
151* 
For  the  reason  that  cows  nourish  all  men  and  give  them 
happiness,  for  that  very  reason  should  men  love  and  honour 
them.i<>s 
The  god  of  wealth  and  chief  of  Egypt  long  ago,  India  has  its  sacred 
the  Yakkhas,  a   class  of  superhuman  anin>als.  Already  in  the  ancient 
beings.  He  and  those  subject  to  religion  cows  are  the  object  of  a 
him  are  supposed  to  exercise  a   bene-  special  worship.  It  is  expressly  en- 
hcial  influence  on  human  beings,  joined  to  treat  them  with  gentleness, 
The  Yakkhas  dwell  upon  earth  and  and  the  Smritis  require  the  same 
in  the  water,  and  form  one  section  respect  for  thein  as  for  the  images 
of  the  guards  round  the  abode  of  of  the  gods.  It  soon  became  matter 
Sakka.  There  are  some  malignant  of  religious  scruple  to  offer  them  in 
Yakkhas  as  well,  but  they  are  not  sacrifice ;   to  slaughter  them  for  a 
referred  to  here.  In  Brahmanic  profane  purpose  is  one  of  the  greatest 
mythology,  Kiivera  is  looked  upon  as  crimes;  to  tend  them,  provide  for 
a   kind  of  Pluto  living  in  the  shades  them,  serve  them,  is  reckoned  in  the 
and  exercising  an  evil  influence,  first  rank  of  good  works  and  of  acts 
Ralcklia  ~   Ralchhasa  =■  Rdhsha,  of  expiation  ;   to  risk  one’s  own  life 
a   demon  living  in  the  Himalayan  to  save  theirs  atones  for  a   Brahma- 
forest  and  feeding  on  the  carcases  nicide ;   contact  with  them  purifies  ; 
of  men  and  beasts.  and,  as  in  the  Parsi  ritual,  their  very 
An  evil  Deva  or  NaL  dung  and  urine  have  the  power  of 
This  is  a   common  practice  with  preventing  or  cleansing  away  mate- 
the  Burmans.  rial  and  moral  defilements.  The-e 
The  greatest  of  all  the  Texas,  customs  subsist  still  in  some  degree 
The  world  he  rules  is  called  JBrahma-  in  our  own  day.  The  Plindus  do  not 
loht.  scruple  indeed  to  subject  their  iniser- 
Rather  “a, wooden  board 
for  able  cattle  to  a   labour  that  is  often 
writing  on  {sampunda).  excessive,  but  it  is  rare  that  they 
A   propitious  Nat.  ill-use  them.  Very  few,  especially, 
Made  of  cloth,  as  a   case  {accu)  will  consent  to  feed  on  their  flesh, 
for  the  wooden  board.  and  the  slaughter  of  a   cow  excites 
The  Hindus  hold  the  cow  in  more  horror  among  many  of  them 
great  reverence,  jj^id  in  Vedio  times  than  the  slaying  of  a   man,’’ — JBarilds 
it  was  an  object  of  worship.  ‘‘  Like  “   Religions  of  India.  ” 
0 


--- PAGE 62 ---
34 
'Ntri  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
152.  ■ 
They  who  the  flesh  of  cows  are  like  persons  who 
eat  their  mother's  flesh:  when  cows  die,  we  should  give 
them  to  vultures  or  send  them  adrift  upon  a   stream. 
153. ^ 
Beginning  a   study  on  Thursday  is  the  consummation  of 
that  study;  beginning  on  Sunday  or  Friday  is  doing  but 
half;  beginning  on  Wednesday  or  Monday  is  learning 
nothing;  beginning  on  Saturday  or  Tuesday  occasions 
deathd^® 
If  a   person  learn  on  the  eighth  day  of  a   lunar  half 
month,  it  is  like  killing  his  teacher ;   on  the  fourteenth 
day,  it  is  like  killing  the  pupil;  it  is  like  killing  know- 
ledge if  one  learn  on  the  tenth  day ;   or  killing  his  parents 
if  he  learn  at  full  moon. 
I5S‘ 
A   person  who  learns  should  not  eat  cocoa-nut  on  the 
seventh  day ;   he  should,  likewise,  not  eat  pumpkin  on  the 
ninth ;   on  the  twelfth  day  he  should  not  eat  pinncm  ; 
and  on  the  third  day  be  should  not  eat  a   curry :  if  he  do 
so,  there  will  be  an  end  to  his  knowledge. 
iS^- 
One  of  a   family  should  be  discarded  for  the  good  of  the 
whole  family ;   a   family  for  the  good  of  a   village ;   a   village 
109  There  are  some  Buddhists  in  tion.  The  Burmese  are  a   very 
Burma  who  will  not  eat  the  fiesh  of  superstitious  race,  and  place  great 
the  cow  from  a   humane  point  of  stress  on.  lucky  and  unlucky  days, 
view,  but  they  form  only  an  excep-  They  have  a   work  called  the 
tion.  A   Brahmanie  influence  in  the  Jcyan,  w’hich  contains  a   detailed 
collection  of  the  stanzas  of  this  an-  account  of  good  and  bad  omens, 
thology  is  quite  apparent  from  the  Vide  Sangermano’s  Burmese  Ein- 
sentiments  expressed  here.  ^  .  pire,”  chap,  xvii.,  and  ‘^The  Burman: 
This  and  the  following  two  His  Life  and  Notfons,”  chap.  x. 
stanzas  display  a   puerile  supersti-  A   kind  of  potato. 


--- PAGE 63 ---
THE  LOKANtTI. 
for  the  good  of  a   district;  and  for  one’s  own  good  the 
world  itself  should  be  abandonedd^^ 
157. 
A   lion,  a   good  man,  and  an  elephant — these,  abandoning 
their  residence,  go  away  (in  search  of  a   more  suitable  place); 
a   crow,  an  evil-doer,  and  a   deer  arrive  at  destruction  in 
their  own  habitation.^^^ 
158. 
In  whatever  place  there  is  no  respect,  no  love,  no  rela- 
tives, and  no  clever  man,  there  indeed  a   man  should  not 
make  his  abode7^^ 
159. 
A   wise  man  takes  a   step  at  a   time;  he  establishes 
Iiimself  on  one  foot  (before  he  takes  up  the  other) :  an 
old  place  should  not  be  forsaken  recklessly. 
160. 
When  paddy  is  being  sold  and  knowledge  is  being 
acquired,  when  a   messenger  is  being  sent  and  desire  is 
being  gratified,  on  occasions  such  as  these  shame  should 
be  abandoned. 
161. 
Women  s  appetite  Is  twice  that  of  men,  their  wisdom 
four  times, 
their  industry  six  times,  and  their  desire 
eight  times  as  great. 
This  stanza  is  adapted  from 
Mitraldbka  (in  the  JIUopadesa,  I59)* 
The  Sanskrit  version  has,  For  the 
sake  of  his  soul  he  should  abandon 
the  earth.”  ^ 
Compare  105, 
where,  instead  of  “   evil-doer,”  we 
find  ^‘coward.”  In  verse  104  of  the 
same,  it  is  said  that  “teeth,  hair, 
nails,  and  men,  removed  from  their 
place,  are  not  beautiful.” 
Compare  Mitraldhlia^  1 09. 
This  stanza  is  No.  107  of  Mit^ 
raldhha. 
Read  the  ill'Sstrative  story  in 
BiihridblLeda^  the  second  section  of 
the  Hitopadcm,  concerning  the  wily 
woman  and  the  magistrate.  In  the 
fourth  section  {8andhi\  we  read  : 
“Now  once  this  Jewel'hrighi  was 
seen  by  Bea^givem  to  be  kissing  the 
cheek  of  the  servant.  Then  the 
wife  instantly  approaching  her  hus- 
band said,  *  Husband !   the  assurance 
of  this  servant  is  great,  for  lie  eats 
the  camphor  brought  for  you.  I 
have  smelt  the  perfume  of  the  cam- 
phor plainly  in  his  mouth.’”  The 
application  is  the  same.  Instead  of 
“industry  six  times,”  the  Banskrit 
has  “cunning  sixfold.” 


--- PAGE 64 ---
36  NlTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
■ 
 ■ 
The  sugar-cane  has  a   better  taste  knot^  after  knot  from 
the  tip  :  a   good  friend  is  like  that ;   a  bad  man  just  the 
reverse. 
163. 
A   cultivator,  a   trader,  a   minister,  a   priest  Ml  of 
learning  and  virtue — when  such  as  these  increase  in 
number,  the  country  must  assuredly  grow  great. 
164. 
Texts,  not  being  repeated,  become  useless ;   the  house  of 
an  indolent  person  comes  to  ruin ;   indolence  is  filth  to  a 
person  of  comely  appearance ;   and  forgetfulness  a   taint  to 
one  who  keeps  a   watch  over  his  senses.^^" 
165. 
The  property  of  men  of  little  industry  becomes  the 
possession  of  those  more  industrious :  evil-doers  say  that 
their  present  lot  has  its  origin  in  former  deeds.^^® 
166. 
The  wise  do  not  say  so;^^^  they  have  striven  ener- 
getically in  every  work;  if  their  work  does  not  come  to 
completion,  it  is  only  devoid  of  fruit — what  blame  can 
there  be  ? 
167. 
One  of  low  extraction  is  without  wisdom,  beauty,  and 
power;  wealth,  however,  is  all-important, this  age  being  a 
degenerate  oiie.^‘^^ 
There  is  here  a   play  on  the  and  forgetfulness  the  taint  of  one 
word  malmh.  See  DkamTnapadaf  keeping  watch.” 
239,  where  I  have  translated  as  Compare  Hitopadesa,  iv.  i,  2, 
follows:  “The  non-i’epetition  (of  jSTamely,  what  is  said  in  the 
texts)  is  the  taint  of  the  wise  ;   non-  latter  part  of  the  previous  stanza, 
repair  the  taint  of  houses  j   indoienoe  See  Eitopadesat  2   and  3  of  the 
the  taint  of  (personal)  appearance,  Sandhi  section.  ^ 
^20  Xmam  k^larii  chuttakalam. 


--- PAGE 65 ---
IL—THE  DHAMMANITI} 
SECTION  1. 
THE  PEECEPTOR. 
I. 
To  whom  in  this  world  there  is  no  solicitude  for  service 
at  the  feet^  of  preceptors,  by  them  what  can  be  accom- 
plished ?   Those,  however,  who  bow  down  to  the  dust  at 
their  teachers’  feet  are  looked  upon  as  both  good  and 
discriminating. 
^  The  Dhammantti  consists  of  414 
stanzas  in  24  sections.  It  was  for 
the  first  time  translated  into  Bur- 
mese by  the  head  priest  Tipitakalih- 
kara  MahMhamma  in  1784  A.D.,  in 
obedience  to  the  order  of  King 
Bodopra.  The  following  three  stan- 
zas are  introductory : — 
(i.)  V.anditv^  ratanam  settham 
Nissitya  pubbake  garum 
Nitidhammam  pavakkh^mi 
Sabbalokasukhavaham. 
(ii.)  Acariyo  ca  sippafica 
Paiiiia  sutam  kath^  dhanaih 
Peso  ea  nissayo  mitt  am 
Dujjano  sujano  balam. 
(ill)  Itthl  putto  ca  daso  ca 
Gharavaso  katakato 
N^tabbo  ca  alahk^,ro 
Riljadharnmopasevako 
Dukadimissako  ceva 
Pakinnako  ti  matika.” 
Translation :   — 
(1)  Having  ptSd  homage  to  the 
Three  Gems  and  to  my  venerable 
preceptor,  I  shall  recite  the  Dham- 
mantti,  based  on  ancient  works,  for 
the  benefit  of  the  whole  world. 
(ii.)  The  Precept07%  Scholarship, 
Wisdom,  Knowledge,  Conversation, 
Wealth,  Babiidtion,  Dependence, 
Friendship,  the  Bad  Man,  the  Good 
Man,  the  Powerful ; 
(hi.)  Women,  Children,  Servants, 
Residence,  Wliat  should  be  done,  What 
should  not  he  done,  What  should  he 
known,  Orna  meditation.  Royalty, 
Ministration,  Things  taken  hy  tivos 
and  threes,  and  Miscellaneous : 
these  form  the  subjects  of  discourse, 
^  We  find  the  following  in  Mann’s 
Ordinauces  regarding  a   pupil  when 
reciting  the  Law  ; — **  At  the  begin- 
ning and  end  of  the  Veda  {Le.,  of  its 
recitation),  the  teacher’s  two  feet 
are  always  to  be  clasped.  The 
clasping  of  the  teacher’s  feet  is  to  be 
done  with  the  hands  crossed  ”   
(ii.  71, 
72)- 


--- PAGE 66 ---
33 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
.  2,  . 
 ■  '  . 
An  ignorant  man,  not  following  the  instruction  of  his 
teacher,  desires  elegance  of  diction:  how  can  the  learned 
do  otherwise  than  hold  him  in  derision  ? 
'3- 
A   clever  pupil  delights  his  preceptor  hy  his  industry 
and  support,  by  attention  to  his  speech,  ministration 
to  his  wants,  and  hy  zeal  in  the  acquirement  of  know- 
ledge. 
4‘ 
He  who  does  not  tend  his  spiritual  and  his  secular 
teacher  as  well  as  his  parents  with  due  respect,  his 
pupils,  too,  will  be  just  like  him. 
But  he  who  does  cherish  his  spiritual  and  his  secular 
teacher  as  well  as  his  parents  with  due  respect,  his 
pupils,  too,  will  be  just  like  him. 
6. 
A   
pupil,  investigating  both  letters  and  words,  shoxild  be 
like  one  who  destroys  a   thief,  but  a   teacher  like  one  whose 
work  is  to  examine  a   thief. 
7* 
If  it  be  heard  where  a   wise  man  replete  with  learning  is, 
that  place  should  be  eagerly  resorted  to  by  one  desirous  of 
knowledge. 
8. 
Pleasant  is  the  shade  of  a   tree;  pleasanter  that  of 
parents  and  relatives;  still  more  pleasant  that  of  a 
teacher ;   pleasanter  yei  is  the  shadow  of  a   king,  and  still 
fmore  pleasant  in  many  ways  that  of  the  doctrine  of 
:   Buddha.^ 
]   ^ 
3  See  stanza  50  of  Zokaniti,  For  ent  NUis^  consnit  the  comparative 
corresponding  stanzas  in  the  differ-  table  in  the  Appendix. 


--- PAGE 67 ---
THE  DHAMMANITL 
39 
9- 
Weighty  is  an  umbrella  of  stone;  weightier  the  utter- 
ance of  the  gods ;   weightier  still  the  admonition  of  elders, 
and  still  more  weighty  the  teaching  of  Buddha. 
10..  ■■■  .  ■ 
Cotton  in  this  world  is  light ;   lighter  is  one  of  a   fickle 
disposition;  lighter  still  he  who  does  not  mind  the  admo- 
nition of  elders,  and  still  more  light  a   priest  remiss  in  the 
law.  ■ 


--- PAGE 68 ---
SECTION  IL 
SCHOL  ABSHIP. 
II- 
Gbiteeal  knowledge, >  science  of  law,  calculation,^  mecha- 
nical art,  the  Byakareins,^  music,  manual  dexterity, 
archery,  antiquities) 
'  12. 
Science  of  medicine,  wit  and  humour,  astrology,  strategy, 
versification,  diplomacy,  magiCj  grammar — these  are  the 
eighteen  acquirements.'^ 
13-  .  ■ 
How  can  there  he  knowledge  to  one  who  is  idle,  or 
^  See  notes  on  Lolcanttii  verses  lo  courage,  good  manners,  knowledge 
and  II.  of  medicine,  freedom  from  covetous- 
5  Perhaps  by  Sankliyd  the  system  ness,  and  forethought.  The  seven 
of  philosophy  known  by  that  name  manners  are — noble  daring  when  it 
may  have  been  originally  intended,  is  required,  calm  and  even  govern- 
For  the  various  systems  of  ancient  ment,  considerateness  for  the  people, 
Indian  philosophy,  vide  -Barth’s  merciful  adaptation  of  government 
“   Religions  of  India.”  according  to  circumstances,  punish- 
^  Pdninf s  Grammar  and  other  ment  of  the  wicked,  watchfulness 
translations  in  Burmese  of  scientific  for  their  detection,  and  just  appor- 
works  from  Sanskrit,  prepared  in  tionment  of  punishments.” 
the  reign  of  Sinbyu-shin.  Trenckner,  in  a   note  to  Milinda- 
7  Alabaster  remarks:  “In  a   panho^  writes:  “The  nineteen  sci- 
Siamese  historical  novel  treating  of  ences  are  intended  to  represent  the 
the  kings  of  Pegu  I  found  a   list  Yonaka  cj^clopsedia,  the  difference 
of  twenty-four  arts  which  princes  of  which  from  the  Indian  must  have 
should  be  conversant  with.  They  been  well  known  to  the  author, 
are  divided  into  4   crafts,  5  arts,  8  Hence  the  number  was  fixed  at 
merits,  and  7  manners  of  action,  nineteen  to  mark  them  out  as  dis- 
The  four  crafts  are — warlike  tactics,  tinct  from  the  ^eighteen’  Indian 
omens,  skill  in  dealing  with  men  ac-  sciences.  But  this  was  all  he  knew 
cording  to  their  characters,  and  the  about  the  matter,  and  so  his  specific 
art  of  judiciously  acquiring  wealth,  cation  of  them  turned  out  a   mere 
The  five  arts  are — knowledge  of  all  farrago  of  Indian  words,  the  exact 
mechanical  arts,  soothsaying,  history,  meaning  of  which  no  one  would  pre- 
law, and  natural  history.  The  eight  bably  have  been  more  puzzled  to  ex- 
merits  are — truthfulness,  just  treat-  plain  than  himso^f  (Milinda),  He 
ment  of  all  people,  kindliness,  first  thought  of  9ruti  and  smriti  of 


--- PAGE 69 ---
THE  DHAMMANITL 
41 
wealth  to  one  without  knowledge ;   friendship  to  one  with- 
out wealth,  happiness  to  the  friendless ;   merit  to  one  un- 
happy, and  Mbb^n  to  one  without  merit  ? 
14- 
Wealth  is  not  equal  to  knowledge;  thieves  do  not 
take  away  knowledge;^  knowledge  is  friendship  in  this 
world,  and  the  bearer  of  happiness  in  the  next. 
Always,  dear  one,  acquire  knowledge ;   do  not  bring 
trouble  to  your  venerable  teacher :  a   king  is  honoured  in 
his  own  country — a   man  of  knowledge  in  every  place. 
16. 
Dear  one  !   wherefore  art  thou  idle  ?  An  ignorant  man 
is  the  carrier  of  another’s  burden.  Acquire  knowledge 
day  by  day.  A   man  of  knowledge  is  honoured  in  this 
world. 
17-  
.  . 
Men,  wealthy  and  reputed,  though  full  of  youth  and 
beauty,  are  without  grace,  being  without  kiiowdedge ;   they 
are  like  the  J3 idea  frondosa, -which  emits  no  fragrance. 
18, 
A   father  is  an  enemy,^  a   mother  is  an  enemy,  if  their 
children  are  not  educated  when  young.  As  cranes  are 
unbecoming  among  swans,  so  are  the  children  in  the  midst 
of  a   (learned)  assembly. 
sankbya,  yoga,  nyaya,  vaigeshika.  Milinda  suspected  of  Buddhist  at- 
For  smriti  and  nyaya  were  substi-  tainments  previous  to  bis  conversion, 
tnted  sammuti  (S.  sarnmati,  perhaps  The  rest  of  the  names  are  chosen 
in  the  sense  of  ‘what  has  univer-  rather  at  random ^  and  mostly  dis-  y 
sally  been  agreed  on’)  and  niti ;   the  guised  as  feminines  ending  in  -d,  in^ 
regular  equivalents,  sati  and  naya,  order  to  look  less  like  Indian.” 
being  objectionable,  because  these  ®  See  Ilitopadekt^  Introduction,  4. 
are  among  the  technical  terms  of  ®  Mitopadem,  Introduction,  37- 
Buddhism  (hay<^ariyo  atthangiko  39.I  (j^nakya  also  says  “as  herons 
maggo),  and  might  have  rendered  among  flamingoes.” 


--- PAGE 70 ---
42 
NItI  LITERATUEE  0F  BURMA. 
One  witliout  worth  should  not  remain  in  a   place  of 
prominence;  a   man  of  quality  has  a   good  destiny:  how 
can  a   crow,  though  perching  upon  a   steeple,  become  a 
ganda 
20. 
A   fool  praising  himself  to  his  heart's  content  does  not 
appear  to  advantage  in  this  world :  a   wise  man.  renders 
himself  conspicuous  although  he  conceal  himself  in  a 
^  22..-  ; 
A   religious  book,  intended  for  the  subjugation  of  pride, 
excites  the  vanity  of  fools;  the  sun,  though  created  for 
all  eyes,  is  darkness  to  owls. 
23. 
Food,  sexual  intercourse,  and  sleep  appertain  both  to 
oxen  and  men ;   knowledge  is  characteristic  of  men :  to 
be  devoid  of  knowledge  is  being  on  a   footing  with  oxen. 
24. 
The  pupil  who,  by  a   desire  to  possess  a   vast  amount  of 
knowledge,  learns  a   great  deal,  that  knowledge  he  is 
unable  to  convey  to  another,  just  as  a   dumb  person, 
seeing  a   dream,  is  unable  to  give  utterance  to  it. 
A   gigantic  bird  in  Bnddhist  worsted  in  battle  and  had  liis 
mythology.  The  Garulas  are  repre-  thunderbolt  smashed.  Vide  Dow- 
sented  as  being  ever  at  war  with  son's  “   Hindu  Mythology.” 
the  Nagas.  In  Hindu  mythology  .  See  verses  10576  id  of  Mahd- 
the  G-aruda  (=:Garula)  is  a   bird  bhdrata,  book  xii,  from  which  the 
on  which  Vishnu  rides.  He  has  sentiments  of  stanzas  19  and  20 
the  head,  wings,  talons,  and  beak  are  adapted. 
of  an  eagle,  and  the  body  and  limbs  The  Eitopadesaj  Intr.^  25,  says  1 
,  of  a   man.  His  face  is  white,  his  Pood,  sleep,  fear,  and  sexual  inter- 
wings  red,  and  his  body  of  a   course,  this  is  the  common  property 
golden  hue.  He  is  said  to  have  of  man  with  beasts.  Virtue  Is  their 
stolen  the  amrita  from  the  gods  in  great  distinction.  Deprived  of  virtue, 
order  to  obtain  his  mother’s  freedom  men  are  equal  witi^irutes.” 
from  Ivadru,  Indra  fought  against  Because  it  is  not  properly  di- 
bim  and  recovered  it,  but  he  was  gested. 


--- PAGE 71 ---
SECTION  III. 
WISDOM. 
25. 
Close  attention  to  study  augments  knowledge;  know- 
ledge increases  wisdom ;   by  wisdom  we  know  the  signifi- 
cation (of  a   thing);  the  knowledge  of  the  signification 
brings  happiness. 
26. 
A   wise  man,  seeing  coming  danger, 
should  avoid  it 
at  a   distance ;   on  seeing  it  approach,  he  should  remain 
fearless. 
■  
.  27. 
A   wise  man  should  spurn  one  who  is  avaricious,  irri- 
table, proud,  arrogant,  idle,  and  covetous ;   he  should  spurn 
also  one  who  is  remiss,  addicted  to  drink,  slothful,  hypo- 
critical, and  niggardly. 
28. 
He  who  is  full  of  faith  and  modesty,  who  shrinks  from 
sin  and  is  full  of  learning,  who  is  diligent,  unremiss,  and 
full  of  understanding — he,  being  replete  with  these  seven 
things,  is  esteemed  a   wise  man, 
'29* 
One  who  is  stable,  by  obtaining  what  benefit  there  may 
be  in  his  present  state  of  ignorance  or  what  there  may  be 
in  the  future,  is  termed  a   wise  man. 
14  « Perceiving^ danger  not  yet  burrow  with  a   hundred  openings.’^ 
arrived,  an  old  ‘mouse,  skilled  in  See  story  in  JJitopadesa.  i,  38,  "”39 ; 
books  of  policy,  occupied  there  a   also  iv.  17. 


--- PAGE 72 ---
44  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
30^  
' 
He  is  a   wise  man  who  knows  Ms  speech,  Ms  affections, 
and  his  anger  to  he  in  keeping  with  his  status.^^ 
.31-  
'■ 
A   king  and  a   wise  man  are  never  alike  :   a   king  is 
honoured  in  his  own  country,  a   wise  man  everywhere, 
32. 
Punishment  truly  is  awarded  to  a   wise  man  recemng 
praise  from  a   fool ’  but  a   wise  man  praised  by  a   wise  man 
is  well  praised.^^ 
■'33*- 
By  one  in  power  controlling  himself,  his  underlings, 
too,  will  exercise  self-control :   a   wise  man  should  put  an 
end  to  his  anger. 
34- 
-   Wide  certainly  is  the  difference  between  the  body  and 
the  good  qualities  of  mind  ;   the  body  perishes  in  a   short 
time,  the  qualities  last  a   cycle. 
35*  
■ 
He  is  called  wise  who,  obtaining  much  benefit,  know- 
ledge, and  prosperity,  can  conduct  himself  as  one  devoid 
of  pride  and  stubbornness. 
36. 
Those  men  who  desire  not  what  should  not  be  desired, 
nor  sorrow  for  what  occasions  loss,  who,  moreover,  do 
not  suffer  confusion  in  failure,  they  indeed  are  wise  men. 
37- 
A   wise  man  should  not  think  lightly  of  a   knotty  point 
in  a   sentence  :  how  can  the  sun,  though  shedding  light 
SahhavasLidisarfi,  ie.,  the  occa-  Of  what  avail  is  the  praise  or 
sion  should  be  considered.  See  the  censure  of  one  of  the  vulgar,  who 
Ilitopadeh.,  ii.  48.  makes  a   useless  n(#5e  like  a   senseless 
Mahdbhdrata,  xii.  4217,  says  ;  crow  in  the  forest  ?   ” 


--- PAGE 73 ---
THE  DHAMMANiTL  45 
on  the  Three  Islands, 
throw  light  into  the  hollow  of  a 
bamboo  ? 
38. 
There  is  no  one  without  merit  or  demerit  in  something 
or  other ;   even  the  gentle  lily  has  a   tough  stalk. 
39- 
They  who  are  covetous  and  deluded  come  to  grief, 
although,  knowing  a   large  number  of  books,  they  possess 
a   vast  stock  of  knowledge  for  the  dissipation  of  doubts. 
40. 
Men  spoken  of  as  good,  on  seeing  a   fault  in  another 
who  is  good,  say  nothing :  the  world  sees  not  an  impres- 
sion in  the  moon,  although  it  be  apparent. 
According  to  Buddhist  cosmo-  appears  in  Hardy’s  “Manual  of 
gony,  each  cakkavcUa  has  four  great  Buddhism” 
The  other 
islands  or  continents — (i)  Pubbavi-  as  taste  and  smell,  are  produced  by 
deha,  {2)  Jambudipa,  (3)  Aparago-  contact.  Unless  there  be  actual 
y^na,  and  (4)  Uttarakuru.  The  allu-  contact  between  the  tongue  and  the 
sion  to  the  Three  Islands  will  be  un-  object  tasted,  there  is  no  production 
derstood  by  considering  the  path  in  ot  jivhd  vinnana;  but  when  any- 
which  the  sun  is  said  to  move.  This  thing  is  in  contact  with  the  eye, 
luminary  gives  light  to  the  whole  of  whether  it  be  collyrium  by  which  it 
the  four  continents,  but  not  to  all  is  anointed,  or  the  grain  of  sand  by 
at  the  same  time.  When  it  rises  in  which  it  is  annoyed,  there  is  no 
Jambudipa,  it  is  in  the  zenith  to  the  consciousness  of  its  colour  or  shape  ; 
inhabitants  of  Pubbavideha,  sunset  notwithstanding  the  eye  can  discern 
in  Uttarakuru,  and  midnight  in  the  hare  in  the  moon,  though  it  is 
Aparagoyana.  At  sunset  in  the  at  so  great  a   distance.” 
latter  it  is  mid-day  in  (2),  .sunset  The  idea  of  the  hare  being  in  the 
in  (i),  and  midnight  in  (4).  When  moon  is  a   very  old  one,  and  had  its 
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  go  to  the  origin,  no  doubt,  in  the  Sasajdtulka^ 
other  side  of  the  Yughandhara  rocks  iv.  2   (6)  of  the  Jdtakatthavannand^ 
nearest  to  Maha-Meru,  they  appear  Pausboli’s,  vol.  hi.  p.  51.  Khys 
to  set  in  (2).  See  “System  of  the  Davids,  referring  to  certain  legends 
Universe”  in  Hardy’s  “Manual  of  concerning  Gotama,  writes: — “He 
Buddhism.”  takes  his  place  also  in  the  ‘Bic- 
Lanjanmh.  Just  as  Occiden-  tionnaire  InferneU  of  M.  Collin  de 
tais  speak  of  “   the  man  in  the  moon,”  Plancy,  a   quaintly  illustrated  dic- 
Orientals  speak  of  “the  hare  in  the  tionary  of  all  matters  relating  to 
moon.”  In  Burmese  folklore  the  devils,,  fairies,  magic,  astrology,  and 
moon  is  represented  as  having  a   so  on.  There  he  appears  in  a   curious 
picture  of  a   man  and  his  wife  pound-  woodcut  as  ‘  Sakimuni,  genie  ou 
ing  rice,  and  a   dog  seated  by.  With  dieu,’  in  the  character  of  Man  in 
regard  to  certain  philosophical  specu-  the  Moon,  or,  rather,  of  the  Plare 
lations  respecting  consciousness  in  in  the  Moon.” 
the  Milinda^anho,  the  following  The  following  is  the  Chinese  ver- 


--- PAGE 74 ---
46  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
4L 
If  a   wise  man  once  contract  a   friendship  with  a   wise 
man,  he  should  strive  after  not  only  his  own  welfare,  but 
also  that  of  the  other ;   he  should  likewise  strive  after  the 
final  bliss  of  Mbb§;n, 
42. 
It  should  not  be  said  that  in  a   well  on  the  bank  of  a 
river  there  is  no  water^  in 
sion  of  the  story,  as  given  in  Beal’s 
“   Buddhist  Kecords  of  the  Western 
World,”  in  connection  with  Gotama’s 
wanderings  in  the  Benares  district : 
— “   To  the  west  of  this  lake  (Cham- 
pion’s Lake)  there  is  a   stUpa  of  *  the 
three  animals.’  In  this  x^lace,  when 
Bodbisattva  was  practising  his  pre- 
paratory life,  he  burnt  his  own  body. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  kalpa  in  this 
forest  wild  there  lived  a   fox,  a   hare, 
and  a   monkey,  three  creatures  of 
different  kinds  but  mutually  affec- 
tionate. At  this  time  Sakra  (Sakka), 
king  of  Devas,  wishing  to  examine 
into  the  case  of  those  practising  the 
life  of  a   Bodbisattva,  descended 
spiritually  in  shape  as  an  old  man. 
He  addressed  the  three  animals 
thus  : — ‘  My  children,  two  or  three, 
are  you  at  ease  and  without  fear  ?  
’ 
They  said,  ^We  lie  upon  the  rich 
herbage,  wander  through  the  bosky 
brakes,  and  though  of  different  kinds 
we  are  agreed  together,  and  are  at 
rest  and  joyful.’  The  old  man 
said,  ‘Hearing  that  you,  my  chil- 
dren, two  or  three,  were  peaceful 
at  heart  and  living  in  sweet  accord, 
though  I  am  old,  yet  have  I  come 
from  far  alone,  forgetting  my  infir- 
mities, to  visit  you ;   but  now  I  am 
pressed  with  hunger,  what  have  you 
to  offer  me  to  eat?’  They  said, 
‘  Wait  here  awhile,  and  we  will  go 
ourselves  in  search  of  food.’  On 
this,  with  one  mind  and  with  single 
purpose,  they  searched  through  the 
different  ways  for  food.  The  fox 
having  skirted  a   river,  drew  out 
from  thence  a   fresh  carp  fish.  The 
wood  no  fire,  in  a   palm-leaf 
monkey  in  the  forest  gathered  fruits 
and  flowers  of  different  kinds.  Then 
they  came  together  to  the  appointed 
place  and  approached  the  old  man. 
Only  the  hare  came  empty,  after 
running  to  and  fro  both  right  and 
left.  The  old  man  spake  to  him  and 
said  ‘As  it  seems  to  me,  you  are 
not  of  one  mind  with  the  fox  and 
monkey  ;   each  of  those  can  minister 
to  me  heartily,  but  the  hare  alone 
comes  empty,  and  gives  me  nought 
to  eat ;   the  truth  of  what  I  say  can 
easily  be  known.’  The  hare,  hear- 
ing these  words  and  moved  by  their 
power,  addressed  the  fox  and  monkey 
thus,  ‘  Heap  up  a   great  pile  of  wood 
for  burning,  then  I  will  give  (do) 
something.’  The  fox  and  monkey 
did  accordingly;  running  here  and 
there,  they  gathered  grass  and  wood  ; 
they  piled  it  up,  and  when  it  was 
thoroughly  alight  the  hare  spake,, 
thus :  ‘  Good  sir  1   I  am  a   small  and 
feeble  thing  ;   it  is  difficult  for  me  to 
obtain  you  food,  but  my  poor  body 
may  perhaps  povide  a   meal.’  On 
this  he  cast  himself  upon  the  fire, 
and  forthwith  died.  Then  the  old 
man  reassumed  his  body  as  King 
Sakra,  collected  all  the  bones,  and 
after  dolorous  sighs  addressed  the 
fox  and  monkey  thus ;  ‘  He  only 
could  have  done  it.  I  am  deeply 
touched;  and  lest  his  memory  should 
perish,  I  will  place  him  in  the  moon’s 
disc  to  »dwell.’  Therefore  through 
after  ages  all  have  said,  ‘  The  hare 
is  in  the  moon.’  After  this  event 
men  built  a   stitpa  Oi  the  spot.” 


--- PAGE 75 ---
47 
THE  DHAMMANtTL 
fan  no  wind ;   in  like  manner  it  should  not  be  said  that  in 
the  mouth  there  is  no  speech. 
43- 
A   wise  man  questioned  by  another  is  like  a   drum ; 
being  questioned,  he  is  lilve  a   great  shower:  a   fool, 
whether  questioned  or  not  questioned,  sj)eaks  boastfully. 
44. 
If  one  embellished  with  abundance  of  good  qualities 
strives  not  after  his  own  and  the  welfare  of  others,  how 
can  he,  a   bearer  of  happiness  to  all  beings,  be  called  a   wise 
man? 
45. 
One  wise  should  strive  after  his  own  and  the  welfare 
of  others ;   being  unable  to  do  both,  he  should  seek  his 
own  good ;   unable  to  do  that,  he  should  at  least  restrain 
himself  from  sin. 
46. 
A   wise  man  hears  everything  with  his  ear  and  sees 
everything  with  his  eye:  it  does  not  become  him,  how- 
ever, to  wish  for  all  that  he  sees  and  all  that  he  hears. 
47- 
Having  eyes,  one  should  be  like  a   blind  man;  like  a 
deaf  man,  one  who  has  ears;  possessed  of  wisdom,  one 
should  be  like  dumb,  and  like  a   weak  man  one  possessed 
of  strength;  and,  when  prosperity  comes,  a   man  should 
sleep  the  sleep  of  one  who  is  dead. 
48. 
Wise  men  wish  for  sons  superior  to  them,  or  equal  to  them, 
in  excellence ;   if  the  child  be  one  who  injures  the  family, 
him,  as  being  of  inferior  worth,  they  desire  not  to  have.  ^ 
49- 
There  are  iSiree  in  books  who  call  themselves  wise : 


--- PAGE 76 ---
4??  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
one  wlio  says,  I  only  am  wise ;   
”   one  who  says,  ''  I  also 
am  wise ;   
”   and  the  one  who  says,  “   I  am  not  wise/'  These 
are  the  three. 
50.  
■ 
That  assembly  is  not  becoming  in  which  no  good  men 
are  to  be  found  ;   they  are  not  good  who  do  not  speak 
what  is  right ;  they,  however,  are  good  who,  abandoning 
lust,  hatred,  and  folly,  speak  what  is  right. 
51- 
The  wise  should  not  look  for  faults  in  a   child,  a   mad- 
man, and  a   king;  nor,  also,  in  teachers  and  parents,  in 
the  priesthood,  and  in  an  elder  brother. 
A   "wise  man  should  not  publish  his  anxiety  of  mind, 
misconduct  in  his  house,  his  deception  by  others,  and 
likewise  disrespect.^^ 
S3- 
He  is  a   wise  man  who  looks  upon  another's  wife  as  he 
would  upon  a   mother,  upon  another's  j^roperty  as  upon  a 
clod  of  earth,  and  upon  all  creatures  as  he  does  upon 
himself.*^® 
54* 
They,  however,  are  not  wise  who  seek  for  friendship  by 
deceit,  virtue  by  defilement,  property  by  another's  anguish, 
learning  by  amusement,  and  a   wife  by  severity. 
!For  “deception”  and  “dis-  This  is  a   literal  rendering  of 
respect’  ’  the  Hitopadda  has  *  ‘  the  stanza  1 3  
in  MitraMhha. 
being  cheated”  and  “   disgrace  ” 
respectively. 


--- PAGE 77 ---
SECTION  IV. 
KNOWLEDGE. 
55* 
One  desiring  knowledge  should  seek  knowledge,  having 
(first  of  all)  sought  for  learned  men :   rice  cooked  in  the 
pot  is  (also  found)  cooked  in  the  dish.'^^ 
56* 
The  wise  from  afar,  not  hillmen  close  by,  take  away 
the  gem  from  the  hill  abounding  in  riches :  like  this  are 
the  foolish  in  reference  to  the  learned, 
57- 
What  benefit  is  there  to  deer  by  mineral  wealth  or  to 
the  impious  by  a   moral  precept  ?   what  benefit  by  law  to 
the  lawless^  by  knowledge  to  fools  ? 
58. 
The  man  who  is  of  little  knowledge  lives  like  an  ox : 
his  fiesh  increases,  not  his  wisdom. 
59* 
One  of  little  knowledge,  being  presumptuous,  deems 
that  little  a   great  deal ;   a   frog,‘^^  not  seeing  the  water  in 
the  sea,  thinks  the  water  in  a   well  considerable: 
In  which  the  rice  is  served  at  a   or  one  of  narrow  experience  is 
meal.  The  Bdjantti  of  Lallfl  L^la  frequently  likened  to  a   frog-  in  a 
says  :  “   As  whatever  you  put  into  a   well.  He  who  does  not  go  forth 
new  earthen  vessel,  you  will  find  its  and  explore  all  the  earth,  which  is 
quality  there.”  ^ 
 full  of  many  wonderful  things,  is  a 
One  of  circumscribed  intellect  weU-frog.” — Pancatantra. 


--- PAGE 78 ---
50  NITI  LITER  A   TUBE  OF  BURMA. 
6o. 
Know  by  this : — a   small  stream  flows  into  chasms  and 
fissures,  murmuring  (on  its  course)  ;   a   large  river  flows 
silently  along.^^ 
A   Telugu  apophthegm  says  :  course,  but  a   foul  stream  mshes 
“The  Ganges  flows  with  a   tranquil  with  a   roar.’* 


--- PAGE 79 ---
SECTION  V. 
COJSrVEKSATIOF. 
61. 
Good  men  say  that  pleasant  speech  is  excellent — (this 
is  the  first  thing);  we  should  speak  in  accordance  with 
the  scriptures,  not  what  is  not  in  keeping  with  it — this  is 
the  second  thing;  we  should  speak  words  of  affection, 
and  not  give  expression  to’  unloving  speech — this  is  the 
third  thing;  we  should  speak  the  truths  and  not  give 
utterance  to  falsehood — this  is  the  fourth. 
62. 
The  fat  of  lions  remains  in  gold  and  not  in  silver ; 
the  conversation  of  the  wise  finds  no  place  in  a   fool. 
63. 
Fire,  having  great  heat,  does  not  soften  earth;  water 
reduces  it  to  softness ;   the  words  of  the  good  soften  one 
who  is  severe. 
■  64.  
. 
By  gentleness  should  one  overcome  an  enemy  or  one 
who  is  harsh :  for  the  reason  that  a   thing  is  not  accom- 
plished, for  that  very  reason  it  should  be  overcome  by 
gentleness. 
65. 
Pleasant  is  sandal-wood  in  this  world ;   pleasant  the 
light  of  the  moon ;   pleasanter,  however,  than  sandal-’wood 
and  the  moon  is  the  conversation  of  the  righteous. 
The  Burmese  say  that  there  is 
a   fish  called  the  Ngahtauhma,  in  a 
hill-stream  of  the  3egu-yoma  range, 
whose  fat  will  not  remain  in  any 
except  a   golden  vessel.  As  soon  as 
it  is  put  into  «any  other,  it  speedily 
evaporates. 


--- PAGE 80 ---
52 
Ntri  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
66. 
One  of  pleasant  speecli  has  many  a   friend^  one  of  harsh 
speech  few:  here  the  metaphor 
concerning  the  sun  and 
moon  should  be  brought  to  mind. 
67. 
A   word  in  season,  though  little,  is  well  spoken;  to  a 
hungry  man  delicious  is  the  badly-cooked  rice  that  has  to 
be  eaten. 
68. 
The  large  talk  of  the  garrulous,  though  beneficial,  no  one 
should  pay  regard  to ;   is  it  not  found  that  the  water  of  a 
river,  though  serviceable,  is  viewed  with  indifference? 
One  should  not  speak  when  the  time  for  speaking  is 
past,  nor  should  he  remain  silent  at  all  times ;   when  the 
time  for  speaking  comes,  he  should  not  utter  what  is 
irrelevant 
he  should  speak  with  deliberation. 
70. 
Wisdom  in  speech  is  the  foundation  in  reference  to 
things  that  are  wished  for  ;   when  there  is  no  wisdom  in 
speech,  what  is  wished  for  is  not  achieved. 
■  '-yi-  ■■  ■ 
The  hand,  the  leg,  the  head,  the  back,  the  stomach — 
these  are  five  individuals  ;   they  serve  the  mouth,  being 
subject,  so  to  speak,  to  its  admonitions. 
Taken  from  the  excessive  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  great  coldness  of 
the  moon. 


--- PAGE 81 ---
(   53  ) 
SECTION  VI 
WEALTH. 
72. 
Faith  is  wealth ;   virtue,  modesty,  fear  of  sinning,  know- 
ledge, sacrificing,  too,  are  wealth ;   wisdom,  certainly,  is  a 
seventh  ”   wealth. 
73* 
The  wealth  of  women  is  beauty,  of  men  good  ancestry, 
of  snakes  poison;  the  wealth  of  rulers  is  an  army,  of 
priests  virtue,  of  Brahmans  knowledge. 
74- 
Beauty  in  the  hour  of  misfortune  is  of  no  benefit,  nor 
wisdom,  ancestry,  and  relations ;   wealth  alone  is  a   special 
boon.^® 
7S* 
Relatives,  son  and  wife,  and  companions  forsake  one  in 
poverty ;   they  cling  to  him  in  prosperity ;  wealth  in  this 
world  is  a   great  friend.^^ 
76. 
As  people  always  depend  upon  tanks  and  the  like  when 
they  contain  water,  so  also  do  they  depend  upon  one  who 
Yide  HUopadekif  ii.  3  :  A   “   He  who  has  wealth  has  friends,  has 
man  of  great  wealth  is  honoured,  relatives.  There  is  no  prosperity 
be  he  even  the  murderer  of  a   Brah-  in  existence  without  wealth.  Like 
man ;   although  equal  in  race  to  the  small  streams  in  the  hot  weather, 
moon,  if  poor  he  is  despised.*’  the  acts  of  a   destitute  man  are  cut 
See  some  bea^iful  lines  on  the  off ;   
’*  and  so  forth, 
subject  in  i/a/idMdrato,  xh.  213  ff. : 


--- PAGE 82 ---
54  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
has  wealth,  on  one  who  has  fortune ;   when  they  run  low, 
they  forsake  Mm. 
77- 
Prosperity  is  brought  about  ^by  oneself,  and  so  is  ad- 
versity; no  one  brings  about  the  prosperity  or  adversity 
of  another. 


--- PAGE 83 ---
(   55  ) 
SECTION  VII. 
EESIDBNOE. 
78. 
Wheee  these  five — a   man  of  wealth,  an  astrologer,  a 
king,  a   river,  and  likewise  a.  doctor — are  not  to  be  found, 
there  one  should  not  remain  for  even  a   day.®^ 
79* 
Where  there  is  no  love,  no  joy,  no  relatives,  and  no 
man  of  learning,  there  a   man  should  not  live  for  even  a 
day. 
80. 
Where  there  is  no  love,  no  respect  for  the  virtuous, 
no  disregard  for  the  wicked,  there  one  should  not  live  for 
even  a   day. 
81. 
Lions,  good  men,  and  elephants,  leaving  their  habita- 
tion, go  elsewhere;  crows,  bad  men,  and  deer  die  even 
in  their  own  abode. 
"S  We  quote  from  the  neither  respect  for  the  good,  nor  the 
section  of  the  Hito^adeia  in  connec-  means  of  livelihood,  nor  friends,  nor 
tion  with  stanzas  78  to  84  of  the  the  advance  of  knowledge,  any  one 
Dlmmmantti: —   should  abandon  that  country/' 
“Teeth,  hair,  nails,  and  men  “A  rich  man,  a   religious  teacher, 
removed  from  their  place  are  not  a   king,  a   river,  and,  fifthly,  a   physi- , 
beautiful;  knowing  this,  the  wise  cian — ^where  these  five  are  not,  one 
should  not  abandon  his  own  place/’  should  not  make  one’s  abode.” 
“ Lions,  good  men,  and  elephants,  ^‘Traffic,  fear,  modesty,  honesty,  ^-9- 
having  abandoned  a   place,  go  away ;  and  generosity — where  these  five 
crows,  cowards,  and  deer  meet  death  are  not,  there  one  should  not  make 
at  the  same  spot.”  an  abiding-place.” 
“   The  wise  man  moves  with  one  Thou,  O   friend,  must  not  dwell 
foot,  and  rests  still  with  one  foot:  where  this  quaternion  is  not  —   a 
without  having  inspected  another  payer  of  debts,  a   physician,  a   re- 
place, he  should  not  abandon  a   iigious  teacher,  and  a   river  of 
former  station.”  % 
 wholesome  water.”  For  these  see 
“In  whatever  country  there  is  Pincott’s  i.  104-112. 


--- PAGE 84 ---
56  NlTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
82. 
Where  an  idler,  a   clever  man,  a   hero,  and  a   coward  are 
equally  praised,  there  the  virtuous  do  not  remain;  what 
benefit  is  there  to  them  by  absence  of  distinction  ? 
83. 
A   wise  man  moves  on  one  foot  and  halts  on  the  other ; 
he  should  not  quit  a   previous  abode  without  carefully 
thinking  about  another. 
S4.  ; 
Teeth,  hair,  nails,  and  men,  not  being  properly  rooted, 
do  not  appear  to  advantage ;   a   wise  man,  knowing  this, 
does  not  hurriedly  quit  his  residence. 


--- PAGE 85 ---
(   57  ) 
SECTION  YIIL 
DEPENDENCE. 
8$. 
One,  though  he  he  similar  in  goodness  to  the  all-wise 
Buddha,  sinks  (into  obscurity),  being  alone  and  not  de- 
pendent on  another ;   a   gem,  though  priceless,  looks  well 
being  set  in  gold.^^ 
86. 
One  should  not  serve  a   severe  master,  and  yet  he 
should  serve  one;  one  should  not  serve  one  who  is 
niggardly ;   more  so,  he  should  not  serve  one  who  op- 
presses; and,  furthermore,  he  should  not  serve  one  who 
will  not  give  him  promotion. 
87. 
One  speaks  badly  of  another  in  his  absence,  but 
lovingly  in  his  presence;  no  one  should  serve  such  a 
person,  treacherous  as  a   pot  of  poison.^*^ 
88. 
The  sun  should  be  approached  by  the  back  towards 
it,  fire  by  the  stomach  facing  it;  one  should  approach 
kings  by  his  whole  body,  the  next  world  by  laying  aside 
delusion.®^ 
Compare  “Glass  by  associa-  “   A   wicked  person  speaks  sweetly, 
tion  with  gold  acquires  an  emerald  but  that  is  not  a   reason  for  confiding 
lustre.”— 
41,  in  him.  He  has  sweetness  on  the 
30  < « One  should  avoid  that  kind  tip  of  his  tongue,  but  in  the  heai^ 
of  friend  who  behind  the  back  virulent  poison.” — Mitralabha,  ^o. 
injures  one’s  purposes,  and  before  ^   The  Sanskrit  has  “   the  next 
the  face  speaks  sweetly.  He  is  a   world  by  sincerity.” — Suhridhheday 
dish  of  poison #with  milk  on  the  32. 
surface.” — Mitraldhha^  79. 


--- PAGE 86 ---
58 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
89. 
One  should  not  rely  upon  an  evil-doer,  nor  on  one  who 
is  given  to  lying;  he  should  not  depend  on  one  who  is 
mindful  of  his  own  interests,  nor  on  one  who  acts  very 
much  in  secret. 
90* 
One,  though  he  he  of  little  excellence,  becomes  eminent 
by  serving  a   man  of  eminence:  golden- winged  birds  be- 
come so  by  remaining  on  a   golden  TnountcvinP^ 
A   powerful  person,  what  can  he  effect,  though  strong, 
if  he  be  without  followers  ?  Fire  put  where  there  is  no 
air  goes  out  of  itself. 
:   92.,- 
Flowers  and  fruits  grow  plentifully,  the  tree  depending 
on  a   good  soil ;   by  depending  on  a   good  man  great  merit 
springs  into  existence. 
The  reference  is  very  likely  to  upon  the  eastern  mountain  an  object 
the  fabulous  birds  on  the  northern  shines  by  the  drawing  near  of  the 
face  of  Mount  Meru.  Compare  sun,  so  by  the  proximity  of  the  good 
Introduction  to  .ffiifopadeicf,  46 ;  “As  even  an  outcast  is  enlightened.** 


--- PAGE 87 ---
SECTION  IX. 
FEIENDSHIP. 
93- 
He  who  is  not  idle,  severe,  and  deceitful,  but  is  pure  in 
mind,  truthful  in  speech,  free  from  covetousness,  eager 
for  his  welfare — such  a   person  is  said  to  be  excellent, 
94- 
Staving  off  evil  in  misfortune, 
supporting  you  in 
prosperity,  not  abandoning  you  in  adversity — these,  in 
short,  are  the  characteristics  of  a   friend. 
95* 
They  who  stand  by  you  in  sickness  and  in  adversity, 
in  famine  and  in  captivity,  at  a   king’s  door  or  in  the 
charnel-house — they  are  friends  indeed. 
Just  as  difficult  is  it  to  find  a   wise  man,  a   good  friend, 
and  a   well-wisher,  as  it  is  to  find  a   good  doctor  or  a 
delicious  medicine. 
97. 
He  who,  forsaking  staunch  friends,  forms  acquaintance- 
ship with  those  wdio  are  unstable,  to  him  tliere  is  the  loss 
^   **  In  misfortunes  one  may  know  ^   For  says  an  old  proverb  :  **  Even 
a   friend,  in  battle  a   hero,  in  decay-  touching  an  elephant  kills;  a   ser- 
ing  fortunes  a   wife,  and  kinsmen  in  pent  smelling;  a   king  even  when 
afflictions.’’ — Mitraldhhaf  74.  Also  protecting  ;  and  the  wicked  evei^ 
compare  Suhridhlieda^  79:  “   On  the  smiling.  ” — Eitopadda^  in.  15,  The 
touchstone  of  misfortune  a   man  Sanskrit  version  adds :  during  a 
ascertains  the  strength  of  the  intel-  national  tumult.” — MitraJMliaf  75. 
lect  and  goodnets  of  the  relation, 
wife,  servants,  and  of  himself,” 


--- PAGE 88 ---
6o 
NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
of  his  faithful  friends; — what  can  there  be  said  about 
those  who  are  unstable  ? 
■98. 
One  should  win  over  an  avaricious  person  by  a   gift; 
one  presumptuous  by  salutation;  a   fool  by  giving  him  his 
way ;   a   wise  man  by  right  behaviour. 
99- 
By  constant  intercourse,  verily,  and  by  keeping  aloof,  as 
well  as  by  proffering  requests  at  an  unseasonable  moment 
— by  this  do  friends  fall  away. 
100. '  
■ 
One  should,  therefore,  not  go  to  another  constantly,  nor 
after  too  long  a   time  ;   he  should  proffer  a   request  at  a 
seasonable  moment:  friends  thus  will  not  fall  away. 
101. 
By  association  with  whatever  friend  safety  diminishes 
—a  wise  man  should,  above  all  things,  guard  against  ruin 
from  him  as  he  would  guard  against  fire. 
102. 
By  association  with  whatever  friend  safety  increases — 
a   wise  man  should,  in  all  matters,  act  towards  him  as  he 
would  towards  himself, 
103. 
The  sugar-cane  is  decidedly  sweeter  knot  after  knot 
from  the  tip ;   a   good  man  is  like  that— a   bad  man  just 
the  reverse.^® 
^   Vide  stanzas  7S  of  LoTcaniti^  221  One  should  win  a   friend  by  good- 
of  BJiaryimapada^  and  Mahdhhdrata,  nature,  a   relative  by  courtesy, 
5^iii.  13,  235,  V.  1518.  The  Sandhi  women  and  servants  by  gifts  and 
section  of  Eitopadesa,  108,  109,  has :  honours,  other  people  by  dexterity.’’ 
The  covetous  should  be  won  over  The  friendship  of  a   good  man 
by  money,  the  haughty  by  joining  becomes  more  and  more  devoted  ; 
the  hands,  a   fool  by  hiunouring  his  that  of  a   bad  man^eteriorates  little 
inclination,  a   wise  man  by  truth.”  by  little. 


--- PAGE 89 ---
THE  DHAMMANlTI. 
6i 
104. 
Therefore  there  was  preached  by  the  sage  (Gotama) 
whatever  Worldly  Laws^^  there  are  as  well  as  the  S;piritucd 
that  lead  to  heaven. 
105. 
All  those  having  reference  to  proper  companionship 
are  for  the  benefit  of  living  beings;  therefore  in  good 
friendships  affection  ought  to  be  shown. 
106. 
That  wise  man,  certainly,  who  is  imbued  with  gratitude 
and  knows  how  to  perform  a   grateful  act  is  a   good  Mend, 
a   devoted  and  a   staunch  one ;   he  does  zealously  what  is 
necessary  for  one  in  distress  :  people  in  this  world  say 
that  one  of  such  a   nature  is  a   good  man. 
107. 
A   stranger  conferring  a   benefit  is  a   relative  ;   a   rela- 
tive doing  what  is  unbeneficial  is  a   stranger:  a   disease 
arising  in  the  body  is  unbeneficial ;   a   medicine  from  the 
forest  is  a   boon,^^ 
108. 
He  whose  face  is  like  the  lotus-lily,  his  speech  is  as 
pleasant  as  sandal- wood;  honey  is  on  the  tip  of  his 
tongue,  poison  in  his  intentions :  such  a   one  we  should 
not  cling  to  ;   such  a   friend  wm  ought  to  avoid.^° 
Loldyd  dharmnd  —   the  eight  tives  who  do  not  help  in  time  of  need, 
“   Worldly  Conditions,”  -viz.,  gain,  that  the  Sanskrit  maxim  says  ; 
loss,  fame,  dishonour,  praise,  Uame,  “Better  a   forest  haunted  by  tigers 
happiness,  suffering.  and  elephants,  trees  for  shelter,  ripe 
The  nine  “   Transcendental  fruits  and  water  for  food,  grass  for  a 
States’"  {7iava  lolcuttarCi  dhamnid)  bed,  bark  for  clothing ;  but  with- 
are  referred  to — the  four  Maggas,  out  wealth,  not  living  amidst  rela-„ 
the  four  Phalas,  and  Nihbdna,  tions.  ’’  ^ 
Mitopadesa,  iii,  loi.  So  pro-  See  note  to  LoTcantti,  88,  and 
nounced  is  the  feeling  against  rela-  BhammanUi,  87. 


--- PAGE 90 ---
SEOTIOK  X. 
THE  BAD  MAH. 
109. 
He  is  a   fool  who,  having  done  a   good  deed  or  a   bad  deed 
in  a   previous  existence,  does  not  perceive  the  one  being 
a   source  of  happiness,  the  other  of  suffering. 
iio»  '  ^  ■' 
One  foolish  deems  his  transient  self  intransient;  he 
(thereby)  perpetually  diminishes  the  performance  of  vir- 
tuous deeds. 
111. 
A   fool,  having  done  what  is  evil,  does  not  exert  himself 
to  put  it  away:  wherefore?— a   tiger  going  along  does  not 
endeavour  to  obliterate  its  footmark. 
112. 
One  in  poverty  seeks  wealth ;   one  weak .  strives  to  be 
strong;  one  of  little  knowledge  is  argumentative;  these 
are  the  characteristics  of  a   fool. 
113- 
Going  uninvited,  speaking  much  when  not  questioned, 
vaunting  one’s  virtues — these  are  the  characteristics  of  a 
fool. 
1 14. 
Just  as  ripe  figs  are  red  outside  but  full  of  worms 
inside,  so  are  the  natures  of  those  who  are  wmked. 


--- PAGE 91 ---
THE  DHAMMANtTL 
115. 
A   pot  not  full  of  water  makes  a   noise;  one  full  of 
water  remains  noiseless:  a   fool  is  like  a   half -full  jar — a 
wise  man  like  one  quite  full. 
I  Id 
A   foolish  man  does  many  an  evil  act,  though  receiving 
admonitions  from  the  wise :  charcoal,  being  washed,  still 
continues  black.^^ 
By  instructing  a   foolish  pupil,  by  maintaining  a'  wicked 
wife,  by  companionship  with  vile  friends,  even  a   wise 
man  deteriorates. 
1 1 8. 
Beauty  in  the  vile  is  the  grief  of  another’s  wife ;   wealth 
is  the  grief  of  the  world ;   the  learning  of  the  bad  is  for 
the  ruin  of  the  good;  advantages  in  the  vile  are  the 
greatest  tyrannies. 
Himself  wicked,  one  calls  a   good  man  wicked  :  there  is 
nothing  whatever  in  the  world  more  ridiculous  than  such 
declaration  of  his. 
120. 
A   wicked  man,  verily,  remains  unhappy  without  re- 
viling others.;  a   dog,  having  tasted  every  dainty,  is  dis- 
satisfied, being  without  what  is  unclean. 
121, 
When  iron  is  heated  it  can  be  welded ;   it  is  soft ;   it  is 
malleable  :  the  heart  of  a   wicked  man  does  not  soften  : — 
how  then  can  it  be  compared  to  iron  ? 
 ^ 
The  Sanskrit  version  is :  “Let  though  you  wash  a   coal  in  milk, 
the  sinner  to  holy  texts,  he  will  the  blackness  be  removed  ? 
will  not  relinquish  his  vile  nature  ; 


--- PAGE 92 ---
64 
NiTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
122. 
Therefore,  if  a   man  of  discriricdBation  wish  p 
perity,  he  should  shun  companionship  with  evil-doers  a-s 
he  would  a   venomous  snake  at  a   distance. 
Verily  neither  enmity  nor  friendship  with  evil-doers  is 
befitting ;   charcoal  burns,  being  ignited ;   when  the  fire  is 
out,  it  regains  its  black  eondition.^^ 
124. 
Though  a   bad  man  be  embellished  by  knowledge,  he 
ought  to  be  shunned;  how  can  a   snake  be  harmless 
though  tricked  out  with  gems  ? 
125. 
The  wind  is  the  friend  of  the  fire  burning  a   forest ;   it 
even  extinguishes  a   lamp ;   in  a   wicked  man  there  is  no 
friendship  whatever. 
126. 
A   snake  is  bad,  a   wicked  man  is  bad,  a   wicked  man 
being  worse  than  a   snake ;   a   snake  may  be  tamed  by 
charms  and  herbs ;   how  can  a   wicked  man  be  reduced 
to  subjection? 
127. 
A   wicked  man  cannot  be  virtuous  by  (simply)  having 
knowledge  in  his  mind :  how  can  the  tragacanth  become 
full  of  sweetness  by  honey  deposited  in  one  of  its  hol- 
lows ? 
This  stanza  is  thus  expressed  in  when  cold,  it  blackens  the  hand.’' — 
the  Sanskrit  original — “   One  should  Mitraldbhaf  83. 
not  bring  about  neither  friendship  This  stanza  is  from  danakya’s 
nor  even  acquaintance  with  a   wicked  collection. 
person  :  charcoal  when  hot  bums ;  When  pierce(^for  the  extraction 
of  gum. 


--- PAGE 93 ---
THE  DHAMMANITL 
128. 
By  association  with  the  wicked  the  good  even  become 
bad:  unpleasant  is  a   road,  though  straight,  on  which 
rubbish  is  deposited. 
129. 
The  man  who  wraps  up  putrid  flesh  with  husa  grass, 
finds  that  the  grass  emits  a   putrid  odour :  like  this,  too, 
is  association  with  fools. 
130. 
One  should  not  look  at  a   fool  nor  listen  to  him ;   he 
should  not  associate  with  him ;   he  should  neither  hold 
conversation  with  him  nor  take  pleasure  in  him. 
One  of  little  intelligence  leads  one  to  destruction ;   he 
strives  to  lead  him  to  what  should  not  be  striven  after ; 
he  is  misleading ;   he  is  sleepy-headed ;   if  kindly  admon- 
ished, he  flies  out  into  a   temper ;   he  knows  not  admoni- 
tion :   the  good,  in  consequence,  avoid  him. 
132. 
Should  a   fool  serve  a   wise  man  all  his  life  long,  he  will 
not  perceive  his  duty,  just  as  a   spoon  cannot  perceive  the 
flavour  of  the  curry  gravy 
I33‘ 
The  plantain  fruit,  verily,  kills  the  plantain-tree;  the 
bamboo  and  the  reed  flower  kill  the  bamboo  and  the 
reed:  homage  kills 
a   bad  man  just  as  a   Tara  colt  its 
mother. 
^  Poa  cynosuroides,  tised  in  an-  — Institutes  of  Mmm,  ii.  Bralimanic 
cient  Brahmanic  sacrifices.  There  girdles  were  also  made  of  Icusa 
is  a   reference  to  it  in  Bhammapada,  grass.  ^ 
70.  ^  It  was  supposed  to  have  a 
 Vide  note  to  stanza  25  of 
purifying  influence.  A   Brahman  Lokantti. 
before  reciting  th^V edas  had  to  sit  During  gestation  Vide  stanza 
on  it  and  rub  his  hands  with  it  also.  85  of  Lokantti, 


--- PAGE 94 ---
66 
NiTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
A   dog  seeing  a   dog  shows  its  teeth  to  bite ;   on  becom- 
ing angry,  a   bad  man,  seeing  a   bad  man,  wishes  to  injure 
him.  ■■■  ■ 
 
■  ■  ■ 
135- 
A   frog  sitting  on  its  rumps  is  not  a   lion;  a   hog 
grunting  is  not  a   leopard  ;   a   cat  is  not  a   tiger  on  account 
of  its  similarity  to  one 
he  is  not  wise  who  is  of  little 
wdsdom. 
A   frog  is  like  a   lion;  if  a   crow  seize  it,  it  begins  to 
squeak:  a   fool  is  like  a   learned  man;  if  a   wise  man 
question  him,  he  says,  '  
•  Sir  !  sir  !  
” 
137- 
Harmful  among  birds  is  the  crow,  a   rat  in  a   house,  a 
monkey  in  a   forest ;   a   Brahman  among  men. 
Submissively  and  as  if  in  ad-  is  like  a   learned  man,”  ie.,  when 
mission  of  his  inferiority.  “   A   fool'  he  deems  himself  one. 


--- PAGE 95 ---
SECTION  XL 
THE  GOOD  MAH. 
138. 
Grass,  earth,*®  air,  and,  fourthly,  pleasant  speech — these 
should  never  be  put  an  end  to  in  a   good  man’s  house. 
139- 
Elvers  do  not  drink  up  tkeir  water,  nor  trees  eat  up 
their  own  fruit ;   rain  never  eats  up  corn :  the  wealth  of 
the  righteous  is  for  others.^® 
140. 
The  good  qualities  of  a   good  man  living  at  a   distance 
do  service  as  messengers  :  bees  go  off  at  pleasure,  smelling 
the  fragrance  of  the  ketaha  flower. 
141. 
As  a   fair  tree,  in  too  great  proximity  to  the  thorn  wpjpU, 
is  not  affected  by  it ;   a   good  man,  likewise,  is  not  affected 
by  the  wicked  though  mixed  up  with  them. 
142;.  ■  . 
One  seeking  permanent  happiness  should  serve  a   man 
of  excellence,  forsaking  his  evil  companions ;   he  should, 
moreover,  abide  by  his  admonitions. 
Just  as  ripe  jacks,  though  thorny  outside,  are  full  of 
juice  inside,  so  are  the  dispositions  of  righteous  men. 
  
  :   
' 
      
  
  
      
  
. a. f ; 
A   spot  of  ground  where  a   stran-  See  Mitralahlm,  60-65,  duties 
ger  may  take  up  his  abode ;   grass  of  hospitality, 
lor  cattle  or  to'^erve  as  bedding.  Compare  Lohantti,  64. 
The  Pandanm  odoratmimm. 


--- PAGE 96 ---
68  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
■  '144.  
■ 
He  wlio  wraps  up  the  taggam  wit]!  the  pal&sa  leaves 
finds  that  the  leaves  give  forth  a   sweet  fragrance  ;   similar 
to  this  is  association  with  the  wise. 
I4S-  
' 
One  should  look  (with  reverence)  and  attend  upon  a 
wise  man ;   he  should  associate  and  converse  with,  and, 
moreover,  esteem  him. 
146. 
A   man  of  wisdom  leads  one  to  prudence ;   he  does  not 
strive  to  lead  to  what  is  unpleasant ;   he  leads  well ;   he  is 
excellent;  being  admonished  rightly,  he  does  not  lose 
his  temper;  he  understands  reproof :   on  account  of  (all) 
this  a   good  man  has  companionship  with  him. 
147. 
If  a   man  of  intelligence  serve  for  a   short  time  a   learned 
man,  he  speedily  perceives  his  duty,  as  the  tongue  the 
taste  of  the  curry  gravy. 


--- PAGE 97 ---
SECTION  XII 
THE  POWEBEITL. 
148. 
Than  these  four  kinds  of  power — power  of  arm,  power 
of  rank,  power  of  wealth,  and  the  power  of  high  ancestry 
— wisdom,  undoubtedly,  is  a   more  exalted  power. 
149- 
In  air  lies  the  strength  of  birds,  in  water  that  of  fish ; 
the  strength  of  the  helpless  is  in  a   king ;   the  strength  of 
childen  in  tears.^^ 
150. 
The  moon  is  powerful ;   powerful,  too,  are  Brahonanas 
and  Samams;  the  power  of  the  sea  is  its  shore;  the 
power  of  woman  is  the  greatest  power. 
151- 
Among  creatures  having  feet,  the  lion  is  powerful ; 
more  powerful  is  a   worm ;   an  ant  is  still  more  powerful ; 
man  still  more ;   a   king  more  powerful  than  all  within  the 
limits  (of  his  kingdom). 
152. 
A   forest  is  the  resort  of  deer,  the  sky  the  resort  of  birds ; 
emancipation  from  passion  is  the  aim  of  religious  precepts ; 
the  aim  of  the  sanctified  is  Nibb&n.^s 
Comp.  Hitopadekif  207 :  **  The  theii-  own  ground  |   of  kings, 
chief  strength  of  aquatic  animals  is  army.”  ^ 
the  water  ;  of  residents  in  strong-  Virilgo  gati  dhammitnam, 
holds,  a   forest ;   of  beasts  of  prey,  NibMnam  rahatam  gati. 


--- PAGE 98 ---
(   70  ) 
SECTIOF  XIII. 
WOMEN.’ 
153.. 
A   WISE  man  should  marry  a   maid  of  good  descent,  even 
though  she  be  ugly ;   he  should,  likewise,  marry  one  who 
is  beautiful,  even  though  she  be  of  mean  descent. 
’■  ■■■^54.  -   ■■ 
The  woman  who  is  lovely  in  looks,  has  eyes  like  those 
of  deer,  hair  long,  waist  narrow,  who  has  fine  teeth,  is 
worthy  of  admiration,  and  has  a   pretty  mouth,  is  clever 
in  talk,  virtuous,  and  industrious — she,  though  she  be  of 
an  inferior  caste,  should  be  taken  to  wife. 
155. 
The  woman  who  attends  to  her  husband  at  his  meals  as 
a   mother  would,  who,  in  nourishing  those  in  her  care, 
acts  as  nurses  do,  who  in  her  own  avocations  is  enthu- 
siastic, and  in  her  husband’s  business  helpful  like  a 
nurse ; 
156. 
Who  in  her  wifely  duties  is  well  grounded,  in  time  of 
sleep  affords  comfort,  and  among  relatives  speaks  as  she 
would  to  a   mother — such  a   woman  is  called  excellent^ 
He  who  under  all  circumstances  is  constantly  earnest 
and  energetic,  that  man,  as  being  a   grati^er  of  every 
wish,  a   woman  despiseth  not. 


--- PAGE 99 ---
THE  DH4MMANITL 
71 
158- 
A   
good  woman  should  not  vex  her  husband  by  froward- 
ness ;   a   wise  woman  honours  all  those  worthy  of  respect 
who  have  aught  to  do  with  her  husband. 
An  energetic  woman  is  not  idle ;   she  looks  after  her 
attendants;  she  does  her  husband’s  pleasure,  and  keeps 
a   guard  over  his  acquisitions. 
160. 
The  woman  who  acts  thus,  doing  her  husband’s  will, 
those  heavens,  where  she  is  re-born,  are  (made)  lovely 
indeed. 
161. 
Certain  women  have  been  declared  most  excellent  of 
all  by  the  Sage  (Gotama) :  “   Of  all  beings,  woman  is  most 
excellent;  she  is  the  chief  of  supporters.” 
162. 
A   man  of  discrimination  should  not  take  counsel  in 
secret  even  with  his  mother,  his  daughter,  or  his  sister ; 
(for)  are  not  women  (known  to  be)  deceitful  ? 
163. 
Women  act  vs^ith  the  quick  movement  of  lightning, 
with  the  cutting  sharpness  of  weapons,  with  the  rapidity 
of  fire  and  air. 
164. 
Women’s  appetite  is  twice  that  of  men,  their  intelli- 
Read  the  story  of  the  ‘‘Two-  But  tell  them  not  your  plans  if 
headed  W"eaver”  in  the  you  are  wise.”  ^ 
A   translation  of  it  appears  in  Monier  ‘  ‘  If  you  have  aught  to  do  and  want  ^ 
Williams’  Indian  WUdomy  in  which  to  do  it, 
we  find  the  following  passages  : —   Don’t  ask  a   woman’s  counsel,  or 
“Give  women  %od,  dress,  gems,  you’ll  rue  it.” 
■  and  all  that’s  nice, 


--- PAGE 100 ---
72 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
gence  four  times,  tlieir  assiduity  six  times,  and  tlieir 
desires  eight  times.^^ 
If  each  woman  had  eight  husbands — -a  heroic  husband, 
a   powerful  husband,  an  indulgent  husband,  and  the  lihe 
— she  would  yet  long  for  a   ninth;  being  unbounded  in 
her  wishes,  she  is  indeed  not  satisfied, 
166. 
A   woman  who  is  disputatious,  who  desires  whatever 
she  sees,  is  immoderate  in  her  wants,  gluttonous,  and 
given  to  sleep — -one  should  shun  such  a   woman,  even  if 
she  have  a   hundred  sons. 
"Women  speak  with  another,  see  another  having  an 
attachment  for  him,  think  of  another  who  is  possessed  of 
various  advantages ; — who  then  can  be  called  the  darling 
of  women  such  as  these  ? 
168. 
If  a   man  could  catch  the  air  in  a   net,  bail  away  the 
ocean  with  one  of  his  hands,  or  produce  sound  too  from 
lus  own  hand,  he  would,  then,  satisfy  women;  such, 
verily,  is  \Yomahs  nature,®® 169. 
If  a   man,  having  a   thousand  tongues,  live  a   hundred 
years,  and  by  him,  by  his  having  nothing  else  to  do, 
expression  is  given  to  blemishes  in  women,  how  will  his 
fault-finding  come  to  an  end  ? 
In  connection  with  stanzas  163,  Jivhasahassiko  yo  hi 
164.,  vide  Lolmiiti,  161.  Jive  vassasatam  naro 
The  following  is  the  Pali  text  of  Tena  nikkaimnuna  vutto 
this  and  the  next  stanza : —   *  Thidoso  kim  khayarii  gato.” 
“   Ganheyya  vatam  j^lena  Por  passages  in  praise  of  women 
S%aram  ekapaninii  and  their  duty  to  their  husbands, 
Osinceyya  ca  talena  consult  “   Institutes  of  Mann,’*  ix,  ; 
Sakena  janaye  ravam  Mahdbhdrataf  i.  3027  ff.,  xii.  5497 
Pamstddsu  visajjeyya  ff.,  and  xiii,  6781%. 
Itthiye  sS,  vajjadhammat^ 


--- PAGE 101 ---
SECTION  XIV. 
SOKS. 
I70-I7I. 
The  ^’ise  wish  for  a   son  having  five  things  in  view, — 
''having  cherished  him,  he  will  cherish  ns,  or  he  will  carry 
on  onr  work ;  he  can  keep  up  the  lineage ;   he  will  inherit 
the  property ;   he  will  give  offerings  to  onr  spirits  after  onr 
death.” 
172. 
The  wise  wish  for  a   son  either  superior  to  the  father  or 
equal  to  him ;   that  evil  offspring  they  do  not  desire  who 
is  the  destroyer  of  his  race. 
173. 
They  who  are  born  from  the  same  loins  are  not  the 
same;  their  features  are  different  as  well  as  their  be- 
haviour, just  as  the  thorns  on  the  plum-tree. 
174. 
Many  are  the  faults  in  the  absence  of  restraint,  many 
the  virtues  by  the  exercise  of  restraint ;   therefore,  wdien 
it  is  time  for  restraint,  one  should  restrain  a   son  or  a 
pupil. 
175- 
One  should  admonish  by  means  of  admonition ;   hef 
should  hinder  from  what  is  unbefitting;  he,  indeed, 
who  is  subdued  is  loved  ;   he  who  is  not  subdued  is 
hated. 


--- PAGE 102 ---
74  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
1^6. 
One  should  admonish  a   son  or  brother  who  is  wicked ; 
he  should  not  forsake  them :  the  hand  and  the  foot 
being  smeared  with  filth,  wherefore  should  they  be  cut 
off? 


--- PAGE 103 ---
SECTION  XV. 
SERVANTS. 
177. 
A   SEBViNT  born  in  tlie  house  or  one  obtained  by  money, 
a   servant  who  is  a   servant  from  choice  or  one  who  is  cap- 
tured in  war — these  are  four  kinds  of  servants. 
178. 
Servants  are  of  five  kinds — one  who  is  like  a   thief,  one 
who  is  like  a   master,  one  who  is  like  a   friend,  one  who  is 
like  a   relative,  and  one  w'ho  is  like  the  master  himself ; 
in  the  same  way  should  friends,  wives,  and  relatives  be 
considered  by  the  wise. 
That  is,  as  being  divided  into  five  kinds. 


--- PAGE 104 ---
(   76  ) 
SECTION  XVL 
EESIDENCE. 
179- 
Living  with  a   wicked  wife  or  with  one  who  is  loveless, 
living  with  one  who  speaks  with  an  air  of  superiority,  or 
in  a   house  infested  with  snakes,  is,  it  cannot  be  doubted, 
death  itself.^^ 
180. 
We  avoid  at  a   distance  a   man  seeking  name  and  dis- 
tinction ;   a   wise  man,  therefore,  by  not  seeking  them  finds 
the  road  (that  leads  to  notoriety). 
181. 
One  should  always  go  himself  to  the  threshing-floor 
and  to  the  stable  and  field;  he  should  store  the  grain, 
having  measured  it;  he  should  cook  it  in  his  house, 
having  first  weighed  it  out. 
182. 
Being  cognisant  of  the  diminution  of  collyrium,  of  the 
increase  of  ant-liills,  of  the  accumulation  of  honey  little 
by  little, — a   wise  man  should  even  thus  conduct  his  own 
house.^^ 
With  reference  to  the  crow  and  no  additions  to  his  wealth,  he  has 
the  black  snake  on  the  tree  where  nothing  left  in  the  end.  The  lUtopa- 
the  former  made  her  nest,  the  Hito-  dda  has  :  ‘‘  Having  observed  the 
•padem  .vsays  : —   wasting  of  collyrium  and  the  in- 
A   wicked  wife,  a   false  friend,  a   creasing  of  an  ant-hill,  one  should 
servant  giving  saucy  answers,  and  make  time  fruitful  with  almsgiving, 
residence  in  a   house  with  a   snake,  study,  and  works.’'  Collyrium  is '"a 
is  death  without  doubt.” — Suhrid-  kind  of  unguent  used  by  Asiatics  to 
hhedcif  1 20.  strengthen  and  ^orighten  the  eyes 
If  only  one  spends  and  makes  (Greek  KoW^pcoy], 


--- PAGE 105 ---
THE  DHAMMANItL 
77 
183. 
One  ought  himself  to  know  what  is  got  and  what  is 
spent ;   of  himself  should  he  know  what  should  or  should 
not  be  done;  he  should  punish  one  deserving  of  punish- 
ment, and  praise  one  deserving  of  praise.®*^ 
'  184.. ■■■ 
A   ruler  should  sleep  during  one  watch  only,  a   priest 
during  two,  a   householder  during  three,  and  a   beggar 
during  four. 
185. 
He  is  a   relative  who  clings  to  you  in  his  prosperity, 
he  a   father  who  nourishes  you ;   in  whom  there  is  sincerity, 
he  is  a   friend;  she  a   wife  in  whom  there  is  quiet. 
186. 
There  being  love  for  and  trust  in  another,  one  does  not 
consider  a   hundred  as  even  an  anna;  being  no  love 
and  trust,  he  looks  upon  an  anna  as  a   hundred. 
187. 
One  who  asks  is  hated  ;   one  not  giving,  being  asked, 
is  also  hated;  a   man  of  excellence,  therefore,  should 
obtain  the  wealth  of  knowledge. 
188. 
One  should  guard  his  wealth  under  all  circumstances ; 
more  so  should  he  guard  his  wife ;   a   greater  watch  than 
over  wife  and  wealth  should  he  always  keep  over  himself. 
189. 
A   wife  should  not  be  held  in  common ;   a   dainty  shouldl 
This  referSj^o  the  duty  of  a   king.  Vide  “Institutes  of  Manu,” 
chapter  vii. 


--- PAGE 106 ---
78  NiTI  LITBRATURE  OF  BURMA, 
not  be  eaten  alone ;   one  should  not  follow  the  Lohayatmn : 
this  is  not  for  the  advancement  of  wisdom.^^ 
190. 
A   man  of  discrimination  should  be  virtuous  and  obser- 
vant of  his  duties  ;   he  should  not  be  neglectful ;   he  should 
be  humble,  not  proud ;   he  should  delight  in  righteous- 
ness, and  be  affable  and  gentle. 
A   wise  man  gives  help  to  his  friends,  sharing  his 
property  with  them;  priests  and  saints,  too,  he  always 
provides  with  food  and  drink. 
A   man  of  learning,  who  wishes  to  know  the  Law,  should 
put  questions  over  and  over  again ;   he  should  serve  with 
reverence  those  who  are  virtuous  and  of  extensive  know- 
ledge. 
The  Lolidyatmh  h   the  name  of  school.  His  system  was  a   heretical 
an  old  work  (now  said  to  be  lost),  one,  wdiich  rejected  the  previous 
treating  of  conti'oversy  of  a   casuisti-  doctrines  in  connection  with  the 
cal  nature.  Being  of  a   misleading  sources  of  knowledge.  He  taught 
nature,  it  was  treated  with  contempt,  the  existence  of  four  eternal  pi'in- 
The  hrst  half  of  this  stanza  presents  ciples—earth,  air,  hre,  and  water  ; 
an  example  of  the  kind  of  casuistry  that  the  soul  is  not  a   distinct  prin- 
in  which  the  Carv^ka  materialists  ciple  from  the  body,  and  that  crea- 
indulged.  The  latter  are  referred  tion  of  things  and  phenomena  was 
to  in  the  Sarmdarsanasmigralia,  a   a   spontaneous  process.  The  belief 
Sanskrit  -work  by  M^dhavdcilrya,  in  heaven  and  a   state  of  punishment 
who  gives  an  account  of  the  old  was  emphatically  denied  by  him 
religious  and  philosophical  systems  and  his  follonVrs.  He  calls  the 
pre%"alent  in  India,  CS.rvilka  was  composers  of  the  Yedas  fools  and 
the  founder  of  the  materialistic  rogues. 


--- PAGE 107 ---
(   79  ) 
SECTION  XVIL 
WHAT  SHOULD  BE  DONE. 
193* 
He  is  wise  who  sleeps  with  his  head  to  the  east ;   of 
long  life  he  who  sleeps  with  his  head  to  the  south ;   he  is 
of  tranquil  naind  who  sleeps  with  his  head  to  the  west ;   it 
is  death  if  he  sleep  with  his  head  to  the  north. 
194. 
Prolonged  is  the  life  of  one  who  eats  with  his  face  to 
the  east;  he  is  wealthy  who  eats  with  his  face  to  the 
south;  he  famous  who  eats  with  his  face  to  the  west; 
one  should  not  eat  facing  the  north. 
195- 
Eating  while  seated  makes  one  stout;  eating  standing 
increases  strength ;   walking  augments  life  ;   running  wards 
off  sickness. 
196. 
He  who,  attending  to  his  manly  occupations,  does  not 
consider  heat  or  cold  of  greater  consequence  than  grass — 
such  a   one  does  not  decline  in  happiness. 
197- 
If  nectar  may  be  got  from  poison,  it  ought  to  be  ex- 
tracted ;   so  also  gold  from  filth :  if  a   man  of  excellence 
can  get  wisdom  from  the  vile  or  a   woman  of  worth  from 
a   family  that  is  debased,  he  ought  to  do  so.®^ 
Manu  says;  ** Ambrosia  can  even  from  ilnp■arit3^” — InstHuies^  ii, 
be  extracted  from  poison,  elegant  239.  We  read  in  Makabhdmta^  v. 
speech  even  froi^  a   child,  good  I125  :  “Let  a   man  take  from  all 
conduct  even  from  an  enemy,  gold  quarters  what  is  valuable  even  from 


--- PAGE 108 ---
8o 
N in  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
■  198.,  ■' ' 
The  man  who  knows  a   secret  that  should  not  be  known, 
one  bears  with  him  like  a   slave  from  fear  that  his  plans 
may  come  to  nought. 
199* 
The  threat  of  even  a   slave  should  be  tolerated  by  a 
wise  man  living  in  obscurity,  though  having  a   temper  as 
potent  as  fire,  . 
20a 
As  in  striving  after  the  acquisition  of  wealth  and  corn, 
so  in  the  acquirement  of  knowledge,  in  sending  an  errand, 
as  well  as  in  times  of  business,  shanae  should  always  be 
discarded. 
■■  '  201. 
Because,  whenever  a   work  is  completed,  no  one  indeed 
notices  the  performer,  for  that  very  reason  should  all 
works  be  incompletely  performed. 
202. 
One  should  meet  a   benefactor  by  means  of  a   benefit,  an 
enemy  by  means  of  enmity  ;   a   thorn  stuck  in  the  foot  is 
extracted  by  means  of  one  held  in  the  hand.®^ 
203. 
Honour  him  who  honours  you,  serve  him  vrlio  serves 
you,  work  for  him  who  works  for  you,  befriend  him  not 
wdio  befriends  you  not,  be  not  devoted  to  him  wdio  is  not 
devoted  to  you.^^ 
a   raving  madman  and  a   chattering 
child,  as  he  extracts  gold  from 
stones.”  The  Sai'ngadhara’-pad- 
dhati-NUi  [vide  Von  Bohlen’s  Latin 
translation)  has :  A   wise  thought 
should  be  got  even  from  a   child : 
does  not  a   lamp  illuminate  a   house 
when  the  sun  is  hid  from  view?” 
This  latter  idea  occurs  also  in  SuhrkT 
hhcda,  7$. 
the  idea  is :  Do  unto  others 
as  you  would  have  them  do  to  you.” 
Vide  MahdhMrata,  xiii.  5571,  5572. 
See  note  to  stanzas  86  and  145 
of  the  LokanML  ^ 


--- PAGE 109 ---
THE  DHAMMANITL  8i 
204. 
Abandon  but  do  not  make  friends  with  him  who  aban- 
dons you;  associate  not  with  one  devoid  of  love:  as  a 
bird,  knowing  that  one  tree  has  no  fruit,  looks  for  another, 
so  should  a   man  forsake  one  friend  and  go  to  another : 
the  world  indeed  is,  for  the  most  part,  like  this* 
205. 
Abandon  one  man  for  the  good  of  a   family ;   abandon  a 
family  for  the  good  of  a   village,  a   village  for  the  good  of 
a   country,  the  earth  for  the  good  of  oneself.^^" 
206. 
Forsake  wealth  on  account  of  the  noble  body;  one 
keeping  guard  over  life  should  sacrifice  the  body :  a   man, 
bearing  in  mind  the  scriptures,  should  forsake  even  all — 
wealth,  limbs,  and  life. 
207. 
Here,  as  days  pass  away  diminishing  the  years  of  man, 
let  people,  therefore,  not  be  oblivious  of  the  teachings  of 
Gdtama. 
208. 
He  who  endures  the  severe  reproach  of  others,  and 
he  who  knows  the  true  doctrine,  their  friends  fall  not 
away  from  them ;   they  the  sooner  attain  to  the  peace,  of 
Mbhil^n. 
209. 
Fire,  water,  a   woman,  a   fool,  a   snake,  royal  families — 
these  should  be  zealously  avoided,  knowing  that  they  pro- 
tect life  like  Death  himself. 
210. 
However  well  cases  are  decided,  the  code  has  to  be  con-  ^ 
^ 
 Mitraldhlia,  159. 
F 


--- PAGE 110 ---
82  NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
suited  ;   however  familiar  one  is  wuth  a   king,  he  has  yet  to 
fear  him ;   a   young  woman  come  into  one’s  hands  has  to 
be  guarded  well :   how  can  there  be  an  end  to  the  require- 
ments of  laws,  kings,  and  maidens  ? 
2 1 1. 
Energy,  which  is  friendship,  is  looked  upon  as  an 
enemy  ;   indolence— an  enemy — is  considered  friendship  : 
knowledge,  wdiich  is  nectar,  is  considered  a   poison  ;   negli- 
gence— a   poison — is  looked  upon  as  nectar. 
212, 
So  long  as  the  hour  (for  revenge)  has  not  arrived,  one 
should  carry  his  enemy  on  his  shoulder;  having  arrived, 
he  should  bieak  him  to  pieces  as  a   pot  on  a   rock.^<5 
2x3. 
One  should  avoid  horned  animals  at  a   distance  of  fifty 
cubits,  horses  at  a   hundred,  elephants  at  a   thousand,  but 
a   bad  man  by  quitting  the  place  altogether. 
214. 
One  should  praise  teachers  before  their  face,  friends 
and  relatives  behind  their  back,  servants  while  at  work, 
and  sons  and  wives  when  carried  off  by  death. 
;  215.;  , 
 ^ 
Knowledge  should  be  gained  little  by  little ;   wmaltli 
acquired  by  degrees ;   in  climbing  a   hill  the  ascent  should 
be  gradual ;   desire  and  anger  should  come  little  by  little : 
these  five  little  by  little. 
216. 
To  a   chief  there  should  be  a   hundred  eyes  and  a   hun- 
Vide  notes  to  stanza  S6  of  Lokantii. 


--- PAGE 111 ---
THE  DHAMMANITL  83 
cireci  ears  :  being  thus  provided,  he  should  be  like  one  who 
is  deaf :  this  is  the  characteristic  of  a   leader. 
217. 
By  the  concord  of  many  acting  in  concert,  to  be  over- 
come is  most  difficult :  rope  is  made  from  grass ;   by  that 
very  rope  is  an  elephant  secured. 
218. 
If  anger  arise,  consider  it  like  a   saw ;   if  there  be  longing 
for  what  is  pleasant,  look  upon  it  as  the  flesh  of  your  own 
son. 
219. 
Generosity  is  the  drug  of  friendship ;   niggardliness  the 
drug  of  hate:  generosity  brings  renown;  niggardliness 
keeps  obscure. 
220. 
One  desiring  wealth  should  trade;  he  should  gather 
experience  who  wishes  for  knowledge ;   one  wanting  a   son 
should  obtain  a   wife ;   one  wishing  to  be  a   minister  should 
do  the  king's  pleasure. 
221. 
A   man  doing  good  deeds  or  bad  should  have  before  his 
eyes  large  expanding  trees,  which  abound  in  fruit,  how- 
ever small  may  have  been  the  seed. 
222. 
He  who  acts  humbly  in  matters  deserving  of  respect, 
he,  putting  aside  his  humble  condition,  is  established  in  a 
position  of  advantage. 
^   223. 
One  should  overcome  one  exalted  by  humility,  a   war- 


--- PAGE 112 ---
84  nITI  literature  OF  BURMA. 
rior  l)y  dissension,  one  vile  by  generosity,  bis  equal  by 
energy. 
224. 
Others  should  not  know  one's  fault ;   he  should  discover 
the  fault  of  another :  hiding  his  own,  like  a   tortoise  hides 
its  members,  he  should  notice  the  disposition  of  others. 


--- PAGE 113 ---
(   ss  ) 
SECTION  XVIIL 
WHAT  SHOULD  BE  AVOIDED. 
225. 
iSleepiho  late,  remaining  idle,  behaving  with  severity, 
’sleeping  long,  travelling  alone,  paying  attention  to  an- 
other’s wife — these,  indeed,  are  not  for  one’s  advantage, 
^   be  he  even  a   saint. 
226. 
A   drunkard,  one  who  goes  and  comes  out  of  season,  one 
going  to  a   place  of  amusement,  a   gambler,  one  having  bad 
associates,  and  an  idler — these  people  destroy  much  wealth; 
this  is  the  outcome  of  a   vile  nature. 
227. 
^'Now  it  is  cold;”  “Now  it  is  hot;”  “Now  it  is  too 
■  late,”  The  moments  slip  past  those  who  neglect  the  per- 
^  f ormance  of  actions  with  thoughts  such  as  these. 
228. 
One  injuring  another  is,  in  the  first  place,  injured  by 
that  other ;  the  grass  itself  which  burns  a   mansion  comes 
speedily  to  destruction. 
229. 
One  should  not  be  familiar  with  an  enemy,  nor  even 
with  a   friend:  a   friend  some  time  or  other,  on  being 
annoyed,  will  divulge  your  faults. 
230. 
A   bad  place,  a   bad  friend,  a   bad  acquaintance,  a   bad  ^ 
kinsman,  a   bad  wife,  and  a   bad  king — these  should  be 
avoided  at  a   distance. 


--- PAGE 114 ---
86  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
231. 
A   crab  goes  along  without  a   bead,  a   snake  without  feet; 
a   hen  has  its  brood  without  suckling  :  one  should  not 
despise  human  beings. 
■,.232. 
A   son  of  low  parentage  becomes  a   king’s  minister ;   a 
fool’s  son  a   learned  man ;   the  son  of  a   pauper  a   millionaire : 
one  should  not  despise  human  beings.®^ 
One  who  desires  another’s  friendship  must  not  do  three 
I   
things, — quarrel,  enter  into  partnership  with  him,  and  pay 
attentions  to  his  wife. 
■ 
A   debt  balance,  a   smouldering  fire,  and,  in  the  same 
way,  remaining  enmity,  augment  continuously:  therefore 
have  nothing  remaining. 
235. 
A   descendant,  being  born  into  a   good  family,  should 
guard  vrell  the  family  lineage ;   having  fallen  into  mis- 
fortune, he  should  not  commit  a   debasing  act. 
236. 
He  wdio  is  well  off  in  grain  is  deficient  in  wood,  water, 
grass,  and  fire :   a   poor  man  is  deficient  in  all ;   therefore 
he  should  not  do  what  is  evil.^® 
237* 
One  should  not  take  the  lead  among  many :   should  the 
action  succeed,  equal  is  the  reward ;   should  it  fail,  lie  re- 
ceives the  reprimand.®®^ 
Compare  Eitopadehf  i,  187.  of  his'caii  alter  that  worldly  status. 
The  idea  underlying  this  s^nza  Goodness  in  the  present  %vill  be  pro- 
is  in  keeping  with  Buddhistic  lielief.  ductive  of  goodness  in  the  future. 
A   man’s  present  status  is  the  result  Mito'padesa^l  25. 
of  his  past  career ;   no  present  effort 


--- PAGE 115 ---
THE  DHAMMANItL 
238. 
Basking  in  the  rising  sun,  inhaling  the  smoke  from 
bodies  of  the  dead,  maintaining  an  aged  wife,  and  eating 
a   curd  meal  at  night,  always  destroy  life. 
239. 
Association  with  women  and  with  bad  men  is  not 
proper;  so  also  with  a   snake  or  a   horned  animal,  with 
a   river  or  disease,  or  with  a   royal  family. 
240. 
Taking  in  hand  an  improper  work,  opposing  a   multi- 
tude,^^ contracting  companionship  with  women — these,  the 
wise  say,  lead  to  death. 
241. 
One  should  not  indeed  pay  attentions  to  women,  nor 
partake  in  what  is  unbeneficial,  thinking  it  good:  we 
should  honour  and  revere  the  aged ;   we  should  not  serve 
a   teacher  with  deceit, 
242. 
A   warrior  should  not  go  to  the  battlefield  without  his 
w'eapon  ;   a   wise  man  should  not  go  without  his  book ; 
a   traveller,  and  similarly  a   merchant,  should  not  travel 
without  a   companion. 
243‘ 
The  five  spirits  which  remain  in  the  body — calmness, 
ability,  wisdom,  modesty,  and  honour — are  taken  away 
from  the  portals  of  request. 
Compare  i.  17.  “From  the  portals  of  request,’’ 
It  is  said  :  “xV  king  should  not  This  is  a   free  rendering  of  dehttiva-  C 
make  war  upon  many  opponents  at  canadvard,  the  literar  signiiication 
once:  even  a   fierce  snake  is  surely,  of  which  is — “from  the  door  of  say- 
destroyed  by  a   swann  of  insects.” —   ing  giveT  The  idea  is  that  one  who 
IIit02xidckii  iv.  96,  begs  loses  the  qualities  referred  to. 


--- PAGE 116 ---
38 
NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
244. 
Denying  a   request  gives  pain ;   making  a   request  like- 
|vdse  gives  pain :  whatever  be  the  circumstance,  never  say, 
I  have  not/'  and  never  say,  Give/' 
245. 
When  people  do  not  know  a   man,  whether  by  means 
of  his  lineage  or  by  means  of  his  knowledge,  there  he 
should  not  make  a   boast  of  himself. 
■  ,'■■■.  ;'246. 
Bad  is  the  speech  of  one  who  has  a   bad  mother ;   bad  the 
conduct  of  one  having  a   bad  father ;   but  he  w’ho  has  a 
father  and  mother  both  bad,  his  speech  is  bad  as  well  as 
his  conduct 
247. ' 
Good  is  the  speech  of  one  having  a   good  mother,  and 
good  the  conduct  of  one  having  a   good  father ;   but  he  who 
has  a   mother  and  a   father  both  good,  his  speech  is  good 
and  likewise  his  conduct 
248. 
One  of  great  height  is  a   great  fool ;   one  of  mediocre 
stature  a   sensible  man :   all  dwarfs,  coming  before  Vdsu- 
deva,  are  crafty. 
249. 
■Eehavidiir  .-shows  the  race,  conversation  one's  country, 
companionship  lp,ve,  and  food  the  body. 
'./.The  critermif  water  is  the  lily-stock,  behaviour  that 
#  Thejima-^ne  that  they  can  ont-  In  the  Bliagamdgttd  he  calls  him- 
wit  a   god.  Viisndeva  is  a   name  for  self  the  creator.  Stories  concern- 
Krishna,  the  celebrated  hero  of  In-  ing  him  abound  in  the  MaMhkdmta 
dian  mythology  and  the  most  popular  and  Purdms.  His  exploits  mark 
of  the  Hindu  deities.  He  is  said  to  him  out  as  the  flercules  of  the  lu- 
be the  eighth  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  dians. 


--- PAGE 117 ---
THE  DHAMMANlTL 
of  a   race  ;   the  criterion  of  wisdom  is  conversation,  of  soil 
its  grass  and  water. 
251. 
One  should  know  a   horse  by  its  speed,  an  ox  by  its 
burden,  a   cow  by  milking,  and  a   wise  man  by  his  speech. 
252. 
One  should  know  a   servant  by  an  errand,  a   kinsman  by 
the  approach  of  danger,  a   friend  likewise  in  adversity,  a 
wife  when  wealth  disappears. 
253. 
Even  all  astrologists  know  not  the  time  without  a   book, 
but  cocks  know  the  hour ;   more  so  trees ;   and  even  more 
the  earth  and  water. 
The  moral  of  this  verse  is  that  man  should  not  be  over-boastful  of 
his  abilities. 


--- PAGE 118 ---
ORNAMENTATION. 
254. 
The  ornament  of  tlie  earth  is  Mern,  that  gf  the  night  the 
moon ;   the  king  is  the  ornament  of  the  people,  an  elephant 
of  an  army. 
255. 
Beauty  is  becoming  accompanied  by  virtue ;   a   race  is 
good  on  account  of  its  behaviour;  a   forest  is  befitting, 
having  flowers,  an  army  on  account  of  the  elephant. 
256. 
The  beauty  of  the  cuckoo  is  its  voice ;   a   woman’s  beauty 
her  devotedness  to  her  husband ;   the  beauty  of  the  un- 
handsome is  knowledge,  forbearance  that  of  priests. 
257- 
Hermits  are  becoming  being  lean,  quadrupeds  if  fat; 
men  are.  becoming  having  knowledge;  becoming  is  a 
woman  if  she  have  a   husband. 
258. 
The  moon  without  the  night  is  not  befitting,  the^  ocean 
without  waves,  a   pond  without  geese,  a   man  without  a 
wife. 
259. 
'  An  ornament  without  clothes  is  not  becoming,  nor  a 
woman  without  a   husband ;   a   man  without  knowledge  is 
not  becoming,  nor  a   feast  without  milk.  ^ 


--- PAGE 119 ---
THE  DHAMMANItL 
91
260. 
The  moon  is  the  lamp  of  the  Island  World, 
the  husband 
of  a   woman  ;   the  Law  is  the  lamp  of  the  Three  Worlds 
a   good  son  the  lamp  of  the  family. 
261. 
Dull  is  a   sonless  home/^  dull  a   country  without  a   king ; 
the  speech  of  an  ignorant  man  is  dull ;   a   beggar  is  dull 
entirely. 
262. 
The  ear  shines  on  account  of  its  hearing,  not  account  of 
an  earring;  the  hand  by  a   gift,  not  by  a   bracelet;  the 
person  of  one  exalted  shines  by  his  goodness  to  others,  not 
by  the  application  of  sandal-wood.'^® 
The  Pour  Great  Continents 
{MaMdtpd). 
5''^  Kdmaloka,  Riipaloka,  and  Aritpa- 
loka^  the  worlds  of  Sense,  Perm,  and 
Absence  of  Porm.  These  are  the 
three  subdivisions  of  sentient  beings. 
Old  Indian  writers  compare  such 
a   home  to  a   cemetery.  Compare 
stanza  I15  of  LokanUi,  which  has 
mtiharJi  instead  of  desaiii  and  asip- 
passa  for  aparmassa. 
Kef  erring  to  the  custom  of 
smearing  the  body  with  perfumed 
unguents,  &c. 
The  following  is  from  Tawney’s 
Two  Centuries  of  Bhartrihari : 
Ko  earrings  deck  the  good  man's 
ears,  which  still  on  scripture 
feed  ; 
His  hands,  still  open  to  the  poor, 
no  golden  bracelets  need  ; 
The  perfume  of  his  kindly  acts, 
like  flowers  in  leaves  concealed, 
Exceeds  the  fragrant  scent  which 
nard  and  sandal  unguents 
yield.” 
“   Charity  best  adorns  the  hand 
And  reverence  the  head ; 
Truth  is  the  virtue  of  the  mouth, 
In  th’  ears  is  scripture  read.” 
“   Valour  lends  glory  to  the  arms, 
Contentment  calms  the  heart ; 
Thus  lofty  souls,  though  poor,  are 
decked 
W'ith  grace  in  every  part.’* 
— Niiisatakam . 


--- PAGE 120 ---
SECTION  XXL 
KINGS. 
263. 
Almsgiting,  piety,  liberality,  rectitude;  mildness,  reli- 
gious devotion,  and  good  temper ;   freedom  from  oppres- 
sion, patience,  and  unobstructiveness ;   kings  of  these  ten 
duties  should  not  be  in  the  least  forgetful. 
264. 
Almsgiving,  beneficial  conduct,  loving  speech,  and  re- 
ciprocal behaviour  — these  five  duties  were  by  the  great 
sage  declared  ''  the  elements  of  popularity/' 
265. 
From  fear  in  a   forest  deer  get  no  repose,  nor  a   king 
from  fear  of  the  superior  strength  of  others ;   the  wise 
from  fear  of  transmigration  obtain  no  pleasure. 
266. 
Patience,  being  on  the  alert,  industry,  the  division  of 
property,  compassion,  and  inspection — these  four  qualities 
should  be  wished  for  by  a   leader  desirous  of  his  prosperity. 
267. 
Gentleness  causes  oppression,  severity  creates  enemies ; 
these  two  things  being  known,  one  should  take  a   medium 
Course. 
Doing  niito  others  as  you  would  samarh  here  repre^nts  samdnattatd 
have  them  do  to  you.  The  <xtta-  (“  impartiality  ”). 


--- PAGE 121 ---
THE  DHAMMANItL 
93 
268. 
Truly  by  gentleness,  truly  by  severity,  one  is  not  able 
to  make  Hmself  exalted ;   one  sbould  take  both  courses. 
269. 
A   cultivator,  a   trader,  a   minister,  a   learned  and  virtuous 
monk — these  abounding,  a   country  flourishes : 
270. 
These  being  deficient,  a   country  declines ;   therefore  one 
bearing  the  reins  of  government '  ®  should  act  so  as  to  make 
his  country  flourish. 
271. 
He  who  plucks  an  unripe  fruit  from  a   large  tree  bearing 
sweet  fruits,  he  not  only  does  not  taste  its  sweet  juice,  but 
the  seed  itself  is  destroyed. 
272.  ^ 
The  king  who  does  not  lawfully  direct  a   kingdom  which 
is  like  a   great  tree,  he  not  only  does  not  taste  its  sweet- 
ness, but  the  country  itself  is  ruined. 
273. 
He  who  plucks  a   ripe  fruit  from  a   large  tree  bearing 
sweet  fruits,  he  experiences  its  sweetness;  the  seed,  too, 
is  not  destroyed. 
274. 
The  king  who  lawfully  directs  a   kingdom  which  is  like 
a   large  tree,  tastes  its  sweetness,  and  the  country  is  not 
ruined, 
275. 
Whatever  princely  ruler  governs  a   people  lawfully,  he 
discards  the  use  of  all  medicinal  herbs.^'^ 
H   "^.MatpiabMravd, 
He  does  not  suffer  ailments,  and  therefore  needs  no  medicine. 


--- PAGE 122 ---
94 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
.276..; 
The  king  ^Yho  oppresses  townspeople,  traders,  and  re- 
venue  collectors,  that  king  suffers  the  loss  of  his  trea- 
sure.'' 
277. 
The  king  who  oppresses  ministers  and  warriors  who 
know  to  choose  the  best  battle-ground,  he  suffers  the  loss 
of  his  army. 
A   
prince  who  acts  contrary  to  duty,  oppressing  monks 
who  practise  restraint  and  attend  to  their  religious  duties, 
he  suffers  the  loss  of  heaven. 
"■279- 
The  straightness  and  crookedness  of  a   large  river  is 
brought  about  by  itself,  not  by  any  other;  the  prosperity 
and  adversity  of  a   country  is  occasioned  by  a   ruling  prince, 
he  having  the  sole  supremacy  in  his  realms. 
280. 
A   son's  evil  act  is  a   mother's  doing,  a   pupil's  that  of  his 
teacher ;   
the  deeds  of  the  people  is  the  king's  doing,  a   king's 
that  of  his  spirituah  adviser. 
281. 
All  subjects  doing  good  and  bad  deeds,  a   sixfold  share  is 
got :  the  king  receives  one  share ;   he  should,  therefore, 
restrain  the  people  from  evil  and  admonish  them,  striving 
to  increase  their  meritorious  deeds. 
282. 
"  The  life  of  an  ignorant  man  is  of  small  value,  that  of  a 
• 
 ^   ' 
     
                   
 ""  “ 
“   For  ifc  is  declared  that  he  obtains  a   share  of  the  spil^uai  merit  (of  his 
subjects).’* — jipastamla,  xi  4, 


--- PAGE 123 ---
THE  DHAMMANlTL  . 
 95 
wi>se  one  of  great  worth 
the  life  of  a   people  is  the  king 
himself,  that  of  the  king  his  religious  duty. 
283. 
People  without  a   leader  are  ruined;  ruined  also  are 
they  having  many  leaders :  those  with  women  as  leaders 
are  ruined,  and  those  come  to  destruction  who  allow 
youngsters  to  rule. 
284. 
As  is  the  cherishing  of  the  offspring  of  tortoises,  fish, 
hens,  and  cows,  so  should  all  creatures  be  cherished  by  a 
king. 


--- PAGE 124 ---
(   96  ) 
SECTION  XXIL 
MINISTRATION. 
285. 
If  one  entering  a   king’s  family  brings  no  prosperity,  for 
that  very  reason  one  entering  it  should  not  be  devoid  of 
bravery  and  forgetful  of  his  duties. 
286. 
Whenever  a   king  comes  across  one  virtuous,  wise,  and 
pure,  he  then,  entering  into  confidence  with  him,  does  not 
withhold  a   secret. 
287. 
If  a   wise  man,  by  night  or  by  day,  receive  a   commission 
in  matters  relating  to  the  king,  he  should  not  be  neglectful 
of  them ;   such  a   person  should  reside  in  the  palace. 
288. 
One  should  not  dress  like  a   king,  nor  decorate  himself 
with  flowers  in  the  same  way;  he  should  not  use  the 
same  toilet  perfume,  nor  speak  nor  look  like  him. 
289. 
Should  a   king,  surrounded  by  ministers  and  queens,  joke 
with  them,  a   minister,  if  he  be  wise,  should  not  practise 
dalliance  with  the  queens. 
290. 
One  who  is  calm  and  collected  and  of  unwavering  dis- 
position, who  is  prudent,  circumspect,  and  fuU  of  resolu- 
tion, he  should  reside  in  the  palace. 


--- PAGE 125 ---
THE  DHAMMANtTL 
97 
291. 
He  who  does  not  wanton  with  the  queen  nor  take 
counsel  with  her  in  secret,  who  does  not  purloin  money 
from  the  treasury,  he  should  reside  in  the  palace. 
292. 
He  who  does  not  sleep  much  nor  drink  intoxicating 
liquor,  who  oppresses  not  the  animals  in  the  forest,  he 
should  reside  in  the  palace. 
293. 
“   I  am  esteemed ! one  who,  thinking  thus,  does  not 
mount  the  king’s  bedstead,  throne,  couch,  boat,  or 
chariot,  he  should  reside  in  the  palace. 
294. 
One  of  discrimination  should  not  serve  the  king  at  too 
great  a   distance  nor  too  close  at  hand;  facing  him,^^  he 
should  remain  calm  and  reserved. 
295. 
“   The  king  is  not  my  friend,  the  king  is  not  of  the 
same  disposition  as  myself,’’  Kings  soon  get  angry,  like 
the  eye  pricked  by  something  sharp. 
296. -/-  
■ 
A   wise,  intelligent  man,  thinking  himself  esteemed, 
should  not  harshly  contradict  a   king  who  is  in  the  midst 
of  an  assembly. 
297. 
A   doorkeeper  should  not  enter  the  apartments  of  a 
As  regards  vstudents,  the  not  tnrn  his  towards  him.”  “He 
A'pastamha^  i,  2,  6,  says — “   If  the  shall  sit  neither  too  near  to,  nor  too 
wind  blows  from  the  pupil  towards  far,”  “   But  at  such  a   distance  thav 
the  master,  he  shall  change  his  the  teacher  may  be  able  to  reach 
place.”  him  with  his  arm.”  See 
“   He  shall  turn^his  face  towards  ,  stanza  137. 
his  teacher,  though  the  latter  does 


--- PAGE 126 ---
98 
NlTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
king,  saying  to  himself,  “   I  have  the  door  (in  my  charge) ;   
” 
he  should  station  himself  as  if  guarding  fire ;   such  a   per- 
son should  reside  in  the  palace. 
298. 
If  a   prince  extend  his  patronage  to  a   son  or  brother  by 
apportioning  villages,  towns,  provinces,  or  hamlets,  ^one 
should  make  his  observations  in  silence ;   he  should  not 
make  any  unfavourable  reflections.^^ 
299. 
A   king,  noticing  the  manner  in  which  elephant-drivers, 
horsemen,  charioteers,  and  foot-soldiers  do  their  duty,  in- 
creases their  wages ;   one  who  does  not  go  among  them 
should  reside  in  the  palace. 
300. 
One  ^?ho  has  a   slender  stomach  like  a   bow,®^  who  shakes 
like  the  bamboo, 
and  does  not  contradict,  he  should  re- 
side in  the  palace. 
301. 
He  who  has  a   stomach  like  a   bow,  whose  silence  is  like 
that  of  a   tongueless  fish,  who  is  prudent  and  wise,  he 
should  reside  in  a   palace. 
302. 
One  seeing  clearly  the  decline  of  power  should  not  go 
frequently  into  the  presence  of  a   woman ;   he  who  does, 
suffers  from  cough,  asthma,  anguish  of  mind,  and  loss  of 
strength. 
303. 
One  should  not  speak  beyond  bounds  ;   he  should  not 
82  Or  “ clever inDuendoes,” — chela-  posture  that  should  be  observed 
pdpalwh  na  hhane.  when  a   nunister  or  servant  stands 
To  make  it  appear  that  his  before  a   king, 
services  are  also  deserving  of  recog-  “   Who  shakes  like  the  bain- 
nition.  boo,”  i.e.,  who  !?3ws  to  the  king’s 
The  reference  is  to  the  elegant  will. 


--- PAGE 127 ---
99 
THE  DmMMANtTL 
always  be  silent ;   at  a   seasonable  moment  lie  should  speak 
what  is  not  irrelevant, 
304* 
One  who  utters  neither  angry  nor  spiteful  words,  but 
speaks  what  is  true  and  pleasant,  who  utters  not  what  will 
give  rise  to  hate  or  destroy  another's  prosperity — such  a 
one  should  serve  the  king  in  his  palace. 
' 
One  who  supports  his  parents,  who  honours  his  seniors, 
who  is  replete  with  modesty— such  a   one  should  serve 
the  king  in  his  palace. 
306. 
He  who  is  restrained,  learned,  and  polite,  who  has  the 
control  of  his  senses,  is  industrious,  and  of  sweet  disposi- 
tion, who  is  unforgetful  of  his  duties,  pure  in  heart,  and 
experienced — such  a   person  should  reside  in  the  king's 
palace. 
■307* 
.  ■ 
 ■ 
He  who  is  humble  in  disposition  and  obsequious  to 
his  betters,  who  is  respectful,  delighting  in  good  and 
living  in  concord,  he  should  reside  in  the  palace  of  the 
king. 
308. 
One  should  avoid  at  a   distance  a   man  deputed  as 
a   spy;  he  should  look  after  only  his  master's  interests, 
not  the  interests  of  another  king. 
309. 
One  should  respectfully  serve  Brahmans  and  Eahaiis, 
full  of  knowledge  and  replete  with  virtue;  he  should 
be  satisfied  with  the  gruel  of  boiled  rice ;   he  should^ 
approaching  the  king,  make  inquiries  about  his  welfare. 
In  case  he  is  suspected  of  abetting  the  spy. 


--- PAGE 128 ---
100 
NITl  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
■  ■  3^0.. 
He  should  not  relax  his  usual  almsgmng  to  Brahmans 
and  Eahans ;   at  the  time  of  asking  for  alms,  he  should 
not  restrain  mendicants  in  anything. 
3x1. 
One  who  is  wise  and  full  with  the  desire  of  benefiting 
himself  and  others,  who  is  skilled  in  rites  and  ceremonies, 
and  knows  the  times  and  seasons/'^  he  should  reside  in 
the  king’s  palace, 
■3x2.  ' 
One  with  discrimination  is  assiduous  in  his  avocations ; 
he  is  well  attentive  to  his  assigned  duties — not  neglectful ; 
such  a   person  should  reside’ in  the  king’s  palace. 
3x3. 
He  should  go  repeatedly  to  the  threshing-floor,  to  the 
storehouse,  to  the  cattle-shed,  to  the  field;  having  mea- 
sured the  grain,  he  should  store  it;  measuring  it  in  the 
house,  he  should  have  it  cooked. 
3x4. 
One  should  give  instruction  to  a   brother  or  son  not 
established  in  the  precepts;  truly  they  are  foolish,  being 
young ;   like  as  the  spirits  of  the  departed,  so  are  they : 
let  them,  therefore,  have  wearing  apparel,  food,  and  a 
resting-place, 
3x5* 
One  should  appoint  in  governmental  duties  hirelings 
and  servants  who  are  industrious  and  wise  and  w^ell 
established  in  the  precepts. 
8"  For  feasts,  fasts,  opportune, mo-  .idea  is,  that  as  there  seems  no  end 
nients  for  undertaking  a   work,  See.  to  the  wants  of  the  departed  soul,  so 
“   Manes,”  to  whom  offerings  on  are  young  people  of  wants, 
a   large  scale  used  to  be  made.  The 


--- PAGE 129 ---
THE  DHAMMANlTI. 
lOl 
316. 
One  who  is  virtuous,  one  who  is  not  covetous,  one 
who  is  devoted  to  his  king,  being  mindful  of  his  in- 
terests both  in  his  presence  and  in  his  absence — such  a 
one  should  reside  in  the  king’s  palace. 
317- 
He  who  is  mindful  of  the  king’s  wishes,  stable  in  mind, 
in  his  behaviour  free  from  suspicion — such  a   one  should 
reside  in  the  king’s  palace. 
318. 
While  a   king  is  being  anointed,  or  during  his  ablutions, 
while  his  feet  are  being  washed,  one  should  remain  with 
bended  head ;   even  if  struck,  he  should  not  display  his 
anger  •  such  a   one  should  reside  in  the  king’s  palace. 
319* 
Truly  should  one  pay  respect  and  salutation  to  a   water- 
jar  and  kingfisher, 
why  not  to  one  who  is  most  excel- 
lent, resolute,  and  generous  in  the  bestowal  of  desires? 
320. 
He  who  bestows  bedding,  apparel,  conveyance,  a   dwell- 
ing-place or  house,  he  too,  like  the  cloud-god, 
showers 
down  wealth  upon  living  beings. 
An  old  custom  is  referred  to.  pared  with  the  clouds  in  Sanskrit 
It  is  well  known  that  the  fish  nsed  literature.  The  good,  like  clouds, 
as  a   sign  of  Varuna,  the  Neptune  of  receive  only  to  give  away,” — Jtaghu- 
the  Brahmans,  was  looked  upon  as  vai/hia.  We  find  in  Hitopadda,  i. 
sacred  and  saluted.  2 1 7 — “   Like  a   cloud,  the  king  sustains 
The  king.  creatures ;   one  may  live  without  a 
Pajjunno,  used  as  a   personified  cloud,  not  without  a   king.” 
deity.  Generosity  is  frequently  com- 


--- PAGE 130 ---
(   102  ) 
SECTION  XXIII. 
TWOS,  THKEES,  ETC. 
321. 
He  who  wishes  for  enjoyment,  having  no  w^ealth,  and 
one  having  no  authority,  displays  anger — these  are  two 
thorns  that  prick ;   they  waste  away  the  whole  body. 
'  ■; 
322.. 
One  who,  without  wealth,  indulges  in  luxury;  who, 
being  without  strength,  fights  constantly;  who,  destitute 
of  wisdom,  wishes  to  discourse— these  are  three  charac- 
teristics of  baseness, 
323- 
Three  things  on  this  earth  are  sweet — sugar-cane,  a 
woman,  and  good  speech  :  people  are  satisfied  with  the 
sweetness  of  a   woman  and  sugar-cane,  not  with  that  of 
good  speech. 
324- 
Three  things  on  this  earth  are  accounted  precious :  the 
three  are  knowledge,  grain,  and  friendship. 
325- 
Those  who,  without  wealth,  wish  for  friendship ;   without 
a   friend  to  go  on  a   difficult  journey ;   who  wash  to  go  to 
war  without  a   weapon,  or  speak  in  an  assembly  without  a 
hook  — these  are  four  fools.  ^ 
Anger  and  poverty.  various  ineanings^of  sattha.  Com- 
There  is  a   play  here  on  the  pare  stanza  27  of  LokanUi. 


--- PAGE 131 ---
THE  DHAMMANlTL 
326. 
One  in  misery,  one  in  sickness,  a   cripple,  one  in  debt, 
and  one  serving  a   ruler — these,  though  living,  are  pro- 
nounced dead  by  Yy^sa 
327. 
That  -wise  man  who  guards  the  doors  of  his  six  senses,^*' 
he,  on  account  of  his  virtue,  is  put  into  a   sixfold  divi- 
sion ;   so  also  one  on  account  of  his  neglect  of  virtuous 
conduct. 
328. 
One  given  to  sleep,  one  remiss  in  his  duties,  one  fond  of 
pleasure,  one  diseased,  an  idler,  one  irresolute,  one  work- 
ing in  ease — these,  in  books,  are  looked  upon  as  people  to 
be  shunned. 
329- 
One  of  good  family,  a   wise  man,  one  resolute,  a   modest 
person,  one  fearful  of  sinning,  one  versed  in  the  suttas,^'^ 
one  desirous  of  good,  one  watchful  of  himself — these,  in 
books,  are  mentioned  as  persons  whose  company  should  be 
sought. 
330. 
One  of  noble  lineage,  a   wise  man,  and  one  seeking  his 
welfare,  a   brave  and  a   virtuous  man,  and  one  of  great 
knowledge,  an  industrious  person,  one  stable,  and  he  who 
strives  after  heaven  — these  nine  are  called  good  and  ex- 
cellent ;   one  should,  therefore,  restrain  himself  from  evil. 
Vydsctf  by  the  Burmese,  is  looked 
upon  as  the  author  or  compiler  of 
a   very  aucieut  Ntti-sdst7^a,  and  is 
alluded  to  in  writings  as  the  JS‘Ui 
teacher.  fSome  take  him  to  be  the 
compiler  of  the  Vedas  and  other 
Sanskrit  works.  On  the  sentiment 
compare  Panmtantra,  i.  298. 
Q' aHliudvLD'd,  “the  six  doors 
or  apertures,”  vii*,  the  eye,  the  ear, 
the  nose,  the  tongue,  the  skin,  and 
the  mind. 
The  idea  is  that  each  of  the 
senses  is  a   source  of  merit  or  de- 
merit. 
SutadJiaro  —   ^^  one  versed  in  the 
suttas,”  or  perhaps,  ‘‘one  who  is 
full  of  knowledge.” 
Sugatigdmiko,  (literally) 
on  the  happy  journey,”  i.c.,  one 
striving  for  heaven.  By  “heaven  ” 
B,  deva  world  is  imj)lied. 


--- PAGE 132 ---
104 
NtTl  LITEEdTURB  OF  BURMA, 
33i‘ 
Buddha, 
a   i^accekabiiddha,^®^  an  Arhat,^^^  a   chief  dis- 
ciple,a   mother,  a   father,  worthy  of  reverence,  a 
teacher,  a   benefactor,  a   preacher — these  ten  by  the  wise 
should  be  known  as  non-offenders. 
Buddha  Gotama.  The  reference  is  to  the  two 
A   Pamelcabuddha  is  one  who  principal  disciples  of  a   Buddha — the 
has  the  knowledge  and  conditions  “right-”  and  “left-hand”  disciples, 
iiecessarj  to  the  attainment  of  These,  in  the  case  of  Gotama  Buddha, 
Nibban,  but  does  not  take  upon  him-  were  Moggaliano  and  Sariputto. 
self  to  instruct  mankind.  . 
 Guru  =   ^^  one  carrying  -weight, 
One  who  has  attained  final  ie.,  one  deserving  of  respect, 
sanctification,  and  has  no  farther 
transmigrations  to  go  through. 


--- PAGE 133 ---
(   X05  ) 
SECTIOiT  XXIV. 
MISCELLANEOUS. 
332. 
Life  is  the  means  of  bliss ;   one  who  takes  life,  how  can 
he  not  be  called  a   slayer  ?  one  who  saves  life,  how  can  he 
not  be  termed  a   presermr  of  life  ? 
333- 
The  long  life  of  the  good  is  productive  of  benefit  to  all 
beings  ;   that  of  the  wicked  is,’ without  doubt,  the  cause  of 
misfortune  to  all. 
334-33S- 
The  sugar-cane  being  brought  under  a   pressing  machine, 
does  not  dissipate  its  sweet  juice ;   an  elephant,  likewise, 
loses  not  its  grace  marching  on  battle-fields ;   sandal- wood, 
if  dried,  parts  not  with  its  sweet  perfume ;   a   wise  man 
under  aflEliction  does  not  abandon  his  virtuous  conduct — 
how  can  he  do  so  during  his  prosperity  ? 
336. 
People  are  their  own  friends  or  their  own  enemies ;   one 
is  always  a   friend  to  himself,  or  always  an  enemy. 
337- 
Good  people  by  self-sacrifice  look  after  those  dependent 
upon  them ;   such  is  not  the  teaching  of  the  WUi  instruc- 
tor.^®^ ^ 
i«4  stanza  il^an  adaptation  of  Vydsa^  or  some  other  old  com- 
Hitopadekt,  i.  73.  piler  of  a   Sanskrit  anthology.  Self- 


--- PAGE 134 ---
io6  Ntn  LITERATURE  OP  BURMA. 
338. 
The  time  of  the  wise  passes  in  examining  prose  and 
poetry  5   
^*^^  that  of  the  wicked  in  injuring  others,  in  sleep, 
and  in  quarrel. 
339* 
Bees  wish  for  flowers,  flies  for  what  is  putrid ;   good 
men  desire  virtue ;   had  men  seek  for  blemishes  in  others. 
340. 
Fruit-bearing  trees  and  wise  men  bend;  dry  wood  and 
a   fool  do  not — they  have  to  be  broken.^^'^ 
34^.*; 
If  a   good  man  quarrel,  he  soon  makes  friends  again; 
as  earthen  cups  are  broken,  so  does  a   fool  break  friend- 
ship :   a  good  and  a   bad  man  are  not  alike. 
342. 
The  wealth  of  the  good,  though  little,  is  serviceable, 
like  water  in  a   well;  that  of  the  bad,  though  abundant, 
is  like  the  water  of  the  sea. 
343- 
Day  by  day  a   thousand  anxieties  and  a   hundred  fears 
influence  a   fool ;   they  do  not  aflect  a   wise  man.^^^ 
sacrifice  is  considered  a   Buddhistic  “Prose  and  poetry,”  Sattha- 
virtue  ;   so  that  the  author  of  the  Icabha,  The  Burmese  gloss  has  “   reli- 
Dkammtruth  very  likely  intends  to  gious  writings  and  poetry.”  See 
be  sarcastic  upon  one  supposed  to  be  Mitopadeia,  Introduction,  4S. 
a   teacher  of  moral  maxims.  Pos-  This  is  one  of  G'anakya’s  apo- 
sibly  there  is  a   reference  to  some  thegms — 
artful^  or  Machiavellian  counsel  of  ‘  
■  Trees  are  bowed  down  with  weight 
the  kind  found  in  the  MahdhMmta,  of  fruit, 
^and  to  which  attention  has  already  Clouds  big  with  rain  hang  low  ; 
been  drawn  in  a   previous  note.  For  So  good  men  humbly  bear  success, 
further  specimens,  see  Muir’s  “   Met-  Nor  overweening  grow,” 
rical  Translations,”  Supplement,  pp.  ^   — BhaftrikarL 
363-365.  See  Bitopad€,4a,  i.  2. 


--- PAGE 135 ---
THE  DHAMMANtTI. 
344* 
The  anger  of  a   mean  person  having  a   malicious  disposi- 
tion  is  like  a   character  written  on  a   rock;  that  of  a   good 
man  is  like  a   character  inscribed  on  water,^^^ 
One  given  to  sleep,  one  discontented,  one  ungrateful, 
and  one  without  confidence  in  himself — ^these  four  are 
never  able  to  acquire  good  behaviour. 
346. 
The  behaviour  of  bad  men  associating  with  good  men 
is  considered  good;  that  of  good  men  with  bad  men  is 
not  deemed  bad :  the  earth  holds  the  perfume  that  exists 
in  flowers ;   flowers  do  not  retain  the  odour  of  earth. 
347- 
In  a   quarrel  with  another,  people  do  not  say  that  one’s 
goodness  is  like  a   mountain ;   they  show  the  small  fault, 
an  atom  in  size,  to  be  as  big  as  a   mountain. 
348. 
People  see  the  fault  of  others  though  big  as  a   sessamum 
seed;  their  own,  as  large  as  a   cocoa-nut,  they  do  not 
notice. 
349- 
An  angry  person  does  not  know  his  owm  good — he  does 
not  understand  his  duty:  when  anger  oppresses  a   man, 
thick  darkness  then  assails  him. 
' 
 350. 
When  anger  arises  in  one,  it  destroys  entirely,  like  a 
fire  in  a   basket  filled  with  clothes  and  ornaments. 
  
   
  
# 
109  is  from  the  Malta-  their  virtues  we  write  in  water.” — 
hlmmta.  Conipar{!!>Shakespeare-^  Ilmry  VIII. 
Men’s  evil  manners  live  in  brass ; 


--- PAGE 136 ---
io8  NtTI  LITER  A   TURE  OF  B   URMA . 
Greed  is  the  splinter  of  the  mind,  the  robber  of  one’s 
welfare;  ignorance  is  the  E§,hu^^^  of  the  moon;  anger  the 
fire  that  burns  np  the  wealth  of  virtue. 
3S2. 
A   king  is  not  satisfied  with  his  wealth,  a   wise  man  with 
well-uttered  discourse,  the  eye  in  seeing  a   lover,  the  ocean 
with  its  water, 
3S3v;';'"" 
A   monk,  if  dissatisfied,  is  ruined ;   a   king  if  satisfied :  a 
harlot  is  ruined  if  ashamed ;   the  daughter  of  a   good  family 
if  not  ashamed. 
A   king,  the  ocean,  fire,  a   woman,  an  artisan,  and  a   cove- 
tous man, — desires  such  as  theirs  should  not  be  entertained 
by  any  one. 
355. 
Freedom  from  sickness  is  a   great  boon,  contentment  a 
great  treasure,  friendship  a   great  relative,  and  Mbb&n  the 
highest  happiness. 
35^. 
0   
gain  1   do  thou  go  to  one  in  poverty — a   rich  man  is 
full  of  wealth.  0   rain !   do  thou  fall  on  dry  land — the  sea 
is  full  of  water. 
357. 
Beggars  do  not  beg,  saying,  “   Give;  ”   they  offer  infor- 
mation, saying,  Look  at  the  circumstance  of  one  who  did 
not  bestow  alms;  let  not  such  be  the  case  with  you.” 
An  Asnra  or  demon  who  is  be-  those  who  are  beggai's  now  have 
lieved  to  cause  eclipses  by  taking  been  made  so  on  account  of  their 
the  sun  and  moon  into  its  mouth.  niggardliness  in  a   previous  exist- 
Literally,  “   the  lowest  of  men,’*  ence.  ^ 
— pacchimdjand.  The  belief  is  that 


--- PAGE 137 ---
THE  DHAMMANITL 
358. 
There  is  not  a   gem  in  every  rock,  a   pearl  in  every 
elephant,  sandal-wood  in  every  forest,  a   learned  man  in 
every  place, 
359* 
A   brave  man  is  one  out  of  a   hundred,  a   wise  man  one 
out  of  a   thousand;  one  eloquent  is  one  out  of  a   hundred 
thousand ;   ^a  self-sacrificing  man  may  or  may  not  exist. 
360. 
One  should  praise  a   warrior  on  his  return  from  victory, 
wealth  when  it  is  brought  home  ;   he  should  praise  food 
when  it  is  digested  ;   a   woman  on  passing  her  prime. 
361. 
The  knowledge  that  is  in  writings  and  the  wealth  in 
another’s  hands,  the  one  is  not  wealth  and  the  other  not 
knowledge  when  desire  for  their  use  arises,^^^ 
362. 
A   word  is  the  weapon  of  a   king,  truth  that  of  Eahans  ; 
the  weapon  of  the  rich  is  wealth,  of  the  needy  an  ox. 
363- 
In  battle  they  need  a   warrior,  in  a   commotion  a   good 
speaker,  in  eating  and  drinking  a   loved  one,  in  matters 
tending  to  one^s  welfare  a   man  of  wisdom. 
364. 
One  should  hold  up  a   friend  in  affliction,  reserve  grain 
in  time  of  famine,  carry  his  knowledge  into  an  assembly 
— ^these  upon  the  earth  are  the  things  that  ought  to  be 
kept.  « 
This  is  fromiCJ'^nakya’s  Collection  of  Maxims.  See  Joh.  Klatt’s 
Trecentis  (fdnaki/ae  SententiisJ'  , 


--- PAGE 138 ---
no 
NlTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
3^S‘ 
Giving  of  food  in  famine,  of  gold  in  time  of  plenty, 
protection  in  danger— these  are  by  far  the  most  excellent 
of  all  virtues. 
3^6. 
Unbecoming  is  a   swan  among  crows,  a   lion  in  the 
midst  of  oxen,  a   horse  in  the  midst  of  asses,  and  a   wise 
man  among  fools. 
367. 
He  is  not  a   king  who  conquers  one  who  should  not  be 
conquered;  he  not  a   friend  who  overcomes  a   friend  by 
unfair  means;  she  is  not  a   wife  who  contradicts  her 
husband;  they  not  sons  who  do  not  support  their  aged 
parents. 
368. 
Friendship  is  not  equal  to  knowledge;  there  is  no 
enemy  like  sickness;  no  love  is  equal  to  self-love;  no 
power  like  moral  merit. 
369. 
Where  is  virtue  in  one  who  associates  with  a   woman  ? 
where  compassion  in  a   flesh-eater?  how  can  there  be 
truth  in  a   drunkard?  restraint  in  one  wdio  is  greatly 
irritable  ? 
370. 
What  weight  is  there  for  those  with  strength  ?   what 
place  too  far  for  a   trader  ?   What  place  is  there  not  for 
the  learned  ?   what  stranger  to  those  of  loving  speech  ? 
371* 
There  exists  no  famine  for  a   cultivator,  nothing  evil 
for  the  good;  for  the  dumb  there  is  no^contention,  no 
fear  for  one  who  keeps  awake. 


--- PAGE 139 ---
THE  DHAMMANlTI. 
Ill 
372. 
A   young  woman,  anything  touched  by  a   fly’s  feeler, 
a   hermit’s  water-jar,  pure  water,  fruit,  and  betel — these 
should  not  be  rejected. 
373* 
A   harper  is  ruined  in  five  days,  an  archer  in  seven ;   a 
wife  in  a   month,  a   pupil  in  half  a   month. 
374* 
Bad  conduct  is  impurity  to  a   woman,  niggardliness  to  a 
giver ;   sinful  behaviour  is  indeed  impurity  in  this  exist- 
ence and  in  the  next ;   lust  is  a   greater  impurity,  but  the 
greatest  of  all  impurities  is  ignpran.Qed^^ 
375- 
The  protector  of  knowledge  is  constant  industry;  be- 
haviour is  the  protector  of  a   family  name;  knowledge 
guards  a   man;  energy  guards  a   king;  contentment  is  a 
keeper  of  wealth;  but  women,  indeed,  have  nothing  to 
restrain  them. 
376. 
Old  age  destroys  sentient  beings,  lust  destroys  every- 
thing ;   scheming  destroys  all  power,  compassion  destroys 
one’s  wealth. 
377- 
Living  in  a   lowly  place  destroys  greatness,  begging 
destroys  respect;  praise  destroys  merit,  absence  of  restraint 
destroys  the  mind. 
^^3  Oom-ptxve  DJiammap.,  240,  24.1  :  ‘‘There  is  a   taint  greater  still — # 
I  “   The  taint  of  women  is  bad  be-  ignorance  is  a   far-surpassing  taint ; 
f 
  
havioiar,  the  taint  of  a   giver  niggard-  having  cast  away  that  taint,  O 
:   liness  ;   evil  actionsure  taints  indeed,  priests,  be  ye  free  from  taint.” 
;   whether  in  this  world  or  the  next.” 


--- PAGE 140 ---
1 1 3 
 NtTI  LITER  A   TURE  OF  B   URMA . 
Food  is  a   source  of  danger  to  the  base,  death,  a   source 
of  danger  to  sentient  beings  ;   to  alL  persons  of  quality 
disrespect  is  the  greatest  source  of  danger. 
379* 
The  sun  is  hot ;   it  has  no  attendants  :   the  moon  is  cold ; 
it  is  attended  by  stars:  the  simile  concerning  the  sun  and 
moon  should  be  here  borne  in  mind. 
3^0- 
An  idler  is  dull  of  intellect ;   one  living  in  enjoyment  is 
oppressed  with  disease ;   a   sleepy-headed  man  increases  his 
flesh ;   a   great  feeder  grows  apathetic. 
381. 
From  pride  comes  negligence,  from  negligence  loss ;   loss 
engenders  enmities :  wherefore  should  a   wise  man  not 
give  up  pride  ? 
332. 
As  is  the  seed  sown  so  is  the  fruit  that  is  obtained ;   he 
who  acts  virtuously  obtains  happiness ;   an  evil-doer  has  an 
evil  destiny,^^^ 
3S3. 
He  who  believes  not  really  in  the  fruit  of  good  and  bad 
deeds,  he,  in  truth,  should  speedily  bring  a   mirror  (and  see 
his  face).^^^ 
384* 
He  who  believes  not  in  rewards  in  a   future  state,  how 
can  he  not  behold  the  happy  abodes  of  those  who  have 
attained  the  clem  world  ? 
^   m   ‘'What  a   mans  sows,  that  he  one’s  future  existence  reproduce  the 
must  reap,”  is  the  Suddbistic  doc-  merit  or  demerit  of  a   previous  exist- 
trine  of  Karma.  ence. 
As  the  mirror  gives  a   precise  ■  Molclcliabher^WtevsIly  signifies 
representation  of  the  face,  so  will  **  halls  of  freedom.” 


--- PAGE 141 ---
THE  DHAMMANtTL 
385* 
Faith,  shame,  fear  of  sinning,  great  knowledge,  industry, 
thoughtfulness,  wisdom — a   man  replete  wdth  these  seven 
things  is  known  as  a   wise  man.” 
386. 
On  Sunday  the  root,^^^  on  Monday  the  trunk,  on  Satur- 
day and  Tuesday  the  leaf,  on  Wednesday  the  flower, 
Thursday  the  seed,  on  Friday  even  the  fruit. 
387. 
One  who  makes  a   blank-book  into  a   field,  writing 
materials  into  a   plough,  and  letters  into  seed,  he  is  a 
wise  man.^^^ 
388. 
For  the  reason  that  each  letter  is  the  image  of  Buddha, 
for  that  very  reason  should  a   wise  man  write  the  Three 
Pitakas. 
389- 
A   
person  who  writes  the  Three  Pitakas  cannot  fall  into 
hell ;   he  becomes  over  and  over  a   monarch  of  the  four 
islands. 
390. 
Or  there  will  be  to  him  the  sovereignty  of  a   part  ruler, 
so  extensive  as  to  be  incalculable  by  reckoning ;   or  he  will 
many  times  become  the  king  of  the  six  deva  worldsd^^ 
If  on  Sunday  a   medicine  is  re-  This  is  the  Burmese  belief,  and 
qiiired  from  a   tree,  it  should  be  taken  a   Burman  will  not,  therefore,  step 
from  the  root.  This  stanza  fur-  across  any  writing  in  the  vernacular 
nishes  an  example  of  Indian  super-  character,  thinking  by  so  doing  he 
stition  with  regard  to  lucky  and  will  show  disresj-jecfc  to  Buddha, 
unlucky  days.  PadesarCiju^  a   ruler  of  a   part  of 
The  metaphor  is  rather  forced,  one  of  the  great  continents.  A 
The  Pali  runs  as  follows  : —   monarch  of  ail  four  is  termed  a   Cak~^ 
‘  “   Potthakadini  khettam  va  hamttirdjd. 
iekhani  yuganaiigalam  The  six  dcva  worlds  are  : — 
ak  harani  katvS;  Odtummahdrdjiha-devaloka,  Tdv- 
car  nto  pandico  bhave.”  atimsa-d°y  Tdtiia-d°,  TasiUt-d'^f  Nim- 
H 


--- PAGE 142 ---
114 
NlTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
29L 
A   coming  Buddha,  by  practising  such  good  deeds  as  alms- 
giving, and  having  his  existences  complete  with  all  bodily 
members,  is  honoured  in  the  three  worlds. 
392. 
A   teacher  of  the  scriptures  is  born  in  a   famil}-,  noble, 
prosperous,  opulent,  and  possessed  of  extensive  property  ; 
by  his  excellence  he  obtains  a   retinue. 
393. 
A   writer  of  the  scriptures  by  the  fruit  of  one  letter 
obtains  the  highest  happiness  during  eighty-four  thousand 
revolutions. 
394* 
A   clever  man,  full  of  discrimination,  by  small  means 
causes  his  prosperity,  just  as  a   fire  of  the  size  of  an  atom 
causes  the  consumption  of  a   wick. 
39S- 
Suffering  for  the  wicked,  happiness  for  the  good ;   suffer- 
ing and  happiness  for  the  partly  wdcked  and  partly  good  : 
every  cause  has  a   corresponding  effect ;   the  fruit  of  merit 
or  demerit  should  be  borne  in  mind. 
396' 
Those  who  encourage  others  obtain  a   fourth,  hired 
servants  a   third,  possessors  of  property  in  proportion  to 
their  wealth,  those  w^ho  are  happy  a   tenth. 
mdnamti-iT,  and  Pa7*anmmita’ms-  in  it  being  equal  to  100  of  the  years 
amtti'cr.  The  first  extends  above  of  man.  The  other  four  Jol'as  rise 
the  four  MaMdlpas,  from  the  Yug-  .one  over  the  other  above  Meru. 
andhara  rocks  to  the  Cakkavli-lapab-  For  the  Buddhist  system  of  the 
"   bata,  and  lias  each  of  its  days  equal  universe,  see  Hardy’s  Manual  of 
to  fifty  of  the  years  of  men :  the  devas  Buddhism,”  section  l   The  devas 
there  live  500  such  years.  The  are  superhuman  beings,  who  live  a 
Tdvathhsa  heaven  is  situated  on  the  life  of  happinesgufree  from  the  ills  of 
summit  of  Mount  Meru,  each  day  ordinary  human  beings. 


--- PAGE 143 ---
TEE  DHAMMANITL 
Better  silence  than  unproiStable  speech,  living  alone 
than  companionship  with  the  vile;  better  looking  at  a 
blind  person  than  on  a   pretty  wife ;   better  possessed  of 
nothing  than  wealth  acquired  from  a   distanced 
398. 
A   man,  though  he  he  of  mean  ancestry,  he  shines  like 
fire  at  night,  being  industrious,  resolute,  and  replete  with 
virtue. 
399. 
One  is  not  vile  now  nor  noble,  if  by  his  deed  he  was  vile 
before  or  by  his  deed  he  was  not  noble  before. 
400. 
Compared  with  a   mother’s  love,  the  earth  is  like  a 
bamboo-leaf,  a   CakkavMa  like  a   needle’s  eye,  Mount  Meru 
an  ant-hill,  the  ocean  a   water-bowl. 
401. 
If,  indeed,  a   person  nourish  a   mother  during  a   cycle, 
her  milk  wdll  far  exceed  even  the  water  of  the  ocean. 
122  version  in  the  Mitopaddd 
is  as  follows  : — 
Better  silence  than 
an  nntruthful  word ;   better  impo- 
tency  than  intercourse  with  the 
wife  of  another ;   better  the  aban- 
donment of  life  than  delighting  in 
the  words  of  a   slanderer;  better  a 
subsistence  on  arms  than  the  plea- 
sure of  feasting  on  another's  wealth.”' 
— Mitmldhha,  155. 
Kwp%m  =   a   cycle.  The  term 
Kappa  is  given  to  certain  vast 
periods  or  cycles  of  time,  of  which 
there  are  three,  Mahukappaj 
hh  tyyakappa^  and  ntarakappa.  All 
the  CakJcavdias  are  subject  to  an  al- 
ternate process  of  destruction  and 
renovation,  and  a   Mahitkappa  is  the 
period  which  elapsfs  from  the  com- 
mencement of  the  destruction  of  a 
Cakkav^Ia  to  its  complete  restora- 
tion. Each  Mahilkappa  is  sub- 
divided into  four  Asafikheyya- 
kappas,  called  Samvatto^  SamvaU 
tatthdyt^  Yivafto,  and  V rnittatijidyt. 
In  the  first  the  destruction  {by  fire, 
water,  or  wind)  begins  and  is  ac- 
complished, the  Oakkavfda  being 
resolved  into  its  native  elements,  or 
consumed  so  that  nothing  remains  ; 
in  the  second,  this  state  of  void  01 
chaos  continues ;  in  the  third,  the 
process  of  renovation  begins  and  is 
completed ;  and  the  fourth  is  a 
period  of  continuance.  After  the 
end  of  the  fourth  period  the  die-# 
solution  recommences  as  before,  and 
so  this  alternate  process  of  destruc- 
tion and  renovation  goes  on  to  all 
eternity.  Each  ±lsaukheyyakappa 


--- PAGE 144 ---
1 16  nItI  literature  of  'BURMA:^'\ 
.  402. 
Parents  are  the  first  teachers  of  their  offspring :   they  are 
spoken  of  as  Brahmas,  and  are  worthy  of  reverence. 
403. 
Therefore  should  they  reverence  them:  they  should 
honour  them  by  food  and  by  drink,  by  apparel  and  by 
bedding, 
.   404* 
By  anointing  and  by  bathing,  by  washing  the  feet,  by 
attending  to  their  wants  and  by  waiting  upon  them,  should 
a   wise  man  cherish  his  parents ;  people  will  praise  him  in 
this  existence;  in  the  next  he  will  find  delight  in  heaven. 
405. 
It  has  been  declared  by  the  great  sage  that  a   collec- 
tion of  bones — of  one  man’s  bones  through  one  cycle,  is 
equal  in  size  to  a   cluster  of  mountains. 
406. 
The  gift  of  the  law  surpasses  all  gifts,  the  juice  of  the 
law  all  juices  ;   the  pleasure  of  the  law  surpasses  all 
pleasures,  the  destruction  of  desire  overcomes  all  suffer- 
i^^gl25 
contains  twenty  Antarakappas,  an 
Antarakappa  being  the  interval  that 
elapses  while  the  age  of  man,  in- 
creases from  ten  years  to  an  Asah- 
kheyya,  and  then  decreases  again  to 
ten  years  ;  this  period  is  of  immense 
duration,  A   Kappa  is  either  Bun^ 
nakappo,  in  which  there  is  no 
Buddha,  or  Amnnakappo  or  Biul- 
dhakappOj  in  which  one  or  more 
Buddhas  appear. 
Gotama. 
^-5  This  is  stanza  352  of  the 
mapada.  Suffering  may  be  over- 
come by  attention  to  the  scriptures. 
This  is  the  natural  inference.  The 
discourses  of  Buddha  are,”  it  is 
said,  “as  a   divine  charm  to  cure 
the  poison  of  evil  desire ;   a   divine 
medicine  to  heal  the  disease  of 
anger ;   a   lamp  in  the  midst  of 
the  darkness  of  ignorance ;   a   fire 
like  that  which  burns  at  the 
end  of  a   kalpa  to  destroy  the  evils 
of  repeated  existence ;   a   meridian 
sun  to  dry  up  the  mud  of  covetous- 
ness ;   a   great  rain  to  quench  the 
flame  of  sensuality ;   a   thicket  to 
block  up  the  road  that  leads  to  the 
Narakas  (hells) ;   a   ship  in  which  to 
sail  to  the  opposite  shore  of  the 
ocean  of  existence  ;   a   collyrium  for 


--- PAGE 145 ---
THE  DHAMMANITL 
407. 
Delight  ill  non-forgetfulness;  keep  a   guard  over  j'our 
mind ;   free  yourself  from  suffering  as  an  elephant  sunk  in 
the  mud. 
408. 
Shun  the  company  of  the  had,  cultivate  the  companion- 
ship of  the  virtuous;  night  and  day  do  what  is  good; 
remember  the  impermanence  of  thingsd-^ 
409. 
Worldly  affairs  are  indeed  transient ;   they  are  in  their 
nature  liable  to  pass  away :   this  being  the  case,  they  perish  ; 
their  extinction  is  happiness. 
410* 
Good  and  bad  are  not  both  productive  of  the  same 
result ;  evil  leads  to  hell,  virtue  conveys  to  heaven. 
taking  away  the  eye-film  of  heresy  ;  the  following  story  : — 
In  a   solitary 
a   moon  to  bring  out  the  night-blow-  path  on  the  road  to  Ujjeni  there 
ing  lotus  of  merit  ;   a   succession  of  dwelt  on  a   pipai-tree  a   gander  and 
trees  bearing  iminortai  fruit,  placed  a   crow.  A   wearied  traveller  on  one 
here  and  there,  by  which  the  tra-  occasion,  on  a   hot  summer  day,  -went 
veller  may  be  enabled  to  cross  the  asleep  under  the  tree  with  his  bow 
desert  of  existence  ;  a   ladder  by  and  arrows  beside  him.  After  a 
which  to  ascend  to  the  Devalokas ;   while  the  shade  of  the  tree  jDassed 
a   straight  highw’ay  by  w'hich  to  away  from  off  his  face.  Seeing  this, 
pass  to  the  incomparable  wis-  the  good-hearted  gander  perched 
dom;  a   door  of  entrance  to  the  upon  the  tree,  and,  spreading  out 
eternal  city,  of  Nirvana ;   a   tails-  its  wings,  caused  a   shade  to  fail 
manic  tree  to  give  whatever  is  re-  upon  his  face.  Having  enjoyed  a 
(guested  ;  a   flavour  more  exquisite  sound  sleep,  he  at  length  yawned. 
than  antf  other  in  the  three  worlds;  a   Thereupon  the  crow,  maliciously  in- 
treasury of  the  best  things  it  is  pos-  dined,  voided  excrement  into  his 
sible  to  obtain ;   and  a   power  by  mouth  and  fie,w  away.  The  tra- 
which  may  be  appeased  the  sorrow  veller,  on  looking  up,  saw  the 
of  every  sentient  being.’’ — Eastern  gander,  and  killed  it  with  an  arrow- 
Monachisrn.  shot.” — Vigraha,  24. 
The  same  stanza  is  quoted  in  This  is  obtainable  by  the  attain - 
the  Ilitojpadckt,  in  connection  with  ment  of  Nibbdn, 


--- PAGE 146 ---
NtTl  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
iiS 
411. 
One  should  write  the  Three  Pitakas  keeping  his  head 
steady  and  his  feet  steady,  and  attending  to  his  wants 
during  the  intervalsd^'*^ 
Three  Pitakas — Pitakattaymii,  Upper  Burma,  a   copy  of  these 
or  “The  Three  Baskets/’  viz. —   books  is  inscribed  “upon  729  marble 
I.  Vmayapitakar/i — “The  Bas-  slabs,  containing,  it  is  said,  131,220 
ket  of  Bisciidine,”  to  which  lines  and  15,090,300  letters.” — 
belong  MahdvaygOf  CMavay-  3£ason.  They  are  held  in  great 
gOf  &c.  veneration  by  Buddhists,  who  look 
II.  SuUa/pitalcmh — “The  Bas-  upon  each  letter  as  an  image  of 
ket  of  Discourses,’^  contain-  Gotama. 
ing  BighanikdyOy  3Iajj?tim-  That  is,  “   in  the  intervals  of 
anikdyo,  KhuddakanikdyOf  writing.”  The  scriptures  are  so 
&c.  ‘ 
 venerated  that  it  is  considered  a 
III.  AWddhamma/pitaka/rih —   sin  to  stop  writing  during  the  time 
“   The  Basket  of  Metaphy-  devoted  to  copying  just  for  the  pur- 
sics,”  containing  Bkamma-  pose  of  attending  to  one’s  personal 
sayigani,  Patihdnarhi  &c.  wants. 
At  Mandalay,  the  capital  of 


--- PAGE 147 ---
(   ”9  ) 
III.—RAyANlTl.^ 
I. 
Heee  is  recited  the  E§;jamti,  for  the  accomplishment  of  a 
king’s  present  prosperity,  and  the  acquirement  of  expe- 
rience for  the  subjugation  of  the  kingdoms  of  others. 
.  2, 
I  shall  set  forth  the  meritorious  characteristics  of  kings 
and  ministers.  A   noble  ruler  should  always  carefully 
scrutinise  the  actions  of  his  subjects. 
3- 
A   man  is  known  to  be  wise  by  his  speech — his  conduct, 
good  or  bad,  by  the  company  he  keeps ;   by  his  general 
behaviour  he  is  known  to  be  pure;  in  time  of  danger, 
whether  he  is  a   man  or  not, 
4- 
A   ruler  of  men  should  avoid  a   servant  who  is  indolent, 
harsh  in  his  actions,  severe  in  his  mind,  rough  and  harmful, 
dissatisfied  and  lacking  strength. 
The  king  should  not  appoint  him  a   minister  who  is 
^  This  anthology,  based  on  the  Hitopade^a,  Chronologically,  the 
Indian  Dharmasastras,  was  compiled  Burmese  compilation  stands  after 
by  the  Brahmans  Anantah3»na  and  the  LohaiiUi  and  Dhamnuudti,  and 
Ganaraissaka.  It  must  not  be  con-  has  for  its  prototype  the  Rdjanit^ 
founded  with  the  RdjanUi  of  Lallu  sdstra  of  C^nakya,  the  famous 
L^la  in  the  Braj  dialect,  which  is  minister  of  Otiudragupta,  king  of 
comparatively  milern  {a.d.  1S59),  PHtaliputra. 
and  based  chiefly  on  the  Sanskrit 


--- PAGE 148 ---
120 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
rough  and  harmful,  who  takes  bribes,  is  ignorant  of 
books, ^  looks  after  his  own  interests,  and  is  ungrateful 
and  given  to  falsehood. 
6. 
If  foolish  persons  be  appointed  ministers,  a   king  suffers 
three  disadvantages :  these  three  without  doubt  are— loss 
of  fame,  loss  of  prosperity,  and  falling  into  hell. 
.  ■■■■  7v' 
If  good  and  wise  ministers  be  appointed,  a   king  derives 
'  three  benefits — fame,  heaven,  and  the  most  exalted  pros- 
Iperity. 
Whatever  good  or  bad  deed  a   subject  does,  that  good  or 
bad  deed  is  connected  with  the  king.^ 
9- 
Therefore,  should  a   king  appoint  a   minister  who  is  re- 
plete with  good  qualities,  and  will  bring  about  his  present 
W’elfare ;   he  should  avoid  one  lacking  in  excellence.^ 
■  ■  10.  .  . 
He  should  be  appointed  a   judge  who  is  full  of  family 
piety  and  virtue,  who  maintains  the  true  law,  who  is  full 
of  wisdom,  amiable,  and  shrewd. 
II. 
He  should  be  appointed  treasurer  who  is  of  an  upright 
family,  who  hoards  up  the  treasure,  who  can  appraise  all 
valuables,  is  virtuous,^  is  a   permanent  resident  and  of 
good  character. 
Such  as  the  LoJcantti,  Rdjmitti,  ^  See  IlUojiadfJa,  iii.  iS. 
^  That  is,  one  who  iriaiiitains  the 
^  Gautama,  xi.  4,  says  :  “   For  it  is  five  precepts  (Paricasilani)~refrain- 
declared  (in  the  Vedas)  that  he  ob*  ing  from"  takhig  life,  from  theft, 
tains  a   share  of  the  spiritual  merit  impurity,  faiseho^^il,  and  spirituous 
of  his  subjects.’^  liquors. 


--- PAGE 149 ---
rAjanIti. 
121 
12. 
He  should  be  appointed  gatekeeper  who  knows  old  from 
new  people,  who  is  strong  and  of  good  appearance,  honest, 
capable  of  bearing  fatigue,  and  shrewd. 
He  should  be  appointed  ambassador  ^  who  is  wise,  un- 
derstands the  conversation  of  people,  is  brave,  familiar 
with  the  disposition  of  others,  and  of  ready  speech. 
14. 
He  should  be  apx)ointed  writer  who  is  clever  in  reading 
the  thoughts  of  others,  writes  rapidly,  whose  penmanship 
is  good,  who  is  intelligent,  of  good  address,  and  shrewd. 
15-16. 
He  should  be  appointed  commander-in-chi  ef  who  is  ex- 
perienced in  the  subjugation  of  others,  who  knows  to  choose 
a   victory-giving  battlefield,  who  does  not  abandon  his  forces 
in  misfortune,  who  remains  the  same  in  adversity  or  pros- 
perity, wdio  is  strong,  of  irreproachable  character,  skilled  in 
the  use  of  weapons,  w^ho  can  bear  the  fatigues  of  riding, 
and  is  replete  with  diligence  and  bravery. 
17- 
He  is  praised  as  a   good  cook  who  is  the  descendant  of 
cooks,  wdio  is  clever  in  cooking,  who  is  acquainted  with 
books'^  on  cookery,  who  can  serve  up  dainties,  wdio  is  de- 
voted to  his  profession,  and  does  not  give  away  articles  of 
food. 
With  regard  to  the  appointment  is  praised  who  is  liked,  pure,  clever, 
of  an  ambassador,  we  find  the  follow-  with  a   good  memory,  wdio  knoivs 
ing  in  the  “Instittites  of  Mann,”  place  and  time,  personable,  fearless, 
wii.  63,  64: — ‘‘He  should  appoint  eloquent/\See al8o//i^opade«fc,iii. 2Q8> 
an  ambassador  learned  in  all  the  "   Such,  perhaps,  as  the  TJravya- 
treatises,  who  understands  gestures,  guna^  an  edition  of  which  is  found 
expression,  and  actnj  pure,  clever,  well-  in  Burma  under  the  name  of  “   Drap- 
descended.  The  ambassador  of  a   king  yagun  Kyand’ 


--- PAGE 150 ---
122 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
1 8. 
He  is  praised  as  a  doctor  who  is  skilled  in  the  treatise 
on  the  principles  of  life  and  its  dissolution,  who  is  clever 
in  his  profession,  who  is  acquainted  with  works  ®  on  medi- 
cine, who  is  of  pleasing  countenance  and  of  high  morals. 
19. 
He  should  serve  the  king  as  an  attendant  who  under- 
stands the  king’s  wishes,  is  of  good  morals,  clever,  obser- 
vant of  the  law,  well  read,  free  from  covetousness,  and  not 
remiss  in  his  duties. 
20. 
He  should  be  a   king’s  domestic  chaplain  ^  who  is  ac- 
quainted with  the  Vedas  and  its  subdivisions,  who  is  prac- 
tised in  fire-ofierings  and  the  use  of  spells,  and  always 
prays  for  the  long  life  of  the  king. 
21. 
He  who  is  modest,  righteous,  versed  in  languages,  who 
understands  physiognomy,  is  conversant  with  different  arts 
and  sciences,  brave,  endowed  with  race  virtues,  and  fearful 
of  the  king — such  a   one  should  be  appointed  to  serve  in 
the  palace. 
22. 
The  attendant  of  whatever  king  is  wise,  loves  his  avo- 
cations, is  brave,  worthy  to  be  consulted — he  brings  about 
the  entire  welfare  of  the  king. 
s  Oaraka  and  Sii-sruta  were  two  what  is  useful  in  life,  of  a   good 
great  medical  writers  of  ancient  family,  not  deficient  in  limb,  and 
times.  The  Ayiir-'  Veda  h   a   treatise  persistent  in  the  practice  of  aus- 
on  medicine  belonging  to  the  XJpa-  terities,  ,  .  .  pure,  free  from  covet- 
vedas.’^  See  Weber’s  “History  of,  ousness,  attentive,  and  able.”  In 
Indian  Literature/’, pp.  265-271*  Gautama,  xi.  12,  we  find  :  ‘-And  he 
With  regard  to  the  appointment  shall  select  as  his  domestic  priest  a 
ri  a   Purohita,  compare  Vishnu,  ni  BriUimana  who  is  learned  (in  the 
70,  71  :  “Let  him  appoint  as  Puro-  Vedas),  of  noble  family,  ekxiuent, 
hita  a   man  conversant  with  the  .  handsome,  of  (a  suitable)  age,  and 
Vedas,  epics,  the  institutes  of  of  virtuous  dispc^sition,  who  lives 
sacred  law,  and  (the  science  of)  righteously,  and  who  is  austere. 


--- PAGE 151 ---
RljAlSltTL  123 
23- 
He  who  has  employmeht,  although  he  have  much 
power  and  reputation,  should  not  deceive  the  king;  he 
should  be  able  to  disclose  what  is  good  or  what  is  bad.  It 
is  a   difficult  matter  to  point  out  what  is  for  the  king's 
advantage  or  agreeable  to  his  mind.^® 
24. 
He  is  no  man  who  overcomes  the  vile ;   he  is  not  called 
a   man  who  is  assiduous  in  a   trifle  ;   he  who  achieves  some- 
thing great  is  a   man.  Who  scandalises  a   king,  although 
he  conquers,  is  not  a   conqueror;  he  is  not  noble  who 
suppresses  the  conqueredd^ 
“   Is  he  a   minister  who,  to  please 
the  king,  counsels  what  ought  not 
to  be  done  as  though  it  ought  to  be 
done  ?  Better  wound  the  feelings  of 
the  king,  but  not  cause  his  destruc- 
tion by  what  should  not  be  done.” — 
IIitopade,4a^  iii.  107. 
The  Pali  of  the  stanza  runs 
thus — 
Nonanunnununanunno,  n^nanimno 
nand  nunu 
Nunnanuniio  nanuimon^,  na  nane 
nunanunanu.” 
Compare  Kirdtarjunlya,  xv.^14 — 
“   jS'a  nonanunno  nunnono  nanii  nana- 
nana  nanu 
jN'umio  nunnonanunneno  naiiena 
nunnanunnanu  t.  ” 
The  following,  quoted  in  Indian 
Wisdom,”  is  from  Milgha’s  Stkipd- 
lahadhu,  xix,  114 — 
Dridadoduddadudditdi  dadddodCi- 
dadidadoh 
Duddiidarh  dadade  dudde  dadMa- 
dadado  dadah.  ” 
With  regard  to  the  artificial  cha- 
racter of  verses  of  this  kind,  Monier 
Williams  remarks :  ‘‘  Some  of  these 
poems,  especially  the  Jiaghmmfisa, 
Kumar asambhciva,  Meglmddta^  and 
RitumniMra  of  Iviiiditsa,  abound  in 
truly  poetical  ideas  and  display  great 
fertility  of  imagination  and  power 
of  description  ;   but  it  cannot  be  de- 
nied that  even  in  these  works  of  the 
greatest  of  Indian  poets  there  are 
occasional  fanciful  conceits,  com- 
bined with  a   too  studied  and  arti- 
ficial elaboration  of  diction,  and  a 
constant  tendency  to  what  a   Euro- 
pean would  consider  an  almost  pu- 
erile love  for  alliteration  and  playing 
upon  words.  Some  of  the  other 
poems,  such  as  the  Kirdtdrpmiya, 
KUupdlahadha^  &c.,  are  not  wanting 
in  occasional  passages  containing 
poetical  feeling,  striking  imagery, 
and  noble  sentiment,  but  they  are 
artificial  to  a   degree  quite  opposed 
to  European  canons  of  taste,  the 
chief  aim  of  the  composers  being  to 
exhibit  their  artistic  skill  in  bringing 
out  the  capabilities  of  the  Sanskrit 
language,  its  ductility,  its  adaptation 
to  every  kind  of  style,  from  the  most 
diffuse  to  the  most  concise,  its  power 
of  compounding  words,  its  intricate 
grammatical  structure,  its  complex 
system  cjf  metres,  and  the  fertility  of 
its  resources  in  the  employment  of 
rhyme,  rhythm,  and  alliteration.” 
Extreme  cases  of  such  artificial 
structures  are  those  in  the  example^ 
given  above,  and  the  discovery  of 
the  meaning  of  the  verses  is  only 
possible  with  the  help  of  a   native 
commentary. 
!


--- PAGE 152 ---
124  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
25-26. 
A   king,  a   minister  who  attends  upon  him,  a   country 
inhabited  by  good  people,  a   fortress  difficult  to  be  taken, 
punishment  in  keeping  with  crime,  a   granary  always  filled 
with  corn/  a   friend  devoted  to  the  king  in  danger— these 
are  seven  elements  spoken  of  in  connection  with  royalty 
by  wise  men  versed  in  the  Mti. 
'  27.:  : 
These  are  spoken  of  as  seven  elements  in  connection 
w’ith  a   country :  a   king,  a   minister,  a   kingdom,  a   fortress, 
a   granary,  an  army,  and  an  ally.^'^ 
28. 
Among  these,  even  if  one  element  is  deficient,  the  king's 
good  state  declines ;   another,  not  wishing  to  remain  on 
terms  of  inequality  with  him,  strives  hard  to  gain  an 
ascendancy. 
29. 
A   king  first  of  all  wishes  for  himself  association  with 
the  virtuous ;   he  next  devotes  himself  to  acquire  various 
qualifications,  and  then  looks  after  his  remaining  duty. 
30. 
He  w"ho^^  is  exalted  among  men,  is  wise,  intelligeiit, 
avoids  lo^v  conversation,  is  shrewd,  patient,  and  upright, 
he  is  law-abiding  and  not  envious  of  another's  prosperity. 
3i‘ 
He  acts  well,  is  provided  with  friends  and  allies  full 
of  ability,  knows  how  to  bring  about  the  ruin  of  other 
kings,  is  industrious,  possessed  of  fortitude,  and  is  cog- 
nisant of  loss  and  gain. 
The  seven  constituent  elements  and  an  ally.’'  —   Institutes,  iii. 
of  state  as  given  by  Vishnu, are:  33. 
“The  monarch,  his  council,  a   for-,  The  king 
tress,  treasure,  the  army,  the  realm,  Samhandhddisahwyutto. 


--- PAGE 153 ---
RljANtri. 
32. 
He  is  grateful,  brave,  depends  on  the  intelligent,  shuns 
harmful  practices,  is  considerate,  not  fault-finding,  and  is 
prompt  in  the  carrying  out  of  a   promise. 
33* 
He  knows  how  to  cause  the  ruin  of  an  enemy,  has  a 
mastery  over  his  temper  and  over  his  senses,  is  neither 
covetous  nor  lethargic,  is  liberal,  and  in  the  habit  of  giving 
admonition. 
■ 
 34- 
He  is  free  from  bewilderment,  does  not  take  what  does 
not  belong  to  him,^^"^  is  respectful  to  the  righteous,  knows 
the  proper  time  and  place,  and  is  devoted  to  the  seven 
duties. 
35. 
He  understands  the  signification  of  terms,  is  skilful  in 
the  use  of  stratagems  and  in  the  organising  of  campaigns ; 
he  delights  in  charity  and  the  observance  of  the  precepts, 
and  speaks  cautiously. 
36. 
A   king  who  is  replete  with  the  qualities  above  men- 
tioned, he,  by  conquering  the  whole  earth,  is  honoured  for 
his  well-deserved  greatness. 
37- 
The  king  who  is  retentive  of  knowledge,  who  is  wise, 
intelligent,  unenvious,  and  waits  upon  his  preceptor — he 
attains  a   widespread  reputation. 
The  king  who  is  possessed  of  the  seven  qualities,  is 
acquainted  with  the  Mti,^®  and  is  wise  and  discriminating, 
he  has  tlie  power  to  conquer  the  whole  earth. 
Ajpariggaho.  any  treatise  which  serves  as  a   guide 
Nttlsattharh.  %   This  may  be  a   to  conduct, 
particular  Niti,  or  it  may  refer  to 


--- PAGE 154 ---
126 
N in  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
.39. 
Indra,  the  sun,  the  god  of  wind,  Yama,  the  ocean,  the 
moon,  the  earth,  and  the  god  of  rain — these  eight  should 
be  borne  in  mind  by  the  king.^*^ 
40.  
■ 
As  Sakka,  the  Idng  of  devas,  exalts  or  degrades  crea- 
tures according  as  they  deserve  exaltation  or  degradation, 
like  him  should  a   king  also  act. 
As  the  sun  (gradually)  dries  up  the  water  during  eight 
months,  so  should  the  king,  who  is  like  the  sun,  exact 
taxes  in  his  kingdom.^^ 
42-  ■' 
As  the  air  (unobserved)  reaches  all  creatures,  so  should 
the  king  know  all  about  his  people  by  means  of  spies : 
this  secrecy  is  the  character  of  the  wind. 
43- 
As  the  king  of  death,  at  the  right  moment  brings  about 
the  death  of  one  whom  he  loves  or  one  whom  he  hates, 
even  so  should  a   king  inflict  punishment  upon  one  who 
deserves  punishment :  this  infliction  of  punishment  is  the 
character  of  Yama 
.  .  . 
 44*  
■  . 
 , 
As  small  streams  fill  the  ocean  without  the  ocean  mak- 
“He  is  fire  and  wind;  he  is  the  little  from  the  kingdom  by  the 
sim,  the  moon,  the  king  of  justice  king,” 
(Yama) ;   he  is  Kuvera ;   Varuim,'he  Spies  are  spoken  of  as  the 
great  Indra  in  grandeur.”— iUamt,  “   eyes  ”   of  a   king  ;  if  he  has  not  one, 
vh.  7,  It  is  said  that  the  Creator  he  is  called  “   blind.”  See  ///to- 
organised  a   king  by  drawing  forth  padcJsd,  iii.  37 ;  Manu^  ix.  256  ; 
eternal  particles  {mdtrdh  sd&vattJi)  Vuhnw,  iii,  35. 
4rom  the  essence  of  these  eight.  Punishment  is  personified  as 
Compare  Manu,  vii.  129 :  “As  the  son  of  t^,vara  and  spoken  of  as 
the  leech  (water  animal),  calf,  and  “the  protector  of  all  beings.”  Por 
insect  eat  their  food  little  by  little,  remarks  on  the  i^^iction  of  punish- 
so  yearly  taxes  are  taken  little  by  ment,  see  Mmiu^  vii.  13-31. 


--- PAGE 155 ---
RljANtri. 
ing  a   demand  upon  them,  so  should  the  king  not  long  for 
all  wealth :  this  not  making  a   demand  is  the  character  of 
the  ocean. 
45‘ 
As  men  who  see  the  moon  when  it  is  full  are  delighted, 
so  should  all  people,  seeing  the  face  of  the  king,  feel 
satisfied:  a   ruler  who  is  like  the  moon  should  show  him- 
self in  the  same  way. 
46. 
Just  as  the  earth  bears  upon  it  all  ci'eatures  equally, 
thus  should  a   king  take  in  his  charge  all  townsfolk  and 
country  people. 
47- 
As  the  rain  falls  in  showers  during  four  months,  a   ruler 
should  give  happiness  to  the  soldiery  by  paying  them 
their  wages. 
48. 
A   king  should  act  the  one  act  of  the  lion,  one  act  of 
the  crane,  four  acts  of  the  fowl,  five  of  the  crow,  six  of 
the  dog,  and  three  of  the  ass. 
49. 
Whatever  act  a   king  wishes  to  perform,  whether  great 
or  small,  it  should  be  done  with  all  his  vigour ;  then  that 
will  be  one  act  of  the  lion- s. 
50. 
A   wise  king  is  like  a   crane,  keeping  a   guard  on  his 
senses :   he  accomplishes  all  his  work  in  the  proper  time 
and  place. 
51- 
Cocks  rise  first,  are  very  pugnacious,  divide  their  food 
with  their  companions,  and  have  the  upper  hand  over  the 
hens :  these  are  the  four  acts  of  a   cock.  # 
Literally,  tliiya  dkamma  'bhutlarh. 


--- PAGE 156 ---
128  NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
52. 
A   crow  satisfies  his  passions  in  secret,  is  very  cautions, 
eats  his  food  in  company  with  his  relatives,  is  observant 
and  industrious:  these  are  the  five  acts  of  a   crow. 
53- 
A   dog  is  not  idle,  is  easily  content,  sleeps  easily  and 
rises  easily,  is  a   staunch  attendant  and  full  of  bravery : 
these  six  are  the  attributes  of  a   dog. 
54‘ 
An  ass,  although  fatigued,  carries  his  burden,  he  minds 
not  heat  nor  cold,  and  is  ever  content:  these  are  the 
three  acts  of  an  ass, 
S5* 
The  wise  king  who  acts  in  this  world  in  keeping  with 
these  twenty  virtues  overcomes  all  his  enemies  and  derives 
great  glory. 
S6. 
Diseases  arise  by  too  much  drinking,  by  gratifying  the 
passions  inordinately,  by  constipation  and  by  constric- 
tion,^^ by  sleeping  in  the  day,  and  by  keeping  up  at  night : 
from  these  six  diseases  arise. 
S7« 
Neither  by  drinking  too  much  nor  by  drinking  too  little 
can  digestion  be  carried  on :  therefore  for  the  regulation  of 
the  bowels  one  should  drink  in  moderation. 
58. 
Until  food  is  settled,  one,  having  eaten,  should  sit  like 
! 
  
a   king ;   till  then,  after  walking  a   hundred  paces,  he  should 
I   
lie  on  his  left  side. 
59. 
Wishing  for  long  life,  one  should  eat  facing  the  east; 
Vaeca^assdvaniroclM, 


--- PAGE 157 ---
RljANtri.  129 
wishing  for  wealth,  he  should  face  the  south ;   if  he  desire 
prosperity,  he  should  eat  facing  the  west  ]   one  should  not 
eat  facing  the  north. 
60. 
He  who  sleeps  after  eating  gets  his  body  bloated ;   he 
I 
  
who  stands  grows  strong;  he  who  walks  up  and  down 
‘■prolongs  life ;   and  as  for  a   person  who  runs,  death  follows 
him. 
61. 
He  who  sleeps  with  his  head  to  the  east  becomes  wise ; 
who  sleeps  with  his  head  to  the  south  prolongs  his  life ; 
if  one  sleeps  with  his  head  towards  the  west,  his  mind 
grows  perturbed ;   who  sleeps  with  his  head  to  the  north 
dies  soon. 
62-64. 
Cutting  the  grass  always,  writing  on  the  ground  with 
the  nail,  not  washing  the  feet  clean,  not  washing  the 
teeth,  the  soiling  of  clothes,  allowing  the  hair  to  become 
dry,  sleeping  at  twilight,  sleeping  without  clothes,  eating 
to  excess,  striking  the  limbs  and  back :  to  those  who  do 
all  this,  neither  the  god  of  w^ealth  nor  Pissahanu  is  able 
to  bring  greatness. 
65. 
Placing  flowers  on  the  head,  washing  the  feet  clean, 
espousing  an  excellent  wife,  eating  in  moderation,  having 
intercourse  vrhile  robed,  avoiding  intercourse  on  the  five 
special  days :  the  king  who,  is  resolute  in  these  for  a 
length  of  time  obtains  glory. 
66. 
Harsh  speech,  punishment,  truculence,  the  destruction 
of  the  property  of  others,  over-indulgence  in  drinking,  in 
intercourse,  and  gambling :  these  bring  ruin  to  a   king. 
    
     
  
        
  
  
m 
"3  Knyera,  the  Indian  Pluto.  Pis-  birth  anniversary,  and  at  the  conrx- 
sahanu,  a   benign  deity,  who  looks  menceinent  of  every  new  year,  when 
after  the  interest  mankind.  the  fabulous  head  is  transferred  from 
That  is,  on  the  eighth  and  one  goddess  to  another, 
fourteenth  days,  at  full  moon,  at  a 


--- PAGE 158 ---
130  NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
67. 
It  is  indeed  true  that  many  faults  accompany  those 
kings  who  attach  themselves  to  these  sources  of  ruin; 
they  should  therefore  avoid  them. 
68. 
The  wise  have  said  that  the  drinking  of  intoxicating 
liquors  ranks  highest  amongst  all  those  things  that  cause 
destruction:  the  drinking  of  spirituous  liquor  tends  to  the 
loss  of  property,  wisdom,  strength,  prosperity,  reputation, 
and  dignity. 
69. 
By  indulgence  in  spirits  great  wisdom  is  destroyed;  one 
cannot  understand  the  truth  nor  know  the  vitality  of 
another;  he  cannot  discriminate  between  harmful  and 
unharmful  food, 
70.  
,   
' 
A   drunkard  looks  upon  his  mother  as  his  wife,  and  his 
wife  as  his  mother,  his  house  as  a   pit  or  the  like,  and  a 
small  thing  as  a   thing  of  great  consequence. 
He  looks  upon  a   small  piece  of  water  like  the  ocean, 
and  the  ocean  as  if  dry  land  ;  he  considers  the  king  as  his 
friend. 
72. 
A   drunkard  diminishes  his  present  property,  engages 
in  quarrel,  contracts  disease,  destroys  his  good  reputation, 
loses  all  sense  of  shame,  and  becomes  weak  in  wisdom. 
73- 
Corrupt  people  are  devoid  of  purity  of  behaviour ;   they 
discard  their  relatives  as  dead;  they  are  without  anxiety, 
and  dead  to  a   sense  of  shame ;   with  great  difficulty  do  they 
obtain  the  necessaries  of  life. 


--- PAGE 159 ---
RljANtTL  131 
74. 
To  him  there  are  no  friends  and  relatives,  no  tranquillity, 
no  compassion ;   he  is  not  fit  to  be  seen ;   he  knows  not 
about  the  two  worlds 
he  deceives  others  and  causes 
dissensions  in  the  family, 
75. 
The  king  who  puts  no  faith  in  the  words  of  his  coun- 
cillors acquainted  with  the  Vedas,  but  acts  up  to  the 
wisdom  of  his  own  inclinations,  he,  like  a   blind  man 
without  a   guide,  will,  on  account  of  enemies,  ere  long 
come  to  destruction. 
76-77. 
Who  am  I  ?  what  is  the  time  and  place  ?   who  are 
my  enemies  ha\dng  advantages  equal  to  or  superior  to  my 
own  ?   who  my  friend  ?   what  strength  have  I  ?  what  stra- 
tagem should  I  use  ?   what  is  the  benefit  of  my  industry  ? 
what  the  good  results  of  my  merit  ?   who  inimical  to  my 
prosperity  ?   what  the  best  reply  to  an  opponent’s  speech  ?   
” 
Those  kings  who  know  these  things  in  the  accomplish- 
ment of  a   work  have  been  termed  by  the  wise  the  most 
exalted  of  kings.” 
78. 
Let  them  think  about  their  duty  in  the  morning — about 
the  jjeople  in  an  enemy’s  country,  the  army,  resources, 
and  the  land,  those  who  are  allies,  the  present  and  the 
future  life,  and  what  should  and  should  not  be  done. 
79- 
A   king  should  honour  one  of  conspicuous  merit  who 
has  nobody  to  depend  upon ;   he  should  likewise  honour  a 
brave  man  and  a   righteous  man  belonging  to  a   foreign 
country,  saying  for  the  information  of  all,  “   This  man  has 
come  into  my  kingdom.”  # 
Present  life  and  future  life. 


--- PAGE 160 ---
13: 
Ntri  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
80. 
First  of  all,  a   king,  having  driven  off  sleep  hy  song  on 
the  harp,  should,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  singing,  hear  the 
recitation  of  the  blessings,^®  and  go  to  sleep  on  the  arrival 
of  the  third  watch. 
81. 
A   king,  comporting  himself  suitably,  holding  up  his 
right  hand  and  appearing  thoughtful,  remaining  gracefully 
seated  and  in  a   good  position,  and  forgetful  in  his  decision 
whether  one  is  a   friend  or  an  enemy,  should  give  a   legal 
iudgment.^'^ 
82. 
It  is  not  the  characteristic  of  a   king  not  giving  punish- 
ment while  thinking  to  himself,  “   I  am  replete  with  for- 
bearance®   by  doing  so  a   good  king  is  looked  upon  as 
bad.  This  reflection  on  the  part  of  others  is  the  occasion 
for  the  infliction  of  punishment. 
83. 
The  pride  of  low  people  increases  by  the  display  of  too 
much  forbearance ;   by  the  chastisement  of  a   bad  person 
others  should  be  deterred  from  acting  like  him ;   by  chas- 
tisement he  is  made  to  desist  from  evil;  by  chastisement 
the  king  bestows  happiness. 
84. 
By  a   king  inflicting  punishment  on  any  one  others  are 
afraid  of  acting  in  the  same  way ;   even  if  unwilling  to 
punish,  he  should  award  punishment  having  regard  to 
future  actions. 
8s- 
The  tooth-cleaner  about  which  he  is  ignorant,  that  which 
the  Mangala  and  other  enemy  and  a   friend  is  truly  the  or- 
mnttas  nament  of  ascetics  ;   towards  offen- 
27  Manu,  vii.  13,  and  viii.  I,  2.  ders  it  is  verily, _  
fpr  kings,  a   defect.” 
28  “   S'orbearance  towards  both  an  — Hitojgadem^  ii.  180. 


--- PAGE 161 ---
RAjfANtTL  133 
has  knots,  that  with  leaves,  one  from  a   fallen  tree,  one 
from  the  dry  bark,  that  from  a   stump,  and  that  produced 
in  a   village  garden — such  should  not  be  used  by  a   king. 
86. 
He  should  use  a   tooth-cleaner  facing  the  east  and  the 
north ;   it  should  be  straight,  without  defect,  and  half  a 
cubit  in  length:  having  washed  it  well,  he  should  dis- 
pose of  it  in  a   clean  place :  while  using  it,  he  should  not 
talk. 
37. 
Should  a   king  not  inflict  punishment,  he  comes  to  grief 
like  an  elephant  without  his  mate,  a   snake  without  poison, 
a   sword  without  a   scabbard,  and  a   cave  without  a   lion. 
88. 
People  with  large  stomachs,  hands,  and  feet,  being 
afraid  of  punishment,  pay  great  honour  to  a   king;  being 
punished  severely,  they  hate  him.  Awarding  punishment 
compatible  with  a   crime  is  a   means  of  securing  peace, 
89- 
Punishing  the  bad,  honouring  the  good,  increasing 
property  lawfully,  being  impartial,  and  looking  after  the 
kingdom — ►these  five  things  have  been  declared  by  the 
wise  as  characteristics  of  a   king. 
90. 
The  king  when  wearied  of  fighting  should  tell  some 
ministers  equal  in  liability  to  himself,  Do  you  decide 
matters  aright.''  Daily  then  should  he  make  inquiries 
and  allow  himself  ‘proper  rest,^^ 
  —   —   
-     
  
  
^   Manu;  vii  142,  has  :  “When  chief  of  the  ministers,  knowing  law, 
weaned  of  regardi^fig  the  affairs  of  discerning,  subdued,  born  of  a   good 
men,  let  him  put  in  that  place  the  family.*’ 


--- PAGE 162 ---
^34 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
91. 
Excepting  every  fifth  day,  at  the  appearance  of  the 
Eazor  asterisxn,^*^  while  that  asterism  is  in  the  ascendant, 
and  at  the  appearance  of  asterisms  7,  5,  and  3,  reckoned 
from  the  date  of  one’s  birth — excepting  on  these,  one 
might  cut  off  his  beard :  beard-cutting  should  not  be  done 
during  war  or  while  spells  are  being  performed.^^ 
^  '92*  '■ 
Kings  who  do  the  things  stated  above,  having  con- 
quered their  enemies,  will  enjoy  sovereignty  for  a   long 
time  over  the  earth,  even  to  the  verge  of  the  ocean. 
Happy  in  their  prosperity,  there  will  be  the  advancement 
of  religion.  Having  great  happiness  by  being  established 
in  the  Scriptures,  they  will  attain  the  eternal  rest. 
93* 
Just  as  a   gardener  always  waters  a   good  fruit-bearing 
tree  and  cuts  down  one  having  branches  old  or  overgrown, 
This  is  known  as  Kattihd  (Sk. 
KrittiM),  the  first  of  the  lunar 
asterisms,  according  to  Buddhist 
astronomy.  It  con.sists  of  six  stars 
figured  as  a   razor,  and  corresponds 
nearly  with  the  Pleiades.  For  the 
Indian  divisions  of  the  zodiac,  see 
Colebrooke’s  “   Essays,”  vol.  ii.,  chap, 
xiv.  For  remarks  on  the  Indian 
system  of  astronomy,  see  also 
Weber’s  "   History  of  Indian  Litera- 
ture,''  pp.  246-264.  There  are  seve- 
ral astronomical  and  astrological 
works  found  in  Burma,  which  are 
either  translations  of  or  adapted 
from  Sanskrit  books.  The  Laghu- 
gmlia  and  Suriyasiddhanta  are 
among  the  most  popular.  Learned 
Brahmans,  entertained  by  the  court 
of  Ava,  have,  from  time  to  time, 
been  instrumental  in  giving  the 
Burmese  the  bulk  of  their  scientific 
literature.  During  the  latter  half 
of  the  eighteenth  century  about 
sixty  works  were  translated  from 
the  Sanskrit  by  the  great  scholar 
Maungdaung-sayadaw  andj  others, 
and  are  known  as  the  Byctkamim, 
the  first  of  the  series  being  the 
Sarasvatt  Yydhamna^  a   well-known 
Sanskrit  grammar. 
In  order  to  deviate  the  course 
of  harma  by  artificial  means  {yatrd 
Jcale).  The  Y atra  practice  is  common 
in  Burma.  When  a   man,  for  in- 
stance, is  very  sick  and  his  death  is 
anticipated,  his  friends  and  relatives 
try  to  'ward  it  off  by  finding  a   sub- 
stitute in  a   dummy  formed  from  a 
plantain  tree  or  otherwise,  shaped 
as  much  as  possible  like  a   human 
being.  The  improvised  dummy  is 
then  put  into  a   coffin  and  all  cus- 
tomary funeral  rites  are  performed 
over  it.  By  so  doing,  it  is  believed 
that  the  sick  man’s  life  will  be 
spared.  Other  practices,  similar  in 
character,  are  also  resorted  to  for 
various  purpose^. 


--- PAGE 163 ---
RljANtTL  135 
crooked,  dry,  and  trailing,  so  should  a   king,  who  resembles 
a   gardener,  ever  bear  this  in  mind. 
94~9S- 
A   gardener  should  carefully  plant  a   twig  that  has  been 
thrown  away ;   he  should  break  off  the  flowers  in  bloom, 
allow  the  small  plants  to  develop,  cause  very  erect  ones 
to  bend,  those  too  much  inclined  to  he  made  more  erect ; 
he  should  remove  the  bark  from  trees  that  are  too  green : 
a   tree  being  small,  he  should  plant  thorny  shrubs  on  the 
outside;  he  should  cherish  lovingly  one  that  is  in  a 
thriving  condition :  a   king,  the  cherisher  of  a   kingdom, 
should  take  delight  in  his  realm,  just  as  a   good  gardener 
takes  delight  in  a   garden. 
96. 
The  king  should  have  ministers  who  are  nobly  descended, 
pure,  brave,  learned,  amicable,  and  well  versed  in  the  Mti/"^ 
97. 
He  is  spoken  of  as  a   good  minister  who  is  learned, 
virtuous,  and  brave,  industrious,  accustomed  to  be  vic- 
torious, and  powerful,  who  is  not  covetous,  has  an  amiable 
appearance,  and  is  perfect  in  his  organs. 
98. 
A   king  governing  a   kingdom  having  deliberated  sepa- 
rately with  his  ministers,  should  subsequently,  after  assem- 
bling them,  follow  a   counsel  which  has  been  well  con- 
sidered.^® 
99* 
The  king  should  find  out  from  wise  men  a   thing  he 
does  not  understand;  by  removing  doubt  and  making 
comparisons  by  means  of  his  own  wisdom,  he  should 
show  the  various  advantages  of  his  deliberation.  ^ 
Mamii  \1l.  54 ;  Eitojpade$d,  iii.  iS. 
33  Manii,  vii.  57. 


--- PAGE 164 ---
136  NITI  LITERA  TURE  OF  B   URMA . 
100. 
The  king  who  always  decides  well  is  a   perfect  ruler ;   he 
is  more  powerful  than  his  enemies ;   he  never  suffers  ruin. 
101. 
One  who  ministers  to  a   king  should  prevent  him  from 
the  commission  of  evil,  should  advance  his  prosperity,  and 
should  not  reveal  what  ought  to  be  concealed ;   he  should 
show  forth  his  good  qualities ;   in  an  emergency  he  should 
not  forsake  him;  he  should,  on  suitable  occasions,  give 
him  what  should  be  given :  the  wise  say  that  these  are 
the  good  characteristics  of  an  attendant. 
102. 
The  forming  of  friendship  is  easy,  but  difficult  it  is  to 
keep  it  up ;   a   wise  king  should,  therefore,  contract  friend- 
ship with  both  rich  and  poor. 
103. 
He  should  bestow  on  a   friend  suitable  gifts ;   in  time  of 
adversity  he  should  keep  up  his  friendship;  not  being 
forgetful  of  him  when  occasions  of  friendship  present 
themselves,  the  king  derives  extensive  benefits. 
104. 
Until  a   favourable  occasion  has  not  arrived,  one  should 
carry  his  enemy  on  his  shoulders ;   the  time  having  come, 
he  should  dash  him  to  pieces  as  a   
jar  on  a   rock.^^ 
105. 
The  king  who  knows  the  horoscope  of  a   brother  king 
and  strives  to  learn  his  own  with  reference  to  his  strength 
and  merits,  he  should  engage  in  war ;   doing  so,  he  will 
always  conquer. 
106. 
He  should  organise  a   campaign,  having  discovered  all 
See  stanza  212  of  BhammanUi 


--- PAGE 165 ---
rAjanItl  137 
favourable  circumstances  in  connection  with  himself,  the 
great  loss  that  his  enemy  is  capable  of  suffering,  and  the 
weakness  of  an  enemy  or  of  an  ally. 
107. 
The  constellation  being  propitious,  by  paying  honour  to 
the  Three  Eatanas^^  and  bestowing  bounties  upon  the 
soldiery,  the  fighting  becomes  effective. 
108. 
A   king  is  capable  of  conquering  the  whole  earth  if  he 
have  elephants,  horses,  and  weapons,  chariots,  infantry, 
and  treasures  of  every  kind. 109. 
The  king  being  wealthy  who  exalts  and  degrades  accord- 
ing to  people's  deserts,  he  escapes  everything — ^anger, 
anxiety,  fear,  covetousness,  misfortune,  and  the  loss  of  his 
lands. 
no. 
Therefore  with  great  zeal  should  a   king  amass  wealth 
by  this  is  his  safety  secured. 
111. 
He  should  overcome  an  enemy  by  concord,  a   coward  by 
dissension,  one  avaricious  by  a   gift,  a   weak  person  by 
punishment.^® 
1 12. 
He  who,  having  elephants,  horses,  wealth,  and  forces,  is 
satisfied,  does  not  engage  in  war,  another  subjugates  him. 
Those  on  the  border  having  raised  a   rebellion,  plunder 
B^iddlia^  his  law^  and  the  priest-  to  be  nncertain.  By  conciliation,  by 
hood.  bribes, by  dissension — by  these  means, 
Hitopadesa,  iii.  42,  43,  has ;  either  combined  or  separately,  on# 
One  should  strive  to  conquer  ene-  should  strive  to  overcome  enemies  ; 
naies,  not  by  war,  because  the  vie-  'never  by  war.’*  See  also  “Insti- 
tory  between  two  cfmbatants  is  seen  tutes  of  Manu,”  vii.  19S--200. 


--- PAGE 166 ---
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
the  wealth  of  the  country.  One  acquainted  with  the  Mti 
causes  them  to  come  into  his  territory. 
1 14. 
A   crow  coining  at  night  to  an  owl’s  habitation,  dies ;   an 
owl  coming  during  the  day  to  the  crow’s,  also  dies;  a 
crocodile  dies  coming  on  land,  a   tiger  coming  into  the 
water. 
IS- 
: 
Thus  a   king,  not  knowing  the  country  and  the  proper 
time  for  battle,  makes  war.  He,  arriving  in  the  enemy’s 
kingdom  and  being  deficient  in  forces,  should  bear  in 
mind  the  words  of  the  wise. 
1 16. 
He  should  not,  being  intoxicated  with  pride,  despise  the 
enemy,  thinking  he  will  be  overcome ;   he  should  not  relax 
his  efforts — he  should  always  be  diligent. 
117. 
Verily  small  enemies  are  like  fire-poison.  The  ram- 
pant elephant  on  the  difficult  mountain  paths,  although 
he  has  the  strength  of  ten  thousand  soldiers,  is  subdued 
by  men :  being  tied  to  a   post,  he  rids  himself  of  the  tern- 
poral  juice. 
118. 
The  king  should  rule,  first  of  all  having  constructed  a 
fort,  surrounded  it  with  a   rampart,  and  provided  it  fully 
with  weapons,  projectiles,  and  other  munitions  of  wavP 
1 19. 
He  should  then  maintain  guards  as  vigilant  as  himself, 
“A  little  fire  bums  up  an  en-  high  rampart,  having  engines,  watei', 
^tire  forest  by  gaining  shelter  in  if  and  rock,  with  the  protection  of  a 
— Mahahltdrata^  i.  5553*  river,  a   desert,  and  a   forest.” — ■ 
He  should  construct  a,  jfort  JTitopadesa^  iii.  55.  See  Manu^  vii. 
with  a   great  moat,  surrounded  by  a   70-76  ;   YUlmuf'i.ii.  6, 


--- PAGE 167 ---
rAjanItl  139 
elephants,  horses,  physicians,  carpenters,  Brahmans,  and 
learned  men. 
120. 
A   king  desiring  to  fight  with  another  king  should  not 
go  to  war  with  a   soldier  who  is  covetous  and  evil-minded, 
cowardly,  devoid  of  strength,  and  having  no  virtue. 
121-122. 
Being  properly  cognisant  of  the  enemy’s  strength  and 
the  strength  of  his  own  army,  the  S^mya,  Bheda,  and 
Dana  stratagems,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  country,  a 
king  should  employ  the  S^mya  stratagem  against  one 
on  an  equality  with  himself,  the  Bheda  against  a   brave 
warrior,  and  the  D^na  stratagem  against  one  who  is 
covetous ;   all  others  he  should  overcome  by  fighting.^^ 
123. 
Of  the  six  qualities,  first  of  all  generosity  is  termed 
sandhigiimi ;  not  realising  its  value  is  termed  viggahaguna  ; 
the  non-possession  of  both  these  is  dmnagnna;  marching 
with  all  the  necessaries  of  war  is  ydnagiina ;  going  with 
half  an  army  is  called  dvidhdguna  ;  having  to  depend  upon 
t]xQ  mQmj  is  smigaguna, 
124. 
The  root  of  the  kingly  tree  is  the  treasure,  the  earth  is 
the  branch.  What  can  a   king  do  without  wealth  ?  He  is 
like  a   bird  without  wings. 
125. 
As  to  one  desirous  of  appearing  pleasant  and  beautiful 
the  eye  is  a   source  of  excellence,  so  should  a   king  by 
watchfulness  increase  his  property,  income,  carefulness, 
and  prosperity. 
Conciliation.  ^ 
 By  giving  money  or  by  bribery. 
Creating  disj|ension  (by  setting  See  Manu,  vii.  107,  loS,  198, 
some  claimant  to  the  throne).  199,  200. 


--- PAGE 168 ---
140 
NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
126. 
A   king  keeps  watch,  over  his  country  against  thieves, 
favourites,  and  people  of  low  quality ;   he  should  then  keep 
a   guard  over  the  revenues  of  the  country :  a   king  should 
keep  a   careful  watch  over  these  four. 
127. 
A   king  in  his  domain  should  not  exact  a ‘tax  in  excess 
of  what  is  customary;  if  he  does,  there  is  the  dissatisfac- 
tion of  the  people  and  the  diminution  of  the  treasure. 
128. 
To  a   king  there  is  a   good  result  if  his  army  is  marched 
to  battle  in  autumn  or  during  the  rains :  certain  wise 
men  have  said  that  there  cannot  always  be  victory  nor 
always  defeat.^^ 
129. 
If  there  be  the  destruction  of  an  enemy,  it  is  productive 
of  merit :  this  destruction  of  the  enemy  is  a   source  of 
general  happiness  to  the  king. 
X30. 
If  the  king's  destiny  be  bad,  he  should  send  to  the  wars 
a   minister  with  good  fate  for  the  destruction  of  the  enemy ; 
if  good,  he  should  not  abandon  his  own  prosperity:  when 
an  elephant  is  discovered,  what  need  searching  for  its  foot- 
marks ? 
131- 
Men  of  distinction,  although  they  do  not  try,  obtain 
their  wishes  promptly  when  the  time  arrives,  just  as  boa- 
constrictors  without  effort  come  upon  the  place  where 
food  is  to  be  obtained. 
“   Let  a   king  go  on  an  expedi- 
tion in  the  clear  month  Mdrgayirsha 
(November),  or  about  the  two  months 
jphaiguna  and  Caitra  (February  and 
March),  according  to  his  forces.” — 
Institutes  of  Manu,  vh.  182. 
See  note  to  stanza  3  :  ‘‘Victory 
between  two  comKitants  is  seen  to 
be  uncertain.” 


--- PAGE 169 ---
RAjfANtTL  141 
13^- 
Many  people,  although  they  strive  much,  are  not  suc- 
cessful in  obtaining  unripe  fruits  placed  in  an  inaccessible 
place;  when  the  fruit  falls  of  itself  and  is  got  without 
trouble,  it  is  full  of  juice  and  is  eaten  with  pleasure. 
Hearing  the  admonition  of  the  wise,  paying  attention 
to  good  words,  receiving  education,  retaining  knowledge, 
looking  on  both  sides, 
comprehending  the  meaning,  un- 
derstanding its  purport — these  are  seven  characteristics  of 
the  wise. 
134- 
A   rampant  elephant,  powerful  and  possessed  of  noble 
qualities,  although  alone,  destroys  a   whole  army ;  a   king, 
victorious  among  elephants,  is  like  the  driver's  hook; 
therefore  is  he  known  to  be  stronger  than  an  elephant. 
135- 
A   wise  king  should  acquire  knowledge  for  the  purpose 
of  keeping  control;  he  should  practise  restraint  for  vir- 
tue's sake:  to  attain  Nibb^n  he  should  follow  the  pre- 
cepts, and  for  almsgiving  and  personal  sustenance  he 
should  accumulate  wealth. 
136. 
A   king  who  bears  in  mind  this  treatise,^®  he,  by  knowing 
the  devices  for  the  conquest  of  enemies  and  by  being  free 
from  anxiety,  overcomes  the  whole  earth  and  enjoys  the 
bliss  of  heaven. 
Behind  and  before.  have  prevailed  in  their  court  seem 
Burmese  kings,  as  a   rule,  com-  to  be  influenced  by  many  of  the 
mit  the  whole  of  this  Niti  to  memory,  sentiments  which  are  found  in 
and  several  of  the  practices  which  this  treatise. 


--- PAGE 170 ---
TV.— THE  SUTTAVADDHANANITI} 
l. 
The  thinking  of  a   had  thought,  the  uttering  of  a   bad 
speech,  and  the  doing  of  a   bad  deed, — this  is  the  charac- 
teristic of  a   fool. 
. 
 .  , 
 .  . 
 , 
 2.  , 
 ,  , 
 . 
The  thinking  of  a   good  thought,  the  uttering  of  a 
good  speech,  and  the  doing  of  a   good  deed, — this  is  the 
characteristic  of  a   wise  man. 
.  3. 
Eyen  if  there  be  no  one  to  depend  upon,  one  should 
not  depend  upon  a   fool :  a   fool,  indeed,  like  an  enemy 
with  a   sword  in  his  hand,  leads  one  to  destruction. 
4- 
If  occasion  arise,  one  should  depend  upon  a   wise  man : 
like  a   dear,  loving  relative,  a   wise  man  does  not  lead  one 
to  destruction. 
.  s. 
The  mango-tree,  yielding  sweet  fruit, ^  
grew  bitter  once 
^  This  anthology  was  compiled  It  is  a   collection  of  maxims  from 
and  translated  into  'Burmese  by  Sad-  Buddhistic  sources  chiefly. 
Chammanandimahathera  of  Ghaun-  ^  Reference  is  here  made  to  the 
kauk  in  Upper  Burma.  JSiittamd-  story  of  the  mango  -   tree  in  the 
dhananiti  signifies  the  “Guide  for  Dadkmihanajdtaka,  a   fairy  tale  in 
the  Advancement  of  Knowledge.”  JdiahatthakatM^L  4. 


--- PAGE 171 ---
THE  SUTTAVADDHANANITL  143 
upon  a   time  by  commingling  with  useless  plants ;   
^  why 
not '  living  beings  ?   
^ 
®  Nimha  ?{,i[i6.paggavalU,  the  useless 
plants  which  destroyed  the  mango - 
tree.  The  story  is  as  follows : — 
‘‘One  day  while  casting  nets  and 
creels  in  the  river  for  sport,  a   celestial 
ainba  (mango)  fruit  coming  from  the 
Kannaniunda  lake,  stuck  in  the  net. 
Those  who  cast  the  net,  when  they 
saw  it,  gave  it  to  the  king.  It  was 
a   large  golden  ball  of  the  size  of  a 
bowl.  The  king  asked  the  fores- 
ters, ‘   Of  what  tree  is  this  the  fruit  ?  
’ 
Having  learned  that  it  was  an  amba 
fruit,  he  enjoyed  it,  planted  its  stone 
in  his  garden,  and  caused  it  to  be 
watered  with  milk-water.  The  tree 
having  sprung  up,  bore  fruit  in  the 
third  year.  Great  honour  was  paid 
to  the  amba-tree.  They  sprinkle  it 
with  milk -water,  they  give  it  five 
fingers  full  of  perfume,  they  surround 
it  with  garlands,  they  light  a   lamp 
with  perfumed  oil.  Its  covering, 
fm’thermore,  was  of  silk  and  coarse 
cloth.  Its  fruits  were  sweet  and 
golden.  King  Dadhivahana,  send- 
ing the  fi'uit  to  other  kings,  from 
fear  that  a   tree  might  grow  up  from 
the  stone,  sent  them  after  having 
first  pierced  with  a   manclu  thorn  the 
place  where  the  sprout  should  spring 
forth.  When,  after  eating  the  amba, 
they  planted  the  stone,  it  would  not 
thrive.  They  asking,  ‘  What  is  the 
reason  of  it?’  learned  the  cause. 
Then  one  of  the  kings  called  his 
gardener  and  asked  him,  ‘  Wilt  thou 
be  able  to  destroy  the  sweetness  of 
King  Badhivilhana’s  amba  fruits  and 
make  them  bitter?’  and  when,  he 
answered,  ‘Yes,  sire  V   he  sent  him 
away,  after  giving  him  a   thousand 
pieces  of  silver,  saying,  ‘Go,  then 
He  -went  to  Baifuiasi  and  caused  it 
to  be  reported  to  the  king,  ‘A 
gardener  has  come  ;  
’  and  being  sum- 
moned by  him,  and  having  entered 
and  saluted  the  king,  he  was  asked, 
‘  Art  thou  a   gardener  ?  
’  and  having 
said,  ‘Yes,  sire  I   enlarged  upon 
his  ability.  The  king  said,  ‘  Go  and 
stay  with  our  gardener,’  These  two 
persons  henceforth  tend  the  garden. 
The  newly  arrived  gardener,  causing 
flowers  to  bloom  and  fruits  to  be 
gathered  put  of  season,  made  the 
garden  charming.  The  king  being 
pleased  with  him,  having  discharged 
the  old  gardener,  gave  him  the 
charge  of  the  garden.  ITe  finding 
the  garden  in  his  hands,  sowed 
nimbas  and  paggavallis  round  the 
amba-tree.  Gradually  the  nimbas 
grew  up.  Their  roots  and  branches 
were  united  and  variously  connected 
together.  By  this  union  with  what 
was  disagreeable  and  sour,  the  sweet- 
fruited  amba  at  last  beaeme  bitter, 
with  a   taste  like  that  of  the  niinba 
leaf.  Having  discovered  that  the 
amba  fruits  had  become  bitter,  the 
gardener  ran  away.  Hadhivahana, 
having  gone  into  the  garden,  on 
eating  an  amba  fruit,  but  not  being 
able,  to  get  down  the  juice  of  the 
amba,  which  had  entered  his  mouth, 
because  it  was  like  that  of  the  dis- 
gusting nimba,  hawked  and  spat. 
At  that  time  Bodhisatta  was  his  ad- 
monitor.  The  king  having  invited 
Bodhisatta,  on  asking  him,  ‘  O 
learned  man  !   of  the  usual  care  be- 
stowed upon  this  tree  nothing  has 
been  omitted,  still  its  fruit  has  be- 
come bitter ;   what  is  the  cause  of 
this  ?  
’  he  recited  the  first  stanza — 
*  This  amba-tree  was  formerly  en- 
dowed with  colour,  smell,  and 
flavour  ; 
Obtaining  such  a   culture,  Why 
has  this  amba  bitter  fruit  ?  
’ 
Then  telling  him  the  cause  of  it, 
Bodhisatta  recited  the  second 
stanza—— 
‘Thy  amba,  0   Badhivdhana,  is 
surrounded  by  nimbas  ; 
The  root  of  one  is  united  with  the 
root  of  the  other, 
The  branches  of  one  embrace  the 
branches  of  the  other ; 


--- PAGE 172 ---
144  NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
6. 
If  one  not  doing  evil  associates  with  one  who  does, 
he  is  suspected  of  evil  and  undergoes  disgrace.^ 
7r 
The  man  who  wraps  putrid  flesh  with  sacrificial  grass  ® 
finds  that  the  grass  itself  emits  a   fetid  odour;  even  such 
is  the  case  by  association  with  a   fooL 
8. 
The  man  who  wraps  the  taggam  with  the  paldsa  finds 
that  the  leaves  themselves  emit  a   fragrance ;   even  such 
is  the  case  hy  association  with  the  learnedJ 
9- 
A   man  deteriorates  who  associates  with  one  who  is 
vile ;   associating  with  an  equal  ever  prevents  deteriora- 
tion ;   a   wise  man  who  associates  with  one  more  exalted 
progresses ;   serve,  therefore,  one  who  is  superior  to  one- 
self. 
10. 
One  who  seizes  the  property  of  another,  one  who  is 
By  reason  of  its  connection  with  33.  A   passage  in  the  MahdhJulmta 
the  bad,  says  that  a   person  acquires  the  char- 
Therefore  the  amba  has  bitter  acter  of  him  with  whom  he  associ- 
fruit.’  ates,  just  as  a   cloth  becomes  tinged 
The  king,  having  heard  hia  words,  brought  into 
caused  all  the  nimbas  and  paggavallis  contact  with  it. 
to  be  cut  off  and  their  roots  to  be  South- Indian  proverb  says, 
eradicated,  the  sour  earth  entirely  to  , 
 drink  milk  under  a   date- 
be  carried  away  and  sweet  earth  to  toddy.  ^ 
be  brought  to  it,  and  the  amba  to  ^ 
 cpiosuroules.  It  is 
be  tended  with  milk- water,  sugar-  frequently  referred  to  as  the  grass  of 
;water,  and  fragrant  water.  By  the  was  customary  for 
union  with  sweet  juices  it  again  be-  Brahmans  before  reading  the  Vedas, 
came  sweet.”  —   FaushdWs,  *  The 
Jdtakas'’  hands  by  rubb^g  them  with  it. 
.  ^“Evil  communications  corrupt  See  « Institutes  of  Manu,”  Bk.  ii. 
'  good  manners.” — I  Coiinthiam  xv.  Lokamti^  40, 


--- PAGE 173 ---
THE  SUTTAVADDHANANtTL 
hypocritical,  a   subservient  friend,  a   friend  who  brings 
destruction, — one  should  shun  these  four. 
II. 
A   friend  who  supports  you,  who  is  alike  in  adversity 
or  prosperity,  who  speaks  about  your  welfare,  and  one 
who  is  compassionate, — one  should  associate  with  these 
four. 
12. 
A   wise  man  does  not  utter  any  and  everything  that 
rises  to  his  lips,  as  if  the  mouth  were  for  the  purpose  alone 
of  eating  and  of  talking. 
13- 
A   wise  man  should  give  utterance  to  speech  of  four 
kinds, — good  speech,  right  speech,  loving  speech,  and 
truthful  speech. 
14. 
One  should  speak  refined  language ;   for  civilised  people 
I 
  
make  use  of  suitable  speech,  saying  Brother  ’’  to  him 
who  is  like  a   brother,  and  Father  ”   to  one  who  is  like  a 
father. 
IS- 
One  should  give  expression  to  what  is  pleasant,  not, 
indeed,  to  what  is  bad:  giving  expression  to  what  is 
pleasant  is  good;  a   person  grieves  giving  utterance  to 
what  is  bad. 
16. 
One  ought  to  speak  what  is  pleasant ;   never  should  he  • 
speak  what  is  unpleasant:  unpleasant  utterances  are 
harsh  even  to  blutes. 


--- PAGE 174 ---
146 
NlTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
17* 
Indeed,  in  former  times,  the  ox  IsTandivisala  overcame 
by  a   thousand  the  Brahman  who  spoke  in  a   displeasing 
way.^ 
18. 
Ignorance  is  displeasing ;   a   man,  verily,  of  little  know- 
ledge does  not  really  know  what  should  or  should  not  be 
spoken, 
19-20, 
In  former  times,  a   Brahman,  on  one  of  his  two  oxen 
dying,  having  learnt  repeatedly  during  one  year  the  way 
of  making  a   request,  on  his  having  to  ask  the  king, 
“   Give  me  one  ox,'’  spoke  differentlyj  saying,  Take  one.”  ^ 
.21. 
It  is  said,  besides,  that  a   fool,  from  ignorance,  is  afraid 
of  what  does  not  occasion  fear;  a   worm  and  also  a   
jay,  a 
heron  and  Dhammika  Brahman  — these,  who  comprise 
®  Gotama  in  a   previons  existence 
was  a   bull  known  as  ISTandivisttla. 
He  came  into  the  possession  of  a 
Brahman,  and,  in  order  to  do  his 
master  a   kindness,  he  one  day 
asked  him  to  make  a   bet  of  a   thou- 
sand that  his  bull  would  move  a 
hundred  carts  well  laden.  The  bet 
w^as  made  with  a   squire.  A   hun- 
dred carts  were  laden  with  sand, 
stones,  &c.  When  Nandivisala  Was 
yoked  to  the  foremost  cart,  he  was 
ruged  on  by  the  Brahman  with 
shouts  of  “brute’*  and  “wretch.’* 
This  made  him  stubborn,  and  he 
would  not  move  an  inch.  The 
Brahman  lost  his  bet,  but  when  he 
came  to  know  that  it  was  on  account 
.   of  the  harsh  language  he  employed, 
‘  he  commenced  to  speak  to  the 
animal  in  sweeter  tones.  At  the 
instance  of  the  bull,  he  then  laid  a 
wager  of  two  thousand.  A   hundred 
carts  were  laden  as  before,  and 
Nandivisala  was  yoked  to  the  fore- 
most. W'hen  he  was  urged  on  this 
time,  his  master  used  the  expressions, 
“Go  on,  my  beauty,”  “Brag  them, 
my  beauty  ;   
”   and  so  giving  a   vigo- 
rous pull,  he  won  the  wager.  See 
Jdtalca,  Bk.  i.  28. 
^  The  reference  here  is  to  the 
story  of  Laiudayi,  the  simpleton,  to 
be  found  in  the  Somadatta  JdtaJca, 
The  moral  of  the  legend  is  that  nc* 
amount  of  training  will  make  uj)  for 
a   want  of  brains.  Lriluciayi  was  for 
one  year  taught  by  his  father  how 
to  ask  for  an  ox  from  the  king,  yet, 
when  he  went  to  make  the  request, 
he  lost  his  presence  of  mind,  and 
spoke  in  a   contrary  way.  See 
Jdtaha^  Bk.  ii.  7. 
Dhammika  Brahman  was  a 
heretical  teach-^*,  to  whom  reference 
is  often  made  in  Buddhist  writings. 


--- PAGE 175 ---
THE  S   UTTA  VADDHA  NA  NITL  1 47 
the  four  foolish  beings,  fear  what  they  should  not  be 
afraid  of. 
22. 
The  fourteenth  day  of  the  dark  half  of  a   month,  a 
dense  forest,  an  overclouded  sky,  and  midnight — these 
are  the  four  kinds  of  darkness :  darkness,  however  great 
each  of  these  is,  an  ignorant  man  is  darker  still. 
23. 
An  ignorant  man  does  not  free  himself  from  suffering, 
being  like  a   log  in  (the  ocean  of)  transmigration ;   there- 
fore two  kinds  of  worldlings  have  been  spoken  of  by 
Gotama,  the  kinsman  of  the  sun, — one  a   worldling  who 
is  Umcl,  and  the  other  a   worldling  who  is  intelligent. 
By  the  eye  of  “   mental  clearness  ”   one  sees  an  object 
i   to  be  plain  and  unconcealed — he  sees  nothing  else ;   by 
I   the  eye  of  knowledge  he  sees  everything  without  doubt. 
It  is  true  that  an  officer,  going  in  search  of  gain,  saved 
from  suffering  a   Brahman  who  ,  was  returning  (home), 
having  known,  by  his  wisdom,  that  a   snake,  from  the 
smell  of  flour-cake,  had  entered  into  the  (alms)  bag  (of 
the  Brahman),  , 
Such  a   person  is  very  often  com-  stance,  Vishnu  severed  his  liead  and 
pared  to  an_  eclipse  caused  by  Eahu.  throat  from  the  rest  of  his  body. 
The  latter,  in  ancient  mythology,  is  He  is  supposed  to  wreak  vengeanct; 
represented  as  a   demon  who  drank  upon  them  by  periodically  swallow- 
part  of  the  nectar  obtained  by  iiig  them  up.  See  J)hamminnt§^ 
churning  the  ocean.  The  sun  and  stanza  351. 
moon  having  revealed  the  circum-  Pasadacakkhiina. 


--- PAGE 176 ---
148 
NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
26. 
Of  the  four  lights — the  lights  of  wisdom,  the  sun,  the 
moon,  and  fire— the  light  of  wisdom  is,  in  point  of 
power^  the  greatest,  as  declared  by  the  most  exalted 
Buddha. 
27. 
There  are  four  kinds  of  Buddhas,”  namely,  the 
? omniscient  ‘"Buddha,”  the  secondary 
“Buddha,”  the 
“Buddha”  acquainted  with  the  four  truths, 
and  the 
“   Buddha  ”   who  is  full  of  learning :  a   man  who  is  full 
of  knowledge  is  also  a   “   Buddha,” 
28: 
Knowledge  is  an  excellent  thing,  and  so  is  wisdom ; 
the  virtues  are  seven  (in  number) — faith,  religious  prac- 
tice, knowledge,  liberality,  wisdom,  modesty,  and  fear  of 
sin. 
29. 
The  seven  good  things  also  are  faith,  modesty,  fear  of 
sinning,  great  knowledge,  energy,  caution,  and  wisdom. 
30. 
These  are  said  to  be  the  seven  gems — gold,  silver,  pearl, 
sapphire,  cat's-eye,  diamond,  and  coral. 
31- 
They  say  that  the  ten  precious  things  are  silver,  gold, 
ruby,  &a,  cat's-eye,  pearl,  oyster-shell,  coral,  crystal,  and 
Or  Paccekabuddha.  lend  to  by  the  destruction  of  passion  ; 
The  Cattdri  ariyasaccdni,  or  fand  (4)  a   life  of  holiness  leads  to  the 
:“Pour  Truths,”  which  form  the  -destruction  of  passion.  Each  of  these 
'  Kasis  of  the  Buddhist  religion,  are :  is  capable  of  comprehensive  appli- 
j 
  
( i)  Existence  is  suffering ;   (2)  human  cations,  and  is  made  the  foundation 
passion  is  the  cause  of  human  suf-  of  a   great  deal  doctrinal  discus- 
I  fering ;  (3)  existence  may  be  put  an  sion. 


--- PAGE 177 ---
THE  SUTTAVADDHANANITL  149 
the  variegated  rubies  (ix,,  the  spotted  ruby  and  the  red 
ruby). 
32. 
The  learned  declare  that  as  the  moon  is  more  excellent 
than  all  the  heavenly  bodies, .  even'  so  is  wisdom  (than 
all  other  acquirements)  ;   virtuous  practice,  glory,  and 
goodness  follow  in  the  wake  of  those  who  are  wise. 
33* 
Even  if,  during  his  whole  lifetime,  a   foolish  man 
attends  upon  one  who  is  learned,  he  knows  not  his  duty, 
just  as  a   (wooden)  spoon  perceives  not  the  flavour  of  the 
curry  gravy. 
■■■  '34.'  
• 
But  if  a   wise  man  attend  upon  a   wise  man  only  for  a 
moment,  he  soon  knows  his  duty,  as  the  tongue  the  flavour 
of  the  curry  gravy. 
35- 
Eight  things  have  been  declared  by  Buddha,  the  relative 
of  the  sun,  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  hearing  of  the  True 
I   
Law,  namely,  a   foreign  country,  existence  in  the  formless 
existence  in  the  ^mco7zscious  state^  defective  members 
(of  the  body),  false  doctrine,  being  a   brute,  being  a   spirit, 
and  existence  in  hell. 
3<5~37- 
General  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  the  Dhainmatiiats, 
arithmetic,  architecture,  knowledge  of  the  Niti,  knowledge 
of  the  Vyakarana,  music  and  poetry,  calculation  by  the 
fingers,  the  use  of  bows  and  arrows,  the  Pur4nas,  medical 
Just  like  the  stars  accompany  of  the  Buddhistic  subdivisions  of  the 
the  moon.  ^ 
 world  of  sentient  beings. 
That  is,  in  the  ArH^alokat  one 


--- PAGE 178 ---
ISO  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  the  ItihasaS;  astrology,  the 
ait  of  circumventing,  versification,  diplomacy,  knowledge 
of  spells,  and  grammar — these  are  the  eighteen  arts  and 
sciences.^® 
38. 
A   wise  man  should  not  despise  as  trifling  these  four — 
a   nobleman,  a   snake,  fire,  and  a   priest. 
39* 
Besides  the  three  kinds  of  sons,  viz., ,  those  who  are 
superior  to,  those  who  are  inferior  to,  and  those  who  are 
on  an  equality  with  (their  fathers),  there  are  besides 
four  others — adopted  sons,  sons  begotten  of  slaves,  legi- 
timate sons,  and  i)npils. 
40. 
A   son  should  act  towards  his  parents  in  five  things — 
supporting  them,  doing  their  work,  maintaining  the  family, 
hearing  (parental)  admonitions,  and  making  offerings  to 
his  parents  wlieii  they  die. 
41. 
They — the  parents — should  attend  to  their  sons  in 
these  five  matters,  viz.,  preventing  them  from  doing  "what 
is  bad,  encouragement  in  doing  what  is  good,  giving  in- 
struction, contracting,  of  a   proper  marriage,  and  bestowing 
the  inheritance  (when  the  time  arrives). 
See  notes  on  corresponding  macy.’^  The  Burmese  rendering  of 
verses  in  Lolcaniti  and  BhammmiUL  these  two  stanzas  in  the  Buttavad- 
wliich  Trenckner,  in  his  Ma-  dlumanUi  is  slightly  different,  al- 
Irpdapanho,  renders  doubtfully  as  though  a   little  more  explicit,  than 
“logic,”  is,  in  the  Burmese  gloss,  what  is  found  in  the  other  NUis, 
explained  by  “   knowledge  regarding  Muddd  mcamna  of  Trenckner  is 
embassies,”  an  idea  somewhat  akin  given  as  Buddie racanena  in  the 
to  what  is  expressed  by  **  diplo-  Burmese  edition  of  Milindapanho, 


--- PAGE 179 ---
THE  SUTTA  VAppHANANlTL  151 
42. 
A   pupil  should  act  towards  teachers  in  these  five 
things — attending  upon  them,  looking  after  them,  hearing 
their  discourses,  feeding  them,  and  receiving  instruction 
properly  from  them. 
43- 
They — ^the  teachers — should  pay  attention  to  the  pupil 
in  these  five  points — complimenting  him,  allowing  him 
instruction,  admonishing  him,  training  him,  and  giving 
him  protection. 
44- 
A   husband  should  act  in  five  matters  towards  his  wife 
— speaking  sweetly  to  her,  not  despising  her,  not  taking 
another  wife,  allowing  her  control  (in  cooking,  &c.),  and 
supplying  her  wants. 
45- 
The  duty  of  a   wife  towards  a   husband  should  be 
observed  in  five  matters — punctuality,  entertaining  (rela- 
tives, &c.),  not  taking  another  husband,  protecting  the 
property,  and  being  skilful  and  assiduous. 
46. 
In  five  things  should  a   person  pay  regard  to  friends 
— loving  speech,  liberality,  looking  after  their  interests, 
seeking  their  prosperity,  considering  them  like  himself. 
47- 
A   friend  should  pay  regard  to  individuals  in  five 
things — seeing  that  they  are  not  remiss,  looking  aiier 
their  property,  affording  protection  in  danger,  not  aban- 
doning them^  and  offering  them  presents,  &c. 


--- PAGE 180 ---
152 
NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
48. 
A   master  should  pay  attention  to  his  servant  in  five 
things — allowing  him  to  work  up  to  his  abilities,  sup- 
porting him,  looking  after  him,  giving  gifts,  and  giving 
leave* 
49* 
A   servant  should  do  his  duty  towards  his  master  in 
five  things — working  well,  showing  gratitude,  sleeping 
after  his  master,  rising  before  him,  and  taking  what  is 
given  him. 
50. 
An  individual  should  act  in  five  things  towards  priests, 
viz.,  liberality,  almsgiving,  regard  for  his  person,  regard 
for  his  speech,  and  regard  for  his  inward  feelings. 
SI- 
Priests  should  have  regard  to  individuals  in  six  things 
— preventing  evil,  encouraging  good,  wishing  for  the  wel- 
fare 'of  others,  giving  instruction,  making  them  cautious 
in  accepting  a   belief,  and  telling  them  of  the  sixfold 
heavenly  path.^^ 
52. 
Friendship  with  women  and  with  wicked  men  is  not 
befitting;  association  with  poison,  a   horned  animal,  a 
river,  disease,  and  a   royal  family  is  not  good.^® 
That  is,  the  path  leading  to  the  MitraMhlm^  iS,  has:  “Oonfi- 
six  Bevalokas  or  angel  worlds.  Bor  dence  should  never  be  placed  in 
th^various  duties  contained  in  stanzas  rivers,  in  those  holding  weapons, 
40-51,  see  Sigdlovdda  Sutta  (Grim-  in  those  with  claws  and  horns,  in 
blot’s  “Sept  Snttas  Palis”),  sum-  women,  and  in  kings’ families.’’ 
marised  in  Rhys  David’s  ^ 
dhism,”  p.  143. 


--- PAGE 181 ---
THE  SUTTAVADDHANANITL 
53* 
All  good  and  bad  men  are  distinguished  even  by  their 
attributes ;   in  the  eyes  of  those  wanting  in  discrimination 
no  difference  is  seen. 
54. 
Seven  times  is  the  destruction  by  fire  for  one  by 
water ;   on  the  sixty-fourth  occasion  the  time  for  destruc- 
tion by  air  arrives.'^^ 
55. 
Destruction  by  fire  is  below  the  Abhassara  heaven,  by 
water  below  the  Subhakinha;  destruction « by  air  below 
The  Buddhistic  doctrine  of  the 
world’s  destruction  and  reproduction 
is  peculiar.  The  moral  causes  which 
destroy  the  world  are  lust,  anger, 
and  ignorance,  and  the  physical 
forces  they  give  rise  to  in  bringing 
about  the  result  are  fire,  water,  and  , 
wind.  Intimation  is  given  of  the 
approaching  dissolution  a   hundred 
thousand  years  before  the  event  by 
angels  from  one  or  other  of  the  De- 
valokas.  At  the  same  time  they  urge 
upon  mankind  to  practise  vii'tue  and 
|jdo  such  deeds  as  will  ensure  their 
j 
  
safety  in  the  Kiipa  and  Arupa 
i   
worlds,  which  will  not  be  involved 
in  the  destruction  of  the  earth. 
When  destruction  by  fire  is  to  take 
place,  all  plants  and  vegetables  will 
perish  from  drought,  the  sun  and 
moon  will  cease  to  shine,  other  suns 
will  make  their  appearance  and  dry 
up  everything.  When  the  sixth  sun 
appears,  some  millions  of  islands  will 
open  and  send  forth  smoke  and 
flames.  Eventually  Mount  Meru, 
with  all  the  deva  worlds,  will  be 
consumed.  The  fire  will  cease  only 
when  all  matter  is  completely  de- 
voured by  the  fiames.  Periodically, 
heavy  and  continuous  showers  of  rain 
will  fall  and  destroy  the  world,  and 
the  destruction  may  also  be  brought 
about  by  wind  according  to  a   certain 
routine.  After  the  destruction  of 
the  world  takes  place  sixty-four 
times,  the  series  will. begin  again. 
The  following  is  the  general  plan  : — 
I.  II.  HI.  IV.  V.  VI.  VII.  vni. 
Destruction  by  fire,  74-7-f7  +   7-f7  +   7  +   7  +   7  =   S6) 
Destruction  by  water,  i-j-i-fi  +   i  +   i  +   I-M  =   7>=:64  times. 
Destruction  by  wind,  .  .  .  .  .  i  =   i  ) 
Eor  every  seven  times  the  world  is  ||  periodic  destruction  and  renovation 
destro^red  by  fire,  destruction  by  | 
  
of  the  world,  see  Hardy’s  ‘‘Manuajp 
water  takes  place  once  until  the  of  Buddhism,”  i.  12 ;  Bigandet’s 
eighth  occasion  of  the  destruction  “The  Legend  of  the  Burmese  Bud - 
by  fire  occurs.  It  then  destroyed  dha,”  vol.  i.  p,  22 ;   and  Sangermano’s 
by  wind.  For  details  regarding  the,  “   Burmese  Empire,”  v. 


--- PAGE 182 ---
154  NtTI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA, 
the  Vehapphala  heaven :   22 ,  thus  is  the  destruction  of  the 
world. 
56. 
One  part  should  be  used  in  enjoyment,  two  parts  in 
business,  a   fourth  should  be  put  by ;   it  will  answer  for 
emergencies. 
57. 
Benefits  slip  by  from  those  idlers  who  abandon  their 
work,  saying,  '"ITow  it  is  hot,”  “ITow  it  is  cold,”  “hTow 
it  is  very  dark.” 
58. 
He  who,  attending  to  his  avocations,  looks  upon  heat 
and  cold  as  of  no  greater  consequence  than  grass,  he  does 
not  diminish  his  prosperity. 
59* 
Patience,  ■watchfulness,  industry,  distributing  money, 
compassion,  precaution— these  are  the  qualities  of  a 
leader;  they  should  be  desired  by  one  wishing  for  his 
own  welfare. 
60. 
Noticing  the  diminution  of  collyrium,  the  increase  of 
ant-hills,  and  the  accumulation  of  honey,  a   wise  man 
should  accordingly  look  after  his  house.^^ 
61. 
Charity,  good  behaviour,  amiable  speech,  unselfishness — 
I   these  by  the  chief  sage  have  been  declared  the  ''  elements 
’  of  popularity.” 
The  cosmical  limits  of  the  de-  Destruction  by  water  reaches  the 
struction  by  fire,  water,  and  air  are  highest. 
here  given.  The  three  heavens  Compare  J^topacMay  ii,  S,  9. 
named  belong  to  the  Brahmaloka.  See  DharmnanUi,  267. 


--- PAGE 183 ---
THE  SUTTA  VADDHANANITL  1 55 
62. 
Charity,  virtue,  liberality,  rectitude,  gentleness,  devo- 
tion, good  temper,  humanity,  patience,  imobstructiveness — 
these,  the  ten  duties  of  a   king,  should  be  observed  without 
neglect.^^ 
<^3* 
A   wise  man,  full  of  discrimination,  brings  about  his 
benefit  by  a   small  means,  just  as  a   small  fire  by  blowing 
(causes  a   great  conflagration). 
64. 
A   wife  who  does  not  commit  violence,  one  who  is  like 
a   thief,  one  who  makes  herself  like  the  master,  one  like  a 
mother,  one  like  a   sister,  one  like  a   slave,  and  the  wife 
like  a   friend — these  are  said  to  be  the  seven  kinds  of 
wives.^^ 
65* 
A   female  at  eight  is  termed  “   Gori  ”   or ''  Dilrika; 
one  at 
the  age  of  twelve,  or  one  yet  a   virgin,  is  called  Kafifiya.” 
66. 
A   female  at  twelve  is  called  Kumari ''  or  ''  Kuin&rikfi;'' 
one  older  than  that  Yuvati  ”   or  “   Taruni.” 
67. 
A   woman  who  is  old  is  called  Theri  ”   or 
Mahallika : 
this  method  of  naming  should  be  duly  observed. 
See  stanza  266  of  DliammanUL  ‘^Maimal  of  Buddhism/* x.  i7,or 
Buttajpitakmh  (SigMovada  Sut-  diners  “   Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,”  iii. 
ta).  explanation  of  the  various  18. 
terms  used  in  this  stanza,  see  Hardy’s 


--- PAGE 184 ---
156 
Ntri  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 
68. 
A   -woman  like  a   murderer,  one  like  a   thief,  one  like  a 
master — these  are  said  to  be  bad  wives:  one  like  a 
mother,  one  like  a   sister,  one  like  a   slave,  and  one  like 
a   friend — these  four  are  said  to  be  good  wives. 
69. 
One  guarded  by  a   mother,  one  guarded  by  a   father, 
one  guarded  by  both  father  and  mother,  one  guarded  by 
a   brother,  one  guarded  by  a   sister,  one  guarded  by  rela- 
tives, one  guarded  by  one  of  the  same  clan,  one  guarded 
by  the  scriptures,  one  guarded  by  one  betrothed,  and  one 
who  is  punished  for  her  falling  away — :these  are  ten 
kinds  of  women  with  whom  no  liberty  should  be  taken. 
70. 
One  who  marries  of  her  own  wish,  one  obtained  by  the 
bestowal  of  property,  and  one  got  by  giving  apparel;  a 
wife  who  undergoes  the  water  ordeal, 
who  is  procured 
while  carrying  a   load,^^  a   slave,  a   wife  who  works  as  a 
servant,  a   captive  woman,  a   temporary  wife,  and  one 
bought  by  money — no  liberty  should  be  taken  with 
these  ten  also. 
71. 
He  who  through  love,  hate,  fear,  or  ignorance  trans- 
gresses what  is  right,  his  prosperity  declines  just  like 
the  moon  at  the  time  of  its  waning. 
Odapattahi.  The  symbolic  prac-  OropacumpaM.  Omipatafu  (or 
of  placing  the  hands  in  a   bowl  of  rather  cxmhatafti)  is  the  circular  roll 
^  water  is  referred  to.  As  the  particles  of  cloth  used  as  a   stand  for  a   vessel 
’  of  water  adhere  to  each  other,  so  or  heavy  weight  carried  on  the  head, 
j   should  the  union  between  husband  Vide  Jardine’s  ‘‘^otes  on  Buddhist 
^   
and  wife  be  permanent.  Law,’’  iii.  16. 


--- PAGE 185 ---
THE  SUTTA  VADDHANANITL  157 
7^2. 
He  who  does  not  transgress  what  is  right,  whether 
through  loye  or  hate,  or  fear  or  ignorance,  his  prosperity 
increases  like  the  moon  at  the  time  of  its  waning. 
73- 
Parents  are  spoken  of  as  the  east,  teachers  as  the 
f 
  
south,  wives  as  the  west,  and  friends  as  the  north ;   slaves 
and  servants  are  like  the  nadir ;   Eahans  and  Brahmans 
like  the  zenith.^^ 
The  author  of  this  anthology  the  performance  of  good  works  in  a 
closes  with  three  stanzas  having  re-  former  existence.” 
ference  to  himself.  They  are  : —   (3.)  The  seven  sudhammas  are, 
(a.)  “   By  this  my  merit  (in  writing  “Baith,  modesty,  fear  of  sinning, 
this  Niti)  may  I  attain  Nibb^n ;   learning,  energy,  intelligence,  and 
until  then,  may  I  always,  in  all  my  wisdom.’’ 
existences,  be  replete  -with  the  four  (6.)  “   May  I  be  born  in  a   family 
sampattis,  four  caJclxtSf  and  seven  altogether  pure  and  honoured,  es- 
sudhammas."'  Note —   teemed  and  exalted,  of  a   good  faith 
(l.)  The  four  smipattis  are,  ^^Kdla^  and  replete  with  wealth.” 
gati^  upddhi,  payogaT  (c.)  May  I  obtain  food,  clothing, 
(2.)  The  four  calclcas  are,  Living  and  wealth,  not  by  manual  labour, 
in  a   suitable  place,  association  with  but  my  supernatural  powei',  accord - 
good  men,  right  seif-regulation,  and  ing  to  my  desires.” 


--- PAGE 186 ---


--- PAGE 187 ---
APPENDIX. 


--- PAGE 188 ---


--- PAGE 189 ---
A  PPEKD II. 
A.— OLD  INDIAN  SAYINGS. 
[The  following  collection,  as  bearing  upon  parallel  pas- 
sages found  in  Burmese  literature,  was  made  a   few  years 
ago,  and  comprises  only  those  maxims  or  sentiments 
which,  by  their  pointedness  or  by  their  happiness  of  ex- 
pression, seemed  deserving  of  being  put  together  as  pearls 
upon  a   single  thread.] 
.  ■'i. ■■■■;■■■  
■ 
Better  one  accomplished  son  than  a   hundred  fools :   one 
moon  can  dispel  darkness;  not  so  a   myriad  stars. 
. 
.  2.  ■■ 
As  from  a   lump  of  clay  a   workman  produces  whatever  lie 
wishes,  so  a   man  obtains  the  destiny  prepared  by  himself. 
3- 
f   Deeds  are  accomplished  by  effort,  not  wishes :   deer, 
verily,  do  not  enter  into  the  mouth  of  a   sleeping  lion. 
So  long  as  a   fool  is  well-dressed  and  speaks  nothing, 
even  so  long  does  he  shine  in  an  assembly. 


--- PAGE 190 ---
APPENDIX. 
162 
S^- 
Glass  by  association  with  gold  acquires  an  emerald 
lustre  ;   by  association  with  the  good  a   fool  becomes  wise. 
6. 
Labour  bestowed  on  the  worthless  is  vain:  even  by  a 
hundred  efforts  a   crow  cannot  be  made  to  talk  like  a 
parrot. 
.   7- 
As  a   river  takes  a   brook  to  the  sea,  so  does  knowledge 
take  a   man  to  a   king. 
a 
As  the  heavens  acquire  light  from  the  moon,  so  does 
a   family  from  a   wise  son. 
9- 
Whosoever’s  name  is  not  written  with  the  pen  in  the 
enumeration  of  those  who  are  learned,  his  mother  is  called 
barren ;   and  those  who  have  not  obtained  praise  in  charity 
and  penance,  in  valour,  science,  and  the  acquisition  of 
property,  their  mothers  have  no  pleasure  in  them — they 
have  only  obtained  the  pain  of  giving  them  birth. 
10- 
Better  silence  far  than  speaking  ; 
Worse  are  kinsmen  oft  than  fire ; 
There’s  no  balm  like  friendly  counsel, 
There’s  no  enemy  like  ire. 
Eogues  have  keener  teeth  than  vipers  ; 
!   Brains  outweigh  the  miser’s  hoard ; 
Better  modesty  than  jewels, 
^ 
 Tuneful  lyre  than  kingly  sword.^ 
^  Tawney’s  Bharfcyihari’s  Nitkatakmfi, 


--- PAGE 191 ---
APPENDIX, 
11. 
Wide  is  the  difference  between  the  body  and  the  virtues 
of  heart ;   the  one  lasts  for  a   season,  the  other  endures  for 
eternity. 
12. 
Where  a   wise  man  is  not  to  be  found,  there  even  one  of 
little  sense  is  commended  :  in  a   country  devoid  of  large 
trees  the  castor-oil  plant  is  accounted  one. 
In  misfortunes  we  know  a   friend,  in  battle  a   hero,  an 
honest  man  in  debt,  a   wife  when  fortunes  disappear. 
The  time  of  the  wise  passes  away  in  the  enjoyment 
!of  poetry  and  the  sciences ;   that  of  fools,  in  vice,  sleep, 
'and  quarrel, 
■ 
Avoid  him  who  injures  you  in  your  absence  and  speaks 
sweetly  in  your  presence  :  he  is  a   bowl  of  poison  with 
milk  on  the  surface. 
16. 
Better  be  dashed  to  pieces  on  a   rock,  better  insert  the 
hand  between  the  fangs  of  a   poisonous  snake,  better  fall 
into  a   fiery  furnace,  than  ruin  one’s  character  by  stains  of 
infamy. 
When  night  comes,  fear  is  at  the  threshold ;   at  break  of 
day  it  flies  to  the  hills, 
" 
 '18.  ' 
 ^ 
The  poison-nut  and  bitter  margosa  are  useful  as  medi- 
cines ;   the  unreeling  wretch  is  utterly  unprofitable. 


--- PAGE 192 ---
APPENDIX. 
164 
19. 
Long  are  the  arms  of  a   learned  man. 
20.  . 
Cowards  sink  from  toil  and  peril, 
Vulgar  souls  attempt  and  fail  • 
Men  of  metal,  nothing  daunted, 
PerseYere  till  they  preYail. 
,'■"..21.  ■ 
As  the  sun  in  the  east  dispels  the  gloom  of  night,  so 
can  books  dispel  ignorance. 
■ 
22.;.. 
Companionship  with  the  base  leads  to  vice:  rivers  of 
sweet  water  become  undrinkable  when  they  join  the  sea. 
23. 
Impossible  is  it  for  those  consumed  by  desire  to  gain 
repose,  as  it  is  for  two  pieces  of  green  wood  to  burn  when 
rubbed  in  water. 
24. 
Eeason  is  carried  away  tinder  the  influence  of  passion, 
just  as  a   ship  in  a   stormy  sea. 
25* 
A   bear’s  skin  washed  becomes  not  white :  a   wooden 
image,  if  beaten,  does  not  acquire  excellence. 
26. 
Treating  an  evil-doer  kindly  is  like  painting  a   picture 
on  water ;   no  one  ploughs  the  air  nor  bathes  the  wind. 
►   :   
' 
 "7. 
,  A   dog’s  tail  cannot  be  made  straight;  a   stubborn 
^   woman  cannot  be  reformed.  ^ 


--- PAGE 193 ---
APPENDIX. 
28. 
Will  white  ashes  remowe  the  smell  of  the  wdne-pot  ? 
Will  a   cord  put  on  the  neck  make  one  twice-born? 
29. 
The  eyeball  is  large;  the  pupil,  through  which  we  see, 
is  small. 
30. 
Trees  are  bowed  down  with  weight  of  fruit, 
Clouds  big  with  rain  hang  low  ; 
So  good  men  humbly  bear  success, 
Nor  overweening  grow^ 
31- 
A   small  deed  honestly  performed  is  a   work  of  great  merit: 
a   small  seed  may  grow  into  an  extensive  banyan  tree. 
32.  
■  : 
A   scorpion's  poison  is  in  its  tail,  a   fly’s  in  its  head ;   the 
poison  of  a   snake  is  in  its  fangs  ;   a   bad  man  is  poisonous 
altogether. 
33- 
The  philosopher’s  stone  in  a   fool’s  hand  would  vanish 
as  fast  as  hailstones  that  come  with  the  rain. 
34* 
What  use  of  an  eloquent  man  where  there  are  no  hearers  ? 
What  use  of  a   washerman  in  a   country  of  naked  beggars  ? 
■  3S*':,, 
Act  in  time :  wait  not  to  repair  the  tank  after  the  water 
ihas  escaped. 
36.  0 
As  gems  on^a  string,  so  on  God  is  the  whole  universe 
woven. 


--- PAGE 194 ---
1 66  APPENDIX, 
17* 
Science  is  a   CGucIi  for  the  wise;  reclining  on  it  they 
feel  no  fatigue. 
38. 
A   man  of  feeble  character  is  like  a   reed  shaken  by  the 
wind. 
39- 
Wealth  without  liberality  is  like  riches  still  buried  in 
the  earth. 
40. 
Here,  in  this  world,  love’s  only  fruit  is  won 
When  two  true  hearts  are  blended  into  one ; 
But  when  by  disagreement  love  is  blighted, 
’Twere  better  that  two  corpses  were  united.^ 
41. 
j  The  washerman  beats  the  cloth  to  remove  the  stains :   a 
*   teacher  chastises  to  make  his  pupil  good. 
42. 
A   crocodile  in  water  can  destroy  an  elephant  ;   out  of 
the  stream  it  is  overcome  by  a   dog. 
'■  43-  ■■ 
Bust  makes  iron  soft;  the  soul  is  softened  by  grief. 
44  
.  ■ 
The  friendship  of  the  bad  is  like  the  shadow  of  a   preci- 
pitous bank,  ready  to  crush  him  who  sits  beneath. 
45. 
^   Where  frogs  are  the  croakers,  their  silence  is  becoming. 
^  Monier  Williams’  translation  of  a   passage  of  Bhartrihari, 


--- PAGE 195 ---
APPENDIX. 
167 
46. 
Good  people  are  like  the  cocoanut ;   tlie  bad,  like  the 
jujube,  charming  only  in  the  exterior. 
47- 
Unpleasant  speech  is  often  salutary:  drops  of  bitter 
medicine  produce  a   beneficial  effect, 
48. 
Friendship  with  the  good  is  permanent:  even  when 
broken,  the  fibres  of  the  lotus-stalks  are  connected. 
49. 
As  the  spokes  of  a   wheel  are  attached  to  the  nave,  so 
are  all  things  attached  to  life. 
50. 
The  good  man,  like  a   bounding  ball, 
Springs  ever  upward  from  his  fall ; 
The  wicked  falls  like  lumps  of  clay, 
And  crumbles  into  dust  away. 
Let  a   man  act  so  by  day  that  he  may  live  happily  by  night. 
He  by  whom  swans  are  made  white,  and  parrots  green, 
and  peacocks  variegated  in  hue,  he  will  provide  thy  sus- 
tenance. 
53- 
When  men  are  ripe  for  slaughter,  even  straws  turn  into 
thunderbolts. 
. 
 . 
 ...  # 
The  tempest  does  not  uproot  tender  grasses  :  great  men 
expend  their  Valour  on  the  great. 


--- PAGE 196 ---
i68 
APPENDIX, 
55'^ 
The  streams  of  rivers  flow  qe  and  return  not;  so  day 
and  night  take  with  them  the  life  of  mortals. 
,  5  
6. 
As  a   man  extracts  gold  from  stones,  let  Mm  also  receive 
what  is  valuable  from  all  quarters— from  a   raving  mad- 
man or  a   chattering  fool. 
57* 
For  a   man  of  energy  Meru  is  not  too  high  to  be  ascended, 
nor  the  ocean  too  extensive  to  be  crossed. 
Show  compassion  to  all  :  the  moon  withholds  not  its 
light  from  the  house  of  a   Ghln(Jlla. 
59. 
There  should  be  no  companionship  with  a   wicked  man : 
charcoal,  when  hot,  burns ;   when  cold,  it  blackens  the  hand. 
60. 
Treachery  is  of  crimes  the  blackest, 
Avarice  is  a   world  of  vice  ; 
I   
Truth  is  nobler  far  than  penance, 
'  Parity  than  sacrifice. 
61. 
Companionship  with  the  bad  is  easily  severed ;   the  good, 
like  vessels  of  gold,  are  hard  to  break  and  easily  united. 
62. 
Better  a   forest  haunted  by  tigers  and  elephants,  trees 
foiii^helter,  ripe  fruits  and  water  for  food,  grass  for  a   bed, 
bark  for  clothing,  but  not  deprived  of  wealth  living  among 
relatives.  ^ 


--- PAGE 197 ---
APPENDIX, 
63- 
1   AfBiction  is  tlie  touchstone  of  friendship. 
64. 
An  elephant  may  be  stopped  by  a   kick;  for  the  head- 
strong there  is  no  remedy. 
65. 
As  a   showman  displays  his  puppets  while  he  himself 
I   remains  concealed,  so  God  governs  mankind  unseen  by 
!   them. 
66. 
The  weak  should  ally  themselves  with  the  strong :  a 
rivulet  reaches  the  sea  by  the  river’s  aid. 
67. 
The  sky  seems  as  if  limited  and  a   firefly  looks  like  fire, 
but  the  one  has  no  bounds  and  the  other  no  fire. 
68. 
Let  a   sinner  listen  to  the  Scriptures,  he  will  not  relin- 
quish his  vile  nature :  though  a   coal  be  washed  in  milk, 
its  blackness  does  not  disappear. 
69. 
Tire  burns  without  speaking  ;   the  sun  shines  silently ; 
silently  the  earth  supports  all  creatures,  moving  and  sta- 
tionary. 
70. 
To  a   man  of  weak  intellect  the  death  of  a   friend  ista 
thorn  in  his  heart;  to  the  wise  man  it  is  as  extracted,  for 
death  is  the  gateway  of  happiness. 


--- PAGE 198 ---
170 
APPENDIX, 
71* 
A   man  is  only  half  nntil  he  finds  a   wife :   a   childless 
house  is  like  a   cemetery. 
72. 
A   house  without  a   wife  is  like  a   desert;  she  is  the 
best  physician  for  many  a   suffering. 
■  '■■73v--',  
' 
A   tranquil  lake  conceals  an  alligator ;   anger  is  often 
hidden  under  an  appearance  of  joy. 
74. 
I   
No  honey  without  a   sting ;   no  rose  without  a   thorn, 
75. 
The  man  of  means  is  eloquent, 
Brave,  handsome,  noble,  wise ; 
All  qualities  with  gold  are  sent. 
And  vanish  when  it  flies. 
76. 
The  desires  of  the  heart  are  insatiable;  those  of  the 
stomach  may  be  soon  gratified. 
77* 
What  use  is  knowledge  to  a   senseless  man  ?   of  what 
use  a   mirror  to  one  without  eyes  ? 
A   shepherd  guards  his  flock  with  a   staff:  God,  by 
f   correction,  protects  mankind, 


--- PAGE 199 ---
APPENDIX. 
lyx 
79- 
One  dry  tree  by  friction  destroys  a   whole  forest;  one 
vile  man  ruins  the  whole  family. 
80. 
Anoint  an  ass  and  he  feels  not  your  kindness  ;   he  turns 
upon  you  and  kicks  you, 
81. 
Mortals  possess  no  goods  of  their  own,  but  we  hold  as 
stewards  things  which  belong  to  the  gods :  when  they 
require  them,  they  take  them  away  again. 
82. 
I   The  learning  of  men  is  from  books;  women  obtain 
I 
  
theirs  from  nature. 
83. 
Amass  that  wealth  'which  has  nothing  to  fear  from 
kings  or  thieves,  and  which  will  desert  thee  not  at  the 
hour  of  death. 
■  84.  
^  ■ 
Better  a   woman  bjind  than  one  too  beautiful. 
>5. 
Give  women  food,  dress,  gems,  and  all  that’s  nice. 
But  tell  them  not  your  plans,  if  you  are  wise: 
|If  you  have  aught  to  do,  and  want  to  do  it, 
'Don’t  ask  a   woman’s  counsel,  or  you’ll  rue  it. 
A   mean  person,  though  rich,  may  be  utterly  despised  : 
can  a   dog  vrnh  a   golden  collar  attain  the  dignity  of  a   lion  ? 


--- PAGE 200 ---
172 
APPENDIX. 
87. 
Books  are  endless,  time  is  short:  let  a   man,  therefore, 
extract  the  substance,  just  as  a   swan  extracts  the  milk 
which  is  mixed  with  water. 
88. 
Nectar  becomes  poison  if  kept  too  long. 
89. 
To  obtain  merit  is  like  roiling  a   stone  up  a   hill;  to  fall 
into  evil,  like  rolling  it  down  a   mountain-side, 
■'■'■"90. 
The  repetition  of  idle  words  becomes  an  ox:  it  is  like 
chewing  the  cud. 
A   Brahman  can  make  what  is  not  divine  divine,  and 
what  is  divine  not  divine. 
92. 
j  A   hungry  snake  devours  its  own  eggs :  a   woman  pinched 
I 
  
by  hunger  may  desert  her  own  child. 
93- 
The  winkings  of  men’s  eyes  are  numbered  all  by  him  :   
^ 
he  wields  the  universe  as  gamesters  handle  dice. 
■■  94*  
,  ■ 
Time,  like  a   brilliant  steed  with  seven  rays, 
And  wdth  a   thousand  eyes,  imperishable, 
Bull  of  fecundity,  bears  all  things  onward,^ 
^  Varuna.  ^ 
”   Monier  Williams*  rendering  of  a   passage  from  the  Aiharvaveda, 


--- PAGE 201 ---
APPENDIX. 
95* 
I   
I'd  sooner  live  in  mountain  caves 
I 
  With  lions,  bears,  and  apes, 
I   Than  dwell  in  India's  heavenly  halls 
With  brainless  human  shapes.^ 
96. 
To  argue  with  a   fool  is  as  if  to  bring  the  dead  to  life. 
97* 
A   moth  is  caught  by  glare,  a   fish  by  a   bait ;   a   man  is 
ensnared  by  desire. 
98. 
Truth  is  weightier  than  sacrifice. 
99- 
Wealth  is  a   great  perverter. 
100. 
The  society  of  the  good  is  a   medicine. 
101. 
Be  generous :  the  tree  does  not  refuse  its  shadow  to  the 
man  who  cuts  it  with  his  axe. 
102. 
Have  not  too  many  enemies :  a   fierce  serpent  may  be 
killed  by  a   swarm,  of  insects. 
103. 
Poisonous  trees,  though  watered  with  nectar,  do  not  pro- 
duce wholesome  fruits.  ^ 
^^Tawney’s  Two  Centuries  of  Bhartrikari. 


--- PAGE 202 ---
174  APPENDIX. 
104. 
As  wood  is  consumed  by  tbe  fire  to  wMcb  it  gives  rise, 
so  a   foolish,  man  is  ruined  by  his  own  greed, 
105. 
;  Thou  canst  not  gather  what  thou  dost  not  sow ; 
!   As  thou  dost  plant  the  tree,  so  will  it  grow. 
1 


--- PAGE 203 ---
APPENDIX.  ijs 
B.— CORRESPONDING  STANZAS  IN 
THE  Nins. 
DhmnmanUi, 
Lohaniti. 
Dhammapada, 
Mdjaniti 
SuttavaiU  | 
dhanantti.  | 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza  , 
7 
8 
... 
8 
50 
9 
148 
... 
...  1 
lO 
147 
... 
...  1 
II 
10 
36 
12 
II 
■  ■ 
 . 
... 
37 
13 
3 
.  ... 
.*« 
14 
4 
...  .. 
. . . 
i6 
17 
. . . 
' 
17 
3^ 
... 
i8 
18 
" 
'  ' 
.1 " 
•■22  ■ 
25 
21 
■  : 
 '  
,  1 
26  : 
X43 
'..y 
30 
29 
1   ■■  y  
■ 
 ■  : 
32 
77 
^  
'..,y;-*y":y:",.L," 
43 
12 
.  './yy':,. 
52 
28 
5S 
152 
65 
48 
... 
66 
93 
... 
... 
72 
y 
28 
73 
95 
..... 
vv'v'y^::,:. 
78 
114 
... 
79 
IIS.  159 
... 
*•*#  . 
S3 
160 
■:... «  .  ■. 
ss 
•   138 
86 
89 


--- PAGE 204 ---
176  appendix. 
Dhammantti. 
LohmitL 
Bhammajpada, 
RdjanUi. 
Siittavad- 
dJiananiti, 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
37 
80 
88 
125 
... 
91 
134 
94 
92 
•  •  « 
95 
92 
«   •  • 
98 
73 
«  «   « 
103 
163 
107 
79 
108 
88 
1^3 
31 
114 
43 
T17 
128 
126 
;.;69\/:- 
129 
7 
133 
'  ■  25'.": 
64 
33 
134 
55 
135 
34 
136 
33 
137 
^   73 
... 
143 
44 
144 
40 
147 
26 
.34' 
149 
119 
... 
154 
108 
•   •• 
155 
106 
... 
... 
156 
106 
164 
162 
166 
105 
..*.*■ 
^75 
59 
77 
179 
127 
182 
■ 
... 
... 
60 
1^3 
124 
... 
■■"'iS4-'  ", 
113 
83 
■■■■:;  ■■;X93'':  X, 
61;.: 
59 
198 
60 
199 
161 
',V':''200'> 
... 
146 
... 
i 


--- PAGE 205 ---
APPENDIX.  177 
JDhammaniti. 
LoTcanitL 
PhomTmjpada. 
EdjanitL 
Suttavad- 
dhananitk 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza  . 
Stanza 
Stanza 
205 
157 
... 
... 
... 
209 
126 
... 
... 
... 
212 
86  ' 
... 
104 
«   <*  4 
213 
90 
... 
... 
... 
215 
9 
... 
... 
... 
217 
133 
... 
... 
219 
132 
... 
... 
220 
117 
... 
... 
... 
223 
60 
... 
Ill,  II2 
... 
224 
76 
■  ■  ■''  *.4" 
226 
140 
... 
«•« 
227 
... 
... 
57 
229 
84 
... 
230 
91 
... 
... 
232 
.37 
... 
... 
... 
... 
23s 
•   ». 
« •   * 
242 
27 
.   *   • 
•   »   « 
246 
52 
... 
*   »   4 
247 
53 
■ . . « ■ 
1 
•   #   • 
250 
14 
i 
251 
... 
252 
256 
■ 
 94 
257 
96 
258 
102 
261 
■■■■■■■■■■■  . 
,  .1* 
263 
... 
62 
264 
•  ** 
61 
266 
120 
269 
164 
1.. 
280 
129 
... 
288 
^35 
... 
... 
294 
^37 
.   •   • 
... 
295 
136 
.«  • 
... 
322 
30 
... 
326 
143 
... 
328 
144 
... 
... 
...# 
334 
45 
... 
335 
•   45  1 
1 
... 


--- PAGE 206 ---
178  APPENDIX. 
Dhammaniti, 
Lolcaniti, 
Dhammapada, 
MdjanUi, 
Suttavad- 
dhmantti. 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
Stanza 
339 
51 
342 
63 
... 
348 
75 
-If  ^ 
352 
35 
3SS 
201  or  203 
358 
7 
360 
99 
... 
361 
13 
... 
363 
... 
,  366 
-:24,;.. 
59 
368 
2:3.s:'^; 
... 
373 
97 
... 
374 
... 
394  ■ 
'  ' 
 f'i 
' 
,  406 
iillllili? 
'  
352  or  354 
407 
325  or  327 
... 
-408 
.42 
....  j 
* . . 


--- PAGE 207 ---
APPENDIX. 
G.— CORRESPONDING  STANEAS  IN  THE 
dhammanIti. 
The  following  stanzas  of  the  Dham'rmniti  are  similar — 
28  and  385 
48  „   172 
69  »   303 
rSi  „   313 
