# CLEAN RE-EXTRACTED TEXT: 1894-bharati-seelakkhandha-vrittamalakhya-jbts.pdf
# Total Pages: 218 | OCR Model: san+eng | DPI: 200
# Description: Vrittamalakhya in JBTS (Purging symbol noise)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 [OCR_san+eng] ---
= Ramakrishna Mission

Institute of Culture Library

Presented by

Dr. Baridbaran Mukerji

4328

--- PAGE 2 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 3 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 4 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 5 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 6 [OCR_san+eng] ---
८.14; oy

SARAT ८: . DAS, 0, ॥, ६,

1894.

CALCU Ax

eRrrTap AWTHE DAP ist 1

--- PAGE 7 [OCR_san+eng] ---
CONTENTS.

wee -

1 Proceedings of the Society

>, Naga or Serpent’demi-gods

Story of the Conversion of Gopila Naga

The Sanskrit text of Gopdla-naga-damanam

Stipa-Avadina

‘6, The Sanskrit text of Sthpavaddinam .
7. Explanations of the mystic astrological chart obtained’ from

the Temple of Sua-du-Sze inecking ve sh
(SANSKRIT TEXT. 1
1. Bodhicharyavatéram we we .. a
2. Introduction to “ Vrittamilakhya ”
3. Vrittamélakhyd
+. Dhammapada

NWA APPENDIX I. :
~ \A Story of Serpent-worship पि + ५

a The Manasa, or Niga 0
19101511}. =, , ws {
\

ichami Ceremony a ।

Bk. Car
heck 1

i
॥
‘
॥

—_


--- PAGE 8 [OCR_san+eng] ---
THE RAMAKRISHNA MISSION
INSTITUTE OF CULTURE `

Yf tog . “4 ° LIBRARY
\ GOL PARK, CALCUTTA-29,
J

Hroceedings of the Society.

Raed fhe Annual Meeting of the Buddhist Text Society was held on the 8th
‘March, Thursday evening, at the Dalhousie Institute, Calcutta. The Chair
{क ocoupied by» the newly-clected President, The Hon'ble Sir Alfred
,Oroft, MA, ए... .
\ ‘The proceedings were opened by the *etiring President, Sri Narendra
Néth Sen, who said, that this was the second Annual Meeting of the Society,
andi he report, to be read shortly, would show it had a record of tseful
i क “luring the past year, and that the Society had been gaining support
iter ied to year. The Journal of the Society had taken a high place, and :
4s 8 8p appreciated where read. He had to congratulate the council on having
860 Sir Alfred Croft as thoir President for the present year. ,

- PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

_ Stk Atrrep C&ort, rising, said:—“ Before calling on the Honorary Secretary
to read the Anuntal Report, I wish to say one or.two words on my own account.
Jp the first place, I have to thank you for the high compliment you havé’ paid
me in asking me to be the President of this Society. The Society is young, but
it ocoupies, I think, a unique position in the learned world, So far as I know,
no othar.Society has precisely the same objects as this, and none deals with
the dame subject matter. Tho growing interest that has been takenén quite
recent years in the Tibetan larfguage, in the literature and history of Tibet,
and (ना in all that relates to Buddhism and its documents, whether in its
original Indian home or in the countries: in which it afterwards took root,—
these circumstances rendered the foundation of ue such Society as this a
necessity: and we may congratulate ourselves on aving been the first to
énter a practically unexplored field. Iam very glad to hear that the Society
and its work have already attracted the respectful attention of the learned in
othergountrics ; that its position seems to ‘bo established, and: its finances
pro&pprous. If we can only secure the same industry and learning for the work
of the Society in tho future as havo characterized it in the past, as evidenced
by the four numbers of the Journal already issued, we may look forward with
well-founded confidence to a useful anf honourable career. F

“In the second place, I have to explain and, if possible, to justify my.own
connexion with the Socicty as its President. I know no Sanskrit and no
‘Tibetan; and my knowledge of the history and doctrines of Buddhism is merely
tof the sort that one picks up in the course of miscellaneous reading. But yet
‘I thjnk I may claim credit for some ghare in the preliminary events that finally
led ‘to the foundation of this Society.” When Sarat Chandra Das first
disclosed to me his*desire to study Tibetan, I gave him the warmest en-
jcouragement, pointing out to him what wealth there lay th the untrodden
“field that invited his footsteps. When he afterwards received an invitation
from the Tibetan authorities to visit Tibet, I was able to smooth the way
for him by obtaining the warm approval of Sir Ashley Eden, the Lieutenant-
Governar, and by securing the ponsent of the Government of India to his
journey, with all the necessary equipment, and with presents befitting the occa-
sion,* The records of the Asiatic Society of Bengal show what results
of the highest value wera secured to Tibetan scholarsBip by his sojourn it that
‘country, Finally, I supported him to the best of my ability in the great under-
‘taking in which he has been engaged for the last few years,—the compilation

be This refers to,the seoond journey which Srf Sarat Chandra made to Tibet in 1881.

--- PAGE 9 [OCR_san+eng] ---
ii PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY. [Journal & Text,

‘ofa Tibgtan Sanskrit Dictionary,—and I succeeded.in obtaining the
Govergment to his being placed on special duty for that purpos¢
I claim to have taken some part in the earlier stages of the 11510
Society, I hope it will be understood that 1 do so, not with the obje
nifying myself, but rather in my own defence, as offering some
palliation for what may be regarded as an act of presumption on
accepting the Presidentship of this Society. It comes to this, in f 113
T have not scaled tlie fortress of Buddhist learning, I have.plantéd laddex
and helped others to scale it; and for this useful, if humble, woj ङ्य hops
I may claim whatever credit is due. ; em
“T will now ask the Honorary Secretary to be good enough
Report.” ॥ “
The Mahéraj Kumar Benoy Krishna read tho Report, whic
follows :— ‘
“The progress that this Society has mado during the dast two
since the ingugural meeting, on April 3rd, 1892, till now, may bo eha
as slow but steady—slow, because our countrymen have been he:
accord to it that encouragement which is essential for the gro
institutions of the kind at the outset; steady, for in spite of their ing:
ence aye have kept on doing our duties in connection with it. The toch
nature of the institution and the uninteresting charactor of its pr एश
to the public have also to a large extent been the cause of its slow g
The Journal of the Society being devoted to original and hitheyggs
known subjects addresses itself to a very limited number, even am
who ta& interest in literary matters. In the fico of these impedig
progress that the Buddhist Text Society fas made within the short
its existence is far from discouraging. The reception, which som) i
Orientalists and publishers of Europe have given to the Journal, has enabled
us’ to persevere in the@arduons work of making investigations in.the vast
unexplored field of Buddhist literature, history, and medicine. If the learned,
public of this country accord a similar reception to the Society, the object
with which it was started—the publication of texts—will bo fulfilled. The
Society has issued four parts of the Journal during the last twelve m€nths,
They contain learned contributions from R, C. Dutt, Esq., C.S., O.LE. ; B.
De, Esq., M.A., C.S.; Sré Nobin Chandra Das, M.A.; Pandit Haya Prasid
Sdstri, M.A.; Rev. Sumangala Pradhdna Niyaka, of Colombo, and’ tho
Mahdthero Seelakkhanda, of Ceylon, The Society's grateful acknowledgments
are due to its retiring President, Sri Narendra Nath Sen, for the keen in-
terest which he has taken in all its proceedings from the time of its founda-
tion. The term of holding office having expired, the Hon’ble Sir A. Croft, ,
M.A., K.C.LE., has been’ duly clected President of the Society at the jast
meeting of the Souncil. Under his -distinguished guidance, the Buddhist
Text Society of India, it is hoped, will’mako its work appreciated by the
learned public. At the same mecting of the Council the following gentle-
men were duly clected Vice-Presidents:—Mr. ©. A. Grierson, the Honour-
able Dr. Mahendra Lal Sircar, and Sri Narendra Nath इला."
Sarat Chandra Das announced thé presentations and donations to
the Society and read a note on Vishdchiké, 07" Amirta Tall Sircar, LMS,
read a supplementary note on Vishdchiké, Sarat Chandra Das exhibited
‘amystic picture. Dr. Gustave Oppert, Ph. D., late Principal, Madras Univer-
sity College, read a note gn the Doctrine of Transmigration, by Mr. Krishnam-
charya, Attorney-at-law, Pondicherry. Sarat Chartira Das oxplained the
doctrine by pictures. Pandit Annad&é ए ऽत्‌ Sarasvatd read 8 translation
of the Stipa Avaddna, and Sarat Chandra Das commented on it. The
 Maharaj-Kumér exhibited the Bharat Munjari and Ramdyan Kathdsdr.


--- PAGE 10 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhis@fext Society.) PROCEEDINGS OF THE socrEry, iii

VOTE OF THANKS.

The Prestpent said he had now to move a cordial vote of thanks to
Sri Narendra Nath Sen for his services as Presfflent of the Socioty during
the eG oar. The difficulty in establishing a Society ‘of this kind was to
find person of position willing to undertake its direction at the outset.
It migh?, turn out a’ success, or it might be a failure; and people were
generall:: reluctant to assume responsibility in a doubtful matter. The
Society jvas therefore all the time indebted to Sri Narendra Nath Sen, not
only for (riving it a st@rt, but also for carrying it so successfully through the
prob&tioyary poriod of its existence. The Society had now established itself A
and a coy siderable share of the credit for this result was due to the President.
(0 ‘that he had taken in the foundation of the Society could not but
a sov{:e of satisfaction to him in future years. He hoped that the vote
f ffanks would be carried by acclamation. .
Sri Narendra Nath Sen, in proposing a vote of thanks to the Chair,
pressed his gratitude for the terms in which his service had been acknow-
ed. He had simply tried to do his duty—and nothing more.
Maharaj-Kumar Benoy Krishna, in seconding the. vote of thanks, said
८ the way in which Sir Alfred Croft had conducted the meeting this evening
raised hopes that he would continue to take an interést in, and fulfil, the
sion cf, the Society.
The following Presentations were announced :—
1. Lhe Asiatic Quarterly Review for January 1894.
2. The Monist-Philosophical and Scientific Journal, Chicagos
«3. The Lucifer, for January 1894,
4. The Polinesian Journal of Antiquities, for the last quarter of 1893.

The following Donations to the Socicty’s funds were thankfully acknow-

{०६९१ :—

` Mr. 8. T. Krishnamichérya, Attorney-at-law, Pondicherry Rs. 50
Sri Probodh Chunder Chatterjca on ove w. 50
Sri Nivodh Nath Mukhopddhydya, of Calcutta =, we 30

Phe Honarary Secretary read the following extract from a Buppnist

‘< where the name Vishichikd occurs. .

Once on a time, Prasenajit, King of Koégala, in ancient Ondh, viding-on a
leet horse, with a number of followers entered the forest for the purpose of
uptiug. He possessed many personal accomplishments. His appearance was

ivery beautiful. Entering the most delightful part of the forest, while he was
alighting from his horse, all‘on a sudden, a village maiden of exquisite beauty
(त herself एण him. To him she appeared like the goddess of Love.
© talked to her, and soon became captivated by her bewitching manners
and cHarms. Her name was Malliké. Like the banner of Cupid, that mind-
born god, she stood over his loving heart. A sweet smile ever sat on her lips.
The fing offered to marry her; she readily agreed to the ‘proposal. Taking
her with him on the back of his elephant, the king returned to his capital.
The name of the chief Queen was Varshiékara, who had given birth to a
son (who according to the history of Tibet was web-footed, besides posses-
sing blug oblique eyes. These signs being interpreted by tho court astro-
logers as very ominous- for the kingdom and the king, the child was thrown
into the Ganges packed in a copper vessel). .
Tn eourse of time Mallika gave birth toa.son, called Virudhaka who
growing up, acquired great proficiency in learning by hig diligence and assidu-
ity. It so happened that once, accompanied by his companion named Dukha-
mukha, he rode towards the forest of the Sékyas for the purpose of bunting.

--- PAGE 11 [OCR_san+eng] ---
iv PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY. [Journal & Text, Part I, 1894.

He was met by the haughty youths af the. Sékya race who treated him
with contempt. They scornfully called him the son of the hand-maid Mallika.
Unable to bear the slight, and burning with spite and anger, he deter-
mined to take possession of his father’s throne that he might turn the entire
force of Kogala to the destruction of the Sikyis, His father was छाम, How
should he gain his end? So he sought counsel from the Prime-minister Ché-
rfyana, under whom there were five hundred officers. 0

An opportunity presented itself for maturing his plans. At this time the
thought of religion dawned in the king’s mind, Buddhg had been preaching
the doctrine of Renunciation and Nirvina at Sravasti. The king went to
hear the sacred sermons, little suspecting the intrigues of his son and
Prime-minister against his throne. King Prasenajit possessed purity, goth
of the mind and body. Soone day mounting ‘his: chariot he w: x with
Chérayana fo see the Bletted Buddha. Leaving the king in the fompany
of the great sage, Chardyana returned to the town and gave out that the
King Prasenajit had taken tho vows of renunciation, leaving the throne to
his son Virudhaka, who in haste was proclaimed king of Kogala. When
Prasenajit returned to the camp, he found it empty, without his retinuo
and guards. The minister was not thero, nor was his chariot in attendance.
Astonished at this @esertion, depressed at heart he slowly walked towards
the ‘town. Before he had proceeded long, he saw from a distance the
queen Varshikaré coming with Malliké to meet him. Being told ‘that
Virudhaka was crowned king, at the false rumour of his abdication, Prasena-
jit sent Mallikd to the palace desiring her to share with her son the kingdom
of Kosala. ‘Then taking Varshékaré with him, and assuming tho guise of a
pilgrim, he set out for Réjagriha the capital of his friend King Ajita Satru.

During the journey, not having any ‘food to cat, oppressed with hunger
he ate a rotten radish, and being thirsty on account of the fatigues of the
lonfy and tedious journey, he frequently drank foul water on the way. This
brought upon him when he arrived at Rajagriha the disease called Visitchikd.
Hearing that the king of Kosala had arrived at his capital, King Ajata’Satru
went to reccive him, He found Prasenajit dead, and his body filled with dust.
Queen Varshikaré performed the funeral obsequies of her royal husband, and
when the funeral pyre was lighted she jamped on it with tho heroism of a
true “Sati.” Ajata Satru was overwhelmed with grief at the tragic death of
his friend, and to alleviate his sorrows went to sec fhe Blessed One,

स जौमूलकं yar करममूलमिवायतम्‌ । च्तारं पौत्वा च पानीयम्‌ पमाताप्तविषिकः |
खनिद्यतामविक्ञाय मोदाय पतते जनः ! स चापायनिकयस्य कायस्योपायष्णया ॥
अजातशुः yea कोगरलेखरमांगतम्‌ | म्ये पांशु स्यं विगतासुं zea तम्‌ ॥

तस्य जायातुयातस्य स. हला देहसत्‌मियाम्‌ | भगवन्तं ययौ aE सगतं, दुःखधात्तये ॥

In the 218८ Pallava of the Avadéna Kalpalaté, called the Jetavana
pratigrahavadina, mention is made of Visichika :—

arenes तस्षिन्‌ Tare ofega | तमादसात्‌ गपतिर्भौजनाय न्यमन्नथत्‌ ॥
स gat विदिधान्‌ तच मच्छभोज्यंमयन्तितः | रात्रौ विस्चिकाक्रान्तदुक्ो र विएलब्यथः॥

In former times there lived in Srévast{, a householder nam
, ed@Andtha-
ए ; He had a Sen named Ja’sagata. " When this son attained the age
i” Puber iy, Anétha became eager to secure, a handsome bride for him.
Accordingly he engaged a Brahman as match-maker, Proceeding to Rajagriha,

--- PAGE 12 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY. v

the capital of Magadha, the Brahmau met with a householder whose beauti-
ful danghter he heard, was of a maryiageable age. Now this householder said
he would not give away his daughter in marriage, until a rich nuptial
present was given to him; it being the usage of his family to take
Pan (price of the bride). When the match-maker agrted to arrange for the
present, the householder showed much attention to the Brahman,” giving
him a sumptuous dinner. Having greedily eaten the various dainties that
were served at the table, the match-maker fell ill at night, being attacked witl

Vistichiké. He cried aloud on account of theexcruciating pains from whic
he suffered.

Dr. Amritaldl Sircar, L.M.S., made the following supplementary remarks
on te disease (Visichikd) referred to above :— ~

A few passages from the most ancient authorities on Hindu medicine
with their literal translation in English, wiM show that cholera, in the form
it néw exists, was unknown in ancient India.

To quote from Charaka Vimansthdn—Chapter I.

+ Physicians have, divided the disorders of the stomach into two classes, Vistchikd
and Alasaka, according to the condition of the howels. In Visdchikd, there is an upward and
downward flow, i.e., @ vomiting and purging. When thero is excess of wind in this discase,
gastrodynia, suppression of urine, bruising pain all over the bddy, dryness of the mouth,
fainting; forgetfulness, loss of appotite, contraction of tendons, and suppression of stools
will take place, When bile becomes predominant, fever, diarrhoea, burning sensation of
the body intornally, thirst, forgetfulness ahd delirium will supervenc. In the case where
phlegm is predominant, coryza, anonexia, indigestion, fovor ushered in by chill (ague)
malaise and heaviness of limbs will be the marked symptoms.”

To quote from—

° Susruta-Uttaratantra—Chapter 56,

“ On account of indigestion the wind becomes irritated and produces apainful sensation
in the body of the patient like that of the pricking of noodles. Owing to this physicians
call this disease Visdchikd.—Sachikd meaning a ncedle. Men versed in the Sastras,
learned people, and moderate eaters seldom suffer from Visichikd. Greedy people, काते
those who have no control over their desires, get this disef®. In Vistchikd’ the following
symptoms appear:—Fainting, diarrhosa, vomiting, thirst, gastrodynia, forgetfulness,
cramps, yawning, bruising sensation all over the body, discoloration of the skin, shiver-
ing pain in the cardiac region, and woakness of the head. If tho teeth, lips, and
nails of the patient become yollowish-brown; if there is no sense whatever; if the
vomiting is too severo and eyes sunk into their sockets; if the voice is very low-pitched
and tho joints seem to be loose, then there is no hope for his recovery.”

According to—

Basnata-StrRastHAn—CHAPTER. 8. .

“People, who have no control over their desires, by stuffing their stomachs with unripe
and indigestible food,. bring on Alasaka and Vistchikd upon themselves. These are due
tothe pressing and consequent agitation and irritation of tho wind, bile, and phlegm in
the stomach. In the latter oF the two discases, the wind boing irritated, several kinds
of pain, like the pricking of neodles, are produced, and hence the‘name of the disease
(Visachikd).

* “In Visichikd, whore wind is predominant, there is gastrodynia, shivering, suppression
of uffine and stools, Where thoro is pre-excess of bile, there is@ever, profuse diarrhea
burning sbnsation of the body, thirst, fainting, &q., &c. In the case where phlegm is pre-
dominant, there will be coryza, heaviness of | the limbs, loss of specch, and flowing in of
saliva,” . .

From the above illustrations it will be seen that the symptoms &
Visichiké do not exactly coincide with the symptoms of cholera. Dr.
Macnamara in his treatise on Asiatic cholera quoted cértain passages from
SuSruta.to establish his view about tho-Indian origin of cholera, but at last
he was, doubtful if the descriptioncorresponded with the symptoms 6f the
cholera of our age; He observed—quoting from Susruta :—* Tho patient is
attacked with vomiting, purging, faintness, thirst, pain in the abdomen,
yawning, forgetfulness, burning heat in the stomach, duskiness of the surface

* ५

--- PAGE 13 [OCR_san+eng] ---
vi PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY. (Journal & Text, Part 1, 1894,
1 ain in the head and heart.” The worst symptoms are “ bine.
Rete red am Kips, and nails, diminution of the senses, coldness of the
body, sunken eyes, suppressed voice, ४ feeling of complete lassitude; ” but
“if burning of the palms of the hands, and body, accompanied with sharp
vomiting ” occur, thé patient is likely to recover; and “should he digest his
food all danger is pasged,” the patient obtaining immediate relief, the purg-
ing stops and he is in comfort. If this description refers to cholera, says Dr,
Macnamara, “ the diseaso must have been in existence for many centuries,”

* Dr. Mahendralal Sircar in the Calcutta Journal of Medicine, of June and
July 1883, proved by indirect evidence, quoting several ancient Hindu and
Tibetan authorities on the subject, that cholera was not of Indian origin,

. I must conclude in the language of Dr. Sircay: ^ Was Visdchike the
the primitive parent of cholera? Is there evolution in disease as there is in
animated nature P This is a question well worth a most careful and searching
investigation ; for if solved in the affirmative, it will open entirely a ‘new
field for hygiene and therapeutics.”

N. B.—Kavirdj Bijoyratna Kaviraiijan, a distinguished medical authority of Bengal,
is of opinion that Visichikd was a form of diarrhwa, which took the placo of cholera in
ancient India, He has very kindly sent mo the following extracts from ८107040 and Suéruta
medical works, in support*of his views on the subject :—Ed,

विद्धचिकौ।
तं दिविधमाम-पदोषमाचक्ते first विखधिकामलसच्च |
तच वि्विकामूर्डघाधच प्ततामदोषां यधोकतरूपां पित्‌ ॥
. त्र वातः मूलानाह फमर्दखष्यो षमूर््छा ।
अमाभिेषम्य Ferree सं्तम्भनानि करोति ॥
पित्तं एनज्व॑रातिसारान्तदाहटष्णामदभमप्रलपनानि |
Om तु Serhan पिपाकीतज्चरालस्यगाचमौ रवाणि ॥

( चरक विमान-स्थाने रयाध्यायः ) |
छवौभिरिव mente तुदन्‌ सन्तिते ऽनिलः | यस्याजोेन सा वरैश्यते तु विदचिका ॥
न तां परिमिताहारा लमन्ते विदितागमाः ^ मूएासतामजितात्मानो ` लभन्ते SHAR लुपाः ॥

मू्छातिसारो वमथुः पिपासा ae भमो देष्टन-चटम्भनदाद्ाः |
वेवण्थैकमयौ ' दये रख भवन्ति तस्यां fincas मेदः ॥
यः श्वाव-दन्तौछ-नणास-स्ो व्र्दितोभ्यन्तर-भात-नचः |
क्षमलरःसून्ैविमुक्तसनधर्ाया्नरोऽसौ एगरागमा्‌ ॥
(कुशवतस्योत्र-तन्ते षट्‌ धच्चाद्दध्यायः }
पौमाना हि वाताय qe कोपिताः। `
was देन तदेवाविष् ETA ॥ `
विढम्भयन्तोऽलसकं च्यावयन्तो विखचिकाम्‌।
 अधरोततरमार्गभ्यां सहसेवाणितरमनः ॥
विविधिवेदगोद्वाादि धः कोपतः |
wifes गात्राणि विध्यतोति विदूचिका ॥

--- PAGE 14 [OCR_san+eng] ---
1११४१8४ Text §न्लन्क.] PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY.
तच TATE TEATS Cre |
पित्ताक्वरातिसारन्त्दाह eo प्रलयादयः |

WATT Y, PAA वाकरम्भद्टौवनादयः ॥
(बाग्मडद्य जच्श्याने eat ऽध्यायः ) 1.

vii

Dr. Gustave Oppert, read the following paper communicated through the
lonprary Secretary :—

in THE DOCTRINES OF TRANSMIGRATION AND 1411211 ACCORDING
॥ TO BRAHMANISM AND BUDDHISM.

By 8. T. Krisayamacndrya.

The able article of Sri Sarat Chandra Das on the Doctrine of Trans-
igvation, in the Journal aud Text of the Budddhist Text Society, has cleared up
mystery in Buddhism which was hitherto inexplicable and irreconcilable. In
» country is Buddhism so well studied as in Tibet, and any exposition bya
ibetax? Theologian, must, be accepted as orthodox. The popular opinion of

~addhistic philosophy is that,—(1) According to Buddhism everything, includ.
1 ing the inner being, is a series of momentary conscious states; (2) that the
doctrine of the Five. Skandas (the law of Association of Ideas), is an invention
to oxplain the Idea of Permanancy ot Continuity; and (3) that the Buddhists
believ@ in the Doctrine of Transmigration of Souls. We all know that these
-Ideas are irreconcilable, There is no possibility of holding the doctrine of
Transmigration if .we cannot believe in a.permanent soul, and if the sonl is
believed to be permanent there is no necessity of the doctrine of the Five
Skandas, which plays a very important part in Buddhism. Speaking of the
soul which undergoes Transmigration, the learned writer says, “A Satva
exists from all eternity and may undergo any number of Transmigrations.”
Again ; he says, “ That Buddhism upholds the doctrine of S:itvic immortality.”
These are according to him the opinions of the Lamas of Tibet. These asser-
‘tions at once prove how unfounded are the opinions that Buddhism holds, that
ithe soul is nothing but a series of conscious states without a permanent sub-
lstratum, and how true is ‘the Nydya Doctrine, “ That Transmigration is pos-
ible only on the belief that the soul is permanent.”

The question now to be considered is—' what aro the Five Skandas and is
there any utility in holdjpg to them? In my opinion the-Five Skandas are
introduced to explain the cause of Samséra, in other words, the Fall of Man or
the Origin of Sin. In the Bhaghavat Gité wo read as follows: “By what
lis man‘propelled to commit sins, seemingly against his will and as if constrained
[क़ some secret force?” Krishna says, “It is Kéma (lust) which instigates
‘him, ‘.The objects are more powerful than the senses. But the Manas is
‘stronger than the objects; and the Buddhi is stvonger than Manas, and Kéma
is still more powerful than Buddhi,” (vide 3rd chapter Bhaghavat 0164). Thus,
according to the doctrine of Bhégavat Gitd, the cause of awe © fall of the SouP
or 11 are—(1) The senses with the objects; (2) Manas ; (3) Buddhs ;
and (4) Kéma. .

The senses with the objects is really the Répa Skandha, for in the Hindu
and Buddhistic language it is explained as efaeaafquifa == कूपः कषः । The
Bréhmanical Manas wm, corresponds to the Buddhistic @qat and the बुि
(Buddhi) = सन्ना, 9 lastly Kéma (WRI) corresponds to संस्कार 160४080 काम and


--- PAGE 15 [OCR_san+eng] ---
viii PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY. [Journal & Toxt, Part I, 1894.
Samskéra ie explained as ways. Whtén these four begin to act on the Soul or
Vijivina wo have the beginning of Samsir&. So the Five Skandas is simply
a mode of explaining the origin of sin. Thas in Bréhmanism and Buddhism
the doctrine of the Five Skandas is neceisary to explain the doctrine of
Transmigration. /  * . .
EKOTYBHAVA. ॥

The surest way to get rid, of Transmigration or re-incarnation is the
meditation of Hkolibhdva, This word in Sanskrit is derived from eka=one,,
ula=séwn, and bhdva=existence, and the phrase Ekotibhdva means the
existence having sewn in one. As far as we recollect, the first mention of 1778
word in the Buddifistic works occurs in the Lalitavistara, Tn chapter 22nd of
this work we are told, when Buddha was practising the meditation referred to
in the 47th 80079 of the Ist Book of Yoga philosophy, he meditated on Ekoti-
bhiva and he enjoyed supreme bliss. Now, what is this Lkotibhdva and have
we any mention of it in any ancient Sauskrit writings, as the means of procur-
ing emancipation? In the Mundakopanishad we read the following verse as
giving an explanation of the Vedic senso of Hkotibhdva : “ In Him is sewn (sta)
the heavens, earth, atmosphere, and the mind with the organs. Know Him
to bo One (रक, |) and dismiss all other words, for IIe is’tho Bridge for Im-

mortality.” पि
Again wo read in the Gitd, “All things are sown (sq) in me as precious
gems ig a string. “ 0
Thus we seo in the कण्ट meditation, the abject of med@tation
should be the cause from which everything proceeds. It is according to
Bréhmanism Brahmi, and according to Buddhism, it is. Buddha,

ये षमा देतुप्रभवाः देतुस्तेषां तथागतः ।
waginy यो निरोध wig मदाग्रमणः ॥

--- PAGE 16 [OCR_san+eng] ---
JOURNAL

BUDDHIST TEXT SOCIETY OF INDIA.

NAGA OR SERPENT DEMI-GODS.
(Compiled from Tibetan works.)

The chief place of residence of the Niyas is éalled Bhogavati—the Land
of enjoyments. It is situated in the nether wozld, 3,000 Yojanas below the
depth of the, great ocean. The Ndgas are, according to the natufe of their
faith in the holy religion, divided into two classes :—Those that do care for
religjon,*and those that do not care for it. The former do good to human
beings, and the latter, being naturally bent on mischiaf, bring tronbles on
them. The mischievous Ndyas are always troubled with showers of burn-
ing sand. Heaps of burning sand fall on them to scald their persons and
to disfigure their fair gex. After each such visitation the Nidgas recover
from the burning effects onlyeto be’ burnt again by succeeding showers. These
storms of burning sand are in fact the kdrmic curse of the Ndyé land. The
Nigas that are devoted to Buddhism enjoy a general immunity from these
infernal storms. * - ५

Tue Curer Catses or Birtu in toe N&ua Lowa, THe 47000
or THE NAGA DEMI-Gops.

Whoever under the influence of passion becomes blinded with anger, and
under its passiqga ate impulse sets fire to the Vihdéras (monasteries) of the holy
congregation, oMhousos, towns, villages, &e., after death, is born in hell, there
to suffer the torments of various. descriptions. Spme of these sufferers in
course of time escape from hell aud are re-bora into the class of animals,
called Tiryak, some as gnakes, others as Néga demi-gods in the nether world.

# In tho 60th Pallava of tho Avadéna Kalpalaté—tho story of Niga Kuméra, tho fol-
lowing acconnt of showers of burning sand occurs :—
A certain Nga named Dhana lived with his family on the sea-shore. Hot sand used to
‘fall at all Limes on their bodies. This was a sonrce of great trouble to them. "Once Sadhana
of the Ndéga Dhana, asked his father, why it was that showers of hot sand caused
0 mnch tronble to them. Was there no charm or spell that could pnt an end to the
‘unwelcome visitation ? Was it truo that all the Ndéas wore subject to that kind of suffering ?
To this the father replied :—Yes, it is a pest to which all Vagus aro subject but only those
who embrace the holy Buddhist faith, enjoy immanity from it, the other serpents remain
in a state of perpetual four. Thoy are miséruble, as they are destitute of* tho blessings
f the divino croed: At that time Jina resided in the Jetavana grovo at Srivasti. He
used to alleviate ‘the sufforings of all distrossed creatures by the nectar of his sublime
precepts. Hearing this Sudhana taking choicest flowors with him sct out for Jetavana,
Having strewn the fowerg at tho feet of the Blessed One he prostrated himsolf in profound
lveneration beforé him. The touch of Jina’s feet was miraculously. soothing to his burnt
tbody. Jina dilivered & sermon of moral precepts to him and thereby alleviated the
{sufferings of those Ndgas who heard it. `

2


--- PAGE 17 [OCR_san+eng] ---
कति OF KLAPATRA NAGA. (Journal und Text, ए, 1804.

of the misdeeds of their former existences, such as

ronsequence : ति
In conseq Vihiras, temples, &e., burning sand and fire

luring other people's houses,
m ticles at times fall on them to torment them. ,

1 The Ndyas of the happier class, १.५) those that are pious and*devoted to
religion, particularly to Buddhism, are mild. ॥ hey sctdom give expression
to their angry passion, consequently storms of burning sand never blow on
then

gencrally delightful, and possessed of springs and lakes
५५८ lotuses of varions s nades of colour, and of rich
castles built of precions stones of various sizes and colours, Their houses
me 10४ ‘ut in appearnce, pecull in shape and design. Kven the
walls whieh surround the superb mansions of the Néga Rajas are built of
coloared precious stones—green, red and yellow.

The Migas are poi ed of the seven kinds of gems of untold value,
which emit lustre of various Imes.

Their dress is rich ahd beautiful, They adorn themselves with flowers
of varions kinds and shapes. They use perfumed powders and seented oint-
mets. ‘They drink ambrdsial wives and eat dainties of various kinds. .

In short, they enjoy a life of casc and pleasure. It is for these cirenm-
stances tat their abode is cafled Bhogurati, १.९.) “ possessed of onjoyments,” *

In former times there reigned in the city of Pataliputra *the cclebrated
King Asoka. Once npon a time while he was seated on his throne,the mor-
chants who had gongin quest of precious stones and gems to the Islands m the
Ocean, returning home made known the following complaint to his
majesty. While returmmg with their cargoes, precious gems and articles,
they were robbed by pirates who were Nagas. A mendicant named Indra
was at that time present in the court. At his syggestion Asoka sent a copper
tablet containing his commands inscribed on it to the Négus for the restitu-
tion of the stolen goods to their owners. Jt was thrown into the sea.
But the Ndyas flung back the tablet on the shore. Ab this the mouarch
became sad and pensive. In the meantime a heavenly deity appeared be-
fore him and advised him to worship Jina, The King accordingly wor-
shipped Jina, and performed 9 religions service in his नाका, He then
for a second time sont a message to the Ndqus, This time the Ndgas obedicnt
to his eall brought back all the robbed commodities of the merchants, The
King restored the stulen treasures to the merchants and disiyjssed the Ndyas
with presents and thanks.

In appearance the Mégas are like Inman beings above the waist, and
snakes below Some among them cau assume any form they like, and some
can nove freely m space. =

Their abodes
siniling with lilies

Tat Story or पना N&ua

Once ou atime, when the Blessed One was preaching the Law, Hlapatra
the king of the Nagas, assuming the gnise of a ( avarti Raja, came to
hewr his sermons. The All-knowing Buddha, fereciving this, addressed him
thos :-—“O Naga Raja, during the m stry of Buddha Kiisyapa you did
viokute the rules of rimaya (Code of moral and religions discipline), aud
thereby wore condenmed to the state of the unhappy, tobe born as a Néyt
Have you now come here, assuming a false appearance like a,hypocrite, while
Tam preaching the Divine Law of Truth ? Appear therefore in your own
shape, and hear the sermon for the purification of eyour mind, if your nature

* From theso and also from tho account

be inferred that they, the Nigus, wor
even in that early period ittfesied the ish

. . °
tof King A<oka’s message to tho Négas it may
no other people than tho Chinese. Chineso pirates
jands of tho Indian Oceun as far as Coylon,

--- PAGE 18 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society ] STORY OF RLAVATRA NAC

will permit you to do so.” Next day, thére appeared in the audionce a huge
serpent on whose head was grown an Elapatra treo. Wien tho tree moved
at each blast of the wind, it seemed 9s if the brains of the Néga were being
drawn out aud his head paralysed. Lis body measured many miles ; for while
118 head caine near the Bicssed One to hear the sermon, its tail lay in
Takshngild (the ancient Taxila), At this strange and fearful sight of the
gerpent the people of the country becaine alarmed. Many among the agulience™
‘an for life in different diréctions. Then the Blesscd One addressing them
said :—* Why are you so frightened ? This is the very Chakravarti Raja who
has been in your midst all these days to hear my scrmons. Now he has only
appeared in his naturaleshape.” Being asked what made him so strangely
transformed Buddha continued :—“Tn one of his former births he was a mouk
of Buddha Kagyapa. Once ona time when he was walking ronnd an Mlapatra
tree, his head struck against its brauch and caused some pain, He became
angry, and cut the branch, little thinking of the consequences that would
result from it. Owing to that transgression he has been born as a Niga, and
that branch of the Hlupatra tree has grown upou bis head. Such are the
inevitable consequences of Karma, and such the sufferings of sin.” *

The following account of a Ndya occurs in the Vinuya pitaka—

“At that time there was a Ndga (serpent) who was ashamed of, and concciv-
ed aversion for, his having been born as a serpent. Now this serpent thought
‘What am I to do in order to become released from being a serpent, and
quickly to obtain human nature ?१ Then this serpent gave himself the follow-
ing answer: ‘These monks of Sikya lead indeed a virtuous, tranquil, holy
life; they speak the truth; they keep the precepts of morality, and are
endowed with all virtues. If [ could obtain (Prarrajyé) ordination with them,
T should be released from being a serpent and quickly obtain human nature.’
Thon that serpent, in the shapo of a youth, went to the Bhikkhnus, and
asked them for the Pravrajyé ordinations; the Bhikkhus conferred on him
the ordinations. At that ‘time that serpeut dwelt together with a certain
Bhikkhu in the Jetavana Vihdra near its boundary wall. When his com-
panion had gone out of the Vihéra for a walk at dawn, the serpent, who
thonght himself safe from discovery, fell asleep in ‘his natural shape. The
whole Fikdra was filled with the snake's body; his windings jutted out of
the window. When the Bhikkhu veturned to the Vilidirw he saw the snake's
body and becgme terrified, aud cried out. The Bhikkhus van up to him and
mide a noise when they saw the snake’s bedy, The serpent awok@ from that
noise and sat down on his seat. The Bhikkhux said to hint ‘Who ave you?’
‘Lam asexpent, Reverend Sirs.’ ‘And why have yon done such a thing P’
Then the serpent told the whole mattor to the Bhikkhus, The DBhiklkhus
told it to the Blessed One.

“Tn consequence of that, and on this occasion, the Blessed One, having
ordered the fraternity of Bhikkius to assemble, said to that serpent: ‘You
serpents are not capable of spiritual growth in this doctrine and discipline.
Nowever, serpent, go and observe fast on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth
day of each half-month in the name of the Buddhist Trinity, Thus will you be
released from being a serpent and qnickly obtain human nature.” ‘Then the
Blossgd Ono said to the Bhikkhus, ‘There are “two occasions on which a*
serpent who has resumed the human shape manifests his true nature:
When he has sexual inteyconrse with a female of his species; and when he
thinks himself safe from discovery and falls asleep,’ ”

The good Nigas to increase the happiness of all living beings
in this world caus¢ copious rains to fall in the proper seasons. They

* Fyom IIdal-va Lafi und Blama C/hu bzui Rin-po C/he-hi Gsufi houm चा, leaf 24,

--- PAGE 19 [OCR_san+eng] ---
५ story OF a SECOND NAGA. (Journal and Text, Pt. I, 1894,
and rain’from coming when 1 are not needed.
i १ to the holy people in general, to Bud dha, Dharma and
(0 Pay ey नि those fens which trouble their fellow Néyas, who are
= they live in peace, and in their devotion to Buddha guard his

0 plies. . न ; .
क a {ime when the people of the four great continents become reli-
on Brahmans perform 1 heir duties, and Sramanas their

ai inclined ; wh
giously ginclined ; when An 7 verfuk They then send
devotions, the pious Naga Rajas become power ful ‘y ५ 1 down rains?

lant harvests and fruits. ; |
“ (पि of this great continent, Jambudvipa, are subject to
8 5

isitati 19 kiad§ of calamities which ecawse (1) famine, failure of
the vislstions of a epidemics and pestilence, ( 4), high winds and floods.

Tn the Western Coutivent, called the Godania, there is danger to life from

cts of foul water.
५० त oe tater Continent, called Videha, people suffer from accidents,
frequently caused by lightning, and from fearful noises that stun the car.

In the great continent of the north, called Uttara Kuru, the greatest
injury ocems to life and property by cold winds, hail-storms, snow and heavy
rains. ‘Thou the skies generally remain overcast with black rain-clouds,

Now, when pions kings rule in these continents, and people there become
inclined to religion, these culamities diminish, chiefly by the exertions of the
good Ndyus, for then they too out of their fajth in the doctrine of Karma
and phala (acts aud consequences ),eendeavour todo good to all the living
beings of this world. This report of their goodness, combined with that of
thoir fabulous wealth, and above all, the cirewustance of their, happy living,
make the people of Jambulyipa to envy their life. Not unfrequently at such
periods men offer their prayeys to be born as, Négus in Bhogavati for enjoy-
ment and blissful ease, वि

Iv is the glare of external show and pomp that tempts them to forget
the fact that, inspite of theie boasted wealth, the Nges are but Tiryak—
living heings of the animal order. *

The mischievous Vdyus also live in the migd-ocean in the nether world,
called Bhogavati.” “

At the time when nnrighteous kings rale in this world and people hecome
sinful, being naturally bent on evil, these Migas exert their malignant influence
to inereaso the sallerings of all living beings of this wodd. They cause
most appalting sounds, like those produced by the falling of mountains, to
resound, and also fearful light ning to flash, and thunder to rattle in the skies of
Videha, when people die in large numbers from the devastating offeets of
these natal phenomena, :

_At the same time in Jambudvipa, the greatest. damage is done to life hy
famine, १५ 14111) 1 ५11, heavy downponrs, Hoods, epidemics, wars, revolutions,

i ५५ rw ae lo the level of the plains,
efits of which nope a धि a water becomes mnddy and bad, from the
711 n great numbers. In Uttara Kuru the skies

+ ौ वि Ht छ a al the year round, the sun being seldom scen, in
van pao Tolt not thrive nor flowers bloom, nor trees blyssom.
“sno Fragrance. It is suid that owing to. the dullness

of the weather, and the y 8]) 1४1. © sound 0.
¢ humidity
idlity of the atmo: plyre th ound of musical

prevent hail-storms, win ds,

00) or tie Naas,

Among the Nié त
human कु cut frogs, besides all that constitutes the food of
3s ubsist on sand, and mostly it is suid sustain their vitality

--- PAGE 20 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) - CONVERSION OF GOPALA NAGA, 5

. : : ५
by inhaling copious draughts of wind. The cating of frogs is common among
the snakes, which are reptiles, and therefore are the lowest ordor of the Nagas
living on this Marth.
* ~

Tus Narore or वाप Nioas.

+ The male Ndgas in their former existence, when they lived as human beings,
had caused their children and wives to work very hard to contribute to their
selfish happiness and amusements. They took the best food themsclves,
giving only the refuse to their children and-wives. For such acts of selfish-
ness, afteredeath, they are born as Negus.

Again the impious Néga Riijas falling out afhtong themselves, and burning
with spite and rage, draw clouds to rain on earth, send hail, and cause high
winds to blow, that the crops may be destroyed and the land devastated. This
is their nature.

It is also mentioned in tho sacred books that men and women of the holy
order, when they break their vows of purity which they had taken, but still
retaining their faith in the holy doctrine, are mostly born as Niiqus.

In his great work called the Lamrim chenmo, Tsoikhapa mentions that re-
ligious persons of the holy order have four duties—to keep the vows of pure
morals, observance of religious rites, holy living, and sacred doctrine. Those
Bhikshus who only keep ono of these four, regardless of the rest, are suro to
be born as Nédgas in their newt birth. ‘The following anccdote is from the
Siitras :—" Onco on a time the Ndéga Raja Samudra, revercntially addressed
the Blessed Onc, ‘Lord, I have ‘been residing in this great occan since the
beginning of the present kalpa (ago). During the time that the Tathdgata
Krakue’handa was in this world, the number of the Niigas had greatly
diminished, but why is it that their nuyber has now again become incon-
ceivably great P’ ॥

“he Blessed one replied :—‘O chief of the Négas! such followers of tho
sacred doctrine in this world, as while leading a life of indifferent morals,
did not care for the observance of the religious rites, for the purpose of
a holy life, but wore true to their creed, in other respects shall not be born .
in hell. They shall generally pass to the land of the Nagas after their death.”

A list is also given in the legendary works of Tibet of the number of
religious men who turned into Négus after their death :—

Daring the time of Tathigata, Krakue’handa 98 millions.

. ” - Kanakamuni 64 » .

» ” Kasyapa 80 9
५ + ” Sdkya Simha 99. ,,

After the death of Buddha Sakya Sithha many of the fallen among tho
four classes of Buddhist priests became transformed into Négas. It is also
stated that many among them, at tho .expiration, of their term of कद life,
had beep born as men and gods.

Srory or tHe Conversion or 60९44 Naca.
(Translated from the 66th pallava of Kshemendra’s Avaddna Kalpalatié),
† By Sri Manenpra [4 Das, B.D. ~

1. Who reveres not those tliat by their goodness have become enlightened
like the moon, whose company is sweot and refreshing like an ambrosial
drayght, and the sight of whom allays the pains (caused by) the venom of
spite and ill-feelings.

2. The Blessed One leaving the country of the Yaksha, named Dhiara-
mukha, in ध short time arrived at the town of Hifigumardana.

--- PAGE 21 [OCR_san+eng] ---
CONVERSION OF GOPALA NACA. (Journal and Text, Pt. 1, 1804.

the reverential homage of King Brahmadatta,

3. There he received
embly for the instruction of the

and delivered a sermon at the royal pss

pious.

4, There all the citizens , with a view to escape from all ‘evils |
ed the Blessed Ono, the deliverer of all living beings, and thus approadh:
ehim :— :

5. “O Venerable Lord! there stands a rocky hill on the outskirts of

this city wheré lives an intolerable wicked Wéga named Gopilaka,

6. “He is ५ great pest 10 men, animals and crops. No one can
say whose transformation tls being is that has.been causing want And distress
in the midst of prosperity:

, 7, “OThon ! that hast subdued the uncontrollable and tamed the unrul.
give us refuge under thy mercy, for we pray for thy protection in ting
emergency.” “

8. Saying this, when they went कण the V
fountain of mercy, left the assembly and prada to धमा ust

9. On the precifiitons side of that hill, he saw the abode of tho
9 Naga whoso breath of venom seemed to blacken the water (of tho
10. Tho Blessed Buddha sat cross-legged on its b vhich*
dashed by countles rushing waves that ulittered like naked, 7

11. The calm loving eycs that mafle his checrful ‘looks sweet. lik
nei Le peers and cleansed the water of the venom. “me

. Mirrored on the blue water, his itti ७
shone liko the sun emerged from the azure क" भण golilon Tastre,
19. The darkness which shrouded the abode Nii
. 7 6 of the N i
ed — sight, as quick as the flight of a host of snakes, ५८ now vanish.
. Tho King of the Négus, with blood-red ¢ red. th
and overcast the world with विः pad-red cyos, soon ontered the sky

15. Tho fire of his furions rage, from the thi
॥ ६ 8 rage, ck ic
५) forth flashes of lightning, caused all the quarters to quake no it' enn
with fear. त _ ^

16. The roaring of the infuriated cl i i
the world’s dissolution had commenced. 1 cay त ति bend
in ह 0 ee the mountains weyc being torn asunder. meen

„ Thon fell fearful showers of rai ¢ ied with i
storm, which smashed the trees and Cashed the hea sk प teary fall

18, At the sight of the Great Deliverer, tle. hen y क
the wicked Néga became, transformed, as it vere, into showers 11
atime tee wontle'gale 0 it were, into showers of flowers

19. Sceing the wowds brig i
freed from the पिति 01 (०
10008, that shamed the beauty of their neck] व
the wicked Naga :— cklace, the sylvan Gods thus addressed

20. O black cloud! gi 18 7 |
this golden mountain, in ‘whose 221) tie yo ee ed ty the
destructive winds, seck peaccful shelte ings 1८0 you when oppressed by the

नि pride being thas fot rey remains unmoved ? .
will, and in reverence, joining the alm ४ न 1
पु > palms of his hands, fell prostrate bofore the

» The Ndgé havin, in hi
of boundless compassion, ng sought refuge in him, the Blessed One, that mine
and (र © him moral instructions, and kindness
3. Then on the supplication ¢ (1 |
had fallen at his feet, the Jina oxpressed पी
a wish to always visit his place.

--- PAGE 22 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] CONVERSION OF GOPALA NAGA. 7
- °

24, In the meantime a Yaksha, named Vajrapini, happened to come
there. Tho Blessed One extended his grace to him for peace.

~ 25. The Great Toacher having allayed the extreme sufferings of tho
world, and beiug worshipped and abundantly praised by the Heavenly deities,
entered the woods and sat under the rocks which had been sanctified by tho
touch of the lotus feet of the past Buddhas.

26. The King of the Gods, Indra, who came there for att interview,
observing a smile on his countenance, asked its cause, aud the All-knowing `
Buddha thus replied té him :—

27. “In a previous existence I lived in this peaceful hermitage, which
was adorned with crystal fountains of holy water’ and inhabited by animate
beings frée from enmity. [४ was a place for Dharma, for the sages to purify
their hearts. .

28. “O Indra! in this solitary forest, where fawns skipped and sucked
the breast. of the lioness, there lived the Buddhas, those sovercign healers of
the world’s sufferings—Krakuc’handa, and the noble Kanakamuni, and the
perfect Tuthdga@ja Kasyapamuni, who was possessed of clear understauding,—
the result of serene peace.”

29. Assoonas this was said, a hunter, the fruition of whose merits
had drawn nigh, happengd to come there and sought refuge unto him. At
the sight of Buddha, he gained that peace which is attainable by moral
instructions.

.30. That fortunate hunter, whose mind, by the graccs of the Blessed
Onc,,.was imbued with piety and religion, orected a slipa, named Mriyd-
dhipa, in whieh tho nail-paring and hair gf Buddha, presented by himself,
formed the sacred symbols. ,

N. B—With this may bo read the following extracts from the Vishyupiréna, Gopila
appears to be the prototype of Kaliya Naga of Vishnn P.

One day, Krishna, unaccompanied by Réma, went to Vrinddvana. Te was attended
by (a troop of) cowherds, and gaily decorated with wild flowers. Ou his way, he camo
8 the Yamuné, which was flowing in sportive undulations, and sparkling with foam, as
if with smiles, as the waves dashed against the borders. Within its bed, however, was the
fearful pool of the serpent Kiliya—boiling with the fires of poison,—from the fumes of
which, large trees npon the bank were blighted, and by whose waters, when raised, by ४
galo into the air, birds were scorched = Beholding this dreadful (lake), which wag like an-
other mouth of death, Madhusdgana reflected, that the wicked and poisonous Kéfiya, who
had been vanquished by himself (in tho person of Gartida), and had been obliged to fly
from the ocean (where he had inhabited the island Ramayaka), must be lurking at its
bottom and defiling the Yamund, the consort of the sea, so that neither men nor cattle
could slake their thirst by her waters. Snch being the case, he determined to dislodge
the Naga, and enable the dwellers of Vraja to frequent the vicinage without fear: for
it was the especial purposo, 116 considered, ofghis descent upon earth, to reduce to sub-
jection all such violators of law. “Here,” thought he, “is a Kadamba-tree, which is
sulliciontly near. I can clin up it, and thence leap into the sgrpent’s pool” Having thus
resolved, 6. bound his clothes tightly about him, and jumped boldly into the lake of
the serpent-king. ‘The waters, agitated by his plunge amidst them were scattered to a
considerable distance from the bank; and, the spray falling upon the trees,- they were
immediately set on fire by the heat of tho poisonous vapgar combined with the or
and tho whole horizon was inn blaze. Krishna, having dived into the pool, struck his
arms in defiwnco; and the snake-king hearing the sound, quickly came forth. His eyes
we® coppery red, and his hoods were flaming with deadly venom. Ho was attended “by
many other (powerful and) poisonous snakes,—feeders upon air,—and by hundreds of
serpent-nymphs, decorated with rich jewels, whose ear-rings glittered with trombling
radiance, as the wearers moved along. Coiling themsolves around Krishya, they all bit
him with teeth from which fiery poison was emitted.

Krishna smiled gently, and (speedily) extricated himself from the coils of the snakes.
Laying hold of tho middle hood of their कार्णं with both his hands, he bent it down, and set
his foot upon tho hitherto unbended head, and danced upon it in triumph. Whenever tho
suko attempted to rpise his head, it was agnjn-troddon down ; and many brnises were inflicted
on tho hood bf the pressure of tho toes of Kyishyua, Trampled upon by the fect of Krishna,


--- PAGE 23 [OCR_san+eng] ---
8 CONVERSION OF GOPALA NAGA. (Journal and Text, Pt. T, 1894.
.

as they changed position in the dance, the snake fainted, and vomited forth much blood.
Beholding the head and neck of their lord thus injured, and the blood flowing (from his
mouth), the females of tho snake-king implored the clemency of Madhusddana, “Thou art
recognized, O gol of goda!” they exclaimed. “Thon aré the soverein of all; thou art
light snpreie, inserntable ; thou art the mighty lord, the portion of that (supreme light).
The gods themselves are unable worthily to praise thee, tho lord self-exixtont. How, then,
shall females proclaim thy nature? How shall wo (fully) declare him, of whom the egy of
mi, made up of carth, sky, watgr, fire, and air, is but a small portion of a part? Holy
sages have in vain sought (o know thy clernal ossouce. We bow to that form which is the
mist subtilo of aloms, tho largest of tho largo; to him whose birth is without a creator,
whos end huows no destroyer, and who alono is the canse’of duration. There is no wrath
in theo; for thine is the proteetion of the world; and, henco, this chastisement of Kaliya,
Yet, hear us, Women aro lo be regarded with pity by ‘the virtuous: animals are humanely
treated even by fools, Let, thereforo, the author of wisdem have compassion upen this poor
creature, Thyself, us au oviparons hooded snake, art the upholder of the world. Oppressed
by theo, he will speedily perish. What is this feeble serpont compared to thee, in whom the
universe reposes? Fricndship and enmity are felé towards cqnals and superiors, (not for
those infinitely heneath ns). ‘Thew, sovercign of tho world, have merey upgn us ‘This
(infortumate) snako is ubout to expire. Give ns, as a gift of charity, our husband.” धि

When they had thus spoken, the Naga himself, almost exanimaic, repepted, fecbly, their
solicitations for mercy. “ Worgive me,” he tharmured, “0 god of gods! How shill 1 addross
thoo, who art possessed, theongh thine own strength and essence, of the eight groat faculties,
--in energy uncqualled ? Thou art the Supreme, the progenitor of the supreme (Brahmi).
Thon art the Supreme Spirit; and from thee the Suprege proceeds. Thon art beyond
wl finite obj How can I speak thy praise? How can declare his greatness from
whom come Brahmi, Rudra, andra, Indra, the Maruts, tho Aswins, the Vasus, and
Adityas; of whom the whole world is an infinitely small portion, a portion destined to
represent his essence ; and whose nature, primitive or derived, Brahmé and the immoftals
do not comprehend? Low can Lupproach him to whom the gods offer ine: pe and flowers
culled fi the groves of Nandana;,whose incarnate forms the king of the deities ever
adores, nncofiscions of his real person; whom the snges that have withdrawn. their senses
from all external objects worship in thought, and, enshrining his image in tho purposes
of their hearts, present to it the flowers of sanctity ? Iam quite unable, O god of Gods !
to worship or to hymn thee, ‘Thy own clemency must alone inflaence thy mind to%how
me compassion. It is the nature of snakes to be nd Foam born of their kind.
Heuce, this is my nature, not mine offence, is created, uatit is déstroyed, by
theo; and the species, form, and nature of all things in the world are thy work Even
such as thou hast ercated me, in kind, in form, and in natore, such L ami; aud such are
iny actions. Should | act differently ? Then, indeed, should 1 deservo thy punishment ; for
80 thon hast declared. Yet, that have been punished by thee is, indeed, ५ blessing ; for
ponishment from thee alone is a fayonr, Behold, Lam now without strength, without
वलिं eprived of both by thee! Spare me my lifo! [१६ uo more. Command mo
what ] shall do.” .

Heing thos addressed by Kiliya, Kyishna replied: “You must not tarry here, (nor
anywhere) iu the stream of the Yamuni. Depart (immediately) with your family and
followers to the sea, where Gunida, the foo of the serpent-race, will not harm you when
he sees the impression of my feet upon your brow, So saying, Mari set the snake king
at liberty, who, bowing reverontially ‘to hig victor, departed to the ocean ; abandoning,
in the sight of all, the Take he had haunted, accompanied hy all his females, ehildven, and
dependants, When the sake was gone, the Gopas hailed Govinda as one risen from the
dead, and embraced him, and"bathed his forchend with teas of joy. Others, contemplating.
water of the river, now freed from peril, were Gilled with wonder, and sang the praises
of Keishuaewho is unaffected by works.’ ‘Thus, eminent hy his glovions exploits, and
eulogized by the Gopas and Gopig, Krishna returned to Vraja. "Wilson's Vishnu Péran,

=

ba


--- PAGE 24 [OCR_san+eng] ---
गापालनागदमनावदानम्‌ |
Gagpila-n4ga-damanam.

wang येषां देषविषोभ्मा प्रशान्तिसुपयाति ।
-श्र्टतरसभ्नौोतलास्ते कस्य ग सुजनेन्दवी TT: ॥१॥
घारामुखस्य awe स्थामाद क हितस्ततः |
चणाद्वाप भगवाश्नगरं FPA नम्‌ ५९॥
विनयात्‌ पूरजितस्तज ब्रह्मदत्तेन WY |

तच्छं सदि qu GH धन्यानामनुग्राखनम्‌ ॥२॥

तज पौराः घमग्येत्य भगवन्तं अणिन्नपुः ।
सर्ग्यापद्धिनिषातेषु wat सर्वदेहिनाम्‌ ten

॥ ~
भगवन्नसि मगरस्याम्ते पाषाणपर्वतः |
तच गोपालको मागः क्रूरो वसति दुःखः ॥५॥

सं पश्यूनां जनानाश्च श्यामाश्च महाश्रनिः।
सम्पस्ञानामभावाय भ fry: केन frida: gn

अद्‌ान्तद्मनस्ासिन्नशान्त्रमनस्य ते । ,
उपसं waa wee शररेषिणाम्‌ ॥०॥

इत्युक्ता तेषु यातेषु भगवाम्‌ करुणानिधिः ।

अन्तितः खभामध्याद्चयौ पावाणन्धरम्‌ ॥८॥
तटे frags तष्ट भवनं भोमभोगिनः ।

ख ददे विषश्वाचैरिव श्यामौहृतोदंकम्‌ ॥९॥

--- PAGE 25 [OCR_san+eng] ---
10

गोपाछनागदमनम्‌ । — (Journal & Toxt, Part 1, 1694,

वलन्निष्को श निंखिंग्रविषमो िंवनाक्गले |
aT भगवान्‌ बुद्धः Tere समुपाविरत्‌ ॥१०॥

प्रसन्नालोकनसुधावन्धृता स्िग्धचचुषा |
a निनायाशट सविषं विषं निरविंषतौमिव ny en

नौलाम्बुविमितततुः स बभौ कनकघुतिः |
CHARTS गाहमान दृवाम्रम्‌ ॥१९॥

तिमिरं नागभवने तत्मकाशविद्धनित॑म्‌ |
पलायमानवालोलवयालजालतुलां ययौ ॥१२॥

नागराजस्तमालोक्य रधिरारुणएलो चनः |
सदसा काश्माविश्व Aa मेघमयं जगत्‌ ॥१ ४॥

कोधाभ्िधूमनिवहेरिव तख घनोन्गमैः ।
विधुच्िङैरकम्बन्त fem: सन्त्रासिता इव ॥१ ५७

गन्नितैमत्तमेषानां प्रलयारमरंसिभिः ।
गुहागेहान्यभ्यन्त इदयानौव श्गताम्‌ ॥१६॥
ततः frag ष्टिः faeries |
पपात पातित्टतिः खूलोपलङ्लाङला NGO

सा दुष्टसुजगोूष्टा efegma तायिनः |
ययौ वालानिलोक्ञासलसत्कुखमवर्ेताम्‌ ॥ १ ८॥

दृष्टा प्रकाशविशदान्यसुपञ्ञवानि
शक्ोपगोतञ्खसुमानि वनानि तच ।
दषेखितप्रसरनिजिततारदाराः

करर फणौग्रमवदन्‌ वनदेवताखम्‌ ॥१९॥

--- PAGE 26 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.J गोपालनागदमनम्‌ |

भोः कालमेघ विकृतिं परिसु्च fara
निष्कम्य एव कनकाचल एष यस्य |,
चुप्दिधाः प्रलयमारूतभन्यमाणा

लीला नितम्बह्ुहरं शरणं प्रयाम्ति ॥२०॥

ततः सद्यःपरिकषीएमदः सं्यक्रविक्रियः |
नागः शास्तारमभ्येत्य प्रणनाम रताश्नलिः ॥२.१॥

तस्य यातस्य PTE भगवान्‌ करुणानिधिः ।
भिचापद्प्रद्क्रे कुशलाग्मलुगरशम्‌ ॥९९॥

प्रणयाद्‌ धितस्तेन चरणालोनमौ लिना ।
wad तस्य भवने सन्निधिं विदधे जिनः ॥२२॥

तसिन्नवखरे तच प्रसक्गाप्तस्य शान्तये |
SIS चक्रे भगवान्‌ वञ्रपाणेर तुगरदम्‌ ॥२४॥

लोकोपतापमसमं विनिवाय्यै रास्ता
विस्तारितस्हतिपद चिद ग्ाच्यमामः |
भेजे वनानि विरहरक्नय waqg-
पादाम्बुनप्रण्यप्ूतशिलातलानि ॥२५॥

तच अन्दगेनातरेन सुरराजेन ससित: |
सितस्य कारणं ष्टः सव्ैन्नस्तमभाषत ॥२६॥

एतेषु पुष्ड्लिलामलनिद्रेषु .
निर्ैरसत्वसुभगेषु तपोवनेषु ।
घर््राधिवासमुनिमानसमाजेनेषु

श्रान्तः पदेषु तु मयेव रतोविष्ारः ॥२७॥

--- PAGE 27 [OCR_san+eng] ---
12

गोपालनागदमभम्‌ | (Journal & Text, Port 1, 1804,

कङुच्छन्दः Tay angie Gra:

स सम्यक्संबुद्ध: . शरमविमलधौः काष्यपञुनिः । *
 विविक्तेऽखजिन्‌ सिंहौखनतलवद्रालरिणे

वने चक्रुः शक्रः स्थितिमखिशल्ोकान्तिभिषजः ५९२८॥

दति gare: agar,

ख युण्छपाकादय णुथकस्य
सन्दरनेरेव शमं दिदेश
गि्पद्‌ार- शरणं गतस्य ॥२९॥

भाग्यवान्‌ भगवतोदयनुगररा-
षकः कुगशललण्मानसः |
तत्प्रदिष्टनखकेशरलाञ्नं

तच चैत्यमकरोन्मगाधिपम्‌ we ot

दति चेभेष्रविर चितायां गोपालनागद मनं ॥

--- PAGE 28 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Sooiety.] STOPA—AVADANA. 13

STUPA—AVADANA.
(The 57th Pallava, Kalpalsté)]
TRANSLATED BY Pandit ANNADA Prasdp Sarasvati.

1. Theyeare glorious who have graced the world with tho (monu-
ments) of their fair fame, and whose talents have been well displayed (in
pious works) like the lustre of ear-rings of glowing gems diffusing in the ten
quarters.

2. The Blessed One being reverentially approached and earnostly en-
treated by Indra, caused a Stipa (monument) of his own to be erected on
the site of the Stipas (monuments) of the past Buddhas.

3. When that Stipa glittering with gems, .was crected by the gods,
it glowed with the brightness of a hundred suns, and darkness like the gloom
of (mind) vanished away.

4, Buddha having delivered a religious discourse on Vinaya (moral
discipline) to the Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Ndgas (serpent domi-gods) and the
Devas (gods), retifed from that place.

5. Assoon as the gods had built four 5८006 (monuments) on, tho
Pdshdna Parvata (rocky mountain), the Blessed One reared up thero a
fifth Stipa with five minarets.

6. Then the venerable Tathdgata proceeded to the country called
Béloksha.* There he was worshipped by a merchant of the name of Suprabud-
dha, who was rich like Kuvera—the god of wealth.

7. Buddha attended by his followers delivered a discourse on the doctrine
of purity and moral discipline. Suprabuddha hearing it awoke from the
slumber of mundane delusions and gained perfect enlightenment.

8. Suprabuddha by the command of the Blessed One, built a Stipa
called Balokshiya, the height of which measured tho loftiness of his character
and merits. He made it resplendent with the brightest gems.

9. From there the Blessed One (Tathdégata) proceeded to the village
of Dambara, where imparting moral instruction, he converted a Yaksha of
the name of Dambara.

10. Thereafter he visited Chanddla Gréma, the village of the Chanddlas,
—the vilest of the vile, where a Chanddli of the name of Malliké, together
with her soven sons became converted into tho doctrine of moral discipline.

11. Asthe lake abounding in lotus is turned muddy by Métatgas
(i. ९.» elephants), so Mallika and hér sons, though vile, being born in a Mat-
afiga (chanddla) family, now by the sight of the Blessed One (Jina) became

urified. .
P 12. *eGood mon who are free from impure thoughts and are ever com-
passionate become conspicuous by their earnestness to help the humble
and to save others who have been guilty, chagrined with sin, or afflicted with
immenso sufferings and tho pains of calamities.

13. Thereafter the Blessed One (Sugata), with the entire band of his
followers, having reached the village of Patala,t delivered religious instructions
to a houseltolder named Potala.

14. Having attained to the state of purity by the religious precepts
with which Sugata had favoured him, be caused ॐ monument made of pre-

* Béloksha appears to be the Sanskrit name of the city of Balkh. The wholo scene of
Buddha’s miraculous exploits was according to the Mahéyéna school, the country incladed
in the Greck Kingdom of Bactriana, which extended from Turkistan to the delta of the
Indus and from the eastern boundary of Persia to Khoten.—Kd.

+ Pétéla— The modern Taté at the mouth of the Indus.

--- PAGE 29 [OCR_san+eng] ---
sTUPA—AVADANA. = | (ण्ण and Toxt, Pt. 1, 1

14 ॥
cious stones to be constructed in which were deposited the parings of

Sugata’s hairs and nails. धि

15. WheneIndra came to sec him, the Blessed One told him, that there,
in that country, would be erected (in time to come) a lofty monument* by a
King named Milinda (Minander).

16. In this manner the Blessed One having visited various places
showing his boundless compassion to all the world, became free from grief,
delusion and fear. The earth was filled with the sweet music of the tinkling
bells that were hung round the newly-erected Stipas—those sacred monu-
ments of Buddhist faith.

* May not this be Manikyala ?

--- PAGE 30 [OCR_san+eng] ---
^ श्तूपावदानम्‌ 1
Stdipavadiénam.

दिक्षान्ता्रवणोत्तंबतुलारो पितसहु्णः |
ते नयन्ति जगेषां यशस विराजते nen

भगवानथ शक्रेण तज प्राणावनाथितः । -
ृरवबद्धकेतसूपे निणसकृपमकारयत्‌ ॥९॥

ते wana तस्मिन्‌ देवैः स्यंशरतलिषि ।
लगाम जगतां कापि महामोषोपमं तमः ॥२॥

तच किन्नरगन्धवैनरमागदिवौकसाम्‌ |
धरी पदे विनयं समादिश्य ययौ जिम: ॥४॥

पाषाणप्ैते Base सूषचतुष्टये |

भगुवान्‌ पञ्चमं पं पञ्चसुपनयवेगरयत्‌ ॥५॥
अरय वालचनामानं दें WATT: । "
Aion सुप्रबद्धेन atta पूजितः ven
दिदेश धषविनयं. तसे येन स सानुगः |
मोदनिद्राचये प्राप सुपरवुद्धः मबुद्धताम्‌ ॥७॥
सख शासमाद्वगवतः पुं निजमभिवेन्नतम्‌ ॥
दालोचोयाभिधं es cath न्यवेशयत्‌ vey

डम्बरयाममासाद्च शनैरथ तथागतः |
विनौय wat नाम ae शिचापदपरदः etl

--- PAGE 31 [OCR_san+eng] ---
HATA | (Journal & Text, Part 1, 1894.

चण्डाशाममभ्येत्य चण्डालो मलिकाभिधाम्‌ |
सहितां सप्तभिः gafaeretarat व्यधात्‌ iy ०॥

ते कगेषसम्प्रासषमातङ्गद्शदू षिताः ।
quay दव प्रापुरवैमष्ं जिनदधैनात्‌ et
wag दूषिततरेषु जुगु सितेषु
पापोपतापविपुखब्यसमातुरेषु ।

समः ramet: कुविकखपरीना
भटोनावलम्नमव्राद धिकं भवन्ति ue ei

श्रवाय पाटशप्रामं सानुगः सुगतस्ततः |

wet टहपतेखके पोतलाख्यस्य सत्कथाम्‌ ॥१२॥
गिकापदाक्षवेमष्यः सुगतानुगरहेण सः ।

तत्के गनखलेगराङ् रत्रसुपमकारयत्‌ ॥१४॥

तच सन्दधेनायातं भगवाजिनद्रमम्योत्‌ ॥
fafeest नाम राजासिन्‌ देभे सूं करिष्यति ug

दरति भगवतः ert स्थाने दयाद्रंविलोकना-
दभवद्खिणो लोकः ओोकप्रमोदभयो ण्द्ितः ।
अरभिगवक्षतस्पो सद्गनग्भपि किङ्धिषो -
कुशकणशकलक्रौड़ालोला ra च मेदिनो ue qi

इति चेभेद्विरचितायां quar ॥

_

--- PAGE 32 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society | 17

Explanations of the mystic astrological ch:
Journal) obtained from the Temple of Suf-;du-&

LUN-TA.

This Tnseription is vulgarly called Riun-rta (the wine
of its being inscribed on flags, to flutter freely in the
bring good Inck. No description of it can be traced in the Kahgy
Tangyur sacred books, and therefore it may be surmised that it was unknown
to the Indian Buddhists. It is only found in the Buddhist astrological works
of Tiket and China. In Chinese it is called “ Lanta” the name being spelt
in Tibetan as Alun-rta, bat uot as षिवा, which literally means a wind-
hors The Chinese word lini, spelt Alnfiin Tibetan, means the year of
(one’s) birth, and Tu, spelt rta, meaning ४ course or wind, is symbolieal of a
jommey. Hence Liin-ta (itItin-rta) in Chinese’ means the life journey of an in-
dividual fiom the year of his birth to death. It is believed by the Chinese,
Buddhists, that if the astrological calculations of a man’s horoscope shew that
there are dangers and accidents to his life, the flying of a flag containing an
inseription of the Lda-te picture in the air, near his residence, Amoves them,
aud. it is from this cireumstanee that the flag has derived its nume Klin-rta,

Tn the centre, and at the four comers, arg the pictures of a horse, tiger,
lion, eagle and a dragon, whieh are generally considered to be the repres
tions of the gods that preside over the destmies of a living being, parti-
cularly man. In fact, they are symbolical representations, tof all,
the career of a man’s life 15 compared with the course of a horse, The
tiger repre ts dangers to life (horse), such as d ५, evil spirits, de.

According to some writers the Tiger-god (fig. C) has been tamed by the
Vajra, the thunder bolt of Bodhisattva Vajrapani, and thereby bound to
protect his devotee from the ks of diseases, evil spirits, &e

The Dragon (jig. J), according to the Tibetans and the Chinese, is the lord
of the’elonds. The rattling thunder is nothing but his ery. The early Hindns
used to invoke Indra the ruler of the and the gods to send down rain,
ese and the Tibetans do vot 1 ise him, but propitiate the diagou
ight bless them with abundant hary
1) has dominion over the serpents, who ave believed to be
the pos th especially the brightest gems fonud in the Sea, and is
therefore propitiated. Serpent tipped by the Hindus, but the
Tibetans believe them to be a y defiled animals whose touch is
death, and breath diseaso They worship the Kagle, the mention of whose
very name is sufficient to drive the serpents to their abodes in the nether
world,

The Liou, (fig. JT) wh
over one’s enemy. — By hy

“b (Plate at the end of the
in Peking.

1:

propitiated, brings the good luck of gaining victory,
2 succeeds in all) sorts of Ie ous:
undertakings. It is for these reasons that the Lamas, princes, nobles and
all classes of respectable people of ‘Tibet, Mongolia and China, fly ff
containing this inscription on poles, or on tops of turrets, house-roofs, or trees
so that it may flutter in the wind to ensure good-luck and snecess in life.
Tamas as a class are prohihited from using inscriptions of this kind on
account of the vow of renunciation which they take ; but in spite of it they
use them all the more. ॥ ॥
There are two large volumes in Tibetan, on the use and benchit of using
this inscription. ०.
In the inscription “there are both mystic and general invocations to two
kinds of gods, 7.९, to unworldly gods, such as Buddhas and Bodhirattvas,


--- PAGE 33 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Ix ‘Journal and ext, Pt. 1, 189.

namely, Maiiju Sti, Avalokitegvara, &e. “And also to the worldly gods such

as Brahma, ISvara, Indva, &e. .
ho charma or mantras contained in this pictere are sacred to the Tri-ratna—Namo
Ratna traydyn. A ; ae
Vaiju Svithosha Bodhi Sattva—Om Arpachana dhih, om Vaigi Svari min,
Sattva—om mannipadme him.
ham phat.

pani, Bodhi-Sattva—om Vaj
६ (goddess),—om Bhriin Sva
i २, Yum-Chenmo (or Praj dramita)—om Amrita Xynrdté
“Om yaté yaté pira gaté para Sumgate Bodhi Svahd,

(6) ,, The Mantra of the Natha Mahadeva (Lord). Om Sri अमात्य Siisana upahdrini *

Asha Apaschima Kilo Ayam, yidam ratna trayaya,
Apakirindn yadi pratijdasnia ris tadd yidam ruishtim, Khakha khéhi khihi, méra,
ira, gribua grihga. Bandha-Bandha, Hana hana, daha daha, pacha, pacha, dinamekena

maraya han him phat phat Svaha om dvanea Sar zlog—
Yodhumé hetit prabhava” hetun teshintathdgato hyavadat. Teshdiicha
yo ni vodha Kvam-vadi Maha Sramana: tad yathdé, din gaté gaté pa agaté
parisamgaté Bodhi Svaha.

The following charms below the breast of the horse ave mystical :—

Om ma faa ram, ram, ye रदति, Om ma ma lam lam ye Svihé Om ina
ma bom bom ye Svahd. Om ma ma stot slot ye Sviha, Oh! protect (him)
from the dangers of the five eleyients, Oh, e (him) !

_ The following occurs between the tiger and the dragon :—Mny life, body,
power and position grow om-ih, gure harinissarna Siddhi him, tiger, lion,
vagle and dragon may also bring prosperity on (him). Let all unite, oh all
1 to do (lim) good,

Longevity, Sré (prosperity) life, body, power, position grow along with
the horse (life's course) of prosperity --let all be abundant! Ye gods! lift
up his head upwards; let by your mevey (his) power and position increase!

B. This monogram is called Nam Chu Wangdan. Ub consists of ten
Sanskrit letters written in the anciont Ranji, (ov Tib, Laalsha) character of
Magadha they are :— .

Om, Ha K, Sha, Ma, La, Va, Ra, Ya.

.
This monogram in which are joined alf the letters symbolical of the five
elements is cousidered yery sacred, Wherever this monogram is put its
eff is so great that all the gods of that quarter will be forced to be in
one’s yor; and all the evil spirits of the land and the evils themselves
will clear up. †
Theso mystical thick black marks are called Parkha, they are the basic
signs of Chinese astrology, and ave said to exist and to lave been discovered
ou the back of a tortoise’s shell. They are called in Chinese Li, Zon, Gin,
Kham, Khen, Khon, Zin, Ta. ~ .

„1. This is the god of Wind; he sits ona stag, holding the Deaja, or the
ensign of victory, on which is inscribed the Lui-ta, or the horse of Fortune.
It must flutter freely iu the wind,

‘The meaning of the letters & (Dsa), written in a row above the mane of

the horse, ri at the month, sa’on the nose, and all the letters of the Sanskrit
Alphabet on its fonr legs are mystieal. The charms, Yam yam, written
at the feet of the horse are also mystical’ The eagle, the tiger and dragon,
are intended to subdue the elemental deities and to sanctify the five elements,
or (the Paiicha Bhiti). .


--- PAGE 34 [OCR_san+eng] ---
SANSKRIT TEXT.
बधिचर्य्यावतारम ।
ॐ नमो बुद्धाय |

सुगताग्छसताग्सधमकाया प्रणिपत्यादरतो ऽखिलांख वम्द्याम्‌ ।
सुगतात्मजसंवरावतारं कथयिव्यामि यथागमं समासात्‌ ॥ 1

न fe किंचिदपूवेमत्र वाच्यं न च संरन्थनकौग्रलं ममासि ।
श्रत एव्‌ न मे पराथेचिन्ता खमनो भावयितुं हतं मयेदम्‌ ॥ ?
मम तावदनेन याति दद्धि कुशलं भावयितुं प्रमादवेगः।

श्रय मह्ममधातुरेव पश्येदपरो saat ऽपि सायको ऽयम्‌ ॥ ‡
चणसंपदियं सुदुलेभा प्रतिलग्धा पुरुषाथेखाधनौ |

यदि ara विचिन्धतेि fed पुनर्येष समागमः कुतः ॥ 1

wat यथा मेघघनान्धकारे विदुत्वणं द भेयति प्रकाश्रम्‌ |
बुद्धालुभावेन तथा कदाचिक्लोकस्य gay मतिः at स्यात्‌॥ 7
तस्मा च्छुभं दु्वेलमेव नित्यं बलं तु पापस्य मदत्ुघोरम्‌ ।

तक्नौ यते ऽन्येन इमेन केन संबो धिचित्तं यदि नाम न स्यात्‌॥ ८
कम्पाननल्याग्प्रविचिन्तय द्विदृ सुनो रे रितमेतदेव |.

यतः सुखेनेव सुखं प्रट्धमुल्ावयत्यप्रमिताश्ननौ घान्‌ ॥ 7
भवदुःखग्रतानि ततुकामैर पि सत्यसनानि दतुकामेः ।
बहसौस्यग्रतानि भोक्तुकामेनं विमोच्य दि सदेव बोधिचित्लम्‌ ॥ ^
भवचारकबन्धनो वराकः सुगतानां सुत उच्यते sa |

ख नरामरलोकवन्दनौयो भवति afer एव बोधिचित्ते ॥ “
अरशचिप्रतिमाभिां zat जिनरतप्रतिमां करोत्यनर्घाम्‌ ।
रखजातमतोववेधनोयं सुदृढं wwa बो धिविन्तसं्नम्‌ ॥ 10
सुपरौचितमप्रमेयधो भिबजनमूरयं जगदेकसा थेवाः,

गतिपन्तनविप्रवासश्नौलाः सुदृढं wa नो धिचिन्तरन्नम्‌ ॥ 11
1

--- PAGE 35 [OCR_san+eng] ---
2 बोधिचर्यावतारम्‌ । (Journal & Text, Part I, 1804,

कदलौव फलं विहाय याति चयमन्यत्कुश्रलं हि स्वमेव ।

aad फलति चयं न याति प्रषवत्येव ठ्‌ वोधिचिकषदटचः ॥ 12

ृलापि पापानि सुदारुणानि यदाश्रयादुत्तरति ata |

शूराश्रयेशेव महाभयानि नाभ्रौयते aera: | 13

युगान्तकालानलवन््दान्ति पापानि यच्चिदेहति णेन |

यस्यानुशंसानमितानुवा च मैजेयनाथः सुधनाय सोमान्‌ ॥ 14
लद्वोधिचित्तं दिविधं frevaat समासतः | atfunfinfutad च वोधिप्रसानभेव च ॥ 15
गन्तुकामस्य गन्तुख यथा मेदः प्रतौयते | तथा भेदौ ऽनयो घय याधासंस्येन परितः ॥ 16
बोधिप्रणिधिचित्तस्य संसारे ऽपि पलं AEA । न तवविच्छिनिपरतवं यथा प्रस्यानेतसः ॥ 12
यतः प्रभ्टयप्न्तसत्वधातुपमो | समाददाति तचित्तमनिवर्यैन चेतसा ॥ 15
ततः प्रति सप्तस्य प्रमत्त्याप्यनेकश्ः। अविच्छनाः एण्यधाराः प्रवर्तन्ते नभःसमाः ॥ 19
इदं सुवाङएच्छायां सोपपत्तिकसुक्तावान्‌ | क्ौनाधिमुक्तिसत्वाधे खयमेव तथागतः ॥ 20
शिरमूलानि सत्वानां नाश्यामौति चिन्तयन्‌ | अप्रमेयेण पण्येन द्यते स्म हिताशयः॥ 21
किमुता्रमितं रूलमेकेकस्य निष्ौर्षतः | अप्रमेयगुणं सत्वमेकोवां च चिकीर्षतः ॥ 2
कस्य मातुः पितुर्वापि हिताशंसेयमौवदृ्ौ । देवानां वा ऋषीणां वा ब्रह्मणां वा भविव्यति ॥
तेषामेव च सत्वानां खाँ ऽप्येष मनोरथः | नोत्मन्नपूवैः खरे पि प्राये संभवः कुलः 24
स्रतदिेषो ऽयमु जायते ga: | यत्यसा्था रयो ऽन्येषां न सार्थे ऽ्युपजायते ॥ 25
जगदागन्दबौजस्य जगद'ौषधस्य च | चित्तरलस्य यत्पण्यं तत्कथं हि प्रमोयताम्‌ ॥ 2
दिता सनमावेय gaye विभिष्यते | कि एनः सर्वसत्वान सर्वसौस्यार्थसुयमात्‌ ॥ 27
इध्खमेवाभिधावन्ति दुःखनिःशर गाशया | सुखेच्छपीव संमोटात्छठखं तरन्ति wag ॥ 28
weal Tea पौडितानामनेकणः | zhi eee: कु्यात्र्वाः पौडाभ्क्नन्ति च ॥ 29
गाग्रययपि ate साधुक्तेन समः कुतः । कुलो वा तादृशं मिध Gel वा तादृ कुतः ॥ 30
छते पः पतिक त सोऽपि तावत्मशस्यते | खअब्यापारितसाधुसत बोधिसत्वः किमुच्यताम्‌ ॥ 91

कतिपयजनसन्नदायकः कुशलकदित्यभिपूष्यते अनः |

चएमश्नकमाचद्‌एनतः सपरिभवं दिवसार्घयापनात्‌ ॥ 32

fag निरवधिखत्वसंस्यया निरवधिकालमनुप्रयच्छतः |

गगनजनपरि्याचयं सकलमनोरथसंप्रपूरणम्‌ ॥ 98

दति सचचपतौ fire ए कलुषं ले इदये करोति यञ्च ।

कशुषोदयसंस्षथा स कर्पाजरकेव्वावसतोति नाय श्रा ५ २

--- PAGE 36 [OCR_san+eng] ---
juddhist Toxt Society.) बोधिचर्यावतारम्‌ |

` अय ge मनः प्रसादमेति प्रसवेत्तस्य ततो ऽधिकं फलम्‌ ।
महता हि बलेन पापकं जिनयुजेषु wi वयन्नतः ॥ 9
तेषां शरीराणि नमस्करोमि अनो दितं  तदरचिनत्तरतम्‌ |
यत्तापकारो ऽपि -सुखातुबन्धौ सुखाकरांसतां acd प्रयामि ॥ 36
बोधिचर्यावतारे बोधिवित्तालुशंसा प्रथमः परिच्छेदः ॥

तचचित्तरत्रयरहणाय सभ्यक्‌ पूजां करोम्येष तथागतानाम्‌ |
शद्धमेरलसख च निमेलस्य बुद्धात्मजानां च गुणोदधोनाम्‌ ॥ 1
यावन्ति पुष्याणि फलानि चेव भैषन्यजातानि च यानि सन्ति।
रन्नानि यावन्ति च सन्ति लोके जलानि च खच्छमनोरमाणि॥ 2
मह्होधरा रन्नभयास्तयान्ये वनप्रदेशाश्च विवेकरम्याः।

लताः सुपुष्याभरणोञ्ज्वलाशच FAY ये सत्फलनखशाखाः ॥ 8
देवादिलोकेषु च TANT: कल्पद्रुमा रलमयाञ्च TT: |
खरांसि चाम्भोरूषग्धषणानि दंखसखनात्यन्तमनोदराणि ॥ “
अरहृष्टजातामि घ शस्यजातान्यन्यानि वा प्ूज्यविग्षष्णनि |
श्राकाश्रधातुप्रसरावौनि स्वाश्छपौमान्यपरियहाणि ॥ 5

श्रादाच gar सुनिपुंगवेभ्यो .निर्यातयाग्येष सपु्केभ्यः |

गन्तु तन्मे acefattar महापा मामनुकम्बमानाः ॥ 6
श्रपुष्यवानस्मि महादरिद्रः प्रूजायेमन्यन्मम मासि किंचित्‌ |
wat ममार्थाय परार्थचिन्ता wa नाया ददमात्मश्रत्या ॥ 7
ददामि शात्मानमदं जिनभ्यः सर्वैण सवै च तदात्मनेभ्यः |
परिग्रदं मे कुरुतागसन्वाः aug दाखलमुयेमि wer ॥ 8
परिग्ेणास्ि भवक्कतेन निभो मेवे त्वहितं करोमि ।

पूवे च आपं समतिक्रमामि avery पापं प्रकरोमि श्वः॥ 9

--- PAGE 37 [OCR_san+eng] ---
बोधिचर्यावतारम्‌ । = (Journal & Text, Part I, 1804 +

रब्रो्वलस्म्भमनोरमेषु सुक्तामयोद्धा सिवितानकेषु |
खच्छोञ्वलप्फाटिकंखुटिमेषु सुगन्धिषु arty तेषु ॥ 1
मनोज्नगन्धोद कपुष्पपूरशैः इम मेदारनमयैरनेकैः |
च्वानं करोग्येष तथागतानां तदात्मजानां च सगौतवाद्यम्‌ ॥ 11
प्रधपितेीतमलेर तयैव तेषां ततुसुन्मषामि |
ततः सुरक्तानि खुधपितानि ददामि तेभ्यो वरचोवराणि ॥ ^:
दिे्दुश्मचूएविचिचोभेरवस्तेरलंकार वरश्च तेः |
समन्तभद्रा जितमच्चुघोषलोजेश्वरादौनपि मण्डयामि ॥ 1:
सर्वचिसारखविषारिगनधेगन्धो त्मैस्ताननुेपयामि |
` खुत्तप्रख्नमष्टखधो तदेभप्रभेज््वलान्‌ स्सुनीन््रकायान्‌ ॥ 14
मान्दारबेन्दौवरमलछिकादेः स्वे: सुगन्धः कुसुमेर्मनोजेः |
श्र्यदेयाग्यच्येतमान्नौ ATT Vy संसखानमनोरमाभिः ॥ 15 `
SQA तानभूपमेषेरपधूपयामि |
Way खाय विं विधे eet निवेदं च निवेदयामि ॥ ।
रब्रप्रदौपांख निवेदयामि सुवणेपद्ेषु निविष्टपङ्गौन्‌ ।
गन्धोपलिकतेषु च कुदमेषु किरामि युष्यप्रकरान्‌ मनोज्ञान्‌ ॥ 17
परलम्बसुक्रामणिददार शोभानाभाश्वरा न्दिगसुखमण्डनांस्तान्‌ |
विमानभेधां स्हतिगोतरम्यारेत्ीमयेभ्यो ऽपि निवेदयामि ॥ 1४
BUTS: कमनोयद्पेः संसक्सुक्तानि ससुच्छ्रितानि |
प्रधारयाम्येष महासुनोनां रनातपचाण्तिग्रोभनानि ॥ 19
खतः परः प्रतिष्न्तां पूजामेघा मनोरमाः | तूयसंगौतिमेघा्च स्ंस्वपद षणा ॥ 20
सर्वैसदधमरलेषु Say प्रतिमासु च । एुष्यरत्रादिवर्षा ख प्रव्वन्तां निरन्तरम्‌ ॥ 1
मर्ुधोषप्भ्टतयः पूजयन्ति यथा जिनान्‌ | तथा तधागतान्नाथान्‌ सएचान्प्रनयाग्य्म्‌ ॥ 22
खराङ्सागरै ST सौमि चाषं रयोदधीन्‌ । रतिसंगोतिमेधाख संमबनयेम्बगन्दथा ॥ 2
सवच्तेथागुसंख्यश्च TOA: परगमान्यहम्‌ । सवन्यध्वगतान्‌ बुद्धान्‌ सदधर्मगणोत्तमान्‌ ॥ ५
-स्चन्ानि वन्देऽहं बोधिसत्वाश्रयां स्तथा । नमस्करोम्युपाध्याय्मभिवन्दान्धतेकलथा ॥ 25

--- PAGE 38 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist ‘Vext Socicty] बोधिचयावतारम्‌ ॥ 5

qe गच्छामि wea यावदानोधिमग्डतः | धभ गच्छामि weal बोधिसत्वगणं. तथा ॥ 26
विक्नापयामि संबुद्धान्‌ wale ष्यवस्थितान्‌ | म्टाकारुणिकांशापि बोधिसत्तवान्‌ छताञ्जलिः ॥ 27
अनादिमति संसारे जन्मन्यतरैव वा एनः । यन्मया पशना पापं छतं कारितभेव वा ॥ og
यच्नानुमोदितं किंचिदात्मघाताय मोद्धतः | तदव्ययं देशयामि wera तापित ॥ 29
रलतरयेऽपकारो यो मातापि वा मया । गुरुषवन्येषु वा चतेपात्कायवाग्बुद्धिभिः कतः
अनेकदोषदुटेन मया पापेन नायकाः । यत्कृतं दारुणं पापं त्से VTE ॥ 31
(कथं च निःसरान्यस्मान्नि्ोदिम्ोऽस्मि नायकाः । मा भून्मे गटलयुरचिरादच्तौगे पापसंघये ॥ 52)
कथं चं निःसराम्यस्नात्पस्विायत सत्वरम्‌ | मा ममाक्तौणपापस्य मरगं श्रीप्रमेष्यति ॥ 33
छताृतापरोत्तोऽयं ग्टुरविं्रम्भघातकः | खस्थाखस्थेरवि्वास्य चकस्मिकमष्दाश्रमिः ॥ 3५
प्रियाप्रियनिमित्तेन पापं छतमनेकधा | सवमुतसुन्य गन्तव्यमिति न arate ॥ 35

अप्रिया न भविष्यन्ति प्रियो मे न भविष्यति । ad च न भविष्यामि सवै च न भविष्यति ॥ 96
AMMA याति SMITA | खप्रानुभरूतवत्छवें गतं न पएनरौच्छते ॥ 57
aa तिखतस्तावद्रता नैके प्रियापियाः | तन्निमित्तं तु यत्पापं तस्स्यितं घोरमग्रतः ॥ 38
रुवमागन्तुकोऽसमीति न मया पत्यवेच्िलम्‌ । मोानुनयपिदवेैः छतं पापमनेकधा ॥ 59
साधिंदिवमविश्राममाय॒षो वर्धते ययः । आयस्य चागमो नास्ति न मरिष्यामि कि APA ॥ 0
Re श्र्यागतेनापि वन्धुमध्येऽपि fagat । मयैकेन सोषए्व्था म्मच्छेदादिवेदना ॥ 1
यमदूतगछोतस्य gat बन्धुः कुतः सदत्‌ | Gua तदा चाण मया तच्च न सेवितम्‌ ॥ ५8
अनित्यजीवितासङ्गादिदं भयमजानता | पमत्तेन मया नाया बङ्पापसुपार्जितम्‌ ॥ 1;
अङ्च्छेदाथं मप्यदय teat विष्यति | पिपासितो दौनदृष्धिरन्यदेवेच्तते जगत्‌ ॥ 41
किं एनभेरवाकारेयंमदृतेर धिष्ठितः | मद्टाच्रासज्चरग्रस्तः एर योत्सरग वेष्टितः ॥ 45
कातरे द्टिपातै् Sarda चतुर्दिशम्‌ । at मे मदाभयादस्मनात्साधस्त्राणं करिष्यति ॥ 46
चागश्रून्या faut gt एनः संमोद मागतः | तदाद किं करिष्यामि तस्मिग्स्याने मष्टाभये ॥ 47
अद्येव शरणं यामि नगन्नायन्मष्टावलान्‌ | नगर्॑च्ताथेमु दक्ताम्सर्व चासद्ध रान्‌ fart ॥ 48
लच्वाप्यधिगतं धमं संसारभयनाश्नम्‌ | शरणं यामि भावेन बोधिसत््वगगं तथा ॥ 19
समन्तमद्ायात्मानं ददामि भयविङ्लः | एनश्च मञ्ुघोषाय ददाम्यात्मानमात्मना ॥ ८0
तं चावलोकितं नाथं छपाव्याकुलचारिणम्‌ | fathered भतः स मां cag पापिनम्‌ ॥ ;1
खयंमाकाश्गभ च च्ितिगभं च भावतः | सर्वान्म्ाछपांखापि चाणान्वेषौ falar ॥ 52
यं pd च संचस्ताः पलायन्ते चतुर्दिशम्‌ । यमदूतादयो cere नमस्यामि वच्विणम्‌ ॥ 53
wate quest सांप्रतं भयदश्रेनात्‌ | Kal यामि वौ भौतो मयं नाशयत Faz ॥ 8५
इत्वरब्याधिभौतोऽपि वैद्यवाक्यं न ape । किमुव्याधिश्यतेगरस्त्वतुर्भितुरत्तरैः॥ ४४
केनापि यतः सरन जम्बदौपगता नराः | नश्यन्ति येवां Past सर्वदिच्त न लभ्यते ॥ 56
तच सर्व॑श्षपैयस्य सर्व्॑रल्यापारिणः | वाकयमुद्लङ्कयामौति भिम्मामव्यन्तमो ष्ठितम्‌ ॥ 57
खन्यप्रमन्तस्तिखामि धपातेष्वितरेख्चपि । किमु योजमसाङ खे प्रपाते दौर्घकालिके ॥ 68
अथैव मरणं नेति # युक्ता मे खखासिका | अवमतिः सा वेला न भविव्यान्यह यदा ॥ ¢

30

--- PAGE 39 [OCR_san+eng] ---
6 बोधिचथांवतारम्‌ | (Journal & Text, Part 1, 1894

ena केन मे ad frafeenta वा कथम्‌ । अवश्यं न भविष्यामि कस्मान्मे सुस्थितं AA: It 60
पर्वानुभूतगेभ्यः किं मे सारमवद्ितम्‌ | येषु मे ऽभिनिषि्धेन गुरूणां लङ्धितं वचः ॥61
जौवलोकमिमं त्यक्वा बन्धन्परि चितां स्तथा | र्काकौ क्वापि यास्यामि कि मे सवः परियापियेः ॥ 2
इयमेव तु मे चिन्ता यक्ता रात्रिदिवं सदा । अश्ुमात्नियतं दुःखं निःसरेयं ततः कथम्‌ ॥ 68
मया बालेन yor यत्विचित्यापमाचितम्‌ | THT यच्च सावद्यं पर्षायावद्यमेव च ॥ 6५

तां देश्रयाग्येष नाधानामग्रतः fea: । छताञ्नलिदुःखमौतः प्रणिपत्य पुनः एनः ॥ 65
warn परतिग्र्न्तु नायकाः | अभग्रकमिदं ATI न कतं एुनमेया ॥ 6

बोधिचर्यावतारे पापदेश्रना दितौयः परिच्छेदः |

अपायदुःखविश्रामं ada तं श्भम्‌ । अनुमोदे प्रमोदेन सुखं ति्न्तु दुःखिताः ॥ 1
संसारदुःखमिर्मोच्चमनुमोदे शरौ रिगाम्‌ | बोधिसत्वववुद्त्वमनुमोदे च तायिनाम्‌ ॥
चित्तोत्यादसमुद्ां श्च SERIE | सवसत््वद्धिताधानाननुमो दे च श्रासिनाम्‌ ॥ s
एण्थानुमोदना ॥
wate रिक्त संबुदान्पराथयामि छताञ्नलिः। धमप्रदौपं कुन्तु मोष्टादःखपपातिनाम्‌ ॥ 4
खध्येषणा ॥
निर्वातुकामांख जिनान्‌ याचयामि aerate: । कल्पाननन्तांलिषटन्तु माभूदन्धमिदं जगत्‌ ॥ 5
याच्ना ॥
wa सर्वमिदं कत्वा यन्मया सादितं शुभम्‌ । तेन i सव॑ सत्वानां सर्वदुःख शान्तिकत्‌ ॥ 6
म्लानानामस्मि भैषज्यं भवेयं Fq ण च । तदुपस्थायकल्ैव याव्रोगापुनर्मवः ॥ 7
afore दन्यामन्नपानप्रवषंयोः । दुर्भिच्तान्तरकल्पेषु भवेयं पानभोजनम्‌ ॥ 8
दर्णा च सत्वानां निधिः स्यामद्मच्तयः | नानोपकरणाकारैरुपतिषेयमग्रतः ॥ 9
खात्मभावांस्तया ated saad pr | निरपेच्तस्यजाम्येष सर्वसक््ार्थसिडधये ॥ 10
सवेयागच्च fata निर्वा ाधि च मे मनः | यकतवयं चेन्मया सव वर सत्वेषु दौयताम्‌ ॥ 11
यथा aetna मयायं सवेदेष्ठिनाम्‌ । we निन्दन्तु वा नित्यमाकिरन्तु च पांसुभिः॥ 12
क्रीडन्तु मम कायेन हसन्तु विलसन्तु च । दन्तस्तेभ्यो मया कायचिन्तया किं ममानया ॥ 13
कार्यन्तु च कर्माणि यानि तेषां सुखावहम्‌ | अनः कस्यचिम्माभून्मामालम्बय कदाचन ॥ 1५
येषां क्रुद्धा प्रसन्ना वा Arata मतिर्भवेत्‌ । स व तेषां हेतुः स्यान्नित्यं स्वेटसिडधये ॥ 15
खभ्याख्यास्यन्ति मां ये च ये चान्येऽप्यपकारिणः। उत्रासकास्तथान्ये वा सव स्यर्ोधिमागिनः ॥ 15
खमाथानामष्टं नाधः साथवाह यायिनाम्‌ | Moai च नौभूतः सेतुः संक्रम ख च iz
दौपार्थिनामष्ं दौपः शव्या श्रखार्थिंनामद्म्‌ | दासार्धिनामष रासो भवेयं सवेदेष्िनाम्‌ ॥ 15
चिन्तामणिर्मश्रघटः सिङधविद्यामष्टौषधिः । भवेयं area कामधेनुख देष्िनाम्‌ tt 16
एधिव्यारौनि भूतानि निःेषाकाश्वासिनाम्‌ | सत्वानामप्रमेयाणां यथा मोगान्यनेकधा | 20
खवमाकाश्चनिष्स्य सत्धातोरनेकधा । भवेयमुपजोव्ोऽहं यावत न FEM: ॥ ५।

--- PAGE 40 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) बोधिचर्यावतारम्‌ ॥ ष

यथा क्तं सगतर्बीधिचित्तं wert: | ते बोधिसत्वशिच्तायामनुपर्थां wer स्थिताः ॥ 2
तददुत्पादयान्येष बोधिचित्तं wifes | तदेव च ताः शक्ताः शिच्चिष्यामि यथाकमम्‌ ॥ 3
ud zee मतिमाग्बोधिचित्ं प्रसादतः । एनः एस्य पश चित्तमेवं परृर्वयेत्‌ ॥ 2५
अद्य मे सफलं जन्म लब्धो मानुषो भवः । अद्य TARY जातो बुद्धएचोऽस्मि सांप्रतम्‌ ॥ os
तथाधुना मया कायं खकुलोचितकारिणाम्‌ | निर्मलस्य कुलस्यास्य कलङ्को न भवेद्यथा ॥ 26
' अन्धः संकारकरूटेभ्यो यथा रनमवाप्नयात्‌ | तथा कथं चिंदप्येतद्रोधिचित्तं ममोदितम्‌ ॥ 9
अगन्म्‌द्यविनाश्याय जातमेतद्रसायनम्‌ | जगदारि्य्मनं निधानमिदमच्तयम्‌ ॥ 28
अगद्याधिप्रण्यमनं भ षल्यमिदमुत्तमम्‌ | भवाध्वभ्रमगश्रान्तजगदिश्रामपादपः ॥ 29
area सेतुः सामान्यः सवंयायिनाम्‌ | जगव्जञोश्रश्मन उदितचित्तघग््रमाः ॥ 30
जगदच्नानतिमिरपोत्षारणमषारविः | सद्म॑च्तोरमथनान्नवनौतं समुत्थितम्‌ ॥ 1

सुखभोगवुभुचितस्य वा जनसायेष्य भवाष्वचारिणः |
सुखसच्मिदं qufed सकलाभ्यागतवच्ृतेणएम्‌ ॥ 32
अगद निमन्तितं मया सुगतलेन सुखेन चान्त |
पुरतः खलु सवेतायिनामभिनन्दन्तु सुरासुरादयः॥ 33

बोधिचर्थावतारे बोधि चिन्तपरिग्रषटो माम ठतौयः परिच्छेदः ॥

र्वं गीत्वा age बोधिचित्तं जिगात्मजः । शिच्तागतिक्रमे यलं कुर्यांतनि्मतन्द्रिवः ॥ 1
स्सा यत्समारव्यं सम्यग्यद विचारितम्‌ | तच्च gata वेत्येवं प्रतिक्लायापि यज्यते ॥ 2
विचारितं तु*्यद्बुद्धे मदा प्रा्ञख तत्सतः | मयापि च यथाशक्ति तच किं परिलम्ब्ते ॥ ;
यदि चेवं परतिक्लाय साधयेयः न कमणा | Vai सवो विसंवाद्य का गतिर्मे मविष्यति ॥ 4
मनसा चिन्तयित्वापि यो न दद्यात्यननंरः | स प्रेतो भवतौ्यक्तमल्पमचेऽपि वस्तनि ॥
किमुतानुत्तरं dhegeagy भावतः | जगत्सवं विसं वाद्य का गतिर्मे भविष्यति ॥ 6

वेत्ति सर्वज्ञ वैतामचिन्यां कमणो गतिम्‌ | यद्धोधिचित्त्धागेऽपि मोचयत्येव तान्‌ नरान्‌ ॥ ;
बोधिसत्वस्य तेनैवं सर्वा पत्ति्ग॑रीयसौ । यस्मादापद्यमानोऽसौ सवंसत्चार्थं हानिछछत्‌ ॥ 8
योऽप्यन्यः च्गमप्यस्य wufad करिव्यति । तस्य दुगं तिपर्यन्तो नास्ति सत््वारथं घातिनः ॥ 9
रुकस्यापि fe सत्त्वस्य fed हत्वा डतो भवेत्‌ । ्शेषाकाशपयेन्तवासिनां किमु देहिनाम्‌ ॥ 10
` णवमापत्तिविलतो बोधिवित्तवलेन च । दोलायमानः संसारे भूमिप्रा्तौ चिरायते ॥ 11
तस्माद्यथा प्रतिक्ञातं साधनौयं मयादरात्‌ | नाद्य चेत्क्रियते यव्रश्तलेनाक्मि तलं गतः ॥ 12
अप्रमेया गता बुद्धाः स्॑सल्वमवेषकाः | नेषामष्ं watt चिकित्सागोचरः गतः ॥ 19

अद्यापि Sata wt येवां एनः पनः । दुग तिख्याधिमर्गश्छेदभेदाथवाक्चयाम्‌ ॥ 14

कदा लथागतोत्यादं मदां ATTA च । TTT aT श्ये ऽतिदुलेमम्‌ ॥ 15

--- PAGE 41 [OCR_san+eng] ---
8 मोधिचर्यावतारम्‌ । = (Journal & Toxt, Part 1, 1894.

ख्यासोग्यदिवसं चेदं cant निरपदवम्‌ | ष्यायुतणं विसंवादि कायोयाचितकोपमः ॥ 16
न Pigitdetatgel लभ्यते पुनः । अलभ्यमाने Ae पापमेव कुतः शभम्‌ ॥ 17
यदा कृश्रलयोग्योऽपि कुलं न करोम्यष्टम्‌ | खपायदुःखेः TAG: fat करिष्याम्यदकं तदा ॥ 16
अवु्वतख que पापं चाप्युपचिन्वतः। हतः छगतिशरन्दोऽपि कलयकोटिश्तेरुपि ॥ 19
अत वाह भगवान्मालुष्यमतिदुलंभम्‌ | मष्टागेवयुगच्छिनिकरूमेग्रौ वापेणोपमम्‌ ॥ 20
RMA कल्पमास्यते। अनादिकालोपवितत्पापातका छगतौ कथा ॥ ?1
न च तम्माचरभेवासौ वेदयित्वा विमुच्यते | यस्मात्तदेदयन्नेव पापमन्यन्मरूयते ॥०
नावः परा वश्चनालस्ि न च Abeta: परः | यदीदृशं wa प्राप्य नाभ्यं कुशलं मया ॥ 2
यदि 34 विग्व्यामि एनः सीदामि मोहितः । शोचिष्यामि चिरं भूयो यमदूतः धरचोदितः॥ २५
fat धच्छति मे कायं नारकाभिः स॒दुःस्टः । प्श्वात्तापानलध्ित्तं चिरं धच्यत्यशिख्छितम्‌ ॥ 2:
कथंचिदपि dom हितभमिं खदुलभाम्‌ | sate च ase तानेव नरकान्पमः ॥ 26
खच मे चेतना नास्ति मन्तेरिव fathers: | जाने केन मुद्यामि कोऽचान्तम॑म तिरति ॥ श
स्तपादादिरद्ितासतष्णादेषादिष्रचवः , न ग्रूरा न च ते ore कथं दासौछतेाऽस्मि तैः। 28
मचित्तावस्थिता खव श्रन्ति मामेव सुस्थिताः । तचाप्यष्ठं न कुप्यामि धिगस्थानसदि शताम्‌ ॥ 29
स्वे देवा मनुष्याख यदि waa श्र्वः | तेऽपि नावौचिकं af समुदानयितुं WAT ॥ 50
मेसेरपि यदासङ्ान्न भसमाप्यपलभ्यते | च्तणाल्त्तिपन्ति मां तच बलिनः sa ॥ 81
` न fe सर्वान्यशचणं दौर्धमायुरपीदृ्रम्‌ | अनाद्यन्तं महादं यन्मम सेवै रिणाम्‌ ॥ 9
ag हिताय कल्पन्ते खानुकूल्येन सेविताः | सेव्यमानास््मौ के शाः तगं दुःखकारकाः॥ 3
इति संततदौवैरिषु ्यसनौघप्रसवैकरेतु ष |
हृदये निवसत्सु निर्भयं मम संसारुरतिः कथं भवेत्‌ ॥ २4
भवचास्कपालकाः इमे नरकादिष्वपि बध्यघातकाः।
मतिवेष्सनि लोभपञ्मरे यदि festa कुतः EE मम ॥ 9 .
awa तावदहमच ut च्तिपामि यावन्न waa इमे feat समक्तम्‌ |
ear ऽपि तावदपकारिणि बद्धसोषा मानोन्नतास्तमनिद्य न यान्ति PTT ॥ 5
प्रछतिमरणदुःखितान्धकासान्‌ रणशिरसि प्रसमं निन्त॒सुयाः |
खगणिलशर्रक्तिघातदुःखा न विसुखतामुपयान्यसाधयित्वा ॥ 97
किमुत सततसवेदुःखहेतून्प्रछृतिरिगमूनुपन्तुसुद्यतस्य |
भवति मम विषाददैन्यमचख असनश्रतेरपि केन हेतुना वै ॥ 98
अकारयेनेव रिएच्तामि गाचेव्वलंकारवदुदशन्ति |
महाथंसिद्य तु समुद्तस्य दुःखानि कस्माग्मम वाधकानि ॥ 9?
खजौविकामाचनिबडचित्ताः केवत्तेचणडालक्ृषौवलाद्याः
प्रौतातपादिव्यसनं सन्ते गगडिताथे न कथं BROW ॥ 40
दश्रदिग्धोमपर्यन्तनगत्‌जञेशविमो च्चये । पतिश्चाय मदास्मापि न लोगेभ्यो विमोधितंः॥ 41
खाल्मप्रमाणम्षात्या AAPM | खअनिवत्तौ भविष्यामि cere MTT सदा ॥ 42

--- PAGE 42 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Bocicty.] बोधिक्यांवतारम्‌ | 9

अच att विष्यामि बैर विग्र । अन्यच तदिधाल्लेश्ाल्केशघातालुनन्धिनः ॥ 43
गलन्त्वन्लाणि मे कामं शिरः पततु नाम भे । न त्वेवावनतिं यामि सर्वथा Sea fears ॥ 44
निर्वासितस्यापि तु नाम wear? स्थानपरिःग्रहः स्यात्‌ ।
यतः Ua: संभ्टतशरक्तिरेति न ज्ञोशश्रचोगंतिरौदृश्रौ तु ॥ 45
कासौ यायान्मन्मनःस्थो निरस्तः स्थित्वा afer यतेत |
नोद्योगो मे केवलं मन्दबुद्धेः केशाः षन्ञादृष्टिसाध्या वराकाः ॥ 4५
न am विषयेषु नेन्द्रियगे नाप्यन्तराले स्थिता
मातो Sas कुष्ठ स्थिताः एनरिमे anf aes जगत्‌ |
मायेवेयमतो विमुञ्च हृदयास भजसोद्यमं
ware किमकाण्ड रव नरकेव्वात्मानमाबाधसते ॥ 47
wa विनिख्ि्य करोमि यत्रं यथोक्तशिच्ताप्रतिपत्तिहेतोः |
वै्ोपदेश्रा्चलतः कुतोऽस्ति Rare निरामयत्वम्‌ ॥ 48
बोधिचर्यावतारे बोधिचिन्ताप्रमादो नाम चतुर्थः परिच्छेदः ॥

frat रत्ितुकामेन चित्तं रच्छं परयत्नतः । न fret thd शव्या चलं चित्तमरुच्तता ॥ 1
अदान्ता मनत्तमातक्का न वुर्वन्तौ ष्ठ तां थाम्‌ | करोति यामवीर्यादौ सुक्तच्छित्तमतक्गनः ॥ o
बद्धखेचित्तमातङ्गः स्मृतिरञ्छ्वा समन्ततः | भयमस्तंगतं सवे छतं कल्यागमागतम्‌ ॥ 3
arat सिंहा गजा seat सर्पाः स्वं च ws: | स्वँ नरकपाला डाकिन्यो राच्तसासतया ॥ 4
सँ बद्धा भवन्येते fae बन्धनात्‌ | चित्तसेकस्य दमनात्छवे दान्ता भवन्ति च ॥ ४
यस्ाद्भयानि सर्वाणि दुःखान्यप्रमितानि च । चित्तादेव भवन्तौति कथितं तत््ववादिना ॥ ¢
शस्त्राणि केन"नरके घटितानि प्रयज्नतः । तक्तायः कुट्टिमं केन कुतो जाताख ताः fers: ॥ 7
पापचित्तससुद्धतं तत्त सप जगौ मुनिः | तस्मात्र कश्िचेलो क्ये चित्तादन्यो भयानकः ॥ 8
अदरिजं नगत्कत्वा दानपारमिता यदि | जगदरिद्रमद्यापि सा कथं पूवेतायिनाम्‌ ॥ 9

परेन ae सर्वस्वं त्थागचित्तं wishes । दानपारमिता भोक्ता तस्मात्सा चित्तमेव तु ॥ 10
renee: क नौयन्तां मास्येयं यतो न तान्‌ | wa विरतिचित्ते तु श्रौलपारमिता मता ॥ 11
कियतो मारयिष्यामि दुज॑नां गगनोपमान्‌ | मारित कोधचित्ते तु मारिताः सर्वश्य्वः ॥ 1
गमिं च्छादयितुं adi कुतच्म भविष्यति | उपानश्वममाचेण eat भवति मेदिनौ ॥ 15
बा्यभावा मया तदच्छक्धा वारयितुं न fe । खचित्तं वारयिष्यामि किं ware निवारिते ॥ 1\
सद्धापि वाकक्रोराभ्यां weeds तत्फलम्‌ । यत्पटोरेककस्यापि चित्तस्य ब्रद्मतादिकम्‌ ॥ 15
जपास्लपांसि सर्वाणि दौघंकालदतान्यपि | अन्यपित्तेन मन्देन ठथवेत्या् स्वित्‌ ॥ 6

TS हन्त॒ छखं प्राहं ते भ्नमन्ति छधाम्बरे | यंरेतद्धमेसवंखं Fane न भावितम्‌ ॥ 1
ब्मात्छधिषित चित्तं मया काये सुरच्ितम्‌ | fenced मुक्ता वभिः किं मम we | 19

पथा चपलमध्यस्थो रक्षति व्रणमादरात्‌ | Ts दुणेनमध्यख्यो Tater सदा ॥ 19
2

--- PAGE 43 [OCR_san+eng] ---
10 बोधिचर्यावतारम्‌ | (Journal & Text, Part I, 1884,

बरयदुःखलवाद्भौतो cafe व्रणमादरात्‌ | संघातपवैताघाताद्वौत्चित्त्रं न किं ॥ 20
सनेन हि विद्धारेण विष्ट रन्दजनेष्वपि | प्रमदाजनमध्येऽपि यतिर्धौँरो न खण्ड्यते ॥ 21

लाभा नश्यनत मे कामं सत्कारः कायजौवितम्‌ | नश्यत्वन्यचच कुशलं मा तचत्तं कदाचन ॥ 22
चित्तं गच्ितुकामानां मयेष क्रियतेऽङ्जलिः। समति च संप्रजन्धं च सवं यनेन SAA ॥ 23
Sgt नगो sea क्षमः सर्वकर्मसु | तथाभ्यां वयाकुलं चित्तं न च्तमं BARAT ॥ 24
छसंप्रजन्यचित्तस्य श्रतचिन्तितभावितम्‌ | सच्छिकुम्भजलवन्न स्म॒ताववतिरते ॥ ४

अनेके श्रतवन्तोऽपि श्रदधायनपरा अपि । असंप्रजन्यदो षेग भवन्त्यापत्तिकश्सलाः ॥ 26
असंप्रजन्धचौरेण सतिमोषानुसारिणा | उपचित्यापि पुण्यानि मुधिता यान्ति दुगैतिम्‌ ॥ 9)
ज्ञेशतस्करसं घोऽयमवतासगवेषकः । प्राप्यावतारं सुष्णाति दन्ति सदरतिजौवितम्‌ ॥ os
तस्मात्स्रतिर्मनोद्वासाम्नापनेया कदाचन । गतापि प्रद्यपस्थाप्या संस्मत्यापाधिकौ' TATA ॥2
उपाध्यायानुशासिन्या भौ्याप्यादस्कारिणाम्‌ | धन्ानां गरसंवासात्सकरं जायते स्मतिः ॥ 30
बुदा बोधिसत्वाख eae raat | स्ेभेवामग्रतस्तेषां तेषामस्मि पुरःस्थितः ॥ ‰

दति ध्यात्वा तथा fas aurea: | बुदधानुस्मुतिरप्यवं भवेत्तस्य मुङ्धसु ङः ॥ sz
संप्रजन्यं तदायाति न च यात्यागतं एनः । सतिवा मनोदारे रच्ता्॑मवतिरते ॥ ॐ

ug तावदिदं fart सदोपस्थाप्यमीदृश्म्‌ | निरिन्दियेणेव मया स्थातव्यं का्वत्सदा ॥ ४।
fron नेघविच्तेषा न कतव्याः कदाचन | निध्यायतौव सततं कार्या दृष्टिरधोगता ॥ 9
दृष्िविश्रामहेतोस्त feu पश्येत्कदाचन | आभासमाचं दृष्ट्रा च खागतायें विलोकयेत्‌ ॥ 36
मार्गादौ भयबोधायं सुः पश्येचतुर्दिश्म्‌ | fest विश्रम्य aha परादयेव ष्तः ॥ 9

स चेदपसरेद्रापि we प्वाभ्निरूप्य च । रवं सर्वाखवयस्थासु कायं ARI समाचरेत्‌ ॥ 98
कायेनेवमवस्येयमित्यात्तिप्य क्रियां एनः । कथं कायः स्थित इति xa पुनरन्तरा ॥ 39
निरूप्य सवेयत्नेन चित्तमत्तदिपस्तथा | धम चिन्तामद्ास्तम्मे यथा बद्धो न मुच्यते ॥ 10

कुच मे ada इति प्रत्यवेच्छ तया मनः | समाधानधर नेव च्तणमप्यत्सनेद्यथा ॥ 44
भयोत्छवादिसंबन्धे यद्यशो यथा सुखम्‌ | दानकाले तु श्रौलस्य यस्मादुक्तमुपेच्तगम्‌ ॥ ४
यदुबुद्धा Aaa ततोऽन्यं न विचिन्तयेत्‌ | तदेव तावन्निष्पाद्ं तदूतेनान्तरात्मना ॥ ५9
रवं fe aad सर्वमन्यथा नो भयं भवेत्‌ | असं प्रजन्यद्चोष्योऽपि टद कैवं गमिष्यति ॥ ५1
नानाविधप्रलापेषु वतेमानेव्नेकधा | कौत्रहलेवु सर्वेषु दन्यादौत्सक्यमागतम्‌ ॥ 45
ग्दग्मर्दनढगच्छेदरेखादयफलमागतम्‌ | रत्वा ताथागतौ' श्रित्तां तत्त्तणाद्धौत उत्छ॒जेत्‌ ॥ 46
यदा चलितुकामः स्यादक्तुकामोऽपि वा भवेत्‌ | खचितं प्यवेच्छादौ कुर्यादर्थेण युत्तिमत्‌ ॥ 4
अनुनौतं प्रतिहतं यदा पश्येत्खकं मनः। न कर्तव्यं न वक्तव्यं स्थातव्यं काखवत्तदा ॥ 48

saa सोपहासं वा यदा मानमदान्वितं । सोत्मासातिशयं वक्रं व्क च मनो भवेत्‌ ॥ 49
यदात्मोत्वमे गाभासं परपंसनमेव च । afraid ससंरम्भ' स्थातव्यं काद्वत्तदा ॥ 80
लाभसत्कारकौ्ेधिं परिवारा वा पुनः । उपस्थाना्धिं मे चित्तं तसमात्ति्ठामि RSA ॥ 81
worded खार्थाधिं परिषत्काममेव वा । वतंमिच्छलति मे चित्तं तस्ाततिष्ामि ASAT ॥ 52
असद्िष्यतरलसंभोतं sai मु खर तथा | खपच्तामिनिविष्टं च तस्मात्ति्ठामि काष्टवत्‌ ॥ 68

--- PAGE 44 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt 8००००.) बोधिचर्थावतारम्‌ | 11

wa संकिटमालोक्ध निष्फलारम्भि वा मनः। निग्टोयादुदृ रः प्रतिप्तेय तत्दा ॥ ५५
खनिख्खितं स॒परसप्नं धीरः सादरगौरवम्‌ | सलब्लं सभयं शान्तं पराराधमतत्मरम्‌ ॥ 55
परस्यरविराभिर्वलिच्छाभिरखेदितम्‌ | autores छ्येतदेषामिति दयाग्धितम्‌ ॥ 5
आत्मसत्ववशं नित्यमनवदयेष aera । निर्माण्मिव निर्माणं घास्यान्येष मानसम्‌ ॥ 57
चिसाब्रा्षं WU सूत्वा WA सुङ्मुं धः | धारयामोदृशं fara grea ॥ ss
गभ्ेरामिषसंग्रद्देः HAA इतस्ततः | न कलोत्यन्यथा कायः कस्मादन्यप्रतिकियाम्‌ ॥ sy
रत्तसौमं मनः कसमादात्मौकत्य समु यम्‌ | त्वत्त सेत्‌एयगेवायं Bars तव को TA to

न सौकशोधि हे मूए काषपुत्तलिकां शुचिम्‌ । अमेध्यघटितं यन्तं कस्मादच्तसि पतिकम्‌ ॥ 61
xa चमं पुट तावत्छबुद्येव एथक कुर । अस्थिपञ्जरतो मांसं प्र्नाशस्त्रेय मोचय ॥ 62
अस्यौन्यपि एथक्‌ छत्वा पश्य मन्नानमन्ततः | किमत्र सारमस्तोति खयमेव विचारय । ४
खुवमन्विष्य यत्नेन न दृष्टं सारमच्र ते । अधुना वद TRAIN कायमद्यापि Tale ॥ 6,

न खादितव्यमश्ुचचिं त्वया पेयं न शोणितम्‌ । नान्लाणि चूषितव्यानि किं कायेन करिष्यसि ॥ ५5
युक्तं गभरष्दगालादेराष्टारा तु रच्तितम्‌ | करमोपकरुतव तन्मनुष्यागां WHAT ॥ ५५
र्वं ते रतच्ततथ्चापि ग्टद्यराच्छिद्य निद॑यः कायं दास्यति weer त्वं किं करिष्यसि ॥ ५7
न स्थास्यतौति wars न gels प्रदौयते | कायो यास्यति खादित्वा कस्मात्त्वं कुरुषे ययम्‌ ॥ 6४
TAH वेतनं तस्ात्छायं कुरू मनोऽधुना | न fe वैतनिकोपात्तं सवं तस्स GATT ॥ ५
काये नौवुद्धिमाधाय गन्यागमननिश्यात्‌ | यथाकामं गमं कायं कुर सत््वाथंसिद्धये ॥ 7
रुवंवश्रौकतखात्मा नित्यं स्मितमु खो भवेत्‌ । व्यजेद्ग्टकुटिसंकोचं पर्वाभाषौ sae ॥ 71
सश्न्दपात सदसा न पौठादौन्वि निच्िपेद्‌ | नास्फालयेत्वपाटं च स्यानिःशब्दरुचिः सदा ॥ 72
वको बिडालखौर्च frat निभ्टतश्वरन्‌ | प्राभ्रोत्यभिमतं कार्यमेवं नित्यं यतिश्चरेत्‌ ॥ ;3
परुचोदनदच्ताणामनधी्ोपकारिणाम्‌ | waster वाक्यं सर्वश्िव्यः सदा भवेत्‌ ॥ ?५
सुभाषितेषु स्वेषु साधुकारमुदौरयेत्‌ | पण्यकारिगमालोक्य सतिभिः संप्रहर्षयेत्‌ ॥ 7
wate च गुणं त्रयादुत्रयाचच तोषतः | खव भाष्यमाणे च भावयेत्तदरग्ञतां ॥ 7

सर्वारम्भा हि तुर्या सा वि्तेरपि दुलभ | भोच्छतुष्टिमुखे तस्मात्यरमचतेग रैः ॥ 77

न चात्र मे ययः ates च मद्त्सखम्‌ | अपोतिदुःखं देवेस्त मष्टदःखं पर च | 7
किश्वस्तविन्धस्तपदं विस्परायं मनोरमम्‌ | श्रुतिसौ स्यं छपामूलं म्टदुमन्दखरं वदेत्‌ ॥ ;9

RI Wawel सत्त्वा्चच्तुषा सपिवच्निव | रुतानेव समाभ्य बुद्धत्वं मे भविष्यति ॥ 80
सात्याभिनिवेशोत्यं प्रतिपच्ञार्थ॑मेव च । गुणोपकारिच्तेचे च दुःखिते च महष्छभम्‌ ot
दच्त उव्यानसंपन्नः खयं कारौ सदा भवेत्‌ | नावकाशः प्रदातव्यः कस्यचित्सर्वकर्मसु ॥ 82
उत्तरोत्तरतः ort दानपारमितादयः | नेतरा तयनेच्छेखामन्यचाचारसेतुतः ॥ 5

णवं बुद्धा पराथेषु भवेत्सततमुल्थितः | निषिडमप्यनुन्नातं कपालोरर्थदर्ििनः ॥ 84
षिनिपरातगतानाथत्रतस्थान्संविभज्य च । yea मध्यमां माचां चिच्चौवरबह्िस्यजेत्‌ ॥ ss
सदधमेसेवकां कायमितसाथँ न पौडयेव्‌ | wate fe सत्वानामाश्ामासु प्रपूरयेत्‌ ॥ 86

aay नोषितं TRS कराये | तु्याशये तु तच्यान्यमित्थं न परिद्धोयते ॥ 97

--- PAGE 45 [OCR_san+eng] ---
19 बोधिचधावतारम्‌ | [Journal & Toxt, Part I, 1894.

wat Gries खस्य न भ्िरोेष्टिते वदेत्‌ | सच्छवदग्डग्स्त्े च नावगुणिटतमस्तके ॥ 88

गम्भौ सोदारमस्पेष न ety पुरषं fer । होनोतकेष धर्मेषु समं गौरवमाचरेत्‌ ॥ 89
मोदारधर्मपाचं च हौने wa नियोजयेत्‌ । न चाचारं परिन्य BATA प्रलोभयेत्‌ ॥ 90
दन्तकाष्स्य खेटस्य विसभैनमपाढतम्‌ | नेष्टः जले we भोग्ये मूचादेश्वापि गदितम्‌ ॥ 91
मुखपर न Yala SUS प्ररटताननम्‌ | प्रलम्बपादं नासौत न ATH मर्दयेत्॒मम्‌ ॥ 02
नेकयान्यस्न्निया galas श्रयनमासनम्‌ | लोकाप्रसादकं सवं FE ष च वजेयेत्‌ । 9
माक्ल्या काग्येत्किं चिदत्तिगेन तु सादरम्‌ | समस्तेनेव स्तेन मागं मप्येवमादिषेत्‌ ॥ 9५

a बाद्कल्च्तेपकं कंचिच्छन्दयेदल्यसंभ्नमे | अच्छटादि तु कर्तव्यमन्यथा स्यादसंढतः ॥ 9
माथनिर्वागाशरगयावच्छयौतेशितया दिश्या | संप्रनानंल्लघूल्थानः प्रागवश्यं नियोगतः ॥ 9
आचारो बोधिसत््वानामप्रमेय उदाहृतः | चित्तश्रोधनमाचार नियतं तावदाचरेत्‌ ॥ 97
राधिन्दिवं च fre चिष्कालं च प्रवर्तयेत्‌ । शेषापत्तिसमल्तेन बोधिचित्तजिनाख्रयात्‌ ॥ vs
या खवस्थाः प्रपयेत खयं परवश्रोऽपि वा | ताखवस्थासु याः शित्ताः शि च्तेत्ता ख यत्नतः ॥ 99
a fe तदद्यते किंचिन्न fared जिनात्मजेः । न तदस्ति न aa विद्ध रुतः सतः ॥ 100
पारुपरयेण साच्तादा सतत्वाथे नान्यदाचरेत्‌ | सत्त्वानामेव चार्थाय सं बोधाय नामयेत्‌ ॥ 101
सदा कर्यागमिचं च जौवितार्थेऽपि न जेत्‌ । बोधिसन्वत्रतधरः महायानारथंकोविदम्‌ ॥ 102
श्रौसंभवविमोच्ता्च धिच्तेयदररुवर्तनम्‌ | रतचान्यच gata Sa रचान्तवाचनात्‌ ॥ 109
frat. सवेष दृश्यन्ते तस्म त्सचाणि वाचयेत्‌ | STE च मूलापत्तीनिरूपयेत्‌ ॥ 10४
शिच्तासमुचयोऽवश्यं scare एनः एनः । विस्तरेण सदाचासो यस्मात्तच प्रदर्शितः ॥ 105
सच्त्पणायवा तावत्पश्यत्छच ससुचयम्‌ | अआयनागाजेनावद्ध feat च प्रयन्नतः॥ 106

यतो निधांयते यच यदेव च नियुच्छते | तल्नोकचित्तरच्ताथं शित्त दष्टा समाचरेत्‌ ॥ 107
wate समासेन संप्रजन्यस्य लच्तणम्‌ | यत्कायचित्तावस्थायाः प्रत्यवेच्ता YSYS! ॥ 108
कायेनैव पटिष्यामि वाकपाडेन तु कि भवेत्‌ | चिकित्घापाठमाचेग रोगिणः fa भविष्यति ॥ 109

बोधिचर्यावतारे संप्रजन्यश्च्तणः पञ्चमः परिच्छेदः !

सवेमेतत्ुचरितं दानं सुगतपृजनम्‌ | छतं कमं सदहसे्यत््रतिघः प्रतिद्न्ति तत्‌ ॥ 1

न च देषसमं पापं न च त्तान्तिसमं तपः | तस्माल्त्तान्तिं प्रयत्नेन भावयेदिविधेनैयेः ॥ 2
मनःसमं न were न fae | न निनं न तिं याति Sees छदि स्थिते ॥ 3
पयत्ययेमानेर्यान्येऽपि at समाभिताः | तेऽप्येनं इन्तुमिच्छन्ति खामिनं देषदुभगम्‌ ॥ 4
खषटदोऽप्यदधिजन्तेऽखाददाति न च सेव्यते । संच्तेपा्रात्ि तत्किचित्कोधनो येन छस्थितः ॥ 5
walt दुःखानि करोतौव्यरिसंल्नया । यः क्रोधं हन्ति निरबन्धात्स खोद परत्र च 1 6
खनिदकएयाव्नातमिष्स्य च विघातनात्‌ | दौमेनस्याशनं पाप्य देषो दूतो feta माम्‌ ॥ 7
तस्ादिषातयिष्यामि तस्या्रनमद्ं fort: | यस्मान्न मद्वधादन्यत्क्मस्यास्ति Star ॥ 8
खन्निद्धागमेनापि न चोभ्या सुदिता मया । दौमेगस्सेन गास्लौद करलं तवव्योयते ॥ 9

--- PAGE 46 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] बोधिचयेपवतारम्‌ | 13

reas पतौकासो दौमनस्येन तच किम्‌ । खथ नाल्ति प्रतौकासो Shirai तथः किम्‌ ॥ 10
दुःखं नयक्तारपारष्यमयश्रसखेत्यनौ पितम्‌ | परियाणामात्मनो वापि श्रचोखैतदिप्य॑यात्‌ ॥ 11
कथंचिह्तभ्यते सौख्यं दुःखं स्थितमयलनतः | निःसासो न दिना दुःखाऋतस्तस्ादुदृष्ौभव ॥ 12
दुर्गाएच्रककर्णाटा दाहष्छेदादिवेदनाम्‌ | सुधा सन्ते मुक्यधेमद्ं कस्मात्तु कातरः ॥ 19
न किंचिदस्ति तदस्तु यदभ्यासस्य दुष्करम्‌ । तस्मान्मदुव्ययाभ्यासात्छोण्व्यापि महावयथा ॥ 14
उदशदं शरमश्कत्त॒त्पिपासादिवेदनाम्‌ । मष्त्कगङ्गादिदुःखं च किमनथं न पश्यसि ॥ 15
शरौतोव्ढष्टिवाताध्वव्याधिवन्धनताड्नेः | agent न कर्तव्यमन्यथा वर्धते यथा ॥ 16
केचित्छश्यो शितं दृष्टा विक्रमन्ते विशेषतः | परुश्रोितमप्येके दका मूच्छ व्रजन्ति यत्‌ ॥ 1;
तचित्तस्य दृएत्वेन RATA चागतम्‌ | दुःखदुर्याधनस्तस्माद्धवेदभिभवेद्यथाम्‌ ॥ 16
दुग्खेऽपि नेव fares प्रसादं च्तोभयेदुबुधः | रुग्रामे हि aw ALIS च सुलभा यथा ॥ 19
उरसारातिघातान्‌ ये परतौच्छन्तो जयन्त्यरौन्‌ | ते ते विजयिनः मूराः शेषास्तु म्टतमारकाः ॥ 20
Tires दुःखस्य यत्सवेगान्मदच्युतिः | defer च कारण्यं पापाद्धोतिजिंने स्पष्टा ॥ 21
पित्तादिषु न मे कोपो मद्धादुःखाकरेष्वपि | सचेतनेषु किं कोपस्तेऽपि प्र्यचोदिताः ॥ 22
अनिष्यमाणमप्येतच्छ्लसुत्यद्यते यया । अनिश्यमाणोऽपि बलात्कोध उत्पद्यते तथा ॥ 2
कुप्यामौति न संचिन्त्य कुप्यति सेष्छया जनः | उत्पत्छ इत्यभिप्रेत्य sty उत्पद्यते न च ॥ os
ये केचिदपराधास्त्‌ पापानि विविधानि च | सवं तव््ययबलात्खतन्तरं तु न विद्यते tes
न च TATRA जनयामौति चेतना | न चापि जनितस्यास्ति जनितोऽसमीति चेतना ॥ 26
agua feats यत्तदात्मेति कल्पितम्‌ | तदेव fe भवामौति न संचिन््योपजायते ॥ 2
aged fe तन्नास्ति क इच्छेद्रवितुं तदा । विषयव्याटतत्वाच्च निसोडमपि Aes ॥ os
नित्यो छयचेतन्ात्मा व्यो मवत्सफुटमक्रियः | प्र्ययान्तरसङ्गेऽपि निविंकारस्य का क्रिया ॥ 2
यः प्व॑वत्‌क्रियाकाले कियायास्तेन किं छतम्‌ । तस्य क्रियेति संबन्धे need निबन्धनम्‌ ॥ ‰
ud पर वष्र aa यद्वरं सोऽपि चावश्यः। निर्वाणवदचेष्टेषु भावेग्वेवं क कुप्यते | 31
वारशुणापि न wend कः किं वारयतौति चेत्‌ । युक्ता परतौव्यता यस्माद्दुःखस्योपरुतिमेता ॥ ॐ
amrefast fast वा दृषाप्यन्यायकारिणम्‌ | ईदृशाः पर्यया अस्येवं मत्वा सुखी भवेत्‌ ॥ ॐ
यदि तु खेच्छया सिद्धिः सवषामेव दे्ि नाम्‌ | न भवेत्कस्यचिदधःखं न दुःखं कश्चिदिष्डति ॥ 3
पमादादात्मनात्मनं बाधन्ते कणटकादिभिः। भक्तच्छेदादिभिः कोपाद रापस्त्यादिलिष्युया ॥ 35
उद्धन्धनपपातैख विषापण्यादिभच्तणेः | Graf केचिदात्मानमएराचरगेन च । 3
यदेवं कतेवण्डत्वादुन्न्यात्मानमपि धियम्‌ | तदेषां परकायेषु परिारः कथं भवेत्‌ ॥ 9
जञे्योग्मत्तौछतेम्वेष veterans | न केवलं दया नात्ति क्रोध उत्पद्यते कथम्‌ ॥ 88
यदि खमावो बालानां परोपडवकारिता । तेषु कोपो न युक्तो मे यथामौ दष्टनात्मके ॥ 9
अथ दोषोऽयमागन्तुः सत्त्वाः प्रछतिपे प्रलाः | तथाप्ययुक्तसतत्कोपः WEAR यथाम्बरे ॥ 40
मुरं दण्डादिकं त्वः परे यदि कुप्यते | Va प्रेरितः सोऽपि VF देषोऽसतु मे वरम्‌ ॥ 41
मयापि प दैश्वानाोदृश्येव श्च Bat | TATA युक्तमेवैततसत्वो पडवकारियः ॥ ५

| तच्छष्ं मम कायण दयं दुःखस्य कारणम्‌ । तेन शस्त्रं मया कायो ITT eT कुच कुप्यते ॥ 43

--- PAGE 47 [OCR_san+eng] ---
14 मोधिव्यांवतारम्‌ \ [Journal & Voxt, Part I, 1894.

ग्डीऽयं प्रविमाकासो शष्टौतो घटूनासषहः । टब्णान्धेन मया TT थायां कुच कुष्यते । 4+
दुःखं नेच्छामि दुःखस्य हेतुमिष्छामि वालिः | खापराधागते दुःखे कस्मादन्य कुप्यते ॥ ५
खसिद्चवनं meee नारकपत्िणः | मत्करमजनिता रख तथेदं कुच कुप्यते ॥ 47 ~
मत्कर्मचोदिता Ta नाता मच्यपकारिणः। येन यास्यन्ति नरकान्मयैवामौ इता ननु ॥ 47
carte मे पापं च्तौयते च्षमतो बड़ । मामाधिव्य तु यान्त्य ते नरकान्दौर्धवेदनान्‌ ॥ 45
खशमेवापकायेां मयैते चोपकारिणः । कसमादिपर्ययं छत्वा खलचेतः प्रकुप्यसि ॥ 49
भवेन्ममाश्रयगुणो न यामि नरकान्‌ यदि | Taras किमायातं यद्यात्मा रत्तितो मया ॥ 50
अथ प्र्ययकारौ स्यां तथाप्येते न रचिताः | Slat चापि मे चर्या तस्मान्नषटास्तपखिनः ॥ 51
मनो इन्तुममूतैतातन शकं केनचिनकषचित्‌ । शरौराभिनिवेश्ातत चित्तं दुःखेन बाध्यते ॥ se
न्यक्वारपरुषं TATA गगः | कायं न वाधते तेन चेतः कसमात्मवुप्यसि । 53
मय्यप्रसादो यो slat सकिरं मां मक्तयिष्यति। इ जन्मान्तरे वापि येनासौ Asia: | 5)
लामान्तरायकारित्वाययसौ मे ऽनभीयितः | agate मे लामः पापं तु स्थास्यति भवम्‌ ॥ ss
वरमयैव मे et मिष्याजौवितं चिरम्‌ | यस्माचिरंमपि स्थिता wags तदेव मे ॥ 5
खगे वर्तं सौख्यं yar यख विबुध्यते | मुद्धतमपसे se सुखौ भूत्वा विबुध्यते ।। ४7

ग तत्रिवजते सौं दयोरपि विवुदयोः | सेवोपमा wae चिरजीव्यल्यजौ विनः ।। 5s
लब्धापि च ase fat yar सुखान्यपि | रिक्तदस्त्च wre यास्यामि सुधितो यथा ॥ &
प्रापच्तयं च UU च लामाच्नोवन्कशोभि चेत्‌ । एर्यकच्तयश्च पापं च लाभा करध्यतो नलु ॥ Go
यद्थमेव जोवामि तदेव यदि नश्यति | fat तेन जोषितेनापि केवलाखमकारिणा | 01
खवगौवादिनि देषः सत्वाननाशयतौतिचेत्‌ | परायश्रसरेऽप्येवं कोपस्ते किं न जायते ॥ oe
परायत्तापरसादत्वादप्रसादिषु ते चमा | जो्ोत्यादपरायत्ते चमा नावर्ग॑वादिनि ॥ 6
परतिमासतूपस्मेनाश्रकाकरो केषु च । न युज्यते मम देषो बुद्धादौनां न हि अथा ॥ ९५
ग॒रुसालोडितादौनां भियाणं चापकारिषु । पूवैवत्रयोत्यादं दृषा कोपं निवारयेत्‌ ॥ os
चेतनाचेतनक्लता देद्िनां नियता था । सा व्यया चेतने दृष्टा MAGA यथां मनः ॥ ०४
Ae ऽपराध्यन्ति कुष्यन्यन्येऽपि Atha: | aa कमेषु निर्दीषं कं वा त्रूमोऽपराधिनम्‌ | ८7
कस्मादेवं छतं पृथे येनैवं बाध्यसे परः । सवै कम॑परायत्ताः कोऽ मवान्धयाछतौ tos

रवं बुद्धा तु Wey awd करोग्यद्टम्‌ | येन सँ भविष्यन्ति Safa: परस्परम्‌ ॥ 69
TWA गहे यददभिगत्वा एान्तरम्‌ | zal यचच asia तदाृष्यापनयते ॥ ०

रुवं चित्तं यदासक्ाद्यते देषवङ्िना | ततृच्तगं cafes परात्मोदाषशङकया ॥ १1
areata: कर क्वा मुक्त ेत्किमभद्रकम्‌ | मलुष्यदुःवैनरकान्सुक्तसेत्िममन्रकम्‌ । 72
यद्ेतम्भा्रमेवाद्य दुःखं सों न पारयते | त्नारकव्यथाहतुः क्रोधः कसान वार्यते ॥ 79
कोपा्मेवमेवा टं नरकेषु ewer: । कारितोऽस्सि न arate: पराचो वा रतो मया 1 74
. न चेदं तादृषं दुःखं मष्ाधे च करिव्यति | जगद्ग्कद्दरे दुःखे पौतौरेवाच युज्यते.॥ 75

यदि Hires पाप्मने Gen gla | मनस्तमपि तं सतवा Tees न इष्यति ॥ ‰
षदं च ते चरिधिखं fread eatery । ग वारितं च गुष्िभिः परावजेनमुत्तमम्‌ ॥ 77

--- PAGE 48 [OCR_san+eng] ---
वि 78, 1 बोधिचयेावतारम्‌ | 15

स्येव छखमिधेवं तवेदं यदि न frag | श्टतिदानादिविस्ते gage तं भवेत्‌ ॥ 78
गे Stina च परसौस्यमपौच्छसि | कौलैमाने पसरो खसौसयमपि नेच्छसि ॥ 79
गोधिचित्तं समुत्याद्य सर्वस्व खेच्छया | खयं ल्धसुखेष्वद्य Tay कुप्यसि ॥ 80

Tee बुडत्वं स्वानां किल वाञ्छसि । सत्कारमित्वरं gg तेषां किं परिदद्यसे ॥ 81
इष्णाति यस्या पोष्यं तुभ्यमेव ददाति सः | कु्ुम्बनोषिनं लब्ध्वा न wate safe ॥ 82
a किं नेच्छसि सत्त्वानां यस्तेषां बोधिमिष्छति | बोधिचित्तं कुतस्तस्य यो ऽन्यसंपदि कुप्यति ॥ 88
दि तेन न amet स्थितं दानपते गहे । सर्वथापि न तत्तेऽस्ति दत्तादत्तेन तेन किम्‌ ॥8५
किं वारयतु Guns प्रसन्नान्‌ खगुणनथ | लभमानो न weg वद केन न कुप्यसि ॥ 8४
न केवलं त्वमात्मानं कतपापं न श्रोचसि | छवएरैः ae स्पर्धा मपरां ad firsts ॥ 86
जातं चेदधियं श्रचोस्लं तुच्छा fa एनभवेत्‌ | त्वदा सनमातेण न चाहेतुभं विष्यति ॥87
अथ तदिच्छया fag ae’ किं ad तव | Sea} मवेदेवमन्थैः कोऽन्धतः पर; ॥ 88
रुतद्धि बडिशं घोरं ज्ञो शरवाडिगिकार्पितम्‌ | यतो नरकपालास्त्वां नौत्वा पच्यन्ति ATT ॥ 89
ह्ततिर्श्रोऽथ सत्कारो न पुराय न चायुषे ¶ न बलाथं न चासोग्ये न च कायसुखाय मे ॥ 90
रतावा भवेत्खाये धौमतः खाथेवेदिनः | मद्यद्य॒तादिसेव्यं स्यान्मानसं सुखमिच्छता ॥ 91
यण्रोऽथं हागयन्त्यर्थं मात्मानं मारयन्त्यपि | किमच्तसाणि भच्छाणि et कस्य च तत्सुखम्‌ |! %2
यथा qian? fag रोदिव्ार्वसवं शिखः | तथा स्तुतियश्योद्धानौ खचितं प्रतिभाति मे ॥ 9
शन्दस्तावद चित्तत्वात्य मां स्तौतौत्यसंभवः | परः किल मयि प्रौत इ्ेतदमीतिकारणम्‌ ॥ 9५
अन्यच मयि वा Sten किं fe मे परकौयया | तस्येव तन्पौतिष्ुखं भागो नास्पोऽपि मे ततः ॥ 95
तत्सखेन सु खत्वं चेत्र्वतैव ममास्तु तत्‌ | कस्मादन्यपरसादेन सुखितेमु न मे सुखम्‌ ॥ 96
तस्मादहं स्ततोऽखमति प्रीतिरात्मनि जायते | तचाप्येवमसंबन्धात्केवलं शिुचेष्ितम्‌ ॥ 97
स्तत्यादयो न मे ae संवेगं नाशयन्त्यमौ | गुणवत्सु च मत्से संपत्कोपं च कुवैत ॥ 98
तस्मातृत्तत्यादिघाताय मम ये प्रद्युपस्थिताः। अपायपरातस्च्ताथं पत्ता ननु ते मम ॥ ५१
सुत्ार्थिनखायुक्लं मे लाभसत्कारबन्धनम्‌ । ये मोचयन्ति मां बन्धाद्रेषस्तेषु कथं मम ॥ 100
दुःखं प्वेष्टुकामस्य ये कपाटत्वमागताः | बुद्धाधिानत दव देषस्तेषु कथं मम ॥ 101
एरविन्नः wat ates कोपो न यज्यते | त्तान्या समं तपो नास्ति न त्वेतत्तदुपस्ितम्‌ । 102
अ्ाद् मात्मसेषेण न करोमि च्तमामिष्ध | मयेवाच छतो विश्नः पुर्धहेतावुपस्थिते । 103
at fe 3a विना नास्ति यस्मिंख सति विद्यते। स णव कारं तस्य स कथं विन्न उच्यते ॥ 104
न fe कालोपपन्नेन -दानविन्नः छतोऽ्धिंना । म च घत्राजके प्रापे भव्रज्याविन्न उच्यते ॥ 105
सलभा याचका लोके दुलंभास्वपकारिणः | यतो मे ऽनपराधस्य न कच्विदपराध्यति ॥ 106
अश्रमोपाजितस्लस्माद्र हे निधिरिवोत्थितः |. बोधिचर्यांसद्ायवात्‌स्पृष्धणोयो मया रिपुः ॥ 107
मया चानेन चोपात्तं AHA ATI | Wa परथमं देयभेतत्पर्वां च्तमा यतः ॥ 108
च्तमासिद्याश्यो नास्य तेन पज्यो न चेदरिः | सिदिदेतुरचित्तोऽपि axa: Worst कथम्‌ II 109
अपकाराधयो ऽस्येति वुर्यदि न wera | अन्यया मे कथं च्ान्तिभिंषनौव हितोद्यते ॥ 110
तद्दुटाश्रयमेवावः प्रतीत्योत्यथते मा । स Tas: मातुः प्यः SAAT TAT ॥ 111

--- PAGE 49 [OCR_san+eng] ---
16 बोधिचयेावतारम्‌ | (Journal & Text, Part 1, 1894,

was गिनश्तेमि्यतो सु गिनोदितम्‌ । रुतानाराध्य गवः संपत्यार यतो गताः ॥ 112
स्वेभ्य fred बुद्धधर्मा गमे समे | णिनेषु गौरवं ven eater कः कमः I 119
ere च ATE TST खतः किं तु कार्यतः | समं च तेन मात्य स्वानां तेन ते समाः॥ 114
FT TAT: सत्वमाात्रयमेव तत्‌ | वुद्धप्रसादादयत्यण्यं बुद्माहाव्यमेव तव्‌ ॥ 115
बुडधर्मागमांशेन तस्मातसत्वा जिनः समाः | न तु बुद्धैः समाः केचिदनन्तग णायेवैः ॥। 116
गुणसारैकरा्ौमां गुणोऽगरपि चैत्कचित्‌ । दृष्येत तस्य wes चेलोकयमपि न च्तमम्‌ ॥ 117
बुदधरमोदयां सत श्रेष्टः सत्वस्य विद्यते | रतदं शानुरूपेण SAT छता भवेत्‌ ॥ 118
किंच निश्कद्मबन्धनामपमेयोपकारिणाम्‌ | सत्त्वाराधनसुत्छुज्य निष्कतिः का परा भवेत्‌ ॥ 119

भिन्दन्ति दें पविशन्यवोचिं येषां छते तत्न छते छतं स्यात्‌ |

मष्ापकारिष्वपि तेन सदं कल्यागमेवाचरितव्यमेषु ॥ 120

खयं मम afar णव तावद्यदर्चमात्न्यपि नि्यपेच्ताः |

ae कथं खामिषु तेषु तेषु करोमि मानं न तु दासमभावम्‌ ॥ 121

येषां wa यान्ति सुदं मुंनौन्दरा येषां व्यैयायां stair मन्दम्‌ ।

तन्तोषणात्सवंमुनोन््तुण्टिक्तत्रापकारे SMR TATA ॥ 122

array यथा समन्तान्न सर्वकामरपि सौमनस्यम्‌ ।

सत््वययायामपि तद्देव न प्रल्यपायो Sfea दयामयानाम्‌ ॥ 123

तस्मान्मया यच्ननदुःखदेन दुःखं छतं सर्वमहाकपाणाम्‌ |

तदद्य पापं प्रतिदेश्यामि यत्‌खेदितास्तन्मुनयः च्तमन्ताम्‌ ॥ 124

श्याराधनायाद्य तथागतानां सर्वात्मना दास्यसुपेमि लोके ।

कुवन्ति मे मूर पदं जनौघा frag वा तुष्यतु लोकनाधः I 12:

arated सर्वमिदं sar: छपात्ममिः नेव हि सं शयो ऽत्ति |

दृश्यन्त Tar तु सत्वरूपास्त णव नाथाः किमनादरोऽच्र ॥ 126

तथागतासाधनमेतदेव STUY सं साधनमेतदेव |

लोकस्य दुःवापष्टमेतदेव तस्ान्ममास्त व्रतमेतदेव 1 19
यथेको राजपुरुषः प्रमद्राति मष्टाजनम्‌ | विकर नैव शतरोति ASTM HET | 1:8
यस्माघ्नैव स TATA तस्य राजवलं बलम्‌ | तथा न दुर्बलं कंचिदपराध्यं विमानयेत्‌ ॥ 129
यश्मान्नरकपालाख AUS TE | तस्मादाराधयेत्सततवान्भ्यश्छग्डन्टमं यथा ॥ 130
कुपितः किं पः कुर्या येन स्याद्नरकव्यथा । यत्सत्वदौम॑नस्येन कतेन छयनुभूय॑ति ॥ 151
तुष्टः किं नपतिदद्यादयदुनुदधत्वसमं भवेत्‌ | यासत्वसोमनस्येन कतेन यनु शरूयते । 18:
आस्सां मविष्यद्बुदवतवं सत््वाराधनसंभवम्‌ | इहेव सौभाग्यः सौख्यं किं ग पश्यसि ॥ 158
प्रासादिकत्वमासोग्ं प्रामोयं चिरभौवितम्‌। anata स्फौतं च्षमो प्राप्रोति संसरन्निति॥ 134

बोधिचर्यावतारे च्षान्तिपारमिता we: परिच्छेदः 11


--- PAGE 50 [OCR_san+eng] ---
VRITTAMALARHY A.
INTRODUCTION TO “ VRITTAMALAKHYA:”

By Riwacmanpra Kavisudearti, or Gavpa ix Benaat,
With a short note on
The Life of the Venerable Maha Nethraprdsddamila.

The present work was compiled by Pandit Sri Ramachandra Kavibharati,
author of the “ Bhakti Sataka.” Although we cannot detinitely state the
period of its composition, yet it must have been written after the “ Bhakti
Sataka ” and “ Vrittaratndkara Paiichiké,” as thoro are many examples from
theso two books quoted in this work, though there is no referonco whatever
to the lattor in the former. Any porson acquainted with tho Sanskrit
language will sco, as the name indicates, that the chief object of the author
in compiling this book has been to give instructions on the several metres of
Sanskrit Poctry. All tho twenty-six metres are beautifully illustrated here.

This contains fifty-two stanzas, the first four of which are composed in
the motre of mdérd. The first verse signifies adoration to Lord Buddha; the
sccond shows what respect skilful poets deserve; tho third and the fourth givo
a description of the Island of Qeylon and tho King Pardkramabihu. +

* This priest was also called “ Dipafkara,” and was born at ''Rammuhgoda "; ho
rocoived the name givon above from the monastery whero ho lived.

क Iam inclined to think that the King reforred to hore must be Véra Parfkramabéhn,
who, according to “ Vrittaratnékara Paiichika,” reignod at Jayowardanapira abont tho
year 1999 A.B., i.e. 46 years after the building of that city. Althongh it is uot montioned
in Mahdwanso that a King by the namo of Pardkramabihn was reigning at Jayewardana-
pura in tho year above roforred to, yet ho may havo been then reigning there, and his
name might havo been omitted in the Mahéwanso through an oversight.

“रू्पपिनिनिंतकामः

श्रीमान्‌ स््व॑च्तचरणदृएमजनः |
वौस्पराक्रमबाड-

face भवति मद धरनि, ॥

“May the King Vira Pardkramabiha, like unto ono who has surpassed 41101944 in
“beauty, whe is deep in his devotion to Lord Buddha, reign on this carth for a long time to
come.” This stanza from the “ Vrittaratnékara Pafichike,” by Sri Ramachandra Kavi-
bh4rati makes me believe that he sojourned in Coylon during the reign of that monarch.

If according to the argument of Pandit Hara Prasid Sastri, the Pandit Sri Réma-
chandra Kavibhérati arrived in Ceylon during tho reign of Parékramabéhu ITII., he could
not have met (as stated in many books on Simhalose Litoraturo) the Venerable Sri Rabula
Sahgha Raja, of Wijeyabéhu Collogo Tottagamawa. For, tho interval between tho reign
of King Parékramabéhu III., and that of Wijoyabihu, who is said to havo founded the
Wijoyabéhu College, is too long to allow us of supposing that Sif Rémachandra Kavibbérati
arrived in Ceylon during the roign of tho former, as also there is not the least doubt of
his having been a contemporary of Sri Réhula.

3

--- PAGE 51 [OCR_san+eng] ---
18

The verses 5 to 17 refer to the Minister Wickremasimhadéva, the father
of two chief priests who lived in the monasteries at Omagamuva (Omagréma)
and Rammutigoda (Ramyasthala). Verses 18 to 22 give a description of the
Princess Abharauawati, the wife of Wickremasimhadéva and the daughter
of Sri Jayasithha Pratirdja of Dambadoniya (Jambudroni). Verses 23 to 50
contain a biographical sketch of tho Vencrable Dipaikara, surnamed Mahé
Nothraprésd4damtila, who was born at Rammungoda and lived at a monastery
called Galapéta Vihdra (Sailanthardyatana),* Verses 51 and 52 describé
tho Vonorable Mangala Samgha Raja, an clder brothor of the Venerable
TDipafkara. ॥

It is needless to say much on the subject of the importance and useful-
ness pf this book, as the reader will not find it difficult to “convince himself
of the fact after a careful perusal.

५ SaTLABIMBARAMA,”” ©. A. SEELAKKANDHA,

Dopanpuwa, Cryton.
8rd March, 1894.

* This monastery (a portion of which was called Nothrapvdsdda) is situated on the
Bentota River, in the Southorn Provinco of Coylon, and ix still held in the highest respect,

--- PAGE 52 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.]

शे्वालाखया |
By Ramachandra Kavibharati.
TAM मगवतेऽ्ते सम्यक्‌ सम्बुद्धाय ॥
पथ्यार्यया ।
्ौघनकमलजममलं जयतात्‌ TRACT, ।
₹हरिहर-दिरश्छगभे-पश्वति-भमराटतं सततम्‌ ॥१॥
, श्रार्खखागोतिः।
कवयः सन्ति जगत्यां बहवः कवयस्तु नाम ते तेः कि? मे)
ये गुणदोषविधिन्ना विरलास्ते साधवस्ठ eter: प्रायः ॥९॥
Baraat
श्रस्ति fe नवरननपूरिता नगरौ eat नाम विश्रुता ।
विलसचतुरसिमेखला विखला विबुधाऽलङ्कुतोदरा ait
द्विणएणन्तिका।
सुनो न्रपादालप्रूजनप्रवीणेन गुरणा चमाश्टताम्‌ |
पराक्रमथुजेन wy प्रपालिता सुनयेन ways ॥४॥
पथ्या-वक्चम्‌ ।
तचाऽग्रपनेः YR रा्रातकमधुदरुैः |
कदलौ-ना लिकेरेच्‌-लवलौ-को लि-दा दिभिः ॥५॥
खवङ्गनागपुन्नाग-नागरङ्गा श्वेतैः |
जमनदुम्नरजन्नोरे वौ जप्ूरकपित्यकेः ॥६॥
तमालतालङिन्ताजेः श्रौ फलामलपाटलैः )
किंटकाश्ोकव्लेः पिशुमन्दइलिपियैः ॥७॥

19

--- PAGE 53 [OCR_san+eng] ---
20

इश्षमालाख्या | [Journal & Text, Part I, 1894,

fadatteaeat fige: THER: |
केतकौकोविद्‌ारश्च पियाल-षरलाग्रनेः ॥८॥
नानापुष्यलतायोषिदा लिङ्गग-विजुम्भितैः |
भमद्रमरञजद्ारेः कूजत्को किल-से वितैः ॥८॥
नानापचिङलाकौ श नैत्यदरिणमण्डलैः |
लौलोद्यानषरिद्वापो पवनेरितपश्वेः ॥९०॥

फलैः प्रत्ययङसुनने विदिता तिधिसत्ियेः ।
च्पकादेख तरुभिः समन्तात्‌ परिवारिते ॥१९॥
विदश्नमसमाकौरै रम्यवेश्म-विग्धषिते |

भारे प्रमदारते धनधान्यसमन्विते ॥१९२॥
परभाते गोुरन्धषणं घरोप्रौनां सहसः |
सतन्यपानेच्ठु-वत्धानां इप्नारावसमाङ्ले ॥१९ २॥
ararat admerat नानाश्रास््ेव्वभोतिनाम्‌ ।
युकः परस्यरालापै सुंखरौरुतदिभ्ुखे ue vl
पूते सम्द्धसदने रमयामाभिषे एमे |

गरामे परग्परायाते लङा तिलकताङ्गते ॥११५॥
गुणवान्‌ धनवान्‌ वाग्नौ रूपनिष्नितमन्मयः |
विद्याविनयषम्पन्नो माकुशसमुद्धवः ॥९ él
सन्नचरणाम्भोजभ्वमरः WATT |
mifenafawren विक्रमाल्नितषद्यशाः ॥१९॥
खं fe सवेगुणोपेतां पुखलचणएलचिताम्‌ |
गुरु्एुशरुएणे Unt श्नौलाचारपरायणम्‌ ॥१८॥
पद्मपचविश्रालाचतौ सदा मधुरभाषिषैम्‌ |
पूहुवदनां तन्तौ सुदती" ततुमध्यमाम्‌ ॥१९॥

--- PAGE 54 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.] इत्तमालाख्या |

श्यामां गजेन्द्रगमना Tat चारभाषिणोम्‌ |

पाब्बैतोभिव रूपेन सौभाग्येए शचोमिव ॥२०॥

अम्बुदो णिपुरस्थस्य दत्तञुक्रायसम्पदः |

श्रीमतः प्रतिराजस्य जयसिंहस्य पुचिकाम्‌ ॥९९॥

देषीमाभरण संज्ञां सर्व्वाभरणण्डषिताम्‌ |

जनताऽद्कादजननौसुपयेमे यथाविधि re an

ख तस्यां जनयामासोत्‌ सुतसुत्तमलच्णएम्‌ |

विश्वन्तरमहाराजं पुषत्यामिव सञ्जयः 18 all

ततस्तमकरोन्नाख्ना विजयं जनकोऽर्यवित्‌ |

भवितिऽतितमायुश्रान्‌ लोके मारजयास्यदम्‌ ॥९ ४॥

सा ततान सुदं fast वर्धमानो दिनेदिने।

तनयः शरजन्मेव पावती चन्द्रमूद्धंनोः ॥२५॥

कालेन कियता सुक्तशोश्गोभवसुक्तये |

सम्बद्ध ्रासने शद्धे विधिना weary wat: ne et

a Hate बालाकंपलवस्यद्धिना gf)

बभौ पलाश्रशाखोव कुसुमः स्कन्धसङ्गतः 12 Ol

तं जओैलान्तरमूल्ेशो werent जिनो दितः |

मन्तः संत्य विधिवच्चक्रे दौपङराहयम्‌ ॥२८॥

श्रय तह्भुएंतुष्टा यतौनद्रासत्तपोधनम्‌ |

mara swf जिनग्रासनदद्धये nec
प्रमाणिका ।

sonar wena स मियोदृश्राम्‌ ।

सुदासुदारवैभवः गणां निकेतनं महत्‌ ॥ र ° ॥

WHE RAMAKRISHNA MISSION

INSTITUTE OF CU
LIBRARY TORE 43 2%.

GOL PARE, CALCUTTA-29.

--- PAGE 55 [OCR_san+eng] ---
22

SAAT | (Journal & Text, Part I, 1894,

ysaytaazar ।
सुरगुरुषदृश्यो ser दिनमणिरिव तेजोभिः ।
हरिरिव वलसन्पत्या चितिष्टदिव THAT ॥२ ९॥

मेघवितानम्‌ |
aga जगतो तृषया एथुना तिलकेन |e!
श्रगमघ्ननकञ्च विद्धं विधुनेव पयोनिधिरुचैः ॥१९॥

TRaATT |
कायेन वाचा मनसा च खलान्‌ सम्मौणएयन्‌ दुःखमपास्य दानैः ।
धर्मे प्रतिष्ठापयितुं प्रटत्तो रम्यस्थलग्रामपति-यतौन्रः ॥२२॥

उपेन्द्रवज्रा |
करोति यस्तस्य यतौश्वरस्य
स्हतिं प्रस्तामिह areas: |
स धमैकमोर्थमवाप्य विदा
सुपेति निवाणरतिं सुखेन ie ४॥
उपजातिः ।
सेषः ॥
धश्नोदयानन्दितसच्छरौरो गो विन्दवच्छ्रौबलभद्रयुक्तः |
स wet: waft प्रजानां ब्रह्मैव धौरश्चत्राननोऽत्‌ ॥२५॥
xan
रज्यस्लग्रामपतेगणणवललौ तस्याभिधातुं भुवि कोऽसि कोविदः ।
वक्तु स एव प्रभवत्यऽपाज्निधेऽरमभां सि कुकी: परिमाति यः पुमान्‌॥र १॥
*मश्नरौकावलो |
महानेजरप्रासादः प्रसादौ यतीन्द्रः
कवोनामाधारः सवेग्रास्ना्थबेरौ |

* चित्‌ “ध्वच्वरोकाबदो

--- PAGE 56 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society. ] छत्तमालाख्या |

सदा मैचौधष्यानाश्क्तचिन्तप्रहन्ति
भेज्युञधैः श्रान्तिं सुक्तरागादिटोषः a on

वसन्ततिलकम्‌ ।

aa: 0

मिचोदयप्रसुदितो विकचालवक्ताः
सव्नोवनश्चपलमौन-दगऽत्यगाघः ।
संसेवितः पद गतर पिराजरषेः
सन्तापद्ा सुनिरयं कमलाकरोऽत्‌ wasn

मालिनौ ।
न भवति तवतुखोऽचेतनः amet
anftfa न गता सा कामधेनुः समत्वम्‌ ।
gufefa agua नैति चिन्तामणि्ते
त्वदुपभितिषु Wet नाय! दारिद्रमासौत्‌ ॥२९॥

वाणिन ।
aero
धनदसखः स धृव्नेटिरिव चमालिङ्गितो
हरिरिव चन्द्रमा दव लसत्‌-कलानां निधिः।
दशरयग्डमिजानिरिव सत्सुमित्नान्वितो
रविरिव पडङ्शोषएकरो gf: wat ॥४०॥

watt

aa ॥
खमाभुपगतोऽप्ययं मुनिवरः quatfrat
भवत्छमदृगोश्वरोऽष्यऽतरलोऽपि PATA: |
सदा नवगुणएाश्रयोऽपयऽतुलसत्यभामान्वितो
टहदिवुधनायकोऽप्यऽमितगोचरचाकरः ॥४९॥

--- PAGE 57 [OCR_san+eng] ---
SAAT | (Journal & Text, Part I, 1894,

*हदरनर््तकम्‌ |
बद्धिगौलसमाधिमन्दिरमुन्दिताखिल किचि
शान्तवेश्रमगेषसत्वदिताथेमात्तघमुद्धवम्‌ |
दानपार मितास्तदुःखितलोकदुष्कुतसन्ततिं
सहुणाभरणं gata जनतेऽचैयः ॥४२९॥

शादूलविक्री fea |
जेलान्तायतनाधिनाय ! भवतः सलौ ततिसुक्ताफले
हारं चारुचिकौषुरत्तमगु्णनाऽदन्तवान्‌ TPE! ।
sand yas तहुणएचये तेषाञ्च Aes
मालस्याद्गणाङ्गने समकिरत्‌ तान्येव भानि भुवम्‌ We aN
मत्तेभविक्रौ दितम्‌ |
भवतः कुन्दकरीन्द्रवनद्रविग्रदे संसप॑ति wast
anfa सौरससुद्रमग्रमिव यत्‌ चैलोक्यमासोत्ततः |
aw हि Ree caters: क गिरिशः कासे wa
अरजन्म्ा च हिमाचलः क जननो ऽतयुचेस्तरामनुवौत्‌ ॥४४॥
स्वग्धरा |
पूते सत्येन तन्तम्मियदितकथनात्‌ समते सव्वैलोकैः
्ेश्रानां sean विदधति सदसासुक्तिमार्गोपदेभरात्‌ |
fort मोत्या मिति ते परुषपिष्नता स्मलापिविंोने
मानेत्पामूलनाथ ! स्वितवति वचने किं ? सुधा प्राथनेन ॥४५॥
प्रभद्रकम्‌ |
मोत सि सर्वजगतां चरन्‌ खकुग्रलोपदेशकिरणे
दुःखितसलकेरवङ्लप्ोधमनुभावयन्नलुपकम्‌ |

* दाचित्‌ “विद्धभ्रिया” 1

--- PAGE 58 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] नालवग्गो | 99

दौघा जागरतो tha दौघं सन्तस॒ ata

दौघो बालानं संसारो aga श्रविजानतं ॥१॥
ae नाधिगच्छ्े्य सेय्यं सदिसमन्तनो |

एकचरियं ae कयिरा afe वाले सहायता ॥२॥
पुत्तामऽत्थि धनश्मऽत्यि दति वालो विदञ्चति ।

तत्य “दौघाश्ति रत्तिनामंसा नियाममन्ता व जागरन्तस पन दोघा दति दिगृणतिगणा विय डला
खायति तस्सा दौघभावं aad मङ्गणसद्खस्स भक्तं कत्वा यावसुरिमरगमना सम्परिवन्तकी समाना
मदाकुरौता पि सुभोजनं yfyer सिरिमयने सयमानेा कमभोगोपि न जानाति each पन
पधानपद्‌इन्ता येगावचरो च way कथन्ता wmafaa च अारुनसमोपे निसोदिवा wai
पृणन्तो च सौखरोगादि पुटो च दत्यपादनच्छदादिं पन्नो च वेदन।भिभूते च रिं मग्गपटिपन्नो
दिके च जानानो ति--““वाजन'न्ति ये।लनभ्यि चतु गाबुतमन्तमेव सन्तर पन fae ale दोति
दिगुणं faa खायति सकल्लदिवमं fe ant गन्ता fawn पटिपथं sre fear gear गामो
Magifa ghar ये।जनन्ति gh धकं गन्व। sacha पच्छति तेनापि distaf वुत्तो ga wa
गन्वा ्परम्पि पुच्छति से।पि य।जनन्तिवदति सौ gfeaghear येजनन्तव वदन्ति ete वतिद्‌
याजने दवे तौणि याजन।नि विथ as ति--“ब।ललानःन्ति दधले।कपरलेाकत्यं पन अजानन्पानं बालानं
Haare परियन्ते कतुं अमक्तोन्तानं यं सन्ततिंमञे।धि परिकभदः सममं अत्वा daa अनो
कशेजनि तं सम्म अविजानतं dart; Qe नाम सा fe त्ते waa ण्व दौघो नाम quia
चतं “च्नमतम्गोऽयं farat संसारा ger काटि न पड्चुयतो'ःति sed पन परियिनते ag
असकोन्तामं अतिदोघो वाति ॥९॥

तत्य “चरन्ति चतुद्रिथापथच।रं sate मनसाचारो Feast कन्याणसित्त परियसन्तोऽति
चत्यो-- “सेयं सदि खमत्तनो” ति चत्तनखोलममाधि पञ्चागुणेदि, चभिकतरं वा सदिमं वा न लभेय
सचव-““रएकचरिय'न्ति wag fe Gal लभमानो सौलादोद्धि agi, सदिमं waar न afer
यति, Qa पन सद्धिं wate वसन्तो ण्कते। व सम्भोगं परिभोगं ated रोलादौदि परिद्धायति,
तेन वुत्त --““ण्वरूपैः gad न सवितव्वो न भजितब्वो न पयिर्पाभितन्बो स्यु अनुकम्पय
aga चनृदयाया”नि-- तस्मा खच कारुं परिच wi मं fama Steals बह्िरसति, तस्मा
gaat किञ्चि अपच्ासिंसन्तो तं सङ्गण्दितुं vate wad कुसलं, नोचे safe ण्कचरिथं दन्द
afc रकोभावमेव fat कल्ला सब्वद्रिय।पथेसु var व विद्दरेष्य,किंकारणा? नव्यि बाले सदाघ्रवृा;
चुक्रसोलं मन्दरिमसोलं मदाकरोलं दसकथावद्यूनि तेरसधुतङ्गगुणो विपस्सनागुणं aac am चत्तारि
फलानि तिस्सो far eafign अये खदायतागुएो बालं निय नव्योति ॥ ९॥

await मे safe धनं मे खल्ि इति बालो एत्ततण्ड।य चेव धनतग्दाय च wai
विरञ्जनि दुक्वौयति, gar मे नद्धस्िति fregia, नसन्तोति विदञ्मुनि, aferdita विरञ्चि
धनेऽपि रमेव नयोदति ewaitfe fawgia, त्तं पोसेस्तामौऽति रत्नि च दिवा च थलजन-
wifes नानप्यकारतो वायमन्तोऽपि regia, धनं प्यारे स्साभऽति कसिवनिन्ज।दौनि करोन्नापि
विदञ्मवेव, वि ञ्चन्तरस च अत्तः द्धि andi नत्थि तेन विघातेन दुक्वितं wait रखिलं arg
असकोन्तरस पवत्तियंपिऽस त्ता fe waar afe, woe निपन्रस्स मारणनिकाद्दि वैदनाद्ि
यग्गिजाल्ल। डि विय परिडर्डमानस्स॒ डिव्जमानेसु सन्धिवन्धनेसु च भिच्जमानेसु affapeg

--- PAGE 59 [OCR_san+eng] ---
30 धम्मपदं । [Journal & Text, Part 1V, 1894

aut fe भ्रत्तनो afer कुतो gut gat धनं ॥२॥
यो बालो agat are पण्डितो वापि तेन सो।
बालो च पण्डितिमानौ स बे. बालोऽति वुत्ति ॥४॥
यावजौवग्पि चे बालो पण्डितन्पयिरुपाति |
नसो ua विजानाति zeal खपरसं यथा ॥५॥
genoa चे fag पण्डितं. पयिरुपासति ।
fau ua विजानाति जिन्दा इूपरसं यथा ॥६॥
चरन्ति बाला दुधा श्रमिन्तेनेव भ्रत्तना ।

_ „८222. -

निम्नो लेत्ला परलोकं salar wee पस्सन्तस्साऽपि दिवसे दिवसे तिक्ठन नदापेला तिक्त
Water गन्धमास्तादौदि अलङ्गरित्वा aad पुद्धोपि सददायभावेन दुक्वपरिक्ताणं ag खसमत्यताय
च्यकतादि अत्तनेा af, कुते। gar कुतेा धनं-- पत्ता वा धनं वा तसिं समये किमेव करिस्स॒न्ति ?
श्वानन्दसेष्टिेो पि aaa fate अदला grea धनं eter ge वा acme frome `
ददानि वा इमं दुक्व' पत्तसस॒ Far प्ता Har धनं ? gar ar wa a किं gaa’ wftg? fa a
सुखं उप्याद्यिं्धति ? ॥ २ ॥

तत्थ धा are’ fa या खत्तना नारो अपण्डित समाने बालो दन्ति त अत्ते बाल्ये बाला
भावं “aga? जानाति-^तेन aft तेन कारणेन से gare पण्डिता वा होति पण्डितिसदिसे-
ar a fe बालो अदन्ति जानमाने egy पण्डितं siege पयिरुपासन्ता तेन पर्ितिभावत्याय
waft अनुसासियमाने तं are afewar पण्डिता वा होति पण्डितितरा वा
बालो'तियेा च बालो समाने के agp मया सदिसे बहकस्मते वा धब्मकथिकेः वा विनयधरावा
धृतवादो बा walfa णवं पण्डितिमानौ wife, सो ag पण्डितं खनु पसङ्कमनो नेव परियत्ति

उग्गण्दाति, न पटिपतति परति, एकन्तबालभावमेव पाएुणति, सो गष्ठिभेद्कचोरा वि, तेन gi

“at बालो ति qaat’fa ॥४॥

तस्सत्यो--बालो wae य।वजौवम्पि पण्डितं उपसङ्कमन्ते। पयिरपासन्ता दमं बुडवचनं रक्तक
बृडवचनन्ति र्वं परियत्तिधग्रं वा खयं चारो विरो चारो गोचरे cx सावन्जं ददं अनन्ने दद्‌
सेवितम्ब ददं न सेवितस्बे ददं पटिविच््रितब्बं ददं सच्छिकातब्बं ति रवं पटिपत्ति ufetuya at न
जानाति यथा फिन्ति “eat द्धपरसं यथा” यथा डि eat याव परिक्डया ननप्पकार।य स्रपवि-
कतिया सम्परिवत्तमानापि दद्‌ wifes इदं अरोणिकं तिन्तकं खारिकं कटुकं अम्लं खनम्बिलं
aaa fa खपरसंननलनाति रवमेवं बालो यावजौवभ्पि पर्डितं पयिरुपासम।ने। grant धम्मन
विजानातौति ॥ ५॥

तस्सत्यो--सयं fassy पण्डिते पुरिसे! qewafa चे अम पण्डितं पयिरपाखति सा aw सन्तिके
saan परिपएुच्छनो शिष्पमेव परियित्तिषम्पं विजानाति तते wage कथापेला पटिपत्तियं घटेन्ता
वासन्ता यथा नाम अनुपदतजिन्दणसारे पुरिसो रखविलाननत्यं-जि्दगगे star स्व॒ कोपिकादि-
भेदं रसं विजानाति रवं पण्डिते चिप्यसेव शोकु्तरधसप्म्पि विजानातौति ॥ ९॥

तत्य “चरन्तो"ति चति दरियापयेदि अकुसलमेव करोन्ता विषरन्ति। “बाला” ति casa


--- PAGE 60 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Socicty.] बालवन्गो | 31

करोन्ता पापकं कं यं होति कटुकष्फलं ॥७॥

नतं wal कतं साधु चं कला श्रतुतप्यति |

यस्त॒ अ्रसपसुखो रोदं विपाकं परटिसेवति von

तञ्च कमं कतं साधु यं कला नानुतप्यति |

यस्म पतौतो सुमनो विपाकं पटिसेवति en

ay वा मञ्नतौ बालो याव पापं न पष्ठति।

यदौ च पचचतौ पापं श्रय बालो दुक्तं निगच्छति ॥१.०॥
मासे मासे कुसग्गेन बालो सुन्नेय भोजनं ।

न सो aga कलं wef सोल्सिं ॥९१॥

न दि पापं कतं क्म सन्नं AC व. मुच्चति ।

परलोकत्यख जानन्त दष बाला नाम । “Safer Sag “खभित्तेनेवा ति अमित्भूतेन विय
afar विय sar “कटुकप्फल "न्ति ति खिणफलं दु क्वफलं ॥ ७॥
* लव्य “नतं ania निरयदिसु निभ्ब्तनखमत्यं दुक्डुद्यं कम्रं कला eT ध्वनस्स॒रि
तक्वण्य ्वनुतप्यति सचति तं कतं न सधन सुन्दरं न WEI यस्स असस॒खो""ति यस्स ate
निन्तसुश्वो trea विपाकं यनुभोतौति sn

तत्य “ये कला”ति यं दैवमनुसूसम्यत्तोनं चेव निम्नाणसम्पक्तिया च निम्बत्नसमत्यं Gara
कला नानुतप्यति खय खो दिट्धक्े येव अनु खरितानुरूरितक्वये पौनिवेगेन पलतेः सोमनस्स
वेगेन च सुमना sar waft पौतिसोमनस्सजाते sar विपाकं पटिसेवति तं कमं कतं साध
फरडकन्ति ॥ ८॥

तत्य “मघुवा“ति were fe प।पं चकुसलकम्मं करान्स्स॒ तं कम्र ay विय सधृररसरं विय xg
am मन।पं निय उषडाति दरति नं से aya रञ्मृति--"य)वा"ति यत्तकं कालं तं पापंन ण्डति
दिद्ेषपे वा सम्पराये वा विपाकंन रेति नाव नं ण्वं मञ्मुनि-- “ae चा”लि यदा पनर दिडषग््र
वा विविधा amaca atta wad ar निरथादरौरु महा दुक्' अनुभवन्तसस॒ तं पापं
पचति अथ से वालो cra’ निगच्छति विन्दति परिललभतेेति ॥ १०॥

तस्सत्यो --स्चे बालो चपरिघ्चातधम्मरो सौलादिरुण।परिभाविते नित्यायतने प्बजितेा तपचरणं
पृरेस्सानोनि मासे मासे पत्ते कुसमोन भोजनं ya awed सञ्चय भोजनं न Sr सङ्कतधम्प्ानं
कलं खग्धति Held, सक्घतधम्मा gel suave gfeawa तेसु Sender sare
agrawal उपरिमकेाटिया खोणएासवो दूमेसं सद्कतधम्प्ानं से बालो कलं aizafa से।लभिन्ति
पुग्गल्लाधिडाना रखना अयं wa अत्थो या aw तथा तयचरणं Qiang awed चेतना या चस
serra कालं वा भक्त वा कुकुबायिला खथुञनन्तस्स॒ cad ष्टोदनकुख्चेलना लसा चेतनाय
खा ताव दौघरक्तः यवक्नचेतना सोलृिं कलं नार्घति ct gw Wife य॑ तस्सा सङ्कतष््रानं
चंतनाय फलं तं Hees कला तते एकेकं एन Trees सालुसकटःसे sar तते wy यं
फले तरेव तस॒ बालस्‌ तयचरशते। HEATH ॥ ११ ॥

न्य “Cagel ia तं षणं येव daa थनेदि fag we खो रं--“मृ तौलि परिण-
मति ददं gw wife यथा ददं yan Ot Gf ख्यं येव न मुनि न परिणमति न पकतिं जति


--- PAGE 61 [OCR_san+eng] ---
32 चम्मपदं | (Journal & Text, Part LV, 1894.

डदन्तं बालमन्वेति भखाच्डन्नो व पावको ॥९९॥
यावदेव श्रनत्थाय अन्तं area जायति |

हन्ति बालस्स॒ aad qgaq विपातयं ny an
wad भावनमिच्छय्य पुरेक्लारञ्च भिक्ुसु |
श्रावासेसु च दरसरियं NITRA च ॥१४॥
ममेव कतमञन्तु गिरो पन्वजिता उभो । `
ममेव श्रतिवसा भ्रु faer fade किमिति i

af पन भाजने दुरिदत्वा afed याव तत्य amife afad पक्छिपन्ति याव दधिभाजनादिकं
च्यम्निलभाजनं न पपुणाति ताय vate अविजदित्वा पच्छा जडति एवमेवं पापकम्पम्यि कचिरमा-
नमेव न पचति यदि विपदेश्यन केचि wean ag festa याव पन कुसलाभिनिब्बृत्ता
खन्धाधरन्ति ताव नं ते रक्त तेसं भेदा अपाये निभ्ब्तक्खन्धेसु विपद्चति विपश्चमानश्च उदनं
बाल्लमन्वेति किं वियाति भसच्छन्रोव पावके यथा fe afta: ofed वौतचचिकङरा अक्घन्तोपि
कारिकाय sfeean न^ताव डति wif पन mia चम््ादौनं डदनवसेन याव मल्यलुङ।
swan गच्छति wad पापकखमम्पि येन कतं Wifa तं बालं दुतिथचे वा ततिथे बा छन्तभाे निरया-*
ate frat swan अनुगच्छतोति ॥ ६९॥

aw “यावदेवा”ति अवधिपरिच्छेदगथ निपते--“अर्ते"नि जाननसभावो afer सिप्यं जानानि
यन्दि वा ceca यसे सम्पत्तियच्च fear जनेन जायति wal vat दनि awd नाम feur
वा fe दस्सरियादिभावो बाकलस्स॒ अनल्याः थेव जायति तं निसाय सा यन्तन अन्यमेव करोदि--
“gata विनासेति-“सुदधसं fa कुखलके!ासं wee fe fad वा दृस्सरियं वा smear
कुश्चलके।इ। सं घातेन्नमेव उप्यज्जति--“सुड'न्ति पञ्मायेतं नामं --^विप।तयःन्ति विदधंसयमानं तस
डि तं oad war पञ्च'सद्कातं सुं विपतेन्तं विधं सन्तमेव इन्तोति ॥ १२ ॥

तत्य “अखत''न्ति बाले। fare, श्वविज्जमानं सम्भावनं Tay अस्सो समाने सद्धोति मं जने
जानातूति cate निदेसे बुत्तनयन बाले अस्सो दुसोले। saga विविक्तो gitar अनुपडित-
सति खसम।हिते। gash अखौणाम्दा व ममाने। अदो वतमं जने। अयं Bet Shear बड़स्पृतेा
पविवित्तो अरङविरियैा उपट्टितखति खमादिते aga खोणासवोति जानेव्याति दसं मन्त
surat रच्छनि-““पुरेक्व रन्ति परिवारं खद्धो यत मं सकल विद्धारे भिक्वु,परिवारेतना पण्ड
gent विचरे्यन्ति vt इचछ्चार sar पुरेक्वारश्च fray cafa—“arate” fa सद्धिकेम्‌च
gag यानि विडारमच्दरे पणौतानि trent तानि अत्तन सन्दिदसस्मत्तादोनं भिक्डून
तुन्दे रधवखथाऽति विचारेन्लो सघ्म्पि वरसेन!सनं पलिबरडन्तो tart खागनुकभिक्ु.नं पचन्तिमानि
उक्ञ।पसेनासनानि चेव अमनुसपरिग््धोतानि च ge दध वसथाति विचारेन्तो श्यावासेषु च
ware इष्डति-“पूजापरकुलेुचा"ति नेव मात।पितुत्नं न आतकानं परेसं येव कलेर्‌ अोवतिम
मण्डमेव gta न अञ्न सन्ति एवं चतूदि पच्चये पूजं दृच्छति--““समेव कतमष्ृन्‌"ति यस
बास यं किशिनिद्धारे उपसथागारादिकरणवसेन कतं aaa तं सभ्वं अन्हकं चरेन कतन्ति एवं
गिद्ध च पम्बजिता च उभोपि मनव fara कतं परिनिडितं agafa सङ्कप्ो उष्पज्लति-
“ममेव खतिवसा असू "ति गिद्धो च पम्बजिता च सभ्येपि ममेव वसे वशन्‌ सकट गोणवाखि ace
welts वा लडम्बनि न्त्‌ अन्तससे oats तापेलापिवन।दौनि वा ety किश्वाकिचसु


--- PAGE 62 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society] बादवग्गो | 33

इति area सङ्धप्यो car मानो च दडति ॥११॥
safe लन्धपनिसा ser निष्वाणगामिनो।
एवमेतं afasra भिक्डु बुद्धत्स सावको ।

सक्षारं नाभिनन्देषय विवेकमनुन्रये ॥१ en

बालवग्गो पश्चमे |

खुदकमदनेसु करणोयेरु fate चि ण्ककिच्चपि ममेव वसे any मं येव खपुच्छिलिा करोन्ति
aah उप्यञ्जति-“ इति बालस्सा”ति यस बालस्‌ याच CE. yg vat BRUT उप्यव्जति
तस॒ नैव विपस्सना मग्गफलानि agin केवलं yaw चन्दोद्ये सनृदस उदकं विय ag Tig
waa awe चेव नवविधमाने च वङ्तोति ॥ १४--९५॥

तव्य “agife लाभूपनिसा अघ्‌ (निब्बाणगाभिनौति लाभूपनिषा नामेखा स्म येव अञ्च
निभ्बाणगाभिनौ पटिपदा लायुष्यादकेन दि भिक्वुना चोकं अकुलं any कतुं वहति कायवङ्का-
दौनि कातम्बानि दन्ति afei fe काले काथवङ्गादौसु fate काति तदा लाभो उप्यञ्जति पाया-
मपातियन्दि ag अकला उजुकमेव wae tartar उक्ठिपन्तसस॒ ea afagaarl ठ wife ag
कला Matar” उक्िपन्तस्स॒ पन पायासपिण्डे werent व निक्खमति वं कायवङ्कादौनि करण-
काले यैव लाभो उप्यच्लति अयं quia लाभूपनिसा नाम उपधिसम्यद्‌ Raed बाङसशच
परिवार अरद्वासाति रवरूपडि. पन athe उप्न्नलाभो धञ्चिके नाम रोति निच्वाखगा-
मिनौ परिपद्‌ पूरेन्ेन पन भिक्लुना कायवङ्गादौनि पडातव्वानि अनन्येनेव अन्येन विय अश्रूगेनेठ
aia विय wafatte बधिरेन विय भवितुं वडति असठेन ष्यमायेन भवितुं वहति--“रवमेतन्ति”
ण्वं लाशुपाद्नपटिपदं निव्वणगाभिनिं पटिपद छ एवं जला sad खषुतसङ्धतधम्ानं agaga
Fy सवणना जातदरेन श्रोवादागुसासनिं वा सवपद्रेन सायके fing अधम्मिकं-चतुपश्चयसक्षारं
नाभिनन्देष्य न चेव faa पटिक्रोसेय्य कायविदेकादिकं विवेकं wages तत्य कायविवेकोति
कायस wha चिक्नमिवेकेति अडृखमापत्तियो उपधिविवेकेति निम्बाणं तेसु कायविवेकेः au
सङ्गणकं विनोरेति चिक्षविवेके fate enfus विनेदैति उपधिच्िका agentes विनेदेति
कायविवेके चिक्नविवेकसस॒ पच्चये wife चिक्नविवेकेा उपधिविवेकस्स wear दाति वुत्तम्पिचेतं काय-
विवेके च यिवेकडुकायानं नेक्वम्म।भिरतानं चित्तविवेके च परिमुद विक्तानं परमवोदानं उपधि-
विवेको च निदपपोनं पुग्ललानं विसङ्कारगतानन्ति- इति दमं fafa विवेकं र्य ay उप-
सम्बञ्ल विषरेय्याति अत्यो ॥ १९ ॥

बालवगगवेखना निदिता ॥

--- PAGE 63 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 64 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I.

—ojegoo—
A STORY OF SERPENT-~WORSHIP.
By Sri Syémcnaran Sen, B. A.

In the ancient city of Champaka Nagar (near modern Bhagulpore)
there lived a wealthy merchaut named Chandra-dhar, who was popularly
known as Chand Saddgar. His wife Sanakdé, was a model of a virtuous
woman. Wealth, honor and every thing that make life worth living
flowed upon them in abundance. Thus for many a long year they enjoyed
the smiles of fortune. But the wheel of fortune, like the course of true
love, seldom runs smooth in this ever-changing world. In an evil hour
he conceived an antipathy against the relentless Manasé, the serpent goddess,
aud from that time his misfortunes commenced. The goddess never lost
an opportunity to wreak her vengeance on him, and he in return insulted
her by all manner of means. In those days there lived the great Dhanvan-
tari, the father of the Indian science of medicine. During his life-time the
goddess failed to make her power felt on earth, and all her attempts
to do mischief by snake poison were baffled by his skill. As he was tho
family physician of Chandra-dhar, the goddess had always the worst of it
in the contest between herself and the merchant. But it was not long before
the great physician also fell a victim to her wrath. From this time Chandra-
dhar was left to the tender mercies of the goddess who now found opportunities
enough to “ feed fat the ancient grudge she bore him,” His six sons died
one after another of snake-bite. His barges which were heavily laden
with merchandise, were all lost in the sea. His friends forsook him, Every
day brought a fresh trouble to him. But instead of crushing him, these
reverses served only to give fresh impetus to his spirit of defiance against
the inexorable goddess. His cup of sorrow was, however, not yet full.
Thus discomfitted, the goddess hit upon another plan to crown his sorrows
(and as he had been infatuated by repeated misfortunes it did not fail
to take effect.) A dancing boy aud a dancing girl of the court of Indra
having been condemned to undergo the sorrows of mundane existence ;
the goddess Manasé determined to turn this incident to her advantage.
She caused them to be born, one as the son of Chandra-dhar and the other
asthe daughter of king Shaheraj. ‘The son bore on his person all the
auspicious signs of good fortune. He was accordingly named Lakshmindar.
The daughter being of exquisite beauty was named Vipulé. Lakshmindar
soon grew up to be a handsome young man well versed in all the different
branches of learning, and his reputation spread over the length and breadth of
the country. His parents wished to see him matched with a girl thoroughly
worthy of himself. ‘The fame of Vipulé’s beauty and accomplishmonts had
spread far and wide. Chandra-dhar with his family priest Joshi, proceeded to
the court of Shaheraj, where they were received with due honor. But Shaheraj
was 9, devoted worshipper of the goddess Manasé. It is not therefore at all
surprising that he regarded the idea of an alliance with Chandra-dhar’s son
with an insuperable repugnance. Chandra-dhar had, in consequence, to return
crest fallen. At this juncture the intervention of the goddess Manasé solved
the difficulty. In the disguise of an old woman she appeared before Vipula

--- PAGE 65 [OCR_san+eng] ---
ॐ APPENDIX I.

and thus addressed her: “Lakshmindar is the only young man worthy of
you, oh maiden! Therefore lose no time to make your mind known to your
parents.” Vipulé had also become enamoured of Lakshmindar by report.
So casting off her modesty, she sent ono of her handmaids to communicate her
desire to her parents. On hearing of his daughter’s desires the king
found himself on the horns of a dilemma: his own religious convic-
tions on tho one side and his daughtcr’s happiness on the other, His heart
turned within himsclf as ho thought of the magnitude of tho impudence
to which he would render himself liable if ho were to go a-begging for the
very thing which he had once despised. His mind was also filled with
grave misgivings as to tho manner in which any such overture from him
would be received by one who had exprienced such mortification at his hands.
But at last his love for his daughter prevailed over all other con-
siderations. He went to Chandra-dhar, excused himself by saying that he
had rejected his proposal only to test the strength of his desire. Chandra-
dhar, too, reluctant to let such a girl slip from his hands, consented to the
proposal. The marriage passed off smoothly. Vipulé took leave of her
parents with tears in her eyes and proceeded to her husband’s place with
a heavy heart. The happy pair returning home in great pomp and ceremony,
found life all joy, all sunshine. They had no idea of tke thick cloud that was
hovering overhead, and which was so suddenly to burst upon them and
involyo all in one common gloom, Chandra-dhar had already taken overy
precaution to protect himsclf from the fury of the serpent goddess Manasa,
and had erected a castle of iron which was very carefully sccured against
serpents however insidious, and constantly guarded it on all sides. But the
malignant goddess seerctly induced the mason to kecp an imperceptible
hole in the iron wall no bigger than a thread, for tho accomplishment of her
fell purpose. When Lakshmindar and his fair bride एकप, had gono
to rest the night after their marriage, and their eyes were soon closed
in otherwise happy profound sleep. Manasé stecped the guards in deep slum-
ber. Her messenger of death the serpent Kalanéga, that darkest and most
poisonous of its species, now entered the bridal chamber and sucked the life-
blood out of sleeping Iakshmindar, When Vipuld awoke, she found that her
husband’s life was extinct, and that the serpent was escaping through the hole,
She immediately cut off its tail, wept over the death of her husband in
most plaintive strains, sufficient to melt stones. The sudden death of Laksh-
mindar threw the whole family into indescribable gricf. The unhappy
Vipula, though overpowered wit 4 grief, prepared herself for a voyage to the
land of the gods to restore her husband to life.

Placing the corpse of her husband upon hor lap, seated on 9 raft,
the lonely widow floated down the stream. She thns lifted up her voico in
humble prayer to the goddess Manasd: “0, mother goddess, may this raft
be borne safely to the region of the gods!” And though her heart was
groaning under the weight of insufferable anguish, her countenance bright-
ened up as she thought of the noble work upon which she had embarked,
and as she looked forward to the happy day when she would return to
her native land, her beloved husband restored to her bosom and hersclf
crowned with a laurel of undying glory.

After she had gono a little way, she found her passage obstructed by a
formidable monster of a crow named Nilimbara, who thus addressed her:
“O, foolish girl, this corpse will make mea hearty meal, giveit up to me.
Though, I have the power to getit by force, yet1 forbear from doing so, only
from the fear of incurring a faithful widow’s curse.” But Vipulé fortified by
the unswerving devotion to her lord, let the raft glide on gently undaunted
by the menace, uutil it, reached a place whore lived a fallen woman.

--- PAGE 66 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I, ili

She thus addressed Vipuld: ५0, foolish womar, why suffer your youthful
beanty to wither away in vain, like a flower that is blown in a wilderness.
Lave that corpse and take another husband to your liking.” Vipuld4
whose heart had been steeled against all temptations turned a deaf ear
to her alluring words. The raft glided on. She then met with a person
who had been driven to poverty by gambling. She helped him with a ring
in order to save him from starvation. As she passed on, she encountered.
two very savage boatmen, among whom ensued a 70166 struggle for the
possession of her fair person. Vipuld finding that she had no means of escape
from the clutches of these wicked men, prayed in despair to Heaven that tho
boat might sink. Down, went tho boat to the infinite surprise of everyone. The
raft glided on. But she had not gone very far whon her uncle-in-law named
Bankai, meeting the raft and being charmed with her beauty began to strug-
gle hard to make her the victim of his lust. Though unknown to cach other
she told him her woeful tale. But nothing could soften his obdurate heart.
She had now no alternative but to cry for mercy to God. And Jo! imme+
diately there was formed a shoal on which his vessel struck, Being thus
again miraculously delivered, she pursucd her course until she met with
her brother who used all his powers of persuasion, adding tcars to entreaty,
in order to induce her to abandon her firm parpose. But they, could not
bend the inflexible determination of her mind. The raft glided on and
she next reached a point where the stream shot off into three branches.
The sky overhead was overcast with a thick cloud. Ahead lay the endless
blue expanse of water lashed into mountain waves by tho roaring winds.
The beauteous person of Lakshmindar, now puivitied and loathsome, attracted
a host of grecdy monsters of the deep by its awful stench, the fine proportions
of his body had now become a horrid unsightly mass.

O! what a sad contrast did it now present. That indescribable youthful
charm had now disappeared. ‘hose quick flashing eyes which retlected
unbounded joy and energy were now closed for ever. The rose-bud of health
which glowed upon his cheeks had now faded away. His lips wheroon
played a cheerful smile had now become lack-lustre.

The putrid flesh was falling away from the bones and being devoured by
the ravenous animals. One of his joints had been washed off and dovoured
by a monster fish. In this dreadful situation, what was the poor loncly
widow to do; she did not know which way to proceed in search of Devaloka
the land of the gods. In utter helplessness and deep distress, she bogan to
weep pitcously like a child. 116 goddes Manasa moved to pity by her lamen-
tations now appeared before her again in the disguise of an old woman, and
thus addressed her: ‘“ Direct your conrse along that ash-coloured stream:
this will lead you to your destination; the stream has received its colour from
the washing 6f the clothes of the gods in its water.” Being cheered by theso
words, she pursued ou her course, till at length she came in sight of the long-
wished for land, the region of the gods. On getting ashore, she heard the
whistle of 9 washerwoman who was busily washing the clothes of the gods,
and having reverentially approached her, greeted her with these words: “ You
are unto mo like a mother: On the wedding night, my husband died of snake-
bite. I have, therefore, come here in the hope of propitiating the gods
that they may restore my husband to life; therefore have compassion upon mo
and help me in my distress.” Tho cclestial laundress was moved to
pity and told her to bury tho bones of her husband near the shore. Then,
with the permission of the good woman, एषो, began to help her in
washing the clothes. Sho first took up the clothes of Siva and Gauri, and
then took up tho clothes of Manasa. She first wrote the name of tho
goddesses on the bark of a tree, and having made humble obcisance to it, set

--- PAGE 67 [OCR_san+eng] ---
iv APPENDIX 1.

to work. When she had done the washing, the divine washerwoman became
highly pleased with her work and allowed her to accompany her to the pre-
sence of the gods. The goddess Manasa, being highly pleased with the remark-
ably clear appearance of her clothes, was curious to know who had washed them
on this occasion. But the heavenly washerwoman simply told her that it was her
sister’s daughter. The god Siva also, being pleased, wished to see the person
who had washed hisclothes, Vipuld being introduced to his presence, he was
highly pleased with her prepossessing appearance, and called for a dance.
The next day also, she appeared charmingly attired in the court of Siva,
where all the gods being invited, were awaiting her arrival with anxious
suspense. The beauty and grace of her person, the light sylph-like move-
ment of her limbs, the sweet melody of her voice, her captivating manners,
the gorgeousness of her dress—all these held the gods spell-bound and
loud shouts of applause began to burst from all sides when she danced. Being
requested by the gods to state what reward she would have, sho prayed for the
life of her husband who had fallen a victim to the wrath of Manas& and for
whose sake she had performed this dangerous voyage Being of a soft
and compassionate heart the goddess Chandika felt sympathy in her distress.
But the malicious goddess Manasé, began to taunt her saying: ‘ Thou vilo
wretch of a woman, how darest thou tell such an unblushing lie”! But
Vipuld unmoved by her taunts, continued :—‘‘ It was the serpent Kala Naga
that had put an end to the life of her beloved one.” Then by the command of
Siva, all the serpents that inhabit the three worlds, viz., heaven, earth and
hell, were brought together, and Vipuld pointed out Kala Naga; and when she
showed his tail which she had cnt off, her veracity was established beyond
doubt. Being thus given the lie direct in this singular way, what could
Manasé do but comply with the united wishes of the gods. Vipula produced
the bones of her husband, But as the knee-joint was wanting, the goddess
waxed exceeding wroth, and said that her husband would be deformed.
The thought that she was the cause of her husband’s deformity was too much
for her, and she burst into tears with extreme mental agony. Tho goddess
being moved to pity sat in meditation; and finding that the jointhad been de-
voured by a fish, had it restored. Before restoring him to life, however, she
extorted this promise from Vipula that, before getting ashore, she must see that
Chandra-dhar sacrificed one hundred thousand animals in honour of her.
Vipulé now renewed her dance. Being questioned as to its cause, she
continued her dance. The Goddess Manasé addressing her said, that since
she had gained her wished for object, she might now depart in glee to
her native land. But श णद said that her father-in-law was of a very
perverse temper and would not be persuaded to offer sacrifices to her,
unless he had his other six sons and his physician Dhanvantari, restored to
him. The goddess, though reluctant, was at last induced to grant this
prayer. Thus encouraged, Vipulé began to dance again with redoubled
energy, and mildly said: “Tho raft on which I came has become rotten.
I therefore beseech you to restore the fourteen barges of my father-in-law with
all their cargoes, which had been lost. This prayer too, was at last granted.
Having thus reached the consummation of her joys, she took leave of the
gods with a heart overflowing with gratitude, and set out for her native
land. Before landing ashore Lakshmindar made a very beautiful fan on
which was wrought a hymn to the goddess Manasé with the name of Chandra-
dhar and Sanaka, and of its maker Lakshmindar. With this fan in her hand,
Vipulé went to visit her father-in-law and mother-in-law in the disguise of a
fisher-woman. The fan by its wonderful artistic skill attracted a large
crowd who, in their eagerness to possess themselves of it, out-bid each other.
But Vipuld declined to part withit for any price. Before she departed she

--- PAGE 68 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I. v

left the fan in a conspicuous place. When the fanhad been bronght to Sanaké,
she became transported with joy as she read the name of her lost son Laksh-
mindar. How inexpressible was the joy of Chandra-dhar as he beheld all
his sons and his barges ; with what eagerness did he long to embrace his sons
who were all but Jost. But his joy was turned into wild wrath, as he was
told that his sons could not land ashore before he had sacrificed one hundred
thousand animals in honour of the goddess Manasé. He began to blaspheme
her in no measured terms and persisted in his deep hatred against her. With
very great difficulty he was however brought to his senses, and persuaded to
do honor to her. Thus he was restored to his former grandeur and wealth
by the kindness of Manasé, and thus was the worship of the Serpent Goddess
Manasé introduced.

N.B,—With this may be read the following paper on ‘Tho Ndga Patichamt Ceremony,
by Mr. 0. Noogi, which appeared in the “ NaTionaL Magazine ” a few months ago.—Ep.

The Manasd, or Néga Pafichamt Ceremony.

This एव is performed on the last day of Ashdr, which falls in July. The deities are
the goddess Manasd, or Padma, the daughter of Siva and wife of Jaratkdru, and her
offapring, the snake-king Avanta, and his four brothers, It is a worship of snakes—s relic
perhaps, of the faith of the old aborigines of India, who havo also bequeathed to us the
legacy of stone and tree worship and swelled the Hindu pantheon with such deities as
Jardsura, tho god of Fovers, Sitala, the goddess of small-pox, etc. Padm& and her rop-
tilean brood aro worshipped towards the beginning of tho rains, as it is in that season that
a groat part of the country being submerged, all dry places and dwellings of men in villages
are infested by this dreadful scourge of man, Manasa is sometimes worshipped in an
image deacribed as follows in the Devt Purdna,—* She is as charming as tho moon and adorn-
ed with pearls, specially with such as are to be found in the heads of snakes, mounted on &
drake, and attended by tho eight chief snakes.

Tur Tater.
The Divine-human Relationship.

Krisidhan, a rich farmer, had soven sons all of whom were married. On a cold rainy
day their seven wives wont for a bath to a ucighbouring tank, and fell to talking of what
each of them would best enjoy on such a day asthat ‘The eldest said she could wish for
nothing better than to be at her father’s house, havo a good meal of fish and flesh, and
nothing more to do than sleep and wake to bo hungry again. The socond was of opinion
that tho best thing ono could wish for on such a foul day, was to be at one’s father’s house,
to have plenty of ready-made sweetmeats and cakes to eat, and to bo sitting or reclining
listlessly the whole day long. And go on; all the six wives had each her say excepting the
soventh—the youngest. She kept so mournfully silent all throughout the conversation
that ono of hor gompanions enquired, saying, “ Sister, why don’t you too say what you would
wish for? We all have had onr turn, it is yours now,” To this, replying, “ Sister,” cried
sho, “you have each a father and a father’s houso to go to, and have wished yourselves
there eating and sleoping as best likes you; but you know, sister, I have no place excepting
my present abode to go to, and no other relatives besidos those whom I havo got here, to
try to pleaso my tastes!” “ But, sister,” said the formor, “ we aro not going to onjoy our-
selves fpr the wish; our chances are as remoto as yours; all this is mere idle talk to keep
our tongues agoing.” “If that be 80,” rejoined Lahand, for that was the namo of the
youngest wifo, ‘1 will not disappoint you. On such a day as this I should greatly like to
have a full meal of kdl fish, and not a stroke of work to do the wholo day.”

When they had bathed and filled each one her pitcther, on their way homeward,
Lahand, who was a little in front of the company, espied in a little pool, no biggor than the
space covered by 9 cow’s hoof, two kél fishes splashing about merrily. One of her sisters-
in-law, coming up cried out gaily, “ Here, my sisters, wo all wished in vain for we wished
it too readily, whereas Lahand, it appears, did not sigh in vain, for are not here 9 pair of
as good kél fishes as one could wish to eat?” ५ 80804, said the eldest coming up, “ take
them with you in your cloth, my girl; as it is your turn to-day, and the whole month to


--- PAGE 69 [OCR_san+eng] ---
vi APPENDIX I.

cook, you will have an opportunity of cooking and eating them when the family meal is
over.” And 80 Lahana carried the fish home in her cloth.

Now those two fishes were no fish at all, but two of the divine serpqnts—AhirAj and
Manirdj, who, out of a mere whim, had put on the piscine shape, and now wished to try the
heart of Lahana. When the general meal was over, Lahani remembered her kdl fishes and
went to fetch them from under the cover of a basket in a corner of the kitchen,

But in the meantime the fish had re-assumed their original shape of terrible snakes, just
to seo what the girl would do under the circumstances, and, of course, because they had no
wish to be spiced, cooked, and eaten, Lahanf, started back in surprise; but was not
confused, and boing naturally of a tender and pious tarn of mind, rightly guessed that
there was something moro than met her eye in fishes changing into suakes. As the reptiles
showed no inclination to harm her, sho had confidence enongh to take them up in her hand,
and place them in an empty cooking vessel, where she regularly fed them with milk and
plantains every day. ‘This she did for a month; and whon her turn of officiating at the
kitchon was ended, one of her six sisters-in-law took her place. Her successor did not
know that the snakes were being cared for in a cooking vessel, and when by chance sho
opened the lid of the vessel, they hissed and-darted forward at tho scent of one who was not
their own. “ What daughter of a snake-charmer have we got here,” cried the young
woman in horror, “ that cherishes snakes in a cooking vessel, and will havo some of us, poor
creatures, bitten and killed one of these days?” Lahani removed them to the store-house
where corn was deposited, and fed them there. And when, after a month or 80) her mother-
in-law went into the granary to fetch somo corn, tho snakes, as before, hissed and foamed at
the scent of one who was not their own. ‘‘ What danghter of a snako-charmer have we got
here, that cherishes snakes in a granary and will have some of us, poor creatures, bitten
and killed one of these days? ” gasped sho too, falling back terrified. Lahand removed her
charge once again somewhero else and fed and nourishod them all the samo, until that year
of plenty passed away, and she could get milk and plantains no longor. So she took them
to a neighbouring ficld, and saying, “ Dear creatures, whom I scarcely know by what namo
to call, I am a poor woman a dependant on others. [ find it now beyond my means to feed
you any longer. It behoves yon, therefore, to go your way and do mo and mino no harm.”
She placed them on a sod and came away.

The snakes were, as 1 have told you before, divino beings, sons of the goddess Manas&
or Padma, When they had gono homo to the nether worlds and like spoilt, children taken
their seats on tho lap of their mother, “ Mother,” said they “wo have had strange adven-
tures this time on Harth,” and related the whole story of how they had turned themselves
into kél fishes and had been taken home by Lahand, and how they had re-assumed thoir
proper shapes when on the point of being cooked and eaten, and how thoy had been fed and
nourished by her for a whole year. “Now mother,” added they, “it beseems us to do
something in return for this daughter of man. She has been very kind and dovoted to us
and but for failure of means would not have parted with us. We know she has no one in her
father’s race to give her a welcome homo for a change and recreation. We would we could
get her here like her own brothers and you would fill the place of a_ mother to her.” My
darlings,” replicd she, “this were hard to do; you arc divine and she human. How can
there be an alliance, or any close intercourso, between her and you? But I wonld not in-
terfere with a generous design. You may fetch her here; if she do not have tho very best
of tho new relationship [ shall not be to blame for it!”

The two brothers, Ahirdj and Manirdj, highly delighted, set out again for the Earth;
and when they had come near the house of the farnter, they put on the disguise of two
young men, and had themselves in a trico attended by a long train of sorvants carrying all
sorts of prosents of spices and wearing apparel, and bearers with a palanguin to carry
Lahand, and maid servants to attend her.

At the gate of tho farmer's house they knockod,—“ Father-in-law, are you at home?
Mother-in-law, are you at home? Wo are brothers of the wife of your youngest son come
to see her.” And they throw tho gate open, much wondering, however, who theso brothers
might be and whence, as it was well-known she had none. But the sight of the long train
of scrvants bearing presents quickly wrought a change in thcir minds, reasoning os they
and their good neighbours did, “ Why should they not be her brothors? Who but they,
that hold her near to their hearts, could give such presents?” And when the new comers
further said that they had gono for trado to a distant country before Lahani was born
and had not been home all tho years she had grown up and been married, and that they
had now come to take her homo for a few days, they aJl said, “It must be so; they were
her brothers thongh they (the farmor and his neighbours) know nothing about it. Wero
thero not many things of which people knew very little, yet they were perfectly truo?”
They then welcomed the brothers and the sight of tho presents gladdenod their hoarts.
Lahana had her misgivings, but sho did not allow hor tongue to uttor what passed in her
mind. After the mid-day meal had beon eaton, Ahirdj and Manir$j obtained pormission of

--- PAGE 70 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I. vil

the farmer to take her with tMm for a few days; and in an auspicious moment they star-
ted on their journey. .

Tho three—two divino and one haman being—wending their way at a rapid rate, now
stood on the shoro of a wido, wido lake. They wero only threo, for the long train of ser-
yants had melted into thin air a fow miles from the farmer’s house. AhirAj and Maniraj
now explained matters, saying, “Child of man, you have possibly perceived by this time
that we are not of your species; we are divino, and sons of Padma Rani. It was wo in tho
shapo of snakes whom you nourished with milk and plantains; and wo mean to do you a
good turn. Consider us your brothors, for like brothers wo shall lovoand recomponse you.”
With that thoy motamorphosed themselves into snakes, and bidding Lahanf hold fast by
their tails, plunged inté the water. They had previously taken care to blind-fold her with
8 piece of cloth so that she might not see the dreadfal sights that would soon present
themselves to view. They swam to the middlo of the lake and then dived headlong down,
Lahana holding tightly on. She heard such strange sounds and felt such strange sensations
all along; but she did not sce anything. Whon at last they camo toa standstill and the
bandage on hor eyes was removed she was in a strange country whero everything was
unlike what she was accustomed to. Her brothers told her it wastheir country. “ Sister,”
added they, “ when we take yon home you will find mother laying on a couch of gold with
her feet upon a foot-pad of silvor, and she is being fanned with a fan made of the white
cow’s hair ; salute hor by prostrating yourself on the ground before her.” Sho promised to

oboy.

"Eahand had not been in the abodo of Padma Rani for a week before it was timo for the
goddess to como to tho Earth to onjoy the pdjds that would be offered her. On the eve of
her departuro she called Lahand to her side, and desired her to keep the house in her
absence. ^ Lahan’” sho said, overy day in the morning as soon as the milkman and the
fruiteror have brought in their loads, boil the ono and pcel the other, and mix them, and
pour a quantity in each of theso holes wherein live my children ; do not forget this, or you
will not be cortain of your own safety.”

It so happened, on tho second day of the goddess’s absenco from home, that when the
milkman and the fruiterer bronght milk and plantains, and it was high time that Lahand
should bo bestirring herself, sho was sleeping the heavy sloep of a woman gone far with
child, Tho reptilian brood of her adopted mothor wore hissing and glaring from all the
holes in the floor and walls, when she woke with a start. and quickly kindling a firo boiled
the milk, and mixed it with plantains crushed, and poured the burning mixture into each
of the holes. This, rathor than putting out the raging flame of hunger within, was liko to
put out the fire of life; for somv of tho snakes had their heads, some their tongues, some
their eyes, somo their life, and some their tails scalded and burnt. And they hissed and
groaned tho fiercer. Furious with pain some of them were for killing Lahand instantly,
some for wailing only till thoir mother returned. But Karkat Nag, youngest of Padma
Ran’i’s sons, was the most ill-tempered of thom all, and issuing from his hole with a bound,
bit Lahan4, and when life was extinct let her lio on tho floor under tho covor of a basket.

Meantimo the goddess Padma Rani, seated on her throne in the house of worship on
Earth, hgd her throne shaken unaccountably. It boded ill ; and by means of yoga, (montal
abstraction) sho knew how matters stood at her honse. So hurriedly going through the
business on hand, sho repaired quickly to hor homo in the nother regions.

Scareely had sho set her foot on tho threshold of her house than a hundred angry
voices were up, crying, groaning, cursing, and complaning of what Lahund had done. Sho
consoled thom all with soothing words and healing their ecalds by passing her hand over
the affected parts. She took Karkat Nig severely to task for being so vengeful and bathed
tho lifeless Lahatta in nectar, who thereupon rose instantly from tho dead. This done,
Padma Rani turnod to her children, and smiling, “ Children,” said she, “ we havo had enough
of our human alliance, I trust ; it is timo the daughter of men be sent back to her earthly
homo before further evil betako her.” They aquiesced, but they would not bedeck the
whole of her person with jewels, as is tho custom, but only half of it in memory of tho in-
juries sho had dono them. When every proparation was made against tho journey, tho
goddess called Lahana to her side and, caressing her head, said, “ Lahani these children of
thine aro not, as you have con, the meckest of creatures, so you should be advised as to how
you need boar yourself with regard to them. Let me tell you that when Abiraj and Mani-
Taj have taken you home thcy will loiter about invisibly to hear what you say of thom; so
touch your mother-in-law’s feet with that one of yours whereon you havo worn the mal
(bangles) whon sho comes to take you out of tho palanquin, and when she cries in disgust
“Ha, daughter, had you not bettor reserve tho vanity of your heart for tho day when they
shall find means to set off the wholo of your person instead of only half of it with gold ?”
say in reply, ‘Long lifo to mothor Padma Rani, mothor-in-law, and to brothers Ahiréj and
ManirAj! if I have got ornaments only on half of my body this time I shall have thom on
the other half too by and by.’” And she promised to oboy her.

--- PAGE 71 [OCR_san+eng] ---
vu APPENDIX 1.

She then set out in company of her brothers, and by the fame way and through
same wide, wide lake they returned till they came within a few miles of the (
house, when ^ and Manir&j changed themselves into two young men, as befory
had Lahana placed in a palanquin and themselves attended by @ long train of ध
bearing rich presents. Arrived at the gate of the farmer's house, they knocked, त
^ Father-in-law are you at homo? Mother-in-law, are you at home ? We are brothe;
wife of your youngest son como to bring her back.” And they opened the ga
mother-in-law came to receive Lahand, atid she, in dismounting, touched her feet v
one of hers on which there was the mal; whereon the mother-in-law cried in disgu
daughter, had you not better reserve the vanity of your heart,” etc, And LJ
instructed, replied, “ Long life to mother Padma Ripi, O mother-in-law, and to
Ahirdj ond Maniraj! if I have got ornaments on only half of my body this tin.
have thom on the other half too by and by.” Ahiraj and Manirdj, who wero hemt
about invisibly, were much pleased at this reply, for it showed that though they
used her quite well, inasmuch as they had bedecked only half her person, she bore th
spite, nay, wished them long life.

When thoy returned home they said as much to their mother, and also, “We must 4
the girl again here for a few days so that we may remove the blemish of her having o1|
one half of her person adorned. It is a good girl, mother, that does uot speak ill even |
those who have done her ill.” |

Tho goddess approving, they set out again for the earth. Very rich presents हा
dened the heart of the farmer and his wife, and they did not object to Lahand’s going wi
her so-called brothers a second time. The few days that she spent in their abode this tin
passed without any mishap, and she was bedecked with jewels on that hulf of her bec
which had been left bare previously. Padma Rint, who was always her well-wisher, gu
hor somo parting instructions before she was dismissed in company of Ahiraj and Manii,
who, ४8 before, wero to take her back to herearthly home. As soon as Lahand had dismoy,
ted from her palunquin in the loving embraco of her mother-in-law, sho, incompliance फ
the instructions she had received, scattered o handful of paddy on the courtyard, and re
them up, inquired of a neighbour, “ Sister, how fares he who turns good tu evil?” Al
the neighbour answered, “ He is burnt to ashes, sister, who turns good to evil.” And
there fell from the air above two small handfuls of ashes at the feet of Laband She kn
them to be all the remains of Ahirdj and Manirdj who had been loitering about invisibly
overhear what might be said of them in that house. Padma Rayt hud taught Lahand sor
words of a charm, which she had no sooner pronounced upon the ashes than the serpel
sprang back to life and bude her adien for good.

They had not gone far before thoy fell to conversing with cach other. “ किप
said his brother, “ this child of man, Lahand, must be an exceptionally good girl; w
reduced to ashes by the decree of a relentless fate, she gave us life. But we have nor
yet done much for her; let us be more liberal.” And they put their heads together |
pitched upon a plan. They made the best of their way to the palace of the king of ॥
country and bit to death the young prince—his only son, Oh! what wailing was thy
then, what ४ tempest of griof, what confusion, and what running far and near in gearch
snake-doctors. Ahirdj and Maniraj had in the meantime disguised themselves as two vo
Brahmins, and were walking leisurely towards the palace. They inquired, as if quite inn
cently, of those who were ranning to and from the palace, what was tho matter, and wh
unsettled them ; and on being told what it was, they said they were snake-doctors and we
confident that they conld cure the prince in no time. Ina minute they were carried in
the prosonce of the king to whom, said they, “Great king, we will cure your son on 01
condition ; it is that you will adopt the wife of the youngest son of tho farmer Krisidha
living in your territory, as a daughter of your own house, and that you will troat her:
every way us such—fetching her to your paluce and entertaining her right royally from tin
to time, and heaping upon her and her relations this world’s goods, of which yon have |
large a share and they so little.” The king, of course, readily promised to do all this ar
more; and Ahiraj and Maniraj took off the venom they had instilled into the body of th
prince. He got up as if after a rofreshing sleep. Thore was now great rojoicing, and song
and laughter flowed.

Thus did Ahirdj and Manirdj provide a father’s houso for the fatherless Lahand, wh
was henceforth frequently sent for and welcomed at tho palace and treated as a daughter¢
the house. She enjoyed the sweets of such a high connection for muny a long year: प),
must be remembered, by favour of Padma Rant; and when she was dead, was driven !
Heaven in a chariot of light, also through the intercession of the same affable goddess.


--- PAGE 72 [OCR_san+eng] ---
JOURNAL ann TEXT

OF THE

पणां Text Rociety of Indiv.

` EDITED BY

SARAT CANDRA DAS, C. |. €

Vol. Il. 1894. Part II.

CALCUTTA:

PRINTED AT THE BAPTIST MISSION* PRESS.

--- PAGE 73 [OCR_san+eng] ---
CONTENTS.

—2 ie
PROCEEDINGS.
The Second Quarterly Meeting ५७ we
Note on Silver Lotus ०५ oe oe
The Third Quarterly Mceting... ५९
JOURNAL.

The Amitdyusa Sitra 0

A short Note on the Mahayana and Hinaydna Schools

On the Evolution of the Works of Mara ...

The Story of Jyotishka

Friendship between Bimbisara and Pukkusati, king of Takshasila
Magadhi Text of the former ... on ५९९

Notes on the Svayambhii Purdnam ॥ वि

“Tibetan Dictiouary” and “The Gates of Tibet” ...

Bodhicharydvatiram. Edited by Pandit Haraprasid Gistri, M.A.
APPENDIX I.
Selections from Jaina Virdgya Sataks ... ०५
APPENDIX II.
Notes on the Worship of Hayagriba
APPENDIX IIk.
“Tibet” on tos ५९ ५९

“APPENDIX IV.
Buddhist and Jaina Spirit Dawning in America.

Page

iv

Nor

22
28
33
38

17

vi

xii

xv

--- PAGE 74 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Proceedings.

* The Second Quarterly*Meeting of the Buddhist Text Socicty of India,
was held in the hall of the British Indian Association on Tuesday evening,
the 15th May, In the absence of Sir Alfred Croft, the President, Dr. Mankn®
pgaLaL Strcar, the Vice-President, took the Chair. He opened the proceedings
by saying that the first item of business was, for the patron of the Socicty,
Mahaérdja Sir Jotindra Mohan Tagore, to introduce his distinguished guest,
Horiu Toki, the Buddhist High priest of Japan, to the Mecting.” It must be a
great satjsfaction to them to know thaf one क the greatest noblemen of
Bongal would introduce to'tltem a noless distinguished visitor to Calcutta
than the Buddhist High priest of Tokyo in Japan. .

` Mahéréjé Sir Jotinpra Mowan Tacore Bahadar, K. 0. 8. 1.) in introducing
the Buddhist High priest, said :—

: °
GpNTLEMENS „ ot ति

“You are_no doubt-aware that wo have now among us a distinguished
visitor from Japan. I mean the Right Revd. Horiu Toki, tie great Buddhist
High priest who has come on a pilgrimage’to the shrines of Gayi and certain
other holy places. Since the palmiest days of Buddhism in India, I believe,
seldom has a foreigner of that persuasion, odcupying sueh high rauk and
position, visited ow» shores. Now, it is my proud privilege to introduce this
Revd. Gentleman to you,-and Lam sure ‘we all will cheerfully accord his
Holiness tliat cordial welcome which his distinguished rank demands. It
is a fortunate.co-incidencé, that this. evening our well-known and learned
friend Garat Chandra Das, 0. 1, E., whose scholarly researches in Bud,
dhist literature have justly carned for him a high reputation, ‘will deliver
a discourse in connection with Buddhism, which we have every «reason
to expect will be -very interesting. The occasion, therefore, eminently
befits the reception we accord to His Holiness and his honored presence no
less befits the‘occasion for which we haye met here. .Our distinguished friend
Carat Chandra may have something further to say ‘regarding the visit of
His Holiness, so I will not take up your time any longer. .

Carar Crranpra Dis, at the request of the President, then- exhibited
twonty-one figures gf Tari Devi brought by him from the temple of Chankya
Lama Lalitavajra, in Peking. He said that in travelling from India to China
the head-dresses of the deities were a little altered, but a good déal of Indiay
ornaments, as they would observe, still adorned their persous. These twenty-
ono female deities (manifestations) of Tari Devi avere not known in the
sacred books of the Hindus; buf they were known in Tibet.’as well as
in Mongolia and China.- Avalokitegvara Bodhisatica, as shown in the
pictute, was in his Tantric mood, and in fhat mood he had symbolically twenty-
one -wives. Tho Tari Devi was symbolical of Prajia Paramitd, supreme
wisdom—wisdom taken to its extreme boundary. ` .

Mr. Porwa Cuanpra Muxuordpuyara, the Government Archmologist, thon,
exhibited an archaic silver Lotus lately discovered by him in a Buddhist cave
near Colgong in the Bhagulpors. district. “He snid, that it was fonud in a
kunkur quarry at Pathuriaghat, along with several other relics, where an
claborate templo once existed. It, was- found well preserved in a vessel swith
nine other relics, and tho Paudds (resident priests) got possession of it. No
Sooner did he see it- than he realised its importance, and tried to secure it for

1

--- PAGE 75 [OCR_san+eng] ---
ii. PROCEEDINGS. ` [ण्ण] & Text, Part II, 1894.

the Museum; but the Pandas puta commercial value on. it, and wanted Rs. 500
for itt hé offered Rs, 5Q but. could not get it. At last he spoke to
Mr. Skrine, the district magistrate, who secured it‘tthrough the aid of the police,
the sum of Rs. 50; which he had given, being distributed among the original
finders; the ‘anddés got ‘nothing. Tho relic was over ,1,000 yeags old.
Auother relic was that of a six-headed and six-handed Bhairava; but he dide
not propose to give them any history of that. The speaker then gave the
Brahmanical meaning of the lotus, saying that it was a flower held sacred not
nly by the Brahmans, but by all the nations of the world, and explained how
beautifully the idea of creation was illustrated by it. ~ .

Maharéj Kumar Benoy Krisuna Dev then read the Rev. Seclakkhandha’s
note on the Sanskrit work called Vrittamalikhya, by Ramachandra Kavi-
bharati, of ancient Gaur, ped Pandit Satyavrata Sdmacrami read a few
passages from the Vrittamilikhya work, descriptive of Lanka. =

Garat Cuanpra ,Dis brought the business ‘of the Meeting toa close
by delivering a short discourse on the close rolationship of -the Mahdydna
School of Buddhism to Hindnism. He said that tho great doctrine of
Buddhism was Nirvana, a word which he need not explain to them. In the
picture or illustration before them they saw a circle, which wag said to be
the wheel of transmigratory existence, and consisted of six stages. This
circle was held, ag they saw, firm in the hold of the Lord of Death. There
were three things depicted in the centre, which prevented them from attain-
ing to the state of Nirvana, the ideal beatitude and immortality of the Buddhists.
These three things, were represented by the pig (AMoha or stupidity), the
serpent (anger), aud the fowl (Inst). ‘Buddha said that if they conquered all
these three, they could then get out of the clutches of the Lord of Death.
The speaker then proceeded to enlarge on Buddhism, saying that for many
yenrs Buddhism was an _ascetical doctrine of the Brihmanical religion,
Buddha was an ascetic, and he said that whoever wished to join him should
-become a recluse. It was said by some, but incorrectly, that Buddha never
recognized caste, but levelled it. This was not so: he did not disturb the social
polity of the people-householders, as'he (the speaker) would show by texts in”

_ the Society’s Journal. His monks, it was truc, had no caste, but this was

because they renounced worldly life and could cook no food for themselves,
but travel from door, to door, and eat whatever was offered them: Buddha,
besides, was not a social reformer, and up to the 13th century after Christ
there was no difference between Buddhism and Hinduism in reference to
social polity and caste. ~ ॥

A short note on the archaic silver Lotus, by Mr. P. C. Makhopidhyiya.

SILVER LOTUS.

The lotus was exhumed in the month of Magha (January-February)
of last yéar, in a kunkur quarry at Chandipore, closo to a Devisthdna, an old
temple-site, where the villagers Still worship the image of a goddess, Chandi-
pur is close to Pitharghata, in the Bhagulpore district. Here are extensive
ruins and remains of old sculpture, both Buddhistic and Brahmanical ; and
on the hill that juts out on the Ganges, are several caves and rock-sculptures,
dating from the Gupta period (about 200 A. D.), if mot eartier. The lotus,

ealong with eight dther relics, were found in a Handi (a kind of flat earthen
vessel), by tho labourers of a contractor of Kahalgion, employed for the
purpose of digging kankur. The “Pandahs of Patharghita secured these
nine xelics, and placed them’in the Bateswar cave, a sacred site and bathing
place, in order to enhance its sanctity and to add a commercial value to it for
attracting pilgrims. ~ ~ ॥ .
Besides the fotus, the other relics-were (1) -8 twelve-drmed and four- faced

--- PAGE 76 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) PROCKEDINUS, “iii

Bhairava, standing on two. prostrate figures, in bronze; (2) a-bronze shrirte
of an image, which is no longer existing ; (3) a metal figure of the Buddha
in a seated posture, of rather silvery appearance ; (4).a bronze Padmapané;
(5) a bronze Maya Devi with the infant Bodhisattva on her lap; (6) a bronze
Tarai Devi seated ; (7) a séated Gyanega in bronze; and (8) a plaster figure
of Buddha. , ति @ - -

But the most interesting of them is the archaic. Lotus, about 8 inches in
height, which is symbolically of deep esoteric ¢import, both Brahmanical and
Buddhistfe, It is composed of a pedestai, flower, and a cap to close it at the top.
The pedestal is highly ornamented with elaborate mouldings, crowned with a
flower, of which the petals spread downward, and are flanked by two figures
of probably Bhairavas rising up in a bending attitude. Underneath is a logend
written in mystic letters within a rectanglo, which is subdivided into fourteen
squares in two rows. ~

Above the pedestal is the letus proper, consisting of cight petals, each
containing the figure of a goddess inreliefon its inner side. Theso eight
figures are alternately seated and standing ina bent aétitude. The centre is
occupied by a goddess, .probably in sitting posture, T'iri Devi of tho Buddhistie
pantheon ; she might be also identified with Parvati, the Braihmanical goddess.
She is eight-armed, and is otherwise worked very exquisitely in silver on bronze
ground, both in details and as a whole composition. The head-dress is
fashioned like a stupa. The lotus expands.and closes, hiding and exposing
the inside figures, by askilful mechanism. When the petals féld togethor
the top which is of,the form of a votive stupa, tightens them and gives it the
appearance of the bud of & lotus. ‘This relic of priceless value is evidently
of the tenth century A. D., if not carlicr; and [-secured it with the eight
others for the Indian Muséum. .

I havo said, that this lotus conveys esoteric meanings from several
aspects. Leaving tho Buddhist portion to be explained by Carat Chan-
dra, I beg to say, that the lotus plays an imporlant part in the symbology,
architecture and arts of the’ ancient world. A prominent place has been
assigned to the lotus by the ancient religion of Egypt. In Chaldca, Persie,
and Greece, and everi in countrics of much later ages, the lotus is traced
-to be a familiar ornament in the productions of man. And so it is no wonder, °
that in India, where symbology found its greatest development and oxpres-
sion, the lotus should play an important part in religion, arts and architecture,

४ is @ cognizance of some of the pre-historic Buddhas and Tirthatkaras,
Om mani padmé him,“The jewel in the lotus,” is a well-known formula of
the Tibetans, daily and hourly repeated in their daily prayers. :

As a Brahmanical object of worship, I may explain the lotus from two
aspects,—one 48.116 cosmos and the other as the man,—thcir evolution and
involution, Srishti and Pralaya. When 28९0, ‘it represents the Egg of the
Brahma or, Brahmduda in its undeveloped condition ; and , ॥ opened, the
cosmos comes into being, the eight petals being the eight directions with
their presiding deities; and the central figure is tho Prakriti, the causal
energy personified as a female goddess. When again closed, it is Pralaya, all
the internal manifestations disappearing ia an undistinguishable mass of the
Mahakdga, the eternal chaos. - ॥ „ "

From the-standpoint of man’s evolution and involution, this lotus shows
him as undeveloped when closed ; when opened it explains the cight stages
of his spiritual progress, as taught in the Hindu system of Yoga, meditation.
Ascending these eight stages, called technically circles," salvation or merging
of the individual soul to the universal, is attained by man.* And the thousand-
petalled lotus, where such a goal is reached, is shown by the several petals,
one above ‘the other, on the top of which the trident points to the divine

--- PAGE 77 [OCR_san+eng] ---
iv PROCEEDINGS." [Journal & Toxt, Part IT, 1894.

Prinity of the Biihmanical sinthoon. Aé an.exoteric object of worship,
the central‘ figure is the god cess Durga, the eight bas-reliefs on the petals,
are her companions, and the fwo lower ones are the guards or door-koepers.

The Third Quarterly Meeting of the Buddhist Text Society. of India, was
held at the Dalhousie Instittte,-Av@Past Ist, 1894. ० ~ “ ॥

The Hon'ble Sir A: Croft, M.A., ह. 6.1. 9., President in the Chair.

The Mintites of the proceedings of the last meeting having ebeen: for-
mally confirmed, the Secretary, Garat Chandra Das, reported that the first
. number of the Journal of the Soviety, Volume IL., had’ beef issued, and that
Part 2 of the sanie volume was in the press,.and would shortly’be issued.
` «The Chairman said that he had to annoance that the Society had secured
the services of Mr. J. Bowles Daly, LL.D.; as its Honorary Secretary, Dr. Daly
was a, gentleman who had spent many yeags travelling in Ceylon, and he had
little doubt that that gentleman. woul be of great value td them in all their
deliberations, and thatgll menibers would regard him as a valuable acquisition
to the Society. There were .2 number of long and interesting papers to be
२९६५ that evening, and he would not detain them with’ any further romarks.
He had one word to ‘add, and that was, that Carat Chandra Das had un-
dertaken to continue performing the important duty of editing their Journal.
He concluded by proposing that Dr. Daly be appointed Honorary Secretary
to the Society. ॥ „ . ॥

The proposal was put to the vote and oarricd by acclamation.

Carat Chandra Das announced the avquisitionsby-the® Socicty of several
valuable books and papers. First of all, there was a very valuable set of
Jaina sacred; works, offered for presentation by Rat Dhanpat Singh, Bahadur.

The next was a oop py of arecent book of travels jn Sikkim, up to the
Tibetan frontier, by Mr. | Louis, of the Caldutta High Court, ontitled The
Gates of Tibet. The author was a distingiishcd member of the Society, and
a Bench Clerk in the High Court. It was .not‘for him to give the members

^ any full or exact’nccount of the contents of this book, but, so far as he could
see, this was the best book of the kiud in reference to Tibet, since the publi-

. cation of Mr. Clement Markham’s account of George Bogle’s, Mission to
that country. He was sure that,all who read the work would be interested in
its contents and with the manner in which the.author had dealt with the im-
portant matter of the politiés, religions, and “trade of Tibet, and also other
matters usually ‘toyched on ina work of travel, पि ' वि

bi The Chairman,said that, on behalf of the Socicty, he begged to tender
its best thanks to the donors for their presentations. 5

Carat Chandra Ia announced the receipt of several donations to the
Society from vayjous sources." ` =>

On the motion of the CRairman, a vote of thanks to these donors was
unanimously carried. . ति

The following papers were then read :—Notes on the Svayambhi Puran,
and translations from the Ashta*Sahasrika, by Pandit Haraprasade Gastri, M.A.

The Chairmaa, in reference tg the first paper, said that it showed a consi-
derable amount of original research. This was just the kind of thing which
was valued by tho Society and its Journal, and he welcomed if with pleasure. .

Dr. Daly, having just then joined the Mecting, the Chairman, in advert-
ing to the fact, said that in introducing that gentleman to the members’ of
the Society to which he had just been appointed Honorary Secretary, he had,
personally, only to“add an gxpression of his" satisfaction at having secured
Dr. Daly's valuable services in connection with the Socioty, and he was sure
that the Society would derive great benefit from those services. He would
now ask Dy. Daly to address them

--- PAGE 78 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.) , PROCERDINGS. v

Dr. Daly said tha¥ he was obliged to the Chairman for this kind intro-
duction, and hoped that his future services to the Society mifht be tho best -
testimony of his appreciation of the honours done him. , In ordér to popu-
lariso the valuable information collegted, there was great need of more sys-
tem, method; and organisation. Mr. Carat Chandra Das should have mord .
timo to devote to editing-his research nfatter.- It was the business of tho
Society to afford him as much leisure for this work as possible. Dr. Daly
added that, during his labours as Commissianer of Buddhists Temporalities
_in Ceylon, he found many of the monks in possession of a curious knowledge
of plants, which was worth investigating, while they possessed also'a decided
acquaintaneo with mctal@and the power of converting the inferior into the
superior article, which sometimes led to abuses, such ag forgery and counter-
feit coining. There are a large number of plants in Ceylon with medicinal
properties entirely unrecognised, Pandit Hari Mohan Vidydbhishun read a
short analysis of the work Madhyamika, Vritti by the Buddhist Sage Chandra
Kirtti and Pandit Gaurinaith Kaviratna read an account of the worship of the
deity Haya Griba by the Hindus as well ag by the Buddhists jn Assain.

Dr.-Daly read a posthumous paper of the late Hon'ble D’Al’wis, of
the Ceylon Legislative Council, communicated by Rev. ©. A. Seclakkhandha,
giving a free translation of an incident which took place about 2,500 years
ago, between King Bimhjisara of Magadha and the King of ancient Yacila in
the @ njab, of a very interesting character. . .

‘arat- Chandra . Das then exhibited the Tibetan documents obtained from
the Bhot-Bagan Templo near Hotvrah. ‘The. first of these documents, was
an official letéor from the Grand Lama of: Tashilhunpo, granting one Pur-.
nagir Gosain the privilege of residence in the Grand Monastery, with
his servants, at’State cost, in recognition of the great services rendered to
Tibet and India, and to humanity in general, by his being the direct means
of averting a bloody war between the two countries. It might be remembered
that about the year 1770; A. D., the Raja of Cuch Behar was carri€l away by
the Bhutanese to the mountain fastnesses, and the first Governer-Genetal
of India, Warren Hastings, espousing the cause of the captive Raja, sent two
thousand troops to invade Bhutan. Deb Raja Shiddr, the ruler of Bhutan,
sbesought the help of the, Grand Lama, who, being ggerso to war, sent hig
confidential agent, ‘Purmagir, with a letter to thg Governor-General of India,
begging him, in dignified language, to withdraw his troops from Bhutan and
restore peace. Purnagir was successful im his mission, and on his way back
he accompanied Mr. George Bogle, the British Envoy.to Tibet.+ a

The second document was a passport granted to tho same Gosain by the
Grand Lama, for travojlipg in Tibet, at State expense, commanding all
Jongpons (district officers), chiefs, and residents of Tibet to help the Gosain on
his travels within their territories. bd . . .

'The third document was a passport granted by the Governmopt of Lhasa
to -Purnagir’s successor,. in th gmple of Bhot-Bagan (who aécompanied the
second British Envoy through Tibet, Captain Samuel- Turner), to travel at
-the State expense from Lhasa to Calcutta, and back.

The‘documents, the speaker explained, were written on a very fine paper,
made of the bark of the daphne plant, which grewabundantly on the Hima-
layas. The documents bore intact the seals of the Grand Lama and the Gov-
ernment of Ljiasa. ॥ : ; धि क

After inspection 21.1.13 interesting exhibits shown b;

Carat Chandra Das,-Mr. Louis remarked that a translation of the letter
of tite Tashi Lama to Warren Hastings yould be found in a footnote at p. 20.
of his beok, and he continuéd’: वि vs

“Mr, Chairman and Gentlenten,—I owe’ # word of thanks, to our learned
retiring Secretury for the appreciative words spoken by him of my little

--- PAGE 79 [OCR_san+eng] ---
vi PROCEEDINGS. (Journals Text, Part II, 1894.

book on the frontier of Tibet; coming, as they do from a man of his pro-.
found knowledge’ of Tibet, they are indeed gratifying. I have endeavoured
to write in a popular form so as to popularige, if possible, the all absorbing
but sometimes abstruse and dry subjec} of -Buddhism, and in the hope that
if it should find its way into the libraries of our Indian colleges, it would tend
to créate a stimulus in the youths of India, a real desire and genuine en-
thusiasm in the study of Sanskrit and Pali literature of the ancient text, ,
and of the more- primitive forms, of the religions of the land, which should ,
be an object of study, not only to men who come from the West, but to every...
man of education in this country, and I desire to impart some of that attrac-
tion I have felt, in common with all those who hav@&ttempted to explore the
mysterious land of the Lamas, from the East or from the West, from China or
from India, We read in the narratives of Mr. Rockhill, one of the most dis-
tinguished travellers, who visited Tibet in later yeaus, that after his first
journey he made a firm resolve not to go there again, because of the hardships
he had to endure ; but fourteen months had not elapsed before he was en route
again for a still more lengthened exploration. He is now all eagerness to go
there again, and.so 10.18 with all of us,

“In the copy presented to the Society there are several illustratiqns not
contained in the published edition, and among them ono of special . interest
to this Society. It depicts tha culminating cvent of a Mission sent by the
Government of Bengal in 1884, to communicate with the Tibetan aut rities
at the fronticr. The interview then held between the Hon’ble Mr. Colman
Macaulay and the Jongpon of. Kambajong, is from a photograph by our

-honoured Secretary, Garat Chandra Das, who, on the night previous to that
interview, had‘an opportunity of saving, and did save, the lives of all the
members of that Mission, as they would, but for the timely assistance sent to
them by him, have been frozen to death in the course of the night, and the
object of the Mission would have becn frustrated.

५ 008 word more to congratulate ourselves on having secured the valuable
services, as Honorary Secretary of this Society, of Dr. Bowles Daly.* We
know not only that he is the editor of one of our leading Calcutta papers, but
the renown of his great learning is, I may say, world-wide, and I have no doubt
that under his auspicegy the popularity of our Society will increase; that our ,
Journal, with the continued gollaboration of Carat © anda Das, ‘will become

Still more interesting, and that our rolls will be filled, as they should bo, with
the names of all the men of eminence and learning in the land.”

Carat Chandra Dis then exibited drawings of an ancient Sadghdrama
(Buddhist heymitage) and monastic temples and houses in Tibet and China.
A few brief remarks were then made by the Secretary, Dr. Daly and the Rev.
K. 8. Macdonald, M. A., D. D., and after a vote of thanks to the Chair, the
Meeting separated. ,

ee, वि

* J, Bowles. Daly, LL.D., the Corresponding Secretary, is the author of several books
on history and economic subjects. He has directed the education of the Buddhists in
Ceylon for four years, having established a Superior School in Kandy, and opened about,
one hundred other schools scattered through the Island, raising the funds entirely from
the people. He has also founded the Maherda College in Galle, obtained its rogistration
from the Government, raised it to the first condition of morit in the Island and affiliated
it to the Calcutta University. Dr. Bowles Daly on leaving Ceylon handed over the
Mahenda Collége to the custody of representatives of the three sects qf the Buddhjst
Priesthood as his gift towards Buddhism. During hiseresidence in Ceylon he mado ‘no
charge for his services and defrayed his own personal oxpenses, M. E. Sir A. Havelock,
Govérnor of Ceylon, appointed him Commissioner of Buddhist Temporalitios. Dr. Daly .
visited over 1,400 monagtcrics and wrote a scathing roview on the disgraceful manner in
which’ the fund& of the Church have been abused. Having sent his final report and ro-
commendations to the Government, ho took his departure fer India and was immediately
appointed chief of one of the leading Anglo-Indian Journals. Editor.

--- PAGE 80 [OCR_san+eng] ---
JOURNAL.

_ OF THE

BUDDHIST TEXT SOCIETY OF INDIA.
THE AMITAYUSA SUTRA.
TRANSLATED FROM THE Corgan,

BY .
ए. B. Lanprs, M.D.

Inrropuction.

The translation is from a book in my possession which was pub-
lished in Corea in the fourth moon,.1753. 1t was published at the
expense of,one Kim, an ex-Prime Minister, in order to lay up a store of
merit as well as to obtain a son. This illustrates what was formerly
very cémmon in Corea, and which still exists although less frequent on
account of the decaying faith. Irefer to the practice of publishing
books or tracts in order to lay up a store of merit. . To the gopy in my
possession there are several prefaees. The first is by 9 man who signs
himself as O Syang Hyen and who was commanded to write the pre-
face by one Ham Ouel. This preface-is merely a few sentences lauding
the benefactor Kim and thé Satra, ५ `

The sécond Preface is really’ a preface to the Cothmentary of the
Satra. It contains some very nicely worded thoughts and philosophi-
cal theories and was written by a monk, Chyouk Chyen by name. वः
will quote here a short description of the mind as it occurs in the Pre-
face. ‘Thére is nod place where the mind does not exist and the
brightness of it pervades the three regions. . There is no time when it
does not reflect its light. It has neither form nor sound, nor can it be
perceived. by the eyes nor ears, It is neither a law nor yet a word, nor
can the mouth discuss it-or the: heart grasp it. Although it occupies
but an atom of space, it is as if it were very large. Although it enve-
lopes a myriad likenesses it is very small. Its nature and virtues are as
the sands of the river and cannot be fathomed any more than man can
fathom the Heavens. Its use is wonderful and infmensurate. Truly
if is difficult to fathom. The wisdom of the Tathagata is in the midst
of it, therefore, it is said that. the Tathagata is the repository of it.
It is in the midst of all the trqubles of mankind, therefore, if is safd to
be the heart of mankind. On this account those who have it darkened
even though they have @ heart like Buddha, become vulgar people of the

--- PAGE 81 [OCR_san+eng] ---
४ THE AMITAYUSA SUTRA. [Journal & Toxt, Pt.-I1, 1894,

world, and those who have it enlightened even though they have vulgar
hefrts, become as sages. Becoming vulgar or sages is in consequence
of the darkening or enlightening of the mind, therefore, avoid tainting
it. You mistaken people, even thougli you see flowers (wrong deeds)
in space, avoid placing flowers there.” The Preface then goes कप to
praise the virtue of Chi Ouk, the Commentator of this Satra. „ ,
Some other editions have yet another prefact which is quite short
and exhorts the people to carefully read the Sitra. -

. We now come to the Commentary itself. This is by the ^ Western
Gramana Ou.ik Chi Ouk.” - Who this personage is I am unable to deter-
mine. He iscalled the Western Gramana so that he would not bea

“native of Corea or China.. The Commentary goes on to enungrate the
ntimerous virtues which follow the chanting of the Sitra and explain’
minutely every werd of the text.- Some of the explanations we should
consider far-fetched indéed, but not so a Uorean or Chinese, who sees a
hidden meanjng in every expression. . ve
| The Satra itself follows.. The author is said to be Kumirajfva
_awwho brought ४ copy to China from the kingdom of Kharacar (North-
Bast of Yarkand), in the year 400 A.D. ‘This is the text which [' have
tranglated: The teaching is simply that of chanting the name of Amita
Buddha in order*te be born in Sukhivati, the Land of Bliss. It is the
teaching of the Pure Land school ahd is the chief belief of the Chinese,
Corean and Japanese Buddhists. Nirvana is forgotten or considered
too far removed from'ordinary people. Who Amita is, is not known.
One of his inost cothmon appellations is Amitdbha—Boundless*Light. He
is also called the diffuser of great light and-great mercy and sympathy.
Bitel says that this Satra reached China through’ 'Tokhara and not
Kumirajiva mentioned above. However, all the Corean books which
I have-had the opportunity of seeiyg, mention Kumirajiva (the tutor
of Fihian), and in no single instance have I seen Tokhava mentiohed.

TRANSLATION.

Thas have [heard:! Once upon a time Buddha was in Jeta’s Grove and
Anatha Pindyda’s Garden which'were in the kingdom of Crivasti, together with
twelve hundred and fifty great Bhikshus, all of them great Arhats wha pos-
aessed immense knowledge. The Arhat Sariputra,the Mahi Mandgalyayana,

“the Maha Kagyapa, tho Maha Katyiyana, the Mahi Kaishthila, Revata, Chy-,
" onripantaka,? Nanda, .Andnda, Rahula, Gavampati, Pindola, Varunadatta,
Kayontari? Malia Kaphina, Vakula, Aniruddha. All these were eminent dis-
ciples. .` त . R . a:
४ ‘Together with all the Bodhisattvas. The Maldsattva Mafjugri, the Royal
Prince of the Law, the Bodhisattva Ajita, the Bodhtsattva Kaudrarkadipa, the
"Bodhisattva Sdrvarthinaman. All theso were eminent Rodhisattvas. -
° an
1 Seo Kern’s Saddhgrma Pondarika. Introdnction. The first four verses almost follow
in the same order: ‘I'ho resemblance in the original toxt is closor still, .
2I can not find out who these two eminent disciples really are, For notes on the
history of the others 1 cannot do better than to recommend the reader to refer to Kori’s
tranglation 4f the Saddharma Pundariki montioned abovo and Bunyio Nanjio’s Short His-
tory of the Japanese Buddhist 86618 both of which give a great deal of information con-
corning the chiof disciples of Buddha ag well aa other noted porsomagos in Buddhist
History, especially of the Noythern or Mabayiink School, * ~

--- PAGE 82 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] THE AMITAYUSA SUTRA. „ 3

Together with Cakra, the king of gods and men, with’ an incalculable
number of Devas and men. At that time Buddha said to the venerable Siri.
putra: “From this place passing one thousand millions of Baddha worlds

. towardsthe west, there is a world called Sukhavati—Extreme Bliss. In that
land there is 9 Buddha designated Amita. At the present time he is showing
forth and discussing the law”. ° ति

9370 678, asked why the land was called “ Extremo Bliss.” Tho answer
was that ingtRat land the (holy) -multitudes do not suffer, only receiving
delights. On this account, it is called “ Extreme Bliss.” ° .
« ` Sariputra again asked about the country of ^ Extrome Bliss” and was told
that there were there seven balustrades, seven nets, and seven rows of trees.
These were all made of the four precions substances which also surrounded
the place. On this account it was galled the “ Land of Extreme Bliss.”

-Siriputra was again told that in the world of “Extreme Bliss” there
were seven precious lakes filled with the eight waters of merit and virtne. At
the bottom of the lakes was golden sand spread ont. The roads on the four
sides were made of gold and silver and glazed substances. Tho balcony and
stairs were bound together and built of gold, silver, red gems, and agate and
diamonds. In the, midst of the lakes were lotus flowers tho sizo of a largo
wheel, and of various colors: Those of azure color gave forth light of an
azure color, those of a yellow color reflected ygllow light, those of a red coir
reflected red light, those of a white color reflected white light, This- world
of Extremo Bliss is beautiful, odoriferous and pure and comple& with merit,
virtue and sedateness.

And thus Baddha continued. * Again, Siriputra,” in that land there is a
continual heavenly music. The earth is made of gold. Day and night are
each six hours in length. There it rains Mandira flowers. The (holy) multi-
tude of that land in the carly morning, each take a bowl and fill it with
beautiful flowerseand worship the thougand million Buddhas of other worlds.
At tho time of breakfast they straightway return to their native country and
thrice partake of food. This Sariputra is the world of “Extreme Bliss”
which has perfect virtue, merit, sedateness and gravity.

And again, Siriputra, thero are many beautifyl variegated birds. White
Egrets and Pea-fowls, Sfris! and Kalavingas,? all sweet-voiced birds.
These innumerable birds dnring the day and night, which are eich six hours
in length, come forth and with pure and harmonious voices make fond and
harmonious notes, in praise of the five roots,’ the five powers,* the seven divi-
sions of Bodhi,’ and the cight divisions of the Holy way. The (holy) muiti-
tudes of that land hearing laws like these all unite their voices in praising
Buddha, the Dharma and the Safgha, ।

You mugt not, Siripntra, say that these birds are there on account of
their former gvil deeds. Why is this? In that Land of Buddha the wicked
ways do not exist, and Siriputra in that Land of Buddha they dPnot know

1 Tho Saris? is a long-legged bird, a kind of crane, .
ॐ Kalavinga is described as a swect-voiced Bird, as an immortal bird. It is the Caculus
»mejanoleicus. . .

8 Paficha Indryani, i.e , prodactivo of life. They are :—(1) Maith v. Qraddendriyn. (2)
EKnorgy v. Viryeudriya, (3) Memory v. Smritindriya, (4) Ecstatic Meditation v. Sami-
dhindriya, (5) Wisdom v. Pradjiiedriya. | फ

+ 716 five Powors are:—(1' The Power of Faith ०, 37900102 (2) The Powor of
Energy v. Viryabala, (3) The Power of Memory v. 8 la, (4) The Power of Madita-
tion v. Samadhibala, (5) The Power of Wisdom ०, Pr ala. ae

5 The seven «divisions of Bodhi are (1) Memory ४, Smriti, (2) Discrimination १. Dhar-
‘ma Pravitchaya, (3) Energy v. Virya, (4) Joy v. Priti, (5) Tranquility ए, Prasrabdhi, (6)
Hestatio Contemplation v. Samadhi, (7) Indifference v. Upeksha.

2


--- PAGE 83 [OCR_san+eng] ---
4. "THE AMITAYUSA SUTRA. (Journal & Text, Pt. II, 1896.

even the name of a wicked way. Moroover, it is true that Amita Buddha
causes the innumerable birds to chant of the Law and its metamorphoses,

Sariputra, in that Land of Buddha when the breezes blow, the trees and
nets shake, causing them to emit fine and beautiful tones, causing them to
emit the one hundred thousand kinds of music. At the same time those who
hear this masic all desire to chant the praises of Buddha, Dharma and
Safigha. on °
. Sariputra, from that Land of’ Buddha thore issues forth .cbwplete merit,
and virtue and sedateness. :
yen Sériputra, you may in your thoughts ask why is that Buddha named

ita

Sariputra, thaf Buddha is light and brightness, his lustre is endless, and
reflects his virtues to the ten quarters! without interruption, On this account
he is calléd Amita. : . :

Again, Saviputra, he has long life, boundless and endless, existing for an
Asamkhyea? of Kalpas. On,this account he is called Amita.

Saripiatra, it is now ten Kalpas since. Amita has become a Buddha.

Siriputra, when endless, boundless noises are heard by the disciples,
they all become Arhats. In number they are inestimable as are also the
multitude of Bodhisattvas, Sariputra, from the Laud of Buddha there issues
fd®th completed merit and virtpe and sedateness.

. Again, Sgriputra, in the Land of Bliss are multitudes of living beings.
Among them are many who have changed their lives. In numbers many
and innumerable, reaching up to endless and boundless Asamkhyea.

Sariputra, the multitudes who hear of it all have a desire to be born in
that Land. Why is it thus? Because the superior and good men all collect
in that one place. * *

It is impossible, Sariputra, by small acts of goodness or by blessed, vir-
tuous fate to be born in that Land. ,But, Siriputra, if thore are any good
men or good women, who hearing of Amita Buddha grasp tirmly his name
for one day or for two days, for three days or for four days, for five days or
for six days or for seven days, if the heart is united and not confused at the
end of life, Amita Buddha with all the multitude of holy ones «will appoar
to that man, and if to tho last he is not upset, he will directly be born in
Amita Budha’s Land of Extrenie Bliss. .

Sariputra, I regarded this as profitable and therefore I spoke thus. If the
multitude hear these words they will surely desire to be born in that country.

* Siriputra, I am_he who now praises tho profit arising from the impossi-
bility of thinking and discussing the merits and virtues of Amita Buddha.

In the eastern quarter there are also Akshobhya, Sume sang, Maha Sumern,
Sume kwang, and the Buddha of beautiful sounds. And like these are in
number as the sands of the everlasting river (Ganges). All of these Buddhas,
each fron? that country reaching out their long tongues and widely covering
the three thousand great thousand worlds. These are true.and sincere words.

+ You multitudes should certainly trust this praising and tho impossibility of
thinking or discussing the merits and’ virtues of all the several Buddhas who
will protect you. Therefore chant this Stitra. "oe

Sariputra, in the southern quarter of the world there are Il Oucl Teung
Buddha, Myeng Moung Kuang Buddha, Tai Ryem Kyen Buddha, Syou Mi
Teung Buddha and Myon Ryang Chyeng Chin Buddha. And like these in

1 The ten quarters are the eight points of the compass with above and below.

9 Asamkhyea is the highest sum which can’ be expressed ३५ Chinese. It is equal to 1-
followed by 17 cyphers, In Tibetan it is 1 followed एणा cyphers, vide Hitel’s Hand-book
of Chinese Buddhism,

--- PAGE 84 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Socioty.] THE AMITAYUSA SUTRA,

number as the sands of the everlasting river. All of these Buddhas, gach
from that country reaching out their long tongues and widely covering the
three thousand great thousand worlds. These “ase true and sincere’ words.
You multitudes should certainly trust this praising and the impossibility of
thinking or discussing the merits of all the several Buddhas. Thereforo,
you should chant this Sitra. न

‘Sariputra, in the western quarter of the world there are the Buddha of
Boundless Age, the Boundless Form Buddha, the Boundless Screening Buddha, ©
the Great Light Buddha,,the Great Brightness Buddha, the Precious Figured!
Buddha, and the Chyeng Kyen Buddha, and like these, in numbers as the
sands of the everlasting river. All of these*. Buddhas, each from that
country reaching out their long tongues and widely covering the three thou-
sand-great thousand worlds. These are true and sincere words. You multi-
tudes will surely believe this praise and the’ impossibility of praising or
9704 the merits of all the Buddhas who will protect those who chant
this 80618. .

Sariputra, in the northern quarter of the world there are the Buddha
with a Most Victorious Voice, the Buddha of the Difficult Prohibition,
the Buddha of the Origin of the Sun, and, the Buddha of the Bright Net.
Like these there are as many as there are sands in tho everlasting river. All
of these Buddhas, each in that country reach out their long tongues and
cover widely the three thousand great thousand worlds, Theso aro true and
sincere words. You multitudes will surely believe ¢his praise and the im-
.possibility of praising or diacussing the merits of the several Buddhas who
will protect those who chants this Siitra.

Sariputra, in the world beneath there aro, the Lion Buddha, the Name
and Sound Buddha, the Name and Brightness Buddha, the Buddha of the
Law, the Buddha of the Screening-Law, and the Buddha of Grasping the
Law.4 Like these, Buddhas in number as the sands of the K verlasting river.
All these Buddhas stretched forth their tongucs and widely covered tho
three thousand great thousand ‘worlds. These are true and sincere words.
You multitudes will surcly .believe this praise although it is impossible to
praise or discuss the merits of all the Buddhas. All the several Buddhas
will protect those who chant this Sitra. .

† Siriputra in the world above there are the Buddha of Brahma’s Voice,
the Buddha of the King of Constellations, the Buddha of Superior Incense,
the Buddha of Bright Incense, the Tai Yem Kyen Buddha, the Buddha of
Precious Form and Bright and Sedate Body, the Buddha who is king of the
Pa Ra Grove, the Buddha of Precious Flowery Virtues, the Buddha: who
perceives what is altogether Righteous, and tho Buddha’who १8 Like Mt.
Sumert. Like these, Buddhas in number as the sandsof the everlasting
river. All these Buddhas stretched forth their tongues and widely covered
the'three thousandegreat thousand worlds. These are true and sincere words.
You multitudes will surely believe this praise although it is impossible to
praise or discuss the merits of all the Buddhas. All the several Buddhas will
protect those who chant this Satra. . ~
* Sariputra, what do you think of this? For what reason are all those
Biiddhas who protect those who chant this Sitra named ?

Sariputra, if there are good men or good women who hearing this Sutra,’
receive it and grasp and hear the names of all the Buddhas, such good men
by protection and chanting all the forms of the Buddhas, all pass along the त
road to Nirvana. They revolve on to unexcelled perfect intelligence.’ On

1 Ratnaketa. 8 Dharmadhara.
8 Anuttara Samyak Sambodhi. This is an epithet of every Buddha,

--- PAGE 85 [OCR_san+eng] ---
6 MAHAYANA AND HINAYANA SCHOOLS. (Journal & Text, Pt. II, 1894.

this account Siriputra, you should certainly trust and-receive ‘ay words and
the words of all the Buddhas. * oa .

* Sariputra, if there is @ man who wished, who now wishes, or who will
wish to be bora in that Land of Amita Buddha, such a man will all pass along
the road to Nirvana. Those who revolve on to unexcelled perfect intelligence
all were born, or being born, or will be bornin ghat,country. On this account
Sariputra, all the good men and good womon if they have faith will surely
wish to be born in that conntry.

Now Sariputra, I pynise all the Buddhas whose merits it is impossible to
discuss. Those Buddhas also praise my merits which are impossible to think
of or discuss. In speaking.these words Qikya Muni Buddha is-able to do
extremely difficult and wonderful things. He is able, in the country of Sa
Pa,! and in the midst of the wicked world of tho five? Impurities, to do strange
things. In the Kalpa of Impurity, seeing and disturbing impurity surrounded
by a multitude and life of Impurity he is able to obtain unexgelled perfect in-
te, iene for all the multitudes of people. This in all the world is a law
difficult to believe,

Siviputra, you must surely know that I, in this wicked world of tho five
Impuyjties do most difficult things to obtain unexcelled perfect intelligence,
fox in all the world this is a law most difficult to believe. Ah! very difficult.

When the Buddha finished this Siitra, Sariputra® with all the world of
Bhikshus, with all the world of Devas, Men and Asuras,* heard the Buddha's
words and was glad anddelighted and believed and received and worshipped
Him and departed. . :

A SHORT NOTE ON THE MAHAYANA AND HYNAYANA SCHOOLS.
“By Pandit Hara 84879 Gastri, M.A.

Below will be found the translation of nearly half of the eleventh evolu-
tion of the Ashtasdhusrikd Prajna pdramita, ‘The chapters of this wark, which
treats of ‘excellent knowledge,’ are namcd *Evolutions.’ The reason why I
have selected this portion of the work for translation, 28 that it treats of
the difference of the two great schools which divided the Bufidhist world of
thouglit,—namely, tle Mahayana andthe Hinaydna schools.’ The translation,
at this stage of our knowledge of Buddhism, must necessarily bo defective,
incomplete, and of a tentative nature; but still, it will serve one useful pur-
pose,—namely, that of awakening an interest in the subject. ^

“ 0 language ean be more emphatic than the following— Do you think

@then, O Subhuti, that those Bodhisuttvas belong to the class of in tellectual
beings, who having access to ‘The Higher Road '—‘ The Unfailing Road ’—
leave it, give it up, and consider ‘The Lower Road as worth seeking ?’” -

Now, the question is—“ Why is Hinaydna so strongly condemued ?” It is
because the followers of this road consider, as their sole aim, the control

1Saha or Sahaloka. This is the world of suffering, the inhabited part of every uni-
verse which are subject tq transmigration and necd a Buddha’s instruction. = ~ त

3 Paficha Klesa (1) Cupidity, (2) Anger, (8) Foolishness, (4) Irreverence, (5) Doubts.

. 8 These are tho mightiest of all demons and the enemies of the Devas.

+ Saripatra was one of Buddha’s chief disciples and was his “right hand man.” He is
to re-appear as Buddha Padmaprabha.

5 [have translated the words Mahdyéna and Htnaydna as the Higher Road and the
Lower Road. ‘The word ‘ Vehiclo, by which it is generally translated, does not convey all
th@ideas involved in the word ‘Yana.’ H P. Castri.

. This Hénydna school appears to me to be different from the Southern School of Bud-
dhism of the prosent time. Ed. . . ~

--- PAGE 86 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society] THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. 7

of qne dima, the peace of one द, and the extinction of one ama. They

` commence the practice of all meritorious acts for ‘the Control, for the peace,
and for the extinction of their own souls. Should that bo tho ‘ be-all and end-
all’ of a high-spirited Bodhisattva? His aim should be to placc his own self
in truth (fathata), then to place all sentient Beings in tathala or truth, and
thus, to bring ,about, the extinction of an inconceivable number of sentient
beings. The author has taken paitis to show that Tinayana is narrow, 861081५
and limited, whereas Mahéyana is broad, catholic, and enlightoned. The
Hinay€na is lacking in zenl, while the Mahayéna is girtin a ‘ strong armour.’
The aim of the Mahayana; is to lead men-and to serve them. = It always aims
to attain the six paramilds, or excellences, .

The best exposition of the highest aim of the Hinayana school is to be
found in the. Articles on ‘ Nibbana’ and " 2110090, › in Childer's Pali Die-
tionary. He confines himself strictly tothe original teachings of Buddha ;
and he thinks the stages immediately preceding Nirvana are these—( 1)

ad Sottdpatti, i.e. falling in a stream from which thero is absolutely no chance
of going back. A man in this stage is bound, at no distant date, to attain
Nirvéna. He may be born seven times, but not more, and that, even, not as
inferior animals. (2) Sakadagami. In this stage the disciple is béund to return
twice, once on Karth and ‘once in Heaven. *(8) Andyami. Once only in
Heaven; and (4) कष्ठ, A man may-be living and yet attain the highest
knowledge; then he is said: to be in Nirvanmarga, and when he dies he is
said to be, by a bold metaphor, ‘extinguished.’ ` There is,no speculation in .
the Hindyana as regards what remains after Nirvana.

But the Maltiydna goes beyond this. The word Nirvéna is not much
used, ‘Obtaining Bodhi knowledge,’ ‘ Obtaining omniscience,’ are the terms
used instéad. When a man knows everything, he knows the miseries of
the world, and therefore cannot enter tho Nirvana without stretching a
helping hand ta tho suffering millions ail around him. He is, therefore, said
to be ‘girt in the strongest armour.’ He resolves to romove the sufferings.
The Mahayana does not altogether ignore the selfish creed of the ITinayaya ;
but it considers that to bo am inferior. thing. The Sarvajita, the Tathagata,
the Lokanatha of the Mahayana school grant individual extinction (pratyeka-
bodhi) to innumerable creatures all round him. While secure in his own
prospect of emancipation, he delays accepting it, for the good of others.
There bad been in the innumerable kalpas many Lokandthas ; there are jn
the infinite space many Sarvujiias ; and there will be in the infinite futuro
many Wath@gutas who, by their preachings, emancipated, emancipate, and will
emancipate, innumerable sentient beings. But none amongst these stand
80 high as the Arya Avalokitegvara, who has vowed not to enter the blissfuly
region till there is a single sentient being unemancipated. The conception
of this character‘is the highest that the Mhdyina school is capable of.
And the conception may. bo regarded as one of the greatest things human
intelléct has attained by its exertions. The Hinaydna is absolutely inca-
pable of such a high conception, or such ४ bold stretch of ideas.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.
On tue Evouution or tHE* Works or Mira.
Then Subhiti, the Longlived, thus spake to the Lord;—“O Lord, thou
ast enumerated the exéellence of those Gentlemen and Gentlewomen : will .
there arise any obstacles in their way, 0 Lord ?” ॥ ॥
This being said, the Lord thus spake to'the Longlived, Subhati i “ There
will arise, 0 Subhiti, many obstacles from the works of Mara, the Ev: Spirit.”

--- PAGE 87 [OCR_san+eng] ---
8- THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. [Journal & Toxt, Pt. 11, 1894.

Subhiti asked : “ Of what sort will the obstacles be, O Lord, that will arise
from the works of Mara?” The Lord said: ”,O Subhiti, audacity will arise `
in the minds of those high-spirited Bodhisattvas speaking of the excellence of the
knowledge, Prajndparamita. This, 0 Subhiti, should be regarded as the firgt
work of Mara, the Evil Spirif. That audacity, as soon as generated, will turn
their heads. This, 8180, 0 Subhiti, should be regarded as the work of Mara, the
vil Spirit. They will write, with gaping month, laughing, and laughing in
their sleeves. This should also, 0 Subhiti, be regarded as the work of Mara,
the Evil Spirit. With their heads turned they will get confounded. This should
also be regarded as the work of Mara, the Evil Spirit. They will write,
as if, possessing each other’s knowledge. This should be regarded 0 Subhiti,
as the works.of Mara, the Evil Spirit. They will lose their memory. This should
be regarded as the work of Mara, the Evil Spirit. They will write deriding
each other. This should be regarded O Subhati, as the work of Mara, the Evil
Spirit. They will write langhing secretly at each other. This should also O ,
Subhiti, be regarded as the work of Mdra, the Kvil Spirit. They will write *
with wild expression in their eyes. This also should be 0 Subhiti, regarded
as the work of Mara. They will be without materials while writing against
each other. This should als® ४९, regarded as the work of Mara. They will
walk about, rising from their'seats, saying we ‘do .not get at the bottom’
of the thing nor enjoy any taste for it. This should also be regarded O Subhiti,
as the work of Mara. They will think that theoxcellent knowledge’ has not
been properly explained to them, and so, with their minds clouded, they will
rise from their seats and walk about. This should also be regarded O Subhati,
as the work of Mara. In this excellent knowledge there is no mention of tho
name of the villagé, the city, or place where they were born; it does not
mention the name or the class of themselves, the name or class of their

arents, nor of the family in which they were born; and so they will think

rajiidparamita to be unworthy*of hearing, and think of withdrawing from
it. Just as they withdraw, owing to the various changes in their mind, so
they will be obliged to take re-birth again and again, for as many kalpas as
there were changes in their mind. They will again try to obtain yoga. Why
80 ? because high spirited Bodhisativas, O Subhiti, not hearing excellent
knowledge, will not get an insight into human and superhuman attributes
This should also he regardéed 0 Subhiti, as the work of Mara for them.

“Then, again, 0 Subhiti, individuals desirous of attaining the condition
of Bodhisattvas, leaving and giving up this Prajiaparamita, the Giver of
the Knowledge, which belongs to the Omnicient, will consider these Satrantas,
which are not the givers of the knowledge which belongs to the Omnicient,
#s worthy of seeking. This, O Subhiti, should be regarded as the, work

of Mara for them. . ॥

“Just as, 0 Subhiti, people desirous of learning human and superhuman
matters, and pegple desirous of entering human. and superhuman affairs,
do not study the Prajidparamita, they cannot enter into hunran or super-
human work without learning the Excellent Kuowledge. «Thus, those people
with small intelligence, leaving and giviog up Prajidparamita, the root
of the exact and true perception of human and superhuman affairs, consider
branches of branches as worthy of having recourse to. Justas, O Subhiti,
any dog leaving morsels of food givgn by his master, thinks of getting a morsel
of food from his servant, thus, should, 0 Subhiti, in the future period
there arise certain people going the way of Bodhisativas, who, giving up

. Prajiaparamita, the root of the knowledge of the Omnicient, will consider
the excellent Buddhattva to be attainable in the way of Grdvakas and Pratyeka
Buddhas, which are like branches, leaves, and straw, This, 0 Subhiti, should
be considered as the work of the Mara for them. Why is it so? Because these

--- PAGE 88 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. | 9

people, with small intelligence, will not know that Prajidparamita is the.
Giver of the kuowledge of the Omnicient.- These, leaving off and giving’
up, and renouncing Prayiidpdramita, consider those Sitrantas to be more
worthy of attainment which speak of the Gravaka stage, and speak of the
Pratyeka Buddha stage. These Bodhisattvas, who have been ‘thus described,
are to be known as bearing comparison with branches, leaves, and straw.
And why is it so? O Subhiti, the high-spirited Bodhisuttva should not
learn in the same way as those going in the way of Gravaka and Pratyeka
Buddhas. How do, O Subhiti, people’ going the way of (ravakas and
Patyeka Buddhas learn? This is their state. ‘We will control one dima; we
will bring peace to one @tmd ; and we will emancipate one dtmd.” Thus, they
commence all practices for the accumulation of Karma, which are the
ground works of merit for their own control, peace and emancipation, O
Subhiti, the High-spirited Bodhisattva should not learn, thus. On the
contrary the High-spirited Bodhisattva should learn thus: ‘I should place
myself in Tathata, or Truth, I will for bestowing favor on all the Lokas, all
creatures place them in Tuthaté, or truth, and I will emancipate innumerable
sentient beings.’ The High-spirited Bodhisattvas* should commence their
practice for the accumulation of Karma, the ground-work of merit in this
way. Thoy should not consider jn the following.marhher. Just as, 0 Subhiti,
a man who ha’ not seen an elep! Fant investigates its colour and.figure. He
gets an elephant in darkness, and looks carefully, where there is light, look-
ing carefully he investigates the leg of the elephant, and from the leg of the
elephant considers the cdlour and figure to be perceived. And so, do you
consider that man, O Subhiti, to belong to the class of intellectual meu ?”
. Subhiti said: “ Not so, my Lord.” = .

Tho Lord said : «८ Thus, 0 Subhati, are to be considered those people be-
longing to the Bodhisattva Yana (Mahayana), who ignorant of this Prajidpa.a-
gnitd, without questioning about her, and leaving her off, and yet desirable of
attaining the knowledge of excellent and true Bodhi knowledge, consider it
desirable to investigate those Sdtrantas which speak of the Qravaka stage, and
of tho: Pratyeka Buddha stage. This should ‘be regarded as a work of Mara,
the Evil Spirit, for them. Just as, O Subhiati, a man desirous of getting
precious stones secs the great ocean but does not plunge into it, does not
get jewels, does not catch hold of them. He considers a Gospada, the mark
of a cow’s footstep, as worthy of: being recourse to for jewels. He
considers the great ocean as being equalised with the Gospada. What do
you thik, 0 Subhati, does that man belong to the class of intellectual beings ?”

Subhiiti said: ^ Not so, O Lord.”

The Lord said : ^ Thus shoulds 0 Subliti, be considered those people going
the way of Nodhisattvas, who, even after obtaining this deep and excellent’
knowledge, will foresakt it without going deep into it, and without investi-
gating it. They will consider, because they move with little zeal, those
Sitranéas as worthier object of investigation which speak of the stage of
Gravaka and the stage of Pratyeka Buddhas, in which the way of the
Bodhisattvaé are not described, but only ie’s own control, peace and eman-
cipation. This is mere useless word, that “I will attain the stage of ‘ flowing
in the stream,’ I will attain the stage of returning only once; the stage of re-
turning no more, and then I will attain Arhatship and Pratyeka Buddhaship,
and I will gttain emancipation by freeing the mind from all that is painful
without any attaghment to perceivable attributes.” This is said to be connected
with'the stages of QGrévaka and Pratyeka Buddha. The High-spirited Bodhi-
sattvas should not,set their minds to euch things. Why is it so P Because,
O Subhati, the High-apirited Bodhisattvas, going by the Groat Way,.aro ‘ girt
with strongest armour.’ They should never set their hearts on small things.

--- PAGE 89 [OCR_san+eng] ---
10 THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. [Journal & Text, Part II, 1894,

Why is it so ? Those good men who are benefactors & men, are their
“\eaders. Therefore, they should, at all times, without intermission, study
the six Parantitmas. Those people, again, O Subhiti, going the way of
Bodhisattvas, the root of whose merits are not yet ripe, whose intelligence
is small, and whose will ig not ‘soft, ignorant of the sitrantas connected
with the six 22706115, and unable to understand them, will consider
those siitrantas as worthy of investigation, which speak of the stages of
Qravaka and Pratyeka Buddha. This should, 0 Subhiti, be considered as
the work of Mara for them. The condition of those people going the way of
Bodhisattvas will be like that of the mason or his apprentice who desires
to make or biild’a palace of the size of the Vaijayanta, the celestial mansion
of Indra. He makes a thorough inspection of the circle of the car of the
sun and of the moon. Thus investigating he will see the cars of:the sun and
of the moon. Hg will then consider it desirable to take the measure of their
size. Do you think, O Subhati, that the measurement of the size of the cars
of the sun and the moon is to be taken by one desirous of making or building
a palace as big as Vaijayanta?”

Subhati said: ^ Not’so, 0 Lord.”

The Lord said: “It is just 80, 0 Subhiti. In the future period there will
be men going the way?of Bodhisattvas, whp, after hearing the Mxcellent
Knowledge, after obtaining it, leaving it, giving it up, will cdnsider कपण -
science attainable by means of Sitrdéntas connected with tho stages of
Gravaka and Pratyeka Buddha. These Sétrantus soy. thus:—‘ Wo will
control one soul, will bring peace to one soul, and wfll emancipate one soul.’
They teach only the control, peace, and emmncipation of their own self. They
will investigate thjs sort of Sitrantas, and will consider them worth learnipg.
Do you consider, O Subhiti, are these Bodhisativas to be considered to
belong to the class of intellectual men P” .

Subhati said : “ Not so, my Lord.” ति .

The Lord said: ^ This, again, 0 Subhati, shquld be considerd, with regard
to them, the work of the Mara. Just as, O Subhiiti, any man becomes
‘desirous of seeing the Chakravarti Rdjé Emperor, and sees the Emperor.
Having seen, having taken the signs, such should be the Emperor in colour, in
figure, in lustre, and in majesty; sees the king of a fort. Alter noting the
colour, figure, Justre, majesty and signs, unable to distinguish, thinks that the
Emperor is like this in colour, in figure, in lustre, in majesty, and in signs.
Do you, therefore, consider, 0 Subhati, that man to belong to the class of
intellectual men who thus thinks of comparing the Emperor with the @hief of
a single fort ?” ~

Subhati said : ‘Not so, my Lord.” e

The Lord said: ५1४ is just so, Insome futuro period there will be
people going the way of Bodhisattvas, who after htaring the Prajiidpdrd-
mita, attaining it, leaving it, giving it up, will consider Omniscicnce as
attainable by means of Siitrdutus*connécted With the sages of Qrdvaku
and Pratyeka Buddhas. This shoald also be considered as the-work of Mara
with them. Ido not, say, 0 Sublfiti, that Omniscience i to be’ sought by
means of Siifrdntas connected with the stages of Grdvaka and Pratyeka
Buddha by tlie High-spivited Bodhisattvas. ‘Then, again, O Subhiti, the
High-spirited Bodhisattvas will not enter into the Highest Bodhi knowledge
without learning the means and resources for the attainment of fhe Prajitd-

Graimité discovered by the Yath@gata for the High-spirifed BodMisattvas.
hy is it 80 ? The knowledge of Bodhisattvas is, doubly blind-folded in other
Siitrantas. Since, therefore, O Subhiti, having seen this guality in. Prajit-
pardmita in long succession, the Tathdgata causes the High-spirited Bodhi-
sativas to see and to give, in Prajidpardmitd. He encourages them,, cheers

--- PAGE 90 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.) THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. 11

them up, makes them enter it, and establish themselves into it. Thus should
High-spirited Bodhisattvas become unfailing in the Highest Bodhi—knowledge.
Do you consider, O Subhiti, that those Bodhisattvas appear to belong to the
class of intellectual men, who after getting the Unfailing Course of the Noble
Way, leave it again and turn back and consider the shorter way as worthy of
investigation P”” ^

Subhiti said: “ Not so, my Lord.”

The Lord said: “Just as, O Subbiti, a hungry man aftcr obtaining
various delicious dishes gives them away which are wholesome, light, and
capable of appeasing hunger and thirst to the end of life, and considers stale
food as worth secking, and having obtained it, leaves off, gives up, the delicious
dishes, and considers the stale food worth cating. Do you think, 0 Subhitid,
that man belongs to the class of intellectual men?”

Subhati said: “* Not so, O Lord.”

The Lord said : ^ Even it is so, 0 Subhiti. There will be in some future
period some Bodhisattvas who after hearing and after getting Prajidparamita
will renounce her, give her up, throw her away, cast her off, and having re-
nounced, given up, thrown away, cast off, will consider the Sitrdufas connected
with the way of Qrdvaka and Pratyeka Buddha as worth secking. They
will consider that Omniscience as attainable by means of those Sétréutas
which speak of the stages of Gravaka and Pratyeka Buddha. Do you con-
sider, O Subhiti, that these Bodhisattvas should be considered as belong-
ing to the class of intellectual men ?”

Subhiti said: ^ Not so, my Lord.”

The Lord said: “ This should also be regarded as the work of M@ara, the
Evil Spirit, with regard to these. Just as any person having secured a
priceless gem, should consider it equal to stone of inferior value and inferior
quality. Do you consider, O Subhiti, that man is to be classed with in-
tellectual men ? ”

Subhiiti said : “Not so, my Lord.”

The Lord said. “It is thus, 0 Subhiti, there will be in some future
period, some people going the way of Budhist/trs., who after hearing and
gaining this gem of Prajidparamita effulgent ant don, will consider it equal
to the ways of Cravaka and Dratyeka Buddha. “nl who will consider Omni-
science and the means aud appliances as worth seeking in the stayes of
Gravaka and Pralyeka Buddhas. Thus, do you think, 0 Snbhati, arc these
Bouhisattvas to be considered as belonging to the class of intelleotual men ?”

Subhiiti said: ^ Not so, my Lord.”

The Lord said: “This, agaiu, O Subhiti, should be regarded as the work
of the Mara, in regard to High-spirited Bodhisattvas. Then, again, 0 Snbhiti,
there will be generated audacity, when the profound Prajidparamia will be
preached, taught, explained, expounded, understood, read, recited, and at last
written, That audacity will produce distraction of mind. This, again, O
Subhati, should be regarded as the work of the Méra in regard to the High-
spirited Bodhisuttvas.”


--- PAGE 91 [OCR_san+eng] ---
THE STORY OF JYOTISHKA.
TRANSLATED Prom Ksnemenpri’s Avapdxa Karparata.
By
Nonrn Cuanpra Das, M.A.

1.

The evil which o’ertakes the pious,
Brings blessings in its train ;

And bliss forebodes to wicked folks
The sure approach of pain.—

The midnight gloom deepens the ray
Of light-emitting bowers,!

And day which gladdens Nature’s face,
The owl’s eye-sight o’erpowers.

2.

In Rajegviha, opulent town,
Where Bimbiséra reigned,

One Subhadra lived, and by thrift
A happy living gained.

3.

To all philosophy a foe,
He loved, by folly led,

The Khapnaks,* who with their priest-craft
The country had o’erspread.

4,
Satyavati, his loved wife,
In time did pregnant grow,
And looked as flush as orient sky
With rising moon a-glow.

5

Lord Buddha, then in Kalandak
Lived in a lonely wood,
One day to Subhadra came
For a morsel of food.

1 Luminiforons plants, known as “ Ausadhi” creopers.
अ Kahapanaka (khapnak), a torm applied to a heretical soct in Anciont India by the
Buddhists.

--- PAGE 92 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) THE STORY OF JYOTISHKA. 13

6.
Subhadra and his goodly wife
With reverence him adored ;
To tell the future of the child
Unborn, they earnestly implored.

7.
“Your son,” he said, “will prosper here,
And gain heavenly power,
And follow in my path to attain
Salvation’s happy hour.”

8.

So said the Lord and went his way
Towards his lonely wood ;
When a Khapnak, Bhurik by name

Came to the door and stood.

9.
Subhadra related to him
All that the Lord had said,
The Khapnak heard with feigned distrust,
And grew by envy mad.

10.

Versed in astrology, he viewed
The starry sphere o’erhead,

And found that true in his mind
What Lord, the Buddha said.

11.
The Khapnak then thought within him
८ All that एवा said was true,
What else of truth can I divine
His wisdom to pursue ?

12.
“ Should I by word of mine confirm
His power and teachings wise,
The Khapnaks will lose people’s love
And Gramanas! will rise.”

18,

Thus reflecting in mind he spoke
Through jealousy and spite ;—
« What the arch-pretender said
Is myth and false out-right.

-1 Buddhist monk.

--- PAGE 93 [OCR_san+eng] ---
14

THE STORY OF JYOTISHKA. [Journal & Text, Part IT, 1894.

14.
« How can a man attain on earth
Power and bliss divine?
It may be he will wander forth
A wretched life to pine.

15.
^ One who is week and hunger-prest,
Whom there’s none to relieve,
Become’s a wandering beggar,
A Cr-:mana’s life to live.

16.

५५ 0 master of the house, I see
If thou hast faith in me,

The child, if born, will surely be
A source of woe to thee.”

17.
The Khapnak then went away ;
Subhadra, left in gloom e
Thought of ways to destroy the child
Still in its mother’s womb.

18.
When drugs were of little avail
To obtain the end desired,
To person pressure was applied,
And the mother expired.

19.
The wretched husband took the corpse
To Sitavan to burn ;
The Khapnaks were greatly pleased
The unhappy news to learn.

20. e
“ Ah,” they cried, ^ what the sage foretold
Has truly come to pass ;
The quickening of the ill-fated child
Has killed the mother, alas !

21.
“Such is the child’s power divine,
And such his bliss on earth,
Thus ended a wanderer’s life
In death before his birth.”

--- PAGE 94 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] THE STORY OF JYOTISIIKA, 15

22.
Thus they spoke in jest and glee,
The report spread like fire
A mighty crowd gathered around
The dame’s funeral pyre.

. 28.

Buddha, by all the world adored,
To creation so kind,

Saw with a smile all that had passed
And thus thought in his mind—

24,
“Ah, how the guiles of wicked men
Put out the inward ray
In simple folks, and make them blind,
As clouds darken the day !

25.
“The Khapnaks with pretensions bold
To shun evil in time,
Has led the foolish man astray
And plunged him into crime.”

26.
So thought the Lord, by pity moved,
And with his Bhikshu-train,
Hastened to where on dismal pile
The lady’s corpse was lain.

27.
The great king Bimbiséra heard
The Lord’s arrival there,
And followed by his ministers
Did to the place repair.—

28.

When lo, a child on lotus borne
Bright as the orient sun

Came tearing the womb of the corpse,
By blazing fire o’errun.

29.
When none did dare to take the babe
From out the rising flame,
There arose from all the crowd around
A doleful cry of shame.

--- PAGE 95 [OCR_san+eng] ---
THE STORY OF JYOTISHKA. (Journal & Toxt, Part IT, 1894,

30.

One Jivaka, a valliant knight
By Sugata’s 1 command

Sprang forth, and rushed into the flame
And took the child in hand.

81.

By the calm and all-soothing sight
Of Jina,? for the while,

The fire had cooled like sandal-paste
E’en on the horrid pile.

82.

At sight of child alive and hale
Amid the burning flame,

The Khapnaks were mute as death
And stood aloof in shame.

33.

To Subhadra who still remained
Lost in amazement wild,
The Lord who brings relief to all -
Thus spoke, ^ Take this, your child.”

34,
Subhadra still stood in suspense
Not knowing what to do,
Looked at the face of the Khapnaks
To know their biddings too.

35.
^ This child, of funeral fire born,
Take not to home,” they cried,

^ That house is doomed to utter ruin
Where shall this elf reside.”

86.
The foolish man thus led astray
Declined to take the boy ;
The king obeyed the Lord’s command
And took the child with joy.

387.

Bright as a star the child came forth
From out the fiery light ;

The Lord himself gave him the name
Of Jyotiska, “ the bright.”

1 Sugata,—Buddha, one who has passed beyond the sphere of death and misery,
&Jina,—a name of Buddha,

--- PAGE 96 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Socicty.] THE STORY OF JYOTISIIKA.

88.
The boy grew up in the palace;
And in the course of time,
His uncle on maternal side
Came home from foreign clime.

39.

His sister’s fate and birth of child

He learned with grief profound ;
To Subhadra in rage he turned,

With crime he charged him round.

40,
“ By faith in Khapnaks,” thus he cried,
“O knave, what hast thou done ?
Thou hast murdered thy loving wife
And hast forsook thy son!

41.

९८ 44 fool with no sense of his own,
Like goblin, laughing though,
By others’ incantations led,
Is a mischievous foe.

42.

“Tf thou, from palace takest not
Forthwith the child that’s thine,
For murder thou runnest the risk
Of forfeiture and fine.”

48.
By rebuke thus taken aback,
And brought to sense by fear,

Subhadra took charge of his boy ;
The king rejoic’d to hear.

44,

Subhadra died in course of time ;
And Jyotishka his son
" Grew rich in wealth and rose in power
Like as the noon-tide sun.

45.

He spent his wealth in charity,
Devoted all his mind

To Buddha, Dharma and Safgha,!
So dear to human kind,

1 Body of. Buddhist monks.

17

--- PAGE 97 [OCR_san+eng] ---
18

THE STORY 0४ JYOTISHKA. [Journal & Text, Part II, 1804,

46.

His aim of life was to attain
Piety and virtue pure ;

He gave rich stores of precious things
To Bhikshus, ever poor.

47,
Prosperity from gods on high
Unto his home did flow,

As streams descend from snowy peaks
Into the sea below.

48,

Even the Lord before whose eye
Both grass and gold are one,
Deigned from him presents to accept

By his devotion won.

49.
By virtue and piety he gained
Of cloth divine, a pair,
Which in whiteness and purity
Might with his fame compare.

50.
The cloth wet after bath, one day
To dry in sun was spread,
When the wind wafted it away
Over the monarch’s head.

51.

The king admiring stood at sight
Of cloth so nicely made ;

Ity heavenly splendour served to throw
His wardrobe into shade.

52.

With his august presence, the king
Once graced his stately home,
And found it like heaven, and praised

The glittering spire and dome.

53.

The pious king in course of time
‘Was murdered by his son,

Ajatsatru, who mad with greed,
Seized his father’s crown.

--- PAGE 98 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.) -«-RUE “STORY OF JYOTISHKA. . 194
| » Ba,
With the death of that vittuous king
' Ended his goldeh reign, =

The Prince now ruled and brought on land †
Impiety’s evil train.

।

The matchless wealth of Jyotisltka

. He viewed with jealousy,”
And thus addréssed that worthy man,—
~ ~. ` “My father fostered thee; `

56. -

“Thou art my'brother thus by law
० So share thy wealth-with me;
Or else ¢ get my lawful rights
Yo fight I challenge thee. .

57,
Jyotishka thus addressed by king,
` With guiles and mischief fraught,
Gave up to him his house and all,
* And elsewhere refuge sought.

° 58.
Prosperity, blessed and bright,
“Chose after him to run, `
With all her bownteous store and train,
* As light follows the sur.

. _ 59
She shunned the king and followed stil)
Jyotishka’s bumble life,
In ler love, though thrice forsaken,
Like a devoted wife.

- 60.
The king’s'rapneity and crime ,.
Q’erspread the country.round ;
Jyotishka thussthought in his wind
With pain and grief profound -—

. .61. :
« A gracious king, as father ‘kid,
; To all his people dear,
“Now dwells in memory alone,

On sinful earth 80 rare |

--- PAGE 99 [OCR_san+eng] ---
THE “STORY .OF JYOTISHKA. ,(Journal & Tox}, Part II, 1804.

62.
“Oh, for the king whose rule benign’
._¢ Makes nightly sleep secure,
On whom the people may rely
As on their father, sure!

63. ॥
“ The rich abound as rank as reeds,.
Like gems the wise are few,
Rarer than nectar isthe man -
` Whose heart is pure and true.

64.
“ How few are they whase nable souls
Are without vanity,
Who“are guileless, sincere and just,
From earthly folly ftee !

॥ 65.
“The prince by greed and malice led,
Does’ now revel in crime ;
Wicked Kali,* through people’s sin,
Has come before his time !

~ 66.
“That glorious king is now no mote,
The friendly sur is set!

‘His son now reigns in gloom supreme,
With all its ills beset. :

67.

“The wicked, unawares, serve as friends,
ˆ To good men, dead and gone,
By setting off their pious deeds,.
Against acts of their own.

~ 68.

“So must I leave this world for good,
In such a menarch’s reign,

Where he.and Evil Time combine,
Life is a source of pain. .

69.

^ When virtuous king rules the earth,
‘Men live a- blameless life ;

Merit prospers’;-and faith and love
_ Do ennoble a wife:

Kaliynga, Eyil Time,

--- PAGE 100 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Soviety.]. . THE STORY OF JYOTISHKA, " 21

Good fortunes and wealth fairly earned
_ _ And fame like moon-beam pure
Make people*happy and content,
From peril e’er secure. .

70.

“The glorious tree of Religion
+ Grows ard o’erspreads the land
I£ not blasted by oppression,

॥ And torn by tyrants’ hand ;
Tis nourished by a natjon’s wealth
And faith, without alloy ;
Yields, virtue and piety‘as fruits

For people to enjoy.

71. -

Kali, as youthful पापाः वार
Let loose his evil train ;
» Unrest, revolt, and funeral fire
. Have marked his wicked reign. ,

72.
Intellect is dull, love is faint,
Happiness is past her youth ;
For me the pleasures of the carth
Have no relish in sooth.

73.
Riches and land, house and attire,
- Servants, children and wife,
Like diseases which know no cure
Cling to man all his life.

74,

Wherever Riches shed on man
Her fitful summer-ray,

There burns the fire 6f quenchless thirst
Consuming life away.

--- PAGE 101 [OCR_san+eng] ---
22 BIMBISARA AND PUKKUSATI. ([Joprhal & Text, Part II, 1894.

FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN BIMBISARA AND PUKKUSATI KING
‘OF TAKSHASILA, 2438 BUDDHIST ERA.

[हप प “ + .
TRANSLATED BY THE LATE HON’BLE JAMES AL’WIS
Memper or Tae Learstative Cotxcr oF Crrton.

Whilst Bimbisira was ruling in the city of Rajagaha in the Majjhimadesa,!
Pukkusiiti was reigning in the city of¢Takkasilé in tho foreigm regions. At
this time some traders with merchantlize from Takkasili* entered Rajagaha,
and; taking along with them presents, saw the kihg. Ho inquired of those,
who stood. rendering obeisance—‘ Of what conntry are you?’ ‘ We, please your
-Majesty, (replied they) aro residents of 'Takkasild.” Therbupon the king,
having questioned them on the affairs of (their) city, and the prosperous con-
dition, and the favourabhleness of the seasons -of the country—asked ‘What is
the nimo‘of.(your) Sovereign ?* ‘Sire, Pukknsiti (is his) name.’ " ‘Is he*
virtuous ?’ demanded the king. ‘Yes, your ‘Majesty,’ replied they; ‘he is
virtuous—ho pleases the pcoplo with tho four Sajighavatthn,} occupies the
position of a parent to the world—and, like a suckling on (० lap, pleases’
mon.’ ‘What is liisagoP’ They then stated his age. He was as old as,
Bimbisiva. Thereupon the king addressed thom (and said,) ‘ Sons, your king
is virtuous (like me), and in age too, he.is equal to me; cin yon make your
king a friend of mine?’ ‘ We can, Sire,’ replied they ; (When) the king re-
mitted their taxes, gave them-a hotise, and said to them ‘Go, and sell your
merchandize; and at the time of departure, you shall sce me.’ When all”
this had been accomplished, ‘they visited the king at the time of their depar-
thro ;. an¢ the king said to them ‘Go, and, after repeated inquiry as to tho
health of your king in my name,* say to him, the king is desirous of your
friondship.’ “They, (the merchants, ) expressed thoir assent, went their way,
arranged their goods,-took their morning-meal® ‘and having approached ‘tlreir
king, aecosted him. The king said to them, ‘Men, where (were you) ? You
were not seen for these (many) days.’ They related all thie (foregoing) mat-
ters; (to the king), when he, -greatly- delighted, said; ‘ Sons, Sadhu! On
your acconnt .I have obtained 9 friend (in the person of)’ the.king of the
Majjhimadesa.’ e . . 7
Some time aftor (some other traders, who were residents “of Rajagaha
‘went to Takkasila. King Pukkusiti, beforé whom they appeared with
offerings, inquired of them from whence.they had come ; and when , 16 heard
they had como from Rajagaha, he askod them: ‘Have you come from the:
capital of my friend ?’ ‘Yes, your Majesty,’ replied the tradors. + Is my
friend in health? demanded the prince. Having: made that inquiry the
king “caused to be proclaimed, by beat of : drums, that ‘From this day,
whenover traders come from the city of my friend, either (अ caravans of
beasts, or caravans of waggons, they shall be provided with Kabitations in their

1 A collegiate city of great renown in tho north-wost of Majjhima (Magadha).

% The Sniigaharatt@n aro the four pre-eminent virtues of kings, via :—Ddna ‘gifts—
liberality ;’* priya vachana, ‘pleasing conversation ;’ gtthachariya, “fruitful conduct—well
being in law;’ and Samanatthata, ‘regarding all as one’s self.’ ~

४ Lit. ‘father'and mother.’ ्

4 Lit. Mama vachanena, ‘in my languagé’—‘in my name oo

वि ह This is a bahuvrtht compound—bhutta pdirerdsd ,, * they-who-ate-the-food-of-early-
dawn,’ ‘ took thelr breakfast.’

,

--- PAGE 102 [OCR_san+eng] ---
" Buddhist पणस Soofety.] * BIMBISARA AND PUKKUSATI. - 23

respective localities, and with allowarteo, baita, from Royal stores; from the period -
of their entrance into my kingdom,—that they shall also be exempted -from

taxes, nnd that in no wis shall they be oppressed.’ Bimbisira’ also caused a

similar proclamation in his own city. Theroaftor Bimbisira geitt a leaf!

to Pukkusiti to the effect, that ‘ precious articles such as gems, poarls, &c.,”
are produced in the Pachchanta? regions. ‘Should there be anything

valuable or worth seeing in my friend's kingdom ¢ withhold it not from rhe.’

* .Pukkusiti, in like manner, forwarded a leaf to ‘the’ effect, that the
- Majjhimadesa is a great country. If.similar precious things are produced
in it, my friend (too) should. ngt withhold it from mo.’ Thus’ these (two)
for a length of time -were intimate friends withont seciig cach other. Of
these, who had (thus) entered into -terms; Pukkusiti first eamo by a
(suitable) object for a present, that is to say ;—he'received eight invaluable
Dlaukets of five colours; and, thiuking ‘these blankefs are betiutiful, I
shall sgnd theni to my friend ’—cansed eight (round) caskets to be turned,
and lacquered, Having doposited the blankets therein, (thoy wore) secured
round the lid with lacquer, They were (then) wrapped in white cloth, and
‘deposited in a chest, which being also covered with cloth, was (stamped)
sealed with the king’s signet. (This donc) ho sent Ministers, saying. ‘Giva
this to my friend.’ A missive, too, was given tethe effect, that, ‘this present
is worthy the: (inspection) acceptance of him who is surrounded by Ministers
in tho midst of the city.’ , .

* They, the Ministers, accordingly went and delivered it to Bimbisira, .
who, having heard (its contents) caused by beat of drum, the ministers,
etc, to be assémbled. Surrounded by them, and scated on the reyal3 couch,
ander the uplifted white ‘state-canopy, in the midst of the eapital, he broke
tho geal, removetl the wrapper,* opened tho box, and released (untied) its
contents; and, when he had seen the round lacquered (caskets), he reflected—
‘my friend Pukkusiiti has sent this present undgr the impression that his
friend was (wealthless) poor,’ Ho then took up a caskot; and, feeling its
weight with his hand, ascertained that it contained an article of “raiment;
he styuck it on ‘a pedestal of the couch, where the Jacquer (with which it had
been seamed) dropped down. When he had opened a casket with (his)
nail, he say that it contained a valuable blanket, and caused, the others, *
also to ‘be opencd. There were blankets in all. Whon spread, ‘they were
beautiful in colour, and soft to the touch; and they were sixtcon cubits in
leagth, and eight in width. ॥ धि .

The multitude, seeing this, snapped their fingoys, waved their gar- ,
merits" round their heads; and, highly delighted; + exclaimed, ‘ Pukkusiti,
the unseen frtend of our king, has sent such a present even without sccing
him; such personage is indeed worthy of being made a friend.’ ॥ “

The king caused-every ono of tho blankets to be appraised ; and they
were all found invaluable. Of these he set four to Buddha, and kept for
himself§ four; and teflected.—‘ One who returns, should send a better gift
than the first. An invaluable present has heen sent by my friend. What
shall I-send (him)? What! Is there nothing more valuable in Raijagaha P वि
Yes, there is.8 Though the king. is fortunate (in precious things,) yet

1 Doubtless, the Talipot (Tél-patra) leaf is meant. . ५. “ .

8 Lit. (Pratyanta or Borderland) ‘the barbarous—wild—unenlightened ;’ but here the
foreign regions are meant. 7

४ Lit.: rare ‘ best, excellent.’
५ ‘cloth.’ . :

"8 Lit.: ‘in his own honse.’ * a

8 No natthi— not, that there is not.’ A double negative to intepsify the affirmative.
See Sakuntalé, pp. 110 and 24, note 1.


--- PAGE 103 [OCR_san+eng] ---
2॥ ५ BIMBISARA AND PUREUSATI. [Journal & Text Part II, 1894,

~ from † the time hé entered the path of Sotapanna! no precious thing, save

the three Rata@nas* was calculated -to produce delight (to him):, He (how-
ever) commenced to find out some, precious thing.® A Ratana, or pregious
thing, is*twofold—Savififiana and Aviffiana.’ The latter (comprises such’
things) as gold, silver, &c. ; and the former is that which 18" associated with
the senses. The one (Aviiiana), is an (article of) adornment, contributes
to the enjoyment of the other, (Savififiana). Thus from among these’ two

_ raténas, Saviiifianaka is chief.

Savififianaka aro also two-fold, namely, Brutes and Men. Brutes are
(such as) elephants, horses, &c., and the same‘exist for the very enjoyment
of man. Of these two, therefore, man is the chief raténa. The estimablo
is also two-fold; that is two say, male and female. Here, too, the female,
though born for a Univetsal Monarch, is for the enjoyment of tho male.
Thus of ‘these two'ilso the very male is the chief. The estimable male is
also two-fold—the layman, the recluse: 5

+ Here again as to the layman, though he may be a Universal Monarch
he makes the five-membered* obeisance to even a Simancra of a single day’s
standing. Thus, of these two also, the very Recluse is the chicf. The esti-*
mable Recluse is also two-fold —S¢ka and Aséka (viz.,he who has entered the
paths, and he who has reachéd the ends of tho paths). Of theso a hundred
thousand of the first cannot equal the least part of one of the-latter. Thus
of theso, Aséka is supreme. He is also two-fold—Buddha and Savakt.6 Of
thesé, a hundred thousand of’ the Savakds cannot equal the least part (attain)
of Buddha. Thus, of these the very Buddha is supreme. Th inestimable
Buddha is’ggain two-fold Pachcheka Buddha and all-perfect’ Buddha. Here,
too, a hundred-thousand Pachcheka Buddhas cannot equal tho least part of
tho all-perfect Buddha. ` Thus, of these two, the all-perfect Buddha is alone
supreme. In the world, including (that of) the davas, there.is no cstimable
object (ratana) equal to the, Buddha. . .

Wherefore (the King) resolving that he would send to his friend this
very incomparable ratana, asked of the inhabitants of Vakhasila, ‘Sons, aro
there to be scen in your country tht threo most inestimable objects Buddha,
Dharma and Satgha?? They replied ‘the very names are not knqwn;® how

* (therefore) can they bo seen?” Saying ‘Sons, very good,’ the king with

plensure thus pondered: ‘Is it possible, with #viow to tho people’s propi-
tiation, to send Buddha to the residence of my friend? But; Buddhas
never renfain till the dawn, in the most distant foreign countries Gotama

-eannot, therefore, go. The great disciples, such as Siriputta, Mogggllina,

etc., cannot be sent: and,;since it is my duty, on ‘hearing that priests re-
sidéd .in a foreign country, to send for them hither, and to pay attenfions to

‘them; (other) priests also cannot go. Since, however, a,missive sent ‘(on

the dhamma) is the same as if Buddha and his chief disciples procecded
thither, I shall इला letter! +» . ~

Thus pondering, he caused to be made a plate of gofd, four cubits long,
and gbout a span wide, and neither very thick, nor very thin. Thinking that

न~ पि .

1 Lit.: ‘entrance into the stream’—‘fallon-into the path,’ that which is the first
stage of sanctification, leading to final bliss. Og .

$ 06 threo gems; the most inostimable things—objocts as precious as rafana or
*gems’—Jatou jitou jad utkrishtam taddhhi rtanam prachakshato, ‘whatever is best
of its kind, that indeed they cull ratana? Henco‘the three gems’ is dh expression for
the triad of Buddhism. .

8 Seo Gogerly’s Essay, in the Fricnd, vol. ii 67. ध .

4 Seo my Kssay on modes of Address, in 0. B. A. 8. J. for 1856-8,

6 Lit. ‘ hearer’— pupil.’ .

6 Lit. ‘thore is ndt even that gound.

--- PAGE 104 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.) BIMBISARA .AND PUKKUSATI. ४
he would write the letter that ‘Very morning, he went through his Bath,!
made the Uposatha vows,* took his breakfast, and divested himself of all
scents, flowers and ornaments. Then taking real vgrmillion intp a gold dish,
he closed all the doors below, and entered his palace ; and, morcover, opening
tho casements facirig tho cardinal points, he sat upon the uppermost* story,*
and wrote* on the gold leaf as follows:— . ^

“Tathagata has appeared in this world. He is (Arahan) a highly
sanctified saint. He is supreme Buddha. He is endowed with both Vijjé
and Charana. He is (Sugata) गाठ who has attained beatitude. He is fully
acquainted with the world. He is the best charioteer (who is able
to subjugate) men. He is the teacher of gods and*’men. He is
Buddha, or perfect intelligence. He is worthy of adoration.” Thexe ,
attributes of Buddha were first written on a small, portion ;—and (ho then
described how) having perfected the ten piramitis or pve-eminent duties, he
was born in Tosita,‘and was conceived in his mother’s womb, how that event
contributed ‘to the World’s emancipation ;5 what happened when he was yet
unborn; what took place when he was a honse-holder; how he departed for-
saking the world; how he greatly exerted; how, having accomplished diffi-
cult acts and having ascended the region of the Bodhi,S and having sat
upon hissunconquerable seat, he attained to the wisdom of Onuistience ; how
(such a result) contributed to’ the’ prosperity of the world; and that such
another supreme being was not in all the universe, incltding the heayens—
* Yankinchi, &e. त “

“ Whatever wealth, or whatever most desirable object: thero may be in
this life, or in that which is to come, or in tho heavens—the sam: not to bo
compared to Tathigata, This too isa highly distinguishing characteristic of .
Buddha. By the power of this truth, may there be prosperity !” ति

Having thus bricfly recorded the virtues of Buddha; the inestimable
dhamma was secondly landed as folgows—‘The dhamuna is evell defined by
Bhagavan. It is attended with results immediate, and without lapse of time.
It is inviting.” It is full of import. It should bo acquired individually by
the wise.’ his done, a condensed account of the Saltatinsa bodhapakkiya®
delivered by Buddha were gigéh to the effect, that they were tho four Sufi-

. patthand the four Sammappadhana, the four iddhipadd, the tive tudriya, tle five
bala, the seven bojjhanga, and the eight-bodicd supreme magga —“ You

ebuddha, &c. : . 5
_ 15 there a pure thing which the.Snpreme Buddha has enlarged upon;
(or in othor words, is there) any samadhi, whicl has been declared (to-he
productive of) immediate reward ; with that samadhi® nothing can 10 com-
pared. This 60, is a distinguishing characteristic of’ the word.!9 By the
power: of this truth, may there be prosperity ! ति

Thus briefly ho wrote the character of dhamma; and then, thirdly,
praised thg inestimable Sazgha, as follows:—‘The‘association of Bhagavis
disciples!! are well conducted. They live uprightly, prudently, and peace-

1 Lit. : ‘washed his head.’ .

ॐ Thes ge the ‘ Atthangasila.’ .

8 Kkésnttale—‘ story ncarest tho sky.’

4 Akkharani likhanto, lit., ‘ writing letters.”

5 Lokavivaranam. ~ . ॥

© Ficus reliyiosa tho 6१०० under which Gotama became Buddha.

1 Ehipassiko, lit., that which bids, ‘come and 800 ’—it is inviting— not-hidden.

The thirty-scven elements of Buddhism. For an oxplanation of them, sce my Alta.

nagaluvansa, note to Chap. iv., Sec. 7. °

9 Tho a@t of confining one’s mind totho,contemplation of doing good.

10 Tho dhamma—‘ doctrines’—‘ tho word!” - ,° .

il'The words bhagavato savakasangho ato repeated after every phrase.

--- PAGE 105 [OCR_san+eng] ---
26 C«; DIMBISARA AND PUKKUSATI. [Journal & Toxt, Part Ii, 1804,

ably.” They are (classed collectively into) four pairs; or eight individuals.
They are fit objects of charity, are deserving of hospttality, and are worthy
of being offered unto. They (stand) to men (in the-place of) a merit-

roductive-He! Ya. This done, he briefly wrote that respectable people who

ad hedrd the discoursos of Buddha, departed and embraced ascetism ; that
some.did so after abandoning thrones ;!—some ‘after leaving (the high
dignity of a) sub-king$ and others (that of) general commander of the
Forces; and that when they had so embraced ascetism, they pursued the
prescribed duties of chulla-sila, majjhimasila, and m ahastla, &९.* He also
gave.a brief account of the (religious observances, commencing from)
chhadvara sanvaran’; sati-sampujaiiia; the four pachchaya -santasa ; the nine
kinds of sén@sana and sitvaranappahana ; together with the ,(prescribed)
hammatthdndni, and tha results of parikamna, jdhuna, gnd 0110794, until
the extinction of distress. Haviug then amplified op the sixteen-fold dyd
pana. siti hammatthént he wrote that tho society of Buddha's disciples
were ulso endowed with -virtues like the following :—“ Ye"putgald; &c.”

“ Ave there eight beings who have been praised: by the holy, they are
four couples, and there are the disciples of Buddha, woithy of being offered
unto. - Whatever is given unto them is productive of much fruit. This too
is a distinguislfing characteristic of the clergy. By the power of this truth
may there be prosperity.” ^ "° . Lo

` Having thus britfly stated the virtues of the Sadyha, and written to the
effect—that ‘the religion of Buddha is well defined;it is very pare. If my
friond can, let him abdicate (secular concerns) and embrace ascetism ;’—ho
folded tho gold plate; wrapped it with a soft blanket, und put it in a wooden
casket. 1t tas.again deposited in a gold casket, that in a-silver casket, that in
@igem-set casket, that in a coral casket, that in a ruby caskét, that in an
emerald casket, that in a crystal casket, that in a casket made of ivory, that
in another made of all sorts of gems, thet in anothcr made of mat; and that
again in a wooden box. Again the wooden box ‘was deposited in a gold box,
and that [in other boxes] a box set with all sort of jems—and that in a mat
box. This box was again deposited in a wooden chest, aud the samo jn others

"1 gétachehfuttan— the white umbrella ;’ £ tho atato canopy,’

9 For au exposition of these duties, sco tho Brahamajilaa suttan, translated by the

Rev. D. J. Gogerly, in 0.B.'A. S Journal ik, p. 22 et sey. : ॥ \
.8 Some of tho theological terms'in the above passngo, require a’ bricf explanation.
Chhadvara sunvara,—‘ the élosing Of six avontés;’ ‘tho subjugation of six organs of
serfsation ; which lead to the @ommission of sin. Sutisampujaitia— memory, ~ discretion,’
६४ memorial retention of {hat which is ascertained by wisdom.’ Pachichaya suntosa—‘ con-
tentment with pachchayay or the requirements of arhacetic, which are fotr in number, viz.,
robes, food, hubitation, and medicine. S¢nsuna ‘habitation, of which thero aro aine kinds
adapted to the recluse. Nivaranappahana ‘destruction of that which screens ;’ .over-
coming*the obstacles against, the leading of a roligious life,” which, are stated to be five,
vis., (1) Inst,,(2) evil design, (3) apathetic indifference, (4) perturbation of the mind arising
frogn the-irresolution und pride, and (6) d@ubt upon cight religious, matters,—vtz., Buddha,
Dhamma, Sangha, प previous state of being, १, futuro oxistence, a pastand-futuro state of
being, the causes of combined-cxistence. [Seo Ceylon Friend for 1839], and vgcillation and
doubt upon’ ll matters. Kammatthaniwforty courses of religious action, sygh as devout
‘meditation, &c. Parikamma, an ifftiatory rite of ascetism, which ought to B completed
before the ‘entrance apoh dkyina. It is the fixing- of the mind upoh one of the
four elements: carth, air, fire, and water; so ag to impress it with the reality of the sub-
stance on which the recluse contemplates ; and algo the continnimy to addross the element,
repeating its nagno, until the mind attains that degree of absorption, which disables the
sentient faculties from discerning any other subject. Dhyina, is ‘abstract meditatic&,’ of
which®there aré four degrees, each of which being considered, a sanctified state or path to
१6५११, or the extinction ef “existence, dndpana sdti kammatthdna ; alao sixtagn modes of
event ead abstract meditation by means of* drawing the, breath, dc. See Gundnandn
tan,

--- PAGE 106 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) BIMBISARA AND PUKKYSATI. 27

in the order above indicated [until you come to] a chest set with all sorts of
gems—and that again in a mat chest. The same being then covered with
cloth, and sealed with the signet of the king, he gave [the following] orders
to his Minister. ‘Adorn tho paths within the limits of my city. Let that
path be cight usabha! in width of which four necd only be cleared. But tho
middle four usabka should be prepared (in a manner) beliting royalty.’

Thereafter (the king) caused his royal elephant to be adorned, and to
place a chair upon him, and to sct (over it) the white canopy of state. He
also caused the streets in the city to be purificd (and cleared) by being
sprinkled (with water) and swept ;—(lined) with flags and banners, plantain
trees, and water vessels,* and (scented) with inconso, Howers, &c. Ie caused,
running messengers to be sent to the intermidiate dwellers? bidding thom
hold a festival as directed, within the limits of their respective residences.
Being adorned (himself) completely, and escorted by his forces, including the
band of musicians, and with a view to the transmission of his gift, the king
proceeded to the limits of his city, and addressed his Minister: ‘Son, let not
my friend Pukkusiti, in accepting this gift receive it in the midst of his wives ;
but let him do so after entering his (own) palace.’ So saying, and making
the five-mombered,* under the reflection that Buddha (himself) proceeded to
the foreign regions, the king returned home. The intermediate dwellers
prepared the way as they were bidden, and caused the progressive conveyance
of the gift.

Paokkusiti observing the same formalities (abovo described prepared the
way from the limits of his rule, decorated the city, and went to meet the
gift. ‘Tho samo reached Takkasilé on the day of Uposatha.6 The minister,
who was the bearer of the present, delivered the king’s message. Whon
the king had heard it he paid the necessary attentions to those who ac-
companied the present, ascended the palace with it, and placod a sentry
at the door with orders that none should enter the palace.’ [This done], ho
opened the casement, placed the present upon a high seat, and he himself sat
upon a low ono. He [then] broke the seal, removed the cloth [covering], and
opening cach gradually from the mat chest to the wooden casket, retlected
thus :—

‘There is nothing remarkable in this. It is (perhaps) the receptacle of a
precious thing. Doubtless there has arisen in the Majjhimadesa a ratana
worthy of being heard.’ Thereafter he opened the casket, broke the royal
seal, and, disengaging the soft blanket, saw the gold plate. When he had
unfolded it, he (observed) that they were indeed pretty, that they wero
exact in (the formation) of their heads, that they were quadrungulur,®
and that the lines wero all uniform; and commenced to read it from
the beginning. Great was his joy on reading that Tuthdyata had appeared
in the world, and of his character. The ninety-nine thousand hairs of the
body stood on end in their sockets. He became unconscious as to whether
he stood or sat.7 Profound was his joy to reflect that he had on account
of his friend, heard of the religion which it was difficult to attain even
in a hundred thousand kéti of kalpas.2 He was (thence) unable to [proceed

1 A measure of seventy yards. 800 Abhidhanapadika, p. 23.

8 Jars or vases filled with flowers, and wator.

8 Residents between the two states.

4 See my Kssay on Titles of Address in the 0.B.R.A.S , 1856-8, 7. 261.
5 The Sabbath of the Buddhists, which is the day of the full moun, &c.
6 This-proves the character to have been the Square Pali. Hd.

7 «Whether he stood on his head, or his feet.’

8 See Glossary to tho Mahawansa for an explanation of these terms,

5

--- PAGE 107 [OCR_san+eng] ---
28 + MAGADHT TEXT, [Journal & Text, Part IT, 1894.

with the] perusal [of the missive], and therefore, sat! down; and, when
excited feelings had subsided, he resamed to read the characteristics of
dhamma, [commencing with] svakkhdto bhagavalad dhammé, etc. Here also
the king becamo [filled with joy] as before; and [therefore] paused (for
a while): and when his excitement had again subsided, he returned to
the letter, reading the characteristics of the Sangha, commencing from
supatipanna, etc. Again the king became excited as before. At last having
read the क ककत satikammatthanan at the very end [of the letter] he entered
upon the four and five-fold jhdnas.2 He (the king) was thus spending his
entire time in the enjoyment of the jlana ; and no ono was able to see him,
except it were a young pago who entered (his appartment), In this manner
he spent half a month.

TEXT.
EDITED BY C. A. SEELAKKHANDIIA STHAVIRA OF SAILABIMBARAMA,
DODANDUWA, CEYLON.

This is from Papanchasivlant, the Atfakatha of Majjhimanika.

afanaza किर wenrean? fafaurt रण्नं कारेन्ते पच्चन्ते तक्कसिलानगरे पुकुसाति
wat कारेसि । श्रथ तक्कषिलातो भण्ड गद्धेत्वा वाणिज्ञा राजग श्रागता । wart
गद्धेत्वा राजानं श्हृसंसु | राजा ते वन्दित्वा fea ^कल्यव'षिनो yee’ ति पुच्छ । ‘ ae
सिलावासिनो देवा › ति — ‹ श्रथ ते राजा जनप स्स खेमसुभिक्खतारौनि नगरस् च पवत्ति
पुच्छित्वा ‘at नाम तुम्डाकं राज्ञा” ति पुच्छ" - “युक्ति नास देवा ति — (धम्मिको ”
fa? श्राम देव धम्मिको चत्रूहि सङ्हवल्थूददि जनं सङ्गण्ाति, लोकस्स माता fragt
ङितो, श्रद्ध Progeresi विय जनं तोखेतौ - ति । ^कतरस्मिं वधे वत्ततौ ' ति ? — sree
वयं श्राचिक्छिंसु । विभ्बिसारेन खम वये छितो । श्रथ से राज्ञा श्राह ‹ताता तुम्ाकं राजा
afmat च aia च मे समानो सक्तुणेय्याच years राजानं मम पित्तं कातुं' ति । age
देवा? ति । राजा ad gg विस्सल्लेत्वा Te दापेत्वा “गच्छथ भण्डु विक्धिणित्वा गमन
ala मं fren megan’ ति are तथा कत्वा गमनक्ाल्े रासानं श्रहुसंसु । राज्ञा
५ गच्छथ yor राजानं सम॒ वचनेन युनणुन mca पुच्छित्वा “ राजा तुष्डेहि सदिं
fauna इच्छती ? ति वदाति श्राह । ते साधूति पटिसुणित्वा गन्त्वा भण्डु पटिसामेत्वा
धु्तपातराखा राजानं उपसद्कुमित्वा वन्दिसु । राज्ञा (कष्टं भने qe इमे frat न
शिस्वथा' ति पुच्छ । से स्वं पवत्ति wag । राजा Sarg ताता तुम्हें निस्य मया
मज्जिमदेसे राज्ञा मित्तो agi’ ति waar श्रोषि ॥

श्रपरभागे राजगदवासिनो पि वाणिजा ages श्रगमंसु । ते पस्धाकारं गहेत्वा गते
gegen राज्ञा कुतो श्रागतत्याति एुच्छित्वा राज्ञगषटतोति सुत्वा ^ WE TET नगरतो
श्रागता gee’ fa श्राम देवाति। “श्रारोग्यं मे ween’ fa श्रारोग्यं पुच्छित्वा

1 Paused for a while.
% Seo Hardy’s Kastern Monachism, p, 253,

--- PAGE 108 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] MAGADHI TEXT, 29

“श्रच्जपद्राय Wey Ww नगरतो TEMA वा घकटसल्येन वा वणिजा श्ागच्छन्ति
wag मम॒ विसयं ufagaradt पदाय वसनदट्रानेसु गेष्टानि राजकोट्धागारतो निवापं देन्तु
Ug विस्सषलन्तु किञ्चि उपदृवं माकरोन्तु" ति भेरि चरापेसि । विभ्बिखारो fr amit
नगरे तथेव भेरि चरापेषि । श्रथ चिम्बिषारो पुकुसातिस्न ver पदि । ‘mete
नाम मणिसुत्तादौनि रतनानि उण्यख्लन्ति । यं मरं wee GE ged वा रतनं
susie तत्य से मासच्छरणयत्रूति ' । पुक्कुखाति पि (मच्मिम देसो नाम werd य
तत्य खवरूपं रतनं उष्यक्जति तत्थ मे सहायो anreguagfa’ war पष्िणि । ‘ed ते
गच्छन्ते काले श्रञ्ममञ्ं wire दल्द्मित्ता weg । र्वं तेसं कतिकं कत्वा वसन्तान मेव
परठमतर युक्तुखातिस्स पस्घाकारो safes, - राजा किर श्ट TEM श्रनग्धकम्बले लमि ।
सो “शति सुन्दरा इभे कम्बला cere मे पेसिस्सामौ › ति लाखागुलृमटटं ay करण्डयो
लिखापेत्वा तेसु ते कम्बले पविखिपित्वा लाखाय वट्ापेत्वा Saag Aden aya पक्खि-
पित्वा वत्थं न ॒वेढेत्वा राज gigas wee ‹ ससे were देथा › ति way पेखेखि ।
सखासन दासि, ^ श्रयं पस्धाकारो नगरमञ्भौ अ्रमचादि परिवुतेन eget’ ति । ते गन्तवा
विभ्बिसारस्स weg! सो सानं सुत्वा रमचादयो सत्निपतन्तृति भेरि चरापेत्वा aaah
श्रमचादि uftadt Gaga धारियमानेन प्रछ्द्धुवरे निसिद्रो aa भिन्दित्वा aay
श्रपनेत्वा egal विवस्तवा रन्तो भण्डिक aig लाखागुले fren ‘aed सदाय ga
खाति ऊनवितक्तो मे षद्ायोति agar ag इमं पश्चाकारं परिणो ' ति। रवां गुलु
weet त्यं न agent तुलयन्तो न्तो gang श्रत्यौति ञ्जासि । श्रय नं पल्लद्कुपादे
weft) तावदेव लाखा परिपति । सो नखेन करण्डकं विवरित्वा रन्तो कम्बलरततं fren
इतरेपि विवरापेसि । wag कम्बला wedi थ ने प्रघारापेषि। ते qareagqr
फस्ससम्गङ्गा दौघतो सोलृखह्या fafa गरद्हत्या weg । मद्धाजनो fren श्रङ्ुलियो
फोटेखि चेशुवसेपं wanfe । wears cpt श्रदिटसष्ायो yaar श्रदिस्वाव ण्वरूपं
werent tafe । ‘gd खरूपं सित्तं ag’ ति श्रत्तमनो श्रहटोखि । राज्ञा रुकमेकं कम्बलं
श्ररधापेखि । da श्रनग्धा weg) तेसु चत्तारो सम्मासम्बुदधस्ष पेसित्वा चत्तारो श्रत्तनो
घरे श्रकाषि । ततो चिन्तेषि पच्छरापेेन्तेन ved पेखितपस्धाकारतो श्रतिरेकं पेषितुं
agit: aera च मे श्रनग्धो cared पेसितो । किं नु खो पेसेमोति, किं पन राज-
गहे ततो श्धिक्तं रतनं vat’ ति । नो नत्थि, महापुञ्यो राजा श्रपि खो पनस सोता-
पद्रकालतो पदाथ ster तौणि रतनानि ag रतनं खोमनस्सं जनेतुं समत्य' नाम नल्थि ।
सो रतनं विचिनितुं श्राग््लो । रतनं नाम खविञ्माणकं श्रविद्चाण्कन्ति विधं, तत्थ
श्रविञ्माणकं सुवश्यरजतादि सविञ्चाणकं इ द्दियपटिवद्धं । विञ्चाणकं सविद्चाणकस्वेव
श्रलङ्कारादिवकषेन परिभोगं ्ोति । इति wig Ag wig खविष्याणकं सेदं । सवि-
ञ्लाणकम्पर दुविधं तिरच्छानगतरतनं agents । तत्थ तिरच्छानगतं हत्थि श्रस्सादि
तम्मि agent उपभोगत्थमेव निष्यत्तति । इति cag gig मनुस्खरतनं OF । Aga.

--- PAGE 109 [OCR_san+eng] ---
30 MAGADHI TEXT, (Journal & Text, Part IT, 1894.

रतनम्यि हुविधं, इत्थिरतनं पुरिसरतनन्ति, तत्य agafag? उन्न व्यिरतनम्पि पुरिख-
wa उप्रभोणं । इति gig gre पुरिखरतनमेव सेदं । पुरिखरतनम्पि दुविधं, रगारिय-
रतनं श्रनगारिथरतनश्च । तत्य श्रगारियरतने श्रपि again श्रव्नपशष्चजितसामणेरं
पञ्चपतिद्वितेन aefa इति ete gle शनगारियरतनमेव सेदं । शनगारियरतनम्पि
हविं, सेखरतनं waar” | तत्य खतखदख्छम्पि सेखानं पसेखस्स we न पायुणाति ।
इति aq Fg श्रसेखरतनसेव 82 । तम्प दु विधं बुद्धरतनं सावकरतनन्ति । तत्थ खत-
सषख्मम्पिः सावकरतनानं बुद्धरतनस्व ved न पाएुणाति | इति इभेसु ge बुद्धरतनमेव
agi शुद्धरतनम्यि gia, पैकञुद्धरतनं सब्धेडुखुद्धरतनन्ति | तत्य खतसस्म्पि पच्चेक-
gen wagqgaa uae न परापुणाति । इति sta द्वौसु weigggud fa सेदं ।
सदेवकस्मिं fe लोषो बुद्धरतनसमं रतनं नाम नल्थि । तस्मा श्रखदिसमेव रतनं मण्डं सहा-
यस्ष पेसेस्वामौति चिन्तेत्वा तक्कखिलावासिनो पुच्छ । ‹ ताता तुम्डाकं जनप बुद्धो धम्मो
agifa इमानि fe रतनानि दिस्सन्तौति ` । घोसो पि सो were तत्थ नस्थि दस्सनं
पन कुतो ति । सुन्दरं ताताति, राज्ञा तुद्रो चिन्तेसि - ^ सक्ता waa जनसद्गन्त्थाय मण्डं
were वसनद्वानं सम्मासम्बुद्धं पेसेतुं । gga पचन्तिमेसु जनपदेसु न शरणं उद्पेन्ति ।
तस्मा BART गन्त न सक्ता । सारिपुन्तमोग्गच्धानादयो were Wy सका भवेय्य । मया
घन Qu wad वसन्तौति सुत्वा परि aged Wen ते अत्तनो समीपं ate उपदटातुमेव
युक्तं तस्मा येरेष्ठिपि न ag गनं । पेन पनाकारेन साखनेपेषिते सत्या च महासावको च
गता वि Sita | तेनाक्षारेन ered पिणिस्वामौ ति चिन्तेत्वा चतुरतनायामं विदत्यि-
मत्तपुगुलं नातितनु नातिबष्ठलं सुवस्धपदटं anne तत्य oer श्रक्छरानि लिखिस्पामौति
परातोवसौसं नहायित्वा उपोखधङ्गानि श्धिहाय सुत्तपातरासो waite गन्धमालाभरणो
games जातिद्िष्गलकं orem हेदो पद्वाय हवारानि पि दन्तो wed श्रारर्ह
‘frame सौष्पञ्मरं विवरित्वा श्राकाखतले निसोदित्वा सुवस्षपदट्ट श्रक्डरानि लिखन्तो ।
^ इध तथागतो लोको sagt we सम्माखगबुदधो विष्नाचरणसम्यत्रौ सुगतो लोकविदू
age पुरिसदम्मघारथौ var देवमनुस्वानं बुद्धो भगवा › ति । बुद्धशुये ताव रुकपदेखेन
fafa । ततो eat दखपारमियो प्ररेत्वा तुखित भवनतो चवित्वा मातुकुच्छिस्निं पटिषन्धि-
aufes | णवं लोकविवरणं oeife । मातुकुच्छियं वसमाने इदं नास श्रहोसि । aaa
वमाने इदं नाम । र्वं महाभिनिक्खिमगां निक्न्तो । र्वं महापधानं प्दहि । खं
दुक्तरकारिकं कत्वा महावोधिमणड़ं श्रारण्ह श्रपरालित veg निषिद्नो सब्बञमुतजायं पटि-
विच्भा । waged पटिविन्भान्तस् ct लोकविवरं श्रोषि । सदेवके लोको श्म
weed रतनं नाम नव्यौति ।

a fafa वित्ति दधवा रं वा wag वायं रतनं पणौतं ।
न ated अत्थि तथागतेन catty बुद्धे रतनं पणौतं ॥

--- PAGE 110 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] MAGADHI TEXT. 31

रतेन स्वेन gata होतु ॥
ea रकदेखेन gaya लिखित दुतिय धम्मरतनं Maat ‘erage भगवता धम्मो
दिधिषो कालिको रुिपस्छिको श्रोपनयिको पचन्तं वेदितष्षो fagfe’ चत्तारो षति-
पद्वाना चत्तारो Tau, चत्तारो इद्धिपादा परञ्चि्टरियानि पद्धवलनि सत्तत्रोज्छङ्ग
श्ररियो wgigat मग्गो ति wena देखितधम्मो नाम ered च र्वरपो चाति सन्ततिख-
बोधप्किखिये र्कदेसेन लिखित्वा |

यं aged परिवषयौ oft समाधिमानन्तरिकञ्चमाड |
समाधिना तेन समो न faerie दद्मि wa रतनं aM ॥

waa सदेन सुवर्यि vig ॥

ea रकदेसेन mega लिखि । ततो ततियं eer waa ‹सुपटिपन्नो भगवतो
सावकसद्भु उजुपटिपत्रो भगवतो सावकसद्को जायपटिपन्नौ भगवतो सावकसद्को सामौ-
चिपटिपत्नौ भगवतो सावकसद्ु यदिदं चत्तारि पुरिषियुगनि श्रदपुरिखएुग्गला रुष भग-
वतो सावकसद्खो ऋहुणेग्यो wet adel रञ्चलिकरणोयो age wT
लोकस्व ' — कुलपुत्तानाम सल्थ्‌, धम्मकथं सुत्वा र्वं निक्वमित्वा पव्यजन्ति । फेचि खेत
eed पाय पव्यजन्ति। केचि good, पचि सेन।पतिदानादौनि पदाय पव्बजन्ति ।
पष्यक्जित्वा पन aay पटिपत्त प्ररेन्तोति gyda सक्मिमसोल कासौलादौनि wade
fafaat कद्वारसंवरं सतिसम्पजञ्चं चतुपच्चयसन्तोसं नवविधसेनाखनं नौवरणप्पहानपरि-
कम्मज्छरानाभिञ्ञा agus wragrifa याव श्राखवक्खधा रकेसेन लिखि । सोलस-
क्त्तुकं ्रानापानसतिकम्मद्वानं वित्यारेनेव लिखित्वा सत्य्‌ सावफसह्कु नाम ख्वरूपेष्ि च
शुखेहि समन्नागतो ।

ये पुग्गला waged weet चत्तारि एतानि युगानि होन्ति ।
ते दक्छिणेय्या सुगतस्स॒ सावका ute दिन्नानि मष्फलानि ॥

दृद्भ्पि सङ्गे रतनं पीतं एतेन aaa खुवत्यि होत्‌-

खुकदेखेन aggya fafa “भगवतो next स्वाक्ातं नौय्याणिकं सचे मरं sera
सक्रोति निक्खमित्वा पव्बजत्‌ ' ति - लिखित्वा सुवश्यपद्रु' संहरित्वा सुखुमकम्बलेन वेठेत्वो
सारसमुग्गे पविखपित्वा तं wal ुवस्ध सुगो, सुवश्यसरयं रजतमये, waa मणिमये,
मणिमयं पयालमये, पवालमयं लोहितद्कूमये, लोहितद्कमयं मसारगघ्लुकये, weg
फलिकमये, फलिकमयं saat, दन्तमरयं खब्यरतसये, सब्बरतसयं किलञ्जमपे, किलञ्ममयं
Tet खारक ण्डके टपेखि । पुन arcana सुवस्थकण्डुकेति पुरिमनयेनेव रित्वा षष्ध-
रतनमयं करण्डकं किलञ्चमये wage ste । ततो Paget सारमये Tam’ ति । पुन

--- PAGE 111 [OCR_san+eng] ---
32 MAGADHI TEXT. [Journal & Text, Part II, 1894.

वुत्तनवेनेव ef सष्वरतनमयपेलं फिलञ्ममयपेलाय sten बहि वर्यं निवासेत्वा राजसु-
frame लब्डत्वा wag श्राणापेखि ‘aa श्राणापवत्तितद्ाने wat लङ्कारापेथ मग्गो age
भवित्यतो eq चद्रुषभद्वानं खोधितमत्तकमेव wig मन्म aged राजानुभावेन पटिया-
quia ततो सङ्गलत्थिः श्रलङ्ारापेत्वा तस्व vofagg पञ्चापेत्वा चेतच्छरत्तं
खस्पापेत्वा नगरवौधियो-सित्तमम्मद्भा खमुस्वित धजपताक कदलि पुख्वघट गन्धधुपपुष्कादौषि
सुपरिमणग्ड्िति। कारत्वा wat reat वि खयप्यदेते रवरपं प्रजं करोन्तु ' ति श्न्तरभोगिकानं
छवनूते twa wi खव्बाकारेन wage सन्बतालावचरसम्मिस बलकायपरिवुतो
पश्चाक्षारं पेखेमोति श्रत्ततो विखथपरियन्तं गन्तवा wage qaered श्रदासि । ‘ara
मण्डं werd युक्तुखाति इमं vara परटिच्छन्तो श्रोरोधामज्मो श्रपटिच्छितवा पाषादं
were परिच्छतु ' ति ea सासनं दत्वा पचन्तदेसं सत्यागच्छतौति पञ्चपतिद्धितेन वन्दित्वा
निवत्ति । श्रन्तरभोगौ तेनेव नियामेन सग्गं परटियादेत्वा पस्वाकारं afig । पुक्कुखाति पि
श्रत्तनो रष्नसौमतो ug तेनेव नियामेन समगं पटियादेत्वा नगरं श्ल ङ्कारापेत्वा पस्वा-
कारस्स प्ुग्गमनं श्रकासि । पस्वाकारोतक्कुसिलं पापुणन्तो उपोषथदिवखे पापुणि werent
हेत्वा गत wag पि र्ना वुत्त सानं श्रारोचेसि राजा तं सुत्वा पस्ाक्ारेन सद्धिं
श्रागतानं कत्तन्बकिचं विचारेत्वा पस्चाकारं श्रादाय परासादं श्रारुण्ह ^ मा इध कोचि wifa-
सोति grag ate सौषपञ्मरं विवरित्वा परश्ाकारं उच्चासने ठपेत्वा खयं नौचासने
निषिन्नो लञ्छनं छिन्दित्वा वासं ote किलञ्जपेलतो gm aqua विवरन्तो सार-
सयसमुमां fren चिन्तेषि । ‹ महापरि्टारो नाऽयं श्र्चस्षरतनस्स भविस्सति श्रद्धा मच्मिम-
aa खोतन्बयुत्तकं रतनं चग्यन्नन्ति › । रथ नं egy विवरित्वा राजलज्छनं भिन्दित्वा
सुखुमकम्बलं suit fagfeat सुवश्वपदुः wget सो तं verter ‘ant वत
श्क्लरानि खमसौोखानि समपन्तौनि चतुरस्सानौति श्रादितो ug वाचेतुं ata । तस्व
इध तथागतो लोषो sais बुद्धगुणे वाचेन्तस्ष वलवसोमनस्सं wats । नवनलुति-
लोमक्रूपषस्वानि उद्धग्गलोमानि wed! wel टितभावं वा निसिन्नुभावं वा न
जानाति । श्रयस्व कप्कोटि सतसष्स्सेहि पि र्वं दुघ्लभसाखनं wert fram सोतुं
लभिन्ति wen बलवपौति उदपादि । सो उपरि aad श्रषक्कोन्तो यावपौति वेगपस्सद्धिया
निसौदित्वा प्ररतो ^ स्वाक्छातो भगवत। धम्मो ` ति धम्मगुणे ane तत्रापिस्व तथेव
श्रषटोखि । सो पुन याव पौतिवेगपस्सद्धिया निसौदित्वा परतो ^ सुपटिपन्नो ' ति agga
शारि | तत्रापिस्छ तथेव weifa wo सब्बपरियन्ते श्ानापानखतिकम्मट्वानं aren
चतुक्धपद्चकभानानि निव्बत्तेखि । सो भानसुखेनेव वौतिनामेति श्रमो कोचि द न लभति ।
eae चुशुषट्राको ufaefa श्वं aye वौतिनामेखि ॥ - +» # #

--- PAGE 112 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) SVAYAMBHU PURANAM. 33

NOTES ON THE SVAYAMBHU PURANAM.
BY

Paypir Haraprasap Cistri, M.A.

This is a Purdns and it isa Buddhist one. The Hindus have eightcen
Mahapuranas, eighteen Upapurinas, and about 50 works which are classed
as Purinas, though neither belonging to the ^ Mahi’ nor to the ‘Upa’ sections.
At an average of 5,000 Clokas, per work, the Hindu purinas run through
about 4,50,000 Clokas, and will fill 90 volumes of moderate size, at
the rate of 5,000 Glokas per volume. It is remarkable, that while the Hindus
have sucha vast Puranic literature, the Buddhists have but only one work,
the extent of which is not more than 5,000 Glokas.

Tho origin of the Hindu purinas is to be traced, like every thing
Hindu, in the Vedas, not so much in the Samhitis, as in the Brahmanas.
These are designed to explain the meaning of Samhité Mantras, used in
sacrifices, and to explain the various processes in the performance of these,
In the course of these explanations, various topics are discussed upon.
Of these, some relate to contemporary human affairs, and are called Nard-
¢amsas; some to past affairs of the world, human and divine, and are
called Purdvritta ; others, again, to traditions handed from generation to
generation, without any knowledge how they originated. These are called
Ltihdsas. These Na@ragamsas, Purdvrittas, and Itihdsas are not to be found
in one place, or in any chapter or chapters of the Bralmanas, but are found
seattered all over the works in small passages, ‘The theory is that these
Purdvritta passages are illustrated, added to, amplified, and expatiated upon in
the works which go by the name of the Puradnas. These derive their authority
from the Vedas, and are regarded as one of the eighteen Mahavidyds,
or orthodox branches of knowledge.

The Buddhist Purinas does not, of course, derive its authority from
the Vedas. It stands on the authority of the interlocutors, who are, in
the first instance, Jayacri and Jinegvari; in the second instance, Agoka and
Upagupta, and in the third Buddha aud Maitrya. Thus, it fulfils the
condition of shatsamvida, as being repeated by threo sects of interlocutors at
three different times. ‘The great merit of this work is that China and Nepal
have been described in it.

China is described as a vast country, surrounded almost on all sides by
unfathomable oceans. It is a populous country full of cities, marts, ports,
villages, and hamlets. At its vast capital, with a circuit which can—though
the reading here seems to be obscure—be traversed in eight months. There
is a mountain named Pancagirsha, in the midst of this capital, at the top of
which there is a lake. In tho midst of this lake there isa palace. There lives
Manjigri, the guardian saint of China, with two of his wives, Kesini and Upa-
kesini. He is the greatest authority in Tantric Buddhism. There is another
saint, named Manjudeva, who is sometimes regarded as the same person as
Manjigri and at others as a different person, though he comes later than
Manjagri in China, he is regarded as the guardian saint of Nepal. Nepal was
once a vast mountain-lake, named Kalihrad with the Svayambhii light in its
midst, which was one cubit high. The light being in the midst of the lake,
unapproachable by tho great majority of celestial and terrestrial beings,
Manjideva coming on a pilgrimage to Nepal determined to cut the side of


--- PAGE 113 [OCR_san+eng] ---
34 SVAYAMBHO PURANAM. (Journal & Text, Part 11, 1894,

the mountain and discharge the water. He took upa sharp sword in his
right hand and a copy of the Prajudpdramita in the left, and took his stand
on a lion and a griffin. He took a survey of the whole lake and at last found
tho southern part practicable. First of all, he cut the mounts Kapotala,
Gandhavati, Mrigasthali, Gokarna, Barapu, and Tantravati. Wherever there
was an obstruction of water the passage was made clear by means of tho
sword. It took four days and nights to make tho place dry. Thero
was, however, ४ small residue of water to the south of the Gandhavati which
was made into a small lake, named Kidhira, or Svanida, the abode of
Karkotaka, the Naga. It became as sacred as the large lake Kilihrada
had been. There is a local tradition that a plunge in its holy waters
confers wealth, and so it is sometimes called Dhanada. Tho lotus in the lake
on which stood the Svayambhi light was converted into a peak named
Padmagiri. The mount which was found on the western side of the large
lake, thus dried up, was named after Manjugri the great saint. On the top of
this there was 1 small lake more sacred than Dhanida, in the midst of which
there was the Padmagiri.

Manjiideva introduced agriculture inNepal. Ie used to drive his plough
by means of his favorito lion and griffin, The place first ploughed by him
is named Manjideva-krisei-bhimi. Ue was found driving the plough in
this fashion by Dharmacri Mitra, a famous Buddhist monk from the Bikrama!
monastery in Benares, which obtained its other namo, Kdgi, from Buddha
Kicyapa, who was born there in the family of a Brihmana who was the
priest to the king.* Dharmagri Mitra came from Benares determined to
proceed to Manjiigri, in China, to get certain abstruse points of Buddhist
worship explained. He, however, had not to proceed so far, as he found
Manjtideva, who appears to be something like an incarnation, or an image of
Manjicri in Nepal.

There was in the country Gaura, a large city with only one gato strongly
guarded. There reigned at the time of Rishi Kigyapa, a powerful king,
named Pracanda Deva, who abdicated in favor of his son Gaktideva and
renounced the world. He came to Nepal and obtained the name of Canti-
kava. He built the Svayambhi Chaitya with brick and mud. He built several
cities, of which one goes by his name, (antipura, and then retired to China.
He covered the Svayambhi light with a picce of stone. He remained con-

' श्रासिना काश्यपेनापि searqatefi तथा |
एथोरपि ससारा च काशौच्ेचं पररितं ॥

तसात्‌ काश्यपजलाच काश्रौनाम प्रसिद्धकं ।

रवं गुणमयं चेतरं काश्यपनाताच् काशौ |

` वाराणस्यां नगर्या विद्धारे यच ख्यातिके |
तदा विक्रमण्यौ लसि विदारे वसदुत्तमः॥
धम्मश्रौभिचोनामोऽयं Frey: पण्डितकष्ुकः |

--- PAGE 114 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] SVAYAMBHO PURANAM. 35

cealed in one of the caves or holes of the Svayambhit peak, where he was found
ages after by Gunakima Deva, a descendant of his son Gaktideva, who
came to Nopal. Cintikara advised Gunakima to worship tho nine
Nagas in order to bring copious rain at a timo when tho valley was
afflicted with famine. It is said that the gods and godesses from heaven,
and Vigvakarma in particular, advised him and helped him and worked
for him in the construction of the brick and mud Chaitya. Kuvera con-
secrated the mud. Baruna poured water into it and reduced it into clay.
Vishnu with Radha prepared the lumps of clay. Yama cut them into bricks.
Vayu dried them. Nairtya, or the Lord of Rakshasas, raised the dried bricks.
Vigvakarma brought them together, consecrated the pile, and put fire into it.
Agni burnt it.

Vigmati is a sacred river in Nepal. It was miraculously produced by
the Krakucchanda, in the Tathayuga, from his fingers with a view toshow some-
thing wonderful to his hearers. Vigmati is as sacred as the cclestial stream
Mandikini. Thero is another stream named Kegavati in tho valley. 16
was produced in the following way. Krakucchanda had a large number
of followers. He got them to shavo their hair and beards. The whole

` was piled up. ‘The pile produced a stream: a holy and sacred one.

Buddhism is considered by many as not opposed to tho caste-system,
as a factor in social organization. In India the lay Buddhists were caste-men,
But there is no distinction of caste in the ^ [नुक Order.” This is evidenced
by a long passage in the Svayambhti purtna which enumerates three classes of
men: one allowed to touch the Svayambhi stone, one to offer pijaand the other
to see it from a distance. The enumeration is a pretty longone. Brihmanas,
Brahmaciris, Yogis engaged in the Yogapraxis, Kshatriyas, Vaigyas,
Satgfdras, Gandhikas, workers in metal, in gold and silver, and in precious
stones, workers in copper, in bell-metal, in iron, the mannfacturers of flags
and silken cloth, weavers, confectioners, rice-huskers, traders, those who
live by their hereditary trade, should worship Svayambhd. The scribes, the
artizans, beetle sellers, agriculturists, barbers, workers in leather, carpenters,
those who cook flesh, the brewers, and the butchers, oilmen, producers
of yi, and others, are allowed to offer lights to Svayambhf. But the
chamirs, the Yogis, the Matafigas, and washermen should salute Svayambhi
from a distance. Here a great distinction has been made between the
Yogis actually engaged in the Yoga, who have been given a place next
to the Brahman, and the Yogés who are uot so cugaged, who come after
chamars, and along with washermen. LI offer no remarks on this, and leave
the great question of accounting for the origin of the Yogi caste all over
India, to be dealt with by the gontleman in charge of the ethnological
work,!

The wotk Svayambhipurin unfortunately is not very old. Iam sorry
to differ from the late Dr. Rajendralal Mitra, who says that the work is at
least five hundred years old; but Ido so on good authority. It mentions
Yakshamalla who reigned in 1460, and after whom the valley was divided into

` इत्यं गुणमये angi विव्ये च विशेषतः ।
कलियुगे वि्ेशवरं wat भविष्यति ॥
देवाखुरमनुष्याणां शास्ता frre अपि ।
wee छृतरान्येऽपि सो रुपो भविष्यति ॥

--- PAGE 115 [OCR_san+eng] ---
36 SVAYAMRBHU PORANAM. [Journal & Text, Part II, 1894,
two kingdoms. But it mentions Narendra Deva, a Samanta,! Now, in Mr.
Bendall’s list of Nepila kings, thero is a king named Narendra Deva who
reigned by the middle of tho seventeenth cen tury (1642 or there about), and
belonged to the Bhitgaon kingdom. We could have neglected all this as
coming at the end of the work, where verses might be added to and interpo-
lated. But in the seventh chapter of tho work there is an allusion to tho dis-
appearance of the Vi¢vegvara in Benares.* Now Vigvegvara disappeared twice,

तोऽपि दोर्धकालेऽच ममल्तराजकुलैः |
यच्तमल्वस्तच राज्ये समुद्धूतानाज्यं छतं ॥

ततः पशादौ्धकालेऽ्र भविव्यकालकेऽपि |
मद्ासमन्तकुले चापि रक राजा भविष्यति ॥
नाम्नापि नरेन्रदेवः एचवत्‌ पालितः प्रजाः |
अथ मिन्तुभिच्ुगौनिः धारणोनिः प्रपूनिलं ।
उपासकोपासके पः atte पूनितं ॥
ब्राद्छीरथवा सरैः चतुरवदादिषेदकीः |
वेदयामासु तस्त च नानागन्धः परूनितं ॥
ब्रह्मचारिभिः Fas गौतवंश्रादिवादनैः।
मौतयामासुस्तसने च नानावा मपूरितैः॥
ange योग्याः पूजितं |
योगयामासुस्तसते च नानान्ननिर्म होत्तमैः ॥
सन्यातैरविविधिः कैशिद्रीतादिपाठकीुंदा |
पाठयामासुस्तसे च नानापण्म॑होत्तमैः ॥
wae चवियेः Faq खगं रत्ादिकचकान्‌ |
कौकयामासुस्तसषे च नानाविधानकरमुदा ॥
ave अथ सैश्च पिग्डपा्ादिसन्ननान्‌ |
खादुरसान्‌ सुगन्धा प्रददुचचैत्यएङवे ॥
सच्छ्दादिभिः तरै नानाविधिभिः पूजनैः |
पूजितं दिविधिथौगीः & BIT: एनः एनः ॥
गान्धकगनधयक्तैख घातुकैरपि धातुः |
खणेकार रूप्यकारै TAMA खपि |

~ तामकारैः कांस्यकारे कारैुंदा एनः ।

--- PAGE 116 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text. Socicty.] SVAYAMBHG PURANAM. 37

once in the time of the great persccutor Sckander Lodi, when tho Temple was
razed to the ground. The old Vigvegvara is still to bo found at the house
of a Gurjara Brahman, close by the old sito. The temple is said to have been
restored by Niriyan Bhatta, who with his son has written voluminous works
on Hindu Law and Ritual. This temple was destroyed about 1675, in
Arangzeb’s time, by an intolerant Viceroy, who was severely rebuked even
by that bigotted monarch. He was roundly told by Arangzeb to restore the
temple and to govern Hindus and Musalmans’ with equal justice. The
site of the old temple, and its remains, are still visible, just behind the
present temple, in the Masjid compound. Ahalyi Bye is said to have con-
structed the present temple, mounted with a gold cupola presented to it by
Ranjit Singh.”

Now, the allusion to the disappearance of Vigvegvara is most likely to
his second disappearance, becauso the temple remained unrestored for a
long time, If that is so, the composition of the work falls within 228 years.

It is written by one who was not « very learned man either in’ Hindi
or in Buddhist Cistras. He places Vikrama Cila in Benares, while on all
hands, it is said to be in Magadha. Benares is in Kocala which is distinct
from Magadha. ‘Tho Sanskrit of tho work is absolutely ungramm:
Pinini’s very existence is ignored. Pali and Desci words are introduce
without coremony. The subject matter in places is, undoubted ly, old, but the
work is written by one man, as the same liberty with grammar has been taken
throughout the whole work.

ध्वनकारैः Uae: तन्तिभिख्छ तथा पुनः |
वयञ्जनिभिः तन्तुलिभिः करथिभिर्विकयेस्पि |
wa: खरत्तिभिः qa पूजयामासुः ate? ॥
लेषकारैलिपिकारैः fuss अन्धकः |
ताम्बलिभिख ठोधिभिः खटत्तिमि पपूजितं ॥
नापितादिभिस्नयेश्च चम्भकारेरपि तथा |
विविधैः काकारे्च नानाश्रस्िभिर्नातिभि ॥
सौलिनिमिध्व॑जिणौभिः खरिभिर्मा सव्तिभिः।
तलिभिटतकैर्नातिः दीपयामास war ॥
wales मातङ्धैयी गिभिरजकैरमि |
ध्वजिभिः दूरतः स्थित्वा वन्दनौयः एनः एनः ॥

--- PAGE 117 [OCR_san+eng] ---
38 “TIBETAN DICTIONARY,” AND THE “GATES OF TIBET.” "

“TIBETAN DICTIONARY,” AND THE “GATES OF TIBET.”

The Rey. A. Desgodins who has sojourned so many years in China
and Tibet, and for the last few years in British Bhutan, on the Sikkim-
Tibet frontier, has proceeded to Hong-Kong to print at the press of
the French Foreign Missions, the Tibetan Dictionary which has been
the life-work of himself, of his predecessor, Fr. Renon, and several other
missionaries. It is a pity that the general usefulness of this great
work will be limited by the fact that it is to be in Tibetan and Latin
only.

Writing to the author of the “Gates of Tibet,” Fr, Desgodins
says: “ During the voyage, I have read and re-read several times your
very interesting little book, pencil in hand, for the notes, explanations,
and corrections I had promised, but it required very little in the way of
corrections, and I have to compliment you on the painstaking accuracy
of your work, You may use my notes for your second edition, if there
is one, as the book certainly deserves that there should be.

९८ Your scientific, commercial, political, and religious digressions are
long; but that is all the better. ‘These serious studies constitute the
solid and really valuable part of your work, and make one forget that
you are on a pleasure trip. It is too often the ease in books of travels,
that the really useful is sacrificed to the mere pleasures of the journey.
Your work is a happy exception to this, and [ congratulate you
upon it,” .

--- PAGE 118 [OCR_san+eng] ---
ddhiet Text Society.) ` बोधिचयावतारम्‌ । 17.

(Continued from 204९ .16, Part I, 1894.)

एवं मीः मनेदौये HT बोधिर्यतः स्थिता । न हि वीये विना wet यथा वायुं विना गतिः॥ 1
कं वयै कुशणोत्सा्स्तदिपच्चः क उच्यते | अलस्य वुत्सिताशक्तिर्विषादात्मावमन्यना ॥ 2
श्रयापारसुखाखादनिद्रापाश्रयटष्णया | संसारदुःखानुदेगादालस्यसुपजायते ॥ 8
रेश्वाग॒रिकाघातः प्रविष्टो जन्मवागुराम्‌ | किमद्यापि न जानासि ग्ट्योरवदनमागतः ॥ 4
वय्यान्मार्यमागणांस्लं कमेगीवं न पश्यसि | तथापि निरः यास्येव चण्डालमश्िषो यथा ॥ 6
मिनोदौच्छमास्य agate सर्वतः | कथं ते रोचते ate कथं निदा कथं रतिः ॥ 6
Taare मरणं श्रौप्रमेष्यति | संद्यज्यापि तदालस्यमकाले कि करिष्यसि ॥ 7
ददं न प्राप्तमारव्यमिदमङंछृतं स्थितम्‌ः। अकस्मान्मुद्यरायातो हा इतो सौति चिन्तयन्‌ ॥ 8
पिकवेगसमुच्छनसाश्रु रक्तो च्तणाननान्‌ | बन्धृत्नि राश्न्संपण्यन्‌ यमदृतमुखानि च ॥ 9
बपापस््तिसंतपतः ्दण्व्नादांख नारकान्‌ । चासोचरारुषिलिप्ताङो विहलः किं करिष्यसि ॥ 10
anes eas युक्त भयमिरिव ते । किं एनः छतपापस्य तौत्राननस्कदुःखतः ॥ 21
छट उष्णोदकेनापि ARATE तप्यसे | Beat च नारकं कम्मे किमेवं GOAT | 19
नरुयम फलाकाङ्गिन्सकुमार WA | ग्टवयुग्रस्तामराकार हा Shas fees ॥ 19 `
प्राव्यं नावमासाद तर्‌ दुःखमहानदौम्‌ | मू कालो नं निन्नाया इयं AST एनः ॥ 19
क्वा धर्मरतिं शरेामनन्तरतिसंततिम्‌ | रतिरौदयद स्यादौ दुःखहेतौ कथं तव ॥ 15
अविषादबलवयद्ठतप्पर्यात्मविधेयता + परात्मसमता चैव परात्मपसिवर्वनम्‌ 1116
नैव्वसादः कल्यः कुतो मे बोधिरि्यतः | यस्मात्तथपातः सव्यं सत्यवादौदमुक्तवान्‌ ॥ 17
तेऽप्यासन्दंश्मणका मच्तिकाः. छमयस्तथा | येरत्सादबलात्पाप्ता दुरापा बोधिरुत्तमा । 18
किमुताहं नरो जात्या शक्तो wid दितादितम्‌। सर्वच्नानौयनुत्सर्गाद्रो धिं किं नाक्चयाम्हम्‌ ॥ 19
अथापि हस्तपादादि दातव्यमिति मे भयम्‌ । गुरुलाघवम्‌ एत्वं तन्मे स्यादविचारतः ॥ 20
greta भेत्तव्यो दादयः पाच्योऽप्यनेकश्ः | कल्पकोटौरसंस्येया न च बोधिर्भविष्यति ॥ 21
रक्त मे परिमितं दुःखं संबोधिसाधनम्‌ | TEMES तदुत्माटनदुःखवत्‌ | 22
atu Fen कुर्वन्ति जियादुःखैररोगताम्‌ | तस्माद्वहनि दुःखानि न्तु सोए्यमल्यकम्‌ ॥ 23
कयामिमामप्यचितां वरकैद्यो न दत्तवान्‌ | मधुरेकोपचारेण चिकित्ति मद्ातुरान्‌ ॥ 24
आदौ श्ाकादिदाफोऽपि नियोजयति नायकः | तत्करोति क्रमात्मचखाद्यत्छमांसान्यपि त्यजेत्‌ ॥ 25
यदा शकेभ्विव प्रज्ञा खमांसेऽप्यपजायते | मांसास्थि त्यजतसतस्य तदा किं नाम TAT ॥ 26
न दुःख लक्तपापत्वात्यण्डितत्वान्न दुर्मनाः | मिश्याकल्यनया चित्ते पापात्कवाये यतो यथा ॥ श
एखेन कायः सुखितः पाणिडि्ेन मनः सुखि | ferry संसारे छपालुः केन खिद्यते ॥ 28
च्पयन्पवपापानि TATU | बोधिचित्तवलादैव खावकेभ्योऽपि Whar ॥ 29
Ui ganged गच्छन्को विबोदेत्सवेतनः | मोधिचित्तरथं पाप्य सवंखेदश्रमापषटम्‌ ॥ 2०
wrung tad सत्त्वार्थसिद्धये | छन्दं दुःखभयात्युर्या दनुशंसंख भावयन्‌ ॥ 81
ad विपक्तमुन्मल्य यतेतोत्सण्डरदये | ढन्दमानरति्यागतात्पयवध्ितावकतैः ॥ 9 ° ,
अप्रमेया मया दोषा ware खपरात्मनोः | रकैकस्यापि दोषस्य यत्र Tea: यः ॥ ae
8

--- PAGE 119 [OCR_san+eng] ---
18 बोधिचयावतारम्‌ 1 [Journal & Text, Part IT, 1894,

तच दौषच्तयारम्भे लेशोऽपि मम नेच्छते । aaa नोरः Bela मे कथम्‌ ॥ 34
शण मयाज॑नौयाख्च बह्वः UCLA: | तैकैकरणाभ्यासो मवेत्वल्पाय वैन वा । 8४
गणने शेऽपि नाभ्यासो मम जातः कदाचन | टथा नौतं मया जन्म कथंचिल्लव्यमद्भतम्‌ | 36
न प्रापतं भगवत्मरूनामष्टोत्सवद्चखं मया । न छता शरासने कारा SCAT न पूरिता ॥ 9 ,
भौतेभ्यो नाभयन्दत्तमा्तां न सुखिनः छतः | Taare केवलं मातुगैतोऽष्टं गभ॑ शल्यताम्‌ ॥ 38
धर्मच्छन्दवियोगेन पौरवेण ममाधुना । विप्रत्तरौदृश्रौ जाता को धर्मे कन्दसुत्यजेत्‌ ॥ 59
कुशलानां च सवेषां कन्दं मूलं सुनि्जगौ | तस्यापि मूलं सततं विपाकफलमं7वना II 40
दुः्खानि दौमनस्यानि भयानि विविधानि च । ्षभिलाषविघाताश्च जायन्ते पापकारिणाम्‌ ॥ 41
मनोरथः aaa यचच यतेव गच्छति | तच तत्रैव तत्पुरः फलार्घेणाभिपज्यते ॥ 42
पापकारिसखेच्छा तु यचच ata गच्छति | तच्च तत्रैव तत्पापे SAME AS । 43
षिषएलस्गन्धिश्यौतलसरोरुह गभंगता मधरजिनखरासनदछतोपोचितद्य॒तयः
मुनिकरबोधिताम्बुजविनिगैतसदएुषः छुगतघछता भवन्ति गतस्य एरः FMA! ॥ ५५
यमपुरुषापनौतसकलच्छविरात॑रवो -डतवदताप-विदुतकतास्रनिधिक्ततनुः |
ज्वलदसिशक्तिघातशतग्रातितमांसदलः पतति qantas ॥ 45
तश्मात्कायः TURE भावयित्वेवमादरात्‌ | वृष्वध्वजस्य विधिना मानं त्वारभ्य भावयेत्‌ ॥ 45
पूवे निरूप्य सामग्रीमारमेन्नारमेत वा | अनारम्भो at नाम न त्वार्य निवंतनम्‌ ॥ 47
जन्मान्तरेऽपि सो ऽभ्यासः पापादःखं च वधैते। अन्यच कार्यकालं च Slt तच्च न साधितम्‌ ॥ 43
चिषु मानो विधातव्यः sated aang । मयेवैकेन कर्तव्यमित्येषा कर्ममानिता॥ 49
सेश्पखतन््ो लोकोऽयं न च्तमः खार्थ॑साधने | तस्मान्मयास्य कर्तव्यं नाशक्तोऽ दं यथा जनः | 50
Ae क्म ete कथं मय्यपि तिति । म्ानाचेन्न करोम्येतन्मानो नश्यतु मे वरम्‌ ॥ 51
wa इण्टममासाद्य काकोऽपि गरुडायते | चापदा बाधते ईल्पापि मनो मे यदि दुर्बलम्‌ ॥ 52
विषादङ्कतनि चेष्ट खापदः सुकरा ननु । गुस्यितश्चेटमानस्त॒ महतामपि SAT ॥ 53
तस्मादएेन चित्तेन करोग्यापदमापदः. वलो क्यविजिगोषुतवं ्ास्यमावर्जितस्य मे ॥ 54
मया fe ad Saeed जेयो न केनचित्‌ | मयेष मानो वोएयो जिनसिंह छतो दयम्‌ I-05
ये सत्वा मानपिजिता वराकासते न मानिनः + मानौ waa नेति मानश्त्ुवशाख ते ॥ 66
मानेन दुर्गतिं नौता मानुष्येऽपि ङतोत्छवाः | परपिण्डाशिनो दासा मूषां दुर्दशंनाः BMT I 57
सर्वतः परिरत्र मानस्तन्धास्तपखिनः | ते ऽपि चेन्मानिनां मध्ये दौनास्त॒ वद TUT ॥ 58
ते मानिनो विजयिनख त wa we ये मानश्न्चविजयाय वदन्ति मानम्‌ ।
. ये लं स्फुरन्तमपि amy नित्य कामं जने जयफलं प्रतिपादयन्ति ॥ 89
संज्ञे ्रपच्तमध्यस्थो यम्य भवेद्दृप्तः सषटखणः | saber. लो णगणेः-सिं्ो म्टगगशेरिव ॥ co
मश्टत्छपि fe aaa न रसं चच्त रौच्तते । णवं Rath पाप्य न सो MAMA भवेत्‌ ॥ 61
यदेवापदयते कमे तत्कर्मव्सनौ भवेत्‌ | तत्कम॑श्ौणो eA Mist YA ॥ ¢४
ware कियते कमे तथापि स्यान्न वा खम्‌ | कमेव तु सुखं यस्य, निष्कामा स सुखौ कथम्‌ | ¢
कानीनं eta: संसारे च्ुरधारामधुपभेः | Teed: कथं ठतिविंपाकमधुरैः ्थिवैः ॥ 6५

--- PAGE 120 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.) मोधिचचीवतारम्‌ ॥ 19

लसमात्वर्मावसानेऽपि निमच्नेत्तच कमणि । यथा मध्यासंव्त at ome करौ ॥ 65
लनाशरादबन्ये तु एनः कर परियजेत्‌ | खसमफं च तन्मु्ेदुचरोत्तरटग्यया ॥ ०
लैप्रषद्टारान्संरच्तन्‌. केशास्त पष्ठरेदुदृएम्‌ । खक्युदमिवापननः श्ििक्ितेनार्णि er 1.6;
तत्र खद, यधा VS WETTER | सूतिखङ्ं तथा भद गरटषोयान्नसकान्‌ समरन्‌ tt 08
विषं रुधिरमासाद्य भसति यथा तनौ | तथैव च्छिमासाद् Sakae vette ॥ 6
कैलपाचधरो यददसिष्टसेरधिङितः | वलिते मरणचासाततत्यरः स्यात्तथा AAT ॥ 70
दकादुत्सङषगे सपे यधोत्तिष्टति सत्रम्‌ | निनालस्यागमे तदत्मतिकुरवौत सत्वरम्‌ ॥ 71
रकैकक्िभ्डले सु परितय्य विचिन्तयेत्‌ | कथं करोमि येनेदं एने न भवेदिति ॥ re
संसं कर्म वा पापुमिच्छेदेतेन हेतुना | कथं नामाखवस्थास Weare भवेदिति ॥ 73
लघु वुर्यात्तथात्मानमपमादंकधां स्मरन्‌ | कर्मा गमाद्यथापृधै सव्नः सर्वत्र वर्तते ॥ ;
ata gaat वायो गमनागमने वश्यम्‌ । तथोत्स्दिवधं यायादूिेनं सग्टध्यति ॥ 75
बोधिचर्यावतारे वौयैपारमिता सप्तमः परिच्छेदः ॥

वर्धयिन्नैवसुत्साद्ं समाधौ स्थापयेन्मनः | विक्षिप्तचित्तस्त॒ नरः जेग्दंटान्तरे स्थितः॥ 1
कायचित्तविवेकेन.विच्तेमस्य न संभवः | weet परि्ज्य वितर्कान्परिवभयेत्‌ ॥ 2
Seq त्यज्यते लोको लामादिषु च टष्णया | तस्भादेतत्यरि्यागे विदरानेवं क्चिस्येत्‌ ॥ 9

` शमथेन विपश्यनयासुयुक्तः कुरुते जेशविनाश्रमि्वेत्य |

शमथः प्रथमं गवेषणौयः स च शोके निरपेच्तयाभिरत्या ॥ 4

कस्यानिचेग्बनित्यस्य Set afaqaefa | येन नन्मसदखाणि ज्यो न एनः पियः ॥ &
अप्यत्ररतिं थाति समाधौ नं च तिति | न च cute दृष्टापि पूवेवद्राध्यते SAT ॥ 6
न पश्यति यथायूलं संवेगादच्च Stes | दह्यते तेन शोकेन पियसंगमकाङ्खया py
afar मुधा याति $खमायुसुंमुंः,। aurea मित्रेण wat म्यति wer ॥ 8
वाजैः समागचरितो नियतं याति दुर्गतिम्‌ | नेष्यते विषभागख किं ont बालसंगमात्‌ | 9
wot eect भवन्ति रिपवः wang | तोषस्थाने पुष्यन्ति दुराराधाः एथग्ननाः ॥ 10
हितसृक्ताः sqft वारयन्ति च मां हितान्‌ | अथ न श्यते तेषां कुपिता यान्ति दुर्गतिम्‌ ॥ 11
शर्योतकटन्मान्दनदो ्ौनात्मानः aie | अवर्णो तिघसेति कदा बालादिनं मवेत्‌ ॥ 1
आतमोत्करषैः परावगैः संसाररतिसंकथा | xara किंचिद्वालस्य बालतः ॥ 19
णवं तस्यापि सत्सङ्ग तेनान्थ॑समागमः | Tart विष्टरिष्यामि सुखमकिदटमानसः ॥ 14 .
बालाददरं पलायेत प्ा्तमाराधयेवियैः । न संस्तवालुबन्धेन किं तूदासौनसाधुवत्‌ ॥ 15
धर्माथंमाचमादय गटङगवत्कुसुमान्मधु | अपूव इव सर्वच वि्ठरिव्यान्यसंसतुतः ॥ 19
लामो च सत्‌रातखाह्टमिच्छन्ति were माम्‌ | इति म्यस्य संप्रा्नन्मरणाल्नायते मयम्‌ ॥ 10
यत्र थत्र रतिं याति मनः सखविमोष्ितम्‌ | तत्तत्सष्टलगुणितं दुःखं भल्वोपतिखति ॥ 18
तस्मात्राच्नो न तामिन्छेदिष्छतो लायते भयम्‌ | खयमेव च यायेतदैये छत्रा पतोच्ङ्काम्‌ ॥ 19
बटवो लाभिनो ऽभवन्‌ बवन Taft | सदह लाभयण्योभिन्ते न च्नाताः क्व गता ति ॥ 20

--- PAGE 121 [OCR_san+eng] ---
20 बोधिचयावतारम्‌ | [Journal & Txt, Part IT, 1904

aaa spate किं पव्याम्यदं तुतः | मामेवान्ये परशंसन्ति किं विषौदामि निन्दितः ॥ ५
नानाधिसुक्तिकाः सत्वा जितैरपि न तीभिताः। किं एनर्मादृररेस्तस्मात्कि लोकचिन्तया | 22
निन्दन्यलामिनं सृत्वमवध्यायन्ति लाभिनम्‌ | Were दुःखसंवाैः कथं तैर्जायते रतिः ॥ ४४
न बालः कस्यचिन्मिच्रमिति set तथागतः | म. खार्थेन विना प्रौतियंग्माद्वालस्य ATTY ॥ 2५
" खार्थंदारेण या प्रौतिरात्माधे प्रौतिरेव सा | Ret यथोडेगः सुखद्ानिछतो छि सः ॥ 25
मावध्यायन्ति तरवो न चाराध्याः परयत्नतः । कदा तेः छखसंवासेः सद वासो WIAA ॥ 26
ून्यदेवकुले स्थित्वा GAGS TES वा । कदानये्तो यास्थामि ष्तोऽनवलोकयन्‌ ॥ श
असमेषु प्रदेशेषु fatty खमावतः | खच्छन्दचायेनिलयो विदुरि्यम्यं कदा ॥ 28
ग्त्ाचमाचविभवश्वौरासंमोगचौवरः | नि्मयो विष्टरिष्यामि. कदा कायमगोपयन्‌ ॥ 29
कायभूमिं निजां गत्वा aye: ee | खकायं तुलधिष्यामि कदा सततघर्मिंणम्‌ ॥ 3०
यमेव fe कायो मे णवं पति्॑विव्यति | semen अपि TRAE ॥ 91
अलेकस्यामि कायस्य सजा अस्थिखग्डकाः | एधकएथम्गमिष्यन्ति किमुतान्यः प्रियो जनः॥ 9
खक उत्पयते इन्तुभनियते चेक णव हि । नान्यस तद्मथामागः किं पिधैव्रकारकैः ॥ %
अध्वानं परतिपच्नस्य यथा वासपरिग्रदः | तथा भवाध्वगस्यापि जन्मावासपरिग्रहः ॥ 3५ ° .
चरिः qaaatag न निर्धायंते ततः । अश्रोच्यमानो लोके न तावदेव वनं RT ॥ 9६
असं स्तवाविसोधाभ्यामेक ण्व शरौरकः । पूर्वमेव wat लोके भ्नियमाणो न प्रोचति ॥ 36 *
न चान्तिकचराः केचिच्छोचन्तः कुर्वते थाम्‌ | garages चास्य पिच्िपन्ति न केचन ॥ 37
तस्मादेकाकिता cant निरायासा श्िवोदया | सवविच्तेपश्मनी सेवितव्या सदा मया ॥ 38
सर्वान्यचिन्तानिसक्तः खचिन्तेकायमानसः। समाधानाय चित्तस्य safest दमाय च ॥ 39
कामा ESAT इ लोके परच च | इह बन्धवधव्छरैनरकादौ परच च ॥ ¢
acy दूतदूतनां छताञ्नलिरस्नेकधा | न च पापमकौतिर्वा यदथ गणिता TET ॥ 41
पर्तिप्तश्च भयेऽप्यात्मा विं च aetna | -यान्येव घ्र परिष्वज्य बभूवोत्तमनिरैतिः ॥ 42
तान्येवाख्यौनि नान्यानि खाधौनान्यममानि च । प्रकामं संपरिष्वज्य किं न गष्छसि निरैतिम्‌ ॥ 4
उन्नाम्यमानं यन्नादन्नौयमानमधो Feat | परादृ्टमदृष्टं वा सुखं जालिकयाढतम्‌ ¶ ५4
तन्मुखं लत्मरिके्मस द्वििवाधुना | waisted पश्य किमिदानीं पलायसे ॥ 45
reamed ऽप्यासौद्यत्मरिरच्ितम्‌ | तदद्य भच्ितं यावत्किमौर््यालो न Tate ॥-4
मांसोच्छयमिम दृष्टा गभरेरन्येख भच्ितम्‌ | आदारः पुज्यते येषां खक्चन्द्नविभ्रूबयोः ॥ 47
निखलादपि ते चासः कङ्कालादेवमौ श्ितात्‌ | वेताडेनेव केनापि चाल्यमानाद्भयन्न. किम्‌ ॥ 4
wa कतरे ऽप्ययं. ceed किमपियम्‌ | न चेत््रयोजनं तेन need विग्टद्यते ॥ 49
रकसनादशनादेषां लालामेध्यं च जायते | तच्रामेध्यमनिष्टं ते लालामानं कथं FAT ॥ so
तूलगमेन्धदु स्पश रमन्ते नो प्रधानक | दुग्धं न श्वन्तौति कामिनो ऽमेध्यमोद्िताः'॥ 61
यदि तेनाखचौ रागः कस्ादालिङ्गसे परम्‌ | मांसकर्दमसंलिपं खयबद्धास्थिपञ्रम्‌ ॥ 52
खमेव Tages ते तेनेव एतिमाचर | अभेध्यमस्नामपरां Tae FAT ॥ ४8
मांसपरियो ऽ्टमस्येति Uy नदं च वान्डसि | सचेतनं खमावेन मांसत्वं कथमिष्छसि ॥ 6५

--- PAGE 122 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] बोधिचयैवतारम्‌ । 21

यदिन्डति ग after aye ag च प्रकते । यच श्रव्यं न age किं तदालिङ्मे मुधा ॥ 58 `
नामेध्यमयमन्धस्य कायं Talay | खामेध्यमय wa लवं लं TTT विसयः Ilse `
विषघनाकौंसुषिकचं सुक्ताः तर्यपङ्कनम्‌ | च्मेध्यशौग्डचित्तस्य का रतिगथपञ्चरे ॥ 57
ग्टदाद्यमेष्यलिप्तत्वाद्यदि न स्पुमिष्छसि | यतस्तत्रिगतं कायात्तं we कथमिच्छसि ॥ 53
यदि ते नाखुचौ रागः कस्मादालिङ्गसे परम्‌ | Saad तद्वनं तेन वर्धितम्‌ ॥ 50
अमेध्यभवमर्पत्वाञ्र वाष्छस्यशचिकछकमिम्‌ | बङमेध्यमयं कायममेध्यजमपौच्छसि ॥ 00
न केवलमभेध्यत्वमात्मौयं न pete | अमेध्यभाग्डानपरान्‌ गथघसमर वा्कसि ॥ 61 `
कपुंरादिषु way Wiel न यञ्ननेषु वा । मुखत्िप्तविदणेष भूमिरप्यश्चचिमता ॥ 62
यदि. प्यत्तमप्येतदमेध्यन्राधसुष्यसे । ्सश्ाने पतितान्‌ घोरान्कायान्पश्यापंरागपि ॥ 09
wanted यस्माद्धय मुत्पद्यते मष्टत्‌ | कथं ्ञात्वापि ततैव एुनरुत्पद्यते रतिः ॥ 6५
काये न्यस्तो saat गन्धन्दनादेव नश्यतः | ऋन्यदौयेन .गन्धेन कस्मादन्यच रच्यते ॥ ७४
यदि खमावदौगन्यादागो नाच शिवं ननु । किमनधं रुचिर्न कस्तदून्धेनानुलिम्यति ॥ 6s
कायस्याच किमायातं सुगन्धि यदि चन्दनम्‌ | अन्यदौयेन गन्धेन कस्मादन्य रच्यते ॥ 67
यदि केशरनददौर्शैनतैः समलपाणडरैः | मलपङ्कधसो नमरः कायः Tefen ॥ os.
सकि संखियते यन्रादात्मघाताय MAY | HAASAN CARL महौ Il 69
कङ्गालान्कतिचिद्दक् ert किल ते war । OTA रमसे चलत्क्कालसं कुले ०
रवं चामेध्यमप्येतदिना मूल्यं न लभ्यसे | तद्थ॑मजंनायासो नरक्ादिषु च यथा॥ 71
शि्तोनाजनसामथ् केनासौ यौवने सखौ । यानेन are) se: कानः करोति किम्‌ ॥ za
कैविददिवान्तव्यापारेः परिखरान्ताः कुगाभिनः | गए मागत्य सायके शेरते स गता दव ॥ 73
दग्डयाचाभिरपरे प्रवासदेशदुःखिताः | वत्सरैरपि नेच्न्ते एचदासांस्तदर्धिनः ॥ 14
यदर्थमेव विक्रीत चात्मा कामविमोष्दितैः । तं न unt सुधैर्वायनौतं तु परकर्मणा ॥ ‰४
किक्रौतखात्मभावानां सदा परेषणकारिणाम्‌ | weed स्रियो ऽन्येषामटवोषविटपादिष ॥ 76
र्णं Rade विशन्ति किल जौवितुम्‌ । मानाथं दासतां यान्ति मूएाः कामविडम्बिताः॥ 77
feed कामिनः केचिदन्ये श्ूलसमर्पिताः | ged दद्यमानाख हन्यमाना शक्तिभिः ॥ 18
, ऋजनरच्तणवाशविषिर चमनं मनन्तमै दि |

UTA धनशक्तमतौनां नावसरो भवदुःखविमुक्तेः | 79 `
रखवमादौनवो भूयानल्याखादस्त्‌ कामिनाम्‌ | शकटं वष्टतो यहत्पशोर्घा सलवग्रष्ः ॥ 80
तस्याखादलवस्यार्थे यः पश्योरप्यदुलमः | इता देव्तेनेयं च्णसंयत्स Saat II 81
aa गन्तुरल्पस्य नरकादिषरपातिनः। कायस्था छतो योऽयं सवकालं परिञ्रमः ॥ 88
ततः कोटिश्रतेनापि खरमभागेन बद्धतां | चर्या दुःखान्मद दुदुःखं साच बोधिनै कामिनाम्‌ ॥ 88
न wei न fad नारि प्रपातो न वैरिणः | कामिनासुपमां यान्ति नरकादिव्यथास्रतेः ॥ 84
रुवमुदिन्य कामेभ्यो विवेके नयेद्रतिम्‌ । कलष्धायासमून्या् शान्ता वनभूमिषु II 8

धनः प्रथाक्चकरचन्दनश्रौतलेषु Ty शम्॑तिएलेवु धिलातलेषु । =»

निभरब्दसौम्यवनमारतवौव्यमानैख्गम्यते परद्िताप पिचितत्यते च ॥ 8

--- PAGE 123 [OCR_san+eng] ---
, 22 भोधिवदधेवतारम्‌ | [Journel & Text, Part I, 1864.

fage यच ब्रचिदिरकालं eyes रच्चतलं JETS ।
` परिग्रहास्च्तगखेदमुक्तखरत्यपेत्ताविरतो यथेष्टम्‌ ॥ 87
खच्डन्द्चायेनिलय, प्रतिबज्ञो न कस्यचित्‌ | यत्संतोवसखं ae तदिन््रस्धापि दुलभम्‌ II 88
खवमादिभिराकारैविवेकरुणभावनात्‌ | उपग्ान्तवितकौः सन्वोधिचित्तं तु भावयेत्‌ ॥ so
भररात्मस्मतामादौ मावयेदेवमादरात्‌ | PAY VTST: GF मालनौया मयात्मवत्‌ ॥ 90
छस्तादिमेदेन बहपकारः कायो यथेकः परिपालनौयः |
तथा जगद्धि्नमभिन्नदुःखं सुखात्मकं सर्वमिदं तथेव ॥ 9
यद्य्यनयषु देहेषु मद्दुःखं न पबाधते | तथापि ARTA AARC TATA ॥ 9
तथा यद्यप्यसंवेद्यमन्धेदुदुःखं मयात्मना | तथापि तस्य तदुदुःखमात्म॑खेहेन दुःस्म्‌ । 93
AIAG हन्तव्यं दुःखत्वादात्मदुःखवत्‌ | HATE मयान्ये ऽपि स्नत्वत्वादातमसतत्ववत्‌ ॥ 9५
यदा. मम परेषां च तुर्यमेव सुखं धियम्‌ | तदात्मनः कोश्विषेषो येनाचैव छखोद्मः ॥ 95,
यदा मम परेषां च मयं दुःखं च न पियम्‌ | तदात्मनः को विशेषो यत्तं रच्तामि नेतरम्‌ ॥ 9
वदुदुःखेन न भे षाथैत्यतो यदि न रच्छते । नागामिकायदुःखान्मे बाधा तत्केन TAT II 9
अमेव तदापौति मिश्येयं परिकल्यना | अन्य एव wat यस्मादन्य ख प्रजायते ॥ 98
यदि यस्येव तद्दुःखं रच्छं Aaa तन्मतम्‌ | पाददुःलं म wa कस्मात्ततेन रच्यते ॥ 99
अयुक्तमपि चेदेतददं कारात्मवतेते | यदयुक्तं frac तत्छमन्यश्च यथाबलम्‌ ॥ 100
संतानः समुदाय पद्विसेनादिवन्‌म्टषा | 'यस्य दुःखं स Mee तत्छं भविष्यति ॥ 19
असाभिकानि दुःखानि सर्वा णेवाविष्ेषतः | दुःखत्वादेव वार्याणि नियमस्तच किं छतः ॥ 102
दुःखं कसमातिवाये चेत््वेषामविवादतः | वाथ चेत्सर्वमप्येवं न चेदात्मापि स्वत्‌ ॥ 108
छया FSCS चेत्वस्मदुत्य्यते बलात्‌ | TE free aug कथं वज्ञ ॥ 104
बद्भनामेक दुःखेन यदि दुःखं विगच्छति | उत्पाद्यमेव तदुदुःखं सदयेन परात्मनोः II 105
अतः सुपुष्पचन््रेण जानतापि SMR | THES न free seat दुःखिनां TATE I 106
ad भावितसंतानाः परदुःखसमपियाः | aalfaramet Sat पद्मवनं यथा 11107
मुच्यमानेषु wag ये ते प्रामोद्यसागराः | तैरेव ननुं पर्याप्तं मो च्तेणारसिकेन किम्‌ ॥ 108
अतः पराथ Behe न मदो न च विस्मयः । न विपाकपलशकाङ्का परा्थेकान्तटष्णया | 109
तस्मा्ययान्तश्येऽवर्णदातमानं गोपयाम्बदम्‌ | रच्ताचित्तं दयाचित्तं करोभ्येवं Weir ॥ 110
च््यासादन्यदोयेषु शुक्रो ितविन्दुु | भवयद्मिति न्ञानमसत्यपि fe वस्तुनि 11111
तथा कयो <न्यदोयोऽपि किमात्मेति न Ee | परत्वै तु खकायस्य स्थितमेव न दुष्करम्‌ ॥ 11:
ज्ञात्वा संदोवमात्मानं परानपि गुणोदधौन्‌ | आत्ममावपसित्यागं परादानं च भावयेत्‌ ॥ 113
कायस्यादथधवत्वेन यथामौद्टाः LTT | जगतो ऽवयवत्वेन तथा कस्मान्न SET ॥ 114
यथात्मबुदधिरभ्यासात्छकाये ऽस्मितनिरात्मके | परेव्वपि तथात्मत्वं किमभ्यासान्न जायते ।। 115
a पराथ त्वपि न भैरो न च विसयः | आत्मानं मोजयितैव फलाश्रा न च जायते ॥ 116
तस्माद्ययार्तिश्रोकादेरातानं गोसुमिष्छति | रच्ताचित्तं दयाचित्तं जगत्यभ्यस्यतां तथा ॥ 177
श्ध्यतिष्टदतो गाथः खवामाप्यवलोकितः | पषंच्छारदमयमप्यपनेतुं जनस्य हि ॥ 118

--- PAGE 124 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) बोभिचयावतारम्‌ 1 23

garg निवर्तेत यस्नादभ्यासश्क्षितः | यदैव खवणा्तासलतेगैव न विना रतिः | 119
aad च परांश्चैव यः whet चातुमिच्छति 1 स चरेत्यरमं गदं परात्मपसिवत॑नम्‌ ॥ 120
यस्मिन्रात्मर््यतिखेद्ादल्पादपि भयाद्भयम्‌ -। न दिषेत्कस्तमात्मानं शवुवद्यो भयावष्ः | 121
यो मान्दयचुत्पिपासादिपरतौकारचिकौर्वया | पच्िमत्छम्टगान्दन्ति परिपन्थं च तिरति ॥ २
यो लाभसतृक्रियाहेतोः पितरावपि मास्येवु । रत्रजयखमाद्यादेनावीचौन्नोः भवेत्‌ ॥ 128
केः पण्डितस्तमात्मानभिच्छेदच्तेत्‌सपूजयेत्‌.। न प्येष्छवुवचेनं aed प्रतिमानयेत्‌ ॥ 124
यदि दास्यामि कि मच्छ द्रव्यात्मा पिश्राचता। यदि मोच्छे किं ददामीति पराथ देवराजता I 125
ara पौडभित्वान्यं नरकादिषु पच्यते | व्यात्मानं पौडयित्वा तु पराथ सर्वसंपदः ॥ 126
दुरगैतिनीचता Ate यथैवात्मोत्नतौष्छया! | तामेवान्यच शंकराग्य सुगतिः सतृकृतिम॑तिः ॥ 127
आत्माय परमान्नप्य दासत्वादयनु भूयते | पराथ त्वेनमान्नप्य खा्ित्वादयनुभयते ॥ 128
ये केचिद्‌ःखिता लोके स्वँ ते खल्खेच्छया । -ये केचित्सखिता लोके स्वे ते ऽन्यसुखेच्छया ॥ 129
ast वा किमुक्तेन दृश्यतमिदमन्तरम्‌ | खार्था्थिंनश्च वालस्य सुनेखान्यार्धकारिणः ॥ 130
न नाम साध्यं बुद्धत्वं संसारे ऽपि कुतः सुखम्‌ | खसुखस्यान्यहुःखेन परिवतंमकुवैतः ॥ 191
आस्तां तावत्परो लोको दृष्टो ऽप्यथ न सिथ्यति। भ्टयस्यावुर्वतः कम खामिनोऽददतो LTT I! 19
AMMA. CTIA | अन्यो ATUL दुःखं wate मोदिताः ॥ 188
उपद्रव ये च भवन्ति लोके यावन्ति दुःखानि मयानि चेव ।

` सर्वाणि तान्धात्मपरिप्रहेण तत्किं ममानेन परिग्रहे i iss
ओौत्मानमपरिग्यज्य दुःखं त्यक्तु न शक्यते | यथाभिमपरिग्यन्य ere यजतु न शक्ते ॥ 195
तस्मात्छदुःखशान्यये परदुःखश्रमाय च । ददाम्यन्येभ्य आत्मानं परान्‌ Wels चात्मवत्‌ |! 138
न्यसंबद्धमसमौति frat कुर दे मनः | wader सुत्सुज्य नान्यचिन्त्यं त्वया्ना ॥ 197
न at खा्ंदृच्छादि तदीयिखच्षुरादिभिः। न युतं ied खरथंमन्यदौयेः करादिभिः ॥ 198
तेन erat भूत्वा काये ऽस्िन्ययदौच्तसे | तत्तदेवापष्कयास्मात्परेभ्यो हितमाचर ॥ 139
ष्नादिष्वात्मतां went परत्वमपि चात्मनि | भावयेव्यौ च मानं च निर्विकल्पेन चेतसा ॥ 140
रष सतूक्रियते are लाभौ नाष मयं यथः | स्तूयतेऽयमष्ं निन्द्यो दुःखितो ऽह मयं सुखौ ॥ 141
ae करोभि कर्माणि तिधयेष तु सुख्ितः। यं किल मर्तो के नौचोऽ्ं किल निरौणः ॥ 142
fa निरी णेन कर्यं सर्वस्यात्मा गुणान्वितः | सन्ति ते येवं नौचः सन्ति ते Baws वरः | 149
शरौलदृष्टिविपत्यादिकेशगत्या न मदात्‌ । चिकित्धोऽदं यथाशक्ति पौडाप्यङ्गीरता मया॥ 144
अथाह मचिकित्छो ऽस्य कस्नान्मांमवमन्धते | किं ममेतद्गुणेः छ्यमात्मा तु शुणवानयम्‌ ॥ 145
दुगतिव्याडवक्गस्थेनेवास्य TAM अने । अपरान्‌ गुणमानेन पणिडितान्विनिगौषते ॥ 146
सममात्मानमालोक्य यतेत्‌ खाधिक्यटद्ये | TARA संसाध्यं लामसत्कारमात्मनः ॥ 147
ate सर्वच मे लोके भवेयः पकटा गुणाः । अपि नाम गुणा येऽस्य न ओ्नोव्यन्यपि केचन ॥ 148
छायेरब्रपि मे दोषाः स्यान्मे पृजास्य नो भवेत्‌। सलब्धा द्य मे लामः पृजितौऽहमयं न Ty 148
पश्यामो सुहिवास्तावचिरादेनं weet | हस्यं जवृस्य सवस्य निन्द्रमानमितस्ततः ॥ 150
अस्यापि हि वराकस्य स्पर्धा किल मया ae । किमस्य शतमेतवव्र्ारूपं कुलं धनं ॥ 161

--- PAGE 125 [OCR_san+eng] ---
24 ब्लोधिषयावतारम्‌ | Tonal & Toxt, Part 11, 1804,

खुवमात्मगुणाच्छूतवा कौत्यैमानानिवस्ततः 1 ` संजातएलको we परि्भौच्ये सखोत्छवम्‌ ॥ 152
rere भवेद्वामो ATT SCATTER बलात्‌। TT याषनामाचमस्मलमे करोति चेत्‌ | 188
सखा च्यावनीयो ऽयं योज्यो ऽस्द्यथया सदा 1 अनेन शतशः स ्नंसाखव्यधिता Fa ।। 164
BUPA गताः कल्याः खा जिन्ञासतस्तव 1 श्रमेण मष्टतानेन दुःखमेव त्वया्जितम्‌ I 165
, मदिराया तथाचापि प्रवतष्वाविचारतः। बच्चस्सेतद्राणद्ाद्भलं fe वचनं मुने ॥ 166
. अमविष्यदिदं कम॑ छलं पू यदि त्वया । ate caged सुक्ता नाभविष्यदियं MT ॥ 157
तस्मा्यथान्यदौयेषु शुक्रो पितिषिन्दुषु | चकथं त्वमद्कारं तथान्येव्वपि भावय ॥ 158
चन्यदौयखखसो भूत्वा काये ऽस्मिन्यदयदौच्तसे | तत्तदेवापटव्यथे परेभ्यो दितमाच्रर ॥ 150
यं सुखः परो दुःस्थो Ao ऽयसु्वकीः | परः करोत्ययं नेति कुरबेष्ये† त्वमात्मनि ॥ 10
सुखा श्यावयात्मानं परदुःखे नियोजय | कदायं किं करोतौति छलमस्य freq ॥ 161
न्येनापि छतं दोषं पातयायेव मस्तके | अल्पमप्यस्य दोषं च प्रकाश्य ASE? ॥ 162
च्न्याधिकयणश्योवदरयो ऽस्य मलिनौकर | निरदटदासवचेनं सत्वका्षु वाष्टय ॥ 168
नागन्तुकगु णेन स्तव्यो दो षमयो. छययं | यथा Alay जानौयादुणमस्य तथा कुर.॥ 164
सं च्तेपाद्यदयदात्मारथे परेष्वपकतं त्वया | तत्तदात्मनि सत्वां व्यसनं विनिपात ॥ 165
नैवोत्साद्ोऽस्यं दातव्यो येनायं सुखरो भवेत्‌। स्थाप्यो Taya करोतौ at ऽय Seay 101
zd gee fred न कर्व्यमिदं त्वया । एवमेष वश्यः कार्या नियराद्यस्तदतिक्रमे ॥ 167
खअयैवसु्माने ऽपि fat नेद करिष्यसि | त्वामेव निगरह्ौव्यामि सवेदोषास्वदाभ्िताः ॥ 168
a यास्यसि मया दृष्टः सवैदर्पान्निदन्मि ते। अन्योऽसौ पूर्वकः काल्या यचासिमि नाधितः ॥ {४
aerate मम खार्थं Kata त्यज साप्रतम्‌ । तवं धिक्रौतो मयान्येषु बखेदमचिन्तयन्‌ ॥ 170
त्वा aaa न दास्यामि यदि नाम प्रमादतः | त्वं मां नरकपालेषु प्रदास्यसि न संश्रयः ॥ 111
ad चानेकधा दत्तवा ware वयद्रितश्विरम्‌। frefa arate तवां तानि वेराण्यनुस्मरन्‌॥ 172
म कार्तव्यात्मनि पौतियैदयात्मप्रौतिरस्ि ते । यद्यात्मा रच्ित्यो ऽयं रत्ितव्यो न युज्यते ॥ 1;
यथा यथास्य कायस्य क्रियते परिपालनम्‌ | छकमाततसो भूत्वा पतद्येव तथा तथा ॥ 174
wad पतितस्यापि सर्वापौयं वसुंधरा | नालं पूरयितुं avai तत्को ऽदयेच्छं करिग्यति ॥ 17s
चअशव्यमिष्छतः कश खाश्ामङ्ख जयते | निराशो यस्त॒ सवच तस्य संपदजोणिंका ॥ 176
तस्मान्न पससो देयः कायस्यच्छाभिरद्धये rane नाम तदस्तु यदिदत्वाच्न गद्यते ॥ 177
भस्मनिष्छावसानेयं feria चाल्यते | खुचिप्रतिमा घोरा कस्माद ममाय; ॥ 178°
किं ममानेन थन्त्ेण जोविना वा गतेन वा । STATS को विशेषो ऽस्य erence नण्यसि॥ 7;
Toa था दुःखमुपाज्॑ते | किमस्य कातुल्यस्य देषेणानुनयेन वा ॥ 180
मया वा पालितं धरायभंच्ितस्य TT | न च SST न च SoA षं करोमि किम्‌ ॥ 18
रोषो ge खलौकारात्तोषो यस्य च पुजया । स व चेन्न जानाति अमः कस्य छतेन मे ॥ 19
इमं ये कायमिच्छन्ति Sofi Rows किल । स्वँ खकायमिष्डन्ति तेऽपि कस्मान्न मे भियाः॥ 1४
तस््ाश्मयानयेन्तेण कायस्लक्तो नगदिते । अतोऽयं बङदोषो ऽपि धायते कर्मभागडवत्‌ ॥ 18
Fare लोकचरितैः पण्डितानुयाग्यदम्‌ | प्रमादकधां weer MAHAR निवारयन्‌ ॥.18

--- PAGE 126 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) बोधिषयैवतारम्‌ ॥ 25

Renee wey समाधोनं actenez |
farratfenaraer खाशम्बगनिरन्तरम्‌ 1185

बोधिचर्या वतारे ध्यानपारमिताः wer परिच्छेदः ॥

द्रम परिकरं सव rary fe सुनिज॑गौ | वस्मादुत्पादयेव्मच्ां sates frre ॥ 1

wef: परमां सद्यदयमिदं मतम्‌.। बुद्धे रगोचरस्तत्वं बुद्धिः संङृतिर्यते ॥ 8

वव्र Mat दिधा gat योगौ षाछसकस्तथा | तच प्रातको लोको योगिलोकेन बाध्यते ॥ 9
बाध्यन्ते Wisi योगिनोऽ््युत्तरोत्तरैः | दृद्ान्तेनोभयेष्ेन कार्यार्चमविघारतः॥ 4 *
लोके न भात्रा दृष्यन्ते Meeps चापि तत्त्वतः | Ay मायावदित्यत्र विवादो योगिलोकयोः ॥ 5
प्र्यच्तमपि रूपादिप्रसिद्या न प्रमाणतः | खशुच्यादिषु श्रच्यादिप्रसिदिरिवि सा ग्टषा ॥ 6
लोकावतारणाथे च भावा माथेन देशिता | वत्तः afar नेते Geen चेदिशध्यते ॥ 7 .
न दोषो योगिसंन्या लोकान्ते aac | अन्यथा लोकबाधा स्यादशुवचिं्नौनिरूपये ॥ 8
मायोपमाव्निनायुखं सद्भावे ऽपि कथं यथा । यदि मायोपमः सत्वः किं एनर्जायते ग्रतः ॥ 9
यावत्म्ययसामयरौ ताक्मायापि वर्तते | दौध॑संतानमारेण कथं Bats सत्यतः ॥ 10
मायाएदषधातादौ चित्तामावान्र पापकम्‌ |. चित्तमायासमे ते तु पापएरयसमुद्धवः॥ 1 “°
मन्त्रादौनामसामर्थ्यान्न माया चित्तसंभवः। सापि नानाविधा माया नानाप्र्ययसंभवा । 12
नैकस्य सर्वसामथ् प्रत्यथस्याल्ि कुचचित्‌ | नितः परमार्थेन Ween यदि संसरेत्‌ ॥ 15
बुद्धोऽपि संसरेदेव्रं ततः कि बोधिचय॑या-। परत्ययानामनुष्डेदे मायाप्युच्छि्ते न हि. ॥ 14
प्यानं तु पिच्छेदा्तसंरत्यापि न संभवः | यदा म भ्नान्तिरप्यत्ति माया केनो पलभ्यते ॥ 16
यदा waa ते afer तदा किमुपलभ्यते | चित्तसैव स अकारो यद्न्योऽसतयेव तत्वतः ॥ 16.
चित्तमेव यदा माया तदा किं केन दृष्यते | उक्तं च लोकनाधेन चित्तं चित्तं न पश्यति ॥ 17
न feats यथात्मानमसिधारा तथा मनः | आात्ममावं यथा दौपः संप्रकाश्यतोति चेत्‌ ॥ 18
तैव vega Shit यस्मात्न तमसाटतः । न हि सटिकवप्नौलं नौलत्वेन्यदपेच्तते ॥ 19

तदा किंचित्यरापेच्चमनपेच्तं च दृष्यते | अनौलत्वेन तन्नोलं नोलङेतुयंधेच्छते ॥ 20

feta fe at नलं कुर्यादातमाग मात्मना | अनोललेन altel कुर्या दात्मानमातमना ।। 21
दीपः प्रक्यशत इति wet ञानेन कथयति । बुधः प्रका्यत इति wie केनचिदुच्यते I-22
प्रकाशा वाघकाशा वा यदा GET न केनचित्‌ | बन्धयादुदिटटलोलेव MwA सा सुधा ॥ २३.
यदि नास्ति खसं वित्तिर्विंक्चागं ख्यते कथम्‌ | अन्यानुभरते संबन्धाठ्सतिराखुविषं यथा ॥ 2४
प्र्यान्तरयक्षस्य aaa पकाग्रते | साञ्ननविधिदृंद्टो घटो गेवाञ्नगं भवेत्‌ II ॐ

यथा ge qa wre Fhe प्रतिधिध्यते | सत्यतः कल्पना त्वज दुःखहेतु्निवायंते ।+%6
चित्तादन्धा ग माया चेद्नाप्यनन्येति कष्यते । वस्तु चेत्सा कथं नान्धा खन्धा चेत्रा्ति व्तुतः | 97
Geary यथः माया ATOR तथा मनः | वस्लाभयन्त्स सारः सोऽन्यधाका्वद्धवेत्‌ |! 28
वस्वाश्रयेणामावस्य भियावश्वं कथं भवेत्‌ । ्सत्यदयमेकं दि वचित्तमापद्यते तव ॥ 29

--- PAGE 127 [OCR_san+eng] ---
26 नोभिचयैवतारम्‌ |, (Journal & Text, Part 11, 1894,

याद्सुक्षं चदा चित्तं तथा स्वे तथागताः | रवं च को Yat शब्भख्छित्तमाथे ऽपि कषित ॥ 90
मायोषमत्वे ऽपि कथं ञाते ज्ञेयो -निवर्तते । "यदा माया feat रा्ग्तत्वतुंरपि जायते. 11 91
audio हि तत्कु तंयसं सेश्रवासना | सद्दृद्िकाल्े वस्यातो दुबला गन्यवासना ॥ 9
रून्धतमवासनाधाना AT भाववासना | किचित्राल्लौति चाभ्यासात्‌ सापि पच्चाव्हौयते ॥ 8
दा न लभ्यते भावो यो नास्तीति परकश्यते | तदा निराश्रयो भावः कर्थं तिष्ेन्मतेः WE ॥ 8५
यदा न.मावो नूभावो मतेः संतिते एर । सदान्यगद्यमावेन निरालम्बा प्श्ाम्यति ॥ ४6,
चिन्तामणिः कर्पतसय येष्छापरिपरणः | विनेयप्रगिधानाभ्यां जिनविम्बं -तचेच्छते.॥ 5 *
यथा गादडिकः wai साधयित्वा विनष्यति | स afaifacre ऽपि पिवाम न्‌ ॥ 8 `
बोधिचर्यानुरूपेण भिगस्तम्भो ऽपि साधितः, करोति स्वैका्त्याणि बोधिसत्विऽपि ॥ 88

` अचिक्षके छता पूणा कथं फलवती भवेत्‌ । gale प्यते Taft fda वा ॥ 99
्यागमाच्च पलं तच संख्या तत््वतोऽपि वा 1 Bags छता पजा सपलेति कथं यथा ॥ 40
स्यदशंनतो सुक्ति! गून्यतादश्रंनेन किम्‌ । न विनागेन मार्गेण बोधिरि्यागमो यतः ॥ ५1
त्वसि aera ae fewer | यस्मादुभयसिजोऽसौ न feat ऽसौ तवादितः॥ 4
यत्मत्यया च ATM खष्टायानेऽपि तां कुर । च्यन्धोभयेरसन्यत्वे वेदादेरपि सत्यता ॥ 49
सविवादं महायानमिति चेदागमं अभ । तौर्थिकेः सविवादत्वात्छैः परैश्ागमान्तरम्‌ ॥ 4५

` पासनं भिच्ुतामूलं भिच्लुतेव च दुःस्थिता । सावशम्बनचित्तानां निर्वाणमपि दुःस्थितम्‌ ॥ 46
कप्रायाग्मुक्तिखेत्तदगन्तरमस्तु सा । दृष्टं च तेषु MURA स्यापि कर्मणः ॥ 46

BA मावादुपादानं नालति चेत्य प्रधार्यते । किमक्िद्धापि carat नास्ति संमोवत्सतो ॥ 4} `
वेदनाप्र्या कषणा वेदमेषां च विद्यते | सालम्बनेन चित्तेन स्थातव्यं यथ तच वा | 48

विना spac चित्तं वद्धमुत्पद्यते एगः। यथासंदिसमापत्तौ भावयेन्तेन शून्यताम्‌ ॥ 49

यतृ यजेऽवतरेदाव्छं तखेद्नुद्ोक्ठमिष्यते | Awa HATS पायस्तर्यं म्‌ किरं मतम्‌ ॥ 50
'रकेनागम्यमागेन सकलं यदि ठीषवत्‌ | एकेन aaa किं ग सै निगोदितम्‌ ॥ 81

. महाकाष्यपसुर्येख यदाक्यं नावगाद्यते | तत्वयानवनबुद्धत्वादय्ाद्यं क' करिष्यति ॥ 52
शक्तिथासात्ननिमु्या संसारे सिध्यति स्थितिः । मोहेन ofertas मून्यताया ददं पलम्‌॥ 68
तदेवं शून्यतापक्े दूषयं नोपपद्यते । तस्माघनिविंचिकित्सेन भावभोयैव भून्यता ४५ `
क्ते्द्येयादृतितमः प्रतिपच्छो fe sega । घ्रं सर्व्लताकामो ग भावयति वां कथम iss
यदुदुःखजननं वस्तु चासस्तम्भास्रजायताम्‌ † अन्यता दुःखग्रमनौ ततः किं जायते भयम्‌ ॥ ce
यतस्ततो ang भयं see गाम किंचन । Tras न किंचिचेद्धयँ कस्य भविष्यति boy
RAMS नादं ey नाप्यस्मि शोणितम्‌ | न सिंहाय न च eet न पयं लसिकापि वा| 88
arg वसा ग च. सेदो न मेदो ऽग्वाणि नाप्यम्‌ | न MEU गृचमूथमद्ं न च ॥ co
नां मासं न aerate वायुरं न च । न च दिगियं नापि षद्वि्वानानि etre ॥ ०
शब्दश्नागं यदि तदा शब्दो yA सव॑दा । छेयं विना तु किं वेत्ति येन छागं निरच्यते ॥ 01
खभागानां यदि श्वानं कारं St परसब्धते । तेगासं निष्ितदवेयं wet wetter नियः ॥ 09
र Saeed नानाति तदा कि न श्टणोच्पि | Weare निधाना्ेत्तवस्लण्कवागमप्यसत ॥ 6;

--- PAGE 128 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text 8०००] बोभिचयीवतारम्‌ | 27

शब्दय णरूपं यत्तदरपग्र् गं कथम्‌ । खकः पिता च एच करयते गनु तत्वतः ॥ 64

arg रजस्तमो वापि न एतौ भ पिता यतः । शब्दग्रह णयक्तस्त्‌ खभावस्तस्य Awa ॥ 66 `
सदेवान्येन रूपेण गटवत्‌ सोऽप्य | स ण्वान्यखभावचेदपूर्वेयं तद्कता ॥ 68
aaa चेभिनं त्ुपसुच्यताम्‌ । waa चेत्ततः सवं Gara प्रसज्यते ॥ 67
चेतनाचेतने er caterer समा | विशेष यथा मिथ्या कः MQ TMT ॥ 68
चेतन नेवा्टमचैतन्यात्पटादिवत्‌ | अथ श्च खेतनायो गृदश्ो गदः प्रसन्यते ॥ 9
ernfaaa waver चैतन्येनास्य .कि छतम्‌ । ` अन्तस्य निच्कियस्येवमाकाध्स्यात्मता BAT ॥ 70
न कमेफलसंबन्धो युक्तखेदात्मना विना । कर्म छत्वा विनष्टे हि. पलं कस्य भविष्यति ॥ 71
दयोरप्यावयोः सिेभिंत्राधारे क्रियाफले | निर्यापारख weavers वादो; TUT मयु ॥ ‰2
हेतुमान्फलयोगोति दृष्यते नैषं संभवः | cameras कर्तां भोक्तेति Via 1 70
अतौतानागतं चित्तं गां तद्धि न विद्यते । अथोत्पघ्नमष्धं चित्तं नषटैऽस्मिन्नास््यददं एनः ॥ ?५ *
यथेव कदलौल्तम्भो न कचिद्धागण्रः छतः | तघाहमप्यसद्धतो ग्रग्यमाणो विचारतः ॥ 7

afte सत्वो म विदत कस्योपरि पिति चेत्‌ | कार्यां मभ्युपेतेन थौ मोदेन प्रकस्पितः ॥ 75
कायै कस्य न चेत्सत्वः स्यमी्ा तु मोहतः । दुग्ख्युपश्रमाथे तु कायेमोदेन वायते ॥ 77
दुःखदेतुरुंकार आत्ममोात्तु वर्धते । सतोऽपि न॒ निवयखेदर नेरात्यभावना ॥ ‰8

क्वायो न परादौ गो ङ्का गरू कायः कटिनै च । नोदरं नाप्ययं षं नोरो बाह न चापि सः॥ 70
न हस्तौ नाप्ययं म क्तौ नाङ्लच्तगः। न मौवा न धिरः कायः कायोऽ्च कतरः पुनः ॥ 80
यदि aie कायौ ऽयमेकदेेन वर्तते | अंशा अंगेषु वर्तन्ते स तु कुच स्वयं स्थितः ॥ 81
सर्वात्ममा Sade स्थितः कायः करादिषु । कायास्तावन्त रव स्युर्या वन्तस्ते करादयः ॥ 82
नैवान्तनं वद्धिः कायः कथं कायः करादिषु । करादिभ्यः amie कथं तु खलु विद्यते ॥ 88
तन्नास्ति कायो abere कायबुद्धिः करादिषु । संनिवेश्रविषेषेण स्थाणौ एरषलुिवत्‌ ॥ 84
यपवद्मद्ययसाममरौ तावत्कः Gathers । णवं करादौ सा यावत्तावत्कायोऽच वृष्यते ॥ 8
खवमञ्ुणिपुञ्नलत्यादो ऽपि कतरो मवेत्‌ | सोऽपि पवैसमूहत्वत्यर्वापि खां प्रमेदतः॥ 86
sur चप्यामेदेन सो ऽप्यगार्िगिविमागतः ¢ दिग्विमिगो निर एत्वादाकां तेन नाख्यगु ॥ 87
रवं aaa रूपे को cede fear: | कायच्वेवं यदा नालि वेदा का Sl एमाख कः ॥ 88
यद्यन्त दुःखं तर्न प्रशान्किं न बाधते । iterate ्टद्ादिसखं चेति न रोचते ॥ 89
बलौयसाभिभरूतत्वाद्यदि ते । वेदनात्वं कथं तस्य थस्य नानुभवात्मता ॥ 90

अत्ति aera SS षतं ननु । तुद्टिमा्ापरा चेव्छात्तसमात्साप्यस्य SAAT ॥ 9
frequents दुःखस्थालुदयो यदि । कल्पनाभिनिवेगश्रो छि Setar गनु ॥ 9

अत va विचारोऽयं प्रतिपक्तोऽस्य माव्यते | विकष्पक्तेचसंभूलध्यानादारा हि योगिनः ॥ %
सान्तराविशनषठ चेत्स शुत तयोः । निरन्तरत्वेऽ्येकल्वं वस्य केगास्तु संगतिः ॥ ४५
mahal प्रवे्यो ऽस्ति निराकारः समख सः! श्यप्रवेशे न मिश्रत्ममिखलत्वे न संगतिः ॥ 9४
frog च. संसगः कथं बामो पपद्यते । संसग च गिरं परतवं यदि वृष्टं निदशरंय ॥ ०

ति्षासयं लमूतैस्य संसर्गा जेव goed |. समूदस्याप्यवसतुलाश्यथा Ws विचारितम्‌ ॥'9

--- PAGE 129 [OCR_san+eng] ---
28 बोधिचयवतारम्‌ ॥ [Journal & Tetx, Part II, 1894.

तदेवं स्प्नाभावे वेदनत्संभवः कुलः । किम्॑मयमायासो बाधा कस्य कुतो भवेत्‌ ॥ os .

यदा न वेदकः कञिदेदना च न विद्यते | वदावस्धामिमां दृषा eal किं न FATT ॥ ०
दृष्यते aed वापि खक्नमायोपमात्मना | चित्तेन सहजातत्वादेदना तेन नेच्छति ॥"100

पूवं पश्चाच जातेन स्मर्यते नानुभूयते | खात्मानं नानुभवति नवान्येनानुभूयते ॥ 101

न चास्ति वेदकः कच्िदवेदनातो न area | निरात्मके कलापेऽस्मिन्क रवं वाध्यते ऽनया ॥ 109
नेन्तियेषु न रूपादौ नान्तराले मनः स्थितम्‌ । नाप्यन्तनं वहि खित्तमन्यच्रापि न लभ्यते । 108
यन्न काये न चान्यच न मिं न एथक्‌ कचित्‌ | तन्न किंचिदवः सत्वाः रत्या परिनिरेताः॥ 104
छेयात्पवं यदि ज्ञानं किमालम्ब्यास्य संभवः | Hat ae चेज्ज्ञानं किमालम्न्यास्य संभवः१। 105
थ ज्नयाद्धवेत्यश्वाचदा ज्ञानं कुतो भवेत्‌ | णवं च सर्वधर्मा णासुत्पत्तर्ना वश्रौयंते ॥ 106

aad संरतिर्नाल्ि ततः सव्यद्यं कुतः | अथ साप्यन्यसंडन्या Mart नितः कुतः ॥ 107
परचित्तविकल्पोऽसौ खसंटत्या तु नास्ति सः । स पश्चात्नियतः सो ऽस्ति न Bava संदतिः॥। 10४
कल्पनाकल्पितं चेति दयमन्यो ऽन्यनिधितम | यथा परसिद्धमाधित्य विचारः सर्वं उच्यते ॥ 109
विचारस्तिन तुःयदा विचारेण fame | तदानवृस्था तस्यापि विचारस्य विचास्णात्‌ ॥ 110
विचारिते वित्य तु विचारस्यास्ि area: | निराखयत्वान्नोदेति तच निर्वागमुच्यते ॥ 111
यस्य sagt स्यं स वातयन्तदुःस्थितः | यदि arama ्ञानाक्िवि तु का गतिः ॥ 119
खथ शेयवशाज्जञानं चेयाक्ितवेऽपि का गतिः । चधान्योन्यवशात्त्वमभाद् स्यादयो रपिः ॥ 119
पिता चेन्न विना Garena: पुचस्य संभवः । एचाभावे पिता नास्ति तथासत््वं दयोरुपि ॥ 114
aya .जायते Foret तेनेव aaa | स्लेयाञ्ज्ञानेन जातेन तत्सत्ता किं न गम्यते ॥ 115
अङ्कःरादन्यतो च्ञानाद्भौजमस्तौति गम्यते । aria कुतो क्लां केयं य सेन गम्यते ॥ 116
लोकः प्रत्यच्ततस्तावत्छवे हेतुमु दौच्तते | पद्मनालादिमेदो fe हेतुमेदेन जायते ॥ 117

किं छतो हेतुमेद ेत्पवहेतुपमेदतः | कस्माचेत्पलदो हेतुः प॒रवहेतुपरभावतः, |! 118

द्वरो जगतो Fars कस्तावदौश्वरः | भूतानिचेद्धवत्येवं नाममम्चेऽपि किं अमः ॥ 119

श्छपि aa केऽनिव्याश्च fader न च देवताः | लदा खासुचयश्चेवं यमादयो न स LAT II 190
TAMA Vea पूर्वनिषेधतः | ata च कटत्वमप्यचिन्त्य किमुच्यते ॥ 121
तेन किं ezfad च आत्माचेतर त्वसौ भुवः । च्पादिखमाव kee चानं जेथादनादि च ॥ 198
कमः सुखदुःखे च वद किं तेन नि्भिंतम्‌ | हेतोरादिनं चेदस्ति मलस्यादिः कुतो भवेत्‌॥ 128
कस्मात्सदा न कुरते नदि सोऽन्यमपेंच्तते। तेनाक्लतोऽन्यो नेव व तेनासौ किमपेच्तताम्‌॥ 1:
ष्यपेच्तते चेत्सामग्रौ हेतु एनरीच्रः । नाकर्तुमौग्ः सामग्रगान्न कुं तदभावतः ॥ 125
करो्यनिच्छत्नरशेत्यरायत्तः प्रसव्यते | इच्छततपौच्छ।यत्तः स्यातवु व॑तः कुत द श्रता ॥ 128

येऽपि नि्यानगन्नाडसतेऽपि पव निषारिताः। सांख्याः परधानमिष्छन्ति नियं लोकस्य कारणम्‌ ॥ 1४
सत्वं रणस्तमच्ेति गणा खअपिषमस्थिताः | प्रधानमिति कथ्यन्ते विषमेण गदुच्यते4 128 `
णकस्य चिखमावत्वमयुलतं तेन नात्ति aq र्वं गुणा न विद्यन्ते wae ते ऽपि हि विधा ॥ 7
शणामावे च शन्दादेर ्ित्वमतिदूरलः | अचेतने च वस्त्रादौ सुखादेरप्यसंभवः ॥ 190
तजेतुरूपांभावा्ेचनु भावा विचाभ्िताः | सुखादेव च ते Rot च त्रस्मात्यटादयः ॥ 19

--- PAGE 130 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.] बोधिच॑यावतारम्‌ ॥ 29

पटादेसतु खखादि स्यात्तदभावात्सुखाद्सत्‌ | सखादोनां च नित्यत्वं कदाचिन्नोपलभ्यते ॥ 198
सत्यामेव खखयक्तौ संवित्तिः किं न ग्यते | AA याति. ्धूलं दषो च तत्कथम्‌ ॥ 139
सधौल्यं aan भवेतृदधष्यमनि स्थौल्यखप्यते | सवस्य वस्त॒नस्तदत्विं नानि्यत्वमिष्यंते ॥ 29 `
न स्थौल्यं चेत्यु खादन्यत्यु खस्वानित्यता Hex | मासदुत्प्यते किं चिद सत्वादिति चेन्मतम्‌ ॥ 195
अक्तस्यासत उत्यनतिरकामस्यापि ते स्थिता | ATS ऽमेध्यभच्ः स्यात्फलं हेतौ यदि स्थितम्‌ 136
"पटारवैेव कार्मा सवोजं tent निवग्यताम्‌ । मो चेत्ेच्तते लोकरूत्वक्षस्यापि सं ख्ितिः ॥ 197
लोकस्यापि च्‌ तञ्च्वानमस्ति कस्मान्न पश्यति | लोकापरमाणतायां wees मप्यसत्‌ ॥ 188
प्रमाणमप्रमाणं Fag तत्मभितं HAT | तत्वतः खन्यत तस्माद्भावानां नोपमद्यते ॥ iso

afer भावमस्मृ् तदमावो न गद्यते | तस्मादभावो म्टषा यो हि तस्याभावः स्फुटं AT ॥ 140
तस्मात्छप्ने BA TS स नास्तौति विकल्पना + तद्धावकल्पनोत्पादं विबघ्नाति wat च'सा ॥ 141
तस्मादेवं विचारेण नास्ति किचिदहेतुतः । न च ree पत्ययेषु व्यवस्थितम्‌ ॥ 142
अन्यतो नापि चायातं न तिति न गच्छति | मायातः को faites यन्मदः स्तः छतम्‌ ॥ 148
मायया निर्मितं यच हेतुभिर्यैच निभिंतम्‌। खायाति तत्कुतः कुचर याति चेति निरूप्यताम्‌ ॥ 144
यदन्यसं निधानेन दृष्टं न तदभावतः । प्रतिनिम्बसमे तस्मिन्लचिभे सत्यता कथम्‌ ॥ 145
विद्यमानस्य भावस्य हेतुना किं प्रयोजनम्‌ | अथाप्यविद्यमानोऽसौ Saat किं प्रयोजनम्‌ ॥ 146
नाभावस्य विकारोऽस्ति हेतुको टिश्यतैरपि | तदवस्थः कथं भावः को वान्यो भावतां गतः ॥ 14
नाभावकाले AAS AT भावो भविष्यति । नाजातेन द्धि भावेन सो ऽमावोऽपगमिष्यति ॥ 148
न चानपगते Gre भावावसर संभवः | भावश्वाभावतां नैति दिखभावप्रसङ्गतः \ 149

णवं न च निरोधोऽस्ति न च भावोऽस्ति सवदा । अजनातमनिरद्धं च तरमात्सवमिदं जगत्‌॥ 160
सप्नोपमास्तु गतयो विचारे कदलौसमाः | निैतानिरैतानां च विशेषो नास्ति वस्तुतः ॥ 181
रवं नयेषु मयु किर सन्ये किं इतं भवेत्‌ । सततः परिभूर्लो वा केन कः संमविब्यति ॥ 18
कुतः सुखं वा दुःखं वा किं परियं वा किमषरियम्‌। का SM कुच साटष्णा ग्टग्यमाणा खभावतः॥ 169
विचारे जौवलोकस्य को नाभाक मरिष्यति। को मविष्यति को भूतः को बन्धुः कस्य कः छत्‌ ॥ 154
aquaria परियन्तु मदिधाः | प्रकुप्यन्ति पष्टव्यन्ति कल्दोत्सवहेतुभिः ॥ 156
भ्रोकायातेर्विमदि शच मिधण्डेदनभेदनैः | यापयन्ति gear पिरप्मखेश्वः ॥ 156

wat पतन्यपायेषु दौषेतीत्र्यथेषु च | आगत्यागत्य गतिं भूत्वा भूत्वा सखोचिता ॥ 167

मवे ब्धपपातख तच्र वा AAEM | तच्रान्योन्यविसोध्च न भवेत्तत्वमौदृशम्‌ ॥ 158

च MQ अनन्ता दुःलसागराः | तक्रैवमल्पवलता तचाप्यल्पत्वमायुषः ॥ 159

प्रापि नौवितासोग्ययामारैः ane | नि्रयोयनवैवांलसं सनिष्ष्तथा ॥ 160
Tiaadearg विवेकस्तु सुलभः | तचाप्यभ्यस्तविच्ो पनिवाशैगगतिः कुतः ॥ 161

स्वापि मासो यतते मदापायप्पावने | त्रासन्मारगैवाङल्यं विचिकित्सा च दुजंया ॥ 162

एनश्च चणदौ्वभ्ं बुडोत्पादोऽतिदुलमः। जं षो दुर्निवार श्यो दुःखपरुंपरा । 168

aet वतातिश्योच्यलमेषां दुःखौघवतिंनाम्‌ | ये नेचन्ते खदौस्थियमेवमप्यतिदुःस्थिताः ॥ 164
wT चात्वा यथा ahafetety मुखमुंङः। खसौस्थियं च मन्यन्त रवमप्यतिदुःस्थिता ॥ 7,

--- PAGE 131 [OCR_san+eng] ---
80 बोधिचयावतारम्‌ । - [Fournal & Text, Part 11, 180,

.श्जरामरलौलान मवं faecet सताम्‌ । आआयास्यन्यापदो घोरोः AA मरणमग्रतः ॥ 169

णवं दुःखाभितप्तानां शान्ति कुर्या मष्ं कद? | परमेषसमुुेः खखोपकरगीः खकः ॥ 19;

कदोपलम्भदृष्िभ्यो देशयिष्यामि शून्यताम्‌ । संड्यानुपलमःन एरयसंभारमादरात्‌ ॥ 108
बोधिचर्यावेतढे प्रच्ापारमितापरिछेदो नवमः॥

बोधिचर्यावतारः मे यदिचिन्तयतः शुभम्‌ | तेन सरवे जनाः सन्त॒ बोधिर्या विभूषणाः ॥ 1
wate feet यावन्तः कायचित्तयथातुराः | ते प्राष्नवन्तु मत्ययः रखपघामोद्यसागरान्‌ ॥ 2
ardent सुखज्यानिर्मां भ तेषां कदाचन | बोधिसक्वसुखं प्राप्तं भवत्यविरतं जगत्‌ ॥ 8
यावन्तो नरकाः केचिदि्यन्ते लोकधातुष॒ | सखाबतौसखामोरैरभीदन्तां तेष देहिनः ॥ +
प्रौतार्ताः प्राघ्रवन्त्‌ष्णमुष्णातगैः सन्तु last | बोधिसत्वमहामेघसंभीजलसागरैः ॥ 5
ष्पसिपचरवनं तेषां स्यान्नन्दनवनद्यतिः | कटश्व्मलोरच्ताश्च जायन्तां कल्यपादपाः ॥ 6

कांदम्बकारगडवचक्रवाकष्ठंसादिकोलादलरम्यश्योभेः

सरोभिरुदामसरोजगरर्भवन्त्‌ द्या नरकपदेश्णाः ॥ 7 ,

सो {ङ्ारराश््मणिराशिरस्त्‌ तप्ता च भ स्फाटिककुटटिमं स्यात्‌ |

भवन्त्‌ संचातमद्धौधराश्च पजाविमानाः सुगतप्रपर्णः ॥ 8

ङ्ारतप्तोपलशस््रटष्टिस्यप्ग्टत्यस्त॒ च पुष्पः |

TSE च परस्परे क्रौडार्थं मास्तु च VASE ॥ 9

परतितसकलमांसाः कुन्दवर्णास्थिदेष्! द नसमजलायां वैतरण्यां निमम्ाः |

मम बुशलबलेन प्राप्तदिव्यात्मभावाः स्च सुरवनिताभिः सन्तु मन्दाकिनौस्थाः ॥ 10

स्ताः पश्यन्वकस्मादिष्ट यमपुरषाः काकग्रभाख घोरा

ध्वान्तं ध्वस्तं समन्तात्सुखर तिजननौ कस्य सौम्या प्रमेयम्‌ |

xara पेच्तमाणा गगनतश्तगतं वच्वपाणिं ज्वलन्तं

दृष्टा. पामोदयवेगाद्यपगतदुरिता यांतु तेनेव साधंम्‌ ॥ 71

पततु कममलरद्िगंन्धपानौयमिच्राच्छमितिनरकवङ्कि दृश्यते. नाश्रयग्तौ । `

किमिदमिति सखेनाङादितं नाम करमाद्भवतु कमलपाणेर्द शनं नारकाणाम्‌ ॥ 12

यातायात wis भयमपनयत भ्रातरो नौविताः रमः

संप्राप्तोऽस्माकमेष ज्चलदमयकरः कोऽपि चौरौ कुमारः |

सवै यस्यानुभावाद्यसनमपगतं प्रौतिवेगाः प्रदत्ताः ,

जातं संबोधिचित्तं सकैलजनपरिवाखमाता दथां च ॥ 18

WPA मवन्तः घर्रतसुकुटर्यैमानाश्चपरद

कारण््ादातैदृष्टि श्रिरसि निपतितानेकपुष्मौघ्कष्टिम्‌ |

करटागारैमनोक्घैः सतुतिसुंखरखरस््नौसष्टखोपगौति-

दाये मद्चघोबं मवतु कलकलः सांप्रतं नारकाणाम्‌ ॥ 14

--- PAGE 132 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Socioyy.] 5 बोधिषयावतारम्‌ ॥ 3l

इति मतूकुशतैः समन्तमगरपसुखानगाढतबोधिसत्तमेघान्‌ |

सखधोतस्गन्धवातदौनमिनन्दन्तु विलोक्य ae ॥ 15
ध्ागयन्तु वेदास्तत्रा नारकाणां भयानि च । दुगंतिभ्यो gent सर्वदुगं तिवासिनः | 16
अन्योन्यभच्तणभयं तिरुखामपगन्छतु | भवन्तु सुखिनः पेता यचोत्तरकुरौ नराः ॥ 17
संतप्यनतां परेता, खाप्यनतां where भवन्तु सदा | आर्यावलो कितेखरकर्गलितच्तीरथारामिः | 8
wan पश्यन्तु eof श्टण्वन्तु बधिराः सदा | afters प्रख्यन्तां मायादेवरीव निर्यथा Wis’
Tet खक्चन्दनविभूवणम्‌ | Aafia BF लमन्तां दितसं दितम्‌ ॥ 20
Have निभेयाः सन्तु ्रोकार्ताः पौतिलाभिनः। उदमख निरुदेगा टतिमन्तो भवन्तु च॥ श
आरोग्यं ोगिणामसतु मुच्यन्तां सर्वबन्धनात्‌ । दुर्बला बलिनः सन्तु सिग्धचित्ताः परस्परम्‌ ॥ 22
wat fom शिवाः सन्तु सैषां पथि वर्तिनाम्‌ | येन कार्येण गच्छन्ति तदुपायेन सिध्यतु ॥ 28
नौयानयाचारूएाख सन्तु सिद्धमभोरथाः | ata करूलमासाद्य रमन्तां सह बन्धुभिः ॥ 2५
कान्तासेन्मागेपतिता लभन्तां सार्ध॑संगतिम्‌ | asda च गन्डन्तु चौरयाघ्रादिनिभयाः ॥ 26
हमत्तप्मत्तानां ्ाध्थारणधादिसंकटे | नाथवालढानां र्तं FT देवताः ॥ 26
सर्वा ्तणविनिसुंक्ताः शरद्वापर्षारपान्विताः | -च्याकाराचारसंपत्नाः सन्तु जातिस्मराः सदा ॥ 2}
भवन्वच्छयको शर यावदरगनगञ्चवत्‌ | निनदा निरुपायासाः सन्तु खाधीनटत्तयः ॥ १8
अत्पौनसख Berane भवन्तु avbre | मवन्तु रूपसंभन्ना ये विरूपास्तपखिनः |) 29
षाः काश्चन च्तियो लोके पुरत्वं gory ताः । प्रा्ुवन्तु च तां नौचा तमाना मदन्तु च ॥ 30
अनेन मम पुण्येन सवै सत्वा अशेषतः । विरम्य सर्वपापेभ्यः वु्वनतु FIT सदा ॥ 91.
गोधिचिन्ताविर्िता बोधिचर्यापरायणःः | बुद्धैः पर्ण्टिहीताख मारकम॑विवर्भिताः ॥ 32
धपमेयायुषद्धैव VAST भवन्तु ते | fret Nag सखिता र्युश््दोऽपि नश्यतु iss „ -
त्याः कल्पदुमो यतिः स्वा मवन्तु च । लुडबुदधात्मनाकौर्णा  धरमध्वनिमनोहरे; ॥ 34
एौरादिव्यपेला च समा पाणितलोपसा | wat च वैदूर्यमय afer सरवर FTG | 35
धिसत्वमष्परषैष्मणडलानि समन्ततः । निमौदन्तु खश्तोमाभि्मण्डयन्तु WHAT ॥ 9
tre: सवैरच्तेभ्यो रण्सिभ्यो गगनादपि । धर्मध्वनिरवि्ामं शरूयतां BAR Fe FH I 9
Ramee fiat लभन्तां ते समागमम्‌ | पूजामिचैरननतख THAT WTR | 98
वो व्षैतु कालेन weeuticg च । रितो मवतु लोक राजा मवतु धामिंकः ॥ २
Tat भवन्तु चौषध्यो मनाः सिध्यन्तु जापिनाम्‌। भवन्तु करगाविष्टा डाकिनौराच्तसादयः॥ 40
॥ कचिदुःखितः स्वो मा पापौ मा च रोगितः। मा नः परिभूतो वा माभूत्कश्िच दुर्मनाः ॥ ५1
उखध्यायककषिला Gere सन्तु सख्िताः | निलयं स्यात्स षसौ संघकायं च सिथ्यतु ॥ 42
Pantin सन्तु शिक्ताकामा भिन्तवः | कमं णचित्ता ध्यायन्तु सव॑विच्तेमवर्थिताः ॥ ५9
मन्यः सन्तु fare कलद्धायासर्वाजैताः | मवन्त्वखगदप्रोलाख" स परत्रजितास्दुथा | ५4
adler सन्तु संविम्नाः पायच्चयरताः wet | सगतेर्लाभिनः सन्तु तच्च चएखण्डितव्रताः ॥ 45 ,
fear aman सन्तु लाभिनः वरैर्डपातिकाः | भवन्तु शुद्धसंतानाः सर्वदिक्स्यातकौर्तयः 11 46
भक्वापाधिकं दुःखं विना दुष्करचयैया । RIAA कायेन नगद्बुद्धतलमाप्नयात्‌ |Iay

--- PAGE 133 [OCR_san+eng] ---
32 बोधिचयावतारम्‌ । [Journal & Toxt, Part 11, 1804.

पव्यन्तां atdgan सव सचिरगेकधा | अषिन्यवौदसौख्येन सखिनः सन्तु भूयसा ॥ 48
fang बोधिसत्वानां जगदे मनोरथाः । यचिन्तयन्ति ते नाघास्तत्सत्वानां सम्दध्यतु ॥ 4
प्रथेवानुद्ाः glad भवन्तु same | देवाचरनरै नियं पुज्यमानाः wate: ॥ 50

. जालिखरत्वं पत्रज्यामहं च पारया सदा । याव पुदितांथूमिं मञ्चधोषपसिप्रहात्‌ ॥ 51
येन तेनासनेनादहं यापयेयं बलान्वितः | विवेकवाससामम्रौं पाक्या सवेजातिषु 152
यदाच ASMA स्या VATA किंचन | aaa नाथं पयय मञ्लनाथमवित्रतः ll 63
दश्रदिग्ब्योमपर्यन्तसर्वसत्वार्थसाधने । यथा चरति agent सेव्‌ चर्या भवेन्मम ॥ 64
आकारस्य स्थितिर्यावदयावच्च जगतः स्थितिः । ` तावन्मम स्थिति गयाच्जगदुःखानि निन्नवः ॥ 65
यत्किंचिज्नगतो दुःखं तत्सवं मपि प्यताम्‌ | बोधिसत्वः सवे्जगत्सखितमस्त्‌ च ॥ 58
जगद्ःवेकमैषज्यं सर्वसंपत्मखाकसम्‌ | लामसत्कारसहितं चिरं तितु श्रासनम्‌ ॥ 57
मन्नधोषं नमस्यामि यत्रसादान्मतिः शमे | कर्याणमिचरं बन्देऽदं यत्सादाच्च वधेत दरति ॥ ८8

बोधिंचर्यावतारे पर्णामनापरिष्छेदो दशमः ॥

--- PAGE 134 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX 1.

SELECTIONS FROM JAINA VIRAGYA SATAKS.
By
Grt GULAL CIHLAND.

1. In this fleeting life of sorrow and tribulation it is virtue alone that can
give happiness. Although Jiva Atma (soul) is conscious of it, yet it does not per-
form good deeds as prescribed by the Sustras.

People think that to-day, to-morrow, or the day after, or even a year hence
they shall be happy by accumulating wealth; but they do not consider that their
health is declining day by day like water in the hand that drops gradually.

3. Whatever good deeds you wish todo to-morrow do them to-day, without
hesitation; secing that there are many obstacles in your way it ix not desirable to
put them off.

4, Behold the versatile nature of this world, whatever is scen of those closely
related to us, in the morning, undergoes great change in the evening.

5. Do not sleep, be vigilant. Bear in mind that yon are pursued by three
enemies: viz.; Disease, Old Age, and Death, and what rest can you enjoy when
you are sure to pass away.

6. The Wheel of Time, Holding the jars of day and night, is pulled by the two
bullocks—the sun and the moon—it is emptying the water of life from the well of
the world.

7. There is no art, no medicine, and no knowledge which can save this life
from the bite of the serpent Death.

8. The Bee of ‘Time is constantly sucking honey from the lotus-like body in
the waters of this world.

9. Death follows man like a shadow, and [0 him like an enemy ; perform,
therefore, good deeds so that you may reap a blessing hereafter.

10. Jiva Atma suffers various sorts of troubles from the effects of Kurmu
done in previous births.

11. Father, mother, son, wife, and other relations all return from the crema-
tion ground after giving a handful of water to the departed.

12. Your sons, friends, and your hard-earned moncy shall all remain here,
Virtue only will accompany you.

13. This life being entangled in the net of Karma, is incarcerated in the
prison of this world, when released it will go to the region of Niredind.

14, Connection with relations, sensual enjoyment, and the company of friends
are as transitory as drops of water on the lotus.

15. Whefe is gone your power, where is gone your youth, and where is gone
your beauty ? Oh! fhey were all fleeting, and so they passed away before your
eyes!

» 16. Jiva Atma, from the effects of Karma, has lived in the dark, filthy, im-
pure drain of the womb times without number.

17. Life is liable to disease, and death and struggles like fish on land. People
witness it, but no one comes to its rescue. ;

18. Jiva Atma is' subject to innumerable changes in this world. rom the
effects of Karmaa wife becomes a mother in her next birth, and a father, son,
and vice versd. वि ॥

19. There is no such caste, no such Yoni (mode of birth), no such family, and
no such place from which life has not sprung forth and passed away times without
number.

20. Frequent enjoyment of earthly prosperity has led to your sufferings.
Pity it is that you have not tried to “ know yourself.”

21. ‘Live in the world but be not of it’ is the precept taught by our Old
Rishis, and it is the only means of liberating you from the world.

a


--- PAGE 135 [OCR_san+eng] ---
ii APPENDIX 1,

22. Rest assured that no one in this world cin do good to you or injure you,
you yourself ५ » the fruits of your Karma, good or bad, just like boys who suffer
from hunger and are satisfied when they get food.

23. ‘the body is perishable and transitory, while Atma is imperishable and
everlasting ; it is connected with the body only by the link of Karma; it should
not he subservient to it.

24. If you fail to ascertain the relationship between yourself and your family
and know not thoir destination when you separate, your connection with it cannot
be guaranteed.

25. Things change like evening clouds, bodies disappear like bubbles, atoms
separate like birds in the morning, Afma only remains permanent. .

26. One can only practise Virtue (Dharm) so long as his senses ure vigorous,
the signs of old age have not appeared, disease has not affected his body, and
death has uot overtaken him.

27. Putting off to the last the performance of good deeds is just like digging
a well for water when the house is in flames.

28. "116 number of times our souls transmigrate is more than drops of water
in oceans and particles of sand in mountains. Waters of the innumerable ocean,
like Lavana Samara, and sands of innumerable mountains, like Meru, will be
much less than the transmigrations of your soul.

29. Your wealth is like the ears of an elephant which never stop moving;
your sensual pleasures are like the colours of the rainbow, which suddenly change
and disappear ; your youth and heuuty are like a flash of lightning, which instantly
vanish,

30. Your soul has transmigrated times without number and has undergone
sufferings resulting from your Karma, #

31. Death comes to man like evening to the day and dawn to the night, ay
time passed cannot be recalled, so opportunity when lost cannot be regained.

32. Tf, through sheer negligence, you do nothing good to your fellow beings,
you will be your own enemy, and become ४ victim to the miseries of this world.

33. One to whom dcath is a friend, or one who has strength enough to avoid
it, Ri only wait for any length of time to do anything good contemplated

1111),

id 34, Leaving behind all family and treasure, the helpless soul separates
from the body just like flowers that are blown down from trecs.

35. Your soul, which nigrating from one sphere to another, has times without
number inade its wbode in mountains, valleys, seas, caves, trees and other places
too mumerous to mention.

36. Death takes away man just as a lion that rang with a deer from the
herd quite unnoticed.

37. Life goes out of the body like water that falls from a broken vessel,
splendour pusses away like the waves of the sea, and the affection of friends and
relations disappears like a dream. Asa Deva or a Devi, as a man or an animal,
rich or poor, learned or ignorant, free or fettered, you have been put to the most:
difficult (१८०५४ in your life.

39. You have been subjected to the ills of life, by the effects of your Kurma
in this world, where the waters of the innumerable occans cannot quench your
thirst and the edibles of the whole world assuage your hunger.

40. Your life in the present birth will suddenly pass away like a flash of
lightning, and yon shall again be left in darkness, unable to sce or do any thing.

41. Your existence in this world is similar to a drop of dew upon the top of
the grass, therefore, Gautama don’t be idle.

42. Blinded by affection and darkened by unrighteousness you are in want
of truth, like a blind man wanting sight, to appreciate the Gems of Truth, which
shine within him.

43. The ship of virtne and righteousness can only take you to the shores
of the ocean of this world, which when crossed, you shall enjoy the happiness of
Nirvina.

44. Wretched as Tam, I have neither given money to the poor out of my
earnings, nor havo I led a life of Celibacy ; neither have I ever practised austeretics
nor devoted myself to Prayer.


--- PAGE 136 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I. ili
45. My inner man (Antakarna) has been burnt by anger, poisoned by cove-
tousness, torn asunder by pride, and besmeared with fraud.

46. Lord! I have done no real good to mankind, all my learning has
been used in discussion only, my preaching simply to please them, and my osten-
sible purity to cheat them.

47. have made my tongue dirty by speaking untruth, my eyes shameless
by looking into the faults of others, and Ihave rendered my heart impure by
showing malice towards others.

48. My body has been decayed by age, but not my passions; neither were
my senses gratified in my youth, nor desires for worldly objects fullilled.

49. Even in the Light of Knowledge nothing was donc, life passed away in
despair, and time lost, like a valuable gem thrown into the sca.

50. Just, noble, harmless, social, attentive, unselfish, philanthropic, benevo-
lent, charitable, ungreedy, hospitable and merciful are the qualities of a good

itizen.

51. Affectionate, affable, far-sighted, frugal, enlightened, respectful, brave,
shameful and pure-minded are the qualities of a household man.

52. Like a frog that devours insects whilst between the jaws of a serpent,
you are constantly doing harm to your weaker brethren, whilst under the
pressure of death, unmindful of yourself being crushed in a second. ^

(a) Insects (Putangas) for the love of the lamp, to enjoy their sight, sacrifice
their lives by leaping into it.

(2) Bees being attracted by the smell of the Lotus flower, in sucking its
juice are shut up at night within it, and loose their lives.

(c) The deer and the serpent being very fond of music, are attracted by the
flute of the hunters, and are caught by them.

(च) The sweet odour of edibles induces birds and fishes to go to the traps laid
for them by hunters, and anglers and are thus entangled in then. Birds
and fishes being created to eat grain and pieces of bread, for the sake of
their taste, are entangled in the net of the sportsman and become vic-
tims to them.

(€) The elephant, to gratify his sexual desire, blindly goes to embrace the
female (decoy) and ix entrapped.

In a similar wa an, to gratify his senses, falls a victim to the evils of this

world, and at last sacrifices his life for their sake.

53. Virtue is spoiled by idleness, hatred, quarrels anger, fraud, pride, bad
society, and carelessn

b+. Vanity and disappointment should not come to you, hy being praised or
censured for your qnalifications and disqualifications, respectively. By the former
you will lose what you have, and the latter will not allow you to reach the goal of
your aspirations, —_

55. Better to do less good, with purity of heart, than to do more with jea-
lousy, pride, malice or fraud. वि

56. Little, but good and affective, work is always valnable, likea pure gem,
the essence ०६०२ drug, or a pithy advice.

57. The secrets of success ought not to be exposed, for the tree cannot pros-
per if its roots are laid open from underneath. | . वि ॥

58. Honesty, perseverance, respectfulness and industry, with patience, bring
prosperity to a man in this world as well as in the next. . ॥ .

59. One who remains idle and loses the golden opportunity of doing good, is
like the fool who does not quench his thirst when a pool of water is before him,
remains hungry when his basket is filled with swectmeats, and pines in poverty
when Kalpu Vriksha is in his house.

60. ‘Those who do not consider what “ Virtue” is, are not truthful, do not show
respect to their elders, and have not the sense of duty they owe to others, a nd like
beasts, are born only to fill their belly. st वि .

61. Tho giant Death, with his mouth wide open, is waiting to devow you,
be you, therefore, careful to perform all your duties, and fulfil all the promises
you have made before he approaches you. धि

62. If you are unable to subject yourself physically to [0 to undergo
ansterities, and to engage yourself in deep contemplation, the proper course to
liberate your soul from the hard fctters of Karma would be tp keep the pas-


--- PAGE 137 [OCR_san+eng] ---
iv APPENDIX I.

sions your heart under control ; to check your desires; to carry out your secular
affairs with calmness; to devote yonrself to the worship of God, and to realize in
yourself the “Permanent Truth,” bearing in mind the transitory nature of the
objects of the Universe.

63. The mind changes according to the nature of the objects it associates
with, like common oil that takes scent from the flowers that are kept in it, and
a piece of crystal or glass that exhibits the color es under it.

64. Therefore Ict not your mind entertain false ideas, cherish bad motives,
or be lost in idleness or vanity ; but Ict it be constantly occupied in the pursuit
of trne knowledge by devotion to God, religious practices, &.

Avoid.—(1) Hearing bad words ; (2) Seeing bad sights; (3) Eating bad things;
(4) Smelling bad odonrs; (5) Touching unclean things. Refrain from—(1) Killing ;
(2) Telling lies; (3) Stealing; (4) Indulging in luxury, and (5) Coveting anothers
wealth. Coutrol—(c) Your mind, speech, and body, so that they may not do
wrong. from—(d) Anger, pride, fraud, and covetousness. Don’t be—(e)
Ta ish, harmful, vain and envious. Avoid Excess in—(f) Mirth, pleasure,
pain. fear, sorrow, and hatred.

6७. To control your mind (Manas), speech (Vik), and body (Kéyd), does not
mean to be thoughtless, silent, or inactive, like beasts and trees; but instead of
thinking what is evil, speaking untruth, and doing harm to others, they should be
applied to good thoughts, good speech, and good deeds.

67. To control your senses, viz., tonch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing docs

not mean that-yon shontd become senseless like earth, dumb and deaf like mutes,
or lose consciousness; but that you should not gratify them by wrong means or
ject yourself to their influence.
68, You can fully enjoy peace if you be not too much attached to the objects
of this world, caring very little about your connexion with, and separation
from, them, as they are transitory. If you do not entangle it much in the con-
cerns of your life, fecling less for your connexions and separations, as all worldly
objects are transitory, and should not be depended upon.

69. After having undergone innumerable births and deaths you have reached
the highest stage in the animal kingdom. Having got ample opportunity of
doing good and becoming virtuons; you should not waste your time and thereby
fall down again into the dark and deep well of snffering.

70. Your soul, while transmigrating in different spheres of Swmsdér, has
several times taken its abode in mountains, valleys, seas, caves, trees, and other
places, too numerous to mention.

71. Your soul has assumed various forms, such asa Dera or a néreki, a plant
or an ant, a fly or a fish, a reptile ora dog, a horse or a monkey, beautiful or
ugly, according to the effects of its karma.

72. As aman it has been a दत and a begger, a Pundit and a fool, a master
anda slave, an upright man and «a rogue, and what not P

73. During the course of your migrations, you have been subjected to all
sorts of physical and moral discipline in this amphitheatre of Samsdr.

74. But the edibles of the whole world have failed to assuage your hunger
and the waters of the numerous oceans to quench your thirst.

75. Asa man you have approached the shores of the oceans of this world;
and if plunged iu it again, you shall have to repent like one whose bow is broken,
when the arrow was about to leave for the object to be shot.

76. Piereed again and again by the sharp spears of disease and death,
your soul hath undergone innumerable births.

77. Not having been enlightened by truth and uprightness, your soul wander-
ed through the dark dens of the forests of this world, like wind freely moving
about in the Akdsa,

78. ity those who, possessing necessary qualifications, are incapable of
appreciating the Gems of Truth.

79. ‘The soul suffers from the bad and careless actions of the body, mind,
and speech ; therefore these ought to be checked and applicd towards all that
is really good.

80. Your attachment to wealth and to your rélations, and your aspiration for
fame, being obstacles in the way of your salvation (mokshu) are uscless to you.
They give you trouble and sorrow.


--- PAGE 138 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I, v

81. Your helpless soul, by the effect of Kurma departs from the body, like
a flower from the treo, falling on the ground by the gush of wind, leaving aside all
your treasures and family.

82. Life leaks away from the body like a drop of water, the splendour of the
world passes like waves of the sea, and affection becomes in a second, a dream.

83. In this forest of the world there is no way to get out, it is filled with
creepers, bushes, and trees of various kinds of Karma, it is darkened by affection,
and on it the rain of Sin (Pdp) is continually falling.

84. Your life is like a water-spout, your prosperity is accompanied by adver-
sity, your beauty and taste are like evening clouds, and the joys derived from
your connexion with your surroundings are 1116 a dream.

Your body is a prison to your soul, wherein you have been placed with
fetters of Karma, which could only be cut off by thy energy, and good will-power.

86. Your soul is subjected to various sorts of blows of connexion with your
body, like iron receiving constant strokes of the hammer by its connexion with fire,
which makes it red hot.

As people do not like to spend their money on a rented house, you
should not likewise be anxious to support your body which has only a temporary
connexion with you.

88. Your body is a home of discase, it is a basin of clay the best use that can
be made of it is to apply it towards the enlightenment of your soul hy supplying
its requirements.

Intoxication, luxury, passions, drowziness, and idle conversation are the
five causes of forgetfulness of thy self.

90. Ignorance, doubt, false belief, greediness, hatred, ill-will and ill-action
are the seven causes which shut out your soul from enlightenment.

91. Thou ought to treat the general public with Muitri (friendship), those
who are learned with Prumode (cheerfulness), and with Odasvritti (liberality),
those who are suffering.

92. To entertain good feelings towards others is termed Muitri (friendship) ;
to relieve one from suffering is Karnud (compassion) to feel happy in another's
happiness is called Miudite (enjoyment) ; and to remain unconcerned with others
affairs is Opekshd (indifference).

93. None may commit sin, none may fall in trouble, and all may obtain
relief from the sufferings of their Karma, are the feelings of Muitri (friendship).

94. To adopt measures of relief for those who are helpless, for those who
are suffering, for those who are in fear, and for those who are in want, are the
feelings of Karund (compassion).

95. Showing reverence to and feeling happy in the company of those
who are faultless, learned in the Sastras, and are respectable by relationship or
age, comprise real Miudita (happiness).

96. ‘Those who show neither favour nor disfavour to simmers, those who do not
censure gods and priests, and those who do not praise themselves, are actuated by
Maédhyasatlé or Upekshé (indifference).

97. Those who entertain good feelings, are not entangled by family-ties
neither are they attached to worldly objects. They are supposed to be in
proximity to Nirvdna.

98. ‘Those who are in Samta, or Samadhi, i.e., perfect calmness and tranquil-
lity of mind, and live in harmony with all Nature are worthy of praise. वि

99. And those who have freed their minds from sensual gratifications enjoy
the happiness of Nirvdne even in this lifo. वि

100. Such are the practices of (य~ Yoga, based entirely on internal discipline,
that the heart of man becomes purified without either the mind or the body being
subjected to austcrities, &c.


--- PAGE 139 [OCR_san+eng] ---
vi APPENDIX I.

APPENDIX IL.

Notes on THe Worsuip or Hayacripa Mapnava By tue HinvUs AND THE
Boppuists, &¢..—By Kaviratna Gaurinata CuaKRavarti.

The temple of Hayagriba Madhava, is situated on the summit of a hill
at Hajo, a village in Assam, well-known for its holy shrines, at a distance
of about 5 miles from the north bank of the Bramhaputra, and about 9 miles
North-West from Gauhati.

The place on the bank of the Bramhaputra, extending towards Hajo, is
called Salkussa, or, more correctly, Soalkushi; it is an old village. Refer-
ring to it, Dr. Waddell remarks,* “ With their extremely scanty knowledge of
Indian Geography, the Lamas evidently concluded that this town of Sal-kussa,
was the town of Kusa, where Buddha entered into Nirvana, between the two
Sul trees—seeing that the word Sal was also incorporated with the equiva-
lent of ‘Tsam-chhidung (2088, mchog grof).’ Ido not know whether this
identical village of Soalkushi is ever visited by the Buddhist pilgrims, but the
spot is sacred to the Hindus, for the temple of Mahadeva Dhareevara, which
stands on the hill called Hatimora (the hill having the shape of an elephant).
A few minutes’ walk towards the north-west of this hill, brings into view the
picturesque group of hills at Hajo, with their three prominent peaks, the
highest of which is crowned by a Moslem shrine. On approaching the foot
of these hills, or rather group of hills, we meet the lake Apnnarbhaba,” a
swanip overgrown with weeds and rank vegetation, where the Hindu pilgrims
bathe themselves for the purification of their souls; on the right bank of
this lake is the Gokarnayogi (yoyt, or ascetic, with ears like those of a cow)
a huge mass of rock which, I suppose, has been mentioned by Dr. Waddell
to be the “fragments” of Buddha’s staff with which he uncarthed the
monster bowl. ‘I'he priests could not supply me with any Hindu legends
connected with the place, neither do the Puranas give any information of this
Gokarnayogi. Not far from this huge mass of rock is the temple of “ Kame-

vara Mahadeva.” Climbing higher up the hill we reach the temple of
Kedarnitha, half-way between the @okurnayoyi and the Mosque mentioned
above: here a phalic linga of Mahideva is shrined in the temple. A beautiful
tank stands just at its gateway. The temple is built after the fashion adopted
by the Hindus in Assam, with a little Saracenic clement in it. Close to this
holy shrine is another temple of Mahadeva, named Kamalegvara. Vescend-
ing this hill we come to an isolated conical hill called Manikfitat on the
top of which stands the holy shrine of Hayagriba Midhava.t 11118 shrine,
presents a peculiarity which in no other temples in the provinco—under
Hindu possession—can be seen. This holy spot is visited annually by thou-
sands of pilgrims from all parts of India. Buddhists from beyoud the Hima-
layas, who venerate itas a place sacred to them, claim the presiding deity
to be their own. ‘“ Buddhist pilgrims,” Dr. Waddell truly said, “from all
parts of Bhutan, Tibet, and even from Ladak and South-western China,

# व. 4. 8.8. (1892).
+ The residence of Hayagriba. which will bo roferred to hereafter.

I These five holy places are called by tho Hindus quay. Tho priests recite the
following verse to the pilgrims :—

खपुनभेव जले खात्वा हदा मोकषेयोगिनम्‌ |
Ferma cyl सुक्धिमेषवदधेनात्‌॥
पात्‌ कामविोकनम्‌ |

--- PAGE 140 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX If. vii
visit these spots, and carry off scrapings of the rocks and the soil in the
neighbourhood, treasuring up this precious dust in amulets, and for placing
them beside their dead body, as saving from dire calamities during life, and
from transmigration into lower animals hercafter.”

Although the deities of the shrine are worshipped by the Brahman priests,
and the temple is under the absolute possession of the Hindus, yet Buddhists
of all nationalities are, allowed admission into it, to perform their prayers
and piijus before the dreaded god. This temple, therefore, forms a common
platform in Assam, where the Hindus as well the Buddhists, though out-
wardly of different faith, join together in the service of Hayagriba Madhava.

The ascent to this hill of Manikita, which is about 300 feet above the
plain, has been rendered easy by a flight of stone steps, nicely cut, in the form
of a ladder from the very foot of the hill, the workmanship of which is
attributed to tho divine architect Viguakarméd, both by the Hindus and tho
Buddhists. This ladder leads to the door of the temple which stands facing
the north. The temple docs not seem to be built in the manner of the
other Hindu temples of the province. It isan oblong picce of building, tho
general details of which have been described by Colonel Dalton.* The deities
within the temple are not, as in the case of other temples in Assam, placed in
a dark and hollow chasm, but, on the other hand, the grand image of Haya-
griba,(+) with four lesser deities on cither side of him, stands on a raised
platform. His lustrous eyes, that gleam out terror, are the peculiarities
which give him the appearance of Bhairava rather than that of Vishnu
—truly he is an unique deity in the Hindu Pantheon! We can hardly agree
with Colonel Dalton whon he says, “It is, in fact, simply a collossal image of
Buddha in stone. Its modern votaries have, to conceal mutilation, given it a
pair of silver goggle-eyes, and a hooked gilt-silvered nose, and the form is
concealed from view by cloths and chaplets df flowers; but remove theso, and
there is no doubt of the image having been intended for the ‘ruler of all, the
propitious, the asylum of clemency, tho all-wise, the lotus-eyed comprehensivo
Buddha,’ ”

This terrific mage in no way resembles the snge-like appearance of
Buddha, who is always represented in Yogasana (devotional posture). The
manner in which this image stands upon the platform, and the wrathful
expression of his face, determined as it were to destroy the world is a remark-
able contrast to the serenely grave posture of Buddha. Removo the cloths,
the chaplots of flowers, pair of silver goggle-eyes and the hooked gilt-silvered
71086, do you find any trace of mutilation under them ? It is a mere pillar of
stone on which the head of the deity stands, not to conceal any mutilation,
or to convert*the idol into a Hindu one, but to make it appear as a full-
sized image that the cloths and chaplets of flowers have been applied over it
by the priests. If the Lamas call it an image of Mahémuni (1.c., the Sage
Buddha) they mast have fallen into the same kind of mistako like the Hindu
priests at Iajo, who identity it with the image of Kalki avatar; that is the
teuth incarnation of Vishnu, destined to appear after Buddha. He is neither

* Loc. Cit.

(t) According to the information received by Dr. Waddell, this grand imago is that
of Madhava, and tho fourth image is that of Hayagriba. Haya, 1 and Madhava are
not two separate doitios, but the compound name Mayngriba-Midhava is tho denomi-
nation of ono and tho same god, and the priosts hore applied this designation to the
chief image of the shrine, I mean tho imago standing in the middlo of other images.
The following is the Mantra uttered by tho priests whon they worship him.

५ ॐ afuge-fafae वासिने विश्वरूपिणे ।
“CUTTS माधवा नमोखुवे ॥


--- PAGE 141 [OCR_san+eng] ---
viii APPENDIX II.

Buddha nor Kalki, but Hayagriba Madhava, of whom the Muhdvarata
and the other Puranas deal more elaborately. He is a common object of
worship of both the Hindus and the Tantric Buddhists of Tibet and Bhutan.
The Hindus have not usurped the possession of this temple from the hands of
the Buddhists, and made the presiding deity their own, by concealment and
mutilation, which béth Dr. Waddell and Col. Dalton appcar to assert; but the
temple is an original shrine existing here from time immemorial, and had been
& common place of meeting of both Hindus and Buddhists. From the recent
discoveries in the Tantric Literature of ‘Tibct, it is now evident that the
Tantric Buddhists of Tibet worship many of the Hindu gods and goddesses
and that Hayagriba (Tam-din) is one of the Tantric deities worshipped by
the Tibetans.

According to the Hindu Mythology, Hayagriba is an incarnation of
Vishnu, who assumed this form to kill a certain demon, named Hayagriba. In
the Mahdbhdérata this incarnation of Vishnu is described in the following
manner.

“(a) He shone like the moon with his beautiful form, more so, by
his beautiful nose. The Lord, who is the store-house of all the Vedas, changed
his head into that of a white horse. The sky with all its planets and stars
shone, as it were, in his newly-formed head. His long beaming hairs glittered
as the rays of the sun.

His dark and deep ear-holes resembled the subterranean chasms. His
forehead was broad like the surface of the earth. His two loins were like
the rivers, Ganges and Sarasvati, and his two eye-brows were wido like two
oceans. The sun and the moon formed the pair of his eyes, and the two
twilights his nostrils. His wisdom was the pranaba “Om” ( # ) and his
tongue was, as it were, mado out of the flash of lightning. The Pitara (the
manes of the departed) who take great delight in drinking the juice of the
somalata, the fabulous creeping plant from which flowed manna, were his
teeth: Golaka the abode of Vishnu, and Bramhaloka (abode of Brahma and
his devotees), were his upper and lower lips; his neck was Kélaratri (the
night-chaos itself.” “

The above extract fromthe Mahabharata, is enough to show that the
Tantric deity, now worshipped by the Buddhists in Tibet, was not unknown to
the Hindus before the spread of Buddhism in India. It is evident from this
fact, that the Buddhists adopted the worship of this god from the Hindus ?

In Kalikapurana we find a full description of Hayagriba and the geo-
graphy of the places of his many achievements. In Chapter 82, Kalikapurana,
we read:— At a place (b), on the bank of the Bramhaputra, where the

(a) ^ सुमािकेन कायेन yar चन्द्रप्रभस्तदा ।

^ छता waft Wa वेदानामालयः प्रथः ॥

^ तस्र मरूडेाखमभवत्‌ द्यौः THT IATA |

“ arene भवेत्‌ Ser रवेरश्समप्रभा ॥ ^
^ कशावकाम पाताले ware भूलधारिनौ । ^ गङ्गखरखतीबरोन्यौ भूवा बालां मोदो
“eget Sawa वे मासग्धया पनः रता। “TEE संखारो विद्युत्‌जिक। च निश्धिता॥
“eae fad राजन्‌ सोमपा इति विरताः । ““ गोोकः metre Sar वासां महाह्ममः ॥
५ Par ae भवेत्‌ राजन्‌ काररानि गुणोत्तर ॥ “ महाभारत ”
(४) बङगङ्गाजलष्डयाननस्लोरे negra च । वि्माथाङयो देवः भ्िवलिङगसमन्वितः ॥
विश्वदेवौ मडादेवौ योनिमष्डलरूपिएौ । रयपोवेण युष यन देवो जगत्पतिः ॥
wats यज war fags तथागमत्‌ ॥ ^ “ कालिकापुराश

wes

--- PAGE 142 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX 11. ix

Vriddha-ganga (Old Ganges) empties ilself into the former ; where Vigvanatha
with other Givalingas, and the mighty goddess, the mistress ‘of the world,
exist in the shape of Youimandal, there the Lord’ of the World fought with
one Hayagriba, a demon, and having killed him proceeded to Manikéita.”

The name of this demon is mentioned by Hem Chandra, the great Tn-
dian Lexicographer, who says, “ Hayayriba, a certain Duitya (demon) » Who was
killed by Vishnu.” (c) Now if we refer to one or more passages of the same
book, our geography of the place will be further illistrated and we hope
we will be more delinite in identifying the places of Hayugriba’s adventures,
and residence.

The river Vridha-ganga, tho old Ganges, mentioned in the passage quoted
above, is described in further detailsin the following passage of the same book.
Here the conrse of the river is nicely traced, though in a language rather a
little figurative, which is characteristic of all the Puranas,

“(d) On the hill of Nataka there is a beautiful lake, which in all its
beauty and grandeur resembles the great lake Manasarovara,

* * * * * *
* * * * * * *

From its eastern and western extremities, and from tho middle point of it,
three rivers flow south toward the direction of the sea. The river that has its
origin in the western extremity of the lake, is Dikkor, and that which flows
from the middle point, is Vridha-ganga, and lastly, the river that has ils source
at the eastern extremity, is Suvarnagriba.”

Now, in the map of Assam, the threo rivers that pour their waters into
the great Bramhaputra, in the District of Durrang, with a slight variation
of their ancient uames, are namely :—The Dikoria, the Boraganga, and the
Sabarnasri. (९) The Dikoria in the west and the Boragauga in the middle
of the two, and the Sobarnasri in the cast, exactly answer the description
given in the Purana. Not very far from the confluence of the two rivers,
Boraganga and the Bramnhaputra, is the town of Vigvanitha, about 20 miles
from Tezpore, where a temple consecrated to Vigvanitha, a Giealinga, 18 still
in existence on the summit of a small hillock in the eastern part of the town,

These facts show that the river Boraganga is identical with the Vriddha-
ganga of the Kalikapurana, and the spot where Hayagriba Madhava is p-
posed to have fought with Hayagriba the demon, is somewhere in the district
of Darrang, near the town of Vigvanaitha; here Hayagiiba Madhava killed
the demon, and procecded to Manikdta to rest himself. Where is this
Manikaita ? We have seen above, the hill at Majo, on which the temple of
Hayagriba Madhava stands, is known by the name of Manikiita, Ts this then
the hill to which Hayagriba went to take his rest after fighting with the
demon? From the presence of his image in the temple dedicated to him, one ean
have hardly have any doubt that this was the hill alluded to in the Kalikupurana.

(८) विग्युवध्यदैत्यवि्ेषः

(a) ^ चल्लि नार जले तु खरो मलस सन्निभम्‌ । यच खाद Reger जलकौड़ं सदा दरः ॥
Bet THURS खणे पज ण्ोभिते। त्य पात्‌ मध्य TET सरित्तयम्‌ ॥
(९) च्यवते प्रयात्येव afaw सागरं प्रति। तस्य पञ्चिमभागे तु नदौ दिक्रिकाहया ॥
मध्यभागात्‌ ता या तु शङ्करेणए।वतारिता। FE AREA सा तु aKa फलदाचिनो ॥ `
यानिदता पूलवेभागात्‌ तस्मात्‌ भिरिविराण wat) सखणेपरोवेति fara + + + + ++ ॥
५ कालिकापराण "
b

--- PAGE 143 [OCR_san+eng] ---
x APPENDIX If.

In order to be more sure of the fact, L quote another passage from the same
work in which the hill is described with further details. Lt is as follows :—

“(f.) The mighty waters of the Bramhaputra flow between the two
hills, Gandhamadana and Manikata; Vishnu, for the good of Suras Asuras,
and men made his residence there. On one occasion, being attacked by a
evil spirit who was an embodiment at that spot of all sorts of malarious fever
Vishnu killed him, and after his recovery from the fever which had laid
him up, bathed himself there. A great lake was formed from the collection of
water used in the bath. This lake was named by Vishnu Apunorbhaba. Any
one who will have the good fortune of bathing in this lake, will be freo from
all the troubles of being born again in this world, Vishnu in the shape
of Hayagriba, lives on the hill of रपत, ‘he height of his body is one
fathom.

We have said something of this lake Apunorbhaba at the outsct : a pool
of water lying at the foot of the hill of Kedarnath. he existence of this
lake, with its ancient mame unaltered, is another corroborating evidence of
the fact, that this is the real hill alluded to in the Kalikapurana, and we think
we are not wrong in supposing that the temple here is not the temple
of Buddha, or any other deity, but itis the temple of Mayagriba Midhaya,
a pure Hindu deity.

The fighting of Hayagriba Madhava with Hayagriba, the demon, depicted
in the Puraua, may have some allegorical meaning in it. In days of yore there
might have lived a certain hero, who ruled over the people of Assan, surnamed
Hayagriba Madhava, who by his great achievements and hervie deeds had
commanded the respect of the people, and became subsequently an object of
their worship, as an incarnation of Vishnu himself. The demon Tayagriba
might have been a certain Bhutia Chief, residing in the neighbouring hills of
Bhutan who occasionally came to make raids in the country. Hayagriba
Madhava killed this enemy of the people and rescued the country from his
rapacious hand; for which heroic deed he was surnamed Mayagriba Madhava ;
nay, he was considered as an sleatara of Vishnu.*

itis well known that some of the wild tribes of the Himalayas were called
Agramukha (horse-faced) by the ancient authors** Hayagriba (neck like that
of a horse )tand Agcumakha seem to be analogous words, and it may be for this
reason that the demon, being an mhabitant of the Hi s, was called Laya-
griba, and the killer of this demon was surnamed Hayagriba Madhava.

The allegory of the fight with the demon, the personification of fever, may
be explained in the following manner. Tn ancient times, an epidemic of malari-
ous fever broke ont throughout the whole country, whereby thousands of people
died. Hayagriba Madhava, who was an able and intelligent ruler, knowing
that the real cause of this epidemic was nothing but the dirty and impure
water the people used, and the presenec of jungle and marshes the real home
of Malaria, removed the evil by cutting down the jungle (which is killing the

Cf): afugzerafat गन्धमादन कस्य च । ^ मघे श्रवति लोदित्यो ज्मपुचरसमाच्धितः ॥
“खला ज्रं तथा विष्ण तच वासमयाकरोत्‌। ^ नर देवाह्ुरादौनां यथा भवति तै दितम्‌ ॥
“ ज्वरेणापोड्ति ननुज्ैरं दला मदाहरम्‌ । ^ सव्यै्ोक दिताथेय सोऽगद चानमाचरेत्‌ ॥
^ अगद सानसण्भरतं संजा तञ्च मद्ासरः । ^ तस्म खथ नाम चक्रो दयपोवोऽप॒नभेवम्‌ ॥
a पनजेयते Vary ततः खाला नरोत्तमः । ^“ quate संज्ञं तत्‌ सरन्न परिकर्तिम्‌ ॥
““ मणिक्रटा चले few देयग्रोव खूप क । सच व्याम प्रमाणेन विस्तारेलेव संख्धितः

+ “उद्वे जयत्यङ्गलि पाण्णिं भागान्‌ मामं सिल्लौभूत दिमेऽपि यज ।

न दुग्ेद The पयोध राता भिन्दन्ति सन्दां गतिमश्रमुष्डयः ॥”

--- PAGE 144 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX 11, xi

devil) and excavated a spacious tank of pure water. In order that the people
might be more induced to use the water of this tauk, ho made ita holy one, by
calling it Apunorbhaba—-that which liberates from re-birth.

Indeed Hayagriba Madhava has become such a beloved deity to the
Hindn community of Assam, that he is daily worshipped in every house, with
the other household deities. A Hindu in Assam, on a day of religious cere-
mony, is required to offer a puja to Haynagriba, before commencing the eere-
mony. This love and gratitude of the people of Assam towards him are
surely due to the great benefits their forefathers received from the hero
Hayagriba Madhava,

In Yoginitantra* we find the following legendary account about the origin
of the image of Hayagriba Madhava at Manikita. “ King Pradynmnua having
seen the great sacrifice performed at a certain house in heaven became
anxious as to how to constrnet an image of Vishnu or earth, on some secluded
hill. Indeed, his anxioty was so great for it that he left all his kingly comforts
for the life of ana One day, as he lay on a mat made of kusa
fast asleep, he dreamt that Vishnn holding in his four hands the four si
emblems, the conch, the wheel, the club, and the lily--addve:
‘Pradynmna, be uot mortilied, go thon to the sea-shore, where there is at
unique appearance. This shalt thou fell with au axe, and cut it into
pieces; out of one of these pieces make my image and estoblish it at
Manihata.’ After this Vishnu disappeared, and Pradyumua, when awake,
found nothing but his anxieties. For the rest of the night he was sleepless
and at dawn went to the sea-shore with an axo in his hand. ‘lo his gre:
surprise, Pradynmma found the tree of that singular-description standing
near the water, [६ was of bright-blue color, unlike any tree growing on
earth. Pradyunma cnt down the tree with his axe, and divided it into
seven pieces, ont of one of theso pieces, an image of Hayagriba Madhava was
made aud established ab Manikita.”

५१०९८ story was adopted afterwards by the Nindus in order to deity
Tha,

* Yoginitantra, from verso 219-245, ।

+ In Yoginitantra wo also find that Hayagriba is another name of the mighty god
Mahabaraha.

t Yoginitantra, ch. 9, verse 244,

The following is the i ption fonnd at the door of the temple of Haya-
griba Madhava. Lt is written in old Bengali, of Mithila type.

ARaq Drafis कितिपतिरभवत्तत्सुतो ष्ातको भिः |
श्रौमत्‌ रौ मक्षरेवो पति रतिमति निच्िताराति जातिः॥
arate प्रथित शयु यशो षकम्मीवदातः।
aq ees यजनि तदनृजो यद्वशेऽओे षदे शः ॥
साक्लात्‌ राघवपुङ्गवो दिभि दिशि प्रष्यातकौतित्रजः।
इन्त! पु्छजनस्य यो विधिव्रात्‌ यः कामरूपेचचरः ॥
योयो वाखिललोक winger ज्वालाबस्तौ वारिदः |
Taq श्रो रषुदेवभूषति वेत्‌ श्एक्लभ्वजस्यौरसः ॥

तस्या Tas: प्रसादजनकः त्रोरुष्णपाद्‌ाद्चकेा |

भूपः WHITE गद्‌ाधरक्षतौ प्रासाद यलं याधात्‌ ॥
aurea गिरौ इपासुररिगो tare मानास्यदम्‌ |

शाके वाण वियत्तिथौ गुपोवरः कादः खयं त्रोधरः ॥


--- PAGE 145 [OCR_san+eng] ---
xii APPENDIX TOL

APPENDIX III.
TIBET.
(From the “ Londow Times.”)

The recent conclusion, after long pour parlers, of the treaty arrangements
between India and ‘Tibet, points to an opening up of trade between the two countries
at no distant date, and perhaps to an eventual resumption of the friendly inter-
conrse which existed last century, prior to the misunderstandings arising out of
the Nepalo-Chinese war of 1792. The moment is appropriate, therefore, for taking
note of a volume which contains a mass of new information regarding Tibet, but
which has hitherto been preserved among the more contidential archivés of the
Government. “The Narvative of a Journey to Lhasa in 1881-82,” by Sarat
Chandra Das, an employd of the Bengal Educational Department, is one of a series
of records of personal adventure written by trained uatives, who, for the last
twenty years, have been mapping out and describing those wilder und more
inaccessible countries adjaceut to वत, which have been practically closed to
British ollicers. But while Sarat Chandra Das's predecessors in this gencral
task were men of comparatively humble acquirements, except as regards their
technical geographical training, he was, or rather, is w man of some culture, with
sufficient intelligence, literary capacity, and general education, to enable him to
collect ४५ mass of valuable data on the government, laws, and manners, wand customs
of the country, and to record his observations aud experience in good English.
The fruit of these researches lies before us in a volume of 200 closely-printed
folio pages, which, in spite of Mr. Rockhill’s useful contributions to the same
subject, may be fairly said to be the most important book on ‘Tibet, produced sinee
Mr, Clement Markham's monograph. It is somewhat to be regretted that the
Government of India, with that excessive caution which has characterized their
censorship of trans-frontier literature, should have so long deferred their assent
to the publication of the work; but now that permission has at last been accorded,
we trust that the jonmual, in its entirety, may soon he given to the world. Sarat
Chandra Das was well qualified for his Mission by kuowledge of the ''rbetan
langnage, and by a previons journey over much of the same ground, in the course
of which he made several friends, but he was also fortunate in his choice of a
companion, a Tama, who was much respected and even better known, and who
counted among his friends many persous of considerable influeuce im the country.
‘The party were thus enabled, when once clear of the frontier guards, to travel i
comparative comfort and security, and the advantage is plainly perceptible in the
fuller and more trustworthy information which they collected, as compared with
the hurried data secretly orded by the native who usually went in
disguise, and in fear of their lives. of course, frequently
out of
g¢ draught for an old man who was suffering from
“Oh! Si imed the amazed patient, “ib boiled and frothed
even as it ran down my throat; it must be a inedicine of wonderful efficacy. I
never saw or heard of such a drink in my life.” The fame of the physician whose
medicine boiled in cold water naturally spread far and wide.

A courteous reception awaited the party at Shigatse, as the Resident Minister
of that place, thongh nt ut the time, was well kuown to both travellers, and
had left instructions for the best rooms to he placed at their disposal. Here they
witnessed an interesting event, the arrival of the ‘Triennial Mission despatched
from Cashmere to Lhasa, a ceremony which is said to date from the defeat of the
Cashmerce forces by the Tibetans in 1841. Students of Chinese history are aware
how the wily Celestial is always careful to giye out that every Mission to his
State is really a tribute-hearing deputation. The sime notion was evidently
impressed on the 15,000 people who flocked to sec the Cashmeree Envoy, with his
horsemen and 100 followers cnter Shigatse. Several merchants had taken advan-
tage of the opportunity to accompany the party, dressed in princely style, attended
hy servants in liveries, and mounted on gaily-caparisoned ponies. There appears
tu be no doubt that the Envoy brings presents. in the usual way, for distribution,


--- PAGE 146 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIN: tL xiti

xo the idea of this imposing corlégé being w tribute-hearing Misson obtains the
readicr credence.

The same place was the scene of a more pitiable spectacle, the punishment
of some district oflicials in connexion with a recent émeule, ent which
for special mention on acconnt of the light cast thereby on the Chinese adm
tration in ‘Tibet. One of the two Chincse Residents at Lhasa inspects every year
the Nepalo-Tibet frontier garrison and defences, and in the presious October it had
fallen to the junior Ampa, or Resident, to go to Shigatse and 'Tengri on this rather
irksome duty. Messengers were sent on ahead to arrange for the Aimpa's recep-
tion at the different stations, and to levy the daily travelling allowance, which
properly ought to be paid by the Lh treasury, but had come to be levied locally.
On this occasion the Ainpa had in «Lon levying Rs, 750, instead of the old
allowance of Rs. £00 per diem, and the people loudly professed their inability to
y this extortionate sum. The only reply vouchsafed was that the village head-
men were flogged and their ponies and properties sold to provide the required
wlowance. On arrival at Shigatse the Ampa halted for several days. Here the
same trouble arose, the people complained that the demand was arbitrary, and in
innce of established custom, and the soldicry bnsicd themselves in torturing
the richer men, so as to obtain the money, “At last the people rose in a body,
with the connivance of the Jongpons, or district officers, and first openly refused
payment and then flung volleys of stones at the Ampa's residence. “Orderlies
were hastily despatched to Lhasa, and the senior Ampa and some other officials
came down post haste. A commission of inquiry sat and delivered judgment,
The two Jongpons of Shigatse were degraded und condemned to receive 200 cuts,
while the six village headmen were actnatly condemned to 400 cuts of the bamboo,
after the Chinese fashion. It is not surprising to learn that some snecumbed
beneath this inhuman treatment. At the time of Sarat Chandra Das's visit. some
of the minor officials, who had been [ल off with a lighter punishment, were being
dragged about the streets imprisoned in the large heavy wooden collar which is a
pamishment much in vogue m China, The poor wretches were ready to sink
beneath the weight of the collar, but were compelled by the whip of the warder
to rise and hobble along. The irony of the whole episode is, however, displayed
in the recommendation of the commissioners that in future the Tibetans should
be exempted from the necessity of paying the obnoxious tax, a request which
(owing, if is said, to a substantial bribe) was actually granted by the Supreme
Government at Pekin.

‘The numerous interviews between Sarat Chandra Das and the “ Minister,”
as he calls hin, recall those interesting conversations that are narrated in Mr.
Markham’s memoir between Bogle and the Teshu Lama. ‘The Minister had studied
photography, and had invented ‘Tibetan terms for the varions chemie He was
also anvions to learn English and ciphering, and read frequently with Sarat
Chandra , ‘The apartments at Shigatse, when decked out for a reception, are
thus deseribed: “Silk ecilings and curtains were hung to give a gorgeous appear-
to the waiting-room and lobl Beautiful silk cushions were spread in tho
e's dvlwing-room, the eciling of which glittered with orange-coloured
China bre The artistically worked dragon made its appearance every where,
in the ¢ 11 011 the floor. Handsome dinin bles, each
measuring by 18in. high, were placed before every त and
sushioned seat, while pretty china cups, and gilt bowls, wooden and metal, were
placed on the little tables.”

A lithographic p' ud been obtained from England by Sarat Chandra Das
for presentation to the Minister, and, after much delay, amsing from the diflienlty
of transpert, the stones, rollers, and oth tus at last arrived, and the first
document transferred to the stone was a si or Iaudatory hymn, composed
by the Grand Lama in honour of the Minister. ‘The latter was quite transported
with joy at the “miracle pregs,” as he dubbed it, and printed twenty copies of
the stanza straight off for distribution among his friends. ॥

On his way to the capital, Sarat Chandra Das fell ill with inflammation of the
lungs, an attack which was not improved by having to pass the night in the porch
of the Samding Monastery. On his recovery, the party continued their way to Lhasa.
‘The approach to the great river ‘'sang-po is thus described : “The great Tsang-po
Howed at the base of a gigantic yawning chasm, which extendcd for miles between


--- PAGE 147 [OCR_san+eng] ---
xiv APPENDIX 111.

two ranges of lofty, dark mountains, whose flanks overhanging the river from
the north were covered with dark forests of fir-like trees. At the foot of those
lofty mountains, but still in the upland, there were pretty-looking villages with
castle-like, white-washed houses, surrounded with tall trees.”

lt was on the 30th of May, 1882, that Sarat Chandra Das entered the famous
city of Lhasa by the western gate, having the grand palace of Potala, the residence
of the Dalai Lama, on the left, with its gilded roofs and pinnacles glittering in
the afternoon sun. By good luck he was not interrogated at the boundary-post,
a formality that even native Tibetans have to go through. Small-pox was raging
in the capital at the time, people seem to have shrunk instinctively from Sarat
Chandra Das’s slow and laboured gait, and bespectacled eyes. In Lhasa his most
influential friend appears to have been a lady of high rank, with whom he had some
characteristic chat on the social practices of their respective countries. Mono-
gamy in particular appears to have excited her wonder :—

“One wife with one husband only!” she exclaimed, in comic surprise. “Do
not you, Pandibla, think that we 'libetan women are happier than the Indian or
Philing (European) women, of whom the former must be the most miserable?”
“Pray, tell me, is it not inconvenient for one woman to serve many husbands £"
said I, “I do not sec,” observed Lhacham, evading the point somewhat, “how
the Indian women, are ha ppicr than the Tibetan women, while the former have to
divide among many the affection and property of their single husband ; whereas in
Tibet the housewife is the real lady of all the joint earnings and inheritance of
several brothers, who are sprung from the same mother, and are undoubtedly
the same blood, flesh, and bones. Their persons are one, though their souls might
be different.”

The same lady kindly arranged for Sarat Chandra Das to be honoured with
an audience of the Dalai, or Great Lama. After ascending endless steps, which
severely tried the Hindoo’s breath and strength, the reveption-hall at the top of
Potala was reached.

“The great altar, resembling an Oriental throne, and supported hy lions
carved in wood, on which his holiness, a child of eight, sat, was covered with
silken scarves of great value. A yellow hinkob, or mitre-hat covered the Grand
Lama's head, and a yellow mantle his shoulders, and he sat cross-legged, with
the palms of his hands joined together to bless us. In my turn, 1 received his
holinesse’s benediction and surveyed his divine face. ‘Ihe princely child possessed
a really bright and fair complexion, with rosy cheeks. His eyes were large and

enetrating. The cut of his face was remarkably Aryan, though somewhat marred
(6 the oblique eyes. The thinness of his person was probably owing to the fatigues
of the ceremonies of his Court and the ascetic observances since taking the vows
of monkhood. [ pitied his exalted [0 for, who, knows that he will be forced.
to undergo another transmigration before reaching his twentieth ycar!”

Although the narrative of the daily life in Tibet, varied by occasional festi-
vals, reviews, and other noteworthy events, cannot fail to interest all readers of
Sarat Chandra Das’s work, probably the most important part will be found to be the
concluding chapter on the Government of Tibet. The Grand Lama is the head
of the State, but the temporal duties are mainly vested in the Regent, who is
sometimes called King, and who in his turn is assisted by four Kaklons or council-
lors. The duties of these various officials are laid down at great length, as well
us the administration of justice and the revenue system. The land-tax is paid
partly in kind and partly in coin, and is equivalent to about Rs. 20,000,000, but
the missers, or farmers, are also hourid to furnish conveyance to travellers furnish-
ed with a pass hy Government. Letters are carried by messengers and special
couricrs, who discharge their duties with admirable efficiency, and are invariably
provided with the best and swiftest ponies. ‘The foot messengers generally travel
20 to 25 miles per diem, while those who ride do 30 to 35 miles. For the postal
service between Lhasa and China specially trained men are employed. The
distance is divided into 120 postal stages, which has to be covered by the Stute
couriers in 72 days. On occasions of great importance and urgency, such as the
affray between the junior Ampa and the people at Shigatse, the express takes
from 36 to 45 duys. The express courier is dressed in a tight blue-coloured dress,
the tape fastenings of which are tied on his head and the knot sealed. He is
required to subsist daily on five hen’s eggs, five cups of plain tea, a pound of


--- PAGE 148 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX IV. XV

corn-flour, half # pound of rice, and a quarter of ५ pound of lean meat. He is
forbidden to take much salt, and strictly prohibited from touching onions, garlic,
red-pepper, butter, or milk. At midnight he is allowed to sleep in a sittin

posturo for three hours, after which he is awakened by the keeper of the posta!
stage-house. The letters are enclosed in an yellow bag, which the courier carries
on his back. They get relays of ponies about every two miles.

The population of Tibet proper, over which the Dalai Lama’s Government
exténds, is estimated by Sarat Chandra Das at from three-and-a-half to four millions.
The regular army consists of about 6,000 trained men, besides which every family
or house throughout the country is bound to furnish one ready-armed yul-mag,
or country soldicr, at cull. Sixty thousand men might possibly be mobilized in
case of necessity. The arms consist of bows and arrows, sabres, slings, long
knives, and matchlocks. Half of the regular army engage in agricultural pursuits,
and receive half-pay. The pay of a Tibetan soldier is five rupeos, and that of a
Chinese soldier six rw न per month. After three years’ service the latter
returns to China, and the former enters the yul-mag, or militia. The head of the
military department is the Ampa, or Lmperial Resident of China, through whom
the Emperor communicates his edicts to the ‘Tibetan Governinent, and receives
their replics. The Ampa settles all political differences between the various States
and the Government, but has no Surisdiction over the internal administration
of the country.

APPENDIX IV.

SPIRIT OF THE BUDDIIISTS AND TIE JAINAS REGARDING ANIMAL
LIFE DAWNING IN AMERICA.

HOW ANIMALS ARE SLAUGHTERED IN CHICAGO.

By Prov. 1. H. Anperson.

Tf our reformers and leaders of society could be made to open their eyes
to the realization of the fact that they are, in a most direct manyer, aiding
in a most cruel and uncalled for barbarity, in gratifying their appetites for
meat, it would aid our reform materially, as there are many people in this
world who follow the example of others rather than the dictates of their
own consciences, and who, were it not for the blinding indifference of custom,
would withdraw their support to slaughter and all its cruelties.

Since becoming a Vegetarian I take an entirely different view of this
matter, and feel, without any question of a doubt, that the slaughter of
animals is a sin, thonghtlessly, perhaps, shared in by all meat-eaters who
certainly aro accessaries to the crime, while they would be horrified at the
sight of the slaughter and bloodshed they are aiding and abetting. If they
were to have the experience I had a short time ago in visiting the Chicago
Stock Yards, and witness the awful things which are undergone to prepare
animals for food, most of them would, I am satisfied, from these observations
alone, have their desire for ever afterwards destroyed. ,

To supply these immense slaughter-houses, employing thousands of men,
animals are brought from every portion of the central part of the United
States; being shipped in crowded cars over long distances, often going
without food or water for forty-eight hours, and sometimes even longer, de-
spite the vigilance of our humane societies. Tho animals come to Chicago
in a feverish, half-starved, and often dying condition Very rarely indeed,
during the summer and fall does a car of stock arrive without some dead
ones, often 20 per cent. and sometimes even more. Others are so badly

--- PAGE 149 [OCR_san+eng] ---
उण - “APPENDIX IV.

‘crippled that they must be hurried to the killing pen in order to save them
from dying a natural death ! The unloading of animals for slaughter is always

- accomplished with cruelty, which is often very severe. Men hardened
with deeds of cruelty trample over the prostrate animals, and with spears,
clubs, and whips, compel the poor, frightened creatures to move on, sometimes
trampling over each other and often crushing the weaker ones.

Those that are alive and unable to walk are loaded in a low wagon made
for the purpose, and are hurried away to the slaughter-houses. ‘I'hose that
are dead are left until they “ ripen,” then sent to the “ stink factory,” or ren-
dering establishment: the fat extracted, and the remainder made into ferti-
liser. What is done with the fat ? you ask; well, my friends, it is hinted that
some of it, and even that of dead horses, goes to the butterine, or oleomarga-
rine factory ! * +

The live, and apparently healthy animals, are driven up the long shutes to
the top of the immense packing houses, always with cruelty and barbarous
treatment, to the pens where they aro sacrificed. The hogs are carried into
a small pen, when a catcher seizes them, ong at a time, by the hind leg and
attaches a chain slipping-noose, and by the aid of steam power the poor
animal is quickly elevated and dangles head downward until it is passed in
front of the “sticker,” who plunges a huge knife in the neck of the strug-
gling victim. ‘lhe hog is then passed by machinery, when, by a simple device,
the chain is disengaged from the leg and the hog is dropped into scalding
water still squealing and struggling! lt is then passed to the scraper and
divested of all hair, and in 1688 than five minutes from the time the chain is
placed around its leg, the hog is cut up and stored in the cooling room, giving
no time for life to escape the torture of all this scalding and vivisection.

The process of cattle-killing is different, but almost equally revolting.
These sensitive cows and steers are forced into narrow stalls, and a man from
above hits them with a sledge hammer or drops a crow-bar between their
horns. One of the animals I saw slaughtered was suffering from what is
known as.lump-jaw and matter was oozing from an abscess.

The rendering of the entrails of animals is a filthy process, in fact, the
whole operation, from beginning to end, is unquestionably demoralizing and
brutish.

The employés at the yards, as a rule, are known as “tough characters,”
and judging from the physiognomy of some of them, show they would
almost as soon murder a fellow-being as the helpless animals.

Are you, dear reader, one of the unconscious sinners referred to? If so,
will you not try the experiment of abstaining, for at least one month, from
the use of meats? Try it just one month,’ you have fiothing to lose and
everything to gain, as a month’s abstinence from flesh invariably results in
complete conversion, and the washing of your hands from this sin. That it
is a sin people in general do not realize ; they do not stop to think that they
are possessed with a low, grovelling gratifying of their unnatural appetite,
and that their minds, desires, and consciences can be elevated above the pre-
sent standard. The idea may at first seem absurd, for the reasori that they
have heen accustomed to flesh-eating all their lives, so have our ancegtors, but
this does not necessarily prove that it is right and proper.

“As to just when the practice of meat-eating was introduced in the human
family, history does not positively inform us; but certain it is that primitive
man was not carnivorous in his habits. In this one thing, at least, Darwin
and Moses agree. The Bible represents man in his primitive innocence as
subsisting wholly upon the fruits of the soil, and there is certainly no reason
why we should indulge in meat-eating.


--- PAGE 150 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Proceedings.

The Quarterly General Meeting of the Buddhist Text Society of India
was held at the Hall of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science,
on Monday, the 7th January, 1895, tho Hon'ble Sir A. Croft, M.A., K.C.LE.,
the President, presiding.

The following Membérs were present :—

Rev. K. S. Macdopald, M.A., D.D.
The Hon'ble Justice Gurudas Banerji, D.L.
The Hon'ble Dr. Mahendra Lal Sircar, M.D., C.LE.
The Hon'ble Rajah Peary Mohan Mukherji, M.A., B.L., C.S.1.
Rai Madhab Chandra Roy Buhadur, U.K.
Pandit Hara Prasad Gastri, M.A.
Gri Hirendra Nath Dutt, M/A, B.L.
Mr. 1. Kawa Kami.
Gri Dina Nath Ganguli.
Pandit Wari Mohan Vidyabhushan.
W. J. Simmons, Fst: .
J. Louis, Esq. ॥.6.8.
Monsieur Charles Jamban.
Gri Qarat Chandra Das, C.1.E.
rt Pirna Chandra Mukerji.
VISITORS ‘== .
Dr. D. D. Cunningham, M.B., F.R.S., C.1.E.
Dr. 1). O'C. Raye, Bde-Surg. Lt.-Col.

A few minutes before the business of the Meeting commenced the
Prosident received a deputation of Simhalese Priests, Mr. Kawa Kami the
Japanese priest interpreting in English and Pali.

Tho Chairman, in replying to the deputation, said that the importance of
the study of Pali would be admitted. He understood that the intention of the
deputation was that facilities should be afforded for that study by opening a
class, under a teacher of the language, in the Sanskrit College, Calcutta. Ifit
could be shown that this could be done ata very moderate cost, and that there
was a likelihood of a sufficient number of students attending the class, he
would readily submit the question for the consideration of Government,
though he must also point out that the present was by no means a favourable
time for proposals involving new expenditure.

To
Tue Honovranit SIR ALFRED CROFT, M.A.. K.C.LE., ,
Director of Public Instruction, and Vice-Chancellor of the Calcutta University.

Honovranie Sir,

On behalf of the deputation * of Buddhist Priests of Simhalese, Burmese,
and Japanese nationalities, I beg to approach ९ with this petition for the estab-
lishment and maintenance of a Pali class which I respectfully venture to suggest

~ + The deputation consisted of the following Priests:— Maha Thera Séranafikara, of
Pupparama Vihira in Kandy, Sumana Thera, Siddhatte Thera, Sumafigala Thera, Dhamma
Ratne Thera, Medbaikara Thera, Athadarsi, and Sumanasira.

--- PAGE 151 [OCR_san+eng] ---
ii PROCEEDINGS, (Journal & Text, Part II, 1694,

may he opened in the Sanskrit College in Calcutta. The following reasons and
considerations are alleged in support of this scheme, and I crave ti he favour of
your kindly according your sympathy to the movement, and recommending it
favorably to the Government in the Educational Department.

The members of this deputation severally, and collectively pray that all
restrictions of nationality and creed be removed so as to make the College
accessible to Japanese, Burmese, and Simhalese, &c., and that facilities be given to
scholars from all countries for studying these classics in Calcutta where they
come in increasing numbers every year. 'Ihis will encourage the interchange of
ideas, and strengt fron the already existing bonds of thought, literature, religions
and race affinities.

2. The study of Pali, they humbly venture to suggest should be encouraged
as far as possible on literary and philological grounds.

3. The extra expense to Government for the institution and maintenance of
this Pali class would he nominal as learned Buddhist Priests, specialists in Pali
can be had from Ceylon on a very small pay.

Catctrta, T have the honor to be, &e.,
Tth January, 189०, W. S. Goonewarvexe, B.A.

The Chairman then asked the Meeting to confirm the appointment of the
following gentlemen as Corporate Members of the 6 , according to the
recommendations of the Council: —His Highness, Cri Ram Chandra Bhuij Deo
Maharaja of Mourbhunj, Mr. W, J. Simmons, Dr. 1१, K. Sen, M. D,, Cri Ma-
hendro Nath Banerji, B.L., Cri Atul Chandra Bose, Gri Radha Raman
Chaterji, and Dr. Q4rada_ Prasad Banerji, L. M. S.

Cri Garat Chandra Das then announced the presentations and donations
to the Society. In noticing the compendious Sanskrit Lexicon called Vaidyaka
Carda Sindhu, compiled by Kavirdj Umeca Chandra Gupta Kaviratna, he said
that it was the latest attempt to collect in one place all the medical and
medicinal terms that existed in the medical works of the Indo-Aryans from
the earliest time to the latest development of the Vaidya Castra in Bengal.
The work was of the highest value to those who studied the Sanskrit medical
works of this country. वि

Mr. T. Kawa Kami then addressed the Meeting :—

In exhibiting the Deva Nagari characters used in Japan, allow me to
say a few words about myself, I am a Buddhist priest of the Shin Shi
which is the most powerful sect in Japan. The high priest of my sect com-
manded me to study Pali and Sanskrit. So I first visited Ceylon and studied
Pali for three years. Then I came here last year, to study Sanskrit, but failed
to get admission into the Sanskrit College, for my not being a Hindu. 1 then
proceeded to Darjeeling to study the ‘Tibetan language, and in the Ghoom
Monastery, I had the honour to mect with the Hon'ble President, Sir Alfred
Croft.

Probably you know that all the Japanese Buddhist works are translated
from Sanskrit. It is, therefore, natural for a Japanese Buddhist, to seek the
original Sanskrit texts ‘in India.

Among our Sanskrit scholars, Prof. Nanjio Bunyno, M.A., Oxford, is
most distinguished, he having studied Sanskrit under Prof. Max Miiller, Prof.
'T, Inownye, who has been to Germany for many years, is another good Sanskrit
scholar. We had, up to to-day, no Sanskrit scholar who had his education in
India. Jambudvipa (India), is the real place for studying Sanskrit. I hope
by and bye, many Japanese Sanskrit students will come over to India; but, I
am sorry, they willfind the same difficulty as I have already experienced,

--- PAGE 152 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Sooiety.] PROCEEDINGS. iii
should the doors of the Sanskrit College be permitted to remain closed to
foreign students.

Now I will read the Amitabha Dharanj in our native Japanese way.

Namah ratna-trayaya, Namah A’rydmitabhaya Tathé gate arhaté Samyak
Sambuddhaya, Tad yathé Om Amrité Amritodbhavé Amyita Sambhavé Ampita-
garbhe Ampitu Siddhé Amyitatéjé Amrita Vimhrité Amrita hram (2 gaminé,
Amrita-gagana-Kitikaré Amyita-dundubhi-svaré Sarvirtha Sddhané’ Sarva
karma-klega-kshayakaré svd-hd.

Cri Carat Chandva Das, in exhibiting the block-print plates containing a
large number of illustrations of Surgical Instruments of Tibet which he
brought with him from Lhasa, said, that he owed a word of apology to the
meeting. It might be asked what the Buddhist Text Socicty has todo with
Surgical Instruments? Both medicine and Surgery were practised in Tibet
and Mongolia by the Lamas. In fact, the healing art was a monopoly of
the clergy there. Buddha is believed to have been the arch-healer both of the
soul and the body. He is called Vaidya Raja—the prince of physicians. All
the medical works of ‘Tibet were intimately connected with Buddhism.
Where medicines failed, the Lamas resorted to religious prayers and mystical
charms to heal the sick. Lama Sherab Gya-tsho of Ghoom Monastery, near
Darjeeling, who was formerly physician to the late Tashi Lama, had
furnished the speaker with a note on tho use of these Surgical Instruments.
Dr. Qarada Prasid Banerji he said, would presently read the note which has
been prepared with the help of the ama’s explanations.

Pandit Hava Prasid Castri then read his note on
Tue Retarion or Bencaut 10 Pant Any SANSKRUY
पषा 1s more Intimate ?

Bengali is a mixed language. It has borrowed its vocabulary from various
languages, such as Sanskrit, Pali, Persian, and Mnglish. The word Pali
includes, of course, various Prakrits, from which also the modern Bengali has
borrowed its stock of words. But in order to understand the relative position
of these various languages it would be necessary to give a brief history
of the changes of language from the ancient Vedic to the modern verna-
culars of India. ॥

The opinion that literary Sanskrit was the mother of the Prakrits, has
now been exploded. It is now believed by the majority of orientalists that the .
Sanskrit of the Rig Veda was the original spoken language of the Hindu
Aryans, The language of the Brahmans, though showing a later stage of
development, was also a spoken language. Since then the original Indian
language seems to have undergone developments in two parallel lines.

The first is Sanskrit or the literary language, called Bhasa, from
which the significant word Bhashya is derived. The word Bhashya means a
commentary in the current literary language, of works written in older and
more archaic forms. That this hterary language has undergonc various
changes, will be understood from the fact, that the Bhashyas are being written
from very ancient times up to the present day. What was the current literary
language of the second century B.C., was not the literary Janguage of the
twelfth century, The Mahabhashya on Panini, was written in about 141 B.C
But the greater portion of the work is now regarded as archaic. _ The various
schools of Grammar by gradually diminishing the number of strict rules, also
point to the same thing.

--- PAGE 153 [OCR_san+eng] ---
iv YROCEEDINGS. (Journal & Text, Part IIT, 1894,

2. The second is spoken languages, which come under the secondary
stage or Prakrits as they are sometimes called, the group of some of the
earlier stages of the Prakvits go by the name of Pali. The oldest form is
known as the Gatha language. It'is to be found in quotations only in the
Lalitavistara. The next stage is shadowed forth in the inscriptions of Agoka,
though the languago of these inscriptions goes by one name, Pali, yet any
one who has carefully studied them, must be aware that there are provincial
and local variations almost in every one of them. In these variations we
have the germs of the various Prakrits, and the many vernaculars.

With the spread of Buddhism, Pali again became a literary language,
got its grammar and its lexicon, and began to be studied by a very large
number of learned men in India and Ceylon. While the spoken languages
underwent further change and became the Prakrits, Bengal was a Buddhist
country. It had a spoken language which must haye been closcly allicd to
the Magadhi of Behar, as nowhere do we find any mention of the Bengali
Prakrits. With Magadhi for its spoken language and Pali for its literary
language, Bengal developed its peculiar civilization for several centuries, till
Brahmanic civilization and Sanskrit culture were introduced into it by the
Brahmans brought in by King Adignr. It is remarkable that Hian-thsang,
as he proceeded from west to cast, found the Sanskrit-teaching Mahayana
School diminishing and the Pali-teaching Hinayana School flourishing.
There were more Hinayana monasteries in Bengal than in any other part of
India, All this shows the intimate conncction of Pali with the spoken lan-
guage of Bengal. The Sanskrit influence came later, and though it has pro-
foundly influenced modern Bengali life, its basis is still to a great extent,
Buddhist and Pali. I will give only a few instances.

The word Banerjce pronounced Banrnrje, if analyzed, will be found to
contain two parts, Banrur and Je. Banrur is acontraction of Banruri, a village
granted to one of the descendants of the five Brahmans, by some Bengali
Raja. The descendants of that Brahman, took their family name from the
village, and in the works of Ghataks or genealogists, the entire clan is known
as Banruri. Tho Je is an honorific added to the word by the people who
wanted to shew their respect to the members of the Banruri clan. But what
is this Je? In Bankura it is still pronounced as Jhya as Banrurjhya. But
what is this Jhya? It is a contraction of the Pali word Upajjhay. The
Sanskrit Upaddhaya. in Prakrit, Upaddhaya becomes Uvyajjhayo, from
which the Maithil word Ojha or Jha is derived. But the Bankura forms of
Jhya is nearer to Pali than to Prakrit, and the Je which is a contraction of
Jhya with a “y,” is more intimately connected with Pali than with the Pra-
krit, or with the Sanskrit. The word Ojha again has been brought into
Bengali from Mithila and has become Roja, the cxorcist.

The next word is Uposh, meaning fast; the Sanskrit word is Upavash,
the Pali is Uposhathaya, in Jaina Prakrit it is Uposhadha or simply Poshadha,
from which Poshala (where religious works arc rcad on fast days) of the
Jainas of the present day, is derived. Krom all these various forms, it will
appear that, the Bengali form Uposh is morc intimatcly connected with the
Pali Uposhathaya than with anything else.

The Bengali numerals वार, तेर, कय, पनर, सतर, खाठार aro all Pali forms,
but it may be said that other vernaculars also have the same forms. But
there is one thing in Bengali pronunciation which is absolutely Pali, १.९) we
pronounce the final © preceded by a compound consonant as खो such as Wet,
we, WEA, केडो, AE, कटो, &c. I cannot dismiss this subject though treated
with brevity, without mentioning the fact that all inscriptions from the


--- PAGE 154 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] PROCEEDINGS. v

most ancient times down to the fourth century A.D. all ovor India, are
either in Pali or in Prakrits. Sanskrit inscriptions came into use from tho
accession of the Gupta dynasty in Northern India, and Chalukya dynasty in
Southern India, to power. This fact, which has been emphasised upon by Dr.
Hultschz in his work on South-Indian Inscriptions, plainly shows that’ Pali
was the court language for many centuries, and it had thus an opportunity
of influencing the vernaculars of India, even where Brahmanism came to
power so carly as the fourth century of the Christian cra, It had greater
opportunities of influencing Bengali. At a time when Bengal, reecived
a fresh accession of Brahmans from the West the Brahmanical institutions
and rites there had been almost upset by Buddhism.

The President then asked Pandit Hara Prasad Qastri, M.A., to read his
note on the Ciinyaté Philosophy of the Northern Buddhists.

Buddhism has been called in ecrtain quarters as a religion of despair.
This is because the Buddhists are said to be Giinyavidi, and Ciinya in ordinary
language, means Void, Nothing, Non-existence. As the Nirvana of the
Buddhist, means Cinyataé, some people think that Buddhism must be a
religion of despair. But this conclusion is based on a misapprehension of the
word Ciinyata, and so I have attempted, by giving a translation of Chapter
XVIII. of the Prajiia Piramité, to give the cxact meaning of tho word
‘Ginyata.’ According to the Mahayana School, Ciinyata is said to be profound,
and “the word profound, O! Subhiiti_is the synonym of that which has no
cause, that which is boyond contemplation, that which is beyond conception,
that which is not produced, that which is not born of non-existenco, of resig-
nation, of restraint, of extinction, or of final journey.”

Then, again, the expression, without measure, is a synonym of Ciinyata, or
Void. Itisasynonym of that which iswithout causc. ‘ho expression, without
measure, is asynonym of that which is beyond meditation. Ciinyata is a thing,

some idea of which may be gathcred from the first Verse of Manu wratfag
तमोभरूतमम्रन्नातमल्लश्णम्‌ . 16 is a condition beyond the reach of human conception.

Madhavacharyya, in his great work the Sarvadarganasangraha, in the chapter
on Buddhism, defines it as an inconceivable condition, to which neither exis-
tence, nor non-existence, neither a combination of the two, nor a negation of
the two, can be predicated, अल्ल नासि तदुभयानुभय चतुष्कोडौ विनिग्बुक्ञम्‌ . That
the complete Bodhi-knowledge, call it Canyata, call it Nirvana, call it by any
name, is an inconceivable and indescribable condition, is evidenced by the
following: —“ 0, Subhiti, these are mere words, as said or spoken by Tathagata,
such as, without measure, without number, imperishable, void, without cause,
beyond meditation, beyond memory, without origin, without birth, non-cxis-
tent, resignation, restraint, extinction. This is, 0, Subhiti, called by the
worthy Tathagata, who received complete enlightenment, as pointing out the
word of instruction.” ॥

So the inconceivable condition, which is the complete Bodhi-knowledge,
can not be described. Words like (inyata, are an attempt to describe what
is indescribable. . ॥

In Chapter XVI., a candidate for Bodhi-knowledge is said to hear the
sound of Cinyata. What is this? Something indescribably indescribable. In
Chapter XVIIL., however, at the ond, complete Bodhi-knowledge is described
as Tathata, or truth. Truth which neither increases nor decreases. How
can Buddhism be a religion of despair, when it aims at attaining truth. But
what is truth again? It can be described only by negatives. It can not be

--- PAGE 155 [OCR_san+eng] ---
vi “PROCEEDINGS. (Journal & Toxt, Part III, 1804,

defined, and so is complete Bodhi-knowledgo described by negatives, so is
Qinyati described by negatives. But there is, in the midst of all these
negative descriptions, an inconceivable positive, which is Cinya; and so
Buddhism does not land its votaries on the shores of despair, but on the
blissful city of Nirvana, the Nibina nagari of the Singhalese, where therc
is absolute truth and eternal peace.

_ | Gri Carat Chandra Das gave a short account of the life and writings of
Acharya Chandra Gomi, the author of Chandra Vyakarana.*

Rebich.

THE STORY OF BARLAAM AND JOASAPH,

is the name of a very interesting pamphlet ou Buddhism rersus Christianity,
edited by Rev. इ. 8. Macdonald, M.A., D.D., Principal of the Free Church
Institution, Calcutta, The subject matter of the story, as bas been summed
up in a few words by the Mditor, is as follows :—

T must offer a remark or two concerning the very anomalous position which
the hero of our story—Joasaph or Jehosaphat—occupies in Hinduism, Buddhism
and Christianity. I nced not stop to remark on the anomalous position he oceu-
pies in Northern Buddhism (or Bodhism as Prof. Max Miiller would have it) as
contrasted with that occupied by him in Southern Buddhism. as 1 have already
written of it at some length. But we have also to remember that, the very person
of Buddha has been appropriated not only by the Hindus as an incarnation of
Vishnu, but by the Roman Catholic and the Greek Church as an orthodox canonis-
ed Christian saint, and as such entered in the Greek and Roman Calendars, and
ordered to be worshipped as a Saint by the former on the 26th of August, and by
the latter on the 14th or 27th day of every November, under the name and title of
St. Josaphat.

The discovery that the Joasaph or Jchosaphat of our story was none other
than Buddha was made at the same time and inde pondently of one another, by
French, German and English scholars. The writer himself admits, that the story
came from India. Any one can recognise it as none other than that of Buddha
as told in the Lalita Vislara. Suffice it to say that, the identity of Buddha and
St. Josaphat cannot be questioned. We nced not go over the story of Buddha's
life. Our readers know it already—only to makc it the life of Josaphat, for Bud-
dhism thcy must insert Christianity; instead of establishing a new religion, he
simply becomes a Christian; and instead of the name Buddha, we have Joasaph
or Josaphat; and yet the identity of the catholic saint and the founder of Bud-
dhism was not discovered all these centuries, though the story was translated from
the Greek of St. John to Arabic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Hebrow, Latin, French, Italian,
German, English, Spanish, Bohemian, Polish, Icelandic, and even Tagala, the
classical language of the Phillipine Islands. Doubts were, however, thrown upon
the authenticity of the story as carly as the 16th century, even by good Catholics.
The great and learned Bellarmine thought the truth of the story was certified
by the fact that at the end of it the author himself worships the two saints
Barlaam and Josaphat! However the event may have happened, Max Miiller is

leased that his hero, Buddha, the sage of Kapilavastu, the founder of Buddhism,
as, as a matter of fact, become a Saint in the Roman Church and thus “ received

# Chandra Gomi’s life will be published in Journal Part I, of Volume IIL,

--- PAGE 156 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] PROCEEDINGS. vii
the highest honors that the Christian Church can bestow. And,” he adds, “ what-
ever we may think of the sanctity of Saints, let those who doubt the right of
Buddha to a place among them read the story of his life as it is told in the Buddhist
canon” (sic). “If he lived the life which is there described, few saints havea better
claim to the title than Buddha; and no one cither in the Greek or in the Roman
Church nocd be ashamed of having paid to his memory the honor that was intend-
ed for St. Josaphat, the prince, and the saint.”

It is, however, somewhat curious, to say the least of it, that ho who denied
the existence of God, should himself be worshipped as God hy a large portion of
the human family, and that the greater part of the remainder should worshi him
either as a Christian Saint, or as a Hindu incarnation, an embodiment of illusion
and deception,

In his learned introduction to this book, Dr. Macdonald has endeavoured
to prove that Christianity borrowed nothing from Buddhism. In doing so,
he has based his condemnation of the great Religion of Gautama Buddha
on a misapprehension of the cardinal doctrine of Buddhism—which is that
Nirvana can only be secured by love and compassion for all living beings.
It is, therefore, necessary to point out where the two religions— Christianity
and Buddhism—may appear to meet each other.

Whether Buddhism influenced Christianity or, on the contrary, borrowed
anything from the teachings of Jesus Christ as compiled by his Apostles,
15 a question which admits of no satisfactory solution. Neither Christ nor
Buddha put down in writing, either himself or through one of his disciples,
the instructions given verbally, under Divine inspiration, to erring humanity.
hough it is mentioned in the life of Buddha that he was versed in the Art of
writing, yet no evidence is traceable to convince the scientilic inquirer that
writing was then known in India, but Christ lived in the Augustan Age,
and what made him to transmit the light of his Worp only through the
medium of his Apostles, is not clear. With the exception of the scantiest
materials—evidence snilicient for probability only—we have nothing to
tell us for certain what the two great teachers actually taught, and how much
of their teachings has been lost to the world. In the case of Christianity, the
Gospels, on account of their being complementary to each other in facts, and
in furnishing testimony to the teachings of Christ, and having been published
immediately after his death, have greater claims upon our confidence than the
Buddhist Sitras or threads, which have been spun out to immense length
until landed in the field of boundless exaggeration. In Buddhism, the student
has, therefore, to traverse the whole field of its literature to pick up the gems
which lie strewn here and there. In Christianity, all the gems are stored up ina
compact form. The inquirer has simply to turn over the pages of the New
Testament, the sublime exhortations contained in it, to read. As to the merits
of tho noble truths and ethical teachings contained in the sacred literature of
Buddhism, the opinions of scholars like Rhys Davids, Prof. Beals, and Olden-
berg, who have made Buddhism their life study, deserve our attention. We
are not aware that they have in any way condemned Buddhism, and far less
in the terms of the learned editor of the Srory or Bartaam AND JoasapH. Dr.
Macdonald might have spared himself the severity with which he denounces
Buddhism as a religion, for the story itself is the most successful con-
demnation of Paganism as well as the glorification of the Majesty of God,
convincing the Atheist of his mistaken determination to die in despair.

In all the Mahayana works that have come to our notice, we observe the
highest condemnation of atheism. It is, therefore, a mistake to characterize
Buddhism as atheism. The highest aim of a Buddhist is to attain to the
state of Visuddhi or Nirvana, that is, absolute purification; and the means
shewn by Buddha for reaching that stage is the gradual cultivation of those

--- PAGE 157 [OCR_san+eng] ---
viii PROCEEDINGS. (Journal & Text, Part 111, 1894,

moral virtues, which, with unselfish love at their head, cnnobles humanity.
Christianity also points out to the same method for the purification of the
soul. Where, then, lies the difference of these two great religions that come
from different directions to mect at the same terminus? Buddhism believes
in the continuity of existonce, both spiritual and corporeal, modern Christianity
holds to the spiritual, rojocting the latter altogother.* The idca of the possibility
of gradual purification for the attainment of spiritual porfection is natural to
the Buddhist mind, although it is absurd to the modern follower of Christ. But
are they justified in so doing? + The Christian has only one chance, namely,
his present existence in which to choose either the state of Perfect Purity or
of eternal Hell, because he does not believe in rebirth in this world.

So circumstanced, he must necessarily look for help, in order to gain salva-
tion, that he may not fall down to Hell, to some Being higher than himself, and
this he finds in God through Jesus Christ. The Buddhist, on the other hand,
believing firmly that he existed before and will exist hereafter, and confident of
the merits he has acquired in this life, dies with the cheerful hope that, in the
measure of the culture of his mind and morals he will be reborn as a man or
God, and again enjoy the sweets of ahappy home in the company of those whom
he loved and who loved him, either on this Earth or in Heaven. The Christian
is not certain of mecting his dear ones in Heavon, for they may have gone to
hell. The Buddhist is confident of mecting his friends, somewhoro at least
because of his having loved them or having been loved by them. He knows for
certain that, as the journey to Nirvana is very long and tedious, ncither he nor
they could have casily gone there. ‘The idea of love, true unselfish love, and
compassion for friends—nay, for all living beings, is an inherent virtue in
the Buddhist mind, yet we aro told that “to love any one, or any thing, oven
life itself or existence, wife or child, progress or growth, uscfulness in God’s
or man’s service, is what he regards as the source of all evil.”

क Sarat Cranpra Das.

* The wise secr and prophet said “And though after my skin worms destroy
this body *(६,९.. this form,)’ yet in my flesh” (i.e, in some other material form or
condition,) “ shall L see God.”

t+ “This also we wish, even your purification.” 2. Cor. xiii. a. Therefore,
having pa principles of the Doctrine of Christ, “led us go on unto purificatiun.”
Heb. vi. 1.

“The God of all grace,....... «make you perfect.” Plam. ए. 10.


--- PAGE 158 [OCR_san+eng] ---
JOURNAL

OF THE

BUDDHIST TEXT SOCIETY OF INDIA.
THE MERCHANT'S WIFE.
Translated from the Sanskrit Buddhist work called

12१५1, 1170
By Orf Manenpra Lar Das, 7. 1.

The great King Acoka, with folded hands, veverentially grected the
Venerable Upagupta, his spiritnal preceptor, and thus addressed him:—
५ Vonerable Sage! व wish very much to hear another Subhashita—moral tale
descriptive of faith,—pray, narrate it exactly as you have heard it from your
Spiritual Instructor.”

The holy monk, Upagupta, in whom wero manifest the attributes of the
dina, being thus exhorted by the monarch, replied to him in the following
words : —

“Mlustrious king! I shall narrate a moral story precisely as my pre-
ceptor related it to me. Pray, listen to me with a pure, devotional heart.

“In times past, there lived in this Jambudvipa the Omniscient Maha-
buddha, the majestic Jina—he that conquered'the world with love being void
of anger. He was well versed in all the branches of learning, in all sciences
and arts. He was the Lord of Dharma (Law) and a Tathagata, ¢. ¢., one
that has attained the state of eternal peace. धि

“Here he was born as the Lord of the Cakya race, to be the King of Kings,
if he chose it, or to be the Saviour of all living beings, revered by the Gods
and men. This lover of the good and the pitier of the unhappy proceeded to the
Kalandaka hermitage, in the Venu Vana grove of Rajagriha, followed by a
train of devotees, consisting of Bhikshus, ‘ Graivakas, Bodhisattvas, Sanghitas.
both male and female, for the purpose of preaching the Divine Law.

“All classes of living beings, gods, goblins, serpents, demi-gods, the
celestial musicians, the eagle demi-gods, &c., came there from different
quarters to hear the excellent sermon, and stood reverentially in profound
devotion, surrounding the Lord.

“ At that time there lived at Cravasti a merchant of good caste, possessed
of learning and immense fortune. He married a handsome damsel, accord-
ing to the custom and usage of his family, equal to him in caste and respect-
ability, Then the happy pair. devotedly attached to each other, enjoyed
perfect love, and worshipped the Lord Jina with sincere faith; but being
immersed in worldly enjoyments the husband became unmindful of his
professional duties, and lost all his energy and aptitude for work. His
business suffered greatly at his hands till it verged on ruin. He became
prodigal; without income his riches began to evaporate like the water of
alake inthe summer. His shrewd, good wife perceived with pain that his

The Editor’s thanks are due to (rf Satiga Chandra Banerji, M.A., for revising this
Paper,

--- PAGE 159 [OCR_san+eng] ---
2 THE MERCHANT'S WIFE, (Journal and Text, Pt, ITI, 1894,

riches daily decreased. She began to ponder on what would befall her husband
if he continued so regardless of his business. In her great anxiety for her
husband’s fate she exclaimed: ‘Ah, what has he done by giving himself up
to luxury and enjoyments! He is losing his energy and promptness for
action. Our wealth will soon vanish if he fails to realize his position. I see
nothing but expenditure, there is no income in our household. So she thought
within horself, how can a man be healthy without work? When his income
falls off and accumulated wealth declines, what will his status in society
be? What, then, if we continue in these enjoyments, will be my husband’s
fate—but premature old age and poverty. Oh! how to become happy in
‘uture

“¢ How can ho be happy who is devoid of riches, and how should one make
gifts, help the poor, who finds himself without tho means of subsistence ?
No real happiness can be gained without giving to others, for gifts alone
can bring fame, virtue, and delight. Charity purifies the mind. Pure
minds become wise and pious ; the wise man becomes good-natured and a
blessing to the world, Such men as do good and virtuous actions can alone
attain to salvation. Therefore, I must urge my husband to work and to eam,
so that he may enjoy consummate bliss in future by acquiring wealth.

“*For a wealthy man alone realizes his wishes, and the Pandits extol
the rich as the fountain of virtue, prosperity, and emancipation. Sages say
that a virtuous wife who follows her husband in all cireumstances, is 9, help-
mate to him in the pursuit, and for the attainment of the three objects
of life, viz., virtue, pleasurc, and wealth. Myself. being a faithful wife, 1 must
prompt my husband to the acquisition of virtue and wealth, 1 must send him
to earn wealth abroad.’ Having thus thought within herself, the chaste good
wife addressed her husband :—'‘ In you, my husband, I have my lord and god
and friend, SoI venture to tell you what has occurred to me as essential
for happincss in this world as well as inthe next. Yon are a man of rank
in society. It does not become you, a hanker and a merchant, to give
yourself up to luxury and to pleasures and thus squander wealth, So
shake off your lethargy for the purpose of acquiring wealth, fame, and
happiness. Tho earning of wealth leads to the path of true religion.
Wealth buys food, food maintains the body, the body shelters the soul, the
soul can earn virtue, and virtue leads to happiness. If the master of the
house bé indolent and careless of his business, all the rest—his depen-
dents—become languid and negligent of their duties. If the master be
pushing and active, the rest also become full of life and activity. Is not
that home a desert—a dreary wildorness—which wants wealth that may be
bestowed on others? Js not that home a heaven where there is charity?
Those who enjoy happiness for a few days on selfish motives, go after death,
as moral destitutes to the regions of Yama. There Yama, the king of
righteousness, seeing their fate, examines the deeds of their life, and sends
them again to carth to reap the consequences of their past actions.

“Those who are sinful and wicked are doomed by him to misery,
whereas the good and virtuous are sent to the state of the happy.

“¢Tn this world as well as in the next all living beings meet with misery
or bliss according to the consequences of their deeds of previous births. ,

“Virtue places a man in the right way and secures fame and felicity
for him. Sin stores calamities for him. The belief that the wicked prosper
in this world has no foundation.

५५0, my dear husband, if you believe in this, for the acquisition of fame,
virtue, and bliss, betake yourself to the calling fitted to your race, and devote
yourself energetically to the earning of weulth. You shall then be in a position

--- PAGE 160 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] THK MERCHANT'S WIFE. 3

to Iead a landable carcer, to practise charity, and to support all living beings
according to your means. Who would then prevent you from enjoying to
your heart’s content the pleasures of this life with honestly earned wealth P

“«By honestly carned wealth you will acquire immortal fame and bliss
for yourself in this world as well as in the world to come. By it you will bo
able to show the usefulness of your life and secure a blessed career for the
future.

“The intelligent householder, her husband, haying heard the above
thoughtful and loving words of his dear wife, who was love personified, replicd
in the following manner:

“* My loving wife, you are one in whom are centred my affections, delights
and all hopes of a happy life. You have spoken nothing but truth. I shall
act according to your advice.

“«But, say, my dear spouse, sweet and tender as your loving heart is, how
shall you part with me ? Where shall I go for wealth P

“*T ama merchant. I cannot earn wealth by ignoble means. Therefore
must I go to the sea in quest of wealth. O, my sweet, my loving wife, attend
to your houschold dutics and stay happily at home. Be patient till I return.
I shall soon come back. Forget me not, and presently be relicved of your
anxietics on my account.

“She, who द moment before eloquently exhorted him to go abroad for
work, now atthe mention of his going to the sea became sad and subdued :
the thought of separation now keenly pained her heart.

“Hearing this, the loving wife became surprised and disconsolate, and
kneeling down before him with tears in her cyes, she thus addressed her lord :

“©O my beloved husband, how will you go leaving mo behind? For
without you I shall be miserable like ono left forlorn in tho wilderness.

“* As soon as you leave home the pleasures of sight, hearing, touch, drink,
food, sleep, and all othcr objects which afford to life a charm will bo mere
afflictions to me.

“‘Surely I shall dic, oppressed with the pangs of separation, that will
never cease to torment my heart.

“Who will protect your property when I shall beno more ?_ There will
be sad bereavement to you on my death.

“¢Then of what avail will all theso riches and gems be to you ? The wealth
of a man who has no son or heir, is surely escheatcd to the Government. Do
not therefore, my dearest husband, undergo the troubles of a journey to the
islands of the great ocean, leaving me behind. So enjoy happiness at home
with me, leading a frugal life. Here also you may find many traders and mer-
chants to transact with in divers merchandise. Open business with them and
acquire wealth.

“We havo no children, and wealth is of no use to us. Hence do I imploro

you not to go to the sea.

“<¢T boseech you to stay at home, dear husband. Riches are always sclf-
acquired, and acquired only by dint of labour. i

“«The acts of a man, whether they be great or small, are followed by like
consequonces. . .

“In this world, the happy and the rich, not bereft of good qualities,
Sometimes become reduced to abject poverty in a moment’s time.

५५0 those prudent traders who resort to the sea unwillingly, a few only
acquire wealth. Sometimes somo of them from avarice or ill luck lose their

lives, by being ship-wrecked. Some, again, who can brave the sea come back
with wealth,

--- PAGE 161 [OCR_san+eng] ---
4 THE MERCHANT’S WIFE, (Journal and Text, Pt. III, 1804

^ * 80 all creaturos suffer the consequences of their former births and few
enjoy the results of their acts done in this world.

“¢Thus the influence of Karma being apparent, great risks are attendant
on the earning of wealth; so do not trouble yourself with the idea of ventur-
ing to the sea.

“«We may always acquire blessing everywhere, and we may enjoy bliss
here and in life hereafter, enjoying happiness throughout life eternal.’

“ After listening to what his wife said, the merchant, casting a wistful
look upon his beloved wife, thus said :—

“* Gentle lady, it is quite true what you have said about the consequences
of one’s acts, and therefore, having regard to such unavoidable consequences
I purpose to go to the sea.

“«The effect of that which will not be, will never follow; and that which
is fated to be, will always come to us as in a natural sequence, without fail.
So I purpose to go to the sea.

५५ Tbe lucky, my voyage will be prosperous, and I shall return home
crowned with success, If misfortune attends my voyage, and disaster follows,
I shall depend on heaven for life.

“As some brave men rush into the field of battle for victory, renown
and happiness, and with boldness befitting themselves, perform acts of chival-
ry regardless of the pleasures of home, so should the son of a merchant
venture to the sea.

“Tf Tam fated to return home I shall come back with renown, wealth,
and happiness. If I am fated to die in the sea, furnished with merit I shall
enjoy happiness in heaven.

“*So my beloved, gentle wife, do you not be sad. Be cheerful, and attend
to your duties till I come back.

“To maintain the dignity of my family, I must by all means go to the
sea. I am not to be shaken in my purpose, and so do not hinder me.’

“ Having thus listened to her husband, and knowing his departure as
settled, tho modest, good wife, humbly saluted him, and in respectful love, with
folded hands, addressed him thus:

५१0 my dearest, if you must go to the sea, may Heaven help you in the
way! May prosperity attend you in all your acts, and may you enjoy happi-
11688 evermore!’

“The merchant took leave of his beloved wife with a heavy heart, and
joining a company of five hundred merchant adventurers addressed to them
a few words of encouragement.

“Tf you wish to accompany me to tho islands in the gieat ocoan, come
with your goods and provisions.”

“All the traders hearing these his words cheerfully returned to their
homes.

“Then having observed the auspicious ceremony required for the occasion.
the merchant with 500 companions set out on his journey to the islands of
Ratnadvipa.

“Having passed through many villages, citios and woods, they at last
reached the shore of the sea.

“Having arrived there they embarked on boats which unfurled their
white sails and flags, and put out to sea.

“Then the merchants having passed through many islands, under favour-
able winds, at last found themselves in the mighty occan.

“When these little vessels rolled about on the boundless expanse the
merchants quarrelled among themselves and thereby disploased the Gods.

--- PAGE 162 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.) THE MERCHANT'S WIFE. 5

“On landing at their destination, the merchants, on account of discord,
failed to earn any wealth for a long time. Meanwhile their friends at
home anxiously awaited their return.

“All this time the good wife of tho merchant found her home as some-
thing dreary and devoid of happiness, owing to her husband’s absence.

“From the day the merchant had left his house, the wife had been
counting the days of his absence. Disconsolate on account of separation, she
grew impatient and oftentimes sobbed heavily.

“Sho grew thin and pale, her hair became glossless, and dishevelled.
She never cared to adorr herself with ornaments, and wore plain clothes
as if in mourning.

“Sho felt despondent at all times. Whatsoever she heard, saw, smelt,
ate, or touched, she expressed herself dissatisfied with. To all pleasurable
sights and merriments she became a stranger.

“The pangs of separation almost paralyzed her tender mind.

“The expectation of her husband’s return and the remembrance of his
love at times raised her drooping spirit.

“Like a man lost in deep meditation, she became slcepless. No other
thoughts except those of her husband’s early return roso in her mind during
her sleepless hours.

“While she was passing her time in this mauner, a kind female friend
seeing her forsake all pleasures and comforts of life in the prime of her youth,
addressed her while sho was alone—

५५0 gentle lady, why are you so sad and unhappy like one who 18 bereay-
ed and sick ? Why do you show such apathy towards cxistence? Be not sad ;
tell me the cause that has embittered your life.

५५१0 good housewife (she continued), why are you so indifforent to all
pleasurable things—all that excite one’s curiosity ?_ Why do you not like to
eat and adorn yourself, to sce and hear, to make your mind cheerful ?
What do you profit by being melancholy and drooping ? Wake up, and be in
good spirits.”

“On heaving tho words of her friend, the merchant's wife thus replied—

“¢O my good friend, I am nota seeker cither of pleasure or of objects for
yratifying the senses, but I am anxious to pursue virtue and religion. How
then can I do so without my husband ?

५५५ [1 is for this reason that I have forsaken worldly pleasures. Being
without desire for enjoyable things, I prefer to remain at home, cherishing
my memories of the past.

५५ live hero in my house as a recluse, my mind being occupied with the
sole thought of my loving husband and his return.

“Till that happy time when he comes back I shall abandon all tasteful
and pleasurable objects.

“No happiness, so called, is happiness to me, when I am without my
husband, and when he is not a partaker of it with me. No other thought
weighs in my mind save that of his love. It is, therefore, that 1 lead a life of
misery.

if Till I see my husband, I vow I shall live in this manner. I shall not
Zo out, but shut myself up in my house even if my life is endangered by any
means,

“A husband is more than a God to his wife. To serve him is virtue.
Consequently, like a hermit shall I only think of him, What is religion to
her who has no husband near home? Tt is, therefore, that I worship him in
my mind at all times.

--- PAGE 163 [OCR_san+eng] ---
6 THE MERCHANT'S WIFE. (Journal and Text, Pt, III, 1804.

५ 4 Unhappy is the life of that youthful woman whose husband is not near
her. When she grows old without having tasted the sweets of her husband’s
company, wealth cannot profit her nor enjoyments be of any avail! Death is
rather more agreeable to such a woman than the hollowness of life. To live
longer in this miserable way is surely worse than death.

“What is this life worth if the porson in whom is centred one’s happi-
ness does not return to her loving embrace ?

“* Blessed are those wives who live in their husband’s company, who
practise piety and enjoy the happincss that comes of their consorts’ love. Oh !
lot there be no more miserable persons like me on this carth!’

“The kind, good friend having thus listened to the words of the mer-
chant’s wife, addressed her thus—

“©O gentle lady, thou hast spoken the truth. A husband indecd is a God
to a good wife. Hear me then what I have thought now for your good.

“*During the time that her husband is at home, a wife should devote
ates to the pleasures of love, and also practise virtuo agrecably to his
wishes.

“When the husband remains away in a foreign country, she should then
devote herself to the worship of the revered God of her husband.

“* Hari is your husband’s God. Therefore adore him with true devotion.

“He can alone fulfil all your wishes. He is the Lord of Worldly
Desires. He is the keeper of the world, and grants pleasures of love unto all
husbands and wives.

“* By the favour of that deity, and impelled by love, your husband will
return unexpectedly with treasures of untold value.

“Then the usefulness of your life willincrease. Blest with a happy
life, you will practise charity, aud enjoy peace.’

“Tho modest, good lady having heard these words of her friend, approv-
ed of her proposal and again accosted her in the following strain :—

““*My gentle friend, what you have told me for my good, is perfectly
true, and agreeably to your advice, I shall adore and pray unto the lord Hari.

“When my beloved shall come back safely laden with wealth, I shall
offer a disc made of gold to Vishnu.’

“ Having made this vow she began to pray thus to Vishnn—

“*T salute thee, 0 Lord, Hari, Narayana, and Vishnu. Be gracious unto
me, who is a helpless female, and restore soon my dearest husband to me.

“** As soon as my husband comes back home in peace, 1 shall present a
golden disc to thee.’

“Having spoken thus in the presence of her friend, she joyfully prayed
to Hari, she vowed to offer a golden disc to Vishnu, and remained there for
a while abstracted, being occupied fully with the thoughts of her husband.

“Shortly after, the merchant, with all his companions, unexpectedly
returned home, laden with wealth.

“On her husband’s safe arrival at home, the good wife was highly de-
lighted, She having greeted him, fellon his feet, and then stood before
him with tears of joy. Her husband narrated to her the account of his
advontures ;she then said—

५४0, my beloved, ever since you went away Icaving me behind, I have
been passing my days in solitude and sorrow, all my thoughts being in you.

“« Then, when I was disconsolate on account of the separation, I met this
friend of mine who, to alleviate my sufferings, advised me to devote mysolf
to the contemplation of Hari.

“¢Thenceforth, in order to assure your early return, I have been reveren-
tially worshipping Hari, your beloved deity.

--- PAGE 164 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] THE MERCHANT'S WIFE, 7

५५ have vowed to offer him a golden disc, and repeat it daily in my
prayers for the success of your voyage.

i ‘As that deity has granted my prayer, I shall fulfil, O lord! my vow
to him.

“*Permit me, 0 my dear husband, to go to tho shrine of Hari with obla-
tions, to present the promised disc.

“The merchant said, ‘ My beloved wife, go, and make good your promise
to Hari.’

“She then proceeded to the shrine of the God, with all her companions,
taking oblations and the disc.

“At that time the Most Vencrable Sambuddha, who was preaching in
the cause of this world for the deliverance of all living beings, saw with his
divine eyes the fortuno of this noble lady.

“When the virtuous Bhadra was walking to the temple of the God, the
Blessed One perceived that she had become fit to attain Pratyekabodhi.

“Then he thus addressed his disciples and followers :—

५५0 Bhikshus! sec ye that gentle lady; certainly by seeing mc she shall
acquire Bodichitta—enlightened heart.

“She shall succeed in implanting the roots of perfect bliss in her heart,
and shall concontrate her thoughts on the attainment of the Pratyekabodhi.

“Therefore, by granting an interview to her 1 shall lead her to Pratyeka-
bodhi-charyus.

“ ‘Let the Bhikshus that ave willing to 806 her, accompany me with their
alms-bowls and in religious dress.’

“All the members of the Holy Order, taking with them their alms-bowls
and ragged-clothes, followed the Blessed Lord.

“Then the Venerable Buddha, accompanied by the entire body of monks
and hearers, &c., in full glory, proceeded to Rajagriha.

“Then the lady saw before her, on tho road, the noble pious Buddha.

“His person possessed the thirty-two marks of personal charms, and
the eighty emblems of beauty. He was possessed of ce! Festial comeliness and
of extraordinary symmetrical grace.

“ He was radiant like the sun, and lovely like tho moon. He was beauti-
ful like a lotus, and bright like a moving gem.

“ Seeing him who was the holiest incarnation of sainthood on this earth,
and delighted at the sight, approaching him all of a sudden she wished to
present the disc.

“Her female companions seeing her walking towards the Buddha to
present the disc to him, wishing to dissuade her from doing so, addressed her
in the following manner :—

५५४ (0 gentle lady, he is not Hari Narayana, he is but Sugata, the Saint of
firm self-control. Therefore do not present the disc which you intended to
offer to Hari.’

“But Bhadra, notwithstanding the hints of her female companions,
moved towards the Blessed One.

“Her heart was full of desire to be initiated in the holy religion of
Buddha, and so she thus replied to her companions :—

५ «My dear friends, it is by good luck that I have been able to see tho
Sambuddha to-day. So I believe that my mission in this life is to-day
crowned with success.

“Being touched by his offulgence, all living beings become liberated
from all misery, and obtaining peace, ultimately attain to unmixed felicity and
life immortal.

--- PAGE 165 [OCR_san+eng] ---
8 THE MERCHANT'S WIFE. (Journal and Text, Pt. TIT, 1894.

“*By the mere utterance of his name, and its remembrance, all creatures,
becoming free from the snares of Méra, attain to the Sambodhi stage.

““«Tistening to his moral precopts, and acting up to them, all living
beings, becoming released from the trammels of sin, attain to blissful peace.

“By making donations to a deserving person in the community, persons
can go to Sukhdvati for enjoying eternal felicity.

, “He has been the Saviour of all creatures, and by promulgating the
six causes of salvation, and by imparting religious instruction, has established
the Truths of the Law.

“*By his highly moral discourses he has secured peace to these threc
worlds, and all living beings have thereby become blessed, ultimately to attain
to the state of Sambodhi. :

“ «This Venerable Teacher is indecd the ruler of the three worlds. ‘That
T have been lucky to see him now is a matter of extreme joy to me.

“«T am truly blessed for the Sambuddha has seen me. I am highly for-
= that this great Preceptor of men and Gods has come before me un-
sought.

“*T must worship this most Holy Sage and present the disc to him, so
that by the merit accruing from it I may attain to the state of beatitudo and
eternal peace.

“A Sambuddha cannot always be seen. Like the flower of the fig-tree
the birth of a Jina is rare.

“*To be born as a man is not always in tho lot of all living beings. To
obtain human existence is no easy matter. 1४ is the result of accumulated
merits.

“*Evon after attaining to human existence, it is not given to man to be
always able to serve Buddha. And who can have the Bodhichitta without
serving a Buddha?

“Who can have unmixed holy inclinations without the true enlighten-
ment—Bodhichitta. And without holy inclinations who can act up to Bodhi-
charyd, (the practices of a Saint) ?

“Without Bodhiwharyd how is it possible for a person to practise bene-
volence? And how can a person be pious who has no benevolence in him ?

“Without piety how can a person attain felicity after being exempted
from all earthly troubles ?

“With a view to be exempted from sublunar troubles, and to obtain
eternal happiness, I wish to worship with joy this lord of the three worlds.

“¢He is the promulgator of the true faith. He is the moral ruler ard
the teacher of this world. Therefore, I do not wish to worship any other
deity save Sambuddha, —the Three Holies. I shall take refuge in him.’

“ Having spoken thus, and taking the disc inher hand with great delight
she reverentially approached the Venerable Sambuddha to worship him.

“ Saluting the sage with oblations, she placed the disc hefore the Blessed
One, with greetings and prayer :—

“© As the All-perfect. Buddha is free from troubles, and is possessed of
perfect self-control, so may I too become pure in heart to be qualified for
attaining to the state of perfect happiness.’

“The Venerable Buddha, seeing her pious resolution, with a countenance
that bespoke of supreme peace, and delightful like the lotus flower, dis-
played ambrosial smiles. Five sorts of rays emanated from that heavenly
smile, some of which went upward and some went downward.

“ By the wonderful influence of the divine rays from Buddha, and his
compassion for all beings, the three worlds got relief from all troubles, and
seomed to be enjoying perfect bliss.

--- PAGE 166 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Bnddhist Toxt Socicty. } MERCHANI’S WIFE. 9

“The obdurate hearts of all sinful creatures became subdued. They
took refuge in Buddha, and in reverence greeted him with the expression,
‘Salutation to Buddha.’

“Meditating on Buddha in their minds, those creatures became sinless
and blessed. Morthwith, as if by a miracle, they became prosperous, and
liberated from the bond of sin, proceeded to the different regions of heaven
namely—Tushita, Nirmanaratika, Brahmakéyika, Brahma purohita, Maha-
brahmanaloka, Parittébha, Apramana, Abhdgvara, Parita-subha, Apramana-
subha, Subhakrisna, Anabhra, Punya-prasava Samjfika, Vrihat-phalam,
Avriham, Atapa, Sudrica, Sudarcana, and Akanishtha.

“ Waving attained to the above regions, they proclaimed in loud voice :—

“¢This world is evanescent. It is full of misery, empty, and void.
Remembering this, ye worship the Triratnd with your whole heart.

“Retire from this world, and commence worshipping the Buddhas,
according to the ritual prescribed in tho holy religion; and so shall ye be
able to encounter the forces of Death.

“¢Those who persist in this moral discipline, without a single deviation,
shall be ablo to bring all their miseries to an end by entering the Holy Order,
forsaking all distinction of caste, rank, or wealth,’

©The rays alluded to, thus diffusing round the world, shone for a while,
making all creatures inclined to good actions, and then came back again.

“They remained for a while in the presence of the venerable Sage,
thrice cirenm-ambulating him, then entered into his person through the
pores of his hairs.

“Then Ananda arose, and with folded palms prostrated himself before
the Sambuddha, ‘hen kneeling on the ground, thus spoke to the Venerable
Sire. ॥

“©O Sage, rays of diverse hnes have emanated from your divine counte-
nance, by which the world has become illumined as with the rising sun.

“« Buddhas haye no pride in them. They are for the good of the world.
They have fully controlled all their passions. So it cannot be that they
smile for nothing.

“©All Cramanas are eager to learn the causo of your smile, so by your
specch satisfy their curiosity.

“¢Sambudhas, whose patience is as profound as the ocean, whose thoughts
are as lofty as the mountains, never exhibit a smile in vain. All are eager to
hear the cause of your smile. Oh! tell us its cause.

“The Venerable Sambuddha, having heard this, in order to explain to
Ananda the cause of his smile, addressed him thus :—

“Yes, you are right Ananda, the enlightened Jinas never smile without
cause.

“See Ananda, this fair one haying saluted and worshipped me, has
presented me with the disc, and has set her heart on Bodhi.

“©This gentle woman, on account of this gift and of her piety, shall gain
heavenly bliss. -

“ «She shall not meet with destruction for fifteen kulpas, and after that
time, being exempted from all mundane troubles, and gaining full control
over her passiuus, shall show commiseration to all creatures.

५ «Her heart delights at the sight of me, Sugata Buddha; on account
of the merit of that good act, she will acquire Pratyekabodhi. a

_ “©The service rendered to Sugata is never futile; purified by faith in
him, a devotee gradually succeeds in attaining to Sambodhi. , ॥

“Those who wish for Bodhi, ought to respectfully worship Triratna,
having taken these things into consideration.’

2


--- PAGE 167 [OCR_san+eng] ---
10 MERCHANT'S WIFE. [Jonrnal and Text, Pt, TIT, 1894.

“ All men being thus advised by the Sage, exprossed their approval and
kecame respectful to Triratna.

“Then by the majesty of Buddha, that disc mounted up to the sky. For
a while, it remained over Buddha’s head emitting a halo of light.

“Thereafter, it. ascended the heavens, and remained over Hara and

Hari. It glittered like the Sudargana and emitted rays.

“Thereafter, the venerable Buddha, having cast his cyes towards that
girl, touched her head with his hand aud gave his blessings to her.

^ *Gentle lady, you shall always he blessed, you shall never be ruined,
and by and bye you shall acquire enlightenment—Pratyckabodhi.’

“The sage Sambuddha, having uttered these benedictions, with the
entire body of mendicants set out for Rajagriha.

“Then that fair one, having saluted Sugata, returned to her home,

“The fair one, having joyfully entered home, communicated the whole
thing to her husband,

“ Her husband, too, became a devoted follower of Buddha, and began to
worship Triratia with her,

“Lhave narrated this story to you, O king, in the manner my Preceptor
communicated it to me. O mighty Sovereign, do you always worship the
Trivatna.

“Cause all your subjects to worship the Triratna. Then will you always
enjoy prosperity, and sueceed in acquiring Bodhi.”

The great king Agoka, having heard with his courtiers the sweet tale,
fron Upagupta. was highly delighted.

ASHTA SAITASRIKA, CHAPTER XVUI.
Tar Evorerion or Cunyara,
Py Payor वपय Prasap Gisret, MA.

Then, again, the long-lived Snbhiiti thus spake to the Lord: “O Lord,
the high-spirited Bodhisattva is possessed of yreat qualities; this is wonder-
fal. The high-spirited Bodhisattva is possessed of immeasurable good quali-
ties. The high-spirited Bodhisattva, O Lord, is possessed of good qualities
beyond measure.”

Having said this, the Lord addressed tho long-lived Subhiti, saying, “It
is 80, Subhuti! itis so! And why is itso? Because a high-spirited Bodhi-
sattva, O Subhiti, who is destined not to return again, acquires infinite and
ondless knowledge, beyond the reach of all Cravaka, and beyond the reach
of all Pratyeka Buddhas.”

Subhiiti said, “ You are capable, © Lord, to point out the sign, the forms
and the ideas, which are as numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, of
the high-spirited Bodhisattva, who is not destined to return again. There-
fore, O Lord, the profound positions of high-spirited Bodhisattvas, connected
with Prajii Paramita, should be pointed out by you.”

Having said this, the Lord addressed the long-lived Subhiiti, saying,
“Bravo! Subhiiti, bravo! that yon are desirous of getting explanations com-
mencing from deep and profound positions. The word ‘profound’ 0 Subhiti,
is synonymons of (कुवत, or Void. Tho word ‘profound,’ 0 Subhiti,
is the synonym of that which has no cause, that which is beyond contem-

plation, that which is beyond conception, that which is not produced, that
which is not born, that which is of non-existence, of resignation, of restraint,
of extinction, and of final journey.”

--- PAGE 168 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] EVOLUTION OF ¢UNYATA. 11

Subhiti said, “It is a synonym, O Lord, only of these, or of the qualities
of these, and not of all attributes.”

The Lord said, “The word ‘profound’ is a synonym even of all
qualities, O Subhiti. Why is it so?—because the material propertics are
profound, so are sensations, so are abstract ideas, so are tendencies, and
sois thought. How are, O Subhiti, material propertics profound? How
are the sensations, the abstract ideas, the tendencies profound? How is
thought profound? Just as Truth, so are the material properties profound.
Thus, sensation, abstract ideas and tendencies, are profound. Justas Truth, so
is thought profound, O Subhiti. They are even, O Subhiiti, just as the truth
about material propertics, so are material propertics themselves profound ; so
are the truth of our sensations, truth about abstract ideas, and truth about
tendencies. Just as trath in thought, so is thought profound. Just as,
0 Subhiiti, abstract qualities are not the truth about abstract qualities, so
it is not about sensations, about abstract ideas, and about tendencies, nor
about thought. The truth about sensation, and sv on, are not sensation and
80 on.”

Subhiiti said, “Wonderful, 0 Lord, that Ihave heen restrained from
material propertics by delicate means, and extinction has been pointed out
tome. Thus sensation, abstract ideas and tondencies are restraints ; thus have
I been restrained by delicate means from thought, and extinction has been
pointed out.”

The Lord said, ‘These are the deep and profound positions connected
with Prajiid Piramita, O Subhiti; he who thinks abont them. and weighs
them, meditates on them, in the following manner—‘Thus should I stay, as
ordered in the Prajia Paramita; thus should T learn, as told in the Prajia
Paramita ; thus should I grasp, as instructed in the Pra: Paranita. Thus
performing, thus meditating, thus retrospecting, thus engaged, thus happen-
ing, thus resigning, one obtains a connection in one day ; how much work does a
high-spirited Bodhisattva perform in that one day ? [t may be said, 0 Subhiti,
that a man is actuated by love and by doubts. Suppose, there is an assigna-
tion made between the man actuated by love and doubt, and a woman hand-
sone, beautiful, and living ina palace. The woman may be in the keeping
of another, and so she can not persuade herself to como out of the house,
what do you think, O Subhiti, in what connection, will the doubts of the
man, prevail?” . ;

Subhiti said, “The doubts will be m connection with the woman,
O Lord,—‘she is coming, sho is at hand, Iwill do this, and this, with
her, thus shall I enjoy, thus shall I sport, thus shall I deport myself.’”

Tho Lord said, “ What, do you think, O Subhiiti, will be produced in the
inan at the end of the day?”

Subhiti said, “ There will be, O Lord, many doubts of the man generated
by the end of the day.” ,

The Lord said, “ As many doubts as will arise, O Subhiti, in the mind
of the man, for so many Kalpas, will a high-spirited Bodhisattva, leave
out, throw behind him, and measure the distance of re-birth. He
who 16801१९8, learns, masters, meditates, grasps, just as is ordered, ex-
plained, instructed, hinted and pointed out in the Prajiia Paramita, and he
who avoids the well-known faults, by which a high-spirited Bodhisattva
fulls from the Supreme and Perfect Bodhi knowledge, that high-spirited
Bodhisattva, who obtaining a grasp of the Prajii Paramita, and deporting
himself in such a manner, as with deep attention, in anether, connected with
Prajiié Paramita, he performs all the actions in one day. That Bodhisattva
again, who though devoid of Prajiia Paramita, makes yifls fur as many


--- PAGE 169 [OCR_san+eng] ---
12 EVOLUTION OF GUNYATA. [Journal and Text, Pt. IL], 1894.

Kalpas, as there are sands in the River Ganges, such 2 man is to be dis-
tinguished from the high-spirited Bodhisattva who obtains a grasp of the
Prajiia Paramita in one day.

“Then again, O Subhiti, that high-spirited Bodhisattva, who living for
as many Kalpas as there are sands in the River Ganges, makes gifts to those
who have fallen in the stream, and establishes them ; and makes gifts to those
who return only once; to those who never return, and to those who are
Arhats, and establishes them; makes gifts to single Buddhas, and establishes
them ; makes gifts to those gone in the true way, to Arhuts who have received
the perfect knowledge, and establish them—yet becomes devoid of Prajiia
Paramita: but, that high-spirited Bodhisattva, who even for a day grasps
Prajfiaé Paramita, just as is instructed, hinted, and pointed out in the Prajna
Paramita, obtains much greater merit than the Bodhisattva mentioned before.
Then, again, O Subhiiti, that Bodhisattva who living for as many Kalpus as
there are sands in the River Ganges, makes gifts to those who have fallen
in the stream, to those who have received perfect knowledge, and establishes
them, and does everything for conduct, yet becomes devoid of Praja Para-

mita; but that high-spirited Bodhisattva, who, following Prajiia Pairamita,
and rising from deep attention into it, teaches dharma, obtains more merit
than the Bodhisattva mentioned before. Then, again, 0 Subhiiti, that
Bodhisattva, who living for as many Halpas as there are sands in the
River Ganges, makes gifts to those who have fallen into the stream, aud to
those who have obtained perfect knowledge, and establishes them, docs every-

thing for conduct, is possessed of merey, yet becomes devoid of P:
71168 ; but that high-spivited Bodhisattva, who following Prajiia
rising from deep attention into it, makes gifts, this high-spirited Bodhisattva,
O Subhati, gets greater merit than the former Bodhisattva. ‘Then, again, O
Subhiiti, but that high-spirited Bodhisattva, who living for as many Kalpas
as thore are sands in the river Ganges, makes gifts {0 those who have
fallen into the stream, and to those who have received perfect kuowledge,
establishes them, and does everything for conduct, becomes possessed of
mercy and full of enthusiasm, grasps the meditations favorable to Bodhi
knowledge and to other qualities, yet is devoid of Praja Paramita; but
that high-spirited Bodhisattva, who makes a gift of dharma in such a
way astolead to perfect knowledge, obtains greater merit than the Bodhi-
sattva mentioned ahove. Then, again, O Subhiiti, the high-spirited Bodhi-
sattva, who thus, making a gift of religion, developes it into perfect knowledge
to which there is no superior, by the process given in Prajii

jiid Paramita,
obtains greater merit than the other, ‘Then, again, 0 Subhiti, the high-
spirited Bodhisattva, who making a gift of Religion, developes it into perfect
knowledge by the process mentioned in the Prajiia Paramita, and after so
developing, attempts to grasp disappearance; that high-spirited Bodhisattva,
again, who makes a gift of Religion, but does not grasp disappearance ; this
Bodhisattva does not get 80 much merit as the high-spirited Bodhisattva,
who making a gift of Religion, again attempts to grasp disappearance, is pos-
sessed of P; Paramita, makes the disappearance of the Prajiia Paramita
permanent. This high-spirited Bodhisattva obtains greater merit.”

Subhiti said, ^ When the Lord has said, notions are doubt, why does the
Lord now say that it produces greater merit ?”

The Lord said, “The notion of merit in a high-spirited Bodhisattva,
following Prajiié Paramita, is certainly called void, is certainly called empty,
is certainly called worthless, is certainly called unsubstantial, just as, again,
and again, 0, Subhiti, doos a high-spirited Bodhisattva look upon all sub-


--- PAGE 170 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text | LVOLUTION OF GUNYALA. 13

stances in this spirit, so the high-spirited Bodhisattva, 0 Subhiti, becomes
permanent in Prajiia Padramiti. Just as, O Snubhiiti, the high-spirited
Bodhisattva becomes permanent in Prajiia Paramita, so he begets merit
without number and without measure.”

Subhiti said, “O Lord, why is this separate mention of ‘without mea-
sure’ and ‘without number?’ 18 there any distinction ? ”

The Lord said, “That is without measure from which measuroment
ceascs; that is said to be without number which cannot be counted by
numbers.” Subhiiti said, “ Is it synonymous, O Lord, that material property
may be without measure; and so sensations, abstract ideas and tendencies.
Is it, O Lord, synonymous, that thought may be without measure.”

The Lord said, “ Subhiti asks this—‘Is it synonymous, O Lord, that
material property may be without measure, and so sensations, abstract ideas,
and tendencies. Is it, O Lord, synonymous, that thought may be without
measure ?’—Yes, Subhiti, it is synonymous. ‘Thus, material property is cer-
tainly without measure, sensations certainly, abstract ideas certainly, ten-
doncies certainly. It is synonymous, O Snbhiiti, that thought is without
measure.”

Subhiti said, “Of what is the expression ‘withoub measuro’ syno-
nymous ?”

The Lord said, “The expression ‘without measure’ is a synonym of
Canyata, or Void. It isa synonym of that which is without cause. The
expression ‘without measure’ is, O Subhiiti, a synonym of that which is
beyond meditation.”

Subhiti said, “Is the expression ‘ without measure,’ O Lord, a synonym
of Void only? 16 the expression a synonym of that which is without cause,
of that which is beyond meditation only, and not of other attributes ?”

The Lord said, “ What do you say, Subhiti! Did I not say that all
attributes are said to be Void?”

Subhiti said, “O Lord, all the attributes have been called Void by the
Tathagata.”

The Lord said, “ Those which are Vuid, they ave imperishable also; that
which is Void, is also without measure. Therefore, 0 Subhiti, in reality,
the distinction, or separate mention of these attributes, is not perceived.
0 Subhiati, these are mere words, as said or spoken by Tathagata, such as,
without measure, without number, are imperishable, void, without cause,
beyond meditation, beyond memory, without origin, without birth, non-exis-
tent, resignatjon, restraint, extinction. This is, 0 Subhiiti, called by the
worthy Tathagata, who received complete enlightenment, as pointing out the
word of instruction.”

“This is wonderful, 0 Lord,” Subhiiti said, “that the worthy Tathagata,
having received complete enlightenment, has explained this to be the essential
characteristic of all attributes. That characteristic of all attributes can not
be ignored, because I know the meaning of what has been said by the Lord,
therefore the attributes can not be ignored.”

The Lord said, “Itis just so, O Sabhati, the attributes can not bo
ignored. Why is it so?—Because, O Subhiti, that which is the state of
being Void in regard to all attributes, it is impossible to ignore.”

Subhiti said, “Can tho object, which can not be ignored, be susceptible
of increase or decrease.”

Tho Lord said, ‘ Not so, O Subhiti.”

_  Subhiti said, ^ 0 Lord, if the object which can not be ignored has no
increase or decrease; Dana Paramit& too can neither increasc nor decrease.


--- PAGE 171 [OCR_san+eng] ---
14 EVOLUIION OF CUNYATA. [णप्‌ and Text, Pt. 111, 1894.

Thus (Vila Paramita, thus Kshinti Piramita, thus Viryya Paramita also,
O Lord, is not susceptible of increase or.decreasc. How can a high-spirited
Bodhisattva understand complete enlightenment ? How can he be near the
highest completo enlightenment, on the strength of the Paramitis which
do not increasc? Nor can a high-spirited Bodhisattva go near the highest
and complete enlightenment without filling up Paramita.”

The Lord said, “It is just so! O Subhiti, itis just so! The thing
Paramité has neither increase nor decrease. Then, again, O Subhiti, the
high-spirited Kodhisattva, who follows Prajiii Paramita and meditates on it,
and becomes expert in the means, will not think thus, that Dana Paramiti
decreases, he will think Dana Paramita is merely a name. Jn making gifts
he turns those reflections, those products of the mind, those roots of merit into
the highest excellent knowledge, and turns them to the way in which the
highest excellent knowledge Then, again, O Subhiti, the high spirited
Bodhisattva, who follows Prajiaé Paramita and meditates on it, and becomes
expert in the means, will not think thus, that (ila Paramita increases or
Gila Paramita decreases. He will rather think Gila Paramité to be a mere
name. Depending upon conduct, he turns those reflections, those products
of the mind, those roots of merit, into the highest excellent knowledge, and
turns them to the way in which the highest excellent knowledge is. Then,
again, O Subhiti, the high-spirited Bodhisattva, who follows Prajiia Pa
mitaé and meditates on it, will not think thus, that Kshanti Paramité
९३६०8 or Kshanti Paramita decreases. He will, on the contrary, think
that Kshanti Paramita is merely a name. Acting in accordance with the
dictates of Kshinti, he will turn those reflections, those products of the
mind, those roots of merit into the highest-excellent knowledge, and turn
them in the direction in which the highest-excellent knowledge is. Then,
again, O Subhuti, the high-spirited Bodhisattva who follows Prajiia Péva-
mit&é and meditates on it, and becomes expert in the meaus, will not think
thus, that Viryya Paramiti increases or Viryya Paramita decreases, on the
other band, he will think that Viryya Paramita is merely a name, Mngaged
in the exercise of energy, he will turn those reflections, those products of the
mind, those roots of merit into the highest-excellent knowledge, and turn
them in the direction where the highest-excellent knowledge is.

“Then, again, O Subhiati, the high-spirited Bodhisattva who follows
[दि Paramita and meditates on it, and becomes expert in the means, will
not think thus, that Dhyana Pairamita increases or Dhyana Paramita decreas-
es. On the contrary, he will rather think, Dhyana Paramita is merely a
name. Performing Dhyinas, he will turn those reflections, those products
of the mind, those roots of merit into the highest-excellent knowledge, and
will turn them in the way in which the highest-excellent knowledge is.
Then, again, 0 Subhiti, the high-spirited Bodhisattva who follows Prajiia
Paramita and meditates on it, and becomes expert in the means, will not think
thus, that Prajiia Piramita increases or decreases. He will, on the contrary,
think that Prajiia Paramité is mercly a name. He following Prajna
Piramité and meditating on it, will turn those reflections, those products of
the mind, those roots of merit into the highest-excellent knowledge, and turn
them into the direction in which the highest-cxcellent knowledge is.”

Then, again, tho long-lived Subhiti asked the Lord, “ What! is this
the highest-complete knowledge ? ”

The Lord said, ‘‘ Tathata, or Truth, is the highest-complete knowledge.
This Tathataé, O Subhiti, neither increases nor decreases. If that high-
spirited Bodhisattva deports himself again and again, and often, with
reflections connected with this, he comes nearer to the highest-completo


--- PAGE 172 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society. | STORY OF KING MANDHATA, 15

knowledge. These reflections also do not leave him. Thus, O Subhiti,
things which can not be ignored have neither increase nor decrease. Thus,
the Piramitis have neither increase nor decrease; thus all the attributes ,
© Subhiti, have neither increase nor decrease; thus, O Subhiti, the high-
spirited Bodhisattva, deporting himself with these reflections, or reflections
of this nature, comes nearer to the highest-complete knowledge.”

THE STORY OF KING MANDHATA.

1. The wealth, pure as the white chowry (yak-tail) and umbrella in the
hands of the damsels in heaven, that generous souls treasure up in the three
worlds, and the fame, bright as camphor and pleasing to the ear, that flows
through them, are but the fruits of a drop of charity. Truly, charity is the
veal source of glory.

2. There lived once a king called Uposhada, whose renown flowing from
uncommon prowess like cream churned out of milk and curd, was the admira-
tion of the learned.

3. Wealthy and powerful and devoted as he was to the protection of
this earth, what sovercign there was, whose head wonld not be bowed down
to his feet?

4, As religion purifies the intellect, charity develops tenderness of soul,
humility adorns glory, so the world was adorned by that illustrious king.

5. Born of a high race, complexion bright as the moon, adorned with a
profusion of Howers, and overshadowing the whole world under his royal
umbrella, he oceupied the foremost place among the crowned heads.

6, His glorious renown bright as the pure water of tho Ganges on the
head of Civ, has hecome an ornament of the three worlds through which it
travels.

7. More illustrious than the thousand-eyed Indra and the achiever of 2
thousand Yogyus, that ruler of the earth had sixty-thonsand handsome wives.

8. Once having devoted his time to the destruction of the Rakshushas
(savages) for the safety of the Rishis (sages), he was wandering in their her-
nuitages on horseback.

9. Some royal hermits having celebrated a rite for begetting sons, had
placed there a pitcher full of water. Being weary by long journey and
becoming thirsty, the king drank out of it.

10. Having returned to his capital after drinking the sanctified water
in that lonely place, the king became enceinte.

11. ‘The Providence that delights in dreams, illusions and magics, and is
the play-ground of endless varieties, is ever triumphant.

12. Who can decipher the wonderful limnings of that ever variegated
painter ?

13. In the fulness of time, piercing the king's head, a child luminous
us the sun was born.

14. With a view to support the universe-wide empire, the queens,
whose breasts were running milk owing to filial love, accepted the child
who looked like a personal embodiment of virtue.

15. As they quarrelled among themselves each saying, “This noble
child will accept meas its mother, ” the child came to be known as “Mindhata”
(by me supported).

16, The playful and thriving Mindhata, having spent his boyhood in
virtuous pursuits, stepped into his youth.

17. On the ascension of his father to heaven, the young man versed in
all the lores, occupied the throne according to tho law of his race.


--- PAGE 173 [OCR_san+eng] ---
16 STORY OF KING MANDIATA. [Journal and Toxt, Pi. ITI, 1894.

18. A Yaksha named Divankosh, having become a slave of his, brought
brilliant presents on the occasion of his assumption of the sceptre.

19. With the embroidered golden crown on his head bedecked with royal
tiara, the king shone like Mount Sumeru, capped with the autumnal clouds.

20. Thereafter, he found his crown jewel and wheel, war-horse, elephant,
wife, home, army,—those 7 gems descending to him.

21. That king, the conqueror of all his enemies, had a thousand child-
ren equally valliant and illustrions like their father.

22. He brought the whole world under his seeptre, which is situated so
happily on the head of the king of serpents, and which has belted the shores of
all the seas.

23. The Lord of the World shone resplendant like the sacred wheel-
adorned hands of Vishnu, illumined with the suushine of all the worlds and
bedecked with a newly-blown lotus.

२५. His renown, like the Ganges, flowed over all the three worlds. His
beanty was illumined with glory. He was the first blossom of the creeper of
virtue.

25. He was one day sauntering in a grove with his courtiers, regaling
his eyes with the beanty of full-blown flowers.

26. He observed there birds which had no wings, but walked on foot,
and which looked woeful, lamenting their inability to fly in the air.

27. He remained gazing at those helpless birds, having neither means
of living, nor feather, nor clothing; wingless, motionless, and incapable of
soaring in the air.

23, ^ 0, what sin have these poor birds committed that they should have
no wings, but move with great difficulty on the ground!”

29. Having said this and being melted with pity, his Prime-minister
addressed him thus—

30. “O Majesty! [have heard why the birds of this place came to lose
their wings.

31. “In this hermitage dwell five hundred hermits, full of devotion and
self-meditation.

32. “These birds used always to make noise in this grove, disturbing
their study, meditation, and prayers.

33. “They became angry with the birds on account of their noises, which
were unpleasant to their ears.

34. “By the fire of the curse, the wings of these birds were burnt and
destroyed. :

35, “In this manner thrown into the misery of winglessness, they are
hopping wearily on the ground, looking up to you for compassion like your
powerless enemics.”

36. The king hearing this story of the curse from his Prime-minister
felt his heart pained and moved with pity, addressed him thus:

37. “What a fiery disposition the peaceful hermits have shown even
in this grove! As unextinguished fire in cinders burns them out, so has the fire
of fury worked in the hermits who have externally adopted the ways of peace.

38. ^ Whatis the good of having such false ascetics (within my domi-
nion) who can not with the water of forgiveness, cool down their minds when
heated with anger ?

39. “The asceticism of those alone is praiseworthy whose intellect has
become pure, and mind has been adorned with friendliness, kindness, libora-
lity, forgiveness, and self-control. The asceticism of others consists in mere
withering up of the body.

40. «५ What good is there in the asceticism of theangry ? Of what use is
the strength of the mad? What necessity is there for the wealth of the avari-


--- PAGE 174 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt 3०0] THE STORY OF KING MANDHATA. 17

cious ? पि good can result from the wicked having knowledge of the
Castras

9 41. “Let such impure, wrathful, unforgiving hermits clear out of my
dominion!”

42, Tho king sent message to them that they should leave the utmost
limits of the country under his control.

43, The hermits having heard of the anger of the king for the sake
of the birds, became thoroughly ashamed and cogitated thus:

44. “This king is the sovereign of the world which has the four seas
for its belt. Where are we togo ? Where is the country which is not
included in his kingdom ? ”

45. After thinking over the matter in this manner, the hermits went to
the Jambu Khanda which lies by the side of the Golden Mountain (Sumeru)
and which is full of gods and men who had obtained salvation.

46. Owing to the great glory of that sovereign, the earth, without being
cultivated, yielded a plentiful harvest, and the sky a cloth of gems.

47, Under his orders, the clouds showered gold for a weok, putting
Indra to shame thereby.

48. Through his own prowess, travelling through space with his
whole army, he annexed the island called Piirva Videha, which is inhabited by
enlightened people, to his kingdom,

49. In his journey through space, he was preceded by an army which
had 18 millions of warriors in it.

50. With irresistible power he governed Godania continent, Uttara Kuru,
and the regions lying near the Sumeru mountain.

51. The king of the four continents comprising this earth, for a long while
enjoyed himself on the golden peak of Sumern.

52. One day, while journeying through space for visiting the gods,
the king covered up the ten directions with his elephants which looked like
an array of blue clouds.

53. ‘The great ascetics, who, having been turned out of their hermitage
by Mandhata, wore carrying on their devotional observances by the side of
Sumeru, had their heads defiled with the excrements of his horses and elephants,
dropped from the clouds.

54, Thus provoked thoy looked towards heaven with indignation,
illumining all directions with a fiery glow.

55. Many amongst them were about to call for curses, when others ex-
claimed —“ What, are we going to shew anger?” Just then a messenger came
from the gods and joyfully addressed them, thus—

56. “This is Mandhata, the lord of the world. His valour is like that
of Indra. His orders are deveutly obeyed by all the kings.

57. “This godly man is travelling in the air with his army. Even the
virtuous goddess of speech feels pride in singing his glories.

58. ‘Though his prosperity has made allthe world happy, yet never
was any pride seen in him. ,

59. “In vast wealth’ he resembles Kuvera, in valour Kairrica, in
asceticism Mauipeva, and in grace Visunu himself.

60. “Ho equals the sun in glory, the moon in giving pleasure to all,
Indra in overthrowing boasted valour. He thus shines as a god.

61. “ Bali has fled to the nether world, Dadhichi has only now his bones
left, but so vast is his charity that the sea has not yet been able to overcome
its regrot on that account.”

62. From the rank of the hermits, one named Durmukho, despite what
fell from the divine message, sprinkled water charmed with imprecations.

3

--- PAGE 175 [OCR_san+eng] ---
18 TOE STORY OF KING MANDHATA, (Journal and Text, Pt, ITT, 1894,

63. Tho general of the king’s army smiled at this and said: “O ascetics !
restrain your anger. Do not injure your asceticism.

64. “Your curse will prove fruitless upon the king. This army is not
like the helpless birds whose wings you had destroyed.”

65. After the general had said this, the army became paralysed by the
curse. The king asked with surprise what it meant ?

66. The enraged general stepped forward and said—“O king! tho
army cannot advance owing to the curse of the great Rishis.

67. “This army, locked up in the skies by the curse, is looking like tho
sun shronded by clouds.”

68. The king having heard it, looked at the army, and his very sight
baffled the curse.

69. The kind-hearted king, unwilling to do any serious personal harm to
the Rishis, and inflict any severe punishment on them, cast three matted locks
on the ground.

70. The locks melted away with the earth, as if feeling ashamed to be a
mere burden to those who have not been able to congner passion and ignorance.

71. The king then reaching the summit of Sumern mountain, saw the
delightful city called Sudargana.

72. There, near the waters, lived furions elephants and the Yakshas
decorated with heavenly garlands, and holding human skulls in their hands,

73. There lived a prond race of gods with a king who had a powerful army.

74, Having defeated the four-mailed and armed kings through his
prowess, the king Mindhaté carried them at the head of his army.

75. He then saw Parijatu, the favorite flower of the gods, which is
lovely as Kovidara, and noble as Kalpadruma,—the wishing tree.

76. He then arrived at the Council of the gods called Gudharma, on
the summit of Sumeru, the white lustre of which shone like a spotless white
garland illumining the skies.

77. There was situated the mansion named Puijayanty, looking bright
with golden pillars decorated with gems.

78. ‘There lilies and heavenly damsels closely resembled cach other,
their face and lotus, their hair and bees having a elose resemblance among
them.
70. Thero the celestial beings being reflected on the jewelled pillars and
pavement, one paradise looks like many.

80. There the heavens being lighted up with the lustre of jewelled gates
and palaces, look as if spanned by rainbows in all directions.

81. There the leaves of Kalpadruma—the wishing tree, blown by a soft
breeze, look like the daughter of heaven’s grace dropped down in a dance.

82, There are the charming gardens of the gods called Chditraratha, the
passion which lovers long for, and an eternal festival of spring.

83-84. The king looked with softened eyes for a moment, awe-struck
and paralysed with joy at the all-fulfilling and all-pleasant home of the
gods, brilliant with the flowers of all the seasons, and thought this was the
land for the virtuous to enjoy the fruits of their good deeds.

85, There Mandhata saw the elephant of Indra which looked like the
pleasant and delightful Nandana garden, beautitied with swarms of bees,

86. Indra, having come to know that Mandhita, the king of the worlds,
had arvived in his realm, proceeded with all the gods to welcome him.

87. Mandhita, who was the foremost of them that had got rid of in-
ferior desires, then arrived at Indra’s Sabha and was worshipped by him.

88. The gods being seated in theirlines of jewelled thrones, Mandhata
shared half the throne of Indra himself.

--- PAGE 176 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Baddhist Text 8००९६४.] THE STORY OF KING MANDHATA. 19

89. Tho king of men and gods thus seated together lovked undistin-
guishable; thcir personal and mental attractions being thoroughly alike.

90. When all the gods were sucking the honey of Mandhata’s lotus-
face, with their bec-like cye, Indra said:— = -

91. “O jewel of light! How glorious is your position! The world is
ornamented by you and the skies by the sun.

92, “The banner of your empiro ornamented with the moon of your
renown, which is of the highest brilliancy, is shinning in the three worlds.”

93. Mandhata, tho jewel of renown, being thus addressed by the king of
the gods, lowered his seat, and rejoined —“ It is the fruit of your kindness.”

97. He dwelt in the paradise being adored by the gods, and lived their
a cycle of six Indras.

98, All the gods placed faith in his prowess and Indra now began
acherving easy victorics.

99. The gods in their war with the fiery Ddanava, the cnemy of the gods,
enjoyed rest by taking shelter under the tree of his valour.

100. The king Mandhita, through his own virtuous deeds, enjoyed end-
Icss bliss, and thus glided away a cycle of six Indras.

101. A pure mind is the emblem which shows the cnjoyment of the
fruits of good deeds, but 8४ soon as it becomes tainted, the end of the happy
state is near at hand.

102. In the coures of time, the king of men became conccited, ambitious,
and sinful.

103, “Through the valowr of my arms,” thonght he, “the gods are en-
joying this prosperity. I can therefore bear no longer their cujoyment of half
tho paradise.”

104. “I am powerful as tho Indra; 1 am inferior to none; my arm is
capable of sustaining the weight of the whole universe.

105. “I shall dethrone Indra, and enjoy all the wealth and empire of
heaven, bringing them under one umbrella-Satrapy.”

106, When he was contemplating this revolt against the Indra, the
white lustre of his glory became dimmed like a fading garland.

107. The tempestuous stream of pride defiles the unsteady mind. Just
asthe clouds by pouring rain overthrow the bank of a river, the rise of
pride unlooses the bank of goodness.

108. A sin-defiled of mind becomes tho inevitable messenger of danger
even for a great man.

109. On the appearance of the sinful resolve in the great king’s mind,
he fell on the earth as an uprooted tree.

110. Knowledge is lost without study, fortuno is destroyed by pride,
goodness by envy, temptation puts obstacles in the way of advancement

111. | Even from the highest summit of culture, the pride of wealth and
power bring about ones fall.

112, In his previous birth, he worshipped the Buddha called Sarva Vibhu
—the lord of all, and it was as a fruit of that merit he had acquired a kingdom
which even Indra would covet. 5

113. Having given alms to worthy persons in his previous birth, he
had obtained greater glory than Indra.

114, In his previous life, he lived ina town named Bandhumati, His
name was Utkarika then. He was o trader of pure character.

115, Vipacyi, one of the fully enlightened and capable of saving all beings,
came to his house for alms. »

116. "9 did ho throw a handful of grain of mudya-pulse into
the alms-vessel of that Bhikshu, four of which dropped on the ground.


--- PAGE 177 [OCR_san+eng] ---
20 SfORY OF JYOTISHKA. (Journal and Toxt, Pt. TIT, 1894,

117. By giving alms he became Mandhata, tho lord of the earth. He
became the lord of all the continents which constitute this world, and
shared half the throne of Heaven with Indra.

118. Owing to his carelessness, in that birth, some of the grains had
fallen on the ground. It was this sin which led to his fall from paradise.

119. What even baffles the imagination, and never dawns in the mind
in dream or delusion and is in the portion only of the fortunate few—that
incomparable blessedness is the fruit of the all-wishing tree of charity alone.

120. The Blessed One in narrating the stories of his former births for
the instruction of the Bhikshus, thus described tho glories of moral merits that
come out of charity.

THE SEQUEL OF THE STORY OF JYOTISHKA.
By
Nopin Cuanpra Dax, M.A.
Continued from p. 24 of Vol. IL, Purt 2, of the Journal,
75.
Tho life-long flow of carthly wealth,
Like th’ ocean’s briny store,

Can scarce assnage the thirst of man ;
Ambition knows no shore.

76.
Could plenty stop the discontent
Which haunts the rich on earth,

Man would not come to life again
Through pain of frequent birth.

77.

Away with wealth, the fertile cause
Of fight, discord and woe !
Farewell, false pride and favour low
Which princes can bestow !

Away with enjoyment and want
Full of perils indeed !

*Tis best for man, in जस्या times,

A life, recluse to lead.

78.

The light of good company fails
In gloomy times of sin,

- The pious then seek for rest and peace
In solitude unseen.

79.

Syotishka thon renounced the world
Revolving so in mind ;

Misfortune opens wisdom’s eye
While it confounds the hind,

--- PAGE 178 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt 8००९५] STORY OF JYOTISHKA.

80.

He gavo his all to the poor and went
To Buddha, bliss to attain,

For one who’s tied by lucre’s chains
Sceks happiness in vain.

81.

So when a drake in Mana’s lake
Longs to reside and swim,
The nether earth, like muddy pool,
Has charms no more for him.

82.
When pleasuro’s fiery thirst is o'er
With folly’s blinding smokes,
When contentment’s ambrosia soothes
The souls of peaceful folks ;
Fortune with all her drink and mirth
And fair one’s flitting charm,
To those retired and happy fow
Can do nor good nor harm.

83.

Unwearied, with the Lord as guide,
He walked lifo’s journey through,
And so he led a wanderer’s life

To seek sanctity true.

84.

The Bhikshus saw him enlightened
As Bodhisatva wise,

And wondering enquired of the Lord,
Who thus to them replics :—

85.

“ Man reaps the inevitable fruits

OE actions of his own,—

The deeds which in his former births
As potent sceds were sown.

86.

“Tn the reign of King Bandhuman,
In Bandhumati town,

There lived a man named Anangan
Of great wealth and renown.

87.

“ A preacher of enlightened mind
Once to that city came,

For the sake of the virtuous there :
Bipasyi was his name.

21

--- PAGE 179 [OCR_san+eng] ---
STORY OF JYOT(ISHKA. [Journal and Text, Pt. III, 1894,
88.

“ The sage was followed by Bhikshus
Thousands, three score and two ;
Anangan welcomed him with joy
And bowed with reverence due.

89.

“ Three months he entertaincd the sage
With all his means and might;

The king invited him as well,

With respect and delight.

90.

“ The worthy citizen and king
Each with the other vied

In honouring the guest with treat,
To suit their wealth and pride.

91.

“With jewelled umbrella and flags,
And elephants arrayed,

The king honoured the saintly guest’,
Anangan saw dismayed.

“ Indra favoured the pious man
And from his heavenly storo
Bestowed on him help and wealth
The Blessed Jina to adore.

93.
“ Anangan then worshipped the Lord
With riches thus obtained,

The majesty of the World’s King
Before his glories waned. = `

94,

“ With flowers, perfumes and jewols
Resplendent as the sun

And moon in full, and Kalpa fruits *
He adored the Blessed One,

Whom Indra’s queen devoutly fanned
With chamarf gently swayed

Such rare devotion put to shade
What the king had displayed.

# Heavenly tree, which yields whatever is asked for.
¶ Tail of the chémari (yak) used in fanning,

--- PAGE 180 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.} BUDDHISM IN JAPAN, 23

95.

“ By faith unflinching in the sage
He did purity attain ;
And in Jyotishik, bright as sun,
Has come to life again,
And so from earthly turmoils free
He moves at 1४86 in peace with me.”

96.

So said Jina, whose wisdom pnre
Has lit up the worlds through,

And thus he taught his followers
The worth of devotion true.

History * or tir Txtropccrioy or Bopputsm into Jaray.
By E. M. Satew, Esq., ©. 21. (+.

The introduction of Buddhism into Japan is sometimes referred to the
year 522 A.D., when a Chinese, named Shiba T'atsu, who had become a naturalis-
ed Japaneso subject, erected a small temple at Sakatahara in Yamato. But
it does not appear that the doctrine found, at this time, any adherents among
the native inhabitants. The first attempt made by China to obtain informa-
tion with respect to the Indian religion is placed in 65 4.7.) when a Mission
was despatched to India, which returned two years later with relics of the
Buddha, and a copy of the Sitra of Forty-two Sections. Some three centuries
later the new religion mado its way into Korea, whore it must have struck
decp root, and wo find the King of Haknsai (an ancient division of that conn-
try) sending a golden image of tho Buddha, and some oft he sacred books, as a
present to the Sovereign of Japan, in 552 A.D. Tho Mikado is said to have
had an image of the Buddha carved out of a log of a camphor-wood tree that
was cast ashore near the capital in the following year, and to have set it up in
his palace. In 554A.D., the King of Hakusai sent over nine monks to replace
the seven who had previously visited Japan. They scem to have belonged to
the Jé-jitsu and San-ron sects, now no longer recognised in Japan.

Twenty-two years later, in the reign of Bi-datsu Tennd, the King of
Hakusai, sent to Japan a number of books, with teachers of the Ritsu and
Zen sects, 8 nun, an exorcising monk, an image-maker, and an architect. In
584 A.D., images of Shaka and Miroku were brought back from Korea by two
Japanese. Soga no Iname, the son of Umako, became their owner, as well as
of some relics of the Buddha’s body, which he enshrined in the first pagoda
erected in Japan. It was after this that tho pestilence broke out, which was
the cause of Buddhism being for a while suppressed. Umako, nevertheless,
obtained special permission to practise its rites in private. In the following
reign, the priests seem to have regained the Mikado’s favour by curing him of
a dangerous illness. Under this soveroign occurred the rebellion of Mononobe
no Moriya, a bitter opponent of Buddhism. From this time dates the prosper-
ity of tho new religion in Japan. Korea still continued to be the source to

* This extract has been taken from a pamphlet presented to me by Mr. E. M. Satow
British Minister, on the occasion of my visit to Bangkok in 1887.—Ed,

--- PAGE 181 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Qt BUDDHISM IN JAPAN. (Journal and Toxt, Pt. IJ, 1894,

which recourse was had for further knowledge of the religion, and numerous
monks were invited over to spread their doctrines. Many of the most celebrated
temples wore founded about this period, amongst which may be named Tenno-
ji, at Ozaka, Udzumasa, near the modern Kioto, Asuka-dera, Daruma-ji, Tayema-
dora, Kume-dera, and Tachibana-dera, in Yamato. Shdtoku Tai-shi died
in 621 A.D. Itis not known with any certainty what form of Buddhism
was taught during his life, but it is conjectured that it belonged to the Sho-jo
(Hinay4na) or so-called ‘ Smaller Vehicle.’

The first Chinese monks arrived in Japan in 623 A.D. It appears, from
a list compiled about this time that, the number of temples or monasterics was
46, inhabited by 1,816 monks and 569 nuns. Tho emigration of Korcan
monks still continued.

In 625 A.D. occurs the first notice of the San-ron and Jo-jitsu doctrines
being publicly tanght in Japan.

Ko-toku Tennd (645—654 A.D.) was a sincere adherent of Buddhism.
Dnring his reign a native monk, named Do-sho, was sent to China, where he
became the pupil of the famous pilgrim Yiian-chang,* called Gen-jo San-zc by
the Japanese. By Yiian-chang’s advice ho placed himself under the tuition of
the monk E-man, of tho Zon soct, and received instruction in tho practice of
contemplation. On returning to Japan ho mado known the doctrines of tho
Hossa School. The Gu-sha form of doctrine was introduced about the same
period. Dé-shd is said to havo dug wells, established ferries, and built
bridges in many parts of Japan, and to a much later period the construction
of bridges was considered a work of morit, entitling the builder to the hope
of Paradise. Two other monks were subsequontly (in 658 A.D.) sent to
China to study under Yiian-chang.

Tommu ‘Tonnd (673-686 A.D.) was anothor generous patron of Buddhism.
He endowed the poorer monasteries with lands, and made them independent of
all government ofticial supervision. Amongst the temples founded by him is
Yukn-shi-ji, near Nara. By 000 of his edicts it was ordered that every house
should possess a Buddhist shrine, and be provided with certain sacred hooks.

In 700 A.D., cremation was first, practised.

He was looked upon by tho Yamabushi, a sub-sect of ascetics, as their
founder.

From 710 A.D., dates the great monastery of Kd-buku-ji, at Nara,

The doctrines of the Ke-gon sect wero introduced by a Chinese monk in
735 A.D.

In 737 A.D., after an epidemic of small-pox (not previously known in
Japan) had almost decimated the population, tho reigning sovereign, Sho mu
Tenua, decreed that in cach province thero should be crected a large monas-
tery, to be called Koku-bun-ji. Afterwards, on tho occasion of a bad harvest,
he commanded the construction of seven-storied pagodas throughout the
country, one to each province, and ordered, further, ६ number of Buddhist
scriptures to be copied. It was this soveroign who founded the temple of
To dai-ji, at Nara, to hold the colossal gilt bronze image of Dai-nichi Nio rai.

In the same year, Japan was visited by an Indian monk, called in the
books Baramon 86-]5, said to have been a member of the Brahmin aren Tho
celebrated priest, Gid-gi Bo-satsu was sent to meet him at the port of Ozaka,
The title of Bo-satsu (Bédhisattva) was conferred on Gid-gi by Shd-mu Ten-
nd; it seems in later times to have been frequently arrogated to themselves
by territorial nobles, and an edict against this abuso was issued by lyeyasu,
in the beginning of the 17th century.

* Julien calls him Hiouen-Theaing.

--- PAGE 182 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] BUDDHISM IN JAPAN, 25

In 754 A.D., the doctrines of the Ritsu sect (Risshii) were made known
by a’Chincsp monk, named Kan-shin (Chien-chén), who, having promised
eleven years proviously to visit Japan, had six times sct out ou the voyage, but
had been as often obliged to put back by a violent tempest. Shé-mu enna
and his daughter Ké-ken Tenno, with 400 other persons, were reccived into
the Buddhist religion by this priest. Shd-mn कलारत was the first of the sover-
cigns of Japan to abdicate the throne and wear the monk’s garb, an example
followed by so many of his successors. His daughter aferwards became no-
torious through her passion for the monk Da-kis.
sh ar year 767 4.12. saw the foundation of a temple at Nikké by the monk
Sho-ds.

The doctrines of the, Ten-dai sect were introduced from China in 805 A.D.,
by Den-gid Dai-shi, the first abbot of Hi-yei-zan.

One year later, Kit-kai, better known hy his posthumous title of Ko-bo
Dai-shi, returned from China to promulgate the teachings of the Shin-gon, or
Yogachara School. An account of his life and teachings will be found at
p. 415,

‘ Nearly three centuries clapsed before there was any further development
of Buddhism in Japan, when the Yi-dzi Nembutsn sect was founded by
Rid-nin.

The Jé-do sect was established in Japan by Hé-nen Sho-nin in the end of
the 12th century.

Not long afterwards the Rin-zai sub-sect of the Zen was established by
Fi-sai. About the same time was introduced the S6-té-shii, a second branch
of the Zen sect, of which Dé-gen was the first Japanese patriarch (1. 1200, त.
1253).

Xho पठ, now styled the Shin-shiti, was founded by Shin-ran in the
first quarter of the thirteenth century, and the Hokke sect was founded in
1201 A.D., by Nichi-ren, from whom the sect takes its other title. It was
shortly afterwards followed by the Ji-shiii, said to be modelled upon the
doctrine of the Ikka shit.

The only remaining date to be mentioned is that of the foundation, in 1661
A.D., of O-baku-san, near Uji, ५ monastery of the Zen sect, by x Chinese
priest named In-gen .

The diferent Seets and their Doctrines. In the following table are shown
the name of the sects still existing in Japan, and the numbee of temples or
monasterics belonging to cach.

Ten-dai (3 sub-sects) =... ove we 5,088
Shin-gon (2 ” > vee we we 13,358
Jé-do (3 „+ 2) ... we . 8,478
Rin-zai (9 sub-sects) we ,.. 7,081
Zon | &5.४5 क ति .. 14,021
O-baku ae ae on _
Shin (10 sub‘sects) we ५५ ,.. 18.783
Nichi-ren (7 sub-sects) ... eee a. 9,085
Yii-dzi Nem-butsn ०० १९ on 347

Only ४ very cursory sketch of the doctrines of each school has been here
attempted. Those of the Ten-dai and Shin-gon sects are extremely metaphy-
sical and mystic, and the materials for giving a clear exposition of them do
not exist in an accessible form, so that the result of further research may pos-
sibly be to modify part of what is here stated,

4

--- PAGE 183 [OCR_san+eng] ---
26 RUDPHISM IN JAPAN. [Journal and Tesi, Pt. III, 1894

Ten-dai Shid.—The threo sub-sccts are those of En-riaku-ji on Hi-yei-
zan, On-jé-ji, or Miidera (also called the Ji-mon Ha), and Sai-kio-ji (known
also as the Shin-set Ha).

The Ten-dai sect is called after T’ien-tai shan, a mountain in China,
where its founder, the Chinese monk Chi-sha Dai-shi, first taught his doctaines.
Most of the old sects took their names from the books upon which their
doctrine was based. The principal book of the sect is the Ho-ko Kio (Sad-
dharma-pundarika-sitra), which is understood by the aid of the Chi-ron
(Maha-Pragiia-piramita-sitra-sdstra) and supplemented by the Ne-han-gid
(Mah&parinirvanasiitra). ‘he ‘law of meditation,’ by which the learner is
enabled to recognise the Buddha under all the forms he has assumed, in order
to save mankind, is found in the Chi-ron. References to the whole canon are
made, in order to support the doctrines thus selected. 1t considers the attain.
ment of spiritual insight to be possible by means only of contemplation and
the practice of asceticism (Kivam-mon), which is confined to monks, while it
may be taught by word of mouth to the laity (kid-mon). Tho highest traths
are, however, considered to be incomprehensible, except to those who have
attained to Buddhaship.

The doctrine of the sect is compared to a piece of cloth, in which the
teaching of Shaka is the warp, and in the interpretation, or private judgment
of the invidual, corrected by the opinion of other monks, is the woof. It is
held that there is a kind of intuition or perception of truth, called Shin-yid,
suggested hy the words of scripture, but transcending them in certainty. This
is said to be in harmony with the ‘Tanght of Shaka. The entirety of doctrine,
however, results in one central truth namely, that Nirviva is the final result
of existence, astatein which the thinking substance, while remaining individual
is unaffected by anything external, and is consequently devoid of fecling,
thought, or passion. _ 10 this the name of Mu-i (Asamskvita) is given, signi-
fying absolute, unconditioned existence, When this is spoken of as anuihi-
lation, it is the annihilation of conditions, not of the substance, that is meant,
Pushed to its logical result, this would appear to the ignorant (i.¢., the unre-
generate) to amount to the same thing as non-existence ; but here we are
encountered by one of those mysteries which lie at the foundation of all reli-
gious belief, and which must be accepted without questioning, if there is to be
any spiritual religion at all. A follower of H. Spencer would probably object
that this is an ‘illegitimate symbolical conception.’

Tngorant and obtuse minds are to be taught by hé-ben, that is, by the
presentation of truth under a form suited to their capacity. For superior
intellects Shaka, quitting the symbolic teaching appropriate to the Vernacular
understanding, revealed the truth in itself. Whoever can apprehend the Ten
Abstract Truths in their proper order, may, after four successive births, attain
to perfect Buddhaship, while the inferior intelligence can only arrive at that
condition after 100 Kalpas, or periods of time transcending calculation.

The principal deity of the En-riaku-ji sub-sect is Yaku-shi Nio-rai (Bha-
ishagyaguru), with whom are associated 1. Nikko, r. Gwakk6, two Bo-satsu.
Bon-ten (Brahma), Tai-shaku (Indra), the Shi Ten-nd (Four Kings of the
Devas), and the Jiti-ni Jin-sho (‘ Twelve Divine Leaders’) are also placed on
the altar.

The Miidera sub-sect worship Mi-roku Bo-satsu (Maitréya Bédhisattva).

The Shin-sei sub-sect worship Amida Nio-rai (Amitébha Tathigata) as
their principal deity.

Besides these, the sect reverences Shaka, supported by Monju and Fu-
gen (Sikya, Mangusri and Samantabhadra), Ji-zd (Kshitigarbha), Fu-do
(Akala), Kwan-non (Avalokitésvara), under his different forms, as the Eleven


--- PAGE 184 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] BUDDHISM IN JAPAN. 27

faced, the Horse-headed, the Thousand handed, the Holy. This deity is
usually accompanied by the Ni-jii-hachi Bu-shii, personifications of the
‘Twenty-eight Constellations, or tho Jiii-ni Do-ji, Twelve Boys. The go-chi
Nio-rai, or Tathagata of the Five Kinds of Wisdon, are often found enshrined in
the pagoda of this scct. The orthodox enumeration of these is Dai-nichi
(Vairékana), in the centre, A-shuku (Akshobhya) on the E., Ho-sha (Ratna-
sumbhava) on the S., Amida (Amitabha) on the W., and Fu-ki-jo-ju
(Amogha-siddhi) on the N. The niches of the chief gateway are usually
occupied by figures of the Ni-3.

The Ten-dai sect formerly worshipped numerous Shin-td gods, such as
Sannd, Tenjin Sama; Inari, Shimmei, Otori, Hachiman, and Godzu ‘l'enna,
whom they explained to be Avatiras of Buddhist deities : Inari, for instance,
being Kwan-non, and so on. In many cases it shared the emoluments of what
had originally been a Shin-t6 temple with the Shin-gon sect, and in such
cases the priests were married and transmitted their oflices to their heirs.
When the separation of Buddhism and Shin-td was effected, after the revolu-
tion of 1868, these priests became laymen, remaining in charge of the
‘ purified’ Shin-ta temples.

Shin-gon-shit.—This is identical with what is called the Ydgachara
School by Dr. Edkins, and derives its name from the Chinese translation of
‘Mantra,’ a Sanskrit word denoting the Mystic salutations addressed to the
Buddhist deities. It was founded by Rii-ju (Nagirguna), also called Rii-
mid, who is said to have made the discovery of an iron pagoda in Southern
India, inhabited by Vagra-Sattva, who tanght him the doctrine of Dai-nichi
(Vairokana). It is based chiefly npon three Sitras, or scriptures, the Dai-
nichi Kid, the So-shit-chi Kid, and the Kon-gs Cha Kis (Mahavairéhanabh
sumbodhi-stitra, Susiddhikaramamahatantra-saddhanopasika-patra and Vagra-
sekhara-stitra. There are three mystic rites— first, Shin-mitsu, or worshipping
the Buddha with the hands in certain positions, called ‘signs’; second,
go-milsu, or repeating Dharaud; third, i-mitsu, or contemplation, The practice
of fasting, with the object of puvifying the spiritual vision, appears to be
common to this and the ''en-dai sects.

Dai-niehi Niro-rai (Vairdkana) was the founder of this school, and trans.
mitted its doctrines to Kon-gi (Vaggrasattva), who was, in turn, succeeded by
Rid-mis (Nagaryuna). The next patriarchs were Rii-chi (Nagabédhi), Zen-
परा (Subhakara-simha), Kon-gé-chi (Vagrabédhi), Ichi-gio (I-hing, a
Chinese), एत Kon-ga (Amogha-vagra), and the Chinese Kei-kwa (Hui-
kuo), who was the teacher of Kd-bd Dai-shi, The latter introduced the
Shin-gon tepets into Japan.

There are two branches of doctrianes, the one called Kem-mitsu, the
other Jid-Jii-shin. Of these the former is adapted to stubborn minds, who
have to be overcome, as it were, by force; the latter are ten stages of spiri-
tual knowledge, commencing with complete ignorance, and terminating in
the perfect enlightment which is the condition of Buddhaship. These steps
are only accessible to those who are already disposed to seck after and accept
tho truth, This division appears to correspond with the two kinds of teach-
ing of the Tendai adapted to the inferior and superior grades of intelligence.

Every human being possesses within himself the six elements of the
spiritual body (Dharmarkiya), but is unconscious of them until Dai-nichi
enters into his heart, and enables him to recognise the truth. Whoever,
placing himself under the tuition of an Ajari (Acharya), believes in and
practices the three mystic rites already named, may arrive at perfect know-
ledge. The deities of the Kongo-kai and Taizd-kai are not exterior ex-
istences, but are to be found within the soul itself, They are states of mind,


--- PAGE 185 [OCR_san+eng] ---
28 BUDDHISM IN JAPAN,  [Jonrnal and Text, Pt. III, 1894,

not regions of space. Mandara means ‘complete assemblage,’ te, the
spiritual influences of all tho Buddhas and Tathagatas, which may be repre-
sented to the eye, as they often are, and is applied to pictures of the deities,
arranged in a certain order, which aro used simply for conveying to the un-
regenerate mind the truth which they are incapable of receiving in an
abstract form. Dai-nichi (Vairokana) is explained to be the collectivity of
all sentient beings, acting through the mediums of Kwan-non, Ji-23, Mon-ju,
Shaka, and other influences, which are popularly belicved to be separate
self-existent deities. But the whole doctrine is extremely difficult to com-
prehend, and more difficult to put into intelligible langnage.

Zen shit.—The founder of the Zen, or Contemplative School, in China,
was the Indian Dharma, who came to that country in 527 a.p., and died there
eight years later.* He is accounted the 28th Indian patriarch, and tho first
of six Chinese patriarchs. At tho root of his teaching lies the idea that truth
caunot be imparted by word of mouth, but must be reached by the intuition
of each individual, or, as they express it, ‘heart speaks to heart.’ 1t will be
remembered that at the close of the Buddha’s life, he is represented holding a
lotus flower in his hand, and slowly twisting it between finger and thumb,
without uttering a word, No ove of the vast assembly comprehends his
meaning, until at last Kashi smiles, and the Buddha immediately appoints
him to be his successor. Language at best is a very imperfect means of con-
yeying the meaning of a speaker, even where the ordinary affairs of life are
concerned, and much more so when it comes to expressing the profound ideas
of Buddhism. Language, says one anthor, is like the finger that points at the
moon, or the float wlvich indicates that the fish has taken the bait We must
not fix our attention too closely on the finger or on the float, lest we fail to
perceive the moon or the fish. It is by introspection, by consulting our own
hearts, that we learn what is the meaning of the Buddha, It might seem
unnecessary, therefore, to worship him or to study the sacred hooks. The Zen
sect, however, reads several siitras, the principal of which is the Dai-hannia
kis, or Mahapragia-pairamita-stitra, not as containing the truth in itself, but
simply as a means of edncating the intelligence to such a point that it becomes
capable of discovering the truth for itself. ‘ Look carefully within, and there
you will find the Buddha ? is the sum of their erecd, and Buddhaship is held
by them to be freedom from the influence of matter and from thonght. They
also study the ११/71 (Vagrakkhedika-prag iid, ramita-sitra), the Rid-ga-
kid (Lankavatara-ratna-sitra), and the Yut-kid-ki.

In most of the temples of the sect wo find Shaka enthroned between
Kasho and Anan, while on others the trinity consists of Shaka, Miroku, and
Amida. Where Amida is the principal deity, he has Kwan-non on the one
side and Sei-shi on the other. We also find the Zen monks revering Kwan-
non under his various forms, and even Ko-ku-z0, Yaku-shi, Ji-20, tho Shi
enna, Bon-ten, and Tai-shaku. In some cascs this is becauso a monastery.
originally founded by another community, has been subsequently trasferred to
a society of the Zen sect.

This sect has in Japan two principal branches, the Rin-zai and the
§o-td, named after Lin-tsi and Ts’ao-tung, two Chinese monks of the 9th cen-
tury, belonging to the Nan-gaku (Nan-Hgo) division of the sect. As far as
doctrine is concerned, they do not appear to differ very widely from the Zen-
shit, of which they aro offshoots,

Tho O-baku sub-sect was founded in Japan by the Chinese priest In-gen.
It'worships, as principal deity, Shaka, who is found accompanied by Kashé and

* The datos given differ according to the authorities,

--- PAGE 186 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] BUDDHISM IN JAPAN, 29

Anan, but it also reveres Daruma, Kwan-non under his different forms, and
Bishamon,

J6-do-shiti.— This sect was founded by the Indian Me-mis (Asvaghosha),
and after transmission by the patriarchs, Rii-ju (Nagarguna) and Ten-jin
(Vasubaudhu), was introduced into China by Bodairushi (Bédhiruki). This
Indian priest translated Vasubandhu’s astra, Mu-rid-ju-kid Upadesa, into
Chinese, and imported the doctrine to the Chinese Do-rrau (T’an-lwn), who
was succeeded by Dé-shaku (‘T'ao-cho’, Zen-dd (Shan-tao), and K-kan (Hwai-
han). According to the teaching of tho Ten-dai sect, the means of salvation
are to be found in the study of tho whole canon, and in the practice of asce-
ticism and meditation. Nagarguna and Shan-tao after him, it is said, maintain-
ed that in the present age of the decay of religion, it is impossible for anyone
to be saved in this way by his own efforts, and they substituted for this diffi-
cult path to Nirvana a simple faith in the all-saving power of Amida. his
is called ‘ relying upon the strength of Another’ (ta-77ki) ; but as the invoca-
tion of Amida is in itself believed to be a meritorious act of the believer, or
‘effort of one’s own,’ the formula ta-:tki chit no ji-riki, ‘ self-effort depending
on other effort,’ is used to express the entire dogma. H6-nen Shé-nin, having
discovered a text which declares that ten invocations of Amida are sufficient
to entitle the believer to his aid, quitted the Ten-dai sect, in which he had
been educated, and made this the basis of a new doctrine, by which he be-
lieved it possible for all mankind eventually to attain to perfect Buddhaship.
Birth in Jé-do (Sukhavati) after the death of tho body is thus ensured, and
then the progress of the soul towards perfect Buddhaship is carried out to
its end.

Amida is therefore the usual object of reverence in the temples of this
sect. Sometimes he is accompanied by Kwan-non and Sei-shi. We also find
Shaka alone, accompanied by Sudatta, Zenzai-ddji, and the Sixteen Rakan.
Like the Ten-dai and Shin-gon, thoy sometimes worship Shin-to deities, as
Inari and Len-ten.

Chi-on-In at Kidto, and 26-jo-ji at Tokio, are the chief seats of the two
principal divisions of this sect.

Nichi-ren-shiai— This is a purely Japanese sect.

The chief book used is the Ho-ke-kid or Saddharma-pundarika-sitra,
which is divided into two sections, each containing fourteen chapters; the
first relates to the history of Buddha, up to his 30th year, the latter, the remain-
der of his teachings. There are two kinds of observances, diflicult and easy ;
the one for the monks and the other for the laity. The central dogma of the
sect is that every part of the universe, including animals, plants, and even the
very earth, is capable, by successive transmigrations of attaining to Buddha-
ship. It is necessary for man to work out his own salvation, by observing the
law as laid down by the Bndhha, and by constant prayer, not by relying on
the aid of Amida, as taught by the Jé-do and Shin sects. There are two
forms of teaching; the one symbolic, intended to attract followers ; the other,
the pure truth, employed to convert the obstinately ignorant, against their will,

Shaka is the object of worship of this sect. They hold that, after the

lapse of 3,000 years from tho birth of Shaka, he will be succeeded by Miroku
(Maitréya), who will convert those who have not yet attained to Buddhaship.
The Lotus is the emblem of Shaka, who is said to have been born into the
corrupt world, like the lotus springing up out of the mud at the bottom of a
pond.
: Besides Shaka, this sect admits as objects of reverence, its founder Nichi-
ren, Shichi-men Mié-ken (1b.), tho Ho ke-kid, the Three Precious Ohes (7.e.,
Buddha, the Law, aud the Church), Fu-d6, tho Shichi Fuku-jin, or Seven
Gods of Good Fortune, and Ki-shi-mo-jin


--- PAGE 187 [OCR_san+eng] ---
30 BUDDHISM IN JAPAN. [Journal and Text, Pi. III, 1894,

Shin-shia.— The carly history of the sect bears a striking resemblance
to the Ja-do-shid, especially in its exclusive worship of Amida (Amitabha),
and in its use of the Sam-bu Kis, ४.८) Mu-rid-jn Kid, Kwan-Mu-rid-ju Kio,
and Amida Kid—Sausk. Sukhavativyiha-sftra (larger, Amit&éyusdhyana-
stitra (?), and Sukhavativydha-sitra (smaller), as the basis of its doctrine,
It differs, however, from it in one vital point of doctrine. The former holds
that salvation is merited by simply repeating the invocation to Amida; while
the latter teaches that this is due to faith in the power and willingness of
Amida to save mankind, and that the invocation is to be used only as an act
of thanksgiving. The Jd-do sect expects that Amida will come to meet the
soul of the believer on its separation from the body, in order to conduct it to
Paradise, while the Shin sect does not, holding that as soon as man believes
in Amida he is taken by him under his merciful protection, Tho latter main-
tains that it alone possesses the truc teaching of Hd-nen Shé-nin, and that
the Jé-do sect has wandered from the original doctrines of its founder. For
this reason it has been termed ‘the Protestantism of Japan,’ to which form
of Christianity the non-observance by its priests of the rule of celibacy also
gives it a superficial resemblance. The Shin-shii also teaches that morality
is of equal importance with faith. It is considered by many to be the richest
and most powerful of all the Japanese sects, and its temples, the chief of
which are known as the Hon-gwan-ji, are the largest and finest to be found
in Japan. But it possesses no fixed property, and is dependent entirely upon
the voluntary contributions of its adherents. It is further distinguished from
the rest by its active prosecution of missionary work in China aud Korea, and
by its endeavours to maintain a high standard of education among its
neophytes.

We cannot do better than reproduce tho account of this sect from the pon
of Mr. Akamatsu, a distinguished member of the Nishi Hon-gwan-ji, at Kidto,
published in the April number of the ‘ Chrysanthemum.’ for 1881 :—

Buddhism teaches that all things, both abstract and conerete, are pro-
duced and destroyed by certain causes and combination of circumstances ; and
that the state of our present life has its cause in what we have done in our
previons existence up to the present; and our present actions will become
the causes of our state of existence in the future life.

‘As our doings are good or bad, and of different degrees of existence or
evil, so these produce different effects, having many deprees of suffering or
happiness: all men and other sentient beinys have an interminable existence,
dying in one form and being re-born in another ; so that if men wish to escape
from a miserable state of transmigration, they must cut off the causes, which
are the passions, such, for oxample, nvetousness, anger, &ec.

‘The principal object of Buddhism is to enable men to obtain salvation
from misery according to the doctrine of “extinction of passion.” The doc-
trine is the cause of salvation, and salvation is the effect of this doctrine.

‘This salvation we call Nirvéva, which means oternal happiness, and is
the state of Buddha.

‘It is, however, very difficult to cut off all the passions; but Buddhism
professes to teach the way of obtaining this object.

‘Nagarjuna, the Indian saint, said that in Buddhism there are many ways,
easy and difficult, as in worldly ways, some painful like a mountainous journey,
others pleasant like sailing on the sea. These ways may be classed in two
divisions : one being called “self-power,” or help through self, and the others
called “ the power of others,” or help through another.

“ Shin-shii,” teaches the docrine of “ help from another.”


--- PAGE 188 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Suciety.]

मान्धातरवदानम्‌।

श्नोभन्ते भुवनेषु भव्यमनसां यन्नाककान्ताकर-
भरौदोदच्चितचारुचामरसितच्छ सिताः सन्पदः |

यच्चोत्सपेति तर्पितन्रुति am कपूरपूरोज्नवलम्‌

qa दट्‌ानकणस्य तत्फलमदो दानं निदानं रियः ॥१॥
अभरूदुपोषधा नाम Bue यस्य विभावतः।
विवुधाभिमता कौत्तिः सुधा दुग्धोदधैरिव ॥ २॥
वसुधामवतेा यस्य वसुधामवतः पुरः |

ननाम प्रणक्तैी कस्य न नाम पतेः शिरः ॥ ३ ॥
qat धौरिव धर्म्मेण दानेनेव दयालुता |
विभूतिर्िंनयेनेव भूषिता येन भूरभूत्‌ ॥ ४॥
गुणिनः प्रा वंशस्य बरवेन्दुदयुतेः स्थितिः |

यस्य सर्व्बालपचस्य Aig सव्वैमहौग्धताम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
यस्येश्वरशिरःस्थायि शुभं गङ्गाजलेाल्वलम्‌ |
भ्मत्यदखं Wag भुवनाभरणं यशः ॥ € ॥
कर्तः कतुसहस्ाणां स हस्ाक्षाधिकंथ्रियः |

यस्य षष्टिसिहस्नाणि कलचं सुद शममूत्‌ ॥ ७ ॥
कदाचित्‌ मुनिरश्षायै Ta: छयकृतश्षणः |
विचचाराश्चमारुद्य स तपावनभूमिषु ॥ ८ ॥

5

ae

--- PAGE 189 [OCR_san+eng] ---
aR

मान्धाचवदानम्‌ | _- [Mégadhi Toxt.

तच राजर्षिभिः कैथित्‌ पुबे्टिकलशं तम्‌ ।
दृराध्वश्रमसन्तत्तः स पयःपुरमापपै ॥ € ॥
विजनासादितं Weal स AMARA पयः |
राजधानीं समासाद्य गर्भ लेभे विभुभुवः ॥ १० ॥
खप्रमाथेन्द्रजालादि यस्याः केतुकविपरुषः।
जयत्यहुतसम्भारभूमिः सा भवितव्यता ॥ ११ ॥
विधेर्विविधवैचिचचिषकम्मैविधायिनः।
ऋश्चथरेखाविन्धासं कः परिच्छे्तूमौ श्वरः ॥ १२॥
कालेन तस्य मूर्खानं भित्वा बालाऽशुमानिव ।
रूढृव्रणस्य सहसा दिव्यदयुतिरजायत ॥ १२॥

तं राजजाया जगुजेगत्सास्राज्यर णे |
वात्सल्यप्रलुतक्षौरा पुरं मूत्तेमिवाश्रितम्‌ ॥ १४॥
मां धारयिष्यति शिशुः श्चा्योऽयं जननौ पदे ।

षति तासां मिथेवाक्यैमरैन्धाताभूत्‌ न्टपात्मजः ॥ १५॥
तस्य प्रवधमानस्य बालक्रौड़ाविलासिनः।

घडिन्दरः HART कालः पुण्यकौड़ाषूयायुषः ॥ १६ ॥
नवयैवनमारूढदृः सव्वैविद्यासु WTA |

स याते पितरि खर्म मेने राज्यं कमागतम्‌ ॥ १७ ॥
gar दिवौकस नाम सुरुतेदौसतां गतः |
अभिषेकेापकर णं दिव्यं तस्यो पनौतवान्‌॥ १८ ॥
स सरवडमुकुटः कल्पितेष्णौषशेखरः।
श्ररदगभ्रावतंसस्य AW ओाभामवाक्तवान्‌ ॥ VEU

--- PAGE 190 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society. ] मान्धाचवदानम्‌ | RR

सप्तरत्नानि तस्याथ प्रादुभ्रूतानि तत्‌छ्षणे ।
चक्राश्चमणिदस्तिस््नौ हसेनाग्रगाखपि ॥ २० ॥
बभूव चास्य पुराणां तुल्यरूपबलैजसाम्‌।

awa विजितारातेभंभुजामिव भूभुजः ॥ २१ ॥
वसुन्धरां समस्तास्िवेलाकलितमेखलाम्‌ |

निखिलां विदधे देष्ि ेषविश्रान्तिनिरताम्‌ ॥ २२॥
शुवनातपसन्नदः प्रत्यग्रकमलाश्रयः।

चक्रवत्तौ स TRAIT कर इवाबभो ॥ २३ ॥
विजगज्नाहवौ कौत्तिः प्रभावाभरणाः fara: |
Bisa सुकूतवलौनां प्रथमः कुसुमेहमः ॥ २४ ॥

स कदाचित्‌ वनान्तेषु विकाशिकुसुमश्रियः |

रुचिरः सचिवैः साई विचचार विलाकयन्‌ ॥ २५॥
ददशे तच निष्यश्षान्‌ विहगान्‌ पादचारिणः।
व्योममागेगतिं स्मृत्वा प्रयातान्‌ BATA ॥ २६ ॥
पक्षहौनानगतिकान्‌ ठत्तिक्षौणान्‌ निरम्बरान्‌।
दरिद्रानिव तान्‌ Stew प्रोवाच छपया Za: ॥ २७॥
अहा वराकैरविगैः Had: Hat रतम्‌ ।

यदेते पश्विकलाः रच्छ चरण चारि णः ॥ २८ ॥
इत्युक्ते भूमिपतिना करुणाकुलितात्मना |
पुरःख्िता महामात्यः सत्यसेनस्तमत्रवौत्‌ ॥ २९ ॥ -
HARA मया देव कथ्यमानं वनेचरः |

कारणं पश्षपतने यद्‌भूत्‌ पक्िणामिह ॥ ३० ॥

--- PAGE 191 [OCR_san+eng] ---
४

मान्धाजवदानम्‌ | [Mégadhi Text.

सन्ति पश्चशतान्यच पुणयधान्नि तपावने |
तपःखाध्यायशक्तानां सुनौनां दीप्ततेजसाम्‌ ॥ ३१ ॥
तेषामध्ययनध्यानजपविघ्रविधायिनः।

UA BACH चक्रुः खगास्तरुवने सदा ॥ ३२ ॥
aa विहगसंधाय करोज्चर करे रते |
ऋअभिसम्बज्नमानाय Fars मुनिमण्डलम्‌ ॥ २२ ॥
तदुदधुतमहा शापतापक्ञोषेण सर्व्वतः |

aaa पिणं पक्षा lara छतागसाम्‌ ॥ २४॥
त va विहगाः पर्ूरदिताः रच्छ्वर्निनः |
त्वदिपक्षा इव वने आन्ताञ्चरणचारिणः ॥ ३५ ॥
मददामाव्येन कथितं निश्म्यैतत्‌ म्ौपतिः।

उवाच करुणाक्रान्तस्तत्तः शापेन परक्िणम्‌ ॥ २६ ॥
अहा तेजः परिणतं शन्तानामपि कानने ।
अङ्गाराणां मुनौनाश्च ददव्येवानिवारितम्‌ ॥ २७ ॥
मिथ्यातपस्विभिः fat: खसुखाय न यैः aa
मनसः कापतत्तस्य परिषेकः एमाम्बुभिः ॥ ३८ ॥
प्रसन्ना Beat As दया दानं दमः क्षमा |

येषां तेषां तपः राध्यं शेषाणं कायाषणम्‌ ॥ ३९ ॥
किन्तपोाभिः सके पानां faqatat बेन किम्‌ |
विभवैः किं सजाभानां दुरत्तानां yaa किम्‌ ॥ ४० ॥
रवं कलुषचित्तास्ते तौत्रमन्युपरायणाः |

SAE रुव मुनयः प्रयान्तु विषयाश्मम ॥ ४१ ॥

--- PAGE 192 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] मान्धाचवदानम्‌ | २५
इत्युक्ता प्राहिणेोततेभ्यः सन्देशं yadda: |
यावतौ मदशा मूमिस्तावतौ त्यज्यतामिति ॥ ४२॥
विदङ्गपक्षपातेन कुपितस्य मदौपतेः।
सन्देशं सुनयः शरुत्वा विलक्षाः समचिन्तयन्‌ ॥ ५३ ॥
चतुःसमुद्रपरि खामेखलायाः fara: पतिः।
नरेन््रोऽयं क गच्छामः के VT a न यः॥ ४४ ॥
इति सञ्चिन्त्य मुनयः पार HART: |
सुरसिद्वसमाकौशं जम्बृदण्डान्तिवं यथै ॥ ४५ ॥
अथ तस्य महौभन्तः प्रभावेण महौयसा |
श्रभूद्र्टशस्या FIA TATE: ॥ ४६ ॥
पाकश्णसनवेलक्षकरणास्तस्य शासनात्‌ |
सप्ताहं हेम segue: संघातवर्षिंणः ॥ ४७ ॥
स प्रभावेण महता सह सैन्येनभागतिः।
चकर प्यैविदे हास्यं दौपं दिव्यजनं ait ॥ ४८ ॥
बभूवुर सैन्यानि स्फौतश्नोयैवलोजसाम्‌।
भटानां व्योमगमने तस्याष्टादशकाटयः ॥ 8९ ॥
गा दानौयं तते दौपमथेत्तरकुरूनपि।
पाश्रौनि स GAA शशसाहतश्ासनः ॥ ५० ॥
ad विहरतस्तस्य मेराः कनकसानुषु |
बह्शक्रो यथै कालु पम्टोपतेः॥ ५१ ॥
स कदाचित्‌ सुरान्‌ द्रष्टं AMAT गच्छन्‌ सुरापमः।
चकार नौलजलदव्यस्ता इव गजैरदिंशः॥ ५२॥

--- PAGE 193 [OCR_san+eng] ---
९६

मान्धाचवरानम्‌ | [Magadhi Text,

अथ तेषां निरस्तानां Feared तपस्यताम्‌।
मुनौनामपतत्‌ मृ्चिं तहजाश्चसकृदिवः॥ ५९ ॥
ततस्ते क्रोधसन्तत्तष्टशा व्योमावलाकिनः ।

चक्रुः ऋङ्गप्रभावल्िकलापकपिला दिशः ॥ ५४॥
किमेतत्‌ काप इन्युक्ता शपाग्मिं विसिखकषया |
अभ्येत्य देवदूतस्तान्‌ प्रदर्षाकुलितेऽवदत्‌ ॥ ५५॥
रष निःशेषभूपालमैलिविश्रान्तणसनः।
पाकशसनतुल्यश्रौर्मान्धाता एथिवौपतिः। ५६॥
नभसा ATA सह Sar प्रसर्पति |

यस्य कौर्तनधन्येयं वाणौ पुण्याभिमानिनी ॥ ५७॥
न दष्टो यस्य निदिष्टसव्वैलाकसुखभ्रियः |
मेहइसंविन्मयस्येव * * * विभवौ मदः ॥ ५८ ॥
कवेर धनदव्यक्तचा कमार शक्तिमत्तया |

Sat इषभयेागात्‌ वैष्णवं ओसमागमात्‌ ॥ ५९ ॥
प्रतापप्रसरात्‌ सैरमेन्दवं अननन्दनात्‌ ।

Ug हप्तवलच्छेदात्‌ दिव्यं रूपं विभर््ययम्‌ ॥ ६० ॥
बलिः प्रयातः पातालं दधोचेाऽप्यश्थिगरेषताम्‌ |
अस्य त्यागेन जलधिः क्षोभमद्यापि नेन््ति ॥ ६१९ ॥
श्रुत्वेति देवदूतस्य वचनं सुनिमध्यगः |

ससजं दुसुग्बो नाम मुनिः शपजलं दिवि ॥ ६२॥
प्रहसन्रय तं प्राह सेनानां परिणायकः |

ACT संहर रुषं मा छधास्तपसः BIA ॥ ६३ ॥

--- PAGE 194 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text Society.] मान्धाचवदानम्‌ |

वेफल्यलन्नां णपेाऽयं यास्यत्यमे AeA |

नैते वत खगा येषां युयं wear: | ६४ ॥
इत्युक्ते सैन्यपतिना शापस्तन्धामनौकिनीम्‌ |

दृष्टा विस्मयादूचे किमेतदिति भूपतिः ॥ ६५ ॥
संरन्थोऽथ समभ्येत्य सेनापतिरुवाच तम्‌ ।

तेषां देव महर्पौणाम्‌ शापात्‌ सैन्यं न सर्पति ॥ ६६॥
दश्च चक्रल ते aia शपविधूणितम्‌।

धत्ते जलद्‌संरुहतिम्मदौधितितुल्यताम्‌ ॥ &७ ॥
रतदाकण्य न्टपतिदृष्रा चाग्रे तथेव तत्‌ I

दशेव विदधे शापं विफलाचणड विक्लवम्‌ ॥ ६८ ॥
देहक्षयं महषौ णाम्‌ परिर्षन्‌ कपाकुलः |

जटा न्यपातयत्‌ भूमौ स लोलालसशासनः ॥ ६९ ॥
अजितक्रोधमेहानां भारभूता रथा वयम्‌।

इतौव लल्नया तेषां लौनाः सितितक्ते जटाः ॥ ७० ॥
अथ मेरुशिरः प्राप्य पः सुरनिकेतनम्‌।

पुर Gene नाम दद्भ प्रियदनम्‌॥ ७१॥
नागास्तच छतारक्षाः प्रस्यातादकनिश्चिताः |
कराटपाण्ये यक्षाः सुरमालाधराभिधाः ॥ ७२॥
सदा AMAA देवाः कोषेोत्तम्मितसैनिकाः |
महाराजकायिकाख्याः चिद्शा बलवत्तराः I NOB!
ATU चत्वारः सन्रडकवचायुधाः।

जित्वा रान्ना प्रभावेण निजसेनाम्रगाः कताः ॥ ७४ ॥

rh)

--- PAGE 195 [OCR_san+eng] ---
ac

मान्धात्रवदानम्‌ | [Magadhi Text.

ततः कल्द्रुमेदारकेाविदारमनेाहरम्‌।

ददश पारिजाताख्ं संश्रयं बिदिवैकसाम्‌॥ OY A
मेरामूङ्गि ततः qua मालामिवामलाम्‌ |
quatre सभां प्राप प्रभावेद्वासिताम्बराम्‌ ॥ ७६ ॥
हेमविटुमवैदृगयस्तम्भसम्भारभास्वरः |

प्रासादा वैजयन्तास्यः प्रख्याते यच राजते ॥ ७७ |
यचाजैवेदनैगङगेरलकैततुल्यतां गताः |

पद्िन्यः सुरनारौणं पद्मिनीनां सुराङ्गनाः ॥ OF ॥
विभ्बितैस्िदशेर्यच मणिभूस्तम्भमित्तिषु |

सुरलके विभरच्येकाऽप्यनेकसुरणाकताम्‌ ॥ ७९ ॥
रतारणदम्यांशुनिवहेर्यच चिविताः।

व्याप्ता विभान्ति ककुभः शक्रायुधशतैरपि ॥ ८० ॥
यच बालानिलालालकल्यपादपपल्लवैः |

aaa इवाभान्ति नन्दिन्यो नन्दनियः ॥ ८१॥
यच चैवरथं नाम Baraat मनेारमम्‌।

aa नित्योत्सवं परेमिकामं कामवसन्तयाः ॥ ८९॥
सर्वकाम सव्बैसुखं CAUGHT |
सर्व्वातिशयितं eer देवानां सदनं पः ॥ ८३ ॥
मुद्धत्तेविसमयास्यन्दसामन्दक्जिग्धसा चनः |
अचिन्तयत्‌ सुरूतौनामिमास्ताः फलमूमयः ॥ ८8 ॥
रेरावणं सुरपतेरलालालिवलया कुशम्‌ t

ददशे AY STATS साकारमिव मन्दनम्‌ ॥ ८५ ॥

--- PAGE 196 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Toxt Society.] मान्धाचवद्‌ानम्‌ |

पुरन्दरस्तते न्नात्वा ard भूमिपुरन्दरम्‌।
प्रत्यु प्रमुदितः सड सर्वम रनर | ८९ ॥
पूजितः सुरराजेन रनराजिविराजिताम्‌ |
राजराजः सभाभूमिं भेजे विरजसां वरः ॥ ८७ ॥
विदशेषुपविष्टेषु रल पयेङ्कपंक्तेषु |

उपाविशनृपः खौ मानासना्ें LAAT: ॥ टट ॥
रकासनजुषेोस्तच सुरेन्द्रमनुजेन्द्रथोः |

रूपं गुशगणेादारं निर्विंशेषमदश्यत ॥ ८९ ॥
ततः सर््वसुरेात्रूष्टस्पष्टलेा चनषटणदैः।
पौयमानसुखाम्भाजं व्याजहार ELTA ॥ ९० ॥
अहा Vesa Bla तेजसा तेजसां निषे ।
भवता भूषिता भूमिर्चोौश्च देवेन भाखता ॥ ९१ ॥
अभ्युन्रतप्रभावेऽयं लसत्सितयशाऽशुकः |

भ्राजते ते चिभुवने साखराज्यविजयध्वजः ॥ €२॥
त्वत्कथाग़्तपानस्य त्वदशेनरसस्य च |

YA ओाचनेचेण सुखाखयाने सरस्वत ॥ ९३ ॥
स्थिरोकतसू्वयै वायं सुरुताप्तविभूतिना |

कम्मैणां फलवादस्य निश्चयज्छिन्रसंशयः ॥ ९४ ॥
अतरवेन्द्रियग्रामे चक्षुरेव स्णृहास्पदम्‌ |

GE: पुण्योचिताचार दण्यन्ते यद्धवदिधाः ॥ ९५ ॥
इत्युक्ते चिदशेन्द्रेण मान्धाता यशसां fafa: ।
त्वत््रसादप्रभावेऽयमित्युवाच नताननः ॥ € ६ ॥

ae

--- PAGE 197 [OCR_san+eng] ---
मान्धाच्वदानम्‌ | (Journal & Toxt, Part IV, 1893,

इत्यवं पृज्यमानस्य तस्व नित्यादरोः |e |
षडन्द्रः प्रययै कालः चिदिवे वसतः सतः ॥ ९७ ॥
तत्पराक्रमविश्वस्तसमस्तसुरमण्डलः |

aaa सुरराजस्य निरपायेदये जयः ॥ ९८ ॥
दौप्तदानवसंग्रामे तस्य शयैमहातरेः।

विश्रान्तिं भेजिरे देवा भुजच्छाथापजौविवत्‌ ॥ €९ ॥
तस्य पुण्यपणक्रौतं सुज्ानस्याक्षयं सुखम्‌।
कालप्रवाहे महति प्रययुः षट्‌ पुरन्दराः ॥ १००॥
सत्कम्मैफलभे गस्य लाञ्छनं विमलं मनः |
कालुष्याज्नायते तस्य प्रत्यासन्नः परिक्षयः ॥ १०१॥
अथ कालेन कालुष्यकलितस्य मनेारथः।
अभूक्लोभाभिभूतस्य ्रपतेरभिमानिनः॥ १०२ ॥
बिद्शनाभियं लश्छौ मंदा इवलपालिता |

तदिमां न at तावदधासनविडम्बनाम्‌ ॥ १०३ ॥
अहमेकः सुरपतिप्रभावेऽनु भवामि कम्‌ |

अयं मम भुजः सर्व्वजगत्‌भारभरक्षमः ॥ १०४॥
च्यावयित्वा सुराधौशं स्वगेसास्राज्यसम्पदम्‌ |
रकातपचतिलकां खयंग्राहाचितां भजे ॥ १०५॥
इति चिन्तयतस्तस्य शकरद्रोहाभिलाषिणः |
ANAT प्रभावश्रौ्माशेव न्वानतां यथै ॥ १०६ ॥
घनेादयसमुत्सिक्ता कै जन्यतेटपातिनौ |

सालं कलुषयत्येव मानसं wach ॥ १०७॥

--- PAGE 198 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Buddhist Text उन्नमन] ¶ मान्धाचवदानम्‌ | ४९.

प्रमदा विपदां दूतिः दुःसहा महतामपि |

कुशले न्मूलनायै व किख्िषाकुलिता मतिः ॥ १०८ ॥
पापसंकल्यमाचेण शित छितिपतिः wag ।
पपाताविश्रम्भफलशच्छिन्नमूल इव द्रुमः ॥ १०९ |
न्ति विद्यामनभ्यासः शरियं दन्ति मरादयः।

विदेषः साधुतां इन्ति इन्ति लाभः समुन्नतिम्‌ ११० ॥
अदा वत महेात्कषशङ्गाराहेा महेादयः।
विभवेद्ववमत्तानां सहसैव पतत्यधः ॥ १११ ॥

तेन सव्बेविभूनौम पूजितः पूव्वैजन्मनि |

तत्‌ फलादात्तवान्‌ राज्यं Weta ARTA: ॥ ११२ ॥
सुराधिपाधिकः केऽपि प्रभावे विस्मयावदहः |
अनल्पपिण्डस्तस्याभरूत्‌ पाचदानांशसम्भवः॥ ११३ ॥
बन्धुमत्यभिधानायां नगग्धामुषितः शुचिः।
वणिगुत्करिका नाम साऽभवत्‌ पव्व॑जन्मनि ॥ ११४ ॥
विपश्चौ नाम भिक्षायै सम्यक्‌ सम्बुह्धतां गतः |
विवेश तद्द सव्वैसक््सन्तारशाद्यतः ॥ ११५ ॥
पाते तस्य स चिक्षेप qxafe प्रसनधीः।

फलानि तच चत्वारि पेतुः ओेषाणि भूतले ॥ ११६ ॥
तेन दानप्रभावेण मान्धाता एयथिवौपतिः |
स्बदीपपतिभत्वा शकरार्खासनमाप्तवान्‌ ॥ ११७ ॥
RAIA यस्मात्‌ भूमौ तस्यान्यचेतसः।

तदै फलपय्यन्ते पतितखिद शालयात्‌ ॥ ११८ ॥

--- PAGE 199 [OCR_san+eng] ---
BR

मान्नाचर्दरानम्‌। [Journal & Text, Part 1V, 1898.

खुटति विकलकल्या यच संकल्पमाला

स्फुरति न च कदाचित्‌ खप्नमायान्तरे या |
भवति विभवभागाभमागिनौ भाग्यभाजा-
मतुलफलततिः सा दानकसख्यटरुमाणाम्‌ ॥ VLE ॥
इत्याह भगवान्‌ बुद्धः पत्य दानफल्रियम्‌ |
निजजन्मान्तराख्याने भि्ुणमनु्ासने ॥ १२० ॥

--- PAGE 200 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I.
Lire oF Buppia,
(From the Japanese.)
By E. M. Satow, Esq., C. M. G.

The subject of Japanese Buddhism naturally divides itself into three parts, which we
shall take iu the following order: ‘I'he life of the founder of the religion ; its introduction
into Japan; and the tenets of the different sects.

Tho Buddha! was tho son of Jd-bou(Suddhodana2), king of Kapira-j6 (Kapilavastu)
in Kosala, Lis family bore the alternative surnames of (iu-don (Gdutama) and Shaka
(Sikya), the former from the sugar-cane which gave birth to Jé-bon’s ancestor Zeu-sei
(Susambhava), the latter from the pluce where he dwelt. Jd-bon esponsed Kiddommi

tami) the eldest, and Maya Bu-uin (Maya) the youngest, daughters of another king of
the Shaka race, named Zon-gaku (Suprabuddha), As Maya Buenin was more beautiful
than her elder sister, and enjoyed a much greater share of the king’s favour, Kiédommi
was racked with the pains of jealousy.

King J6-bon's rie was marked by benevolence, clemency and justice, qualities which
might have sufliced to ensure the happiness of his people, but owing to the want of religi-
ons and moral teaching they were sunk in frivolity and vice. ‘Their pitiable condition
moved the comprssion of Go-mel Dai-shi (Prabhapdla), who inhabited the heaven called.
To-sotsu Ten (Tash Filled with an ardent desire to save mankind from their mise-
8, ho cust his cyes downwards in search of a suitable spot whence he might carry out
merciful design, ‘Lhe virtues of King Jé-bon and his wife seemed to promise a favonr-
able sphere of action in Kapira-jo, and descending from heaven npon Coutral Indi with a
retinue of Dévas and good spirits, he approached during the night the pavilion where
Maya Ba-nin and her hushand where reposing. Suddenly the sonnd of sweet music
attracted her attention, She vaised her head, and beheld ४ golden pagoda in the uridst of
a purple cloud which filled the sky, Whilst she gazed tho door of the pagoda opened, and
presented a golden Buddhw seated within, Then a red-headed white elephant with six
tusks made its appearance, carrying ou its head a white lotus, on whieh tho Buddha took
his seat. From the white spot ou lus forehead shone a brilliant light which illuminated the
whole aniverse. Approaching her, he said, * Well done! Maya Bu-nin, व have something to
amnonnee tu thee. Linked (० thee already by a chain of ea vhich had their origin in
the past, L have resolved to enter thy womb and so gain a passage into the world, in
order to bring salvation to mankind sunk in greedy desire and ignorance. Tt is my inten.
tion henceforward to adopt King Jé-bon for my father, and thee for my mother, and thus
to tako hmmanity upon myself” Great fear fell upon Queen Maya, and bowing her head
she prayed to be relieved from the great hononr of becoming the mother of a Buddha; but
Go-mei Dai-shi soothed her fears, and alighting from the white elephant passed into her
bosom like a shadow. ‘Then all the attendant dévas and good sg; 8 fell upon their knees
and worshipped her ax the mother of the Buddha, aud as she was endeavouring to escape
from them she awoke. ‘The King awoke at the same moment and told her he had had a
remarkable vision, whic actly with her own, and they concluded that heayen had
at last answered their prayers by bestowing on them a son. Shortly afterwards it beeame
evident that the Qneen was pregnant, and great was the joy of the King and his courtiers.

Tho promised happiuess of her sister only added fuel to the flames of jealousy which
tortured Kiédommi, With the aid of her steward Ba Shé-gnn, she employed magic arts
st the life of her rival in the King’s affections. Bnt the wicked design failed of its
Ba Sho-gun committed suicide ont of remorse, while Kiédommi, sincerely repent-
me २ noble and devoted woman from that moment.

According tothe ordinary form of the legend, the effect of the arts employed by
Kiddommi was to retard the child’s birth for three years, but modern Japanese writers reject
this as fabulous, and beliove the period of gostation to have been the samo as in ordinary
cases.

objec
ing, be

1 Tho following account of the lifo of Sikya-muni is condensed from a Japanese popular
work, the Shaka Jitsu-roku. . वि
$ ‘The names in brackets arc the Sanskrit oquivalents.

--- PAGE 201 [OCR_san+eng] ---
te

APPENDIX ।.

One night in a dream the Buddha appeared to Maya Bu-nin in the form of an infans,
and prostrating himself before her, begged pardon for the evil he had bréught upon her. Ite
explained to her the three privileges enjoyed by mankind: 1. ‘That. of being born in hnman
form the crown and roof of, things; The endowment with the knowlelye of good and
evil; 3. The power of penetrating into the constitution of things in thomselyes. ‘The<e three
Hoessings could only bo retained by the observance of ten rnles:—1. Condescension towards
urferiors in station; 2. Condescension towards inferiors in intellect and understanding ;
Lenimney towards the wicked; 4. Char ty to the poor; 5. Goodness to the unfortnnato ;
0. Perseverance in spite of difficulty ; 7. "Forbearance to the imtruthfal; 8. Compassion
for the deformed; 9. Patience with the ignorant nd 10. Recognition of the law of
causation, an consequent forgiveness of injuric
his last was the great law of eanse and effect (in-gou), by reason of which eve
action was followed by its due recompense or punishment, ac (o its nature, just as
the frnit of a tree was dependent. upou the nature of its re To st asa tease,’ the
discovery of crimo and punishment was the ‘effect! In the same way charity and goodness
were rewarded in the end by happiness and prosperity, A काद actions in his previous
existence could this be explained by his condition in this, and the conduct in this life was
an index to the future state in the nest life. He who sows a good seed will gather good
fruit; if he planta bad seed, bad will be the fruit thereof. Everyone, being the master
of his own actions, can choose for himself whether he will be happy or miserable. Mankind,
howevef, imagine that they can reap happiness where they have sown wickedness; they
are ns foolish as a peasant who plants millot-sced and expects it to produce a evop of vie
A knowledge of this great truth should enable man to overcome hatred of his neighbou
How foolish are those who are moved by the passions of joy, anger, sorrow, and ploasnre «
this brief span of existence, who are ded away by the passion of love, or eniate their fel.
lows in the pursuit of fame or riches, without ever performing a single good action, and
make no preparation for the life to follow. This is becanse they avo ignorant of the imper-
manency of this fleeting existences, which perishes hke the hoav-fros’ of moining or the dew

of evening. ‘Thou who art the wife of a king, and art lodged in golden halle and

vameseent than the hht and shade

marble towers, clad in rich garments, art not less ८
sand by this Jaw thom must.

of a winter's day. That which isborn must surely ¢
become dust of the carth. Pray, therefore, that thon mayest be able to sever the ties of
affections, and, attaining to Buddhaship, enter into the perfect bliss of Nirvan With
these words he passed again within hee bosom. Maya Bu-mm was utterly free fiom the
three yiees of greed, auger, and stpidity and having now obtained knowledge of the truth,
constiuntly observed the eight prohibitions,t and practised (he six enedinal virtues

‘The period for the birth of the ebild now being at hand, the King commands that a
great festival of all his people be held in the ancestral gardens of the Rambiny Park (lian.
bini Guden), Within it lay a lake as large as a sea, with rockwork of diamonds, crystal,
and Japeslaznli, and the paths wiich Gaversed it in all dircenions were strewn with the
precious junbu-gold, believed to fall in the form of dew from the jambu-treo on Shi-ani-sen
(ML. Méru). Cranes standing on the margin of the water, and tortoises expanding then
tails on the rocks, of feheitous suggestions of the crowning blessings of long hte, while
rare trees and exotic plinty uriso on every hand. Among them is the heautiful | Sorrow less
Tree’ (पार, or A-dka), bearing countless gorgeous blossoms. whieh exh de delicious
oilours. Hore the peacock displays its gorgcons phanage iad the havebinga hive (kalayrie
ka) utters its melodious note, In the midst of the garden ris cnil cone
structed of precious woods and adorned with the ravest gems and precions s! Here the
banquer is served to the King and Queen. ‘Then ned with wine, in generons mood hoe
bids his courtiers each to pluck a flower, promis’ to him: whose choice shall
be approved hy Maya Burnin. ‘They phinge ud retirn laden with blossoms,
whieh they lay at the fect of the Queen?

‘Lhe King then begs Maya Bu-nin to fetch him a flower of the ‘Sorrowless Tree? Sho
leaves her seat, and approaching the tree, raises her rij in towards a branch, when
her robe opens, and from her right side the promisod infant is born into the world 3 From

L'The eight prohibitiona (Jak kui) aro:—1, Taking life; 2. Theft; 3. Fornication ; +
Lying; 5. Wine-drinking ; 6, Lying in a large bed; 7. Personal ornaments; 8. Dancing
and Singing. ‘Che six cardinal virtues (Koku Haramilsu, Sansk. six PAramitd) are :—1.
Charity ; 2. Morality ; 3. Patience; 4, Energy; 5. ‘Tranquil contemplation ; 6. Wisdom.

2 "Phis is said to be tho origin of tho so-called Hana-mi-do, or flower palace, which forms
part of tho decorations of a Japanoso Buddhist Tomplo at tho celebration of the birth af
Buddha on April 8.

४ Bee the Plate in Journal and Text, Vol. 1., Part IL.


--- PAGE 202 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX, T. 3

the earth at her fect springs a blue lotus flower, large as achariot-wheel, upon whieh the
nt sinks, radiating from his body a brilliant. light that illuminates the nniverse. At
ame moment the heavens open and there appear the Four Kings of the Dévas,
bearinga robe of damask, while the two Naga Kings. Nanda and Ubananda (Nanda and
Upinanda), eject from their mouths streams of water, which dl त npon the head of
the new-born child. Nevtall the D@vas and Boddhisattvas deseend and worship him
Tho four Kings of the Dé shikn, Bon-ten, and the two Naga Kings, re-axcend to
heaven, ‘The child descends from the lotus flower, and having taken three steps forward
and four backwards, points with his right hand fo heaven, with his left to the earth, and
prononnces these words with the voice of a hou: Of alone, of all he heaven ahove and
under the heavens, am) worthy of hononr 4 Buenin, who was thus delivered of her
burden without pain, sat down beneath the tree, and at her side there welled forth a
spring of the purest water. ‘The infant was given in charge of his aunt  Kisdomuni to
nurs

On the Following day Jé-bon-nd accompanied by a trainof courtiers, took the child
to worship at the Temple of Bon-ten, The in of the god arose and hissed the infant's
fect, explaining Lo the astonished King that the babe was worthy of honour by all beings,
including the heavenly sprits of space.

Seven days later the Queen died. Mer body was consumed by fire, and the ashes,
being collected, were placed ina vase, The place she had inhabited was removed to the
Mount of the Eyeuing Sun, and. the vase deposited therein Close by a pagoda, 160 fect
in height, was erected in her hononr, and the * Sorrowless Tree’ was transported from the
garden and planted in front of the mansolenm:

Shitta Vai-shi (Prince Sidhirtha) was she name given tothe young child, who was
tenderly cared for by his anni: Kiddounni, ‘Thirty-two of the most lovely women of tho
Shakw vace were appoimed to wait on him, cight to carry him) in theirarus by turns,
eight to wash him, cight to give hint mith, and eight for his amusement. We grew xo
rapidly that when three years old he had the appearance of a boy of tive that ago, while
his conduct and intelhgence were those of a grown-np man. At the age of eight he was
placed wider the tuition of the Brahman Mittara (Mitra ®), and a boy unmed Udai (Uday in)
was chosen to be hix companion, Ue early oxbilated an inclination for religions meduation.
Inashort time le had learnt all that his teacher was able to impart.ind returned to the
palace Jlore he was visited by the Roshi Ashita (Asita), who recognized: in him the
thirty-two seus of a perfect Buddha, and foretold that he would become the Savionr of
Mankind ‘The King asked whether Shitta Taishi would not first reign over his kingdom
before retiring into the ranks of the holy, but the Rishi refused to answer, giving as his
excuse that he must uot reveal the designs of Heaven. J6-hon, in order to tien av his
sou from his uworldy ideas. surrounded him with 5,000 of the most beantifnl girls to be
found throughout the kingdom, and endeavoured to amuse hint with the pleasures of sense,
so that he might forget his intention of retiring from the world, butallin vain, Then he
lodged him ina palace surrounded with a beautifnl pa nd provided him with companions
of his own age, amongst whom was his cousin Daibadatta (Devadatta)

One day as the prince and bis friends were engaged in shooting ata target, a flock of
wild geese flew overhead.auid Datbadatia disebarged his arrow amongst them, wonndi
one and bringing if to the groud in front of Shitta: Taishi, ‘The youth was filled with
pily for the ngeles« pata intheted, aud lifting the helpless bird, extracted the arrow and
bound up the wound, At this moment he was rejoined by Darhadatta, who demanded the
goose ax taxSown property. ‘The prmee calmly gazed “upon him and replied, "1 admire
your skill, but surely having exhibited yonr wonderful aceuracy of pin to ns, you cannot
have any further iuferest in the Give it toame, 1 pray’ Daibadatta shook his head;
‘No. However much you may wish to keep it, Lame nor disposed to yield my quarry to
another. Lam goin बि and shalleat it. Give wt back tome at once. Shitty
Tai-shi mxwered : * To rejoice in the destruction of life ix the act of a wild animal. and a
Laman being, the crown of creation, shonld be ashamed of such a deed. No ene h
ght to tate the life of a bird for his own pleasure. ‘That you shor it and that it fell at
my feot is the result of the chain of cause amd effect. T hope to tend it amd restore it to
life, and Twill only give it back to you if it dic he stroked) the bird's wings
two or three times with bis beawtifal hands till it revived, aud springing to the yronud,
scemed to make obeisauce to its deliverer. Then spreading ils wings in Hight, it was

1 Also called Utsuran-hotsn, or Udra-raima-Patr

2 Tho birth of the Buddha is nsnatly placed by the Chivese and dapanese in the year
3027 ऋ, ¢., bnt the date accepted in Europe is 633 ४.८, Some of the Japanese however
fix it in 742 ४८. BK. 01 Satow


--- PAGE 203 [OCR_san+eng] ---
4 APPENDIX I.

speedily lost to view. This adventure gave great umbrage to the prond Daribadatta, who
quitted the park with his followers, and from that time forward became tho bittcr cnomy
of tho prince, whom ho already disliked on account of his marvollous suporiority in all
feats of skill and strength.

At tho age of fifteen Shitta Tai-shi was formally rocognised as hcir-apparent, and was
henceforth obliged to livo in greater stato than before. But ho preferred the intercourse
of books to all carthly delights, and his constant talk was of the preparation for the hereafter
and tho sinfulness of taking lifo. Lest ho should carry ont his intention of forsnking tho
world, without leaving an heir to continue the lifo of the Sikyas, it was determined to
marry him. ‘The lovely Yashudara (Yasddhara) was selected, sono say by himself, out of
large number led before him, and their nuptials were celebrated with royal pomp. For
awhile tho socicty of his bride appeared to have turned his thought in a new direction.
Three magnificent palaces had been built for him to ocenpy in turn during the three seasons
of winter, summer and rains into which tho year was divided. ‘To prevent the predictions
of the aoothsayers and the Rishi Ashita from being fulfilled, छ huge wall was drawn round
the prince's park, with four iton gatcs, strongly guarded day and night by soldiers, while
sentinels constantly patrolled the enceint to hinder any attempt to escape. |

In spite of the endeavours thas made by his father and all around him to wean tho
prince from his intention of quitting the world, the desire seemed only to grow stronger
upon him. To distract his thonghts, it was arranged that he should pay a visit to the
King at the Rambini Garden. As the cortige left tho castern gate Shitta Tui-shi’s notice
was attracted to an aged beggar, who, endeavouring to approach tho palanquin, was rudely
beaten by the guards, and knocked down. Struck by the emaciated appearance of the old
man, whoso limbs refused to support him ina vain atlempt to rise, the prince began to
reflect on the shortness of life, and the lightning specd of its course front infancy to
decrepit old age. Then, overcome by sadness, ho ordered the bearers to curry him back to
the palace.

‘A second time he set forth to visit his father. Every precaution was taken to keep the
route clear of anything that might offend the eye, or shock the feelings. But he had not
gone far when he fell in with a man lying in the road, wasted to a skeleton by the ravages
of disease, and presenting 2 loathsome spectacle. Shitta ‘lai-shi began immediately to re-
flect that this sickly@bject had once been the possessor of perfect health, but by ovor-indul-
gence of the appetites his powor had beon wasted and destroyed, till at last ho had fallen a
victim to disease and death, 1t secmed to him that a like destiny mtenaced the poor and
rich, the mean and noble, in the samo degree, because of their want of self-control, their
passions, and their pride. Again he sank into melancholy, but bidding his physician to
attend to the beggar, continued on his way to the palace.

When evening fell ho mounted his horse, and, issning from the western gate of
the garden, proceeded homewards. ‘he Déva Jé-ko Ten (Suddhavisa), who had by two
successive transformations presented to the prince’s eyes the shapes of discaso and old age,
was resolved to give him a third lesson on the vanity of human oxistence, but. fearing that
the guards shoulil prevent him, rendered himself invisible to all but Shitta ‘Lai-shi_ and his
confidential follower Udai. Assuming the form of ठ corpse, he lay down_in the road, पा
perceived by the escort as they passed; but the prince sceing him called to Udai, sayi
‘Behold that dead man. His fleeting breath and his soul are sped, the clements of which his
body was composed are undergoing dissolution. All men, from the king to the meanest
subject, must end thus. We spend our little span of life in the pleasures of sense, or
abandon ourselves to the pursuit of richos, forgetful, that impermanence is the gencral
characteristic of all things earthly, and in a monient’s bricf space we must give place to
others.’ Udai hastily seized the bridlo and led the prince away, but the latter having

1 Tho Japanese author rojects the story of Shitta Tai-shi’s contest with cight other
princes for Yashudara’s hand on tho ground that it was one of his principles to avoid any
action which could incito a fecling of rivalry and disappointment. On the other hand, he
accepts the tradition that, though Shitta had two other wives besides Yashudara, ho never
knew them. षत्‌ he not heen both a husband and a father, and known the joys of carthly
affection, he would havo sacrificed nothing ; it was this very sacrifico thet ennbled him to
attain to perfect knowledge, and open the oyes of mankind to their miserablo condition. Tt
is the example of tho Buddha himself that justifies the practice of marringo among the
priests of the Ikkd Shii. Although the monk is not obliged to imitate the Most Venerable
Ono in all the circumstances of his life boforo ho attained to knowlodge, Shin-ran Shd-nin
thought it better to mako this concossion to the weakness of tho flesh than to incur tho risk

of ono man bringing disgrace upon the whole order by licentions disregard of a too strict
rule of life.

--- PAGE 204 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX I. “ 5

now been face to faco with old ago, diseaso and death, was more than over confirmed in
his reaolve to seck tho way of salvatian. Whon search was made for the aged mendicant,
tho sick man, and tho corpse, no traces of them could be found, and the conclusion
impressed itself on all that the hand of some spitefnl demon had hero been at work. Not
long aftorwards tho princo, fecling his long confincment irksome, went forth into tho
country. On reaching an open spot he dismissed his retinue, and sitting down beneath an
old jambu-tree, with his eyes closed, his legs crossed, and his hands folded, endeavourod
to attnin to a condition of completo mental tranquillity. Suddenly he was accosted by 9
mouk, clad in tho Kesa (Kashya), who held a pilgrim’s staff Shaku-ja in one hand, and a
bogging bowl (Teppatsu) in tho other. ‘This was no other than J6-ko Ten, who had taken
upon himself the duty of gniding tho futuro Buddha in the path towards salvation. On
being interrogated, ho replied: “'The monk (Biku Bhikshu) is one who follows the पपाठ
of poyerly, sovers the ties of parental and marital affection, and escaping from the law
of metompsychosis, lives a puro and unsullicd life. He has uo other property than his
own body, — Mis staff is the instrament which aids him in the performance of the ritos.
To rattles it ay a safeguard against drowsiness, and to give notice to others of the road to
wisdom. 'The bow] is to hold his food which he begs from house to honse. You will ask,
‘Why must [ cast away the affections and endeavour to escape from the metempsychosis ??
I will tell you. Man, though conscions of the inmninence of old age, disease and death,
remains drifting about in tho misery of snecessive existences, and is ignorant of the
means of attaining to the perfect joys of infinito wisdom. By the practico of poverty
yon may learn to renonnee all the pleasures of the senses, and while the heart disports
itself in tho pure and holy ‘path,’ ! escape from the sea of the eight iiseries is mnde easy,
until at length you reach the haven of Nirvana. Man is like a wretch who has fallen into
a well, and strives in anguish to support himself by the aid of a tuft of grass, which jnts
out from the side. Below lies coiled a hugo serpent with gaping jaws; a ferocious tiger
watches above with open month, impatient to devour him if he ascends; and an army of
rats gnaw the roots of the grass. Tn such a position neither wifo nor child, treasures nor
exalted rank, can help him, and if the keen-edged blast of iimpermanency strikes npon him,
he is deprived of all in a moment.” With theso words he rose into the air, radiating from
his person a golden light, and disappeared from view. ‘Then the prince mderstood that
a spiritual being had appeared to tell him of the blessed state of tho mun who ‘has gone
ont from his home and family’ (Shukke, Sansk.  Abhin' hkramana), and, resolving to
devote himself thenecforth to the stndy of incomparable wisdom, in order that he might
convert both men and dévas, he returned homewards in a state of beatific ecstasy.

Shitta Tai-shi now determined to search for a teacher who would be ablo_to impart
to him the necessary knowledge. One night, as he was reposing by the side of Yashudara,
he suddenly heard a melodious voice calling upon him to quit home und family. He arose
at once, and, casting his robe over his wife, who seemed to sleep like one dead, made his
way forth through tho crowds of slecping, attendants. ‘The doors, as ho opened them,
made not the slightest sound, though purposely constructed to give warning when anyono
passed through. Betaking himself to the stable, he roused his groom, Shanoku (Chandaka),
and ordered him to Iead forth tho horse, Konjoku (Kantaka). As if divining the prince’s
purposo, the iron doors swung noisclessly upon their hinges, and tho heir of the Sikyas
went forth guided by the invisiblo hosts of tho dévas and good spirits past the sentinels,
who wero sleeping on their posts, Leaving behind him, withont a sigh ora regret, the
magnificent palace where he bad passed_ his youth, he abandoned father, mother, wife and
child, and set forth in the direction of Dindokusen (Dantaldkagiri), full of his m
redemption. By dawn he was already at the foot of the mountain, where tho spirits left
him. He felt inspired to hope that by climbing to the summit ho might perchance fall in
with some spiritnal being who could teach him the path of wisdom and Nirvana. Stroking
the stced’s forehead, he promised that if he ever should attain to perfect वि knowledge, he
would help tho faithful beast to escape from the ‘animal cycle.’ Then, turning to Shanoku,
he commanded him to return to tho city, and inform the King of the step he had taken.
Suddenly a rustling was heard among tho trees, and a hanter issued forth, holding in his
hand a ‘bow and arrow, and wearing a ycllow robe. Presenting theso to the prince, he
disappeared from viow, leaving behind him an odour of fragrant incense. The stranger
being was Jd-ko Ton in human form. Shitta Tai-shi, putting on the miserable hempen
garment and thrusting tho arrow into his hair, took the bow into his hand, and began to
ascend, barefoot, the rugged path towards the summit of tho mountain. a

1 Tho path that loads to tho extinction of passion, belicf in which is tho fourth of the
so-called ‘ Four Noble Truths.’ . cos

9 It is this renunciation of all worldly joys and comforts for hardship and privation that
॥ Japanoso ascetics of Inter ages have ondeayoured to imitate by making pilgrimages

--- PAGE 205 [OCR_san+eng] ---
0 APPENDIX 1.

On the following morning it was discovered to the gonoral dismay that the prince had
disappeared with his horse and man. ‘The gates and doors worc found closed and barred,
while the walls and ditch were known to be insurmountablo except by supernatnral aid.
Parties were sent, out to scour tho country in all directions, and Shanoku was met leading
back tho horse with slow and ‘reluctant step. Ile delivered the prince’s message, and ro-
connted tho story of tho flight, tho miraculous rapidity of their journcy to the mountain,
and the apparition of the hunter ; but scarcely ono belioved, his report except the King, who
comprehonded that the portents which had accompanied Shitta Tai-shi’s birth-wero now
fulfilled, in spite of all the efforts he had made to counteract them.

Yashudara now recalled to mind the prince’s words spoken on tho night before his
departure, forctelling that she should bear a child within her bosom for six years, and
beeame aware that sho was pregnant. But her state remained unperceived by ‘others for
four years. Sho was afraid, however, to repeat what Shitta Tai-shi had predicted, lest she
should not be believed. At last, when it could be concealed no longer from tho notico of
her haudmaidens, she became the object of very natural suspicions on tho part of those
about her, including even the King and her annt Kiddommi; and at the instance of the
wicked cousin Daibadatta sho was placed in confinement until, by the return of Shitta 'ai-
shi, the truth might become manifest. Kighteen months later she gaye birth to a boy, who
at named Ragora (Rihula), six years, according to the accepted story, after the flight of

is father.

Wrapped in his monkish garments and leaning on his bow, the prince unfaltoringly
pnrsued his way up the mountain, until, after overcoming insuperable obstacles, he reached
its snow-clad summit. 1166 he fonnd an old man with a human face, and tho bones of a
erano, clad in a garment of leaves and seated in a meditative posture, with elosed eyes.
Believing that he had at last discovered the teacher of whom ho was in search, he
waited mtil the strange being awoke from his trance, and announced his desire to perform
the exercises which he believed wore necessary for the attainment of Nirvana. ‘Tam the
Rissoi Avara (Arvada), he replied. ‘Tt is no casy task for the unregenerate man to attain
incomparable wisdom, and to rescue mankind from their miserable condition. ‘Thou must
first practice self-mortification.’ Tho prince heard these words with joy, and submitting to
the tonsure, registered a solemn vow to abandon all human passions. Under the name of
Gudou Shami (the Sramana, or novice, Gintama), he applied himself diligently to the rigid
observance of the 2,500 prohibitions, cheerfully submitting to the greatest privations and
hardships in the hope of attaining perfect knowledge.! With no other food than wild. fruits
aud puro water for his drink, the prince continued the ascetic practices which alone could
purify him from desire, at first. mder the guidance of Arara Sen, and then under the
tuition of Karara Sen (the Rishi KAldima or Karama) who taught him the three kinds of
truth. For a hundred days and nights he continued seated without moving, and for cqual
gpace of time he remained standing without once sitting down; then for a third period of
same length he lay prostrate on the ground. Paring this time he neither slepi, thonght,
nor spoke ; nor a drop of water passed his lips, and his sustenance, was a singlo fruit or nut.
In this way he becamo worn to a gkeleton, his skin was scorched by the blazing sun, and
there was no relief cither from the parching heat of summer nor the frosts of winter. Six
years passed away in these fruitless attempts to discover the essence of religious truth, until
at last he awoke to the consciousness that this was not the way to attain to everlasting
peace. Quitting his teachers, he betook himself to Z6-drn-sen, where he passed another six
years in fruitless attempts to subdue his natare. All night long bo remained seated on a
hard stono in an attitnde of meditation, while his days‘were spent in toiling over the pre-
cipitons side of the monntain with no other nntriment than a single grain of sesaine.2

At first he was assailed by poixonons serpents and ferocions beasts, but the Bow of Morey
and the Arrow of Compassion given him by the strange hunter, effectually kept them at a
distance, until finally they were converted from their murdcrons appetites. Then Mara
(Mira), king of the domons, alarmed for the security of his rnle over human beings, assumed
the form of स beantiful woman, and endeavoured to seduce his senses; but ho had now by
Jong-practised ansterities uttained to miraculous powers of insight, and striking tho fiend
on the head with the Arrow of Compassion, forced him to re-assume his real shape. ‘Then

to the loftiest mountains in their country. Tho more difficult the ascont, tho greater their
merit.

1 Thus arose the practice of shaving the head which afterwards became ono of the dis-
tinctive marks of the Buddhist neophyte. The first Japanese who underwent this rite was
Tasuna, son of Shiba Tatsu, in the reign of Su-jun Tennd (188-592).

2 This is the process taught by Dharma, and still practised by the Zen sect, with the
necessary motlifications,

--- PAGE 206 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX T. 7

all the hosts of Holl surrounded him with sword and spear, and raising a tumult that shook
heaven and earth, endeavoured to hinder hia meditations, but in vain,

In spite of this prolonged endeavour to obtain the truth by mortification of the flesh
and spiril, the novico Giutamn felt that ho was no nearer the goal than at first. ‘This was
clearly not the way to obtain dcliverance.! Ho resolved therefore to take food before
further attempting the pursuit of knowledge, and betook himself to the banks of tho
Nironga (Nairanjana). As he bathed thero, a wooden sotoba (stiipa) came floating towards
him, inscribed with tho words :—

« AN phenomena are impermanent,

Beeauso they are subject to the law of origination and perishing.
Whon this law of origination and perishing comes to an end,
Calm (i. ¢., Nirvana) will bo found to be true happiness.’ 2

Io recognised at once in these lines the essential truth of which he was in qnest, and
the scales fell from hi: Burying his bow and arrow ou the spot, he planted
over them a sofoba, which afterwards was transformed into a splendid edifice of gold, said
to be still in existence. The Buddha now descends from tho mountains, boing in his 30th
year, and the date, the 8th of tho 12th moon. 8

‘As he passed’ throngh the village of Zen-sei (Susambhava) in Magada, the people
prepared for him a golden dish of rice boiled in milk, and awaited his coming in order to
give him tho title of World Honoured One, the Tathagata Sdkya Mnni, Kneeling down
they presented the food to him. Having partaken of it, ho” pronounced theso words :
May the benefactors of the ‘Three Precious Ones + have peace, health, prosperity and
long life in this world, aud in tho world to como may they bo born as men or Dévas to bo
tho recipients of all joys.’

Thence he proceeded to tho Rokn-ya-On (Mrigadiva) and expounded the doctrines of
tho Four 'linths (A ya) which condnct man to the stato of Arhat.5 These aro
as follows: 1. Suffering; 2. The Generation of Suffering ; 3. The Destruction of Suffering ;
4, The Path leading to the Destruction of Suffering. Under the first. two are explained
tho’ connection of cause and effect between actions in the previous life of those who are
in tho world, and their cousequences in the present (in-ywa), suffering being tho effect,
generation its canse, The third and fourth truths: describe the connection of canse aud
effect when the world is abandoned, destruction of snoring here being the fruit, and the
path leading to its destruction the canse. ‘This is in fact the kernel of Gautuma’s teaching 5
that life as wo know it is bul misery, which misery arises from the natural impluses of the
heart aud body, and that escape from this misery “is only possible by tho destruction of its
cause. In other words, Unt pure happiness is ouly to be attained of desire and fecling,
until tho thinking substance attains, after 2 scrios of transmigrations, to a condition of
porfeet rest and tranquillity, पमु titude, in a word, to Nirvana.

Next ho qnitted (he park for the town Wf Harayetsn (Varinast), visiting on tho way
three Rishis named Urubin-Kashd (Uruvilva-Késyapa), Gaya-Kashd (Gaya-Késyapa), and
Nadai-Kashé (Nadi-Kasyapa), famous for their power of working miracles. Sceptical as
to the teaching of the Buddha, they suhjected him to severe tests of endurance, bt finding
that he came unharmed out of the very fiercest trials, they became converted, and eventually
attained to the degree of Rakan (Arhat).

The fame of this story coming to the cars of King Bimbashara (Bimbisdra) of Magadba,
tho latter gnvited the Buddha to his palace to preach the doctrine of ‘Cause and Effect,’ and
was so deoply impressed that ho pardoned all the criminals in his dominions and gave

1 As Mr. Kitel puts it, liberating oneself from all subjective and objective trammels,
and attaining to a stato of liberty which leads to Nirvana.
2 This is an attempt at rendering tho often quoted lines—

Sho-gid mu-jo,

Ze sho meppo ;

8110 metsu metsu i,
Jaku metsu १ raku—

the meaning of which is embodied in the i-ro-ha, or arrangement of the Japanese syllubary,
invented, it is said, by K6-b6 Dai-shi, and taught to every Japancse child as its first lesson.

8 This is an incident in his life often depicted by the Buddhist artists under the title of
Shussan no Shaka, or Sikya issuing from the mountains.

4 Tho Buddha, the Law (or Religion), and the fraternity of Monks.

5 Condition immediately preceding Nirvana.

--- PAGE 207 [OCR_san+eng] ---
8 APPENDIX I.

away large sums in charity. Crowds of people flocked to hear the teacher, and the King
built the Monastery of Chiku-rin Sho-ja (Karrandavenuvana Vihdra) for him and his dis-
ciples, who now numbored several hundreds.

Now there was a man named Sharihotsu (Sdriputra), the son of a woman called Shari
(Sériké) or butchor-bird,’ from the keonness of hor vision, who, by the practice of asceticism
had acquired miraculous powers. But, after hearing the doctrine of tho Buddha, ho
enrolled himself among the disciples of Sakya Muni, bringing’ with him his friend Mokuren
(Maudgalydyana). Sharihotsu was afterwards known as tho wisost among the Ton Great
Disciples (Jin Dai De-shi), His noxt adhcront of importance was the Brahmin Maka-Kashd
(Maha-Kasyapa), moro usually styled simply Kasho.

Tho Buddha now called to mind his former abandonment of father, foster-mother,
and wife to go in search of salvation, and resolved that he would visit thom in order to
communicate the glad tidings. So, departing from tho Chiku-rin Shé-ja, ho journoyod
towards his native city, teaching the multitude as he wont. Amongst his converts the
most conspicuous was King Waruri (VaidGrya) of Rarabasa who fain wonld have
detainod the teacher, but the desire of the latter to reach homo was not to bo
overcome. 110 help the King to remain in the path he had chosen, the Buddha directed
him to tako 108 seeds of tho Bo-dai-ju (Ficus relyiosa), and threading them on a string,
to repeat tho words Namu Daruma, Namu Sdgia (Hail Buddha! Hail Religion! Hail
Fraternity of the Monks 1), passing a bead cach time botweon his fingors. This he was to
do 200,000 times daily, and tho roward promised was purification of the heart in this life,
and birth hereafter in ériten (tho Traiyastrimsa Heaven). A million times would bo
roquired in order to escapo from the 108 kinds of depravity, and attain to ovorlasting joy.
This is the origin of tho Buddhist rosary.

Accompanied by his hundreds of disciples, tho teacher drew near to the fronticr of
Kapira, begging their food as they wont. ‘Tho King was overcome with joy, as one who
had found an Udonge (Udumbara) flower, when ho learnt that. lta Tai-shi had finished
his studies, and was now returning as tho beloved and honoured Shaka Muni Nio-rai (SAkya
Muni Tathigata). Ho despatched a messengor with a carriage to beg him to come to tho
palace from the house of arich man named Karid Chod-ja (? Kala Sreshthin), whore ho
had taken up his abode. The Buddha replicd that he was no longer a prince-—that it was
not the tie of relationship that induced him to revisit his old home, bat the desire of
saving all liviug beings. Ie would therefore simply como in the same humble dress as
his 1,600 disciples. Qn approaching the city of Kapira, ho turnod aside to the mausoleum
of his mother, with his followers.

The King now arrived, accompanied by Kiddommi, the secondary wives of Shitta
Tai-shi,and the whole of his court; but they were unablo to recognize the gat and
sunburnt Sramana among the crowd of men clad in black dresses of wistaria-fibre and
8007908 (kesu) of leaves knitted together. Yashuglara had obtained pormission to mingle
with the women of the palace, and led by the hfind her littlo boy of six yoars. Giving to
the child the robe which the prince had thrown ovor her couch on the night of his departure,
she bade him present it to the father of whom they had so often spoken in secret. Guided
by uncrring instinct, tho boy passed through the crowd of pcoplo, in spite of angry words
and looks from the courtiors, and walking straight up to tho company of Holy Monks, fell
on his knees before tho Arhat (Rakan), who oveupicd the third seat, and offered him the
robe. The Rakan took the garment in his hands, and as be pronounced with a clear voice
the words: ‘Unchangeablo truth of tho universal law, mystorions insight aud state of
unconditioncdness, the wisdom and the prayer of all beings aro both fulfilled,’ his
countenanco was transfigured, while the tuft of white hairs on his forehead radiated forth
a brilliant light, illuminating the spacious hall. Then the wholo company fell on their
knees and worshipped, whilotho 1,500 Rakan rising from their scats uttered with one
voice the salutation, ‘ Hail, 0 Tathigata Sikya Muni!’

Then he pronounced a charm, and behold! tho garment the child had prosented to
him was fonnd to be embroidered with the words ‘Six years after my departure thou
shalt have a lovely boy, who shall be a sage from his birth.’ Thus the King and all his
courtiors saw how thoy had unjustly suspected the princess, and her innocence was mado
as clear as the noon-day.

The Buddha now assembles the whole of tho Shaka family, and expounds to thom
the doctrino of ‘Cause and Effect’ (In-ywa), and tho offects of Hannya (10400) or Wisdom,
tho highost of the six Haramitsu (Paramitaé). Amongst the moro important of the converts
mado were his cousins Anan (Ananda), Anaritsu (Aniruddha), Batdara (Bhadra), and
Ubarimitsu (एषा). Daiba alone romained obstinately hostile to the new doctrine.

The Buddha changod the name of Seki-y6-san to Maka-Maya-san, and converted the
mausoleum into a monastery, under the name of T'd-ri-Ten-shdji. Hore he oxpounded the


--- PAGE 208 [OCR_san+eng] ---
APPENDIX 1. 9

Fa-bo, Hé-on Kid, the Daihannia Kié (Maha-prajiid उपप) and the Hosshin H6-sha-Kio, 1
and the number of his disciples grew from day to day.

After this the Buddha established another monastery on Mount Rid-ju-sen (Gridbra-
६८६९), whither the young and old of both sexes flocked to hear his teachings. It was here
that King Bimbashara caused to be constructed a flight. of steps five leagues in length and
ten paces wide, in the course of a few days, so that believers might ascend the mountain
without fatigue.

Daiba now took counsel with a magician named Mid-ken, to besiege Rid-jn-sen, and
destroy the Buddha together with his disciples. Seeing that his followers nevertheless
began to lose heart, Shaka-muni summoned to his aid all the Dévas and good deiti With
banners waving, gongs aud cymbals beating, Kashé led them against the demons, who
fled in all directions without striking a blow. It is in memory of this occasion that bannors
are suspended in some Buddhist temples, and that gongs aro beaten during the recitation of
the Scriptures. Daiba and Mid-ken were taken prisoners, and brought before the Buddha,
who expounded to them his doctrincs, but without effect. Then Mokn-ren let loose on
them a multitude of insects, armed with sharp stings, until Mid-ken crying for pardon,
re-assnmed his natural form of a bull and fell dead, bequeathing his hide to be used in
making a drum® to frighten away the foes of Buddhism. Daiba, on beholding the miracle,
was filled with remorse for his sins. = [1९ submitted to have his head shaven, and donning
0 नं of the ascetic, became one of the Buddha’s diciples, under the name of Cho-

latsu.’

Maya Bu-nin, the Buddha’s mother, for her great virtues during her previous state of
existence, had been rewarded by elevation to T6-ri-ten (Traiyastrimsa), where she was
adopted by Tai-shaku Ten (Indra). She attained to the knowledge of the three elementary
truths, and acquired the six kinds of supernatural powers. +

Accompanied by his disciples Kashd and Sharihotsn, the Buddha ascended to Té-ri-ten
upon a golden cloud, and expounded to his mother and Taishaku the H6-on-kid.6 Tho
former presented him in return with the Mandira flower (Mandarava-pushpa) which she
wore in her hair. From this incident ix said to have originated the practice of offering
flowers before a Buddhist shrine.

During his absence, which lasted three months, the faithful in this world felt as if
plunged in uttor darkness, and lamented him like a lost parent. At the command of tho
two kings Uten (Udayana) and Bimbashara (Bimbistra) the soulptor Bishukatsuma
(Visvakarman), whose skill was believed to be go great that the wooden animals and birds
that came from his hand were endowed with the power of motion, and who from frequent
attendance on the teachings of the Buddha had come to know every line of his countenance,
carved a likeness of him in wood 5 fect 2 inches high. When it was finished the two
kings installed it in the principal hall of the Rid-ju-son monastery. It was afterwards
removed to Gi-on Shé-ja (the Jétavana vibsgn) ). When the Buddha returned from Té6-ri-ten
(Traiyastrimsa Heaven) to Ri6-ju-sen, the weoden image came forth to mect him, Shaka
spoke to it, saying: ‘My Nirvana isat hand. Thou shalt take my place in converting
mankind,’ and they walked back in company into the building.

The number of the Buddha’s disciples now increased with great rapidity. Amongst
them the chief oncs are known as the Ten Great Disciples (Jit Dai De-shi), tho Sixteen
Hakan and the Five Hundred Rakan, The ‘en are Kashé, Anan, Sharibotsu, Mokuren,
Anaritsu, Shubodai, Furuna, Kassenyen, Ubarimitsu, and the Buddha’s son Ragora, all of
them noted fér some distinctive powers. (In Sanskrit Kasyapa, Ananda, Sariputra, Maud-
galyayana, Aniruddha, Subhtti, Pdrna, Katyayana, Upali and Rahnla). The Sixteen

are Batsura-tasha, Kiadakaha, Takaharida, Sohinda, Takora, Batdara,® Kari, Hottara,

1 Tho Sanskrit title has not becn identified.

$ In modorn times the drum, as a means of repelling the assaults of the demons, was
chiefly used in Japan by the Hokke sect, founded by Nichi-ren. वि

8 This isa mistake of tho Japanese author. The two Japancso forms arc merely
different ways of reading the Sanskrit namo Dévadatta.—B. N.

4 The former are—1. The impermanency of existence ; 2. The miscrable condition
of man; 3. Tho bubble-like constitution of the human frame. The latter are—1 and 2.
Infinite sight and hearing; 3. Unlimited power over the body; 4. Knowledge of tho paat
stages of existence of all creatures; 5. Enowledge of the thoughts of all beings; and 6.
Supernatural knowledgo of the finality of life.

6 The Japanese author is responsible for tho name of this Sitra. In my catalogue
(No. 153) there is one entitled ‘Si tra of Buddha’s Ascension to the Traiyastrimsa heaven,
to preach tho law for his mother’s sake.’—B, N.

6 Bhadra.

--- PAGE 209 [OCR_san+eng] ---
10 APPENDIX 1.

(पव Handaka,! Ragora,* Nakasina,8 Inkata itsunahashi, Ashita and Shudahan-
laka.

Under the beneficent rulo of Nanda, the Buddha travelled through many countries
until he came to Bishari (Vaisali), where he collected a multitude round him in the
monastery of the Great Mango Forest (Anra-ju-yen). More than 20,000 persons quitted
the world to become monks.

There wasacertain wealthy man of the neighbourhood named Gwakkai, who was
enormously wealthy, and lived in a magnificent mansion, more like the dwelling of a private
individual, but miserly, irreligious, and earcless about his future condition. The Buddha
resolved to effect his conversion, and accompanied by Anan, Ragora, Mokuren, Shubodai,
and Ubarimitsu, went to visit him. Standing at tho door they presented their begging
bowls, and besonght the miser to fill them. The rich man’s heart was touched by the
humility of him who had abandoned rank, wealth and power, and piling up the whitest of
rice on a coral dish, brought it to them with his own hands. The Buddha rejoiced at this
sign of a better disposition, and preached to him on the vanity of worldly riches, warning
him of the fate which awaited those who failed to make use of their opportunitics.
Gwakkai was deeply impressed with his words, and becoming ashamed of his former
wickedness, not only was converted to Buddhism, but gave a large picce of land to the
monastery Dairin Shé-ja, and distributed large sums in charity to the poor and needy
ones of his relatives. The rich man Shudatsu (Sudatta) of Shaye (Sravastt), bought the
gardens of Gita (Géta), and in conjunction with Gwakkai erected a hugo monastery to
which the name of Gi-on Shd-ja (@éta-vana vihdra, the monastery of Géta’s garden) to
which Géta gave all the trees that stood on the land. ए

Shaka pagscd tho next seven years at the Gi-on Shé-ja, preaching to the multitude
who flocked together to hear him from all quarters of the compass, until his doctrine was
accepted throughout India. He had now arrived at the age of 77, and knowing that his
end was near, he returned with his disciples to Ri6-ju-sen. Surrounded by the ten chief
disciples, the Sixteen Rakan, and 3,000 more of his immediate followers, and taking
a Kompara (Kampila) flower iu his hand, he told them that this blossom had three aspects.
They were unable to comprehend his meaning, and sat silently thinking. At last Kasho
smiled and looked upat the sky. Shaka said: ‘Kashd can carry on the work of the
Makayen (Mahayina 6), and handed him the flower, together with a gold-embroidered
Kesa. Next he called Anan to him, and bidding him assist Kashé in teaching the truth,
gave him his own begging bowl. Then he tanght them to repeat certain mystic sentences.

Eighteen months after this Buddha quitted the monastery of Rid-ju-sen, and coming
to the city of Kushina-j6 (Kusinagara), delivered his last teachings to his disciples as he
sat between the two rows of teak-trees (Sara-sd-ju, Sansk. Sala). In tho beginning of
the second moon of the following year he took 1० his couch, to the great grief and alarm
of all the Rakan, who besought him to call in [€ aid of a physician, but he forbado them,
saying that his time had now come, Let tem after his entry to Nirvdna look upon
Kash6 as their teacher, and he would lead them in the way of attaining to that blissful
state. The disciples lifted up their voices and wept, praying him to abide with them yet
the space of one Kalpa. But he waved his hand asa negative, saying, ‘Life has a limited
span, and nought may avail to extend it. This is manifested by tht impermanence of
human beings. But yet whenever necessary I will hereafter make my appearance from
time to time asa god (i. ¢., Shin-t@), a sage (Confucian), or a Buddha.’ After this he spoke no
more, and on_ the fifteenth day of the month, lying on his right side with his head to the
north, and his face looking west, he entered Nirvana like one falling asleep, in his 80th
year. At the same moment a brilliant light radiated from his corpse, and illuminated the
universe. ‘The Rakan from every place, the kings of all countries, the Rishis, the magicians

1 Panthaka. 4 Rahula. + 8 Nagascna. + Chullapanthaka. The
names of the others cannot be identified with certainty.

The sixtecn Rakan are probably those who went to livo in sixteen different places after
(?) Shaka’s Nirvana to teach the law.—B. N.

The lower ranks of disciples are classed as biksus or monks, bikuni or nuns, ubasoku and
ubai, lay men and women who keep the five commandments (Sank, bbikehu, bhikehuni,
updsaka, and upAsika).

6 The five great Indian monasteries were the Gi-on, Dai-rin, Chiku-rin, Sci-ta-rin and
Neranda, or G@éta-vana, Mahavana, Vonuvana, Nalanda. Sei-ta-rin has not been iden+
6 The form of teaching which pervades the later discourses ascribed to the Buddha,
They are not regarded as his authentic utterances.

--- PAGE 210 [OCR_san+eng] ---
11.31 11

the fish of the Ganges, all animals, birds, and even insects, wept, knowing this to be the
sign that the Buddha had entered Nirvana, crowded to tho spot and bewailed their loss.

Then all tho Buddhas, Bédhisattvas, Indra and Brahma, the four Déva Kings, and all
the innumerable company of the Dévas and good spirits, and even Amida from his Puro
Land in the West, came riding on purple clouds to escort him to Paradise, and the diciples
arising carried his corpse to the bank of the river Battai (tho Hiranyavatt, flowing by tho
city of Kusinagara). They brought it into the monastery of Ten-kwan-ji (Divya-malya-
vibara ?), where they washed it with perfumed water and awaited the coming of Kashd. As
soon as he arrived the funcral was arranged, and millions of the people followed the
coffin of the departed Buddha. Placing the coffin of the deceased teacher on & pyre of
fragrant wood, they consumed it with pare fire, and from the ashes they recovered a count-
1588 number of Skari (Sarira) or relics resembling tho diamond. These were divided among
the kings, who carried them home and enshrined them in magnificent pagodas,

क. B.—The pamphlet from which this has been extracted was a republication of Mr.
Satow’s contribution to tho Japan branch of the Royal Asiatic Society.—Ed,

APPENDIX II.

“ VILAVILAIREVO:” OR “FIRE CEREMONY,”
OF THE FIJIANS.

By KF, Arrive Jackson, or “Jackson Date,” Fist.

From the Journal of the Polynesian Society.
A long time before the paper entitled “Ze Umu-Ti: a Raiatean ccre-

mony,” by Miss Teuira Henry of Honolulu, was published in the Journal
of the Polynesian Society,* I had been told by Fijians that a similar power
of walking unharmed through Native Lovus (or ovens), when the stones
thorcin were at white heat, was possessed by one Matagali (tribe), on the
Island of Boga (pronounced, Bengah). At first I discredited what the
Natives told me, and continued to be an unbelicver, until I was told by
the Hon. James Blyth, Native Commissioner, that, what I put down 88 onl

a Native fable, was quite truc. It ५& heard that, in order to set the ध

of the story at rest, His Excelloncy $he Governor of Fiji—Sir John Bates
Thurston, K.C.M.G., had the “Fire Ceremony” performed by command
before the Vico-Regal Party, and about five hundred Native spectators,
Having reason gto believe that Miss ‘leuira Henry’s statements were taken
in certain quarters, “cum grano salis,” I was anxious that they should
receive coroboration from a High Official, so I wrote to His Excellency Sir John
Thurston, suggesting that ho should writo a short account of the “Fire
Ceremony,” he had becn an cye-witness of, for publication in the Journal
of the Polynesian Society. His Excellency replicd that he had already written
on the matter for a forthcoming work, and that he did not wish to touch
the subject again ; but Sir John was kind enough to give me a vivid description
of the ceremony he witnessed, and sent me a photo., taken by himself and at
the moment the men were entering the Lovu (oven), and suggested that
I should take “Na Mata” for my text, and myself write to the Polynesian
Journal. I replied that, although J had been twenty-five years in Fiji, I
would not trust my own translation of “Na Mata” for the purpose of publi-
cation. Iam indebted to the kindness and the courtesy of His Excellency
for the following translation from “Na Mata,” ४ newspaper published in the
Fijian language. Sir John Thurston also informed me t hat 6 bodies of the

* See एण, II, ए, 103,

--- PAGE 211 [OCR_san+eng] ---
12 APPENDIX IL.

Natives who walked through the fire were examined by the Chief Medical
Officer of the colony, The Hon. Bolton Glanvill Corncy, M. L. C., but he
could arrive at no conclusion at all as to how the feat was performed.
Amongst the Europeans in the Governor's party were His Excellency and
Lady Thurston, The Hon. Bolton Glanvill, and Mrs. Corney, Mr. Basil Home
Thomson, Mr, J. W. Lindt, F. R. G, S. (author of Picturesque Fiji), and
others. The party all took “shots” with the camera, but Mr. Lindt’s proved
the most successful. Lady Thurston threw a cambric handkerchief on the
shoulder of the chief of the Fire Walkers as he was centering the Lovu, and
it would have been burnt up, had not Mr. Thompson adroitly plucked it
back with a long stick. The handkerchief was terribly scorched, although it
only rested on the man’s shoulder for a few seconds. The ladics present
divided the handkerchief, or what was left of it, asa memento. None of
those present could in any way account for the wonderful power these
Sawau men possessed of being able to walk unharmed through a regular
fiery furnace. They werc as much astonished and nonplussed as the Biblical
King was when witnessing another “Fire Ceremony,” performed by the
three young Jews we all wot of.

In Tibet a class of Shamans (Tantrik Buddhists who are said to be adepts in
mysticism) practise « kind of “ Fire Ceremony ” which bears a marked resemblance
to that described in the above extract. The Shaman after chanting some charms
touches a red hot iron bar or knife with his tongue. Some Shamans stand
upon red hot iron plates with perfect case. This practice is said to be very

common in Tibet. It is said that on account of the efficacy of the BANYAN

Chag-tag (iron-charms) the red hot iron becomes cool at the touch of the
tongue. Had.

WHE RAMAKRISHNA MISSION
INSTITUTE OF CULTURE
LIBRARY
GOL PARE, CALCUITA.20

--- PAGE 212 [OCR_san+eng] ---
BUDDHIST TEXT SOCIETY OF INDIA.

प, प, Qri Raw Cuanpra Bauns Dzo, Mahérdjé of Mourbhunj.

Mahérdjé Siz Jorenpra Monan Tacorz, Béhddur, K.C.S.1 | Patrons.

Council :

‘Tue How’stz Str Aurrep Crorr, M.A. K.C.LE. President.
Prasanna Koumde 1८१५, D. Sc.

G. A. Griersoy, Esg., L.C.8., Px.D., C.1.E.

Tae पणा Mananpra [40 Sarcar, M.D., 0...

> Vice- Presidents.
Grt Nanswpra Nara Sun. }

Members :

As'vtosh Muxuopdvurdva, D.L., F.R.A.S., &c.

Prof. C’anvropava Vidydvinoda,

Gri Dina Nira तद.

Tue Hoy’srg Justice Gurvpss Banpyrordpnydya, D.L.
Pandit Hara Prasap Castri, M.A.

Qrt Hirenpra N&ru Darra, M.A., B.D.
Mahémahopddhydya Manes C’axpra Nydyaratna, C.1.E.
Qrt Niropx Néra Moxnordpayiva,

Vidydratna Neismua C’anpra Muxuopdpuydya, M.A., B.L.
8. J. Pkpsuan, Esq.

Roi Rascomar Sarvdpurxdur, Béhétur, M.A., B.L,
Gri Givk Prasanna Buarricuarya, b L.

Mahéraj Kumar Vinaya Krisuna Dey, त .
Gr Gauar Cuanpra Dds, C.LE. | onorary Secretaries.
स. Duarméehia, Esq., Assistant Secretary.

Qri Hani Mowan Mugnopdpardra, Pandit and Librarian.

॥ Corresponding Members.

Rey. A. Tomory, M.A.

Rav. ©, A. Sftaxkaypa Mahé Thero. High Priest, Sailabimbérama Vihéra,
Ceylon,

` , 4.11 Commanications as well ag Remittances forthe Journaland Teat may be sent to
the Manager, Buddhist Text Society, 86/2 Jaun Bazar Street, Caloutte.


--- PAGE 213 [OCR_san+eng] ---
Contents of Vol. I, Part I:—

Lives of Santi Rakshita, Kamala Sila and Dipafkara, The Lamaic Hierarchy of Tibet.
“Bodhipatha Pradipa” (English and Text), ‘‘Visuddhi Marga" (Pali and Sanskrit),
“ Muktalaté,” a Sanskrit Poem, by Kshemendra, with Translation in English Verse, by Mr,
नि C, एण, 6.5. C.LE., “Bon, the pre-Buddhistic Religion of Tibet, and Tibetan folk
re.

Contents of Vol. I, Part II:—

Proceedings and Correspondence. The Story of ‘ EkaSringa,” in English verse, by Nobin
Chandra Das, M.A., with Sanskrit Text. English translation of ^ Bhaktisataka,”” by Pandit
Haraprasad Sastri, M A., with Sanskrit Text. Lamaic Hierarchy, by Sarat Chandra Das, C.LE,
Sanskrit Text :—‘Sakyotpatti, Buddha Janma.” Abhinish-kramana, Magadhi Text :—
‘Saraantakuta Varnana.”” Tioetan Text :—-A photo-litho copy of Buddha’s life, from a Sculp-
ture of Rajgriha. Appendix 1. ‘RishyaSpinga.” Text and Translation from the + Mahé-
Bhérata.” 2, Bon Religion of Tibet. ‘

Contents of Vol. I, Part III :—

Proceedings of the Society. Correspondence. The Doctrine of Transmigration, By
Sarat Chandra Das. Samsara Chakra. Ziryak—Animal Kingdom. Preta, or the Ghost
World. Hell. Cold Hells. King Kanishka and some Historical Facts, The Four great
Earliest Schools of Buddhism. “ Bodhi Patha Pradipa.” ‘The Story of King Manichida, by B.
106, Esq., M.A., LC.S. A short Note on the Avaddna Kalpalaté, Introduction to Ava-
dana Kalpalata, by Somendra, Sanskrit Text of Manichida Avadéna. Dhammapada, with
Buddha Ghosha's Commentary : Edited भू Rev Maha Theo Sjlakhanda. Appendix I, The
Principal Deities of the Bon Pantheon. Appendix Il. The Five Visions of ‘Rhedubjé, The
Goddess Chamunda. One Plate (The Five Visions of Khedubjé).

Contents of Vol. I, Part IV :—

Metrical version of Rukmévati.—Sanskrit Text of Rukmévati.—Daily religious service_
in the grand monastery of Tashi-Ihdnpo,—The grand monastic University of Téshi-Ihinpo.—
The Ten Sufferings of Buddha.—Sanskrit Text.—Sanskrit Text of Ratnamalé.—Dasakarma
plutévadana (Text)—Dhammapada —The Origin of the Sikyas.—Appendix I, Purnagir’s
account of the Téshi Lama’s death at Peking.— Appendix II, Indian Hells.

Contents of Vol. II, Part I:— ;

Proceedings of the Society. Maga or Serpent demi-gods. Story of the conversion of
Gopala N4ga. The Sanskrit Text of Gopdla Néga-damanam. Stipa-Avadanam. Its Sans-
krit Text. ‘he mystic astrological chart called‘ Rluf-ta.”’ Bodhi Charyavatéram, Vyita-
malakhy&, Dhammapada. A story of serpent worship, the Néga Pafichami ceremony.

Contents of Vol. II, Part II .

Proceedings of the 2nd and 3rd quately meetings ; note on an archaic silver Lotus; the
Amitayusa Satra; a short note on the Mahayana and Hinayéna Schools; on the evolution
of the works of Mara; the Story of Jyotishka: friendship between the kings of Magadha and
Taksha (ila, its Mégadhi Text ;" note on the Svayambha Purén ; Review, Bodhi Charyava--
taram ; Jaina Vairdgya satak ; the worship of Haya Griba; “Tibet ११

2. “Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow.” By Sarar
Cuanpra Das, (1.2. (120 pages, Demi 8vo.)—Price One Rupee.

Student Life in Tibet. The monastic University of Tashi-lhanpo. Notes on the above.
Ealy Indian Pandits in China. Origin of the Mah4yéna School. Origin of Social Ex-
clasiveness. Ongin of the Bengalis Periods of Missionary work of the Indo-Aryans.
Farliest Notices of China. Earliest notices of India in China. Introduction of Buddhism into
China, The Chinese and the Mahay4na School. Translation of Buddhist sacred works
11110 Chinese, Kumfra Jiva and the Chinese traveller Fa-hian, Bodhi Dharma. Foreign
Buddhist embassies to China, The Chinese traveller Hieun-tshang. Bréhmanical astronomy
introduced into China, The Wu-mei Sect in China (as described by Edkins), Bengal Pandits
in Tibet. Buddhism and the written languages of ‘Tibet. Bengal Pandits in the Buddhist
Eee aganda, Life of Dipafikara Sri Jiiana-Atisa, The King of Tibet—His anxiety to reform
Buddhism. Prince Chan-Chub and Nag-tcho Loch&va. Nag-tcho’s Journey to India. His
arrival at Vikrama Silé, Religious Assembly at Vikrama 314, Atisa and the Buddhist
oracles. His Journey to Tibet. doctrine of transmigration. The Lamaic Hierarchy of
Tibet. The first Jataka (of Avalokitesvara Bodhisattava). The Lay OF LACREN, Pranpoori
the Indian ascetic. A trip to Sikkim. Life of Tashi Lama Panden Yeshé. The Emperor
Kienliifig’s letter to the Dalai Lama, Note on Purnagir Gosain,


--- PAGE 214 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 215 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 216 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 217 [OCR_san+eng] ---

--- PAGE 218 [OCR_san+eng] ---
